===== Internet Archive OCR: 17962.10985-_djvu.txt =====

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
NATIONAL LIBRARY, CALCUTTA 


Casa No. he 19-E 
Book No. 30] 


N.L. 38. 
MGIPO—S1—19 LNL/62—27-3-63—100,000. 


THE 


SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 
OF RELIGION 


( A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF SANKHVA, 
VEDANTA AND OTHER SYSTEMS 
OF FILOUGHT } 





BY 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA 
1908. 


Price Rupee one. 


Calecuttas 


PUBLISHED FROM 


UDBODHAN OFFICE 
30 Bose Para Lane, Baghbazar. 





Printed by G. C. Neogi, 
N AU ABIBHAKAR PRESS, 
ut 2, ilachooa Bazar Street. 


EDITOR’S PREFACE. 


‘When any Science reaches a unity, it 
cannot possibly go any farther. You cannot 
go beyond this idea of the Absolute, the 
idea of the One, out of which everything 
in the universe has evolved. * * The 
last word of Advaita is Zattvamasz,— 
That thou art.” These are the words of 
the author of the present volume, at the 
end of the book. It is a clear and concise 
statement of the daring claim made by 
the Sages of India, from very old times, 
that they have attained to such Unity in 
the religious field and succeeded in bring- 
ing Religion to the rank of a perfect and 
complete Science. The methods adopted 
by them to come to this result, were the 
same as followed by all the Sciences of the 
present day, vzz., observation and anulysis 
of the facts of our experience, aid a 
synthetical combination of the risults 


z 


Editor's Preface. 


ol.tained, to find out the same facts. That 
Kapila, Vyasa, Patanjali and indeed all 
the philosophers of India, including most 
of the Vedic Seers, applied these methods 
in coming to their respective discoveries— 
has been fully discussed by the author in 
his books on the different Yogas. 
Wonderful as the claim seems and 
improbable to the Superficial eye, the 
world had not had the power and incli- 
nation to shift the grounds on which it was 
advanced. The difficulties of an obsolete 
language, expression and imagery, the 
two concise character of the aphorisms 
( Sutras ) and the leaden dross of time 
always overwhelmed or led astray the 
stray stragglers, who made any attempt 
along the line while the Indian national 
mind was sleeping through centuries, 
perfectly exhausted with the super-human 
exurtions of the great discovery! No 
wonder it needed the present period of 


3 


Editor’s Preface. 


reawakening of ‘the mother-land of 
Dharma’ and along with it the Super- 
human vision of Bhagawan Sri Rama- 
krishna and the gifted talent of Swami 
Vivekananda to do the work as well as to 
teach humanity the way to apply the 
great truth to its daily life, in India and 
abroad—for an Indian mind is always 
needed to interpret things purely Indian. 
To understand fully the greatness of the 
Swami, however, we must always bear in 
mind the fact that these were a Series of 
seven lectures, delivered without notes, 
before a little class in New York, in the 
beginning of 1896! It is fortunate indeed, 
that they were taken down at the time 
by shorthand, making it possible for us 
to get them printed in this present form, 
after the expiration of such a long time 
and the editor is thankful for being 
requested to do his work while he was in 
America, at the beginning of 1897. 


222 


Editor’s Preface. 


Nothing of any importance has been 
changed in the body of the lectures them- 
selves excepting the substitution of the 
word Prakriti for Nature. In the editor's 
humble opinion there is no English 
equivalent for the Sanskrit word and 
Nature can never be one. For the idea 
connoted by i: is the finished result of 
what is connoted by the word Pvrakratz. 
Prakriz therefore can never mean Nature 
but the primal elements and forces, which 
form the materials for the creation of the 
universe. Prakritz is the cause, of which 
Nature is the effect or out of which Nature 
is being produced. “Primal matter and 
energy held in equilibrium” or “the latent 
condition of primal matter and energy” 
expresses the idea aright. We would 
rvquest the reader to keep this will stamp- 
ed in his mind to understand the words of 
the Swami in the following pages clearly. 


227t 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION 


J. 
THE SANKHYA COSMOLOGY 


I], 


PRAKRITI AND PURUSHA 


THT. 


SANKHYA AND ADVAITA . . . 


IV. 
THe Free Sout 


V. 


Owner EXISTENCE APPEARING AS Many. 


VI. 


UNITY OF THE SELF 


VII. 
Tue Hicuest IDEAL or Jnana YoGA 


13 


38 


65 


93 


123 


. 146 


163 


Pare 





INTRODUCTION 


Tus universe of ours, the uniyerse of 
the senses, the rational, the intellectual, is 
bounded on both sides by the _ illimitable, 
the unknowable, the ever unknown. Here- 
in is the search, herein are the inquiries, 
here are the facts, whence comes the 
light which is known to the world as 
religion. Essentially, however, religion 
belongs to the supersensuous and not to 
the sense plane. It is beyond all reason- 
ing and is uot on the plane of intellect. 
It is a vision, an inspiration, a plunge 
into the unknown and unknowable, making 
the unknowable more than known, for it 
can never be ‘‘known.” The search has 
been in the human mind, as I believe, 
from the very beginning of humanity. 
There cannot have been human reasoning 


Introduction 


and intellect in any period of the world's 
history without this struggle, this search 
beyond. In our little universe, the human 
mind, we see athought arise. Whence 
it arises we do not know, and when it dis- 
appears, where it goes we know not either. 
The macrocosm and the microcosm are, 
as it were, in the same groove, passing 
through the same stages, vibrating in the 
same key. 

In these lectures I shall try to bring 
before you the Hindu theory that religions 
do not come from without, but from within. 
It is my belief that religious thought is in 
man’s very constitution, so much so that 
it is impossible for him to give up religion 
until he can give up his mind and _ body, 
until he can give up thought and _ life. 
As long as a man thinks, this struggle 
must go on, and so long man must have 
some form of religion. Thus we see 
various forms of religion in the world. 


2 


Introduction 


It is a bewildering study, but it is not, 
as many of us think, a vain speculation. 
Amidst this chaos there is harmony, 
throughout these discordant sounds there is 
a note of concord, and he who is prepared 
to listen to it will catch the tone. 

The great question of all questions at 
the present time is this : Taking for grant- 
ed that the known and the knowable are 
bounded on both sides by the unknowable 
and the infinitely unknown, why struggle 
for that infinite unknown ? Why shall we 
not be content with the known ? Why shall 
we not rest satisfied with eating, drinking, 
and doing a little good to society ? This 
idea isinthe air. Fromthe most learned 
professor to the prattling baby, we are told 
to do good to the.world, that is all of 
religion, and that it is useless to trouble 
ourselves about questions of the beyond. 
So much is this the case that it has become 
a truism. But fortunately we m#eust ques- 


3 


Introduction 


tion the beyond. The present, the expres- 
sed, is only one part of that unexpressed. 
The sense universe is, as it were, only one 
portion, one bit of that infinite spiritual 
universe projected into the plane of sense 
consciousness. How can this little bit of 
projection be explained, be understood, 
without knowing that which is beyond ? 
It is said of Socrates that one day while 
lecturing at Athens, he met a Brahmin who 
had travelled into Greece, and Socrates told 
the Brahmin that the greatest study for 
mankind is man. The Brahmin sharply re- 
torted : ‘‘How can you know man until you 
know God?” This God, this eternally 
unknowable, or absolute, or infinite, or 
without name,—you may call Him by what 
name you like,—is the rational, the only 
explanation, the vazson d etre of that which 
is known and knowable, this present life. 
Take anything before you, the most material 
thing ; take one of the most material 


4 


Introduction 


sciences, as chemistry or physics, astronomy 
or biology, study it, push the study forward 
and forward, and the gross forms will 
begin to melt and become finer and finer, 
until they come to a point where you are 
bound to make a tremendous leap from these 
material things into the immaterial. The 
gross melts into the fine, physics into meta- 
physics, in every department of knowledge. 

Thus man finds himself driven to a study 
of the beyond. Life will be a desert, hu- 
man life will be vain if we cannot know the 
beyond. It is very well to say: Be con- 
tented with the things of the present; the 
cows und the dogs are, and all animals, and 
that is what makes them animals. So if 
man rests content with the present and 
gives up all search into the beyond, man- 
kind will have to go back to the animal 
plane again. It is religion, the inquiry into 
the beyond, that makes the difference 
between man and an animal, Well has it 


5 


Introduction 


been said that man is the only animal that 
naturally looks upwards ; every other animal 
naturally looks prone. That looking up- 
ward and going upward and seeking perfec- 
tion are what is called salvation, and the 
sooner 4 man begins to go higher, the 
sooner he raises himself towards this idea 
of truth as salvation. It does not consist 
in the amount of money in your pocket, or 
the dress you wear, orthe house you live 
in, but in the wealth of spiritual thought in 
your brain. That is what makes for hu- 
man progress, that is the source of all 
material and intellectual progress, the 
motive power behind, the enthusiasm that 
pushes mankind forward. 

Religion does not live in bread, does not 
dwell in a house. Again and again you 
hear this objection advanced, “ What good 
a. religion do? Can it take away the 
promety Of the poor?” Supposing it cannot, 
would that prove the untruth of religion? 


6 


Introduction 


Suppose a baby stands up among you when 
you are trying to demonstrate an astronomi- 
cal theorem, and says: ‘Does it bring 
gingerbread?” “No, it does not,” you 
answer. ‘‘Then,” says the baby, “it is 
useless.” Babies judge the whole -universe 
from their own standpoint, that of produc- 
ing gingerbread, and so are the babies of 
the world. We must not judge of higher 
things from alow standpoint. Everything 
must be judged by its own standard and 
the infinite must be judged by an infinite 
standard. Religion permeates the whole 
of man’s life, not only the present, but the 
past, present, and future. It is therefore 
the eternal relation between the eternal soul 
and the eternal God. Is it logical to 
measure its value by its action upon five 
minutes of human life? Certainly not. 
These are all negative arguments. 

Now comes the question: Can religion 
really accomplish anything? It can. It 


7 


Introduction 


brings to man eternal life. It has made 
man what he is and will make of this 
human animal a god. That is what reli- 
gion cando. Take religion from human 
society and what will remain? Nothing 
but a forest of brutes. Sense-happiness 
is not the goal of humanity; wisdom 
(Jn4nam) is the goal of all life. We find 
that man enjoys his intellect more than 
an animal enjoys its senses, and we see that 
man enjoys his spiritual nature even more 
than his rational nature. So the highest 
wisdom must be this spiritual knowledge. 
With this knowledge will come bliss. All 
these things of this world are but the 
shadows, the manifestations in the third 
or fourth degree of the real Knowledge 
and Bliss. 

One question more : What is the goal ? 
Nowadays it is asserted that man is infi- 
nitely progressing, forward and forward, and 
there is no goal of perfection to attain to. 


8 


Introduction 


Ever approaching, never attaining, what- 
ever that may mean and however wonderful 
it may be, it is absurd on the face of it. Is 
there any motion in a straight line? A 
straight line infinitely projected becomes a 
circle, it returns to the starting point. You 
must end where you begin, and as you 
began in God, you must go back to God. 
What remains? Detail work. Through 
eternity you have to do the detail work. 
Yet anther question. Are we to discover 
new truths of religion as we go on? Yea 
and nay. In the first place we cannot know 
anything more of religion, it has all been 
known. In all the religions of the world 
you will find it claimed that there is a unity 
within us. Being one with divinity, there 
cannot be any further progress in that 
sense. Knowledge means finding this unity. 
I see you as men and women, and this is 
variety. It becomes scientific knowledge 
when I group you together and call you 


9 


Introduction 


human beings. Take the science of che- 
mistry, for instance. Chemists are seeking 
to resolve all known substances into their 
original elements and if possible to find the 
one element from which all these were 
derived. ‘The time may come when they 
will find one element that is the source of 
all other elements. Reaching that, they 
can go no farther ; the science of chemistry 
will have become perfect. So it is with 
the science of religion. If we can discover 
this perfect unity, there cannot be any 
farther progress. 

The next question is : Can such a unity 
be found? In India the attempt has been 
made from the earliest times to reach a 
science of religion and philosophy, for the 
Hindus do not separate these as is custo- 
mary in Western countries. We regard 
religion and philosophy as but two aspects 
of one thing which must equally be groun- 
ded in reason and scientific truth. In the 


10 


Introduction 


lectures that are to follow I shall try to ex- 
plain to you first the system of the Sdukhya 
philosophy, one of the most ancient in India, 
orin factinthe world. Its great exponent 
Kapila is the father of all Hindu psychology 
and the ancient system that he taught is still 
the foundation of all accepted systems of 
philosophy in India to-day,—which are 
known as the Dérsanas. They all adopt his 
psychology, however widely they differ 
in other respects. 

Next I shall endeavour to show you how 
Vedanta, as the logical outcome of the 
Sdukhya, pushes its conclusions yet farther. 
While its cosmology agrees with that taught 
by Kapila, the Vedanta isnot satisfied to 
end in dualism, but continues its search for 
the final unity which is alike the goal of 
science and religion. To make clear the 
manner in which the task is accomplished 
will be the effort of the later lectures in 
this course. 


1] 


I 
THE SANKHYA COSMOLOGY 


Here are two words, the microcosm and 
the macrocosm, the internal and the exter- 
nal. We get truths from both of these by 
means of experience ; there is internal 
experience and external experience. The 
truths gathered from internal experience 
are psychology, metaphysics and religion ; 
from external experience the physical scie- 
nces. Now a perfect truth should be in 
harmony with experience in both these 
worlds. The microcosm must bear testi- 
mony to the macrocosm, and the macrocosm 
to the microcosm ; physical truth must have 
its counterpart in the internal world, and 
the internal world must have its verification 
in the outside. Yet as a rule we find that 
many of these truths are constantly conflic- 
ting. At one period of the world’s history the 


13 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


“internals” became supreme, and they began 
to fight the “externals” ; at the present time 
the ‘“externals”, the physicists, have become 
supreme, and they have put down many 
claims of the psychologists and metaphysici- 
ans. So far as my little knowledge goes, I 
find that the really essential parts of psycho- 
logy are in perfect accordance with the essen- 
tial parts of modern physical knowledge. 

It is not given to every individual to be 
great in every respect ; it is not given to 
the same race, or nation, to be equally strong 
in the research of all the fields of know- 
ledge. The modern European nations are 
very strong in their researches into external 
physical knowledge, but the ancient Euro- 
peans were weak in their researches into 
the internal part of man. On the other 
hand, the Orientals have not been very 
strong in their researches in the external 
physical world, but have excelled in their 
researches into the internal, and therefore 


14 


The Sankhya Gosmology 


we find that some of the Oriental theories 
are not in accordance with Occidental phy- 
sics, neither is Occidental psychology in 
harmony with Oriental teachings on this sab- 
ject. The Oriental physicists have been criti- 
cised by Occidental scientists. At the same 
time each rests on truth, and, as we stated 
before, real truth in any field of knowledge 
will not contradict itself, the truths intertial: 
are in harmony with the truths external, 
We know the present theories of the 
Cosmos according to the modern astrono- 
mers and physicists, and at the same time 
we know how wofully they hurt the old 
school of theologians, and how every new 
scientific discovery that is made isas a 
bomb thrown into their house, and how 
they have attempted in every age to put 
down all these researches. In the first 
place, let us go over the psychological and 
scientific ideas of the Orientals as to cosmo- 
logy and all that pertains to it, and you will 


qT) 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


find how wonderfully it is in actordance 
with all the latest discoveries of modern 
science, and when there is anything lacking 
you will find that it is on the side of modern 
science. We all use the word Nature, and 
the old Hindu philosophers called it by two 
different names, Prakritz, which is almost 
the same asthe English word “nature”, 
and by the more scientific name, Avyakiam 
(“undifferentiated”), from which every- 
thing proceeds, out of which come atoms 
and molecules, matter and force, and mind 
and intellect. It is startling to find that 
the philosophers and metaphysicians of 
India ages ago stated that mind is but 
matter ina finer form, for what are our 
present materialists striving to do but to 
show that mind is as much a product of 
nature as the body ? And so is thought ; 
and we shall find by and by that the intel- 
lect also comes from the same nature which 
is called avyaktam, the undifferentiated. 


16 


The Sankhya Costhology 


The ancient teachers define avayaktam 
as the “equilibrium of the three forces,” one 
of which is called Sattva, the second Razas 
and the third Zamas. Tamas, the lowest 
force, is that of attraction, a little higher is 
Rajas, that of repulsion, and the highest is 
the control of these two, Saztva : so that 
when the two forces, attraction and repulsion, 
are held in perfect control, or balance, by 
the Sa¢tva, there is no creation, no modifi- 
cation ; but as soon as this equilibrium is lost, 
the balance is disturbed and one of these 
forces gets stronger than the other. Then 
change and motion begin and evolution of 
all this goes on. This state of things is going 
on cyclically, periodically ; that is to say, 
thereis a period of disturbance of the balance, 
when all these forces begin to combine and 
recombine, and this universe is projected ; 
and there is also a period when everything 
has a tendency to revert to the primal state 
of equilibrium, and the time comes when a 


17 
B 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


total absence of all manifestation is reached. 
Again, after a period, this state is disturbed, 
the forces tend to project outward and the 
universe slowly comes out in the form of 
waves ; for all motion in this universe is in 
the form of waves, in successive rises 
and falls. 

Some of the old philosophers taught 
that the whole universe quiets down for a 
period ; others maintained that this quieting 
down applies only tosystems. That is to 
say, that while our system here, this solar 
system, will quiet down and go back into 
that undifferentiated state, there will be mill- 
ions of other systems going the other way. 
I should rather follow the second opinion, 
that this quieting down is not simultaneous 
over the whole universe, but that in difterent 
parts different thing’ are going on. But 
the principle remains the same, that all that 
we see, that Prakreg herself is progressing 
in successive rises and falls. The stage of 


18 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


going back to the balance, to the perfect 
equilibrium, is called the end of a cycle. 
The whole Kealfa, the evolution and the 
involution, has been compared by theistic 
writers in India to the outbreathing and in- 
breathing of God ; God, as it were, breathes 
outthe universe, and it returns into Him 
again. When it quiets down, what becomes 
of the universe ? It still exists, only in finer 
form, as it is called in Sanskrit, in the “causal 
state” (Kdrana). Causation, time and space 
are still there, only they are potential. 
This return to an undifferentiated condition 
constitutes involution. Involution and 
evolution are eternally going on, so that 
when we speak of a beginning, we refer 
only to the beginning of a cycle. 

The most extraneous part of the uni- 
verse is what in modern times we call gross 
matter. The ancient Hindus called it the 
‘Bhutas, the external elements. One of 
these according to them is the cause of the 


1g 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


rest for every other element is produced 
out of this one, and this clement has been 
called Akésa. This is somewhat similar to 
the modern idea of ether, though not ex- 
actly the same. Aé4dsa is the primal ele- 
ment out of which every gross thing pro- 
ceeds, and along with it there is something 
else called Prdna: we shall see what it is as 
we goon. The frdua and the ékdsa exist 
as long as creation lasts. They combine 
and recombine and form all gross manifest- 
ations until at the end of the cycle all these 
subside and go back to the unmanifested 
form of ¢kdsaand prdna. There is in the 
Rig Veda, the oldest scriptures in existence, 
a beautiful passage describing creation, 
which is most poetical—‘When there was 
neither ought nor nought, when darkness 
was rolling over darkness, what existed ?” 
and the answer is given, “It (the Eternal 
One) then existed without motion.”* Prana 


* Rig Veda—Mandal roth, 129 Shukta., 


dab: 204 20 


The SAnkhya Cosmology 


and &kdsa were latent in that Eternal One, 
but there was no phenomenal manifestation. 
This state is called Avyaktam, which literally 
means “without vibration,” or unmanifested. 
At the beginning of a new cycle of evo- 
lution, this avyaktam begins to vibrate and 
blow after blow is given by prdua to the 
dasa causing condensation and gradually, 
through the forces of attraction and re- 
pulsion, atoms are formed. These in turn 
condense into molecules and finally into 
the different gross elements of which every 
object in nature is composed. | 

We generally find these things very 
curiously translated ; people do not go to the 
ancient philosophers or to their commentat- 
ors for their translation and have not learn- 
ing enough to understand for themselves. 
They translate the elements as ‘“‘ air,” “ fire,” 
and so on. If they would go to the comment- 
ators they would find that they do not mean 
anything of the sort. The dédsa, by the 


21 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


repeated blows of srdna, produces vdyu or 
the vibratory state of the éfésa, which in 
turn produces gaseous matter. The vi- 
brations growing more and more rapid gene- 
rate heat, which in Sanskrit is called ¢ezas. 
Gradually it is cooled off and the gaseous 
substance becomes liquid, Apa and finally 
solid, przthzvz. We have first akdsa vi- 
brating, then comes heat, then it becomes 
liquified, and when still more condensed it 
appears as solid matter. It goes back to the 
unmanifested condition in exactly the re- 
verse way. The solids will be converted 
into liquid and the liquid into a mass of 
heat, that will slowly go back into the gase- 
ous state, then disintegradation of atoms 
will begin and finally the equilibrium of all 
forces will be reached, when vibration will 
stop and thus the cycle of evolution which 
in Sanskrit is called Ka/pa will be at an 
end. We know from modern astronomy 
that this earth and sun of ours are under- 


22 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


going the same transitions, this solid earth 
will melt down and become liquid once 
more, and will eventually go back to the 
gaseous state. 

Prdna cannot work alone without the 
help of d&dsa. All that we know of it is 
motion or vibration. Every movement 
that we see is a modification of this Ardxa, 
and everything that we know in the form 
of matter, either as form or as resistance, is 
a modification of this d&dsa. The prdna 
cannot exist alone, or act without a medium, 
and in every state of it, whether as pure 
préna, or when it changes into other forces 
of nature, as gravitation or centrifugal 
attraction, it can never be separate from 
adkdésa. You have never seen force without 
matter or matter without force; what we 
cal] force and matter being simply the gross 
manifestations of the twoand these when 

superfine, the old philosophers have called 
préna and dkdsd. Préna you can call in 


23 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


English, life, or vital energy, but you must 
not restrict it to the life of man, nor should 
you identify it with the spirit, Atman. 
Thus creation is a product of prdna and 
ékdsa and is without beginning and end ; it 
cannot have either, for it is eternally going 
on. 

The next question that comes is rather a 
fine one. Some European philosophers 
have asserted that this world exists because 
“T” exist, and if “I” do not exist, the world 
will not exist. Sometimes it is expressed 
thus—if all the people in the world were to 
die, and there were no more human 
beings, and no animals with powers of per- 
ception and intelligence, all manifestations 
would disappear. It seems paradoxical, but 
gradually we shall see clearly that this can 
be proved. Butthese European philoso- 
phers do not know the psychology of it, 
although they know the principle; they 
have only a glimpse of it. 


24 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


First we shall consider another propo- 
sition of these old psychologists which is 
rather startling, that the grossest elements 
are the dfu¢as, but that all gross things are 
the results of fine ones. Everything 
that is gross is composed of a combi- 
nation of fine things, so the d4u¢éas must 
be composed of certain fine particles, called 
in Sanskrit the fanumdtras. I smell a 
flower; in doing so, something must have 
come in contact with my nose. The flower 
is there, I do not see it move towards me ; 
but without something coming in contact 
with my nose how can I have the smell ? 
That which comes from the flower and into 
contact with my nose are the fanmda@tras, 
fine molecules of that flower, so fine that no 
diminution will be perceived in the flower 
even if we all smell it the whole day. So 
with heat, light, sight, and everything. These 
tanmdtras can again be subdivided into 
atoms. Different philosophers have differ- 


25 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


ent theories about the dimensions of atoms 
but we know these are only theories, so we 
leave them out of discussion. Sufficient 
for us that everything gross is composed of 
things that are very, very minute. We first 
get the gross elements, which we feel ex- 
ternally, and composing them are the fine 
elements, which our organs touch, which 
come in contact with the nerves of the nose, 
eyes and ears. The ethereal wave which 
touches my eyes, I cannot see, yet I know 
it must come in contact with my optic nerve 
before I can see the light. So with hearing, 
we cam never see the particles that come tn 
contact with our ears, but we kriow that 
they must be there. What is the cause of 
these fanmdtras? A very startling and 
curious answer is given by our psycholo- 
gists,—self-consciousness. That is the cause 
of these fine materials, and the cause of the 
organs. What are these organs? Here is 
the eye, but the eye does not see. If the 


26 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


eyes did see, when a man is dead, and his 
eyes are still perfect, they would still be able 
to see. There is some change somewhere ; 
something has gone out of the man, and that 
something, which really sees and of which 
the eye is but the instrument, is dalled the 
organ. So this nose is an instrument, and 
there is an organ corresponding to it. 
Modern physiology can tell you what that is, 
a nerve centre in the brain. The eyes, ears, 
etc., are simply the external instruments. 
Thus the organs, J/udrzyas, as they are 
called in Sanskrit, are the real seats of 
perception. 

What is the use of having one organ 
for the nose, and one for the eyes, and so 
on ? Why will not one serve the purpose ? 
To make it clear to you,—I am talking, 
and you are listening, and you do not see 
what is going on around you _ because 
the mind has attached itself ‘to the organ 
of hearing, and has detached itself from 


27 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


the sight-organ. If there were only one 
organ, the mind would see and hear and 
smell atthe same time, and it would be 
impossible for it not to do all three at the 
same time. Therefore it is necessary that 
there should be separate organs for all 
these centres. This has been borne out 
by modern physiology. It is certainly possi- 
ble for us to see and hear at the same 
time, but that is because the mind attaches 
itself partially to both centres, which are the 
organs. What are the instruments ? We see 
that these are external and made of the gross 
materials, Here they are,—eyes,nose, and 
ears, etc. Of what are the organs made ? 
They are made of finer materials and are 
internal things because they are the 
centres. Justas this body is composed of 
gross material for transforming Ardza into 
different gross forces, so these finer organs 
behind, are composed of finer materials, for 
the manufacture of prdéua into the finer 


28 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


forces of perception. All these organs or 
indreyas combined, plus the internal instru- 
ment or extahkarana, are called the finer 
body of man,—the Axga (or stkshma ) 
SAYIVR. 

It has a real form, because everything 
materia] must have a form. Behind the 
indreyas is the manas, the chztta in 
vrittz, what might be called the vibra- 
tory or the unsettled state of the mind. 
If you throw a stone into a calm lake, first 
there will be vibration, and then resistance. 
For a moment the water will vibrate and 
then it will react on the stone. So, when 
any impression comes on the chz¢fa, or 
“mind stuff,” it vibrates a little. This state 
of the mind is called the manas. Then 
comes the reaction, the will.* There is an- 
other thing behind this will which ac- 
companies all the acts of the mind, which is 


* Sanskrit—Buddhi, the determinjng or decisive faculty 
of the mind 





29 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


called egoism, the ahkamkdra, the self- 
consciousness, which says “I am,” and behind 
that is what is called J/ahat,* the intelli- 
gence, the highest form of nature’s éxistence. 
Behind the intellect ts the true Self of man, 
the Purusha, the pure, the perfect, who 
is alone the seer, and for whom is all this 
change. The Purusha is looking on at 
all these changes. He himself is never im- 
pure ; but by implication, by what the Vedan- 
tists call adkydsam, or reflection, he appears 
to be so—as when a red flower is held 
before a piece of crystal, the crystal will 
look red or a blue flower and the crystal 
will look blue and yet the crystal itself is 
colorless. There are many Purushas or 
Selves ; each pure and perfect, and it is ail 
these various divisions of gross matter and 
fine matter that are imposing on Them and 
making Them appear variously colored. 

Why is Prakritz doing all this ? Prakrztz ts 


* Literally means great. Sometimes called Buddhi. 


30 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


undergoing all these changes for the en- 
joyment and the benefit of the Self, so that 
it will realise its free nature. This immense 
book which we call the universe is stretched 
before man so that he may read, and come 
out,as an omniscient and omnipotent being. 
I must here tell you that some of our best 
psychologists do not believe in a personal 
God in the sense in which you believe in 
Him. The father of all psychologists, Ka- 
pila,denies the existence of God as Creator. 
His idea is that a personal God is quite un- 
necessary ; Prakretz is sufficient to work 
out all that is good. He repudiated the so- 
called “Design” theory of the universe. A 
more childish theory has never been ad- 
vanced. But he admits a peculiar kind of 
God. He says we are all struggling to get 
free, and when man becomes free he can, 
as it were, melt away into Prakritz for the 
time being, to come out at the beginning 
of the next cycle an omniscient and om- 


31 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


nipotent being and be its ruler. In that 
sense he can be called God. Thus you 
and I and the humblest beings will be gods 
in different cycles. Kapila says there 
can be such a temporal God, but an eternal 
God, eternally omnipotent and_ eternally 
ruler of the universe, there can never 
be. If there were such a God, there would 
be this difficulty--he must either be 
bound or free. A God who is perfectly 
free would not create ; there would be no 
necessity. If he were bound, he would 
not create because he could not, he would 
be weak himself. So, in either case, there 
cannot be an omnipotent or omniscient 
eternal ruler. So wherever the word God 
is mentioned in our Scriptures, the Vedas, 
Kapila says it means those perfected souls 
who have become free. The Sdukhya 
system does not believe in the unity of all 
souls. VedAnta believes that all individual 
souls are united in one cosmic Being called 


32 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


Brahman, but Kapila, the founder of the 
Sdnkhya, was dualistic. His analysis of the 
universe so far as it goes is really marvellous. 
He was the father of Hindu evolutionists, 
and all the later philosophical systems are 
simply outcomes of his thought. 
According to this system all souls will 
regain their freedom and their natural rights, 
which are omnipotence and omniscience. 
Here the question may be asked, whence 
is this bondage of the souls? The Sdukhya 
says it is without beginning : but if it be 
without beginning it must also be without 
end and we shall never be free. Kapila 
explains that this “without beginning” 
means not in aconstant line. Prakritz is 
without beginning and without end, but not 
in the same sense as is the soul or Purusha 
because Prakritz has no individuality, just 
as a river flowing by us is every moment 
getting a fresh body of water, and the sum 
total of all these bodies of water is the 


33 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


river and yet the river is not 4 constant 
quantity. Similarly everything in Prakretz 
is constantly changing, but the soul never 
changes. Therefore as Prakritz is always 
changing, it is possible for the soul to 
come out of its bondage. One theory of 
the Sdxkhya is peculiar to this psycholo- 
gy. The whole of the universe is built 
upon the same plan as one single man, 
or one little being; so, just as I have 
a mind, there is also a cosmic mind. When 
this macrocosm evolves there must be first 
intelligence, then egoism, then the tanmd- 
éras and the organs, and then the gross ele- 
ments. The whole universe according to 
Kapila is one body, all that we see are the 
grosser bodies, and behind these are the 
finer bodies, and behind them, a universal 
egoism, and behind that a_ universal 
Intelligence ; but all these are in Prakriti, 
all these are manifestations of Prakritz 
not outside of it. Each one of us is a part 


34 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


of that cosmic consciousness. There is a 
suni-total of intelligence out of which we 
draw whit we require, so there ts a 
sum-total of mental force in the universe 
out of which we are drawing eternally, but 
the seed for the body must come from the 
parents. The theory includes heredity and 
reincarnation too. The material is given to 
the soul out of which to manufacture a 
body, but that material is given by here- 
ditary transmission from the parents. 

We come now to the proposition that in 
this process there is an involution and an 
evolution. All is evolved out of that indis- 
creet Prakritz ; and then is involved again 
and becomes Avyaktam. It is impossible, 
according to the Séxkhyas, for any material 
thing to exist, which has not as its material 
some portion of consciousness. Conscious- 
ness is the material out of which all mani- 
festationis made. The elucidation of this 
comes in our next lecture, but I will show 


35 


The Sankhya Cosmoiogy 


how it can be proved. I do noi know this 
table as it is, but it makes an impresston ; 
it comes to the eyes, then to the zxarzyas, 
and then to the mind; the mind then 
reacts, and that reaction is what I call 
the table. It is just the same as throwing 
a stone into a lake; the lake throwsa 
wave against the stone; this wave is 
what we know. The waves coming out 
are all we know. In the same way the 
fashion of this wallisin my mind ; what 
is external nobody knows ; when I want 
to know it, it has to become that material 
which I furnish ; I, with my own mind, 
have furnished the material for my eyes, 
and the something which is outside is only 
the occasion, the suggestion, and upon 
that suggestion I project my mind, and it 
takes the form of what I see. The question 
is, how do we all see the same things ? 
Because we all havea part of this cosmic 
mind. Those who have mind will see the 


36 


The Sankhya Cosmology 


thing, and those who have not will not see 
it. This goes to show that since this 
universe has existed there has never been 
a want of mind, of that one cosmic mind. 
Every human being, every animals also 
furnished out of that cosmic mind, because 
it is always present and furnishing material 
for their formation. 


37 


I 
PRAKRITI AND PURUSHA 


We will take up the categories we have 
been discussing and come to the particulars. 
If we remember we started with Prakrziéz. 
This has been called by the Sdukhya 
philosophers indiscrete or inseparate, and 
defined as perfect balance of the materials 
in it ; and it naturally follows that in perfect 
balance there cannot be any motion. All 
that we see, feel, and hear is simply a 
compound of motion and matter. In the 
primal state, before this manifestation, 
where there was no motion, perfect balance, 
this Praéritz was indestructible, because 
decomposition comes only with limitation. 
Again, according to the Sdéxkhya, atoms 
are not the primal state. This universe 
does not come out of atoms, they may be 
the secondary, or tertiary state. The 


38 


Prakriti and Purusha 


original matter may compound into atoms, 
which in turn compound into greater and 
vreater things, and as far as modern 
investigations go, they rather point towards 
that. For instance, in the modern theory 
of ether, if you say ether is also atomic, 
that will not solve the proposition at all. 
To make it clearer, say that air is composed 
of atoms; and we know that ether is 
everywhere, interpenetrating, omnipresent, 
and that atoms are floating, as it were, in 
ether. If ether again be composed of 
atoms, there will still be some space 
between two atoms of ether. What fills up 
that? Andagain there will be another 
space between the atoms of that which fills 
up this space. If you propose that there is 
another ether still finer you must still have 
something to fill that space, and so it will 
be regressus en infinitum, what the Sdukhya 
philosophers call axavasthé,-never reaching 
a final conclusion. So the atomic theory 


39 


Prakriti and Purusha 


cannot be final. According tothe Sdxkfyes 
this Prakritz is omnipresent, onc omni 
present mass of matte: in which aic the 
causes of everything that exists. What is 
meant, by cause ? Cause isthe more subtle 
state of the manifested state, the un- 
manifested state of that which becomes 
manifested. What do you mean by 
destruction ? It is reverting to the cause, 
—the materials out of which a body is 
composed go back into their original 
state. Beyond this idea of destruction, 
any idea such as annihilation, is on the 
face of it absurd. According to modern 
physical sciences, it can be demonstrated 
that all destruction means that which 
Kapila called ages ago “reverting tothe 
causal state.” Going back to the finer 
form is all that is meant by destruction. 
You know how it can be demonstrated in 
a laboratory that matter is indestructible. 
Those of you who have studied chemistry 


40 


Prakriti and Purusha 


will know that if you place a candle and a 
.tustie pencil inside a glass tube and let the 
candle burn away, then take the caustic 
pencil out of the tube and weigh it, you 
will find that the pencil will weigh exactly 
its previous weight, plus the weight of the 
candle,—the candle became finer and finer, 
and went on to the caustic. So that in this 
present stage of our knowledge, if any man 
claims that anything becomes annihilated, 
he is only making himself absurd. It is 
only uneducated people who would advance 
such a proposition, and it is curious that 
modern knowledge coincides with what 
those old philosophers taught. The ancients 
proceeded in their inquiry by taking up 
mind as the basis ; they analyzed the mental 
part of this universe and came to certain 
conclusions, while modern science is analyz- 
ing the physical part, and it also has come 
to the same conclusions. Both analyses 
have led to the same truth. 


Al 


Prakriti and Purusha 


You must remember that the first manifest- 
ation of this Prakriéz in the cosmos is what 
the Sénkhyas called Mahat. We may cali it 
universal intelligence—the great principle ; 
that is the literal meaning. The first mani- 
festation of Prakrit7 is this intelligence ; I 
would not translate it by self-cor:sciousness, 

»because that would be wrong. Conscious- 
ness is only a part of this intelligence, 
which is universal. It covers all the grounds 
of consciousness, sub-consciousness and su- 
per-consciousness. In nature, for instance, 
certain changes are going on before your 
eyes which you see and understand, but 
there are other changes so much finer that 
no human perception can catch them. 
They are from the same cause, the same 
Mahat is making these changes. There 
are other changes, beyond the reach of our 
mind or reasoning, all these series of 
changes are in this Mahat. You will 
understand it better when I come to the 


42 


Prakriti and Purusha 


individual. Out of this A/akat comes the 
universal egoism, and these are both 
material. There is no difference between 
matter and mind save in degree. It is the 
same substance in finer or grosser form; one 
changes into the other, and this will exactly 
coincide with the modern physiological 
research, and will save you from a great 
deal of fighting and struggling if you believe 
it than that you have a mind separate from 
the brain, and all such impossible things. 
This substance called Mahat changes into 
the material called egoism, the fine state of 
matter, and that egoism changes into two 
varieties. In one variety it changes into the 
organs. Organsare of two kinds—organs 
of sensation and organs of reaction.* They 
are not the eyes or nose, but something 
finer ; what you call brain centres, and nerve 








* Organs of sensation—The nerve centres by which we see, 
hear, smell, taste and touch. Organs of reaction—The nerve 
centres regulating hands, feet, voice, excretion and procreation. 


43 





Prakriti and Purusha 


centres. This egoism becomes changed, 
and out of this material are manufactured 
these centres and these nerves. Out of the 
same substance, the egoism, is manufactured 
another fine form, the /¢axmdtras, fine 
particles of matter, those for instance which 
strike your nose and cause you to smell. 
You cannot perceive these fine particles, 
you can only know that they are there. 
The ¢anmadtras are manufactured out of the 
egoism, and out of the éaxmdtras, or subtle 
matter, is manufactured the gross matter, 
air, water, earth, and all the things that we 
see and feel. I want to impress this on 
your mind. It is very hard to grasp it, 
because, in Western countries, the ideas are 
so queer about mind and matter. It is 
hard to take these impressions out of our 
brains. I myself had tremendous difficulty, 
being educated in Western philosophy in 
my childhood. 

These are all cosmic things. Think of 


44 


Prakriti and Purusha 


this universal extension of matter, un- 
broken, one substance, undifferentiated, 
which is the first state of everything, and 
which begins to change just as milk 
becomes curd, and that it is changed into 
another substance called M/aheft, which in 
one state manifests as intelligence and in 
another state as egoism. It isthe same 
substance, only changed into the grosser 
matter called egoism. Thus is the whole 
universe itself built, as it were, layer after 
layer ; first undifferentiated Prakrztz (Avya- 
ktam), and that changes into universal 
intelligence (A/ahat), and that again is 
changed into universal egoism (Ahamkéra), 
and that changes into universal sensible 
matter. That matter changes into uni- 
versal sense-organs, again changes into 
universal fine particles, and these in turn 
combine and become this gross universe. 
This is the cosmic plan, according to the 
Sdnkhyas, and what isin the cosmos or 


45 


Prakriti and Purusha 


macrocosm, must be in the individual or 
microcosm. 

Take an individual man. He has first a 
part of undifferentiated nature in him, and 
that material nature in him becomes 
changed into mahat, a small particle of 
the universal intelligence, and that small 
particle of the universal intelligence in 
him becomes changed into egoism—a 
particle of the universal egoism. This 
egoism in turn becomes changed into 
the sense-organs, and the faxmdtras, and 
out of the latter combining he manufactures 
his world, his body. I want this to be 
clear, because it is the first stepping stone 
to Vedanta, and it is absolutely necessary 
for youto know, because this is the basis of 
the different systems of philosophy of the 
whole world. There is no philosophy in the 
world that is not indebted to Kapila, the 
founder of this Sdukhya system. Pytha- 
goras came to India and studied this 


46 


Prakriti and Purusha 


philosophy and carried some of these ideas 
to the Greeks. Later it formed the 
Alexandrian school, and still later formed 
the basis of Gnostic philosophy. Thus it 
became divided into two parts; one went to 
Europe and Alexandria, and the other 
remained in India, and became the basis of 
all Hindu philosophy, for out of it the 
system of Vyasa was developed. This 
was the first rational system that the world 
saw, this system of Kapila. Every meta- 
physician in the world must pay homage to 
him. J want to impress on your mind that 
as the great father of philosophy, we are 
bound to listen to him, and respect what he 
said. This wonderful man, most ancient 
of philosophers, is mentioned even in the 
Vedas. How wonderful his perceptions 
were ! If there is any proof required of the 
power of the Yogis to perceive things 
beyond the range of the ordinary senses, 
such men are the proofs. How could 


47 


Prakriti and Purusha 


they perceive them? They had no 
microscopes, or telescopes. How fine their 
perception was, how perfect their analysis 
and how wonderful ! 

To revert again to the microcosm, man. 
As we have seen, he is built on exactly the 
same plan. First the nature is “indiscrete” 
or perfectly balanced, then it becomes 
disturbed, and action sets in and the first 
change produced by that action is what is 
called mahat,—intelligence. Now you see 
this intelligence in man is just a particle of 
the cosmic intelligence,—the Makhat. Out 
of it comes self-consciousness, and from 
this the sensory and the motor nerves, and 
the finer particles out of which the gross 
body is manufactured. I will here remark 
that there is one difference between 
Schopenhauer and Vedanta. Schopen- 
hauer says that desire, or will, is the cause 
of everything. It is the will to exist that 
makes us manifest, but the Advaitists deny 


48 


Prakriti and Purusha 


this. They say it is the intelligence. 
There cannot be a single particle of will 
which is nota reaction. So many things 
are beyond will. It is only a manufactured 
something out of the ego, and the ego is a 
a product of something still higher, the 
intelligence, and that is a modification of 
*“indiscrete” Nature, or Prakrite. 

It is very important to understand this 
mahat in man,—the intelligence. This 
intelligence itself is modified into what we 
call egoism, and this intelligence is the 
cause of all these changes which result in 
producing the body. This covers all the 
grounds of sub-consciousness, consciousness 
and super-consciousness. What are these 
three states ? The sub-conscious state is 
what we find in animals, and call instinct. 
This is nearly infallible, but very limited. 
Instinct almost never fails. An animal 
instinctively knows a poisonous herb from 
an edible one, but its instinct is limited to 


49 
D 


Prakriti and Purusha 


one or two things; it works like a machine. 
Then comes the higher state of knowlege, 
which is fallible, makes mistakes often, but 
has a larger scope, although it is slow, and 
this you call reason. It is much larger 
than instinct, but there are more dangers of 
mistake in reasoning than in instinct. 
There is a still higher state of the mind," 
the super-conscious, which belongs only to 
the Yogis, men who have cultivated it. 
This is as infallible as instinct, and still 
more unlimited than reason. It is the 
highest state. We must remember that as 
in man this mahat is the real cause of all 
that which is manifesting itself in various 
ways, covering the whole ground of his 
sub-conscious, conscious and super-conscious 
states—the three states in which knowledge 
exists—-so in the Casmos, this universal 
Intelligence, A/ahkat, exists as instinct, as 
reason, and as super-reason. 

Now comes a delicate question, which is 


50 


Prakriti and Purusha 


always being asked. If a perfect God 
created the universe, why is there imperfec- 
tion in it? What we call the universe is 
what we see, and that is only this little 
plane of consciousness or reason, and 
beyond that we do not see atall. Now 
ghe very question is an impossible one, If 
I take up only a bit out of a mass and look 
at it, it seems to be imperfect. Naturally. 
The universe seems imperfect because we 
make itso. How ? What is reason? What 
is knowledge? Knowledge is finding asso- 
ciations. You go into the street and see a 
man, and know it is a man. You have seen 
many men, and each one has made an 
Impression on your mind, and when you 
now see this man, you calmly refer to your 
store of impressions, see many pictures of 
men there, and you put this new one with 
the rest, pigeon-hole it and are satisfied. 
When a new impression comes and it has 
associations in your mind, you are satisfied, 


51 


Prakriti and Purusha 


and this state of association is called 
knowledge. Knowledge is, therefore, pigeon- 
holing one experience with the already 
existing fund of experience, and this is 
one of the great proofs that you cannot 
have any knowledge until you have already 
a fund in existence. If you are without, 
experience, or if, as some European 
philosophers think, the mind is a tabula 
rasa, it cannot get any knowledge, because 
the very fact of knowledge is the recog- 
nition of the new by comparison with 
already existing impressions. There must 
be a store ready to which to refer a new 
impression. Suppose a child ts born into 
this world without such a fund, it would be 
impossible for him to get any knowledge. 
Therefore the child must have been in a 
state in which he had a fund, and so 
knowledge is eternally going on. Show 
me any way of getting out of this. It is 
mathematical experience. This is very 


52 


Prakriti and Purusha 


much like the Spencerian and some other 
western philosophies. They have seen so 
far that there cannot be any knowledge 
without a fund of past knowledge and that 
therefore the child is born with knowledge. 
They have found out the truth that the 
cause enters into the effect, that it comes 
‘in a subtle form in order to be developed. 
But these philosophers say that these 
impressions with which the child comes, 
are not from the child’s own past, but were 
in his forefathers’ and have come to the child 
by hereditary transmission. Very soon 
they are going to find this theory untenable, 
and some of them are even now giving 
hard blows to the idea of heredity. Heredity 
is very good, but incomplete. It only 
explains the physical side. How would you 
explain the influence of environment in 
accordance with it? Many causes produce 
an effect and environment is one of 


them. On the other hand the Hindu 
53 


Prakriti and Purusha 


philosophers say that we make our own 
environment, because as our past was, so 
we find our present. In other words, we 
are what we are here and now, because of 
what we were in the past. 

You understand now what is meant by 
knowledge. Knowledge is pigeon-holing 
anew impression with old impressions— 
recognizing a new impression. What is 
meant by recognition ? Finding its associ- 
ation with similar impressions that we ai- 
ready have. Nothing further is meant by 
knowledge. If that be the case, it must 
be that we have to see the whole series of 
similars in the process. Is it not ? Suppose 
you are to know a pebble; to find its 
association, you will have to see the whole 
series of pebbles similar to it. But with 
the universe we cannot do that, because in 
our reasoning we see only one perception 
of it and can neither see on this side nor 
on that side of it and refer it to its associ- 


54 


Prakriti and Purusha 


ation, Therefore the universe seems un- 
intelligible, because knowledge and, reason 
are always finding associations. This bit 
of the universe cut off by our conscious- 
ness is a startling new thing, and we are 
not able to find its associations. There- 
fore we are struggling with it, and we 
think it isso horrible, so wicked, and bad— 
sometimes we think it is good, but 
generally imperfect. The universe will 
be known only when we find its associations. 
We shall recognize them when we go 
beyond the universe and _ our little self- 
consciousness, and then alone the universe 
will stand explained. Until we do that all 
our fruitless striving will never explain it— 
because knowledge is the finding of simi- 
lars, and this conscious plane gives us only 
a partial view of the universe. So with 
our idea of the universal M/ahat, or what 
in our ordinary everyday language we call 
God. All that we have of the idea of God 


35 


Prakriti and Purusha 


is only one perception, a partial view of 
Him and all the rest is cut off and covered 
by our human limitation. ‘I, the Uni- 
versal, so great am I that even this uni- 
verse is a part of me.” * That is why we 
see God as imperfect, and we can never 
understand Him, because it is impossible. 
The only way to understand Him is to go 
beyond reason, beyond self-consciousness. 
“When thou goest beyond the heard and 
hearing, the thought and thinking, then 
alone wilt thou come to Truth.” + “Go 
thou beyond the Scriptures, because they 
teach only up to Prakrztz, upto the three 
qualities of which It is composed and out 
of which evolves the universe.” {| When 
we go beyond them we find the harmony, 
not before. 











et 


* Bhagavad Gita X 42. 
+ Bhagavad Gita Il. 52. 
t Gita If. 45. 


56 


Prakriti and Purusha 


So far it is clear that this macrocosm 
and microcosm are built on exactly the 
same plan, and of this microcosm we know 
only one very small part. We know 
neither the sub-conscious, nor the super- 
conscious. We know only the conscious. 
If a man says “I am a sinner,” he is foolish, 
because he does not know himself. He is 
the most ignorant of men about himself ; 
one part of himself only he knows, because 
the fact of knowledge covers only one part 
of the “mind-ground” he is in. So with 
this universe ; it is possible to know only 
one part through reasoning, but Prakrzte 
comprises the whole of it, the sub-conscious, 
the conscious and the super-conscious, the 
individual sakat and the universal Makat 
with all their subsequent modifications, 
and these lie beyond reason. 

What makes Prakriti change ? We have 
seen up to this point that everything in 
nature, Prakritz itself, is zad@ (insentient). 


57 


Prakriti and Purusha 


It is working under law ; it is all compound 
and insentient. Mind, intelligence, and 
will, all are insentient. But they are all 
reflecting the sentiency, the Cz‘ (Intelli- 
gence) of some Being who is beyond all 
this, and whom the Sankhya philosophers 
call Purusha. This Purusha is the un- 
witting cause of all these changes in Pra- 
Aviti—in the universe. That is to say, this 
Purusha, taking Him in the universal sense, 
is the God of the universe. It is claimed 
that the will of the Lord created the uni- 
verse, This is very good as a common 
daily expression, but that is all. How 
could it be will? Will is the third or fourth 
manifestation out of Prakritz, Many 
things exist before it; and what created 
them ? Will is a compound, and everything 
that isa compound is a production out of 
Prakritz, Will itself cannot create Pra- 
krittz, Itisnotasimple. So to say that 
the will of the Lord created the universe 


58 


Prakriti and Purusha 


is illogical. In man will covers a little 
portion only of self-consciousness. It 
moves our brain, some say. Ifit did you 
could stop the action of the brain, but you 
cannot. It is not the will. Who moves 
the heart ? It is not the will; because if 
it were you could stop it at your will. 
It is neither will that is working your 
body, nor the universe. But it is something 
of which will itself is one of the mani- 
festations. This body is being moved by 
a power of which will is only a mani- 
festation in one part. Soin the universe 
there is will, but that is only one part of the 
universe. The whole of the universe is not 
guided by will, that is why we do not find 
the explanation of it in will. Suppose I take 
it for granted that the will is moving the 
body, and then begin to fret and fume. It 
is my fault, because I had no right to take 
it for granted that it was will In the same 
way, if I takethe universe and think it is 


59 


Prakriti and Purusha 


will that moves it and then find that things 
do not coincide, it is my fault. This Purz- 
sha is not will, neither can it be intelligence, 
because intelligence itself is a compound. 
There cannot be any intelligence without 
some sort of matter. Inman, this matter 
takes the form which we call brain. Wher- 
ever there is intelligence there must be 
matter in some form or other. Thus in- 
telligence being a compound what then is 
this Purdihg ? It is neither intelligence 
nor buddhi (will), but yet it is the cause of 
both these ; itis His presence that sets 
them all vibrating and combining. Purusha 
may be likened to some of those substances 
which by their mere presence promote 
chemical reaction, as in the case of cyanide 
of potassium which is added when gold is 
being smelted. The cyanide of potassium 
remains separate and unaffected, but its 
presence is absolutely necessary to the suc- 
cess of the process. So with the Purusha. 


60 


Prakriti and Purusha 


It does not mix with Prakrzti ; it is not 
Intelligence, or Mahat, or any one of its 
modifications but the Self, the Pure, the 
Perfect. “I am the Witness and through 
My witnessing, Prakrit? is producing all 
that is sentient and all that is insentient.’* 

Whence then is this sentiency in Pra- 
kritt ? Its basisis in the Purusha, and it 
is the very nature of the Purusha. Itis 
that which cannot be expressed or under- 
stood, but which is the material of all that 
we call knowledge. This Purusha is not 
consciousness, because consciousness is a 
compound, but whatever is radient and 
good in this consciousness belongs to It. 
Sentiency is in the Purushka, but the Puru- 
sha is not intelligent, not knowing, it is 
the very condition in which knowledge is 
possible. The CAz# in the Purusha, plus 
Prakritz, is what is known to us as intelli- 
gence and consciousness. All the joy and 


a 





* Gita IX. 10, 
61 


Prakriti and Purusha 


happiness and light in the universe belongs 
to the Purusha, but it is a compound be. 
cause’ it is that Purusha plus Prakrite, 
‘Wherever there is any happiness, wher- 
ever there is any bliss, there is one spark of 
that immortality, which is Purushka.”* This 
Purusha is the great attraction of the uni-, 
verse ; untouched by, and unconnected with 
the universe, yet it attracts the whole uni- 
verse. You see aman going after gold, 
because therein is a spark of the Purusha, 
even though he knows it not. When 
a man desires children, or a woman a 
husband, what is the attracting power ? That 
spark of Purusha behind the child and the 
husband. It is there, behind everything 
only overlaid with matter. Nothing else 
can attract. “In this world of insentiency 
that Purusha alone is sentient.”+ This is 
the Purusha of the Sénkhyas. As such it 


* Brihadfranyaka Upanishada [V. 3—32. 
+ Katha Upanishada V. 13. 


62 


Prakriti and Purusha 


necessarily follows that this Pxruska must 
be omnipresent for that which is not omni- 
present must be limited. All limitations are 
caused and that which is caused must have 
beginning and end. If the Purusha is limit- 
ed it will die, will not be final, will not be 
free, but will have been caused. Therefore 
if not limited, itis omnipresent. According 
to Kapila there are many Pxrushas, 
not one. An infinite number of them, 
you are one, J am one, each is one; an 
infinite number of circles, each one infinite, 
running through this universe. The Puruska 
is neither born nor dies. It is neither mind 
nor matter, and the reflex from it is all that 
we know. Weare sure ifit be omnipresent 
it knows neither death nor birth. Prakrits 
is casting her shadow upon it, the shadow 
of birth and death, but it is by its own 
nature eternal. So far we have found the 
theory of Kapila wonderful. 

Next we will have to take up the proofs 


63 


Prakriti and Purusha 


against it. So far the analysis is’ perfect, 
the psychology cannot be controverted. 
There is no objection to it. We asked of 
Kapila the question: Who created Pra- 
&vite? and his answer was that Prakritz 
is uncreate. He has also said that the 
Purusha is uncreate and omnipresent and. 
that of these Purushas there is an infinite 
number. We shall have to controvert this 
last proposition, and find a better solution, 
and by so doing we shall come to the ground 
taken by VedAnta. Our first doubt will be 
how there can be these two infinites. Then 
our argument will be that it is not a perfect 
generalization, and that therefore we have 
not found a perfect solution. And then we 
shall see how the Vedantists find their way 
out of all these difficulties and reach a 
perfect solution. Yet all the glory really 
belongs to Kapila. It is very edsy to give 
a finish to a building that is nearly complete. 


64 


Il] 
SANKHYA AND ADVAITA 


I WILL give you first a resumé of the 
Sdénkhya philosophy, which we have been 
studying, because in this lecture we want 
to find where its defects are, and where 
Vedanta comes in to supplement these 
deficiencies. You must remember that ac- 
cording to the Sdzkhya philosophy, Prakretz 
is causing all these manifestations which 
we call thought, intellect and reason, love, 
hatred, touch and taste ; that everything is 
from Prakritz, This Prakritz consists of 
three sorts of elements, one called Saztva, 
another Rayas, and the third Zamuas. 
These are not qualities, but the materials 
out of which the whole universe is being 
evolved, and atthe beginning of a cycle 
they remain in equilibrium. When creation 
comes this equilibrium is disturbed and 

E 
65 


Sankhya and Advaita 


these elements begin to combine and re- 
combine, and manifest as the universe. The 
first manifestation of these is what the 
Sdnkhya calls the Mahat (universal Intelli- 
gence), and out of that comes conscious- 
ness. And out of consciousness is evolved 
Manas (universal Mind). Out of this 
consciousness are also evolved the organs of 
perception and action and the éanxmdtras,— 
sound particles, touch particles, taste parti- 
cles, and so forth. All fine particles are 
evolved from this consciousness, and out of 
these fine particles come the gross particles 
which we call matter. After the tanmdtras 
(those particles which cannot be seen, or 
measured) come the gross particles which 
we can feel and sense. The chz¢éa (‘‘mind- 
stuff”) in its three-fold functions of intellect, 
consciousness and mind* is working and 
manufacturing the forces called prduas. 
These Aréuas have nothing to do with 


* Sanskrit equivalent: Buddht, Ahamkdra and manas. 
66 


SAankhya and Advaita 


breath, you must at once get rid of that 
idea. Breath is one effect of the Prana (uni- 
versal Energy). By the prdzas are meant 
the nervous forces that are governing and 
moving the whole body, and manifesting 
themselves as thought, and as the various 
functions of the body. The foremost and 
the most obvious manifestation of these 
prénas is the breathing motion. If it were 
caused by air, a dead man would breathe. 
The prdéza acts upon the air, and not air 
upon it. These rd@zas are the vital forces 
which manipulate the whole body, and they 
in turn are manipulated by the mind and 
the zxdrzyas (the two kinds of organs). 
So far so good. The psychology is very 
clear and most precise, and just think of 
the age of it, the oldest rational thought 
in the world! Wherever there is any 
philosophy or rational system of thought, 
it owes something to Kapila, Wherever 
there is any attempt at psychology, there 


67 


Sankhya and Advaita 


is some indebtedness to the great father 
of this thought, to this man, Kapila. 

So far we see that this psychology is 
wonderful, but we shall have to differ with 
it on some points, as we goon. We find 
that the principal idea on which Kapila 
works is evolution. He makes one thing, 
evolve out of another,because his very defi- 
nition of causation is “the effect is the cause 
reproduced in another form,” * and because 
the whole universe, so far as we see it, is 
progressive and evolving. This whole 
universe must have evolved out of some 
material, out of Prakvitz, Therefore the 
Prakritz cannot be essentially different from 
its cause, only when it takes form it be- 
comes limited. The material itself is with- 
out form. But according to Kapila, from 
undifferentiated nature or prakriti down to 
the last stage of differentiation, none of 
these is the same as Purusha, the “Enjoyer,” 


® Sankhya Philosophy I. 118. 
68 


Sankhya and Advaita 


or “Enlightener.” Just as a lump of clay, 
so is a mass of mind, and the whole universe. 
By itself it has no light, but we find reason 
and intelligence init, therefore there must 
be some Existence behind it, behind the 
whole of Prakritz, whose light is percolating 
through it and appearing as Maekhat and 
consciousness and all these various things, 
and this Existence is what Kapila calls the 
Purusha,or Atman and the Vedantist Self. 
According to Kapila, the Purusha is a 
stemple factor, not a compound. It is imma- 
terial, the only one that is immaterial, 
whereas all the various manifestations are 
material. The Pxvrusha alone knows. 
Suppose I see a blackboard, first the ex- 
ternal instruments will bring that sensation 
to the organ (to the zzdrzya according to 
Kapila), from the organ it will’ go to the 
mind and make an impression; the mind 
will cover it up with another factor,— 
consciousness, and will present it to the 


69 


Sankhya and Advaita 


mahat (intelligence), but mahkaé cannot act ; 
it is the Purusha behind that acts. These 
are all its servants,bringing the sensation to 
It, and It gives the orders, and the makhat 
reacts. The Purusha isthe Enjoyer, the 
Perceiver, the real One, the King on 
his throne, the Self of man, and It is imma- 
terial. Because It is immaterial, it neces- 
sarily follows that It must be infinite, It 
cannot have any limitation whatever. So 
each one of these purushas is omnipresent, 
each is all-pervading, but can act only 
through fine and gross manifestations of 
matter. The mind, the self-consciousness, 
the organs and the vital forces compose what 
is called the fine body, or what in Christian 
philosophy is called the “ spiritual body ” 
of man. It is this body that comes to 
reward or punishment, that goes to the 
different heavens ; that incarnates and re- 
incarnates ; because we see from the very 
beginning that the going and coming of 


7O 


Sankhya and Advaita 


the soul (Puzuska) is impossible. Motion 
means going and cominy, and that which 
goes from one place to another cannot be 
omnipresent. It is this “nga-sarzra (subtle 
body) which comes and goes. Thus far 
we see from Kapila’s psychology that the 
soul is infinite, and that the soul is the 
only principle that is not an evolution of 
Prakritt. It is the only one that is outside 
of Prakrite but It has apparently be- 
come bound by Prakritz. Prakritz is 
surrounding the Puruska and so It has 
identified Itself with Prakrztz. It thinks “1 
am the 4inga-sarirva,” It thinks “I am the 
gross matter,the gross body,” and as such is 
enjoying pleasure and pain; but these do 
not really belong to the soul, they belong 
to this “nga-sarira, and to the gross body. 
When certain nerves are hurt we feel pain. 
We recognize that immediately. If the 
nerves in our fingers were dead we could 
cut the fingers and not feel it. So pleasure 


71 


Sankhya and Advaita 


and pain belong to the nerve-centres. 
Suppose my organ of sight is destroyed, | 
do not feel pleasure or pain from color, 
although my eyes are there. So it is 
obvious that pleasure and pain do not 
belong to the soul. They belong to the 
mind and the body. 

The soul has neither pleasure nor pain ; 
it is the Witness of everything, the eternal 
Witness of things that are going on, but it 
takes no fruits from any work. ‘As the 
sun is the cause of sight in every eye, yet 
is not itself affected by the defects in any 
eye such is the Purusha.”* “Asa piece of 
crystal appears red when red flowers are 
placed before it, so this Purusha appears 
to be affected by pleasure or pain from the 
reflection cast upon It by Nature, but It 
remains ever unchanged.”+ The nearest 
way to describe Its state is that which 


* Katha Upanishada—Chapter If. a—11. 
+ Sankhya Suttra. II. 35. 


72 


Sankhya and Advaita 


we feel during meditation. This meditat- 
ive state is that in which you approach 
nearest to the Purusha. Thus we see why 
the meditative state is always called the 
highest state by the Yogz, for to feel one’s 
self as one with the Purusha is neither a 
passive nor an active state, but the medi- 
tative state. This is the Séxkhya philoso- 
phy. 

Next, the Sdxkhyas say that this mani- 
festation of Prakrite is for the Soul, that 
all the combinations of the materials of It 
are for something outside of It. So these 
combinations which we call nature, these 
constant changes within and arround are 
going on for the enjoyment of the Soul, 
for Its liberation, that It may gain all 
this experience from the lowest to the 
highest: and when It has gained it, the 
Soul finds that it never was in Prakreti 
but was entirely separate, and It finds that 
It is indestructible, that It neither goes nor 


73 


Sankhya and Advaita 


comes, that going to heaven and being 
born again belong to Pra&rztz and not to 
Itself. So the soul becomes free. Thus all 
Prakritz is working for the enjoyment and 
experience of the Soul and It is getting 
this experience in order to reach the goal, 
and that goal is freedom. These Souls are 
many, according to the Sdxkhya_ philoso- 
phy. There is an infinite number of them. 
And the other conclusion is that there is 
no God, no Creator of the universe. Pra- 
&ritz herself being sufficient to produce all 
these forms, God is not necessary, say the 
Sankhyas. 

Now we shall have to contest these 
three positions of the Sdéukhyas. First that 
intelligence or anything of that sort does 
not belong to the Soul, but that it belongs 
entirely to Prakrztz, the Soul being simply 
qualitiless, colorless. The second point is 
that there is no God, and Vedanta will show 
that without a God there cannot be any 


74 


Sankhya and Advaita 


explanation whatever. Thirdly, we shall 
have to contend that there cannot be many 
Souls, that there cannot be an infinite 
number of them, that there is only One 
Soul in the universe, and that One is 
appearing as many. 

We will take the first proposition, that 
intelligence and reason belong entirely to 
Prakritt, and not to the Soul. The Ve- 
danta says that the Soulis in its essence 
unlimited or absolute Existence-Knowledge- 
Bliss ; but we agree with the Séazxk- 
hyas that, that which they call intelligence 
is a compound. For instance, let us look at 
our perceptions. We remember that the 
chitta (or the ‘‘mind-stuft”) is what is com- 
bining all these things, and upon which all 
these impressions are made, and from 
which reactions come. Suppose there is 
something outside. I see the blackboard. 
How does the knowledge of it come ? The 
blackboard itself is unknown, I can never 


75 


Sankhya and Advaita 


know it. It is what the German philosophers 
call the “thing in itself.” That blackboard, 
that ‘“X,” is acting on my mind, and the 
chitta reacts. The chztza is like a lake: If 
you throw a stone upon a lake, as soon as 
the stone strikes it, a reactionary wave 
comes towards the stone. This wave is, 
what you really see. And this wave is not 
like the stone at all, itis a wave. So that 
blackboard, ‘‘X,” is the stone which strikes 
the mind and the mind throws up a wave 
towards that object which strikes it, and 
this wave which is thrown towards it is 
what we call the blackboard. I see you. 
You as you really are is unknown and 
unknowable. You are “X” and you act 
upon my mind, andthe mind throws a wave 
towards the point from which the action 
came, and that wave is what I call Mr. or 
Mrs. So-and-So. 
There are two elements in this, one 

from inside and the other from outside, and 


76 


Sankhya and Advaita 


the combination of these two, “X” plus mind, 
is our external universe. All knowledge 
is by reaction. In the case of a whale 
it has been determined by calculation how 
long after its tail is struck, its mind reacts 
upon the tail and the tail feels the pain. Take 
athe case of the pearl oyster, in which the 
pearl is formed by the oyster throwing its 
own juice around the grain of sand that 
enters the shell and irritates him. There 
are two things which cause the pearl. First 
the oyster’s own juice, and second the blow 
from outside. So is my knowledge of this 
table, “X” plus my mind. The very 
attempt to know it will be made by the 
mind ; therefore the mind will give some 
of its own substance to enable it to under- 
stand, and when we understand it, it has 
become a compound thing,—‘“*X” plus the 
mind. Similarly in internal perception ; 
when we want to know ourselves. The real 
Self, which is within us, is also unknown 


77 


Sankhya and Advaita 


and unknowable. Let us call it “Y.” When 
I want to know myself as Mr. So-and-So 
the “Y” has to appear as “Y” plus the mind. 
That “Y” strikes a blow on the mind, 
when I want to know myself and the mind 
must throw a blow upon the “Y” also. 
So our knowledge of the whole world is ‘“X” 
plus mind (the external world), and “Y” 
plus mind (the internal world). We shall 
see later how the Advaitist idea can be de- 
monstrated mathematically. 

“X” and “Y” are simply the algebraic 
unknown quantities. We have seen that 
all knowledge is a combination, and so is 
this knowledge of the. world, or the uni- 
verse, a combination, and so is intelligence 
similarly a combination. If it is internal 
intelligence or mental experience it is “Y” 
plus the mind, if an external intelligence or 
experience of an object, it is ‘““X” plus the 
mind. All internal knowledge is a combi- 
nation of “Y” plus the mind and all 


78 


Sankhya and Advaita 


knowledge of external matter is a combi- 
nation of “X” plus the mind. We first take 
the internal group. The intelligence which 
we see in nature cannot be wholly in 
nature, because intelligence itself is a com- 
pound of “Y” plus the mind and ‘“Y” 
comes from the Self. So the intelligence 
that we know is a compound of the power 
of the light of the soul plus nature. 
Similarly, the existence which we know 
must be a compound of “X” plus the mind. 
We find therefore that in these three 
factors, I exist, | know and I am blessed, 
(the idea that I have no want, which comes 
from time to time) is the central idea, the 
grand basic idea of our life, and in pro- 
portion as this centre or basis becomes limit- 
ed, and becomes a compound, we think it 
happiness or misery. These factors mani- 
fest as existence phenomenal, knowledge 
phenomenal, and love phenomenal. Every 
man exists, and every man must know, and 


79 


Sankhya and Advaita 


every man is made for bliss. He cannot 
help it. So through all existence. Animals 
and plants, from the lowest to the highest 
existence, all must love. You may not 
call it love ; but they must all exist, must 
all know and must all love. So this ex- 
istence which we know is a compound of 
“X” and the mind, and knowledge, isa 
compound of that “Y” inside plus mind, 
and that love also is a compound of that 
“Y” and mind. Therefore these three 
factors which come from inside and are 
combining themselves with the external 
things to manufacture phenomenal ex- 
istence, knowledge and: love, are called 
by the Vedantists “Existence Absolute, 
Knowledge Absolute, Bliss Absolute.” 
That Absolute Existence which is limit- 
less, which is unmixed, uncombined, which 
knows no change, is the free Soul, and that 
Real Existence, when it gets mixed up, 
muddled up, as it were, with the elements 


80 


Sankhya and Advaita 


of nature is what we call human existence. 
It becomes limited and manifests as plant 
life, animal life, human life, just as infinite 
space is apparently limited by the walls 
of this room, or by any other enclosure. 
That Knowledge Absolute means not the 
knowledge we know, not intelligence, not 
reason, not instinct, but that which when it 
becomes manifested we call by these names. 
When that Knowledge Absolute becomes 
limited we call it intuition, and when it 
becomes still more limited we call it reason, 
instinct, etc. That Knowledge Absolute 
is Vzjndna. The nearest translation of it 
is “all-knowingness.” There is no com- 
bination in it. It is the nature of the soul. 
That Bliss Absolute when it becomes 
limited we call love, attraction for the gross 
body, or the fine bodies, or for ideas. 
These are but distorted manifestations of 
this blessedness which is not a quality of 
the soul, but the essence, the inherent 


81 


Sankhya and Advaita 


nature of the soul. Absolute Existence, 
Absolute Knowledge, and Absolute Blessed- 
ness are not qualities of the soul, but 
its essence ; there is no differer.ce between 
them and the soul. And the three are one; 
we see the one thing in three different 
lights. They are beyond all knowledge 
and by their reflection Prarztz appears to 
be intelligent. 

It is that eternal Knowledge Absolute 
of the Self percolating through the mind 
of man that becomes our reason and intelli- 
gence. It varies according to the medium 
through which it is shining. There is no 
difference as soul between me and the 
lowest animal, only his brain is a poorer 
medium through which the knowledge 
shines, and we call it instinct. In man the 
brain is much finer, so the manifestation is 
much clearer, and in the highest man it has 
become entirely clear, like a piece of glass. 
So with existence ; this existence which we 


82 


Sankhya and Advaita 


know, this limited bit of existence is simply 
a reflection of that Existence Absolute 
which is the nature of the soul. So with 
bliss ; that which we call love or attraction 
is but the reflection of the eternal blessed- 
ness of the Self, because with these 
manifestations come lirnitations, but the 
unmanifested, the natural, essential ex- 
istence of the soul is unlimited, to that 
blessedness there can be no limit. But in 
human love there are limitations. I may 
love you one day, I may cease to love you 
the next. My love increases one day, 
decreases the next, because it is only a 
limited manifestation. The first thing 
therefore that we find against Kapila is 
that he conceives the soul to be a mere 
qualitiless, colorless, inactive something. 
Vedanta teaches that it isthe essence of all 
Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss ; infinitely 
higher than all knowledge that we know, 
infinitely more blessed than any human 


83 


Sankhya and Advaita, 


love that we can think of, infinitely exist- 
ing. The soul never dies. Death and 
birth are simply unthinkable in connection 
with the Self, because it is Existence 
Absolute. 

The second point where we will contend 
with Kapila is with regard to his idea of 
God. Just as this series of limited mani- 
festations of Prakritz, beginning with the 
individual intellect and ending with the 
individual body, requires the Self behind 
as the ruler and governor on the throne, 
so in the Cosmos, we must enquire what 
the universal Intelligence, the universal 
Mind, the universal fine and gross materi- 
als have as their ruler and governor ? 
How will that series become complete 
without one universal Self behind it as its 
ruler and governor? If we deny that 
there is a universal governor, we must 
deny there is a soul behind the lesser 
series, because the whole universe is a 


84 


Sankhya and Advaita 


repetition of the same plan. When we 
know one lump of clay we know the 
nature of all clay. If we can analyze 
one human being, we shall have analyzed 
the whole universe, because it is all built 
on the same plan. Therefore if it be true 
that behind this individual series there 
stands one who is beyond all nature, who 
is not composed of materials, the purusha, 
the very same logic will apply to this uni- 
verse, and this- universe too will require 
such a Soul. The Universal Soul which 
is behind the modifications of Prakrztz is 
called by Vedanta Jsvara, the Supreme 
Ruler, God. 

Now comes the more difficult point 
to fight. There can be but one Soul. To 
begin with, we can give the Sdxkhyasa 
good blow by taking up their theeries and 
proving that each soul must be omni- 
present, because it is not composed of any- 
thing. Everything that is limited must be 


85 


Sankhya and Advaita 


limited by something else. Here is the 
existence of the table. Its existence is 
circumscribed by many things, and we find 
that every limitation presupposes some 
limiting thing. If we think of space, we 
have to think of it as alittle circle, but 
beyond that is more space. We cannot 
imagine a limited space in any other way. 
It can only be understood and perceived 
through the infinite. To perceive the 
finite, in every case we must apprehend 
the infinite ; both stand or fall together. 
When you think of time, you have also 
to think of time beyond any particular 
period of time. The latter is limited time 
and the larger is unlimited time. Wher- 
ever you endeavor to perceive the finite, 
you will find it impossible to separate it 
from the infinite. If this be the case, we 
shall prove thereby that this Self must be 
infinite, omnipresent. Then comes a fine 
question. Can the omnipresent, the infinite 


86 


Sankhya and Advaita 


be two? Suppose there are two infin- 
ites, one will limit the other. Suppose 
there are two infinites——A and B; the 
infinite ‘‘A” limits the infinite “B,” because 
the infinite ““B” you can say is not the 
infinite ‘‘A,” and the infinite ‘A ” it can 
be said isnot the infinite “B.” There- 
fore there can be but one infinite. Second- 
ly, the infinite cannot be divided. Infinity 
divided into any number of parts must 
still be infinity, for it cannot be separated 
from itself. Suppose there is an infinite 
ocean of water, could you take up one 
drop from there ? If you could, that ocean 
would no longer be infinite, that drop 
would limit it. The infinite cannot be 
divided by any means. 

But there are stronger proofs that the 
Self is One. Not only so, but that the 
whole universe is one. We will once more 
take up our “X” and “Y”. We have 
shown how what we call the external 


87 


Sankhya and Advaita 


world is ‘‘X plus mind,” and the internal 
world “Y plus mind.” “X” and “Y” are 
both unknown quantities, unknown and 
unknowable. What is the mind? The 
mind is “time, space and causation.” These 
form the very essence of the mind. You 
can never think without time, you can 
never conceive of anything without space, 
and you can never imagine anything with- 
out causation. These three are the forms 
in which both “X”" and “Y” are caught, 
and become limited by the mind. Beyond 
them there is nothing else in the constit- 
ution of the mind. Take off these three 
forms which of themselves do not exist,— 
what remains? Itis all one; “X” and 
“y” are one. It is only this mind, this 
form, that has limited them apparently, 
and made them differ as internal and ex- 
ternal world. “X” and ‘“Y” are both un- 
known and unknowable. We cannot attrib- 
ute any quality to them. As such they 


88 


Sinkhya and Advaita 


are both the same. That which is qualiti- 
less and attributeless and absolute must 
be one. There cannot be two absolutes. 
When there are no qualities there can be 
only One. “X” and “Y” are both without 
qualities because they take qualities only 
gn the mind, therefore this ‘“X” and “Y” 
are one. 

The whole universe is One. There is 
only One Self in the universe, only One 
Existence, and that One Existence, when 
it is passing through the forms of time, 
space and causation, is called Intelligence, 
Self-consciousness, fine matter, gross 
matter, etc. All physical and mental forms, 
everything in the universe is that One, 
appearing in various ways. When a little 
bit of it gets into this network of time, 
space and causation, it apparently takes 
forms ; remove the network and it is 
all One. This whole universe is all one, 


and is called in the Advaitist philosophy 
89 


Sankhya and Advaita 


Brahman. Brahman appearing behind the 
universe is called God ; appearing behind 
the little universe—the microcosm, is the 
soul. This very “Self? or Atman there- 
fore is God inman. There is only one 
Purusha, and He is called God, and when 
God and man are analyzed they are one, 
The universe is you yourself, the undivided 
you; you are throughout this universe. 
“In all hands you work, through all mouths 
you eat, through all nostrils you breathe, 
through all minds you think.’* The whole 
universe is you; this universe is your 
body ; you are the universe, both formed 
and unformed. You are the soul of the 
universe, its body also. You are God, you 
are the angels, you are man, you are the 
animals, you are the plants, you are the 
minerals, you are everything ; all manifest- 
ation is you. Whatever exists is you— 
the veal ‘““You’—the one undivided Self— 


gO 


Sankhya and Advaita 


not the little, limited personality that you 
have been regarding as yourself. 

The question now arises,—how have 
you, the Infinite Being, become broken 
into parts, as Mr. So-and-So, the animals 
andsoon? The answer is that all this 
division is only apparent. We know that 
the infinite cannot be divided, therefore 
this idea—that you are apart only—has 
no reality, and never will have ; and this 
idea that you are Mr. So-and-so was never 
true at any time ; it is but a dream. Know 
this and be free. That is the Advaitist 
conclusion. “I am neither the mind, nor 
the hody, nor am I the organs ; I am Ex- 
istence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute ; I am 
He, lam He."* This is knowledge, and 
everything besides this is ignorance. 
Everything that is, is but ignorance, the 
result of ignorance. Where is knowledge 
for me, for I am knowledge itself! Where 





* SankarAcharya’s Nirvan Satak I 
QI 


Sankhya and Advaita 


is life for me, for I am life itself! Life is 
a secondary manifestation of my nature. 
Iam sure I live, for I am life, the one 
Being. Nothing exists except through 
me, and in me, andasme. I! am mani- 
fested as the elements, but I am the One, 
free. Who seeks freedom? Nobody. 
seeks freedom. If you think that you are 
bound, you remain bound ; you make your 
own bondage. If you realize that you are 
free, you are free this moment. This is 
knowledge, the knowledge of freedom and 
freedom is the goal of all nature. 


92 


IV 
THE FREE SOUL 


We have seen that the analysis of 
the Sdxkhyas stops with the duality of 
existence, Prakritz and souls. There are 
an infinite number of souls, which, being 
simple, cannot die, and must therefore be 
separate from Prakrittz. Prakretz in itself 
changes and manifests all these phen- 
omena, and the soul, according to the 
Sdénkhyas is inactive. It isa simple by 
itself, and Prakriti works out all these 
phenomena for the liberation of the soul, 
and liberation consists in the soul’s 
discriminating that it isnot Nature. At 
the same time we have seen that the 
Sdénukhyas were bound to admit that every 
soul was omnipresent. Being a simple the 
soul cannot be limited, because all limit- 
ation comes either through time, space, or 


93 


The Free Sou! 


causation. The soul being entirely beyond 
these cannot have any limitation. To 
have limitation one must be in space, 
which means that it must have a body, 
and that which hasa body must be in 
Prakritz. Wf the soul had form, it would 
be identified with Prakritz ; therefore thw 
soul is formless, and that which is formless 
cannot be said to exist here, there. or any- 
where. It must be omnipresent. Beyond 
this the Sdukhya philosophy does not go. 
The first argument of the Vedantists 
against this is that this analysis is nota 
perfect one. If this Prakrztz be a simple, 
and the soul is also a simple, there will be 
two simples, and all the arguments that 
apply in the case of the soul to show that 
it is omnipresent, will apply equally in the 
case of Prakritz, and that too will be be- 
yond all time, space, and causation, and as 
the result there will be no change or 
manifestation. Then will come the diffi- 


94 


The Free Soul 


culty of having two simples, or two absol. 
utes, which is impossible. What is the 
solution of the Vedantist ? His solution 
is that, it requires some sentient being as 
the motive power behind, to make the 
mind think and Prakrztz work, because 
Prakretz in all its modifications, from gross 
matter up to /ahat (Intelligence) is simply 
insentient. Now, says the Vedantist, this 
sentient being which is behind the whole 
universe is what we call God, and conse- 
quently this universe is not different from 
Him. Itis He Himself who has become 
this universe. He not only is the instru- 
mental cause of this universe, but also the 
material cause. Cause is never different 
from effect, the effect is but the cause 
reproduced in another form. We see that 
every day. Sothis Being is the cause of 
Prakritz, All the forms and phases of 
Ved4nta, either dualistic, or qualified- 
monistic, or monistic, first take this position, 


95 


The Free Soul 


—that God is not only the instrumental but 
diso the efficient cause of this universe,that 
everything which exists is He. The second 
step in Ved4nta is that these souls are also 
a part of God, one spark of that Infinite 
Fire. ‘As from a mass of fire millions of 
small particles fly,even so from this Ancien 
One have come all these souls.”* So far 
so good, but it does not yet satisfy. What 
is meant by a part of the Infinite? The 
Infinite is indivisible; there cannot be 
parts of the Infinite. The Absolute cannot 
be divided. What is meant therefore by 
the expression that all these sparks are 
from Him? The Advaitist, the non- 
dualistic Vedantist, solves the problem by 
maintaining that there is really no part , 
that each soul is really not a part of the 
Infinite, but actually zs the Infinite Brak- 
man. Then how can there be so many 
souls? The sun reflected from millions of 


ery: 


* Mundakopanishada II. 1. 
96 


The Free Soul 


globules of water appears to be millions of 
suns, and in each globule isa miniature 
picture of the sun-form ; 80 all these souls 
are but reflections and not real. They are 
not the real “I” which is the God of this 
universe, the one undivided Being of the 
euniverse. And so all these little different 
beings, men, animals, etc., are but re- 
flections, and not real. They are simply 
illusory reflections upon Prakrztz. There is 
but one Infinite Being in the universe, 
and that Being appears as you and as I, 
but this appearance of division is after all 
delusion. He has not been divided, but 
only appears to be divided. This ap- 
parent division is caused by looking at Him 
through the network of time, space, and 
causation. When I look at God through 
the network of time, space, and causation, 
I see Him as the material world. When 
I look at Him from a little higher plane, 
yet through the same network, I see Him 


97 
G 


The Free Soul 


as an animal, a little higher as’ aman, a 
little higher as a god, but yet He is the 
One Infinite Being of the universe, and 
that Being we are. I am That, and you 
are That. Not parts of It, but the whole 
of It. “It is the Eternal Knower standing 
behind the whole phenomena ; He» 
Himself is the phenomena.” He is both 
the subject and the object, He is the “I” 
and the “You.” How is this? ‘How 
to know the knower ?’* The Knower can- 
not know himself. I see everything but 
cannot see myself. The Self, the Knower, 
the Lord of all, the Real Being, is the 
cause of all the vision that isin the uni- 
verse, but it is impossible for Him to see 
Himself or know Himself, excepting 
through reflection. You cannot see your 
own face excepting in a mirror, and so the 
Self cannot see its own nature until it is 
reflected, and this whole universe therefore 


* Brihad&ranyaka Upanishada V. 15. 
98 


The Free Soul 


is the Self trying to realize Itself. This 
reflection is thrown back first from the 
protoplasm, then from plants and animals, 
and so on and on from better and better 
reflectors, until the best  reflector,—the 
perfect man,—is reached. Just as a man 
who, wanting to see his face, looks first ina 
little pool of muddy water, and sees just an 
outline. Then he comes to clearer water, 
and sees a better image, then to a piece 
of shining metal, and sees a still better 
image, and at last to a looking-glass, and 
sees himself reflected as he is. Therefore 
the perfect man is the highest reflection of 
that Being, who is both subject and object. 
You now find why man_ instinctively 
worships everything, and how perfect 
men are instinctively worshipped as God 
in every country. You may talk as you 
like, but it is they who are bound to be 
worshipped. That is why men worship 
Incarnations, such as Christ or Buddha, 


99 


The Free Soul 


They are the most perfect manifestations 
of the eternal Self. They are much higher 
than all the conceptions of God that you 
or I can make. A perfect man is much 
higher than such conceptions. In him the 
circle becomes complete; the subject and 
the object become one. In him all delusions 
go away and in their place comes the 
realization that he has always been that 
perfect Being. How came this bondage 
then ? How was it possible for this perfect 
Being to degenerate into the imperfect ? 
How was it possible that the free became 
bound? The Aadvaztzst says he was never 
bound, but was always free. Various 
clouds of various colors come _ before 
the sky. They remain there a minute 
and then pass away. It is the same 
eternal blue sky stretching there forever. 
The sky never changes ; it is the cloud 
that is changing. So you are always 
perfect, eternally perfect. Nothing ever 


100 


The Free Soul 


changes your nature, or ever will. All 
these ideas that | am imperfect, lama 
man, or a woman, or a sinner, or I am the 
mind, I have thought, I will think, all are 
hallucinations ; you never think, you never 
had a body ; you never were imperfect. 
You are the blessed Lord of this universe, 
the one Almighty ruler of everything that 
is and ever will be, the one mighty ruler 
of these suns and stars and moons and 
earths and plants, and all the little bits of our 
universe. It is through you the sun shines, 
and the stars shed their lustre, and the earth 
becomes beautiful. It is through your bles- 
sedness that they all love and are attracted to 
each other. You are inal], and you are 
all. Whom to avoid, and whom to take ? 
You are the all in all. When this knowledge 
comes delusion immediately vanishes. 

I was once travelling in the desert in 
India. 1 travelled for over a month and 
always found the most beautiful landscapes 


IO! 


The Free Soul 


before me, beautiful blending of trees and 
lakes and all things. One day I was very 
thirsty and I wanted to havea drink at 
one of these lakes, but when ] approached 
that lake it vanished. Immediately with a 
blow came into my brain the idea that this 
was a mirage about which I had read all 
my life, and then I remembered and smiled 
at my folly, that for the last month all the 
beautiful landscapes and lakes I had been 
seeing were this mirage, but I could not 
distinguish them then. The next morning 
J again began my march ; there was the 
lake and the landscape, but with it immedi- 
ately came the idea, “This is a mirage.” 
Once known it had lost its powers of 
illusion. So this illusion of the universe 
will break one day. The whole of this 
will vanish, melt away. This is realization. 
Philosophy is no joke or talk. It will be 
realized ; this body will vanish, this earth 
and everything will vanish, this idea that 


102 


The Free Soul 


I am the body, or the mind, will for some 
time vanish, or if the Karma is ended it 
will disappear never to come back ; but if 
one part of the Karma remains,—as a 
potter’s wheel after the potter has finished 
the pot, will sometimes go on from the 
past momentum—the body, when this 
delusion has vanished altogether, will go 
on for some time. Again this world will 
come, men and women and animals will 
come, just as the mirage came the next 
day, but not with the same force, for along 
with it will come the idea that I know its 
nature now, and it will cause no bondage, 
no more pain, nor grief, nor misery. When- 
ever anything miserable will come, the 
mind will be able to say, “I know you as 
hallucination.” When aman has reached 
that state he is called sevan mukta, “living 
free,” free even while living. The aim 
and end in this life for the /zdna Yogz is 
to become this 7zvan mukia, living freedom. 


103 


The Free Sou! 


He is jzvan mukta who can live in this 
world without being attached. He is like 
the lotus leaves in water, which are. never 
wet by the water. He is the highest of 
human beings, nay, the highest of all 
beings, for he has realized his identity with 
the Absolute, he has realized that he is one 
with God. So long as you think you have 
the least difference from God, fear will 
seize you, but when you have known that 
you are He, that there is no difference, 
entirely no difference, between you and 
Him, that you are all of Him, and the 
whole of Him, all fear ceases. ‘There 
who sees whom ? Who worships whom ? 
Who talks to whom ? Who hears whom ? 
Where one sees another, where one talke 
to another, where one hears another, it is in 
law. Where none sees none, where none 
speaks to none that is the highest, that is 
the great, that is the Brakman.’* Being 
© Brihadfranyaka Upanishada V. 1.02 


104 


The Free Soul 


That, you are always That. What will 
become of the world then ? What good 
shall we do to the world ? Such questions 
do not arise. ‘What becomes of my 
gingerbread if I become old ?” says the 
baby. ‘What becomes of my marbles if 
I grow, so I will not grow,” says the boy. 
“What will become of my dolls if I grow 
old ?” says the little child. It is the same 
question in connection with this world ; 
it has no existence in the past, present, or 
future. If we have known the Atman as 
It is, if we have known that there is 
nothing else but this Aman, that every- 
thing else is but a dream, with no existence 
in reality, then this world with its poverties, 
its miseries, its wickedness and its good- 
ness will cease to disturb us. If they do 
not exist, for whom and for what shall we 
take trouble ? This is what the /nxdna 
Yogis teach. Therefore, dare to be free, 
dare to go as far as your thought leads, and 


105 


The Free Soul 


dare to carry that out in your life. It is 
very hard to come to juduam. It is for 
the bravest and most daring, who dare to 
smash all idols, not only intellectual, but 
also of the senses. 

This body is not 1; it must go. All 
sorts of curious things may come out of 
this teaching. A man stands up and says 
“T am not the body, therefore my headache 
must be cured !’—but where is_ the 
headache if not in his body? Let a 
thousand headaches and a thousand bodies 
come and go. What is thatto me? “I 
have neither birth nor death ; father nor 
mother I never had ; friends and foes I have 
none, because they are all 1; I am my 
own friend and I am my own enemy; Iam 
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute ; I 
am He, lam He.”* If in a thousand bodies 
{ am suffering from fever and other ills, in 
millions of bodies I am healthy. If in a 

* SankarA&charya’s Nirvan Satak. 
106 


The Free Soul 


thousand bodies I am starving, in other 
thousand bodies I am feasting. If in 
thousands of bodies I am suffering misery, 
in thousands of bodies Jam happy. Who 
shall blame whom, who praise whom ? 
“Whom to seek, whom to avoid ?” I seek 
fone, nor avoid any, for I am all the uni- 
verse, I praise myself, I blame myself, I 
suffer for myself, I am happy at my own 
will, lam free. This is the /xd@zz, brave and 
daring. Let the whole universe tumble 
down ; he smiles and says it never existed, 
it was all hallucination. Thus he sees the 
universe really disappear before his eyes 
and questions wondering ‘Where was it? 
Whether has it melted away ?” 

Before going into the practical part, we 
will take up one more intellectual question. 
So far the logic is tremendously rigorous. 
If a man reasons, there is no place for him 
to stand until he comes to this, that there 
is but One Existence, that everything else 


107 


The Free Sou! 


is nothing. There is no other way left for 
rational mankind but to take this view. 
But how is it that what is infinite, ever 
perfect,ever blessed, Existence-Knowledge- 
Bliss Absolute has come under these de- 
lusions ? It is the same question that has 
been asked all the world over in all timese 
In the vulgar form the question becomes 
‘How did sin come into this world ?” This 
is the most vulgar and sensuous form of 
the question, and the other is the more 
philosophic form, but the answer is the 
same. The same question has been asked 
in various grades and fashions, but in its 
lower forms it finds no solution, because 
the stories of apples and serpents and 
women do not give the explanation. In 
that state, the question is childish and so 
is the answer. But the question has 
assumed very high proportions now. “How 
this illusion came ?” and the answer is as 
fine. The answer is that we cannot expect 


108 


The Free Soul 


any answer to an impossible question. 
The very question is impossible in terms. 
You have no right to ask that question. 
Why ? What is perfection? That which 
is beyond time, space and causation. That 
is perfect. Then you ask how the perfect 
kecame imperfect. In logical language 
the question may be put in this form— 
“How did that which is beyond causation 
become caused ?” You contradict yourself. 
You first admit it is beyond causation, and 
then ask what causes it. Questions can 
only be asked within the limits of causation. 
As far as time and space and causation 
extend, so far can this question be asked. 
But beyond that it will be nonsense to ask 
it, because the question is illogical. Within 
time, space and causation it can never 
be answered, and what answer may lie 
beyond these limits can only be known 
when we have transcended them, therefore 
the wise will let this question rest. When 


109 


The Free Soul 


a man is ill, he devotes himself to curing 
his disease, without insisting that he must 
first learn how he came to have it. 

There is another form of this question, 
a little lower, but more practical and 
illustrative. What produced this delusion ? 
Can any reality produce delusion ? Certainly 
not. We see that one delusion produces 
another, and so on. It is delusion always 
that produces delusion. It is disease that 
produces disease, and not health that 
produces disease. The wave is the same 
thing as the water, the effect is the cause 
in another form. The effect is delusion. 
and therefore the cause must be delusion. 
What produced this delusion ? Another 
delusion. And soon without beginning. 
The only question that remains for you to 
ask is, does not this admission break 
your monism, because you get two ex- 
istences in the universe, one yourself, and 
the other the delusion ? The answer is,— 


110 


The Free Soul 


delusion cannot be called an existence. 
Thousands of dreams come into your life, 
but do not form any part of your life. 
Dreams come and go; they have no ex- 
istence ; to call delusion existence will be 
sophistry. Therefore there is only one 
éndividual existence in the universe, ever 
free, and ever blessed, and that is what 
you are. This is the last conclusion reached 
by the Advaztzsts. It may then be asked, 
what becomes of all these various forms of 
worship ? They will remain; they are 
simply groping in the dark for light, and 
through this groping light will come. We 
have just seen that the Self cannot see It- 
self. All our knowledge is within the net- 
work of Md@yd ( unreality ), and beyond 
that is freedom. Within the network there 
is Slavery, it is all under law. Beyond that 
there is no law. So far as the universe is 
concerned, existence is ruled by law, and 
beyond that is freedom. As long as you 


iil 


The Free Soul 


are in the network of time, space and 
causation, to say you are free is nonsense, 
because in that network all is under rigor- 
ous law, sequence and consequence. Every 
thought that you think is caused, every 
feeling has been caused ; to say that the 
will is free is sheer nonsense. It is only 
when the infinite existence comes, as it 
were, into this network of Méyd that it 
takes the form of will. Will isa portion of 
that being caught in the network of Méyd, 
and therefore ‘free-will” is a misnomer. It 
means nothing,—sheer nonsense. So is all 
this talk about freedom. There is no 
freedom in AZdyd. 

Every one is as much bound in 
thought, word, deed, and mind, as a piece 
of stone or this table. That I talk to you 
now is as rigorously in causation as that 
you listen to me. There is no freedom 
until you go beyond Méyd. That is the 
real freedom of the soul. Men, however 


I1i2 


The Free Soul 


sharp and intellectual, however clearly they 
see the force of the logic that nothing here 
can be free, are all compelled to think they 
are free ; they cannot help. No work can 
goon until we begin to say we are free. 
It means that the freedom we talk about is 
the glimpse of the blue sky through the 
clouds, and that the real freedom,—the 
blue sky itself,—is behind. True freedom 
cannot exist in the midst of this delusion, 
this hallucination, this nonsense of the 
world, this universe of the senses, body and 
mind. All these dreams, without beginning 
or end, uncontrolled and uncontrollable, 
ill-adjusted, broken, inharmonious, form our 
idea of this universe. In a dream, when you 
see a giant with twenty heads chasing you, 
and you are flying from him, you do not 
«think itis inharmonious; you think it is 
proper and right. So is this law. All 
that you call law is simply chance without 
meaning. In this dream state you call it 


113 
H 


The Free Soul 


law. Within A/dyé, so far as this law of 
time, space and causation exists, there is 
no freedom, and all these various forms of 
worship are within this A/déyd. The idea 
of God and the ideas of brute and of man 
are within this 1/d@yd@, and as such equally 
hallucinations; all of them are dreams. 
But you must take care not to argue like 
some extraordinary men of whom we hear 
at the present time. They say the idea of 
God is adelusion, but the idea of this 
world is true. Both ideas stand or fall by 
the same logic. He alone has the right to 
be an atheist who denies this world, as well 
asthe other. The same argument ts for 
both. The same mass of delusion extends 
from God to the lowest animal, from a 
blade of grass to the Creator. They stand 
or fall by the same logic. The same 
person who sees falsity in the idea of God 
ought also to see it in the idea of his own 
body, or his own mind. When God 


114 


The Free Soul 


vanishes, then also vanish the body and 
mind, and when both vanish, that which 
is the Real Existence remains forever. 
“There the eyes cannot go, nor the speech, 
nor the mind. We cannot see it, neither 
know it.” And we now understand that 
s far as speech and thought and 
knowledge, and intellect go, it is all within 
this Wéyd, within bondage. Beyond that 
is Reality. There neither thought, nor 
mind, nor speech, can reach. 

So far itis intellectually all right, but 
then comes the practice. The real work in 
these classes is the practice. Are any 
practices necessary to realize this one-ness ? 
Most decidedly. It is not that you become 
this Brahman. You are already that. It is 
not that you are going to become God or 
perfect ; you are already perfect, and when- 
ever you think you are not, it is a delusion. 
This delusion which says that you are Mr. 
So-and-So, or Mrs. So-and-So, can be got 


115 


The Free Soul 


rid of by another delusion, and that is 
practice. Fire will eat fire, and you can 
use one delusion to conquer another de- 
lusion. One cloud will come and brush 
away another cloud, and then both will go 
away. What are these practices then? 
We must always bear in mind that we ane 
not going to be free, but are free already. 
Every idea that we are bound is a delusion. 
Every idea that we are happy or unhappy, 
is a tremendous delusion; and another 
delusion will come,—that we shall have to 
work and worship and struggle to be 
free,—and this will chase out the first 
delusion, and then both will stop. 

The fox is considered very unholy by 
the Mohammedans, and so is the dog by the 
Hindus. So, if a fox or a dog touches any 
bit of food it has to be thrown out, it can- 
not be eaten by any man. Ina certain 
Mohammedan house a fox entered and 
took a little bit of food from the table, ate 


116 


The Free Soul 


it up and fled. The man was a poor man, 
and had prepared a very nice feast for 
himself, and that feast was made unholy, 
and he could not eat it. So he went toa 
Mulla, a priest, and said: “This has 
happened to me; a fox came and tooka 
mouthful out of my meal; what can be 
done? I had prepared a feast and wanted 
so much to eat it, and now comes this fox 
and destroys the whole thing.” The Mudla 
thought for a minute, and then found only 
one solution and said: ‘The only way is 
for you to get a dog, and make him eata 
bit out of the same plate. Now because 
dogs and foxes are eternally quarrelling, 
the food that was left by the fox will go 
into your stomach, and that not eaten by 
the dog will go there, and destroy each 
other and thus all will be purified.” We are 
very much in the same predicament. This 
is an hallucination that we are imperfect, 
and we take up another, that we have to 


117 


The Free Soul 


practice to become perfect. Then one 
will chase the other, as we can use one 
thorn to extract another and then throw 
both away. There are people for whom 
it is sufficient knowledge to hear, “Thou 
art That.” With a flash this universe 
goes away and the real nature shines, but 
others have to struggle hard to get rid of 
this idea of bondage. 

The first question is, who are fit to 
become /uxdna Yogzs? Those who are 
equipped with these requisites. First, 
renunciation of all fruits of work and 
of all enjoyments in this life or another 
life. If you are the creator of this 
universe whatever you desire you will 
have, because you will create it for 
yourself. It is only a question of time. 
Some get it immediately ; with others the 
past samskdéras (impressions) stand in the 
way of getting their desires. We give the 
first place to desires for enjoyment, either 


118 


The Free Soul 


in this or another life. Deny there is any 
life at all, because life is only another name 
for death. Deny that you are a living 
being. Who cares for life? Life is one 
of these hallucinations and death is its 
counterpart. Joy is one part of these 
hallucinations, and misery the other part, 
and soon. What have you to do with life 
or death ? These are all creations of the 
mind. This is called giving up desires of 
enjoyment either in this life or another. 
Then comes controlling the mind, 
calming it so that it will not break into 
waves and have all sorts of desires ; 
holding the mind steady, not allowing it to 
get into waves from external or internal 
causes, controlling the mind perfectly just 
by the power of will. The /xdna Yogz 
does not take any one of these physical 
helps, or mental helps, simply philosophic 
reasoning, knowledge and his own will, 
these are the instrumentality he believes 


119 


The Free Soul. 


in. Next comes 7ztzkshd, forbearance, 
bearing all miseries without murmuring, 
without complaining. When an injury 
comes, do not mind it. If a tiger comes, 
stand there. Who flies? There are men 
who practice ¢ztzkshd, and succeed in 
it, There are men who sleep on the banks 
of the Ganges in the mid-summer sun of 
India, and in winter float in the waters of 
the Ganges for a whole day; they do not 
care. Men sit in the snow of the Hima- 
layas, and do not care to wear any garment. 
What is heat ? What is cold? Let things 
come and go, what is that to me, I am not 
the body. It is hard to believe this in 
these Western countries, but it is better to 
know that it is done. Just as your people 
are brave to jump at the mouth of a 
cannon, or into the midst of the battle-field, 
so our people are brave to think and act 
out their philosophy. They give up their 
lives for it. ‘‘ I am Existence-Knowledge- 


120 


The Free Soul 


Bliss Absolute; | am He; I am He.” 
Just as the Western ideal is to keep up 
luxury in practical life, so ours is to keep 
up the highest form of spirituality, to de- 
monstrate that religion is not merely frothy 
words, but can be carried out, every bit of 
it, in this life. This is ¢z¢zkské, to bear 
everything, not to complain of anything. 
I myself have seen men who say “I am 
the soul; what is the universe to me? 
Neither pleasure, nor pain, nor virtue, nor 
vice, nor heat, nor cold are anything to 
me.” That is ¢zézeshé ; not running after 
the enjoyments of the body. What is 
religion? To pray: “give me this and 
that”? Foolish ideas of religion it is! 
Those who believe them have no true idea 
of God and soul. My Master used to say 
the vulture rises high and high until he be- 
comes a speck, but his eye is always in the 
piece of rotten carrion on the earth. After 
all, what is the result of your ideas of re- 


121 


The Free Soul 


ligion ? To cleanse the streets, and have 
more bread and clothes. Who cares for 
bread and clothes? Millions come and go 
every minute. Who cares? Why care for 
the joys and vicissitudes of this little 
world ? Go beyond that if you dare; go 
beyond law, let the whole universe vanish, 
and standalone. ‘I am Existence-Absol- 
ute, Knowledge-Absolute, Bliss-Absol- 


ute; I am He; I am He.” 


122 


V 


ONE EXISTENCE APPEARING 
AS MANY 


WE have seen how Varrégyam, or 
renunciation, is the turning point in all 
these various Vogas. The Karmi (worker) 
renounces the fruits of his work. The 
Bhakta (devotee) renounces all little loves 
for the almighty and omnipresent love. 
The Yogz renounces his expériences, 
because his philosophy is that the whole 
Nature, although it is for the experience 
of the soul, at last brings him to know 
that he is not in Nature, but eternally 
separate from Nature. The /ndxz (philoso- 
pher) renounces everything, because his 
philosophy is that Nature never existed, 
neither in the past, present nor future. 
We have also seen how the question of 


123 


One Existence Appearing as’Many 


utility cannot be asked in these higher 
themes; it is very absurd to raise the 
question of utility, and even if it be raised 
after a proper analysis what do we find in 
this question? The ideal of happiness, 
that which brings man greater happiness is 
of greater utility to him than those things 
which do not improve his material con- 
ditions or bring him such great happiness. 
All the sciences are for this one end, to 
bring happiness to humanity and that which 
brings the larger amount of happiness, 
mankind takes and gives up that which 
brings a lesser amount of happiness. We 
have seen how happiness is either in the 
body, or in the mind, or in the A tman. 
With animals, and in the lowest of human 
beings, who are very much like animals, 
happiness is all in the body. No man can 
eat with the same pleasure as a famished 
dog, or a wolf; so, in the dog and the 
wolf the ideal of happiness is concerned 


124 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


entirely with the body. In men we find 
a higher plane of happiness, that of thought, 
and in the /d@nz there is the highest plane 
of happiness in the Self, the Atman. So 
to the philosopher this knowledge of the 
Self is of the highest utility, because it 
gives him the highest happiness possible. 
Sense gratifications or physical things can- 
not be of the highest utility to him because 
he does not find in them the same pleasure 
that he finds in knowledge itself; and 
after all, knowledge is the one goal, and is 
really the highest happiness that we know. 
All who work in ignorance are, as it were, 
“the draught animals of the devas.” The 
word deva is here used in the sense of a 
wise man. All the people that work, and 
toil, and labor like machines do not really 
enjoy life, but it is the wise man who 
enjoys. A rich man buys a picture at a 
cost of a hundred thousand dollars perhaps, 
but it is the man who understands art 


125 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


that enjoys it; andif the buyer is without 
knowledge of art it is useless to him, he is 
only the owner. All over the world, it is 
the wise man who enjoys the happiness of 
the world. The ignorant -man never 
enjoys; he has to work for others un- 
consciously. 

Thus far we have seen the theories of 
these Advaitist philosophers, how there is 
but one Afwan ; there cannot be two. We 
have seen how in the whole of this universe 
there is but One Existence, and that One 
Existence when seen through the senses is 
called the world, the world of ° matter. 
When It is seen through the mind It is 
called the world of thoughts and ideas, 
and when It is seen as it is, then It appears 
as the One Infinite Being. You must bear 
this in mind ; it is not that there is a soul 
in man, although I had to take that for 
granted in order to explain it at first, but 
that there is only One Existence, and that 


126 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


one the Aman, the Self, and when this is 
perceived through the senses, through sense 
imageries, It is called the body. When It 
is perceived through thought, It is called 
the mind. When It is perceived in Its own 
nature, It appears as the A/man, the One 
Only Existence. So, it is not that there are 
three things in one, the body and the mind 
and the Self,—although that was a con- 
venient way of putting it in the course of 
explanation—but all is that Azéman, and 
that one Being is sometimes called the 
body, sometimes the mind, and sometimes 
the Self, according to different visions. 
There is but one Being which the ignorant 
call the world. When aman goes higher 
in knowledge he calls the very same Being 
the world of thought. Again when perfect 
knowledge comes, all illusions vanish, and 
man finds it is all nothing but Aiman. “I 
am that One Existence”—this is the last 
conclusion. There are neither three nor 


127 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


two in the universe ; itis all One. That 
One, under the illusion of A/dyd is seen 
as Many, just as a rope is seen as a_ snake. 
It is the very rope that is seen as a snake 
There are not two things there, a rope 
separate and a snake separate. No man 
sees two things there. Dualism and non- 
dualism are very good philosophic terms, 
but in perfect perception we never perceive 
the real and the false at the same time. 
We are all born monists, we cannot help 
it. We always perceive the one. When 
we perceive the rope, we do not perceive 
the snake at all, and when we see the 
snake, we do not see the rope at all; st 
has vanished. When you see illusion, you 
do not see real men. Suppose one of your 
friends is coming from a_ distance in 
the street ; you know him very well, but 
through the haze and mist that is before 
you, you think it isanother man. When 
you see your friend as another man, you 


128 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


do not see your friend at all, he has 
vanished. You are perceiving only one 
person: For suppose your friend is A.; 
when you perceive A. as B. you do not 
see A. at all. So in each case you perceive 
only one. When you see yourself as a 
body, you are body and nothing else, and 
that is the perception of the vast majority 
of mankind. They may talk of soul and 
mind, and all such things, but what they 
perceive is the physical form, the touch, 
taste, vision, and so on. Again, with 
certain men, in certain states of conscious- 
ness, they perceive themselves as thought. 
You know, of course, the story told of 
Sir Humphrey Davy, who was making 
experiments before his class with laughing- 
gas, and suddenly one of the tubes broke, 
and the gas escaping, he breathed it in. 
For some moments he remained like a 
statue. Afterwards he told his class that 
when he was in that state, he actually 


129 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


perceived that the whole world is made up 
of ideas. The gas, fora time, made him 
forget the consciousness of the body, and 
that very thing which he was seeing as 
the body, he began to perceive as ideas. 
When the consciousness rises still higher, 
when this little puny consciousness is‘ 
transcended for ever, that which is the 
Reality behind shines, and we see it as 
the One Existence-Knowledge-Bliss, the 
one Aiman, the Universal Being. “One 
that is only knowledge itself, One that 
is bliss itself, beyond all compare, beyond 
all limit, ever free, never bound, infinite 
as the sky, undivided and unchangeable, 
—such an One will manifest Himself in 
your heart in meditation.”* 

How does the Advaitist theory explain 
all these various phases of heavens and 
hells and all these various ideas we find in 

all religions ? When a man dies it is said 


* Vivekachudamani 410. 


130 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


that he goes to heaven or hell, goes here 
or there, or that when aman dies he is 
born again in another body, either in 
heaven or in another world, or somewhere. 
These are all hallucinations. Nobody is 
ever born or dies, really speaking. There 
is neither heaven nor hell, nor this world ; 
all three never really existed. Tell a child 
alot of ghost stories, and let him go out 
into the street in the evening. There isa 
little stump of a tree. What does the 
child see? A ghost, with hands stretched 
out, ready to seize him. Suppose a man 
comes from the corner of the street, want- 
ing to mect his sweetheart ; he sees that 
stump of the tree as the girl, A police- 
man coming from the street corner sees 
the stump as a thief. The thief sees it as 
a policeman. Itis the same stump of a 
tree that was seen in various ways. The 
stump is the reality, and the visions of the 
stump are the projections of the various 


131 


One Existence Appearing as. Many 


minds, There is one Being, this Self ; 
It neither comes nor goes. When a man 
is ignorant, he wants to go to heaven or 
some place, and all his life he has been 
thinking and thinking of this, and when 
this earth dream vanishes he sees this 
world as a heaven, with devas and angels 
flying about, and all such things. If a man 
all his lifé desires to meet his forefathers 
he gets them all, from Adam downwards, 
because he creates them. If a man is still 
more ignorant and has always been 
frightened by fanatics with ideas of hell, 
when he dies he will see this very world 
as hell, with all sorts of punishments. All 
that is meant by dying or being born is 
simply a change in the plane of vision. 
Neither do you move, nor does that move 
upon which you project your vision. You 
are the permanent, the unchangeable. How 
can you go and come ? It is imposible ; you 
are omnipresent. The sky never moves, but 


132 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


the clouds move over the surface of the 
sky, and we think that the sky itself moves. 
Just as you go into a railway train, and 
you think the land is moving. It is not 
so, but it is the train which is moving. So 
you are where you are while this dream, 
like these various clouds, moves. One 
dream follows another without connection. 
There is no such thing as law or connection 
in this world, but we are thinking that 
there is a great deal of connection. All 
of you have probably read ‘Alice in 
Wonderland.” It is the most wonderful book 
for children written in this century. When 
I read it 1 was delighted, it was always in 
my head to write that sort of a book for 
children. What pleased me most in it was 
that what you think most incongruous, that 
is there—the want of all connection. One 
idea comes and jumps into another, without 
any connection. Wien you were children 
you thought that to be the most wonderful 


133 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


connecticn. So this man brought back 
his thoughts of childhood, perfectly 
connected to him as a child, and composed 
this book for children: whiie many of 
these books which men write, trying to 
make children swallow their own ideas as 
men are nonsense. We too are grown up 
children, that is all. The world is the 
same unconnected thing,—‘“Alice in 
Wonderland,”—with no connection what- 
ever. When we see things happen a 
number of times in a certain sequence, we 
call it cause and effect, and say that the 
thing will happen again. When this 
dream will change another dream will 
seem quite as connected as this. When 
we dream, the things we see all seem to be 
connected ; during the dream we never 
think they are incongruous ; it is only when 
we wake that we see the want of connection. 
So when we wake from this dream of the 
world and compare it with the Reality, it 


134 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


will all be found incongruous nonsense, a 
mass of incongruity passing before us, we do 
not know whence or whither ; but we know 
it will end. And this is called MWdyé. 
Like masses of fleeting, fleecy clouds is 
all this changing existence, and the sun 
itself, the unchanging, is you. When you 
look at that unchanging Existence from the 
outside, you call it God, and when you 
look at it from the inside you call it your- 
self. Itis but one. There is no God 
separate from you, no God higher than 
you, the real “you.” All the Gods are 
little beings to you, all the ideas of God 
and Father in heaven are but your 
reflection. God Himself is your image. 
“God created man after His own 
image’—-that is wrong. Man creates 
God after his own image—this is right. 
Throughout the universe we are creating 
gods after our own image. We create 
the god, and fall down at his feet and 


135 


One Existence Appeariug as Many 


worship ; and when this dream comes, 
we love it ! 

This is a good point to understand,— 
that the sum and substance of this morning's 
lecture is that there is but One Existence, 
and that One Existence seen through 
different mediums appears either as earth, 
or heaven, or hell, or God, or ghosts, or men 
or demons, or world, or all these things. 
But—“he who sees that One, who never 
changes among these diverse changing 
things, he who sees that One Life in this 
floating universe of death, he who realizes 
within himself the One who fulfils the desires 
of these many, unto him belongs eternal 
peace ; unto none else, unto none else.’* 
This One Existence has to be realized. 
How, is the next question. How is it to be 
realized ? How is this dream to be broken, 
how shall we wake up from this dream 
that we are little men and women, and _ all 





* Katha Upanishada V. 13. 
1 36 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


such things ? We are the Inflnite Being 
of the universe, and have become material- 
ized into these little beings, men and women, 
depending upon the sweet word of one 
man, or the angry word of another man 
and so forth. What a terrible dependence, 
what a terrible slavery ! 1 who am _ beyond 
all pleasure and pain, whose reflection is 
the whole universe, little bits of whose life 
are the suns and moons and stars,—-]_ am 
held down asa terrible slave. If you pinch 
my body I feel pain. If one says a kind 
word I begin to rejoice. Look at my 
condition,—slave of the body, slave of the 
mind, slave of the world, slave of a good 
word, slave of a bad word, slave of passion, 
slave of happiness, slave of life, slave of 
death, slave of every thing. This slavery 
has to be broken. How ? “This A¢man has 
first to be heard, then reasoned upon and 
then meditated upon.”* This is the method 
“© Brihadiranyaka UpanishadaV.6.2=~«~*2~2~ 


137 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


of the Advaita /udnz. The truth has to 
be heard, then reflected upon and then to 
be constantly asserted. Think always— 
“I am Brakman”; every other thought 
must bé cast aside as weakening. Cast 
aside every thought that says that you 
are men or women. Let body go, and 
mind go, and gods go, and ghosts go. Let 
everything go but that One Existence. 
“Where one hears another, where one sees 
another, that is but small ; where one does 
not here another, where one does not see 
another, that is infinite.’’* That is the 
highest, where the subject and _ the 
object become one. When I ain the 
listener and 1 am the speaker, when | 
am the teacher and I am the taught, 
when I am the creator and I am the 
created,—-then alone fear ceases ; for there 
is not another to make us afraid. There 
is nothing but myself, what can frighten 
* Chhandogya Upanishada XXIV. 


1338 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


me? This is to be heard day after day. 
Get rid of all other thoughts. Everything 
else must be thrown aside, and this is to 
be repeated continually, poured through 
the ears until it reaches the heart, until 
every nerve and muscle, every drop of 
blood tingles with the idea that I am He, 
Iam He. Even at the gate of death say 
“lam He.” There was a man in India, 
a Sannydsin, who used to repeat 
“Shivoham” (“I am Bliss Eternal”), anda 
tiger jumped on him one day and dragged 
him away and killed him, and as long as 
he was living the sound came “Shzvoham, 
Shivoham.” Even at the gate of death, 
in the greatest danger, in the thick of the 
battle-field, at the bottom of the ocean, on 
the tops of the highest mountains, in the 
thickest of the forest, tell yourself “I am 
He, lam He.” Day and night say “I 
am He.” It is the greatest strength ; it 
is religion. ‘The weak will never reach 


139 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


the Adéman.”* Never say: “O Lord, I 
am a miserable sinner.” Who shall help 
you? Yor are the help of the universe. 
What in this universe can help you? 
Where is the man, or the god, or the 
demon to help you? What can prevail 
over you? You are the god of the 
universe ; where can you seek for help? 
Never help came from anywhere but from 
yourself. In your ignorance, every prayer 
that you made and that was answered, you 
thought was answered by some Being, but 
you answered the prayer yourself, un- 
knowingly. The help came from yourself, 
and you fondly imagined that some one 
was sending help to you. There is ao 
help for you outside of yourself ; you are 
the creator of the universe. Like the 
silkworm you have built a cecoon around 
yourself. Who will save you? Cut your 
own cocoon and come out as the beautiful 


140 


One Existence Appearing.as Many 


butterfly, as the free soul. Then alone 
you will see Truth. Ever tell yourself 
“IT am He.” These are words that will 
burn up the dross that 1s in the mind, 
words that will bring out the tremendous 
energy which is within you already, the 
infinite power which is sleeping in your 
heart. This is to be brought out by 
constantly hearing the truth and nothing 
else. Wherever there is thought of weak- 
ness, approach not the place. Avoid all 
weakness if you want to be /x@uz. 

Before you begin to practise, clear your 
mind of all doubts. Fight and reason and 
argue, and when you have established it in 
your mind that this and this alone can be 
the truth and nothing else, do not argue 
any more ; close your mouth. Hear not 
argumentation, neither argue yourself. 
What is the use of any more arguments ? 
You have satisfied yourself, you have 
decided the question. What remains ? 


14! 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


The truth has now to be realized, therefore 
why waste valuable time in vain argu- 
ments ? The truth has now to be meditated 
upon and every idea that strengthens you 
must be taken up and every thought that 
weakens you must be rejected. The 
Bhakta meditates upon forms and images 
and all such things and upon God. This 
is the natural process, but a slower one. 
The Yoge meditates upon various centres 
in his body and manipulates powers in his 
mind. The /#dxz says the mind does not 
exist, neither the body. This idea of the 
body and of the mind must go, must be 
driven off ; therefore it is foolish to think 
of them. It would be like trying to cure 
one ailment by bringing in another. His 
meditation therefore is the most difficult 
one, the negative ; he denies everything, 
and what is left is the Self. This is the 
most analytical way. The /xd@xz wants to 
tear away the universe from the Self by 


142 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


the sheer force of analysis. It is very easy 
to say, “I ama /nudnz,” but very hard to 
be one really. ‘The way is long ; it is, as 
it were, walking on the sharp edge of a 
razor, yet despair not. Awake, arise, and 
stop not until the goal is reached,” say the 
Vedas.* 

So what is the meditation of the 
fndénzt? He wants to rise above every 
idea of body or mind, to drive away the 
idea that he is the body. For instance, 
when I say “I, Swdmi,” immediately the 
idea of the body comes. What must I do 
then ? I must give the mind a hard blow 
and say, “No, I am not the body, I am 
the Self.” Who cares if disease comes or 
death in the most horrible form ? Jam not 
the body. Why make the body nice? 
To enjoy the illusion once more? To 
continue the slavery ? Let it go, ] am not 
the body. That is the way of the /xdzz. 


* Katha Upanishada. I, 3—14. 
143 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


The Bhakta says : “The Lord has given 
me this body that I may safely cross the 
ocean of life and I must cherish it until 
the journey is accomplished.’ The Yogz 
says: “I must be careful of the body so 
that I may go on steadily and finally attain 
liberation.” The /xdnz feels that he 
cannot wait, he must reach the goal this 
very moment. He says: “I am free 
through eternity, | am never bound ; I am 
the God of the universe through all 
eternity. Who shall make me perfect ? | 
am perfect already.” When a man is 
perfect he sees perfection in others. When 
he sees imperfection, it is his own mind 
projecting itself. How can he see imper 
fection if he has not got it in himself ? So 
the /xdénz does not care for perfection or 
imperfection. None exists for him. As 
soon as he is free, he does not see good 
and evil. Who sees evil and good? He 
who has it in himself. Who sees the body ? 


144 


One Existence Appearing as Many 


He who thinks he is the body. The 
moment yet get rid of the idea that you 
are the body, you do not see the world at 
all. It vanishes forever. The /xdéxz seeks 
to tear himself away from this bondage of 
matter by the force of intellectual con- 
viction. This is the negative way,—the 
“nete, nete” (“not this, not this”). 


145 


IV 
UNITY OF THE SELF 


To illustrate the conclusion arrived at 
in our last lesson, I will read to you from 
one of the Upanishads* showing how 
these ideas were taught in India from the 
most ancient times. 

YVajnavalkya was a great sage. You 
know the rule in India was that every 
man must give up the world when he 
became old. So Yajnavalkya said to his 
wife : ‘My beloved, here is all my money 
and my possessions, | am going away.” 
She replied: “Sir, if I had this whole 
earth full of wealth would that give me 
immortality ?”? Vaynavalkya said: ‘No, 
that cannot be. Your life will be that of 
the rich, and that will be all, for wealth 
cannot give you immortality.” She replied : 

* Brihadaranyaka Upanishada V, 
146 


Unity of the Self 


“That through which I shall become 
immortal, what shall I do to gain that? 
If you know that, tell, me.” Yaynavatkya 
replied: “You have always been my 
beloved ; you are more so now by this 
question. Come, take your seat, and | 
will tell you, and when you have heard, 
meditate upon it.” He continued : “It is 
not for the sake of the husband that the 
wife loves the husband, but for the sake 
of the A¢man (the Self) that she loves the 
husband, because she loves the Self. None 
loves the wife for the sake of the wife, but 
it is because he loves the Self that he 
loves the wife. None loves the children 
for the sake of the children, but because 
he loves the Self, therefore he loves the 
children. None loves wealth on account 
of the wealth, but because he loves the 
Self, therefore he loves wealth. None 
loves the Brahmin for the sake of the 
Brahmin, but because he loves the Self, 


147 


Unity of the Self 


he loves the Brahmin. So none loves 
the Ashatrzya for the sake of the Kshatriya, 
but because he loves the Self. Neither 
does anyone love the world on account of 
the world, but because he loves the Self. 
None similarly loves the gods on account 
of the gods, but because he loves the Self. 
None loves anything for that thing’s sake, 
but it is for the Self of that thing that he 
loves it. This Self therefore, is to be 
heard, is to be reasoned, and is to be 
meditated upon. Oh my Maztreyz, when 
that Self has been heard, when that Self has 
been seen, when that Self has been realized, 
then all these things become known.” 
What does this mean ? Before us we 
find a curious philosophy. That the Self 
shines through all these various things 
which we call the world. The statement 
has been made that every love is selfish- 
ness in the lowest sense of the word ; 
because I love myself, therefore I love 


148 


Unity of the Self 


another—this cannot be. There have 
been philosophers too in modern times who 
have said that self is the only motive 
power in the world. That is true, and yet 
itis wrong. This self is but the shadow 
of that real Self which is behind and love 
of this little self appears wrong and evil 
because it is limited. That very love we 
have for the Self, which is the universe, 
appears to be evil, as selfishness because 
it is seeii through limitation. Even when 
a wife loves a husband, whether she knows 
it or not, she loves the husband for that 
Self. It is selfishness as it is manifested 
in the world, but that selfishness is really 
but a small part of that ‘“Self-ness.” 
Whenever one loves, one has to love in 
and through the Self. 

This Self has to. be known. Those 
that love the Self without knowing what 
It is, their love is selfishness. Those that 
love knowing what that Self is, their love 


149 


Unity of the Self 


is free, they are sages. ‘None loves the 
Brahmin for the Brahmin, but because he 
loves the Self, which is appearing through 
the Brahmin. “Him the Brahmin gives 
up who sees the Brahmin as separate from 
the Self. Him the Xshatrzya gives up who 
sees the Kshatrzya as separate from the 
Self. The world gives him up who sees 
this world as separate from the Self. The 
gods give him up who believes the gods 
to be separate from the Self. All things 
give him up who knows them as separate 
from the Self. These Brahmins, these 
Kshatreyas, this world, these gods, 
whatever exists, everything is that Self.” 
Thus Yajnavalkya explains what he means 
by love. The difficulty comes when we 
particularize this love. Suppose I love a 
woman ; as soon as that woman is particu- 
larized, is separated, from that Altman 
(the Self), my love will not be eternal ; 
it has become selfish and is likely to end in 


150 


Unity of the Self 


grief, but as soon as | see that woman as 
the Atman, that love becomes perfect, and 
will never suffer. So, as soon as you are 
attached to anything in the universe, 
detaching it from the universe as a whole 
—from the Atman—then comes a reaction. 
With everything that we love outside 
the Self, grief and misery will be the 
result. If we enjoy everything in the 
Self, and as the Self, no misery or reaction 
will come. This is perfect bliss. 

How to come to this ideal? Yayna- 
valkya goes on to tell us the process by 
which to reach that state. The universe 
is infinite ; how can we take every particular 
thing and look at it as the Aéman, without 
knowing the A/man ? “With the drum, at 
a distance, we cannot conquer the sound 
produced by it by trying to control the 
sound waves, but as soon as we come to 
the drum, and put our hand on it, the sound 
is conquered. When a conch shell is being 


151 


Unity of the Self 


blown, we cannot conquer the sound, until 
we come near and get hold of the shell, 
and then it is conquered. When the vina 
is being played, as soon as we come to the 
vina, we can control the centre of the sound, 
whence the sound is proceeding. As when 
some one is burning damp fuel, all sorts of 
smoke and sparks of various kinds rise, 
even so from this great One has been 
breathed out history and knowledge ; 
everything has come out of Him. He 
breathed out, as it were, all knowledge. 
As to all water the one goal is the ocean, 
as to all touch the hand is the one centre, 
as to all smell the nose is the one centre, 
as of all taste the tongue is the one centre, 
as of all form the eyes are the one centre, 
as of all sounds the ears are the one centre, 
as of all thought the mind is the one centre, 
as of all knowledge the heart is the one 
centre, as of all work the hands are the one 
centre, as of all speech the organ of speech 


152 


Unity of the Self 


is the one centre, as the concentrated salt 
is through and through the waters of the 
sea, yet not to be seen by the eyes ; even 
so, oh Maztreyz, is this Atman not to be 
seen by the eyes, yet He permeates this 
universe. He is everything. He is con- 
centrated knowledge The whole universe 
rises from Him, and again goes down unto 
Him. Reaching Him, we go beyond 
knowledge.” We here get the idea that 
we have all come out just like sparks from 
Him, and that when we know Him then 
we go back, and become one with Him 
again. 

Maztreyt became frightened, just as 
everywhere people become frightened. She 
said : “Sir, here is exactly where you have 
thrown a confusion over me. You have 
frightened me by saying there will be no 
more gods ; all individuality will be lost. 
When I reach that stage shall I know that 
Atman? Shall I reach the unconscious 


153 


Unity of the Self 


state and jose my individuality, or will the 
knowledge remain with me that I know 
Him ? Will there be no one to recognize, 
no one to feel, no one to love, no one to 
hate ? What will become of me?” “O 
Mazrtreye ! replied her husband, “think 
not that I am speaking of an unconscious 
state, neither be frightened. This A/man 
is indestructible, eternal in His essence ; 
the stage where there are two is a lower 
one. Where there are two there one 
smells another, one sees another, one hears 
another, one welcomes another, one thinks 
of another, one knows another. But when 
the whole has become that A/man, who 
is to be smelled by whom, who is to be 
seen by whom, who is to be heard by 
whom, who is to be welcomed by whom, 
who is to be known by whom ? Who can 
know Him by whom everything is known? 
This Atman can only be described as 
“nett, netz” (not this, not this), Incompre- 


154 


Unity of the Self 


hensible, He cannot be comprehended by 
the intellect. Unchangeable, He never 
fades. Unattached, He never gets mixed 
up with Nature. Perfect, He is beyond 
all pleasure and pain. Who can know the 
Knower ? By what means can we know 
Him? By no means; this is the con- 
clusion of the sages, O Mazfreyz ! Going 
beyond all knowledge, is to attain Him 
and to attain immortality.” 

So far the idea is, that it is all One 
Infinite Being, and in It is the Real 
Individuality, where there is no more 
division, no more parts and parcels, no 
more such low and illusory ideas. And yet, 
in and through every part of this little 
individuality is shining that Infinite, the 
Real Individuality. Everything is a 
manifestation of the Atman. How to 
reach to that ? Yaynavalkya told us in the 
beginning that—“This Atman is first to 
be heard, then to be reasoned, then to be 


E55 


Unity of the Self 


meditated upon.” Thus far he has spoken 
about the Self, the Azman, as being the 
essence of everything in this universe. 
Then reasoning on the Infinite nature of 
that Self and the finite nature of the 
human mind he comes to the conclusion 
that it is impossible for the finite mind to 
know the Knower of all—the Self. What 
is to be done then if we cannot know the 
Self? Yajnavalkya tells Maztreyt that It 
can be realized, although It cannot be 
known, and he enters upon a discourse as 
to how It is to be meditated upon. This 
universe is helpful to every being and every 
being is also helping this universe, for they 
are both part and parcel of each other, the 
development of the one helps the develop- 
ment of the other ; but to the Atman, the 
self-effulgent One, nothing can be helpful 
because It is perfect and infinite. All that 
is bliss, even in the lowest sense, is but 
the reflection of It. All that is good is 


156 


Unity of the Self 


the reflection of that Atman, and when 
that reflection is less clear it is called evil. 
When the Atman is less manifested it 
is called darkness—evil, and when it 
is more manifested it is called light— 
goodness. That is all. This good and 
evil are only a question of degree, the 
Atman more manifested or less manifested. 
Just take the example of our own lives. 
How many things we see in our childhood 
which we think to be good, but which 
really are evil, and how many things seem 
to be evil which are good? How our 
ideas change! How an idea becomes 
higher and higher ! What we thought very 
good at one time, we do not think that 
so good now. Thus good and evil depend 
on the development of our minds, and do 
not exist objectively. The difference is 
only in the degree. All is a manifestation 
of that Atman ; tis being manifested in 
everything, only when the manifestation is 


157 


Unity of the Self 


very poor we call it eyil, and. .wheo. jt is 
clearer we call it good. That Atman 


eed 


Itself is beyond both good and-evil. So 
everything that is in the universe in first 
to be meditated upon as all good, because 
it is a manifestation of that perfect One. 
He is neither evil nor good ; He is perfect 
and the perfect can be only one. The 
good can be many, and the evil many, 
there will be degrees of variation between 
the good and the evil ; but the perfect is 
only one, and that perfect One when seen 
through certain kinds of covering we call 
different degrees of good, and when seen 
through other kinds we call evil. -Qur— 
ideas of good and evil as to distinct things 
are mere superstition. There is only more” 
good and less good and” the less good “we 
call evil. These mistaken ideas of good and 
evil have produced all sorts ‘of dualistic 
delusions. They have gone deep into the 


hearts of human beings, terrorizing men 
158 


Unity of the Self 


and women in all ages. All the hatred with 
which we hate others is caused by these 
foolish ideas which we have imbibed since 
our childhood. Our judgment of humanity 
has become entirely false ; we have made 
this beautiful earth a hell, but as soon as 
we can give up these false ideas of good 
and evil, it will become a heaven. 

“This earth is blissful (‘sweet’ is the 
literal translation) to all beings, and all 
beings are sweet to this earth ; they all 
help each other. And all this sweetness 
is from the Aéman, that effulgent, im- 
mortal One.” That one sweetness is 
manifesting itself in various ways. Wher- 
ever there is any love, any sweetness in 
any human being, either in a saint ora 
sinner, either in an angel or a murderer, 
either in the body or the mind or the 
senses, itis all He. How can there be 
anything but that One ? Whatever is the 
lowest physical enjoyment is He, and the 


159 


Unity of the Self 


highest spiritual enjoyment is also He. 
There is no sweetness but He. Thus 
says Yajnavalkya. When you come to 
that state, and look upon al! things with 
the same eyes; when you see in the 
drunkard’s pleasure in drink or in the 
saints’ meditation that sweetness only, then 
you have got the truth, and then alone you 
will know what happiness means, what 
peace means, what love means. But as 
long as you keep these vain distinctions, 
silly, childish, foolish superstitions, all sorts 
of misery willcome. That immortal One, 
the effulgent One, He is the background 
of the whole universe, it is all His sweet- 
ness. This body is a miniature universe, 
as it were; and through all the powers 
of the body, all the enjoyments of the 
mind, shines that effulgent One. That 
self-effulgent One who is in the body, He 
is the A/man. ‘This world is so sweet to 
all beings, and every being is so sweet to 


160 


Unity of the Self 


it !’"—for the self-efulgent Immortal One, 
is the bliss in this world. Inus also, He 
is that bliss. He is the Brahman. ‘This 
air is so sweet to all beings, and all beings 
are so sweet to this air’—for He who is 
that self-effulgent immortal Being is the 
air; He is also in this body. He is 
expressing Himself as the life of all 
beings. ‘This sun is so sweet to all beings, 
and all beings are so sweet to this sun,” 
for He who is the self-effulgent Being is 
the sun, and Him we reflect as smaller 
lights. What can there be but His re- 
flection ? Heis inthe body, and it is His 
reflection which makes us see the light. 
“This moon is so sweet to all beings, 
and all beings are so sweet to this 
moon,” for that self-effulgent and im- 
mortal One who is the soul of that moon, 
He isin us expressing himself as mind. 
“This lightning is so sweet to all beings 
and all beings are sweet to this lightning,” 


161 
K 


Unity of the Self 


for the self-effulgent and immortal One is 
the soul of this lightning, and ts also in us, 
because all is that Brahman. This Brakman, 
this Atman, this Self, is fhe King of all 
beings. These ideas are very helpful to 
men ; they are for meditation. For instance, 
meditate on the earth, think of the earth, at 
the same time knowing that we have in us 
that which is in the earth, that both are 
the same. Identify the body with the earth, 
and identify the soul with the Soul behind. 
Identify the air with the soul that is in the 
air and that is in you and so on. All these 
are one, manifested in different forms. To 
realize this unity is the end and aim of all 
meditation, and this is what Yaznavalkya 
was trying to explain to Maztreyz. 


162 


Vil 


THE HIGHEST IDEAL OF JNANA 
YOGA 


As this is the last of these classes it is 
better that I give a brief resumé of all that 
I have been trying to tell you. In the 
Vedas and Upanishads we find records of 
some of the very earliest religious ideas of 
the Hindus, ideas that long antedated the 
time of Kapila, ancient as this great sage 
is. He did not propound the Sdxkhya 
philosophy as a new theory of his own. 
His task was to throw the light of his 
genius on the vast mass of religious 
theories that were existing in his time and 
bring out a rational and coherent system. 
He succeeded in giving India a psychology 
that is accepted to the present day by all 
the diverse and seemingly opposing phil- 


163 


The Highest Ideal of fnana Yoga 


osophical systems to be found among the 
Hindus. His masterly analysis and his 
comprehensive statement of the processes 
of the human mind have not yet been sur- 
passed by any later philosopher and he 
undoubtedly laid the foundation for the 
Advaita philosophy, which accepted his 
conclusions as far as they went and then 
pushed them a step farther, thus reaching 
a final unity beyond the duality that was 
the last word of the Sdukhyas. 

Among all the religious ideas that pre- 
ceded the time of Kapila,—I mean among 
recognized religious ideas, and not the 
very low ones, which do not deserve the 
name of religion,—we find, even the very 
first groups include the idea of inspiraton, 
and a revealed book and so forth. In the 
earliest stage, the idea of creation is very 
peculiar ; it is that the whole universe was 
created out of zero, by the will of God, 
that in the beginning this universe did not 


164 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


exist, and out of nothingness all this has 
come. In the next stage we find this con- 
clusion questioned. The first step in Ve- 
danta asks this question: How can ex- 
istence be produced out of non-existence ? 
If this universe is existent it must have 
come out of something, because it was 
easy for them of old to see that there is 
nothing anywhere coming out of nothing, 
that all work that is being done by human 
hands requires materials. Naturally, 
therefore, the ancient Hindus rejected the 
first idea that this world was created 
out of nothing, and sought some material 
out of which this world was created. The 
whole history of religion, in fact, is the 
search for this material in our attempts to 
answer the question : Out of what has all 
this been produced? Apart from the 
question of the efficient cause or God, apart 
from the question whether God created 
the universe, the great question of all 


165 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


questions has been, out of what did God 
create it ? All the philosophies are turning, 
as it were, on this question. 

One solution is that this material and 
God and soul are eternal existences, like 
three parallel lines running eternally sidc 
by side, of which nature and soul comprise 
what they call the dependent, and God the 
independent Being. Every soul, like 
every particle of matter, is perfectly de- 
pendent on the will of God. These and 
many other ideas we find already existing 
when the Sdz&£hya psychology was brought 
forward by Kapila. According to it, 
perception comes by the transmission of 
the suggestion,—which causes irritation 
of the physical doors of the organs viz. 
perception first to the eyes etc.,—from the 
eyes etc. to the organs, from the organs to 
the mind, from the mind to the éduddhz 
and from the duddz to something which is a 
unit, which they call the Atman. Coming 


166 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


to modern physiology we know that they 
have found centres for all the different 
sensations. First are found the lower 
centres, then # higher grade of centres, and 
these two will exactly correspond with the 
actions of the duddhz and the manas (mind), 
but not one centre has been found which 
controls all the other centres, so philosophy 
cannot answer what unifies all these centres. 
Where and how do the centres get 
unified ? The centres in the brain are 
all different, and there is not one centre 
which controls all the others ; therefore, 
so far as it goes, the Sdukhya_ psychology 
stands unchallenged upon this point. We 
must have this unification, something 
upon which the sensations will be reflected, 
to form a complete whole. Until there is 
that something, I cannot have any idea of 
you, or the picture, or anything else. If 
we had not that unifying something we 
would only see, then after a while hear, and 


167 


The Highest Ideal of Jnina Yoga 


then: feel, and while we heard a man talk- 
ing, we should not see him at all, because 
all the centres are different. 

This body is made of particles which 
we call matter, and :tis dull and insentient. 
So is what is called the fine body. The 
fine body, according to the Sdukhyas is a 
little body, made of very fine particles, so 
fine that no microscope can see them. What 
is the use of it? It is the receptacle of 
what we call mind. Just as this gross 
body is the receptacle of the grosser 
forces, so the fine body is the receptacle of 
of the finer forces, that which we call 
thought with its various modifications. First 
is the body, which is gross matter, with 
gross force. Force cannot exist without 
matter for it can manifest itself only through 
matter ; so the grosser forces work through 
the body and finally become finer. The 
very force which is working in a gross form 
works in a fine form and becomes thought. 


168 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


There is no real difference between them, 
simply one is the gross and the other the 
fine manifestation of the same _ thing. 
Neither is there any difference is substance 
between the fine body and the gross body. 
The fine body is also material, only very 
fine material. 

Whence do all these forces come ? 
According to the Vedanta philosophy 
there are two things which form nature, 
one of which they call Adsa, which is 
substance, or matter, infinitely fine, and 
the other they call Prdxa. Whatever you 
see, or feel, or hear, as air or earth, or any- 
thing, is material. And everything is a 
form of this d&dsa. It becomes finer and 
finer, or grosser and grosser, and it changes 
under the action of Pvrvdua (universal 
Energy). Like @kdsa prdna is omni- 
present, interpenetrating everything. 
Akésa is like the water, and everything 
else in the universe like blocks of ice, 


169 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


made out of that water and floating in it, 
and prdna is the power that changes the 
@kdsa into all these various forms. This 
body is the instrument made out of éédsa 
for the manifestation of prdna in gross 
forms, as muscular motion, or walking, 
sitting, talking and soon. The fine body also 
is made of é&désa,a much finer form of 
@kdsa, for the manifestation of the same 
préna in the finer form of thought. So, first 
there is this gross body, beyond that is the 
fine body, and beyond that is the 
jiva (soul), the real man. Just as these 
finger nails can be pared off a hundred 
times a year, and yet are still a part of our 
bodies, not different, so we have not two 
bodies. It is not that man has a fine and 
also a gross body ; it is the one body, only 
it remains longer when it is a fine body, 
and the grosser it is the sooner it dissolves. 
Just as I can cut this nail a hundred times 
a year, so millions of times I can shed 


170 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


this body is one won, but the fine body 
will remain. According to the dualists 
this 7zva, or the real man, is very fine, 
minute. 

So far we have seen that man is a 
being who has first a gross body which 
dissolves very quickly, then a fine body 
which remains through zons, and lastly a 
giwa. This zeva, according to the Vedanta 
philosophy, is eternal, just as God is 
eternal, and Pyrakritz is also eternal, but 
changefully eternal. The materials of 
Prakritz, the prdna and the dkdsa, are 
eternal, but are changing into different 
forms eternally. Matter and force are 
eternal, but their combinations vary 
continually. The 7zva is not manufactured, 
either of dkd@sa, or of prdna; itis imm- 
aterial, and therefore will remain for 
ever. It isnot the result of any combi- 
nation of préna and &kdsa, and whatever is 
not the result of combination will never 


171 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


be destroyed, because destruction is 
decomposion. That which is not a com- 
pound cannot be destroyed. The gross 
body is acompound of ¢édsaand prdua in 
various forms and will be decomposed. The 
fine body will also be decomposed after 
along time, but the jzva@ is asimple, and 
will never be destroyed. For the same 
reason, we cannot say it ever was born. 
Nothing simple can be born; only 
that which is a compound can be born. 
The whole of this nature combined in these 
millions of forms is under the will .of God. 
God is all pervading, omnicient, formless, 
everywhere, and He is directing this nature 
day and night. The whole of it is under 
His control. There is no independence of 
any being. It cannot be. He is the Ruler. 
This is the teaching of dualistic Vedanta. 
Then the question comes, if God be 
the Ruler of this universe, why did He 
create such a wicked universe, why must 


172 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


we suffer so much ? The answer is made 
that it is not God’s fault. It is our own 
fault that we suffer. Whatever we sow 
that we reap. God does not do anything 
to punish us. If amanis born poor, or 
blind, or lame, he did something before he 
was born in that way, something that 
produced these results. The zzva has been 
existing for all time, was never created. 
It has been doing all sorts of things all 
the time. Whatever we do we suffer for. 
If we do good we shall have happiness, 
and if bad, unhappiness. Thiszzva is by 
its own nature pure, but ignorance covers 
its nature, says the dualist. As by evil 
deeds it has covered itself with ignorance, 
so by good deeds it can become conscinus 
of its own nature again. Just as it is 
eternal, so its nature is pure. The nature 
of every being is pure. When through 
good deeds all its sins and misdeeds have 
been washed away, then the zzva becomes 


173 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


pure again, and when he becomes pure he 
goes after death by what is called Deva- 
yana (the path of the gods), to heaven, or 
the abode of the gods. If he has been 
only an oridinarily good man he goes to 
what is called the “Abode of the Fathers.” 

When the gross body falls, the organs 
of speech enter the mind. You cannot 
think without words; wherever there are 
words there must be thought. The mind 
is resolved into the Jrdza, and the préua 
resolves into the zzva. Then the jzwa 
leaves the body and goes to that condition 
of reward or punishment which he has 
earned by his past life. Devaloka is the 
“place (or abode) of the gods.” The 
word deva (god) means bright or shining 
one, and corresponds to what the Christ- 
ians and Mohammedans call “angels.” 
According to this teaching there are various 
heavenly spheres somewhat analogous to 
the various heavens described by Dante in 


174 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


the Dzvine Comedy. There are the 
heaven of the fathers (or pztres) , devaloka, 
the lunar sphere, the electric sphere and 
highest of all the Brakmaloka, the heaven 
of Brahma. From all the lower heavens 
the yzva_ returns again to human birth, but 
he who attains to Brakmaloka lives there 
through all eternity. These are the 
highest men who have become perfectly 
unselfish, perfectly purified, who have 
given up all desires, do not want to do any- 
thing except to worship and love God. 
There is a second class, who do good 
works, but want some reward, want to go 
to heaven in return. When they die, their 
jiva goes to the lunar sphere, where it en- 
joys and becomes a deva (god or angel). 
The gods, the devas, are not eternal, they 
have todie. In heaven they will all die. 
The only deathless place is Brahmadloka, 
where alone there is no birth and no death. 
In our mythology it is said there are also 


175 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


the demons, who sometimes give the gods 
chase. In all mythologies you read of 
these fights between the demons, or wicked 
angels, and the gods and sémetimes the 
demons conquer the gods. In all mytholo- 
gies also, you find that the devas were 
fond of the beautiful daughters of men. 
As a deva, the jzva only reaps results of 
past actions, but makes no new Karma. 
Karma means actions that will produce 
effects, also those effects, or results of 
action. When aman dies and becomes a 
deva he has a period of pleasure, and during 
that time makes no fresh Karma; he 
simply enjoys the reward of his past gand 
works. But when the good Karma is 
worked out then the other Karma begins 
to take effect. 

In the Vedas there is no mention of 
hell. But afterwards the purduas, the 
later books in our Scriptures, thought that 
no religion could become complete without 


176 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


a proper attachment of hells, and so they 
invented all sorts of hells, with as many, 
if not more, varieties of punishment than 
Dante saw in*his /zferno, but our books 
are merciful enough to say that it is only 
for a period. Bad Karma is worked out 
in that state and then the souls come back 
to earth and get another chance. This 
human form isthe great chance. It is 
called the 4armzc body, in which we 
decide our fate. We are running in a 
huge circle, and this is the point in the 
circle which determines the future. Soa 
human body is considered the greatest 
body there is; man is greater than the 
gods. Eventhey return to human birth. 
So far with dualistic Vedanta. 

Next comes a higher conception of 
Vedanta philosophy, which says that these 
ideas are crude. If you say there isa 
God who is an infinite Being, and a soul 
which is also infinite, and Prakritz which 


177 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


is also infinite, you can go on multiplying 
infinites indefinitely, but that is illogical, 
because each would limit the other and 
there would be no real infinite. God is 
both the material and the efficient cause of 
the universe; He projects this universe 
out of Himself. Does that mean that 
God has become these walls, and this 
table, that God has become the animal, 
the murderer, and all the evils in the 
world? God is pure, how can He become 
all these degenerate things? He has not. 
God is unchangeable, and all these changes 
are in Prakritz,—just as ] ama soul and 
have a body ; this body is not diffcrent 
from me in a sense, yet I, the real “I,” in 
fact am not this body. For instance, I am 
a child, ] become a young man, an old 
man, but my soul has not changed. It 
remains the same soul. Similarly the 
whole universe, comprised of Prakrztz, and 
and infinite number of souls, is, as it were, 


178 


The Highest Ideal of Jnina Yoga 


the infinite body of God. He is interpene- 
trating the whole of it. Healone is un- 
changeable, but Pra&ritz changes and the 
souls too change. In what way does 
Prakriti change ? In its forms ; it takes 
fresh forms. But the souls cannot change 
that way. They contract and expand in 
knowledge. Every soul contracts by evil 
deeds. Those deeds which contract the 
natural knowledge and purity of the soul 
are called evil deeds. Those deeds, again, 
which bring out the natural glory of the 
soul, are called good deeds. All these 
souls were pure, but they have become 
contracted by their own acts. Still, 
through the mercy of God, and by doing 
good deeds, they will expand and become 
pure again. Every soul has the same 
chance, and, in the long run, must become 
pure and free itself from Prakretz. But 
this universe will not Bease, Because it is 
infinite. This is the second theory. The 


179 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


first is called dualistic Vedanta ; while the 
second which teaches that there is God, 
soul, and Prakrztz, that soul and Prakrztz 
form the body of God, and that these 
three form the unit—is called qualified 
monistic Vedanta. Believers in this second 
theory are called qualified non-dualists 
(Veseshktadvactens). 

The last and highest theory is pure 
monism, or as itis known in India, A dvazta. 
It also teaches that God must be both the 
material and the efficient cause of this 
universe. As such, God has become the 
whole of this universe. This theory denies 
that God is the soul, and the universe ts 
the body, and the body is changing. In 
that case what is the use of calling God 
the material cause of this universe ? The 
material cause is the cause become effect ; 
the effect is nothing but the cause in an- 
other form. Wherever you see effect, it is 
the cause reproduced. If the universe is 


180 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


the effect, and God the cause, this must be 
the reproduction of God. If it be claimed 
that the universe is the body of God and 
that that body becomes contracted and 
fine and becomes the cause, and out of that 
the universe is evolved, then the advaztzst 
says it is God Himself who has become this 
universe. Now comes a very fine question, 
If God has become this universe, then 
everything is God. Certainly ; everything 
is God. My body is God, and my mind 
is God, and my soul is God. Then why 
are there so many jzvas? Has God be- 
come divided into millions and millions of 
jivas ? How can that infinite power and 
substance, the one Being of the universe 
become divided? It is impossible to 
divide infinity. How can the pure Being 
become this universe ? If He has become 
the universe, He is changeful, and if He 
is changeful, Heis in Prakritz, and what- 
ever is in Prakretz is born and dies. If 


181 


The Highest Ideal of Jnfina Yoga 


God is changeful, He must die some day. 
Remember that. Again, how much of 
God has become this universe ? If you say 
“X,” the algebraical unknown quantity, then 
God is God minus ‘‘X” now, and therefore 
not the same God as before this creation, 
because so much of Him has become this 
universe. The answer of the monist is 
that this universe has no real existence, it 
exists in appearance only. These devas 
and gods and angels and being born and 
dying, and all these infinite number of 
souls coming up and going down, all these 
things are mere dreams. All is the one 
Infinite. The one sun reflected on 
various drops of water appears to be 
many. Millions of globules of water 
reflect so many millions of suns and in 
each globule there is a perfect image of 
the sun, yet there is only sun, one—so it ts 
with all these zzvas, they are but reflections 
of the one infinite Being. A dream can- 


182 


The Highest Ideal of Jnadna Yoga 


not be without a reality, and that reality is 
the one infinite Existence. You, as body, 
mind, or soul, are a dream, but what you 
really are is’ Existence-Knowledge-Bliss 
Absolute. Thus says the Advaztzst. All 
these births and rebirths, this coming and 
going are but parts of the dream. Youare 
infinite. Where can you go? The sun, 
moon, and the whole universe are but a 
drop in your nature. How can you be 
born or die 2? The Self was never born, 
never will be born, never had father or 
mother, friends or foes, for it is Existence- 
Knowledge-Bliss Absolute. 

What is the goal, according to this 
philosophy ? To receive this knowledge 
and become one with the universe. For 
them who attain to this, all heavens, even 
Brahmaloka, are destroyed, the whole 
dream vanishes, and they find themselves 
the eternal God of the universe. They at- 
tain their real individuality, infinitely beyond 


183 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga. 


these little selves which we now think of 
so much importance. No_ individuality 
will be lost; an infinite and eternal 
Individuality will be realized. Pleasure in 
little things will cease. We are finding 
pleasure in this little body, in this little 
individuality but how much greater the 
pleasure will be when this whole universe 
appears as our own body? If there be 
pleasure in these separate bodies, how 
much more when all bodies are one? 
The man who has realized this has 
attained to freedom, has gone beyond the 
dream and known himself in his real 
nature. This is the teaching of Advaita, 
the non-dualistic Vedanta. 

These are the three steps which 
Vedanta philosophy has taken, and we 
cannot go beyond, because we cannot go 
beyond unity. When any science reaches 
aunity it cannot possibly go any farther. 
You cannot go beyond the idea of the 


184 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


Absolute, the idea of the One, out of 
which everything in the universe, has 
evolved. AW people cannot take up this 
Advazta philosophy ; it is too hard. First 
of all, it is very difficult to understand it 
intellectually. It requires the sharpest of 
intellects, a bold understanding. Second- 
ly, it does not suit the vast majority of 
people. 

It is better to begin with the first of 
these three steps. Then by thinking of 
that and understanding it, the second one 
will open of itself. Just as a race travels, 
so individuals have to travel. The steps 
which the human race has taken to come 
to the highest pinnacle of religious 
thought, every individual will have to take. 
Only, while the human race took millions 
of years to reach from one step to another, 
individuals may live the whole life of the 
human race in a few years, or they may be 
able to do it more quickly, perhaps in six 


185 


The Highest Ideal of Jnana Yoga 


months. But each one of us will have to 
go through these steps. Those of you 
who are non-dualists can, ne doubt, look 
back to the period of your lives when you 
were strong dualists. As soon as you think 
you are a body and a mind, you will have to 
accept the whole of this dream. If you 
have one piece you must take the whole. 
The man who says, here is this world but 
there is no God, is a fool, because if there 
be a world there will have to bea cause 
of the world, and that is what is called 
God. You cannot have an effect without 
knowing that there isa cause. God will 
only vanish when this world vanishes. 
When you have realized your one-ness 
with God, this world will no longer be for 
you. As long as this dream exists, how- 
ever, we are bound to look upon ourselves 
as being born and dying, but as soon as 
the dream that we are bodies vanishes, so 
will vanish this dream that we are being 


186 


The Highest Ideal of Jnéna Yoga 


born and dying, and so will vanish the 
other dream that there is a universe. That 
very thing which we now see as this 
universe will appear to us as God, and 
that very God who was so long external, 
will appear as the very Self of our own 
selves. The last word of Advaita is, Tat 
tvam ast,— “That thou art.” 


