===== Internet Archive OCR: 20828.180.JB.92.36_djvu.txt =====

THE SERPENT POWER 


SUAOMAKRA-NIRUPANA AND 
PADUKA-PANCHAKA 


TWO WORKS ON LAYA YOCA PFRANSDATDD PROM TIT) 
SANSKRIT, WIT INFRODUGLION AND COMMENTARY 


1४ 


ARITUR AVALON 


(Necond Revesed Rdaton) 


1011108 
GANUSH & Co, MADRAS 
1024 


11/८1 


In my work “Shakti and जपत {© (ण्त्‌ tor the first 
time the principles of “ Kundal -Yoga ” so much discussed 
in some quarters, but of which so little was known, 

Tins work is 1 description and explanation im पणिः 
detail of the Serpent Power (Kundali Shakti), and tho 
Yogu offected through it, a subject occupying a pre-ominent 
placo in tho Tantra Shustia. Tt consists of a translation of 
Gyo Sanskait works pubhshod somo years ago in tho second 
volume of my sotios of Tantrik ‘oxts, but ntherto un- 
translated, 110 first, ontithadl त Shateh ukimirdipana ” 
(“Deseriphon of and Pivestigntion into the Six Bodily 
Contros ”), has ५५ its author the celebvated व्या 11८ 
ता) (पातु Svan, १ short note o whose lilo is given lator, 
[| forms the sixth cheaper of his oxtonsryo and unpubhshod 
work on Tanti Ratual ontatlo | च Shr tattvachingimani ”, 
Mis has boon tle subject of con mentarios by amor g others 
Shangkara and Vishvanitha cilod in Volume [[ of tho 
Tantiik ‘Poxts, and used in the making of tho present trans 
lation. ‘The commentary boro translated from the Sanskrit 
is hy Ki charana, 

Tho second text, callod  Pidukn-Panchaka” (^ Fivefold 
Footstool of the (प्प), deals with one of the Lotuses 
doseribod in the larger work, oi is appended a transla 
tion fom tho Sanskmt of a commentary by Kilicharana, 
To the translation o both works Ihave added some further 
oxplanatory notes of my own, As tho works translated aro 


vi IMB SX CENEIRES AND JHE spre प्र 1011 


of a Inghly rzcondite character, and by themselves 11- 
intelligible to the Dnglsh reader, I have prefaced 116 
translation by a general Introduction in which T have 
endeavoured t) give (within the limils both of a work of 
this kind wud my knowledge) a description and qxplanation 
of this form of Yoga. I have also included somo plates of 
the Centres, which have been drawn and painted acco Wing 
to the description of them as given in the first of those 
Sanskrit Texts. 

Tt has not been possible in the Introduction to do more 
than give a general and summary siatemont of tho principlos 
upon which Yoga, and this particular form of it, rests. 
Those who wish to pursue the subject in greater dotail are 
referred to my other published books on the Tantra Shistra. 
In Principles of Tantra will be foand general Introduc- 
tions to the Shastra and (in connection with the prosent 
subject) valuable chapters on Shakti arfd Mantras. In my 
recent work, Shukit and Shakta (the second odition of 
which is as I write reprinting), I have shortly summarised 
the teaching of the Shakta ‘Tantras and thor mtuals, In 
my Studies m the Mantra Shastia, the fist thico parts 
of which have been reprinted from the “ Vedanta Kosan ” 
in which they first appeared, will bo found more detailed 
descriptions of such techmcal terms as Tattva, Causal 
Shaktas, Kala, Nada, Bmdu, and go forth, which avo refomncd 
to m the presant book, Other works published by mo an 
the Tantra, including the “ Wavo of Bliss,” will bo found 
in the page of advertisements 

The following account of Purnananda, the colobrated 
Tantrika Sadhika of Bongal, and author of the “ Shat« 
chakranirupana,” has been collecied from the descendants 
of his eldest son, two of whom are connected with the work 
of the Varendra ‘Research Society, Rajshahi, to whoso 
Director, 8}. Akshaya Kumara Maitra, and Secretary, 


RAC yil 


Sj. Radha Govinda Basak, J am mdebted tor the following 
details + 

Purnananda was a [पुपर drabmana of the Nashyapa 
Gotta, whose ancostors belonged (५ the village of Pakrashi, 
which has not vs yet boon inde tified, Tas sey mith ancestor 
Auantuchirya 19 said to have nig alod from Buranagara, 
m tho distinct of Morshidabad, to Kaiteh, in {10 district o 
Mymensingh. In Ing famly were born two colobated 
Tantrika Sadhakas—namoly, Sarvananda and Purnininda, 
Tho doscendaity of Sarvananda reside at Mehar, while 
thoso of Purnananda reside mostly in tho distinct of 
Mymonsingh. 1160५ is known about the worl lly lito of 
P wninanda, oxcopt that ho boro the namo of Jagadiinande, 
and copicd a manuserpt of tio Vishnupmanam पो the 
Shaka your 1418-a.0. 1526 Mus manuse ipt, now in the 
possession of one of his descondants namod Vandit Hari 
Kishore Bhatiachusya, of Kartal, is still ian tai state of 
proservation It was brought for inspeetion by Pandit 
Satis Chandra Siddhintebhishane of the Varendia Resourch 
Society, Tho colophon statosy that dagadinanda Sharma 
wrote tho Piriina in the Shika you 1118 

This dagadunanda assumed the name 9 ` Piivnananda 
whon he obtained his Diksha (Enitiation) ftom Brahminanda 
and went to Kiimaiipa (Assam), in which provinces he is 
believed to have obtamod his “ Siddla” का state of spiritual 
perfection in tho Ashrama, which still goos by the namo of 
Vashishthighrama, gibuatod ab a distanco of abont sovon 
miles from tho town of Cauhati (Assam) Piininanda 
novor returned homo, but lod the hfe of a Parunvhangsa 
and compiled soveral Tintmke works, of which the जान 
tattvachintimani, composed im tho Shaka yoat 1499-a.p, 1577, 
Shyfinirahasya, Shiktokrama, labbvinandatarangini, and 
Yogasura aro known. is commentary on the Kili- 
kakiraicita hymn is woll known, ‘Tho Shatchakranirupana, 


yin LHE SIX OGNERIS AND PUR SEIPEN POWER? 


here translated, is not, howevor an independent work, but 
a part of the sixth Patala of the Shritativachintiman, 
According to a genealogical iable of tho family of this 
Tantrika Acharya and Virachara Sudhaka, given by ono of 
hig dasesndants, Pummananda 19 removed from his Pp asent 
descendants by about ten gencrations, 

This work has been on hand some five years, but hoth 
the diffisulties of the subject and those created by the war 
have delayed its publication. I had hoped to include some 
other plates of original paintings and drawings in .my 
possessicn bearing on the subject, but presont conditions 
do not allow of this, and I have therofore thought it better 
to pubhsh the book as ४ stands rather than risk further 
delay. 

Animur Avatow 
Rayos 
September 20, 1918 


NOTH TO SUCOND HDITION 


Jonsini wine the recondite niliure of tho subject, tho 
fist odition published by Mossts (च्ल & Co., London, has 
17८ * ४ moro rapid sale t an was oxpeeted anc a call for 
a second edition has enablod me to revise the whole worl 
and to make soverl correetions uid additions both in the 
Introduction and Text. ‘fo this sccond edition has beou 
added tho Sanskrit loxt of the wor <s here teimslated which 
formerly appeared as Vol. 2 of tho ‘Tantik ‘Texts md which 
has since gone outof print. ‘Chis edition also contains m 
addition to tho osgmal colouret plies othe Chakras, a 
numbor of half-tono plates ta con from aie, showing some 
positions in Kundalini Yoga. 

Tho Lutrvoduotion doaly in a general way with tho 
subjoct-mattor ol the Texts (rv पणत्‌, | 1 पल however this 
opportumty lo say कुप) that it has net becr possible to 
givo 1010 ५ full explanation of such matters and relor my 
reador to my काला worss dealing wilh the Tantras and 
tho Ritual, namoly, Principles of Tantra, a wor's ol poo पोताः 
vulue in that it is a Ganslation o the wore of + Bongah 
Pandit himsoll ५ Shikta unacquamte lL with the Mnglish 
language but an inhoritor of the old (tadttions; as also the 
second edition of my Shah aud Shdlte (कणा with 
rilual, publishéd since the date of my first Preface. 1१9 
“Studios in Mantra Shastra’ referred to therein has also 
recently boon published under the Gide of ^ वर्ना of 


Letters. All such techmeal (emus as Bindu, Nida and 
4 


x TN SIX OHNIRNS AND I) SERPENTS COWLR 


the lke used in the works translated have beon fully 
explamed theroin as also the gonoral principlos of Mantra. 
Tt is necessary also to know with accuracy the oxach 
meaning of the terms Consciousness, Mind, Lafo, Matter and 
so forth as usod in Vedanta and these have been given in 
the series of little works undor the goneral caption “ ‘The 
World ०५ Power” [४ ig not possiblo to undlorstand the, 
rationale of Yoga without an accurate understanding of 
these fundamental terms. It has been mghtly said 
that “the practical portion of all Yoga, specially of Rnja 
Yoga, is concerned with mental practices. It is thorefore 
absolutely necessary that the student of Yoga should 
know what 118 mind is and how it works” (Maja Yoyu, by 
Swami Dayanand, p. 9). I have given a short account of 
Sarvinanda and his hfe m the Mindusthan Review, Othor 
works by me on the Shastra are noted in the advortiso- 
ment sheet at the end of the book. 


Lrs Anpoiys, Burr A. AVAION 
October, 1922 


“Wo pray to the Paradevata umted with Shiva, whose sub- 
stance is tho pure nectar of bhsy, 10d ke wto verm hon, tho 
young flowor of the libseus, and the sunset sky, who, having 
cleft Hor way through the mass of sound suing from the clashing 
and tho dashing of tho two wiids in the midst of Sus/ umna, rises 
to that brilhant Dnergy which ghtters with tho Instie of ton 
millon lightnings. Moy She, Kundalin , who quickly govs to and 
votuing fiom Shiva, giaut vs tho fiuit of Yoga! She heing awak- 
oned w tho Cow of Plonty to Kunlas, and the Kelpy (जोन 
of all things doswod or thos wio पकाल) ler?—Shdadd 
Tulaka, xxv, 70, 


CONTENTS 


TAGS 

Inrropuction . i ति ¢ 1—820 

I, Introductory ॐ ‘ P ५ 1 

IT, Consciousness and Its Power ४ ह 24 

TIT, Embodied Consciousness. 4 ॐ ४ 49 

IV. Tho Garland of 1८० द $ A 1 84 

V. The Centres or Totasos ‘ ४ 1 105 

VI Piactico ‘ $ $ ‘ १ 184 

VIL, Vheorstical Buses of the ४०६४ 1 261 

Tax: (‘Tier slation) 1 ^ ‘ 1—184 
Description of the Six (1४०५ (Shatchalaa- 

nuipana) . ५ ५ + + 1 

Tho Tivefol) Pootstool (Pidukipanchala) ९ 10 

Toxr (Sanskrit). ५ ५» ^ ५ 1--164 


TL USTRATIONS 


11440 , 


I 
Ul. 
TIL. 
IV 
V. 
vi 
vn. 
VII. 


IX. 


४, 
XI. 


211. 


XUV 
XIV. 
XV. 
XVI 
XVI. 


‘The Contres 01 Lotnses 
Muladhaa Cl ukra 
Mamptiaka + 


(Jutroduction) 


9) 


(Translation) 


Svidlushtl ana,, 9 

41119६१ ) 

Visnddha 4 is 

Ayna ॐ 

Sahasiina a ‘ ” 
YOCASANA ILLUSTRA SIONS 

Mahabodha nocording (o Matha 


yog पाद्वत wd Yamala 
Padinisana with Lanhki + रं 
Uddiy wa Bandha m diddhasana 

—Ist Stage . > ४ ५ 
तवा) ana Bandha पा Siddhisany 

--2 id Stage १ ४ 
Mehabandha , ५ ६ 
Malabandha in Siddhiisana + 
Youi पीत + ” 
Mahimnda + ^ १ 
॥ 11/11 111 


taal 


Pontisprocr 


117 
144 
2५४ 
1 
(1 
76 
9४ 


00 
101 


112 


120 
128 
186 
144 
102 
100 


THE SIX CENTRES AND THE 
SERPENT POWER 
I 


INTRODUCTION 


Tin two Sansktit works here (vanslatel  Shatchakiant- 
rupana (र Doscription of tho Six Centios, or Chakras?) 
aud Piduka Panchaka (“Vivo old Pootstool”), Cont with a 
particular Jorn 0 Tin 116 Yogw namod Kinda Yoga, ov, 
as some’ works लप्‌] at, तिच) वृता,  P1eso vamos refor 
to tho Kundalini Sha ct, op Supreme Powor in the baman 
body by the mousing of which the Youu is ac ueved, and 
to the purification of tho clome ts of the body (Bhi te- 
५1 पततो) which takes place upon (iat event. us Yo vis 
offectod by a procoss tech ueally known as Shatchakrabhe ta, 
ot picreing of the six Centres or teg ons (Ghakis) or 
Hotuses (Pada) ol tho boty (कला (10 woek cose ibes) 
by the ageney of Kundalii Shak, whiet, in or or to give 
it an Mnglish vame, | have hero called the Serpent Powor? 
Kindaly means coiled. Mus Power 1s the God less (Dev) 
Kundalim, or that whieh is coiled; Lor Tor fami as tha of 
a coiled and sloe vug serpent in the lowest bodily contro, at 
the baso of the spit column, until by tho meus doseriber 
Sbo i+ aronsed im thab Yoga woich is uamed alter Mor, 
Kundalim is tho Divine Goamic Wine gy in bodies (a pose). ) 
1 Qno of tho uaries of bhis Davi i Bhn yw gi, pr tho Serpent. 


2 IM SIX OUNETRES AND MI SLRPENI POWLRE 


The Saptabhum, or sevon regions (lioka),! aro, as popular- 
ly understood, an exoteric presentimont of the inuot untrdc 
teaching regarding the soven conties.’ 

The Yoga is callod Tintrik tor a twofold reason, [1 
will be found mentioned in the Yoga Upaniqhads which 
rofer to the Centres, or Chakras, and in some of the पा पिच, 
The treatises on Hathayoga also dea) with: the subject. 
We find even simila: notions in systoms othor than the 
Indian, from which possibly 171 somo casos thoy have been 
bonowed. Thus, in the Risala-i-haq-numa, by Princo 
Mahomed Dara Shikoh,? a description 18 given of tho thico 
centres “ Mother ot Brain,” or “Spherical heart? (Jil-i- 
mnddawar), the “Cedar heat” (Dil-1-sanowbar1) ; and 
the Dil i-mlofart, or “ Lily heart १.५ Other roforenc ss may 
be found in the works of the Mahomedan Sufis, So some 
of the Sufi fratermties (as the Naqshband:) ave said? to 
have devised, or rather borrowed, from the [Indian १001५ ^ 
the Kundahni method as a means to realisation? | am 
told that correspondonces are discoverable botweon the 
Indian (Asiatic) Shastra and the Amorican-India Mayi 


1The seven “worlds ’ Bhul, Bhuvah Svai Muah ou, 4 पा) 
Satya See my * Wavg of Buss (Comm. toy 35) ok 8 ॥ wl ab 
me seen (lokyante) that’ 1s, attamod md muy honec the fis of 
Karma in tha fom of partienlario-binbi Sityinudis (Com on 
Isha Up,’ Mantra 2 Seo p 258 

2 That ta, the six Chakras and tho uppor cciebial ocntro, or Sah i. 
vara As to Upamshads and Pmanis, soo post 

3“The Compass of Truth’ ‘Pho uuthor was tho olccat aon of the 
Lmpero: Sleh- Jehan and died in Ap 1659, [15 toaching + allegod 
to he that of the secret doctrine of tho ‘ Apostle of God”, 

4Chapter Ton Alam-t-nasut the physical planc, 0 पु the 
Hindus call the Jagiat state Ld Ru Babidur Siishe Chandra Vasu, 

$ See “The Development of Molaphysius m Pera,” by Shiilh 
Muhammad Iqbal, p 110 

9 Al-Bnumi 1s sard to iave tianslated Pater yilv’a wos, as dao hoe 
Sang shya Sutras, into Arabic at the bogu ning of the eleventh car tery, 

"Lhe aithor ered, howover says. ५ Such आतत ds of cont अपा 
fron me quity umslame m character, and the nghar Salis do nob wttac’y 
any importance to them ” 


1 „1. (11111111 3 


Scripture ol tho Zunis callod tho Popul Vuh My inform- 
ant tolls me that thew ९ tih-tube > 14 the Sushimni; thoir 
“twofold an-tubo” (ho Neds Tl and Pmgpaly “Tae 
kan,” 01 Hghtning, is Kundahn , and the centies are depicted 
by ammal glyphs Similar iotions have beon एलका ed to 
me as being held in tho sec rot teaching o' othor commuimitios, 
That the doctrine and practice shot ld bo widespread wo 
might oxpoct if il has a Loundation on fact. This form 
of Yoga is, however, in particular associated with the 
Tantias or Agamas, firstly, oecanso thése Scriptures aro 
largoly concerned therewith = fn fact, such ordorly desemp- 
tions in practical Lull detail as lave boon written aro to be 
found chiefly m the Iatheyogs. worke ind Tart ५ which 
ao tho manuals, nol only of तादृ worship, but of ats 
oceultism. Next, Yoga through ac ion on the lowost contre 
seems cl aractoristic o tho Tints system, the adepts o' 
which are tho custodians of tho practical knowledgo wh ५ 
by tho gonoral drastians in (ho books may be practeally 
apphec. ‘Tho systom as ol a कपि cuaacter algo in 
vospoet of ats selection of the chipf contro of consciorsnoss. 
Various people have in antaqinby assigned to vaious pals 
of tho body the soat of the soul” "or lilo, such as tho 
blood? the heart, and the reat], Generally tho bisin was 
nob so rogaided, ‘he Vaidik systom posits the hout as 
tho chicl conte of Consgionsness—a rolic of which notion 
wo also still preserve in such phrases as © trike 1b to heart? 
aud to “ loan by heart’. Sadhaka, whieh is one of the 
five functions of Pitta,) and whichis situated in tho hoart, 
indhectly assists 1 1 tho perfor nanco of cognitive functions 

LA translit ion waa, T am tod, begun and ncb fin shod by tho 


occultist dames Pryso in Lurefer, the old Thecseph cal wuel, which I 
have nol seou 

2p the Dibheal auying, “Pho blood is the lfc % 

४ ५09 p. 1% 0 the Cotroductiou [0 the thnid volun 6 ol my Panuic 
Toxty (Prapauchasdey, ‘Lauiea) 


4 LG siX (द RIS AND Ub SERITNI TOWTR 


by keeping up tho rhythmic cardiac contractions, and it 
has been suggested! that it was perhaps this yiow of tho 
heart’s construction wl ich predisposed Indian physiologists 
to hold it 10 bo the scat of cogmtion Accorcing to the 
Tantras, howeyor, tho chief contios of Consciongnoss aro to 
be found in the Chakras of the cerebro-spinal system and 
in the upper brain (Sahasrara), which they describe, though 
the heart 18 also recogmsed as ५ seat of tho Jivalma, or 
embodied spirit, in its aspect as vital principle or Prana? 
It is for the reasbns mentioned that the first verse o! tho 
Shatchakranirupana here translated speaks of the Yoga 
which is to be achieved “according to the Tantas” (Tantri- 
nusarena) that 18, as Kalicharana 115 Commentator says, 
* following the anthority of the Tanivas”, 

Recently some attention has been given to the subject, 
in Western hterature of an occult kind, Genorally its 
authors and others havo pupoited to give what thoy 
understood to be the [त thomy of the mattcr, but 
with considerablo maccuracies. Those aro nob hmitad to 
works of the character mentioned. Tus, to take bat 
two imstances of these respective classes, wo find in a 
well-known Sanskrit dictaonmy* that the Chakies aro 
defined to be “cueles or depressions (sic) of tho ho ly lor 
mystical 01 chiromantic pm posos,” and their location has 
im almost every particular been wrongly given, ‘The 
Mulidhara is inaccurately described as being “above the 

1Kaviraja Kunjalala Bhishagratna in his edition of the sushinta 
Sanghita Another eaplanation, howcver, may be given 11 116]; , that 
during man’s histay the importance of tho various por tive edulies 
has ar fart vaned, 

2 Acendmg 10 somo [ता प्रा views, the bram 1१ the centre of tLe 
mind and scrses and the heart that cf hfe (धात) saya thit iho 
heart is the 100t from which spin g all ot] cr parts of tho Lody, ard 1५ 
the conte of some of the funchoiso1 organs Accord’ng, to Sus] 1 ta, 
the heart 1s the seat of sensations. 


3 Professor Momer Wilhams Sanskrit Diclionnry sus ५५८० 
4 ८ a 
Shakira”, ‘ 


IN {20061 ON 5 
pubis”. Nor a the Svadbishthana the umbilical region. 
Anahata 1५4 10 the 100 cl the nose, but is tho spinal 
(९८८ 12 the region of Lhe heart; Vas) ul tha iy nob “the 
hollow besween cho ve ta. sin sesy? bos tha spina. 
contro om the region ol le throat. + फो is not the 
fontanelle or union o the coronal and swithy sutures, 
whieh are sud to bo the Brahmarandhra,) but wim the 
position allotted to the third eye, or dnanichakshng. 
Others, avoding such gross ertors, me not Ireo from 
lesser 11106८1 ८.०४, ‘Thus, an author who, [am informed, 
had consin able knowledgo of chings occult, spraks of 
tho Sushtunna as a “fore” which “ car not be energised 
until Ton and Pimgala have proces ed it,” which 4 passes 
to the accompamment of silent shock 1 rough each seo. 
tion of the spinal marrow,” and which on the awakonmy 
ol the sacral plexts passes along the sp nal cord and 
impinges on the brair, with she residt that the neophyte 
finds “himsell to bo on une ubod ed soul aloie im the 
black abyss of emply 3) we, struggling, against (1५१ and 
terior mullorablo”’, To also writes that the current”? 
of Kundalin is entlod Nidi; that tho Sishumne catonds 
as @ nerve to the Bralnmarandlur ; that the Tattvas ae 
sovon in number; and other matters which we mice. 
rato, ‘Tho Sushmonii ws uot a“ fores,?? and does uot 
pass and impinge upon suything, bub ५ the outo of 
the tlrce Nady, which fotm tho con hat for the foro 
which as the arousing of | 0 Devi called Kundalim, the 
cosmic Power in bodies, which fo eo 1५ nota self ४ Nadi, 
bet passes (hough the umorinost, or Ght iti Nal’, which, 
termmates at tho twelye-potalled lotus bilcw the Sahasiiina, 
from which ascent) is mado to Un Bralimarandhen 1८ 


14 torm whicl 8 als) omploycd to don to the [ऋ पाता, प 
that the lattor as the pissige vhorwby the Bethinwindlia im the 
corgbrum i abluned, . 

2Lxcont in tho vonso that overytl ng is a onprifostytion of power, 


& LIL, SIX OLNIRES AND THE SLREPUNL POWER 


would be easy to point oul other mistakes in writcis who 
have 10613 to tho subject. {[t will be more profitablo if 
1 mako as correct a statement as my knowled ze admits of 
this mode of Yoga. But [ desire to add that somo 
modern Indian writers havo also helped to «if usq crroncous 
notions about tho Chakras by doscribing them from what 
is merely a materiahstic or physiological stanc point. * 'l'o 
do 80 18 not mercly to misrepresent the case, but to givo 1b 
away; for physiology does not know the Chakras as thoy 
exist in themselves that 1s, as centres of conscionsnoss— 
and of the activity of Sukshma Pranavayn or subtle vital 
force; though it does deal with the gross body which 18 
related to them Those who appeal to physiology only aro 
hike to retin non-suited 

We may here notice the account of a woll-known 
“Theosophical” author? rogarding what ho calls tho 
“ Force centres” and the ^ Sorpent Fire,” of which ho writes 
that he has had personal oxpomence. Shough Mr, teadbeator 
also refers to tho Yoga Shastra, it may porhaps exclude 
error 1f we here point out that Is account doos not profoss 
to be a representation of the teaching of tho Indian Yogis 
(whose competence for their own Yoga the author 
somewhat disparagos), bub that it is put forward ६५ the 
Author’s own original explanation (forlafod, as ho con- 
ceives, by certain portions o Indian teaching) of the 
personal experionce which (he writes) he Inmsell has had. 
This oxperience appvars Lo consist 17) the conscious arousing 
of the “Serpent Mire,”? with the enhanced “astral and 
mental vision which he believes has shown him what ho 


5 “The Inner Life,” by त, W lieadhoatur, pp 413-478, Mast 
61168 

४ Ths and tie following notes एता 10१76 his and tho ind au (तणा 
The Devi 0" Goddess is called Bhujangi ग वणक, bec il to 
lowest ecnire (Muladhua) she les * cod’ round 1109 Liga 
“Coiled? st rest “ho Cosme Powa 1 voties ws hen 6 1८7, 
when roused 14 18 felts 17061 ae heat 


IN RO UOLION 7 


tolls us! The centres, or Chakras, of (he पपरा प body are 
by Mr. Leadboater deser bod to be vortices 0' “ethene” 
maiter? into which rush from the astral”? ! world, 11d at 
right anglos to the plane of the wir ling dsc, tho sevenfold 
foreo of the vogos bungmng “divine ile”? mo tho physical 
body. hough all these seven forces operate on ul the 
centres, in oach ol them one form of the forco 15 greatly 
predominant. ‘hose mrtshing forces are alleged to set 
up on tho surfaco of the “etheric double”! secondary 
forces at tught angles to themselves. Tho primary force 
on entranco into Lhe vortex radiates again m sta ght lites, 
bué at right angles. Tho number of these radiations of 
tha primal foreo 15 said fo determine the munbor of 
*notals?" (as tho Lhindis call thom) which {10 * Lotus ” 
or vortex oxlubils. ‘Tho secondary force rushing round 
tho voriox produces, it is said, the appowa co cf tho polals 
of a flowar, or, “perhaps more accurately, svucors or 
shallow vases of wavy amdoseent glass’? In this way— 
that is, by the supposition of an eb 10116 vortex subject to 
an imeommng [01८५ of the Logos both the ^ Lolises” 
desetibed m the Itmdu books and tho numbor of (ier 
potaly is accounted for by the author, who substitt tos ‘or 
tho Sy iditisht] fina contre a six-potalled lotus at the spleen,* 
and corrects the number of potals of tho lotts m the hoad, 
which ho says 13 not a thousand, as the books o this Yoga 
aay, “but exactly 9607." Tho “uthore” conte which 

LGorbun Siddhis or ०८) ut powers aro acqu'red ab eneh corto us 
the practitioner works Lin wiy ipwirds 

2'Lho potels cf the lotus ue Pranishakti mantfostid by Pranavaye 
or vital force, Wich lotus is tee tio of a difleront form of “matter ” 
(Bhutan) thors predon mant. AA, 

3'T 18 isa Western term —A A 

4 Not mer tioned in tho weount [मद giver A A, 

¢ Soo 1 19 1 06 bu theo. ॥ 

So little abba toy sccms to be givon de ५९। ( ((ात्‌क uth m 1616 


vhav one ci the (ष्णम्‌ i aroppea in ovacr to पाठ LOCO pe पाह ches 
48, 50% 20 “Thousand + 18, 1 (८ only symbohe of mignitude —A Ay 


‘ ५ 


8 HI SIX OFN RLS AND MIE $ पकिव OW 1 


keops alive the physical vehicle is said to comespond with 
an “astral”? centre of four dimonsions, but between thom 
is a closely woven sheath or wob composed ol a single 
compressed layer ol physical atoms, which provonls a 
premature opening np of communication botaweon the planos. 
There is a way, it 1s said, m which thoso may be properly 
opened or developed so as to bring more through* this 
channel from the higher planes than ordinamly pasos 
thereby. Each of these “astral” centres has curtain 
functions : al the navel, a simple power of feeling; al tho 
spleen, “ conscious travel” in the astral body; at the heart, 
“a power to comprehond and sympathise with the viora- 
tions of other astral entities”; ab the throat, power of 
hearing on the astral plane; betweon the cycliows, 
“astral sight”; ab the “top of the head,” perfection of 
all faculties of the astral life’ These contres aro thorofore 
gad to take the place to somu extent of seuse organs for 
the astral body Tu the first centro, “nt the bise of the 
spine,” 15 the “serpent fire,” ov Kundalim, wh ch oxists in 
seven layers or seven degicos of force? This is the mam 
festation im ethene matto, on the physical p ang, ol ono 
of the great world torcas, one of the powers of the Loos 
of which vitality and electrieily are examples. Tt 13 not, 1b 
is said, the samo as Piina, o vitahty.? Tho + otheric 
centres” when fully aroused by the “ Serpont lire” bring 
down, it 18 alleged, into physical consciousnoss whatever 


1Certan Sddhis are said to be gancd al eieh cenfie Bat the 
top of the ieid 18 iar beyond the “astral 110 ' 1010 Sid), 0 
unton with Jhe Supreme Const ousness, wh d AA 

?Pmashabd whicd 1s Kundilnt im Ifa asperb as uns) of al 
sound has sever aspects fiom Kurdah to तपरा AA 

3 Kundal is Shabdabrthman o tho‘ Word (Vak) in Tod (त and 
is m Her own form (Svarupa) Pare Gonscroust ons, ard yall Powers 
(Sava shakiimaya) Kundah 18 in fact the coymie energy ‘1 hoc ies 
and as such tho cause of all md Lhough manifesting 19, 14 not confined 
to, any of वाधः proditts —A A ति 


INIRCDUC TON : 9 


may be tho qualty imhorenb im the astral (आण which 
corresponds to it  Whon vivified by the “Serpent 
Vireo” they become gates of connection between tho 
physical and “astra ” bodies. Whon the astral awakon- 
ing of these con tes first took place, tis was not 
known to the physient consciousness, Bub tho sense body 
ean‘ now “ba brought to shara all those advantages 
by repeating thal process of awakening with the othere 
0७108”, This is dono by tho arousing through will-force 
of the “Serpont Tivo,” which exists clothed in “ etheric 
mattor in the physical plane and sleeps? in the coirospond- 
ing otheric contro—that at the base of tho spe”. When 
this 18 done if vivifios the highor contros, with the effect 
thal it brings into the physical consciousness tho powers 
which wero aroused by the development of ticir 6010५ 
ponding astral contros. In short, ono begins to live on tho 
astial plane, which w not a togethor an ac vantage, wore 1b 
nob that ontry into the horvon world 14 said to be achovod 
at the closo o 10 on this plue? Thus, at the second 
0011110, one is conscions in (ho physieal body “ of all lands 
of astral influa ies, vaguely (नफ that some o them aro 
fiondly and somo hostile witho ॥ in tho leash knowing 
why At tho thiid ९८ 16५ one is onabludl to vomerbor 
“only partially? vaguo astral ocrnoys, w th somolimes 
half-romembrance of a blissful sensation of [पाह (rough 
the 811, At tho lourth contre man is instinctly aware of the 
joys and sorrows of olhors, somotimes voprodt cing in him. 
solf tho physical aches and pains. Ab tho arousing of tho 


1 Kundalr is called tho Sapmt (Bhujangi) Sho ५०8 in ho 
Malidhaa. Ay to what she m seo last note Sho s copa bor anso sho 
is ot vost, 1 101 man’s cor scionsnass 18 aw ८५ to bho world, [णा ereaticn 
m which Sho is narmnont. Whon dhs awakos ard You vis complote 
man sleeps to the world and onpoys divine Cxpouonce 

4 Lio ond of Knundali Yogs is beymd ul owen walks No 
Yogi socks “ Dleavon” but won with thit whi has tho sone o all 
worlds ५ 

3 


10 गा SIX ता 118 AND ID SERPLNL POWDR 


fifth centre he hears voices “ which make all ands of sug~ 
gestions to him”. Sometimes he hears music “ or other 
less pleasant sounds”. Tull developmont scourcs clair- 
audience in the “astral” plane. ‘Tho avonsmg of the sixth 
centre sccures results which are at first of a trivial charac 
ter, such as “ half seeing landscapes and clouds of colour,” 
but subsequently amount to clairvoyance. = 11010 it iv said 
there 1s > power of magnification by means of an “other” 
flexible tube which resembles “the microscopic snake on 
the headdress of the Pharaohs” ‘Iho powor to oxpand 
or contiol the eye of tlus ^ microscopic snako” 18 stated to 
be the moaning of tho statemont, in ancient books, of the 
capacity to make oneself large or small at will Whon tho 
pituitary body is brought into working ordor, it forms a 
link with the astral vehicle, an} when the Tre १८४८१०५ the 
sixth centre, and fully vivifies 1४, the voice of the “ Mastor” 
(which in this case means tho higher self in ils vanous 
stages) is heard.’ The awakomg ot tho seventh contre 
enables one to leave tho body in full consgiousnoss, 
“ When the fire hag thus passed Lhrongh all these contres in 
a certain ordor (which var es for cifloront Lypos of poaplo), 
the consciousness becomos continuous up to tho entry into 
the heaven world‘ ab the ond of tho hfe on tho 08118} 
plane.” 

There ave some resemblances betweon this account and 
the teachimg of the Yoga Shastra, with which in a genoral 
way the author cited appears 10 have some acquamtance, 


1 According to the text translated, the sourd of the Shrbdaln पा 
man 1s} ead at the Anahata or fourth contre AA 

2 Thera 13 no mention of such a ‘snare’. ‘The Siddhis Ani na, 
©#0. do not depend on it = [+ 15 conscrousnoss which dor (1104 tt sell with 
the small ०1 the gienb —A A 

3 As the text 11816 translated says tho Ajni is so oallod [एक्क 
hore 18 recenyed the command of the Guru from above ~A. A 


4 See lost note but threo, ante 


INIRODUGL ON 11 


and which may have stgposied to him some “cat nes of lis 
account. ‘There are [1191] seven corfies, wo ch with one 
exeoption correspon with tho Chakras lescutbod ‘She 
author says that there are | (५0 ध lower cer res, bub 
tnt concon ™ hon on homas 1... 0", 11, WEE those 
aio 18 not stated. There 14 no contie lowe, that Lam 
awato of, than the Mulu hara (as the namo © root-co ie ” 
itsolf supplies), and tie only centre near to it which ‘s 
excluded, im the above-montioned account, ऋ the Apas 
Tattva contre, ov Svadhishthe na. Noxt there is the lorce 
“tho Serpent 1 ५, which the Uindus coll Kundalin, 
in (1५ lowest contro, tho Muladhavy lastly, she e foot 
of tho rousing of Uns orce, which as uco nolished by 
will power (Yogvbala),! 19 smd (0 exalt the physical 
conseior sness thiongh fhe aseonding = planos 10 the 
“heaven world”. ‘lo uso the [hindu expression, (16 
object and rim of Shatchakrvboieda is Yoga. ‘hs is 
wiimately won with tho Supreme Self तो [पपा 
but ib is obvious that, as tho body an us natural 
slate is alvoady, though प्रात eiously, mm Yoga, othorwise 
ib would nob oxist, cach conscious slop upwards is Yoga, 
and theve are many stages o such be o 6 (कापा) 01 
Kaivalya Mi kla ig attained, This and, indeed, many of the 
procoding stagos are fa beyoud tho “howven world” ol 
which the anthor spencs. Yoows wo nob concerned with 
the “howen world,” but sock to 4 rpass it; छात wise they 
ao not Yogi at a. Wha, accorling to this theory, 
manilestad foreo apparently does is Us: af ondinneos tho 
montlal and moval qaiahties of the soll-oporator as they 
existed at the timo of its discovery. But ॥ this be 59, such 
onhancomont way bo as ible les able as te original state. 
कण 6 trom the nocossily lov tho possession of health aud 


1 With the wd of bodily [प्राप लकाम catiit Aannag ant Mudiis 
(५, post), a 


12 शप्ता" SIX (क्रिय 8 AND 191. SERPENI (प 


strength, the thought, will, and morality, which il is pro- 
posed to subject to its influence must bo first purified and 
strengbhened before they aro intensified by tho vivifying 
influence of the aroused {0166 l'urthor, as [ hav olse- 
where pointed out,! the Yogis say that the pioveing of the 
Brahmagranthi or “ knot ”* sometimes involves considerable 
pain, physical disorder, and even disease, as is not mi likely 
to follow from concentration on such a contre as tho navel 
(Nabhipadma), 

To use Hindu terms, the Sadhaka must bo compotent 
(Adhikiri), a matter to be detormimed by 118 Guru from 
whom alone the actual method of Yoga can bo loarnod. 
The incidental dangers, however, stated by Mr, Leadbeater 
go beyond any montioned to me by Indtaus themselves, 
who seem to be in gonoral unaware of tho subject of 
“ phallic sorcery,” to which reference 1s made by Mr. Lead- 
beater, who speaks of Schools of (apparontly Wostorn) 
“Black Magic” which aro said to uso Kundalins for the 
purpose of stimulating the sexual con(ro. Anothor anthor 
says:' “The mero dabbler in tho psendo-ocoult, will only 
degrade 128 intellect with the puemlties of psyclism, be- 
come tho prey of tho evil influenco of the ph wntasmal world, 
or ruin his soul by the foul practices of phalhe sorea y—as 
thousands of misguided peoplo are domg एषणा in this ago.” 
Is this so? 1६ is possiblo that porverso or misguided con- 
centration on sexual and connected centres may have the 
effect alluded to. And it may be that tho Commontator 
Lakshmidara alludes to this when he speaks of Uttara 
Kaulas who arouse Kundahn in tho Muladhiiva to catty 
thow desir for world-enjoyment and do not attempt to loa 


In the first edition of my Mahanirviiny Paniva, OXX1V. 


2 There aie three “knots” which have to be pierced or contecs whore 
the force of Maya is pmticulmly strong 


3« Pho Apocalypse Unsealed, p 62 


1 (1077९17० 13 


Tor upwards to the [Tighest Contre which is the objecb of 
Yoga socking supor-wor dly 14५4, Of such, a Sunsktt verse 
runs “they me the [176 prostitules” — 1 have, however, 
nover hoard Indians ro or to this matte’, probably bec ५५6, 
it does 110८ belong to Yoga in is ordinary seuse, as also by 
reason of (he antecedent chsciplme required o those who 
would undettake this Yog., the nature of thon practice, 
and tho. aim they have m view, such a possibility dows not 
como under consideration, Tho Tndian who practises tis 
or any other Jand of spiminal Yoga ordmaiily does so not 
on account of a enrious mterest mm occullism ot with a 
dese to gain “astral” or similar oxperiences.! Ths 
attitude in this as in all other matters is essentiilly a rcligi- 
ous one, based ona firm fulhin Brahman (Sthiamshtha), 
and inspired by a desire for un’on wilh Lf which is [नपान 
tion, 

What 14 competoncy for ‘Tantra (Tantiashastridhi- 
kira) is doseribed in the second chapter of tho Gand पये 
Tantra as follows: ‘Tho aspuant mush bo intolhgent 
(Daksha), with sonsos controlled (लोकवा कष), abstaining 
from injmy to all bemegs (Su valingsiivininmuktah), over 
doing good to all (Sarvaptimlnto rata), pure (Shuch); a 
Doliover in Veda (Astike), whoso faith and roluge च in 
Brahman (Bralmishthah, Brahuavids, वाः Brahma. 
parayana), and who is a non-dualst (Dvaitahina) “Such 
& one competent im this deripturo, obherwise ho 1s no 
Sidhake” (So’sinin Shistrodhikitu का tadanyabtra ua 
sfidhakah). With कतमा an attitude it is possible that, as 
pointol out by an Indian writor (Ch, VIE post ), con- 
conbration on the lowor contres assomated with the 

1Those who do practise magio of thc kind mentioned work o ly in 
tho lowest contre, ] ave recourse (3 tha Prayoga which loads te NWiyika 
S‘ddlu, whoreby ¢omimorco is had ५1८1 female spr ts md tho lisa 


Tho process im this worl desaibed is ore upon the path of lboration 
and has nothing to do with sexual प्छ mig’, ~ 


14 THE SIX ODNTRES AND IML SERN! POWIR 


passions may, 80 far from rousing, quot thom, Tt is quile 
possible, on the other hand, that another atti ude, practice, 
and purpose, may produce another resull. 10 speak, 
howevor, of concentration on the sexual contio 18 114५1 
misleading, for the Chakras ara not m the gross, body, and 
concentratio: 15 done upon the subtle contre, with its 
presiding Consciousness, oven thoagh such contres inay 
have ultimate elation with gross physical 1) notion. 
Doubtless, also, there is a relationship and correspondance 
between the Shaktus of the mental and sexual centres, and 
the force ot the Jattor, if directed upwards, extrac dinarily 
heightens al mental and physical functionng! Jn fact 
those who are “centred” know how to mako all thor 
{07088 ००1९५189 upon the object of ther will, and tram and 
then use all such forces and negloct nono Tho oxporienced 
followers of this method, howeyor, as [ havo stated, a low 
that this method is hable to be accompanied by cortain 
inconvemences or dangers, and 1b 18 thorefore considorod 
inadvisablo except for the fully compotent (Adinkiri) 
There are, onthe other hand, many substantial points 
of difforence betwoen the account which has been + पो" 
marised and the theory which underlies tho form o Yoga 
with which this work deals ‘The terminology and el syi- 
fication adopted by that account may bo tormedl  Thoo- 
sophical”;? and though i may bo possible for those who 
aro fambar both with this and tho Indian terminology to 
establish pomts of correspondence bel woon the two systoins, 


1 Mind, Breath and Sexual function ae mtorcomiectod ५॥1711 
of the Yogi 1 lo eury “big इत्‌ Ingh to bo ववा obis itis 
called = Vor thiy pu pose tho Vipaaita Midray are do १११५८ 

2 Fam aware that the Theosophical Souiwly 1 ८५१०५ Mc dock 10 
What 1 call *‘Lheosophical’ are tho theories put forwud  y 1५ ea ling 
exponents and largely accepted by uy memos, [ का the word in 
inverted commas to dot oto वकल ठ so tanght and hold by lia Sco aly, 
with which doctrines, Theosophy, mm its genoral sens, 18 1 ol 0¢LHbe Ly 
wholly identified. 


४ INL २001 0110 15 


ib mist by a moans ho assimnod that {he connotatio 1 evon in 
such 09 ॥ “ways oxaotly tho same = Mor though ^ 'Mhoo- 
sophic A” teacln ng 1s lately inspnod by Indian ideas, the 
moaning WIC) 10 states 10 the Indian terms wl ah it 
employs 1५ + aw ys Viet given {0 these terns by Indians 
thomsolyos, This I somotimes contusing and nnsloading, 
- result which wor k T havo bean avoided had the wrlors of 
this school ५ 114 1 qll casos then ow! nomonelature and 
defimtions.! ‘Thor gh ue tho visualisation of our concc ptions 
tho term “ planes Sh convontont one, and may bo so om- 
ployed, tho division hy“ ti incrples ” more noarly adi mbratos 
the uth [| is not ५ usy to cotrolato with complete 

fhoosop! ical theanos as to man’s 


accuracy the Indi and ॥ 

९५. has, however 
principles, ft has, » boon sta ed 4 tht the physical 
ons ? ard ९५, [५11८१ body ; 


body has two ¢chyiions, the 
1 teya and [21 पपोष 


that those correspond to thy 
“ ste 
koshas, and that tho “ [1 प 40 
[8181 1/1.) 


Kamik or deste sulo of tha 
ing for arg inven 
shoath, Assuming for arg men) (त पक्षा o nrespoxidionsn, 


“ 4a (0110104 *? 
then the “ otheria contros ” on Vhakvas of Mr, Loadboatot’s 


6 \५ (01. 5 
account (44 1 ध न 1 onorgy of tho गाप 
॥ ध] 4 (1५८१, oO 
० ४1८५ Foree 10 (पि MO BL thas aud contres of the 


1 ay ai 8 १५३५, ¢ ( 
universal conyciousnc Kun Intus 71104000 


i ॥ dies i 
the ७0111४0 onegy पो badic ॥/ ५911८ 3 ob all 
1 1५9 Mr. lowlbeatan’s 


onergies, including Pring, Accord 
ini in s 21८4) Me aa a 
dhoory, Kundalini ix somo force क) + data fain 


U'Thina, tho ‘Theosophic ud Sars ६1114 
in bis’ ty rodaction to Yogu Plilosopby ? 
“the obfherml (प्प 1८" (1, +) 4 
Indinn uso 0 thiub tom the Ling Shans ५ 
is tho Ailibkuans and ude y ४ ५५] 11 | ` 
according to another (कपा 13 the me Pednas telin 
onllod the “Asuiel” body, wd gomo at Mowe np) 
Ohakras which aro nol a accordance with the vgs 
[11 1111 ५ 

9 Anoient Wisdom,” p. 176, by Min ^ [ऋ ॥ 

E 


fitslu Chardia Vian 
lls the Linga ५] aia 
ng to the cidimay 
19 sul do leily =that 

the ‘anmutias, (1) 
0९ 111 1 () SL) 1/ 18 
10 mado.ad to tbo 
wilh which Lam 










16 AME शर OBNERES AND HE SHRPLN POW! R 


Prana, wnderstanding this term to mean vilaltly or the hon 
principle, which on entrance into the boy, shows itsell 
m various manifestations of 11 which/ ata 1191 
Pranas, of which mspiration 18 callo a by tho general 
name of the force itself (Prana). Vince 10 and LI any 
of Kundahm. “It 1s She who main ying alt tho boings 
(that 18, jiva, jivelma) of the world by means of mspira- 
tion and expiration.” She is thu; the Prana , Devata, 
but, as She is (Comm, एए, 10 रणत्‌ 11) Srishti-sthiti- 
layatmika, all forces therefore are, ter Sho 18, in [५०१ 
the Shabdabrahman or “Word” का ताज, ‘Tho theory 
discussed appears to diverge frqy that of the Yogis whon 
we consider the nature of the Ghakras and tho question 
of their vivification, Accorine to Mr, Leadboator’s 
account, the Chakras are all 47008 of + etheric matter,” 
apparently of the samo Kini and subject to the same 
external influence of the ashing sevenfold force of tho 
“Logos” but differing in th, that in each of the Chakras 
one or other of the sevyFold forces is prodomuaut, 
Again, if, as has heon stay, the astral body corrospondy 
with the Manomayakoshy thon {ho vivification of the 
Chakras appears to bevaccording to Mr. Leadbeater, a 
rousing of the Kank sig of the mental sheath. According 
to the Hindu doctrineyhese Chakias are difformg centres 
of consciousness, vitalit, and Tattvik energy Hach of tho 
five lower Chakias ‘Sthe centre of energy of a gross 
Tattva —that 1s, Of that form of Tattvik activity or 
Tanmitra which Myfests the Mahabhuta or sensible 
matter. The six' Ig the centre of the subtle montal 
Tattva, and ths Aasrara is not called a Chakra at all, 
Nor, as atater, 1 »’ spleme centre included among the six 
Chakras whit. gece,ealt with in this account. 

In पा hewn system the total number ol tho potals 
correspon tant, । \ the number of the letters of the Sanskrit. 


* 


| १0070110 17 


Alphabet, 1 and the number o tho petals of any speeific 
lotus is determiner by tho disposition of the subhle 
*norves” Nadis around it, Those petals, पीतो", boar 
subiile sour d-powers, and are fi ty} in numbe , as ao the 
loltors of the S.nskuit A.ph vbet 

This work ० deseribes cor tam things which we gu ied 
by contemplition on cach of tio Chakras. Some of thom 
aro of a goncral charactor, such as long lio, focdom from. 
desire and sin, control of Ue senses, knowledge, power 
of speech, and fame, Somo of these and other q । पाठ 
alo rosults common to (कल्ला पणा on moto than one 
(धात Othors aro statod in connection wilh the contom- 
plation tpou one contre only = Such statements scum to be 
made, not necessarily with tho miboution of accuimoly 
recording fhe speee ros), 1 anv, whieh 3] ०४५ 1 फक) 
concentration upon a particula* contre, but by way of pruse 
for mere wed sol -control, or 8( प -४१५।१५; ns whero it 14 said 
in ४, 41 that contemplation on tho Nibhi-pacma gaiis tor 
the Yogi power to destroy and croate the worl, 

Tt ig also कत that mastory of the contros may produce 
vations Siddhis or powors iu respect othe prodominating 
olements there, And this 14, in fret, allegod? Pandit 
Ananla Shistu says:? We cm meob with sevoral persons 
every day elbowing us in tho stroots or bazais who in all 
sincority attomptod to roach the ghost plano of bhas, but 
fell victims on tho way Lo tho illus ons of tho psyelne world, 
and stoppod al ono or the other of the six Chacras. hoy 
are of varying dogroes of aliainmont, and aro seen to possess 
gome power which is not found evon in the best mtelloctu ly 
of the ordimary ran of mankind. That this seltwol of 


1Which ne omelones given as bO and sometimes is 51 
2Se0 Yogalativa Upwunishad wlero so दिको on the outh 


(011८ acemes mastery (ष्णा ( rth, of At tho sua timo at pou {6 Vv 


out Uhat these powas ? rie obstacles to] beration 
9 Anandalahoi, p, 35, ^ 
१ . 


^ 


18 {HL SIX OIN‘RES AN) 1 FP SORPIN POW R 


practical psychology was working very well m India at one 
time 13 evident {1 छाए these hving mstances (not to speak of 
the numberless treatises on the subject) of men roaming 
about m all parts of the country.” ‘Iho mero rousing of tho 
Serpent power does not, from the spiritual Yoga sland- 
pomt, amount to much = Nothing, however, of real momont, 
from the Inghe: Yogis’ point of view, is achieved until the 
Ajna Chakra 18 reached. Hore, again, 1 is said that tho 
Sadhaka whose Atma is nothing but a meditation on this 
lotus “becomes the creator, preserver, and destroyer, ol 
the three worlds”, and yet, as the commentator po nts 
out (v 84), ©Thigis bat the Inghest Prashangsay da or 
Stntivada that is, compliment whicr m Sanskrit htera- 
ture is as often एनत्‌ of reality as it 15 1 our ordinary ॥ ५. 
Though much 18 here gained, 1b is not until the पृ (थर of 
this centro are also absorbed, and complete knowle Igo । of 
the Sahasrara is gamed, that the Yop attains (hit which 19 
both his aim and the motivo of his loour, cessation from 
rebirth which follows on the control and concon tation of 
the Clitta on (16 Shivasthanam, the Abodo of 1311९५4, [| 1५ 
not to be supposed that si nply boom se the Sorpent [wo 
has been aroused that oro has thereby become a Yor on 
achieved the end of Yoga. Thero me other points of 
difference which the reader will discover for himsolf, but 
into which I do not entor, as my object in comparn धु Lhe 
two accounts has been to ostabhsh a gonoral contrast 
between this modern account and that of tho Indian 
schools. JT may, howevor, add that tho differences aro not 
only as to details Tho style of thought dilfors ma way 


1 Phis, 1४ 1¢ obvious, comes only aftor lon, effort, wd following on 
less complote exper’ences and results, Accord ig te [क्ष 1 106) 
suecess (Siddi) im Yoga may be tho fut of oxpnie as of mony 
preceding lives Kundal must be gadually raised fiom one centro bo 
another until she reaches the Lotus in the cachum Tho lengll of 
time required yates in the individual it may be yeus ordi क) on in 
exceptional case; months 


11.411, 19 


nob easy shortly to dese tbe, but whidi will be quickly 
recognised by these woo bave some [काणा y with the 
Incian कलाया and noleo thoagat. Tae « ler as yor 
disposed to i terpret all processes vad aor resis 1011 a 
su yoctivo sbundpo a, tioug lor {10 pu poses of Sv thane 
the objective सकता is not ignored ‘Mee Tnd an theory 14 
Inghly  plnlosophica fhus, to teko bet one inst uce, 
whilst Mi, Geadbeuter attuibulcs the power of beeomme 
largo छा small at will (ततो 1१ and Mahim? Sildh) toa 
floxablo tubo or “ meroscopts snake ” 11 the lorehead, the 
Thndu says thet all powo s (कवत) aro tho पवि फक 
(Aishyaryya) of (ie Love Ishvaa, ठा Creative Conscions- 
noss, and that im the cogree [1५ the Jiva vedisos that 
conse 011810४9 ! he shares t10 powers inheren v1 the degroo 
ot his atta nment, 

Thu which 14 (16 gere al charac काजल of tho Indian 
systems, and thal which constitutes ला real profun bby, 
1> tho paramount impor धा ५ attached to Consciousness and 
is ६10६, (bh is theso slates whieh croate, sustvin, and 
dostroy, the worlds. Brain, Voshina, anc Shiva, are (10 
names lor [प्र [कात af Che one Universal Corscroustiass 
operating. ino omsolvosy, And whitsver be the moans 
omployed, wis the trans nmation o tho “lower? into 
“Tighet * states of conyciousuess which ts Lho process aid 
fruit of Yoga ana the cause of all 13 oxporiences br this 
and other mattars, however, we must dastingtish both 
practico and oxporenco [ron theory, A sivulat exporionee 
may possibly be gained by vuious modes of practice, ant 
an oxporionce nay bo in |1५५॥ ४ true ono, though the they 
which may be giveu to ace omit for it 1५ incorrect. 

Tho following seotions will onablo the reader bo purses 


the comparison for [+| 


VAs 1118 is by the Dosia (१५५५ She called “the giv of tho 
oght Siddins ? (ishitvidsfshtasiddbida) Seo (रो प, U 17, Sho 
gives Aishvatyyn. 


20 TIE SIX CHNIRIS AND 111; SIRPRNT POWER 


As regards practico, I am told that Kundalini cannot 
be roused except m the Muladhara and by the moans | ५1५ 
mdicatod, though this may take place by accident whon 
by chance a person has Int upon tho necessary positions 
and cunditious, but uot otherwise, ‘hus the sory i told 
of a man being found whose body was as cold as a corpse, 
though the top of the head was slightly warm (1 1५ 19 
the state in Kundah Yoga Samadhi) Me was mass 1९५५ 
with ghee (clarified butter), when the head got gradual- 
ly warmer. ‘The warmth descended to the neck, when 
the whole body regained ity heat with a aush. ‘Tho 
man came to consciousness, and then told tho story 
of his condition He said he had boen going thiough somo 
antics, mmitatmg the posture of a Yogi, when suddenly 
“sleep” had come over him, It was surmised that his 
breath must have stopped, and that, boing in tho ight 
position and conditions, ho had unwittingly roused Kur dah, 
who had ascended to [न cerebral contro Not, how sver, 
being a Yog:, he could ‘not bring hor down again, ‘Tus, 
furthor, can only bo done when tho Nadis (v past) aro pure, 
I told the Pandit (who gavo mo this story, who wus loaned 
in this Yoga, and whose brother practised it,) of the cayo of 
a Huropean friond of mime who was not acquainted with 
the Yoga processes hero described, thongh ho had read 
something about Kundali in iranslations of Sanskril works, 
and who, nevertheless, tchevod ho had rousod Kundali by 
meditative processes alone. In fact,as he wrote me, ib was 
useless for him as a Huropean to go into tho minnie of 
Eastern Yoga. IIo, howovor, saw the “noives” [di and 
Pingala (४, post), and the “contral fire” with a trombling 
aura of rosy hght, and blue or azure light, and a while fie 
which rose up into the brain and flamed out in a wiiged 
radiance on sither side of tho head. Tivo was soon flashing 
from centre to centre with such rapidity that he ९01 ld see 


LN] RODUG णतप 91 


httle of the vision, and movements of forees were seen m 
the badus o 0110१, Tho racince o atiy om [पृ was 
seon as moonive that is, palost azo und Ping ila re bor 
ratlor pale rosy opatescence. und पा appe ued an vision 
ag of nionse sgoleen-Vke white ne rather elec ६, 1 ally. 
Taking the cent os, द्वि भा प्राता, Ida, md P nga, to be 
symbohsed by the Caduceas o Moreury,!' tho little ball at 
the top, of the red was wWontitted witi tho Sahasrua or 
pineal pland, and the wings as tho flammng of auras on 
cach sido of the ५८ 1५ wha. tho five stves 11 = One night, 
being abnormally [८५ frou the in तटा of bodily desires, 
he felt the sorpont uncoil, and 1 ran up, uid ho was “in a 
four tam of fie,” and fo t, as ho sad, “tho fla nes spreads ig 
wingwise about my head, and there was a musical clashing 
as of cymbals, whilst some ol these fla nes, ke omanati ns, 
80611100 (0 expand and mect like gathored wings over my 
head. 1 folt a vockm, motion = [ roally (lb fugl tenor, 
as tho Powor seomed somothing which could cor sine me.” 
My triond wrote wo that in his ngitation he forgot to fix 
his mind on the Supreme, and so missod a chviue adyontnre, 
Porhaps ib was on this account that he sas 1५ did nol 
regard tho awakening ol this powor as a very gh spintual 
oxperioncs or on ४ level with other statcs of consciousness 
ho oxporenced. ho oxpericnce, howovor, convinced Lim 
thal thoro was a real science and magic वो tho Endian books 
which treat of oceult physiology 

Tho Pandit’s observations on this experience wore १५ 
follows: TF the breath as stopped anc tho nund is ened 


Yin which the a dow tle eontral ८ anol (Susht1 1 पो पात्‌ 14 
intorliced by the [कह wd Pingalae aymptt] olaca, 113 po nfs of ५0५1 
bem at (0. onfies, ‘The tio wings ab the bop are tho two lolis or 
petals of the Aqua Cl akra 

४ [66 1 differ To Sahamiia is ab the top of the शेवा] or पण 
brain ‘Tho pireel glind क mach Jowor m the edgion of the k vi 
Chakra, 


22 TUL SIX ORNPRUS AND वा], STROBNI POWER 


downwards 1986 is folt. Tt 1 possible to “seo” Kundalini 
with the mental eye, and in this way to experience Her 
without actually aio smg Ter aud bringing [er up, which 
can only be offected by the Yoga methods proscied. 
Kundal, ray have thus been secon as Light ip tle bral 
centre (Mnladhara), Th was the mimd (Buddha) (५, post) 
which porceived Her, but as the experiencer lrad not been 
taught the practice he got confused, ‘There 1s 01 ए sumple 
test whether the Shakti is actually aroused. When sl 0 is 
aroused intense heat is telt at that spot, but when she leaves 
a particular centre the part go left becomes as cold and 
apparently lifeloss as a corpso ‘he progress upwards 
may thus be extonally verified by others When tho 
Shakti (Power) has reached the uppor brain (Sahasraia) 
the whole body is co त and corpse-hke ‡ except 1 he top of 
the skull, where somo warmth 1s felt, this boing tho placo 
where the static aud kinetic aspects of Consciousnoss ur ito. 

The present work is issued, nob with tho object of 
establishing the truth or oxpediency of the prinerplos and 
methods of this form of Yoga (as yeb mdoed T have no 
decided opinion upon a matter which vach will ( ctormino 
for himself), but as a first eudecavow to supply, more 
particu aily for those intorosted in ocenltism and inysticism, 
a fuller, more accurate, and rational piesontation of the 
subject. 

An understanding of the recondite matlors m the 
treatise here translated is, however, only possible if wo 
first shortly summarise some of tho plilorophieu. md 
religious doctrines which undorhe this work, and ५ know- 
ledge of which 77 118 reader 18 asqumed by its author, 

The following sections, therefore, of this Tnbroduction 
will deal firstly with the concopts ol Consciousnesy । wd 


1 For . : ४ : 
shakta the meaning of this toim as horo used, soo my ‘Shakti and 


पि १0 MIC ION थ 


of Mind Ma fer and Tac whe aoe meonscious, 7 | with 
the assocituion am tie Mimbo cd जा ot व (ष्पद. 
Nextly 016 kinotie aspect of Spin, or 9] ucti, isco sidered ; 
ity cronlive ideation and manifestation m= the evalved 
Maerocosm an in tio hitman bod y ot Mie tocosm ( Kal 11111. 
brahminda), which 1 a replica on a small seale of the 
grodier world = 4 {1८7 an account of the ^ Word ” and the 
letters of speech, 1 conclude with the mothod of involution, 
or Yoga. The lattor will nol be understood unless the 
subject of the proceding seolions has boon mastored 

It 18 necessary Lo oxplam and unde stand the | eory 
of world-ovolufion even an the practienl matters with 
which this work is comeored [ता as the Cy nmentator 
says in ४, 39, when dealing with the practice of You. the 
rolo is that baumes dissolve into that fiom whch t ev 
omginate, and the Yogv process bere described is sich 
dissolution (Laya)., This 1५111 or Cissol lon process 
(पिएण) in Yoga will nob be understood wilesy the Tor 
ward 01 (16 [1४५ (Pravis i) process is understooc,  Sialar 
considorations apply to obbor mattots heve doall with 


Il ९ 


CONSCIOUSNESS AND 118 POWER 
(SUIVA-SILAKT) 


Tu bases of this Yoga are of a mghly metaphysical and 
scientific character. Tor its understanding thore iy 10 
quired a full acquaintance with Indiai philosophy, reli 
gious doctrine, and ritual in genoral, and in particular 
with that presentment of these throo matters which is 
given in the Shakta und Momistic (Advaita)? 8 raive Tantras, 
It would nced more than a bulky volumo to deseribo md 
explain in any detail tho nature and meaning of this Yoga, 


1Kularnava Tantra speaks of that + Momam of wo ch Shive 
speaks” (Advaitam ta Sh venoctam, I 104) Soe alay Mahaai vate 
Tantra, Ch Il vv 5३44 ET 43 35, 0.60. Pra i woh wat 
Yantra, [ XIX XXIX [क पलोह Tin re, Gl XIX [ण the 
identity of Jisatma and Paamatma 1४ Vbantior (Mukt ), whic) the 
Vedantasara defines to be Jivabivhmanm wkyim See Mahiw वी पपा 
Tantin, where they are given (VUT 261, 265, V 105) Seo also 
Prapanchisara Tanta, [[ whore Thing w idontified with KK mdah and 
Hangsrh, and then wth “So’ hang”. See also 2b, Gh, XXIV That 
whieh 18 subtle Iam’ (Yuh Sukshmah §3 ham); and पिकी पसप 
Tantra, XX! 10 As to Brahmasmi, sea Kularnwe Tantra, LX BY, 
antl ab, 41+ So hambhavena pujayet ‘Tho ShAkta diseiplo (Sidhaka) 
should not be a dualist Maharudyayamala, 1 Khuda, Ch 1h, UT 
Khanda, Ch. 2 Similarly, the Gandharva Tantra Ch 2, says that lo 
must be devoid of dualism (Dvaitahina) Seo Pifinatoshim, 108 
The Seventh Sutia of the Shakti Siitias of Agastya rans Tat-kal 
pekatvam aupadhikam (The fact of Lfor beg cereus x is Jor 
Upadh ) Tn fact, that particular form of worship whielt has 01 12 | 
the Kanla Tantias thei 1] name claims to bo a practical appheabien of 
Advaitavada Kaulachara is said to properly follow a ull kan wlodyo 
of Vedantik doctrine As the Shitchasra-ivupain hore tans) uted 
says the Jivatma or embodied spirit 1५ the same as the Py imi ra or 
Supreme Spit and ki owledge of this 15 the 100 of all wisdom (11५ 


vidya) 


CONSO OUSNISS AND IS क), (9 तका ) 26 
3116] the bases on which i resis [कात the © ore ass me 
in tho reaccr oe thor ths general krowlee णो 1 desi ( to 
acquire it, and confiie riysol to गमौ an छतो क) of 
genoral principlos and leading facts as will stop y tie 
key by which the cours पकप to aw theoreucal kuow- 
lodge of the sub’eet may be opene by those desirous 
01 passing thiongh antl beyon? them, and as will thus 
facilitate tho undeistandin, o tho difhcult toxts hore 
translated. For on the practic side 1 cin वमनु 
reproduce the directions given 10 the books, together with 
such oxplanationy o tiem as [ have received o aly Thoso 
who wis) 10 go larthar, umd to out into actual process this 
Yogi, must learn dnectly of a Guu who has hinself boon 
through it (Siddha) [hs experience alone will say whe hor 
the aspirant "त capable of ५०५९५९५. It is said wa! of + ००५ 
who attompl 11 one out of a thous ud may have success, [1 
tho latter enters upon tho path, tho Guru alone can १५४७ 
hin from at ondant risss, nouldirg anl giiding the } 
practico as he wall according 1५ the partion ar capacityos 
and needs of his disciples, Whilst, | oro ore, का this 
heating ois posablo to capluin somo (कफान्‌ punciplos, 
their application is dependent on {10 circumstances af each, 
particu ar case 

It 18 ossontia) Indian Mourstic Doctrine tat manasa 
misracosm (Kshud abeni nin ta), that 14, eveything णाल], 
js in the Universo isin lam. Lverything whie 11s in this 
world is im tho othor world-systoms ol the Universo — ‘The 
doctrine is concisely oxprosscd आ the following words of 
the Vishv wara Tantia—“ what is hove is olsewhore = What 
is not here is nowhoro” (Yad ih sta tad anyatra yan nehiati 
na tal kyachit), Manis Spirit, Mind and Matter,’ Spirit is set 


LHpont is Adma on Sol? [ts venules ao Mud or Antahiarena 
work’ng w'th Mdnas and tla Sonsox or Indriyas and Matter, namely 
tho five kinda of Bhiite or sensible mat er 

a 


20 TIL SIX CINIRLS AND 111, SERPTINL 1OWER 


over against and may be contrasted with its volicles Spirit 
is onc. There 810 no dogrees or quahtics of Spit. ‘The 
Sprit which ism manis tho Spuib whieh 15 in ovorythmg 
and which is, as the object of worship, tho Lord (Ishvara) 
or God. Mind and Matter are many ana of many degrees 
and qualities. Atma or Spirit 1s the wholo (Pina) without 
section (Akhanda), Mind and Matter are parts in*that 
whole. They are the not whole (Apuina) and are Lhe section 
(Khanda). Spin is mfimte (Aparichchhinna) formless 
(Ariipa). Mind and Matter are fimte (Parichehhinna) and with 
form (Rupa). Atma is unchanged and unmoving im action. 
Its Power (Shakti) in the form of Mind and Matter 14 con- 
stantly active and changing. Pure consciousness 1s Chat or 
Samvit. Matter is the antithesis of that, And Mind too is 
unconscious according to Ved. nta. Tor mind limits ¢ sci 

ousness 80 as to enable man to have finite oxperionce. Mind 
appears to be conscious becauso of ils association with 
consciousness. ‘There is no’ Mind withont consciousness as 
its background, though tho Consciousness, which 4 tho 
Lord, is Mindless (amanah). Whoro there is no mind 
(amanah), as in the case of God, thore is no damtation and 
Tle is theroforo Porfect Experience. Consciousness doos nob 
limit consciousness but a princrplo of Unconseiousnoss does 
so. Man then 18 Pure Consciousnoss (Chit) vehiclod im 
uneconscions Mind and Maitor. 

The ultimate reality is Puro Consciousness (Chit, 
Samvit) from out of which by ils Powor (Shakti) Mind and 
Matter proceed. In theology this Pmo Conscious ws is 
Shiva and [18 Power (Shakt:) which 1s ono with 111 9१५ 
is the Devi, the Mother of the universe who oxists in 1 10114 
body im its lowest centre just as Shiva is veahsod in tho 
highest brain centre, tho corebium or Salinsrain Padma, 
Completed Yoga 1s the Umion of Jer and Ulm 7 tho 
body of the Sadhaka, ‘Tus is Laya 0 dissolution, tho 


= 


GONSCTOUSNTSS AND 115 POW!R (शा ए५ शा) a7 


reverse of Srishtt 0 inyolation of Spuil in Mind and 
Maitor. 
Veda says: “AIL this (that 14, tho प पात्‌ world) is 
(tho ono) Brahman” (Sayun त्‌ पोरा Brahmy । How 
the many ¢an be tho ono*is vuimely oxpluacd by the 
difforont schools. The in erpretation hore given is that of 
+ tho frand doctrine underlyiig and contamed in the Shakta 
Tantras or Agamas, In tho first place, whats the ono Redity 
which appears as many? What 1s tho nature of Bralinan 
as ibis in itself (Svarupa) > Tho wswor 1s Sat-Chil-Ananda 
qo that 1s, Bemg-lochng-conseiot snoss-bliss, Consciousness 
or fooling, as such (Clit, or Chaitany., or Samvit), 13 
udentical with benz as such काकाह्वा in ordina y exporionce 
the tivo mo ossontially bor nd up togethor, thoy still seem 
10 divorge ‘rom each ot] on Mon by ५ eonstit fon 
involantely bolieves in an objective oxistence beyond and 
independent o Jamse [, Afid this त so as long as, be 1g 
ombodice Spirit (५1९ tui), las consciousness 1 votlod ay 
Mays. Bub in tho ultimaty be sis of oxperionco, which 1s 
tho Supreme Spiul (Params [ 11 पो) the civerzenco has gong, 
for ni 1{ [५ 1 undifferentiated mags osperioncer, oxporienca, 
and tho oxporioneed = Wher, however, we spoak of Clit as 
fooling -consciousness we must romomber (hv what we cnow 
and observe as such is only a limited ५] anging mani estation 
of Chit, which is in sell the infimte changeless principle 
which is the background of all oxperionce. ‘ns Boing- 
consorousnoss is absolute Bliss (Ananda), which 19 dehnod 
ag “resting m the sel”? (Svuupwyishrin ). 1 is Bliss 


1 this, as tho Muahintvany anit vsiys (VIE 98), 4 Ghe end and 
aim of ‘Tantmkw Knlfe ia, t ५ एण sition of wht [प्त gti Pra. 
panchasara ‘Lar tia els tar ffth or supra + (6 (1 XLX, Vol. TH, 
Tantei 'foxts’) 

2s 19 sud of Dosi thit Sho isin t 0 fo 1 of one ard many 
(तपाता) 114 सय] ), Nam oka ५] दता on Miya A ekin tho 
sovort) ayninia—that is, Avidyn She s beth ay Upith of ts) vara 
and Jive (Trishati, 11, 24) 


28 JD SIX OPNIRLS AND LHD ५1, पराप्ता POWER 


because, beme the infinite all (Piirna), ib can be in want 
of nothmg (षड bhssful consciousness 19 tho ultimate and 
real nature or Svariipa, as 10 15 ca od, o the ono Rovity, 
the own form or tho propia forma of the scholustics. 
Svarupa is the nature of anything asi 1५ im ibsolf, as 
distinguished trom what it may appear to be. This St pre no 
Conscionsness 18 the Supreme Shiva (Par ashiva) [| dover 
changes, but etornally endures tho same throughout all 
change. 

But if this be so, how is it that everything wo sco 18 
associated with apparont unconsciousness? Our nnd is 
evidently not a pure, bul a hmited consciousnoss. What 
limits it must be something eivher in पर ut conscious o1, 
rf conscious, capable of producing the appearance of 
unconsciousness. In the phenomenal world there 18 nothing 
absolutely conscious nor absolutely unconscious, Con- 
sciousness and unconsciousness aro always intormielod. 
Some things, however, appear to bo more conscions, and 
some more unconscious than others, This is duo to 
the iach that Clit, which is nove. absonl an काकु 
thing, yet manifests itselt mm various ways and degroos. 
The degree of this manifestation iy detormmod by the 
nature and developmicnt of tho body 11 which 1५ is onsh~ined. 
Spirit remains the same, the body changes. Tho manifost- 
ation of consciousness is moro or less limited as age mb 14 
made from the mineral to man. Tn the mineral world Chit 
manifests as the lowest form of sontioncy ovideneed by 
reflex response to stimuli, and that physical consciousness 
which is called in tho West atomic memory. ‘The sentioney 
of plants 1s more developod, though it is, as Chakrapam 
says, in the Bhanumati a dormant consciousness, ‘Tus is 
further manifested im those micro-organisms whiel are 


1१0 alternative 18 given to meet the differing siewa of Maydvidn 
and Shaktivada. 


CONSOIO ISNFSS AND [Is COW RB (8 [[४५-९।५९ ) 29 


inter nediate stages bet woon the vegotable and animal worlds, 
and have a psydne hle of ther own, [1 the am nal 
word Gonsclousness becomes 11916 Centra ise fue 
complox, reaching als | | ८५ development 11 nan, wie 
[0५१५३५० all tho psyclue fiuchons, ster as (तदपा आ) por- 
ceplon, feeling, and wilh Behind all toesa partieul uw 
chaiging 101 us of sentigicy or Conse ousness ws the me 
formless, change oss Chib as त या tsclt (Svarupa), 
and as distinguished fiom the pulicular forms ० 18 
muauifestation. 

As Chit throughout ul |] 056५ stages 0 1 ० vomuns tho 
sano 16 s nob rely developed. Tle uppomance 0 deve- 
lopmont is duo to 1१6 race that Luis now more and now loss 
veilod by Mint and Matter — [t 1s this एनपा by tho powor 
of Gonsciousness (Shakti) which eroates the wold. What 
is a, then, which vols consciousness and thus producos 
world-oxperlonce P 

The answer s Power or Shactias Miyi. Miya Shakti 
is that which soenungly milkos (he whol (रपा एष) into the 
not-wholo (Apiirna), tho infimte nto tho 11116, the form oss 
into fornsadthe he [bis a power which thus culs down, 
veils and negates Nop {५५ what? Porfoet consmousness Ts 
Shaktr the same as or dihorenm (10 Shiva oe Gi te? Tt 
must bo the samo, for otho wise all conld not bs ono 
Brahman, Bub i it 1 the seme uo mist ov also Chit or 
Consciousness —Thorofore 1 1५ bacheh dinandamayi + and 
Chidriipini? 

And yet thero 1s, at leash in appearance, some distinc- 
tion. Shakti, which comos from sho root Shak, to have 


9 


power,” “to bo able,” uieans power. As Sho is one with 
1'Phat ‘sa, ity subsbence ‘s Sat, Chit, Annida, ‘hy ६106५ May 


and Rupia ind cite a subtle d काकिका -uamoly, that She is Chu, and 
yot by appemanco somothing वीण क्रा trom it 


21n tho form or na we of Chit, As the Kub aki ‘Torben says the 
Params Kala is both Ohit (लावा तषि ard Nady (कत). 


80 HE SIX CENIRES AND 111 § R EN] POWER 


Shiva, She as such powor is tho power of Shiva or Con- 
sciousness There is no difference botwoen Shiva as tho 
possessor of [मणे (Shaktiman) and power अर्ल, Tho 
power of Consciousness 7s Conscionsnoss in ibs active aspect, 
Whilst, therefore, both Shiva and Shaktt ave Conscious 1058, 
the former is tho changeloss static aspect of Consciousness, 
and Shakti is the kinetic activo aspect of thé samo (1071 
sciousness, Tho particular powor whereby the dual + 
world 1s brought into being is Maya-Shakti, wh eh is both 
a veiling (Avarana) and projecting (Vikshapa) Shakti, 
Consciousness veils itself to itsell, and pro‘ecty ‘Lom the 
store of its previous experiences (Sangskata) tho 10110 1 of 
a world im which it suffers anc 61108, ‘Tho wnivorve 13 
thus the creative unagination (Smshtakalpana, as 1t is callod) 
of the Supreme World-thinkor (ishvara). Mayi is hat 
power by wich things are “ measured ’—Lhab 1s, formoil 
and made known (Miyale anaya iti maya). Tb 18 the sonso 
of difference (Bhedabuddhn), or that which mikes mat soo 
the world, and all things and persons thoroin, as different 
from himself, whon in truth he and it and they aro the ono 
Self. Tt is that which establishes a cichotomy m= wiiat 
would otheiwise be a umtary experience, and iy tho cause 
of the duahsm inherent m all phenomonal oxperioneo. 
Shakti veils consciousness by nogating 11 vations degrees 
Herself as consciousness, 

Before the manifestation of tho umverse, Boing-Con- 
sciousness-B iss alone was—that 14, Sh va-Shakt1 as (rib 
and Chidrupim respectively. Consciousnose not oxorcising 
its power, Consciousness alone changolossly wis Tn this 
the qmescent state of flo Atma or So f, Shakti bong ] प, 
is one with it = [षा in the Kulachiidamam Nigama! swys + 
“T, though Prakriti, He liddon in Consciousness Bliss.” 


Abam prikrituapa chet chdanardi paraya a (G> , ५५ 16-8 
Vol IV, “Tanta< Texts ') ^ † ५ 


CONSLIOUSN 88 AND 18 POWIR (SIIVA-31 AK 1) 31 


Raghava Bhalla says :? “Sho who 14 eternal (Ani dit पृष) 
oxistod in a subtle siite, av ib woro Consciousness, dining 
tho preat Gissolution.” 
This is Parashtva, who in tho schome 0 1110 TM uty-six 
Pattvas is, known as Pudsamvit, Tins is the por cet 
experience and perfect universo. By this later term 15 
not "mount any heaven m the sonse of a porfected world of 
torms. ‘ho porfect uriverse is Shakti herself प Mor own 
nature as Consciousness oxpertonced by Shiva as conscious- 
108५4, As tho Upamshad says, “ ‘The soll knows and loves 
-tho soll” It is this love which is bliss ov “resting in tho 
golf,” for, ६५ it is elsewhere said, ^ Supreme lovo 14 bl ss” 
(Niretishaya-prom ispadatvam + nandat vem) 1, hawnver, 
thero be one Changeless Conse usness there is no 1 1 णा 
tation Lf, aguin, wo assumo some ofher than Conscions- 
1088 as cause of the umvorse, thon tho Monis 16 (Advaita) 
truth is costroyod, ४५ im the dnalistic Singkhya, which 
assumes, in addition to and indopendont 0" the ?nrusha 
consciousnoss, tho Prakritt tneonseionsnoss as tho matoual 
cause (Upadinakiwana) 0" tho world, Al Indian Moms n, 
therolore, posits ६४ dual aspoct of tho singlo consciousness 
ono tho transcondontal changoloss aspoct (Paviisnmvit),? 
and tho olhor the creative changing aspoc + which 1s callsd 
Shiva-Shakti ‘Taltva? In Parwamyit the स + (Aham) 
and tho “ This’? (Idam), or nnivorse of objocts, are indis- 
tinguishably mingled mm tho supromo umlary oxperionce.! 


1४ anicmupa chaitiny idhynseny क्तु sikshn i sthita 
(Comnt o1 91 पपत, Tika Gh 1) thibis, the A hyasvor द्य a 
is given from tho wold aspect  Pranscendo bly Show then पा) or 
own nitio (Svarupa). 

27his is Pa amashiva, का Nirgune (allt oiteloss) ot Nashkale 
(partless or de youd of Shakin, Shivt, 91 Patabrit min 

3 This ia S दप (with प्लावो or Sacale (w th 118 or Sh kta), 
Shiva, or Sh bludtu nan (उ पोका ex lo sowee ch som,’ द past), 

TAs he Yog’rui'eayy par (14 पपच ‘Tho Para Devt Prakasa 
vimarshagamimasy wipnr = lis 1 (10 Noaivisalpa-quana stato in 


१ ५ 


32 J | ४९ CEN hos AND ९ TINE TOW ॥\ 


In pdhiva-Shaki: Tattva Sh kh, wh chow the regative 
aspecl of the torma, Het unction bang neghtion 
(Nishedha- vapara-rt pa Siaktil), negates hoe sell १५ the 
Idam of experience, leaving the SInya eonsmousness as a 
mee स “not looking towads another ? .(Ananyon- 
mukhah ahampratyeyah), This ५ ॥ slate 0 1160 
subjective i lumination (Prakisha matra)! to wach Shakti, , 
who 18 called Vimarsha,? again presonts Ueisel, but’ 
now with a distinction of “T” and म This” as y st hold 
together 29 part of one self. At this point, th first 
incipient stage of dualisin, there 15 the first emanation 0" 
couscionsness, known as Sadashiva-or Sadakhya “Cattva, 
wlich is followed by the second or Tshyata ‘attva, tho 
Lord 

And then by the thid or Shuddbavidya Tattva, Ta 
the first emphasis is laid on the “this”, in the seeonc on 
the “J,” and on the third on both equilly, Thon Maya 
severs the nmicd consciousness so that the ०} * 0८, 1 soon 
as othe: han the self and then split up 1110 the mult. 
tudmons cbyéets of the universe Some worship predonn« 
nantly the masculine or ght side cf the conjoint mao and 
female figme (Ardbanarishvarn), Some, he Shiklas, 
predomina itly woiship the Ieft, ad eall Mor Mother, for 
She is the grcat Mothor (Magna Mater), the Mabidevi who 
conceives, bears, and nourishes the universe sprung fom 
Ter womb (Yoni) This is so because She 1s the active 


which there is no distiiction of * This’ and “That? of [) ad 
«Tlis’, In Vikalpa qnain there is subjoct and obj at 

'Pmamashiva Jas two aspects Prakesha and Vimareli, on 
Kameshva a and Kameshva or Pualnga  Prakisly aph itas- 
pluttkara, or mamfest ition of whot 1s nob कोका, 

2" hs word cones fron the root mesh to touch, to afl eb, to 
cogitate । [८ 5 that which क pour ded m handlad, hindkd by thought, 
that is, object of reflective ought = Pradhaa ४ and [1 वत itv alao my olve 
the meaning “placme im front? ; that which is so placed क obicet 
All three terms denote the principle of objectivity 


CONSCIOUSNISS AND TLS OWE? (8 1४५9 का) 83 


aspoct' of Consmonsness, nuagimig (Srishtikalpani)? tho 
wold to be, according lo the improssions (Sangskaa) 
doevived from on,oymont and suffering in ormer worlds. 
TL is natiral to worship Moras Mothor. ‘ho fist Mantra 
into which, all mon are initattad is the word Vi (Mott or) 
Tt as then first word and generally then last. The fathor 
vis atmero helper (Sahakii-m.{ta) of the Mother, ‘Tho 
whole world of the five cloments also springs from tho 
Active Consciousness (01 Shakti, and is [fer manifestation 
(Pina vikusa)  Thorofore men worship the Mothor,* 
than whom i nono 71316 tender,” suuting [Ler smiling 
beauty as the Rosy ‘Tripmasundius, the somec of the 
universe, and Tler awe-inspning grandeur as Kb, who 
takes it back into Uorsell, 


VThe (५८५ ५) 1४६ speek 1१ by ite de Tria wat ft is 
becuse of this that the Doviis on the Lines symocleuly rep (८ पनत 
ag bor g ab ve tbo ledy of ना 1४1) who licsirdo Tord co ve 0 
(Shwa). An dle Kibake ‘lute, Clot, swe, tos Bri mi, 
ककत पा) vid Rudy, woo ccek, mentary, and destroy, bib tho 
Shalctis, Biahmiiiay, Vushuavy, Rasta Soe [म पपक्ष ॥ Activity 
w the vate of aka 1 (Stngshyy Proveehuim ॐ tra, lL 00) Von 
the sumo reascu tho cr ale forums rey os nbed 1 नि८९। च] पाका as be ny 
above (10111 ) the 11] When tho Dovi atirda whove ५ )1\ , tho 
ay? bohism algo Conctus (part wll in tho cue of Kalt) the Ubcvat ag 
aspect of the My ace 6 (111 ciples cf (४1.10, 1324 

४१10 wets Gace at tht ५७ 1 (Kp ce) १1 1 *५८ al ve 
wlontion on rece Ned me पलापो As the Yop nihiidi yet पावक says “tho 
preture of Cw wereld in designee by Ho (का will (Svedich  wishv ४ 
miyollokhisht biter), “see ई which Boo gaym wis very plow 1". 

‘The Suprame Pathor giv 8 lis 1 win ic CPrakiishea}. She, 
the Vimaralaslakia, ceues babnot lone, (Vi niushasl परता] | rake. 
shatud puan shive ५ 3 पा पतो पशत एप प्ति पा [1 kevela 
(Yoginibiiday ‘Tuntin) 

4In Matm-bhevi, coording lo the Siusku tum. Philos pl icilly 
aloo th # as sound, for all that nan cows (कापा ecstasy or Sumadhi) 
w tho Motior im To form aa the wrld ‘Lhe Supreme Sl प) who is 
nob diffirent fiow Sliva (Paashik ashivebhim कै) a on be lied iy every 
order cf{ tha g (Sary kr mish rnp. -Yoguul vidya). 

Sit is sad thib © ther w षां more ber dar than [ग 1 पष wlo 
saves Puruala क cvary way in Lis anfcymont, ता धोक givn y Mor cti oe 
hboration by rotaimg from Lim, 

$ 


84 4) SIX OINIRES AND 1 817 शद 10८11 


In the Mantra side of tho Tantra जाल doaling 
with Mantra and ils ongin, these two Tattivas ema ating 
from Shaki are {rom the sound aide known as Nada and 
Bmdu Parashiva and Parashakt are motionless (Nil - 
spanda) and soundless (Nihshabda). 0 

Nada 15 the first produce | ककराला in the वतत 1 
cosmic conscionsness leading up to the Sound-Braltuvi 
(Shabdabrahman), whenco all ideas, the language m which 
they ae exprossed (Shabda), anc the objects (Aitha) 
which they denote, aro derived, 

Bindu hiterally means a pomt and the dob (Anus: ara), 
which denotes !im Sauskiuit tho nasal bicathing (°). Tt 1s 
placed in the Chandiabindu nasal brcathing above N ula (~) 
In its technical Mantra senso it denotes that stato of 
active Conscionsness or Shakti m which the ^ [ग or 
illummating aspect of Consciousness identifies itsolf 
with the total “This” as tho yot dualstically un- 
manitest state of the universe? Tb si bjectifies tho 
“his,” theroby becom, a pont (Bindu) of ccusci- 
ousness with it When Consciotsnoss apprehonds an 
object as chfferent from itself at ५८५९५ that ob ecb as 
extended mm spaco. Bub when tha object 1५ complololy 
subjectified wb 1s expenenced as aun unoxtended pom. = ¶ 11४ 
is the umverse-cxperie ice of tho Lord exporioncor as Bindu ) 

Where does the Universo go at chssolution ? fb is with. 
drawn into that Shakti which projectod 1, 1, collapsos, 4o 
to spoak, into a inathematical pomt without any magnitude 


1 Tat, What goos w th (anu) with vowel sound (Svtta or. Svarn), 


2 For until tho oporation of Maya ab । 1 पा singo 10५ 1 116 १1६ 
811] exporicnesd as part of the “I”. Therefore thera is no manifest ian 
or dualism, 


9 Tor the same reason Shakti is thon said to bo Ghanibhita whieh 
is literally massive or condensed = [( is thal stato of gatl or d-up wwwor 
which immediately precodus the burgeoning णम्य (Sphmana) भ the 
universe 


GONSULOUSN 9७ AND 11५ 0) (SI fVA-S AK ) 385 
whatover.!. Tais is the Shiv तप्र, w ich yam 14 with- 
diawn 1 {0 tho Shiva-Shas -Tative which produecd it, 
lé is conceived that rounc tie Suva Bindu V (1५ 1s Couedt 
Shakti, just as in the earth-ccntre called Mo lidhira Clakta 
m tho hunan body a serpent el ngs round the sol -produced 
Phallus (Sviyambhuln ga). ‘This coiled Shakti may be 
conevived ay a mathematical line, also witho wt magnilnde, 
wluch, being everywhere in contact with the pomb round 
which it 18 coiled, 1५ compressul together with it, and 
forms {16५1010८ also one and the same pont. ‘here 14 one 
indivisible unity of dual aspoct which 18 figure | also in the 
Tantras? as a grain of pian: (Chanaka), which has two 
secds so closely jomed as to [छक as one surrounded by ar 
outer sheath? 

1110 10611, to tho former simile, the Shakti coiled round 
Shiva, making ono poml (Bindu) with it, ig Ki "(धशा 
Shakti. Mus word comos forn tho word Kundala or ©2 coil? 
५५ 0 1071619 *, Shoisspoke of as coiled bout so Sho 1५ likened 
to w sorponb (Blu ange), whieh, whon costing and sleopme, 
hos colod; and oecatse tho nature of Ler powor is 
spnalino, iamlesting sol as such im the worlds the 
sphovonls or opes ०" Brah na” (Brahminda), wd im the 
aivevla ov revowing ७1 [1५ and in ovher ways ‘his tho 
Tantras speak of the develop nn, of the strught line 
(Rijurokhé) from the point which, whon 1 has gone is 
longth as a point, is tuned (Vikrarekhi angkushikari) 
by the force of tho spita mo च (लर ( ` Mayi in whieh it works 
yo as ‘to form a figure of Layo cimonsions, which again is 


1Tho miagery, Ico all of ats ते ig neccasumly imperfect, fy 
such a porl, thot! 1b hiv ro maymtude is usumed b hue a position 
lore there 18 none, for we are im spacclessncss. 

9 Seo tho Conmont wy, post 

3‘Lhe (५) sceds aro Shiva ant Shikts, ard tho sheath is Mays, 
Whin thoy come apiet there is (णा ~Ayain tho imagery is‘faulty, 
in that thao aro bwo svods, bul Shiva and Shakti aro tho One with 
dual aspost. 


86 TIE SIX ODNTRES AND (णा 8 (पिव POWER 


turned upon itself, ascending as a straight line into tho 
plane of the third dimension, thus forming the trian- 
gular or pyramidal figure called Shringataka.' In othe 
words, this Kundali Shakts is that which, whon if moves 
to mamfest ilself, appears as tho universe. ‘Po say that 
it is “coiled” is to say that it is aéaest thats, m the 
form of statee potential energy. This Shakti coiled round 
the Supreme Shiva is called Mahakundal) (“The gieat 
coiled power”), to distinguish it from the samo powor 
which exists in individual bodies, and which is called 
Kundah or Kundalm.? Ié is with and through tho last 
power that this Yoga 15 eflected. When it is accomplished 
the individual Shakti (Kundal) is -inited with the great 
cosmic Shakt: (Maha-kundah), anc She with Shiva, with 
whom in truth She 18 one, Kundalini 18 an aspect of tho 
eternal Brahman (Brahmarupi Sanatam), and is both 
attributeless and with attibnte (Nirguna and Saguna) 11 
Her Nirguna aspect She is puro consciousness (Chailan- 
yarupin)) and bliss itself (Anandarupim, and in eration 
Brahmanandaprakashim). As Saguna She 11 29 by whose 
power all creatures are displayed (Sarvabhut prakashim).? 
Kundah Shakti in individual bodios 18 power at rest, 01 the 
statie centye vonnd whiel every form of existonce as moving 
power rovalves. In the univeiso thore is always in and 
behind every form of activity a static backpround., This 
1s one of the profound truths of the Shakta Tantras, which, 
as later explained, is 01716 out by recont discoveries of 
modern science. ‘Tho one Consciousness is polarised mto 
static (Shiva) and kinetic (Shakti) aspects for the pu pose 

‘The shape of the Singara watcy-nut which grows freely m tho 
lakes of Kashmmr Hero I may obsorvo that Yantras, though drawn o1 


the flat, mast be concoived of in the solid mass. ‘The flat drawn ¢ 15 a 
mere suggestion of the three dimensional { gure which tho Yantaa is 


? Recanee Sha 18 thas bent the Dev 1s called Kubjice (henck buck). 
3 Kubpké Tantra, Ch. I, Pranatoshim, 8 


CONSCIOUSNISS AND 1 POWDR (बाता) 37 


of ereation. This Yoga is the resolutim of this duality 
into unity again. 

The Thoin Seviptives say, in Mie words of Herbert 
Spencer in 11५ “First Principles,” Wat the niverse 18 an 
unfoldmemt (डमा) from the homogencous (Mul पा णेता) 
to the hetorogenocous (Vikrit), and 11८२६ to the homoge- 
neous agam (Pralaya or dissolution) More aro thus 
altornate states of evolulion and dissolution, m unfestation 
taking place after a pemod of vost So 11७0 Professor 
IIuxloy, in his “Wyolutiot and Hthies,” sseaks of the 
manifestalaon of cosme enorgy (Maya Shaka) alternating 
between phases of potentiihty (Pralay 1) and phases of 
explicaion (जमो). “Tb may 1५ ro says, “as Cat 
suggosts, evoly casune mig na predostinod to evolve 179 १ 
new world has been (10 no less prodestinod ond of a 
vanished prodecessor.” This tho non Shistes affirms in 
its doctumo that there 1 10 such thing ag an absolutely 
first croation, the present universo bemg but onc of a series 
of worlds which aro past end ate yot to bo. 

At tho timo of dissolution (Pralaya) there ts 1 con- 
sciousnoss as Mabikundali, tho gh undislingwushable fiom 
its gonoral mass, tho potontialily or seed 0 ' tho universe to 
be. Maya, as the world, powrtially exists as कृणोनत nod’, 
who is Tlersolf ono with Consciousness or Shiva ‘This 
Maya contains, and is in fact constitu ed by, ths colloc- 
tive Sangskiia or Visana—that is, the mont inpros- 
sions and tondoneies producod by Karma accomplishe | in 
proviously oxs ing worlds. These constitute the n ass of 
the potontial ignorance (Avidyi) by which Gonsciousness 
veils itself, They wero produced by dosiio tor waildly 
enjoymont, and thomsolves produce such desne Tho 
wailds exist bevanse they, in their totality, will to evisl. 
Each incividual exists bocarso his will desires worldly 1116. 
This seod is thorofore the collective or cosmic will towa ds 


38 1H2 8X CENIRLS AND THE SERPENT ‘OW BR 


mamifested life that is, tho lifo of form and en oyment. 
At the ond of the period of rest, whieh is dissolution, this 
seed rmpens in Consciousness, Consciousness Tas thus a 
twin aspect its liberation (Mukti) छा formloss aspoct, in 
which 16 2s as mere Consciousness-Bliss ; and a universe or 
form aspect, in which 1t becomes the worlds of on oy 1 ont 
(Bhukta). One of the cardinal principles of the Slakta 
Tantra 18 to secure by its Sadhana both 1 beration (Mukti) 
and enjoyment (Bhukti).! This is posuublo by tho iden- 
tification of the self whon रा enjoyment with the soul of the 
would. When this sced ripens Shiva 15 said to put forth 
His Shakti, As this Shakti is (limsolf, it 1s 116 in lus 
Shiva-Shakti aspect who comes forth (Prasarati) and ondows 
Himself with all the forms of worldly hte In tho puro, 
perfect, tormless Consciousness there springs up tho desire 
to manifest m the world of forms tho desi lor enjoyment 
of and as form ‘This takos place as a limmted stress in the 
unlimited unmoving surfaco of pure Consciousnoss, which is 
Nishkala Shiva, but without aflocting the lator Photo is 
thus change im changolossness वा ( changclessness 1 1 change. 
Shiva in [lis transcendent aspect does nol change, but 
Shiva (Sakala) in [Tis immanont aspect as Shakti does, As 
Creative wall arises Shakti chills as Nacla,? and assumes che 
form of Bmdu, which is Ishvara ‘Tattva, whence al the 
worlds derive. Tt is for then creation that Kun ali पादपम, 
Wheg Karma mpons, the Devi, 1n the words of tho Nigama,’ 
becomes desirous of creation, and covers [Torself with Hor 
own Maya”. Again, “the Devi, joyful m tho mad वाह्या 
1 Bhogena nokshan apnots bhozena ku wa hanim 


Tasmad yatnad bhogayukio biaved 711 पा au hih 
(Kulatrave Sanginta, ४ 2L)) 

2 Literally ‘ sound,” that atial activity which ५110 fst source of 
the subsequently mamfested Shabd. (sound) wuch is the woul 1) whieh 
correspouc's the Artl a 04 ob ‘ect. 

3 Kulachudaman, Vol IV, ‘Tm tuk Toxta,’ Ch 1 vv 16-24, 


CONSOLOUSNI'SS AND 1 ५ POWLR (SIIVA-8 (KL) 39 


of Mer union with the Supreme Akula,’ bees nes छात्रा 7? 
—thab is, tho Vikaras or Titlvay of Mince und Matter, पालो 
८५ {111८७ Go cutive’ se, appor 

Tho Shist as have cealt with the sligeso creation in 
grout वकाम ooth from the subjoclive पो | ob ective view- 
points as Changes in tle hited consaors ess or as 7 ove= 
meifl (Spanda), form, and “sound” (Shabd.). Both St uvas 
and Shaktas equally accept the “hirty-Six categories or 
Tattvas, tho Ka is, the Shaktas Unman , wid the 104, 1m the 
Tatbvas, the Shadadhya, tle Mantren co rcepls of Nada, 
Bindu, Kamakali, and so forth.’ Authors o tle Northern 
Shaiva school, o which aleadmyg Shastivas the Malin ४ पध 
Tantia, have descrbea पवता, great prosarcity these Tattvas, 
General conclusions only aro, however, beta summarised, 
Theso thirty-six ‘Tattvas aro in the ‘antes divide | पा 
three groups, called Atma, Vidya, and नपण ‘Pattvas 
The first group amcludes 11) the ‘Tatlyvas, 101 the lowest 
Prithivi (“oatth ’)to Prakm& which ao known ws thin puro 
categories (Ashe lc hataltya); the seconc ine uces Miyi, he 
fanchukas,! and Purasha, called tho prro-m pure calogor os 
(Sanddl ४- whedd ia (पप) ; and the (at | वत | des she f ve 
Inghest Pattvas, called tho pure (पपणर (S tc tha Tatya), 
from Sova (प. ४. to Sondeh acy = धच toreacv sti tal. 0 


1 4 प्रा] is ४ ४1६ nine [9 Stiv, Shoko de pg called रप 
which 14 Mai Mant Misa tr tho 001) [116 ५ ५ [ ria ib i bul 
(Ch, 1) , Kulam moy umanamé tiloksh oii, (र पपत tatsar (नी । १५५० 
{४0५ wo Kiewor Brow ay, Knows, for that is conse onsacss us की तोरन 

2 Kulvehidam un, Vol [V, “Taal k Costs,’ Ch | vy 16-2 

3 Yoo as to those torms the wt aa “Culimd of [५1५ + on 
५ ५ udws im the Minirel dst a” 

'Poms cf Siakt wlo aby the 11 पाः) perfoct ors of Conse niness 
ara limited ‘Lhus, fiom all-knowmg i bucomes | (10. snowmg from 
boing almighty, it Loco nes « little (0८४ ole Seo त (प्रापण Letters"! 

Tho term Sang cocha (om f vlion) axprestos the sume वा 1 Pho 
Devi is (0 thadriipi through Matu, Miia नम ५ ad (०१०५ ६0 
also 16 Shiva as Jiva (क्षे shivo’ prsangkuchadetip wh) —Yoginthridaya 
Tontin 


40 [प्राः SIX OPNIRES AND LUD SLRPINL POWLR 


supreme changeless stato (Parisamvit)' 18 2 unilery ox- 
perienco in which the “1” and “This” coalesce into a 
unity in waich reither are perceived as such. 

In the kinetic or Shakti aspect, as presented by the 
puro categories, experience 1ccognises an #1? and This,” 
but the latter 15 regarded, not as something opposed to and 
outside the “I,? but as part of a one sell which has two 
sides an ‘1” (Aham) and “ue” (dam). Tho emphasis 
varies from insistence on the “I” to msistonce on the 
“lng,” aad then to equality of emphasis on the “£” and 
“This” as a proparation for tho dichotomy in ५004८10 1411049 
which follews 

The pure-impure catogories are intormedrate betwoeon 
the pure and the impue. ‘Tho ossential charactor stic of 
experience constituted by tho impwe calogorics 18 168 
dualism effected through Maya -and 11s limitations — tho 
result of tho operation of the Kanchukas — Flore the 
“This” 18 not seen as part of the sell, bub ४५ opposed to 
and without ib as an object seen outside, Nach conscious- 
noss thus became innt wally exelusivo sho ono of tho other, 
The states thus described are thioelold: a transcendent 
mingled “1” and “This,” in which these elomonts ot ox- 
perience are as such not perceived’; » puro form of expori- 
ence intermediate betweon the first and last, in which both 
the “1” and tho “This” are experienced as part of tho 
one self; wd, thirdly, the stato of manifestation propor, 
when thers 1° ४ complete cleavago belween tho “1” and 
the “This,” in which an outer ob’ect 15 presonted o the 
consciousness of a knower,  ‘l'his last stage is itself twofold. 
in the first the Putusha expericuees a homogenco ts uni- 
werse, though different from himself as Pralkiiti; 11 tho 
second Prakriti is spht up into its offecls (Vilaita), which 
210 Mind and Mattor, and tho multitudinous beings of the 


1 Thus is not counted as u Tattva, be ng Patt vatita 


CONSOLOUSN 388 AN) ३ (पराः (SITLVA-SHAK 1) 41 


universe which (hese compose. Sbiktt as [1 छता first 
evolves mind (Bucdhi, Albangkara, Minas) and sonses 
( Tradl ay aw), ou! the sonsbo* aw (3 ier ) 0 yorok ७11८1 
(«छत्‌ ता, “ai, Ere? तप लार स वा 91 ccrived from 
the supetseusiblo generals of tho ser se-par iculars लम] १त्‌ 
Tann itra When Shakti his entered te last wd grossest 
Tattva (fourth) Chat is, solid matter—there 1s nothing 
further for Jler 10 do. [lou creative activity thon ceascs, 
and Nhe ८१८१, Shoe vests im ler last emanation, the 
“oath? principle. Sho is again coilod and sleeps. She 
is now Kundal Shakta, whose abodo in the human body is 
the cavth contio or कत पीपय Chakry. As in the supreme 
state Sho lay cole as bc Moh kancel round tho § 1101110 
Shiva, 80 here Sho coils round the Svayambhu Lingga in 
the Muladhara. This last ८८0५ or Chakia and the four 
above it are centres of tho five for 114 of Matter ho sixth 
00116 1५ that of Mind. Consciot sness and ils processes 
through Shakti priot to the appouane o Miya aro 
realised in ths seventh loluy (Sah wii a-spidma) aid conties 
tte mediato between । पत [1.6 sat or Ajui Mind contro. 

Tho Mantra cvoluton, wah mist bo known af the 
Poxt is lo be wae stoo |, 1 set forth with grew elarity in 
the Shoivacs Milaca, wher as said that com the Sakal 
Shiva (Shiva Tutva), who ws dat-Chit-Snanca, suc 
Shacti (Shakti पी पापो; from the utar Nida (ल (पताक 
Tattva); and from N da evolve | Bude (fs) vara ‘Taltva),? 
which, to dislmgwsh wo from the B udu which ‘ollows, 1s 
eullodthe Supreme Bindu (Para-Bindu). Nada and Bindu 


1 4113५90 (01106 hive uch ८७५! | uy el sh moureg, 111 denote 
tho ५।५ उष्‌ gascons, igneous hou d, ud solr) states of ४1 dn 
woiship (Pi'n) hey uo synbolw d by the fllowiig iugrchents 
(Upiehara). Pushpr (lower) sther, Dhupt (1 corse), an, Dip (ght), 
dro, Naivedyn (food-ollormg), water Ob mdarn (sandal), enrth 

Diwhehidanand vib awit ae cuit poremoshya it 
Asichebalis «to ride nt lad bing # adbhavab 
(Ch I) 
6 + 


42 fHN SIX OENIRES AND IN SPRPPNL POWER 


are, like all elso, aspects of Shakti, being those st ues of 
Ler which are the proper conditions for (Upayogavasthi) 
and m which She is prone to (Uchchh mevisth:) eroa jor. 
In thoso Tattvas the germ of action (Katya Shakti) sprouts 
towards 1t> full mamifestat on ~ 

The ‘Tantias, in so far as thoy are Mantra Shiistras, 
are concerned with Shabda ot “Sound,” a term lator ox- 
plained. Mantra is manifested Shabda. Nada, which 
also hterally means “sound,” 18 the first of tho produced 
intermediate cansal bodies of mamfostec Shabda. 3indu, 
which has previously been explained, is described as tho 
state of the letter Ma before mamfestation, consisting of 
the Shiva-Shakti 119 tva anvelopad hy Mays ov TParame 
Kundah. Tt imphes both the void (Shunya)—that 1s, the 
Brahman state (Brahmapada)—in the empty spaco within 
the circle of the Bindu; as also the Gunas which aro 
impheitly contained in it, smce 1 is in indissoluble umon 
with Shakti, in whom the Gunas or factors constituting the 
material source of all things aro containod! ‘Tho Para. 
bindu 13 caled tho Ghanavastha stato of Shakti. Lt is 
Chidg hana or massivo conscionsnoys—that is, Chit assoc iatod 
with undifferontiatod (that is, Chidrupini) Shakta, nm which 
lie potentially m a mass (Ghana), though undistinguishable 
the one from the othor, all tho worlds and beings to be 
created, This is Parama Shiva, in whom ave all the 
Devatas. Tt 18 this Bindu who is tho Lord (Ishvara) whom 
some Pauranilas call Mahavishnu aud others the Brihma- 
purusha.? As tho Commentator says, it doos not पाप {01 
what [6 is called [16 is the Lord (Ishvaia) who 1 wor- 
shipped in secret by all Devas,’ and is pointed to in difforont, 


1566 vy 4, 3749, S.N., post, Todala Tantia, 0) LV रं 
Kang calamaliui ‘antea, oted mm v, 43, १ nae 

४७ N,v 49 

370, Al 


CONSCIOUSNLAS AND 114 OW1 2 (३ [LVA-SIAKL1) 43 


0114808 of tho Chandrabindu, o Nad, Bindu, Shakti, 
} 2 , 
and Shanta of the Om anl other Bija Maut as [ts abode 
is Sutyaloka, which withu the human body oxisis m the 
pericarp of tho thousand-pet dod lotus (Sahasiara) in the 
highost corebral ८५1 10. The Shuadi? then says that this 
Parabindu, whose substanco is Supreme Shakti, divides 
iiseM into threo that 14, appous under a threefold aspect. 
There ava tlus three Bindus, the first of which 1s called 
Bindu and the others Nada and Bija. Bindu is im the 
naturo of Shiva and Bia ol Shaktv? Nada 1s Shiva-Shakti 
—that is, their mutual relation or inicract on (Mathah 
sunavayah) 4 or Yoga (110), as the Prayogasiia calls it. ® 
The throcfoll Bi du (कपोत पो is supromo (Pain), subtle 
(Sukshma), and gross (Stil) Nada is thus the umon of 

1Gh [ 

2Kuyya ov कृत्ता Bindi, to distingmish ४ fron tho en sal 
(Karina) Bindu or Par प प्ता 

th tho caso o the Mar tery, |} ५ (४ cording {०9४५ Kalash पपा) 
vy 5b) is bio lyst Webber fa (८५५1 pr up and wi vi followa ig 8 प 
‘Thos in tho Mintiy § Kem,” Kos Bea ind Rowd T ५५ bhaki By 
the Bia form as rinde (Br ena M atk pany ) 

4 vashakbomay vb परम 1८ (षता sin [तका do pun th 

Bindur uid bajam ib tasye [त्वह कषक 
Binduh 9 iva tuo bi ang shakin midis tayor ruth ih 
Sun way ah se vakhy Wah पपर पराको कपत पो (Ch [) 

Tho 1180 word of tho thnd lino reads botter uw Binduh shivitn ako 
than as Biduc raditimeke as sone MSS, 6 ग) ८5 tw from which 
Lo yuoted in Ti tvoluetor to thy Mahamivarn ‘Lhe Gormer tary to 
v 40, post, also sponks of Bindu as homg Nalvtnaka ut explame thet 
thet moans Shiviitimaka Sov also Lo the suno effect Kriyasaia 

5 boo Raghava Bhattv’s Conm on Ch Tv 8 of Sharada 

Nuguonh s gunast फण shivo ‘ac yal sauiilanal 
Na gunachehaiva sang 1 bod was 1 2१ ove गो 
* Brehmalnndur नातो di rudvebindur mivhos ryan 

Tho voiso as cited in [द्धा {त्रा (p 18) roaca m sccond line 
Nirgunishchaivea; but this must bo a nustake for Nitgundchchhaiva, 
for the Bindus thomselyes vo nob वा प्रो) bub sprmp fiom 1४ 

SAsmach cha kirwabmdch किदे krumona kityyabindus talo 
nides tato bijam wi trayam utpannam tad idang paras [001 
padah kathyale (ualiti-Sahasranama, Com ), 

Thogo vapreso.t the Chif, Chidashit, Acsit aspects of काण 
Ohidangshah chidachimeh पी achidar gshasheha teshang ripim (Bhis- 


44 TOY SIX CDNIRIS AND LITE SIRPINL POWDR 


these two m creation. As Lhe ‘Ioxt says (ए. 40), it is by 
this division of Shiva and Shakti that thero arises creative 
ideation (Svishti-Kalpand). ‘he causal Bindi as from the 
Shakti aspect undifterentaated Shakti (Abhedaiupa Shakti) 
with all powers (Sarvashaktumaya); from the Prakuti 
aspect Tiigunamay: Miilaprakriti; from the Dovati 
aspect the unmamfest (Avyakta); fom tho Dovi aspeut 
Shinta. The three Bindus separately mdierc the 
operations of the three powors of will (Ichchha), know- 
ledge (Jnana), and action (Kriya), and tho threo Gunas 
(Rajas, Sattva, Tamas); also the manifestation cf the 
three Devis (Vama, Jyeshthi, Raudit) and tho tlioe 
Devatas (Brahmu, Vishnu, Rudra) who spring from them.! 
It is said in the Piayogasara and Sharada that Raudm 
issued from Bindu, Jyoshtha from Nada, and Vama from 
Bija. From these came Rudra, Vishnu, Brahma, which 
are in the nature of Jnana, Kriya, [chchha, and Moon, 
Sun, and Tno2 ‘The threo Bindus aro known as Sun 
kararaya Gomm कणि) Kalena bhidyamar ista sa bindur 11 vati 
त्‌ा, Sthulastkshmapamiatyena tasya पित्‌ yam'shy woe, 91 त 
nadabyatvabhedena cha nigadyate [40 a karan ia vadiyash cha + 
vara adhidaivatam avyakteshy wali yagar bhavirdleyvarupaih shanty 
vama yesht] uandiirapa = ambrhecl chhaquanakriyart pash cha (2b ), 


Adhibhutantu camarnpapuinagnijalwnd! aaudydnapithar pth Pitha- 
pupa iti tu nityabridayo spashtam (2b) Citing Rahasyagama 


1Jeichha, Rajus Vamet Biahma, Pashy antishabda, 
Jnana, Sativa, Jyoshtha, Vis inn, Madhyamashabda, 
Kny,, ‘amas, Randr Rudra, Vaikhamshabda 


See 00 ए 42 Shloka, Kamakalavilasa, Singkcta 1, Yous ihiidaya 
Tantra, and Saublagya Sudhodaya, cited m Saighot 2 of 10 Inst 
Tantra As tlo Rudi» Yamala says (IL 22), tbo ५५ Deway mo 
aspects of ६10 One 


Eka muirtistiayo deva biabr ayishuaa itheshvarah 
Mama vigrabasanghhpta sr jaty १४६८ ] पा cha 
But see next note. 
2 Cited in Pranatoshim, p. 8 


Ranida1 bindos tato nadaq ‘yoshtha bipad aiayata 
Vama tabhyah samutpannah rudze-bahma-1amadlupah 


CONSULOUSN 85 AN) 1 ५ POWER (1४१ -8 {AK 1) 45 


(Ravi), Moon (Chanda), and Tro (Ag), terms constantly 
appearing tn the works here brat slated, 

In Son thane ge Pra 111. Moot [1 14 knawy 14 
Mishra Bindu, and in the om of sul is ol different 
from Paramashiva, and 14 Kamakela. Kumada is 110 
Triangle of dive dosire formed by the thieo Bindus 
thats, thom collectivity (Simisitiinpy2 गत Kimi 
kala is tho voot (Mula) o all Mantra. Moon (Soma, 
Chandra) is Shiva Bindu, aid white (Site Bindu); Tire 
(Agm) is Shaktibidu, and red (Shonabindu); Sun is a 
mixture of the two. Ine, Moon, and Sun aro tho Iech- 
chha, Jnana, Kiya Shaktis (will, cow edge, action) On the 
matorial plane the white Bindu assumos the form of 
gomon (Shukra), and tho ved [क्तात of menstrual fluid 
(Rayasphala, Shonita). Mah binda is tho state he oro tho 
mani ostation of Prakmti! All (1100 3indus—that 1५) 
tho Kumakeala—wo Shakti though ०10 may indicato 
predominantly tho Shiva, bio other tho 911५111 aspect. 
Sometimes Vishra Bindu is (पात| Shakti Pabtya, to 


Te vanochchh += तरी पि o एषो 114 प साह at pir ak. 
1८17६ [कतै Cutla द्वि py gat व [षा (त vie st navi 
¶471तोद shictih alhite कृषि । एषा षट yot रो | 
As the पा ८1 of the Pra पक tri ( 9) says, the nam sua not to 
bo road 1 tho order of wards (11 (रा (पा), & काणा doar would 
bo iso red wth Vesa ua, [011 ५ cord ag te tla f cts (क (त sine 
bhavim) 1५ ost tel im tie ter. Aceon dng (५ his ५८ ont at would 
soem (iat Juin Sativa, md [६1134 । umas 1 note ¶ =) ब्‌] ho 
transpe sed 
1 [॥ 18 Ap ishomunyth Sec Take, vv. GO 7, of Sumy salayilisy 
Seo my ^ Carlie (( fettas” 
2Awt as Kamayukbi Kula, Mui with cre uase will (ace 1 4 marie 
festation) 
Mihitmdt) Pun एनपा M तीत आतव Revi पक्षा पण 
Raw tp waniashivabhome mist वतम्‌ तताप wpa Kimalkala 
SAs Ravi or Surya (Sun) Binet i iu the form of Parwhiva, wid 
111 1 10 tho othov two Bind 1, 1618 ८1५ Swmasht riipy of bien, पात्‌ is 
thus called Kim ukela 
1 गूम whieh mO, [८८८५ ₹ that 1५ (का Ray, and Ra 
(five) 


46 PU SIX CPNIRES AND LL SORPIN TOW UR 


denote tie supremacy of Shakti, and sometimes Shiva 
Tattva, to denote tho supremacy of tho poss ssor of 
power (Shaktiman), It 1s of conplod form (Yamaluupa), 
There is no Shiva without Shakti, 710 ' Shakti withort 
अर. To separate? thom 1s as unpossible as to sep wate 
the moving wind from tho <«teadfast ether im which ib 
blows. In tho one Shiva-Shakti there 19 a wnon (Maa 
thuna),? the thrill of which 13 Nada, whence Mih vbindu 
28 born, which itself becomes threefold (Traibindu), which 
218 Komakala It is sad im tho Slaridi-Tiaka that on 
the “bmisting” or differentiation of the Sipremo Bindu 
there was unmaufested “sound” (Shab la) Tus un- 
manifested Shabda 18 through actior (Kiya Shakti) the 
sourco of the mamfested Shabda and Artha deseribe 1 lator! 


1 ‘Layor yad yamalang rup wg sa sangh itie iti smiutal 
Anandashekith saivokla yato vishvar g visti yale 
Na Shivah Shaktirahito na निपतितौ Shivavar ta 
(‘Tintanlohn-Abmbki, 3) 


“Phe coupled form of these two (Shiva Sh पृक) 19 ¢ Wed yunchion 
That is calle the blissful Shrcti fiom whi ercation arises ‘Thora 
११ no Shiva without Shakti, nor Shakti without Shiv” 

४.70, ५ Ahn 

3 On tle physical plauo this word lonotes sexnal umdn 

410 tho Shicl akin this is in the rog on of Baindava Chikra, tho 
highest, fo owed by tho tringniar Chacra which is Kavieshvari, 
Bhagamali, and Vayracivam “Sea urtior ig fy Kam hola, prsd 
ठ Bhidyamo iat patad b तका avyakt iimar wo? bhi ub 

Shabcabrahmeti tang prahub sarvagntavisl aaduh —, 
(Sl ११६५५ Tilakn, Ch 1) 


[t will be observed that in this verso the first Bindu 1४ cal cd Para 
and to make this clcar the autho of tho Pran itoshim adds the fol ow'ny, 
note. ^ 

Paradtindo ityanena shaktyavasthainpo yah prithaic [वा तपन 
tasmat (By Parabmdu is meant tho fst 3indi which i a stuto of 
Shahtz) See ‘Galand of Lettus” 

0 866 Ragtava Bhatta, Comm Ch [ ए 12, Shavadi, ard tho samo 

Ki yasl aktipradhanayah shabda-sh tbdarthakéranam 

Praki ter bindurupinyih shabdabrahmabhavat param 

As the Kularnava Tantra (Khanda 5, Ullasa [) says, the one Binh- 
man has twofold aspect as Paramabrahman (transcendent) and bhabda- 


4 


OONSOLOUSNISS AND 15 Bown’ (SH VA-SHA सा) 47 


The Brahman as the source cf language (Shabde) and पतेताम्‌ 
on one hand, and tho ०0/०8 (Artha) they denote on the 
other, 18 called Shubdabraim un, or tho Logos! 11011 this 
differontivine Bindu am the 0 11 0" Praki1 a ५ evolved 
tho ‘attvas o Mind ard Matto in all thon vartous forms, 
as also tho Lords othe abtvas (Pitivesha) that 14, then 
direéting intelligonces Shambhu,? the presicing Devata 
over the Ajni Chakra, the contro ol the mental tacullies ; 
and Sadusliva, Isha, Rudia, Vishnu, Brahma, tio Devatis 
of tho five forms of Mattor, concluding with [णिए 
(¢ ८०11१ ”) m the Miladhaa centre, where the croative 
Shakti, having finished [cr wok, agaim vests, and 18 
called Kundalini. 

Just ay the atom consists of a static centre round 
which moving foreos 1 evolve, ६0 in tho human boc y Kundalini 
in tho  Umth-Chakia” 1s tho statie contro (Kondra) round 
which She in kinotie aspect as the forcos of tho body works, 
“ho whole body as Shaci as in ccasoless movomont. 
Kundali Shakti 15 the bnmobile support of all these opera. 
tions, When Sho is aousec and Herself moves upwai is, 
She withdraws with ail into Lforsolf these moving Shaktis, 


brahman (mm mont) — Sh ebdabralmapivamdbs पोत अपद dona bahmanor 
dvuvidhyam ukiam (And soo Uso Shumad Bhagavats, ( Skandhi 10 
Ch) Tona shabdirt] arupavish shlasya shabd van thmaty un avadhaitam 
(Pranatosl ini, 11). 

1 [1 is aid im the Prdnaloshim, p 22 that Sharibhu 18 the । isso 
cate ({ trio (भाक) प्ण), bec uso Cala in the for n दिता assim 
m giving biti to Lim and tho obhor uy ites 

2 Atha bindyttmanah sham] hoh kilabud oh पद्वते ah 

A*ay ua jigatesiike 1 xarvavy ip” at dashi ah 
Sidaishivat bhaved Tat is tate Ra diasiumad ol aval 
Tato Vishina tato Brahma to ham ovam s unudbhavah 
(Ol 7 ४४ 15,16) 

11५3 tley aro mentioncd in conn tior with do form 13 पमो 
(शधन) “ho Prannloshint says Atra art as ग्रो ता punah 
yaditiam ubpatt sty milan pont myam fesham utp ubth klub. 
व्य (षद, ato na pauuaruktyenm ¢ kel maya tacdatmanas dadutpan- 
natyat 


48 qHb SIX GLNIRIS AND 1111, 8177118) 0 


and the: umtes with Shiva in the Sahasrara 10119. ‘he 
process npwaid (evolution) is the reverse of the involt tion 
above described. Tho Worlds are d'ssolved (laya) from 
dame to lame for al) beings The perfected you) । 1sselyos 
the Universe for all time for lumsel. Yoga 1s thus aya. 

Before proceeding to a descriptuon of the Chakras ib ts, 
firstly, necessary to describe more fully the ednstat 16 ois of 
the body—that 1s, tho Tattvas mentioned, extonding from 
Prakriti to Prithivi, 16 18 of these ‘lattvas that the Chakras 
are cenires, Secondly, an oxplanation is required of the 
doctrine of ^ Sound” (Shabda), which exists 111 the body in 
tho three inner states (Pari, Pashyanti, Madhya na), and 13 
expressec. in uttered speech (Vaikhiwit) Tins will help the 
reader tc an understanding of tho moaning of Mantra or 
manifested Shabda, and ot the “Garland of Letters” which 
is distributed throughout the six bodily contres 


aa 
98011५79 CONSCIOUSNESS (J1IV.ATMA) 


Tus Transcendental Consciousness 15 called the Supreme 
Self 01 Atiii The consciousness which is either am fact 
embodied or liable to be embodiod is the divitm — Those 
are bub names for differing aspects of tho samo Self or 
Atma, In the first case Conserousness 18 hboratod from, 
and in tho second it 19 witli, orm. As Consciousness is 
in itsolf formless, form is derivable ‘rom its power (Shakti), 
This power is Pracrilt Shakti tha, is, the imimedicio 
yource and the (कात ठा of Mind and Matle. The 
corresponding —consciousness-aspect of the same powor 
is callod यान्न, This (orm is somotimos appliod to the 
Supreme, ag in bho namo Brahmaparusha? [610 is moant 
a limited consciousnoss—lunnted by the associated Prakriti 
and Hor products of Mind and Matter In this sonso tho 
term Purusha doos nob moan morely a humen being, or 
indeed any animal, but all beings and things which aro 
centros of oxprossedl or hidden consciousness In this 
gonse pn atom of sand isa urnsha—that is, a conseious~ 
noss idontafying एन्‌ with that parlictdar [crm of solid 
matler [nintly showing such consciousness in alomic memory 
andin its response to stamuli For with that with which 
man idontifies himsolf that ] ५ becomes, Ms 18 Lrom tha 
philosophical aspect More popularly by Parusha, as by 


1 80 ib 1s said Porushiu ue pora ig kinolit si cashthi ai pita gehh, 


50 111 SIX 0 पऽ AND 111; 8.70 10 


diva, ig meant sentient bemg with body and sensc»—th ub 
1s, orgame hfot Man is a muocosm (राप रणा प्रा 
manda)? ‘The world 15 tho macrocosm (का भा inda), 
Thore are numbeiless worlds, each 01 wiueh 1s gover 1 
ed by «ts own Lords, though there is but one gre 
Mother of all whom these Lords tl erisclyes worship, 
placing on their heads the dust of Her feet. In everything 
there 18 all that is in anything else 1110८16 18 thus nothing 
in the umverse which 1s not in the human body. There 1s 
no need to throw one’s eyes into the heavens to find God, 
He is within, being known as the ^ Raler with nu” (An- 
taryamin) or “Tnner solt”? (Antaratma).? All olso 1s 11५ 
power as Mind and Mattor. Whatever of Mind cr Matter 
exists m the universe exists iv some 101 प्र or Manner In Vie 
human body, So as already stated it 1s said in the Vish- 
vasira ‘Tantra: “ What is here w there, What is not hero 
is nowhero.”4 In the body there are tho Supreme Shiva. 
Shakti who porvade all things, Tn the body is Prakriti 
Shakt2 and all Ter products, [n tact, the body is a vast 
magavino of powor (तर). Tie object of the Tant ic 

1 Dehondryadiynktah chetano ivah Loo सूपां nava Pande 1. 
7.9, desaihos tho divas is parts of Shiv cnvoloped in Mayit (wl ich 
gives them the falea notian of separaticn from din ), Ihe spake issuing 
tom fire—an old Vedantic aden As however, Jivuim Mayavida Vodin ta 
18 voally Biahman (1४0 एकमा ava naparah) there 6 according to such 
doofrine m reality no independent category called Jiva (Na hi ‘ive naman 


kashehit svatantrah padarthah)., Atma is called Java who. with कवत 
—that is, body, ०४८, Philosaphically, all Atma with upadli (alternate) 
is Jiva 

2 Tattle egg (spheimd) of Brabma,’ + 

3The Jniiarnava Tantra (XXI 10) says tlat “artal १ फाला 
scoret and subtle, for the Atma fine lise an atom, 1s within ovarything 
This is the bid Ilangsah which dispots in the Lako of [द्विष्ठ ५०५ On 
dissolution, when it 14 Sanghararupi Atma is revealed 'L 10 Motl or 
ig the Antaryamin of the Devatas also, auch as the five Shivas, Bia. 
mia, etc. -for She 1s Parabrahmanandarupé, रिष पहा पृ कषत वत, 
and Clidriipa, and thus dnects them (‘Liishati LI 47) 

4-Yad ihast: tad anyatra yan nohast: ua tat kvachil—an Iudin vere 
sion uf the Hesmutic maatin, “As above, se beww’, 


LMBODI) 2 CONSIOMSN So (JIVALMA) 51 


rituals 14 to raise these various forms of powe to their tall 
express on, "his 1 the work of Sidhani ‘ho ‘Pantris 
say that it is in the power o nan to acco 1 ती all he 
wishos 11 he centres his wil thereon, Ard this ust be so, 
for man is in hus essency one with the Supre ne Lord 
(ishvara), and the more 0 manifests Spirit tho greater 
is Te ondowed with as powers ‘Tho centro and 1001 0 
all his powers is Kundah Shakti ‘The contic m which the 
quieseent consciousness 13 realised 3s the uppor brain or 
Sahasiara, whence in tho ease of the Yogi, tho Prana ९०८०१५8 
through the Brahmarandhia at death. (Seo Plate VTIT.) 
The Mind and Body are constiti ted of the products of 
Prakriti, Both having (1५ same ongin, cach, whether 
Mind or Matler, me natemal” (imgs  taat 1s, they are 
of the nature of 10 ces, and Hnaited instruments through. 
which Consciousness fi nctions, and thus, {hough [र्णा un- 
lanitod, appoars to be limited. ‘The dight in a Jnntern 18 
unaffected, but 1.8 mamfost ition to thoso without is affectod 
by the matormal though which tho light slinos,  Prakeiti 
is nob seientific Matton, Tho latter is only ils prossost 
product, ard has no lasting existonce, Prakiiti 18 the 
utimato “ matorial” or substantive cause of both Mind and 
Mattor, and the whole universe which they compose. 1b is 
the inystorious Lrucvescent womb (Yom) whence all 14 born. 


५ So Horbeat Spercor holes, 1 ecnfain uy with 116 an deeg rie, 
that the wm verse, wlether physical or psychic age play > o1co whieh 
11 the case of milk wo wthosel ortiid cxpaiace wobyect As 
lo M nd und M (का seo my voluries so Catitlod 

2The word has been ga [10 be dove [ {का} Kee one the wll x Pear, 
whicl as add d to aaprcss b/) ea (1 the abstr ५( iden प्रात्‌ son sb ries 
tho Karmic. obo tof tho a tin, ou ष्मक इ with the (८१९ ulix 
श्छ (८ (वो the nomic tive womes hh fis, [गाव itis (herelore 
his been sul lo conmexpord with Pies (uatms) ol the व द्‌ 
(Banjo "+ VDidogues cn Tada Plilosophy,? 2). [bay uss ontled 
Pradoiny गपत्‌ धन्वा Pradl cite guava पो 111 of that which 
continue wil thmgs naiself tho source md accepteelo of all in पणा and 
form) Pradhie aso] terally moans cl tof” (substance), for weording 
to Bangkhy v vt is tho rel creator, 


52 4UP SIX OMNIRES AND 1111) SHROTNL POWER 


What She is in Hersolf cannot be reahsed. Sho is only 
known by Ter effects! Mulaprakmti is the noumenal 
eauso of the phenomenal world from which crontion arises? 
Ultimately, as if ig in itself (Svartipa), Prakriti Shakti, 
like all else, is Consciousness, for Consciousness as Powor 
and Consciousness are one.’ Conscious) 033, however, 
assumes the role of Prakriti—that is, creative powbor— 
when evolving the umveise. Ter substance consists of tho 
Gunas or modes of this natural principle wluch are called 
Sdttva, Rajas, Tamas.! The gencial action of Shakti is 
to veil sonscionsness. Prakriti, in fact, like the wala 
prana of the Thomstic philosophy, 18 a fintlising principle, 
To all sceming, it finitises and makes form in the infinite 
formless Consciousness® = 80 do all the Gunags But one 


{See the splendid Hymn to Prakriti in Prapanchasar, Tanta, 
Vol. TIT, “Tantuk Texts’. What can ho seon by tho oyon oun Lo dofinod, 
but not She “It cannot be seon by the eyes.” Kena Up, 1.0 “Yat 
chakshusha ma pashyatr” She is beyond tho gona Henea tho 
Prishats addresses the Dev: (JT 11) as idmgityavin एत्‌ shyd (who {91 ob 
to be parhiculmly pomted out as boug this a tu) dec 8] ¢), "वप 
Tilaka, Vamahoshyaa, and Vishyasa a ‘artis ced in Prars lost nn, 
p 24 She is imoffablo and meoncoivahlo witl fam (Vier ti), yot 
Horself (Mulapakiiti) formless Malanirvara रा 1, 1४८ 3436. 
Thus Sayana (Rig Veda, X 129 2) soya thit whilat Mayu iw Ani 
vachy. (mdofinablo), since 16 18 neither Sat nor Asnt, Glib 14 def uvblo 
ag Sat 

2 Kiiteh praambbo yasyah That is by which eveation (Srishtr) 
maintenance 014, ind dissolution (liaya) are dono (गेत) slo 
karyadikam anaya). a 

See Snadananda’s Comm on 4th Mantra of Isha Up “The 
changoless Brahman whieh is conscionsness appoars m creation as Miiyn 
which 1s Trahman (Biahmamay1) conacionsnoss (दात्‌) कापर), hold 14, 
Herself wnboginnmg (anadi) Karmik t+ doncies (Karmasangskiit v) 
m tho form of tlo three Gunis [०६९० Sho is Cunamays dospife 001 y 
Chinmay: And as there 1s no second principle thoso Gunas aro Chil- 
Shakt: ” 

4fhe thee Gunas are Prakriti. ‘he [ठे ia im tho form of 
Prakriti, is called वप gunatrk’& (who 18 ९0 nposod of the three Gunas) 
All nature which issues from Tor, tho Groat Canse (Mah पा 14४१ 
ग्री), 18 also composed of the same Gunaa in dithevent states of relation 

5 See an articlo of mine in the Indian Philosophical Revww, च Shakta 


und Mayw + seproduced in 2nd Ud., “Shaku and Shaken‘. 


LU IODIED GONS(IOUSNI'SS (एर्‌ MA) 53 


does it less and another more, The 1181 is Satbvaguna, 
the function o which, relative 10 hoe other Gunas, is 10 
१८१४८११ consciousness. The gioater tho presence 0° power 
0 Sattvagi na, the proalor ॥10 approach to the condition 
of Pure Consciotsness. Similmly, 1५ function of {unas 
Guna is to suppress or v2 consciousness, — he Function 
of ‘Rajasguna is to male aclive—that is, il wort on 
Tamas to suppross Sativa, or on Sativa .o suppress 
Tamas ‘he ob cel and the effect of evolution, as 1 is 
of ul Sadhana, 18 to develop dSativaguna The Guitas 
always coexist in ovorythiig, bat vanously predominate. 
The lower descent 13 mado m the scale of nature the more 
Tamasgnna prevails, ax mn so-called “ brute substance,” 
which has boon supposed to bo altogethor inet Tho 
highor ascent is made the more Sativa prevails ‘The 
truly Sélbvile man 1५ a divine mea, lis tempoeramont boing 
eallod in tho Tautias Divyabhava® Through Satty guna 
passage is made to Sal) which is Gait or puro Conscious- 
ness, by tho Siddhayogi, who 1५ ucnlified wit 1 Pure Spirit. 

Prakii exists im tivo ५ ates, 11 one of which (so far as 
any ofloot is concomned)! Sho ts qmescont, ‘Tho Gunas 16 
thon in stable equilibmim, and not wocting ono another, 
Thora is no manifostation, ‘This 19 the unmanifest 
(Avyaktn), tho potontiahty ol natural powor (natin 


1 In tho wads of Professor ®. Mukhyopdby ya, dealing with the 
matte का कातता, those are the hice elemcats o (५ ज ५ Strosa on 
the surfico cl pure Gonseiousnoss tamely, presor tition (Sativa), 
moyon onl (iia w), ud एणा g (Tamia), which 116 tho (1110५ (lorie ita 
of erontive cvolution ( ‘Tle Patent Won ler,” p 19) 

^ [10५40 uo whom Ra as ( प्रा vis prodamimant, aad who work that 
Guia to supproxs Tamas, ao Vor (9 and tho man whom tho 
Tamasguua provias 1s & Pashu (a umal) 

4 he thice gun s ४10 कतल char geful, Napninamya kshana- 
mupyavatishth inte guoih (the प its do not vemun lor a moment with 
out movonont)  Vaohiwpals Mista, Sungkhya-Tativa-Kanmudi 16th 
Kinika, Tho movement is tvofold (८) Saripaparn dima or Sidrisha 
parmima in dissolution and (6) Virupaparmima in ८११६७१५1 


+ 


54 IL SIX CENTRES AND IL SPRPUNT 7OWRR 


natwans). When, howover, owing to the rponiig ot 
Karma, tie time for creation takes placo, there 1s a stirring 
of he Gnas (Gimakshobha) and an umtial vibration 
(Spandana), known in the Mantia Shistra as (5 mic 
Sound (Sabdabrahman), Tho Gunas af ect one another, 
and the universe made of these threo Gunas is created. 
Tho products of Prakmti thus ovolved aio cal ed Vikara 
or एतन. Vileriti 18 manifest (Vyakta) Prakriti (०८/१५ 
naturata), In the imfimte and formless Prakr ti there 
appears a strain or stress appearmg as form. Qi the 
relaxation of this strain in dissolution forms disappou in 
formless Prakriti, who as power (Shakti) vo-onters tho 
Brahman Consciousness. ‘These पाद ड are the latlvas 
issuing from Prakriti,’ the Avidya Shakti: namely, tho 
different categories of Mind, Sensos, and Matter. 

The bedies are throefold: causal (Karanashainy, or 
Parashariva, as the Shaivas call it), subtlo (Sukshma- 
sharira), and g1os3 (Sthulashariva), Those botlies in wh oh 
the Atma 1५ onshrmed are evolved from Prakriti bhakti, 
and aro constituted of ifs vario is productions = Mhey lorm 

1This 1s 1 fact the ८11 काका) of 121 ४८१] as opposed to Viariti> 
Sattvarajastan asaig —satiyavastha oprisaili. 111१1] 
{81150 न Sargshya Pravachana, [. 61. 

2Vi Gin av Vilewife ia aome 1. ng which 1५ 1011 cuuyed, « card 
from mils ‘The former 1 a Viki of tho latter Vivartti is py; पमा 


but प्रतारण chinge such as the appomance of whut wis und is tropa 
asasnuke The Veda rtavara tl us musi ily do ines t10 two dorms. 


Satattvato’ nvathapratha vi sia ५10१ पता 14111 
Atitivato’ nyatha Ubi vivarta iby ula bul, 


Under V 40 of the Slatchacra the commontitor spe rks of Vilait 
asa roflection ‘Prattbimbata) of Priki {1 This Peake timo ace 

9 As alealy eaphunced, thor ue Tatlves whi h preec da the 
Puinsha Prakiili Mativas [1110 1 cally | uttva is an ५401141 (५11४. 
ation from the [णात प्प * Tab” (hv), 0 MM पतह, and पा iy, tt hus 
been pointed cnt, be compared with tho Tlwucertiis of D4 & otis 
The Tattva n a general sense 19 ‘Louth or [1 पा प्रो Sut oy tho 
Saukhye tb has a techined sense bon, omoloycd wa cm rete term to 
denot» tha eight ‘pradieaia” tha ५1061 pred ist vas,” ond the 
twenty-fifth Tattva o Purughy 


9107 D CONSOLIUSN 55 (१५ MA) 55 


the tabornaclo of tho Spirit (Att), whieh as the [0 is 
“an all beings, and who from within al beings controls 
them”? Te bo ए 0, tho Lord Gshvue) is nore Sut va 
guna (Shidchasitivagunapiadhana).? This 1s 110 1२६1५ 
gate Prikati or Maya of Him or [नि is tle Croator- 
Creatrix of all Uungs  J’va, as tho Kularnava Tart a 
says, 19 bound by tho bonds (Pasha) ; Sudashiva 15 tee of 
them. The former 18 Pashu, and the latter Pishupata, or 
Tord of Pashus (Jivas) hat 18, Ishvar 1s not affected 
by Uer own Maya. She is all-secing, all-hnowmeg, पा 
powerful. [shvara thus rulos Maya, Jiva 15 ruled by at. 
From this standpoint the Mother and Lfor child the Jivaare 
not, this, the sume ठा the latter is a limited conse one. 
ness subject to 0170, and governed by thal Maya-shakti 
of ers which makes the world scom to be वनलता trom 
what i in ils ossonce 1s, Tho body of Jivays tl erof re 
known as the md ४ dual Pralkrili or Avilyi, in which (eve 
is impuro Sattva, and Ra‘us and ‘amas (Mahne saltyva~ 
gimapradhinn), Bub m the Mothor wo all creaturos, 
And so inthe 1] [भाप the devi is callod “in ८16 form of 
one and many letters? (Dk mokiksl क्तिचा 1), As Uki 
She + the Ajrana which i pure Sativa and attubute 


TYah parveshi bh teshu tahthan vah savin bo tirvari ag 
णा ५८१ (एषा Up, 7, 15) he [1६५14 thus Obi पवपव ५५१५ ५1८] 
the Upadhi हाता ४ and ils offects, mind पात्‌ body and which is Al hi 
mann, 01 attributor to itself, of the wik ap ole, ११५५. 

2 ha gkare’s Bhashya, TL de 5 Lie diva 1५ Ch utany ५ 1 stm. 
gushed by Upidhi, ‘ho latter term reins distinguishing proporty, 
attribute, body, ots, and hoe body (Dota), sovses (वा वष) ५) mind 
(Manas; Buddin) ote (2b 1 2-6) 

9 1 Khardy 5, 'L units Ie Toasts 

4 Pashabaddho bhavey ivah pashamnbkinh sudashivih (Kul mava 
Tantra, LX. 48), upon which the abhor of the Pranntos ui, who cites 
this passngo, says: ‘Thus tho ier tity of Shiva and Jive is stow ? 
(iti shivazivayor aikyam प्रोता फो 

8 Yonunino of Tshvma Some worsh’p Sliva, some Devi, Both 
Are (111) 

0 Comm. by blangkara on vy 23 


56 lit SIX CENLRES AND MIE SIRPIN  POWFR 


(Upadin) 21 Tshvara; as Aneka She 18 Upathi or voliclo 
of Jiva. Whilst Ishvara is ono, J vas are many, 1 ace nding 
to the diversity in the nature o cho indivadaal Prasradr 
caused by the appearance of Rajas and ‘Tamas in it पा 
differmg proportions ‘The Atma appears as ive in the 
various torms of tho vegetable, animal, and human worlds. 

The first or Causal Body of any particular’ diva, तात 
foro, 1s that Prakriti (Avidya Shakti) which 1s the cause 
of the subtle and gross bodies of {1118 J va which are 
evolved from it. Ths body lasts until lberation, whon 
the Jivatma ceases to be such and ig the Paramatimn or 
bodiless Spirit (Videha Mukti), Tho Jiva exisis im this 
body diving dieamless sleep (Sushupta) 

The second aud third bodies are the diflorontations 
through evolution of the causal body, from which first 
proceeds the subtle body, and from tho latter is producod 
the gioss body. 

The Subtle Body, which 19 also (नामत lange Shana 
or Puryashtaka, 1s constitutod of tho first ov lutos 
(Vikritt) from the causal Prakritic body —namely, the 
Mind (Antahkarana), tho imtornal प्रात प्राना togothor 
with the oxternal instruments (Bahyakarana), ov tho 
Senses (Indriya), and thor supersonsiblo objects (Tan- 
matia) ‘Tho third or gross (०4१ is tho body of “ mattor ” 
which 18 tho gross particular object of the sonsos ४ dc rived 
from the sr persensibles, 

Shortly, this subtle body may bo doseiibed as the 
Mental Body, as that which suecoods 14 called the pross 
body, of Matter. Mind 1s considered by itself, that is as 
dissociated {rom Consciousness which 14 nover 110 caso, an 
unconscious forco which breaks up into particulars the 


1 Acco di ig to another Vedantio view ther is oly ony iy 
2Tha dofi ton of 9 Rh ite (sensible mit 2) 14 Lat whise can be 
seen by the o tor organ, such as the eyo car, ५८८ 


TMRODIED CONSCIOUSNESS (ITVAIMA) 57 


Expenience- Whole whieh iw (शा 1 13 ealled tho 
“work'ug within” or “interial insirumont” (Antah- 
karara), ana is ore only, bul 1 giver ८ Fount raves to 
denote the diversity of its functions. । Tho sugkhya thus 
speaks of Buddhi, Abangkara, Manns, to which the 
Ved uta adds Glutta, bemg difterent aspects or alhibutos 
(Diarma) of Mind as displayed 17 tho psychical processes 
by which tho iva knows, feels, and wills. 

These may be consiule ed from the pomt of view ol 
evolution that is, accorling to the sequence in which 
the limited experience of he Jiva 1५ evolved or from 
that in which they aro regardec after creation, when the 
experience af eoncrote sense oh ects has been had. Ac- 
cording to the former aspect, Buddin or Mahat 'Tativa 
18 the stato of mero prescntation’; consciousness of bemg 
only, wilhoub thought of © 1” (Ahangkiia), and unallee od 
by se gations of particular objocts (Manas and [तो पष). 
Jt is thus (10 amporsonal diva Consciousness, Ahang sira, 
of wluch Buddhi ws the basis, 1 tho person 1| conseior snogs 
which toalives 1186] as a pir दपर “1,” the exper‘encor, 
ho Jiva, in tho 011५1 of crewtion, first oxpor oncos in a 
ण्व gonoral way with oul conscions 1639 0° the sell, liko 
the experience whic 1s had i nmediately on waking after 
slecp [४ thon refers this experionce to the [म्‌ solf, 
and has the consciousuess “ | am So-and-so १, 

Manag is tho dosire which follows on such oxperience, 
and tho Senses (Indriya) and their objects aro tho moans 
whereby thal enjoyment is had which 18 the ond of all will 
to 1५, Whilst, however, in tho order of evolution Buddhi 
is the 0181 principle, in tho actual woking of tho Antwh- 
kavana after creation bas taken place it comos last. 

[॥ is 11016 convome i, bhorefore, to commenuco with 
the sense-ohjecis and tho sensations they evoke = The 
1Sargkd ya Pravach ina Siitta, [ 16 Seo my vol on! Mind” 

8 4 


58 LHD SIX OENIRES AND ‘WIL & *RPLNL TOWER 


experience *is affected by Matter 1n fivo (afferent ways, giving 
mise in him to the scngations of hoang, Louch and feel, 
colour and form? and sight, taste, and smell. 1 Bub sensible 
perception exists only im respect of particular ob‘culs and 
js thus percerved in is variations only, Bub shore oxist 
algo general elements of the partict lars of sonse-porceplion. 
That genorul ideas may be formed of particular schso- 
objects indicates, it is said, + tho existence in some parts of 
the Jiva’s natwe as facts of expenence; otherwise the 
generals could not be formed from the particulars given by 
the senses as the physical facts of expenence This 
general 18 called a ‘Tanmatra, which means tho ‘ more 
thatness,” or abstract quality, of au object. hus, the 
Tanmitra of a sound (Shabdatanmatra) 15 nob any particular 
sensible form of 1t, but the “thatness” of that sound that 
18, that sound apart fiom any of its particular variations 
stated. The Tanmatras have, theroforo, aptly boon oallod 
the “generals of the sense particulars” "—~that 13, the 
general eloments of sense poicoption. ‘Those nocossarily 
como into oxislonce when the senses (Indriya) are praidiced } 
for a sense necessitates somothing which can bo the abyoct 
of sensation ‘These Siikshma (subtle) Blu tas, as they are 
also called, aio not ordinarily thomselvos perceive, for 
they are supersensible (Atindrya). ‘Their existence 13 only 

1 866 post also my volume on ^ Matte 

9 Rupa is primarily colour, By means of colour [०1114 percorved, 
for a perfectly colomloss thing im not perceiy ible by the gross ०५11५५8 

$ Tho कण objects of the senses aro tho speakablo, prehcnatblo, 
approachable, excitable (that which iy w thin tho gemtalg), ar'd ५७१९. 
table, “Dac 1 senso 28 sn ted to a particular class of influonces touch 
to sohd prossure, heumg to tov) pressure, tas ८ to hgud, 111५ to 
luminous rays’ (Bau ‘Mind and Body,’ p 22, 1892) 
eee aT ee NE AO Shige atta 
Mane 9 व greater detail J ८ ध] पन pa © र्कम 


5 See pr st 


कका) GONSOTOUSNESS (TIVA LMA) 59 


mediately perceive | through the gross particular objects of 
which they are the gonerals, and which proceed from them. 
Thoy can be tho objects of immocdiato (Pratyaksha) per- 
coplion only to Yogtw! ‘hoy ao, 1 ९6 the grosa sonse- 
objects derived trom tlom, five im number nanely, sound 
(Shahdatanmatra), touch and foel? (Sparshatanmatra), 
colour and form (Rupatanm ura), flavor (Rasatanm tra), 
and oc (Gandhatanmubea) ay universals. Wach of these 
evolves from that which pecedos it * 

Sensations moused by sense-objeots avo oxporionced 
by means of tho 01101 irstrumonts (Bihyakarana) of the 
Lord of tho body, or senses (fndriya), which are the gate- 
ways through which tho Jiva receives worldly experience 
Thess aro ton m unmbir, and are of two ४५५९५ ` ऋ) 
tho five organs of sensation or perception (Jnane rdriya), 
or om (hearing), skim (fochng by touch), oye (sight), tongue 
(taste), and noso (smal), and tho [४५ 0 gai of १८ ion 
(Kunmoudviya), which wo the reac ive response which 
the self makos to sendation-—namely, month, hands, 
legs, anus, and genitals, wheroby spealkiig, grasping, 
walking, oxurolon, and procroation, ac perlormed, and 
through which ollect 1s given to the Jiva’s dosney = Those 
ato afforont and efforont mmpu ses 1ospec ively, 

Tio [ndmya, or sense, is not the physical organ, but 
tho faculby of mind operating through that o1gan as its 
instrument, ‘Tho outward sonse-organs are the usaal moms 
whereby on tho physical plano the linet ons of hearmg and 
80 lorth are accomplishec Bul, as they aro more 11 भुणा 
mounts and their power a derrvod fiom the mind, a Yogi 

1 So it 16 sand ‘Cant vastin i taumatiidint pr vty ksh evi) पणो) (that 
28 to Yoxia). 

४ Whoroby U1 0 thern al quil ty cf things 1 pureai ved 

3In a general way tle last fone eortespond with tho Varsho- 


shika Piramonns, = 10019 nre difleronces, howover hus, the latter aro 
eternal (Nitys) and do not procoed from one another 
४ ‘ 


^ 


60 1UD SIX CLNYLRES AND GHP SERPIND POWrR 


may accomplish by tho mind only all that may be done by 
means of these physical organs without the use of the 
latter, 

With xeferonce to their physical manilestations, but 
not as they aro in thomselyos, the classes intotwhich tho 
Indriyas are divided may be doseribod as tho senso y and 
motor norvous systems, As the Indriyas are not the 
physical organs, such as car, eye, and so foith, but faculties 
of the Jiva desiring to know and act by thoi aid, the Yogi 
claims to accomphsh without the use of tho latter all that is 
ordinarily lone by ther means. So a hypnotised at bject 
can perceive things, even when no use of the special 
physical o1gans ordinarily necessary for the purpcse is 
made! Tho fact of thero being a variety of actions docs 
not necessarily involve the samo number of Indriyas, An 
act of “ going” done by means of the hand (as by a cripple) 
is to be regarded really as an operation of tho Indriya of 
feet (Padendrya), oven though the hand is tho seat of tho 
Indriya fo. handhng.? By the imstrumontahty of those 
Indriyas things are percovod and action 1s takon with 
reference to them The Indriyas aro not, however, sufficient 
in themselves for this purpose. In the first place, unless 
attention (Alochana) co-operates thoro is no sonsation at all. 
To be ^ absent-minded ” 1s not to know what is happenings 
Attention must therefore co-operate with tho senses belore 
the latter can “give” the oxperiencer anything at all4 
Nextly, at one and the samo momont the oxperoncor 1s 
subject to receive a countless number o sensations which 

1826 ‘ Kashmy Shavarm, by J.C. Chatty, p 120 = Mhus Pro. 


fessor Lombroso records the case of a woman who, Loing 1] nd, read 
with the tp cf het ear, tasted with ho knees, and smelt witl her toos 


2 Tantrasaia Alka, 8 
3 See ^ Kash nv Shaivaism, p, 112 


490 u. the Bithadaranyacn Upanishad, L. 3 27,10 तपत्‌ “My 


Manas (mmd) was divoited olsewheis ‘Thereforo | did not hear” 
| ४ 


EMBODIED GCONSOIOUSNISS (ITVAIMA) 61 


como to ard press upon lim fiom all sides Tf any of these 
is to be brought into the field of conse ousness, 1b mist be 
१८१०९९९ to the exclusion of ( {0 ¬ Tie process of oxpori 

01८6 13 the selection of a special section from out of a 
general wholo, and then being engaged on 1, 80 as {> make 
1, one’s own, cither as a partiedar object of thought ora 
particular ficl Lof operation. Lastly, as Westorn psychology 
holds, the sonses give not a comploted whole, but a 
manifold the mamfold of 0156 = ‘Thos» ^ points of gonsa- 
tion” must be gathored together and made into a whole. 
These three Mncliors 0 ` attention, sclect on, and synthesis- 
ing the discrete manifold of the senses, ave those belonging 
to that aspect of tae wertal body, tho mternal agent 
(Antahkarana), galled Manas? Just as Manas 13 necessary 
to the senses (पता पृष), tho (टा are necessary for Manas. 
For the latter is the seat of desire, and cannot oxist by 
itself. Tt is the desue to percerve or acl, and therofore 
exisis 7) assocmtion with Lhe Indriyas, 

Manas 1५ thus the leading Indriya, of whieh tho soases 
aro powers, Tor without tho aid and attention of Manas 
the other Tudmyas ao menpable of performmyg thor 
respective (1९५५ ; and as those [ndpryas are those of por- 
coption and action, Manas, which co-oreratos with both, 
1५ sad to partako of the charaetor of both (०111110 1 and 
action, 

Manas, through assoaation with (1 ५ eyo म other seuse, 
becomes manilold, being parficularised or ( 1 fcrentiated by 
iis co-operauion with tat puhoular imsteument, which 
caunob fulfl 11५ tunetions oxcepl in conjunction with 
Manas 


1 80, in tho ‘Poxt hare trinslated post, Manas 13 spo ci of as a dcor- 
keopor who lets some (पाला) wnt kosps others outs de 

2०८५ +| जाए Shuvesm,” 9-14 1 isis tho Sa दो ऊषा and 
0४1८५ doin tion AccorCing to tho Vis doshisa, Manas 1५ th ub 
which gives knowledge of pleasure, pain, and Jivatmé (1 am So-and-so) 


62 111 शिर OLNIRIS AND 4 वा SLROENLE 10 


Tts function 18 saul to be Sangkalpa-Vikalpa ‘That 
is, selection and rejection from the material provided by 
the Jnanendrya When, afsor naving boon biorglt ite 
contact with tho senso-objecls, 11 selects the sensation yhich 
is to be presented to tho vthor faculties of the mind, here 
18 Sangkalpa. Tho activity of Manas, however, 1s ilsoll 
neither mtolligont result no. moving feclings of pleasure or 
pain It has vot an imdependent power to revoal itself to 
the experetcer. Before things can be so revealed and 
reahsed as objects of percoplion, they must be made subject 
to the oporation of Ahangkua and Buddhi, w thout whose 
intelhgont hght they woulc be dark forms unseen and 
unknown by the expericrecr, and the efforts of Manas bus 
blind gropiigs in the dark Nor can the mages built up 
by Manas affect of themselvos the oxporicncer 80 18 to 
move him in any way until and unless the oxpomencor 
identifies himself with them by Ahangkua—that 1s, by 
making them Ins own in feeling and experience. Manas, 
being thus an experience of activity in tho dark, unsoon 
and unrevealed by the hght of Buddhi, and not movine tho 
experiencer tntil he identifies himself with it in fooling, is 
onein which the duk veiliig qiahty (Tamas guia) of 
Shakti Pracmti is the most man.est.! ‘his Gana also 
prevals in the Indriyas and the subtle objects of their 
operation (‘Tanimatra). 

Ahangkara the ^ I-makor” is ५6]. rogation?—-thal 15, 
the realisatio: of oneself as the personal “1? oy solf- 
consciousness of worldly experience, in wluch tle Jiva 
thinks of Innself as a particular person who 15 im iclit‘on 
with the objects of lis experience [Tk 1५ tho power olf 


1 Seo ^ Kishmn Shatynism,’ p 116 whoo tio uthor cites the 
dictum of Kant that rercoptios (Anschauung) w thont conceptions 
are blind 

4 abn main Abh’mano‘hang’carah oe Sangkhya Lattva Kau- 
audi, 24 Kanka, and Bk I], Sta 16, Singkhya Pravashana Sitie 


EMBO D CONSUIO TSN ५५ (ITVA A) 63 


solf-avrogatio: whereby all that constil ites man is welded 
into ono Kgo, and the porcopt or concept 1s roloried to that 
paruceler Gunleng sabjocw ard becomes pel or avs ox- 
perience. When, thorefare. a sonsation is perceived by 
Manas and-determiied by Bo ( (111, Ahangkara says. 1b 1s 
[ who percoive it” 

“This 1s tho “1” of phonomo ial consciousness as distin 
gushed from “this” tio known, प्राता functions with 
its support! = Buddhi consi ored with relation to the other 
facultios of experionce 1५ bint aspect of the Antahkarana 
which determines (Adhyavasayatmika buddhth)? “A man 
18 sud to dotermine (Adhyayasyati) who, having porceived 
(Manas), and thought, ‘J sum concermod in tins matter? 
(Ahangkiira), and thus having solf-ar1og ued, comes to the 
detomnination, ‘This must be dono by mo’ (Kartayyam otat 
may)? Must bo dono” reve does not refer to exterior 
action only, bat to montal action (Manasilaiya) also, such 
as any dolermmation by way of the Lorming o concepts 
and porceply (५ || 40”) and resolutions (“Lb वामा be 
dono”), Buddhi porvades all ollects whatever other than 
1४011. ft is Lhe prineipal ‘Ta tva becauso it porvades all the 
instrumonts (I ndviya), is tho receptacle of ml Lhe Sangskaras 
or Karmic tandeneios, and व in Singkhyn the seat of 
momory.' {tis the thinking prmeiplo winch forms concepts 
or gencralidoas acting through the mstrumontahty of Abang- 
kuva, Manas, and the Induyas, Tu the operations of the 
senses Manas 1s tho primeipal; in tho operation of Manas 


Van abangharam apajwya hi biddhn adhyasasyats (Sanghhya- 
Tatty ve Kaen indi, spn a) 

2Saghhya-Piavachima, 1] 13 10 Sth ५४ his Ad yavisayo 
brddivh; but tho Commentator pomts out that Baddbr is nob to be 
idontilicd with its frnetions, Buddhist os eels कको लपु व्रता 

3 Sangkhbyv-Tatlva दाप 2hd Kuki Servo syavil ula 
Alochyn mativi aham पततत iby abhimatya ker davyam ott mays 
wi adhyavasy au 


4 Siugkhya-Piavachana, ]| 40 41, 


84 THE SIX CBNIRLS AND JUN SLROGN* क न 


Abangkara 1s the principal; and in the operation of 
Ahangkara Buddhiis the punupal. Wit the ms ‘uinont- 
ably cf all of these Raddhr acts, modifica ००४५ talang place 
w Budd though tho mstiumcntality 9" the senso 11 1८ 
tions! Lt 15 Buddlu which a the basis of all coz ution, 
sensatior, and resolves, anil makes over objects to Purushy 

that 13, Conseiousness, And so it 1५ sul thal Budd uy, 
whose characteristic 15 determination, 14 tie chamotcor , 
Manas, whose charactoristic 1s Sangkalpavikalpa, 18 tho 
rems; and the Senses are the horses diva ts the Hnjoyer 
(Bhokta) that is, Atma conjoined with body, senses, 
Manas, and Buddin? In Buaddhi Sattvagena predomi. 
nates; 11 Abangkara, Ra,as; in Manas and tho | ulrtyas 
and their objects, ‘lamas. 

Chitta® in its special senso is that faculty (Vitti) by 
which tle Mind first recalls to memory (Smaranam) that 
of whicl there has been previously Anubhava or Praty 
yaksha «nana —that 14, immediate cogmtion, "This 91119 
yanam exists only to the extent o actual Anmtbhava. lor 
remembrance 1s the equivalent of, and noither moro nor 
less than, what has been previously hnown, + remo nhrance 
bemg the calhng ip of that. Chinta, agam, is that faculty 
whereby the अपाला of thought dwells, thinks, aud con- 
templates upon (Chinta)* the subjecbh so recalled by 
Smaranam, and previously known and determined by 
Buddlu. For such meditation (Dhyina) 1s done through 
the recall and fixing tho mind upon past percopts and 

1 Sangkhya Pravachana, IT 45, 39 

2 Shangkara’s Commentary on Kathoparishad, did Valli, 401 
Mantia Atmendiyamanoyuktang bhoktetyahur marishimah and see 
Sangkhya Vravachana, IT 47, 

3 Chetati anena iti chittan + 

490. the Patanjala अपण says  Anubhitavishayfgamp: unosh th 
smriih (Nothing 18 takon away from tho object purcervod) 


5 Annanrdl anatmtka antahisvans.vit {11 itt veduntal (It w tho 
faculty of tho Antal .arana which mvestigates m the Vodanta ) 


LMRODIED CONSCIOUSNLSS (1९५ WA) 65 


concepts. According 1) Vedanta, Buddln determines but 
once only, anc tho furthor rccall and thought upon the 
menial object so Gelorwme 1s the facrity of the separate 
mental category called Chili. Singkhya, on the principle 
of economy of categorios, 1000 [५ Smatanam and Chn ta to 
bo funetions of Buddhist In the works hero iranslated 
and olsewhere Chitta is, however, cinrently used as a 
goneial term for the workirg mind = that is, as a synonym 
for the Antalkarana ? 

To sum up tho functions of the subtle body: the 
sense-objects (Bhuta, derived fiom Tanmiitia) affect the 
senses (Indriy.) and ato porcoived by Manas, aro referred 
to the sel! by Ahinghi.e, and ave cetormit« by Baddhi. 
The latter in its turn 15 Ulumined by the light of Conseious- 
noss (Chit), which is tho Putusha; all tho Principles 
(Tativa) up to and including Buddhi bong modifications of 
appwently unconseious Prakriti hus all tho Taltvas 
work for the enjoymont of tho Self, or Purnsha They aro 
not to bo rogarded as things existing independently 
by thomsolvos, but as ondcwments of the Spit (Atma). 
Thoy do not work arbitrarily as they will, but represont an 
organised co-operative oflot im the service of the nyoyor, 
the Experiencor, 01 Prrusha. 

The subtle body 1g this composed of what are called 
the 17," 0, Buddhi Gu which Ah wgkiva 1s included), 
Manas, the ton sorsos ({ndiiya), and the five Tammnatia. 
No special montion 18 mado ol Prana or Vital Prinerple by 
the Sangkhya, by which 10 1५ reg uded as a mcdifeation of 
the Antahkarana, aud ag such is ipl ently ineluded 19 


'Sfinghhyasl astic cha chinbivii tikisya chittasya buddhiw: एदा 
tabhivah (In the Sang chya Shesiva, Chitta the fun tion of which 1s 
Chinta, 18 included in Huddhi, { 61). 

*Ontiun attobsutmeniinia yatu (Chitty w the Artabkaara in 
gonoinl) + Singkhya-Prav whana-Bhashya. 

0 . 


66 171, SIX GENIRLS AND 1111, SJ णापि POWLR 


Mayavadins inset the Prana pentad instead of tho Tan- 
matra,} 

Tho Jiva byes in his subtle or 1 ental body done when 
in the dreaming (Svapna) state. For the ovbsice world 
of objects (Mahabbuta) 15 thon shut out, and tho con- 
seiousncss wandors m the world of ideas. The subie 
body or soul 1s impersbable wntil Liberation 1s attaiied, 
when the Jivatma, or seomingly conditioned consciousness, 
ceases to be such, and is the Supreme Conscionsness or 
Paramatma, Nirguna Shiva, The subtle body thus sm vives 
the dissolution of the gross body of matter, from which it 
goes forth (utkraman), and “temcarnates”* (to uso an 
English term) until liberation (Mukti). Tho Lingasharira 1s 
not all-pervading (Vibhu), lor in that case 1t would ho etornal 
(Nitya), and could not act (कप). But it moves and good 
(७९), Since it 1s not Vibha, 1॥ must be limited (parich- 
chhinna) and of atomic dimension (Anuparmniina), It is 
indirectly dependent on food. For though the material body 
18 the food-body (Annamaya), M ud is dopondont on it when 
associated wilh the gross body Mind im the subtlo body 
bears the Sangskuras which are tho result ol past actions. 
This subtle body 15 tho eanso of the third or gross body. 

The wholo process of evolution is duo to the prosonee 
of tho will to life and enjoymont, which is a result ol, 
Visana, 01 world-desiie, cairiea from 1110 to hfe in the 
Sangskaras, or improssions made on the subtle body by 
Karma, which is gmded by Ishvara. Tn its roaching forth 
to tho world, the Self is not only endowed with the faculties 


1 Sana chya-Pravachana Sutra, IJ 9 See my voluino on ‘Tate 
(Prane-Shakt1) 

+The a8 trinsmigi पाठया or pretyabhava, which moans ‘tl ar aug 
aguu’ (and agam) punnritpaitah protyabbavah, as Guntana saya. 
Pretya havi g died and Bhayu—“ the beco nn g (born into tle world) 
agai” ‘Again’ imphos habitualness bu tl then death, tion 1011, 
and so on, until final emaneipation, whigh 1 Moksha, or Apayin ga 
(,oleage), १५ tho Nyaya calls it. 


1 णण फ CONSCIOUSNESS (11४ अद्‌) 67 


of the subtle body, but with the gross objects of on’oyment 
on which those facultics ocd. Tiere ticiefore comes into 
bog, as a pro ection ol tho Powor (Shakti) of Conscious- 
ness, the 40१५ body of mittor callod Sth ila Shana. 

The णा Shiriva co nes from the root Shirt? to 
decay; for the gross body is at overy moment undorgomg 
moteculu birth and death until Prana, 01 vital ty, leaves 
the orgamsm, which, as such, is dissolved. Tho Son] 
(Jivatma) is, when 1b leaves the body, no longer concerned 
therewith. ‘hore is no such thing as the resurrection of 
the same body. Jt returns to dust, and the Jiva when it 
reincarnatos does so in a new body, which 15 nevertholess, 
like the last, suited to give cfteet to its Karma, 

“ho Sthula Sharira, wilh 18 threo Doshas, six Koshas, 
seven Dhatus, ton Iires, and so forth,! is the perishable 
body composed of compounds of five o1ms of gross sensible 
matlor (Mahabhuta), which is over decaymp, and is at the 
end dissolved into ils constituents at death! = 11114 15 the 
Vedintak body of food (Annamaya Kosha), 80 called becanso 
ib a4 maintained by food whieh 1 converted into chyle 
(Raga), blood, flesh, fat in bone, marrow and seac-compononts 
of the gross organism. ‘ho diva lives in this body when 
in the waLing (Jiigrat) slate. 

Tho human, physical, o1 gross body is, according to 
Western science, composed of (एला [ता compounds, ० which 
the chief are water, gelatino, tat, phosphate of limo, 
albumen, and fibrine, and of those water constitutes some 
two-thinds of tho total wagit = 'Theso substances are com- 
posed of simpler non-metallic and motalhe eloments, of which 
the cluef aro oxygon (to dho extent of about two-thircs), 


1 See 11 groduetion ( my odin of Piapanchasivn Tank ८ Vol TIT, 
“‘Tantrils Texts”? 


2 Deeny and death are two of the six Urmis which, with hunger and 
thust, gre and igncrance. aro chiunetertstics of the holy (Deho- 
dharma): Prapanchasixe Pai tra, IL. 


68 THD St¥ CLNIRLY AND THT SLREPUNL एषा 


hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, calcimn, and phosphorus. 
Again, to go one step farther back, though tho alloged 
indestructability of tho cloments and thoir atomy 18 still 
said by some to present the charactor of a “ practical t11 th,” 
well-known recent experiments go to re-establish the 
ancient hypothesis of a single Primordial Substanco to which 
these various forms 01 mattor may be reduced, with the 
resultant of the possible and hitherto dorided trans: iutation 
of one element into another; sinco cach is but one of the 
plural mamifestations of tho same undorlying unity. 

Recent scientific research has shown that this original 
substauce cannot bo scientific “matic ”—that is, that 
which bas mass, weight, and inertia, Matter has beon 
dematerialised and reduced, according 10 गामा hypo- 
theses, to something which differs profoundly Ivom “ matter” 
as known by the sonses. ‘his ultimate substance is statocd 
to be Ether in a state of motion Tho present 861७117९ 
hypothesis would appear to bo as follows: The ultamato 
and simplest physical facto. fiom which tho nmverso has 
arisen 18 motion of and in a substince cilled * other,” 
which 13 not scientific “imatto:”. ‘ho motions of this 
substance give 1180 trom the realistic pot of view to the 
notion of ¢ mattor”. Matte: 1s thus at base one, nobwith- 
standing the diversily of its forms, [ts uliimate elemont 
28 on the final analysis ol one kind, and the difforences in 
the various kinds of matter depond on the various movo- 
ments of tho ultimato particle and its succeeding ¢ mbina- 
tions. Given such umity of base, 1b is possiblo that ono 
form of mattor may pass into another. 

The Indian theory here deseribed agrocs with tho 
Western speculations to which wo havo reforred, that what 
tho latter calls scientific or ponderablo mattor doos not 
pormanontly oxisl, bub says that Lhore ao coitain 1notions 
or forces (five in number) which produce solid mauuor, and 


EMBODIED GONSCLOUSNT 5७ ( ४) A) 09 


wluch are ultimately reducib ५ to cther (पा ४७ ४) — Akasha, 
howovor, and seientife ^ Uther? we tot in all respects the 
same, ho latter is an ulti nate substance, not “ mattor,”? 
having vibra o'y movements and alfordiig ८1५ medium for 
tho transmission of light. Akashw 18 one o the gross 
{01008 into which the Pumerdial Power (एषण, -Shakta) 
differentiates itself, Objectively considered it 18 a vibra~ 
tion? im and of the substance of Prakitio which 1, is a 
transformation im which the other forces are observed to 
be operating — Lastly, Akasha 1 not an ultimate, but 1s 
itself derived from the sipersensible Tanmatia, with its 
quality (Guna) whereby Alcishv allects the souses , and this. 
Tanuniatra is itself derived tro n the mental L-making princi- 
ple (Ahangkita), 0: personal consciousness produced from 
the superpersonal Jiva-consciousness as such (पवता), 
emanating trom the voot-energy, छा Prakriti-Shakt1 tho 
cause and basis of all forms of “ mitonal” force or sub- 
stanco, At the bick of both “matter”? and mud, thero is 
the ७५६४५ cnorgy (Shakti) of the Supremo who 19 the 
९८180 of the universe ant Consciousness itsol!’, 

Matto: aflocts the J°va in five differ ont ways, giving 
1180 in him to tho sonsatiors of simnell, taste, sight, toneh 
and [९७५], and hearing 

As alroady oxplamed, the Taumiitras aro 8) personsiblo, 
being abstract qualtios, whilst the sonsey perecivo thoir 
variations im particular ०0५५ only. "Those sonso-parti- 
culars avo produced fiom the gonorals or Universals, 


11४ is Spardanashila (vibratory) according to Sa एता, for the 
products sharo the clmacta of the nigind vor ng [पत्यं पत्‌ 
thoro products aio 110४, 11९७ Pra aiti itself, Wl-poryadt g (Vibhu) "he 
Vaishoshika दा पित) acgards ib ay a motion loss, colourless (Niupa) 
continuum (Savavyapt). Lb is nob भो ate t nd is Viblu, therefore 
1b cannot vibrate (Gaikeyu). Tie Commentators nigue that, as at is 
a Diavya, or thing, 1 must possess tho gonow | quality (Dharm) of 
Dravya or Kriyi —that is, action Seo my Volume on “ Matton ” 


70 1117; SIX OBN RES AND MIL SMRPTINT POWT? 


From the Shabda ‘lanmatra and from the combma- 
tions of the latter with the other Tanmatias are produced 
the pross Bhutas (Male bmuita), which as things at physi- 
cal magmtude perceivable by the senses approuch the 
Westorn defimtion of discrete sonsible “matter”, ‘These 
five Mahibhitas are Akasha (Mther), Viyn (Air), ‘Pojas 
(Fire), Apas (Water), and गिर (Harth) ` (पना dove- 
lopment takes place trom the Tanmibra, from one unit of 
that which 15 known 1m sensiblo matter as mass (‘l'amas), 
charged with ouergy (Rujas) by the gradual accrotion of 
mass and redistribution of enagy The result of this 
13 that cach Bhita is more gross than that w uch pro- 
cedes it until “ Karth” ag reached = ‘hase five Bhiutas 
have no connection with the Hughsh “ elements” so called, 
nor, indeed, are they cloments at all, boing derived from 
tho Tanmatia. Dynamically and objectively consilored 
they are (proceeding fiom Akiisha) said to bo fivo forms of 
motion, 11to which Prakriti differentiates 1.81 : viv, uon- 
obstructive, all-directed motion radiating lines of ‘oreo in 
all directions, symbolised as tho “ Tews of Sinva,”! 
affording the space (Akusha) in which the other forcos 
operate; transverse motion? and locomotion in spuco 
(Vayn), upward motion giving use to expansion (l'ojas) ; 
downward motion giving riso to contraction (Apas) ; 
and that motion which produces cohesion, its (haractarmtic 
of obstruction being the opposite of the non-obstructive 
ether m which it exists and fiom which ab ana the कलना 
Tattvas spring. The first is sonsed by hearing though 


2. 


1 १ Kashmir Shaivaisin,’ ] 139 wlhae at is sngpested tint tho 
11165 of the magi ctic held ae connected ४ th 1olnos of Jik (d rection) 
aa the linos of cthoreal energy. 


2Vayn as the Prapanchasara ‘Tanta siys, is claractorised by 
motion (Chilanapara) "ha Sm.skrit root Va to move Soo Sashimi, 
Vol II, p. 4, ed Kava’ Kunje Lala Biishagratue 


07) CONSCLOUSNEDS (णव दो 71 


its quality (Guna) of sound (Shabda) ; 1 the second by tonch 
through resistance and fooling ;? the thiid by sight as 
colow 3? tho .owth by taste Heo gh favo es ane tho (th 
by the sense 0 smel through its तवणा, which 1५ produced 
by matter only m so lar agit partakes of he 8014] state! 

The hud and stablo obstructive “eath”? is that 
which 13 smolt, tasted, seen, aul touched, and which exists 
mm space which 1s known by hearnug — that 14 the sounds 
in it. The smooth “ water ” 18 that which 18 tastod, seen, 
and touched, in space. “Tire? 1s what is seen and 
touched that 15, fell as temperaturo—in space. “ Air” 
is what is so felt in spaco, And sound whuch 1s heard 1४ 
that by whieh the 01416100 0 tha Hither? 14 known, 
Theso {3110185 when compounded make up the material 
universe, Nach thing theroin boing thas macle ol all the 
Bhutas, we find m tho ‘lantias that form, colom, ane) 
sound, ave rolated, a trath which is of deop ritual sigmfh- 
cance, Thus, cach of the sounds of specch or music has 
a coiresponding form, which have now been made visible 
to tho veya by the Phonoscope’ hus tho doal may 
porcoive sounds by tho oyo, just as, by tho Optophone 
the blind mey ‘road by moans cf the oa. 


1 According to Weatorn 1 0 ous, ibs the an which is tho (पा of 
sound = Accondmp to वृणो nolo | for 1 tho substratum of 
(Ashiaya) of sownd, and Aw (Vayu) is v helper (dah vvart) 11 14 2 वपा 
fostation 

24ouch 18 not hore used in tho sense of all forms of contast for 
form and solidity are not yet dovok ped, but such putionlar contact is 
that by which isiealised the thormal quility of things 


3 Vivo 18 the name for hit ection which builds and dosti ys 
shapos 

4 All matter m the solid stato (Parthivy) giving miso to smoll ism 
tho statu of cath—e gy, mets, flowers, ote 

5 When words aro apohon or su g into vstioll trumpol attached 
fo tho insanmont, ८ veyolving diye uppous vo les.k up ino a पताकाः 
of patiorns, which vary with tho varmlions in sound 


72 ग्रा SUX OPNIRES AND THE SORPLNE POWrR 


In the sano Shastra various colours and fig ves (Man- 
dalas) are assigned to the lattvas to denote them Aku. 
sha is represonted by a tiausparent while circular qigram 
in which, accordmg to some 1660 1209 thera aro dots 
(Chhidia hole), thus displaying the interstices whieh Akt- 
sha produces, for Akasha, which 1s all-porvading, intorvonos 
between each of the Tattvas which are evolved from 1, 

Vayu is denoted by a smoky groy, six-cornered वाध 
gram;! Tejas, red, tmangular diagiam; Apas, whilo, 
cresce it-shaped diagram; and Prithhy, yellow,  qua- 
drangular diagrum which as the suporfie’al prosontat on of 
the cube well denotes the notion ०9 solicity. 

Srinlaily, to each Devata also thore 1x ass gnod a Yan- 
tra, or diagram, which 13 a suggestion al tlo form ase 
sumed by the evolving Prakrili or body of that particular 
Consciousnoss. 

Tha gross body 18, then, a combination of the com- 
pounds of theso Mahabhutas, dorivablo from the Akush 
(^ Ether ”) Tattva. 

The Bhutas and the Tanmatia, as parts of tl ose com. 
pounds, pervatle the body, but particular Bhitlas ave said 
to have contios of foreo in कष) एला regions. hus the 
centres (Chakra) of “ Uarth and “ Wator” are tho two 
lower ones 10 tho irunk of the body. “ Fire”? predominates 
in tho central abdominal region, and न Au” and ^ Hither” 
in the two higher centres in the heart and throat hose 
flve Taimatias, fivo Bhi tas, and tho ten senses (वा एषम) 
which percoive them, ae known as tho twenly gross 
Tattvas which aio absorbed in Yoga in the eontros of the 
bodily trunk, The remaining four subtio montal पपक्ष 
(Buddhi, Ahangkira, Manas) and Prak.iti have thou spocial 
ceniros ol activity in the head. Agnin, the Bhutas may be 


1See as to this and tho otha dingrams ha colom ed plutcs of the 
Chakras 


17001 10 CONSO फणि SS (11४1 MA) 73 


specially displayed im cther portions of the bodily orgamam. 
Thus, Prithivi displays itself as bone or muscle; Apas as 
प्र © and salve s Teas as amger and thors; Viyt ain 
grasping and walking, Pho is mani’old, its great mystery 
being salutoc by many namos, 50 पीलक mam esis both as 
hight aud heat, lor, as Helmholts says, the same object may 
effedt the senses in different ways ‘Cho samo ray of 
sunshine, which is called hght when it falls on the oyes, is 
called heat when at falls ou the skin. Agni manilosts in 
the honsohold and umbilical fives; as Kamigm in the 
Muladhnta centre; in Vadavyi or submarine fire and in the 
*Laghtming ” of tho Snshumna m the spinal column, 

Matter thus oxists in the five states elhoric,' acrial,® 
fiery, fluid,’ and इनत Prithiv doos not denote merely 
what is poptlarly called “ Marth”. All (नाते (Parthia) 
odorous substance 13 in the Prithyi stato. All substance um 
tho fluid (Apya) slate 1s 1 the Apas state, as over ything 
which has cohesive resistance sm that of Prithiy. ‘Mus 
Jatior, 11010100, 18 the cohesive vibration tho canso of 
solidity of whie1 tho com non cathh is a gross compounded 
form, All (ला in the aorial (V" yaya) condition is im the 
Vayr stato, ‘Thoso aro all primary diforontiations of 
cosmic matter into a univorsy o subtly fino motion 1116 
Yattvas regarded ob‘octively ovoke in the Indriyas smell, 
tasto, 81116 touch, and hearii 2. 


1 All-porvaling (Suvavy yi), thongh iolitiely ५) in Singkhya, 
and colourloss (Nir ipa) As bo vib at'or, ४, ante 

2 With moyomonts whicl aro not st gob (ङितो mi-shile) 

3 Wuminatimg (Prk wha) and heating (Tapa) 

4lnguid (Taral.), moving (Catlanashiln) — lt has the quality cf 
Sneha, whacby things ci be 1ollel yp into viimp (Pinda) as nom 
toucd flour or ecaril  Scmo का things beeorto liquid for ५ time 
through how and others }ocor ५ solids the dati (spec os) cf which as 
still water (Jalaty v) 

"Wethout holloy .onge (Chav) fur (Dadhn), comeircd (Sug 
hate), and had (Kathina) 

to ४ 


74 UL STIX OPNIRES AND LHP Sbip NP POWER 


The gross body 1s thus a combination of tho co nponnds 
otf these Mahuabhutas, domvable ullimately fiom Ether 
(Akasha), :tself evolved *n manner aoscribed, 

The gross and subtle bodies abovo described aro vital- 
ised and held together as an organiym by Prana, which 
is evolved from the active energy (Kriya Shakt1) of tho 
Linga Shara, Prana, or the v'Lal principle, 18 tho special 
relation of tho Atma with a cortain form of matter which 
by this relation the Atmi orzamisos and builds up as a 
means of having experience! This special relation con- 
stitutes the mdiv'dual Pt maim the [ताल्वा पे body. Tho 
cosmic all-pervadimg Prana is not Prima in this gross youse, 
but 19 a name for the Brabnun ५.५ the vithor 0 {पछ 
individual Prana. ‘The individnal Prana 18 limited to the 
particular body which it vilalisos, and 18 a manifosta,ion in 
all breathing creatures (Piant) of the crostive and sustaining 
activity of the Brahman, who is represented in individual 
bodies by the Devi Kundalim. 

All beings, whethor Dovatiis, mon, or animals, oxish 
only so long as tho Piiina is within the body. 1415 tho li o- 
duration of all? What 110 1s has boon tho subject of dispute 
in India as elsowhero,’? The mater ists of tho Lokiyate 
school ccusidered life to be tho result othe cher rial 
combinations of the clemoents, in the samo mannor as the 
intoxicating property of spirituous hquors rosulls from the 
fermentation of unmtoxicating mee and molasses, or as 
spontancous genoration was supposed to (टला under the 
influonce of gene warmth. This 15 demiod by the Simgkhya. 
Though Prana and us fivofold Junctions are callod Vayu, 
Life, according to this school, is not » Vayu in tho sonso of 


_ 1५ ताय Realism,’ p 84 See my volume on “ Lafo” 
4 Kaus utaka Upanishad, 3-2. 
3 886 my volume on “ Life”. 


TMBODILD CONSUICUSN $8 (TIVA MA) 75 


a mero biomechanical force, nor any more mechameal 
motion resulting from the impulsion of sich Vayu 

Accoraing vo the viow of this school, Piva, or एः पानक 
18 the common tunefion o the mind and all tho sonsos, both 
sonsory (Jnanondriya) and motor (Karmendriya), which 
result in the bodily motion. Just as soveral birds when 
confinod 71 ono cage cause that eage to movo, by thetselves 
moving, so the mind and sensos cause the body to move 
while they are engaged in their rospective activities. Life 
38, thon, a resultant of tho various concmrent actrvities 
of other principles o forces m the organisin. 

Tho Vedantists agreo in the view that the Pri na 18 
noither Viiyn nor us operation, bitdeny t ata 18 the mera 
resultant of tho concomitant activitios of the 016 mism, and 
hold that 1४ 15 ५ separate indopondent principle and 
“matorial” form assumed by the univorsel Consciousness. 
Lilo is therefore a ऋ prmeiplo pervading tho whole 
orgamsm which is nob gross Viiya, bat is all tho same ४ 
snbtlo kind of apparently unconscious force, ७1106 every- 
thing which is nob tho Alri or Purusha 1s, according to 
Mayevada Vodinta aud Singkhya, nnconscious or, im 
Wostorn parlance, “material” (Jada).t Tho gross outer 
body 13 heterogoneous (Parichehhinna) o1 mado up of distinet 
or woll-dofined parts, On the other han, tho Pranamaya 
self which lies within the Annamayn solf 1 १ homogenoous 
undivided wholo (Sidhirana) pormexting tho wholo physical 
body (Sarvapindavydpin), Lt is nob cut off into distinct 
regions (Asudharana) as 18 the Pinda, or microcosmic physi- 
eal body. Unlike the Jattor, 11 has no spoctalised organs each 
discharging a specific function, Jt 1s a homogencous wuty 
(Sadhitana) presont im every purl of the body, which it 


1 06 Commoninry on tutbiiryy Upanishad, edited by Mahudova 
Shistri, and Appendix O, by Di. Broqendia Nath Sonal, to Profosso. 
BLK, Surku’s “Coe [कपत Basagroaud of कपप Souolo,y,” wher 
yomo furthor authorities me givon. 


76 PHL SIX CENTRAS AND ‘LUTE SURPUNT POWER 


engouls as its inner self Vayu ! which courses throngh tho 
body is the manifestation, sclf-begot ton, tho subtle, mvisiblo, 
all-pervading, divine onogy of clernal hfo. = 1 1५ 80 eallod 
from the fact of its conrs: & thioughow 110 universe 
Invisible in self, yet its operations aro manitost — Vor it 
determines the buth, growth, and decay, of all amu vod 
organisms, and as such 1b receives the homage of a | croatod 
being. As vital Vayu 16 1s instaniancons im action, radiating 
as nervs force through the organism in constant currents. 
In its normal condition it maintains a state of eq ulibrinm 
between the different Doshas? and Dhitus, * or 1001 prin- 
erplos of the body. Tho bodily Vayu is divided, ay are the 
principles callod Pitta * and Kapha, ? into five chic’ divisions 
accordirg to the ditlerences m Jocation and function, 
Vayu, known in its bodily aspect a3 Prana, the universal 
force of vital activity, on entry into oach individual is 
divided into tenfold functions (Vitti), of which five are 
chief. ‘The fist or broathing, bear tho sino namo (Prana) 
as that given to the force cousidored in 11५ totality -- tho 
function whereby atmosphoic an with its porvading 
vitality, which has beon first drawn from without into the 
bodily system, 1s oxpiredd. १ 

On the physical plane Prana mani ‘ests in bho animal 
body as breath through inspiration (Sa), or Shakti, and 
expiration (Ila), or Shiva ‘Lhe male principle of Prina 
throws out, and the female principlo draws in, in 
accordance with tho natwo of Shakli ag Shabdabrahman 





1Tn the sense of Prina "he Simscritiont va to move See Sush- 
ruta, Vol JI, p 2 edition by Kayvna Kun »v als Bhish yr voy 

? Seo Introduction to thnd volumo of “I wimk Texts, wl ore th oso 
terms are explaued Tho Devatas of these Dhitus ary Dakani and tho 
other Sha ctis in the Chikris. Seo my volume on “ 11116 ’, 

3 The Vayns havo other functions thin thoso montioned ‘tha 
matter is here stated only ma एकाल्‌ way Seo Sushinte Sunghita, 
cited ante. Prana is nol the physical breath, which 19 a g oss ding, 
buv that f motion of vicu force whieh oxhrbits र्णा m rospiration 


ऋता 0 CONSULOUSNUSS (JTVAIMA) 77 


(Kula-kundalint) Breathing is itself a Maniza, known as 
the Mantra which 19 not recited (A api-mantia), for 11 is 
said without yolition,! 

The divine ला वला 1s Hang and Sa or 1] ९ motion of 
Wa and Se This motion, wateh oxists on ill tho planes of 
life, 13 for the euth plane (Bhutloks) createc and sustamed 
by the Sun, the solar breath ot which 18 the eause of human 
breath with its contrifugal and contripetal movoments, the 
counterpart in man of the cosme movement of the 
Hangsah or Shiva-shakti ‘Tattvas, which aro the soul of the 
Umverse. The Sun 1४ not only the contre and upholdor of 
tho solar system,® bit tho source of all avulable enorgy 
and of all physical hie on carth. Accompanying the sun- 
shine thore proceeds from the orb a vast invisible radiation, 
the prorequisite 0° all vogetablo and animal life. Lt is 
these invisible rays which, acco ding to scionce, sustain tho 
mystery of all physical 1110 = 140 Sum as tho groat | परध 
is the body of the Solar Go |, a great manilestation of tho 
inner Spiritual Sun,’ 

Apana, the downward “ breath ” which pulls against 
Prana, govorns the oxcotory functions; Samina kindles 
the bodily fire and govorns tho processes ol digestion and 
assimilation; Vyina, or diffused “ broathing,” 13 prosont 
thoughout the body, offecting division and diffusion, 


1'Thus the Niuttava antra (Ghapto TV) sya 


Tangk ven vahiv yati sahara vvishet pun th 
नदम्‌ paramang mintrug [एण apalisuy dae 


(By Tngkna ॥ gocs ot, end by Stkua it cones im agan 4 
divv always roei os the Suprome Mantir Hu gss) Seo dao Dhyana- 
bindu Up. 

2'The Sun 1५ said to hold the vist bulk of the otal mattor cf tho 
solar system, whilo it only त niiss about 2 per cont of its moment of 
momentum, 

Tha Yoza works speak of the Moon-chit (Cluehchandia) — Tt is 
‘his spiritual moon whieh 18 shown on Uo coven of this book, ombiacad 
by tho Sei pont Kundalini 


78 Hh SIX OLNLRLS AND 1111) SIk?LNL POWIR 


resisting disintegiation, and holding the body together im all 
its parts, and Udana, the asconding छत + is 1 1¢ so-cal ed 
“upward breading”. Prana is mtho wet; Apoawin tle 
anus; Samana in tho navel; Udana in tho throab; and 
Vyana pervades the whole body.! By the words “navel” 
and so forth 16 18 not meant that tho Viyu is im the navel 
11801? but in that region of the body so designated = the abdo- 
10778] region and its centro the Manipiira Chacra, ‘ho five 
minor Vayus are Naga, Kurma, Krikaa, Dovadatta, and 
Dhananjaya, which mamfest im hiccup, clos ng ६1 | open- 
ing the eyes, digestion,” yawming, and in thet Vayu “ which 
leaves not evon the corpse”, Tho functicns of Prana 
may be seentifeally defined as follows: Appropriation 
(Prana), Rejection (Apana), Assimilation (Sumana), 
Distribution (Vyana), and पक्वा (तप्रो), he 
Prana reprosents tho involuntary reflex action of the 
organism, and the Indriyas one aspect of its voluntary 
activity. ; 

Tn the case of the individualised Prana, or principle 
which vitalisos the ammal organism during its earth Tile, 1 
may be said, whon regarded as an mdependont principle, 
to bo a {0100 more subtlo than that which mv u‘osts ag 
terrestrial matter whieh it vitalisos. In other words, 
according to tlis theory, the Atmi givos life to the 
earth organisms through the modium of torrostrial Prina, 
which 1s one of the manifostations of that Mnorgy which 
issues from and 18 at baso the all-pervading Atmii, as 
Shakti. 


VAmritanada Upamshad, vy 3¢  35—Anandashrarn  Udrtion. 
Vol XXX, p 48, Shandilya Up, Ch. ॥ Seo also as to 11111 
Ch. Ii, Prapanchasata Lantia Tt 19 also stid that Pranvis ab the tip 
of the nostuils (Nasagrayartt ) and othors are nlso suid bo eo else whore, 
¢ es local ties denote special sevis of funetion Sco my volume on 

Lafe 


2 Kshudhakara , ht, ‘ appelite-maker’. 


६1601 CONSCIOUSNISS (JIVA 3 A) 79 


Atm as ना has uo slates, but in wor «ly parlance we 
spoac ol such. So the Mandukya Upunshad! speaks 0° 
the four aspeets (1). da) of th» Brahman, 

Chaitanya, or Consciousness 11 bodies, 18 :mmai ent in 
the individual and collective g1oss, subtle, and car sal bodies, 
and (ransconds them. Ono and the samo Chit pervades and 
transconds all things, bub 14 given different names to mak 
its differont aspects in the Jiva  Ohit, being immutable, 
has itsolf no states; tor states can only oxist in the 
products of the changing Prakmt-Shakt, From, however, 
the aspect of Jiva several +tatos exist, which, though in- 
former by the same Clit, may from this aspect bo called 
states of consciousness.” 

Tn the manifester world, Consciousness appears m 
three states (Avasthn), 14 1; waking (J grat), droamme, 
(Svapna), and dicamlogs slumbor (Sushupti). Tn the waking 
state tho Jive is conscious of sxtoinal ob ects (Balihprayna), 
and 18 tho gross en/oyor of these objects throngh the senses 
(Sthulabhuk)! ‘ho Jiva in this slate is called Jagari-— 
that 18, ho who takes upon himsolf the gross body called 
Vishva, Tlore the diva consciousness 18 in tho grass body. 

In dreaming (Svapna) the J°va 1s conscious of innor 
ob ects (Antahprajna), and 110 onqjoyor of what is subtle 
(Praviviktebhuk) —that 1s, impressions loft on the mind by 


14] 18 Upamshid givos au malyss of tho states of Conseronsnoss 
ou all planos, and should bo shucicd ao mmeetio wit 1 Qaudapada’s 
Kuriht on tho sume sib oot wth Shangharacl fiya’s Commentary on 
tho } पण 


2 Desoriked m dota 1 pov 
3 Seo Miindu cya Upamsh it (where these ao w uy sed) with Ganda- 


५ + 


pide’s दता परय and Shungtar ict ककष Gon प्राणका on tho aamo 


‘ 

!Mandukyn Up., Mantra 3 Prapancinsma Tanta Svarindii- 

yair yaditmi bhungto bhogin 8४120009 bhavata(Ch XIX, ‘Tantrik 

Toxts, Vol III) Soo ishvmapiatyabhiynd: Sn vikshagocharatvens 

yi tu vibyataya sthild (७.५८ by 1) 1 m Comr. tg v. 62 of 
Lalita) , 


80 LUE SIX OLNIRES AND THD 8 1 । 0, ४ 


objects sensed in the waking state Tho ob’ects of droams 
have only an eatoinal reality for the dicamor, whoreas the 
objects porzerven wher awake have such realty for ll who 
are in that state. ‘he mind ccasos to record Lesh impres- 
sions, and works on that which has been registered in the 
walking stato. 

The first (Jugrat) state क thit of sense perception. 
Here the ego lives in a mental world of ideas, and tho Jiva 
consciousness is in the s¢béile body Both those states are 
states of duality in which multipheity is exporicnced + 

Tho third state, or that of dicamless sloop (Sushupti),. 
is defined as that which is neithor waking nor dreaming, 
and in which the varied oxporionces of tho {wo dormer 
states are merged into a simple experience (Ekibhuta), as 
the vanety of the day is lost in mght without extinction of 
such variety. Consciousness is not objective (Bahihprajna) 
nor subjective (Antahprajna), but a simplo undiffer sncod 
consciousness without an object (Prijnanaghana) tn 
waking the Jiva consciousness is associated with mind and 
senses; in dreaming tho sonses ao withdrawn; droamloss 
slumber mind also is withdrawn, ‘The Jiva, called 171 "१ 
is for tho me bomg morged in lus causal body that is, 
Prakriti insoparably associated with Couscionsnoss—tl at is, 
with that state of Consciousnoss which 1s tho scod Lrom 
which the subtle and gioss bodies mow ‘The state 18 one 
of bhss. ‘Tho Jiva is not conscious o anything,’ but on 
awakoning presoives only the notion, ^ | [पकर 1 slept; 1 


1 See Marducya Up, Mantrad ishvarapratyabbima 
Manomatiapathe’ dhyakshavishayatvena viblnamat 
Spashtavabasabhavanang srishtih svapnapadu gn atom 

^ (Cited in [पाक under v 113 

Prapanchisma Tantra Sangjnarahiten ap को asyinubhayo 

bhavet punah svapnali 


1 Th g sinte, when nothn g 19 dreamt, 11771111 avp- 
posed 


00111 (तक्तर्000रद्वा०५ (1 VAIMA) 8 


was not conscious of anyth ng.”! This state is accordingly 
that which has as 1s object the senso of nothingnoss.? 
Whilst thot wo fommor states enjoy tho goss ant sabtle objects 
respectively, this is the enjoyer of bliss only (Anandabhuk)— 
that is, sumplo bliss withont an object. The Lord 1s always 
the enjoyer of bliss, but in the first two states he enjoys bliss 
through objects. [ero ho enjoys bhss 1solf free from both 
subject and object. In this way the Sushupti state approaches 
the Brahman Consciousness But it 1s not that in its purity, 
because 16, as the other two states, are both associated with 
ignorance (Avidyi) the first (wo with Vikviti, and the last 
with Prakriti, Boyond, therefore, this stite there is the 
“fourth” (‘Lamya). Here the pure expcrionce called 
Shuddhavidyé is acquired through Samadin-yoga,  Jiva 
in the Sushupti stato is said to bo in tho causal (Kirana) 
body, and Jiva in the Turiya slate is said (0 be m tho great 
causal (Mahakarann) body.’ 

Boyond this thero is, somo say, ४ fifth 81210, ^ boyond tho 
fourth”? (Turiyitita), which is atlained though firmmoss in 
tho fourth Hero tho Tshyara Tattva is attaine 1. This is 
the Unmosha‘ stato of consciousness, of which the Sac é- 
khya ‘Tativa is the Nimosha! Passing boyond “the spotless 
one attains the Inghast oq alily,” anc ia merged in the 
Supreme Shiva 

Tho aboyo divisions Vishva, Tarjasa, and Piajna—are 
those of the individual diva But thero 1s also the collective 

1 Sco Paty ale ४06४-६ tia Sukhumal a nasy tos vig na lor chid ave- 
4 shain if: 6m war at. 
2 Abhavipratyayflambua-yritti vidin Seo age Piapanel wera 


Yantia Atumarnadyukictiya nenesulyang 1} wel sushuptir api (Ch. 
XIX Vol Lf, [कपा ५६४) 

> Bhaskw vaya in lis Comm on lialte sus Aa evi sushuplid प 
shapannapyvopi lhoh ker umsharratveny tryna lash yp mmapyvop whoh 
mahikinanash पप्रष्ठ v vy iy uh neh 

4 Opommy and ol ष्ण of the eycs (of corscioiwncss). ‘he labver ऋ 
the last singo before tho porfeot Shiva-consciousnoss is gamod 

11 त 


82 IAL SIX OFNIRGY AND ‘MID SERPENP POWLR 


or cosmic Jiva, which 2५ the aggrogate of the individual 
Jrvas of each particular state.! {In the maciocosm those 
collective? Jivas are called Vaishvanara (coLresponding to 
tho mdividaal Vishva body), Unauyagarba, and Sutil ni 
(corresponc ing to the individual Tai‘asa hody) , and Ishvara 
25 the namo of the collective form of tho Jivas dos ribed 
as Prajna. Cosimeally, those aro the conscious Loids of 
the objective, subjective, and causal worlds, beyond winch 
there is the Supremo Consciousness. 

Supreme Yoga-oxperience and hboration 1 altamed by 
passing beyond tho first thice states of ordimary expericnes, 

The Yoga-process is ४ rettun-movement to the Source 
which is the roverse of tho creative movement thorefrom, 
The order of production is as follows. Buddhi, thon 
Ahangkara, from the lattor the Manas, Ludriya and 
Tanmatra and from the Jas tho Bhuta, As the soat of 
the Sourco is m the human body tho cerebrum in which 
there 1s the greatest display of Conscivusnesy, tho seat of 
Mind 18 betweon the eyebrows and tho soats of Mattor 
in tho five conties trom the throat to the baso ol the 
sping Commencement of Lhe rebirn-movemont 18 mado 
here and the vamous kinds of Matte: aro dissolved into 


1 Accounts vary im detail according as a groater on less number of 
stages of ascert are enumeated hus Nuvana Tantra, cited in Comm 
ta vy 43 post, says the Paramatima is the Devata m the Turtys state , 
and Prapanchasma Tantra (Ch XIX) says Jageat is Bija, Svapna 18 
Bindu, Sushupti 1s Nada, Turiya is Shakti and the [4४४ beyond 13 
Shanta 

2 The nature of tho collectivity 1s not merely a summi thio of ute, 
but a collactivity the umts of which are rolated to ona inotha as puis 
of an orgarisod whole, Thus Una iyagatbhais ho wl 0 has the conscions- 
noss of bersg all the divas Samashtyabhunati Win inyay wu bh wtmakah 
(Bhaskararaya, op ९८, ४, 61) = [10 18 tho aggregate of these Jivas 

There is said to bo this distinction betwoon tho two thu tho 
Paramatm. manifosted as the collective Antahikar una ws Hiranyagarbha, 
and ns {] e collective Prana itis culled St tratma Whon mar fort t nough 
these two vehicles without differentiation itis Antaryamm Soo Bhaskn 
varaya, lac. ९२८, 


पाणण CONSOLOUSNTss (11VAIMA) 83 


one another, and then into Mind and Mind into Conscious- 
ness as described later m Chapter V ‘lo the question 
whethor man can here and now altain the supreme state of 
Bhss, tho answor in Yoga 1s “ yes”. 


1४ 
7 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS (VARNAMALA) 


Rerernycn ig made m the Toxt and in this [ntsc duction 
to Shabda, Varna, Mantra. It is said that the letters 
(Varna) of the alphabot aro chshiubuted throughout the 
bodily centres on the petals of tho lotusos, ay is shown on 
Plates TI-VII. In oach of the lotuses thore 1s also a Seed- 
Mantra (Bija) of tho Tativa of the contro, Kundalim is 
both 118} ४ (Jyotirmay1) and Mantra (Mantiamay),’ and 
Mantra is used in the process of rousing [णा 

Theie 18 perhaps no subject in the Indian Shistia 
which is loss understood than Mautia, The sub‘ect 18 80 
important a pat of tho Tantra-Shastra that ws othor title 
is Mantra-Shistra. Commonly Ontentalists aud ollera 
describe Mantra as “prayor,? “dormule or worship,” 
“mystic syllables,” and so forth Those aro tho super- 
ficialities of those who do not know thow subject. Whilst 
Loam not awae of any wok in any Duropewu lauguage 
which shows a knowledgo of Mantra and 115 science, yet 
there is perhaps no subject which has beon so ridiculd ~a 
not unusual attitude of ignoranco. Manta seionce may be 
well founded or nol, but even in tho latter cago ib 1s not the 
absurdity which somo suppose it to bo. Those wlo think 
so might except Mantias which aro prayors, and tha mean- 
ing of which they wndorstand, for with prayer thoy ara 
familiar. But such appreciation itself shows a lack of 


‘The first 1s tho subtle, the second the gross form Soo 08 rogeads 
tha auhiect matte of this Chapter the Autho’s ‘ Garland of Lottas + 


THN GARLAND OF LILIBRS (VARNA ATA) 85 


understanding, 11616 ५ nothiig necessarily holy or 
prayo.ful about a Mantra, Muntra is a power (Mantra- 
shakt1) which ‘ends itself mparua'ly to any use. A man 
may bo injured or lalled by Mantra ;* by Mantra a kind of 
union with the physical Shakti is by somo भत्‌ to be 
effected ;* by Mantra in the imfiation called Vedhadiksha 
there ig such a tvansfotence € power fiom the Guru to the 
disciple that the latter swoons under the impulse of it ;* 
by Mantra tho Homa fire may and, according bo ideal 
conditions, should be lighted ;4 by Mantra man is saved, 
and so forth. Mantra, in short, 14 a powor (Shakti) ; powor 
in the form of Sound The root ^ man” moans “ 0 think”. 
Tie creative power of Ghougit i now euciviig पा 
creasing acceptance in the West == ‘liought-roading, 
thought transforenco, hypnotic suggos ion, nigical pro- , 
jections (Mokshana), anc shiolds (Grahana),*’ are beconmng 


LAs im Mmanam and othor of Uo Shithama lo juote m 
exumplo which [ have rout 7 कव चषका of 111 wu wr rowlse 
“suspoet’ as w Oceultist Cheosoplist cto. (1910 [ । Mars 
not cad ® acorpion ९1१0 to tho tiot of ५ Sid. “Domt wy, he 
said, + thore sa scorpion by कता fool” ‘Tho Sidhu leu Lover inl 
when ho suv tho acorpon ho porated atit wth bs fingo s on wn 1 
tho arial क्रा 1८ truely aud im the preso ice of bo Conor al st rivellal 
up and died 6 Yeu goer to hive syne powe ¢ alreudy,’ he Cor ori 
anid, bub tho Sadhu simply wai d tle muta wade is Lome of no 
mpoatance (““Obna dim’ ‘Inadents1 tho la ol a Mnliny Velor- 
an,’ by Major-General J त प्रयास p 7. Teme nan) 

2 An oxhhamdinary uso (0 whch 16 is put, | un infor ned by somo 
worshippers of tho Bhanava Manisa ‘Lho man pro eoty t ० Mantiy , 
on to the woman who tl en experiences ६1७ तछा sation of a phys1 ५ पा का 
Tho Vishnu [रादा च speaks of gence ition by w'll power 

४ As tho Kulanava Tantri says, and as may bo readily पा derstood 
such a Gur is hard t pol The chao ple who received big mitiation 
gols all the powers of [19 in tintor, 14 18 stid that the ० ae Cuins who 
can at 071९6 male thou disciples fit for the lighest ims 

4 48 isatatcd to have actually happened lately m the house al ४ 
friend of a collabovator of mine, A man s Ulegel to have 1b the tel 
in Kushandik& Toma simply by Mant and the Baja of fie (Ram ') 
without recourse to 1 ght or match. 

This Sanskrit torm oxpresses nob so mach a “fenco” to which uso 
a Kavacha is put, bul tho knowlec go of how 2 man may “catsh” 2 
Mantia pro‘ooted ab 11117. 


86 LIT SIX OLNIRUS AND PHD आयत (6 


known and practised, not always with good rosults, Tho 
doctrine is ancient in India, and un lorlies tho practices 
to bo found m tho Tantias, some of which are kopt im 
genoral sonccaled to prevent misuse! Want, lowever, 
is not understood 11 tho West 18 tho pulicular form of 
Thought-svience which 1s Mantravidya, ‘Chose (वपता 
with the Western presontmont of similar subjects will 
more readily undorstand® when ] say that, according to 
the Indian doctrine here described, thought (like mind, of 
which 16 18 the operation) 18 a powor o Shakti Tt 13, 
theroforc, not only as real, bub ma sense more roal than 
outer matenal objects, which ao thomsolves but the 
pro‘ections of the cicative thought of the World-thinker. 
The root “man? which—to thuk, is algo the roob of the 
Sanskuit word for man, who aloue of all creation is pro« 
perly a thinker. Mantra is the mamfosted Shabda- 
brahman 

But what is Shabda or “sound”? [1616 the Shakta- 
Tania Shastra follows tho M’mangsi doetrino of Shabda, 
with such modifications as aro necossary bo adapt it to its 
doctrine of Shaktz. Sound (Shabda), which is a quality 
(Gina) cf other (Akasha), and is sensod by hoeaung, is 
twofold -namely, lettered = (Varnntmaka shabda) and 
unlettered, or Dhvani (Dhvanyat nila stabda).! Tho 


Vin {10 Suuhilaé called Kula nave (rob to Ts tae of that rame) 
Shiva after roferriig to somo 16110 o 11168 witl & o Mosh of black cats, 
bats, and othot an nals, the soiled lien cf ५ Glan ye woman, the 
shroud of a corpse, and so fortl says “O}, Parvati, my howl ind 
dimbs tremble my month is died” (Mh [को campita nomi, gb ani 
mama kampanto, mu cham shushyate Paryati), (तवां ह Ore mast nob 
speak of it ono must not speak, mo raust nob sponk, nya wm Lagam Lv 
ab must not bo spoken of” (Na vaktavyam ne vaktwyam in ए पत पणा 
punah punah), 

४ [¢ 1s because the Qrientahst and missionary know nothing of 
occultism, and regaid it as superstition, that thou prosontn ent of 
Indian teaching 15 so often rgnorant and absurd 

5This Dhvam is the gross body of the Manin Sve tho Author's 
“ Garland of Letters ’ 


1) GARTAN) OF TE 1DRS (VARNAMALA) 87 


lattor is cased by tho strikiig of two things logcther, and 
is meaningless Shabda, on Lhe contrary, whichis Ani hata 
(a term aprolicd 10 the Th alt Mowe >), 1५ tl ob dru! 1111 
sound which is not cansel by tho stucngo two tli gg 
together —‘Loltered sou id 15 co nposed ० sentcuces (४ 1 ष), 
words (Pada), wd 1५1७५ (Vana). Such sound hi a 
meanng. Shabda mamfesting as spoech 15 sad to bo 
oternal? ‘Tus the Naiyayikas dony, saying that ib 18 
transitory. A word is uttercc, and it is gone This 
opinion the Mimangsu demes, saying’ that (ho perception 
of lettered sound must bo distinguished Lrom lettoiod sound 
itself.? Perception ix due to Dhvani caused by the striking 
of the air in contact with tho vocal organs—namely, the 
throat, palato, and tongue Belore there is Dhyam ॥ ore 
must bo the striking of onc thing against anothu, [५15 
not tho mero striking which is the lettered Shabda This 
manifosts 16. The lettored sound 1s produced by the form. 
21011 of tho vocal organs in contact with mr, which form- 
ation 18 in rosponse to Lho mental movement o+ idea, which 
by tho will thus seoks oulward oxprossion im andiblo 
sound. It is this porception which 1s tlansitery, lor the 
Dhvani which mani ests wdew im language is sich [पा 
lettered sonnd, as 11 त in वित) त eternal Tt was not 
produced at tho moment 1l was porceived. 11 was only 
mantfostod by tho Dhvam 10 existed before, «3 ॥ exists 
aftor, such manifestation, व्रा as a jar in a dark room 

1 When tho word + Ghaty 716 nbborad thou there isos im tl 3 mind 
the idea of a ya 

2 Not ag audible sounds (Divari), but ag tl at whicl finds auditory 
oxpreiion im andiblo sonnds ‘Lhe de unblo oxprossions are brat siont 
Behind them is the Hternal Logos (Shabd unabmen), whose manifesta 


tion they are 
3 Samantu titiadarshanam (५ Bub alice 1s tho prccoption धानक) 


{ns is only one form m whieh lotters fin sonsiblo opi os on 
thus wring gives visuul expression and to the blind poifoaled dots 
givo taciual exprossion 


88 1 1 S\ CNRS AND HO उ राप [क्या 


which 15 rovealod by a flash of hghtning 1५ nol then pro- 
duced, 101 coos i cease to exist on its Coasing bo be per- 
ceived though the cisappemance of its mantfestor, the 
hghtmng The an m contact with tho voice organs 
reveals sound in the form of tho Jettors of tbc alpl abet, 
and their combmations an words and sentences — Tho 
letters are produced for hearing by the effort of (he person 
desiring to speak, and become at dible to the oa of others 
through the operation of unlettered sound or Dhvani. ‘The 
latter being a mamfoster only, lettercd Shabda is something 
other than its mamfester. 

2५1७० desembing the nature of Shabda 111 its different 
forms of+devolopment ib is necessary to understand tho 
Indian psychology of perecption At cach moment the 
Jiva 18 subject to innumerable 1 fluences which from all 
quarters of tho universe pour upon him, Only thoso reach 
his Consciousness which attract his attontion, and aro thus 
selected by his Manas ‘The latter atlends to one or other 
of these sense improssions, and convoys 1 lo tho Buddhi. 
When an objoct (Artha) is presented to tho mind and 
porcorved, the latter 18 formed mto tha shapo af the object 
perceived. This 1s called a mental 1111 (modification), 
which it is the object of Yoga to suppioss ‘The mind as a 
Vritt: is thus a representation of the outer object, But 
in so far as it is such representation it is as much an 
object as tho outer one. The lablor—thal is, the physical 
object is callod the giosy object (Sthila artha), and the 
former or mental 1uprogsion is callod the subtle object 
(Sukshma atha). But besides the object there 15 (70 mind 
which perceives 1t. Jt follows that the mind has {wo aspects, 
in one of which i is the perceiver ant im the othe 
the percoived in tho form of tho mental formatin (Vitti) 
which in creation precedes its outer projoction, and after 
the croation follows us the umpression produced in tho mind 


PHD (तादा) OF 1111, १ (VARNAMAT 1) 89 


by the sonsing of a gross physical obyet Tho mental 
myprossion and tho physnal object exactly conespond, or 
the physical obyee is, in fact, but a projection of the cosime 
imagmation, though ॥ hay the sume readily as the und 
lag} 10 moro and no less, ‘ho mind 1s thus both cog msor 
Grahaka) and cognised (Giahya), vevenlor (P ak whaka) 
and vovealed (Prakashya), denote (Vicha<a) and denoted 
Viichya). When tho mind 0०८५५५३ an object 1b is tans- 
formod into the shape of that object. So the mind which 
thinks of the Divinity which प worships (Ishtadovata) is at 
longth, through continued devotion, transformed in to the 
ikeness of that Dovata. By allowing the Devata thus to 
occupy tho mind for long ib becomes as pure as the Deyata. 
Tlis is ॐ fundamental piineiple of Tanti Sadhana ov 
religious practico, ho object perceived is called Artha, a 
term which comes from the root “ Ri,” which means to got, 
to know, to onjoy, Artha as that which is known, and 
which thovefore is an object of onjoy nont The mind ag 
41108 thats, in the form of the montal umpiession—is an 
exact reflection of the onlor object or gross Artha, As tho 
onter objoct is Artha, so 19 tho intorior subtle montal form 
which corresponds to it, ‘That aspect of the mind which 
copmses is called Shabla or Nama (name), and that 
aspoct in which it is its awn object or cognised is called 
Artha or Bupa (forn), Ths outer physical object of wich 
the lattor is, in the ind vidual, an improssion is also 
Artha or Rupa, and spoken spoech 18 the outer Shab la, 
Subject and object ao thus from the Mantra aspect 
Shabda and Artha—torms corresponding to the Vedintioc 
Nama and Rupa, or conccpts and concepts objectified. 
As tho Vedanta says, the wholo creation is Nama and 
Rupa. Mind iw tho powor (Shakti), tho function of 
which is to distmguish and identify (Bhodasangsargayi ithe 
Shakti). ~ 


12 





90 ML SIX (पर| १.8 AND 1 1 ५ kOINT 0४1 


Jus* as tho body 1s eansal, stbtle, and gross, so is 
Shabda, of which there are four slates (Bliava), cal ed Pari, 
Pashyanui, Machyere, and Vaikbet terms further ox 
plamed in Section V of this Introduction, Pata sound 18 
that which exists on the differe tiation of the Mah vbindu 
bofore actual manifestation. This कत motionless causal 
Shabda in Kundalini m tho Muladhara contio of the body. 
That aspect of 16 m which if commences to move with a 
general—that is, non parhioulaiised motion (Samanya 
spanda) 18 Pashyanti, whose place is from tho M uadhara 
to the Mampina Chakia, the noat contio, [t is 1५6 
associated with Mauas Those reprosont tho motionless and 
first, moving “Shvara aspect 01 Shahd: Max hyama sound 
18 associated with Buddha It is [hranyagarbha Shabda 
(Hnanyagarbharupa) extending fiom Pishyanti to 10 heart, 
Both Madhyama sound, which 1s tho inner “ naming” by 
the cogmtivo aspect of mental movomont, as also i ५ Artha 
or subtle (Sukshma) object (Arthy), belong to the montal or 
subtle body (Sukshma 0 Linga sharin.  Poreeption is 
dependont on distinguishing and identification, Tn the 
perception of an object that putof tho mnd which identifies 
and distinguishes, or tho cogmsmg part, 18 subtle Shabda, 
and that part of if which takes tho s iape of the objcet (a 
shape which coriesponds with the outer thing) is subtle Artha, 
The perzeption of an objoct 18 thug consequent on the 
simultaneous [functioning of tho mind in its twofald agspoct 
as Shabda and Artha, which ae m indissoluble rolation 
with one another as cogniser (Grihake) and sognisod 
(Grahya) Both belong to tho subtlo body. In cioalion 
Madhyama Shabda first appoarod. At that momont thore 
was no outer Artha Then tlie cosmic mind projosted this 
inner Madhyama Artha into the world of sensual experionce, 
and named it m spoken speech (Vaikhari Shabda), Tho 
1986 or Vaikhari Shabda is uttored speech doveloped in tho 


IMD CARTAND OF 11, (9 (VARNAY At A) 91 


throat issuing from the mouth. his is Virit Shabdda. 
Vankhari Shibda 1५ therefore language o1 gross 1५1५ ed 
sound. [ts corresponding Artha is the physieu or gross 
abjoct wluch language denotes This bolongs to the 
gross body (Sthule shativa)  Madhyama Slabda 1s 
montal movement or ideation in its cogmtive aspect, 
and’ Madhyama Artha is the montal impression of the 
gross object. Tho inner thcught-movement m_ its aspect 
as Shabdartha, and considered both in its knowing 
aspect (Shabda) and as the subtle known object (Artha), 
belong to the subtle body (Sukshma shar ra). The cause of 
these two is the first genoral movement Lowards particular 
ideation (Pashyanti) from tho motionless cause, Parashabda, 
or Supremo Speech. Two forms of mner or hidden speech, 
cangal and subtle, accompanymg immd movement, thos 
precede and load up Lo spokon language. The inner forms 
of ideating movement constitute tho subtle, and the uttered 
sound tho gross, aspect of Mantia, which is tho manitested 
Shabdabiahinan. 

Tho gross Shabda, callkd एकता or nitered ऋणी, 
au the gross Artha, ov the prysical ob‘oct denoted by that 
specch, ave the projection of the subtle Shabda and Artha 
through tho imtial activity ol the Shabdabiahman into the 
world of gross sensual poicertion. Therefore in the gross 
physical world Shabda means Jangnago that 18, sentoncos, 
words, and letters, which arc the expression of ideas and 
avo Mantra. [n the subtle or mortal world Madhyama 
Shabda is tho mind wlich “namos” in its aspect as 
cogniser, aud Artha is the samo mind in its aspoct as the 
moutal object of ils cognition. [1 18 defined to be the outer 
im the fovm ol the mind. It is thus similar to tho stato of 
dreans (Svapna): as Parashubda 1s the causal ता camless 
(Sushupti) and Vaikham tho waking (diigiat) stato, 
Mental Artha is a Sangskara, an impression 101, on tho 


9४ HL SIX CLNIRLS AND 111, 81.41 [नि POWLR 


subtle body by previous experence,’ which is recalled 
when tho Jiva reawakes to world experience and 
recallects the expenance temporally lost in the cosinic 
dreamless state (Sushupt:) which 1५4 dissolutior (Maha- 
pralaya), What 1s i which arouses this hangskera? As 
an effect (Kmya) it must have a ८१1९५ (Karana), This 
Karana is the Shabda or name (Nima), subtle or gross, 
corresponding to that particular Artha. When tho 
word “Ghata” 15 uttered this evokes im the mind 
the image of an object a jar just as the presont- 
ation of that object does, In the Ihranyagarbha state 
Shabda as Sangskara worked to evoko mental images. 
The whole world 1s thus Shabda and Artha that 14, name 
and form (Nama rupa). Theso two aie inseparably 
associated. There is no Shabda without Artha or Artha 
without Shabda. Tho Greek word Logos alsd moans 
thought and word combined. Thoro is thus a deublo hne 
of creation, Shabda and Aitha, ideas and language to- 
gether with thew objects. Specch, as that which is heard, 
0 the outer mamfestation of Shabda, stands for tho 
Shabda cieation. Tho Artha creation are the innor and 
outer objects seen by tho mental or physical vision, From 
the cosmic creative standpoint the mind comes first, and 
from it 18 ovolved the physical world according to the 
ripened Sangskaras, which Jed to the existence of the 
particular existing universe. Thoreforo the montal Artha 
precedes the physical Artha, which 18 an ovolution in gross 
matter of tho former ‘This montal state corresponds to 
that of dreams (Svapna) when man livos in the mental 
world only. After creation, which 18 tho waking (Jugrat) 
state, thoro is for the mdividual an already existing 
parallelism of names and objects. 

Uttsred specch 18 a mamfostation of tho inne: naming 
or thought. This thought-movemont is similar in mon of 


‘LED GARLAN) OF LELIPRs (४५१ iA) 93 


all races. When an Tnglishman or an Indwn thins of an 
object, the image 18 to boll tho same, waicther ovoked by 
the object जलन or oy the atten mee of iw name. orbaps 
for this reason a thor el t-realor whose ce ebral contre 14 
en 1410000 6 with thal o another may tcac the mdden 
“speech” that 1s, tho thought of one w ose spoken 
speéch he camot understand hus, whilst the thought- 
movement is similar in all men, the expression of it as 
Vaikhari Shabda diffors. Accorling to tradition, there 
was once a univorsal language. According to the Bibheal 
account, this was so before the con usion of tonguos at 
the owe: of Babel. Simlarly in the Rigveda a mys- 
temons passage! speacs 0° the “three fathers and three 
mothers” by whose action, hke that of the Moh, “ all- 
comprehending speech” was made into that which was 
not so, Noi 14 this unhkely when we eonsidor that dif or- 
ence in gross specch 1s duo to dif erence of races ovolved 
in the course of ame Tf the instruments by, and con- 
ditions under, which thought 1s revealed in speoch wero 
the samo for all mon, then there would be bat one lan- 
guage, But now tus is nob so. Racial charactoristics 
and physical conditions, such as tho nature of the vocal 
organs, climate, inherited impressions, and so Lort 1, 11101 
Therefore, so also doos langiage == Bat lor each particular 
man speaking any particular language (he uttored name of 
any object is the gtoss oxpression of Ins inner thought- 
movomont, J{ evokes that movemont and again expresses 
it. It evokes the idea, and the idev is consciousness as 
mental operation. ‘Chat operation can bo so intonsifiod as 
to be itsoll crentive. ‘This is Mantra-chaitar ya. 

Fiom tho above account ib will be underatood that, 
when it 1 said that tho “letters” avo in the six bodily 


10 report ०५ an Indiar परिजात whe 1.१5 tm gotton to g.ve me the 
reference, 


94 1 PD अ OLNIRLS AND UL 1 दहि] TOWPR 


Chakias, 11 18 not to be supposed that it 1५ mended to 
absurdly affirm that tho letters as wrilfon shapes, ता as 
the uttered sounds which are heard by tho ear, are there. 
The letters in this senso—thal 1s, as gross things are 
mamfested only m spoech and writmg., This mnnch 1s 
clear. But the precise sigmficanco of this statement is 
amatter of great difficulty. ‘hore 1, in fact, no subject 
which prosonts more difficulties than Mantravidya, 
whethe: considered generally or im relation to the par- 
ticular mattor m hand. In tho first place, ono must be 
constantly on guard against falling into a possiblo trap 
—name क, the taking of prescribed mothods of :oalsation 
for actuahtics i the common 807९6 of tiat term. ‘The 
former are convontional, the latter are real. Doubts on 
ins matter are increased by some variations in the de« 
scriptive accounts. Thus in some Ganeshais the Deva 
of the Muladhara. In the oxi here translated it is 
Brahina = Simlarly this Text grvos Dikint in tie (ह 
dhiva as the Devata of tho Asthi Dhatu (bony substance). 
When sitting in the preseribed Asana (posture), Cho bones 
ave gathered up aro md this Chakiy, प्रात्‌, moroovor, from 
it as the centro of tho body the bones run up ard ¢own- 
wards, Another account, however, given to mo places 
Devi Skikim here! Mistakos have also to be ‘ockonod 
“with, and can only be ascertamed and reetifed by a 


1'Phis account which may be compared with that 0 the Toat i as 
follows 


Bone (Astlidhatu). Muladh wa chakra Devi Shakin 
Tat (Medadhatu). Svadhisht ina chakiy, Dey Kaci 
Tlesh (Mangsadhatu) Manipura chaliy Dovi Latin. 
Blood (Riktadhatu): Anahaty chakra, Devi Ras, 
Skin (Tvakdhatu) Vishuddha chakra Dov Dalam 
Murow (Ma jadhatu) Ajna chaloa, Devi Wai cant 


In tle Sahasrara Padma aro all Dhatns [शाता with Shukia 
(somen) 


11} GARLAND 0 Tf Pt (पपर) 95 


ou nparison of soveral MSS! Again, four lebters ae said to be 
on the polals of the Mulidhata [जाड्य पान, Va, Sha, 
Skt, and Sa. Woy are ५1386 said to be there? Varioes 
gbatemonts lave been made to 710 As tho o are certain 
lettors which are ascribed to cach form of sensible mattcr 
(Bhuta), it soems obvious to suggest that tho cath letlers 
(Pathiva varna) aro in the earth centre But au examin- 
ation on this basis does not boar tho suggestion out Next, 
1 18 said that [] ¢ letters have colours, and the lettors of a 
particular colotr ato al ०८५४९ 1 to the lotuses of the same 
colour, Tho Text does not support this thoory. It has 
been said that cortain Iotters derive fiom cortam Devats 
But the let.ers peod.ce the Devata, for those are the Artha 
of the Mantra as Shabda. T have been also told that the 
letters are placoc according to their seat o pronunciation 
(Uchcharana), Bul it is repliod that the Muladb a is the 
common source o this (Uchchwanasthana) 01 all? Again, 
it is said that the lotters on tho potals aro Bijas or seed- 
mantras 0 all activities (K1aya) connected with the Tativa 
of tho centie, eich lottery undergoing vaiiations according 
to tho vowols!) Al beings in Prithvi (Hath) Tatlya, 
should be moditued upon in tho Mulidlira. Horo are 
the ofove (as we night expect), tho argany ^ [1१५1 (Piidan« 
driya), the action of walking (Gamanakmyn), smell (Gandha), 
the quahty of Prithivi, tho sense of smell (Ghrina), Nivmtli 


1 Thus in the toxé given me, from which T qtotc, 110 four 1०1८१ of 
the Mauladhun nave given as Vi Shi, Sha, and {40 ‘Phe latter should, 
according to olhe: accounts, be m पका ष्ठत Sa. 


2 This 1५ tine, bub noverthcless [] (10 my be special seats of pro- 
nunetion for exch kctter 61 ए] 164 of 1044५1५ As apparently suppo ting 
this suggestion il may ho notcd th vt the vowel somads wo placed 1 the 
throat contre, and Ta wd Ksha above. 


१ T am informod that tho sub och 18 dealt with in dela in the 
Kundalmbaloatacu, ud im particular im the Adryatins iat, पनर 
of which MSS, hayo I yet seen, 


96 1 11 SIN GLNLRUS AND LHL 811} [हि 10, 


Kala,! and Brah wa (Lord of the Tattva). Bub wo are iso 
told that the letters Va, Sha, Sha, and Sa are the At na and 
Bias 01 tne fom Vedas or the “our Yugas,' ७॥ the wour 
ocoans,! which are therefore called ( iataryarnibaala, or un 
the self o the fon letters 115 trie bin the ‘om Vedas 
are in, and issue tom, Pv ashabda, tho seat of which 15 tie 
Muladhiva. For Votla in its primary sense is the world १४ 
idea in the mind 0 the creative Brahman, portions of which 
have been revenled to the Rishis (seers) and embodied m the 
four Vedas. Bué why should Va bo tho sood of the Rigveda, 
Sha of the Yajurveda, and so orth? Tho ritual oxplana- 
tion, as givenin the Rudray imala (xiv 73, xv. 2, xvi. 1, 9), is 
that the pota: Va is Brahma (Razogana), and 1s the Br'a of 
Bik; § 18 15 Vishnu (Sattvaguna), and Sha, being Pundari- 
katma, is the Bija of Yajus; Sha is Rudra (‘lamoguna), 
and 15 the Bija of Sima Sais the Biya of Athurva, as it 
18 the Bija of Shakti" ‘These tow mo in Parashabda in 
Muladhua, Tt scems to me (go far as my studios in the 
Shistra hayo yot ca.ztel me) that the (५ ails of bho descup- 
tions of the centies ae ol (wo kinds, 1111610 are, firstly, 
certain facts of ob uclive and wnvorsal calily This, for 
oxampl, thore are छा [वाप cont 0५ (Ghakie) 11 tho spinal 
९011701. Tho pume ple of ५0. ९.१ (Juba (शय) sin 
the lowest of such contres, whic. as the centre of the body 
contains the static or potential onergy callod Kandah 
Shaki ‘The contre as a lotus is said to have fom petals, 


1 Soc antior’s ‘Stidies in tho Muitia Shasta” (पम of the 
Shaktis) Sumaur Viyn is also located hore. 


2 Va of Rix, Sha of Ya ng Sha of Sama, wd Svol Alhrava Veda. 
3 Tha fom ages Sitya, Treti, Dvapira, and Kili 
4 Of sugar cana ico, wine, 61०6 (Ghutn), mils 


5 Sow Rad ayamily XVII, where priomity is given to Atl uve as 
deal rg woh the Achat ५ of Shaws [८ च Al}arva arose Suma, fr ore 
Sima, Yayns, and from tho latte: Rak 


पा GARLAND OF यव (VARNAWALA) 97 


becauso of tho formation and distribution of the Yoga~ 
nervos? (Nadi) at that particular pomt. Soldity is donotod 
aptly by a (पाठ which is the diagram (Yantra) of that 
contre, ‘Tho consciousness of that contre as Dovata is 
also aptly "00110 on an olophant, tho massive sohdity of 
which is emblematical of the sotid earth prineiple (Prithivi). 
The {01९08 which go to tho making of solid mattor may, by 
the Yogi, he scon as yollow., It may bo that particular 
substances (Dhatu) of the body and particular Vritti (quali- 
ties) 819 connectod with particular Chakras, and so lorth. 

There are, howevor, another class of details which 
have possibly only symbohcal reality, and which ave placed 
beforo the Sadhake for ‘ue purposes of instiuchion and 
meditation ouly.? ‘The lottors as we know them that 1s, 
as outer speech mo manifested only after passing through 
the throat. ‘They cannot therefore exist as sich in the 
Chakras. But thoy aro said o be there hoy aro thore, 
not in their gross, but in thew subtle and causal forms = Tb 
is these subtle forms which are called Matrica. But as 
such forms they aro Shabda of and as ideating movomonts, 
or aro tho (ध! ५6 (161 001. Gonscionsness, wluch 15 114५] 
(Svaviipa) youndless (Nil-shabda), in ils supremo form 
(Para shabda) .ssvmes a (माला ए] undifferentiated movemont 
(Simanya spanda), thon a differentiated movement (Visho- 
sha spanda), issuing in clearly articulate specch (Spashta- 
tara spanda), ‘Tho innor movement has outor correspond- 
enco with that issuing trom the lps by the aid of Dhvani. 
This is but tho Mantia way of saying that the homogencous 
Consciousness moves as Shakti, and appears as subject 


1The tam ‘uceve? is used for default of another equivalent, 
These Nadis, called Yoga-Nadis, aro not lke the Nadia of physiology 
gvosa things, but subtle channels ¢long which the life-force works 11 


bodies 
2See the Demechog Tania, now published asa voli me of ‘Tan- 
tik Toxta १ 
13 


५8 1 SIX OLN’ {1५ AND TT + प्ति TOW] ४ 


(Shabda) and ob’ect (Artha) at first in the subtlo [orm of 
Mind and its contents gonorated by the Bangs सीदत and 
then m tho grasa farm of 111 120 as the expression of 
ideas and of physical objects (Artha), which tho creative or 
Cosmic Mind projects into the world 0 sonsual exporience 
to be the soureo of impressions to the individual oxperioncer 
thorem Tt is truo that m this sonso tho 1611018, as hidden 
specch or tho seed of outer speech, are m the Chakras, but 
the allocation of particular lettors bo particular Chakras is 
a matter which, if 1 has a teal aid nob moroly symbolical 
significance nust receive the explanwion given im my 
“ Shakti and Shakla ”. 

Tn each of tho Chakras there 1 also a Ba (seed) 
Mantra of cach of tho Tattvay therein, They are tho ६८५ 
of the ‘Tattva, for tho lattor springs fiom and ro-onters the 
former, ‘Tho Natural Namo o anything 18 the sound 
which is produced by tho action of the moving forces which 
constitute 1. 11५ therefore, it is said, who mentally end 
vocally utters with creative torco the nabutal namo of any- 
thing brings into being tho thing which bows int name. 
Thus “Ram” is tho Bije of fire in the Muup ie chakra, 
Thy Mantia “ Ram ” 1s said (0 be tho expression 11 gross 
sound (Vaikhari Shabda) of tho subtle sound produced hy 
the [01608 constiluting fie, he samo oxplanation 15 
given as reemds “Lam” in tho Muludhaa, and the 
other Bijas in the other Chakras Tho more utlerance,! 
however, of “Ram” or any other Mantra is nothing but 
2 movement of the hps. When, however, the Mantra 
is “awwakoned”? (Prabuddha)—that is, when thore 1 


1The mind must in worship with form (Sacura) b) cor trol on tho 
Deity of Worship (Ishtadevaté), and in Youn on tho hyht fam (तकण 
mayarupa) 1४ is said, howover, thet moro repetition of wv Mantra 
without knowing its meaung will produce soma bonoht — "11110 sub‘out 
of natural Name 18 dealt with in iho Author s “ Garland of Lettois ” 

?Thonght is nut thea only वष the outor lve’ de wet tenet 
through its conscious contro. 


PHE GARIAN) OL TLILERS (YARNAMADA) 99 


Mantra-chaitanya (Mantra-cousciousness) then the Sadhaka >, 
can make the Mantta wok, hus in the caso cited the 
Vaikhan Shabda, through 1५ veliclg Dhyam, 14 tho houy 
of a powor of Consciousnoss which enables the Mantrm to 
becomo the Lord of [पठ Howove this may be, in all 
casos it is the creative thought which onsouls the uttered 
sound which works now m mans small magic, just as it 
first worked in the grand magical display ol tho World- 
creator. [hs thought way the aggregate, with creative 
power, of all thought. Lach man is Shiva, and can attain 
8 power to tho dogrov cf lus ability to consciously 
realise himsolf as such. = 10" various pr poses the Devatas 
ave invoked Mantra and Devaty are ono and the samo, 
A Mantia-Devata 13 Shabda and Artha, the forme: boing 
the name, and the lattor the Dovata whoso namo it is, By 
practico (Japa) with tho Mantra the presonco of the Dovata 
is invoked, Jupa or repolition of Mantra is compared to 
the action of a man shaking a sleeper to wake him up. 
Tho two lps aio Shiva and Shakti. Their movoment is the 
coition (Maithuna) of the two  Shabda which issuos thove- 
from is in tho natme of Scod or Bindu. ‘Tho Devatii thus 
produced is, ay it wore, the ‘son” of the Sadhake, It is 
not the Supreme Devat. (‘or it 1 actionloss) who appears, 
but in all casos an emanation produced by the Sidhaka for 
118 benefit only. {n the case of worshippers of Shiva a 
Boy-Shiva (Bila Slnva) appcars, who 18 then made strong 
by the nurture which tho Sidhaka gives to his eration, 
The occullist will understand all such symbolisin to mean 


1Some allan these powers through woiship (Upasana) of Agni 
Vetala, ५ Devayon: some of Agm Ilimself Tho formor process, 
which requnes 12000 Japs, is given in Shavive tania —[n the suno 
way ob acts are said to bo movod, thongh at a distance from tho oporntor, 
by the worship 2 Madhumui Davi. A हाल state of develop nent 
dispenses with all outer agents 

£. Saryya (San God) bo invoked, 1 ig an omanation which comes 
and then goes back to the sun, 


100 TUL SIX OFNIRLS पर) Tf SPROLNT तणा 


that the Dovata is a form of the consciousness of the puro 
Sidhaka which the latter arouses and strongthens, wi 
gains good thersby. T पत Ins consciousness which 
becomes the boy Shiva, and when strongthonod tho [प]. 
grown Divino power usolf. All Mantias avo in tho body as 
forms of consciousness (Vijnana-1fipa) When the Mantra 
18 fully practased it enlivons tho Sangskara, and the Artha 
appears to the mmd Mantras aro thus a form of the 
Sangskaia of Jivas, the Artha of which becomes manifest to 
the consciousness which is pure Tho essence of all this 18 
—concentrate and yvitaliso thought and will powor, But 
for such a purpose method 1s necessary nanoly, lan- 
guage and determined yanetics of practico according to 
the end sought. These, Mantiavidya (which explains what 
Mantra is) also enjoins. 

The causal state of Shabdats called Shabdabrahman— 
that is, the Brahman as tho causo of Shabda and Artha, 
The wunmanifost (Avyakta) powor or Shibda, which is 
the causo of manifested Shabda and Artha, upriyes on tho 
differentiation of tho Supreme Bin Iu from Prakriti in the 
form ot Bindu through tho provalonco of Kmyi Shaktit 
Avyakta Rava or Shabda (unmamiosiod sound) is the 
prmeiplo of sound as such (Nada-matra)—that is, un- 
differentiated sound nob speci vised in the form of leltors, 
but which is, through croativo activity, the cause of mani- 
fested Shabda and Artha® Jt is tho Brahman considered 
as all-pervading Shabda, undivided, unmani ested, whose 
substance 1s Nida and Bindu, the proximato ereative 


1 906 v 12 Sharada 
Kuyash vtipradhandy ah shabd whal dirt] a kira ant 
51 binduripmyah shabdalbahmabhavat puram 
Tn plan Englah this means, in offect, that incieasin,, arbivily m 
the Consciousness about to create (Bindu) produces that state in which 
it is the cause of subject and object as mind and matter 
*Tena shabdartharipa vishisht sya shabda-sbraliratyian wad a 
ritam (Pranetoshim, 13) 


UE CARIAND OL 111 [५ (VARNAY ५1१) 101 


impulse in Paashiva and proximate cause 0" manifested 
Shabda and Arthat It is the eternal partless Sphota? 
which is not digtinpuishad 1711.) Shahla and Artha, bat 196 
the Powor by which both oxist and ac known. Shabda- 
brahman is thus the kinotie ideating aspect of the unditter- 
entiatod Supreme Consciousness of plulosophy, and the 
Saguna Brahman of rchgion, It 15 Chit-shakti velnclod by 
undifferentiated Prakrili-shakti—that 15, tho creative 08" 
pect of the one Brahman who is both transcendent 
and formless (Nirguna), and immanent and with form 
{Saguna)? As the [athay: gapradipika says । “ What- 
ever 1५ heard in tho form of sound is Shakta. ‘Tho ab- 
soibod state (Laya) of the Lattvas (evolutes of Prakriti) 
is that m which no form exists.’ So long as there 1४ the 
notion of Ethor, so long is sound heard. The soundless 15 
called Parabrahman o1 Paramatma.’?® Shabdabiahman 
thus projocls itself or the purpose of croation into two sots 
of movemont—namely, firstly, the Shabda (with mental 

1980 Pranatoshi, p 10 Rughava Bhatia, Corim v 12, Ch f, 


Shanda, 

Sushiymimeakhe-p nam whisa pratha rollasamiatam akhando yy ak- 
to nadabindumayn ova vyyapako छि पो एतो को shabdah 

2 fphota, which is derived fvom Sphut, to opon (as a bud doos) 15 
that by which the pwtionlu meaning of words 15 10४८ भतत्‌ ‘Ihe letters 
singly, ९८५१५१५१ [कषठ aso ॥ 1 पवपव tbe ace nu saute ५८ Awad 
is not the thiig but that threugh which, whon ultorcd, there 1४ cogni 
tion of the thing thereby denitel ‘Lint which denotes tho thing 
denoted 1४ ad sclosmo (Sphoty) oliver tl परा theso letters १] 18 Sphotea 
is भण्‌ Shabda 

3 It 18 to be noted that of five Bhutw Akashy end Vaya bslonging 
to tho formless division (Amurtt.) aud the 191 ming three [८ the 
fovm division (Mintt1) ‘Che [५४ 1५4 sovsol by काणो ge Shibdvis 
vibration for the ८ प्र वत name Agni, tho hoad of {lo se ond division, 
is sensed as form (Ripa). Arthe is vibration to the eyo (mental or 
physical) aa form 

40h LV ५४, 101, 102 


4 Yotkinchin nidariipena shiiiyate shaktir ova si 
Yus taityanto mrakiiah se, ove pwameshvaah 

ठ Tayud wkishuangsalpo yavach chhabd पे pi cvactate 
Nihshabdam tatparam bit hma paramitmoti piyate 


102 1 SEX OLN IES AND LHD SDR ON | OWIR 


vibrations of cognition) which, pissing thi ough t1e vocal 
organs, become articulate sound; and, yocondly, Artha 
movements donoted by Shubda in the fo n of all things 
oonstitulmg the content ol min tand tho ob cet vo world. 
These tivo avo cman tions tro n the smo Gonscions Activity 
(Shakti) which 15 the Word (Vak or Logos), aud ao in 
consequenco essentily tho samo, TLlence tho ¢ mnoction 
between the two is permanent. [1 18 1m tho above sense 
that the univeiso is said to bo composed of tho looters, It 
is the hfty! lottors of tho Sanskril alphabet wluch are 
denoted by the garland of severed jiman heads which 
the naked* mothor, Kah, dark hke a threatening मणा 
cloud, wens as She stands amidst bones and carrion beasts 
and birds in the burning-giound on the white cor pso- 
hke (Shavarupa) body of Shiva. For it is She who 
slauglilers "—that is, withdraws all speech and its 
objects into Hersolf at tho time of tho disso ttion of 
all things (Mahipralaya).? Shabdabiahman is the con- 
sciousness (Chaitanya) wm all creatures, Tb asses the 
form of Kundah, and abides in the body 0" all broathing 
creatiues (Pram), manifesting ityolf by lebtors in the form 
of 1080 and verse. In tho soxual symbolisn of tho 
Shakia Tantras, seed (Bindu)” wsued upon tho rovorsed 


1 Somotimes given as fifty-one, 


2 Sho 14 80 pictured becanse Sho 1g hoyond Miya (Mayatila), she 
is the ‘Bewilderm of WW” by Hor Maya but is Uersolf (त्‌, evived 
thereby Ibis Kah symbolism 1५ oxpliumod in tho Svarupn vy Ukhya of 
the § Hymn to Kah (Kupwadi Stoliv) which | have published ay 
vol TX of Tantiik Texts 


१ The same symboliam is given in tho desomption of the [मपा in 
the Budd ust Demohog Tantra 


4 Chaitanyam sarvabhuia ing shab [प] vhimela mo मा 
Tat prapya kundaluupam कारक dobamad! yayam 
Varnatmanivirbhaval gadyapadyadi-bhedatah (Sharada 
Tilaka, Ch 1) 


5 The term Bindu also menus a drop as of aumen, 


1111 (तप्र) OF TILLERS (एतिन) ALA) 108 


anion of Mahakala and Mahakil, which seed, Liponing 
in the womb of Prakriti, issued as Kundalt in tho for n 
of the Jettors (Akshara), Kunde) as Mahamat गोमा 
damn has fitty-one coils, which aro the Mat: kus or subtle 
forms of tho gross lettors or Varna which 18 the Vaikhan 
form of tho Shabda at tho contres. Kundal when with 
one coil ig Bindu; with two, Praknti-Puusha; with three, 
the three Shaktus (Tehchha, Jnana, Kriya) ard three Gunas 
(Sattva, Rajas, Tamas); with tho three and a half She is 
then actually creative with Vikriti; with four She is tho 
Devi Lkajata, and so on to Shrmatrikotpattisundan with 
fifty-one coils Tn the body, unmanitested Parashabda 18 
in Kundali Shakti. That which first issues from it is in the 
lowest Chakia, and extencs upwards through tho rest as 
Pashyanti, Madhyama, and Vaikhar Shabda. When Shakti 
first “sees”! Sho ig Parama Kalu! in the mothor-form 
(Ambikarnipa), which is supromo speoch (Para vik) and 
supreme poaco (Parama म पा), She “ sces”? the manifest 
od Shabda fiom Pashyantt to Vukhar. ‘Tho Pashyanti) 
stato of Shabda is that in which Ichchha Shakti (Will) ir the 
form of a goad © (Angkushalcwa) is about to display tho 
universe, then in seod (Bia) form. This 14 tho Shakti 
Vami.” Madhyama Vak, which is Jn una (knowledge), and 


1Vipaiia mmihuna Shakt 14 above Shiva, ॥ 11 moving (1 and 
in cortion with fi because She is tho active wil Ifo the inert (णा ~ 
810081 0४१ 

> Shaktisanggema Tantra, first (ववम Utpatiikhanda When with 
ton co la Sho 1s tho well known Dashamuahavidy a 

3 Tho first movement m veiton called Ikshans (“sooitg ) पो 
Veda To 500 ix 10 ११९1०. 

4Paran w—supreme ot first  Kal& Vimarsha Shakir of Atma 
Sho is, a8 such, tho hrat caugo of all the 1८118 

Pashy पा Sho who‘ sees’ (Thshana). 

0 [०9 tho crooked lino (Vakrave sha) comog fast, and tho strmpht 

second. Possibly this may bu tho Imo rising to form tho triangulie 


pyramid, 
? ५0 enllod bocauso sho“ vomits foith tle universe (Vamanil 


viima it). 


104 UB SLX OLNIRES AND LUE SERPENP POW)! 


in form of a straight line (Rijmokha), 15 Jyesbtha Shakti. 
Here thero is tho first assumption of form as the Matmka 
(Matrikitvam upapanna), for horo i partic iat motion 
(Vishosha Spanda). ‘Tho Vaikiari stato is wnat of Kriya 
Shakta, who 1s tho Devi Raudm, whose lorm is tmangular ? 
and that of the wntyerse, As tho formor Sha स produces 
the subtle letters or Matvika which arc tho Vasana,’ so this 
last 13 the Shakti of the gross letters of wor Is and their 
objects? These letters १16 the garland o lhe Mothor 
wsuing from [Ter in [ना form as Kundal: Shakti, and 
absorbed by Her in the Kundahi-yoga here dosembed, 


1 Shringitaka that 1s, a tmangular pyramidal fgme of three 
dimensions 


„| 2 That 1s, Sangskara or revived impression which is tho seed of tho 
ideating Cosmic Consciousness. 


9 Yogihindaya Taunton, Sangheta I 


Vv 
THE CENTRES OR LOTUSES (CILAKRA, PADMA) 


A1 this stage wo aro in a position to pass to a consideration 
of the Chakras, which may shortly bo doscribed as subtle 
centres of operation in the body of the Shaktis or Powers 
ot the various ‘lattvas or Principles which constitute the 
bodily Sheaths. Thus the five lowor Chakra from Mula- 
dhara to Vishuddha aro certres of the Bln ta, or five forms 
of sensible mattor. The Ajni and other Chakras in tho 
region betweon it and tho Sahasrara avo centres of tho 
Tattvas constituting the mental sheaths, whilst the 
Sahasiaira or thousand-potalod lotus al tho top of tho brain, 
is the blissful abore of Parama Sliva-Shakti which is the 
stato of puro Consciousness, 

A description of Lho Chakras involves, m tho first place, 
an account of the Wostern anatomy and physiology ot the 
contral and sympathotic nervous systems; secondly, an 
account of the Tantrik noi vous sysiom and Chakras; and, 
lastly, tho correlation, so far ag that is possible, of tho two 
systems on the anuvlomieal and physiol gical side, for the 
rest is. im goneral peculiar (> Tantrik occullism 

The Tautitk theory tocarduig bic Gl akias and Salias- 
rira is ccncernod on the physiological side, ov Bhogayatana 
aspect, with tho contral spinal systom, comprising the brain 
or encophalon, contained within the skull, and tho spinal 


curd, coutsined within the vertebral column (Mei udenda), 
14 


- 106 HH SIX (द्वा 6 AND PHE SIRPEN? POWrR 


It 18 to be noted that, just as thoro are ive gontros 
(Chala as) hereinafter वरल तत्‌, the vertebral ¢) umn itself 
is divided into five regions, whic h comneneing from the 
lowost, aio the coccygei, comity छ ort inperteoor 
yvertobi ए, offen united together 1110 ouw bone called the 
coccyx, the sacral region, consishing 0 five ver ebiw uuilod 
together to lorm a single bone, tho sacruns the lumbar 
region, or region of tho loms, consisting of hye vertebra 3 
tho dorsal region, or 10011 of tho back, consists ig of Lwelve 
vertobras; and tho cervical region, or region ol tho neck, 
consisting of seven vettehna As exhubited by sogments, 
the cord shows different charactorstics in different regions, 
Ronghly speaking, these correspond to tho regions which 
are assigned to the govermrg conutol ५, the क दत्तान) 
Svadbishthana, Manipura, Anahata, and Vishuddha counties, 
or Chaktas ‘The central systom has rolation wib1 {ho 
periphery through tho thirty-ono spinal and twolve cranial 
nerves, which are both alforent and olforent or sensory wd 
77101491; arousing sensiion or stinmteating action, O° the 
cramal nerves, the last six uiso [10 the spind balb 
(medutla), and the other s"x, except the ol aetory and oplie 
norves, from the parts of tle brain just im ‘ont of the bulb. 
Writers of the Yoga and ‘Pantera schools uso the toru Nadi, 
by preference, or ne ves. They ५.५0, it has buon «id, 
mean cranial norves when they speak of Shiras, nover using 
the latter for arteries, as ॥५ done in the modical hteratiure! 
It must, however, bo noted that the Yoga Nadis are nob the 
ordinary material now ves, but subtler lines ol dnection along 
which the vital [01608 go. ‘The spinal no.ves, after bho oxit 
from the intervortobral foramina, onler into communication 

1 Dr Bro endranath Seal, p. 337, Appondiy to Picfosso. Benoy 
Kuma. Sarkars ‘ Positive Baecgiound of Indu Sociology. ‘Tho 
कणत Dhamant 15 also used for verve [८15 to bo noted, howovor, that 


the present work usey Shnas for other than cranial nerves, for iif 
it oalls Ida and Pingpals Nadig ov Shiras, 


WIE CLNERLS OR TOLUS 8 (GHA CRA, PADMA) 107 


with the gangliated cords o the sympathetic nervous 
system, which lie an cach side af tho vertobral column The 
spinal cord extends m tho case 0 imu trom the upper border 
of the atlas, bolow the cerebollum, passing into tne medulla, 
and finally opening into the fourth ventiele of the bran, 
and desconds to the second lumbar yortebia, where it tapors 
to a point, called the filua fenminal. T am told that 
recent microscopic investigations by Dr, Crmningham have 
disclosed the existence of nghly sensitive grey matter in 
the flum termanale which was lutherto thought to bo mere 
fibrous cord. ‘lus 18 0 importance, having regard to the 
position assignod to the Muladhava anc the Ser sent Power. 
It 18 continvec in this for a variable distance, and there 
ends blhudly. Within the bony cove~ing is the cord, which 
is a compound of grey and white brain mattor, the grey 
being the immer ol the two, the reverse ol the position m 
the encophalon. ‘Thc cord is drvided प्छ two symmetrical 
halves, which are connected togethor by a commissure in 
the centre of which there is a minute canal called the 
contral spinal canal (wherom is the Brabmanadi), whieh 18 
said to be the remnant ol tle hollow tube from which the 
cord and braun were developed! This canal contains 
cerebro-spinal fluid. “he ervey matter viewod longitudinally 
forms a column extending though the wholo longth of the 
cord, but the width is nob umform, There ave special 
enlargements in tho lumbar anc cervical regions which ao 
due mainly to the greater amount of grey matteo. in these 
situations, But Lhroughont tho whole cord tho grey matler 
18 specially abundant at the ‘unclions of tho spinal nerves, 
so that ५ necklace arrangement is visible, which 13 more 
apparent in tho lower vortebrates, corresponding to the 
ventral ganglionic chain of tho invertebrates.’ ‘Tho white 


1 Seo Ferrior’s * Functions of the Brain ’, 


21b,7. 


108 IU SIX GLNIRLS AND 111 ऽ गद [तषार 


matter consists of tracts 01 colunns of nerve 0010५. AL 
the upper border of 410 atlas, or fist corvical yortobra, (he 
spmal cord passes into the medulla oblongata below the 
corobelium. ‘Lhe ९6710 canal opens imo the ourth 
ventricle of the brain. ‘Tho corcbollum १५१५ deve opment 
of tha posterior wall of the hinder most of tho three primary 
dilatations of the ombiyonie corobro-spinal tube, the fourth 
ventiiclo constituting tho remnant of tho origimal cavity. 
Above this 18 the cerebrum, which with tho parts below 1 
is an onlarged and greatly modified uppor part of the 
cerebro-spmal neryous axis ‘The spinal cord as not merely 
a conductor between the perphery and the contres of 
sensation and volition, but is also an independent contre or 
group or centios. ‘Thero aro various contros 11 the spinal 
cord which, though to a considerable extent autonomons, is 
connected together with tho highor centres by the associat- 
ing and longitudinal tiacts of tho spinal cont! All the 
functions which are ascribed primauly to the spinal contres 
belong also in an ultimate songo to tho corobral contros. 
Similarly, all the * Lottors ”® which oxast disttibutod on the 
petals of tho 1०1१९08 oxist in the Srhasriie. ho contres 
influenco nob only the muscular combinations concornod 1n 
volitional movemonts, but also the tanctions of vascular 
innervation, secretion, and tho like, which lave their 
proximate centres in the spinal cord he corobral 
contres are said, howovor, ‘to control those functions only 
in reation with the mantfestations of volition, fooling, and 
emotion ; whereas tho spinal centres with tho subordinate 
sympathotio systom aro said to constitute tho mochansin 
of unconscious adaptation, in accordance with tho varying 
conditions of stimih which ato cssontial Lo the conlinned 
existence of tho orgamsm. ‘Tho Modulla, agam, 1 also 
both a path of communication belweon tho lugher contios 


1 See Tennicr’s  Vuactius s of the Brun,” p 80 


1 ध) OLNIRIS 0४ LOLISES (( AKRA, PADMA) 109 


aud the pe‘iphory and an indepct dent ललाप regulating 
tinctions of the greatest importiuce im the systen [413 
to bo noted that the uerve fibres which carry motor impulses 
desconding om tho bia to tu spin cot d CLOSS (0४७ 
rather suddenly from ono sxle to the other on their way 
through the spmal bulb (madulla), a fact which has been 
noted m the Tantras in the doseription of the Mukta 
Trryeni. ‘Ihe lattor is connected by numerous af’orent and 
efferont tracts with tho cerebellum and cerebral gangha. 
Above tho cerebellum 14 the cercbrum, tho activity of which 
18 ordinarily associated with conscious volition and ideation 
and the orgination ol voluntary movements. ‘The notion 
vf Consciousnoss, which 15 the intrespectave subject-matior 
ot psychology, must 101, howsver, be con‘ased with that of 
physiological function. here w thercfore no organ of 
consciousness, simply becanso “ Consciousness ” 14 not an 
organic concoption, and has nothmg to do with the phy- 
siological conception of onergy, whose inet intiospoctive 
sido it presents.’ Consciousnoss in isell is the Atma, 
Both mind and body, of which latter the brain is a part, are 
imperiech or yeiled exprossions 01 Consciousness, which im 
tho ५४६५ of body 18 $0 veiled that it has the appearance of 
uneonscionsnoss, The living brain 1s constituted 01 gross 
sensible matter (Mahabhit.a) 11.uged by Prina. te material 
has been woiked up so as to constilute a sitablo yoluclo 
for the expression of Consciousness in the lorm of Mind 
(Antahkarana). As Consciousnoss is not a property of the 
body, nother is it a more function of the brain ‘The fact 
that mental conscionsnoss is affected or disappoars with 
disorder of the brain provos the necessity of the latter for 
the oxpression of such consciousness, and not that con- 
sciousness is mhorent alone in brain or that it is the property 
of the samo, On each side of tho vortebral column there 
1 Auguste Porel’s “ Hygiono of Nerves and M ad,” 95 


110 110 छ CN RPS AND 11 ५ [ग OWLK 


as a cham ol gangha connected with nerve fi bro, called the 
sympathetic cord (Ida and Priggalt), extending ul the way 
from tho base of the sku] to the cocvyx. This 4 im com. 
munication with the spmal ecard. Lt 1s noteworthy that 
thore 18 1) the thoracic and lumbar regions a ganghon of 
each chain corvesponding with groal reg tarby to oach 
spinal nerve, thoigh in tho cervical rogion mary of them 
appear to bo missing; ind that cabra largo clusters of norv- 
ous structure ac to be found in [ 16 region of the heart, 
stomah, and lungs, tho regions governed oy the Anviita, 
Manipura, and Vishuddha, respectively, the threo up oer o 
the five Chakras heromaftot cescmbed. = 1) the sym. 
pathetic clan on each sido neryo fibros pass to tho yiscora 
of the abdomen and thoax. VTrom tose, uoryes are 
also givon off which pass back into the spinal nerves, and 
others which pass into some of tho cranial 161 ४९५, Lhose 
are thns distributed Lo the bloodyossels of the linabs, finnk, 
and other parts to which the spinal or cramal nerves 90, 
The sympathotic norvos chiolly carry impulses which govern 
the muscular tissue of Lho viscora anc the muscr lay cob 0" 
the small artenes of tho various taysnes — Tb is through 
the sympathetic that the tone of tho blood vessols 13 kept up 
by the action of tho vaso-motor contre im the spinal bulb, 
Tne sympatheric, owovor, dorives the inpulses wich it 
distributes from tho cential norvous syste n; these do nob 
arise im the sympathetic itself. Tie impulses पदमत Lrom 
the sjinal cord by the anterior roots ol bho sprial norves, 
and 1४88 though short branchos 1110 the svmpathctic 
chains, The work of tho sympathotie systoms controls an | 
influences the circulation, digestion, aud respiration, 

The anatomical arrangemont of the contra norvons 
system 18 excossively intricate, and the ovonta which 
take place in that tangle of 0916, cell and fibril, ave, on 

1 Soe foster and Shore's “ hysiology,” 206, 207 


TIL ५ 118 OR 1010519 ((॥14 ५।६॥५ 14 2014} 111 


the othor hand, (र्णा now almost unknown.! And sow 
has been admitted that m the description of the physiology 
of the contral nei vous system wo can as yob do litle more 
than 118८५ the paths by whieh impulses may pass betwoon 
one portion of the system and another, and from the 
anwtomical connections deduce, with more or less pro- 
babilty, the nate of the physiological nexus which its 
parts form with each othor and the rest o° the body.? In 
a general way, however, thcre may (it is said) be 1 ९९80118 
to supposo that thore mae nervous contres in the central 
system ielated m a special way to special mechanisms, 
sensory, 9061 01614, or motor, and that centies, such as the 
alloged gomito-spinal centre, for a given physiological 
action oxiss in a defimvo peruon of tho spmal cord = 1४ 
is the subtle aspect of snci conics as oxpressions of 
consciousness (Chaitanya) ombodied in various forms of 
Maya Shakti which is horo called Chakia, ‘Those aro 
related thro igh intermediate cond (लकल with tha gross 
ogwms of gonoration, inictuiition, digestion, cu diac action, 
and iospivation im allimato icletion with the पतु 
Svadhishth ua, Mampiua, Am hata, aud Vishuddha Chakias 
respectively, just ४8 tracts have bocn १५३१९०५ | in tho 
1111081 centios as boing in special, even 1 not exclusive, 
relation with various pereeplive, volitivuel, and uleative 
processes, 

With this short prelniinary in terms of modern 
Western physiology and anatomy, 1 pass to a doscpion 
of the Chakras and Nédis (nervos), and will then ondea- 
vour to correlate the two systens. 

Tho conduits of Piimk or vital forco ae the norves 
called Nadi, which are reckoned 10 oxist in thousands 1m the 


1 *Manual of Phystology,’ by G,N Stewart, 5th edition, p 657 
(1906) +. | 
9 1१५५, 


112 पृ, SIN (9119 AND LL SLR) NEO OWLE 


body. “As in tho leaf of tho Ashvattha 11८८ (1८५१ 
1९111044} there aro minute fibres, 80 1५ the ho ly permeated 
by Nadis.?! Nadi is sad m vy. 2 to be domvod trom the 
root rad, ov motion Tor hore tho Prana or t1’o Principle 
moves. The Bhutashuddh: Tantra spoaks of 72,000, the 
Prapanchasma Tantra of 800,000, and the Shiva Sang lite 
of 850,000; but of 1९०५, whatever be their total oxtont, 
only a limited number are of nuportance. Some are 
gross Nadis, such as the physical norves, voins, and 
artcries, known to medical science. But they aro not 
all of this gross or physical aud visible character. They 
exist, 1116 all else, in इर्य] forms, and ave known as 
Yoga Nadis, The lattor may bo deseribsd as subtle 
channels (Vivara) of Pianik or vital cnergy १0 Niidis 
are, ag stated, the conduits of Prana, Through them its 
solar and lunar currents run Could wo see them, the 
body would present the appearance of those maps which 
delincate tho various ocean currents. ‘They are the paths 
along which Piauashakti goes They thore'aie belong to 
the vital scionee as lifo-cloment, and not to the medical 
Shastra (Vaidyashastra). [माछ the impot.anco of the 
Sadhana, which consists of tho physical purification of the 
body aud its Nadis. Purity of body is nocossary if 
purity ५ mind is to bo gained m its oxveuded Manda sonso, 
Punfication of the Nidis is perhaps the chief fictor in 
tho preliminary stagos of this Yoga, tor just as their 
impurity impodes tho ascont of Kundali Shakti, thew punty 
facilitates 1. ‘hs is tho work of Prnniyama (५, post). 

Of these Nac is, the principal are fourteen, aud of those 
fourteon Ida, Pmggala, and Sushnmni, are the chief! = (21 
these three, again, Sishunma is tho groatost, and to a 


1Shandilya Up, Ch 1, whore the Nadis are givon and thon 
purifcation spoken 0 Dhyanabindu Up , ard as to Sushumna seo 
Man@alubial naw Up, Vast Bralimane 


1, OPNIRES OR 011 68 (CHAK tA, AMA) 113 


all others are subordinate; for by the power of Yoga 
(Yogabala) Prfina is mado to go through it, and, passing 
the Ghakiis, leave the body through tho Brahmaandhea, 
{८ is situate am tho वा bone: 3 Vie cetoro-spmal axis, {18 
Merudanda, or spinal column, im tho position assgned to 
ils 11101101 canal, and exten ls trom the basic plexus, the 
[शार centre ६४५ the Mualadbita, to the twolve- 
potallod lotus in the pericarp of the Sahsrava Padma, or 
thousand-pelalled Jotus, With tho fiery 10d “nmasik 
Sushumni i the lustrous Rayjasik Vay or Vajim: Nad, 
and within the lattor the palo neclar-dropping Suativik 
Chitra oy Chitrini. ‘Che (काण, of tho lattor is callod the 
Brahma Nids Cho first 1s said to bo fire-ltke (Valin 
gvavupa), the second sun-l’ce (Stryyasvarup ), and vie 
third moon-like (Chandasvarupi).! 1 1040 aro the thnco- 
fold aspect of the Shabdabrviman. ‘The oponing at the 
end of the Chiteini Nadi 1s callod tho door of Brahman 
(Brahinadviia), ‘or throvgh il tho Dove तपाता onters to 
ascond.? = [{ w along this last-montioned Nid, k iown as 
the Kula Maga and tho “ Royal Road,” that tho Shakti 
Kundahni is led m the process 1८1 ५५1५1 described, 
Ouisulo this norvo are the tv» Nadi, the palo Tdi or 
Shashi (Moon) and tho rod Pinggali ov Milina (Sun), which 
are connocled with tho allormate bicathing fom the ugne 
to tho Jolt 1104111] and ree versa.’ The first, which 14 


1116066 Sho is called im the Lat ta-sues mine (४ 106) Muladhe 
ramnbuyaridht, 116) Sun, and Moon uo aspoc » ¢f tho di कला पतप 
Paralindu or Kan 0 व्ह (v ante) Seo tho Ohapto o1 Sun, Moon and 
Vive in “Garland ( | lotteas”. 


2 he sun generally vapresants poison, and (6 mocn nectar (Shan- 
dilye Up, Gh 1) Both wero obtv ned ab tho ol wing of 6.10 ocean, 
aud represent tho npbuilding and dost wtiyo {01९0५ of Natur, 


3 Tho TT ndus hive long known that Ineathing 1५ done ६ 10 one 
nostri] for ५ porto cf timo and then ध rough the othor, In Pranty ama 
to mako the bioathing chango one प्म bis closxd But the sk Hod 
Yogi can shilt the brewhing at his will withont clos: ठ ५1 sh Lwith 


16 


11. [ SIX (८ षा ५ AND 41 Sk ON Powrh 


“feminine” (दषस प) and tho embodiment of neetar 
(Ame tavigralia), 1 on [1५ left; and the sceord, whial 1s 
® masculine,” as bemg im tic native o Radia (Randrat- 
mika), 18 on the right. They both indicate Mimo or Kua, 
and Sushunmi devours Salas Por om that path entry as 
made imto tumelessness. Tho three ae also known as 
Ganga (Idi) Yannn  (Pinggal), uid Sarasyat (नप 
shumnn), after the na nes of the {hice sacced rivers of haa 
The Muladhiva is the meeting-phice of tho threo rivers,” 
and lhenee 1 ca ed Yuk पाण्ट  Proceedmg rom. the 
Adhata lotus, they नाला वत fiom ught to 1311 ana Jolt to 
night, thus go ng round the lotuses According, to another 
account, their position 18 thal o two bows on either side of 
the spinal cord An Jndian med cal [लात्‌ telly ne that 
these 819 not discrepant accounts, but represent different 
positicns according as Ida and Pinggalt exist inside ण 
outside the spmal cord = When thoy rewh tho space 
between the oyohaws known ag the प्प Clakva, they 
ontet tho Sushvmni, making a platted knot of threo called 
Muktatrivent Tho three न Rivers,” which ave again un ted 
at this pomb, flow separately tharefrom, and or this reaso ) 
the Aina Chakia 25 called Muktatiiven A Got separation, 
the Nid which proceeded fom tho mpht testicle goos to 
tho left nostml, and thal from the le 6 tosticlo to the mght 
nostt1 Tt has beon said that the distinction mado betwoon 
the heating “Sun” and cooling “Moon” is that which 
oxisls between the posilive and nogative phases of tho samo 
subject-matter, positive and negative forces being prosout 
m overy form of activity TPinggali is thus, according to 
this view, the conduit of the positive solar current, and Ida 
of the negative lunar current There are also, we have 
gseon, interior solar and lunar Nidis m the flory Si shwmna 


his fingers At the moment of death breathing 1s through both nostrils 
at one and tho same time 


11 UBNIES OR TOLUSDS (म, PADMA) 115 


whore the two currents mecb.! These me all but merocosmic 
instances of the vaster system of cosime mattor, every 
portion of which 18 composed of the thrice Gunas (Tgu- 
nitmaka) and the thicelold Bindts, wh ch arc Sun, Moon, 
and 1110. 

As regards nerve (कात्‌ and ibres, cramal and spina 
161 ४७५, and the connected sympathotie nerves, Dr. Bio- 
jendranath Seal says “With tho wrilors on the Yoga, 
all tho Shiras, and such of the Dhamanis as aro not 
velucles of vital curient, motabohe पात्‌, lymph, chyle, 
or blood, aio ला क्स्‌ nerves, and proceed trom tho heat 
through tho spinal cord to tho cranium These cranial 
nerves includo pairs lor the larynx and the tongue, for 
the understanding and use of specch, for the raismg and 
lowering of the oyohds, fo. weeping, for the sonsations 
of the special senses, ote, a confused and unintelligent 
reproduction of Sushrute’s classification, Bult the cun- 
mevation of the spinal ठा ४८५ with (he connected sym- 
pathetic chain and gangha is a distinct unproyoment on 
the old anatomists,’”? 

{lo then continues: “Tho Sushunme is the conti ५ 
cord in the vertebral column (Bialmac aida or Morn), ‘The 
two chains of sympathetic ganglia on the loft and ught 
aro named Lda and Pinggalu respectively. The sympa- 
theta. norves have thei man connection with Sushum- 
na at the solu ploxus (Nibhi chakia), Of tho seven 
hundied nervo cords of the sympathetic spinal system 


1 Similarly, there ao three Nadis which m= Lutasadhena are wor- 
shipped in the Midanagma यद, C un dri, Sua Agnoyi, representing, 
the sun, moon, and fre 


४] 310, Appendix to Profcssor Snrkir's “ 051४6 Bickground of 
Indu Sociology, > subsequently published in lus “ Positive Sciences 
of the Ilmdus” ‘Tho author पाणण च plan which atte npis to (1९6 a 
vough idea of tho rolative position of the prmeipal norves of tho sym- 
pathotic sprnal system 


116 {UL AIX CINTRES AND ‘HL SERPENT POWT 2 


(sce Sangitaratnikara), the fourteen most important 
216 :1 

५] Sushumma, in the contral channel of the spinal 
cord. 2, Tda, (1५ left sympathetic chain, strc ching from 
under the left nostril to below tho left kidney in the form 
of a bent bow. 9. Pingeala, the corrosponding cham on 
the ght 4 पाप, the pudic nerve of the sacral plexus, 
to the left of tho spmal cord. 6. Gandhi, to the back 
of the left sympathetic chain, supposed to stretch from 
below tlic corner of tho left eye to the left leg. Té was 
evidently supposed that some nerves of the cervical ploxus 
came down throngh the spimal cord and joined on to the 
greal sciatic nerve of the sacral ploxus, 6. Tastijihva, 
to the front of the left sympathotic chain, stretching from 
below the corner of tho left eyo to tho groat toc of tho left 
foot, on the same supposition as before, Pathological 
facts were boheved to point to a spocial nerve connoction 
betweon tho oyos and the 1064, 7. Sarasvati, to the right 
of Sushumni, strotching np to the tonguo (the hypoglossal 
norves of the cervical ploxus) 8. Pusha, to the back of 
the right sympathetic chain, stretching fiom below tho 
corner of tho right eyo to the abdomen (a connocted chain 
of ccrvical and Inmbar nerves). ¢, Payasvini, betwoon 
Pisha and Sarasyati, anmenlar branch of the cervical plox as 
on the left 10, Sankhim, betweon Gindhir and Saras- 
vati, auricular branch of the corvical ploxus on tho leit. 
11. Yashasvini, to the front of tho right sympathehe 
chain, stretching from tho right thumb to the left log (the 
yadial nerve of the brachial plexus continued on to cortain 
branchos of the groat sciatic), 12. Viruni, the nerves 
of the sacral plexus, between Kuhiiand Yashasyim, rami y- 
ing over the lower trunk and limbs. 18, Vishvodari, the 
nerves of the lumbar plexus, between Kuhii and Dastijihvi, 

1 Some of these aie referred to in # ० prosent work . ६66 v. 1. 





PLATE 2. 


HI (देवाह OR TOLUSTIS (CHARRA, 1ADMA) 117 


ramifying over ४ 10 lower trunk and limbs. 14, Alambusha, 
the coerygeal nerves, proccoding from tho sacral yortobre 
to the urino-gonitary organs’?! 

The attvas in the body pervaded by Prana have 
celtam special centres of predominance aud influence 
therem, which are the Chakras (centies or circles or 
regions) or Padmas (lotuses) of which this work 1s a 
deseription, 

Inside the Meru, or spinal column, aro the six main 
centies of Tativik operation, called Chakras or Padmas, 
which ure the seats of Shakti, as the Sahasiara above 
is the abode of Shiva.2 ‘hese aro tho Muladhira, 
Svadinshthina, Mampma, Anahata, Vishuddha, and Ajna, 
which i the plysiwal body aro sud to havo thew corre- 
spondences in tho principal nerve plexuses and organs, 
commencing from what is possibly the sacro-coccygeal 
plexus to tho “space befwoen the oycbrows,” which 
some identify with tho pincal gland, the contre of the 
thir on spivitral eyo, anc others with the corebollam 
Tho Chakras’ thomselves are, however, as explained lator, 
contres of Consciousness (Chaitanya) as oxtremely subtle 
force (Shakti); but the gross regicns which aro brilt up 
by thew comsoned vibrations, which are subyect to thei 
influence, and with whieh Joosely and imaccnyratoly they 
ave sometimes identified, have boen said to be various 
plexuses in the trunk of the body and the lowe: cerebral 
centres mentioned, Tn the portion of the body below 
the Miuladhua ae the seven lower worlds, VPatila and 


PQitin, Sangthunrtuikera, Shlokas 144156, also the Yogarnava 
Tantia ‘Ths account has m puts Icon crilwiscd by on [वादा 
medical friond, who tells me thal it 18 m those parts influoneed too 
आलो hy Western physiology 

2Varaha Up, Ch V 

3 (5 Ch_V, एव्र Up and Dnyiuabinds Up, and Uh वा, 
Yogeundali Up 


118 111, SIN OLNIRLS ANY LIEB SPAT | POW UR 


others, together with the Shaktis which support ul in the 
11111४61 se 

The first centre, o. Muladhira Chakra, which is so 
called from its boing the root of Sushwnnn whore Kundal 
rests! 15 al tho place of ueeling of ८ ५ Kanda (1001 of al 
the Nadis) ard the Sushumia Nad, anc is 1) the region 
midway between tho gombals and the anus 1८1५ thus the 
centre of the body for men By this and जावा state- 
ments made as reguds the othor lotuses, 1b is not meant 
that the Giakia propor is in the एणा of the gross body 
doseribed, but that it 18 the subtle ocntic of that gross 
1001070, such contre existing am the spmal column which 
forms its axis, Tho reader must boar this observation in 
mind in the deseripfious of tho Chakras, or an crroneons 
notion will be formed of thom. ‘his crimson Mididhara 
1018 9 18 described ४५ ono of four pelals, tho Vrittis of 
which are tho four forms of bliss known as Paraminanda, 
Sahajananda, Yogananda, and Vranan a! On those four 
petals aro tho golcon lob as Vang (a), Shang (क), Siang 
(ष), and Sang (स) व्य letter in its Vankhar form isa 
gross manifestation of immer or subtle Shabda Ov the 
petals are figured tho lottors, which aro cach a Mantra, 
and ६५ such a Dovata. The petals aro configurations made 
by the position of tho Nudis at any particular conte, and 
are in themselves Pranashakt: manifested by [> पा पका in 


1 Derived fiom M ua (root) and Adl ara (support) 

2 Shandilya Up, Ch I wh or? also the contros for birds and other 
antmals are given, [n some (Kashnuy “Nadichahiy’) [तापात्‌ is 
represented above the position 1९८१ 111 the ‘ext 

$This and other Jotuses hug lead dow क्र पतह oxcopt when 
Kundali passes through thom, whon they turn upwards 

4 These Viittis or qualities (see post) denoting four forme of 1011986 
16 not given in the toxt hore translated, but in ‘‘wkilang carws Com 
mentary to the Mahaunvana Iantra 

5 In thie ard other (१९१३ meditation १९ dene from tho meht (Dak 
shimavartena) See ए 4, Shat-chakra nuiipana cited as SN 


धवा CONPRES OF 101८5 & (GOHARRA, ADMA) 119 


the living body. When tha Viyt depnits thoy coase to 
be manifost, act lettor a thus ५ patticulas Shabda ण 
Shakt: and a surrounding (Avarana) Doyati of [10 Princi- 
pal Devain wd 31५ Shakti o tho par [पौष (, ak a As 
Shaka they aro mani est पताति 0  Kundali, and an thew 
totaly ८014 tule Her क पकम body, for Kui lal 1५4 both 
light (Jyot'riiy ) and Mintry (Mantranay) Tho litter 
is the Sthula aspect of wlich Japa done, ^ 
the Sikshima aspect which 1s led up tom Yora, Then 
specific en tmoration and allocation denote tho dillerontia- 
tion ain the body o the tolal Shabda This votns is the 
centro o 116 yellow Prithiv , o> “oath”? Tittva, with its 
quadrangula Mandala, the B ya or Mantra ० ` which Tattve 
is Ting (@).! 

At this contre is (he Prt rivi (पार्‌ the Bija ol which 
is © Ca,” with Bindu or the Brahma-consciousnoss prosid- 
ing over this conbye 0 “ Lang” which is said to be the 
expression ing oss (क ता) sounc of the subUe sound 
mato by the vibration o the forces o this contic. So, 
again, tho subto ‘Teas Tattva and wy Bijy Rang is 19 the 
Manipura Chaka, and tho gross fire known as Vaishvi- 
nara woin the physical belly, which tho subtlo contre 
governs. ‘This Bra represents in terms of Mantra tho 
Yathva regnant al this cont‘e, and its essential activity. 
With tho symbolism used throughout this work, Bye 
is said Lo be soated on the elexhant Airiivaty, which is here 
located, This and the other animals figured in tho Chakras 
ave intondod to denolo the qualtios of tho ‘Tattyas 
there regnant. ‘hus, the olephant is emblematic of the 
strenpth, firmnoss, and solidity, o this Tattva 0 ' “Barth”. 
They are, further, the vehicles (Vahane) of the Dovatas 
thee, Thus in this Chakra (लाह 1s tho seed-mantra 


he former 1४ 


॥॥ 


Tho Dhysnabirda Up aasocintes tho क" ५ vith the नष Praoas 
Thus “ Gang ” 18 associaled with Vy ina 


120 THE SIX CLNIRES AND PHL SERINNI POWL? 


(Bija) of Tndva, whose vehicle is tho elephant Airavate. 
The Lovata of this centre 1s, according to the Text, the 
creative Brahmi, whose Shakti 13 Siiviti.! Toro also is 
the Shakti known as Dikin ,? who, as also the other 
Shaktis, Lalam and the 10५1, which follow, me the Shaktis 
of the Dhatus or bodily substances ? assigned to this and 
the other centres. Lere 18 the “ fomalo ” triangle or Yoni 
known as Traipura, which is tho Shaktipitha, m whieh is 
set the “male” Shivahngga known as Svayambhu, ol the 
shape and colour of a young leaf, reprosonting, as do all 
Devis and Devas, tho Maya-Shakti and Clut-Shakti, 
aspects of tho Brahman as manifestod in tho particular 
centres (vv 4-14), Tho Linggas aro four—Svayambhu, 
Bana, Hara, Para. According to tho Yoginthridaya Tantra ! 
(Ch 1), they are so called because thoy load to Olut, They 
are the Pithas, Kamarupa, and tho 10st becanso they 
reflect Chit (Chitsphurattidharatvit), ‘They aro Vrittis 
of Manas, Ahangkara, Buddhi, Chitia "90 tho frst three 
are asvigned caitam forms aud colours namoly, yellow, 
ved, white, {uangular, crcular;as also cortain Iettors 

namely, tho sixteen vowels, the consonants Ka to 
Ta (soft), and Tha to Sa. Para 14 formloss, colow- 
loss, and letterless, being the collectivity (Satasht) 
ot all letters in the form of 01184, ho Traipura is the 
counteiparé in the Jiva of the Kimakala of tho Salas- 
1474. The Dovi Kundalim, Iwninous as lightning, shining 
in the hollow of this lotus like a chain of brilliant lights, the 
World-bewilderor who maintains all broathing croatures,® 


1'Ths3 Groator is ealled Savita because 116 eres tos, 

2 Wlo, accoding to Sammohane Tantra, Ch IT, als as koopor of 
the door 

3 Viz, chylo blood, flesh, fat, hone muurow, see 

4Yogrmhmdiye Pantia Ch I 

$ See vy 49, 8 N 


LIL GHNINES OR LOLUSIS (CHAKRA, PADMA) 121 


hes asleep coiled three and a hall times? iound the Linga, 
covering with Her head the Brahmadvara ? 

The Svadhishth ma Chakra is the second lotus [10९९५ = 
ing upwards, and is, according to the commentary, so called 
after Sva or the Paam Lingam? Tt 18 a vermbon lotus 
ot six petals placed in the spinal contre of the rogion at the 
root of the genitals On these petals are the lettors like 
lightning Bang ब), Bhang (मै), Mang (म), Yang (य), Rang 
(र), Lang (कछ) “Water” (Ap) is the T'attva of this Chakra, 
which i known as tho white 1eg on of Varuna. Tho 
Tattwik Mandala is in the slape of a crescent moon 4 
(Ardhendurupalasitan) The Bija of wator (Varuna) 15 
“Vang”. This, the Varuna B ja, 1s scaled on a white 
Makma® with a noose in his hand, Han (Vishnu) and 
Rakim Shakti of fuious aspect, showing Ter tecth fiercely, 
are hore (vy 14—18). 

Above 11, ab the centre of tho region of the navel, 18 
the lotus Manipura (Nabhipadma), so called, according to 
tho Gautam ya ‘Tantra, because, owing to the presence of 
the fiory Tojas, 1b 18 lustrous as a gom (Man).$ It isa 
lotus of ton petals on which 816 the letters Dang (3), 
Dhang (8), Nang ज), Tang त), ‘hang (4), Dang (द), Dhang 
(a), Nang (नै), Pang (प), Pheng (क). ‘Mus is tho tien. 
gua iogion of tho ojas Tattva The trianglo has 

1 11086 correspond with the three ada half Bindus of whieh the 
Kubjiha Tantra speaks. Seo ante 
४ Untianca lo the Bushumna 


3 i'n another del nition sco Dhyanabmln Up, where all ilo 
Chiistas are named Another derivation 8 own abodo ’ of (9 पपात), 

{The dingian 4 or maa dalis gy ntbolie of t] o olements nro also giver, 
as here stuted im {16 lust chapter of the Shava li (1110 ce and in (9 
Vishvasara Tantra, crtel ab p 25 of bio Pr matoshinr with the escep- 
tion that according to the Vishvasus Tantrs the Mandala of waton 16 
not a crescont, but eight-cornored (Ashtasie), 

5 An animal like an alligato: See Plato 3 

9 Vor another derivation dorivad fom Sunaya worship, seo Com- 
mentary on the Lalita-S thasrar ama, ए\ 8b, 89, 

16 


122 {UE SIX CINTRES ANDO THE SER गने। (01८ 


throe Svasiikas ‘The red B ya ol firc, * Ratg,” is seat. 
ed on a 1am, the carrior of Agm, the [014 of Fire. 
Herc 18 the old red Rudia smearod with white ashes, and 
tho Shakta Lakin who w tho Dovaln o 11 + digestive 
contre 1s said to be “Jond o amnal fooc, and whose 
breasis are ruddy with the blood anc tab whieh drop 
from Her mouth”. Jalan and the othe speaal Shaktis 
of the centics here nuned are the Shaktis ({ tho Yor 
himself—that is, Shaktis ol the Dhatus ussigned to 
each ot his bodily centies, and concentration on this centie 
may involyo the satistaction ol the appetites of this Dovata 
The Shaktis of the lighor contios ate not meat-ertors 
From theso three centres the gioss दाते, waking body, 
18 evolved (vv “9-2 ) 

Next above the navol lotus (Nabhipadima) is the Aun- 
hata, in tho region of the heart, which 1s ved like a Ban- 
dhuka flower, and 1s go callod becauso iL is im | 11४ p aco 
that Munis hea that “sound (Anahala siabda) whieh 
comes withott the stukug o any two things togetha,” 
01 the “sounl” of tho Shabdabr परा पा) wuch is 1016 the 
Pulse o late Vor ab 1५ hore that the |) 111५011, (divatime) 
dwolls, Mus lotus 18 to be distinguished from the Tent 
Lotus of eight petals, wach 1५ reprosented m (he placo 
below it, where su mucou wos p ७८५ Patron Doity (पच 
devatu) 18 meditate! upon. (Seo Plato V.) = [ere ५ tho 
Tree which grants all desires (Kalpatait) andl tho jewclled 
altar (Manipitha) beneath 11 Ag tho Vishvasmne Tanta 
cited in the Prunatoshin says: “Shabdabrahmiwm 19 said 
to be Dova Sadashiva That Shabda 15 said {> be in the 
Anahutachakra, Anuhata is the eroat Chakra am the [त्वा 
of all boings. Ongkaa is sud to be (1610 im association 


with the three Gunas.”! Tho Mahasvachehhanda Tantra 
1p 10 
Shahbdabithinet tg prala sakshad devia sa १५] 1४१ 
Ana inteshn chacies it sit sh ४ त कृता प्क 


TU? (षणा 6 Ov LOLUSLS (CHAKRA, २40१५) 123 


says 1 “The givat ones declare that Tiy bhssful form, 
O Queen, manests in Auahata, and 1s experionced by the 
mind inward-turned of the Blessel Ones, whose hairs 
stand on end and whose eyes weep with joy? ‘This 1 a 
lotus otf ter petals with the vermilion Ietlots Kang क), 
Khang (ख), Gang (a), Ghang (3), Nzang (ड), Chang (ची; 
Chhang @), Jang (ज); Jhang (क्ष), Nyang (ai), Vang (), 
Thang @). ‘This is the cenlie of the Vayu Tattva 
According to ४, 22, the region of Vayu 1s six-cornored 
(that 1s, formed by two triangles, of whicl one 1s inverted), 
and 18 colom that of snoce by reason of its being 
surroundcd by masses of vapour? Tts Biya ^ Yang” 18 
seated on a black antelope which 19 noter for 115 fleetnoss, 
and 1९ the Vahana of “An” (Vayu), with its property of 
motion Here ave Isha, the Overlord of tla first three 
COhakras; the Shakti Kakini gailandca with human bones, 
whose “heart is softened by the diinking of पतल", and 
the Shakti in the form of an invertod triangle (Crikona), 
wherem is the golden Bona Sanga, “ joyous with a rush 
of desiro”? (Kumadgamollasita), and the Mangsa as Jiv- 
atm, like “the steady Hamo of a luup in a windless place” 
(vv. 22 27) Tho Atima is 8८ described boenuse just ag the 
flame is undisturbed by the wind, so the .\tma 1५ 1m itself 
unaffected by the motions of the word? 


Anahalang mahachakrang |imdaye ५६ २४१ माम) प 
Tatra onghara ttynkto gunatraya-sama vital 


1 (द्व्‌ by Bhiskaiarayas Cy m on Tiahta, vy 127, ot the t lo of 
the Dev as Nadaiupa md ir v 216 whore she 1s described ६५ Nada- 
1 [7 , referring also bo Yogimti d ङ ५ Lar tra 


2 According bo tho Slarida Ch f (aid to tle same effect Prapan 
chasira ‘Tnira) the colours o ६४०५ Bhitas ae as follows Akasha 
(ether) 18 transparent (sviehehln) Vajn (an) 18 blick (Kmshna) 
Agni (five) is red (Rakta), Ap (valer) is white (Sveta) and Prithive 
(earth) 1५ yellow (Pita). 


3-This steady, still, state 19 Uhal of tho Atma See Mandulalnah- 
mana Up, Biahmanas 1, I! 


124 [111 SIX CCN RES AND TH > hOUN OW CR 


Tho seventeenth verso of tho Anand lahat nentio is 
that tho Dovatus Vashin and others me (> be worshiy ped 
in tho two dasementoned Chace च, Vas मो ang ९११ 
aro aight in number! 

(1) Vashin, (2) Kumeshvan, (8) Modiu, (.) Vimdh, 
(5) Arnaia, (6) Jaymi, (7) Sarveshyan, and (8) Kil ot 
क्षा ‘These ave rospeetively the Prosidiig Dewacs o 
tho following eight gioups of lolttars; () अ to अ, 6 
letters; (2) क to इ, 5 letters; (8) च to ज, $ lettors; 
(4) z te ण, ¢ letters, (5) त to a, 9 lolte s; (0) प 
5 lettors; (7) य to a, 4 lollais; (8) @ lo wor ठ, 5 ७116, 

The other 00183 m ४ 17 of Anancasthar 1041 to 
the twelye Yog vis, who are (1) Vidyayog 1a, (2) Rechisa, 
(8) Mochika, (4) Ammta, (5) 1) pika, (6) mann, (7) ६] 1- 
yam, (8) Vyapim, (9) Medhi, (J0) Vyomaiupa, ( 1) चत्‌. 
dhirupa, and ( 2) Lakshnnyogin 

Theso twenty Deities (aght Vashinis aid tivelve Yooi- 
nis) ave to be wormpped m Manipuia and Anthate 
contres. In respect of Tus, the Gom ne ala or quotes a 
vorse ftom tho Puttimy uanyaka, and gives a doser ption 
of these Deities, their respective co ours, place, obt 

At tho spinal centro of tho rogion at the base of the 
throat (Kantha-m da) 14 che Vishaddha Chakra or Bh 
ratisthuna,’ with sixteen petals of ४ smoky purple hue, on 
which ६०५ tho sixtoon vowels with Bnduthecon that as, 
Ang (अ), Ang (आ), Ing (@), Ing (ई), Ung @), “ny ऊ) 
Ring (#), Ring ऋ, 11178 (@), liv ag (दे, Wng (ग), Aing (*), 
Ong (ओ), Aung (ओ), and tho two Inoathings Ang (ei), 
Ah (अः) According to the Devibhigwata (जा, 35), the 
Chakra 1s so called because tho diva is mio pire (Vie 
shuddha) by seoing tho Vangsa [1५10 is the contre of tle 


1 Pandit Aim ta Shastr’s Anwda shai pp {7 ˆ^ md fash 
tit of saw by A Avalur, ‘Wave of Biss’, 


? That is, abode of tho Devi of spoech 


25 


LUD लम पाड OR LOLUSIS (CHAKRA, PADMA) 1 


white arculat Akasha or Ether Tativa, the Brja of wh clas 
“lang”. Akasha 14 diessod im white and mounted on a 
wlito clepham. 115 Mandaw i 11 tlo form of a circle t 
५८५ 18 Sadashiva in his anc rogyne or Arddhanitshyara 
Murti, mm which half tle body 1 white and the other half 
gold. [167५ also is the white Shakti Shakim, whose form 
13 hght (Jyotihsvarupa), Tero, too, is the lunar reg on, “the 
gateway of the great hberation”. It 1s at tlus place that 
the Jnani ५ 8668 the threo forms of time”. (‘T'mkaladarshi), 
As all thmgs ao in tho Atma, the वृ प्रपा who has realised 
the Atma has seen thom (vv. 28-31). Above the Vishuddba, 
at the root of the palate, is a mmor Chakra called Lalant, 

2 in some ‘antias Kala Chakia, which 19 no. mentioned in 
the woiks here translated Tt 18 a1ed lotus with twelvo 
petals bearing the followmg Vritti or qualities: Shraddhe 
(faith), Santosha (contontment), Aparadha (sense of eivor), 
Dama (sclf-command), Mana (anger)? Snoha (affection)," 
Shuddhata (purity), Arati detachment), Sambhrama (rgit- 
ation),’ Urmmi (appotite).” (7. post) 

Before suummansing the previors desctrption, ib 1s to 
be here observed that the Gommentator Kilicharana 
states the principle of this Yoga to be that that which 18 
grosser is morged 11 ८५ that which is more subtle (Sthu- 
lanim sukshme layah) he grosser are lower in the 
body than the moie subtlo. Tho g1oss which are in and 


1 (१118 1१ sometimes represented as ५ ciecle with a namber o acts 
m it, for, as the Prapanchasara ‘Lantia sis, Ak isha his innumerable 
Sushna—that is, Chlidta, णा spacos botwoon its sabstane [॥ 1६ 
because of ts interstitial character th vt things oxisbin space 

४ 118 term is gonoially applied to ७०१ mising hotween tw> 
persons who aro attiched to ono anotl or, as man ind wile 

3 Usually understood as alftocto1 towuds those younger or lower 
than oneself 

{Through 1everenco or respect 

9 Qi it may 1101 to tle sy whieh are techmeuly called umm. ~ 
that is, hunger, thirs , sorrow ignoi ince (moha), decay, and doth 


126 1 SINGNRS AND ५१५ क्षि OW 


below the Mul clara or comceted with 1 प -(1) the 
Puthy: Tanmitra; (2) the Pooh Maubibhita, (3) the 
nostrils with their sense o smell, whch 14 the grossest 
of the sonses o knowledge (लया भात riya), and w 111५ 
tho quality (Guia) of the Prithivi ‘Tamm ting ard ( ) the 
feet, which ao the grossest 0 ` the senses 0 act on (Kar. 
mendriya), and “whieh have Poth (art ) for thow 
support”. TIere the nostuls ue classified as the grossest 
of the Jnunendmyas, because therem is tho scnse which 
perceives the quality (Guna) 0" smell 1 the grossest Tan. 
काव (Gandia), trom which is derivec the Prithiy Sthale 
Bhuta Thus the Jn nencayas live a elitior with tho 
Tanmitias tirough then Guns (qua ites), for the poreep- 
tion of which these sonses exast. In the caso, however, of 
the scnses of acon (Karmondriya), no sich relation 
appears to exist betwoon them and the Tum 11१५. Tn the 
order of successive merging or Laya, tho feet ocem 111 tho 
same grado as owth, hands inthe sane grade as witor, anus 
in the samo giace as fire, poms im tho sumo prade wsair, and 
mouth mm the same giade as other, not, apparently, because 
there + any direct relation botween arth ar | oet, wator and 
hands, fire and anus, aud so forth, but beeanso those organs 
are m tha same order of comparvive subtloly as oarth, 
water, and fire, and so forth, Tfands ave supposed to be 
subtler agents than foot, tho ans! a subtlor agent than the 
hands; the poms a subtlor agont thar the anus; and the 
mouth a subtler agent than 16 pons पनित 1s also the 
order 1 which these agents are sitiated in the bo ly, the 
hands coming second begu se thoy find theit place botweon 
the foeb and the anus when tho arms aro given their 
natura] vertical postion [bt is lo bo 1amembe ved in this 


TAT first mght this mgt apporr uot to bo go, bub (he mportaree 
ef the nuns in well know: to modi ua ports ity ५८1011१ hoy ug 
even piven mse to what has boon called a ५ Paycholagy of the anus” 


५ 


JW) (पर प्8 OR 101 ISHS (+र) PADI A) 127 


connection that the Tantras here follow the Sangkhya, and 
state the scheme of creation as it occurs also in the 
Varanas, according to which tho enancndriyas and Kar- 
mendriyas aud the ‘anmatias issue fiom ct ferent aspects 
of the throetold Ahangkua There is a relation between 
the sonses and tho ‘lanmatras in the created Jiva, according 
to the Vedanta, for the senses arc related to the Tanm itias, 
but the order, in that caye, in which the senses occur 18 
different from that given m this work. For, according to 
the Vedantik scheme, earth 18 related to the sense of smoll 
and penis; water Lo tho sense of taste and anus; fire to 
the sense of sight and feet, air to the 86186 of touch and 
hands, and ether to the sense of hearmg and mouth. 
Another explanation seemingly artificial, howevor, which 
has been given, is १५ follows: ‘Ihe fvet aro associatedt with 
“ Barth ” because the latter alone has the powor of support, 
and the ‘cob 10st on il. “ Wator ” 18 associate | with the 
hands because in dinking wate: tho hand is used. 11८ 
word Pani, which moans hand, 1s de rved from tho 1008 
Pa, to drink (Piyate anena 11 pam) = “ Fire”? 1s associated 
with the anus because what iw caten 1s consumed by fire 
an the stomach, ब त the resiaue is passed ont throvgh 
tho anus, whereby the body becories pure. “Ait”? 1५ 
associated with the penis beeause 111 procicalion the 
Jiyatma as Prana Vayu throws itsell owt throngh the 
ponis And so the Shruti says, “ Atma ifself is reborn 
in the son” (Atmi vai jiyate putrah) न Mthor” 
14 associated with tho mouth because by ihe mouth 
sound 1 uttered, which is the Guna (quality) of ether 
(Akasha). 

flitherto we have dealt with the cot iparatively 
pros, Tatbvas. According to this work, tho twenty 


128 1 8४ CLNIRES AND 1 SIREN 10४४1 ! 


10००९ Tattvas aro associated (1X5) ns in tle ollowing 
table : 


८९५५ ` ८५ १८८५१ can 
किरि (११८९५०१ batted 
1 Mludbaa (#्तो (sncll) unity Proluvi “ab va 


(uth) 110 च म ८1११ ef on Ht the 
Kani day vot fy 


Y Svadhosl thina ११७१५ (tists) Linmitia Ap प (४५41) to 
+ anonde ya (| taste (८ साका त्‌ा ya ८ 

1 १५१५ 
Manipiia १ 1 (० {) 14 ५ (८ 1५ balbyy (113) he 
rirendriy ५ of ५ङ्॥ Uy Ku कावा 1१५ of 

anus. 
| Arahita Sprsha (५५८ 1) Timm ta ४ १ ‘battva Cun) 
tho Jimenbiya | {0 ८] the Sunendi yi of 

८१५ 

3 Vishiddha Shitda (sound) lan 4611, Akas a Matty । {८11 


tle enancnday eo 1 दादु the Carmondiy ५ 
of moub) 

It will be observed that with cach of the clement is 
associated an o1gan of sensation (Jninendiya) vd action 
(Karmendiiya) In Chapter [1 of tho Prapanchasiua 
Tantia it 1 saudi: ^ (ल wom tle cars, aiv in tle skin, 
016 in the eye, water in the Longue, and earth in tho 
nostrils” The Karmondiiyas are posmbly ५0 arrangod 
because tho ‘Tattvas of Lhe respective contycs in whieh they 
are placed are, a3 abovo stated, of similar grades ol subtlety 
and giossness. As oxplainod below, crch class o ‘Tatlvas 
1s dissolved in the next ghor class, commoncing from the 
lowest and grossest centre, the Miladhua, So far the 
Tattvas have beon those of tho “matter” side o croation, 

Progress is next mado lo the Jast or Ajna Chalcra, in 
which are tho subtle Tattvas of Mind and Prakriti. Tho 
Chakra 1s so called becatso it is hore that the command 
(Ajni) of the Guru is reevived [rom above, It 1४ a lotus of 

1 The 1086 is a centre ab which soxual oxeilomont may bo wouse [91 


subdued Though tho roproductive o gan 1 higho. प) than the 
Muladbara, the sexual force proccods fron tle latter, 


111 OENIUES OR 0108 § (CHAKRA, 14 MA) 129 


two white petals belween the eyebrows, on wluch aro the 
white letters Hang (ह), and Kshang (क). = ‘Tus exhausts the 
hity ‘ettors {1 will have been o'ser voc twat there are hiby 
petals aud fifty lettors in the six Chakras [11 the [नात्र 
15 the great Mantra Om”, Lach Lotus has oither tivo 01 
four more petas than tho one immediately below it, wd 
tho number of the potals im the Vishuddha Chakra as the 
sum of tho preceding cifferences = 11५1० ate Para nashiva 
in the forin of Tlangsa (Langsa- upa), Siddhakaly, tie white 
[गता Shakti “elated by craughts of ambrosia,’ tho 
inverted tmangle or Yom (Tukona), aud the [tara Linga, 
ghimng like [1811171 184, which as set mat ‘The th ee Lingas 
aro the om the Miu ule, Ad पतव, via Wia Oni< as 
respectively , tor here at these throo Bial magtanthis the 
foree of May: Shakti ism great shiometh., Aad 11713 is the 
port at which cach of 1 1८ three groups of Pattya wsociated 
with fire, sun, and moon, converge! ‘Tho plirase + op ‘ning 
the doors” vo ७1५ Lo passage through ticse Granthi = 11५० 
in tho १, ब्‌ as the seat o tho subbe ‘attvas, प and 
Pracnti. Tho ormer 13 the Antvikarana woh Gunes 

nan oly, Budd 1, Ghitta, hang ca a and its prodaet Manis 
(sasangkalpavikalp ike). Commonly and shortly at is sud 
that Manas is tao "'ateva of tho Ani Gada As, However, 
it is tho mental contre, 1४ includes all tho aspects of mind 
above slated, and the Prakiiti whence they dumye, as also 
the Atma in the foun of the Prinaya (Om) its Biya [Tore 
the Atma (Antaralina) shines Justions lice a flume "16 
hght of this 1egiun makes yvisiblo all which is between she 
Mula and tho Brahmarandhra, Tho Yogi by contemplation 
of this lotus gains farther powers (तेता), aud becomes 
Advaiticharavacds (Momst). fm connection with tus Padma, 
the text (SN, ए. 36) explains how detachment is gainod 
through the Yoni Midw, V1 ऽ here that the ०६. at the 

TV post 
17 


1:30 Lt SN GNRS®AN?D I SIR ON OWL? 


time of death places his Prana, and (on er ters the supreme 
primordial Deva, the [पाया प (ancient) Parusha, “ who was 
५.06 the three worlds, and js know hy the Ve. min”, 
The same verse desetibes the mothod (Prinuropana- 
नरप). [om the last centio and te causal Prakriti is 
evolyed the subtle body which individually 1 known as 
aijasa, and collectively (that 1s, the Ishvare aspect) ay 
Fhranyaigarbl a, The latter tern is applied to the mani- 
testation of the Paramitmi in the Antahkarana; as 
chsplayod an Prina it 15 Sutratma; and when mamtfestod 
throug) these two veluclos withott differentiation at is 
known as the Antaryami . The Chakias ae tho bodily 
cenlies of the world of differentiated manifestation, with 
its gross and stbtle bodies arising from thou causal body, 
and its threefold plancs of consciousnoss in waking, sleep- 
ing, and dieamless slumber. 

Above the Ajna-chakia (vv. 82 89) there are the mino 
Chakras called Manas and Soma, not montioned 11 the toxta 
hore translated. ‘The Manas Chalaa is a lotus of six 
potals, on tho petals of which are (that is, which is the 
seat of) the sensations of hoaring, touch, sight, smell, 
taste, ind contrally initiated sonsations in dream and 
hallucination. Abovo this, agam, 19 the Soma Chakra, 
a lotus of sixtoen petals, with certain Vrittis which are 
detailed later Tn this region aro “tho house without 
support” (Niralainbapun), “whore Yogis seo tho radiant 
ishvara,” the sovon causal bodies (४, 39) which aro inter- 
mediate aspects of Ady& Shakti, the while twolve-potalled 
lotus by tho poricaip of the Sahasrita (vv. 82 39), in 
which twelve-potallod lotus is the A-ka-tha triangle, which 
surrounds the jowellod altar (Manipitha) on tho aslo of 
gems (Mamdvipa), seb in the Ocvan of Nectar,’ wth Bindu 

1V post 


2 {४ mental wors'up the jewolled alcar of vio L[shvadev ite is in णण 
aight-petuled lotus below Anahata (sco Plate V) ‘The Islo of Goma is 


111} GuNLIS OR LO USS (CHAKRA, PADMA) 181 


above and Nada below, and tho Kamakala triangle and the 
Guru of all, or Paramashiva. Above tus, agam, mm the 
pericarp, are the Reryya ana Chanure Mar Calas, tho Para- 
bindu surrounded by tho sixtconth and sevonteonth digits 
of the moon लाल In the Chandia Mandala thore 1s a 
triangle. Above tho Moon is Mahavayu, and then tho 
Brahmarandhra with Mahishangkhini, 

The twelve-petalled lotus and that which 1s connected 
with it is the special sub/ect of the shoit book Padukupan- 
chaka Stotra hore tianslated, which 13 a hymn by Shiva in 
praise of the ^ Fivefold Footstool,” with a commentary by 
Shn Kalicharana. The footstools aro variously classified 
as follows: According to the firs. clagsific.tion they are 
(1) Tho white twelve-polalled lotus in the pencarp of the 
Sahasrara lotus. = [1५10 there is (2) the inverted Tangle, 
the abode of Shakti callod ^ A-ka-tha ”. (3) The region of 
the alta: (Manipitha), on cach side ol which are Nada and 
Bindu The eternal Guru, “white hke a mountain of 
silvor,” should bo meditated upon, as on the dowelled 
Altar (Manipitha), (4) he fourth Paduka 1s the Tangsa 
below the Antariitmu; and (5) the Triangle on the निकी 
The differences between this and the second classification 
ave explained in tho notes 10 ए 7 of the Padik: = Accord. 
ing to this latter classification they are countcd as follows: 
(1) Tho twelvo-petalled lotus; (2) tho triangle called 
A-ka-tha; (8) Nada-Bindu; (4) tho Mampitha-Mandala ; 
and (5) the Hangsa, which makes tho triangular Kimakali. 
This Trianglo, the Suprome Tattva, is formed by tho thioe 
Bindus which the text calls (th mdra (Moon), Sinyya (Sun), 
and Vahni (Mire) Bindus, wlich are also known as Pra- 
kasha, Vamarsha, and Mishin Bindu This 1s the Tangsa 


a supreme state of Consciousness and tho Ocean of Nest u_ 5 tle 1 finite 
Consciousness [कु As tu thy wusd bodies so any 6 Culadl of 
Letters ’ ox“ Sindies in tho Mantia Shastia ” 


14४ भूर्‌ (१५ AND TE ५ हनन्त 10४11 


known as the triangular Kamacaa, the ombotimont o 
Purusha-Prakriti. ‘the ormer is the Bindu Thu gkira at 
the apex of tho triangio, ana tic uve of ce Bincus एषठ 
Visarga or Sa are Prakriti, ‘Mis Kimakeli is the Mila 
(root) of Mantra 

The Shabdabrahman with ats firectold aspect and 
onergies is represented in tle Tantias by this Kamakala, 
winch 5 the abode of Shakti (Abalalayam) = (1५ is the 
Sumeme Tangle, which, lice all Yonipthas, is inverted. 
lt may be here noted that Shakti is denoted by a triangle 
because of its threclold mamlestation as Will, Action, and 
Knowledge (Ichchh , Kriya, Jrany) 890, on the material 
plane, sf there ae thiee ०१८८५, there as no other way in 
which thay can bo brought to interact execpt in tho form 
of a triangle in which, whilo thoy are cach separate and 
distinct. fiom one another, thoy mo yet related to each 
other and form part of one whole At the cornors of the 
Triangle there ao two Bindus, and at the apex a simeglo 
Bindu Those aro the Bindus of Miro (Vahuibindu), Moon 
(Chand abindu), and Sun (Siryyabindu).! ‘Mhreo Shaktis 
emanate fiom those Bindus, donoted by the 1716५ joining the 
Bindus and thus forming a triangle. These Imes avo tho 
Ime of tho Shakti Var, the tine of Wo Shake» yoshtha, 
and the line of tho Shakti Randm hese Shaktis aro 
Volitior (Ichehhi), Action (Kriya), ard Cog ition (Jnana). 
With them ae Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, associated 
with the Gunas Rajas, Sattva, and amas 

The hnes of the triangle emuating [पको the threo 
Bindus or Hangsah ae ormod by forty-eight lotters of the 
alphabel. The sixteen vowels beginmng with A form one 

1The Kamakalavilasy says“ Binda try may ws tognaelvitayah 9 
(three Bndug and thiee fires) ` + Tiipurisn पतता sits in the Chakia 
which 13 composed of indus (Bindu naye chakio) Uer abode bemg the 


Jap ol Kimeshyma, whose forehead is adorned by the croseent moon 
She has {160 eyes, which aro Sun, Moon, and Me.” 


IHL OPN RS OR 1010१18 (CHAKRA, 1ADWA) 13; 


line; the sixteen consonants begimune with Ka tom the 
second line; and the following sixteen letters begmmng 
with Tha lorm the third hne = [6 ९५ tho tuanele is known 
as the A-ka-tha triangle. In tho 1aner three एता ला 0 
the tuangle are the remuning leblers Ha, Ula, Ksha. ‘The 
Yamala thus speaks of this abode, “F now spoak of 
Kamakala,” and, proceeding, says: “ She 18 tho eternal One 
who is the †1106 Bindus, the three Shaktis, and tho three 
Forms (Tumurti)” ‘The Brihat-Shii-krama, in dealing 
with Kamakala, says: ^ [पठा tho Bindu (that 1s, the 
Paiabindu) She has assumed the form of letters (Varna- 
vayavarupin).” ‘The Kah Urddhvanniya says. “The 
threefold Bindu (Tribindu) is the supreme ‘atova, and 
embodies in itself Brahma Vishnu, and Shiva’? Tho 
triangle which is composed of the letters has emanatod 
from the Bindu. 11030 letters are known as the Matiuka 
Varna, These form tho body of Kulakundahni? the 
Shabdabrahman, boing in thew Vaikham state various 
manifostations of the pumal umamfosted “sound” 
(Avyaktanada) 

Thoy appear as manifostod Shabda on the solf-division 
of tho Parabindu; for this self-division marks tho appear- 
anco of the difcrontratod तना, 

The com nentary on tho Padukipanchaka (v. 3) says 
that the Bindu is Parashakti itself, and its vamations are 
called Bindu, Nada, and Baja, or Sun, Moon, and Fire; 
Bindu, the sun, being red, and Nada, the noon, beng 
white? These form the Chinmaya or Anandamayakosha 


1 Tie Maheshvais Saighilé says “Stuyya, Chanta, md एषाम) 
ae the 11168 Bindis, and Biihma, Visl w atd Shiumbhn, ire tle 
three lines › 

2 The Kamikalavilasa says “1 “ep anchashadakshuatmi (She 
ig in the form of the 51 letters) Seo A Avalon’s odition and tins slation 
of this text, Vol 9 Tintmk 1०५1१ 

3 This appears to bo in conflict w th the previous statement of 
Raghava Bhatta, that Biidu is Moon and Nada the Suu 


1". 11 , SIX , NERIS AND TH ५.४१. OWL 


(Padukapanchaka, ४, त) ‘The two Bindus making the 
base ot the tuangie are the Visatga (2, ४.०} In tho 
Agamakalpaarama ats said: Tangara is Bina ur 
Purusha, anc Visaiga ५ Sah का Prakriti. Hangsar is the 
union of the ale ard female, «nd the universe 18 
Hangsah.” Tho tuang da Kimakali is thus formed by 
Hangsah (ab). The ITangsa-pitha is co nposod of Mantras 
(ib, ४. 6). 

Ag this subject is of great importance, some further 
authovities than those 1eforred to im the work hore tran- 
slated are given. Tn his commontuy toy 12 0 the Laliti, 
र whiel the Deviw aldressed as bee in the form o 
Kamakata (Kemakaturupa), Bh skew ariya says: Phere 
ae three पोत and the Iudhakah 07 these Biidus 
the first ए» called Kama, and the Naku iudha is namod 
Kala.”* [५ adds that the nature of Kamuatula is sot 
forth in tho Kimakalivilasa in the verses commoncing 
“Supreme Shakti (Para Shakti) is the mam ested union of 
Shiva aid Shakti in the form of sood and sprout,’ and 
ending with tho los न Kim (ineans) dosirabloness, and 
the Kala he samo Tho two Bindus we said to be the 
[ive and Moon” ® Kama, or croative Will, is both Shiva 
and Devi, and Kal. 18 thon manifestvion, Hence it is 
called Kamakalé. This is oxplained in the Trpurasiddhinta : 
५0 Parvat , Kali 18 the mamfostuion o Kameshvara and 
Kimeshvai Tlonce She 1s known as Kamakali”?!' Or 


1 Also called Hacarardha thu is, half the ५04५) [1४५ (द) > 


2 पात्र 19 (8 hardhakala cha ity atia prath iio 01 १त्‌ १1 तापी 
hhyash charama kui chviti pswyahmanyayonn k imakaloty uchyate 


¶ Tasyah svarup wy sph iashivishiké’-s imagem पापहा aviiping 
pare sha om aabhy: Kameh kamaniyatya kul cha dahanendnyi- 
giahan bindu ity tena nu काहु karinkalévilase bdr ipety wthah (१८.). 


4 Kamayoh kaletiva taduktang Cripurasiddha te 
‘Tasya kan eshvmakhyacya camos qv yas ९0, Pm yvati 
Kalakhya sala sa cha chyata hamakaleti sa 


PAE CENTRES 0, TOTUSIS (CHAKRA, PADVA) 135 


She 15 the manifestation (Kali) of desire (Kama)! that 1s, 
of वला) 1 Tle Kahka [urna says: Devi 19 callec 
Kama because Sic caine to ve secret p’ace on the blue peak 
of the great mountain (Kailasa) along with Mo fot tho sake 
of desire (Kama) thus Devi 18 called K ine As She is 
also the giver 0 fulfiller of desire, desiring, desirable, 
beautiful, restoring the body of Kama (Manmatha) anc 
destroying the body of Kima, hence She 14 called Kuma” 
After Shiva (with whom She is one) had destioyed Kama, 
when he sought by the instilment of passion to destroy 
His yoga; so She (with whom He is one) afterwards gavo 
a new body to the ^ Bodiess One” (Ananga). ‘They 
aestioy the worlds arc take them to thensclves throug] 
the cosmic yoga path, and again by Thor dosire and will 
(Ichchha) 1ecreate them. Theso Bindus and Kala aro 
referred to in the celohated Hy nn “ Waves of Bliss” 
(Anandalahari), atéributed to the groat Shingkarach wyya? 

This Devi is the grew Tmpurasundan. = Bhaskara- 
raya’s Guru Nrisinghiinandanatha wroto the followmg 
verse, on which the diserplo commentates : ^ [ hymn 
Trpura, the treasure of Kula,‘ who is red of beauty; Her 


1 Kamagh ohasaw तवोक्ता ipa cheti va 


2 Kamapadan itr i-vachyatayah Kalipi ran prawpad ma 
Kamarthim anata yasman mya sadhang mal ag rau 
Kamakhya prochyato dev; nilekuta ahogata 
Kamala comin kamyé kanta kdamanggaday int 
Kamitngea rashing yismat kamal ya tora kathyate 
Iti shadaksharamidang nama (ib ) 


3Mukhang bindarg ki'tva kuol aynyum adhis 1189 tadadho 
Hakaardhang dhyayet harunalush tc mwmathakalam (y, 19) 


(let him contemplate on the first Bindu as the face cf the Devi, 
and on the othe: two Bindns as [ठ two breasts, and bolow that on the 
half Ha) Tall ie is the केण the womb, aid omgin of all See 
uahita, २, 206, 

4Kulamdhi [mn us hiteal गक्ष sonse Kula means 1906 o 
family, bet has a namber of othe: meanings Siakti (Akula र Shiva), 
the spirttual hierarciy ot Gurus, the Milachaia, ८16 doctrine ot the 
Kaula Tantiiks, ete 


136 111 SIX CINIRLS AND HIP BLtt NE TOW 3 


hinbs ike unto those o Kamat 1, whois ado ed by tho 
threo Devatas! of the three Gunws; who the desire (or 
will) o Shiva ,? who ewe |]५ 11 tle Bunen and vho 1 1011)1- 
ests tio universe.” ~` ए ५ called (1५ the con nen ator 
ated)? Tripura as She bast tee ( 11} ) ५५ (ht, crlies), 
but, bere meamng Bindus, « igles, 11 ०९, sylablos, ete, 
Tle Kahki Prima says: She Tas three angles (11 the 
tuangular Yoni) as well ww 11166 cucles ( ] ५ th roc Bindus), 
and hor Bhupma! has three hnes. lor Mantia is sud to 
be of thice syllables,? and Sic has tuce aspects Phe 
Kundaln onc gy is also tuceloc, in ndor tat She nay 
create tho tree Gods (3 ihma, ४1011 , tudie). ‘Phos, 
since She the supreme encigy ws cyorywhere triple, She is 
called Laipurasundar 2% Phese sylhkubles arc sai by tie 
commentator list cited? te bs the thiee 1१५५ [1५ tlaice 
divisions (of the Panchudasn) क, Vigbhava, [६111111 
and Shakti, which accordiig to the Vamakes wars antia 


TVish vu, Boia 1 Rik (1५ Sibbva, [१ ५, nd 1! ५ 
(111101८५ respectively 
9 | [५ wo tbe (५1 neatubor’s 111 द ,, । dvdr fa fa 


॥11--0 A 011 1४ to tw +] \1 detrr ory “A? Tas 1110 wether 
mentings (ats + 191५1५४, 1 ५, vw nt pte the A cea tl तोधा 
20042) 111 Lac, | ॐ) 2) 112 a as Isa, + 1५४0) ) Dhabas 
tharcfore tle sporse of Say yar को ११९ ra tie cesie or will of ~ ४ 

Siibedsd 1, {6 , dte 

4'Lh potion of the पफ wh ho sol comioact om ud wid 
encloses tho pubealir d sign anits (लाति) | bofaacnco my, wenn, 
1150 be hore mece to the tee outer Lincs cf bo 116] ५९५ 

5V post Tle Kama [1 1 1५ Cling | Clinykart is Shiva dina 
Were In, 1९१5 the Kamivia im the ‘its ५५ thong which 
Moksha is gu 16}, ant herce the meu ng of b ५11 (८0 ४ 176) 
that he who hous the Bra without Kv ard tiv dowd not (रलो tho 
plico of the good actons that is he d os nol go to the region ibta’ned 
by good acéons, but to that utamablo by cnawledge alc ne (soo 7b, 
y. 189, ert nz Vamahoshvaia ‘ant a) 

© Otlor imstances ray he given, such as the [mpuranoa, which 
says that the Doyi is euled Tuspma becanse Slo dwolls i) tho threo 
Nadis (Sishumné Pinggala, ard fda ४ post) धा 10 Budidl i Manag 
Chitta (v post) 

१४. 177 


LL तदपा OR LOLUSLS (CITAKRA, PADMA) 137 


ave the Jninashakli which confers salvation, and the Kriya 
and Ichchha Shaktis, 

Thioe “ Pada” aro also spoken of as Tripar. white, 
red, and mixed.t Klsowhere, as in the Varaha Purana, 
the Devi 18 sad 10 have assumed thice forms white, 
red, and black: that is, the Supromo energy endowed 
with the Sativik, Rajasik, aid 'Tamasik qualities? The 
one Shakti becomes three to produce effects. 

Tn the Kamakala meditation (Dhyana) the threc 
Bindus and Tarddhakala are thought of as being the 
body of the Devi Tripurasundar. The Co nmentator on 
the verse of tho Ananda-Lahaii ciled says १ “ [0 the fifth 
sacrifice (Yaina) Jet the Sidhaka think of his Atma as in 
no wise different fiom, but as tho one only Shiva; and 
of the subtle thread-like Kundahmi which 18 all Shaktis, 
extonding trom the Adhara lotus to Paramasliva, Lot 
him think of the thee Bindus ag being in [er body 
(Lripurasundari), which Bindus indicate Ichchha, Kriya, 
Jnuna—Moon, Five, and Sun; Rajyas, Tamas, Sativa; 
Brahma, Rudia, Vishnu; and then Iet him meditate on 


the Clitkala who 18 Shakta bolow it ” 4 


1 According toa uote of R Ananta cuishna 8114811 ए, translator of Ue 
Labta, p 218, the three “feet ’ are expluned m another work of 
Bbascm aay. ५१५ fallawae Whte tho pre क. 9९1 (Consmananags) 
untunted by any Upadhis, 1९त्‌ the [राप ante (Supreme Individuality), 
the frst Viitt: (medificationy from tio Samvit wud the mixed the 
above mentioned as ono inseparable modi ication (the Viibtr) of “T*. 
These ave known as the “thee ‘esol (Cl arana-imtaya), or Indu 
{white), Agim (ved), Ravi (mixed) 

280 also the Devi Bha, witty Pi saya ‘he Shambhayiis white , 
Shrividya ied md Shy ena, blace, ‘The Yantra of Sliividya is the 
Shiichaksa rientioned 

3 Shanekarachary yigranthival: (Vol 10, 61 Shi Prasama 
Kuma a Shashi 416 cdilor’s netes are based on the Commentary of 
Achyutanauda Syvami 

4 Atha panchamayiige abhcdabnddhy ए atmanang s) var pam ekat 
maning vibhavya adi avat paramashivintang sutiarupang su cs imang 
kundali iug saivashaktu mang vibbivya sativaray ist unognnasuchak ug 
brahmavishrnushivash: Ltyktmas me suryagmrcherd a रपण bindulra 
yang tasya anggo vibhayya adhash ch tkalang dhyayct (Vomm to y 19) 


18 


138 THD SIX ULNIRLY AND HL SIdIPEN] POW! ? 


Tic Bindu which 14 the “tice” mdieates Virineh ? 
(Brahma) assoeated will the Rayas Guna The two 
Bindts which ave the “breasts”? and tpon whiss medita- 
tion should be done in tho heatt, md cate Hai? (शानो) 
and Hara? (Radia) associited with the ४ ५४1 ond TMimas 
Gunas. Bolow ther mccilate in the Yount णा the 
subtle Chitkala, whicl imdieates all tues Ginas, and 
which 15 all these three Devatas.' The meditation given 
in the Yogim artia is as follows. “Think ol threo 
Bindus above Kal, and thon Chat front these a young girl 
sixtoen years old springs ‘orth, shimng with (he heht of 
millon, of msing stus, iluainatimg every quarter of the 
firmament  hink of TIfer body trom crown 10 Uhroat 
as springing trom the upper Bindu, and that hor body 
from throat to middle, with 118 wo breasts and three belly 
Imes of boanty (Trivals), aise Srom the two Jowor Bindus. 
Then imagine that the 16५ of Mer body trom gemtals to 
foet is born from Kuma, ‘Thus formed, She is adored 
with al mannor of ornamonts and dross, and is adored by 
Brahmi, Isha, and Vishnu, “hen lot the Sadha ve think 
of his own body as such Kamakala? © ‘She Sty tatbviir- 
nave swys: “The glorious mon who worship in that body 
an Samarayya® ae freed from the waves of poison in 
the untraversable sea of the would (Sangsita).”? © 

!'Phat 18, We who eroates, hom ^ =220h 

2 He who tacos way ow dostroys (प्तप ) all grief and ar 


the sume 

MMikbing brdurg cobve अकुण्ठ पोष) पे, 1 vain कषा पसा 
पता कह mukbang kritva कक) पतत ha day sthane sit yatan cgi 
sichakag | प पि कद्र षटु कवार पत 6 = वात iyages, ka ba, 
tasyadhih 1. 1 1 buihnaya ad yn andig ai ysl 
mang bitkalayg lakdiadlag ity” yonuyantarg itil: (कामाना 
siitva dy. yot (2h ) 

5५७९ p 109, ef seg दि} tpt कोपयत्‌ at oy Jiganmolnr । Laka. 
langkara 

6'That ww ०८1६] fochng च bem now tl , homagencs y, yon 
of Shiva aid Shikt 


11 (८ Nth इ OR OFUSPS (CHAKRA, 14791) 189 


110 ithe same offect are the antuk works tho हष. 
rama? and Bhivachudamam’ citcd in the Commentary to 
the Ananda-Laham The frst says. “O% the threo 
Bindus, 0 Mistress of the Devas, let him conlemplate the 
first as the month and in tho heat the {wo Bindns as the 
two breasts. Then let him meditate upon tho subtle Kali 
Hakurardha in the Yom.’ And the second says: “ Tho 
face in the form of Bindi, and below twin breasts, and 
below them tho boauteous form of the Hakiridha’” The 
three Devalas Biahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, with their 
Shaktas, are saic to take birth trom the lotters A, U, M, 
of the Ongkma or Pranava.? Ma, as the Piapanchasara 
Tantra’ says, is the S..n or Atm. among the lottery, for tt 
is Bindu T'rom each of those ton Kalas arise 

Verse 8 of tho first werk translated says that in tho 
Mulidhara centro there 18 the Triangle (‘Trikona) known 
ag ‘Traipura, which 13 an adjective of Tripura — Tt 18 80 
called because of the presence of the Devi Tripura within 


1 Pathe cha Sliicrane 
Bindutrayasya deyesht p athim we devi vaktra sang 
Bindudvay aug slannc vandvang कपा sthane myojayet 
Taker fidhar g huang sul shmang yor imadhyo vichintayet 


2Laduktang Bhavachudunanan 
Mi charg 1५४ प्तृ् ह 
‘Lad idhah kuchayugmakam 
Tadid 11811614 hal aradhang 
Supatis skritim वन्न um 


The third live of this verse 18 also punted Iadadhsh saprrardhaug 
cha, But th’s means the same thing Sapara ax Ilacami, as Ha 
follows Sa Vor furtler Dt yaraa and mode of meditation see p 1 
of the Nityapuy paddhati of dJagann obana Tarkalang cara 


3 Phetkauim Tata Cl T 
Tobhya eva sumutpanna varna yo vishnn-shulindt 
Muctayah 9) aktisangyu sti achy ante tth kiamena tu 
And so also Vishvasa ए Tanti ए (see Pranatoshim, 10) 
Shivo hahmé tatha vishnmongkere cha pratishtitah 
Akash cha bhaved brahn a nkmal sachchidatmakah 
Ma cararnden ten. 9 1 1 वततत तोत Ipann 


4Qh If 


110 1117 SIN CLNLRIS ANY 1° S REN LOWER 


tho [६५ inside tho tangle ‘this Ka is the click [( (1८८८ 
the Kama Bra, and Kang! ५ the yu ol Kania, the 
aspecl of ‘Tripuasundart in the Muladhita Here also, as 
the same veiso says, thore mo tho thee lines Vana, 
dyeshtha, and Raudr, and, as tho Shatehak v-viveiti adds, 
Ichchha, Jnana, and Kriya. This tho Trapur. पप [काप 
is the gioss ov Sthila aspect o that subtle (Suleshina) 
Shakit which is below the Sahasrara, and as called 
Kamakalu, Ib 1s to this Kamin thatin worshp tho essence 
ot Japa (‘l'ojorupa apa) is of ered, the external , apa bomg 
offered to the Deval. worshipped in order that (ho Sidhaka 
may islam tho fruits o bis worshp.’ hore are also two 
other Lingas and ‘Miconas at the Anithata and (1५ 
centres, which are two of the Knols or Granthis, and which 
are so called becauso Maya is stions ab thoss points 01 
obstruction, ab which oach of the theo groups converge. 
The Trarpma Trkona 1s that, however, in the Milidhare 
which is the grossor coitespoidenco of the Camakali, 
which is tho rool (Mula) of all Mantvas bolow tho 
Sahasrira, and which, agar, is tho correspondence in diva 
of the Tribindn of Tshvara. 

Before, however, doaling in detail with the Sahastaa, 
the reader will find 1 conveniont to relor to the tables on 
pp. 148 and 141, which summarises some of tho details 
abovo givon up to and including the Sahasrua, 

In the deseviption ol tho Chakras given in this work, 
no mention 18 made ol tho moral and other que lilacs and 
things (Vitti) which aie assouatod with tho votes 1 
other books, such as tho Adhyitinaviveka, (० nmoncing 


TNibyapujapaddhal: p ०0, by Jag umoh ime dar cal agh ur 


263 p 117, Vol 11, of Tantiic Lexty where thal Commentary 1५ 
punted. 


3 Ni-yapujapaddhati, dee cit. 
4 Quoted in the Dipika to v. 7 of the Langsopamshad 


01 ON ५१५०, 1) $8 ( LAK tt, ^ 94) 14 


with tho root-lotus and जपा with the Sona Chakra. 
Thus, the Viittis, Prasl ava, Avishy wa, Ava u , Murebha, 
Sarvanasla, Cruratiy! ara assignod (o Syid nshthana; 
दध, Pshanala, [1 ज}, Trishni, Sishupti, जामा प्व, 
Kashiyea, Moha, Ghrina, Bhaya,* to tle Mampura, Asha, 
Chinta, Cheshta, Mamati, Dambha, Vikalata, Abangkara, 
Viveka, Jiolata, Kapatatt, Vitarka, Anutapa,? Kipa, 
Mriduta, Dhairyya, Vanagya, प, Sampat, Husya, 
Romancia, Vinaya. Dhyana, Susthirata, Gumblnryya, 
Udyama, Akshobha, Auduya, Hkagiata,! to the seevot 
bomachakra, and so forth In the Muladhua, which 
has been deserber as the “source of a massive pleastm- 
able asthosia,” there are the fom for us of bliss already 
mentioned; in the Vishuidha the seven subtle “ tones,” 
Nishada, Rishabha, Gandhara, Shadja, Madhyama, 
Dhaivata, Panchama; coitan Bias, Hung, Phat, Vaushat, 
Vashat, Svadhai, Svaha, Namah; am the ल्कः petal 
“venom,” and in tho sixtoonth “nectar”; and im the 
petals and pericarp o the Ajna tho threo Gunas, and in 
the former the Bijas tag and Kshang ; and im the six- 
petalled Manas Chakra above tho .Ajnu are Shabdajnia, 
Sparsha/nana, Rupa’nana, Aghianopalabdlu, 1] 
and Svapna, with thom opposites, denoting the yonsations 


'Oiednlity, suspicion, dislun delumon (01 disinchyation), inlaw 
huowledge (ht, dastruchio1 of overs thing ५ 11९] file + owledgo leads 
to), pil lossness 

2 Shame, treachary, ealonyy desire, 8 iprneness, svdness, worldiness, 
ignorance, nyersion (or disgust) fou 

3 {Topo care or पारक) or doavom, mineness (resulting im atier 
ment), arrogance or hypoorsy, soso of lingucr, egoism or धा 
congsit, discimimation covatousness, duplic ty, mdec ५ 01 tagret 

4Meroy, gontlonass pationco or composure, त्‌ spass on constency, 
prosperity (spiitual) cheerfulness rip ure or thi, humility or ser se 
of propmety, meditativouess, qmotude or rostialuess, gravity (ot 
demoeanou), enterpriso or o ml, omot onlossnoys (ben g wid aturbed 
by emotion), magnanimity cor cor tay ion 

5 Both were oxtracted at the chummy of tho ocean and, as 80 
spokan ol, represent tho dosti votive and upbuilding [५९९१ of the world. 


142 11 S\ ( NEES AN ५ ५११ OW, 


ol the sensowium— earng, 10८15 sig t, नाला, वि, and 
contral y imtiated sensations im dicam and hallucination 
Te "~ state? that partie dar Viittie ave assigned to e parti 
evar lotis, because o a connection betweon such Vitti 
aud the operation of tho Shaktis o the ॥ १1४८ at the 
contre to which 1 is assigned. कापा thoy oxist at any 
particular Ghakra 15 said to 20 shown by thoir dis ippear- 
ance whon Kuncar asconds through ti Chakra ng 
the bad Vritti of the lower Clactas pass away in the Yog. 
who raises Kundal above then 

Moral qrahbes (Viith) upper 1 somo of the ower 
Ohakras and 1 the scaret twolve-petallod 1011 ५ called the 
{च 81) (कात्‌ आरो sone ‘Sauties Kal) Chakra, ditiate above 
the Vishuddha, at the 100 of the palato (‘Talumiila), as 
also m the sixteon-petallec lotus above the Manas Chakra, 
and known as the Soma Chakra 1b 14 noteworthy that the 
Vritti ot the two lower Chakras (Svadhishthany und Mani- 
एप्प aro all bad; thoso of the Anahata centie ave mixed,! 
those of the Lalann Chakra aro predommantly good, and 
those of the Somachakra wholly so; thus indicative of an 
advane> as wo procesc ‘tom the lower to the [ष्काम 
contres, and this must bo so as (ho diva approachos or lives 
in Ins higher principlos. fn te twelveepetalled white 
lotus im the [नाला of the Sahasiiua 1४ the abodo ot 
Shakti, callod the Kai nakali, aloady desoribord. 

Betweer Ajnt and Sahasira, at the sew ol the 
Kaiana Slama of J va, ave the Varnavaluupy Viloma 
Shaktis, descending कका) Unmanm [५ Bineu Just as in 
the Ishvaia 0, cosine creation there are seven creative 
Shaktis tron Sakala Parameshyvara to Bindo, and in the 
microcosm or Jiva creation seven crealive Sh uktis rom 


146 ४ {1 Dambha (mioguce), Lolate (covotons est), Kapatata 
(dapheity) we feo Aska (bone), ul eshte (or duwvuur), Vivus ५ (cles 
erimination) 


PHF CLNERES OR 1010५18 (61141 1 ADMA) 


143 


...-----~~--~-----~-~--~-~--~~~--~-----~---------~------------------------------- 


AKIA 


Melpdhare 


Sv id 1161 
thay 


Mampue 


Ann sata 


Vishuddhe 


Aqua 





SIrlar On 


५} ॥ shock 
71८1) ho ow 
ge 11113 


Spoiler iced 
10610 1 above 
tho gon tis 


Sp ral contre of 
region of the 
naval 


Sp nal centro of 
logion 4 the 
hom 


Spinal contre of 
rogion of to 
throat 


(0011610 of region 
betwoon tho 
oyobiowa 


पि) ket 


८४ 


Pour 


12 


w 


L श्य्‌ 
ON 
SAW 


भ ६ 


ve ) 1 
na ya 
84 1 


५६५ ५॥ 
1 ta 

tha, di 

dla, ma 


"11 


11 1 oo, 
ga, gh 
igicly 
dary 
yaya 
iota 


{५ Woe 
४ ५1 

१ 1.५1 
Uh’ ९ 
a uw 
ang ॥ 


ha and 
ka? 


Re Nin oat \ 


६7) 1 ५ 
en ५ 
11111\ tohe 
819, ५ प्रो 


my 7५५ 2) 
areal 


Ap (०१1 ८ ८ 
१८1 1 iting 
sc seo tiste 


10] १,८९}) sa 
m ate ng heat 
148८ nulatiig 
१६६) ४ senso of 
40 madfom 


४५1 ae ou 
nevorort, 
abm lati g 


Be 90 at {on 


Ah soa, ५ 4 
ving stimu 
411) 80 ६८ # 
he ang 


Miwag Qc til 
f cali on) 


Gort 
(४ 
ATIVA 


Yow 


Woe 


Rea 


Si ohy 


Wh te 





410५0 tho Ajne 18 the causal region a त the Lolud ol: thousrad ८ 155 | oa the 


1 ttord, whoret: ig tho प de 


{tu S pone Bundt Pera \ 


144 


INL SIX CBONIRLS 










me pea] | a 1 \५।६ 
ANDI S 
VAL ANA 


Biv ani 1 ४ 
Vanant 


Mannars | (Ga trey) 


hqu ie Thang on 31५11 \ 
the (11 
Anwitt llangs 
ok )11 १४ 
Orescent | Vang cm एका (८) 


Mkit { ind 


Ran, ॥ ५ Ria a 


Print gh 
im णो] 


Sir-pou ted Yangon ११ Tah 
hexagon = ५1 (6101 ¢ 


Ore Thogon + dishiva 
w ite ole 
poiant 
On Sl ambl 7 


। 






0५ 


2) भा 


Roa 


Tika 


Kahin 


Sih 


Wiki 






brad 


14४ 


SI] ६।'} पि 


Lin a 
ANY 
Yont 


५\ 111. 
hawt 
"0111 ure 
T hor 


Bana nv 
11९0 y 


[ 110 and 
Tr hoy 









POWER 





११ ५ Larrys 
11 ५४ 
1 पणा ४६1 


(पवा \ (भन्‌) | ५८41 
anoll (orga ८ कय. 
Batt) fect (प of 
clic 1) 


Rasa (11५10) | ॥ ty 
tiste (agin of वणा. 
rt ६ n) + hand (orgar 
of etiat) 


Ripy (foe md cdour 
tush) Pattva, mpght 
(ag 9 ({ 81 101), 
aro (gun (1 act on) 


816 1 (teh cad 
fool) Lattva, — touol 
Cngrin of sor gation) 
pons (gry of पणा) 


Salty sound) Le brn; 
toring (०४४५१ of 
woravaom)y; 101 th 
(og ua of पणा) 


Mibu, the ५ hae 
191 ॥ | ५161 ( ॥1)64 
व प) 11 qv 62) 


"~~~ ५0१ 





(ede iS ; ) 


(च 
„| NY 
( | 
ey Ly) 
त ( 


| 


(व ^ 





( 
ध 
ह ee | | 


॥ 
‘ 
a ८ ry 
| + 
Mf 
YN (8 y 









PLATE 3 


IHN OENIRES OR 1010878 (LHAKRA, PADMA) 14 


Kundalim, who is in the Miladhara, to Bmdn, both ot 
which belong to what is called the Anuloma order :! so in 
the region boetwoen the Ajni Chakra and Sahasrara, which 
is tho seat of the causal bocy (K wana Shara) of Jiva, 
there ave sevon Shakuis, which, commencing with tho 
lowest, are Bindu (wlich is in Ishyvaia Tattva), Bodhim, 
Nada, Mahanada or Niadanta (in Sadakhya Tattva), 
Vyapika, Samam (Qn Shakti Tattva), and Onmam (in Shiva 
Tattva). Though these latter Shaktis have a cosme crea- 
tive aspect, they are not hore co-extensive with and 
present a different aspect from the latter. hoy are not 
co-extensive, because the last-mentioned Shaktis are, as 
here mentioned, Shaktis of the Jiva, Hangsa, Jiva or 
Kundah 18 but an infinitesimal part of tho Parabindu 
The latter is in the Sahasiara, or thousand-potalled lotus, 
the abode of Ishvara, who is Shiva-Shakti and 13 tho seat 
of the aggregate Kundah or diva. And 16100 it is said 
that all the letters aro hore tweutyfold (60 20= ,000). 
In tho Sahasrara are Parabindu, the supremo Nirvana 
Shakti, Navona Kala, Amakala,? and the fire of Nibodhiki. 
In the Parabindu is the empty void (Shunya) which is the 
supreme Nirguna Shiva. 

Another difference is to be found in the aspect of the 
Shaktis, Whilst the cosmio creativo Shaktis are looking 
outwards and forwards (Unmukhi), the Shaktis abovo the 
Ajnai are, in Yoga, looking backwards towards dissolution. 
The Ishvara of tho Sahasrira is not then the creative 

1That is, the ordinary as opposed to tho reversed (viloma) order, 
Thus, to read the alphabet as A to 4 is anuloma, to rend at backwards, 
¢ to A, is viloma, In the above mat.or therefore प्रकते is cieation 


(smshl1) oy the forwaid movemont, and viloma (nivittli) the path of 
letuin, 

28eo my Geland of Letters छा ‹ Studies in Mantra Shastia ’: 
“Qansal Shaktis of the Pranaya ” 

3 806 my Gailand of Letloa 0 “Studies mm Mantin Shasiva +, 
‘ Kalas of the Shaktis,” 


19 


147 JH). SIS OLNIRLS AND IT) § ROLN COW UR 


aspect of Tshvaia ‘There [५ is in the Nuvana imoac, 
and the Shaktis leadmg up to Nitvana Shakti are ^ upward 
moving ”—that is, hberating Shaktis of tho Jiva. 

Those seven statcs or aspects of Bindumayaparashakt 
(8. N, v.40) leading up to Uninant, which are described 
in this and other Tantrik books, are called causal forms 
(Karanarupa). The commentary to the Lalit! apparently 
enumerates eight, bné this seems 10 be due to a imstake, 
Shakti and Vyapika boing rogaded as distinct Shaktis in- 
stead of differmg names for tho third of this series of Shaktis, 

Below Visarga (which is the upper part of the Brahma- 
randhra, in the situation of the ‘ontenelle) and tho exit 
of Shangkhin: Nadi 1s the Suprome White (01, as somo call 
it, variegated) Jotus of a thousand petals (S8.N , vv, 40—49), 
known as the Sahasrara, on which aro all tho lotters of the 
Sanskrit alphabel, omitting according to somo the Vaidik 
Lakaia, and according to others Ksha Those aro re 
peated twenty times to make the 1,000, and are read from 
boginning to end (Auuloma), going round the Lotus from 
right to loft. [foro is Mahiviyu and the Qhandraman- 
dala, in which is tho Supromo Bindu (0), “which is 
seived in secret by ul the Devas”. Bindu as such im- 
plies Guna, but it also moans the void of space, and in ity 
application to the Supreme Light, which is tormtoss, 18 
symbolical of its decaylessness. ‘This subtle Shunya (Von), 
which 1s the Atma of all boing (Sarvvitmu), is spoken 
of m 8.N,, vv. {2—49 [196 in tho region of the Supreme 
Lotus is the Guru, the Supreme Shiva [फन्‌ [10766 
the Shaivas call it Shivasthana, [60 of all lusion, and 
the abode of bliss where the Atmn is reahsed. Lore, too, 
is tho Supreme Nirvina Shakti, the Shakti in the Para- 
binds, and the Mother of all the three worlds. Ile who 
has truly and fully known tho Sahastira is not reborn in 

1V 12], Lalti-Sahasianama. 


HU 0119 OR TOLUSLS (ना) TADMA) 147 


the Sangsara, for he has by such knowledge ए ग्य all the 
bonds which held lim toit. Ths earthly stay 1s hmuitod to 
the working out of the Kaima already commenced and not 
exhausted. We 18 tho possessor of all Siddhi, is hberated 
though livmg (Jivanmukta), and attains bodiless libera- 
tion (Moksha), or Videha Kaivalya, on tho dissolution of 
1118 physical body. 

In the fourteenth verso and commentary thereon ot 
the Anandalahari the Deity in the Sahasrara 18 descnbed. 1 

“She is above all the Tattvas. very one of tho six 
contres represents a ‘Tattva. Mvery Tattva has a definite 
number of rays. ‘Che six centres, or Chakras, are divided 
mto three groups. Mach of these groups has a knot or 
apex where converge tho Chakras that constitute that 
group. The names of the groups are derived from those 
of the Presiding Deities. The following table clearly 
puts the above: 








ere Naw No cr x NAM 
AMF OF Rirp AMA OL (1 Oon- 
Now! “Ona cra ace ov Gnovr VUNGING Tem anes 
TALvaA Pont 
1) Mulidhata Bu 66 Agm:- Rudia [In Sabamua the 
2 | Svadhish- Agri 62 Kanda granthi 1138 ५10 nun 
¢ ५५५५१ ७1 ५७५ of tou 
and un imited 
by spaco. 
4) Manipura Apna 62 Snyi Vishnu- | There 18 another 
4 |  Anchata Vayu Gt y grinth Ohondra her) 
whose tays ae 
count oss and 
& | Vishuddhi Akusha 72) Ghats Bial mie 0४८1 -8]1111 ig 


Manas 615 granthi 


6 १.1 














1809 Pandit R (पवा Shastm’s Anandalahari p 42 et seq The 
passage within quotation marks is taken from that work 


8५6 Wave of Bhs,” by A Avalon 


| 18 || SIN CEN ¢ S$ AND JUL SP घ प्रि OWLR 


 Lakshinidhare quotes the Till । yarany vk yin support 
of his commentary, ftom wlich we have bacon the 1 ofes 
wbove हषा, Mhoesttacls which hem ukos rom ‹ Bharava 
Yiime la’ aro very valuable, In ciseoursing about Chandra, 
Shiva addresses (vy. 117, Chindiajninavidy wprakaran 1) 
Parvati, his consort, (1 ४ 

“*Woleome, O Beauly of the threo worlds, wel- 
como 18 Thy question. ‘his knowledge (which I am 
about to disclose) is the secret of secicis, and T 
have not imparted u to anyono Ul now. “(Bulb T shall 
now toll theo the grand gseetct. Liston, then, with 
attention’ :) 

“Shr chakia (in tho Sahara) is the form of Para- 
shakt) In the mddle of this Chacia wa place called 
Baindava, whero she, who is १०४५ all ‘alt vas, rests united 
with Iler Lord Sadashiva. O Supremo Ono, the whole 
Cosmos 13 a Shrichakra formed of tho twonty-five Tattyas 
—5 clomonts+5 Tanmatyas+10 In imyas-+ Mind + Maya, 
Shaddhavidyu, Mahosha, and Sadishivat Just as itay in 
Sahasrara, 80 cosmeally, also, Baindava 1५ abovo all 
Tatbvas. Devi, the canse ol tho creation, protection, and 
destruction, of tho universe, 10818 11010 over mitod with 
Sadashiva, who as wall 1s above all Talt vas and ovet-shining 
Uneountable aro the rays that wsue torth from 1161 body ; 
O good one, they emanate in thorsands, laces—nay, ००१७६. 
But for this light there would bo no light at all in the 
universe , . , 360 of thogo rays alumino the world in 
the form of Tire, Sun, and Moon, ‘Those 830 rays mo 
made up as follows: Agm (Fue) (18, Sun 100, Moon 136 
O Shankar, those three lummavios onhghten tho macrocosm 
as एण्‌] as the uncrocogm, and give 1156 to tho cal- 
culation of timo—the Sun for tho day, the Moon for tho 


1 Maya to Sadashiva aio the Shiva Lattvas doacibed m the Intro- 
duction A A 


IND GLNLRIS OR TO USLS (OMAKRA, 1 भध) 149 


might, Agm (Fre) oceupymg a mean position between the 
two.’! 

© Teneo they constitnte (or are called) K ila (time), and 
the 860 days (vays) makoa yea. The Vela says: ‘The 
year itself 1४ च 101 1 of the Lord. The Lord o time, the 
Maker of the world, first ctcated Marchi (rays), ete, the 
Mnunis, the protectors of tho wold, Hyerything has come 
to exist by the command of Parameshvari’ 

“Dindima takes a quite different view of this verse 
He interprets il 98 meaning that, having already described 
the Antaryiga (mne: worship), the author recommends hure 
the worship of the Avarana Devatis ६.८५.) Deities residing in 
each of tho Chakras or centres without propitiating whom 
if 13 impossible lor the practitiouer ta Icad the iundalnt 
through theso Chakras. JIv enumerates all the 860 Deities 
and describes the moce ot worshipping cach of them, 

“There are other commontators who understand the 
360 iays egoterically, and connect the samo with the 860 
days of tho your, and also with the human body, Tvory 
commentator quotes tho Taittariynranyaka, first chapter, 
to support his viows. ‘Thus it sooms that Taittaryaranyake 
contains much esoteric matter 01 the mystic to digost, 
The first chapter of the Aranyaka referred to 14 chanted im 
worshipping the Sun. It is caliod Aranam vecenso it 
treats of Aruna (red-coloured Devi).” ४ 

An Indian physician and Sanskritist has expressed the 
opinion that boltor anatomy 18 given in the ‘Tantras than 
in the puvely medical works of the Lhndus [| 1५ easier, 
howevor, Lo give a statement of the present and anciont 


1 See Wave of Bliss,” ed A Avalon 
+ 2 Pp 42—45 of Pandit Anauta shaste’s Anendalahan 

31 BD Bisa, of the 1 dian Medteal Servieo, in 115 11140 Uasay 
on the Hindu System of Mediome published in the Guy's Uosplal 
Gazette (1889) cited in Vol. XVI. “Sacrod 1०0 ९७ of the IMindus.’ by 
Professor Bonoy Kumar Sm kat 


150 1 &\ OLN 2S AND Sun (ष 


physio ogy than to co olate tiom Indeed, (his 1५ tor 
the prosont a difheull mattor. In the fist place, the 
materi as iceards the latter is 1151 fhictontly available 
and known to us, and {1040 native scholars anc Siwdhakas 
(nowadays, probably, nol numerous) who aro acquainted 
with the subject are not conversant with Wostcrn physio- 
logy, with which it is to be compared. Lb 1५, further, 
possiblo to be pracheally acquambtod with this Yoga 
without knowmy its physiological relations, a knowledge 
of which 15 not so important as 14 sumcfunes supposed. 
Working in what is an unexplored fol, fear only hore 
put forward, on the lines of tho (एत and such informa- 
tion as J have gatiored, explanations and suggestions 
which must in some cases be of a tontative cl aractor, 1 the 
hope that they may bo followed up and testod by others. 
It 18 clear that the Mo.udancda 18 the vertobral column, 
which as the axis of the body 18 supposed to boar the 
samo relation to 16 as doos Mount Moru to the euth 1 
extends fiom the Mula (root) or Muladhara to tho neck. 
Tt and tho connected uppor tracts, spinal bulb, corebollum, 
and tho hke, conlain what has beon dascribsd as the 
contra] system of spinal uorves (Nadi) and cranial nerves 
(Shiro-nadi). The Sushtmna, which is undcubtedly a 
Nadi within the vertobral column, and as such 1५ well 
doseribed by the books as the principal of all the Nid, 
runs along the longth of tho Morudanda, ay does the 
spinal cord of Western physiology, if we inolude thore- 
with the jilum termunale, TE wo include tho filum, and 
tako the Kanda to be botweon the anus and penis, it 
starts from practically tho same (sacro-coceygcal) region, 
the Mfladhara, and is spokon of as extending to the 
region of the Brahmarandhra,! or to a point bolow the 


‘Sanmehuue “antra, 11, 7, छथ, woody to the Ti Ipuriisarasa- 
muchoh ya, cited in ४, 1, fiom tho head to the Adhara. 


TOD CINIRES OR 101 एश > (६२, 9) 151 


twelve petalled lotus (ए 1)—that is, at a spot below but 
close to the Sahasrara, or cerebellam, whore the uerve 
Chirini also ends ‘Tue poswior of tie Kanca 3s that 
stated in {118 work (ए, |) [tb is to be noted, however, 
that according to the Hathayogapiadimka the Kanda 1s 
higher up, betweon the penis and the navel.’ The place 
of the union of Sushumna and Kanda is known as the 
“Knot” (Granthisthana), and the petals of the Mula 
lotus are on four sides of this (४, 4), It is in this Su- 
shumma (whatever for the moment we take it to be) that 
thee are the centres of Prana Shakti which ate callod 
Chakras or Lotuses The spimal cord ends blindly in tho 
jilum termumal’, and is apparently closed there, ‘the 
Sushumna is said to be closed at its base, called the 
“gate of Brahman” (Brahmadvara), until, by Yoga, 
Kundali inakes its way through it. The lighest of tho six 
centres called Chakra in the Sushumna is the Ajna, a 
position which corresponds frontally with the space 
between tho oycbrows (Bhriimadhya), and at the back 
with the pineal gland, tho pituitary body, and tho Lop of 
the cerebellum. Close by it is the Chakra called Lalani, 
andin some antras Kale Chakra, which is situate at the 
root of—that 18, iust above -the palate (‘T.Jumula), [४8 
position as well as the natue of the Ajna would indicate 
that it is shghtly below the latter? The Sushumnn passes 
into tho vontricles of the brain, as does the spinal cord, 
which enters the fourth ventricle. 

Above the Lalana aro the Ajni Chakra with its two 
lobes and the Manas Chakra with its six lobos, which it 
has been suggested are ropresonted im the physical body 

1V post. 

2 And not, as I wrote in the Introduction to the Wildimirvana 
Tantra, p Ixn, nbove it On further consider ion, I think the position 
as stated in the toat is cotrect though in any caso tho two are very 
close togethor 


152 111 SIN CPNIRLS AND "ID SaRPrN | OW te 


by the Corebollum and Sonsorum respectively. The 
Soma Chakia above this, with is sixloon “ potals,” has 
beon said to comprise the centres 11 the middle of the 
Jerebrum above the Sonsomum. = [1 एन] {16 = ॥ 10014 पात. 
petulled lotus Sihasin a co sespords to | uppor Core- 
brum of tho physical boly, wilh ats cortical convolutions, 
which will bo siggosted to the reader on an examination 
of the Plato श 111, hore given of that contie, Just as all 
powers exist in the scat of volimtary action, so it 1s said 
that all the fifty “letters”? which ao distrib ied through- 
out the spmal centres of tho Sushumni oxist hore im 
mn fiphed form—that 14, 50x 20, Tho nectar -rayed 
moon! is possibly the undor part of the brain the convolu- 
tiors or tobes of whic), resembling “wll-moons, are called 
Chandrakala, and tho mystic monnb Kaili sa is undoubtedly 
tho upper biain, Tho yonbuclo connected with the spinal 
cord is also somlt nar in shape. 

As above state, 11616 18 no doubt that the Sushumna 
is situated im the spinal colunn, and at bay boon said that 
it vepresenty the conbral canal Tb कम probable that its 
goneral position 1s that of tho contral लाप, Bub a quay 
may be rawotk if it is meant that tho सनाप alone is the 
Sushumna. Vor the littor Nadi, according to this work, 
contains within it two others —namoly, Vajrint and Chitvini, 
There is thus a theeofold division, 1 has been suggested 
that the Sushumni whon not considored with its inner 
Nadis as a collective uni, but as distinguished from them, 
2५ tho while nervong matter ol Lho spinal cord, Vajrim the 
grey mattor, and Clitrim the central cand, the inner Nid 
of which is known as tho Brahmanicdi, and, m the Shiva-~ 
sanghiti, Brahmarandhra*? But ag against such suggestion 
it 1< to be noted that v. 2 of this work doscribos कानि 


1 See Shiv. Singhita, TI, 6 
2Ch JI,v 1& 


“TL ८ NEWS OR 10108 ५ (CHAKRA, FADMA) 158 


as bemg as fine as a spider’s thread (Iuuta-tantipamoy: ), 
and the giey matter cannot be so described, but is a gross 
thing We must therefore discar this suggestion, and 
hold to tle opinion cither that the central canal is the 
Sushtmna ot that the latter 1s im the canal, and that with- 
in or [041८ of it aro two still more s wbtle and imperceptible 
channels of cnorgy, ca led Vajum and Chitrim. [ incline 
to the latter view The tive nature of the Clitrim Nid 
is sax in ए 3 to be pure intelligence (Shuddha-bodha- 
svabh.va) as a force of Consciousness As ४, 1 says, the 
three torm one, bub considered separately they are distinct. 
They ave threetold in the sense that Sushumna, “ who is 
tiemmlous lize & woman m passion,” 1s as a whole com- 
posed of “Sun,” “Mooi,” and “ Fire,’ and the three 
Gunas. It is noteworthy m ths connection that the 
Kshuniki Upamshad,! which speaks of the Sushumna, 
directs the Sadhaka “to got into the white and very subtle 
Nad, and to dive Prmaviyu thiough it”. These 
three, Sushumna, Vajrim, and Chitrini, and the central 
canal, or Biahmanidi, throngh which, m the Yoga here 
descmbed, Kundatin passes, aro all, in any caso, part of 
the spinal cord. And, as the Shivasanghila and all other 
Yoga works say, the vest of the body 1 dependent on 
Sushumna, १९ bemg the clict spinal .opiesentative of the 
central nervous system. ¶ 010 seems also to be some 
ground to hold that the Nidiv, Tda and Pinggala, or 
* moon” and “sun,” are tle 191 and mght sympatho- 
tie cmds 1espeelively on each sido of the “fiery” Su- 
shumni. Tt as to be noted that, according to one and a 
common notion reproduced im this work, theso Nadis, 


५ {प Avandashiama Sores XXIX p 146, Prana does not here 
mean gross bre wh, bul that wl ich in Lhe resp: atory centres appears as 
auch and which appous im 01101 forms im other functions and parts of 
the holy, 

20 


154 HN SIX OLNURUS AND 1111 STRPENT LOWER 


which ave desciibed as being pale wid 1 ddy respectively 
(v 1), do not he merely on ono side of the cord, but Gross 
wt alternating fom one sito to the other (see ए, 1), Uhus 
forming with the Sushu imi and (he two मनत of the A ne 
Chakra tho figme of tho Caducets 0 Motcuy, which 
according to 80110 represon ५ them. = Klsewhere (४, 1), 
howover, 1b 18 sud tl it they are shuped 16 bows. ‘iat 
18, one 18 united with Sushumna and connoeted with the left 
serotum, Ib gocs up to a position new tho lofl shoulder, 
bending as 16 passes the heart, (10४६80५ over (6 the mphi 
shoulder, and then procecds to the right 71090111. = त्विव) 
the othor Nadi com octcd with tho night seroinn passes to 
the left nostril. [Tb has becn suggested to me that Ida and 
Pinggala are blood-vessels 1opresenting tho infer 01 Von 
Cava and Aorla But tle works and the Yogi process 
itself indicate not ertomes, bit nerves. Idi and Pinegala 
when thoy roach tle space betwoon the eyebrows male 
with tho Sushumne a plated Uneolold hug, ca lod Urivem, 
and proceed to the noshils. hy, it has been said, 14 tho 
spot im the medula whore the sytipatholie coras jom 
{0801161 or wheuco they take thoi, ompin 

There romams bo be considered tho position of tho 
Chakias ‘Though this work speaks of six, Chore are, 
according to somo, others, ‘Ing 15 stated by Vishvanutia 
in lus Shatchakra-Vivith = Thus wo have mentioned 
Lalana, Manas, and Soma Chakras, Tho yix here givon 
aro the principal ones. TIndeod, a very long list oxists of 
Chakras or Adhatas, as some eall (hem. Tn a modom 
Sanskrit work callod “ Advaitamwbinda” tho anthor! 
gives twonty, numbering thom as follows (1) dhe ५, (2) 
Kuladipa, (3) Vajra or Yajna, (८ ) Suddhishthdna, (5) Raudra, 


1 Brahm vu anda Svami, a nitro of Palghat, in (ho Madias Prosuloncy, 
late Guin of JFIT the Mahmayy of Kas mm, वू 0 work 8 primted प 
Jummoo 


MID CUNIRTS OW 1010308 (तामा, PADMA) 155 


(6) Kavala, (7) Guhvara, (8) Vidy prada, (9) Trimulha, 
(10) Tripada, (11) Kuladandaka, (12) Ukara, (18) Kaladvara, 
(14) Kavangaka, (15) Dipaka, (16) Anandalaliti, (17) 
Manyuraha, (18) Na cula, (19) Calabhe lana, (20) Mahotsaha 
Then for no apparont reason, many others are giver with- 
out numbers, a circumstance, as well as delective printing, 
which makes 1t difficult in some cases to say whether the 
sanskrit should be read as ono word or two.' They are 
apparently Parama, Padukam, Padam (or Padakampadam), 
Kalpajala, Poshaka, Lolaina, Nadavarta, Triputa, Kang- 
kilaka, Putabhedana, Mahagianthiviraka, Bandhajvalana 
(printed as Bandhojvalana), Auahata, Yantraputa (printed 
Yatra), Vyomachakra, Bodhana, Dhinya, Kalakandalaka, 
Krannchabherundavibhava, Damara, Kulapithaka, Kulakola- 
hala, Halavarta, Mahadbhaya, Ghorabhairava, Mishuddhi, 
Kantham, Utlamam (quee Vishuddhikantham or Kan- 
thamuttamam), Purnakam, 016, Kakaputtam, Shringatam, 
Kamarupa, Purnagiv, Mahivyoma, Shaktiiupa. But, as 
the author says, in the Vedas (that 18, Yogachu [पक्षा 
Yogashikha Upanishads, and others) we read of only six 
Chakras—nameoly, thoso italicised in the abovo list, and 
described in the works hore translated and 80 10 15 said: 
“ How ean there be any Siddhi for him who knows not the 
six Chakras, the sixteon Adhaas, the five Nthers, and threo 
(uakshas, in his own body ?” 

I have already pointod out that the posilions of the 
Chakras gonorally cor espond to spinal contres of Lheanatom- 
cal divisions of tho vertebiw into five regions, and it has 
been stated that the Padinas or Chakras com ospond with 


1f am not sme that the autho himself was aware of th’s tn all 
cases We may have [6५1 qroting himsclf fiom some 11818 without 
othe: knowlodgo on the sub ect Jha 1st has to my oyos, 111 some 
respects an uneritical ispoot ¢y, rpal trom biacketed notes in the 
text, Kamarupa and Purnagirt mo Pithas, the others, Jilandhara and 
Anddiyana, no hang mantionac = (16 last quotation he ma cer d ane 
a distinction between the Chakras and Adharas 


16 7 हर ( षः २५ ANE | | ५ ग ॐ OW 2 


various plexuses which exigh in the body sir ५ mdi g tose 
rogions. Various st ggestions have been iere mide he 
Author of viceont work! ident fios (com पलाला 3 with the 
Mulad iia and gomg upwards) tie Ghasras wit) the sacral, 
plostatic, opigastric, cardiac, laryngou (or phary igoal), and 
cavernous ploxises, and the Sahastaiia with tle Medulla. 
In passig it may bo notod that tho last suggostion cannot 
in any ovont bo corect. It is apparently based on vorse 
120 of chapter ए of the Shiva Sanghita? But this work 
docs nol in my opinion support the suggestion,  Hisewhore 
the Author ated rightly identihes Mount Kailasa with the 
Sahas ara, whieh is uncoubledly the upper (कोणा, The 
anatomical position of tho Medulla is below that assigned 
to tho पा) (रा, Pro essor Sarkar’s work contains 
some valuable appendices by Di, 1310 ondravath Soal on, 
amongst others, Efindu ideas conccumag plant and animal 
life, physiology, «nd Inology, ine uding ८८01 01५ of the 
neryois systom in Charaka and am the ‘antias. After 
pointing oul that the cerob o-sp 1 uo परान with (ie comneet- 
ed sy npathetic syste n cont uns a numbor of ganghone 


1 Pho Posty» Barckgvor त ५ 1[ पतप So “ogy, by 1 ५५५१४ 
Bonoy Kun ar Suk nv 

2] 5 of tho translabon cf S osha Clme ५ Vist whierl 
refer bacaase tho aa hor sot (१0५, । 160 10. ange } 2५७०८. oc 
not do justice to the teat, and Itbert ea have beon tacen + that Phas, 
a large portion ins boon omilled withont word 01 wirnmy, an tat p Lk 
if is said that Kundalini is of the form of vlocts city | ८१८ 1416) 
warrant for this im tho teat and Smdal फ ५4100 ac पाषा ~ to tie 
Shastia, mere electricity 

T earnot too stro gly protest iyainst attempts to represent | 1 प) 
90068४1६, not agib actu uly zs, bab what sora who voce corned w th ८ 
would lke wt tobe State acca पकक what sm tho Shas + 111 thor 
disapprove of it if you will 

3Toth the work of Pio cessor Sarkw aud tlo Appondics of 
Dy Seal ave of interest and एताम and gather to,ethar । co widerable 
number of facts of importance on Indian ७८061011 y Tithnolagy, 
Mmeza ogy, Zoology, Botany and Ilndu Physiology, Moch पा ५ md 
Acoustics, These Appendices | ६१०५ sinco boon 1opubhal od sapmately 
as a work entitled Positive Sciencos of the [ताड 


fb छक 3 Oh LOLUSLS (Ol AKRA, PADMA) 17 


centres and plexuses (Chakras, Padmas), Lrom which nerves 
(Nadi, Shirt, and Dhamam) radiate over the head, trunk, 
and linbs, the latter says, as rogards the ganghonie cen- 
tres and ploxnses constituting the sympathetic spinal 
system : 

^ Boginning with the lower extremity, the centres and 
plexuses of the connected spinal and sympathotic systems 
may be described as follows: 

“(1) The Adhara Chakra, tho sacro-coccygeal plexus, 
with four branches, nine Angths (about six inches and a 
half) below the solar plexus (Kanda, Brahmagranthi) ; the 
gourco of a massive pleasmable sathesia ; voluminous 
organic sensations of repose. An inch and a half aboyo it, 
an | the same (1418106 below t10 membium ₹1116 (Mchana), 
is a minor centre called the Agni-sikhi (2) ‘Tho Sv idhish- 
thana Chakra, the sacral plexus, with six branches (Dalani 
—petals) concernod in the excitation ol sexual tochng's, 
with the accompannnents of lassitude, stupor, cruelly, 
suspicion, contompt. (3) Tho Nabhikanda (corresponding 
to tho solar plexus, Bhannbhavanam), which forms the 
great junction of tho mght and left sympathouc chams 
(Pinggala and Tda) with tho ecrebro-spinal axis. Connected 
with {111५ is the Mamiparaka, tho luambu_ plexus, with con- 
nected sympathetic norves, the ton bi anches * of which aro 
concerned 7४ the production of sleep and thirst, and the ex- 
prossions of passions hike jealousy, shame, foar, stupefaction. 
(4) The Andhata Chakra, possibly tho cardiac ploxus of the 
sympathetic cham, with twolve branches, connected with the 
heart, tho seat of tho egoistic sentiments, hope, anxiety, 
doubt, romorse, concert, ogoisn , otc, (5) The Bharatisthina,’ 


1 11056 and other Vri ti ४ they are called, ae ennmoratcd in the 
Intioduction to my nst edition of the काकि एषा, Tantra 

2'That is, potala 

8This is a name for tho Vishuddha Ciacva 1s abode of the 
Goddess of Speech (3181861) 


158 वि SIN CONCHES AN व Ste मै [का 
the ‘unction 0 the spinal cond wit) 1] 0 moc पा oblongata, 
which, hy neans o nerves lke 110 pnoumog tue, 
clu, regulate hc ke yas ard ८ ८ काहिति 2 ate Oe align 
(6) ‘The Lalani Chakra, oppose the tyela, which as 
twelve loaves (01 lobes), suppose | ८) be the tract a 1०( 
ed in the production of हूत पतति sentiments and 
altections, hke self-regard, pride, aflocl on, gricl, regret, 
respect, vovorence, contentment ote (7) The yensori- 
motor tracl, comprising two Chiloas. (7) tho Ajua 
Chakri (if, tio circlo of commind over movements) 
with its two lobes (the (नाका गाप), and (4) the Manas 
Chakri, the soiorium, with its 9s lobes (fve special 
sensory for peiphowaly insHaten se ssabors, ang ono 
common sensory for centrally imbiated sensations, as in 
dreams and hallucinations), Tho Ajna-vaha Nidis, effor- 
ent o1 motor nerves, communie wo motor impulses {0 the 
petiphery from this Ajni Chakra, ths conte of command 
over movements; and tho alforont ov sonsory 1101 ४८५ of the 
specia sonses, in pairs, tho Gandhavahi Nadi (olfactory 
sensory), tho Rupavahi Nidt (optic), the Siwbdavahi Nadi 
(anditory), tho Rasavaha Nid (pustatory), and tho Spar. 
shaval Nadi (tactile), como from tho pemphory (the 
pouphoral organs of tho spocial senses) to this Manas 
chakra, the songory track al the base of the brain 
The Manaschakia also icceives tho Manoval 1 Nadi, 
a geroric namo for iho channels aong which con- 
trally imbiated presentations (as 11 droaming or [धप 
enation) come to the sxth lobo o the Manasehakra, 
(8) The Somachakri, a sixtec i-lobed  zanghon, com. 
prising the centres in tho वप्त ५ of the corebrum, above 
the sonsormin; the seat ol the allemstic sent ments and 
volitioial coutrol eg, compassion, gentleness, patience, 
raminciation, maditativanags, gravily, carnostness, reso~ 
Intion, detcimination, magnanimity, et, And — lastly 


[10 OLN RES OR 1010808 (CHAKRA, PADMA) 159 


(9) the Sahasraia Chalkta, thousand-lobed, the upper 
cerebryin with 1/3 lobes and convolutions, the special and 
highes. scat of the J vs, the soul 7! 

Thou, deahng with the cerebro-spimal axis and the 
heart, and thew respective rolations to the conscious Ite, 
tho Author cited says . 

«Vijnanablukshu, in the passage just quoted, iden- 
tifies the Manovaha Nadi (velucle of conscionsness) with 
the cerebro-spinal axis and its ramifications, and com- 
pares the figure to an invorted gourd with a thousand- 
branched stem hanging down. ‘Tho Sushumna, tho 
cential passage of the spinal cord, 15 the stem of this 
gourd (or a single branch). The writers on the Yoga 
(including the authors of tho vaious ‘antrik systomy) 
use the term somowhat differently. On tlus view, the 
Manovaha Nadi is tho channcl of the communication of 
tho Jiva (soul) with tho Manaschakra (sonsorium) at the 
base of tho brain Tho sonsory curronts aio brought (o 
the sonsory gangha along afleront nerves of tho special 
senses. But this 18 not sufficiont for thom to mse to tho 
lovel of discriminative consciousnoss, A communication 
must now bo established between the Jiva (in tho Sahas- 
vara Chakra, upper cerebrum) and the sensory currents 
received at the sonsorimm, and this is dono by means of 
the Manovaha Nadi. When sensations are centrally 
initiated, as in dreams and hallucimations, a special Nadi 
(Svapnavaha Nadi), which appears to be only a branch of 
the Manovahi Nadi, sorves as the channel of communica. 
tion from the Jiva (soul) to the sonsomum In the same 
way, tho Ajnuvahi Nadi brings down the mossages of the 
Soul from the Sahas.ara (upper cerebrum) to the Ajua 


t The anthor cited कतत (0 tho Jnéina sangkelm Tantin Sangita- 
vatifkara and for fisct.ors of Aja एवाह Nal, word Muno,aba हाता 
to Shangkaia Mishin’s Upiska a 


160 {HW SIN CIN (५ AND LS UN OW? 


Chakra (motor tract at the base of tho braun), moss iges 
which are thence carmed [कीत down, a ong cl orent 
nerves, fo varous 014५6 the perighory. | onay add (ha 
tle special sensory ne ves, fogolhor with the Manovaha 
Nad, aro sonotames gonorally tormod ताय पदरात N uli 
ht, chinnol 0 presentative knowledge Taicre ५ no difh. 
culty so far he Manovaha Nad and the A’ परमा Nid 
connect the sensori-motor tract at the bise ० ' the brain 
(Manas Chakta and Ajna © पप्तो with the Inghost (and 
special) seat o tho soul (iva) im the पकम cerebrum 
(Sal पा 1६), the one be ng tho Gawnnel or carryiig up the 
sensory, and the other for bimging down the motor 
1) ०५१०५ Bet ५ 0115 of the will (Aria, Prayatna) avo 
17 1 presentations, and tho Manovahii Nad mnst 
therefore co-operate with tho Ajnivaha in yrodtemg the 
consoions 10०५ of effort. Tndeod, atfontion, the charactor. 
istic function of Manis, by wie. it raises so iso-prosonta- 
trons to the level of discriminative consciousness, inplies 
लाका (Prayatia) on the part o the soul (At na, diva), an 
oflort of which wo are coiseious Uirougl the ehannal of 
the Manovahii Nidt. But how to oxplain tho presentation 
of effort आ the motor norves? Shangsia Muishia, the 
auth of the Upaskura on Kannde’s Sf (षा, arenes that 
the Nid’s (even tho volitional ot motor nei voy) are thom. 
gelyes sensitive, and thoi alfechions are cor veyed to the 
sensor by means of the nerves of the (inner) souso of 
touch (which ae intersporsed in minute filly among 
them) ‘The consciousness of offort, then, in any motor 
norve, whether Ajuivaba (volitional motor) ov Cranavaba 
(automatic motor), depends on the tactile nerves (or nerves 
of organic sensation) nixed up with it hus tho assimila- 
tion of food and drink by the automatic activity of the 
Pranas implics an (automatic) offort (Piayatna) accom- 
paniad by a vaguo organic consciousness, whieh 18 duo to 


THE OLNTRIS OR 1010508 (CHAKRA, PADMA) 16] 


the fact that minute fibres of the mner touch-sense are 
interspersed with the machinary of tho automatic nerves 
(the Pranavahe Nadis).” 

To a cortain extent the locahsations hore made must 
be tontative, Tt must, for instance, be a matter of opimon 
whether the throat centre conesponds with the carotid, 
laryngeal, or pharyngeal, or all three; whethor the navel 
contre corresponds with the epigastric, solar, or lumbar, 
the Ajna with the cavernous plexus, pineal gland, pitttary 
body, cerebellum, and 89 forth. Vor all that is known to 
the contrary each contre may [४९० more than one of such 
correspondences All that can bo said with any degiee of 
cortainty 1s thet the four contres, above the Mualedhiva, 
which is the seat of the presiding enorgy, have relation to 
the genito-cxerctory, digestive, cardiac, and respiratory 
functions, and that the two upper centres (Ajna and 
Sahasrarva) donoto various forms of cerobral activity, ening 
in tho roposo of puro Conysionsness, Tho uncertainty 
which provails as regards some of those matters is mdicate t 
in tho 'loxt itsolf, which shows that on varions o° the 
subjects hove debated differing opinions lave been expross- 
ed as individual constructions of statomonts to be found m 
tho Tantras and other Shistras, 

Thore are, however, if L road thom correctly, state- 
ments in the abovo-cited accounts with which, though nob 
uncommonly accoptod, 1 disagteo. Jt 18 said, tor instance, 
that the Adhira Chakra 7s the sacro-coccygeal plexus, and 
that the Svadhishthina ४ tho sacral plexus, and so forth, 
This work, howover, not to mention others, makes it plain 
that the Chakras avo in the Sushumni. Verse 1 speaks of the 
“Gotusos inside the Mou (spmal column); and as tho 
Sushunina supports theso (that is, the lotnses) She must 
needs be withm the Mora”. This is said in answor to those 


who, on the stiength of a passage in the 'Tantrachudamam, 
al 


10. UHL SIA COND? S AND 1111 ४ ROINL (OVE? 


e1ioicously sup ose that Sushumit is outside the Moru, 
ln the samo way the Commentato rofules the कामा" of 
those we), tolying an the N‘g matatfvas 141, st ppoge 1 hat 
not only Sushumni, bul Id? and Pingeals, ure inside the 
Mein Vorse 2 says that iiside Vi'ra (which is rtsolf 
wilhin Sushumni) 16 Chitrir, on woich tho lotuses are 
sting as it were goms, ant who tie a spider’s thioad 
pierces all tho otuses which are within the backbone. ‘Che 
Author in the same placo co nbats the vow, based ou the 
Kalpa Sutra, that the lotuses aro within (1111101 ‘Those 
lotuses ate in the Sushumnea ; and as Chittin: 1५ within the 
latter, she piercos but dovs nob contain them, Some 
confision is rawed by the sinto nent inv. 31, that rhe 
lotuges are m or on the Brahmanid (षा by this is meant 
apportaining to this Nadi, for they ae im Sushumna, of 
which the Brahmanidi is the coitral channel. The 
commentator Vishvanatha, quoting fiom (ho Miya Tantra, 
gays that all tho six lotuses are attached to tho Chitrin 
Nach (काहि वक्षे), Que cone usion emorgos cloarly 
from all this—naimely, that the Lolusos ae in he vortobral 
column in Sushumna, and not in tho ner vo ploxuses which 
surround it. There in the spimal column thoy oxist as 
oxtromely subtle vital conties of P anashalt and contros 
of consaiousness, Tn this connechon [ may cite an 
extract fiom an article on the “ Physical Hrrors of 
Hindwsm,”* for which 1 am indebted to Professor 
Sarke’s work. “Tt would indeed oxeite tho surprise of 
our readors to hear that the Tlindus, whe would not 
oven touch a dead body, much lesy dissect it, should 
possess any anatomical knowledge at all. , , , Tb is 
the Tantras that furmsh us with some extraordinary pioces 
of it formation concerning the human body, , , , But of 
all the JIindu Shastras oxtant, the Tantias lio in the 
1 Published m Vol XI, pp 446—(€0, of tho Caleutéa | कण 


HN CINIRES OR LOLUSDs (CHAKRA, PADMA) 163 


greatest obscurity, . . . The Tantrik theory, on which 
the well-known Yoga called ‘ Shatchakrabheda’ 18 founded, 
supposes tho cxistence of six man internal ovgans, called 
Chakras or Padmas, all bearing a special resemblance to 
that famous flowa, the lotus, ‘These are placed one 
above the other, and connected by three imaginary chains, 
the emblems of the Ganges, the Yamuna, and the 
Saraswati. . . . Such 1s the obstinacy with which the 
Hindus adhere to these erroneous notions, that, even 
when we show them by actual dissection the non-existence 
of the imaginary Chakras in the human body, they will 
rather havo recourse to excuses revolting to common sense 
than acknowledge the evidence of their awn eyes They 
say, with a shamelossness unparalleled, that theso Padmas 
exist as long as a man livos, but disappear the moment he 
dies.”+ his, howover, 1s nevertheless «inte correct, for 
conscious and vital centres cannot exist in a bo ly whon the 
organism which they hold together dies. A contrary conclu- 
sion might indeed bo described as “ shameloss” stupidity ? 

The Author of the work trom which this citation 18 
uiade says that, though theso Chakras cannot bo satis- 
factorily identified, the Tantmks must nevertheless have 
obtained thoir knowledge of them by dissection. By 
this he must icfer to the physical regions which corte- 
spond on the gross plane to, and are governed by, the 
Chakras proper, which as subtle, vital, and conscions centres 
im the spinal cord are invisiblo to any but a Yogr’s vision,’ 

1 Physteal [षज of TWinduisin,’ Calcutta Peven, Vol XI, 
pp 486 440 

= This .eminds one of the story of a miteriahstis doctor in Caloutta 
who sud ie had done hundieds of post-1200tem examinations, bat had 
never yat discovered the 16८6 of a soul 

2 ९0 it is said: Tin yastun tanmatradin: pratyakshavishayam 
(Sueh things as the Janmatin and othors uve subjee of immediate per- 


ception by Yoging only) a Yogi “’ sees vho Cha‘sias wis’ his monval oye 
(2.1 18). In tho ७१86 of others thoy not 10 mattor of mforence (Anutaana) 


164 श 1 SEN CRN RIS AND (1 SERPENT [तेग 


existing whon tho body is alve and chsappearme 
when vitalty (Prana) leaves the body as pul of the 
Lingasharia, 

It 18 a mistake, therefore, mm my opine, to adontify 
the Chakras with tho physieal ples seq manhoned 
Theso latter aro things of the {1058 body, whoreas the 
Chakras ato extremely subtlo vital contros of various 
Tiattvik operations, In a senso wo can connect with 
these subtlo centies the gross bodily parts visible to the 
eyes as plexuses and gangla, But to connect or corre- 
late and to identify are different things. Indian thought 
and the Sanskrit languago, which 1४ ils oxpression, havo a 
peculiarly penotiative and comprchonsive q tality which 
enalles ore to oxplam many ideas for which, except by 
paraphrase, thore १५ no equivalent meanmeg in Knglish. 
It is by the Powor 0 Shakti ot the Atmi or Conscious- 
ness that tho body exists Jt is tho colloctive Prina 
which holds it together as an individual पोषो unit, 
just as it supports the different Principles and Mlements 
(Tattva) of which it 1s composed, These Tattvas, though 
they pervade the body, have yot various special contres 
of operation These contios, as ono might othorwise 
suppose, he along the axis, and ao the Stikshma Riipa, 
or subtle forms of that which exists in (1048 form (Sthula 
Riipa) im the physical body which 19 gathered around it. 
They are manifestations of Prinashakt. [nother 
words, from an objective standpoint tho subtle contros, 
or (Qhakras, vitahso and control the gross bodily 
tracts which are indicated by the various regions of the 
vertebral column and tho gangha, ploxuses, orves, 
artories, and organs, situato in these respective rogions. 
It 13 only therefore (if at all) in tho sense of being the 
gross outer representatives of the spinal conlros that we 
can connect the plexuses and so forth with tho Chakras 


नाय OLNIRLS OR TOPUSES (CHAKRA, PAIMA) 165 


spoken of in the Yoga books, In this sense only the 
whole tract, which extends from the subtle centre to 
the pemphery, with its corresponding bodily elemonts, 
may be regarded as tho Chakra As tho gross and subtle 
are thus connocted, menta. operation on the ono पो, affect 
the other. Certain forces are concentrated m_ these 
Chakras, and therefore and by reference to their function 
they are regarded as separate and independent centres, 
‘There are thus six subtle centres in the cord with grosser 
embodiments within the cord itself, with still grosse 
sheaths in the region pervaded by the sympathotics Tda and 
1168818, and other Nacis, Out of all this and the gross 
compounded elements of the body aro fashioned the organs 
of hfe, the vital heart of wlich 1s the subtle Chakra by 
which they ara vivifiad and amtralled Tha spinal aspects 
of the six contros according to Tantik doctrine must not 
be overlooked whilst attention is paid to the gross 01 
physiological aspect of the body. As previously and in 
the Commentary to the thirty-fifth verso of the Anandala- 
har: explained, thoro aro six Dovas viz, Shambhu, 
Sadusliva, Ishvara, Vishnu, Rudia, Brahma whose abodos 
are the six Jokas or regicns, via, Maharloka, Tapoloka, 
Janaloka, Svarloka, Bhuvarloka, and Bhurloka (the Barth) 
It 18 these Divimties who are the forms of Consciousness 
presiding ovor the Shatchakra, Ju other words, Conscious- 
ness feoling (Chit), as tho ultimate experiencing principle, 
pervades and is at base all being. Lvery cell of the body 
has a consciousness of its own, ‘I'he varions organic parts 
of the body which the colls build have not only particular 
coll-consciousness, but the consciousness of tho particular 
organic part which is other than the mere collectivity of 
the consciousnoss of its units. Thus there may be an 
abdominal consciousness. And the consciousness of such 
bodily region is its Devati—that is, that aspect of Chit 


160 SIN OENIRIS AND LE ५1, द 1)५॥.१ 


winch is associatod with and informs that regio1 Lastly, 
the organism as a wholo has us co weiousnoss, which 18 the 
qndevidual -liva, ‘hon there is the a bile form or hody of 
these Doyatus, in the shape of Mind supersonsible 
“matler” (‘Tanmitia); and sensible “matter ?—naunoly, 
other, air, fie, water, carth, with then conties at the Ajni, 
Vishuddha, Anahata, Manrpiiva, Svadhishthana and Mula- 
dhara, Ot these six Tattvas, not only the gross human 
body, but the vast macroecosm, is composed, The six 
Chakras aro theretore the divine subtle centres of the 
corresponding physical and psychical shevis. the seventh 
or suprame contre of consciousness is Paramashiva, wh se 
rhode ws Sa yaloka, the Cosmic asnect of he तवोप 11 nthe 
human body. Me Supreme, there ore, Cesconds throat gh 
118 manifestations from the sub ५ to the gicss ६५ the 
six Devas and Shaktis m ther sx abodes in the world. 
axis, and as tho six contves in tho body-axie or spmal 
णोप, The special operation of ereh of the ativas 
18 located at 11१ individual conte no he micvoecam — But, 
notwithstanding all such subtle and gross 11 पातका 
tions of and by Kula-Kundalim, She over vemaing mi Ter 
Brahman or Svmupa aspect the Ono, Sat, Clit, aad 
Ananda, ag 1s realisad by the Yop whan di एषतु the Deve 
from Wor world-abode m the outh contro (Mai तोता) he 
unites Tfer with Paramashiva am the Sahasriva in that 
blissiul union which is the Supreme Lovo (Ananda) 

Tn a सोक mannor ofher statomonts as regards these 
Chakias should bo dealt. wih, as, for stance, those cone 
nected with the existence of tho ¢ Petals,” tho 11111007 of 
which in cach case his been sed to be deto muned by 
charactorisuics of the gross 1egion which the particular 
Thakia governs. ‘The conties aro said to be composed 
of petals designated by cortam lettore — Professor Sarkar? 

1 (2 et, p 292 


TUL OLN RIS OR 1010५ 8 (CUAKRA, एकप) 167 


expresses the opinion that these petals point to either the 
nerves which go to form a ganghon or plexus, o1 the nerves 
distributea from such ganghou or pleats. 1 have been told 
that the disposition of the Nid sat the particular Chakra in 
question dotermines the number of its petals == In the five 
lowa Chakras their characteristics are displayed in the num- 
ber and position of the Nadis or by the lobes and sensory 
and motor tracts of the higher portions of the cerebio-spinal 
system. As I have already oxplained, the Chakra is not to 
be identified with the physical ganglia and plexuses, though 
it is connected with, and in a gross sense represented by, 
them, The lotuses with these petals aro within the 
Sushumna, ana they arc there reproscntcd as bloommg 
upon the passage through then of Kundah. Tho letters 
are on the petals. 

The lottors m the six Ciakras are fifty m nomber— 
namely, the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet ess Ksha, 
according to the Kangkilamalim ‘Tantra cited in ए 40, or 
tho second La (1८ ). All these letters multiplied by 20 oxist 
potontially in tho Sahasrara, whore thoy therefore number 
1,000, giving that Lotus its name. ‘There are, on tho other 
hand, 72,000 Nadis which rise from the Kanca Further, 
that these Ictters न the Chacras are not g ०६५ things is 
shown by ४९. 28 and 29, winch say that the vowels of the 
Vishuddha are visible to the onlightoned miid (Dipta- 
buddhi) only—that 1, the Buddhi which i free of impurity 
resulting from worldly pursu ts, as the eflect of the constant 
practice o Yoga. Verse 19 and othor verses speak of the 
lettors 11616 mentioned as being coloured. Hach object of 
perception, whether gross or subtle, has an aspect which 

1566 my Mahanirviini Tantia (inst Dditon) p. ए My refer. 
eneo there to the lotus as a ploxus of nadis 18 to the gross sheath of the 
subtle centre, which gross sheath 14 said to coutain the detc.minant, 


though im another senso 1४ 18 the eTect of the charactcusties of tie 
subtle centre, 


168 गाः BIN O NFRES AND LEP तप्र LOWER 


corresponds to each of the senses, [tb 1 for this । ५१००) 
that the Tantra correlates sound, orm, and colour. Sound 
produces form, and form 14 assouratod with colour. Kundah 
is a form of the Suprome Shakti who maritiing all breath. 
ing creatures. She 13 the source from whieh all so id op 
cnorgy, whother as ideas or spooch, mani osts. Tint sound 
Mitrika when utterod in humen speech assiumos the form 
of letters and prose and verse, which 1s made ol their 
combinations, And sound (Shabda) has 114 moaning—bhat 
18, the objects denoted by tho ॥ ५१३ which ato expressed 
by sound o words. By tho impulso of Iche पा Shakes 
acting through the P नावर्‌ (क (vital force) o the (tine 
13 produced in the Muludina tho sound power callod 
Para, which in its aseonding movemont — through 
other Chakias takes on othor characteristics and namos 
(Pashyanti and [Madhyama), and whon uttered by the 
mouth appears as Vaakhui in the fom o 110 spokon 
letters which are the gross aspect ol tho sounc in the 
Chakras thomselves (७८० vy 0 and 11), 11109 when 
spoken ao, thon, tho manilested aspoob 111 gross spooch of 
the subile onorgy of the Shabdabiahiman as Kendai. The 
samo onergy which protluces those lotlors manifosting as 
Mantiis produces tho gioss umyerse, tn (110 Chakras 18 
subtle Shabda im its stalog ay Pari, Pashyanti, 01 Madhyami 
Shaku, which when translated to the vocal organ assumes 
the andiblo sound form (Dhyvam) which is any particular 
lotter, Particular forms of enorgy of Kundal aro said to 
be resident at particular C वपता all such onorgios oxisting 
in magnified form in the Sahasrau, Mach manifostod 
lolder is a Mantra, and a Mantia is the body of a Devata. 
There are thorefoic as many Devaliis in a Chakta as thoro 
aro petals which we surrounding (Avarana) Devatis or 
Shaktis of the Dovate of the Chakin and tho subtlo clomont. 
of which [ois te prosiding Consuonsnoss. hus, णप 


[` CONIRES OR LOILSLS (CHAKRA, PADMA) 169 


1५ the presiding Consciousness of the Muladhara lotus, 
mdicated by the Bindn of the Bija La (Lang), which 13 the 
body ot the earth Devalu; and around and associated with 
these are the subtle forms of the Mantras, which constatute 
the petals and the bodics of associated energies. Tho whole 
human body is in fact a Mantra, and 13 composed of Mantras, 

These sound powe!s vitalise, regulate, and control, the 
corresponding gross manifestations in the regions sur- 
rounding them. Why, however, particular letters are 
assigned fo particular Chakras is the noxt question, 
Why, for mstauce, should Ha be m tho Ayna and Sa in the 
Mulidhara? lt is true that in some places in the ‘Yantras 
certain lettors arc assigned to particular clements, Thus, 
there aie certaim letters which arc called Vayava Varna, 
or letters pertaining to the Vayu Tattva; but an examina- 
tion of the cage on Uns basis fails to account tor the 
position of tho letters, as lettors which aro assignod to one 
oloment may be found in a Cl akra the pedominant Tattva 
ol which 18 some other clement = Tt has been said that in 
tho utterance of particular lotters the contres at which 
thoy aro situated are brought into play, and that this is the 
solution of the question why those particular letlers wore 
at their particular centre, A probable solution 1५ that 
given by mo in my “ Shakti and Shakta”.! Apart fiom 
this one can only say thal ib is cither Svabhava or the 
nabure of tho -thing, which in that case 19 as httle suscept- 
ible of ultimate explanation as tho disposition in the body 
of the gross oigans themselves; or the arrangement may 
bo an atificial ono for the purpose of meditation, in which 
case no farther explanation is necessary. 

Tho four Bhivas, or states of sound, in the human 
body ae 80 called & एणा statos in which sound or 
movoment is produced or becomes, evolving from Pari 


1 Second Kdition Seo Chi ptor on Kundalryaga 
22 


170 UL SIX GONLRES AN) JID SERPENDP POWFR 


Shakti m the body of Ishvaia io the gross पता 
Shakli in the body of J va. As alroady stated, in tho 
bodily aspoct (Adhyatma) the Kinany Bindu rosides in the 
Mulidhma centre, and is thore known as the Slakti Pinda 
or Kundalm?  Kincalt i a name ot Sha odabrahman m 
humai bodes. Tho Acheryya, speaking of Kundalian, 
says: “There is vy Shakti evilod Kundaliny who 1s ever 
ongaged in the wor of eroating tho univorse, [ए who 
has known Ter never again enters 1] ५ mother’s womb as a 
cluld or suffers old ago.” ‘That i, he 10 or gor enters 
the Sangsara or world of transmigration.’ Tas Karane 
Bindt exists ina non-difforenty ted conciQon, 

The body of Kundal 1s composed of tle filly letters 
ov soind-powers, dust ag thore is an apparent evolution । 


1She os so called because all he Shikl sary olla (त ) * rolled 
into one masa om [ल [ण ia the Kerdia (eortia) ef all tho St aktis 
The Svachechhu dias also the Sh rada say 

Pndag Kuiduim-shak th 

Prding harggal pre cht tal 

Lpupbidw is १५1 
Ripiitis tue 1 ५. 

{Kunde सिर is Ponda, Uangsah te Pada, Bindu is Rupa but 
(प्रो (Chit) 14 (1110६५4 104 1४1, es poten ticity cf maa 
fosted powa, 18 11 tho M [त्‌ 110 GG 11 110 66८0 व ५५९४1 ५ 
m Ant (11) whoe tle hewt beats, १८ life-pulse Bolu, tho ९१११ 
foom body, as Supromo Shakti isin Aqna, and tho formioss Consmons< 
nes pass ge throvgl Banda 1111101 
resting as Kundalm, 18 in the Bithymindhia (see ‘Lich of fist 
Sangksta of Yoo पणो तष ‘lantra). 

४ Adhyatmantu karan vbindub shaktpind thundaly पतात ab tivachyo 
muladhirasthah (Bhaskarardéya, Gomm Walita, y 142) 

3 ५ Shaktal प्ता = vishvayanar पिका वषत्‌ odyamang 

Jndtivartthung va punar 1111111 
narah” 
ity Adinity fichary yin vyavahy tah (2b ) 

4 So’yam avibhagavasthah haanabmduh (1८ ) 

$ Vikara on Vikittt is camothing whieh 19 redly cheuged, as curd 
fromimlk 110 former is a Vikviti cf the षठा — Vivaitn 18 appmont 
but umeal charge such as the tppenranco of what was end is ५ rcpe 
धऽ एषा 40 Tle Vedintarara thug n usally dof nes tho .wwo lamas 

Satattvato ‘nvathipraths शाप dyndininh 
Atattvato nyathapit tha vivarte पतेत] + प, 


I GN RLS ०६101४५ (CHAKRA, ताम) 171 


in the cosnne body of Ishvara, represented m the seven 
states preceding fiom Sakala Paramcshvara to Bindu, so 
thuc is a similar developrivat 411 the [पस vody 111 
Kundal, who 1s tho [जारण therem. ‘There aro evolved 
by this form the following states, corresponding with the 
cosmic development viz, Shakti, Dhvyani, Nada, Niro- 
dinka, Ardhendn, Bindu ‘hese are all states of Kundali 
[16186] in the Muladhata, and are known as Para sound, 
Bach one of the letters composmg the body of Kundal 
exists 111 four states as Para Shakti, or m tho succeeding 
states of sound, Pashyanti, Madhyama, and Vaikhan, to 
which referenco is later nade, he first a» a state of 
undifferentrated sound, which exists 11 the body of 
Tshvara; the second and third as existing in the body 
of Jiva aro stagos towards that complete manifestation 
of difterentiated sound in human specch which 18 called 
Vaikhari Bhava. In tho cosme aspect theso four states 
ue Avyakta, [shvara, Thvanyagarbha, and Vint Tho 
Avthastishti (object creation) of Kundalini aro the Kalas, 
which arive from tho lettors such as the Rudra and Vishnu 
Mivtis and their Shaklis, the Kuinas and Ganoshas ancl 
thei Shaktis, and tho 1110, In the Sakala Parameshvata 
or Shaihlabrahman 17) bodies —that 14, त्राता Shakti— 
the latter 1s callod Chit Shakti or Shakti simply, “ whon 
Sattva ontors ’—a slate known as the Paramukishavastha. 
When Shoe mto whom Sattva has entered is next “ pierced” 
by Ragas, She is called Dhvam, which 1s tho Alkshavavastha. 
When She is again “pierced” by ‘Tamas, sho 18 called 
Nida, lus is tho Avyaklavastha, the Avyakta Nada- 
which 1s the Parabindu. Again, Sho in whom ‘lamas 
abounds 18, as Raghava Bhatta says, callod Nirodhika ; Sko 
in whom Sattva abounds is called Arddhondu ; and the com- 
bination of the two (Iehchha and Jnana) in which Rajas as 
Kmyi Shakti works is called Bindu. ‘Thus it has been 


172 HIB S\N RS AND ५ SURCUNL TOWER 


sad. “Drawn by the force of 1८८ पोत Shekts (will), 
पो त्त्‌ by Jnana Shakti (knowledge), Shakt: the Lord 
appearing as male creates (Kriya कपप or action).” 
Whon tho Karana Bindu sprouls ” in order to Create 
the three (Bindu, Nida, and Bia) there uises that un- 
manifested Brahman-word ov Sound called tha Shabda- 
brahman (Sound Brahman)! It is said: € From the 
differentiation of tho Kiiara Bindu uises the unmanifested 
“Sound’ which is called Shabdabrahman by thoso learned 
in शाप." Tt is this Shabdabraliman which is the 
immediate cause of tho universe, which is sound and 
movement manifesting as idea and language. "his sound, 
which is ono with the Kivana Biidu, and 18 therefore 
all-porvading, yot first appeas m man’s body in the Mula- 
dhara, “Tt 18 said im tho Muladhava in the body the ‘air’ 
(Pianaviiyu) first appews. ‘Mhat ‘air’ acted upon by the 
offort of a person desiring to spoak, mam ‘esis the all- 
pervading Shabdabrahma ग Tho Shabdabrah nan which 
ism tho form of the mane Bindu wen it remains 
motionloss (Nishpanda) im ity own place (that wy, in Mund li, 
who 13 Torsolf in tho Miladhara) is callot Pare Sakti on 
specch "009 same Shabdabrahman nani’estcd by tho 
same vir procecd ng as far as tho navol, united with the 
Manas, possessing the nature o the mamniestal Kuryya 
Bindu with gonoval (Simaunyaspanda) motion, 14 named 
1 Ayamovachn yada hat yabindvadite ५1 unancoinnkho ) 14) tte tad+ 
dashaydm avyaktah shabd unahmabl idhey 1 ravas {१1 1) प} ite eb ) 


2 ‘Tadapyuktam 
Biados tas nad bh dy nnanad avyakla na rave "bl as il 
Sa raval shiutisampannuh १ iabdabrahmoti gy to (ab) 


3 So yang ravah hau abmdutadatmy wannitvab survag tc pi vyan- 
jakay at asangshittapavanavashit =o pranmang milid}ara cya ablive 
yajyate Taductang 

Dehe’pi muladhare’smin sanudeti s फा पान 
Vivakshorclob hay otthoaa pr ayatneve ousar,aki tal 
Sa vyanjayats tatraiva shabdabrahmaps sarvagam (2b) 


ज OSNPRLS OR 1010१18 (( IAKRA, PADMA) 173 


Pashyanti speech Pashyanti, which is descnbed as 
Jninatmaka and Biidyiumaka (in the natme of Chit and 
Bindu), extends from the Miladhara 10 the navol, or, 
according 10 somo accounts, the Svadishthana. 

Next, tho Shabdabraliman mamfested by tho same air 
proceeding as far as the heart, umted with the Buddhi, 
possessing the nature of the manitested Nada and 
endowed with spccial (Visicshaspanda) motion, 18 called 
Madhyama speech* This is Hiranyagarbha sound, ex- 
tending from the region of Pashyanti to the heart. 
Next,’ the same Shabdabrahman mamfested by the 
same air proceoding as far as the mouth, developed in the 
throat, ote, articulated and capable of being heard by the 
ears of others, possessing tha natwe of the manifested Bija 
with quite distinct articulate motion (Spashtatava), 18 called 
Vaikhar speoch.! This is the Vnat state of sound, so 
called because if ‘comes oul”. 

This matter 18 thus explamod by the Acharyya* ५ That 
sound which first arses in the Mulidhira is callod Pai, 
noxt Pashyanti, noxl, whon il govs as far as the heart and 

1 Pad iding karanibindvatmikam abliyyastaug shabdabrahnins- 
vaprat shthwiyi mashpandam tadeve ला para vig ityuchyate Atha 
tadeya nabhipmyantam gachchhita tena payanonabbiyyactam v1 
प प्रलाप पुनता 4st a yUCIr sada yrspaud-ya doh aupacdeyyr 
bindumayang sat pishy m2 vag uchy vio (2h ) 

2Atia tad eva shabdunahna tor tva viyuna Iidiyoparyante 


mabhivyajyamanimg msichayatnikya ouddiya yuktang vishesha~ 
spund ipra cas warupaniidamayang sab mulhy mavag tyuchyate (2b ) 

JAtho tid ova vad mapiryyantang tent iva vaynua kanthadistha- 
neshy tbhivyayyamina nu acaridivarnarup meg parnst rotra grahanayog- 
{4 apashiatarapiokasharupabi idmak ing sat varchar: vag uchyite 

3९) 

4Thab ia, Shabda iv its physial form. कहर 041 190 1) F's com- 
montary to tho same verse (132) of tho Talila, givos tho following 
derivations, Vi much: khata had Acemd ng to the Saubhagya- 
Sudhedaya, Vai cevtamly, hha. cavily (of the car)? ra to goor 
enter. But according to the Yova Shasfias, £1: Desi who isin tho 
form of Vartkha (Vatkl (सव) is ५० orlled beeaase sho as prodaced 
by the Prana called Vichua 


~ 


Wi ULL SEX CENTRUS AN UE SER \। OWER 


is joined to the 3rddh, st 1५ ea led © Mach १५1 1.7 This 
namo 1५ corived {1011 Ue act that She abules *i1 the 
midst? Sleisneithe hke Pashvant 1) doos Sie proceed 
outwad like Vakbu, with aticu Won [1 | developed 
But Sho is m the middle bot ween these two 

Tho fill) nanifestation ws Vaakhar of tho man wishing 
to ery oul Tn this way articulated sou द 1 produecd by 
au? ‘The Nitya Tantra also says: “The Para form 11568 
in the Muladhara noducod by ‘aw’; the sune ‘aur’? vising 
upwards, mamiested m the Sv.dhishthi a, attams the 
Pashyai [1 siato The samo slow क 1'sing upwards and 
mamfested 11 fae Am hate un ted with tho undarstunding 
(Buddhi), as Machyama  Agam isi g upwards, and 
appearing m tie Vishuddha, ib issues fom he throw 
as Vatkhan’) As the Yogakundal Upamshad says 
“That Vik (powor of spooch) wiieh sprouts im Part gives 
forth leaves in Pashyanti, buds forth तो Madhy ani, and 
Dlossoms in एष्या पा [क roversing the abovo o dor sound 
as absorbod. Whosoover realises te grout Lord of Vile the 


1} daltomast wyyad 
2 1 adl mat pwathamim पता 1१४५] cowl 7 1 parity 
Pra chat pas } 01६ adhe bed १115) caddy yug med } 111 ६ yah, 
Vyacte vusbuyathor फो ताण sya ५ tel sushurac, 
Baddhas tasmat blavate pavanaproriid var 111१ 
riya cp eel) 

*Blaskumiayr erties Hor o he inc, U tina ५ uy), 11 ttle 
Saubhagy vSudhodaya, which says. “Ax ५] ) aces all on [[७४ 1 and 
an Sho rises (Uttnna above the path of action this Mother १५ enalled 
Pashyanti and [ता्‌ ’) 

) Nity atantire pi 

Mulidharat कवि aah pudshyo radia n shave 

Sr ovordhynatay y nitah svadhishth ine vipa ubhunb 

Pashyrntyakhya n avapr ots {एला nd virg sana h sil 

Anab vo biddhi-taity wamoto mad ay umebl द awh, 

१ पा tiyodhy uy पा एषो sm vishidd an k पता adesl atah 

Vaicharyacd ya ily adh (Bhi skaradyi, op ct ) 

830 alsa Ch, 1, Pripanchasara lartia, Vol [| of Tanti’k 
Yevts,ed A Avalon 


40h ता 


1111, कावा 8 OR LOLUSLS (CHAK tA, 147५) 175 


undifferentiated illuminating Self is unaffected by any 
word, be 1t whal 11 nay.” 

Thus, thoagh there aio Jour kinds of speech, gross~ 
minded men (Manushyah sthwadtishah)! who do not 
understand tho first three (Pai ete.), think speech to be 
Vaikhari alone,’ just as they tako the gross boty to be the 
Self, in ignorance of 118 subtler principles. Shruti says : 
“ Hence mon think that alone to be speech which 1s imper- 
tect” that is, imperfect in so far as 11, doos not possess the 
first three forms Another Shruti also says :4 ^ Four are 
the grades of speech -those Brahmanas who aro 150 know 
them: three aio Inddon and motionless; inen speak tho 
fourth.” The Suta Sanghita also says “ Apaca (the mo- 
tionless Brahman) becomes Pada (tho fou forms of speech), 
and Pada may become Apada. Tle who knows the distinc- 
tion botweon Pada® and Apada, ho veally sees (ic, 
himself becomos Brahnian),” ¢ 

Thus, the conclusions of Shruti and Smmti are tat the 
«hat? (at) im the human body has four divisions 
(Pain, ole) But even in tho Para form the word Tat 
only donoics the Avyakta with throo Gunas, the cause 
of Pari, and not tie unconditioned Biahman who is 
above Avyakla. Tho word “Tat”? which occurs in the 
transcendental sayings means the Shabdabrahman, or 


1That is mon who see and accept only the gross aspect of things. 

21tthang chaturvidhasn matmkésu paraditrayam ajananto manu- 
shyéh sthuladrisho vaikhirim ova vashang manyate (Bhaskararaya, 2b ), 

3‘fatha cha shrumh Y!asmad yadvicho naptang trnmanushya upa 
jivanti ili, anaptam apianang tisribhir vir ubitam itynr tha itt yedabhashye, 

4Shin yantare'pi chabvai vakparimita pada ह 1m शता brabmand 
yo mavishineh, guba tin. mhiti nonggayanti, turyang vacho manu- 
ahya vadantiti (2b ) 

3 06 Pada, or wad, 13 that which hag ate mmation Panini says 
(Sutra, [, av, 14) ` “hat which onds in Sup (nominal endings) and 
mm Thin (verbal torminationy) is called Pada” Aga n, tl 9 Sup (ter nma- 
tion) has five divimong 

0 Bhaskaariya, lor ce! 


70 H OSX CENIRIS AN 11\ ५ द से षष 


[&]1‰.71 endowed with tho work of creation, 1 1111161 ance, 
and “dostinction,” of the Universe. ‘fie sume word alsa 
indieates induectly (laksbana) (6 vneonditionec on 
supreme Brahman who is without alimbutes Tho rela. 
tion betwoon the two Brahmans is that of samonoss (Ta. 
ditmya). Thus, the Doy or Slakti 1 the ono ossonce of 
consciousness (Chidekarasariipim)—that is, She 18 evor 
inseparate from Ghat, ‘Tho relation of the tw) Brahmans 
18 pessible, as the two are one and the same, Though 
they appear as different (by uliibuics), yot at the same 
time they arc one 

Tho commentator ated then isks How can the word 
Tat in the Vaikhati form indieato Brahman ? and rephes 
that ॥ only does so indirectly. Tor sound im the physical 
form of speech (Vaikhur) only expresses or 1s identified 
with the physwal form of Biahman (tho Vier), and not 
the pire Supreme Brahman, 

‘he followmg will serve as a stn nary ol correspon. 
donces noted in this and the previous Chaptar कषण 
38 first theo Nuguna Brahman, which in its creative 
aspeo 18 Saguna Shabdabruhman, vd assumes the 
form of Puabindu, anc then of the threetold (ribmdu) ; 
the {0१1 who atc represented क the 83 140 above 
stated by the font forms of speceh, sound or state 
(Bhava). 

The causal (Kirana) or Suptome Bindu (Parabindu) 
is unmamiost (Avyakta), uncifferontiatod Shiva-Shakti, 
whose powers ate not yol displayed, but aro bout to be 
displayed from out the then undifferentiated state of 
Milaprakriti. This is the state of Supremo Speech 
(Pari Vik), the Suprome Word or Logos, the seat of which 
in the individual body is tho Miladhiva Olakra. So 
much is cleu. There is, however, somo diflicully in co- 
ordimating the accounts of tho threefold powers mamtosting 


THD (दकम OR 101४ (CHAKRA, TADMA) 177 


upon the differontiation of the Great Bindu (Maha- 
bindu). This is due in part to the fact that the verses in 
which the accounts appear are not always to be read in 
the ordov of the words (Shaoda Kiama), but according to 
the actual order im fact, whatever that may be (Yathr 
gambhavam).! Nextly, there 12 sone apparent variance 
in tho commentarios. Apart fron names and techmeal 
details, the gist of tho matter 15 simple and 1) accord. 
ance with other systems. here is first the unmani- 
fested point (Bindu), as to which symbol St Cloment of 
Alexandria says* that if from a body abstraction be mado 
of its properties, depth, breadth, and length, that which 
yomaing is ४ point having position, from which, if 
abstraction be made of position,’ there is the state of pri- 
mordial unity ‘hore is one Spit, which appears thiee- 
fold as a Tinniby o Manfested Powe: (Shakti), As 80 
manifosting, the gno (Shiva-Shakti) becomes twofold, 
Shiva and Shakti, and the relation (Nida) of these two 
(Tayor mithah samaviiyah) makes the threefold Trinity 
common to so many ichgions. ‘he Ono first moves as 
the Groat Will (Ichchhi), then as the Knowledge or 
Wisdom (Jniina) according to which Will acts, and thon 
as Action (Kriya). ‘his is tho orde. of Shakti in Ish. 
vara. So, according to tha Pauranik account, at the 
commencoment of croation Brahma wakes. ‘The Sangskaras 


1 Ag pointed out by the author of Pianatoshim, p 9, when citing 
the vorse from the Goraksl a Sanghita 
Ichehha hriya tathé jninang gaur: brahim tu vaishnayi 
वपता shactih athiti एतद tatparang नना Om ati 
According to this account of the Dovas of different Adhazas of 
Pranashakt: npasana the odor 1s (according to suquence of words) 
Iehchhas-Gaun, Kaiya Biihmi, Vushnavi Jnana 
2Shomata, Book V, Ch I, in Vol. TV, Antonieno lamary 8) 
also in “Ties Mystéion de In Cros,” an vighteonth ¢ontury myst cal 
work, we oad “Anto omma punctum exstiizé non mathomalisum 
sed diffusivum ’ 
3 8०6 my “ Galaud of Letters o Studios 11) the Mantrashastra’ 
ay 


178 LUE SIA CUNTRIS AND IH SR? N ४ 


thon ariso in [78 mind. hore arises the Desire to create 
लानो ia Shaki); then the Knowledge (Jnana Shaled1) of 
what Ilo 15 about to creato; and, lastly, the Action (Kriya) 
of eroation In the caso of Jiva the order is Jniina, 
Iehchla, क, Vor To first considers or knows somo- 
thing. Informed by such knowledge, Hoe wills and then 
acts. ‘Tho thro powors are, though counted and spoken of 
as arising separately, insoparablo and indivisible aspects of 
the One. Whe ever thero is one there is the other, though 
mon think of each sepaately anc as comme into beitg 
that is riamfested in [6 separatoly. 

According to ono nomenclature the Supreme Bindu 
becomes threefold as Bindu (uyya), Bia, Nida Though 
Shiva 1 nover soparate from Shakti, nov Shakti from 
Shiva, a manifeslation may piedonnnantly signify one or 
another. So 101५ said that Bindu is in the natme of Shiva 
(Shivatmaka) and Bija of Shakti (Shakiy: Guaka), and Nada 
is tho combmation of tho two (Tayor mithah samaviyah), 
Those are also called Mahabmdi (Parabindu), Sitabindu 
(White Bindu), Shonvbindu (Rod Bindu), and Mishrabindu 
(Mixed Bindu). Those च 0 st prome (Para), subtlo (Suksh- 
ma), gross (Sthula), hore 18 anothor nomonelaturo—vis , 
Sun, Tue, and Moon here is no question bib that Bija 
18 Moon, that from B°ja issues tho Shakti Vami, from whom 
comos Brahmi, who are in tho ५1116 of the Moon and 
Will-Powor (लाना गपि). [नालो Shakti in torms 
of the Gunas of Prakriti is Rajas Guna, which impols 
Sattva to self-display. This is Pashyanti Shabda, tho seat of 
which is in tho Svidhishthana Chakra, T'rom Nada similarly 
issue Jyoshtha Shakti and Vishnu, and fiom Bindu Raudri 


1 Randi birdos tato niiday jyoshtha bijad a ६) १४ 
Vama tabhyeh samutpanna rudiabrahmaramidhipah 
Sangqnanochchhalaiyatmino vahnind varka-avariipm wh. 


(Sharada 'Tlaca, Gh 1) 


IHD GINLRIS OR 10 एज (CHAKRA, PADWA) 179 


and Rudra, which ace Mad] yama and Vaikhan Shabda, 
the seats of which aro the Anthata and Vishuddha Chakras 
respecuvoly. According to o1e acco nt} Binduis ^ Fire” 
and Kriya Shakti (action), and Nada is “Sun” and Jnana 
Shakti, which in toms of the Gunas aro ‘Tamas and Sativa 
respectively? Rughavabhatia, however, in his Commentary 
on the Sharada, says that the Sun is Kriya because, hike 
that luminary, it makes all things visible, and Jnana 18 
Fire because knowledge burns up all creation. When Jiva 
through Jnana knows itsolf to be Brahman it ceases to act, 
go as Lo accumulate Karma, and attains hberation (Moksha). 
It may be that this 1016165 to the Jiva, as the former 
represents the creativa of Tshvara 

In the Yogimbridaya Tantra it 18 said that Viima and 
Tehehha Shakti arc in the Pashyanti body, Jnana and 
Jyeshtha are callod Madhyaina; Kriy. Shakti 18 Randri ; 
and Vaikha1i 1s im tho form of the universe? The eyolu- 
tion of the Bhivas 13 givor in tho Sharada Tilka‘ as 
tollows: tho all-porvadmg Shabdabrahman or दप पतला 
emanatos Shakti, and thon follow Dhyam, Nida, Niro- 
dhika, Arddhondu, Bindu. Shakti is Chit with Sativa 
(Paramikashavastha), Dhvani is Chit with Sattva and 


1 Yogimhy daya Tantra; Commentary already cited referring to 
Saubhagyasudhodaya and ‘Lativasanc oha See also Tantialoka, Ch VI. 
2Tho following shows the correspondence according to the texts 
cited + 
Biyn Shakti, Moon, Vama, Brahma, Bharata, Iehchha, 
Shonabindu Rajia, Pashyant: Svadhishthana 
Nada 1 Sliva-Shakt, Sun dyeshtla, Vishna, Vishvambhara, 
M shrabindu Jnani, Satéya, Mad) yima, Anahate 
Bindu Shiva, Divo, Raud:i, Rudia, Rudiem, Kriya, Tamas, 
Sitabindu Vaikhari, Vishuddha 
3 Ichohhashaktis tatl a Vama pachyantavapusha sthita 
Jnfinashaktis tatha Jyoshtha madhj ami vig udarita 
Katyashaktis tu Raudiayam vukhari vishy wigrahd 
(Cited under v 22,Comm Kamakalavlisa ) 


4 Chap. I. 


180 THF IX CENTRES AND 111 SLRPENT कषप 


Rajas (Akshatiivastha) ; Nada is Chit with Suttva, Rayas, 
Temas (Avyaktavasthi); Nuodlik 18 the same wilh 
abundance of Tamas (Tamah-prachury at), Arddhondu the 
same with abundance of Saliva; पात्‌ Bindu the sombination 
of the two. ‘This Bindu is called by (ho different namog 0 
Para and tho rest, according as it is 111 tho differont conties, 
Muladhira and the 10५ [ this way Kundali, who is 
[लान्‌ ha, Jnana, Kriya, who is both in the form af conscions- 
uoss (‘Teyorupi) and composod of the Gunay (तपाता), 
०१७४4५५ the Garland of Lotters (Varnamala), 

Tho fou Bhavas have been doall with as (द पाट under 
Nada, itsoll one cf the following rine man ‘estations of 
Devi. 

Pandit Ananta Shaistrm, referrmg to Lakshmidhara’s 
commentary on y. 84 of Anandalahai, says ; 1 

*¢Bhagavati is the word used im tho text to denote 
Devi. One that possosses Bhapa igs callut a Bhagavati 
(feminine), Bhaga signifies the knowledge of (1) the 
croation, (2) destruction of tho umyvoryo, (3) the origin of 
beings, (4) the ond of boings, (5) 10a) knowledge or divine 
truth and (0) Avidyi, or ignorance. Tho that knows all 
theso six iloms is qualified for the {1110 Bhagavin, Again, 
Bha=9%. “Bhagavata” refs to tho nine-anglod Yantra 
(figure) which is usod in the Chandrakalavidya.’ 

“ According to the Agamas, Dovi has ninc manilosta- 
tiony, which aro ; 

1. Kila groap—last‘ug from the twinslng of an 
eyo to tho Pralaya time The sin and moon are included 
प्रा this group. Tin, 

“2, Kula group—consists of things which have tom 
and colour. Torst, 

“3 Name group—conaisty of things which have 
names, Naw. 

1 Ananta Shastri, ap cit, p 72 


LUE GINIUS OR 101 (CHAKRA, PADMA) 181 


“4, Jnana group—TIntelhgenee. It is divided into 
two branches: Savikalpa (nixed and sub‘ect to change) 
and Nirvikalpa (pire and unchanging). Cut. 

«5, Chitta group consists of (1) Ahangki ra (egoism), 
(2) Chatta, (3) Buddhi, (4) Manas, and (8) Untnanas Minn, 

“G6, Nida group—consisis of (1) Raga (desire),' 
(2) Tehchhu (dese! strengthonod, or developed desire), (3) 
Kritt (action, का active form of desire), and (4) Prayatna 
(attempt made to achieve the object desired) These 
correspond, im order, to (1° Para (tho first stage of sound, 
emanaling fiom Mulidhiry), (2) Pashyanti (the second 
stage), (3) Madhyamn (the third stage), and (4) Vaikhar 
(the fourth stage of sounc as coming ont of the mouth) 
Soon. 

«7, Bindu gioup—consists of the six Chakra» from 
Mulidhara to Ajni = Psyc o ssrvet, in. Spinviuar Geen. 

५8. Kala group consists of fifty letters from Mula- 
dhiva to Ajni,  Keyworss,! 

“9, diva group: consists of souls in tho bondage of 
matter. 

“The Prosiding Deitics or Tattvas of tho four con- 
stituenl parts of Nada ave Maya, Shuddhavidya, Mahesha, 
and Sadashiva. ‘The Commentator deals with this subject 
tully, quoting extracts 0010 occult works. ‘Ihe following 
is a translation of a fow liaes from Nuamakalividyi,' 

1 Rage should bo translated as “imtorest” asin Raga hanchuka 


Ichchha is tho will towards action (Kriya) n conformity therew th 
Desire 18 ६ {1088 thing which comos in with the matanal world. 

2) cito the passige ag wiilton, but thoso terms are not olen to me 

9 ¶ do not know what the Pandit moans by this term 

14 This work 14 nol easily wearlablo to Pandits 0 scholars, wo do 
not find this namo in any cf tho catalogues propared by Jiaopean or 
Indian scholars ‘Ll 0 maka-socrel pohey has spoiled all auch books 
Dyven now, tf we ind wy MS. donl’ng with occult mattors m the 1 onses 
of any snciont Pandits, wo wall not be allowed ovon to seo the book , 
and ngtuilly theea works bava fcr a long time bocome food for worms 
and white ants” (Ananta Shastri) 


182 MP SIX CENTRES AND LHD SPREONT 0५/1१ 


a work on phonetics, which will bo of imterost 10 the 
reader : 

“Poa 1५ ha (waloiw ality), os opposite ws tue 
next ono (J’ashyanti); Madhyami is caivided ito two, 
gross and subtle forms. tha giosy form consists of the 
mine groups of letters; and tho subbo form is the 
sound which differentiates the nine letlors. , , One 
is the cause, and tho other the olfect; and yo there 15 
no matanial difference betwoen tho sound and its gross 
forms ' 

“Oom ‘iki’. When the threo Gunas, Sativa, Rajas, 
and Tamas, are in a stato of oqtulbrinm (Simya), that state 
is called Para. Pashyants is the stato when vhe three 
Gunas become unoqual (and consequontly produce sound). 
Tho noxt stage is callod Madhyama; the gubtlo form of 
this is called Sukshmamadhyama, and the second and gross 
form is called Sthitlamac कदो), which producos nino dis- 
tinct forms of sound ropiosmted by nine groups ol letters: 
Ving (and all the othor vowels), क (Kava & ५ 5m numbor), 
च (Chavarga, 5), द (Lavarga, 5), त (‘Tavarga, 5), प (nvarga, 
5), 4 (Ya, Ra, La and Va), दा (Sha, Sha, Sa und Ha), 
and क्ष (रमाह), hoso lettors do not in voalily oxist, but 
ropresont only the ideas of mon. ‘hs at the forms and 
lottors originato from Para, and Para ws nothing but 
Chaitanya (Consciousness). 

“The nine groups or Vytihas (mamfostations of Devi) 
above enumoiated mo, again, classed under the ollowing 
three heads: (1) Bhoklu (oujoyo.) -comprises No. 9, 
Jiva-vytha. (2) Bhogya (ob, cots ol on oymont)—comprisos 
groups Nos, 1, 2, 3, 5,6, 7, and 8, (8) Bhoga (on oymont) 
~—comprises No. ~, Jn inavyitha 

“The above 18 tho substance of the plilosop iy of the 
Kanlas as ovponnded by Shii Shankarichirya in this shloke 
of Ananda Lebar: (No. 34), In commonting on this, 


गा GLNTRES 0६ LOLUSIS (6014114; PADMA) 188 


Lekshmidhain qnotes soveral verses from the Kaula 
Agamas, of which tho following is ono : 

“eho bligsht } Lore is of nine forns ‘his God 18 
called Bharava  [t 18 ho that confors enjoyment (bliss) 
and hborates the souls (from bondage). This consort is 
Anandabhaivavi, the evor-blissful, the Chaitanya When 
those two become equal (umte in harmony), the universe 
comes mto oxistonce.’ 

“Tho Commentator remarks here that tho power of 
Devi predominates im creation, and that of Shiva in 
dissolution.” 


Vv 
PRAC'INCK (YOGA: LAYA-K RAMA) 


Yous 1५ sometimes understood as moanmng the result and 
101 she procoss which leads to ut. According 10 this 
moaniig of the form, and ‘vom the standpoint of natural 
dualism, Yoga has beon doscmbed to bo the union ot 
the individual spimt with God. 

But if Jiva and Para nitma are really one, there can be 
no such thing xs union, which torm is strictly applicable to 
the case of tho coming together ol two distinet boings, 
Samadhi (estasy) consists in tho voalisntion that tho 
गरवो a Pavamitmi; wd Youre means, not this मपा 
tion, but the means by which it is attamed. तदु 18 thus ॥ 
term for those physical and psychical procosses which aro 
used to discovet man’s mnor ossence, which 14 tha Supreme. 

fas thus not a ipsult, but the process, method, or 
practice, by which (014 rosull is atuained. ‘This rosult is 
possible, according to Advaita Vodanta, boom so Obit, as 
the truo being of every Jiva, is not really fottered, but only 
appears to be so. Wore Atma nob trcly foo, Liberation 
(Moksha) would not bo possible. laboration or Moksha 
{10761616 18 potentially in the possession of overy diva. ITis 
identity with Paamibmai oxists now as thon, but is not 
roahsod owimg to tho रणो of Maya, though which Jivatini 
and Paramatm. appear as 860४1016, As ignorance of the 
identity of the Jivatna and Param. tmi is due to Avidyi, 


11५८1161 (YOCA* TAYA+KRAMA) 185 


the realisation of such idonlity is attmmed by Vidya or 
Jniina, 

Pc Tatler one enn inmeriately 7०८९५ hboration 
(Sadyomuktt) Jnana is used ima twofol sonse namely, 
Svarupa Jnana and Kriy: Jnana. ‘The first 15 Pare Con- 
sciousness, which is the end and aim of Yoga; the second 
19 those intelloctive processes which are the means taken 
to acquire the first. Jnana considered as moans 01 mental 
action (Manast Kriya) 19 an intellective process that 18 the 
discrimination between what is and whatis not Biahman; 
tho mght undorslanding of what is meant by Brahman, 
and the fixing of tie mud on whit 1s thus undorstood 
unfil fle Brahma wholly vid por nancnily ace, pres tho 
mind 10 the displacement of all ५७6 Min | is then absorb- 
ed into Brahman or Consciousness, which alone icmains ; 
this 15 roalisation o: the atlainmont of the state of pure 
conscionsness, which 1s Jnanv in its (1006 (Svarupa) 80186, 
Laborating Yoga ५ 1016 of perfect dnt ia offects what is 
called Kramamukti—that 15, the Yogi a(tams Sayujya 
with Brahuin in Satya-loka, which is thence perfectod 
into complote पिपा through the Devala w'th whom ho 18 
thus umted What the Siddha (complete) Inanayogi or 
Jivarmekta himself accomplishes im this 1 0 is therealter 
abtlained ag the seqiel to Braamasayujya But man as not 
only intellect. Ife has feelig and devotion, Ie 15 not 
only those, but has a body  Othor processes (Yogas) aro 
therefore assoe ated wilh क्षा 1 im aid of at, such as those 
belonging Lo worslyp (Upiisana) and tho gross (Sthula 
Kriya) and subtle processos (Sukshma [९ ध) of Hathayoga. 

Mind and body aro the instruments whereby tho 
ordinary soparative worldly experionco 18 had. As long, 
howevor, as they are so used they aro impecimonis in the 
way of attainmont of tho static of pure Consciousnogs (Chil). 


For such attainment all scroonings (Avarana) of Chit must 
२४ 


186 THE BIX CENTRES AND Tb SERPENT POWER 


be oeared away. Yopa thorelore 1s the method whereby 
mental mtollection and (ना (Chittaviitty) and Prana 
४19 first controlled and then stayec, Whon the Ghitta, 
Veith, and Piona,. o silec, thon Chit or Parumitma 
stands rovyealed IL stpo venes withoub 11116 efort on 
tho absorption of matter and mind uty the prin ordsal 
Powcr (Shakth) whenee they sprarg, o whom they ate 
mamifosted forms, and who 1५ [1५146] = ४ Shiva one with 
Him who is Shiva छा Consciousness. Yoga thus works 
towards a positive stube 9 pire consciousness by the 
negation of the operation of the principle ol 1 ueouscious- 
ness which stiunc4 in the way o ils uprising. his prunng 
action 18 well 1 lustraled by the names o a Shakti which in 
this work 15 ९४110 tsly doscutbed as Nibodiki an Nuodhika. 
Nhe first means the Giver of Kuowledge, unc the sevand 
That which obstructs—thal ts, obst ucts the allectation of 
the ind by the ob’ective world throvgh the senses Tt is 
by tho proilition of such umpressions that the state o 
pure conscious: ess auses = (१0५ वाका ५0 नालो slate ५ 
called Sam:dhi = (1141 as, the ecstatic conchtion {1 which the 
“aquality ? that is identity of J एवय and द्वात (os 
realised ‘Tho experience is achioyod a (८) |} ५ absorption 
(Laya) of Prana and Manas and 110 cessation > ull adeation 
(Sangkalpa) An unmodified state (Sammuasat yam) 1s thus 
produced which iy tho natural state (Saba, avasthi) of tho 
Atma. Untal then there aw that fluctuation and modifica- 
lion (Vvitti) which 1s the mark cf tho cond tioned gon. 
selonsness, with ils solf-duomption of 1” and “how, 
Tho state of Samadhi ‘s “hike that of a gram of salt, 
which mingled in wator beeomes one with 1१. Th as, in 


1 ho ‘Tattva ( १८४10) is revenled whe all ong) | 4 gore (Kuldy 
nava ‘lentra, IX 10) 

2 flathayogapratimki, [४ 5—7 ‘he ५1116 similo न nsed on tho 
Buddhist Demchop Lantia 


MACE ( (YOUA. 14१4- १२१११) 187 


the words of the Kidarnayva Tantra, “thal form of eon- 
tomplation (Dhyana) m which thore is noithor ‘hero’ nor 
‘not here, in which there is umination and stallness ag of 
nome gical ०८८६1), tna wlich 15 tle Void ltsolf”! 

The all-knowing and veucrable Teacher has said, “ One 
wlo has attained complote knowledge of the Atma reposes 
hke the stall walors of tic deep” (v 81), Tho Maya 
antia (५१५५ Yoga as the unty of Jiva and Paramatma 
(v. 51); that by which ononoss is attained with the Supreme 
(रावा पराध), and Samadi, णा ecstasy, 18 this umty of Jive 
and Atina (10). Others define ib ag tho knowledgo of the 
adentaty of Shiva and Atom. The Agamavidis proclaim 
that the knowledge ol Shakti (Shaktyatmakang jnanam) is 
Yoga Other wiso men say that the xnowleage of the 
“ternal Prrusha” (पाता) Purusha) 18 Yoga, and others, 
कटवा, (he Prakaitivadis, decluwe that the knowledge of the 
anon of Slnva anc Shakt11s Yoga (ib) All such dofim- 
tions icler to one and the same thing—tho realisation by 
the human spirit that ib as the Great जुषा, the Brahman, 
who as the Rulor of the worlds 15 known as God. As the 
Hathayogapradip ca says.) Riyayoga, Samadhi, Unmam,! 
Manonmani,! Awmatvam (Immortality), Shunyashtinya 
(void yel non-vord), Paramipada’ (the Supreme State), 
Annaske (withowt Vanas suspended operation of mental 
tunctioning),” Advaita (non-dual), Niralamba (without 
support ie, dolachment of the Manas from tho external 

VIX, % 

2 As walor ponred mn 0 water the two aro undisting nshablo (Kula 
niva Tantia, 1X, 15) 

3 Qh. LV, ४४, 3 4 

4 State of mii dlussness Sec Nadabmda Up 

" Soo lath yogapadipilet, IV, ४ 87 ‘The Yogr hice the Conscious 
ness with which ho 18 ot 4, is boyoud bot! 


8Tho 1006 pad “to go to,” and Padam therefore is that to which 
one hag 0९९०७४8 (Comm on v 1, Ch LV, of Tathay ogapadipika) 


7 Seo Mandalabrahmana Up LU, TL 


188 ५3 CNIRPS AND ५ धा रपि ow 2 


world), Ninn ana (stainless) माषा 15 ( कत्व पाका i tie 
body), Saha avast 1 (natural stiutco the Atria), ine Marys 
(किप Stele), १ meat one anc fe sumo tl na-~that as, 
tho cessation of both mental mohorng (Chitty) me पणो 
(Karma), on wuch there arisos 10060 1 tou joy and 
sorrow and a chargeloss (वाशा) > पत This on tho 
dissolution of the 20 y 1५ followed by boddoss (Videha- 
kaivalya) or supre no iberation (?aama nusti), which 1s 
the permanont existence of the eal stato (Svarupavas- 
thanam). Whilst tae aim ind the ond of al Yoga is the 
game, {16 inethods by wach ws altamed way. 

Tote we, ib is comnonly suc, oi fais o Yoga, 
called Mantrayoga, | achayoga, Layayoga. ant Riijuyoga.? 
These are all various modes of pract co (दिता an ) whereby 
the feolmgs and intolleett al activities छ the umd (Chitta- 
vritti) aie brought ino control and tlhe [य पोप isan 
yarious ways realiseo (Bia masiksh tkrra) Maca of these 
forms }as the samo cight subservionts, wlio rao caller the 
“ oight limbs” (Ash ingga) 1 1 0 Lese his || ५ sao 
aim—nimely, spiritual oxportence or ren तणा 0 Bial - 
man, biey dif er, howover, w bo bho means emp oycd are, 
it is Sard, im dogree 0" vost |[. Phe Sunidhi 0" tho first has 
been described as Mal abhiva, of bho second as Mahabod i, 
of the third ag Mahilaya, md by Ri ayoga anc Jnanayoga, 
it 13 sail, the hhoration called Kaivilya nnkti is oblamec. 


+ 1818 tho Vualuvbipm 1 dbo 16८ + ext 


४ (प्रुत) Mayopadl: (tho (षत्‌ , )1 चग (11]# 1 | grate 
tion [00116 प by May jor ppeuarce) न (क्ण) कात 1 atest inte 
of that (Tadrii tin), or ॐ पवता एणा कोपा) tl tas, (1 3 पापा 
Comm Jlathayogapradynha, ४ \ 1 

}Vmaha Uparish d, Ch Vil Yegatiltvap ५ ५ ए 1 dyst 
of Yoga will bo [णात्‌ 1 | द॥ ondia Ghosos! 91६11 । ५१८ Ra aap 
Moution 1s Uso mide of 1 (१16९ cld dy sic veonesp od” इ \ Che thice 
Vawik Kardas vz, Kiem फक (Kame Kand ), 13 kts Voge (Upa- 
sand Kanta) Jrava or Ra'a Y ge (sone CAO). Korie Yog e's goud 
action without desire for tts fr = Bhakti Yoga 14 devotion to Cod 


RAC LU* (YOGA: TAYA- दभ) 189 


It a to be notar, however, that m the estimation 0 
the practiloneis o Kundal Yoga it 1s the highest Yoga 
in whier a porleck Samidhi is gamed by the umon with 
Shiva of both mind ind bor y, as heroattor deseitbed — In 
Rayv and Jnana Yoga intollective processes are the pro- 
dommant whore they ao not the sole means employed Tn 
Mantra Yoga worslup anc devotion predommate. Tn 
Hathayoga thore is more stress on physical methods, such 
as breathing. Mach, howevor, of these Yogas employs some 
methods of the othors. = गाम, in Tlatha Layayoga there 18 
Kriyfijnana., Bat whoreas the dnina Yogi atta’ns Svarupa 
Jnana by his montal efforts without rousing Kundal , the 
Tathayog: gots this dnina through Kundalini Terself. 
Tot Hor union with Shiva m tho Sahasrara brings, and in 
fact as, Svarupa Jnana, 

Tt will bo convonient, therefore, to deal with the 
gonotal subsorvionts (Ashtingzga) which are common to all 
forms o Yoga, and then ‘ollow with vn account of Mantra 
and tho lowor Latha Yogas as a proluminary to that form 
ot Layayoga which is tho sub oct of this work, and includes 
within itself olements to bo found both n Mantra and such 
Tathayogas, 

The prevequisilos of all Yoga are tho eight limbs or 
parts, Yama, Niyama, and otho's. Morality, icligious 
disposition and practice, and discipline (Sadhana), 80 
esseutial provoquisites of all Yoga which has as its am 
the attaimmont of tho Supreme ब्रह्न मि. Morality 
(Dhaima) is the oxpressiou of the tree nataro of being. 
Tho word Dharma, wach includes both cthies and religion, 
bub hus also a widor context, comes Jiom the root dhii, 

There aro forms of Yoga, sucl as that with the olo rents giv og 
“powers” (Siddlit) ovat thom, to which diferent considerations apply 


This 18 a part of magi, and notof ral gon, So tho umting of Prana 
with tho Loyns Tatlya i. त navel (A gnayidhavana mndia) 1a said to 


secure immunity from lire 


190 It Sty (ष्पा 5 AND 114१ CBN LOWER 


to sustain, and 1४ therofore boll the sustaimo: and tho aat 
of sustaining The Umyorso is ५ estained (Dh षपतो by 
Dharma, and the Lord who ig 113 Supromo Sust uner is 
embodied ‘n the oternal law and is the Bhas woud ibs 
fulfil nent secmmes = Dhar na is thus (10 law govornime the 
universal cyolution, or the path of outgoings (Pravetti), 
and involution, or the path of retura (विभा 1(1).1 And oily 
those can वद्या the liberation to which the latlor path 
loads who by adherence to Dharma co-ope ate 7 the 
carrying out of the nniversal ycho no, Mor this reason it as 
finely sad, “ Doing good to others is the Supreme Daty ” 
(Paropakuro hi paramo dharmah) 

Tn this schome the diva passes from Shabd vidya, with 
its ‘Vapas एण viig ogoism and “uit atlamed throug’: the 
* Path of the Gods,” its Karma (rites), wh ला ave लीनाः 
Sakama (with dosire {9 ' |) or Nishk une (dist orestod), 
to Brahinavidya (knowledge of the Brahmnr) or (00. 
sophy as taught by the Upanmshads ‘This transition is 
made through Nishkuma Karim. By Salina Kamna is 
attmned the “Path of the Fathors” (1 1), Dharma, Artha 
(woalth), Kama (desire and 114 | पोना), ता Nishkima 
Karma produces that pur by 07 unt (hilta-shuddln) which 
makes man compotent for Biahmavidyi, or hoosophy, 
which leads to, and in its complotest sense ix, “iberation 
(Moksha) 

11 is obvious that before tho pure bhiaslul slate of the 
Atm can bo attained tho Jiva must first live that ordered 
life whieh 18 ts proper cxpressin ou tus plane 


UM ५ हःते concept, therefor | च 1 mame tor afd those Luvs (of 
which rohizict is but one) whicl hold {16 प averse togethar [८1 tho 
mmherent Jaw of all mamfoated bere. las this the Law of Voom which 
18 bey md (11 ¢ w beyond beth Dhame 91 Adhume As pan followa 
wrong domg tho Va shoshiky Durshantd sober Dharn vas “that by 
which happincas is 7191 1त्‌ 1) this and the voxt wold, avd birth and 
sufforing aro brought to an ond (Mokshadh wma)” 


TRACHION (४०८५ : LAYA-KRAMA) 191 


lo uso theological language, only those who follow 
Dharma can go to its Lord ‘Che disordor of an immoral 
life 1s not a foundation on which such a Yoga can be 
basoa = { do nov aye the corm न imuimoralicy” i tue absurdly 
limted meaning which ordinary Kuglish parlance gives 
it, but as tho inftimgoment of all forms of moral law. All 
such infringements are {छपरा वत्व on golfishnoss. As the 
object of Yoga 18 tho dostruction of the limited solf even 
m its moro ordered manifestation, 16s doctrines clearly 
presuppose tho absenco of a stato disordered by the 
selfishness which is the grossost obstacle to its attaim- 
ment. The aim of Voge is the achovement of complote 
detachment fiom the world [na hle govorned by 
Dharma, there as that unt’ attachment to worldly objects 
and sengo of separatonoss even in acts of merit which must 
exisb until by the dosliuetion of Manas tho Unmami state is 
abtaincd, Where, howoye, thore 1s unrightconsness 
(Adharma), allachmont (Riig ४) exists in ity worst and mosb 
injurious for un, and tho sense of separatenoss (Dvaitabhava) 
which Yogasouks to ovoreome is predominantly present in sin. 
Tho body 18 potsonod by tho sooretion of passions’ poisons, and 
vit ity o: Prina 18 lessoned and 1 1०५५, ‘The mind under 
the influence of ango,! lust, malice, and other passions, 18 
first disbracucd, and then, on tho principle whet a man 
thinks that he “ becomes,” 18 ९०1४ 6त्‌ on, and is perma~ 
nently mouldod into and becomos, the expression of Adharma 
(unughteousness) 11५0}. In such a caso the diva 14 nob 
meroly bound fo the world by the Maya which affocts both 
him and the virtuous Sakama Sidhaka, but suffors Hell 
(Naraka), and “ 9003 down” in the sealo of Beng 

Dharma in its devotional aspect 13 also necessary. 
Desire to achieve the ghost aim of Yoga can only spring 
from a roligions disposilion, and such a disposition and 


1 Accurding to Indiv nuvivls, प षठ १ ४ o worst of sirs 


19४ HHL SIX CLNIRIS AN 111 SERPENT TOWLE 


practice (Sadhana) furthers the acquisition of {11086 qualities 
which Yoga requires. Indoa , by persevering dovobion to 
the Mother, Samadhi may be aehwovod 

Vhorefore 18 16 that tie Commontator iy. 50 of the 
first of those works says 

१ [५ alone whoso naturo has been purified by tho 
practice of Yama and Niyama and tho like (referring to 
the Sidhana heremafte: dose: bod) will loam from the 
mouth of the Guin the means whereby the way to tho 
groal Liberation 1५ discovered ” 

He adds, howevor, (hab the 1 ४८८५ of Yuma and tho 
hke 1s only nocessary for those whodo minds are distut bod 
by anger, lust, ‘ant other ovil p opensilics = 11, however, 
a man toiroug) morit acquired in provious births is by 
good forture of ह natme which as f oo of these and othor 
yicos, then he is compelout for Yoga without this pro- 
liminary prop uation 

Al forns of Yogi, whotha Mvitia, Hatha, o पि], 
hive the same ot finds (As [पष्प or prop uato y sub. 
serviguts Yumi, Niyama, Astra, Pranny ima, वा पी) ara, 
Dhivan , Dhyana, and Sanadht Yuna 14 ol ten cmes; 
Avonlane o iijuy to all [४ 1 © oalures (1111). ५ ४); 
trulhfalness (Satyam) ; 10s एय from takiiez what belo es 
wo unashor, or covevonsnoss (Asteyain); sexun  continones 
in mind, speoch, or body (Brahimwharyyn); = [0114 प 1166, 

'Vorthy Up Gi ४, 113 prokimn wies me recossuy only for 


those who 1 we rol पठत्‌ = १४ (10०0 who hive Niyany तपो 
and elise ato noodiss Kula niva hy Ga XI, ४६, 20 

४ As tho Ifvthayoriprrtprd saya 6 lic who kiows Yoga should 
[१०९० १९ hig senon Low the expenditure of ta latter Lands to death, 
but t] 016 28 lifo for hin wio proseryes 1” 

Dvang stngiukshayot bindung mrilyung joy wi yogayit 
Maranang bindupiitona ivan ng Dindudhae in it, 

Seo also गे 08 ५९५८१ Up, which says (11 १५ Lith wor scenes such 
persoval beanty to tho Yogi that all womon will dosive him bul thoy 
must bo reasicd And sce also v 90, which shows tho ec unection 
botwem some , mind, and life, In the onvly stagos of Wathayogn 


“i 


RAGL = (० १. कषा १४४५) 193 


the [९५411118 paliontly of all tangs pleasant ov unpleasant 
(Ksham1); orf tude im happiness ot unhappiness (कापि) ; 
meity, [तद [५५५ (Days); sbupheiby G\rjavam); moderation! 
in and rogidation~ of diot (Mitabara), suited to the devolop- 
nent 0 the Saitvaguna, ad purity of boty and mmd 
(Shaucham), The ns ori 0 prnty 1s tho estemal 
cloansing o the bo ly, partie ilarly dealt with by Tathayoga 
(४, post); and the second is gained through the science 
of self (Adhyitmavidy:).! 

Niyaina is also of ton hands: Austenitios, such as fasts 
and the hke, ए the nature of purificatory actions ('Tapah) ; 
contontmont with that which one has unasked (Santosha) , 
एना m Vode (Astakyam) charity (Dinam) that ts gitts 
to the doserving of what one has lawfully ac पाठत्‌; 
worship of the Lo-d or Mother (Ishyarapujanam) vecord- 
ing to 11५ or He various forms; hearing o Shistric 
conclus ons, as by slidy 0 the Vedanta (अत्‌ [7५ 
vakyashravanam) ; mo lesty and shame fell in the doing of 
wrong 0610 15 ([ 1, a mind mghtly chreeted towards 
knowledge ieveales and practice en, oined by the Shastra 
(Mati), recitation of Mantra (Japa); and Toma sacrifice 


Sadun the lout goes ipwards, tle pers shrines, त dsoxual powers 
are Impoly lost | (ताता wit emission of semen ub this stapo is hkoly 
to prove full. Baba Sid dia vega ns his (प power ar Leu exercise 
it ‘of fro and ths o ex ole 16 1(५ eer t hint him what ean i 
woman do? Presumably, however, the dictnm cited vpphoes, for ८01 ~ 
tinenco musb im all cases tond to streaigth and longevity  [b may 
however, bo thu tho physive) [तवक or assumed negatives the all 
Choets obser yor आ on 111) ay mon, 


1Yogiya uwalkya (Gh [) seys #32 mouthfuls for 1 housoholder, 
16 for ५ foros rocluso, and 6 for x Muni + 


2 |} foods detrimental to Yoga, ६36 Yoritattva Up Yogakundal: 
Up. 
Shindilya Up, Ch 1, १५) use Minddabrahmana Up 


4 Which is other spoke: (which agai. 1s loud on soft) का mental 
(Shandilya Vp.) 
26. 


194 111५ SEX OBNERLS AND 1111 तानद्य एह) POWDER 


(Yutam) !—that 15, (ल हुठपम्‌ observances १४ general (Vrata), 
The Palanjala Sutra mentions only vo Yams the 
first four and frecdom [ता covetousness (Parigralia), 
Abings” w the root of those wl cl णा  Sheichan, 
ot cleanliness, 16 incluced among the Niyama. [१1५0 of 
tho Jatla are stated—~namely, cleanliness (Shancham), 
contentment (Santosha), purnheitory action (‘apah), 
study of the Seript ues leading to liberation (Syidhyaya), 
and devotion to the Lae (isl yarapranidhina) ° 

‘tho statoment of sich कषणम truths world hardly 
be rovessary were a nol that tho ¢ are still some who sey 
im Yoga 1८८८ Shama usu,” [८ tach breathing, acrobatic 
posturn g,” and so fort], On the coub uy, ue country 
since the Midale Ages ata tna! our ovn has lan 
grea.ev ५10५5 on the necessity of tle aesociation of 
morality and religion with ul forms of Jiuman activity, 
than India has done! 

Tho prachice of Yuma anc Niyana leads to renuncia- 
hon of, and detachmont ‘rom, the | 1111085 ol | 1184 world and 
01 the next,’ masing from the hoew ec ge of [1 ) permanent 


140 Gf fy vv 16,17, Math yogyradinkt and p bss gad vol 
of Tanbik Tots ed A Aveda Me Shataly: Up, Ch 1, givox 
Vrata a8 the Inst, slneh ५ dosaabut 14 th obsot vanes ol actions 
enjoined and rohan fron tous prot 1 10 see also Oh ४, 
Varal a Up 

2 Patangali’s You Stir O1 IY 30, 82 

3 So, ay was tho eiso in om Machovil gtulds, 1५] g on insp 108 
Indian Ait and फत्‌ an spoculiéion is asso ited wth उष [णिन्‌ ys wag 
the scrolashe philosophy In mocorn ties in the Worst the 1५1५९ mey 
of 19 gion an 1109 ny iors Tas not Loan por erly considlorod 10 bo 
appmont, Gaflsmanship aw the one case and ritolliger seu 11० obhen 
beng usnaily thonght to be sufficient, 

4Sneh os the Sudha (roctar) whith w gamed 11 {he heavens 
(Hathayog rpradipik”, Com to v9, Ch [) Renn adic may 
doublloss be practised by gov & ip what one wants, bab run पालो 
ot abandonment (lyiga) here menrs tho wrt of deste of (1), oyment 
(४४४१ -bhogechebhibl avah) (4b) ‘Tioxe who souk the joys of any 
heaver can nover attain the end of higa Yous 


1 1401101} (YOGA: LAYA-KRAMA) 195 


and impormanent, and imtonse desne for and meesgant 
striving atter emancipation, which characterises him who 
1s Mumuksliu, or longs for laberation 

Yama and Niyama aro the first two ot t10 eight acccs- 
sorios of Yoga (Ashtange woga) ‘These aceossomes or 
hmbs may be divided into five exterior mothods । (Bahi- 
rangga), chiofly concerned with the sub, ugation of the 
body, and threo inner methods? (Antarangga), or states 
affecting the development of the mind. 

Atlention 14 paid to the physical body, which 1s the 
yohicle of the Jiva’s existenco and activity. Purity ot 
mind is not possible without purty of the body in which 
it functions and by which it is affected Purity of mind 
is here use in the [त्‌ 867६8. According to English 
parlance, such pwity morely connotes absonce of irregulat 
sexual imaginations. ‘This, lhough creditable, particularly 
in a civilisation which almost scoms designed to fan every 
desire, is yet obviously insufficiont for tho purpose m 
hand, Piopor thought and conduct im all ity forms is 
but the alphabet o' a school m which thoy ae moroly 
tho first step to tho conquost of greater difficulties to 
(गाछ, What is here moant is that state of the mind or 
approach theroto which is the result of goud funotioning, 
clear thiuking, detachimeus, aud concentration, By theso 
the Manas 18 freod of all those modifications (एण) which 
enshroud by tho illusions the Atma fom Itself. 11 is 
turned inward on the Buddhi which becomes Laya in 
Prakmh, and the Atmatativa or Brahman 

Provision thoreforo is made in respect both of Asana 
(posture) and Praniyama, or breath dovelopmont, both 
of which avo shortly dealt with later in connection with 


1Yuna, Niyama, Asani, Pranayama, Pratyahara 
2 Dhyana, Dharand, Samadhi, which is both mcomplote (Savikalpa 
छ Sampraynata) and comploto (Nn pikalpa ण Asamprajnaty), 


190 PH. SEX ORNIRIS AND 141, पका क्रा POW! 


Hathayoga, of which they aro particulm processes, Prat. 
yahira ws the reshaint of and subjection o the songes to 
the mind, which is thereby yloadiod = पपाठ mind is with- 
drawn fram the objects of the senses. ‘Tle mind is by 
nature unsteady, for if is at overy momout being affected 
by the mght, sounds, and ५0 forth, of oxternal objects 
which Manas thronzh the agoncy o the songes (Indriyas) 
perceives, Tt must therefore bo dotacher fram tho objects 
ot the sensos, withdrawn from whalsoover direction it may 
happen to tend, freed fiom all distraction, and kopt under 
the control of the domimant sell.  Stoadiness (Dhairya) 
therefore 14 the aun and result of Pratyahiva? 106 three 
procosses known as tho “innor limbs” (Antaranga)— 
namely, Dhirana, Dhyana, and Savikalpn Samidhi— 
complete the psychic and mental diserplinc, ‘Mhose aro 
concentration of the mind on an object; unity of the mind 
by contemplation with its objeot; resulting in tho last 01 
cousciousness of the objoct only = ho first is the “ holding 
by ?—thab 1g, fixing the Chitin, 0) thinking principle, on 

a parlicular objoct of thought or concontration (Dhiranii), 
Tho mind, having been drawn away from the objects of the 
senses by Praty hava, is fixed on one object, such as the 
Devatus of the Bhutas, alonc, Uniform contemplation on 
the subject which the Chitta holds im Dharana 18 Dhyana 
(meditation), Dhyina has been defined to bo tho state 01 
the Antahkarana (mind) of those whose Chaitanya holds 
10 and is oceujned by the fhought 0 one object, having first 


1 866 600 पात्‌ Sangluta, Pomth Upides} ५ Shintilya Up Ch 1 
Ammitanide Up  Mandalabrahmion Up, ‘nat Biahmana Tho 
Sharada Tilaka defines Prntydhara धह । tha {कष्टा ५ obstruction of the 
sensos wandorme over then objects  (Indriyanang vichaatang visl ५ 
yosl x balid fharayam tobhyah pratyahivah vdhiyalo) ‘ho Shandilya 
Up (loc eft) speaks of five hinds of Pratyahary the Last of which 1s 
Dhiiana on eighteen tmportant pomts of the body 

2Shandilya Up, Ch To Amvitamda Up Manda alnabmana Up, 
Tust Bathmara 


। ५414101 (१०८५. t TAYA-KRAMA) 107 


cast away thought of all other objects. Through Dhyana 
is acquired the quality o montal realisation (Prityaksha) 
Th 18 of two kinds: Sazuna, ot moditation of a form 
(Marti); and Nuguna, in which the solf is 118 own obiect, ° 
Samidli hig been defined to be the idontification of 
Manas and Abin as salt in water, that state in which allis 
known as one (equal)! and the “nectar of ocquality ” 
(oneness)." Complete Sumadhi 1s thus the state of Para- 
samvit or Pure Consciousness Of Samadhi thero are two 
degrees, in tho first of which (Savikalpa) the mind ina 
lesser (6६1 ee, and in tho second (Nirvikalpa) in a complete 
dogree, continuously and to the exclusion of all other 
objects, ४४५५४ the uabure and becomes one with the 
subject of its contomplation, . 
Thoro mo in Advaita Vodinta thice stutes (Bhumikn) of 
Samprajuiita (Savikalpa) Samadhi—namoly, Ritambhari, 
Prajnaloki, Prashantavihita.® In tho first the content 
of the montal Viibli 1५ Sachehidunanda, hore is still 
४ separate knowor ‘lho second is that in which ovory 
kind of Avarnua (scroonig) is cast away, and thero 18 
Sitkshitkara Biehmijnana passing into the third state 
of Peaco in which the mind is void of all Vritti and the 
self oxists a4 tho Brah nan alone:? “On which beng 
known ovorything is known ” (Yasinin viynite sarvvam idam 


VV 17 atiy apr ity walniskt ip rvisise abiyaya (तरता oh niantara 
(vyfpli)-vishasiaity hutuyy gy yasy ५ bit dads) ong hittam a tah- 
karviing yeshim (Comm on y 35 of the Trish th, on tho title of the 
Devi ag Dkaginelnit pudhynta), 


2Shand lv Up Oh 1, Munduabrihmua Cp, Veal Brabmani, 
चा) Up Ch, tl 

4 Amnritinid Up. 

5 Yogakundali Up, Gh. 111 

§Gomm y 85 cf Pinst ali, 

7 Comm २/२ , Man wo vritt'shinyasya bvahmakmatayasthitil Tho 


mind has always Vaiittt (modiloations)—that os, Guna If tho diva's 
mind 18 freod of theso, ho 18 Briulunan, 


198 L SIN GPNIRLS AND QL) SHRPEN POWUR 


yynitam bhayali)  Hnirance is hore made into Nirvikalpe 
Samadht by Rajayoga. 

Those three—Dhirant, Dhy ina, Savikalpa Sa undhi— 
called Sangyama, are mero’y stages im Vie monte’ offort of 
concer tration, (101 ९15 as later statec, according 1५ the 
Hathayoga aspect, they avo progressions m Pranayama, 
each stage bemg a lorger ला 70 of retention of Prana? 
Thus by Yama, Niyama, Asana, the body iy controlled ; by 
these and Prinity una the Prana is controlled ; by vhese and 
Praty theta the seases (Indiryas) are brought under subjec 
tion, Then rough the operation of Dliiant, Dhyana, 
and the Tesser Samadhi (Savikalpa ov Samprajn ita), the 
modifications (Veilta) of the Minas cease and Buddhi alone 
functions. By the प्रादाय ana long practice or daspassion 
or indifference to both joy and sorrow (Vanagya) Buddhi 
itself becomes Laya, and the Yog attains tho true umodi- 
fied state of tho Atma, in whieh the Jiva who is then pure 
Buddhi is morgod im Prakiuti, and the Brahman as salt in 
the waters o ocean and ag camphor in the fame. 

Pissing then to the processes? poculiat to the difforout 
Yogas, Mantiayoga comprisos ul those ‘orms of Sadhani 
mm which {he md is controllod by the means of its own 
object that 18, tho mamfold objects of tho world 0 ` name 
and form (Nu narupa). ‘ho whole uaiverse is ado up of 
names and forms (Nimarupatiuia ca) which ave tho objects 
(Vishaya) of the प्राप्ते, The mud 14 itself modified mto 
the form of thal which it porceives. These modifications 
avo called its Viilti, and the mind is not lor ona monont 
devoid of ideas and fechngs, 1b is the Leohng 0 mtontion 
(that 1५, Bhava) with which an act is dono which determines 


1 900 Yogatattva Up mish id 

2 Seo two publieations by the 8 2 Bhuatalhar nmerahimandala 
—Mantrayogn and Hathayogy in the Dharma Prac iiva Series 
(Benares ) Tho latter m a short compass oxplam tho main essentials of 
oach of the fom systems 


PRAGLION (YOGA: LAYA-KRAMA) 199 


its moral worth, It 1s on this Bhava that both character 
and (16 whole outlook on life depend = Tt 14 sought there- 
fore to vonder the Bhiiva pure. As a man who falls on the 
giound raisos himsolf by moans of the same ground, so to 
broak worldly bonds the first and ७६४8106 motho [ 18 to use 
those bonds as the moans of शाणाः own wndoing.! The 
mind 15 distracted by Numarupa, but this Namarupa may 
be utilised as the fist moans of escapo therefrom In 
Mantiayoga, thoreforo, a particular form ol Namarupa, 
productive of pure Bhava, 1s given as the object of contem- 
plation, his is called Sthula or Saguna Dhyana of the 
five Devatas, dovisad to mot the requirements of difleront 
natuios. Besides the ordisary “eight limbs ” (Ashtanga)? 
cammon to all rorms of Yoga, cerwain moues 01 uaining and 
worship aro proscribed In the latter material media are 
utilised as tho first steps whereby the formless Ono 18 by 
Jninayoga abluicd —such as images (Mutti),’ omblems 
(Langa, Shilagrama), pict wes (Chitra), mal markings 
(Bhittirokha), Mandalas and Yantias (diagra ns), Mudras,’ 
Nywa® With this tho proscribod Mantra 1s said (Japa) 
either aloud or so tly only. The source of all Bya-Mantra 
(Soed-Mantra), the Pranava (Om), or Brahman, is the 
articulate equivalent of that primal “Sound” which 
issued from the fish vibration of the Gis of Mulapra- 
kriti, and the othor Biva-Mantras are the same oyuivalents 


‘This is an ossontially Tantric एष कल Sec [पाप Gh TT, 

५ Vids ante, p 114 

४ ५ 11116 Dava of Uo unawakcned’(Aprabnddl a) is iu Images , of the 
Vipiasia Tura of the wei the [oats Che Dove ol thove who know 
the Atma is everywhere” (Kulanava Tantia, 1X, 41) = 6 0 Beautifal- 
Dyed Not in Kulasa, Moru or Manduan do Tdwell Tam there whue 
the knowers of Kila doctrine aro’ (2h, ४, 94). 

4 Seo Introduction, Mal dtirvina Uaubee 

5 70. Thoso 1rtual Mudrais are vot to be confused with the Ycga 
1198 later described 

५ Soe Introduotion, Mala mvann Tantia. 


200 1B SIN LNEIES AND Tr spreren owre 


of the varous Saguna forms, Devas and Dey 4, which 
thorea ter appearec when Prakiili onterod the Viaush unya- 
vastha state. la Mantrayoga tho stale 0" Sam idhiis called 
Mahaibhaya ‘tins 18 the simplest oc ao Yoga practice, 
suited for those whose powers and caprcities ato nol such 
as to quah’y them for cithor of the othor nothads 
Uathayoga comprises thoso 8 dhanis, or 11086 1164 
methods of exercise and practice, whch ae concerned 
primarily with the gross 01 physical body (Sthtila Sharira). 
As the latter 1 connected with the superphysieu or subtle 
body (Sukshma Sim va), of which if 1५ tho outer sheath, 
control of the gioss body av ‘ecty the subtle body with its 
inte lection, feolings, and passions, In fact, the Sthiula 
Sharia + ५६ क 1 | designed to oname the Sushi 
Sharia to work out tho Kar na 1b has incmral. As tho 
former 15 constructed according to the nature of the latter, 
and both are umbod and interdopendont, 1 follows that 
operation mare tpon tic g ५५ bo ly w’ools tho subtle 
hoady; the physical p ocesses of this Yoge have boon 
preseribed ।) putictdas tomperamonts, in ordor that, the 
physeal body being first mastered, the subtle bo ly with its 
menta functioning nay bo brought under control! Those 
meicly physical processes aro auxiliary to others, As the 
Knlarnava पष says 2 Neither the lotus sea nor fixing 
the 28०0 on the up of the rose aie Yoga, 11 is the idontity 
of divatina and Parain ttn, which is Yoza.”? Phe special 
features of this Yoga may bo fist contrasted with Mantia 
Yoga 11 the latter there is concorn with things outside 
the pl ysical body, and special abtention is given to oubward 
observances of ceromonials Duo regard must be paid to 
the laws ol tle caste and stages of hfo (Varn shrama 


"Se {10 short suamary of the Mat! yoga Sanghibe given im tho 
Dharma Prachara ५८८८१ (Shia Bharatadharmamahdmaud Ua, Benares). 


2)X, 30 


1746116) (YOGA! न्रा) 201 


Dharma), and tho vespoclive dutics of mon and women 
(Kula Dharma). So tho Mantra which is given to the male 
jmtiato may not bo given to a woman. Nov is the Mantra 
given to a Brahmana suitable for a Saudia The objects 
of contemplation are Dovas and 06४18 in thon varions 
manifestations and conerale symbols, and the Samadhi 
called Mahubhnva is atta ned by contemplation of and by 
means of Niimarnpa. [n fathayoga, on the other hand, 
the question of tho fitness or othorwise of a novice is detor- 
mined from the physical pomt of view, and rules are 
prescribed to procure and incroase health and to fice the 
body of diseaso. In Hatiayoga contemplation is on the 
“ Jaght,” and the damadn called Mahabodha is attamed 
by the aid o1 comrol of bioath and ovher vital Viyus 
(Pranayiima), whereby the mind is also controlled. As 
already observed, Asana and Prune yima, which are parts 
of UWathayoga, aie also parts of Mantrayoga. ‘Those who 
practiso the latter will derive bonefit fiom taking advan- 
tage of some of the othor ७४५ 6808 of Tathayoga, ust as 
tho followois of the latter system will be helped by the 
exorcises of Mantrayoga 

Tho word Iatha is ¢»mposed of the syllables Tla and 
Tha, which mean the “Sun” and “ Moon ”—that is, the 
Prina and Apina Vayns. In ४, 8 of the Shatchakra- 
niriipana it is said that the Prana (which dwells in the 
heart draws Apana (which ciells in the Muladhara), and 
Apina draws Prina, just aga falcon atiached by a string is 
druwn back again whon ho attempts to fly away. These two 
by thoir disagroemont provent oach othor froin leaving the 
body, but whon they mo in accord thoy leave च, Both 
thei: union or Yoga in the Sushummi and the process 
leading theroto is called Pranayama. Tlathayoga or 
Hathavidyi is thereloro tho science of tho Lifo-Principlo,’ 


1In my volume on‘ Life” 


a6 


202 ‘Hp SIN OBNERIS AND EID SBULEN | POWHT 


using that word in the souse of (he vanity forms of. yitel 
Viyn into which Prima is divided Prana in tho body 
of the individtal is a put ) 116 Universal Broatl 
(Prana), or tro “Great पद्व का atte r pty, ए croton, 
18 fusl made to harm on’ge tie md \ ताव] b eatl, known as 
Pinda ov Vyashts Prada, witli the cos me or collective 
broath, or the Brah nance. or Samishti Prana, Strenetl 
and health ae thereby ulamod, Phe regulation of the 
harmo nsed breath helps (> the regulation anc steadiness 
of min , and therejore concent) ation, 

Tr correspondcnee with the three od division Adh- 
yatma, Adhiduya, Adhibhuta, Mid (Manas), Prana 
(vitality), and Viryya (scion), are one Thoretora the 
subjection of Manas cuuses the sub‘ecuon of Prank o 
Vayu and Viryya. Sinmnlarly, by controling Prona, Manas 
and Vryya aro automatically controtled. Again, if the 
Virya is contiolled, and the substance wouch under the 
influence of sexual desire develops into gross soo. + त made 
to flow upwards (Utde hy totus), cont ol as had over both 
Manas and Ohana. With Prinny ima the some 1 (+ 111141५) 
dries up. Tho soumal force ascends ance comes b ek as 
the nectar (+ 117111५) of Shiva-Shakts. 

P aniyaima is recogmsed ay onc o the © hmbs” of all 
the (Ashinngga) Jorms of Youu. Bo, whercas it aa uscd 
in Mantra, Saya and Raja Yoga, as an arviliery, the 
Tlathayog: as such rogatds 15 rogulat on und Yoga 
of breath as tho chief ricuns peocduetive of that result 

LAgending to Miidn ew so 1८ 1 (Shug cesty 11 ॥ able 
doom thronghout tts whole body Uh der the 11116 (८ of the sex tm 
will at is withetawn and elabor del inte a gacas form oo the sox wl 
ogans 110 be “rdchymetas os nol moely ta prevent {} = Gmiasior of 
gross seme: alieady formed bnt lo provent rts fools nog इ ( ५५५५० 
and it» absorpt om im the ता पव्‌ system ‘Tho body cf ५97६ whow 
tinly m ddhyaretas 1 1५ the scont of wlotus A ob alo nan wherg gross 
semon has formed may on tle other hand smell hho 1 buck gout 


Sone roe ris cin nike 106] to Poms and textos disappear 1 tly 
pubic arch so thal tie boly has the appear ince of that of a wom 


९५ (1८1 (८८५ PAYA*KRAN A) 208 


(Moksl a), which is { ८ Common onc of all schools of Yoga. 
This school, proceeding on tle basis that the Vritti णा 
modification of the क्त्‌ a ways follows तिक्त and on the 
sufheioncy 0 पाष tact, dele (ना by the aid of tho umon ol 
Ha and Maori tlhe Sus amnua, and the leading of the 
combined Prinas (गला to the [31 वो) narandhra, Samidh 
was attamed ‘Though the -eciptocal action of matter and 
mind 1 common knowledge, and bodily states fluence 
psychic or mental states as thc latter the former, the 
tTathayoga method 1५ p eponderantly a physical one, 
though the gro%s physical acts of the preparatory stages of 
this Yoga ४19 succecded by Krynynana and subtle vital 
processes which lave Prine as thoir subject 

Under the heading of gross physical traming come 
provisions as {0 the place of residence, mode ot life as 
regards oatiig, drmking, sexual function, exereise, und 
५० forth 

The nacbice and exercises connected with Hathayoga 
ave divided 1910 seven parts or stages—naimely, cleansing’ 
(Shodhana) by the six prccosses (Shatkarma) ; tho attan- 
mont of sbrongth ov hrnmess (Didhata) by bodily postures 
(Asana), 0" fortitude (Sthirata) by bodily positions 
(Mudri); ol steadiness of mind (Dhaiya) by restraint of 
the sonses (Prat yntiara), of lightness (fighava) by Pr ०६ 
yama; of realisation (Pratyaksha) by meditation (Dhyana) ; 
and ५ ' dotachmont (Nitlptat va) im Samidin, 

Those who sifler trom imeqnality ol the three 
“humours”? ave voc ued to practise the “ six acts” (Shat- 
karma) which purily the body and facilitate Prancyama. 
For others who arc free from these defects they arc not 


{Chiltv has two causes दद्रा पात्‌ Piina | [£ one is controlled 
ticn both are controlled (Yoga Knndali Up, Ch 0) 

2 Villa, Kapha and Pitta Those will be found desuibed 1 1 my 
{ntroduction to tho Pripanchasiia Lantia, Vol If of Tantuk Texts, 
and in my volume on ' Lite 


204 PHY SIX (फति 6 AND IIB SERPENP POWER 


necessary in such case, and according to some toachers the 
practice of Priinfy une alono is sufficient १५९0 form the 
first stops im the Hathayoga, On this cle msing (Shedhana) 
of the body wt N cas, [तपा w द. ठत He milo 1 [१८ as 
rondored mote active, and restramb of breath (Kimubhaka) 
18 facilitated. Recowso 1५ also had, i recessary, a 
Oshadlnyoga, m which herbal prepamations wo ulmunister- 
vd to emo dofective health, 

Cleansing (Shodhasa) 1५ effected by the six processes 
known as tho Shathama. Ol these, the 1140 is Dhauti, or 
washing, which is fourlold, or mward washing (Antardhau- 
ti), cleansing ol tho booth, etc, (Dantadhanti),o the *hoart” 
that 16 throat and chost (Titddhauti), and of the anus (Mt a- 
dhanti) Antardhanti 1s also fourfold namoly, Vitagara, by 
which ai is drawn into tho belly and thon oxpelled 5 Virisiira, 
by which the body is filled with wator, which is then ovacuat- 
ed by the anus!; Vahnisava, in which the Ni bhigianthi 1s 
made to touch the spin column (Motu), and Vahishkata, 
in which tho belly 4 by Ki cmmndii? filled with an, 
which is retained hall ४ Yema,-and thon sont lownward. 
Dantathantr is fow old, consisting in the cloansing of the 
root ot the tooth and tongue, the oms, aud tho ‘hollow of 
the skull” (Kapilarandhra) By Uriddhauti phlegm and 
bile avo removed ‘This 18 dono by a stick (Dandadhant) 


1 {16 ntest ues avo depleted of ar and ther by the wetion of the 
anal muscles water is sucketii, Ib फक्त पङ्‌ flows m te || 116 vou 
ereated by the doplotion of an ou tho lest nes © Another fou whi 1 | 
hase sean is the dhaywing 20) of ar and 174 mto the nethra, fom fhe 
mito the bladder and out apain Apart frorvilam dial van 184 lave 
mont of the bladder 16 18 १ mudi + छत्‌ { soxnil emer ion whercby 
tho JTathiyopi sucks into timeelf tho forcss of tha wo nen without 
ojecting any of his force or substance a practico Which (apart fiom ary 
other ground) 1s to le condemed as itjurious to the woman wo 
‘withers’ under such trontmont 

2 Gheranca Saughiti ' hivd Upadod v(v 00) ००८ vo Math aye ge 
pradipria, [I 21 38 : 

VA Yama is three boars, 


PRACHOL (YOCAT TAYA-KRAMA) 205 


or cloth (Vasodhauti) pushod into tho thioat, 01 swallowed, 
or by vomiting (छो पोप thai). Muladhanti 14 done to 
cloanse tho exit 0" (he Apiniiyu, cit ier with the middle 
010८ ' ॥1 (| water का the stack of a [पातका plant 
Vash, tho secondo tho Shat<carma, is tivo old, and as 

etthar 0 (1५ dry (Shagh ca) or watory (Jala) kind. [9 the 
second {01 11 the You sits n tho Utkatasana! posture m 
water tp to the novel, aud the ani is contiacted and ८६ ' 
panced by Ashyins Mudie ; (01 the same 18 done in the 
Pashehimott misani,? and the abdomen below the navel 14 
gontly moved, In Nott the nostiuls aro cleansed with a 
[1५७५ of string. [कणत is the whnlmg of the oelly from 
side to side (soo Plate X) Ln Trataka the Yogi, without 
winking, gazes at some minute object until the tears start 
from Ins eyos. By this the “colestial vision” (Divya 
Dnshti) so often referred to im tho Tantiik Upisani is 
acquivod, Kapulabliti i a process for the remova ot 
phlogm, and is throcfold. Viilakrama, by inhalation and 
exhalation, Vyiitkeuna, by water diawn through tho 
nostiils and ejeetot through the mouth, and Shibkrama, 
the reverse process 

hose are the various procosses by which the body 
1५ cloansed and made pure for the Yoga practice to 
follow. 

Asana, or postine, 18 the next, and whon the Shat- 
karma avo disponsed with, 19 the fitst stage of Iath toga 

Didhali, क shongth 01 fi mness, the acqmsition of 
which 1५ the second ५ the above-mentioned processes, 1५ 
{01104 hy Asana. 


1 Gheranda Sunghit”, Sucond Upulosha (४, २१) Phat s, squitt ug 
1081111 on the loos, the heoly off the ground, and buttocks resting 01 
heels ^ Wathiyogi om giv) himself a पय] enoma by » tting im 
wator and diawng i up though the anns ‘The sphinctor muscles 
me opened and shut, and suction ostablisl od 


2 Thi. ४, 20 


206 1117 SIN OLN ६।५ AN) 1111, ० ONE POW Ok 


The Asanas are [004७५ of tho bc ly. "ho ter nas 
gonetully १५५८१४५६ as modes 0 souing the body [+ 
tho poste 15 not necessarily wv siting ono for somo 
Asanas are done on (he belly, back, 1 पा([५, otc [[ 1५ anid 
that the Asanas ue as 16101 ५ as hving boings, wid that 
there are 8,400,000 of {11646 ; 1,600 ave dogla ७ 1 to be ax. 
cellont, and out of these thirby-two we auspicious tor mon, 
which are desorbed in detail. ‘Tho of ths conmonost of 
these ae Muktapal nisana? (the loosened lotus seat), the 
ordinary position for worship, and Baddhapadmisana! 
Kind: lyoga os ordinuily dono nan Asma ud Mu [71 in 
whicl the feet press upon the rogion of the gombal centre 
and closo the anal aporture, the hands closing the othors ~ 
10411118, eyes, cars, mouth (Yonmmudia). ‘The right hoel is 
prossod against the anus and tho left wgainst tho rogion 
of the gemtal contre and in order to close the aportiurs 
of the penis, it 19 contracted and withdrawn soto the pubie 
arch so that ib iy no longo sean ho Cong 10 is [पाठत्‌ 
hack in Khochart Mudri so as to close the throat also 
w oro these two Mudias a e combined. 

Thore ae cortair olhor Asean which ave peculiar to 
the ‘lanbras, such as Mun [क्षि i, (कात, and Sha- 
viisani, it which skulls, the uneta pyr, ud ५ 





'Cchorande Sughi Second [ [द(न] ॥ [1 ths Shivi sangha 
(Gh UI, vv St 91) eighty fou post wes are ment oncd, of whied [४ 
aro Lacommended ४९५ Sddaasir Usiasun Sy ast cist ॥ und 
Pidmasinan A (७५1 vccunt giver 11१ ctled (५ 11८1 Badthe 
padmasana, “Oueonasany, Moy nagana Bho pur १५४1 


Pic rghtfotispwod mthel bul phyb cok | ८ bo | aright 
thigh, int the herds are acascd ud pliccd का पापु the thighs 
the cla 15 placed on tle Inersl, and the gaze hyvod on thet p of bhe rove 
(see १५0 Sh va Singhita, Gh 7४ 52) 

tie sane oxccpt that tho hands are prssad b hind thy back, and 
the 1241४ hand holds the vght (०५ mad the left haid he loft boy By 
this imervastd prossure is placed on the M datha a, and (10 acivos no 
biaced with the | ghtonng of the body Che prsition is | प्राप्त्‌ in 
Plite XVII 


41 (१0 A: ++ १) 207 


corpse, 167 श्नु, form the seat of the Sudhaka, These, 
thot gh thoy have other vitual and magical objccts, also form 
part of the discipline or the conquest of few and the attain- 
mont of mdatterence, which 15 the quality of a Yogi. And 
go the Tantrw preseribo us tho scone of such rites the 
goliimy mountamn-top, tho lnoly e npty houso and mversidy, 
and the cremation ground. ‘Tho mtouor cremation ground 
18 (0106 whore the Kamik body and its passions ave con- 
- yumod im tho fire of knowledge.? 

Patanjah, on the subject of Asana, mercly points out 
what wo good conditions, loaving cach one to settle the 
dotails for himself according to his own requirements. 

Asana is an aid {0 cloar and collect the thought. The 
test of suitabi'iwy of Asana is that whic’ 18 steady and 
pleasant, a matter which cach will sottle for himsolt 
Posture becomes perlect when offort to that end 66०९६९8, so 
that thera is no moro movement al the body — The Rajas 
Guna, tho acaou o whieh produces ficklenoss of mind, 15 
restranoc. A suitable steady Asana procucos montal oyuih- 
brivn — fTathayoga, however, proseribes a very large 
numbor of Aganas, to cach o which a peculiar offoct is 


TIn suecossful Shavdsure ilo Vovt appoms to tho Siidhake, 0 
Shavisidhana tho Sadh uke sits astride ou tho back of a corpse (heady, 
the north), or whiel 1 dross . Yer my nd dacn Joes J pa of M tre 
with fhodharyisa and Piya on its herd A corpse 18 selected as bemy 
wu pug form of apguised matt, since the Dovata wl ch 1s mvoked 
11160 it 1# the Mahavidyw whose Svarupy 1s Nugm abrat man and by 
synch vocation becomes Saguna Tho corpse 14 fico from ain on 
dosne ‘Tho only Vayninitis th = प को] पुल, + which leayos not even 
म (वाक ‘Bho Dova y maitanlisos by mears of the corpse | ‘there 
18 a possess on of ib (Aveal ए) thib is, entry of the Dov ita into the 
dont body | At the aonclus on of a succossfu 1140 the head of the corpse 
{1111५ 160 एद, ard, Licing th Sadhieka speaks, biddiig ]im name his 
1000 which way do spr tii o worldly tdvincement as 10 wishos 
This as part of Nily Sid पणि done by tie “Horo (Vina), for it anc 
Shay inwa aro attunded by many (0108 

» As tho Yogakundali Upamshad 8 ys (Ch UT); the outer bunny 
18 no burning ab all, 


१ Patan Ua Yogasutra, 46, 17 (Sthuasukham asanam) 


208 HL StX OPNIRES AND THD SERPHNE OWlR 


ascribed, 11656 are move in tho nature of a gymnastic 
than an Asana in 1/8 sense of a sonted posttre = So ne forms 
o tes gymnastic ate done suatod, ote others are no 10, 
bit standimg upright, sending, lym, down, an | stunding 
on the head = This latter ws Viikshisani  Uhus, again, in 
Chakr isana tho Yog stands and bonds anc touches lis 
tect with his hance, a fauthar exeverse, as 18 alec ४110 
dakshi iapadasana, a kid of gooso step, in which, however, 
the logs are brought up to right angles witi the body, 
These ०४८०८५०५ secure a fine physical condition and free- 
dom fom discase! ‘They also bring di’ छठा portions of 
tho boc y into such ४ position as to ostablish a direct contact 
of Prana एक" between them, ‘hoy are also ssi. fo assist, 
im Prarayama, and to help to effect ity ob’ect, cluding the 
rousing of Kundalini, Tho author of the work last cited 
says? that as among the Niyamas tho most important is 
Abingsa, and among Yamas Mitihira, or a modotato diol 
(a significant choice), so 14 Siddhasna (in which tho Muli- 
dhara 5 firmly pressed by the heel wd the Svaclishthine 
region by the othor foot) among tho Asanis, (Seo Plates 
Xi, 1) Mastery of tins helps to secure the Unmani 
Avastht, and the three Bandhas (post) aro achioved 
w,thout diffic, lty 

Sblurata, or fortitude, 18 acquired by tho practico of 
the Mudrs? The Mudra doalt with in works o [पा 
yoga are positions of the body.’ hoy are gymnastic, 
health-giving, and destructive of disoase and of death, 


1५९५ Ch J of Gheranda उकुण and Nathayogapradipika, 
1, ४४८ 19 85, Shandilya Upanshad, Ch I 

20h. 1, ? 39 

3 According 10 the Commentary on the lJ whayogapmadipika 
(@ IV, y. 37) Mudra 18 so called becanso 1b romoves pam and sorrow 
(Mndrayati kleshim iti macré) Soe my Tntiodnetion to Mahénirvina 
Tantra, 18४ Ud CXXVIT and Ch. ITL of Ghoranda Sangnita 


4Gheianda Sanghite Thiid Upadesha 


PRACIICE (10 LAYA-KRAWA) 200 


suoh as sho Jilandharal ard otier Mudiis. Thoy also 
progerve irom injiiy by fic, water, or air. Bodily action 
and the health reantting theres1om react upon the mind, 
and by the mnono ५ porfeet mind and body, Siddhi is by 
thar moans attainod. ‘he Mudii is also desenbed as the 
key tor opening 01 the door of Kundabni Shakti = [t is uot 
(as Li ndorstand it) that all keys पठ necessarily to be om- 
ployad in cach caso, bul only such as aro necossa y to accom- 
plish the pur pose in that particular case; what 18 necessary in 
one caso may nob be necossmy in anotier. "6 Gheranda 
Sanghita describes a numba of Madras, of which (with the 
cight Asaias mentioned at p. 205) ten aro gatd {0 be of 
wmportanco m Kundalt Yoga, of which Khechars is the chief 
as Siddhusana is chict amongst Asanas, In Yommudra, the 
Yogi in Biddhisana stops with his finge ९ the ears, ८१०७, 
nostrils, nd 11101 (11, so as to shut out all caternal im- 
prossions. As nveady stated he prosses with his heel the 
दिशा ot contro 0" the porineum clesing the anal 
sport ane wil ulawng tho poems imto the pubis ach 
(Soo Plate XV), Ho imbhalos Prinavayu by KUamimudi,? 
and tnites if wilh Apinaveyt. Medifating in their order 
upon tho sia Chakras, ho arouses tho sleopmg Kulakun- 


dala by the Manta & [Ping Hangsah +, पका ^ tang? 


dnd, y 12 


2Tho lips mo omed to rsomble tho ber. of ॥ wow and the 
ur pontly down 1 (Ghorand: Su ptita, [1 86, 67) 

१ पा ow (प्व Civcha [प Hung as Kavacla Biv “May 
L bo protected” Wuag sbinds for Kat a (desire) and Krodl ॥ (niger). 
६11 1016 14 (9 6८ ५1४6 will (Si 8] (1), and दन्ता ५ ts revorse, or 
dissntion (lays) So-called “angry” Dovatas aro nob ugry in the 
ody uy sense, ॥ { aro Pein dont wpect iv which they ave Lorde of 
Dissolition, an aspect whith xooms ५ gry ot terbhe to bbe wor dly 
minded St we lofthe पापो 2 \1111 dle Way mit 8 the sound 
of tho wide t blew with force on the Ghola lice to the west of Mein 
whub time She mantostid  Tlipash Piast (Sah) ard Pusha 
(in g) om divin ‘This Minti vis wsed on talang Kund uini up, and 
boham (119 ॥ un) 13 br ngiig Ho. down, Ting also Sun (Suryya), 
and Sah + Moon (Indt )- Kiima -fohchhe 


at 


210 4111, SIX CONTRES AND THE इ वि (लका 


or the Sun, heat is produced, and this heat is made to play 
on Kuudali Shaki. By Sah” tho Kama or wil (1८) ehha) 
18 malo active The vital ai (Vay 1) m the Muladhiry is 
m the form ef beth Moon an. Sa (Somas pyyart p ) 
With ^ [वटक ” She i tor sod, Hang rousing Her with 
his beat, anc Sth lifting Fler upwards. 116 raises Tet to 
the Sahasriia; then deommg bimself porvaded wath the 
Shakti, wd in blissful union (Sangeama) wits Shiva, he 
meditates (pon himself as, by reason of that umon, Bliss 
Itself and the Brah पो Ashvinmudti consists of the 
‘epeater contraction and Cxpansion of the anus for the 
purpose 4 Shodhana, or of contraction to roxtrain the 
Apanaviyu in Shatchaloabieda — Shaktichnlana employs 
the lait, प्रताप , which is ropeated until Vayu nanifasts in 
the Sushumna, Shaktichflana is the movement of the 
ebdominal nusclo fiom lelt to vight and right to lefts; the 
object bomg to uo vo Kundalini by this spiralino moyomont. 
The provcss is accompanied by inhalation and the tarion ot 
Prina and Apana whilst in Siddhisana? 

Yom Mucra is agcompiied by Shaktich dant Mudra, 
which should. well practisod first before (he Yom Mudra 
isdone ‘Tho vectal muse ५ 1s contiacladl by Ashyini Mudra 
until the Viyu onteis tho pSushumua, a feet which is 
indicated by a pcoulia sonnd which is howd thore.4 And 
with tho Kunbhaka the Serpent goes npwaids to the 
Sabasrara roused by the Mantra “ Ling [1 ह्ण), The 
Yogi should thon think himsel to be pervaded with Shakti 
and in a state of blisgit) urion (Sanggama) with Shiva, 
Ifo then contomplates: म am the Bliss [140 > “T am 


1 Gheranda Sanglnts, “thnd Upadesha, 

2 Jud, vv 37, 49, ९९. 

3 Ind, IL, vy, 49. 61 

4 [athayopapradipiki., Commentary 10 Ch T, v 72 


॥ १ 


7401101, (१०५५ ; 1AYA*KRAMA) gil 


the Brahman” + Mahimndie? and Mah. vedha are done 


in conjunction with Mahlubandht, already desertbed. Tn 
the first the Yog pross’s the Yoni (Mulidhara) with the 
left heol, anc, strotclan, ott the right leg, takes hold of 
the two ‘vot wath both huds. (8५५ Plato XVI), Jalandhara 
Bandhe is then ५010५. When Kundalin 15 awakoned, the 
Prana enters tho Sushu nna, and Ida and Pinggala, now 
that Prina has eft them, becomo lifeless. Expiration 
should bo dono slowly, and the Mudra shod be practised 
an cqual number ol times on the lett and right side of the 
body. This Mudra, hke other MHathayoga Mudens, 1 
sud to ward off death and disoase. In Mabhavedha* the 
Yogi assumes the Mahabandha posture, and, concontrat- 
ing Ins nind, stipe by mothads already described the 
upward and downward cowse of the Prana ‘Then, 
placing the palms of his hands on the ground, he taps 
the giound with hiv buttocks (Sphich),! and the 
“ Moon,” “Sun,” and “Tire ’—that is, Ida, Pinggala, 
and Sushumua—becomo united upon the ontry of the 
Prfina into the latter Nadi. Then the body assumes 
a doath-hke aspect, wich disappears with — the 
slow expiaion which flows. According 10 another 
modo of rousing Kundalini, the Yogi seated am 
Vagrasana takes firm hold of Ins tech a little above 
the ankles, and slowly laps the Karda (४ post) with 
them. Bhastva Kuubhaka is cone and the abdomen is 
contracted.” 


1 कू Mintra Hangsah is bic bioath hold in Kumbhaka 


2Uhoranda bmyehita Ul 387 42 Tie Yoni Mudra “ which 
dotactcs te Maris परिपा the obyctive worke ? 15 deserrbod im the 
Com to v. 30 of work hae ust auslated, post 

Tih, v 28 at seq. 

1 ७७ aa lo this tipp 18 Pluie 1X which shows the position of the 
ground before or after ib hay hoon tapped 


^ Cchorarda Sangl its, Ob UIT, ए, {14 +t seq 


21४ THE SIN CENERES AND (111 ५ RPENE POWIDR 


he Khochar Mudta, whieh, as well as the Yoni 
Mudia, is roforred o 111 the text | anslaled, ५॥ he onpthon- 
ing of the tongue untal it reaches the spaco between the 
eyebrows 11 1५ thon turned back the (Throat, and closos 
the oxil of the breath previoasly anspirod ‘The urind 1s 
fixed in tho Ajna? until with Siddha this “path o the up- 
ward Kundah” (Uhddhvakundalini) conquers the whole uni- 
youse, which 1५ realised m the Yogs’s body as nob differont: 
from Atna, Tt is said that someti nos tho fienun is out 
but othors car do the Mudrt without dong a physical 
mjury which imtorferes with th निह ont and 
withdrawing tie tongne without manu holp La Shambhayi 
Mudra 15 tho mind kept froe from Viiltr or denetionuyg in 
Siddhas ma 

The tom Mudra algo includes’ what aro callod 
Bandha (bindings), cortain physical mothods of controlling 
Prana, Three important oues which are velorved to in the 
toxts hove translated are Uddiyana, Mula and dalandhara, | 
(Sco Plates XI, XII, XIV) In the first tho lungs ace 


1 40 ealled, aecord ng, to the Db द (द्व्‌ च Jp, beer we Chitda 

ayes in Kha (Akishy), aud tho torguo throug! Ghia Midian ताना 
1\ 

2 Choranda पिपा 8, Cl TE, sv ४ 27 Suspension of bre uh 
and maonsililiby २८१ 1, ao tat the Yop may be biased in the gronnd 
without an foor or dri. agin the cia of tho Yoru spoken of im the 
accounts of Dr MeGregor and Tneut A 1 Boleat, cited in पि. 0 
Pauls ^ 41001166 on the Yoru Philosophy, p 49 tu Gh LV, ५. 50, 
of the Hathayogipradipika, ab 5 sud t wWeoucentrition botwoen the 
eyobrows is the ७१५08 and quckost wiy 0 abliinmont of Unmanr 
Avisthi See Slandilya Up, Ch 1 Dhyanvb ndu Up. 

१ Yogukcundal Up, Oh If 

4.00, O) WE ve ‰ 70, ^ (16 1५ sc he Mal dbandha (sce 
Pinto XTIL) Gh TT v 45, says that Jubimdhy 1 shot? bo cone ab the 
end of Puaky and ववार १1५ Bandhan the od of Kumi hika md 
hoginming of %ebacn Sco uso Yop hurd i Up Oh fo, Ch. ITT, 
vy 57; Yogatallys Up, Dhyduabind: Up "hs Varaha too, Ch VY, 
says that as Pris as always { yirg op (तता 0), so bhi [पाती च by 
whch its flight is arrested, is called Uddiyar tha dha, Yogakund di 
Up, Ch [, ६१४५, because Pin ab वतको ५ (goes 1p Ho Sushumni) m 
thia Bandi a, ए seniled Uadayanr 


५ (णा (YOCA: 144 ¢RAMA) 213 


emptiod by च strong oxpiration, and drawn against 
the upper part of tho thorax, carrying the diaphragm 
along with thom, and Prana is made [७ mse anc enter the 
Sushumni = Phoough Milabandha (see Plate XTV) the 
Prina and Apia वात 1 and go ito the Sishumna. ‘Then 
tle wher “sounds” are head that is, १ vibration is felt 
—and Prana and Apana, uniting with Nida of the cardiac 
Auahata Chakia, go to the heart, and are चील एषम umted 
with Bindu in the षत In Mdabandla the perinal 
region (Yon) 35 pressed with the foot, the recta muscle 
contractod (by Ashvmi Mudra), and the Apana diawn 
up? ‘The natural course of the Apaua is downwards, but 
by contraction at the Mulidhara st 15 made to go upwards 
through tho Sushumni whon it meots Prana. When 
tho latter Vayu roaches the region of fire below the navel,’ 
tho {16 becomos bright and strong, boing fanned by Apana. 
Tho hoat in the body then becomes vory powerful, and 
Kundahni, feohug ut, awasos from Her sloep “just as a 
gerpont stuck by a stick hisses and straightens itself”, 
Thon ib entorg the Sushumni, Jilandhara Bandha 1 
done by doop imspiration and then contraction of the 
thoracic rogion (whorein is situatod tho Vishuddha Chakra), 
tho chin being held firmly pressed against the root of 
the nock at a castance 01 about fon fingers (Anguli) from 
the heart, This 19 said to bind tho sixtccn Adharas, ‘ 01 
vital centres, and the nectar (P yusha) which flows from 


11110 ५] 4 प्व Up, Gh, {| ccfnes raniwvana to 0 the won 
o Pri vand Apina Nala and Bindu are thus united 


28eo AganakaTpadiuma cited n nots to SN, \ 50 post, comm 
and Dhyinabindu Up ‘Lhe Yogikwidali Up, (4 1 says that tle 
downw wd londency of Apart is freed up by be adn 3 dowr 


3Vahver mand dang पकक प्क nabhor adhobl aye (Wathaycgn 
एषतो 2b, ए Gb) 


4 Soo Commontary, post, ४, 3d, 


214 1 1]. SIX प्रि 1 18 AND LTE 8 .RPEN LOWER 


the cavity above the palate,’ and ix also used to cause 
the broth to become Laya m the Sushi na |" the 
thoraeie and [तका ax | regions ate s multanoorsly contractad, 
aud Prana 1s oreed downward and Apina upwind, tho 
Vayu enters tha Sushmuna> Mas mon of the threo 
Nadis, Ida, Pi gave पात्‌ सजपा) may bo also of coted 
by the Malabandha, which alsa aids the faa on of the 
mind inthe Ain. Pressure is done on Uo porineal region 
between the anus and enw with tho left heel, tho right 
1001 being placed on the lelt thigh. Broath is msypued and 
the chin placed fly on the rot of the neck iat ws top 
of the breast-bone as in Jalandhara, (sco षग vit plate 
XVI) or alternatively tha tonguo is prossed fiemly against 
the base of the font tecth ; and while the mind 15 centrod 
on the Sushumne the Vayu is contracted. After tho breath 
has been restiaimed as long as possiblo, if should be expired 
slowly. ‘The heath exercise showa be done first on tho 
loft and Jhon on the right side. Che offect of His Bandha is 
to stop the upward course of tho breath through all the 
Nacdis exeopt the Sus] uit. 

As tho Dhyanebmdu Upanishad says, tho diva कमा 
lates up anc down under the influence of P jina and 
Apiina and is never at rest, just as a ball which is hit to 


1Phe ^ Moon? aw sifmato m the palital region nem the दक 
Hero 1५ (10 Somachakiv undor the Aqii and from the So 1५८] वतन 
comes ५ abroam of nectar which, ac ताता to somo, 1114 1 8 origin abovo, 
Tt deseonds ६) the “Sin? now the navel, whieh swallows it Dy the 

rovoss ol V paritak wana these are m ido to chingu posttions, and tho 

inter al fro (Jathuagn) is increased 1 tho Vip nity postion the 
Your stands an his head 

21 athayog का प्ता स IE vv. 46, 47+ You (41 1 Up, 11 yiina- 
bindu Up. Yegakur dali Up (Ch. 1) ५ ya thit the cont का of the 
upper part of the body is u impediment to the pusuge of the Viiyu 
upwards, 

3 Dhynavabiidu Up, 2b, 111, ¥ 19, donc 111 conqunc ion ywibh Maha- 
mndey on] Mal.cvedh,, deemiber pret of, v 25, wd Yogatitva 
Upamishad 


1146006 (YOGA. TAYA-KRAMA) 215 


the 61] with the palm of the hand uprises again, or hke 
a bird which, tied to its perch by a string, thes away aud 18 
drawn back again. ‘These movements, lice all other 
dlualities, are stayed by Yoga, which umtcs the Pranas 

When tho physical bocy has been purifted and con- 
trolled, thore follows Pratythara to 80५6116 steadiness 
(Dhairya), as alroady doser abod, With this the Yog1 passes 
from the physical plano, and sooks to acquire tho equipoise 
of, and control over, tho subtle body. [४ is an advanced 
atago in which control is ace uired over both mind and body. 

From the filth or Pritnay ama arises lightness (Laghava) 
—that 18, the lovilation or hghtening of the body 

The a which 1s breathed through the mouth and 
nostrils 13 material air (Sthula Vayu). ‘The breathing is a 
manifestation of a vitalising force cal ed Prina Vayu By 
control ovor the Sthula Vayu the Prina Vayu (Sukshma 
Vayu or subilo ain) is con rolled; tle process concerned 
with this is called Pranayama, 

Prinayima is troquontly translated “ broath control”, 
Tlaving regmd lo tho processes employed, tle term 18 not 
allogothor imappropmate i 1 18 understood that “ breath” 
moans nol only the Sthiila bub the जतजा na Vayn. But 
the word docs ui como fiom P ana (breatl) and Yama 
(control), but rom Prana and Ayima, whic 1 latter term, 
according to the Amarakosha, moans length, rising, ox- 
tonsily, expansion ;! in othor words, 1b 18 the process whero- 
by tho ordinary and comparativoly shghé manifestation of 
Prana is longthoned and strongthened and developed This 
takos place firstly in the Prana as i courses in Idi and 
Pinggala, and then by 118 transference 10 tho Sushumna, 
when 16 18 said to bloom (Sphurats)* or lo display itself in 


1 Dawghyoam ayiima molah par niho vishalaté (Ammakosha Dio 
tionary). 


4Comm. Lathayogapridip ka IIL, v 27 


216 {1}, ७९ OUNER S AND LHE S 1५ Wh 


its fulness, When the body has beon puntied by constant 
practice, Prana [07८८5 15 way with caso bl rough 8 shim 
in thoir middlo.! Prom bemg tho small path of daily 
experionde, tt becomes the “ Royal Road”? which is the 
Sushunna Thus, Suryabheda पापीय 14 practised 
until Prana i folt to pervade tho whole of the sody from 
head to toe, Ujjayi until fho breath filly the sody from 
throat to heart; and in Bhastya the brewh is inhaled and 
exhaled again and again rapidly, as tho blacksmith works 
his bollows ‘The bieeth is controlled only in the sense 
that 1 13 mudo the subject of corte imitial procogsos, 
Those processes, | owovol, do nob control in the sonso of 
confine, but expand ‘lho most appropriate term, therefore, 
tor Pranayama is “breath contol and developmont,” 
leading to tho unon of Prana and Apana, Pra ayama is 
first practise | wilh a view to control and dovelop the Prana, 
The latter is then moved ito Sushurune by the stirring of 
Kundalin, who bocks the ontry (Br thmadvir ज) thereto, 
With tho disappearance of Prana thorofiom, Ida and 
Pingeala “dio? hand the Panam ता सा को by moans of 
the Shakti Ki ndalim piorcos tho six Ohakias which bloek 
the prssige im tho Braliminah, and oventually becomos 
Laya in the Gieu Broath which 1 tho final ond and aim of 
this prc cess, 

Pranayama । should be practised according, to tho m- 
siructions laid down by the Guru, the Sadhake hving on a 


\Shandilya Up, Oh 

2Pranasye sh inyapadays tulbara wpatl iyato (ob, vv 2, 3) 

IPhat 1५ thoy ue relixed wd devitil sed, as ovory prt of the 
holy 1a जा which the Peans Shaki is wi} drawn 

4Tho Shand lya Up, Ch 1, says: “As hors a ints, mid tigers 
ac giidaally taned, ५) also (10 brovh when gh ly mur 1261 comics 
wider ९ 1४101, elsc ib killa the prac tiara? [त्र कपृत्‌ 10, therefore, 
be पफ oted ५ thout प्रसप्तो Miny have पा red thon selves and 
somo Tave ed Trough mistases mace nthe processes, wh'ch must be 
adapted to the ned: o each porsen, Llonro the novwssily for a» 
expolionead Gm 


RAGHCE (YOGA! TAYA-KRAMA) 217 


nutritious bul moderate diol, with his sonses under control. 
As alroudy slated, mind anc bicath roact upon one another, 
and wlan the latter is vegt lated so is the mind, and thoro- 
toro thythniie breath ng s sorgh( ‘Mus Pranayama is 
said to be success ul only when the Nad ¢ are puted, for 
unless this 1५ 40 the Prona does not entet the Sushumna 1 
The Yor, assuming the Padmasana posture, inhales 
(Puraka) and exhales (Rocha ca) alternately through the left 
({dit) and right (Pinggala) nostrils, votainmg tho breath 
meanwhile (Kumbhaka) 10 gradually incroasing pomods, 
Tho Dovuas of these ole nouts of Pranay ima are Brahma, 
Rudra, and Vishnu ~ ‘Tho [ग ia entors Sushumna, and if 
rotamo sufficiently long zoos, aller the piorcing of the 
Chakras, to tho Braimarandhia = 116 Yoga manuals spoak 
of various forms of Priniyama according as commencement 
ig made with Rochaka or Puraki, and according as tho 
broath is suddenly sloppol without P waka and Rechaka, 
Thora aro also various fons of Kumbha <a, such as Sahita 
Kumbhaka, whic. resembles the first two above nentioned, 
and which should bo practised until tho Prana onters the 
Sushumna; and Kovala, in which tho bigath 14 restrained 
wilhout Proaka and Rechak.? Thon thoro are others which 
cure oxcoss of Vita, Pitta, and Kapha,* and tho discases 
ausing therefiom, and Bhastia, which 15 an important 
Kumbhaka, as it operates 1 the case of all throo Doshag, 4 

Lifath wopgapradip ki, Ch IL ४५ 1 0 (ace p कणा of my 
Introduction to 1८ Mal tunva a‘ antin), 

2 Dhyinunidu Up, and da A neitniida Up, Varaha Up., Ch. V, 
धि पात १५01} nine Up 

+Tho bhand ly: Up Ch 7 says that by Koytla the knowledzo of 
॥९.17त॥ wisos and ine becorics [पतते iv पणव -thatis, us so ninal 
onorgy goos upwud instord of dovelo nng into tho gross seed which 18 
thrown by Apana dow ivards | ndu (somi al cnorgy) must be con» 
quoied, or tho Yogy fua As to tho Biodas assoaintod with Sabita, 
soo Ch. L, Yogakundali Upanisl ad 

4 390 Intioduetion to Piapwmehasia Tantia ‘Lantrik Texts, 
Vol. LIT, p. 11, of seg, 

28, 


218 PHP SIX CENTRES AND 111 SERELNT POWDR 


and mds the Prana to bienk through the three Cranthis, 
which aro firmly placed im the Sushumna,! 

{४ will be obser vod that all the metho 1s previously and 
subsaqnontly doacribed practically subset ve one object, the 
making of tho Prana ontor Sushun ni, o¢ thon become 
Laya in tho Sahasara alter tho Prana Deyaty Kundalim 
hag picreed the mtervening Chakras, tor when Prana flows 
through the Sushumna the mind becomos stoady,  Whon 
Chit is absorbod in Sushumna, Prana as molaonloss.” "hia 
abject colows also the methods Pratyahira, [ति पा Dhya- 
na, and Samadii; for wheroas in the Raj. yoga aspect they 
are various mental processes an Lsintes, rom the Unthayoga 
point of yi wv, which 18 concerned with breathing,” thoy are 
progressions in Pojineyima, Thorelore it is that some 
works describe thom chfferently to harmonise them with 
the Ilatha thoory and practico, and oxplam tl cm ५५ dogi con 
of Kumbhaka varying according (o tho length of its dura. 
tion? ‘Thus, uf tio Prina is retained for a particular timo 
1b 18 called Praty hua, if for a longer time it is (पप) 
Oharava, and so on until Samnuthi is atta ned, whieh is 
equivalont to its relonlion or tho longest poriod,' 

All bemgs gay the Ajapi Gayatm? which ts he expul- 
sion of the breath by Usrgkina, and its inspiration by 
Sahkiva, 21,000 times a day. Ordinarily tho b oath goos 
forth ४ chstance of 12 fingors’ boadth, but in singing, 
eating, walking, sleeping, coition, tha distances avo 16, 20, 
21, 80 and 36 broadths, rospcctively, {n violont ०२९१७१६५ 
those cistances aro oxccoded, the greatest distunco boing 


1 Flathayogapradiprca 11. 4 75 

2 Yogakundali-Up, Ch [ 
~ 38५. Yoga Sutra, ed तक्ष्‌ Nabhubl ar Dvived , Ap V1 

4 See Comm io Hathayegapradipika, Gh 11, ४ 1a 

४7] 18 wthe Mu tia Haresvh me ifested by [गम ५, Seo Divine. 
bindu-Up, Uangsah as divatma, and Paramalangen 19 अ (दद्य 
Seo Man rsa-Up mal ad 


PRAC IGE (CCA 14१५-1 RANA) 219 


96 broadths, Whore tha breathing 1s under the normal 
distance, hfe 13 peolonged  Wheie it 1 above that, it is 
shorloned.  Pitaka is ins nation, and Rechaka expiration. 
Kimbhaka is the coturtion of bieath betweor these two 
movoments. विप्रा प ts, according to the Ghoanda 
Sanghiti, of oght lands Saluta, Suryyabhedi, Uyjaya, 
Shitah, Bhastrike, विप्रो$), Murehchhi, and Kevah 
Priniyame similarly varios. Pranayama awakens Shakti, 
frees from disease, produces detachment from the world, 
and 01188, Lt 18 af varying valuos, viz, best (Uttama) mid- 
dling (Madhyama) and inferior (Adhama), The value is 
measured by the length of the Purake, Kumbhaka, and 
Rochaka. Tn Adhuma Pranayama it is 4, 16, and 8 res- 
pecelvely=28, In Madhyama it is double of that, viz, 
8 3d, 16,=56. {1 Uttama it 1s double of tho last, mz, 16, 
64, 82 respectively 112. ‘he number given is that of the 
‘ccitation of the Pranava Mantra The Sadhaka passes 
through three difleront stages in his Sudhand which aro 
similarly named In Adhama porspivation is produced, in 
Madhyama tremor, and Uttama done for a 100 times is said 
to vosult in levitation, 

It 1 necossary thal the Nadi should be cleansod, for 
aux does not enter those which are impme. Months or 
yoarg may fa pent in fla prolimina ry proenss of cleansing 
the Nadis, ‘Tho cleansing of the Nadi (Nadishuddhi) is 
oither Samanu o: Nirmanu—that 1s, with or without the 
uso of Bija, Accordmg to tlo first form, the Yogi in 
Padmisana doos Gurunsiisa according to the directions of 
the Guru. Mcditating on “ Yang,” he doos Japa through 
Tdi of the Bija 16 tines, Kumbhaka with Japa of Brja 64 
times, and thon oxhalation through tho solar Nadi and 
Japa of Bija 32 timos. Fire is raised from Manipuea and 
anited with Prithivi. ‘Chen follows inhalatioy by the solar 
Nadi with the Vahni Bua 16 times, Kumbhake with 64 


220 THE SIS दकाप AND IHL SERPENT POW R 


Japa of ihe Bija, followed by oxha ation throng? tle lunar 
Nadi and Japa of the Bija 82 (1५५. He ८) nodilates on 
the Tumar brilhance, gazing ab the (ip ol le rose, and 
inales by Ida whi dapro’ the By “img” 16 times 
Kumbhaka is done with tho B ja Vang 6 पातत | ५ thon 
thinks of humsel as 1०७५ ] by noctu, anc cons ders that 
the Nadis have beon washed — He oxhales by Pigg twith 
32 Japa ot tho B ja Lang, and considers homsoll iaeby 
as strougthoned, 110 (ren takes hia scat on amato Kushe 
grass, a doerskin, otc., and, fuciig cast or का 1 doos 
Pranfyara. Tor its exorense there must be, m addit on to 
Nadi Shuddhi (pwaifcation of च nerves”), comadorahion of 
proper place, timo, and food Thus, the place shot ld not 
bo go wistantas to nduce anmory, Nor in an unproteeto 1 place, 
such as a foiest, nor im a city or crowded ocality whieh 
induces distraction. ‘he food should be pure ard of a 
vogetarian character = [१ should not be too hot or too cold, 
pungent, sour, salt, or [ऋका basting, the taking of one 
meal a day and the 1 ko are prohioited On the conten y, 
the Yogi should not romain कलिका | ood or moro thar one 
Yama (thice 1५1 1५) Tho food tacon shou d bo heht and 
strongthouing, Long walks and other violent ¢xcreise 
should bo ayoided, as also -cortainly in the caso of be- 
giunors—sexual meorconso. Tho कताव should only be 
half filled, Yoga should be commenced, 1f is suid, वा spr'ng 
or antumn As stalec, the forms o [29 ayama vary. ‘Thus, 
Sahita, which is काठ with (bagaibha) 0) without (प) ~ 
gavbha) 3ija, 18, according to the former form, as follows. 
The Sadhaka meditates on Vid (Bream), who is Cull ol 
Rajognna, red im colow, ard the umago o Akwi. The 
inhales by Tda, im six measiucs (Mitra). Before Kum- 
bhaka he does tho Uddiyanvbandha Mad", Meditating on 
Hai (Vishnu) as Sativamaya and tho black उत [वता he 
does Kumbhaka with Gr Japa af the Bija, thea, meditaring 


RAGLION (YOUA! AYA-KRAMA) 221 


on Shiva as Tamomaya and lis wh te Biya Makara, he 
oxhalos though Pmggala with 32 Japa of the Bija, then, 
inhaling by Pinggaln, he does Kumbhaka, and exhales by 
Adi with the sime Bija. ‘Tie process is repeated in the 
norinal und rovorsed order. 

Dhyant, of meditation, ts, according to the Gheranda 
Sangliia, o threo ands ( ) Sthula, or gross; (2) dyotal ; 
(3) Sukshma, का subtle’ In the first the form of the 
Devata ts brought before the mind. One form of Dbyana 
for this pirposo 1४ as follows: Let the Sadhaka think of 
the gieat Ocean of Nectar in his heart Tn the middlo of 
that ocean 1s the islaud of gems, the shores of which are 
mado of powdered gems. ‘ho island 1s clothed with a 
Kadamba forest in yellow blossom This forest 18 sui- 
rounded by Malati, Champaha, Panyata, and other frag ant 
trees, In the nidst of the Kadamba forest there rises the 
boaulitul Kalpa tice, laden with diesh blossom and fimt, 
Amidst its leaves tho black bees hum and the Kool buds 
mako love = Its fom branchos are the forr Vedas. Under 
the treo thera isa great Mandapa of precious stones, and 
within 1b a beautiful couch, on which let him preture to 
himsel his Isbtadevaty. The Guri will direct him as to 
the form, raiment, Vahana, and tho title of the Devatn 

Jyobindhyana 1s the in usion of fire anc hte (Teras) 
into the form go magmed. In the Multdhira hes the 
snake-hke Kandalim Thero the Jivatma, as ib were the 
taporing flame of a candle, dwells. ‘The Sadhaka thon 
moditates npon tho To/omaya (Light) Brahman, or, 


1 (] छा पतप Sanghit , Siath Upadeal ॥ 11६७] by Bhask waraye 
m tho तपय (v पच), thot there are three forms of the Devi प hich equally 
patie of both the Prukashy end Vin ish. aspe चष्ट tho physteal 
(SU uly), the aul te (Sukst ma), and the snprome ( Para) ‘The physical 
form 1n4 hands, fect, ete, tho subtle consists of M ntra, a 1५ the 
supromo is the Vasuna ov im the technical sense of the Mai tra Shastra, 
rou छा own ‘Lhe Kularnave Tintra divides 2) yana mt> Sthula ond 
Sukshma (JX. 8) beyond which, 16 says, 1s Samadhi 


222 H1 SIX OLNIRLS AND LIL S*RPLNT POWL? 


allornatively, botween (hoe eyebrows on {ie [गा ए पोपप 
flame (lo hght which is Om) omitUng its Litre. 
Sakshuadhyina om medi ion on Kundalar with 
Shambhivi Madia ५10 Sle has been 10 sol. By this 
Yoga (ude post) the Atma is revered (.Atmasitks mt sia), 
Lastly, through Samidh the qua ity of Nuliptatva, or 
detachment, and thereafter Mi kti (Liberation) is attained, 
Thos Samadhi Yoga is, according to tle G voran ta 
Sanghité, of six kimds:? (1) Dhyanayogasamidiy, altamod 
by Shambhay Mudra,’ in प पलो, after meditation on the 
Bindu-Brah nan and veatisation of tho Atma (Atita- 
pretyaksha), the latter ts resolved into the Mahitkesha or 
the Great Wthor (2) Nadayoga, allamned by Kheghan 
Mudra,’ im which the tongue is Jongthened untal 1 reaches 
une space betwoon the eyebrows, ana is thon mtroducod in 
a reversed position 1110 the mouth ‘Chis may be dono 
with or without cutting of the fianunt. (3) Rasinand ryoga, 
attained by Kumbhaka,! in which tho Sichaks प wv silent 
place closes both oars and does Purake and Kumbh ike, 
anit bo hears Nida in sounds varying in s{rength from 
that ol tho cricket's chirp to Utat of tho large kotUedrarn. 
By daily pravtica tho Andlats sound is hoard, and the 
Light (Jyotib) with the Manas therein as soon, which is 
ullmately dissolved in the suprome Vishnu. (4) 1१५४ 
gadhiyoga acvom plishou by the (८1५01 पपठ You Taare 
already Jeseribed.’ Tho Sidhaka, thinkiig of limsolf as 
Shakti and the Paramatmi as P uusha, feels himyol im anion 
(Sanggarnia) with Shiva, and on oys with Tim tho bhss 


1 ५५४५ th Upadesha 

2 (५९१ Vhiid Upadesl \ v 65 cf «cy 
Vihd, v 25 (+शु 

4 10४८ [गा Upadosha, + 77 ef seq 


$ the [तपाद (र. 194) the कला २ uddrosscd os Day पता -the 
op nae of Layn ov absorption 


MAGIC’ (10त+ 7 LAYA-KRAMA) 228 


which 18 Shringirarasa,! and becomes Bliss itself, or the 
Brahman (5) Bhakti Yoga, in which meditation is made 
ou tho [shtadevata with’ devotion (Bhakti) until, with 
toara flowing fvom the oxcess of bliss, tho ecstatic condition 
18 attained. (0) Rijayoga, accomplished by aid of the 
Manomurchehhi Kumbhaka? Tlere the Manas, detached 
from all worldly objccts, is fixod between the eyebrows in 
the Ajnichakra, and Kumbhaka is done. By the umon of 
the Manas with the Atma, in which the Jnani sees all 
things, Rijayogasamadhi 18 attained. 

Tho TIathayogaprad pika says that on perlection being 
attained in flatha the body becomes lean and healthy, 
tho eyos are bright, the somon 33 concentrated, the Nidis 
are purified, the internal fire is increased, and the Nada 
sounds abovo-mentioned aie hoard.’ ‘These sounds (Nada) 
isyuo from Anahata Chakra 7 the cardiac region, tor it 
is hore that the Shabdabrahman manifested by Vayu and 
in association with Buddli, and of the natire of manifested 
Nada endowed with a gpecial motion (Vishosha Spanda), 
exists as Madbyama speech, Though sound (Shabda) is 
nob distinct and hoard by the gross senses until it issues in 
the form of Vaikhart speech, the Yogi is said to hear ting 
subtle Nida when, through the various Bandhas and 
Mudriis described, Piina and Apiina have united in the 
Sushomna. This combined Prana and Nada proceed 
upwards and unite with Bindu, 


1 Shringpar’a is the Joyo sontimont or soxual passion and soxual union 
Doro Shiungaraasn is the cosmic root of that, The {rst of the eight 
or nine Rosas (88) timonts) +22, Shringgarn, Vira (hero’sm), Karuna 
(compassion), Adbl uta (wondermg), वकल) a (humour ), Bhay a 1ika,(fear), 
Bibhatsa (dhagust), Randaa (४10), to which Mammathabhatta, प hor 
of the Kavynaprakasha, adds Shanti (peace) What 10 Yogi enqaya is 
that supersensual bliss which manifests on the eaitbly planc as mate ial 
Shringara 

2 Thad , Fifth Upadesha, ए. 52 

3 {1}, 11, ए, 78. 


१४५ Wh SIX GENFRES AND Ul Sire Nt row ( 


Thore 1a particular method by which Laye (absorp. 
ton) 6 sud to be attainod by hearirg 1) 0 variow bodily 
sounds!) ‘Lhe Yogi m Viectasina ane with Shambhayi 
Mudra concontiates on (ie sounds deatd 11 the right ont ; 
thon after closing Ue senso aperires by तिपत 
Mudra and atter Primiyumey a sound न heud in tho Su. 
काप्य, tn this Yoga there ame ou stages. Whe the 
Brahmagranthy has been proreed, the sweet tinkling sor nd 
of ornaments is heard in the othercal vod (Shinya) of the 
heart, m tho second stage the Prana unitod with Nida 
piorees the Vishnugrantin In this, the futher void 
(Atishunya) of the thoracic region, sounds are hoard like 
those of a kettle-drum. In tho third siage a drum-bko 
sound (Mardala) is heard in tho Ayni or Mahishiinya; 
the seat of all powers (इवतां), 11167 the Prana, having 
forced the Rudragranthi or Ajni, goes to tho abode of 
Tshvara On tho insotting of tho fourth slago, when the 
Prina 2008 to Brahmatandhra, the forth ov Nishpatti 
stato voces. Dung the imbial stages the souncs aro loud, 
and gradually bocomo very subtle. Tho mind ts copt olf 
all oxternal objcets, and 1s contied fivst on the Toud and 
thon ou the subtle somds. ‘Tho mind thus becomes ono 
with Nada, on which a 1s fixod. Nida "५ thus liko a 
snare for catching a door, for hko a hater 16 kills the 
mind It first attracts ib and thon sliyy 1, ‘ho mind 
absorbed in Nida is freed trom Vriltis. Mie Antulikarana, 
like a deer, 18 attracted to the sound of the bolls, and, 
vemainiig immovable, the Yog: hike a skilftl archer kills 
it by directing his breath to the Brahmarandhr, (hough 
the Susiumna, which becomes ono with that at which ib is 

1 As thea Nidabrdu Up. says, the sound cor trols the rad which 
voves in the plorsure gardon of ihe senses 

2 As the Amiitanada-Upanishad says (v 24), the Akshava (imporwh- 


able) is that whi his Aghosha (withont sound), which is ne ther yowol 
nor consonant and 18 nob uttorod 


1140 11, (१०८५ ; TAYA*hRAMA) 225 


aimed. Glut exists witrin these sounds, which are its 
Shakus, and by union with Nida the self-cffulgent 
Chaitanya (Consciousness) is sad to be attamed. As Jong 
as sound is heard the Atma is with Shakti, Tho Laya 
slate 15 soundless.' There are also other methods? by 
which Laya is aclueved, such as Mantrayoga, or the recita- 
tion of Mantras according to a particular method 
Layayoga is the thid and Inghor for of Iathayoga, 
which, in connection with other auxiliary Hatha processes, 
is tho subject-matter of the works here translated Both 
Sachchid manda or Shiva and Sachchidananda or Shakti 
aro present in the body, and Layayoga consists m the 
control of Chittavritti by imerging the Prakriti Shakti in 
the Purusha Shakti according to the laws which govorn 
the Pimda (individual—Vyashtz) and Brahmanda (cosmic— 
Samasht1) bodies, and thercby gaining Tiboration (Moksha). 
Ag in the case of tho precoding systoms, Layayoga has 
special foatures of its onn.’ Speaking in a general way, 
ordinary Tathayoga is specially, though not oxclusivoly, 
concerned with tho physical body, its power and functions; 
and affects the subtle body through the gross body. 
Mantrayoga is specially, though not exclusively, concern- 
ed with the forces and powers at work outside, though 
affecting the body. Layayoga deals with the supersensible 
Pithas (scats or contres) and the supersensible forces and 
functions of the inner world of tho body. These Pithas, 
01 seats of the Dovatis, are the Chakras already doscribed, 
ranging from the Sahasrira, the abode of tho unattached 
(Nivhpta) Sachchidinancamaya Paramiitmii, to the Mula- 
dhiva, the seat of Prakriti Shakti, called Kulakundalim in 

1 Wathayogapradipika, Ch TV, vy 65 102. 

2 Amiitanida-Upanishad, Ch. TV, ए 66, says that Shiva has g ven 
out a quarter of a crore (2 500,000) of ways for the attamment of Laya, 
though Nada is the best of them all 

3 See Dharma Prachara Scries, 9 

20 


226 VIL ATA CENE URS AND 1111) ५1.१2) | POWER? 


the Yoga Shistras ‘Tho object of this Yoga is tharef ore 
10 lako and morge this Shaktain Po tsha when Samidhs 
woat(umed, In fat ryogi the coda plat om of ^ हा 
8 1) particular ptescr bed, thorah, > vbeady scaled, ts 
Yhy ma we threo old, In Vantrayoga the तया fo ns 
in which Sprit clothes [seth ate code npated After 
Prakvig-Shakiin Ge 191 190 Kultkundatu tas ov cording 
to this method ७ Layiyogt been reused by const int 
practicn, 165 reflection 15 miami ested wa |, ght betwee ॥ [1८ 
eyobrows, which wher 101 fixed by praetce and coutont- 
plation boeo nes the subject of Bindudhy me च पापपो is 
aroused by various Tabia md other provesses here altor 
१०९८0५९ = Mot ods are followed which are ८० 1 mon to ul 
the systems, such as Yama, Niyama, Agana, thotgh oly a 
111 tited number of theso and of (10 Mudris of Hab rayoga are 
used. These belong to the physical processes (Sthuh |< iyi), 
and are followed by Proay una, Pratyalita, Dhan , 
Dhyuna (on Bindu), which aro ना 20) ) [चात 1 (२८1 (चणम 
(Suksh in Kesyi). tn addition to these are cortan leat rcs 
peculiar to this Yoga "hero ae, bostdes (hose a toady 
noted, Svarodaya o+ tha serenge valeting to tha पिता 
Panchotattva Chica, St cshinaptana, anc the hhe nner 
forces of natine ; and the Layakray:, londing throw zh Vda 
and Bindu to the Samadhi, which 1s eallod Mahalay:. 

Tho heaung of the Nada sounds 19 inehided unde 
Pratyahiiva, and under Dhinant tho rousing 0 Kundalh 
As Japa, or teatation of Mantra, is tho elie! olcment iu 
Mantrayoga, ind Pranayama im the ordinary 11 पापकम, 
so Dhiran 15, with the last as a prolimmary, the mast 
important part of Layayoga. Tw to ho observe |, | ow- 
evor, thal Pranayama is only a proliminary methad to 
secure mastery of tie breath Tow tho lowe: door at 


1 {० ५८१०५ fois of Prtayema give ou [पा पण्या 61 
sad thato ly wo ue onployed n 1, 1१०३1 


PRAGIICH (YOGA. LAYA+h (AMA) 227 


whieh the already perket u this matter need not enter. 
Some processes described are for practice (Sadhana) only 
An oxport (Siddha) can raise and lower Kundal Shakti 
within an hour. 

1b 14 smd that as Anata, the Lod of Serpents, 
supporls the whole universe, so1s Kundalim, ‘by whom the 
body is supported,” ! the support of all Yoga practice, and 
that “as one forces open a door with a key,’ 80 the Yog 
should {01८6 open the door of hberation (Moksha) by the 
aid of Kundalin १ (the coiled one), who 1s known by 
various names, such as the Shakti, Ishvam (Sovercign 
Lady), Kutilung: (the crooked one), Bhujanggi (serpent), 
Arundhati (anstayable helper to good action). ‘This 
Shakti is the Snprema Shakti (Parashalt1) in the human 
body, embodying all powers and assuming all forms, 
Thus the sexual force is one of such powors and is 
utihsed. Tnetead, howaver, of descending into gross 
seminal पात्‌, it 1s conserved as a Lorm of subtle cnergy, 
and 11408 10 Shiva alorg with Prina — Let is thus mace 
a goureo of spiritual hfe instoad of one of the causes 
ol physical doath With the extinction of scxual desire, 
mind is released of its most powerful bond.’ 

Sho the “Serpent Pcewer” sleeps coiled up in the Mila 
dhava, closing with [fer month tho entry to the Sushwmna 


1Varaha Upanishid, G1 ४ 


2 Hathayogapradipikn Gh Lif ए 1  Sarveshang yogatimtranang 
tathadhara 11 Kundalt 
3 Hathayogupridipika, Gh [[ \ 105 
Udghatayet kapitan tu yatla kim ehikaya hathat 
Kundalinya tatha yogi mcekshady uang vibbedayet 
no same verse ocewsin Ch LIT, ए 5, of the Ghoranda banghita 
3The Yogakundali Up Cl 1, calls Sarasvati Arundhaty, saying 
that it is by avousing He that Kundals is aroused When Kundah 
wishes to go up nothing can stop Tio. Therefore Sho 18 called 
Arundhati, which is also the name of a Nadi 


4 Yoonkundah Upanahnad, Gh T 


228 WH SIX CUNIRES AND JIE SEREYNI LOWLT 


callol the doo of Brahman” (Biahmadyira) किण 
sloeps above wha, 33 eallod the Kanda or Kucayom, 
which 1s fout fingers in Jength and broa Jb), anc 4 covered 
by a “soft white clobh ’— hat is, 1 ombrane line the 
ope of a bird. [६ is gononily (ददतम्‌ aa beng twa 
Gngors (Anguh) above the anus (Guda) and two fingers 
below the poms (Medhia).! fom this Kanda spring the 
72,000 Nidis which hore both unito and separ tte. Kula. 
kundalini 36 the Shabdibrahman, and all Mantras avo 
lor mamfostation (Svarupavibhuti) Por this reason ono 
of the names o this, tho Mantiadeviti, whose st balance 
as “Jobbers,’ 38 Malaiki—that is, tho Gonotriy of all the 
mnivorses. Sho is Metuka, Dov She 14 tho Moor ol all 
and not the chikt of any She is tho workd-conse ousness 
(Jag ichchattanya), tho Vurt conecicusness cf the world 
as a whole? Just as in space sound is produced by movo- 
«ments of air, so also in (ho ofher within the divas ody 
currents flow, owing {to the moyeinonty cf the vill 
ar (Prinavayu), and its inward anc outward passage 
a3 inhalation and exhalation, Verso 12 desenbes Kunda- 
lint ५५ tho voymed supremo Parunoshyar (तकता क्क) 
Lady), the Ommipolont Kali in the formo पि (४४111६11. 
She, tho subtlosh of the 9 bilo, holds withm Hersell the 
mystery ol creation,’ and tho stream of Ambrosia which 
flaws from the atirthe lelegs Brah nar, By Har rac. tee 
the aniverse ig प्रवता ठत, and by 1 ctarcal know cdpe is 


CAS pron by Yai एप रष पत्त a Commo buy tov Th. 
JU, ० Uathayogapradaynke woh 1 1५ १0 ९१५ (0 the Gon ha (नीत 
Tho torso म्णा पृषत ty ४ ils postin vs 1५८५ the porns mel 
navel (Nabh ), twelve ingers (४ tsb) ubeve th > 1111 (९ पद्‌ 
1s also apphed to (10 seat of Pru १, the hemi sec Shate पचा 1 1 प 
y. >) 

५8९0 Vol. 1, © Pain कृणत of नु पा, Ch. XT, XU, ।( ५4. dos 
because She ४ Mantrades we tlat Sho १५ roused by Mar 111 

sSho 14 cicatbon aself (Si abtaip ) १४ 10, We a, 1 ler ave 
Qreaticr, Tig 1 प (6 चाप्‌ ( ssolt tion (जार्ज Ost ul Tiyate ‘kad, cb, 


114८1100 (YOGA, LAYA-KRAMA) 229 


awakoned '— that is, Sho both binds as Creatmx (Avidya 
Shakti) and is tho moans as Vidya Shakti whereby Liber- 
ition may be attained Tor this reagon it is said in tho 
Hathayogapradipikn that She gives liberation to Yogis and 
bondage vo tho igiorait. For he who knows fer knows 
Yoga, and those who ae ignorant of Yoga arc kept m the 
bondage of this worldly life. As vy. 10 and 11 of the 
Shalchakranir ipaua says: “She the World-bewilderer is 
lustre is as lightning; [ler sweeb murmur is hike the m- 
Mstinch hum of swarms ot love-mad bees.? She is the source 
ol all Spooch. It is She who maitains all the beings of the 
world by means of inspiration and expiration, and shines 
in the hollow of the Mula lotus hke a chain of brilhant 
lights.” Mantras aro 11 all cases mamfestations (Vibhut) 
of Kulakundalint etsel’, for Sno as all lotters and Divan! 
and tho Paramatm. Itself. [Hence Mantras are used in the 
vousing of Kundalim. ‘Tho substance of Mantias 1s the 
Htornal Shabda or Consciousness, though thew appearance 
and oxpression is in words. Words in themselves seem 
10५६8 (Jada), but the Mantra power which thoy embody 
is Siddha—that is, tho truth and capable of teaching it, 
becauso it is 8 manifestation of Chaitanya, which is Satya 
Itself. So Veda, which 1s the formloss (Amur) Brahman 
in Veda-torm (Vedamirti), is tho self-allumined Princrple 
o! [xperience® (Cait) itsclf, and 1s displayed im words 


tor Sho is also beyond the universe (Vishvatita), and is tho 
form of knowledge itself (Jnanariipa), 7b, As such She 15 thonght of 
AS gomp upwards, as im deseer ding She creates and binds 

2 Vishyanatha tho Commentator says that She makes this sourd 
whon awakenod According to the Commentator Shanglara, this 
ude vies the Vaikhari state o° Kundahm. 

3 ‘Thus, Prana and Apana are declared to bo the mamtamers of 
aurmate bong (ए 8, post), 

1 806 ‹ Prmexples of ‘lantea,’ Vol 11, Gh Xf and XIT 

5 Voda 18 one with Chartanya As Shangkara says (comm Trishati, 
vy 19), doding with the Pwchidasht Mantra Serve veda yatra ekam 
bhavands, ०४९, Shiulya vedasya almabhedona syaprakashataya, 


230 SIN GO 1६ ANT [[[1 SER ENG CWE 


(suldhashabda) which ae witho | 11 1711) athoship 
(Apaurushoya), mecasantly rove ting, know (वृहत ` of the 
707 OP Bralunan, of Pare Beans, nd os Dart, 01 
those prin ip os and luvs, phys cal and psychteal and 
somtual, by whieh the umyense is sustamed (Dh yate). 
And ४) the Diyine Mother ay sd to be Bruhn at cnow- 
ledge (Binhmavilyn) 11 the tom 6 that imme tiate 
experience owhier ws tho 1111 0 the aealsation othe 
great Vedintie sayings (Mah vavya). As, notwatlistind- 
mg tho eastance ५  coling-eonsenusness tn all [11 ags, 1 
does not 1 111016५ wi boab parhicular processes. so, al hough 
tie substonce of Mantras 1५ teeling-conseioustiess that 
17117171 त NOL pwrceplibe without the aon 
(0 the sachakes Shakti (derived from Sadhani) with 
Mantrashakti, [न a has been sad om the Sharda 
Nlaka> © Although Kulakundain, whose substance is 
Mantias, shines brilhant as lightning 1) the Mulad} aia of 
ovory diva, एण 1 wp only in the lotuses othe he uts of 
Yog ४ tha She reveals [कारण] and cancos mm Hor own joy, 
(॥ other casos, though existing in sible | )1 1119} Sho does 
not royva [|>]. JLo substi nee as all ४५11५, 1 Man- 
tras, une al दपा ५५ She ws the Mothor of the three 


1 Ane he wise 1 s withen sue inthis p 1414५ पात्‌ "only, ib 
i ( 1110 नापप i (५ wlibishond 7) कावप) च ८१ 1111 ९1१ hat kriy 14८ 
(नाध कषा Marvin Serghhye Tatlva Kur ict) (त्‌ ses dhe (तादो 
cited 1 कथया पना 1 19 "$ dios Beal man, cat ( ont as The 
Inouth rg” 

2 (Fhe 111 Ved tn dot + [त [८ 1( ५1८, be hiew 

) ४७५1 1८1) 11१, {0४ Tada athe wrtwt ath va पाप ~ 
shp ४11 Cis | 3 पो 13 ind Yar ye ॥ पका ।} 9 (५7 
]\ ५६१ epur एषो त्फ \ 1१४ 

Sakst १॥ ९6 th bos, प [पवो कात] ३९] (4111 (ल CApiwokshw 

[विषपो os cppasee (५ ८ प्ल (वान [त्वापो ct vcr ly 1{ Ucetnal 
hnowlodge 

" Vedintiumuldivasy unva-s [पो पता पकरतति may त्‌) (Shing. 
kus (पो 1 on Tisha, 65) Pio Vedauty aie means Upon 
ahid ५) वण॑ ny partionlu pl iosophy so called 


1140 1 (ष) 4 144114४५) 231 


forms of enorgy, Sin,’ ' Moon, and ‘Vio,’ and Shi bda- 
brah nan [soll [रा adaln 1५ there oro the 111] [1५५ 
पाद ८५५) ५ 9 Carve powcr 1 the yore aoa. 
Kundalias the Shabda nahman tin is, A 1५ nari esl. 
od Shakti 11 bodics, and m vo y owe, persor and 
thing. he Six Cent es ant च evolved | orefrom ae 
Her manifest 1101 Shiva “dwells? am | ( Sahastora 
Tho latter is the uppor # vichakia, as the siv contres ue 
tho lower Yot Shakt and Shiva ae ono. कष oretore the 
body of Kundahu Shakti consists of eight pa ts (Ang is) 

namely, the $x centres of psychic smd physical force, 
Shakti, and Sadashiva Her Lord! 1 116 Salis ar 
Kundal is o.crged in the sipreme AtneShast) x anda. 
191 is the great Pravadevata which 1५ Nault, and ।' 
Prana is to be drawn up t rouge the © वृत, path,? the 
Sushumna towards (he Brahmaranchira, tom st of necessity 
pierco the lotuses or Clasras which ha tie way heren. 


Kundan boemg Po anishekti, i She ow movec |) #। 
moved, 
The Asanas, Kumbhakas, Ban has, an die vis, are 


used to rowe Kundalin, so tial the Prana withd awa 
from Idi and Pinggda omy by the powor of 114 Shich, 
नण entoy into the Sughumnn 91 ven (Sh ayn), {0 111) 
wards towmds tho Brahmarandhra’ The Yop is then 
said to bo free of the active Karna, and attans the 
natal stato! The ob act, thon, is (0 dovilt lise tho rest 
of tho body by getting the Prana from Lda and Pingga " 
into Sushumni, which is for this reason roguided a» tle 
most important of all the Nadis and “the dehght of the 
Yog),? and thon to make it ascend throw gh tho lotuses 


180८ Lacshmidl vis Comm. on vy 9, Anancalahw 2) ndin vc 
v 35 2b, says that the eight fooms चा hess (Miadto “Hull ’), 
tho Stn and Moon 


*Flathayogapracipra OL LY, ¥ 10 
) {03४ 11, upon what ‘ollows गी also to Gh 1Y, ab, passe 


232 PE SIN CENIR US AND 11 ` STR LNT LOWE? 


which “bloom” on ils approwh. Tho body on cach side 
of the spinal column is devit used, ard the whole cuiient 
of Prina thrown into thu column The Manousan 
sumo is seid to ariso with tho Daye 0) Prene, sor on this 
ensnos Laya of Manas. By daily practising restrafnt of 
[ष का Sishumni, tho प्ण val ef ort of the Prina along 
its ordinary channels 14 weakenod and the mind 1s steadied. 
Kor when there is movement (Parispanda) of Prana there 
is movoment o mind, that is, ib feods upon the objects 
(Vishaya) of tho objective world, 

But when Prana is in Sushwnni © thore 1 neithor day 
nor might,” for “ Sushumni devours time”. When thero 
is movement of Prana (Pritnaspanda), thera is no cc ssution 
ot श, (mind तालान), And, as tho Yogavashishtha 
suys, 80 long as Priina doos not coase {o exist there 14 
neither ‘Tattvajnina nor destruction of Visuni, the subtle 
cause of tho will towards lifo which is tho canso of rebirth 
For Tattyajuiina, or supremo knowledge, ix tho destyuction 
of both Chitta and Visani® Rostinint of bieath also 
ronders tho semen firm, Vor tho semen flict ates as long 
as Priva docs so, And when the somon is no steady the 
mind is not steady? Tho mind thus tramod dotachos 
itself from tho world, 686 varions results aro snid to be 
achioved by rousing Kundahm, ant by tle subseqnont 
procosses for which She is tho “key.” As ono forces 
open a door with a key, 60 the Yogi should force open the 
door of hberation by Kundalini?4 For it is bho who 
sloaps mm tho Miladhiva, closing with Nor moth the 
channel (Sushumni) by which ascont may be made to the 


1 (४; vv, 10 and 17, Commentary thoreto, 

४4. ४४ 19-21, and Commoutwy (Lativajnii ang manonfsho 
vasanikshay a ova chia) 

3 Soo ante, and Vavaha-Up, Oh, V. 

४ 76 , ध. IU, vy 106 Soo Bhitashuddhi Tantra cited under + 60, 
post, 





PLATE 4. 


WAC C* (YP Ad \५-१।५\\) 238 


Bialhmarandbra. ‘his acst be opened wher tio Pron 
naturally ontors into t. “She, the young widow, 1 to he 
despoilod toruibly.? Ibs prose “bed thi, there shall be 
daily pragtico, with a vicw o necuite powe + to प्रापो tate 
this Shakti. 

1 gonerally tikes years fon the commence ent of 
tho practice to Jew the Sinktr fo tho Sahast i, thong] 
in oxcoplional casos 16८ nay bo done ina siorl time? At 
fst She can only bo led to 1 certain poin, and then 
gradually highor, {6 who hay led Ther to a particular 
contro can voach tho samo contro more easily at tho next 
attempt. But to go highor re [षड्‌ futior ollort. At 
each contre a partionlar kine of bliss (\nanda) is experione- 
ed, and particular powors, such as the conquest of the 
clemontmy forms ol sensible nation (Bhiita) ar gained, 
until ab tho Ajua centro the whole universe is oxporrences, 
In tho carhor stagos, moroover, there is a natural tendency 
of tho Shakti to एणा, fn the contin id practice 
facility and greater control mo gamed Where the Nadis 
aro puro tt is easy (o dead Ter down oven from tho 
विधञ्च, In tho perfection of practio the Yog™ ean 
stay as long as he will in tho Swhasrara, whore the bliss 
18 the same ns shab exporioreod in hbeation (sub ect in 
this case to return), or he riay transfor himsoll mto 
another body, a piaches known to beth the [तापा 
and Tibetan 'Pantias, in the 11 (1 of whieh it is e ded 
Phowa. 

The principle of all the mothads to attam Samidht 
ig to got bhe Prana out of Idi and Pinggali. When tis 
is achioved these Nidis bacome “ dead, because vitality 
has gone out of them, The Prina then ontors the 
Sushumna, and, altor piereing by the aid of Kimiali , the 


1.70, Oh. TH, ४, 112 ef aug 
9 As rolated by Yogi from a (1201) speake g of his awn नफ 
30 


284 | ५६ UPN {IS AND ॥ $ द N owt 


ax Gow as on the Sis um 1 beeo as Lay छा vasorbed 
nitho S [वनान्‌ Mo reats to (is cred, when oper iting 
from vio Vira ut, seem fo vuy 11 Ceti, pur का फक्क ४ 
commen pr लठ mune y, to [त्क of Pioua cown- 
wad aid Api ५ tpwards? (thal is, the reverse of thon 
natural directions) by the dalindhara end Mula Banda, ar 
otherwise, wien by them union the mbornal fire 1s increased, 
Tho position a4 thus आण to a hollow tubo im which a 
piston is working at both ences without csc pe of the 
cortral ar, which thts becomes heated — ‘Thon the Serpent 
101९५ Kirditi + worsed by the heat thus generated, is 
morsel 10 Tle poteabal state calcd + slecp,” in which 
She los ewied up; S10 then nisses and straig itens Ie. 
sell, and enters the Brahmadvata, or enters mto the 
Saslumia, when by farther vepeated eflorts the Chakras 
in the Sishumna are pierced. ‘This is a grad tal process 
which 1५ accon pamcd by special d fhe ities at 110 | 1५ 
knots (Gear ts) whero Mayashiktuis poweelul, por (ल्प uly 
the al onanal knot, ५५ yneteing of which nay, it 1५ 
alinilts |, raivolyo (0 siderable par, physteal d sorcer, and 
even cisease, As [ला $ explirce, these krots”? aro 
tho pants ॥ which converge the Cl vais of excl ol the 
{11166 groups. Some of tye eovesmenuored processes 
are वणा षत्‌ in the p esert work, to which we now 
procee , and which on this mattar 1 ay be summarised as 
follows 

Tho prominuy verso (and in the reference (9 the 
vases [ लोपा the Commentary) sey that only those 
who aro aequunted with the Six Lotuses can deal with 
then; and tho frst vorso siys that Yoga by means of 
the mothod hee desenbed दपाठा be achieved without 
knowkdgo o tho Chakras and Nidis, ‘Tho first verse 
says that tho Brahn im wi'l be realise? The nest question 


1 Sev Varsha Upmishad, Cb 111 


१401161, (१०८ , LAYA-KRAD A) 235 


js, Thlow as this offected? ‘Pho Commentulor im the 
proliminary verse says that tho very ciereifa Peau arda 
Sviim , bemg wishlal to rescue the wo ld sunk tthe mire 
of misory, hay undo lakon the task firstly o inste emg 
i, ax rogmds the wnon o7 the Shakti Kund dni with the 
vital contres, or Chahias, and secondly o in puting that 
knowledge of Brahman (‘Tattyajnitny) which leads to Labora. 
tion, ‘Tho for nor—that is, knowledge corecriing the 
Chakras, and so forth is the “first shoot” of the Yoga 
plant Brahman, as the Commentator says, ts tho St nema 
Consciousness which arses upon the acquisition of know- 
lodge, ‘Tho first cause of such krowledge is an acquit 
tanco with and practice af tho Vartiik Yoga Sac heni, 
which 18 concorned with the Chahias, Nadis, rnd Kunda- 
11101; the noxt causo is the realisahon of that Sathana by 
the rousing of Kundalmi and the final restlt 1 tho 
oxporiontial coalisation of the Brahmin, which 1५ the 
effect of the action o Kundalin, who is the Stakti or 
powor of Wall (Tchchhi), Actior (Kriya), and Knowle lgo 
(Juina), and existe in forma both subtle aud gross. Mind 
is ४५ much ono of tho 0114 of Kundali as is (hb whie is 
called “matter”. Both ave eqaully predcats of Prakriti 
shakti, which is nx groysot form of tho Nedamayt Shaki. 
Kundalt takes the Jorm of the eght Praksiis! 11 as 
nocesgary 10 bea this wollin mind, (01 there is holy to be 
uninsiiueted criticwm of (he systom ०) the pro md of its 
supposed ^ पाला लोलो ard so forth The Power which 
19 aronsed 18 in ilsolf (Svarupn) Conse ousucss, and when 
aroused and ttker to the 1 णण corebral ८५८५ is the 
giver of fine knowledge (Svarupy नी पापो, which is the 
Supreme Consciousnoss. 

The arousing of this totec उत nelnoved both by wil and 
mind powor (Yogabala), aceompaniod by suis ble physical 

1 Shindilya Uparwhad, Oh 1, Youukundah-Up, Ch 1 


236 11 SN CIN TIS AND | ॥ ५ QIN (८५) 


acon, Phe Sadhakat > himself ins the prescribed 
Agana inc steadics [त amd by tho [सल्ला Mudia, im 
which concentration i between the (माफ, Ai is 
whalod (सपादो auc thon retained (Kumbhaka). वा 
tpper parlor the bony is tava contacted by d lanai a- 
bandha,? so that the tpward broall (Prima) 1 checked, 
By this confiact on the a so inhalod is provented tron 
escape. The au so checked ton ls downwards, When 
the Yog ces that the th within him, from (he throat to 
tho belly, 1s tendig dow wards [वना ही the channels in 
tie N d's, the escape of Vayu as Apenaa again chockcd 
by the Mulabindlaand Ashvin M dit, im which tho anal 
muselo is contracted. ‘The air (Vayu) thus stored becomos 
an instrumont by which, under the direction of mind and 
will, the potcutialitios of the vital forco um the Muli dhara 
may bo forced to realisation, ‘The procoss of mental con- 
contratior on this contre 1५ doscribod as follows: Wath 
montal Japa ol the Mantia prescribed and ac juisition 
thoreby of Mantrashakli, J ४ पतो । Gindivic ual Consciousness), 
which 1५ tlovght ०9 as bemg in the slape othe inporing 
flamo o a lamp, is brotght rom the rog’on of tho heart 
to the Muladhira, + प्ता here spoken of 15 tho Atma of 
tho subUle boly—that is, tho का तोता ov mind as 
Buddin Gelding thorem Ahangkura) and Manas, the 
facullics of sessc (Tudriye) छा mind operating ५ rocoive 
impression through the sense organs, and Prima,’ the 
constituonts of the sceond, third, and fourth bodily sheaths, 
Tollowing such Goneentration and impact ol tho retained 
Vayu on this centre, the Viyt is again raised with the 


Tie accomt here given ollows and amplifies the loxb See 
Gommentary to ४ 50, post, 

2 Vide ante and Dhyinabindu-Up 

3 According to the Vedant | defirition, or tho tive aumuatias, 
according to Sangkhya ‘The Chitta (mind) thorefore ontors विषमो पका 
along w tl Prana (Yogatattva-Upni ishad and Dhyanabindu-Up ) 


PRACHOL (YOGA. 1१४५ TAWA) 237 


Bya “Yang”. A revolution from le t to meght is given to 
the “ain of K na” or [सपा ना] 1 (कता ५११११) 7 
form of [ehehha Sank. Phis, (he presstre cf (he Prana 
and Apana held in Kun blake, the । पान beat पाना 
thorelrom, and the Vahi Boje (Poe Ment a) “ Rang,’ 
kindle tho fio ol Nima (Kimoigm). he fie (५ (1 }^५ 
and arouses the slumboring serpent Kuda im, whe ws then, 
in the language of the Shistia, seed with the passion of 
न ८५716 ?' for Hor Spouse, the Parahangsah or Param ishiva 
Shakti thus rendered 1८060 + (1 धर) to Shiva, as n the 
case of ordinary posifive and negative ¢ ectue charges, 
which mic thotuselves at offer nautestations of the 
wniversal polarity whieh atlects the marifested world 

The Yogakundal Uoamshad* states the fol owing 
methods and othors montioned Whon P 1 प is passing 
throgh [वि assume Pad nisina and cngthon the Ak isha 
of 12 points by —that is, asin exhalation Pr ina goos oul im 
16 measures, aud in inhalation (७ nos in 2, inhale lor Lo and 
thus gain powor Thon, holdin, the sides by each hand, 
sty up Kundalini with all ono’s strongth froma ght to lott 
fowlessly for 18 nunutes Draw tho body apa [1116 to tot 
Kundali onter bashumma पति Yogi does ad awing-up 
movemont m which the showdors wo ४५५५ and dropped, 
Piina onters of itself will Ter Compressing above and 
expanding below, and vice 1८1 १८५ Patna rises 

Tn tho commontuy! on yorse 32 of the Anand daha 
it is said. “'Thoe sun and the moon, ag they move always 
in Devayima and Pitriyiina (northern and southern orbs) 
m the Macrocosu, are travollmg (inecssuntly im the 
Microcosm) by Ida and Pinggala day and mght, The 
moon, ovor travelling by the loft Nidi (पि), bedews the 


Hs 14 at 


14 form of Apine Viyn 
20h. J. 
3 Anandalahnri, od. Pandit ए, Ananta Sl कष, pp 69, 70 


238 1 SIX GN RIG AND THE SERENE Pow LR 


wholo system with her nectar, The sun, (ravolling by 
tho right Nad (Prgeds), dros 1५ systers (hus 1174 
ercd by 1८} ). When the stn ard the moon moot at 
Malidl ina, 1 dy is called Amuavasy (new noon day ) 
eee Mo Kincatalso sleeps in Athaak mdi... When 
& Yop whose mint 13 under control woable to confine 
the moor in ler own place, 1५ also the क + (hen the moon 
and sti [५८५५ दकानि), a d consequently the moon 
em of sied ‘ts nectar un the sunday it) Neat, whon 
the ]) 100 of rectar becomes dued by [1५ fire with the 
helo of ४ yr, then tho Kuadalt wakes up tor want of tood 
and lissos Ice n serpent Afterwards, b (पताह th rot gh 
{ ५ theo knolsy, Sho ros to Sahasriva and bites ॥10 
01 ५१५ (moon), which is in the middlo of Che same, ‘hen 
the nectar bezins to flow, and webs tho (other) Chandra 
Mandala in Aj achakra. Prom tho latter tho wholo body 
hocomoy bodewed with nectar,  Aflorwards the filtoon 
oternal Kalas (pats) of Oiandia (moon) i1 Atha go to 
Vishuddin and move thoreon, Tho Chandra Mandala in 
Sahasrara is also ovlled Bamdaya, One Kali semaine 
thoe always That) Kali is nothing bat | Iso f, 
whieh is also called Atman, Wo call Hor Tipmasundac. 
Jt is unde (छत्‌ by this that, in ordor to rouse {16 Kune 
011, ono should practise in the luam forlnght alone, and 
not in tho solu one,” 

Kundalini 1s lod upwards “as a rider guides teat rod 
mare by the roms,” through tho apoiture hithcito closed 
by Mer own coils, but now open, within tho ontiance 
of the Chitrini Nad She thon piorees, in that Nid, cach 
of tho 1011808, which turu their heads vpwarcs as Sho 
passes though them. Ax Kundahnt uniled with the 
subtlo Jivalma passos through oach of thoye 1) uses, Sho 
absorbs 11110 Terself tho regnint ‘Patlvas of each of these 
centres, and all that has been (0४४ described to be in 


RAC 1, (१५८१, 1 पाष) 230 


thar As tic asco sm vile, 01८10 ५ 101 ` [४१५ 
enters ito ths [ष stu, andiwwaep ied by th ey 
of Kendalim, भ 1 1 atten tie pass tgs ५" 14 + 1\\\ 1 
Chakra rvoplacos thom ‹ The ५१८१४८५ which कुप im 
assucration with these grosser ativas uy ne poo 11 ter, 
who then absorbs ito Haself the subto ‘attvas of the 
Ayna Kundalint Herself takes cna व्‌ नाना wpoct as 
Sho ascends the 11106 pl nes, and urdes wih earch of 
the Limgas 11 that fo m of Hors whichis appropr ito to 
such union, Uo wheress wn tho Muladl ite Sie 15 the 
Shakti of all in thei gross or physic ] पाप ilested stite 
(Virat), ab the stige o Aqni, 9101411५] १1.110 Ve rental 
and psyehie or suble boc y CTnanyaga {0 ), are "1 tho 
rogion ol tho Sahast ia h cas the Shakti of the spn 1 ual 
plano (बाप) which, (hough 1५५1 11 114 Brihnan 
४५])५५८ uadferontintcd, contains mits Prwe -tsoect 
all lowor plancs 1) ४ concorlod pote rb al sti ( Moa Mayi 
Pantia (soo ४, 51, post) ५ ys thal tho | tr sotnd-proc c+ 
ing Shaktis 71 noly, Pua Pashy 111 Mar 11, ind 
Vaikhari ave Nandali | [णा (und वा yabhod rp प, 
Ttence, when Ku dali starts to goto S | >) 1105 ते ५ in 
[ler form as Vatkhui bewitehes Syaya nha [५ any Soo 
thon similarly bewilehos Bune Tings } 11 cut us 
Madhyama and [पो [कद i tha ५१८2) Wwe as Pash 
yan. ‘Thon, when Sho roiches the = 1.५१ Paro tu, 
Sho atbuny tho s ue of Pa a (Parnbhiiva). 

Tho upward movement is rom 1 ho g ass to tho move 
gubtlo, wd the order of ¢ ssolt ion { Lac (1६५ 414 as 
follows. (गा) with the Trcuyas (nell ul cet), the 
latter of which have +) (1५ euth ५6 ou 101) ५ 
thew support, is dissolved 110 Cant पाशा, ot Trane 
mitra of smell, which 1४11 the Mit (111; Qardba प्प 
ig then takon to thd Svadhish(iina, man, Ap, mits 
connectod Indriyas (taste und ha ads), wo dissolved in 


2) 11) SIN (, ‰1 14 AND LIL SURLIN OWFR 


1६५०1 (isto) Panmitia; (he latlor i oaker fo the Mani- 
pua ml there Rasa Fat इ 3 Pojay, and ity eo mected 
lanyas (git anc mrs), ne cisso'ved nto Yi pa (Ss ghey 
Tann tir, then the life ५ taken ॥1) 10 Aninthata, 
and a, Voyt, anc the connecter ndriyas (torch and 
pens), ae disso ved वो Sparsha (torch) ammatra; the 
litter 14 taken to fhe ४५१] wdhi, an there au, Akasha, 
and assouater [तए yas (hearing 1111 oath), are clissolved 
in the Shabda (Sound) ‘Mam व + be litter as thon takon 
to the Avni, and, there and beyond, 1 and Manas are 
dissolved in) Mahat, Mahat 111 Stiashine Prakiita, and the 
litter 4 umtec with Parib nduim tho Sahasraia, In tho 
case of tho latter morgor there are various stages which aro 
mentioned in tho toxt (इ, 52), as of Nida into Nadinta, 
Nadanta mto Vytpika, Vyipiki ito Samant, Samani into 
Voman , and the latter into Vishnuvaktia or Pungbindu, 
which is also Paramashiva. Woon al tho letlers lave 
been thus caissolvec, all the six (जोव पचत are cissolyar ag 
the pol vs of the lott sea boar the le tors. 

01 this cpwad ioveriorn{, [च] 111 9४ + Diikin, 
the Devas, क [तेत and Vai (tis, of the Md dhaza, are 
absorbe | 7 Sindalit, as ws also the Mahimandala or 
[गार + anc the [पाषा Sia “Nang” into which क 
passes, For these Bijas, or sound powers, oxpress (he 
subtle Mantia aspect of that which is dissolved in thei, 
Thus ‘earth? springs from anc is dissolved in its sood 
(Biya), which is that particular aspoct of the oroative con- 
scionsness which piopolle af Tho uttered Mantra 
(Vakhart Shabda) o + Lane” is the expression in gross 
sound of that, 

When the Dev leaves the Miladhara, that lotus, which 
by reason of the awakoning of Kundalini and the vivilying 
intuusity ० the Phan current hed oponed wud bared its 
flower upwards, again closes and hangs ils head downwards, 


RAG [लाः (LOCA + FAYA-KRAMA) 241 


As Kundalim reachos tho Sv dhishthiina, that lotus opens 
out and lifts its flowor upwards Upon To ontrance, 
Vishnu, Lakshun, Sa.svat’, Ri kit, दत and Vitti, 
Vaikunthadhama, Goloka, and the Deva ind Devi residing 
therom, avo dissolved in the body of Kundalim The 
Prithivi ov Harth Bija “ling” 18 dissolved in tho Taltva 
water, and water converted into its Bia © Vang ” 1amins 
in the body of Kundalm When tho Devi roaches the 
Manipura Chakra or Bralmmgrantiu, all that 14 im that 
Chakra meigos in Tor, "he Varuna Bija “ Vang” is 
dissolved गा fire, which 16 nains in Tfor body as the Brja 
“Rang” Tho Shakti nost reachos tho Anihata Chakra, 
which is known as the Kot of Vishnu (Viehnverarthi), 
where also all which is tl भभा) 1५ moigod m Iler, The 
Baja of Vivo “ Rang ” is sublimod in air, and a convortod 
into its Biya ^ Yang ” 1s absorbed in Kundahni, Sho then 
ascends to the abode of Bhirati or Sarasvati, tho Vishuddha 
Chakra. Upon Wer ontranco, Arddhanuishvara Shiva, 
Shalani, the 16 vowels, Mantia, ole, avo dissolved in Tox. 
The Bija of Air + Yang ” is dissolved in cthor, which, itsol! 
being trangformed into the Bija “ Tang,” is merged in the 
body of Kundalin. Pioreing tho conconlod Lalana Chakra, 
the Devi roachos tho Ajni known as the ^ Knot of Rudra” 
(Rudragranthi), whoo Paramashiva, biddhakal , tho Dovas, 
and all olso theroin, aro dissolvod in [0 At Tength the 
Bija of Vyoma (ether) or “Hang” is absorbed into the 
subtle Tativas of tho Ajni, and then into tho Devi. Aller 
passing through tho Rudiagranthi, Kundalin amtos with 
Paramashiva. As Sho procoeds upwads from the (षण 
petalled lotus, the Nirtlambapuri, Pranaya, Nada, ०८. 916 
16186 m tho Devi. Sho has (hus im Tor progress upwards 
absorbed in Horself tho twonty-thiov पप्य, commoncing 
with the gross olomonts, anc. Lhon romaining Torse.f Shakti, 


the canse of all Shaktis, unites with Pavamashiva 
81 


212 11], SIX OBNIRTS AND HE SRN OWER 


By this mothod of mental concentation, aided by the 
physiol and other processes described, 1} ५ 610०५ is absorbed 
into the subtle, cach chasolving ube ils 70 mediante cause and 
all into the Gliditma ot the Atma whiel 14 (11. In 
language borrowed om the world oe | प्तप passion, which 
33 soll bub a gross reflection on ow physical plane of 
corrosponding, though mare subtle, superscnst ५ activities 
and bhss, the Shakti Kundalmi who lis been seized by 
desne for [16] Lol 19 sad to make swit way to him, and, 
kissing tho Lotus mouth of Suva, ८ joys bint (SN vt) 
By the torn Sanarasya as moant (ie sense ol on oy mont 
aigng fom the union (Sumarasya) o male and omalo. 
This the most imlense form 0 physied delight symbolyes 
the Stpromoe Bliss ausing from {1५ wuon of Shiva and 
Shakti in the spiritual plano upon which it is enacted So 
Dakgha, the Dharmishashiakira, sus Tho व पका ws 
to be kuown by [tsolf alone, and to know [[ as as Choe bliss 
of knowing a vugin” Simla y, tho Sadhaka im [वा 
siddbiyoga, thiking o  Inmesolf as Shakt and tho Pare 
mata as Pornsha, fools hansel im vnion (Sangean) wilh 
Shiva, and enjoys with him (ho bhss which is Shmngaruasa, 
tho first of tho nine Rasa, or the love scutiment and bliss 
ns Adirasa (Shringma) which a aroused by Sattyaguna " 
is impartito (Akhanda), solf-illuminating (Svaprak isha) 
bliss (Ananda) whose substance is Chit (Ch nmaya).! Tt 
is so intenso and all-oxclusivo as (५ rondo: the lover 


'Svisangvedyam olad drahma cuviiesbiesukharp १५) । ( ted 
in Commontary to v 15 of Gh} of the Mathayog yn adipihe 

260 all the opht Bhivas commer cig wth Sveti, Stamlla, 1 Ind 
1110 tho well-known Romaneha oy (1111) 1 wl the hair star is or 0 1 
(Pultha), tho त] okig voico (Syurabl at ga), pulo (Varvanya), ada 
forth, aro all Sa tyik 1110 objeetion of an nd an fied, Wat {1 (५ 
Bhavas could not be Sattvik a asmuch as Sativw waa 5) [परा], san 
apt nstares of tbe वृष णलो पिका fiom आता tlotglt etc ted by 
Unglish educati 

fTt is nota Tamasi< thio such wc cam or mi [तच ote 


5 PRAULION (प्त ; LAYA-IRAMA) 243 


unconscious of all othe: ob’ects of knowledge (कन्तु intara- 
spaisha-shunyah), and tho own brother! of Bi vhma-bliss 
(Brabmasyadasahodara)? Bub as the Brahma-blisy 1s 
known only {0 the Yog , 59, a8 the A angk ua Shastra last 
cited obyorves, even (110 truce loyo-bliss of the mortal would 
“14 known to a fow knowers only” (पुषिः karshohit 
pramitribhih), such as pools and othors. Sexual as well 
as other forms of love ary reflections ov Liagments of the 
Beahman-bliss, 

This union of the Shakti Kundalin” with Shiva in the 
body of tho Sidhaka is that coition (Maithuna) of the 
Siittvika Panchatativa whicl the Yogini 'Pantra sus is 
“the best of all unions for those who have already con- 
trollod tho passions,” and mo thus Yat.) Of this the 
वोप Shukvama (vide SN ve St, post) says“ Thoy 
with the eyo of knowledge see the stainless Kaln, unitod 
with Cladananda on Nada. Io is the Mahiideva, white 
hko a pie crystal, and is the offalgent Gauso (Vinh wii pa- 
nidina), and Sho is the lovely woman of boauteous limbs 
which are listloss by reason of Her groat passion”? On 
their umon nectar (Amrita) flows, which in a nbrosial 
stream rons from tho Brahmmandha {to the Milidhara, 
flooding the Kshudrabrabminda, or microcosm, and 
satisfying the Dovatis of il4 Chakras — Tt is then that the 
Sadhaka, forget{il of all m ths world, is immorsod in 
ineltable bliss, Refreshment, meroasod powcr aud ता त 
ment, follows upon each visit to the Well of मए, 

In the Chintamanislava, allaib ved to Shui Shangkaras 
chiryya, 11 sands bis family woman (८ + Kundalini), 


1 Snhodaia—that 1५, biothors born of bho anmo mothor. Sesual-bliss 
is tho veflection (faint comparatively though ‘b bo) of Brahman bhss, 
® SAhityn Darpana, Ch. 111 
ach VI- 
Sal astdropard bindan kand yd पण्‌ पा shive 
Maithunang pavamang dvavyang yal puikitl tam, 


2.1 UP SIN (प्न वष) TEL S GREEN । पो 


entaung the voyal roul (ee, Sushnman), taking vost at 
intervals in the snorod plaeos (4 + Chakras) embraces tho 
Sup rome Husband (Pamshiva) and makes nootar to flow 
(iw, fron the तिपा) 

Tho Gamws instinefions are to go aboye the Aja 
Chakra, but no speeial diroctions are रक; for adtoy this 
Chakia has been pierced, Che पपत can, and indeod 
must, reach tho Brahmasthiine, or aboda of Rrialunan, 
unaided by his own elort, Above the Ayn tha volution- 
ship of Guew and Shishya (Master and cuaaiple) evasos, 
Kandaline having picreed tho tourteen Knots” (Gran. 
this)—or., {11106 Lingas, six Chakras, and the five Shivas 
which thoy contam, and then Morsel! drunk of the nectar 
which issuos from Parashiva, returns along tho path 
whonce Sho camo to Ifor own abodo (Miilidhiiva)! As 
She returns Sho pours from Torsolf 1110 tho Chakras all 
tha, Sho had previously absorbed thorofiom, In other 
words, as [Tor pasdago upwarcs was Layakiuna, cause 
Ml things in the Chakias to pass into the Laya state (dis 
solution), so Uer rotirn is Srishtikvama, as Sho ^ 10. 
creates? ©) makes thom ianitest. Tn Chis manner Sho 
again veachos tho Mialidhiva, when all tint las boon 
arealy वृणोत to be m tho Chakras appears in tho 
positions which they occupiod before Her awakening, 
Tn fact, the desconding वास काति makow for himpsol! the 
idon of that soparated multiplo and individuatised world 
which passed from him as ho ascouded to aud became one 
with the Causo. Sho ay Consciousness absorbs what Sho as 
conscious Powor projected. In short, tho द्रा of 
Kundahni is tho sotting again of the divatim im the pho- 
nomenal world of tho lowest plane of bog altor ho hid 
\been raised therefrom in a slate of ecstasy, or Samir 
Tho Yogi thus knows (because ho oxperiencos) the unture 

' Ax to the Samaye prnetics, ए post, p 250 ct sey 


\ 


IRACIIOL (YOGA 144 -1र454) 2.16 


and stato of Spirit and its pathway to and from tho Mayik 
and ombodiod world. fn this Yoga there 1 ५ gradual 
process of involution of the gross world with its clomonts 
into its Cause, Mach gioss clement (Mvhibhuta), bogother 
with tic suurle clomont (tanmatia) fon wich it pro- 
ceeds and tho connected organ of sonso (Tndriya), 18 dis- 
solved into the next above it until tho last cloment, other, 
with the anmiitra sound and Manas, are dissolved 11 
Bgoiwm (Ahangkaia), of which they aro Vikritis, Ahang- 
kara is merged in Mahat, tle first manifostation of creative 
idoation, and the latter into Bindu, which is the Suprome 
Boing, Consciousness, and Bliss of the Brahman. Kundah 
when aroused is foll asx intonso loat, As Kundalini 
ascends, the lower limbs become as mort and cold asa 
corpse, 80 wlsy १०८७ ५५८५) purb ७१ the budy when Sho has 
passed through and leaves it. This is due to the fact that 
She as the Powor which supports tho body is leaving [er 
centre On tho contrary, the upper part of tho head 
becomes + Instrous,” by which is nob meant any oxternal 
lustre (Prabhi), but brightness, warmth, uid animvion, 
When the Yoga is complete, the Yogi sits gid im tho 
posture selected, and the only trace of warinth Lo be found 
in the wholo body is at tle crown ot the head, whore the 
Shakti is united with Shiva. ‘Those, therefore, who aro 
sceplical can oastly verify the facts should they be fortu- 
nate onough to find’ a suecossftl Yog who wall let them see 
him at work. They may obsorve Ins cestasis and tho 
coldness ol tho body, which 34 nol progont im tho case of 
what 1s called the Dhyiina Yogi, or ५ Yogi operating by 
meditation only, and nob rousing Kundalini. This coli is 
an oxtornal and casily porcopliblo sign 11५ progrossien 
may be scen, obviously denoting the passimg away of 
something which supphed the movious heat ‘Tho body 
seoms lifoloss, indicnting that ils supporling power has 


216 [ ५६ tN {८ AND ॥ ५ RPLNI OW \ 


(hot gh nob ont rely) loft 1. Tac cownware 10111 1 (| the 
Shakta tans moved is, on the other hanc, ridie wed by the 
scappemrance of warmth, 9111 11, and fle nasnal con- 
SCLOUST ORS १ (\ 1८ "1 pPLocess is one of cevolt tien rem 
the highest st uve ol vlamment lo the point o depute ce, 

Tough not dealt with tr this work, rclerenes may 
here be mule to the Sidhans accompany ig the return of 
Kundain (0 [८ vosting-pluc 1 {1 iti | practice 
called [11 पनी वा, where tie weent ant doseent we 
1 पोषा प्प्‌ only 

The Se haka, [1 काति 9 the Vayu Bu & Yang? as 
heir, in tho left nostia, inhales through [da पोषा Japa 
ol the [31] \ siateon tines ‘her, closmg Toth nostials, he 
makes नक्तो) ५ the Bija sivty-tour tines. 11५ then thinks 
of the “black man of sin”? (Pipapurusha !) iu the left? 
avvily of tha ablomon as home dmed up (by the vir), 
and so thinking he oxhaloy throigh the right nostril 
Pinggih, makiag Japa ५ the 131 \ thirty-two times 
Tho कत्ता tier, uecditating कोको the red-coloured 
Biju * Rug” in the Mampura, inhaler, naking sixteen 
Japrv of tho Bja, and then closos the 1081116, making 
sixteen Japa Whilst making Japa he thinks that the 
body of the “man ol sin” is boing burnt and reduced 
to ashes (by the 010}. He thon inhales threngh the right 
nosleil with thirly-two dapa, and then medilates upon tho 
while Chandrabija “Thang”. tle noxt inhalos throw gh 1a, 
making Japa of (ho B ya sixtoon Limos, closes both nostiils 
with Japa dono sixty-lorr times, and exhales through 
Pinggalii with thirty-two Japa, During mbalation, holding 
of breath, and oxhalation, ho should consider that a new 


1 See Mabinevunn ‘ante. Ullisa, Ch ४ ४९ १५, 99, where the 
Bhiitas] पवतो process is 8101115 १०६८ पतत्‌ Also Dovi-Bhigavata, 
cited post 

¶ The worse or worker silo. 


# 
PRAGHION (YOGA? TAYA-KRAMA) 247 


celestial body is bemg formed by the nectar (composed of 
all the Matrik:-varna, o1 sonnd-powors, embodied in thou 
Vaikham form as kttorcd sound) diopping rom the 
Moon.” Ina sinilar way with tho Bijvof water ५ Vang” 
the formation of the body is continnod, and with the bya 
“Tang” of the cohosive Prithvi Tattva 16 15 campleted 
and strongthoned. Tastly, with the Mantia क ho’ham + 
(«We Iam”) the Sadhaka leads tho Jivatma into its place 
in the heart. Some forms of meditation aro given 11४, 61. 

Kundali does not at first stay long in Suhasrira ‘ho 
length of slay dopends on tho strength of the Yog ’s 
practice, here 15 41 on a nat val tendency on the pat of 
Kundali to कम्रा, Tho Yogi will uso all of ort at his 
disposal 10 छपा Hor above, lor the longer Uns is done 
the nearcr approach 13 made to the time wl on ho can be 
in a pormanont manner rotaimod there.’ Por 16 1> to be 
observed that Jiboration is nob gained by morcly leading 
Kundah to tho Sabasrara, and of courso sill Jess is: it 
gained by stiving it up in the Mulidhiira on fixi 16 it in 
any of tho lower centres, Taboration पत gamod anly whon 
Kundah takes up Hor permanent abodo in tho Suhasviaa, 
go that Sho only returng by the will of the Sidhaka, Tb 
ig said that after staying in Sahasiiia for a time, some 
Yogins load the Kundalini back to Tridaya (heat), and 
worship her there. ‘ais is dono by U oso who aro vnable 
to slay long in Sahasrara, Tf they take the Kundalin’ 
lower than Hridaya—i.:, worship hor in the three Chakras 
below Anuhata—thoy no longor, 16 is said, bolong to the 
Samaya group.” 


1Great power (Suldh ) is had by the mau who can keep Kendal 
Shakti in the Sahara thrice days wid thicg mgt ts, 


2 Gakshmidhara cited ly Ananta Shastri, ep ee, p 71. What this 
means 14 mote than Iocan sv, asd ant et fendi wth tha views cf 
tho school which Lakshmidh wa (cited also gist) quotes 


od 


* 


= 
218 11 ५६ GUNIRTS AND TH STR त owrn 


Thus, whon by tho proliminary Sidhanii pu ity of 
physical and montal Lunchion is gamed, the Sadhuka loarns 
how to open the entranco o the Sushunna, which js 
ordirai'y closea ४ tho nise, (नध ae tho mowing (५ the 
atatamont that the Serpant will ts cai closes the pato of 
Brahmi, At the base othe Sushuimis Nid and in the 
Adlara lotus tho Shakti Kundalin tes shin iborme coiled 
round tho Lingt, the Shiva or Purusha aspect in that 
contro of tho Shabc abrahman, of which She is tho Prakriti 
aspect, तेता वा the orm of Ha ereative omanations 
ag mind and 1 व्ल ५ the wholo moving ody, but She 
[161४५] oxists at the Mithidhua or carth contie as a gross 
aspoet of Shakti im its sleopmg form, This is tho normal 
avodo of tho Shakti who 1s tho Shabdubvaliman [तल्‌ For 
having #0 completely mant'estod Herself Sho vests or 
sleeps in what is bor grossest and conoli ding nat ilestation, 
Tha vosidual vital lorco m this vontro thore oxists in a 
latort and potontial stato, Th ils an towuds Yoru is 
sought, tho first procoss must bo that by which the Serpont 
ig arousod from its slumber, In other words, this [01८6 is 
raised from its Jatont potontial stato 10 one of avliviby, and 
thero rounitod with Itself in its othor aspoct as tho Spiritual 
Tnght which shines! in tho corobral contro, 

Kundali: Shakti is Chit, or Conscioanoss, in 18 
creative aspect as Power, As Shakti it ig through or 
activity that the workl and all beings thoroin exist. 
Prakrili Shakti is in tho Milidhixa m a stato of sloop 
(Prasupti)—that is, latont activity looking ondwmads 
(Vebirmukli) Tb is because Sho 15 in this stato of latont 
ackivity that through Tot all the outor material world 
functions of life ave being porformed by man. And it is 
for this reayon that man 1s ongrogsed in the world, and 


1Vor this reason tho Sahasrara is algo eled Bhaloka (from tho 
1006 Ud, “to shina *), 


॥ 
1461161" (१०६ ; JAYA*RRAWA) 249 


under the [पा of Maya takes his body and सुमा to bo 
the 108] Solf, aud thus goos 1ound the wheel of hfe in its 
unonding eycle of births and deatl s, When tho Jiva thinks 
the world to bo differant 1 0 15098011 and tho Brahman, 
it is though the influence of Kundalini who dwells within 
him ITor sloop in the Mulidhiia 1s, therefore, for the 
bondage of the ignorant.! As long as She 1omains m the 
Mulidhara lotus—namoly, a that state of Tors which is 
the concomitant of the cosnie appearanco—so long must 
that appearance endure. In short, whon She is asleo, man 
is in tho waking stato (Jugal). Lence it is said + that the 
Shakti of tho imtiato is awake, that of tho Pashu जमु), 
Sho is therofore arougod trom sleep, and when awake 
retarns to [ler Lord, who is lint Torsdb in. nother aspect 
Tor retwin is, in act, tho withdrawal o that wtivily of 
Tlers which produces [16 worle of appearances, and which 
with such withdrawal disapooms, Por on [16 ipwind 
Path Sho absorbs into Horsel! all the Tativas winch had 
emanatod from Wer. ho individ ial conserousness of the 
Yogi, the J vatma, boing पाठत्‌ with tho world-conseious- 
ness in Ter, or Kundali, thon becomes the universal ८०11. 
sciousness, or Paramatin’, fiom which it appoared to bo 
difforent only by reason of the work -creating and bowild- 
ering achivity of Kundal) which is thus withdrawn Tho 
osteblishment though Tor of the puro state of Bome- 
Consciousness-Bliss ig Samidhi 

In short, Kundahi is tho individ al bodily ropresonta- 
tive of the great Cosmic Powor (Shakti) which eroatos and 
sustains tho univorse, Whon this individual Shakli mani- 
fosting as the individual consciousnoss (J va) 14 merged in 
the consciousness of the Supreme Shiva, the world ws for 


3 Shandilya Upauis! ad, Gh I 


2Knuléinava Tantra, ©} ४, Madalabrotmana-Up ‘Tan as 18 
dguhoyad thara 


82 


250 (. SIX CENIR S ANT HT A RENE COWRR 


such J vi dest oyed, aad Eason ution (Mukti) is obtained, 
Unto, howsva, on ence (| he Cosmio Shakt, tho 
tiverso Contes fot Fiose फ ) nto bot [कता पतत्‌ until the 
ger Dissolat on (Mal pralaya), al bo eloyo of which (he 
universe again evolves into those divas whoso Karma has 
not been oxhauster, a | who 11४८ there ore not been 
liberate ‘The rotwmpg and पापात्‌ up of Kindal क 
Kindal ४०९४५ ।५ thus ५ ‘orm of tia motecr of the individ. 
ual imo tho wavarsal eorsebusuess whieh is the ond of 
eyory system 6 वोपप Yoan 

Pandit [६ Auanty Slash says! thab “Tho bamaya 
method of worshipping Shakt’, evled tho Samay नोभ 
is dont with in five tre ut ses whose reputed mithors aro Che 
{८५५८ gagosy Sanika, Hanada, Sanatkumira, Vashishtha, 
and dShuka, Tho followme ma summary of tho touchings 
containcd in these Sumaya Aginas, cach of which goes 
ator tho namo of its author + 

“Tho Shakis or onorzy, the developmont o which is 
tho subjeet of thoso tiontisos, is called tho Kundalini, ‘he 
plase whore it resides is callod tho Midadhiira (orginal 
abcde), By a successful dovolopmer( and working ol this 
Shakti, the liberation of the soul is attamod., In the 
orcinny condition Kundalini s oeps quietly ab the Mili- 
dhara. Tho first purpose of the practilionors 1 to 
awakon tis sleepmg snake, and tins is elected im two 
ways: 

1) By ‘Tapas. Flore Tapas refers to tho process ol 
Prinayama, which moans the rogulation of tho breath and 


{ Anidatahmi p 8 ‘Lho pnssago १५ given by way ot orlation only, 
hue 10 stalomonts ind which [ol we not vole + ad somo fiom 
which [ dissont and some which £ do nob widerstand 

४ (11114 tom is nppuer tly of varymy sinilicn reo — [6 xcoms to Lo 
uscd horo im a ४५ 8० opposed to, somo forma ab least of Kuliohadia, and 
0/8 ugod in tho Kaul Shastias to don oto thow worship with tho 
Pa rchatativa 


(^+८ ८) (०८५ : TAYA-KRAWA) 261 


holding it for stated periods of timo. This 14 also the 
course advocated by tho Yoga Shistas. 

“ (2) By Mantras. The pupil 15 initiated m tho chant. 
ing of certain Mantras which he has to tepoat a fixed 
number of times at particula: hours of the day, all tho while 
having before his mind’s eye the figure of the Murti or Gad 
connoted by tho Mantra ho chants ‘Tho most important 
of these Mantras is said to be tho Panchadasht. 

“Whon it is thus roused up, the Kundalim ascends 
from (1) Mulidhira, where 11 was sleoping, to the next 
higher contre, called the (2) Svadhishthiina (own placo). 
Thence with great effort this Shakti is carned to the 
following contres in rogular asconding order: (8) Maniptiva 
(full of rays); (4) Anahata (sound, nob emanating fom the 
collision of bodies)—tho Shakti hore is transformed into 
gound; (5) Vishuddhi (placo of purity)—here it becomes a 
puro Sattvic olomont; and (6) Ajni (i-jni, a little know- 
lodge). Ab this slago the practitionor may be said to have 
so far boen succogsful m secure a लना पात्‌ over this 
Shakti, which now appears to him, thoigh only fo. a 
moment, in the form of v sharp flash of lightning. 

“The passago of cho Kundalin from the Milidhiva 
through the above contros of ona gy up to Ajna conslitutes 
the first part of the ascont. Tho disviple who takes to 
this practice has to undergo a course of Upisana (contom= 
plation and worship of tho proscribed Doity) and Mantra 
Japa (chanting of incantations),? into which he will be 
initiated by his Guru (leacher and guide), The six contres 
of energy abovo onumoratod from Mulidhara to Ajni, 
joined togothor by imagmmy shaight ines, form a 

1 Tn this and othor citations from the P पव the Muglish oquis alonts 
of Sanskiit terms me incoroct, as nught be expected none to whom 
Enghsh is not his own tongue dapais nob ‘charting’. 1) faot, m 


Upangshu Japa nollung 18 head, aud “meantations provoke another 
sel of 1dens to tho Unghph mind 


25) EL ०५६ CLNIRO8 AND ||] SPRPEN 10४4 


umon of Sat ant Chil (iat wm Ue gor) of the aspirant 
Tio Kendalm which has been cdo al the way to the 
तिक पत तत should be merged mito (las प्ता र Uns is the 
ond of fle som Ps omrey; le raw er oss bontitude 
Uself (Pam nan la). 

“But this (undalini doos not stay in } ८ Salvi iva 
for viong time — Lt always Conds to refurt, and doos retunn 
to Ws ogni position. ‘he process should agun and 
weain be repeatod by the aspir mt several [वतक until tho 
Shakti nakes a permanent stiy with [ता Pati (husband)— 
nunoly, Sidashiva-—or until the union of Sadishiva and 
Chit is completo, and becomes Vativrati, as already 
mentioned ‘Tho asphant 1s then a divanemukta, or pure 
Sattva, Ilo 1 not conscious of this material limitation 
of the soul. {lo is all joy, and as tho Btornal पहना, ५60 
vy. 9 पात्‌ 10. So much of Samayiehara, 

“Now lo tho other mothods of Shakta worship; tho 
Katlay worship the Nundaline without vousiag hor fom 
hor sleop? in the Malu) ira, which is called Kula; and 
Joneo Kaulas (Sans. Ku oath, Pridhivi, so पिततत्रे. 
Boyond tle Milidhma they co nob tino, thoy follow the 
Vamichiva or black magie,? aud gain thoi temporal 


1 4 stato nent by tho samo author ab p65 1411 ypparont conta 1 
(छा wit this Ho (ero nays (111 वु like 11 ५५ * bho Kaas 
who wouship Kurdvhni im tle Mulillira Lave ne dor 1101 than 
(८८१८११४ 1 Lom its sleep When tha is dona, Ucy thiae that bl oy 
heye attained ton cbyoot, and there they aicp hi tl ciy owu wads, 
the Ker las hwo Navin always nom at had? 


द Vaim chars is not © blnek magis, | tho no west Sanskrit एए atont 
for wlich 1४ Abhichina, Thera may havo heen, 18 the ए पादी) 
Samhutié suys (11:४8 TI), some K uidis wl o, like tle Vaidikas, sought 
onpymont in this and the next wold, wd at Liberation (Armkintham 
kawayanti amrto दात ue दा एताहि), Bul to abito bddly that 
Kaulegas a wholo to 100 rouse Kundalini and load | er to the Sale पा 
fa neorect क पक प्राते Svami, tho author of the Pert (SN) hoo 
tranalated, was huuaclf a Caula, and tho whole object of the work 1s 
to svoure Laburation (Mokshy) So nuch agrormice of, and pra ndioo 
agamat, tho Kuula schovla prevail that aintemants adverse te tom 


1140८" (YOGA " LAYA-KRAMA) 285 


objects and enjoy; they aro not liborated fiom buth and 
death ; thoy do nob go beyond ibis cath. Nay, more, 
the Kaulas aro now so tar degraded thal they have left 
aft altogether the worship of the Kundalim in the Mula- 
dhara, and have beteken themselves toe practieos most 
inhuman, which are tar fion being divine’ The Mishias 
are farabove tho Kanlas, Chey perform all Karmas, worship 
the Devi or Shakti in the clements, such as the sun, an, 
ete, and do Upisani with Yantras made of gald or other 
metals. They worship the Kundalan, awake her, and 
attempt to lead lor on, Some of the Mist ra worshippers 
rise even as far as tho Anileta. 

"Wo lomn from the Commentators that this whole 
subject of Shakti-worship 8 treated of in तमां in the 
‘ Tailtariya Avanyaka * (Ist chaptor) Samoa of then oven 
quoto from that “Avanyaka’ in support of thoi caplanations, 
This subject is vast and a vory difficult ono. Tt 18 not 
possible for one to go into tho intricacies of the yi byeot 


should always be tested ‘This 19 not to say Uiat some pinclices may bo 
blameworthy, 


1Tho Pandit hore apparontly adopts tho opmion of Lakshmidhaia, 
a followor of tha १1 Samaye selcol and an opponort of the 
Kaulas. If (as is probably tho engo) “imhuman’ is tho Pandil's 
phraseology il is mvpt. ‘Iho praglicos appaontly 1001० to—namely 
the worship, so litle undor stood, with wine, moat womm ~ i in pat a 
gontinnanco of tho most angiont Viadhk sages in diftoring forms (seo 
my “Shaki and Shakta’) It miy be «dmiltad that some fo rao 

Sfidhana mo dangorous or blamowortly and that somo dutails of tho 
ritual wall bo gonorally conmidorod vopollent, ax will also bo (1 may add 
by way of example) the एषिता “hoiso-saeifec  (Ashyamcdhal—nat 
any rato, as Mahidhara and othors intorrot it. Tho worst chaigo which 
oan be sucoaastully mamtained agama somo of tho lowar odor of the 
class referred to 19 black magis propor, through improper uso of the 
Shatkarma As Shivy in tho Kulfinava Sumhiti (not tho go cri 

known Tantra) gays, “Lu Kale all mon are Iestfal Lor monoy, and wil 
evon destroy boings to gain it But 1 will dostoy all such os doos fro 
dey gross,’ ‘Pho abusos of some of tho followers aro rot to he laid to 
the chargo of the च पठ Shiistra Tt must also nat bo forgotten that thao 
have boon different communities with vory differing views and prackieo, 
eg, Brahma Kaule and a Kapihke 


{ [भि 


fe 


956 PE SIN (1 द] | AND HEL SEREPNT LOWLE 


vuless cre be a pront Guan of vast Jeong and much 
personal oxporience; 16५ wor ha hhayo boon written on 
even single ports in the ascent of the aspuant up Ue 
payehic conties.?! 

“The followers ol tho humay tproupare prohibited from 
worslupping Devin the Maciocosm, They should worship 
ठा in any of the Ghahias m the कपा body, choosing 
that centre wlich theit prictice and alnlity permits thom 
toaeach, ‘hoy shoud contemplate on Doviard [फा Lond 
Shive w (1) hava g the sure abode (Adhisht] “nase n ya), 
(2) ०९८५८ pying the sane pesition (Avasthimnsamya), (3) 
pertormmng tho same unetions (Am shit] iwasiimya), (1) 
hoving tio samo form (Rapa), and (6) as huving the samo 
natio (Nama). us, in worstupping Doviin the Adhara- 
chakra, क्प and Shakti (1) have Milid) ava 01 thew 
seal, (2) both of them occupy the position of daneors, (न) 
hoth togcthor perform the function oF Chau ng ५ unyeise, 
(1) both mo red an (कम), (4) Shiva is called प्रपाक, and 
Slakti Bhairw 

“Smiluly 2 2 her Chakras montioncd 1 the 
proceting Shlokas ‘This is the way how boginners have to 
practise, Advanced sbudents worship Dovi in tho Sahasrii- 
ya, and notin the lower couties flow ix the worship to be 
ear vied on in bahasiire? 

“The worshipper should fix Ing attention on Buindava, 
whuch is tho locality whore the over-oxistng 26th Tativa-- 
the umon of Shiva and Shakti—:esides, [thes abovo all the 
25 Tattvas, and is situated im Chandiamandala (tho aphore 
of the moon) in स्विति, [16 should contemplate on the 
suid union and idontify himsolf with 11, This shows thet 
those who cary on Bahya [रह or worship m tho extemal 
world, do not belong to tho Samaya Sehoo, As regards 


1 Toro { wholehcattedly १60 with sry friond We Pandit. 
£ Sve 1114 edition, Anwndalahari, pp 8 13 


—_ ee 


PRavHon (१९८५५ , LWAYA-KRAMA) 257 


the iwentification of oneself with the union of Shiva and 
Shakti ab Baindava just spoken of, there aro two ways of 
realising ib; one is known as the fowfold path, and the 
othor the sixfold path. Theso should be learnt hom tho 
Gur? 

“A novitiato in tho Samaya school has 1० go through 
tho following course : 

५ (1) Tle should cherish tho utmost regard for and 
confidence in his Gmu. (2) Wo should receive the Pan- 
chadashi Mantra from his Guru, and chant the same 
according to istiuclims, with a knowledgo of 119 seer 
(Ris), metre (Chhandas), and the Deity (Dovata) 
(8) On the eighth day in tho bright lortnight ol Ashva- 
yuja month, Mahinavam’, he should at midnight pros- 
trato himself al 1114 Guiw’s fect, whon tho latter will bo 
ploased to initialo him in somo Mantra and the ved nature 
of the six Chakras and of the sixfold path o identification 

 Aftor ho is thus qualified, Lord Mahadeva? gives him 
tho knowlodge or capacity to ५0५ his inner soul. , , , 
Then the Kundalini awakos, and, going up suddenly to 
Mampiira, becomes visiblo to tho dovoteo-pvactitioner. 
Thence he has to tako lor slowly to tho nghor Chakras 
ono after another, and thero porforms the proscmbed 
worship, and Sho will appoar to him moro and more 
alearly. Whon the Ajnichakra is crossed, tho Kundalini 
quickly darts away lice « flash of hghtning to Sahasviiva, 
and enters tho Island of Goms sumounded by tho Kalpa 
trees in the Ocoan of Noctar, wmtes with Sac ashiva thero, 
and onjoys with Tim. 


1 416 Rosh of tho Mantra is he to whom it wis [186 revealed, tho 
motro ts that in which ib was first 01/60 by Shiva; aud tho Dovataas tho 
Atha of the Maitra as Shabda ‘Lhe Arthe 14 fivefold as Dovati, 
Adindovata, Pratyndhidova.i, Varnidhidovati, Mintaiidhidey ata. 

2Shive initiates }im प tho knowledge of Brxhmen Thus, Shiva 
is considered tho “'ouchor of all apimitual Gurus (Adinatha). 

४४ 


9४ HP SV (१) १1५ AND TIE S 11 LOW bh 


‘Pho [ता [काला sheuld new wut outsiule the val! 
प्राव] (ट्प | पा vetiuns fo Tle: own place, aid or Ter 
1001 conbnue the precess 10111 Sle ot , की प्व tor (ण्णः 
wilh Sidwhiva in ¢ त Salasria, tnd never volt rns. 

“ho process hereto cre | त) त पात्‌ offers aba 
similar nabure are always sept secre 3 yet the common- 
tilor says 16 has onto compass ते 1 towares his diseiplos 
givon hore an outline of Che rietho 1. 

“Myon in (ho mote expeclation of the velurn of Kanda. 
lin "01 Sabasma, the aspirant = तलह  Bralimiinanda 
(धा 1 45). Ilo who ay once [चतो Kundalin’ to 
Sahasrara is lod to desire nobhing bul Moksha (Liberation), 
if hoe has no ot et oapeetation = Leven alary of 116 Samaya 
peaglitionors have sone worldly oxpeetations, they mast 
still wors) ip in the mic. cosm only. 

“*Subhagodaya? and other famous works on Shyi- 
viyn say Chit the practitiona: should conc mite tus mud 
01 Doviwho trestles mb [को nan tela (the सरति cise), and 
goon. ‘Chis statcmoub is nol at varies wide Cho bone hing 
vonlamotl in this book, lor tho Saryamane ale rofor ed to 
applos bo the Cue andla (nuavocesta), and mot to Heal nde 
(mierocosm), Sumlarly, all the verses advocating oulor 
worship are to be appliod bo the corresponding obZects in 
tho Pindandae”? 

'Tho last, highest and most पीले form of Yoga is 
Rijn Yoga, By means of Mantra, Matha and Gaya Yoga 
tho practitionor by gradual at ainmont of purity bocomes 
fit for Savikalpa कितो, Lb is through Rija Yoga alone 
that ho can atfain to Nirvikelpa Samidhi, ‘Tho formor 


11118 aa woll ua somo abhor dotola of toa des 1 ‘plion, T (ण nob 
follow, Wlo is writin outers tho (11 Tho five ix, on the case 
stated, with n, if thera bow val, and what ia at? 


20umm on तै पातो पृषे, od by Pant R. Ananta Shdati, p 5 
«t soy, whoadla “ ४ lull कृष्ठम्‌ एह cf these कृवा सदत ee fe Ut पप, 


Sumiutii,’ one of the ive hun tas of the Hamaya group. 


छानता) (¥YOCA : [AYA-KRAMA) 269 


Samidhi or Hestasy is ono in which unless ib perfects into 
the second kind there is a roturn to the world and 118 
exporionco, ‘This is not so in tho Samachi of Raya Yoga 
in which thore is not tho shgl test seed of attachment to 
tho world and in which therotore Choro 18 no vottun thereto 
but etornal unity with Brahman, Tho first threo ands of 
Yoga prepare the way for the fourth? Ln the Samadin of 
Mantra Yoga the state of Mahabhava is attained marked 
by immobility and speochlossness. In the Samadhi of 
Hatha Yoga respiration ceases and to outward oxporience 
the Yogi is without sign of arimation and hko a corpse. 
In tho Samadhi of Laya Yoga doscribod in this 
book the Yogi hay no outer consciousnoss and is 
also immorsod in tho Ocoan of Bliss. The Samadhi of 
Raja Yoga is complote (Chit-svarupa-bhiva) and final 
(Nirvikalpa) Jaberation? Thorc are, ibis said, Jour states of 
dotachmont (Vaniigya) 1om the world corresponding to the 
four Yogas, tho mildest form of Vaitagya bomg tho mar k 
of tho first or Mania Yogn and tho greatest dogieo of 
detachment bemg the muk of the highost Yoga or Raja 
Yoga. Anothor mark of distinction is the prominonco given 
to the mental sido, All Yoga is concerned with montal 
practices but this is moro spocially so of Rijn Yoga which 
has been described? as tho discrimination of tho real from 
tho unreal, that is the infinite and enduring from tho finito 
and transiont by thoiv roasoning with the help of the 
Upanishads and tho recognised systoms of Philosophy, 

LRaja-Yoga by Swimi Dayiuanda, pubhsl od by Shri Bharata 
Dharma Mahiimindaly, Bonaros. 

2 Ind , 19, 20. 


3Mridu (intermiltont, vaguo and work) Madhy wna (middling), 
Adhimatra (high dog.co when worldly enjoy ment oven becomes 2 णया 66 
of pam), Para (gheab when the nund is {11110 completely hom 
worldly ob ects and cannot he browghb back to thom urdo. any 
citoumsiances), 


4 (१५९. $ 


260 HU) SEN CEN OPS AND TI कषा [द्वा powr? 


Tho Uneglish revo: must uot howover identify it with 
inv 6 plnlosophising. Hy 14 the एठा तवत of Reason by the 
mod y po and infolloctt uly great undo the conditions 
and subject to the diserplino above deseribed with Via दप 
or Ronunciwion. fn the man of Knowlodge (dn ini) Buddhi 
or Reagon holds lull sway. Rua Yoga comprises sixteon 
divisions = (पला arc sovon varicties ol फला va (reasoning) 
in seven planes of knowledgo (Bhiimka) called dninada, 
Sainyasada, Yogada, Li lonmukii, Satpad?, Anandapada 
and Paratparat By exorcise thoroin the Riija-Yogt gradu- 
ally offectively practisoy tho two kinds of Dharani? 
vis, Prakrityishaya and Bralinishaya dependout on 
Nature or Brahman rospectively, hore aro threo kinds of 
Dhyana whoreby the powor of  self-ronlisation (Atma- 
pratyalcsha) is produced, hero ave fou for ns of Samadhi. 
Thore are throe aspects of Brahinan, viz, Tis gross aspoct 
ag immanent in the univoiso known as the Viru Purusha, 
[४ subtle aspoet as tho eroator, progor vor and वार्ता) of 
all Uns is the Lord (shyara) and (he supremo aspeet beyond 
thatas Sichchidinanda. Rij. Yoge lays down dil‘orent modos 
of Dhyina for tho throe aspoots.) OL the four Samu This 
won by those overeisos tho (wo first or Savichiira, that is thore 
ig still a subtle connoohion with the conscious working णा the 
powor of Vichiva (ronsoning, discornmont), and tho last two 
ave without this or Nirvichara, On reaching this fou th state 
tho Raja-Yogi attains libo ation oven whon liv ng in tho body 
(Jivanmukta) and is severed fiom the Karmishaya! It 18 
only by Rija Yoga that this Nirvikalpa Sam idin is attained, 


1Similiwly theo are soven Bhiimkas or pluios of Kina, tas, 
Vinidisha 0 Shubhechehha, Viel arani, Tanumiinagi, Saltipatts, 
As vigsakti, Padartl abhivini, Turyage and also sovon plaucs of Worsl ip 
(Upasana Bhimuka) wz, Namapaia, Riipapma, Vibhittipa a, Shahti- 
pun, Gunepiva Bhivapua, Svarupapary, 

2 Soo p 207, ante, 

3 Ra‘a- Yoga, by Dayananda Syvami, 19 

4 Tho maga of टना, Sangakiris in कषठ & 01 (13) stato. 


CHAPIER Vit 
TIHRORETICAL BASHS OF FHIS YOGA 


Tis Yoga has been widely aftirmed. The following 
review does not profess to bo oxhanstive, for the liiorature 
relating to Kunc ali and Liya Yogais very great, but includos 
morely a short reference to some of the Upamshads and 
Parainas which havo come under my uotice, and of which 
I kept a novo, whilst ongaged in this work, Tr will, how- 
over, cloarly establish that this doctime coneormng the 
Chakras, or portions of it, 35 10 be found in other Shisti as 
than tho Tantras, though tho referoncos i some casos are 
80 curl that ib is nob always possible to say whothor thoy 
are dealing with tho mattor in tho same YVopa-senso as tho 
work hore translated or as forms of worship (Upisana). 1, 
is to bo noted in this connection that Bhutashuddln is a 110 
which is considered as a necossary proliminary to tho 
worship of a Dova.” [6 i obvious thatif wo undorstand 
the Bhutashuddhi vo horo moan the Yoga practice वकष पण, 
then, with the oxcoption of tho Yogi oxport in this Yoga, 
no one would bo compotont Sor worship al all. Mor it is 
only tha accomplished (Siddha) Yogi who ean really tako 
Kundalini to the Sahasriva. %In tho ordinary daily 


1 Thore aro many others. Samo reforonces kindly supplied to mo 
by Mahamahopadhyiyn Adityarama Bhattichinyy a arvived too Into for 
insertion in tho firsl Udition and have since boon imgorted 

५ Sea Taranga I of tho Mantiamahodadhi: Dovarchi-yogyati- 
priptyai bhitashuddhing samich wot 


209 { YIN (1६१ ५ AND | SER ENT OWER 


Bhitlasli ddl, thorelore, the p ocess ms purely ५ 1 1 पण or 
Imaging y ous, ard there orolorasgperto Cpisam, ind nob 
Yor Murther, as a form of worship Choe sidhaka may, 
and does, ulore hin [shtadovett ॥ ४॥ ious party o his 
body. Chis, agin, 1५ च [ष 0 कपा, Somoo’ tho 
Shastras however, next uoentioned, clearly tela to the 
१0६ \ procoss, anc olhers ippear fo Co so, 

Tn what aro called the oa hes Upumshics,! rienticn is 
mado of corlai maltags wel ate more oxphe't y doseribed 
an sich as ave said by Wes oom onontalists to be of later 
dato. Tits, wo find reference to to four slates of (का~ 
sciousnoss, woking, and so torth; tho four showths; and to 
the cavity of the hoat asa “soul” contre, 

Aw nhoncy statec, 11 the 11 त) schools 1] ५ ता was 
considored to be tho soat of the waking consciousnoss, Tho 
heart expands during waking, anc contracts in sleep. Tnto 
it, during dhowming sleop (Svapna), he cxtor ad senses are 
withdrawn, thot gh tho represou dive fondly is awake; 
wil in dioantoss sleep (Sushup ४, il also os wilhdvawn, 
Roleronce ix also mado to (he 72,000 Nidis; 110 entry and 
oxtt of tho Prita though the Bruahmarandhis (above the 
foramon of Monro and the middle commiastre) 5 and up. 
breathing” through ono of those Niidis. hese to some 
extont probably involve the necontance of 0 her elements 
of doctrine not expressly stated, Thus, the reforenge to 
tho Brahmarandhia and the “one nerve” imply the 
corobro-spinal axis with its Sushi a, through whieh alone 
the Pring pisses to the Brvhminrandhra ; for which reason, 
apparently, tho Sushwunn itself is rveforrad to in tho 
Shivasanghiti as tho Brahmarandhea Liberation is finally 


1 Lor some roforenses from tho older Upun'sha ls, aco an utiolo 
by Profossor Rays Davide in J RAS, 7] (वपो, (899), “Theory 
ot Soul in कानी Soo also Vol, क of any + Prineplos of 
fantea,’ rofo.cng amongst o-lLove ta Peasana Upanihed, 1 त, 6, १, 


110, ICA BASS OL गना $ YOGA 268 


offected by न knowledge,” which, as the anciont Aifaroya 
Avanyaka says,! “1s Biahman’’, 

Tho Hangsa Upanishad + opens with the statomont that 
the knowledgo thorein contained should be commented 
only to tho पिपोला, of poace/ul mind (1४), solf 
controlled (Dante), anc devoted to the Guru (Gurubhakta), 
Navayana the Commoniator, who cites amongst othor works 
the ‘Tantrik Compendinin the Sharada Thlaka, describes 
himself as ^ ono whose solo supports Shruti”? (Narayanona 
shrutimatropajivina). ‘Tho Upamshad (§ 4) moutions by 
their names tho six Chakias, as also the mothod of raismg 
of Vayn from the Muh dhara—that, is, tho Kundalini Yoga, 
Tho Iangsa (that is, diva) is stabed to bo in tho eight 
petalled lobus bolow Anihata 4 (§ 7) whore tho Tshtadovata 
is worshipped. hero are vight potas, with which are 
associated certain Vriblis, With the Hastorn petal 15 asso. 
ciated virtuous inclination (Punyo matali) ; with the South- 
Hastern, sleep (पिपा) id laziness (Alnsya); with tho 
Southern, badness or cruelly (Kriia mati), with (ho South. 
Western, sinful inchiation (Pipe manishi); with tho 
Westorn, various inferior or bad qualitios (ततत) ; with tho 
North-Westorn, intontion in movomont o1 action (Gamanidau 
buddhih); with tho Northorn, atlachmont and ploasurablo 
contentmont (Rati and Vrits) ; and with tho North-Mastorn 
petal, mannal appropriad ion of things ( Dravyagraha na) Tn 


1 P, 236 (edited by Arthur Bor iod Uo Koith) of । Ancedota Oxonion- 
sia”, 

2 Upanishadang Samuchohayah : Anandish wna ९०१०४) Vol XXIX, 
p 593 

3'The Tantra liko overy othor Indian 8) isha, नुधा to bo based on 
Veda 

4This lotus is commonly confused with tho Anihatn Tho lattor 
isn Qhakva im tho spinal column; tho oight-potalled lotus is in the 
region of the heart (एव्‌) in the body. 

Shit, “‘tekmg of things”. Tho translation of this and somo of 
the othor एसा is tontative Tt is not oasy in overy caso to understand 
tho promso meaning or bo find an Unglish oquivalont. 


201 [1 SIN CINTRES AND EL. SEU भै 10४ ॥ 


the contro of this lotus as dispassion (४ (11 कपयो. [प tho 
filamonis ५ the wasing state (dijiad-avastia) 3 पो tho 
porictep tho seopmy stato (तिषा; 11) tho siak the 
salooo Crews saber (Si 1 11) ) Above the 101 18 
is “tho placo withott support”? (Na पोका ५ pradesha), 
which 1s fie वृषा ॥ stato. ‘Tho Commentator Narayana 
says that the Vrittio tho petals avo piven in the Adhyit- 
maviveka which assigns them to tho ११11 16 loluses, पा 
the passage citud trom tho [| ingsopmmshad, they, or a 
number o these, yppear to bo collected in thy eoutie of 
meditation upon the Ishticevata, fn ई 9 ton kinds of 
sound (Nida) aro mentioned whieh have definite physical 
offsets, ५ ch a4 perspiration, shaking, and the like, and 
by tho prncuico or (ho tenth kind of Nien (he Biahma- 
pada is sud to bo attainod, 

Tho Biahnna Upanishad! mentions in vy 2 tho navol 
(दिपो homt (Hiidaya), throat (Nanthe), ant head 
(कप्त तापी), as placos (Sthina) “whore Che fou quarters 
of tho Braiman shine’. ‘ho Gommontator Nirayana 
says that tho Biahmopamshad, by tho rention of these 
fora, incheates that they are the ८0111104 from which the 
Biahman may (according to the method there prescribed) 
bo abtnined*? Retoronco is made to tho lotuses at bheso 
four placus, wal the ming is spoken of as the “tevth 
door,” tha other nino apertures being tho eyes, cars, 
nostrils, and so forth. 

Tho Diyanabindu Upanishad? vofors to tho heating of 
tho Anihata sounds by tho Yogi (v. 8) The Upanishad 
directs that with Piraka meditation should be done iu 
tho navol on tho Gicat Poworful Ono (Mahiiv va) with four 


1 Anandishrama Series Vol XXEIX, 1, 325. 


2Tt will bo obsovod that the two lowor ‘l'nmasi centyes ue nol 
he "0 rientioned 


3 Ibid, p 202. 


1110 CAL ५4 5 OB 41118 YOGA 265 


arms and of the colonr ol the homp flower (2.7, Vishnu) ; 
with Kumbhaka meditate in tho heart on the red Brahma 
soatod ona lotus; and with Rechake think of the throe- 
eyod one (Rudra) m tho किलल, The lowest of these 
lotusos has कहा potals : (५ second has its head dawn 
wards; and the thn |, which as compounded ol all the 
Dovatis (Sarvadevunaya), is tke a  plantuin flower 
(vv. 9 12). Inv. 18, moditation 1s dieetod on a hunded 
Jotuses with a» hundred petals each, and then on Sun, 
Moon, and Hiro, 1६ is Atma which rouses the lotus, 
and, taking the "8 fiom il, goes to Moon, Cue, and 
Sun. 

Tho Amrianida Upanishad 1 rofors to the five olemonta 
and above thom Arddhamatiei—that is, Ajna (vv. 30, 41). 
he elamants hers are those in the Chacvas, for v 26 
spoaks of tho hoat ontrance as tho ६७१४ entrance (Jor tho 
Viyu Tativa is hore). Above (his, it is saic, 18 tho gato of 
Liberation (Mokshadvara). Ib i stabod प ४, 25 Ghat Prine 
and Manas go along (ho way tho Yopi soos (Pashyati), which 
tho Commentator swys# refers to the way Prima ontors (and 
doparts from) Miilidhiva, and so forth, [6 algo (1908 some 
Tlatha procosges. 

Tho Kshuriki Upanishad * speaks of the 72,000 Nadis, 
and of Idi, Pingala and Sushumna (vv. 14, 15). All these, 
with the oxception of Sushwnni, oan “bo sovered by 
Dhyina Yoga” (ib.). Voiso 8 directs tho Sudhaka “to got 
into the white and vory subtlo Nada (दल Nidi) and to 
drive Prina Viyu through it”; and Piivaka, Rechaka, Kum- 
bhaka; and [Hatha processes aie roforrod to. ‘he Common. 
tator Narayana, on ए 8, romarks that Kundali should bo 
heated by the intornal fire and then placed inside tho 


1 Op. ost, 43, Tho Anzitabindu Upanishad al p 71 deals genorally 
with Yoga. 


£ एष , Vol, XXX, p 14. 
24 


266 111 SIN CENTOS AND UT ५ { NE 1OWGR 


Biahmanidt, for which ovrpose the Jalandhar Baudha 
shonle be employed 

Tho Nrisinghaptivadipaniyt Upanshid 11 Ch. V, 
४, 2, spoaks a thy So ceeshena (which {५ apparently here 
tho Maladhiva) clanging into loluses ol six, aght, twelve, 
sixloon, and thuty-two petals respectively. ‘This. cor- 
rosponds with tho number of petals as pivon in this work 
excopt asx to tho second. Por, taking this to be tho Syas 
diishthina, the secon! lotus shoud be on» of ton potals, 
Appmontly this divergones 18 due lo the ‘acl that this is 
the munber of otters in the Mantra assipnod to this lotus, 
Fortin the six-potalled lotus is tho six-le(torod Mantra of 
Sudushana; m tho eight-potalled lotus the oight-lettered 
Mantra 0 N riyany; adm tho twelve-petal ed lotus tho 
twelve-lotlorod Mantra of Viisudeva. As is the caso 
orcinarily, in’ tho sixteon-potalled Jolus avo tho sixteen 
Kalas (hore vowols) sounded with Bridie or Anusyira, ho 
thitty-bwo-potalled loti s (Agni) isvenlly (wo-petalled becnuse 
thero mo two Mantras hore (coach of sixtoon lottors) of 
Nrisingha पात्‌ Wis Shakti. 

Tho sixth chaptoro the Mailri Upanishad १ spoaks of 
the Nadis; and पो particular of (he Sushun navy the piere 
ing 0" tho Mandalas Sun, Moon, and Piro (each of these 
hang within the othor, Salfva in Fire, and in Satlva 
Achyuta); and of Amani, which 1s another mune for 
Unmani. 

Both the Yogatativa Upanishad and Yogashikhii Upa- 
nishad‘ rofer to Lathayoga, and tho lation speaks of tho 


1 Anandismama Mdition, Vol. XXX p 61. 

2Vol XXIX of sume edition p. 615; see pp 4 1, 450, 451, 468, 
and 400. 

9 Samo edition, Vol XXLX, p. 477 

4 Tbud., ए, 483 mad as to tho passngo of कप वा through tho 
Brahmadvata, soo p. 485 


प्वातठाए्ा1 [तदा, BASES OF IS YOUA 207 


closing of tho “inner doo,” tho कोला of tho patoway 
of Sashumna (that is, by Kundal ontoring 6 Brahmad- 
vara), and the piercing of the Sun. Pho Runatiipanya 
Upanishad! yofors to various Yoga and Tantrik procosses, 
such 88 Asana, Dvyarap™””, Pithap. i, and expressly 
mentions Bhitashuddhi, whieh, as above oxplainad, 14 the 
purification of the clemonts in the Chakras, cithor as an 
imaginativo, 01 real proeess by tho aid of Kundalini. 

I have already cited in tho Notes numerous passages 
on this Yoga from the Shindilya Upanishad of the Athar- 
vaveda, the Varaha and Yogakundalh Upanishads of tho 
Krishna Yajurvoda, tio Maidalabrilimana Upanighad of 
the Shukla Yajmveda, and the Nidabindu Upanishad of 
the Rigveda.’ 

Tho groat Dovibli gavata Parana (VTP 35, XT 8) 
mentions in a full acconnt the six Chalras or Lotuses; the 
yousing of Kundal (who is called the Paradeyata) in the 
Mulidhiva by tho manner hore doseabed, uniting diva 
therewith by the Hangsa Mantra; Bhiitashuddh’; tho 
dissolution of tho gross abbyas info the subilo Tatbyas, 
onding with Muahat in Prakriti, Miya in Atma. ho 
Dharimandala is mentioned, and it and the othe Man- 
dalas are doscribed in tho munnor hero stated. The Byjas 
of Prithivi and other 'Vattvas ave given, Allusion 14 also 
made to the dostiuction of tho “man of sin” (Pipapu- 
rusha), in terms similar to those Lo be found m the Mahii- 
nirvana and other क्क, A remarkable Dhyina of 
Prinashakti is to bo found in this chapter, which 10ads 
very much like anothor whish is givon in tha Prapancha- 
sara Tantra? 

1 Anandishiama Bdition, Vol XXLX, ], 520. 

2 1111088 Yoga Upanishads have boon recently taansl wed as कृष | of 
“Thirty Minor Upanishads,” by K Nirayanasvimi Avy u ("hoosophienl 
Society of Madras, 1914) 

3 860 Oh, XXXV, Vol. LIT of my “ Vanwik Toate . 


268 1 ५५. GUNERIS AND TES पाग] POWOR 


Lingga Pnoiina, Put 1 Ch. LXXV, montions the 
Chakias with their ciferent po rs, the names of which 
aro given by the Coumentitor Shiva is Nuguna, 1 
says, but for the benefit a, nen Te rexidos a the bady 
with Una, and Yoo s meditate upon Tint in the differ ont 
lotusos. 

Chaplor XXTH of tho Agni Purina, which is replete 
with Tantmk rituals, riagie, and ५१ चात्‌, कण्ण 1010५16 lo 
the Bhetashuddlie ere wherom, after moct ation with the 
vospoclive [1 ५ Martas 01 the ave), heart, and Ajni 
(८110५, the body of tue Suthakn is colreshed by the flow 
of nectar. 

Finally, an adverse eile of tus Yoru whom ] oite 
lelow invokes he 1, of Che gecat Aber kets, (ough 
in fact, 11 tradition bo eorroct, ibis agaimsl fun. Shangkara, 
in whoso Maths may bo [काकात्‌ the great Tantrik Yantra 
euled the Shrichakia, says in ins Comm entary on yy. प्रादु" 
10 of Ch VEL of the Bhagavad-Gitas Mast the hoart 
lotus (Anihata) is broaglt प्रवेता दकम्‌, Mon, by conquers 
ing } पापा (Mulidhia, ole) anc by {ho upward going 
Nadi (Sushu nnd), aflor having placed Pr ina bebweon the 
tivo eyebrows (soo ए, 38, Shatehakianiviipana), the Yogi 
70061108 the lustrous light-giving Prrusha’’? On this tho 
Like of Anendagier tans: By the Sasha Niel? between 
Tid and Pinggali, ho throat is reachod by tho same way 
—the spaco between the eyebrows. By conquoring earth 
(Bhim) is moant the process by which the five Bhutas are 
controlled.” Slnidhara Svimi saya: “By the powor of 
Yoga (Yogabala) Prina nast bo led along the Sushi.” 
And Madhusiidana Sarasvati says; “Tho upward-going 
Nadi is Sushunnii, and tho conquest of Bhitmi and the rost 
is dono by followmg tho path indicated by the Guru; and 
by the space belwoon tho eyobrows 18 moant tho Ajni 
Chakra, By placing Priina there, it passes ovt by the 


111 011, OAL BASLS OF 11119 १०८५ 269 


Brahmarandiia, and {06 Siva becomes one with the [षा प्र 
sha.” ‘The fimous hymn called Anandalahari (= Wave ot 
Bliss”), which is universally ascmbe | to Shaagkara, deals 
wilh ths Yogu (Shatehakrabheda) ; and in (ho thintcenth 
chapter of Vidy uanya’s Shangkaravijaya tho sia lotuses 
are mentioned, as also tho [1 पा to be gained by worship- 
ping the Devata in cach Chakra 1 

Pandit R. Anata Sbastii says :? 

“ Many a gieat man has successfully worked the Kun- 
dalini to tho Sihasrat ए and oftceted her con with the Sat 
and Chit. Of those stands foremost the great and fare 
famod Shangkarachurya, a humblo pupil of one of the 
students ol Gandapadieln rya, the author of the well-known 
‘Subhagocdaya’ (52 slokas), [विणा well acc aintcd himself 
with tho principles contamed in tl is work, Shim Shangkara- 
charya received special insbrncbons based npon the personal 
expotionce of his Gur. Anc adding his own potsonal oxpori- 
onco to the abovo advants ०५, he Composod has Jamous work 
on tho Manbra-shiistia, consisting of 100 slokas; the first 
forty-one of those forming the ‘Anunda-Tahart,’ anc the rest 
forming tho ^ Sanndarya-Labari’ ; tho latter apost ophisos 
the Dovi as a being who is heauteous from head to foot. 

५ १ Ananda-lahart? may be said to corlam the quint- 
essonco of the Samayachara, ho work 1s all tho moro 
valuablo because the author {eachos it from personal 
experience. longthy commentaries aro written on almost 
evory syllable of (he (०२, ‘The valuo attached to tho work 
may ho adequately wndarstood by the folowimug theory, 
Some hold that Shiva is tho voal anthor of ‘Ananda. 
Lahari,’ and not Shangkmachuya, who was bub ९ Mania 
drashla ov Rishi—ie, ono who realisod tho procoss and 


1 Soo also Anandaginy’s Sh yk wasijay anand Madhav v's Shangkara- 
vijaya (Ch, XL; soo uso al, where Shriahatia is montionod). 

®Koandalahari, 14. | have translated this hymn undor bho title 
“ Wave of Bliss”. 


270 | } SIN GCN RIS AND १), SEROPN LOW UR 


gave tt Lo tho world. No Joss than thot y-and-six commen- 
fnnes on this work me now osant, Among thom wo find 
ono writton by our great Appaya Dikshiia, The commons 
lanes mo nol entirely diferent, bet ०1८] has its own 
pocuhar views and theories 

* Aw cor the toxto ^ At 11110 | al ar? it (0 11 uns forly- 
and-cne slokas According to some commentators, the 
slokas ate 385 in member; somo recognise only 80, and 
according fo Sudhividyotiny and others oily [10 following 
slo cas constiitido the text of (Arandasfautini? 1 2, 8-69, 
10—~—11, | —21, 26—27, ¶ —41, व आकु opinion, alsa, the 
last statement seoms Lo be correel, as the 01} er slokas treat 
only of Prayogas (applications of Mantias) for worldly 
purposes.? Only a low of those Prayogns are recognised 
by all the commentators; wile tho rest avo passed over as 
being entirely Kit 116. 

५ As Tas beon romarked alveady, “Ananda-Lalwas’ is 
bub on onlagemont of the work culled Stbhagccaya by 
Gaudapida, who ts the (11 0 the auditor's (पाप | Mat 
work gives only tho mam points, without any o tho 
characteristic admixture of  ilustiations, ५८.) above 
noticed 

“OF all the commontarios on ‘Annuda-Lahai? Lak- 
shim] ara’s scoms to be the most recor |; yet in aynte al 
this il is tho nosl popula, and with reason, too. Othor 
commentaries advocwlo this or that aspeeb of Lho various 
philosophical schools; but Lakshuidhara eollatos some of 
tho viows of othors, and records them sule by side with 
ins own, Ths commontary as in this way the most 
claborate, Ie sides with no pauty;* his views aro broad 


1Thus, vy 13, 18, 19 ave saad to tront of Madu a-piaye gn that is, 
application for the thid Purual tha ov Kéma (dose) 

2 [ए xeoma to bo very adyorac to tho Uttara or Noho Kany 
School, and af his viows aro neomatoly repro liced by the Pandit he i 
not always correct ag to how tenching —-A A. 


HHBORDELCAT: BASIS OF ERIS YORA 271 


and liboral A schools of plilosophers aro represented m 
Ing commontuies  Lakshinidhua las also commented on 
many other wotks on Mantrashas ra, ands consequently of 
much high repute. So his commontaies (10 as valuable to 
both ‘Ananda-Lahau? and ‘Sanndarya-Lahari as Sayana’s 
are to the Vedas, 

“Tiakshimidhara seems to havo been an inhabitant of 
Southern India; t} ५ observances and customs he desembes 
all point to this conclusion; tho illustiations ho adduces 
smack imvariably of the South, and even to this day his 
views aro more followed im tho South than in the North. 
[6 has also written an olaborate commentary on Ganda- 
pada’s Subhagodaya. Tho 1cferonces to that m the 
commentary to this work, and tho cou ientaor’s apology 
hore and there for repeating what ho has written on the 
forme: occasion, lead to tho inferenco that the author had 
for Ins life-work (he commentary on tho origmal book, 

© Achyutiinanda’s commontarios wo in Bengah char- 
actors, and aro followed as authority in Bougal oven to 
this day. Various commentaries aro followed in various 
placos, but few havo risen to be univorsally १५0९016, 

* There ave only threo or four works (renting of Pra- 
yoga (applicatio1) ; I have had access to all of thom = But 
here T have followed only ono of thom, as bong the most 
prominent and unportant, Tt comes from an anciont fumly 
in Conjcevoram, Tt contains 100 slokas, The Yantias 
(figures) for tha Mantras contamed in the slokas, the 
different postures of the worghippor, and similar preserip~ 
tions, are clourly doscribod in 3b Lo the minutest cotail, 

*Thore seems to be some mystical connection between 
each sloka and its Bijakshara? 31 t it i4 not inlolligiblo, 


4 छ T hayo followed this commontary also m my + Wave (1 Bliss". 


2 Bija or vool-mantia.—A A 


॥ जक 


272 1111, SIN CLNIRLS AND SE SLRPPNE LOWER 


nor hay any of (10 Prayoga Kartis explained tho 


8 11110 
«ho fo owe waist of (कप्त tos प। [वपे upon 


Reorda स see of them ine nde Csa mdarya- 


Jiahar’? also. 

1, *Manoana a Conmentuy 2. A Commontary 
by Apprye Dikshite (तारम्‌ Palace Labrary) १, (गा 
pupakshi?  Porhaps thas may be the sumo as No. 14 piven 
below. 4. By Kavi qjashatimad about 3,000) pranthas 
(Docean Collogo labray). 5. सद यार पीदा)" by Wrish- 
icharya, the son of Vallabhacharya- slckas about 1,700, 
Uo says om dns Lnbroduetion that Shai Shankarichirya 
praiscd the Biahmoshakt: called Kundalini whon he was 
meditating on the banks of the Ginges, He gives the purport 
of this work in his first sloka: ^ [ praiso constantly the 
Kundalini, who creates inmmumorable worlds continuously, 
tiough Sho ww tike a tlament of the Dts, and who resides al 
bio roob al tha trea (Malad! aa) to be roused and lod (lo 
Sahanira)? Musas pop sarin tho Bonpal Prosidoney. 6. 
Anothor Commontary, called (तिषा gyavardhau,’ by 
Kavalayishume, Tho Adym Labriay has a copy of it Chis 
is popular throughout Encha, so wo can got as many MSS, 
of tho samo as wo requive from difforont places. Tt eomtains 
about 2,000 pranthas, 7. Ry Keshvabhatta, & “Tativa- 
dipiki,’ by Gangehari, a small commontary based on 
Tantrashistra, 9, By Gangidbara, 10, By Gopivamana- 
twkapravachana—granthas about 1,400, Seams to bo of 
vocont origin, 11. Gaurikintasirvabhanmabhattichirya—- 
granthas about 1,300, Of recent origin, 12. By Jagadisha, 
18. By daganniitha Panchinana. 14, By Narasimha—- 
granthas 1,500. ‘The chiof poouliavity of this commontary 
is that ए explains the toxt in two difforont ways, cach sloka 
boing applicable 10 Dovi and Vishnu at the same lime, 

1 Phoso weilors wlo del wilh tho prastical apphiawon, A.A. 


PILOR ICAL BASIS OF LEIS YOCA 273 


Though some comment ors have given difforent meanings 
to some ol the vorses, yot all of them apply te the dilterent 
aspeets ol Doyi alone, and not to tho dif erent Dovatiis, 15. 
* Bhaviirthachipa, by Bealinna andy हा पाताल about 1,700, 
16. By Mallabhatta. 17. By Milidovavidyayaizisha, 18. 
By Midhavavaidya (Deccan College Library). 19. By 
Ramachandra—granthay about 3,000 (Deccan College 
Library). 20. By Ramanandatirtha. 21, Lakshmidhare’s ; 
which is well known to the public, and needs no comment. 
Tus has beon brought ०1 ॥ oxcollontly in Deva Ni gara type 
by the Mysore Goveinmont latcly 22 By Vishvambhara. 
28. By Slnikanthabhatia, 24. By Rama Sui 25. By 
Dindima (Adyar Library), 26. By Ramachandra Misia— 
grauthas about 1,000 (Deccan College Library). 27. By 
Achyntinands (printed in Bongal clarneters). 28, Sadii- 
shiva (Gover nmont Oviontal fabary, Madras), 29. Another 
namolois Commontary (Govornmonl Quiental Libary, 
Macras), 20, By Shrivangadisn., ot. By Govinda Tarka- 
vagisha Bhatbichirya —grantlias 600. Tlo seein to give 
the Yantra algo fo. cach vorse. Vurthor, he says that tho 
god Mahidova spovially incarnued as Shangkariichu ya to 
promulgato the scionce of Shrividyi, 32, Sudhavidyotani, 
by tho son of Pravarasona. ‘This commontator says that tho 
author of this tamous hymn was his lather, Pravavasona, 
Princo of tho Draindas. Yo tolls us a story in connection 
with Pravarasone’s birth which is vety peculiar, As ho 
was born in an inauspicions hour, Dramia, the lather of 
Pravaragona, in consullation with his wise Minister, by name 
Suka, threw him out in the fovest, lest ho (the father) 
should loso his kingdom,... ho child praised Devi by 
this hymn, and, ploased with it, the Devi fostored and took. 


1 This ta tho cololn wed Benzali Paramahangaa ge of Pruninanda 
Svimi, author of the Shatehakran rapane Bralminenda was the 
author of tho colobratod Shaktin widatarangini-- A. A 


86 


. 


274 THE SIX ODNTRDS AND THE SURPINT POWLR 


eare of him in the forest. The story ends by saying that 
the boy returned to his father’s dominion and became 
King. By his command, 118 son, the present com- 
mentator, wrote Sudhiividyotin, atter boing filly 
initiated into this mystic Shastra, Shrividyaé. The 
account, however, appears to be rather fantastic. This 
MS. I got from South Malabar with much difficulty. Tt 
gives the esoteric meaning of the verses in ‘ Ananda- 
Lahan,’? and seems to be a valuablo relic of occult 
hterature $3. The book of Yantras with Praycga. 
This is yory rare and important 

^ Besides the above commentaries, we cdo not know 
how many more commentaries there are upon this hymn.” 

The celebrity of + Anandalahari” and the great 
aumber of ccmmentaries upon 16 are proof of the wide- 
spread and authoritative character of the Yoga here 
described. 

To conclude with the words of the Commentator on 
the Trishati : “ It1s well Lnown in Yoga-Shastras that noctar 
(Amrita) 1s 11 the bead of all breathing creatures (Prim), 
and that on Kundah going there by the Yoga-path which 
is moistened by tho current of that nectar Yogins become 
like Ishvare.”! 

Tho Chakras, however, mentioned are not always thosu 
of the body above stated, as would appear from tho 
following account, which, it will be observed, is peculiar, 
and which is taken from the Shatchakra Upanishad of the 
Atharvaveda’* Apparently reference is here made to cosmic 
centres in the worship of the Vishnu Avatira called 
Nrisingha 

1Sarveshang praninang shirasi amiitam asti iti yogamargena 
kundalmigamane tatiatya tatpravahaplutena yogman Tshvarasam yam 
jayate 1४1 yogashastreshu prasiddham (Comm, y. 1) 


2 Bibhotheca Indica od. Asiatic Society (1871), The notes aro 
trom the Commentary ot Narayana 


THLORLL CAT BASDS 01 11118 YOGA 275 


“Om. The Dovas, comme to Satyaloka, thus spoke to 
Prajapati, saying, ‘Toll us of tho Narasingha ' Chaka’ 
(to which he roplied).  ‘Thoro are six Narasmgha Chakras. 
The first and second have cach four spokes ; the third, five; 
the fourth, six; the filth, seven; and the sixth, गह 
spokes. hose six aro tho Narasingha Chakias Now, 
what are their namos (that is what you ask). ‘They are 
Achakra,? Suchakra,? Mahuchakia,! Sakalaloka-rakshana- 
chakra,> Dyuchakra,’ Asuruntaka-chakra.’ 10680 aro thoir 
respective names. [1] 

“Now, what are the threo circles (Balaya)? Those aro 
inner, middle, and कपाला. ‘The first is Bija;° the second, 
Narasingha-gayatri; and the third, or outer, 18 Mantra. 
Now, what is tho inne: ला८ ५१ Thore are six such (for 
each Chakra has ono); {11080 me tho Nirasingha, Maha- 
lukshmya, Sirasvata, Kimadeva, Pranava, Kiodhadarvata 
(Bijas), respoctivoly. Thoyo wo the six intorion circles of 
tho six Nivasingha Chakras. [2] 


1 The man-lion incanation of Vishnu, 

2 Anandatmaha, in tho golf of Ananda (bliss). 

9 Good, porfect, 

4 Imstious (Tejomayn). 

5Tho Chakra which by the Shaktis of वदिप and Kriya protects 
all rogions (Lon). 

6 The Chakia of the path reached by Yoga. 

™Tho Chakra which is tho death of all Asuras, ov lias, 

8 That is, oxch Chakra has threedivisions ini, mid lo, and outor ; 
or Biya, Narasingha Gayatr2, Mantra. 

9The root Manta, which in this caso ao those givon im tho next 
note but one 

10 That is, the Mantra, Narasinghiya vidmaho vajranakhaya dhimahi 
tanneh singhah prachodayiit, (May wo contemplito on Nirasnghn, 
a wo meditate on his Vajra-like claws May that Man-lion dnocé 
us 

M That is, tho following Bijas. Kshanng (in Achakin) Shiirg, 
His Shakti (in Snohakra), Aimg (in Mahichakya), Kling (m 
Sokalalokarakshana chakra), Om ‘in Dynohakra), and ing (in 
Asurintakachakio), 


276 THB SIX CDNTRES AND 1HD SDRPENI एठा 


“Now, what 1s the middle circle ? There aro six such. 
To each of these belong Narasinghaya, Vidmahe, Vajra~ 
nakhaya, Dhimahi, Tannah, Singhah prachodayat, rospec- 
tively! These are the six circles of tho six Narasingha 
Chakras. Now, what are the six outer circ.cs ० The first 
is Anandatma or Achakra; the second is Priyatma or 
Suchakra; the third is Jyotiratma or Mahachakra; the 
fourth is Mayatma or Sakala-loka-rakshana Chakra; the 
fifth is Yogatma or Dyuchakra ; and the sixth is Samap- 
tatma or Asmantakachakra. These are the six outer circles 
of the six Narasingha Chakras. [8] 

“Now, where should these be placed 7 9 Let tho first 
be placed in the heart ;‘ the second in the head ;5 the third 
at the site of the crown-lock® (Shukhayim) ; the fourth 
all over the body ;" the fifth in all the oyes® (Sarveshu 
netreshu); and the sixth in all the regions’ (Sarveshu 
desheshu) [4] 

^ He who does Nyasa of theso Narasingha Chakras on 
two limbs becomes skilled in Anushtubh,” attains tho 
favour of Lord Nrisingha, success in all rogions and 

1 That is, to each of them is assigned the sevoral parts of the Nara- 


singha gayatri above mentioned 

2The Atma as bliss, love, light or energy Maya Yoga, and the 
concluding Chakra which 18 the destruction of all Asuras. 

3 That 1s, how should Nyasa be done ? This is explained in the taxt 
and following notes where the Nyfsa 18 given. 

4 Kshaung Narasinghaya achakraya anadatmane svaha hmdayaya 
namah 

5 Shring vidmahe suchahraya priyatmane svaha 81111080 svaha 

§ Aing vajanakhaya mahachakiaya jyotiratmane svaha shikhayat 
vashat. 

7 Kling dhimahi sakala-loka-rakshana-cha aaya mayatmane svahi 
kavachaya hung, 

8 Ong tanno dyuchakraya yogatmane svaha netiatrayayn vaushat 

9 Heung nrisighah prachodayat asurantaka-chakraya satyalmane 
svaha astiaya phat, 

10 That is, he becomes capable of speech—a post. IIe knows the 
beginning and end of all things and able to explain all things. 


1] नाना 1 1८, BASES OF SUIS YOGA 277 


amongst all boings, and (at tho end) liberation (Kaivalya). 
Therefore should this Nyasa be done This Nysa puri- 
fies. By this ono 1५ mado porfect m worship, 14 pious, 
and pleases Nirasingha, By tho omission thereol, on 
tho ofhor hand, tho favour of Nrisingha is not gainod nor is 
strength, worship, nor piety generated. [5] 

५ Fle who reads this bocomes versod in all Vedas, gains 
capacity to officiate as prisst at all sacrifices, becomes hke 
one who has bathed in all places of pilgiimage, an adept in 
all Mantras, and pure both within and without. 116 be- 
womes the destroyor of all Rukshasas, Bhi tas, Pishuchas, 
Shakims, Pretas, and Votilas.! = 116 becomes freed of all 
fear; thorofore should it not bo spoken of to an un- 
behievor.””? [6] 

Notwithstanding tho universal acceptance of this Yorn 
it has not escaped some modorn criticism. The ollowing 
passage in invortod commas is a summary’ of that passed 
by an Enelish-ocucabod Hindu,’ formerly ५ luvyer and now 
a Guru, from one of whose diseiplos 1 rocoived it. [t was 
olicited by tho gift of the Sanskrit text of tho works hore 
translated : 

“Yoga as a moans to liboration is attainod by entry 
through the doors of Jnina (Knowledge) and Kama 
(Action). Yoga 1s doubtless bliss, for it is tho nnion of the 
Jivitma with the Brahinan who is Bliss (Ananda), But thoro 
are various forms of Bliss, hore is, for instance, physical 
bliss, gross o1 subtle as it may be. This a mistake to suppose 


॥ Varions forms of terrifying and malign wt spiritual inflnonces 

*That is, not to ong who 1१ not compotont (Adhikii 7) to receive 
this knowlodge., IToro मात्‌ tho Atharvaniya Shaéchaka opanish ५ 

9 क my aummnary, takon fiom the Bongali, points the pious va bities 
of the original the critic would, Lam gure, net complair 

4Ib is always important to rocord auch a fact for it gonoally in- 
fluences the outlook on things. In somo casos tho mmnd 18 80 Westornisod 
thaé it 18 unable to correctly approciate ancient Indian ideas 


278 THE SIX CENTRES AND THI SLRPENT POWER 


that because a method of Yoga procures bliss it there- 
fore secures Itberation In order that we bo hberated we 
must secure that particular Bliss which is the Brahman. 
Some centuries ago, however, a band of Atheists (1.¢., tho 
Buddhists) discovered the doctrine of the Void (Shunyavida), 
and by a falso display of a new kind of Nirvana Mukti 
locked up these two doors which gave entry to liberation. 
To-day these doors are secured by thice padlocks, The 
first 1s the doctrine that by faith ono attains Krishna, but 
where there is irgument (‘Tarka) He is far away. ‘The second 
is the error of tho Brahmos, who in Western fashion think 
that they can 2ontrol the formless, changeless Brabman by 
shutting their eyes in church and repeating that Ile is the 
merciful, loving Father who is ever occupied with our good, 
and that if Ho be flattered He will be pleascd , for worship 
(Upasana) 18 flattery. The third 1s the opinion of those to 
whom all religious acts are nothing but superstition; to 
whom self-interest is the only good, and whose pleasuro it 
is to throw dust into the oyes of othors and securo the praise 
of those whom they have thus blinded. Vishnu, in order to 
cause the disappearance of the Vedas in the Kah age, mani- 
fested as the atheist Buddha, and allowed various false 
doctrines, such as that of the Arhatas, to bo proclaimed. 
Rudva was affected by the sim of destroying tho head of 
Brahma. ‘Then he began to dance, and a numbor of Uchch. 
hishta (or low maglinant) Rudras whose deeds are never 
good issued from His body. Vishnu and Shiva asked each 
other, ‘Can we do these peoplo any good ? ` Their partial 
manifestations then promulgated Shistvas opposed to the 
Vedas, fitted for the atheistic bent of their minds, that thoy 
might haply thereby rise through them to higher things. Gcd 
fools the wicked with such Scriptures. We must now, how- 
ever, discriminate between Shistras. It 18 nob because it is 
sad in Sanskrit ‘ Shiva says’ (Shiva uvicha) that wo should 


THLORELIOAL BASES OF 1HIS २०८॥ 279 


accept all which follows this announcement. All that is 
opposed to Voda and Smriti must be rejected. Of the 
enemies of tho Vedas! for whom such Shistias were de- 
signed, somo became Vaishnayas, and others Shaivas, 
One of such Seripvures was tho Tantra with a materialistic 
Yoga systom called Shatchakra-Sadhana, which 1s nothing 
but atrickery on the part of the professional Guius, who 
have not hesitaied also to promulgato forged seriptmes. 
«The very mention of lantmk Shastia fills us with shame.’ 
The Shatchakra Sadhana 1s a mero obstruction to spuitual 
advancement. Tho bliss which is said to bo attained by 
leading Kundah to the Sahasrara is not demed, since it 
is affirmed by those who say thoy havo experiencod it, 
But this Bhss (Ananda) 13 merely a momo tary superior 
kind of physical Biss which disappears with the body, ana 
not the Bliss which 18 Brahman and liberation Moksha is 
not to be got by ontoring the Sahasrua, but in leaving 1 
by pioroimg tho Brahmarandhia and becoming bodiless? 
*The Tantnik scoks 10 remain in tho bedy, and thus 
to obtain liboration choaply, just as the Bralunos and 
Members of tho Arya Samija havo become Brahma- 
1182118 (knowors of the Brahinan) al a choap prico, Nee- 
tar, too, 18 cheap with tho Tantuks. But what is cheap 
is always worthloss, and tig shows itself whon one attempts 
to carn some frail from onc’s endeavours. ‘And yet all 
men aro attractod whon they hom of Shatchakra’ १ Many 
are so steoped in Tantrik foith that they can find nothing 
wrong with ity Shistras.” And tho [पतत nowadays has 


1 This no Tantrik would admit 110 would say that if 18 yenoance 
(Avidya) which seas any difforences betweon Voda and Agama The 
exitic 1a-ochoes somo Westorn omticiams 

2 Tt 18 trne that comploto Muti or Kvivalyn ia bodiless (Videha), 
But there is a Mukti im which tho Yogi rotains } is body (Jivanmults) 


In truth, thoro is no leaving,’ for Atma, as Shangkaza saya, docs nob 
come and go 


280 THE SIX CEFNIRES AND IHD SERPEN1 ‘OWLR 


been put in such a maze by his Tantrik Gurus that he does 
not know what he wants. For centuries he has been 
accustomed to the Tantmk Dharma,! and his eyos are there- 
fore not clear cnough to see that it is as truly unaccoptable 
to a Hindn as itis toa Mussalman. In fact, thease persons 
(for whose benofit the क्या ए makes these remarks) are full 
of Miechchhata,? though, after all, it must be admitted to be 
some advance for such a creature as a Mlechchha to adhere 
even to Tantrik doctrine. Tor bad as it is ib 18 better than 
nothing at all. All the same, the Gurus delude them with 
the fascinating talk about Shatchakra, Luke a lot of the 
present-day advertisers, they otfer to show their so-called 
‘Lotuses’ to those who will join them. Men are sent to 
collect people to bring them to a Dikshnguiu (initiator). In 
this respect the Tantriks act just hke coolio recruiters for 
the tea-gardens? The Tantrik says there are really 
‘Lotuses’ there; but if the Lotuses are really thore, why 
are we not told how we may seo them?’ And there also 
are supposed to be Devatus, Dakinis, Yoginis, ‘all ready at 
every moment for inspection.’> And, thon, how matorial 
it all is! They speak of a Parashiva above Shiva, as if 


1 This, at any rate, attests its wide pervasiveness 

2 This is a contemptuous term which has descended from the days 
when the atianger was looked on as an object of enmity or contempt. 
Just as the Greeks and Chinese callod anyone not 8 Grea 4 or a Chinese 
w “barbarian,” 80 Hindus of tho Bxoteric Schvvl call all non-]indus, 
whother aboriginal tubes or cultivaled foreigners, Mlechchhas Mlech- 
chhata is the state of being a Miechchha It 18 to the aredit of the 
Shakta Tantra that 1t does not encourage such nariow ideas 

3 These wander about India persuading the villagers to go ard work 
on the tea-gardens, to which they are then conveyed by means which, 
to say the least, ave not always admirable Truth makes it necessary to 
state that the allegation that the Gurus employ agents to secure 
followers 1s basoless The Gurus of tho right typo as a matior of facb 
are vory particular about the competency of the wonld be diseipls. 

4 The books and the Gurus claim to do so 


5 It 18 rot © peop show open to any. Only thoso aro said to soo 
who have mastered the great difficulties m this path 


THEORDTIOAT BASES OF THIS YOGA 281 


there was more than one Brahman, And, then, the nectar 
is said to bo of the colour of lac Well, if so, i 18 a gross 
(Sthula) and percoptiblo thing, and as a doctor can thon 
aqueezo it out there is no need for a Guru.’ In shout, tho 
Tantrik Shatchakra 13 nothing but ‘a sweet in the hands 
of a child’, A child who is wayward is given a sweet to 
keep him quiet. But if he has senso onough to know that 
the sweet is givon to district him, ho throws it away, and 
finds the key to tho locked doors of Yoga, culled Karma 
and Jnana. ‘This process of Yoga was oxpelled from | [तृप 
society conturies ago. [or nearly 2,400 yoars ago Shang- 
kara,? when destroying atheism, oxterminated also Shat- 
chakrayoga (When Shangkara disputed with the Kapa- 
lika Kvrakacha, tho lattor invoked to his aid tho 0५1९0 
form of Shiva called Blairava. Bunt on Shangkaia’s 
worshipping tho God, tho latter said to Kiakacha, ‘Thy 
time has come,’ and absorbed ILis ५५५४०६५५ into 1fimsell )? 
Shangkara thon showed the worthlessnoss of the Tantras, 
They aro again to-day atlumpting Lo ontor Hmdu socioty, 
and must be again destioyed.” 

Tho writer of tho note thus summarised omitted to 
notico or porhaps was unaware that the Chakias are mon- 
tioned 10 tho Upamshads, but ondoavoured to meet tho fact 
that they are also described in Lho Puranas by the allegation 
that the Pauranik Chakras are in conformity with the Vedas, 
whoreas the Tantmk Chakias are not. It 1s admitled that 
in tho Shiva Purana thero 15 an account of the six conties, 
but 1४ is said that they are not thero alloged to actually 


1 'Thoso obsorvaliors display iiisundastanding of the subjort der lt 
with, T doalt with this class of cridicien = limit my presont 
observations to the listonieal omg'ns of (Lis You, 


2 This 1s tho Indian tradition as to the pl tlosopt er 8 date 


3 Tho, + 18 प्रा 80५ also Madhavas Shangkara- 
vijaya, Ch XV 
88 


282 THI SIX CDNTRES AND TIE SDRPINE POWER 


exist, nor 18 anything mentioned of any Sadhana in counee- 
tion with them They are, it is contended, to be imagined 
only for the purpose of worship. In external worship Devas 
aud Devis are worshipped in similiar Lotuses, ‘ho 
Puranas, in fact, 1९९०1708 10 this view, convert what is 
external worship into internal worship. If, according to 
the Purana, one worships an interior lotus, it is not to be 
supposed that thore is anything there. Ono is worshippmg 
merely a figment of one’s mmagiuation, though it is euious 
to note that it is said that this figment securos certain 
advantages to the worshipper, and the latter must commence, 
according to this critic, with the Chakra which he is 
qualified to worship. It is not obvious how any quostion 
of such competency arises when each of the Chakras is 
imagined only. Attention 18 drawn to tho fact that in the 
Linga Purana there is nothing about the rousing o! Kundah, 
the piercing of the sia centres, tho drinking of nectar, and 
so forth. The Purana merely says, “ Moditato on Shiva and 
Devi in the clifferont lotuses,”” There is, it is thus contcnd- 
ed, a radical difference between the two systems. “In tho 
Pauranik description of the Chakias everything is stated 
clearly; but with the Tantrik all is mystory, or else how 
indeed, except by such mystification, could thoy dishonest- 
ly carry on their profession as Gurus?” 

Buddhists may dispute this critic’s understanding of 
thew Shinyavada, as Tantriks will contest his account of the 
origin of their Shastra. The Historian will call m question 
the statement that Shangkara! abolished the Tantra. Tor, 
according to the Shangkaravijaya, his action was not to 
abohsh any of the sects existing at his time, but to reform 
and estabhsh bonds of unity between them, and to induce 
them all through their differmg methods to follow a common 
ideal. Thus, even though Krakacha was absorbod 116 his 

1 See ५०४९, [ 281. x 


जप्ता, BASDS OF LUIS YOGA 283 


God, tho extreme Tantrik sect of Kupilikas which he 1epre- 
sonted is said to havo continued to exist with Shangkata’s 
approval, though possibly in a modified form, under its 
leader Vatukanatha. The Brahmos, Avyasamaj, Vaishnavas, 
and Sharvas, may resent this critic’s rzomarks so far as thoy 
touch themselves. I am not hero concorned with this 
religious faction, but will hmuit tho following observations in 
reply to the subject in han: 

The criticism, notwithstanding its “ pious” aco bity 
against forms of doctrine «f which tho writer disapproved, 
contains gomo just observations. = 1 am not howovor hore 
concerned to ostablish the reality or value of this Yoga 
method, nor is proof on eithor of theso points avalable 
except through actual oxporimont and experience, Irom 
a doctrinal and historiew point of view, howeve, it 
soems that this critic dul not have a sufficient know- 
१6086! of the subject which ho has thus so vigorously 
condemned, ov of thea wide aocoptance which tis 
Yoga has received in India, It is true that Karma 
with Jnina aro moans 16४ the attainment of Moksha, 
These and Bhakti (devotion) which may partake of tho 
character of the first or the second, according to tho 
nature of its display,’ ४19 all contained in the cight pro- 
cesses of Yoga. ‘I'hus, they include Tapas, a form of 
Karma yoga,’ and Dhyana, a process of Jnana yoga Ags 

1 An English education, such 18 the Author of UI 18 o1 itic ism received, 
not infroquently has tho effect af drvoroing thoso thus educated, not 
only from a knowledge of Indian Shastra, but fom tho possilulily of 
widerstanding il, 

2 Thus, tho offering of flowois and tho like to tho Divinity patakes 
of the nature of Karma; whilst Bhakti 10 14s ta wscondontal aspect, in 
which by love of the Lord tho dovotoo is morgod in Flim, is a form of 
Samadhi 

5 When, howovor, we deal wilh what aro called the throo Kandas— 
wz; Koma, Upiisana, and Jnina ‘Tapas and tho like practices form 


part of U pisana Kanda. The ubovo dehnition is for tho purposes of 
Yoga vlassification only 


284 THD SIX CUNIRDS AND IHR SERPENT POWER 


188 been pointed out, the “cight-limbed” Yoga (Ash- 
tangayoga) includes Hatha processes, such as Asana and 
Pranayama What Hatlayog.s have dono is to dovolop 
the physical or Hatha processes and aspect. Tho true 
view of Hathavidya recogmses that it 28 an auadtary of 
Jnana whereby Moksha is obtained. It is also obviously 
true that all Bhssis not Moksha, Ananda (Bliss) of a kind 
may be secured through drink or drugs, bul no one supposes 
that this is hberating Bhss. Similarly, Hathayoga proccsses 
may secure various forms of gross or subtle bodily Bliss 
which are not The Bhss ‘here 18, however, a mis- 
understanding of the system here described when it is 
described as merely materialistic. It has, hke othor fcrms 
of Yoga, a material side or [atha aspect, sinco man 1s. 
gross, subtle, and spiritual; but it has a Jnana aspect also, 
In all Yoga there is mental exerciso, As tho Jiva is both 
material anc spivitual, disciplinc and progress in both the 
aspects is needed Kundah is aroused by Mantra, which is 
a form of Consciousness (Chaitanya), “It is he whose 
being is immersed in the Brahman,” who arouses tho Devi 
Kundali by the Mantra Hungkava (y. 50), ‘The Devi is 
Herself Shuddha Sativa! (ए, 51). “Tho wise and excellent 
Yogi, wrapt in Samadhi and devoted to the Lotus Feet 
of hig Gmu should lead Kulakundah along with Jiva to 
Her Lord the Parashiva in the abode of hberation within 
the pure Lotus, and meditate upon Her who grants all 
desires as the Chaitanyarupi Bhagavati (that is, tho Devi 
whose substance is Consciousness itself); and as he leads 
Kulakundah he should make all things absorb in Tor,” 
Meditation is made on every centre in which She operates. 
In the Ajn& centre Manas can only unilo with and 
bo absorbed into Kundali by becoming ono with tho 


1Sattve, Atisattva Paramasattva, Shuddhnsativa. and Vishud- 
dhasattya, are five different forms of Chaitanya. 


THULORLICAT BASES OF NTs ९00५ 285 


Jnana-shakti which Sho is, for Sho is all Shaktis Tho Laya- 
yoga 15 therefore a combmation of Karmaand dnuna, The 
formor modiatcly and tho lattor dneetly achieves Moksha. 
In the Ajna is Manas and Om, and on this the Sadhaka 
meditates (vy. 83). ‘Phe Sadhaka’s Atm. must be transformed 
into a meditation on (71६ lotus (y. $4). Lis Atma 18 the 
Dhyana of Om, which is tho innor Atma of those whose 
Buddhi is pure. 6 roalses that ho and the Brahman are 
one, and that Brahman is alono roal (Sat) and all ०३०९ unreal 
(Asat). He thus becomes an Advaitayadi, or one who 
realises tho identity of tho imdividual and universal Solf 
(@b.). The mind (Chetas) by repeated practico (Abhyasa) is 
here dissolved, and such practice 18 mental operation itself 
(v. 86). For tho Yogi meditating on the Mantra whereby 
he 10812868 the umty of [1 पा and Manas closes the 
*houso which hangs without support’. That is, he 
disengages the Manas from all contact with tho objective 
world (४, 86), in ordor to attam the Unmani Avasthi. 
Tiere is Pmamashiva, ‘Cho 'antrik does not suppose 
that there aro soveral Shivay in the songo of sevoral dis- 
tinct Deitios, Tho Brahman 1s ono. Rudra, Shiva, 
Paramashiva, and so forth, aro but names fo different 
manifestations of the One. Whon it is said that any 
Devati is in any Chakra, it is meant that that is the seat 
of the operation of the Brahman, which opointion im its 
Daiva aspeot is known as Devati. As theso operations 
vary, so do the Deyatas. Tho Ilangsah of the Sahasriia 
00118708 in Timsolf all Dovatis (v. 44). It 18 here in 
the Ajni that tho Yogi places at tho time of death his 
Prana and entors the supremo Purusha, “ who was 00010 
the threo worlds, and who is known by tho Vedanta ” 
(v. 88). It is truo that this action, hko others, is aecom- 
panied by Flatha procosses. But theso aro associated with 
meditation, This meditation unites Kundali and Jivatma 


286 THE SIX CBNTRES AND LHD SERPENT POWER 


with the Bindv which is Shiva and Shakti (Shivashakti- 
maya), and the Yogi afte: such union, pieremg the 
Brahmarandhra, 1s frecd from tho body at death and bo- 
comes one with Brahman (2b.). The secondary causal body 
(Karanavantara Sharira) above Ajna and bolow Sahasrara 
1s to be seen only through meditation (v. 89), when perfec- 
tion has been obtained in Yoga practice. V. 40 refers to 
Samadhi Yoga. 

Passing to the Sahasrira, it is said, “ well concealed 
and attamable only by great offort, is that subtle ‘ Vaid’ 
(Shunya) which is the chief root of liberation” (vy. 42), In 
Paramashiva are united two forms of Bliss (ए. 42)—nantely, 
Rasa or Paramananda Rasa (that is, the bliss of Moksha) 
and Virasa (or the bliss which is the product of the union 
of Shiva and Shakti). It 18 from the latter union that 
there arise the universe and the nectar which floods the 
jesser world (Kshudrabrahmiinda), or the body. The ascetic 
(Yati) of pure mind is instructed in the knowledge by which 
he realises the umty of the Jivtama and Paramitma (v. 48). 
It 18 “that most excellent of men who has controlled his 
mind (Niyata-nija-clutta) that is, concentrated the inner 
faculties (Antahkarana) on the Sahasrara, and has known 
it who is freed from rebirth,” and thus attains Moksha 
(ए, 45). [6 becomes Jivanmukta, remaining only so long 
in the ण्त्‌) as is uecessary to wok out the Kuma, the 
activity of which has already commenced—just as a revol- 
ving wheel will yet run a little time after the cause of its 
revolving has ceased. It is the Bhagavati Nirviina-Kala 
which grants divine liberating knowledge—that is, Tativa- 
jnina, or knowledge of the Brahman (v.47). Within Her 
is Nityénanda, which 18 ‘ pure Consciousnoss itself” (ए, 49), 
and “is attamable only by Yogis through pure Jnana” 0.) 
It is this Jnana which secures liberation (il.), Tho Maya 
Tantra says: “Those who are learned in Yoga say that it 


41 1019 [1८ BASUS OL THIS १०५५ 287 


ig tho unity of Jiva and Atma (in Samad ii). According to 
the oxporicnco of others, 1b 1५ tho knowledge (Jnana) ol the 
identity of Shiva and Atmi, Tho Agamavadis say that 
knowledge (Jnana) of Shakti1s Yoga, 0010 wise mon say 
that the knowloage (Jn ina) of the Purana Purusha 1s Yoga; 
and others again, the Prakritivadis, declaro that the know- 
ledge of the union of Sluva and Shakti is Yoga” (vy 57). 
“The Devi, by dissolving Kundalim in the Parabmdn, 
effects the liberation of 8076५ Sadhakas through them medi- 
tation upon the identity of Shiva and Atma in the Bindu. 
She does 80 in the case of others by a similiar process and 
by meditation (Chintana) on Shakti, In other cases this is 
done by concontration of thought on tho Paramapurusha, 
and in other casoy by tho moditation of the Sadhaka an 
tho uuion of Shiye wad Slukts”? (क). To fact, the wor- 
shipper of any particular Dovata should voelise that ho 1s 
ono with tho objoct of his worship. fn Pranava worship, 
for instanco, tho worshippe’ rowlses lus identity with tho 
Ongkara. In othor forms of worship ho roalises his adontity 
with Kundalini, who is ombodied by tho difforent Mantias 
worshipped by different worshippus, Tu short, Jniina 18 
Kriyfjnana and Svariipajnina, Tho latter is direct spuitnal 
experionco. The formor are tho moditatiyo processes 
leading to it, Thoro is hero Kriyajnana, and when Kunda- 
lim amtes with Shiva She gives Jnana (Svatapa), for Her 
nature (Svarupa), as algo 15, 18 thal. 

After union with Shiva, Kundah makes Ter एनत 
journey. After She has repeatedly! gono to Tim, bho 
makes a journey from which, at tho will of tho Yogi, 
there is no return, Thon tho Sidhaka 16 Jivanmukta. 
His body is proso: vod प्रान such timo as the activo Karma 


1Tiis is nocossary in ordor that tho aptitude bo aliamed Ty 
repetition the act becomos natura, and its result ni the ond becomes 
pei manent, 


288 गणाः SIX COLNIRES AND THR SDRPLNT POWLR 


is exhausted? when he can achieve bodilesy (Videha) or 
Kaivalya Mukti (supreme Inberation), ‘ ‘The revered Lord 
Preceptor”—that 1s, Shangkaracharyya—in his celebrated 
Ananda-Lahan thus hymns Hor return (v. 58) : 

९ Kaharim, Thou sprinklest all things with the stream 
of nectar which flows from the tips of Thy two feet; and 
as Thou returneth to Thine own place, Thou vivifieth 
and maketh visiblo all things that were aforctime invisible ; 
and on reiching Thy abode Thott resumeth Thy snake-like 
col and sleepoth.” That is, as Her passage upward was 
Layakrama (dissolution of the ‘Tattvas), so [er return is 
Srishtikrama (re-creation of the Tattvas), V. 54 says that 
the Yoo: who has practised Yama and Niyama and the like 
(that is, the other 10668888 of Ashtangayoga, including 
Dhyana with 103 resulting Samadhi), and whose mind has 
been thus controlled, 1s never again reborn. Gladdened by 
the constant realisation of the Brahman, he is at peace 

Whother the method above dosciibed bo ot be not 
effectual or desirable, 16 must be obvious upon a perusal of 
the text, which givos an explanation of 10, that the Yoga 
which the author affirms to be tho cause of hhoration is not 
merely material, but that it is the arousing of the Power 
(Jrvashakti) of the World-Consciousness (Jagachchaitanya) 
which makes man what 16 18, Tho Yog: thus does claim 
to secure the Bhss of hberation by making entry thereto 
through the doors of Karma and Jnanayoga. 

A Brahmo Author’ who 18 80 little favourable to the 
Tantra as to describe the differenco between it and tho 
Veda as beimg “as great as that which exists between the 
Netherwo-ld (Paitala) and Ifeavon (Svarga)”? does not 


1 Gayatrimulake, Shatehakrer vyakhyana ० sadhan& (Mangala 
Ganga Mission Press) 

2 The unorthodox author cited, quoting the saymg that ५ 10 attam 
Siddhi (frution) in Shinti (study and practice of ordinances of the 
Vedas) the Bishmana should follow the Tantra,” asks, in confo mity 


1 20 4 [1८४ JASES OF [५ ५0८4 989) 


deny tho oTicioncy of the Tantik Shichakra Sidhani, 
but contiasts it with the Vaicika Giyate Sicha in an 
aceotnt of the two mollods which | here ५ mmatise m 
17001104 commas. 

५ tho Chakras (the existence of which 14 not Cisputed) 
are placer whore tho nerves and museles 1 1110. The .\ 11 
18 the placo of the Gommand = ‘his manifests 111 the 
operation of Buddhi. It the command 1५ ollowed, the 
Sadhaka becomes pure of disposition (Bhava) and speoch, 
Speech displays itself in the throat, the region of the 
Vishuddha. ‘Clo noxt lower Chasia is called Anil ate 
bocauso of 1ts connection wilh Nada, whic is self-prod todd 
in tho heat 111५ Vayuain Analata is Prinashakt. Tere 
whon free from sin one ८४) sco the Atma — Here the Yog 
reahsos ९" am Te’ 11५ ल a’ the cave’ he scat or 
dosito is at {ho root of the Svudaishth कप In the lowest 
lotus the Muladhiia aro the threo St aktts of Java—namcy, 
Tohehha, Kyi, wand Joma in an 1 लतो ९५ ous unenhyonod 
state. The Sadhaka by the aa cf tho Par ttm ४ [110 
(Agni) and ait (Vayu)? awakens t hose three Lorces (Shaktts) 
and ultmatoly by tio gine of the Paratna le is uniter, 
with tho (प्रापक Bialbman,” 

In days of old Sadhan: commeneed at the Mtlu] pra 
Ghakra; that is, those who woo not Sidhakus ol tho 


wit) ug views on 1 16 latla Shisthy ^ low cum {1180 woo uc diveaccd 
finn Voda gob Siddin im Shritit ! Tis eels ५ (८11 का 1) hy 
that the Putra is oppose tc (५ Vode whiet the जानना 16१0] ( 1116४ 
The Kulutraa Tantra spouks of ib oom the catiuy, ws Ved amok v 
Of course it 14 ono question to iim toby 1 पतत or Voduad ancther 
whothor ५ particular Shastr vis ii fact im ५ (को ue withit Oaths 
the Indian schools dispute, ust as the Chi ५11 ॥ sects differ as to tho 
Bible which ul clum as thon bass. 

Amis dofimtion is mucem ule, As ospla ued Inte ths prya al 
ganglia mo merely goss cori wponcences of ths subble vitel Chacras 
which inform then 

€ ११0 Author hoo refers to the proocascs subsoquer tly dosc Lac, 
whoroby aris inchaws and the ternal few 1५ act iblive dona se 
the slosping Sorpont, Tho Paral ue is tho Sipremo Aime 


37 


290 THE SIX ORNTRES AND 110 SDRPINI POWLE 


Gayatii-Martra commenced from below at the lowcst 
centre hore was a good reason {01 tlus, for thereby the 
senses (Indriya) wore controlled. Without such control 
purity of disposition (Bhava) cannot bo attamed. Tf such 
purity be not gained, then the cumd (Chitts) cannot fiad its 
place in the heart; and if the Chitta be not in the heart 
there can be no nnion with the Paratm. The first thing, 
therefore, which a Sadhaka has to do 1s to control the 
senses Those who achieve | this without hxing then minds 
on the Lord (Ishvara)* had to go through many difficult 
and painful practices (such as the Mudias, Bandhas, ete., 
mentioned later) which were necessary for the contiol of 
the Indriyas and of the action of tho Gunas. All this is 
unnecessary in the Gayatri Sadhana or method. Tt 18 true 
that the souses should be controlled in the threa lowor 
centres (Chakras) this is, cupidity (Lobha) in the Muli 
dhiva, lust (Kama) in the Svadhishthaina at the root of the 
genitals, and anger (Krodha) atthe navel. ‘These throo 
passions are the chiel to sct the ९५८08८४ i motion, and are 
the main doors to Hell ‘he way, howevor, 1) which 
control should be effected 1५ to place the Chitta (m nd) on 
Satta (existence) of Paramatma m these Uhakras, The 
Chitta should be taken to each of these three lowest contres 
and controlled, whereby those passions which have their 
respectiva places at thoso centres ara eontrolled. Whonever, 
therefore the senses (Indriya) got out of control, fix tho 
Chitta (mind) on the Paramatma in the particular Chakra.” 

[To give the above an English turn of thought : if, say, 
anger is to be controlled, carry the mind to tho navel, and 
there meditate upon the existence of tho Supreme Ono 
(Paramatma) in this centre, not merely as tho Supreme 


1This observation suggests » [7० of — onght which is of value, 
Some pursue the path of dovo ion (Bha xt), bit wo ab of tl oso whe have 
it not or 17 Jess degree ¢ 


{|| (५ CA BASIS ५० । $ १५ 4 291 


withe i tho body and within the body, but as embodied in 
that particuar part of tt, lor that 1 Tts manifest: tian. 
Tho result is that the passionate activity of this contre is 
subdicd ; for ats functioning is १५110५९ to the stato of the 
Atma which informs it, aud both the body and inind attain 
the peace of the Atma on which the self is centred ॥ 

“faving thus controlled the seuses, the Gayatr Sa- 
dhana commences, nob at the lowest, bub at the highost, of 
tho six conties—namoly, the Ajuu between tho eychows. 
Thoro 1s no nocessily for the difficult and paimful process 
ot piorcing the Chakras from bolow.’ Tix the mind on the 
Lord (fshvara) in the highost centro. Mor the ether (Akasha) 
there is the existence (|, ) of Lhe Suprome Atma, There 
and in tho two lower conties (Vishuddha and Anihate) 
enjoyment 1५ had with Ishvara. ‘he union between diva 
and Prakriti is called Lfonoy (Madhu) m tho Upanishads. 
By Sadhani of the A‘ni contio (Chakia) pity of boing 
(Bhavashuddhi) is allained, and purity of speech lollows on 
the altainmon€ of such Bhiva, Yopa with tho Supreme 
Devata who 14 all-knowing is had hee Le who is Lreed 
from all disturbing conditions of body and mind reaches the 
stato which is boyond the Gunas (Gi nitita), which 18 that 
of the Supreme Brahman.” 

We many conclude these two criticisms with (ho tuo 
Indian saying somowhat in onsistontly quoted in the first : 
५९10 dispute tho religion ( arm) of another is the mak 
of a narrow mind, O Load! O Great Mag cian! with 
whatsoover lath om feeling wo call on Thee, hou arb 
pleagod.” 


५ 


1 वृष paragraph in brackets 1५4५ A A 


2 This observation shows a 14117111. १ 
acter o the Youu [ ib aw dosed te ३०५ [पत्‌ he then ¢ per पता 
must Dam dold एणा माए vt the lowost contro, ‘ore we, haweycr, othor 
forms of Yoga im which Kundali 1s nob woused —A A, 


292 WIL, SIN CEN RLS AND 111, SLI? NL TOWLE 


Whatsoover diftorence there has been, or may be, as 
to forms and methods, whether: m Upasani or Yoga, yet 
all Indian woishppors of tho ancient typo sock a common 
end in unty with Laght of Consciousness, which 1s beyond 
the regions ot Sin, Moon, and Tire. 

Té will now be asked what are the general principles 
which underlio the Yoga practice above desembud 1०४४ 
is ib that the rousing of Kundahm Shakti and [स union 
with Shiva oflects the state of ecstatic union (Samadhi) 
and spiritual exporience which 1s alleged? The reador 
who has understood the general principles roco: led m 
the previous sections should, if he have nob «lroady 
civined it, reachly appreciate tho answer here givon. 

Tn tho first place, the preceding section will have ind. 
eated that, there aro two lines of Yoga~namely, Dhy.na 
or Bhavana Yoga, and Kundah Yoga, the subject of this 
work—anl that there 1s a dilferonce betwoon the two, 
Tho fast class of Yoga is that in which cestasy (Sa nadhi) 
is attaimed by intellective processes (वक jnana) of medi- 
tation and the like with the ad, it may be, in tho prelimin- 
ary stage of auxiliary processes of Mantra or Hathayogat 
(othor than the rousmg of Kundal Shakti) and by detach 
ment from the world; the second 18 thal Yoga in which, 
though intellective processes are not neglected, the creative 
and sustammg Shakti of the whole body as Kundu is 
actually and truly umited with the Lord Conscionsness so 
as to procure for the Yogi a result which the Jnana-yogi 
directly gains for himself, The Yogi makes Iler introdi co 
Tim to Her Lord, and enjoys tho bliss of union through 
Her Though it is He who arouses Iler, 16 13 Sho who 
gives Jnana, for She 1s Herself that. The Dhyana-yog1 
gains what acquaintance with tho supreme state his own 
meditative powers can give him, and knows not the 

1 Such ९५ Pranayama, Asana, See ante, p 195 





LOG TAL BASIS 0 [1५ YOUA 293 
onjoyment o union with Sh va in and (101 दा his पाका 
mental body-power. ‘Phe two forms of Yop. di er both 
as to method and result. 1 16 [fathayog in soatcho lay a 
rogards his Yoga and its fiiib as the highest ‘Pho Jn: na- 
yor thins sunilarly of his own, And iu act Raja Yoga rs 
gonorally regarded as tho highest for n of Yoga. Kunda- 
hni is so renowned that many seck to know Her. Having 
sludicd the theory of this Yoga, [ have often beon ५६०८ 
“whethor ono can get on wilhout i”. The answer is: 
“ft depends upon what you are looking for and on your 
powors” It you want ४) ronse Kundal Shakts to enjoy 
the bliss of union of Shiva and Shakti through Ho, whach 
your capacities do not otherwise allow you to have o1 if you 
wish to gain the accompanying powors (Siddhi),! 1 19 
obvious thab this oud cau only ५५ achieved by the Y og 
101५ described, But if liberation 19 so ght and tho You 
has capacity to कथ 1 without Kundalin, thon sich 
Yoga is not necessary, lor liberation may be obtained by 
puro dranayoga through detachment, tho oxerciso, and 
then tho stilling, of the mind withott any reference to tho 
central bodily power at all, Indeed कोन एन Taborat on 
(Nirvikalpa Samadi) can only be obtamcd in this way by 
Raja Yoga of which Kundalt Yoge as a prohminu y method? 
Samadhi may also bo attamced on tho path ० devotion 
(Bhakti), as on that of knowledge. 11 ८८८, + the highest 
devotion (Parabhakti) is nob differont from snowledgo, 
Both are realisation, A Dhyana-Yogi should nob noglect 
1128 body, knowing that, as ho 18 both imind and matter, ) 
cach reacls tho ono upon the other. Negloct om mere 
mortification of tho body is more apt to produce 


1Thus, by taising Kuodalt Shacti to the Manipur १ contre, power 
may (1b 18 said) be acquned ova fie 
, ४ Subject to Dharma, Yam, Nryan i, eto वाप पाक case where the 
ond sought 18 puroly spiritual thore is Vanagya ot ronunciation, 


294 IML SIX CBNLRIS AND UL S.thLNI POW! १ 


disordered imagination than a truo spiritual expcrionce. 
[0 is not concerned, howeyei, with the body in the 
sense that the [athayog: is. It 1s possible to Le a suc- 
cessful Dhyana-Yog: and yot to bo woak in body and 
health, sick, and short lived. Tis body, and not he hin- 
self, determines whon he shal] dic. Tle cannot dic at will. 
The eestasis, which he calls “laberation while yet hving” 
(Jivanmukta), 18 (so it was said to mc) not ४ state like that 
of real hberation Ile may bo still subject to = suffering 
body, from which ho escapes only at death, when, ho is 
hberated. His cestasy 18 m the nature of a mcditation 
which passcs into the Void (Bhavana samadhi) offected 
through nogation of thought (Chittavriti) and detachment 
trom the world a process in which the act of raising the 
central yower of the body takes no part. By his effort 
tho mind, which is a product of Kundalim as Prakriti 
Shakti, together with its worldly desires, 18 stalled, so that 
the veil producod by montal fietioning 15 removed from 
Consciousness In Layayoga K midalun लान्‌, when 
roused by the Yogi (for such 10 sing is his act an] part), 
achioves for him this ilhummation. But why, it may be 
asked, slould one trouble over tle body and its central 
power the more particularly that there are unusual risks 
and difficulties involved ? The answer has been already 
given—alloged certainty and facility of roahsation thi ough 
the agency of tho powor which is Knowlodgo itself (Jnana- 
rupa shakta) ; an intermediate acqmsition of powors (Siddha) ; 
and both intermediate and final enjoyment. This answor 
may, however, usefully be developed, as a fundamontal 
principle of the Shakta Tantra is involved. 

1This makes Raja Yoga the highest nd nost difleult of Yogns, for 
mind 1s mado to conquer ttself In Layn Yeu1 tho conquest 1s achieved 
for the Sadhaka by Kundalini Shakti IIe arouses Mor and She achiaves 


for him Siddhi 1४ 15 easier to arouse Kundalim: than to win by one’s 
thought alono Nurvikalpa Samadhi, 


(11010110 24915 of 1718 YOGA 205 


The Shakta Tantra cluims to give both enjoyment 
(Bhoktz) in this and the noxt world, and Hboration (Mukti) 
from all worlds. ‘his chum is bayed on a profoundly trno 
principle? Tf tho ultimato tenlity is the ouo which oxists 
in two aspects of ymeseen! cnjoyment of tho Se! in hbera- 
tion {rom all form and of active on oyment of objects = that 
is, as pure Spit and Sprit in matter thon a complete 
union with Reahty demands such unity in both of its 
aspects, Tb must be known both “here” (ha) and “thor” 
(Amutra). When tightly approhendod and practised, there 
15 truth in tle doelrime which teaches that man should 
make the best of both wailds.) Phere 18 no veal incom- 
patibihty bebwoen tho twe, provide! action 14 taken in 
conformity with tho universal law of mantostation. Tb is 
held to be false toacLing shat happy oss hereafter ew oly 
bo had by neglect to see¢ it now, or m deliberately sought 
for suffering and mortifieal ०1. [+ 14 the mo Shiva who is 
tho supromo bhssful expenonce, and who appens im tho 
form of mat with « 110 of nungled pleasure and prim. Both 
happiness hore anc tho bliss of liberation hero and horo- 
aller may be attuned if he identity of theso Shivas bo 
realisol in every human act. This will bo achieved by 
making overy hunan function, without oxcoption, a roligi- 
ous act of 88611060 and worship (Yajna). In the ancient 


1Aa there aro persona wlo alws va associate with the word or ay 
mont’ (Bhoga) “ hese an Ls cittlos,? 1418 nowess uy to suy thet that is 
not the necosamy 1 (तता o blo wad Bhogt no thos rsomwh h 
iW ia 1010 used = Philosophically Bhogr is tho porception of ob ५४ 
upon which onjoymont or it may be su dor ng, (1181108 [66 any ford 
of senso or intellectual enjoytient 1१ 1itended 411 10 in the world of 1 
form 1a enjoyment 

४ Which 1 18 poasiblo to ado ot without approval of any कष (लाषि 
application to which it my be put Thor ae Kome dangerons prac- 
1160१ which im tho hands of 1) feuor porsons have led to reaulta which 
have given to Shasta vin thos resect is iL rept) 

© Worlds” [षपपति thot w the [ iglish phraso Toro, 1 owever, 
the antithes s 1s between the world (whother as emth or hcayver) and 
hberation trom all worlds. 


296 ND 81; OUNIRLS AND Ink sirernt rowik 


Vaidik ritual enjoymont by way of food and drink was 
preceded, and accompaniod by, ceremonial sacrifice anid 
vilual. Such ecujoyment was the या, of tho sacrifice 
and the gitt of the Gods. At a 01870 stage n the life 
ol a Sadhaka 17 is offered vo the One from whom all 
gilts come and of whom the Devatas aro inforior hmit- 
ed forms. But this offermg also involves a dualism 
from which the highest Monistic (Advaita) Sadhanv of 
tho Shakta-Tantra is freo. Hero the individual life and 
the world hfe are known as one. And so the Tantrik 
Sudhaka, when eating or drinking,’ or fulfilling any other 
of the natural functions of the body, docs so, saying and 
beheymg, Shivo’ham (I am Shiva”), Bhairavo’ham 
(“I am Bhaivava”),? Sai’ham (“T an Sho”) Tt is not 
meicly the sevatate individual who thus acts and enjoys. 
Tt is Shiva who does so in and thivugh him. Such a one 
recognises, as has been well said,’ that his hfe and the 
play of all us activities arc nota thing apart, to be hed 
and pursucd ogotistically for 1ts and his own sopatate 
sake, as though enjoyment was something to be soized 
from hfe by his own unaided strongth and with a sense 
of separateness; but his Ife and all its activities aro 
eoncetvod as part of the divine action in nature (Shakti) 
mamfesting and operating m the form of man. Tle 
realises in the pulsing boat of 118 heart te एर) 
which throbs thio igh, and is the sign of, the universal hfe, 
To neglect or to deny tho needs of the body, to think of 
it as something not divine, is to neglect and deny that 


1Thua in the Slakta ritual tho Sadhak» who {५९८५ tho wine व्य) 
pours the wine as a hoation into the mouth of Kune 1 Shak{, ilo 
Shakti yppearing in the form of | imsolf. 

2 A name of Shiva 

3‘Lhat is, the Mother of all appear ng im the forn of Mer 
worshipper 

4 By Sy Arobindo Ghoso jn the Arya 


110५ [८ 14०५1५0 1 ५ ४०८५ 297 


groater 110 of which it 1s 4 part, and to ‘alsify the great 
doctriie of the पप्र ०" vl and of the tlimato idontity 
of Maltor and Spit. Governed by such a concept, even 
the lowliest physical necds tace on क cos nic significanco. 
१५] 0 vody 18 Shekt. Mts veers are 9] 1161५ reeds; when 
man enjoys, 1 15 Shakti who en oys tlro gh का nall 
he sees and ({008 16.18 the Mother who Icoks and acts. [11४ 
oyes and hands aro Hes The whole body and all its 
functions ato Tle: mant'eslatio 10 fully calso Her as 
anch 1s to porfeet ths puticulu manifestation of [ला 
which is himself. Mar, wien seeing to be tho mister 
of himself, so seeks on all the planes, physical, mental, 
and spiritua ; nor can they be severed, for they ao all 
10 ated, being bat त fori दु aspects othe one all-por- 
viding Consciousness. Who is 10 more diving, ho who 
neglects and spurns the body ot mind that he may attain 
some fancied भुरण आलकक) of he who mghtly 
chorishes both as forms of (16 one Sprit which they clothe P 
Realisation 18 more spco lily ad tee ly attamed by dia- 
cormmg Spit in, aud as, ul [लाह and aly activitios, than 
by flecing rom and casting ticse aside as being काम, 
unspiritual or illusory and impediments in the path! 
If not rightly co ceived, they may be impedime its and 
the cause of fall, othorwiso they beco no instinmo its of 
attainmonts ; and what others are tlore to hind? And 
so tho Kularnaya पकाय says “By what mon all, by 
that thoy rise.” When acts avo done in the night fceling 
and frame of mind (Bhiiva), those aets give enjoymont 
(B iukti); and the repeated and prolonged Bhiiva pro- 
duces ab longth that dine oxporionce (Tattyajniina) 
which is liboration When the Mother 15 seen in all 


1 ae 1180 1५ the Tanti moticd of apply pe Vo tit (10 tintl , tho 
second, {ho १६०6५0८ or Mayavala mothe | witiagrortitcds | its own, 
but loss conformm,, [ thins, (110 nee la ct tho a ess of men 

34 


998 HP र CENPRES AND 1 SLRP ONT POWDR 


things, Sie 18 at length realised as Sho is when beyond 
them all. 

These general principles have their more frequent 
appheation in the 1१८ of the world before ots ance on the 
path of Yoga proper. ‘Tho Yoga here described 18, how- 
ever, also an application of theso same principles in so 
far as it is claimed that thereby both Bhukti and Mukti 
are attained. Ordinarily 16 1s said that where thero is 
Yoga there 1s no Bhoga (enjoyment), but in Kaula teaching 
Yoga is Bhoga and Bhoga 1s Yoga, and tho world itself 
becomes the seat of hboration (‘* Yogo bhogayate, 
mokshayate sangsarah ”).* 

In Kundah Yoga enjoyment (Bhoga), and powers 
(Siddin) may be had at each of the contres to which the 
Central Power is bought and by continuance of the 
practice upward the enjoymont which 1s Liberaticn may 
16 had, 

By the lower processes of TIathayoga ib 18 songht to 
attain a porfect physical body which will also bo a wholly 
fil instrument by which the mind may function. A. perfect 
mind again approaches, and m Sam ulh passes into, pure 
Consciousness itself, ‘he Tathayog: thus seeks a body 
which shall be as strong as stccl, healthy, free from 
suffering, and therefore long-lived Master of the body, 
he is master of both hfe and death lis lustrous form 
enjoys the vitality of youth. He lives as long as ho has 
the will to live and enjoy in the world of forms His 
death is the “death at wall,” when making tho great and 
wonderfully expressive gesture of dissolution? he grandly 
departs. But it may be saul the Hathayogis do gat sick 

1 Yogo bhogayate sakshat dus‘ihritam sukiitayate 


Mokshayate hi sangsarah kauladharmo kuleshvari 
(Kulunava ‘Tantra ) 


2 Sangharamudra, the gesture whicl signifes dissolution “Now I 
am about to die”, 


ILO? 1164 = ASS 0 "111५ YOUA 299 


and die, In the first placo, the fall diserplme is one ol 
difficulty and visk, and can only be pursued under the 
guidance of a skilled Guru. As the Goraksha Sanghite 
says, unaided and uusuceossft] practice may lead not only 
to discase, but deavh. Ts who secks ta conquer the Lord 
of Death लाव the 1is< on failuro of a moro speedy con- 
quost by JIim. All who altompt this Yoga do not, of 
course, succecd, or moot with tho same measure of success. 
Those who fal, nob only incur the infivmitios of ordinary 
mon, but others brought o1 by practices which have boon 
ill pursued, or for which they aro not ht. Those, again, 
who do succeed, do so in varying degico, Ono may 
prolong lus lifo ta the sacred ago of 84, others to 100, 
othors yot further Jn theory, प least, those who ao 
porfyctod (Sidd'a) go from ‘hes piano when they will 
All have nob tho sumo capieily or opportunily (1101 gh 
want of will, bodily stvcugth, or circumstance. All may not 
be willing or able to ollow tho strict rules nocossery for 
success, Nor doos modern 1719 o ce: im genoral the oppor- 
tunities for 80 complote a physical culture, All mon may 
nob dosiro such a Ifo, om may think the attainment of ib 
not worth tho trouble involved, Some may wish to be rid 
of thoi: body, and that as spoodily ५५ possible Tt 14 
therefore said that it is caster to gain liberation than 
deathlessnoss = Pho former may bo heal by uusolfisinoss, \ 
detachmont from the wll, moral and monta) diserplno. 
But to conquer death 1५ harder than this; for those 
qualitics and acls will nob alone avail. Llo who does so 
conquer holds lifo in the hollow of ono hand, and if ho be af 
successful (Siddha) Y gi, 11061101 20) in tho कना, Foe has 
enjoyment and hberation, Uo 1s the Emperor who is 
master of tho world and the possessor 9" tho bliss which is 
beyond all worlds. ‘Theroforo it is clammod by the {fat ha- 
yogi that ovory Sidhana 1s intorioy Lo Mathayoga, 


300 qs SIX CONTRLS AND ILE SIRPLNY Lows? 


Ths Tathayog: who rouses Kundalim gains various 
oceull powors (Siddhi) and enjoyment thorcby. At covery 
contro to which he Icads Kundahm he experiences a 
special form of bliss (Ananda) and gains speci | powers 
(Siddhi). Tf he has Vairagya for thoso he carties Her to the 
Shiva of his cerebral centre, and onjoys the Supreme Bliss, 
which jn its nature is that of Liberation, and which, when 
established im permanence, is Laboration usolf on the 
loosening of the spuit and body, She who “sl ines hke 
a chain of hghts”—a lightming-flash—in tho contre 
of his body is the “Inner Woman” to whom reference 
was mide when it was saul, “ What need have 1 of 
any outer woman? I have an Innor Woman within 
myself.” The Vna (“hero”)! Sadhaka, knowimg him- 
self as the embodiment of Shiva (Shivo’ham), unites with 
woman as the embodiment of Shakti on tho physical 
plano ४ The Divya (“dive”) Sidhaka or Yogi unilos 
within himself his own princaples, fomale and male, which 
ave tho ^ [लकष of the Lord” (Umdayam parameshituh) 
ov Shakti, and Tor Tord Consciousness or Shiva, It is 
ther union which is tho mystic coition (कता पोप) of the 
Tantras.¢ Thore aro two forms of Umon (Samar wya) "= 
1 300 my © Shakti and Siakta” 
_ 2 tho statoments in the Tantras that this nmon as hboration (Mnkti) 
is mere Stuti—that 1s praise m the Tidian fashion of the sub ५८॥ 1 
hand, which goes beyond tho actual ९९४ The Duropean ronder who 
takes such Statements az peed do la {8/८7८ and ridicules them muakos 
himself (to the hnowmg) ridiculous What actnally 1 ppe os m such 
case 15 & fugitive bliss, क नो, hho «ll bliss, emanates fron tho Groat 
Bhss, but 18 a pale reflection of 16 which nowiso, m itoolf scenes 11 
munity fiom futnre rebirth, It is the bhes of this lower Sidh wa, a6 
the union of Kundalini Shakti with Shiva 1s that of the higl e 
पौ ५ 45 the Parapraveshika beautifully calls Tor. Yoginimidaya 
Tantra says “Sho 1s the heart, for from Mer all things rssu0 

4This, as tho Yopiu Tantra says is tho co tion (Maithnni) of 
those who are Yat (wl o have controlled (८ प passtors) 

5 This term indicates the en oyment which wines 3 the uric 


of male and forle, which may bo gitier cf bodies or of thar पन 
principles. 


THC 011416६, BASIS Of 11 6 YOWA 301 


namoly, tho first, which is tho gross (Sthula), cr the wen 
of tho physical embodiments of the Suprome Conscious ress 5 
and tho second, which 1 the subtle (Suksl ma), ot the 
union of the quiescent and active pr neiples in Gonseions- 
noss itsolf. [bis the latter which is hberation. 

Lastly, what in a philosophical sense 1५ tho naturo of 
tho process here described ? Shortly stated, onergy (Shakti) 
polarises itself into two forms nanely, static 01 potontial 
(Kundalini), and dy amic (tho working forees of the body 
as Prana) Behimd all activity there 1 a static back- 
ground, ‘This stalie contig im tho human body ५ tho 
contral Serpont Power in the M Vadhara (90, support) 
Tt is tho powor which is tho static support (Adhara) of the 
whole body, and all its moving Panik [0008 tris 
contro (Kondra) of power is a gross orm of Olnt or 
Consciousness fiat 1s, in itself (Svat pa) 1 1५ Conseous- 
noss and by apponance it 13 a power which, as tho lug] ost 
form of force, is a mamfostatior of 11, dust as thoro is wv 
distinction (though identity ab baso) bet weo the si premo 
quiescont Consciousness and 114 achive powor (Shakt), so, 
whon Consciousness man fests as oneigy (Shaka), it 
possesses the Lwin aspects of potor il and kinetic cnorgy. 
Tn Advaita Vedanta thoro can be no partition, m act, of 
Reahty. To the perfect cyo of its Siddha tho process ol 
becommg is an aseription (Adhyfsa) to tho ultimate Real,! 
To the imporfecu oye of the Sadhaka—tvhav 15, the aypuant 
for Siddhi (perfected accomphshme 1)—to tho spat which 
28 stall toiling through the lower planes and vuiously iden. 
tifying itself! with thom, becoming is tonding (6 appear, 





1'Po the oye of Siddhi to tho sp’rmt who is Udisine (sample witness 
unmindful of the oxternal world) Wecoming 18 Ad) yisa and iothing 
real (in the Indian sense of that boom, ay used by Sieigkwa) CO ontion 
(रिणा) ww Vivartin, or appuo t ard rot ied evolitien (Pau iama), 
Adhyasa is attibuting to sometling that which 6 dave uch really 
povseas, 


302 LU, SIX GLNLUS AND IHR SLRPRNL POWLR 


and appearance is real. The Shakta Tantra is a 10ndor- 
ing of Vediatie truth from this practical point of viow, anc 
represents the world-process as a polarisation in Conscious- 
ness itself. ‘Ibis polatity as it oxists im, and ag, the body, 
is destroyed by Yoga, which disturbs the equilibrium of 
bodily consciousness which is the result of the maintenance 
of these two poles. Tn the human body the potential pole 
of encrgy, which 1s the supreme power, 18 stirted to action, 
on which tho moving forees (dynamic Shakti) supported by 
it arc drawn thereto, and the whole dynamsm! thus 
engendered moves upward to umte with the quiescent 
Consciousness in the highest Lotus. This mattor has beon 
so well put by my friend Profossor Pramathanitha 
Mukhyopnadhyfiya that [ cannot improve on his account,’ 
and therofore cite 1४ in lieu of giving a further description 
of my own: 

“When you say that Kundali Shakti is the primordial 
Shakt at rest, T am led to think of an analogy (and it 
may bo more than an analogy) in modern १५०८८. = (08116 
energy in ils physical aspect may bo considerod either as 
static or ag dynamic, the forme: boing a condition of 
equilibrium, the latter a condition of motion or chango of 
relative position Thus a material thing apparently at 
rest (thore boing no absolute rest except in pure (078८1 97४ 
ness or Chit) should be regarded as cnergy or Shakti 
equilibrated, the various elements of it holding ane another 


1The projecting power of consciousness withdrivs ita projections 
into the sensual world, and tho power of Congcionsness mcigos in Con- 
sclonsness itself, 

2Why hore it may be asked socing that Consciousness 19 all por- 
yading® True; but there the tamasik force of Maya 18 at its lowost 
atrongth, Therefore Consciousness is reached thore 

3 In a lotter (0 me, tn reply to ono of mi 19 a sworn some inqnirics 
made by him as regards this Yoga 119 wrote that my letter had sup. 
gested certain ideas “on a subject of द iprome 1 itorost philosophically 
and practically in the hfe of a Hindu,” wich Lroproduce im the toxt, 
The bracketed translations of the Sanskiit words aro mine, 


QIPORPTIGA BASS 01 PINS YOGA 303 


in chock (or, as the mathe nalicians will say, the algobraic 
gum of the forces bemg ८०0). Of course, in any given 
case the equilibrium is rel. tive rather than absolute, The 
important thing to note 18 this polarisation of Shakti mto 
two forims—static and dynamic. 

“In the tissues of a lying body, again, the operative 
enorgy (whateyor the natme of that may be, whether we 
belicve in a special ° vital force * ठा not) polamses itself into 
two similar forms anabohe and katabobc—ono tending to 
chango and the other to sonserve tho tissues, the actual 
condition o the tissues being simply the resultant of these 
two cooxistont or concurrent activities, 

“Tn tho mind or experience also this polarisation or 
polaity is patent to refloction, [1 my own writings? T 
havo constantly urged this polarily bobweon pure Chit and 
the stroys which is mvolved in it; thore is a stress छा 
Shakti developing the mind thongh an infimby 0" forms 
and changos; but all thess forms and changes are known 
as involved in tho pure and aubounded cther of awarcucss 
(Chidakisha) his analysis therofore oxlibits tho pri- 
mordial Shakti in the same tio polar forms as bolore 
static and dynamic—and hero tho polamty is most funda- 
montal and approaches absolutonoss, 

* Lastly, 100 us consider for one moment the atom of 
modern science, The chemical atom has coised to be an 
atom (indivisible unit of matucr), Wo have insvead the 
electron theory. According to this, tho so-called atom isa 
miniature universe very mich liko om own solar system. 
At tho centre of this atomic system we have a charge of 
positive olectricty round which a cloud of negative charges 
(called electrons) is supposed to rovolvo, just as n yriads of 
planets and smallor bodies 1ovolve round tho sun, Tho 


1* Approaches to Truth,” + Tho Patent Wondo,” vali able pro- 
sontmonta in modern terms of tho angier ८ Vodantic benching, 


204 11 { SIX GINERDS AND MLD इशत 706 


positive and the negative charges hold each other m chock, 
80 that tho atom is a condition of equilibrated ०१८ gy, and 
does not therefore ordinanily break up, though it may 
possibly break up and set freo its equilibrate! store of 
energy, as prohably ii does in the emanaticns of the 
radium, What do we notice hore? Tho samo polarity of 
Shakti into a static and a dynamic partncr—viz , the positive 
charge at rest at the contie, and the negative charges in 
motion round about the centre: a most suggestive analogy 
01 ilustiation, perhaps, of the cosmic fact. Tho illustration 
may be carried imto other domains of science and 
philosophy, bub I may as well forbear going into dotails. 
Tor tho present we may, I thnk, draw this important 
conclusion 

“Siakti as manifesting itself in the universe, divides 
itsolf into two polar aspects—static and dyname whieh 
imphes that you cannot have it in a dynamic form withort 
at tho same time having it in a comesponding static form, 
much hike the poles of a magnet Tn any given sphero 0° 
activity of forco we must have, according to thas cosmic 
principle, ® static background- Shakti at rest or ° coiled,’ 
as the ‘Tantras say. 

* Bofore I proceed, lot me point out what I coneaive 
to be the fundamental significance of our Tantric and 
Pauranie Kah. This figure or Murti is both real and 
symbolic, ag indeed evory Murti im the so-called Iindu 
mythology is, Now, the Divme Mothor Kah is a symbol of 
the cosmic truth just explained  Sadashiva, on whose 
bieast She dances, nude and dark, 18 the statie background 
of pure Chit, white and inert (Shavariipa), bosause pure 
Chit 18 in itself Svaprakasha (self-manifest) and Nishkriya 
(actionless). At the same time, apart fiom and beyond 
Consciousness there can be nothing—no power or Shakti 
—hence the Divine Mother standa on the bosom of 


1111071 तता 3AS 8 0 Ib YOGA 305 


the Divino Tather ‘Tho Mother [नकन is all activity 
and Gunamayi (in [er aspoot as Prakiita composed of the 
Gunas), Tor nakednoss moans that, though She encom- 
passes all, there is nothing to encompass Herself; her 
darkness means thal Sho 14 inscrutable, Avang-manasa- 
gochara (beyond the reach of thought and speech), Of 
course, this is no partition of reality mto two (there lies 
the imperfection of the Sangkhya doctrine of Pnrnusha and 
Prakriti, which is otherwise all right), but merely polari- 
sation in onr oxpericnce of an indivisiblo fact which is the 
primordial (Adyn) Shakti iisolt. ‘Thus Chit 13 also Shakti. 
Shiva 18 Shakti and Shakti is Shiva, as tho ‘Tantras say. 
It 18 Gunashraya (support of Gunas) as well as Gunamaya 
(whose substanco is Gunas); Nuguna (attiibutcless) as 
woll as Saguna (with attribute), as said im a well-known 
passage of the Chand. 

“You suggestive hint! makes tho nature of tho Kun- 
dali Shakti rather clear to mo. You aro quilo mht, 
perhaps, in saying that tho coymio Shakti is tho Samashti 
(colloctivity) in relation to which the Kundali in tho bodies 
is only tho Vyashli @ndividual): it is an illustration, ४ 
reproduction on a miniature scale, 0 merocosme plan, of 
the whole. The law or principle ०" the wholo—that of 
macrocosme Shakti should thorefore bo found 1 the 
Kundaht. That law wo have soon ta be the law of polarisa- 
tion into stalie-dynamic or potontial-kinelic aspocts. Tn 
the hving body, thoroloro, thore must be such polarisation, 
Now, the Kundal: coiled {1166 times and a half at the 
Miiladhara 1s bho indisponsable and mntaihng static back- 
ground of tho dynamic Shakti oporativo in tho whole body, 
carrying on procosses and working out changes. he body, 
therefore, may bo compared to a magnet with two poles. 
The Mulidhara 18 tho static pole m relation to the rost of 


1That Kundalini is tho static Shakti 
30 


306 HYP इ CENLRPS AND ' (1, SPRPENL POWER 


the body, which is dynaime; the working the body necos- 
sarily presupposes and finds such a static support, hence 
perhaps? the name Muladhara, the fundamental support. 
In one sense, the static Shakti at the Muladhata is neces- 
sarily coexistent with the creating and evolving Shakti of 
the body, because the dynamic aspect or pole can never be 
without its static counterpart. In another sense, it is the 
Shakti lefé over (you have yomsolf pointed tlis out, and 
the italics are yours) after the Prithivi—the last of the 
Bhutas—has been created, a magazine of power to be drawn 
upon and utilised for further activity, if there should arise 
any need for such, Taking the two senses together (yours 
as well as mine), Shakti at the Miladhbara is both coexistent 
with every act of creation or manifestation and is the 
residual effect of such act—both cause and effect, in fact— 
an idea which, avoply looked (०, shows no real contradic- 
tion. There is, in fact, what the physicist will doscribo as 
a cycle or circmt in action, Let us take tho impregnated 
ovum the carliest embryological stage of the hving body. 
In x6 the Kundali Shakti is already presented in its two 
polar aspects . the ovum, which the mother-clemont 
represents, ono pole (possibly the static), and the spermata- 
zoon, which is the father-element, represents the othor 
(possibly the dynannc).? From their fusion procecd those 
processes which the biologist calls differentiation and inte. 
gration ; but m all this process of crcation the cycle can 
be fairly easily traced. Shakti flows out of the germinal 
cell (fertilised ovum), sees upon foreign matter, and 
agsiin lates it, and thereby grows in bulk; divides and 
subdiyides itself, and then again co-ordinates all its 
divided parts into one organic whole. Now in all this 
1 Certainly. 


2Tho process of fortilisation is deal with im tho Mitmkabheda 
Tantra 


11110101, 11614 6 BASIS OD (11118 YOGA 307 


we havo the cyclo. Suing upen [नामद्वय mattor is an 
outwardly directed activity, assimilation 1s an mwardly 
directed activity or return current; coll division and 
multiplication is an outwardly directed oporation, co- 
ordmation is inwardly directed,' and so on 106 force 
in the germ-cell 18 overflowing, but also continuously 1 18 
flowmg back into itsclt, the two operations presupposing 
and sustaining oach other, as in overy circuit, ‘The given 
stook of force in tho gorm-coll, which is static so long as 
the fusion of the malo and fomalo olemonts does not take 
‘place in the womb, is the necessary slarting-point of all 
creative activily; it is tho primordial cause, therefore, in 
relation to tho body primordial as well as constantly 
given, unceasing, On the other hand, the reaction of every 
creative action, the return current or flowing back 0 ` evory 
untolding overflow, constantly renews this starting torce, 
changes it without changing ils gonoral conilition of relative 
eqmhbrium (and this is quite possiblo, as in (ho caso of any 
material systom) ; the force in the germ-coll may therefore 
be also rogarded as 9 porpetual olfect, something loft over 
and set against tho working forces of tho body. Many 
apparently inconsistent ideas onter into this conception, and 
thoy have to bo reconciled, 

“1, We start with a [0160 m the gorm-cell which is 
statical at first (though, like a dicotyledon scod, or even a 
modern atom, it involves with itso L both a statical and a 
dynamical polo; otherwise, from pure 1080 involving no 
possibility of motion, no motion could over arise). Let this 
be the Kundali coilod. 

«2, Thon thore is creative impulso ansing out of it 5 
this is motion out of rest. By this, tho Kundali becomes 
paitly static and partly dynamic, or ojocts, 80 to say, a 
dynamic pole out of it in order to ovolve tho body, but 

` This outflow and inflow 18 a common Tentiuk notion 


308 TH SIX OUNTRLS AND 111 SERPLNY POWER 


remaining a static pole or background itself alla ong. In 
no part of the process has the Kundali really uncoiled itself 
altogather, or evon curtailed its threo coils and a half, 
Without this Miladhara Shakti remaning intact no cvolu- 
tion could be possible at all, [८18 the hingo upon which 
everything else turns. 

“8, ach croative act again reacts on the Muladhara 
Shakti, so that such reaction, without disinurbmg the 
relative rest of the coiled Shakti, changes its volume or 
mtensity, but does not curtail or add to the number of coils. 
For instance, every natural act of respiration roacts on tho 
coiled Shakti at the Mulidhira, but it does not commonly 
make much difference. But Pranayama poworfully racts 
on it, so much so that it awakes the dormant power and 
sends it piercing through the centres. Now, the common 
Jeserrption thal the Kundal uncoils [नना thon and geos 
up the Sushunna, leaving the Mulidhira, should, T thinks 
be admitted with caution. That statac background can novor 
be absolutely disponsed with. As you have yourself tightly 
observod, ^ Shakti can never bo depleted, but this 28 how to 
look at it. Precisely; the Kundali, when powerfully 
worked upon by Yoga, sends forth an emanation or ejection 
in the hkeness of Her own self (like the ‘ethereal double’ 
of the Theosophiats and Spiritualists) which pierces through 
the various centres until it becomes blended, ag you point 
out, with the Mahakundali of Shiva at the highest ०८ 
seventh centre. Thus, while this + ethereal doublo’ or solf- 
ejection of the coiled power at tho Miilidhara isconds tho 
Sushumna, the coiled power itsolf docs not and noed not 
str from its placo. I 18 like ४ spark given frcm an ovor- 
saturated! electro-magnetic machine; or, rathor, it is like 
the emanations of radium which do not sensibly detract 
from the energy contained in it. ns last, porhaps, 

1 Overchai ged. 


11115071 11 1481५ OF 1 11५4 YOGA 309 


is tho closost physical parallel of the case that we 
are trying to undorstand As a well-known passage 
in the Upanishad has it, ‘The whole (Purna) is sub- 
tracted from tho whole, and yet the whole remains,’ I 
think our prosont caso comes very near (0 tins. ‘The 
Kundah at the Muladhiaa is the wholo primordial Shakti 
in monad or gorm or latency: that is why it 1५ coiled. ‘he 
Kundah that mounts up the Nadi is also the whole Shakin 
in a specially dynamic form—an eject hkeness of the 
Rternal Serpent. ‘Lhe rosult of the last fusion (there are 
successive fusions in the yamons centres also) in the 
Sahasriiza is also the wholo or Purna, ‘ns 18 how 1 look 
at it In this conception tio petmanont static background 
18 not really doploted, much less is it dispensed with 

५4, Whon agam I say thal tho volume ठा intonsily 
of the coilod power can be affocted (षष्ठा 106 its 
configuration and relative equilibiium), 1 do not mean to 
throw up the principle of conservation of enorgy in relation 
to the Kundali, which is the ombodiment of all enorgy. Ht 
is merely the conversion of static (potential) cnergy 11110 
dynamic (kinetic) energy in part, tho sum remaining 
constant. As wo havo to deal with infimbies here, an 
exact physical rendering ol this principle is not to be 
expocted. ‘The Yogi therefore simply र asvakens,’ and 
nover creates Shakti. By the way, tho germ-coll which 
evolves ihe hady does not, acco.ding to modern biology, 
cease to be a geim-cell in any stage of the complicated 
process. ‘The original gorm-cell sphts up into two, one 
half gradually develops itself into the body of ५ plant or 
anmmal—this 1s the somatie ecll; the other hall remains 
encased within the body practically unchanged, and is 
transmitted in the process of reproduction Lo the offspring— 
that 1s, the gorm-plasm. Now, this germ-plasm is nnbiokon 
through the whole line of propagation. This is Woismann’s 


810 आ) SIX CBNLRLS AND ‘LUD SLR IND POWFR 


doctrine of ‘continuity of the germ plasm,’ which has 
been widely accepted, though 1 is but an hypothesis,” 

[7 a subsequent postscript the Professor wrote * 

“1 Shakti being cither static or dynamic, ovory 
dynamic form necessarily presuppuses a static background, 
A purely dynamic activity (which 18 motion 1 its physical 
aspect) is impossible without a static support or ground 
(Adhara), Hence the philosophical doctrine of absolute 
motion or change, as taught by old Ileraclitus and the 
Buddhists and by modern Bergson, is wrong; it 18 based 
neither upon correct logic nor upon clear intuition, ‘The 
constitution of an atom reveals the static-dynamic polari- 
sation of Shakti; other and more complex forms 01 exist- 
ence also do the same, In tho living body this necessary 
static background is Muladhara, whero Shakti is Kundaly 
coiled. All the functional activity of the body, starting 
from the development of the germ-cell, 1s correlated to, 
and sustained by the Shakti concentrated at, the Mulidhira, 
Cosmic creation, too, ending with the evolution of Prithivi 
Tattva (it 18, howover, an tnonding process in a difforont 
sense, and there perhaps Henri Bergson, who claims that 
the creative impulse is over orginal and resourceful, is 
right), also presupposes a cosmic static background (ovor 
and above Chidakasha—ether of Consciousness), which 19 
the Mahakundah Shakti in the Chinmayadoha (body of 
Consciousnoss) of Parameshvara or Parameshvan (the 
Supreme Lord in male and female aspoct). Tn tho carliost 
stage of creation, when the world arises only as a mist m 
Divine Consciousness, it requires, as the principle or pole of 
Tat (That), the correlate prmerple or pole of Aham (J); in 
the development of the former, the latter servos as the static 
background. In our own exporiences, too, ‘ apperception * 
or consciousness of self is tho sustaining background 
—a string, so to say, which holds together all tho loose 


HUPORLUGAT BAS 5 0 111५ YOCA 311 


beads ol our clemonts of fooling The sustaining ground 
or Adhira, as the scat of static force, therefore 18 found, 
in one form or other, यो overy phase and stage of ercative 
evolution. Tho absolute or ultimate form is, of course, 
Chit-Shakti (Conscio.sness as powor) itself, the wileiling 
hght of awareness about which om Gayatri (Mantra) 
says: ‘Which sustains and impels all tho activities of 
Budd.’ This fact 18 symbolised by the Kali-muti: not 
a mere syinbol, however. 

*9, My romarks about the rising or awakening of the 
Serpent Power at the Muladhara have been, perhaps, 
almost of tho wature of a paradox. The coiled power, 
though awakened, uncoiled, and msing, nevor really stirs 
from its place; only a sort of ‘ ethereal doublo’ or ^ oject’ 
is unloose. and sent up throngh thy system of centres, 
Now, m plain languago, this cbhoroal doi ble or oyect means 
tho dynamic eqtivalont of the static power coucar trated at 
the Mula, or root. Whenevor by Pi iriyama of Bijamantra, 
or any othor suitable means, tho Mtiladhara becomes, hko 
an cloctro-magnotic machine, oversatmated (though the 
Kundah Shakti at tho Mula is infinite and oxhaustloss, yet 
the capacity ol a given finile organism to contain it in a 


static form 18 linnted, and therctoro thore may ho over- ' 


saliation), a dynamic or operative cqmvalont of the static 
power 18 set up, possibly by ‰ law similar to Nature’s law 
of induction, by which the static power itself is not deplet- 
ed or rendered other than static, It is not that static 
energy at the Miila wholly passes ovor into a dynamic form 
tho coiled Kundal loaving the Mula, thus making it a 
void; that cannot be, and, wero iL so, all dynamic operation 
in the body would cease directly for want of a backgiound. 
The coiled powor romains coilod or static, and yet something 
apparently passes out of the M Ua—viz., tho dynamic equi- 
valent. This paradox can perhaps be oxplained in two ways: 


812 IHp SIX OPNERLS AND THE SLRPINL POW 'R 


‘ (4) One oxplanation was suggested in my main 
letter The potential Kundalh Shakti becomes partly 
converted into kinetic Shakti, and yot, sinco Shakti, ovon 
as given in the Miila-centre, is an infimtudc, ib 18 not 
depleted: tho potential store always 1omaing nnexhanstod. 
J referred to a passage in tho Upanishad abu w Prima, Tu 
this case, the dynamic equivalent is a pattial conversion of 
one mode of energy into another. In Laya-yoga (here 
described) 1# 18 ordinarily so. Whon, howevor, the infinite 
potential becomes an infinite kinetie—whon, thet 18 to say, 
the coiled power at the Mula becomes absolutely uncoiled 
—we have necessarily tho dissolution of the three bodies 
(Sthula, Langa, and Kirana—gross, subtle, causal), and 
consequently Videhamukti (bodiless liberation), because 
the static background in relation to a particular form of 
existence has now wholly given way, accord ny ta our 
hypothesis. But Mahikundal remains; henco individual 
Mukti (liboration) nocd not mean dissolution of Samsara 
(transmigrating worlds) itself. Commonly, however, as 
the Tantra says, ‘Pitva pitva punah pitvii,’ ete. 1 

५ (¢) The other explanation is suggested by tho law 
of induction. Take an electro-magnetic machine ;* if a 
suitable substance be placed near it, it will induco in it an 
eqtivalont and opposite kind of olectro-magnetism * without 
losing its own stock of energy In conduction, cnorgy 
flows over 11010 another thing, so that tl 6 801 rea loses and 
the other thing gains what it has lost, and its gain is 
similar in kind to the loss. Not so induction. hore the 
gource does nol lose, and tho induced enorgy 18 equivalent 
and opposite in kind to the inducing energy ‘hus a 


1“ Having drunk, having diunk, hiying again drunk, # pasarge 
w the Kalarnave Tantra signifying not actual dimlig (as some 
suppose), but repeated raising of Kundali ii 

2 We may say “Take a magnet’ and “ magnotism ५, 


* ORLJLOAL BASLS O1 11118 YOGA 318 


positive charge will induce an equivalent negative chargo 
in a noighbomung object. Now, shall we suppose that the 
Muladhara, when 16 becomes over-sati ratod, induces in the 
neighbouring centro (say, Svadhishthina) a dynamic (nob 
static) equivalont?! Ts this what the 1180 of the Serpent 
Power roally means? The explanation, [ am vempted to 
think, 18 not perhaps altogether fantastic.” 

Tn reply to tas lughly interesting and illustrative 
account of my friend, T wrote suggesting some difficulties 
in the way of the acceptance of his stateront that Kun- 
dali-Shakti did not, in fact, Horself uncoil and ascend, 
but projected upwards an cmanation in tho hkeness of 
Her own self. Tho difficulty I felt was this: Tn tho first 
place, the Yoga books, to which full credence must be 
given in this mattor, uneqmvocally affirm that Kundali 
[मडल does, in (ला) ascond. This is vorne ont by some 
inquiries mado of a Mante k Pandit vory fami with his 
Shastra? after tho recoipt of the lolter quoted. As tho body 
of tho Yogi still livos, though in an inert corpse-like condi- 
tion, when consciousness of it is 1086, L asked him how tho 
body was sustained whon Kundah loft Lor cential abode. 
Ths answer was that it was maimtained by the ucctar which 
flows from tho union of Shiva and Shakti im tho Sahasrara, 
This noctar 1s an ejection of powor generated by their 
union, If Kundali does nct ascend, but a meio emanative 
spark of Hor, how (ho s1ther asked) is iv that the body 
becomes cold and corpse-like? Would this follow il the 
power still :emainod at its centre, and moroly sent forth a 
dynainie equivalont of itself? There woro furthor difficulties 


1 Here is the sont of tho fist moving, ot Pashyanti Shabda 
2.Thougl nob practising himself, lis brother, from whom 10 had 
1901116, was en adept in this Yoga 1119 statoments T have nlwaya found 
of peculiar valnc. 1४ must, 1७४०९०1, be ramombered that, howaser 
learned ०1 practised a Pandit o1 Yogi may be, it is possible for him to be 
ignonent of the soiwntific implications of Ins doctiine aud practice 
40 


314 THL sIX CENERDS AND INN SERPEND PowhR 


in the theory put forward by my friend, thongh it may be 
that there are also difficulties in tho acceptanco of the 
statement that the Miladhara is entirely depleted of the 
great power. I[ suggested that Kundah was the static 
centr3 of the whole body as a complete consciot इ organism, 
and that each of the parts of the body and their constituent 
cells must have their own static centros, which would 
uphold such parts and cells; and that tho hfe of the body, 
as a collection of material particles (from which the gencral 
organic consciousness as a whole was withdrawn), was 
sustained by the nectar which flowed trom Kundali Shakti 
when in union with Shiva in the Sahasrara. In reply, 
Professor P. Mukhopadhyaya dealt with the matter as 
follows : 

“ According to my presentation of the case, something 
—viz,, a dynamic equivalent or ‘operative double ’—is 
certainly sent forth from the Muladhira, but this basic 
centrc or seat 18 not deploted or rendered void of static 
energy 1 congequonce of that operation. The Mula (root), 
28 the seat of static or coiled power, can nevor be disponsed 
with, It is the sine qua non of all functions of the tmple 
body (gross, subtle, causal). It is, so to say, tho buffer or 
base against which any activity of tho diva (embodied 
consciousness) must react or recoil, like a naval or any 
other kind of heavy gun against its base or emplacement. 
Thus, while the dynamic or uncoiled Shakta ascends the 
axis, the static or coiled Shakti retains its place ab the 
Mula, and remains as the very possibilty of the dynamic 
upheaval. The ascending power is simply the dynamic 
counterpart of the static ground. To say that Kundah 
leaves its place and ascends is only {0 say that it ceases to 
be Kundah and becomes dynamic. ‘Ihe ascending power 
is therefore uncoiled or non-Kundali powor; it is the 
dynamic expression of the Kundah power. So far all can 


TITORLEICAL ^§ 8 OF 1178 YOGA 315 


agroo, But the quostion is: Is the Mula doplotod or 
deprived of all power (ospecially coiled powor) when that 
dynamical expression leaves 1 and ascends tho axis? Ts 
the dynamic oxprossion wholly at tho oxpense ol tl © static 
ground? Should the latter cease im order that the for mor 
may commonco ? 

“Heo, 1 think, 1 must answer in the negative. This 
a caso of powor leaving as well as remaming—leaving 
as dynamic and romaimimg as static; 118 the case of tho 
Kundah bemg uncoiled in one aspect or polo and romain- 
ing still coiled 1m another aspect छा pole. A paradox, 
perhaps, but, ke most paradoxes, it 18 hkoly to be (rne, 

“Ig seuiplural author ty, which, by-the-by, 1 hold in 
utmost reverenco, really challenged by this inter prota- 
tion? ‘Tho nature of the dynaime oquvalont and its 
relation 10 tho statte background have beon indieatod in 
the previous two communications, end [ neod noé dilate 
on them. { havo claimed throughout that the Muladhata, 
as the seat ol static (६.८. coiled) power, can nover bo 10n~ 
dered ५ vacuum in rolation to such power except in the 
circumstances of Vidohamukti (bodiless liberation), when 
the triple body (gross, subtle, causal) must dissolve, I 
think, also, that the point of view which you havo taken can 
be reconcilod with this intorprotation of tho matter. ‘he 
Kundali Shakti is the statie aspect of the life of the wholo 
organised body, as you say rightly. ‘Che relation betweon 
the hves ol tho individual colls and that of the whole 
organism is not cloarly undoistood in scionce. Is tho com- 
mon life a merely mechanical rosultant of tho lives of the 
individual cells, or are tho livos of tho individual cells only 
detailed manifestations of tho common life ? In othor words, 
18 the common hfe cause and the coll-hvos effects or vice 
versa? Science is not yot sottled on tus point, As ४ sub- 
scriber to the Shaktivida (doctrine of Shakti) I am inclined, 


316 १८४ SIX ODNIRES AND LH SURPDNE POWDR 


however, to give primacy’ to the common life; in the germ. 
cell itself the common hfe is givon m substance, and the 
whole development of the Jivadcha (Jiva body) 18 only the 
detailed carrying out in particulars of what has been 
already given in substance, according to tho principle of 
Adrishta (Karma), Nevortheloss, [ am quite willing to 
conced3 to the individual cells hives of somi-independonce, 
‘Semi,’ because they requiro to be sustained to a consider- 
able degree by the hfe of the whole = Benefit or injury to the 
life of the whole reacts on the condition of the ९५18 ; tho 
oath of the whole life is followed by the death of tho cells, 
and 80 on. 

“Now, in every cell there is, of courso, statiy-dynamic 
polarity ; in tho wholo organism, also, thore is such polarity 
or correlation. In the whole organism the static pole or 
correlate is the cviled power ab tho Mulidhurs, and the 
dynamic correlato is the operative power (the five Pranas 
४2 , Prana, Apiina, Samana, Udina, and Vyana), which 
actually carries on the vaiious functions of tho body, 
Ordinarily, therefore, this dynamic power is distributed over 
the whole body, vitalising nol morcly the largor tissues, but 
the microscopic colls. Now, the dovitalisation (ns you say) 
of the body in Kundahyoga or Shatchakrabheda 18 due, T 
venture to think, not 10 the depletion or privation of the 
static power at the Mwadhara, but to the concentration or 
convergence of the dynamic power ordinarily diffused over 
the whole body, so that the dynamic equivalen. which is 
set up against tho static background or Kundah Shakti 18 
only the diffused fivefold Prina gathered home—withdrawn 
from the other tissues of the body and concontrated in ४, 
1116 along the axis. Thus ordinarily the dynamic equivalent 
is the Prina diffused over all tho tussucs; in Yoga it 18 
converged along the axis, the static eqmvaloent or Kundali 
Shakti enduring in both cases. ‘Thus also the polarity or 


[111 0111 1041 BASES O1 । 11४ YOGA 317 


correlation is maintained: m tho formor case between 
Shakti at Mulidhara and he diffused Prana; in tho lattor 
caso belwoen Siakti ab Mila and the converged Prina 
along the axis. ‘This will perhaps adequately explam 
coldness, iucreased inertia, msenstbility, ctc., of the rest 
of the body m Kunaa Yoga o: wluch you waite. Con- 
monly in Yoga this withdrawal and convergence of Pr ina 
is incomplete; tho residual Prana, together with the hves 
of the cells, keeps the body alive, though mert or corpse- 
like. In tho case of complote withdrawal and tocussing, 
the colls will dio and the body disintog rato. 

On the other hand, i tho coiled power were simply 
and wholly uncoilod (५.५ dynamised) in Kundah Yoga, 
then there should be an oxcess rather than a delect ol 
vitahty all over the body; nothing would be subtracted 
from the alrcady avealable dynamme onergy ot the boty, 
but somothing would bo added to 1॥ on account of the static 
power at the Mula boing rendered kinotic, and go1ig up the 
axis and influencing noighLouing tissues. 

५ 1107100 £ should venture to conclude that the static 
power at tho base of the axis, without ilself bomg doploted 
ov rendered othor than static, induces or produces a 
dynamic oquivalont which is tho diffused Prana of the 
body gathered and eonyerged along the axis, The slates 
in the process may thus be summarily indicated ° 

“1. To begin with, thore 1s coiled power at the baso 
of tho axis and 108 necessaiy correlate, tho dynamic Prana, 
diftused all over the body in tho five forms, 

“2, In Kundali Yoga some part ot the alicady avail- 
able dynamic Priina is mado to act at the baso of tho axis 
im & suitable manner, by which means the base—~or par-~ 
ticularly the four-polalled Padma (lotus) which roprosents 
this centro—becomes over-saturated, and reacts on the 
whole difiused dynamic power (or Prana) of the body by 


818 ५४ SIX OLNIRES AND THE SIRPLNI 10 


withdrawing it from the tissues and converging it along 
the lina of the axis. In this way the diffused dynamic 
equivalent becomes the converged dynamic equivalent 
along the axis This is what tho rising of the serpent 
perhaps means. 

“ (1) In thus reacting, the coiled power has not lost 
its general eqtuhbrium or static condition. 

५ (ए) The modus operandi of this reaction is difficult to 
indicate, but 1 19 probably (as suggested im my provious 
communications) either () a partial conversion of tha 
infinite coiled power into the soit of influence that can 
thus gather the diffused Prana, and converge it in its 
own resultant line along the axis, or (1i) an inductive 
actior, analogous to olectro-magnetic action, by which 
the Pranas are collected and converged. Jn tls latter 
case thore 18 no need for conversion of the static onergy. 
We shall have perhaps to chooso botwoen, or rather co- 
ordinate, these two explanations in understanding tha 
modus mpeand. In mathematical language, the diffused 
Prana 18 ४ scalar quantity (having magnitude, but no 
direction), while the converged Prana is a vector quantity 
(having both magmtude and definite direction), 

“Suppose, lastly, we are witnessing with a Divya- 
chakshn (inner eye) tha progress of Knndah Yogs ‘hore 
something hke condensed lightmng (‘Tadit) is memg from 
the Miladhara, ond gathermg momentum in going ap 
from Chakra to Chakra, till the consummation 18 reached 
at the Paramshivasthuna (abode of the Supremo Shiva), 
But look back, and behold the Kuwlakundalni is also 
there at the Mula coiled three times and a half round tho 
Svayambhu Linga She has left and yet romained or 
stayed, and is again coming back to Herself, Is not this 
vision supported by seriptual authority and the 
experience of the Yogi?” 


1 TORP ICAL BAS ५ OL HIS YOGA 319 


Putting aside detail, £10 main principle appears to bo 
that, when “ wakened,” Kundali Shakti onhor मण्णा 
(a as my fiiond suggests im [णा cyect) ceases to he a 
static power which susturs the world-conocioasness, the 
content of which is hold only so long as She “sleops,” 
and, when once sol in movomont, is diawn to that othor 
84016 contro in the thousand-petalled lotus (Sahasiarza), 
which is Tlerself in union with the Sliva-consciousness, or 
the consciousness of ecstasy boyoud the world of forms. 
When Kundali “sleeps” man is awake to this world. 
When Sho “awakes” ho sleops—that is, loses all con- 
sciousness of the world and entors his causal body In 
Yoga he passes beyond to ormloss Conscionsnoss. 

I have only to add, without Lurther discussion of the 
point, that practitionors of this Yoga claim that it is 
higho. than any obhor,! and that tho Samadhi (ecstasy) 
attainod thoreby 18 more porfocb. ‘Tho 1cason which they 
allogo is this: In Dhyanayoga oustusy takes place through 
detachment from the world and montal concontiation, 
leading to vacuity of mortal operation (Vritti), or the 
uprising of pure Consciousnoss unhindered by the hmita- ) 
tions of the mind? Tho dogreo to which this unvoiling 
of consciousness is offocted depouds upon the meditative 
powers (dnanashakti) of the Snadhaka and the oxtent of 
his detachmont from the world, On tho other hand 
Kundali, who 1५ all Shaktis, and who is therefore Jnina- 
shakti itsolf, produces, whon awakened by the Yogi, full 

1 do not sny eithor that this is admitted o that itisatact Only 
he who has bad both tiue spritual oxpertonce and has beon through 
this Yoga can say. FY moicly hoo stato the facts Seo the criticism, 


ante, at p 277, Another 15 porhaps suggested by the distinchon madam 
the Buddhist Tantras botween natural and itilicial Samadhi. 

2 What, [ boheve, the Christ en Scientist calls the “mortal mid ’. 
In Tndian doctiine mind 18 a temporal and lmted mamifcstat'on of tho ८ 
unlimited otornal Consciousuess As tho states ae diflerent, two terms 
are better Lhan one, 


(मः 


820 AN. SIX OEBNIRLS AND LHD SERPTYL 0५1 


Jnana for him. Secondly, in the Samadhi of Dhyana Yoga 
there is no rousing and umon of Kundah Shakti, with tho 
accompanying bliss and acquisition of special powers 
(Siddln). Further, in Kundah Yoga there is not moroly a 
Samadhi through meditation, but through the central 
power of the Jiva, a powor which carries with प, the forces 
of both body and mnd. ‘he union in that sense 1s claimed 
to be more complete than that enacted through mental 
methods only ‘Though in both cases bodily consciousness 
is lost, m Kundali Yoga not only the mind, but the body m 
so far as it is represented by 1४8 central power (or, may bo, 
its eject), is actually united with Shiva. This union pro- 
duces an enjoyment (Bhukti) which the Dhyainayogi doos 
not possess, Whilst both tho Divya Yogi and tho Vira 
Sadhaka have enjoyment (Bhukti), that of tho former is 
infimtely moro intonse, bomy an experionee of Bliss itself. 
The enjoyment of the ४118 Sadhaka is but a reflection of 
it on the physical planc, ४ wolling up ol the true 
bliss through tho deadening coverings and trammols of 
matter, Again, wluist 1) is said that both have hberation 
(Mukti), this word 14 used in Vira Sadhani in a figurative 
sense only, indicating a bliss which 24 the nearost approach 
on the physical plane to that of Mukti, aud a Bhava or 
feeling of momentary union of Shiva and Shakti which 
ripens in the higher Yoga Sadhana into tho literal lboeration 
of the Yogu. Ile, in its {nllest anc literal sorsc, has both 
Enjoyment (Bhaktt) and Liberation (Mukti). {10०८५ its 
claim to be the mperor of all Yogas 
Howover this may be, I loave at this point the subject, 
with the hope that others will continue the inquiry L have 
here initiated, It, and other matters in tho Tantra Shistra, 
seem to me (whatever be their inhorent value) worthy 
of an investigation which they have not yet received. 
"नः Ay A. 





PLATE 5. 


DESCRIPTION OF THE SIX 
CENTRES 


(SHATOHAKBRA NIRUPANA) 


Proroanary Vnesi 


Now I speak of tho first sprouting shoot (of tho Yoga 
plant) of complote vealisttion of the Brahman, which 
is to be achieved, according to the Tantras, by moans of 
the six Ghakras and so forth in thoi propor order. 


८11 /॥ 0 


^ We alone who has beco ne avquaimtod with the wealth ! of the 
six Lotuges? by Maha-yog 15 ablo to explain the पान principles 3 
thoreof, Not evan the most excellent among the wise, nor the 
oldest (in exporione), 15 able, withoul the morcy of the Guru, 4 to 
explain the inner pic ples iclating to the s x Lotusos, replete 
as thoy are with tho greatness of Sha, Sa, and Ika “5 

Now, the very morcilal Purminanda Sviim, wishful to rescue 
tho world sunk m the mie ol musory, takes that task upon 


1 Paichila-shad mbhoja-vibhayva, 

2'That 18, the Shat-chakea, six contics, which mo+ Milidhara 
Svadhishthana, Man‘pura, Aniihata, Vishuddha and Ajna 

3 Antas-tattve~—2 ¢, relating to tho shaé chakra 

4 Korpa-natha, lod of Meroyze, tha Guin, 

5 Sha, Sa, Ha, Sha—Linil Liberation, Sa—Knowledyo Ha— 
Supreme Spirit , also Brahmi, Vishnu, and Shiva, respectively 

i 


THE SIX CEN परऽ AND LITE SPRPPNL POWFR 


himself. [He does so to gmde Sadlakas,! to mmpart Tabtiya- 
jnina? which loads to Erbeintion, and also with the desu of 
sperking ol the पाछा ० = Sundal पा + tl tho sin C melas 4 

“Now” (Atha) —he force of this pear ide as to show tle 
connection of this book with the Authors wark entatled Shi + 
tattv -chintimami, the first five car pters o which deal wth tie 
rites and practices proininatry to Shaf-c vianwupara १ In this 
book he speaks of tho fsb 8} oot of the realise tron ol tho Brahman 

Paramananda (Supreme Bhss) means Brabman, Who, says 
साप्य, ५ “Dtoaid (Nityan) ard knowledge (प्राप्या) a d 
Bhes (Aranda n)”. 

© Following the Tantras” (Jautiant saiena)—t 6.) following the 
authority of the Santras 6 

“Fast sproutmg ehoot” (Piathammgkuia) ue, the first 
steps which lead to realisation of the Brahman. I'he first canse 
of such realisaton is achieved by knowledge of the six Clakras, 
the Nadis, snd so forth, whieh ag the Tntt ca Yoga Sadhana, 

“Conplete realisation” (कषा एषि) ‘he Sanskut wod n eans 
“accomphshmont”; here, 18 the accomplishmor t of Ue immedi- 
ate experie bal iealisition of the Biah nan & 

न Achiwved by means of the sa Chakras avd other things” 
(Shat-chakiadi-k mmo gata)—te, attained by 9 meditating on the 


1 Those who pr tise Sadhana, ० spnitual discipline ; 1 ore aspire nts 
fo. Yoga 

2 Tattvea joana=Biahma-jnana, or Biahmai -knowledgo 

3The Devi as Shabda Brahman (Shabda brahmi supa Kundalim, 
v 2, post) m the world of the body (Pindanda), ० Kshadra-brahmanda 
(microcosm) 01860 10 deser bes Wer as Sho who maimtaing all 1 0118 
in the world by inlalation and ककष Unmamnfcsicd ^ soanc ” 
agstimes the form of Kundali im the animal body (५१, 10, 11) 

4 Malad ima, ete 


$ Shat chakra vituparn = कषा प्रण, imyestigation, scettamment 
into, and of, the six Chakins 1118 forms the sixth chapter of Purvi: 
nando s Shri tativa-chintamam, 

6 In which 1s to be found a detailed descatption of tho p ०९९५ here 
desembed, known as Shat-chahii-bheda, or piercing of the 8 x Chrkias 

T Lhe “nerves,” 01 channels of energy (soo vy 2) Nadi is dorived 
fiom the 1006 nad, ‘motion ” and means a chai nel (Vivain) 

8 Biahma-sakshatkara-rupa-mshpattih 

9 * Attained by.” ‘This is Udgaia, which htevally means “ sprung 
ont of” o1 ५ ap outed ont of”, 


DIMSORI LION OL THI SIX ( NIRS 3 


six Chak as, एष्ट  Muladhaiy, Svidhiwhthana, कणिका) Anahata, 
Vishuddha, and Agni and oti thiigs,t cz . or Lhe Nadi, the 
Linggas,? tho five [36 nents! Shiva, Shakti, ete., co mected with 
the six Chakras, in their oder, 

She ord (Kramn) is, first, meditation on them, next 
avakening of Kiet, and Ta passage .o the [नागा lotus 
and then Ile: ieturn therefiom, the union of Shiva and Shakti, 
ete , and so foith 

“Order (Kvama) by whch at is attamed, and this as tho 
same as Yoga pract ce 

Ihe Antoior 11 substance says “TE spunk of the first step 
(A gkma) of bie pactce which is the Lust Cause ५ tho 
im nediate or experent ४ rcalisat on) of the Binal nan, bro wht 
about by a knowledge of the six Chukias, as is leid down in 
the ‘Tant as,” 


+ According to Shangkara, by ‘ other things” mo meant tho 
Sahasraia, oto, Mis Shangkuv hero and herealtor referred to 18 9 
commentator on this work, and uot the plulosophor Shangkariebaryya 

१ See nole 2, p. 9. 

9 Jn thioe of the Chakras wz, Syayambhu, Vana, and Ltara, 

4 Vyoma panchaka 

5 Brahmn-sakshat-kara, 


4 LH SIX CENIRLS AND LUD शोका POWPR 


1781, 1 


In the espace outside the Meru,’ placed on the left and tho 
right, are the two Shiras,? Shashi? and काण The Nadi 
Sushumna, whose substance is the thicefold Gunas,® 1s m 
the middle. She is the form of Moon, Sun, and Pine 3° 
Her body, a string of bloommg Dhustura’ flowors, oatonds 
from the middle of the Kanda* to the Head, and the Vajra 
inside Her extends, shining, from the Medhra’ to the 
Head 


ComMEni Any 


Now, Yoga hke that which 3 about to be spoken of cannot be 
achieved vithont ४ knowledge ot the six Chukaias and the Nadis, 
the Author therofore describes tho relat ve Nidie m this and the 
followmg two voisos. 

“In the space outsule” (Vahya-pi ७51 e) the two Nadis, 
Shashe and Mikua (Shash- minva 8311116 == 6116 two Nadis 01 Shiras, 
Shach: and Mihne) Shashi=:Chandra (Moon) ; Mihna-Suryya 
(Sun) ‘Theso two Nadis, which aro in the nate of the Moon 
and Sun, aie the Nadis, Ida and Pinggali. 


1 The epmal column 

224, Nadis 

3 Moon that is, the feminine, or Shakt-riipé Nady Ida, on the lelt 
4 Sun, or the masculme Nadi Pinggala, on tho right, 


5 Meaning either (४ post) the Gunas, Sattva Ra‘as, ancl Tamas , 
or, as ‘strings,’ the Nadi Sushumaé with the Nadi Vajra inside it, 
and the Nadi Chitrizi within tho Intter, 


6 That 18, as Chitria, Vajrini and इना 

7 Dhatwea fastuos 

8 The root of all tho Nadis (४, post), Kanda— Bulb 
9 Peme 

10 Chandrasvarupi and Suryyarupa 


DUbCRIPLION OF 11. SIN CENIELS 5 


“Meu” Ts w tle Mot danda, the backbone or spinal 
columt, axteidig froin the Mula (oot) or Muladha a to the 
neck = '‘his will be explored later, 

५ Placed on the left and the 1141 ८ = (Savya-daksho rsh wno). 

“These. tuo Nadis”— Ths Idv is placed on the left, and the 
Pinggele on that gllot the Mera” gaye the Bhata sheddhr fant a 
The Sammohans ‘Tantia! speaks of their hkeness to the Sun 
and Moon as tollows 

“he {dv Nadi or the left is pale, aid is n the niture of the 
Moon * (Chandiasva dpi) ५ ८ is the Shakt -rapa Devi, and 
the very embodinent of nectar (Amita-v g thi) 01 ther ght 
18 the nagculiie Pnggala, in the uatu ५ of the Sui Sho, the 
great Dovi, 8 Rud atonka,s and is lustrous icd like प्र ५ filamenta 
of the pomegranate flower ” 

These two Nadis go upward singly from the Muli (ie, Maly 
dhaia), and, having ieached the Ayia Chalia, proceed to the 
nostrils 

The Yanala says: “On ats (re, ६16 Mern’s) left and ught 
are Td and Pinggala, Those {wo go shaghb up, albe nating 
fiom lett to right and right to left, and, haviiy thus gone round 
all the Lotuses, those engpicious ones procead to the nostrils.’ 

The above passage shows the twofold and diffaimg posi- 
tions of the two Nadis, ‘hey go upward alte nating from left 
to mght and right to left, and gomg 19 ind tho Lotuses (Padme) 
they form a plut aud go to the nostrils. 

Ksewhore tiey aia deserioed as beng paced lice bows 
“Know that the two Nats Idi and Pinggala ove shoped hke 
bows ” 

4१8५४ ; “Sho who is comec ed willl tne Icft scrotum 18 
umted with the Sushumra, and, passng nea by the nght 


Ch iv,S 6 The seventh yerse, which ५ not gnoted by the 
Commentator runs ‘[nside tho Mera १) 9 who extends f om tho 
Mila to the placo of Brahman as tho fiery Sash ima, bho vory अर्णा of 
all knowledge.” 

2 Of Rudrayiimala, Ch. XXVIL, v 51 

3Shakuiaupi the Deyi as bhakti or ‘female’. 

4 Rudritmika—thvt is, of the natwo of Ridivor ‘mile’ 

§Pissage is fiom Prapinchasarr (Vol ITL, Tantrik Texts), Oh I, 
vy, 81, 82 Thore 18 a variant roading nadiki for nasika, 


0 1 + &§ + 0 NIRPS AND TT 841 प Cow ए 


shoulder omt, rcmains bent | रण a bow by tho heart, and dav g 
reached the left shonlder-jomt passes ७) to the nose. करका) 
She thal comes 1101 th right राता 1) pisses on to tio left 
ता. + 

These two Nadw wluch cone frou the left and tiglt scrotam, 
when they 1८६८1 tho space betwee ‘he eycbrows, whe with 
the Suskumra a plated hnot of Unce (विष्ठा) ind p oveod to 
the nostri १. 

Iley me aso this desertled “Tn ) tdv 1५ tho Dov 
Yamin काते 1 2 1 हट] ॥ 1 Sa वक्फ andra Sisko na dwells 
Ganga} /। ey fo nov thicefold ple? ied t the root of 
the Dhy jus (४ sesuae ब tly eyebrows, ait ho ५ tas 
called Thivens yoga, aad bathing trere fy rods प एवमा frat” 

“WT ose substance is the threcfold Gunas’? ( १1 aya guna- 
may!) —The compound word ero used 1१ capable cf ditterent 
Intel pretations. Readng Guna to mean “a ett ng,” ib would 
mean “mado np of three stings ’—~viz, 819 प्रो, Vita and 
Chitran.® ‘These thea form ono, but consid ned supra ely tl ey 
mie distinct If Gunw be read to mean qua by,” then 16 would 
mean ‘ possessed of the qualtogs Saliva, Rajis and ‘ana १५, 
Now, the substanco of कापा) 19 Sativa (batt vegies amayr), of 
Vijia, Ragas, tad of & shunina, ‘bo mis 

“Ts in the muldie” (Midhye) 1९, m the middt ५1 riside 
the Meru 

“Sho who sinside the Meru fio ithe Mtli to the egion of 
the Biahma-rand ua,” ete. 


1Summohana Tantra Ch Tl, 13 thas ‘ht 3 1 1५ the Deyi 

Jsbvevs, ccd Yamin som P ngendy ard Sarsevab® sor Star a 
all names of Indian siered 11८18 

2 Ph s an also inter proted to mean Lhat the th oa Nadis conjou at tho 
thee Granthis Biahma granthi Vishau-giarth: and Rudia-granthi, 

3 The pens 

4By “bathing there, cte, im tho “rivas’ s ment, when tho 
mind is suffuscd with a full cnowledge of this Chakra grout benefit a 
thereby attained 

5 Suchun ra is the outermost shoath, and Ohitri the mnetmost, 
and within Chitiia is Brahmanad , the chamnel alorg which Kandali 
goes. 

®Sammohana Tantia, II, 7, also ocourg m Ch. XXVIL, v, 52, of 
Rudrayimala 


DUSCRIPIION OL 4111 SIX तश्चा 118 7 


Yep uaesu esariiche nya प्त, “Sie who 1s within the 
hollow of tha andi, exterd uz ron tie lewd tothe Adhea” 
(06, Mulad} aa), aud ५0 for h. 

Sone porsors vely on tic folownig pissige of the ‘ant a 
chuda nani, and wge that ib slows that the जाश कत is 0119 de 
the 21५0 0 Shiv, on the Jelbo 91113 placed ॥ 6 Nadi Ida, 
the Moou-noctar, and on tsig + 0० Si-hke > ggudi Ortside 
it (Itud-vahye) 1 पात्‌ betwee 1 these two ( च 01 nadhye) 5 the iery 
Sushume.” 

But this 1s merely the गाला of these persors Our Author 
speaks (10 the followin g sarse) of the Lobases riside the Mera; ind 
as the 9 hu nna supports these 8 10 must neads be withti the Mow 

“Foon of Muon, Sun, and Poe” (Crandia-suiyyagm iupa), 
—Chitiim is pale, and 18 the form ol the Moon, णपा is Sunhke, 
and hence has the Instie of tie flauents of the pomegranate 
flower; Sushumna is fiory, and hence red. The Bhitas पवता 
Tantra, in desoubing the Susraria, sepports hese th ee desu p+ 
tions Sushumma 1५ the outermost and (वा tha innermost, 

“Inside it, ab a hog t of two द्वण bicudth, 9 Viz a, ud 
so is Ghitrint, hence ib 18 tl ५ Sushi ava as वुप1 एय, sho 14 
tremulous liko a passionvte woman, she is tho ecoplac 6 of 
the thieo Gunas, Subtva and others, and the very forn of Moon, 
Sun and Lie.” 

© Hom the maddle of the Kanda to the Head ? (Kandamidhy 101 
chhnahstha).—Kanda is the ३०८॥ of all the Nadis 10 09 spoken 
ot as fol ows: ‘Iwo fingers above tho ar us and ५४० # 1४८13 below 
the Median? 19 the Kanda-mult, m shape like a bnd’s egg, aid 
fom fingers’ broadth im extont ‘The Nadis, 72,000 m nu पाता, 
emanate fom it’? Vhs Naidis come out ol this Kanda 

Shiakstha (placed n the h.ad) + By this 1s to be unde stood 
thab sho ends m tho middle of the Lows o twolve putals which 
18 nea the pericarp of the Sahasi tre, hiunging downwards in the 


1 Tad-vahyo be into: preted 10 mean outside these two, then ts 
apparent contridiction ww remover | ‘Tadvahyo 8 for ued eitho by 
Tasya valiye or Tayo. valiyo, if (10 litte , then tie meantig would bo 
outside the two ‘Those who rely upon th s pagsige १५५ Licevaryo as 
equal to Tasya vahye, 

2 Voynni vayra, 

3 Medhin poms. 


8 SN GOIN ॥ 8 AND UL SER INT 10४ ६ 


head Sce tle जलाद्‌ verse of > प्तप र panchika + | adore the 
twelve-petalled Lotis that 1५ the crown of tle Nudi aloig the 
channel (Randlna) ! within which 1 ५ Kundilt passes.” 

As the Gh 111 eids tere, 16] Contamer, Sushinin , also ends 
here. If it be [पगला to mean thas she exists above the Salias ara 
then thee a. be. cont .dict.on .0 the १९७९१ ptio. 1. ths fortieth 
veise, where the Sahasimia is spoker of as ^ shining in vacant 
space” (Slinyadeshe prakasham), Tf Sushumna passes over it, 
there ९९ 1 be no vacant spree, 

‘here ar some who contend that all tho three Nadis Ida, 
Pinggala, and Sushurma—me inside the Meu, and quote the 
following as ther authority fiom the Nigama-tativa-10 “The 
thiee Nadis wae said to be inside the Mei 1,11 tlo middle of the 
back” But tlus cannot be; all the T'antras say that tre Ida and 
Pinggala aie ००686 the Mein, and on the authority of these out 
Author speaks of then bemg outside the Meri, कपा] er, if they 
we 6 inside tlo Mein they could not be bow-shaped and touch tho 
hip and shoulder jomts. ‘he N gaina-lattva-sura by the “ three 
Nadis” apparently means Sasvkumni, Vapa and Chitin, and nol 
Idi, Pmggala and Sushumnn, 

“The position of the Sushumné from tho Muladhara to the hoad 
ig thus desciibed ^ कपप govos forwad, chnging lke ५ 
Chavya-cieepor ? to the Meru, and reaching the end of tha neck, 0 
Beanteous Ore, she emerges and deflects, and, supporting } evself 
ou the stalk of the Shaigkhim,! goos towards tho rogion of 
Brahman (Bivh na-sadana) ” 

Also क. ` “ Lhe other two aro placed hke bows, St shu nei 18 
the embodiment of P anava,4 emeiging { om the backbone, she 
gous to the fovencad Paselg between the wyebrows wid uawed with 
Kundali, she with her mouth ® approaches the Biahma-randhra.” 


1 This channel or passage within Chitri is Brahinanadi 

2 Lehanthera Apetala (Colebiooke s Amaia cosha) 

१ Nach of that name ८ post. 

4 Pranavakriti—the mantia Ong ‘This mevns that Pranavea mam 
feats as the Sushumna 

5 Devi Kundalini, ५ ante 

9 Tle: mouth has neaied the Biahmaandhra ‘Tho locative hare 18 
Samipye saptami—tl at 18, locative m sonav of provim'ty  Suskumnit 
does not actually reach Brahmuandhra bat goes now it, ending near 
the twelve petalled lotus Cf ए 1, Padukapanchake 


Dust UPON O LES SIX धाद tS 9 


By this १ becomes app uent tha, the backbone extonds to the 
ond of the १८९ of the neck 

Supporting Lersoll on the stall of Shangkhim ” (Shingkhim- 
nilam alunbya) Shangkhini ¢ thus deseubed 

शष्ट 1४ said तद्या क्षा and Kaha me on either side of 
उप्र, Gaidhui and ffitipoava win are on ther git aid 
left of Ida,” 

And again. “ Betweon Gaidhan and Sarasvati 1५ Shangkhim 
The Nadi van ed Shangkhini goes to the left car.” 

And also aga un: “Shangk! m,e पाषा ठ fron the hollow of the 
thioat, goes ob] quely to the forghead, and then, 0 Ambika,! प्रा ited 
with and twisted round Chitti she thereafter passes to the hoad ” 

1५1८५ she (Shangkhimt) stats tom Kanda-mul., proceeds 
botween Sarasvati and Gindhun and reaches the throat, and then 
one of her branches proceads obhiquoly to the lelt au and the other 
goes to the top of the head, 

“ Vajre msde Her” (Mudhyamo ’syah) = ५.0, mside Sushumna. 

hore ave some who contond that the Meru danda oxte ids 
from the feet to tie Brahma व ताक and quote m support the 
following passage from Nig umastativa-st a: The bony staff which 
goes tom the foot? to the उक प्रोच-1४ त्‌] 1 is oa led the Wor r- 
dana of the fourteen Lokas.” 

But the backbono 18 tlo spinal hone (Meru-danda) — It 
oxtonds from the Mula-kanda to the end of the back of the neck. 
This 18 solf-ovident, and no cathority can alter things which ५1९ 
patent, Moreover, tt 1s impossible for ono p aco of bone to go to 
the end of the fool, for thou the legs could not be beut or stretched, 
The Mein therefoie does uot go below the Mula (Maladhaa). 
The mean.ng of the pessige fiom tha N gama-tittynssiina boc mes 
olear if we rend Pada to moan “log,” and not “foot” “ Begining 
of the pada” (Padadi) would then moan “whee the legs 
begin” ‘The sense would thon be that the bone which controls the 
whole body fiom the feet righ. up to the head 1s the Meiu-danda, 
which 15 hke a stiok, and begins from the penis two fingers dreadth 
above the Mula-kanda, The Bhutashnddhi Tanta says. “ Within 
it and two [हुलक bioadth above it are Vaj a aud Chitin.” 


4 Mothea,' a title of the Dovi 
2 Padad: Lit beginmng of the pada, » post 
42 


10 LHD SIX OLNIRLS AND 111, 91 RPLNL ठक 


Visi 2 


Inston 101 1 19 Clitrint, who 14 lustrous with the ] istre of 
the Pranava® and attainable in Yoga by Yogi. She 
(Chitin ) is subtle as a spider’s thicad, and pierces all the 
Lotuses which are placed within tho backbone, and is pure 
imtelhgenre.’ She (01011001) is beautiful by reason ot those 
(Lotuses) which are strung on her Inside her (Chitrin) 
is the Brahma-nadi,’ which extends from the orifico of 
the mouth of Uara® to tho place beyonc, where Ach- 
deva * 18. 


COMMLNIARY 
^ Inside Wer” (Laumidhye)—ve , mside Vajia 
“ Lustrous with the (1१416 of the Pranava ” (Pranava-vilasite), 
She absorbs the Innmous character of tho Pranava in Ajnit- 

chakia when she passes through it. Cf v 37, post 

¢ Like a spider's tiead” (Luta-tantupa neya).—Sho 1s fine hke 
the spider’s thie id, 

^ She {६५९९४ att the Lotuses,? et (suc aesaias yun mer i 
madhyantaia-sthan bhittva dedipyate)—She pierces tho pericarp 
of the six Lotuses, and shines hke a thiead strung with ge ns, 


1 ‘Lhat 15, inside र्वा wh eh is, agai, with 1) Suskumaa 

2 Tho Mantra “Om’. 

9 ShudIhabodhasvaupa = मि hei 1 तरा एतत्‌ Jnana by those 
who me pure (Shangkara) 

4The Biahmanadi 1 not a Nadi sep uate from Chitin but tho 
channel in the latter 

5 Shiva, hero the Svay wmbhu-hngga 


¢ The Puawa Bmdu_v 2b The Brahmarad rue hes the proximity 
of, but not the Adi dova H inself 


11811 PILON OF 1॥ SIN (10४ 11 


Thete is a passage qioled as from the fouth Kanda of the 
Kalpa-Sutra, and esplaiood 10 mean. “In tho hollow channel 
within Chitin? ao six Lotuses, and on the potals of these Ue 
Mahadevi 3hujangg move abcut (vih want) ” 

But this text, as it}as given ४ plual verb to Bh ywmggi! m 
the singnia, seoms to be incor cet = But it 16 be suid that 16 13 the 
word of Shiva, and (hab the plazal is used as 3 ngulan, it would 
then have to be understood thit the locwive in the phi 146 “in the 
channel within Chitin” 18 used ag un instinmental, and the 
correct meaning of tho passvge would in that case be “ that 
Bhujanggi goes along the channel withm Unt ini. And १५ She 
passoa m her upward movenont She prerees the Cha (105 aid 
moves about on the petals ot tho Chakias’? Or at may also nean 
“that Bhuj imggi goos along tie hollow of the Chitrim, and moves 
about on the peolals of the ४" Lotuses within Sushumny, a त 1 
length goos to Sahasritia ”. 

Fiom the above aatlority it 18 not to be concluded tha, the 
six Lotuses ae in the ho low o Cl item 

“Inside her” (an madhye).— Within Chituntis कोपा पवी, 
The word Ni here mows a channol (V vara), fb 18 derived trom 
tho 100६ Nad, 10601 ‘Tho word ष्णो nani: means the char rol 
by which ह पदो goes tion the Maladhara to the place ot 
Pavama-shiva. Kundaloy is 1 form of the Sl abda-Brah nan 
Fiom thie it is (लापो that the inside of Chitin is hollow, and 
there 13 no other Nadi inside her 

“Tho ortfica of tHe mouth of aa” ({ava-mukha-k hava) — 
The ०१८५ at the top of the Svayamb} u-l ngga m the Muladhaa 
Adideva 18 tho supieme Bindn m tho percmp of the thonsard 
petalled lotus 

The 1680 of the ९९18० requ es no expl mation 4 


Vat, “Serpent,” a uame of Kundal ni 

3 Vishvanitha, quoting fiom Maya Tantra, says thot all tho six 
lotuses are atlached to the Chitrin1 (Clnkivi-giathitang). 

3 Shabda-Biahmirupa Kundalini ‘he Shabdalahman (see 
Introduction) is the Ch utany vin all beings 

4Shangkara reads this verso in a slightly modified fom, but the 
meaning is practically the samo, ths modifications beimg of a verbal 
character only 


19 Ji} SIX GbNIRGIS AND 111 ५ २ NI 10411 


५.8 


81118 beautiful hke a ciain of hghtuing and 0110 lke a 
(lotus) fibre, and shines in the miids of the sages. She 
is extremely subth ; tho awakoner of pure knowledgo ; 
the embodiment of all Bhss, whose {ro native is puro 
Consciousness? Tho Brahma वणप shines in her mouth, 
This placo is the entrance to tho region spriikled by 
ambrosia, and 18 called the Knot, as also the mouth of 
Sushumua. 


COMMBNIARY 


By ‘hs Shloka ५८ 1५ further doscribed 

“ Wine like a (lotus) fibre and shines” (Linsab-ton,i-rupij)— 
ue, She 18 lunmous, albeit fina lio tho fibve in the lotus-stulle ; 
she shines beca we of tle presence of K dala 

न Hmbodiment of all bliss” (ouka asikl नाप) ~ Sukha 1 
here used as the equivalent of 2 2 पतेय, which noans Spiritual 
Bliss She 18 the source of al Bliss! 

^ Whose trus nature w pure conscrousnes ” (Shit ddhi-bodha- 
svabhive ) —Shuddha-bodha 18 ४५ praia, She whos Nature 5 
18 pure Consciousness, 


1 That is, Chitrim, the interior of which is called the Br पाकि, 

४ Shuddhe bodha-svabhava 

3 860 Commentary 

+ Because, accordrg to Vishvanath: She diops nectar, and there- 
fore contams all kinds of biss Shangkma says 16 18 also cvpable of 
the inte: fretation, “ It is blissful to all’, 

5 Svea bhava is interpreted by Kalicharann to mean one’s nature 
Shangkéia inteiprets the word to mean the Jnana which is tho Paia- 
matma, or, in other words, divino or spiritual Jnana According to 
Shangkara, the reading is Shuddba-bhava-svabhiva 


DLSORIPIION OL ‘LH SIX तारा प्रः 18 


© Brahma-dina” 1 18 the ontrance and exit of Kuadiuhm m 
her passage to and trom Shiva 

“Her mouth” (‘Tadasye) the month of Bishmanadi, the 
0110८68 in the mouth of Lara 

“This place” (Tndetat)—ee., the place near the entrance. 

५ {16 entrance ta tha region spronklad by anlirga” (S idhae 
dhaa-gamya pradesha) —Tho rogion which 1s spimkled by the 
ambrosin (Sudha) which flows from the union 2 ot Parama Shiva 
and Shakti, and which 15 attained by the help of Shiva and 
Shakti dwelling in tho Muladhara, 

^ Knot” (Granth -sthanan)—lle place of the nunio1 of 
Sushwmnt and Kanda 3 

Is called "—that 15, by those versed in the Agamas, 


1 Door of Brahman 
६ 2 Samarasya, a term which is ordinuily applied to soxual union 
(Stripungyogat yal saukhyang tat samarasyam)—here and elsewhe re, 
of course, used symbolically. 
9 The root of all the Nadis; 806 ९, 1 ante. 


14 1HD 87 OBNPRES AND गि70 81 त्रि एतषा 


$ (8; 4 


Now we come to the Adhara [011 8.1 It 18 attached to the 
mouth of the Sushumma, and is placed bolow the genitals 
and above tho anus, It has four potals of crimson hue. 
Its head (mouth) hangs downwards. On its potals are the 
four letters from Va to Sa, of the shining colour of gold. 


° ConMentARY 


Atter having described the Nadia, the Author describes the 
Mulédbara Ghakia in detail m nine verses begmning with the 
present. 

"It is attached to tle mouth of Sushumna” (Sushurrnisya- 
lagnam) ‘‘ho petals? aro on four aides of Lho place where the 
Kanda 3 and Sushumni meot 

“Below the genitals and above the anus” (Dhyajidho 
gudmddhvam).—TIiom below the 1001 of the gemtals to Suskumaa, 

^ Wour petals of crimson hue” (Chatuh-shonapatiam)—The 
four petals are 1ed m colour, Shona is the c:imson colour of the 
red lotus 

"On 9९ petels ave tha four letters from Va to Sa” (Va- 
kfradisantairyutam veda 4 -varnaih).—The fow letters aro Va, Sha 
(palatal), Sha (carebral), and ६४, 5 On each of tho petals of the six 


1'Lhat 18, Muladhara chakra, so called fiom its bog at the 1001 of 
the six Chakras, see hence to ए 12, post. 

2 See Introduction 

3V.p 7, ante, 

4Veda-varna Veda stands for “four” here are four Vedas, and 
the learned sometimes use the wad Veda to mean founr—-2e, the 
number of the Vedas. 


See Introduction 


DESORIPILON OL JHE SIX GENTRES 15 


Lotuses the letters of the alphabot are to be meditated upon, going 
round in a circlo fiom the right (Dakshinavmtent), Of Vishva- 
sua ‘Tantia’ “tho petals of tho Lotuses aro known to contain the 
letters of tho alpbabet, and should be meditated upon as written in 
a circle fiom the right to the left ” 


16 TE SIX ONNTRLS AND 117 31 पिः पै  POWLR 


Vins 3 


In this (Lotus) is the square region (Chakra) of Py ithivi, ! 
surrounded by eight shming spears, 118 of a shining 
yellow colour® and beautiful hke lightmng, as is also the 
Bija of Dhara + which 1s within. 


ComMENTARY 


In the pencarp of this Lotus is the squaie region of Prithiv, 
which is described in वलो. On the eight sides of the squue 
are eight shimng speais ‘Ihe 1egion 1s of yellow colour, 

Cf ©O Thou of Qulcet speech, in tho Miladhia 1५ the 
four-corn ned region of Dhaia, yellow in colom and surrounded 
by eight speais (Shila) liko Kulachalas ” 

Kulachala 18 by sone interpreted to mean tho bicast of 
४ woman, According (0 this view, the tips of these spears 
are shaped hke a woman’s beasts Others undeistand by the 
expression the seven Kula Mountains, 8 

Cf. Nnvana Tantia; “O Devi, the sevon Kala Mountins 
viz, Noilachala, Mandara, Chandra-shekhara, Himalaya, Suvela, 


1 Darth element, which 18 that of this Chakra The form of this 


tuttva is» quae, पि ct a 
2 The Ashéa shila are shown thus «| (+ 
ry. 


3 The colour of the earth clement which presides in {118 Ohakra 
Lach Tattya manifests the form, colour, and action, of 108 particular 
vibration ( 

4That is, the Baja of करव the earth पष or‘ Larg” See 
Intioduetion. 

5 Mahondro Maleynh Sahyak Shuktiman Rikshapatvatah 

Vindhyash cha Paripatiash cl a saptuite kulap परयत 
(quoted in Shabdastomomahanidht) Somo read Pariputiah in plice 
of Pampatiah Shangkara says that the spears nie hore because the 
Chakiais nhalnted by Dakimi, who 18 one of the givat Bhanavis 


VISORIPLION O° If 81 ODNIRGS 17 


Malaya and Suparvate—dwell in the fom corners,” According 
to this notion, tho eight कमम we hh ened to the seven Kula 
Mountains on Vath. 

© Pitan ४” (Mad-angke’ —Inside the 1agion of गधा 
(Dhadi-mandala) w othe Bijvof Hath mz,“ Lang”. This Bye 
1५ also of a yellow colom = ‘ie pling: “shining yellow colo ” 
(Lasat-pita vainn) 1s doserptive of the Bia also. So 1 has beon 
said , 

“Jngde 1b 1५ the Amdra Biya (Bija of Indin),! of a yellow 
colour, possessed of fom artis, holding the thunder im one hand, 
mighty? and seated on the लक] ant Airavate.’’? 


1 The Biya of India aid tho B a of uth mo the same 
४ Maha bahn, “posyossod of proat long aims” sign of prowoss. 
Of, Aj mu-lombita-buliu (arms reachit g the kneos), 
4The elephant of Ihdrv ‘Lins and other anmals fgwed in the 
Chakras donote both qualitios of tho ‘lative and bio Vohieles (Vahana) 
of the Dovata therem, Seo Introduction 
48 


18 HI SIX CBNLRPS AND 111 SIRPLNI POWLR 


Vow 6 


Ornavenl 0 with fow arms! and mounted on the King 
of Hlephants,? He carries on his lap? the elild Creator, 
resplendent lke the young Sun, who has four Instroug 
arms, and the wealth of whose lotus-face is fourfold ! 


Cowen LARY 


‘his is the Dhyana of tho Dhara Bya The Biya of Dhara ov 
12 111४1 is identical with that of Indra, 

On lus lap” (Tad-ingke) 26, in the Jap of Dharé Bra. 
The sense of this verse is that the Creator Biah na dwells in the 
lap of Dhaia Bya. By ‘ angka” (lap) 18 to bo understood the 
space within the Bindu of Dhma Biya. Cf. “tn tho Mulad ina 14 
the Dhma Bry, and im its Binde dwells Biah na, tho 1 nage ol ४ 
Child, and the King of the Lmmortals © ig mou od onan Dlephint.” 

The १८०४९ quoted passtge, 1b 18 ged, moms ^ the King of 
the Immoitals 19 पो the lap of Dhaai Bija” But ac vord'ng 
to om viow asthe Dhain Bij and the Indra [रा ॥ aro the sume, 
then idontity 18 here spoken of ; for it 19 also suid “ the letters of 
the Mantra aie the Devata; the Devata is m tho form ol the 
Mantra (Mantra-rupim).” 

Also cf. Nuvana ‘vantia: ^ 0 boauuiful one, the Indra Bija 1s 
below the genitals, ‘he very perfect and boantitul dwelliug of 
Brahma 13 above Nada, and thoro dwolls Brahma the Creator, ५ the 
Lord of creatures.” 


1 These two adjectival phinses qualify Dhan Bija. 

2 Aivavata 

3 That 18, the Bindu of the Bija (Dhue) or‘ Lang” This 18 ox~ 
plained post 

4 Brahma 1s represented with four heads 

४१०, Indra Deva 

§ Sozshtikarta 

7 Praja-pati 


DESORIPLION OT PHD SIX CMNIRES 19 


By “above Nada” 11 this pissige, we must mderstand that 
the abode of Bahina is withti the Hada which ts above Nada. 
Some read “Jel o the gemtals,” and thus thore 18 a diftcrence of 
जाता, Tho दिया पवत guys that the Adhat iw are varius accoid- 
ing 10 different views, . 

^ Four lusnous aims” (“asad veda 'bahn).—Some meorpies 
the Sanskrit compound word to nean “in whose arms shine tl o 
fou. Vedas Sama and others,” thus thinking of Brahini as beng 
possessud of two atms only Bat Brahmi is nowhere described as 
holding tho Vedas in his hinds, aud tlat he shoud be neditated 
upon as baving fxn aims is cleat from the followmg pissage पा 
Bhuta shuddhi Tantia 

“Know, © Shiva, that im us lap is the tou-armed, 1ed- 
colomed child? Biah ni, who ias four faces and 1s seited on the 
back of a swan.” 3 

“The wealth of those lotus-face is fon fold” (Mukh unbhoja- 
lakshmik chatin bhaga-bhedak) By this is to be understood thal 
Brahma has Lour faces. 

Some read the passage as Chatur-bhag weda ” , thus row the 
meaning practically is tho sane T{ the Sanskrit tex 15 read 
५ M ikhambhoya-lakskini-chatur-bhagaveda,” the moanmng wou d bo, 
“tho Lour different Vedas enhanco the beauty ol 118 lotus Jacos”, 4 

As opposed to tho opimon that Brahina holds the fom Vedas 
m hig arms, the Vishva-sme Janiaa in the Bialmi-dhyaon says: 
“ Meditate on Biahm (Shakti) vw ted in colour and garbed im the 
skin of tha back antolope, aid as holding {16 stall, १ gourd, 6 
rosmy of Rudiakshe beads? and makn g the gesbmo dispelling 
fear’’® And im tho Sapta-shati Stolia® it has been svd thot 


1 Voda is used to mcan fo, thore boing four Vedas 

2 Te,, Tliranya gaa bha 

9 langsa, or, as somo say, goose o flamingo Seo Woodtolfe’s 
“Garland of Letlors’ p 155 

4The allusion is to tho behof that the fou Vedas camo oul of the 
four mouths of Brahma. 

5 Vanda. 

§ Kamandalu, 

¶ Aksha-siilra 

8 That is, tho Abhaya-mnd:i Tho hand is uphfted the palm 
boing shown to tho spectator, ‘he fom fmgors are oloso together, and 
the thumb crosses the palm to tho fourth finger. 

§ Mii kandoya Chand. 


20 JUD SIX GDN RPS AND IP SERPEN तषा 


Shiva and Shakti mo to bo meditated upon as having the same 


weapons 

Also cf. Yamala “The Adi-Murti! should be meditated 
upon as makmg the gestmes of dispolling lear and granting 
boons? as also holding the Kundka? and rosary of Rudriksha 


0४08, and adorned with fine ornament ” 
This 15 how She should be meditated upon. The rest 16 yuires 


no explanation 


Brahmi Shakti 
४ That is, the Varadamudra, the hand bemg held in tho same 
position as m note 8, p 19, but with the palm held horwontally instead 
of vortionlly 
3 Kamandalu a vessol with a gourd-shaped body, and handle at 
the top, used for carrying water, generally by ascotios 


1) SORT HON 0 + 1 SIN (वा १(५ 2] 


Vis 7 


Herr dwells the Devi Dakin by name; her four arms 
shine with beauty, and her eyes are brillant red. She 18 
resplondent lke the lustre of many Suns msing at one and 
the same time? She is the carrier of the revelation of the 
ever-pue Intelligonce.’ 


Cod MENIARY 


In ths Shloka the Anthor speaks of the presence of Dakim 
Shakti an tho Adhma-padma, ‘The sense of this verse 19 that in 
this Lotus the Devi Dakin dwolls . 

“She is the Carter of the revelation of the evar-mue In- 
delligence’ 4 (Prokiisham vahanti enda-shuddha-buddheh)—that 19, 
she, Jikint Shakti, onablos tla Yogi lo acqune knowledge of the 
Tattve (Iattva-ynina) By moditatang on her, whieh 18 part of 
Yoga practice, one acquires ‘Pattva-jnana. ‘Phis Devi is the 
presiding Divinity of this reg on. 

Gj. *'The month (the lotus) has the Jettos Va, Sha (palatal), 
Sha (Igual), and Sa, and is p osided ovor by Ditlini” 


1 Dakini and the othe: Shaktis of this class arom some Tantias 
called tho Quoons of the Chakras, and im others the door-koepers 
thereof, 


2 That is according to Vishywmatha, sho is vary red 
3 Shuddha-buddhi—: ¢., Tattva-jninn 


4 7 the word ‘sada” is iend separately from ‘ shuddha-buddn,” 
10 becomes nn adverb qualifying “ vahanti,’ and tho pnssago would 
then moan that “sho ovet carrics rovelation af Divire Knowledge ” 

¢ Vaktva This is possibly the transeribor’s nustake Lor ‘Padma’ = 
1018. 


22 THE SIX ¢ पिरया AND 1 1}; SPUPENE JOWTR 


“Dilam, Ruka, Lakim, Kacin, as uso Shaka and [kin , 
nie the qicens of the six respective Lot 1868 1 =} yawhore 1५ given 
the Dhyira ot Dakini this “ Med tate on her, the (त्‌, the rad-eyed 
Dikini, प the Miladhua, who strikes tertor into the hearts 
ot Pashus,? who hods n hor two ight bands the Spam 4 and 
the Khaivinga + and im her two leit hands the Sword and 
a dinmking-cup filed with wme She 1५ fierce of tenper and 
shows hor 76106 teet! She crushes the whole host of enemies, 
She 18 plinp of body, and 1५ fond of Payisana ( [॥ is 
thns tlat sle should be meditated upon by tloso whe desire 
Tnnortahty’ Llsewhe e sho is dese bod ay “bought with a 
^ laka? of vertuthon, her eyes ornymonted wth co lyin, clad 
in Diack (antclope’s skin) and doc xed with varied jowols,” 
ete 

On the authority of the abovo passage, which ocets in a 
Dhyana of Dakim, she should be neditatec npon as clad im black 
antelope skin 

The Devas Biahma and ot iers me to be nedit tect upon as 
having then faces down or up weording to the Lane of mind 
(Bh wa) of the Sadhak.. 

The >} iktananda-tuangg ni ® quo cs the following from tho 
Maya Tantia 

“Parvatr ashod. How can they be im the Lot ises which have 
the 1 }eads dow iwaid bent ? 


1 fhe Shaktananda tuangeim places them in a di erent order, 
Seo PK Shasti’s cdit’on, ए 75 


*Vhe mflumred, See Intioductiou to Aut) ors Mal Ginvane, 
3 Sh ule 
4A staff sarmounted by ५ human skull 


5 Khadga a kind of sword used m the sacrifice of animals Somo 
read Kheta. 


64 kind of nulk puddig made of reco boiled in milk with ghee 
and sugar . 


7 Hero the mark borne by woman betwoen tho eyebrows showing 
that her husband 1s hying an auspicious mark 116 Saubhagyaratna- 
kara saya that Dakim abides in Tv ik Dhatu 


STouth chapter Pirsanna Kumara 90850115 edition, pp 78, 79 
‘Lho pass ige in the text 15 incompletely quoted 


DISOUPILON OL 111) SIX CENIRTS 28 


Mahadeva aud = Pho Lotuses, O Devi, have then heads n 
different directions. In the [16 of action! they should be thonght 
of as having their heads downward, but in ths path of renun- 
ciation? thoy ate alwiys modtifed upon as having thon | eads 
upwaid tinned.” 

‘The rest 1५ cle u 


1 Prayeztti-maipa the outgomp path as distmguished from the 
Nrviztbi-marga, ov path of return to the Parabrahm in 


2 Nivovtti-marga. 


24 HL SIX CLNCRPS AND | 1 SDRL NL POWLK 


Ving: 8 


Near the mouth of the Nid called Vajin, and n tho 
poricarp (cf the Adhara Lotus), there constantly shines the 
beautifully Juminous and soft, hghtning-hke tuanglo which 
13 Kamarupa,! and known as ‘Trapura? hero 1s always 
and everywhere the Vayu called Kandarpa,' who 18 of a 
deeper red than the Bandhujiva flower,! and is the lord of 
Beings and resplendent like ten million suns 


(कापा वष 


In this Shloka ts described the triangle im the pericap of 
the Mula Chakia, 

“ Newr the mouth of the Nadi callul Vaya” (Vop tkhya- 
vaktiadeshe,—Ihe mouth of the Vaz 1५ two fingors above that 
of the Suskhum ard below the baso ol the gomtals 

“The trangle knot as Trapura” (Cikonam traipua 
khyam) —T'ho ti angle 15 80 called because of the presence ol the 
Devi पकषत within the Ka inude the tangle, and the letter Ka 
is the cluef letter of 16 Kamabnqa, 4 

Cf Shaktuanda tatanggii6 “Inside dwells the Devi 
Sundan, 7 the Pa adevata.” 

1 Mee (.0ा १ tary, pas! 

2'This tangle says Vishyanatha, citing Gantamiya Tantya 15 
॥ 11117517. 1 toiat is, the powers of Will, Knowled ze, and 
4011८ 7. See Introduction 

3A tan of tho Apana vayu Kandarpais a name of Kame the 
Deva of Love 

4 Pentapetes Pheenicea 

5TMat is, the Mantra ‘Kliig’; 11 Tanttuayy Stiva sponking 
to Devi says, “lebter Kay 1१ Thy form.” ‘Tho Nityapujapaddhal, 
p. 80 menticns m this connection “ Kang,’ the Vija of Kamit See 
Inti duction, 

6 When dealing with the Kakara-tattva, p 165, Prasuuna K पवाक 
Shastiz’s edit on. 


TSundar २९; ‘Iripmasundari, 2 nime of the Devi Sce ’Lan- 
traraja (Tantrik texts, VIII Ch 4 6) 


no 
on 


D'SCRIPILON OF CHE SIX (111; 


© Soff” (Komult) ५.९ oily and smooth 

^ Kamarupa 1 , that by which ९१११४1१ caused to le felt— 
io, it is Madanng atin ike? 

Cf. “Te tiuiangle shontd be kiown as the chuning 
11.11.111 

This tuang e 1५ above the Vhaa-vija. Cf. Sammohane Larter, 
speaking of Dhata-vija “Above wt (Dhata-viq2) aro three lmes— 
Vama, Jyesht? a, and Raudr = 

© Kanda pa.”—Vhe presence in the 'I'rkona of the Kandaipa- 
vayu is hore spoken of. Tt 19 everywhere (gamantat) that 18 extend- 
ed thioughout the triangle. 

“Lod of Begs” (Jiveshn) So called because the con- 
tmuance ol life depends on Kama or Kandarpa 

It 18 said that “In tho Kanda (heart) region dwells Piara; 
and Apana dwels m the region of the anus” [ho an in the 
region of the annus is Apana, and Kandaipa Vayu aecondingly 
28 a part-of Apana Vayi$ Tf 14 910 a d that 4  Apann dawg 
Prana, and Prana draws Aparn ust as a falcon attached by a 
string 18 drawn back again who ha flies awry, tlese two by tl en 
disagreemont provent cach other fom leavn g the body, but when 
in accord they leave 16” ; 

The two Vayus Pi tna and Apina go difterent ways, pally g nt 
one another, and neither of thom, thoroforo, can leave the body, 
bab when the two area im accord that 1५, go in the same direc ction 
—thoey leave the body. Kandi-pa Vayu, bemg a कोका of (तोता 
also pulls at Pinna फक्क) and prevents the 1 tter fiom escapng 
fvom the hody ; hence Kandarps Vayuis the Lord of Tate 

In ४, 10 the Author deseubes दिक्पा as She who mnin- 
tams ull tho bemgs of the woild by Inspnation and Bapiration ”* 
Tle himself hag thus said thil Praw and Apaniare the maintamers 
of animate being. 


1Shangkma 0108 this ६१ the embodiunont of the dovotecs 
desire” (Bhaktabhilasha-svarupam ) 

® Chamber of Madana (Deva cf Lave)—~the Your 

3‘Viyu hero is « name for a matfestation of Prana, the five most 
impovlant of such manifestations wing Prava, Api, Samina, Vyana, 
Uduna. Seo Introdactior 

4This is an oft-repeated passage (Shaktfininda, p, 5) 

४ The Inspwed and Rxpired breath 1s Hangsal. 

4h 


26 प्र SIX OINIRLS AND 1171) SUIPLN  POWLR 


Visi 9 


Tysin1 16 (tho triangle) 1» Svayambhu! m Tis Lingga- 
form,® beautiful lke molten gold, with Mis head downwards. 
Tle is revealod by Knowledge} and Meditation, aud is of 
the sbhapo and colom of a new leaf As tho cool rays of 
lightning and of the full moon charm, so doos [Tis beauty. 
The Dova who resides happily here as in Kashi is in form 
like a whirlpool,’ 


ComMeNLary 


Tu this verse ho apeaks of the [१०१७१८० ol he Svayambhulingga 
m the thangle. 

© Srayambhu i his Langga-fom” (Lingga-.tpi svay wubhu) 

ie, here dwells tho Sh valingga whose nano 1५ Syayambha, 

“ Beautifnl hke molten gold” (rnta-k maka-kala-komala).— 
Ths body has the soft 1015016 of molten gold. 

Ths head downwards” (Pashchimasya) —Cf Kah-kul unreta . 
“hore 18 placed the great Lingga Svayambhn, who is over 
bliss‘cl, his head downward, act ve when noved Ly Kuna Biju. 

“Revealed by Knouledege and Meditation” (Jnana-dhyana- 
piakasha). -Whose oxistence 13 approhendad by us by Knowledge 
(Jnana) and Meditation (Dhyana). By Juana we realise tho 
attiibutelessness, and by Dhyana the attributefulness ‘of the 
Brahman). Such is Svayambhu. 


1 Solf-originated, ’ “ solf-existent,’ the Shiva Lingga of that name. 
2 As the human phallus 

3 Jnana 

4 Dhyana 

5 This refers to a depression on the top of the Lingya, 


DESORIPITON OF HE SIX OLNIRES 27 


“The shape and colow of neu leaves” (Prathama-kisha~ 
layakarmupa).—By this 18 conveyed tho 1dca that tho shape of the 
Svayambhu Linggy is (aper ng like a now nnopened leaf-bud. 
fake the pisti inside the Clampaka ककल, 1b 15 bioad at the 
bottom and tapers to a poms at the end, this algo shows that tho 
Svayambhu-lingga 15 of a bine-gieen colour (Shyama) 

Cf. Shaktananda-taranggw “QO Mahesham, meditate mside 
ib (the tiiangle) u90n tho Svayambhu-lingga, who holds his head 
with an aportme therom downwaid the beautiful and blue-green 
Shiva (Shivang shyamala-sundaram) ” 

In the Yamala occurs the followmg passage “ Meditate upon 
the very beautiful celestial tiianglo (लपक) im the Mulaédhaa ; 
within its three lines 1s Kua lah, charming hike ten million hght- 
ning flashes in the dark blue! clouds” 

This passage, which dosciibes Kundali as ^^ lghtnimg m the 
dark blue clonds ’, {१०९३ to show that the Svayambhn-Lingga 1s also 
blae; but Nila (blac) and Shyora (dark greer) belong to the same 
category, and hence ६1616 19 no contradiction, 

^ 4९ coal rays of lightnang and of the full moon cham so docs Ive 
beauty” == (Vidyut-purndudu-bimba-prakaakaia®-chaya-simgdha- 
santina-hasi), As the stiong light of the moon and of hghtmng 
omits no heat, 89 18 the hght wich emanates from the Svayambhu- 
linga cool and pleasing, binging gladness into the heats of men, 

“The Deva who resides happily hore as in Kash.” 3 (Kashi 
vas, vilasi) Kashi is the place sac ed to Shiva, lis favounte 
abode By these two adjectives it 13 imphed that the Svayambhu 
in the Adhiia Lotus 18 happy as Ilo 1s m Ths form of Vishveshvara 
in Kashi, and IIe is ag pleased to bo here as at Kish, “ Vilasi” 
may algo mean amorous because 1६ has been said above, “ moved 
by Kama Bija”, Vilas: is indicative of [8 Loidship of the 
Universe.4 

“Take a whalpool” (Said-avarte 1ipa~prakm a).—The कोण 
ing water on its outer odge creates ४ depression im the 


1 Nila, 


2Vishvanutha for Kara (पको) reids Rase- that 15, the nectar 
flowing from tho Moon 


3 Benaras 0) Birannat 
4The Univarae 18 Wis Vilasa or Lila 


28 IHL SIX GENTRUS AND LHE S‘ROUNL POWTR 


middle and the centio thereof is 1used like the shape of ४ 
conch ! 

‘This Svayambhu 18 pliced on the Kane bry ‘hs his been 
said in Kah-Kulameeta: “Surounded by tio filaments of the 
lotus ws the 810 ged 2 aad over thesis oat प Muha [ट्ट 
Svayambhu, with an open ng on tho top, ever happy, holding his 
head downwards, and active whon moved by the [६ ॥ परा ja” 

Lisewhere the followmg occurs “ Phere, in the poricarp, 18 
the above-n entioned Dakin, and the $ ingle (Iv kona) within 
which is a small aperture and the ied Ka पच, There 14 algo 
the Svayambhu Lagga, lus head downwar 1] and of a ruddy hue ”? 
Ch sis, however, a diffrent co iwweption 


1Shanghrra says that he is so desmibed boranse of his restless 


motion 
2 Tho tiangular pyramidical sont of Kan a 


OLSCRIPTION Of THE SIX OGNTRES 29 


Viwss 10 amb "1" 


Ovir 16° shines the sleeping Kuxdahm, fine as the fibre of 
the lotus-stalk, She 28 the world-bewilderer,' gently 
covering the mouth of Braima-dvara! by Her own lake 
tho ypiral of the couch-sholl, Her shining snake-lke form 
gocs threo and ४ half times round Shiva,’ and her lustre 1s 
as that o a strong flash of young strong hghtning [न 
swoot murmur is lice the indistinct hum of swarms of love- 
mad beos® She produces molodions pootry and Bandhy? 
and all othot compositions m prose छा verse 7 sequence or 
otherwise" in Sanski ta, Praks ila and other languages. Tt is 
She who maintains all the bogs o the world by means of 
inspiration and expiration,' and shinos in the cavity of the 
root (Mila) Lotus hke a cham of brilliant hghts 


1 Shangkara, nalko Kalicharava, bas annotated tho tivo एताणि 
soparitoly 

१8४४) vmbha Singga—~thvt 1s, round [Lt with [म body and over [ 
with Her head 

9 Kundalini ts the Shacte whorcby the Mays world exists at rest 
In the रपा Purine Shiva says “This Suprone Shakti 1s in me, 
and 1५ Brahman ftsell. 1115 Miya is dew to mo by which this ५ त्‌ 
18 bewildered = Wore the Devi in the Lalita 1५ culled “ Siry imohim ? 
(all-bowildering) 

4 Seo Co nmontary 

5 Shivopati. 

6 Vishvanitha says She mikes this sound when swakenod 
According to Shangkar, this ind cates 610 Vaichwi stato of दभा 

"fa a class of literary composttion in which verse 14 artanged in 
the manner of a dingram or picture 

8 Bhedakia ny and Alubhedakiama 

9 Vishvanitha quotes Daksdiaa nurti as stvting that during day 
and night mai bieathes 1 and on 21,600 times, taking both oxpration 
and jnspivation as the uni, Seo Int: odarhon 


39 111) SIX OPNIRGDS AND TN STRPLNT (ते 
Con MLNIARY 


In these two verses the anthor speuks of the presonce of 
Kundalm Shikti in the Svayambhu Linggs. It 1s the Dev? 
Kundalin. who mamtams the existonca of indiv dual bemps 
(Siva, Jivatna) by the functions of inspiration and expiration 
She places then m individual bodies, She produces tte hum- 
ming १0०70 iesembling that of a swarm of bees, and 14 the source 
of Speech and Sho, as descr bed below, dwe 18 in the triangul w 
hollow 11 the peticatp ot the Muladhma Lots 1esting upon the 
Svaya nbhu Lingga. 

© Shines fine as the fibres of tho lous stall” ( dian-tantu- 
sodata-lasat-sukshma)—ue, She is fine lke the 1016 of the 
lotus-stalk. 

 World-bewilderer ” (Jagan-mohini)—1e, She 1१ Maya 10, 
this world. 

* Gontl)”?) Madhuam, 

“The mouth of Bralma-deura” (Brahma-dya veinukha) the 
hollow on the head of Svayambhu Lingga 

“A stong flash of young lghtning” (Naviia-chapn i-mila- 
vilfigaspada),—Lit, “possessed of tho weallh of a stiorg finsh 
of young lightning” In youth every thmg and person shows 
the character ste qnahties in a slate of vigorous porfoction. 
Hence ४ “ young flish of ] ghtning ” means a stro ig flash, 

“She produces melodious poetry cte ,” (Kom uakivya-bandda- 
rachani-bhedit bheda-kra na) —This shows tho mode in which 
words me produced ‘The sott 1 196 produced by a combination 
ot soft णात्‌ melodious woids desciiptive of beanty, virtne, obc., in 
all its modulations, resulting [rom perfection of composition and 
regulauity and megulaiity in the disposition of words, By Bandha 
18 here meant pictor al poetical conposition in prose or verse 
ananged to look | ke a lotus (Padmabandha) ए horse (Ashvabandha) 
and soon, and by Atbheda the author alludes to all the words in 
Sangskrzta and [> तिच ta, By using the woid “ order, seq 1ence,” the 
anthor emphasises the fact that these compositions and words come 
out m the oder laid down in the Shistras. Kundalini produces, 

१ Madhuram * this 1s usod as an adjective, according to Shangkara, 


and means sweet Ilo says Sho is drinking neclar by the Brabmad- 
vara, as the nectar is coming thiongh it, the Braimadyaia 18 swoet. 


1076000 Of VD SIX CONIRES 81 


both at tandon, and m set forms, Kindalmt produces words, 
Sangsketta and Prikodtla, district and distinct. She isthe source 
from which all sound emanates. 

Of Shuradal- ‘Upor the bursting (witolding) of the 
supreme Binda mose uimanifested Sound? (Avyaktainva) [0 
assnined the tom of Kundah m hving bodus, and manitested 
ttsolf 11 prose and verse by tho ad of the letters of the Alphabet 
(ht , the essence of the letters) ” 

By “ Prose and Verse” a} forms of speech we n cant, 

1४ has distinctly been sa din Kad mata . द By the action of 
the Ichchha Shakti of the Atma acting on Pinna-vayu there 
is produced m the Mulidhari the excellent Nida (Sound) called 
Para’ Tn its ascondu ह movement it 1s thrown upward and openng 
out m the Svadhishé/ ana, it receives the name of Pashyanti, and 
agan gently Jed up as before nentioned, 1b bocomes un ted an the 
Anihata with Budd tattva, and 18 named Madhyama Gomg 
upwaid agnin, it reaches the Vishuddha in the throat, where it is 
called Vukhari, und from 11010 it goes on towards the heid, 
{appo. part of, the thiont, the prate, 610 lips, ५1५ (eeth — Ib also 
spreads over tho tongue fiom root to tip, and tho tip of the nose, 
and romaming in the throat, the palate, and the 1 ps, produces by 


1 Oh [+ secord hre of v lland v 14, the imtormediate vorses aro 
omitted ‘hese 1 प्रो) as follows “That sound 1s caller, by those versed 
am tho Agamas, Shabdimahman Sone toachors वनी 10 Shabdabah 
man 10 moan Shabdintha, othars (giammarins) define it to moan 
Shibda, but noithor of thom 8 correct, boenuse both Shabde and 
Shabdartha we Jada (unconscious things). ` (प my opinon Shabda- 
brohman iy the Chattanya of पा bemgs” Tho Agamy ii tho toxt 1 
Shinti Righaya quotes Shangkmicharyya m Prapanehasara which 
speaks of mon versed = Shrati Chaitanya is the Brat man conadered 
ag the essence of all bemgs that is Chit aud Shakts, or Chit in mum 
festation 


2 That is, the Principle or Cruse of Sound = See {ntrodnetion 
SVantrarija (Vols VIN and ऋता Tanirik Poxts) Ch, XXVI, 
vy 5—9, 


1.4# pp 120 122, Vol If Tantus Texts Vishvanatha aponcs of 
Para, Pasbyanti, and the othas Sinstis. The form of Nada says the 
Manovama, should be known fom the Guin ‘ins Ichehha Shakti 
१8 Kalamay2 


5 Pashyanti 18 sometimes ass ciated with Max pura Soo Lutredue- 
tion 


82 1 SIX GLNIBES AND IHS SBR [दि (षाग, 


< 


the throat aid tle Ips the 1७0५8 of the Alphube, fiom A to 
Ksha” 1 

[८ 1s needless to quote more 

1 sew] ere his Kundu been his descibed + कषत tite ipon 
Devt Kurdaim, who scaoands ॥ 6 Svaya पा (जा पका wio is 
Shywne and subtle, w! ) 1५ Creation र्ट in whom are Greatior, 
existence, a1d disso 1011, 9 who 1s beyond tho un verse and 1s 
conscionsness > itself = 'Vhink of Ile: as the One who goos up- 
waidg " ` 

Also’ “Meditate upon the Devi Kundalini as your Lshta~ 
१९४६१ ५7 18 being ever in the form of a damsel of sixteen m the full 
bloom of her 0156 youta, with large and beantifully formed breasts, 
decked with all tho varied kinds of jewels, lustious as the full 
moon, red in colour, with ever restless eyes.” 8 

“Red (Rakta) as 1668118 Sundari”, so says {} 0 Author of the 
Shaktanandatarangimi. Kundalm, as a matter of fach should 
always be medituted upon as ied (Rukta) in colour.® 

Shyamé (which ordinarily denotes “ colour ”) 1s hora mo uit to 
siguily something different. In all Vantias and all (द ऋ 
colluctions Kundalini is described to be hke hghtuing., “ Shyama 
13 the neme giver toa woman who is warn in wintor aid cool m 
summer, and has the Iustie of molten gold? Mhia is what 14 


1The sense of this, says the Menoame, is that Nada which has 
four ste gos (Avisthachatushéayatinaka) does after pass’ng through 
the differ2nt centres mentioned m the ‘eat assume tho form of the 


51 letters 

2 Srashéirupa 

3 Srishti-sthiti-layatmika. 

as Vishvatita She 1s not only immanent, but transcends tho 

universe. 

5 Jnana rupa 

6 Urddhvavahim, for Kundalini ascends to the Sahasrara 

7 {64 deve syarupia. Tho I,ttadovata is tho pattienlar Devata 
of the Sadhaka’s woiship. 

8 These m women indicate a passionate nature 

9१1 6 Shaktanandataangim siys She "8 only to be meditated upon 
as red only whon the ob ect of worship is ‘Lripura ‘he toxt may also 
be sead as meaning that “red” is an attribute apphieabls to Sb 
Sunda that is, the Devi Tripurasundan. 

10 ‘Thia 18 a quotation fiom the Alangkara Shastra (Ihetorie), 


bise wl HON 01 1111) ०९ UNLESS 33 


moant here and colour 1 not mtinded Thus the apparent discie- 
pancy 18 1emoved 

The Kangkelvemaln "पप्रा desenbes Kudu in the 
Bishma-dvura, and before the pacing of the Chak as, thas 
“Sho, the Brahman Itsell, resplondcnt like millons of reons rs ng 
at the sano t me, has four ar ns and three 0५५ Ler hands nako 
the gestures 1 of ह १५१४।८ B 1५५८५ > wud dispollir £ fear, and hold a 
book and a Vini 2 Sho 1s seited 01 a lion, and as Sho passes to 
her own abode? tho Awe-inspning One (Bhima) assumes differont 


forms ” 


1That is the Mudias Vaawind Ablaya 2 ante, pp 19, 20. 
4The musical mstrumont of that neo 
9 The Muladhaia 

45 


84 lib SIX GON Bob AN 1 1 StRPLNE UW 3 


Vis. 12 


Wi win it? reigns dommant Pari,’ the Shri Paiamesh- 
vari, the Awakener of eternal knowledge. Sho is the 
Ommpotent Kala’ who is wonderfully skillul to create, 
and 1s subtler than the subtlest. She is tho receptacle of 
that continuous stream of ambrosia which flows froin the 
Hteinal Bliss. By 11८ radiance it is that the wholo of 
this Univaiso and this Cauldron । 1 illumined. 


Con MLNLARY 


11७1५ ow speakirg of the Stufl-hhe Para Shaki, who is like a 
stiaight th vad above Kendal m, who 1५ co lod round Svayambhu- 
Lingge. ‘The Shi Prrameshyar, whose aciance पप 1 nos this 
Univaise® and iby cauld or, dwels 11 Uo Svayambhu Lingge 
wbove whore Kundalm 15 coiled wid holds » ipieme sway 

“Omnipotent? (Param). Slo is tho Maya who 1s able to do 
that which 15 impossible. 9 


1Svayambhu hngg. round which Kundalt is coiled, 
2Accading t> Shangket, Pama is im Kodali. Sho 18 called 
Biahman by Vishvanatha who quotes the Syvachchhandas mggrahe 
In Kondiln is the Para state of Shabde 
3 Vade post 
4 1९१८४] । Uab is, tho lower half of the Biahmanda, moe as sack 
vauldron-shaped 
5 Bal manda ogg of Brat ina 
080 the Devi Pmana (Ch XLV), spouking of this puwor of tho 
Supreme, says 
Vehitia saryyakdrare ch ntitatiphalaprada 
Svapr ondrayalaval loke maya tora praku lita, 
Paramai may alsomem Parang miyate antya itt Parama~:¢, She 
by whom the Supreme “is measmod, in the senso (Lor the Su premo 18 


DNSCRIPIION OF THI 8X CTNIRTS 35 


“ Kalé” 13 8 form of Nada Shakti (Kala Nida-shakts-ripa) ; 
and inseparate from Kundaha.t 

The Shiktananda-taanggm says “ Kala is Kundalim, and 
She, Shiva has saad, 14 Nada-shalkta,”? ? 

And 1 has also been elsewhere said “ Above 1t, meditate in 
your mind on Chitkala umred with 4 (La'sm ) wo 1s tapering 
of shape hke the flamo of a lamp, and whois ono with Kurdali.” 

Of, Kahka Shrnti: “Man becomes fieed of all sins by 
meditating upon Kundalini 28 withi1, above, and below the fame, 
as Brahma, as Shiva, as Sura3 and as Paameshvma [1 nself ; 
ag Vishnu, as Prana, as Kiliigni,! and as Clandra” 5 

By “within the flame’ 18 meant tle excellant Kala (=Na- 
darupt) above Kundalin’s threofold coil, This 1s what hay been 
staid by the author of this Lahtual asya, 

“She (Para) w wonderfully skilful to create” (Ati kushala)— 
we, She ib 18 wha [०९५५५०८५ the wondarfil skill ard powar of 
creation, 

"She a9 tha reecptacle of that continnons strcam of amb osia 
flowing from Hternal Bliss (Ihahman)” (Nitytnanda-paramparati- 
vigalat-piyt sha-dhina-dhaa), By Lternal Bhss (Nitywnanda) is 
neant the Nuguna or Attiubateless Binhman. Parampardé moans 
“connected step by step”, पा) Nityananda, wh ch is Nugaua 
Brahrian, theo arisos (in Its aspect as) Saguva Binhman, fiom 
Saguna Brahman, Shakti; 10m Shakti, Nada; from Nada Binda, and 
from Bindu, Kundalini.$ (को kal# 1s another form of Kandaliii, 1४ 
13 thus that the ambrosia comes step by step to Para neshvan, the 
Chitkaln She is N tyanandvparampara—that is, She bolo igs to 
the chain of omanation from Nitydinanda downwards ; and She is 


immeasurable) that Sho who ‘s ono with the Supiemo, is format’ ve 
activity 866 (ntroduetion Vishvaratha quoting an unnamed I utra, 
says that this Maya is within Kundalini, and this Panmé is Pwa- 
matmasvarupe 

1 Kundalmyabheda sharin. 

2 Nada-shakti Shaktias Nida. Seo Inticduction. 

38ira Soryya or Sun 

4Tho 110 which destroys all things at the time of dissolution 
(Pralaya). 

9 Moor, 

6 Bee Introduction, 


36 VID SIN (कपिः हाऽ AND PIT SPOPNT POWER 


Atvigalat-piyusha-dh nadhara—that is, Slo 18 the rece stacle of 
the strewn of ambrosia which flows copie isly fron Nityananda 1 
१19 componnd woid may bo interpretod to mean that Sho 
holds the copious flow of ambrosia caused by her un on with the 
Brah nan, Diom Nityananda this nectar co 105 to Para-Binda, and 
passes thiongh tho Ajn» Cha’aa, V shuddua Chakra, ote, tli ie 
reaches the Milidhui, and this nectu is प 6 of whch She ws 


the receptacle ‘lo interpet ib to mean th 5, the ता word 15 


1oad as one, 


1 That is if the compound be rend in two sections _vtz , Nity imnnda- 
pmampara, and then separately, Ati galalpiyushadhataidhara 4110 
translation a‘lopted im the teat is that which is referred 10 in tho paras 
graph which follows 


ISG? TON OF FE? लर OY RTS 27 


Virsr 18 


By meditating thus on [Ter who shinos within the Mila 
Chakra, with the lustre of ten million Suns, a man becomes 
Lord of speech and King among men, and an Adept im all 
kinds of learning. [fe becomes ever freo from all diseases, 
and his inmost Spirit becomes full of great gladness. Piro 
of disposition by his deop and musical words, he serves tho 


foremost of the Devas, 
Commenrary 


Tn this verso the Author १ enka of the bonofit to be dorived 
fiom meditating on Kundalini, By Mele Chakra ts monnt ‘tha 
Muladhma. “Ib is tho root of the six Chalias—honce its name.” 

“Wethan” — (Miala-chak.antaia-vivera-lasat-koli-9 ryya-pia 
kfisham),—-She shines in the Méladhiia Chakta like ton पानो 
818 shining at ono and the samo time, 

“Ths deep and musical words” (एतिका kivya-piabandha h). 
—~Ilis speech is musical and full of meaniigs, vs in ४ postical 
composition, 

^ [५ serves” (Sevate)® Tle १५७१ 1118 words in byrns of pinise 
and for puiposos of alike natura, Ile pleasos them by words of 
adoration, 

“All the foremost of the Devas” (Sakala-suia-gurnun).—The 
word Guru here moans excellen., and the Author by Sura-guun 
means Biahma, Vishau, and परक the principal Devas. Amara 
anys that “addmg the words Singha (lion), Shiidiila (lige), Niga 
(serpent), ete., to a malo name implies excellence” 

1That is, Brahma, Vashon, Shiva, ete 


2 That 18 by his mastory over words 16 beco nes lho to Buihagpati 
Guru of the Devas (Shangkaa) 


38 प्रो SIX CCN RPS AND UEP SDROPN COW RB 
उणा 


The Muladhma is a Lotus of four रार, The petals 
are red, aid have tho letters Va, Sha (palatal), She (cerebral), 
Sa, in colouis of pold In tho peucap 1५ the squue Dhara 
mandala surounded by oight spears and with at and ¡1 the 
lower pat is the Dhari-bija? who has for r 0 ) ५ and is seated on 
the olephant Anavata, Ile is yellow of colour, and holds the 
thunderbolt ?in his hands 19५ do the Bindu of the Dia t-b ya is 
the Child Biahma, who 1s red in colont, and has four hinds 
with which he holds tho stuf,) the goud,t the Rudraksha rosy, 
and makes the gesture which dispols few" Ile has fonr faces, 
In the penieup there 1५ a 1ed lotus on which ५ the presiding 
Divmity of the Chakia (Chakradhishdhitri), the Shaklt Dalian. 
She 18 red and las fom arms, and in her hands aro Shula! 
Khatvingga,’ KhadgaSand Chashaka® In the povcirp there 
is also the light ॥॥ +& 111६५ ष्णा ule 3 usida Wwlech ave Kaine yay 1 
and Kima-bija,” both of which are red. Above 1113 ia the 
Svayambhu Lingga which 1s Shyama-vana,!! and above and 
round this Lingga is Kuadalim coiled thee and a lalf times, 
and above ths Inst upstands, o1 tho top ०" {le samgga, 
(लिप 

(Phis १५ the ond of the first c0eetion ) 1) 


1 ५ Lang.” 

४ Vina 

१ 0१४ 

4 Kamandalu. 

SAbhayamudiit ४, 19, unten 8 

५ Spear. 

7 Skull-mounted staff. 

8 Sword Khalga is a heavy snevificial aword 
9 Drinking-cup 

10 * Thing ” 

11 Its colour 

2 Desertbed in v, 12 as another form of द्रत पा, 


12 Praka ana. ‘he commentator divides tha text and h 4 com: 
jmentar y into eight sechiong 


LSC || ऊ 60 TH SIN CLNIIS 39 


Viusp 14 


Ture is another Lotus! placed inside the Sustumaa 
at the root of tho gemtals, of a beautiful voi milion colour. 
On its six petals aro the letters from Ba to Puvandara,? 
with tho Bindu® superposed, of tho shining colour of 
lightning. 


(001) UNLAKY 


11४५४ ng described the Muli dhtia, he describes the Svadl she 
thane Chakra im [४८ verses beg viing with the क) ५५८10, This 
verso says that al tho rool ol the genitals thao is, cist net 
fiom the Muladhaia, another: Lotus, of a beantiful ver nilton 
colour 

^ Placd wmside the Sushwand” (त पाना nnn 4 -nadhyagha- 
(दपा) —Tho place of this Chakra ot Padme 1७ within Suskumma 

At the root of the ger italy” (Dhva ५ mrladosho) 

“Of a beautiful vwimbhor colour” (Smdwa-pun-ruchi- 
1uruia).—~This Lotus is of {he charming red colow of voi काण, 

Ou ats 9४ petals” (Angga-chhad vih) —[b 13 sumtomnded by 
its six petals which ५१1० the letters. 5 


1 १11 ५ is, the Svadhiskd/ni Chakra Sev Introduction. 
2 "Tho letter La, ४ post 
8Tho Anusvara 


4Saushumnn Shang cam iv uls tis word to mean the Brahmas td 
which is within Suskumra and suys thet tho suflix “in”? by which 
the change is a lected 15 used m the senso of ^ .clating to, and not 
“placed within’, 


$ V. ante, Jntroduction 


40 VIL SIX (111 9 AND Lith siRoLNL 10104 


“The letters” (Badyaih savindu-lasitai Purandarintnih),— 
By Purandaa is meant the letter La, it being the आण of 
Purandais or India. Lach of these letters from Ba to La is on 
each peal of the lotas hoy hive tho Bindi ८४८) thom, and me 
ol the shining colour of hghtming, ‘Cho above may also moan that 
the lustre of tho letter 1s caused by then anion with the Bindus 


placed over तपा 


116४7110 of 41, Sty GNI RLS 1 


Vosrsu 15 


Wii it! is the white, shining, watery region of Varuna, 
of the shape of a half-moon,’ and therein, seated on a 
Makara,is the Bija Vang, stainless and white as the 
autumnal moon. 


CcMMENLARY 


Hore the Author speaks of the presenco of the walory Legion 
of Varuna in the pericarp of the Svadhishthuna This watery 
region (Ambhoja-mandalam) is in shape like the half-moon (Ardhon~ 
durapalasitam), and is Inminously white (Vishadapiakasham), 

‘The Shinada says “he region of water is lotus (shaped) 
that ot varth is tout-cornered 4 and has the thunderbolt (Vajia) und 
so totth.’ Raghava-bhe ta in dese ‘ibing it, says“ Diaw a halt- 
moon, and draw two LoLuyas on its tive sides.” ‘ho (1091 Toacher 6 
says that ८ the region of water is lke the light of the Lotus-umted 
Tlalf-Moon ", 

Thon he spowks of the Varuna-bija, This Biga is also white, 
and is seated on a Muakata, which ts tho Custer? of Varuna, He 
has the noogo in his hand, 


1 Svadhishéhina 


* Water is the olomeut of this Chakta, wh ch is ropresouted by the 
crescent, 


¢ 9 An कपण] of a legend परक forw, somewhat Ike an alligator Soe 
lato. 

40h Ty 24, Chatmasram , sed gu, tor ordinmily the Mandalw is 
semicit cular. 


४ ‘he famous Commontator on the Sharadi-tilaka 


¢ Apparontly Shangkmichityys, Propauchasma (lantrik Toxts, 
vol 117) i, 24 त 


7 Vahana 
48 


42 411. Six OLNIKLS AND INL ४।,।६। UNE 101 ## 


Cf. “ (Meditate) upon the white Bija of Varuna (within 
the Lotus), Vaiuna is seated on a Makara, and caries the 
noose (Pasha). And above him! (that is, in the Bindu) meditate 
on Ilmi? wuo 18 blue of colour (Shydma) and four-wrmed.” 

The Va in Varuna B ya belongs to tha Ya class—i.c., to the 
gioup Ya, Ra, fa, Va ‘I's becomes clear from the arrangsment 
of the letters in Kulikula Chakra and in Bhutalipi Mantia. 


‘The rest is clea. 


1Padtiddhvam, Soo Comm to next verse 
2 Vishnu, 


DTSORIPPION OF THT SIX CCNIRES 49 


Virsrn 16 


May Hari, who is within it,! who 18 in the pride of early 
youth, whose body is of a luminous blue beautitul to behold, 
who is dressed in yellow raiment, is fonr-armed, and wears 
the Shri-vatsa,’ and the Kaustubha,*® protect us | 


तणा 


The Author here speaks of the presence of Vishnu in the 

Varuna Bija, ५ 
†  Wulon it” (Angkadeshakality )—ie, in the Bindu above 

Va una Bija, in the same way ag Bralimais in the lap of Dhara 
Bija. ‘he same explanation applies by analogy to the description 
of the other Lotuses. 

^ Whose body, ete.” (Nila-prakisha-1uchna-shiiyam).—LTat, He 
possesses the enchanting beruly of blue effulgence ; ¢ 9५ his body 
18 of & luminous blue beautiful to behold, 

" Wears Shiivatsa and Kanstubha.”—Dhe following 18 his 
Dhyéna in the Gautamya ‘Tantin: “On his heart is the gem 
Kaustubha, lustrous as ten thousand Suns shining at the game 


196 Vishuu is within “the lap” of the Bindu of Vang. 


2 Lit., Favourite of Shri or Lakshmi an suspicions curl on the 
breast of Vishnu and his Avatica, Kreshua. It 1s said to symboheally 
vepresent Prakrity, Seo Ahinbudlinya Samhit, 52, 92, ating also the 
Astrabhiishana Adhyaya of Vishnu Purana, I, 22 


3A great gem worn by Vishnu, which 1s said to symbolically 
sigrify the souls (see authorities in last note), These ve sud to be 
umtod with the Kaustubha of the मत्‌ (Vishnutijaka, 11, 100). 


44 एणा) SIX CNNTRUS AND FAT SERPENT POWER 


time, and below it 1 the garland! with the Insiie of ten 
thousand moons Above Kaustubha is Shii-vatsa, which also is 
luminous hike ten thousand moons.” 

The Tantr&ntara speaks of the weapons in the hands of Hari: 
“ (Meditate on) Him who has the noose in His hand, and on Hari 
who ia in his lap, ond has four arms, and halds tha Canah, 9 Nise 
ous,? Mace,4 and Lotus,® is daik blue (Shyama) and dressed in 
yellow raiment.” 

By “who has the noose in his hand?’ is meant Varuna as he 
hag been desctbed 111 tha verse preceding the प्छ quoted. 

Elsewheae he (Hari) 18 spoken of as “ clad in yellow raiment, 
‘bemgn of aspact, and decked with a garland ”, ५ 

We hive 869 that, in the Mulidhira, Brahmi: 1s sented on the 
TTangsa, and we should therefore think of Vishau as sented on 
Gurnda, 7 


1Vannmila: the namo for ५ large garland doseonding to the kneo 
Tt ia defined ११ follows : 


^ 


पाणां पदिद 8 wvartu-kusumo ] रप्‌ 
९ Madhye athilakadambidhya vanamaleti kirtita, 


(That 18 anid to be Vanamila which oxtends down to the kneo, 
beauteots with flowers of all seasons, with big Kadamba flowera 
in the middle) This garland is celestial becaase +n it the flowers of 
all ४ 6 seasons are contained 


2 Shangkha, 
3 Chakra, ; 
4 Gada. 

5 Padma, 


6Tho garland symbolises tho elements as the alub, Mahat; the 
couch, Sattvika Ahangkara, the bow, Tamasika Ahnngkéia ; the aword, 
knowlege, 1t8 sheath, ignorance, disens the mind and the arrows the 
enses, See authorities ated at p, 48, ante 


7 The Bird King, Vahana of Vishnu 


4. 


DESORPTION OF ववा सङ्क CrNTRTS 4B 


Vorsn 17 


It is here that Rakini always dwolls.’ She is of the colour 
of a blue lotus? Tho beauty of Ter body is enhanced by 
Her uplitied arms holding various woapons. She is dress- 
ed in celestial raiments and ornaments, and [167 mind is 
exalted ® with the drinking of ambrosia 


ConmmntTary 


In this Shloka the Author spenks of the presence of Riki in 
the Svadhishéhdna, 

Gf. Rakini-dhyitna elsewhere: ^ Meditate on Rakini, who is 
blue of colour (Shyaima) Jn Iler hands are a spear, a lotus, a 
drum 5 and a sharp battle-nxc,® She is of fnuonsaspocb, Mer 
three eyes ave red, and her teeth + show fiercely. Sle, the Shimng 
Devi of Devas, is seated on a doublo lotus, and from one of her 
nostrils there flows a streak of blood’ She 18 fond of white rice, ® 
and giants the wished-for boon,” 

As Rakin is within another lotus 10 in this Lotus, therefore 
shauld the six Shaktis everywhere be understood to ba ina red 
lotns 8१ in the Malidhara, 

1Dwells (Bhati)+ the Sanskrit word [निक meas “sh nes? 
‘here’ that is in the Svadhishéhina, 


90 the colour of a blue lotus (Nilimbujodara-sahodarakanti- 
shobha); lit, Her radiant beauty oqanls the interio: of the blue lotus, 

§ Matta chitta; for shc तरा tho nectar wh'sh drops from Sahas 
rira. She is exalted wiih the diyine energy wich infnses Ter, 

Shula. 

5 Damaru. 

6 Tangka. 

7 Dangshtin—z.e , She ] as long projocting tooth, 

8 Raktadhirakanisam, The Sanbhagymatnakara has Rakta- 
dhatvekandtham, that is, sho who is the Lord of Raktad rate, 

9 Shuklanna. 

10 There is another smallor Totus in each of {he main lotuses on 
which the Shakti sits, 


46 WG STIX ONN RIS AND PT शप प" TOW IR 


Vorsr 18 


Hn who meditates upon this stainless Lotus, which is 
named Svadhishthana, is freed immediately from all his 
enemies,! such as the fault of Ahangkiva* and so torth. 
Tle becomes a Lord among Yogis, and is liko the Sun 
ilumining the dense darkness of ignorance.’ ‘Lhe wealth 
of his nectar-hke words flows in prose and verso in woll- 
reasoned discourse, 


Comarns ARY 


1 this veise is desertbed the benefit derived fron the 
contemplation of the Svadlishihana Lotus, 

“ Svadhishthdna.”—* By Sva 18 meant tho Para-Linga (8१. 
premo Tinga), and hence the Lotus is callod Svadhishéhina,” 4 

“ fault of Ahangkira and so forth” (Ahangkira-doshid'),— 
By this 1s imphed the six evil inchnations: Kama (lust), Krodha 
(anger), etc ‘hese >, which me the six enemies of Man, nie 
destroyad by contemplation on the Svadhishthina Lotus, By 
contemplation upon 1४ are also dostroyed the darkness of Miya, 
and Moha,o and the Sun of knowledge (Jnina) 15 acquired ‘The 
rast is clear. 


1 That is, his enemies tho six passions 

2Tigosm. Sce Introduction 

3 Moha 

4TIns is from v 58 of Ch, XXVIT of tha Rudra-yiimala, 

5 ५12, Kiama (lust), Krodha (anger), Tobha 18०0), Moha (तनप- 


sion), Mada (pride), Matsaryya (भारक); which all arise from a sense 
of mmeness (Ahangkara), 


6 Tgnoran 16) lusion, infatyation, 


DLSORIPLION OL HL SIX (1.1 ६.५ 47 
Summary ov Vises 14 ro 18 


The Svadhishéhina Chakia 15 of the colow of vermilion, and 
has six potals, On its six potals are tho sx lettors Ba, Bha, Ma, Ya, 
Ra, and La, with the Bindu placed thereon, ‘They are of the colour 
of lightning. In the pericarp of this Lotus is the region of water 
in the form of an eight petulled Lotus, with a half-moon in ils 
centre, This vegion 13 white Inside this latter 1 the Varuva 
Bija ^ Vang,” seated on a Makara, with a noose in Ins hand. In 
the lap of the latter (¢¢., in the hollow of the Bindu) 1s Vishnu 
seated on Gaiuda. He has {0८1 hinds, and is carrying the 
Shangkha (conch shell), Chaka (discus), Gada (mace), and Pad no 
(lotus), He 18 dresséd in yellow व शाना, wears & long छा भात्‌ 
(Vana-mala) round his neck, the mark Shirvatsa and the gom 
Kanstubha on lis breast, and is youthful m appearance. On aired 
lotus in the pericatp is the Shakti Rakini. She is Shyama-vaini,t 
and in her four hands she holds thy Shida (spew ०५ tudsut), Abjw 
(lotus), Damau (drum), and ‘lat gke (battle-axe) She is ॥ ree- 
vyed and has fierco projecting fangs,? and is (0111790 to behold, 
She 1s fond of white 11८09 and ॥५ stream of blood runs trom Ler 
nostril , 

(Here ends the second ५८८५९०१ 


4 See nate to y. 11. 
2 Kutila-dangshéra 
8 Shuklanna. 


18 JL siX GLNIRLS AND 1111, SLRPLNL । ०१४ 


Vins 19 


Above it,! and at the root of the navel, 1 the shining Lotus 
of ton petals,’ of the colour of heavy-laden rai 1-clouds, 
Within 1४ are the letters Da to Pha, of the coloir of the 
blue lotus with the Nida and Bindu above them. Meditate 
thore on tho region of Lire, triangular in form and shining 
hko tho msing sun. Outside ib are thico Svastika marks,’ 
and within, the Bija of Vahm himseli.! 


Cosamn any 


The Manipiua (पत्ता 1s desetibed in Uns and the two follow- 

Ing Voiser 
“Shing lotus of ten petals” (Dashadala-lasite)—.a, the 
[40/18 which shines by reason of its fen petals 

“Of the colour of heavy ram-clouds” (Pu nemegha-prokashe) 
—ta, of ५ dark hue 

“With it aro the letters,” elo (Nilimbhoju-prakashais 
upuhitajaihare didt-phantak sachandiah) 

The ten letters fiom Da (corebral) to Phe, with the Bindu 
placed above them, are of the colont of tho bluo lotus, and are 
each of them on tho ten sovoral petals ‘The letters are Du, Dha, 
Na, Ta, ha, De, Dha, Na, Pa, Pha, By Sachandraik which 
qualficsg Vainath is ment that the 1601618 have [पात्‌ and Nida 
ove: thom, Lor these two go Logether, 


1 Svadhishthana 


+The Manipuva Chakra, the sout of the Hlemout of dire the sign of 
which 1s a triangle. Seo Introduction 


3 An auspicious mark , 9, post. 

4 1१784 is, “ Rang,” the Secd-mantra of Iie 

5 Shangkaa roads Dasha-dala-lalite—¢e, the charming lotus of 
ten petals 


DMSORIPLION OF NIN SIX OFNTRuS 49 


“Tike the rising Sun’ (Aruna-mihira-samain)—2e, like the 


young sun, 
 Svasteta Marks'—Those thiee maks or signs are on three 
sides of the triangle. 
Reghava bhaéia says? “A Svyastika sign is made by the 
cross ng of two straght lines gong m four different duections’” 
Tn this :egio1 of Tire 13 Ran the Bia of Tire, 


12.0, hike a 01098 mal 


2 In tho note to भ. 28 of CI 1, fof the $l hada ‘Maka 
a7 


50 VU SIX OLNIRLS AND 1) SERPENT [तण 


पाणाः 20 


Menrrat. upon Him (Fire) seated on a ram, fonr-armed, 
raciant like the rismg Sun. In lis lap ever dwells Rudra, 
who is of a puro yermilion hue. [6 (Rudra) is white 
with the ashes with which [५ is smeared; of an ancient 
aspect and three-oyed, Tis hands are placod in the attitude 
of granting boons and of dispelling foar He is the 
destroyer of creation 


५) । {1 101. 


Mlsewhera the [कृता of Vahni is ns follows: “Seated on 
४1010) a Rudritkeha rosary in ono hand, and the Shakti %in the 
other.” 

Ag there are no weapona placed 19 the other hands i is to be 
inferred that the other two hands aro in the attibude of g ranting 
boons and of dispelling fear; that is how Ue is dosciibed to be in 
othor Dhyanas of ILim. 

Rudia should hero be maditated upon as seated on a bull, 

“He 2 white , . . smomed” (Bhasmaliptingga-bhishi- 
bhmana-sita-vapuh).—The ashes wich which his body is smeared 
and the ornaments he 13 weming malo hin look white (thongh his 
hue 18 160), 


1 That ia, making Vain and Abhayn Mudvis, १ ante, pp. 20, 21. 
2Vahni'a or Tire’s wonpon, Bhiiskamiiya saya it 19 the woapon 
which is o Ulod in Maharashtra Siimti. 


(09८८1111 (छप 01 1" SIX (14708 81 


1४51; 2। 


Tur: abidos Lakim, the Lenefactress ot all, She is tom- 
armed, of radiant body, is dark! (of complexion), clothed 
im yellow raimont and decked with various ornaments, and 
exalted with the drinking of ambrosia.” By meditatang on 
this’ Navel Lotus’ the power to destroy and creato (the 
world) is acquired. ४१५ with all the woalth of knowledge 
ever abides in the lotus of his face, 


Coane ary 


© Decked with various ornaments”? (Vividhuevirachanilang- 
Aaitt)—She who 18 docoruted w th goms and pels mianged m 
venied and beautiful des'gns 

Of Unkimt-dhyina elsowhoro + “ Lob the oxcollont worshipper 
meditate upon the Dovt षती) who is blue and has thige faces, 
and thiee eyes (lo each faco), fierce of aspect, and with Mer tooth 
protiuding.® In Ler right hand She holds the thundorbolt and 
the Shakti,” and im tho left Sho makes tho geatures® of dispelling 
fear and of granting boons She is in the pericarp of tho navel 
lotus, which has ten petals, Slo is fond of meat (Mangsiishi),® and 


1 Shyéma , 866 ante, note to v. 11, 

2 Matta-chittw, wde ante, p 44, n 3 

3 tat. ए variant reading is cvam, “in thix nianner’ 

4 Nabhi-Padma, 

6 That is, the Devi of Speoch, Sarnsy ati, 

6 Vishvanatha quotes a Dhyana im wh ch She is doseilbed as humps 
backed (kubjimi) and as carrying a alaff. 

¶ १116 weapon of Vahni (Lire), Seo note 2, page 50, 

8 Mudra, 

®Somo read ^ Mar gsastham ==She who abides in flesh, 


52 1111. IX CLNIRDS AND THLE SURPDNL POWLR 


her branst is ruddy (with tho blood and fut which drop from Ifo 
month,” 

The navel lotus 18 called Mani-piue, ‘The Gantemiya Tantia 
says! ‘Mus Lotus is called Manipiia because ib 18 Justrous like 
w gem,” ? 

Summary ol Vurses 19 10 21 


Tho N&bhi-padina (Navel Lotus) is of the colouw of the 1am. 
cloud, and has ton patuls; on each of ity petals ate cach of the 
ten letters Da, Dha Na, Ta, ‘Tha, Da, Dha, Na, Pa, and Pia, of a 
lustions blue colour, with the Bindu above each of them. tr thie 
pericarp of this Lotus is tho red Region of Dire, which is triangular 
in shape, and outside 11, on 169 throe sides, aro throes Svashike signs, 
Within the tranglo is the पुण of Fire—“ Rang”. Ie (9) of 
T 1e) 18 16d 11 colom and is seated on च 1 छा, 1s four-tumed, and holds 
in his hands the Vajia (thunderbolt) and the Shaleti weapon, and 
makes the signy of Vara and of Abhaya! In the lap of Vahnt Bija 
4s Rudia, red of colour, soated on the bull, who, howevor, appoars 
to be white on acconnt of the ashos wh ch Wo smems on his body 
lie is old in appenvance On ao rod Totus 11 the pori-ap of this 
Lotus 1४ (1५ Shakts liking, She 1४ bine, has throw Jaces wibh threo 
oyes in oach, 18 fom-armod, aid with [or hands holds tho Vajra 
and the Shakti weapon, and nakes the signs of diapoll ng Lem 
and granting boons She bas 06106 projecting toeth, and is fond 
of eating rice and dhal, cooked and mixod with mont and blood! 


(ere ends the thud section) 


LA Vatheaya ana of goat authoiy, ‘he quotation w trom 
Qh dd of the samo, 

2 Mani-vad bhinnang = Bhinna 1616 means “distingmshod,” for in 
the Maripma is the Regon of live Soo also Rudi yamala, Oh. 
XXVILI, v, 60, ’ 

५ 3 Vara and Abhaya—te, the Mudias dispolling fear and granting 
00118 

4 Khechaanna—that is, meat nixed with 11८0 and dhal, शाना ng 

Khochatinna (Khichri), Palin, eto, , 


9 


छर 
|; 


DESCRIPLION Of Pb SIX (षा 


Virsu 22 


Anove that, in the heart, is the charming Lotus,’ of the 
shinmg colour of tho Bandhuka flower,’ with the twolvo 
letters beginning with Ka, of the colow of vormilion, 
placod therein. It 38 known by its name of Anuahata, and 
is like the celestial wishing-trec,’ bostowing cyen more 
than (the supplicant’s) dosiro, The Region of Vayu, 
beautiful and with six cornors,’ which is hko unto tho 
sinoke in colour, is here. 


Com .NLARY 


“he Anihala Lotus ix dusoutbed im tho six ९०४०8 beginmng 
with this, 

This Lotus should be meditated upon in the hemt; the 
verb dhyayet is understood, ‘The twelve lettors begiuniig with Ka, 
that is, letters Ka to Tha aro on the petals, 

“Te a8 known by its name Andhata? (Nani nihala-sangyna- 
kam) —-“ IL is so called by tho Munis becanso 16 19 hero thab 
the sound ol Shabdabiahman is head, that Hhabda or 


1The Anahata or | eart Lotus, seat of the au clement, the sign of 
which is described ag hexago ial, 18 here, Soe Introdustion. 

° Penlapotes Phonteca, 

> Kaloa-tan Shangkara says the Kalpa-taru, one of the celestial 
पकक in Indra’s heaven grants whet 16 asked but the gives moro, 
since 10 leads him to Mokshn 

4 Shackoua that is, intetlacing triangles Soe Plate ४, See Intro- 
duction and Rudrayamala, Ch XXVIT, v. 64 


54 HL SIX GLNIRLS AND ‘EL & .RPENL POWs 
sound which issues without the striking of any twc things 
together,” 

« Wishing-tree”* 18 the treo in Ieavon which grants all one 
asks, as ib 18 hke the Kalpataiu, so ib bestows moo than 18 
dosirod 

© Region of Vayw” (Vayor wandalom. In che poricatp o. bhis 
Lotus 18 Lhe Vayu-mandala, 


‘Vishvarithe quoles (p 121, Vol LU, Yar trik ‘osts) tho 
following = Within rt is Vilna Lingga, lustious 11९0 ten thousand suns, 
also Sound which 19 Shabdabiahmamay v (whose substance 1a Brahman), 
and 18 produced by no cause (Ahetuka) Such is tho lotns Anahate 
wherdin Purusha (that is, the Jivitmi) dwells’ Ag to Shabda- 
brahman 803 Raghavabhada’s Comm on § tradi, Ch I, v, 12, 


> Surataru==Kalpa-tary, 


र 
on 


PCSORIPUION OF TID SIX OTNIRTS 


Versn 28 


Moorrarn within it on the sweet and excellent Pavana Bija,! 
grey as a mass of smoke,’ with four arms, and seated on a 
black antelope. And within it also (meditate) upon the 
Abode of Mercy,’ the Stainless Lord who is lustrous like 
the Sun,’ and whoso two hands* make the gestures which 
grant boons and dispel the fears of tho throe worlds, 


Cost en rary 


In this vorse the Anthor speaks of the presenco of tho प्रप 


Bra in the Anahata Chaka, 

^ Pavana Bija” (Pavanikehava) ४९.) the Brja Yang : 

“ Gray as a amass of smoke” (Dhimayali-dhusara)—It has the 
greyish colour of smoke by 1eason of its bemg surounded by 


masses of vapour. 

“A black antelope,’ which 1s noted {0 its 1९61688, 1१ the 
Vahana (carrion) of Vayu, Vayu caries lus weapon, “ Angku- 
sha,’ in the same way that Vari aa carries his weapon, ^ Pasha,?? 


18९.) Vayu, whose Vija is “Yang”. 

2 This smoke, Shangkara says emanates from tho Jivitma which 
is in the form of a flame. 

3 Shangkara reads ^ ocoan of meroy”, (Karunavinidhi ) 

4 Wangan, the Sun a namo also of the Suproma. (Cf ® IIving tho 
Supreme Hangsa dwells in the brilliant honven” Seo the Tangsavati 
Fak of Fegveda [प --40 qnoted in Mahannvann Tantra, yy. 196, 197, 
Ch फ, Hangsais from Han==Gati, or motion, It 18 enllod Aditya because 
it is in perpetm] motion (Sayana), Iangsa is also tho form of the 
Antaritma, 986 ए, 31, post. This 1९५६ also 1una m Yaqurvoda, X 24, 
und XI, 14, and in some of the Upanishads 


5 This shows that (he Bij has [ anda and foot (Shangkarn). 
५ Gond. 
7 Noopo, 


56 THN SIX OLNEIPS AND 1117; SERPLNT POWrR 


He next spoaks of the prosence of Isha in tho Vaya Brja, 
Dverywhero Shiva is spoken of as having Lhies eyos,! hence Isha 
also has three eyes 

Bleewhere 16 is said> ^ Meditate upon him as wenring a 
jewelled necklet and chain of gemsionnd his nock, and bells on 
his toes, and also clad in sil’xen वका का ” In the samo way of him 
vw has uso been said “Tho beautiful Ono possessed of the soft 
iadianes of ten milion moons, and shining with tho 1841166 of 
1118 matted hair.” 

{sha should therefore be thought of as clad in silken पफल, 


ote, 


1 Tilo third eyo, s‘inate in the forohoad in tho rom of the pineal 
ind, is the Eyo of Wisdom (Jninachakshu), 


7030 [कपि OL IN 5 X (द्र 57 


Vorsr 21 


पप्र) dwells Kakim, who in colour is yellow like unto new 
lightning,’ exhilarated and auspicious; three-oyed and the 
benefactress of all. She wears all kinds of ornaments, and 
in Her four hands She carries the noose and the skull, and 
makes the sign of blessmg and the sign which dispels fear, 
[€ heart 1s softenod with the drinking of nectar, 


Conant a ty 


In this verso tho Author spoaks of the presence of tho 
Shakt Kak'ni. 

^ Behilaated”® (Matta)—thatl is, Sho 1s 106 1) an ordinary, 
hut in a happy, excited mood 

“With the drenking of nectar,” ote, (Pirnas dha rasiidin« 
livridaya)-— ler heart is softened to benevolence by the duking 
of nectar, or 16 may be interpreted to mear that [ler hen t is 
softened by the sap.eme bliss caised by 4" ak.ng the excellent 
nectar which drops fiom the Sahasia [न | owrt expands w th 
the supreme bliss. Kaikim should bn thought of as wearng the 
skin of a black antelope. 

Compare the following Dhyana of Kakini whoe She is so 
described: “If thon desiast that the mactico of thy Mantia be 


UNava-tadit-pitaé 1९.) whero tlere is mmo thurder than rain, 
when tho lightning shows itself vory vividly. Pati is yellow, Kakint 
is of a shiming yellow aolour 

2 Shangkara gives १741८ (maddoned or oxalled) as equivalent of 
Matta 

{8 


58 SHE SIX CLNTRES AND SHR SERPENT POWOR 


crowned with snecess, meditate on the moon-faced, evel- 
axistont! Shakti Kakini, wearmg the skin of a black antelope, 
adoined with all ornaments,”? 


YNityam If this i not stuti, posmbly the word is nityam, 
always” 


2Vishvanatha, in_his commentary on the Skaichakin, gives the 
following Dhyfina of Kakini ‘ Meditate on Kakimi whose abode is in 
Fat (Meda-sangstham) holding in Her handa Pasha (ncose), Shila 
(trident), Kapala (skull), Damarn (dram) She is yellow in colour, 
fond of eating curd and rico (Dadhyanna). Ter beautiful body is in a 
slightly hendmg pose (Syavayavanamité). [Tor heart is nado joyous 
by the draught of rico wine (Varuzi).” Tho -Saubhigy a-rntnakara 
cites Seven Dhyanas of tho Soven Shaktis or Yoginis Dakin nnd othors 
which show that each has her abode in one of the seven 1) 17011, ‘Tho 
Seventh Shakti Yakshini is not montioned in th’s hook 


01.8८1 ton ob 111, siX ८1 ह 11५ 59 


Vir 25 


Tu, Shakti whoso tender body is hke ten million flashes of 
lightning 1s in the poucarp of this Lotus in the form 
of a triangle (Trikona). Inside the triangle is the Shiva- 
lingga known by the name of Vana. This Lingga is like 
shining gold, and on his head is an orifice minute as that in 
agem. [6 18 the resplendont abode of Lakshm., 


OomaeNiARY 


In this Shlokw is desaibed the triangle ‘I konw which ts: 
in the perieup of this Lotus | 

५9/04 in the form of क triangle” (‘Triko पवाद पा), 
—By this we aro to andastand that the apox of the trisugle 1s 
downward 1 

This ‘Luikona is be ow tho Vayu B ja, ५५ has been said else- 
whore. “In 1g lap is Ishy Below it, within tho V'rikona 1s 
Vana Lingge ” 

“ On his head,” ete, (Maulan gitkshma-vibheda-yung nanih).— 
This 18 a description of Vina-Lingga, ‘The orifice is the little 
space within the Bindu which 18 w thin the half-moon which 1s on 
the head of the Lingga. 

Dlsewhere we find the following description: “‘The Vina- 
Linggs within the tiiangle, decked 11 jewels 11६० of gold—the 
Deva with the half-moon on 116 head, in the middle is an eacellent 
red lotus ”” 

The ved lotus in this quotation is one below the poricatp 
of the heart lotus; it has its head turned upwards, and has 
eight petals, It 18 in this lotus thal mantal worship (Manasapiya, 


1As 16 is a Trikona Shakti 16 must have its apex downwards ag 
m the case of the Yoni 


60 11, SIX U'NIRIS ANI JHUL ५ RPLND LOWLS 


should be madet Compme tho following: “ Inside 1s the 1ed 
eght-potalled Jotus, There 18 also tho Kalpa-tioo and the scat of 
(116 Ishfu-dova undor a beaut fel awnme (Chandi द्धो) surrounged 
by trees [११५1 with floweis and fruits and sweol-voiced buds 
Thore mod tato on the Ishiw-deva according to the ritual? of the 
woishrppor ` 

"Ornjico minute as”—Ie here spcaks of the Bindu wh cl in 
the heac of the Vana Linggn. As a gem has a 20911116 orihes 10 1/ 
(wl en pierced to bo threaded), so hus this Lingga? By Uns 1s meant 
that the Bi duis nthe head of tho Shive Lingga. 

५ The resplendent abode of Lakshmi 14 = By th sone must know 
tle gieas beauty of the Lingpa, due to v1 ish of desned 


1 his is nob one of the eix Chakras, but a lotus krown na Ananda- 
kandi, whero the Loffndey ti is meditated upon Seo Ch, V, v 142, 
Mahar ivaay Tantra. 

2Kalpa Talat kalpoktamiigainh, That iw, 21) प annoy enjoined 
by the respective sampiadaya of tho sadhana 

38The Lingga itself 18 nob pierced, but it caries the Rindu, which 
has an er pty spree (Shinya) within its भो 96, 

{That is here, beanty. 

5 Kamodgama 





PLATE 6 


DLSURIPILON OL 111} Stk GLNLRES 6 1 


Vrisp 20 


Hi. who meditates ov this Tlomt Lotus bocomes (ike) the 
Lord of Speech, and (like) Ishvara he is able to protect and 
destroy the worlds. ‘lus Lotus is like the cclostial 
wishing-tree,’ the abode and seat of Sharva.? It is beauti- 
fied by the langsa,’ which 18 like unto the steady tapering 
flame of a lamp in a windloss place.’ ‘Iho filaments which 
surround and adorn its poricarp, illumined by tho solar 
region, charm, 


(01141 १ 


Tn this and the followmg verse ho sponks of the good to be 
geuined by meditating on tho [मणा Lotus. 

“He who mediates on this Lotus in the Meat becomes like the 
Lond of Specch?—7 6.) Brthuspati, the Guin of the Deyas—and ablo 
like Ishyaia the Creator to protect and destroy the woilds. Buelly, 
he becomes tho Cicator, Protector, and Destroyer, of the Worlds. 

He speaks of tho prosence of the Jivaltma which is IJangsa, ४ 
in the porcarp of this Lotus. Tho Jivatmai is like tho sbeady flame 
of a lamp in a windless place, and enhances the beauty of this Lotus 
(Amla-hina-dipa-kalika-hangsena sang-shobhitam), LJangsa is the 
Jivatmi, Ife also speaks of the presonce of the Suryya-mandala 
in the pericarp of this Lotus, 


1 Sura-larncekelpa-dara. 

2 Maha-deva, Shiva 

3 Tore the divitma 

4 866 Introduction. 

5 Vishvandtha quotes a ४०४6 in which this Hangsa 18 spoken of as 
Purusha, 


62 1117 SIX OHNERUS AND LUE sLRPLNL LowLk 


“The filaments which suround and adorn its per tear p, illumined 
by the sola 1/०, cham” (Bhinormandala-manditontara-lasat- 
kinjalka-shobhndhaiam).—IL 1s boautified by 1eason of the 
filaments which suiround the poricarp being tinged by the rays of 
tho Sun. The 10१8 of the Sun beautify the filamonts, and nob the 
space within the pericarp, The filaments of the other Lotuses ue 
not so tinged, and 16 is tho distinctive fortwe of this Lotus, By 
the expression “the Mandala of Saya (Bhanu)” the 1eador is to 
understand that all the filaments in the pericarp are beauteougs 
with the rays of the Sun and not a portion of them 

All over the pericarp is spread the r:egion of Vayu. Above 
it is the Rogion of Siuyya, and above these the Vayu Biya 
and ष्मा, etc, should be moditatcd upon, his is quite 
consistent. [In mental worship the mantra 1१ ^ Mang salutation to 
the Region of Fhe with Is ten Kaliis,”! ote. rom texts and 
Mantras like this we therefore seo that the 1egions of Vahni (lise), 
411४ (Sun), and Chandra (Moon), are placed one above the otha, 

© Tshvara”—t.e , Creator 

„ “Able to protect and destroy the uorld” (Raks/i-vinishe 
kshamah)—ze, 1b 18 ho who protects and destroys, ‘ho iden 
moaht to be conveyed by these (1100 abtubates ११ that he bocomos 
possessed of Lhe power of croaling, mainlan ing, end dosti oy ng, tho 
Universo? 


1 Kala==digita or portions of Shakti. 
४ By reason of his unification with the Biahma-substance 


DISORIPMON ज वाण SIX वपया) 63 


Vrrsn 27 


Forusost among Yogis, ho evor is dearer than the dearest 
to women. He 18 pre-emmently wise and full of noble 
deeds. His senses are completely under control, 78 mind 
in its intense concentration is engrossed in thoughts of the 
Brahman. 1118 inspired speech flows hko a stream of 
(clear) water. Ile is like the Devati who is the beloved of 
Lakshmi” and he 18 ablo at will to ontor anobher’s body.’ 


Communrary 


“Dearer than the dearest to women” (कृष priyaiamah 
kantikulasyn)—i.o, ०५८86 ho 18 skilful to please thom 4 

^ Eha senses ane completoly adler control” (Jitondiiyaganah)— 
४6, he is one who should be counted among those that have 
completely subjugated their senses, 

“His mnd . . , Brahman” (Dhynnivadhina-ksha nah) — 
Dhyfna 1s Bralma-chintana, and Avadhana means stoady and 
intense concentration of the mind, Tho Yogi is capable of both 

“Tis wnspived epeach flows luke a stream of (clear) water” 
(Kavyambu-dhara-vaha),—tho flow of his speoch is compmed to 
an uninterrupted flow of water, and il is he fom whom 16 flows, 

५ Te 8 lke the Devatd who ts the beloved of Lakshna” (सको 
ianggana-daivatah)—Ie becomes like the Deva whois the beloved 


1 Privat priyatamal—mors boloved than those that no dent to thom, 

9 According to Shangkaras roading Jiikshmi becomes his family 
Devata—that ia, his family is always prosporons 

$ Parapura ; v, post 

4Karmmakushalnh. द Denyor than thojr hushanda ” (Shang car 9). 


84 गृणा, SIX CENTRES AND TID प्रगत POOR 


of Lakshmi Takshmi, the Devi of Prosperity, १५ the spouse of 
Vehnu. Mus compound word 18 capable of anothor meaning. It 
may nean One who has enjoyed all prosperity (Lalsskm1) and all 
good fortuno (Ranggana) in this world and who goes along tho path 
of liboration Jt has therefore heen said ^ Tayi g onjoyad 11 
this world the best of pleasuios, he m the end goos to the abode of 
Liber ttion.” 5 

« Another's body” (Para-pma).—TTo is able at will to enter 
the onemy’s fort or c'tadel (Dnga), oven thongh guarded and 
ienderod difficult of access. An he gaims powor by which he may 
render himselt invisble, fly acioss the sky, and other similar 
powers Tt may also mean ^ another प णा body ”. ४ 


Suaarary or Vursrs 22 10 27 


The TTemt Totus is of the colour of the Bandh ska १ flower, 
and o1 tts twolve petals are the letters Ka to Pha, with tho Bindu 
above them, of the colour of vermiion, Tn ils paricarp is tha 
heaugonal4 Vayu-Maudala, of a smoky colour’, and wbove + 
Stryya-Mandala, with the rikona Instions as ten wi hon flashes 
of lightning withn i. Above it the Vayu Bij, of a smoky hua, 
13 seated on 9 black antolope, lour-armed and carrying the goad 
(angkt sha). In hig (Vayn-bijvs) lap is thco-oyod Tsha, Uke 
angst (पादुका) [lig two arms extended in the gestured of 
grantiig boong and dispelling foar, In the pericarp of thus Lotus, 
acatad on a rod lobis, is tha Shakti Kaicint She is fouv-armed, 
and carries the nooso (Pasha), the skull (Kapila), and makes the 
boon (Vai ए) and teat-dispelling (Ablinya) signa ५10 18 ofa goldar 
huo, 15 chessed 17 yellow iniment, and wens every van ety of jawel 
and a garland of bones, Ter henit ig doftoned by nectar, In tho 
middlo of the Tikona 1 Shiva) the form of a VinwLingga, with 
the crescen6 moon and Bmdn on his hoad [9 is of a golden 


eolonr. 


4 Tha bhuktva varan bhogan anto mu cli-padam brajot 

2116 Siddhi by whch Yogia transfor t1emselves into anothor's 
body, as Shangkaracharyya is sud lo hive done, ‘he latbor inter: 
pretation is proferable, for such wi one will not hive enom’cs, o1 if ho 
havo will not seek to overcome thom 

3 (कीत Phonica 

4 Seo Introduction, 


DESORIPIION OF THD SIk CBNIRIS 65 


He looks joyous with ४ rush of desire, ! Below him is the Jivatma 
hke Hangsa. It is like the steady tapermg flame of a lamp.? Below 
the pericarp of this Lotua 1s the red lotus of eight petals, with its 
head upturned It 15 1n this (red) lotus that there are the Kalpa 
Tree, the jewelled alta: surmounted by an awning and decorated 
by flags and the like, whch ss the plice of mental wo.shp * 

(Here ends the fourth section) 


i Kaémodgamollasita. 
9 See Introduction. + 


3 868 Mahdnirvana Tantra, Ch, V, vv 129, 130, p 85, where the 
Mantra is given. 
40 


66 ग, SIX OLNTRES AND VIL SLRENNE एए 


Vursis 28 ann 29 


In the throat is the Lotus called Vishuddha, which is pure 
and of a smoky purple hue. All the (sixteen) shining 
vowels on its (sixteen) potals, of a crimson hue, are distinet- 
ly visible to him whose mind (Buddhi) 14 उपानत्‌, In the 
pericarp of this lotus thore is the Ethereal Region, cirowar 
in shape, and white hke the full Moon,t On an elephant 
white as snow is seated the Bija® of Ambara,’ who is 
white of colour, 

Of 118 four arms, two hold the noose 4 and goad, १ and 
the other two make the gestures® of granting boons and 
dispolling fear, These add to ITis boauty. In Lis lap? 
there over dwolls the groal snow-white Deva, throo-cyed 
and fiye-faced, with ten beautiful arms, and clothed in a 
tiger’s skin. Jlis body 1s umted with that of Girija,® and 
he is known by what his name, Sadii-shiva, 0 signifies, 


1Dther is tho olemont of thia Chakin, tho sign (Mandala) of this 
Tattva being a oivelo (पा प्पे Seo Introduction, 

2 Manu==Mantia==(here) “ Tang”, 

3 Ambara=the 11601616 प Rogion, the word also meonns “ apparol” 
—* Vyomni, visasi ‘ (Amaia-coshv) On au olephanv of vhe colour of 
snow 18 sented Ambara, white in coloir in a Bijaform. The Sangkret 
is capable of anotho. meanmg~ “On an olophant is sonied the Biya 
whose raiment is white” 

4 Pasha 

5 Angkusha. 

6 Mudra, ४ pp. 20, 21, ante 

7 OF the Nabhovija or ^ Hang ” 

8 Mountain-born,’ a title of tho Devi.as the daughter of the 
Mountam King (Ilimayat—Timilaya), The..eferonce 1s here to the 
Androgyne Shiva-Shakt: form See Commentary, 

8Sadassever Shivas=tho Bonoficent One, Bonellcenco 


DESORIPLION OF पाः SIX OrNIRes 67 


ComMEn rary 


The Vishuddha Chaka is १68९1106 in four verses beginning 
with these. 

“Becanse by tho sight of Lhe Iangsa the Jiva attains purity, 
this Padma (Lotus) 18 theretore called Vishuddha (pure) —Hthereal, 
Great, and Dxcellent ” 

In the region of the throat ix the Lotus called Vishuddha”— 
Pure (Amala, without impumty) by reason of its being ejo-maya * 
(108 substance is teas), and hence free fiom mmpuiity. 

५ All thé vowels” (Svaraik sarvaih)—2 6, all the vowels begin- 
ning with A-ha and endimg with Visarga—altogether sixteen in 
number, 

“ Shineng on the petals? (Dala pamlasitark) —The vowels 
bemg sixteen in number, the’ number of petals which this lotus 
possesses is shown by implication to be sixteen also, 

Dlsewhere this has been clearly stated : “ Above 1b (Anahata) 
1s the Lotus of sixteen petals, of a smoky purple colom ; 16s petals 
bear the sixteen vowels, rod in colour, with the Bmdu above them. 
Lts filaments ave 1uddy, and it is adorned by Vyoma-mandala "5 . 

“ Distinctly visible” (Dipitvm).—These letters are lighted up, 
as 1b were, for the enlightened mind (Dipta-buddhi), 

“Whose mind (buddhi) ts illumined” refers to the person 
whose buddhi, or intellect, has become free from the impurity 
of worldly pmsuits as the result of the constant practice of Yoga 

“The Hthereal Regron circular wn shape, and white lube the full 
Moon” (Pirnendu-prathita-tama-nabho nandalam v2 ettaripam),— 
The Ethereal Region 18 circular in shape (V2vbtaripa), and its 
roundness 1esembles that ot the tull Moon, and like the Moon 16 18 
also white The Shaiadé says ‘ The wise know that the Mandalas 
pai ticipate in the lustre of ther pecuhar elements”! The Mandalas 
ave of the colou of their respective Dovatas and elements Ether 
is white, hance its Mandala is also white 


1 See Rudrayimala, Ch XXVII, v 67. 

४ Five purihes. 

3 The Ethereal Cirele. 

4 That is, ench Mandala (1¢ square, circle triangle, ete ) takes 
after the characteristics of its elements, (Vide Sharada-tilaka I 24) 


68 THL SIX GENTRDS AND ‘11 SLRPLNI POWLR 


“Iu the pericarp of this lotus is tha cercular Hthercal Region " 
(Nabho-mandalam vritta-.ipam).—-In the lap of this white Ambma 
(or Tithereal Region) eve: dwells Sada-shiva, who 18 spoken ol in 
the second of these two verses. 

“On an elephant white as snow is seated’ ({fima-chchhiya- 
nagopari lasita-tanu).—Thus qualifies Ambata, 

Noga here means an Dlephant, and not a seipent. ‘The 
Bhuta-shuddhi clemly says. “Inside it is the white Bija 
of Vyoma on a snow-white elephant” Literally, “ His body 
shows resplendent on an elephant,” because [6 is soated 
thereon 

“The Bia of .tmbara” (Tasya manoh)—Tasya manoh 
means literally ^ His mantra,” which 19 the Biya of Wther or 
Mang 1 

“His four arms, (two of) which hold tha Pasha (noose), 
Anghusha (goad), and (the other tuo) are in tne gesture granting 
boons and dispelling fear, add to hos beauty” (Bhujaih pisha- 
Dhityangkusha-vara-lasitah shobhitiihgasya)—The meaning, in 
shoit, 18 that in Ihe hands Ilo is cairying the pdsha and 
angltusha, and making the gestures of dispolling fear and gianting 
(008. 

“Jn the lap of us Bia” (‘Tasya manor angke).—lUo is 
lee m [9 Biya form—m the form of Tang which is Akitsha- 
Biya, This shows the prosence of the Biyw of Mthor in the 
peucaip of this Lotus, and we me to meditate upon it as here 
desoribed, 

© The snow-whta Deva whose body ts wnetad with (or on-saparable 
fiom) that of Garvja” (Girvjibhinna-doha) —By tlis is meant 
Arddha-natishvain® he Deva Arddhandinshvaia is of a golden 
colony on the left, and snow-white on tha nght [6 dwells in the 
lap of Nabho-bija Ie 15 deserbod as “tio Deva Sada-shiva 
garbed in white rament, Ifalt Lis body being inseparate {rom that 
of लाप, Ie is both silvern and golden”. | 0 16 also spoken of as 
“possessed of the down-tuined digit (Kali) of the Moon which 
constantly drops nectar ”.3 


1 The Biya of a thing 18 that thing in essence. 
2 Wara-Ganri-miirt: (Shangkara) 
3 This 18 the Ana Kala, 


DESCRIPLION OF THD SIX OENIRLS 69 


The Nirvana Tantra, in dealing with the Vishuddha Chakra, 
says: “Within the Yantra? is the Bull, and ove) 1t a lon Seat 
(Singhasana), On this 18 the eternal Gaur, and on [er right 1s 
Sade-Shiva He has five faces, and thiee eyes to each face; His 
body 1s smemed with ashes, and He 18 like a mountain of silver. 
The Deva is weaiing the skin of ४ tiger, and garlands of snakes 
are His o.naments,” 

The Lternal Gauri (Sad@ Gaut1) 16 there as half of Shiva’s 
body. She 1s in the same placa spoken of as “the Gaun, the 
Mother of the Universe, who is the other half of the body of Shiva ”. 

“With ten beautiful arms” (Lalita-dasha-bhuja} The 
Author here has said noth ng of what weapons the Deva has in His 
hands Ina Dhyana elsewhere Ie 18 spoken of as cariying in His 
hands the Shula (trident), the Tangka (battle axe), the Kripana 
(sword), the Vajia (thunde: bolt), Dahana (fire), the Nagendra (snake- 
king), the Ghanta (bell), the Angkusha (gond), Pasha (noose), and 
making the gesture dispellmg fear (Abhitikara).3 In meditating on 
Hun, therefore, He should be thought of as carrying these imple- 
ments and substances and making these gestures m and by Ife ten 
arms. Great (Prasiddha lit known) here wel known for his 
greatness. The vast can be easily understood, 


1Patala VILL The text translated is mcorrect. In Ragsikamohann 
Chaétopadhyayn'’s Ddition it runs + Within the Yantra is the bull, 
half whose body 18 that of a lion.” This is consistent with the Arddha- 
namshyara, as the bull is the Vahana (09) 161) of Shiva, and the lion of 
the Devi, 

2 That is Yiat-kona yantra 

3 This gesture is onlled also Astra or a weapon which 1s thrown 
because 1४ throws goodness on the Sadhaka, 


70 THD SIX CDNIRES AND THE SURPRNL POWRR 


Verse 30 


Purrr than the Ocean of Nectar is the Shakti Shikini 
who dwells in this Lotus. Her raiment is yollow, and 
in Her four lotus hands She carrios the bow, tho arrow, 
the noose, and the goad. ‘The whole rogion of the Moon 
without the mark of the hare! is in tho pericarp of this 
Lotus. ‘This (region) 1s the gateway of great Taboration 
for him who desires tho wealth of Yoga and whose 8011868 
are pure and controlled, 


Coimtan i Ary 


"Here the Author speaks of the presence of Shakini m the 
10५1108) 9 of the Vishuddht Lotus, 

५ Purer than the Ocoun of Nectar ” (Sudhwindhoh ° Shnddha). 
—The Ocoan of Noctar is white and cool and makes minor tal 
Shakini, who w tho Lorn of hght ilsolf (Jyotih-svai apa) 1 white 
and heatless, 

In the followmg 19) त of Shakam She is dosortbad in detail : 
“Tet tie excellant Sidhaka meditate m the thont lotus on the 
Devi Shakim She is light itself (Jyolih-svaripa) ; sach of Ter 
five beantiful taces is shiming with three eyes, In [ण lots hands 
She caries the noose, the goad, the sign of (116 book, and males 
the Jnmamudra,3 She maddens (or distracts) all tie mass of 


1 The ५ Man in the Moon”, 

१ Sudbasindhu, says Shangkaza, is Chandin (Moon) Sho is purer 
and whiter than the nectar in the moon. ‘The translation here given 
is according to the construction of Shangkara and Vishvanatha, who 
vead Sudhasindhok in the ablative, तीनो, howover, reading 
it 7) tho possessive case, gives tho moaning “pme liko tho ocean of 
Nectar,” which is the innermost ocoan of the seven osonns, which 
surrounds the Jewolled island (Manidvipn), 0 

3Mide by touching the thumb with tho first finger of tho ught 
hand and placed over the heart. 


DISORIPIION OF {MC SIX ORNTRIS 71 


Pashus,! and She has her abode in the ०16 ४ She is fond of 
milk food, and elated with the neetar which She has drunk.” 

By the expression ^ She is light itself” in the above Dhyana, 1b 
is meant that She is white, whiteness being characteristic of light, 
The two Dhyanas differ as regards the weapons the Devi has in her 
hands. ‘This 1s d 16 to differences m the nature of the Sadhaka’s aim 3 

The Devi ,1s sn the lunar region (Chandiamasdala) within the 
pericarp. ‘I'he Piema-yoga Taramgini says: “Here dwells the 
Shakti Shakint 11 the auspicious region of the Moon” 

“In this Lotus” (Kamale)—i.e, im the pericarp of the 
Vishuddha Chakia. 

“In thas penrcarp is the spotless region of the Moon, uathout the 
mark of a hae” (Shasha-parirahita), conveys the same meaning. 
The spots on the moon me called “the sign of the hare,” “ the 
stain on the moon” She 1s likened to the Stainless Moon. 

“The gateway of great lberateon”? (Maha-mokshka-dvaia) — 
This 18 attributive of Mandala, the lana: region, and 1s used in 
piuise of the Manda, It is the gateway of Liberator, of Ni vana- 
mukt, for those who have puiified and conquered their senses, 
among othe practices, by meditatmg on this in the path of Yoga 
they attwin hberation (Mukti) 

^ Who desu es the wealth of Yoga” (Sbrryama bhi ata-shilasya). 
—By Shm is meant “the waalth of Yoga”, Jor him who by lis 
very nature desires the wevlth of Yoga, that is the gateway of 
Liberation, This clearly explains the meanmg of Shuddhendriya, 
whose ganses 816 pure and controlled. 

In the pericarp of this Lotus 1s the Nabho- nardala (ethereal 
region) inside the latter 1६ the triangle (‘Trikona), inside the 
tuangle is the Chandra-mandala; and mside 1४ 18 the Nabho- 
bijat and so forth Cf. “ hink of the full moon mm the triangle 
within the pericaip; there think of the snowy Akasha seated on 
an elephant, and whose iaiment is white, There is the Deva Sada- 
Shiva” Whose isiment is white” qualifies Akasha, 


1 §eo Introduction to A Avalon's Mahdnirvana Tantra 

४९९, She 18 the Devata of the Asthi Dhitu, 

3 The nature of the Dhyana (meditation) varies with the am which 
a Sadhaka wishes by his worship, See Tantrarajn, Tantrik Texts 
Vols VIII and XJ], 

4 The Biya of Ether—Hang 


72 IHD SIX OLNIRTS AND 170 SDRPENE 1OWDR 


Versi 81 


Tin who has attained completo knowlodge of the Atmi 
{Brahman) becomes by constantly concontrating his mind 
(Ohitta) on this Lotus a great Sago,! eloquent and wise, 
and enjoys unmterrupted peaco of mind? Io scos tho 
throe periods,’ and becomes the benefactor of all, free from 
disease and sorrow and long-hved, and, like Hangsa, the 
destroyer of endless dangers. 


Comamnrary 


Jn this versa he speaks of the good gained by modilating on 
the Vishnidha Chakra. 

Who has attaned,” ebo (Alma-sampinna-yoga).4 —Llle whose 
knowledge of the Atman is comploto by realisation of the fact that 
४1५ all-pervading. Atman=Biahman, 

Accoiding to anothe: reading (Attn-sampiina-yoga), the 
meaning would be “one who has obtained perfection in Yoga". 
Hence the venerable Leache: §has said ‘Ono who has attinined 
completo knowledge of tho Atma 160०808 hike the still waters of 
the deep.” The Sadhaka who fixes his Chitta on this Lotus and 
thereby acquies a full knowledge of the Biahman, becomes a 
knower (Jniini)—2 ¢., becomes possessed of Lhe knowledge of all tho 
Shastvas without instruction therein, [is Chitta becomes peaceful ; 
he becomes “ merciful towards all not looking Lor any return therefor, 


1 Kan 
2Shanta-chetak Shama, says Shangkarachivyya, in his Atmanat- 
maviveka, 18 Antavindriya-nigraha—z 6. subjection of tho mnor sense 


3 Past, present, and future, ie 
4 Tho word Yoga is here used ag equivalent of Jnana 
4 Shumadichiryn, ५९३ Shangkarichian yo 


DESORIPILON OF Ii SIX 0 8 73 


He is constant, gentle, steady, modest, courageous, forgiving, self- 
controlled, pure and the like, and free from gieed, malice and 
01106 ” + 

“ He sees the three pertods” (‘lni-kiila-daishi)—26, by the 
knowledge acquned by Yoga he sees everything in the past, 
present, and futue. Some say that the meaning of this is that 
the Yogi has seen the Self (Atma), and, as all objects of knowledge 
are theiein, they become visible to him 

^ Pree from disease and sorrow ” (Rogashokapramuktah) 9 ५७) 
by having attained Siddhi im his mantra he becomes fiee from 
diseases and long-lived, and by 1 801 of his havi1g freed himself 
from the bonds of Mayw he feels no sorrow. 

“Tuke ILangsa, the destrojer of endless dangers” (Nuavadh- 
vipadang dhvangsa-hangsa-prakashah).—Iiom acts good and evil 
various dangers (Vipat) arise, ‘lhe Sadhaka becomes like the 
Hangsa whioh is the Antaratma that dwells by the pericatp of the 
Sahasiaa,? for be oan destvoy all such daugets and in the result 
open the gate of Inberation (Moksha), Iangan 18 the form of the 
Antaiatma. The rest is clea. ¢ 


Sumaary ot (या $ (आएका + तप्+ 


Ab the base of the throat 418 the Vishuddha Chakia, with 
aixteen petals of smoky pmple hue. Its filaments are inddy, 
and the sixteen vowels, which are 1ed and have the Bindu 
above then, sre on the petals, In its percaip 18 the ethereal 
region (Nabho-mandala), cirenla1 and whte Inside 10 18 the 
Chandra-mandala, and above it is the Bija Mang. ‘his Bija 
is whites and हत्य पणतु in white,® soated on un elephant, and 
13 four-avned In 118 fom hands he holds the Pasha (noose) 
and the Angknusha (goad), and makes the Vara-mudia and 
the Abhaya-mudré, In 118 lap is Sada-shiva, seated on a 

1 The poition within mverted commas is from the Bhagavad Gita, 
XVI, 2,3 

2 Of Sarvarogaharachakia in Shi Yantra 


3 That is, the Hangsa is m the 4 01: etalled Lotus below the 
Sahasiava, Shangkara and Vishvanatha call Mangsa the Sun 


4 Kantha-mile. 
5 That 1s clothed in space 
50 


74. THR SIX ULNERUS AND HID SVeRPuNn? POWER 


greut Hon-seat which 1s placed on the back of a bull. 11७ 18 
in his form of Arddhandrishveia, aud aa auch hall his body 
18 the colour of snow, and tho other half tho colo of gold, 
De has five faces and ten wms, end 11) his hands he holds the 
Shula (tiident), the ‘Tangka (battle-axe), the Khadga (sacuficial 
swoid), the Vajia (thunderbolt), Dahana,? the Nagendin (groat 
snake), the Ghanéa (bell), the Angkusha (goad), the Pisha (noose), 
and makes the Abhaya-mudia. [1९ wears a tiger’s skin, his whole 
body 13 smemed with ashes, and he has a garland of snakes 1ound 
his neck, Tho nectu dropping from the down-tuinod digit ot the 
Moon is on his forolead, Within the poricarp, and im the Lunm 
Reg on and soated on bones, 1s the Shakti Shikini, vhito in colom, 
tour-armad, five-faced and thieo-eyed, clothed im yellow, and carry- 
mg in Her hand a bow, an arrow, a noose, and a goad, 


1 Agneyn astra, 


DESORIP1ION OF THE SIX (तत पि 15 


Vorss 8141 


Tat Yogi, his mind constantly fixed on this Lotus, his 
breath controlled by Kumbhaka,? is in his wrath? able to 
move all the three worlds Neither Brahma nor Vishnu, 
neither Hari-Hara‘ nor Stiryya’ nor Ganapa,° is able to 
contro] his power (resist him), 


४) ११५१५. 


“Es wreath controlled by Kumbhaka” (Atta-pavana),— 
Literally 16 meang, who has taken the aw in, which is done by 
Kumbhaka, 

“Hara a.”’—Tho Yugula (coupled) form, consisting ‘of 
Vishnu and Shiva combined , 

^ Suryya” (Kha-mani)—This word means the jewel of the 
sky, or Sihyya, 

(Here ends the fifth section) 


1 This verse has not been taken into account either by Kalicharana 
or Shangkara, It 18 given by Bala-deva in his text, and 1118 Commentary 
js also here given I 18 in Trpurasiiva-samuchohaya, Ch. V, 26, 

® Retention of breath in Prandyima 18 Kumbhaka, 

3 "This is praise (Stutivada) of his great powers—that 1s, were he to 
get angry he could move the thres worlds 

4 Seq Commentary.. 

४ Sun. 866 Commentary 

8 Ganesha. 


76 THE SIX CENIRTS AND 41) SERPENT POWDER 


भए 32 


Tas Lotus named Ajnat is hke the Moon, (beautifully 
whiie). On its two petals are the letters [la and Ksha, 
which are also white and enhance its beauty. Tt shinos 
with the glory of Dhyana.* Inside it 18 the Shakti Hikim, 
whose six faces 816 hke so many moons. She has six arms, 
in one of which She holds a book*; two others are lifted up 
in the gestures of dispelling foar and granting boons, and 
with the rest She holds a skull, a small drum,‘ and a 
rosary.’ Ter mind is pure (Shuddha-chitta), 


‘ CoMMENJARY 


The Author now descitbes tho Ajni Chalkia between the 
eyebrows in the seven veises beginning with this. 

“Totus named Ajna” (Ayni-nimn) ^ Ajni of tho Guru is 
communicated here, hence it is called Ajna.” = म 3 betwoen the 
eyebrows js the Ayna (Command), which is communicated from 
above, hence it is called Ajni hia Lotus which is woll known is 
here ¢ 


1 Ayna—command. 806 Commentary, The Tantriintain Tantra calls 
this Chakra the house of Shiva (Shivageha) 

2 Tho state of mind which is acquired by meditation (Dhyana) 

3Vidyam mudrim dadhini, ४९.) sho is making the gesture of 
Vidya or Pustaka Mudia and those of dispelling fear and granting 
boons It 18 not that she is carrying a book in hor hun 866 post 

4 Damaru 

5 Rosary with which ‘ Recitation” (japa) of mantra 25 done, 

6 1418 here that the Ayna of the Guiu is communicated ens 
Tantra, cited by Vishvanatha), Soe Rudrayimala, Oh XXVI, v. 68, 
which says that the Guru’s Ajni is commumented (Gurorijnets) 





PLATE 7. 


DESORIPLION 01 THE SIX OLNIRES 77 


This Lotus is betwee 1 the eyebrows, as the following shows : 
“Gomg upwards after entermg the thioat and palate, the 
white and auspicious Lotus between the eyebrows 18 reached by 
Kundah, Jt has two petals on which are the letters Ha and Kesha, 
and 17 18 the place of mind (Manas).” 

The following are descriptions of the Lotus. 

“Tnke the Moon, beautrfully whale” ( Huna-kara-sudrishang) 
—This comparison with Chandia (Himakaia) may also mean 
that this Lotus is cool 1 16 the moonbeams (the moon being 
the receptacle of Amszta, or Nectar, whose characteristic is 
coolness), and that it 18 alsc beautifully white. 

Tk has been said in “ Ishvara-kirtikeya-sangvado 
 Ajna Chakra 18 above it; it 18 white and has two petals ; 
the letters Ha and Ksha variegated in colour, also enhance its 
beauty It is the seat of mind (Manas).” 

^ Two petals” (Netra-patia).—The petals of the lotus. 

“The letters Ma and Kesha, which are aleo white” ({o-kshi- 
bhyang kalabhyam panlasitavapuh su-shubhram)—Phose two 
lettors are by their vory natme white, and by thuir bemg ou the 
white petals the whiteness thereof 1s made more charming by this 
very excess of whiteness? ‘The letters ave called Kalas because 
they ave Brjag of Kalas.3 

Tt shines with the glory of Dhyana ’ (Dhysna-dhiima-pinka- 
sham)—that 18, its body shines like the glory of Dhyina Shalt: 

* Hakini.”—Te next speaks of the presence of the Shakti 
Hakim here ‘The force of the pronoun 86 (She) in addition to 
Her name 18 that Sho is the well-known Hakini. 

“The gestes of dispellang fear and granting boons” (पता), 
—This word stands for both Mudias. ‘here should be six weapons 
in He: hands, as She has six hands. There are some who read 
Vidyi and Mudra as one word, Vidya-mudra, and interpret it to 
mean Vyakhyaimudri—the geste that conveys learning or 
knowledge—and speak of Her as possessed of four arms, D’fferent 


ॐ 1 


Ife, the Sammohana वृष्णि tra. 

2Or the menammg may be that the Ajnaé Chakva has rays cool like 
the ambrosial rays ofthe Moon and like the Moon beautifully whito 

3 866 Introduction, Prapanchasara Tantra, Vol. ITI, Tantmk Texts, 
ed A Avalon 


78 {HL SiX OLNIRLS AND tH. SLRPONT POWLR 


manusotipts give different readings. Various manuecripts read 
these ag two words ‘I'he wise reader should judge fo. himself 

In a Dhyana in another place She is thus desorbed. “ Medi- 
tate upon JIer, the divine lakini. She abides m the maivow! and 
is whits. In Her hands are the Danain, the Rudriksha rosary, 
the skull, the Vidya (the sign of tho book), the Mudin (gostue of 
granting boons and dispelling fear) She 18 fond of food cooked 
with Turmim, and 18 elated by dunking ambrosia. Sho is well 
seated on a white Lotus, and Iler mind ts oxalted by the drink of 
the King of the Devas gathered from the Ocoan " 

‘The rest 15 clear. 


. 


1Majjastha Acocordmg to another reading (chakiasthi) abides 
in tho chakra 


DFSORIPHION OF THE SIX OLNIRES 79 


Versn 38 


Wiran this Lotus dwells the subtle mind (Manas). It 
is well known, Inside the Yoni in the pericarp is the 
Shiva called Itara,’ in His phalhe form, He here shines 
hke a chain of lightning flashes The first Bua of the 
Vedas,? which 1s the abode of the most excellent Shakti, 
and which by its lustre makes visible the Brahma-sutra,? 
is also there. The Sadhaka with steady mind should 
meditate rpon these according to the order (16861 ibed). 


ComMENLARY 


Ie sponks of the presence of Manas m this Lotus, ‘ 

Subtle” (Stikehma-dpa)—Lhe Manasis beyond the scope 
of the senses, that boing so, it may be asked, What is the proof 
of its existence? ‘The answer is, It 18 well known or universally 
accepted (Prasiddha) and handed down fiom Anadipurus/ a हलान्‌ + 
ation after generation as a thing realised, and is hence well known 
‘Nhe evidence of the 8188169, also, is that this Manas selects and 
rejects.! Tero 1s the place of the Manas The presence of Manas 
is above the first Biya of the Vedas as will appear trom what 18 
about to be spoken of, 

 Phallie form” (Lingga-chihna-piakisham) —Ile next speaks 
of the presence of the Shiva-lngga ® m the Yom which is within 

lng, Kalang tarat: iti Itarah (Vishvanatha), “Ttara ’ is that 
which enables one to cross Kala Ing—that is, the world of wandering 

20m, 

3 The Nadi Chitrini. 


4Sangkalpavikelpatmaka This is the lower Manas, and not that 
referred to in the Commentary to ४, 40, post As to the mental faculties, 


soe Introduction 
5 Phallic emblem of Shiva 


80 ‘LAL SEX CUNIRLS AND का, SURPLNY POWER 


the paricaip. ‘The [tara-Shiva who is there 1s 7) Ths piallic form, 
and within the Yon, Within the triangle in tho pertcarp dwolls 
Itara-shivapada !—ie, tho Shiva known by the mmo of Tara. 
This Lingga 1s in the phallic form and white, As has Leen said in 
the Bhita-shnddln Tania: “Inside it is the Lingga Ttara, 
crystal no and with three eyes.” This Lingga resemb 6१ continu- 
ons streaks of ightning flashes (Vidyun-maléivilasam) 

€ Ryst Bya of the Vedas” (Vediinum adibijam) —He then 
speaks of the presence of tho Pianava® im the pericarp of 
this Lotus In the peucarp there 13 also tho first Bija—te., 
Pranave ,® 

“Which a the abode of’ the most eacellent Shakt, › (Pvana- 
kula-pada) —Kula—Shekt: which 1s here of a trieng dar farm. 
Parama means most excellent, by reason of its resembling ] ghtnmg 
and the hke lunmous substances, and Pada means place 10, 
the trangula spaco lence this Lija—namely, the Pranava—we 
peicave 58 within the tiuangle, ‘his ie cleavly staled in tho 


“tollowing text ` 


^ © Within tho paicarp, and placed in the trinngle, is Atma 
m the form of the Piavava, and abovo it, hiko the flame of ४ lamp, 
18 the el ar mng Nada, and B nde which is Maka, Fand above itis 
the abode of Manas,” 

Now, if tho Paramakulapada । be the contain (वापा) of 
and theiefora tisopmate Siom the Prarava, how 19 16 that 10 18 
gepnistcly mentioned as ono of tho sixtven Adhiras spoken of in 
the following passage? for st hag been said that “ sho sixteon 
Adhavas haid of attainmont by the Yogi mo Malidhiia Svidhih- 
thina, Ven-pma, Anihata, Vishuddha, Ajna-chaka, Bindu, 
Kalipada, Nibodinkai, Arddhondu, Nadi, Nadainta, Unmani, 
Vishin-vaktia Din avamandala, 5 and Shiva” 


1 According to Vishvavitha this wan Angsha (part) of tho 
Nirguna Para Shiva in the Sahas iin 


20m. 
‘ 5The letter Ma, that is, 161s Makérarips o1 Ma bofore manifosta- 
107) 

4Shangkara says that Poannkula=Milidhara Pidma, and 
Paamokulapada=Lle who has his abodo in the Maladhiin, 


5 See Sharada Tilnka Ch. V 136, Ch, 1, v. 117 c¢ seg, Kulixnava 
Tantra, Ch IV, and Inboduction 


DESORIPLION 01 THLE SIX OLNIRES 81 


The answer is that the second Kalapada is not the one im the 
Ajna Chala, but 18 im the vacant space above Mahandda which 18 
spoken of later ‘I'hs will become clear when dealing with the 
subject of Mahanada 

“ Which makes manifest the Brahma-sitiia” (Biahma-sitra- 
piabodha) —Biahma-sutra—Chitivn-nadi. 1118 Nads is made 
visible by the lustie of the Pranava. In ४, 8 this Nad) has been 
described ag “lustrous with the ustie of the Pianava” 

The Sadhaka should with o steady m id meditate upon all 
these—r72., Hokini, Manas, Itaia Limga and Pranaya—in the 
order 16५५५106. his 18 different to the order in which they me 
placed in the text by the autho: But the arrange nent of words 
according to their import 1s to be preferred to their positions in the 
text. ‘The order ns shown 616 should prevail ‘Thus, fist Hakini 
in the pericatp; in the triange above her Itara Lithga, in the 
triangle above him the Piavava and last of all, above the Pianava 
itself, Manus should be medicated upon. 


61 


82 IH) SIX OBNTRES AND 177, SDRPEN) POWLR 


Vins 84 


Tar excellent Sidhaka, whose Atmi is nothing but a 
meditation on this Lotus, is ablo quickly to entor another's 
body ? at will, and becomes tho most oxcollent among Munis, 
and all-knowing and all-sceing. Hoe becomos tho benofactor 
of all, and vorsed in all the Shistras. Tle realises his 
unity with the Brahman and acquires excolient and un- 
known powors.* Tull of fame and long-lived, he ever 

. becomes the Creator, Destroyer, and Preserver, of the three 
worlds. 


GCONMYNLARY 


In this vorse ho speaks of the good to be gained hy the 
Dhyana of this Lotus. 

Most ewcellent amony Munis” (Munindra).—A Muni is one 
who is accomplished in Dhyana and Yoga? and othe excellent 
acqunements, ‘Che suffix Indra means King or Uheftain, and is 
added to names to sgmify excollence, 

८ Versed ww all che Sndstras ’ (Sarva-shasn drchavectil).—Such 
an one becomes proficient in the Shistias and in Divine knowledge, 
and thus he becomes all-seeing (Sarva-daishi)—t¢, able to look at 
things from all points by reason of Ins being possessed of wisdom 
and knowledge which harmonises with Shistras, manners, and 
customs. 


1 Pava-pura—may also mean anothor’s hoi se. See p 63, ante, 


2 उतवा. ८ 


3 Dhyanayogidisampannah. ~The word may also menn one who is an 
adept in प and 00 acquiromonts, 


DELSCRILION OF THL SIX CLINIRTS 83 


“ TIa realises,” ०८८ (Advaitichara-vadi). Ue knows that this 
Universe and all matemal existence 1s the Brahman, from such 
sayings of Shruti as, “The worlds ae Its Pada (thats Angshas) ”: 
५ All that exists is the Brahman”, 1 and, ‘ I am the Deva, and no. 
one else; I am the very Brahman, and soniow 1s not my share.” ४ 
He knows that the Brahman a one 18 the Real (sat), and every- 
thing else is unreal (Asaf), and that they all shine by the hght ot 
the Brahman,’ ‘the man who by such knowledge 18 able to realise 
the identity of the Individual with the Supreme Spiut 4 (Jivatma 
and Paiamatma), and preaches it, 1s an Advailavadi. 

“ Facellent and unknown powers” (Paramapuiva-siddln)— 
that is, most exalted and excellent powers, 

५ full of fame” (Prasiddha) 1¢, famous by reason of his 
excellence, 

“ He aver becumes,” otc (So’pt karta tri-bhuvana-blavane 
sanghretau palane cha).—This is Prashangsa-vada ; 5 or it may mean 
that sich Sadhaka bacomes absorbed in the Supieme on the 
dissolution of the body, and thus becomes the source of Creation, 
Preservation, and Destruction ^ 


^ 


1 Pado ‘sya v’shva bhiittiniti’ ‘T'adidang sarvvang Biahma’ Tho 
Chha -Up. reads (3, 19, 8), ‘Pido’sya sarva bhutani’ and (3 14 1), 
९ दद्य रकी khalvidam Brahma’ which mean the same things, 

2 Ahang १७९० ne chinyo’son Biahmaivdasmi na shokabhak 

3 Biahmaivarkang sad-vastu tadanyad asat prapancha-samudayas 
tu Biahbma-bhasatay& bhasate, 

4 Jivatmo-paramdtmanor aikyachintauam 

ide, Stuti-vada, or praise or, as we should say, comphment, 
which, while 169] in tho sense of the presence of a desire to praise that 
which 18 in fact praiseworthy, is unreal 80 fer as regards the actual 
words in which that desie is voiced 


84 TIL SIX (पि AND THL SERPENT POWER 


Vorsh 36 


Wismiw the triangle in ths Chakra over dwolls tho com- 
bination of lettera ! which form the Pranava, It 1s the inner 
Atma as pure mind (Buddhi), and resembles a flamo in its 
radiance. Above it is the half (crescent) moon, and above 
this, again, 18 Ma-kira,’ shining m its form of Bindu. 
Above this 18 Nada, whose whiteness equals that of Bala. 
rama’ and diffuses the rays of the Moon. * 


Comaten Lary 


The author desires to speak of the presence of tha Pranava in 
thet Ajni Chakra and says that in this Chakia, and within the 
tmangle which has eheady boen spoken of, over dwells tho com- 
bmation of the letters A and U which by the rules of Sandhi 
males tio thirteenth vowal 0 8 combination of letters 18 
Suddha-buddhyantmitimi—z¢, the innermost Spruit manifesting ५8 
pure intelligence (Buddhi). ‘The quealon may bo asked if the 
thirteenth vowel (0) is that, ‘To obviate this the author quahfies it 
by saymng “above it 1s tho half Moon, ete.” It 18 by udd ng the 
half Moon (Nada) and Bindu to 0 that the Pramava 14 fo med 

Tle next gives its attributes " 

“ Resombles a flame wm rts radiance” (Pradipibhajyotah) —But 
how can this thnteenth vowel by itself be Shuddha-buddhyan- 
tuatme? He therefore says: 

 tbove % 18 the crescent moon” (‘Tadirdhve chandrardhah). 


1That 18, a and #, which by Sandh: becomes 0, and with annavara 
(th) thus form the Pranaya, or mantza Om 

2 The letter Min its प्ता form m Chandya-vindn. 

3 Shangkara veads 1६ as “Jaladhavala, ote,” and explains it by 
“white like water’, The last potion may also moan “ amiling whrte- 
nesa equals that of the Moon ” 


DPSGRICRION 0 JIB SIX ODNIRES 85 


And above this, agam, is Ma-ktia, shining in ats form of 
Binds” (‘Vad-upart vilasadbmdu-:ipi Ma-kmahk) —It 1s thus 
shown that by the placing of the crescent moon and the Bindu! 
over the thnteenth vowel the P arava is completely fo.med 

above ther 15 Nida” (' पतप ताए nado’san) २५, above the 
Pianava is the Avantara (final o second) Nida, which challenges 
as it were the whiteness of Ba adeva and the Moon (Baladhavala- 
sudhadhiia-santina-hisi). By this he means to say that 1b 18 
extremely white, oxcellmg m whiteness both Baladeva and the 
rays of the Moon 2 

Some read ‘Tadodye nado’sau (in the place of ‘ladirdhve 
nido’sau), snd interpret 16 as, ‘Below Bndu-rupi Ma-kma is 
Nida”, But that 15 mcorvect ‘Lhe text says, ^ Above this, again, 
is Ma-kiia, shining 11 its form of Bindu,” and there is Nada below 
iL; that being so, 16 18 useless tc 1epent that Nida is below, 

0५७1१५8, this Nida 1s beyond the Nada which fons put of 
the Pianava, and is part of the different ating (Bhidyamina) 
Parabindu placad above the Pravava. If, however, it be पा&९त 
that it 15 necessary 110 state the details in desermbing the sped al 
Pronava (Vishishta-Pianave), and it is asked, ^ Why do you say a 
second Nida 13 inappropriate?” then the reading ‘I'adndye 
niido’sau may be accopted. 

But read thus 1t should be mter preted in the ma ier following 
“his Nada shown below the Bindu-répi Ma-kéia is Bale-dhavala- 
sndhadhira-santina 098 (५, ante), and the Nida 9186 spoken of 19 
also so १९8७1106 Such repetition is free from blame on the 
authority of the maxim that “the great aie subject to no 
Timitarions ५, 


1 That ia, Anuavarn 
2 Sudhadhirasantana, Vishvanithn says, means a multitude of 
moons 


86 THU SIX (पसह AND TUL 81 RPENT POWER 


Visi 36 


Wun the Yogi closes tho house which hangs without 
support 1 the knowledge whereof he has gained by the 
service of Parama-guru, and when the Chetas* by ropoated 
practice becomos dissolved in this place which is the abode 
of uninterrupted bliss, he then sees within the middle of 
and in the space above (the triangle) sparks of fire 
distinctly shining. 


COMMENTARY 


` Having desorbed the Pranava, he now spoaks of ils union 
(with Chetas), oe, Pranavayoga 
‘The Yogi: shoutd close the house (Pan baddhva)—ie, he 
should, with hia mid gat on the act, closa the पाणा house ; or, nt 
other words, he should make Yont-mudii$ in the mannor preserb- 
ed, and t ws effectually close the inner house he use of tho word 
Pur used shows that the Yon-nidiiis meant. ‘Then when his 
Chetas by tepeated practice (Abhyasn) ot moditalion on the Pranava 
becomes dissolved (Lana) m this place (the Ajndohala x), he sees 
within and in the space above the tmangle where the Pravava is, 
sparks of Fine’ (Pavana-sulireding kanin), or, Lo put 16 plainly, 
spuks of hght resembling spaks of fire appear before his mental 


1 Nirilamba-puri Niralamba (८, post) moans that wlich has no 
support «2, that by wich the mind’s connection with tho world 
has beon 1:omoved and realisation of the infin 0 ostablshed = Akiisha- 
mangst whose flesh or substance is Akasha (Rajannghantu Diet.) 

2 See next page and Intioduction. 

3 ४6 closes the avenues of the mind and concentrates i within 
itselt १ 

4 Pavana-sulheed “Ile whose friond is कए "न्ता, Whon the 
wind blows fire spreads 


DESChIPHON 0 MIN SIX CHNIRIS 87 


vision above the fi angle on which the Pianava iests Ibis by 
Yoni-mudra that the imne self (Antah-pui) 15 restramed and 
detached from the outside woild, the region of material sense 
The Manas cannot be priified and steadied unless 1t 18 completely 
detached from Lhe matorial sphere, It1s therefore that the mmnd 
(Manas) should be completely detached by Yom-mudia 

Yom-mudia, which detaches the Manas from the outside 
world, is thus defined “ Place the left heel against the anus, and 
the ught heel on the left foo., and sit erect with your body and 
neck and head iu a straght line. Then, with your lips formed to 
resemble a crow’s beak,! diaw n air and fill therewith you belly. 
Next? close tightly your ear-holes with the thumbs, with yom 
index-fingers the eyes, the nostrils by you middle fingers, and 
you month by the 10 naining fingers. Restrain the क्या withm you, 
and with the senses controlled meditate on the Mantra whaeby 
you realise the unity (Iukatvam) of Prina and Manas4 Ting 1 
Yoga, tho favoamto of Yogis.” 

‘hat stoadiness of mind is produced by restramt of bieath 
through the holp of Mudra, has beon said by Shut, “The nyhd 
under the ainiluence of Hangsa5 moves to and fio, over different 
subjects, by 1eslinming Uangsa the mind 15 1 esbramed + 

“Closes the house” (Pura baddhvi)—This may also mean 
Khechat Mudia® 11115 latter also produces stendinesa of mind 

As has bean said, “ As by this the Chitta roams in the Biah- 
man (KXha),? and as the sound of uttered word® algo romans the 


? 


1That is by Kaki-mudra 8 ruta says that when Vayu is drawn in 
by thia Mudiaiand stopped by K mbhaka steadiness of mind 18 produced 

9 These and followme vorses occur in Sharadé Tilaka Ch XXV, 
vv. 45 46. Tho first portion of th’s passage describes Siddhasana 

9 That is, by Kumbhaka 

4'hat is, vocite the Hangan or Ajapamantia, or broathing in 
Kumbhakn, 

5 The Jivatma manifesting as Prane 

0 One of the Mudras of IIntha-yoga. See Introduction 

? Khoa hns three moamngs wz, Uther, Brahman, and space between 
eyehows (क्षा) Brahmainanda the Commentator of the IInthayo- 
gapradipiki, adopts the last moaning in mterpreting this verse (Ch ILI, 
vy. 41,) and in commenting on v 55 of the [Tathayogapradipiki gives it the 
meaning of Brahman. 

8 Tat, tongue 


88 11, SEX CON RLS AND गाः SFRIUNL LOWLR 


Dther (Kha), therefore 18 Khechait Madri honoured by all the 
Siddhas ” 

The Chitta is Khechaat when, disunited fiom Mauas and 
devoid of a1 attachment to all worldly things, 1b bocomes Unmani? 

As 1४8 been said} “the Yogi is united w th Unman, without 
Unmani thero 18 no Yom” Niralanba means thab wl ich has no 
support —namely, that from wlich the mind’s connection with the 
would has been removed 

“The knotledge whereof he has gamed by the serrice of his 
Pa ana-qun” (Parama-guin-sevii-suy ditam) — Torame ts excellent 
in the sense that ho has attamed excellence m Yoga practice (by 
instructions) handed down along ५ ser’es of spnitual proceptors 
(Garus), and not the result of book-lear ning 4 

" 9611 ४१ the Guru.—Such knowledge is obtamed trom the 
Guru by pleasing hin by personal services (Seva), Cf, “Tt can be 
attaimed by the instructions of the Guru, and not by ten mill on ot 
Shastras ” 

¢ ¶ 14, abode of uninter upted १1154 ? (Su-sull a-andana)—? ९ , 
tlig 13 16 place whee ono enjoys happiness that nothing can 
interrupt. This word qualifies placa (Lhu-sthine—uc, Ajnie 
chakia) 

५ Sparks of fire distinctly shining = (Pavana-subi eam praviles 
sita-ru अ 1 kan 1) —heso soarks of Lue shing quite d stinctly 

Hsewhore it $ clearly stated that the Piamava 18 sm rounded 
by spaks of ght “Above it 1s the [पाठोप Alma, auspictous 
and in sh pe ] <o the Pranava, on all sites surrounded by sparks 
of light’ 


1 What moves about i1 the sky or ethor Lt is Manas which deprives 
the Chitta of froedom by causing attachment to tho world On being 
disumited from Manas if moves froaly in tho ethor, gomng its own way 

*Unmani is thera where, to coin a word, the * Manasnogs" of 
Manas ceases Seo note tov 40, Ut==without, and mani 18 fom Manas 

3 Mna is from Jnanarzava Tantra, Oh XXIV, v 37, 

4 Which 1s well rocoguaed (0 be insuflicient in theao १०18, 


DLSGRIPTION OF PHE 8 > CENTROS 89 


Vorsr 37 


He then also sees the Light? which is in the form ofa 
flaming Jamp. It is lustrous like the clealy shining 
morning sun, and glows betweon tho Sky and the Marth. 
It is here that the Bhagavan manifests Himself m the 
fulness of His might.? He knows no decay, and witnesseth 
all, and is here as He is m the region of Fire, Moon, and 
Sun! 
JONMPNLARY, 

ल 

Yogis such ४५ these see other visions beside the spay of 
light, After seeing the fiery sparks they see the light. 

“Thon” (Trdann)—ie, after seemg the sparks spoken of 
in the preceding Shloka 

९ thon desembos this Inght (Jyoth), 

“Glows hetucen the Sky and the Barth” (Gagana-dharani- 
madhyamilita) —This compound adjective qualifies Jyotch or Light, 

Gagana (sky) is the sky or empty space above Shangkhini 
Nadi (५५५ verse 40, post), and Dharani (Barth) is the Dhard-mandala 
in the Muladhiva ‘This light also extends from the Miladhira 
to the Sahasraia ° 

1 Jyoth 

2 Seo Commentary, post. 

3 Pairna-vibhava, which, howover, as Kalicharana points out post, 
may be inte:preted in various ways. According to Vishyanatha, the 
socond chapter of the Kavalya-Kaliki Dantra contajns ६ vorse which 
says that the presence of the all pervading Brahman 1s reahsed by 
Elis action, as we vonlise the presence of Rahu by his action on the san 
and moon, 

4 That is, the triangle on Manipi‘ha within the A ka tha triangle, 
Seo v dof the Paidukipanchaka 

5 The particlo vi m the text is used m an inclusive sense 


52 


90 LHE SIX CLNPRES AND (HL SERPLNT 70 


He next speaks of the presence of Puama Shiva in the 
Ajna Chalaa, 

५ ८ ५ here” (Lhe sthane)—i.e, in tho Ani Chakra; Paama 
Shiva is here, asin the Sehasiiin = =Bhagaviin is [ह पवा Shiva, 

© Mar ofests Himself” (Sikshiid bhavatt) 1.4. [16 1५ here! 

“In the fulness of 1/1 mght” (Pivna-vibhav1) पाऽ com- 
pound wod which quahfies Bhagavin 13 onpable of varios 
mterpretations, 

Purna-wibhava may also be interpreted in the following differ- 
ent ways 

(a) Purna may wean complete in Thmsell, and vibhava miinte 
powers, such 15 the power of o1oation, etc. In that cago the 
word would mean “ One who has in Ili n such powers, who is the 
absolute Creator, Dostroyer, and Supporter, of the Universe.” 

(b) Vibhava, agam, may mean “ the diversified and hmitless 
creation,” and pina “ all-speading”. In this sonse Pa na-vebhara 
gneans ^ fle from whom this all-spreading and endloss (vast) crea- 
tion has emanated? Gf ५ [धज whom all those originated, and in 
who having ouginaled they hve, to whom thay go and into whom 
they ‘enter ” (Shruti)* 

(c) Vabhava again, may mean “omnipressuce,” and वाद 
“all-sproacimg’’. Eb would thon mean: “Tle who in is omnipre- 
senco porvades all things,” 

(@) Purna 4 may also moan the quahty of one whose w sh is nob 
moved by tho result and 1s 106 attached to any objecl, Pama 
wmbhava would then mean one who 15 possessed of that qua ity. 

All thinga excopt Atma pass away ‘Che 6 nmiprosonoe of the 
etheveal region, (Akisha) ole, is nob ever-existant = (0० Nivvinn 
Tantra (Ch IX) spoaks of tho presence of Parama Shiva m the 
Ajna Chakia m detail 

“ Above this (ve, Vishuddha) Lotus is Jnana Totus, which 18 
very difficult to achieve; 1 is the region 4 of the {nll Moon, and 


1 He is seen here. 

2 Tat Up, 3,11 : 

3 Phalanupahita-vishayitanfispadechchhikatvaih Te whose wish 
18 not movod by tho result, and is not attachod to any object; or, in 
othe. words, Ho whose ways aie insciutable to us, subject as wo ate to 
limitations (Maya) 

4 Piixna-chandiasya mandalam, 


DOSORIPLION OL ध्र SIX CDONIRES 91 


has two petals.” Again “Inside it, in the form of Hangsah, is 
the Biya of Shamblu”; and ywain: “Thus 16 Zangsrh in Mane- 
dvipa,! and in its lap is Parama Shiva, with Siddha Kah 2 on lus left, 
She 18 the very self of eternal Bliss” By lap 1s meant the space 
withn the Bindus whch form tha Vismga at tha end of 
Tangsah.3 

So it has been said in deserbmg the Sahasiara: ^ There are 
the two Bindus which make the imperishable Visaga4 In the 
space withm is Parama Shiva” As It is in the Sahasraia so It is 
represented 1616. 

We are to understand that these two, Shiva and Shakti, are 
1616 in union (Bandhana) in the form of Parabindu, as the letter Ma 
(Ma-karatma), and that they are smronnded (Achchhidana) by 
Méya.® “She the Mteinal One stays here (क्वाह Chakra) in 
the form of a grain of gram,’ and creates bemgs (Bhitini).” Here 
the Parama Shiva asim the form of a gram dwells, and according 
to the Utkaladimata 9 also 01 cates. 

५ 48 He ws ww the region of Fire, Moon, and Sun” ad 
shashimihirayo. mandalamiva) —As the presence of Bhagaviyi in 
these regions 18 woll known, 80 18 Ile here. Or it may be thet the 
author means that as [16 in the shape of a grain of gram dwells in 
the regions of Fire, Moon, and San, in the Sahasrira, so does He 
dwell here also, We shall describe the Arka, Indu, and Agni Mandala 
inthe Sahasiaa later. Tn Pitha-pija the एषु of Paramitma and 


1 11116 isle of gems in the Ocean of Ambrosia. The Rudrayamala 
says that it is in the contre of the Ocean of nectar ontside and beyond 
the countloss myriads of world systems, and that there is the Supreme 
abode of Shrividya. 

2 A form of Shakti, 

४६0, the two dots which form the aspirate breathing at the ond of 
Hangsah 

4 Imporishable visarga—Visargarupam avyayam 

'That is, the Parabindu is represented in the Ajna by the Bindu 
of the Ongkara, which is its Pratika. 

6 Bindu 18 the nasal sound cf Ma, which 18 a male letter, Bindu 
38 1616 the unmanifest Ma 

¶ Ohanakakara-ritpmi, See Introduction 


8 Apparently a school of that nanie 


92 THE SIA CENURLS AND का SURPENE POWDR, 


Jninitma should be performed on the Mandalas of Sun (Arka), 
Moon ({ndu), and Tire (Agni). By Patamitma Parama Shivais 
meant, and by dnanatmi Jnana Shakti: ‘Pho Bindu should be 
meditated upon as like the giain of gram, consisting of the 
inseparable couple namely, Shiva and Shakti. 


1 Tho grain referred to is divided in two under ita encivoling sheath, 





PLATE 8 


DLSURIPIION OF 1111 SIX OBNIRES 98 


\/ 178 88 


Trius is the incomparable and delightful abode of Vishuu. 
The excellent Yogi at the time of death joyfully places 
his vital breath (Prana), + here and enters (after death) that 
Supreme, Tternal, Birthless, Primeval Deva, the Purusha, 
who was before the 61166 worlds, and who is known by the 
Vediinta, 


CoM MteNraRy 


He now speaks of the good to be gained by giving up a ठ 
Pring by Yoga in tho क्प Chakra ५ 

‘This verse means. ‘he excellent Yogi (Yogindta) at कक (पः 
of death (Prima-nidhane) joyfully (Piamuditamanah) places his 
Prana (Privang sammopya) m tho abode of Vishau in the Ajna 
Chakia (Lhe sthine Vishnoh—ie , in the abode of Bhagavan in the 
Bindu elrendy desombed), and passes away, and then enters the 
Supreme Purusha. 

“ At the time of death” (Prina-nidhane)—i.e, feeling the 
approach of death. 

¢ Joyfully?? (Pramudita-manitth)—Glad in mind m the enjoy~ 
ment of the blissful union with Atma (Atmanandena hreshia- 
chittah.) 

“ Pishnu "== Bhagavan=Parama Shiva (see previous Shloka), 

^ Hera” (Tha sthive)—io, in the Bindu in the Ajni Chakra 
spoken of above, 

“ Places the yana here” (Tha sthine prinang samiropya)— 
¢@, he places ib on the Bindu already spoken of. He desoribea 
Porusha as Eternal. 

1 Qompnare Bhayaynd-Giti, Ch VILL, vv. 9 and 10, and the com- 
mentary of Shengkardchiryya and Madhusfidana Sarusvati on those 
verses, 


91 JWG SIX OLUNERES AND PHD कप] + 1007014 


 Miernal” (Nityam).—Indosti wetable (Vinusharalit an) 

 Birthless” (Aja), 

^ Pyymeval” (Purana). He 1५ tho one known as tho Pane 
Purnsha 1 

“Deva” means he whoso play 13 Creation, Hxistenco, and 
Destruction. 

“Who was before the three worlds = (lm-jagatun ddynm),.? — 
By this the implication 18 thit Te is the Canso of all as Ile 
preceded al. 

५५ Knoun by the Vedanta” (Vodanta-vidita) } —~Vedintas 
are sacied texts doahng with the mguiry concermmg tho Binhman, 
He is kaown by ४ Knowledge (J 1ana) of these. 

Tha way the Priva 1s placed (Priniiopana-prakian) in the 
place of Vishnu 15 described bolow. Knowing that the time 
for tha Prana to depmat 1s approaching, and glad that ho is 
abont to be absorbed into the Brahman, tho Yogi sils m Yogi- 
sana ard restrains his breath by Kumbhaka, Ife then loads 
a, e Jivatima in the heart to the Maladhiia, and by cont acting 
théyanus! and following other proscribed processes 1040१ the 
Kundan, Ie next moditates upon the hghtuing- ike, पमष 
Nada, which 1s thead-hko and whose substance is Kundalt 
(Kundalin-maya). [० thon merges tho IJangsa winch iy the 
Paamitma m the form of Pitnas in the Nada, and leads i along 
with the Jiva though the difforent Clakias according to the rules 
of Chakia-bheda to Ajna Chakia. Ue thore dissolves all tho 
diverse elements fiom the gross to the subtle, bogimung with 
Prothivi, in Knndalini, Last of all he unifies Ter and the 
Jivitma with the Bindu whose substance 14 Shiva and Shakti 
(Shivasshakti-maya), which having done, ho piorces the Brahma- 
xandhra and leaves the body, and becomes merged m tho Brahman, 


1 According to Shangkara it is an adjective, and moans “116 who 
18 the cause of Oreation ” and the like. 

2 That 1s the three spheres उ Bhuvah, Svahk tho Vyihati of 
the Giyatri 

3 Shangkara reads Vedinta-vihita, and explains tho exprossion to 
mean “this is the teaching of the Vedanta” 

4 Gundam akunchya—that is by Ashyini Mudra, 

5 Pranoupashvasaparamitmakam., Soo Jninfirnavya Tantra, Ch 
XXI, vy 18-18 


DUSCRIPLION OL LITL SIX OLNTRIS 95 


Somaary or ute Agnk लातत) Virses 82 70 88 


‘the Ajna Chakra has two pebils and is white, The letters 
Ha and Kesha, which are while, are on the two petals The 
presiding Shakti: of the Chakra, Takini, isin the एना] She 
१8 white, has six taces each w th three oyes, and six mms, and 18 
seated on a wlite lotns Wish Sle: hands She displays Vara- 
mudin and Abhaya-mudra,? and holds a Rudriksha rosmy, a 
human skull, a small drum, and a book, Above Het, within a 
Tiikona, 18 [tara Lingga, which is hghtning-like, and above this, 
again, within arothor Prikona is the inner Atmn (Antaratma), 
lustrous like a flame. On its four sides, floating in air, are sparks 
surrounding a light which by its own lustre makes vistb e all 
between Muli and the Brahma randma Above this, agam, 18 
Manas, and above Manas, in the region of the Moon, is Hangsah, 
within whom is Parama Shiva with His Shaki 


(Hore ends the seth sectrorn) 


(Vishvanatha,? in the Commentary to the Shaéchakia, + 
under this verse n description, takon from the Svachchhanda- 
samgralin, of the region beyond the Ajni—that is, bey ond the 
Samashti or collective or cosmic Ajni: “ Within the Bu du isa 
space a hundied milhon Yojanas4 in expanse, and bright with the 
brightness of ten million suns [66 is the Lord of the State 
beyond Shanti (Shantyatiteshvara), with five heads and ten ams 
and lustrous as 8, mass of lightning flashes, On 1118 left 18 Shan- 
tyatiti Manonmani Sumounding them ४16 Nivritin, Pratishtha, 
Vidyi, and Shanti5 Bach of these is adorned with ¢ moon and 
has five heads and ten arms his is Bindu [attva, Above 
Bindu is Arddhachandra, with the Kalas of the latter—namely, 
Jyotsna, Jyotsnivati, Kanti, Sufrabhe, Vimala Above Arddha- 
ehandra is Nibodhika, with the Kalas of the latter-—Bandhati, 


1 Karbura==white, and also means var regated. 
2 V pp. 19, 20, ante 

3 ‘Vho portion in brackets is my note.—A. A 
4 A Yojana is oven sight miles. 


5 Geo, as to the Kalas, Introduction to Vol. II, Tantiuk Texts, ed 
by A, Avalon See also Introduction to this volume; and “ Studrea in 
tho Mantrashfstra,” by A. Avalon. 


96 Mi. शद ONNIRES AND PHN गणक LOWRR 


Bodhim, Bodhi, Ininabodha, Tamopahi, Above NibodInkais Nida 
and its five Knlis—Indhika, Rochiks, UWiddhvags, rast, and 
एषा, On the lotus aboye this last is Ishvara, m extont a 
handiod millon Yojanas, and lustious as ten thousand moons. Tle 
18 five-headed, and each head has three eyos. 1715 hai: is matted, 
and he holds the trident (Shila). Ife 1s the one who goeth 
upwards (Urddhyagam), and m His embiace (Utaamga) 1५ the 
Kala Urddhvagamini ”} 





LITAYOGAPRADIPIKA 


CORDING 10 114. 


८ 


Phare IX MATUABLDUA A 


AND YAMALA 


To face p 96 


10150 तिङि OF LAN SIX OLNIRDS 97 


एष्य 39 


‘Wurn the actions of the Yogi are through tho service of 
the Lotus {66४ of his Gurn in all respects good, then he 
will see above it (ie, Ajni.schakra) tho form of the 
Mahinada, and will ever hold in the Lotus of his hand 
the Siddhi of Speech." The Mahnnada which is the 
place of dissolution of Viyu? is tho half of Shiva, and 
like the plongh in shape, १ is tranqml and grants boons and 
dispels fea, and makes manifest pure Intelhgence (Buddhi).! 


ConMBNLARY 


Le now wishes {o descubo the inte:mediate cansal body 
(Kivanivintarn-shariin)® situate above Ajai Chalna and below 
Sahasiira, and says: When the actions of the Yogi are, though 
tho saivico of the Lotus feat of his Guru, in all respects good— 
that is when he oxevla by intense concentration of the mind in 
Yoga prackice—he then 8868 the image of Mahaniida above 1४ 


1'Phat is all powers of speoch 

2Vayok layasthinam Shangkara defines it by saying: Dtat 
sthinam viyoh virima-bhutam—thit 18 the place where vayu ceases 
to ha 

5 That is, Shiva is Makavo ; and sf the upper part of [ln is removed, 
the remaining portion of the letter has the form of an Indian plough 

4 Shuddha-buddhi-prakisha 

5 Karanavintornsharine, Kivana=scause ; Avintara—secondary or 
intermediate o1 inclusive; Sharira==body, Body 18 60 called because, 
it १०५8४86 and fades It ig derived from the root Shs, to wana = Kara- 
navintaro-shariva would thus mean “the intermediate Sharir of the 
Cause.” ‘The primary cause is the Great Canse Its effects are also 
intermediate onuges of that which tiey therselyes pracuce, they me 
thus secondary or intermediate causal bodies, Takmg the Saknla 
Parameshvara to be the frst cause, Mahinda 18 one of its effects and 
a Kaandvantarasharira gs regards that which 16 produces and which 
follows it 

5B 


४ 


98 Iti SIX CUNIRIS AND १1 STROLNE POWUR 


(above Aynn Chalat,, and he becomes accomplished im speech 
(Vak-siddha) 

“ dehions wm all respects good” (Sushila)—The good mcli ia 
tion {01 Yoga practice rendered admnablo by slong and wadiv dod 
appheatior thereto The (सप्‌ ष्ठ ebtamed vy very ng the Cary 

‘he anthor ther qualfics Nada, ant says 1 1५ the place of 
dissolution of Vayw (Vayor laya-sthinam) Tho Rule as “things 
dissolve into wlat they omgimite ion? LIfence, although in 
Bhuta-shnddhi and other spractices [ has been seen that Viya 
disso ves nto Spaisha-tattva,? and tle lattor m Vyoma,? Vayu 
dissolves in Nada also. We lave che utthouby a Revelation 
(Shruti) 101 this 

“Mthivi, the possessor of Rasy (Rasa-v 11), originated Lom 
L-kina? को Ka-kura,? who 1s Rast, the wate ५ and Ti thast 
issned; fiom Repha (र्द्म) ongimated Vahni-tabtva 0, from 
Nada’ came Vayu which pervades al lie (Sarva-prinamaya). 
Trom Bn du 3 onginated the Void? which is empty of all things 
and is the Sound-conteimer And fiom all (6६0 + ‘ssued the 
twonty-five Zatévas which are Guaa-maya All this Universe 
(Vishva), whol 1s tho nandane cgg of Biah na, is pervaded by 
Kalika.” 

Woe shonld therefore rea ise m om फते that at the (फ 
the Icttors of tho Kaih-mantia® me morged mto bhit which w 
subtle, Vayu 18 absorbed in Nada 


LPho “touch prineiplo,” also तपान्‌ ‘Lvak-tittva As to Bhata 
shnddhi seo tho samo desembod u Authors Introduction to the 
Mahan rvdna Lantia 

2 [णा 

9 Tho Bi a Kring is here boing formed (पदकारा kien 
Brahmi as ine Tkiia--Mabfmayfi.  Annavina or Ohandiabindn 
(Ng) 15 dividod into two ods, Nida, which 1s Vishvami ta, or Mother 
of the Universe; and Bindu, which is Dudkhahara, त 2५ naver of pain 
(Byakosha) 

4 Places of pilgrimage where tho devoteos bithe, Tt also moana 
sacred waters 

6 1106 

9 Aw, 

¶ Gagana, ० [न 

8 Lhotbis from Kring as composed of Ka-- Ra {+ Ng, 


१ Kring 


DESGRIPLION OF 1; SIX CLNTRES 99 


“alf of Shiva” (Shivmddha)—By this 1s meant that here 
Shiva 18 im the form of Aiddha-nirshyaia. [षा is Shakti 
which is Nada 

“Tike a@ plough” (Snakara) The word Sira 1s spelt here 
wih a short 7, oad m Anma-Koela at 1 spelt with 8 loag ce, 
but rt is clearly (1 @ samo word, as ib beg ns with a dental s. 

Cf. “Above 16 ° Mahanida, in forn lke a plough, and 
lustrous ” (Ish vara-ki tikeya-Sangvada). 

If the text is read as ‘ Shivakara instead of Sakata,” then 
the meaning would be that the Nida 1s Shiva-Shaktamaya? 

Cf. Prayoga-stha “That Shakt which tends towards 
tho seat of L’beration? 18 called male (Pungiupa—that is, Bindu) 
when, quekaned by Nida, She turns towards Shiva‘ (Shivon- 
mukhi)?? It ह thevefoie that Raghava Bhatia has said 
thet “Nada and Bindu are the conditions under which She 
creates "7. 

Tt hag alsowhere bean sal “She 15 etermal® existing 
४५ Ohit (Chinmitra)?. when bemg near the Inght She 1s 
deans of change, She becomes massive (Ghan-bhuya) and 
Bindu.” 


Jaa, Sammohaua Tantra Ud, R M, Chattopadhyaya. 
2 That is, 118 snbstanco 18 Shiva and Shakti 


8 1 she who is धान्त to the place of 
Liboration ; that is Shakti im the supreme state 


4 Tending towards, intent on, ow with face uphfted to, Shiva, that 
18 here topdmg to creation, That is, tho first stato 1s Chit. Nadn is 
tho Mithah-samaviya of Shaki :ud Bindu The estabhshment of 
this relation quickens er to turn to S nva for the purpose of creation 
when Sho appears as male, or Bindu 


5 Tasyi eva shakter nidabindu sizshktyupayogyorupan (Upayoga 
18 capacity or fitness for creation), 


9 According to another reading this part would mean ^ She who 1s 
the Tattva” 


¶ 8106 18 there, oxisting 28 Chit, with whom she 18 completely 
unified She “measures Chit’—that is, coexists with and as Chit, 
and is also formative activity. The above translation 18 that of the 
text, but the verse has been quoted elsewhere as if 1t were Chinmatra- 
jyottsiah, and not Ohinmatra jyotisha, in which case the translation 
would be: “She who ‘when near Jyotik, which is mere consciousness, 
becomes desirous of change, becomes massive and assumes the 
Sorm of Bindu ” 


100 JHI आई OPNIRDS AND JL. SERPLNE POWER 


So in the word of the honomed (Shrimat) Act arya 1 Nada 
becomes massive and the Bindu.” Now, taking all these mto 
consideration, the conclusion is that Shakti mamfosts horself as 
Nada-lindu, lke gold in car-rings uado cf gold? 

Nada and Bindu again are ono—that 14 the deduction, 


4 Shangkaracharya 
2 That is they aro both gold m the form of an उपमिन ng. 
Of Chhandogya Up., 0. 1.4 


५0 Gontle One, by one lump of olay all things made up of clay 
ae known ‘Tho yutahou is m tho names given lo it when spoken 
about The clay aloro is r0al.” 


DISORIPLION OF SUE SIX (क्रयः 101 


(81; 40 


41081, all these, in the vacant space 1 wherein is Shangkhim 
Nidi, and below Visarga is the Lotus of a thousand petals? 
This Lotus, lustrons and whiter than the full Moon, has 
its head शफात्‌ downward It charms, Its clustered 
filamonts aro tinged with the colour of the young Sun. Its 
body is Iummous with the letters beginning with A, and it 
is the absolute bliss. 


Cominn, ARY . 


ho Achiryya enjoins that Sidhakus who wish to practise 
Samadhi Yoga “should before such timo with every consideration 
and effort dissolve all things im thoir oide from the gross to the 
subtle m Chiditma ५4 All things, both gioss and subtle, which 
make up creation should first be meditated upon, As the know- 
ledge thereof is necessary, they are here described mm detail 

The five gross eloments—l»ithivi 5 and so fo.th—have been. 
spoken of as besng 17 the five Chakias liom Milidhara to Vishud- 
dha, In the Bhinandala® m the Mulidhara there are the follow- 
ing-—-tiz,, feet, sense of small, and Gandha tattva, 7 for this is then 

1This place 18 called the Supreme Ethor (Parang-vyoma) im the 
Svachechhandasauggiaha, ated by Vishvanatha. Pararna-vyoma is the 
name given in 106 Poncharatrn to the [highest Weaven or Vakuntha 
See Ahirbudhnya, 49 

2Tho Sahamira 1s called Akula, according to the Svachchhanda 
saihgiaha, cited by Vishvanatha 

3 Kevalainanda-ripam, ९.) Brahman Bliss. 

4 The Atma considered as Chit 

5 Havth, Water, Wire, An, Bther 

Region of the Darth Llement, or Muladhira Chakra 

7 Smell prinerple or Tonmatra 


102 LIU SEX ODNLRLS AND TL ५ ROLNT POWDR 


place. In 116 Jala-nandia,! च milaily, ace the hands, conse of 
taste, and Rasa-tattva? In the Vahm-marudala 9 ५16५ bho anns, tle 
sense of sipht, aid Rupa-tative.! Ln tho Vayumandals,® te 
poms, senso of tonch, and Spaisha-t tva.? In the Nabho- 
mandala? mo spoech, the senso of hearing, and Shebda-tattva, ४ 
These make fifteen tativas, Adding theso १५५6५ 1 b> Prithiv and 
so faith, we gob twenty gross talbvas, ८ 

We next proceed to the snbtlo forms In the क्म्‌ Chikva 
the subtle Manas has been spoken of Others have boen spoken of 
m tho Kangkila-m@ imi ‘Tantia (Ch आ) who denling with tio 
Ayn Chaka. “Tee constantly shines the excollont Mauna, 
made benutifn] by the presence of tho Shakti Nalini Lt is 
lustrous, and has Buddln,® [ग कसा and Ahaugkiia,! for ibs 
adoinn ent? 

Ficm tie above the prosence of the threo subtle [0119-७ 
Bnddlu, Piakoiti, and Ahangkira—in tins placo becomes cloar, 
We inst, iowever, know that Almogkiine is ob placed 1 the 
order shown 11 the nbovo quotation, We have secn that fom tho 
Miladhiia upwaids the gonerated 1 below sho (८ 1014660 , thi 
which 18 dissolved ig below what 1619 dissolved वण) पात wo also 
know that tho Shibdakiame is stior ger th vn [गद्या णाप ® We 
must rene एठा thal Vyoma is d'asolved 11 Ahangkiia, ard) ence 
the litter 13 next above Vycma Cf “In Ahang-kitva, Vyoma 
with sound should bo a’‘ssolved, and Aba gkira tga nin Mabet.” 
Ahongkina, bei g the place of dissolution, cones first above 
Vyara, and above 1४ ae Buddhi aud Prakoati. 


4 Svadlnshéhiin1, which is tho region of Water (Tile) 
2 Principle of trste. 

3 Mani pira, which is tho region of [१10 (Vahni), 

4 Principle of sight 

5 Anibata, which 19 the region of Air (Vayu). 

8 Prneiple of touch 

’Vishnddha, which is the vogion of Uther (Wrbhas) 
$ Prinerple of sound. 

9 Seo next 70४0 

10 See Intreduction, and pos, Vo nmenimy. 

HN Ygoiam — solf-cons tionsnoss १ 


That 1s, the actual arangomont of thmgs as compared with the 
ordor in which thoy are stated 


DESURIPITON OF MAL SIX ( [क 1.४ 108 


The Shinaditlaka (f 17, 18) speaks of then connectioi as 
Junyn (effect, gonciated) and Janaka (cause, ge rerator) 

“Viom tho unmamiost (Avyakta) Milabhita, Paravastu 1 
when Vikota ongimated Mahet-tattva, 1 which consists of the 
(प्त and Antel-kuwana Prom this (Mabat-taltva) ogmated 
Alm g-k a, which 1 of theo kinds accoiding to its source of 
geneiation 7% By पाच whici means change is here meant 
reflection or mago (Piativimba)® of the Paravastu, aud as such 
veflectiin it as Vikodts, but as it 1७ the Prakooti of Malate 
tallva, ०७८ , iL is also called Piakeatit Cf. पिप (णं 18 the Parama 


I Mahnt-tubyn is 4 1.9.11 The Mulobhnta asyakta 
(पठतत roob-hemg) conesponds with the Sangchyan Mala 
prakistr 1५0, as Riighava Bhatia says, Tabtvasyesitt 1s mdicated 
{Gomm to Ch. ॥ vv 17, 18 of Sharada), and interprets (Ch I sv 17, 
18) thus Unmamferst Mulabhiita Paravasita may mean either the 
Bindu om Shabdy Biehman. By Vikosta is moant readiness or prone- 
१८५8 to 06110 (Srsktyunmukhy) | णया this Bmdu or Shabda Brah- 
mu emanatus कष्‌ + (भ by whch is mewn foe Padiatha Mab ot 
which २५ known as Buddhi-taltve im Shaivaemati This Ms hat or 
Buddh -tattva ccusists of the (1100 (प्र Sativa, Rajis and ‘Lamas, 
Thet is it tiehtdes Manas, Buddlu, Abang-kara and Chitta 
Those fow aro the product (Kinyn) of the Gunas as cause 
(1९61 ven), und the cause (Katana) inhaes (ए) प्लोष) im tho eftect 
{(Karye) After quoting the words of Tshana-Sl iva Raghava remarks 
diab Vamakeshyiy tantra also cays that from tho Unmanifest Shabda 
Brahman कोटा पठ Biddhi-tetiva wherem Sattva guava 19 mam ‘est 
110 thon distinguishes tho Shy view according to wlie the 
State of cquililnium of चपर Ragas and ‘Tamas 16 Prake ety, which 18 
also evlled Pradhina and Avyakia (18 is the Suptome (Paravastu) 
Prom a disturbance im the equilibymm of the Guxas arises Mahat 
‘This Mahat consists of Gunas wd is the cause of the Antahka: was, 
By Guns according to this are meant tho fivo ‘Lanmatias Shabda, 
Spaisha, ote according to this view also fiom Pra vzti comes Mahat 
and rom tho latte. Ahangkéra ५ 

Righava thus shows tho different ways in which the text of 
Sharada can bo interpreted hom the Shahkta, Shaiva and Sangkhya 
points of view. 

2 Sp tehtibheda—that 1s, one Ahangkixa 1s tho result of the pre 
dominance of Sattva, another of Rajas, and a thid of Tamas 

3 That 18 in the sense of product, In Shaivasbiktadarshana, Mula- 
prakozt is पणू a product of tho Slivashaktitattva for the Self 
bocomes object to itself. 

‘That is पह regmded Lom tho point of view of the Paravastu it is 
an effect, but rogarded in relation to that which 16 produces it 15 ४ 
cause 


101 IIL SEX GENIRUS AND PAV SERPENT POWER 


(Supreme) Shakti, and Vikrvti is tho product ८५० Th has 
also baen shown before that the Pinkert of tha Pma Brahman 
is but another aspect of Thm (Prativimbasvariipun) 

Azeording to Shiadiulaka, Mahate-lativa is the same as 
Buddh 2 Tshana Shiva says: ‘tha objeolive Pinkieti,) which 
19 evolved by Shak , is when rssociated with Sat va gina, Boddhi 
tattva, [6 18 ths Buddhi that 1s spoken of as Mahat in Savkhya ” 

Mehat-tativa consists of the Gunag and the Antah-karana 
The Guras mo Sattva, Rayas, and ‘lamas Tho Shiinada-tilake 
says. “ Antuh-kivann 15 tho Manas, Buddli, Ahang-kiia, and 
Chitta, of the Atma‘ All these ne comprised in the term 
Mahat- tative, 

Now, a question may be .nised—namely, Lf Manas be withm 
Mahat-tattva, what of that which has been said in v 3%, where 
Monas has been spoken of ag having an independent oxistonco ? 
Bué the answer to that 1s, that that Manas is tho product of 
Ahangkua, and Righava-Rhafla quotes a [५६॥ whioh says: “ In 
so much ४५ the obher Manns js the one which १७५८५ and roy obs 
(Sn-sengkalpavikalpakn), ५ 10 is known to bo tho jnoduot ol 
‘Poyas” © "hus it is that, ४१ Manas and other (पष in the Ajna 
Ohalna me placed m then oder, Ahang-kina and 00५19 should 
be known as boing placed above them — In tha Ajna Ghakra me 
Hakim, Itua-hmga, Pisrava, Manas, Ahangkina, Buddhi, and 
Prakrzit, placed consecutively one above the other, No plage being 
agsigned to Chandia-mandala, which has been spoken of baforo, 
it should bo taken to be placed above all those, If it be asked, 
Why 15 10 not below all these? then the reply 1१ that ib has been 
sad in the Sammohana ‘ant a+ ^ Moon (Indu) 18 in the forehend, 
and above it is Bodhini Ilesolf” Tvom vhis it would apponr 
that Indu and Bodhi aie above Ajni Chalaa, plaved one above 

1Vikeetih prntivimbati—in a mirror ono is seen, but tho image ia 
not oneself, १ 

° Raghavabhaééa says that this 18 so accord g to Shaiva doch ino, 


3 Boddhavya-lakshani—that is, that whieh oan ho known (jneya) ; 
the objective or manifested Praleeeti 


4 Soo Introduction 
$ As to Sa-sangkalpa-vikalpa, sco Introduction” 
5 That as, Tarj ise ahangkena, which ts tho sowco of the Indriyas. 





Phare X PADMASANA पाता LAULIKI 
(५८ p 205) 


To {0५ p, 10% 


SCRIPTION OF QD SIX CEN RIS 105 


the othe: without anything mtervenirg between them, Bodhim 
18 above all the rest 

The Summohana Tanta speaks of the Cause (Karanartipa) as 
above Ajna Chakia: ‘Indu (the Moon, herve—Bindu) 1s in the 
region of the forehead, and above it 1s Bodhim Herself, Above 
णवा shires the axcclent Nedi, in for n hike the half (crescert} 
moon abvve this 13 the Instious Mahwmada, mn shape hke a 
plongh; above this 1s the Kala called Anji the beloved of Yors. 
Above this last is Unmam,! whch having reached one does not 


गछ ” 

In the whove passage, m the words “above it 1५ Bodhim,” the 
word “at” stunds for the forehead or Ant Chakia, 

The 3huta-s} uddhi Taitra speaks of tle existence of the 
[वप्र below Bodom: “Dov, above Vindu and Matrai-dha 
is Nada, and above this, agam, 13 Mahi ada, which 1s the place of 
the dissolution of Vayu,” Mitriiddha is Matrarddha Shakt. 2 

The ollow'ng passage from Brzha -tr-vikrama-sanghita proves 
that the Arddha-mati? means Shaktt “Lustrous like the young 


tfy this passayo Ani is Samam. ‘Tle Bhailashuddht (sce post), 
makes « distinctio too betwoon Anji and Samani, ‘Theso me the 
Avantaasharivas of the list Cause enumerated in Layauame The 
text quoted from tha Sl arada gives the Sresht” kiama 

2 Matvirddhi In the Dov Bhigavatn thers occurs the oxpression 
Arddha-miitia (which 14 a namo for Nada) in I, 1, ए 55, and TIT 5, 
vy, 29, and Nilakanéha defines #10 mean Param padam—tho sup eme 
stale, ov the Brahman The expression Arddha matra also occurs in 
Chandi, 1, 53, m practically the «ame sonse Gopala Chakravai ti quotes 
a passngo which says “ Arddhamitra 18 atiributeless (Niguet), and 
realisable by the Yogi” 17९ quotes another passage which says ‘Om 
~~this ig the 11115 Vedas thioe Lokas, and after: the thieo Lokas 
Mitriiddha 15 tho fourth—tho Supreme Tattva.” Seo CNandi 
“Tvamndgithe arddhamit.ési, and Devibhagavale J, 5,v 55  Shrati 
says “Thou at the Arddhamétii of Pranava, Gayatri, and Vyahits.” 
Rere the un ty of Devi and Brahman is shown. 80618 Brahman united 
with 21819 (Alay Avishishéabyahmaripii). ‘the Nadabindu Upanishad 
(v 1) soys ' A-kara is the r'ght wing (of On fignred as » bud), 
{~ sre is the other (left) wing, Ma-kéia the 111}, and Arddhamatia 
the hend, Sativa is ils body, and Rajas and Lomas ave its two feat, 
Dharma is iis vight eye, and Adharma is its loft eye, The Bhur-loka 
28 its feet the Bhuvarloka its kneos, the Svarlokn 18 iis middle, the 
Mahaloka its navel danaloka 18 the heart, Vapololka its throat, and 
Satyalokn the placo between the eyobrows.” Seo also Biahmavidya 
Up, v 10 

5k 


ध 


106 PHE SIX (क पोऽ AND LN SLRPENL PownR 


Sun 18 Akshma, which is Birdumat ( आता itsell), sbovo itis 
Arddham iti i, essocialed witi the Gindhirariga.”! 

As both the above passages point to (16 same thing, we muat 
take 1b that Arddha-matra and Bodhim are identical Bindu, 
Bodhin , and Nida, me bub different aspects of he Bindu-maya- 
para-shakti 

The Shiiadi-tilaka says: ^ Piom tho Sakela Paraimeshvara, > 
who 13 Sat Chit, and Ananda, Shakti emanated, ton Shakti, 
again, emanated Nida; and Bndu has its ougm fom Nida, 119 
who 1s Para-Shakti- naya mamlosts Mimself in thioo diftoront ways. 
Bindu ard Nada and Bi'a me but [hs differont aspects, Bindu is 
Nadatinala,? Biya 18 Shakti, and Nadi, agam, 19 the amon or 
reation of the on» to tho other 4 ‘Musi spolron of by all who 
816 veiged in the Agamas” 5 

“Para-Shakti-maya ” Para -Shiva , honce shiva-Shakti-maya 

Bindu. ‘Ihe Bmdu who 15 above the forehead is Nad it naka— 
, Ubab 18, Shivitmake® = कपर 13 Shakti as Bodin (कतो तेपा) 
Nada 15 tle connection betweon the two whereby tho one [५५ upon 
the other; hence if as Kiya Shakti, Abovo (1५५0 thive 1s Maha- 
1148 "1118 has already beon shown, 

“Abcvo this 14 Kalo,” ०५, ' KnlazeShaky  Anyi=ssa crooked, 
avy, bent line, ‘This is in shape lke a bent o crooked 19६ ovor 
aletter, This Shikt: appemed in the begumme of aenaon Qf, 
Paucha-ritia “Uaving thus seen, the Supremo Malo m the 
beginning of crention makes manilest the olerual [गणपा who 1 


4 16 third of the seven prummy subtle tones, 


2 Sharidi, Ch 7, vy 7-9, Sakala, 08 opposed to Nishkala ov 
Nuguna, means united with Kala, which according to Saugkhya 18 
Simyivastha of the Gunas which is Prakseti. Accordug 16 the 
Vedantistse (of tho Miya Vide) Kulais Avidyi आ tho Shaiva Lana 
Kali is Shakti: (Raghava 0110८18). 


8 Anolher text has Shivitmaka—that is, Vindu is the Shiva 
aspect 

4 Samaviya = kskobhya-kshobhaka-sambandha—lit , connec tion 
which 18 ४36 connection of rectprocty 

5 Seo Introduction, 

5 In the Benaros edition as also im Rasika Mohana Chattopidhy jiya's 


edition of the Sharadatilaka tho toxt reads Shivitmaln, ns if yualitying 
Vija, which seems o1roneons. 


DLOORIPLION OF THT शर OLNIRLS 107 


the embodiment of Sat, Chit and Ananda, in whom! are all the 
Tattvas, and who 15 the prending (Adhishthite1) Devi of creation.” 

Also clsewheic: ¢ [छा the unmanifosted (Avyakta) Pava- 
moshvara, the united Shiva and Shakti, emanated the Adya (frst) 
Devi Bhagavati, who is Tripara-sundari, the Shakti from whom 
came Nada, and thence came Hindu.” 

“Above it 14 Unmam,” etc. Gf. ^ By going where ‘ Manas- 
ness’ (Manastva) of Manas ceases to be, is called Unmam, the 
attainment of which 18 the seoret teaching of all ‘Tantaas,” 2 

‘the state of Unmani is the ‘lattva which means the dispelling 
oi tho attachment prompted by Manas towards woildly objects 

Unmam, agam, 13 of ४० kmds: (1) Nirvana-kala-ripa, 
which also has its place in the Sahasrain?, (2) Varnavah-.upa, 
which also has 168 place m this vegion Gf. Kangkata-malini: “In 
the pericarp of the Sahasraza, placed within the circle of the moon, 
is the seventeenth Kala, devo d of attachment4 The name of this 
ia IT mam, which antg the haic of attachma rt to the world ? 

Of also “By mental recitation of the Mali-varna (rosary 
of letters) 1s Unmani the gianter of Laberation (attamed).” 
Mali-varnes=Varnivalt-rapa 

‘he Bhita-shudd speaks of tho Saman below Unmani, 
“Next is the Vyépike Shakti (Diffusrve Kuergy) which psople 
know as Anji Samam ® 18 over this, and Unmani 18 above all’ 
This (Samam) also is an mtermediate aspect (Avaintaraupa) 
of Parashakti, 

1Righava reads “ Samastatattvasamg! abmasphurtyadh ‘shihatri- 


yupiaim which means “ who is the Devi presiding over or directing 
tho evolution or manifestation of all the mage of ‘Tattvas”. 

2 Vishvanitha, quoting Svachchhandasaihginha, which speaxs of 
Unmani as above Samana, says that in the Unmani stngo therd 18 no 
cognition of and no distinction is made between Kila and Kala, there is 
no body, and no Devatas and no cessation of continuity It is the pure 
and sweet mouth of Rudin Of Vrettilinam mana in the Shiva. 
Sahhita, V, 219, 

3 Sahasfvadhari, See Introduction. 

4 Sarva-sangkalpa-rabiti—ie, who is free from all attachment, 
not prompted by snything m any action, The passages quoted are 
from ch v Kangkila-malim. १ 

४ Vishvanatha speaks of it as दिह, and says that She 18 Chida- 
uatidasvariipa (that 1s, Chit and Ananda), and the cause of all causes 
(Sarvakivanakéianam.) 


108 TIN SIX GONERES AND TUL SERPINL POWIR 


We now get tho following 

Abov» Ayna Chakra is tho socond Bindu—which is Shiva 
(Shiva-svarupa), Above Bindu 15 tho Shakti Bodhini m shape 
hike an Aiddha-mitia, noxt ia Nida which 19 the union 
of Shiva gnd Shale, in shape hike a half (croscent) moon, next 
(above this) 18 Mahanide, shaped hko प plough, above 
Mal anada 18 the Vyapika Shakts, crooked (Anji) im shape ; above 
this last 1s Samani aud Inghest of these allis Unman ‘This 
18 the oder m whch the seven cansal forma (Kirana-.tipa) 
are placed, 

There 1s no need to go into further dotail Let us then follow 
the text 

Wishing to desciibe the Sahasiira he speaks of 16m ton more 
1061869, 

© Above all these” (Tadiuddhve) Above every other that 
has been १५8८106 ० spoken before 

“Over the head of tha Shamkhint कद्‌ w sight of which 
has been given to the dise plo 

“Vacant spac” (Shinyn-desha)—tha, is, tho plavo where 
thoie me no Nadis, the implication is that it 1s above whore 
Sushumni ends. 

“ Below Vararga is the lotus of a thousand petals.” —This is 
the pwpoit of the Shloke. Vismga isin Uo upper pert of tho 
Biahmagndhis Of “ (Moditata) in that पना on Visurgn 
the ove bhisstul and stamless.” ‘There mo other similar 
passages 

"Tts body 1 luminous with,” 666 (Lalatidymik शपा 
pravilasitavapul) ‘The word Lalita stunds for the fi st vowel, 
A. By ths we are to understand that the accund Sakina (11) 
28 to be left out in conntmg the letters of the Alphabet In 
counting tho fifty letters, the second Dakire! is slways 
left out 

Tf the text 1s 1end as" Dakavidyath varnmh,” as is done by 
some we must leave Ksha-kiin oub im counhng the letters, 
The fifty-one letters cannot be taken to be in (16 petals of the 
Sohasiia? ‘With fifly-one letters repentoc twenty — tines, 


^ 


1Vaidika Laken (Da) 
४४०, fifty-one lottorg em not be arangod in tho सषाम 


DESORTEITON (1 का) SEX CLNIRTS 109 


the nynber 19 1,020, and repeated nmeteen times is 969, By 
leaving ont Keha-kiin we mo freed of this difficulty By 
५ Dakivadyni” ib 13 10 meant that the letters are to be 
vead Viluma? The Kangkala-mal or in the following passage 
distinelly says that it 18 to be road Analoma? “The Great 
Lotus Saltsiita is white, wid has 1s head downwaid, and the 
Instious letters fom A-kfva (A), ondng with the last letter 
before Kehakina (Kesha), decoimte ot.” Here it 18 distinctly 
statud that the | भल Ksha 18 left ont. 

Akarddi-ksha-kinitntaih. Shis compound, Ksha-karanta, if 
formed by Bahu-verhi-samisa,s would mean that Kskakiia is 
left ont of calenlation 

There is nothmg said of the colour of the letters, and, as 
the Matevkit (letters) ae white, they ae to be taken as bemg 
white on the Sahasriva petals. These letters go :ound the Sahas- 
ama from meht to left! 

Some read P avilasita-tanuk in place of pravilasita-vapuh, 
and say that, as the word padma alternatively becomes mascul ne 
in gender (vi pings! pad nam), therefore the word Tann, which 
qualifies a word i the masenline gender, 18 itself masculine ‘That 
cannat 16 ‘The verb Nivasats (=28, dwells) has for tls nominative 
Padmam, and, as 1४ ends with the Banda (mh), 16 13 in the neuter 
gender and not maseulmo Tor in that case it would have ended 
with vrearga (1.8, 4), and its adjective, dann, would also end with a 
४१8१2, ‘he word tanu (1 then reading 1s accepted) would be in 
the nanter ; thevelore 16 cannot end with # Bindu, And if there is 
no Bindu the motre becomes defective. ‘Ihereforo the corect 
reading 15 Piavilasita-vapuh. 

The vest 14 clear, . 


1१.९५ from end to begining, 

2 From bogmning to end 

3 A form of Sanskxit verbal compound 

4 Dakshindve ta—tho opposite way to that m which the hands of a 
clock work. 


110 THL &X OBNIRTS AND (HE STRPINE [काप 


ए 15 41 


Wi nin 1b (Sahasrara) is the full Moon, without the mark 
of tho hare,’ resplendont as in acloar sky Tt sheds its 
rays in profusion, and 1s moist and cool liko noctar. Inside 
16 (Chandra-mandala), constantly shining hke hghtning, 
is the ‘Tmangle,’ and inside this, again, shines tl o Great 
Vond 9 which 1s served in secret by all tho Suras.! 


Comat NTARY 


He he e speaks of the existence of the Chandra-mandala in 
the pericarp of tho Sahasiaira, 

 Rosplendent as in aclea sky” (Shuddha)—soen 11 ॥ oloudloss 
sky (na malo-daya-vishrhta) 

^ 18 norst and cool,” 0८0 = (Puuma-rasa-ch ya-smpgdbo-sentinn- 
hast) —Smigdha पानो means moist hoe implies tha moiatnie of 
tho nectar, Prrama-rasn (Amrin) is {166 trom hoat., Tlonce the 
meamng of {this compound word: Lts rays 016 cool and mosh, and 
produce a feeling of smiling gladnoss, 

The Kangkala-malim speaks of the prose ice of Antu iitma, 
eto , in the upper portion of the space below Chandi -mandida, In 
dealing with the Sahasia a, ib says । In ils pericarp, O Devoshi, 
is thesAntaiatma, Above 1618 the Guru, ‘Tha Mandvas of तितिक 


1The nan im {76 moon 

> Tho A-ka-thad: triangle according to Vishvanall a. 

3Shii ya—Bindu thu is, the Parabindi, ov Tshvava, having ay 
its centre the abodo of Brahman (Brahmapada) In the vortl 0111 
Shaiva and Shikta schools Sadiishive and Ishvara aro the Ninoshe and 
Unmesha aspecis of the experience intermedi vo between Shiva 4१५ 
and Shnddhayitya the former boing callod Shiinyflishinya ‘She 
positions of the Sun and Moon oiroles in the Sahai a and of tho 
twelve-potalled lotus with the Kamakali aro givan in tho Toxl, 

420, Devas 


Wst UPL ON OL SIU, SEX ODN RES 111 


and Ghandia ae also thae, Above thie 15 Mabavayn, and then 
the Biahine-iandhra, [n this aperture (Randhya) 18 Visarga, the 
ever blissful Biahman. Above this (‘Tadirddhye) last 18 the Devi 
Shangkhini, who creates, maintams, and destroys.” 

त Watkin Ohandia-mandala constantly shines, hike laghimng, 
the triangle” (Thikonam tasyaitah vidyndakmaiupam) That is 
the shining triangle is there 

Inside this ahones the Creat Vord” (‘Tadantah shunyam 
sphurati)—Lhat which as a void within 18, the body of the Para- 
pindn (Paravindushm 1am), Within the tmangle the excellent 
Bind 1 (Shunya) shines, or witiin the tr angle the Shunya which 
18 tho excellent Bindu shinos, 

Cf Vodala Tantia, 6th Ullisa, ५ ‘The Supreme Light 1s form- 
less (Nirakata), and Bindu is imperishable Bindu means the 
void (Shunya), and imphos Gann also” 1 

^ Served am secret” (Sevitang chitiguptam).—The rulo 1s, 
“Matng (Ahiva), evaceation (Nithiit), sexual irtercomse (Vibita), , 
and Yoga, should be done 11 geeret by him who knows the 
Dharma.” Lenco Suras (Devas) servo or worship 1b im secret 


1 When it assnmes the form of Bindu, It is with the operating 
Gunns, for then [¢ is Sakaln 


112 HIL SIX (पदापि AND 11; SERPING LOWDR 


Vins 42 


Wor concealed, and attamable only by great effort, is that 
subtle Bindu (Shanya) which is tho chicf toot of Libovation, 
and which mamfosts tho pure Nuview Kali with Amit 
Kuli Tero is the Deva who is known (0 all as Parana 
Shiva. Ho 1५ the Brahman and tho Atma of all beings 
In Tim avo united both Rasa and Virasa,? and Tle 18 tho 
Sun which dostroys the flarknoss of nescionce? and 
delusion.! 


ComMnn sary 


Pho senso 16 that the vould (Shinya) is very sera and aubtle, 
bemg, ag doscibed later, like the Lou milhouth put of tho ond of 
atau, 61s attamable only by grew क| consesing of lang and 
incessant performance of Dhyana and hke pract ८७१, Tt makes 
manifest the puity of the sixteenth Kalt of the moon along with 
Navin Kali~re, the void (Anteh-shinya) slong with the Ami 
Kaa and Nivana Kua within the (ia iglo 1५ veal‘sed (Prak wham 
bhava) by medilanor (Dhyina) Lb m the some of all the 
mais of great Bhss, wluch is Liberation Soma howeve , aad 
Salcala-shushi-sala-s inddha-1ipe-prvkdshain as qua ify g he peat 
४० wothm the प्रणष्टो, and ied ‘alate’ to mean witl oll vhe 
s x.cen kalits and say that the Para Bindu manifests tho moon with 
such kalis, ‘This requires connderation When jt was sa त्‌ that the 

3 (0610 me savonteen Kallis (digits) of the Mcau, bib tho neet ४. 


dropping Ama and the Nuvdvakealy are only at th 4 stugo rovonlod, 
The other Kalas avo montionod im Skanda पाक्त, Prabhasa Ch wide 

2fho Bliss of liberation and that mising fiom to union of Shive 
aud Shikti, ede post, 

¶ Ajnana 

4Moha, This रणत oecurs m Tripure-siia-sammol chiya, ch V, 40, 





isi STAGE 


Puain XI UDDIYANA BANDIIA IN SIDDHASANA 
(V de pp 208 and 212) 


To face p, 112 


DBSORIPILON OF 100 Six CONTRES 113 


‘Tiikoun (timangle) is within the full moon, tho repetition of 16 1s 
useless. I'mthermors, in the previous verse we have got “served 
by tho Stas”, Tho torm “serviée” asx applied to a void is 
inappropriate ‘The object of service 15 tho Bindu within the 
triangle [tit be said that the Void should be worshipped by 
yeason ७, the preserce of the Para Binde, taer the Para Budu 
being there present there 15 no vord 

„ “Wal concealed” (Suguptam)—By reason of its bemg like 
the ten 11110100 part ol a han = ` 

© By great effort” (Yatuat)—2e., by long eo rtrived practice 
of medits tion (Dhyana) and so forth. 

“Chief iat” (Puang kandam,!)—?ara usually means 
supie ne, excellent, here clef, principal. Kanda= Mula. 

५ Taberation,” ote (Atishaya-paramamodasantina-rashi) ‘The 
compound word neans, literally, continuity of all the mass of 
grent and supreme bliss, and this 1s Liberation (Moksha), 

© Many csts, ete., Amikali ? (Sakelu-shashi-kala-shuddha-upa- 
prakishain).- [his componnd word 1s to be broken up as follows 

Sakalaz=witl the Kala Kala here neanng Nuvana Kala 
In the wood Slashi-kala the Kalu moans जषा tho sixteenth 
Kala, 0 shgit, of the moon Shuddha=pure; the lustre is not 
obscured by anylaing 

The sonse 1४ that the Pa vbindu, though subtle and othe wise 
unperceptible, 1s seen by med tation (Dhyana) wits tho Ama Kala 
and Nirvana Kala in the ‘Pikona, If Sugopy un be 1ead im place 
of Sugupta n, thon it would be qua ified by Yatuat. 

Some read Sakala shashi-kwa-shuddha-.upa prakasham to 
qualify Shinya in the previous verse, and say Shunya means 
“ vacunt space,” but that is wbsurd.? ५ 

Noxb he sponke of the presence of Parana Shiva in the peri- 
cap of the Sahasrara, 

© Poramashwwa ” > (Paramushiva-samakhyana-siddha). He who 
18 known by the name Parama Shova. 


1Kandw means bulb o 2०९ ‘Lhe Yoginhrdaya says that this 
Kanda ig tho subtlo Paranavda-kandabinduiupa, o the r00¢ of supreme 
Bhas in Bindu form (Vishvanitha) 

2 Aceoriling to tho Commentator, 11 qualihes Kanda Bindu is the 
ervele 0 , the void is tho Brahmapade or space within. 

3 Vishvandtha says that this Shiva 1s {10 Saguza Shiva. 


65 


114 THE SIX OUNTRUS AND ‘MID SERPNNY POW I 


“Ths Brahman” (Khaviipt).t—Khas Ai ma, tho spi. 

“Th déimé of all bemgs” (Sarvatmil)—Soi vase ul (bompy). 
Tle is tle Jivitma, bub m fact thore is no dist’netio1 bebwaon 
Jivatma and Paramatméi. Tho Atmfiis the Jiva Tho A Uhyatma 
Ramayana says: “he Jivitna 15 meioly nother name 
(Pavyyiiy») for the Paamatmé. When by the instructions of the 
Acharyya and the Shastins their oneness is known, then the 
disciple possesses Mulavidya concermny Jivilma and (काणो, 

The Shruti also, whon ut says That thou art -- 40 tvan 
ast, —idontilies the vam (Nhon) with the Tad (That), 

^ Rast and Puasa” (Rasa-virasamita) ~—Rasa is Pareima- 
nanda vasa—ie, the experience of Supreme Bliss!  Virasn is (he 
bhss whish 15 the product of tho umon of Siva and जी प्री We 
is both Or Rasw may mean the natmal attachment to worldly 
enjoyment, and Virisa detachment from it, ‘lho mean ng would 
then be in वाप 1s the Supreme Bliss auising from Ins detachment 
from worldly enjoyment, 4 

“Tu Sun’=TTongsa, As tho sun dispels darknoss, #0 doos 
116 dispel 08061106 (Ajnina) and delusion (Mohn), 


1Of Shruti “ Khang Brahma” Chhi. 4—10—5 एणा, ५ -L—1 
४ ५ hat Thou art” See Intvoduetion. 

५९) Mokeha, 

4'That is, the Rasa im Ilim has beeome Virasa. 


DESCRIPLION OF THD SIX OBNTRIS 115 


Vorsi 43 


By shedding a constant and profuse stream of nectar-hke 
ossonce,' the Bhagavan? instructs the Yati? of pure mind 
in the knowledge by which he realises the oneness of the 
Jiviitmi and the Paramatma. He pervades all things as 
their Lord, who is the ever-flowmg and spreading current 
of all manner of bhss known by the name of Hangsak 
Parame (Parama-hangsaa). 


(काप 


“ Constant and profuse” (Niiwvadhi vtitaram) 

“By shedding a stream of nectar-like essence” (Sudha dhira- 
siiam vimunchan) —I'hea compound word can be made np and 
interpreted in (कफ differont ways 

1. Sbedding a stream 01 nectar-like essence, 

४, The Adhiia (vocepts cle) of Sudha (nectar) 1s Sudhadhara, 
by which is meant the Mcon; Asiva is what flows therefiom, a 
stream. Now, what flows from the Moon is Nectar, which is 
silvay, hence the whole wod means “ the silvery beams of the 
moon”, [his adjective proves that the qualhfied noun is white or 
transparent hke the moon Shedding=Vimunchan " 

3, Asiva may, agai, mean “what is uttered,” ‘word ”. 
Sudhadhira==1eceptaclo of sweatness, which 18 a quality of nectar ; 


1 As appears fiom tha Commentary post this may be variously 
translated ns follows. “ By shedding a constant and profuse stream of 
neotar resombling tho silvery Leams of the Moon,” or ‘ By umemittin 
and noctar-like words strong for the dastinction of the darkuess 0 
delusion,” » “By conslant ropetition of tho word which is nectar-like 
in its morcy and conteins the essence of the Brahma-mantra ” 

2 That 18, the Lord as the possessor of the six forms of Aishvaryya, 

१ Self-controlled, whose mind is umfied with the object of worship, 


116 गा STIX पापा ह AND LIL स फणि कषक 1४ 


hence Sudhidhmisiian=nevtar-hke or ambioswl woid. "the 
moaning of Niravad] ¡ would thon be “ af all times,” and Adatniim 
would moan “ powerful in des toying the dark ress of ignorance or 
dolusion”, Vununehan should thon mean “ nblormg”?. 

4 Sudhi, षडप + ime) uve: “ neous of nor 4000 tad Sivas 
^ essence "—~t.e, the essence of Biah na-mautra; and Dhara is a 
stream (contimuous repel tion) of Lhe प्रमा वपि word contaming the 
essenco of tho Biah na-mantr ए 

© Tnstru ts the Vali,’ ete (Bhagavan numula-miter yates 
aviitma-jn mam dishata) 

© Vanr—He whos mind titently rests upon the Jevatd of 
his worship. 

Knowledge by whieh, ee, Por anatme (Svatmea-jnw ie) > Svan 
Jivatma and AtmassPaamitiné, and Jnina! that by which one 
knows—namely, the ‘Tataka-brah na-mantia, which leads to a 
knowledga of the Part mitna, and (990) holps the woishippor 
to 10४1186 the onencas of the Jivatmai and Paamitma = Dishatis= 
Upedisha.i (instructs). ‘Lhe sbove qualifying expressions imply 
that the qualihed noun 1५ tho Gia, ४8 instrag ions rogiding 
‘Vinaka-biobma-manire proceed fiom Ulm, So it qualifios 
“Pmama-shiva” in the preceding verse, ay 11५ 1५ tho Gara. Cf, 
Goro-tativa-nitipany im Laltiarhvsya. 

After doxciuibuug Guu as “the well-known and cxcellont 
Pusha who is over fond 2 of enjoyment with the Salt (Atma ate 
priya),” 1, goes on to say = ^ [14 beloved 18 the प्रपात Ono whe 
may be ga ned wi hdificulty by the Brahma-vartina (Brahma । road), 
The Parana Brahman 14 but the effulgence of Ter lotus Feet ” 

By the above passage is meant that the कक एवाक्‌ of Mor 
lotus feet oversprcads the heart-lotug of Paisma Shive who 14 Para 
Biahiman. The place for the foob of the lishons (पुनत) 
Beloved (Shakti) of the Guru is on tho breast of the Guin, and 
not ot that of any otha: Purtwha. Tlence Paramag Shiva and the 
Guru aie one and the same. 


1 Jnana is spiritual knowledge or wisdom and Vi nia ia tho 
knowledgo of the material world (scion 0) 

४१४८, who is engrossed in ^ 

Shs 1s m ऽ of Shaki, without whom Shiva fa Shave 
(a corpse) and unable to move 


DLSORIPMON OP LIE SIX GONTRES 117 


The Nirvana Tantra also says} “In the Lotus m the head is 
Mahideva—the Patama Gara: there 1s in the three worlds no one, 
6 Daevesht, who 18 so dase-ving of woishp as Ie. 0 Devt, 
meditate on Lis form, ? which meludes all the four Gurus.” § 

This Parama Shiva is outside the tangle in the pericarp, and 
above the [fangeal of which we apenk below, 

The Kangkala-malini ‘lantra‘ says. “In the नल} of ths 
Lotus, O Deveshi, 1५ tho Antatatma, and above it the Guru, The 
Mandalas of Sun and Moon are also there”? And atter having 
spokon o tho prosance of different things in ther order up to 
Maha shungkhin, it then proceeds. “ Below 1t, 0 Devesht, 1s the 
Tkona (tangle), placed 11 the Mandala of Moon, and having 
moeditniod there 01 the undecaymng Kala, (one should meditate) 
within ib upon the seventeenth Kale, by name Nirvana, which is 
hike a crescent” (Kuédtla), 5 


This passage occurs in the did Prtala of the Nirvana Tantra 
(Rasika Monona Chaseopadnyaya'’s [तानन 2. 3), and is in answer to 
the following question of the Devi “'Lhe Deva who is m ihe Tunya- 
dhiima (the fourth stato) 18 unquostionably the Paramatma. if he be 
placed in 1116 Lotus in the hewW, how can obeisance be made to him out- 
wudly P” Phat is, Mow can the Siadhaca bow to him who isin the 
head whieh is ataolf bowed ? 

2 "ho passage as quoted by the Commentator reads “ Teda igsham 
(his par’) in R. M Ohattopadhyay's प्रवा 16 reads “'Tadn pam ” 
(his form), which reading 1s 1619 adopted. 


320, Gun, Paramagarn, Paraparagurn, and Parameshtigury 


§Thia pasyage ००९19 प) Pafaia 1 (p. 3 of R अ, Ohattopadhyaya s 
Kdition), which im its entiroty runs thus. “ln it (Sahas.ara), O Deveshi, 
is tho Antaraima, and above it Vayu, and above Mahandda is Brahma- 
पादप Ln the Brahmarandina is Visarga, which 1s Dteenal Peace 
and oss (9 Niranjana which also means stainless, free from 
dglusion.) Above il is the Devi Shangkhim, the Oreatx, Maimituinor, 
and Dostrnctress {Inving modiinted on the Triangle placed below, He 
thinks that Kailasn (tho paradise of Shiva) is thore O Mahadeva, by 
placing the undisturbed Ohetas (heat or mind) here one lives in blise to 
tho full term of one’s life (Jiva-jiv1) free from all ils, and for such a one 
11910 18 no rebirth. Here constantly shines Ama Kala, whieh knows 
neither inovense nor decay, and wilhin it, again, is the seventeenth digit, 
known as Nirvann Kala Within Nirvana Kali 1s the fery Nibodhika 
Above rt is unmamfested Nida, offnlgent as ten million sung. 10 18 the 
excellent Nirviina Shakti, the ०४०88 of all. In this Shacti itshould be 
known that Shiva who is changeleas and free from ulusion abides.’ 


$ See Jnanarnave Tantra, XXIV, 36 


1 


~~ म 


118 THI SIX 6 NIRES AND TIL SERLTN COWL 


‘he above passage spoaks of the proscuce of Ama Kila, and 
५0 torth, wrthm che triangle m the Chandra Ved da, ‘The Guru 
therefore 14 holow then and above Antarftma Now, it wt be 
asked how at is bint, the Kangkla-malint having placed the Guin 
over the Antiraimy, the Gmn 19 spokea ०, as placed above 
Tlangsel ? the answer is that the Antualna and tho Tlungsah me 
one and the same. 

Of किय पत ष्णा im Kangkala-emali 111. “ Moditale on you 
Guin seated ०1 च slim g Unone (Simbhisany) placed on the 
excellen, Antaatme betweer Nada and Bindu,” ote, Also clye- 
whore ‘Meditate on you Grin, whe १ the image of Shiva 
Tlinselt, ay serted on tho Hangsa-puh which is Muntramaya,.” 
Also ef the Annada-kalpa Tatra? त Meditate on your Gramm 
the white Lotus of a thousand petals in the head, Le is Parma 
Shiva seved on the Hangs t among the fa nents.” 

On a careful consideration of the ebove nuther (१०५, the 
ident ly of Tangs. with Antuatind becomes clear By tho 
expression “ones own Guin, who 14 Naaman Shiva,” if is to be 
understood thal Patama Sluva [पता is the Gara 

The following passago, which 10१७५ o tho Svhas maa, shows 
thal Poame Shiva i im the trwuagle. “Within (00 nem) 1 
(पषात) 18 tho hghtnog-hke Triangle, and within the 
Tuotgle co the two Bindus which mice tho impershable 
Viserga. Thorom the ५ ipty void is Param Shiva.” 

These conflicting views load to the cone nsion tha, the 
Gm is wittm the tiangle m the pecers o the पात्व्‌ 
Lotus ct tweve p:als, below the pereirp of the 5 पपन 
and inseparable from 1५ Shi as becn made clew in the 
Padika-panciaca ककत ज [षणा these prssiges at is not 
to be mioned that he (in 1 is within the trivigle in he 
periceap of tie Swhasrata ‘The tiangida Hangs 14५ below 
the miuldle tirngle; otherwise 16 would एकपात with the 
authority of the Kangk@la-malim ‘Tanta 

“The pervades all things ay thew Lord” (S maste sur ९७8 [1४40 ~~ 
20, m this parcup dwolls He who 1 the Lod of A Now, 

1 Pagal Uf 


2 this quotation is net tracerbo 11 Pragsumakuminy Shastri’s 
Weition of this Tantra 


१8८८ notes to v 7 of tho तिता vi-Panchake 


DESORIPLION 01 JHE SIX CENLRES 119 


by saying that Parama Shiva is thae 16 has been said that 
Ishvma (Lord) is there then why this repetition? But there 
rs an objoch in so doing, as the following qualifying expressions 
will show ‘he Sarvosha (Lord of All) 18 the Hangsah—ze, 
Ife is the Mantra “ [Tang-Suh ”” 

Cf, Prapancha-sain “Sie whose name is ‘Tattva 1s 
Chinmitié!: when by proximity to the Light she wishes to 
cieate,® She becomes massive (Ghambhuya) and assumes the 
form of Bindu Then mr tine She divides Merself in two; 
the one on the tight is Bmdo, and that on the left side 1s 
Visarga. The mght and left ave respectively distinguished 
as male and female, Hang 15 the 3100, and Sah is the Visarga , 
Bindu 18 Purusha, and Visaga 18 Piakozti; Hangsah 1s the 
anton of Prakriti and Puruska, who pervade the Universe ” 

The Mahaka&h ‘Contra spaaks clealy on the subject (Patale 
[} “In the empty space? in the Chindra Mandala‘ which 
18 within tho Sahaséin, adoined with a celestial gateway, 
119 the letters Lang and Sul, over which (neditate on) Him 
who is pure liko rock crystal and dressed in pmie white silken 
imment, and go forth,’ Mere the letters Mang and Sah ae 
oxphertly spoken of 

O: if Hangsa and Puram. be read separately as 11971658, and 
Payama, 1 wonld inean “ Te who 1s known as Jlangsna and 
Pavama ”, The Author hiniself speaks of वा as Hangsahk 
in the forty-ninth verse. Or if the two words be read to- 
getha, then the meanig would be “ [Ie who is known by the 
name of Paramashangsal,” by oue of the exceptional rules of 
Sarmadhoraya Samasa this ware hav.ng been formed, the word 
‘antah’ being omitted. Cf Agama-kalpa-druma: “ He is walled 
Pavama-hangsah, pervadmg all that 1s moving and motionless ” 


1 Vide ante, v 39, The toxt quoted here differs from that of the 
Hidition published by me (See ch. I, vv. {1--44, Tantmk Texts 
Vol. TIL). 

® Vichikirshu-—“ wishos 10 ‘istort herself.” Here “ distortion,” 
or atrora, is crention See Introduction Vide ante p. 99, 

3Shanya. Tho Shinya is the empty space within the Bindu, 

4Tho lovatrve 18 fo be read Samipye sapiami—that 18, the space is 
not in, but near, the Chandramandala, otherwise there appears to bo 
a contradiction 


120 111} SIX CPNIRDS AND 1111, अनप रकः (क्न 


“Who w the crar flowing,” १८ (Sakala-sukha-santone-lahari- 
paliviha)—.e, m Lim becomes mamitest in ev ay posible way all 
kinds of imporishible and metering huppiness, thal 14, Hoa, us 
ib Were, an interminable chai of happmess. 

It has previonsly been sud that this Hangs eis below Parune 
Shiva. 


7 





एकडा, UDDIYANA BANDHA IN SIDDHASANA—2np STAGE 
(Vide pp 208 and 212) 


To face p. 120, 


NNR 1 | TON 0 ' TT SEX CLNIR ३ 121 


Vorsr || 


‘un Shaivas call it the abode of Shiva!; tho Vaisinavas 
call if Parama Purnsia*?; others, again, eall it the place 
of [षस Those who aro filled with ov passion for 
the Lotus foot of tho Dov + callit the excellont abode of 
the Dovi; and othe great sagos (Munis) call it tho pure 
placo of Prakriti-Purusha? 


Conan NEARY 


५ 

As Hangsah, who has in ति all dhe Devatis (Suyadevaii~ 
maya), and othors, mo in this porteurp, ib 19 tho place of the 
Devatis of worship of all classes of worshippois, such ५४ 
Shaivas, Shiktns, ५५, 

“The 91४५ 1.4.) the worshippers of Sliva—call at the 
placo of Shiva 

Tha Veasluaray® call ९ Parama Purwsha"—ta, the place 
of the Panna [मपा or Vishan, . 

© Others, ayam” (Kechid apnia)—.e, ofho ५ why ara wor. 
shippers of Imi-LHara, o1, in othor words, United Vivian and shiva 
and not ol Shiva alone ov Vivian wlone, calli the place of Tn 
Uma” ‘They do not oul it cithor the pluoe of Tas (Vista) or 
of Shiva (Lfora) but the place of thar nuited selves 


+ Shiva-athinam, 
2 2, , tho placo of Pavan a Purusha Vision 
४ Vashon ond Shiva 
1 Shakin, or the Goddess, 
5Shakt-Shive  , 
॥ Worshippora of Vistarn 
¶ (lavi-JTare-padam. 
56 


122 111 SIX CNERIMS AND (आ SIR BNL POWLR 


“Othe great sages” (रावणी upyanyo),—By this the 
author here means the woishippers of the + Hangs ve’? Mantie who 
call it the pme p ५८०५० Prakrelh-Purush Hangs 14 tho union o 
Prakriti and Puasha,? hence at 1५ he place of [वदं nid 
Purushe, 

The above snows chav, as chis Louis w fle dwelliig-place ५ 
the Paa Bmdu, in which me all the Icvatis, onch worshipper 
galls 16 the place of the Devati of his own sop wate worgdnp 


1Munt means “ knower” ard whose Mind is therefore always inn 
atate of Meditation a 

2 Hangaasyn prakevti-purushobhayar patvit Tang mw the Puro 
sha, ad Sab is Prokreti 


DLSORIBIMON उ CHL SIX CLNIADS 128 


Virsi 45 


Trar most oxoollent of mon who has controlled his mind * 
and known this placo is novor again born in tho Wander- 
ing,? as thoro is nothing m tho throo worlds which bmds 
him. Tis mind boing ecntvollod and his aim achioved, ha 
possessos complete power to do all which he wishos, and 
to provont that which is contrary to his will [0 पण्णा 
movos towards tho Braliman.? [lis speech, whothor in 
proso 01 verso, {५ over pure and swool. 


Conn rary 


tn this verso ho speaks of tho [1 o (८० एकोत cow cdge 
of the Sohasiie, ‘Tho ५१ songht to be conveyed as that ५ 
knowledge of this placo should be gmmod asa whole and im dotail. 

"Who hax controlled hit mud” (N yutaeniy-chitby)—de , he 
who has controlled ind consentiatod the mner faculties on this 
place. Such an ono bec 4 frac fiom Sangsiiy, or, in other 
words, ho is wlensed fou houdage, ad thare is uotlang lo bid ar 
attract him in these waldy By bondage 1५ moant bhe कि) पर 
bonds of virtne (निकष) and sin (Papn). 

Tho Bhigavate says Lf 610 avlion which is ths produol o* 
tha operation of the (1 ४5 is attributed to the sell, thon anoh 


1 Qhitla 


2 Sangaiia, the world of buth and rebirth to whieh mon are 
mopollod by thor Kaan 


, 3 Phe into. protation of V shy inathn is hove adopted, acc wding ४2 
which Kha==Biahman As tho torm ala moana tho “ air” oy “ ethan,” 


the toxt is capablo of translation as “ Ho is able to yom tho sly ” 


124 1 SIN (1२8 AND 1 ५ भा INL TOWLR 


(दिध) attimb ition as bond ye and Smpysitra nid servitude.” Also 
cf. Biagavid-Girt (0) Sor of Kunti, Man is षा} 1 by actior 
which 15 he product of lis own ne (Sv t-bhiva) 721 

To mbabit this body lor the purpes of undorgoing Pipa (sn) 
and Punya (virtiie) 15 bondago. [1 heaven ०३८ enjoys (tho (णा( 
of) Pimyr, and in tho nother world (Pitty) ono su Tors sorrow, 
and on outh man w sabjoch o both Papa and Punya Jor tho 
Tativa-judmt (him who knows ths auth) theve ia neither yn 
no. Papa, wach are the cinses 0 bmdage; lus aconmulatod 
(Sanchita) Karma of met (Parya) and doneut (Pip ) ५ also 
destroyed Tio {५ in coiseynoncs under गो) bondage whothor in 
heayon (Svmga), earth (Martya), or not a wor व (ता ४) an lhe 
18 706 tity ombcdied ® Sash ४ ong ste ys on ourth so long only wa 
he has nob wo ked out what he has bogun 11५ 14 hberated 
though hving (Jivannukta), avd attains ¢omploto Labor on on 
the dissolution of the body 

The Kulueava ‘Tanti says  “Phore who live eho 
Biahman in tho hearé can acquire ueithor moit by performing a 
hundied = 10186 ०६८४ fioes, nor demorb by killing a hundred 
Bruhmanis.” ‘Tho Gitw (IN, 18) also says © Hor him thero 18 
nothmg m this world that should or should not be dona, Mor such 
¢ one thero 18 no dopandonco on any beng ?4 

The Svoedlini4 intorprets this vorse te mean (ए [ the 
‘knowcr” (Tathvajnins) acqunes no 1 (116 by the porlormances of 
actions nor demerit by the o1isston (hereot, 

Shratid speaks of tho destruction of aceumul ted (Sanchit १) 
Punyn and Jap. “When Mani, which is now seloctiug and 
now iorecting, 18 dissolved im ‘That, wlhon Papa and = असत 
are destroyed (lit, birnt), Sadishiva, who is Shaki and Abt na 


10h इभा], \, 60, 
2Na shuivi परपद thoyh he has a body, ho is not of it, 


$ Tolang s ‘Translation “ITe las uo ‘ntorost ab all 12 what ia dora, 
and none whntovor in what 28 nob done om this world nor 1 any 
interest of lus dependont on any beng” (p 5, Sacred Books of the 
Daal, Vol. फा) 


4Thabis Shiidhata-sy amis Gomnonlsry ott the तै 


5Tho text quoted 1s from TIingan Upantehad but differs slightly 
from the publighed tovts of that Upautshad 


JUSCRE TION OP ॥ } SEX ( ष] ५ 125 


(of. 11 (1४१५४ ante), mdbditel? Of. Blagivad-Giti © And o¢ 
the tre at knowladpa destroys all पयण, 

© Gomplite pou” (Sumagrt shok +) 1) power whicr 
guablis lim to त) ov iytiing [फ power, or Siechi, ts now 
whiny ० do ul he des ८५ fo dotand counterw all hum, to 
fly across the wit,’ and to beeomo possessed of हमत pcwors of 
speech vid of puotic compc sition 


{Chat 1, peace mid quiskude lke the शपा surfaces of on ovoan 
char notoristio of tho Suprome Slate, 


४1४, 87, 


9 Such an ono may have such a power 14८ will not wrongly 
oxoboiso 1८ ॥ 


4 [दद्‌ this is Kalicharany’s interpretation as to Vishyanitha, 
veo p 123, 1, 3, ante. 


126 HD SIN OPNPRES AND PIP SHRPENE POW 'R 


Vensp 45 


Hoes is tho excellent (suprome) sixteonth Kali of the 
Moon, She is pure, and rosembles (in colour) the young 
Sun, She is is thin as tho hundrodth part of a fibre in 
tho stalk of a lotus Sho is lustrous and 8016 hko ton 
million hghtiing flashes, and is down-turno | From [णार 
whose source is the Brahman, Hows copiously the 
continnoas svroau of nectar? (or, Sho 14 the recapae e of 
the stream of oxcollont nectar which comes from the 
blissful union of Para and Parit)? 


JouM NIARY 


Versog || ovat 42 souk of tho presence 9 द. nikal, 
Novine-con, ant lr व्‌, w thin the beivaglo in the per छण) 
of the कषत व Ue now desires 0 dosombe them by their 
distinclive att bites, and spuvks im tis verse of che disunctive 
features of Ami-kuli 

५ Hroallunt 0 sumone” (Paaj—ve Sho 13 (का dha ctr. 
Tn tha Piabhisu-khandw ocema tho following passage. “She 
exoellefhl Maya who maintams the bodies of all thab have bodies.” 
This is altmbutive of Ama, 

1 Kalitharana ronda “ Vidyotiti,’ but bhangkera roads + Nityo lita,” 
© constantly shi ting ” 

2 Altornative roading of Commentator: Nilyananda-parampor Wivi- 
gulot-piyfishe-dhiri-dho.d Parampari may monn + in a continnong 
course,” on साथ may moun Shiva and Pari, Shakti ‘This differouco 
in searing ४५ duo to the diforont waya in whivh theso worda muy be 
ren 

9 Pari, acecrding to Shangkora, may monn Prva, Pashyanti, [पतान 
yami, and Vaikhai collectively Para and Para avo tho Bind wipe 
Shiva and Shaku 


[00010110 ( 1 1) SIX GIN RIS 147 


“The srateenth Kale of the Moon” (८ 1 पाता ५५ च shodash’), 
By this wo ae bo undostaid haf hos spovkug of 4 1 ततो) 1 

“Pave” (५ पत्‌) ~) भपप 

Sho १1 १८१07८५, ' ८/८  (Shishu-su yy 140 111 १.)६॥11) By Chis 
tho redness of ths Kala 18 mdteated 

“Phan as the hundicdth part of a fra un the stalh of the 
lotus” (Nira‘ एते eshma-tantu-shat dh t-bhagaik v-rapa) —Phin like 
a hundiodth put of the fibre in tbe lo as-stalk split lengt hw se 

^ Whore sowe. a the Brahman” (Nibyivanda-prin कता) — 
Nityanandas Prim aanda=Breh nan, 

^ Wows,” et (Ativigelat-piyuvia-dhih प) wi) —If the last 
two compound words be reid ५५ one long compound wo da, ५५ 
follows, [ता परोत दत) पाकपे thivignlat-piytisha- Univ तो ma, tho 
meaning of ib will be ay given within brackets at the end of he 
verse, Ananty wil thor riean the joy of प्राप, and [11111101 
will thon mean Shiyv and Shake 

Paras Bindi ya, Shiva. Pari Prue, Shad Auda 16 
tho joy which wises for the anion of the two, ard fom such 
union flows (16 हलोः (| which दै कराने 16 the vecept cle 


¢ 


, 
1 Vishvauiithe says thet this Anehalé is Uiddhavashekdeupa ot 
the upwerd (towrrds che Bral nan) roy g Shakti: 


128 111 SX (नदा AND HD SBR INE LOWLR 


Veusr 47 


Twsrpn it (Ami-kali) is Nirvana-kali, moro excell ont than 
the excellent. She 18 as subtle as the thausandtl part of 
the ond of ahair, and of the shapo of the croseont moon, 
Sho is the ovor-existont Bhagavati, who is the Devati who 
pervades all bongs. Sho giants divine knowledgo, and 
18 as lustrous as the light of all tho suns shining at one 
and the same lime. 


COMMBNLARY 


In this versa the Nuviina Kalt ह dosarile ad 

५ Insu ott” (Tadantm guta)—i 6. pl wed in tho lap! of Amtek alii, 
Tho Kali has alroady been dosertbod? as the “crascont soventoar th 
Kalo placed within Ami, nud known by the name of Nurviinae 
kala,” 

५ 11016 evcelloné than the cveallent? (Pari paratuit)—The 
Ami-kali 14 excellent; this 19 more excollont than Amd. 1 
‘Pariitparatma’ be accepted tor ‘Pari pmatari, thon tho moaning 
wil] bé that She is the most excellent. 

“She i ae sublle .. haw” (Koshigiasya sahamadha 
vibhaplasymkiugsha-vripa).—She 18 eqnal im dunension to tho 
thousandth part of the end of a haw so very subtle is She 

^ Of the Shane of theerescent Moon” (Chand trdhimga-samina- 
bhathguiavati)—like Amakala sho 1s in shapo | ke the 01०8०७४, 


1That 1s, within tho ००1९6 of Amaknli  Vishvanatha anys, not 
within Amfkala, but within the Chandramandaln, of which tho Ama- 
kpla 18 ono of the digits, Nirvinakals is, ho says, Vyiipinitattva 


28eap 112, ५१५. 





शिक्तः का, MAHABANDHA 


8, 


DISCRETION (0 ५९ ODN RDY 120 


"That Devat® who pervades all beings” (Bhitimen ६ वपव 
vatam) —Adhi-daivatam== [[irdd ल | पाक) and ths Kua is 
Unidda-chaita ryn-svarupa of all ocings 

“She grunts divine Anouladge” (Nilya p wbodhodaya)—ce + 
Sho grants ‘Tattva-jnena, ता knowledge of the Bralunin 

“And ॥ lustrour ote? (Quy ule (पकए पो —Thore aro 
twelye suns (Dvidnshidilys). “When all the twelve suns mo 
shining ’—sueh is MWe Justre, ‘This adyective also implies that 
She 1५ 164. 


1 [क्रतद पप, क 1 defines Uirdda to पलप एप 
Snoht—ze, 10601070, love That is, tho [shéadevati कणन त्त्‌ in 
the hom.t; tho Shakti who is Moraell tho heart of the Lord ‘The word 
18 derived from lodd=shoml. ‘ho Devata also oxtls as what is callod 
the Hinddakali. Seo Introduction 


57 


180 TE SIX GN IHS AND पो; S°R UNL POW 1 


Virse «8 


Wutuy ity middle spaco (ur., middle of the Niviinak ali) 
shines tho buprome wd Pamordi क एतत Shakti! ; she 
18 1150 07५ like {en mulon suns, ५4] 14 the Mother of the 
thice worlds. Sie ts ०116 wly ¢ibble, and like unto the 
ton-muillionth put ol the ent of a hair Slo contains 
within Lor the const utly flowi ig stron 0" yladnoss,® त्‌ 1८ 
is the hfo of all beings. She graciously carries the kn ow- 
ledge ol the Truth (तष) to the mind of the sagos, 


Gos भ (५५४ 


Ho now sperks +| 11 Pu a-Binda. 

५1/११ (3 wy 1) of 1 कार्ण Sali 

^ Mid Ue” (Madly 1५५ ie) क 1॥ 11 he lip 

Ths Supreme «nl Lromarcdial Nirvana Shabti? (rm ae 
11111111 11111 paryaeni vin esl chi) Para ni” 
—1a,the Simone [णा षणो wShak1  Apiuva -2¢, Shy he no 
whom there wis nothiig Sho hung ppearet at (1 + beygmume 
on eration 


१8 7 17 1 ए) Suman pady oa Samant 
Shaki ‘Lina stato is nob hoe कव्‌ the ४ पक्त of उतत (Piha ali), 

~Prmi Soe notos, 2 ast 

3 This worl &Teltva haa by Vishvaat a bern s [| fo be Shave- 
bhalayninam 2c, tha nn~Datmetio belwern Sh ४। कष्‌ Sh'va 

4 Phat is, wilhia the qeseant Accodusy bo Vishvanabrr the 
locativo ind cates proxtmty and moans rut the micdlo but नहा ily 
above ४ 

४} s worl has been पणाय (व्‌ by Slimgkt 1 2 mem ' She whois 
as [240 us tho Pua o Supromo ?  Vishy wild] ॥ सकत ib moans ५ Sho 


whe 1॥८ (८७५१ वपर कक (Para Ubtdarahdla) "that os all (110 tine 
win [1८1 emticl 


DISGRIE [ON OP ULE SIX CONLEDS 31 


^ Shanes” (Vilas ub [पपी । --2 ८, dwells 1 (नुव 
# ^ Mother of the tee worlds” ( |] ॥४ पा ए प्रा भ 2 ¢, dhe 

is tho ougm of the Umverse which © pn ses Syargu, Mmtya, 
wad Pata cand the lke ४ 

© Show crbeemily subth, Like auto tha law millionth part of tha 
and of & hen? (Kostagrasya kc éi-bhajm curdipa’ wnkelima) ~As 
She 1s hke the ten-mlbonth puto th end of a hen, She is 
oxtiomely subtle 

Sho contams methin UW, the constantly flowmy stream of 
gladness” (द्वा दशत्‌ ररह ore uid! ar edhe i)—Piema 1५ the 
tondeiness 0 mind produced by Scola ५  glidiess, that iy, 
She holds within Mor hes ॥ ब 1 of cxccllent nectar which has its 
ougm in the र्मा uuon of Slive md Shall, and which flows 
incessantly. 

Ty the hfeof all benys” (Surveshiing एषो) uti e, am- 
inated boing ws bib a part of ar 

Ch O Devi ts spuks fy loth from flame, yo doos the 
Pu abindu (as Jivt) issto fom Her (दरे) ५ पप) and becomes 
knowing? whon t toue os tho [कता] ” 

By “Her? as nonnt dle द फ whoa [1 the Paabindn, who 
w both Shiva पात्‌ ॐ] ket, and from for लापो ॥ ८४ tho Jiva, 

Nnvinn Shakti 1५ ४1011 व b lew Mi vine-lkaa, and ovor 
NibodInké,” which is Nidaatipa® Gy. Phiced w tun Nirvan 
(Kale) ts the [लाक (Volnidye) Nrbodhiki, wl o 18 unm पातत 
Nida7, whove ib is tho भणत ne Nirvine-Shast, who is the oa we 


tPmoami~She wlo is ९०७५१८५ on cf equal वत with tho 
Su prone (Part) ov she who ko २५५ the Sueno This 8 (५ पामा 
10 Miya 

2 ITeavon, Duth, and Notherw old . 

SSabyuiiyuktah oe, civaecons usress Ul ayy alao moun 
‘hocomes cndowe 1 with a पप 10१ Name und foam claracter‘xo the 
world as Sat, Gut wid Anda do [ऋणा पणा 

cy Asti bhid prrya gi prorg 1 को} लात upsha-pan du ken 

Adyang tayo gy Brahman pang agade pang 1 (2 dvaynn 

५ Yada bhunau peati tad san naynkto bhavati Tho eve wien of 
Jiva is 1५1० spokon of Tho Lexb juotod m fon Nivvaeitan 1५1. 

Seo Intyoductim, wid note bo + 10 partieularly the por lion doal- 
ing with Nada, Bodhi ad Bind 

V'That is Shakts, ay Nace 


Avy 1 र्न fida—unmainfestad प्रपात 


192 ग] SUX OLNERDS AND HD SORPEN Pow sh 


of all wd is possessod o the lustre of ten milhon sung. || asin 
Tes that thers1s the Brahman! who w the chingoless Shiva ^ 16 is 
here that Kundali Shaki or 03s with atamatma.” 

Mibodluka is a pl ise of Avyalla-nila (Avyakle-nidatinka), 
and is fio-lke Raghava-bhafia anya“ Nadi exists iu 11106 
states = Whon ‘lamo-g int is dor nant, ib 14 merely sound nme 1 
fest (Avynkta-niida)3 11 the niture of Dhvau; when %yo-guna is 
more dominart, there 1 sound 11 which there is somowhat of ५ 
placing of the lotters!; whor the Sa tyaguaa preponderates, Nida 
assumcs tho formo Bindi?” ence Nada, Bindu, and Nibodhika, 
mie respeclively the San, the Moon, and [फण and then vetivities 
aro Juana, Tohehha, and (४३९ शिवा) agar, "च Mire, Iohobhi 
tho Moon, and Kmyi the Sin his has boen said in the Sherada 
Therefore, msumuach as 16 has been said that Nn vane Shakti is 
above tho fey (Vil unup:) Nibodhiki, the wise should conclude 
thal Nirvana-Shakti is pliced above the Mandalas of the Sun, the 
„ Moon, and Tire, 

“his hie been clemly तपन in th Kulianava ‘Tantra, 1 tho 
Pava-Brahma-dhyaut, which begms, “The Bindu-tipa Par 


1 दा पा, ‘Chis word mey sithor be cgual bo Nik-fau ane (ee, 
४ 1111098) 01 Nik-+ en’ vin (unatlocted by ploasme ce pri, wim ४ d) 
Tb as one of the iaperts of tho Beihm w 


४ काशा \ Somered N rvikelpa, on of unconditior cd oss ona 
ness. Nirvikulpy 4 also the last stage of Sumida in which thavo me 
no (Nir) शला! ददात 1018 (Vikalpa) and no “this” and “that” 

}Tamo-g wadhikyera kovaladhvanyaimeko'vyaktanidad, 

' Raja adhikyena kmehidvarna-baddha-nyaisumakah  ‘Uhe so ise 
appears to he that tho letters 0६14 anyhow togotl ar in nassive un. 
diflorentiated ferm, 

5 Saltvadlukyena vindu-ripak 

8 Patash cha nada-yindwanbodiké akenda-val n'-rupat.  dnfne 10 
Tire, becaune ¢ burns up all पलति Who the result of acben is 
realised, action (68668 (606 note to v.45) {८} ना+ w {1 ५ Moo, be- 
cause Ichchha is the precursor of ercation and is eternal ‘hoe Moon 
contains the Ama-kala, which knows neither mero se nor dooay 
Kriya is the Sun beeause like the Sur 1b makes ovorytl ing vistblo. 
Unless thore 18 striving there enol be realisation and mam ककं) 
Of. “ Aa ono Sun makes m vnifost all the Locas " (Gita) 

Tho Text will be mado cleuor if wm mramgomo t bo made in the 
following 81 , (1) Nada, Sun, Kriya, (2) Bindu, Moon, [ehohha , 
(8) Mibobhika, Tivo, Jnani But seo Tntroduetior 


DISORIPHON OF LEP SIX OLNERES 133 


Brahma in the Sahasina’” md onds, + Keantiied by the thee 
Mardalas within the tangle m tho poremp.’ By thoe Mand vas 
aia meanb the Maurduas cf Sun, Moon, and ne We shill 
show thab the कि क्ण प 13 mn the form of Para bmda 


(Para-binda-1upa). 


131 11 SIN ( NIRS AN 1 ५1५1 | 0५1 


४, ५, . 0 


Wun Hor is the everlasting place valled the abode o 
Shiva, whet is [106 fron Miyi, all unablo on y by Yous, 
and known by tho namo of Nityinanda, [lis veploto with 
every form cl bliss? and is Puro Knowledge itsoll, Some 
callit the Brahman; othoty call it the [Tangsa, Wise 
men degorihe ib as the abode of Vishau, and rightoous 
mon ५ speak of it as the inoffable place of mow'odye of the 
" Atmi, or the place of Laberation, 


Com sNiARY 


He sporks of the masBuhinestl iu (place of Pai 
Biahme) im the Vod willun Navara नापर, 


UShiva-palum 01 state of Shive ‘lis, Visl v पप my + 14 the 
Unman stato of Shakti whoro thore iw ne thor Kili nor Kala limo 
nor space. Il is the Lody of Suva (कायन) Ib m thor gat 
Unmanym lo Parashivak ‘Tho following ४०४५ which वतका in Padme 
Purdan (Uttara Khanda, oh 7, ए च 3) puts tho idea in & more popular 
form It says + 

Shavah Suuash cha Ganoshih Vawhaw vk shaktp 1 alah 
Mamoyve pripnuvanti hi varshambhak sugmang yathi 

4 Shuvis, Sinras, Gunoshas, Varsheavus aud Shiletis all vouly 

come to me 111६9 run wator the ocem * 


2Sakalasukhamayam  Viehvanitha rcacs hero J arumaknlupadam 
which he intorprots as Param Akula-padam, ता tho abode of the 
Suprema Shiva who 18 known as Akula, av Kulu क Slakti 1 is 90 
called because 18 horo that the universe {nds 144 rest 

१ 8 uddha-bodha-svert sam 


1 Suk (नापप 


IFS ष्रि 0 1 SIX (प। ६५ 39 


५ Wulin ie” (पय ॥ madhya Cudle} ce, within ददिष 1 
Shakti in 1५ otnol Pwan Badu, ८5 the empty spice w thin 
the 3indi 

« thode of Shiva” (Shy [५ 11) -- 11५ as the pl ee of ha 
Brahmu 

त Wee from Maya” (Amalam)—c+ , foo trom tho inp परयः ot 
Maya 

“Gallad” 1 ८ , calel by tose wlo know tho “attya 

« Attamabla only by Yoo” (Your-gwanyen). Ox weornt 
of 1८4 oxtromo subll ty, ५ beyond he scope ct wo dandrind, 
wahlanable by Yogis by pmo + nana ^ only 

« Some call १८ ve, tho Veda at sts (Wa [क्षर ५) call t 

© Treffable? (Simipi) १ wo der-1ig) ving, 

© Place af the hnowle १0९ of the dime? (Mt wep abodhin) ~~ 
he [1166 where the Atma ts secn 01 1 १५१५८ 1. 

© Liberation” (Moksku)—re wo ee ono 14 tbe wel fom 
Moy Dy whic on as प्फ acd 

Now be good onough 10 ) ५ k the follow ap the Parabrida 
whoh ow Praelr mad [शपा 1५ ५11 कपा वणे) by Maya, 11} 14 
withty tho (पनाह 11 the prenup of ty क्स ) vthousinl 
pelalsx, So it hes becn sud 

“Tu the Satynsoka sn ५ 19 aless amd Lis rows Oa She 
has sniounded Jeuell by Maya, adits like v gia fd gam, 
devoid of huds, foul, and ae tk She as Moon, Si, tnd 
Ena, When 01416 ५ (Woe yn) the (एलको (sand) ana) of 
Mayé, She becones of ५५५] aspee (dv dha bailvt) and 
Unonhliaé then on the divison ci ५८2 पा) ol Shiv and 
Shuktr पच्छः creitiye ideat’on”? 

1 Vishvan ttl vsays Suma प . 

Spuitual snowledg¢, acai sad Mi keto [वो पात 1 11} (111 
एणा ए च) Ipiubistov ॥ The hnowledyo whid 14 Mokena 
(10041101) a culcd dans, otha fr + ) र owlsdye, such + fine 
vets, and the Shastias aug छती 1 

1) 1/9 11111111 11113111 

4 [फ ( अध्ये 11 (पा 1] ५ Slabs 216५6 ov नकां) 

१ ताएता agora ऋ पर) (1 separation क ता art 
that Shiva is roally divided or sop uatel fori Shucti for the ५१५५१ + 

ver cnc and thy same bul hit Shak i, whe cvdats ताप as me 


with (9 Brihinan it त्वक प) ap pous t) issue Mom [ 1) ceition 
as tho minifostod may nse 


१/8 1. श . Phat is, t10 sthy.ot kucws i scl aw objoct 


186 1H SIX CENIRIS AND LH नरद JOW R 


The woid © Satya-loke” in the hove passage mons Sulusray 1, 

also of. “Tho attibutelosy Bindu 14 without dowbt the 
Cause (of the altammont) of Siddlisy  Somo say thab tho Dove 
who 18 990, stuinJesa (प 101 119), 91) amb acing (21५ पतत) and 
united with the prnnordial Shakti as in the frm of a giain of 
काद्या क Biahad, wid by sono, aguin How cllod Visken, by 
other, again, He is called the Deva Rudra” 

Tho lummous empty space within the Nirvana Shalt (८) 
the outer ८166 of the Parabindt), which is more minute than the 
tensmillionth part of the end of ४ hair, is, aecording to (he author, 
tho abode of Brahmas (Biahmvpady. (/ © With nb? ia [मा 
bindu whose natme i 18 fo croato, memati, and dostroy "ho 
spice w thin ts Sliva {inself and Bindut is Puama-kandali ” 

Also “he cucuntorence (Vaitta) 1५ the Kundalin-dhakt, 
and She possesses Lhe three (119४६, ‘Tho space within, () Boloved 
Mahesl im, 18 both Shiva and Shakti”! 

hes Binda 2s, recording to some, Ishvara, the Garse ol AlL 
Sono PaAikas call Him Maha-Viednu, others eall Tim Brehm 
Purnsha 

Cf 'Thove was neither day nov प्रा, neither tho iamameut 
nor the varth, neither dk १८५५ 716 wy obha light, tf ore was Chat 
the Lishma-Maly, > impacepttblo to hoaring, and tho otha somes 
of knc wlodge united with Pradhiine.” 

The Shintda? siys “Tho etoral Shiva should be known” 
Doth as Noga (abltiibutoless) and क्षपण (possessed of attri 
bntos). [८ is Nirguren when (considete las) disnssoomtod fiom 
the workings cf | तर bat whar Sakae (7.4, 00 assoc ated w tlt 
Praks ti) He i bagnan.s 

a 


1Qhanaka, which under its oubward sheath contring two undivided 
haly es. ^ 


2 Appmonty Nirvana-Kala. 

3 That is, tho cneumfer ones aa appoxed to the mnor spice. 
4 Inanivnava Tantra, XXIV, 91. 

$ Piadhanikang Brahma-pi main 

0 [रह Pmana XXIV, ४, 185 

TOh I 


8 And 80, also, the ShiktAnandaluramgint (Oh. [) says of tho 
Novi that Maharoyé without Maya wm Nigani, aud with Muy Saguni, 


> 





Prat: XIV) MOULABANDUA IN SIDDIIASANA 
{Vide p 214) 


To face p 186 ¢ 


DwWER "पदि 0 [ज SIX CON AES a7 


‘hy ghows that the Bindu is Sagunw idinan We sl oad 
know bat Sapuey 3 chain isan पराक bit ono though He as 
culled by Ailetent nanes acording 19 homeh tons of nen, 
११ (16 14 no need lo go 106 futher do ils 


Soumya ol # ५६५41 0 9 


Above (the ond) ol bio Sani Ne low thy ^ 080 a 
thotsind petals, 1 1५ white and has ts hoad downvud tar xd, 
its filamamts ue rod. “ho itty letters of bie Alphabat tro a Ato 
Tn, which wo also whit, ह+ 10 पा 4 Lionnd ws biciseid potals 
twenty Gimes On ts [00116 ४) 19 Toen,svi, und पातर) 1614 the 
Guin who as Pavama-Sluva Utasell, Above the (प्प ५५ the 
Smyya wd Ghandia Mandl, anlib vo thon Malivay , Ovor 
the latter is paced [आपा 11 पप dh a, aul wbove it Mabast पाडा 11, 
In tho Mandala ol the Moon the Thon pecs vil) within 
which 1४५ tio sixtoerta vw tot the Veo jwueh 1५ 1५ [7५0 wthe 
hundhedth put of 1] ) | न्न, a {9 a 10 colin, ५ (114 
1101 d wawud ॥॥ (व 1 [५] } of dim Kalvos he Nuvew - 
Kali, subtle hike (he thowunlbt part (| the ला] ५। nda, ५५31५ 
tod wita (he mouth dow award une Baw Na vere [६ ule ts the 
Vie calet पी] वहः, which won 3 1 Avyik: adit Alnve 
ab (Ntbodhikii), ant फो ॥ 2 Nivivelaly + Cae Budi, which os 
both Shiv and Shaka “ho Shiuci 2 tas 11 ५ Bada he 
पपि 1\१॥५ Shakti whois [रा (न) ant (९ ५611 ५ fam of 
Hu gsah (Wangs ips), पत्‌ च ५ [नास thy oe = ulbonth pr tof 
the ond ol ५ hii ‘bal [ण ५५1५ Jive Wit it the Boida ५ 
tuc void (Shaotye) whe. om th S hapwde (pe ५ he 
Binhinie ) : 

According to 1५ view expressed 1) the fol (} णन 
0" वत Agatiekalon-de ime vid other wos, thy te wgle A- Cr 
Mavis 1 thy कला) of the Sthasaa. A 1 च thies cones 
moe (1110) Binduss tho lower श्राप व tha 1०5 ot the 
tiangle 1५ Ha-kiias usd is mae () 1 पतत); पाद the two 

1१] vas, काप 

2 Avy प्प वपम, पापिका पापा 

1 {1 in, tho 1 पद + पपोप्व “nile form of hab प .1५ 1117111 
toiny of Piidukipa (पृ = प Divi's Malszsaemayi 

Teas, Weng at presenting the © Male? [वपषा 

ae 


{88 TUE SIN लपिते AND THE १। दक कान 


Bindus at the corners (00०1016 the Visargn in tha form Sa! 
and represent Praad , विद्वा wh obi Pusha and [पपरा 
thus shows itself im the forn of three Bndus, fi its middle as 
Amikui, and im flo lap iq Nirviwe-Shakts, and) tho vac wut 
space wither Nievtiw Shack ता, 1 TR bog heey 
said“ With'n the किप o 1५ neor in the whilo fof is 
of a thousand pelals slimes lice lightning the (षणा) A- 
Ka-Phea umted with Ua-biekela? Within at, is tha exoel ont 
(Pia) dmdu (Shunya), placet below Visaiga. Tn tl is region ws 
the dowimard-lurned svteunbe Kea, al bra colour at the visting 
Sun, u sipo hike ¢ (८ पठता noon wie [५५1४1५९ — strenn of 
nectar, rnd with 1 (or 9 Pra Shokts, possossing ths elulgoace of 
ten ulin saus S10 is as भा त ns thee thoasin téh put of bt 
Lotus fibve, ands Chidotia ea Waithia [ता 13 Bindu whe 1५ the 
Nranjaia Parusha, who ws beyond m nd ard ypeeuh vid is Stuh- 
chidanunda, and Viserge (who is also there) is Pevki it, Mangan 
who ty both Pung 4 and Pralkesti shines by His oa offa pongo,” 
Those who follow this ए aw, plage Su dra ove Che Brid t, und 
place the (un above Visurga” wid Bird to which togother पाम 
Tlangeal. But thy canne, bra gh. The Naviaw Mantra ypoaks 
of tho Guru as wors upp ng {10 Pua [तापनी पता) md as 
boing clow to Let पात्‌ पा the act of wo plipping Lor. ho wore 
shipper shorld wlways stl tbe level lower than, and प tec at of the 
object of worship, wid never wb a hig iat fevel than, wed behind 
the objech of worsmp Of. Nirviny . त Medilato upon the 
41111 Devi within tle Sabyaclokea on the Ghintimmnp ela? ag 


MUbat os, ltoaly stant Sy. Voeugeta le famsa he 
16640 Sa or more abuebly St without tho vowel, changes into Visnryy ॥ , 
thus, Teqas become To ah, Ru 9 Rajah, 

2 Tease Varank ave पाद्व the te angls AK the 

3 Of the natme of Club Cf. dofinition of Miy&-Sh ucti in Tativa 
Sandohi lt 

4 Tho Malo, पिपा प्रण 

5 fib, Gcrevator af फा पुष (seo note क ante, p 136), for front Sa 
Visarga conios 

6 Nirviine Cantia, Ch X 

7 ho पते made of Chnitim wai stone which genta nll dcsivos, 
doscribod im the 1 and [ष्फ Purina, Tho alii 
retors fo 1 as bomg tho place oy origin of १1] ¢ ov Ma as whieh 
hostow all desned vb ois (C पि) 


DUSURTPHON O° PEE १६ CENERES 39 


placed on the jewolled thione or hon-seut (Si vhtsane), and on your 
(211 as being neny 19 1 141 yorshipp ng Ter.” 

The Mahakih "wnira, noreover spoiks caple tly of the 
presence of the Guin ovor |] त two lotiirs Ting and Sak! This to 
ho nndaistood that 11 (hoe be any (exts which df 1 from, or vad 
to those hore adopted, then they must he talon to vel (0 diflorent 
methods and opmons. 


This ws fhe end of seventh selon. 


1 In the Jnanévaovea Tar tia (I, v, 18) ५18 कणप, (0 Parvati, in 
Ho-kivn with Bmdu *(iang) is Brahmi and, 0 Maheahvai, tho lwo 
Bindus of Visargn (Sav) ६19 Wom and Mysoll, By 10011 of this in- 
separable connoction mon in this world spoak of वपव. 


140 ना ८ ४। १ ५ ५ Sik ४ OW R 


Ves 30 


एः whose nate is pumfied by the practico of Yama, 
Niyama, and the like? learns fram the mouth of hiy Guru 
the process which opens tho way to ho Ciscovery of the 
great Jaboatio = Te whose whole being ऋ fmmorsed in tho 
Brahmm then rouses the Dev by Hung-k wa, pierces (he 
contre of the Litiga, the mouth of which 1s closed, and is 
therofore invisiblo, and by monre of the Ait and Mire 
(within Jum) places Wor within the Brahmadyara? 


GOMMINIARS 


Having descubod tho लो) पत or ding with the Sah warden, ho 
row wishes lo speak of tho cmon of Kned dint, and peli mary (6 
that he refers to [1 ५ modo of ronsng (ष्णी i} 

‘The sense gor veyed by thie versa 1५ that tho tain whe has 
ablumod success in Yoga leans Lom iis Gain the proccss, which 
consists of contracting the hems, rousing Kwedalint by the powor 
of the airavd ^ ७, a d 50 Feith 45 acd Levi lear iad 1 for to 
nouth of his Gura, he vouses Ko wedc lint, attacking [10४ wills are 
and fie, md Ly uttering the Kiehchy (Ming? ४ प povcing the 
mouth of the Sveyambhu Langa places Ki adult witha Brahn एन 
dvain, o1, in othor words, wthit the mouth cf Woe Nad ( [पानं 


1 8५५ Introduction 

२ "१101 iw wrthi Ohitrint Nadi 

911 the Yoga-procoss known ts Shatel पल काप ga कपो do- 
seribed in the Intiodnetion, but wlach practically must be [एषण of 
the (mu 

(The (कापा tudor की वा (प्रकर citing ( काणा ५ पानात suyr 


that an mikes the fre go upwards, ind ths dre aw vkons [पक्का ond 
Sho uso gees upwards, 


) ५.17 OL HL शद GN AS | 1 


“Us १0१ nate iy कष 04" (Sushila) 2) 1७ who 
repularly काष्ठा ५५५ Yuri and so Path, awlas rvied काकण 

By practising Yama, Niyama,” cle (Yauery 1) 1१ 1 
bhyasn-shilan) —] १५ be obyorved thib i ts no mercy by 
the paacaceo, You. + वृ प्रि.) तना. por scm तलगत nary 
Yoga pricties! sa ined But the Sadbake hus by pr vetice bo 
destroy auch mcliiat oi as list, anger, and the like, whteh inter 
0160 with Youu, and cul ivvto obhars, such asco to Lag tho mer 
wr sterdincss of mind, and so [काम which ue help 1 Yoga 
110८८५५, 16 1५ because of this tha my Sf bi A 101) hay iad 
the word © फा कपि in he कोष]  Practsiig Yama avid the 
hke 14 necossuy, however, for thoso whos: mnds me dstribel 
by Inst and cther prosoisities If however, vman by rose (1 
moat and pox [का [पाप acquired 1 ५ prove ts buth, vad by hs 
nature, ts free fom ५11) Inst, and काठ passions, ther he is 
capable of rau Yogv without he prolummuy 01 ॥ 1८6५ ‘us 
mast bo woll ander steod 

© Tram the mouth of 1८५ (1 (Shit-nitha-v ५.1 11), ~ lho 
process (0४५11106 bo loaut wi hout the mshuctons o the Guu 
Hence 1 has boon sail) “It can be lownt fiom the (fue alone, 
and not from ten mi hou Shastins १ 

५ (000५१ * (Kran) — Steps, order 

५ Whack opcrs the way to tha cisco sery of the yr at Taberaton” 
(Mahit-mokeha-vea tin -prakisha) —By thisis acuib tho ‘process? 
by which the entunea into the कान्‌ of Le Nal Chit ats 
oponed ont ‘Way of Libna ion? (Woksha-vart ny) is the wy 
through the लात्‌ wihm (जापर ‘Pie Cdeov ry? (rikisha) 
18 mide or this by वषपर ng one’s way vhrough 1, 

“Tle” (San) —ie, thea man woo his वोजा] hi पना by 
his success in Yog y practices 

© Who whole bang wanmersod athe Buthman (Shuddha- 
biddhi-svabl five ४) —Studdla-buddhi moans the पापा) wd 
he whose Svubluva (own bomg) isan [hu ‘This compound 
word may also mot “ Ue whose bomg (Bhivy) by reason of the 


TArhga-yout. Sco Lutroduct on, uid Vishvuni ha o'ting Ga ate. 
maya Tanta (Th bik Teats, Vol. Tf, p 11, 01 A ^ 101) 


2 Shangker. roads prabhiva, and renders thy prsige us Ue 
whose power 15 due lo tho purity of the Buddha’ 


142 HSIN PNIR ^ AND PLP SORLANE POWER 


party ob bes anid (Shuddha-biddh) i ram red athe Sonat 
(Svaz= Atm)” 

^ १५१८५८१ the Darby Hite fra’? (| [१1 दुता कए Devin) "~ 
The Agama-kilpa-deame «ues तपता having tiontally एतत 4 
flangs1, gon ly cont act the nuns?! { there ove follows (hub 1 
moving Knadil oi tho Wangs. Manta should bo uttered “he 
Author of the Lastuabasya fo fowmp this, suys पाप in mov ng 
Ki ndalini tho Vantin “tung Mangsii” shod 1५ cmployed, 
But, fion the fac thu the put 1५ to be contrrebod मलो ths 
Tangs» Mantua is recited, the mtonfion appeuws to be thit the 
गोद, which ws of the shape of the fluo of a livrp, should by 
the recitation of the Unangsy Manta be brought bron the hort ७ 
the Mulidhara, and then moved along with Kundalins 

The Agama-kalpa-dinma am a sabsequont passage saya: 
“Ra sng and again rusing the Shaktr with the Alma from the 
abodo of Brahma,? the excollent Sidhake should (and go forth).” 
This shows thet She showld be led away along with Auma or 
Jivitma. ‘The Cali-Kulamrwa has ^ Flaving 161 vivad om Cie 
heat by the Hargse Mintin to the Milly Lots, and having 
roused the Parndc vati Kundidint by Wing: स Pha Kangkila 
mihi says: © O dangh oro + ५ King of Mo mtaing, Paying पा प 
tho Jivatmi by the Crnnava, lot the Silivkey nove Prean and 
(रदत with Kueduint by the aad of tas Se ham? Vantin, 
and make the Devi onber the Svidlus/ thin.” 

The wise should, fron tho above texts, nadaslond thal the 
Jivatma should bo ought 10m the how by bs md ot eibhor (he 
Pranave or Mangas Mantia, and then कृपात should be roused 
by the Kiel cha-biys alone, 

^ Tha mouth of uhich is closed,” ote. (Guplam) This word ney 
bo 10ad either as an adjechve qualifying Limga, and » oan प्रको 
fosted by 1oason of its noth boing closed,# oy परप Lo rend as पो 
adverb qualfying ‘plices,” and thon the wad would mean 
^ ympercaptibly .” 

1 Shanan ikunchayed gudam—-that is, by Ashvini-mudri 

2 Brahma 16 in Maladhiia, 

3 Mukhimbhaja, This may be a mis-soript Lov ME [पि 4) प 

५४९, Prathivi, ५ 


४ (11 the top of bho langga ia Nidabindu—z¢, (तात Bin lu. 
The mouth is the Bindu which प्तप pierces, 


LSURT LON OF LE SX CLN RIS [43 


Tn tho Agni a-kalpasdia i, anchuneshakhi, the mode of 
rousing tho Kinda, i doamibod im dotail thus +^ fhiving 
seated oucse bin the [तुको + pos कपा 0, the two lane should bo 
placed in the [मो "hore (oer, bivimg mo णक ice ted the [rigsa 
Mantra, the anis should be gently contr wled. Ore should len 
repontedly riivo tho an by bie samo way, tand hivirg vused it lob 
him pierce the (पत | now spank ol tls process. [i the 
Muladha a Lotus is a vory boautitl trangle Inside 1॥ ५ Ka 1५2 
(aykous) hke len milion yo ng sans, above Wim (Kama), and 
amrounding Svayentha-fange, is Sundae कपत» Also ef. 
^ Ag the rosull of oxertation by tho Ka पद्या aid the action of the 
Kiuehch-mantia on ier Sha is seized with desne for Pua- 
11११४५४ 

‘Lhe Bhata-shuddhi also says: ५6) Shiva, tle #1त 1४ 
should contiach tho chest ab, 1९४ ), letting his b eath ve nam 
there,5 md he should contiol the base of tha tno { and othor 
parts of the body, and than sndido ily opomng tho loo by roans 
of a teey-liko mo cn (Suno'n'’ed)® and (tho we o*d sie) should 
be kindlod, O Puinnoshya, by means 0 the 11 (Pavann)” 
“hon the Sepent® whe as slooping on thy danga 1 the 
Miladhina and who ए stuig by tho heat ol bo fu, should be 
awakenod in the Ui uga at the mouth of bhe Your aut by the hous, 
{of her dostre) be led [७४८८४] upwards.” ©“ Move the a ५ [ण tho 


{Pour एयक wil ~thab by छा 01 Kundalini ws to go 

2'Tho Kimuvily प) or Air of Kama 

SPuang Uargsubhulivhiny ८4 3 passion 15 excited un flor, wd She 
is unpolled by the we of Kiama एष पातर tho Pa arg [फदर 1) the 
Sahasrara. 

4 ‘This pisaugo 19 obscura, and कपो 106 bo (तत्त्‌ 1 1 ८ oculy publ'sh- 
ed adition of the ‘i umtra, but is simile to cortam pussagos1) the 
Mathayogapracipiké which doals with Bhiiteshuddiu. Tt svems tc contain 
1: from variona toxiy to 4] ४४५४० tho process of Bhutashuddhi. 

ho CGormmentator his, howeyn, move olewrly dosembed the process in 
dis own words 

5 [lo thus ककण the pasaago of (ho ipward bieath, 

6 That is, the chest aud the anus, thre cloang the passage of the 
upward and downward mrs 

¶ १ hat ia tho motion of tho Kama viiyu spokon of pod 

8 Nagini, ono of the naiios of Kun lah 

0 That is, tho Trikona in tho Milidhdia which suet ands tho Sva- 
yembhu ष, 


141 PoE ५६ CCNERTS AND 1 भारा POWPR 


Nadi acsording, to the ames ol Kombhaka (2 | 10190 of bicath) 
and the ncthod shown by the Ginw bet thos "ye hina car 1८ त्व्‌ 
be lad by the concealed passage, and by they pward 11 अपो) wale 
all tho Lotugos bam thew heeds upwards. [[ शा टु Lilly aw ukenod 
Hot, let the wiso one lead Hor to Bland (८1५ San) ab the suman 
ole Maw (ce, the Sid. ५. 1). 

Now pay attention to the procadare ag ab ished by ac neolul 
conideration of the bove testy! "hoe Yost should si im tho 
proper postine and place his two hands with pablus वृत पवत 11 his 
lap, and steady us mid (Chita) oy the Kis tia Mata He 
showd naxt HL (he tater ov of hts body with an ard had at in hy 
Kumbhiba, 2 and contract tho haut? By co dori the csc ups of 
tie upwud brah च ate [क्व्‌ Mot wher ॥ faols thu the ar 
with Iam fiom the belly to the throat a ५ पता 1 downwud 
thioigh cho chanuels m [14 वित, he shentd ¢onfeacd dhe ans 
and stop the downward wi (Apana), then, tgam having raised 
the ait, let him give tho Kine! within the t wngle m the per carp 
of the Mélaidhiia Lotus ५ turn hom the left to the wight (Vii 
vattenn): by vo domg tho fe o Kine fiero 14 kin od, und 
Kundaln gots boued (oxe cd) thoely 1 ३ नका] hen pierce 
the morta of tho Sviyenbl ए fafa, ud [10 1 = pertnrs 
with the ud cf the “Hug” By, owl Pei who dos os nmon * 
will] PuwieShive, within the mouth of the (जा ‘nieNad. ‘has 
19 the cletr sense of feats 


1 416 pissages in quot 1 पतत aa hve ented ft 11 di torent 
hooks )1 1 {त aye gee 

2 Retention of breath in Pri वतका 

3 Wiedayam akenchayet that is, by Jalan diay Bauch , ot Seo 
fiticdu tun 

4 Kamasvayu 

[क +... 1,11.111 place bo doncle doxnnl 
wniu. 





एव XV YONI MUDRA IN SIDDHASANA 
{Vide p 209) 


To {06 p 14% 4 


DPSURIPMON OF NID SIX OBNIRES 145 


Vorsn 51 


Tun Devi who is Shuddha-sattvii! pierces the three Lith- 
gas, and, having roachod all tho lotuses which are known 
as the Brahma-nidi lotusesy, shinos tho:ein m the fulness 
of Ifer lustre. ‘hereafter in Iler subtle state, lustrous 
hke lightning and fine liko the lotus fibre, Sho goes to 
the gloaming flamo-liko bhiva tho supreme Bliss, and 
of a sudden produces the bliss of Jaberation. 


[४५ ॥ 110१1 


Now he spenks of the mode of the Union of Kundalini (with 
Shiva), ‘he meaning of this verse, m 0119, is that the Devi 
Kundalint 1161068 the theo Lithgas—viz, Svayambhu, Bina, and 
Itara%—nand by so doing makes ९ passage lor न}, and when 
she २७१८५1७8 the lotuges m (० appertaining to) ४10 Nad? called 
Brahma-nddi she shines in tho falness of 1101 lustre in those lotusos, 
Then, when m 6 subtle form, fine hke the lotus fibro, She 
approaches Shiva, who is Suprome Bliss 3 Ttsel/, and who is in His 
Bindu form in the penemp of tho Suhasviva, She brings fo the 
Sadhaka the Bhes of etornal Liboiation4 when that is least 
expected, 

“ Pwicos” (Bhedn) means making a passage throngh that 
which 18 obstructod, : 

 Shuddha-satvg.”—Sattva, Atisativa, Parama-sativa, Shud« 
dha-sattva, and Vishuddha-sattva, ave the fivo different depress of 


1A form of omhodied Chaitinya, Soo Commontary, post, 
*In the Milédhare, Anihata and Ajnd Obakias respectively 
4 Poramaraan==Pmamanandn 
4 Mokehikhyinandm tpam==Nityfnandaripa-muktim 

iy) 


140 TIP SIX UbNLRSS AND 11 SPRPTIND (वफ 


Chaitanya pervading the hody.! Shuddha-sattva id trerotore the 
fourth (‘Tmiya) stage By Brehmanidi is mowt (प्रे Tho 
Tuotuses are the ax Lotuses which are strung upon Chianti. 

“The threo Langas” (langa-tiayrm).—The ॥ 60 Lahgas 
sheady १०६८१११९. By Uns wo ave to undaatand thai the six 
Chakras and ‘ive Shivas ave included. Se pioroos all these, which 
altogother make fomteen knots (Granth), 

‘ho Shaktinanda-taramgim speaks of “Ilor whe goos along 
the Channel of B abman * having picieod tho fomtoon cots”, 3 

Tho Svatantra Tinta speaks of the distinetive features of 
Lithga and Shiva 

«Phe Dovi goes to Brahman (Nishkela) 4 olter having piareod 
the Shivas place] in the sx Chalias As Sho reaches ach of the 
Aifeont Chalkias, She acquires the beauty characteristic of cach 
and bewilches Meheghina १; and having there ropeatedly enjoyed 
Lim who 15 filkd with joy, She roachos the Miernal One (Shash« 
* yava). 116 19 said to ba trangmarged (पपोष); ag [[6 13 bewitched 
by Para? १ 

The Miya Tontin says, “The Dovi gous along tho Shakti» 
minga, pracing tho throe [भक्त im tho Chalaas in ovoh of ILoy 
different for ns? (‘Latiaditipena), und having wWhamed anion (in the 
Sahasiia) wth Nishkala (frahmon) Sho is saliatlod Pate 
tadiipenn—z¢, in tho forms Vaikhati, Madhyama, and Pashyanti, 

14 has beon sud that 7 Tho first slate (Bhitva)  Vaikhart, 
and Madhyamiis placed in {ho heart, bolwean tho oyeln ows is tho 
Pashyni ti stute and tho Para stato tin thy Bindu 4 Tho mew. 
ing of the above quotation is that the fom sound-piodneing 


18) arwivaeheh unna-chailanya 

2 Biahma-randhra, the channel willan Qhiteii, 1 oallud Brahmas 
गर्ता and Brahma-randhia 

3 पृषद्‌, is 8 Lingas, 6 Chakras, and the 5 Shivag-—ver, Diahma and 
the resi—in tho 5 Chakras, 

4Pho Supreme or Niegure Beahman, 

४ That 18, the Shiva m tho partioula, Chakra, 

6 That 1s, Sho unitos, m Tor passage along the Nadi, with eneh of 
the Linggas in that form of Tos which 1s appropriate to such union. 

TSco Commentary on ए 11) ante 

8 According to ४ 11 Para is in Miladbiia, Poshyanti in Svadheh- 
thiima, Madhyami m Anadhata and Vaikhoi in the mouth, What is, 
howeve', hore dosetihed 18 Layakrama 


DUSGRI ION OF THT Six काणा 147 


(Shabdotpidrka) Shaktis—vi., Pari, Pashyanti, Madhyama, and 
Vaikhai~are identical with Kundahni (Kundulinysbheda-ripa), 
19160 ab the time whon Kundalini starts to go to Svhasrara She 
in Yer form of Vaikhai b witches Svayambhu Lihga, Sho then 
similmly bewitehes Vina-Lunga in the homt as Madhyamé, and 
Ttara Limga between the cyebrows ag Pashyanti, and then 
when sho reachos Pan Bndu She attans the stage of Pari 
(Pari-bhava). : 

The Method of Chakri-bheda is thus described ‘O Para- 
meshyant, lat the Sidhaka carry along with Ter the Lotuses which 
mo on tho Chitrini, and श्लो have their or gin in the mud of 
blood and fat! Let him? entor the channel (Nila)? on tho loft, 
from below, and in this way Chakra-bheda (piercing tho Ohakia) is 
effectod., Afte: having thus poiced the six Chakras, Sho along with 
Jiva should be led as tho rider guides ॥ trained maro by tho reins,” 

Also of. “The Devi should be led by tho Tangsa Mantra to 
the Sabasriia through tle por sts of union of the six Chakras (with 
the Nadi) along the road of Sushumna.” 

“Gleaming flame-lito” (Stkehma-dhimm  jnadipe) ~The 
gloam is {ho Mangsa, whic is tho lummons onorgy (aaa) of tho 
Poin Bindy, in its aspoot as Ni viet Shakti (Nivviinnshakbyitmakn), 
The Pavama Shiva shines with it, 

We now describe how tho joy of Liberation 15 biought about, 

The Devi by dissolving Kundal’nt i1 the Para Bindu effects 
the Liberation of some Sidhakes through thow meditation upon the 
identity of Shiva and Atma in tho Bindu Sho doea go in tho ०७९ 
of 0४00४ by a similar process, and by thoi meditation on Shucti4 In 
other cases, again, this is dcne by the concentration of thought on 
the Pmama Purusha, and m othor cago by tho medilatiot of the 
Sadhake on the bhias of union in the Bindu of Shiva and Shakti 


1 Lotuses grow in the mud, aud thoao Lotuses grow m tho blood and 
fat of the body, Tho ५ desombod is Kuadalini-yoga, o1, ag it is 
called in Lhe Tippani of Shangkara, Bhadla-shuddhi, 

2 As the Sidhaka, who has taken the Jivatmi from the haart to the 
Maladhava, and thus identifies himsolf with Kundalini, it is ho who 
ontere, 

3 That is, tho Natl, 


4 Shaktydtmakachimtana; or 16 may moan meditation on tho पप्र 
ol Shiva and Shakti. 


148 1111 SIX UENLRES AND (11, SERP NL POWDR 


‘ho Mayan ‘Tania says! “Those who me leaned in Yoga 
say that w 13 the union of Jiva and Alma, Aconding to 
othets (९, Shaivas) iw is the expmionec of the identity of 
Shiva an] Atmi ‘The Agama-vadis proclaim that Youn ? is tho 
knowledga (Jnena) relating to Shakti  Oltherwiso mon say 
that tho knowledge of the Puana Munya is Yoga, and others, 
agam, ths Piakeati-vadis, declare that the bliss of nuion of Shiva 
and Shaki 1s Yoga” By “umon of Jiva and Atma” is meant 
Samadhi. By Yoga is meant that by which oneness 13 attained 
with the Paamatma. Llaving spoken of Sunidhi, he thon deals 
with tho वणमा kinds of Yoga in Dhyana By “ bliss of union 
(Sumunsya) of Sluva and Shakti” is meant the senso of enjoy- 
mont arising from the union of male and female! 

Tho Brzhat Shrikiama spoaks of the mannor in wh ch this 2 
to be meditated upon: “They with the eyo of knowledge 6 866 the 
stainless Kala, who is united with Uhidinanda® on Nada 119 is 

+ the Mahadove, whie hke pare orystal, and 18 the eflalgent 14181 
Cause (Vitnba-ripaudina),” and She is Par& the lovely woman of 
beauteons body ® whose limbs aro lstloss by reason of Ter gioab 
pagsion 9.) 


1 ‘hero vorsos also ocour in Gh XXV, ४४, 1, 2, of Sharad Tilokn, 
By “umon of Jiva and Atma” 1s monul tho roalisntion of tho identity 
of tho individual with tho supromo apint as india wed in tho Mahayilya 
“Tat tvam am (‘hat thou art)” By Purdan Prruska tho Purushe in 
Siikhyn Darshana ia moant the Vaishuayas undorstand by 16 Niwiyann 
(collective humamty) By “knowledge of Shakti” as meant tho 
Knowledye that Shakti 1s insoparate from Shiva 

2 8 inltyatmoke प्प्‌ 


3 Samavasyéumakam jnavam, Tantiantara soys that Simarnsaya 
18 the Dhyana of a Kulayogi 


4Suapumyogit yal seukhyang si:iasyang prakiptitam, Tn 
other words, the bliss of Union of Shiva and Shakti, of which sexual 
union is the matenal type 


9 Jnauna-chakshuh 
4 Chiddnai da is Cousciousness-Bhss 


7A vanant reading is Bindu-ritpaandany, the Livst Cause in the 
Bindu form, 


§Vimorn—ht, beautiful thighs, the put shoing scloctod ns an 
example ofthe whole 


2 Mad? Inan-vapuh 


1214011 1100 OF IHD SIX OENIRES 149 


By Kala in the above 18 meant Kundalhni. Vimba-ripa- 
nidina quahfies Paa-shiva 9 Chidiunnda. Chidananda is the 
Bindu-rapa Sluva 01 Pra Sh va 

It has also been said elsowhero म Taving un‘ted Kundalt 
with the Shanya-1Gpu! Parashiva, and having caused the Devi so 
untitled to drink the excollent nectar from their union, She by the 
sume way should be brought back to the Kula cavity 2 

^ [षण bionght them togebher and meditated upon thew 
union, 9 let the Deha-devati+ be satisfied with the nectar which 
flows from such a union ” 

The Gandhava-milika speaks of a different process “ Ihe 
Sahasiiia is the boantiful and auspicious place of Sudishiva It 
18 fiee fiom sonow and divinoly beautiful with trees which always 
bem and are adorned by flcwes and finits ‘The Kalpa Tree 5 
adds 10 its beauty. ‘This treo contains all tho five ^ elements,” and 
18 possossed of the three Gunns, ‘ho fom Vedas ave its four 
branches, It is Inden with beautiful unfadmg flowers which are 
yellow, whito, black, rod, green, and of variogated colom. Ilaving 
moditated on the Kalpa ‘Tree in ths mannor, thon meditate upon 
the jewolled altar below il, O Beautoous One, on it is a bonutif al 
bed adorned with various kinds of cloth and Mandiina flowers, and 
scouted with many kinds of sconts, It is thoro that Mahidova 
constantly stays Moditate upon Sadashiva, who is liko the pwost 
crystal, adorned with all Ikmds of geins, long-armed,® and of 
enchanting beauty, 16 is over gracious and smilingy Ln [15 ears 
are oar-ings, and « chain of gems goes round Ilis nook. A इण ~ 
land of a thousand lotusos resting on his neck adoins Ths body 19 
has cight arms and three oyes Hko the petals of the lotus On 
Ilis two feet 116 wears thinkling too-ornaments, and Jlis® body 
is Shabda-Brahma (Shabda-Biahma-maya). 0 Lotus-ayed Ona, 
meditate thus on Lis gross Body (Sthila-vapuk) Lo is the 


1Shunya-riipa Shinya means “tho void” or space within tho 
Bindu—tho Shiva who is ‘hat, {110 Supremo Shiva, 


*Kule-gahvarn tho Miladhaia, 

3 Simarasya ; ४, ante 

4 That is, the body.af tho Sadhaka considered ax Devati 
SA colostivl wishing-tice which grants all fnit 

0 Associntod with the iden of strongth. 


150 THD SIX OFNIRUS AND वो SURLINE POWDR 


qtuescont, corpseslike? Deva within the Fotus who is vord of all 
action ” 

Also ‘Meditate upon the Devi Kundalini who oncirclos the 
Svayambhu Luhga, Tead tho Devi, with the ad of the Tanger 
Manta to the Sahasnwa, where, O Paameshvari, is the giont 
Deva Sadishiva And then place there the beadtil पु Kandwini, 
who is excited by Iie desite, Kundalim, 0 Bolovod, thon walos 
up and kisses tho lobus-moubh of Shiva who is gladdoned by the 
scent of Ler lotus-hke mouth, and, O Doveshi, Sho then enjoys 
Sadashiva but 0 very httlo whilo when immediately, © Dovi, 0 
Parameshvari, 11610 sues nectar, ‘This negbay igsning from their 
union is of the colout of lac® With this nectm, O Doves, should 
the Para 00३ be 80806, Llaving thus satished tha Devatis 
in the six Chakras with that ambrosial stream, the wise one ahould 
by tho same way bing Yor back to Milidhara. he mind should 
in this process of going and coming be dissolved thoro4 O Parvati, 

+ he wlo practises this Yoga day by day is frood fiom decay and 
death, and is hberated fiom the bondage of this world ” 

Other similar processes should bo looked 191 in obher Tantins, 


4 Shiva withont Shakti 18 Shaya (corpse), Dovibhipavata, and v, 1 
of the Anandalal art 


2 Red, which 18 tho colour of las, 16 alao thet of tho Rajns gin, 
® Kundalini. 
4Tn the Snyasthanam 


DUSORTPYION OV 'LILD SIX GONPRLS 191 


Versr 52 


Tun wise and oxcollent Yogi rapt in eestasy,' and devoted 
to the Lotus feot of his Guru, should load Kula-kundali 
along with Jiva to Wer Lord the Parashiva in the abode 
of Liboration within the puro Lotus, and meditate upon 
Her who grants all desires as tho Chaitanyaripi Bha- 
gavati®? Whon he thus loads Kula-Kundalini, he should 
make all things absorb into Hen. 


[१५ ११, Lary 


Taving spoken of tho Dhyina-yoga of Kundalinl, he now 
speaks of tho Samidhiyoga of Kundalint ‘Tho substance of this 
verse is that the wise (Sudhi) and oxcollant Yogi (Yopindyn) intent 
on the attainment of Samadli should first of all lord Tor who has 
been roused, who then (ताह with ILor Jiva, reachos the Brehma-~ 
dvira, causing the absorption into Terself of everything as She 
moves along Whon Sho who is tho Ivkéndevati and the giver of 
all good finita is led up to Wor Lord and 1s united with tim, the 
Para Bindu, she should be meditated upon as the Supreme (Pad, te , 
"Para B'ndu, Parahbindusyarapim) When She has boon led to 
Tlor Lord Shiva, the Para-Bmda, and has boen uritod with Tin, 
She should be meditated npon as the Ishéndovats who grants 
good fruit, 

Tle should thee (in tho Sahasiiia) dissolvo the 1४19 
Bindu in the Chiditmai,8 which is in tho void within the Bindu, 
and should meditate upon ठः (Kundalini) as Shuddhacho- 
tanyartpa.é Ile thus 1eahses tho identity of diva and Atma, 


{Samadhi Vede (ntioduotion, and post, Commentary. 
४ The Dovi who if the Olnt in all bodies. 

§Tho Biahman ag Chit. 

4 Pure Chit 


a 


182 JWG SIX OUNTRIS AND (THM SORVONT LOW He 


being conscious withm himeolf that ^ am Ie” (8८ ham) ; and 
having dissolved the Clutta he romains unmoved, by reason of Ing 
full and all-pervading Knowledge. 

The Royered Precopta: (Shiimat Achiryyn)! has anid: “The 
wise one should absorb tho Karana® Ma-kina mio the Chidiuni, 
and 16186 =^] ‘am Oludiitmi, I am aebernal, puro (Shuddha), 
enhghtened (Buddha), lhboated (Mukta); [am Nhat which alone 
18 (Sat), without a second (Advaya); 1 am Sapreme 13189 
wherem is all bliss and Vasndeva’s vory self, I am—Om.’* Naving 
reslised that the mmd (Chitta) is tho diseviminaton, he absorbs it 
into its witness! Leb not tho mind (Chitla) be distracted when 
yt 19 absorbed into Chid&itma Tot hind (the Sadhakn) rest in the 
fulness of Ing Llummation like a deep and molionloss ocean.” 

Ma-kua 5+ ‘his is said for thoge who are Sidhakna of the 
Pranava. By Kirana is hero meant Pma-Bindn. By “I am 
Vis ideva” (Visudove’hom) .bo Vinehaavag me alluded to (wide 
ante, vy. 44,19). 

We thus soo that the worshipper of any particalar [हरम 


, should :eahse that Knadalini 18 one with the objoot of his worship. 


In. Pranava worship, for instance, the worshipper jentises his 
identity with the Ongkira; m othor forma of worship he realisos 
his identity with Kundalini, who is ombodiod by wl the Mantras of 
differ ont worshippers, 

The ‘Tantrintua says “Tho King among Yogis becomes full 
of Brahma-bliss by making his mind the abode of the gient void 
which 18 set in tho light of the Sun, Moon, and 2116. 

"Lead Kundali along with Jiva” (Jivenn sirddhang nitvg), 


—Tho Jivatma which is the Tanga, in form like tho tapering ' 


flame ‘of a light, should be brought to the Mladhive fiom its 
plade m tho heart, and then led along with Kundalini, 


1 Phat is, Shangkarachiryyo, 
*That 18 tho Bindu 1s Makiia. It is tho Kavonn or (प्प of all, 
9 Chiditmihang nity a-shuddha-buddha-muktasadad शप 
Paraménanda-sandoho'hang vasndevo’ ham om iti. 
4 Tint as, the Atma, of which it is said Atma sikehi लाति kevalo 
nirgunash cha 
5 ‘Tho Bindu 15 the Ma-kara, : 
6 (प is, in the rogion of tho Sobasria a Soe dv of tho Paguka. 
| 


 panchaka 


॥, 


x 


a 





Pate XVI. MAHAMUDRA 
(Vide pp 211 and 214} 


To face 7, 152, 


५ 


५ 


DHSORIP LION: OT THN SIX ODNIRLS 1४8 
इ 3 


" Abode of दाव च ‘“Mokshe वकद) पड qualifies 
Pure Lotus (Shuddhapadma) ! Ib 18 hove that Taberation is 
attained, 

“Devoted to the two Totus fact of his Guru” (Gurn-piida- 
padma-yugalilambi).—This qualifios Yogindra (oxcellont yogi). 
The Author mean§ that Siddn can only be attained by the 
inshuctions of the Guru, The Sidhaka should therefore seek 
aheltar at his fect 

^ Rapt in ecstasy”? (Samaidhau yatah),—The Kulivrave Tantia 
(ix, 9} defines Samadhi thus: “Samadhi is that kind of contem- 
plation? in which there ts neither ‘here’ nor ‘uot hove,’ which is 
illumination and 16 still hke the ocean, and which is tho Void 
Ttwelf.” 9 

Also elsewhoro: “The Munis declare that tho constant 
vealisation of the idontity of the Jivitmé with the Paamatma is 
Samadhi, which is one of tho eight limbs (Aimga) of Yoga,” 4 
Patwujeli defines “ Yoga tu be the control of the modifivations (or , 
functions) of Chitia (Yogash of ittava tttiniiodhah),” 

Rapt (Yatah)—ic, ho who constantly and with undivided 
attention practises it 
' ५ When ha leads Kula-Kundalini, he should maka all things 
‹ absorb ५८० her” (Laya-vashat nitva).5 Bolow is shown the [0100686 
ot absorption : 

५0 Deveshi, the Lang-kira® should noxt be meditated upon 
in the Uiangle ; there should also Brahma and thon Kima-deva ba 
contemplated. Waving fixed Jiva there with the 11060066 
of the Pianava, let lim loud the Woman, who 19 longing for 
the satisfaction of [for passion,” to the place of Io husband, 8 
O Queen of tho Devas. 0 Great Queen, O boloved of my 
life, let him think of Ghiiina (Prothivi), and meditate on the 


_ 1 Shankara 1 onda 16 १8 Shuklapadma, white lotus, 
§ Dhyana 

` 8 Svariipa-shinya, 

44 'thig 18 from Sharada Tiloka, Ch. XXV, १ 26 
"b-Vighwnndtha reads it na Noyn-vashat 

“0 Bija of Prethivi 

च, Visargu-nitsha-kammi 
* 8 That ia, the Bindu 1 किष, 

५ 500 . 


104 १7; SIX ONNIRUS AND THD ALRPONE POWER 


0018016 Shakti Dakint © Daughter of the Mountain, O 
Queen of tho Ganas,1 O Mother, all these should be led into 
Prithivi ” 

Also: ^ (पका) © Great Quaon, the blessed Prithit should be 
absorbed irto Gandba, and then, O Darghter of 11.90 Mountain 
King, the Jivatma should bo drawn (from the heart) with the 
Pranava (Mantra), and the Sidhalca should lead Priva? Gandha, 9 
and Kundalini, nto Svidhishéina wilh the Mania Sham.” 

And also: “In its (Svidhowhthina) pormarp shonld Varuna 
and Ifui4t be meditated upon, And, O Boauloous Ong, aller 
moditating on Rakini® all those and Gundha (smell) should be 
absorbod imto Kase (taste), and गार्ह, Kondalin’, and Rasa, 
shonld bo moved into Manptia,” 

And again “QO thon of beautiful hips$ (Suelo), 111 147 pede 
oarp Lh3 Sadhaka should meditate upon Lire, and algo on Rudra, who 
is the destioyo of all, as being m company with the Shakir 
Liki and beautiful to behold And, 0 Shiva, lol him next 
meditate on the lustious sense of vision, and absorb all these and 
Rose (taste) into Ripa (Sight), and thorontior leid Jiviuma, 
Kundalini, and Rapa, nto Andhate ” 

Aad agam “Jot him meditate in ily® pericarp on Vilyn, 
who dwells in the 1ogion of Jiva, ag पिर on the Yoni-Moandala, 
which is mada beanteous by tho progenco of the Bime-~Limga, 
Let him thero also medilate on Vayn® 78 united with Rikint and 
touch ‘vagindriya 0 Sparaha), and there, O Thon who purifiest, 
Jiva, Kundalini, and Ripa, should be placed in Sprisha (Louch), 
and then diva, Kundalini, and Sparsha, should be placed in the 
Vishuddha ” 


प : Attondant (Upadovatau) on Shiva, of whom Ganesha is tho 
ord, 

2 Sic in toxt: Quaere Ghrien or Prana in sense of Ho 1698, 

820, Gandha Tanmitra, 

4४९. Vishnu, 

5 Pavanakivini—one of hor names, 

52,9, one who has a beartiful figure, the part being salected for 
the whele 

7 ^ ठ —2e, of Mampiue padma. 

8 “Jig? 1.6) of Anuhalapadmn 

9 Viiyn here is Isha the Lord of Air, 


DESCRIPLION OF LAN SIX तवि 155 


And again: “Let him meditato in ils! pericmp on the 
Dthoreal region, $ and on Shiva accompamed by Shikini, and 
having placed Speoch (Vak), and [जाप (Shrotia), n Ubher, let 
him, O danghtet of the Mountain, placo all theso and Sparsha m 
Shabda (Sound), and plage Jiya, Kundalini, and Shabda, im the 
Ajna Chakra,” 

Tho above passages ave fiom Kangkalamalini Tantra 

“Tangle” in the above is tho Tiiangle in the Malidhia, 
fiom which the commencement 18 made, Lang-kira should be 
meditated upon as within this Imanglo  Jueading of diva with the 
ase of the Pianava 18 a vauant practice, “ Visaga-nisha- 
kimini’”’: By Visorga is meant the agitation caused by an 
access of Kiima (desne), ‘lho compound wad moans She who 
is striving to satisfy Der desne (Kama). The bringing of Jiva 
by the Ilangsn Manta 1s according to the teaching of somo, 
 Placo of her husband” (Patyau pads), 41019 is the Bindu, the 
Shivw in the Lotus of ४ thousund petedls, Sidheka should lead , 
Tier there. 

The Biya Lang, Biahma, Kimadovn, Nivkint-Shokti, and the 
sonse of amell ((thrinendriya)—all those are absorbed into 1? पाण) 
and Prithivi 1s sbsorbod into tho Gundha-tnliva  Jiviitmé, 
Kordalini, and Gandhn-tativa, are drawn upwad by tho Pranava, 
and brought into the Svadhishthina by the Soham Mantia, ‘Chia 
18 the process to be applied mght though. After leading Jiva, 
Kundalini, and Shabda-tattiva, into Ayni Chakra, Shabda-tativa 
shonld be ४०६०११० mto Ahangkira which is thore, and Abang 
kara into Mahat-tattva, and Mahat-lattva into Sitkehma-prale di, 
whoge name 15 Ilvanya-garbhe, and Prakriti again into Para-bindu, 

The Mantin-tantia-prakisha says “Tet Vyoma (ther) be 
absorbed into Ahangkira, and the latter with Shabda mto Mahat, 
and Mahnat, again, into the unmanifost (Avyakta) supreme (Pa) 
Cause (Kivann) of all tho Shaklis, Let the Sadhake think 
attentively that all things beginning with Prithvi me absorbed 
into Vishnu,’ the Cause who ie Sat, Clit, and Ananda” 


1 Vishuddhapadma, 
2 kasha. r 


5 'Vishau is sposified by this parteular Tantia, bub ib may bo any 
othor Devat® who 16 the Teitadoy पह of the Sadhake (896 p, 151), 


186 UM श OPNLRES AND LUD STRPENL LOW CR 


‘hat is, Mahal, which is oll Shaktis (Snivashakta), shonld 
be absobed into Stiksima-prale ti, who w known by tho name 
of Iinanya-guabha, and that Prakriti should bo absorbed ito 
Pma, by which ig meant tho Causo in tho form of DPmabindu, 
In this connection the मोदा कर has lund down the rule that 
the pioss should be dissolved mio tho subtle! Cf. “It 
should be ationtyely considmed and practised (hub tho grossa is 
absorbed into the subtle, and all into Olndatina.” Sho absorption 
of all things, beginning with Prathivi and ending with Anahata, 2 
takes place in tho aforesntd manna ; that being so, the feot and 
the senso of Stiell (Ghifinendriys) and all portaming bo Prathivi 
aie dissolved in tho place of Prithivi, ag thay inh se in Prdthivt, 

Bimlaly, the hands, the senso of Tisbo (Rasanendnya), 
and all that pertains to Wator, are dissolved in the rogion of 
Water. Tu tho region of na (Vahni-sthina) mo dissolved 
the anus, tho senso of Vision (Ohakshurindviya), and wl that 
+ pertains to Fue, In tho rogion of Ai (Viynesthina) tho gom- 
tals, the 86086 of ‘Touch (‘'vigindiiya), and all that porlaing to 
Vayu, 00 dissolved In the placo of Alisha aro divaolyod 
the sonso of Spooch (Vak) and hoaving (Shro.ondriyo) and 
all that pertains to Alisha (lithor), 

In tho Ajna Chakra tho dhasolution of Ahai gkinn, Malas, 
भिहि पिदा, and so (णका, takes placo, each dissolving 
into its own immeditate canse, Phe lottors of tho alphabet 
should then bo absorbed sn tho 20९५180 ordor (Viloma), 94 
gimmng with Keho-kitva and ending wilh A-kina, By “all 
things” ib is meant that “ Dindu,? + Bodhint,” and so forth, 
which have been shown above to be cansal bedies (Kiana 
Shmira), shorld be dissolved in a reversed ordor (Vilomena) 
into the Pimordial Cause (Adikinana)—the Para Bindu, ‘hua 
the Brahman alone remains, 

Tho process 18 thna duseribed “The Sadhala, having thus 
Mande his determinahon (Sangkalpa), should diaselvo 9 the lottora 
of the Alphabet in the Nyfsa-sthina.! ‘Cho dissolution of Kein 

4 146 ए 40 and Commontary under it 


2 This sooms an onor, for the last Mohibhiita Alisha 1a diasolyod 
in Vishuddha, & 


9 Barham ot. 
4 The places भत tho Varna havo boon placed व कष द्भ Nytan 


DESORIVHON OF 4111; SIX GLNLRES 157 


19 in Jun, and La in Ila; Ila, again, 28 dissolyed ito Sa, and Sa 
into Sha, and thus i goes on till A is reached. ‘This should be 
very carefully done.” 

Also+, “Dissolve the two letlois into Bindu, and dissolve 
Bindu imto Kala, Dissolve Kali im Nada, and dissolve Nada 
in Nidanta,* and this mto Urmani, and Unmani into Vieliu- 
vaklia?; Visknuvakha should be dissolved into Guruvaktia 4 
Let the excollent Sidhakea then renhse that all the letters me 
dissolved in षष फा Shiva.” 

By Vishnuvaktia is meant Pang-Bindu, “ ‘lhe Siiryyabindu 
is called the Face, and below are Moon and Ine,” “ Bindu is said 
to be the Male, and Visage is Prk iti /?6 

All those authorities imply tho same thing, and go to prove 
that 118 the “ inouth of Vishnu ” (Vishun-vaktva) wherg dissolution 
should take place ho following from Keshavichiiry yn १ also leads 
to the same conclusion , ^ Lead Ler (प्राप्ता) पात thc Male, which 
is the Bindu; lead Bindu into Paritma, and Pmiatma into Kala- 
tative, and thts latter into Shakti, and Shakti mto ©) datma, which 
18 tho Supreme (Kovala), tho tranquil (Shinto), and efulgent.” 

Wo have seen that each digsolyes mio 318 own immediate 
enuse, Nitdiinta is thorofors dissolved in Vyfpikii Shakt, tho 
Vyapiki Shakti 21 Unmani, and Unmant in Samani? and 
Samani in Vishnuvakiia, When the letters havo beon thus 
diseolved, all the six Chakras are dissolved, ns the petals of tho 
Lotuses consist of letters, 8 


1 {1616 is shown the Anuloma process, Tho two lottors are IIa 
and [६510१ 

9०, that whioh is beyond Nida. Sea Introduction 

3 Pung-Bindu ; ५, post. 

4That is, the month of the Suprome Binda (oited from Sharada. 
tilaka, Oh. V, vv. 134-136), Also of, Shivada, Oh, उ, 123, and 
Kularnava IV, 76. 

5 Of, Shivada, Ch, XXV, v 51 Also Nitydshodashika, I, 202, 
and Kama-Kalavilisa (Vol X, Inntrik Toxts) 

6 Also called Keshava Bhirati—n gront Vaishnava {शानाम्‌ who 
mitinted Shri Ohaitaryn tho grontost among Intler day Varshnovas. 
into Sannyfisa o tho path of Renunointion 

7 Ste, This is me conflict with obher texte, according to which 
Unmani is above Samani, 

8 Padmadaliuing varna-mayatvat, 


158 ‘ULL SIX GONERIS AND पाए SbRE INT TOWER 


Tho Vishvasina Tautia says. “Tho potuly of the Lotuses 
mo tho letios of tho Alphabet, boginmug with Av’! The 
Sammohana Tantie? describes tho dissolution tof (ho Lotusas and 
the petals thugs “ Dissolve the lellers from Va to Sa of the polals 
in Brah na, and disgolve Brahmi in the Lotus ol six potas which 
contains tha letters Ba to La, and which 15 called Svidhishéhina, 
Do this as the Guru directs.” And so forth. And ending with 

“The wise ono shoald thon dissolve it (Vish tddha) in tho 
(Lotus of) two petals which contains tho two lottors In and Kako, 
and dissolve the two lotioa which aie in tho lable lobes पाण 
Bmdu, and dissolve Bindu mto Kali” 8 

Wo thus sec that the lour 16610 in tho कोहो aro dise 
solved therein and Miélidhirva is dissolved in SyAdlnehthina 
Proreeding in this way tall the Ayn Uhakra iw reached, the lotlers 
Ifa and Keka which are thore ave also dissolved nt this place. 
Then the Lotus itsolf ठ dissolved into Rinda, Bindu into Bodhing, 

+ and proceeding in this way ag nlroady shown overything 18 
dissolved into Paa Bindu Whon the Ajna Cho tia 1 dissolyod 
all that it contains in its porionrp—Llikini, Torn-Gnign, Prana 
mo unablo to exist without support, and therefore after tho 
dissolution mlo Pratl thoso also aro dissolved irto Para Bindu, 


t Adivarniitmakam patram padminim pmikiriitam 

20h. TV, Tho passago sited also ०९०18 in Shiraditilake, Oh V, 
vv 129-234, 

$Vilaya ^ 

4Thabis, Miladhira whoro [पाक op Kamaligana 1s, 

§ That is, tho Bindu of the Ajné Chakin ig dissolved into Kundalini 


DESORIPLTON 0, का) SIX 01 प्रन 159 


Virisn 53 


Tun boautiful Kundali duinks the excellent red! nectar 
issuing from Para Shiva, and roturns from there where 
shinos Hternal and Transcondont Bliss? in all its glory 
along tho path of Kula,‘ and again entors the Miladhiva. 
The Yogi who has gaincd stoadinoss of mind makos offering 
(Tarpana) to the Tsiéa-dovatit and to tho Devatas in tho six 
centres (Chakra), Dikimi and othors, with that stream of 
celestial noctar which is m the vessol! of Brahmuaala, the 
knowledge whereof! he has gained through the tradition of 
the Gurus, 


90111, 19१11 


He now speaks of what should bo dono aftor all the differont 
kinds of Yoga dosmibed have been understood, ‘Tho meaning of 
this verse is that the beantil | Kundali drinks the excollent nectar 
issuing from Para Shiva, and having emerged from tha placo of 
Eternal and ‘Tiauscendental Bliss, She passes along the path of 
Kula and ve orters Milidhain, The Yop, after having understood 
the different matters mentioned (‘Sat-tad-dhyaninantaam), should 
think of tho insepaate union’ of Shiva and Shalt, and with the 


1Shangkara says it is so coloured becauso 11 19 mixed with the 
menstrual fluid, which is symbolic, like the reat of this erotic imagery 
Red 18 the colour of tho Rajoguna. 

४ Brahman 18 [ter nity and Bliss. 

3 The Channel in the Chit ninfidi 

4'Tho vessel is Kundalini, 

5 Samarasya, 


(0 Tite SEX CENCKIS ANT CEU SERPONT LOWE 


excellent कष्ण prod teed from the bias of मालो ine iw th Pave 
Shiva make ofleving (Capua) to Kadal 11. 

“Pah of Kale” (Kela-patha) Lhe path of Thalman, the 
channel n Ghitrini, 

Kuali arn ke tho nectar wth wh ok Popa mde to cen, 
‘Phe followimg authority siys: Having तत्तत (haw inion wat 
having made (Her drinc),” ote TL follows, thor fore, tbat Sho is 
made to dimk "11५ १५८५] 18 ted lle tho colon: of Jac , 

५८.010) there where shines land and 4१११९ शद (कि 
(Nityanand.- nahodnyat)—th nb is, Sho rolurns fiom the plico 
woo otenal and anscondental Blas 38 onjoyod 2.0.) whore the 
{3181111 पो 18 ८14 uly revhyoed, 

८ Agaw onters Milddhara” (Malo vishe )~ She has to he 
brought back in the samo way as Sho was led tpword, As She 
passed thiongh tho difforonb Laingas and Chalins in thon order 
(Chakia-bhoda-kiamons) whon pomp upward, so पठतत She whou 
rotuynmeg to the Mulidhira, 

‘the Revered Groat Procoptor siya Wubarmi, '’Phow apemley 
Josh all things wilh tle stream of N oti whieh flows fiom the tips 
of Thy two feobs and 1१ ‘Thon reburneth to ‘Thy own plice how 
vivifioth and maketh visible all Ghings that wero uorobine mvisible, 
and on reaching My abode Thou dost वदता hy sn पूप coil 


and sloop, > 


“Ay Thou roluineth “how viviliobh end कप्त visible,” 
This desuithes the velirn of [क्लमो to [ता फणा plaice, As She 
robuns Sho walnses Rasw ? into tha various thmgs hie had provi- 
ously absorbed into [करमो whon pomp upward, and hy tho 
mingion ot Risa, bho makes them all vigthlo and mamifost. Let 
passage was Leyeleaiia, and Lor return So dvidieler ina, ॥ [काप 


1 Kuhata is a cavity: Kahu‘ wonkd then 1५ She whose whoda is 
a cavity -tho cavity of tho Mulidl iia 

2 Cited fiom tho colehrited Anonduahni निका Waive of Bliva 
TIymn, attributed to Shangkarichuryya. Keo “Wave of Bla” a 
translation, by A Avalon ह 

11.311. Sho 1¢-vitulisos thom 

4 906 $, 52 and noxt nolo, 

$ That i, She rocrealos or rovives ax Sho 4 णा प to hor own abcde; 
just as Sho “dostioys ग or absorbs all things or Ler upward progress, 





Pratt शा BADDHA-PADMASANA 


To faco p, 160, 


DESORIPPION OL PI SIN तणा § 161 


it has been snid: © Kundah, who is Blisa, 1 the Quoen of the Sumas, ४ 
goos back m tho samo way to the Adh ua } Lotus”? 

The Bhétaeshaddhi-prakmansy has tho following: “Tet the 
“‘(ativas Probhivi, ole, m thoir ordor, ag also Jiva and Kundalmnt, 
५ Jed back trom [ष्वद्य aod cach pluced in its cospective 
position,” She is thon put colarly deseibed “Sho 15 lustious 
whon, first Sho goos, and Sho 19 ambrosial 4 whon Sho returns.” 

“ Stream of celestial nectar” (Divyau ritadha x) —Lhns 13 the 

_ excellent nectar which, a3 has eheady beon shown, is produced by 
‘the union ® of Siva and Shaktt, aud rang in « sérea from the 
Bralhmerandlia to the Milidhiva Jt 14 fc1 this reason that tho 
Author says in ४, 8 that “the Brahmadviie which shines in (Ler 
month 15 the entiance to Lho place sprinkled by ambios a.” 

“ Knowledge whereof he has gainod through the tradtiow of the 
Guus” (Yogn«parampua-vi litayé) -- 1115 qualifies “Stream of 
Nectar”. Lt means that the know odge 1s gvined from instructions 
(in Yogw practice) handed down traditionally through the snccession 
of Guns. 

“Which ty in the versal of Bralkoadnda” (Brahmandabhdnda- 
sthitam).—Lhis qualitics Amis (nocter) ‘Tho ४००१५ or support. 
(Bhindn) on which the Rial wtyda (universe) rests is [हप 
Kundalini 1 the Bhanda as Sho is the Source (Yoni) of all 

By Daivatam 7 is meant the [sh/adovatay wd Dakin and others 
in the sx Chakras |¢ has boon suid “O Dovesh", with this 
nectar should नदा ष्टि (‘Tarpane) bo made to the Parndavata, and 
then having done ‘Tarpama to tha Devatis 11 tho six Chakias,” and 
36 forth, 


1 Mudrakivi —that ia Anondarupini for MudiizAnn dadaym. 
Mndta is dotived from Mud=iinanda (blias)-- Rat sd dati Cyivos) + 
Mudra therofora moans that wh ch giver bisa 

‘8 SurnszDova, ovo tho difforont Novas 11 the Chasias 

te, Miladhina 

4 ५९६ 160 ambrosia (Amst) grvos life 
+ § Samarisya 

0 Vishvanatha roads this as an adjootive qualifymg Daivatam and 
this seems moa im consonanco with tho toast The Brnahmiinds is 

^ compared to a Bhinda, and 1 16 Jovalay atom thal. The olferny ia 
thon made with that stew of nectar fo the Devatis who aro im the 
Universo O1, wem ding to Kailicharana, offering 13 made to the 100९0108 
of tho Amita which Kundali his drank, 

¶ Daivaiam ‘s the colloative form of Devatita. 

OL 


162 UN SIX OUNLRES AND THN SERPEN POWER 


Vora 5A 


Tu. Yoo: who has, alter practice of Yuma, Niyama, and 
the liko,! leat this excollent method from the two Lotus 
Foot of tho auspiaious D 1१॥ eeu? which aro tho source 
of uninterrupted joy, and whose mind (Manas) 1s control- 
led, is noyor born क्षता in this world (Samsua), Por 
him thore 1५ no disaolution oven at tho time of inal 
Dissolution Gladdened by constant realisation of that 
which 14 the soureo of f{iternal Bliss,‘ ha bocomes full of 
peace and fyrumosb a nong all च ०४०. 


Comm LNA ty 


He here speuks of the good to be ष्णा त्‌ by knowmg tho 
method of Yoga practice, 

©From tho lotus foet of his auspicious Dikshd-quau, which are 
the । of turinturruptcd joy” (Shri-dilesa-gu -pidnepadma- 
yugalamnoda-piavahodayal) —Amoda moans joy or bliss; aud by 
Pravaha 15 meant omutonupted and contimnons connection. 
Amodagpraviha therefore means Nityinanda, ov “ Vitornal Bhs”, 
Bliss such as this conos fiom the Lotus feet of हि ५ Gain, which 
also load to ४ knowledge of Yogu practice, 

Lhe Dikehi-gura is hore spoken of as ha is the first (0 11161046, 
and also by 1901801 of his pre-eminones. Bat in 11५ sbyence rofage 


1 Soo Introduction. 

2 The Grin who has govon him initiation 
3 Sangkshayas= Pialaya 

1 Nityén dass Biahman 

5 Swiim—lit , “of tho Gool’ 


DESORIPITON OF LID SIX (11128 162 


may be sought with othe. Gmus. [t has therofore hoen sud : 
* As a bee dosnous of honey goes 1om one flowor to another, so 
does the disciple desirous of knowledge (Jnana) go fiom one Guu 
to another,” 4 

“Gladdenced by constant realisation of that which is the 
somes of Mernal Bhas” (Nilyananda-painmpm i-pramudita)—e , 
who 18 united with the Stream of Ltanal Bhss. 

“ Foremost among the good” (Satum aginm)—ie , he is count- 
ed to be foremost among the good who are the Yogis 


1Thia 18 from Ch. XI, of Nivutlara dar 16 This verse also 
ocours in Kulivnave (‘Tantil Text, Vol. +), Ch, 111, 182 


164 11}, SEX OPNIRLS AND HD सतन) OW R 


Virar 55 


Tv the Yogi who is devoted to tho Lotus Moct of his Guru, 
with heart nnportanbed and concentrated mind, reads this 
work which 15 the supreme source of tho knowledge of 
Jaberation, and which 3s Ianitless, prre, and most soo ob, 
then of a very suroty his mind! dancos al the leet of his 
Jshta-devata, 


Comat NLARY 


Ila Tere aperks of the geod to be gad by the study of the 
versos relating to tho six Oh vkias. 

“eat 10000 (20८4 (Svabhivasstlitalj—io, engrossod in 
jis own ta to spnimal bong. 

‘ Concentrated mind” (Yatintarmanih)—~oe, 10 who by 
practice ol Yoga his stoadied and concontanted his mind on the 
innor spirit (पक्षा). 

‘Tho rest 13 clear, 

Tere onds the Lighth Section of the Wxplanation of tho 
Vorses duseriptivo of the Six Chakias, lormmg part of tho 
Shritativachmtimani, composod by Shri-Pirnin mdayati, 


1 Chotas or Ohitin 


{IIE FIVEFOLD 10018100, " (PADUKA- 
PANCIAKA) 


Lyircpuorory Virsn? 


{ muptai on the Guu in the Lotus of a thousand petals, 
who is radiant like the cool rays of the full moon, whose 
lotus hands make the gostmes which grant blossing and 
dispel foar. lis raimont, guland, and कन पाठम) are , 
ever frosh and pure. His countenance 1s कन हा 16 
is in tho Wangsa in the hoad. Lo is tho Hangsa Himsoll. 


1 The moanmg of this is oxplained फा ४, 7 post 

2 This verso is ihserted as it was found ino 61 bolonging 
to the Inte Achnlananda Syimi, now in tho possession of the Yatondra 
Anugandhane Samita 


166 |, ५०६ CN [1५ AND TU Sta पि OW]? 


Verse ] 


T avorr the wondorful White Lotus of twolve lottors 
whih is withia the womb (Udare) ol, and insoparablo 
from, the pericarp of the Lotus in which 1s tho Brahma- 
randhia, and which is adomed by the ली पान्‌ of [पाषा ? 


9) + 1, LARY 


४ Who hymn Paduk epanchake, coupoxud by [ण of 
Vive ८५8, 9 dostioys all वल पल ! Kali ohanen by his Tike 
eallod Amala (Stamlcgs) makos patont its bo wly 

Sidishivi, the [तापा of the threo Worlds, boing desn ous 
of sper king of Guudhym पकक" in tho form of a hymm (कुप) 
first of all describes the plice of the Gun 

11 0 vorb Bh vjois Pirst णाहो Singular, Atm mopad ए omph फं 
ing that Shiva [परन्‌ adorcs or woiships He snys, “1 do adore or 
worshi>,” By saylig so 11५ exprosses tho novossity (प all wor 
shippers (Upisakus) of tho Mantias revonled by Him should adore 
this wend lal bwelve-potallod Lotus Ile tha shows tho nocownly 
of Tlis woiship. 

Tho meaning of this verge mm buef is bis | adore tha (५५८४०. 
petalled Lotus which 13 withm (he per'cap of the फणा पावा. 


1Pvadash uxa—that is, bwelve potals ‘The pots of tho lols wo 
nob mdepondent of tha Lattors ther oor 


2 That is, the Chitria Nid: ‘The lotug rosls on the uppor ond ol 
Chitrint 


3Shivy Sor as to tho hyo [ठम्‌ tho ebaticn from the Li agin hana 
fantra, v7 psf, णण ws ako a con घृणते sith fice, ५] ९५ the colo, 
caused by वरस्तु poron’ known as Nale kavthe 


4A ighay gin and णावता pam wd por alty’ 
§ Yoga with the Supreme mown aa tho Grin, 


WP 11४1101) POOTS COL (स) CA ANG IA ९१) 167 


© Wondayal” (Adbhuta) —1b excites om wonder by reason of 
ils being perveded by the 1५818 (1 ८ jes) of Bralmean, and Lor other 
reasons 

१ Lotus of twelve letters” (Dvitdasharna-sarasi tha)—7 ८ , tho 
Lotus which contains twolve letters = 4१ ५ twelve letters, wording 
to those learned in the ‘Tantias, are tho twolve Ictters which make 
the Gurumantia; they me Sa, ha, kha, phicng, ha, sa, ks? a, ma, 
la, va, ra, yang. Some say that by Dvadaslarnn 18 meant the 
twellth vowel, which 13 the Vag bhava-bijat But that cannot be, 
lf it were 50, tho authority ¢uoted bclow would be tai tologons , 
“(Meditate on) yom (मात्र who 18 Shiva as bemg on tho lustions 
Tlangsapitha, the substance of which 1s Mintra (Mantiamaya), 
which 18 m the penicup of the Lotis of twelve Ictlers, new Uo 
region of the Moon? in the percarp, md which 15 adorned by 
the letlers Ie, La, and Keka, which are withn the tangle 
A-Ka-""ha. ‘Tho lotus of twelyo letters is i1 the कना} (of tho 
Sarhasrart).” 

Tho १0४० pnssage speaks of (1५ Manh unayyntha, tho 
2191111४, substance of this 11011 is the Curie 11५11८1५) rol 
Vag-bhava-hij..3 ‘Phero would therelora be v repetition of 1५ 
same Mantra © Dvadashiiea” s made up by Behuvi li Sumas i 
that im which thore ae Dvadasht (awelve) Aris (lottas) ‘This 
lotus has therefore twolvo patils, on which aro the twolve leticrs, 

Té is truo that the lobtors me not hers specified, and thero has 
been nothing smd as to where they are placed , but tho Guiugita 
says” that “the 1७14618 Ilang and Sa surround (tht 18, 1 pet ५५) 
the Lotus,” wherein the Gurishonld be meditated = (१५ lowds us 
to the conclusion that the Joblors Jang and Sak mo repented भूर्‌ 
times, thus making twelve, and so the nambor ol [५ पत becomes 
clearly twelve, as each petal contams one lelter, Tua ५ ht 
subject of consideration for the wise. 


14,0, Baja of Sarnsvata —Aing, 

2 Chandra-mandala, by the Commontator (en ting the locative us 
Suwipye suplami ४.6, locative cago mide १५ of proximity ) 

3 Aime), ‘ 

4 ‘That 1s, 11 we nnderstond thu the body of hoth the Piha end tie 
petals is Aing Tho Vagbhava Bia Amgs tho (का) Ban also, 


5 Tis verse 8 quoted m ए] under ए 6 post, 


168 1) SIX CINIR'S AND LID हा, 1 (00 


न Fasepovable from” (Nitya-legn प) ) —Thab is, 11 th connceted 
with tho कि तपण im suche way (ib the ono (1 11106 bo thought 
of wi-hont thinking of tho other, 

८ Wheek क within tha womb of and inseparable from 
the perwarp ८ the Lotua wm which ww fhe Breaky arandhea ”? 
(Bribmmandhia-sarasnuhod wa) —That is, the Stuhasrirva the 
thonsand-petalled lotus in which is the Brahmarandhry; within ils 
woml, that is to say, within it (‘Tanmadhye), that is, within its 
poricarp (‘Tat-karnik ष्ण) 

Tho Kangk da-Malm, in dose: bing the Lotus of m thousand 
petals, thns sponks of tho placo of the Brahm unandhya+ In its 
(Suhamdre) por carp, O De vests, ts Artarata a, and above it i the 
Guin, above him is the Stiryyy Mandala and Chandia Mandala 
and Mahavayu, and above it is Brahma-randhra.” 

Some say that by Udara (belly ov miontor) ig movnl within tho 
tangle in tho poricarp, ‘That 18 nob ught The word Udara hore 
means “nterior 7 or “conlio” की) intotior of the Lotus contains 
ils माल्‌, but the toxt doos not moan tho mtorion of the tangle 
in ths petoarp, becanso the Lrianglo ts not here mo itioned, Tho 
Shyfima-sap uyy 1 quotes tho following expheit + 

८ Who Lotus ol twelve pots (or Letters) 1 within tho pov 
emp of tho White Lots of a thousind pois, which hos its hond 
tamed downward, and the Matmen sat which ava of the colour of 
the rising aun, ond whioh as adoined by all the [क्का of tho 
alphabet’? Tero tha statemont ‘within tho pericarp? 1५ oxplicil, 

५ Adorned by the channel of Kundal7” (Kandali-vivara-kaindas 
mandiiam) —Lhe Vivera (Channel) is that by which Kundalini 
gous to Shiva in the Suhuma., ‘The Chitria containe wilhin ib uhis 
passaye or channol, तपा 18 the tubo (stalk), as 1b wore, 
through which the passage ring, and (त adorns and is 
adoned by tis Lotus, As Lotua vests on its stalk, so does tho 
twelvo-petalled Lotus 10st on Chitin, and is made beautiful by its 
stalk, 


TID PIVEPPOLD 10015100, (PANU <APANC TAKA) 169 


Vowr 2 


I avorn the Abode of Shakti in the place whore the two 
pericarps come togethor, Tt is formed by the lines’ A, Ka, 
and Tha; and tho letters IIa, La, and Kesha, which are 
visiblo in each of 104 corners, give it the charactor of a 


Mandala.? 


COMMLNIARY 


Tho Guin shonld be meditated upon asin the tiangle A-Ka-Tha 
withm the pericarp of tho Lotus before-montionad, He now wishos 
to describe tho tnanglo so that an adequate conception o 1b may 
be formed. 

“The abodle of Shatti” (Abalalayam).—By Abnlé is meant 
Shakti. [न Sho is Kimakals triangular in forn, und tho threo 
Shaktis, Vaud, Jyeskéha, and Ronda, aro tho lines of the tuiangle. 
These (11166 lines 01 Shaktis onanate fon tho thro Bindus3 
Kamakala is the abode of Shakti. 

Tho Yaimala speaks of the identity of Kimakala with this 
१०१०, ‘ho passage bogms, “1 now speak of Kima-kala,” and 
ploceeding says! “She 18 the throo indus, She 1५ ४16 three 
Shaktis, She 18 tho tmovtold Mamtestat‘on, She is ovoilasting.” 
That is, Kamakala is composed of tho thico Shaktis spoken of 
(‘Kishaktirdpa)., Ho next speaks of tle attributos of Abalilaya 
(abode of Shakti), 

1A-Kiv-Thidi 20, tho lives formod by tho lebiors A to Ah, Ka to 
Tas and Tha to Sa Thos lotlors placed a4 (0३९५ limes form tho three 


sidos of tho tranglo 
४५९, tho dagram whore tho Divimty is summonod and worshipped, 


3-Vindutrayangkmeabhilt that is, thoy have 9 6 {1010५ Bindus ag 
then smonting shoot (Seo Kamakulavilésa, Vol X, १ पद्व Toxts.) 


4 १11\ पातृ sa iy shaktih उवे trimirtit si sandtani 
04 


~~ 


170 THE SIN GENERTS AND HIP SERPLNE LOWER 


“Tho place where the tuo pericarps come together? (Kandalitn- 
Kninikfp 1/2). Knndala ordinaily means a त 10101 यो) wh oh one 
attacks the o(ha with words — Tore its sig ( पापा ts rraoly chu 
116 porcnrp of one (the twolvo-y ofallod lotus) 1५ uoludcd within 
that of the othor (Sal asrva) 

Pinco (Puta), tc, the lee whore the tr ingly is © formed by 
the line A, Ku, and Tha” (Klipta-vekham nl पण In okhnya).— 
The sixteon vowcls begmuing wit A torn the line Vat, the 
aixtcen ५0५ beginmiig with (1 form the lino dyovhtha, and the 
axteen 10105 bogimmag wth Tho tam the ne [४ पवा, The 
Abodo of Shikti is for nod by (hase threo mcs 

The भाष जदोष, in dealing wih + पोपप ५ says: 
“From the वाया iw the sprouting ro (Arekara) Sha has 
assumed the form of [( 6८181 1 

५ Phe letters Ha, La, and Kaha, which ao msible in us cornea, 
give it tha character of ८ Mandala” (Kor ale call पपा 
mardali-bhave-lakshyam) —ln its cormas—ee, om the inner 
corners of the aforcand tamnglo, The threo corners of the 
काष्ठ mo at the पुण्ड tle ight, ind the lot. tho lotto 
Tn, ln, md Nein, which ue yisblo tore, give the Jaco tho 
chavictar cl ॥ Mandala, 

One cannot orm an rvdoquato comecpUon (hy ina) of this 
trianglo withont knowng af ऋ all ity 1111 1, and that 
18 why other withoritios ara qroted ‘hs (पहन should be 
80 diawn that al one wae to walk round it would uwuys bo 
on ono's 1011 

Tho Shakt minda-taiamgi says ^ Wiite the triangle 
A-K Tho so that walking outside ibis vways on one’s loll.” 

fake Urddhvan vaya “Tho पताव aa the Suprane 
Tattva, and embodies within itsolf Biehma, Visheu, and Shiva 
(Brahmavishnushivatmakam), ho tianglo compored of the 
lottois has emanated from the Bindu” Also ‘Phe [क 


1 Vanndviyava वपा Bindu appears in tho form of letters by 
germinating as a sprout. ‘Tho letters aro aprouts from Bindu that is, 
the Universe is evolved hom Bindu 

१ Pho tringle, 1b should be rxomombered, has ws apox downwad 

{ Vain &varlona रुक्मा The diawimy 1 made oa the direction 
whie 1 is the reverse to that of the dards of a wateh 

4ze,tho thie Findus considered as ony and also separately. 


{QE TV AOLD 1 00191 कछा (RADUKAPANOUAKA) 171 


A to Visargy meko the lno Tivhma, which 1s tho Imo of 
Prajapati, the lottois Ka to ‘la make the most supreme 
(Caratpara) lino of Vishen ‘ho letters “ha to Se inako tho 
11116 of Shiva, Tho three lines omanalo from the „11106 Bm lus” 

Tantra-jvanun “he 1 109 Rati, Sattva, md Tanas, 
suiround the Yom-Vandala” Also “Above 19 the Ime of 
Sattvi; the line of Rajas ts on tho loft, aud tho line of Tamas 1s 
on one’s right”! 

By a careful consideration of the above autho shes, the con 
clusion 18 irresistible that the letters A-Ka- ‘ha go nthe dnoc- 
tion above-mentioned 

‘The Svatantra “untia sis+ “Tho lines A Ka-Tha sin round 
tho letters Ifa, La and Kehr”? 16८ thaetore places tho letters 
Ua, Za, Ksha within tho triangle. 

{¢ 15 needless to discuss the matter ab greatar length, 


'Tint 18, on tho left and ught of tho Yom or tho mght and left of 
tho spoctator 


172 AN SIN COND ५ AND [1 SPREENT POW! 


Vins. 3 


In दु heart I meditate en tho Jowolled Altar (Manipitha), 
and on Nada and Bindn as within the tnangle aforespoken. 
Tho palo red! glory of tho gems in this altar shames tho 
brilhanco of the lightning flash. Its substance is Chit. 


ComMLNLARY 


"ho placo of the Guu 13 on the jowellod altar within the 
trianglo Tle therefore describes the jowollod altar (Mampitha), 

“Tn my heart” (वोता), we, in my Mind (Manasi). 

On the ८१५८ ९1 Albar andon Nida and Beudn? (Nid vebindu. 
maenpuhamandalam).—Tho compo md word may be Lormod in twa 
ways: Marupithunandalum along with Niidy und Bndu (Nidn- 
bindubhying पपाद); or Nidy and Bindu and Man’ pid/ amandalan~ 
to, ६ [ bhase theo. Some intorprot this to mown that (he Mand da 
Manipicha is composod of Nadu and Bindu. Bal dat cannot 
be. Nida is white, and Biidu is ted, and the puo rod glory 
whereby the Manipitha shames tho lushe of the hghtuing flagh 19 
101111८7 16d nor white, 

‘the Shiradititakea says: + दूह प्ता is Shiva and Shakti,® 
and divides ilsel! into thiee different para; its divinons ao called 
Bindu, Nada, and 1) Tf this bo mterproted to riot, as it 
ought to be, that Bindn 1s Pava-Shaktimaya, ond Biya, Nada, and 
Bmdu, aro respectively Fie, Moon and Sun, then Nida bemg the 
Moon is white, and lind २ bomy the Sun wviod. Pa wananda alyo 
speaks of Nada as bung white hko Baladova, cte. 

The Brthat Shrikiamy also says. “hore was the mporiwh- 
able Bindu, lustions (10d) [6 the young Sun,” 


1 Pifala, 
2 Para-Shaklmoya=Shiva-Shakte-mnay a 
SV 435, Shaé ohakia-niz ष्ण 


THE TIVEPOID QGSSLOOL (भ एद ANCIHIA CA) 178 


Now, as one is whits and tho other rd, they cin never bo 
the palo rod pon ‘The me wing given by as 1 therefore ९0110८६. 
The solution is that Nada is below, md Budu rbove, wd 
Manipiha in betwoen the two —thus should one medit toe Chis has 
been cloaily shown ii the Got idhyana in रप दुरम ए nadini Lantia 
* Med tate on the excellent Antaat.! m the Gegion of the) (मतम 
of a thonsind petals, and wbovo it (Antaritm:) meditate on the 
resplendent throne? between Nada and Bindu, and on this throne 
(meditate) upon Lhe eternal Gara, white hke a moimtuno silver” 

“The pale red ylory of the goms wn thre altar shames the brilir- 
ance of lightnang” (Paru-tadil-kadarim i-sparddhaniin 1 masipad la- 
prabham).—This qualihes Mamp thn mandalam, To be pat 1?) 15 to 
be able to fully do one’s wok. Now, lightning wants to display 
itself. [1७16 the idoa is that the pale red lustre of the gems im the 
Pitha shames the umnterrupted brilliance of the :eddish-yollow 
(Pimgale) lightmng flash, It is of a pale red colom inismnch as 
the Manipitie is covered all c vor with goms, 

“ Tis substance 15 Chit” (Chinmayang vapuh).—lhe Chi unaya 
o. Jninamaya body. ‘The body of Nada, Bmdn wd Mani- 
pitha, 18 Uhinmaya ar Jnina-maya.! Others riterpreb ib Lo mean, 
“T moditato on tho Chinmays body of the tiwollth vowol,t thy Bye 
of Setasvati, which 18 the Gumantiy” Bub that is wrong, Tho 
Guru 18 white, and his Biya s also write ; Lo attribute to it ॥ pale 
red lustre would be incongruous, 


AThis Antudtma is angst Unless tho words 111 tho text, “in 
tho lotus of a thousand potala bo vow Samipyo stpta ni, the view 
here oxprossod differs fiom that adopted by Kalicharava, that Wangan 
18 in the twolve-potalled 10 us, 

2 Siinhasana~hit, tion sett, the soat of the horowed one the 
King s seat, 

3 Phat 1s, then substance फ puro Chit nob in association with Maya 

4'Uhe Bija of Surasvati on Vagbhuva Biya is Amy. At 18 tho 
twelfth vowel 


fe ग~ ~ ५ त 


174 1111, SIX CLNIRES AND 1111) इ चषा POW Ut 


Voor 4 


T intryiry meditate on tho threo lines above at (पिष), 
boginning with tho Ime of Tire, and on [} 0 brilhance of 
Map tha, which 14 heightened by the lustre of those linus. 
{ also meditito on tho primordial Mangss,! which as the 
all-) owerful Great Light in which the Universe ss absorbodd.? 


ComMENEARY 


On Hangsa-pit/a, which 1४ within tho (१ wngle or Mvapitia, 
between Nada and Bmdn, 1 tho place of the (11, Ula now 
wishos to dosuutbe Hangyy and the tuimgle in orcer that ५ alow 
cone rption of these (wo may [6 gamed 

Le ucauing of this verse 34, slortly, this: Trieditete ou the 
10119020] Vangsa, Imoeditate on the throo lmos, begamung with 
tho lino of T'na, above the plics of M up thy and algo on the glory 
of tho Maripithy itself Mumimod as it is by tho hght of the thea 
nes of Dire and 01614, ‘the verb ^ moditvbe १ occurs ones in 
this verge, and governs thieo nouns in the objective casa. 

५ wtently meditate” (Vyatatehiimi),—That w, } think with 
taind undistribed, oxeleding all snbjocls likely to inverfora with 
my thoughts, 

‘ Above 6” (Wrddlivam asyn)—thab 14, above Manipithy 

‘The three lines beginning with the ling of Fire” (प्रणापा 
shikl i-tayam) —This compound word 14 made wp according {to the 
rule known ४५ Shika-partlava, hy which the word Adi which 
comes in between two words 18 dioppod, Adi moans “and others” 


Tab is, the Patamahangsa whieh t both, Prat cti aud Purvaia. 
४1५४  Inght whieh devours the Universo’ 
१९७) the m ion of Hang wd Sak whoroby the Wangs. is formed 


पराः TIVE OTD 1001910का (PADUKA श्रा +र) 175 


Tho Line of ए 6, which s ealled tha Line Vama, emanates trom 
Vahni Bindu in the Sontl, and goos to the North-Nash Corner ; 
and the Line of Moon eminates 10m Chardin Bindu m the 
Noth Must Correr, ard gocs towards tho North-West Corner: 
this is the lmo dyeshkthi ‘Tho Line of San aianates from 
Suryya Bindu im the North-West Cornea, and reaches Vahm 
Bindu: this is the ano Riudei ‘the triangle which 15 formed 
by the theo Imes uniting the thoe Bindus is Kamakala 
(Kimakalirapam). 

The Brohat Shnlaama says “She whose form 15 le(ters 1s 
coiled up in the Bindu and comos out (1९८० as a sprouting seed 
from tho South = का there? She goes to the Ishana commer 
(प्रन) She who thus goes is the Shakti Vimi, ‘This 1s Chitkala 
Para and the 17४० of 1116, The Shakti which has thus gone to the 
Ishann cone: then goes 11 a strmght hne (that as, to the N.W.). 
Mus line is the ino of Jyeshtha This, O Parameshvan , is Tripura, 
tho Sovercign Mistress, Again tuning left 9 She returns to the 
place of spouting She is Rand, who by Hor amon with 
Ichehha and Nada makes tho Shrimgaén ” | 

Tho Mahoshvart-subhi दे says; = सिप्रा कक Chandra and Valni, 
ave the three Bindas, and Brahmi, एकप and Shambhu, are tho 
(11९५ lines.” 

the Proma-yoga-laimhgini, in desembing tho Swhastiia, 
qaetes an authority which 98 here cited, clemly showmg thab 
tho place of the Gma 18 withm this timnglo Within ib is 
the excellont hghtning-hko triangle Within tho triangle are 


1 [न [८ 16 the ongm of hfe, wd is thorefore waoemted with 
Brihma. Moon is assoombod with Viskon And tho Sun spokon of 
here stands for the twolve sins (Aditya) which 1186 to burn t bo world 
aé dissolution (Pralaya) 

2Yasmat is according tc tho roading given m tho origmal, Tho 
same passage is quoted elagwho1o roiding yaimyat (from the south) m 
place of # ६४०६८ 


3 Roading valeibhuté pura vamo for yy alabbiiya panar vimo. 


4 According to anothor tondmg, ‘By the amon of Iehchha, and 
स्ना, Raudii makos the Shara gife.” ho passage uhove quoted shows 
that the Kaéma-kala is a subtle form of Kundu, moro subtle thin tho 
AKa tha tuanglo Of, Auandalahart, y 21, whore tho § tkekmea dbyona 
of Kundalini is givon, 


176 1[1 SEX ( [प्रा AND MED ५ (६ वद्न ।0१४।१॥४ 


tvo क ८ वनो फण Bindus im the torn of हारणा, Within it, in 
the void, 18 Shiva, known by the meme of Pera 14 % 1 

Siangkwacha yy v also hw shown this clearly in his Anvida- 
Jahav = The Anthor of the Lalit rinhiya asc sp uke of the Guin 
14 sertod on ना Viewmgi oa ile two Bud ५ Ch ndin ind 
Smy ya at tho upper angles othe (dow i-turned) 111१ 116. 

"On the prmordial Hanya” (Adthangsvyor yugam).— 
Literally mlerproted 16 wonld mem the wionc ल the pumordial 
Wang and Sak, By Adi (first) 18 11 कात | the Pe cama-hungsa, 
wlich is also kiown ay An mat na, and 1 | Ou Javetoa, which 
regembles the fame of ५, Jamp. Mhe Har gs here ५ Ue combi 
nation of Prakretr ard 1) १ २९४ 

11 Agnatia-kalpade una-paucl aslakha ibis said“ Llangkarn 
14 Bindu, and Visage 9 Sak, Binds [गाम ४ 11 प Vis urge is 
Pinkert. Hangsa is the union of Pung (Male) ind न प्रप्रा 
(Female) ‘Tho world 16 pervaded by this [कोना ” 

dome intorpret ^ Aaya ह (दण + tome “ wbove Manip tha, 
and say that the verso means“ [ medit ve 01 the umon of the 
two who constitute the prmoul प वो पाद्वत पाकम नि 10111 ae? 
Mus is wrong The Kangle | पतता specks ob the ककि as 
thove Hangsa md bolwoon Nidward Bide So bow can theso 
be below Uangsa? ‘his 1५ amposs ble, ‘hia also showy) tho 
impossibd lity of the vending adopted by some—-namoly Hadaebhul « 
shikhi=vakham Vin placo of Uuda-bhuk-shihhil-drayam 1) this readme 
were accepted, then the words Urddhoam asya (nuove it) have no 
mearing ‘ho mlorprotation “1 meditate on the cnion ol,” as 
given above, may, howaver, bc tndarstood in the toc wing sande, 
Wo have seen thas the (पोहा spe vks of tho Lanpsa ॥५ 
below the Mampiéha, which 1५ betwoon Nady and Bindu ‘the 


” 


4९, [गप्रा Shiva 

१४ , Hing and Sak, Tho wuon of the two पिष I (५५४. 
Vins 1a tho bog ming wd end cf crentun, Tho outgoing broth 
(Nishvisa) Uang of tha Supreme is the duration of tha 1 6 cl Brahiné 
the Gioator (Of, Tavayny mama inshvanak-—Prapanehasira Tantrn, 
Ch_ 1) wd Sak is tho indiawimg bvonth by which creation volun s bo 
Prakocti. 

} {futa-bhnk-shikha-sakha-~the frond cf thy fui (1 11८4 By this 
womennt Vayu (an) As thae 1410 Vayu 7 this region, U oefore 
Vayn camot se above the tingle ov alove Muipidhy 


4 


THUD PLVETOLD पण्णा (RDUKAPANCNAKA) 177 


interpretation mentioned is in great conflict wih tha view of 
Kangkilamalini Bub af TIuta-bhuk-slokle-tiayam be read os 
qualifying ITangsa, then the difficnlty may bere noved. = ‘hen tho 
meaning would be: ^ Below Manpiéha is Lowmgsa, and above 116 
tho triang War Kimakale wh ch ts for ned by the Hangsa ”! 

“© Which is the all-pouonful Groat Lught in which the Unirorse 
ds absorbed” (Viehva-ghas nua mahochehi lotkaé um) —* Bhaksh” 
and “(thas” moan the sane thng the 1006 “ Chas” n eans “lo 
devour,” and tho roots “Clud,” “ [1] त,» and “1 p,” 11] mean 
“to 3111116. Tho Great Light (Mal ochcl it) which 14 the Devomer 
(Ghasmara) of the Universes: By that 1५ moant that [ft is all- 
powerful (Utkata) Utkafa, which hy ally means vay] क , } 01८ 
means vory powerf al, 


1Tasya pavinatasya Apparently tho senso 16 tint the 1160 
Bindus, or Tangsa, avo holow, bub that (lo tingle which they (नाण. 
tively form, or the Kimaknla, ia n ovo, and 11 this senso the [Tu gan ig 
hoth above and halow Msn piho, 


63 


178 Whe SN OBNEREH AND JI SPR ENE (प 


Vere 5 


Tit mind thera gonteriplais t 9 two Totuses whieh ara 
tho Poob of tho Ginu, and of which the ruby-colourod 
1061" is ti honey. Theso two foot aro cool hke the 
noctar of lo Moon, and are the place of all a wspiciousness, 


Cosmrrn ary 


Having deser bed the placo wh vot o two Lctrs Root of the 
Gut should Lo moditnt dl ipon, be now spokes of bic (Sa पताम) 
0101 blorewth by medita on (Dhyana) oy diem, in How and ho 
follwing: verat, 

“Thao” GQitaj-fe, in tho tiangle on the Manip (५ 
The ocaoamng of Uns ४093, in shor, ५, The mind bhava, 
wih's the | होः on tie सो पवद contemplitos upon the 
hotns [१६५४ of the Guin + 

“Of uluch the ruby-colowret nectar i the honey” (पाद्व 
1 fisnvepariierandayok) — 11 1४ qualities “the [त 1१४१ रपु 
kum त्यात ied, fhe colow of Inu. ‘The cxoollont nectur 
which 19 of tho colom ol Ing is the honey of the Lotus Feat of 
the “Gura, ‘Some read “dha” for “Pari” ; tha meaning 
would then bo. “from which flows [५ bowy 010 ritby- 
colowad nectar” 

*Qool bho the necta of tha Moon” (Ind emakarnnda- 
shitaluin)—ie., they are cool aq the noctuelico bens cf the 
Moon As tho beams of the Moon contort heal, so doow 
dovolion to the loeb of the Garn evoreome # xrow and anflerme, 

* Plaos of all 11 94/11 17 1g 
the placo where ono gutsy all ono doses, ‘Who sense is thot 
by devont conconintion on the 140, of the Gym all ayceess js 
aluamed, 


Ho 11४10 ) 00151001 (PADU VA ANGHAKA) 179 


Vinsn % 


1 anor, in my head the (५७ vobus eet of the (110. 
Tho jewelled footstool on which they rest removes all sin. 
They mo ied hke young leaves. Thor nails resemble 
tho moon shimng 11 all her gory. ‘heirs is tho beautitul 
lustre of lotuses growing in a lake of nectar. 


Comm Niaty 


Ile sayy heros 1 wlote tho two wots [एण] tho (पा) 
resting on the Loo stool शालाक dosmibod 11 ny dead” By 
५4७1010 1 hora moditution 1५ me unt, 

“The १०८८1 foutatool on which they reat remuves add sen”? 
(Nishoktasmeni-piduk tn ya | एषो) whee) ib as, धो | ८ 
multitude of sins me ronoved by dovotiot to tie yowelled 
loolstool winch sorves ad (he rosting-place of [५ Poot Or at 
may bo interproted thus ‘Te footstool wl ch is भ्रव ^ twit 
goms—that 1४, tho Mampitha-rimndala which ts ths loolstool— 
removes all tho multitude ol gins. By med tating on the Peot 
of tho Gmu as rosting on this stool oll si s aro dostroyed ” 
Ov at may be thus mleiproted “The five toots vols, with 
which aie inseparably connocled the goms (by which aro ricenl 
the Ohimbamant-like loot of tho Gara) dastroy all the muliitade 
ol sums.” Sy meditating fist on tho fivefold Lootstoul, and (hen 
on the feeb of the Guru as resting thereon, sis iemoved. Ay 
tho icmoval of ging 19 offecte 1 by med tation on tho fivefold 
Lootstools, 1b 18 Lho cnuse which offocts such removal. 

“They are lhe young leaves” (Sphuat-lasuayaiune 11). 
~ [hab 18, tho feet of tho Guru possess tho 1ed eolotr of newly 
openad leaves, The leaves of the Mango aud Konuduka! treo 


1 Drospyros glutenosi 


180 11 ४६ GIN UES AN , SER ENE Low it 


whon iowly cpenod mo of ated colour, and coripriso 1 १५ mide 
with the ५, 

“Pho nails resemble the moon shinny a all her glory” 
(Nakhi-so nn llasacheh udrakun) ae, the (जलात्‌ are Tika sa 
many Lenutital y staining: moons, 

“Vhewrs 1 the beantifad lustic af lotuses groring in ¢ Lalo of 
nectar” (Dara ne eba-s प ०४ ७१४ sac as प्रोक्त] wham) —Thub 15, 
they have the clear lastro ol lobases growing i a laleo of cela, 
Uo m ans to say that the oxcollont acctar ता कम coral untly hom 
the Lobis [७५ of the Gu. Pai ता रोता bas sid (1) same thig 
in v 48 of the Shaé-chataunupius. ‘he कलमा पा nectar ms 
the ako or which the Pout show lke lotusos hay boon ^ ud that 
tho plice of the Gaia 1५ betweon bho porcarps of the two Lobusos 
aloro-menlioned Now, च quostim ay bo mused ay bo wl ether it 
is in the poucup of the twolve-petallot lotus below, or in thet of 
she Sel sien above, “Wo golva cas eho Jollow.ng prasagos tro 
quoted , 

Brehat Sluilaamas “Then meditate npon tho Lotus which 
with ils head downward as ebove vl, wand which drops लष an 
the dhakti ol the (प्रा ता bo othe Lotas” 

Yomiles MC Lotus ob a Chousand polls 4 like a caropy , t 
ibas wlove all, and drops vcd neobu 

(ई (७1 [आजा own Garni पप्तू पच ov the Suprome Guia 
a4 havi g two mms in tho Lotus wh oso peda + have tho [+ ६८७५४ (any 
wid Sah and as starounded by wll the causes? of bho univorse, 
Although le manitosty in all in varying dogicos, Ho ig withaut 
wand bayoid the Universo. Ou 1{ ५ will thore are no पापमिति, 1 
from Lm gmanates tho Light ot Libation, ito is the visible 
etuhodnnent of the letters of the word} Guru” 

Phe Shyama-saparyya quotes tho dollowimg : “The Jaolas 
Sahas ma downwaid tuned, 1 the head, is wlabe. Ly [19901146 
४1५ ol (१1५ colon of the ising sun; all the Jebbors of the Alphabot 

{Wlnch wan emblom of sapron acy 


220, tho Avinimakaavashuriias Seo Shalshalaani upawa vy, dO 
ob aug 


Jovachel hundar fitmechehhayd By Wis own will 1५ is 170५, 
4 Uf Mant पा dovata prckty doy ua gure pink, 


Tho word (पक्वा 6 many | enefvont qu uitios (seo Kuli: nave, 
tantrik Peats, Vol ¥, Ch XVII) 


LUE (1४.11 ) ००।४।०0 (+९। ॥६ WPANGILA <A) 181 


tue on sts petals fn the pericarp of tho ठप पन v's Chandra 
Mandala, and below the por (षण्‌) is the lustrous lotus of twelve 
petals which contains the toang ५ A Ka-Tha, mm cod oab by tho 
lotteis a, La and Ksha  Meoltate the ५ ७1 your Guin who as 
Shiva, seated on tho [[ ४06५४ piv which 1५ composed of M ubias,” 

The above and similar passages indiwatc tht the p aco ol the 
Guu ism the pericarp of the sobus of twelve pobals 

Tho Kangkala-Malmi ss + Meditate on the cxcellent 
Antatatima im the Lotus? of a thouswm ] petals, md on the shiiing 
throne which 1७ bebweon Neda ard Bindu, and on {the tone 
meditate) constantly upon your own Guru, who 13 116 ४ Mcunta n 
ol Silver,’ ole, 

Tho Yamala says? (Medilato on yom Guru) in the Lotus of 
w thousand pelala. [115 cool beauty 15 ike that of the [आ noon, and 
111४ Lotus hands aio lifted up to gia ॥ boons and to dispol fou 

Tho Purashcharanr-rasoll isa (Ch. VILL) has the lollowmg वात 
logue “Shu Mehadovasid “Lhore in {16 pore up of the wonder ful 
evorlasting Lotus of , thousand petals meditvto vlways o1 your own 
Guru? 8011101 एष वधत्‌" ‘ho head of tho Great Lotus ol a 
thousand petals, O Lord, 1s alwys downwud burnod; chon say O 
Dove, how can the Guin constantly dwell tlore 01 जि Mal adova 
sud ‘Well last thou asked O Boloved. Now liston whist | 
spewk to Theo, ‘Tho great Lotus S chasiara hes a thousand polals, 
and is the abodo of Sadayhive aud 1 [1]) of olornel bliss. This full 
of all kinds of dolightful [षु mico, aud 1४ Uo place of spoulancous 
(18६ = 11116 head of this Lotus is always downward, bat bho 
poiicarp is always tumed upward,! and united with Kundan 
is always 11) vhe foi of a Lamy 1७, 

Tho Bal-vilisa काद्र has the followings “Shi Dakshini- 
muti said. ‘As you awako in tho morning tioditate on your 
Guu in the Whito Lotus of a thousand potels, the hoad of 
which great Lotus 18 downwud turod, and which is decorated 


101 in tho rogion of the lol is of & thousand petals 

> [0 Oommontator does rol xi fiom which of tho वाणम 
Yaémalas he has quoted this and tho passngo in tho fist group, 

3 Sahajinanda—that is, tho bliss springs up isolf ‘This blisa 1s 
Svabhiva. ; 

५५ ig, appaontly, if we reg ud thw port’on of tho portcarp 
which is allachod to the lotus as its hond = ‘Tho taisugle 1 A-Ke-Tha, 


182 1| भार्‌ GN RY AND ॥ १ RLENT ow t 


with all tho letters of tho Alphabot Withia it as bho tr angle 
Known by tle name of A- tithe, which ए dcocod by t ha 
Idltas Ha, av पणत्‌ (५५ Lo of the sulla yg cou atomunce is on 
tho Unngsn pita, which asm the region of Ui Ghandin M पष्‌ 
willin at (tho Sthagary. Shi Devi sud 60 fod, how does 
the (पाप slay thao when iw heal oo ott. G cownwards f hh 
Daleatimamintr smd: 6 Lac Oh पराता Mandala in the poricy p of 
the Lotus of a thousand pelals rs tw nod upward ; ho Lungs iis 
there, and there as tic Gia wy pho? ? 

Pheso and sinile passges spe ale of the plice of tho Guru as 
in tho [लाल o the Lots oa bionsmnd petals. 

As there mo two (11५1111८, me hods, on sho tld ol ow the 
instauct on of tho Gurn and adopt ono of the bwo 1) lis bad sane 
(A 11441164 un), for 11 hus hoon lad dywn 11 the Kulan we 'lanbia, 
(Oh, 21) ` ^ Joloved, Voday and ‘Tantias ha ided down to ws by 
(1४141011, us aldo Mantras and usages, become fruilial ॥ communt- 

= ented to ws by sho Gua, and १५ otherwise.” 


1 Kamokall, 


पपरा, वणते D PO) १00, (16 UhAPANOITAKA) 183 


एणा; 7 


Tats hymn of praiso of the Tivefold Tootstool was ultored 
by Him of Tive Faces. By (the recitation and hearing of) 
it is attainod that good which 1s gained by (the recitation 
and hearing of) all tho hynins in praise of Shiva, Such 
frnit is only attrinable by great labo w in the Wandering 
(Sangsira). 


Conan BNUARY 


Ila pow ape aks of tho pond gaine] lay veci jap and listoni g 


to this Stotra, 

Hymn of praise of the Parefol  Kootstool” (Pady [वनात] wka- 
stotiari).—Paduki moans a footstoo (Pade aksharadhiia), 11५ 
five of those ave (1) Me (twelve pel uled) Lotas, (2) tho tr angle 
A+Ka-lha in its poricarp ; (3) Uho region of t+ Nida, finds, and 
Mamipithe 11 it; (4) the Langer below, and (5) the tangle on, 
the Mampidha Or thoy may he counted ७11५ (1) ‘ho Lotus (tc, 
twelve-petalled) ; (2) the tr’anglo (A-Ka-Tha), (3) Nada-Dinds; 
(4) the Manipihe Mandala; (5) tho Mangsa—whaich 1s १०९५ b 
and taken collectively form the trangular JCA पष्प, 1 


1'Thosa two account appear 16 agree कत to tho position of the 
followme in tho order statcd = ११४, twolve-potalled Lotus with A-Ka-Th ४ 
tangle in whieh avo Mampitha, with Bindu १४०४) and Nada below, 
Thore remains then to be conmdered the position of Wangsa and the 
Kamakali which they form Both 016 one ard tle same, the ust tong 
the throo Bindua, and tho second the tr argle they make (Kan akala), 
fiom which omanitos (ard iw this sonse forms part of ib) 110 lowor 
A Ka-Lho tiianglo (Jor 41 is is Van umayn), In the sceond classi [९ ution 
the throo Bindus and the t angle (Kiimakalu) which thoy for n moa 
trented as one, and placed above the Manipidia 1) tho {vat olussificn- 
tion, apparontly wilh a view b> gan aceordanca with the Kanglaly 
milini ‘Pantin cited ‘ander v 4, the Hangan and tha triangle which 
they lorm ayo takon sopmatcy, the fiat bomg placad bolow and tho 
other abovo Maniputha, 


181 MEP भा UBNORTS AND TED SERPENT Lower 


Stotia 19 9 bymn of prusc. ‘This hyntn, including tho voraa 
which aponks of the bonofib to be gained hy listening (0 it, ts ono of 
seven verses. 

“ Tttored by Mun of Five Faces”? (Panch vv भत्‌ vin, पमि), 
—Tho Five Tacos of Shiva vs piven tho Limgareluny ‘Panta 
mes ५01 the West! (ar, buck) 19 Sudyoypite, on the Noh (aa, 
loft) 18 Vamadeya, ७) thy South (ight) w कद्व काप; vadon the 

hit (front) ws u-epu di वि + should bo know sas bomg im 

tle middle hoy should thus bo meditated upon 1॥ + dovout 
apie” Vinge v meus atte rod (df, Come ouf)— Il 1५) ultered 
hy those Wy | १८७५, 

“By a ५ attained that good” (५ षा uaya-phalu- 
pape un) —This litorally mows. by it is obtained the fenil of 
what hag been spoken by the Six Mouths’? “he Six [पठत aro 
tho five p’ver thovo wd a sixth concealed oro which is bclow, 
ealed Vina काऽ ig uluded {0 im Shadvakbonyase an the 
Shiv Gane (huss “Oog thing [ताह Aung [न तपा पतो 
१५४१} पल पृक्ण perce co won (2) क्तो heed given, clus: 
© @he lowar fnca, Nilaknahn, ws ob the Coote oa twad hy the 
त adly potion Ka akula,” * 

Shadi vreya ws wha, dad boun spolcon by theyo Pacaw—that 
i4, all tho hymns ol pra so to Shiva, By the lin bob this ia monnt 
the bonofil gamed by vc sting on ivondog 0 all those Muntins, 
and priclisiag the appropiite S-dhaw 1177 
through this hy nu. 

“Tr 4५ altunable by great Lebo an Has Wandering” (Pie 
pancho chitid wlvbham)—Ry Propweha is moant this S ngsarn 
(Wandering of Wold), conip ising the Uniyeise 11011 all offgats 
nn 10 Brahma. and which w shown hy Moy 1 adilic lo, 
alumamoent (Darlvbla), ag it ia tho vosult ¢* ताति manit 
१6111110 by the prictica of Inborious ondoavent (‘lap rs) in provi- 
ous births, 

Bnd of tha Conncatny (क्षा) of the Namo of Amalia 
(Stiintess), written by Shi Kalicherueyoed the Ptla cipwchake 
Stotra. 


2M od vaction cue faeces ta lho Haat. 


2Tho powon charred ont of tho ortan ard drunk hy Sh'ya Bho 
word s10ung the se rel mssuy of Deuth 


itd by WR, Ai fie Vi wis Pow Ayu, Mah 


TANTRIK TEXTS 
षट्‌चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


TANTRIK TEXTS 


ARTHUR AVALON 


VOL, 1 


Will 
SHATCHAKRANIRUPANA 
AND 


PADUKAPANCHAKA 


Second Ldition Revised wal variant ¢ ५५८ s 


Eputp ny 


TARANATHA VIDYARATNA 


PUBLISHERS : 
GANESH & CO., MADRAS 


1924 


CALCULIA LONDON 
SANSKRIT PRESS DEPOSITORY wizac & co, 
80 CORNWALLIS कद 4G GREAT RUSSP SPRUEL, WoC. 


षट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


अथ तत्रानुसारेण षट्‌ चक्रादिकरमोदतः | 
उच्यते परमानन्द निव्वाहप्रथमा ङकरः ॥ ५॥ 
ॐ || 
aera परिचित्तषडम्भोजविभव 
स एवान्तस्तत्वप्रकटनसमर्थो न दि पर | 


Tag ज्यषठोऽप्यमिरितक्रेपानाथकरूण 
परडन्जान्तस्तखं पसहविभवं प्रस्फुर्यितुम्‌ | 


अथ दु.खपङ्कममं जगहुदधिधीषुः परमकारुणिक पूर्णानन्द्वामी सुकति- 
सम्पादकतच््ज्ञानसिद्धये seth करुण्डकिनीयोगं वत्तुमिच्छन्‌ साधकावधानाय 
प्रतिजानीते अथेति अथानन्तरं स्वङ्ृतश्रीतत्वचिन्तामण्यां पट्चक्रनिरूपणात्‌ 
पूल्वेमदरितत्तकम्मैकथनानन्तरमिय्थ. | eM परमानम्दनिर्वाहमथमादूनुरः 


| ओं नमः पर्देवतये । 


प्रणम्य दरीकाधिपकन्थकायाः) पदान्जभन्नासनविष्ुपूज्यम्‌ | 
प्रतन्यते Aa, पद्वक्ररीकाख्यमुपस्तिकेयम्‌ ॥ 


| # ॥ अथेयादि यदयप्यथक्रब्दो nero प्रते, तथापि 
आनन्तय्यारथं एव गृहते, ey Aaa a ala मङ्गलर्थोऽ- 
यमिति केचित्‌ । तन्त्रानुसरेण रिवोक्ततन्त्रीयप्रस्तावानुसरिणेल्ैः | wale 
करमेण Bad योऽथ इयथः | अततादिपदैन सहल्रदलपदादिकमुच्यते परमानन्दो 
Prana ये Pole हृपप्रतिसतस्य प्रथमषर्ुर इहि यष्वत्‌ । 


पट्चक्रनिषूपणम्‌ 


मेरोर्घाह्यप्रदेशे wee aera raat 

मध्ये नाडी सुषुम्णा त्रितययुणमयी sexqzat- 

[ent | 

धूस्तूरस्मेरपुष्पग्रथिततमवपुः कन्दमध्याच्छिरःस्या 
वज्राख्या मेदृदेशाच्छिरसि परिगता मध्यमेऽ- 

। [स्या ज्वलन्ती ॥ १॥ 


उच्यसे carat परमानन्दो ब्रह्म, “Pret विज्ञानमानन्दं ब्रम ` इति रुत | 
तस्य निर्बाहस्तःसाक्षाकाररूपनिष्पतति तरमै प्रथमादुवुरस्त्ारणगूप्रथगम्र- 
 कटमनकर्ममस्वर्प मयः gradthat gad | सोऽङ्कुर किम्भूतः ” 
तन्तारुसरिण पद्चकरादिक्रमोद्वत इति तन्त्ानुसरारेण तन्तमतेन eat 
मूकाधार-खापिष्टान मणिपूरकानाहत-विलयुद्धाज्ञास्यानाम्‌ of aT AH 
नाडीलिङ्गव्योगपश्चकशिवदक्तयादीनाश्च य॒ at, aaa Pee 
ब्रहमपवागमनागमनरिवशचिगेलनादिविधानाुपृचिकषप, कम", तैन उद्वतः 
पराप्तः योगसाधनाद्यभित्न. इत्यथैः | ततश्च तन्विषटितपटूचक्रधटितयोगसाधना- 
भिन्र्ह्मसाक्षाक्ताराद्िकारणीभूतकम्पैप्वरुपोऽद्वुरो गया उचते दति समुदरया- 
areata: ॥ # ॥ 

अथ तादृशवक्ष्यगाणयोगः TTS चैना न सम्भवतीपयत 
परथमं cera निरूप्यन्ते मेरोसियादितिभि- ae । Wifes 
सच दण्डौ मूरावधि्रीषापय्यन्तव्यापवप्ष्ठासथि" इति स्फुटीकरिष्याम" | 
तद्वा्देशे शरिभिदिरदिरे इति । शरी चन्द्रः, Re al, Art नादी 


(१) FARIA car MARA दडापिङ्गरास्ये तः इति। 
Sea वागदक्षिणयोः तत्र प्राण्यद्खात्वात्‌ समाहारः | निषण्णे we इति याबत्‌ | 
मध्ये FORA सम्बन्धनीयम्‌ | चित्तयगुणमयी सच्वरजम्तमोयुणगयी | Breer afer 
अवयवा्थं तयप्‌ | यतश्न्द्रू्पा्िषपा अतन्नितयगुणपयी | कल्दमध्यास्‌ yet 
woke य्त्‌ । शिरःस्था क्रिदस्थित | तदेव भरस्तूरयन्पस्युदधितस्येव 


पटूचक्निषटपणम्‌ a 


ततश्च चन््रसर््यस्वरूपिष्यो दवै नाड्यो इडापिज्ञलाख्ये सव्यदक्षे वामदक्षिणे 
निषण्णे fia इत्यथै. | 
तद्रा Hea ward 
मेरो्व्वामि इडा दषे fixer च Rad उमे ॥ इति । 
अनयोशचनदरसूय्य्वरूपलमाह सम्मोहनतन्ते-- 
वामगा या इडा नाडी श्वा चन्द्॑स्वरूपिणी | 
शक्तिरूपा हि सा दैवी साक्षादसतषिप्रहा ॥ 
दक्षे तु पिङ्गला नाम पुंरूपा सूर्यविग्रहा | 
रोद्रालिका महादेवी दादिमीकेसरमा ॥ इति ॥ 
द्मे नण्ड्यो मूरुण्टजुरुपेणाज्ञाचकरप्तं पराप्य नसनरे 
तदुक्तं यामले--- 
get च पिङ्गला चैव तस्य ait च aft 
astra रिरे ते च वामदक्षिणमेदत- | 
सर्व्यपदानि dea नासरनधरगते BW ॥ 
oa AR तेच इत्यत्र चकारो षाथ, तेन सर्वपद्मानि es प्रामदक्षिणमेदतः 
वामदक्षिणमेदेन वेणीबन्धक्रमेण ade dear वा नासारन्धगते इयथः | 
एतेनानयोः श्थत्यः द्विविध, कल्पो Pa agra tor 
स्थितिरुक्ता । : 
तयथा-- 
चिद्धि ते धनुराकार arteries परे ॥ इति ॥ 
प्रथितं प्रकृ ofa वपुर्स्याः | एतैन--उमयतो धूस्तूराकृतिद्विसुखीति फलिताः 
अपय चास्या मध्ये वन्नानाक्नी नाड़ी, सा तु मेद्देरात्‌ Packt परिणता 


groan: Fae खर्वा सहसधटपह्कजसुक्म्णास्ययोर(?पर्यधोभाविन सप्यु- 
ठत्वात्‌ | ज्वन्ती देदीप्यमाना | 


\ पटुचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


धनुराकारपकारमाहे 
या वामसुप्कसग्बन्धा सा श्िप्यन्ती गुपुम्णया 1 
दक्षिणं sare धनूर्ववक्रा हदि स्थिता | 
वाभांँशजच्वन्तरगा दक्षिणा सारिकरामियात्‌ ॥ एति ॥ 
wy स्कन्धभुजयौ सन्धि 
तथा दक्षिणसूष्कोद्था मासाथा वामरन्भगा ॥ दूति ॥ 
वामदक्षिणसुष्कोधितै ते भुमध्यपय्यैन्तं प्राप्य तत्र दंडापिङ्गलायुपुम्णानादी- 
याणा Rotator अन्थिमावमापन्ने नासारन्धमिितै यर्थ 
तहुक्तम्‌ 
इडायः यमुना ad पिङ्गलाय सरस्वती । 
सुपुम्णाया बसेदङ्गा तासां योगसिधा भवेत्‌ | 
सङ्गता भ्वजमूक च विगुक्ता भरूवियोगत. 
तिवेणीयोग" सा प्रोक्ता तत्र सानं गहाफलम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
मध्ये इति गेरुद्ण्डमध्यरने इयर्थः | 
तदुक्तं ~ 
मेरुमध्ये स्थिता या तु Force । 
तथा तिपुरासारससु्चये- 
या मुण्डाधाखण्डन्तिरविवरगतेतयादि | 
अन्न युद्यपि 
मरर््बागे स्थिता नाडी डा चनद्रामता शिषे । 
दक्षिणे align पिङ्गला नाम नामत | 
aaa त॒ तयोर्मध्ये gyro वद्िसंयुता ॥ ° 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 4 


इति तन्त्रचूदामणिवचने सुपुम्णाया मेरोरब्मभ्थिति प्रतीयते, तथापि तद्वचनं मत 
Waa, भरन्थकारमतै तु “ सकरसरसिजान्‌ Rea ra,” RITA षट्‌- 
TTA मेसुमध्यरनरस्थलकथनेन तदाधारभूताया घपुम्णाया AeA AAT, | 
त्रितयगुणमृयीप्ति Bed gp छुपुम्णा apr fatoffe रपभेदेन 

त्रिसूत्ररूपं॑तदास्मकेत्यथे अथवा त्रितयगुणं सुषुम्णादिनादीलयमपे्य 
हयमेकेयमेकेयमेकेति त्रितयार्चनं aa, सा त्रितयगुणा afte | यद्रा 
चितयगुणा, सत्त्वरजम्तमोगुणा यस्यां तन्मयीं । ततश्च चित्रिणी 
aa, war रजोगुणमयी, apo तमोगुणमयीति | चन्ूर्याभि 
रूपेति । चिनरिणी चन्द्ररूपा नेन saat, वज्रिणी सूरययरुषा तेन 
दाडिमीकेसरपमा, apo वदहिरूपिणी तेन रक्तवर्णां इति । एतल्तिविध- 
व्या्यानपरमाणमाह सुपुग्णारक्षणमभिधाय HATS) - 

तदन्तद्रंयद्गुखो दधँ त॒ ase चित्रिणी तथा 

अत, सपुम्णा त्रिगुणा ward} र्लना यथा |) 

सत््वादित्रिगुणाधारा चनद्वसू्याभिरूपिणी ॥ इति ॥ 

कन्दमध्याच्छिर'स्था इति | कन्द, सन्वैनाडीनां मूलं | तहक्षणमाद — 

TAY MY मेदूतु Frege 

चतुरगुखविस्तारं कन्दमूलं खगाण्डवत्‌ | 

नाब्यस्तस्मात्‌ BATA. सहस्राणां द्विसप्तति ॥ इति ॥ 
तद्ूपकन्दमारभ्य शिर.स्था रर 'स्थिताधोएलसहसदरुकमरकणिकावरि्रादस- 
दरपङ्कजाध 'प््यन्तस्थितेत्यथैः ‹“कुण्डलीविरकाण्डमण्डित,द्रादशाणेसरसीरुं 
aa” इति गुरुपादुकास्तोलस्मरणात्‌ कुण्डलीविवरकाण्डरूपायाधित्रिणीनाब्या, 
तद्वधिकले तदधिकरणसुमुम्णाया aft तदवधिकलम्‌ | अन्यथा सहल्वलोद्ु- 
quran सहक्षदरपदास्य चारिदतृशोके “ शस्यदेर प्रकाम '' त्यनेन 
eats स्थायिलानुपपततेः apna श्यदैशव्वामावात्‌ | अघर केचित्‌--- 
५ मेरोरमध्यघरष्ठगतास्तिक्षो नाड्य प्रकीरिता ” इति निगमतत्वसारवचनं प्रमाणं 
ददोयितवा इडािङ्गला॒ुम्णेति Rant नाडीना मेरमध्यस्थितिं वदन्ति | ततर 


६ eae, 


cefineitivae Rut सर्व्वतन्पचनसिद्धलात्‌ season Wal 
ante इत्यनेन ani Rad स्यषटमुखेनामिधानाच Pea Tether 
Hera धनुराकारभङ्गया हृदयात्‌ AAEM न सम्भरतति । 
निगमतत््वसारवचने feet नाड्य gfe गुपुम्णा ग्रा यितिणीति 
fie, न विडापिङ्गरयोस्तदन्त्मावः | त्र gga मूलादिस्तकपय्यैन्त- 
स्थितिप्रकारमाह 
रुपुम्णा wera मेरुश्चिष्रा परोगता | 
shared प्राप्य गरिता तिय्यैगूभूता वरानने | 
शडयिनीनाठमालम्ब्य गता चा ब्र्मस्रादनम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
तथान्यत्र 
चापाकारे स्थिते चान्ये युपुग्णा प्रणबाक्रति" 
प्ष्ठास्थिषुण्ितो भिन्ना ति्य्यगभूता weet | 
भूमध्ये कुण्डली लमा गुन व्रषरन्धरगा ॥ इति ॥ 
गर्त्ता मेरदण्डाननि.सता । तथा पृष्टित भिना खस्याप्ययमर्भ. | पतेन 
Hemera भरीवापर्यैन्तरिथति' प्रतीयते | 
शद्खिनीनारमाङ्ब्येति | शद्खिनीरक्षणमाह | 
PA उवाच | 
सरस्वती Rea सुपुम्णापाश्चयो" भ्थिते | 
गान्धारी हस्तिजिह्वा च इडायाः year. ॥ 
aay 
गान्धाराया सरस्वत्या मध्ये प्रोक्ता च शड्खिनी । 
शड्सिनी नाम सा नाडी सब्यकर्णान्तमिप्यते ॥ 
तथान्यत्र - 
राखिनी कण्डविवरात्‌ fea wea | 
चितिणीसङ्गताक्षि्टा यावच्छिरसमग्विके 1 दति ॥ 


पटच निरूपणम्‌ ७ 


तन्मध्ये चित्रिणी सा प्रणवविरसिता योगिनां 
[योगगस्या 
दूतातन्तुपमेया सकरुसरसिजान्‌ मेरुमध्यान्तर- 
[स्थान्‌ । 
भिचा देदीप्यते तदु्रथनर्चनथा शुद्धबोधस्रूपा 
तन्मध्ये ब्रह्मनाडी हरमुखङृहरादादिःदेवान्त- 
[संस्था ॥२॥ 


ततश्च सरस्वतीगान्धार्ययोम्मैध्ये कन्दमूरमारभ्य Horde गता कक्रगल्या 
एकामेण वामक्णैरम्धमिकिता, अपराप्रेण मस्तकान्तं पातेति । अत्रे केचित्‌ ~ 
पादादित्रहमरनरान्तं यदस्थि कौठफोपमम्‌ | 
चतुहशानां लोकानां मेरुतण्ड प्रचक्षते ॥ 
इति franca प्रमाणं दर्शयिता cared मेरुदण्डस्य 
स्थितिमाहु. | तचिनयम्‌ | य weave: म एव भेरुदण्डसतप्य मूरकन्ददृदूवधि 
Hace मव्यक्षसिद्धतेन seater वचनमन्यथा ag न 
शक्तोति | किश्वाखण्डैकास्धो teaser पादादिस्थितत्ये पादयोराकुशचनप्रसार- 
णादिक्रिया न स्मात्‌ , तस्मान्मूलोदूवधिरेव मेरुदण्ड | निगमतत्वसारवचनस्य 
स्वयमथ | Tek alee aly toa कलक 
वद्धारकमिति मेदृदेशान्मूरकन्द व्यद्गुलोद्भवभि तदुक्तं भूतशद्धौ- - 
तन्मध्ये द्वधङ्गुरो दँ त॒ बजाया चितिणी तथा ॥ इति ॥ १॥ 
तन्मध्ये इति वजामध्ये इयथः प्रणवविकसिता आङ्ञाचक्रावन्छेदे 
तन्मध्ये प्रणवप्रकारेन ees; अतएव अन्थकरिण cere 


(२) तन्मध्ये इति । सन्यध्ये asst चित्रिण्याख्यनाडी प्रसिद्धत्वेन 
बिलठसति | प्रणव इव विकसिता प्रदीप्ता | योगिनां योगगम्या अतिसूक्ष्मत्वात्‌ 


८ पटुवत्र निरूपणम्‌, 


५८ तदनु च नवीनार्कबहुलप्रका्षं उ्योतिषव्वां गगनधरणीमध्यगिकितिमि aw । 
mata wee aera भित्वा दैदीप्यते 
दत्य. । 
यततु-- 
, चित्रिणीशूत्यविवरे संजाताम्भोरहाणि पट्‌ | 
aay vere भुजङ्गी विहरन्ति च ॥ 


दति कल्पसूत्रचतुरभकाण्डीयवचनं तत णकवचनान्तभुजङ्गीकतरैया बहुवचनान्त 
विहरन्तिकरियान्वयायोगादमूलप्‌ । समूरत्येऽपि aera feet 
Ratan एकवचनार्थे बहुवचनम्‌ | नित्रिणीरन्ध विवे; इति करणाथविपया 
धरे सप्तमी | ततश्च भुजक्षी वृण्डलिती महादेवी Paola चित्निणीमाड्या 
wad यत्‌ विवरम्‌ इतस्ततो afm, नेन पथा aaa 
पड्म्भीहदाणि संजाता aera सती away विहरति दीप्य gel । aT 
यानि प्डमोरुहाणि युपुम्णान्तराते विहरन्त प्रकाशन्ते, usta) चितरिणीरन्ध 
विवरेण तसतरेपु संजाता संस्थिता सती भनन्तरे राहत, Peedi । न॑ तु 
तद्वचनात्‌ reve चित्रिणीविवंः स्थितिः प्रतीयते | तनाध्यै चित्रिणीग्ये । 
me अत्र नडगताचिति धातोर्नश्यते शम्यतेऽनया पदव्या हति नाडी 
पवी, ब्रह्मणो नाडीति sae ब्रह्मनाडी sega} पव्वत्रतारूपायाः 
वुण्डहिन्या" oar rear क्निधिगमनपथर्ययिन्निणीनाड्यन्त्मैतदूल्यग्णग a 
यावत्‌ । न तु चित्रिणीमध्ये Teale Per aaa 
स्वयम्भृल्ङ्गिच्छिदात्‌, | आदिदेव सहलदलकमलकणिकामध्यस्थपरविन्तु" | 
अन्यत्‌ सुगमम्‌ | २ । 


अत ण्व. छ्तातन्तूपमेया सक्ररसरसिजान्‌ गूाधासदीन | मेरमध्ये गुपुम्णा- 
वन्नानाड्धौ तयोरन्तरस्थान गध्यस्थान्‌ भित्वा तेषा पाना प्रधनस्वनया देदीप्यते 
शं दीति कगेतीयर्थः | एतस्या गध्यवरिनी ब्रह्मनाडी व न्दस्थहस्पुखच्छ्रात्‌ 
परमरिवान्तरस्थिता मध्ये आशिता gage बोधो grt यस्याः | 


TET ९ 


Agata सुनिमनसि रसत्तन्तुरूपा 
[सुसृष्ष्मा 
शुद्धत्तानप्रबोधा सकटसुखमयी शुद्धबोध- 
[खभावा । 
बरह्मदरारं तदासे प्रविरुसति सुधाधारगम्धप्रदेशं 
greyed तदेतद्दनमिति सुषुम्णास्यनाख्या 
[रुपन्ति ॥ ३॥ 


शछोकान्तरेण तां विशेषयति विदयुन्माकेति कपत्न्तुरूपेति | sad 
दीप्यमाना तन्तरूपिणी अन्जतन्त॒सदयी कुण्डरिनी यत्र सेत्यर्थः | सकल , 
सुखमयी सर्व्वानन्दमयीसथेः शुद्धबोधस्वमयिति gaa saga 
स्वस्य आत्मनो भावो भावना ae तदास्य ब्रहनाख्याः भस्मे 
RUT TASK कुण्डङिन्या रिवसन्निभिगमनाय प्रवेशनिर्मगपधरूपमिलरथ 
सुधाधारगम्यप्देशमिति ga परमशिवराक्तिसामरस्यनि सृतामरतधारो 
गम्यते मूलाधारस्थरिवशक्तिभ्यां wat येन द्वरिण त्रूप्रैशमिलयै 
तदेतदिति तस्य द्वारस्य पएतस्समीपवरसिपरवेशं दुपुम्णाया अन्थिस्थानं कन्द 
सुपुम्णयौ सम्धिस्थानं arora वदनश्च इति कपन्ति आगमन्ञा वदन्ति इति 
सथुद्ायाथै ॥ ३॥ #॥ 


(a) वियुन्मल्यादि | एतस्या sere एव विरोषणान्याह, विद्युन्भाकेत्ि 
विद्युन्माङेव विरसः प्रकारो यस्या; स॒निमनसि प्रकारागृणारतन्तुरूपा भतः 
सूक्ष्मा | BAMA प्रकारो यस्याः | अतः कटासहितानां सुखमयी, यद्रा सर्पा 
सुखमयी gat एवात्मभावो यस्थाः) यद्या शद्धमावानां स्वे पएात्नि भावो 
ञानं यतः सा तथा | तस्था उखे Aaa प्रकाशते | शगृतस्य य आसारः 
सीकरस्तस्य neater गमनप्रकृति यदास्यमिति यावत्‌ । ^ प्रदेशाः waranty” 
दति त्रिकाण्डदोषः | तदेततददनं सुपए्णानागनाज्या प्रन्थिस्थानम्‌ | सुधियौ बदन्तीति 
तत्‌ तया Terran मिलनं तत्रैवेति ॥ [अत्र मते शुद्रभावघ्वभावेत्ि पाठः |] 

2 


ite परट्चक्तनिरूपणम्‌ 


HAUNT सुषुम्णास्यलभ्ं 

ध्वजाधो गुदो चतुःकरोणपलम्‌ | 
अधोवक्लमु्यस्सुवर्णाभवर्णे- 

वकारादिसान्तेयतं वेदवर्णेः ॥ ४ ॥ 
अमुष्मिन्‌ धरायाश्चतुष्कोणचकं 

समुद्धासि शरुरा्टकेराष्रतं तत्‌ । 
salary aaa 

तदन्ते समास्ते ata खबीजम्‌ ॥ ५॥ 


नाडीं निरुप्य अग्नपरयञ्चादिराितं मूलाधार्रौ निरुप्यते जअथाधार- 
, पद्ममिति नवमि शेके । गुपुम्णाम्यग्सं age कल्दुनुपुम्भयौ राम्धिम्धान- 
सेखममपतमिय्थ, । vas मुदो लिद्मू्ादधोऽवभि मुपुम्णापन्यनते 
इयर्थः । चतु शोण रतवर्भचतृदैलत्‌ । वकारद्रिसन्तिः व श प से दृति 
वेदत्‌ | अत्र पटूचक्रु पदानां दलावच्छरैम दक्षिणावर्तेन कयोगश्ि- 
न्तनीय । तदुक्तं विश्वसासतन्ते -- 
स््यवर्णसिकं पत्रं परदानं परिकीर्तय 
दक्षिणावरयोगेन शिखिनं चिन्तयेद्धिया ॥ दति et 
अघुष्मिन्‌ धरायाश्चतुप्कोणचक्रमिति । एतद्मभकणिकोपां चवुप्कोणष्पै 
प्रश्वीमण्डलं समास्ते wt | मण्डलं facets समुद्रासीद्यादिना | 
(४) अथाधार इति | नाड़प्रतावनानन्तरं पदरपवानां यथात्र मूतः सङ्गतिः 
कथ्यते | अथाधाप्पवरं वक्ष्ये इति रम्बन्धः | सुप गाया आस्ये रां ध्यजाधौ 
गदङब्दोऽयं दस्यो अपानस्याने तत्पतास्य salar: | चतुःगोणपत्र चत्वारि 
र्ताकाप्पत्राणि यस्य | अधःस्थित वक्र कणिकादिर््येति | उथत्॒वणस्य या आगा 
तस्था इव वर्णैः यस्य | TART: सकारासमश्वतुत्वर्ुतप्‌ } 
एतेन एतद्रणोपलकितप्र्न्यस्य वक्ष्यमाणलक्रमन्तराटपध्यवक्ि aaa ॥ 
(५) sana इति। ry THT: GReTL aE 
SPURT Sait aes येषा एवप्भूरोए्यगष्य तत्रो af AeA 


पटूवत्रनिरूपणम्‌ ११ 


चतुवौहुमूपं गजेन्बाधिरूदं 
तदङ्क नवीनाकंतुस्य प्रकाशः | 
~ Las (as ~ 
रिश साष्टका ललदरदाबहु 
n ~ 
म्मुखाम्माजलष्ष्माश्चवुभागयमदः ॥ qu 
तस्य wee AHMAR एतन्मण्डलं पीतव, स्पटमाह | 
Fore धराचक्रं चतुष्कोणं प्रियम्बदे | 
पीतवण ofa Fora: | इति | 
qs Hat FORA aie awed 
यद्वा--कुखचकैरिति | 
flared मन्द्रश्च पर्व्वते बन्द्रहेखरम्‌ 
ferret gies मल्यश्च सुप्तम्‌ | 
चतुप्करोणे aa एतत्‌ CITA | 
इति fale यथा are सप्कुखाचरास्तथात्राषटशूलानि 
gore इति भाव तदन्ते इति तस्य धरामण्डरस्य अन्ते मध्ये 
धराया स्वबीजं लकार' समास्ते एतद्वीजमपि पीतवर्ण तेयथा-- 
बीजं तन्मध्यतश्चैनद्रं पीतव चतुर्मुजम्‌ | 
वज्रहस्तं महावाहुमैरावतगजस्थितम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
तेन ्सर्छतवणेमिद्युमयसम्बन्धः । ५ ॥ ; 
धरावीजध्यानमाह चतुरि्यादि 1 यदैव धरावीजं तदैकैन्रवीजमितय- 
विरुद्धम्‌ 


स्वीकलाविभूतडाकिन्थादिनिवासभूतत्वात्‌ | geek ततराधिषठितत्वाच 
मूढाधारादीना, area प्रतीयते | मेरवीचक्रसंस्थितिरियादि यामख्वचनात्‌ कीं 
wed, Haan यस्य॒ विद्युदिव अङ्गं यस्थ तचक्रमध्ये grea: स्वबीजमास्ते 
ABARAT इति ॥ 

(8) चतुर्व्वाहरभूपमिति | वीजस्य विषणं चत्वारो वाहवो भूपा अलङ्कारा 
इव यस्य॒ गजेन्द्र भधर गयर्थाकम्मैकेलादिसू्रात्‌ wae क्तः | तद Tey, 


१२ CETERA RIO, 


ack इति verted घषिकारी amr aafrenar | तप 
धरावीजस्य Pega इति गोच्यम्‌ | aaa 


Aer aes: तदिद ब्रह्मपर" fea ' 
तदङ्क शिगुरूपस्य गजारूढोऽमराधिपः ॥ इति ॥ 
frees ब्रह्मण स्थितिरि्न्यय. | 
aa धरावीजक्रोडे अमराधिप इति तु मतान्तरम्‌ | 
स्वमते धराबीजैन्ध्रमीजयोरमेदात “ गन्लार्णा दैवता प्रौक्ता Aaa , 
मन्त्ररूपिणी "' इति वचनाच्च तयोरमेववणनप्‌ । नि््वाणतन्ते 
दिन्दरमीजं वरारोहे fewer वागदरशके | 
aft mama TRTT BPA | 
aaa fratiger सटिकत्ता पजापति" ॥ इति ॥ 
त्र॒परावीजस्य नादोपरि ऋसितिकथनेन नाद निनदुमभ्य 
स्थितिरगभ्यते | fewer वागवैशचके इति मतान्तरम्‌ । अत एव aT 


आधाराश्च विदुस्तत्र मत्तभेदादनेकधा | TTT | 


a Pea. लसङ्वाहुरिति } अप्र केचित्‌ meh fiesta ठस-+ 
हयाहुवेदा. साभवेदादयो बाहो यस्येति व्यु करत्वा तत्रैव संस्थापन । 
तस॒ ब्रह्मणो हस्तास्यां वेदधारणस्य दुत्राप्यदसयैनाच्‌ । किन्लत्र अहा 
चतु्ुनलेनेव ध्येयः | तथा स्पष्ठमाह भूतशुद्रौ - 


तदङ्गे च चतुर्बाहुं रक्तवर्णं शिं शिवे । 
asda Cas ब्रह्माणं विद्धि aay ॥ एति ॥ 
मीजाकासमू्तल् प्रातःकालीनसूर्तुस्यदीप्ि. wien Braker ठकसन्त्यारे 


बहवो सत्य | युवाम्गोजव्ीशचूभागो वेदो यस्य अधरात्‌ चतुरनिशिषमहा 
इयथः | [अग्र मतै चतुभागवेद इति पाट; ।] 


Te TPA RIT, १६ 


वसेदत्र देवी च डाकिन्यभिख्या 
BALTAFSSITT रक्तनेत्रा | 
समानोदितनेकसूय्य॑धकाशा 
प्रकारं वहन्ती सदा शुद्धबुद्धेः ॥ ७ ॥ 


सुलाम्भोजलक्षमीशचतुरमागमेद' इति | अस्य ब्रह्मणश्चतुिभगया मेद' अवयवेषु 
fat मैव युखाम्मोजरकष्मीरिदर्थात्‌ ब्रहमणश्तुम्भुखलमायातम्‌ यद्वा-मुमे 
अम्भोजलक्ष्मीस्य तथा चतुमि्मागे अर्थात्‌ सुखावच्छेदे मेदो यस्येति 
Ranga | “ चुर्मागवेद्‌ ” ईति पदै अमेदरूपेण पूर््प्रकाराथै, | अत्र 
ब्रह्मणो हस्तोऽक्लानमिधानेऽपि-- 

दण्डकमण्डलुधरं अक्षसूत्राभयन्तथां 

ध्यायेततां रक्तवर्णाश्च बराह कृष्णाजिनोज्वलाम्‌ ॥ 
दति विश्वसारतन्लो्ताक्षीध्याने ब्रहमशक्तिहस्ते दण्डकमण्डल्वक्षसूत्राभय- 
ददनादत्रापि तथा कटप्यते य्य देवस्य यदं दृ्यादिना सप्दी्तोत्र 
रिवक्तयोरेकाश्षदशैनात्‌ इति वदन्ति वप्तुतस्तु-- 

अभयवरदहस्तं कुण्डिकापक्षमाराम्‌ | 

दधतममरभूपं चिन्तयेदादिमूर्भिम्‌ ॥ 
इति यामोक्तकर््मान्तरीयध्यानप्राप्तामयवरादीनि ध्येयानि स्प्टमन्यत्‌ ।६॥ 

जधारपश्रे डाकिनीरक्तिधिपितिमाह वसेदिति | अत्र पदे डाकिनी 

नान्नी दैवी वसेदि्न्यय, | सा किम्भूता १ सदा सब्व॑सिन्‌ करे छद्धबुदे- 


(७) aaa सपैव चरे डाकिन्यभिष्या नाम यस्याः सा वेत्‌ | 
«अभिख्या नामदोभयोः ” इयमरः कसद्धि' प्रकारद्विश्चताबहुमिरुन्यरा 
स््ताकारनेत्रा च सा देवी | समानोदितैति ; एककारीनोदिताना अतेकसूर््याणामिव 
प्रकारा उदयो यस्याः सातथा «Tea एन प्रका वहन्ती परमा्विपरयी- 
भूता सदृशं धिभावयन्ती, तद्वावान्वित्ानां ज्ञानमेव द्दातीसर्थः | 


१४ पष्ट्मक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


स्तत्चक्ञानस्य प्रकाशं वहन्ती तेत्वज्ञानसम्पादवित्रीयथ तथाच योगाङ्गत्ेनात्र 
तां area त्चक्ञानमाप्नोति इति भाव 
हयं देवी चक्रािषठात्री तदुक्तं 
यवत्रं वद्यपसीपेतं डाकिन्या सगथिष्ठितम्‌ 1 हति । तधा 
डाकिनी राक्रिणी चैव लाकिनी काकिनी तथा | 
शाकिनी हाकिनी चैव क्रमात पटपङ्कजाधिपा ॥ इति ॥ 
अस्या ध्यानविरोपमाहन्यत्र 
रक्ताक्षी रक्तवणौ पशुजनमयक्रच्छरूुषद्वाङ्गहम्तां 
वामे wed दधानां चपकमपि सृधापूरितं चैकववत्राम्‌ | 
अदयुगरासगरद॑ष्रामरिकुरमथनी पायसानने प्रसक्ता 
Festa परिवरनवप्रुपं डाकिनीं चिन्तयता 1 इति ॥ 
तथा 
सिन्वृरतिरुकोदीपामञ्जनाश्चितरोचनाम्‌ 
कृष्णाम्बरपरीधानां नानाभरणभूपित्ताग्‌ | 
इयादिकम्मन्तरोक्तडाकिनीध्याने प्राते soot laff | अत्र ब्रह्मादीनां , 
पदचकरस्थतकसदेवानां TAA ga स्ितिचिन्तनमाह शाक्तानन्द 
तरङ्गिणीधृतसयत्तपत्रे प्वसयुचष्च , 
` अधोववलस्थिति्तत अधोभागे कथं भवेत्‌ । इति प्रभ, 
महादव उवाच 
aed पङ्कजं दैवि स््वतोमुखमेव च 
्रवृत्तिमावचिन्तायामधोववत्राणि चिन्तयेतं | 
निष्त्तिभावमार्ठु सतैवोंडखानि च | इति ॥ 


अन्यत्‌ सुगमम्‌ || ४ | 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ १९ 


वजाख्यावक्लदे शे विरुसति सततं कणिकामध्यसंस्थं 
कोणं तत्‌ त्रेपुराख्यं तडिदिव Road 
कामरूपम्‌ | 
कन्दर्पं नाम वायुर्निवसति सततं तस्य मध्ये 
समन्तात्‌ 
जीवेशो बन्धुजीवप्रकरमभिहसन्‌ कोटिसूय्यै- 
प्रकाशः ॥ ८ ॥ 


Remain त्रिकोणे निरूप्यते वजाख्यावकत्रदेले इति aga 
आस्यात्‌ GIG रिञ्गमूरादधो ama ay मूलाधारकमलकणिका- 
मध्यस्थगहरान्तव्ैसिं तत्र त्रिकोणे विकसति इत्यन्वय । त्रिकोणं wet’ 
Agee त्रिकोणगमस्यकामनीजघटकककारमभ्ये त्रपुर॒न्द्य॑भिष्ठानात्‌ ` 
्ैराख्यमिति TRIAL | तदुक्तं शाक्तानन्दतरङ्गिण्यां ककारतत्व्षथनमुपत्रम्य- 

ant मध्ये स्थिता दैवी सुन्दरी परदेवता इति 
कोमलं ger । तथा कामरूपं कामं निरूप्यतेऽनुभूयते येन तादशं 
मदनागारासकमिषयथै" अत एव-- 
५ सिकोणं तत्तु gel शक्तिपीटं मनोहरम्‌ । इत्युक्तम्‌ 

पतत्‌ लिकोणं धराबीजप्यो्धं | तदुक्तं सम्मोहने धरावीजमभिङ्त्य — 

वामा ज्येष्ठा तथा रौद्री विरेला च aga. | इति 


(८) वज्नाख्येति | अस्यैव पदस्य त सम्नन्धीदं 
पुरं तदेवाख्या नाम यस्य | चतुष्कोणं बन्नाख्यनाञ्याः BAAR TATA 
wees Paha प्रकाकषते aad कामरूपपीम्‌ | यद्वा भक्तामिलाषलरूप तस्य 
HORA मध्ये समन्ताचतुदक्षु welds कन्दर्पो नाम वाययुविरसति काम एव 
वायुभूतोऽत्रास्ति इति geaton तेनैव हेतुना जीवात्मनाविर्भवतीति आह 
जीवेश इति । किम्भूतः ! बन्भूकपुष्पसमहं wed उपहसन्निव ततोऽप्यलथै- 
रक्ताकारः अतो वायु" क्पवानियादि साच्यसिद्रान्तमपि सद्धगच्छते पुनः 
कीटाः ! कौटिपूर्पणां छव प्रकारौ दीप्िरयस्येति | 


१६ पट्चक्रानिरूपणम्‌ 

तन्मध्ये रिङ्गरूपी वुततकनककराकोमरः पश्चिमाम्यो 
जानध्यानप्रकादाः प्रथमकिसटथाकारसूपः सखयस्भुः। 

विद्युसूर्णन्दुषिभ्बप्रकरकरचयल्िग्धसन्तानहासी काशीः 
वासी Rah विकसति सरिदाव्तरूपप्रकारः॥ ९॥ 

तदिप्नोणगध्ये कन्दरपवायुस्वितिमाह wah एति शमन्तान्‌ त्िकोणव्यापक 

रुयेणेय्थं अविर दति अस्य जीवधारकलाजरश sega । तथा हि. - 

HAT वसेत्‌ प्राणी हयपानो गुदमण्डले | 


इव्याद्रिवचने गुढमण्डरस्थवायोरपानलागिधानात्‌ ताषशगुदमण्डलस्थकन्दरपवायो- 


. रप्यपानाश , ततश्च ~ 


अपान करति प्राणं प्रागोऽपानश्च कषति । 
रज्जुबद्धो यथा श्येनो गतोऽप्याघ्नप्यते पून, | 
तथा चैतौ विसम्बादे सम्ब aerate ॥ एति ॥ 


विसम्बादे wera एतो प्राणापानवागू तथा कर्परी arent 
अविरोभियमने दमं te सन्यजेदरियधैकतद्रयने कन्दर्पावान्तरनामकापानवायोः 
moat दैहधारणल्वालीवधारफलं ela अतो जी cere 
माव । अते एवं बर्थ दङ्चगशषोके “area जगत" जीवो 
यथा area इत्यनेन श्रारोच्छसरूपयो. प्राणापानयोर्जविधारकलं 
स्वयमेबोक्तम्‌ | स्पष्टमन्यत्‌ ॥ ८ | 

तिकोणमध्ये स्वयम्भुलिङ्गर्थितिमाह तन्मध्य दति । सिकोणमध्य 
लिङ्गरूपी ary; स्वयभ्ुनामकशिवरि्गं विलसतीलन्यथ | दुतकमककला- 


(९) तन्मध्ये इति । तत्कोणस्य Rabe, उपरि दिङ्गरूपी aay: 
भावकपेण तिति | कीटाः ! ger या कनककरा वहिक्षपीभूता तस्या श्व 


car निरूपणम्‌ १७ 


कोमल तप्तकाश्चनावयव दृव Raat इष्यै पश्चिमास्योऽधोमुखं 
तदुक्तं कालीकुलामरते 
aa स्थितो महाचिङ्ग स्वयम्धु सर्व्वदा सुखी 
अधीमुख- क्रियावध्ध ana are fe 
ज्ञानध्यानप्रकास दति ज्ञानभ्यानाभ्या प्रकाचो यम्य ताष्टश इत्यथै तथा च 
ज्ञानेन fom ध्यानेन सगुणर्यप्रकाशो यस्य स॒ Tare 
म्बयम्भरिति भाव 
दृष्टान्तेन विगेषयति प्रधरमक्रिसलयाकारख्य इति अचिरोयन्नपलाइ्कुर- 
यत्‌ आकार. रूपं यस्य तैन म्थूलमूलात्‌ स्षमामपय्यन्तं चम्पकवुसुममध्यस्थित 
शलाकावदु्तत' इयामव्णश्ेय | तदुक्तं शाक्तानन्दतरङ्गिप्याम्‌ 
स्वयम्भुलिङ्खं तन्मध्ये aed पिमाननम्‌ | 
ध्ययेचच परमेशानि रिषं स्यामकयुन्दरम्‌ ॥ इति । 
यत्तु-- 
Fev स्फेदिव्यं त्रिकोणमतिनुन्धरम्‌ 
तस्याज्रिरेामानीय ATTA AAT 
नीकतोयदमधयस्थां तदिक्ोरिसमप्रभाम्‌ | 
हृति यामल्वचने कुण्डलिन्या नीकतोयदमध्यस्यविरोषणेन स्वयम्भुरिङ्गस्य 
नीलवर्णखमायातं त्रीरुद्यामयोरेकपर्य्यायलान्न Bags, 
विधुधूर्णनुधेग्यमकरकरचयन्िष्यपन्त बह सते । धधुसूरणचन्द्रविश्मयोय 
्रकरृष्टकर. उत्तापरहितकरिरण ayer गसमूहेन श्रदुप्रवाहविरिष्टमकाशोः 
ऽस्यास्तीदय्थं । काशीवासी विरासीति अत्र काशीवासतुस्यवासवििष्टः 
aa, fortes तेन यथा काथीवाते सुखं भुनक्ति तदरदत्नापीति भाव 
कोमठकः | पञ्चिमास्योऽधोमुषखः ज्ञानध्यानाण्ययोगाम्या प्रकाश उदयौ यश्य | 
नवीनपह्वाकारस्येव रपं यस्य | निशयुरन्दुनिम्यसमूहाना कण्वुन्दक्निग्धसमूहुस्येव 


हास्य इव सविरोषो यस्य } तत्स्थानमपि विकसितं शीं अस्थ सरिदावररूपप्रकारा 
आतिथ्य भलिचश्चलत्वात्‌ णवम्मूत' सन ete ॥ 
4 


१८ पटूनक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


तस्योदरं विस्ततन्तुसोदररसप्सृक्ष्मा जगन्मोहिनी 
ब्रह्महरारमुखं सुखेन मधुरं संछादयन्ती स्वयम्‌ । 

` द्रा्कावत्तनिमा नवीनचपलामाछाविङासास्पदा 

सुषा सर्पसमा शिवोपरि छसत्सादधंत्रिदताङ़तिः॥१०॥ 


अथवा विकास za कामप्रफुलमाव दति यात्‌ - तद्विशिष्ट ged | 
"+ कामवीजेन चाक्ति ' दति चनात्‌ अय ary करा्ीषासी waa 
Peace सूचितं इति । सरिदावर्परपप्रकार इति सरिदावततं यद्रुपन्तलकार 
ततश्च यथा प्राम्यमाणनदीजछे गव्यमिप्तस्तनाधये करिश्िद्रुलतं aaa 
भाव अयं ary: कागबीजोपरिस्थित तदाह areas 
किञ्रस्फोपरि amie. wer युमनोहर' 
तत्र स्थितो nether स्वयम्गु रान्य ot 
अधोमुख क्रियावांश aint चालित ॥ ति 
तेथान्यत्र--- 
gaat डाकिनी तत्रे ककायां त्रिकोणक | 
यन्मध्ये चिवरं सृषं रक्ताभं कागप्रीजकग्‌ 
तत्र AYMARA HITT, ॥ 
इति मतान्तरम्‌ ॥ ° ॥ 
mary कुण्डकिनीदाक्तिस्थितिमाह तस्यो इति द्वभ्याप्‌ | अनयो- 
ध , यया queer शवारुग्ासविभद्धनेन yada जगत जीषो 
(१०) तस्यो इति | तस्य रवस्य aye इय, । मृणाठतन्तृस्दसी 
ger यस्या" ण्व्भूता सा कूजन्ती ङ बुण्डलिनीति वहत्यपाणश्टोकेनान्वयः 
यत्‌; बिसतन्तुसदृशी अत॒ः सूक्ष्मा जगता alee महामायारूपेणेयर्थः ब्रहमह्मसुषं 
ger gana स्वयमेव सज्छादयन्ती रामयन प्रकरिणाच्छदुधन्तीलकः | 
एतेन Aaa कृत्वा syd faced. | अत aaa तन्मुखं 
मधुरं RET व्टनाकारतुल्या ahaha ion एव स्थाने Ferrara 
यावत्‌ सुता अतः सर्पतुल्या सर्पो हि Ger वुण्डाकारो भवति | िवस्योपरि 
सत्‌ प्रकारात्‌ सार्दविवृतते जतिः ae यस्याः | 1 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 1९ 


करूजन्ती FRIST च मधुरं मत्ताङिमाङास्फुटं 
वाचं कोमरङकान्यवन्धरचनायेदातिभेदक्रमेः। 
श्वासोच्छरासविभस्जनेन जगतां जीवो यया धार्यंते 
सा qargunat विरुसति प्रोदामदीता- 
, वि; ॥ ११ ॥ 


shen aad देहावच्छेदे स्थाप्यते सा दैवी मत्तालिमाास्फुरं यथा 
स्याचथाकरतिः एवं वक्ष्यमाणक्रमेर््याचम्‌ अर्थात्‌ जनयन्ती सती अम्बुज 
Te मूकाधारकमरुकगिकामध्यक्रिकोणगहुरे तस्य स्वयम्भरिष्गस्योदं 
भागे विरुसतीति aaa विरिष्टान्विताथ' निसतन्तुसोदरटसप्ुक्ष्मा 
स्रणालसूत्रतुल्यसूक्ष्षा ह्यथ जगन्मोहिनी जगतां माधाहपिणीयधं । 
Tae स्वयम्भुखिन्नच्छिद्र मधुरं मृदु यथा स्यात्तथा BBA संछादयति 
हूस्यथे, 1 नवीनचपलामामाविलासास्पदैति शरव्यां नवीन्वे प्रकाश्चाधिषयद्ं 
नादत्र adelante, । saan erent 
विलासस्य Radeon gaat स्थिरतरातिप्रफारितविद्युस 
मृहकाशतुरयपरकारवतीति पर्यवसितम्‌ | 

वावयजननक्रममाह फोमल्काव्ययन्धस्वनाभेदातिभेदङ्रमैरिति कोमर 
कान्यं॑मृदुशब्दधटितरूपगुणरसादिवणैनालकवावयम्‌ । बन्ध पद्मबन्धाश्व- 
बन्धादिचित्रकाव्यम्‌ | स्वना तदतिरिक्तगयपयासकवाक्यम्‌ | Haat भिरेष | 


(११) कूलन्तीति। सा करुण्डकिनी मुरं यथा स्यात्तथा aed कुरमन्तीसवः। 
एतेन रन्धध्वत्यात्सकरष्दो भवति | तत्र स एव दन्दः कण्टत।त्वाधभिघातेन 
वर्णात्मकप्वेन परिगण्यते sere कोमर्काव्यनन्धप्रथनाया या भेदो नानाप्रबस्धः 
He) वैदर्भी पञ्चारी कथितारीतिकपः तस्य भेदस्य श्ृदगासदिनवप्सनन्धेन 
योऽततिभेदस्तत्मेः | HEIs स्फुटं यथा स्यात्तथा वाचश्च वूजन्ती तस्य 
एथ Medea, आयातमित्ि यया देव्या च श्वासौच्छरासविभश्ननेन जगता जीवो 
धार्यते सा Tene TAPE प्रकारते | प्रोदामदीप्तावल्थिस्याः दीप्तमिति भावे क्त ॥ 


२० धटूचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


अतिभेदस्तदितरसंसकतप्ाङृतवाक्यसमुद्ाय  तयोर्य॑क्रग॒शाखन्यवहारानु 
खूपरीति तादशीमी fafa जनयन्तीति परिष्छृताथंवृण्डलिन्या 
संस्छृतप्राछ्रुतविरोषाविगेपयावद्भाक्यजनयित्रीप्वात्‌ 
तदाह शाखायाम्‌ 
मियमानात्‌ पराद्वि्दारव्यक्तासा रवोऽभवत्‌ 
aera कुण्डलीं प्राणिना दहमव्यगम्‌ ` 
वर्णालनाविर्भवति ग्पद्यादरिमेदत । इति 
ग्पथादीवयादिपदात्‌ यावद्रावयं गृह्यते 
व्यक्तमाह कादिमतं 
स्वासेच्छाशक्तियातेन प्राणवायुस्वरूपत 
ASM VTA WEA नाद उत्तम | 
स प्व ateat नीत स्वाधिष्टानविजुम्भित 
पद्यन्साख्याभवापरोति Wars शनै शनै 
अनाहते बुद्धितत्वसमेतो मध्यमोऽभिध 
तथा तयोरुदधुगतो Pagal कण्ठदेशत 
वैखर््यास्यस्तत कण्ठीर्पतास्वोष्ठदन्तग 
जिहामूाग्रघरस्थस्तथा नासाग्रत क्रमात्‌ 
कण्डताल्वो्ठकण्स्थ कण्डौषद्रयतस्तथा 
समुपन्नान्यक्षराणि क्रमादादिक्षकावधि दति 
अकं विस्तरेण | 
कुण्डङिनीध्यानान्तरमाह अन्यत्र-- 
ध्यायेत्‌ कुण्डकिनी देवीं खयम्भुलिङ्गयेटिनीम्‌ 
यामां Gent चषटिरूपा सषटिस्थितिर्यासिकाम्‌ 
विश्वातौता ज्ञाना चिन्तयददुवाहिनीम्‌ ष 


पटूवक्रनिष्पणग्‌ ९१ 


तन्मध्ये परमा करतिकुशखा सूषक्ष्माकषिसूष्ष्मा परा 
नि्यानन्दपरम्परातिविगरत्यीयूषधाराधरा | 
ब्रह्माण्डादिकटाहमेव सकर TRAIT भासते 
a. a, 2 +) ba ions ~. ca, RY 
सेयं श्रीपरमेश्वर विजयते निदप्रचोधोदया ॥१२॥ 
तथा * 
ध्यायेत्‌ कुण्डलिनी दवीमिष्टैवस्वरूपिणीम्‌ 
सदा प्रोड्दावरीया पीनोन्नतपयोधराम्‌ 
नवयीवनकषम्पन्ना सर्वाभरणभूषिताम्‌ | 
Tora रक्तां सदा चश्चललोचनाम्‌ । इति 
रक्तामिति gate ज्ञेयमिति दाक्तानन्दतरङ्गिणीकार वस्तुतस्तु 
सर्वदरैवताचिपये एव कुण्डिन रक्तवर्णैलेन ध्यया न तु eae प्राय ` 
सब्चैतन्त्े सब्वेसं्रहे च कुण्डकिन्याप्तदिदराकारत्वकथनात्‌ | इयामामियनेन 
शीतके भवेदुष्णा चोष्णकराके च शीतला 
परतप्तकाश्चनाभा रा द्यामा खी परिकीर्सिता 
PC GEC क्राम्तवं ज्ञापितग्‌ न तु श्यामवणैतमत,. सन्बैशास्षसामञ्जस्यमिति 
चक्रगोदनात्‌ पू HART कुण्डखीध्यानमाह कंङ्कारमारिन्याम्‌ 
कोरिचन्द्रपरतीफाश्या परन्रहमस्वद्पिणीम्‌ 
चतुर्थां PAA वरामयकरान्तथा ॥ 
तथा पुस्तकवीणान्च धारिणीं सिहवाहिनीम्‌ 
गच्छन्तीं स्वासं सीमा नानाहपध्रासिकाम्‌ दहति १० १९१ 
स्ययभ्भुरिष्गवेटितवुण्डकिमय्धूं समसू्रपातन्यायेन दण्डाकारेण fare 
, पर्यन्तम्थितां पररक्तिमाह तध्ये इति अस्याः यद्भासया यस्या" शक्तया 


(१२) तन्मध्ये a । तस्थाः कृण्डटिन्था मध्ये परमा कटा आस्ते परं 
परमात्मानं मीयते अनया दति पमा असर gars यतः सातिक्रा । GBA 


RR पटूचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


feat weer तक्कटाह््य भासते प्रकाशते सेयं श्रीपरमेश्वरी तन्मध्यै 
स्वयम्भुणिङ्ञे कण्डलिनीवटन दँ विजयतं सर्व्वान्‌ बशषवर्तिन wer fade 
सा किम्भूता “ परमा अवटनयटनपटीयसी माधा कला नादगक्तिषपा 
कुण्डङिन्यभेदशरीरिणी 


तदुक्तं शाक्तानन्दतरङ्धिण्याम्‌ 
कला कुण्डकिनी सैव नादशक्ति शिवोदिता 


तथान्यत्त 
तस्योपरि मनो ध्यायेत्‌ चिक्र ई-समाभिताम्‌ 
प्रदीपककिकाकारा बुण्डस्यभेदरूपिणीम्‌ | इति | 


तथा काकिकिश्रुतौ 
तस्या रिखाया मध्ये तु अध उद्भ व्यवस्थिताम्‌ | 
a wat a रिवः ae स एव परमेश्वर 
सएव fey सप्राण wo Her स चन्द्रमा । 
इति कुण्डटिनीं ध्याला सर्पे प्रमुच्यते || इति ॥ 


तस्या रिखाया मध्ये त्िवर्यस्यद्ं व्यवस्थिता परमां करं नादशूपामिवयर्थः | 
हति लकितारहस्यकार अतिकुरला खृष्टिसम्पाद्रनयोग्यतारूपकौशख्वतीद्यथै' 

निप्यानन्दपरमपेति । निव्यानन्दात्‌ परम्परा परपरक्रमसम्बन्धो यस्या इसर्थ । 
ततश्च "नित्यानन्दो निर्गुणं बरह्म तस्मात्‌ सगुणाविभाव' agora शक्ति 


यतस्तस्या मध्ये परा पयन्ती मध्यमा वैखरी समाधिरूपा नित्यं आनन्द्रपरम्पया 
यस्याः सा त्था | अयर्थविदुन्मेव रपत्‌ प्रकाशात्‌ दीधितिस्तेजो यस्याः 
ब्रह्माण्डस्य आदिकटाहपर्यन्तं यस्याः काया भासया सकठं भासते यद्रा 
हारीरस्यापि ब्रह्माण्डसंज्ञा “ब्रह्माण्डे ये गुणाः सन्ति ते हि सन्ति कवेर"? 
इति प्रामाणिकोक्तप्वात्‌ सेयं श्रीपरमेश्वरी विजयते sade: | निल्नामस्येदथो 
यत्तः | ^ 

1 पेद इति पाठन्तपम्‌ ह ° 


yea RIOT, RR 


ध्यालेतन्मूटचकान्तरविवररुसत्कोरिसू््यप्रकारां 
बाचामीदो ater: स भवति सहसा सय्वै- 
विव्याविनोदी । 
आरोग्यं तस्य निलयं निरवधि च महानन्द 
चित्तान्तयत्मा 


वाक्यैः काल्यप्रबन्धेः सकटसुरयुषून्‌ सेवते 
शुद्धशीरः ॥ १३॥ 


anata raters: भिन्दो कुण्डलिनी कुण्डङिन्यवान्तररूपेयं Prada 
aga, नि््यानन्दप्म्परेत्ति भाद्‌" । यदुः निव्यानन्दपरस्परातिविगङल्षीयुष । 
धाराधष्येकविनेषणम्‌ । निद्यानन्दरासयरम्पर्ा निव्यानन्द्रात्‌ परं चिन्दु 
तयरमाज्ञाचत्रं तसरं Raga एवं क्रमेण ered अतिविगकन्ती या 
पीयूपधारा सा भियते gad यया Bes. | स्पष्टमन्यत्‌ | १२ ॥ 

मूलाधारे कृण्डकिनीचिन्तनफरमाह ध्यालैतदिति woah, “ मूढ 
माधारषट्‌कानां मूलाधारं ततो विदुः '” दति वचनात्‌ AeA तस्यान्ते 
मध्ये afat गहरं तसिन्‌ cutie सकरुसुरगुरूनिति | 
“Ranger पुंसि aera” इ्यमरोक्तया सुरगुरवसिना 
गुरुशब्देन सुरश्रेष्ठा ब्रहविप्णुरिवादय प्रतीयन्ते ततश्च तदापिदरवान्‌ सेवते 
स्तवादिवाकसतोषयतीत्यथै सष्टमन्यत्‌ | १२ ॥ # | 


(१३) ध्यात्यैतदिति । एतत्‌ प्रूखाधारस्थं सर्व्वं ध्यात्वा नरः एवमेवं 
भवति तत््रमेणाह--- वाचाभीरौ नपणामिन्द्रतुल्य. सहसा सर्व्यविद्याविनोदी च 
* भवति | तस्य नियमेव आरोग्यं निर्ययि oefigta महानन्द ईरः तचिन्ताः 
विद्िष्ट; अन्तसयत्मा य्य एवं भवतीयथ' | एतत्‌ aleat ! मटाधारमध्यप्रकाशघ. 
कोटिसूर््याणां प्रका) यस्य तत्तथा | स॒ जनः काव्यप्रनन्पैः वाक्यैः सकयसुरगुरं 
Saale: सन रोयते वाक्पत्तिसददो भवतीयथेः | [अत्र मते गुरमिति पाठः] 


२४ पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


सिन्दूरपूररुचिरासणपद्ममन्यत्‌ 
सौषुम्णमध्यघटितं ध्वजमूलदेग्र | 

अङ्गच्छदेः aad तडिदाभवर्णे- 
sala: सबिन्दुरुसितेश्च पुरन्दरान्तेः ॥ १४॥ 


तदयं महावाक्यार्थनिणैयः मूलाधारच्ं चतुद reach aaa 
इति स्वर्णामचतुर्ववणयुक्तदर्कणिकाया धरामण्डलं चतुष्कोणं अष्शूखातरतं 
पीतव तन्मध्याधौधरावीजं sais teed deat aed चतुर्भूज्‌ 
धराबीजबिम्दुमध्ये Repeal रक्तवणे aga: दण्डकमण्डल्वक्षसूत्राभयहस्त 
चतुम्धुल | तक्कणिकाया रक्तपओपरि चक्रािषठात्री डाकिनीति" रक्तवर्णा 
Jag शल्लदज्गलङ्चषकहस्ताकणिकामध्ये विधुदकारत्रिकोणं तन्मध्य 
कामवायु arias रक्तवर्णेम्‌ तदुपरि ease श्यामवर्ण" | aR 
कृण्डकिनीशक्ति साद्धत्रिवल्याकारा agg लिङ्गम चिका दण्डाक्रोण 
स्थितेति ॥ इति प्रथमप्रकरणम्‌ । # ॥ 

Tere निरूप्य स्वाधिष्ठानचक्र निरूपयति सिन्दरपरष्यादि 
पञ्चमि प्रथमस्यायमथे ध्वजमूलेणे eae अन्यत्‌ आधास्चक्रभिन्न, 
aes सिन्दृरम्य पूरणेन यथा मनोहररक्तव्णी against 
आस्ते इति क्रियासमाहरेणान्वय पद्मं विरोपयति सौपुम्णमध्यघरितमिति | 
spores निमितं तथा Reet पर्वतं धटुपत्रयक्तमू्‌ | 
परन्दरान्तैरिति पुरन्दरो ठकार तदन्तेवधिम्तेन वभमयरलेति षड्भि. 

(१४) सिन्दूरेति । अन्यत्‌ खाधिष्ठानाख्यं लि्गमूढसमदेरे आस्ते 
सुपुम्णामध्यवटकीमूत SMe a अण इति केचित्‌ तदयं | वस्तुतस्तु 
AIT इदं ब्रहमुनाञ्यादि तन्मध्यमूतं णक तस्येदमियर्थे अण कौररं सिन्दूर 
-रंचिरतया wer, पुतः कौदृशं ! अडगच्छदै' पदूदराव्रतम्‌ | ated ! 


तड्दिवाभा वणो येपा तथक्तिः पुदन्दगे amare: बिन्दूना प्गिकसिंतैरव- 
स्भूतेदैदेरियथैः एतेन वर्णानां सर््वपतनषु दरमध्यवक्तित्वमायातय्‌ 


पटूवक्रनिरूपणम्‌ १५ 


तस्यान्तरे परधिरुसष्टिदादपकाश- 
मम्भोजएण्डलमथो वरुणस्य तस्य | 

अर्न्दुरूपरसितं शरदिन्दुशुच्रं 
वङ्कारबीजममरं मकराधिरूढम्‌ ॥ १५ ॥ 


तदिदाभवरणदखवत्सरिवति, तैन ॒दलावच्छेदे वणैयोगः प्रतीत । वर्णान्‌ 
विशेषयति सचिन्दुरमितेरिति बिन्दुना सह ater सविन्दव, लसिता" 
प्रकारिता | सनिन्दवश्च ते ofa aRed. । ततश्चात्र विरेष्य 
विरेषणमावकस्पने विरेषणीभूतनिन्दौ करितल्वकारणत्वम्‌ प्रतीयते ५“ सुराप 
पततीत्यत्र कपविरेषणसुरापाने comida | यद्रा बिन्दर्नां लसितं 
बिन्दुलसितं मिन्दुमकाशः तैन सह वतमाने TARE १४ । 
प्तदद्मकणिकायामम्भोजमण्डकस्थितिमाह तस्यान्ते इति | तस्य पद्मस्य 
अन्तरे मध्ये अम्भोजमण्डलम्‌ अम्मोजाकारमण्डकं प्रविलसत्‌ प्रकादामानम्‌ 
तत्‌ fed’ frat a पन किम्भूतम्‌ / अर्ेनदुरूपलसितम्‌ 
अद्धैचन्द्रयुक्तमितय्थै दतं weed तद्राह शारदायाम्‌ - 


अम्मोजमम्भसो Wags सवल्ञकम्‌ | इत्यादि 


परतन्मण्डललक्षणमाह्‌ राघवम ५ अद्धैचन्द्रं करत्वा तदुभयभागे सरोजद्भयं 
gale) तदुक्तमाचा््यँ "अन्जोपेतार्ढन्ुमहिम्बमाप्यमिःति। मण्डलमध्ये 


(१९) तस्यान्ते इति तस्य पवस्य मध्ये अम्भसि जातं वर्णस्य 
गण्डलमास्ते अथो दन्दः सम्भावनायाम्‌ Meal) प्रकषण विकसत्‌ निम्मीढ- 
eT यस्य MAT | तस्यैव वरणस्य इदनदुरूपेण छसितं मनेक्म्‌ अत एव 
वङ्कारबीजम्‌ अमरु निपीरप्ापन्द्र इव ye । मकगधिषूदं मकरो जन्तुविरोषः 
ओङ्कार इति स्ातस्तदधिरूदं walt क्तः, अत एव अम्भोजमण्डल्ददीनात्‌ कमपि 
afi इति agree महीं मूकाभरे sea चामुपपत्ति" ay तद्चवसाथिभिः 
प्रतिघ्यातव्यम्‌ | TARY तत्र व्य्तसमस्ततया व्याख्या ब्रूमः |) 

4 


Ra yang fq, 


AMUHAMHGA हरिरेव पायात्‌ 
नीरप्रकाशरुचिरशियमादधानः | 

पीताम्बरः प्रथमयोवनगव्वधारी 
श्रीवस्संकोस्तुभधरो धृतवेदबाहुः ॥ १६ ॥ 


वरुणवीजस्थितिमाह अथो इति तम्येति sere प्रसिदम्येवयग 
मकराधिरद्मिति पाराहस्तश्च॒ तदाह 


तदन्त्म्बारुणं वीजं शेतं मकरवाहनम्‌ 
qed aes, च हरिं श्यामं चतुर्ूजम्‌ ॥ दहति | 


„ अयं वरुणबीजस्वरूपो वकारो यवरगीय कृकावुलचकरे भृतकिपिभन्ते च 
तद्वकारस्यैव यलवणैलेनामिधानात्‌ | स्यषटमन्यत्‌ १५ 

वरुणबीजस्यङ्के विष्णुश्थितिमाह aa इति शङ्गे बीजमम्तकष्ण- 
बिन्दुमध्ये भराबीजचिन्दौ ब्रह्मण स्थितिदशनादलापि तथा दएपरिकल्य 
नान्यायात्‌ प्व वक्ष्यमाणं Gat बोध्यम्‌ करिति ग्थित इत्यर्थ । 
नीलम्रकाशरुचिरश्चियमादधान दति fester या adhe शोमा तां 
दधान ह्यर्थ, तेन नीरुतेज पुञ्ञरीरीति यावत्‌ 


| Perot इहि, egrewre गति 
कोस्तुभं हदये रलं सूर्य्यायुतसमपमस्‌ 
तदधो वनमालाच्च चन्द्रायुतस्मप्रमाम्‌ 
कोप्तमोद्धँ च श्रीवतसननन्द्रायुतसमग्रभम्‌ ॥ इतिं | 


(१६) तस्याङ् इति| तस्य बीजस्य क्रोडदेशक्सितः easy: Baya 
पायात्‌ | hea: ! dese ala कान्तिम्‌ माधत्ते oleae, प्रथमयौवन 
Te TA ay शीरपस्य तथोक्तः श्रीयत्सचिहं कौस्तुभश्च दधातीत्यथैः | 
धृताश्चत्वारो बाहवो येन स तथा ॥ . ५ 


पटूचत्रनिरूपणम्‌ २७ 


अत्रेव भाति सततं we राकिणी सा 
नीराम्बुजोदरसहयोदरकान्तिशोभा | 

नानायुधोयतकरेरछसिताङ्गरक्ष्मी- 
दिव्याम्बराभरणमूषितमत्तचित्ता ॥ ९७ ॥ 


afte जखमाह तन्त्रान्तरे 
पाशहस्तं तदङ्क च हरि श्यामं wage | 
शद्खचक्रगदापदमधारिणं पीतवाससम्‌ । इति ॥ 


पारहस्तं वरणम्‌ ght edu: अन्यत्र ` पीताम्बरं सान्तमूर्ि 
यनमाछाविभूपितम्‌ '' इति Terai हस्र ब्रह्मण स्थितिदलैनादत गरुदोपरि 
विष्णुश्चिन्तनीयः | १६ | । 
तत्प राकिणीशक्तिस्थितिमाह अपरैवेति स्पष्टम्‌ राकिणीष्यान- 
fame 
श्यामां श्रछार्जहस्ता उमस्करयुता तीक्ष्णरङ्ग वहन्ती 
aut wafanat कटिकसयिलसदन्तदंग्राः प्रभासि 
दीं ai? वेवयवीं fearon रक्तथरिकिनासा) 
gar सक्तचित्तामभिमतफर्दां " राकिणी चिन्तयेत्ताम्‌ ॥ 


लय पान्त ९ किणः Ra Ra त्‌ सवयत्र र्पपदमान्तरोपरि yee क्तीना 
स्थितिरिति बोध्यम्‌ ॥ १७ | 


(१७) अत्रैवेति अत्रैव पतने खलु निश्चितं सर्ववदेवस्य oferar सविणी 
आस्ते | नील्पवस्योदरतुल्यश्रौमा यस्याः नानाघ्रेणोयतकंरेः प्रकाकमाना शोमा 
यस्या. सा तथा दिव्याम्बयलङ्कासम्या मूषिता च मत्तं चित्त यस्याःसा 
देति तथा॥ 

1 वरिङपषष्टदन्त, * * दीप्तास्यं. 

५ स्तधात्वंकताधां, , + चित्ता सधुमदसुदिता, 


१९ पट्वकरनिरूपणम्‌ 


सखाथिष्ठानाख्यमेतत्‌ सरस्िजममरं चिन्तयेयो 
मनुष्य- 
स्तस्याहङ्कारदोषादिकसकररिपुः क्षीयते 
aera | 
योगीशः सोऽपि मोहाद्ुततिमिर्चये भानुतुल्य- 
पकाशो 
Ta: पयः प्रबन्धे्विरचयति सुधावावध- 
सन्दोहरक्ष्मी; ॥ १८ ॥ 


स्वापिष्ठानपद्माद्वियिन्तनफलमाह्‌ स्वाधिष्ठानास्यमिति 
तदुक्त--- 
स्वशब्देन परं fest खािष्ठानं ततो धिदु । इति । 


अहङ्कारदोषादीत्यादिना कामक्रोधादयो गृह्यन्ते तेन कामाद्विपदूरिपव क्षीयन्त 
wat | मोदहाद्भुततिमिरचेये इति दुर्मबाय्यमोहान्धकारसमूहै eat | ततश्च 
मायामोटरूपान्धकारनाक्चाय ज्ञानरूपसूय्यैमापनोतीति भाव॒ स्पष्टमन्यत्‌ ॥१८॥ 

तदयं महावाक्यार्थनिर्णयः । स्वाधिष्ठानचत्रं॑सिनदृरवणीपड्वलं 
तदिदाभसनिन्दु वभम यर क इति पडवर्णयुक्तदरम्‌ | तक्क्णिकायां मध्य 
स्थलार््नन्द्रयक्ताएटदल्पद्माकारमम्भोजमण्डलं TRL | तन्मध्ये वं एति वरूण 
बीजं मकराधिरूढं पाशदस्तं | sents विष्णुररुदोपरिस्थितश्चतुर्य॑ज' शाद्धयक्र- 
गदापद्मधारी पीताम्बरः वेनमााश्रीवस्सकौस्तुभधारी gaat | पदमकणिकायां 


(१८) खाधिष्ठानेति एतत्‌ घाधिष्ठानाख्य सरिज यो मुनीन्द्रधिन्तयेत्‌ 
तस्याह रदिदोषरूपसकररिपव, ज्ञानप्रतिवन्धकत्वात्‌ शु्रज्ञानपरिपन्थिनः तत्‌- 
क्षणेनैव क्षीणा भवन्तीति) ca alert? aad farfo स ovina 
मवति | मोहाडुतान्धकागचये mage भवति । स च गैः संसफरतया 
वाचा पैः शछोकप्रनन्धैः नानावर्णादिमिः अमृतायमानकाव्यसमूह [प्रये धिप्वयत्ि ॥ 


arf RIO २९ 


तस्योदरं नाभिमूरे दशदलरसिते qatar 
नीखाम्भोजप्रकाररूपहितजटरे डादिफान्तेः 
सचन्द्र; | 
ध्यायेद्रेश्चानरस्यारुणमिहिरलमं मण्डं तत्‌ त्रिकोणं 
aga खस्तिकाख्येशिभिरभिरखुसितं ax बहेः 
BAMA ॥ १९ ॥ 


रक्तपद्योपरि राकिणी शक्ति BTA ARE सूलान्नडमरुटङ्भधरा PAT 
कुरिरं मयङ्करी यु्कानरक्तथाराभिलाप्रिणीति | इति द्ितीयप्रकरणम्‌ ॥#॥ 

मणिपूरच्रं निरूपयति seit इयादित्रिमि । त्स्य ख्वाषिषठान- , 
aay. ददशशदलसिते इतति aaceaftd प्रकारिते पपे हति रेष, । 
at किम्भूते ८ पूथीतेषप्रकाशचे कृष्णवर्णे | तथा डादिकान्तैः उ दढ णतथद्‌ 
aac HR दशवोपदितं at sat मध्यं यस्य aR ged aaa 
रिति। चम्द्रोऽगचनद्रः युगलाध्ववाहिलाहिन्दुश्च ताभ्यां सह वर्च॑मानै्यणै 
fed. । वैश्वानरस्य वहे । अरुणमिहिरसमं बासर्कसदशमित्यथेः | 
स्वस्तिकास्थैरिति "* स्वस्तिकं नाम परस्परसम्बद्ं विदिणतचतुर्बवतं रद्रयमि"" 
saws । Torah स्वस्तिकैः त्रिकोणावच्छेदे अभिनसितमियर्थं | 
भत्र वहिमण्डले बहिवीजं रं | १० ॥ ¢ 


(१९) तस्यो इति तस्य पुष्ये aie द्रादलकमशे ककत मनोते 
goiter इव प्रकारो यस्य एवम्भूते पत्रे वैश्वानरस्य aes ध्रिकोणं मण्डल ध्यायेत्‌ | 
कीदृशम्‌ ! अरणसुर्ययोसमुल्यम्‌ | पुन, कौदृशं ? तद्रे त्रिकोणस्य बहिः त्रिभिः 
व्स्तिकाष्यैरमिठसिते, ala anes aa: लवीजम्‌ आस्ते | argent रेफ 

afi) परमे किम्धूते! demise प्रकाश्यो tay एवाभूतेः aa: 
उकारिफकारन्तैरपहितजेटेे caieshhaas उपस्थित्मध्ये sry. ॥ 
aged “4 ande-whea’? इति पाट. | 


३० RARE 


ध्यायेन्मेषाधिरूदं नवतपननिभं वेद वाह्र्वलाद्घ 
ame सुद्रमूतिर्मिवसति सततं शुद्धसिन्दूररागः | 
भस्मालिताङ्गभूषामरणसितवपुव्वद्धरूपी त्रिनेत्रो 
रोकानामिष्ठदाताऽभयरुसितकरः खष्टिसंहारकारी॥ 
अत्रास्ते छाकिनी सा सकरशुभकरी TUSSI 
श्यामा पीताम्बराचेल्विविधविरचनालङ्कृता 
सत्चित्ता । 
भ्यासरेतन्नाभिपद्यं प्रभवति नितरां संहतो पालने वा 
वाणी तस्याननाभ्जे निवसति सततं न्ञान- 
MASA ॥ २१ ॥ 
ध्ययेदिति | भस्ालिप्तङ्गभूषामरणस्ितवपुरिति | मप्मलेपनाङ्गभूषा 
मरणाभ्यां शयुीकृतदेह zea । ध्यायेन्मेपेति । व्याने विरोपगाहान्यत्र 
मेषस्थं gags शक्तिदम्तं स्मात्तत. | इति ॥ 
वितेषानभिधानादन्यदसतद्रय वरामयौ चिन्तनीयौ ध्यानान्तर तथा दद्धौनात्‌ 
छोकानामिष्टदाता aad अभयकसितकरस्नेन वराभयधारीति भाव, | 
wa वृषोपरि रुद्रो ध्येय | स्पष्टमन्यत्‌ ॥ २० | 
ward इति | विविधविश्चमेति विविधेन मणिसुक्तादियौगेन चित- 


विचितेधरटनेन विरचना यत्र तदररमलड्क्ृतं यस्या इव्यथः । यद्रा विविधविर- 
चनया Assad HSER धार्य्यते यत्रे | अत राकिनीध्यानेविरेषमाह्‌-- 


(२०) ध्यायेदिति वहिबीजं ध्यायेदिति परवयश्टोकेनान्वधः | कीुशम्‌ ! 
मेषं ated प्रातःकाटीनसुयत॒स्यं चतुरभर्याहुमिरुन्यलाड गम्‌ तस्थ बौजकीास्य 
ay रद्रमूभिनिवसति सततमेव कीदशः! शुद्रसिन्दुरस्येव wad यस्य 
भस्पञ्िततमेवाडगभूपाभाणं तेन प्रकारवपुरयस्य व्द्राकारः त्रीणि नेत्राणि यस्य स 
तथा | त्रिलोकवासिनामभीष्टदाता अभयरसितकरः से; dear च | 

(२१) wares इति यत्रैव पर्ने सा प्रसिद्धा काकिनी अस्ते ateath? 
adits शुभकरी | aghaighersaererh श्यामवर्णा पीक्तवघ्नाधेर्या नाना- 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ६१ 


तस्योदरं हृदि पङ्कजं सलितं बन्धूककान्प्युञ्जुरं 
काये दशवणं कैरुपहितं सिन्दुररागान्वितैः | 

नाभ्राऽनाहतसंज्ञकै सुरते वाच्छातिरिक्तष्रदं 
वायोम्मण्डलमनच्र PARE षट्‌कोणश्ञोभान्वितम्‌ ॥ 


नीरां दवीं चिवक्ला तिनयनरसिता द॑षटिणीपुग्रह्या 

ast af दधानामभयवरकरा देक्षवामे क्रमेण | 

ध्याला नामिस्थपवरे दशदरुचिरसस्कणिके काकिनीं तां 
मांसस्था' गोरभक्तोत्‌ुकह्दयवतीं चिन्तयेत्‌ avr | 


नाभिपदयचिन्तनप्रलमाह ध्यादेतद्वि्ादि नाभिपदां मणिपूरास्यम्‌ | 
“aay मणिबद्धिन्नं मणिपूरं तथोच्यते" दृति गोतमीयात्‌ | 
अन्यत्‌ सपम्‌ | २१॥ 

ard पषावाक्या्भनिर्णयः । afc मेषवणैवशदलं तदक्षु 
नीलामसनिन्दु उदणपतथदधनपफ दति aaa तकणिकाया 
विकोणाकारं तरिक्रोणवहि स्वस्तिकायुक्त cna वहिमण्डलम्‌ | तन्मध्ये रं इति 
afd wnat tye चतुरं वज्नशक्तिवराभयधरम्‌ । ततक्रोडे 
wm aed रक्तवर्णो द्विजो वरामयधारी भम्मलेपनगुक्कामरणारभ्या 
gees gear प्रश्कणिकायां रक्तपद्मोपरि mate नीलवर्णा 
fant तिनेला wad वजदाक्तयभयवरकरा पोरद्रा स्तयुक्तवेचरानमां- 
साभिलाप्रिणीति | इति व्रतीयप्रकरणम्‌ | ॐ 

हदि पङ्कजं निरूपयति aA त्यादि प्ट्मि fk पद्कजमिति | 
Tay vest eff व्ययेद्धिति क्रियाध्याहारिणान्वयः | gafed gre 


विस्चना तयां sega | Ad चित्तं यस्याः सा तथा एतन्नाभिपत्रं मणिप्ररकाख्यं 

ध्यात्वा ee | संहारपाटने च प्रभवति समर्थौ भवति तस्थाननण्जे सततमेव 

वाणी विङृसति | atest ? क्वानसपृहसंप्रात्तिः एतेन ब्रह्मविप्णुशिवतुल्यो भवतीः | 
(२९) तस्यो इति । तस्य पद्मस्य ag हदि सुछितं मनोरमं नान्ना 

HRT पकमास्ते "1 ale? नन्भरूककान्तिवदृज्ज्यकं सिन्दूरराग हव 
1 “ मांसाशी गौरस्तासव्‌ ' इति पाठान्तरम्‌ 1 


RR षट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


तन्मध्ये पवनाक्षरश्च मधुरं धूमावरीभूसरं 
ध्यायेत्पाणिचतुष्टयेन रसितं कृष्णाधिरूदं परम्‌। 
तन्मध्ये करुणानिधानममरू हैसाभमीराभिधं 


पाणिभ्यामभयं वरश्च विद धष्लकवयाणा- 
` मपि ॥ २३ ॥ 


feat | aah कखगघडवचषछजक्नजटटठ दति द्वादश 
वर्णकैरिति बोध्यम्‌ | dead युक्तमिष्यश्र॑ नाघ्रानाहतसंक्ञकमिति 

aera शब्दो ऽनाहतस्तव् BAT | 

अनाहताख्यं vat तत्‌ सुनिमि परिकीर्सितम्‌ | 
` दति वचनादनाहतनामपश्चमिति aera यत ates क्पतरप्वरूय- 
मतो वान्छरातिरिक्तफव्प्रदमिति देतगभविणेषणमिति माव । तयद्मक्णिकाया 
वायुमण्डलस्थितिमाह वायोरिति 1 २२ ॥ 

वायुमण्डलमध्ये वायुबीजमाह तन्मध्य दति पवनाक्षरं य॑ दति बीजं 

मधुरं मनोहरम्‌ धूमावलीधूसरमिति धूमश्ेण्यावरृतदेहत्वात्‌ धूमधूम्रवणैमिति 
भावः | कृष्णाधिरूदमिति करप्णसाराधिशूढमिष्यथः वरगदस्ते पाशदर्शनादन्न 
वायुदस्नेऽशवुशो ध्येय वायुवीजमधये दशस्थितिमाह तन्मध्य इति स्यषटम्‌ | 
aaa रिवस्य त्रिनेत्रं रिवस्य Baa त्रिनेत्र । एवं “ गरेवेयाङ्गदहारनू 


अञ्चितैः प्रातः ककारः ठकारान्तेद्ादरासंल्यककीरदिकमध्यवत्तिमिस्पसोमितम्‌ 
पुनः ale! सुरतरुः aerated अतौ वाञ्छातिरिक्तप्रदं वाज्छितस्याप्य- 
तिददातीतति तत्तथा ser: Feta पूर्णवाञ्छितफणदातारः, अयन्तु 
तदतिरिक्तं पक्षं pea ददातीयर्थः | wa पण्डके वायोमण्डटं विद्यते | aes? 
धूमसद्दाम्‌ । पुन" वीदृाम्‌ १ पटूकोणकोणस्य या शोभा तथा अन्वितम्‌ | 
[एतन्मते ‹ सिन्दूररागाधितिः `? इति पाठः । |] 

(२३) तन्पध्ये इति | तस्य मण्डस्य मध्ये" परवनाक्षरं वायुब्रीजम्‌ | 
अक्षरपदेन नीजमुच्यते एतत्‌ प्रकार यस्य मण्डलं तप्येव गीर्जमिति दषटत्वात्‌ | 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ aR 


अत्रास्ते ag काकिनी नवतहित्पीता Gast शुभा 
सर्व्वाछङ्करणान्विता हितकरी सम्यग्‌ जनानां 
Wat । 

हस्तेः पाशकपाखरोभनवरान्‌ संविश्रती चाभयं 


मत्ता प्रणैसुधारसा्र॑हदया कङ्कारमाला- 
धरा ॥ २४ ॥ 


qed क्षोमाम्बरं चिन्तयत्‌ '" इ्यादिकम्मीन्तरोक्तभ्यानप्रापक्षौमाम्बरलमीश्चस्य 
ward कान्तश्शाङ्कोरिकिरणं प्रोय्कपरज्वलम्‌'' इति । २३ | 
अत्रे कणिकार्यां काकिनीशकषिस्थित्तिमाह अत्रास्ते दति । मत्ता 

अस्वभावस्था स्लररितिमावा } पूरणहठधारसाग्हदयेति पृण, सम्पूर्ण, afta. 
य॒ yaw परीषकार भेमततकोमलं हदयं चिप यस्थ इयथः । यद्रा 
पूरणी galas य॒ सह्दरुकमलान्तसिगरितिपरमामृतरसप्तेन् 
TAMAR PSAs हदयं यस्या <I | अन्यत्‌ स्पष्टम्‌ | 4 

कप्णाग्यरपरीधाना नानामरणभूपिताम्‌ | 

ध्यायेत्‌ राशिखीं नित्या काकिनीं मन्सिद्धये | 


दति ATRIA बोध्यम्‌ ॥ २४ | 


meant) मधुरं हयड्गमम्‌ | पुनः कीम्‌ १ दीपकचल्िकाकारजीवात्पसप्बन्धिनी 
यः wad तया gael) पाग्चतुषटयेन रक्षत कृश्ाजनारिरूढं पर ope 
एवम्भूतं मीजं ध्यायेत्‌ | तत्र यायुपण्डले दर cater नाम यद्य एवम्भूतं 
शुकपणे््वपुरस्ते । agar? करणावारिधिखरूपम्‌ and निम्मैर हसाम यूय 
द्व शोभा यस्य । पुन" कौीदृहाम्‌ १ पाणिभ्या कराभ्या अभय वरत लोकत 
याणामरपि विदधत्‌ | एतेन इयं प्रधिः हएपाादिविरिषटेति 

(२४) अत्रास्ते इति । समैव पतै खलु निश्चितं काकिनी दैवी भासते | 
agar पीतवर्णा } त्रीणि नेत्राणि यस्या सा शुभाष्चुमदायिका, eal 
ठङ्कोरप्रता, Hat हषण जनाना सम्यकप्रकरिण हितकर | चतुरिर्स्तेः ae. 
शरूशोमगवसर्थयान्‌ संनिश्वती | मता उन्मत्ता) AHMET ALATA | 

¢ 


६४ षटूचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


एतन्नीरजकणिकान्तरटसच्छक्तिखिकोणाभिधा 
विभयुत्कोटिसमानकोमरूवपुः सास्ते तदन्तगेतः। 
बाणाख्यः शिवलिङ्ककोऽपि कनकाकाराङ्गरागोञ्जुलो 
मोरो सूक्ष्मविभेदयुङ्मणिरिव sere 
BATISTA: ॥ २५ ॥ 


पतखद्यकर्णिकामध्ये त्रिकोणं निरूपयति एतदिति त्रिकोणाभिधा 
त्रिकोणाकारा शक्तिरित्यनेन त्रिकोणस्याधोयुखवं ज्ञापितम्‌ सा आस्ते zara: 
एतल्तिकरोणं वायुबीजस्याधीदेनर | 
तदाहान्यत्र तच्ोडे St तदधक्िकोणे बाणटिद्गकम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
,बाणास्यरिङ्ग विरोषयति मोढो सूष््मविभेदयुगिति | शिवणिक्गमस्तकेऽर्- 
चन्द्रबिन्दुयोगात्‌ aera शन्यरूपो विभेदरछद्ं तेन युक्त इत्यथ, तदाह 
Poros कनकामखैयुतम्‌ 
* aaa दैवं मधये रक्ताभ्बुजं परम्‌ । इति । 
मध्ये रक्ता्बुलमिति eave कणिकाधोवेरो उखुखरक्तवर्णाएटदलपा fire, | 
एतशषोपरि मानसपूजा कार्य्या | 
तदुक्तं यथा 
, तन्मध्येऽष्टदलं रक्तं तत्र करयतरं तथा | 
दृटदेवासनं चारुचन्द्रातपविराजितम्‌ ॥ 


(२९) wade इति । एतत्पश्नकणिकान्तपप्रकासात्‌ त्रिकोणाभिधा 
aired प्रसिद्धत्वात्तेति | तदन्त्मता सत्री आस्ते इति सम्बन्धः | यद्रा स 
एव रिवः अन्तरतो यस्याः सा तथा | तस्याः ate मौठादुपरि atone: 
Raber: समास्ते | लर्णकरिणाङ्गारगेणोज्वलः सूक्मरूपेण std 
युनक्तीति | एवम्भूतो मणिरिव | पुनः कीराः ! प्रोदामरक्ष्याटयः सूक्ष्मे इकत्वात्‌ 
तस्या; क्तिरेव प्रकृशोदामश्चियः तत्नाख्य इति | [अत्र मते ^ प्रोदापरुश्म्या- 
oa”? पाडः] | ५. 


पटुचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ a4 


ध्यायेषयो हृदि पङ्कजं grad wets पीटादयं 
देवस्यानिकहीनदीपकछिकार्हसेन संशोभितम्‌ | 
भानो्मण्डलमण्ड्तान्तररुसकिञ्जस्कशोभाधरं 
वाचामीश्वर SATAY जगतां रक्षाविनाक्षे 
क्षमः ॥ २६ ॥ 


तधा-- 
नानापुष्पफयेबततः मम्जुवावपक्षिशोभितम्‌ | 
दइष्या्यमिधाय 
तत्र ध्यायेद्वै तत्तक्कस्पोक्तमार्गत, ॥ इति । 


अलं fearon प्रकृतमनुसराम । aaa गिन्दुभकाररष्ान्तमाह ` 
मणिरिति । यथा सरन्धमणिप्रकायस्तथा शिवरि्नोपरि गिन्दुप्रकाद 
दति ma | प्रो्ठासनध्म्ास्य इति cea कामोदम तच्छोभायुक्त 
Tad ॥ २५ ॥ 

हृ्यक्षचिन्तनफलमाह ध्ययेदि्यादिद्राभ्याम्‌ । अस्यार्थं यो जनो हदि 
पङ्कजं ध्यायेत्‌ स॒ जनो वाचामीश्वरो बृहर्पतिसमो भवति एव सर्वैर ईशर 
हू्यादिपथमान्नेन भवति क्रियान्वय बोध्यः | 

aa पद्मकरणिीकायां हेरूपजीवापसमस्थितिमाह अनिल्हीनदीपकरिका- 
हैमेन संशोमितमिति वायुरहिता या दीपकटिका तस्सहशंसेन संशोमित- 
fread: | ततश्च पञ्चक्रणिकायां वाताहतिरहितस्थिरतस्द्ीपशिखाकारहंसरूषः 
जीवात्मा वतैते इति माव" | 


(२६) ध्यायेदित्ति। य एतन्‌ पव कल्पवृक्षतुल्य हदि ध्यायेत्‌ सः 
एवमेवम्भवत्ति वाचापरीश्वरः बुहस्पतितुल्यः जगतामीक्नरः रक्षाविनारक्षमश्च अधात्‌ 
जगताम्‌ | पकं कीदृशा १ शब्वस्य देवस्य पीठाख्यग्‌ | पुनः aleat? अनिठहीनदीप- 
कथिकारूपदेनात्मना संशोभितम्‌ | MAUS मण्डिते अन्तरे SETH: 
केसरशोभामाव यस्थ तत्तथा | 


६६ पट्चक्रनिषूपणम्‌ 
गगरो भवति श्रियात्‌ प्रियतमः कान्ताुरुस्यानिरां 


^, ~. mS. 


ज्ञानीश्षोऽपि कृती नितेन्द्रियगणो ध्यानावधानक्षमः। 
Ta: पद्यपदादिभिश्च सततं काव्या्बुधारावहो 
रक्ष्मीरद्गणदेवतः परपुरे शक्तः HAT क्षणात्‌ URI 


एताकणिकाया तसूरख्यमण्डलस्थिति ज्ञापयति भानोम्मण्डलमण्डि 
तान्तररसक्किञ्चस्कशोभाधरमिति भानो्म्पण्डकेन मण्डिता भूषिता ये 
अन्तरठसन्त कणिकामभ्ये प्रकाशमाना facet केसराः अथवा या. 
किञ्ञल्कशोमास्ता धारयतीत्यथै अत्र मामुमण्डलमण्डितलयं किञ्चस्कविशेषणं 
नव्वन्तरविशे पणं तथात्वे सन्वैस्मिन्‌ पदमे किञ्नरकयोभाधरसादत्र विेषोपादानं 
, व्यथै ॒स्यात्‌ । भानोम्प॑ण्डलमण्डितत्वविरोपणवि्िषएत्वे तादशविश्चिषटकिञ्चल्का- 
नामन्यत्रासत्वात्‌ तदुपादानं रा्थकमिति एवश्च भानोभ्मण्डलस्य कणिका 
रुपके ततेजसा wa किद्ल्कानां शोमायिव्रयरूपमण्डितलवं सम्भवत्ति न 
वेकदेहस्थितले 

ततश्च तक्रणिकायामादो कर्काम्यापकं वायुमण्डलं तदुपरि तथा 
सूर्यमण्डलम्‌ तदुपरि वायुभीज्रिकोणादिकं ध्येयम्‌ युक्तश्ेतत मानसार्बनायां 
५“ मं॑वहविमण्डलाय ane नम॒" इत्यादिना पूजायाम्‌ उपद्यैपरिकरिमेण 
wrested दृपरिकर्पनान्यायावतारात्‌ अलमति 
विस्तरेण ! 

dex इति चष्टिकर्ता cad रक्षाविनाशे क्षम स्थितिप्रलयकतता 
way | तेन स जन" सृष्टिभ्थितिप्रल्यकर्तेति तायर्यया्थं २६ 

योगीश इत्ति प्रियात्‌ प्रियतम arate atfigaer 
कर्ममकुशक | जितेच्ियगण इति aha मध्ये गण्यते तुल्यत्वेन गृह्यते 








(२७) aria इति पएतत्पङ्कजध्यानपते जनः एवम्भवति | योगीरा 
कान्ताद्ुलस्य etait प्रियात्‌ खासिनोऽपि प्रियतमो vate | बरुपीकाः कृती च 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ९७ 


wares ध्यानावधानक्षम ध्यनि ब्रह्मचिन्तने अवधानाय स्थिरमनो 
ऽभिनिवें कर्त क्षम रामथै इत्यथे काव्याण्ुधारावह इति कोव्यरूपाम्बूना 
धारा जविच्छेदनि सरणम्‌ sad धार्य्यते येन तादणो मवतीति 

लक्षमीरङ्गणदैवत विप्णुसद्य say यद्रा लक्ष्मी सम्पत्ति रङ्गणम्‌ 
आनम्दनुमव दैवम्‌ . अदृष्टं तत्समूहो दैवता जनतावत्‌ तत्य रक्ष्मीभीरङ्गणाय 
दैवता यस्येति बहुव्रीदयथे eta ततं सिद्धम्‌ अत एवोक्तम्‌ 


इद युक्त्वा वरान्‌ भोयानननै aad ब्रजेत्‌ | इसि | 


Re शक्त प्रवरं क्षणादिति signee दु्ममीकृतायामपि परपूर््या 
प्रवरं शक्त प्रवेशकारणभूताद्नाकारगमनादियोगयतापन्नो मवतीयथै अव 
केचित्‌ दैवतभिति farged परित्वा यदापि जनयिरोषणतया दवव॒तमिल्यर्‌य et. 
भवितुं पार्यते तथाप्यजहलिङ्गव्वात्पंसकलमिति वदन्ति तन्न aac 
दैवतानि पूंसि वा दैवता सियाम्‌ " इत्यमरकोये रैवतराब्दस्य पुंनपुंसकलकथनात्‌ 
दैवत दति विसर्गान्तपाेऽपि साधु प्रदर्शितार्थे त॒ सुतरा तथेति 
स्पष्टमन्यत्‌ | २७ # | 

तदयं पहावाक्यार्भनिर्णयः हयं बन्धूकं सिन्दुराभसमिन्दु 
RETT STs aHesS इति द्रादरशवर्णयुक्तद्रादरादलम्‌ 
तक्कणिकायां प्रदकोणाकारवायुमण्डलं धूमाभम्‌ deat qaqa 
विदयु्तोटिनिभलिकोणम्‌ तद्ध वायुवीजं छृष्णसाराधिरुदं aap 


मवति जितं इन्द्रियं मनो येन स तथा ध्यानेनावधाने क्षमो भवति | गवैः 
dena: पयपदादिभिः sess: गयप्रथरूपाम्बुधाशावहो भवति 
अलयन्तवर्षणशौरः मेघरूपो भवति इति यावत | रक्ष्मीतत्ुख्दैवतमिति प्ररास- 
sara: Rese भवति gad: यद्रा ठक्ष्मीविदिषा seca यस्य सः तथा 
स सत्कुटीनो भवतीति यावत्‌ | दैवतमिति स्वार्थं अण्‌ एवं सः क्षणादेव पस्पुर 
अन्यके 98g समथा मवति कुमारीतन्त्र पगपुगपरेदास्याप्येतत्पकध्यानफकत्वै- 
नाभिधानात्‌ [एतन्मते ५ कक्षमीततु्वतम.”› इति पाठ. ] | 


६८ पटचकनिरपणम्‌ 


विशुद्धाख्यं कण्ठे सरसिजममटं धूमपून्रावभासं 
स्वरः सर्व्वैः शोणे्दरुपरिरसितेर्दीपितं stage | 
समास्ते पूर्णेनदुप्रथिततमनभोमण्डलं FAST 
हिमदछछायानागोपरि कसिततनोः, aa 
वर्णाम्बरस्य ॥ २८ ॥ 


चतुयजम्‌ अड्वुशप्तम्‌ sols dart ईशः fas: वराभयकर; त्रिणेत्र | 
अत्र कर्णिकाया रक्तपश्नोपरि काकिनी शक्ति पीतवर्णा चतुभजा पाशाकपारे 
` वराभयकरा feat सर्व्वारङ्करणान्विता युषा्रहदया कङ्गालमालाधस्‌ | 
ˆ मध्यत्रिकोणे बाणरिङ्गशिव अर्धचन्द्रविन्दुरूपमस्तक race aOR. | 
तदध स्थिरतरदीपकलिकाकारहंसरूपी जीवासमा प्तत्क्िकाधोरक्तवणो 
मुखाष्टदलपद्मम्‌ तत्र॒ कल्पतृक्रलयेदीचन्द्रातपपताका्लइकृतै मानम 
पूजास्थानम्‌ इति चतुर्थप्रकरणम्‌ । # ॥ 
हृदानीं aad विशुद्धचक्रं Preah विदुद्धाग्यमित्यादविचतुभिः 

वशुद्धास्यमिति 


विषटुद्धि तनुते यस्माज्ञीवम्य हंसलोकनात्‌ 
विद्धं पदममास्यातम्‌ आकाश्चाख्यं महत्‌ परम्‌ । इति ॥ 


(२८) विद्यद्राख्यमिति अन्यत्‌ निपट विचुद्राण्यं ga कण्ठे आस्ते | , 
किम्भूतं  भूप्रेण या भ्रूत्राभा नस्या इव सुतिर्स्य तत्तथा पुनः कीरा ! weds 
Tenet cartes: परिकसितेदीपितं प्रकाितम्‌ दीप्तबुद्रैवीपाकारबुद्रर्जनस्य 
ज्ञानयिषयी waded: तत्रैव पमे श्ुवर्णाम्बग्धगस्य विष्णोः धूरणन्दूरिव प्रथिततरभ 
ख्याते नमोमण्डल समास्ते | यष्टा पूर्णेन्दुना ख्यातम्‌ |“ चियद्िष्णुपदम्‌ ” . 
इयमरः । विष्णोः किम्भूतस्य ? हिमवणमिकान्तिविभा यस्य॒ एवम्भूतस्य 
नागस्योपरि aia तनुर्यस्य ‘i 


पटचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ३९. 


ar कण्डे gies Pagan सरसिजं समाप्ते दृयन्वय पद्मं 
Raa अमरूमिति Aswan गररहितमियथ स्वै aol अकारादि 
विसरगान्तै teaekdiagg निरन्तग्योगाभ्यामन विषानुरागरूपमलरदितसनेन 
प्रकारितबुद्धे साधकस्य सम्बन्धे दीपितं प्रकारितमि्थं स्वरे कीटो / 
दरपरिरुसितैरिति , पतेन स्वराणा पोड्शल्ादितत्‌ पद्मं पोडशादरमिति 
सूचितम्‌ 
व्यक्तमाहान्यत्र 

तदधं पोडशदलं पद्कजं धूम्रवणकम्‌ 

युक्तं शोणे पोडशमि स्वै विन्ुविभूपिते 

आर्त किञ्चल्कयुतं भ्योममण्डरमण्डितम्‌ | इति 


तथा पूर्णनुप्रथिततमनभोमण्डलं पूर्णचन्द्रमण्डक्वत्‌ सम्पूर्ण RAT अत एव 
“° ततदधूतसमाभानि मण्डलानि विद्धा ' इति शाश्दोक्तवचनेन मण्डलानां 
तततदैवतभूतसमानवैविधानात्‌ नभस" शृङ्चवरणलाच्तन्मण्डलस्यापि शुञ्कव्भलव 
प्रतीयते नभमण्डलं वृत्तरूयं रामस्ते एततपश्चकणिकायामिति रेष | 
Vea नभोमण्डलस्य मध्ये शृष्कवगैस्याम्बरस्याकाशस्याङ्के “ सदा- 
geal देव रिव दति च समाल्यानसिद्ध "` सद्राशिवना्ना स्यातो दैव सततं 
निवसतीति द्वितीयक्षोकेनान्वय' अम्बरस्य कीटस्य “ हिमच्छायानागोपरि 
afta aes am हिमच्छायानाग इति ततीयान्ततपृरुषेण 
हिमोपमाविरिषनाग इथ यद्रा दहिपच्छायातुस्यो नाग इति शाकपार्थि- 
वादिखात्‌ मध्यपदकोपे तसदसिद्धया saad दथ 
अत्र नागो हस्ती व्यक्तमाह्‌ WATS 
तदन्तर्व्योमबीजग् ae हैमगजस्थितम्‌ ॥ एति ॥ 


हैमेति हिमस्यायमितीदमरथतर्ितप्रत्ययेन हैमगज शुङ्कहस्ती द्यं ततश्च 
BRE TRA प्रकाशमाना AAT ae: | २८ | 


Bo प्चक्रनिहूपणम्‌ 


भुजैः पाकश्चाभीसखङ्करदावररसितेः रोभिताङ्स्य तस्य 
wae निदं निवसति गिरिजाभिन्नदेहो 
हिमाभः। 
त्रिनेत्रः पशास्यो छलितद शभुजो व्याघ्रचम्माम्ब- 
राद्यः 
सदापूरव्वों देवः शिव इति च समाख्यानसिद्धः 
्रसिद्धः ॥ २९ ॥ 


भुजैरिति पन कीदृशस्य “ भुजै पाशामील्कुशवरलसिते 
` शोभिताङ्गप्येति पाशाङ्कुरावराभयदस्तस्येति फलितार्थः । पुन कीशस्य “ 
ˆ मनेरेति हं दृ.याकटकजं evade तेनव कषीकप्त्त नशोवीजं 
स्थितं ay उक्तकूपेण चिन्तनीयमिति तालम्‌ | 
waht Pama गिरिजाभिन्रदेह इति अरदनारीश्वर ged: 
हिमाभ, शृ्कवरण, ततशार्नारीश्वरवद्भामाद्दहं cats दक्षिणा शम्‌ इति | 
व्यक्तमाह्‌ — 
Jara संवीतं तत्र देव सदाशिवम्‌ | 
गिरिजिाभिन्चदेहारद रोप्यहैमशचरीरकम्‌ । इति | 
तत्र नमोकीजक्रोडे द्य. , तथा स्दा बुधारूविचन्द्रगर' ककधोमुखतिवितम्‌ 
इति | 
(९९) gather तस्य विष्णोर्भनोरङ्के वीजाकारमूर्तरदके पञ्चास्यः गिव 
निवसति नियमेव | तस्य किम्भूतस्य ! पाञ्ाभीलङ्बुरपरिरुसितमुनैः रोभि- 
ताङ्गस्य | रिवः किम्भूतः ! गिरिजया पा्वै्याऽभि्ौ देहो यस्य हर्गौरीमूत्ति- 
fe} पुनः कीदशः! हिमस्येव रोमा यस्य | Baa: valet eras यस्य 
सं तथा व्याघ्रव्माम्बरैधुक्तः । यदा व्याघ्रचम्पैणा साम्नेरेण च युक्तः 


हरगौर्यात्कत्वात्‌ सदाहिव इति समाण्यानसिद्वः नियघरूपप्रसिद्धः योगिना 
मनसि प्रकाराः ~ 


परटूचक्रनिषपणम्‌ ४१ 


सुधासिन्धोः शुद्धा निवस्लति कमले शाकिनी पीतवचछरा 
शरं चापं पाशं णिमपि दधती हस्तप्यश्चतुभिः | 

सुधांशोः सम्पूर्णं शशपरिरहितं मण्डलं कणिकायां 
महामोक्षद्वारं भियमभिमतश्षीरस्य शुद्धेन्द्रियस्य ॥ 


निर्व्वाणतन्ते 'विदुद्धचक्राधिकरि--- 
यन्त्रमध्यं च वृषभं महासि्ासन ततः | 
तस्योपरि सदागौरी दक्षभागे सदाशिव. ॥ 
Raa qa प्रतिवक्तते त्रिकोचनम्‌ 
विभूतिभूपिताङ्गश्च रजताचरसोदर' | 
ठयाधचर्म्मधरो दैव फणिमालाविभूपितः ॥ gente 
५‹ तस्योपरि wan” इति रिवस्याद्ङ्गरूपेण स्थितेति 
वयक्तमाह्‌ तत्रैव - 
या मौरी लोकमाता च शम्मौरदधाज्गहारिणी | इति | 
vast इति गावण्येन प्रशंसितदशदस्तयुक्त ead | 
अत्र देवस्य द्रशसुजेप्वञ्चविरेपानभिधानात्‌ 
शूलं THREAT AM AMT S TATA, 
याकशाभीतिकरं दधानममिताकल्पोजवराद्गं भजे 
इति ध्यानान्तरे यान्यस्वाप्युक्तानि तान्यस्य भजेपु चिन्तनीयानीति ध्येयम्‌ 
प्रसिद्ध इति प्राधान्येन स्यात इत्यथै. । अन्यत्‌ सुगमम्‌ ॥ २९ ॥ 
एतसश्चकणिकायां शाकिनीशक्तिस्थितिमाह घधासिन्धोसियादि | 
कमरे विशुद्धचक्रकर्णिकाया शाकिनीनान्नी शक्तिर्मिवसति इत्यन्वयः ता 
(Ro) generate | तत्र करे Slee शाकिनी निवसति | की्डी ! 


सधासिन्धोशवन््रत्‌ छद्धसेम्बन्धीययाऽग्रतधार्या Gat इति यावत्‌ चतुभिर्हलपः 
‡ सिहारदुददक्तम्‌ इति या. 
9 


४२९ षटूचक्रनिखूपणम्‌ 


विरोषयति युधासिन्धो ger इति | घधासमुदरसदशदुष्चव्णा तथाच यथा 
सुधासिन्धोस्ण्रृतमययुशीतल्र्चलं तथा ज्योति ena शाकिन्या sara 
eager इति भाव, 
ध्यानान्तरे शाकिनी विशेषयति 
दैवीं ज्योति.स्वरूपा त्रिनयनरुसितां aaah 
हस्तैः परैश्च पां छणिमपि दधतीं पुस्तकं ज्ञान्म्‌ | 
ध्यायत्‌ कण्ठस्थपपे निखिरपद्युजनोन्मादिनीमस्थिसंस्था 
aura! प्रीतियुक्ता मधुमदसुदितां शाकिनीं साधकेन्द ॥ इति ॥ 


ज्योतिःस्वरूपं ज्योतिषां स्वभावत शुष्चवर्णलेनेयं gaat अत्र ध्यानद्रये 
" द्विषिधाख्लदशैनादिच्छया विकल्प | हयं देवी क्थिकान्तश्चन््रमण्डकले वर्ते | 


तदाह प्रेमयोगतरङ्धिण्याम्‌ 
तत्राप्ते शाकिनी शक्ति सुधांशोर्मण्डरे spit ॥ इति | 


एतक्कणिकायां grata शशपरिरहिते निप्कलद्कं सम्पूण मण्डरमपि 
विलसतीति पूवक्रियायामन्वय | मण्डलं विगेषणेन प्रशेसति महामेक्षेत्यादि 

wanes gear जितेन्द्रियस्य महामोकषद्रारं॑निर्व्वाणसुक्तिमाहु | 
एतचचिन्तनादियोगमार्गमवकण्ब्य सुक्तिमामरोतीति भाव श्रियमभिमत्त- 
feat | भियं योगरकष्मीमभिमन्यते आकाइ्षतीति भियमभिमतम्‌ | 
atest शीरं स्वभावो यस्य तद्ुपस्य शु्धेन्द्रियस्यति faked | अत्र 
कणिकायां चन््रमण्डलादिस्थितिप्रकारस्त॒ आदौ क्थिकान्तर्मेभोमण्डकं art 
त्रिकोणं तदन्तश्चन्द्रमण्डकं तन्मध्ये नमोबीजादिकमिति 


at चापं पाक्षं सृणिमपि दधती तस्य पक्षस्य कथिकायां सुधारोशवन्द्स्य 
शङ्वपरिरहितं सम्परणपण्डरम्‌ आस्ते कीदृशम्‌ ! मोक्षार निव्वाणसक्ति्मरम्‌ | 
पुन" He १ उल्वणबुद्धीठस्य जितेन्द्रियस्य श्रियं दधानम्‌ इयर्थः | 

> aR? इति पाठान्तरम्‌ । ल 


पट्चक्रनिषपणम्‌ ४६ 


इह स्थाने चितं निरवधि विनिधायास्मसम्पूर्णयोगः 
कविव्वोग्मी ज्ञानी स भवति नितरां साधकः 
शान्तचेताः | 
Aart दर्षी सकरहितकरो रोगशोकप्रमुक्त- 
श्चिरज्ञीबी जीवी निरवधितिपदां ध्वंसहंस- 
प्रकाशः ॥ २१ ॥ 


तदथा 

कर्णिकायां त्रिकोणस्थे Waray चिन्तयेत्‌ | 

Bani गनमारूदमाकारं तत्र चिन्तयेत्‌ ॥ 

शुक्चाम्बरेण संवीतं तत्र देष, सदाशिव । इति 
Server संवीतमाकाशमिति ३५० | 

विधयुदधचक्रचिन्तनफलमाह दह म्थाने इति । आलसम्पूणैयोग इति 

आत्मनि ब्रह्मणि सम्पूण aerate परिपूर्णा योगो ज्ञानं यस्य तादश । 
आत्तसमपूर्णयोग इति पठे आत्त" प्रात सम्पू्णयोगो येने. । अत एवोक्तं 
श्रीमदाचार््येण ““पूणीवोधास्मना तिष्ठेत्‌ पूर्णाचलसमुद्रवत्‌ '' इति ततश्च 
य॒ साधक दृह स्थाने निरवभि चित्तं विनिधाय आससम्पूरणयोगो भवति, प 
ज्ञानी sotst विना सव्व॑शास्राथैवेत्ता शान्तचित्त चास्तिगुणावलम्बिचित्तः | 

द्रया भूतेष्वकोट्यं med द्रीरचापलम्‌ 

तेज. क्षमा धत्ति; शौचमद्रोहोऽनमिमानिता | 
ह्यादिगुणोपहितचितत इति याबत्‌ त्रिकाठाना दर्शति अत्र केचित्‌ 
ज्ञानरक्षणासका लौकरिकसन्निकर्मरूपयोगधर्मेण ad oad अन्ये तु 


(३१) इह स्थाने इति इह Rage पे चित्त यो निदध्यात्‌ तल सम्पूर्ण 
योगविषये ज्ञानं भवतोत्यर्थः | अथवा तत्सर््यमेन सम्पूरणयोगत्वेनोपदिष्टं तदेवाह 
क्रमेण कविः स जनः कविर्वग्मीयादि | निरवधि नियमेव विपत्परापताना घ्राणे 
सूय इव तेजस्वी. भवति.) 


४४ पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


आन्नानामाम्बुजन्तद्धिमकरसहशं ध्यानधामप्रकारं 
हक्षाभ्यां वे कराभ्यां परिरुसितवयुनेत्रपत्र Gata | 

तन्मध्ये हाकिनी सा शारिसमधवखा TAIT दधाना 
Rat सुद्धां कपारे डमरं जपवटीं बिभ्रती शुदधचित्ता॥ 


तादरजनस्यासमप्रयक्षे तत्र मासमानसर्नवप्रमेयवस्तूनां seat मवतीति वदन्ति | 
रोगगोकपरस॒क्त सिद्धमन्तलाद्रोगसुक्तध्िरीवी छिनमायापाशलात्‌ शौकरदित 
इत्यथः स जीवी जन" नितरामतिदायकविर्भवति एवं cedar मवति क्रियान्वय | 
निरवधिविपदां ध्वंस इति | अवधि" सीमा तद्रहितविपन्निरवभिविपत्‌ आदिना 
, पापपुण्यरूपकरम्म॑बन्धे नानाविपत्तिरिति यावत्‌ तेषां ध्वंसाय विपत्िप्रागभावा- 
, समानकारीनविपत्तिनाशाय फलतो मोक्षाय deer सहदल्कमरुकणिकान्त 
गतदंसरूान्तरासन, प्रकारो यस्य तादशो मवतीति स्पष्टमन्यत्‌ ॥ ६१ । #॥ 

तदयं प्रहावाक्याथनिर्णयः | कण्टमूे Agee पोडशदलं धूम- 
en आरक्तकेसरं रक्तवणैसनिन्दुकषोडशप्वरयुक्तम्‌ | कणिकराया नभोमण्डलं 
Tet ya तन्मध्ये त्रिकोणं aa चन्द्रमण्डलम्‌ तदुपरि हं इति 
नभोबीजं शुक्वणं शुह्वाम्बरपरीधानं Tarts चतुधैजं पाशाड्कुशवरामयधरम्‌ 
wae awe स्थितमहासिंहासने सदाशिव अर्धनारीश्वर ्रङ्गयुवणा 
भाद्धाज्गशु्ाभः caer त्रिनेत्रः ara शल्रङ्कखज्गवजदहनन गेन्दर- 
ण्टाङ्ुशपाराभययुक्तदशदस्त व्याघ्रचर्म्माम्बर॒भस्मरिक्सर््वाज्ग, नागदार 
शोभित ` garages. | एतछणिकायां चन्द्रमण्डलमध्ये 
अस्थ्युपरि स्थिता शाकिनी शक्ति. agent चतुर्यूना पाशाद्कुशधनु शरकरा 
पीताम्बरा पञ्चवक्ता त्रिनेत्रेति ॥ इति पञ्चमप्रकरणम्‌ ॥ *# ॥ 

इदानीं yrange निरूपयति आज्ञानामान्धुनमितयादि 
सप्तभि, | “ आज्ञासंक्रमणे तत्र गुरोराङेति athe” । आ्ञानमिति जत्र 


(३२) आज्ञा इति | तप्मसिद्धं भूमध्ये आज्ञानाम्‌' पन्नम्‌ आस्ते | कीदृक्‌ ! 
हिमकरसदद म्‌ अतः cg ध्यानिधामनि प्रकारो यस्य a eee 





eae PRIA, ४९ 


गुोरक्ञायंक्रमणादान्ञानाम ततश्च तन्नाम तस्पसिद्धमम्बुजमाप्ने हति 
क्रियाध्याहारेणान्वय | एतत्‌ पकं भूमध्ये धितम्‌ | 
त्था 

areas प्रवदयोदध भ्रूयुगाने सितं जुभम्‌ 

द्विदलं हक्षवणास्थां मनोऽभिष्ितमम्बुजम्‌ ॥ इति | 
पद्मं Raat fame चन्द्रवच्छुक्ृवणैमित्यधैः तथा ध्यान 
धामप्रकाशं ध्यानस्य धान्ना तेजसा तेजोरूपरावत्या प्रकाशो ae | अत्र 
ध्यानशव्त्या धामवत्‌ प्रकारितावयवभिदयर्थ वर्णानां कलाबीजलवा्त्र 
Romana | Aart Bre apr इति caveat gutter: 
तथाच ware esata भाव, एतेन हृक्षवणैयोरपि ` 
gad चितं शुक्षयोगेनैव ages तिक्चयक्षशभवात्‌ = शद्रा आन चक्रं हिम ` 
aed चन्द्रस्यामरतसयशीतकिरणवत्‌ शीतकिरणं तथा aya | हक्षाभ्यां 
कर्बूरवर्णाभ्यामिति बोद्धव्यम्‌ | 

तदाह garners -- 

mart agg त ws द्विदकमण्डितम्‌ | 

क्रहक्षलसितं मनोऽधिष्ठितरस्मितम्‌ ॥ इति | 
एतस्कणिकायां हाकिनीशक्तिस्थितिमाह तन्मध्ये दति । सा हाकिनीनास्नी 
प्रसिद्धा विद्यां geal वरामयरूपा तेनास्या भुजेषु षडविधायुधददौनात्‌ 
wat | केचितु वि्याुद्रामियेकविभत्तयन्तं seer विये gat 
परक्षितदलाभ्या परिरसितं वपुरस्य । Hereafter केचित्‌ पठन्ति । तन्मते 
हकारक्षकाररूपकरमभ्यां खरविरि्ाभ्यामित्ति पुनः alec? Ant Ros 
freed: । एतत्पगर सा प्रसिद्रा हाकिनी निवसति | atest? शदिसमधवहवर्णा 
sad च । हस्तैः कणरेतान्‌ विभ्रती विधान्ञानमुद्राकपाख्डमस्जपवदीरिति | 


ae चित्तं यस्याः सा तथा | [एतन्मते “ कलाभ्याम्‌?” इत्यत्र ae” 
इति पाठः । | ^ 


४६ पटूचक्रनिरपणम्‌ 


पतदद्यान्तरारे निवसति च मनः सूक्ष्मरूपं प्रसिद्ध 
योनो तत्कर्णिकायामितराशिपदं लिङ्गचिह्- 
THT | 
बिधयुन्मालाविरासं परमङुरुपदं ब्रह्मसूलप्रवोधं 


वेदानामादिबीजं स्थिरतरहृदयश्िन्तयेत्तत्‌ 
क्रमेण ॥ ३३ ॥ 


विदायुद्रं व्यास्यासुद्रामिति caer अस्याश्चतुर्भुजत्वं वदन्ति 1 किन्तु 
नानापुस्तके प्रथगिभक्तयन्तपाठो ead दति सुधीमिव्िवेच्यम्‌ | 
ध्यानान्तरेण हाभिनीं विेषयति--- 
lata RA SHURA कपालं 
fat gat दधानां त्रिनयनविरसद्रक्तपड्वक्तयुक्ताम्‌ | 
हारिदरन्न प्रसक्तां मधुमदरुदितां श्कमव्जं Test 
देवीं देवेन्द्ररताकरमधुषदितां भावयेत्‌ हाकिनीं ताम्‌ ॥ हति ॥ 


स्मष्टमन्यत्‌ || ३२ 

एतद्रे मन स्थितिमाह पएतसग्मान्तराले इति सूष्ष्मरूपमतीन्धिय 
Ray. ननु मनसोऽतीन्द्रियत्वात्‌ तस्सत्ताया fs प्रमाणमित्याह प्रसिद्धमिति , 
अनादिपुरषपरम्पराप्रापतप्रयक्षकरणव्वेन प्रसिद्धम्‌ | 


(६६) एतदिति एतत्पये सूक्ष्मरूपेण प्रसिद्धं मनो निवसति | तस्य 
पकणिकायां या योनिः तस्यामितराख्यः शिव आस्ते तस्य स्थानमिदयर्णः | 
लिङ्गचिहेन ST यस्य | पुनः कीदृशम्‌ ? ess न्माला इवं Oe यस्य , 
तत्तथा | परमन्न तत्‌ कुरशेति WHFS म्ाधारपक्रं तदेव पदं स्थानान्तरं यस्य | 
ब्रह्मसूत्रस्य प्रबोधो यस्मात्‌ | तन्मनोनिवासभूतं बरह्मनाद़ीवत्मस्थिताना सर्व्वषामेव 
तस्मादेव ज्ञानं waiter: | 

ग चतरं दृति पाठान्तरम्‌ 


पटुचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ४५ 


तथा-- 
सङ्कत्पश्च विकल्पश्च बुरव्वाणा तु मनौ मवेत्‌ 


MATS । अत्र मानसस्थानं वक्षयमाण्वेदादिबीजसयो्देरो 
वक्ष्यमाणवचनात्‌ | 

अत. पर॑ शिषरिङ्गस्थितिमाह योनौ त्कणिकाथामिति कणिकान्त 
सिकोणे इतरशिवपदं इतरनामकशिवरूपं वस्तु निवसतीति पू्वक्रियान्वय 
लिङ्गचिहमरकाशं दिङ्गरूपेण भासमानमिव्य्थः | 


इदं fas gaat तदाह भूतद्युदधौ -- 
तदन्त eat fas enfant त्रिखोचनम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 


, रिग विशेषयति विधुन्माकाविलासमिति : 
अत्र प्रणवस्थितिमाह परमेव्यादि । कर्णिकायां वेदादिवीजं प्रणयोऽपि 

वसतीद्यन्वयः बीजं विरोपयति परमढुकपदमिति कुरुं शक्तिस्तदत् त्रिकोणा- 

कारपदं स्थानं परमं विदुदाफारादिना sad TS पदं यस्य तादसमिथे, 

तेथ॒ च तद्वीजं निकोणमध्यवर्तीति setae । 


व्यक्तमाह 
after त्रिकोणस्थमासानं प्रणवाकृतिम्‌ 
उ्वरद्रीपनिभशचोद्धं नादरूपं मनोहरम्‌ 
बिन्ुम्मकाररूपश्च agg मानसाख्यः ॥ इति । 

नन्वत्र परमकुलपदस्य प्रणवाधास्ेनएथक्े-- 
मूलाधारं स्वाधिष्ठानं मणिपूरमनाहतम्‌ 
विशयुदधमाज्ञाचक्रश्च निन्दुभूय ककापदम्‌ | 
निबोधिका तथाद्धदुर्तादो नादान्त एव च | 
उन्मनी feat ध्ुवमण्डस्कि रियं 
ging षोडशाधारं कथितं योगिदुदधमम्‌ 


४८ प्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


ध्यानात्मा साधकेन्द्रौ भवति परपुरे शीच्रगामी 


£ १७ अ lon £ सुनीनद्रः 
ASIN: ASAT सकलाहतकरः Sagi 
aT 


9 


अद्वैताचारवादी विलसति परमाप्रूदवैसिष्धिभ्रसिद्धो 
दीर्घायुः सोऽपि Hal ्रिमुवनभवने संहतौ 
~ 
पालने च ॥ ३४ ॥ 


इति वचने पोद्श्चाधारगणनायां कलापदस्य प्रथगमिधानं कथं सङ्गच्छते ८ इति 
, चेन्न eed नाज्ञचक्रसथं किन्तु वक्षमाणमहानादोद्ै शस्यदेशे 
स्थितमिवयतेन्महानादप्रस्तवि स्फुरीकरिष्याम 

| ्हमसूनररबोधमिति ब्रह्मसूत्रं धित्रिणी नादी तस्था प्रबोधः प्रकाशो 
Ray अत एव पूर्वमुक्तं “‹ प्रणवविरसिता "' दति तदिति safe. 
हाकिनीमनरतररि्गवेदादिवीजरूपं ad fea सन्‌ क्रमेण 
चिन्तयेदिलय्ं 

क्रमोऽत्र न अअरन्थकारोक्तपाठक्रम, किन्तु पाठक्रमाच्छान्दकमध्य 
लवतत प्रदरितशान्दक्रमो गृहते एवश्च पद्मकणिकायां हाकिनी aT 
त्रिकोणे इतरणिङ्गं तदू Patt omg मन gad करमेण चिन्तये 
दिति ॥ ३३ । 

पएतद्भयानस्य KEATS ध्यानासेति उक्तरूपेण ध्यानपरायणः साधकेन; 
प्रपुरे शीघ्रगामी भवतीति सव्व क्रियान्वयः | युनीन्द' सुनिरध्यानयौगादि- 
सम्पन्नप्तदिन्द्रस्तच्छष्ठः | aaa पूवक्तरूपेण सब्वदस्ी शाक्षव्यवहाररीत्यनु 
रूपविवेकबुद्धया yeast | 


(३४) ध्यानात्मेनि | एतद्भयानपरो जन एवं मवत्तीयाह । ध्यानत्मा 
ध्याननिषठ ए 1 स साधकेन्द्रः परपुर शीघ्रगामी मवति | तत्तदिव्यभावविपये 
RUA Baad तत्तु उदासीनानामेव सम्भवतीति नान्ये पराम्‌ | saree 


पुटूचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ Be, 


तदन्तश्चकरेऽस्मिन्िषसति सततं शुद्धबुद्धधन्तरात्मा 
प्रदीपाभञ्योतिः प्रणवविरचनारूपवणप्रकाश्चः । 

aga चन्द्रास्तपरि विरुसदिन्दुरूपी मकार- 

MI MASA बरुषवरजुधाषारसन्तानहासी ॥ 


द्रैताचायाद्रीति-- 
पादोऽस्य feat भूतानि ईति | तदिदं सर्ववं ब्रह | 
इस्यादिश्चुतिवाक्येन 
अहं देवो न चान्योऽसि ब्रहैवास्मि न शोकभाक्‌ | 

ह्यादिवाकयेन च ब्रेक VHT तदन्यदसत्‌ पपञ्चसथुदायसतुबरह्ममासतया भासते 
इष्यवधारणमद्रैतम्‌ ताद्श्ञानेन यदाचार' जीवासमपरमापमनोरययिन्तनादि- ` 
सूधधोगस्तद्र-द THINS स जन अद्रैताचारवादी भवतीति waa. । ` 
परमापूर््सिद्धिममहासि स्तया प्रसिद्ध. प्राधान्येन एयात हयं | सऽपि कर्ता 
तरिभुवनभवने deat पाचने चति प्रद सापरम्‌ | अथवा ताद्शसाधफ्य ददन्ते 
परमासनि स्यात्‌ य. सष्टिध्थितिपररथकर्ता स एवायं भवतीति ताप्यम्‌ ॥२४॥ 

` तदान्ञाचतरे प्रणवयोगं ageat sod मिरेपयति तदन्तरिति । 
wed, अस्मिन्‌ चक्रे तदन्तस्तस्य पूर््वाक्तत्रिकोणस्य अन्तम्प॑ध्ये a प्रणव- 
विरचनारूपवर्णप्रकाशच प्रणवस्य विस्वनारूपेण अकारोकारथो सन्धियोगेन. 
यक्चयोदशस्वरसद्यवणपरकाशच. सततं निवसति स शुद्धनुदधयन्तरासा gaa. | 
a विषेयति प्रदीपामज्योतिरिति। ननु तर्हिं कि त्रयोदशस्वरसद्शवणेमाप्रं 
YSTTATUAT ˆ RA ae चन्द्राप्तदुपरि salygedt मकार 
इति | तेन ता्शवर्णोपरि दधैचन्द्निन्दुथोगेन sacar पर्य्यवस्यति | 
ag द्ील्मस्येति स तथा एव्‌ भवति | स साधकः कीदशाः ! प्रकृणसु आदिरिद्निषु 
समर्थौ भवतति अतो दीर्घायुभ॑वत्येवः प्रिभुवननिवासिना उत्पत्तौ संहती पाठने षा 
स कर्ता | अतो ब्रह्मविष्णुदिवात्मको भवतीलयैः 


(३९) तदन्तरिति | agg अस्मिन्‌ चक्र सततमेव प्रणवविरचना प्रणवं 
तिस्वयति येन ^ ओकारेण aggrecan निथसति | ale? wagdar 
7 


५५ can RIOT, 


इह स्थाने खीने सुसुखसदने चेतसि पुरं 
निराटम्बां बद्धा परमयरुसेवासुविदिताम्‌ | 
aaa wages wate कणान्‌ 
तततस्तन्मध्यान्तः प्रविसितरूपानपि सदा ॥३६॥ 


age नादोऽसायिति sate अवान्तरनादोऽस्तीति | प तु बरुधबेक- 
सुधाधारसन्तानहासी बलदेवस्य धवलं सुधाधारसन्तानश्च उपहसितुं शीलं 
यस्येदयर्थ॑त्‌ aay नाद 

केचित्तु aa नादोऽसाविति पठन्ति aad चिन्दुरपी मकार्याये 
` हति व्याल्यायन्ति च॒ cae | तदुपरि विरसद्िनदुहयी मकार इत्यनेन 
" मकाराय Tama पुनस्तदुपादानं व्यथै स्यात्‌ परन्स्सौ नाद प्रणव 
घटकीभूतनादातिरिक्तो भिद्यमानपरविन्दोरवयवविनेप प्रणवोद्धँ वततत 
य॒दि तु विरिष्टपणवनिरुपणे तदङ्गमरज्गमेव agafad कथं तदतिरिक्तनादो 
saga प्रस्तूयते हति चेतति तदामे नादोऽसाविति पाटोऽभिमन्यते किन्तु 
तस्यायमर्थः | तदाये बिन्दुरूपिमकाराये मरदर्ितोऽयौ नाद" बरधघल- 
सधाधारसन्तानहारीति waka मरुधवरेत्यादविविकेपणं विधीयते 
‘a g विदिष्टस्य Rata” अतो न पुनरुक्तिदोषः ॥ २५ 

प्रणवं निरूप्य दानी तदुयोगं निरूपयति इह स्थाने इति । भ्यां 
योगी जन पुरं बद्धा TERIA संरुध्य THOS पुररोधकारणी- 
अन्तरात्मस्वरूपः | यद्वा शु्ैजनैर्वगत अन्तरात्मा अस्य॒ तथा प्रदीपस्य आभा 
व ज्योतिष्यस्य तस्य ओकारस्यीपरि चन्दर तदुपरि ees ल्पौ मकारः | 
एतेन आक्गाख्यपक्षस्योपरि प्रणवप्रकारसिद्धिः तस्योपरि असौ मादौ arate 
qe: १ जस्य Fenner ववछागृतप्रेणिसि हासो Aedes स तथा | 
[एतस्मते “ जर्धवछ्सुधाधारसन्तानहासः ›› इति पाठः| 


(६६) इह स्थाने इति | अत्य्थसुष्सदने दह“ स्थाने चेतसि AA सत्ति 
परमयुस्सेवाविदरितां faterai gar ag सव्वैदाभ्यापतात्‌ योगी सन्‌ पयनघुहदां 


PEC ORNL’ ९१ 


भूतयोनिमु्रा बद्धा इति यावत्‌ तेन पू शन्दैन योनिमुद्रा रक्ष्ये | तनषु 
बद्धा इह स्थाने TTY तदभ्यापात्‌ तस्य प्रणवस्य पुन पुनश्िन्तनात्‌ तत्र 
चेतसि प्रणवचतु्दक्षं ve सति ततस्तदनन्तरं तन्मध्यान्त प्रणवाधार्रिकोणमध्ये 
अन्तरन्तरिक्ष wares वीनां कणान्‌. वहिकणवज्योतिस्फुलिङ्गान्‌ परयति 
नैषां मानसपयक्षो भवति इत्यथ. ! अत्र पुरयन्धनं विना मनस geek न 
सम्भवतीत्यत पुरं बद्धुक्तम्‌ 
पुरबन्धनकारणयोनिमुद्रारक्नगमाह --- ` 
ततो qa वामपादपाण्णिन्तु विनिवेशयेत्‌ 
तस्योपरि Heras दक्षपाणि निवेशयेत्‌ 
 क्ऋलुकायरिरोग्रीव काफचज्चुपुटेन च | 
आकारेण aftealg जरं परिपूरयेत्‌ 
अङ्गुकीमिषदं gr करणानि समाहितः 
. अङ्गुष्ठाभ्यासुमे a तञ्जनीभ्यां विलोचने | 
TR च मध्याभ्यामन्ाभिव्दनं BSA | 
aa मे प्राणमनसामेकपं तन्मनुं स्मरन्‌ 
weaned सम्यक्‌ योगोऽयं योगिवहमे । इति | 
एवं द्रया ara मनस Pele श्रुति । एवं हंसवशान्मनो विचरते 
हूतस्ततो विषयेषु भ्रमति तत्स॑यमेन मन संयमो जायते यथं । 
मथवा पुरं येचरीमुद्र बूः दथ तयापि रन whe भवति 
तदाह 
चित्तश्नरति श्वे यस्मात्‌ जिह्वा चरति खे यत्त | 
तेनेयं खेचरी मूद्रा स्व॑सिद्नमसछृता ॥ इति । 
जीवबुद्धीना कलां wa | अस्य स्थानस्य चेतोीनत्वम्‌ आश्चर्यं मह्‌, यदि 


भवति dea निरालम्बा, gar भवति | तदतुभवो योगिभिरेव ज्ञायते | ततस्त- 
लमध्येऽम्बरे पदान्‌ स्थरान्‌ रूपान प्यति [एतन्मते ¢ पदान्‌ '? इति प्राठः] 


९९ घट्चक्रनिरूमणम्‌ 


ज्वलदीपाकारं तदनु च नवीनाकेबहुल- 
प्रकाशं अ्योतिव्वां गगनधरणीमध्यमिलितम्‌ । 
इह स्थाने साक्षाद्धवति भगवान्‌ प्रणविभवो- 
ऽव्ययः साक्षी वहेः इारिमिदहिरथो- 
स्मण्डलं इष ॥ ३७ ॥ 


अत्र चित्तस्य वेचरत्नान्मन संयोगाभावेन विपयज्ञानरहितलादुन्मनी वति 
अत एवोक्तम्‌ -- 
उन्मन्या सहितो योगी न योगी उन्मनी विना ॥ इति ॥ 
- प्रणवस्य ज्योति स्फुणिद्गवेषटिततवं स्प्टमाहान्यत्न 
तदं प्रणवाकारमात्मानं दीपसननिभम्‌ | 
स्फुरिङ्गज्योतिरिक्षभैर्व्टितं परित शभम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
स्थाने et? सुयुखसदने मिरवच्छिसुखम्य सद्रनं यत्र तादगे । पुरं 
किम्भूतां निशरम्बां निगैतोऽवलम्बो मनसो विपयसम्बन्धो यया तादृशी 
मित्यर्थ, तथा परमगुरुसेवामुविदितामिति परम" गुरुपरम्पराप्राप्तयोगाभ्या- 
सनिपुण ताद्गुरू" तस्य सेामिर्जातक्रपयोपदेमेन सुविद्धिताभिति फरार 
अत एवोक्तम्‌--- 
गुरूपदेशातदवम्यं नान्यथा aerate ॥ इति । 
कणान्‌ फिम्पूतान्‌ ? प्रविकसितरूपान्‌ परकृष्टरूपेण भासमानान्‌ इति ॥ २६ | 
Tet वद्ठिफणावान्तरपकारर्नेनमपि भवतीत्याह ज्वरदीपा 
कारमिति तदनु वहटिकणदर्चनमनु दरौनानन्तरं ज्योति परश्यतीस्यथ" | 


(३७) vedo पदान्‌ रूपान्‌ किम्भूतान्‌ ! ज्वलशीप्य. 
वाकारो येषां ते तथा | तत्रैव गगनधरणीवीजयोभ्मषये स्थिति sale 


पटूवक्रनिरूपणम्‌ , ५१ 


ज्यौतिवविरोषयति उवलद्रीपेत्यादि गगनधरणीमध्यमिलितमिति | गगनं 
“agg शडसिन्या निवसति शिबे geass विकासम्‌ '' इत्यनेन safe 
श्खिनीनाडयुदशूत्यरूपरगनं धरणी मूलाधारस्यधरामण्डलं तदुभयोम्मै- 
ध्यमिकितिं werner जयोतिर्ति fread वेति 
ae: GEA | 

आज्ञाचक्रे dead परमशिवस्थितिमाह इह स्थाने दति भगवान्‌ 
परमशिव दृह स्थाने साक्षाद्ठवति स्वयं aad इत्यथै | भगवन्तं विशेषयति 
gare त्यादि | qa. स्वात्मनि og: सृटिक्ुत्वाचरेषयोगयताूपविभवो 
Tae , अथवा Rescate Dr सव्वव्यापकलेन स्थित 
तादृशविभवो यम्मादिरय्थं ५“ यतो वा ser भूतानि जायन्ते येन जातानि ` 
जीवन्ति यत्‌ प्रयन्यभिसंविशन्ति ' इति aa । यद्रा विभवो विभुत्वं पणे ` 
aaa भ्थितम्तादृश विभवो wee | यद्रा पूतं फठानुपहित 
विषयितानास्पदैच्छाकल्यं तादृशो विभवो यस्येति frye आसातिरिक्त- 
वस्तूनामनित्यलादाकाशचादीना Aya न सर्व्वकारव्यापकमिति विशेष | 


अत्र परमरिवस्थितिं विशेषेण व्यनक्ति Reales - 


MRT GAY ज्ञानपदं BESTT 
्रद्रयसमायुक्तं पूरणैचन्द्रस्य मण्डलम्‌ ॥ 


गगनधरणीमण्डल्योरन्तःस्थितं॑तद्वीजमित्ति यावत्‌ | ज्योतिः कीदृक्म्‌ ! 
प्रातःकालीनसूर््यस्येव oa यस्य तत्‌ तथा इह स्थाने अर्थात्‌ चेतसि छीन 
क्रीमगयान्‌ साक्षात्‌ भवति । कौदृशः ! प्रणैः विभवः गानं यस्मात्‌ | न व्ययति 
इयन्ययः । अतः स्ैषा साक्षी एतेषां ततस्थानाधिवासभूतत्वात्‌ | वहिशरि- 
मिहिराणां मण्डलम्‌ इव प्रकाशते अयरधतेजोमयत्वात्‌ | [एतन्मते ^ ज्वलद्ी- 
पाकाणन्‌ !? इति ais") | 


९४ षट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


तेधा-- 
सभ्भुवीजं हि तन्मध्ये साकारं gan 


तथा-- 
एवै हंसो मणिद्रीपे तप्य क्रोडे we fer । 
वामभागे सिद्धकाली सदानन्दस्वरूपिपी दति | 


तस्य क्रोडे दंस हत्यम्य विन्ददरयरूपवित्ैम+ये | 


तदाह Tea -- 
बिन्ददरयन्तु तन्मध्ये विस्मरूपमव्ययम्‌ 
तन्मध्ये watt तु दिव cei इति ॥ 


एव॑ सहस्रे दर्दनादलाप्याकादक्ायां तथा इत्ति । अलानयो" rare 
म्मायायन्धनाच्छादनेन मकागमख्यपरंबिन्दुरूपेण स्थितिर्योध्या | 


तदुक्ते आज्ञाचक्रमुपक्रम्य — 
उछलादविमतेऽत्ैव चणकाकाररूपिणी 
aft करोति भूतानि अत्र स्थिल्ला सनातनी । दति ॥ 


जत्र चणकाकाररूप परमरिव सदा वर्तेते उत्कणाद्िमते तु अत्र स्थिता 
aft करोतीयथ । दृष्टान्तमाह वहैर्तादि यथाञ्ैरभिमण्डङे भगवान्‌ 
वर्तते amare अर्फादिमण्डके भगवतोऽवस्थानं प्रसिद्धम्‌ । यद्रा 
वदहिशरिमिदिरमण्डठे सदशनेकमरस्थर्किनद्रयिमण्डले यथा चणकाकरिण मगवान्‌ 
वैते ages | सहस्रदकेऽ्नद्रभिमण्डलानि मदरौयिष्यन्ने ¡ अत एव 
पीरटपूजायामरकद्रभिमण्डलोपरि पररम्मज्ञानासनो पूजा विधीयते | परमातमा 
परमशिव ज्ञानासा ज्ञानराक्तिस्तदुभयामित्तरिवसक्तय प्मकश्चणकाकारमिन्दु रिति 


[ 


ध्येयम्‌ | ३७ | ्ु 


पटधक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ९९ 


इद स्थाने विष्णोरतुखुपरमामोदमधुरे 
समारोप्य पाणं प्रमुदितमनाः प्राणनिधने | 
परं नित्यं देवं पुरुषमजमा्यं त्रिजगताम्‌ 
पुराणं योगीन्द्रः प्रविशति च वेद्यन्त- 
। विदितम्‌ ॥ ३८ ॥ 


आज्ञाचक्रे योगेन प्राणव्यागफलमाह इह स्थनि इति | अप्याथ 
योगीन्द्रो जनः प्राणनिधने प्राणवियोगकाले प्रमुदितमना आसमानन्देन 
aera स॒न्‌ इह ogra? foots स्थाने उपदरितयिनदुरूपे प्राणं 
समापेप्य अथवा तद्धिन्दौ प्राणे समारोप्य sma सत्ति एं पृषं. 
प्रविरतीदयन्वितार्थ, पूरुषं Raa नि््यमविनारिनम्‌ दवं सटिरिथति- . 
प्रयै क्रीडन्तम्‌ अजं जन्मरदितम्‌ त्रिजगतामाद्य अनन स्वां Gea 
afta’ aden सूचितप्‌ पराण पुराणपुरुष इति क्ता यो निगचते 
स एवायमिति भाव वेदान्ता व्रहमनिरूपकश्रुतिवाक्यादि तञ्जानज्ञाप्य- 
feat ॥ ३८ ॥ # ॥ 

तदयं विष्णोः स्थाने प्राणारापणप्रकार; प्राणवियोगकालं ज्ञाला 
ब्रह्मणि Hat भवामीदयानन्ितमना योगासनमासीन सन्‌ ठुम्भकेन ae संरुध्य 
हृदिस्थं जीवासानं मूलाधारमानीय gangs वथोक्तविधानेन बुण्डछिनी- 
ant मूरादि्रह्मरन्धान्त तदिदाकारमानन्द् gostei सूत्र नादं 
ध्यात्वा प्राणरूपश्वासपरमातमकं हंसं wart विलाप्य जीवेन सह चक्रमेद- 
कमेणा्ञाचक्रमानीय तल स्थिताया वुण्डलिन्या wager TI 
व्यादिप्रपश्चसमुदायं विलप्य ता पुनर्जीवासना सह तत्रे स्थितशिवरक्ति- 

(Ac) इह स्थाने इति विष्णोरतुखूपरमामोदमधुरे इह स्थाने योगी 


प्राणवियोगसमायोगसमये , प्राणान्‌ मनश्च समारोप्य प्रकृष्मुदितमनाः सन्‌ प्रं 
पुरुषमेव ofa निर््वाणसुक्त प्रापरोतीति रोषः वीरां परम्‌ ! सत्वैषामन्तभूतं 


९६ घट्चक्रनिरूपषणम्‌ 


छयस्थानं वायोस्तदुपरि च महानादरूपं शिवा 
सिराकारं शान्तं वरदमभयं शुद्धबुद्धिभरकाशम्‌ | 
यदा योगी पदयेहुरुचरणयुगाम्भोजसेवाखुशीर- 
स्तदा वाचां सिद्धिः करकमल तरे तस्य भूयात्‌ 
सदेव ॥ ३९ ॥ 


मयविन्दुनैकीमावमापाद्य तिष्ठेत्‌ ततो AEA दें स्यक्तवा ब्रह्मणि 
कीनो भवेदिति । # । 

तदयं परहावाक्या्निणेयः | आज्ञाचक्र Bad Jarl कर्ूरव्हक्ष 
, द्वययुक्तपतरम्‌ | कणिकाया चक्राधिषठादी हाकिनी ata शङ्कवणा wage 
ar FET वमयक्षम-ककप-रुडमरुुस्तकधर शक्कपपरे स्थितः 
agg त्रिकोणं इतरशिङ्ग, yaa. Pear. तदृ त्रिकोणे प्रणव्ृति- 
Ga प्रदीपाभज्योति तस्य aa feg जन्तरिप् ज्योतिःस्ुरिङ्गयिम्य्येित, 
ज्वश्ीपसहरेन स्वतेजसा मूलादिन्रहमरन्धान्तप्रकाशकः । तदृ Bare 
मनः | agg चन्द्रमण्डले dane परमदिव, सशक्तिफ इत्ति ॥ 
इति ष्टप्रकरणम्‌ ॥ # ॥ 

हदानीमज्ञाचतर दँ ALAA STATA .स्थानवक्तिकारणावान्तरकरीरं निरू 
पयितुभिच्छननाह कयस्थानं वायोरिति | अस्यार्थं यदा यस्मिन्‌ कारे यौगी जन' 
गुरुचरणयुगाम्भोजसेवाघशीर गुरुचरणयुगम्मोजस्य सेवया सुशोभनं eect 
अमनोऽभिनिवेरेन सव्वगयुनदरं ae योगावुषठानरूपसद्र्ं यस्य तादश सन्‌ 


fel दैन्यम्‌ दीव्यतीति देवम्‌ न जायते इत्यजम्‌ | प्रिजगतामाद्यम्‌ | 
yao वुष्टिस्थितिप्रलयकारणम्‌ बेदान्तविहितं वेद्ान्तमतमेतदिति | [एतन्मते 
^ वेदान्तविदितम्‌ ** इति पाठः] 

८१९.) छ्यस्थानमिति | एतत्‌ end area, । तदुपरि 
महानादरूपं योगी sal यदा TRA तदा तस्थ वाकि्द्धिरपि' करपद्मतके Gea 


पटूचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ९७ 


तदुपरि आज्ञाचक्र महानादरूपं महानादस्य रुपं पद्येत तद्रा तस्य योगिन 
करकमर्तरे सदा सर्वस्मिन्‌ Ble वाचा सिद्धि वाक्यसिद्धिर्भूयदिवेयन्विता्थं | 
नादं विकेषयति स्यस्थानं वायोरित्ति । अत्र सहानादे ater 
agate: तत्र क्यनियमात्‌ यद्यपि vagal स्तच्च वायोरैयस्तस्य 
च safe क्यो cert तथापि कदाचित्‌ arash वायौरयो भवतीति | अत्र 
५ प्रथिवीकानाध्रसवती रसारजायत ककारात्‌ सर्व्वाणि जलानि तीर्थानि 
गेफाद्रहितसयं wae Gao निन्दोर्मगनं स्वशू्यं इन्दमथं तेभ्य 
पश्चविश्षतिगुणमयत्वं सव्व॑मिदं विशयं ब्रह्माण्डं कालिकामयम्‌ "' 
हति श्ुत्िवाक्येन काटीमनत्रवर्णस्य सूक संहरणकाके नादि वायोढैयो 
भवतीति ध्येयम्‌ । रिवाद्धमिति रिवस्याद्भनारीश्वर्वात्‌ तदङ्गे शक्तिसतद्ुं 
नादमित्यथै | सिराकारमिति दन्त्यादि सिरो omer 
WE तु महानादो कङ्गलाृतिरुज्जयल | 
aft कार्िकेयेश्वरसम्बादवावयात्‌ | यथपि ^ afta लाङ्गलं हरं गोदा- 
wa deer” saat लाङ्गख्वाचकसीररब्दस्य aed तथाप्यत्र 
वचनान्तरैकवावयतानुरोधेन वृतीयस्वरयुक्तसिर "पदेनापि sme प्रतीयते इति 
अथवा शविवाकारमिति तैन शिव्क्तिमयोऽयं नाद | 
तदुक्त प्रयोगसारि - 
नादातना प्रबुद्धा सा निरामयपदोन्सुखी | 
शिवोन्शुखी यद्या शक्ति year सा तदा स्पृता ॥ इति ॥ 
अत एव aay एव शकतर्नादनिनदु aoa " दति राघवभदैना- 
any | 
भूयात्‌ । कौदृशम्‌ ! दिवो अ तदाकारं शिवदेव्योर्राङ्गघरूपं यस्य 
हरगौ्यात्मकत्वात्‌ | शान्तं सौम्यमूतिस. | वरान्‌ ददाति अभयमपि | सुबुद्रीनां 
a यस्मात्‌ | योगी कीदृ, ! गुरूचरणसेवासुशीर इति गुरुचगणस्येतदुपदेश 
wera | ^ 
: पृषत्युपमोग्यरूपौ, इति वा पाठः । 
8 


९८ पट्वक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


agg शङ्धिम्या निवसति रिखरे शून्यदेशे रकारं 
Rants: पद्यं दरतदलं प्रणैचन्द्रातिशुश्रम्‌ | 

अधोवकततं कान्तं वरुणरविकराकान्तिकिञ्जस्कयपुञ्न 
ठकारायेव्वर्णैः प्रविरुसितवपुः केवङानन्द.रूपम्‌ ॥ 





अन्यत्र-- 
सातत्यसंज्ञा चिन्मात्रा ज्योतिष." afte 
विचिकीषरषनीभूय कचिदभ्येति बिन्दुताम्‌ । इति ॥ 


तथा श्रीमदाचा्स्यवाक्यम्‌ “नाद एव घनीभूतः; कचिदभ्येति चिन्दुताम्‌ 
` हति अत्र सकलवचनपर्य्यासोचनया शक्तिरेव नादबिन्दुरूपेणाविर्भूता acl 
'ुण्डकमिव नादबिन्दु पुनेकाकारैव इति Read अभयवरदं अभय- 
वरदातारमिथर्भ, ॥ ३९ ॥ 
अथ समाधिरूपयोगानुश्षीकनसाधकानां 
समाधिकालत्‌ प्रगेवं विचिन्यातिप्रयक्नत 
woman स्व्यं चिदामनि विलापयेत्‌ ॥ 


इ्याचार्ययवचनेन समाधेः पूर्य स्थूलसूष््मरूपथिप्पञ्चसमुद्ायचिन्तन- 
विधानात्‌ तजन्ञानस्यावश्यकघादल वदन्ति | तत तयेत्‌ एथिव्यादि-पश्च- 
ween मूरादिविशुदधान्तचक्रे उक्तानि । sabe मूलाधारे 
भूमण्डरे पादप्राणेन्द्रियगन्धतच्वेति त्रिः | जमण्डे पाणिरसनेन्द्रियरसतच्वेति 





(४०) तद्धे, इति! तस्य महानादस्य Sy महाराडछिन्याश्च शिखृप्समदेदो 
शुल्यनिरारुम्बे विसर्गस्याधः cared esas निवसति अलर्पूर्णचन्द्र 
हव oe adler कान्तं तरुणरविकला इव कान्तं किकलस्कपुयस्य ठकाटदठ- 
छाटादिविन्यस्तैरकादिपशचाशद्रणैष्वकतिप्रकरिण? greats: केवरानन्द- 
पमिति | 

* ar तत्तवस्ञा चिन्माच्रज्योतिषः ” इति वा पाठः । - 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ १९ 


धि, | ass पायुचञ्ुरिन्धियूपतेति चिः वायुमण्डरे उपस्थल- 
गिन्दियसयशैतस्येति मि wise areal ARR 
सथुदायेन प्शचदशतच्वानि वर्तन्ते | पए्रथिन्यादिता fife वि्तितवानि 
wert गोद्धग्यानि । इदानीं aerate विधीयन्ते ‹ तत्रष्टाचरे सूक्ष्मं 
मनः स्वयं प्रदर्ितम्‌ | अपराण्याह्‌ कङ्कारमारिनीतन्तरे जज्ञाचक्रयुपक्रम्य-- 
मनश्चाब सदा माति हाकिनीशक्तिरञ्चितम्‌ | 
यद्धिञ्तयदङ्कारारइृतं तैजसं प्रम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
अत बुद्धप्रकृ्यहङ्कारासकसूक्षमरूपलयाणां स्थिति, प्रतीयते । तत्राहङ्कारस्य च 
पाठक्रमात्‌ स्थिति । मृढाभारादि ata प्थिव्यादिजनकस्य ततद्विखयाधारस 
च "जन्यविलाप्ययोरध 'स्थितिदेनात्‌ पाठकरमाच्छान्दक्रमस्य बटवत्वाचात्रापि ` 
तथा स्थिति, कर्प्यते | तेन “ ख्हङ्करे दरद्‌ न्योम सशब्दं तन्मदु्पि ” इति - 
वचनात्‌ Ae Real तद्विरयाधिकरणस्याहङ्कारप्य प्रथमोप्थितं तदादाव- 
ह्रसते बुिपरकृो' स्थिति । एतेषा जन्यजनकमावमाह शारदायाम्‌-- 
मूरभूात्ततोऽव्यक्तात्‌ विकृता AGT: | 
आसीत्‌ किर महत्त गुणान्त'करणास्रकम्‌ 
अभृक्तस्मादहङ्ारशिविध खष्िमेदत ॥ इति ॥ 
विद्कतादिति इदं परस्तुनः प्रतिचिम्बसेन विक्ृतिषूपं॑महततत्वादीनां 
भकृतिलात्‌ ्रकृतिनागकन्च | भतणएवेक्तम्‌ | 
प्रकृति" परमा रक्तिविवक्ृतिः प्रतिविम्बता ॥ इति ॥ 
तथा ^“ परह्मासप्रकरति प्रतिविम्नस्वषटपिणी '” ति प्रागुपदरितम्‌ शारदामचने 
महत्त्वमिति | यदैव महत्त सैव शुद्धि | तदाह ईशानरिविन-- 
बोद्धग्यरक्षणा सेव प्रकृतिः क्तिजुम्मिता | 
यद्धितं भवेद्‌ व्यक्तं साचिकं गुणमाभिता 
देषु बुद्धिपमहवाम तत्वं सस्यैः भगीयते ॥ इति ॥ 


६० पटचक्रनिषूपणम्‌ 


महत्त्वमतु गुणान्त करणालकम्‌ गुणा सच्वरजस्तमोरूपा । अन्त.करणमाह 
शारदायाम्‌ “oa मनोबुद्धिरहङक्वारथित्तश्च परिकीर्चितम्‌ '' 
इति एतत्समुदायाप्मकं महत्वम्‌ ननु मनसो महत्तत्ान्तरगतसे 
८ तदन्तश्चकरेऽस्मिन्‌ sea मन॒ aaah "त्यनेन परथगभिधानं 
कथं सङ्गच्छते दति चेन्न तन्मनो न महतत्वान्तरगतं किन्तु तदहङकारजन्य- 
मतिरिक्तम्‌। । 
तदाह-- 
^ यतोऽपरं मनस्त्वं ससङ्कल्पविकल्पकम्‌ | 
तैजसदिव तञ्जातम्‌ "' इति राघवम 


, एकश्वासाचक्रस्थमन wera कमेण स्थितेविहिततवात्‌ तदृद्धँऽहङ्कारादीना 
स्थितिर्गोध्या ततशवाज्ञाचर हाकिनी इतर रिङ्गपणवमनोऽहङ्गारुद्धिप्रकृतीना 
मन्यवहितोदौ कमेण स्थितिनिरुपणात्‌ स्थानविोपानमिदितस्य पू्ैदधित- 
चन्द्रमण्डरघ्य तेषामूदँ स्थितिरिति । ननु तेषामधः कथं न स्थीयते इति 
aa । ^ इनदुकैलाटदैन्न च agg बोधिनी स्वयम्‌” इति सम्मोहनतन्वचनेन 
वक्षयमाणाज्ञाचक् gar समनियतयोरिनदुबोधिन्योरोभागे स्थितिबोधनात्‌ 
तयोरव्यवधानाय Beale एव तस्य स्थितिरिति 
अथाज्ञाचकरोदधँ कारणरूपमाह सम्मीहनतन्ने-- 
HRA च ITH बोधिनी स्वयम्‌ | 
तद्ध माति नादोऽसावद्धैचन्दाृति परः ॥ 
तदधं च महानादो राज्लाकृतिरुज्धरः | 
agg च कला प्रोक्ता आङ्जीति योगिवहमा । 
उन्मनी तु तद्ध च यद्‌ गत्वा न निवर्ते ॥ इति । 


तवं Afra तदृ seg आज्ञाचक्रं इति यावत्‌.। 


पटतक्रनिश्पणम्‌ ६१ 





AR मिन्दुसितिमादह भूतश्ुद्धितन्ते 


बिनदुमालादधैतो देवि agg, नादसंज्ञितम्‌ 
लयस्थानं तथा aims तदृदुत ॥ इति । 


मात्रा शक्ति-- 


वारपू््यप्रतीकाशमासीदिनदुमदकषरम्‌ । 
तद्ध चार्धमात्रा तु गान्धार्रागमाभिता ॥ 


इति बृहलिविक्रमसंहितावचनेना दधमात्रायाः राक्तिवाचकलप्रतीते. अप्र 
्योर््यचनयोरेकवाक्यतया arsarar सैव बोधिनीति बोध्यम्‌  बिन्दुबोधिनी- 
नादेति त्रयं बिन्दुमयपरशक्तेः रूपविरोष । 


तदाह शारदायाम्‌-- 


सचिदानन्दविमघात्‌ सकरत्‌ परमेश्वरात्‌ 
आसीच्छक्तिस्ततो नादो नादाद्िनदुसमुद्धव" | 
परशक्तिमय, साक्षाल्निधासौ Raa पुन. | 
Regalia बीजमिति तस्य मेदाः समीरिता, | 
चिनदुर्नादासको बीजं शक्तिनिदिस्तयोभिथः 
ena समाल्यात, wea | इति ॥ 


परशक्तिमय पर" शिवस्तेन रिवशक्तिमयो बिन्दुः | अय रोद्धुं स्थितो 
बिन्दुर्नादासकः रिवासक |. 
बीज॑॑राक्तिबोंभिनीरपमित्यथै । नादस्तयो समवायः सम्बन्ध, 
क्षोभयक्षोभकहूपस्तेनाये क्रियाराक्तिरूप एतस्रयोद्ँं महानादः पूर््वोपदित । 
तद्ध च कल्यं परोक्ता इति । कला शक्ति' । आज्ञीति तिर्यक्‌ 
रेसाषूममात्रकरारे ead. ॥ श्वं शक्ति" खष्टयादो आविभूता | 


६२९ पट्चक्रनिषूपणम्‌ 


तदुक्तं पञ्चरत्न 
एवमारोक्य सर्गादौ सचिदानन्दरूपिणीम्‌ 
रामस्ततत्यस॑वाता सय"यिष्ठावृरूपिणीम्‌ | 
व्यक्तां करोति fat तां प्रकृति परम पुमान्‌ ॥ इति | 
अन्यत्र-- 
दिवशक्तिसमायोगादव्यक्तात्‌ परमेश्वरात्‌ 
आधा भगवती देवी सैव त्रिपुरखुन्दरी 
आसीच्छक्तिस्ततो नादो नादाद्विन्दुसमुद्धव । ईति | 
उन्मनी तु तदधं चेति : 
तल्व्चणमृह्‌ ~ 
यत्र गला तु मनसो मन्व नैव विधते | 
उन्मनी सा समाख्याता सरव्बतन्तेपु गोपिता ॥ इति ॥ 
ततश्च मनोधृततिमद्विषयावरुभ्बनचेष्टाकाटीनविप्ावरम्बनसामान्याभावसम्पादनं 
aerate सा च द्विविधा सहस्ाराधारा नि्वाणकरारूपा 
एतस््थानस्थिता वर्णाबडीरूपा 
तथा च कङ्काकमारिनीतन्ते-- 
सहल रकर्णिकायः चन्द्रमग्डरम१५१ | 
सब्वैसङ्गटपरहिता कला श्दशी भवेत्‌ 
उन्मनी नाम तस्या हि भवपाशनिष्न्तनी | इति ॥ 
तया-- 
उन्मनीश्च aera स्मरणात्‌ मोक्षदायिनी | इति ॥ 
aera वर्णावरीशूपमित्यथैः 
1 संपात्मस्पूर्त्य इति वा पाठ. 0 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ६६ 


उन्मन्यध समनीमाह भूतददौ-- 
ततो हि व्यापिका शक्तिराञ्चीति या fear: | 
समनीमूष्वैतस्तस्या उन्मनीनतु wage । दति | 
दृदमपि परचाक्तेवान्तररूपम्‌ | ततथ्वाज्ञाचकोद्धं द्ितीयमिन्दु' रिवस्वरूप, 
ae अद्धेमत्राकारा बोधिनीशक्ति्तद द्धं शिवशक्तिसमवायरूपाऽदचन््रा- 
कृतिरनादस्तवद्धुंलाङ्गलाक्ृतिम्मंहानावस्तदृदुँ आञ्जीरूपा व्यापिकाराक्ति 
तवद्ध समनी agg उन्मनीति क्रमेण स्तकारणल्पाणि वतन्ते | 
अरमतिविस्तरेण प्रकृतमनुसरामः । सदस्दर्पदं निरूपयन्नाह AT 
दति aah । तदृ प्रागुपदचितसर््वेषाम द्धं | पूषवोपदरितशङ्खिनीनाब्याः 
शिखरे मस्तके | शूल्यदेगे averages । तैन सुषुम्णाया जपि ae इति ` 
सूचितम्‌ | भेयरप्यण्ध. इशरात्दलं सदस्लदलं wat निवरति zea: | 
विसर्गन्तुबरहनभसयोरदभागे 
तस्मिन्‌ eA विसर्गश्च Read निरज्ननम्‌ 
दद्यादि वक्ष्यमाणवचनात्‌ 
पदम विरोपयति पूणेचन्द्रेयादि छ कारैर मरविकसितवपुरिति | 
अत्र ठ कारम्रहणं न Rata वणैचिन्तना्थं किन्तु छ-कारमहणं क्ष कार- 
परितयागार्थम्‌ ततू्यागवीजं दि वणानां ewes स्थितिरावसैनेनैव घटते | 
एवश्च क्ष Hasna विशव्याव्ेनेन विदाव्यधिकसहक्तसंस्या 
भवन्ति sate तु णकव्रिशच्यूनसदसतसंस्या भवन्ति । अतः 
क्ष-कारपरियागेन तत्‌ समाधीयते | तेन अ कारादि छ-कारान्तपश्चादाद्रणा 
अनुकोमेन विकव्यायतनेन सहस्दशे चिन्तनीया इति ध्येयम्‌ अनुजोमेन 
वर्णचिन्तनं व्यक्तमाह कङ्कारमाशिनीतन्ते 
सहस्रं महाप DHS | 
ज-कुरादिक्ष-कारान्तै'स्ुरमव्विराजितम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 


६४ परचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


समास्ते तस्यान्तः शदापरिरदितः शुद्धसम्पणैचन्द्रः 
स्फुरजथोरल्लाजारः परमरसचयनल्िग्धसन्तानहासी | 

लिकोणं तस्यान्तः स्फुरति च सततं वि्युदाकाररूपं 
तदन्तःश्न्यं तत्‌ सकलसुरगणेः सेवितं चातिशुल्तम्‌॥ 


जत्र क्ष-क्रारानतैरियत्रान्तशन्दस्यावतानाथेकलात्र क्ष-कारोऽन्तेऽवसाने य्येति 
agli क्षकारं विहाय ठ कारान्तपञ्चाश्रणैयोग अथवा छ कारायैरिति 
छकार - क्षकरान्तपश्चादद्र्णानामकथादितरिेखावद्मामावर्तेन = यथायोऽयावसेनेन 
विन्यास | कङ्कारमारिनीचचनन्त॒ दक्षिणावर्तेन वपैविन्यासविधायकम्‌ इति 
. वचनद्रयाविरोध । अत्रे पञ्चशिर्णाना रुपविशेषानभिधानाततद्रणैमथ्या 
मातृकायाः Teese yea चिन्तनीया इति ध्येयम्‌ | 
sepa पठे J ललारदन्देन माघ्रकान्यासोक्तरलारवरणैः अकारप्त- 
arate | ada छकारं विहाय अकारादिक्षकारान्तं wae 
वोध्यः | CAT TAIT अन्यदकारत्यागद्रीनात्‌ 

aa केचित्‌ प्रविलसिततनुरिति पठन्ति | तत्र “वा पुंसि पद्मम्‌, 
afi ata पुंसि विशिष्टस्य water Raion तनुरतयस्यापि 
deaf व्याख्यायन्ति च ! तते एततश्ोकस्थनिवकषतिक्रियाया' कररैवेन 
पद्ममिति गिन्धन्तनिर्श्ात्‌ safer एव प्रतीयते न तु ifaw 
wart: विसर्गान्तो भवितुमहति अतेस्तद्रिरोषणस्य aya क्कीगल्वमच्दयं 
ard तथाते React न भवति fae छन्द पातस्तस्पाद्रपुरििष 
पाठ" | स्पष्टमन्यत्‌ ॥ vo ॥ 

सहक्षदरकमर्कणिकायां चन्द्रमण्डलस्थितिमाह समास्ते इत्ति 
तस्यान्तः तल परमे अन्तर्मध्ये ge निम्मैरोदयविशिष्ट" | चन्द्रं विशेषयति 


(४१) समास्ते इति | तस्य पयस्यान्तम्पध्ये gaa: serdar 
समपूर्णचन्द्रः समस्ति | कीदृशः स्फुरन्ति Semel यस्य स तथा | 


षटूचक्रनिरूषणम्‌ ६९ 


epee परमरसचयस्षिग्यसन्तानहासी इति | किध" आ्र॑सदशमावस्तस्य 
सन्तानो fear यत्त za । ततश्च परमागृतरसचयेन उत्तापहीनतया 
क्ििसन्तानयुक्तो दारवदानन्दमयकिरणविधिष्ट sea | अथ चन्दरमण्डल- 
स्याध ag अन्तरासाद्रीना स्थितिमाह कङ्कारमािनीतन्त्रे weet 
मुपक्रम्य-- 
। तव्कणिकायां देवेशि अन्तरा ततो गुर 

सूर्यस्य Wess चनद्रभण्डलमेव च || 

ततो APSA HAR ततः स्तम्‌ । 

तसन्‌ रने Rate Read निरञ्जनम्‌ 

aay, aft देवी खष्टिरिथितयन्तकारिणी ॥ इति ॥ 


तप्यान्तः TMS सततं निरन्तरं विदयुदाकाररूयं चिकोणं स्फुरतीति | 
तदन्त.शून्यमिति अन्तर्मध्ये get यस्य॒तदन्त.शूत्यं॑पर॑बिन्दुशरीरं 
तसन्‌ सिकोणे अन्त aed तदन्त aed लिकोणमध्यवसि परमिन्ुरूपं शल्यं 
स्फुरतीति क्रियान्वय" । यद्वा तदन्तस्तिकोणमध्ये श्ये परं बिन्दुरूपं 
स्फुरति | 
अत एवोक्तं तोडकतन्ते wae — 
निराकारं परं ज्योतिकिन्दुश्वाञ्ययसंककम्‌ | 
चिन्दुशब्देन शुन्यं स्यात्‌ तथा च गुणसूचकम्‌ | इति । . 


अल ५“ आहारनिर्हारविहारयोगाः सुसंवृता धर्मविदा तु काय्य" इति 
चचनात्‌ योगस्य गोपनेनानुष्ठानविधानात्‌ Tare MAAR यथा स्यात्तथा 
सकटसुरगणै' सेवितम्‌ आराधितमिव्य्थ. ॥ ४१ ॥ 








पस्मरसचयेन्‌ दिवसम्बन्धाय्‌ परमागृतसमूहेन मलर्धकतिग्धहासौ दीपस्य त॒स्य 
चन्द्रस्य मध्ये Facial सब्वैदैव स्पुरति विथुदाकार इव रूपं यस्य त्रिकोणान्तमौष्ये 
तत्‌ Ura विहृति .। सकरमुरूणः सेवितम्‌ | शूल्यत्वादतिशुद्यम्‌ | 

9 


४६ पट्चतनिद्धपणम्‌ 


gue तद्यल्लाद तिरयपरमामोदसन्तानराश्चः 
परं HA YA सकखदारिकलराशुद्धरूपप्रकाराम्‌ | 
इह स्थाने देवः परमरिषसमास्यानसिद्धः site: 
wed सर्घ्वाद्मा रसविरसमितोऽज्ञानमोहा- 
न्धहंसः ॥ ४५ ॥ 


Bae अस्यायमर्थः वक्ष्यमाणकेशाध्रकोटिभागैकरुपस्वादतिगुपतं तत्‌ 
Get sare भिरमिरन्तरध्यानाचनुष्ठानात्‌ सकल्शदरिकराद्धशूपप्रकारं कका 
निव्यीणकला तया ae वर्तमाना या शदिनश्वन्द्रस्य परोड्शी कला तथा 
. निर्मररूपपरकासौ ' "यस्य तदियर्थः तथा चातिसृष्ष्ममपि सिकोणान्तव्व्यैमा- 
. कलानिरन्याणककासहितपरैयिन्दुरूपान्त शस्यं ध्यानिने प्रकाशितं भवतीति भाव. | 
प्रभामोदसन्तानरेम्मोकषस्य परं कन्दं Hota । BYE 
areata ws aaa उभयत्नान्वय इति ध्येयम्‌ | 

केचितु लिकोणान्त शूल्यं gar ag कीदशम्‌ ! सफकशदिकला- 
शदधरूपमकाशम्‌ | AAT AHH समस्तकला" NICKS तत्‌ 
Bi UW wai तदैव प्रकाशो ae ताद्शपूर्णचन्द्रभमकाराभितयथैः इति 
व्याप्याग्रम्ति तेचिन्त्यम्‌ । aan पूरणैचन्द्रमण्डलमध्यवरिसवकथनेनेव 
तिकोणमध्यस्थानस्य पूणैवन्दरु्यप्रकादप्रा्तौ पुनस्तक्कथनं व्यथं स्थात्‌ | किश्च 
सकरुसुरगणै सेषितमि्यनेन शुट्यस्थानस्य सेवनं न युज्यते किन्तु विकोणा 
न्त्विन्दोरेव सेव्यलमिति } यदि तु तत्‌ aero परं जिन्दोरधिषठानात्‌ 








(४२) सगुप्तमिति । सुगोप्यं तत्‌ दयन्याकाररिवटिद्धगं यत्नात्‌ et 
गोपनीयं कस्मैचित्‌ यायत्तावन्न कथनीयम्‌ | कौद्राम्‌  अततिदायपरमामोदसन्तान- 
जनकामरृतरारो' FRETS तस्मादेव परमागृतं क्षरति | seed ala 
सकेलकैवांशूपं प्रकाशो यस्य | इहं स्थान एव परमरिवत्वेन सिद्धः aedfeaher: 
shea: योगिनां हृदये प्रकादानपरः we) wen । सव्वषाम्‌ आत्मा 
रसविस्समिततः परमरसैनाच्छरादितः aga यो मोहान्धकारः तत्स: सू्यैसकृकषः | 


परूचकरनिरूपणम्‌ ६७ 


सुधाधारासारं निरवधि विमुधन्नतितरां 

यतेः स्वाव्मन्ञानं दिशति भगवान्‌ निम्मरुमतेः । 
समास्ते सर्व्वशः सकरुसुखसन्तानरुहयी- 

परीवाहो हंसः परम इति aA परिचितः ॥ VR ॥ 


सेव्यत्वमिल्युच्यते तदा a ae पर॑बिन्दोरधिष्ठानात्‌ tera 
मिदयुच्यते तदा तत्‌ शन्यस्थानमेव मो भवतीति सुधीमिर्माव्यस्‌ 
सहखदककणिकायां परमरिवस्थितिमाह इह स्थाने हति इद स्थाने 
कर्णिकायामित्यथ. | परमरिवसमास्यानसिद्ध, waar स्यातो दैवो 
aad इति ` शेष. । दैवं बिरोपयति cede ब्रह्मरूपी व्रह्ममयमिति यित्‌ । . 
स्वासा सर्वषां जीवानाम्‌ आला जीवासमस्वरूप जीवासपरमातमनोववैस्तुतो . 
भेदाभावात्‌ य भसः स एव ऊव" अते एवेक्तमध्यास्राम'यणे-- 


* जीवातमा cone च पर्यायो नात्र मेदधी' | 
आचार्ग्यश्ाश्लोपदेशादैवयज्ञानं यदा भवेत्‌ | 
आतमनोजीवपरयोम्भूखा विद्या तदैव J ॥ 


ofa ५ तत्वमसि ' इति वाक्येन तत्वपदयोरेकाथैवं दयति | रसविर्‌- 
समित इति रस प्रमानन्द्रसः विरस्त्रक्षण्येन शिवक्तियोगजन्यपामरस्या 
waar । तहुभयरसमित' प्राप्त. इत्यथ, | अथवा रस प्रथमोपस्थितेन 
विषथरसस्तसिमन्‌ विरसा fanaa रसेन स प्रमनन्द्ररस्तन्मित 
sad: | भज्ञानमोहान्धदंसः भन्ञानमोहान्धकारनारकलयात्‌ हंस" सूर्यरूपं 
waa ॥ ४२ ॥ , 

सुधाधारासारं निरवधि Rasa । निरवधि निरन्तरम्‌ 
अतितरामतिरयं यथा स्याचथा युधाधाराख्यसारं fase: 





(४३) सुधाधारासारमिति | स भगवान्‌ रिवः निप्मैपतेर्योगिनो जनस्य 
भत्मविषयस्य परमात्मनि ज्ञानं दिरति | कीदृशम्‌ ! सुधाधार॑सासम्‌ अग्रृतधाराया 


६८ पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


अथवा सुषाया आधारशन्दरस्तप्मादाकचियते -नि.ियते यत्‌ तत्‌ सुधा- 
धारासारं शुङ्चवर्णादतकिरणं विमुञ्चन्‌ carafe: । एतद्विरोषणेन 
विशेष्यस्य चन्द्रवत्‌ Yea सूचितम्‌ 

यद्रा आस्यते नि सार्य्यते उच्चार्यते इति यावत्‌ प्राव्यं सुधाधारया 
सह॒ आसारं सुधाधारासारं सुधामयवाक्यमित्यथे | ततश्व निश्वपि athena, 
ae अतितरां मोहनासायातिप्रबल्तय युधामयवाक्यं विश्वन्‌ उच्चरन्‌ सन्‌ 
यतेरपास्यदेवतायां नियत्तमनस स्वाज्ञानं wala तेन सह आसा 
परमातमा ज्ञायतेऽनेनेति | अतरष्रथक्साहित्येन जीवास्मामेदेन परमातसमज्ञान- 
कारणं तारकग्रहमन्त्रम्‌ उपदिदातीति aera: | 

अथवा सुधा Bd TAT युक्तं सारं ब्रह्ममन्तात्मकसारवाक्य- 
“ get ee Raced | एतद्निरेषणेन तारकमन्त्रोपदेशकलन्ञापनापु 
Raed सूचितम्‌ । एवशनतद्विरोषणं पूर्व्ोकोक्तपरमरिवस्यैव गुरुत्वात्‌ | 
अतपएय रङितिारहस्ये गुरुत्वनिरूपणे-- 


ख्यातोऽयं पुरुषश्रेष्ठ सव्वदातरतिप्रिय' | 
इत्यादिना गुरं वर्णयिला 


तेजोरूपा परिया तस्य sages | 
प्रमं ब्रह्म यद्पादपङ्कजययुतिवैभवम्‌ ॥ 


gaan शोभाधिक्येन पदपङ्कजयो' परब्रह्ूपपरमरिवस्य हृदपश्रादिति sar. 
ered | तेजोरूपगुरुपरियाया, पादद्वयारोहणं ques एव न लन्यपुरुषस्येति | 
अतो a प्रमरिव. स एव गुरुरिति तालर्यम्‌ | 





आसाएमिव | यद्वा अमृतधारासारं निरवधि अतितराम्‌ aed विभुश्वन्‌ इति भगवतो 
विरोषणम्‌ एवंभूत" स्वैरः रिवः सर्वेपां सुखसमूहर्हरीबदिभूतः सन समास्ते | 
कीदृश, ! नाम्ना परमहस इति परिचितः | i 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम ६९ 


निव्वौणतन्तेऽपि-- 
शिर.पदमे महादेवस्यैव परमो Te । 
तसमो नास्ति देवेशि पूज्यो हि भुबनत्तये | 
ada चिन्तयेदैवि na गुरुचतुष्टयम्‌ ॥ इति | 
अयं waka कणिकान्तरि्िकोणस्य बहिरध कथ्यमानं इत्यस्योपरि ade | 
पूवव क्तकङ्कारमालिनीतन्त्व चने 
तत्कर्णिकायां देवेशि अन्तरासा ततो गुरु" । 
सयस्य मण्डलं तच्च चन्द्रमण्डकमेव्‌ च ॥ 
हृस्यादिना करमेण मदहाशद्धिनीशक्तिप्यन्तस्थितिमभिधाय 
तस्याधस्ताचच देवेशि चन्द्रमण्डमध्यगम्‌ | 
त्रिकोण तत्र सन्ध्य क्षयहीनास्मिका कला 1 
„ तम्मध्ये कुटिका निर्ववाणाख्यसपतद्ी का ॥ 
इति वचनेन चन्द्रमण्डकान्तस्विकोणेऽमाककादीनामेव स्थितेशुकतलात्‌ गुरोस्त 
तदधोऽन्तरासमन उपरि स्थितिर्वा ननु कष्कार्मारिनीवचनेऽन्तयसमन 
उपरि शुरो. स्थितिरुक्ता ae हंसस्य उदं गुरोः स्थितिरुच्यते इत्ति चेन्न 
हंसान्तयसमनोरेकाथैलात्‌ | 
तथा हि कङ्कार्मास्नीतन्ते गुरुध्यानं यथा-- 
AISA RIAA TTT | 
TAR Taras सिहासनोज्ञ्वरम्‌ ॥ 
तस्मिन्‌ निजगुरं निलयमित्यादि | 
तथाऽन्यत्--हंसपीडे want स्वगुरुं रिबषूपिणम्‌ | 
अमुकानन्दनाथान्तं सरितन्नामपू्यैकम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
तेथाऽ्नदाकस्पे--शिर परे ge दशतदे केसरगते | 
” पतत्रीणां तल्पे परमरिवरूपं भिजगुरुम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 


Go पदूचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


एतेषा वचनान पर््यारोचनया हंसान्तरात्मनोरमेद प्रतीयते | एवं परमशिव- 
ed निजगुरुमिस्यमेन परमशिव एव गुरुरिति भाव्यम्‌ 


यतु सहसरदल्मुपक्रम्य-- 


तन्मध्ये तु चिकोरणंस्याद्वियुदाकाररूपकम्‌ | 
Praga तन्मध्ये विस्रूपमनव्ययम्‌ | 
तन्मध्ये सू्यदैरो तु रिव" प्रमसंज्ञक" । 


हति वचनं परमशिवस्य त्रिकोणमध्ये स्थितिवोधकम्‌ तन्मतभेदैन सदस्चदर- 
कमरामिन्रततकणिकाधोवदषुसद्रादशादल्कणिकान्तस्तिकोणे गुरस्थितिबोध- 
, कम्‌ । एतसादुकापचकस्तोतै wlan न तूद्ुसहसदरकथिकातिकोणे 
गुहस्थितिगोधकम्‌ । मध्यतविकोणस्याधस्तनलिकोणान्ते aio स्थितः | 
` अन्यथा कङ्कारमादिनीतन्लवचनविरोधात्‌ 
समास्ते wala इति अल कर्णिकाया सन्वैपामीश्वर सास्ते हय. | 
aaa परमरिवस्थितिकथनेनैव ररस्थितिरुक्ता तत्थ पुन" सर्वेशस्थिति- 
शुच्यते हृत, सर्ववेशं विरोषयत्ति हंस इति 1 अयं सर्ववेशो हंस. हंस इ्यानु- 
पूर्थिकमन्ताकार | 
तदुक्त प्रपश्चसारे-- 
सा तत्संज्ञा चिन्मात्रा ज्योततिः afte: 
„ Arata कचिदभ्येति Rego, ॥ 
काठेन भिचमानस्त॒ स बिन्दुर्भवति fear 
निन्दक्षिणमागश्च बाममागो Bee ॥ 
तेन दक्षिणवामाख्यौ भागौ प-स्वीविरेषितौ | 
ae Praha विसर्ग. स इति eae. ॥ 
fire: पुरुप इत्युक्तो विस; प्रकृतिः स्मृतः 
Serer हंसक्तदा्मकमिदं जगत्‌ ॥ इति IP 


Te RIOT, ५७१ 


शिवस्थानं देवाः परमपुरुषं वेष्णवगणा 
छपन्तीति प्रायो हरिहरपदं केचिदपरे । 
पदं देव्या देवीचरणयुगर(म्भोजरसिका 
मुनीन्द्रा अप्यन्ये प्रकृतिपुरुषस्थानममरुम्‌॥४४॥ 


सुब्यक्तमाह्‌ भहाकारीतम्ते प्रथमपरले 
wea श्ये दिव्यतोरणशोभिते 
चन्द्रमण्डरमध्ये तु हंसवर्णद्रयोपरि 
श्॒द्धस्फरिकसङ्काशं शद्धक्षौमविराजितम्‌ sate | 
aa हंसवणेदरयोपरीति सुन्यक्तम्‌ । अथवा हंस परम इति नाश्ता परिचित 
हंस इति ae परम इति star च परिचितो वियात sear | अतएव . 
TIER उनपश्चाराच्छरोके केचिद्धरास्यमेतद्विसयनेन हंसनामकलं THT 
यद्वा हंसोऽन्ते यस्य a हंसोऽन्त हंसोऽन्तश्चासो परमश्येति कम्मैधारयेण 
शाकपाथिवादिलात्‌ मध्यपदलोपे हंस परम इति सिद्धम्‌ तेन परमहंस शति 
नान्ना परिचित इयं । 
अतएवोक्तम्‌ जागमकल्पदुमे - 
असौ परमहंसास्यो युक्तस्थावरजज्गमः | इति |) 
सकरदुलसन्तानरहरीपरीवाह इत्ति पव्यप्रकारयुखं सकरुखं तस्य सम्तानो 
Ree स एव ररी श्रेणी परि सन्वैतोभवेनोक्यते उत्तरोत्तरकारष्थायितेन 
प्रकादयते aftr sah: | ततश Sorento सब्वैव्यापकसव्वैप्रकारघुखविशिष्ट 
aft यावत्‌ | अयं हंस. प्रमरिवस्याधोवर्तयुक्त प्राक्‌ ॥ ४३ ॥ 
एतत्‌ कर्णिकायां सब्वैदेवतामयहंसादीनामधिष्ठानात्‌ Sarat 
सककोपासकानासुपास्यदेवतास्थानमिव्याह | रिवस्ानमिति शैवा" शिवोपासका 





(४१) शिवस्थानं इति एतत्‌ परमरिवस्थानं Sar जनाः िवृस्थानमिति 
wafer | वैष्णदाः परमपुरषं परा omer मा दक्ष्मी्स्य एवम्भूतपुरुं वदन्ति | 


७२ पटूचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


इदं स्थानं ज्ञात्वा नियतनिजविन्तो नरवरो 
न भूयात्‌ संसारे पुनरपि न बद्ध्चिभुवने | 
समथा शक्तिः स्थान्नियममनसस्तस्य कृतिनः 
सदा कर्तु TY खगतिरपि बाणी GAAS ॥ ४५॥ 





एत्न रिवस्थानं रपम्ति वदन्त्यः परमपुरुषं परमपुरुषस्य विष्णो" 
स्थानं॑हदमर्थतद्धितप्रघ्ययेन सिद्धम | केचिदिति ये हरिदरोपासकास्ते मैवा 
मैष्णवाश्च ते केचित्‌ अपरे केवरशिवयिष्णुपासकेतरा हरिदरपदं wafer | अत, 
af शेवा वैष्णवा फेवरुरिवस्थानं केवरविष्णुस्थानं न वदन्ति हयभिप्रायेण 
। दयुक्तम्‌ अन्ये युगकमजनशीला, यद्वा अन्ये हंसमन्तोपासका सुनीन्दरा' 
" प्रकृतिपुरषस्थानं हंसस्य परकृतिपुरुषोभयरूपत्वात्‌ तद्धिष्ठितस्थान wath. | 
पत्मददीनमात्रं तत्स्थाने सर्यदेवतामयपरंबिन्दोरयिष्ठानात्‌ यो यदेवतोपासकः 
स तदेवतास्थानं वदतीति बौध्यम्‌ ॥ ५४ ॥ 
सह्ार्तानफलमाह इवं स्थानमिति । साङ्गोपागरूपेणेतससथानक्ञानं 
wats भाव, नियतनिजचित्त इति नियतं तंत्र नियुक्तं निजचित्तं येन 
wad. न भूयात्‌ संसारे सुक्तो भवतीति मावः | यत, कचिदपि न बद्धसि- 
भुवने इति दैतुगभेविरोषणम्‌ | बद्ध, पुण्यपापरूपमायापाराबद्व' | 





अपरे केचित्‌ प्रायो हरिहरपदमिति eq अन्ये देवीचरणयुगखानन्दरसिका 
aan पदं छपन्ति | वस्तुतस्तु नानाप्रकारभावनाया एको निरज्ञन एवं निर्वाच्य; | 
अतएव “'तलकुटिलनानापथज्चषां raat गम्य? इति पुष्पदन्तौक्तं साधु संगच्छते॥ 
(24) ददं स्थानमिति । इह एवं दानै एतत्स्थानं ज्ञाप्वा नियतं संयतं 
निजचित्तं येन सः परमात्मचिन्तापे नरवरः संसरि न भूयात्‌ कविदपि त्रिभुवने 
बद्धो न मवति | संयतमनससतस्य कृतिनः समप्ता शक्तिः स्यात्‌ । तदेवाह wea 
क हततुं स क्षमौ भवति खगतिरकाशगततिरपि भवति | मपि वाणी सर्व्वाहूादिनी 
सुविमहरक्तिरूपा भवतीति | 


षट्‌ चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ७६ 
तदुक्तं भागवतै--- 
कर्म्मणि क्रियमाणे तु गुणेरालमि मन्यते | 
तदस्य संखतिब्बैन्धः पारतन्तथश्च पत्‌ स्पृतम्‌ | इति | 
भगवद्वीतायामपि-- 
स्वभावजेन कौन्तेय Peg स्वेन कर्मणा ॥ इति ॥ 


ततश्च Joon शरीरधारणात्‌ बन्ध । स चरस्व Goma पात्ामे 
पापभोगाथं मर्ये उभयभोगायै भवतीति तच्वज्ञानिनान्त॒ बम्धरेतुभूतपुण्यपा- 
पानुदयात्‌ , सश्चितपुण्यपापक्षयाच कचिदपि करिन्‌ काकेऽपि त्रिभुवने 
ees न ag न शरीरी भवति | सोऽयं प्रारन्धकरम्ममोगप्यन्तं ` 
Shaner सन्‌ तिष्ठति tend मुक्तो भवतीति माव | ` 
तस्य पण्यपापानुदयमाह कुकार्णवे-- 
अश्वमेधक्षतेनापि जहयहस्याशतेन च | 
पुष्यपापिन रिप्यन्ते येषां ब्रह्म हृदि स्थितम्‌ ॥ इति | 
तथा भगवद्रीतायाम्‌-- 
नैव तस्य कृतेनार्थो ना्तेनेह कश्चन | 
न चास्य सर्बभूतेषु कश्चिदथम्यपाश्रयः । इति ॥ 
तस्य प्रकरान्ततत्तवक्ञानिन' कृतेन कम्मेणा पुण्यं नास्ति न arate fie 
कम्मेणा कश्चन प्रस्यवायोऽस्तीति सुमोधिनीव्यास्यानम्‌ | 
सश्धितपुण्यपापक्षयमाह श्रुतिः — 


तस्मिन्‌ मनसि. Ha गते सङ्कल्पविकर्पे at पुण्यपापे सदावः 


शक्त्यात्मा शान्तं. इति 4 
10 


७४ षट्चक्रनिरूपणमय्‌ 


अत्रास्ते शिशुसूर्यसोदरकखा चन्द्रस्य सा षोडशी 
शुद्धा नीरजसूक्ष्मतन्तुशतधाभगिकरूपा परा | 

विश्ुस्कोटिसमानकोमरतनूविंयोतिताऽधोमुखी 
निलयानन्दपरम्परातिविगलत्पीयूषधाराधरा ॥ ४६॥ 


भगवद्धीतायामपि-- 
जञानामि' सर्वकर्माणि wera कुरुते तथा ॥ इति ॥ 


तस्य समग्रा सर््यका्यसाधिका शक्ति स्यात्‌ । शाक्तिकाथ्यै दरौयति सदा 
करमिति अभीष्टकाय्यं ay तथा हरम्‌ अनिष्टं ad deg च शक्ति" खगतिरा- 
ˆ कारपथगमनं सुयिमला मधुरगयपयमयी वाणी स्यादिति सम्ध॑तान्वयः ॥४५॥ 

अथात्र पूर्वै तदन्त.शूप्यन्तदितयनेन सकरश्षरिकक्ुद्धरूपप्रकाशमित्य- 
नेन च सहक्षारकणिकान्तक्जिकोणे अमाकरामिर्व्बाणकलापरंमिन्वुनामधिषठानं छले- 
नामिहितम्‌ | इदानीं वेषां स्वरूपेण दइतरभेदकविरषणेन च प्पषएटयिदुमिच्छना- 
दावमाफलस्वरूपमाह seared इति । शि्ुसू्य॑सोदरमित्यनेन काया रक्तवर्णं 
ज्ञापितम्‌ चन्द्रस्य या प्रोड्री्यनेनेयममाकरेति ज्ञापितम्‌ । नीरजत- 
Tawa तस्य दतभागो दी्थफाकेनेति बोध्यम्‌ । श्रुद्धा करङ्करदिता | परा 
चिच्छक्तिरूपा Prema र्धम्‌ | 

अतएवोक्तं प्रभासखण्डे-- 

संस्थिता परमा माया देषिनां देहधारिणी ॥ 


(४६) अत्रास्ते इति | oa पमे चन्द्रस्य सा प्रसिद्धा अमानाभ्नी Sheath 
कला आस्ते कीढरी १ प्रातःकाङीनसू्यस्येवे कठा दीप्तिर्यस्याः सा तथा | 
शुद्धा निन्विकारत्वात्‌ । Toad: सूह्दाप्तभागस्येव एकरूपं यस्याः | पय 
प्रकृष्टा अथवा पद्यन्तीमध्यमावैखरीसमषिरपा | पुनः कीदशी | विशुदामसमानवोमला 
तुया | निप्योदिता क्षयोदयरदितत्वात्‌ | अधोमुखी पूर्णानन्दपरःपरा अति- , 
प्रकाशमाना या पीयूषधारा तदाश्रया परम्पराक्रमेण दिवसम्बन्धिपीयूषधागाधरेर्थः | 
[एतम्मते ¢ नित्योदिता ?› इति पाटः] : 

1 gat इति art 











refer ७९ 


नि््वाणाख्यकला परा परतया सास्ते तदन्तर्गता 
aaa सहखधा विभनजेतस्येकांशरूपा सती। 
भूतानामपिदेवतं भगवती निखप्रवोधोदया 
चन्द्राद्धोङ्गसमानभङ्करवती स्व्वारकतुद्यप्रभा ॥ 
इति अमाविरेषणम्‌ निव्यानन्दपरम्परेति ब्रह्मपरम्परोखत्रा ह्यथ, अतिषिग- 
क्पीयूषधाराधरा अतिशयागतक्ाविणीय्थ, । यद्वा निव्यानन्दपरम्परातिविग- 
सलीयूषधाराषरत्यकविरेषणम्‌ | अस्थाथे, परं चिन्दुरूपं शिवः परा प्रतिः 
शक्तिः आनिन्दैन समरसानम्दैेन परम्पराभ्यां रिवशक्तिभ्यामतिविगरन्ती या , 
पीयूषधारा wa निलयं निरन्तरं ताद्शधाराभिव धारां arated. । 
स्पष्टमन्यत्‌ ॥ ४६ | 
भिर््वाणकङास्वरूपमाह निर्व्वाणाए्यककेति | सा परा परतरा परमा कका 
अस्या अपि परतरा श्रेष्ठा | परादिति पारे सर्ववशरष्ठा set | सा तदन्तगता 
अमाकरायाः क्रोडे स्थिता । “ तन्मध्ये कुटिला निर्न्वाणाल्यसपतदरी Fer” 
इति पूर्ववोक्तवचनात्‌ | Feet Fase सहक्षमागेकमागरूपसूक्षमा 
सती जप्त इत्यन्वय । भूताना सर्न्व्राणिनामधिदैवतं edie 
gay । निव्यप्रबोधोदया तचवजञानघम्पादयित्री | warhammer 
चन्द्रद्धङ्गषटपामाकर वत्‌ gerry । raha एकदं gar 
ू्य्योदये यादकूमकाशः तादशप्रकाशमाना रक्तवर्णां च | ९७ ॥ 





(४७) निर्व्वाणाख्येत्ति | सा निर्व्वाणनाम्नी कठा अमाकटान्त्गता सती 
आस्ते | कीदृशी { पया प्रकृणदपि प्रक्रत सदहलप्रकारेण विभजितस्य are 
एकागरारूपा। सती शोभना | पुनः Heath ! भूतानामधिदेवतास्वरूपा भगवतीस्थृरूपा 
च| नियः प्रबोधोदयो स्याः सा तथा | BHM भङ्गुरं वक्राकारं वपुर्स्याः 

~ goat इयर्थः | 


७६ पटचक्रनिूपणम्‌ 


एतस्या मध्यदेशे विखसति परमापूव्वनिव्वाणशक्तिः 
कोव्यादिखप्रकाश्चा च्िभुवनजननी कोटि- 
भागेकरूपा । 
केशाध्रस्यातिसूष्ष्मा निरवधि बिगर्सेमधाराधरासा 
सर्व्वेषां जीवभूता मुनिमनसि संदा तखबोधं 
वन्ती ॥ ४८ ॥ 


परं बिन्ुस्वरूपमाह एतस्या इति एतस्या निर्व्वाणकलाया, मध्य- 
" देशे क्रोडे । अपूर्वा खष्ेरादावाविभूतत्ात्‌ किञ्चिदपि नासति ged यस्यास्ता- 
ˆ दी । परमा प्रहशकतिषटपा नि््वाणदक्तिथिकसतीत्यथैः , निर्वाणा 
Rae Renesas | waa स्वभ॑मरत्यपातालादिपपश्च- 
समुदायस्योखसतिस्थानरूपेदयथं यत Feet कोटिभागकभागरूपा अतोऽति- 
सूक्ष्मा निखधिविगरुतरेमधाराधरेति प्रेम आनन्दद्रैभावप्रफुहता | सामरस्या- 
नन्दाद्रभावप्रफुताजनिता या परागृतधारा निरवधि निरन्तरं विगरन्ती 
तादशधारां धारयतीदयर्थसर््यैषा जीवभूतैति 





एतस्या अंशं एव जीव. तदुक्तं यथा-- 


` ऽवरदमेयथा देवि स्फुरन्ति विस्फुरिष्का | 
तस्याश्चचुतं परं बिन्दु्॑दा भूमौ पतघ्यपि | 





(४८) एतस्या इति एतस्याः कया; मध्यदैरो पप्मापर््वनि्व्वाण- 
दाक्तिव्विलसति | agai ! कोव्यादिय इव प्रकारो यस्याः | श्रिमुयनजननी aedtst 
आधाप्भूतत्वात्‌ । ment कोटिभागैकभागरूपा अत्तसूष्षमत्वात्‌ अतो 
गुह्या ] feat Reader सा शक्तिः सर्ववैषां Mager सती सुदा वैण 
मनिमनसि तत्वज्ञानं बहस्तीति | ie 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ७७ 
तदैव सहसा दैवि संज्ञायुक्तो मवध्यपि ॥ इति । 


तस्याः शिवशक्तथासकपरचिन््न्त्मतशक्तया, । संज्ञायुक्तो जीवनामा vated | 
स्पष्टमन्यत्‌ इयं निर्व्वाणशक्ति, । निर्व्वाणकलाध.स्थाने नादरूपनिवोधिकोप्रि 
aad | 
तद्‌ य॒था 
निर्व्वाणाभ्यन्तरगता विरूपा Patter | 
नादोऽव्यक्तस्तदुपरि कोव्यादिव्यसमपरभा 
निरन्वणदयक्ति, परमा सर्वयेषां योनिरूपिणी ॥ 
, तस्यां शक्तौ शिवं जञेयं an निरज्ञनम्‌ 
त्रैव वुण्डरी शक्तिर्विहरेत्‌ परमासना ॥ इति ॥ 


निबोधिकाऽव्यक्तनादासिका वदहिहूपा । तथा हि नादस्य त्रिविधावस्था । 
५ तमोगुणाधिक्येन केवरुध्वन्यात्मकोऽव्यक्तनाद" | रजञआभिवयेन किश्चिदरण- 
बद्धन्यासात्मक | सच्वाधिक्यन fare” इति राघवम, | ततश्च नादगिन्दु- 
निबोधिका' अर्कन्ुवहिरूपा “a न्ानेच्छाकरियात्मानो वहीनद्र्कखरूपिण,"' 
ति शारदावचनात्‌ । तस्मादत्र वहिरूपनिोधिकोपरि स्थितिकथनत्‌ 
सू््यचन्द्रवहिमण्डलोपरि निर््वाणदक्ते स्थितिरिति सुधीमिभाव्यम्‌ 


व्यक्तमाह बुराणवोक्तपरहमध्याने--- 
बिन्दुरूपं परं ब्रह सदक्द्संस्थितम्‌ | 
शतयुपक्रम्य--- 
कणिकान्तसिकोणान्तरण्डलत्रयमण्डितम्‌ | इति ॥ 


mewn सूथचन््रवहिमण्डेन मण्डितमिलयथे हयं गिर्ववांणशक्तिः 
परविनदुरूपेति HERAT ॥ ४८ ॥ 


७८ प्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


तस्या मध्यान्तरारे शिवपदममरु शाश्चतं योगिगम्यं 
निलयानन्दाभिधानं सकठसुखमयं शुद्धबोधखरूपम्‌। 
केचिद्वद्याभिधानं पदमिति सुधियो वेष्णवं तद्छपन्ति 
केचिद्धंसार्यमेतत्‌ किमपि सुकृतिनो मोक्षमात्- 
TATA ॥ ४९ ॥ 


निव्वाणराक्तिमध्ये परब्रहमप्थानमाह तस्या मध्यान्तराले इति | तस्याः 
RSNA मध्यान्तराले TRA sad मायामरूरदितं 
„ frat ब्रह्मस्थान लपन्ति तच्चज्ञा इति रेष । योगिगम्यं सूक््मातिसक्ष्म- 
„ त्यात्‌ IATA चरस च योशेनः ज्ञ नमात्रगम्यभिति भवः । केचित्‌ 
वैदान्तिका ब्रहमाभिधानं ब्रहेति ater र्पन्ति अथवा हंसास्यं दंसनामकमिति 
aa । अन्ये सुकृतिन किमपि अनिन्बचनीयम्‌ आसम्रनोधम्‌ 
आत्मसक्षाकारस्थानं रपन्तील्यथे | मोक्षमिति इच्यते मायापरपश्चाहहि्ूयते 





(४९) अस्या इति अस्याः रक्तर्म्यदेशान्तरले Peas शिवपदमास्ते | 
निलानन्दं शाश्वतम्‌ अयन्तासक्तत्वात्‌ । योगं प्राप्य अलन्तक्ञानसाध्यत्वात्‌ 
सकटानां सुखमयं अथवा सकटं Hear सह वत्तमानं तत्‌ सुखमयञ्ेति तत्‌ तथा | 
Baga प्रमोधो ज्ञानं यस्पात्‌ | एतत्‌ पदं केचित्‌ परनरह्माभिधानमिति वदन्ति | 
अन्ये सुधियो वैष्णवं पद ठुपन्ति । केचित्‌ सुधियो मे्षं मेक्षखरूप ह॑साख्यमिति 
ठ एतेन ब्रहमविष्णुदिवदाक्तिस्वरूपं तत्पदमिलायातं हंसाख्यत्वात्‌ | तथाच 
ज्ञाना्णवे-- 


हकारे चिन्दुरूपेण ब्रह्माणं विद्धि पार्वति | 
सकरि सरीबिन्दुभ्या हरिशवाहं महेश्वरि 
अविनाभावस्म्बन्धात्‌ oh हरिहराविति ॥ 


eat Pat उ्ारितुमक्यत्वात्‌ aac तत्र स्फुटा. कीवृकाम्‌ ! आत्मनः 
परमात्मनः प्रनोधो यस्मात्तत्तयेति | . 


त 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ७९ 


यत्र amassed | अत्रेदमबधीयताम्‌ | सहक्षदखकर्णिकान्तश्िकोणे 
मायाबन्धनच्छादितप्रकृतिपुशूषासकपरंनिन्दु । 
तदुक्तम्‌-- 
सत्यरोके निराकारा महारयोति स्वटपिणी | 
माययाच्छरादितासानं चणकाकारणूपिणी ॥ 
हस्तपादादिरदिता चन्द्रसू््याथिरूपिणी | 
मायानन्धनसुत्सृज्य द्विधा मिला यदोन्णुखी 
रिवशिविभगेन जायते छषटिकल्पना | एति ॥ 
MIAH TEA TAY | 
तथा-- 

, Reon बिन्ुरूपश्च सिञधिकारणमेव हि । 
केचिद्वदन्ति रा ब्रह्मा कैशित्‌ विष्णु प्रकथ्यते ॥ 
कैश्चित्‌ wat AEM एको देवो निरञ्जनः 
आयाशक्तियुतो दैवश्चणकाकाररूपकः ॥ इति ॥ 

we Beat केशाग्रकोटिमागैकमागरूपसृकषपतेजोऽशो निर््वाणरक्तिम्मैध्य- 
दू्यभागो ब्रह्मपदमिति अन्धकारमतम्‌ | 
तेथान्यत्र- 
तन्मध्ये परनिन्दुश्च खछष्टिस्थितिर्यासमकम्‌ 
दत्यरूप रिव साक्षाद्‌ fg प्रमकरुण्डली | 

तथा-- 
वृत्तं कुण्डङिनीराक्तिगणलयसमम्वितम्‌ | 
TINT महेशानि रिबशक्तयासकं भिये ॥ इति ॥ 


do पट्चक्रनिषूपणम्‌ 


अय॑॑भिन्दु॒सर्व्यकारणरूम fac इति केचित्‌ । पौराणिकास्तु महाविष्णु- 
रूपोऽयमिति वदन्ति | जन्ये तु ब्रहमपुरुषोऽयम्‌ 


तदाह--- 


नादो न Ue Raa get नासीत्तमो ज्योतिरभूत्वान्यत्‌ 
श्रोललादिुद्धयानुपकभ्यमेकं प्राधानिकं aa पुमांस्तदासीत्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 


निर्भुण" सगुणश्चेति शिवो ज्ञेय. सनातने. । ~ 
Palo EAA सगुण सकर स्मृतः, ॥ 


दति शारदावचनात्तन्मध्येऽयं सगुणन्रहमह्य' | वस्तुतस्वेकमेव मतमेदान्नाना- 
` विधनान्ना marcas विस्तरेण ॥ ४९ ॥ # ॥ 

तदयं महावाक्यार्थनिर्णयः | Gyre सहसदपद्रं श्व 
mgd what अकारादरिककारान्तपश्वादद्णै. दुङ्काभै्िरतया- 
वनेन सदसरसंख्यकैु्तं सदक्दरम्‌ | णततणिकायां हंस. ततत, प्रम 
रिवरूपगुरु तत सूर्यमण्डलं चन्द्रमण्डलं ततो महावायु, | ततो ब्रह्म 
र्धम्‌ । ततो मदाशद्धिनी चनद्रमण्डके विध्ुदाकारलचिकोणम्‌ । तन्मध्ये 
मृणासूतरहतमागौकमागरूपसूक्ष्मा चन्द्रस्य पोडशी ककाऽधोमुखी रक्तवर्णा | 
तत्कोडे केा्रसहस्तमागेकभागरूपसूक्ष्मा निर्व्वाणका रक्तवणौऽधोुखी | 
तदधप्तात्‌ अव्यक्तनादात्मकनिगोधिकाख्यवहिः । तदुपरि नि्व्बाणकल क्रोडे 
Res Re अस्य वेशाभकोरिमागेकभागष्ूपसृष््मतेजोहेसषूपा 
निर्व्वाणदाक्ति' | अस्या ह॑सो जीव । मिन्दोम्मैध्ये get ब्रह्मपदमिति | भागम- 
कलपदुमपश्चराखादिमते सहसदलपद्मकणिकामध्ये चन्द्रमण्डले जकथादित्रिकोणं 
तन्मध्ये तिकोणसमीपे त्रिनिन्दुः तस्याधो PRET: GoM, | BERS: 
्रयरूपविसगैः सकारः seer । पएतदुभयासमको हंससिगिन्दुरूपेण 
प्रकाशते 1 तन्मध्ये sare ae निर्व्वाणशक्तिः तस्या मध्यदं 
परं ब्रहम इति । 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ८१ 
तद्था-- 


जथ WN पूर्णन्ुमध्यविस्फुरत्‌ | 

त्रिकोणं तडिदाभासमकथादिहटक्षयुक्‌ ॥ 

तदन्तरे परं शूल्यं विसर्गाधो व्यवस्थितम्‌ 
बालादित्यप्रभा तत्र कठा परोडश्यधोसुखी ॥ 
aad सौधधारां वै चन्रद्ाङ्गविभङ्करा | 

तदन्तरे प्रा शक्ति" कोव्यादिलयप्रभामयी ॥ 
Ragen चिदासिका 

तदन्त. सच्चिदानन्दो वेदाप्गीतो निरञ्जनः ॥ 

` बिन्दु ger cee विसर्ग प्रकृतिम्भ॑त' | 
Ysera हंसः स्वपरकागेन भासते ॥ इति |, 


एतन्मतमाश्रि्य परंबिन्दोरुदध हंसघटकविसरगौपरि गुरुस्थितिरिपि वदन्ति | ततर 
समीचीनम्‌ | निर्व्वाणतन्तरे परंचिन्दुरूपदाक्तिसमीपे तस्या, पूजाध्यानपरायणस्य 
निजगुरोः स्थितिकथनात्‌ । पूजा्पवेशनन्तु अध. स्थे सम्मुख एव युज्यते 
न तूर was 
तदुयथा । निर्वाणे 
सत्यरोके बीजकोषे चिन्तामणिगरहे दुमे । 


ध्यायेकिरञ्ननां दैवी रलसिंहासनोपरि | 
तस्यान्तिके निजगुरं पूजाध्यानपरायणम्‌ ॥ हृत्यादि | 


fra पूर््वमदिते महाकाटीतन्तवचने हंसवण॑दवयोपरि शुरुस्थितिः erat | 
अन्न मूकादिसषटस्दश्पर्य्यन्तोक्तप्रकारविपरीतपरकारबोधकानि तथां तदतिरिक्त 
बोधकानि च यानि वधनानि द्यन्ते तानि मतभेदेन परकारान्तरविधायकानि 
इति बोध्यम्‌ ॥ “ति सुपमभ्रकरणम्‌ | # ॥ 

11 


८९ पटृचक्रनिषपणम्‌ 


guia देवीं यमनियमसमभ्यासशीः सुशीलो 
ज्ञास्वा श्रीनाथवक्लात्‌ क्रममिति च महामो- 
ATM THT | 
ब्रह्मद्वारस्य मध्ये विरचयति स तां शुद्धबुद्धिखभावो 
भिचा तषिङ्गरूपं पवनदहनयोराकरमेणेव युतम्‌ ॥५०॥ 
अथेदानीं सदसदरपय्यैन्तं चकं निरूप्य तत्र कुण्डङ्िनीयोगं कथयिष्य- 
तरादौ कुण्डरिन्युष्थापनप्रकारमाह xe seared स योगिन 


शरसिद्धो जन गुरुवक्तात्‌ क्रमं ज्ञात्वा येन क्रमेण प्रकरण हदाधरकुश्चनादि- 
` पवनदहनयोरक्रमणं॒कुण्डङन्युत्थापनाद्धिकं भवति asad star 





(५०) gare | इदानीं भूतछ्द्िः कथ्यते | ता देवी शुण्डलिनी 
यनियमसमम्यासङीढः स॒ जनः श्रीनाथवकतात्‌ गुरुमुखात्‌ महामोक्षपथप्रकादं 
क्रमश्च ज्ञात्वा ¢ तत्‌, स्वयम्भूषिङ्गं भिचा ब्रहारस्य मध्ये विप्वयति | 
जनः कौदृशः ! शोभनं रीढं यस्य स तथा | शुधबुगरतः प्रभावो यस्य स तथा 
नन्वत्र सुप्ता तां Hearne नयति gene पवनदहनयोरिति त्योराक्रमणेन 
अर्थात्‌ पयनयोगेन दहनस्य Serie: Haar सरपाकृतिः सा उरुगतिभवत्येव | 
तथाच-- 

मूलाधारे Seed रिकोणं तेजसो निधिम्‌ 

तस्थाप्निरखामानीय मध उषव्यवस्थिताम्‌ ॥ 
इतयूद्नीयवचनात्‌ | 
परज्वरुद्कूजगाकारा FAAS BAT | 
सन्वैषां जननी प्रोक्ता generat | 
प्रबुध्य वद्ियोगेन मनसामन्धता हता | 
सूती गुणमादाय ATT GIFT । 
उद्वायेत्‌ कवाटन्तु यथा कुशिक्या हठात्‌ | 
बुण्डछिन्या तथा योगी मोक्षद्वारं प्रभेदयेत्‌ ॥ 


इति गोरक्षसंदिपोक्तत्वाच ॥ [एतन्मते “ छब्रबद्धरमावः ”? पति पाठः] | 


प्टूचक्रनिख्पणम्‌ < 


Tea ज्ञाता पवनदहनयोराक्षमेण हूमिति कूयैवीजोचारणेन च 
कुण्डङिनीयु्याप्य darvet मित्वा स्वयम्मुरिङ्गच्छिप्रं sete तां 
देवी कुण्डङ्नी बरहदवारस्य मध्ये चित्रिणीनाडीमुखमध्ये विरचयति प्रापयतीत्यर्थः | 
rence 
ततो daar रनैराकुश्येद्‌ गुदम्‌ | 

इव्यायागमकस्पद्रुमवचने हंसमन्प्यो-वारणेन बुण्डङिनीचाठनविधानात्‌ । ५ ह 
da इति मन्व कुण्डङिनीचारने विनियुक्त '' इति ररितारहस्यकार. | चिन्त 
हंसस्मरणपूर्व्वकतदाकुञ्चनविधानात्‌ हंस इति मनुममुस्पृत्य जीवात्मानं हृदयस्थं 
दीपकलिकाकारं मूखाधारमानीय तेन सा guste etme || 

अतएवागमकसपदरुमे — 

, आरोप्यारोप्य शक्तिं कमलजनिरयादासना साधकेन | 
हृति परक्वने आलना जीवासना UT चालनख॒क्तम्‌ 


काठीकुखाखतेऽपि-- 


देदयाद्धंसमनुना नीला जीवं सुखाग्बुजे | 
Re समुत्थाप्य कुण्डङीं परदेवताम्‌ | इति ॥ 





HEAT VL Ta 
आक्कृष्य प्रणवेणैव जीवासानं नगेन्द्र | 
कुण्डङिन्थां सहं प्राणं गन्धमादाय साधक" । 
सोऽदन्तु मनुना दैवीं घ्वाधिष्ठनि प्रवेशयेत्‌ | इति ॥ 


तत्य हंसेन प्रणवेन वा erated मूराधारमात्रीय jaa 
ङण्डकिनीुथाययेत्‌ इति सुधीमिभाव्यय्‌ | 


८४ पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


स जन कीशः £ यमनियमसमभ्यासश्चीठः यमनियम इति ate. 
बल्थककामक्रोधादिनाशकतदनुकरूकशरीरान्त्वायुरेवनमन'्े्यादिसाधकाङ्गयोग - 
प्रदी । तैरेव saat: न तु फेवर्यमनियममात्रेण | अतएव 
WEA चतु.पचचाशच्छरोफे "योगी यमयै्ुत ' gaa यमायैरिति बहुवच- 
नान्ततलेन प्रयुक्तम्‌ । अयन्तु यमा्भ्यासः कामायाकुरतिचित्तानामेव | यदि 
त॒ ज्मान्तरीयादषटवशात्‌ स्वभावतो वा क्रोधकामादिरष्ितः तदा तदूयोगा- 
भ्यास बिनापि प्रङृतयोगे शक्तो भवतीति बोध्यम्‌ | 

सुरीटे इति यत" यमायभ्यासश्पैर' अतएव सुशील इति | श्रीनाथ- 
वक्रादिति | गुरूप्देद्यं विना करम्ञानं न भवतीति भावः । 


अतणएवोक्तम्‌-- 
गुरूमदेशतो जञेयं न त्‌ रूसार्थकरोटिमि" ॥ इति | 


क्रमं विशेषयति महामेोक्षवरसमकाशमिति मोक्षसमं चित्रिणीनाड़ीमध्यच्छि्र- 
era ae प्रकाशः प्रस्फोटनं येन क्रमेणेव्यथै, । शुदधयुद्धिस्वेभाव इति 
Veta ब्रह्मणि स्वमावो यस्य अथवा शुदधबुद्धया स्विन्‌ आसनि भावो 
यस्ये, | सुगुप्तं यथा स्यात्तथेति करियाविरोषणम्‌ । अथवा तलिङ्गरूपं 
घुगप्तं॑शद्रितपुखतेनाव्यक्तम्‌ अप्रकारितसुखमिति यावत्‌ । अथात्र 
कुण्डखिनयुस्थापनप्रकारं विरेषेणाह | 


अगमकल्पदुमपश्चमशालायाम्‌-- 
पद्मासने निवेश्याङ्के तत" पाणिरयं न्यसेत्‌ | 
ततो हंसमुपस्छत्य दानै" सङ्कोचयेदुदम्‌ ॥ 
यायुुत्तोरयेत्तन वसना स पुनः पुन, 
उत्तोल्य daha तस्यानुष्ठानसुच्यते ॥ 
भूलाधारसरोजे तु Pag ` =“ 


धटूचक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ८९ 


कामो मवति तन्मध्ये Tahara 
ag कुण्डलीशक्ति स्वयम्भूरिङ्गवेष्िनीम्‌ | 


तथा-- 
कामाथिना Ha पर हंसामिरामिणीम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 


तथा Hayat 


हृदिस्थां gaat wear गला तदुदरे शिवे 
कण्ठाय समनुप्राप्य द्वारं इुश्चिकया हात्‌ | 
Sara परमेशानि पवनेन प्रदीपयेत्‌ | 
हताशनपतपतं त॒ तापेन भमु ॥ 
प्रसुप्त नर्न Vs योनिवमते प्रयोधयेत्‌ | 

, ततः TTR यावननाच्यन्तरेषु च | 
गुरुदिषटेन मार्गेण waar कुम्भकेन वै । 
आक्रभ्यैवं ततो जीवं सुगतेन पथा भृशम्‌ । 
उद्धौच्छासैरूँदलान्‌ कारयेत्‌ पङ्कजान्‌ रिषि 
प्वोधयन्‌ ashy eae नयेत्‌ सुधी; ॥ इति ॥ 


तदयं सकर्वचनपर्य्यालोचनरिद्ध॒क्रमोऽवधीयताम्‌ योगी जनः 
विहितास उपविद्य स्वाङ्के उत्तानौ करौ कला Gates स्थिरचित्तः सन्‌ 
दहान्त्ायुमापू््यं कुम्भकं इत्वा हदयमाकुशचयेत्‌ तेन उद्धौचाोतसरण- 
Raft: | ततो वेहान्तरस्थवायोरद्रकण्डादिव्यापकतया नाडीच्छिद्रपरसफोटने- 
नाधोगमनमनुभूय गुदमाकुच्चयापानं संरुध्य वायुुत्तोरय मूलाधारकमरखकि- 
कान्तसिकोणस्थकामं वाममावरचयेत्‌ । dada तत्र Rade कामाभरिनोत्तप् 
कुण्डरिनीं Reno चेतयित परमशिवसामरस्यामिरापिर्णी तां स्वयभ्भूठिङगयुलं 
स्फोटयित्वा azar चित्रिणीनादीयुखमध्यं प्रापयेदिति waka ॥५०। 


८६ पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


fen लिङ्गत्रयं तत्परमरसरिवे सृक्ष्मधान्नि प्रदीपे 
a देवी शुद्धसन्ता तड़द्धिव विलसत्तन्तुरूप- 
SEM | 
बह्माख्यायाः Rrra सकरुसरसिजं प्राप्य 
. देदीप्यते त- 
न्मोक्षार्यानन्दरूपं घटयति सहसा सूष्ष्मता- 
छक्षणेन ॥ ५१ ॥ 


इदानीं कुण्डकिनीयोगमकारमाद भिच्वेति | संशुद्धवत्मैनि sala 
मेद । स्याथ सा देवी दरुण्डछिनी तलिङ्गत्रयं स्वयम्भूबाणेतराल्य erat 
ˆ भित्वा तैः संरुद्धवस्मनि वर्स gen ब्रह्मास्याया, शिराया. चित्रिणीनाडी- 
सम्बन्धि तद्प्रथितमिति यावत्‌ | गरथितं तत्‌ सकरुसरसिजें प्राप्य तल दैदीप्यते 
तत. सूक्ष्तारक्षणेन Geet सूषषममविनेति यावत्‌ । तेन भविन 
बिरुसत्तन्तरूपस्वरूमा सती परमरसशिवे परमरस' परमानन्द" तन्मये शिवि 
सहस्दरुकणिकास्थपरेनिन्दुरूपशिवसमीपे अर्थाद्वा मोक्षास्यानन्दरूपम्‌ अर्थात 
साधकस्य निध्यानन्दरूपघुक्ति सहसा serie | रि्गत्यमिति तसूष्वौक्तं 
rath पञ्चशिवघनेति चतुर्दशथन्थीन्‌ ARTS बोध्यम्‌ | 


तदुक्तं शाक्तनन्दतरङ्ञिण्याम्‌--- 
गच्छन्तीं mas भिचा रन्थीशधतुरैश ॥ इति ॥ 





(4?) Brea { इदानीं तस्या comme सा देवी तष्िद्ात्रयं 
खयम्भूबाणेतयख्यलिङ्गान्‌ frat agers: सकठ्सरसिजाने प्राप्य 
परमरसरि्े देदीप्यते शरश Ae वुष्यैती सहसरा Gana मोक्षानन्दरसं 
घटयति च अर्थात्‌ रिवकिद्गप्य सा कष्ट ? gece चतुध्िरातित्यसम्बन्धा | 
पुनः कीदृशी { figea प्रकारातन्तुरूपमिव खरूपं यस्थाः सा तथ। | शिषे 
किम्भूते १ genes ger धाम यस्य । प्रदीपे oO व्यति | 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ८७ 


तत्र fester स्वतन्तन्ते-- 
पट्चक्र्थान्‌ शिवान्‌. भिचा देवी गच्छति निष्कलम्‌ | 
चक्राधिष्ठानतो स्यं शृत्वा तचन्मनोहरम्‌ ॥ 
मोह यित्वा महेशानमानन्दराप्ठतविग्रहम्‌ 
रमिता तत्र तत्रैव यावत्‌ प्रापनोति शाश्चतम्‌ । 
मोहितः प्रथा यस्मात्तस्माद्धिन उदाहृत । इति ॥ 
तथा मायातन्ते- 
भिचा लिङ्गलयं दैवी शक्तिमार्गेण गच्छति 
तत्तद्रूपेण चक्रेषु निष्कं प्राप्य fide ॥ इति ॥ 
ततद्पेणेति वैखरीमध्यमापद्यन्तीमविन | 
तदुक्तस्‌-- 
, प्रथमे वैसरीभावो मध्यमा हृदये स्थिता 
et पदयन्तीमाव" पएमापप्तु चिन्युनि ॥ 
अस्याथैः परा पद्रयन्ती मध्यमा Fede चतस" शब्दोत्ादिका" शक्तय, 
goatee | तत. wean कुण्डिनीगमनकारे प्रथमे स्वयम्भू- 
रिक्गसमीपे वैसरीमाविन तं मोहयित्वा एवं हदये बाणणिङगं मध्यमामाविन yr 
aries पदयन्तीभावेन मोहयित्वा परंबिन्दु निकटे पराभावमामरोतीय्थ' | 
चक्रमेदप्रकारमाद-- 
चिचिणीविवरे रक्तमेदपद्कसमुद्धवान्‌ | 
CAAA ASM TTS तान्‌ 
maa ATA AR, परमेश्वरि | 
नालं वामभ्विरोत्‌ पदान्तेन मेद, प्रजायते | 
यथा रिस्पवतीं ररिमवाहीं erate ay | 
मेषूधिला तथा चक्रं षड्‌ जीवेन नयेच्च ताम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 


८८ षट्‌चन्रनिरूपणम्‌ 
तथा-- 


षट्चक्रसन्धिमारगेण सुपुम्णाव्मना तथा | 
हसेन मनुना दैवीं wean समानयेत्‌ ॥ इति Ul 


परमरसरिवं विरोषयति । सूषष्मधानि प्रदीपे इति सूक््षधाम निर्वाण 
MMH हंस तन्मध्ये दीप्यमाने इत्यर्थ, | 

दैवीं विरोपयति शुद्धसत्वेति स्वातिसच्यपरमसत्वश्ुद्धसत्व- 
Rasa wit शरीरावच्छित्रचैतन्यरततरोत्रग्र् तत्रेयं॑शुद्धसत्वा 
तुरीयेति यावत्‌ 

केन॒ प्रकारेण मोक्षास्यानन्दं घटयतीवयाकाङ्क्षाय रुच्यते । तल 
" परंबिन्दौ at कुण्डलिनीं विलाप्य केषाश्चित्‌ साधकानां शिवात्मनीरभेदेन तदधिन्दु- 
चिन्तनेन केषाञ्चित्‌ तथा शवस्यासमकचिन्तनेन केषाश्चित्‌ परमपुरुषमय- 
चिन्तनेन तथा केपाश्चित्‌ केवलरिवशक्तिसामरस्यचिन्तनेन सा देवी मोक्ष 
घटयतीति | | 


तदुक्तं मायातन्ते 
पेक्य जीवासमनोराहुयोमं योगविशारदाः | 
शिवात्मनोरभेदेन aaah परे विदु" ॥ 
WRATH तथा ज्ञानं जगुरागमवादिन, 
 पुराणपुरुषस्यान्ये ज्ञानमाहुविशारदा, ॥ 
रिवशक्तयो सामरस्यात्मकं परकतिनोऽपरे ॥ इति ॥ 


tet जीवासनोरिति समाधिविपयम्‌ 1 योगमिति युज्यते परमासमना 
एकीभूयते अनेनास योग. | त॑ योगमि्यथ. | समाधिसुक्तवा ध्याने योगमेदमाह | 
रशिवात्नोरिथादि | सामरस्यासमकमिति 


खीपुंयोगे तु यत्‌ सौर्यं सामरस्यं प्रकीरितम्‌ | 2 


पदचक्रनिकूप्णम्‌ ८९ 


तचिन्तनपकारमाह ब्ृहच्छरीकरगे-- 
कलां कलङ्करहिता चिदानन्दपपेयुषीम्‌ | 
बिम्बरूपनिदानश्च शुद्धस्फरिकसननिमम्‌ ॥ 
पराविराभिवामोरुमदारुसवयपु.स्ियम्‌ | 
नादोपरि महादेवं grater ज्ञानचक्षुषा ॥ इति ॥ 
wot gost | चिदानन्दं बिन्दुरूपरिवमुपेयुषी प्राप्तवतीमिय्थ, | 
बिम्बरूपनिदानं पररिवम्‌ | 
तथान्यत्र-- 
'ूयरूपं पररिवं प्रापयिला तु कुण्डकीम्‌ 
ततः स्मरसीभूता पाययित्रा परारृतम्‌ | 
पुनस्तेन पथा दैवीं प्रापयत्‌ बुरुगहुरम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
यथा 
aed तयो. Fa सामरस्यं विभाव्य च 
agente तपैयेदेददेवताम्‌ । इति ॥ 
प्रकारान्तरमाह गन्धव्व॑मारिकायाम्‌-- 
wean शिवपुरं wi दु.खविवज्ितम्‌ | 
सर्व्तोऽटक्तरदियं Reagernagh. ॥ 
सदारिवपुरं vs कल्पतक्षयशोमितम्‌ | 
पञ्चभूतात्मकं वृक्षं गुणत्रयसमच्ितम्‌ | 
चतुर््येदचतु'शाखानि्यपृष्पसमनिवितम्‌ | 
पीतं शेतं तथा कृष्णं रक्पुप्पन्च पाव्वैति | 
हरितश्च विचित्रश्च नानापुष्यमनोहरम्‌ । 
एवं Rage ध्याता तदधो रततवेदिकाम्‌ ॥ 


पट्चक्रनि्पणम्‌ 


तत्रोपरि सुपर्यक amare, | 
मन्दारपुष्पसहितं नानागनधानुमोदितम्‌ ॥ 
तत्रोपरि महदिव" सदा तिष्ठति aah | 
ध्यायेत्‌ सदाशिवं दैवं शुद्धस्फयिकसनिभम्‌ ॥ 
वद्धरलसमाकीणै Aas मनोहरम्‌ । 
स॒सप्रसन्रवदनं स्मेरास्यं सततं प्रिये ॥ 
श्रवणे कुण्डलोपेतं waar शोभितम्‌ 
TS पदमसहसेण माख्या शोभितम्‌ वपु ॥ 
अष्टबाहुं त्रिनयनं रिवं पदमदलेक्षणम्‌ | 
पादयोर्न पुरं रम्यं शब्दनरहमयं वपु. ॥ 

एवं स्थूवपुस्तस्य भावयेत्‌ कमलेक्षणे | 
पद्ममध्ये स्थितं देवं निरीहं शवरूपवत्‌ | 
शाबरूपो महादेव" wet नास्ति कदाचन | 


तथा-- 


ध्यायेत्‌ कुण्डिनं दैवीं स्वयम्भूरिङ्गवेष्टिनीम्‌ 
हसेन ममुना दैवीं Geant समानयेत्‌ ॥ 
सदाशिवो महादेवो यत्रास्ते परमेश्वरि | 

देवीं रूपवतीं कामसथह्ासविहारिणीम्‌ । 
सुखारविन्दगन्धेन aed प्रमं शिवम्‌ 
प्रचोध्य परमेशानि तेत्रैवोपविरोत्‌ प्रिये ॥ 
शिवस्य मुखपद्मं हि चुचुम्बे कुण्डली शिवे | 
सदारिवेन देवेशि wot रमेत्‌ प्रिये ॥ 
अमृतं जायते देवि तक्षणात्‌ परमेश्वरि 1, 
separa दैवि राक्षारससमायतम्‌ ॥ 


x 


FEAL ARI ९१ 


iar तां कुखकण्डलीं wasting जीवेन are सुधी- 
tala धामनि शुद्धपद्मसदने शैवे परे खामिनि | 

ध्यायेदिष्टफलगप्रदां भगवती चैतन्यरूपां परां 
योगीन्द्रो गुरुपाद पद्मयुगलाङम्बी समापो TAN 





तेनानेन देवेशि त्यत्‌ परदेवताम्‌ | 
पट्चक्रदेवतास्तत्र सन्तर्प्यामूतधारया ॥ 
आनयेत्तेन मार्गेण मृखाधारं पुन get: 
यातायातक्रमेणैव तत्र वुर्यान्मनोकयम्‌ ॥ 
एवमभ्यस्यमानस्तु अहन्यहनि TALE | 
जरामरणदु .खायेैच्यते मवबन्धनात्‌ ॥ 


एवम्प्रकारान्तरस्तन्त्ान्ते अनुसन्धेय, ॥ ५१ ॥ 

दुण्डरिनीध्यानयोगमुक्तवा समाधियोगमाह नीलेति भस्यायमधैः | 
समाधौ यत, योगीन्द्रः adh ता पूष्वोकतोत्थापनक्रमेण aaa प्राप्तवती 
भगवती बुण्डसिनीं जीवेन सा लयवशात्‌ samt शुद्धपवसदने Teal 
मध्यै परे परविनदुरूपे शिषे रिवपदे arth स्वामिनिकटे नीला conan 
दृष्टदैवतारूपां ता स्वामिरूपपरंविन्दुना सहैकीभावं प्रापयित्वा परा othe 





(५९) नीत्वेति | तस्यास्तु साधकाय ओमियाह नीत्वेति | सुधौः जनः 
तां gequefedt आयेन जीवात्मना सादरं eran दीनां कृत्वा रैव fra 
सम्बन्धीयमेक्षे धामनि नीत्वा ध्यायेदित्ति । “‹अपानः कषैति प्राणं प्राणोऽपानश्च 
कर्षति” इत्येततक्तमेण यदा प्राणो जीवम्‌ धकषैयति dea जीवात्मना ea तस्या 
आनयनम्‌ | कीदृ Bua se सदनं स्थानं यस्य । परे उतकृ 
अथवा परे स्थानघामिनि सर्ववेषामधिकारिणि संहारफारणत्वात्‌ । तां alex? 
gene प्रददाति इति genene | भगवतीं श्रीकाममाहात्म्यवनततं चैतन्यरूपां चेतना- 
wer | परं प्रफृश शतैः पादपकमधुगरारम्बी defen: एवंक्रमेण भावयेदिति 
सम्बन्धः | ain श्यानधारणादौ यत्त; | [एतन्मते “ डुककपक्रसदते ° इति पठः 


QR पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


स्वरूपं ध्यायेत्‌ । चैतन्थरूषामिति } तदनन्तरं परविन्दुमपि तन्मध्यशूल्यमध्ये 
चिदासनि विलाप्य शयुदधचैतन्यरूपां ध्यायदिति सथुदायाथै' | तत सोऽ्म्मविन 
fated ज्ञात्वा तत्र चित्तं era सरधैव्यापकसम्पूरीज्ञानासना स्थिर- 
चित्तः सन्‌ तिष्टेदिति शेष. | 
तदुक्त श्रीमदाचा््य॑स्वामिना 
मकारं कारणं प्ाज्तथिद्ास्मनि विलापयेत्‌ 
Frere नियञुद्धबुद्धयुक्तसदेदरय' ॥ 
परमनन्दसन्दोहो वासुदेवोऽदमोमिति | 
ज्ञात्रा विवेचकं चित्तं तत्पाक्षिणि ema ॥ 
चिदासनि विलीनश्चेत्तचिततं नैव चारयेत्‌ 
। पूणैबोधालना तिघ्‌ पूर्णाचरघमुद्रवत्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
भकारमिति प्रणवपक्षे | अत कारणं परविन्दु" । बासुदेवोऽहमिति “ वैष्णवं 
तपन्ति" इत्यनेनैकवाक्यतया वैप्णवपक्ष | तेन यो यदैवतोपासक, स 
सोऽहमिति ज्ञाला । ॐ इति प्रणवोपासनायाम्‌ । अन्यत ॒तत्तम्मन्ततमय- 
्रुण्डलिनीस्वरूपं rear ति बोध्यम्‌ | 
तन्तान्त-- 
किरणस्थं तदभिष्यं चन्द्रमस्किरमध्यमू | 
'महामूल्य (शल्य) मयं छरा पूणैस्ति्ठति योगिराट्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
जीवेन ae नीयेति पू्यपद्रितवचनात्‌ da इति shard हृदयस्थं 
दीपकल्किकारं हंस इति मन्तरेण मूलाधास्मानीय तैन are ुण्डङिनीं नयेत्‌ | 
लयवशादिति | रयक्रममाह्‌--- 
विकोणाख्ये तु देवेशि went चिन्तयेततत, | 
ब्रह्मणन्तत्र Uber कामदेवे्च चिन्तयत्‌ | 
` ¬ "महूलय रमं गत्वा ५ इति ताराखस्यदतिकधृतपाटः भ 


पटूचक्रनिषूपणम्‌ 


जीवं ततैव निश्चित्य प्रणवोच्वारणेन च | 

पदै च गमनं cat विसग॑नाशकामिनी ॥ 
घराणं सञ्चिन्स देवेशि महेशि प्राणव | 
डाकिनीं परमारध्यां शक्तिश्च भावयेत्ततः ॥ 
एतानि गिरिजे मात galt नीता गणेश्वरि ॥ 


तथा-- + 
ततश्व" प्रथिवी धन्या गन्धं नीलया महेश्वरि | 
आष्कृष्य प्रणवेनैव जीवात्मानं नगेन्द्रजे ॥ 
कुण्डकिन्या सह प्राणं गन्धमादाय साधकः 

` सोऽदं त॒" मनुना दैवि स्वाधिष्ठाने प्रवेशयेत्‌ ॥ 


तथा-- 
त्कणिकायां वरुणं तत्रापि भावयेत्‌ हरिम्‌ 1° 

" प्रुराणकारिणी" ake पिन्तयिला वरानने ॥ 
एतानि गन्धश्च दिवे रसं नीला वरानने । 
जीवासानं कुण्डिनं रतश्च मणिपूरे ॥ 


तथा-- 


त्करणिकायां सश्रोणि वहि afer साधक | 
तत्न शुद्र. स्वयं कर्ता संहरे सकरस्य च ॥ 
ऊाकिनीदाक्तिसंयुक्तं भावयेतते मनोहरम्‌" | 
ततशक्चभरिन्धियश्च ध्यात्वा तेजोमयं शिवे | 


९६ 





+ वीजं ada संचिन्त्य पाणावादानमेव च 

पदे च गमनं पायौ विसर्ग नसि कामिनि ॥ इति पाठान्तरम्‌ ॥ 
° ^" पूर्वोक्तां "* इति पाठान्तरम्‌ ॥ ४ Saree? इतिं पाठान्तरम्‌ ॥ 
+ ^“ सोऽहमिति *° af पाशन्तरम्‌ ॥ 


gt परं ^“रसनेनिष्यकूपस्यं tam seed” पुस्तकान्तरे sates: पाटः ॥ 


५ ^ युवानैराकिणी °? दति पठन्तम्‌ ॥ TR तत चक्षु, 


९४ पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


एतद्रसानिः Bay we? नीला महाभगे 
जीवालानं कुण्डखिनी रूयश्चानाहते नयेत्‌ | 
तथा - 
ates wag जग्वस्थाननिवग्सिनम्‌ 
तत्र योनिमण्डल्श्च वाणटिद्धविराजितम्‌ | 
शाकिनीशक्तिसंयुक्तं तत ag खगिच्धियम्‌ ॥' 
एतानि रूष संयुज्य स्पशे चमल्कारिणि 1 
जीवं कुण्डलिनीं wat fas स्थापयेत्ततः ॥ 
तथा-- 
ठकणिकायामाकाशं शिवश्च श्राकिनीयुतम्‌ | 
ara: श्रोत्रश्च आसारो संस्थाप्य amar ॥ 
एतानि खै शब्दै वै नीत्वा शङ्कर मसिये | 
जीवं कुण्डरिनीं शब्दश्चाज्ञाचकरे निधापयेत्‌ ॥ 


ह्यन्तं क्कारमारिन्याम्‌ जनिकोणास्य पक्रान्तमूराधारलिकोणे त्म्ये 
रङ्करचिन्तनमिति | एवं प्रणवोचारणेन जीवानयनमिति मतान्तरम्‌ | विसर्ग- 
नाशकामिनीति । विस उपसे. alee इति यायत्‌ | तततीरायिद्लु शीलं 
यस्याः सा qvetedt पत्यौ पदे सहक्तदलकमरस्थनिन्दुमयरिये गमनं साधकेन 
कर्ति रेषः | एतानि रङ्कारनरहषकामदेवडाकिनीशक्तिघाणेन्धियाणि get 
नीतया प्रथव्यां विकाप्य प्रथिवी wae विराप्य जीवासानं कुण्डरिनीं 
Tea HUE सोऽदमन्तेण स्वाधिष्ठाने समानयेत्‌ एति रेष । एवं 
सर्व्वत योध्यम्‌ | जीवै वुण्डकिनीं शन्दतत्मान्ञाचक्रे नीला wera 
AAR अहङ्कारं FETA महत्त दिरण्यगर्माख्यसूक्षप्रकृतौ प्रकृति 
परमिन्दौ विखपयेत्‌ | 


a 








----- ------------ ~ --.--- -~~ ~~~ ~ 


1 एतामि eam, ८ शस्य, 


पट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ९९ 


तदुक्तं मन्त्रतन्त्रप्रकारे - 
अहङ्कारे हरेद्रयोम सदब्दं तन्महव्यपि | 
महच सर््वशक्तीनामव्यक्ते कारणे परे | 
सचिदानन्दरूपं यत्‌ रष्णवै कारणं परम्‌ । 
परथिव्यादिक्रमात्‌ wea तत्र छीनं विचिन्तयेत्‌ । इति ॥ 


सर््वशक्तिमव्यक्ते Rommel nesta प्रकृतिश्च परे परबिनदु- 
रूपकारणे हरेदित्यर्थः | 
अत्र-- 
, समाधिकारात्‌ प्रगेव विचिन्ध्यातिपयक्त | 
स्थूलसृक्षक्रमात्‌ सर्व चिदातमनि विरापयेत्‌ ॥ 


दत्याचाय्यैविधानात्र्‌ स्थूलानां सूक्ष्मे ऊयः । पएरथिव्यादिकमनाहतपय्यन्तं 

ee स्ये पएरथिव्या्रितसेन पादघराणेन्धिययो पएथिवीप्रपश्चसषदा 

यस्य च एथिवीस्थाने विलापनम्‌ | एवं जरस्थाने पाणिरसनेन््ियनल्मपश्चानाम्‌। 

वहिस्थाने पायुचक्चुरिन्धियवद्धप्िपश्चानाम्‌ | वायुस्थाने उपस्थतगिन्धियवायु- 

HOTT । जआकारास्थने वानश्रोतेन्द्रियाकाशमपश्चानां ख्य | STAT 
AHMET तेषायुक्तक्रमेण कारणे ख्य | तत. क्षकारायकारान्तवर्णान. 

Rett Pe wea cafe सर्व्वम्त्युपादानात्‌ ब्रहमात्राव- 

Raat जाज्ञचकोस्थितपूर्वोपदरितमिन्दुबोधिन्यादिसकलकारणशरीरमपि 

विलोमेनादिकारणे gist विरापयेदित्ि | 


FORTE 
सङ्गरपथैवं ततो न्यासस्थानाद्र्णोश्च संहरेत्‌ | 
प्रतिलोमे कक्षयो ऊकारस्य हकारे ॥ 
हरयश्च सकारे च सख्यश्च THT | 
aang} यशसा यतत. 1) इति ॥ 


९६ । पटचक्रनिषूपणम्‌ 


तथा 
तद्ौ संहेष्ठिन्दौ ककायान्तं नियोजयेत्‌ | 
at नादेनान्तरं नादं नादान्ते संहरेत्‌ पुम" ॥ 
तसुन्मन्यां समायोज्य विष्णुवक्त्रे नयेच ताम्‌ | 
तं पुनर्मुरुवक्त्रे तु योजयेत्‌ साधकोत्तम' | 
ततश्च योजगेदररणानिल्येत्‌ परमे रिषे । इतिं ॥ 
विष्णुवकतर seat | 
eater मोक्तमधस्तादिन्दुपावको | इत्यादि | 
बिन्दु" पुरुष इ्युक्तो विसम" प्रकृति स्परत' । 
इव्यादिवचनयोरेकवाक्यतया तस्यैव TART 


नील" तः पुंसि बिन्द्रासनि तमथ परष्मन्यथो करतत 
तद्र श्तौ Barratt च मयतु तां केवले arf शान्ते 
इति केशवाचा्यवचनैकवावयत्वाच्च अत्र स्वकारणे संहरणद्ीनात्‌ नादान्तस्य 
व्यापकराक्तौ तामुन्मन्यां ताँ समन्यां at विष्णुवकतरे इति बरोध्यम्‌ | प्वंप्रकरिण 
वर्णानां संहरणे षटूचक्राणां संहार" RETA वणेमयल्वात्‌ | 
तदुक्त विश्वसारे 
, आदिवरणासकं पत्रं carat परिकीसितम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
अथ वणैपद्रोमयसंहरणप्रकारमाह सम्मोहनतन्ते-- 
वादिसान्तान्‌ दरप्थार्णान्‌ संहरेत्‌ करमरासने 
तं carat परे बादिरान्ताक्षरान्िते | 
स्वाधिष्ठाने समायोज्य बोधयेदाक्तया गुरो" ॥ इव्यादि ॥ 
विपत्र हक्षरपिते योजयिता तत" सभी: | 
तवरणौ datferat तं कराया नियोजयेत्‌ ॥ ea | 


पटटवक्रनिरूपणम्‌ ९७ 


Bard award परशिषात्‌ पीला ga: ण्डली 
नित्यानन्दमहयेदयात्‌ Forays विशेत्‌ सुन्दरी। 
तहिव्याशरतधारया स्थिरमतिः सन्तर्पयेहैवतं 
मोगी योगपरम्पराधिदितया ह्याण्डभाण्ड- 
स्थितम्‌ ॥ ५३ ॥ 
तत्य HORNS age संहत्य aast स्वाभिष्ठाने संहरेत्‌ | एवंक्रमेण्ना- 
चक्रस्थहक्षप्ययन्तं dee cast Prat निन्दुं बोधिन्याम्‌ एवं पूर्व्ववत्‌ सर 
ara Remake एवाज्ञाचक्रसंहरणे तकणिकास्थष्ाकिनीतररिङ्ग 
प्रणवादीनां निराधारस्थिव्यसम्भवात्‌ ्रकृतिपर्ययन्तसंहरणानन्तरं तानपि erat ` 
data शृद्धपद्मसदने किम्भूते 2 मोक्षे धामनि स॒क्तिसम्पादकस्थनि gad । 
योगीन्द्रं विरोपयति generar | गुरूपदेरेनैव सर्वसिद्धिरिय- 
तस्तयदाभित सन्निति माव | 
समाधौ यत दृति | समाधिरक्षणमाह zee -- 
aaa ara fale स्तिमितोदधिवत्‌ स्यतम्‌ | 
स्वरूपशुन्यं यद्धयानं तत्‌ समाधिधिधीयते ॥ 
तथान्यत्र--समस्यभावना नियं जीवाल्मपरमालसनो' 
समाधिमाहुगभुनय, प्रोक्तमषटाङ्गलक्षणम्‌ ॥ इति | 
¢ योगध्चित्तवृत्तिनिरोध- इति पातञ्जलसूत्रम्‌ । तस्मिन्‌ यत॒ तदभ्यासयुक्त 


Fay ॥ ५२ ॥ 
उक्तप्रकारसकल्योगचिन्तनानन्तरं यकर्चन्यं॑तदाह क्षाममिति t 
„ eat. | दुण्डलिनी सुन्दरी पररिवात्‌ परमामृतं पीत्वा निव्यानन्दमहोः 





(५३) छक्षाभमिति | ददानीमस्या आगमनं खस्थाने इति तदा सा 
करुण्डखिनी प्रणनन्दस्य, महान्‌ उदयो यस्मात्‌ परमशिवात्‌ सदाग्रिवात्‌ परमां 
18 , |, 


९८ घट्चक्रनिरूपणम्‌ 


aaa कुरपथात्‌ चित्रिणीनाडीमध्यस्थव्रहमपथं प्राप्य मूले ASM पुन" 
afar: | da पू्वोक्ततत्द्भयानानन्तरं रिवशक्त्योः सामरस्यं 
विभाव्य सामश्स्यानन्दैन पररिवादुखत्नपरमागृतेन geet तयेत्‌ | 
ततत्षणाष्तं पीले. | 


साङ्गत्यन्तु तयो. छता पाययित्वा परागम्‌ ॥ 
इति पू्ववोक्तक्चने पाययित्वेव्नेन पानकारययपररणवोधनात्‌ 


समृतं विशेषयति semi अकक्तरसवदेकाभमित्यथ. । नित्या 
नन्व्महोदयादिति नित्यानन्दस्य महोदयो महपरकाशो यत्र तस्मादिषयर्थ | 
ae ARR । येन पकारेणोत्ाननं पुनस्तेन प्रकारेण मूराधररे आनयनम्‌ | 
. तेन मदा लिङ्गादिभेदक्रमेणो गच्छति तदा agile पुनराधारमाधाति । 
तदुक्त श्रीमदाचार्य्यस्वामिना-- 
सुधाधारासारश्वरणयुगसाम्तधिगरिति, 
nog सिश्वम्ती पनरपि रसान्नायमहसा | 
अवाप्य eat भूमिं सुजगनिभगष्युष्टवसयं 
स्वमात्मानं He स्वपिषि Faas कुहरिणि ॥ दति ॥ 


wa शोके रसाभ्नायमहेसेति । आन्नायते कथ्यते विधीयत इति यावत्‌ । 
तेनाक्नायो विधानम्‌ महे" प्रकाशः | पुनरिसयनेन पूर्वरूपरसविधानप्कारोन 
स्वा भूमिं मूखाधारमवाप्य इव्यर्था्तथा प्रतीयते | ठयक्रमेण गमने तु पुनः 
सृष्टिक्रमेणागमनम्‌ | 


तदुक्ते यथा--ततः सा कुण्डली शक्तिर्युद्राकारा सुरेश्वरी | 
पुनस्तेन प्रकरेण गच्छयाधारपङ्गने ॥ इति ॥ 





पीत्वा तेनैवं gouty qe मूछधारपथे । क्षा aes! सुन्दरी । wad 
ale | लाक्तामं रजःसम्बन्धात्‌ ददी भावनैव ater महाप्रन्थोक्तत्वात्‌ | 
अतो योगी ध्यानप्रम्परक्रमेण ज्ञातया तदिव्यामूक्तधासया स्थिस्मतिः सन्‌ बक्षाण्ड- 
म णडस्थितं स््यैहेवतं सन्तरपयेत्‌ ॥ ९३ । 


€ 


पृट्वक्रनिषपणम्‌ ९९. 


ज्ञातैतत्‌ कमसुत्तमं यतमना योगी यमायेुतः 
श्रीदीक्षाघुरुपादपद्मयुगरखामोदग्रवाहोदयात्‌ | 

संसारे न हि जन्यते न हि कदा संक्षीयते संक्षये 
नियानन्दपरम्परप्रमुदितःशान्तःसतामयणी॥५४॥ 





तथा भूतहद्धिपकरणे-- 
परात्मन प्रथिव्यादितद्रत््वानि चं क्रमात्‌ | 
जीवं युण्डलितीं चापि स्वस्थानं प्रापयेत्‌ क्रमात्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
विरेषस्तु--प्रकामाना प्रथमप्रयाणे 
प्रतिप्रयाणेऽप्य्रतायमाना ॥ इति ॥ 


तदनन्तरं तदिष्यागरतधास्या पूष्वदरदितशिवशक्तिसामरस्योखननपरमामरतस्य ब्रहम- ` 
सान्पुराधारपर््यन्तगसितधासया | aaa ss तृतीयश्षोके —“ saat तदास्ये 
sea ` सुधाधारगम्यपरदेशम्‌” इति । स्थिरमतिः स योगी । दैवतम्‌ 
दष्टदैवतं परुचक्रस्यडाकिन्यादिदैवतश्च Gate: 

तैनाश्रतेन देवेशि alate परदेवताम्‌ | 

षटुचक्रदेवतास्तत्र सन्तप्यांमृतधारया ॥ 
हति ahaa | saat Ramat योगपरम्पराविदितयेति । 
योगस्य गुरूपदैशपरम्परभ्राप्तल्ात्‌ योगपरम्परदयुक्तिरिति भाव॒ तेन शुरूपदे- 
शपरम्पराविदितयेत्ति afer. | अमृतं विशेषयति ब्रह्मण्डमाण्डस्थितमिति 
ब्रह्माण्डस्य भाण्डं आधारपात्ं कुण्डकिनी तस्याः welt योनिरूपत्वात्‌ तत 
स्थितं कुण्डशिनीपात्रस्थितमिः्यथं, ॥ ५३ ॥ 

उक्तयोगक्रमज्ञानफरमाह ज्ञालैतदिति श्रीदीक्षागुरुपादपग्नयुगकामोद 

प्रवाहोदयादिति | आमोद आनन्द, तस्य प्रबाहयोऽनिच्छि्ोत्रोत्रसम्बन्धस्तेन 


(५४) जतवैतदिति | एतत्‌ उत्तमं कम ज्ञात्वा संयतमना: सन्‌ योगी जनः 
meg शी्रीक्षायुरपादपकषुगछमेदपरवादोदयात्‌ dat न हि जन्यते ¦ 





१०० yeaa SIL 


योऽधीते निश्चि सन्ध्ययोरथ दिवा योगी खभावस्थितो 
मोक्षज्ञाननिदानमेतदमरं शुद्धश्च YI परम्‌ । 

श्रीमत्‌ श्रीदरुपादपश्चयुगरालम्बी यतान्तममना- 
स्तस्याबद्यमभीषठदेवतपदे चेतो नीयते ॥ ५५॥ 


नित्यानन्द इति यावत्‌ तस्योदयो यस्मात्तादेशपादपर्वगखाजृज्ञाचस्यथे । 
Hager प्रथमोपस्थितलेन गौरवातिरायेन च ॒तदुपरहणम्‌ । तदभवि 
अन्यगुरोरपि TAT | 
अतएवोक्तम्‌---मघुव्धो यथा Be. POT पृष्पाम्तरं व्रजेत्‌ । 
ज्ञानटन्धस्तथा शिष्यो गुरर्ववन्तरं aa ॥ ईति ॥ 
„ farmers हति । निघ्यानन्दधारारूपहर्पयुक्तं gad) सतां 
योगिरूपपरशस्तजनानामग्रगण्य इयं " ५५४ | 
पटचक्रश्ठोकाध्ययनफटमाह योऽधीत इति । स्वभावे स्थित आस- 
भवि नियुक्तं gad । यतान्तम्भ॑ना दति यतं योगाभ्यासेन fete 
अन्तरासनि मनो येन तादा इयथः | IBAA ॥ ५५ | # ॥ 
इति शरीप्रणनिन्ध्यतिविरचितश्ीतत्वचिन्तामण्यन्तगीत- 
षटूचक्रविवरण्छोकार्थपरिष्कारिण्याम्‌ 
अष्टमं प्रकरणं समाप्तम्‌ ॥ # ॥ 





न हि कदा संक्षये संक्षीयते | प्रख्येऽपि तस क्षयो नास्तीयर्भः | सः ale 7 
पर्णानन्दपरम्पस्यौ प्रमुदितं खान्तं यस्य सः तथा | सतमप्रणीरपि भधति । 
[अत्र मते ^“ पूर्मानन्दपरम्पराप्रसुदितघान्तः ”' इति पाठः ]] 

(५५) योऽधीते इति । अधेतत्‌ सुगुप्तं यः स्यीयभावस्थितः सन्‌ निरिं 
सन्ध्ययोः दिव्‌ अधीते serrata अभी्टदैवतपदे चित्ते gegafe | यतं 
नश्वरम्‌ अन्तम्मैनो यस्य स तथेति । 


aft षयुबकमेदटिप्पणी समाप्ता 1 


पाङ्कापञ्जकम्‌ 


रिषोक्तम्‌ 


बरह्मरन्धसरसीरुहोदरे 
निललम्रमवदातमद्रुतम्‌ | 

कुष्डङीषिवरकाण्डमण्डितं 
TATE भजे ॥ १॥ 


, प्चववत्रकृतपश्चपाहुकास्तोतरमंहसमुदायनारकम्‌ | 
तस्य रोचिरमलास्यरीकथा कोऽपि कारीचरणः प्रकाशयत्‌ ॥ 
अथ त्रिछोकोद्धारकर्ता सदाशिवः स्तोत्ररूपेण श्रीगुरुध्यानयोगं 
कथयिष्यन्‌ तदथै प्रथमतो गुरोरथिवासस्थानं निरूपयति seats | aed: 
Taisen Teas यत्‌ ated सहसतदरुकमढं तस्योदरे 
तन्मध्ये तकणिकायामिति यावत्‌ । द्वादशाणैसरसीरुहं द्वाद्व्णविरिष्ं पदर 
भजे सेवे gad: | अत्र भजे इति क्रियया अस्मक्कचलोपस्थिते. रिववाक्यात्‌ 
शिवेन स्वीयमजनीयलयं दरीयता स्वेषां रिवोक्तमन्त्ोपासकानां भजनीयलं 
सूचितम्‌ | एवं सर्व्वत्र बोध्यम्‌ | 
TACHA कङ्ारमालिनीतन्ते ASTER 
तक्र्णिकाया देवेशि अन्तरात्मा ततो गुर. 
gale मण्डं तत्र चन्दरमण्डरमेव च । 
तते वायुम्भेहानामा Tee तत. स्पृतम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
oe 


१०२ पाठुकापश्चकम्‌ 


केचितु तादृशपदमोदरे तत्कणिकास्थत्रिकोणोद्‌र्‌ इति वदन्ति तत्न 
अ्रोद्रशब्दस्य मध्यवाचकतवात्‌ पदममध्यं कणिकैव पतीयते न त कणिका 
मध्य॒त्रिकोणमध्यम्‌ अनुपस्थिते | 
RAE दयाग्णसपर्याधृत्वचनम्‌ ~ 
रिर पथे BEA BHA aaa | 
तरुणारुणकरिज्जस्के सर्यव्णविभूषिते 
कणिकान्त पे तत्र द्वादस्ाणैसयेरुहे ॥ ह्यदि ॥ 


aa क्णिकान्त"पुटे इति game । द्वादरशार्णेति द्वादशवर्णा" aah. 
हसक्षमल्वरयू्‌ इति युस्मन्ात्मकद्रादशवणां. तद्िशिष्टप्मिति waar | 
` केचित दवादशव्णो वाभ्भवबीजं तदयुक्तमिति वदन्ति | 
तन्न तथाल 

कर्णिकान्तःपुरे तत्र द्वादशार्णसरोरुहे | 

तेजोमये क्णिकान्तश्न्द्रमण्डरमध्यगे || 

अकेथादित्रिरेखीये हरक्षत्रयभूषिते 

dads wand स्वगुरं शिवरूपिणम्‌ | 


हति वचने मन्लमये वाभ्मवबीजरूपगुरुमन्तमये इत्यनेन ब्रादश्ाभैयस्य 
पौनरुततयापत्ते द्वादशार्णिति द्वादश अणा वर्णाः यत्र तदिति ग्युसस्या 
सरोरुहै दवादश्षवेणैयोग प्रतीयते 


way द्वादशवरणानां विरोषामिधानं॑तदुयोगस्थानश्च॑नाभिहितं 
तथापि-- 
हंसाभ्यां परिवत्तपत्रकमले दिव्यैजगकार- 


विशोत्तीरणमनेकदेहनिखयं खच्छन्दमासेच्छया | 


इति गुरुगीताया हंसाभ्यां परि्तपतरेयनेन तांहरसरोरुदस्थ dae 
प्रतीयते | तयोरेव vera द्वादशवर्णा wate aay पत्रम्‌ । त्र 


पाडुकापश्चकम्‌ १०६ 


तस्य कन्दङितकणिकापुदे 
छसरेखमकथादिरेखया | 

कोणछक्षितहलक्षमण्डली- 
भावलक्ष्यमवराटखयं VT ॥ २॥ 


पत्रावच्छेदै वर्णयोगकथनात्‌ पत्रस्यापि sede व्यक्तीभूतमिति 
सधीमिभाव्यम्‌ | द्रादशा्णसरोरुदं विरोपयति frets । निल्यल्मविना- 
भावसम्बन्धेन decors मिरितम्‌ अवदातं शुङ्घवणेमदधुतं ब्रहमतेजो- 
waren कुण्डलीयिवरकाण्डमण्डितमिति । दुण्डद्या विवरं 
सदस्चदरकमलकणिकास्थरिवसमीपे कुण्डलीगमनपथरूपं छिद्रम्‌ | तदधिकरण- ` 
भूतकाण्डं नाकं चित्िणी नाड़ी तेन भूषितम्‌ । यथा aoe vay ` 
fread, चित्तिणीनादीरूपरणालभूषितभित्यथै ॥ १ ॥ 

उक्तपश्यकर्थिकायामकथादिहिकोणमध्ये युरुधिन्तनीय' भतस्तज्तानाय 
त्रिकोण निरूपयिष्यन्नाह तस्येति wend कन्दुल्तिकथिकापुदे इति | 
कन्दं परस्पराक्रमणपू्वकं वागिवाद' | अत लक्षितरक्षणया पए्रस्राक्रमणमतं 
गृह्यते | पुरम्‌ आधारभूतस्थानम्‌ ततश्च तस्य पूव्वौक्तसदश्षदरकमरद्रादश 
दल्कमलोभयस्य कन्दस्ति wend कर्णिकापुटे कर्णिकासकाधारस्थाने 
अवारयं भजे सेवे इयन्वयः | Sy तप्य द्वादरशदरप्येति व्यास्यायम्ति । 
तत्न ane श्रीनाथस्य सहस्रदरुकमणद्रादरदलकमरोभयस्थरे श्तिषिधाय- 
भयक्ष्यमाणवचनानामसङ्गलयापत्ते 

अवसा afi सा aa बिन्दुतयाडूकुरभूतवामाग्यष्ठारोद्रीनामक- 
तरिरक्तिरूपेखातयमिरितित्िकोणकूपरा कामकला areata | 


कामकरायास्तद्रपल्वमाह यामले 
अथः कामकैरां वषये तत्तदैवात्रूपकम्‌, | 


१०४ पाहुकापशचवम्‌ 


इटुपकम्य ~ 
fates सा Rafe: सा चिम. सा सनातनी | 
RANGEL | सा कामकला पूलयैदरितत्निदाक्तिरूपा इत्यथैः 
अबलालयं विरोषयति ्ृषरेखमकथादिरेखयेति | ornare, 


वामा रेखा ककारादिषोशर्ष्ठा रेखा थकारादिषोड्शमी रोद्री रेखा इति 
रेखातयेण ger Pagar रेखा थत्र तादशावसारयमिलयथैः 


ae WEA का्मकलप्रकरणे - 
बिन्दोरद्कुरभायिन वर्णावय्वरूपिणी | इति | 
“ga: किम्भूतम्‌  कीणक्ितदरक्षमण्डलीमावरक्ष्यमिति | कोणेषु उक्ततिको- 
ˆ णत्यान्तराणेु सम्मुखदक्षिणवामफोणेपु लक्षिते, प्रकाशितैः दरक्षवणैः मण्डली - 
भवेन तत्तद्रणाङ्गितस्थानरूपेण रक्ष्यते ज्ञायते असौ तादृशमित्यर्थः । अत्त 
far Ravn विना सम्यगूध्यानं न भवतीद्यत. प्रमाणान्तरेण त्तिकोणं 
विशेषयति | अत्र त्रिकोणं वामावर्चैन रेखनीयम्‌ 
तदुक्ते UTHER Rear — 
वामावर्तेन विरिखिदफथादित्रिकोणकम्‌ ॥ दति ॥ 
कालयद्धानिये-- 
` त्रिबिन्दुं परमं तत्त्वं ब्रह्मविष्णुरिषालमकम्‌ | 
airs त्रिकोणन्तु जायते गिन्दुतस्त, ॥ इति ॥ 


+ 


तथा-- 
अकारादिविसर्गान्ता ब्रहरेखा प्रजापतिः | 
ककारादितकारान्ता Reuter परालरा | 
थकाराविसकारान्ता Peete तिन्दुः | ^ 


पदुकापश्चकम्‌ १०९ 


aye पटुतडिकड़ारिम- 
स्पद्धमानमणिपाटर्प्रभम्‌ | 

चिन्तयामि हृदि चिन्मयं ay- 
नौदविन्दुमणिषीटमण्डलम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥ 


तन््जीवने-- 
weaker योनिमण्डरमण्डिता ॥ 
तथा-- 
उपरिष्टात्‌ सत्वरेखा रजोरेखा स्ववामतः | 
तमोरेखा दक्षभागे रेखात्रयमुदाहृतम्‌ ॥ 
एतद्चनेपर्यष्ठोचनयापि अकथ्दीनः THAT । 








स्व्न्ततन्ते- 
अकथाद्ित्रिपत्तया तु दक्षमध्यमण्डितम्‌ |) इति ॥ 


एतेन हठक्षवर्णानां तरिकोणमध्ये स्थितिरियुक्तम्‌ | भरं विस्तरेण ॥ २ ॥ 
उक्तत्रिकोणमध्ये मणिपीढोपरि गुरुर्थितिरि्यितस्तत्र मणिषीदं वर्णयति 
age हति अयम. | तलु उक्तत्रिकोणमध्ये नादचिन्दुमणिपीढमण्डलं 
, हृदि मनसि चिन्तयामीत्यन्वयः | नादिनदुमणिपीठमण्डकमिति | नादयिनु- 
भ्यां सह मणिषीरमण्डलम्‌ मथवा नादश्च बिन्दुश्च मणिषीठमण्डलश्च तदिलयथे' | 
केचित्तु नादबिन्दुरूपमणिपीटमण्डलमिति वदन्ति | तत्र तथात्वे नादस्य BE 
वर्णैत्ात्‌ बिन्दो" रक्तवर्णत्वात्‌ पटुतडिकडारिमेत्यादिविरेषणस्या्संकमनापत्े 


तथादि- 
परशक्तिमयः साक्षातिधासौ fier पुन. । 
चिनदुननौ बीजमिति तस्य भेदा" समीरिताः ॥ 


14 


१०६ पाहुकापश्रकम्‌ 


इति शारदाक्चनध्य परराकिमयो fe ने बीजनद्वविन्डव' वदीन्रकै 
स्वरूपिण. wad नादस्य चन्द्रस्वरूपलात्‌ gad विन्दो सूरय्यम्बरपलयात्‌ 
रक्तयमायातम्‌ | 
व्यक्तमाह Tea पूर्णानन्द 
तद्ध asi बर्धवरसुधाधार्सन्तानहाप्री | इति ॥ 
वृहच्छीकरमे- 
बासूरथ्यप्रतीकारमासीदिन्दुमदक्षरम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 


एवश्च तयोः शृष्करक्तते मणिपाटरप्रगलं सर््वथाऽसम्भवम्‌ | अत" safer 
ष्व साधीयान्‌ | एवश्वाधो नाद, Gg Reg मध्य मणिपीटमण्डलं चिन्त- 
नीयमिति व्यवस्था | 


व्यक्तमाह्‌ कङ्कारमाखिनीतन्त्रे गुरुध्याने 


सदस्रदरुपदयस्थमन्तरासमानसु्तमप | 
तस्योपरि areas सिंहास्ननोज्यलम्‌ |) 
तसमिभ्निजगुरं fet रजताचरसन्निभम्‌ ॥ gear ॥ 


मणिपीटमण्डलं विशेषयति पटतदिकडारिमस्पद्मानमणिपादर्पभमिति । 
स्वकाय्युसम्पादनयोगयत्॑ TEER ततश्च स्परकाशरूपत्वकाग्यटुसम्पादन- 
विरोधदोपरादि्येन स्व्यैव्यापकातिप्रकाकमगनानतं Rat कंडारिन्ना रुहरकेड्‌ 
Rar पिङ्गलेन earth, cessed, | मणिपीस्य मणिमय- 
wager, | अस्य नादबिन्दुमणिपीटमण्डरुघ्य बपुश्रिन्मयं ज्ञानमयमिरथं | 
अन्ये तु Prd वपुः द्वादश्स्वरस्वरूपं anaes} gent वपुधिन्तयामीति 
वदन्ति । तम्मन्दम्‌ । गुः श्षवरणलवात्‌ तद्वीजस्यापि शृक्षखेन afin 
परमलविरेषणे न सङ्गच्छते ॥ ३ ॥ ॥ 


. 


4 


पादुकापश्चकम्‌ १०७ 


Hane इतमुक्‌शिखान्रयं 
तद्धिखासषपरिवहणास्पदम्‌ । * 
विश्वस्मरमहोचिदोत्करे 
व्यापि युगमादिहंसथोः ॥ ४ ॥ 





dada नादबिन्दुमध्यस्थमणिपीटो त्रिकोणे रुरोरधिवास' | अत- 
स्तयोर्ानाथै हंसतनिकोणयोः स्वरूपं ज्ञापयिष्यननाह उद्ुमिति | अस्याः | 
महम्‌ आदिसयो्ुगं व्याखामि wane मणिपीरस्योदधं इतथुक्‌सिखावयं 
ara | तद्विलसन quaker घप्रकारेन odo 
उदिश्यमानमणिपीटरूपास्पदं armani तस्मतिबन्धकविषयचिन्तादित्यामेन 
स्वस्वस्थाने स्थिरतरं मावयामीति प्रसेकं क्रियान्वय | 
हुत्रविशषखात्रयमिति | इतञ्चकिशिखादित्रयं हुतञ्चविरखात्रयम्‌ | 
शकपा्थिवादित्वात्‌ मध्यपदलोपे तसदसिद्धिः । हुतभुक्‌ वहिस्तच्छिला 
वहििन्दोरद्वुरभूतदक्षिणादीरपय्यन्तगता वामा रखा । आदिना दंशान्‌- 
कोणस्थचन्दयिन्दोरङ्ुरभूतेशानादिमषत्कोणपर्यन्तगता अ्येष्ठा रेखा । मर- 
कोणस्थसू्यैनिन्दोर्ड्कुरभूततदादिवहिबिन्ुसङ्गता dat रेला | एं Paes 
तरिरेखामिरिित्रिकोण कामकसख्यम्‌ 
तदुक्तं ब्रहच्छीक्रमे-- 
बिन्दोरदूुरमावेन वर्णाचयवरूपिणी | 
feat ऊुरिलीभूता याभ्यादीशानमागता | 
मनोरमा शक्तिरूपा सा शिखा चिल पररा | 
श्तीशानगता रेखा प्रयगायेयमात्रगा 
जयेष्ठा सा परमेशानं fag परमेश्वरि | 


t 


१०८ TAIRA, 


व्यक्तीभूय TACT मरथमाङ्करमागता | 
aaa Madea et शरृक्गाटमागता ॥ इति ॥ 
सा शिखेति andar वदहिसम्बन्धिनी मात्रा ar शिखा वहिशिगेयथै- | 
मादेश्वरीसंटितायाम्‌-- 
aaa Fee Area भरेत्‌ ' 
wear विष्णुस्तथा AAPA रखात्रयं मतम्‌ ॥ इति । 
एतरिकोणमध्य गुरस्थितिं ene प्रेमयोगतरड्‌ गिणीधूतवचनम्‌ | 
सहस्रदकसुपक्रम्य-- 
तन्मध्ये तु त्रिकोणन्तु विधुदाकारुत्तमम्‌ | 
बिनदुद्रयश्च तन्मध्ये विसमैरूपमभ्ययम्‌ 
तन्मध्ये aaa च शिवेः vende ॥ इति ॥ 
अतपच रङ्कराचाय्यैणापि taal at सुव्यक्तममिदितप्‌ । श्रीनाथस्य 
antec इति ररतिरहस्यकारणोक्तश्च विसरमतु॒तरिकोणोर्ुवतति- 
चन्द्रसूर्यरूपबिन्दुद्वयमिति | 
aera एव गृह्यते न॒ द 
वीपकल्काकारजीवासहंस., अयं हंस. प्रृतिपुरषरूप. | 
तदुक्तमागमकसपद्रुमे पञ्चराखायाम्‌-- 
„ इकारो बिन्दुरिुक्तो विसर्ग स इति स्तं । 
बिन्दुः पुरुष द्युक्तो विसर्ग" परकृतिः स्मृत, ॥ 
पम्रयात्मको हंसस्तदातमकमिदं जगत्‌ । इति ॥ 
fag अस्य मणिपीर्ौदधु आदिहंसयोधुं व्याख्ृशामीति व्या्यायन्ति । 
तन्वं पूववोक्तकङ्कारमारिनीवचननोषितहंसो रँ ' नादवि्डुमध्यस्थमणिपरे 
Tama. aaa । एतेन हतुक्तिसासलमिति 


पादुकापच्चकम्‌ १०९ 


तत्र नाथचरणारविन्दयोः 
कुङ्कुमासवपरीमरन्दयोः | 
दन््रमिन्दुमकरन्दशीतलं 
मानसं स्मरति ARTETA ॥ ५॥ 


केषाञ्चित्‌ waar निरस्त तथाते agar Faerie’: | यद्वा 
अस्य मणिपीठमण्डरस्योँ आदिरहसयो्धुगं व्याखलामि | कङ्कारमारिनीवचने 
सादयिन्दुमध्यर्थितमणिपीठाधःस्रे defeats ser । त्र मणिपीठे fae 
कथने महान्‌ विरोधः अतप्तयोरविवादाय हंसं विशेषयति हुतुविशिखात्रयमिति ।. 
ततश्चाध.स्थके हंस इृ्यानुपूिक्ष्य स्थिति. | उम्‌ पूववोक्त्रिकोणाकार- 
कामकठारूपेण परिणतस्य तस्य स्थितिरियवियैध. कामकलाया हंसरचित- ` 
मू्तिकत्वात्‌। 
पुनिरोषयति बिश्वधस्मरमहो चिदोक्टमिति । 
उभक्षलुघसौ चाथ घसिबक्षरणे व्यु | 
तथाच-- 
aay याच चिदिहदे दीष च्युदकनुदिच्छिदि वा । 


aft धातुपाडत्‌ घसधातेर्क्षणा्थलम्‌ | चिदो दीप्यथैलम्‌ | ततश्च विधानां 
घस्मरा भक्षिका अर्थात्‌ संहारा या महयचित्‌ महाप्रकाशस्तया उत्करं दूरतरं 
सर्व्वाधिकबर्वदियर्थ' ॥ ५ ॥ 

श्रीनाथचरणारविन्दचिन्तसाधिकरणपीदं Pesta तद्धयानयोगं सूच- 
HAR ततेति द्वाभ्याम्‌ । अस्या" तत्र मणिपीटस्थतिकोणमध्य नाथचरणार्‌- 
विन्धयोद् मनसं स्मरति ध्यायते SAA: | 


११० पाहुकापश्वकम्‌ 


निसक्तमणिषाढुकानियमिताघकोराहलं 
स्फुरक्किसख्यारुणं ATAYSAA RHA, | 
GUTTA IT aaa ATT 
भजाभि Rie स्थितं युरुपदारविन्द.दयम्र्‌ ॥ ६॥ 


age विशेषयति हुडूकुमासवपरीमरन्दयोरिति i 
बीप्त्थम्भावचिहेषु तेपु भागे पसिती ॥ 


इति बोपदेवीयात्‌ Raley | ततश्च कुडकुमासवानां सगक्षा- 
,रसाभपरमातानां य, परि्भागः स एव मरन्दौ मकरन्दो ययो्ताृशषोरियथैः | 
“atmo” इति पठे a mol नि.सरणमिति यावत्‌ । ततश्च 
‘gaia aaa पकारते ' gat: ठु ङुमास्वानां इरी घर्थात 
हएणाश्रयङुङ्ुमासवो मरन्दो saree: | ॥ 

Fe कीदराम्‌ ४ इन्दुमकरन्दश्षीतकम्‌ gala यो मकरन्दः समत 
fea: तद्त्‌ शीतकम्‌ यथा चन्द्रामृतकिरणन उत्तापनिष्तिस्तथा 
पदद्नद्रसेवनेन दुःखतापशान्तिरिति माव, 

मङ्गलास्पदम्‌ अभिपरेताथेसिद्धिस्थानम्‌ | तच्चरणस्थाने मनोऽभिनिवेशे 
सर्म्वामीष्टसिद्धिरिति तस्यम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥ 

निसक्तेति | send: अहं शिरसि स्थितं पूतवोक्तपीठोपरिस्थितं गुर- 
प्दारविन्दद्रयं भजामि ध्याये इत्यन्वयः | पदारविन्दद्भयं विशेषयति | 

निसक्तमणिपादुकानियमिताघकोकाहरमिति । निसक्तमणिपादुफया 
पेवित्तमणिपादुका्वारा नियमितः Prete: अघकोरादक. पापानां ala 
येन ताहशमियर्थं । यद्वा निसक्तो निबद्धो मणिर्य॑त पादुकार्यां सा मणिपीर- 
मण्डलरूपपादुका तथा नियमितः अघकोराहरः येने, तव्पाहुकोपरि गुरुचरण 
चिन्तनेन पापनाशात्‌ | अथवा निसक्त ated) मणिर्ुरचरणरुपचिन्तामणिर्वादु 


पादुकापश्चकम्‌ १११ 
प्चपाटुकासु ताभिनियमिताधकोखाहरमिल्यथै, | ततश्च पृश्चपाटुकाध्यानपूव्यैकं 
तदुपरि गुरुचरणचिन्तनेनैव पापनाशात्‌ पापनारे पश्चपादुकानां ध्यानरूपन्या- 
पारसाध्यत्वेन द्वारत्वमिति | 

स्फुरक्िसरख्यारुणम्‌ । प्ुरतां किंसख्याना प्वानामर्णुल्यमरुणं 
mae आभ्रकेनुकण्देपहवग्लः tet anata त्रैव ZETA \ 
नखसमुह्टपचन्द्रकं TET णव ॒समुहसचन्द्रा. निर्मटमरकादमानचन्द्रसवरूपा 
Tay, | 
RAMA ARTA TT EA उदितं यत्‌ सरोजं 
पदं aga सद्रोचिवं निम्मैरपरकाशो यस्येति । अथस्भाव श्रीनाथस्य चरणाभ्यां 
निरन्तरं परमामृतं नि"सरति । 
SATA पूर्णानन्देन- 
सुधाधारासारं निरि aaa 
यते स्वालन्ञानं fale भगवानिरममलमते' | इति ॥ 


एवं aad atacand तदुपरिस्थितं चरणं पदमवतु प्राते इति । ननु 
swung? गुरस्थितिधिधीयते | तक्िमध -स्थितद्रादशदलकमल- 
कणिकायां far उद््यसहलदल्कणिकायामित्याकादृक्षायामत वदन्ति 
गृहच्छरीक्रमे- - 
सर्वोपरि ततो ध्यायेत्‌ पथिमाननयद्कजम्‌ | 
सवन्तमस्तं दिव्यं व्यङ्गे pred ॥ इति ॥ 
" deat गुरुशत्तयज्ञे | 
श्रामले--- 
छ गद सहक्तपतकमलटं रक्तं मुधाविर्िणम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 


११९ पाडुकापश्चकम्‌ 


गुरुगीतायाम्‌ — 
हंसाभ्यां परिवत्तपलरकमरे दिव्यैजगत्कारणै 
विश्वोततर्णमनेकदेवनिलयं स्वच्छन्दमासेच्छया 
तततदुयोग्यतया स्वदैरिकतनु wading 
प्रयकषाक्षरविग्रहं youd ध्यायेद्विवाहुं गुप्‌ ॥ दति ॥ 
सयामासपर््याधूतवचनम्‌ -- । 
शिर "पदो सहेते geal तधोसुखे | 
तरुणारणकिक्स्के सर्ववव्णविभूषिते ॥ 
कणिकान्त पुरे तते Aedes 
तेजोमये कणिकान्तश्वनद्रमण्डरमध्यगे ॥ 
aa ees दशकषत्रयमण्डते । 
हंसपीरे मन्तमये ways शिवरूपिणम्‌ ॥ इति | 
एवमादिवचनैद्वीदशदलकमल्कर्णिकायां गुरोरध्षठान विहितम्‌ | 
काङ्कारमारिनीतन्तर 
PEACOAT IAA | 
तस्योपरि नादबिन्दोम्मैध्ये सिंहासनोज्वरम्‌ 
तस्मिननिजगुरं नित्यं रजताचलसन्निभम्‌ ॥ cere ॥ 
यमरे-- । 
` सहस्दरपङ्कजे सकलठशीतरद्विपरभं 
वराभयकराम्बुजम्‌ -दस्यादि | 
पुरश्रणरसोष्छासे- 
श्रीमहादेव उवाच 


सहस्र ततो Ret पङ्कजे परमाद्भुते । ` 
aay ATH तु भावयेत्‌ स्वगुरं सदा || ° 


पादुकापश्चकम्‌ ११६ 


Aurea 
सदसे Heal सद्या Ae प्रमो | 
गुरुस्थितिः कथं aq सतत वद्‌ निश्चयम्‌ ॥ 
श्रीमहद्धैवं उवाच 
ayy प्रि प्रवक्ष्यामि यदेतत्‌ पर्टमुत्तमम्‌ 
AAR ACTH सहसदरसंयुतम्‌ ॥ 
सदारिवपुरं तन्तु नित्यानन्दमयं सदा 
नानागन्धयुतं पं सदजानन्दमन्दिरम्‌ ॥ 
„ सदा aed पद्मं बीनमद्धूय॒खं सदा 
Ramat कुण्डरीसंयुतेन च ॥ इल्यादि ॥ 
बाखाविकासतम्ते 
श्रीदक्षिणापतूतिर्वाच 
HAGA धवरे Tea गुरं स्मरेत्‌ | 
wages महापद्मे सर्ववं विभूषिते | - 
अकथादिक्रिखाव्यहरक्षत्नयभूपिने | 
, तदन्तशनदरविम्ब्थहंसपीरे स्मिताननम्‌ | 
श्रीदैम्युवाच । 
अधोमु गुरुस्तत्र कथं तिष्ठति च प्रभो 
श्रीदक्षिणामूततिरवाच 
अधोमुखस्य पदस्य कणिकामध्यसंस्थितम्‌ 
चन्द्रनिम्बश्च वव्रं तत हंसस्तत. Rafe: ॥ इति ॥ 
reais सद्तदरंकणिकायां गुरोरवस्थितिभिधीयते | cabaret 
विहिते श्रीनाथ आक्षा तयोरेकतरप्‌ अवधारययाुष्ठातव्यमिति सिद्धान्तः | 


at 


११४ पादुकापश्चकम्‌ 


पादुकापथकस्तोघ्रं पञ्चवक्त्लाद्धिनिभेतम्‌ । 
षड़ान्नायफरपात्तं प्रपञ्चे alae ॥ ७ ॥ 


अतएवोक्तं FOOT एकादरोष्ठासे 
पारम्प््यागमास्नायं मन्वाचारादिकं BA । 
स्व्यं गुरुसुखाछन्धं सफलं स्यात्त चान्यथा ॥ इति ॥ ६ ॥ 


doesn पादुकापश्चकस्तोलमिति पदरक्षणाधार' पादुका 
तासां पञ्चकम्‌ । पदम्‌ ॥ १ ॥ seni अकथाद्वित्रिकोणम्‌ ॥ २ ॥ 
, तदन्तर्नादयिन्दुमणिषीरमण्डलम्‌ ३ ॥ तदध स्थहंस ५ ॥ पीठोपरि 
त्रिकोणम्‌ ॥ ५ । समुदायेन पञ्चस॑स्यक्रम्‌ | 
अथवा पद्म्‌ । १ ॥ त्रिकोणम्‌ ॥ २ । TPE ॥ २॥ मगि- 
पीठनण्डकम्‌ ॥ ¢ | तदृुरयत्निकोणाकारकामकलारूपेण परिणतो हसः 
॥ ५ ॥ इति Teer तस्य तोत्रम्‌ फलश्रुतिसटितसपश्चोकासक 
Pras: | 
पश्ववकधराद्विनिगैतमिति । , 
रिवस्य पश्चववत्राणि यथा लि्ञार्ैनतम्त् - 
स्ोजातं पश्चिमे g वामदेवं तथोत्ते । 
ˆ अघोरं दक्षिणे तेयं gel तद्पुरषं स्पृतम्‌ | 
dart मध्यतो ध्येयं चिन्तयेदठक्तितलधरः ॥ इति ॥ 
तेभ्यो विनिर्गतं तैरुक्तम्‌ | 


षड्न्नायफरप्रातमिति पडूमुलानि यथा पूर्वोक्तानि पञ्च | षष्ठवक्तन्तु 
ू्वववतरस्याधस्तात्‌ गुप्तं तामसम्‌ | एतत शिवतन््रे स्ोजातादिषद्षलन्यासे 
५ॐ हही ओ हीं तामसाय स्वाहा " दलनेन atten  नीरकण्ठ- 


GATT, ११५९ 


मधोवकतं कालकरटस्वरूपिणम्‌ `" ह्यनेन च प्रकटितम्‌ | fatter ड्ववत्राणि 
भवन्ति | एभि प्र्वकरैरान्नायते कश्थतेऽपो इति tema रिषोक्तस्ोत्र- 
समुदाय तस्य फं तततन्मन्धसमुदाय विहितकर्म्मफठं प्राप्यते TAA: | 

wey feria ५ प्करितसंसरे अतिदुरटममिति घति- 
हु खेन ead यत्तदतिटु्ठमं॑तलाभकरणपुण्यपुञ्ञजनकजन्मान्तरीयतपस' 
क्ेशस्वरूपत्यात्‌ दु"खकभ्यस्यमिति भावः | ७ | 


इति श्रीकालीचरणक्रृता पादुकापञ्चकस्तोत्रस्य 
अमकानाम टिप्पणी समाप्ता | 


॥ # ॥ ॐ” तत्‌ सत्‌ । # ॥ 


-षट्‌चक्रविन्रतिः 


(विश्वनाथकृत) 
ॐ श्रीगुरवे नम 


टीका श्रीविश्वनाधेन नदा सन्तन्यतेऽभ्विकाम्‌ 
कैबल्यकरिकातन्तद्रितीयपय्छस च ॥ 


वृद्ररूपी ater वसिष्ठाय gear sored पिना तस्मिन 
नाधिकार अपस्तदुपदेधुं गुरुसम्मानपूव्वकमाह यज््ञतेनेव्यादि | 


तथाच काणिकापरुराणे-- 


यः पूजयेद्राऽन्यमावै तस्य ऋणदयोधनम्‌ | 
पितृदेवनरादीना जायते न कदाचन ॥ 

सोऽभ्य्य त्रपुरायोगे तेन योगेन संयुत. ^ 
जायते यदि सुपरास्तदा मोक्षमवाप्नुयात्‌ | 

Paget Tester Rosle, सब्यैदेवासकलात्‌ | 
उक्त “ सम्भैदेवमयी सा fe? इति ॥ # ॥ 


Meee Ma AP ae एडागिङ्गलानादयौ | 
^ मेरुदण्डवहि पर्वे चन्द्रपूयासमके ' इति मायातन्तात्‌ 


११८ पटचक्रविषृतिः 


तयोः स्थितिधकारमाद्‌ रीकाकार gaara -- 
वाममुष्कातु सम्भूता नाड़ी दक्षिणगाभिनी । 
SHOE aA जता वामभागं समाश्रिता ॥ 
हदधत दक्षमागस्था SATE समाश्रिता 
वामन्तु नासिकाहारं प्राप्रोति गिरिजेऽमरे | 
नाडी दक्षिणयुष्कात्तु सज्ञातोत्तरगामिनी | 
युपुम्णाकणिता जाता मागं दक्षिणमाश्िता | 
EGA वाममागस्था जन्रुमभ्यं समाश्रिता ॥ 
दक्षिणं नासिकाद्वारं प्रामोति भिरिजेऽमरे | 
चापञ्रतिर्भूला दक्षिणगामिनी उत्तसगामिनीति ध्येयम्‌ 
मध्य नाडी GEMS । मध्ये मेरुदण्डस्य Perera 
मेरुदण्डवहि "पार्थे चन््रसू्यासिके रिरे 
मध्ये TIT --दति मायातन्त्ात्‌ । 
WEN सारसयुचये -- 
या मुण्डाधारदण्डान्तरविवरगता arcdteniht 
det धारा नभोऽम्मोरुहकुहरविधो संसवन्ती वहन्ती | 
तस्या वज्ञाख्यनाञ्या खगथुदरदरीमध्यगं यो विदध्यात्‌ 
तस्या ब्रह्मण्डभाण्डप्ररुयमपघनं स्यादुघनं wea | 
at कीदशी ¢ हारनोदारगौरी स॒क्ताहारनीहारगोरी । ““गौरोऽरणे सिते पपै, 
Ree | एतेन युपुम्गान्त्मताया aa मेरदण्डान्तव्धिधरगतात्कथनेन 
gpa अपि मेरुदण्डान्तवििवरगतालसिद्धि यद्रा या goers 
यदन्तरं विवरं तत्र बिवरगता अर्थात्‌ रुषुम्णायां विवसता 
अन्तरं अवकक्ञावधिपरिधानान्तद्धिमेदतार्दश्य | 
दिद्रासीय विना बहिवररमध्ये अन्तरासनि च | हयमर । 


ential: ११९ 


nag ॒सुपुम्णाक्ररिता इति परम्परया आश्रिता इत्यै । यद्रा ततर तत्र स्थाने 
मेरुदण्ड भित्वा सुपुम्णाकचिता द्य 
गौतमीयेऽपि - 
विश्वं शरीरमियुक्त पञ्चभूतात्मकं सुने | 
चन्द्रू््यामितेजोमिर्ज्जविवरहैषयदूयकम्‌ ॥ 
तिस कोटचस्तदर्धेन शरीरे नाड्यो मता 
तादु सस्या दशभरोक्तास्तायु तिक्तो saver ॥ 
* प्रधाना मेरुदण्डेऽत्र चन्द्रसूय्यामिरूपिणी 
हृडा वामे स्थिता नाड़ी शुक्रा चन्द्रस्वरूपिणी ॥ 
` शक्तिर्या त॒ सा नाडी साक्षादमरतविप्रहा 
दक्षिणे या पिङ्गला्या पुंरूपा सूर्यविग्रहा 
` सववैतैजोमयी सा तु agar वदिरूपिणी, | 
Reads भैरुदण्डान्तरनिवर 
च्रारदायामपि-- 
पण्णवल्यङ्गुलायामं शरीरसमयातमकम्‌ | 
गुदध्वजान्तरे wags विदु" | 
तम्माद्िगुणवित्तारं पृरत्तषूणेण शोभितम्‌ 
त्त नाड्य eye geTRee sata, ,, 
get वामे स्थिता नाड़ी दक्षिणे णिज्गला मता | 
तमोम्पैध्यगता नाडी agen वंशमाभिता | 
पादाद्गुठद्वयं याता रिफाभ्यां शिरसा पन" । 
रहमस्थानं समापन्ना चन्द्रसूर्याभिरूपिणी 


भाः दिफाभ्यां मूलाभ्याम्‌ शिरसा अग्रभागेन वकं एवम्‌ आश्रि । 
विवरगतात्वसक्तम्‌ | या सण्डाधारदण्डान्तरविवरगतेष्यनेनाहुः | 


१२०, पट्चक्रविवुतिः 
तन्त्रान्तरे तु 

व्योम प्रोद्धि्य नासाभ गती चन्द्रदिवाकरौ 
अधोवकत्रं weal क्रोदीकष्य सुपुम्णया ॥ 
aga नासिकामध्यं गतं चित्रा तु तद्वता | 
ऊर्द्धं मिवा तु fast वै इतरान्‌ पुष्करान्‌ तथा ॥ 
वहिरुद्रमनाकाङक्षाकाद्क्षिणी मोक्षदायिनी |” 
जीविनाहतसम्बन्धात्‌ स्थिता स्तमसंविधो 


तद्वता सुषुमणात्र सा तु तत्समदेशं गता लिखिष्याम न पिरोधात्‌ | अतण्व 
सप्तम॑विधौ cana नासिकामध्यं नासिकाद्रयमध्यस्थानं न तु नासिका- 
“gael गता तत्र इडापिङ्गले गते । अतएव ५ कुम्भमय सुपुमूणया "इति 
सङ्गच्छते | 

तरितयेति यत॑ सोमसूरखयामिरूपा अतस्तरितयगुणमयी | aye 
कीदशी ? स्मेरं परसफुरितं तथाच प्रस्फुटितकनकधूस्तुरपुष्पमिव मथितं वपु॑स्या' 
सा तथा यथा कनकधू्तूरपुष्पस्य मध्ये अन्यत्‌ पुष्पम्‌ एवभ्भूत- 
अथिततेमवपुरिति भावः केचित्तु प्रभिततगवपूरिति पाटमाहुः । वृत 
सुपुम्णा Sarat तदाह केन्दमध्याढििति | 


५ 


कन्दरूपमाह रारदायाम्‌ 
" गुदभ्वजाम्तरे कन्दमत्सेधाद्रयद्गुलं विदु" | 


तस्य द्विगुणविस्तारं वृत्तरूपेण शोभितम्‌ | 
तत्र नाञ्य सपुखन्ना | gers | 
गोरशसंहितायान्तु-- 


oe मदरादधो नाभेः कन्दयोनि. खगाण्डवत्‌ | 
तत्र नाड्य. समुसन्ना" सदस्णा द्विसप्तति." “ 


पट्चकरविवृतिः १२९१ 


ger । कन्दयोनि कन्दरपोससिम्धानम्‌ aad वास्या 
नादीमाह वज्रास्येति । Azden fre सिर "परयन्ता इयथः Ta 
सा ae | अस्या मये छुपुम्ाया मध्ये samt उल्वरन्तीयथं | 
+ भष्थचश्चपरप्मश्न weasel? ene | 
सायातन््रेऽपि 
मये aa तन्मध्ये वज्राघ्या ferret इति ॥ # ॥ 
चित्रनाडीमाह तन्मध्य हृव्यादिना | तन्मध्ये वजामध्ये | प्रणवविटसिता 
आज्ञाचकस्थप्रणवाधारप्वात्‌ रा कीदशी ˆ सकरुसरसिजान्‌ flea maar 
अथनस्चनया दे्रीप्यते | gata, किभ्भूतान्‌ ' मेरमध्यान्तरस्थान्‌ मेदमध्ये 
यदन्तरं विवरं परम्परया AAT | । 
म्ये ORO तन्मध्ये वजाख्या fer 
तन्मध्ये Patol सूक्ष्मा विसतन्तुसहोदरा | 
` मूलमूराप्‌ सदशारस्तदन्तवरै्नाडिका 
तथा--- 
मूलाद्विषदसरोजातं चित्रिणीम्रभितें परिये 
रिङ्गापोद्धुनाभिवुककण्टभमध्यदेशजम्‌ ॥ 
इति भायातन्तात्‌ । मूलूत्‌ सहधारसतमूलाधारपूखाद्‌ aaa इति । 
तथाच weet चन्रेण्या प्रथिततम्‌ । 
अत्र च-- 
तस्या मध्ये Rene अरतस्राविणी gat 
स््ब॑तेजोमयी सा तु योगिनीहदयङ्गमा | 
विसर्गाहन्ुपरययन्तं व्याप्य तिष्ठति तत्वतः ॥ 
इति गौतमीयवचनस्य Read दृ्दुप््यन्तमिति वा पाठ लरारस्य- 


firgaoled दृन्दुप्नतं वा व्याप्य सहक्ताराधोदेश्पर्न्तगा तद्वतीयो बोध्य | 
18. ` * , 


+ 


१२९२ पटूवक्रषिवृतिः 
मेन चित्रायां पद्यानि सन्ति तदाह तन्तचू डामभौ 


तथेव ग्रथितं पदां मूलादिपद्मपश्चकम्‌ 
कलिकाकाररूपेण डाकिन्याचचवरम्वितम्‌ ॥ 


तथैव चित्रमेव पथं मृखादविपदिति दोप ced स्वाधिष्ठानादिपश्चकं 
कलिका कररूपेण अथितमिति सामान्यत उक्तवा विरेषरुपेणोक्तम्‌ एनेन 
मूढाधारपशं विकसितं एवं समस्तपद्मप्यधोयुखा-येव 


तदुक्तं कोटिकतन्ते ताराकस्पे 
सप्तपदं WARE सुपुम्णाग्रथितं प्रिये । 
जधोवक्लादिमान्तश्च नाख्येयं यस्य कस्यचित्‌ | 
येन पं्याश्चिवालं तदाह श्रीषमे-- 
तस्याश्वान्तता तिष्ठेत्‌ चित्राख्या योगिवछभा 


पश्चव्णोज्वला दैवि पश्चभूतप्रकाशिनी | 
Tata GoM WAAL नायो मता | 


सन्यश्रापि - 


रह्मा THe रुद्र ईश्वरश्च सदाशिव 
चित्रास्यनाव्यन्तरस्था पञ्चभूताधिदेवता । 
घत्र पञ्चभूतानां पश्चाधिदेवता उक्ता | भूमध्ये लु परशिवोऽस्ति छिसिष्यमाण- 
वचनात्‌ ॥ 
mares तस्यान्तरिति } तस्यां चित्राया agen) प्रसिद्ध 
ब्रह्मनाडी RATE सूलाधारस्थस्वयम्भूरिक्नसुखविवरात्‌ | आदिदेवान्त- 
संस्था ब्रहपय्यैन्ता | मायातन्तरऽपि “ सिरा स्यात्‌ ब्रहमपय्यैन्तम्‌ !! इत्यादि । 
विच्ुन्मारेव fen) यस्याः रा । पद्म॑सूत्रतुर्या अत. सूक्ष्मा 
Bea परवुध्यनो ज्ञायन्ते यया सा तथा अृतक्षाविणीलात्‌ सकल- 


पटूचक्रविवृतिः १९६ 


सखघुता मावर मनोधर्मं स्वभाव er शुद्धो भावः स्वभावो यस्याः 
सा इति प्चम्यनतच्हुरीहि "भावो हि मानसी wal cepa | 

यन द्रेण कुण्डणिन्या शर्मणि गमन तत्‌ gE व्रह्मरमिति | 
AT THATS अन्ये 


भूकाधारात्‌ HEAR TATA ST 
सिरा स्थात्‌ aes तद^तर्रमुत्तमम्‌ ॥ 


हूति मायातन्तात्‌ | 


ब्रह्मद्वारमुखं नियं aaa तिषएठति | 
` येन द्वारेण गन्तव्यं श्रहस्थानं निरामयम्‌ | 
मुखेनाच्छाद्य TER प्रा परमेश्वरी 


इति गोरकषसंहितायचनाच्च समेति छधाकणसुतिप्रदेशं मन्थिस्थानम्‌ एत्र 
शपुम्णाया नाड्या वदनं धीरा वदन्ति # ॥ ४ 
सपारपद्मगाह्‌ अधेलादिना 
पण्णवद्यड्गुकायामं ATTRA, 
गुद्वजान्ते कन्धमुप्नधाद्रयङ्गुरं विदु" 
तस्य Rare वृत्तरूपेण शोभितम्‌ ॥ 
इति शारोक्तकन्द एव gente? एष मन्थसतवृं ध्यजाध युपुम्णास्यर्म्‌ | 
तथा च मायातन्ते — 
Beret wees वजाध wae | 
want वेदवर मूलाधारोऽप्यवादूदल । इति । 


saz प्रफुटितम्‌.। 


१२४ पटूचक्रविवृतिः 
तथैव ग्रथितं पदां मूखादिपद्मपञ्चकम्‌ 
करिकाकाररूगेण किन्याध्यवलम्वितग्‌ | 
हति वचनात्‌ | Gata व्याख्यातं तत्‌ पुवर्णामर्वुरिति 
तथायं दक्षिणामूर्तौ 
आधारे स्व्णवर्णेऽरिमिन्‌ वादिसान्तानि संस्मरेत्‌ | 
दतसौवणैव्णानि वर्णानि परेश्रि । इति । ' 
as veg wig वर्णा fgg उक्ता ग्रन्थगौरवभिया नात्र 
प्रकटिता. | # | 
सतुष्करोणचक्रमिति 
तथाच मायान्ते - 
तछ्णिकान्तर walt चतुष्कोणा सुपीतभा । ईति ॥ 
तथा तन्त्रान्तरे -- 
We चतुरं र्मादम्भोवज्रविभूपितप्‌ | इति | 
धराथा स्वबीजमिति | 
तथाच शारदायाम्‌-- 
वृत्तं दिवस्तत्‌ प्बिन्दुखाज्छितं मातरिधन' | 
, Prato स्वस्तिकोपेतं added ॥ 
अम्पोजमम्मसो Waa सवजफम्‌ 
ager मण्डलानि fest 
ath aerate: स्वस्वनामावृतान्यपि ॥ 
तततद्भुतकषमवर्णानि मण्डलानि तथा सर्व. ga ca ठ वौ्क्तानि 1 तथा 
wera पएरथिव्यादीना स्वस्वनामाघृतानीय॑धैः एतदनुसरिण सर्वेषु 
पत्रेषु स्यस्ववीजामि हेयानि । x | Yak 


पटूलकरविवृतिः १२९५ 
चतुर्बाहु इति अत्र पने ब्रह्माप्तीयाह तदङ्ग इ्यादिना | नवीनार्क 
aera रक्तवणैः सटिकारी ब्रह्मा चतुरबाहुयुक्तः चतुरभागेदो 
मुलाम्भोजरक्षमर्यस्य स तथा । # ॥ 
अत्र डाकिनी शक्तिरस्ति zane वसेदत्रेति | 
तथाच WTI 
मूलाधारं ब्रह्मण स्थानमेतत्‌ सौवर्णामं डाकिनी दैवता इति एषा 
डाकिनी aaa affect ze: 
तन्तान्तरे 
रक्ता TERRA TORR BACT 
यामे खड्गं दधाना arma छभापूरितं चैकववताभ्‌ ! इति । 
Baas. मकारं वहन्तीतयन्वयः | # । 
मध्ये अवान्तरयेवतादिकममिधाय saa areata वजास्याया 
aaa सामीप्ये सप्तमी अधोभागे इति यावत्‌ | 
मुख्यनादीत्रयं मनये वज्ञाध इरि | 1 
दति aera | कणिकामध्यसंस्यं Agued त्रिकोणं एतत्‌ कामहूपास्यं 
त्रिकोण तत्‌ कामरूपाय कन्दपों वहि" समन्तात्‌ प्रमति नाम oat 
aay वायुश्च निवसति | 
तथाच मायान्ते ~- 
तकर्णिकान्तरे wat चतुष्कोणा सुपीतमा | 
तन्मध्ये योनिमध्ये च वह्धिाय्यो- समाश्रये ॥ इति | 
श्रीक्रमेऽपि ~ `, 
करणिका स्थिता योनि" कामाख्या परमेश्वरी । 


१२९६ पटूचक्रविवृतिः 


जपानास्यं हि कन्दरम्‌ आधर afer 

स्वयम्भूटिङ्गे aut पञ्िमाभिघखं प्रिये | 
शुद्रयामकेऽपि - 

भ्रम्रौनिगतं ध्यायत्‌ कामं बन्धूकसन्निभम्‌ | 

उ्वरुकाकानरप्रल्यं तडिकोरिसमध्रमम्‌ | 


wae जीवश्च care बन्धूकपुष्पसमूहममिहसन्‌ तदधिकरस्ववण हति 
भावः । “ बन्धूक बन्धुजीवक " इयमरः | “' जाधारे तस्िकोणके 
ZITAT, 
तथा-- 
aout Sarre इच्छन्त aha ah 
मध्ये खयम्भूटिङ्गरत कोरिपू््यसमप्रभ । 
इति गौतमीयात्‌ | 
तथा 
अधोुसौ रि्गरूपी देमाभो अमणे रत । दति ॥ # । 


पृनरपि मायातन्ताच्चाह तन्मध्ये इति | भिकोणमव्ये elt cepa | 
दुतदव्णकला इति कोमल सुव्वर्णथोगिलात्‌ ater तथाभिहितम्‌ | 
fare, अधो. । ज्ञानध्यानाभ्या प्करादयते य स तथा प्रथमफिस- 
arate नूतनपषवाङ्कुराकार विद्यते इति । तथाच पूर्णचन्द्रा 
दधिकरससमृहे इयथः fat सन्तानं सिगसमृहं हसतीति सिग्धसन्तामहासी 
काशीव,सीत्यादिविरेषणप्‌ | सरितां यावत्ते चक्रवत्‌ जलाना अरमण तद्रूप 
प्रकाशो यस्य स तथा “स्थादावर्पीऽम्भसां भरम ”' sere. । # ॥ 
तलङ्गं साद्धं्िवर्येनावेएय कुण्डणिनी शक्तिरस्ति zene तस्योदरं 
हयादिना । बिरतन्वसोदरतस्या सा चासौ कका ््ृतिश्तति सा तथा | 


cecal: १२७ 


अत. सूम नवीनचपरामाना तस्या विणस॒न्योभया सह anad आखद्धा 
यस्या" पा तथा । “ तदित्‌ सौदामिनी वियत्‌ चचरा चपरापि च ” cera, 
am निद्धिता शिवोपरि aaa साङ्गतरिग्रता erate. शरीरं यस्या सा तथा। 
सा तु अषौवक्त 
गधा श्रीक्रमे 
अधोवक््ा Raat दैवी उ द्रपुच्छातिश्ोभना | 
अव्र विधुहताक्रारा aed mead | 
परिस्फुरति aeaten सुप्ता हि इजगकरति 
बरहम्रारमुखं नियं सुखनाव्रय तिष्ठति | 
` येन द्वारेण गन्तव्यं Re मनोमयम्‌ | 
wan च्छ A dg Ca Hae | 
मस्तवेः मणिवद्धिन्ना स्वयम्भूरिङ्गयेषटिनी ॥ 
यौगान्तरेऽपि 
gaara तद्वारं कुण्टली्चकरिरुज्वला | 
निद्रावश्षगता देवी प्रसृप्तभुजगोपमा | 
तथा माग्रातन्त्ेऽपि 
साद्धतिवर्यानन्दा नन्दिता मारमा ॥ इति ॥ # ॥ 
्रूजन्तीति उस्थिता सतीति शेष , 
तथा च तन्त्रान्तरे 
स्िष्ठीवाव्यक्तमधुरा करूजन्ती सततोधिता इति | 
कोमलवाक्ेर््वाचं वरूजन्तील्थं | 
तत्‌ प्राप्य कुष्डलीषूपं प्राणिनां देहमध्यगम्‌ | 
ु्णीःतराविभेवति गचपचचादिभेदत ॥ 


+ 


१२८ पट्चक्रविवृतिः 


हति शाक्ते तत्‌ चैतन्यम्‌ श्वासोच्छरसविमस्जनेन वायुना यया जगता जीवः 
जीवात्मा हंस" धायते 


faa कुण्ठली afer हस्माश्रिताः 
हंस प्राणाश्रयो नित्यं प्राणो नादीसमाश्रय"" 
आधारादुद्रतो वायर्यथावत्‌ राव्वैरेहिनाम्‌ 

देहं प्राप्य are प्रयाणं get बहि † 
ह्रादशाङ्गुरमानेन तस्मात्‌ प्राण इतीरिति । 


भा कुण्डली आलानं परमात्मानं विमि तव्योगभागिनी्य्थः कीसी ? 
हं" जीवालानम्‌ आश्रिता जीवाधिष्ठाना ater दंस aoe: 
्रीणवायुसूुमाश्रय प्राण नादीपधाश्रय कशं त्य नाद्ीसमाः ware १ 
" इत्यत आह आधारादविति | परमाणं wet इति प्राण" इतति प्राणपदरवयुसक्तिरपि 
दशितेस्यन्तनाहु 


 दक्षिणामूची त॒ 


उच्छास चेव निश्वास हंस दक्षम्‌ | 
तस्मात्‌ प्राणस्तु हंसाय आलाकारिण संस्थित. | 
पट्‌ शतान्यधिकान्यत्र सदसनाण्येकविशति । 
अहोर त्र RAT स जभौ भीक्षदायक | 


च 


अन्यत्रापि 
सकारेण बहिर्याति हकारेण विशेत्‌ पुन, ॥ इति | 
प्रोदामदीपश्रेणी # | 





` ¢ स्वं समाधिता '” ति पायन्तसम्‌ “ ¢ गाडीपथाध्रयः "` इति पाठान्तरम्‌ । 
४ ५ भासिनी '” इति पशन्तरम्‌ । ed”? इति पाठन्तसम्‌ । 

1/1 
56 प्राणस्य नाडीपथा * afi पायन्तरम्‌ + 


पटूचक्रपिवृततिः १२९ 


तस्याः कुण्डरिन्या मध्ये परमा at शक्तिर्च्यते तन्मध्ये इत्यादिना | 
प्रमा SBT परा परानान्नी अतिसूक्ष्मा | 

तथाच भद्रधृततन्ते 

सूक्ष्मा कुण्डसिनीमध्ये ज्योति्म्मात्रा परा मता इति । 





सा एव परमात्मस्वरूपा 
तथा च श्रुति.-- 
तस्या शिखाया मध्ये तु परमा सा व्यवस्थिता | इति | 


नित्या ध्वृसप्रागमावरहिता अनिन्दपरम्परा आनन्दसमूहयुक्ता अति- 
aor, विद्युता इव लसत्‌ दीधितिर्दियैस्या' सा तथा । यस्याः ` 
कलाया. प्रमया waned जगत्‌ शरीरं भासते सा विजयते | 
निव्यज्ञानस्य उदयो wet सा # 
कोष्यवन्यैव्वाकयै बरहश्पतीन्‌ सेवते गौरवे बहुवचनम्‌ । # 
स्वाधिष्ठानास्यपदममाह fier = अङ्गच्छदै' रप्र विधुत्‌- 
परका््वायै पुरन्दरानर्वादिलान्तै समिन्दुकं परितं पम्‌ 


तथा च मायातन्ते-- 
तदृ त॒ मरेशानि स्वापिष्ठानमरतुच्छदम्‌ 
रक्तवर्ण कणिकायामन्जमर्दन्दुसंयुतम्‌ , 
मण्डलं वारुणं देवि aa मणिपूरकम्‌ ।। इति ॥ 
दक्षिणामर्तौ — 
स्वाधिष्ठाने विद्रुमामे बादिलान्तानि संस्मरेत्‌ | 
विचयुसुञ्ञसगामानि विचुद्धासितमस्तके ॥ इ्यादि ॥ 


शास्दायां विशदभृकारौ Yar तत्द्धूतसमामानीति प्रागुक्तम्‌ | 
Wy = + 


१६० पटूचक्रविवृतिः 


अम्भोजं AVI अङ्धंचन्द्रयुतम्‌ | 
4 वीजं मकराधिरूढं स्वाधिष्ठानं विष्णुगेहं प्रदिष्टम्‌ 
बालार्क राकिणी देवतात ॥ दति वचनात्‌ ॥ # ॥ 
तस्याङ्के इत्यादि | नीलबुतिषूपो wart शोभाम्‌ आदधानः । 
गौतमीये-- ; 
स्वकषब्देन परं िङ्गं स्वाधिष्ठानं ततो विदु" । 
Heras देवसदशकमनीयता शोभा यस्याः सा । नानादुधेति । 
तदुक्तं तन्वान्ते-- । 
श्यामां श्रूलान्जहस्तां उमरूकसहितां Hence वहन्तीम्‌ | 
दैवीं cata द्ितयदरुरसरदषदन्तप्रमामि | इति | 
a मोदाद्ुतान्धकारसमूहे wager: तन्नाशको भवतीति धुधेति अब्रहतुल्य- 


काव्यसमृहसम्पसिं भजन्ते 1 अत्र पयन्ती शक्तिरस्ति प्रमाणं विश्ुद्धपब- 
व्यास्याने रिसिष्यते ॥ # ॥ 
मणिपूरमबमाहं तस्योदरं इत्यादिना 
मणिव्धन्नं तत्‌ पदं मणिपूरं तथोच्यते | 
नीरवे नीरवणैडादिफान्तवौर्कते । तथा च दक्षिणामूर्तौ--“ gate 
मणिपूरके उफान्तामि महानीरप्रभानि परिचिन्तयेत्‌” | वदैम्मण्डलं बीजं चाह 
वैश्वानरसयेत्यादिना । वैश्वानरस्य बहे्णण्डलं रक्तवण त्रिकोणं aa तरिभिः 
RARER | 
मायातन्ते-- 
ard पयोजातं फणिकायां महेश्वरि ¡ 
वाहेयं मण्डलं रक्तं त्रिकोणं स्वस्तिकान्वितम्‌ I.” 


vara Rata: १६१ 


स्वबीजं रेफः । “वौ सै रञ्ञितान्यासन्‌'" इति प्रागुक्त, प्रातू््य॑सम- 
waa । मणिपूरम्तु AS सद्रसथानं काकिनी देवतप्रेति वचनात्‌ | तामाह 
रद्रमूरषिरिसयादिना | garam अतिशयरक्तवर्ण. | tangata | 


तदुक्तं तन्ते — 


छष्णां दैवीं त्रिववतां प्रिनयनसरितां कुष्जिनीमुगरूमा 
ast शक्ति सदण्डामभयवरकरां दक्षवामे दधानाम्‌ | इत्यादि ) 


नानेति स्ञानसमूरेन सह रक्ष्मीस्नाम्‌ ॥ # ॥ 
अनादेतपद्ममाह तस्यदं हृ्यादि । बन्धूकपु्पकान्िवरूपरक्तवणै 
कादिरान्तैः gama: सिन" युक्तम्‌ | 


त्थाच दष्षिामूर्तै-- 


पिङ्गं महावदिकलिकाभानि संसत्‌ 
> कादिगन्तानि बणानि चतुर्ऽनाहते भिये ॥ 


तन्मध्ये TERT वायुमण्डलम्‌ | 
तथाच मायतिन्ते-- 

अनाहतं द्वादशारं रक्ताभं हदि wat | 

तत्मध्ये पावनं पवां पटकोणं धूप्रवणैकम्‌ ॥ # ॥ 
वायुबीजमाह तन्मध्ये दृव्यादिना | पवनां यं । प्रमाणे आधायन्नव्यास्याने 
उक्तम्‌ | धूसरं ईषत्‌ पाण्डुरम्‌ । देस्तचतुटययुक्तं कृष्णसाराधिशूढम्‌ | 
रक्तमनादतमीश्वरमेहन्सु काकिन्यपीहोक्ता इति वचनात्‌ । तदेवाह तन्मध्ये 
करुणानिधानमिलयादिना | grated gee हंसाभं सूरयप्रभम्‌ | 
अभयवरदपाणि्धययुक्तम्‌ | तत्र art नवतदित्पीता गौखर्णा त्रिनेत्रा 
पाराकपारवराभयान्‌ Agha. बिभ्रती । were इति अस्थिमाराधरा | 
५ स्यात्‌ शरीरा कङ्कालः" इत्यमरः । 


१६६ पटूचक्रविवृतिः 


तथाच तन्ते 
काकिनीं मेघ(द)संस्धाम्‌ 
Te शूं HTS SHEA Rego पीतवर्णो 
दध्यन्ने carat स्ववयवनमितां वारुणीमत्तचित्ताग्‌ 
BESTT वराभयं तथा अस्थिमाला तन्त्रान्तरे उक्तम्‌ | 
aes तु तन्मध्येऽधोमुखे शक्तिके इति 
त्रिखिकोणयुक्ते इति क्रमात्‌ 
तथा 
तन्मध्ये बाणरि्गन्तु सूर्यायुतसमप्रभम्‌ 
शब्दब्रह्ममय. शब्दो न हेतुप्तदहेतुक ॥ 
अनाहताख्यं तदव पुरुषाधिष्ठितं परम्‌ | 


पुरेण ओवासमना इति गौतमीयाचच त्रिकोणं armies ओवाघ्मामश्चाह 
एतन्नीरजेव्यादिना। कनकं बन्धूकपुष्पसदशे बन्धूक ' Joo, तद्रदज्गरागोजवर'। 


हेमवन्धूकवु युमशरचन्द्रनिमानि च 


हति योगिन्येकवावथत्वात्‌ | स्वयम्भूवाणरिङ्गेतरणिङ्गविरेपणं Barks 1 मौरौ 
मस्तके सूक्ष्मविभेदयुक्तौ विवरयुक्तो afta career | aden देवस्य 
पीटाख्यं  निर््वातदीपरिखाकारद॑सेन जीवास्मना रोमितम्‌ | मायातन्त्ेऽपि -- 
“army त्त्र प्रदीपा. ” हति भानोरियस्य मण्डकपद्ैनैकदेरोन aera: | 
तेन मण्डरमण्डितं अन्तरं मध्य॑ यस्य स चापौ रसकिञ्स्कशयेति स तथा 
तस्य चोभाधरम्‌ । “ किज्ञल्. केसरोऽखियाम्‌*” इत्यमर" ॥ # ॥ 

विषुदधपदमाह्‌ fuser हिमच्छायायुक्तस्य नागस्योपरि सित- 
शरीरस्य wads पाशाङ्कुशादिकसितैः शोभितशरीरस्य daa: उदीप- 
qi fare शुक्तः सदाशिव eee सिद्ध प्रद | 


पट्चक्रविवृतिः १२६ 
तथा तन्तान्तरेऽपि - 
सदारिवेस्थानमिदं विशुद्धं साकिन्ययेहापि च yaaa | 
सुधासिन्धो. शद्धा शुका । 
तथा च तन्त्रान्तरे 


देवीं उयौति.स्वरूपां त्रिनयनविलसवश्चवक्ता सुद 
हस्ताम्भोजेषु चापं शरूःमपि दधतीं yeah agar । इति । 


पुस्तकन्ञानथद्रामिति शरं पाशम्‌ हति तन्वान्तरे उक्तम्‌ | युधांशोश्वन्द्रप्य मण्डलम्‌ 
तथा च स्वच्छम्दर्समरहे 


असताचास्तथाकाशं चन््रभिन्दुं तवृ । 
कण्ठो परमेशानि रम्बिका चतुरङ्गुले ॥ 


मतिक्षीरस्य ज्ञानशील्युक्तस् gaara जनस्य महमोकद्वारसम्पसि दधत्‌ 
मण्डकमिदथेः स जीयो विपदा अन्धकारखस्पाणा eae: | जत्र 
वैखरी शक्तिरस्ति 


तथपि भ्रधृततन्ते च्म 


went कुण्डरिनीमध्ये salferatar परा मता 
अोतनविषयात्‌ तस्मात्‌ किचचिदेवोदंगामिनी ॥ 
स्वय॑भकाशा पश्यन्ती सुपुम्णानाभिमाधिता 
भेव हृपङ्कजं प्राप्य मध्यमा नादरूपिणी ॥ 
तत" संजस्पमात्रा स्यादविभक्तोदंगामिनी | 
सैबोरुकण्ठताछ्स्था रिरोधाणरदाधिता ॥ 
जिहामूरेधनिष्यूता छृतवणैपरििहा | 
दन्दपपश्चजननी tame तु वैखरी । # ॥ 


१३४ पट्चक्रवितृतिः 
आज्ञाचक्रमाह आज्ञानामेद्यादविना गौतमीये--“ आङ्ञासक्रमणं तत्र 
गुरोरज्ञेति Aa "' चनद्रतुस्ङ्केदजनकं ध्यानस्थानं प्रकाशस्वरूपम्‌ | 
zara विशुद्धाया काभ्याम्‌ अक्षराभ्यां युक्तं दिपरम्‌ ala 
arash “आज्ञाख्य Bas शुभम्‌” इति | 
दक्षिणामूरत्तावपि-- 
आज्ञायां विचुदामायां wit दक्षौ विचिन्तयेत्‌ | 
हाकिनीति 
तन्त्रान्तरेऽपि 
आज्ञापुरं aaa हाकिन्यथोक्ता शिवगेहमेतत्‌ | 
, विद्या पुस्तकम्‌ | मुद्रा ज्ञानमुद्रा अङ्एठतजेनीमिरिता 
पन्ते-- 
आज्ञास्था gaol उमरकसदितामक्षपूत्रं कपालं 
विद्या gat दधानां त्रिनयनविरपटुक्तषटूकोणयुक्ताम्‌ (?) । इति । 
AQHA तथ्काशचघरूपशचेति तत्‌ तथा | 
मायातन्तेऽपि-- 
भास्यं द्विदलं शुभ्रं कशीकःयः मनोख्यम्‌ । इते । 
सिद्धं निं िद्धशब्दो fran इति वैयाकरणा इतरशिवपदं ई ard 
तरति इति इतरं शिवस्य परशिवस्य पदं इतरश्च तत्‌ शिवपदश्चेति तत्‌ | 
रिङ्गचिदेन रिक्ञाकारेण प्रकाशो यस्य तत्‌ । वियुन्मालेव प्रकाशो 
TA तत्‌ | 
योगिनीहदये-- 
इतरश्च पुनस्तथा शरचनद्रनिमं सदा इति ! 


was fake: १९९ 


जामन्दर्ह्यामिपि - - 
तवाज्ञाचक्रश्थं तपनररिकोरिघुतिधरं 
परं aaj वन्दे परिमिर्ितिपाश परचिता | 
ताराषोदान्यास्ाधिकारतन्ते-- 
ब्रह्मा विष्णुश्च ददश Paral सदाशिवः | 
तत, परदिवो A पट्‌ रिवाः परिीरिता. ॥ 
मूकाधारादिविषुद्धपेषु पश्चरिवन्यासममिधाय-- 
आज्ञाचक्रे च दैवेरि दक्षवणैसमम्वितम्‌ | 
, परं शिवं ब्रह्मरूपं हाकिनीसदितं न्यसेत्‌ | eA ॥ 
a च सहतारनिुणपरशिवस्यांशस्वूपी अप्र रिवो जेय | अत एवं : 
aOR, THAT, त॒ जहम इयुक्तम्‌ | परमकुरपदम्‌ एतत्‌ 
पयन्तं परमकुरदमिसुसंहरेणोक्तम्‌ | 
तथाच श्रीमते--. 
तत्रतदकषिणं षट्कमाज्ञपूै galway | इति | 
` आनन्दर्हर्यामिपि-- । 
महीं मूलाधारे कमपि मणिपूरे हुतवहं 
feud स्वाधिष्ठाने हदि मरुतम कारामुपर | 
मनोऽपि भूमध्ये सकलमपि भित्वा Gor} 
waa पशमे सह रहसि पत्या विहरसि ॥ 
aa कं जटं ahem मणिपूर हुतवहमिति व्यत्ययेनान्वय, | ब्रह्मसूतेति 
HAA ब्रहनाब्या. प्रबोधो यस्मात्‌ तत्‌ । वेदानामादिवीजं प्रणवः तंत्र 
चिन्तयेत्‌ । विकसितधरमोऽूष्वैसिद्धपरसिद्धो यस्य सः अत्रान्तराता 
wefan gygeenan | Baas; Yar स चासौ अन्तरासां 


१६६ पट्चक्रविवृतिः 


चेति सः dicate आभा dite ज्योतिष एवम्भूत उयोतिःप्रणवाभ्यां 
विरचितौ स्शूपवर्णै यघ्य स alates 
श्रीक्रमेऽपि 
भूमध्ये जन्तरात्मानमरूपंसव्यैकारणम्‌ 
reread प्रदीपामं जगन्मयम्‌ ॥ 
अत एव प्रकाशः ज्योति स्वखप, तदृ पूर्वक्तन्तराममोद्धुं az: 
ware frre मकारः तदुपरि नाद इति व्य्ययेनान्वय | णवं नाद्‌ 
orate ठिसिष्यमाणयोगिनीहृदयात्‌ ज्ञेया असौ नाद्‌ अतीव 
ze wena ow Te तरत्‌ awa: यश्च पीयुपाधास्थन्द्र 
" तत्समृददासी तद्धिकु इति भाव । 
योगिनीहदयेऽपि 
न्दो तदं बोभि्यां नादे नादान्त ण्व च इति । , 
eal विन्दौ तद्धे द्वन्द | । 
स्वच्छन्दसंग्रदेऽपि 
तत्र बिन्दोर्यैथा Pract स तकँतः 
सू््यैकोरिप्रतीकाराम्‌ अतिदृं महदुणम्‌ ॥ 
तन्म्ये areca संख्या योजनपञ्चकम्‌ 
, तकणिकायामासीन. शान्त्यतीतेश्वर प्रमु" | 
waa east Regatta 
frahia प्रतिष्ठा च विया ara, ॥ 
परिवास्य स्थिता्चित्रा ar) शान्त्यतीतेश्वरस्य च 
वामभागे समासीना शान्ययतीता मनोन्मनी ॥ 
पन्चववत्रधरा" सर्व्वा aera SIT: 1 
चिनुत समास्यातं को््ुदरतेवबैतम्‌ || ,“ 


पटूचक्रविषूतिः १६७ 


शर्धन WHT बौभिनी तस्य चोपरि । 
उयोरमा स्योप्लावती कान्ति asa विमलापि च | 
अद्धंचन््रोलििता dar कला पन्च saat । 
वन्धती बोधिनी बोधा smear तमोपहा ॥ 
निघोधिता (का)कला a कण्टिता area | 
्ह्मादिपदुमेश्चाना परपराप्तिनिबोधनात्‌ | 
निबोधिकेति सा प्रोक्ता तस्या मेदाद्ररानने | 
arated यदुक्तं ते नादम्तस्योपरि स्थित 
warmer aaa: | 

, पुरै" परिृतोऽसंस्यैममध्ये papas 
हस्थिका दीपिका चैव रेचिक्रा मोचिका तथा ॥ 
BHT मव्यगा त्रासा पश्चमी प्रमा कमा | 
चन्द्रकोटिसगप्रव्यं तनाध्यरस्वुदयोजनप्‌ ॥ 

` पद्ममध्ये समासीनम्‌्ंगामिनमीश्वरम्‌ | 
चनद्रायुतपरतीकरास wad त्रिलोचनम्‌ | 
दिन्द्वायैरावृतं च शूटपार्णिं जटाधरम्‌ 
SIEVE II परमां HATA ॥ 


ध्यायेद्धिति रेप. निराकम्बामिति aera | 


टीकाकारधृततनत्र 
ast रीथिल्यमङ्गाना नासाभ age | 
मुखं विद्णुयात्‌ किश्चत्‌ दन्तैदन्तान्‌ न संरेत्‌ ॥ 
रसनामन्तरा दु्यादनङ्गे धारयेन्मन | 
हयं सा परमा सुद्रा निरारम्बेति watt ॥ 
दृह स्थाने णवं सुद्र वंदा सदाम्यासात्‌ पृतपवनात्‌ पवनघुदां वीनां 
mor प्रश्यति |, तदनन्तर तम्मध्यान्तःप्रविरसितूपरान्‌ SORTA, 
16. 7 


१६८ पटूचक्रिवृतिः 


पयति पश्यात्‌ नवीनसूर्यप्रकाशचाकारं गगनभूमध्यमिखितं पद्यति दहं 
स्थाने भगवान्‌ साक्षात्कारविषयो भवति 

ननु सर््बन्यापित्वात्‌ अपरिच्छिन्नस्य sever कथं परिच्छितिस्थाने 
अमिव्यक्तिरित्यत आह राहरिति गथा अम्बरगतो wed र्यते किन्तु 
शरिमू्ययोम्भण्डलमेव eet तथायं Rare एवम्भूतकम्मैिरेषकरणात्‌ 
अत्रैव साक्षद्धवति । प्राणनिधने मरणकारे इह स्थने. प्राणान्‌ वागन. उदु 
याभिन्या aren समायेष्य वेदान्तविद्वितं ““ नित्यं विज्ञानमानन्दं wa” इति 
श्ुतिविदितं परं नित्यं देवभिप्यादिविगेषितं पुरुषं प्रविशति | 


तथा गीतायामपि-- 


प्रयाणकारे मनसाचलेन भक्तया युक्तो ATT चेव | 
वममभ माणमिद्य सम्यक्‌ स तंपरं ee दिव्यम्‌ इति॥*॥ 


wren वायोरिति | तदुपरि पूषव्वोक्तनादोपरि चकारात्‌ नादस्य।पि कयस्थानम्‌ | 
यत्र॒ ayaa अथैनं sania ब्रहमरन्धस्यादिस्थाने प्रीयते तत्‌ 
वायोनाद्स्यापि went नादान्तमिति यावत्‌ अत्र अद्धनारीश्वरोऽस्तीव्याह 
महानन्दमिव्यादिना महान्‌ आनन्दो यत्र तं महानन्दखह्यम्‌ | दिवा 
शिवाया ae शिवस्याकारम्‌ अरद्नारीश्वरमिवयथैः 


तथा ख श्रीक्रमे ~ 


“ चेतसा संमपदयम्ति नादान्ते वृषभध्वजम्‌ 
तमद्धदेहं वरदे कारणत्रयमातरम्‌ | 
पुटद्रयविनिप्कान्तो aa प्रीयते ॥ 

सखच्छन्दसंग्ररेऽपि-- 
हलाक्रारस्तु नादान्ते भित्वा सर्वमिदं जगत्‌ 
LATA विनिर्भय उदंश्तयवसानकम्‌ | ^ 


पचक्रविवृति, १९९ 
नाड्या Aas ीनस्वव्यक्तो ध्वनिरक्षणः | 
अतो ब्रह्मनि जयं saa ॥ 
aa sofia जेय, सराग सतधननिभ, | 
AMAA पश्चवरतेनदुरेखर ॥ 
ब्रह्माणी aa शकि" बह्मणौत्सङ्गगामिनी 
द्वारं सम्ोक्षमागीप्य सोधयित्वा व्यवस्थिता | 
FATA BURA ET 
दवीस्थानं राहस्नारं प्रविरीदरवुरे प्रिये | 
इति श्रीक्रमाद्रवुरए्यसहसरारपश्चमाह्‌ तकु sara । श्धिन्या नाव्या 
रिखरे अग्रे दूल्यदेगे Pier मेरुमण्डस्य च years तैन सहन्तारं न 
Heaney मभ्ये च यित्रिण्या मयितम्‌ ^ 
मायतिन्सेऽपि 
Farhad चित्रिणीम्रथितं भिय | 
रिङ्गधो द्धुनाभिवक्ष Hoey AT ॥ 
अत ण्व खच्छन्दसंग्रहे - 
BRU wera रूपेणार्ाबसानक्प्‌ | 
Brag wow wy व्योम प्रकीर्सितम्‌ ॥ 
श्रीकमे - 
आसन्यकणत्‌ दैवेशि रद्धिनी च रिरोपरि | 
हेखाधनन्तरम्‌ । 


शङ्खिनीनालं संप्राप्य चास्थिशूखं निमिं य, 
wad येत्‌ Paced परमानन्दरक्षणम्‌ ॥ 


१४० पटूचतरविवृति' 


सहारं vest रक्तकरिञ्जल्कयोभितम्‌ 
दतदेमाम्बुजं जातधारपातप्रवषण्‌ 
विसरगाध पद्ममिति सगे शक्तिर्निंशकर | 
इति नारदोक्तेन विसर्गस्य सहसायदरारिण्या ayaa TACT TTL | 
निर््वाणपद्धयामपि 
goed भवेत्‌ शक्ति विस्ममण्डलं प्रि 
सहस्रारं महापद्मं र्तकिज्ञल्करोभितम्‌ ॥ 
सारसमुचयेऽपि “ सहस्रारपद्मं॑विसर्गादधम्तात्‌' पणपूर्णनुगुभरं पै 
Haga तच्च Greate तत्‌ वारपूय्यैररिमसमकेसरसमूहो यस्य तत्‌ | 
“पदन्तु YHA 
यथा मायातन्ते 
He सहक्तारे निशाकसहोदरम्‌ 
अधोववतं कणिकाया चन्द्र शक्तिरूपिषी 
BORA समस्तमावृकाक्षर युक्तम्‌ तन्मे पूर्णचन्द्र सिगसन्तानं 
हसतीति सिभ्वसन्तानहापी । तस्यान्तशवन्द्रमण्डलस्य मध्ये त्रिकोणं ay 
अकथादिग्रिखात्मफं afar soar तदन्तसिकोणमध्ये श्यं 
mise were तेजोवणैला्‌ श्यं wearers यावत्‌ 
तथाच गौतमीय 
“ ससरि दिमनिभे सर््ववणैविभूपिते 
अकथादितरिरेलायु हरक्षत्रयभूपिते 
तन्मध्ये परबिन्दुञ्च सृष्टिस्थितिरयात्मकम्‌ | 
योगिनीहदये-- 
WET CHAT वृतं परमलिङ्गकम्‌ । " 
बिन्दुरूपं परानन्दकन्दं निलयं पदो दितम्‌ 


uaa agtas १४१ 


व्याख्यातञ्च अमृतानन्दस्वाभिना यथा पररिङ्गस्य Asta द्रादशवर्णो हंस 
अत" सुद्ष्मरूपम्‌ अत we विन्दुरूपं frees मातरकालाहुसचिविनादरहितम्‌ । 
पदात्‌ पं प्राप्य उद्वितं प्रकाशितस्‌ | तदेबाह परमामोदसन्तानराने परं कन्दं 
सूक्ष्ममिति दारिसमस्तकरषद्रूपम्‌ | “fret विज्ञानमानन्दं aa” 
हति शरुत्िबोधितो य॒ परशिव स Bar भूवा परमरतिवास्य सगुण शिवः 
yar सत्र प्रबिन्दुचक्रे निवराति शत्याह-- इह स्थाने दत्यादिना । 
पररिवसमाख्यानसिद्धप्रसिद्धं य्य स 

तदुक्तं MATA - 

अकार सम्वैवरणाम्य प्रकाशः परम, शिव | 


हकारोऽन्सय Hered चिमर्शास्य प्रकीर्ित । 
अनयौ सामरस्यं यत्‌ प्रसिन्‌ महसि सुरम्‌ ॥ 


तत्र अमृतानन्दप्वामिन" अ इति ब्रह्म get अकारवाच्य परदिव तस्यांशितेन 
परमरिवोऽप्यकारवाच्य प्रकाशरुपत्रव्ारिषात्‌ । ater Pate 
रशक्तिरियन्तेनाहु. “mea ger प्रेदं wel यद्धुतं यत्च भव्यम्‌ 
इति श्रुते रसो द्रव्यविशेप परे दति प्रसिद्धस्तप्य विसर समूहस्तदूवत्सित. 
शुक. । “ सन्दोह बिसरत्रजा " gam. भन्ञानमोहान्धस्य हंस qe 
सुधाधारासारं अतितरां Res यते स्वासन्ञानं स्वस्य रिवाभेदज्ञानं 
Raft भगवान्‌ रेशर््यादधयुक्त स परमशिव परमहंस इत्याह समास्ते 
saat | यकरुसुखसमहृस्य खरी RK तस्य परीवाह“ अलेच्छासा' 
परीबाहा"  ह्यमर' । परम इति नान्ना समुचित परमहंस ह्यथ स च 
भायावच्छिन्न' | 


तथाच तन्वन्त 


avenged प्रधिकसत्‌ सहसच्छवं 
` कमादरणकेसरभकरमास्वरनिम्भेलम्‌ { 


५ ५ 





१४२ पट्चक्रविधृतिः 


तदन्तरपि चिन्तयेदग्तरोचिषो मण्डले 
पुराणपुरपं परं परितं महामायया इति | 

मायोप्रधिविनि््भ्तं शुद्रमिस्यभिधीयते | 

मायासम्बन्धतशचेशो जीयोऽविदयावशस्तथा ॥ 


इति वेदान्तोक्ते रिव gente स्पष्टम्‌ | 
परमपुसूपमिति मारते 


अब्धक्तं मन इ्याह शरीरं परसुच्यते | 
अब्यक्तके पुरे रेते पुरुषस्तेन चोच्यते ॥ 


-खगति, खेचरः स्यात्‌ | यद्रा खे ब्रह्मणि गति. स्यात्‌ “खं ae” 
हर्यश्ुपनिपत्‌ । Baked कलामाह sae इत्यादिना । प्रात.सूस्यतुस्या 
चन्द्रस्य पोड्शचकका अमानाघ्नीति यावत्‌ | 


अमा पोड्भागेन दैवि प्रोक्ता महाकठा 
संस्थिता परमा गाया दवैहिनां देहधारिणी ॥ 


दति वचनात्‌ पूष््मलात्‌ शतधाविभक्तय्रगाण्तन्तुभगिकल्या क्षयोद्रय- 
tear अधोमुखी खष्टुन्युखी पू्णानन्दयमृह्धो - यस्याम्‌ या 
अभिगल्लीयूषधारा तस्या धरा | 
सवच्छन्दसंमहे-- 

ब्रह्माणी त्वपराशक्ति, ब्रह्मणोस्सङ्गगामिनी | 

at समोक्षमारमस्य रोधयिल्वा व्यवस्थिता ॥ 

at भित्त्वा तु वरारोहे sagas परां शिवाम्‌ 

शाक्तितत्वासिकां देवीं प्रसुरशजगाकृतिम्‌ ॥ 

शक्तित्वं समाख्यातं शुवनैराभितं महत्‌ | 

शक्ति तत्त्वासिकामृ्ुशक्तरुपरि संस्थिताम्‌ | 


पट्‌चक्रकिवृतिः १४९३ 
after sti 
शक्तो पूतनर्व्वयापिकाथां atari | इति ॥ 
व्यापिनीतच्व॑शक्तितस्वघ्ठरूपमाह निर्व्वाणास्य दृयादिना । aera 
wan विमजितस्य केदाभागस्यैकमागतेत्या ages कुटिला सर्वक 
Ger द्रादरशादिखप्रभा । परात्‌ eT कराया प्रत तदन्तर्गता 
चन््रमण्डलान्तगैता न त॒ NST कराया" अन्तमैता | 
यथा सारसमुचचये षोडशीं aes 
maar परत स्थिता भगवती भूतापिदेवाधिषा 
निर्व्वाणाष्यकलार्चनद्रबुटिका सा परोडशान्त्ता 


वालस्य eee विभजितछेकेन मागन या 
स्मात्‌ सदृशी Paras या द्रादशार्वम्रभा ॥ इति ॥ 


१ 


एवन्छन्दंमहे 

पोडशान्तमिति स्यातं व्योमस्थनेन्दुमण्डलम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
तत्रैव ~ 

आधारं मावनानाश्च प्रवक्ष्यामि समासतः | 

wan चव qq aaa Bara ॥ 


चतुरश्च श्थितास्तासां मध्यस्था व्यापिनी स्पृता | 
yaaa fear च सतेजास्या च पश्चमी | इति ॥ 


स॒मनापदमाह एतस्यां gener) परं उत्तरकाठं मातीति परमा ध्व॑सरहिता 
fateh | anata Gaver कोटिमागेकसागरूपा अत, अतिगुद्या | 
Prat Reed) या ` अष्रतधारा तस्या धरा । पनिमनसि रुसिततसवयोधं 
शिवामेदज्ानं वहन्ती" | 


a 


१४४ पट्चक्रविवृतिः 


अहनतेदन्तयोरेक्यमिति विद्या Pare ॥ 
इति परापञ्चारिकावचनात्‌ ब्रहमणोऽतिनेकट्येन तथोक्त 
तथ -- 
समनान्तर्म्वशरोरे पाशजाटमनन्तकर्‌ 
इति वचनात्‌ अव्रापि पाशजारप्‌ । एतस्या निर्व्वाणककायाः 
मध्यदेगे हति सामीप्ये सप्तमी तथा च मध्यदशसमीपे करिश्चिटु परीय 
तथाच स्वच्छन्दसंम्रहे 
चिदानन्दस्वरूपा तु परा शक्तिरतवृ्ुत 
समना नाम सा शक्ति" सर्वकारणकारणम्‌ 
सर्व्वान्तानि Reda शिवेन समभिष्ठिता | 
अल्ल SE स भवने रिव परमकारणम्‌ | 
शिव wae कर्तेयं क्ति कारणसुच्यते | 


उन्मनीपरमाह तस्या मध्यान्तरलि दृययादविना तस्या समनाया' मध्या 
ras घ्र सामीप्ये सप्तमी शिवतनुपरा्िस्थानम्‌ उन्मनीत्ति यावत्‌ | 


स्वच्छन्दसंमहे 
Praag समाख्यातं तदु शक्तितनुत' | इति | 
तथा a4 


शिवशक्तिद्रयश्चैव रिवतनुं प्रकीरितम्‌ 
सूक्षमाथैशततयवच्छिननं रिवतनुमिदय्थ | 
तथाच तत्रैव 
यावत्‌ सा समना शक्तिस्तव उन्मनी स्पृता 
नाल कालकलामानं न तनुं न च देवताः | 


परूचकरविवृततिः १४५ 


अनिर्वाणं परं शुद्धं Saad तदुच्यते | 
रिवशक्तिरिति स्याता Here निरञ्जना ॥ 
तत्वातीतं वरारोहे 
इत्यादि अग्रे सिखिष्यते | मन सितात्‌ समना | “यतौ वाचो निवर्ते 
अप्राप्य मनसा सह" इति sear मनोऽतीतवादुन्मना इत्यमृतानन्दस्वामिन । 
राक्तिमध्यगतो नाद समनान्तं प्रसर्पति ॥ 
दूति स्वच्छन्दसंहात्‌ नात्र Hens WaT परमक्ुरपदमिति परं 
उन्मन्था पर अकरुलपदम्‌ अङ्घुराष्यपरशिवासकपदं विश्वस्य विश्रामस्थानलात्‌। 
पदमिति अमं सत्वादितरिगुणयु ु)क्त९ । शाश्वतं निव्यम्‌ योगेन प्रां 
नियानन्दममिधानं यस्य॒ तत्‌ । “ नित्यं विज्ञानमानन्दं wa” इति श्रते, ` 
aaa शद्ज्ञानस्य प्रकाशो यस्मात्‌ । तथाच दीकाकारधृततनत “ उन्मन्यन्ते 
परशिव " इति । 
स्वच्छन्दसंग्रहे उनानीमभिधाय- 
तत्वातीतं वरारोह TERA नैव गोचरम्‌ 
“at वाचो निवरषन्ते " इत्यादि श्रुतैः | त्यं “ तत्वमसि " इति श्रुते । 
स्वामाविके anf विवरं aera, 
इति रिबतन्त्ात्‌ | 
श्रीमते-- 
sera सम्बन्धः प्रथम" स्थित | 
erie परो fg: शक्तया वे्ठितभास्वर' 
अतो नादो विरोधी च अद्ध॑चन््रसमक्तमात्‌ | 
पततु पश्चमपोक्तं TAA महोदयम्‌ 
तत्र तदृकषिणं परकमाजञापूर् कुलोद्भवम्‌ ॥ इति ॥ 
नियतनिजचित्त इत्‌ | " 


19 ८ 


१४६ षटुषक्रविवृतिः 


गौतमीये 
अहिंसा waned marae दयाज्वम्‌ | 
क्षमा धृतिभिताहार श्ौचश्चेति यमा दश्च ॥ 
sq सन्तेष्‌ a Rea ze देवस्य पूजनम्‌ 
सिद्धान्तश्रवणञ्चैव हीर्मतिश्च att हुतम्‌ | 
दते नियमा प्रोक्ता योगशाखविदारदै । इति ॥ 
तथाच पतद्रयाभ्यासक्ीक श्रीनाथववतात्‌ wear मोक्षव्सप्रकादं क्रमं 
area eek मूलाधारस्थितवहिपवनयोरक्रमेण तकां कुण्डलिनीं ge 
we मध्ये तां स्वयति 
शद्रयामले 
इद्कारेण स्थाप्य शक्ति स्वाधारसंस्थिताम्‌ | 
ˆ ततः सा प्रबोधिता cera स्वयम्भूवाणेतरटिङ्गत्रयं भिर्वा मेदं कृता 
ahaa ब्रहमाख्याया इति स्यन्ोपे पश्चमी ब्रहमनाड़ीमारुक्च सकरसदनं प्राप्य 
परमरसयुक्तरिवे परमरिवे प्रदीपामे देदीप्यते तत सा शुद्धस्वमावा 
सूक्षतारक्षणेन तडिदिव कसततनतुरूपा तन्मोक्षानन्दं घटयति नयवशात्‌ 
dita समाधौ यतो योगीश. ता वुख्बुण्डकिनीं जीवासना are 
Aan wae सचिदानन्दरूपे भगवतीं चेतन्यरूपां ध्यायेत्‌ | 
तन्तान्तरे- 
ध्यै चिन्ताया स्तो धातुशिन्तातत््वेन निश्चखा | 
ˆ एतेद्धयानमिह प्रोक्तं सगुणं निर्ण द्विधा । 
सगुणं वर्णभेदेन निगुण केवलं तथा | 
अन्यत्रापि-- 
astra सोऽहमस्मीति" वेदनम्‌ | 
तन्निगुणमिदम्‌ इत्यादि 


 “ हस्यादिति "° ति पाठान्तरम्‌ 


परूनक्रविषृतिः {४७ 


ततो लक्षा रक्तवर्ण परमामृतं Gosforth पीला पूर्णानन्दमहोदयात्‌ प्रशिवात्‌ 
रिवसकारात्‌ प्राकूपादितोन्मन्यादिखष्टिमार्गेण serra ToT AAT 
Re मूलाधारे स्वस्थाने प्रविरोत्‌ | ततो योगी aaa योगपरम्परा 
प्राप्तया teased शरीरस्थं aad डाकिन्यादिकं तर्पयेत्‌ sto । 
श्रीनाथवक्त्ादिति यदुक्तं तत्‌ गोरक्षसंदितादौ स्पष्टीकृतम्‌ | 


यथा प्रबुद्धा बहियोगेन मनसा मरुता हुता | 

aia गुणमादाय ase सुषुम्णया ॥ 
ज्वठन्ती भुजगाकारा पर्मतन्तुनिभा BAT | 
उद्धारयेत्‌ wares थथा कुशचिकया द्‌ | 
कुण्डङिन्या तथा योगी ब्रह्मद्वारं प्रभेदयेत्‌ ॥ 
gat संपुटितौ करौ eat बद्धा ठ प्रासनं 

गदं वक्षति were चिबुकं ध्यानश्च Tee " 
वावारमपानमूदरुमनिशं मोत्सारयन्‌ पूरयन्‌ 

प्राणं सश्चति मोक्षमेति शनकै राक्तिपमभावात्‌ यत ॥ 

ghana ठुद्धपकारीतयास्यया | 
निव्वणपद्ध्यामपि-- 

आदौ पूरकयोगेन स्वाधारे योजयेन्मन 
गुदमेदान्ते योनिप्तामावु्चय प्रबोधयेत्‌ | 
werd ध्यायेत्‌ कामं बन्धूकपन्निभम्‌ | 
उवर्ालानरप्रस्य तदित्ोटिसमप्भम्‌ | 
तद्ध ठ शिला agar चिद्रुपा परमा कंसा | 
तया सदहितमासामेमेकीभूतं विचिन्तयेत्‌ | 
गच्छन्ती ्रहममार्गेण लिङ्गमेवक्रमेण तु | 
अमृतं यद्निसर्म्थं परमानन्दलक्षणम्‌ | 
तरतं सतेजाव्यं धारापातपरव्षणम्‌ | 
पीत्वा Fora पुनरेव HS विशेत्‌ | 


॥। 


१४८ पटुचक्पिवृतिः 


सा च प्राण" समाख्यतस्तन्तेऽस्मिन्‌ परमेश्वरि | 
एवमभ्यस्यमानस्य अहर्निंशनिबन्धनात्‌ । 
चतुब्विधा तु या afteet योनौ प्रजायते | 
पुम. प्रीयते त्स्य काकम्यष्दिरिवान्तिकम्‌ 
योनिसुद्रा परा सा तु बन्धस्तस्या प्रकीसित" ॥ 
TSP नैयायिकमते पुरुषात्‌ सांख्यमते ्रकृतिपुरुषाभ्याम्‌ पातञ्ञकमते 
मरकृतित' | मीमासामते अदात्‌ खष्टिः तत्र योगो द्विविध । 


प्रथा शारदायाम्‌-- 

पिण्डं भवेत्‌ कुण्डणिनी शिवासा पदन्न हंस सकखन्तरात्मा | 

रूपं भवेत्‌ बिन्दुरमन्दकान्तिर्तीतरूपं रिवसामरस्यम्‌ ॥ . 

पिण्डादियीगं शिवसामरस्यात्‌ सथीजयोगं प्रवदन्ति सन्त" 

शिवे wt नित्यगुणाभियुक्ते मिर्बीजयोगं फलमव्यपेक्षम्‌ । इति ॥ 
तथान्यत्र-- । 

दिकरालादिषिवजिते परदिवि चैतन्यमात्रासके हत्यादि 
सच्छन्दसंग्रहेऽपि-- 

पिण्डं कुण्डरिनी शक्ति पदं हंस cathe: 

रूपं चिन्दुरिति ख्यातं रूपातीतस्तु चिन्मय ॥ 
तत्रान्तरेऽपि-- 

पिण्डि युक्ता पदे युक्ता रुपे युक्ता षडानन | 

ङूपातीते तु ये युक्तास्ते मुक्ता नात्र संशय. ॥ 
मतमेदे अनेकानि ware स्वच्छन्दसंमहे-- 

अधश्च BEAT: सहत्दरसंयुतम्‌ 

रक्तं Aas साहस्दलस्थं शक्तिसंयुतम्‌ | 

agit were कणिकाकेशरानितम्‌ - 

शक्तिरूपं महादेवि कुराकुरमयं छुभम्‌ । ˆ “ 


ल 


परूचक्रविवृत्तिः १४९ 


पङ्कजंद्रयसीरानि स्थितं शाश्वतमव्ययम्‌ 
तयोम्मेध्ये सुपुम्णान्तसि्ादाधारपङ्कजम्‌ 
शक्तिरूपं शिवाकारं सर्व्वाध्यासं निजालयम्‌ 
PAR रेष" । तथः कियत्‌ Baal ages | 
तदाह तत्रैव 

आधापङ्कनप्ोद्धे साद्धह्यङ्ुलकोपरि 
तैजसं साष्टपत्रशच पीतकणिकया युतम्‌ ॥ 
eee कणिकामध्ये स्थिता रिङ्गादिदैवता | 
एतस्मात्‌ द्रचङ्गुरुस्य स्वाधिष्ठानं षड्भकम्‌ ॥ 
aa राकिणी्चक्ति' पूरव्वाभि" शक्तिभिर्युतम्‌ | 
ततश्च भावयेदैवि नाभिमष्टाद्गुलोपरि । 
तदं मणिपूरश्च aad सुशोभितम्‌ | 
काकिनीमध्यगं तच तामथादाभिरा्रतम्‌ ॥ 

" चतुदशाद्गुखषृद्धुं मणिपूराल्यपङ्गजात्‌ 
पङ्कजं काकिनीमध्यं वायव्यं द्वादञ्चारकम्‌ | 
तततस्थकाररातरचादिशक्तिभिश्च समावृतम्‌ | 
तव्नस्थसूर्यनिम्बे च नादो यानादिपी्कम्‌ | 
एकादशा्गुलादृं Pag पोड्शच्छदम्‌ | 
मध्यगा शाकिनी Tag परमेश्वरि ॥ 
अग्ताचक्षरन्तस्था TAM तदृद्ुगा | 
कष्ठोदँ परमेशानि ofa चतुरङ्गुल 
आज्ञाचक्र द्विपत्राग्जं दक्षद्िदरसंयुतम्‌ 
हंसवती क्षमा cadet मध्ये तु हाकिनी ॥ # UI 

तन्तान्तर TAT ASME यथा 

स्वापिष्ठानं पड्ढलोपेतमुयत्‌विच्ुखक्ष वादिशन्तैध वणँ | 
यक्तं शावित्रीसहितं ARR ध्यायेदस्मिन्‌ राकिणी देवताश्च ॥ 


१९० पटूचक्रविवृतिः 


योगिनीहदये 
एताश्चतक्न शक्तयस्तु का ¶ू जाउ इति क्रमात्‌ | 
पीठा, कन्दे पदै रूपे रूपातीते क्रमाद्धिटु ॥ 
Tara, पूर्वोक्ता अभ्विकादय aaa कामरूपादविपीठलेन परिणताः | तथा 
च मूलाधारे कामस हदि पूरणगिरि भूमध्ये जारन्धर' सहस्रे sear | 
ने च ^एकमेवाद्नितीयं aa’? इत्यादि ora ब्रह्मण एकलमभिहितम्‌ | 
शकतिप्तायत्‌ केति चेत्‌ तद्र्मरिवशक्तिसामरस्यपरसमेष 
यथा HOT 
aad केचिदिच्छन्ति द्तमिच्छन्ति चापरे 
मम ad न जानन्ति द्वताप्रैतविवजितम्‌ | 
स्वच्छन्दसंग्रहेऽपि- - 
अनयो सामरस्यं यत्‌ परस्मिन्‌ महसि श्रवम्‌ 
amiga इधर्गीताया शिववाक्यम्‌ 
एकया मम सायज्यमनादिनिधनस्छुटम्‌ 
पुसोऽभूदन्यया भूतिमन्यया तत्तिरोहितम्‌ ॥ 
एकथा मायासिकया शक्तया विशिष्टस्य मम अनादिनिधनं age सहयोगं . 
अद्धनारीशवरासकमभूत्‌ अन्यया आचया ज्ञानाणिक्रयेति यावत्‌ बिशिष्पंसो 
भूति उत्पत्ति जानीहि अन्यया Reon तत्‌ तिरोहितम्‌ तथेव क्षणे 
तिरोहितम्‌ ब्रह्माविनाभूतम्‌ 
अतएव तैत्तिरीयवाक्यम्‌ 
ag मे frond रूपं चिन्मात्रं केवरं शिवम्‌ 
सब्वौपाधिविनिमुक्तमनन्तमपरं परम्‌ | 
कारिकापुराणेऽपि ' 
Perks निराकारां परं तरहमस्वरूपिणीम्‌ । 


परचकरविवृति, १९६१ 


अन्मखण्डे राधिका प्रति ृष्णवाक्यम्‌ 
यदा तेज स्वरूपोऽह तैजोरूसासि ea तदा 
न शरीरी यदाहश्च तदा वमशरीरिणी । 
तन्ेऽपि 
a दिवेन विना ahr न शक्तया रहितं शिव, 
अतस्तयोरमेदशच चनद्रन्द्िकयोरि 
वेदान्तेऽपि “Pear "' 
तथा--गायोपधिविनिमुक्तं छुद्धमित्यमिधीयते 
मायासम्बन्धतश्श्चो जीवोऽबिधावदस्तधा | 
ह्युक्तम्‌ | तदैव सामरस्यं परं ब्रह्म सगुणिव शक्तयाद्िनानारूपेण परिणमते 1. 
यथा ear 
कारेन प्रेरयेन्माया aaa । 
„ या मूलप्रकृति प्रोक्ता सा माया परिकीरिता | 
योऽयं सद्राशिव प्रोक्तः स एव पुरुष प्र । 
एके ब्रह्म द्विधा भूखा सिषा विधीयते ॥ 
aga वनिता भूल अर्धेन पुस्पस्तथा 
ताघुभौ च समो wer खिव्यक्ति नयेत्‌ सुधी । 
माथावच्छिनेश्रस्य TERME कूरषुराणादौ-- 
सर्वज्ञता aire स्वतन्त्रता Reagent 
अनन्तशक्तिश्च पिभोविधिन्ञा' षडाहुरङ्गानि Heer I #*# ॥ 
नारायणो वैदिकश्च wera: समीरित. | 
तस्यासजो TATA च 
तस्यासजो विश्वनाथप्तेनेयं रचिता सदा | 


इति षट्चक्रविदृतिटीका सम्पूर्णा | 





१९९ 


बरदैवटीकाकारधृत पटूचक्रनिरूपणस्याधिक शोक 


इह स्थाने चित्तं निरवधि निधायात्तपवनो 

यदि pat योगी चर्यति समस्तं लिभुवनम्‌ । 
न च ब्रह्मा विष्णुनं च हरिहयो नैव खमणि- 

स्तदीयं सामर्थ्यं शमयितुमलं नापि गणपः॥ ३१।८१) 

ze स्थान इति । इह स्थाने Agere Path प्रतिक्षणं चित्त 

मनो निधाय सम्बध्य आत्तपवन गृहीतवायु सन्‌ कुम्भकं BA यावत्‌ 
योगी जन, यदि क्रुद्धो भवति तदा समस्तं fama चलयति | तदीयं सामथ्यै 
योगेन ceases शमयितुं ब्रह्मा सिक्ता विष्णु staat 
हरिहरः हरिहरातसक दर खमणि पूर्य गणप गणेश, एते नानं 
समर्था इथं ॥ 


१९६ 
ॐ शरश्रीगुरवे नमः | 


सरोजमधु सादरं सरसि मानसे सव्व॑दा 
यथाद दति षट्पदा नतु कदापि सैवारुकम्‌ | 
तथेव युणिनो बुधा कचति दूषणलयागतो 
ममाददतु साम्पतं यदि य॒णस्तमिदरथये ॥ 


इद खट हु खजोकरसङ्ुलसंसाररन्धजनुपां परमपुरुषध्यानैकनिषठचेतसा- 
मपि मानुषाणां सवाभ्यन्तरवरिषट्चक्रनिरूपणमेदादिज्ञानं विना मोक्षोपायः 
कोऽपि नास्तीत्ति परमकारुणिको भगवान्‌ परमेश्वर; दु.खसमवायाततानुद्दिीषः 
Tea RA ATTA स्वपोक्ततन्ब्ाखमदहोदधीनन्तरान्तरा षट्‌चक्तनिरूपणं ` 
तदधेदादिङ्कतश्च उपदिदेश किन्तु पदुपदिष्टतन्तशास्लाणामतीव बाहुल्या- , 
दरावययोधल्याचाधुनिका स्वस्पायुपो जना परमपुरुषप्रोक्ततन्वकाख्ाणां 
सारांशमाग्र्तीकरमनीशा सन्तो नियतं निरयमेव गच्छन्तीति परपरित्राण 
परायण" परमपुरपसमाहितचेता, श्रीमतपर्णानन्दयति. निखिकतन्तशाससाससुदधू्य 
TUR wae पटुचक्रशथितिस्थाननिरूपणतद्वेद 
सङ्केतसन्द्ितं षट्चक्रनिरूपणं स्वरचितश्रीतत्वचिन्तामण्या छ्रतवान्‌ 

तस्य च पूव्वपिक्षया सहजवोधगम्यवेऽपि सारांदप्रका्चकटीकाया 
अभावात्‌ अदावयाधैबोधोऽयं न्थ रति प्राथ एव उक्षित भसीत्‌ | हृदानीन्व- 
स्माभिस्तपरिभिहीषया परसुरतरा्न्ययेन साधनासिद्धबोधविद्वमगण्य्रमत्‌- 
कालीचरणप्रणीता निगृदप्रकादिनी कापि टीका संगृह पण्डितमण्डलीपरिदो 
धिता gear पुर्तकेऽस्मिनिवेशिता साग्परतन्छनया fagial यदि कथश्चिदप्या- 
नुकरूयभागिमो भवन्ति तदैवास्माकमर्थव्ययं परिशरमश्च सफलं मन्यामहे 

` किंच बहुलवि्तृतश्रीकालीचरणभरणीतटीकावोकनेन कियदपि कक्षं 

avian विपयासक्तचतसा क्षटिति aerate विद्रकुल- 
चूडाम णिश्करविरयिता मूलतत्वाथेविद्रतिकारिकाऽपरापि टीका सनिवेरिता 


ci) 


१५४ 


यसु 
ze स्थाने चित्तं निरवधि निधायात्तपबनो 
यदि क्रुद्धो योगी चख्यति समस्तं त्रिसवनम्‌ | 
नच ner foo च aad नैव खमणि 
स्तदीयं साम्यं शमयितुमरुं नापि गणप 
हति शोक विद्लुरदिरोभणश्रीमहर्देववियाभूषणकृतटीकासम्बरितिमद्रित 
परुचक्रनिरूपणनामकपुस्तकान्तरे एकत्रिशच्छरोकात्‌ परमधिको seat स त 
अस्मदुपजीव्यश्रीमत्कारीचरणशद्धराभ्यासुपेक्िततवात्‌ नैव पुस्तकाङ्गलेन निवेशितः 
किन्तु पुस्तकस्य समाध्यनन्तरं श्रीमद्ररुदेवविद्याभूप्रणविरचितया टीकया सह 
सन्निवेित इति 
: अपरच्च बिश्वो्तारणकारणश्रीमन्महेश्वरवदनपद्कजनिनिर्मतकैवल्यकलिका 
नामपरेयतन्लस्य षट्चक्रनिरूपणासकद्वितीयपटरेन arg सिद्धाचास्येवय्येधरीमत्‌- 

` पूर्णानम्दयतिविरचितपट्चक्रनिरूपणासकश्ठोकसमूहाना sats fracas 
कचित्‌ कचित्‌ पामैषम्यस्य कैवल्यकरिकातन्तद्वितीयपरकरीकाकृच्छीमद्विश्वनाथ 
सुखिक्येनानुमीयमानलात्‌ Iola रीकथापि पुस्तक 
मिदमलङ्करतकलेवरमासीत्‌ 

किन्तु दुखं पुरेतदनुभूयते यद्रहुतराथव्ययं परिशमन्च स्वीक 
कुल्ापि कैवल्यकलिकातन्तं नोपरब्धं नापि ed सुतरामेव कैवस्यकलिकातन्मश- 
ममनिरनन्योपायैरस्माभि कैवर्यकरिकातन्तेण श्रीमसूरणानन्दयतिविरचितस्य ष्‌ 
चक्रनिरूपणात्मकश्ठोकसमूहस्य पाठाद्विपभ्यं परिदर्शयितुमनीरेमृैर्भूयते इति 

अन्यच्च आर्ययभर्म्माबम्बिनां सर्वेषामेव श्रीगुरुराराधनीय इति पृष्व 
पूर््वाचाय्यैतिष्ठाचारपरम्पराप्राप्ात्‌ जगद्युरुरपीश्चर श्रीगुरुपाहुकापश्चक 
सतोत्रव्याजेन श्रीगुरो स्वीयाराध्यतां aa सर्व्वानुपदेष्ं पादुकापश्चकं नाम 
स्तोत्रमकार्षीत्‌ तदपि विद्वखवरश्रीमक्ारीचरणविरचितया गूढभावा्थप्रकारिकभा 
अमरास्यदीकया षट्चक्रविव्रते" प्राक्‌ अन्थेऽस्मिन्‌ सभिनेशितमिति | 


सस्पादकस्य निवेदनं 





Printer by J R Ait at the Visnuta Prose Ady uu, प्रलाप » 


> 


SOME PRESS NOTICLS 

> 
“Tunsn Books deahng with the secret Mysticiam and 
Magic of India are the most interesting which have beon 
publishod m recent years.’—New Alctaphysesuhe Rundschau, 

“Ths book (Mahdnivvenc) brilhantly inanguvates the 
aludy of the Tantras, the literature of which occupies a 
frou’oreak in tle ashyiets Ive of Modoru India, 116 
introduction 10 t is tho most sold and exact account that 
has yet boon written on the coeliimes of (] ५ antas, their 
ontology, mystical plinsoology, worship, yoga and othios.” 
—Peoue Critique (Di, Professor Sjloain hen), 

Mo translation (Maddénu एन) 18 distinguished by 
its ologanco and by tho protow d and comprehensive know~ 
lulgo by which il is backed”; (and by another critic m 
the samo (कपोतो) ५ Shakti and Shaklw reveals a wondorful 
grasp of tho fundamentals of couseiousnoss ?—The Theo- 
sophtst (Or. Professar Schrader), 

“Ho commoneed his work with a THindi’s heart, with 
a Ihindi’s regard and a णता ५ faith, and so his transla- 
tion is whab it ought to be. The Introduction not only 
rovoals the learning of its author, but is also proof that he 
ling undorstood im what hght Mindiis regaid the ‘Tantra 
Shistia.?—Hudabade 

«In povusing the author’s Introduction to the Mahd- 
wivndna 41110 We have been bewildered with astonishment. 


11 SOML PRESS Nu ॥61 ५ 


We could never have dreamt that it was pessiblo for 
a Modern Christian Inglishman to so fully understand 
such mattors as the Mode of Tintuk 8 dhani ‘Tho author 
has certamly learnt a ercat deal of the innor and secret 
doctrins of the Tantia. We have nevor hoard sven from 
any Bengali Pandit such a clear exposition cf Mantra 
Shakti as the author has given. Tt seems as if the World- 
Mother las again willed tt ard has again desivec to mani- 
fest [ler power.”—Sahitya. : 

“The fist really important work that T kiow of on 
the Spint of any Ritual-philosophy.”— Das Heise Tagebuch 
Taner Philosophen (Ler mann Keyserlang). 

* A magnificent historical and philological record dio 
to the awhor who has taken upon himself with complete 
* suceess a task which mght seem to bo thankless, but 
which is in realty fecund, opening for tho firet tine an 
enormons and almost unknown branch of Ladin literature.” 
—Isis (21. Masson (2 (0119१९८). 

“Mr, Avalon is doing a very groat service Jor students. 
of rehgions by making a small part of it (‘Lantra-Shistra) 
accessible, The 1110056 (Principles of Tantra) 1s 116 most 
remarkable presentment on the subjoct which has yet 
appeared. Tt is [ull of points of very proat interest’? 
—The Quest (IV. Mead), 

“Ts clealy a Muropean disciple olf some Pandit 
belonging to the lelt-hand Shaktas and he shows great 
sympathy for the sect. [e is always ready to dofond any 
of its doctrines and practices, even the most shameful. 
On the other hand his farthfal discipleship has brought 
lim ४ wonderful understanding ol the teaching and cult of 
the sech . . of great oxogetical value.’—Sifranational 
Review of Missions (0. त N. Maryuahm). " 0” 


SOML PRLSS NOLIOLS iit 


९ Wor the stident of religions thoe is thon a mine 
opened for his enquiries ‘Tho whole work bears the stamp 
of congciontiousnoss and accuracy.” —[iterarishches Zentral- 
01001 fuer Deutschland 

“ho first impression was of amazement and delight. 
The Muhaniivéna is one of the most important of Hindu 
philosophical works combincd with claborate mtualism, 
and its translation thercforo by a European myolved cer- 
tainly a prodigions amount of study, sympathy and real 
understanding Of the ‘Introduction’ alone it may be 
said that for its lucidity, conciseness, directness and for its 
depth of penetration and insight it may itself claim to be a 
standard work on the much abused Tantras. We have’ 
rarely come across such an illuminating exposition of the 
Prinuples of Devi Worship.” -Prab iddha Bharata 

© Most moritorious productions. vom what has beon 
said 1८ ' ५ clea that Avalon is mght when ho doclares that 
up to now this htcrature has been too often judged and 
more olten condomned without knowing 1 and that the 
Tantias deserve to become 1004107 known than has beon the 
case hitherto.” Ostasiatische Zeitschrift (Dr. Prafessor 
M, Winte nitz). 

५ Arthur Avalon has 1ondered an eminent service to 
tho Causo of Sanskrit Litorature.”—Caleutta Review (Maha- 
muchopadhydaya Satish Chandia Vulyabhushana). 

“Wo suspect that Arthur Avalon is ono of the learned 
Pandits of Bongal whose natyyo speech has not been with- 
ont influonco upon his almost impeccable English We 
valuo lughly the work done, if for no other roason than 
thal it gives us a roal insight into the jargon of the ritual 
aud the worthlossnoss of ‘Tantrik Philosophy.”—The 
Nation (Neto sYork). 


३ 1 


iv 50811) PRUSS NOLIC ® 


“THummating discussion (“ Serpent Pawer ”), The 
Author makos some ratoly fne brillant definitions . 
thoughout maintains a strictly scientific attalude, though 
he is obviously unpressed with tho oxtraordinary nature of 
tho Tantmk Doctrine.” ian and (1414. 

“Thero is no doubt that he has an extensive and 
peculiar knowledge of the subject of which he treats.” 
Lnaue’s Oriental List (Di, Baa nett.) ¢ 

“The first fact which strikes the student of Wastorn 
Philosophy is the Author’s oxtraordinary knowledge and 
the second 18 his impartialty ” (Shakis and Shahta).—New 
Indwa 


BOOKS BY SIR JONN WOODROFTE 


? 


BHARATA STTAKYT (Addrosses on Indian. 


culture), 8ed ताता 

IS INDIA CIVILIZED ? 8rd Kdition 

THE SHED OF RACE, 2nd Edition 

811.41< 1 AND SILAK'LA (Essays and Addross- 
os in the Tantra Shistra), 2nd Edition 

GARLAND OF LETTERS (Varnamala), Studios 
in tho Mantra Shistra ; 

TLE WORLD AS POWMR~RDALITY 

THE WORLD AS POWER—LIFE 

THM WORLD AS POWER—MIND 

THE WORLD AS POWER—MATTER 

THE WORLD AS POWER—CAUSALITY 
AND CONTINUITY ५ 

TIE WORLD AS POWER-—CONSCIOUS 
NESS (du Preparation ) 


Rs, 


1 


४5 > > ४ ~> 


> 


o 


oo > ॐ 


I8 INDIA CIVILIZED ? 


PRUSS OPINIONS 
° 


^ Vornian domination has beon much more than mainly 
political, It is the cultural and social conquest of India 
which is the really important ono, nsidious in its cause but 
permanent in its results, Alien culture threatens to 
obscure the soul of India, to swamp the Indian culture, 
Thoelure Sn Jolin Woocroffe’s ‘atest book 15 most 
opportiimo. is style 1s simple and convincing. ‘The * 
fundamontal principles of Indian culture ave oxammed with 
great power of insight. Sir John’s purposo is to defend 
tho minds of young India against defilement—to cieate a 
strong working faith in thoir own ideals, and for this India 
will be vary grateful.’—The Commonucal (M 8.M.). 

“Powerful oxposition of Indian culture . , Many wise 
political, social and religious observations abound in its 
inspiring pages. We can commend its perusal to all who 
ave seokers aftor the truth. If it serves to induce the 
Europeans to abate some of their racial pride, ‘prejudice 
and intolerance, and the Indians to have a more correct 
appreciation of their culture, then it must bo regarded as a 
most opportune publication at the present moment when 
the groat, catastrophe in the Wost has shaken tho faith in 
the basic principlos of Western culture and has given a 
poworful stimulus to the spirit of introspection and enquiry.” 
~The 10." 


vill PRESS OJ INIONS 


“Doep insight mito what 1s of true value m Tndian 
culture clear with an enthusiasm all the move effective 
becauso iestramed It 1s his conception of India that 1s 
the great ingpiration in the book. [115 concoption of hfe 
is Indian through and through. T have read this book all 
one afternoon, maiking page ator page is tenchant 
criticisms of om detractors, 10५ pen pictures of Indian 1116 
and culturo, and especially its lu ninating description of 
what sone of om philosophies ically moan, 1८ is as af 
once again as of old, ono heard an anciont Guru talking to 
his disciples. [t is a noble book for every Indian home.” 
—New India (©, Jina ajadasa), 

+ Sm John has already earned an abiding placd in tho 
afoctions of our counlrymen by lus intimate and sYofound 
studies of Tinduism and his enthusiastic oxposilion of the 
basis of Wind culline, Tho volume in spite of tho 
ephemeral nattre 9 the incicents of composition has a 
permanent valuo and must find a placo in the Vinay of 
every scll-vespocting Indian.” he Central Tanda College 
Maguaus, The monthly oigan of Beuries Hindu University 

«Ms mattor and much moe are oxplaned with 
wondor ilucidity Sir John pomts oul that the true view 
of human evolution is the Mastern ong, and supports and 
illustrates his position by 10feronce to and also using tho 
cloarcut,and meaning{ul nomonclatuio of that systom of 
[प्ता Philosophy and Religion of which hoe is such a 
master.’ —The [Hindu (Di, Subramanya Atyar) 

“So ably indicates tho basic principles of Indian 
civilization and repudiates the baseless charges with such 
commendable enthusiasm and iightoous indignation as 
could have befitted one who by buth has inhemted tho 
cultwe—deservos study by evory sincore bélioy? in Indian 


PRoSS (0 > (दत्‌ 1X 


thought. Au adminble book ciushmyieply = Lrom start 
10 fimsh shows thal the author has a masterly and sym- 
pithatie grasp of the whole situation und he who goes 
thiough at will find hnuself in touch with the essontials of 
Tndian envilization.?’—Piabuddaw Bhaiala 

“Sir John Woodrof’o has done well to oxposo the 
fallacies underlying cortain old imo attacks recently 1 eiterat- 
ol—is deoply fmbued with tho spmt of Shakta Vedantism, 
and it ix from this point of view that he defonds Indian 
civilization. In a very fine shaptor Sir John Woodrofie 
exhibits tho various opinions hold about India and hor 
civilization.” —Sei vant of India (Professm ६. D ltanade). 

*Qontains, high inlollectnal quahties with freedom 
trom projudice or nonsonse of wy kind—the bost mlormed 
work on tho sub, ecb written by one not a Tindu.?— (न्व्‌ 
India and Natwe States, 

“Tho book demands tho close attontion of every Indian 
who 14 interested in tho futwe of his countiy Ibis an 
urgont invitation to us to appreciate better both this 
saciod trust and the near porl which besets it, and to 
stand firm and tathful in the hour of ordeal. ‘lhe author 
dovolops his theory with great slall and much qmet depth 
and the ossays aro strewn thoughout with acute and 
penetrating observations exprassed with a lucid soldity 
which tompts ono constantly to quotation.’—di yu? 

“Ts throughout thonght-provoking and 1eplete with 
intoresting passages. Bunt those on whom Sir John’s 
oulogisms will drop hko manna from [feaven should also 
ponder on what (०8५) ho has to say. It would be well 
for India if instead of cultivating a blind racial vanity, for 
which Siv dohn’s book will furnish amplo material to the 
unthinking’ bigot, ayo concentiate our atiention on those 

#ै 


Bes + 


x PR ५५ 01 NIONS 


othor lessons preached by lum, for only by 83 doit & we 
would mako a wight use of the truths if cont wns.” 
The Modan Remew . 

This noble work is a trumpet cull to the Tnchans to 
realise thon greatness and distinctivenoss and £2 build ‘the 
great futwo of India a loving anc it timato student of a 
great culture.”—The Hindu Message 

“India owes a deop dobt of gratitude to Sir John 
Woodroffe for this timely volumo m dofence of Tndian 
culture coitain soual aspocts have been so satisfactorily 
discussed and defended by 11५ erudite de ender of 
our civilization that if ihe Tndian social 11101 nor would 
care to read and think over them, much, 0" his rancour 
towards orthodoxy will prove baseless  Tndws groatost 
civilization 1s misunderstood by many mtolloctual imps 
both foreign and indigenous. Lt is a consolation to find 
that groat minds, Indian 01 oreign, can revise 1 #o woll 
as in tho case of Sn John’s, Knowlodge of the mnor 
capalality of the Hgo teaches but ono kind of palrioiiam 
which 18 of course universal and not nabionu. — Lt is as ally 
to hug the degonorates of our own nationality ag to hate 
the great souls of the otha: continents, But [८ sland for 
their rights when »pprossed is tho privilogo 0 overy migl t 
thinking man and woids fail us in thanking Sir John for 
his पद्मा duty, may they be ever more.”—The Mahratta, 

“Sir John writes profonndly of the Hine i rehgion 
and culture of which he 18 an aident adumor and lis 
१५५१९७8 of Indian civilaation is mflormed with a glowing 
enthusiasm. [He finds if easy to confonnd the-rationalist 
Mr. Archor, The book will not please every Christian that 
reads it, Bunt no occulentel student of Tndian pohties 
should miss tho réading, for it oxplains much wr'tho फा 


न eee 


1 2198 OPINIONS xi 


character and point of viow that before was obsowe and 
incomprehonsible, The Author beheves that the ancient 
Hindu cultnro which has persisted throughout the agos, 18 
the best for India anc he 1५ fearful lest it be lost m the 
political maelstrom which will follow the war.” The Oapital, 

“@Qreat erudition—sturdy champion of Sanitana 
Dharma.”—The Indian Daily News. 

“Most effective and crushing rejoinder the work of 
a distingmshod scholar and doep thinker iruly merits a 
very wide circulation in this country. 1४ is a profoundly 
philosophic study of tho subject.”—Vhe Mindusthan Renew. 

“The constitution o1 a poluically dopondont poopla can 
nevor appear to advantage, because it 18 the interest of the 
politically dominant people to discredit everything belong~ 
ing to the subject race asintorior, The Author has boon 
actuated by a strict regad for tinth ghd a desivo tor the 
establishmont of true Dharma. Tle las not sparod fom 
evitiowsm what is mean, calculatang, vulgar, mhuman in his 
own countrymen, nor has ho minced words i condemning 
what is low or soryilo or golfish o: inmbative im Fachans of 
to-day. Actuated by the ghost aims, he has roally given 
a most remarkakle and convinemg book on ५ difficult and 
much-abused theme.” Lhe Bombay Chrontcle. 

“Ably written defence of Mindi civilization by a pro- 
found scholar... [t would have been bettor*il he had 
entered as much gn emphatic protest against the pi ovailing 
abuses of Hindi socioty as ho has taken care to lefino its 
viitnos and ideals.”—/ he Moeryman’s Renew. 

“Tt १18 rathor unusual to find among the British 
mombers of tho, Indian Judiciwy an apologist for tho 
claims of sho Noo-Thindit revivansts and shor alles, tho 
ixticme Nationalists, Tt is in this rdlo that wo find 


Og ce 


xii 1१ ५ 0 IMONS 


Si Joln Woodrofo figming as a sort O° modorn Soul 
anong the prophels mich 0 tho book is acer pigd with 
an unworthy attack on Western and au boular y (लापता 
orihvation.’—The Madras Mail, ; 
“Tom hoon irilation anc annoyance... Wo passer 
to a foelmg of contempt touchcc by ॥ sorry ५1५0 ५ 
amusement that the Absolute (or tho Sproat or whatever 
elso the Author wis cs to call al) sioud ‘Indu ge in the 
bad joke of this ९011161. ... Wo cons dor “botlt Me. -A cher 
and Sir John Woodrolfo in this op sode a nuisance + , 
Thove is an absenco o clear 108५ ०५५1 of [फाल , , , A 
person who presents snel a position a 1114 तात, only 
and truly tho [लात्‌ of India.” ~The (८१ Vhilosgphical 
„ Poview (Professor Ay Welgay), 
^ *Rechaufs of more or loss fami arguments —wilh- 
ont the iuninat on ol any now thot zht vag (3 फोन. 
logical antithosiy and ०००0 11d Casmpcnuo is assertions. + 
एदे णाह. abstraction—camot bo exempted [काप the 
chaige of big Ths riterp etaton of 1५ Wosl st [१५०५५ 
that with all h’s motaphys cal abst actions he s tnable to 
chstingmsh foun from rovhty —vapounsiue, nehulous, he 
uspec, 0 these essays 14 when not obsct 1५ ou 11111 '; thei 
style 19 provocative without (1168 ve क च ॥111 116. The 
contusion of issues, (he mi ltipheation o sketchy extracts 
withoul contoxt, the breach of sample 1114८ logic are a 
running speech {hat gives no reuson othe div sion into 
Chapters, make allege ho = 1 book which 1४ vory hard to 
read and still harcer to remember wien roac == 7 hg 
Hnglashman + 
“Sir John Woodtolle ४ हतत wlom the reader may 
folow with confiaence. Tle bas aved any yooag tn [षू 
and has shown limself (७ be पा ral aymputhly wath the 


sgh ^ 
च 


a 


> 


५ 
1 व (01 N ONS Xl 


spuit of the Bast; on the athor hand ho bac not lost tov eh 
will the ideals o Lis own people nor been olinded by the 
essonpitl beat ly of [1 dian tradition so as to be unaware of 
actual noesont delccty, nor docs he forget that those who 
write against ov in [0101456 0 India must do so with oxact- 
ness, CROVInNaOn, and tho latter with the avoidance of 
moro pulling general statcmorts. Le is defimte and 
balanced andeives ono tho impression of bung thoroughly 
reliable? = (१८ Theasoplast Gl. de tn) 

“Toxutnno (ho spit of absolute श्वा ८५० with which 
Sir John Woodroffe has approached tho task—should bo 
sfadiow euefilly by every Tadian who apues to lead tho 
poople, ant Coamould the ayprations of his countrymen,”— 
The Indian Revian (Hon, 01 dustiee Seshaght Aliya). 

“The whole book 14 veplolo wth usotul suggestions to 
every ono who ४ intorestod 11a proper understanding of 
Indint cullvia- Sir John wlo hus dovoled many years to 
the study of [वापा 16 igion and who brings to his task a 
Sudiew! fine of mind पात्‌ कोन पदा sympathy has no 
diheulty um proving the ullot hollowness o Mr Archer's 
conclusions ~The Valdiuta Kesar 

“Su John Woodtole rightly carnod he gratitnde of 
the poople oy bis recent vigorous reprdiadion of (hc many 
tush asparsims mace on Indiv and the तणाः by a 
fore gn crtbie”? -(Hou ५११८१८८ Sui Abdi Rahim १४ lus Cons 
vocation Adidiess af 1919 to the Mysore University 

We have not seon any ono who loves Bhnata as’ 
Sir वणा Woodrolo doos. THis pre-omimence consists in 
{Ins thatshe has suid that tho sorvice (Sov) of Bhivata 1 
the service of Gor (Shit Bl agavan).”—Utsana (2 DAL) 


a 
+ # 


xiv TRESS CEINJONS 


Ry the same Author ~ 


BUARATA SHAK ET + 
COLL] OMON छा ADDREASNS ON INDIAN OU /LURD 


“Tho thoughtful sayings of an honest foroignor, a true 
Mum or © Troothiukor ” ax ho himself into plots the [finda 
terns... ought to bo in the hands of ovory Indian, 
It would give him thought an [ soll-respech. ‘Tho Ohmatian 
Miasionary and the Chustian Oriontalist are the lwo grout 
factors of Indian conationalsation, Wo fight tho third 
factor the poltician moro or less snecessfully. Wo have 

„ fought the Missionary and doloatod him gonurally, bub the 
sous of his carly attacks wo aro unconsciously bearing: as 
acceplable badges =, + + Thus when wo ran down we 
avo unwillingly showing ot tselves ws Cho iis ol tho modio- 
erty of Keropo Tike a living organi wo must cast off 
the foreign imatior trying to bore a home into om iitel- 
leetual systom. Sir John (0९५ not spare tho tndian mind 
in its analysis, To has very ably shown thib our so oftor 
professed Vairiigya is moro ofton our inogpacity and soma- 
times philosophic contusion. Tho httle book is ono of 
those productions which would go to make a now ago in 
this country, Tl is a protest against cultural smoido of a 
civilization designed by its past to tivo for evor?—7 ho 
"Modern Review. 

“Sir John Woodrofle varoly says anything which has 
not an elomont of originality in it, = 19 makox a poworlul 
plea against the oullmal conquosl of thig countiy by the 
nations of tho West . . + a vigorous plealwhich wo 
commend io tho 10066 cs (रणे true Born Indian, 


Pinss OPINIONS XV 


Sir John’s sympathy is bold and fovwless as his scholarship 
18 doop, and crudite—he has a clear and perspective viow 
of oup culinve.”—The Amaia Basar Patria 

Tho whole or the booklot is studded with shining 
goms o° thought and thnlling insight into trath. , , 
this storling faith in the profound mdividuahty of India, 
in tho glorious futwo which She is bound to work out for 
TLlersolf, in ५ groat mission Sho is to fulfil im the world, 
anmnates every Word spoken in the addresses compiled in 
this book. Wo cannot, in fact over-ostimate tho necessity 
of ovary sbudont of India, of overy worker in Her causo, 
furnishing himself with a copy of ths compilation and it is 
our aydent wish that the gieab ox ronent of the wondorful 
Tautrik lore of India would moro वलि make time to como , 
forward, as in bhoso addrosses to contribute his weighty " 
ideas to tho keon intollociual struggle going on in our 
countiy round practical probloma of re-organising om 10 
and thought.” —The Prabuddha Bharata, 

“Mach of those papors is overflowing with thought. 
fulness and dose (6 do good to Bharata Wo ask ovory 
English edycated man to road it. Lt will give us rovorence 
for our natural एतत and will save us from the thought+ 
logs spit of imitation.” 

५ Politionlly India is dead; this is bad onough, but rf 
oultival conquest follows tho political, then She will be 
truly doad, Ts India to bo a mere name and Tei culture 
agyignod to the cold room of the O sental scholar, or 1s She’ 
to bo a living form? Sir John Woodroffe takes up the 
question, with as much enthusiasm as the youngest 
Natjonalist amongst us. ITis angwor is ono of courage and 
hopo , Ty bub "Sir John 1s not blind to the difficultios ” 
The Seart blight. 


* ०५ १९ 


xvi TRESS OPINIONS 


“Tnsping ttlo—he has, what is not given to many, 
understood the soul of India — {To is ५ thorough sympetliver 
with Indian aspirations and has dwelt upon tho roy on 
and purpose of our elfarts. Ought to be voad by overy 
pahiiotie Indian, {9 will fhen have a clou vision and fool 
a new stiength in his onward stengelo,”—New adic, 


^ ^ (NTE SEED OF RACH 
~An Essay on Indian Hducation, Prive Re. 1, 

“There is much in this little essay with which the 
student of India cannot but heartily agree.”—The Asutic 
Stevie. 0 

“Of immense valuo... what is Sangskira, the 
Racial soul, the author ag one who has dived deep into 
Indian Philosophy, fully discusses in detail . , . this is tho 
right viow of Indian Ndueation.”—The Searchlight, Patna. 

¢ All who seek knowledge as to the essentials of Indian, 
oducation should possess and study carefully a copy of this 
book.”——New Fidin, 

*Readors of {3 India Civilized ? will realiso how 
woll qualified tho author is to offer an opinion on the 
maintenance of racial साप, Tis answer 18 sufficient to 
yetute the contention of his critics that his love for the old 
and beautiful in Indian Culture has made his outlook 
reactionary.’—The Theosophist (4, de Tr) 


Punttourn ry GANESIL & Co, MADRAS 


