===== Internet Archive OCR: Sivajnana Siddhiyar of Arunandi Sivacharya-1913_djvu.txt =====

/ 


SIVAJNANA S1DDHIYAR 

OF 

ARUNANDI SIVACHARYA 


TRANSLATED WlTH INTRODUCTION, NOTES, GLOSSARY ETC. 


BY 

J. M. NALLASWAMI PILLAI b.a., b.l. 

PRESIDENT 

THIRD AND SIXTH CONFERENCE OFTHE » 

SAIVA SIDDHANTA MAHA SAMAJA 



MADRAS 

MEYKANDAN PRESS 
1913 


All "Rights Reserved 




\ 


R 


v^m r 

S 5 

WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR 


(IN ENGLISH ). 


<"Z S''* r 


Studies in Saiva Siddhanta, Royal 8vo pp. 400. 

Sivajnanabodham of Meykandadeva. 
(Second Edition —In the Press). 

Tiruvarutpayan or The Light of Grace 
of St. Umapatisivacharya. 

c 

Irupa Irupahtu of St. Arunandisivacharya. 

Siva Bhakta Vilasa of St. Sekkilar. 

(In the Press). 

Studies in Tamil Literature. Antiquity etc. 

(In the Press). 


i * 


A 


\” v- ' N 

MAY 2 0 1973 









/ 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction ... ... ... ... i—xl 

Note on the Author ... ... ... xli-*-li * 

List of Agamas and Upagamas , ... ... lii—lv 

* List of Siddhanta SAstras ... ... ... lv 

✓ ^ t 
Sivajnanabddha Sutras (in Sanskrit) ... ... lvi 

Invocation ... ... .... ... ... i 

BOOK I. 

Alavai or Logic ... ... ... ... „ * 3 

BOOK II.— PARAPAKSHA. 

CHAPrER I. 

Charvaka’s Statement ... ... ... ... 9 

Refutation ... ... ... ... ... 13 • 

CHAPTER II. 

SautrAntika Bauddiias Statement ... ... ... 24 

Refutation ... ... ... ... •••34 

YogAciiAra’s Statement ... ... ... ... 49 

Refutation ... ... ... ... ... 49 

Madiimika’s Statement ... ... ... ... 50 

Refutation ... ... ... ... ... 51 

VaibhAshika’s Statement ... ... ... ... 51 

Refutation ... ... ... ... ... 52 

• general remarks ... ... ... ... ... 52 

Note on Nirvana ... .. ... ... ... 57 

CHAPTER III. 

Jaina’s Statement. 

NikandavAdi ... ... ... ... ... 60 

Refutation ... ... ... ... ... 67 

AjIvaka Sect * ... ... ... ... ... 74 















11 


CONTENTS 


Refutation 

... 74 

General Remarks 

••• 75 

CHAPTER IV. 


Purva MimAmsa System. 


f 

Bhattaciiarya’s Statement ... 

... 82 

Refutation 

... 84 

PrapAkara’s Statement ... ... . 

... 86 

Refutation ... ... ..' ... 

... 87 

Sabda Brahma VAdi’s Statement 

... 87 

Refutation 

... 8g 

Notes 

... 89 

CHAPTER V. 


MayAvAdi’s Statement 

••• 93 

Refutation 

... 96 

BhAskarAciiArya’s Statement (ParinAma Vada)... 

... 105 

.Refutation 

... 105 

Note on the Meaning of Sat and Asat... 

... 108 

NirIsvara Sankiiya System ... 

... in 

Refutation ... ... .... 

... in 

CHAPTER VI. 


PancharAtri’s Statement 

... 1 1 3 

Refutation 

... 114 

BOOK III.—SUPAKSHA. 


Invocation 

... 121 

Author’s Preface 

... 123 

SOTRA ]. 


u 

Pati Laksfiana. 


Sutra 

... 125 

Adiiikarana 1. 

... 125 

Do. II . 

- 1 33 





/ 


CONTENTS 


SUTRA II. 

Advaita Lakshana 


Sutra 

Adhikarana I. 

Do. II. 

Do. III. 

Do.. IV. 

Do. , V. * , 

SUTRA III! 

Pasulakshana. 

Sutra ... ... ... ... ...» 

SUTRA IV. 

Pasulakshana ( Continued ). 

Adhikarana I. 

Do. II. 

Do. Ill . 

SOTRA V. 

On the Relation oe God, Soul, and Body. 
Adhikarana I. 


Do. Jl. 


SUTRA VI. 

Nature of the Supreme. 


Adhikarana I. 
Do. II. 

Do. III. 

Do. IV. 


SUTRA VII. 

Atm a DarSana. 


Adhikarana I. 
Do. II. 

Do. III. 


lii 


... 162 
... 164 
...* 165 
... 178 
... 184 
... 185 


193 


... 198 
... 2 QI* 

... 208 


... 212 
... 213 


... 215 
... 215 
... 216 
... 2l6, 


... 2l8 
... 2lS 
... 2l8 


I 








JV 


CONTENTS 


The 

SUTRA VIII. 

way Jnana is Imparted to the Soul. 


Adhikarana I. 

,,, ,,, , , , ... 

... 222 

,Do. II. 

• *• •** ••• 

... 226 

Do. III. 

• » • ■ * * ••• 

... 238 

Do. IV. 

• • • 

• 

... 240 


SUTRA IX. 

« 

Adhikarana I. 

Purification of the Soul. 

• • t i » • it* • • • 

... 242 

Do. II. 

• It « t t «•• 

... 243 

1 5 o~'- III. 

t • 9 • » f •«• 1 t t 

... 244 

Adhikarana I. 

SUTRA X. 

Pasatciiaya. 

... 247 

* Do. II. 

... 

... 247 

SUTRA XI. 

Pati JnAna or Bhakti Lakshana. 


Adhikarana I. 

... ... ... 

... 258 

Do. 11 . 

... 

... 260 

Adhikarana I. 

SUTRA XII. 

» 

Nature of the Sanctified. 

... 262 

Do. II. 

• • f t • • 111 • t t 

... 263 

Do. III. 

• •• I • I ••• • • • 

... 263 * 

Do. IV. 

• 1 1 ••♦ » • • ill 

... 265 

Glossary ... 

• •• #♦• ill 111 

267—281 







INTRODUCTION. 


M Y serious study of the system commenced about the year 
1S94 and I began.it by translating that wonderful work, 
Sivajuandbodham of Meykandadeva ; and as the work progressed, 

I thought of publishing it and this was done in the year 1S95. 
Every' one knows that this is the most difficult work in Tamil 
though so short in dimension and the mastery of it gave me 
real insight into the philosophy of Saivaism. In the-ytl;'' 1897, 

I published the translation of Tiruvar u (pay a n or the Light of 
Grace of Saint Umapatisivachariyar, a work of such exceeding 
beauty that it attracted the attention of other scholars as well 
and I found that the late Rev. Dr. G. U. Pope and Rev. • 
G. M. Cobban had both severally translated it) and they did 
not publish their translations, solely out of deference to my 
previous publication; aYid Dr. Pope incorporated his translation 
in his notes to Tirttvdchakam. In the year 1897, in the month 
of June, in commemoration of the Diamond Jubilee of the late 
Queen-Empress Victoria the good, was commenced the monthly 
Journal, the Light of Truth 'or the Siddhanta Dipika, under my 
sole auspices and support, and in its pages was commenced the 
translation of the present work, and it was completed by the >ear 
*1902 in the Vth volume of that Journal; and owing to various 
causes, its republication in book form has been delayed till now. 
All my contributions on Tamil Literature and Philosophy have 
appeared in the pages of this Journal, and I was able to bring 
out in separate book form in last year, most of my palters on 

< V* 

Saiva Siddh&nta under the title of “Studies in Saiva Siddhanta ”; 
and my papers on oih'r MibjVets still await repnbhration, J 




11 


INTRODUCTION 


induced Mr. Mahadeva Sastri, h.a. of the Oriental Library of 

v* y 

H. H. The Maharaja of Mysore to translate Sri Nilakantha Siva- 
charya’s BhZshya on the Brahma sutras , on the promise of 
* an honorarium which was contributed partly by myself and 

• r 

partly by the late lamented P. Papdituraisvami Tevar Avergal, 
Zemindar of Palavanattam and President-Founder of the Madura 
Tamil Sahgam, whose loss to the Tamil, country cannot be 
easily estimated. The translation was finished most creditably 
in the Vllth volume of the Siddhanta Dlpikci. I entrusted the 
revision and editing of this rare work to Dr. V. V. Ramanan, 
Pn.D??"fcat he took such a longtime over even the introduction, 
that 1 had to cancel the arrangement; and I hope to issue 
it however before next April. I am glad to say also that I was 
. the means of attracting a large number of students to the study 

v' 

. of Tamil Literature, Antiquities, and Saiva Philosophy, both in 
Tamil and Sanskrit, and their contributions have found place in 
the pages of this Journal. My translation of Tirumular’s Tine- 

v 

mantra, Saiva Samayancri Vilakkam, dnd the other Siddhanta 
Sustras are being continued, and before I lay down my mortal 
coil, l hope to make it my proud boast that I and my friends and 
co-workers had translated all the fourteen Siddhanta Sastras 
together with other works on Agamailta. 

I may be pardoned for entering into these personal details 
as there was hardly any bibliography on the subject in English 

V" 

before 1 commenced my work. The original translation of Siva-< 

* v 

jnanubodham and Sivaprakasam, by Rev, Idoisington and that of 
Sivajhanasiddhiyar by Dr. Graul was published more than forty 
or fifty years ago, but they did not seem to have attracted the 
attention of European and Indian scholars. About the time 1 
commenced my work, Rev. G. M. Cobban was familiarising the 
Madras readers with his translations from Saints Patfinattar and 


( 


INTRODUCTION 


HI 


Tayumiiiavar published in the Christian College Magazine. Dr. 
Pope’s long promised Tiruvdchakam only appeared in April 1900. 
And since then, the subject has received considerable attention .at 
the hands of Christian Missionaries like Rev. Mr. Goudie, Rev. 
Mr. Goodwill and Rev. Mr. H. \V. Schnmerus* and their contri¬ 
butions appeared in the Christian College. Magazine, Harvest 

1 

* Field, Gospel IFitncss etc., and some of them have been republished 
in the Siddhanta D'piPd also. In recent years, the Sanskrit side 
of the philosophy has been handled ably by Dr. V. V. Ramanan in 
his several contributions to the Siddhanta Dipikd, 1 and the trans- 

v- y 

lation of Siva Sutra Vimarsani i by Mr. P. T. Srinivasa Ajvangar 
11 .a. 1 is an important contribution, and Dr. L. D. Barnett § 1,1 .a., 
Litt. D. (British Museum), as is well-known, has interested 

* I gladly note that my friend Rev. Mr. Schomerus went home to 

v" 

bring out his translation into German of SivajXunobodham and this waj * 
brought out in last October. 

f Vide S. D. vol. x. Psychology of Shadadhvans, the Mystic works 
of Sivagrayogin, vol. xi. S*ikshmagama, Virasaivaism. 

t The original has been published by the Government of H. II. 
Mahii ja. of Cashmere. 

5 /ide, Vol. xi. Siddhanta Dipika commencing at p. 62 for his learn¬ 
ed address on Saiva Siddhanta, delivered before the Royal Asiatic Society. 
“The subject to which I have the honour of inviting your attention 
to-day is one of such vastness, and its issues are of such immense import¬ 
ance in the history of both ancient and modern Indian religion anil 
theology, that I tremble at my own temerity in raising it to-day, and feel 
\:onstrained to ask in advance your indulgence for the necessarily super¬ 
ficial manner in which I must treat it. I shall endeavour to lay before 
you first a brief sketch of the buiva Siddh.intain, the system of theology * 
which express the religious and philosophi< al ideals of the great 
majority of the Tami’s in India and Ceylon, and of a considerable number 
of their Dravidian neighbours; and this system I will try to trace to its 
origins and connect it with the ancient speculative movement which ha:; 
for it.. literary inonu ifent the San.ktit l 'panishat 





IV 


INTRODUCTION' 


himself in the study of the subject and is about to bring out 
English translations of some of the Upagamas like Paushkara and 
Paramarthasara of Abhinavagupta etc. Of course as noted at 
pp. 459 to 445, Vol. xii of the Siddhanta Dipika, the latest contri¬ 
bution is that of Professor R.W. Frazer* of the London University 

to the Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. The wonder how- 

« 

ever is why in spite of the Antiquity t of Religion and Philosophy, 
and the vastness of its literature in Tamil )- and Sanskrit, § it has 

r ~ 

* 1 extract the following from his letter to my son, the Editor of the 
Siddhanta Dipika. “ I do this on account of my profound regard for your 
Siddhanta Dipika and for the great work it is doing in a noble spirit of 
self-sacnhce’to bring to light some of the great literary treasures of Tamil 
land. I do it further with feeling of deep debt to the learned Editor of 
the Dipika and further with profound respect for the learning and labours 
of the revered scholar Sriman J. M. Nallasvumi Pijlai Avargal and 
Prahmasn V. V. Ramana Sastrin Avargal." 

« | Rev. \V. F. Goudie writes in the Christian College Magazine 

(xx. q.) as follows :— 

“ There is no school of thought and no system of faith or worship 

V' 

that comes to us with anything like the claimsiof the Saiva Siddhanta.” 
“This system possesses the merits of a great antiquity. In the 

v 

Religious world, the Saiva System is heir to all that is most ancient in 

South India, it is the Religion of the Tamil people by the side of which 

every other form is of comparatively foreign origin.” 

“ In the largeness of its following, as well as in regard to the anti- 

✓ 

quity of some of its elements, the Saiva Siddhanta is, beyond any other 
form, the religion of the Tamil people and ought to be studied by all 
Tamil Missionaries.” 

* Almost the whole of the literature in Tamil is permeated with the 
Philosophy of the Saiva Siddhanta, so much so that European students 
have been led to think that it is purely a Tamilian Religion and 
Philosophy. Vaishnava Religion occupies a fairly respectable position, 

V V 

but its philosophy is nearly the same as the Saiva Siddhanta. Sankara’s 
Vedanta is represented by hardly any ancient books in Tamil. 

§ The vastness of the Aganrinta or Siddhanta literature in Sanskrit 
has hardly been reali^sd by European savants. 1 As for the matter of 




IN'TRODl CTION* 


V 

attracted the attention of so few Oriental scholars. The reason 
is not far to seek. Most of the European scholars from Sir 
William Jones lived in Northern India, and the school of philo- 

v * 

sophy that was brought to their notice was that of Sri Sankara 
and that of Saktaism In their general appearance and ordinary 
practices, the Siddhanta Saivas are hardly to be distinguished 
from those Hindus who follow Sri Sankara and hence all these 
scholars hare supposod that Sankara’s Vedanta represented the 
philosophy of the Saivas. This misapprehension has been carried 
to such an extent that we find such a talented scholar as the 
Jate Sir W. W. Hunter writing in the Imperial Gazette^ that Sri 
Sankara was the greatest exponent of the Saiva Religion. No 
doubt his followers conformed in general to the practices of the 
most ancient faith but Sri Sankara introduced, or brought into 

that, owing to the ignorance of the priestly class, the gurukkajs, its sturdy * 
has been altogether neglected in South India, and it is sad to relate that 
consi able portion has been lost for ever. Its study has been kept up 
by t e Virasaivas in the. Canarese and Telugu countries, and theie is 
just a chance that if the ancient libraries in the north, in Rajaputana, 
Cashmere and Nepaul are carely explored, some of the works hitherto 
considered lost may yet be discovered. Great credit is due to the late 
C. Shanmukhasundara Mudaliyar of Chintadripet, Madras, who brought 
out most of the Tamij Siddhanta works and all the available Agamas 
and Upagamas in his Sivajnanabodha Press, which he has richly endowed. 
His heir and successor Mr. M. AJagappa MudaliySr is carrying on the 
work. Unfortunately all these Sanskrit works are in Grantha character 
’ and they are as such not being availed of by European scholars, and 
scholars in other presidencies of India. This defect was sought to be 
remedied by Rai Bahadur Mallappa Varad of Sbolapur who at great self* 
sacrifice brought out a large number of works on Agamanta, and it was 
his intention to bring out an edition of all the original Agamas also, but 
unfortunately he has been cut off by the cru;l hands of death before 
he could complete his self-imposed task. I hope hia successors will 
carry on the noble v'ork. 



VI 


INTRODUCTION 


greater prominence, owing to the exigencies of the time? as l 

believe, certain innovation in the ancient form of the philosophy 

which was not sanctioned by Agamanta; and by his towering 

personality and great erudition lie seemed to have won over 

all *♦ the Brahmans to his side, except those who were in direct 

charge of the Saivite Temples all over India; baton the o;her 

hand, he seemed to have exercised littlb or no influence on the 

< 

other classes. Then again these schloars wlio came, across the 
Sakta Agamas or Tantras (,Vamamarga) failed to distinguish these 
from the Divyagamas which belonged to the Right-hand path or 
Dakshina marga, and were repelled evidently from thsir study. 
But it isTen.arkable as Svami Vivekananda in his famous address 
at Chicago said, that all the rituals from the Himalayas to Cape 
Comorin are guided by the Agama or Tantra; and especially 
as I should say all the rituals connected with the Temples, 
whether Icaiva or Vaishoava or Sakta. The most essential 
characteristic of the Dakshina Agamas is its extreme purity, and 
all the abominations, either original or derived of the Vamamarga 
are foreign to the Pure Saiva Siddhanta. j However, the views 

* Not all. All the brahmins who are Sri Vaishnavas and Miidhvas 
do not follow h»s leadership. In the Circars, Virasaiva Brahmins called 
Aradhyas intermarry with Niyogi Brahmins, but do not acknowledge Sri 
Sahkara’s leadership but follow Sri Nilakaptha Sivachurya. 

jit is a most noticeble fact that the Saiva Brahmin priests have 
refused to associate themselves with Vav;a practices, though the latter 
were connected with the Temple of which they were priests; and others 

\r y v 

have been deputed to do this polluted worship. In Sri Sailam or Sri 
Parvatam, in Kurnool District, I observed that the Pujaris of the Siva ‘ 
Shrine, where the worship is pure and undefiled are the ancient Saiva 
pricsis called Tamballas or Tapobalas, and the priest of the Goddess 
called Brahmarambha, where animal sacrifices are even now offered, are 

y %/ 

followers of Sri Sahkara. In the famous Temples of the God and 
Goddess at Kanchi (Conjeeveram), pujaris arc similarly different. Vide 
also our author’s hit at the Vamamargi, where (Chapter v. 15) the 
Lokayata is made to shake hands with the Yami. 1 


( 




INTRODUCTION 


vn 


of these oriental scholars mainly influenced those in Europe so 
much so that in course of time, Hinduism has been identified 
with the Vedanta of Sankara, in the European mind ; and with 
the revival of learning in India itself, this has also acted on 
the Hindu mind, so that twenty years ago, 1 remembe’r a 
Hindu gentleman who since came to fill the highest position 
in the official world, asking a friend of mine who was delighting 

the audience on boadd a steamer with singing hymns from 

» 

Tayumanavar and Manikkavachakar, whether there was any 

V' ✓ 

other baiva philosophy except that of Sankara. More than fifteen 
years ago, Rev. Mr. G. M. Cobban wrote to me to say that great 
injustice was being done to this school of philosophy, but he 
hoped at the same that the time was fast approaching when full 
justice would be done to it. And naturally enough too, Dr. 
Barnett complains of the neglect of Saiva Siddhanta by European , 

t* 

scholars. I j hope that when the mists of misapprehension 
and ignorance are fully removed, the claims of Saiva Agamanta 
would be fully recognized for the glory of our ancient mother¬ 
land and the whole world. 

As 1 have already pointed out, the Tamil literature being 
saturated with the baiva Siddhanta Philosoj hy, the few European 
scholar^ like Rev. Dr. G. IE Pope and others who laboured hard 
in this field have been led to think that this philosophy is the 
choicest (pure) product of the Dravidians (Tami's) and it had no 
» relation to the ancient Sanskrit Philosophy, and their opinions 
seem to be guiding subsequent writers like Rev. Mr. Goudic, 
Professor Frazer and others. And my own friends like the late* 
Professor Sundaram Pillai, Pandit D. Savariroyan, m. r.a.s., 
Yirudai Sivajnjna Yogigal, Mr. T. Ponnambalam Pillai, m. r.a.s. 
have been trying to impress upon me the like notion and they 
have g>n.e so far* as to say that the original Sanskrit Sutras 


VIII 


INTRODUCTION 


forming the Text of Sivajnanabodha shjuld have been translated 
from the Tamil of Meykandadeva and not vice versa. It was just 
a few weeks ago that I had a most interesting conversation with 
that talented Tamil lecturer and authoress Mrs. Alarme'mangai 
Animal when she tried to argue out that the Tamil Religion, 
and Philosophy was monotheistic and pure before its contact with 
the Aryan Religion and Philosophy. This is no doubt the 
pleasant side of the picture and one highly' tickling to the vanity 
of the Tamilian. But there is another side to the picture as 
well, and there have not been wanting men who have tried to 
traduce the^character of the Tamil people, their social customs 
and their religious beliefs, and practices, and scholars, old and new, 
have gone to the extent of affirming that the gruesome picture 
of Rudra as the Destroyer, in the Rig-veda etc., and even the 
f gruesome picture of the Vi&varupa described in the Bhagavat- 
g'ita was all derived from the Demonalatory and savage rites of 
the Dravidian aborigines.* They also say that if Rudra is praised' 

v' 

* Vide p. 182, Studies in Saiva Siddhanta, article on “the Union of 
Indian Philosophies ” by Charles Johnston : “ As a third element in the 
Bhagavatgitd we have the Puranic episode of the transfiguration, and, we 
must say, it reproducts all that grim and gruesome uglinesss of many 
armed gods, with terrible teeth, which the puranas have preserved most 
probably from the wild faiths of the dark aboriginals and demon 
worshippers of Southern India.” 

And my reply pp. 177 to 180. “And we come to the fact that the whole 
of the chapters 9, 10 and 11 of the Gita is a mere reproduction and a short 
abstract of that central portion of the whole Vedas, called the Satarudriya 
fcf the Yajur Veda. What is called transfiguration is the ViSvasvarupa 
DarSana, or the vision of the lord as the All, as manifested in the whole 
universe. One and all, the objects in the whole universe, good, bad, sat, 
asat, high and low, animate, inanimate are all named in succession and 
God is identified with all these and it is pointed out that He is not all 
these, ” the soul of all things, the creator of all things, the pervader of all 




INTRODUCTION' 


IX 


things” {Visvi.tr, Mile vista s-ijc vis van: aviiitya iiskthute). This Suta- 
rudriyam ought to be known to every Brahmin more or less, and it is the 
portion of the Vedas which is recited in the temples every cay. The 
praise of the i atar.idrivam occurs throughout the Mahabharata, and most 
in Drona and Anususana Parvas, and these parvas dealing as the$‘ do 
with various visions of God (Yisvasvanipa Darsana) as granted toF.ishis, 
Upamanyu, Yyasa, Naraca/ Kabila, and Krishna himself on other occa- 
sions, contain the similar reproductions of the balarud/iya as in chapters 
9 to ii of tfte’Gi.a. What is more importont to be noted is that in the 
case of Krishna, he got the teaching from Upamanyu Maharishi, and 
after initiation (Dikshaj into this mystery and performance of tapas, he 
gets to see the vision himself, and he describes it as follows {vide p. 87 to 
91 Anusasanaparva. P. C. Roy’s translation). 

The hair on my head, O son of Kunti, stood on its end, and my 
eyes expanded with wonder upon beholding Hara, the refuge of all the 

ceitres and the dispelier of all their griefs .Before me that 

Lord of all the Gods, - Sarva, appeared seated in all his glory. Seeing 
that Isana had showe llimself to me by being seated in glory before my* 
eyes, the whole universe, with Prajapati to Ir.dra, looked at me. I, 
however, bad not the power to look at Mahadeva. The great Deity then 
addressed me saying, “Behold, O Krishna and speak to me. Thou hast 
adored me hundreJs and thousands of times. There is no one in the 
three worlds that is dearer to me than thou.” And the praise by Kiishpa 
which follows is almost what Arjuna himself hymned about Krishna. 
Vyasa meeting AsvatLthaina after his final defeat tells him also that 
Krishna and Arjuna had worshipped the Lord hundreds and thousands of 
tunes. And does not this explain Kiishna’s own words in the Gita that 
he and Arjuna had innumerable births (iv. 5 

What we wish to point out is that this transfiguration scene with its 
gruesome description which Mr. Johnston wants to trace to Pur.inic 
kgends preserved from South Indian aborigines is, by express text and by 
the authority of Krishpa himself traced to the second Veda; and to say 
that the Yajur Veda, the ccutial portion of this Vfcda, should copy the 
holiest portion of the whole Vedas, as believed by the contemporaries 
and pred'^cj-ijor. of Krislin i, from the demonology of the South Indians, 
ou'd o .ly be a parody o! truth; audit t. L be true, this dcmonoloj. y 
of il.c 1 l.al.al UAc.i.J o. oc:r. 0 a t.urg rcpugnar.’l must have been 





X 


INTRODUCTION 


as gracious, Blissful and with healing remedies, it is only by 
way of flattery to avert his terrible anger. To all these, I have 
replied and 1 would again reply that they have not studied the 

glorious indeed, to be copied by the Brahmavadir.s 01 Yajur Veda days. 
Western scholars have only misread and misunderstood the nature of this 
transfiguration and ViSvarupa mystery, as they have misread the mystic 
personality of Rudra or Siva Himself, whose ideal these scholars say, 
was also copied from the aborigines. To the credit of Mrs. Besant, be it 
said, she has understood both these mysteries better than any other 
European. Siva’s whole personality, with his eight forms, Ashtamuhur- 
tams (see p. 220 of the Siddhdi.ta Dipika, vol. 1, for full description) 
earth, fire^air etc., and his three eyes, as Soma, Surya aud Agni, and his 
Head as Akasa, and his eight arms as the eight cardinal points, his feet 
as Pfidala, and the sky as his garment, Digambara, and himself, a Nirvdni 
and living in cemeteries and yet with his Sakti, Uma, a Yogi yet a Bhogi, 
all these give a conception of the Supreme Majesty of the Supreme Being 
which, no doubt, nobody can look up in the face. Does any ordinary 
° person dare to look up nature’s secrets and nature’s ways in the process 
of destruction aod creation and sustenlation ? If so, he will be a bold 
man, a great man. Strip nature of its outside smooth and fragrant cloak 
and what do you see inside ? The picture is r ugly, dirty and gruesome. 
Yet the scientist perceives all this with perfect equanimity, nay with very 
great pleasure. A small drop ol water discloses to the microscopic 
examination multitudes of living germs, and these fight with one another, 
devour each other with great avidity. We drink the water. Plants drink 
up the water. Animals eat the plants, 'insects and animals devour one 
another. Man, the greatest monster, devours all. There is thus constant 
struggle of iife and death going on in nature. And when this nature 
is, as thus, exposed to view in the transfiguration, and Arjuna sees 
before him this havoc, in the Person of the Supreme as the Destroyer,' 
(‘Dcvourer* of lvatha Upanishat) (and be it remembered that this 
1 Visvasvarupa Darsana is more gruesome in Gita no doubt, than similar 
ones presented in the Anuidsana Parva, as Krishna’s whole burden of 
advice in the Gita is simply to force Arjuna to fight and kill his foes, 
and to conquer his repugnance), a remark that it is derived from Puranic 
legends and aboriginal practices is altogether out of place. We hope to 
pursue this subject on a future occasion. 







INTRODUCTION 


XI 


subject in all their historical bearings and with a due historical 

perspective, and they have not availed themselves of all the 

materials to be fcund in both the languages. Many a mistake 

of the Sanskritists would have been easily corrected if he was 

an equally good scholar in Tamil and the imperfections of the 

latter would have been easily cured if he was a good Sanskritist. 

> 

• We have 90 literary^ records in Tamil earlier than Tolkappiyam, 
which though preceding the arrangement of the Vedas by Vyasa 
may be given a date at least 1000 years before Christ. And 
yet at this distant date, the amalgamation of the Tamils and 
the Aryans had become complete and the Tamils ha<j borrowed 
all the forms and names of the Aryan Religion and Philosophy. 
All that we could say now is that judged by the very high 
state of efficiency of their arts and civilisation which they pos¬ 
sessed even indep ident of any Sanskrit influence, they must 
have possessed also a refined form of religion which was akin 
to the highest Aryan conception or was even much more mono¬ 
theistic at that early time. And it will be asserted only by the 
ignorant that Tami’ians or Aryans were not at one time or 
other idolaters and demonolaters, or that they borrowed from 
each other. Nor have they ceased to be so even now. These 
are practices connected with every race and nation from their 
earliest infancy and with all our boasted growth in civilisation, 
and religion, the lower strata are still in the same position in 
^different countries and nations, and will continue to be so till 
we reach the milennium. 

I should like to correct the notion first that there is anything ’ 
peculiarly lamilian in Saiva Religion and Philosophy; but on 
the other hand, almost all the terms and forms we use are 
derived from Sanskrit; and the bulk of the literature in Tamil 
dwindles to in sign iff ranee when compared with the vast Again. mta 


XU 


lXTRi IDIVTIOX 


literature in Sanskrit.* And our Tamil Ac: b dry as were also 
great Sanskritists, as our author himself was, who was called 
Sakalagama Pandita , (Doctor well learned in all the Ag'amas) 

. < v' ^ 

before he received his Dikshnnamam of Arulnandi Sivacharya 

from his Guru Meykaodan. Our author states expressly in his 

introduction and in verses 13 to 15 of eighth sutra how this 

precious religion and philosophy is based on the Vedas and 

6 

Agamas; and I have tried to give a brief synopsis of my argu- 
ment that modern da)’ Stfivaism and Saiva Siddhanta Philosophy 
is lineally descended from the ancient Vedas and Upanishats, 
and 1 have tried to fix the approximate place and date of the 

1 r V' 

Agamas also, in my papers on ‘ Sveiasvtara Upanishat ’ and 

V V' 

‘ Saiva Religion and Saiva Advaita Siddhanta Philosophy ’ (vide 
pp. 109, 273 Studies in Suiva Siddhanta) ; and 1 hope to elabo¬ 
rate the same in my introduction to Srikautha Bhashya. So 
far therefore as this part of the subject is concerned. 1 would 
leave it here, except so far as to offer a few remarks called 
for by Dr. Barnett’s statement that Tamil Saiva Siddhjntam 
was derived from the Pratynbhijna school of Cashmere in the 
beginning of the thirteenth century (vide p. 103, Siddhanta Dipika 
vol. xi.) That this is not correct will be apparent from the 
following facts. So far as the formal religion was concerned 
nobody will question the statement to-day that Saivaism was 
anterior to the clays of the Mahlbbarata. So far as the philosophy 
is concerned, all scholars including Dr. Barnett are inclined to 
the view that it should be traced to the Svetasvalara Upanishat 
and that it enunciated an eclectief form of Hindu Philosoph)\ 

* VUc appendix where the Sanskrit authorities are given, 
f Piofessor Monier Williams: “The Bhagavatgita commented on by 
the. great Vedantic Teacher Sankaracharya, may be regarded as represent¬ 
ing the Eclectic School of Indian Philosophy. As thejegular systems were 


t 




IXTRODl CTIPX 


XIII 


V 

Thai this is an ancient Upanishat anterior to the days of Sri 
Sankara and Badarayana is also admitted. That this Upanishat 
is the foundation not merely of the Saiva Siddhanta but also of 
the Vaishnava Philosophy so well expounded by Sri Ramanuja * 
in his famous Bhllshya in the twelfth century will also be apparent. 

And then we have the fact that Sri Nilakantha Sivacharya i 

__ _ _ > 

developments of the Uj>anishats, so the Eclectic School is connected with 
those mystical treatises, through the Svetasvatara Upanishat. This last 
is a comparatively modern Upanishat, 1 but whether it was composed 
before or after the Bhagavatgita, the desig i of both is evidently the same. 
They both aim at reconciling the conflicting views of different systems, by 
an attempt to engrajt the Sdnkhya a d Yoga upon Vediinia doctrine*." 

Professor Macdonnel : "Of the eclectic movement combining Saiikhya, 
Yoga and Vedanta doctrines, the o'dcst representative is the Svetatvatara 
Ufanishat. Much mor< amous is the Gita. 

Professor Frazer : \ ‘The teachings of idealistic Monism by Sankara 
Acharya, the Karma-yoga of Patahjali with a theistic Sarikhya were . 
united and formed an eclectic school of philosophy for South India known 
as the Saiva Siddhanta, which dealt with the nature of a personal God, 
the soul, and its bonds or Maya, which separated it from mystic union 
with the soul of things." 

Rev. Mr. F. Goodwill : “ Those who have studied the system unani¬ 
mously agree that this eulogy is not a whit too enthusiastic or free 
worded. That the system is eclectic is at once apparent.” 

* Professor Monier Williams; " It is scarcely too much to say that 
the creeds indicated by these two terms Saivaism and Vaishnavaism 
constitute the very life and soul of modern Hinduism." 

i All the accounts that we have of the life of Sri Sankara agree 
, that Sri Nilakantha Sivucharya was the elder contemporary of Sri 
Sahkara. If he was later than Sahkara, and he was an insignificant 
personality, there is no reason to suppose that the eminent biographers* 
of Sri Sahkara would have made him an elder contemporary of Sri 
Sartkara. My own view is that he was much anterior to Sri fsahkara 

1 ProfeTOr Max Muilir: “That no argument that has as yet been 
brought forward stems to inc to ptove in any sense of the woid its 
modern c la acter." • 


XIV 


INTRODUCTION 


wrote his Bhashya on the Brahma sutras not later than the eighth 
century a. d. and the form of the Saiva Philosophy was settled 
once for all in his time. 

V 

And the latest date ascribed to Sri Sankara is the eighth 
cenfUry. And Sri Nilakantha Sivacharya declared in no unmis¬ 
takable terms that he perceived no difference between the Veda 

✓ t m ‘ w 

and Sivagama. 1 'And it is our contention as that of Sri Nilakantha 
that all the Vedas and Upanishats and Agamas established the 
Saiva Religion and Siddhanta Philosophy.’ A few dates in the 

and as he was a factor to be reckoned with, they make him enter into 

V V 

a disputafior. with Sri Sankara. That this meeting between the two 
is wholly apocryphal will be evident from the fact that all the arguments 
ascribed to Sri Nilakantha for the purpose of refuting him find no actual 

v 

support in the Bhashya. Vide also Srinivasa Dikshitar’s article on the 
Age of the different Bhashyams in the Brahmavidya, extracted and trans¬ 
lated in page 215 vol. n. S. D. 

V* v> V 

I am informed by Pandit Sundaresa Sastri that Sri Nilakantha Siva 
charya’s Matham is still in existence in Gokarapa, and adjoin the famous 
Temple at the ancient place and the Adhipati’f of this Math keep up the 
traditions connected with their ancient founder. And I am not quite sure 
if there were not other seats of his in other parts of India, which came 

V* 

to be usurped by followers of Sankara or filled by Virasaiva and Saiva 
non-Brahmin Adhipatis. Vide page 86 vol. x. S. D, 

1 & * Srikanthasivachurya’s Bhashya. on II. ii. 38. p. 267, vol. 11. 
S. D. “Former Acharyas (teachers) maintain that this Adhikarapa is 
intended to set aside the theory, advanced in parts of Siva-Agama, that 
Siva, the Parahrahman, is a mere efficient cause. On the contrary, we 
see no difference between the Veda and the Sivagama. Even the Vedas 
may properly be called Sivagama, Siva being the author thereof. 
‘Accordingly Sivagama is two-fold, one being intended for the three 
(higher castes), the other being intended for all. The Vedas are intended 
for people of the three castes, and the other for all. Siva alone is the 
author of both. 

"Or, the question may be viewed thus: —The Vedas and the Agamas 
are both authoritative inasmuch as we find, in both alike, Brahman, 


l 


( 






INTRODUCTION 


XV 


history of the Tamil Philosophy will be of the greatest importance 
in this connection. No doubt Saint Meykandan and his followers 
wrote in the thirteenth century. But what about the age of 
Raitravagama, of which Sivajnanabodham was itself an excerpt ? 

I pointed out long ago in my article on Svctasvatara Upamsnat * 
at page 126 that for the beginnings of the Agama literature we 
have to go far behipd the days of the Mahabharata and Puranas 

as the Agafna doctrines and rituals were bound up with these. 

» 

And my friend Mr. M. K. Narayanasvami Aiyar is prepared to 
agree with me in this opinion on an examination of the Suta 
Samhita, f an integral portion of the Ska it da Malt’d % Parana, 
and his conclusion is “ that such a considerable literature existed 
even at the time of t* inception of the Puranas lends colour to 
the surmise entertain* 1 by many that the source of these Agamas 
had their origin in times almsost coeval with the days of the . 

1 

Brahmana period.” And he proceeds to point out that Tirumular, 
the greatest of the Saiva Saints in his Tirumantram, whose age 
is ascribed to the first* century a. c. mentions several of these 
Agamas by name. To go back to my argument based on the 
Tamil literature, it will be evident that the Santana Acharyas 

Praqava, the Pafichakshari, Prasada, and other mantras ; mentioning of 
Pasu, Pati, Pasa and other things ; such lofty dharmas as the smearing 
of ashes, the wearing of Tripurdra, worship of Lihga, the wearing of 
Rudraksha, and all other such things. The author being the same, and 
% both expounding the same thing, they are not opposed to one another.” 

* Vide Studies \n Saiva Siddhai la pp. 109 to 145. 

f Vide his article the Suta Samhita and the Saivagamas in vol. iv. S. D .* 
pp. 134 to 136. A colophon to the Suta Samhita states that Sn Sankara 
read it eighteen times before he wrote his famous Blushya. Sayana, in 
his commentary on the Suta Samhita quotes frequently from the Agamas 
in explaining the text. Appaya Pikshita in his commentaries also freely 
•juotc fiom tr.e A gam 




XVI 


INTRODUCTION 


v 

from Saint Meykapdan freely make use of Sri Nilakantha Siva- 
charya’s conclusions. St. Sekkilar, the author of Pcriyapurana * 
or Siva Bhakta Vilasam in Tamil preceded these Santana Acharyas 
and he was immediately preceded in the eleventh century by 
Nambiyandar Nambi, the Tamil Vyasa who arranged the Tamil 
Veda into eleven Tirumurai. In these eleven Tirumurai are 
included the Devara Hymns of St. Jnanasambandhar, St. Appar, 
St. Sundarar, St. Seraman and the H}nTns of Saiift Mapikka- 

r 

vachakar, Tirumular, Nakkirar, 1 Karaikkalammaiyar, } Patti- 
nattar, Kandaraditya and others. All these precede the age of 
Nambiyandar Nambi, and the ages of Kandaraditya and of Saint 
Tiru jiianasambandha are fixed once from all by Epigraphical 
researches § to the ninth and sixth century a. c. respectively. 
The only age in doubt is that of Saint Manikkavachar, but this 
does not matter. It was at any rate before the ninth century. 
That Saint Tirumular preceded Saint Jnanasambandhar, there is 
ample evidence. And more than this, the age of the third Tamil 
Sahgam is not put down beyond the first century a.c. by almost 
all Tamil Scholars. If this be so, Nakkirar who was the head of 
the Tamil Sahgam was about this date, as also many of his con¬ 
temporaries, whose works are collected in the eleventh Tirumurai. 

'1 he works of all of them do clearly show and imply the prior 
existence of the Saiva Agamas and Saiva Siddhanta. If therefore 
the Saiva Religion and Saiva Siddhanta Philosophy was anterior 
to the lirst century a.c. how could it have travelled from the North < 
to the South and in the thirteenth century from Abhinavagupta. 

St 

* Vide Summary of Pcriyapurana in the h.dian Patriot by me. 
f Yule Siddhanta Dipika vol. xn. pp. 407, 522. 

X Vide Siddhanta Dipikd vol. xin. p. 157. 

Vide Tamilian A tnjnary No. 3. Some Miic-sto.es by Professor 
Sundiiam Pilkii, and C. M. UutTs Giro cioyy of India. 


( 



i 





INTRODUCTION 


xvn 


\r 

The only safe conclusion to be derived is that the Saiva 
Agamas being coeval with the Brahmana period, they have been 
developed in the North and in the South and in the West * in the 
several centuries succeeding this. The development in the North 
and South and West were independent of each other, though 
the authorities (the Saivagamas) they followed were the same. 

. No doubt ^ Dr. Barnett does not ignore the existence of Saiva 
literature in, the Tamil, and Canarese countries earlier than thir¬ 
teenth or tenth century, and he traces* all the different schools 
to the Svetaivatara Upanishat which as he observes was canonical 
long before the days of Sankara. And we fail to understand 
therefore how the Tamil Siddhanta could have been derived from 
the Pratyabhijha school/ the tenth century. 

Leaving this portion of the subject, I would say a word or 
two about the theory that the conception of Rudra-Siva was 
derived from aboriginal sources. I have already discussed this’ 

V" 

question at some length in my papers on Svetdsvatara Upanishat 
and Union of Indian Philosophies pp. 114 to 11S, 177 to j So. 
It can be easily shown that the so-called aboriginal conception of 
Siva can be traced to the Rig Veda, and if so, as observed by me 
elsewhere, the demonolog}' of the South Indians, instead of being 
a thing repugnant must have been glorious indeed to be copied 
by the Brahmavadins of Yedic days. These scholars have com¬ 
pletely misunderstood the character of Rudra-Siva. This fierceness 
is not alone characteristic of Rudra but of other Ycdic dictics also, 
and whole passages could be quoted from the Rig Yeda to this 
effect.* It is this which KYidusa uKo brings out by his lines:* 

* By :ne real Lasava and before him by bri Ni’akantha bivticharya. 

| V dc 1.1C io, owing among others, ta! cn from Wilson’s translation of 
the Rig Veda : 

1 . vii. Ci Mo*/ 8. Harm us not Indra, abandon us not; deprive 
us not of uuo'j rrtn .V tail are dear to US; inj .ic u- i.ol, afflict not ouf 


XV111 


INTRODUCTION 


“ The Gods, like clouds, are fierce and gentle too, 

Now hurl the bolt, now drop sweet heavenly dew.” 

unborn offspring ; harm not those who are capable (only of crawling) on 
their knees. 

I. iv. (4-54) t. Urge us not, Magavan, to this iniquity, to those ini- 
qxtiVous conflicts, for the limit of thy strength is not to be surpassed. 
Thou hast shouted and hast made the waters of the river roar; how (is 
it possible) that the earth should not be filled with terror. 

1. v. (6 6 3 ) 1. Indra, thou art the naughty one who becoming mani¬ 
fest in (the hour of) our alarm, didst sustain by thy energies heaven and 
earth. Then through fear of thee, all creatures and the mountains and all 
other vast and solid things trembled , like the tremulous rays of the sun. 

1. ii. (2-25) 1. In as much as all people commit errors, so do we 
divine Varufta, daily disfigure thy worship by imperfections. 

2. Make us not the objects of death through thy fatal indignation, 
through the wrath of thee so displeasured. 

3. We soothe thy mind, Varuna by our praises for our good, as a 
charioteer his wear}' steed. 

, I. ii. (1-24) 13. Suneshepas seized and bound to the three footed tree 
has invoked the son of Aditi, may the regal Varuna wise and irresistible 
liberate him; may he let loose here his bends (Pasa.) 

14. Varuna, we deprecate thy wrath with prosrtations, with sacrifices, 
with oblations, avertor of misfortune (asura) wise and illustrious, be 
present amongst us and mitigate the evils we have committed. 

15. Varuna loosen me from the upper, the middle and lou'er 
bond (Pasa). So, son of Aditi shall we through faultlessness in thy wor¬ 
ship became freed from sin. 

I. iii. (1*36) 20. The flames of Agni are luminous, powerful, fearful 
and not to be trusted. Ever assuredly and entirely consume the mighty 
spirits of evils and all other adversaries. 

II . ii. (13-152) He amongst those (who are your followers) who 
observes truth, who is considerate, w'ho is commended by the wise, who 
is able to inflict harm, carefully weighs (the means whereby) fierce and 
well armed, he slays (a foe) less efficiently accoutred, and by which the 
levilers of Gods however naughty may perish. 

11. ii. (1 5-1 54) 2. Vishnu is therefore glorified that by his prou'ess 
he is like a fearful, ravenous and mountainous haunting wild beast that in 
his thioe paces all w'orlds abide. ‘ 


t 






INTRODUCTION 


XIX 


and which was philosophically explained by the Sutrakara 
and Bhashyakara under i. iii. 40 on the text “ because of 
trembling.” And 1 have also shown how this is not an idea 
repugnant to Christians. Our author brings out the transcendent 
character of Biva in a number of beautiful verses (Supaksha 1/48 
to 54) and in verse 51, he explains the contradictory character of 
Siva, as showing his transcendent nature, and says that all these 
different forms were a’ssumed for manifesting His Grace, and His 
destructive acts were acts intended to destroy man's sin. 

One would be tempted here to give a resume of the doctrines 
enunciated in this book, b’" one could not do justice to the 
task, seeing to what sub.xe details of doctrine and argument 
the author takes us to. And unless one takes the trouble to 
master the details, he couid never honestly say he had compre¬ 
hended the philosophy. My further excuse would be that in the 
several papers forming my Studies in Sawn Siddhaufa, I have’ 
discussed at sufficient length on some of the most leading 

doctrines of this school severally; and which 1 have tried to 

✓ 

summarise in my paper on ' Saiva Religion.’ However it will 
not be quite out of place if I just draw the attention of the 
readers of this volume to some of these points. 

The first thing that will strike the readers of this system 
is its all comprehensiveness, its many sidedness, and its eclectic 
and universal character. From the passages already quoted it 

•will be seen how Kuropcan Scholars trace this philosophy to 

✓ 

the Svctaivatara Upanishat and make 'it out to be an admixture 
of Yoga and Sankhya and Vedanta. Mr. R. C. Dutt is also ’ 
of this opinion. But this is no jumble of these systems, no ol/apn- 
dr'uia ; nor did it grow out of thoc systems and after their 
various auth rs had propounded them. With regard to the 
six t \stc»5s of ili 1 philosophy, I lave lri*d to argue against 


XX 


introduction 


the idea that they arose at sometime or other, and the order 
in the naming of these systems meant any thing like historical 
sequer.ce. If it means any thing at all, it means a psychological 
order, an order in the growth of human thought, from its infancy 
or' childhood, the selfish Lokayata, to its maturity which ends in 
selflessness. The maturity had been reached thousands of years 
ago in India, and found expression in the Vedas and Agamas, 
together with the various stages in the soul’s growth. This 
formed common fund of the national or popular philosophy, 
the manasa lake of the philosophical thought and language of 
Yijfianabhikshu, referred to by Professor Max Muller in his Six 
Systems * This manasa lake was not a waste of waters but 
was life-giving and organic and was one whole. This popular 
philosophy had its counterpart m the popular Religions and only 
two such can lay claim to this position, J namely Saivaism 
and Vaishnavism. And anybody who knows anything of India, 
modern or ancient, will not fail to note how Saivaism is the more 
ancient, and the more popular of the two. § The Saiva Religion 

* “ The longer I have studied the various systems, the more have 
] become impressed with the view taken by Vijuanabhikshu and 
others that there is behind the variety of the six systems, a common fund 
of what may be called national or popular philosophy, a large manasa 
lake of philosophical thought and language, far away in the distant north 
and in the distant past, from which each thinker was allowed to draw 
for his own purposes.” 

* It is scarcely too much to say that the creeds indicated by these' 
two terms Saivaism and Vaishnavism constitute the very life and soul of 

‘modern Hinduism. (Monier Williams.) 

§ Some European Scholars have given out that Vaishnavism is the 
more popular of the two. 1 cannot understand what they mean by this. 
It cannot be in numbeis as the majority of the Hindus in all parts of 

v 

India wear S.iivaite emblems, and should be counted as Saivaite for 
histori ;al purposes, though they miv be divided as S.iktns and Ginapatyas 


l 



INTRODUCTION 


XXI 


preserves as such the old religion and traditions, from the days 
of the Rig Veda, which can be observed even more clearly in 
the ritualistic portion, and if there was a change at all, it was in 
polity when all the symbols of the Yajfia became more truly cloth¬ 
ed with a spiritual meaning. There has been no break in*the 

philosophy of the Hindus all this time either; otherwise, it would 

) 

be incomprehensible that the oldest and most eclectic form of 
philosophy ’enunciated' by the seers of the Svetasvatara and Gita 
should have died out, when all sorts of faiths continue to live in 
odd comers of this Bharatavarsha. It will be observed- however 
that from time to time w sects have branched qff. from the 
parent stock and formed into new creeds, and new schools of 
have risen, some to suit the exigencies of the times.* It was in 
Southern India, that the great struggle between the old Hinduism 

etc., and their philosophical opinions may vary. The fact that all 
Saivites have no prejudice against the worship of Vishnu cannot go tb 
weaken our position ; for it is in the nature of seceders and converts to be 
more bigoted than those who belong to the parent religion. If they mean, 
that Yaishnavism appeal:? more to the lower classes, this may be true in 
a sense. R. Sewell’s list of antiquities will show what proportion of the 
Temples in Southern India are Saivite as compared with those dedicated 
to Vishnu, the proverbial proportion being 1008 to 108. I have known 
Towns in this presidency where you can count those who wear the 
Vaishnava mark on one’s fingers. Some of the Alvars would seem to 
have worn the sacred ashes, (the Saivite emblem) by references to the 
same in their hymns. 

V* v- 

* It is an opinion which I have stated elsewhere that Sri Sankara 
adjusted his philosophy to meet the Muyavddha of the Buddhists, and so 
promulgated a new theory of Maya and that he never changed his 

v 1 

belief in the traditional Saiva Religion, and faith which is evidenced by 
his minor works Sira Wtujangaw, bivur.audalahari, Saundaryalahari, etc., 
in which works he has prahed the baivnite Saints Jhanasambandha 

v t > 

Siruttopda, Kapnappa, and others of the biVa lJhaUa Vilasa. In this 
opinion, I am glad to say several eminent pandits of Sri Sankara's school 
aie di posed to agree with n.e. 



xxu 


INTRODUCTION 


and Buddhists and Jains occurred in the earlier centuries of the 
Christian Era, and it was our great Saiva Achnryas, Jfiana- 
sanibandha, Vagiiia, Sundara, and Manikkavachaka who overthrew 
these heterodox sects.* Sekkilar speaks of J hanasambandha in 
the*following terms: 

Q&tpQ. t. flpsmij. AQp irsas iAI(gjsta fsvpzxup *a? ar,iis 
L^^uSujuadoQL'iJ^Suj Ljesfip, SL‘triuit>(i‘>n li pdf p ( 

&3>t^ vs^ju putisSt t A §(rf.pyff^ T JiLuip j 1 

C 

UR fftysOthQ i/ToOTf® f (IKftT Qua u^SV/TlD, 

y 

That 'so the Yedic paths may flourish, and Saiva Haven may shine, 
And tke r followers of old tradition may prosper, His pure lips broke 
out in cry, 

Tirujhanasambandha of Pngali, girt with cool rice fields 
With I Iis Feet on our head, we will set forth the history of Ilis mission. 

And the famous lines setting forth the greatness of all the four 
Achdryas are to this effect: 

Qjnp(eX.naljlb Q J> IToSiflulP^ Q pnJsr pgi’QLLtok & A p 0 QP lb 

£ pQ&nsvovirp&iirp Qp&u&pi — QppQ sn^l 

GDISplsvQtr*v, i§Qp'Sj(2& uDnuo&npjjr<svpnQeaTikiQ# 

SJ .5 S»PL$ 0 n AQpQ£pQp tC,QX. 

If Vagtsa, and Sambandha and Sundara 

And our Guru of Vudavtir (Manikkavachaka) had not come forward, 
Where would our Holy Ashes be, where our Sacred Vedas 
Where would our Panchakshara be ? 

It will be noticed how in these stanzas their special mission 
is stated to be the preservation of the ancient Vedic Religion 
which was at the same time Saivaism. And almost every line 
of the Devara and Tiruvachaka Hymns set forth the praises of 
the Vedas, and the keenness of the struggle is evidenced by the 

* See Tamilian Antiquary No. 3, ‘ Some Mile-stones’by Professor 
Sundaram Pillai, as to the part respectively played by Sri Sahkara and- 
Sri Ramanuja, in the overthrow of the heterodox faiths. 


t 





INTRODUCTION 


XX111 


Acharyas devoting one verse in each of the Devara Hymns to 
the denunciation of Buddhism and Jainism. And as I open the 
sacred book, the first lines I light upon are these : 

l — ^ G51T (jQ G\s (T £ LLG3& <?(T£a*LU 

L/S6ZZ L_ iT <5 GtZT uSgZT il '$ ©oi’QfcW OT/jft=2JT , 

aS'«S3T£_Q Oa-63brg:3fi;i?6v 

Q £ rtoizi— ‘jrr'S'jj ^a^sr/r/r ^7 u.r (?/ ,tG\ a<. 

The Kundars and the wicked Jains and Sakyas, 

V j 

Their gross insults hearing, don't be incensed. 

The Lord who burnt the Triple-city, in Venni 

Him if they praise as His Bhakte~, no sorrow to them at all. 

(7 nvt'imyur Pad i gam of Sambandha.) 

v 

We can very well understand how the Saivaites had to bear in 
patience all the contumely and insults of these atheists, till our 
.Acharyas, adopting the tactics of the enemy, threw open the gates 
of knowledge till then enshrined and concealed in the .Vedas,* in a 
dead language, and made it accessible to one and all in their own* 
Vernacular language, and in as inviting a form as possible, by 
means of their sacred Hymns and oral discourses, and when they 
had thus turned the popular tide in their favour, they found 
courage to beard the very kings who were supporting the alien 
faiths and finally won them over to the ancient faith. Their 
incomparable services were.appreciated lovingly by the people 
is evidenced by their images being set up and worshipped in 
almost every temple in the South and West and North J of 
.Tamilagam. And in the seventh century and long before Sah- 

* Note my reading of the miracle performed by Jnfinasambandha 
and VagLa at Veduraijyam, in my paper on Saint. Appar pp. 172, 173, ’ 
vol. in, S. D. 

* 'I heir images are found in the famous Temple at Xanjangodc near 
Mysore, and their images along with those of Srt Nat a raja anc l Sivakami 
v.ere dis overed a few years ago in an under giound cellar in Ike Temple 
of Makkui’itijvurm.i rAair Clnttur (Noilh Arcot District. ; 


1 


XXIV 


INTRODUCTION 


kara’s days, Buddhism and Jainism had become dormant as we 
gather from the account of IleunSiang. We find therefore how 
true is the claim made for the old old Hinduism as represented by 
Saivaism as the universal Religion in the oft-quoted verse of our 
author which will bear repetition here. “ Religions, postulates, 
and text-books are various and conflict one with another. It is 

asked which is the true religion, which the true postulate and 

< 

which the true book. That is the True Religion, Postulate and 
Book which not possessing the fault of calling this true and 
that false (and not conflicting <with them) comprises everything 
reasonably in its fold. Hence all these are comprised in the 
Vedas and Saiva-Agamas. And these are imbedded in the Sacred 
Foot of Mara.” (Supaksha vm. 13.) 

And by the way, our Achjrya laid down once for all the 
test of a Religion which claims to be universal. I challenge if 
such a definition had ever been attempted in any of the thousands 
of creeds in this world. We are familiar with the doctrine of each 
one of the sectarians that theirs is the Qiiiy truth and the only 
one, and all those who do not follow the same are doomed to 
eternal damnation. Who has declared in such unmistakeable terms 
that there is salvation for all, and that there is truth in each and 
every creed and which is suited tq one’s needs, and he could 
progress gradually and ascend in course of time the different 
steps of the ladder in the Spiritual ascent. This Sopdnamdrga * 
is alone set out in the Saiva Religion and this would account 
for the greatest toleration displayed by the followers of this 
‘ancient faith, and which has degenerated into even indifferentism. 
We could therefore understand how our Books both in Sanskrit 

V' 

* Vide for fuller exposition the last paper in Studies * Saivaism in its 
relation to other systems,’ read before the Convention of Religions at 
AJahautd. 


t 



INTRODUCTION 


XXV 


and Tamil speak of this religion as Siddhanta , (the True end) 

Sara, (Essence) and Saniarasa, (the Essence of all or eclectic) 

Sanmarga (the True Path), terms, which one would never come 

across in books of other schools, and it is only since a few years, 

members of the Theosophical Society are adopting them, Tind 

its President is making a simi'ar claim for Theosophy. But nobody 

> 

can be prevented, from making claims of this kind, and the test 
will be whether the doctrines put forth and the practices set up 
are such as will satisfy the thou , and'aspirations of one and all, 
in every grade of moral and spiritual development. The religion 
and philosophy so comprehensively expounded by ,our author 
both in the Parapaksha and in the Supaksha in the book of 

y 

S’ ivajndnasiddhi (Fruition of Divine Wisdom) present an ideal 
system, in which God is pictured as possessing all auspicious 
qualities, though described as Nirguna ; in which God though 
spoken of as past thought and speech, yet enters into close ancf 
intimate relation and communion with the loving soul; in which 
God, though the Supreme Trancendent Intelligence is yet all Love, 
though perfectly Free and Sinless feels for the bound and sorrowing 
soul, and is ever intent on saving him ; in which, though man is 
stated to be different from God and sinful and sorrowing, the 
path is opened out by which he can get rid of his sin and 
sorrow and rise to such an height of God-hood and Divine Bliss 
in which he can declare Sivoham ; in which the difficulties of both 
,thc idealist and materialist and nihilist all vanish; in which, the 
perplexities of Lhcda-vadis, Abhcda-vadis and Bhcdabhcda-vadis 
arc removed ; in which Karma, Bhakti and Juana enter into every ’ 
step for building up one's salvation ; in which the cravings of 
every soul thirsting after the spirit arc easily satisfied. In its ex¬ 
position of the relation between God and man, in its analysis 

of man’s nature and the nature of his bondage, in the different 
u 


i 


XXVI 


INTRODUCTION 


paths it opens out for his salvation, its varied and eclectic cha¬ 
racter can be easily perceived. And in all this, it has no 
recourse to fictions like that of a higher and lower Brahman, 
Vyavakarikam and Paramartikam, no recourse to illusions and 
my\hs, no confounding of man and God and the world. It will be 
noticed as one follows our author closely how in almost every 
detail of doctrine, where differences exist, a position is arrived 
at, which reconciles the conflicting opinions. To just mention 
one or two. To the question whether God is Rupi or Arupi or 
Ruparupi, it is replied that God is none of these, as these are 
all notions, derived from matter, and yet Cod can assume all 
these forms at His sweet will out of His Chit-Sakti and not out of 
Maya. (Supaksha i. 41.) 

To the question whether the soul is Anu or Vibhu, the reply 
is that he is neither, and yet as it becomes one with whatever 
it is united to, it is in a sense limited and yet its Vydpakam 
extends to the whole of what it is united to, just as a drop of 
ink let fall iiito a glass of water diffuses itself through and through 
the whole glass of water. (Supaksha iv. 20.) 

Then consider again the different kinds of Mukti discussed, 
by the way of various analogies. 1 here is a shadow of truth 
in each but experience alone can give.us the reality, (xi. 1 2.) 

Leaving this question here, 1 will pooceed to notice the 
other points. 

In regard to the God-head postulated by the system, the 
grossest fallacy that prevails among outsiders is that Siva or 
Rudra is one of the Trinity. 1 have devoted a whole paper to 

v 

this subject in my Studies in Snivn Siddhauta. It is not a 
sectarian claim I am advancing but one for the student of 
Religious History to consider and investigate. Even if it be 
a sectarian claim, we are bound to take >notice of it, as a 


l 


INTRODUCTION 


XXV11 


question of fact. If the 'followers of a particular religion hold 
up a certain ideal of God, which by immemorial tradition is 
associated with certain names and forms, we are bound to recog¬ 
nize it and not whittle away the distinction, especially when the 
distinction is of such paramount philosophic import. Professor 
M. Rangacharya in his paper on the Origin of Vaishnavism 
contributed to the Brahmavadin (Oct., Nov. 1912) no doubt 
argues that? about the Hindu Trinity, Brahma, Vishnu and 
Rudra or Siva, the henotheistic idea prevailed at first, and as such 
no distinction was made between them and each was considered 
Supreme Brahman, even by Kalidasa, though he was a^vorshipper 
of Siva, and the language of philosophic description and praise 
he applies to Vishnu in one place is almost identical with the 
language of adoration he applies to Siva in another place, and 
when people began to philosophise they came to ascribe 
different functions to these deities, namely creation, protectioil 
and destruction and that the)’ were regarded as partial manifest¬ 
ations of the one great God of advancing philosophy, and yet 
the heart of the worshipper was not at ease in the worship of 

one of them as the Supreme, and under this impulse Siva 

and Vishnu who were already popular Gods, (why Brahma 

dropped out he does not say) rose to represent the only 
God of true Philosophy, and Saivism and Vaishnavism appear 
in this light in the Mahabharaia “ although we cannot fail to 
, notice therein a very marked tendency in favour of looking 
upon Vishrju as the one only God of true Philosophy.” We 
are thankful to the learned Profe-^or for one thing, that unlike’ 
the general run of Vai-lvava writers, he speaks with the 

greatest retr.iint on the subject. And wc have no doubt he 
arrives at this position from hi-, knowledge of modem day 
VaiJnavism. But it doe-, not explain modem day baivism. 


i 


INTRODUCTION 


xxviii 

His position would be good again if the order in the Religious 
evolution lie adopts is chronologically correct. His opinion about 
Malixbharata is not borne out by great European Orientalists, 
according to whom Vaishnavism was just then coming into favour. 
Asvegards Kalidasa’s description of God Vishnu, as for instance in 
the Raghuvamsa, no doubt it is almost the same as that of Siva, 

t 

but as Vishnu is the hero of the piece, He could not. be made 

anything less than the equal of the Supreme Brahman. And 

then no Saivite has any prejudice against the worship of other 

deities, nay in fact he does worship them, and in such worship 

he worships them as Siva Himself and not as anything else.* 

But this description of Vishnu is not followed by the Viashnavas 

themselves, who only regard Him as one of the Trimurtis, though 

the Highest and the generator of the other two.f I cannot 

however go into the question as fully as I wish, but one thing 

more l will refer to and that has special bearing on the question 

now under discussion. As 1 have already observed, our Professor's 

view is correct so far as it bears on modern day Vaishnavism. 

All the Piiranas and Itihasas and the Alvar's Prabhandas in 

Tamil are agreed that Vishnu is one of the Trimurtis, and the 

later notion that He was the chiefest among them and there 

was no one above Him had also come to prevail. That this 

Su|veme Vishnu was Saguna and was clothed with Pure Satva 

✓ 

will also be admitted. But this is not the position of Saiyism. 
It holds that its God Rudra-Siva is not one of the Trinity at all, 

* Vide our author’s view on this subject follows that of tbeGitd. 
Supabsha u. 24 to 27. 

| Vide p.475, vol. xvn. Brahmavadin: “ Tirumalisai Alvar was a 
monotheist as he himself admits ‘ 

i_n.r.’ (fcff. $. 2) and preached that that one God as Vishnu while the 
other two of the traid—Bhahma and Siva—were created by him. 

“ ibttsitQfA^T hit nnujGtznasT ptrasr thir<k(if>£s&p]LD 

j-.ii io'ZexT i ^ / }ndsr ujoit—ppirscry — hit. i s). i . 


( 




INTRODUCTION 


XXIX 


and He is different from Rudra-Siva, one of the Trinity though 
He goes by the same name. He was therefore called the Fourth, 
Chaturtham and Turivam and never clothed in Satva or Rajas 
and Tamas, and as such Nirguna and Gunatita. In this account, 
there are two Sivas or Rudras, one belonging to the order 
of the Trinity and clothed with the Gunas (Bahis Tamas and 

i 

Antas Satva) and another who is above all the 1 'hree. This 

i 

classification *of three and one has reference to the division of 
Omkara into three and an ardhamatra tvhich is regarded as the 
Fourth, and which has reference again to the division of the 
avasthas into Jagrat, Svapna, Sushupti and Turiyam. As A, U, 
and M represent the first three states and the three deities, 
the ardhamatra (the soundless sound) represents Turiya and Siva, 
which is beautifully expressed by Pushpadanta in the famous 
Mahimnastotra: 

“The mystical and immutable One which being composed • 
of the three letters, A, U, M, signify successively, the three 
Vedas, the three states of life (awaking, dreaming and sleeping), 
the three worlds (heaven, earth and hell), the three Gods (Brahma, 
Vishnu and Rudra), and by its nasal sound (ardhamatra) is indica¬ 
tive of thy jaurth office as Supreme Lord of All, (Paramesvara) 
ever expresses and sets forth thy collective and single Forms.” 

'That he follows * in this view the older teaching found 
in the Upanishats like Alharvasikha and Maiidukya and others 
goes without saying. Atharvasikha is an Upanishat referred 
to in Vaishpava Bhagavatam, section vm. chap. vii. 29. (See 
extract in p. 506, vol. xi. Sidd/iauta Dipikd* 

* Consider also the following passages from Bhagavatam extracted 
in the same article. 

“O Girtsa, Thy Supreme Light is not attainable by Brahma, Vishiju 
and Indra.” vin. vii. 31. 

" When you create, preserve and destroy the universe with your 
energy then you a suihe the names of Biahma, Vishnu and Siva.” 




XXX 


INTRODUCTION 


The statement therefore in the Atharvasikha f that Brahma, 
Vishnu, Rudra and lndra are Kara pa or caused beings, and Sambu 
is Nakarana, the causeless, acquires greater force, and with this 
has to be compared the opening verse in the Bhagavatam itself, 
“Satva, Rajas and Tamas, thus these are three gunas of Prakriti; 
united to these, one Supreme Purusha bears for the sake of the 
creation etc., of this (universe) the names respectively Hari, 
ViriHehi and Hara. Of these, man can 1 seek welfare from the 
Satva-embodied one (namely Vishnu).” And hence the Pauranika 
proceeds to detail the exploits and glories of Vishnu. There is 
only one Vaishnava Tamil writer, a bitter opponent of Saivism, 
named Pillai Perumal Aiyarigar who noting the distinction as pre- 
sented by Saivism and Vaishpavism, made bold to say that Vishnu 
was the Fourth and not one of the Trimurtis. However students 
of Saivism will do well to bear in mind that when Saivites adore 
°God, in Rupa or Arupa, in images of copper or stone, they do not 
offer this worship to the Rudra of the Trinity, who is considered 

V' V' 

a Jiva but to the Supreme God, who is Santam , Sivam , Chatur- 
tham and Advaitam. This classification into three and the 
Fourth is a Vedic one, following the division of Gupatatvas or 
Prakriti into twenty-four. But as the Agamas following some 
of the Upanishals, postulate twelve more tatvas, which are 
Aprakrita and yet is Maya or material, and which are divided 

V' 

into the Asuddha Maya or Vidyatatvas, and Suddha Maya or 

V V’ V" 

Sivatatvas, the Supreme Siva and His Sakti is further distin- 
f Vide verses 34 to 36 p. 57, vol. xii. S. D. 

Vide also verse 1 of the inscription at the Ganesa Temple, Muvali- 

puram, p. 69, vol. xii. S. D., which closely follows the Atharvasikha idea, 

✓ 

showing thereby how it had permeated the popular mind “ Let (Siva), 
the destroyer of Kama, (who is) the cause of production, existence, and 
destruction (but is himself) without cause fullil the boundless desires 
of men.” 





INTRODUCTION 


XXXI 


guished from certain orders of Gods who have bodies formed of 
these more subtle conditions of matter, and we have the Nava- 
bhedam, the first two the Lord Himself and His Supreme Sakti, 
and the rest Nadamurti, Vindumurti, Sadasiva, Mahesvara, Rudra, 
Vishnu and Brahma. (Vide Table of Tatvas appended to this 
volume.) 

9 

When, >vith this Supreme ideal of God, we hold to the doctrine 
strictly that the Supreme God cannot be born through the womb, 
we can see how transcendental this philosophy is. 

It is a wonder to me how outsiders fail to note some of the 
commonest notions that prevail in the Saiva Religion, ^apd which 
can be gleaned from the most common place book relating to this 
school, and they often and on repeat statements about it which 
are absolutely incorrect. One of such statements is that Siva is 
Saguna Brahman or the lower Brahman. Such word a never finds a 
place in the description of God or Siva in any of the Tamil works; ‘ 
and the term Nirguna is solely used, together with the word 
Nishkala.* And then tb/re is such a lot of misconception about 
the meaning of this word that it has given rise to the grossest 
absurdities. As Guna is not to be postulated of God, say these 
wisemen, you cannot even call God Sat, Chit and Ananda. It is 
therefore necessary to consider what these words Nirguna and 
Sagupa mean and whether the translation of these words into 
Impersonal and Personal is correct. I have discussed these ques¬ 
tions elsewhere fully and I need state here only my conclusions. 
'I'he word Gunn means technically the Guna or attribute of Prakrit!, 
namely Satva, Rajas and 'Lamas, so Nirguna means non-Pra- * 
kriti or Aprakrita or non-material and its equivalent is Gunatita. 
Saguna would mean united to Prakriti, Satva, Rajas and 'Lamas, 

* Vide Tiruvitt.tt)dr ver e i, 7 rutkalirtuf'fa'Jnar verse 4, £ ivajnar.a - 
hdha-n ix. 2-1, t'iiaf re,’d,jiH verse 1. 


I 


XXX11 


INTRODUCTION 


to one of these or to two or all of them, in all kinds of proportion. 
This Sagunatva is specially therefore characteristic of mortals. 
When therefore the statement is made that God is Nirguna, it 
does not mean that no attributes at all should be ascribed to him 
such as that He is Sat, Chit, Ananda, Omniscient, all-Povverful 
etc. God is accordingly called ersssr^esadr (possessed of eight 
attributes) in the Saiva Agamas. Our Saiva Ehashyalfara enume¬ 
rates only six of the attributes, and he 1 would use>the Saguna 
as meaning “ possessed df all auspicious attributes,” which view 
of course is adopted by Sri Ramanuja. But this usage has not 
come into the Tamil language. Any how the distinctions we have 
pointed out above about these words, their literal and later usages, 
are important and should not be forgotten. Our author should 
be closely followed under Sutra i, Supaksha , to note how he 
makes out that God conceived in all sorts of Forms and Bodies 
is in no way material and all His Forms are not derived from 
matter but from His Chit Sakti or Arul or Grace or Love. 1 have 
followed the definitions of Personality t as given by European 
writers of eminence like Emerson, Lotze etc., and defined it to be 
Pure Being, which would therefore be no translation of the word 
Saguna in the original sense. 1 have therefore pointed out that 

V' 

God according to Saivism is both. Nirguna and Personal; and 
Christians need not be frightened by the word Nirguna which 
means merely non-material, that is, Chit or Pure Intelligence. 
As Pure Intelligence, He is inaccessible to us, and therefore 
the further statement is made that God is all Love and can 
therefore enter into personal relations with us, which is the 
other distinguishing feature of this Religion. As Saint Tiru- 
mQlar puts it: 

“ epssr rDGv6BT(nfQcBT ^jsessri—Qjdr @«jrOT0«fr ” 

He is the One, the second part of Him is His Sweet Grace. 


I 


INTRODUCTION 


XXX111 


And the whole of the teaching by our author on this head may be 
summarised in the beautiful words of Tirukadavur Uyyavandadeva: 

iL'h sOarm Ga <ri£UJibgnQG5ri.Q& 

G'nnai & lUGzrjQcvkiQa — 

^ dv h<~ .7gp ;lct ujrTGizrLQ-GiGzcrGuipu '* 

Gu0a'^6acts: uj rr jj mtGu^, 

Where avill we get the Agamas.? Where will arise the Six Systems ? 

* i 

Where w ; ,ll Yoga be, f>nd where our knowledge? 

If He with His Half of Grace did not take us into Himself 

Who will know His Great Form? Speak! 

We can see the Sun just by the little ray of light he sends out 
and not otherwise. It is by this Light of Grace that God reveals 
Himself to us, enlightens our intelligence, and shows us the way by 
which we can know and reach Him, and whereby He links us to 
Himself. And this Light and Love and Grace and Will or Power 
of the Lord is what is symbolised as His consort, His Half, Uma,-* 
Parvati, Sakti, our Mother. And here we come across these 
Pseudo-Yedantins, who though they cover themselves with 
bushels of Holy Ashes and cartloads of Rudraksha beads and 
utter the Holy name thousands and tens of thousands of times, 
will call our Mother, Maya * or matter, just as they read Saguna 

* I was familiar with the Motion that Sri Laksiinn, the consort of 

Vishriu was one of the Jivukotis, and the greatest Uhakta of her Lord; 

and it was with some surprise that I met with the statement for the 

first time in the pages of the Brahmaviidin (Oct.—Nov. 1912, pp. 563 and 

564) already referred to, that Sri is Pralqiti, (the Jada—non-intelligent) and 

our v.orship of Sri was worship of Prakriti. in the Atihafalchu/.a and 

Yatu.dri-slata-lJif\'.a, the authors do r.ot discuss lhe nature of this bn, 

but this Goc.dc-s along with LI:: and S.la are mentioned as supporters of 

Namyaga ; and we are not let to understand v»hat the nature 01 these 

latter is and how they are rented to bn. In an apieudix to the Art' a- 

* 

; a' 1 ha a, A. Govind..c »rya Svairuu e. pa ns that bn is liens , Grace, 
uni.ersal mediatrix, acor.c ler, pe„c<MTUiker and mother, and observes that 



XXXIV 


INTRODUCTION 


Brahman or lower Brahman wherever they come across the words 
of Siva, Hara, Isa or Isana, Rudra in the Upanishats. A great 
Acharya translates Uma of the Talavakara Upanishat as Brahma- 
vidya or Brahmajnana. If it stood alone, it may be taken to mean 
this or any thing in the abstract. T he epithet Uaintavatim refers 
distinctly to a certain Personality, the consort of Siva. But the 
Acharya is not wrong in his explanation as our author defines 
this Sakti also as unobstructed Juana" (Supaksha> i. 62), and 
derives therefrom God as 'the Supreme Will and Supreme Power. 
What we complain of however is that knowing fully well how 
this Perspnality of our Mother appears in this Upanishat, they 
should speak of Her as Maya and Saguna and so on in other 
places. It is this identifying of our mother with this Maya Sakti 
that has given rise to all the abomination of the Varna marga. 
The definition by our author of our gracious Mother in the 
'introductory verse and in sutras one and two (verses 76, 77) and 
five (9) have to be clearly noted ; and it will be noted also how 
he tries to distinguish this Sakti, from al] Forms of Maya, which 
our l ord and Lady having to enter as it were and vivify are 

there are not wanting those who equate or identify it with inert or inani- 
mate (Jada) Prakriti or Nature and that they forget that Sri-fatva is 
sentient or intelligent (Ajada) and this is borne out by all the Sastras 
from Rig-Veda downwards, but he only gives one quotation and that from 
Skiiitda Malta Puma a in which Sn is spoken of as Para-prakriti. He 
tries to identify it with Daiva-prakriti of the Gita, but what these two 
terms mean he does not explain. Saivas take it as meaning only subtle 
matter or Mahamaya. and not as Juanasakti at all. Sec the table with 
all its synonyms and authorities at p. 68 of Sri Kasivasi Sentiniithier’s 
Vaidika buddhadvaiia Saiva S.ddhanta Tatva Catechism. To the Vaish- 
navas even Suddlia Satva, translated as pure matter by A. Govindacarya 
Svamin is Ajada (Vide YaLndra-Mata-Dif i'a p. yo) and self-luminous. 
But the worst part of it is, this Prakriti, of which .Sis said to be the 
personification, is said to be Avidya (Nescience) and Maya (illusion) 
though eternal. (See p. 66, para one of the same book). 




INTRODL CTION* 


XXXV 


also spoken of as His Forms and bodies, and our commentators 

are also careful to note that these Bodies, spoken of as those 

of the Lord, are only so by upachara. This ideal of God and 

His Lakti is transcendental, and yet in the Image of our Father 

and Mother is brought next to our heart.* And yet there 

✓ 

are people who would assert that Saivism is not a religion of 

f 

Love. And yet is there any religion which possesses an hymno- 

9 

logy which in bulk or antiquity or loving sweetness could compare 
with the sacred Tirumurai of the Faivitts, in 'I'amil, not to speak 
of those in Sanskrit ? It could also be shown that most of the 
Yaishnava Alvars, if not all, rose long after the Saiva.Hymners 
and they owe the very form and expression of their devotional 
poetry to their Saivite predecessors. 

I shall notice two or three more points and close this 
introduction. This will relate to the nature of the Pa§u and 
Paia and of Advaita. PaSu is the technical term used by this’ 

* Vide the following verses of Uyyavandadeva : 

Lonjj'uuuQs ».G\> v 3j<s@ ay Lsn^L'uuuQsear 

ay LC5).Lu~iun ay^ju FQ * Qj 

G7«Woi/T JiUt-jrip ? IT tfui-fppg} 

ic5\.3v nn'lu/rSv Snuzear. 

Know That (our) Father jind Mother are the Parents of the World 
Our Father and Mother will show us Grace as such. 

Our Father and Mother trancends all these worlds 
liven here They stand as though they are not. 

Q uza Jr Qu Q uJr /rJruircv'if ^ 0p'/t 
u<aun i 

/c-i f i ?)jjni> ft a./r/f i ?'?',<*<•{ Jr QjjujiLjitas/Qj 
■*r i t v 7 

‘ Oh my Low, n y Low ’ one eric, in love 

Ar.d Ivcori ing one with this Love, lie loses his self-consciousness 
Without this love, all bathings, and meditations and pujas 
\’. ill Lea: no hint at all. 




XX XVI 


INTRODUCTION 


school to denote the Jiva or the Atma or the Soul, which 
corresponds to the Chit of the Ramanuja’s and the Jiva of the 
Sahkarins. This term along with the other terms Pasa and Pati 
connects us with the ancient sacrificial rites from the days of 
the Rig Veda and furnishes a proof of its anquity as I have 
elsewhere shown. I extract the following definitions of Pasu 
and Pasa from the Vcdic Index of Professor Macdonnel which 
by the way omits the terms Medhapati, Pati, and Pasupati found 
in the Vedas, meaning the Lord. (Rig Veda, i. 43. 4.) 

Pasu means animal generally including man. There is frequent men¬ 
tion of the five sacrificial animals—the horse, the cow, the sheep, the goat 
and man/' r 

Tait. Sam. iv. 2. 10. 1-4. 

Kfithaka Sam. xvi. 17. 

Mait. Sam. ii. 7-17. 

Vajasneya Sam. xiii. 47-51. 

Another division is that of Biped (Dvipild) and quadruped (catus pad) 

R. V. iii. 62. 14. A. V. iii. 34-1. 

Man is a Biped. 

Tait. Sam. iv. 2. 10. 1-2. 

Vajas. Sam. xviii. 47. 4S. 

He is the first of of the beasts. 

Satap. Br. vi. 2. 1-18. 

vii. 5. 2. 6. 

He is king of animals. 

Kfithaka Sam. xx. 10. 

Satap. Br. iv. 5. 5. 7. 

He possesses speech. 

R. V. viii. 100-11. 

Pasa denotes in the Rig-Veda and later a rope used for fastening or 
tying up. 

1. i. 24. 15. 15; ii. 27. 16; 29.5. etc. 

2. A.V. ii. 12. 2; ix. 3. 2; Vajasneya vi. 8. 45. 

Rope and knot are mentioned in the A.V. ix. 3. 2. 

T he Pati is the Lord of the sacrifice, to whom the Pasu (the 
Pasutvam, his individuality or egoity) is offered in sacrifice by 
the Ljaman, otherwise called also At/nl, the Soul, and the Paisa is 


INTRODUCTION 


XXXVII 


the rope with which the Pcisu is tied to the sacrificial post or 
Yupastambha or Skhambha in the midst of the flaming Fire or 
Bali-pitha. This is the symbology even now employed in Saivite 
Temples with the Sivalinga and Nandi (the freed soul, and 
formerly the Pasu or Basava = bull) and Balipitha and Dhvaja- 
stambha. It is the soul (Ejaman) or Atma, that is asked to offer 
up his Pasjttvam , the animal part of himself, his Tatbodha, His 
‘ I ’ ness, or Ahankara oT Anava in the J fianagni, and the moment 
this is done, the soul becomes Nandi or Sivam, the blissful, and 
one with Siva. Our author discusses every possible shade of view 
regarding the soul under Sutra IV, and it is seen that-it is not 
Maya, nor Anava nor God, nor any abhasa nor admixture 
of these, but it is above the 24 or 36 tatvas and distinct 
from God. But its nature is such that it identifies itself with 
whatever it is united to and becomes one and indistinguishable 

-1 

from it. (S. IV. 20.) It is this which explains how though 
the soul may be said to be in a sense pure in itself, it becomes 
impure, and it also explains how though different from the 
Brahman it can become one with it. Its purity is like that of the 
pure crystal or perfect eye but which may become dimmed 
by various causes, and unlike that of the glorious sun which 
knows no darkness. This theory' of the soul does not necessitate 
taking Maya as illusion, and Anava or Ajiiana as a delusion. 
These latter are positive facts or entities and must be accounted 
for in any rational system of Religion or Philosophy. All the 
absurdities of the Ekatmavada or Mayavada school flow from 
our not understanding the nature of this Pasu properly, and 
in either ignoring its existence or mistaking it for the Brahman 
itself. And we define Advaita as a relation subsisting between 
God and the Universe of nature and man (the Clictana, Achctana 
Prapafidia) and the relation is such that it cannot possibly be 


XXXVI11 


INTRODUCTION 


stated to be one or two or neither, i. e., Abheda, Bheda or Bheda- 
bheda. Our author does not use the word Advaita, but defines 
the relation in Supaksha, Sutra II, verse i. as one, different and 
one-and-different and in verse 2 explains how the Vedas state 
th&re is only one by the illustration of vowels and consonants. 
He however uses the word Ananya in very many places, and 
in his Inipa-irupahtu * he uses his famous phrase 9®jr^s/r^ev, 

rviBosan® LSsar^sttLDGv, Neither one mor two nor 
neither, which brings out: the natural paradox and contradiction 
in this Supreme union, which as Dr. Bain pointed out long ago 
is characteristic of the union of Mind and Body. This union 
is made possible only by the nature of the Jiva already referred 
to, and I need not say more about it, as I have fully elaborated it 
in my notes in this volume, and in my paper on Advaita according 

v 

to the Saiva Siddhanta in my ‘Studies in Saiva Siddiulnta.’ 

I wish to draw also particular attention to the way the differ¬ 
ent kinds of Pasa or Mala namely Anava, Maya and Karma are 
sharply defined and distinguished, and the important advance made 
in the classification of Maya. The ordinary schools of Sankhya, 
Yoga, of Sankara and of Ramanuja and others take note of Maya 
or Prakpiti, Mula-prakpiti or Pradhlna or Avyaktam, and the 
twenty-four tatvas beginning with Buddhi are derived therefrom. 
(Book III. I. 57-62.) The Saiva school takes further note of twelve 
more tatvas, seven of which are classed as Asuddha-maya-tatvas 
or Vidya-tatvas, namely Ragam (Ichchli) Yidya, Niyati, Kala (time) 
Kala, Purusha and Maya (Asuddha-mayii) f and five more as 

* This is being translated by me in the curreut volume xm of the 
Siddhanta Dipihd. 

t The terms used in Svetasvatara Upanishat I. 2, is Kala, Svabho 
(Kala), Niyati, Ichchii (Ragam), Bhuta (Vidyii), Purusha and Yoni (Maya); 
see the texts quoted from Kailasa-samhitii, Vayu samhita and Brahmanda 
Purana at p. 145. Studies ,n Saiva Siddhanta. 


( 



INTRODUCTION 


XXXIX 


Suddha-maya-tatvas or Si va-tatvas namely, Suddha-Yidya, Mahes- 

✓ ✓ 

vara, Sadasiva, Bindu (or Sakti) and Nadam (Sivam.) (Book III. 
i. 19. 11. 54 to 56.) The further products of the different classes 
of Maya and how they are interacted by the Sakti of the Lord 
and how they form the bodies of man and how they influence him 
lie at the very foundation of all the higher spiritual culture and 

9 

requires su,ch a close,study that they cannot be detailed here. I 
have howevez added ful? notes under the respective verses dealing 
with them. It is by not knowing these higher tatvas that even 
such a great scholar as Proessor Max Muller pronounces the 
whole of the Mantra Sastra as rubbish. It is by' understanding 
them again, even yoga will become intelligible. Their psycho¬ 
logical and spiritual importance will alone be properly understood 
when taken with the actual religious practices which deal with 
Kalosodhana and Adhvasodhana in the various forms of Diksha 
from Samaya to Nirvana. All this precious knowledge though it 
existed in India from lime immemorial has altogether been the 
sole heritage of Saivites, and it being considered sacred and secret, 
and only open to the initiated, accounts for its being kept out 
of the knowledge of non-initiates. 

I wish only to touch upon one more subject which brings out 
the universality of Saivism namely the four Padas or Margas 
which it opens out for the spiritual aspirant namely, ( harya, 
Kriya, Yoga and Juana otherwise called Dasamarga, Satputra- 
marga, Sahamarga and Sanmarga. (Book lll.viii. iS to 22.) These 
embody practices suited to the least developed of men and the 
most highly developed and combining Lhakti and Karma and 
Jhana. the one below leading to the one higher which is beautifully 
expressed by Saint Tayumniavar in the following couplet. 

(7* t l, - * * T 4 or* 1 ry jy ' r i n ? 7 ? * n ^ t i 




r t , fr; 


J 


» 4 . A . 


XL 


INTRODUCTION 


The desirable paths from Charya to the True Jliana 

Is this not like bud, dower, raw fruit and ripe fruit, O Lord of lords? 

As noted at page 130, I had proposed to collect some of the 
Upanishat and Agamic texts bearing on the Tatvas etc., and add 
them as an Appendix to this volume. But what was my wonder 
and pleasant surprise when His Holiness the Pandara Sannadhi 
of J iianaprakasa Mutt at Kafichipura mentioned casually to me 
that he had in his possession a cadjan lhanuscript called Agama 

v ( 

Drishlanta for Sivajnanasiddhi)'dr. And I cannot express my 
thankfulness to him in sufficient terms for his handing over the 
manuscript to me at once, and this is now in the press and will be 
issued separately. It will be noted that most of the works 
referred to therein could not be found now, and they have pro¬ 
bably been irretrievably lost. There are very few of these works 
that are available in print, and a few more probably in manu¬ 
scripts. r I he value of this work cannot be easily estimated. I 
am appending a list of all the fourteen Tamil. Siddhanta works 
as also the names of Agamas and Upagamas as far as they are 
known. 1 append also the twelve Sutras of Sivajuilnabodha 
which form the text for this work also. 

V" 

My edition of SivajnCutabodha translation is now out of print, 

V 

and 1 hope to issue it next together with Sivaprakasam and. 

V* 

other minor works, after my edition of Srlkantha Bhashya is 
published. 1 append here with a few additions the note on the 

y 

author etc., appended to my edition of SivajMnabodha. 

With these few words I commend this volume to the notice 
of all those who are interested in the study of Religion and 
Philosophy of this ancient Land of India. 

SlVARATRl DAY, 1913, 

Madras. J. M. NALLASVAMI. 


I 


NOTE ON THE AUTHOR. 


4 


The foh’owiiii* I extract from my edition of SivajTiCaiabodham 
which begins with a\i account of Mcykandadcva, the teacher 
of our Author :— -» 


" He who translated and commented on SivajTidnabodham 
whose knowledge was imparted by Nandi and his disciples, for 
the purpose of obtaining Salvation, by pointing out the way to 
proceed from the knowledge of the body full of sorrow, to the 
knowledge of the soul, and thence to the knowledge of the 
Supreme Spirit, enshrined in the Mah.lvukya, just as the glorious 
sun, enables our sight by dispelling the deep darkness from the 
vast surface of this earth ; 

*' He, who under the*namc of Svctavana lived in Tiruvennai- 
nailur, surrounded by the waters of Pcnnar ; 

" He, who left all false knowledge knowing it to be such and 
was therefore called Mcykandadeva ; 

" He is the Lord whose* feet form the (lower worn on the 
heads of even the holiest sages.” 

Such is the brief Sirapfm-Tayiram which is usually affixed 
to the Tamil edition of the book, giving particulars of the name 
and place of the author and the merit of his work. 

V* 

'I he author who translated into Tamil, .b ii'a jhd nahodham and 
commented on it was tailed in early li r c Svetavana, and after 
h* 1 attained spiritual eminence was called Mcykandadeva (meaning 
'I ruth find'-r and he lived in 'I iruvennaiiudlur situated on the 
banks of the ower Primal, about twenty miles from Paoruli on 

7 


l 



xlii 


SIVAJNANA SlDDHlYAR 


the S. I. R. line. To tliis brief account, tradition adds the following 
particulars. One Atchutan of Pepoagadam Village near Tiruven- 
kadu or Svetavana in Tanjore District, was long childless and he 
prayed incessantly to Svetavana lsvara for the boon of a child. 
One morning he went early to the temple tank and bathed in it 
and when he got up finishing his prayers, he discovered lying on 
the steps of the tank a new born babe whom he at once pressed to 
his bosom, and praising God for his mercy to him,” took it home 
and gave it to his wife. And these two were bringing it up. 
Being the gift of Svetavana lsvara, the child was named Svetavana. 
In course of time, however, his caste people began to murmur 
against Atchuta, saying that he is bringing up a low born found¬ 
ling. The parents were in very deep sorrow on this account, 
and when Atchutan’s brother-in-law had come to him on a visit 
from Tiruvennainallur, and he offered to take the boy with him 
and bring him up, they gladly consented, and the babe’s home 
became Tiruvennainallur from its 3rd year. It happened, how¬ 
ever, that the child was dumb from its‘-birth, but the bent of its 
mind was discovered in its very play which consisted in making 
Sivalingam of sand and becoming absorbed in its contemplation. 
One day, a Siddha, passing by that way, saw the child in its play 
and was at once attracted towards it, and observing the child in 
advanced spiritual condition, he touched it with Grace, altered its 
name to that of Meykandadeva, and instructed the child with the 
Divine Philosophy contained in Sivajnanabodhaiti, and ordered it 
to translate the same into Tamil and let the world know its truth. 
'Phe sage, however, retained his silence till his fifth year was past, 
during which interval, it is stated, he was receiving further 
instruction from God Ganeja of l iruvenpainallur, who was called 
IV.la PiPaiyOr, and the abstract of the Sutrams and the various 
arg invmis called <~hfirnika is said to have been imparted to 


I 


NOTE ON THE AUTHOR 


xliii 


Meykandadeva by Polla Pillaiyar. However, after his fifth year, he 
began to speak out and preach his Sivajnanabodham , and he 
attracted a very large body of disciples. In those days, there lived in 
Tirutturaiyur,* a famous pundit and philosopher named Arunandi- 
Sivacharyvr, well versed in all the Vedas and Agamas, and hence 
called Sakala Agama Pandit. He, with his disciples, came on a 

I 

• visit to Tiruvennainallur ; and while there, his disciples became 
attracted by the teaching of Meykandadeva and gradually began to 
desert their former teacher. Arunand’sivafcharyar came to know of 
the cause of the desertion of his pupils and went to meet and 
vauquish Meykandadeva, face to face. He went there, ,and the 
moment the eye of Grace of Meykandadeva fell on him, he felt his 
Aliankara or A puma leave him, and feeling vanquished fell at 
his feet and sought his grace and thence became his most 
prominent and devoted disciple. Here a fact has to be noted. 
Meykandadeva was a Vella la, at least his foster parents were so, 
and yet Arunandi Sivacharyar occupying the highest position 
even among Brahmans did not scruple to become his disciple. 
Under Meykandadeva's inspiration, Arunandi Sivacharyar com¬ 
posed a philosophical treatise called Irupa Irupahtu (@0u/r 53) (ij 
t Under his direction again, Arunandi Sivacharyar 
composed Sivajnanasiddhi, .as an authorized commentary on 
Sivajnanabodham , two works which have been rarely parallelled 

* This is about four miles from Panruti Station on the S. 1 . R. 
The name is corrupted into 1 iruttalur by the people and except by this 
name you can’t discover the place. A Pa yd a ram attached to the Tiru- 
v<tv.idniurai Mu{{ is in charge of the Samadhi of our Saint. There is a 
very tine and picture^ue £aiva shrine near the Samadhi, and on the first 
floor of the shrine and attached to the Gopura are figures illustrating a 
hne cp’. <Ah: in the life of St. Sundara. 

| Thic is being translated by nr* and published in SuUJurta Difi/ut, 
vol. ..III. 



SiVAJNANA SlDDFIIVAR 


xliv 

even in Sanskrit. If the genius of Tiruvalluvar gave to the 
Tamil language all the teachings to be found in the Vedas, Agmas, 
Upanishads and Dharma Sastras on the first three Purushdrthams, 
Dharma , Artha and Kama or Aram, Pond and hibam, in a 
thoroughly systematized form, the genius of Meykandadcva and 

v 

Arunandi Shuicharyar gave to the Tamil language, all the 
teachings of these books on the last Purus hart ha namely, Moksha 
or Vidu, in a similarly condensed and Systematized' form. The 
plan of the first work is this. The twelve Sutras are divided into 
2 Chapters of 6 Sutras each, general and special. These chapters 
are divided into two ‘ lyals ’ each making a total division of the 
book into four, of three Sutras each. I have, however, divided the 
work into four chapters, indicating at the same time whether each 
belongs to the general or the special division. 

The first chapter treats of the proof of the three entities or 
Padarthas, the second dealing with their further attributes or 
relationship, the third dealing with Sadhana or means of attaining 
the benefit of the knowledge of the three Padarthas, and the last 
dealing with the True End sought after by all mankind. The 
reader of Vyasa's Sariraka Sutras or Vedanta Sutras will observe 
that the divisions adopted in the latter work are the same as in 
SivjTionabodham. Further each Sutra is divided into separate 
theses or arguments and Meykandadeva has added his comment¬ 
ary called Varthika to each of these theses or arguments or 
Adhikarana as it is called. This Varthika commentary' is in very 
terse prose and is the most difficult portion of the work. Meykapda- 
deva has added Udarana or analogies in verses of Venba Metre 
to each of the Adhikaranas. These Udarana are not similes 
of rhetoric but are logical analogies used as a method of proof. 
The reader's attention is particularly drawn to these analogies 
and he is requested to test these analogies with any rule of Western 


I 


XOTE OX THE AUTHOR 


xlv 


logic, and at the same time test the analogies ordinarily set forth 
in works on Hindu Philosophy published in English. SivajTiiina 
SiJdhi is divided into two books, Parapaksham and Supakshcim. 
In the Parap-.ksham, all the Hindu systems from Charvaka Philo¬ 
sophy to Mayavadam are stated and criticised, and it is similar* to 
Sayana’s Sarva Pars an a Sangraha, and yet a cursory compari¬ 
son will show the superior treatment of the former. The subject 
which Sayana or as he is better known in Southern India, Vidyar- 
anyar has compressed in one chapter fri a few pages, under the 
heading of Saiva Darian, is treated by Arunandi Sivacharyar in 
in his Supaksham in 300 and odd stanzas, and the printed works 
with commentaries comprise about 2,000 and odd pages. The 
ground plan of this work is the same as that of Sivajiianabodham 
but it contains in addition a chapter on ‘ Alavai ’ or logic, an 
abstract of which has been also translated by Rev. H. R. Hoising- 
ton and published in the American Oriental journal, vol, nv 
Though this is based on Sanskrit works on Logic, yet an advance 
is made in a new classifipation of logical methods, predicates &c. 
And this 1 might say of the genius of Tamil writers generally, 
though they have borrowed largely from Sanskrit, the subject 
receives altogether an independent and original treatment. As my 
old teacher used to observe, .no doubt gold from Sanskrit source 
is taken but before it becomes current coin, it receives the stamp 
or impress of the Tamil writer’s genius. 

Then about the date of these works, there is no data available 
to fix the exact time of these works. But that they must have 
been very old is manifest from the fact that they have supplied the' 
form and even the language for nearly all the Tamil writers on 
philosophy and religion, excepting in Devaram and Tiruvdclta- 
kam and other works included in the Saiva 7 intmurai. And 
there are al->o clcar,data to show that these work's were anterior to 


xlvi 


sivaJnana siddiiiyar 


the establishment of any of the great Saiva Adhinams or Mutts in 
Southern India, and the great Namasivaya Desikar who founded 
the Tiruvavaduthurai Adhinam about 600 years ago claimed to 
be the fifth or sixth in succession from Meykandadeva, and the 
disciples of this Mutt and Saivas generally call themselves as 
belonging to Meykanda Sanlhathi. One other fact which fixes this 
much more approximately, I must mention. Umapathi Sivachariyar 
who is fourth in succession from Meykandudeva, giver, the date of 
his work, Sahkarfmnirakrfranani , in the preface of the work itself 
as 1235 of Salivahana Era. This will make the work therefore 
582 or 583 years old and giving a period of 25 or 30 years for 
each of the Acharyas, the date of Meykandadeva will be about a.d. 
1192 or 1212 or say about A. D. 1200.* These facts therefore 
furnish us with a positive data that these works could not have 
been at least less than 650 years old. I have not been however 
^able to investigate the matter with all the available sources of 
information, for want of time and opportunity and 1 must leave 
the subject here. , 

A few words about the commentaries on these works are also 
necessary. There are two short commentaries published on Siva- 
jucinabodham. One is by Pandi Perumal, and it is a very clear and 
useful commentary for the beginner, and nothing is known about 
the writer and about his life except his mere name ; but from the 
way he describes himself, he must have lived very near the time 
of Meykandadeva. The other commentator is a well known 
person, Sivajnana Yogi or Muniver who died in the year Visvavasu 
‘before last, 1785 A. 1 ). The famous Adhinam at Tiruvavadu- 
turai has produced very many great sages, poets and writers in 

W' 

its days but it produced none equal to Sivajnana Yogi. The 

* Sayana and his brother died about 1387, and SivajT.auasiddhiyar 
proceeds Saroada.Sana Sungniha by nearly two centuries. 


I 




NOTE ON THE AUTHOR 


xlvii 


Tamil writers do not think that any praise is too lavish when 
bestowed upon him ; and I have heard pundits of even other faiths 
speak in av e and respect of his mighty genius. He was a great 
Poet, and Rhetorician, a keen Logician and Philosopher, and 
commentator and a great Sanskrit Scholar. He with his pupil 
composed Kanchipuriin which in the opinion of many surpasses 
many of the Epics in the Tamil language, so far as the imagery of 
its descripti®n and its gfeat originality and the difficulty of its style 
and diction are concerned. He is the duthor of several commen¬ 
taries and works on Tamil Grammar and Rhetoric. He has trans¬ 
lated into Tamil the Sanskrit Tarkasangraha and his conjmentaries 
on Sivajnanabodham and Sivajnana Siddhi have been rarely 
equalled for the depth of perception and clearness of exposition 
and the vastness of erudition displayed by him. His short com¬ 
mentary on Sivajnanabodham is the one now published and 
his other commentary called the Dravida bhashya has not been 
published vet.* 

A few biographical notes of the different commentators of 
SUidhiyar will also be interesting. 1 iru Marai Jnanasambandhar 
seems to be the earliest of them. He belonged to the Santana of 
Alavanda Yal.jal, one of the sixty-four disciples of the great Juana- 

V" 

sambandha of Sirkali. He was a Brahmin and Saiva. He is the 
author of Paramata Timirabluinu (the sun which destroys the 
heterodox Religions) and he treats the subject of Parapaksha 
of Siddhiyar in simple and beautiful couplets and which I 
have quoted here and there in my foot note;* (vide p. ioi,) 
as found in the commentaries. The book is not yet available’ 
in print. He has al>o composed Pali Pain Pai>a Pamivul 
and other work->. 

• Ihi_. 1 m» since been pub'i.lvid though in ail imperfect form, bee 
my re\lev. of the -ai^.e iij SddkauU Li'i'u. 



xlviii 


SI VAJNANA SIDD1IIYAR 


Sivagrayogi, the most learned of them, was the disciple of 
Nigama Agama Saiva Paripalaka Sadasiva Yogindra. He found¬ 
ed the Mu it at Suryanarkovil, under the patronage of the Rulers 
of the country at that time. The present holder of the Adinam is 
a nlost learned and pious Svami. He is the author of Satan Pari 
Bhashti, a work on Logic and eleven other works. His^wnr ti/ca 
on Sivajuanabodha in Sanskrit is the most compendious of his 
works, and attempts are being made to publish the text in Deva- 
nagiri as also its Tamil tranlation. A short commentary of his 
has been published in Benares in Nagari and in South India in 
Grantha. The commentary of his on Siddhiyar published by 
C. Shunmugasundara Mudaliyar is in Manipravala; and there is 
said to be another commentary in pure Tamil also. (vide. pp. 
470, 471, vol. x. Siddhanta Dipika for a fuller account of him.) 

Jfianaprakasar was born near Jaffna in a Vella la family and 
travelled much in the South and West of India and became pro¬ 
ficient in Tamil and Sanskrit and in Agamic lore. He finally got 
his initiation in the mutt at Tiruvannamalci and became a sanya- 
sin. Then he removed himself to Chidambaram where he com¬ 
posed most of his works, among which are Paushkaragamavptti, 
Sivajfianbodha-vritti, Siddhantasikhamani, PramSpa Dipika, 
Prasada Dipika, Ajnana-Vivechanam r Sivayogasaram, Sivayoga- 
ratnam, Sivasamadhi Mahatmya Sangraha, (all in Sanskrit). He 
dug a big tank near his mutt which is still known after his name. 

Nirambavalagiyar belonged to the Santana of St. Umapati 

✓ 

Sivacharya and was a resident of Madura. He translated into 
‘Tamil verse, Setu Purana. He wrote a commentary on St. Uma¬ 
pati Sivachirya's Tiruvarutpayan or the Light of Grace. 

hivajnanayogi is almost the last of the commentator and he 
has already been referred to. Subramanya De^ikar was the late 
Panrarasannadhi of Tiruvavaduturai Mutt, a most learned scholar 


l 


NOTE ON THE AUTHOR 


xlix 


and patron of learning. This Mutt attained to its present emin¬ 
ence in his time. His commentary follows that of Sivajiianayogi 
and gives a word for word interpretation. 

The Siddhanta Sastras are fourteen in number. The first is 
Sivajnanabodham of Meykandadeva; and two works of Arunahdi 
Sivacharyar I have already mentioned. Another of Meykanda- 
deva’s pupils by name Manavasagam Kadandar composed a 
treatise called ‘ Unmai Yilakkam ’ or 1 The Light of Truth ’ and 
this litt'e work contains an explanation of many aprotound truth in 
Hindu philosophy.* Two works, Tini-vuntiydr and 

1 irukkalirrupadiydr (‘Si&ssi.&priuiQ-ujnn) are ascribed, to a Sage 
Uyyavandadevar, of Tiruvisalur and his pupil of the same name 
respectively, and eight works were composed by Umapati Sivachar- 

V' 

yar, the principal of which Sivaprakdsavi has been translated by 
Rev. H. R. lloisington, and another Tirtivarutpayan or Light of 
Grace by me and Rev. Dr. G.U. Pope. The authors of these treatises 
together with Maraijuana Sambandhar are regarded by Saivas as 
their Santana Acharyas, expounders of their Philosophy and Fathers 
of the Church, as distinguished from their Samaya Acharyas, Tiru- 
jfiana Sambanthar, Yakisar. Sundarar, and Manickavachakar who 
were authors of devotional works, and maintained the supremacy 
of their Vedic faith and Religion against Buddhism and Jainism, 
and but for whom the modern Hindus would be reading the 
Tripitaka and Jatnka talcs instead of our Vedas and Upanishad-. 
and works founded on them, and would be one with the Atheistical 
Saime-sC or the highly idolatrous and superstitious Chinee. And 
here 1 might take the liberty of addressing a few words to my 
Hindu countrymen, at least to those whose mother tongue is Tamil 
and who arc born in the Tamil country and are able to read the 
Tamil language. It i-> r ot every body who has the desnc to Mudy 
• 'J rarii ated and ptfbmhcd by me in my btudm in iaicu biddlm tu. 


1 


S1VAJNANA S1DDHIYAR 


Philosophy or can become a Philosopher. To these, I would 
recommend the devotional works of our Saints, whether Saiva or 
Vaishnava. Unlike the Hindus of other parts of this vast Penin¬ 
sula, it is the peculiar pride of the Tamilian, that he possesses a 
Tamil Veda, which consist of his Devaram, Tiruvachakam and 
Tiruvaimoli, and this is not an empty boast. As Svami Viveka- 
nanda observes, Vedas are eternal, as truths are eternal? and truths 
are not confined to the Sanskrit language alone. The authors of 
the Tamil Veda are regarded as avatars and even if not so, they 
were at any rate Jivan Muktas or Jfianis. And as I have explained 
in my notes to the Eleventh Sutra, these Jivan Muktas are true 
Bhaktas and they are all Love. And the Tamil Veda is the out¬ 
pouring of their great Love. My old Christian teacher used to 
observe that the Dravidian is essentially and naturally a devotional 
man; and is this not so, because they had early received and 
imbibed the Great outpourings of Love of our Divine Saints? To 
the student or enquirer who is more ambitious and wishes to 
fathom the mysteries of nature, I cannot do better than recommend 
these very books as a first course, and the conviction will surely 
dawn upon his mind as he advances in his study of Philosophy 
and compares what is contained in the Tamil Veda with the bare 
bones of Philosophy that he has nothing better for his last course 
than what he had for his first course ; and as the Divine Tiruvafiu- 
var says, what is the use of all philosophy and knowledge if it does 
not lead one to the worship of his Maker in all truth and in all 
love ? However, as a course of philosophical study, the Siddhanta 
works contain the most highly developed and logically systematized 
thinking of the Hindus. And if it is thought necessary, a study 
of the Vedas and Upanishats may follow. Without this prelimi¬ 
nary course, a study of the latter will only land one in chaos 
and confusion. 1 address these remarks &s a student to a 


/ 


NOTE ON THE AUTHOR 


li 


student, as one enquirer to another, and I claim no more weight 
to my words. 

I give below a stanza which shows in what high estimation, 
Tamilians hold the present work and other works referred to above. 

“ QzugLD u-p Quyjjxin sldlL tcnsueun 3 

gJpesft gycT(Grj jp/Q/sdj — QuirpiSl(^ 

Q s hi$zri£z ^emsunjiT £ar QoisisrGe^T'L Qwii&csai i _/ tss 7- , 

Q&lip psrz&BS ib,” 

(The Veda is the cow; the Agama is its'milk, the Tamil (Devaram 
and Tiruviichakam) of the four Saints, is the ghee churned from it; tne 
excellence of the well-instructive Tamil (Sivajfianabodam) of Meykanda- 

i * 

deva of Tiruvennainallur is like the sweetness of such ghee.) 

Note .—We have referred to the Tamil Edition of the Siddhanta 
Sistras by the late C. Shanmuga Sundara Mudaliar of Chintadripet, 
Madras at the Sivajfianabodha Yantrasala. We also recommend the 
edition in one Volume of Sriman Kanchi Nagalinga Mudaliar of Madras, 
brought out under the patronage of His Holiness The Pandarasannadhi 
of Tiruvavaduturai Mutt. 



LIST OF AGAMA OR TANTRA 
WITH UPAGAMAS 


1. Kamika. 

2. Yogaja. 

3. Chintya. 

4. Karana (= Karana). 

5. Ajita. 

6. Dipta. 

7. Sukshma. 

S. Sahasraka (« Sahasra.). 

9. Amiiman (Amsumat). 

10. Suprabha( = Suprabheda=* 

Sftprabodha). 

11. Vijaya. 

12. Nisvasa. 

13. Svayambhuva ( = Svayam- 

bhu -- SvayambhQ = Sva- 
yambhuta). 

14. Agneyaka ( = Agneya = 

Anala*= Anila). 


I. Kamikagama 

(100,000,000,000,000,000 verses). 

(i) Uttara. 

(ii) Bbairavottara. 

(iii) Narasimha. 

II. Yogajagama (100,000 verses), 

(i) Vinasirottara. 

t (ii) Taraka-tantra. 

(iii) Sinkhyagama. 

(iv) Suntyagama. 

(v) Atmayoga. 

III. Chintyagama (100,000 verses). 

(i) Suchintyagama. 

(ii) Subhagama. 


15. Bhadra (Vira). 

16. Kaurava. 

17. Makuta (Makuta = Mukuta). 

18. Vi mala. 

19. Chandrahasa («=Chandra- 

jnana). 

20. Mukhayugbimha( =Mukha- 

bimba = Bimba). 

21. Udgita ( = Prodgita). 

22. Lalita ( = Lalita). 

23. Siddha. 

24. Santana (Santa). 

V 

25. Narasimha ( = Sarvokta = 

Sarvokta = Sarvottara). 

26. ParameSvara ( = Parames- 

vara). 

27. Kirana. 

28. Para ( = Parahita => Vatula 

r = Vatula = Vatula). 


(iii) Vamatantra. 

(iv,) Papanasaka. 

(v) Sarodbhava. 

(vi) Amritagama. 

IV. Karanagama( 10,000,000 verses). 

(i) Karapa-tantra. 

(ii) Pavana-tantra. 

(iii) Daurjanya-tantra. 

(iv) Mahendra-tantra 

(v) Bhima-tantra. 

(vi) Marana-tantra. 

(vii) lsana-tantra. 

V. Ajitagama (100,000 verses). 

(i) Prabhutagama. 


1 




SIVaJX'AXA SIDDHIYAR 


liii 


(ii) Virodbhuugama. 

(iii) Parvati-tatnra. 

Civ) Padma-samhita. 

VI. Diptagarna (: 00,000 verse), 

(i) Ameyagama. 

(ii) Apratinwgama. 

(iii^ Apyagama. 

(iv) Asankhyagama. 

(v) Arr.itaujasagama. 

(vi) Anandaga/na. . 

(viii) Adbbutagama. 

(ix) Amritagama. 

VII. Sukshmagama 
(1,000,000,000,000,000 verses). 

(i) Sukshma-samhita. 

VIII. Sahasragama 

(ioo,oco,ooo,ooo,coo verses). 

(i) Atitagama. 

(ii) Amalagama. 

(iii) Suddhagama. 

(iv) Aprameyagama. 

(v» Jyotirbhavanagama. 

(vi) Prabudddhagama. 

(vii) Vibuddhagama. 

(viii) Hastagama. 

(ix) Alankaragama, 

(x) Subodhagama. 

IX. Amsumadagama ( = Ambuma- 
nagama) (i,000,000 verses).' 

(») Vidyapurana. 

(ii) Bhaskaragaina. 

(iii) N'llalohitagama. 

(iv) Prakaraijigama. 

(v) Bhutatantra. 

(vi) Atmalartkura. 

(vii) Kasyapagama. 

(viii) Gautamagama. 

(ix) Mabcndragama. 

(x 1 Brabmagama. 

(xi) \’a ishjhagama 

(xii) liariottara. 


X. Suprabodhagama (30,000,000 

verses). 

(i) Subodhagama. 

(ii) Prabodhagama. 

(iii) Bodhangama. 

XI. Vijayagama (30,000,000 verse?) • 

(i) Vijayatantra. 

Cii) Udbhavatantra. 

(iii) Saumyatantra. 

(iv) Aghoratantra. 

(v) Mrityunasakatantia. 

(vi) Kuberesatantra. 

(vii) Vimalatantra. 

(viii) Mahaghoratantra. 

XII. Nisvasagama (10,00b,000 

verses). 

(i) Nisvasa. 

(ii) Uttaranisvasa. 

(iii) Nisvasamukhodaya. 

(iv) Nisvasanayana. 

(v) Nisvasakaraka. 

(vi) Ghorasamhita 

(vii) Susankhya. 

(viii)Gubya. 

XIII. Svayambhvagama ( — Sva- 
yambhuvagama) (35,000,000 
verses). 

(i) Svayanabhuta. 

(ii) Prajapatimata. 

(iii) Padmatantra. 

XIV. Analagama ( = Analagama) 

(300,000 verses). 

(i) Agneya. 

XV. Virugama (100,000 verses). 

(i) Prastara-tantra. 

(ii) Prasphura-tantra. 

(iii) Prabodhaka-tantra. 

(iv) Bodhaka tantra. 

(v) Bod'na-tantra. 

(vi) Amoha-tantra. 

(vii) Moha-samaya taulia. 

(viii) Sakaja tantia. 


liv 


NOTE ON THE AUTHOR 


(ix) S.ikafa-tantra. 

(x) Hala-tantra. 

(xi) Vilekhana-tantra. 

(xii) Bhadra-tantra. 

(xiii) Vira-tantra. 

XVI. Rauravagair.a (100,000,000 

verses). 

(i) Kaladahana. 

(ii) Rauravottara. 

(iii) Kautnara. 

(iv) Kaja. „ 

(v) Mahakala. 

(vi) Indragatva. 

XVII. Makutagama( = Muku$a- 

gama) (100,000 verses). 

(i) Makuta- 

(ii) Makutottara. 

XVIII. Vimalagama (300,000 

verses). 

(i) Anantabhogagama. 

(ii) Akrantagama. 

(iii) Hriddagama. 

(iv) Avikritagama. 

(v) Udbhutagama. 

(vi) Marapa-tantra. 

XIX. Chandrajiianagama 

(30,000,000 verses). 

(i) Sthira-samhita 

(ii) Sthapu-samhita. 

(iii) Mahat-samhita. 

(iv) Nandi-samhita. 

(v) Nandikesvara-samhita 

(vi) Ekapada-purana. 

(vii) bapkaragama. 

(viii) Nilabhadratantra. 

(ix) Sivabhadragama. 

(x) Kalabhedagama. 

(xi) brimukhagama. 

(xli) Sivasasanagama. 

(xiii) bivasekharagama. 

(xiv) Devlmatagatna. 


XX. Bimbagama (100,000 verses). 

(i) Chaturmukhatantra. 

(ii) Malayatantra. 

(iii) Mahayoga. 

(iv) Samstobhagama. 

(v) Pratibimbagama. 

(vi) Arthalankara. 

(vii) Vayavyatantra. 

(viii) Kautatantra. 

(ix) Tixti-nila-kara... 

(x) Tulavrita. 

(xi) Tulayoga. 

(xii) Kuttimatantra. 

(xiii) Sarva-sekbara 

(xiv) Maha-vidya. 

(xv) Maha-sara. 

XXI. Prodgitagama (300,000 

verses.) 

(i) Kavachagama 

(ii) Varaha-tantra. 

(iii) Pinga)a-mata. 

(iv) Pasubandha-samhita. 

(v) Dapdadhara-tantra. 

(vi) Kusa*tantra. 

(vii) Dhanurdhiirana. 

(viii) bivajnana. 

(ix) Vijnana. 

(x) Trikalajfiana. 

(x'i) Ayurveda 

(xii) Dhanurveda. 

(xiii) Sarpadamsh(ravibheda, 

(xiv) Sanglta. 

(xv) Bharata. 

(xvi) Atodya. 

XXII. Lalitagama (800,000 verses). 

(i) Lalita. 

(ii) Lalitottara. 

(iii) Kauniara tantra. 

(iv) Vighnesvaragama. 

XXIII. Siddhagama (5,000,000 

verses). 



1 


SIVAjXAXA 5IDDHIVAR 


lv 


(i) Sarottara. 

(ii) Devesottara. 

» v 

(iii) Salabheda. 

(iv) Sasimandala. 

XXIV 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 '. Santagama ( = Santan- 

agama 600,000 verses). 

(i) Lingadhyaksha. 

(ii) Suradhyaksha. 

(iii) Sankaratantra. ’ , 

(iv) Mahesvaragama. 

(v) Asankhya-tantra. 

(vi) Anilagama. 

(vii) Dvandvagama. 

XXV. Sarvottaragama ( — Sarvokt- 

agama 200,000 verses.) 

(i) Uttaragama. 

(ii) Tattvottaragama. 

(iii) Vishyottaragama. 

XXVI. Paramesvaragaina 

(1,200,000 verses). 

(i) Matanga-tantra. 

(ii) Yakshini-tantra. 

(iii) Padmugama. 

(iv) Paushkara. 

(v) Suprayoga. 


(vi) Hamsagama. 

(vii) Samunyagama. 

XXVII. Kiranagama (50,000,000 

verses). 

(i) Garudagama. 

(ii) Nairitagama. 

(iii) Nilatantra. 

(iv) Rukshagama. 

(v) Bhanagama. 

(vi) Vaikramagama. 

(vii) Buddhagama. 

(viii) Prabuddhagama. 

(ix) Kalatantra. 

XXVIII. Vatulagama (100,000 

• • verses). 

(i) Vatula. 

(ii) Uttara*vatula. 

<iii) Kala jnana. 

(iv) Parajita. 

(v) Sarvagama. 

(vi) Sarvesh(agama. 

(vii) Sreshthagama. 

(viii) Nityagama. 

(ix) Suddhagama. 

(x) Maliadagama. 

(xi) Visviisagama. 

(xii) \ isvatmakagama. 


LIST OF SIDDHANTA WORKS IN TAMIL. 


1. Sivajfianabodham. 

2. Sivajfianasiddhi. 

3. Irupa-Irupahtu. 

4. Tiruvuntiyar 

5. Tirukkalinrupadiyar. 

6. ljnmaincrivi|akkam. 

7. Ui^niaivi’akkam. 


8. Sivaprakasam. 

9. Kodikkavi. 

10. Vitiavcnba. 

11. Ncnjuvidututu. 

12. Sankaj:panirakarnani. 

13. Poj;j;ipahj:odai. 

14. Tiruxarutpayan. 




SiVAJNANA SIDDHIYAR 


II & II 

3 ?T TORIW 


ii ii 

^PT^'TTf^I 3 UicT: ^TT^^IcT I 

3 TKcT B S 3 PJTO 5 Rj|?: II 1 II 

< 

aT^WF^lfocTFTO: 5 Pcfr SCTTSSRcT. I , 

#TfcT qqTRT sTRT qqqcRTT 11% II 

C 

qfrrdl qqqfs^R- ^Tqtf?TCTVRT: I 

vRF 7 ftqFTRT qfq II X <1 

^qqPcT:'TronT; 4 TS QJRq<il | 

jqrqr R Tiq flTSiq I 

cTf^'TiR RTW -TRRrSqrq <7 R qqq; l| ^ || 


3 Tf Xq %X 7 ^rqr TRT RSffeqf q%q \ 

m ¥* II X II 

T%T q farlRT ?H fa>j: I 
1RRRT cTqr.^J^ II v» II 


R'Rqr qgR^.qfq: ft\ B Wfcf qTNcT: I 


^-.qimfcT cRq?q ii * n 


fa^iwfa TJ^qT ffriqfirwq; I 

/*_ 

7 %qT faqq^Tqr v 7 jT%'q^l^fl g>qi: II « II 


fqqqqq ^cTT'TH^ffR^: I 

qRWgRRJSt ^JcT ?*T 3 *ncWRl IM ° II 

'TqTfqfqcTi3Rq[ R*q TqfqcTF faq: l 

cRqirtRqjqJT qifFi $qRRqTqq;R% II.'H II 

^ giPj 77RTqt q^|q faqTRqq i 
Rq fq^iR^qiiH qn? jiqiqfn^;q n n 






siva jnAna siddhiyAr 

• OK 

aruln^ndi sivachariyar. 

% v • • ♦ I 


INVOCATION. 


O God Ganesa,* with the elephant head, single-tusked, 
double-eared, triple-juiced, with the hanging lip, and five hands, 
begotten by the Lord with the braidedhair, adorned with the 
Ganges, the crescent moon and the cassia flowers, Thy feet 
will remove without fail the evil in the hearts overflowing with 
love, humility, and knowledge, night and day. Thy feet will lift 
such far above the delights of Brahma and Vishnu. 

2.| Let my love to .Him increase Who has neither beginning 
nor middle nor end, Who is Infinite Li b ht, Grace and Wisdom, 

* Gane^a is called ViKoya^a “He Who has no Lord above 
Him.” The elephant head, with the single tusk and trunk, denotes his 
Pranava form ; the triple juice or secretions denote His powers, will, 
intelligence and action (Ichcha,* Jiiiina, Kriya;. IIis five hands denote 
His Panchakrtya (s'shti, slit hi, zci'r.hara, tirobhava and anugrttha). The 
wearing of the Ganges signifies 1 1 is conquest of Ahankfir; and the wearing 
of the Soma, the uplifting of the truly humble; and the cassia (QxmZranjr ) 
flower is the crow ning Indian Laurel, signifying His Lordship, and is symbol 
of Praijava (the Mantra Rajam). These symbols have other meanings 
to the Yogi. The double effect of I lis Grace in effecting Pusatchaya and * 
inducing Patijuana is alfco well set forth in this stanza. 

t 'I his describes the Supreme Who is neither Riipi nor Anlpi 
nor Ruparupi, W'ho is neither Snguva nor Nirguna, Who transcends all 
these, and the next verse describes, how He manifests Himself to man¬ 
kind. ’I hi j gives His condition as Pure Sat, and which could not he 
anything, unless it is ('hit and Ananda at the same time. 







6 


si vajnAna siddhiyar 


Who unites Himself on the left side to Her Who begot the 
world, Who is praised by the world as the crown-jewel of the 
celestials, Who dances in that Spreading 1 ight of Chitakas, 
with His coral braids adorned with the crescent moon, falling 
behind Him, and let me lift such lotus feet full with fragrant 
pollen on the crown of my head. 

3. * She, Who is Lord’s (Isa) ParijSakti, Ichchasakti, Kriya- 
sakti, Jnanasakti and Tirobhavasakti, Who .actuates aU creation, 
sustentation and resolution, Who is form, &nd formless and neither, 
Who is the wife of the 'Lord in these Forms, Who is all this 
world and all this wealth, Who begets the whole world and 
sustains them, the gracious lotus Feet of Her, our Mother, 
Who imparts bliss immortal to souls, and removes their bonds 
of birth, and Who remains seated with our Father in the hearts 
of the freed, let me lift upon my head. 

In Praise of His Teacher. 

4. The Gracious Sun which shining on this universe opened 
the Lotus bud of the human hearts, on the opening of which, 
the bees of the ancient Vedic Hymns hummed about, the fresh 
honey gushed forth, and the Fragrance, of Sivam blowed forth; 
He, Meykanda Deva, Who was living in Tiruveniieynallur, sur¬ 
rounded by groves, in full blossom, The Great Saivile Teacher, 
His golden feet which outrivals the lotus, resting on my head, 
I shall ever worship. 

[* This shows how God as Light and Love diffuses in all and 
1. •„ ery thing and manifests Himself. ] 



i 


BOOK THE FIRST. 


ALAYA! OR LOGIC. 


Some classify Logical methods into Six (i) Pratyaksha 
(observation and experiment), (2) Anumana (Inference), (3) Agama 
(Testimony or Authority)/ (4) Abhava (Non-existence), (5) Arthfi- 
patti (Deduction), (6) Upamana (Analog}'). Some add the follow- 

1 ■ 

ing four to the foregoing, namely (7) Parisesha (Inference by 
exception', (S) Sambhava (Co-existence), (9) Aytigam (Tradition), 
(10) Svabha-Lihga Natural Inference). All these* are included 
in the three first, Pratyaksha, Anumana and Agama., . 

* The Tamil equivalents of these ten Pramanas are:— 

(t)*/ni£, (2)i(5^S (S)***?, (4) (5) GuiTQStr, ( 6 ) puq, 

(/) (S) P-ezbrsoir, (o) (io) Abhava is the mere 

negation of a fact, anil Svabha-Lmga is merely the gathering the meaning 
of an ambiguous word from the context, and there is no inference in either 
case, and they rest therefore and are included under Pratyaksha. Artha- 
patti (e.g. He does not eat during the day. He is fat. hence he must eat 
during the night), Pariiesha (eg. Rama fought Ravana, Rama won, hence 
Ruvana failed), Sambhavd (e.g. fifty is included in hundred, part in a 
whole), are all included under Inference; but in many of these there is 

m — 

litt'e or no inference. Aytigam is included under Agama. Upamana 
o cnpies a jicruliar place and is included in inference but is sometimes 
(uhi h 1 think is more correct; classed as a separate method. The 
es ential cistin tion between Western and Pastern Logic has to be borne 
in mind, namely, that the former deals with names and propositions and 
syllogisms tall forms; whereas the latter deals with, concepts and real 
argumentation. Western Logic was, till Mill’s time, all deduction, and 
induction was barely enough noticed. But the Eastern Logic was more 
indu.tive than dedu live, and was concerned more with the proof of 
tilings, and the methods of discovering truth by the application of human . 
rea* on and by 1 he aid of the Highest Testimony. And in this last respect 
of including'1 estiinony, of course, it is broader than Western Logic. 
Of the ten divisions of proof, herein set forth, the various Indian Schools, 
adopt only some or all. I r or instance, the Indian Materialist (Lokayita) 
accepts only Pratyaksha. The Buddha and Vai-eohika accept this and 
infcrcn.e; the Safikbya accepts also Agama Pramana; The Nyayika 







4 


blVAjXAN'A blDLtliiVAR 


2. Pratyaksha is the direct and correct perception of things 
without doubt and mistake, and without the sense of differ¬ 
entiation. By Anumana, we infer things hidden from certain data 
by knowledge of their inseparable connexion (by succession or 
co-existence or equality). Agama Prm.Ina will guide us to the 
knowledge of things unattainable by the foregoing two methods. 

3. Doubtful perception is doubting a thing seen to be this 
or that; the mistaken know’edge is knowing one thing to be 
another; Savikarfw knowledge comprises the knowledge of 

accepts also analogy ; The Jtiin and Prabhakara add to these four 'Artha- 
patti The Vedanti accepts also ‘Abhava’; The Paur.V.ic adds to these 
‘ Sambhava* and ‘Tradition’. Each one of these Schools take up Logic as 
only an instrument for ascertaining the Highest truth ; and the subject is 
merely appended ar. in Sivajdanasiddhi, as serving to help them in the elu¬ 
cidation of the postulates and proofs they set forth in their discussion as 
to the nature of God, Soul and Matter: and each of the two distinctively so- 
calied Logical Schools—Vaiseshika and Isyayika—treat of Logic as such 
and proceed to discover the Highest Tiuth, whereby and whereby alone, 
can any real escape from human pain and suffering be effected. 

“ When man shall roll up the sky as a piece of leather, 

Then shall there be an end of pain without the knowledge of foiva.” 

t — Svet. v. 20 . 

As such, we shall explain certain terms which are used frequently in 
these discussions. Pramana (Alavai is Proof; Prameya (Quitq&t) 

is the thing proved; Pramatha (- 9 / /nsuGit) is the person who investi¬ 
gates; Pramithi is the Intelligence cognizing the proof. The 

term ‘Abhava’ (non-cxistenre) is frequently used in Vedantic discussions. 
It is divided into Samsargabhava (Relative non-existence) and Anyonya- 
bhava (psor pt-tauc —natural or Reciprocal non-existence) and 
the former is divided into Adyantabhava gmAmm-j —absolute non- 

existence); Prabhava (ctpasiGsfl .d —antecedentn on-existence); Prati- 
dvamsabhava ^.eirsirpssrunsuu —emergent non-existence.) The terms Vya- 
paka, Vyapti and Vyapya are of very- great importance in Logic and in 
Siddhanta literature. Vyapaka is that which pervades over everything else, 
the universal, ((?<c6v^an/pay) and corresponds to the major term in a 
syllogism. Vyapti is what is comprised in the universal, the particular 
(and corresponds to the middle term and Vyapya what is 
co-inheres to the Vyapti (spd>r.in uSsnc-ip tBempsn) and corresponds 
to the ‘minor term. 





AI.AVAI OR LOGIC 


name, class, attribute, action and thing. Nirvikarpa knowledge 
is the knowledge of the thing itself without knowledge of its 
name, class, attribute and action. 

4. * Direct Perception or Pratyaksha is classified into four 
kinds, (1) Perception by means of external senses, (2) by me^ns 
of internal senses, (3) by the feeling of pleasure and pain, and 
(4) by Yoga or seership.. Anumana or Inference is divided into 
two namely (1) Svart-anumana, (2) Parart-anum.lna. Agama is 
divided into. (1) Mantra, (2) Tantra and (3) Upade^a, the words 
of the wise teacher (JiUni). The things proved by means of 
these logical methods are classed as Visesha (particular) and 
Samanya (General). 

5. Visesha applies to things which exclude from'its deno¬ 
tation, species of its own class, as well as other classes. Samanya 
applies to class to which the thing belongs, excluding other classes. 
1 hese two classes described above will comprise all things. 

6. f Perception by external senses arises when with the Soul’s 
intelligence, the external senses coming in contact with light, 
air, etc., perceives correctly form, sound etc., without being 
misled by difference or similarity. 

Perception by internal senses arises when after such external 
perception, a mental impression is produced freed from doubt 
and mistake, involving the operations of retention and reflection 
and the sense of difference and similarity. 

* The different kinds of Perception are called or snjSjb 

aeiL£, or eae ^ d s n , Qsup'tewsstuL'cr (DunsiarrLLf> t 

The different kinds of Anumana are called dfirw 

Visesha ate called /ssrxPxievu, and Samanya Q_-/»^JV'cvc/. The 
Visesha mean the Ir.fme species or the lowest sperics of obje ts and even 
among them, it seems to mean the class of Differd.t-.a more particularly. 

j The first kind of perception is bare external perception without 
any shade of thought or operation of the internal senses. The mental 
perception is in fa t the more direct perception so far as the soul is con¬ 
cerned and the external per eplion is accordingly remote and indiiect. 
This classification of per.eption is vety exu t and stiritly scientific. 
Feelings arc al^o clawed properly as a source of perception. As tegards 






6 


S1V JN’AN'A SlDDIlIYAR 


7. Perception by feeling arises when the feelings of pleasure 
and pain arc produced in accordance with the instinct of desire 
and hate, guided by the law of kala .* 

Perception by Yoga is the perception by the Yogi, seated 
in one place, of all things, remote in place and time, possible to 
him by his having destroyed all mala by remaining in Samfuihi. 

8. Paksham (Propositions) arfe of three kinds, Paksham (con¬ 
clusion), Sapakshani (analogy), Pipaksham (negative proposition). 

'There are three kinds of llctu (<§>uJiv l;, snifhuu>,- 
Inference is drawn out of the invariable concomitants flowing 
from these Paksham and llctu. And the inference is of two 
kinds, inference for one-self and inference for others. Inference 
for others fs for explaining the proof to others. And this latter 
is divided into A nv ay a-Ann man a and Vyatircka-Amtmana. 

9«t The three Pakshams are—Paksham, Sapaksham and 
Vipaksham. Paksham is the statement comprising the conclusion 

perception by Yoga, the Western scientist may not admit, but proofs are 
accumulating which make such knowledge possible. If by the inter¬ 
position of a few slides and by the arrangement of a few wires, things 
invisible by distance by the intervening matter, etc., can be made visible, 
why should not the human intellect be so sharpened by practice as to 
make such knowledge possible ? The difference between the Eastern and 
Western method is in this. The European tries to subjugate external 
nature to serve his material ends etc., but the Oriental aims at the highest 
and his mind is always turned on himself. In regard to Yoga, the really 
gifted are so few and the charlatans and deceivers ate so numerous, 
whiJi latter class are only too much encouraged by the utter stupidity 
and credulity of the many (we are afraid that we have to in lude among 
them, a large section of even the so-called educated), that it is a pity that 
the practice should be gradually falling into contempt. 

* Kala (sovit) is one of the higher Tattvas which enables man to 
* experience perceptions, without at the same time reaching Jfianam, by 
the temporary drawing of the Veil of A.ava. 

t These have reference to purely Logical Methods of Inductive 
proof. The Text gives here the grounds of all Induction, as based on 
uniformities in Nature («gy >vg3)-_ffiw) as Equality or Inequality, co-exist¬ 
ence and causation. And on these depends all Inductive reasoning; and 
Inference (Paksham) is got at by the methods of Agreement (Sapaksham) 


4 




ALAVAI OR LOGIC 


7 


or Inference. Sapaksham is statement of similar instances. Vipak- 
sham is the negative statement where the thing proved and the 
antecedent are absent. The first two give the proof by the 
method of agreement and the last by the method of difference. 

io.* Hetu or Reason is of three kinds. Reason from natyral 
relation (co-existence and equality), Reasoning from causal relation 
(succession) and Reasoning by means of contraries (Inequality). 
As for instance, we qxhibit the first kind of reasoning when we infer 
the meaning* of “u/r” in 4 the sentences “air ” “u,a 

The second, when we infer fire from the presence of smoke ; the 
third, when we infer the absence of dew from the absence of cold. 

and by the methods of Difference (Vipaksham). This .is exactly 
the foundations of Mill’s Inductive Logic, and Dr. Bain condenses Mill’s 
six kinds of predicates into three as here stated and Dr. Bain gives five 
methods, Method of Agreement, Method of Difference, the Joint Method, 
the Method of Concomitant Variations, and the Method of Residue, of 
which the first two are no doubt the Primary Methods. 

We will state the five laws as given by Dr. Bain. 

(ij The Method of Agreement. — If two or more instances of a phe¬ 
nomenon under investigation have only one circumstance in common that 
instance is the cause or effect of the phenomenon, (ii) The Method of 
Difference. —If an instance when a phenomenon occurs and an instance 
when it does not occur, have every circumstance in common except one, 
that one occuring only in the first ; the circumstance present in the first 
and absent in the second is the cause or a part of the cause of the given 
phenomenon, (iii) The Joint Method.— If two or more instances when 
the phenomenon occurs have only one cio umstan e in common, while 
two or more instances when it does not occur have nothing in common 
save the absence of that one circumstance; the ciicumstance wherein 
alone the two set of instances differ, is the efl'e« t or the cause or a neces¬ 
sary part of the cause of the phenomenon, (iv) The Method of Con¬ 
comitant Variations.—Whatever phenomenon varies in any manner 
whenever another phenomenon vaiies in some other particular manner, is* 
either a cause or an effect of the phenomenon and is Conner ted with it 
through some bond of concomitance, iv) 1 he Method of Residue. — 
Subduct from any phenomenon such pail as previous induction has shown 
to be tr.c effect ot certain antecedents, and the residue of the phenomenon 
is the eftc l of the remaining anP-cedenl. 

• bcc note (\) on page 6. 




8 


SlVAJNANA SIDDH1YAR 


i t. Anvayi-Anumana comprises the argument with Pratijna , 
Hctu and Instance as in the form : Fire is in the mountain 
{Pratijha). Because smoke is rising from the mountain ( lletu). 
Because fire and smoke is both present in oven {Instance). 

c Vyatireki argument is of this form: Ihere is no fire in the 
mountain, because there is no smoke arising from the mountain. 
For instance, there is neither smoke nor fire in the deep tank 
filled with lotus flowers. Nyayikas and Saivas clearly state the 
argument with five propositions including' Nigama and Apanaya. 

12* Purvadarsaiia Anumana is where we infer a particular 

flower from a particular smell, from our past knowledge of its 

connexion. Vasanalihga Anumana is where we infer the amount 

* < _ 

of a man’s learning by the words he utters; Agama Anumana 

is when we infer a man’s past Karma from his present experience 

of pleasure and pain. 

1 3*t Agama is the word of the Perfect Eternal Being. Of 
this Agama, the Tantra portion treats of the rituals ascertained 
without defects and inconsistency and required for salvation. 
The Mantra portion treats of Upasana required for controlling 
the senses and contemplation of God; the Jnana kanda treats 
of the nature of the Supreme, Beginningless and Endless. 

14. Inferential Fallacies are four in number. Fallacies in 
reasoning (Hetu) are three. These divide again into twenty-one. 
Fallacies in agreement or analogy are eighteen. Fallacies of 
Nigrahasthan are divided into two and sub-divided into twenty- 
two. There are six other sub-divisions again. O11 the wholc- 
the Fallacies are sixty-five in number. 

* These kinds of inference are to be distinguished from the logical 
divisions of Pratyaksha, etc. 

f Agama is Revelation and means both Veda and Saivagamas. 
It must be the word of the Perfect Eternal Being. The words of any 
Being who does not answer to this description are of no authority. The 
Tantra and Mantra portions, The Mantra Kanda and Jnana kapda 
portions find place both in the Vedas and Divyagamas. The mantra 
portion answers more to the Upanishads, the Yogapada; and Jnana 
kaijda to the Jnana kar^a of the Divyagamas. L . 




BOOK THE SECOND. 


PARAPAKSHA. 

CHAPTER I. 

» * 

The Charvaka’s Statement. 

■> 

•Not having the intelligence nor the grace to understand 
the trick (real purpose) of the theory promulgated by Ipdra’s 
Purohit, Brhaspati, the Charvaka who is tied down to the plea¬ 
sures of this sea-girt world, and whose person is rubbed with 
sandal and adorned with festive wreaths, (bases his own case 
on Brhaspati’s authority), and states as follows. 

* Indra was disgusted with the pleasures of his state, and aspired to 
something holier and purer before his time and wished to do tapas. His 
icharya Brhaspati wishing to turn him from his object, and to lead him 
into his former life, preaches to him the reality of the world’s joys and the 
falsity of all other hopes. ’This is compared to the object with which 
Srt Krshpa tried to dissuade apparently Arjuna from his resolution not to 
fight and kill this near kith and kin. The arguments are plausible enough, 
and Arjuna is led on to commit what would be regarded by the world as 
a sin. But neither Brhaspati nor Krshna wished to mislead really their 
pupils. They simply wanted them by means of sophistry, if necessary, 
to confine each to his station and thereby do his duty ; which if faithfully 
and umtlf.ihly done as duty would be sufficient for attaining all the Highest 
ends in due course. Jt was in the nature of the highest crime which nothing 
could excuse that the man should forget the duties of his station. Their 
highest ideal was Duty. It is with this High Ideal, man is permitted to live 
his life in different airams, and to work for virtue or wealth or pleasure. 
But if this ideal is not kept in view, these aspirations will surely degene¬ 
rate into mere hypocrisy, earth-hunger and grossest licentiousness, and 
the v/holc society unhinged. These masters were the builders of society. 
Not understanding Brhaspati, the Lokayita, despised everything else, 
and took to indulging 'in grossest forms of pleasure, in the same way as 


2 





IO 


SsIVAJNANA S1DDHIYAR 


[Book II. 


2* *. The only measure of all things is by perception alone. 
This perception when united to mind etc., divides itself into 
six kinds. Inference and Agama are not correct methods of 
proof. The things proved by perception are the (four) elements 
and their inherent natures such as hardness, coldness, heat, 
and diffusiveness. 

3. The names of the (four) elements are earth, water, fire 
and air; and the quality of the products of each of these 
respectively, are smell, taste, form and touch. These are the 
great eternal entities; and these unite one with the other in 
regular order. 

4. Just as you get various shaped utensils from clods of 
clay, so*by the union of these elements, all forms are produced. 
Like the bubbles formed in water, Buddhi and other antahkarana, 
and senses and sensation arise also from the union of these 
elements. 

5f. If one of the elements is separated from the rest, the 
senses and sensations and intellect, etc., all die. So do all moveable 
and immoveable objects die. When the effects, as form, quality 

false prophets who seek to justify their drinking and gluttonous 
and riotous acts from the maxims of Sri Krshna, saying that when they 
drink, they drink without any attachment, and as such no sin will attach 
to them. Such is the way the noble teachings of noble masters are 
dragged to the dust. Alas ! a'as! 

* The six kinds of Katchi, are called ^tuasml. 9 —doubtful perception, 
einuSliris-rTLL '?—perception by other senses than the eye, eSs/huasmLG >— 
perception of a thing in its relation to class, spe ies and attributes and 
action, ^i/bemuianCS —perception of fire by the presence of smoke, 
e 8 uj£l( 2 n&&&rul .&—perception of a flower from its smell, £hftL\£*'rL - < ?— 
wrong perception. Anvaya and Vyatireka are classed here as direct 
perception, as involving very little of real inference. The names of the 
elements believed in by the materialist are given in the next stanza. 

f In stanzas 2 to 5 the Charvaka states his own theory, and he now 
proceeds to state the other’s case, and criticise it, and the peculiar note in 
his manner may better be observed, namely his heart overflowing with 
pity and kindness for those deluded fools who would not readily appreci¬ 
ate the goods we have, but go on hankering after unattainable fancies. 



Chap. I.] 


P^RAPAKSHA—CilARVAKA 


I I 

etc., vanish, thev are resolved into their cause, the four elements. 
And such knowledge constitutes the highest Wisdom. 

6. Against this, there are those who postulate the separate 
existence of Karma and Soul and God. How did the people 
of this earth offend them ? They assert that that the incom¬ 
parable sterile woman begot a son, and the latter got up on 

the horns of the hare and plucked, without fail, the flower of 

» 

the sky ! 

7. If y,ou assert that the Karma effected in a former birth 
attaches to one in his present life, how is this possible, when we 
see all the Karma die with the death of the body. Oh, my 
good sir, if you say that this Karma lives in sTtkshma (subtle) 
form, then it is like saying that flame can bum apart from 
the wick of the lamp. 

S. If you compare the action of Karma to the dead straw 
which rotting in the field comes forth again as fresh grass, 
this is possible wherever you manure the field with the straw. 
This will illustrate the case of those who wish to derive as 
profit the excreta of a man who coming tired and hungry was 
fed with food. 

9. O fool, if you say that it is by this Karma, men’s bodies 
and qualities and intelligence do not fit with each other, then, 
by what sort of Karma, do not all the fingers on one’s palm 
resemble each other. All these differences are due to the propor¬ 
tionate increase or decrease in the constituent elements. 

1 o.* I) you say that it is by the effect of Karma men 
endure pleasure and pain, then, tell me, by what sort of Karma 
does the body feel pleasure when I am smeared w'ith fragrant 

and he fails not to flir.g irony and r.dicule , against his antagonists, as all 
fa se reformers do, but irony and ridicule have never been known to secure 
one single convert. 

*'lhc last three stanzas deny the existence of Karma. The Bud- 
dhi>t tnot Ksoteric if you will have it) goes a step higher than the 
Chun if a and to the four elements and their products, he adds Kama. 
Karma in big capitals is his God virtually, the cause of all existence, and 
wnen you kill this cause, you cease to exist. 


12 


SlVAjNANA SIDDHIVAU 


[Book II. 


sandal-water, and feel extreme discomfort when brought in contact 
with fire. All these are due to the nature of these things. 

11. If you assert there is a soul independent of the body, 
do not make a false assertion. Such a soul must be perceived 
by one of the six modes of perception. The assertion against 
the proof furnished by perception is like statements about the 
length of the hare's horn in the world ! 

12. If you say that God is Arupi, then He is non-intelligent 
like the sky. If He is a Rupi, then he is one witft the objects 
of this world. If you spy He is Rupa-rupi, then tell me, can 
you suspend a stone in the sky. 

13. Oh! Why should these people follow these various 
delusive paths, and fall into error and sorrow, when their own 
Veda asserts that the elements evolve into food, and from food 
arises body, and from the latter mind and the rest, and resolve 
into each other in the same order ? 

14. * O! These fools give up the pleasures on hand in this 
woild, hanker after heavenly pleasures, and drown themselves in 
sorrow. They are like those, who feeling thirsty, leave the water 
in their presence, and fly after a beautiful mirage, only to die of 
greater thirst. 

15. O hail to you, O Vami, give me your hand. You 
are my real incomparable friend, since you pursue like myself 

* Herein is indicated the abhorrence of all good men and true in 
regard to the arts and practices of the Vamachari, and it will be an 
absurd caricature and blaspheming of real Hinduism to seek to identify 
this Vamachar with Hinduism. You may as well call this Lokayita 
wallowing in the lowest depths of passion and vice, a follower of Hindu¬ 
ism ! The bane and curse of Hinduism has been its so-called tolerant 
spirit and spirit of compromise, to seek to sanction and clothe with its 
approval, all sorts of opinions, low and false, and partly false. Could we 
conceive of any couutry where so many myriads of divergent faiths 
and inconsistent practices seek to live and propagate themselves under 
a spirit of miscalled universal religion and universal truth. Truth 
cannot be so hideous and repellent as in some of these forms. O, for a 
day when truth will be uncovered in all its Glory and in all its Beauty! 



PARAPAKSHA—CHARVAKA 


Chap. I.] 


13 


the paths of murder and robbery and vice which the cowards 
call evil, and are the light of an admiring group of girls with 
lovely braids of hair. 

16. ISa and Brahma, Vishnu and Indra, attained their great¬ 
ness by having associated themselves with their goddesses. If 
you also wish to attain to such greatness, you will do well 
also to enjoy life with beautiful women with fragrant locks. 

17—20. Instead of deriving pleasure from the society of 
women, people die by believing in the shams set up by false 
systems of philosophy, and by believing in a future existence. 

21. Why do you get weary in pursuit of Moksha? Show 
me one, who had pointed out this way, or had seen it, or had 
heard of it ? Without transgressing the laws of the ’king, cam 
money, and seek pleasure as well as you can. 


Refutation of Charvaka.* 

1. f O Lokayita! Why do you hold that whatever is seen 
by direct perception is true, and whatever is inferred is false? 
Tell me, how you know that you had a father and mother, 
when your father had died before your birth, and your mother 
after giving birth to you ? It could only be by inference and not 
by direct perception. 

2. f When you assert that, when it begins to lighten and 
thunder and the heavens darken with clouds, it will surely rain, 
and when you assert that, when the river-flood dashes down 
Sandal and Agil trees, it had surely rained on the mountain 
ghats, your knowledge is derived from inference, and not by 
direct perception. 

3. t If you assert that even such inference is only perception 
as it is derived from our knowledge of previous direct perception 
(of observed instances), then, how do you know that intelligence 

* The words CharvJka and Lokayita are synonymous. 

f These stanzas show how the world’s knowledge is built on 
testimony and inference and that without these two instruments of know¬ 
ledge, it v,ill be impossible to know anything. 'I he Lok-iyita’s sphere of 



M 


SIVAJXANA SIDDHIYAR 


Book II. 


arises from the body composed of the four elements ? And if 
not by inference, how do you know that your intelligence per¬ 
ceives sensations by means of the senses ? How do you derive 
this visible body by the union of invisible elements? 

logic is indeed too narrow, and his modern representative has certainly 
advanced beyond him, in this, as in not stopping short of only four ele¬ 
ments. And he accepts now a fifth element an ether, and electricity etc. 
And the modern materialist has discovered several scores of elements and 
has reduced the four or five so-called elements into much simpler ele¬ 
ments called gases, such * as nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen etc., 
and as such the old Indian classification of elements into four or five 
will therefore seem incorrect. But not so necessarily. The Indians 
recognize'" finer conditions of matter; and if we translate the term 
y^'i> (which does not necessarily convey an idea of a simple substance) 
into merely a condition or state of matter, then the division of substances 
into five (Bhuta), states of matter, will stand good, and they will 

be, the solids, the liquids, the gases, heat and electricity. The Loka- 
yitas are, however, very few who follow this scientific investigation, 
so far, though the Germ-plasm theory holds sway still among a small 
section of European Materialists and so called Idealists. The more res¬ 
pectable of the modern day materialists go by the name of agnostics and 
positivists and humanitarians. They postulate a mind and matter so far 
as they are within our cognition and no further; and they are not able to 
assert positively whether mind is derived from matter or matter is a product 
of mind. And as regards a future or a past and anything higher than your 
own mind (phenomenal), they plead complete ignorance; and they are elo¬ 
quent, however, on our duties to each other and to the whole race and 
about the miseries of mankind and the means of relieving them; and they 
cry down all religions and institutions as superstitions and conventionali¬ 
ties and lies as intended to cheat and deceive credulous mankind. And it 
is no wonder that among some at least of these modern day agnostics 
1 Buddhism is becoming fashionable. But there is a difference between 
these and Buddha. Buddha was a strict moralist, and his high ideal 
was Duty, and he believed in the darkest pessimism. But the modern 
day humanitarian believes that the world, as it is, can be bettered, 
and more pleasure, and in course of time, the highest pleasure can 
be introduced into society, if only people will.be induced “to see”. 





Chap. I.] PARAPAK5I3A—REFUTATION OF CHARVAKA 


T 5 


uith Max Nardau “ the civilization of to day, whose characteristics 
are pessimisms lying and selfish egotism, followed by a civilization 
of truth, love of one’s neighbour and cheerfulness.” See how vivid is his 
hope! “ Humanity which is to-day an abstract idea, will then be a fact. 
Happy the later born generations, whose lot it will be to live in the pure 
atmosphere of the future, flooded with its brighter sun-shine, in this per¬ 
petual fellowship; true, enlightened, good and free!" A noble ideal and 
noble future indeed, if it could be realised, by the methods proposed! 
How vain are these hopes with the history of Buddhism before us! 
The Singalese disciples of the Renowned Buddha are the grossest beef¬ 
eaters in Ceylon, and it is a horrible sight which meets one at every turn, 
these beef-stalls. The Singalese would argue, O the Renowned Buddha 
only enjoined us not to kill but not to eat dead meat of any kind. And so 
will everything, the most glorious looking maxim and precept be reduced 
to a mere letter and a sham, when you deprive one of any higher aspira¬ 
tions than your present phase of existence ! Why should I care for my 
neighbour or for the perpetuation of the race, if 1 am to be no more 
to-morrow and why should I not take my utmost share of this world’s 
pleasures, as our ancient Lokayita asks ? If there is misery, the best 
remedy would be not to undergo all this trouble and vexation, but to 
annihilate the whole world by the most deadly of human means, maxim 
guns and torpedoes. “The weak should go to the wall” and “the 
survival of the fittest” are their catch words. “ Why should we allow 
the ignorant and weak nations and principalities of this earth any longer 
any existence?” Nihilism and the so-called Idealism and Positivism and 
humanitarianism all tend gradually to lower itself down to anarchism. 

There is however a lesson which ever}’ one ought to learn even from 
a Lokayita, and which should not easily be forgotten. And that is to 
learn to test the facts, inferences and higher testimony, properly and 
scientifically, and not to accept them blind-fold as facts and inferences, 
the moment it is presented so before us, however patent it might seem to 
be and however high the authority of the one who appeals to us. There 
can be no sin greater than credulity in scientific investigation, and 
honest doubt is essential to right understanding. There is the other ex¬ 
treme of turning deaf to everything which may not seem to suit one’s 
fan' y and sniffing at well attested facts, and ue see to-day even Truth (of 
Mr. Lkbouchcrc) aAing for a fair heating to Mr. Gatakor, ‘ the expert 
water tinder ’ in Jic..t words. “ What may be the explanation of he 




i6 


SIVAJNANA SlDDHIVAR 


[Book II. 


4. Besides, we have seen that the statements contained in 
the Vedas and other treatises prove true. For instance, we 
find the remote calculations of Astronomers and Astrologers 
verified in*due time. Besides, persons are able to discover buried 
treasure by following the directions given in certain books. 

5. Why do you say that matter is imperishable and un¬ 
changeable ? As its form changes, there must be one who causes 
these changes, in the same way as we infer a potter, when we 
see pots made out of clay. If you say,'-these need no cause as 
the bubbles formed in water, then even then, bubbles are formed 
by the agency of air and not without any cause. 

6. And then, the bubble formed of water and air is only 
of the sam'e kind as its cause ; similarly, the product of the body 
will be similar to the body itself and not like mind which is of a 
different nature. You may say that the product is dissimilar 
like the red juice produced on chewing betel and nut; but then 
the colour is inseparable from the matter itself, and on analogy, 
the mind must be inseparable and concomitant with the functions 
of the body. But we see the life departing when the body is 
left behind, and hence what you say cannot be true. 

7. When the betel and nut are chewed together, redness 
alone results. But by the union of different kinds of matter, 
senses and sensations and qualities of different grades and kinds 
result. How could this be ? And then, you will have to notice 
that an agent is required to bring together betel and nut; and 

success, and that of other men who work in the same line, I do not know ; 
but it seems to me, as I said before that when a man can show that what 
he is doing is a commercial success, there is prima facie evidence that he 
is able to find it. Scientific men ought to be able to tell us how it is 
done; and if it is all trickery and imposture, they ought to be able to show 
us how the trickery and imposture are performed.” And as there is even 
a tendency in a people to believe in the impossible and the marvellous, and 
we have reason to suspect that this tendency is giowing more upon us, 
following a blank Atheism and Nihilism, the caution conveyed above to 
test fa~ts and inferences and experiences, and not to swallow them whole¬ 
sale, may Dot be thought unwarranted. 1 



Chap. I.J PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF CI1ARVAKA 


17 


as such, you will have to admit plainly that for bringing about 
material causation, an agent is also required. 

8. If you say that the five senses, hunger, sleep, fear and 
passions are produced from the body, without any other first 
cause, like the web from the spider, then why don’t you produce 
the web from the sky ? As the elements unite only in one 
way, then differences of sex and gender and different orders of 
creation will become impossible. 

9*. If you deny K’arina, then the different orders of creation 
and their different senses, varying in* number and intelligence, 
from one to five cannot be. Then again, the mere union of 
matter, cannot produce learning and enjoyment and qualities. 
Karma alone can cause these differences. 

* Single-sensed (touch) are trees and grass and vegetable kingdom. 
Double sensed (touch and taste) are of the order of the Mollusca, 
starfish, snails, oysters &c., triple-sensed (touch, taste and smell) are 
white ants, ants, &c; four-sensed, (the last three with sight) are beetles, 
butterflies, &c.; five-sensed (with hearing) are devas, men, beast and 
birds &c. To these five senses, European scientists add the alimentary 
canal and the genital organs and the pleasures derived therefrom, but 
they may be classed prinftirily as touch. These senses from touch to 
hearing are in an ascending scale of intelligence, the least intelligent 
being touch, and the sense most intelligent, the sense of hearing; ami the 
sense of sight competing with it for the first place almost. And the 
orders of creation possessing only one or more senses arc also p'aced 
in a lower or higher order of development and intelligence. The lower 
orders simply live to propagate its species with no higher pm pose 

(in itself the highest; and as the species arc more and more developed 

they increase in usefulness. And if man in whom the sense's are 
most fully developed and highly intelligent, lives to cat and to procreate, 
we say of him, that he is vegetating and that he is leading an animal 
life. Man’s pursuits are accordingly high or low inasmuch as he 
devotes himsc.f to the purpose of one sense or other. And the man 

who can use his eyes and cars most, and then thinks out the facts 

he has ol/servcd, and pro ced to higher and higher views of lile, he 
alone can be said to have li'.cd Ins life. I he .'lit?, gastronomy, 
horticulture, paintin' and mu i follow the same law nl esthetics in 
3 



§iv\jnAna SIDDHIVAR 


[Book II. 


iS 


io. If you say that matter causes mind, then, we do 
not see any mind in earth, air or fire etc. If you say that 
intelligence can only arise, after the body is formed, then why 
is there no mind in the dead body? If you reply that it is by 
the absence of Pratia, breath, then why is there no consciousness 
in sleep ? 

the matter of their appreciation; gastronomy the lowest, as music is 
the highest. A single morsel can only appe/ize' one man, but a single 
flower, a single picture, a single note of music, what a large and spread¬ 
ing circle of human beings it can attract and influence. And one 
principle -derived from these has its bearing on Ethics. The highest 
intelligence is the highest Morality and the highest Benevolence. No 
man can claim to any intellectuality if his conduct is not consistent 
with his professions ; we rate a most learned man’s worth at zero, 
when he does not give the benefit of his learning to his fellow men 
and is not useful to them. The greater the man’s learning the greater 
in his sphere of usefulness. Great men and true are the most bene¬ 
volent ; they are the salt of the earth ; they are the world’s luminaries. 
They live not for one country nor for one age. Great musicians, and 
great sages have breathed their harmony and given their thoughts 
which live for all time to come and like pollen of flowers leave one 
brain, and fasten on to another, vivifying and fertilizing and fructifying 
this other. 

Lo! The man of learning puffed up with his own learning and 
importance, and looking down upon others as beneath him! A man 
might take the highest degrees, the University can offer him, and if 
in the duties of life, set for him, he does not show honesty or sympathy, 
remembering his sovereign and his God, of what use are his titles? 
A man might be a great lav'yer; what is the use of him, if he is 
cold and selfish and calculating, unless it be, by the lacs he amasses, 
be wishes to Jive well and to see others of his line behind him live also? 
And unfortunately, the sense of • living’ only becomes too predominant 
in his descendants, and a fortune acquired with so much skill and 
hair-splitting is easily enough dissipated. 

Man is therefore given a choice, unlike other orders of creation 
to select the lower or the higher, and in the wisdom of his choice lies his 
whole future. < 





Chap. I.] parapakfha—refutation of chArvaka 19 

11. * If you say thatintelliger.ee is a product of the body, 
then, in different orders of creation from ant to elephant, 
intelligence must differ in equal proportion to the respective 
size of the body. On the other hand, the animal with the biggest 
body (elephant for instance) is less intelligent than the animal 
(man) with a small body. Explain this difference if you can. 

12 . If you say that, when the elements unite, intelligence 
preponderates when material components are less gross, and 
intelligencejs less when the material components are more gross, 
then, the respective bodies should neither grow larger nor smaller, 
and they should be stationary as once formed. On the other 
hand, the bodies grow and decay with time. 

13. If you say all these are due to nature, Alien nature 
must be uniform, and as such you should account for differences 
of persons being bom as male and female. And why should 
procreation be possible by means of male and female ? And as 
such it will falsify your theory that the natural body is caused 
by matter. Your theory is illusory. These differences are 
really caused by one in accordance with each one's Karma. 

♦ Modern materialists locate the intelligence not in the body but 
in the brain. And the objection herein pointed out is explained 
by the fact that the brain is divided into parts which have different 
functions to perform such as motor and sensory, intellection and will &c ; 
and in large animals the portion of the brain (medulla oblongata and 
cerebellum &c ,) which has to control the large muscles are largely 
developed, and the brain prope'r (cerebrum) is least developed. In man, 
size for size, the frontal brain is laiger and more fully developed and 
convoluted. No doubt there is a considerable correlation between 
the brain and man’s intelligence, but the most mature investigation fails 
to establish any causal connection between the two, except a cone.'ation. 
And this is quite consistent with the theory of Siddhantis, who pos¬ 
tulate an eternal connection and correlation between mind and body 
and who even postulate that even in Mukti, the tnf>adu)ll,ai aie 
not annihilated j jd A is b thereby differing iTom 

the idealist and the materialist who po.tulale only mind or matter 
as a sub>ta. cs and hold the other as a uieic ptieuomeujd product 
or a shadow’ or illation. 






20 


SIV'AJN'ANA SIDDIllVAR 


[Book II. 


14. You say that forms are created in thiswise. Like pots 
made out of clay, male and female forms are produced from matter 
and these in turn create forms. I his we refute. The elements 
by their nature possess opposing qualities. You say these will 
unite, then tell me if you have seen fire kept unquenched in 
w^ter ? 

15. If you say that bodies are formed by the union of 
different kinds of matter, then why is there any necessity for 
human love? This human love simply fqllotvs the universal law 
set by the Lord and Mis Sakti. 

16. You queried what Karma it was by which sandal water 
was cool - and heated water was not. From your own example, 
understand .how one thing get possessed of two qualities. In 
like manner, it is by Karma, men derive both pleasure and pain. 
And then the sense of this pleasure or pain only appertains to 
the soul and not to the bod)'. 

17. * When enjoying pleasure, you would assert that all 
this is nature and not due to Karma, then why do you feel pain 
in the absence of pleasure. Tell me if you can, how this was 
derived. This is due to Karma already performed (Prarabdha). 
Fveu Karma cannot induce anything Jby itself. God in His 
infinite love, has to give to each according to his deserts. The 
souk and their Karma arc eternal and eternally connected. 

18. If you object that nobody need unite the two 
(Karma and Soul, See.) if they are eternal, then hear that Mala, 
Maya, Karma, Soul and Siva are eternal. When souls perform 
Karma, Karma cannot of itself consciously give them their 
forms. The eternally caused bodies, being unintelligent, cannot 
unite with the soul of itself. God therefore brings about these 
unions and enjoyment under an Internal 1 aw. 

* What the materialist fails to account for by referring all 
qualities to nature &c., is the factum of consciousness, the thing which 
becoiu.es conscious of qualities and of pleasure and pain. This has 
no sort of similarity or connection with the objects perceived and 
when you begin to analyse it, it lies at the basis of your invest!- 






21 


Chap. I.] parapaksha — refutation of charyaka 

19. * If by reason of our externa) senses not perceiving 
the soul, you deny the soul’s existence ; then, can the pot see 
the eye which saw it. It is the eye which sees it, without 
doubt. In like manner the soul which is conscious of objects 
and objective senses is similarly imperceptible to the external 
senses. The soul will perceive the senses and the senses will 
not perceive the soul; from thence, you see the truth of the 

soul’s existence. 

* 

20. Fire (oxygen)* cannot bum and become apparent unless 
connected with some substance (carbon). The soul also cannot 
be active unless attached to a body. The light bums in a 
lamp filled with oil and wick. So also, the soul eats the Karma, 
attached to a body. 

21. If it is objected that the soul dying and being born 
in bodies and different from the bodies, should possess its 
intelligence intact, then, can you be conscious in dreams, of 
dream as a dream and not a reality ? Then, is the intelligence 
of yourself the same as after you are born. As such, pure 
intelligence cannot be postulated of the soul. 

22. If you say that it is impossible that the intelligence 
which now decays should again be reproduced, then, will you 
explain how in sleep you are unconscious and in waking you 
become conscious. If you ask how one body goes and another 
body is got, then it is like the soul in sleep losing all consciousness 
of a body and regaining it in waking. 

23. If you ask how it is that the senses are lost in death, 
and are regained in rebirth, then it is like the man who, losing 
all breath and consciousness, all on a sudden, regains them after a 

H External senses, internal senses and soul and God belong 
to different planes and orders of intelligence. In the presence of the 
higher, the lower is non-intelligent and non-apparent (Achit or Asat/, 
and as su.h it cannot perceive the higher. I he eye is intelligent, we 
might say and it perceives objects, but what is its intelligence when 
compared to mind; and the eye cannot sec mind. Similarly, mind 
is nOn-inte.hgml in compari on to the soul, and cannot perceive the 

caul, and the sou cannot know God. 

) 



SlVAjNANA siddhiyar 


22 


[Book II. 


while. The world speak of the moon waning and waxing as 
its death and birth. Soul’s death and rebirth are similar. 

24. O my dear Sir, understand that there is an efficient 
cause, inasmuch as this material world undergoes creation 
and destruction. If you say that the body formed like a pot 
frofri clay can only be from matter, then even in a such case, 
we require an efficient cause like the potter. 

2K* The Lord who was difficult of knowledge by the 
Tevas and the Vedas, walked with His footsteps as a,mediator to 
the house of the beloved, of His strong Devotee 
Saint Sundara). As such, He is easy to be approached by His 
devotees. Therefore aproach His Lotus-Feet without fail. He 
will confer on you even the blessings you desire in this life. 

26.f If a rich golden ornament, becomes covered with dirt, 
we do not bear to touch it. So, in fact, we must regard the 
sexual passion of women, as a thing fit for our giving it up. 
These females’ bodies are composed of blood, and urine which are 
ugly to behold. What benefit do you hope to derive by falling 
on their bodiesj* _ 

* To look up to the Supreme and to hold that all the benefits we 
derive are from Him, even when we fully recognize that we will reap as 
we sow, has a high ethical and spiritual value, and is the important step 
in one’s sadana of liberation. And then, when we wishing to withdraw 
the man from indulging in the lowest pleasures, we teach him to believe 
that he can get better benefit by following a better path, this is only 
following a well recognized principle o'? education and must not be 
counted as a deception. The highest philosophy of duty and Nirvana 
will not have the slightest attraction for such a man, and cannot wean 
him for a moment from his practices. The next stanza contains a further 
step in his conversion. 

f You are first taught to hope for these enjoyments by referiing 
’yourself to a superior path ; and then gradually is instilled into your mind 
the uselessness of these pleasures. How many men wreck their whole 
fives by neglecting even ordinary sanitary laws and by most heedlessly 
associating with the most abominable creatures. And these in their turn 
carry their curse into other wombs and into other generations! How sin 
multiplies itself and corrupts everything it touche^ not for one age but 




*3 


Chap. I.] PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF CHARVAKA 

27. O those women, who are praised for their eyes like 
fish! What are they ? Their bodies are composed of skin, 
blood, flesh, fat, bones and secretions. They are the urine pot 
wherein, dirt and worms and urine and phlegm only too well are 
generated ! Their bodies are only a mass of dirt without doubt. 

2S. One's indulging in low women is like the pig wallowing 
in dirt and enjoying itself. The pleasure we derive by worship 
of I§a is the blemishless and eternal and pure Ocean of Bliss- 

29. People in whom anger permanently dwells do not 
understand the benefits of patience. People wallowing in passion 
do not know the pleasure derived from passionlessness. Hold 
on to the Feet of the Supreme Lord of Lords, worshipped by 
Devas. That instant, an inextinguishable Bliss will rise in your 
body. This is Truth. 

30. You have regarded passion and other vices as pleasure. 
This is like seeking pleasure in smothering heat in time of winter 
and in cool water in summer. If you reach the Godly path, you 
will obtain everlasting pleasure. 

31. We read the Sivagama. We declare the truth of the 
Three Padarthas, Pati, PaSu and Pasa. We ever praise and 
worship Isa’s victorious Feet. We give up Kama and other low 
desires, and we hold fast to God’s Grace. With this our faith, 
we hope to leave the stains of the three mala and to unite with 
the Ninmala God in Mukti. 

uLf--i(Vj freun&u.’Xj'Ug.uajQtAa® ppUpth 

er'd#flutl Lf&j'?<rsBT or.etsifi Q^nyfi Qeie&gi’Q'iA 

(3 t, i> Quir^iir tnujunfs) t&r Qun^cftccw 

QP$-2gl Q/>3 uj sol bSl 18 rSsyruisvQ^'d fQ&sr CL». 

for ages together ! Do they who sin bear these things in their mind, or 
do they know one instance, in which the sinner has come out unscathed? 
With poverty and want of education and copying of fashions, sexual 
immorality is only too much on the increase; and a gallant general in 
his place in the council would even hold that we have no sense of sexual 
morality ! O for a tongue and for a \oi< c, that would stem this tide that 
is growing upon u.,!!! 


1 





CHAPTER II. 


Sautrantika Bauddha’s Statement. 

1. * The Bauddhas are of four classes who denying the 
Dharma as set forth in the Vedas, follow the Dharma as set forth 
in the Pitakas, and act up to the five or<-«ten golden rules, and 
wear the red vesture, and ^worship the Bothi (Ficus Rcligiosa — 
'gjz&LDgtx) tree. Of these four, the Sautrantika Bauddha, who 
recognises no caste, claims our attention first. 

2 . f The great sage Buddha is our I ord, who becoming 
omniscient, hated (he five great sins, such as killing etc., and 
being filled with true Grace, took on himself the sorrows of other 
beings, and composed the holy Pi taka Agamas praised by the 
Gods. 

* The four classes of Bauddhas are Sautrantika (Representation - 
ists), Yogachara (-Subjective idealists), Madhyamika (Nihilists) and 
Vaibhashika (Presentationists). The five golden rules are: (i) Ahimsa, 
(2) Satya, (3) Astheya , (4) Brahmacharya and (5) Sangraha (congre¬ 
gation.) For the ten, we have to add, (6) Being seated in high places, 
(7) not reclining, (8) not wearing sandal etc., (9) Dislike of song and 
dance, (10) eating before sunrise. Caste includes Dravya, Nama, Guna, & c. 

f (1) To the Buddhist, Buddha is the God, or his saviour and 
he sets up his images and prays in its presence, and anything connected 
with him, su-h as his tooth, umbrella, Bo tree &c., has also become 
objects of fetish worship. The result can’t be otherwise. Man always 
wishes to rest bis mind on something higher than himself and when the 
True One cannot be pointed out, anything that comes in the way supplies 
its place. While journeying in Ceylon, a Singalese began to preach to 
us “what you call God, Devadi Deva, Sivadi Siva, Chakradi Chakra 
was Buddha Himself.” We had to point out that such good understand¬ 
ing between the Buddhist and the Hindu was good enough, but the 
essential distinction between the two conceptions had to be borne in 
mind nevertheless. What our Singalese friend called Buddha was a 
man born in Kapilavastu and who attained Buddhahood. As such he 




Ch. II.] 


PARAPAKSHA—SAUTRANTIKA BAUDDHA 


25 


3.* There are two methods of proof, namely, Perception 
and Inference, accepted by the Pitakas. The things derived 

could not be the undying and the unborn (i QjsulSgS, the 

author of creation, sustentation and resolution, ThirOpava and AnU- 
"raha: One who in the words of Tiruvachaka is “ the oldest of 

O' * 

the old and the newest of the new” (“(joottSssxu uipi> GunQ^iL^tja 
Qpssr^esru utpx QunfTjQsn- i 3 gx 2 pstu l Guir&gj’Aau Qup'SnjQssr"') 
One who was before.all the 2: Buddhas put together, one whose 
Golden crowd is where all’things and words cease to penetrate ( ( G<?ir$ 
U’€3cfl‘Tpi3.Q~na)c£ i £)G3 : nsti&S i !P.i^/-§mp Gp itsz'gsld,’ 1 Guir^nir u^^rQfisuLjix 
aevsurru QunQsaQp'j^Gaj ') ; One who fills our hearts with grace like 
water-flood, brooking not its banks, (‘ £Gnp'U(np$bQuiis\' Piesi^eutuLiSj 
unqjo SluGst ’). There may be no such God, and no such consum¬ 
mation as we assert and there may be only the five Skandas and 
their result or extinction as the Buddhists assort, yet the two notions 

V 

of Siva and Buddha are entirely distinct and can have no connection 
between them. This does not prevent the Siddhanti from holding 
that it is the only One who appears in every form, and is adopted for 
worship by mankind, and accepts the adoration of the truly penitent heart 

(jj/tG gn ( t^Gj gu€h'hieivixi: ^JiQ^-Leu.in's €T/£scrr u.nG^rr(mun ^itud 

a/0ii). The essential difference of these two statements have to 
be borne in mind, that the true God is not every ideal (gross or noble) 
of mankind but is present in every such form. Compare verses 22 
and 23 of Chapter IX of the Gita. “ To those who worship Me, not 
meditating on another, to those ever harmonious, 1 l ring full security 
of Yoga,” and * They also who worship other Gods, with devotion, 
full of faith they also worship Me, O son of Kunti ; though this is 
con rary to the ancient rule.” In the subsequent verses, Sri Krishna, 
speaks of them as those not knowing Him in Essence, and that they fall 
and go to the Gods and pitris whom they worship. 

(2) The special acts of grace shown by Buddha arc enumerated in 
Tamp works such as Mamnu'alai ike., as giving up his kingdom, wife 
and child, losing his eye, giving his flesh on account of a pigeon, &c. 

(3) The Pi{akas .are three in number, Vimmaya (Vinaya), Sutra 
(Sutra), Abidharma (Abhulamma). 

* The change is of four kinds:—(i) Increase by change, (2) decrease 
by change, (3) remaining the same after change, f.j) total dcstru tion by 
change. * 


4 




26 


SIVAJNANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. II. 


I 


therefrom are subject and object, and these changes (die) from 
moment to moment. The subject and object divide themselves 
into Rupa and Arupa, Nirvana (&£) and belief (<&/#>«©) and each 
one of the four divides itself into two, and there are thus 
eight in all. 

4. Rupa is of two kinds, Bhuta Rupa (material form, 
Achaitanya) and Upaddna Rupa (Sensory, Chaitanya); Arupa 
is of two kinds, Chitta (mind) and Karma ; Nirvara, of faults 
and of Skandas; and belief, of true and false belief. 

5*. Earth, water, fh*e and air are BPta Rupa. Hardness, 
taste, smell and colour form the Upaddna-Rupa . When these 
eight combine, we have visible forms. Chitta (Buddhi or mind) 
perceives* sensations through the senses. When the Buddhi 
perceives such as good or bad, it is due to the effect of Karma. 

6. Nirvana of faults {(§pp a?®) is attained when the sins 
of lust, &c. are avoided. Nirvana of Skandas [skp eSQ) is 
attained when knowledge of Rupa, name &c. is lost. Right and 
wrong belief are divided each into aggregation (Qpnema), success¬ 
ion (QpnL-irJ : @) and annihilation (Qpnpp /s/r&u>). 


* From these eight forms and their ac'tions are derived the five 
Skandas. From the visible form is derived Rupa Skanda (1); from the 
senses, Nama Skanda (Abstract Ideas) (2); from the Buddhi, VijT.ana 
Skanda (3); from Karma, Vedana (4) and Bhavana (Tendencies) (5). 
Rupa Skanda are the four elements and their four Upadana ; Namaskanda, 
the five senses, and Buddhi; Vijfiana Skanda, the six kinds of Sensations 
or knowledge perceived by these six senses; Vedanaskanda, the know¬ 
ledge of pleasure and pain ; Bavanaskanda, ten kinds of merit and ten 
kinds of demerit. The ten kinds of merit are (r) Aru) or Love, (2) Desire- 
lessness, (3) Love of austerity, (4) Sweet words, (5) Truth telling (6) 
Useful speaking, (7) Preaching charity, (8) Humility, (9) Giving to the 
needy, (10) Performance of austerity. The ten sins are (1) Contemplation 
of Evil, (2) Desire or Lust, (3) Anger, (4) Speaking harsh words, (5) and 
useless words, (6) and false words, (7) Envy, (8) Thieving, (9) Killing and 
(to) Doing useless acts. These ten kinds of merit and sin seem to be 
from the Sutra of forty-two sections, translated into Chinese in the first 
century A. D. C 



Ch. II.] 


PARAPAKSHA—SAUTRANTIKA BAUDDHA 


2 ? 


7 *. Right belief of aggregation is when we assert th.it what 
we call a man is merely the aggregate of the five Skandas. 
Wrong belief of aggregation is when we assert that man is an 
entity different from the aggregate of the five Skandas. 

8 . Right belief of succession is the path of holding that 
events succeed one another as cause and effect without refer- 

* The first kind of Right belief is explained by the simile of the 
chariot and its parts. \Vithout its parts there is no chariot. Without 
the Skandas, tftere is no Atma. To assert otherwise is heresy. Buddha 
denies clearly the existence of an Atma, but he does posit Buddhi, or 
mind. It must be remembered that, in his days, the Hindu philosophy as 
represented by the Gita and the Siddhanta was in existence and Buddha 
was only arguing against such Hinduism—and against Lokdyita. The 
Lokayita postulated the existence and eternality of the four material 
elements. Gautama analysed these into the five Skandas, denied its 
positive existence and only asserted its phenomenal appearance ( Q#npp±) 
and claimed that it was capable of annihilation Beyond these 

phenomenal appearances, he does assert the existence of mind or Buddhi. 
This was one of the andakaranas recognized by his opponent. But as 
for postulating an Atma beyond this mind or Buddhi, Gautama could 
never consent. According to the Hindu, Atma was different from Buddhi 
or any one or all of the andakaranas. But Gautama would sometimes 
identify this Buddhi itself with Atma, or God, as Hindu Idealists identify 
Atma, individual soul, with Paramatma. With this essential difference 
and distinction in mind, the question whether Gautama affirms or denies 
the existence of a soul will be easily solved. To the Hindu, Buddhi itself 
was perishable, and when Gautama asserted its imperishability, the Hindus 
called him Buddha, the system Buddhism, which held to the assertion of 
Buddhi as a Padartha, Tfys will explain also why in the classification 
of seven principles of man according to Theosophy for shall we say 
esoteric Buddhism», Buddhi is classed with the three principles above as 
imperishable. To the Hindu as such, Buddhism is clear Atheism and . 
Denial of Soul or Atma. Where the definition and analysis of each is 
clear and distin t, it serves no good purpose to state that all ate one. The 
reliability of the account of Buddhism as herein set foith may he compar¬ 
ed with neo-Buddhism as represented by some Theosophists, as the Tamil 
account ^ee n. to follow »otnc of the oldest treatises on Buddhism by 
Hiodu Buddhists botDin Sanskiit and in TamiJ. 



2<S 


SIVAJNAN’A SIDDHIVaR 


[Bk. II. 


ence to time, past, present or future and that in succession there 
is no continuity. Wrong belief of succession is when we hold 
that there is one soul or padartha unchanged at all time, in 
continued succession of cause and effect. 

9. To hold that all things that appear will surely be annihi¬ 
lated is Right belief. To hold that things do not die but are 
existeat as cause in effect is wrong belief. 

10. To this Right belief (Sat-vada) and Wrong belief (Asat- 
vada are to be added four other kinds of belief namely, Sat-Sat- 
vada, Sat-Asat-vada, Asat-Sat-vada and Asat-Asat-vada. Sat- 
vada is when we assert an actually existing fact as that an 
elephant hastueks. Asat-v&da is when we make statements like 
that an hare has tusks. 

11. To hold that intelligence is born from mere contact is 
Sat-Sat-vada. To hold that if an intelligence dies another cannot 
rise in its place is Sat-Asat-vada. To hold that Intelligence can 
rise without an antecedent cause is Asat-Sat-vada. To assert 
the statement like that hair grows on the palm of one’s hand 
and that there is a rope of sand is Asat-Asat-vada. 

12. Except our four postulates, we do not understand all 
that these people assert. Are they not mad in saying that there 
are Aka£ and l ime, and several cardinal points, and soul and a 
Lord whom thought and words cannot reach ? These things 
cannot be true. 

13. We cannot use Akas in any of our productions. If 
you say that Akas holds and gives room to everything else, it 
cannot do so, as it is formless. If you say that it is the cause of 
sound, it cannot be, as sound is the prodftet of bodies with form. 
If you say that it is present inseparably everywhere, there are 
no such things as this or that. (A thing is mere action and attri¬ 
bute and not substance). 

14. If you assert that man has an Atma or Intelligence, 
then why does he not understand withjut the senses (internal 
and external) a id sensations and books. If you say that the 
soul understands by uniting with the senses and by contact of 
sensations and by permeating into books, thm why do you feel 


Ch. II.] 


PARAPAKS1IA — SaUTRaNTIKA RAl'DDHA 


29 


doubt as to the color of the cloth you take out in darkness ; * as 
such it cannot so understand. 

15. Man cannot know except by the senses. If, as the 

senses are not intelligent, you say it is the soul that understands 
in union with the senses, then the soul must, through each one of 
the senses, feel the same sensation. If you say that the sctjI 
understands as it is joined to the senses, then we are mistaken in 
not knowing you to be a Buddhist. What you say is really 
beautiful 1 > * 

16. Is jTiatha postulated besides Jnuna and JTtcya by 
you, sentient or insensient ? If the latter, then it is material 
(Achetana) like earth. If sentient, you postulate one too much 
beyond Jnana itself, as if a man should say that Dhqli rice has 
Dholl for its curry. 

17. * If the Atma is formless, then it cannot be attached to 
a body with form ; if of form, it cannot be contained in another 
body. If it is an amt (an atom) then it will pass away without 
staying in the body through many of its openings. If it is 
eternal, then it should not be capable of appearance and dis¬ 
appearance. 

iS.j That the Atma is omnipresent, cannot be true, as our 
knowledge does not extend everywhere. If Atma is said to 
pervade the whole body, then it will die with the death of the 

* The following quotations from Kuyfa’a^tsi, one of the PaScha 

Kavyas (a lost work; are cited in the commentaries on this stanza. 

♦ 

et cxj ±j zi p ajf $ £ Q Gujj 

3 - 7*2 

s'LfSzy j. r.i fipt _ a.i7£S ssis t— §jdz t_nC _c7.” 

“ Tex"g -r,t _ c-S~-s? ,51_i 3 r 

O^T-.£T, U><7rOa t»ZL ££\llS-- SfV 

aigi Q*n *a .{Sst p 

tyszr &vJZ’in * * a <oC)* /Csp.” 

| If there should then be any doubt that the Buddhist denies an 
Atma, the arguments so e.aborately set forth from stanzas 14 to ib both 
inclusive ought to place the matter beyond all doubt. The commentators 
quote from works of Buddhist themselves. These texts deny a JfL-tha as 
distinct from JnAnaj a Gu?i as di-rinct from Guga, an Atma as distinct 






50 


SIVAJNANA 5IDDHIYAR 


[Ek. II. 


body. If it is located in any one organ of the body (such as the 
heart), it cannot have consciousness in any other part of the 
body as the feet and head. 


from Bucchi oc other senses. Is there such a thing as Anna distinct from 
Bsddhi or not : If it is, then the Buddhist surely denies its existence. It 
won't do tor him to jay that his Juana and Gupa and Buddhi is as good 
as Atma and that as such, he does not really deny such an Atma. This 
is perfectly futile as where we have pointed out above. Buddhi is regarded 
by the Siddhlnd as material and insentient and Atma as noe-materia! and 


sentient. Look at the following apology of an argument from the learned 
Editor of the Mciist. 

“ This is plain to every one who understands that truths are real even 
though they are not substances or entities. And the same is true of the 
soul. To deny that Volition, Cognition, and other mental activities are 
substances or entities, or that they need a substratum or metaphysical 
subject, is not a denial of their existence — it is simply the consistent con¬ 
sequence of the commonly acknowledged truth that they are not material.” 

And the able Editor accuses Prof. Oldenburg, the greatest Pali 
scholar, of misunderstanding Buddhist texts. It will be apparent to 
anybody, in the light of our foregoing observations, as to who has really 
misunderstood Buddhism; or rather, the fact is, not that Paul Cams 
has not understood Buddhism but that he has not understood true 
Hinduism better. The quotation from Paul Carus we have given 
above contains the gist of the grossest idealism. And Hinduism 
has been till now solely understood in its idealistic form, which ac¬ 
cording to the opinion of a number of scho’ars such as Prof. Kunte, 
Col. Jacob, and as understood by the Hindu schools of Sinkhya (both 
Niriswara and Seshwara) was derived from Buddhism. The Professor 
talks of ‘ the consistent consequence of the commonly acknowledged truth 
that they are -'ot material.' Consistent consequence indeed! Need we 
wonder that the most thorough-going idealists of to-day are also the most 
thorough-going materialists of the day, and vice-versa. Anybody who 
knows anything of the social and political condition of to-day will not 
fail to be struck with the fact how closely related are Idealism and 
Materialism and Nihilism and Anarchism of to-day. What to the Hindu 
Siddhanti is immaterial, to the Buddhist is non-existent. What to the 
former is material, to the Buddhist is not material. And yet Atma and 
Buddhi are to be held as synonymous ! » 




Ch. II.] PARAPAKSHA—SAUTRANTIKA BAUDDllA 3 1 

19. How does your Time operate ? If it is that by which 
all things undergo creation, development and destruction, it will 
be confused with the objects themselves; and time will cease, 
when such things cease to exist. T o assert that there are three 
kinds of time and not three kinds of objects is clear wrong belief 
(Asat-vada). 

20. To one standing’to the east of myself, the direction 
where I stand is west* but to one west of myself it is east. There¬ 
fore tell me which is the proper direction, 1 stand in. Your wrong 
belief in cardinal points is therefore false. 

21. * You postulate a God who created the earth. If the 
earth existed before creation, it needs no creation. If’ il did not 
exist before, then it cannot be created. If creation means creating 
the effect from its cause, then the world must be said to exist 
and not to exist. 

22. f If you say that God creates the world, as a potter makes 
pot out of clay, where did he stay when He made this world. If 
you say he stood on the world, then the world should have been 

* The reference in the*last line is to the asti nasti or Sapta Bhangi 
Xyaya of the Jains, according to which neither existence nor non-existence 
can be predicated of a thing ; and as in the first case, it will be mere 
implication and in the second case not a fact. So, all that can be said 
is ‘ asti-nasti,’ ‘existent, non-existent.’ This is a curious conclusion. 
There is however an element of 'truth in this, so far as the nature of a 
logical predicate is concerned. Dr. Bain for instance rejects ‘ existence ’ 
stated by Mill as a predicate and reduces the latter’s six classes of predi¬ 
cates to three, namely, co-existence, succession and equality. The 
Buddhist apprehension of the theory of causation is entirely erroneous 
in the light of the modern theory of causation as involving conserva¬ 
tion of energy, held by Western Logicians ; and this only follows what 
the two schools of Slnkhya (Niriswara and Seshwara) have always held. 
Both the Jains and the Buddhists merely quibble about it and there is 
neither scicn e nor sense in it. 

f The argument is that inasmuch you cannot separate God from the 
world, no God can c\is> as such apart from the world. 




3 2 


SIVAJNANA S1DDH1YAR 


[Bk. II. 


created before hand. If you say he was everywhere, and omni¬ 
present, then ‘everywhere,’ must have existed before God and 
given Him birth. 

23. * If you say that God created the world out of nothing, 
out of His mercy, where is His Grace and mercy, when creating 
the death-dealing monsters such as lions, tigers and elephants 
and Yama. If He created all these things as He liked to show His 
might, then you had better worship a madman. 

24. What is the purpose of this creation ? If it is mere play, 
your Lord is a mere child. If necessitated by Karma performed, 
then the persons performing Karma must have existed before 
creation. The truth is, the world is eternal and not created. 

25. If God is Rupi, there must be one who created this 
form. If He assumed Form out of His mere wish, then all the 
world could do so by their mere wish. If each gets His form by 
His Karma, then the Karma must have existed before Him. 

26.1 If God is Arupi, He like Akas, cannot lift us from our 
sin. If He is like the shadow of a tree, then the credit is due to 
those who neared the shelter (or the benefit is to those who 
approach the shelter) and as such He is not omnipresent. If He 
is omniscient, then a Form is necessary which should be lovingly 
dwelt upon. If there was no such form, no intelligence could 
subsist. 

* A mad man does not know the consequence of his act and God 
should have known that H'S creating these terrible animals must produce 
evil to His other creatures. 

‘j- The Akas does not put forth any active powers. It is merely 
passive. Here the Buddhist is wiong. We now know what amount of 
force is locked up in Akas or Ether and the modern European research 
tries hard only to unlock it and even when they, sometimes by mere 
chance, unlock such powers, they are past their comprehension, as for 
instance the X-rays. As similar to a shadow, God cannot be omnipresent 
and omniscient, and no credit to Him, except to those who approach Him. 
This latter view will account for their believing more in a Buddha, a 
Mukta. as a saviour than in God. According to the Buddhist, no intelli¬ 
gence can be conceived of,- except as dwelling in seme form. 






Ch. II.] 


PAR^PAKSHA—sautrantika bauddha 


-ft 

00 

27. If you say the Vedagamas are eternal and prove the 
existence of God, then what you say, that nobody gave it forth 
is really beautiful! You, to say that you knew God by the 
Vedagamas and the Vedagamas by means of God ! This is 
wonderful indeed! 3 

2S.* 1 he vegetable kingdom (Urpija) and all its multitudi¬ 

nous forms grow and die like hair and horns on animal’s bodies 
and hence h^ve no life or intelligence. 1 hey exist for the benefit 
of other creatures with life, (Andaja, Svetaja and Sarayuja). 

29T You must not kill at all. You’can eat always what had 
been slaughtered already by others, as a slaughtered animal is 
simply dead like earth. Tell me who gets the merit of the deed, 
whether one who keeps a water pandal with fragrant drinking 
water or one who partook of that water ? 

30. To say that the five Skandas are not annihilated but 
are reduced to their cause is Wrong belief of {Q?npp nx&ih), and is 
the cause of birth and suffering. To hold that these are altogether 
annihilated is Right belief and leads to the Bliss of Moksha, Nirvana. 

314 To leave off the sins of Kama, envy, etc. to hold on to 

good deeds, to destroy the desires of the senses, and the sense 

» 

* Urpija are produced from the eauh ; Andaja from eggs, Svetaja 
from sweat and damp, and Sarayuja from womb. 

t Meat is distinguished to be of two kinds, Kallya v Karpiya) Mumsa 
that which can be eaten, and Akallya (Akarpiya), that which cannot be 
eaten. Akarpiya is of three kinds, Trikodi (meat got by direct killing, 
or express order or implied consent), Shatkodi (last three and by seeing or 
hearing that it was killed for his own use and by not suspecting the 
character of the slaughter), Navakodi (the last six and by relish of meat, 
eating too much, ptaise of the killed meat). Really the distinctions are 
too nice, but the ignorant cannot possibly understand their niceties and 
they hold on to the saying that they cannot kiil but can cat meat killed 
by others; and in so acting, they do not make any distinctions of the nnat 
of any animals that might be slaughtered for their use. 

* The eight kinds of right condu t are— ( i) Right seeing, (2) Right 
robbing, (3) Right speech, (4) Rights'lion, (5) Right life, (<>) Right 
endeavour, (j) Right principles and (0) Right company. 

5 





34 


S1VAJNANA S1DDH1YAR 


[Bk. II. 


of pleasure and pain, to practice the eight kinds of Right conduct, 
and to give up all wrong doing and attain to such J nana is to 
attain to Imperishable Samadhi or Nirvana. 


” Refutation of Sautrantika Bauddha. 

1. O Bauddha, you did say without thought that your Lord 
Buddha knew everything. Me could hot know everything, at all 
times as the universe is immeasurable. -If everything was under¬ 
stood by him one by one, then the universe should not be called 
immeasurable. If this is possible by his limitless wisdom, then 
his wisdom is not so capable ; he could not know everything, as his 
intelligence dies and is bom from moment to moment. 

2. If you say that he will know the rest by knowing a few of 
each kind, how is this possible, as objects of knowledge are 
innumerable and one divides itself into innumerable other species. 
Besides, as human knowledge implies perception of similarity and 
difference, how is knowledge of various objects possible, by 
comparison etc., when, according to you, we do not retain the 
consciousness of each previous moment. 

3. * If your Lord Buddha gave - out his Dharma after 
attaining Mukti, Nirvana, then his speech after Nirvana (annihi¬ 
lation of Skandas} is like that of the person who died by eating 
ghee and honey together, coming to life again to say, that to eat 
honey and ghee is bad. If you say he died after giving out the 
Dharma, then the law was given Dy one who had not attained 
to Mukti and as such it cannot lead one to Mukti. His vain desire 
is like that of the person who not knowing the depth and breadth 

* As Nirvana is merely the destruction of all the Skandas such as 
Rupa, Naina &c., no speech is possible after Nirvana. Of course, 
Buddhists will say that Buddha wasajivan Mukta, but this will be a 
contradiction in terms, in the view they take of Mukti or Nirvana. Jf 
Buddha had not attained to Nirvana, his law cannot proceed from actual 
experience and cannot be authority. The difficulty arises from the fact 
of the Buddhist not recognizing a God,Who has not to undergo evolution 
to increase this experience. And the dilemma which in consequence 
arises is beautifully put. The Next stanza follows the same subject. • 






Ch. II.] PARABAKSHA—REFUTATION OF SAUTRANT1KA 


35 


of a rushing flood desires to cross and land all the rest on the 
other side of the river. 

4. * You state that, unlike our God Who, being present in each 
as taste in water, effects their preservation, your Lord undergoes 
the fiery ordeal of miserable birth and getting himself release^, 
saves other mortals. This is like a deer rushing to save his kind 
already caught in the toils of the hunter’s net and being caught 
itself. This law will only lead to great sin. Your doctrine is 
really incomparable! It you say that wishing to create Dharma, 
he was bom and he created the Dharma’, then this also might be 
said of every man that is born. 

5. f If you say that your Lord entered an endless number of 
wombs for the propagation of Dharma, then his births‘must have 
been caused by Karma. Kay, if it is said that this is by his mere 

* This stanza emphasizes the S:i[ rente principle of Siddhanta that 
God cannot be lorn in the flesh, for any reason, even for the purpose of 
saving all mankind ; much less of His mere whim, for His own pleasure, 
for realizing Himself, from Karma, for improving Himself by successive 
evolutions. He is the supreme subject and cannot become the object also, 
which He will be when He is born. If there is however a Vedic text to 
that effect, it only means to ’emphasize the fact of God’s supreme nature, 
that independent of Him, nothing can exist, nothing can act and nothing 
can be owned. God is Sarva Svatantra, Svamparaprakasa. Everything 
else is Paratantra and shines only by reflected light, c.f. Tayuviaiavar, 

‘'fioveuiQj.eorfcTLf.QnitQjj, 67 0 vev/r Qpd>t Qx*snsami(otu, 
zi&jevn Qp&zgrysnL-uj QjuQev,'' 

and verse 52 of Karunukarakajavu]. 

c.f. St. Karaikalaminaiyar, 

“ £ t>:d pnQzsr <jj/lcSuL.nch(yQesr 

u/tCun -jj f)ifiasr(irjar(ijQGnr — uj/i&eerp 
Ou/jjuQutT(r^^ 5 z8<r&t—nua a.ian.t 

LuQutt i finQezr -ucucit 

t Siva is called 1 Ayonija.’ Iiuddlmts claiming a similar Divine 
attribute for their Lord, have a story that Gautama’s mother on her way 
to her mother’s house was taken with premature pains in the beautitul 
forest of Lumbili (Lumbini) but the feet us could not be brought out in 
the ordinary way and '^lc belly had to he cut open to remove the child 




36 


5l VaJNANA S1DDH1VAR 


[Bk. II. 


will, ihen the same can be said of every man that is bom. If it 
is said that he was born not like ordinary mortals but came out of 
the belly, don’t mention to me the Pharma of one, who killed his 
mother before he spread his Pharma. 

6 . When the Lord Buddha incarnaled himself as beasts of 
prey, did he not forget virtue and kill men and animals with 
pleasure? If he did not kill and eat their flesh, did he feed on 
straw to appease his hunger? You say he took on himself the 
sorrows of others. Really his acts of grace shown fo the woman 
who had lost her husband and to the bird-catcher are beautiful 
to behold ! 

7. * * Before you discover an idea and find words to express 
the same and put the same in writing, your intelligence would 
have changed ever so often. How can you therefore have any 
authoritative treatise ? If you say the words follow one another, 
then the same words must get repeated. You say by the change, 
the intelligence which it succeeds is superior to the preceding one. 
No, it cannot increase, as its duration is only momentary. A true 
book must be consistent throughout. Is your book of this 
character ? 

from the womb. The mother died after the seventh day. Even to-day, 
we hear in Tibet, the child intended as the future Lama is taken out 
similarly. This is a mere travesty of the noble truth. 

* Association of ideas <s,it*oT is of four kinds, Lamp from 

lamp (jsL jf is $ a sot ri>), air from air (qjitil] ^is^rreonb), light from star (prunr 
&&,$nmtb', Pipilika. (iftSleSIsn &ps#amib). These are several kinds of 
illustrations to show the passage of living beings from one body to another 
and for their final extinction: 

The simile of the lamp is as follows.— 

Dipaka Santa 1a .—The life of man, to use a constantly recurring 
Buddhist simile or parable, is like the Hame of an Indian lamp, a metal or 
earthenware saucer in which a cotton wick is laid in oil. One life is 
derive! from another, as one flame is lit at another ; it is not the same 
flame, but without the other, it would not have been. As flame cannot 
exist without oil, so life, individual existence, depends on the cleaving to 
low and earthly things, the sin of the .heart. L If there is no oil in the 



Ch. II.] PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF SAUTRANTIKA 


37 


S. You said that your Lord performed various virtuous acts 
in the beginning and became omniscient, and out of grace, gave 
out the Pi takas to enable mortals to attain Moksha. If so, who 
determined what was virtue and vice, before your Lord performed 
virtue. If one like himself, who taught this predecessor o ihis; 
as such you will get no one who gave out the law in the beginning; 
as such, whom do you hold as your God in your school ? The 
fallacy of having no beginning (=s? ) is present in your 

argument. 

9. If you hold the Lord Gautama as your God and Saviour, 
then who was his Lord whom he worshipped ? Where is the 
sanction of his Guru’s words for the law he set forth ? \ye do not 
find such sanction anywhere. If you ask for our final authority, our 
ParameSvara, beginningless and of endless knowledge, self-existent 
when every thing else is destroyed at the last day, He it was 
Who gave out our law, which is comprised in our Vedas and 
Agamas. The sages who follow this law also advise control of 

lamp, it will go out, though not until the oil which the wick has drawn 
up is exhausted and then no new flame can be lighted there. And so the 
parts and powers of the perfect man will be dissolved, and no new being 
will be born to sorrow. The wise will pass away, will go out like the 
flame of a lamp, and their Karma will be individualized no longer! 

Tara sanfana ’ Stars, long ago extinct, may be still visible to us 
by the light they emitted before they ceased to burn, but the rapidly 
vanishing effect of a no longer t active cause will soon cease to strike 
upon one’s senses; and where the light was, will be darkness; so the 
living, moving body of the perfect man is visible still, though its cause 
has ceased to exist ; but it will soon decay, and die, and pass away ; and 
as no new body will be formed, where life was, there will be nothing. 
Again the five bkandas, the bodily and mental properties and tendencies, 
are like a tree. '1 he tree produces a seed, a fruit, from which will spring 
another tree; but if the tree be cut off at the root, it will be visible a 
little while only whilst it decays, and will not produ e any further seed. 

Pifilika iar.tana. Again, Trislnja, the yearning thirst, is compared 
to a creeper which grows like a parasite on the sftla trees, and eventually 
destroys that on which it was nourished ? (Dr. Rhys David's Manual of 
hu.dih\vn). > 




blVAjNAN'A SIDDII1VAR 


~Bk. II. 


3^ 


passions and performance of tapas. Your law enjoining eating 
before sunrise without washing and eating of flesh was made by 
a glutton. 

ro. Authorities are of three kinds, the authority of the 
Nhimcila God (qp/fco ^> 1 , the authority of the sage who provides 
explanations and exceptions not inconsistent with the original 
authority (ojl$ greo), the authority of the successor who following 
both authorities, gives his own opinion from experience* also q 
r&rso). Could you say to which class of authorities, your law 
belongs? As it cannot come under any of these, your law cannot 
be true. 

n. O Bauddha, whom do you praise as Buddha who had 
attained Nirvana, and why? If you say that the rituals performed 
in honour of the dead will confer benefits on the living, then the 
beings must be eternal. And we require a God who will appre¬ 
ciate your good acts and confer benefits. But you do not assert 
so. Your honouring the dead is like supplying oil and wick to 
a lamp that has been completly extinguished. 

12. You say that to know the contents of a book is as good 
inference as when we infer an author when we find a book written 
by him. Well, the existence of a hell and heaven you postulate 
could not be ascertained except from some book. Otherwise tell me: 
But this knowledge of hell and heaven could not be by inference. 
This alone is possible by believing in Agama Pramana. As you 
do not postulate Agama Pramana, your Pi takas themselves cease 
to be authorities. 

13. You state that all things will suffer annihilation. Is this 
annihilation possible to beings or non-beings or being-non-beings? 
If to the non-being, then it is ever non-existent; if to the being, 
it could never cease to exist; if to the last, from its character of 
being a being, it could not cease to exist. If you ask me to point 
out an object which is not capable of destruction, what you see 
undergoing changes of birth, growth, and death is the Sthala body 
(and not the Sukshma body). 

14. If you say that things die and are reborn by mere 
change of form, as the sprout is produced from the seed, then 


Ch. II.] PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF SAUTRANTIKA 


59 


you have forgotten your postulate of Sarvatn-tulsti and hold on 
to the Asti-nasti doctrine of the Jains. If you say I misunder¬ 
stand you, and explain that, what appeared as sprout, leaves, and 
tree are not stable but are capable of destruction, then hear, that 
it is not the visible form that is destroyed but changes are wrought 
on it by reason of its youth, maturity and old age ; and after such 
changes, the subtile (Sukshma) body remains, though the Sthula 
barira is destroyed. , 

15. If you say bddies are formed from the mixture of the 
four elements, then these cannot unite as'their natures are opposed 
to each other. If you say they are formed by the union of blood 
and semen, then account for toads being found in the heart .of 
rocks, and worms in 1 he heart of trees. If you say the real cause 
is good and bad Karma, then these, being opposed, cannot join and 
form bodies. If food is the cause, then the food which in youth 
develops the body is not capable of preventing decay in old age. 
If intelligence is the cause, then that which is formless Chaitanya 
cannot assume Achaitanya (non-inlelligent) form. If you assert 
that bodies are formed from nothing, then we could cull (lowers 
from the sky. 

16. •Ifyou say that forms ran be produced from nothing as 
the tree from the seed, then we assert that the tree was already in 
the seed. If you object that we do not find the tree in the seed by 
actual observation, then the fact that a paddy seed does not pro¬ 
duce a palm tree but only one of its own kind requires explanation. 
As one species of tree do not grow out of another species of seed, 
what docs not exist cannot be produced. '1 he seed is the cause 
and the tree, the effect. You also forget what you before asserted 
that form'* (as effects) arc produced from their cause, the live 
bkandas, as the Moon is formed by beams of light. 

17. If you say that ifv* bodies are formed by means of the 
four elements and their causes; then these cannot unite, as their 
natures are opposed to each other ; and cm* h of the elements cannot 
be limited to the nature of all other c ements. Understand also 
tliat the*: cl'-menU and their <au cs are all objects of sensation. 

* 'Ihb is a v.ell *Uc„lcd la.t ol modem buenec. 




40 


SIVAJNANA SIDDHIYAR 


Bk. II. 


18. If you say that it is matter, in its eight various forms, 
that forms the body, becoming subtile, as the extracts of medicinal 
herbs in medicated oil, then we require a God who could bring 
about this creation, as the Physician who prepares the oil. If 
matter alone is the cause, then all forms must be of the same 
nature. But, as their natures are different, you have not really 
understood the drift of your words. Then again, show me, if you 
can, the four causes of the four elements, which are Guna (attri¬ 
butes), apart from the four elements themselves. 

19. If you say that' intelligence dies at one moment, and 
at another moment is bom again, then what is dead cannot give 
rise to a new product. Then the new intelligence cannot know 
objects and perform functions which the former intelligence knew 
and performed. If you say that the old intelligence ceases to exist 
after creating the new intelligence, then two such intelligences 
could not exist at the same moment. If you say that the old 
intelligence does not die wholly before creating the new, then the 
sentience becomes Sat-asat, and your assertion that it is Asat 
cannot be true. If you instance the case of old straw used as 
manure becoming new straw, to prove that the old sentience dies 
and is reborn, then know that the old straw does not die 
altogether but is only reduced to its subtile condition, and from 
this condition, is produced forth as new straw.* 

70. If you say that sentience is generated by association of 
ideas, then this association must be eternal. If you instance the flow 
of water in a stream to illustrate your position that the moment 
one sentience dies another takes its place, then, as the things in solu¬ 
tion in the first flow of water will flow away with it alone, then all 
the Good, Vasana etc., attaching to the old sentience will die with 
it and will not become united to the new one. If you say there 
is no break in knowledge as there is no break in the water flow, 
then this knowledge cannot be momentary but must be eternal. 

* According to modern science, matter is indestructible. They 
follow the law of conservation of matter. The old straw does not die 
and is reduced to its constituent elements by the agency of bacteria and 
it’must be so reduced before it can be absorbed byuhe plant as food. 




Cll. 1 I.J PaRaPAKSHA—RF.FC'TATION OF AAl'TR AXTIk'A 


41 


21. Is this Santana (association) the cause or the effect or the 
cause-effect? In either of these cases, it must be eternal. If you 
say that succession involved in causation is the intelligence, even 
then it must be held to be eternal, as it is ever recurring. If the 
intelligence is separate, then it is different from the external senses 
and as such it will become an eternal object. The consequence 
wall be that instead of our understanding^ intelligence as subject 
and the rest as objects, the senses must be regarded as subject and 
intelligence ’as object. ’ Consider deeply the absurdity of this 
position. 

22 * •* If creation and destruction take place at the same moment 
of time, then these two functions must be the same. Jf Time is 
merely the change in the conditions of things, then why do you 
speak of present, past and future Time. If this is so spoken, as 
things undergo the successive changes, then you must not speak 
of it properly as the pre c ent, past and the future, and all the activi¬ 
ties of things must be one and the same. If all the different 
activities are comprised within the same point of i ime, then this 
point of Time is capable of division into three kinds of 1 ime, as 
for instance, when a needle is passed through a pack of 100 lotus- 
petals, though the time taken up is ever so short, yet the succession 
of time can very easily be perceived. 

* Wc are bound to say we are not convinced by these arguments. 
No doubt there is succession in '1 ime. but whether there is a distinct 
entity like Time apart from things and actions succeeding one another, 
that is a matter of doubt altogether. If is an abstraction like many other 
notions such as space, &c. If there is no perception of succession, there 
will be no perception of lime. If ihere is no perception of co-,existing 
object , there will be no perception of space. But that the Buddhist 
who believes in so many airy nothings such as his Katina, his Nirvapp 
A. , should dislike time is wondetful indeed ! Ct. The following passage 
from Dr. Rhys Davids’ Manual of Buddhism. • 

•* Strange is it and instructive that ail this should have seemed not 
unattractive these 2,300 years and mote, to many despairing and earnest 
hearts—that they should have trusted themsdves to the so seeming 
stately bridge which Buddhisiu has triad to budd over the liver yj the 



42 


SIVAJXANA .^lPPlMYAR 


[Hk II. 


23. According to you, one sentience is produced from 
another sentience ; this cannot be, as the sentience you postulate 
suffers momentary death. Sentience if it dies once, cannot survive. 
If the body, as the cause of sentience makes another sentience, 
then the body must manifest active intelligence even in deep sleep. 
If the bodily senses are the cause of intelligence, then as the senses 
are always active, the intelligence also can be eternal (non¬ 
momentary). 

According to you again, Karma is the cause of sentience. 
Then any particular act performed must be intelligence itself. It 
is not a fact that any such acts are so. 

24. If you say that Karma begets sentience, and sentience 
begets Karma, then as memory is an attribute of sentience, Karma 
must also possess memory. As Karma is non-intelligent, one 
cannot produce the other. As everything is momentary , one 
cannot produce the other and then die. If sentience after being 
produced from Karma, destroys Karma, as fire produced from a 
piece of wood destroys the firewood, then this is fallacious, as 
Karma is destroyed the moment sentience is bom, and one cannot 
produce or destroy the other in succession. The fire bom of the 
firewood, though it can destroy the firewood, cannot produce 
another piece of firewood. 

25. You asseit that that there are dwellers in astral and 
Devachanie planes (Devils, Celestials, Brahma etc.), and that these 
have bodies but not born of a father and mother; as a body is 
merely a product, there must be a cause for the same. If the 
cause of this body, sentience, or the finer matter (eight kinds of 

mysteries of sorrows of life. They have been charmed and.awed perhaps 
by the delicate or noble beauty of some of the several stones of which 
the arch is built; they have seen that the whole rests in a more or less 
solid foundation of fact; that on the one side of the key-stone is the 
necessity of justice, on the other the law of causality. But they have 
failed to see that the very key-stone itself, the link between one life and 
'another, is a mere word—this wonderful hypothesis, this airy nothing, 
this imaginary cause beyond the reach of reason—the individualized and 
individualizing force of Karma ! ”. • • • • ‘ 





Gh. II.] PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF SAUTKANT1KA 


43 


them), or Karma, or was it produced by some other person. The 
Truth is causation is of three different kinds, first cause. (SuS?#!*) 
material cause and instrumental cause To 

perceive this is real wisdom. 

26* O Bauddha, you assert that except the product of the 
five Skandas. there is no separate entity like Atma (soul). You 
also assert that there is no being who understands the five Skandas 
separate fr-sm himself. It is Buddhi that perceives those Skandas. 
Then, who it is, who has knowledge of this Buddhi? If Buddhi 
knows itself and other objects, as th. iarhp makes its own presence 
feit, while it illumines the eye and other objects; then understand 
from the same simile, that there must a soul who is conscious of 
Buddhi and other senses and objects, as the eye perceives the lamp 
and other objects. 

27. You loudly assert that your Ego is merely your body 
and senses and mind (andafokaranak The body does not know in 
sleep. The external senses are also dormant in sleep, and, besides 
are not able to perceive the sensations of each other. As >our 
mind is only momentary, it cannot perceive the past and the future 
and the present. So the real Kgo is the intelligence which, per¬ 
ceiving the body, senses, and mind and their functions, discriminates 
itself from these, and becomes conscious of objects in contact with 
the mind, through the channel of the senses, and performs actions 
with the body. 

28. You say that there is no soul independent of the mind 
as the latter perceives objects, when it is born again after moment¬ 
ary extinction. '1 hen when I say, ' I said so,’ what does the * 1 ’ 
mean ? Is it merely the mouth that uttered the words? Clearly it 
means a person different from the mouth etc. Ju.bi so, that which 
says after knowing everything possible to be known by all the 
senses (internal and external;, ‘ I know,’ this ‘ 1 ’ i\ the soul, the 
true Ego. '1 hat which perceives with the mind, utters with the 
mouth, acts with the body and at the same time i-, the support of 
mind etc., i-> the true Ego, Soul. 

' C. 1 . 4lb b Ura aikI i.uIlj, in my u> abulham. 


44 


SIVAJNAN’A SIDDHIVAR 


Bk. II. 


20. You say that the Chitta born of the external senses, and 
the Chitta born of the mental senses are two, and one is bom 
after the death of the other. If so, why don’t people feel the same 
in dreams, as in their waking state; and vice versa ? Besides, the man 
born blind has no knowledge of form and colour. If you say the 
defective sense is the reason of the defective knowledge, then it 
must follow, that when the senses, and knowledge, in waking and 
dreaming are all stilled in deep sleep, nothing will remain to bring 
these senses &c., back again to life. THe True Ego is the real 
cause of man’s volitional, mental and bodily activities <s rnm, 

GiPabv) and preceives both in waking and in dreaming states. 

30- If according to you, a sentient act arises in one external 
sense at one moment only, then, the sound perceived by the two 
ears could not be perceived by one ear. Besides it is a fact that 
at one and the same moment, a person sees another with his two 
eyes, and hears his words with his two ears and knows him. The 
five external senses can no more percieve anything when dissocia¬ 
ted from the mind. Each of the senses can only perceive objects 
one by one. 'I he mind too cannot perceive all the sensations 
together. Besides, each sense will not perceive what the other 
perceives. This is what is done by mind. That which under¬ 
stands everything by means of the senses, internal and external, 
is the True Ego. 

31.* If as you say, the five senses with the formless as the 
sixth, become conscious in each organ after undergoing change 
every moment; then, as the mind is formless, it cannot unite with 
the body and undergo change of youth, maturity and old age. 
When a man wakes to consciousness when his body is disturbed 

* The commentator gives another illustration of the Buddhist. A 
lame man and his crutch cannot cross the river each by itself. But 
the one with the other could. So consciousness does not arise when, 
the mind, and senses and air &c., act together. The reply is that a boat 
is necessary and even with the boat, the lame man and his crutch and 
tbe boat cannot reach the other shore without a boatman. In the illus¬ 
tration of the lamp, light is conciousness, wick is the soul, the body is 
uu lamp, trend and reuses are the ghee or oil. 





Ch. II.] 


PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION' OF SAUTRANT 1 KA 


45 


in sleep, where does his consciousness proceed from ? if you say 
from mind itself, no, it cannot so proceed bv becoming conscious 
through the senses; and the senses and sound and air cannot rouse 
the mind, as these are Asat (objective). The light proceeding 
from the wick will vanish when the wick is exhausted, and will 
not flash up again from the earthen lamp. Tell me also where 
consciousness dwells, when a man is unconscious. 

32. * Desire ancj hate, pleasure and pain, intelligence and 
action are all’ qualities o*f the soul. Desire is the liking we feel 
for an object, say a fruit, when we see it*again after once we had 
tasted it. Hate is the reverse feeling; and the other qualities 
also imply similar previous experience. As its experience thus 
refers to the past and future, the wise postulate an eternal soul 
and disagree with your theory. 

33. t Akas (Ether), supports and affords room and is in 
inseparable union with everything, is neither darkness nor light 
and yet gives room to both. Its attribute is sound; air and fire 
and ether elements are produced forth from it and reduced into it. 
We have a"ready explained our position about the soul. Time is 

* The verses 26—32, controverts the position that there is no 
separate entity called soul, apart from the body and the senses and the 
Andabkttrana. As definition is the most important thing, in these respects, 
to avoid all misconceptions and confusion in thought and argument, the 
attention is drawn to the way these various senses and organ are distin¬ 
guished one from the other. For futher information on the subject 
referen e may be made to Sutras 3 and 4 and the notes thereon in my 
Edition of bivajTiSrabcditam. Atma is something other than Buddhi 
and other Andahkarapas, senses and the body: There may be no such 
thing. It will be useless to confound these one with the other; the 
arguments herein given tend to show that the phenomena of existence 
cannot be fully and adequately explained without this postulate. The 
test of a true hypothesis consists in that the theory ought to cover all 
fa' t* and explain them without any self contradiction. Stanza 32, 
controverts the opponent's theory that desire is the cause of sentience. 

f Ak&a may mean spa^e, in which case it is an abstraction no 
doubt, or ctb*r when it is a padartha. The word is used in both senses 
end i • then often the caucofmu'h confusion. As regards tin ie, the 




46 


SIVAJN’ANW SIDDH1VAR 


[Bk. II. 


divided into morning, noon and evening, days—past, present and 
future -and is ever changing and is productive of good and evil. 
The cardinal points are four, East and West, South and North— 
and are eternal in their nature and invariable and productive of 
good and evil. 

34. As the world is a product like a pot, we require a first 
cause like a potter. Vedas and Agamas are the most ancient 
works in Sanskrit, teaching our duties in regard to the four great 
Purusharthas and they enlighten our understanding and action. 
As these words had at first been promulgated by the greatest gods 
and seers, a properly qualified teacher should be found to teach 
their meanings. We require a witness for attesting the truth of 
the Vedas themselves. Such a person and author of the Vedas is 
the Supreme Siva. 

35. * You said that trees (Vegetable kingdom) are lifeless. 
They have life, as they fade when they are not watered and grow 
when they are watered. If not, even dead trees must grow by 
watering them. It is the nature of bodies with life that they grow 

belief is an old one and quite conventional. Compare the passage from 
Mahabhayata. 

“ No one can leave the way marked out for him by Providence. 
Existence and non-existence, pleasure and pain, all have Time for their 
root. Time createth all things and time destroyeth all creatures. It is 
Time that burneth creatures and it is Time that extinguished! the fire. 
All slates, the good and the evil, in the three worlds, are caused by Time. 
Time cutteth short all things and createth them anew. Time alone is 
awake when all things are asleep indeed. Time is incapable of being 
overcome. Time passeth over all things without being retarded. Know¬ 
ing as thou dost that all things past and future and all that exist at the 
present moment, are the off-springs of Time, it behoveth thee not to 
abandon thy reason." 

* We knew that the Buddhist’s logic and Psyhology were faulty 
enough but never knew ere this, that their Biology &c., was a’so 
faulty. Hindu philosophers class the vegetable kingdom with living 
organisms possessing only one sense, namely touch. European scien¬ 
tists have now no doubt about the point and the characterises of plant 


K 


t 



Ch. II.] 


PARAPAKSIlA—REFUTATION OF SAUTRANTIKA 


4 /“ 


with food and decay without it. If you say that the trees have no 
life as they have no external organs, you forget that eggs and 
spawn which contain life, have no sense organs. If you sav that 
when the eggs are hatched at least, the animals come out with 
organs, but we do not see this in the case of trees, know that trees 
have flowers and fruits, they have organs and life. 

5 6. If you ask, whether one life divides itself into many, as 
when we cur, the branch of a tree and transplant it, No; souls enter 
into seeds, rodts. branches and the eyes of trees, as their womb 
and are bom. If you say that oviparoifs and filth-bom animals 
have the power of locomotion after birth and the trees have not, 
then why don’t lame men and animals walk. The variations in 
creation are infinite. 

37. O Bauddha, you assert that It is no sin to eat killed meat. 
Does not the sin attach on your account to those who kill animals, 
knowing that you will eat their meat ? If you were not known to 
eat, no body would kill animals and offer it to you. If you again 
say that it is only those who kill are blamable, where is your 
charity when you earn sin for vour own kind host. Why don’t 

life are moot analogous to animal life, and they arc most varied ar.d 
curious, nay, they manifest such adaptations to conditions aud circum¬ 
stances, displaying the greatest intelligence. And it we want to study 
God’s handiwork, we could not find a better and more beautiful subject 
than plant life. The root and fibre and bark in plants correspond to the 
alimentary canal in animals; ihe‘ leaves to the respiratoiy organs: the 
f!o\. -rs (containing the Pistil—ovary, style and stigma ; and stamens— 
filaments and anthers;, to the reproductive organs. Most flowers con¬ 
tain both organs in each flower. In some plants the male and female 
flowers afe different, the commonest example of whit h are supplied by 
the gourd species, (*«>jr, SnitiX <Sx.) There are also ope¬ 

rate male and female plants, as the female and male palmyra. Of all the 
flower shrubs, tue orchids arc the most wonderful in creation, possessing 
every variety of form and adaptation to needs. There are some most 
beautiful specimens in the Ooty Government gardens, one of which is of 
the exact shap/j of an insect ] which is itself a mimic but in 

most gorgeous colour^. These flowers mimic birds, dove-, p gmies, &c. 


4 s 


blVAjNAXA SIDDHIVAR 


[Bk. II. 

you offer meat to your God ? When you despise your own body 
as unclean, where is your sense when you eat the flesh of lower 
animals ? 

3S. If you say that sentience is again born as the shade of 
an umbrella and the image in a mirror, then know, these shadows 
will disappear with the umbrella or thing itself. So, when your 
five Skandas die, the sentience will also die and not be bom and 
there will be none to attain Nirvana. If you. say that the sentience 
is again generated from the embodiment of Karmic memory as the 
waking intelligence after dream-sleep: then, the spawn, and the eggs 
and the blind man will indeed attain Moksha after losing their 
vitality. Hence, the soul will never be separate from the body. 

39. O Bauddha you defined your Mukti (Nirvaiia) as the an¬ 
nihilation of the five Skandas and their associated sentience and 
the burning up of desire and sorrow as lighted camphor. We ask 
who it is then that attains Nirvana ? You reply that there is none. 
Then who feels the Bliss of Nirvana ? If it is the sentience born of 
the five Skandas, then, it cannot die, and cannot lose its body, and 
you will never release yourself from Bandha nor attain Moksha. 

40. Hear our idea of Mukti. Our Paramesvara, who is 
eternally pure, the supreme, the immutable, all-intelligent, all- 
powerful, and all-beneficent, appears as the Divine Guru to him 
who is balanced equally in good and evil, (§)<gG$2zw Quunucf) and 
grants His Grace (*g$asftun#Lc) after burning up all his evil by His 
Eye of Jfiana, destroying thereby his external and internal senses 
and showing them the four paths of adoring Him, lifts them by 
His hand of Grace, out of the slough of birth, into eternal Bliss. 

«sy 5 n£)(Lp,&£ <*>S)i)uu!J(S$) tutrsvizv)® Qujbv*\)rTti> 

gpi&@ js (ip<aaL—uj@jsssT sdsnoib 

p 

^soj^sS&g) LDfx*v&Qeirev6LfT jfDr&J&Qn trd£l 
©sit got 'Zest 

GViftud)-*c\> inn d&qdb^'rd et»<tiund> 

gj’gtpfiSvu i_Q*rtPGrP(&T± p' QinGl£g!tx>nrirj> 

r iQpQ •t'sorsuuum ermadr Qfi ffjs) 



Ch. II.] 


PARAPAK3HA — YOGACHARA BAUDDHA 


49 


Yogachara Bauddha’s Statement. 

The Yogachara, not thorougly learned in Philosophic lore, 
states that it is Buddbi that is evolved as the senses and the forms 
of perception and that this intelligence is manifest only when in 
union with the sense experience (Yadana) and that intelligence is 
formless, and affirms therefore that the world is a dream and in¬ 
telligence (Buddhi) is alone Sat. 

i , - 

> 3 - — 

Refutation of Yogachara Bauddha. 

1. You asserted the existence of ftuddhi and something else 
which you called sense experience (Yadana). They must be 
different according to you. If not, say that Buddhi ( rind sense 
experience are one and the same. If so, know that Yadana is the 
renewed activity displayed by the Buddhi when induced by Kaga 
(desire), it once unites with sound, light &c. Dreams arise in the 
mind after an original perception. 

2. * If you say that Intelligence is the body, flies) l must exclaim, 
‘I am the body.’ These arc different. If you say they are different 
and the intelligence stands apart from the body and the universe, 
no; when the body is united to the intelligence, the intelligence will 
not be apparent, as the crystal is lost in the colours reflected in it. 

* The Yogachara is the follower of the Mahayana School and 
caUed as such Mahayanikan in Tamil works. The founder of this 
School was Asanga or Vijra Satwa and it was inlioduced into China 
from Ceylon about 720 a. d. by .Vijrawati whose great pupil was Amoga, 
Pu-kung. This is called the Tantra School, and they borrowed their 
rituals from Brahmanism and Saivaism combining with die doctrine of 
Lihy.ma Buddhas (of Nepaul) and the Mahayana Philosophy. (Bdkins). 

Vada a is what is usually miswritten as Ycdana in Buddhist Text 
books. 

I he siatcmcnt and its refutation of this school is vtiy biief, as this 
school virtually ac cpts all that the Sauiraiitika aflirms and any recapitu¬ 
lation i therefore unnecessary. 'J he points wherein they differ arc 
alone _et forth here. According to the Sautrantika, Buddhi is a pioduct 
and not ind- ;vmd-nt of the sen cs. I he Yogachara is inclined to think 
that it may be independent o I the semes hut link, it in a peculiar manner 
with sensation (Vad.ma) Any how thifc is an advance on the Sautran- 
tika wrio 1 a I'oiougb $ i.yavaii and Mayavad:. 

7 





50 


blVAjXANA S1DDH1YAR 


[Ek. II. 


Madhmika Bauddha’s Statement. 

* It is the ten senses that appear as the body. When the 
senses perish, we cannot point to anything else as body, and as 
such there is no body at all (as a substance). As there is no body 
(substance), there is no such thing as Intelligence united to the body. 
Such are the ridiculous statements made by the Madhmika. 

* Madhmika is called Madhyamika in Buddhist Text books. Be 
seems to be a thorough-going Nihilist altogether. This school was 
originated by Nagarjuna (B. C. 43) of the Tibetan Marfayana school. 
1'ardysays ‘ ; The philosophers in India had taught either a perpetual 
duration or a total annihilation with respect to the soul. He chose a 
middle way,- hence the name of this sect." The work which bears his 
name in China is called “Central Sastra” (chung-lun) and was translated 
into Chinese in the fifth century after Christ. This system reduces every¬ 
thing to bald abstractions and then denies them. The soul has neither 
existence nor non-existence. It is neither permanent nor non-permanent. 

V 

It may be noted that Yogi Sivajnana Svamigal gives a different 
derivation to these words. The Madhyamika argued if the world was 
sat. it cannot be destroyed; ifasat.it cannot come into being; if both 
sat and asat, it will be contradictory; if neither, our knowledge will be 
impossible. Hence everything is Silnyam or void ; through delusian they 
appear as objective existence. Inasmuch as he accepted literally his 
master’s (Buddha's) teaching he stood first in rank in the order of 
pupils, and as he did not question his master for further elucidation, he 
stood last; so he occupied a middle rank. The Yogachara was a 
subjective idealist and denied objective reality. The idea or Juana was 
of two kinds Sakara and Nirakara. Our idea of things as round or square, 
black or red is Sakara ; our idea which arises without this limitation 
when our bondage is removed is the Nirakara; owing to Vdsaua, our 
ideas appear as objective. This was his master’s teaching and he accept¬ 
ed it and questioned him further. Inasmuch as he followed his master’s 
teaching it was achara, and as he questioned him, it was Yoga. 

The master taught that the objective reality was dependent on our 
subjective ideas and both had momentary existence only, and there were 
two kinds of aggregates (Samudaya), external (Fumm) and internal 
(Ahain), and the external aggiegatcs consisted of earth, air, lire and water 
and their atoms. The internal consisted of the five Skandas, (Skanda 



Ch. II.] 


PARAPAKSHA — REFUTATION OF MAD.MIKA 


51 


Refutation of Madmika Bauddha. 

1. The parts or attributes present in a pot are not 

present in a doth and vice versa ; that which is present in each, 
saving its identity, is substance («svaioe 9 ). These two form the 
substance or the body, as such, not only is there a body, but also 
an intelligent soul. 

2. (In Sushupti), though the senses and sensations and objects 
are ever prfesent, yet no 3 perception (knowledge) is possible, as the 
soul is not in union with the senses. When the soul unites with 
the senses internal and external), then perception is possible. As 
such both Soul and its Intelligence is Sat. 


Vaibhashika Bauddha’s Statement, 
i. As redness results when saffron and lime are mixed to¬ 
gether, so the visible world arises when the perceptive intelligence 
and objects of perception unite. This is jiiana Darsan. Those 

meaning aggregates; ; Rupaskandas being sound &c., cognised by Chitta ; 
The sense cognising Rupaskanda is Jnanaskanda, which divides itself into 
Sakara or Nirakara. Pleasures and pains resulting from Jnanaskanda 
is Vedanaskanda ; names as Rama and Krishna are Sanjua. The Vfisana 
arising from all these associations is Yusanaskanda. The pupil who 
heard the teaching in the form of sutras (suttas) asked where these sutras 
nil! end. I fence he was called Sautrantika (stitra-antika). Dr. Rhys 
Davids points out that the teachings of Buddha consisted of short and 
disjointed mnemonic sentences called sutras and these were afterwards 
stringed together and this collection was called sutranta or suttanta. 

The Vaibhashika contested the position of the last one by saying 
that this v.as absurd inasmuch as if these were no objects, there will be 
nothing from which our objective cognition could arise. Hence his words 
ar»- cahcd ► in.dd l a Hhasha. '1 hough these different schools differed to 
*■ -.*• c.xttn: in ai'irn.nig or det.y n»'objective reaiity, still, inasmuch as 
t ie doctrim-of lillufaU t> 'm . 1.0:. «ntary do tru< tion, was common to 
all, a i of t' ** 1 ; t \y ci.1 •*! a . '.jity «v uhs. 

Vaib'i 1. i*. 1 lilitra iy Vrruddha lihasha, (absurd language), 

oae who p-j set*. e •••■:)’ oth»*r view except his own as absurd, a school 
wh.th !Arms to have pn\y too many followers) even now. 



SIVAJXAXA SIDIM11VAK 


52 


[Bis. n. 


who perceive this clearly will attain Nirvana without doubt. So 
asserts lovingly the Vaibhashika. 


Refutation of Vaibhashika Bauddha. 

1. The objects are external and the mind internal, as such 
these two cannot unite. 1 he mind is besides formless (Arupa) 
and the objects have form. As such too, they cannot unite. I he 
Vaibhashika who asserts otherwise has no more to say. 




General Remarks. 

Thanks to the labour of European scholars, the book''* relating 
to Buddhism occupy considerable space in any Oriental Library, 
and no religion has received so much attention in Europe and 
America and in India in recent times as Buddhism. It has 
attracted the fancy of large classes of Europeans, who emerging as 
they do from a form of gross materialism and not being prepared 
to believe in a future life or God, yet wish to have a beautiful 
fantasy to toy with for the moment. We won’t believe in a Soul 
or God. We will believe in man, in perfected man; Perfected Hu¬ 
manity shall be our goal. In current modern European thought, 
there is however a divergence; and that is because the national 
ideals of the European and Gautama are different. Gautami’s 
countrymen have always considered life a burden, ‘all is Pain, Pain,’ 
and they wait lor the first occasion when they can free themselves 
from the bonds of birth and death. On the other hand, the 
European would not consider his life worth living, if there was not 
some ray of pleasure to be eked out at all events; and his whole 
aim is in fact to seek and add to the summum of Happiness, 
and we find Max Nardau preach the new Gospel of Humanity, 
according to which, every body shorn off of all lies, shall enjoy the 
maximum of pure unalloyed pleasure, by means of song and dance 
and music and other social organizations. This is a modern 
evolution out of the old Lokayita and Bauddha, and the place of 
Buddhism placed next to the Lokayita by all Hindu writers is 


< 



Ch. II.] 


GENERAL REMARKS 


53 


easily perceived. The order is not a chronological one but purely 
a psychological one. And it will be useful to remember here 
generally that though our Hindu books old and new very often 
neglect to record historical dates and events, yet the}’ are valuable, 
as no histories of any other nations are, in recording the mental 
history and evolution of the race and of an individual man. Some 
writers have also been misled by the mere order in arranging the 
Six systems ,of Philosophy that one school is older than the one 
succeeding it. * It will be "certainly older if we are to count man’s 
age backwards and not forwards as we do. Maturity is not old 
age. It is ever fresh. It is old age that is second childhood. The 
Lckayata is the gluttonous and selfish child, and the Bauddha the 
thinking and generous youth, when life’s troubles and temptations 
beset, it remains to be seen whether he will break or grow into 
robust manhood retaining his generosity and purity. The youth 
rashly vows that he will remain pure and true, when he does not 
know what the strength and allurements of vice are. But unless 
he does, at that very stage, sow in himself good seeds, and what is 
most important, allow them to take firm root in good soil, all his 
labour will be lost. 

W e now turn to the’personality of Buddha, and we may be 
allowed to ofTer our humble homage at his sacred feet. We have 
the greatest respect for the purity and unselfishness and nobility of 
his life. What is often forgotten by his admirers and opponents is 
that he was a Hindu, and a Hindu of Hindus, and as Dr. Kh}'s 
Davids puts it, he was the greatest and wisest and best of the 
1 lindus. In his own time, he was honoured by the princes and 
peoples all alike. They did not care what doctrines he preached, 
provided his character was pure and answered to their ideal of right¬ 
eousness. Sri Krishna places the Xirisvara Suhkhya, Kapila, among 
the first of Sages. Is it because he approved of his theoiy ? No, 
he often takes trouble to refute it. Jaimini was an arrant atheist, 
and he was a great MaharKhi. And to-day, we see the same trait 
in the 1 lindu. It does not matter whether he is a Mahomedan or 
( hristian, if only he leads a saintly life, we know how the 1 lindus 
will flock round him. And what capital, do not impostors make 


54 


sCVAJNANA SIDDIHVAR 


[Bk. II. 


out of this by donning a Kasluya and sitting in ashes, and by pre¬ 
tending maunam, though they cannot read and write a syllable. 
Need we wonder therefore if Buddha Gautama was also regarded 
as a great Rishi, who had a particular mission to fulfil in life ? The 
story goes it was Vishnu who incarnated as Buddha to preach his 
doctrines to the Tripura Asuras. In his own days Buddha was not 
considered a heretic by the Hindus, nor did he regard himself 
as any other than a Hindu, just so as in the case of the revered 
Galilean, Jesus Christ. It was in the days of his followers and 
after the various councils, they seceded completely from the 
Hindus. Buddha was indifferent as to what they ate, and when 
they drank, and how they dressed, provided they cleansed themsel¬ 
ves of desire, likes and dislikes, and when this is 

obtained, no one need consider where to go to or what to attain next. 
But Gautama calculated without his host when he constructed his 
beautiful structure on such slender basis. Could any religion be 
stable which is not built on the rock of a future life and that Rock 
of Ages ? What was the result ? The noble brotherhood, so fondly 
thought of, fell into dissensions even in his own days, and con¬ 
troversies raged hot subsequently on such questions as to the 
time of eating, kind of food, kind of dress, place of ordination, 
owning of property etc., and the followers of each school called 
the others heretics and followers of Mara, and hurled denunciations 
on their heads. And in spite of Buddha’s denunciation of rituals 
and priestcraft, a close and rigid hierarchy with elaborate rituals 
came into existence, and they have invented more heavens and 
more hells and Gods than are to be met with in the stories of all 
other nations put together. And the system had become so 
corrupt even in its birthplace that it had to be removed out of 
the country, root and branch. Dr. Rhys Davids says, “ We hear 
of no persecutions till long after the time of Asoka, when Buddhism 
had become corrupt.” And we wont say that there were no 
persecutions in India. But people should not go off with the idea 
that a persecution in India was at all anything like those we 
hear of in Kuropean History. It was quite a tame affair. It was 
more social than political. And a religious revolution was in a 


Ch. II.] 


GENERAL REMARKS 


sense much more easily accomplished in those days than now. 
From several Pcriyapurxna incidents, it would seem that both on 
the part of the Buddhists and the Hindus, the sole aim was to con¬ 
vert the king of the country, and when that was accomplished, they 
say the whole people had also been converted. So, in either wa)', 
the conversion could not at best be more than nominal. Our own 
belief is that the people, the laity, not those who clustered in 
Monasteries, had never been converted into Buddhism. The 

•* i 

king turned*a Buddhist and all the people styled themselves 
also Buddhists. This will account for. the boasted spread of 
Buddhism in ail India. However, the conflict came at last, and it 
is in Southern India, we have authentic accounts of such conflicts 
from the first century after Christ, though European Scholars know 
very little about it. The southern kingdoms were very powerful 
in those days, and they were extending their arms north and south. 
Inscriptions record the conquest of Vatupi, the modern Badami in 
Bombay Presidency, and Ceylon was conquered more than once. 
And Buddhism ^eems to have been introduced into Southern 
India from Ceylon. And if we take the period of Manikkavachakar 
ns the first century after Christ, in his life indeed we meet with 
the first conflict between Hinduism and Buddhism. And the 
tight was won b} the miraculous cure of the dumb daughter of the 
Ting of Ceylon at Chidambaram. 'I he account is given in full 
d tail in 1 Tirit<aAav.:rar-JnirFinam , to which reference can be made. 
In our recent vi-it to Ceylon we found that the tradition of the 
ewe of the dumb Princess is well known to the native Singalcse. 
1 ater rn, Jainism seems to have been on the ascendant, and the 
'1 ami! traint \ppar was a prominent Jain before his reconversion, 
u 1 \\a^ styled as Bharmasena. After hi-. reconversion, he was 
I'm • if bitterly persecuted by the King of Pataliputra at the in¬ 
ti rat on of the Buddhi.-t (Jain; monks. 1 ii-> contemporary was the 
(.p at Jfiuna'*ambandha, and he reconverted the King of l\mrli, 
K-i.-Pun . a, by performing various miracle-., and gave a complete 
route to tl • Buddhi t . This occurred in the early years of the 
uy.th century, and in addition to the arguments adduced by the 
!.%»r- ] r«fc v. '.-.ram Pi}’-, i a d Mr. Veuknyya, we may point to 


Sivajxaxa siddhiyar 


[Bk. II. 


5^ 

the fact that the Chinese traditions and histoiy point to the fact 
that in A. D. 526, Bodhi-Dharma, who was a native of Southern 
India, and laboured long there, had to leave it for China, and the 
reason is assigned to be persecution at the hands of the Brahmans. 
And it is also related in his life that he was more a Jain than a 
Buddhist, though he promulgated a much modified form of it in 
China. And neither Buddhism nor Jainism ever reared its head 
again in Southern India, though the few who remained were never 
molested, but, on the other hand, were honoured with grants by 

v' 

kings even in much later times. The stories of Sankara and 
Ramanuja having routed out Buddhism are more apocryphal than 
true; they could not have been more than dialectical feats at any 
rate. There is reason to think however in the case of Sankara that 
he might have got hold of the few remaining seats of Buddhism in 
Northern India and established his own Mathams in imitation of 
the Buddhist Monasteries. We hear of no Mathams before the 

v' 

days of Sankara at all. 

The morality of Buddhism has received very high praise from 
high quarters. Professor Max Muller says:—“ The moral code of 
Buddhism is one of the most perfect the world has ever known.” 
But the Buddhist moral code is feebleness 1 itself when compared to 
the Confusianist. But its sanctions are very weak ; and its power 
for good on various peoples has not been proved. Except in the 
case of Burmah, it has not improved the moral condition of the 
people. In China, says Dr. Edkins, “ What virtue the people have 
among them is due to the Confucian system.” Col. Olcott’s own 
statistics show that the morality of the Singalese is much inferior 
to that of the Hindus, and a visit to Ceylon will amply demonstrate 
the fact. Even in Burmah, Dr. Edkins remarks, “ The power 
shown by Buddhism to win the faith of Burmese, I should rather 
trace to the superiority of the Hindu race over the mountain tribes 

of Indo-Chinese Peninsula . The superiority of Hindu arts and 

civilizations helped Buddhism to make this conquest.” Bishop 
Bigandet says: “ The Burmese want the capability to understand 
the Buddhist metaphysics. If the Buddhist moral code in itself 
has the power to influence a peop’c so far as to render them 



Ch. II.] • NOTE ON NIRVANA 57 

virtuous and devotional, independendtly of the element of intellect¬ 
ual superiority, we still lack the evidence" of it.” 

And after all, what was Buddhism, but the child, the product 
of Hinduism ? and “so far from showing,” remarks Dr. Rhys 
Davids, “ how depraved and oppressive Hinduism was, it shows 
precisely the contrary: for none will deny that there is much that 

is beautiful and noble in Buddhism." 

» , 

NOTE ON NIRVANA. 

And I need not go much into Buddhist metaphysics as that 
had been already done in the text. However, a word or t\Vo about 
the Buddhist ideal of Nirvapa. Learned men have discussed at 
great length as to the precise meaning ot this conception, and they 
are all at logger heads. Professor Max Muller and Dr. Rhys 
Davids* however, say that this cannot mean the extinction of a 
soul. “ It is the extinction of this sinful, grasping condition of mind 
and heart, which would otherwise, according to the great mystery 
of Karma, be the cause of renewed individual existence.” The 
definition is so far correct but I beg leave to ask, if Buddha did 
postulate the existence of a soul and a future state or not. No 
doubt, latterly, as among the C hinesc, the conception was thoroughly 
materialised and votaries waxed eloquent about the beauties of 
the paradise. But the question remains, according to Buddhist' 
metaphysics, was there a soul or not ? Our own opinion is that 
Buddha did not go to affirm or deny a soul, though later Buddhists 
made him den}' a soul and Isvara. (vide .S. 1 ). Yol. i page, 60. 
Paul Cacus quoted by Mr. Ramasvami Aiyar.) lie contented him¬ 
self with the fact that the cessation of all desire and suffering and 

* In his contribution to the latest edition ot the Lm ydopadia 
Brittanica, the learned Doctor states that the word 'Niivana' meant ineicly 
drK&iih p or Jiv<in',.mkta condition, a stale to be reached in this life only 
and not a 'tat'* to bo reached after death. 1 le also points oul (p. 7 13 Yol. 
IV) ! ow l. c do trine c .iiitc, the denial of the CNiotence ot a soul i;j tbo 
Hindu :cn 0, o cupicd the forefront oi Buddhi t c.xpo>iti6'iis. 

S 


SIVAJNANA SIDDHH AR 


[Bk. II. 


58 

birth must be the sole aim, and nothing further need be thought of. 

The other side represented by Hinduism was altogether ignored. 

In fact, as we shall show, Buddha only took one side of Hindu 

metaphysics forgetting the rest. The idea of Nirvana as defined 

above is a purely Hindu idea. The word occurs in the Gita (v. 24, 

* 

25, 26), and in the Saivite rituals, Nivana Diksha is the highest 
mystery. The word, literally means non-flowing (the same root 
as in vayu, vahini', Achala, steady, peace; and as this peace was to 
be obtained by casting off desire, it has come generally to mean 
extinction (cf. Nirvananrin Tamil meaning—nude and Nirvaiji— 
nude person. The Arhat (jsiqsgst) is represented as nude). All 
these words—Nirvana, Mukti, Vidu mean therefore casting off or 
giving up Something. What is that which has to be cast off or 
given up ? It is man’s egoism (the feeling of ‘ 1 ’ and 1 mine ’), the 
feeling of like and dislike, desire, the cause of birth and death, and 
suffering and sorrow; and until man s egoism, his separate person¬ 
ality was destroyed, annihilated, no suffering and birth can cease. 
But this egosim is different from man’s innermost soul; and that 
can never be destroyed and is never destroyed. This lives, clothed 
in Glory and Bliss and in a Higher Existence, and is never consc¬ 
ious, and could not be conscious of its existence. Jnanis, Muktas 
both in the body and outside (there is no inside or outside), are 
dead to the world practically, He enjoys Ananda but is never 
conscious of such enjoyment. The meaning will be plain when we 
pause to consider the difference and distinction between a feeling 
and a consciousness of such feeling. In the union with the Sup¬ 
reme, there is no duality. The duality will be present only, if the 
soul in Mukti is conscious. In the absolute, both the subject and 
object merge, though the object is present; it ceases to exist as it 
were, by reason of cessation of object consciousness. Buddha 
never cared to go into these deeper mysteries or as some would 
have it, did not want to throw these pearls before swine. But the 
mEchief has been done, and what he openly gave out has been 
crystallized into a system, and it holds in its thraldom millions of 
mankind. '1 here is always a danger in proclaiming and emphasizing 
an half truth, however whole ome it may be at times. The Hindu 


Ch. 11.] 


NOTE ON NIRVANA 


59 


himself meant to emphasize by the use of the words Nirvana, Mukti, 
Vidu, the supreme importance of giving up desire as the supreme 
means of Salvation, but he does not ignore as Buddha did, the 
entry' of the soul into a blissful state of existence. Though these 
conditions follow one another as cause and effect, yet these are two 
distinct experiences, and the latter condition depends on a Higher 
Will than man’s puny efforts ; another condition precedent to it is 
that man nuist own his allegiance to the Higher-Self and melt him¬ 
self into love’of Him. 1 have elsewhere illustrated the difference 
of these conditions by the simile of the blind man. The blind man 
when operated on, in a dark room, does lose the defect, by casting 
off the film that covered his personality; but can that alpne be his 
goal. The Buddhist ideal will lead the Arhat only so far. He 
might regain his sight but he will still have to remain in darkness. 
It will do no good but this may be in itself a satisfaction so far. 
But w ; th only such a motive, man cannot proceed far. Who will 
think it worth his while to go to an expert doctor and pay him a 
high fee and undergo some suffering too, if after regaining his eye¬ 
sight, the same doctor should enjoin that he should never see 

light. Much better it would have been if his cataract had remained 

■ 

as it was. '1 here are some other schools among us also which go 
by much more dignified names which would land us in the same 
difficulty. Some of these latter postulate utter annihilation of the 
soul at the moment of attaining Mukti, and others again assert that 
there is no anubhava at all. 1 hese views are met by Sage 
Meykanda Deva in his commentary on the nth Sutra of &iva- 
jhanabodha ; and the connection between this SQtra and the 
foregoing one illustrates the point I have been discussing above. 
'I he tenth Sutra'treats of Pasatchaya, removal of Pasa, or bonds, 
“ iDs^tccssiuj fesrOgg'Hib excvdiiiscruSGsQ p, (In Submit¬ 

ting to the Will of the Lord, Mala, Maya, and Karma are all 
removed) and the nth SQtra treats of Patijfiana, or Anubhava, 
the entering into the Blissful condition, j>(ujoii ji&nbdt j/jxrsipcv 
Qs (with undying love it will enter the feet of Mara). The 
following appeared in the * Notes and Comments in the July No. of 
Vol. I of I he Siddhanta Dipiku which i beg permission to quote:— 


6o 


S1VAJNANA SlDDIlIYAR 


[Bk. II. 


“ A reviewer in the Apirl Number of the Asiatic Quarterly Revie on 
Dr. Dhaliman’s work on Nirvana, points out that according to the learned 
Doctor, who is a great authority on Malabhayata , Nirvupa is a pre- 
Bhuddhistic idea, borrowed neither from the classical Vedanta nor from 
the classical Sankhya but from an older system, in which Nirvana means 
Brahma-Nirvana, and entering into the Absolute-Brahman and that this 
system, is to be found in the Mahabharaia and Gila. This is no new 
news to the Siddhanti, w r ho jubilantly sings, 

“ uejLeorQsiKidtiSlrr G^LL'Sesurn^Gsil. Gl.ust sgu&rvvQpio Qurraj 
tBirz&rQ$LLL-eL‘n utru?.p QpetrGmrcmu, QsirL-L-irGixa. 

“ Let me sing, I am lost, my mind is lost, my sense is lost, my body 
is lost." 

“ is frv2> iciTg) S'sviijiTesnSfn'unLsip 
Qp-ott Gvvsmii QsiuLL—irGion 

“Let me sing, I lost my T and gained “ Sivam" 

These quotations are from Saint Manikkava^agar’s Tiruva$a- 
gam , and to these I will add another quotation, which I hope by this 
time our readers have got by heart. I refer, of course, to stanza 
No. 7, in ‘The House of God,’ printed at page 51 of Vol I. of the 
Siddhanta Dipika. 

^ebrGpcvrss^erf) aS(VjGfrs 19.15 s,idretrp 
QpCLfQeirp ^iraSQp Guirebrja’ 
i$6bTp.fleisrpsv)Lo $2einuu pS‘2cmiQ s 
■ cffF 'u cvnp l 9 flyp ui/b/Sl^srecoLD 
QffCOT jru G<?ebrtr>rTS!) 3 >iiTiup (cptiiiryp QpujfcQpndsrtffc 
l$lq5uQu(Vjkgl6miD U)€ 5 >rr>@<au(o<oGr 
Giunmjrv liajGv'Zeo ajesrftGiuiTefrpileo'fco 
UjfltuQputfQrj. 

This day in Thy mercy unto me thou didst drive away the darkness 
and stand in my heart as the rising sun. 

Of this Thy way of rising — there being naught else but Thou. — I 
thought without thought. 

I drew nearer and nearer to Thee, wearing away atom by atom, till I 
was One with Thee, O, Siva, Dweller in the great holy shrine. 

Thou art not aught in the universe, Naught is there save Thou. 

Who can. know Thee ? „ 


Ch. II. 


NOTE ON NIRVANA 


6i 


The simile contained in this Hymn may be drawn out in the 
following manner to illustrate the meaning. The Sun rises on the 
horizon and proceeds to the zenith of its glory; and we have to 
watch a man and his shadow from early morn to midday. At the 
point of rise, the shadow is the longest, and when the Sun is just 
overhead, the shadow vanishes altogether and the shadow is seen 
to decrease as the Sun mounts higher and higher up in the heavens. 
Man might fancy that.the Sun is coming nearer to him, when in 
fact he is goin'g nearer to the Sun; but the other also is a fact ; for, 
but for the influence and attraction of the Sun itself the earth itself 
could not revolve on its axis. In the place of the Sun, place God ; 
and in the place of man. his soul, and for shadow, his egoism, his 
apava, his inperfections, lies, sin. As he nears his God, and gets 
nearer and nearer ‘ G^ssr*!,’ with the thought past thought 

that there is naught but God “ tsjjcxajbtSfigj iLr.fl&Tsnic 
tizssik'Zfi” his evil, his shadow gets thinner and thinner 
Gfhks when finally ail is removed, and naught else remains but 
the one Supreme Light which covers and swallows him in Its 
mystic folds.. 

’Z-.QP'*& ujSsvG&sugGf 
cr a rfySoGsar 

•2^rt cc, &xjG<2. A cxi Ga^i 

fit iSsr/HV G^j. 

“ O Tliou Inexhaustible Ambrosia, Thou King with the sparkling 
spear, 

O Thou Ocean of Intelligence, can I speak it ? 

Swallowing fuiiy what 1 call my *1/ 

The Supreme stands One, alone, without a second” 

. —Artinagiri Natkar 

In that short book of his, Kandaranubhuti, consonant with the 
title of hL book, how often does not Saint Arunagiri Nathar 
emphasize the same truth. 

“ Qu<! .w/t u*. p hco/,,” 

u The good of my having lo^t myself, forgetting all.” 

< 2-1 2u-AV it t ftj 1 —m 


62 


blVAjNANA SIDDIIJYAR 


(Bk. II. 


Qo ffls»pp*teo Q&)n< 3 es>!! SJLjlDjrjp 

^l;SsuppfSjJ(fsa 3 m<Lj u>ppg)G®i. 

The moment my Lord showed me the way of knowing the mark 
without knowing it, I lost my bonds,. I lost my mind involved in 
worldly converse, I lost my intelligence and ignorance." 

flQeunearpp (Sear pfl svn a/$e£eo 
tSI flQsvrrearpp Searp l 9snear’ieoQujn 
Q&'flQsurreorpp eu*i^ltyGetr Qetnpuj , 

Q&j nSQiSL'earpsuQ Drr®£Vih QevevsuQear, 

“ Art thou not the Lofd v'ho inseparably dwellest in the thought of 
those who think of Thee without thought ? 

Thou dwellest with those who have lost their madness by losing 
theil bonds, and their darkness.', 

u niSsmuD g)GefT(ruSesnSear 
Qujn^apiL^tg) i$piggiQeu.” 

“ After the rope of desire is cut asunder into atoms, the unspeakable 
Anubava came into being.” 

These last two lines put in the Buddhist’s and Siddhantin’s 
position in clear juxtaposition. One says '^irSsanj) g>£&r -gi®’ 
and stops with it, and the other does not stop with it and proceeds 
to postulate a higher state of knowledge and enjoyment. With the 
foregoing, both in language and in sentiment may be compared 
the following verses from the Kural of Saint Tiruvalluvar, 
especially as he is credited to have been a Buddhist or a Jain. For 
one thing, Saint Tiruvalluvar believed in a Soul and God and a 
future life, and there could be no doubt about it, and he does not 
make it a secret. He postulates with Buddha that desire, tanba, is 
the cause of birth, 

** jya/n Osjeisru ereoevn ojuSlifd^ ^tr^^ireai pnb • 
peunutSpuiSgaif'-o eMfgp ”. 

" Desire is the unfailing cause (seed) of birth, always, to all living 
beings.” 

And in the next verse, he says that this much desired freedom 
from birth is possible only by desiring the cessation of desire. 
And yet in other preceding chapters, he lays down that the bonds 
of birth are cut asunder, when desire is lost, \upppp <*«ar(2«w &pu 


Ch. II.] 


NOTE ON NIRVANA 


63 

u&igj'x,' that for attaining this means of salvation, the desire of 
love of the Perfect Being is essential. 

“ up&auppp'njesr upfS^BsrjjCi up.eapu 
up&s uprg^L~p@. 

The difference of Pasatchaya and Patijnana are also well 
brought out in the following verse with the familiar simile of light 
and darkness. 

“ ^0srSi.S nsi tux wju&qf, 

tu6ura(^, n 

“ The seer of the spotless vision, after losing his defects, obtains 
Bliss, shorn of darkness.” 

The similarity between xg&r £dsu> and Sdsib on the one 
band, siu !9 and gsruib wuppeo on the other, and the 

difference between these two are what should be noted particularly 
in this and in verse 5, in Chapter I and the whole chapter itself. 

^06 ir Q<?(fi(geS2se: ^sapsuesr 

Q _/iT0ar Q*.7Lj& gnrucn lLS. 

If we turn to the Gi/a, for a moment and read again chapters 
4 and 5, we will find how word for word, these repeat themselves. 
j\s an eminent Indian once observed, we have to read the Gita 

9 

from back-wards, and then the connection of 5th and 4th chapters 
will be apparent. Chapter 5 treats of Karma-Sannyasa-yoga 
and chapter 4 of Jnana-yoga , and the same distinction of Pasatch¬ 
aya and Patijnana is brought out to the full, by the use of the 
words and the same figures as in the Tamil passages quoted above. 
“He who acteth, placing all actions in Brahman, abandoning 
attachment, is unpolluted by sin, as a lotus-leaf by the waters 
(V. 10) (c/. 'ysapusedi &c.) “ The harmonised man, having abandon¬ 
ed the fruit of action, attaineth to everlasting Peace ; the non-har- 
mom^cd. impelled by desire, attached to fruit, are bound {cf. 

1 kc. above). Verses 14 and 15 by the way, meet the common 
fallacy that Cod is the cause of our material naturc,ind is the author 
of the evil, and that all evil and good should be ascribed to him. 
Nothing can be a greater mistake than tin's. Nature, Maya, 
explains the universe of mind and matter and action. Ignorance, 
Anavamala covers the naturally pure human spirit. “ Verily, in 


64 


SIVAJNANA S1DD1IIYAR 


[Bk. II. 


whom Ajnjnana is destroyed by Brahmajnana or Patijiiana, to them 
is revealed the Highest, shining as the Sun.” “Thinking on That, 
identifying himself with That, believing in That, solely devoted to 
That, they go whence there is no return, their sins dispelled by 
Wisdom.” (Verse 16 and \y cf. u ^ 6 BrQp^Brds(g&f)). ,, “Pie whose 
self is unattached to external contacts, finds joy in God.” (Verse 21 
cf. utr&w stfissr^^y u*<sii&Q(—lo ughurnb.) “ The Rishis obtain the 
Brahma-Nirvana, their sins destroyed, their duality removed, their 
selves controlled, intent upon the welfare of all beings.” (Verse 25). 
Having known Me, as (he Enjoyer and Rewarder of Yajnd and 
Tapas •(Mcdapatim ), the Mahevsara of all the worlds, as the 
Lover (Suhirtha, Sankara) of all beings, he goeth to Peace (Santi- 
Nirvana—Brahmananda) (Verse 29). Mr. Kuppusami Ayiar, 
following the commentators translates the word Brahma Nirvana 
into Brahmdlaya , Brahmananda , and Moksha, which no doubt is 
true. But this double aspect of the true Advaita Siddhanta, I 
have taken trouble to bring out, is this the same, as the Buddhist 
view of Nirvana ? Where is the meeting between the two ? No 
doubt both follow the same route and meet at the famous statue 
with the shield : but the one will only look at the one face of the 
shield, lying on the shady side and refuses to go over and look up 
to the other face, exposed to the Full Effulgence of the Radiant Sun, 
and which blinds him with its unspeakable Light and Glory, the 
very moment he looks up (a second blindness and death surely, but 
one where the craving for light and birth is all lost). When, there¬ 
fore, in all seriousness, and in all humility and in the cause of truth 
alone, the inadequacy of Buddhism, and its one sidedness (this one¬ 
sidedness producing evils as it filters down to the masses and in its 
actual working, which we could not conceive, who have no means 
of judging of its practical effect on the life and instincts of man, 
and who but look upon it as a mere theory, a beautiful vision) are 
pointed out, what is the good of our being referred to a beautiful 
moral code, whose beauty nobody denies ? We will admit the 
correctness of the definition of Nirvana, we quoted at the beginning 
of this article that it is the extinction of that grasping condition of 
mind and heart. Mind and heart! Is the mind and heart at least a 


Ch. II.] 


NOTE ON NIRVANA 


65 


positive factor which rests in Peace and Bliss ? Is there no higher 
thing than mind (Buddhi) and heart ? Is there no such thing as 
Soul and God ? Or, is it true, that even according to the so-called 
Hinduism and Brahmanism, the notion of a Soul and of a God are 
also mere phantoms of the brain ? Surely, the saying of the Lord 
is as true as ever. “ Whatsoever a great man doeth, (sayeth) that 
other men also do (say); the Standard he setteth (the opinions he 
holds) by that the people go." There is a fashion in opinions as 
in dress, and Buddhism is the latest fashion of the day ; and he who 
runs counter is indeed a guy and a gawk. 



9 


CHAPTER III. 


JAINA'S STATEMEET. 

Nikapdavadi Sect. 

1. * Let us state the views of the Jains of the Digambara sect 
who worship the Asoka tree, laden with sweet scented flowers, 
covered with bees, who, in the performance of Tapas, inconsistent 
with the Vedic Dharma, go about without clothes,.and with dust- 
covered body, remain ascetics, abjuring family life, and feeding 
sumptuously, carry about with them mats and peacock feathers. 

2 . f Our Lord is the Immortal Aruga, (Arhat) full of glorious 
attributes praised by the Gods, who leaving all the eight evil 
qualities, is clothed with the eight immaculate virtues, as the full 
moon is clothed in coolness. 

3. Our Lord filled with austerity, has rid himself of the evil 
senses and know in an instant what takes place in all places and in 
all time, and is gracious to those who worship him and worship 
not. His other good qualities will be further described. 

44 Leaving the evils of hunger, thirst, fear, envy, liking, lust 
thinking, abusing, disease and death, sweating, surprise, pride, 

* Nikanda means literally without clothes and these are otherwise 
called Digambaras, which means clothed with sky and the secondary 
meaning of Nirvana is also a naked person. Digambara and Nirvani are 
both names of Aruga and Siva. 

f The eight virtues (<simi Qtozcuh) are’ Anantajnana—endless Intelli¬ 
gence, A'-ahta Darsanam —Limitless vision, Atlanta Viryam —endless power 
AxanlaSukam —endless joy, namelessness, scctlessness, (Gotra), agelessness, 
and Immortality. The eight evil qualities are Ignorance 

Defective Vision, Belief in the Vedas, Sensuality, -Possessing name and 
Gotra, and sorrows arising from age and bodily pains. The glorious 
attributes (£vr) are Perfection, Omniscience, Benevolence to all sentient 
beings, Joyfulness, Activity, Being possessed of the fourteen wonders, 
Being seated in Devaloka &c. 

1 It like a King, he must dwell on earth and punish the wicked 
and reward the good, but God Aruga is said to be good to the wicked 
and the virtuous. 



Ch. III.] 


PARAPAK5HA—REFUTATION OF JAINISM 


6 / 


wondering, eating, and birth, and sleep, and being covered with the 
eight good attributes, and being seated in the Highest Heaven 
above this world, He imparted his ' One word ’ to the host of 
Siddh.is who surround him. 

5. Following that one word, the Siddha composed several 

treatises called Charana, Yoga &c., so that mankind may not be 

misled. The gist of these books is that time, space, Dharma 

body and Adharma body, Punyam (virtue) and Pap am (sin) 

Atomic bodies, At;;:a Bandam and Moksha are all eternal 

» 

verities. 

6. Of these, Time spreads over the past and the present 
and the future, and comprises all the three kinds of Tiiyie in one 
moment; Atma, which is limited by this Time, is present in a 
body and fills it wholly, passes through periods of youth, adoles¬ 
cence and age, undergoing various changes, and is intelligent and 
eternal. 

7. 1 he Dharma body causes the Astral body to 

die, so that it may not develop again. The Adharma body causes 
the permanence of the Astral body. Virtuous acts ( Punyam) is 
conducive to the Dharma body, and evil doing ( Pupam) is always 
the cause of Adharma body. Space gives room to everything. 
We will state the nature of the material body (u pscmb). 

S. Material bodies are all objects with forms like iron, stones, 
trees, &c.. which have a power of their own and are present every¬ 
where. The six kinds of perception, such as sight, taste See., which 
cause evil constitute Bandha. Good Karma or 'Papas is performed 
when Wf are loosened from the control of these senses Phis Papas 
will bring about good births. When we get rid of both Punyam 
and Pctpam ahc. -ating the fruits thereof by repeated births, we 
a* tin to !<d; lu 


Refutation of Jainism. 

1 «Sr 2. If you lay that your God Aruga i. associated with 
good quaiith-, a- the moon and its coolness, then the comparison 
1-. not true. I In- evil wa, in him before, and as such, he belongs to 
the ordei ol m-n, 1.1.* good was not inherent as coolness in the 




I 


68 


blVAjNANA SinnHIYAR 


fBk. II. 


moon but only associated and acquired). If you say that Cod 
Aruga attained perfection by his virtue, then it implies the 
existence of one who laid down the rule of virtue for the purpose 
of effecting salvation, and some one who followed it to attain 
salvation. As such we will have to postulate a Being who is above 
your God who is worshipped by those who do not kill. There¬ 
fore which of these will you accept as God ? 

3. You asserted that your God sees and knows everything 
without the intervention of the bodily senses, and yet you assert 
that his body is immortal. If so, his mind and other senses cannot 
leave him, and without these and his body, he cannot understand. 
He cannot know all time at oYice either. 

4. All those who get rid of their evil qualities such as anger 
&c., cannot attain Mukti as your Aruga is a Jiva in a body. If you 
compare him to a King who bestows benefits on mankind, then 
why should he dwell in the City with the golden walls. 

5. If you say that the perfected Arhat derived his teaching 
from the one word of the Eternal Aruga, and gave it out to man¬ 
kind, then as you do not postulate his having senses and mind &c., 
how can he hear what is told him and give it out again. This is 
like the dumb teaching the dumb. 

6. The Aruga dwelling in the Blissful Regions cannot know 
the sorrows of this world and so cannot come as a teacher to 
remove it. If he can know, even from where he is, then he has 
experience of sorrow, and the Blissful Heaven ceases to be such, 
and 1 have really no answer to give you. 

7. You asserted that the Soul fills the whole body. If so, 
where any portion of the body is defective, then the Soul must be 
defective in proportion. Besides this body will die, and when it 
dies, the soul must die also, as the water is lost when the pot is 
broken. 

8. You say that both the Dharma body and Adharma body 
elevates and depresses man, in the same body at the same time. 
This cannot be. If you instance the case of beetles and birds 
which fly and sit, their actions are not simqltaneous. 


Ch. III.] 


PAR’APAKSHA—REFUTATION OF JAINISM 


69 


9. * If you say there is no God who knowing the good and bad 
Karma of mortals, makes them eat the fruits thereof, then there 
will be no one undergoing the joys of heaven and the pains of hell. 
If you reply that virtue and sin attaches to a person of their own 
force as an arrow shot from a bow, then your simile implies a 
person who shot that arrow and we require a God like the bowman. 

10. You said that bodies like iron, stone &c., have soul wtih 
one sense. * But all life is seen to be destroyed, but we never see 
stones and metals die. Besides if these have souls, they must 
attain Moksha also. You are alone in asserting life of such lifeless 
things as stones Sc c. 

1 i.f You say that Tapas is performed when the six kinds of 

# 

perceptions are lost. But no wealth can be acquired in trade 
unless wealth is invested in the trade. (So action is necessary for 
Tapas). If you say that Tapas is reached by the fruits of past 
Karma, then the same Karma explains the growth and extinction of 
the evil perceptions. So you cannot reach Tapas except by action. 

* Both Karma and man have to be actuated by a superior power 
and without It, they will be merely inert. Man cannot choose his own 
good and bad, and cannof foresee the far reaching consequences of his 
Karma and guide his own conduct thereby. 

t Mere inaction or Passivity cannot prevent one’s rebirth and give 
him eternal bliss. If so, then all inanimate things can attain Moksha 
and man himself will be reduced to a condition of a log or stone. It is 
opinions like these promulgated by the Jains, that mere inaction is virtue 
that accounts for the often unwarranted slur that is cast upon the Hindu 
System of Ethics. The misfortune is that some of the phrases and words 
have become so common that they are used by everybody w hetlier with 
meaning or without meaning, whether appropriate or inappropriate and 
hence arises a great deal of confusion. And then these little systems 
having each had their day, have not altogether ceased to be and they have 
left their .marks in the public inind and morals. If the fact be true that 
Jainism wa« dominant in South India for several centuries and all the 
best literal and ir.orali t*» of the period, were Jains, it is no wonder some 
of th< e fallacies have stdl lingered tbcic. Jainism pleached a life of rigid 
asceticism and morality and was thoroughly exclusive. And the six kinds 


) 




SlVAJNANA SIDDIIIVAR 


[Bk. II. 


70 


of evil actions were considered to be cultivation, mechanical industry, 
writing (Being in office), trading, teaching and sculpture. This was 
against the very genius of Hinduism whose ideal was the four Dharmas 
—Virtue, Wealth, Pleasure and Bliss. Hinduism though preaching 
control of the senses, and cessation of all desires only does so, so that it 
may reach higher spheres. “Q&iup&rfhu Q&Leuirfi Quifhufi” (The great sage 
does actions, impossible for others) says Saint Tiruvajluvar in his chapter 
on l, £ppnir Qu^eonr ” (The greatness of Freed Beings), That real 
asceticism does not mean merely giving up family and children and is 
possible in one and all the various ashrams was exemplified in the life of 
this very Sage, who lived with his wife, and continued to live by his 
spindle. In Siddhanta works, wherever the greatness of these seers are 
described, their entire benevolence and love of all God’s creatures is in¬ 
variably set forth. Says Saint Tiruvaljuvar in the same chapter, 

“ cgy i p<sm /f ^pQ surra cap Qpsusyu$rra(S)U> 

Q* homes'll) 6 v/tso.” 

*• The sage is called Antnana, as he is full of virtue, and is full of 
kind actions to all sentient beings.” Says Saint Umapati Siva-Charya, 
in his similar chapter on ‘^j^r.iQprrrr psoremu)’ in his ‘ Light of Grace,' 
*srrsrrp p ’bsv&jiT jpujrraQ^JsIp pms^dbsur 
QiVftr .,ir p • p ati 1 SI*. L 

“ Out of the depths of their love, they are troubled and tossed about 
for the sorrows of their erring kind.” 

Saint Tayumanavar also devotes a chapter to the same subject of 
“ The path of Bhaktas” (^wru/iQ/s^), and he says 

“ P’F'srgsrtViQun Qtx em sapi pQunpscir 

QjiFiimi'ftsnGij 15 £ ksKpan'snuu Qpibif.ir^’otiir.’' 

“ O for the day! when I will think of the Wisdom of those ascetics, 
who consider all life as they would regard their own life.” Compare also 
Gita V. 25. 

But different people and nations have different ideas of wheat is good 
for themselves and for others. A chrislain missionary remarks that “all 
this time the philosophy of quietism has been sound asleep or with its eyes 
fixed on the point of its nose, according to the directions of the Gita, it 
has been thinking itself out of its wits," and puts such things as the want 
of Railways and Telegraphs, prohibition against widow marriage, want of 
education, and civilization and good Government, evils of caste &c., to 

r 




Cb. III.] 


PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF JAINISM 


/I 


12* You say that subjecting one’s body to great privations 
is the greatest Tapas. Then you must assert also that persons 

the discredit of Hinduism (vide page 99. Selections from the Upainshads 
by Dr. Murdoch). One might as well retort and ask if all Christian coun¬ 
tries are free from all vice and wickedness and social evils. If Railways 
and Telegraphs are such great boons, why were they not invented by the 
founder of Christianity. There are more Gcdless men among scientists 
and inventor than among other classes of people. There are more 
unredeemed and God forsaken slums in London alone than in all India put 
together. St. Paul’s first advice to widow is that they should not marry. 
Count Tolstoi’s views on Christianity (which we believe is the true veiw) 
is condemned by other Christians as thoroughly impractical and unfit for 
public Government. Regarding the views of Gita itself, they are unmis- 
takeable. Over and over again, Lord Krishna says that action is neces¬ 
sary. Such action covers the whole field of Chariya ( ' fiemuj), Kriya 
(SPzeixi) and Yoga, no doubt, and any of these acts performed with an 
object and for purely selfish ends are condemned in the strongest terms by 
Lord Krishna and other Siddhanta writers (vide <?tPismtu 46 Lpibfl Q/Pesjuj# 
Qua4 in p^JsSQejn 'Sssii of Kannudaiya Vajjalar). The 64 
charities enjoined on the Hindu cover a larger field of usefulness 

than those known to the Christian Missionary. The charity of the Hindu 
is proverbial. In his fasts and feasts, he remembers the poor and the 
helpless. \Ye require no poor law for our country. Unless reduced to 
the direst distress by poverty and famine, you cannot imagine a more 
contented and happy and hopeful individual. If he does not rise up against 
oppression and tyranny, should'that also be put down to the discredit of 
Hinduism. The strong hold of Hindu Loyalty is his Religion. Be it 
said also to the credit of Hinduism that its ideal of a holyman is not that 
of a sport-loving Missionary, whether the sport be dancing, acting, tennis 
or cricket-playing,* fishing or hunting. The ascetic and saintly life led 
by the early Christian fathers of the chumh docs not commend itself to 
modern day Christians, and Dean Farrar is forced to write an apology for 
them almost, though the tradition is well-preserved by the modern 
Catholic chur h. 

• Mere physical privation conld be no object unless it is un¬ 
dertaken in the service of God or your fellow creatures. Bhakti and 
Jflan.t and cc ation of deJre alone can lead one to Moksha. J he 




72 


SIVAJN’ANA SIDDHIVAR 


[Bk. II. 


undergoing the greatest agonies from bodily disease are the first 
to get to your heaven. If you reply that to desire vainly Moksha 
is itself undergoing bodily pain, then you had better cut off your 
nose in view to your securing Imperishable Bliss. 

13. You say that we can reach the golden city after the 
fruits of past Karma have been eaten up. As Karma is endless, 
what certainty is there that you will finish eating them. If you do 
succeed, even then, when your Karma ceases, body and its senses 
(begotten of Karma) also cease. Your case is like the cat waiting 
to eat the fish after the southern ocean dries up. 

14. . Your trying to reach Heaven, without a God (a First 
Cause) is like the attempt of the pot at the bottom of the well to 
reach of itself the top. As one at the top has to lift the pot out, so 
be wise, and own your allegiance to Siva. 


Ajivaka Sect. 

1. We will now state the case of the Jains of the Svetambara 
sect, who though professing to be filled with grace to all creatures, 
as to one’s own self, yet prescribe such austerities to all mankind, 
productive of immense pain, similar to their own suffering, when 
they pull the hairs out of their head. 

2. The word of the Lord Aruga, with endless Intelligence 
declares that there are five atoms or entities which fill everything. 
They are the earth, the water, the fire, the air, and the Jiva. If we 
are to describe the nature of these five, then, the earth is hard, the 
water is cold, the fire is heating, the air is flowing, and the soul is 
intelligent. 

3. Earth and water have a downward tendency to spread. 
Fire and air spread upwards. And the Jiva enters bodies formed 
of these, and these atoms individually. When it enters besides, 

commentators add that the worship of Jivas, like God Aruga (Arhat) 
though by their karma they have become powers, and principalities and 
Devas, cannot secure this object and the Love and service dedicated to 
the Supreme One alone who was never subject to births and deaths, who 
is A uadi u;ukta and Niniiala, will be of avail. 




PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF JAINISM 


73 


Ch. III.] 

it obtains the nature of the particular body to which it is united. 
This is the way these atoms act. 

4. The first four atoms cannot know each other; neither can 
one atom change into another atom One atom will not enter and 
abide in another atom. Yet they will unite in the living body. 
These never come into being newly; nor do they die by lapse of 
lime. They always unite together and not one by one ; and they 
never change, their nature. 

5. These atoms as such never undergo creation, 

development^ destruction or resolution, can neither be eaten, nor 
swallowed nor digested nor spit out; neither made nor unmade. 
These pass beyond the vast worlds, and enter all bodies and forms. 
These spread always and every'where and are of the same unvary¬ 
ing nature. 

6. '1 he Jiva cannot be seen by the eye (is formless). Induced 
by Karma, they are bom in bodies with form ; and even then, the 
Jiva cannot be seen by mortals, but can be seen by’ the Immortal 
Gods. We will describe the way, the other four atoms mix 
among themselves. 

7. Neither any three of these nor any two of these will be 
found united together. But with earth, all the four will be united 
together; with water, the other two (fire and airl will be found 
together; with fire, air will be found together; and air will stand 
alone. 1 his is the way these four mix among themselves. 

8. 1 here are six colours, namely, white, golden, red, blue, 
green and pure white. Of these, pure white is the colour pertaining 
to the Heavenly regions. 1 he other colours are found in earthly 
forms and are perceived by the soul by touch, perception etc. 

9. Wealth and poverty, pain and pleasure, living in ones 
own country and going abroad, old age and death, all these become 
attached by the result of previous Karma to the Jiva, in the womb 
itself. And the v.oild move-, on subject to the laws of Karma. 

10. Our Lord has further declared that with Puny am and 
Piifxim, these arc all the entities. I hose who understand this to 
be v.iidom w 11 icnch the 11 gheU Heaven. 



74 


blVAjNANA SIDDHIYAR 


r Bk. II. 


Refutation of Ajivaka Sect. 

1. * From moksha, there is no return. As such there can be 
no return of your Lord to the earth to reveal his word ; and hence 
there can be no authoritative book for you. As the five atoms 
cannot reach your heaven, your Lord can have no body. He 
cannot be omniscient for all time nor can he know all things at 
one time ? 

2. You say that Arhats are of two diasses, called Mandalar 
(beings of earth) and Sembothakar (the perfect), and that the 
Mandalars return to the earth and reveal the teaching. Then these 
Mandalars become indistinguishable from the jivas of the earth. 
They cannot partake both the earthly and divine element in 
themselves. 

3. You state that the soul becomes intelligent by contact 
and full union with the body. The soul is not so, when a person 
is not intelligent or when he is an infant. As such your statement 
is false. 

4. If as you say, of the four atoms, some two spread below, 
some two above, they cannot form any one body. If they can 
form one, then the atoms will undergo destruction. If they don’t 
unite, there must be interstices in the body between these atoms. 
As such they cannot unite into one body. They will be so 
various, and there won’t be any harmony and co-ordination. 

5. If you say that these various bodies are made possible by 
their being innumerable atoms, yet as these cannot unite, they 
cannot form one united body. As these atoms spread in different 
directions and are contrary in nature, they cannot conduce to the 
soul being present in them. Your theory is ridiculous. Even a 
thousand sticks cannot form one pidar. 

6. The atoms themselves cannot unite to form bodies as 
they have no intelligence of their own. If you say that air unites 

* The commentator here asks “ How do you know your Lord is 
omniscient? If you say, it is because he has attained to the condition 
of manna, then you can say that all the dumb men and animals etc., are 
also perfect. Besides, if he ever remains in manna, of what use is he to 
mankind? He will be merely an useless sinner". 







Ch. III.] 


GENERAL REMARKS 


75 


all the other atoms with the soul, the air cannot know the other 
atoms and the souls to be united, so as to enable it to unite them. 
If you say Karma effects this union, it cannot be. as it is also 
non-inteiiigent and cannot know the person to whom it has to be 
united. Therefore learn to know the One who brings about the 
union of these various atoms into bodies united to each soul 
according to its Karma. 


GENERAL REMARKS. 

Indian writers, both Sanskrit and Tamil, place Jainism usually 
after Buddhism, in their general retrospect or review of the various 
Schools of Indian Philosophy, and we have* on< e more to call 
attention to the fact that this is not altogether an historical or 
chronological order. The caution would be unnecessary but for 
the fact that eminent writers chiefly European, have been misled 
and have concluded that Jainism had no independent beginning, 
and that it was more an offshoot of Buddhism, and as such have 
failed also to grasp its essential differences, and have therefore 
bestowed very little attention to this system and its Bibliography. 
And in consequence, this School of Philosophy has not attained to 
that amount of importance in the European and Indian minds of 
to day, as Buddhism has. But for all that, so far as South India 
is concerned, it played a greater part and for a longer time than 
Buddhism, and its effect on the South Indian People and their 
literature ha-> been much more beneficial and lasting. Jains are 
-till found nil over South Iandia, and they hold quite a respectable 
p!ar** in >)( icly. ’ whereas not a Buddhist can be found anywhere 
'•sen a a •-ample. Long after Jainism received its death blow 
in ' lie hand > ^ f the Great Saint Sambaiidar, its professor-, were 
allowed to r»*maui unmolested by the people, nay. their kings and 
nobles ri ( o'jia^ed t i-m openly bv grant* of land ami endow¬ 
ments foi there temples Arc. 1 here were many things in them 
\ hit h comnvnck d \hem to the other clas~e». 1 lu»y were very strict 
moral! ts and they 1 M ryemplary liyes At,opc.t»m<\ nil the 



SlVAjNAXA S1DD1IIV AR 


[Bk. II. 


76 

learning of the land, in the departments of literature and grammar 
and ethics and the learned sciences, was in their hands, and it could 
not be in better safekeeping. Some of the best classics in Tamil, 
most of the Ethical treatises, and that excllent grammar Nannul , 
and lexicons were composed by Jains. Added to this, in their 
words, they never went out of their way to be unnecessarily 
offensive to the other classes of the people and in their life they 
conformed to the life of their neighbours as much as possible. If 
the outer man can be a .fair index of the inner mind, you have 
only to compare a Jain and a Buhdhist and a Hindu in their 
externals. The Jain could be hardly distinguished from his Hindu 
neighbour. „ Even in Buddha’s day, his followers have debated 
and differed as to what sort of animal food can be eaten or not 
eaten, though they Say Buddha taught kindness to all creatures, 
(one European writer goes to say that the Hindus never even had 
this doctrine before his days!) and his followers of to-day (the 
mass of them) are gross flesh eaters all over the world; but in the 
case of Jains they were throughout and are even down to-day 
rigid abstainers from all kinds of fish, flesh or fowl. This was 
such a marked trait in their life and character that their neighbours 
and successful rivals tried to excel them in their good trait, that 
Brahmans of all classes in South India, unlike their neighbours in 
the West and in the North are rigid abstainers; and the more 
civilized and intelligent classes are also rigid vegetarians — Saivaites 
— we were going to say. Among the VeJJalars, there are certain 
sections of them, who by birth are vegetarians and call themselves 
Saivaites. Our Pupcit friend once shrewdly suggested to us that 

v 

these Paramparai $aivas, (vegetarians for generations) must.be 
descendants of ancestors who were once Jains and subsequently 
reconverted. And Saivaism to day is so rigidly vegetarian, that 
the words are almost used synonymously by all classes ; and some 
of the §aiva Vellalars, though since converted to Vaishnavism are 
still rigid vegetarians and call themselves Saivaites. We may trace 
also to the influence of Jainism the stopping of all animal sacrifices 
in all Hindu shrines in South India, though they are still in vogue 
in some of the North Indian Temples. The geieral disfavour 




GENERAL REMARKS 


ch. m.;, 


with which all Wajapeya (Vedic) sacrifices are looked upon by 
the people must also be due to this Jain element. The general 
mildness of the character of the South Indian people, their extreme 
docility, piety and modesty may all be traceable to their in¬ 
fluence also. In their Psychology and Metaphysics too, there 
was much greater affinity between the Jain and the Saiva than 
between Buddhism and the latter. We to-day add the opinion 
of Dr. H. Jacobi, the learned translator of the Jaina Sutras, as 

to what Buddha taught in regard to the postulates of Soul and 

* 

God, believed in by the Hindus, and the same passage contrasts 
• the views of the Jains on this point. He says in his introduction 
(Sacred Books of the East, Vol. xxiii, p. 33), “ Whatever Buddha 
may have taught and thought about the state of Nirvana, whether 
he went the length to identify it with absolute non-existence, or 
imagined it to be an existence, different from all we know or can 
conceive, it is beyond doubt, and a striking feature of Buddha’s 
philosophy that he combated the Brahmanic theory of Atman, as 
being the absolute and permanent soul, according to the pantheist 
as well as the monadic point of view. But the Jainas fully concur 
in the brahmanic theory of Atman, with only this difference that 
they ascribe to the Atmans a limited space [Ann,) while the Brah¬ 
mans of the Sankyha, Nyaya and Yaisheshik Schools contend that 
Atmans are co extensive (vibhu) with this universe. On the other 
hand, the Buddhistical theory of the five Skandas, with their 
numerous sub-divisions have no counterpart in the Psychology of 
the Jaina'..’’ 'Ihe learned Doctor aNo proceeds to point out, 
what seemed to us as very' curious in the theory of the Jains also, 
“A characteristic dogma of the Jainas which pervades their whole 
philosophical system and code of morals namely, the holy zois-ticai 
theory that not only animals and plants but also the smallest 
particle^ of the elements, earth, fire, and wind, are endowed with 
soul Ijiva No such dogma on the other hand is contained in the 
philosophy of the Buddhists." Uur own opinion seems to be, if 
we may judge irom some ol the rules for drinking-water by 
straining See., that the’Jain Philosophers seemed to recognize the 
presence of active life germ;, quite invisible to the naked eye, and 


blVAjNAN'A SIDDIHVaR 


[Bk. II. 


~ s 

which are ever present all about us, in the very dust that we tread, 
in the very water that we so scrupulously drink, and in the very air 
wc breathe; and much more largely in all our articles of diet; and 
which are now revealed to the microscopic eye of the European 
Scientist who raises them up all around us in such numbers as 
almost to strike us with terror. We take the liberty to quote the 
following passage also, as they exactly square with our own 
conclusions on the suject.” 

“To Indian philosophers the various degrees of knowledge up to 
omniscience are matters of great moment. The Jainas have a theory of 
their own on this head and a terminology which differs from that of the 
Brahmanic philosophers and of the Buddhists. Right knowledge, they 
say, isfi\e-fold: (i) Mati, right perception; (2) Srula, clear knowledge 
based on mati 1(3) Anadhi, a sort of supernatural knowledge; (4; Manah 
paiyaya, clear knowledge of the thoughts of other; (5) Tavala, the high¬ 
est degree of knowledge consisting in omnisciences. This psychological 
theory is a fundamental one of the Jainas, and it is always before the 
mind of the authors of the sacred hooks when describing the spiritual 
career of the saints. But we search in vain for something analogous in 
the Buddhist scriptures. We could multiply the instances of difference 
between the fundamental tenets of both sects, but we abstain from it, 
fearing to tire the reader’s patience with an enumeration of all such cases. 
Such tenets r.s the Jainas share with the Buddhists, both sect have in 
common with the Brahmanic philosophers, e.g., the belief in the iegene- 
ration of souls, the theory of the Karman, or merit and demerit resulting 
from former actions which must take effect in this or another birth, the 
belief that by perfect knowledge and good conduct man can avoid the 
necessity of being born again and again etc. Even the theory that from 
time immemorial, prophets (Buddhas and tirthakaras) have proclaimed 
the same dogmas and renewed the sinking faith r has its Brahmanic 
counter part in the Avatars of Vishnu. Besides, such a theory is a 
necessary consequence both of the Bnddhistical and the Jaina creed, 
l or what Buddha or Mahavira had revealed was, of course, regarded by 
the followers of either as truth and the only truth. This truth must have 
exirted from the, beginning of time, like the Veda of rhe Brahmans; but 
could the truth have remained unknown during the infinite space of time 
elapsed before the appearance of the prophet ? No, would answer the 
pious believer in Buddhism or Jainism, that was impossible; but the true 




GENERAL REMARKS 


79 


Ch. III.] 

faith was revealed in different periods by numberless prophets, and so it 
will be in the time to come. The theory of formei prophet seems, therefore, 
to be a natural consequence of both religions ; besides, it was not wholly 
unfounded on facts, at least as regards the Jainas. For the Nirgranthas 
are never spoken of in the Buddhist writings as a newly risen sect, nor 
Nataputta as their founder. Accordingly the Nirgranthas were probably 
an old sect at the time of Buddha, and Nataputta only the reformer of 
the Jaina church, which may have been founded by the twenty-third 
Tirihakara, Paisya.” , 

His cnelusions are 11) “that Jainism had an independent origin 
from Buddhism, that it had a development of its own, and did not 
’ largely borrow from the rival sect ; (2) that both Jainism and 
Buddhism owed to the Brahmans, especially the Sannyasins, the 
ground-work of their philosophy, ethics and cosmogony;” and in 
the preceding pages he proves that how all the ethical rules of 
both Jains and Buddhists were both copied from the older 
Bodayana and Apastamba and Gautama Sutras. 

The learned German Doctor has stated the Psychological 
difference in somewhat general terms. \Yc will proceed to state 
them more fully. Hindu philosophers generally classify all tattvas 
or categories into 56 or g 5 ,o[ these the lowest 24 are the elements 
(5! Tanmatras (5), Karmendrya (5), Jfianendrya (5), Antakarana 
ff'hitla, Manas, Ahahkara and Buddhi). As it is. the 24th is 
Buddhi tattva. 

It is this Tattva which the Buddhists affirm as the only truth 
and as the highest truth- Beside and beyond this there is no other 
reality higher or lower. All the 23 that are below the 24th tattva 
are only phenomenally or momentarily true. If any body were to 
a'-.crt that there was anything higher than the Buddhi tattva, the 
Buddhist would regard him as telling an untruth, as suggesting a 
fiction. In his table of Sk< ndas, Vijuann-skanda is one of them; 
but thi-> Vijriana-skanda is merely the six kinds of sensations or 
knowledge perceived by the five external senses and Buddhi as the 
sixth '/mse. As such thi*» Yijiifma is only derived from Buddhi and 
what would be regarded as bom of MayA or matter. 'To confound 
therefore thi-> material VijnAna with the Vijfi&na of the Upanishads 
a mranmgthcnonmatfn.i 1 Atm.il highly unscientific. Passing 


bo 


SlVAjNANA ilDDHIVAK 


[Bk.II. 


beyond the 24th tattva, the Hindus postulate Guna which means 
attribute or quality. This is the quality of the Mulaprakriti. This 
guna is divided into Satva, Rajas, and Tamas and when the soul is 
clothed with these three gunas it attains its distinctive individuality. 
Though this guna gives him the peculiar individuality, the soul 
in its own nature is distinct from the three gunas. But the Jains 
would seem to hold that this individuality brought about by the 
gunas itself as an individuality, apart from anything like a soul or 
Atma behind it. And.it is this individuality which the lain would 
call an Atma in his turn, just as the Buddhist would call the 
Buddhi itself an Atma if need be. It follows therefore why the 
Jain could not postulate omnipresence (co-extensiveness with the 
universe) to hisjiva, but only a limited condition (Anutvam and 
not Vydpakatvam). According to the Sankhya and the Siddhanti ( 
the Soul (Atma) in its own nature is a Vibhu and not an Ann;* 
but it becomes limited (Ann) by its assuming the coat of the 
guiias. As it is, the Atma postulated by the Jain is not exactly 
the same thing as the Atma, postulated by the Sankhya or the 
Siddhanti, but as this gupa personality persists in the Sakala 
condition of the soul, and undergoes various transformations as— 
“Grass, herb, worm, tree, animal of sundry kind, 

Bird, snake, rock, man, devil, angel, titan, 

Of evil might, sage, godling— 

These and all else in this wide universe 
Have I been born, and 1 am weary O Lord.”— Tiruvuchakam. 
and many more, the Jain’s belief is not in actual conflict with that 
of the Hindu. Popular Hinduism does not carry ordinarily its 
idea of the highest felicity (Bliss in Moksha) further than the 
regions of the Gods, Indra, Brahma. Vishpu, and Rudra. Accor¬ 
ding to the Siddhanta, these mightiest Gods, Indra to Rudra 
are only regarded as the ordinary souls (Jivas)of the last class 
called Sakala. We recognize higher orders of souls called 
Pralayakalars and Vijnanakalars who are not clothed with either 
Tamas, Rajas, or Satva guna and who are yet far from having 

* Ramanujas assert that the soul is only an Anu and not a Vibhu 
and the Vedantins that it is only a Vibhu and not an Apu. 




Ch. III.] 


GENERAL REMARKS 


Si 


reached the final goal from which ‘there is no return ‘there is no 
return.’ The highest condition of felicity thought of by the Jains 
is also a god-hood similar to the condition of these Devas. We 
therefore understand why the Jains also believe in the Hindu gods 
as beings who have attained to Arhatship. We thus see how the 
Jain’s position is much greater in advance, and a more positive one 
from the stand-point of the Hindu over that of the negative postu¬ 
lates of the Buddhist. The coming chapters in Siddhiyar will show 
how other scnools of Indian thinkers have gone in advance of the 
Jain view. 

It only remains for uS to add that the founder of this sect 
Mahavira is regarded by Dr. Jacobi as a distinct historical 
personage who flourished at or before the time of Gautama 
Buddha himself. 



CHATTER IV. 


BHATTACHARYA’S STATEMENT. 

Purva Mimamsa System. 

1. We here set forth the doctrines as now extant in this 
sea-girt earth, of Jamini Bhagavan as expounded by his disciple 
Bhattacharya, to the effect that the Vedas alone are true and that 
there is no God and that by performing' Karma h6aven will be 
reached. 

2. The souls have lust and other Cunas (attributes). If the 
Veda was given out by man, they cannot be accepted as true: as 
he is educated, he becomes intelligent, and without education he 
will be something like a baby or a dumb man. (So it is impossible, 
man himself could have given out the Vedas). 

3. * If you say that he who made the Vedas is God and He is 
not a man, then, when He attains a body, He must be a man only 
and His measure of knowledge is as He is educated. If He gets 
no visible body, then He can have no (mouth to utter) and mind 
to think. 

4. All the Devas, Sages and Siddhas and clementals, and 
evciybody also assert that they never heard that the Vedas were 
revealed by anybody. This is what has been imparted from 
generation to generation. It could have no human author either, 
as it treats of future births and states. 

5-t In the Vedas are comprised all the six a fig as and the three 
Upa-Vcdas. All knowledge is centred in it. It is eternal, having 

* This last stanza proves that no man could have been the author 
of the Vedas, as man derives all his knowledge from the Vedas themselves. 
And no God could have revealed it either, which if true, he must have a 
mouth and mind and senses like man to utter the Veda — in which Be is 
reduced to the condition of man, and the former objection again applies. 
So it is not only among those who disbelieve in the Vedas there are 
atheists, but among those within the fold also. 

t The six augas, are Numbers, Nirukta, Grammar, Chandas, Astro¬ 
nomy, and Kalpa. The three Upa-Vedas, Ayuv Vcda (medicine) and 
7 Uiinuy-Vcda (sueiae of warfare) and Cavdarva-Vcda (music). 







Ch. IV.J PARAPAKS11A—BHATTaCUaRVa’s STATEMENT 


§3 

neither beginning nor end. It is ever consistent and in constant 
usage. 

6. It contains rules and prohibitions, and the description of 
the true paths, and the various mantras and their respective Devas, 
and the description of the various sacrifices are contained in the 
Vedas and as such they cannot be all .similar. When people under¬ 
stand all the past, present and future, the Vedas appear in some 

form in all its truth. 

1 > 

7. Observing faultlessly the rules of dividing the words of the 
Veda, the rules of pronunciation, the Karma prescribed by the 
Veda should be performed. 1 hen the great boon of Moksha will 
be secured and all bonds (PaSa) surrendered. 

S. The vast universe has neither beginning nor end and is 
not caused by any one and is eternal and filled with souls, in¬ 
separably united to Karma and manifests itself in the tattvas from 
earth etc. 

9. The Soul is eternal and is omnipresent and is intelligent 
and is united to Buddhi and other Karanas and is pure and 
formless and attains bodies in accordance with its previous Karina 
and understands through the senses. 

10. As gras-, and other leave-* used ab manure in the fields 
reproduce themselves, >0 the pa-*t Karma will attach itself to the 
soul in its next birth and produce fruit-*. 

11. The daily rite-* performed by a man according to the law 
will secure happinc--*. 1 le will secure all kinds of boon he desires, 
by performing Agnihotra. By performing Vedic sacrifices yajfias) 
he will attain liberation. 

12. *' Bv mens of both the Jfiana-kaiida and Karma katy’a, 
a man can liberate him elf. By pursuing Jnana m.irga alone, one 
giving up rilu ds become-* an out ca-*tc ( inner, and the Vedas 
themselves do not prescribe any rule of salvation lor such a 
person. 

• Here Ji'Una-m.irfji '-imply mean the l*elicl in the Veda as eternal 
ami uueau ,cd. 



8 4 


blVA.IN'AN'A SIDDHIVAR 


fBk. IL 


13. The Vedas declare that performance of sacrifices by 
killing/tas// is virtue; following this precept as true, if one recites 
the indestructible mantras he will derive happiness as one, hungry, 
removes his craving by eating. 


Refutation of Bhattacharya. 

1.* Except your words, there is no authority in the Veda itself 
that the Veda is uncaused ( Svayambhu ), if there is, you had better 
show me. The great Mahabhdrnta itself is an example. In the 
same way as the Mahdbhdrata has an author, and in the same way 
as we infer from the presence of things made of earth and cotton, 
that they were made by potters and weavers, so we infer that Veda 
was revealed by an author. And the Lord with the crescent moon 
is also the authority for the Word that the Vedas were revealed 
by Him. 

2. If you say that the Veda was not revealed by God, then 
they will be merely noises like those heard from the sky without 
any meaning. And as such they will be faulty. If you say that 
the Veda spreads its light and makes itself known like a lamp, then, 
it must be limited in its nature. T his is also what sage Kapila 
says. Then it must follow what he also says that they have a 
beginning and an end. How do you prove also that the Veda was 
formless at one time and became clothed in form at another time? 
What you have said is simply foolish. 

3. You say the Vedas will appear united to a person; as you 
don’t describe the person, even a frog is likely to utter your Veda. 
If you say that the Vedas do not mention a particular person as its 
vehicle, that it will be cenveyed to a proper person who is proper 
and fit to receive it, it cannot be Even when we receive clothes 

* Of sourse by inference and by Agama pramana it is proved that 
the Veda was revealed by God. The Agama pramanas comprise the 2K 
Agamas revealed by Siva Himself. Lord Siva has Five faces (Paficha.- 
nana); from the lower 4 faces the 4 Vedas were, uttered and from the 
upper one the 28 Agamas. 








Ch. IV.] PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF BI-I ATTACH ARYA 


»5 

from distant islands we infer there must be a person who manufac¬ 
tured those clothes even though we may not have seen them. So 
there must be an author for the Vedas. 

4. You sav the Vedas are uncaused as people of different 
countries speaking various languages accept the Vedas as true. 
So also are similar pots made in various countries. Hence there 
must be an author who understanding the words and their meaning 
reveals those words without fault. If you say the words and 
meanings become naturally combined as the flowers and their 
fragrance in a garland, even then, there mast be a person who must 
choose the words ; otherwise they will be merely like the unmea¬ 
ning roar of the sea. 

5. In the same way as we are united to our body, so God 
dwelling in the universe as His body graciously revealed to us the 
Word or (Vedas) and having been revealed by the eternal uncaused 
Being, it has been the usage to call also the Veda as eternal and 
uncaused, in the same way as people regard an)' letter containing 
the command of the king as ^530-=^ (Royal presence) itself. 

6. If you say that the three higher castes of Brahmans etc., 
speak the language of the Vedas, then explain how the astrologers 
who come from the fourth caste learned their science, and how is 
it also that in the North no caste is prohibited from reciting the 
Veda^. To say that the Veda containing every thing in itself is of 
the nature of sound, and that it has no author is to say that 
persons come to being without a mother. 

7. If you say that the soul is intelligent as it is united to the 
body, then it will be destroyed as the body is destroyed. If you 
say that the bodily organs themselves become united to the soul, 
then it has no such power. They became united by the intelligent 
action of a creator. Plant-, sprout from seed-, in the rainy season 
and they all die out in the hot weather; so the body also dies. 
Hence the world cannot be said to be eternal. 

If you say that the sou] is omnipresent, then it cannot 
pursue the paths of virtue, enter heaven and be bom again. Or if 
you say it fills the tbdy as the fragrant smell a pot, then it will 
follow that as the body decays ih'* * oul must also decay ; but you 


86 


blVAJNAXA SIDD)IIVAR 


|"Bk. I!. 


are aware of Yogis leaving one’s own body and entering another. 
As you have not understood the meaning of the Veda in full, your 
ideas are also confused. 

9. As the acts performed by a man die with this body, how 
do you say that the past reproduce themselves. If you instance 
the case of manure, then you can as well say that the food eaten 
every day having been reduced to mere excrement, the excrement 
can again produce food. As the acts die with the body, they 
cannot of themselves be united to the body in a future birth. 
'1 here is a Gracious Lord who unites each to eat the fruits of his 
proper Karma, as persons who employ labour give each man his 
wages according to the work turned out by him. 

10. if you say that by performing sacrifices and knowing 
that the Veda is true you can attain final liberation, but this very 
performance will induce desire for wealth etc., which will in turn 
prevent your securing higher knowledge, and thus lose all chances 
of final liberation. The more a man enjoys pleasure by securing 
wealth, the more will his desire be to secure more wealth again. 
Similarly the desire to perform sacrifices to attain heaven will 
only induce the desire to perform Karma more and more. 



Prapakara’s Statement. 

1. We will state to the world wherein Prapakara differs 
from Bhattacharya in the exposition of the doctrines held by that 
austere ascetic Jaimini Bagavan from a diligent study of the 
Vedas. 

2* Such a thing as Apurvn arises after a man has performed 
austere sacrifices, and it (Apitrva) again produces fruits, (in the 

* The Prapakara sets up a new postulate calling it Apitn'ii to explain 
the Karma being undergone in one’s life time, and he does not try to 
explain it as the effect of past Karma. Apurva means something which 
did not exist before. The explaination is as much no explanation at all, 
and naming such notion is like explaining the effects of opium by saying 
that it is due to its somnolent power. 






Ch. IV.] PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF PRATAKARA 0 / 

next birth) after its past Karma has been performed by the body in 
conjunction with the intelligent Soul. When the Soul has attained 
to a condition of freedom from all action and results, and remains 
quiet like a block of earth or stone, then it is that the soul has 
attained Mukti. This U his statement. 


Refutation of Prapakara. 

» 

r. 'I he Vedas assert that it is the past Karma that produces 
fruits and you now set up against the authority of the Vedas some 
new thing as Apurva. If the fruits are not the result of the past 
Karma but derived newly from Apurva . then we may assert that 
the flowers of the sky acquired their fragrance, after they were 
worn on the head. 

2. The Vedas speak of Ananda in Mukti, and what you state 
therefore is erroneous that cessation of intelligence and action is 
Mukti. As well could you say that the man in a swoon is in Mukti. 
Fire deprived of its redness (heat) loses its identity. Your asser¬ 
tion that the soul can subsist in Mukti after it loses its intelligence 
cannot be admitted by us. 


Sabda Brahmavadi’s Statement. 

i it is Sabda (sound) which is delusively understood as the 
Universe. The substance postulated by the ignorant, (as different 
from sound), is a mere myth. The right understanding of this 
doctrine is real Mukti. So says the Sabda Brahmavadi, without 
a proper study of the nature of the Universe. 

2. '1-hU delusive perception is caused by the differentiation 
and inerca.^e (Parinama of Sabda ); and this results in the seen 
Universe. As such the only real entity is Sabda. What is called 
the substance (meaning) is merely the product of Sabda. If you ' 
assert otherwise, then no substance does exist without sound 
(name;. 

3. In two such Words (pj) and an (m.i)’ meaning respec¬ 
tively * (lower and Uakshmi’ at one tim-, and ‘earth and animal’ 



SlVAjNANA S1DDHIYAK 


[Bk. II. 


ss 

words (sound) remain ihe same though the meanings differ. As 
such it is the words (Sabda) that we lovingly utter that contains 
the concept meaning different things. This is similar to rice 
becoming fried rice 

4. It is after we utter a word, we become conscious of the 
substance; as such, understand that the word (sound) is the only 
real substance. If you say that the word and its meaning are 
related together conjointly, then, even when you give,the meaning, 
it is a word. 


Refutation of Sabda Brahmavadi. 

1. If you say the Universe was formed by the delusive 
differentiation of Sabda , then you had better admit also as a 
substance this delusive differentiation. If believing in Sabda as 
a reality is itself Mukti , then you conflict in this matter with the 
express teaching of the Vedas which insist upon the performance 
of rites and the attainment of knowledge as the means of salvation. 

2. As the Sabda is formless, it could not think of attaining 
forms when becoming the Universe- If you compare this change 
to the change of milk into curds, then curds could not become milk 
and the world could not be reduced back to sound, and your 
Sabda (sound) will perish. 

3. * When you predicate change (by Parinama and Vivarlh- 
ana) of Sabda you must admit at the same time that Sabda is 
perishable, as the substance indicated by sound is everywhere, the 
words (sound) become merely the symbols of the things when we 
wish to know them. 

4. You said that the substance has no,form except from 
sound, and that therefore sound is the substance. The word 

* Says a commentator “ If the thing is the Paripama of sound, 
then when we utter the name ‘fire,’ fire must be produced. If the thing 
is Vivavthana , then when we utter the name fire, our tongues must be 
scorched.” As such the thing cannot be derived from Sabda by either 
mode. The word is a mere symbol or mark (s^^dQL'i't) by which 
we have learnt to call the thing. 






Ch. IV.] PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF SABDA BRAHMAVADI 89 

(sound) has two meanings ‘Vishnu’ and ‘monkey.’ Then can 
you say that Vishnu is monkey if sound be the real substance ? 

5. Rice requires fire to become fried rice (so the analogy is 
fallacious). As a number of meanings is united in a word, the 
learning to know the meanings is knowledge of Sabda ; and real 
knowledge consists in learning to know the distinct Padarthas 
(things). As such the knowledge of things (substance) is of greater 
importance il]an the knowledge of Sabda. 

6. The name indicates the thing we have already perceived 
or about to perceive. As such the substance is really the thing 
perceived and not the name (sound). Where did you learn to say 
that Sabda is substance and not the thing ? 

7. Perception (knowledge) of a thing is induced when the 
soul is in conjunction with the internal and external senses and 
their cause (Prakriti) and the thing perceived and the light of God. 
In such a perception or knowledge there is no name but only the 
thing or substance. 

S. As a lamp lights the things lying in darkness, so Sabda 
is an instrument or aid for understanding the substance. The 
Sabda is not eternal; it will perish. The Sabda w r as produced by 
the Almighty God and as such the Sabda cannot be God. 



NO l ES 


As thus explained and exposed, it might be thought that the 
system deserves very little consideration, that this represents an 
efTete and obsolete system. But the fallacies inherent in this 
system are so deep-rooted that they can be detected in many a 
subtle reasoning to day. Many of the word-juggles existing in the 
Vedanta philosophy can be traced to the influence of this system 
such as the myth of the t\ama Pupa Prapancha, as illustrated 
by the simile of the sea and the wave and the foam and in many 
other arguments. The names or sounds arc themselves taken 
for things and hence the confusion in thought. It is forgotten that 
a name is * merely i mark attached to a thing to enable it to be 
spoken about.’ and that there may be knowledge without language 



90 


SIVAJNANA SIDDHIVAR 


[Bk. II. 


and things without names. Says Dr. Bain, “The knowledge that 
guides the lower animals is unconnected with language. They 
observe by their senses the things about them; and the observations 
are remembered in sensible forms. The bush that gives shelter, 
the herbage for food, the animals to be preyed upon, are known 
and sought after, by the sole guidance of sense impressions.” 

“Human beings have numerous experiences of the same kind 
involving the order of nature, without being connected with words. 
The child has a large stock of sense-knowledge before it can 
understand and employ language. The skill of the artizan consists 
for the largest part, in associations between sensible appearances 
and movements; to the stone polisher the sight of the surface at 
once suggests the next blow. Even in a highly intellectual 
profession, as the practice of Physics, the consummation of skill 
requires a large sense knowledge passing beyond the scope of 
language. The physician learns from books, everything that can 
lie expressed in words; but there are delicate shades of diagnosis 
that no language can convey, stored up without verbal expression, 
in the eye, the ear and the touch.” “And there are numerous 
sources of error, pitfalls and snares in the use of names, and 
mostly in the abuse of abstract names, which is exemplified in the 
almost irresistible tendency they have to sugge-t the existence of 
things in the abstract.” 1 he other branch of the Sabda Brahnia- 
vadis, believe in the Vedic mantra (sound) as all powerful, and 
that no higher power like God is at all necessary to explain the 
existence and origin of the Universe, and that Sabda is itself God. 
There are believers in the Veda like Jaimini and his pupils and in 
the efficacy of Vedic rites and ceremonies, and yet who believed in 
no God. Among the modem day Brahmins, many may be found 
who strictly adhere to the belief that the Vedic mantra alone is all 
powerful, and Siddhis &c., can be acquired by the power of the 
mantra without belief in God. The phrase ‘ Man trie Power’ 
embodies the fallacy of the whole system, as opposed to Divine 
Power. Consider the following quotation from Barth, “ Sacrifice 
is only an act of preparation, it is the best of acts, but it is an act 
and its fruit consequently pi-r’sh'ble. According 1 )’ aUhough 


( 




1 


Ch. IV.] PARAPA’KSHA—REFUTATION OF SABDA BRAHM AY ADI 91 

whole sections of these treatises (Upanishads) are taken up 
exclusively with speculations on the rites, what they teach may be 
summed up in the words of the Mitndaka Upcimshat , ‘ Know the 
Atman only and away with everything else; it alone is the bridge 
to immortality.’ The Veda itself and the whole circle of sacred 
science are quite as sweepingly consigned to the second place. 
The Veda is not the true Brahm; it is only its reflexion. And the 
science of this, imperfect 3 r ahm, this Scibda Brahm or Brahm in 

words only is a science of a lower order. The true science is that 

- % 

which has the true Brahm, the Para Brahm for its subject.” The 
Rishis of Tiiritkrtvana were votaries of the Sabda Brahm and they 
believed that they could effect their salvation bv the Ycdic Mantra 
aione, and thought, like Indra and .\gni of old noticed in the Kcna 
Upanishat , th it they acquired all their powers by their own will 
and independent of the Divine help, and became thoroughly filled 
with Kgoism (Ahankara). This Ahankara had to be destroyed. 
Their power and sanctity had to be put to the test. Their power 
was so frail that their sanctity left them the moment they and their 
v. ivei saw the form of Mohhii and Bilchadana. 1 hen they tried 
their powers to destroy these Beings. d he Veda is often symbo¬ 
lized by the deer, chielly as the sound uttered by it is 

supposed to resemble ihe Vedic chant, and the Rishis created a 
gigantic deer and sent it out to kill .^iva. It raised such a tremen¬ 
dous bleat as to reach the uttermost regions and yet it affected 
not th* Supreme; and tl c One took it in its hands and held it 
quite clo-e to its ear. '1 his a’.leg »ry truly illustrates the principle 
that however loud we may shout out the name of Clod, we cannot 
reach h m and know him, unless we do it in all love and in all 
sp rit. One other Yem irk and we close our notes. In regard to 
Bhatlarhjrya’s syvtem, that the Veda is unrevealed (Svayambn) it 
wnl be interesting to note that of tin* present day Hindu system, 
except haivaism, all the other school* hold to this doctrine, and 
ffaivanm alone believes in the Veda as revealed and Clod as the 
revea.er. It odvr s< hno’.s hold that the Veda is not revealed, it 
1 because the Being* they Ixdieve in are not expressly mentioned 
in the Veda itself as the icvealer or they have not ascended to the 


92 


bl VAJNANA SIDDIUVAR 


[Bk. II. 


true idea of God as the revealer of all knowledge out of His Infinite 
Grace. In any view, it cannot be true that the Veda was self- 
caused. It must cither have a human author or a Divine author, 
and it can only be an euphemism to call it Svayambit. 


o 


o 



l 


I 






CHAPTER V. 


MAYAVADl’S STATEMENT. 

1. * We wjll state the system promulgated by the Mayavftdi 
himself, who incorrectly believing that he is himself God and all 
the world is a whirl-car, and yet dwelling in the body, professes 
to initiate other Jivas in his path. 

2. This Brahman is the cause of all the worlds, the limitless 
bliss and intelligence, is formless, omnipresent and etenlal, is true 
and pure, free from all marks and attributes, and is the measure 
of the Vedas, and is without distinction of Jnathuru and Juana. 

3. | As the one Sun shining in numerous pots of water leaves 
its reflection in each and yet passes beyond, so this one God lives 
in each body and yet is imperceptible to the senses and andah- 
karanas. Accordingly God cannot be known by the six kinds of 
proof such as observation &c. 

* Some uncomplimentary epithets are applied to the Miiyavadi, as 
he mistakes the Jiva subject to karma, birth and death and suffering, who 
has no independence ( Asvatai.t/a ), and is of imperfect intelligence with 
the Being, who is eternally free and intelligent, and omniscient, self- 
dependent (Svadav-’-c) and self-luminous ( Svamprakdsa ) and all power¬ 
ful; and the inconsistency of his position is brought out that while he 
professes to be himself God he could not avoid dwelling in this body of 
sin and sorrow and while he professes to reject the whole world as 
delusive, he believes'in the authority of the Vedas and the rules prescribed 
therein. 

| The six kinds of logical proof admitted by the Mayavadi are 
observation, inference, Agau;a t U^amaua, Attta£ntti and Abdva. 

1 he being above the andahkaratjas is God, Jtva being also above the 
andahkaraijas Jiva and God are identical. Professors of this school how¬ 
ever quibble and differ a good deal about the precise meaning of the Jiva 
or Alma or Pur’jjba or soul. One learnt J Svami defined it as r. 





94 


SIVAJNANW SinnniYAR 


[Bk. tl. 


4. The rope appears as snake in darkness. When light 
dawns, the rope appears as rope and the snake disappears as a 
delusion. Similary, the world appears as Sat when deluded ; in 
sp iless wisdom, the true Chit appears as Sat; and all the world’s 
allurements will appear mad. 

5. The world appears derived from the Nirvachana 
Brahman. If not, it cannot come into being at all. If it is an 
independent material cause, it must exist for ever. , (The reason 
why it changes is) because it is a delusion. When both the shell 
and the silver piece are'thrown into the furnace the silver comes 
out bright but the shell is destroyed. So, in Pdra/ndrtiha , the 
changeless God appears as true, and the world disappears as false. 

6 . The material cause of the world is the Sat. As the 
spider produces from itself the thread, and works it into a web and 
then takes it back into itself, so God, originates the world as real, 
and sustains it and when he resolves it, it becomes unreal again. 
Looking to its place of origin, the world and all its appearances 
are also Sat. 

7. * * '1 he course of evolution is this. From Brahm was 
produced Akas, from Akas, air ; from air, fire; from fire, water; 
from water, earth ; and from these elements, plants; and from 
plants, food; and from food the body and its six component parts- 

S.t The above mentioned six parts constitute aitnamayakosa ; 
when the air vitalizes these, they constitute the prdnamayakos a ; 
with the nianas, they form the m a nomay akas a ; with buddhi and 
j'ldnendriyas , they constitute the vijTidnamayakosa ; with the 
above and karmendriyas, they constitute the anandamaya kosa. 


combination of Brahman’s shadow, a bit of andaMcarapa and a bit of 
Avidya! Another talented lady when we asked for a definition, and we 
expected more light from her, gave an answer of the type of the old 
schoolmaster’s definition, ‘refer to the dictionary’ and we were told to 
refer to the Gita and Brihadarariyaka. We will discuss these definitions 
and others latter on. 

* The six parts are skin, bone, blood, nerves', flesh, and semen, 
f Kosa means an organ or part. 



Ch. V.] 


PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF MAYAVADI 


95 


9.* 1 his Brahman appears united in this visible body composed 
of the above mentioned PaZc/iakcsas. The way in which he so 
appears is similar to the rays of the Effulgent Sun which is difficult 
to be reached in the sky becoming reflected in several pots of 
water. Yet God does not become tainted by such contact, as 
Pasa cannot bind God. 

10. f As the same thread strung through countless beads of 
different colours appears , also as particoloured, so the once God 
dwelling in different bodies appears as different beings and appears 
as undergoing different kinds of enjoyments without in fact 

- undergoing such. 

11. * 1 he one Brahman is known by different names by its 
union in different bodies and appears to undergo enjoyments of 
pleasure and pain. It undergoes in the body the four avasth.is, 
Jagra, Svapna. Sushupti , and Turlya. In Jagra it is in conjunc¬ 
tion with the organs; in Svapna with four; in Sushupti one; and in 
Turiya, all these org.ins, and the resulting enjoyments vanish. 

* If so, we have asked, to whom is Bhanda, birth and death, 
sin and sorrow, to uhom is moksha ? Do all these happen to the 
Atma or to the body ? If to the body, and the soul does not suffer, 
why care we to attain freedom fiom death and birth ? What re-k 
we if the body suffers all this ? Are we really seeking moksha for the 
flesh or for the soul? Are all these things delusions merely? If so 
v.ill not the attempt to free one from delusion be itself a delusion? And 
then why should it not remain in eternal delusion ? Are there any defects 
attached to remaining in this stale of delusion and what are they ? '1 hese 
questions and more have been asked again and again, and except the 
honest reply that they are not answer, ibie, no icply has ever lven forth - 
con ing Ai d yet tie, tide rolls on for ever and how many get plunged 
undo its bunding wave ! 

t I o whom doe-> he appear as riiffejcnt and as undergoing 
different experience? To himself or to others? If to otl.cis, who arc 
they! 

I I he five external sen-e t rjc, ear <£.•<*., and the five sensations 
*ig'ht <fo:., at d the four anda\ kaiana* arc the fourteen oigans a< live in 
J~gra ; the four ac'ive .:i Svapna aic the four ar.da’.karat.as; and the one 
i.. o. pi. . stla. 


t 



96 


SIVAJNANA S1DDHIYAR 


[Bk. II. 

12. To identify all the bodily organs as the self is Bhanda ; 
when this false knowledge is destroyed, mukti is attained. The 
seed of Bhanda is in avidya; and by its acts may a and its products 
attach to the Brahman. When avidya is destroyed maya also 
vanishes, when this happens, wisdom (Jfiana) is secured, and Batha 
knowledge disappears. 

13. * By the practice of Karmic rites, andahkaranas get puri¬ 
fied. This purification will induce Juana (wisdom); This Jfiana 
will induce the knowledge of 'Aham Brahmasmi' ‘lam God.’ 
When this ‘Ahambrahma’ knowledge attains perfection, the self 
can be perceived in maya as the moon’s reflection is seen in still 
water. 

f 

14. Brahma Jfiana is knowledge that the Ego is Brahmm. 
And when the self becomes self, and enjoys the self in the self, 
and when such things as body, senses, prana, lose their form and 
name, when the great elements are destroyed, and the self remains 
unchangeable, this knowledge is possible. 

15.1 When we understand the Mahavakyas such as ‘ Tativa 
masi ’ &c., enshrined in the Vedas, they teach us on more truth 
than thou art God. Those who do not attain this knowledge 
perform worship on the five Asanas (postures) and eight kinds of 
yoga, for the purpose of attaining this soham knowledge. 

Refutation of Mayavadi. 

r. The confusing statement of the Mayavadi that he is God 
and that jivas should attain Mukti by attaining Ahambrahma 
Jhimam does not explain the true meaning of Soham Bhavana and 
Mokshananda. Mis statement is like that of one who says that 

* Who attains Jnana, Brahman or something else? Is this 
attainment real or false ? Why should this be possible by the purification 
of bodily senses ? Cannot the Brahman see his form except in Maya 
ar.d before he attains Mukti ? 

•f The five asanas are Kurmasana, Anantasana, Simhasana, Padma- 
sana, and Yogasana. Eight kinds of Yoga are Iyama, Nyama, Asana, 
Pr*!>yatra Fratyakcra, Dbarana, Bhyana and Samadhi. 





Ch. V.J 


PARAPAK5UA—MAYAvADi’s STATEMENT 


97 


the barren crow picked a piece of rock flesh, and with it fed its 
young ones, to satisfy their hunger and thirst. 

2* If it is true th it the Veda states that there is only One, 
(without a second Padartha), then as the same Veda states that 
there are jnathitru, jndna and j'icya the statement that there is 
only one becomes refuted. Besides the statements being contra¬ 
dictor}*, the value of the Vedic authority will suffer (or that state¬ 
ment of Ahr-mbrahma »Jnanam is inconsistent with the Vedic 
doctrine of ‘Tattvamasi’). As you do not, postulate an intelligence 
as the soul, separate from God, Anubhuii (enjoyment; in bliss is 
rendered impossible. 

5/ Your postulate of the only one Existence conrjot be true, 
as, following the analog}* of one Sun shining in many pots of 
water, the one (God) is formless (unextended . and it cannot unite 
with a body with form (extended\ and cannot produce reflexion 
(extended form); and no reflexion is also possible, as there is no 
second thing in which the reflexion can be formed ; and a> it also 
follows that some one else is required to see the reflexion of the 
Sun (God formed in the water (body). 

1 , V' 

• Jfiilhuru or the knower is the sou). Jf.ana is the Chit-Sakti of 
God whereby the soul knows, jf.eya, the known is God. Amtbhuti 
implies both perception, know;edge and enjoyment. Unless difference 
lies at the root, such perception or knowledge is not possible. 

t Other objections are taken as follow. How can the limitless 
and fonn’ess and eternal Being originate in a finite and changeable and 
extended body ? The sun is limited and extended, its reflection is further 
hinted, and extended, and the pot of water is also limited and extended. 
\\ eat is rrfle led js not the sun but one only of its countless rays, 
i ere .» as su h no division ot the one God involved. And no one mis¬ 
takes tre rctVx.on itself for the sun. 

1 be real lahacy in the u»c of the aralogy consists in igroting that in 
t*c bfune a, thing compared, elements cones|»onding to a reflecting or 
rcira ting med.um u po«ili\tiy ignored. And there is aiso the fallacy 
of nAMafci .g the r»-i • >1 n ot (>od for the j.\a mstiad of for God Ilinr-Hf; 
Jf v.c take the s in 1 . God, the rrfVxion a- God's pir“-*n c in man f'oul; 
il'.d the -ata.iri v.t.icb the p;e-er.ee is tc.t a- tht jjva and the binding 




9 3 


blVAjN'AN'A siddhiyar 


[Bk. II 


4.* The being dwelling in the body does not understand 
except in conjunction with the different senses external and internal; 
SAstras also support such view; and yet you assert like the man 
who asserts the existence of h ire's horns, that the One Brahman 
in union with the body knows by itself. And then the Brahma- 
Jnuna said to be attained by your One Being cannot be of much 
real import. Difference does exist between the Supreme spirit 
and the human spirit. * , • 

element, pot, as maya and karma then the whole analogy comes off quite 
correct. For a full discussion and elaboration of this analogy, see my 
edition of Sivajhina-bolham pages no and in. The analogy may also 
be viewed in another light. The reflexion or image perceived in the 
water is only a delusive appearance. Ihe real image is formed only in 
the retina of the eye, and without such perceiver, no reflexion is again 
possible. Though the sun or moon might shine on a whole sheet of 
water, no image will be formed unless the eye becomes focussed at a 
certain point where the light falls. We have frequently watched how 
this image follows one’s eye, as one sits watching in a moving train, the 
moon shining on the tank or sheets of water lying by the road side. So 
also without a knower, soul, God will only be a non entity or as good as 
non-entity. In Bhanda, God is as much Asat to the soul, as the world is 
Asat in moksha. 

* In this verse, a fact is appealed to as proof, besides authority. 
The fact is that human intelligence is found to be possible in mani¬ 
festation only when in conjunction with the bodily organs. Between the 
human mind and the body there is an exact correspondence, correlation and 
connection, and the one rises or falls with the development or decay of 
the bodily organs. If this being is a vibhu, the bodily powers tend to limit 
this intelligence and it becomes an anti (^syjp 1 ). This fact is either real 
or not. If real, it requires an explanation. Which is the being which 
is so limited by the body or which grows or decays with the growth or 
decay of the body itself ? Which is it therefore which is in Bhanda ? We 
point to a being which is in Bhanda ; and which is this being ? It cannot 
be God or Brahman, as the very idea of God is opposed to all sense of 
limitation growth and decay. What else is it fehat is in Bhanda ? The 
Siddhauta view that it cannot be God and that it is the soul different from 
God that is actually in Bhanda becomes irresistible. If the soul is not 




Ch. V.] 


PARAPAK5IIA—REFUTATION OF MSyAVADI 


99 


5.* * If you compare the oneness to the unity of the ruby and 
its brilliance, you only destroy the oneness. Besides, the ruby 
and its light are related as guni and guna. If you deny even the 
attribute of Ic/icliii, Juana and Kriya to the One, then the One 
cannot create this world and It cannot be intelligent. 

postulated, the Bha; da will and must surely be ascribed to Brahman. If 
the idea of Bhacda is itself declared unreal, then the idea of seeking 
liberation frora it, the usefulness of Tapas, Sadana, Sadushtuya, and Yoga 
and Jhina, the idea of moksha are also delusions, and we will be landed 
in a practical absurdity, and moral suicide. We need not quote more 
than verses 36 to 3^ in Gita chap. 3, to strengthen the position that man 
is really dragged into the mire and made to commit, as it were by will 
constrained (SarJara explains as a servant by the king), acd Avidya and 
Maya becomes the King as the Jiva becomes the servant. (See the whole 
note in pp. 74 to 3-2 in my edition of Light of Grace). What can it else 
be but blasphemy to call ‘this’ that is smoke-enveloped and rust-covered 
and sin-subjugated, as the one Supreme Light which is 'Svaut Para 
Pra\aza,‘ ’Svadavlwe,' and 1 Sva Yasase,' ‘Siva Svahan’ and l Sva Yasya' ? 

* The brilliance in the ruby is only a separable accident. In darkness 
it has no brilliance. The Brillian.e is really derived from external light. 
As God is nirguija, His relation to the soul or world as gum and gutiv 
cannot be postulated. The .Mayav.idis would deny to God, Will, Intell¬ 
igence and Power, 1 lis authorship of the woild, and would interpose a lower 
brahman, who possesses these attributes; and South Indians who belong 
to this school regard this lower brahman as asat or no Brahman at all, 
whereas those in the north, of Svami Vivekiinanda school, (the editor of 
the L gkt p/ the East asks why should we distinguish between Brahma, 
Vishgu, Kudra because all those are only asat,; fully identify the two, 
saying the distinction is without difference. Some in the South again 
would deny that this one is SaUhid.'tnanda, while those in the north admit 
it to be su'-h. Under any system of theisti • philosophy Indian or foreign, 
the only proof we haVe of God is be ause we requite an intelligent and an 
all powerful Being who is the author of the origination, sustentation and 
resolution of this woild, an 1 if God i*. therefore no creator and protector 
of this world and po.,e.ses neither J.l.ma and Kriya, the position of the 
Lokayita i i only thereby strengthened, and \vc cannot prove the existence 
of such a God. We have elsewhere stated our reasons why the 
Brahman referred to in the Second of the Brahma SiUras, cannot be 
regarded as the lower one in addition to the reason pointed out by 
Ijt. Thtbaut. 





lOO 


blVAjXANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. II. 


6 * You state that the world is produced from sat as when 
the straw sticking out of an ant-hill is fancied with great fear to be 
snake. If so, the person, becoming so deluded must also be the 
Vikara or modification of your Brahman. Such doctrine will 
only induce deluded knowledge and you will never attain Divine 
Bliss. 

* The fallacy in this simile is in omitting the seer in the Prameya 

< 

to whom God appears falsely as the world There being merely God it 
is unintelligible how any bet-ha knowledge will arise at first unless the One 
himself become a Vihari modified by delusion. When He clothes Him¬ 
self in delusion the world would result when he did not choose, the world 
will not resplt. As such, mayu becomes a real Bhanda of Brahman? 
Fancy how it looks that this Brahman should forget himself and mistake 
himself for what he is not. In our human experience and in the illus¬ 
tration of rope and snake, it always happens that when such illusions are 
caused, the very thing involves the existence of tuo real things and of 
these two, one is mistaken for the other. Both snake and rope are rea 
things. Both of them we know independently. We mistake the rope for 
the snake. Why? Because our eyesight is dimmed by darkness or weak¬ 
ened by some nervous condition of the system. With perfect vision and 
in light, uc will never make the mistake. The real cause of the mistake 
is thus traced to an imperfect intelligent mind and does not exist in the 
rope or snake itself. So the question resolves itself into this. Why is 
the human mind imperfect ? If it was ever perfect, why did it become 
so? This question is fully discussed in the article “Another Side” 
in my “ Studies in Saiva Siddhauta ” and need not therefore be discussed 
by me at length here. 

That the simile involves a real difference of padarfhas combined with 
a mistaken similarity is well pointed out by Srila Sri S. Somasundara 
Nayagar in his numerous works. The two things will not be mistaken 
for each other if there were no points of similarity between the two. The 
snake will only be perceived in a rope twisted as a snake is. It will not 
be perceived in a piece of rock or clay, or shell or silver or any other 
dissimilar thing. The snake perceived will be of the same dimensions as 
the original rope. Are all these circumstances^ present in the Prameya . 
God is Sat, Intelligent and Ananda. The world is asat, unintelligent and 
sorrow producing. Is there any point of contact between the two? 




Ch. V.] PARAPAK5HA — REFUTATION OF KAYAYaPI IOI 

7. How do you make out that the world is Nirvachana ? Can 
any fool talk of a thing which is existing and not existing at the 
same time? If it has an origin, then in must have an existence. If 
it does not exist, it will never come into being. When we, however, 
ordinarily speak of its non-existence, we simply refer to its 
resolution into its invisible primordial cause. 

S* If you say that God and the world bear some resemblance 
to each othei’ though different like the shell and silver, then we may 
mistake the world also to be God or an illusion. If you say that 
Maya was only real when we mistook it for God, but became 
unreal when we saw otherwise, this cannot be. The world in 
spite of its changes remains unchangeable. Earth cannot become 
air or fire or vice versa. So the world is real both in Vyavahara 
and paramartha. 

9.| If you state that the false world arises out of Brahmas 
the threads which came out of the spider, then it must follow that 
(the ch ingeiess and formless) Intelligence becomes changed and 

* The argument contained in this verse is more pithily expressed 
in the following couplet. 

“ £ cj(ycrr'(?L_aj 

-njQ$ 

‘■If both things exist, then will arise illusion; 

Not, when one alone exists." 

For an i ludon to be called an illusion, there must be a reality under¬ 
neath the illusion. When a*l are illusions, the dividing line between an 
iUus'on and a reality is destroyed, and the illusion itself becomes a reality. 
So it is that the Mayuvadi is able to perform the remarkable somersault, 
that while he ioses no moment, no opportunity to call everything but 
his flgobm—we beg pardon—his Ego to be false, he is as much rooted 
to the things of this earth as anybody else. 

f'lhesc two quoted by Juanapragasar cantain the same argu¬ 
ment' in ump'.er language. 

“• * > ■ tu T.» V 

L- ■ UC fi C CP- • g 

* 

"If as web from * pider, from God the world appear 

b.u i- present in God, it i - clear-” 




102 


SlVAj.NANA SIDDH1YAR 


[Bk. II. 


formed into the visible world and corrupted and deluded. If you 
reply that the spider is not caught in the toils of its own web ; but 
(then the change would otherwise be impossible), as no cloth can 
come out of mud. 


“ tgfrzisrQ pjb &i—u)Gfsr 6 i 58 figeutTiuu uspOptyir 
gpGSrQjD UL-LC6Bm6wfiQGU ”j 

“ If not, the achit world will not from’God arise ' 

As cloth from mad you can’t in any way surprise.” 

Of course, some belonging to this school, possessed of a ‘sharp 
intellect and bold understanding’ do not pause to assert the identity of 
God and Maya, but we need not be forced into such absurdity if we 
understand the simile aright. The Mayavadi understands the spider to 
produce the web which did not exist before or to produce from the 
same substance as itself. If, however, we distinguish the spider into its 
life principle, the being with intelligence, volition, judgment &c., and 
its body, from the shapeless secretions of which the beautiful web is 
designed, no better simile can be thought out for describing God’s 
creation of the world. The world and creatures stand to God as the body 
to the soul. From out of His body, from out of the shapeless Maya 
He wills that these world should arise. The intelligence and design 
apparent in creation is all His own and can no more be due to Maya^ 
than the beauty and design and judgment displayed in the web can 
that of the web itself. The material of the web was neither non¬ 
existent before nor after. And it cannot be said to be of the same 
nature as the spider’s life-principle. So all this material cause of this 
world was neither non-existent before nor after and cannot be of the 
same nature as God’s. But as in popular language w ? e always identify 
the soul and body together, our poets and philosophers always sing 
of the identity of the worlds and God; though they at the same time 
take care to assert their difference. Even the insignificant spider has a 
purpose in making its web; but by denying the existence of the separate 
souls, Mayavadi’s would deny to God that He has any purpose in 

''T 

creating and resolving these world, cf. Svetdivatava-Ufanishat, vi. io. “May 
the One God who, spider-like, enwinds Himself with threads spun from 
Pradhana, following His nature’s law, may He bestow on us regression 
into Brahm.” 



Ch. V.] PARAPAKSHA — REFUTATION OF MAYAVAPI IO3 

10. * You say that God manifests Himself in different bodies. 
If God, is so present, then why does He not manifest Himself when 
the body undergoes various avasthas, such as Svapna, Sushupti, 
&c-, (or in dead bodies). If you explain, that it is so, as manas 
and other kara?as are not active, then, it must be, that either God 
became non-inteliigent at times, or with all His presence, the senses 
became dead. 

11. YoU’ assert that Brahman is present in these bodies, 
without any attachment. Yet this Brahman, would not leave the 
body even when it becomes sinful and deceased by old age See., 
and shudders at the very thought of such leaving! Though you are 
fully aware that your Brahman (soul) is attached, it is, your vain 
hope that it be not so. 

12. f You spoke of the beautiful beads strung on one string, 
and of these beads being different and yet resting cn the same 
string. Y’ou are no doubt correct in comparing the different worlds 
to the beads and the one unchangeable God to the string. So the 
worlds change but God remains unchangeable; but that does 
away with your doctrine of Abctha. 

13. Hear O, madroan, who say that God is covered by 
avidya and maya in union with the body, and undergoes pleasures 
and pains, and yet at the same time assert that He has no attach- 

* The Furvapakshi cites as an example the presense of Akai in 
different pots. To this, the following objections are taken. Why does 
Brahman leave the dead body? Even when Brahman is present, why do 
the senses become .active and inactive? If the same Being is present in 
all bodies, why do you hate some people and love others? Why is one of 
different thinking from another? Why is one an atheist, and another a 
theist? Why does one undergo misery, when another undergoes pleasure? 
Is the person suffering in hell, the same as one entering Moksha? Are the 
King punishing, the felon punished, and their respective capacities the 
same ? 

f The Siddhanti accepts the simile, and no wonder, because the 
sir*tie o.curs in the —a non-mayavada work. “There is naught 
whatever, I iqher than I, O Dhanailjaya, AH this is woven in me, as 
multitude; of jewe’j ou a string." (viu. 7 ). 




104 


SI VAIN AN A S1DDHIVAR 


[Bk. II. 


ment, this only appears from your statement that the doctrine of 
non attachment cannot be true. If not, why do you undergo 
pleasure and pains from attachment in actual life, if you say that 
this is only a bhavana of the Jiva, then you must have really no 
shame to say that the Brahman has no attachment, and that the 
Supreme is past thought and speech, and that this Supreme 
Being is yourself. 

14. If the Atma fills each and every body entirely then it 
cannot undergo the avastas, and become inactive. If you say that 
it is not the Atma but the andahkaranas that undergo the avastas , 
then where did your God who was present in the body hide Him¬ 
self? If God was present, the Karanas could not become inactive. 
If you compare God’s action on the andahkaranas to that of the 
magnet on a piece of iron, then the same analogy does not explain 
how the andahkaranas become inactive. 

15. If we can see to-day a sun veiled by darkness, then may 
a Brahman exist veiled by ignorance mistaking its body and senses 
for itself. The statement that the soul having its ignorant covering, 
attains knowledge by clearly perceiving itself to be God, and enters 
moksha, where the soul becomes itself the only Sat, can only be 
ridiculous as it involves the proposition that the amala (Pure) God 
can, at the same time, be impure, to necessitate its removal. 

16. Purity cannot become an accident of the Supreme 
Param. It is an eternal attribute of Him. You ascribe impurity 
to the chit (soul) derived from Brahman, and in consequence, you 
impute impurity to its cause, Brahman also. You do not under¬ 
stand the nature of the soul and mala and karma and mlXy a and 
their First Cause, the Supreme God. If you instance the analogy 
of fire latent before and now manifest in wood, this only applies to 
i'hc case of body and soul, and implies duality. 

17. When you speak of the self enjoying in the self, duality 
is clearly involved. If you say that you do not perceive yourself 
as the enjoyer, then the person enjoying himself is gone. If you 
say that MoVsha is merely removal of ignorance, even then there 
will be sentience present. If you deny this sentience and say that 


Ch. V.J 


parapaksha—parinAmavAda 


105 


conscious sentience is only Maya, then your Brahman itself can 
only be all Maya and be therefore destructible. 

18. Understand well the meaning of the Vedic Text ‘ Tattva - 
masi' (Thou art that'. Knowing well the distinction between 
yourself and the Supreme Cause, practice Soham bhavana , 
To approach the feet of the Lord difficult to be thought of by the 
Gods, practice the beautiful Sadapas and attain Yoga and Jnana. 



Bhaskaracharya’s Statement. 

ParinamavAda. 

t. Though agreeing with the Mavavadi in regarding the Ycda 
as Svayambu, yet he differs from him in regard to the end of the 
Veda, and postulates both bethani and abetham of brahm. This 
Philosophy we will expound herein. 

2. It is Chit that evolves by Parinama into this world and 
Jivas, so Sat (Brahm is all. 1 he Vedas declare the means where 
by the bliss of Moksha can be secured. If these means arc 
followed, the Jiva will lose his separateness and become One with 
Brahm. So the Parinamavadi Stales. 


Refutation of Parinamavada. 

1. Brahm rannot become this world, as the same entity 
cannot become matter, and yet be separate from matter. If vou 
instance the salt present in union with sea-water, even then, the 
nature of salt is quite distinct form the water and the subject 
rannot divide itself into subject and object. Why do you confuse 
yourself whose intelligence is so ponderable ! 

2. If you assert that this world forms only a fractional part 
of God, then this part becomes destroyed in time, and is reprodu¬ 
ced from Maya. If you s-ay that it rc,o!vcs into Brahman it elf 
then this portion of brahman brromrs mere inscniicnl matter only, 
by reason of thi origination arid disaolution. And as you your,elf 

14 



SlVAJNANA SIDDHIYAR 


10 6 


[Bk. II. 


evolve with this world, your intelligence aspiring to soharn cannot 
itself be real and cannot but be insentient matter. 

3. * You instanced the seed as the Brahm and the tree as the 
world. Then your describing God as Eternal and unchangeable 
cannot be true and your Brahm will change into insentient matter 
and die out again as such. Besides, when the seed developes into 
the tree, it has the support of the earth (for nourishment etc) but 
whence does your Brahman, derive support. 

O you, who have become Brahman, r will be ridiculed by the 
world as mad. 

4. Jf you say that as from gold is produced all kinds of 
ornaments, so all this world is God, then it must follow that there 
must be a person who created this world and persons for whom 
this world was created, as we infer from your analog}', persons 
who made the gold ornaments and persons who wear them. 

5. ^1 The Jiva cannot reach the Heaven of Moksha, if its in¬ 
telligence and volition die out. Yet you say, he can reach 
Brahman by losing his intelligence and volition. If this individual 
intelligence & c., die out, then there is nothing to unite with God. 
If without such annihilation, you can reach bliss, then why don’t 
you enjoy it in this body, but instead, try to rid yourself of it and 
subject yourself to all sorts of mortification. 


* The seed and the tree, gold and ornaments, sea and salt pro¬ 
duced from sea are the familiar analogies of this school. 

«[ Mula or Root is here identified by our commentators with Chilta 
or Intellect, in which case what Mr. Davies says cannot be correct. He 
says ‘The mental physiology of Kapila is imperfect. The ‘intellect’ 
(buddhi) merely represents sensational ideas in a complete form to the 
gaze of the soul and the soul never acts. It does not appear therefore 
how abstract ideas are formed or by what means a course of reasoning 
can be carried on. The Vedantists add a fourth faculty called Chiita the 
thinking or reasoning faculty.” We are not sure also if he is correct in 
translating buddhi as intellect and chitta as reason. See pp. 48 and 49 
SivajTauabodJiam for our definition of these terms. Puriashtaka comprise 
Manas , Buddhi and Ahankava and the five tanmatra, sound, sight, touch 
smell and taste. Vikriti are the gross elements and senses,—namely, five 


i 






('h. Y.j PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF PARIN'A.MAVaDA 


ID/ 


elements, five organs of sense, the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue and 
the skin ; the five organs of action (Kanr.et.driya) the voice, the hands, the 
feet, the anus and the organs of generation. The Sankkya Karika gives a 
slightly different classification. Prakriti (mula) is not produced. Prakiiti 
in this sense is the Tamil word Pakuthi (jg,S). That which is produced 
is Yikriti, same as Tamil (Vikuthi) (zS^Jz)). Mahat or Buddhi, and 
Ahankara and the 5 tanv.iatras are both Pakuthi, (ug^) as they are 
produ'ing, anil Vikuthi as they are produced from Mula Prakriti. 

The rest 16 are Vikuthi only (including the 5 elements and 5 

senses and 5 organs of action and rnanas). The five tanmatras are 
produced from Ahankara. So the number of tattvas (Prakriti) is variously 
given as 24 or 19 when we include the five tanmatras or omit them in 
the enumeration. Including Purusha, the total number is 25. The 
Siddhunta classification, as will be seen from the table printed in Sttuius 
t>i bz va StddftJ la, p. 35 accepts these 23 tattvas and postulates 11 more, 
c.f. Vdyusa r.lulj, Purva 25. Ch. 15. 

“ Sdnkhya yoga prasiddhani tavanyapi kanichit 
Siva sustra prasiddhani tatonynniyapi critnasah.’' 

Prakriti is called Mula as it is the root of all the 24 tattvas, and as it is 
the first cause and is causeless, it is called Param. The Puriashtaka form 
the SiPih'-rna Sar.ra. The gross body, St..la Sanra is formed of Manas, 
buddhi, and Ahankara, 5 tanmatras, 5 senses, and 5 organs of action. 
MJa Prakriti or Pradhana is called Avyakta or unmanifested, and the 
rest of the tattvas are called Vyakta or manifest. The manifested or seen 
is Sat, and the unmanifested is Asat (unseen). The soul ox Purusha or 
Luu:a>. is unmanifested or Avyakta. Asat is explained as 0 snsu.nSi 
or Lr'v >’ or Qp : i^^ydt—n a.u, by Saint Meykandan and 

Saint Aru’, Nandi and that this is the original and true meaning and not 
unreal or non existent or illusory will be apparent from the learned note on 
’exit and Asat’ fiom Mr. A. J. Davies, m. a., which we take the liberty to 
extract below. We stated elsewhere how this misreading and misunder¬ 
standing and incorrect tianslation have been the paient of so much 
confusion arid tortuous n*a»onmg. The phrase Sat and Acat’ and ‘neither 
Snt r.o. A it’ o cur \ety fie-ju^ntly and aluay., m conjunction a*, a 
phrav: in the Gita, Mul\ Llrala and Lfa.i huts and Wdas] and when it 
is .aid of God or Soul that it L neither Sat noi Asat' the meaning is 
inte;.ir,iL.c enough it the p mi:*: (Sat and A at) means only Prakiiti (both 



ioS 


blVAjNANA 5IDDHIYAR 


[Bk. II. 


unmanifest and manifest), but it is quite unmeaning if God is spoken of 
as neither existing nor non-existing, neither real nor unreal. The mistake 
consists in reading into these primitive words mistaken notions developed 
in quite medieval times. The original meaning is still preserved in 
popular language—when a man states what he saw with his own eyes 
and heard with his own ears, that is Sat and Satyam (truth) and the rest is 
not Satyam. A hearsay evidence might be as much of a truth by itself 
as a direct testimony, and yet the latter is alone truth, though a witness 
giving hearsay evidence is not a liar. The word Sat originally meaning 
seen and latterly meaning cruth, and from truth to permanency, and the 
only thing permanent, thus it came to be applied to Soul, and God and as 
distinguished from them, Prakriti was called Asat, and when the word 
Sat has beon more often confined to God, the word Safas at has been 
brought into use to mean Soul or Purusha. The same changes can be 
traced in other words also, as in the word Atma, which beginning to 
mean mere life, living things, animals, living body, manas, soul and 
going up to God, has been latterly confined to mean Soul and God, and 
necessity arising to distinguish between these two ‘Atmas,’ the word 
Paramatma and Atma have come into use. In the Tamil language these 
last meanings have become fixed, Atma meaning only Soul or Purusha 
and not God; and Paramatma meaning God; though owing to the recent 
Sanskrit revival, some thoughtless writers of Tamil are again trying to 
confuse these words. Vide —Chudamatji Nigandu. 

“ Qptflp 0 qpuSIQd iLia^dr Qe^earesr 

\-\p ear «£y ggue&ujLLnmvIiT g^airuui.” 


Note — On The Meaning of Sat and Asat.* 

There is a general misunderstanding of these terms as used in the 
philosophy of the Hindus, especially in the system"of Kapila, Sat is 
supposed to mean existence and Asat is therefore represented as its 
logical opposite, or, rather contradictory, the negation of being, or non¬ 
existence. Thus Dr. Muir writes “ These ideas of entity and non-entity 
seem to have been familiar to the Vedic poets and we find it thus declared 
(R. V. X. 72, 2.2.), that in the beginning non-entity was the source of 

* Extracted from “The Hindu Philosophy’’ by J. A. Davies, u.a., m.r.a.9., 
Turbuers Oriental series. 


I 


( 






Ch. V.] PARAPAKSHA—NOTE ON SAT AND ASAT I09 

entity, ‘In the earliest age of the Gods entity sprang from non-entity; in 
the first age of the gods entity sprang from non-entity (asat).’ In the 
Atkarva Veda (X. 7. 10.) it is said that both non-entity and entity exist 
withrn the god Skambha, and in V. 25. of the same hymn, powerful indeed 
are those gods who sprang from non-entity. Men say that that non-entity 
is once the highest member of Skambha.’ The Taittiriya Upatushat also 
(P-99), quotes a verse to the effect: ' This was at first non-entity. From 
that sprang entity (Sat)’’; and in a note he adds, “This phrase is also 
applied to Age! in R. V. X.^. 7, where it is said that that god, being ‘a 
thing both Asat, noD-existent («‘. e., unmanifeste{l), and Sat, existent (1. t., 
in a latent state or in essence), in the highest heaven, in the creation of 
Daksha and in the womb of Aditi, became in a former age the first boon 
of our ceremonial, and is both a bull and a cow. ’’ (Progress of the Yedic 
Religion, Journal A. S. 1865, P. 347). So also Professor Max Muller 
writes “Some of the ancient sages, after having arrived at the idea of 
Avyakrita undeveloped, went even beyond, and instead of the Sat or To 
en, they postulated an Asat, Te my e* as the beginning of all things. 
Thus we read in the Chhandogya Upanhkat, “And some say in the 
beginning there was Asat (not being) alone, without a second; and from 
this Asat might the Sat be bom'" (Sans. Literature, P. 324). There is 
occasionally some confusion in the minds of Hindu writers, especially 
the later ones, about the mea'ning of Sat and Asat; but, with Kapila and 
his exponents, Sat denotes the existence of things in the manifold forms 
of the external world, the Daseyn of Hegel, the Natura natural a of 
Spinoza, and Asat is the opposite of this or the formless Prakriti, the 
mind-matter from which all formal existence has sprung. Sat corresponds 
in each separate form to the “being-this” of Hegel, and Kapila argues, as 
the German philosopher, theft “by virtue of its predicate of merely being 
this, every something, is a finite,’’ and therefore it is an effect because 
otherwise we could only conceive it as absolute being, and therefore 
unlimited. Soul was something different from both. So in the Satapatha 
Brahman* (X 5. 3, 1.) it is beginning this universe was, as it were, and 
was not, as it were. Then it was only that mind. Wherefore it has 
been declared by the rishi, ‘There was then neither non entity (asat) nor 
entity (sat); for mind was, as it were, neither entity nor non entity.” 
The meaning is that mir\d is neither the primal matter (Prakriti), (which 
Kapila assumed to be the source of all formal existence', nor the sum of 
exittuag things The Vcdantins taught that this primal matter was the 


i ro 


sivajnana siddhiyar 


[Bk. II. 


Sakti, or productive energy of Brahma. So says Sankara Achurya “We 
(Vedantins) consider that this primordial state of the world is dependent 
upon the Supreme Deity, (Paramesvara), and not self-dependent. And 
this state to which we refer must of necessity be assumed, as it is essential; 
for without it, the creative action of Supreme Deity could not be accomp¬ 
lished, since if he were destitute of his Sakti, any activity on his part 
would be inconceivable.” (Comm, on the Brahma Sutras. Muir’s Sans. 
Texts. IV. 164). The full development of the Vedantin’s doctrine made 
the external world to be only maya, illusion.' There is nearly neither Sat 
nor Asat, but the Supreme Spirit is absolutely the All. Nature is only the 
projection of the One, or, as Hegel thought, for he was essentially a 
Vedantin. “ The idea in its externality, in having fallen from itself into 
a without in time and space ; ” but this is only a manifestation of the Ab¬ 
solute “ The Absolute, the being thinking (the ultimate synthesis of 
existence and thought, of object and subject), passes through the three 
periods, and manifests itself as idea in and for itself, (thinking); secondly 
in its being otherwise, or in objectiveness and externality, (nature); thirdly 
as the idea which from its externality, has returned itself, (mind).” 
(Chalybaus’ Hist of Spee. Phil. Eng. ed. P. 362.) As Mr. Morrel has 
expounded his views and correctly, I may add, “With him God is not a 
person, but personality itself, i. e ., the universal personality which realizes 
itself in every human consciousness, as so many separate thoughts of one 
eternal mind.God is with him, the whole process of thought, combin¬ 

ing in itself the objective movement as seen in Nature with the 
subjective as seen in logic, and fully realizing itself only in the universal, 
spirit of humanity.” (Mod. Phil. II. 189). Pure Vedantism? though 
Hegel, if he were alive, would protest, against such a statement. But 
Kapila, was tot a Vcddntin. With him, tin aggregate, oj existing things, 
and each separate existence, (Sat)., and the formless Prakriti from which 
they issued (Asat), were objectively real and eternally distinct from Soul, 
though both Soul and Prakriti are eternal and uncaused. Dr. Muir, 
however, refers to the commentators on the Rig-Veda, who explain Asat 
as meaning “ an undeveloped state" and adds that if we accept this 
statement, there will be no contradiction. Asat does not mean simply an 
undeveloped state hut the state of pure or formless existence of the 
primal substa < ce from which all forms have sprung. It is clear, however 
that if Asat means, an undeveloped state then Sat must mean, not the 
essence of au'ihvg, but a developed state, the development of the existing 


K 


I 



Ch. V.] 


PARAPAK5HA—X1RI5H VARA S.XNKHYA 


I I I 


world as Kafila uses it. The writer of the Vedic hymn (R. V. X. 57), 
meant to say that Agni was Asat, but, became Sat in the birth. 
(Janman), of Daksha and in the womb of Aditi. It is clear also that 
Kapila, in this part of his system, incorporated, an older theory, in which 
Asat denoted, at least the undeveloped state from which existing things 
have been developed. Sat was the whole of existent things. In Rig- 
Veda. I. 96, 7, Agni is called Sat as gopa, the guardian of that which has 
a present being. There fs also the germ of another part of his system in 
a hymn of thisAleda. (X. 1.79). “There was then neither Asat nor Sat.” 
There was only the one Supreme Spirit dwelling in self-existence. 
“Desire, then, in the beginning, arose in It, which was the earliest 
germ of mind, and wise men there beheld in their heart, not being 
ignorant, that this is the bond between Asat and Sat." In the system of 
Kapila, it is an unconscious impulse on the part or Prakriti, of instinctive 
desire to set the soul free from matter which causes the emanation of 
Prakriti into the manifold forms of developed life (Sat). This latter was 
in Kapila’s view, an effect, because developed, and implying therefore a 
developing cause. 


The Nirishvara Sankhya System. 

Prakriti divides itself into Mula Puriashtaka and Vikriti ; and 
Sthula, Sukshuma and Param. The Purusha evolving in con jun¬ 
ction with the evolution of the worlds and bodies fancies he is one 
with them and when he understands from attaining wisdom that he 
is different from Prakriti he attains Moksha. So the Nirishvara 
Sankhya states. 


Refutation of Nirishvara Sankhya. 
j. If the Purusha's intelligence is pure, Prakriti cannot 

1 

envelope it- As such, even after Moksha he will become covered 
again. As we cannot get rid of the evil effects of Prakriti by per. 
cciving them to be evil without the aid of the Supreme Intelligence 
(Paraiakti or Divine Arul/i, he can never attain Moksha, lo the 
Pure Being {Cod), there is no veiling by Mulaprakrili. 

2. When the P'urush 1 is united to Prakriti, the Purusha’s 
intelligence becomes cleared up a little and with ihi >, it guides the 



§ivajnana siddhiyAr 


[Bk. 21. 


112 

dark Prakriti and eats the fruits thereof, as does the lame man 
seated on the back of the blind man guides the latter, so the 
Purusha is not the Lord (God). He who unites both and actuates 
their intelligence and activity is no other than the Nintnala 
(Hara). 

3. The Pursha is not self-luminous . Prakriti is insentient. 
Know that there is a First Cause who evolves these two. If mukti 
is attained by knowledge (that you are not prakriti), no, you 
cannot get it by-such knowledge. For removing the bondage, the 
help of the person who brought about the union is required. This 
bondage will be removed by the Grace of God. By following the 
fourfold path of Chariya, &c., secure the Grace of the Ni it mala 
God, and remove your physical bondage. 



( 


V. 


CHAPTER VI. 


PANCHARATRI’S STATEMENT. 

Ne'e . — 'It may be distinctly understood that we do rot want to open 
any sectarian controversy on the subject matter of this chapter. We 
would fain rave omitted it altogether but it would spoil the completeness 
of the work tirder translation. This chapter closes the Parafahsha, and 
God willing, we would enter on the colossal work, comprising the 
SufaksJuan of Siddhiar.] 

1. Mayan (Visbiiu) who is the Beginning, the Formless, the 
Indivisible, the Omnipresent and the Wisdom-Light, took a form 
of his own free wiil, and from out of his just grace,* slept in the 
midst of the vast ocean and gave out the Pancharatra Agamas ; so 
begins the Pancharatri his statement. 

2. Producing Brahma from his navel and creating the worlds 
through him, and creating Hara to destroy these worlds, and 
becoming Himself the Protector for such worlds, He is thus the 
author of creation, destruction and protection. 

3. The Pancharatri states further that his Lord out of His 
great mercy incarnated in this world as the Fish, the Tortoise, 
the Boar, the Man-Lion, and the Vamana, Parasurama, Rama and 
Ealarama and Krishna and will incarnate still as Kalki, and He is 
the God of Gods also. 

4. Our Lord had borne the seven seas in his gill, fas the Fish) 
and the great mountain .on his back (as the Tortoise) and discove¬ 
red the earth which became submerged, (as the Boar), and split 
the body of Hiranya (as the Lion\and measured the three worlds 
fas Vamana) and'became the king of kings (as the three Ranius)and 
had thus protected the earth by destroying the wiles of the Asuras. 
He wul even become the Horse in future. 

5. \\ h^n that elephant was caught between the teeth of the 
crocodile and was unable to get home and cried out 'O my father 
my Lord, () the fi\st cau'c,’ wi;o eFe but our I ord whom we 
won hip for our salvation, ran with rapid strides to his hdp and 
killed the fierce crocodile and gave Moksha to the eb pliant. 



114 


SIVAJXAN'A SIDDIIIVAR 


[Bk. II. 


6. Our Lord of illusive powers churned the ocean and distri¬ 
buted the ambrosia to the Devas, destroyed the evil doing Asuras 
and protected the worlds, and gave out the true meaning of all the 
Sastras to his Bhaktas out of His grace, and thus became 
Supreme. 

7. Our Mayan is himself the Maya, himself the Jiva, himself 
the product of Maya, himself the Maya that binds the mortals; and 
this Maya bandham cannot vanish except ,by his aid.. .Full of this 
conviction, if a man worships Mayan, his Maya will vanish, and he 
will be taken into the Vaiguntam by Mayan. 


Refutation of Pancharatri. 

1. If he was the Beginning, this beginning will have an end. 
So the Vedas say he has neither beginning nor end. Jf he is Light 
and Wisdom, then he cannot unite with Maya (darkness). If his 
body is formed of indestructible Intelligence, then it cannot be 
formed of the Sapta-Datu. 

2. That he possessed the elements of the human body (such 
as flesh, blood, &c.) is evidenced from the episode of Sankara going 
and begging for sacrificial food. When Vishnu opened out his 
head, was it not his blood that flowed out and from loss of which 
he fainted and fell down. Our Lord raised him from his fit, and 
he who slept on the waters walked behind Him. 

3. If Hari can assume form of hjs mere will, then why did he 
not make good his own head, on that day .when he went to eat at 
the great sacrifice, and lost his head by the fearful act of Virabhadra. 
At the entreaty of his devotees, our Lord gave back Narayapa his 
head. 

4. You said that Mai (Vishnu) gave out the Vedas and 
explained their meaning. Who but our Lord, taught the great 
truths from under the Banyan tree, when the whole world lay 
confused through ignorance of the Vedas. He it was who is the 
real author of the Vedas. 

5. You said that Hari begot Ayan (Brahma). He was not 
able to create the (fifth) head of Brahma nipped off by Rudra. 



Ch. VI] parapaksha—refutation of pancharatri 


II 

And is it not therefore false to assert that this Brahma begot Rudra. 
Understand therefore without mistake that all are Siva’s acts. 

6. You assert that he is God and incarnated of his own will 
to protect the world, him who was bom like ordinary mortals from 
the wombs of a few individuals ! The Lotus-bom Brahma unable 
to create, prayed to Hara, and the Lord of the Vedas burst forth 
from Brahma’s forehead and taught him the act of creation. 

7. As.>jarayana begot Brahma and Brahma created Narayana 
so each is the cause of the other. That the first cause of both is 
the Lord who cleaved the body of the eiephant-Asura, is asserted 
by the Veda. As such indeed, Vishnu and Brahma became merged 
on either side of Hara. 

8. You said that the world is destroyed by the ’fiat of Hari. 
But he cannot stay his own destructiou which comes at the end of 
time; and the Relics of Vishnu's frequent deaths, are worn by 
Rudra. So too is destroyed the assertion that by the flat of Hari 
everything is destroyed. The Destroying Siva, it is He, who also 
creates and deve’.opes the world. 

9. You stated that Mayan protected the three worlds. He, 
to cleave the body of Jalandara of whom he was afraid, prayed 
to our Lord for the Discus, and on obtaining it, he killed the 
Asuras, and protected the world; and this episode is well-known 
everyhere. As such Sankara it is, that protects. 

10. When Mai assuming the form of a fish carried the seven 
seas in its gill and threatened the whole world with destruction, 
presuming that he was # the Lord of Samharam, the Lord of the 
trident speared the fish and severing the gill and eyes, put them 
on the trident as an ornament. 

1 1. 'When Vishpu assuming the form of the tortoise bore the 
mountain Meru as a supporting piece of rock he became pulled 
with pride, and asserted that he was the support of the whole world. 
And the devas kept -»ilcriit without supporting or repudiating his 
claim. Hara, looking on, broke the loi toLe open, and put on the 
shell a- an ornament, 

12. As the Boar, he cleaved through the seven worlds ^nd 
bore them on hi, tu>k, and put him-elf forward as the only 


/ 


l 


KJ « 


SIVAJNANA S1DDHIYAR 


[Bk. II. 


116 

Adorable 1 ight of the world. 1 hen did the Lord who delights to 
dance in the Burial ground, tear out the boar's tusk, felling him 
down. 

13. When Hiranya asked if Viohnu was in that pillar and 
struck it with his foot, Vishnu appeared as the man-lion and 
catching him cleaved his body and assumed the God. Then did 
Hara appear as the Sarabha Bird and subdue the man-lion. 

14. Begging for alms, and obtaining the three fe,et of earth, 
and taking the Heavens also, he took a mean advantage and 
imprisoned the giver Maha Bali. Such as he, cannot be the Lord. 
They are not the best of men who injure their benefactors. 

15. You would make him as the Lord of Maya, him who not 
knowing the illusive deer as a deceitful creature, was caught in the 
toils of the Rakshasa and thus lost his wife. Becoming bewildered 
(from the loss of his wife), he went and killed the Rakshasa and 
to purge himself of the sin of killing, worshipped the divine Father 
(at Ramesvaram). 

1 6. Parasu Rama, a devotee of Paramesvara, conquered 
all the race of kings, and for freedom from the consequent sins, he 
again performed austere penance and worshipped Paramesvara. 
Bala Rama again stood in Yogic contemplation by meditation of 
Lima’s Lord, adored by the whole world. 

17*. When Maharishi Upamanyu bestowed his gracious look 
on Vasudeva (Krishna) and touched his head with his hand and 
made him a vassal of Paramesvara, do you know that the said 
Vasudeva dedicated his body and soul and,wealth to the service of 
his teacher and fell down and worshipped him. 

18. You said that as a horse (Kalki) Vishgu will become 
incarnate in the future. If he does, we do not know what will 
befall him from our Isa. You have learnt what happened during 
the previous avatara . Nothing but the glory of the Lord whose 
crown is adorned with konrai (cassia) flowers did shine every¬ 
where. 


* The Anueasana Paiva of Mahabarat gives the full account of 
Lonl Krishna's initiation. 


i 


V 


( 




Ch. VI] PARAPAKSHA—REFUTATION OF PANCHARATRI 


II7 


19*. Simply because the elephant cried out ‘O First Cause/ 
should God Vishpu be held therefore as such. When any one 
cries out “justice ! justice! O king,” does the King himself run up 
to him. This act of the Lord of Protection is like that of the City 
Magistrate who renders justice. 

20. Besides, the elephant was a vassal of Vishnu, and if it 
called its master 'Adimulam/ the latter does not thereby become 
so. For instance, your o\\ T n slave calls you 1 my Lord,’ and hence 
you are not to compare yourself to your Lord Vishnu. 

21 . f You said the Devas partook the ambrosia by the aid of 
• Vishnu who swallowed the earth. When the fearful poison arose 

from the sea, and Vishpu and other gods fled to the supreme king 
and cried “Save us O Lord from this untimely death”, then if the 
Supreme PaSupathi did not swallow the poison, how could the 
gods have partaken of the ambrosia ? 

22. When Vishnu fled from fear of the Asura, Sura Padma, 
the latter was killed by God Kumara, the Son ; Asura Tharuka 
was killed by Sakti Kal.i ; the three forts of the Asuras were burnt 
down and Jalandhra was smashed. Did not Isvara protect the 
world by all these mercies ? 

23. * When Partha (Arjuna) seated on the car saw the 
assembled hosts and all of them his kinsmen and he refused to slay 
them with his sharp arrows and reign as king after their death, the 
wily words uttered by Vishnu to induce him to fight, you accept 
as your high authority. Why don’t you also accept the words of 
the Buddha Avatar of VLbnu, propagated for the conquest of the 
Tiripura Asuras. 


* Both -derive their power from a Superior Power, which to all 
appearan.e is invisible and inscrutable and latent: but the moment the 
inferior power begins to misuse or abuse its authority, then will the 
Power of the King and Master be brought into certain play. 

t Thi ’story is given in Vulmilri's Rfimayana. This .story is the 
apt<* 5 t il u-tration of the nature of the supreme being as defined in the 
Kural " Jctca >J/t tv ” 

J God Vishpu ’»** said to have taught Buddhism to the Tirupura 
a u a , to picpsue tic 11 for their defeat, 011 the prn ciplc laid down by the 


/ 



SIVAJNANA SIDDIIIVAU 


[Bk. II. 


118 


24* *. Mays cannot become souls; nor souls maya. Mayan 
cannot become these last nor they, Him. These padarthas, Pasa, 
Pasu and Pathi are eternal. He being omnipresent. He appears as 
the All in all; (and cannot become these). 

25. f When the pure Agamas assert that mukti is obtained by 
the soul ridding itself of its PaSa and uniting itself to the Pathi, and 
when you would senseless say that your Immaculate Vishnu will 
become the ignorant soul, will not tlpe wise fe.eh ashamed and 
leave this confounded theory to yourself. 

26. When Brahma and Vishnu fought for each others’ 
superiority as the Supreme Brahman, and the Supreme looked on 
and stood in their midst as a Pillar of flaming fire, He was not 
understood by the fighting Gods. Such Vishnu you say is the 
Supreme! 

27. He cannot be God who in his fight with the Maharishi 
Dadichi was vanquished by the latter, 

Mahabharat “The man for whom the gods are preparing defeat, is deprived 
by them of understanding; he sees everything pervertedly.” Dr. Muir 
also quotes the parallel lines from Latin and gieek. 

“God deprives of reason those whom he wishes to destroy.” But 
when the God brings evil upon a man, he first injures his understanding 
and he cites from the Bible also passages containing the sante sentiment. 

* It is this nature of the union of souls and matter and God that 
people would not understand. This union is advaita and is not dualistic 
nor external and internal norl Pari^iama nor Vivarta. Have any of the 
schools of modern Hinduism compared the simile of vowels and conson¬ 
ants postulated by the Siddhanta, with the similes of rope and snake, gold 
and ornaments &c. &c. Everything is in Him and He is in everything. 
God is immanent in all nature and yet he is beyond all.. Light is in 

1 

darkness and yet beyond it too. God has no opposite. In his Presence 
everything else is naught “psBTgv tfujeoVeo tum/fl Quneir Says Saint 
Manickavachaka. In this single sentence is exhibited the Highest 
Doctrine of Pure Monism of Advaita. 

f The novel doctrine sometimes broached is that the so-called 
God though clothed with three gui.ias (the substance of Prakriti) as any 
other mortal is, is not contaminated by it. The Puranic traditions we 
possess of these Gods only prove tl e c jn.r.iry. 



Ch.' VI] PARAPAKSH A—REFUTATION OF PANCHARATRI I 19 

2 S. He cannot be God who was punished by the Rishi 
Ddrvasa ; and from the scar left on his chest, is he not called 
Tirumarnmarbhan. 'He with the scar in his chest’? 

29. When Maharishi Brigu found marks of violence left on 
his wife’s body by Mai, and swore on the strength of his true 
allegiance to Isa, that such a violator of women’s chastity should 
undergo ten evil births, Mai fell down shuddering. 

30. When, in fear of, this curse, he prayed to the Supreme 
(Para) the latter appeared and comforted him and asked him 
what he wanted and when he preferred his prayer that he should 

• be rid of Bhrigu’s curse, the Lord replied that Bhrigu was his 
Bhakta; and when he further prayed that he should be redeemed 
at every one of his births, the Lord of the world promisedto do so. 

31. * He cannot be the Ninmala God who bound by the 
curse of Bhrigu was bom ten times, and endured sorrow and pain. 
As such, be assured Hari cannot be divine. Be advised and 
worship the lotus feet of the Blue-throated God of gods. 



• The unfortunate part of it is, that in such an orthodox and 
philosophic Vaishijava treatise as the Tatvatraya'n, the truth of this story 
is accepted; and the explanation offered that the God only sought this 
curse as an excuse to be born and to do good, ccrainly cannot commend 
itself to the intelligent. 


/ 

























BOOM THE THIRD. 


\ 


SUPAKSRA. 


With earnest prayers to the Supreme Sivam to give us strength 
and light, we proceed to translate the Silpaksham of Sivajnana 
. Siddhiyar, a work by far unparallelled for the lucidity of its thought 
and felicity of its expression, and closeness of its reasoning. Our 
Pundits fall shy generally of Sivajnanabotham, but this work is 
more popohr with them; and its words and phrases throughly 
permeate their speeches and writings, and one feels so far quite 
at home in Sid .hiyiir when one takes it up, after an acquaintance 
with the writings and speeches of our Pundits. The verses are 
flowing whether long or short, and there is very fine rhythm 
about th m.and we recommend our readers to read them even 
along with our translation, and familirizc themselves with the 
expressions and the technicalities so to assimilate them much more 
into their thought and life than otherwise. 

Our achariar begins his work as u^ual with an invocation to 
the Supreme and a jxjrface. 

Invocation. 


To t:if. Supkkmi:. 

i. He, who has no beginning, middle and end, the Infinite 
I ighf, Love ai d lnl(Tigcnce, the Consort of the Mother of the 
\v rid-clusters, the Principal Gem in the crown of the I'cvas, who 
praised by the world, w,;h the h inging c ral braids, adorned 
with th" Kil mootvdn.'.cc. in 'he arena of the spreading Light 
(chit.»k,*s ; III-* po,.-wov< red Lours 1 <ct. I will make my crown, 
and let my mu hanging love grow t- ward* Him. 





114 


SIVAJNANA SIDDH1YAR 


2. Let me place on my head, the feet of Siva who stands as 
the goal of each of the six forms of Religion, w 7 ho stands in the 
special Forms conceived by the various internal schools of Saiva 
Religion, and yet stands beyond all conception as set forth in the 
Vedas and Agamas (according to the Ideal of the Siddhanta 

y 

Saivam), and fills all intelligences w'ith his Love, and becomes 
my Heavenly Father and Mother, and fills inseparably one and all. 

In the above Mai:gala Verse, the author sums up die substance of 
all his teachings for the elucidation of which the student is requested to 

v ^ 

look up Sivajuanasvami’s commentary. 

**■ 

Sakti. 

3. She, w-ho becomes'manifest as Isa’s Supreme Will, and 
Power, Jnana, and Love, working for the origination, sustentalion 
and resolution of these worlds; and who assuming both Rupa. and 
Arupa and Ruparupa becomes God’s Supreme Consort, these 
worlds and their contents; who, giving birth to all forms of life, 
and making them eat their fruit in the respective worlds, destroys 
their bodies in due time; She, my Mother seats Herself in Majesty 
with our Father in the hearts of the Sinless Devotees. Her 
gracious Feet, let me place on my head. 

Gan esa. 

4. For the completion of this my work in Tamil verse 
without any obstacle or blemish, I praise with love and fervour 
the lotus Feet of the Klephant-God 'Ganesa who, begoden by the 
Omnipresent Light and His Mountain Wife, has five hands, four 
shoulders, three eyes, two feet, and a long tusk and a big belly. 

SUBRAMANYA. 

5. The gracious Infant Guru, who taught the import of the 
rare Vedas and Agamas, Angas and Sastras to Agastya; the 
Muni of Vedic Munis, The Deva of Devas, the loving Child of 
Siva, the God of the Yogis; the Hero of victorious Heroes, 
Skanda, who gives liberation from the bond cf births to those who 
worship Him incessantly with llowers of holiness and water of 
purity; His 1 win Feet let me plant on my heart and on my head. 


/ 




( 


I 


SUPAKSHA—INVOCATION 


”5 


St. Meykanda Deva. 

6. The gracious Sun, which shinning on this universe, 
opened the lotus-bud of the human hearts, on the opening of 
which, the bees of the ancient Vedic hymns hummed aloud, the 
fresh honey (of love) gushed out and the fragrance of Sivam 
spread forth; He, Meykanda Deva, who lived in Tiruvenneinallur, 
surrounded by groves in full bloom, the great Saivite Teacher, 
His Goden Feit which outrivals the lotus, resting on my head, I 
shall ever worship. 

The imagery in this verse is simply exquisite. 

Preface. 

* 

7. My attempt to declare the knowledge of the'Supreme, 
who was imperceptible to the Gods and the Vedas, and in the 
presence of the Lord’s devotees who have no infirmity except that 
of clinging to the Feet of the Lord, after knowing in truth the 
substance of the Vedas and Agamas and other books of knowledge, 
is like that of the water standing under the hoof of the cow 
braving itself out for comparison with the roaring and spreading 
flood of the seven seas when brought together. 

8. Men and women of this world dote over the unmeaning 
babblings of their darling children, and fondle them ever so much 
as their greatest treasure. Indeed, the learned, also, out of their 
gracious regard for me will not notice the faults in my verse. 

9. My attempt to describe the Feet of Him, who could not be 
understood by the Vedas, Vishnu, and Brahma, by the mind and 
speech, and by argumentation, will surely excite the laughter of 
the learned. 

10. Nevertheless, it is possible by the Grace of God, to 
know Him by the teachings contained in the Agamas, and also by 
proj>cr argumentation, and to f>erreive l lim in our heart by Jfiana- 
Skdana, our doubt having vanished, and to gel the darkness 

of Maya removed, and to dwell in the company of the Holy. 

« 

11. As different ways lead to the same town, so will the 
various religion > taught in the Again is given out by God who is 


/ 




n6 SivajnSna sjddmiyAr 

self-luminous lead to the same truth. But those, who listen to the 
inconsistent sayings of people who are led by their own self conceit 
and not by God's revelation will fall into the depths ol the 
sea, though seeking to reach the heights of Mount Meru. 

12. Leaving those who have attained to the Highest know¬ 
ledge, and those who are incapable of any, 1 write this work for 
those who are in search of a way for reaching the truth, from the 
instruction imparted to me by my teacher by< means of his 
Sivajnanabotham, derived in succssion from Sanatkumara, Nandi 
and Paramesvara; and I call my work Sivajfiana Siddhi. 

13. Those Devotees of the Lord who worship Him in this 
birth, owing to the strength of their previous attainments in 
other births, will be .led to the Purest Seat by the Lord Himself. 
To others only who desire to seek the goal by the reading of 
books, do 1 undertake to show the path of reaching His Lotus Feet. 

14. Let me here expound the nature of the Paramesvara, 
and the books revealed by Him, the sublance of Logic, and the 
things discoverable by its methods, and the sadana to be pursued 
by the truthseeker, the nature of both the Bound and Freed 
condition of Souls, after removing, by question and answers, the 
false doubts and misgivings induced like a mirage by the various 
sectarians, and thus try to arrive at clear truth. 

15. Let me here expound the truths of Saiva Siddhanta, 
following as my chief guide the work of Meykanda Deva, who, out 
of mercy, adorned my head with his twin feet and placed the 
knowledge the True Self in my heart, and thus plucked me from 
the sea of human births and suffering. 



/ 




t 


l 



SUTRA I. 


r. All the worlds that are denoted by the words he, she, and 
it, originate, and are sustained and are resolved into its primal 
condition. Hence, a First cause that can effect these changes is 

necessitated. This resolution is effected by the author of Sam ha- 

• * , 

ram. He reproduces these worlds, (for the benefit of the eternally 
bound souls) as He is the eternally Free, and Intelligent Sat. 
Hence the First Cause is Hara. 

Adhikarana I. 


THE UNIVERSE UNDERGOES CHANGE. 

2. If the Lokayita could say that this universe undergoes 
neither creation nor destruction and that it is eternally permanent, 
then I need no deductive and inductive proof to refute him, as 
even our own observation shows the origination and destruction 
of every' component part of this universe. 

IT NEEDS A FIRST CAUSE. 

3. If it be said that it is by nature that the universe undergoes 
change, then what undergoes change cannot be natural. If it be 
said that it changes because its nature is so, then except as chang¬ 
ing, there is no such thing as nature. The argument that the four 
elements constitute nature and these undergo change implies a 
First Cause who bring-* about such change of condition, as the 
object-universe is inert. 

* 1 ---_ _ 

1. This sutra is divided into three adhikarai..as ; up to the end of the 
sccor-d sentence is the first. The third and fourth sentem es relates to 
the second adhikaraija; and the last sentence deals with the third adhi- 
karapa; verses 2 to 2b relate to the first, vcises 29 to 59 to the second and 
60 to 70 to the third adhikarapa. 

2. In the Paraf/akiha, the views of other schools were considered 
an 1 critici/Aal. In the Supaksha, the Siddh mta is statcJ and the 
objections met. 


/ 






118 


SivajnAna siddhiyar 


[Bk. III. 


4. Of the four elements, ?.ir produces the other three from 
itself; fire destroys other elements; water contains them all and so 
on; and as such, these elements themselves produce and resolve 
each from and into the other; and consequently no First cause is 
necessary'. If this be your argument it is faulty; as all these 
elements undergo evolution and resolution together, and a First 
Cause which has neither a beginning nor an end is accordingly 
required. 

c ' 

KSHANA dhanga no explanation. 

5. If the argument is that as all things arise by Kshana 
Bhaiiga, and from the previous attachment, no First cause is 
necessary, then you should^ say whether the birth is of things 
existent or non-existent. Non-existent will never come into being, 
and the existent need not come into being. Then it must be what 
is neither or Anirvachanci (as argued by the Madbyamika). 

EVERY EFFECT IS PRODUCED FROM A CAUSE. 

6. (Even this argument is faulty) as, if it is only existent, 
it will come into being; otherwise it will never come into being, 
and no origination of the universe is possible. The truth is that 
effects are produced from causes, as the potter produces the 
pot See., from the clay, but could not produce cloth &c., from the 
same cause. 

THE EFFECT IS IDENTICAL WITH TIIE CAUSE. 

7. If it be asserted, that the same thing is both existent and 
non-existent and that 110 efficient cause is required, it must stand 
to reason that no one thing can possess such contradictory qualities. 
If the cause is said to exist, and the effect not be existent in the 
cause, this is also incorrect as the effect is really existent in the 
cause (being identical), and the change necessitates an efficient 
First cause. 


4. Verses 2 to 4 refute ihe Cburvaka’s position. 

5. This refutes Sautruntika Buddha, , 

6. This refutes the Madhyamika Buddha’s position. 

7 . This meets the Jaina objection. 


t 


I 


\ 

* 




/ 




SL'PAKSIIA—SUTRA I. 


A. I.J 


119 


THE WORLD HAS AN END. 

S. The birth and death of the body is seen, but we do not 
see the end of the world; how do you conclude that the world has 
also end, (says the Purva Mimamsaka). We reply that this is 
possible as this illusive world is evolved in succession from Akas, 
and other elements and is resolved in return. 

THE WHOLE AND NOT MERELY A PORTION IS RESOLVED. 

9. If it’be said, that only a portion of this universe is destroy¬ 
ed and a portion re-formed and that the whole is neither produced 
nor destroyed all at one time, No. The universe, as a whole, in 
due time, is destroyed and reproduced, as the seeds produced in 
the autumn are destroyed in the hot season. 

TIME IS NO FIRST CAUSE. 

» 

10. If it be said that it is l ime that produces these changes 
and is the only God, No; Time is in itself inert and non-intclligent. 
1 hough it is true, we find Time producing changes, it is because, 
God as the Efficient Cause actuates Time which is the instru 
mental cause. 

PARAMANU ARE NOT THE PRIMAL CAUSE. 

ti. If it be said that the atoms reproduce themselves as the 
universe, after the primal resolution, with the aid of karma, No; 
because karma and these atoms are said to be inert and Jada. 
Besides, these themselves undergo resolution at the final destruc¬ 
tion of the world. 

THEY IRE PRODUCED FROM MAYA. 

12. If it be said, that if the atoms as cause arc destroyed, 
the universe itself could not originate, No; from the cause Maya, 
the universe could be produced. 1 he objection that we do not 

& to 10. These three verses meet the objections of tbe Purva 
M.nurnsa school. 

11. This argument is common to the schools of Sautrantika, 
Vaibhashika, Ajivaha and Nyaya and Yai^cshika. 

12 to 14. I hese Continue the argument and show that Maya is the 
undifferentiated co- mi. material cau_c, and atoms aie only the differenti¬ 
ated cosmic matter and cflect. 


I 


1 


S1VAJNANA SIDDIIIVAR 


120 


[Bk. III. 


see Maya but only the atoms, is met by the fact that these atoms 
are the visible product of the imperceptible Maya. 

PARAMANU ARE PRODUCTS. 

15. If it be asked how the atoms can be called a product 
and not a cause, we find it so by its having form and parts; and 
all products like a pot which has form and parts are seen to be 
destructible. Therefore it is the indestructible Maya that produces 
these atoms with form and parts. 

MAYA IS THE PRIMAL MATERIAL CAUSE. 

14. The wise declare that the world evolves from Maya, and 
the common people also can point out that in the seed, the tree 
and branches &c., are contained in a subtile condition, and other¬ 
wise, they wont be produced ; and these words you have forgotten. 
Understand therefore that Maya is the material cause. 

OUT OF NOTHING NOTHING COMES. 

15. If you deny that the world is produced from and 
resolved into a cause, Maya, then you will be asserting the exis¬ 
tence of hare’s horns. If you again object by saying that it will 
be true if the dead leaves of a tree will go back into the tree and 
come out again as fresh leaves, our reply is that when these leaves 
are reduced to the primal condition, by time and other causes,* 
they will again come out as fresh leaves. 

THE UNIVERSE IS ETERNAL IN ITS CAUSE. 

16. As the world is produced as an effect from a cause, and 
as both effect and cause are real, the world also may be said to 
be eternal and indestructible. But as a Supreme God creates and 
destroys it at stated periods, this world may said to have a 

15. This meets the arguments of the Siinyavddi, who denies a 
Primal cause like maya for the world. 

* Mr. Conn points out in his Story of the Genus, that but for the 
action of Bacteria, which reduces all dead animals and plants into a con¬ 
dition fit for being'assimilated as food by plants, the world will be fully 
stocked with dead things and quite uninhabitable. 

16. The definitions and distinctions drawn herein have to be fully 
borne in mind. And it will explain why even in Siddhanta works like 





SUPAKSIIA — SUTRA I. 


129 


A. I.j 

beginning and to be destructible, on account of the change of 
condition it undergoes. 

V AY A CANNOT EVOLVE BY ITSELF NOR BY PURUSHA BUT BY GOD. 

17. If you object that Maya does not require any other 
creator for its underdgoing evolution, Hear then. The universe, 
appears as the work of an intelligent Being. The Purusha (soul) 

though intelligent is not conscious unless when in conjunction 

» • | 

with the body and senses; and Maya appears as the material 
cause of such body and senses ; and Maya is not conscious and 
as such non-intelligent. Hence, the One God (who is self- 
dependent and intelligent) is necessitated for creating these worlds 
out of Maya. 

CAUSES ARE OF THREE KINDS. 

iS. Causes are of three kinds; the material cause, the 
instrumental cause, and the efficient cause. Taking an illustration, 
the clay is the material cause, the wheel is the instrumental 
cause, and the potter is the efficient cause. Similarly, the Lord, 
like the potter, creates the worlds from Maya as the material 
cause, with the aid of His Sakti as the instrumental cause. 

DIVISIONS OF MATERIAL CAUSE OR M.'.VA. 

19. From Yindhu, Maya is evolved, and from the latter 
Avyaktam is evolved. From the first, the four VCiclis , Vaikari 

Tayumanax ar the world is said to be false, illusive and ephemeral live. 
They all refer to the changeability and unstabilily of the world and the 
worldly pleasures. ► 

The last line in the Tamil Verse has to be read with the one which 
follows and hence its translation is omitted here. '1 he last 6 stanzas 
establish thfe principle of “ lix nihilo, nihil lit ” "Out of nothing, nothing 
con^s," which is calic 1 o itji." Satk.uyavadam, a doctiine 

uiiar to tb* S:f khyas and Siddhantis ; and it conlli ts with Vivarta- 
\v<!a, though the Vc'-iata-inras especially lay stress on Satk.irya vitda. 

li. '1 he malt rial < atttR h» called in 1 ami! or Liist and in Sans¬ 

krit, Up.*! v a ; the in lruirwr.tal cause i 7 wa or S ilukaii; and el lie ient 
cau•** i • N‘ i.itla 1 l»i’ and la* t vet c m»- l the S inkhymi objections. 

kj 1 he i«-idcr attent on i° chav.1i to tl.r ili»lin< tionr, litre drawn and 
*• ut fo io.. . Anti t!^ tab'e of l'.it,... j i.nt <1 m p 24 | \’ol. i, S.H. may 

»y 


. I 


» 


% 


150 


blVAjNANA SIDDHIVAR 


[Bk. III. 


See., are evolved. From Mitya, R again See., are produced. From 
Mulaprakpiti, the three gums are generated. And these undergo 
evolution in the Presence of Siva-Sat. 

VA1KARI VACH DEFINED. 

20. Vaikari Vach is the power which is felt in the ear as 
sound, full of meaning, and understood so by the understanding. 

be also referred to usefully. But the terms are used variously. The first 
Sudda Maya is also called Malta Maya and Kudila and Knndaliui , and 
even as Salti and Vindhu. The four Vachs that are generated from this 
are, Sukshma or Para or Ncdha, Paisanti , Madhvama and VaPari. The 
second Maya is called Asuddhamaya, but in reference to the still grosser 
one, Mulaprakriti, it is called Suddhasuddha Maya. The tatvas which 
generate from this are Niyaii, Kalam, Kala and Ruga and Vidya and they 
form the body of the Nirguna souls or P raj ay d Kalars. The last kind of 
Maya, is variously called Mula-prakriti Prakriti, Pradhana, Avyakta, 
Mahat or Mahan, and its essence are the three gunas, Satva, Rajas and 
Tamas. A more elaborate table of tatvas containing greater details with 
references in the Vedas, Upanishats &c. for the various tatvas included 
in the Siddhanta has been published by Sri Kasivasi Sentinathier which 
will afford greater help to the student in understanding these details. 

This maya sakti of God is not Abhinna or Samavaya but it is 
Bhinna sakti, called also Parigraha-sakti. 

God does not undergo any weariness or trouble in creating these 
worlds, and the evolution takes place as the lotus undergoes all the vari¬ 
ous processes of evolution in the presence of the sun, its light and heat. 

v ' 

It will be noticed how this division of maya is special to Saiva Sid¬ 
dhanta. The third class of maya, namely, Mulaprakriti or gross maya is 
alone recognized by all other Hindu schools comprising the twenty-four 
tatvas. The Higher Powers of maya comprising the elven higher tatvas 
are not known to these systems. Though some have tried to assert that the 
higher tatvas could be comprised under the lower. These three divisions 
correspond to the three divisions of adhvas themselves, called Suddha, 
Mikama, and Asuddha adhvas, and to the three classes of souls 
called Yijfianakalar, Pralayakalar and Sakalar, who get their material 
bodies frome these three classes of maya and adhvas respectively. The 
Texts f i om the Upanishats, Agamas etc., in which these higher tatvas 
and adhvas are mentioned, will be added in an appendix to this volume. 

i 


( 



A. I.] 


SUPAKSIIA—SUTRA I. 


131 

This Vach is caused and influenced by the bodily Udana-vayu 
and by the Prdna-vdyu in forming the letters (Akshara). 

MADIIYAMA DEFINED. 

21. Not audible to the ear, but softly arising and audible in 
the throat and intelligible to the understanding, guided not by- 
the Prana vayu but by the Udana-vayu, without being able to 
throw out the well formed letters (sounds), and differing both from 

Yaikari and Paisanti, such is the nature of Madhyama Vach. 

> 

PA ISANTI DEFINED. 

22. Just as the white and yolk of the egg conceal in them¬ 
selves all the body of the pea-cock, so*does Paisanti Vach contain 
in itself in an undifferentiated and highly subtile and self luminous 
condition all the* various sounds. 

SUKSIIMA VACH DEFINED. 

23. The Silkshnia or Para Vach is the Luminousness of 
the Highest body, indestructible in itself, but destructible in its 
products such as Paisanti &c. If one can witness this subtile light 
he will reach the unvarying intelligence and bliss and immortality 
(of Apara-Mukti) without being subject to birth and weariness and 
change. 

23. Vach means speech or sound, sabda or r.odha ; and the fust pro¬ 
duct of evolution from buddha niaya is this Vach or nadha ; and the 
symbol is the Dan:ara J a. And all the ietters arc said to have been pro- 
du ed by the beating of tnis Damaraka by Siva, as stated in 1 ’anini. 
Prom the most subtle, it. passes into the most gross form of sound ; and 
the Yogi has to ascend up from the gross nadlia to I’atanadha. 

This Parai.udh 1 Vac', is often mistaken for GoJ on account of its 
great luminousnes-, and this place is also mistaken for the final place of 
rr t, a 1 though one v.ho enters this place will not return to the earth, 
yet thi* do« not cor. titute I'aramukti. One has to transcend this t.udhu; 
hence the term (j. Mali ivrata baivas j>ostulate l.udltu-m as the 

p'-i c of p .t; Suva aik*yav.tdi*, VijiUnakalar ; and Sahkhyas, Patanjalas 
and Veda nth a* Puuuha Utva. 1 Icncc the statement in the next verse, 
that thi. Va h is not Lrahman and i domed from buddha maya. 


. I 


I 



1 3 2 


5i vajnaxa ridditiyAr 


[Bk. III. 


VAC 11 IS NOT BRAHMAN, 

24. These four Vachs become five when united to the 
five different Kola such as iXivirti. These vachs are not Brahman, 
are produced from Mafia maya, not by the process of Parinama, 
nor by that of Vivarta , but by the process of Virti as when cloth 
is made into a tent. 

MURT1S AND THEIR BODIES. 

A u 

25. To the Mantra Isvaras, and VidyeSvaras, and Sadfi- 
sivas, their Pada, Vania, Buvaita , Mantra , Tatvas, bodies, 
and senses and enjoyment are all formed out of Vindu or Buddha 

v 

Maya Bakti. 

SOULS UNDERSTAND WITH HELP OF MAYA. 

26. Ail the three classes of souls, cannot have any know¬ 
ledge unless they are associated with the intelligent Power of 
Suddfia-Muya and the four vachs. When a person can however 

24. The live halos out of which different bodies are produced are (1) 
Nivirti Kola, with Sthidadama Viich, (2) Pratishtd Kola, with Sfhula- 
dam Vach (3) V-idya Kala with Sthula vach (4) Soldi hala with suhshuia 

v' 

vach (5) Sahtyotita hala with sakshmadara vach. 

Sana: day a Viida is the union like a heap of gingily seeds, and this is 
asserted by the Buddhists and Jains to account for evolution; Nyayikas 
postulate Arambha Vada, which is like the weaving of threads into a 
cloth ; Vivarta is asserted by the Mayavadis, and this is the false appear¬ 
ance like a mirage. Parinama is of two kinds, (1) where the whole 
undergoes change as milk into curds, (2) where only a part under¬ 
goes change, as where maggots are formed in ghee. The first kind of 
Parinama is asserted by Vedfuitis; and the second by Siddhantis. Virti 
is a kind of Suks’nr.a Parintlma and does not involve much change. 

25. The number of mantra Isvaras of suddha bija tatva are said 
to be 7 crores. Those who dwell in the Isvara tatva are eight, namely 
Aiun.fur, Suhshwar, Sivottinnar, Ekaiutrar, Trimnrti, Snhanfar and Sikarjdi 
and are also called Ashta-Vidyesvaras. Those who dwell in the plane 
of the Sadasiva tatva, are called Anusadasivos and their names are 
Pranavar, Sadukyar , Tirtar, Karanar, SnSilar, Shkshir.a or Kalar , Dcsasay 
and A:ubn. Most of the authorities are agreed in calling all these Murtis 
VijuuDakalar. 


i 


i 


\ 







SUPAKSHA — SUTRA I. 


A. I.] 


133 


ascend to the knowledge beyond this Mayavic intelligence, then 

✓ 

alone can he reach the Feet of the Supreme Siva, whose banner 
is the Bull. 

THE RELATION’ OF GOD AND MAYA TO THE WORLD. 

27. All this universe is spread out and multiplied from the 

i 

Primai invisible and subtle Maya into visible and grosser and 
grosser forms, as life and body ; and these forms again are resolved 
in the same order and thdy appear as one, different, and one-and- 
diflferent. The One Supreme 3 eing also is one, different, and 
one-and-dififerent from the world. (Abheda, Bheda and Bedha- 
beda). 

VISIBLE CAN PROCEED FROM 'THE INVISIBLE. 

2S. If it is objected that the visible cannot proceed from the 
invisible, and change from Avikara, know how the Akas contains 
the other elements air and fire &c., and how from the same ether 
clouds and lightning and thunder start up. 


Adhikarana II. 


WHERE FROM DOES COD CREATE ? 

29. The pots are produced from the clay by the potter. Isa 
creates all forms, and these effects are produced each from its 
own material cause. 1 Icar, if.you want to know where and how 
I !e creates these things. , 

HE REQUIRES NO SUPPORT. 

• 

30. It is not .possible to understand His nature by anything 
we sec in this world. As such, there is no one who could undcr- 
sl:nd HU Supreme Form and Station. However, His action may 
be compared to that of T ime, which brings about the origination, 
development, and destruction of the seven worlds. 

Tint t!.l,\I.I M. RISES \ND MI I CIS IN CCD. 

31. A the word* arnlTdc; > we had learnt become imbedded 
in and ari.e out of oar minds, the diifcicnt states of wakefulness, 




1 34 


S1VAJNANA SIDDH1YAR 


[Bk. III. 


sleep &c M arise and merge in our life, so are the worlds evolved 
and ingathered by the Supreme God, who stands united and at 
the same time not united to this world. 

THU REASON FOR REPRODUCTION AND RESOLUTION. 

32. If you ask why the souls and worlds are reproduced 
from Hara after resolution, this becomes necessary owing to exist¬ 
ence of Anava Mala. "I he necessity for its undergoing resolution 
in particular is to be found in the fact that the bodily' energies be¬ 
come exhausted. The effects are destroyed and resolved into 
their cause. And Isa reproduces these forms as before from their 
cause. 

GOD UNDERGOES NO CHANGE. 

33. If you say God will undergo change, once we attribute 
to him powers of creation &c. No. In the presence of the sun, the 
lotus blooms, the crystal emits fire, and water evaporates. 

THE ONE GOD IS THE AUTHOR OK ALL THE THREE FUNCTIONS. 

34. If you ask, how it is that we ascribe all the powers to 
the one God, when all say that these three powers are held by the 
three different Gods, Brahma, Vishnu &c, our answer is that these 
Gods, by the power of their Virtue receive the Ajiia Sakti of the 
Lord at His bidding. 

THE AUTHOR OF SAM11ARA IS THE AUTHOR OF OTHER FUNCTIONS ALSO. 

35. At the end of time, only One alone remains. If more 
than One, then it cannot lie called Samharam. Ilara alone 
remains at the end, as He it is that destroys all. Hence, from Him 
also, do the worlds originate and develops again. 

32. The repeated births are necessary for the purpose of washing off the 
inherent Ar.ava inala, by gaining experience and knowledge and spiritu¬ 
ality. The resolution is required as rest lor the tired bodily energies, just 
as we take rest during night to recoup our energies for the task of 
to-morrow. 

33. The sun does not undergo change by any of these operations, 
and much less does God undergo any weariness or change. The three 
examples are respectively for the three functions. 



A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA I- 


135 


THE REASON OF HIS FUNCTIONING. 

^6. If you ask why God should exercise these powers, we 
may reply that this is His mere play. \\ e may also point out that 
by these acts of Grace, He makes the souls eat the fruit of their 
Karma and thus get rid of their Mala and attain Mukti. 

PURPOSE OF FIVE FUNCTIONS. 

77 . Samharam is to give rest to the souls ; Snshti is intend- 
ed for the purpose of enabling souls to eat their Karma and thus 
to remove it. When souls eat their Kafma, Tithi is exercised. 
Tirobhava brings about the maturing of mala by effecting Karma- 
samya. He exercises His power ot Anugraha when He frees us 
from our bonds. All these five functions are acts of His Grace. 
Revile not. 

GOD HAS RUPA, ARUPA AND RUPARUPA. 

5S. If you ask whether the Creator has form or no form or 
has formless form, I may tell you that all these forms belong to 
the one and the same Supreme Being. 

GOD ASSUMES FORMS AT WILL. 

39. You object that* when form is ascribed to God, another 
creator like the one who creates our own bodies will be required, 
and that if God wills His body, the Jivas may be aid to will their 
own bodies also. But we cannot assume any body we like. Our 
Supreme God assumes any wondrous form He thinks of, just as 
biddhas do. 

LIKE MftDHAS YET DIFFERENTLY. 

40. You say th it if God takes form just as Siddhas do, then 
He become^ one like them. But these biddhas exercise tlie^e powers 

y>. \\ hat is meant by play here is, that the exercise of these powers 
i so c.i'y for Him, as when ue say, that it is mere child's play lor him. 
It a: • mear* • mat the-e v.orks are performed not for his own benefit. 

3s. '1 Uc above six stanzas dealt with the subject of God’s function- 
in*; the v.o Id. i l i- and the farming tv.eniy one \ersespiovo the 
c hara ter of God a the Ltcrnally I ice an I Intelligent (Auadi mill. la 
<• - v / • 4 ► y fro) a tated in the fust situ a. God being 

a- r bed fom.j et , 1 j ul.ed I hj 'I a,.utl a !uk k.u a. 


I 


5lVAjXANA SIDDHIVAR 


136 


[Bk. III. 


only through the Grace of God. And if all forms are born of 
Maya, then the forms of God are also from Maya ? 

man’s BODY IS FROM MAYA. GOD’s FROM CHIT SAKTI. 

41. The bodies formed of Maya are obtained by the souls 
as necessitated by the Anava Mala. As the Supreme One is 
free from Maya and Anava Mala, and is pure absolute intelligence 
and imparts both knowledge and power to souls, His body cannot 

V' 

be formed of Maya but is formed out of His own Sakti. 

1IIS FORMS REQUIRE NO EVOLUTION. 

42. You say that even if Ilis form is from Sakti, it must 
undergo change, and consequently God cannot be eternal and so 
God can only be formless. His is not one of the six Adhvas 
(formless material things) even. As you seem to be intelligent, you 
had better hear further about the supreme nature of God. 

HIS FORMS ARE NOT MATERIAL, 

43. All objects of this world either have form or no form, 
and some objects cannot change their form either. If, therefore, 
the being of immeasurable intelligence is called formless, we will 
only be ranking It with one of these objects. 

HIS SUPREME NATURE ADMITS NO QUESTIONING. 

44. He is not one of those objects which are subject to bonds 
and are free. He has neither beginning nor end. He is infinite. As 
such, it connot be postulated that my Supreme Father is only this 


41. This is in answer to the objection raised in the last sentence of 
the previous verse. Almost all the commentators agree that Sakti here 
means Chit Sakti. 

42. There are formless objects like the adhvas which are limited and 
are formed of matter, and as such, there is nothing gained by simply 
calling God formless. 

44. Following the definition of God as Anadi mukta chit and beyond 
Time and Space, all these objections do not arise) Compare the following 
stanzas from Devaram and Tiruva^agarn. 

(ij 41 stnuAJUisj-i g d,essT^zB}(Grr,i}> $ it 

icj-nzn? gassT ^nhsss'ji—'vasst uinQjn&i 


I 



A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA I. 


157 


and that, and that He cannot become this and that ; and therefore 
any such postulate regarding the nature of the Supreme does not 
admit of any refutation either. 

ttL-'zj ezra: su q oir ^ 

13 Zorich G^ga'oCJL 0 

!L!—J JJ c3T Cb ^ cl elf cU 6C37c££TSf pj 

erzi"(Tj'2oT gesrgspas afr&zru&tkGifiso 
£T dei.’ -ns.-f’z: irrPdij eu xx exi J? p 

GzP^err.sz-.tz-Kasrzhr Qp zr & * n lLQi^it sry Qp. 

"The Lord, with braided hair and His spouse with pencilled brows, 
live in the burnmg ground of Kane hi, He knows no sin. lie is not one 
of the mortals. He has no one as His equal. No town claims Him as 
its citizen. He is beyond compare ; unless we with the oye of His 
Grace perceive His true nature, we can’t paint Him, and show Him as of 
such form and figUre.” 

"This Self is not attainable by explanation, nor yet by mental grasp, nor 
by hearing many times, by Him whomso He chooses— by him is He 
obtained. For liim the Self, its proper Form reveals.”— {M u -j>ja \ a 3-2-3. ) 

2) " ?;Zzr~i(J£ i _C7 cx^ap <r n2cjr zj&rsr n^ssr 

,_p.'Srr,_'0 5 sshuQssr unzaz~'ijan tusv'ZwxlUs cj 
Q * u'cSzt g) sb a? (rrl! Jtr Gpxssrgpu QijQzsccujQezr 

JJ x CT ilj'k £ s'*} Chh-S XJoVO.'/r2 > o3T. 

TTiou who art without pleasure or pain; Who yet hast both’ 
Loving to loving ones! Who art all and Dot all. 

The effulgent Light and the Deep Daikness ! 

The invisibe greatness. The first, middle and end. 

And none of these. 

(x) “ 'Jqj/qp i 'iSlJtw&v, tr.iaS 

GxoftoJjri) Gun ijsz.u’ij ld,i uS rya A i 
Q •' si] j r j#rr<>r n jS ts,’ *i & r 

f-7uQpxn ^.vuicn A yyt 
Qpp:£f tff lS^n 

-I* fiQ/'^n Ll t! b Ltt iS 'oS,! 

oip(tpj,<iii ^rrrifTF) 

- {_ J i. ' * '(WjP //C(? p/p L .lltGiT. 

1 o: Him Who is the Vedas and the an< till e, 

for him V>Iio i*» the fa!*-hood and tin* Truth ; 

J *r Hi n who L the Splendour and the (.doom ; 
f ji 11 in. Who L the Alllictiou m/l Dcii»;ht; 



I 3 s 


SIVAJNANA SIDDH 1 VAR 


[Bk. Ilf. 


HE ASSUMES FORM OUT OF GRACE. 

45. As He does not possess the defect as an object of 
perception, and as He is possessed of both absolute Intelligence 
and Power, as He is not possessed of likes and dislikes, the Nir- 
inala God can assume any form out of His Grace. 


For Him Who is the Half, Who is the Whole; 

for Him Who is the Bond and the* Release; 

For Him Who is the First, Who is the Last; 

Dancing, Pound we the dust of Gold. 

45. If an object, He will be capable of change and cannot be called 
self dependent. If possessed of finite intelligence and power, lie can 
only be limited. If possessed^of likes and dislikes, He will be subject to 
sin and sorrow. Not being possessed of these defects, none of the limita¬ 
tions which apply to human beings and matter apply to him at all. 

cj. (i) “'gfzmn—L/tT rftfVjC™) 3 ai—igpunjir 

uessr'SlQuiT^iiQiCiT G arrsisr^i—sJ-^i—iT 

acsorQiziznii fi sunoffi &ir,7dQ&(?.iTj) 

Qsu'osony.ikisLL sesTresstiQs^^lajGesnssruG 0 . 

These worlds and the spreading darkness 
This old divine Light transcends. 

This effulgent Light who can know. 

It is the crescent-adorned Brahman, the Seers say. 

( 2 ) “ e3ifl&$iT (U^rTuSsrJj^n LA^hujuc^frGsiipJi'Si 

■ UJoVSVff eShoSSTGru 

£hr!g(V) eLirj-i&jGbGurr Q& 

Q£&fl£(nj uistiovn QpifluSJv 

sessrsssfhijffletr Giv/r^utr ‘bitas> 

ffl/0i>Tr &(T trCSBT QJfVjnUTtT 

eiifluja Q.tTaixnj uiHimuotun(T zldGcmt 
$ 6B)LCUUrT0 LCGV6VrfiSu(Iff. 

Not the effulgent sun, not the moon, not the vedas 

Not Akas, not the earth, not the wandering air nor the flaming fire 

Not the clear water is He. When known, 

He is the Lord, who out of Grace was united to Uma with 
pencilled eyes as His Half. 

The wearer of serpent-necklace, lie is not one of the Devas no? 
one of the mortals. 



A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA I. 


139 


THE REASON OF HIS ASSUMING FORMS. 

46. If he did not. out of His Supreme Grace, assume forms, 
there would be nobody who could give out Vedas aud Agamas, 
and there would be nobody who could impart instruction, in the 
form of the Guru to the Gods, men, and the residents of nether 
regions; and so nobody can secure salvation. 

ALL HIS FORMS ARE LOVE AND ASSUMED OUT OF LOVE. 

47. His form is love*; His attributes and knowledge are love ; 

His five functions are love ; His organs like arms and feet See., and 
His ornaments like the crescent moon Sec., are also love. These 
things are assumed by the NirmaLi God, not for His own benefit 
but for tl:e benefit of mankind. , 

> 

GOD IS VISVADHIKA ETC. 

45. None ‘ know that His form transcends the universe. 
None know that in I lis form, the universe rises and merges. 
None know that I Ie is the life and the body of this universe. 
Ignorant of 1 lis Supreme form, the)' call I lim as one of this world. 

46 . cf. [ ] ) “ yjuu* (ipsvQy ^/s 

Qxzrrnk) -5 .t 7 e ss — unG’ev, j? 

r 2 £ Q-a’&yisvsjr n.,ij2i<% 

C* ai.3v_.Aj5i. '1 iruvacagam. 

The Three and ihirty-ihrec and other Gods 
Understood not our biva-Lord. 

1 Ie rode on Ma! ( Vishnu; and came down to the earth 
Woishipping Him, bliss in our heart will rise. 

( 2 ) “ i Cj {.ij uj _y ranji f ir2,6i £(2* 

r 2 1 x , s Odessa2m£2* — ua<tp 

P Vj L(X l It Lf.su'237T G\'ipu 

^ .jrn~ (q . ni-T5/?a/TT T'u- .dpissiotfipj uutjLUjnir . 

Where will we get the Agamas, where the religions six 
Where will be Yoga and where Jliana. 

If He with Hi- Am, b tkri did not show us grace. 
bj^:ak ' Who can Know that linincasuiable Form ? 

47. (/. “ Hi* I bud i• •mdy love ; Joy, His right wing, delight I lis 
left; b.i - i^ III ;.f. ibrahinan, weheieon He rests.” Taitt. ii. 5. 

.*S. '1 Ik author li«M n fet • to the vedic text-, in which Kudra is called 
\'u ..alhi’-a, \'i .„L.;a .1, \ LvantarvAmi and \ Lva-varupi. 






140 


SIYAJXAXA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. IIL 


EXFLA'N'ED BY PURAXIC EPISODES. 

49. The}* call Him as one of the Devas, but they know not 
that Siva is all the three gods, the half of His body is Uma, that 
neither Vishnu nor Brahma was able to fathom the great Jyoti. 
And they neither know what Form arose out of this great Jyoti. 

49. In this verse, the author illustrates by Puranic episodes the vedic 
texts referred to by him above. 

The episode of Brahma and Vishnu searching for His crown and 
feet and not finding them, proves that God is Visvadhika The same 
story which further states that the three Gods appeared from the great 
Jyoti shows that God is Visvakarana. The same story which further 
states that the great Jyoti subs-ded into the Linga form shows that God 
is Visva Antaryami. The puranic episode that Uma llaimavati became 
half of l lis body shows that God is Visvasorupi. 

That Siva is all the three Gods, as it is His power that shines in 
them, and that yet He is different from them, in essence, and that the 
latter do also belong to the order of souls but to a very high order, is 
a position which has been very often explained by us. When the power 
of the Supreme God is manifest in the person and body of the Trimurtis 
and other Higher Powers, Mahesvara and Sadasiva, the identity of 
the two is perceived, nay, the Light of the supreme is alone perceived, 
owing to the translucent body of the Gods, just as we perceive only 
the light and light alone, when looking at a chimney lamp from a distance, 
and the bright chimney, corresponding to the person and body of the Gods 
and Jivan Muktas, is altogether imperceptible. Hence the defence of the 
worship of the three Gods; and of the Linga which symbolises the fifth 
order of Gods, the Sadasivas, which is both form and formless. When 
we remember how out of Sadasiva Tatvaro the next tatva of Mahesvaras 
and the three lowest, Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra arise, the Linga Purana 
story that the Great Light (Jyotis), “that the Pure JL.ight of Lights,” the 
stainless. Partless Erahm, “placed within (man’s) radiant highest Vesture” 
(Mund. 3-1-9) “From whom all words fall back not reaching Him, mind 
as well” (Tait. ii. 4.) “CU/r^c ootU Q/up-Q&nsveSIev Q^ns^eSlrois^i i§,asrpQ<sn 
(,aas>u> Qa>ndn<j)> Shjoeossar') ; and “whose form stands not within 

vision’s field, with eye no man beholds Him," (Kutha. ii. 6 9) “That Bliss 
Supreme, that all description beggars (Katha. ii. 5. 14.) and who according 
to another Vpauisha! again is “not grasped by eye, nor yet by speech. 




A. II. j 


SUPAKSHA — SUTRA I. 


141 


god’s bhoga, yoga and ghora forms. 

50. They know not that in His Bhoga Form, He grants 
enjoyment to jivas. They know not that iu His Yoga form 

nor by other powers nor by mere medication, not even by bold deeds,” 
(Mund. iii. 1. S.), was r.ot perceived by the greatest gods who were waging 
war against each other out of unmitigated Ahankara; and that when ' 
from that Light and “ Life, which flames through all creation,” Mund. iii. 
1. 4), arose tha i Might? So:tt:d (Omkara) and subsided into the Visible 
from of the Linga (Sadasiva From) and that from this Linga again the 
three Gods arose "as of that Brahman Suprenle, it hath also been sung, 
in Him is the three” (Svet. i. 7,) acquires full force and meaning and it 
cannot be relegated as merely a sectarian story. When Yaishnava 
writers freely quote from Svetasvatara ’ Upanishat for instance, and 
take the Rudra and Siva of these passages as denoting the Highest 
Brahman, and pur within brackets “ Narayapa," next to such words, 
Saivas could not be doing violence to themselves or to any body when 

V 

they take the Siva and Rudra ot the Ptiranas (whose sole purpose is to 

explain and illustrate Yedic Mea/iings) as denoting the Supreme Brahman. 

And we heard a Yaishnava pandit explain also that there are other 

Vishttxs and Saraya'.as besides the Highest Narayana who with the 

Trimurti Rudras are classed as Jivas. And it will stand to reason that 

the Jivas, Rudra, Narayana cannot surely comprehend either the Rudra, 

Para, Brahma or Narayana.Parabrahma. We have ventured upon this 

explanation as one of our respected Yaishnava friends took objection 
✓ 

to the story of Siva’s feet and crown being searched as a blasphemous 
one. What a firm hold this story has got on the popular imagination, 
will be proved by the standing ihcmorial of the Tiruvanpamalai Temple, 
and the Kartikai feast, and by Yaishpavas also celebrating this feast, 
in the same way they unwittingly celebrate, I )asara, Brahmotsava and 
Kan.an Papdigai. According to the Saivas, the Karligai Feast and 
1 iruvappamalui celebration, (celebrated in every other Temple also), 
and the raising of the great column of Light, refer to this Lihga Purapa 
episode; but what explanation Yaishpavas have for the Yibhi.ni Kartigai, 
v/e aie yet unable to dis'over, expect that they followed suit. 

'Ih- lory of ArdhaimrAvara formation clearly illustrates that Sivain 
and Si .t: i- one. I’nft means literally ’i."ht and wisdom, and this can 
never be i IcntificU with matter and darlw »>. This episode by the way 
gi.Cv a!*j a iefuutiou to the theory that " Lina ’ Laji is Maya. 




142 


SIVAJNANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


He grants perfection to yogis. They know not that in His fearftil 
Form, I Ie makes the souls eat their Karma. They are fools 
without discernment who call him one of the gods. 

HIS FORMS TRANSCENDENT MANIFEST GRACE. 

51. They know, not that His possessing various and incon¬ 
sistent Forms prove that I le is not of this world ; the}' know 
not that all these Forms are manifestations of His Grace. And 
that His Act of Samahra (destruction) is an act whereby He 
destroys Sin. 

51. The great poet Kalidasa brings out the meaning of the first thiee 
lines as follows, in his Kumar a Sambhava. 

“ No selfish want e’er prompts a deed of mine ; 

Do not the forms—eight, varied forms —1 wear 
The truth of this to all the world declare.” 

And he observes in another place 

“ The gods, like clouds are fierce and gentle too 
Now hurl the bolt now drop sweet heavenly dew, 

In summer heat the streamlet dies away, 

Beneath the fury of the God of day 
Then in due season comes the pleasant rain, 

And all is fresh and fair and full again.” 

Long before the gifted poet, Lord Krishna brought out the self¬ 
same contradictory character of the Supreme Being in the following 
passage: (Maha.bha.rata, Anugasana Parva.) 

“Large-armed Yudhishtra, understand from me the greatness of glori¬ 
ous, multiform, many-named Rudra. They call Mahadeva Agni, Sthanu, 

V 

Mahesvara, One-eyed, Tryambaka, the nniverfal formed, and Siva. Brah¬ 
mins versed in the Veda know two bodies of this God, one awful, one aus¬ 
picious ; and these two bodies again have many forms. The dire and 
awful body is fire, lightning, the sun. The auspi-ious and beautiful body 
is virtue, water and the moon. The half of his essence is fire, and the 
moon is called the (other) half. The one, which is his auspicious body, 
practises chastity; while the other, which is his most deadful body, 
destroys the world. From his being lord (Isvara) and great (Mahat), 
he is called Mahesvara. Since he consumes, since he is fiery, fierce, an 
eater of llesh, blood and marrow,—he is called Rudra. As he is the 
greatest of the gods, as his domain is wide, and as he preserves the 




SUPAKSHA—SUTRA I. 


r 43 


A. I.J 

vast universe,—he is called Mabadeva. From his smoky colour, he is 
called Dhurjati. Since he constantly prospers all men in all their acts, 
seeking their welfare (Siva' 1 , he is therefore called Siva” etc., etc. 

European scholars have puzzled and bewildered themselves over 
this character of Rudra,* and they have sought to explain it on various 

* Dr. Muir collates the passages as follows ; “ The character ascribed 
to Rudra in the hymns of the Rig Ysda are most heterogeneous and 
frequently indefinite. 1 shall endeavour to gather from different places 
and to group together those epithets which h’ave most affinity to each 
other. This God is described as wise, bountiful and powerful, (i. 43, 1; 
i. 114. 4,) as the strongest and most glorious of beings (ii. 33, 3,) as lord 
(liana) of this world, possessed of divine power (ii. 33, 9,) as unsurpassed 
in might (ibid. 10,) as the father of the world, mighty, exalted, undecayirg 
(vi. 49, 10,) as cognisant of the doings of men and gods by his power 
and universal dominion (vii. 46, 2,) as putting the waters in motion 
(x. 92, 5,) as self-dependent (vii. 46, 1,) and as deriving his renown from 
himself (i. 129, 3; x. 92, 9,) as the lord of heroes (i. 114, 1. 3. 10; x.92. 9,) 
as the lord of songs and sacrifices (i. 43, 4,) the fulfiller of sacrifices 
(i. 114, 4,) brilliant as the sun, and as gold (i. 43, 5J tawny-coloured (this 
epithet is frequently applied,; with beautiful chain (ii. 33, 5,) fair com- 

I - - - 

plexioned (ibid. 8,) multiform, fierce, arrayed in golden ornaments (ibid. 9,) 
youthful (v. 60, 5,) terrible as a wild beast, destructive (ii. 23, 11,) wearing 
spirally-braided hair (i. 114, i, 5,) and as the celestial boar ( b d, 3). He 
is frequently represented as the father of the Muruts or Rudras (i. 64, 2; 
i. 85, 1 ; i. 114, 6, 9 ; ii. 33, 1 ; ii. 34, 2; v. 52, 16; v. 60, 5; vi. 50, 4; vi. 
(6, 3; vii. 56, 1; viii. 20, 17;. He is once identified with Agni (fi. 1, 6). 
lie is drscribed as seated on a chariot (ii. 33, 11 ,) as wcilding the thunder¬ 
bolt fi ii. 33, 3.) as armed with a bow and arrows (ibid. 10, 14; v. 42, 11; 
123, 6.) with a strong bow and fleet arrows, with sharp weapons, ( vi. 7.), 
4 ; vii. 49, 1; viii. 29, 5). Ibs shafts are discharged from the sky and 
traverse the earth /vii. 46. 3;. He is called the slayer of men (r.ri-gk c 
iv. 3, 0 ). His anger, ill, will, and destructive shafts are deprecated (i. 114, 
7, ii- 33. 1, 11, M-’ '1-2 ,7; viii 46,3,4;. Hut he is also representd 
a benevolent (i. 114, 9,) as mid, and easily invoged (ii. 33, 5,; IrenelicciU 
(ibid. 7.) graciou \. 92, 9.) as tlw < nu*-c or condition of health and 

pr'»*pcrity to man and l>ca«t (i. 114, 1). I Ic is frequently dcsciilied as 
tlie po of hca’ing remedies, and is oiu e charac tei i/cd a^ the 


i 


/ 


1 




144 


SlVAjNANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


hypotheses. Some have thought that the conception of the God was 
borrowed by the Aryans from the aborigines and savages of Southern 
India, who they say copied it from the Hamitic tribe of the Jews, and 
some go to say that the addresses to Rudra as gentle and beneficient, 
are made by way of flattery, and not otherwise, and that his beneficence 
consisted more in refraining from doing mischief etc., etc. Some of these 
views we have met elsewhere, and the following remarks may also be 
borne in mind. European scholars have themselves noted, how the God 
Rudra, even in the Rig Veda, is spoken as the god of storms and 
clouds (Indra) and father of Maruts (winds) and as wind itself, (Vayu), 
and now as fire (Agni) and now as the sun (Surya and Vishnu) and now 
as the moon (Chandra) and is associated with Soma, as the healer and 
Supreme Physician. He is spoken of as the Destroyer, and the Des¬ 
troyer of Andhaka (yama) in the Atharva Veda. And these scholars 
speak of the God Rudra having slowly supplanted all the Vedic deities 
Agni, Vayu, Mitra, Varuna etc., except Vishnu; and yet they fotget why 
it is He is spoken of in these Vedas themselves as the Lord of sacrifices 
(medbapati) and the Lord of all living cieatures (Pasupati—Pasu mean¬ 
ing jivas and not cattle) and the ruler (lsana) and God of gods (Mahadeva) 
and as deriving his power from himself and as self-dependent. None 
of these epithets are connected with other gods. And as lord of sacrifice 
and Pasupati, He gets the first portion of the offering, and the hands 
have to be washed after giving the. first portion. Connecting these with 
the position He holds in the Upanishats, Itihasas and the Puranas, as 
the only one without a second, as the Supreme Brahma and consort of 
Divine knowledge (Uma), the Position of Rudra, as the Supreme Being, 
identified with all animate and inanimate existence, being the indweller 
(as Ashta-murti) in all Nature, and who is the Generator, and Preserver 
and destroyer—the universal Evolver—is readi'iy perceived ; and as point¬ 
ed out by Kalidasa and Arunandi Sivacharya, and by Mrs. Annie Besant, 
His cruel or destructive, aspects, though apparently so, are really the 

greatest of physicians (i. 43, 4; i. 114 , 5; ii. 33, 2, 4, 7, 12, 13; v. 42, 11; 
vi. 74, 3; vii. 35, 6; vii. 46, 3; viii. 29, 5). He is supplicated for bless¬ 
ings (1. 114, 1, 2; ii. 33, 6,) and represented as averting the anger of the 
gods (i. 114, 4; ii. 33, 71). In B. V. (vi. 74, 1 $.,) he is connected with 
Soma in the dual, and entreated along with the latter to bestow' good and 
avert evil. 






A. II.] 


SLPAKSHA — SUTRA I. 


MS 


most beneficent aspects. This is also explained by the Puranic descrip¬ 
tion of Him as “inwardly beneficent” (Antas Satvani) and “outwardly 
cruel” (Bahis Tamas). .And when we perceive the really beneficent 
action of the terrible storms and clouds, and thunder and lightning, sun 
and heat in such a purely agricultural country as India, we can also 
conceive, how His Wrath is productive of the greatest benefit to suffering 
and sinning humanity from freeing them from this mortal and effete body 
and from this world, as the Yedic Poet so rapturously sings, like a 
cucumber severed from its stem (Yajur Veda) to regenerate (srishti) again 
after proper rest (Samhara) to undergo with greater strength the 
struggles of Life, and thus eat ofF his karma and eventually obtain 
final release from birth, and rest in God. The whole diiticutly of Euro¬ 
pean scholars will vanish even on their own evolutionary method, if they 
will only see that in and around the Personality of Ivudra cr Siva, the 
Highest Ideal of God head was slowly and surely accreting Irom ihe 
time of the Rig-Veda, and which is most distinctly evolved in some of 
the Upanishats like bvetasvatara, Kaivalya, Atharvasiras, etc., and much 
more plainly in the Mahabharata and several of the Puranas, though 
since and after the days of the Mahabharata, the cult of Vishnu, influenced 
by the tales of Rama and Krishna was gaining greater footing, though it 
never su:ceeded in supplanting the oldest faith anywhere in India. 

In the stanza again, the* reference to His being the killer (Devourer 
of Ka^ha UpanishatJ is to his power of destroying our Pusa (sin and 
sorrow and ignorance >, all our material environments (body etc.) and 
as the Killer of ewl, He is represented as fierce and terrible, and yet as 
He is the saviour of our soul by this very same act, He is called 
Siva (gracious; and Safikara (Beneficent), and bambhu (the beautiful) 
and Nandi (Lovable ; and Aie reason is not far to seek why the latter 
set of names became more popular than the former set of names, 
si: h as the generator (Brahma) and Ugra (Arc) etc., Kudra (destroyer' 
of sorrow. And wha't o lr author has now in view are all the Pur.inic 
ep‘ odes in whi h the Supreme One or His Consort Um.i, or 11 is sons 
(Kumara) are repreicnted as fiercely contending with Manmatha and 
Lemons, and Asur as, the real meaning of which ofcour-e is that God 
is the destroyer of Lmt and Evil and Ignorance, and Hi aid is absolutely 
require 1 for man to ro^i^ror un and death. And tl » mo t popular 
fotiva-. r»*pr' -mting thr jc .onque t of kuo.vWh <• arc the PiahmotKiv.i 
anJ JJa^ara and K unan-PawJifpii and Skandabasliii and \ inuyuLi* 


i 




SjIVAJN’ANA SIDDIIIYaR 


[Bk. III. 


146 


Chaturthi. Writing to the Hindu some years back on the Brahniotsava 
we gave the following account. 

THE BRAHMOTSAVAM OR tHE CAR-FEAST. 

In ever)’ grand feast lasting over several days, each day is performed 
what it called an ‘Aitikam' (sg^siij), a logical term meaning an ancient 
tradition or truth, and which 1 may compare to the mystery plays. And 
the grandest event in a Brahmotsavam is the car-feast; and that feast only ' 
is called Brahmotsavam in which the car-feast is one of the events. The 

a * 

Brahmotsavam would mean a feast in honour of the true Brahm or where 
the Truth of Brahm is manifested. 

To describe briefly the festival: the principal tlnng is the huge car. 
in the body of which all the ‘Devas’ are worked in wood. We find 
attached four horses, and above them is seated a figure with four heads, 
and behind the figure, its modern representative is the ‘ KanmuVa ’ waving 
his red handkerchief. Behind him the musicians. In the middle is seated 
the representation of the ‘Deity’, with a single arrow and bow in Its 
hands. We see the whole town or village turning up to see what is 
popularly called Kafchi (amL?) or Dart ana, meaning the manifestation 
of God’s grace. 

The breaking of the car’s axle is also an ordinary event in the car- 
festival. Now, consider the ancient tradition recorded in the Yajur Veda 
and elaborated in the Puranas* and Mahabharata, and the story is also 
alluded to in the Ramayana. The story 1 alluded to is the story of the 
‘ Tiripura-samhara ’. 1 give the story first as given in Yajur Veda 

(6th Kanda, 2nd Prasna. 3rd Anuvaka and 12th Mantra.) 

Teshiim Asuranam tisrapura a sa n n ay a s :n ayyava mat ha vajatatha harinita 
deva jetnnna Sakmivaiita U pa sadaiva jig i shin tasmadahur yasthaivam Veda 
yatclia nopasadavai. 

Mah&puram Jay ant it i ta iskum 
Sonias Knrva ta gain: anikam 
Soman Salyam Vishnum tejunam 

* Matsya Purana, Chapters 129-140, Skanda Purana, Upadesa 
Kanda, Chapters 70-72 and Liiiga Purapa, Purva, 72 chapter tf. in last: — 
Athah hhagavdn Rudro Dcvdn avalokyoa Sanharah 
PaSi.ndm adliipatyam me dattam iianmi taiosuran. 

“ Thus Sahkara, the Bhagavan Rudra looked to the devas (and said) the 
Lordship of Pasus was given to me and therefore 1 will kill the Asuras.” 


i 


( 








A. II.] 


SUPAKSIIA—SUTRA I. 


H 7 


ic bry.va". ha twain aSishyatiia 
Rudr2 iti altravail rudro vai 
Kmra ; So r.ya tuiti sobravii 
Varan Vrira abhani eva PasTnuun 
Adhifaierasaniti tasmdt rudra) 

PaiuiAn adhipat stfn rudrova 
brijat Saiisrah Pure bhiteva ebyo’i 
Lokebhys Surdn prJuudaia.f 

Three Asuras t had acquired by their iapas (human will and desire) 
three flaming forts whereby they were committing woe and destruction 

j There were the three cities of iron, silver and gold (belonging) to 
Asuras. The gods not being able to win them (by fight) wished to win 
them by seige. (The great) say that He (the Brahmin etc.) .who knows 
(what ought to be known) and he (the non-Brahmin etc.) who does 
not know—they a*re able to win by seige the great city which cannot 
be overtaken by fight ; (then) the gods made an arrow composed of Agni 
as (the bottom hiit) wood Soma as (the middle) iron (<^6vs PUju,) 

and Vishnu as (the top ) (Qy c ?jA) and declared (consulted; who will 
discharge it, and determined Rudra, the ciuel (was) able : lie, (the Rudra) 
said the boon was made over. I am the Lord of Pasus (both the two- 
footed and four-footed); so Rudra the Lord of Pasus discharged it, 
broke up these three cities, and blown up them all from these worlds 
(_$ 3, rO/sy-fsiy}, 

* Our own account follows the more improved puranic accounts 
where incidents and details are altered somewhat to bring out the esoteric 
meaning much more fully—for instance, tbc Purapic account states that 
tP* arrow was never fired and ilutt the car became a ruin. 

Cf. 'I iruve,again.— 

c jiAui y tctit i'iS do 

• - * l iu fiy jufcqf i • u ’ 

CidaytA Al. 0 * x/ • yu r . 

y * *.f.i *, * 4..- ?j y t /./j _ r. ib 

i ' 7 ir ■ i'^ul 

S- y . • • Jsr ay . 

Thi» vc*y •imAi i* very suggestive of the true meaning y l HyyA) 
a-» leavin' of one’ h&’iian ti<"«, when >jjlq </VL.i_cu, initiation by tlio 
c G i u happen*, and th"-i * ’* j/ 7 • ' , yLiq u y* y ’ , our Pasu 
Uvk.a and / a'j cor* aicad d-^ir yc 1. 


t 


I 


1 




14 $ 


S1VA1XANA SIDDJJIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


on men and Devas. The ‘devas’ repaired in a body to the Supreme and 
invoked his aid. He consented to destroy them provided each rendered 
his help as He is described as “ pexrQunjstom fiujn ? #meawiu&sr ”, 

(He who is not aware of His own greatness). Then the ‘devas’ shaped 
the huge car in which each had his part. The upper and lower halves 
were the heavens and the earth. The sun and the moon became the 
wheels. The four Vedas became the four horses, Brahma is the 
charioteer, Mount Meru and Vasuki became the bow and string; and 
the arrow was shaped out of Vishnu, the iron, Vayu, the feathers, and 
Agni the head. The structure had become complete and tbe Deity had 
taken its seat, and the dreaded Asums were tempted by curiosity and 
were nearing to view the ‘ wonder ’. When, lo! pause ! 

The DevaS could not contain themselves and each began to think 
“ I foolishly invoked the aid of ‘the one’; what could he do without 
my help.” The very moment the Deity stni'ed ; the three pttras (three 
flaming forts) had joined and were consumed to ashes; and the three 
Asuras look their stand by the Deity, and the axle broke and the car was 
a ruin. The Devas woke up smashed and addressed the Deity that He 
was the PaSii/ati and that themselves were all pains. And from that day, 
the one began to be addressed as Tripurantaka and Pasupati. And it is 
to be noted that in Rfnr.ayana the Deity is addressed as Tripuruntaka and 
Pasupati in the same verse. 

Now for its meaning. Not to be accused of the foolish and blind 
error ascribed to the ‘modem Hindu Revivalist,’ I simply quote the verse 
from ‘Tirumantram ’ of TirumCilar which is being translated and publsb- 
ed in the pages of the Siddhanta Dipika. 

“jyuL-essB Q&Qemt— <un $!i-\ unpesrear 

G&ppiar Qcsrmurrsar Qpt—na&r 
(ipuLjn utTcu^a Qp'.bir.^ stufituib 
rfyut-l/D Gioiupsmo tuinrfi eunQp,” 

The ancient of Days, with water in Plis coral Braids, 

Destroyed the Triple-city, say the fools. 

The Three Forts are the product of the Triple mala. 

Who knows what happened next ? 

Here the only clue given is that the three puras * are the product of the 
three mala or Pasa or Human coats of the soul or Atinii. And I proceed 

* Pura as used in the upanishats and other places technically 
mean bedy. 


t 





A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA I. 


149 


to draw out the parallel. The Asuras typify the human monad, in itself 
pure, but working mischief through its encasement in the flesh and senses 
(flaming forts). Liberation comes when these coverings are destroyed 
and the feet of the Lord reached. “u~ ~:h~ u<~a/<5Si_io 

To effect this liberation is the effort of humanity, and their labour and 
perseverance is truly wonderful. They pray to all sorts of gods, and 
* read all sorts of books, and think out all sorts of methods, but the one 
thing running, through theig whole fibre, is their Egoism; that pride of self, 
Ahankara and Mamalcara, they do not forget, and it ever and anon crops 
up. Even when they pray to the ‘True One*’ this pride of self does not 
vanish and he exclaims 1 What a great jfiiini, what a great bhakta am I.’ 
"Am I not achieving Salvation by my own Jflanam and by my own 
Bhakti.” This poor human effort can'only provoke a smile, and the 
huge structure built by this so-called Jnanam and Bhakti falls to pieces. 
A.nd yet the Asuras who nearing to view the Supreme (they forget their 
own peril, their self) for the time being unite their three forts, i.c. attain 
‘ ’ and ‘ QQ^eSf-xrQjjnuLj ’ to the indifference of the self, 

by the balancing of pleasure »and pain, yet these attain to the feet of 
the Lord, their Mala being destroyed, by the fire, yea, the smile (Grace) 
issuing frem the lips of the Lord. And this is called destruction or 
samharam. This is merely destructive conquest of flesh, a conquest of 
Ajf« nam by knowledge and Grace of God (Patijt.ar.au:). And the heading 
to Patigam called ' .5?(75-45,2^rnf ’ in ‘ ’, describing ' Tiripura 

SamkZram' etc , is called Jt.azavsrfi’ (GTrrsarQ&pjff, conquest by JfiiSna.) 
As this conquest by its very nature involves a conflict, and a very fierce 
conflict too, the Deity is sonict,imc« represented in a dread aspect and 
yet called, 1 Sivam ’ * The ^Blissful And when we approach the Place 
of Peace, vvl.cn our passions arc reduced to ashes and from which there 
is no return, this is the real i i.aiar.a-; * or burning ground and not where 
our earthly bodies are consumed from time to time, and ever and anon, 

• This Kudta Bhumi is represented on earth by the sacred shrine of 
Y.rat>ff (Lenare-) where yogis obtain release through the fontene! and 
obtain tiie feet of Siva the bli ful, (hence all men aspire to die there-Oh- 
if on.y they v.ill realiy rea h the true VaraiUji !) in the same way as the 
cave of the yogi, the Hru!.tk.i»a for the Dahata upusana is represented 
by the sacred duinc of Chidambara in South India. The word SuiaSuut 1 
b^th mean cremation and Bcuare . 


i 


I 


$ 


1 




150 


SIVAJNANA SIDDIIIVAR 


[Bk. III. 


lo assume another by our flaming unbilled desires and passions. (See a 
beautiful passage in the first Section of the Open court lectures by that 
really inspired lady, Mrs. Annie Besant, where the yogi of yogis is 
described). One thing more. Have we not here discovered the true 
nature of the Pati, and the 'nature of the Pasu covered by the pride of 
Self (Pasa) and the way this fata (three puras) can be destroyed, and 
can we then question the propriety, if in this place the ‘gods' describe 
themselves as ‘Pasu', and the ‘One’ as the Pasupati in the Vgda. And can 
we cavil if the feast illustrating all this is called Brailmotsavam ? As 
regards the working of thi instituition, if the object of any religious 
method is simply to draw out man from his own self and to make him 
looked up to and to own allegiance to the Highest, then I have seen 
the populace- display more real'enthusiasm and religious feeling at the 
drawing of a car in the streets under a burning sun, than the most cul¬ 
tured in society in gilded palaces and under zephyr-breathing pahkhas.” 

DURGA l’UJA. 

Last Saturday (October 19) was a day of universal rejoicing and 
sacredness in the land of Ind, and from the poorest peasant and village 
artisan to the richest and bravest warrior and king, and the devout 
Brahman, all unite their gladsome heart in doing piija to the Universal 
Spirit which is all knowledge and bliss. As is generally the case in 
Hindu Religion, the central idea is one thing, and it assumes a symbolism, 
and slowly and surely in course of time, the thought and symbolism is 
expanded and extended and adopted in the multitudes of creeds and sects, 
we have among our midst. The central thought is that the Supreme 
Intelligence and Wisdom arises out of darkness and conquers evil, and 
that it is only with the aid of this Divine Light we can conquer also our 
darker passions. This idea runs through stories of India and Vritra, God 
and Satan, Ahura and Alniman, the sun myth, and Buddha and Maya etc., 
etc. This central thought is contained in the famous “Na.SadAsid” 
hymn of the Rig-veda (x. 129). 

“3. In the beginning there was darkness hidden in darkness; all 
this was indistinguishable chaos. That which, being everywhere was 
wrapped in indistinctness grew into one (Sat) by the Great Power (Kriya 
Sakti) of the austerity of contemplation (Jnuna Sakti). 

V' 

4. At first arose Desire (Ichcha Sakti) whicl? is the primal germ of 
mind ; Sages searching with their heart’s thought have found the kinship 
of the Sat in the A<at. 



A. II.J 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA I. 


151 


5. This spreading ray of light, was it across, below or above? Ihese 
were impregnating powers, these were mighty forces, Self-sufforicd was 
below, and the Encrq scr above." 

As all the Vedic and man trie rituals and philosophy were subse¬ 
quently clothed in Agamic (Tan trie) symbolism, the thought comprised 
in the above verses were symbolized by Durga warring with Mahishusura* 
*s and trampling him under foot triumphant and her standing also on the 
bosom of Her Lord Siva. Durga is the “Power", “Thought” and 

) 1 I 

“Desire” (Kiiya, Juana and Ichchu-'akti or Chitsakti ) of the above 
mentioned verses, and she is the Energiser ‘and her Lord is the Se l f- 
Supfctt 'fig Sat. Maliith sura, the Asura with the buffalo head (what 
more stupid than the buffalo to the Hindus?; means Ignorance, Avidyfi 
or evil. This is the Universal war going on from eternity, and whit h 
war is represented in various shapes from time to time. This exactly is 
the meaning of die war in the Skanda purdra, in the Rdmuyara and in 
the Mahabhlirata. 

“Whenever there is decay of Dharma, O! Bharata, and there is 
exaltation of Adharma, then 1 myself come forth for the protection of the 
Good, for the destruction of the Evil doers, for the sake of firmly establish 
ing Dharma, I am born from age to age", says Lord Kiishna the master 
and Guru of Arjuna who is enjoined to fight out the evil in himself, his 
egoism. ThL story also is "instructive in this way that without the divine 
Guru (Aru] Sakti) we cannot know ourselves and our Gcd. And the 
original of this story and teaching is in Aruj's (Sakti) own person in the 
famous Bramlii I’panishat (Kena), teaching the nature of the Brahman, 
the Supreme. I his Supreme Wisdom, this Malm Sakti, this Great Chit 
thi> Mahadevi (wIiOjC feast in' the Malmnunbuj this Durga who is 
addressed a> the “One v.itlf the Bialm.an” in the famous Hymn of Arjuna 
in the battlefield of Kuru^shetia, this Unm (Wisdom, Light; see a beauti¬ 
ful article on the derivation of the word and histoiy in the Madras Mn>l 
by Charles Johnston) highly adorned, thedauglitei of llimuvat, tells the 
highly conceited Deva , who thought the \ ictoiy was llit irs, when the 
Brahman it wa» who obtained the \i lory, “it L the Brahman. It is 
through the \i tory of Brahman, that youdiave thus lK_-Come gteat.” '1 his 
Brahman i- (•.<: t, 2 and 3 of tl.e 211 1 kai.da) known and thought 

by one who t 1 inkrst 1* • do • not know ] lim, and ii not known to 1 im 
who lliiul he ki ow . I lie (»o<l-» c.v li 111 I n < un nnn<h thought In was 
the ,rcat Lc.i.g, the ;rcal actor; and their own mi gmlican e and the gieat 


$ 


\ 


) 



r 5 2 


si vajxAxa SIDDHIVAR 


[Bk. III. 


truth, they did not know, till they were told by the Supreme Sakti (Anil) 
herself. This teaching is repeated in the story of the Tripura Samhara. 
This is what is taught to Arjuna by Krishna, not to think that he is the 
actor, that he fights, and that he kills, but that he should dedicate all his 
acts to Isvara as His acts, in whom he must fix his thoughts, attaining a 
mind perfectly balanced towards evil and good. When therefore Durga 
or Sakti means Supreme Sakti or Wisdom, it is easily conceivable after- 
the nine dark nights of conflict of good over evil, all arts and learning 
and knowledge and work and sport should receive their light and life, and 
the Puja to Mahadevi, Mahalakshmi, and Mahasarasvati, and weapons 
and tools (Ayudha puja) &c., should be celebrated. This was originally 
celebratd in the spring, when after the death and darkness and misery of 
winter, nature herself put on he? best and freshest robes, and everything 
assumed beauty and life and light. But it was changed from spring to 
autumn as Rama worshipped Durga in this season before commencing 
his great fight with Ravapa. And Arjuna invokes her aid also in the 
famous battle of Kurukshetra, and it is said that ‘Durga lvi Jai’ was the 
universal war cry in India. And from this also, we gather what were the 
notions of true warfare among Hindus. Ko war could be justifiable 
unless its object was to put down injustice and vice and lawlessness; and 
no war could be sanctioned which had merely the object of greed and 
gain and power only. 

People may ask w’hy God should be represented as terrible at all, but 
this goes to the history of evolution of all religious ideas in this land and 
elsewhere (even the God of the Christians is an angry and jealous god), 
and we gather also our own feeling on the matter when we speak of 
“righteous indignation.’’ The story of Uma Haimavati being the 
mediator* between tbe Ignorant gods from India clown words is repealed 

V* V 

in all the Saiva purapas, with the more explicit mention of Siva as the 
Supreme Brahman and this has vast bearing also on the history of the 
evolution of the Brahmic Ideal. This story taken with the stories of 
Daksha’s sacrifice, and the sacrifice performed by the Rishis of Dharuka- 
vana, leave no doubt about the true meaning. 

THE FIRE SACRIFICE, 

In any of its three forms was the original mode of worship by the 
ancient Aryan, and in this worship all the gods arc invoked.. Thereby 

* Cf. The famous line “ Q sm** fa sap emu. <i 

“follow the mother and embrace the father.” 


f 





a. n.j 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA I. 


153 


the idea of the only One without a second was being forgotten, and the 
rituals and sacrifices became more and more formal. The improving 
conscience and thought of the people felt that something must be done to 
make the sacrifice to the One true God more explicit, and to eliminate 
from the category of the true God, all the minor gods who.were till now 
addressed as one with God. And greater veneration was being paid to 
the sound of the Vedas as mantra and not to the true spirit, (this class 
gave rise to‘tile Purva V.mamsa or Sabda Brahma Yadam) and this 
pernicious influence had also to be checked. ,And hence, the Pauranika, 
who narrated not facts in political history, but a much more important 
aspect of history, namely, the mental and spiritual history of a people, 
invented these episodes, to illustrate the psual trend in the public minds, 
and the changes which were being slowly introduced. The Kena 
Upanishat story,proves that the earlier gods were even discredited at the 
time of this Upanishat, and it explains also that the worship paid to 
these deities in the Vedas was nominally so, but really to the Supreme 
and that these Gods and their triumphs merely represented the One True 
God and His Triumphs. 

THE DAK'- HA STORY, 

Would even point to a time when the Aryans had fallen to a lower 

level, and the true spirit , of sacrifices ( Dakshayani-Kriya Sakti; was 

totally ignored, and they turned a deaf ear to true counsel, and more 

heroic measures were necessary, which was nothing else than the entire 

putting down of sacrifices. And the Gods from Vishnu downwards are 

smashed by Virabhadra, the creation of God’s anger, and the sacrificial 

place is turned to a crernatoriupi. And when Daksha relents, we find 

* 

a tualiy in the Vayu Purppa (See the account in Wilson’s Volumes), 
God b.va, telling him that all sacrifices and worship which is not directed 
to the glory of the true firahr.an is bound to end in such failure, and that 
worship reAlly belongs to God, and must be directed to Him solely and 
wholcly to ensure salvation. And the proud and haughty Kisliis of 
Darukavar.a, 

nil. jAW>\ I'l'AIIM w \Dp; , 

I lad al*o to le put down similar y, and the 1 Vrr which tlv y created, and 
sent to t]r troy God (Siva), by if fearful noise, represent.; mcily the Veda 
('/rtf. n nr ■* , pronoun'ed without meaning, ai d God Siva, took up this 
I '* r at He t.rif'M *.r d he'd it up !o r to His Bar, without any evil 
cf/c t, On y to ritrtt.it*, th.il r.ywtvu .oud v,« may shout out the name of 
/<> 


1 


% 





154 


SIVAJNANA SIDDHIVAR 


[Bk. III. 


HE IS THE LIGHT OF LIGHTS. 

: 2. When Uma out of playfulness shut the eyes of the 
Supreme Lord, the whole worlds became dark, which darkness was 

God, it cannot reach His ears and have any effect, and unless and until 
we bring to bear our whole heart and whole soul, in His praise. And in 
this connection how full of meaning is the line from St. Manikkavaeagar; 

“ Qeu^foserr igturrQ smssrQ&Jir <hQ tgn rgysGorir) ^.eawessH'jjQesr .” 

“The Vedas cried Oh Father, and Thou transcendest far far beyond.” 
and each one of the five wofds following the word Vedas, shows the ever 
increasing distance between Vedas and God, though in other places, God 
is extolled as < 6 $(i£uQun(r$‘xr.'' (The Supreme Truth of the Vedas.) 

This is the true meaning of these episodes, and Oiiental Scholars 
have sought Vainly to read into these, conflicts between a savage creed 
and the true ancient Gods, and nothing can be further from fact than to 

V r 

say that Siva was not the God of the Brahmans. Lassen truly observes 
after a careful reading of Mahabharat that Siva was the God of the upper 
classes, Brahmans and Kshatriyas, and Manu in mentioning the caste of 
the Gods, makes out that Siva is Brahman, Vislipu Kshatriya, and 
Brahma Vaisya, and Indra Sudra, and their worship by die respective 
castes are recommended. And Sri Ramakrishna Pramahamsa speaks of 
Siva as the ideal of all contemplative and self-absoibed men, and as the 
God of the Yogis; and the description of the Muni, (Yogi) is almost the 
same as that of Rudra even in the Rigveda, (R. V. X. 136) and the Muni 
and Rudra are declared to drink the Visha together. And in the Maha- 
bharata, Siva is over and over again spoken of as the Yogi of Yogis. 
And the form ascribed to Siva, his braided hair, his naked body or body 
clothed in skins (^ubuouir^ — Skin consisting of Ambara- 

Akas), with Upavida of snakes, with his Ganges and Dandu, are exactly 
the features and accompaniments of a Brahmir Ascetic (Yogi;, and the 
remarkable resemblance will be strikingly noticed in the Poona Art 
Pictures of Siva and Parvati, Vasishta or Visvamitra and their wives. 
And to-day ninety per cent of the Hindu Population w'ear the emblems of 
Siva, Ashes and Rudraksha, and the temples of Siva cannot be counted 
in numbers, and one need only try to count the temples mentioned in 
Mr. R. Sewell’s book on South Indian Antiquities. (Vide the papers on 
Svetasvatara Upanishat and Saiva Religion in my “Studies”). 

5.’. “I11 this Indestructible, (Brahman; the sun and moon were 
established'” (Br. Up. 3.8 11.) “There shines not the sun, nor moon and 




A. IIU 


Sl’PAKSHA—SUTRA I. 


155 


removed by His third eye. They know not that by this tradition 
that ail the Lights of heaven are but reflections of His Supreme 
Jyoti form. 

HE IS YOGI AND BHOGI. 

5 3. They know not that the Devas felt de jected and unhappy 

w > 

for want of sense-enjoyment when the Supr eme Siva assumed Yoga. 
They know not that when God Vishnu persuaded His son Kama 
Deva to face Siva, the letter burnt him to ashes by His Upper Eye; 
and when the Supreme however became united to the Gracious 
Mother, Uma Haimavati, all sentient creatures recovered their 
happiness. 

THE REASON FOR HIS ASSUMING FORMS. 

54. Unless the Supreme can assume Forms, we cannot have 
manifestations 'of His Pafichakriiya, and of His Grace to His 
Bhaktas. We cannot gel the sacred Revelations. We cannot eat 
the fruits of our Karma, and seek release by Yoga, and by sacred 
initiation. 

GOD IS RUPA, ARUPA AND RUPARUPA. 

55. Once we assert Form to the Supreme, it follows that It 
is Formless also. Fronvthis again, we derive a third Form which 
is neither form nor Formless. All these three varieties of Forms 
are assumed only and solely for the purpose of dostroying our own 
physical forms, (cause of birth and death). 

GOD SMADAD1IVA MURTI. 

« 

56. If asked why God U spoken of as Adhva Murti (having 

the Adhvas for Ilis Body), it is because His is Eternal and 

• _ 

stars, nor do these lightnings shine, much less this (ire. When he shines 
forth, all things shine after Him. By Brahman s shining, shines here all 
ly ow." (bvetaj. Up. vi. 14; Kupia Up. v. 13; Mu',i(j. Up. ii. 2, 10; 
Cilia xv. C.) 

55. 'I l.c fir t is tailed the Sakala or Apara, the sc ond is called 
Kishkalx or l’a’a, and ihe third is or Sakala-Nishkala or I’arapara. 

56. 1 hc~c ix adhva’ aic (1) Ka’.a, whose subdivisions ate 

Sntyatlta Ka’a (•<: *'.*«'.*), banli Kaia (fir Vidya (Jjp 

cz/), Brati-hja ( - cfaef.tz.t-), Nivirti (SeSr/fa), (2) Bhuvana, (3) Varga, 


156 


sivajnAna siddhiyar 


[Bk. III. 


omnipresent and inseparable from all these bodies, and He actuates 
and moves both Chit and Achit, that the Vedas call Him so. 

GOD IS MANTRA MURTI. 

57. If asked, why it is the Vedas speak of Mantra more 
specially as His Body, it is because that, of the material causes of 
the Universe, namely, Vindhu (Kundalini), Mohini (Asuddha Maya) 
and Mahat (Parkriti), the Vindu body is the purest, and is in Union 
with Siva Sakti. 

THE REASON. 

58. And because this Mantra originates from this Pure 
Vindhu, and is caused and permeated by Parasakti and is the 
cause of man’s progress and salvation, all the Vedas speak 
specially of the Mantras as Hara’s Body, 

GOD IS PANCHA MANTRA MURTI. 

59. If asked why of these Mantras, the Tantras speak of the 
five mantras, lsana &c., more as His Body, Hear! These five 

(4) Mantra, (5) Pada, (6) Tatva, and these respectively form (1) members 

of His body, (a) bead, (b) face, ( c) chest, (d) arms, (e) feet, (2) hairs, (3) 

skin, (4) blood (5) nerves, (6) flesh and bones. \ ide mantra No. 991 in 
✓ 

K. A. Sastrin’s Lalita Sahasra Kama. “ 7 ransc ending, etc. (Shadadhvatita- 
rupimj. The six adhvas are, words (Padudhva), worlds (Bhuvana), letters 
(Varna), categories (Tatva), parts Jxala) and Mantra (Mantradhva); of 
these, three are the parts of of Vimarsa, and other three of Prakasa. The 
Virupiksha Paiichasika says, “ The quality of Vimarsa is attributed to 
three viz., nsrds, mantras and letters, of Prakasa, is worlds, categories and 
farts." About these the Jnanarnava says, “In this Chakra there are six 

adhvas, O Devi, adored by warriors,.thus one should meditate by six 

adhvas upon the pure Srichakra.” Thus ends characteristics ascribed to 
each adhva c. i., adhvas of meditating upon Siva, viz., as manifested in 
words, &c. The Dakshinamurti Sam. also; Hear now, O ruler of Yogas, 
the nature of six adhvas....thus one should meditate by six adhvas upon 
the Snchakra.'’ 

59. The Pancha-mantras are Uanam, Tatpurnsham, Aghoram, Varna- 
devam, and Sadyojatam. They are called Mur tarn, Vaktram, Hndayam , 
Gtihyam, and Marti; and their respective functions are Anugraha, 1 iro- 
dhana, Samhara, Stithi and Srishti. liana, is so called as it is filled with 









A. III.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA I- 


157 


mantras arose first and is the cause of all other Mantras, and are 
guided by the five First Saktis. 

Adhikarana III. 


, ^ GOD AND TRIMURT1 c . 

60. If it be asked how the gods Brahma and the rest are also 

» * • ^ 

Forms of Hara, it is so, because it is by the Power of His Sakti 
that these gods perform their functions. 'The objection that if 

the highest qualities and is the ruler of all and it is called Murta, because 
it grants the highest wash ot Tatpada. It is called Tatpurusha because it 
dwells in all souls as Antaryami and it is called also Vakira (mouth) as it 
fills the worlds with Saptajdla, the product of Nadham and Bi'uiu. 
Gborjin is Aj'd>:a and Agkoram is Juana and as its place is the heart it is 
called Hridaya. Vdmaieva is so called (Varna— left or cruel) and ( Dcva •= 
Prakasa or light; as it plunges the soul in Maya (lower) in pursuit of 
Dharma, Artha and Kama, and its form is light; and it is called guhya 
as it induces Yijhana etc., from Bindu, and this is a Sukshma act. 
Sadyojitam is so-calied because it induces from its mere wish Sthula and 
S-Ik^hma bodies to souls, through mantesvara mantra, and that is the 
reason why it is called Murti also. These live mantras form five Saktis and 
together with llarar.i, Jarani and Rhodayatri, they form the Ashta Sakti. 
Ildrani Sakti acts both as Samhara and Anugraha Sakti. Janaui as 
Srishti Sakti ; and Rhodayatri as both Stithi and Tirobhava Sakti. The 
Pane ha mantras were the first to-Arise and they are called mantra inula 
a> all others rise from them. ’These are called Brahmans also, and there 
is a special upanishat devoted to it and which is translated into English 
in the September number of the Siddhanta Dipika (1912). 

It may be noted’ here that the commcutator observes clearly that 
th^se mantras are only God's bodies, so called (Upachara) and not real, 
as Ife is Chit-u>r.ifi and can have no bodies in Maya or Mantra. 

60 The power of they; Gods is confined to and by the respective 
Material p.anc* in which they exercise tneii fun lions. Gods, Brahma 
ard Vi.hr.u, r anr.ot rise above the Prakiiti plane of the Universe, Kudra 
a. J Mahs . ara above the AauJdl a Maya plane and so on. So that, an 
A-.-vser and Ah worker t. essentially tie e.> ary. 






1 5 8 


SlVAjNANA SIDDUIYaR 


[Bk. III. 


these gods perform these functions, no other Cod as Hara is 
necessary is met by the fact that these Gods can only perform one 
and only function each. 

god’s sakti one. 

61. The Sakti is not many but only one. It appears as 
various by its manifestation in various functions. Just as the one 
Supreme Law and Power vested in the person of our AugusT 
Sovereign appears as various when executed by Her Majesty’s 
ministers of state, Hara actuates all Gods and grants boons and 
salvation according to His own Supreme Will. 

FORM OF SAKTI. 

62. &jipQ' 3 uQpdresfip psai—uSevir (Gj/Tssric/r^ic, 

Qp'hpplfi iSjsto&Q&tufi) tiS* 3 >aj<GrtT 6 orpgp&rQsun QsL’dresBd 
Qsvptslp (^rrssrQf&rsfr pp piH<?<5Si&Q&\L$sl 
anaupjglQLoetop lSsst^ rnssiQsSQtb Qi-flsmujQujGOevnii>, 

IT IS PURE INTELLIGENCE. 

62. The form of this Sakti is Pure Intelligence. If asked 
whether Supreme Will and Power are also found in this Supreme 
Intelligence, yes. Where there is intelligence, there is will and 
power. As such the Power and Will will be manifested also by 
the Supreme Chit Sakti. 

61. One minister of State works for peace, another for war. One 
educates, another punishes. One is engaged in collecting Revenue, another 
in spending. One attends to Home affairs and another to Foreign affairs. 
And all these derive power from one and the same source. The com¬ 
mentators mention the incidents of the Daksha’s Sacrifice, Markaiideya’s 
salvation, the churning of the Ocean etc., as illustrating that none of 
the Lower Gods can act independently of the sweet will of the Supreme 
Paramasiva. 

62. The saying “ Knowlodge is Power” explains the statement above. 
The phrases psmL-uSleurr, mempuiSso that cannot be obstructed or hidden 
applied to the Supreme Intelligence, have to be remembered particularly. 
The Siddhanta does not contemplate any Power or Intelligence which can 
even temporarily undergo obscuration or change or become impure. In 
the presence of this Supreme Sat Chit, there can be no darkness, no 
ignorance and no sorrow at any time. Darkness, ignorance and sorrow 





A. III.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA I. 


159 


ICHCHA, JNaXA and kriya sakti. 

63. This one Parasakti becomes three as Ichcha, Jnana and 

Kriya Saktis. Ichcha Sakti may be defined as the Supreme Love, 

desiring the welfare of all living creatures. As Jnana Sakti, God 

knows all, and the wants of each and every one, and grants their 

✓ 

deserts. By His Gracious Kriya Sakti, the Lord creates ail these 
worlds. 

• * JlVA IS* NOT EQUAL TO COD. 

64. Can the Jiva by possession of hio will, intelligence and 
power be said to be equal to God? No. These powers of the 
Jiva are veiled by the eternal mala or impurity. '1 he soul knows 
by the Grace of God, according to karm«. performed by him. The 

cannot be postulated by attributing any veiling or obscuration to this 
bupieme light. The Supreme light uniike the Earthly suns, shines every¬ 
where and at all times and in all splendour, undiminished and unobscured 
though the poor mortals as we are, cannot and will not perceive this 
tight, owing to the veil or covering over our eyes (and not over God, 
mind), just as the blind mail fails to perceive light on even a bright noon 
day. The little covering is over the blind man’s, little man’s little eyes 
and not over the sun, (try to compare the dimensions man’s eye and that 
of the sun), though the poet sings that even a small umbrella can hide 
the sun. The poet fergcts that it is not the great sun the umbrella hides, 
but his little head. There are many similiar fallacies in popular speech, 
and this one particular fallacy is a fruitful source of error. 

63. At the sight of the jivas weltering in sin and suffering, God’s 
Love is excited, and He c-f/.r to save the souls, and intelligently sets 
about adjusting means to this end, and the special incurs adopted for their 
salvation is by creating these worlds for gaining experience and wisdom. 
The following'verse from Mah.ibharata show that the worlds are created 
for the enjoyment of jiva ; Know O Kesava, that this all, consisting of 
animate and inanimate existence, with heaven and other unseen entities; 
which occurs in these worlds, and which has the All-pervading Lord 
for its soul, has Mowed from Mahe&vara, and has been created by Him 
for the enjoyment of Jiva." 1 he following line fiom Emerson shows also 
what the be.I Christian opinion is. " Everything is pin pr live, and man 
11, to live her*after, tUnl the v orld is for tii-> edit- ation L the only suie 
so: .lion of the cinema," 


> 


) 


\ 





[Bk. III. 


l6o SIVAJNANA SIDDH1VAR 

soul is not seif-dependent enough to secure the fruits of his works 
or salvation, himself. 

HIS DIFFERENT FORMS. 

65. When pure Juana , He is called Sivam. When Pure 

✓ 

Kriya , He is called Sakti. When Jnana and Kriya are equally 
balanced, He is called Sadasiva. If kriya predominates, He in 
called Mahesvara. If jfiana predominates He is called Vidya 
In these Forms or Bodies, He performs the various functions, 
constituting ReabsorpLion (Layaj, Enjoyment (Bhoga)and Creation 
(Adhikara). 

1US SVANTARA BODY. 

66. 1 hese five forms of Sivam, Sakti &c., form His Five- 

self- luminonus Bodies. As these Siva-Tatvas are in existence 

before the generation of Time itself, these may be said to be 

eternal (Nitya). The order is not order in Time, therefore, but 

✓ 

order in manitestation of Jnana and Kriya Saktis. 

GOD N1RVJKAR1. 

67. As one actor plays the part of many ch traders such as 
Ravaiia, Rama etc., so, the Supreme One works in all these Forms 
and yet remains one and unchanged. All these Forms are His 
Sakti. He and His Sakti are related as the tree and its inner solid 
core (gviSulo). 

GOD UNKNOWABLE EXCEPT THROUGH HIS GRACE. 

68. Just as the crystal appears as the various colours 
reflected on it, yet remains unchanged, so God manifests Himself 
as variously as His Sakti Forms, and remains Pure and one. And 
He cannot be perceived except when He manifests Himself in His 
Arul Sakti. 

y v 

65. The first two forms, Sivam and Sakti constitute the Laya or 
Nishkala Body. Sadasiva is the Bhoga-Form or Nishkala-Sakala body. 
Mahesvara and Vidya are the creators and constitute the Sakala-Form. 

66 . We will have to note that there are forms of Matter which lie 
beyond Time and Space too. These bodies are called Svatantia, as these 
bodies are the purest and most translucent and God’s Light shines in its 
own Form. 



A III.] 


SUPARSHA — SUTRA I. 


i6r 


THE UNIVERSE IS AFTER GOD’s IMAGE, MALE AND FEMALE. 

69. All this Universe is of the Form of Si v am and His Sakti. 
Of Their form, are all males and females, possessing marks and 
qualities agreeing and differing from each other. By the Power of 
irakii, are all our welfare secured. People do not understand the 
secret meaning of the Sivalihga and Pita. 

70 . ?rp/g eLQTjzjj:G;e\€zr 

• • ^ * 

Qifr?ScsQmirgyj) u ezzr^ssfi So.» t Lodi'-cvon' 

S Ql.i7~Qui7£dD g'+uUQJ GST €3T (fifQ 63T 

iS aZxX 2L.p cS GS)tU»; ^QlLiT S5T ^ L$€&tUiE uS UJ 6V iS! $cZ)Q €oT „ 

GOD IS ALL AND NOT ALL, 

✓ * , 

70. Siva is neither a Rupi nor an Arupi. He is neither chit 

nor achit. He does not create nor sustain nor perform other 
functions. He was never a Yogi nor a Bhogi. Though present 
in and pervading all these inseparably, yet, He is of a nature 
different from all these. 




G9. Compare Mahabharata, page 74 (AniEu Parva). “This universe 
of mobile and immobile creatures is pervaded by two kinds of forms 
(male and female). Every being with the mark of the masculine sc.\ should 
be knov.n to be of buna; while every being with the mark of the 
feminine -cx should be knov.n to be of Uma," 

70. After all tin* above-named discussion, note the supreme position 
assumed by the Siddhantu finally. 

21 

\ 


i 





SUTRA II. 


Advaita Lakshana. 

- 

god’s RELATION’ TO THE WORLD. 

I. utrm), (o6U(tr?uj, i S-L—&pjLcndj petfhunuj 6^4/0, 

^cu©6o/r ajuSInsar, ^emuSssr Q&suevg, 

f^eosijfStp'Li, (gftGvrifif&T ^esrsann peisrdQsrij^eSIf&rftp gnQetsr 
iilsvsH@ Jujovgp©, $&jrpsGTGST f iiiki&tr Q^th^to. 

One with the world, and different, and one-and-different, The 
Light transcendant, 

The Lord who guides souls innumerable, in obedience to 
His Will (Ajna Sakti) and each ones’ karma; 

The First Cause, untouched by the defects of His creatures; 
Self-luminous Nirmala Being, stands, secondless, pervading all. 

i. The author expands this one verse into ninety-five stanzas and 
the division by commas in the Tamil verse shows the various parts 
of the same and each is in answer to different objectors. The primary 
division is into four adhikaranas, and the reader is asked to follow 
this with the Sivajfianabodha Sutra and churnika and adhikaraijas and 
illustrations. We give very few notes, as the subjecf is more or less fully 
treated in my edition of StvajTidttabodham. 

We will also refer to the papers 'i’n our “ Studies ” on “ Mind and 
Body”, “The Two Gems”, “God and the 1 * World" and our “Review 
of Dravida Bhashya”, All knowledge is relative, and the true purpose 
of Philosophy and Religion is to seek tke relation that subsists between 
man and the world and God; and from the relations deduced, we proceed 
to govern our life and guide our actions. In discussing these relations, 
some people deny the existence of some one or other, or all, of these 
things; and some in doing so, assert the identity of the one with the 
other. Most peopie do not know however to keep the divisions and sub¬ 
divisions separate, and they confound and confuse some and all of them. 
Now we shall state some of these questions distinctly. 

(1) Whether the existence of all or any one or any two is accepted 
or denied ? 


< 





SUPAKSI1A—SUTRA II. 


163 


(2) Whether between any two. (a) Both are regarded as substances, 
(b) or both are regarded only as phenomena, (c) One is substance and 
the other phenomenon, (d> One is substance, another is attribute. 

(3) What is the relation between these sets ? (a'' Whether order in 

place, Co-existence, ( b) Order in time, Succession, or cause and effect, 
(r) or any other. 

(4) Whether (a) as between substance and attribute, substance and 

phenomena, cause and effect, substance and cause alone are real; attri¬ 
bute, phenomena and effect are unreal, ( b) whether the latter are real, and 
the former unreal. * 

All these are distinct questions and require distinct answers. And 
if one wishes to be exact, he must try and answer these questions. 

The second Sutra is the Sutra which ^discusses this Relativity. Our 
name for this relation is Advaita . This Advaita relation differs from that 
of every other sc’hool, though it shows the way to reconcile all these 
s;hoo!s by accepting the element of truth contained in each. 

The word ‘ Advaita’ is interpreted as meaning ‘ ananya ' both by the 

y 

St. Meykanda Deva; and by St, Xilakantha Sivacharyar in his Bhashya 
on the Vedanta Sutras. This Advaita, the Bliashyakara says under II. i. 22, 
is not that form of Visishtadvaita declaring Bhedabhcda nor is it bh'.da 
as between a pot and cloth, nor absolute Abheda, as that of pearl and 
silver, one of them being iflusory, but he sets up a form of Auanya- 
tu da, as the non-difference between the body and the embodied or 
substance and attribute. The Prapahcha cannot exist apart from God 
and is inseparable, and inasmuch as whatever cannot exist apart from 
another is conditioned by the latter, they may be said to be one; and 
therefore Brahman is said to be’one with the Chetana and Achetana 
Prapancha; and yet there ‘is a natural distinction between the two, so 
that the Supreme Brahnjan is ever superior to the other two. Thus 

he seeks to reconcile the Bleda and Abheda Srutis. Tiro Siddhanta 

• • 

writers also dicinguish their Advaita from Bhotla, Abheda and Bhcd.i- 
bieda do.trines which assert dilfercn c like light and darkness, one-ncss 
like goal and ornament, one-and-dilferent like words and meaning, and yet 
postulate Bhcda like eye and sun, Abheda like soul and body and 
Bhedabhcda like the soul and eye-sight. As will lx; evident, the analogy 
of soul and body, vov’els and consonants is to describe the Abheda 
relationship and this relation i> called 7 a l at my a; and Sivajnana Yogi 
d.ttir.gui-hc- two kiiuL of this; ( t ) one tiling appears as two like the 




164 


SIVAJNANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


Adhikarana. I. 


MAYAVADl’s OBJECTION' ANSWERED. 

2. When all the Vedas proclaim the Oneness of God without 
a second, why do you populate a second by speaking of His 
Presence in souls? No. You misread the Vedas. They only, 
declare that there is only One God. His relation to the souls is 
that of the letter (A) to other letters. 

dOD IS ALL AND NOT ALL. 

3. As the soul is attached to its forms and organs (physical 
body) and is yet separate form the body, so also is Isa attached to 
the souls.' However, the souls cannot become God, and God 
cannot become the souls. God is one and different from the 
souls. 

body and the embodied, or substance and attributes, (2) xvhere two things 
become one by the power of association (41/g) <$!§) and he says the 

former kind of Tadiitmya is called as such, and the latter kind cf 
Tadatmya is called Advaita. And he distinguishes from the above said 
relation, other kinds of relations like aikkyam, as union of the Akas in 
the pot and the Maha Akas, Samavdya, like fire and heat (Samavaya of 
Tarkikas is same as Tadatmya). Say regain, like fingers on one’s palm. 
So r ft fa m union from some one similarity, and Auiyvachuniyam. We may 

V"" 

also point out that of all Indian followers of Sankara, it is Manilal 
Dvivedi alone who points out in his work on “ Monism cr Advaitism ”, 
whi.h we have quoted at length in our' ; Dravida Bhashya Review' that 
Advaita means An any a, and not Eha or Abhcd'a or Abhinna. 

2. St. Arul Nandi Sivachariar does not devote much space for the 
discussion of advaita, and he does not even use the word anywhere in- 
his works. He however defines it as <g)nemi—n&nu.<co, §,<sisrjp/ 

LSlDekr(diSdsr(tysrTLDer , ' ) meaning neither one nor two, nor negation of 
either” in his “ Irupa Irnpahtu." The illustration of Vowels and Conso¬ 
nants is found in Aitreya Aranyaka “ Its consonants form its body ; its 
vowels, the soul (Atma).” Cf. also. “lie who dwells iu Atma and 
within the soul, whom the soul does not know, whose body (Sarira) the 
soul is, and who ru'es the soul within, He is Thy God, the Ruler within. 
The Immortal”. lirihadaraiiya Up. 3,7, 22. 




a. m 


SITAKSHA—SUTRA II. 


165 


Adhiksrana II. 


HOW GOO ACTUATES SOULS AND KARMA. 

4. The Soul, subject to good and bad Karma endures birth 
and death, and pleasure and pain. The sonl enjoys the fruits of 
Karma through the Power of God, in the same \vaj\ as a King 
metes out reward and punishment in this mundane world or as 
a physician applies remedies. The fruits cannot attach to a future 
birth by the appropriate bodies etc. of their own force. 

THE LOKAYATHA’s OBJECTION. 

5. If you object to the existence of Karma, by saying that 
both pleasure and pain are only natural to us, then natural 
characteristics must be harmonious. Men should not be subject 
to pain and pleasure which differ. You again point to a natural 
fact such as water becoming fragrant when flowers are soaked in 
it and becoming warm when ‘heated. 

MAN IS DIFFERENT FROM HIS ATTACHMENT AND MUsT BE INTELLIGENT. 

6 . Just so; the water becomes fragrant or hot, not by its 
own nature but by its attachment. So also the two Kinds of 
Karma become attached to the soul. Pains and pleasures cannot 
attach themselves to a non-intciligent, non-conscious substance. 

ANOTHER OBJECTION. TIL.RE IS NO FUTURE STATE. 

7. It is again objected • that a man’s effort is the cause of 
hK earning wealth and enjoying pleasure. The indolent can never 
gain nor can they enjoy. If, otherwise, persons must secure wealth 
who do not, po^es-j industry and effort. 

THE SAME AN WE RED. 

8. To this we reply that a man’s effort or indolence is the 
r *ult of h -> pro. iuuj Karma. 1 hen again, when a man is most 
i ,du->tno i> in tlr pur uit of wealth, suddenly he becomes indolent. 
'1 hen again wvlth secured a her great effort is sudd'illy lost by 
hre or Jieft etc. Hum c ., the most indolent are ako rolling in 
luxury. 



SIVAJXAN’A SIDDH1YAR 


[Blc. III. 


166 


HOW KARMA ACTS. 

9. Gain and loss and pleasure and pain, honour and disgrace 
all these six, become attached in the womb. They manifest 
themselves as the result of one’s endeavour. They are the result 
of the endeavour made in a previous birth. Results of present 
endeavour will be manifest in a future birth. 

HIS BODY IS CAUSED. 

10. Karma being acts of the body, how was the body caused 
you ask. The karma of the last body causes the new body. They 
are mutually connected as cause and effect, as the seed and tree 
mutually cause each other. 

HOW OUR FUTURE IS FORMED. 

ir. If past Karma is eaten in this birth, how do you get seed 
for a future birth you ask. This Karma consists of acts producing 
pleasure or pain. These acts caused the present body and in 
performing them again, other acts are formed. It is impossible to 
act without giving rise to other acts. Hence the conneciton. 

THE ABOVE POINT ILLUSTRATED. 

12. As the fruit of husbandry yeild us food for present 
enjoyment and 'seed for to-morrow, so also, our acts also account 
for our present enjoyment and form seed, the fruit of which will 
be enjoyed in a future birth. This is the eternal order of Karma. 

9 & 10. The author points out how personal effort is necessary in all 
the stages. Even a seed would not sprout into a tree nor a tree yield 
seeds without cultivation and watering. 

12. The three kinds of Karma and their definition have to be borne 
in mind. Sanchita karma follows one from birth to birth. Prarabdha 
karma is formed out of Sanchita and is the direct cause of the body and 
worlds and enjoyments, one is born to in the present existence. Akamiya 
karma is the seed gathered for a future sowing while so enjoying and 
consists of Puny am and Papam. From the beginning of this adhikarapa 
to this, the Siddhantis position is established as against the Lohayata. 
Ptavabdhci is distinguished as Ichcha, like the pleasure and pain endured 
by a person in performing a secret sin, Anichcha i > like the results of light¬ 
ning, storms etc. and Parcchcha as one suffers punishment meted out by 



A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA II. 


167 


GOOD AND BAD KARMA DEFINED. 

13. Karma are either good or bad, performed without 
harmony by the mind, speech, and body. By good karma, you do 
good to all sentient creatures. By bad karma, your injure all. 
The Supreme Lord understands your deserts and makes you suiter_ 
pleasure or pain accordingly. 

* _ _ _ ..._ _ __ __ 

the king. They are called also as Drishfam, where results appear at once 

from our present acts as in taking medicines elc., Adn'shtam , where pre¬ 
sent acts produce results in another life ; D&shfadrishtam, where as in 
performing asvamedha, the present acts yield results in present as also 
in future life. 

13. The definition of Good and Evil, (Hit am and Ahitatn ) Right and 
Wrong, Punyam and Papam as herein given has to be noted carefully. It 
is the doing of acts which give pleasure or pain to all and every sentient 
creature within one’s own sphere, and one’s own pleasure and pain is also 
involved. Humanity is so tied that one cannot think of his own good or 
his own loss absolutely. It is only when a man judges of his act in their 
effect on the whole of humanity, that he can be judging rightly. In our 
view of Pupyam and PSpam, the doing of good is enjoined as a positive 
duty, as much as the refraining from evil or injury. The list of thirty two 
Dharmas or charities contains every one of those active duties which a 
man can think of to benefit* his fellow creatures by removing their suffer¬ 
ings and adding to their pleasure. The sole trait of the Saintly consists 
in their overflowing Love towards humanity and in their pain and sorrow' 
at their fallen brethren. 

“ 4.f)r or £ ~ "tsvcurr g)<ub sqrfd pebr aqi'bc'zr 

Q&arxrpdia M 
says Saint Umapathi. 

We were most pained to see the phrase “ desiring the welfare of all” in 
Gita chap V, 23 most sapicntly explained to mean " injuring none”. This 
sort of tendency marks the downward fall in Hindu Ethics, and some of 
the reproaches levelled at Hindu Quietism arc not altogether undeserved. 
Who could do a greater harm to society than by the perverted explanation 
of the Gita passage as given above? A positive injunction to do good to 
all i con truer! into a mere negative injunction to injure none. And how 
can trouble - of the sinning and sorrowing humanity ruffle the undisturbed 
talmrw- of Such a saint. We have elsewhere pointed out that such a 
calrnnc* will not prevent a man from a rebirth hut it only presages the 
storm that i> to follow. Woe Woe to those who would follow out such 
\icw» of calmric-3 and saintliness. 1 1 1 




s6S 


§IVAJNANA SJDDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


THE PURVA Mi MAMSAKa’s OBJECTION ANSWERED. 

14. How does God mete out the fruits of Karma you ask. 
He the Omnipresent does so, out of his Love to his creatures. 
He blesses those who do good and afflicts those who do wrong. 

god’s WAYS ARE ALL LOVE. 

15. It is out of His Love, He punishes the wicked. He 
punishes those who do wrong and makes them mend their ways 
and do right. All his acts therefore flow out of His Love. 

AN ILLUSTRATION. 

16. Parents chastise their refractory children. Is this not out 
of love? God’s anger is also similarly manifested. 

FURTHER OBJECTION ANSWERED’ 

17 & 18. Acts themselves produce fruits; no God is necessary 
you say. But these acts themselves are lost as soon as performed. 
You further instance manure and medicine which die and produce 
results. But this rule does not hold good in every case; as when 
you give food and betel to a starving man you secure no strength 
but faces. 

FURTHER ANSWERS 

19. Further the example of manure and medicine is not a 
proper one. But if you still say there are instances where acts 
performed in one place produce fruit in another, such as Tila- 
tarpana on water Ilavis on fire and alms, yet these are found to 
perish even here. How can they produce effects in an another 
world ? 

THE SAME ARGUMENT CONT’NUED. 

20. You say that all these acts leave their impress on the 
doer’s mind, and are reproduced from the mind in another birth. 
If so, sir, the heaven and hell and earth attained to by the virtuous 
and vicious resolve into your mind and they were born again from 
your mind. My dear sir, your beautiful words are wonderful! 

GOD IS THE SUPREME LAW". 

21. The gift and giver, the rites and receiver, all perish ; as 
such, an Eternal Knower who can mete out good and bad is 


/ 


A II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA II. 


169 

necessary. All good actions are the .ordinations of the Faultless 
God. If we follow His Law, we will also be freed from our disease. 

HOW ? 

22. Souls enjoy alone in conjunction with body and organs, 
place and time and order, action and object; all these latter are 
non-intelligent and cannot attach themselves to the soul of their 
own accord. The soul being bound cannot choose these of its 
own power. ’ As such th’e Infinite Being brings about their union 
by the Supreme Power of His Law, (Anja Sakti) and out of His 
Supreme Law. 

LOVE IS LAW. 

23. Good behaviour, Love, Grace, Achara, courteous recep¬ 
tion, amity, good sense, blameless austerity, charity, respect, and 
reverence, and intelligent truthfulness, faultless Sannyusa, humil¬ 
ity, if these constitute blameless Virtue, they are also the ordin¬ 
ances of the Loving Lord. 

LOVE GOD. 

24. When one worships the God he loves, with mind fixed, 
and mantras and words of praise, and hands showering forth 

flowers, after getting rid of anger, desire and other faults, and 

> 

entering on the practice of the above named virtues, then the most 
Ancient of the ancient gods will deign to accept his worship. 

23. These virtues are comprised under Iyama and Niyama of the 
eight kinds of yoga, aud are general to every one, whether he believes in 
God or not. These arc cot sufficient and as we have elsewhere pointed 
out, love of God is nacessa»y to free one from his sin, though without this 
moral perfe* tion no further progress is possible. Heme, the next vorso 
Goals with the worship of God. 

24. The word tn the text O/zLoju,'' “any God loved" is 

gerx-ral and refer to the worship of any deity, the sole requisite lieing that 
fie 'ead!> a blameless life, and is filled with true devotiou and perfect 
harmony of thotr.hf, spec h, and deeds. 

It is however contended that Siva understands and metes out the 
reward. Thi* i- not a mere matter of taiian prejudice. If as uc con- 
tend, hi\a tard I r all lint i* h: ;hc.t and ooh'e t an I puicst in our 
ton tption of tf 1 '‘*iiy, u to..ov.\ that • u h a i ower can a'onc confer any 
/cal aud latur./' fit Gur .uncvplior. ot v.hat v.e hope for, our ideal oi 


1 

\ 


I 







1 70 


SlVAJXANA S1DDHIYSR 


[Bk. III. 


AND THE TRUE ONE WILL SHOW YOU GRACE. 

25. Qfitueiih saxTt£.ff^ Qpdjanr.irSlujikQa 

uxrQ'&iTQij uir&gyiip.ru; it jj prop QpujQiijsar 

Q&ipVzvru u®L^jpd(^u> iSIp&fgjth QLD0^zi5csara.iuQ<rujiLju> 

^poS^eaQiuSm/r pirsv j&ip 0<srr Q^djsufXsrdrQp." 

2 5. Whatever God you worship, even as Him, the Consort 
of Uma will appear there. Other gods will die and be bom, ana 
sin and suffer by performing Karma. He, who is above all this, 
will understand your true worship and show you Grace. 

THE REASON THEREOF 

26. When we worship some beings, such as parents, &c., it 
is not they who show us grace in the future state. Even where 
these gods show us grace, it is thus. All these gods are under 
the guidance of the Supreme power ; and the Supreme grants us 
our prayers through them. 

THEREFORE WORSHIP THE TRUE GOD. 

27. If it is Siva who shows you Grace ultimately, the love 
of Him will be the supreme virtue. All other worship will be 

Mukti is also in consonance with our conception of the Deity. And onr 
contention is that the idea of Mukti as postulated in Sicldhanta is the high¬ 
est; and unless one attains to it, there will always be a return, and immort¬ 
ality will be merely a shadow. The reason is given plainly in the next 
stanza where the conception of God as the Unborn (Aja) and Nirmala and 
Nirgupa is contrasted with the conception of the deity as subject to all 
the laws of birth and death. How canzone cure you of a disease, when 
he is subject to it himself ? , 

25. Cf. (a) The words of that most ancient poet Kar-kirar, 

" 6\)f2jQBQfP' JX>Gpftih e? d\)F, rrird driT '' 

@3y/f6VffoOs)i€cr ( i?0'i^:(?o/6K3T/_ l 7ic .—zainrrQp v < 

airp &$pQ0 n zkQppgtplQ a &) <bn<>rppi'uirdtr jinnirr 
p <lG ptijsuGiyurr ld." 

26. Just as the honors conferred by the Viceroy of India flows 
directly also from Her <most gracious Majesty, so do also the gods show 
grace each in his own sphere of influence. 

27. The author explains his true attitude with regard to his own 
religion and other religions in these verses, He does not condemn the 
worship of other gods, for the simple reason that all such worship is useful 


/ 

t 

c 

( 


t 


1 1 



A. III.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA II. 


171 


lower and vain. The highest Dharma *s diva’s command. He 
has no desires himself; (and so this worship is not for his 
pleasure} His sole desire is to do you good. So persevere in 
His worship. 

THE WAY O? WORSHIP. 


20 . ir fr -wi’ 5 2^r.-isrc si’ 2 0 n ?erf sir jy 

-j 3 rb fQivszj'&Lt.SJgpi $5 i ossa uu ear 

i Qjj JV V Snp i c r {-f, <5&<r 


_T_j 5 *vT 






■jj r iju Zio2ur z i ^rjurr ?^Z u&n^Q'-jjQ. 


2%. The Supreme accepts worship both in material Forms 
(^iva Firiga) and in living Forms (God’s devotees) and shows His 
Grace. If you can place Him in your heart and worship, this will 


ia tha: ai’. such worship, if true, tends to raise him from his own low 
desires and selfish instincts, and towards a nearer approach to the Supreme 
God ; and the A!i-Seer, and AU-knower, and All-gracious cannot fail to 
take note of his sincerity and love, and to reward him as he deserves. 
Lut however useful, the worship of the lower god cannot be the highest 
object of our aspiration. We can bow before the Fountain of Grace 
itself direct, and drink of the supreme bliss- This is also the teaching of 
the Gua, and in reading it, one has only to remember, that whenever Lord 
Krishna speaks of Himself, he speaks as the supreme Guru and Achurya 
of Arjuna, and as such, represents, the supreme God Himself. Many a 
passage will be unmeaning otherwise; and the worship of Himself which 
he recommends is not to be take to mean any Sagupa worship or the 
v.ofjhip oi any God other that the Highest. 

Cf " Become wise at the end of many births, one worships Me. That 
high-souled saint is very rase to whom Vasudova (the Supreme God) is.all.” 
vii. io. 

? * * 

" Whatever form devotee v/isheth, in faith, to worship, that faith in 
him do I nr> k r firm.” vii 20. 

" Po*se«.«*d with that faith, v,hoso devotes himself to that worship, 
obtai-.s tner.' e hi- wisl.e , hut they ate merely granted by Myself.” vii. 22. 

** ft*:* to t’n ■— of t«;u 1 under-.landing (all) fruit had an ending. Tho 
votari.« of the dc.tiu. jom the deities ; my votaries join Myself." vii 23. 

"In i/noiar.t v.or 1 knows me not as the birthlfss and d cut hies 

* •* ' j 1 •' > .“t j . ^ - b »i . . Iitiiu at ion). 


I 

\ 



/ 


3/2 §IVATNANA SIDDHIYAR [Bk. III. 

be adequate worship. In any mode, fail not to love and laud him 
every day. 

THE GREATNESS OF SUCH DEVOTIN'. 

29. Even the sins of the Lord’s devotees become virtue, the 

virtues of loveless men are sinful. The austere sacrifice of Daksha 
was in vain; while the sin committed by the human child was 
beneficial. ^ 

WHERE THE LAW IS COI^TAINED. y 

30. The Veda is God’s Word. They who do not follow the 

Word reach hell; and those who follow reach the worlds of bliss. 
Men suffer pain or enjoy pleasure according to the ordinances of 
God. , 

AN ILLUSTRATION. 

.31 By the law, the king administers justice and punishes 
those who do not obey the law. Those, who follow the law, he 

29. All sins flow from selfishness, and virtue from selflessness, and 
love of man and God. This is the true test of vice and virtue. Even 
man-made law looks to the intention in the first instance, in defiuing 
most crimes. As such, where we may be sure that any act was not 
prompted by any personal greed, for the avoidance of pain or the gaining 
of pleasure to the individual but had proceeded out of pure love of God 
and bis fellow creatures that at once ceases to be a vice. In fact, all 
personal responsibility ceases with such persons, in the same way, as 
with children, idiots, and lunatics, and the weald have called such grea^ 
beings fools and idiots. 

Cf. “utTGvQffrT® QuiuktSIppir undsresnuQiucsr tSpu^Qen 

@ 6 vidlgj ^vgsBiur pu> Q&uj6t»&u!Jiru0QiD. n — Tayumanavar. 
f‘As children, lunatics and the possessed, so do holy Juanis behave.” 

The allusion in the last line of the text is to the history of St. Dapcjisa 

v , 

Nayanar, one of the Saiva Saints, who, when interrupted in the divine 
puja, by his own father, struck and severed the latter’s foot with a stick. 
(Vide p. 89, Vol. I, Siddhai.ta Dipika). 

We have already enlarged upon the story of the Daksha sacrifice 
and its import. Daksha was the first son of God Brahma, and so from 
the beginning of this world, the contrast between lip service and heart 
worship has been manifest, between mere rituals and true devotion to 
God and love to man. 


t 


t 


c 


/ 



A. Ii.] 


SUPAKSIiA — SUTRA II. 


*75 


loads with wealth and lands, and clothes them also with powers 
under the law. Such is also the Power of God’s law. 

THE king's LAW NOT AN EXCEPTION TO THE SUPREME LAW. 

32. Even the act af the king is an act of God’s mercy. Those 
who commit high crimes and misdemeanours are punished surely 

and suffer and thus work out their Karma. Then thev learn to 

* / 

follow the law. Such purified beings will avoid hell. The suffer¬ 
ings of man m hell and in earth are really the same. 

BECOME BALANCED IN GOOD AND EVIL. 

33. He who commits wrong against the injunction contained 
in the sacred loastras given out graciously by God, will suffer 
pain in the dark regions of hell, and thus work out his sin. The 
virtuous man ^lso works out his Karma by eating the fruits in 
heavenly regions. This kind of suffering and enjoyment are the 
two kinds of physic which the Supreme Physician administer for 
the removal of man’s mala. 

__ _ ■ __ _ 

33. Both virtue and vice binds man to the earth and form the seed 

of birth and death. This is one of the central doctrines of Hinduism. 
Our Christian friends are hardly able to comprehend this truth. But this, 
by the way, forms also one of the chief points in the Christian doctrine. 
Accordingly to them, how was the fall of man brought about in this 
earth. How did sin arise and with it death and birth ? Why by the 
first n.an disobeying God’s law? And what was this law? Do not eat 
the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. And what is the 
meaning of this sentence? To’ the ordinary Christian, we dare say this 
will be quite meaningless.’ At any rate, it will be a puzzle to him how 
the tasting of the know’cdge of good will be sin. When, however, it is 
explained jhat the tree of knowledge of good and evil is merely man’s 
consciousness of good and bad, and his eating of the fruit of them is his 
following out in action such knowledge. With the feeling of Ahaiikara 
and Mamakara (‘I’ and 'Mine’j most predominent in his mind, i.e., 
with his will as the sole guiding princip'e and not the supreme will of the 
Lord, then indeed, he commits -in at d lays the ‘ced lot a course of bit tits 
and death . If avoiding IxJtn .food and bad, as he felt it, he simply and 
ca tn;y .ubnitted to the \\ ill o! God (and dedicated all his aU 3 and 
t..oug.iLs and 'pcwvh to God’s .cmccand glorification (&+■<n-^xti 1 ) 


1 


\ 

\ 




1/4 


SIVAJNA.NA S1DDH1YAR 


[Bk. III. 


THE SAME EXPLAINED. 

34. He who follows the rules given in books of hygiene will 
never sufler sickness. If such rules are neglected, sickness will 
torment a man. The physician will administer medicine to the 
suffering man and remove his illness. He will cure ills even with¬ 
out medicine by an incantation or a mere touch. 

So also, does £iva make them eat Pharma and get freedom. ^ 

BOTH GOOD AND EVIL ARE FOR THU 1 * BENEFIT OF IvUN. 

35. Our earthly physicians cure certain ills by cutting and 
cauterising. Other ills are cured by feeding with milk and sugar. 
So also the Lord cures the ills of Karma by subjecting mankind 
to pain and pleasure. 

LIFE APl'ER DEATH. 

36. When the gross body dies, the soul retains its Stikshma 
£arira of eight Tatvas, for enjoyment or suffering, in heaven or 
hell, under the divine decrees, and passes into the womb as an 
atom before it is bom again into the world. 

all sin and suffering will vanish. “iDevuttnmjpGSTQgyQu) Gu&xsSZzMtiSemQp.” 
(See paper on the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil in Studies.) 

But this ideal of the highest ethics and religion cannot and does not 
commend itself to the thoroughly materialised peoples of the West and 
hence their obtuseness. 

As the Supreme Physician who cures our ignorance and sin, He is 
called Vaidyanatha; and under such name, God is worshipped in the 
Vaidlsvaran Koil in Tanjore District. 

35. No body can accuse the physician of partiality in causing pain 
to one and pleasure to another. The fact is, these acts are not for his 
own benefit but to benefit his patients possessir/g different maladies. 

36. The Puri-ashtaka is the Sukshma Sarira cr body composed of 
the five subtle elements, Sabdn, sparta, rupa, rasa and gaudha . and manas , 
bnddhi and ahanhara. In this subtle body, they undergo no new experi¬ 
ences, but live over tho life they have lived in this world, in a more 
intensified form than on earth. If in this life their thoughts were good 
and pleasant, they feel thousand times more happy in the astral world, 
but if they led a vicious life, their bad thoughts' haunt them ever, and 
theiy suffering is multiplied a thousand-fold. After the appointed lime 
*s over, they are again reborn to work out their furtlicr Karina. 


I 

! 


f 

( 

( 


4 




A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA II. 


US 


THE SAME. 

37. When or.e gross body perishes, the soul may take on at 
once another gross body or it may be dormant like a stone for a 
time; and after the alloted time and after enjoying pains of Hell 
and according to its Karma, it will take on another gross body. 

AN ILLUSTRATION. 

* * 

3S. The snake dropping its skin, the birds leaving its shell, 
and the yogi leaving his body and entering another, illustrate the 
parting of the soul from his gross body alter death and its entry 
into a different world of consciousness, with its intelligence 
changed as in the passing from a waking state into dream 
condition. 

KARMA DEFINED. 

» 

39. Karma comprises virtuous and vicious acts and their 
results, becoming the cause of loss and gain, pleasure and pain. 
It is one of the three eternal tnalas covering the soul and lrom its 
appearing in the form of acts of mind, body and speech is 
named kamya. 

THE THEORY OF BIRTH. 

40" This karma of £ood and evil is eternal. Yet it has a 
beginning ?.s it starts with the acts performed by men in time. 
It has an *md after it is worked out by man fully. It becomes 
attached to maya-mala at the great dissolution of the universe, 
and is reborn with the subtle body of each soul and is continuous 
(like a Hood; in each successive rebirths and deaths, and is of 
different forms (as Sthula, SUcshma and Atisukshma) and is yet 
formless and acts under the law of Supreme Hara. 

* * BHATTACII tKY'.’s STATEMENT. 

41 You say that of living beings, both moveable, and 
immoveable, cacli of them will only change its body at its rebirth, 

41. I ho Lihap.acharya’s theory is that ^rass, herb or bird or animal 
or man will be reborn a^ ,'ra c s, herb, etc., respectively and not one into 
ano'her, A'co-i *0 Mvlha U ckur-a (Dvtita School) when mortals 
1 etch t* . f ' ' -'•.•"'t, tV*y i r** t. man or beast 01 bird 

a -.ordiPi ’ .v.'i’. ! .r.i v •„ u, 1 


SivajnAna siddhiyar 


[Bk. III. 


176 

according to its respective karma, but not its form. But answer 
me first, whether when human beings enter Svarga and partake 
of the bliss therein, whether they do so there as human beings 
or as celestials ? 

42. If they enjoy in heaven as.mere human beings, then this 
heaven ceases to be such. If as celestials they enjoy, your theory 
that they do not change their forms falls to the ground. After 
enjoying as celestials, when they are reborn on earth, they will be 
only reborn as human beings and not as celestials. 

SOME ILLUSTRATIONS. 

43. Some worms become beetles and some worms become 
wasps. Similarly beings change their forms according to their 
Karma. Most of the schools are also agreed on this point, and 
why should you alone have doubts about it. 

THE SAME. 

44. The accounts of Agalya becoming a stone, of MabS 
Vishnu incarnating in several forms, of a spider being born in the 
Solar Race of far famed kings, and a rat having become Mahabali, 
also demonstrate our point. 

A FURTHER OBJECTION ANSWERED. 

45. You say that these instances only show that these 
change of forms were due to certain causes and not to the effect of 
karma. But I have already stated that the Lord is the Witness of all 
kinds of karma. As it is, everything follows only the Divine Will. 

KARMA INERT UNLESS ENERGISED BY GOD. 

46. Karma cannot of itself discover the particular body or 
the particular world and attach itself to'-jiva and the Jiva itself 
is equally incapable of choosing the particular*body. .The union 
and evolution of these bodies are brought about by God. God 
intelligently gives each a suitable body, according to his karma. 

GROSS BODY IS DERIVED FROM THE SUBTLE ; NECESSITY OF A CREATOR. 

47. If you ask whence the gross body is derived, it is 
derived from the subtle body. If you ask' again, whether, if so, 

47. The question has often puzzled people whether the higher 
forms of animals, and man can revert in a next birth to still lower and 


J 






A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA II. 


177 


the forms should not all be similar, we answer no. Though gold 
is one, different kinds of ornaments like chains etc., are made 
therefrom. The creation of all these forms and universes are 
brought about by the only One God, Siva. 

HOW THE GROSS BODY IS CAUSED. 

I 

48. The gross body is not formed by the change and des- 
ruction of the subtle body, nor the body formed separately in 
the subtle bo’dy itself. The subtle body itself possesses the power 
of creating the gross body, as a tree when cut down to the root 
is again produced from the root. 

different forms. But the difficulty will vanish when as herein pointed 
out that the different kinds of gross bodies possessing form are all 
derived from the more subtle and formless matter. From this formless 
subtle matter, it will be as easy to form one body as another, the two 
chief powers bringing about this form being the Supreme Power of God 
and the lesser power of the Karma of each individual. But we seem to 
feel doubt as to how the man’s .superior intelligence can vanish into the 
brute's intelligcn e. The intelligence does not suffer in any way but is 
simply covered over or hidden by the particular body for the time being, 
just letting in a little light or more, and just as we cage a wild animal, 
so that the brutai instincts of the man may not run riot and cause more 
damage to himself and others. And the difficulty of most people will 
vanish aho when this fundamental tenet of Hinduism is grasped, namely, 
that the soul of man is in itself perfect but is eternally covered over by 

Anava or Avidya and is further covered over by maya mala or matter, 

» 

and the effect of the last covering is just to give as much opening as 
is necessary for letting in the light of God, to shine on the individual 
soul and to make itself tAiinc. The higher and the higher the body, the 
greater and. greater, will be the intelligence displayed. But as often 
happens, man misuses his intelligence and powers ; these have to he 
curbed and limited again for a time, and so a less developed body is 
given, where he cannot be able to use all such superior powers he 
possessed for mis hief. When these powers have been thoroughly 
subjugated, modulated in perfect harmony, the individual gains back a 
better body for hi further cleansing. 

<*,8. Variou theories of formation of the gross from the subtle body 
arc .onJdercd here, and each j.hoo have a favourite simile. According 

>3 



I/S 


SIVAJNANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


A FURTHER EXPLANATION’. 

49. Under the Divine law, the gross body arises from the 
subtle body. Without such divine power, it cannot arise of itself, 
and from the power of Karma alone. The gross body can arise 
from its material cause, as a tree from a seed. The tree and 
seeds may be destroyed together, and so the subtle body can 
also be destroyed ? No. These bodies arise and perish and 
arise again, as the moon and its KaliV waxes aiia wanes and 
waxes again. 

THE ULTIMATE CAUSES OF THE BODY. 

50. The cause of the gross body is the Puri-ashtaka or 
subtle body. The cause of <*the latter is Mulaprakriti. Its cause 
is Asuddha Maya or Mohini. Its superior cause is Vindhu or 
Kundali. Above it, and energising them all is the power of the 

^ \S 

Lord (Sakti) and the Lord Himself (Sivam). When the soul 
reaches the Supreme God, all these distinctive bodies cease, as 
also the soul’s bondage. » 


Adhikarana. III. 


god's ways. 

51. God’s acts are determined by love, we staled before. 
Making them eat the fruits of their karma in the different worlds, 
and giving each, suitable bodies, God removes the mala by the 

to one school, the change of body is like one piece of gold ornament 
changing into another ornament. According to another (Buddhist) it is 
the seed giving rise to the tree. According to a third, it is like the child 
formed in the mother’s womb. A fourth theory is that it is derived as 
the rays of the moon one after another. The differences are very subtle, 
though each of the similes is useful in expressing a phase of the meaning. 
The author’s own simile, a rare, one is the root and the tree, inasmuch as 
even in our present gross body, the subtle body is present and is not des¬ 
troyed; and the Sukshma body remains, evdu though the gross body may 
be cut off. 


( 




< 




A, III.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA II. 


179 


means of these medicines, and gives the souls the highest bliss and 
crowns them with His own Lotus-Feet. 

MAYA, A PURIFICATORY MEANS. 

52. The body and senses are formed out of (Maya) mala, 
dirt. W hy do you say that this dirt will remove another dirt. 
(Anava) Mala, you ask. Yes. Just as the washerman washes all 
clothes dean ( by mixing^with them cow-dung, fuller’s earth, etc., 

so the Ancient of Days removes our sins with Maya Mala. 

* 

DEFINITION' OF MAYA. 

53. Indestructible, formless, one, seed of all the worlds, 
non-intelligent, all pervasive, a sakti^of the Perfect On?, cause of 
the soul's body, senses and worlds, one of the three m.das, cause 
also of delusion; is Maya. 

ITS PRODUCTS ; TIME, ETC. 

54. From Maya arise Time and order (Niyati), and then 
Kala. Of this, Time acting under the Lord’s will rules all the 
worlds in its three forms of past, present and future, b}* creating, 
developing and destroying everything and giving rise to divisions 
of time. 

NIYATI, KALA AND VIDYA. 

55. Niyati brings about order and harmony in the working 
of Karma; the energetic Kala arises next and lifting Anava a little, 
brings into play the soul’s active powers; the Yidyfi tatva arises 
out of Kala and brings oijt the soul's intellectual powers. 

53. The definition has to be carefully noted. Each word in it is in 
answer to a particular school of philosophy. Maya here means Asuddha 
Miyu. It is called Nitya, as against Kshanika Vadis; formless against 
l^okayata*; one, as against SuMdiyas; seed, as against Sunya Vadis ; 
acini, as against bivastuna Vadis, who identify it with Cliil-sakti; vibliu, 
as agairr.t the atomi theoiy (VaLeshikasj ,* S.ikti, as against the 
Hluiskara 1 ' theoiy that it is the Pauyama of God ; Mala, as against the 
a'.nvjfha tya dot ' mu * ; ami cau^e of deln.ion also, as against a school 
o r Saiva who a' > rl its sole fum tion to he earn iug delusion. Sakli lieie 
1 , nox th- ALi.tn a 1 U I la'li but the hhiut a l J u,- ^rahu Suf.lt. 


§ 


) 


\ 




i So 


S1VAJNANA SIDDI1IVAR 


[Bk. III. 


RAG AM AMD PURUsIIA. 

56. From Vidya tatva arises Ragam which according to 
each one’s Karma induces Desire for Bhoga or sensory enjoy¬ 
ments. When the soul is thus clothed in these organs of action, 
intellection and volition, this combined tripartite body is called the 
Purusha tatva. 

MULAPRAKRITl I ITS PRODUCTS. 

57. From Kala rises Prakriti in Avyakta form. This gives 

rise to the three Guna ; each of the Guna is of three kinds and 
these Guna pervade everything. And the soul becoming com¬ 
pletely of the form of these Guna becomes bound for purposes of 
enjoyment » 

C11ITTAM AND BUDDlIl. 

58. From the Avyakta, Chittam arises, and thinks out every¬ 
thing. From the same, arises Buddhi, and becoming attached to 

56. This body is also said to five-fold including Time and Niyati, 
and hence is called Paiicha Kafichuka. 

This Purusha Tatva is not a separate Tatva, but it is what consti¬ 
tutes the karmic ego or individuality of the soul which thinks that it is 
that which acts, desires, and thinks and thus perforins Karma becomes 
clothed with ignorance and desire etc., enjoys and suffers, and requires 
merit and demerit; and becomes attached to the sou! like a shadow and 
is reborn from birth to birth, and is altogether annihilated at the time of 
final Moksha (Nirvana). It is this Purusha Tatva which Buddhists 
recognize and not the real soul; and according to them ourselves, this 
undergoes extinction. Still, as the soul is associated with this Purusha 
Tatva (^y^®j^5/swc,<s6v), it is certainly the soul that enjoys; and the 
Purusha Tatva will become dead and inert, the moment the soul turns 
away from it and towards God. 

57. The three Gupas are Satva, Rajas and Tamas. When combin¬ 
ing, with each other, and one of the qualities alone predominate, they 
form into groups of Satva, Satva-Rajas, and Satva-Tamas, Rajas, Rajas- 
Satva, and Rajas-Tamas etc. 

58. If every body is not influenced by his individual good and bad 
Karma, and his own apprehensions of pleasure or profit or loss, then his 
judgment would be clear and his action true. 

The* several influences that act on one’s Buddhi are the three Guna, 
good^“ud bad Karma, pain and pleasure, fear and Moha. 


I 

( 


/ 


A. III.] 


SHPAKSHA — SUTRA II. 


1 S 1 

Dhcirma and Adhanna, discriminates between the mental percep¬ 
tions, and becoming clouded by Moha, pain and pleasure, influ¬ 
ences both J fiana and Kriya. 

AH AN K AR A. 

59, Buddhi gives rise to Ahahkara which is the Seed of 

4 I ’ ness in man, and which says, ‘ who is there to compare with . 
nTe, and which says 4 I ’ and 4 Mine and is inseparably connected 
in man. This. Ahahkara is of three kinds, according to each of 

the three Cuna, Satva, etc., namley Taijasa, Vaikari and Bhdla. 

* 

MAKAS 1 JNANENDRIYA AND KAR.MENDRI YA. 

60. From Taijasa arises Manns. It perceives objects and re¬ 
members and distiguishes and and doujbts them. From Taijasa also 
arne the Jnancudriyas. From Vaikari. arise the Karmcndriyas. 

' JNANENDRIYA AND THEIR OBJECTS. 

6r. The Jn:\nendriyas are ear, eye, nose, tongue, and body. 
Their objects of perception are sound, form, smell, taste and 
touch. Kach of them is united to a particular material element 
such as Akus etc. 

KARMENDRIYA AND THEIR ACTION. 

C2. The wise declaVe the Karmendriyas to be mouth, feet, 
hinds, alimentary canal, and organs of generation. Their actions 
are repectively speech, motion, manipulation, alimentation and 
excretion and pleasure. 

A CLASSIFICATION OF ALL THE ABOVE. 

« 

63. The Karmendriya and J nanendriya form external organs. 
Manas and other faculties form the internal organs (Antahkarana). 

'1 hose who enquire further will find the Ragam and other 
faculties ait* even internal to theac four. And the soul lives con¬ 
trolled by these forces generated by Maya. 

p.huta: tanmatkas, buriashtaka. 

V* 

O4. From Hhuta are generated the five Taimuitras , Snbda, 

Sf at £a, Iinsa, and Gattdha. 1 hey induce knowledge in 

» 

64. 'I he former chi of 'Ianmatras are the objective and the latter 

•ub jc'-tive, and hould not be confounded v.ith each other. It is a dis¬ 
tinction ol *. er) . } \ Uoui*. a ui*jKJitan c, 


SivAiXANA smnmvSR 


1S2 


[Bk. III. 


the external organs. The subjective Tanmltras and Manas, 
Buddhi and Ahankara from the Puriashtaka. 

THE KrVE GROSS ELEMENTS AND THEIR RELATIONS TO THE ABOVE. 

6;. Prom the five Tanmatras arise respectively akaS, air, 
fire, water, and earth. 1 hese have qualities one more than the 
other. The relation of the original Bhiita to its visible products 
is that of the embodied to the body. ' 

THE QUALITIES OF THE GROSS ELEMENTS^ 

66. Alois is space giving room to all other elements. Air 
moves everywhere and brings together everything. Fire burns 
and unites things. Water is cool, and it softens things. Earth is 
hard and it bears all things. 

THEIR FORM, COLOUR AND SYMBOLS. 

67. The earth, water, fire, air, and akas are respectively of 
the form of a square, crescent, triangle, hexagon, and circle. 1 hey 
are respectively of the colours gold, white, red, black, and blue. 
Their letters respectively are so, 0 , uj, ^. 

THEIR SYMBOLS AND DEITIES. 

68 . Their symbols respectively are: the sword of diamond, 
lotus, Svastika, the six points, and Amrlta Bindhu. Their deities 
are Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, MaheWara, and Sadasiva. The 
deities of the five Kaltis are also the same. 

A SUMMING UP AND CLASSIFICATION OF THE TATVAS. 

69. The first five, named above as Suddha Tatvas, and the 
next mentioned thirty-one tatvas make up a total of thirty-six. 

65. Bhiita, the product of Ahaiikdra, is‘the visible element out of 
which the gross material elements earth, etc., are finally evolved. This 
original Bhiita is mental and is subjective. The gross element are object¬ 
ive, though all these are products of Maya. 

AkaS possesses only one quality sound, which is its special one. 

Vdyii possesses sound, and its own peculiar quality Sparta. 

Agni possesses sound and touch and its peculiar quality Ri\pa. 

Water possesses sound, touch, form, and in addition Rasa or taste. 

Earth possesses all the above four and its own peculiar quality, 
Caiidha or smell. 

69. The commentators add that the first five only are called Chit, as 
they reflect the True Chit, Light of Truth, perfectly. Atma or Purusha 



A. III.1 


SUPAKSIIA—SUTRA II. 


1^3 

Of these, the first are classed as Chit, and one other is the atma 
who distingui'hes the'-e as Chit and Achit and hence called, 
Chitachit, and the next thirty are Achit. 

ANOTHER CLA^f 1FICATION. 

V 

70. The first five are classed Buddha. The next seven are 
c)?.ssed Suddliasudrfha. '1 he next twenty-four from Mahat etc., 
are classed as sttuddha. ^7 hey respectively form for the Jiva, the 
regions of Preraka (Lordship), Bhoi'a (enjoyment), and Bhuiya 
^things enjoyed). 

ALL ARE TATVAS. 

71. The whole Universe, constituting all that has form, the 
formless, and those that have form and no form, is the fnanifesta- 
tion of the Tatvas. These Tatvas manifest themselves, each in 
three ways, Sthula, Sukshma and Para. Thejivas that always 
stand connected with the Tatvas which are under the impelling 
influence of the Sadakyas, also bear their names. Thus all things 
are, in fact, Tatvas only. 

INVOLUTION' AND EVOLUTION OK THE TATVAS. 

72. '1 he twenty four Tatvas, from earth to Mu’aprakriti 

complete their involution in the Atma Tatva, and the six Tatvas 

beyond the Mulaprakriti, in the Vidya Tatva ; the three, Suddha 

* ^ 
Tatva upwards, in the Siva T atva. 1 hese three, vis., Atma, 

Vidya and Siva Tatvas are eternal, say they. T he other two 

Sakti Tatva and Siva Tatva involute in the Suddha Siva. The 

evolution of the Tatvas also follows the same order. 


tatva is called Chitachit because it becomes light in light and dark in 
darkness. 

71. ' c*- n i> ’ in the original, gives us ' those that have form and no 
form,* Para—Atisukshma. Jivas here stand for the three kinds of Jivas, 
Vijuunnkalur, Pi/t).iy<ik;tlar, and Sakalar. 

72. biva i cu-riml. T he other three T atvas are so, only in name. 
A , ilv I «ttv t. i tvolure in and evolve from Suddha baa, it follows that 
lie is t f 1 caujc o! involution and evolution. 




S1VAJNANA S1DDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


184 


Adhikarana IV. 


PI.ACE OF RELIGION'S IN ORDER OF TATVAS. 

73. All false creeds take their stand severally in the Tatvas 
from Bhatas (elements) to Mohini (Asuddha Maya). The six true 
creeds beginning from S’aiva have their respective places in the 
Tatvas from Vidya upwards. Our Lord is beyond the Tatvas.' 

NAVA* 13 HE DA AND THE LORD. 

74. The one Lord alone acts, pervading through the nine 
vargas: Siva, Sakti, Nada, and Bindu, the formless four; Sacla- 
siva, of form and without form ; Mahesvara, Rudra, Vishnu and 
Brahma, the four of form—who manifesting themselves in different 
Tatvas, perform their several functions. 

SAKTI BHEDA. 

75. The Sakti kinds appertaining to the manifestations of 

V' \S lx- 

Siva are seven in number—Sakti, Bindu Sakti, Manonmani, 
Mahesa, Uma, Lakshmi and Sarasvati. Yet they are all one, 
Parasakti. Whatever aspect Her Lord manifests Himself in, in 
that She manifests Herself also. 

SAKTI AND SIVA. 

76. It is Sakti who manifests Herself as Nada and the six 
following vargas. It is Siva who forms all vargas from Sakti 

73. False creeds are eighteen in number, of which six are external, 
six externo-internal and the remaining six are externo-external. The 
names of these creeds and their explanation can be gleaned from com¬ 
mentaries. ‘Creeds’ here stand for the deities worshipped by the people 
who profess them. The Tatvas, which form the seats of the deities, also 
form the Mukti Sthana of the creeds. ‘Our Lord’ Suddha Siva is the 
Deity of the Siddhanta Saiva Religion. 

74. Sakti and Bindu are included among the male ensrgies of Siva 
in spite of their female character, because, unlike Manonmani and other 
Saktis, they partake of the characteristics of both the male and the 
female energies in causing the manifestations. 

75. The manifestations of Siva reckoned here arc only seven ; for, 
Sakti and Bindu have been left out, as they stand midway between the 
male and the female energies. , 





A. IV.l 


SUPAKSIIA—SUTRA II. 


rS 5 

upwards. Whatever of shape there is, that proceeds frc m Sakii* 
is Sakti and Siva combined. The Sakti who manifests Herself in 
whatever forms the Sakta wills is His matchless Consort. 

THE SAME. 

✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 

77. Siva begets Sakti and Sakti begets Siva Both in their ( 

happy union produce the worlds and the Jivas. Still Bhava 

r V ✓ 

(Siva) is a Brahmachari (celibate) and the sweet-speeched Sakti 
remains a virgin. Sages only comprehend this secret. 

THE DONDAGE AND RELEASE OF THE SOUL. 

7S. The Tatvas manifesting themselves as the body, senses, 
worlds and enjoyments, bondage (bandha) and freedom (moksha) 
arising Irom these, affect the Jivas. He who thus understands the 
nature of the Tatvas and eliminates them one by one through 
Nivritti and other Kalas, realises the Supreme beyond. Such is 
the true sage just described. 

THE UJE OF THE TATVAS. 

79. Why do all these Tatvas together affect the Jivas ? It 
is for reaping the fruits of past Karma completely, for rooting 
out the very seed of Karma so that it may not arise again, and 
getting rid of the evil Anava Mala. 


Adhikarana. V. 


NATURE OF ANAVA MALA. 

So. Anava Mala,'with its many Saktis, is one. Pervading 
through thb numbbrlcss Jivas as the dirt in copper, it binds them 

7 g. Since it is Jivas, not Siva, that get rid of Mala and Karma 
by means ol the Tatvas, it follows that the Tatvas do not afTect Siva. 

80. The dirt that is inherent in copper can be removed once for all 
only by alchemical pro'e«*ts; and, when it is so removed, the copper 
remains no longer ropj>cr hut is transformed into replendcnt gold. In like 
manner, the Jiva that ii affected by Mala can be freed from it only when 
Sivajfiuna is attained ; and the Jiva that is so freed from Mala temains 



SalVAjNSNA SIDDIUVAR 


186 


[Bk. 111. 


from Jnana and Kriya. It also affords them the capacity for 
experience, and is ever the source of ignorace. 

ANAVA AND MAYA DIFFERENTIATED. 

Si. Do you say, ‘There is no other entity as Mala (Anava): 
it is only the effect of Maya.’ Understand well that Maya causes 
Ichcha, Jiiana and Kriya to arise in the Jivas but Anava causes 
the same to disappear ; that Anava is inherent in the Jivas but 
Maya is separate from them, and, besides, manifesting itself as the 
universe, forms the body, senses, worlds and enjoyments. 

PURVAPAKSHA VADA. 

82. As a black cloud hides from view the brilliant sun, so 
Maya veils'}nana and Kriya of the Jivas. The sun begins to 
shine in his full glory when the cloud vanishes. So, J nana and 
Kriya begin to shine in the Jivas with the dissolution of the body. 

PURVAPAKSHA VADA (CONTINUED) AND SIDDHANTA. 

85. As the expansive light disappears when the cloud veils 
the sun, so Juana and Kriya disappear when the body screens 
the Jivas. 

Siddhanta. Ichcha, Juana and Kriya are manifest in the 
Jivas when they are embodied. When they are not, nothing but 
darkness prevails. 

SIDDHANTA (CONTINUED). 

S4. What veils Juana and Kriya of the Jivas is the Anava 
(whose existence you ignored). Since it is commingled with the 

no longer a Jiva but attains Patitva merging into Siva. The illustration 
of dirt and copper is favourite with the Siddhanta, and should, therefore, 
be carefully noted. 

ci. This forms an answer to the false creeds’ that identify Maya 
with Anava Mala. 

82. This is called the Avarapa Sakti of Maya. Its power to enlight¬ 
en the soul is called Vikshepa Sakti. 

83. ‘ Embodied ’ includes both the gross and subtle bodies. 

84. By commingled, it is to be understood that Mala is separable 
from the Jivas, and by 'one of the qualities’ that it is so very intimately 
connected with them. The word ‘also’ indicates that Agava is not a 
quality of the Jivas. \ ide following stanza. 


A. V.J 


StrPAKSHA—SUTRA II. 


1S7 

Jivas, it may also be said to be one of their qualities. Maya 
graciously provides the Jivas with the Tatvas from Kala down¬ 
wards, so that they may shake off the shackles of ignorance. 
These two, therefore, are as opposed to each other as darkness 
and lamp-light. 

J1VA AND MALA DIFFERENTIATED. 

55. Do you mean that ignorance (Avidva) is a quality of 
Purusha (Jiva)? Then, Purusha should be matter. Would you 
say that the defect in the eye of a blind man is a quality of the 
eye itself? Possessing ignorance as its attribute, Mala always 
remains matter. But Jiva is spirit (Chit) which has Juana for its 
quality. 

HOW THE THREE MALAS ACT. 

56. The .three Malas—Anava. Maya and Karma, delusive 
in their character, veil the true nature of the Jivas, and produce, 
in them, illusory enjoyments, bondage and capacity for experience 
as the sprout, bran and chaff in paddy. There are also two other 
Malas which we will point out presently. 

S5. It is clearly shewn by the illustration that Mala is a defect, not 
a quality of the J.vas. 

The commentators point out that the nature of this Apava or Ajiiana 
is neither the opposite ot Juana (Juana \ irodhi' nor Juana abhava in its 
divisions of Pragabhava, Pratidvamsabhava, Atyantabhava, nor Anyata- 
j.'iana, and ihat it is Juana tirobhava (i.e.,) concealing or veiling of Juana, 
'they also point out that this is neither Aka/.duka, a connection established 
at a particular lime or Svabhayika an inheient connection, in which the 
A jnana can never disappear, These distinctions are of the highest import¬ 
ance and should be carefully noted as they affect one’s view of nature 
and of man very materially. 

The products of Apava are stated to be Mohan:, Madam, I\'a gam, 
V tskaJam, 7 up am, Sosham, and Vichitriyam. 

86. Apava Mala, in conjunction with the efficient cause, provides 
thcj.vas with the capacity for experience as the chaff is the eflicient 
c-auve of sprouting. Maya, being the instrumental cause, makes, with 
its effects —bodies and sen^c.*, the bondage of the Jivas, as the bran 
favouring the growth co-exi->ts with the other ingredients. Karma, being 
the material cause, affords enjoyments to the Jivas as the sprout becomes 
manifest by a power latent in it. 


I 


I 


• > 



SivajnAna siddhiyar 


[Bk. III. 


188 


THE TWO OTHER M ALAS. 

87. One is Mayeya, which is the effect of Asuddha Maya ; 
and the other is Trodayi, a Sakti of the Pure that commands the 
three Malas to perform their respective functions. So the learned 
say. These five Malas stand adhering to the Jivas. 

This foliows Sivajnana yogi’s explanation; other commentator’s diffe r 
as to which is which. Sivagra yogi identifies bran with Anava and Maya 
with husk; and with this we are disposed to agree. Though both are 
coverings of the soul, the connection of Anava is much more immediate 
and the husk (Maya) is useful in removing the bran (Ariava) in pounding 
(See vsrse 84 above). 

All the Three Malas cause Bhanda and cover the soul like the 
sprout, bran and husk. Karma is the material cause (Mutal karajiam) 
causing immediately pleasures and pains, and called therefore cause of 
Bhoga. 

Maya is called cause of Bhanda and as instrumental cause (Tuna!) 
causes body, senses, etc., making the soul enjoy pleasures and pains. 

Anava is called cause of Bhoktritva and is the efficient cause (Nimitta) 
induces all these for its own removal finally. 

Mayeya otherwise called also as Maha Maya is the combination of 
all the products of Asuddha Maya, from Kala etc., which becomes attached 
to each individual soul. It is these Mala as attached to each man causes 
his individuality and which is born again and again, till they aie utterly 
annihilated in Nirvapa. 

87. Mayeya is the Mala that limits Ichcha, Jfiana and Kriya of the 
all-pervading soul. 

Tirodhana or Tirobhava literally means concealment aud is accord¬ 
ingly translated in Tamil as LDesi/nfipeo or ld6»£>ui_/. In 1. 37, this is 
considered as a Sakti of the Supreme God, in effecting one of the Pancha 
Krityas, Tirobhavam. As the Paiicha Krityas are ascribed to the five 
Murtis from Brahma, Vishnu, etc., the Lord of Tirobhaya becomes 
Mahesvara. It has its place in the Panchakshara and its symbol ‘ Na \ 
(Vide Uijmai Vijakkam, v. 41, 42 Studies). The rules for the contem¬ 
plation of the five letters are given in verses 74 and 79, SivaprahaSam. In 
the verse before us and in verse 20 Sivaprakeisim, this Tirobhava Sakti 
which is really of the Lord is considered as a Mala or Pitta, impurity, 
and the reason is given in verse 8, Sivaprakatam. 

. ujfisyQPQ£js/2Gin tLjLoe&p&iVjib 

un i uLuJesvaa 3 '9 sir psfilQ 3 np nuSI .f p fid 





A. V.] 


5 UPAKSHA—SUTRA II. 


189 


usirsgZ'gacnssr'xsc.'aiLSsreyxusnajZ apuifi.i <£> 

Tif xn s uxQt~'ir0 ?&sk — 'jj rr ls 2 - i 

erzr £j'g.ca.ap r^lcajr S-Zi'jjSQjT^nlssr. 

“It conceals the intelligence tully and brings about Malaparifakav; 
and hence it is called a Mala. The same Sakti will act as the Grace 
which will make the soul reach the Feet of the Lord whose braids are 
ad'Omed with the serpent and Gang! and moon 

In v. 20, St •Umapati Sivacbariyar speaks of this as inducing Mala - 
faripakam again. This he describes more fully in his PorripaljroJai : 

. ueogsuStir 

sy ezr ar so & xf /r a? 0 a9 ?fad7 ^ * sarfi gst p 0 ^ 

(tyt&^ZTQpgQsvaireGTQp<« <&ifoQ&)fT - J> 

► • 

GC337 ^a'/Tc^CO@Cci) ALJL/eib' '£uLj&3T $ 

G^eV* OfT^LD - /SoVoXiQ.S ^ 

GXJ £-(2 p fT T -z D cV.j) p <31 c3T ©5T LJ 620^7 <5 <5 6&3T <3TLJ P 

JJ^-bajG Rp'V ^r9G £’JLj <ir L—fT £> U - GDUUJKcQj 

ILlLL—Q l£/LC5Vj7i7jjay0'5/To^)«5J’(7/:fi37&5J: 'Frcr 

OLC.JLli-/Tiy0a , /T0DG5^GuTrCO<5 - SlI^LUjG# tf/T 

/?6Va)L9 pui$ p$ pulSt p 

Q usoteviS jds 'bL$3nL-QiunuL§p 

£iL$d€uttQ'ff}€i:<nQ£LGB Jpuff r. pplQ^i jg 

~p i p jjjQunpp ). 


•‘The ancient of ancients, with no one before him, thus makes the 

souls eats the fruit of both kinds of Karma, and on performing good 

Karma, He makes them ccter the Punya lokas in succession without 

entering the hells, and when he thus nears the good path. He makes them 

both enjoy the company of true’bhaktas and just as a flower becomes a 

full blown flower from a small bud in good birrhs, and when their Karma 

is balanced- He watches the proper time and gives His Grace to them. 

Praiic be to I Iim/ # 

• » 

In Tiruhkajirruffadiyar, verse 4, it is said : 
s «r ll uj xrr h & sir p &/u.ucvp Qp L pp cjt 
& i&riLUUj iu/r QppiQ — (Q&i.trun 

tLfifzr*&inp * l Utiri.&nczBL-* 3 ?r&cjr treisf 
uiwi a, 1 & -.jJ? ryi— uto i j*j. 

“The Oun cr in the Ambalar., the Nishkaji, Uranic immanent in the 
world even as bakaia, Oh my disciple and He even bo anie one with me 
to rid me of my Ai?ava Mala.” 





190 


S1VAJNANA S1DDHIVAR 


[Bk. III. 


RF.-INCARNATION OF TMF J1VAS. 

8S. The soul, affected by the five Malas—Aoava, Maya, 
Karma, Mayeya, and Trodayi-passes in a moment at the good 
Lord’s behest, through the wheels of birth and death, the higher 
and the lower worlds, like the whirling fire brand and the whirl¬ 
wind which cease not in their motion. 

RARENESS OF THE HUMAN BIRTH. 

< , 

89. When we consider the case of a Jiva which, after pass¬ 
ing through the eighty four hundred thousand kinds of yonis 
(embryo), of four-fold nature as Andaja, Svetaju, LJtbija and 

In TirumantWy this very same aspect is brought out under the head¬ 
ing of rirobhava. 

loir «r y>Q $ /r0SuSsar 3-n,slct»uu 

P-wanieS ol$. & isj 4 trQo.tr (V)Si,%sst 
&. shot/Qp£ptr zqj (ipi—QesuiS^sQ^ijo 
P-GirotrtAnlj’fesr r$ il'ItQ &, 

Him who dwells in souls, The Light that is within us 
The one who is not separated even one foot from our heart 
Him who dwells together with the souls 
1 lim, the souls did not understand. 

^esruuiS'tocrSuesu—^^ tafiztnnreuzvvih 

g)zht u <£5(0) juju n p gin ttyetr ^fsoi—i^eanrirr. 

The Lord who is born as Bliss 
Entered the sorrows of the evil Pasa. 

Heeee also He is ca'led fg)0s iflio &)0ofr. (The darkness in darkness). In 

yr * 

the verse before us, this Sakti is said to order the activities of 
other malas. From these we gather that the Lord’s Power has to come 
into play in nature and in man and his sheaths of Pasa, and while in such 
close union, He conceals Himself from the souls, and the souls from Him¬ 
self, and conceals their intelligence, besides, till they have eaten the fruits 
of Karma and attain to MalaparipaHam and Iruviuaiyoppu; and thus 
becomes the saving Grace which finally unites the soul to His Feet. 

88. 'At the good Lord’s behest' shows the agent with whose grace 
the escape from the wheel of birth and death can be effected. 

89. It is to be noted that the human frame only is fit for the attain¬ 
ment of eternal freedom by the Jivas. 


( 


I 



A. V.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA II. 


I 9 I 


Sarayuja, becomes human born, we can but compare it with an 
individual who has with his own hands swum the white cceau. 


RARENESS OF A HIGH CLASS HUMAN BIRTH. 

90. it is a great blessing to be born in a land where savages 
do not inhabit but the study of the four vedas reigns supreme. 
Escaping birth among the lower classes of the human race, rare is 
it that one should be fortunate to be born among the people 
privileged to perform religious austerities, and to profess the Saiva 
Siddhanta religion without falling into the ways of other creeds. 

RARENESS OF BECOMING A SAIVA. 

91. Very rare is it that one should be so fortunate as to eater 
with meekness the Saiva creed unaffected by the pride of riches 
on the one side and escaping the littleness of poverty on ■’the other. 
Those who can worship the ciescent-crested Being, with the high 
Sivajfiana, have attained His Grace. 

THE USE OF HUMAN BIRTH. 

92. Was it not the purpose, when the souls were endowed 
with human birth, that they should, with their mind, speech and 
body, serve Hara who is anointed with the five-fold products of 
the cow. The celestials themselves descend on the earth and 
worship Hara. Dumb men, alas! who roam hither and thither, 
in the fleshy frame, understand not anything (of this higher life;. 


TRANSITORINESS OF THE HUMAN BODY, 

93. Perishable in the womb, perishable as soon as it is born, 
perishable after a little growth, perishable as an infant, perishable 

91. Riches are of various kinds of rank, youth, learning, wealth and 
power. To be born poor is indeed miserable. It is desirable therefore 
that one should be rich in a moderare degree so that he may not go abeg- 
ging; but, ho must nqt, however, be proud of it. Such meekness cannot 
be obtamed but by devotion to the Lord. Thus meekness and devotion 
are almost synonymous, bivajfiana — knowledge of Siva. M lave attained' 
expresses certainly. 

92. 1'y ‘dumb men’ are meant the beast like men whose aspirations 
go no farther than the : atisfaclion of the physnal cravings. 

93. body in all iu> .r.pech, L evanescent as mint in the air. Where 
i'j room then for a inan's being proud of his strength or youth, power or 
beauty ? 



192 


SIVAJNANA SIDDH1YAR 


[Bk. III. 


as a youth, perishable as a grey-haired old man, any wise, Death 
dogs the foot-steps of the flesh. Therefore, look to your freedom 
(from bondage) while yet you are strong. 

TRANSITORINESS OF WORLDLY EXPERIENCE. 

94. When one sense experiences, other senses are away. 
The experiences of a single sense are not exhausted at once. In a 
certain state, all experiences vanish. The annoying life-experiences 
are either instantly vanishing sometime after as dreams. If (this 
truth is) understood, (freedom) is attained. 

MEN OF PROSPERITY WITH PRIDE ARE CORPSES. 

95. With spices smeared and with garlands adorned, wearing 
cloths of .gold and followed by attendants, men of prosperity, 
speechless and devoid of understanding, lounging proudly in the 
palanquin borne by carriers, on either side fans swinging, amidst 
the harmonious music of the instruments and the wild sound of 
the clarion, are but corpses. 

WORLDLY POVERTY VERSUS DIVINE RICHES. 

96. Behind men who lead the life of a corpse, you move 
about like walking corpses, straining your body, soul and under¬ 
standing together for nourishing your body which appears and 
vanishes in a moment. Knowiug thus, you do not even once 
worship Hara. (If you do so) He will see that beings higher than 
you fall prostrate at your feet. 

94. ‘Sense-experience’ signifies experience induced by external objects. 
As the experiences are so multifarious and varying, they cannot all be 
grasped at once by the intellect that resides in the body. The peculiar 
state referred to is sleep or swoon. ‘ Life experiences ’ also include the 
objects that form the stage of experience. 

95. With all the embellishments that riches can afford, what better 
profit can men derive than corpses if they do not open their eyes of 
Understanding. 

96. To support this body is not a great thing. For the mattet of 
that, the creator Himself will take care of your body if you fail to feed it. 
Therefore worship Him always, aiming at liberation from ignorance and 
bondage. When higher beings themselves tender their homage to you, 
no mention need be made of beings of your kind. 




SUTRA III. 


Pasu Lakshana. 


THERE IS A SOUL : ITS NATURE. 

I . n 

r. There is a soul separate from the body. It is existent ; 

k is united to a body, and possessed of faults (the feeling of ' I ’ 

and ‘Mine’); it zei/ts, thinks and acts (Ichcha, Juana and Kriya) ; 

it becomes conscious after dream ; it experiences pleasures and 

pains, (the fruits of Karma); it undergoes the five avast-has ; and 

it rests in Turiyatita. 

> 

i. Each one of these statements is made in answer to a different 
theory as regards the soul. It is said to be ‘existent,’ in answer to those 
who deny the reality of a soul-§ubstance, as such a thing is implied in 
the very r act of denial. The next statement is made in answer to those 
who would assert that the body itself is the soul, and that there is no 
soul other than the body. The fact is, though the soul may be in con¬ 
junction and correlation with the body, yet it asserts its own independ¬ 
ence when it calls, “ my body, my eye ” etc. Another asserts that the 
five senses form the soul. To him the answer is made that the soul is 
possessed of more powers than those exercised by the Juaveudriyas. 
Another states that the S.ilshtna kanra forms the soul. The answer is 
that after awaking, one becoming’ conscious must be different from the 
dreambody. l J 7 dra is shown*not to be the soul, as there is no conscious¬ 
ness in deep sleep, though, I’runa may be present. It is different again 
from God, as instead of its inlelligence being self-luminous, it understands 
only in conjuncfon with the different states of the body. The combina¬ 
tion of all the above powers cf the body is shown not to be soul, 
inasmu h as it subsists even in the 7 unyiitUn condition when all the- 
bodily functions cease. 

'I tii stanza i further important as it gives a clear and concise defi¬ 
nition of the oul or J.vaim.i, a definition which we fail to get in any 
o' »y 'm. It ij hown to I*: different fioni the body composed of 
>!-»>• a and it t*'»J'i‘.t , Hud loi, sen o , et' , and also different liom God. 

*5 


» * 


I 


t i 





194 


sivajnAxa siddhiyar 


[Bk. III. 


It is not to be identified with any one or with £?il or any combination and 
permutation of the bodily functions; nor is it a combination of the body 
(Maya) and antahkaranas and God nor any ubhdsa of these. But how it is 
found? It is always found iD union with a body, gross or subtle; and the 
mystery of this union is of more serious import than most other problems. 
It is possessed of certain powers, will, intellection, and power, but distin¬ 
guished from the Supreme Will and Power, inasmuch as this is faulty-or 
imperfect and dependent. It is possessed of feeling and emotion, and 
suffers pain and pleasure as a result of its ignorance and union with the 
body; and this suffering is not illusory, which must distinguish it again 
from God, who is not tainted by any and who has neither likes nor dislikes, 

' QsuGzrQpdo QauesarL^nioa>LCt6levn^ < uppp^da * u,cvu96vir<ssr 
U0SV/J6BT ’, etc. 'i 

The soul is also limited by its coats, and this limitation is not illusory 
either. 

Even after saying all this, there is one characteristic definition of 
the soul, which is alone brought out in the Siddhanta and in no other 
school, and which serves to clear the whole path of psychology and 
metaphysics, of its greatest stumbling blocks. We mean its pov cr 
" ^^7 . u <?n.ippe£r axswrsssj <.cn &s\) t tunOpirfirjni upcR®?pdr 

^uu^utru iSppso ”, to become v>identical with the one it is attached to, and 
erasing thereby its own existence and individuality, the moment after its 
union with this other, and its defect or inability to exist independent of cither 
the body or God as a foothold ov vest (u rjjidQ ^iruc-esrf) SppecuTetmcaLD). 
So that the closest physiological and biological experiment and analysis 
cannot discover the soul’s existence in the body, landing, as such, a 
Buddha, and a Schopenhaur and a Tyndal in the direst despair and 
pessimism; and it is this same peculiar.ty which has foiled such an 
astute thinker as Sankara, in his search for a soul when in union with 
God. The materialist and idealist work fiom opposite extremes but they 
meet with the same difficulty, the difficulty of discovering a soul, other 
than matter or God. Hence it is that Buddha, and his modern day repre¬ 
sentatives the agnostics (it is remarkable how powerfully Buddha appeals 
to-day and is popular with these soul-less and God-less sect) declare the 
search for a psyche (soul) to be vain, for there is no psyche, in fact. And 
the absurdities and contradictions of the Indiah idealistic school flows 
freely from this one defect of not clearly differentiating between God and 
soul. This power or characteristic of the school is brought out in the 


c 


< 


< 




SUPAKSHA—SUTRA III. 


*95 


analogy of crystal or mirror, (see last note in my edition of Light of Grace or 
Tiruvaruipcyan) and the defect of the soul is brought out by comparing 
it to the agni or fire which cannot become manifest except when it is 
attached to a niece of firewood or wick. \\ hen oner we understand this 
particular nature of the soul, how easy it is for one to explain and illus¬ 
trate the Taivamcsi and other mantras, which are to be taught to the dis¬ 
ciple for practising soul elevation. And in my reading, I never came 
upon a more remarkable book than a small pamphlet of Professor Henry 
Drummond called the "Changed life", in which the analogy of the mirror 
is fully brought out, together with a fuil explanation of the process by 
which the soul-elevation is effected, The text chosen by the learned 
theologian is that of St. Paul which wc quote also. 

“ We all, with unveiled face, reflecting as a minor, the glory of the 
Lord are transformed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as 
from the Lord the spirit.” 

He paraphrases the sentence as follows: " We all reflecting as a 
mirror the character of Christ are transformed into the same image from 
character to character—from a poor character to a better one, from a 
better one to one a little better still, from that to one still more complete, 
until by slow degrees the perfect image is attained. Here the solution of 
the problem of sanctification is compressed into a sentence, reflect the 
character of Christ, and you will become like Christ”, or as we will say, 
reflect the image of God in yourself, and you will become God like, 
or God. 

But how is the poor character to be made better and better, or the 
reflecting image clearer and clearer? It is by cleansing the mirror (soul) 
freer and freer from dirt, apjl bringing it more and more in line with the 
effulgent light, that this can be effected, and when tbc.mirior is absolutely 
perfect and nearest, the lij^ht shines brightest, and so overpowers the 
rn'rror, that the mirror f is lost to view, and the glory and Light of the 
Lord i • fdt. For, observes the learned Professor truly, " What you are 
consciou of is the 'glory of the Lord.’ And what the world is conscious 
of, if th« result be a true one, is also the 'glory of the Lord.' In looking 
at a mirror, one does not see the mirror or think of it, but only of what it 
reflects. For a mirror qever calls attention to itself—except when there 
v* Ha- i:i it" 'Hiefliv.* are the Colours of tic Sicldhunti who com- 
p • r •, ’i to tli* m* y i or body. In union with the Ixxly, it is the body 
<1 that i- cjgiu/td, ind not w>_ 1 e oul. In union with God, 


I 


I 





20 


SlVAJNAN’A SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


SOUL IS OTHER THAN BODY AND PRANA. 

2. Why should you require a soul other than the body? 
Does the body itself feel and know ? Then if so, why does not 
the body feel when it becomes a corpse? If it be replied that 
feeling is absent, as Prana is absent; then there is no feeling either 
in sleep, though Prana is present in the body. 

r * 

the Gloay and Light alone is perceived and npt the mirror-Uke soul either; 
and the Professor declares, “All men are mirrors—that is the first law on 
which this formula (of sanctification or corruption) is based. One of the 
aptest descriptiohs of a human being is that he is a mirror,” and we must 
beg our readers to go through the whole pamphlet to note how beauti¬ 
fully he draws out this parallel. 

He notes the second principle which governs this process, namely, 
the law of assimilation or identification. “ This law of assimilation is the 
second, and by far the most impressive truth which underlies the formula 
of sanctification—the truth that men are not only mirrors, so far from 
being mere reflectors of the fleeting tbirgs they see, transfer into their 
own inmost substance and hold in permanent preservation the things that 
they reflect. No OHe can know how the soul can hold these things. No 
one knows how the miracle is done. No phenomenon in nature, no pro¬ 
cess in chemistry, no chapter in Necromancy can even help us to begin 
to understand the amazing operation. For think of it, the past is not only 
focussed there in a man’s soul, it is there. How could it be reflected from 
there if it were not there? All things he has ever seen, known, felt 
believed of the surrounding world, are now within him, have become 
a part of him, in part are him — he lias 'becn changed into their image.” 

These two principles, the law of reflection and the law of assimi¬ 
lation in fact underlie our Mantra and Tantra, our Upasana and 
Sadana, Bhavana and Yoga, and our books instance thp case of the 
snake charmer chanting the Garuda Mantra in illustration of this second 
pinciple of assimilation or identification. The doctrine of regarding 
God as ether than the soul requires very elaborate treatment, and we 
hope to deal with it separately. It is the one point which distinguishes 
the true Vedanta as borne out by the text of the Vedanta Sutras 
themselves and which is accepted by all the 'Tamil philosophers like 
Tirumular ahd Tayumanavar and others, and the Vedanta so called, as 
interpreted and expounded by Sankara. 


( 


1 


< 


« 4 


I 




SUP A KS HA — SUTRA III. 


197 


THE FIVE SENSES DO NOT CONSTITUTE THE SOUL. 

3. If the senses constitute the real soul, then why don’t they 
perceive in sleep. Then the senses perceive one after another and 
each one a different sensation. You say this is their nature. But 
it is a defect that one sense does not perceive another sensation. 
What cognises each sense and sensation and all together must be’ 
different from all these and it is the soul. The five senses have no 
suchcognitibn. 

PRANA IS NOT THE SO^L. 

4. Prana is the conscious Being as there is no consciousness 
when the breath is stopped, temporarily or permanently. But it is 
not conscious in deep sleep. You say this is so, as it is, not in con¬ 
junction with the senses. But if the Prapa is the soul, the senses 
cannot drop when Prapa is conscious. The soul really cognises 
everything, by controlling the Prana. 




SUTRA IV. 


Pa 5TJ Lakshna — ( continued .) 


Adhikarana I. 

ft . .* 

SOUL IS NOT THE ANTAHKARANA. 

1. You say the conscirus being is the Antahharana. But 
none of these senses cognise each other’s operation. Each in fact 
performs a different function. The soul understands all, controls 
all, is in union with them, bringing them into manifestation or not, 

s 

in the various Avasthas, and stands apart with the consciousness 
of ' i ’ and ' Mine 

THE THREE KINDS OF JNANA \ PASA, PASU AND PATIJNANA. 

2. Manas, Buddhi, Chittam, and Ahankara are the instru¬ 
ments of the soul. The union with the soul is such that tho 
Antahkarapas look as though they were the real soul. Regarding 
it merely as a light (which aids the eye in darkness), and clearly 
distinguishing it as such from the soul, he understands his real self. 
Such knowledge is Pasujnana. Then will be induced the higher 
knowledge, Patijnana or Sivajnana. 

2 . The identifying of soul with the Products of Maya is PaSajnana. 
That the knowledge of one’s own nature is distinct from matter and from 
God is Paiujnana or Atmajnana. Where even this cousciouness is merged 
and lost in contemplation and enjoyment of TbeJHighest Bliss, he attains 
to Patijnana. 

The expression * pe&VzBTujflpM 1 pesrZeor il / ’ is very often 
misunderstood and misinterpreted. It simply means “ understanding one¬ 
self,” “understanding his real nature,” and does not mean “ understanding 
oneself as God or as anything else.” After attaining this self-know¬ 
ledge, the Vedas postulate distinctly a higher knowledge, the knowledge 
of God and such passages are again misinterpreted to mean that “ the 
soul secs God as himself.” When in fact the last two words ‘ as himself ’ 
is nowhere found in the text. 




I • 


4 ‘ 


« 






SuPAKSHA 


UTRA IV. 


199 


A. I.] 

THEIR AKSHARA. 

3. The Akshara, A, U. M, Vindhu and Nada respectively 
represent and influence Ahankara, Buddhi, Manas, Chittam, and 
Soul. A.li these together form the Pranava (sukshma). The way 
the consciousness rises and falls is as the rise and fall of the waves 
in the sea. When considered deeply, the nature of their action • 
will be manifest. 

*' THEIR DEVATAS, 

4. Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Mahesvara, and Sadasiva res¬ 
pectively guide the letters A, U, M, Vindu and Nada. It is in 
this five-fold union the soul cognises, and as such is more like 
Asat. If one controls in Yoga his two breaths and examines them, 
their nature can be plainly seen. 

1 

THE COM PI NATION OF ALE THE FOREGOING IS NOT THE SOUL. 

5. If the Atmd is stated to be the combination of all the 
above senses and sensations, then the seer will only see them each 
separately and not as a .single whole (Alina). If you say these 
various things themselves in fact constitute the soul, then the man 
who cognises them all together is different, as the object perceived 
is quite distinct from the perceiving subject. 

5. The view of the soul (Jlvatma) refuted here is credited to the 
Sautrantika Buddhists by some commentators and to Mayavfidis by 
others. We have not been able to get from the followers of the latter 
school a proper definition of the Jiviitmh, nor a uniform one; and one 
Svami of Chidambaram when we pressed him for a definition stated that 
it v.a an n!la;odr da of.the ab’.iavi of Brahman, and Antahkarana and 
odcr lower products of Maya. Our reply to him was:—which of these 
wa> in Hat dham, /bondage; and which of these was to reach Multi (free¬ 
dom;? The ubhusa of Brahman is either Brahman or it is not. If it is 
Brahman, it can -ufTer no bondage nor docs it .equirc to be freed. If it 
is not, then we reck not if it is in bondage or not. It cannot matter to 
tii either whether the anta^karapa and lower senses do or do not . ulhr. 
And it is here stated um-c more that our dhlin< l jio.-itioii A that the. 
Jlvatma v.e'jwst date ii o:.e above the antlVkarai^lj and L in no sense an 
“ .'c'odn a o.‘ any t.umbe r of tilin'... lie it is that is constrained and 




200 


§i vain Ana siddhiyar 


[Bk. III. 


dragged by sin and desire, and suffers pam. The following passages 
from the Upanishads clearly bring out the distinction. 

“ Isa supports all this together, the perishable and the unperishable, 
the developed and the undeveloped. The Anisa, Atma ,* * is bound , because 
he has to enjoy (the fruits of Karma); but when he has known God 
(Deva) he is freed from all fetters.” 

‘•'There are two, one knowing (Isvara) the other not knowing (Jivg), 
both unborn (Aja), one strong, the other weak; there is she * the unborn, 
through whom each man receives the recompense of the works; and 
there is the Infinite Atmc (appearing) under all forms, but Himself 
inactive. When a man finds out these three, that is f Brahma.” 

“That which is perishable is the Pradhana; the immortal and imperi¬ 
shable is Hara. J The One God (Eko Deva) rules the perishable 
(Pradhana) and the At.nd. From meditating on Him, from joining Him, 
from becoming one with Him, there is further cessation, of all illusion in 
the end.” (Svetasvatara Up. I. S to io.) 


* Amsa and Isa, Atma and Paramatma, Purusha and Paramapurusha, 
Jiva and Param or Brahman, Pasu and Pati, Ajna and Jria are parallel 
sets of terms meaning Soul and God. Isa in these passages does not 
mean a personal God but the Highest Brahman. 

* She is Pradhana or Prakriti and not Deyatma Sakti. 

j- That here means man, i.c., man when he understands the distinction 
of the Tripadartha becomes God. The three means Pasu, Pati and Pasa. 
And Isvara and Brahma in the passage do not mean repectively Personal 
and God Brahman but mean the same Being. According to Sarikhyas, 
a true knowledge of Pasa and Pasu, Prakriti and Purusha, alone gave 
liberation. 

I Professor Max Muller observes on this word, “ he would seem to be 
meant for Isvara, or Deva or the One God, though immediately after¬ 
wards he is taken for the true Brahman and nof*for its phenominal divine 
personification only.” I.c., in one and the same mantra, Hara means both 
the Personal God and the true Brahman 1 When it is further seen how in 
other passages, the same learned Professor and others of his ilk read Siva 
and Rudra for the True Brahman, wherein is the real distinction between 
Isvara and Brahman. The word Isvara or Isa (the first word in the Isa 
Upanishat) originally meant in the Upanishats and Brahma Sutras only 
the Highest Brahman, not any phenomenal something or nothing. The 
word ‘ Isvara ’ has however been used by Sankara and his foliowers as 
meaning the lower Brahman in a restricted sense. Misled by this later 


< 


« 


t t 


I 




A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA — SUTRA IV. 


2or 


Adhikarana II. 


ki this adhikarana are reviewed the various theories which has been 
propounded in regard to the nature of the soul ; and they require very 
close attention. 

SOUL IS DERIVED FROM GOD BY PARJNAMA? XO. 

6. You state that the soul possessing the qualities of Intelli¬ 
gence, Will and Power of *the Supreme, stands to the Supreme as 
heat to fire, as guna to guni in Bhedabheda- relation and appears 
variously. If so, then the Jiva need not be possessed of senses 
and organs to become intelligent. 

THE SAXKHYAN DOCTR1XE REFUTED. 

7. If it is slated that the Atma is pure intelligence and not 
possessed of gunas like Will and Power, then it cannot develope 

use of the word, our Professor and others would often take the Isvara 
and Isa of the Upanishats in the latter restricted sense. And hence the 
inconsistency and confusion which arises in their interpretation of these 
passages. Forget for once this distinction when reading the Upanishats, 
then the whole meaning will be clear. The Upanishat writers had no 
prejudice in using the words Isa, Isvara, Hara, Rudra, Siva, Deva, Maha- 
deva, and Mahesvara, as the present day Yedantists would seem to have. 

“ When that God (Dcva) is known, all fetters fall off, sufferings are 
destroyed and birth and death cease.” (Svetas, i. 8 to 11). 

“On the same tree, man (Anisa) sits grieving immersed, bewildered by 
Ins own im*oter.ee : But when he sees the other, Isa, contented and knows 
His glory*, then his grief passes awuy.” (Mundaka iii. 1. 2.) 

“ l-ools dwelling in dark tress, wise in their own conceit, and puffed up 
with vain knowledge, go round mui round staggering to and fro like blind 
men led by the blind.” (Katha i. 2. 5). 

See further page *1 it seq. Part III, Nityanu Sandhana Series, where 
a good resume of the whole subject is given Only we could not tind the 
text “ Athrayam Purushassvayam Jyotir-Bhavate” at Brihad. vi. 3 . <j, 
and the soul cannot be called self-luminous though in union with God, it 
may be found to Ixj aclf-Iuminous. 

6. God h -Pf-luminous, and if soul is also God, it must be sc’.f-luini- 
nou. also. But the soul in union with the body shims with the light of 
V body it c f, a it will do so with the Light of the Lord when in union 
v.itn the l^ord 

Qfj 




20 2 


SIVAJNANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. Ul. 


Will and Power. If it is replied that these gunas are acquired 
from the body and in the Presence of the Atma, then, these powers 
must be found also when the body is dead or dead asleep. But 
if it is again said, that this is due to the death or the sleep of the 
body itself, the statement that these are brought into activity by 
the Presence of the Atma. stands contradicted. 

THE SAME. 

< i 

8. It is again said that th eguna is induced by the Presence 
of the Atma just as the magnet attracts the iron. If so, it can 
only induce its own power of attracting objects and not that of , 
repelling objects. On the other hand, the Atma. induces such 
varying ketions such as thinking, and forgetting, running, sitting, 
reclinining, standing etc. 

THE PAURANIKA’s DOCTRINE. THE fOUL HAS FORM ? NO. 

9. If the soul is said to possess a form, then this form must 
be apparent in the body. Then also, it will become indistinguish¬ 
able from matter which undergoes transformation and destruction. 

It must again be perceived when this Atma enters the womb. 
You reply that it is sukshma and imperceptible to the eye. Just so, 
your own words belie your theory that it has a form (perceptible). 

THE SOUL HAS NEITHER SUKSHMA FROM. 

10. If you say it has sukshma (subtle) form, then you 
are evidently mistaking the Atma for the subtle cause of the gross 
body, namely, Manas, Buddhi, Ahaiikara and the five tanmatras 
(the Puri-ashlaka). If you say no, and would make it even more 
subtle than the Puri-ashlaka, then according to us, there are even 
tatvas higher than Puri-ashlaka , the Kald, Ruga, Vidya etc., and 
all these are material and achit, and perishable. 

THE SOUL IS RUPARUPA. NO. 

11. If the soul is said to be Rupdrupa, then know that Rupa 
cannot become A rupa, and Arupa cannot become Rupa. One 

11. The commentators ascribe this doctrine to seyemr or «a/«rr*/r 
(pronounced kaula,|kaulaka, or gaula, gaulaka?) and we are not able to 
identify who these schoolmen are. Perhaps they are Saktas. 


t 


i 1 


I 




A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA IV. 


203 

thing cannot have two contradictory natures. If you say, it is 
like the fire latent in the wood, then as the fire shows out in 
visible form when it bums, the soul must become visible. If it 
does, it will cease to be sat. 

THE SAME 

12. If you say again that the Alma is RQpSrupa (form and 
formless) like the moon, then it must become visible to our eye at 
some moment. If you reply that this visible body itself is the 
product and manifestation of Atmd, then the Atmd can never 
become freed of Blnuida, it becomes a chit and material. 

patanjala's doctrine, soul is apupi and inactive. 

13. If you state that the soul is ArTtpi (formless) and inactive 
or (unchangeable/ like Akas, then explain why does the soul, 
becoming bound in bodies, make it undergo all sorts of motions 
such as walking, etc. 

THE VIEWS OF VAISESIIIKA, PUR VAM IMAMS AKA AND OTHERS. 

IS SOUL ACHIT, CHITACHIT OR CHIT? 

14. If soul is Achit (non-intelligent), then it can have no 
cognition at all. If it is Chitdchit, then, also what is chit cannot 
become achit, and vice versa. It cannot be achit in one part, and 
chit in another part. If again, another asserts that it is not achit, 
but chit, then why is it, that it has no cognition except in union 
with the body. 

PANCIIAR ATRl's DOCTR.^E. T1IE SOUL IS ANU, OR ATOMIC? 

15. If the soul Is said to be Ann or atomic, then it can pass 
away easily from the body by any of its outer passages. It cannot 

12. One commentator ascribes the purvapaksha views statcJ in the 
last four stanzas to a section of the Pancharatris. 

14. Matter is intelligent, soul is intelligent, God is intelligent. But 
all these are of different planes, and the lower one pales and is considered 
non-imel.igcnt in the presen e of the superior one. And the soul in par¬ 
ti*' u!ar re civ-s light from both sides from matter and from God. Soul is 
luminous but not self luminous. It cannot illuminate but can be illumi¬ 
nated. 


204 


sIVAJNANA SIDDH1VAR 


[Dk. Ill. 


be kept up in the body. It cannot bear burdens and sufferings. 

It will be reducing it to the level of material atoms which are 
Achit. Even as an atom, it will have an organism and accordingly 
it will be perishable. 

THE SAME. THE SOUL OCCUPIES PLACE IN THE BODY ? 

16. If you say that the soul is located in some portion erf the 
body, then it becomes limited like a •form, and hence becomes 
perishable; and its intelligence cannot be felt all over the body. 

If you instance lamp and its spreading light, even then the soul 
will only cognize the things nearest it, as the lamp can light only ■ 
things near it. Else, as light, its intelligence must be felt through 
every sense at the same time. 

THE JAINA’s DOCTRINE. THE SOUL IS ALL OVER THE BODY? 

17. If you state that the soul is spread over the whole body 
and thus cognises, then it must not undergo sleep and other 
Avasthas. Besides, it must understand through all the senses all 
at once. Then the intelligence must be more or less in proportion 
to the largeness or smallness of the body. Then, again, it must 
decrease as some one or other organ is>cut off and, it must vanish 
when the whole body vanishes also. 

THE PURVA MiMAMSAKA's DOCTRINE. THE SOUL IS VIBHU. 

r8. If you say the soul is all pervading then you must 
explain how it is that the soul undergoes the five Avasthas and 
enters hell and heaven and how it* cannot perceive all things all at 

16. Sivajnanayogi also points out that the analogy is wrong, inas¬ 
much the soul and its intelligence are related as Guni and Guna, whereas 
there is no such relation between the flame and its light. •• He points out 
that light is but particles of the flame and is one with it; and the flame 
as such can be dissipated. 

Of course, it is an old and well-rooted fallacy that mind can fill 
matter or space. The two are utterly contrasted; mind is the unextended 
and matter the extended. How can the unextended fill the extended ? It 
can only do so, if it was the extended, i.e. t matter. But mind in present 
in all and every part of the body, and the nature of this connection is 
what is really mysterious. The analogy of vowel and consonant is what 
gives us the barest idea of the nature of this connection. 



A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA IV. 


205 


once ; and how it can know other thing* when it knows only 
through some one sense or other. 

THE ^ AME. MAYA CONCEALS THE FOUL ? 

19. If you say the soul’s intelligence is covered by the dirt 
of Maya, then it must derive no knowledge through the senses 
and antahkarana. Then even the freedom from Bandha will 
not induce Mukti. If he was the ever free and the self-luminous, 

1 # 

he can undergo no bondage. 

soul's real nature, it is arupi; vyapi and pasu- 

20. It is formless (Arupa) and all pervasive (Vibhul but 
unlike that of achit or matter. Its Vyapaka cansists in be- 

19. If the ever free entered into bondage, the same causes will operate 
to bring it into bondage even after it attained to moksha once. If it was 
all pervasive, it cannot get limited. If it did this of its own sweet will 
and pleasure, then the bondage and limitation is only a name and not a 
reality. And it can restore itself to its pristine purity at any moment. 
Then again the distinctions between purity and impurity, right and wrong, 
sin and virtue, good and evil, truth and falsehood, must also be nominal. 
No one need be advised to follow the true and avoid evil, no one need be 
advised to practise self-abnegation and sadana chatush'.ayam, follow a guru 
and perform tapas and worship God. The monstrous results of this doc¬ 
trine will be patent to everybody except to those whose vision is com¬ 
pletely obscured by blind prejudice. The schools reviewed above postulate 
soul and maya or prakriti merely and they omit all consideration of 
another factor namely auava or avidyd which covers and limits the soul. 
Hence the defect in their doctrines. It is this arjava which limits or 
covers, and the maya it is tha't tries to lift the veil little and little, as the 
lamp lights us in darkness, but is of no use in the broad day. Having 
stated and met the theories of other schools, the author now proceeds to 
state his own position. 

20. In this verse is brought out the real definition of the soul or Jiva, 
and which is discussed in our notes in the beginning of the sutra. It 
meets all the conflicting views held by different schools as regards the 
nature of the Jlva, and shows also how these different views rose also. 
It is because of this particular nature, of becoming one with whatever it 
is united to, that people have been led to deny its existence or to identify 
it with various organs and senses and God. When the true nature of the 
soul L per civcd, all our diihculties vanish, and we reach the true road 
v. bicb will lead uc 011 to the Goal of Life. 




206 


SIVAJNANA SIDDIIIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


coming one with the thing it dwells in for the time being (body 
or God.) Its eternal intelligence and power is eternally concealed 
by the Piisa, (bondage) Anava-mala and hence called Pas it. 

ITS DIFFERENT MAYA COATS AND THEIR EFFECT. 

21. Entering the womb of Maya (Asuddha) it regains dimly 
its intelligence, will, and power. Putting on the further coats of 
Kala, Raga, and Vidya, it shines in particular bodies Further 
donning the cloak of the three guiias and their products such as 
antahkarana etc., it perceives in advaita union with the same. 

ITS PILGRIMAGE. 

22. The soul quits a sukshma-sarira and lives in a stlmla 
body, and continues in the five Avasthas, and becomes born and 
born again, and performing good and bad works, it enjoys the 
fruits thereof. 

THE FIVE KOSAS. 

23. The five koSas are Anandamaya, Vijfianamaya, Mano- 
maya, Pranamaya, Annamaya. Of these one is more subtle 

21. These constitute its gum-Sarira, kanchuka-Sanra, and karana-Sarira • 
according to one classification. , 

23. Each one of these kosas is mistaken for the atma. The materialist 
mistakes the annamayakosa for the soul. The Ahankavavadi mistakes the 
Manomaya as the soul. The Buddha mistakes the Vijrianamaya as the 
soul. And the Vedanti (idealist) mistakes the Anandamaya as the soul. 
Commentators identify the Anna and Pranamayakosas with the Sthula- 
Sarira, Manomayakosa with the Sukshma body, and Vijnana and Ananda- 
mayakosas with the Karana-Sarira. Sivajnana Yogi identifies these five 
kosas respectively with the Sthula, Sukshma, Gupa, Kafichuka and 

v 

Karana-Sarira as defined in stanzas 21 and 22. a 

When the soul identifies itself with Annamayakosa, it is within it. When 
it ascends to the Pranamayakosa and cognises the Annamaya as different 
from itself, it gets out of it and so on. But it is to be noted paricularly 
here that the highest condition postulated by Vedantis as Anandamaya, 
where the atma is in its own place, is but an experience derived by the 
soul at its first contact and co-ordinate evolution with matter or maya. 
What rises even above this is the Siddhanti’s soul or Jiva or Pasu or atma 

v 

and above this and on a higher plane dwells the Supreme Brahman, Siva. 






A. LI.] 


SUPAKSHA—SClTRA IV. 


20 / 


(Sukshma) than the one that follows it. And these are all evolved 
from their first cause Maya. The formless Atma found in these 
five kosas lives in and out of it. 

HOW THESE KOSAS ARE MOVED ? 

24. The soul lives and moves and has its being in these 
respective bodies, as the charioteer and the car, as the showman 
and the playing dolls, as the masked man, as the Yogi in another 
body, as the actor and his different parts. 

THE ATMA OR SOUL IS DIFFERENT FROM THE BODY. 

25. Your body is different from yourself as you say, ‘my 
body', ‘my senses’, ‘my karana’, ‘my buddhi ’ etc., inasmuch 
as you also say ' my house ’, ' my cattle’ etc., what you considered 
as inseparable from you, you find to be severed as your hairs and 
nails. 

A FURTHER ARGUMENT. 

26. When you clothe yourself in silks and adorn yourself 
with jewels and flowers, you are not conscious that these are 
different from you. But when they are removed from you, you 
become consicous of the difference. Just so, know thyself to be 
different from your body. 

SOUL IS DIFFERENT FROM VTJNANA AND ANANDAMAYAKOSAS. 

27. I understand that the body (first three kosas) is not 
myself; but how can you say that my understanding / (Vijfiana, 
physical consciousness) is differen from myself? Inasmuch as you 
say (my understanding). But we say also ‘ wy soul’ ? He who 
has really perceived the soul wiil not say ‘ my soul \ It is the 
ignorant who say so. 

THE MEANING OF ".MY SOOL." 

28. By lakshana also we speak cf the Buddhi as Manas, 
and Manas as Buddhi ; we.speak of chitta as Jiva, and Jiva as 
chitta ; we speak of Atma as God, and God as Atma (soul). So 

24. It will be seen that the identification and subjection of the man to 
his part is h-s and Icj*. as he ascend*, up ; and in the charioteer lie lias 
full control ovsr the car lie "uidc-j and lor his own bcnelit. 



§1VAJNANA SIDDHIYAR 


208 


[Bk. Ill 


also the phrase of ‘my soul’ denotes another, namely, the Supreme 
Soul dwelling in your soul. 

SOME LANGUAGE FALLACIES IN COMMON USAGE. 

29. The understanding, body, cliittam , etc., are one and all 
called Atma (in the upanishats) as we speak of the burner 

as the light itself (a9srri@). All these senses etc., 
are different in their action ; and inseparably united to them, the 
soul cognises them as object. The object (^/jflQungar) js separate 
from the subject (=$ tjS&gi). 

THE FIVE AVASTHAS. 

30. The soul who cognises through the external senses 
dreams in sleep, and sleeps soundly with but bare breath and 
without action or enjoyment; and waking again, recalls its 
dreams, and feels its sound sleep and then enters into eating and 
exercises. This is the way the soul cognises through the five 
avaslhas, with the aid of the physical vestures. 

SOUL IS NOT. SELF-LUMINOUS. 

31. If the soul was self-luminous then why does it require 
the aid of senses and organs. As the soul is concealed eternally by 
A nava, its intelligence is restored by the physical senses etc. Its re¬ 
lation to its,senses and organs is like that of the king to his ministers. 

Adhikarana. III. 


RELATION OF SOUL TO THE'LOWER ORGANS AND ITS CONDITION 
IN THE VARIOUS AVaSTHAS. 

SOUL IS THE KING. 

32. Just as the king, on his return from a possession with 
his troops, re-enters his palace, leaving guards at the gates of the 

32. This is an old Sahkhyan analogy (vide Sahkhya sutras, v. 115), 
and this has found its way through the ancient Greeks into the thought 
of Europe, and Lytton also uses the simile of the king and his ministers 
in one of his novels. 

Sivajnana Yogi thus expands the simile: Soul is king ; Manas is 
chariot ; Pra^a and other vayus, the horses; Buddhi is the chief minister; 





A. III.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA IV. 


209 


different courts he passes through, and finally enters alone the 
innermost harem, so also the soul passes through the five 
avasth;-.s in the body, leaving Prana as the guard of the inner¬ 
most portals. 

THE NAMES OF THE FIVE AVASTHAS ETC. 

33. When the soul is in Jagravasthd, it and its organs 

number thiry-five, and the place is midbrows. In svapnavastha , 

, • 

they' number twenty-five, and the place is the throat; in the 
Sits/i upty'ti vast ha , they number three, and the place is the heart; 
in the Turiyavastha, they number two, and the place is the ttdb/ii; 

and in the TurlydtUa avasthd, the soul dwells alone. 

» •» 

HOW THESE ARE ENERGISED BY THE VIDYA TATVAS. 

34. In Jagra, all the five Vidya Tatvas (from Siva and Sakti 
etc.,) are active; in the Svapna, the first four; and in the next, the 
first three ; and in the Turiya, the first two; and in the last condi¬ 
tion, Siva Tatva alone guides it. They are so active, as the soul 
developes through the Asuddha Maya and Prakriti Tatvas: 
Ur.destand this well. 

Ahankura is the Driver; and Juanendriyas and Kannendriyas are the 
footmen; the midbrows, throat, heart, belly and anus, are the different 
courts of the palace. 

The nature of this passage of the soul from one condition to 
another has to be cleariy noted and realized; otherwise, there will 
be endless confusion. Vide pp*. 51 1053 Sivajnanabodham for fuller 
exposition. ' 

33. The thirty-five arc* the ten Indriyas, and their ten subtle elements, 
the tanmatras, the ten Pranas, and the four antahkaranas, and soul. The 
twenty-five are arrived at, by omitting the first, the Indriyas. The three 
arc Chitta, iVana and Soul The two are Praria and Soul. In the Turiya- 
ttta, the soul alone cxist 3 . 

Sivajfiina Yogi adds that even in Turiyattta, the soul is united to the 
subtle cau'-tl matter ; but what is meant is, it had not developed into a 
separate and differentiated organic body. 

v.4. Some 1 omnentator interpret tb» to mean that the thirty-live 
and twenty Inc ct ., arc further grtii|»ed into gtoups ol Inc, etc. 




210 


SIVAJNANA S1DDM1VAR 


[Bk. 111 . 


THE LOWER AND HIGHER AVASTHAS. 

All the five Avasthas are found united in the Jiva when 

it is in'the flta, region. You can perceive their play when Ih- 
v. The ever-wise luanis also, tor getting 

s“st zx —.»;«—»■* 

five Higher Avasthas, with the Grace of God, 

THE FRUITS CF THESE CONDITIONS. 

0(5 Of these two kinds of Avasthas, the one, lower will 
drag"down man into births. The other will lift h™> “P 
him from birth. The Yogi attaining to samadh, w.ll attain sal 

tion in the very next birth. 

" karanavastua. 

„ '1 he causal or subtle' Avasthas are three, called Kerala 

Sakala and Suddha. The soul is in Kevala when the soul is by 
itself (without volition etc.) It is in Sakala, when God unites l o 
a ,T!ts senses and organs. It is in Suddha, when leaving birth, ,t 

is free from all mala (impurities). 

KEVALAVASTHA. 

-s It the Kevalavastha, the soul, is non-intelligent, it is 
formless, Liable; H 

35 . The lower Avasthas afjSgra, Svapna, 

dtfingui^&e five no activities 

37 - 1 " the i k , ik e a bright diamond in a dirty pool, or 

of any kind and ,t is lost ormnk I ke t Sakala condi- 

Hke ,he same diamond c-<«« thtough tl ,e aid of the 

lion, its intelligence etc., rece PJ , the diamond l'cllect the 

physical faculties, inf/^^'^ch s^ ^8round and rubbed of its 
the light, now blue, now red etc as ^ ^ ruggedness and dirt is 

dirt and '“g8^ u and steadily the Supreme Light and is merged in 
’thHame G^ Th/se conditions are fully described in the next three 

stanzas. nn . ^ vprsc in almost the same 

Thk definition is impoitant. Ihere is a verse in am 

terms in the Tirumantra. Evidently both are translating bom 





A. III.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA IV. 


211 


Gunas, nor to Ka’a and other Tatvas; it is action-less, mark-less; 
it is not a self-agent; it cannot enjoy fruits; it is united to Anava ; 
and it is Vibhu, omnipresent. 

SAKALAVASTHA. 

30. In the Sakala, the soul gets a body, and becomes clothed 
with the various organs and senses, internal and external, and the 
desire to enjoy the objects of the senses, and reincarnates in 
different births. 

suddhavastma: 

40. He becomes balanced in good and evil. 1 he grace of 
the Lord descends on him. He gets his Guru’s blessing. He 
attains to Jnana Yoga Samadhi aiid is freed from tlfe triple mala. 
He cease3 to be finite in intelligence, and becoming omniscient, 
he is united to the Feet of the Lord. This is the Suddha condition. 




veisc in the Agama. Vibhu is explained to mean as ; not localised in 
any one place or particular body.’ 

40. The truth of this verse is often shortly expressed in the phrases: 


“ GujiTuu, tLCvuiPutrau),” 

" flftzra, si u tr 01) 

and they sum up the highest teachings. 

rujbjsJr $>ul 2 Qf’tuji#] 

Qupjr <wnia Qi n i ' jp'D i r ’ ~ ~ 

1 ucs3f!ri_4- v pp/* '*> p w T ~OJ 

G.u£<tl i_.it p Uj *0 hj.n' 2 j). 



sen RA V. 


ON THE RELATION OF GOD, SOUL AND BODV. 

GOD, T11E SUPREME KNOWER AND INSTRUCTOR. 

i. As the senses can only understand with the .aid of the 
soul, and yet cannot know the soul, so also the soul can only 
understand with the grace of the Lord and yet cannot know Him. 
The all-knowing Siva alone knows all and imparts knowledge 
to all. 

Adhikarana I. 


WHY don’t SOULS ALL EQUALLY UNDERSTAND WELL ? 

?. If God imparts knowledge, then every one’s knowledge 
must be equal. If the difference in wisdom is due to Karma, then 
no God is necessary. No. The First Cause gives to each according 
to his Karma, in the same way as the earth yields according to the 
labour spent on it, or as the sun brings into bloom the lotus buds. 

v; 

1. This power of the Lord is called His Tirobh'nva bahti. 

2. Though the soil may be equally good, one man reaps a good crop 
and another not, as he labours well in it or not. Though the sun is 
absolutely necessary for the maturity and blooming of flowers, yet the 
sun cannot make the bud blossom before'-its time. This view does not 
destroy the omni-penetrativeness of God, while’at the same time, it pre¬ 
serves to the individual his responsibility. It i?, this view which saves 
Hinduism from degenerating into blind Fatalism or base Pantheism. 

The following verse from Ulahudaiya Nayonar expands the simile of 
the lotus beautifully. 

lo6vQu> gp/ii?i—d$p & & & s p $s) sx Lcm^ujujnucStyraSso 

LDSsreg/QpQsuLLL-iri js^^tsurr rrerj) loevrflpyj pcmpQujtjpeSpssp 
fesr j ^n?>sniS ffessrQib tism e&);Q& & maser: 

«* 

^CV{&}Ql£>CCT g3/(_-6T CST QLL&T 

CTGsrgn-id&fevpfl eSiucotyilunticnci* £ ipo&nQuj 


< 


« 

< t 


« 






A. II.] 


SL'PaKSHA—SUTRa V. 


213 


CAN THE 5 0UL UNDERSTAND HIMSELF? 

3. The Soul understands only with the aid of the Supreme 
Intelligence, and cannot understand by himself, inasmuch as this 
knowing soul knows only through some sense or other, forgets 
what it has learnt, and learns from others, and does not know 
himself the knower. 

« » 

Adhikarana II. 


HOW COD IMPARTS KNOWLEDGE. 

4. The One, Only God graciously imparts knowledge to the 
soul, by means of the various organs of sense, and sensations, by 
means of the luminaries, and time, Karma, and bodies, by means 
of books on logic and philosophy, and by the word of the Guru, 
inasmuch as the soul in the Kevala condition is formless and 
non-intelligent. 

COD REQUIRES NOT THESE AIDS FOR HIMSELF. 

• 5. The one God knows all and imparts knowledge to all 
and is the soul of-all souls’, and is different from them, and is in 
all, creating and developing all, without any form, and without 

sr u.etXczn^4 l S^ey>jjnjj «^y 0 drTGO £_< 5 <5B)LDujnt±j$eirp 

uj it Ljevzun&xr) Ltrr S £)Qiu. 

In the Tank of Ariava Mala, in the mire of Karma, the lotus buld of 
Maya is planted and it shoots into the stalk of twety-four tatvas, and bud 
with petals of the seven higher tatvas up to Vidya, and Mahesvara and 
Sadasiva as Stamens and Sakti as the ovary and Nadham and Vindhu as 
the Pistil. Snch is the Lotilsscat formed of my body which Thou 
graciously occ’upicst. I fancied that I did occupy it myself. Thou 
gavest me that Light of Grace to perceive my error. Oh Thou Ambala- 
vaj^a of Tiruvavarjuturai that art non-existent to men in bondage and 
existent to those dwelling in grace and who showercst His Grace to his 
devotees! 

Cf. illustration C to 3rd Adhikarana of the 9th Sdtra SwajHaiiabodha. 

3. The soul is not self-luminous or Svaprakasa or Svayamjyoti, 
and God is defined a- bvaparapiakusa, self-luminous and illumining 
ui others 




SIVAJNANA S1DDI1IYAR 


2(4 


[Bk. III. 


the aid of any organs or objects or luminaries or time or Karma 
or body or books etc. 

DOES GOD RECEIVE TAINT BY HIS PRESENCE IN THE WORLD? 

6. You have forgotten the Vedic text that the worlds under¬ 
go change in the mere presence of God. God cannot be enshrouded 
in Maya, and no Achit can exist in the presence of Siva, (the pure 
Chit). In His Presence, the embodied,, souls undergo evolution 
and are given wisdom. 

4 

ALL ARE BUT PARTS OF HIM. 

7. The worlds form His body; thejivas, His senses; the < 
Ichcha, Juana, and Kriy^ Saktis, His Antahkarana . Inducing 
all the countless Jivas to reap good or evil, according to their 
deserts, the Supreme Lord dances the Dance oLCreation, Develop¬ 
ment, Destruction, Veiling and Grace. 

god’s GRACE HOW BESTOWED. 

8. The Supreme One after inducing thejivas to unite in 
bodies with five senses, and undergo pleasures and pains, and 
thus make it gather experience by suffering many births, pities 
their fallen condition, and graciously grants the Higher knowledge 
as Guru and grants the Supreme Seat. 

god’s RELATION TO HIS SAKTI. 

9. <?pj$ lutr^ih pest a s(tftarit$eh 

Qp(j^ett ffleu iSlevlev ujtsp& &auL$eo&p£s) uSeo'ciso 
tDgafl&sr lUQtjetrtta) evirilLp. lAe&ggijSlna s&fluucar aessrsiL 
©0wfl‘Ss6r Qujnetflujn QmitlLQld ^treStocotuu Quitsv eS&esr, 

v < 

9 Hara has Grace for His Sakti. Except as this Supreme 

V* y» •/ 

Love and Grace, there is no Siva. Without Siva, thtre is no Sakti. 
Isa removes the illusion of the Souls with his love, and grants 
them bliss, just as the Sun dispels the darkness shrouding the 
eyes, with his light. 


7. His acts are compared to a dance, as they are solely intended for 
the benefits of the souls (spectators) and not for any pleasure or profit of 
God Himself. 



SOTRA VI 


NATURE OF THE SUPREME. 

i. If you ask whether God is an object of knowledge or not, 
then know, if He is an object of knowledge, He will become 
Achit and Asat. If He cannot be known, He must be a non-entity. 
Tho all-pervading Sivam is neither, and is pure Chit and Sat. 
In the presence of the Sat, cognized by following the True Path, 
Asat will not appear. 

Adhikarana I. 


WHAT IS ACHIT ? 

2. All objects of cognition are Achit. All objects of cogni¬ 
tion come into being and are destroyed (being bound by time) ; 
they divide themselves into the worlds, bodies and organs (bei ng 
bound by space) and enjoyments; they are identified at one time 
by the intelligence as itself (in bandha) and at another time (in 
moksha) are seen as separate ; and they are all products of 
Maya. Hence all such are Achit or non-Intelhgent or Asat (other 
than Sat.) 

•ASAT DEFINED. 

3. The enjoyments of this life, and the bliss of the King of 
gods, Vishnu and Brahma, the lives of the countless millions of 
sentient beings, all these, may be compared to the tricks of ihc 
magician, or the dreams, or the mirage. '1 hey seem only to exist, 
and then perish instantly. Hence the world is spoken of as Asat. 

, Adhikarana II. 

• __ 

COD IS NOT UNKOWAOLE. 

4. If God is unknow iblc, then there can be no benefit from 
Him ; I le can never pervade us ; neither can we unite with him in 

4. The truth is He cannot be known with our Paiubodha. Wc can 
only perceive Him with HisCira r eor Sivaju.uia. 

" *>f >»f j» 1 ,(»m 4 . I. ». 1 It «>| v'.\ 1 A 

t 

,;,JU ? 0*7 u, jit k.v 

^apr.*'iiff u *?'*>*■ ( >tl ' i’t ' 1 '- r 





2 16 


§ 1V A 1NA NA ST'riDl 1!VAR 


[Bk. III. 


Moksha. He cannot perform the Panchakrityas for our benefit. 
His existence will be like that of the flowers of the sky and of the 
rope formed of the hairs of the tortoise. 


Adhikarana. III. 


GOD IS NOT AN1RVACHANA. ‘ 

5. Why should not God be described as (Anirvachana) being 
neither Sat nor Asat nor Satasat ? Well, if the answer to the 
query whether God is existent or not should be that He is 
existent, then it only establishes that He is Sat. Hence He is 
Chit which is past our human thought and speech. It is Achit 
that can be perceived by our human mind. * 

HOW GOD CAN BE KNOWN. 

6. 1 he known objects are Achit and perishable; and the 
unknown is called Sat; and what is the use, as God virtually is 
non-existent? The knower, will perceive Him with His Grace 
as nnanyn as the knower and the known are one and different and 
one-and-different. God will be known in the Form of Love 
(Arul) alone. 

Adhikarana IV. 

THE yogi’s CONCEPTION OF GOD NOT REAL. 

7. If God can be meditated, t.hen as an object of our senses, 
He becomes Asat. If you regard Him 'as not conceivable by our 

6. This relation is the Advaita. Till the soul, by God’s Grace becomes 
one with God, it is impossible to know Him. Iu that condition too, as 
the soul is one with God, it cannot know Him as other than itself, and 
the soul itself is Sivam. But if the Jivanmukta should for a time regain 
his individual consciousness, then he may feel his experience of God, just 
as a man waking from sleep speaks of his experience in sleep. In the 
next Adhikarana, even the knowledge of Yogi is said to be unreal. 

7. The various conceptions of the Yog’ are pronounced, to be merely 
fictitious and symbolic. Vide, notes on the 6th Sutra in my edition of 
Sivajhanabodham ior a fuller treatment of the subject. 









A. IV.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA VI. 


217 


organs, even >that it is of no use. If you contemplate Him as 
beyond contemplation, even then it gives you no benefit, as it is 
a mere fiction. If you contemplate Him as yourself, that is also a 
fiction. Giving up these fictitious ideas of God, the only way to 
know Him is by understanding with His Arul or Grace. 

WHY GOD CANNOT BE PERCEIVED. 

» 

S. As % God is not, different from the soul, as He is in the 
soul, and as He is the thinker of all the soul’s thoughts, as in Him 
there is no distinction of ‘ I ’ and ‘ mine ’, God cannot be perceived 
by the soul’s intelligence. 

fO’JL IS AND IS NOT COD. 

» « 

9. When •‘One only without a second ’ is postulated, the 
very postulating implies that the thing postulated is different. 
God is not different either, as He is inseparably associated with 

you, and transcends all discriminating intelligence. As He is ever 

✓ 

the uisidi of the soul, the soul can be said to Sivam. 


s' 


8 ’l lie first tlirt-o ✓atemrnts explain the AJv.iiia relationship. '1 he 
n* >t ar^i. rent ov, that in (i<*l there is no riistm lion, of JfiatUMi, 
j'.ur-i, a 1 J 7.1. i I c ip. averse "ives a '.union not to mistake tin; 
lor Oo»*. 

. ^ 


• • 


t 




50 TRA \ II. 


Atma Darsana. 

Adhikarana I & II. 

r 

SAT CANNOT KNOW. AND ASAT CANNOT i:XI T. 

<' (. 

i. If everything is Sat, then no conscious knowledge of any" 
thing can arise. If you say that Sat becomes the knower by 
union with Asat (its products—the organs), no ; Asat cannot 
appear in the presence of Sat, as no darkness can subsist in the 
presence of'light. If you say that Asat itself is «the knower, no, 
it cannot be, as it cannot subsist m the presence of the Sat, and as 
it is merely the instrument of knowledge of another. 


Adhikarana MI. 


T1IS KN’OWI'R or DOTH IS TIIH SOCL. 

<• 

2. The knower who knows both Sat and Asat is the Atma 
(soul). It is neither Sat nor Asat. It is eternal and Satasat. It 
is not produced from either (as cause and effect). Yet it is pro¬ 
duced from them as the fragrance conies out of the flower. 

IMPURITIES ATTACH TO SOU.L AND NOT TO GOD. 

3. Asat and Ajhana cannot attach themselves to the Sat and 
Jnanasvarupi and Jyoti (God ). All impunities become attclied to 
the soul. 1 he Vedas declare that the sbuls and Asat exist even 

6 t 

eternally with God; as in the instance of the sea and water 
and salt. 

2. As Satasat, it is united to both and in union with each, it identi¬ 
ties itself with each so thoroughly that it becomes each. This is a peculiar 
characteristic of the Soul, which Professor Drummond calls the law of 
assimilation. 

3. The analogy of the sea is particularly note-worthy. There is a 
xtoild of difference between the way this analogy is used by Vcdantis and 


t 


< 







a. in.] 


SFPAKSHA 


219- 


—SUTRA v:i. 


the way it is explained by Siddhamis. The l’urvapaksha view is thus 
set forth by a learned Svami. 

"There is but one Atman, One Self, eternally pure, unchangeable, 
tr ik.t 'ged, and all these various changes are but appearances in that One 
Self. Upon it, name and form have painted all these streams; it is the , 
form that made the wave different from the sea. Suppose the wave sub- 

9 

sides, will the form remain ? No; it will vanish ; the existence of the wave 
was entirely dependent upon the sea, but the existence of the sea was 
no: at all dependent upon the wave. The for in remains so long as the 
wave remains, but as soon as the wave leaves it, it vanishes, it cannot 
remain. This name and form is what it called Maya. It is this Maya 
that is making individuals, making one appear different from the other. 
Yet it has no existence. Maya cannot be said to exist. Form cannot 
exist because it depends upon another’s existence. It cannot be said to 
non-exist, seeing that it makes all this difference. According to the 
Advaita Philosophy, then, this Maya or Ig. orai.ee, name and form or as it 
has been called in Europe, ‘time, space and causality,' is out of this One 
Infinite existence, showing us the manifoldness of the Universe ; in sub¬ 
stance this universe is one.” 

So according to this Svami, the One Infinite existence is God, and its 

i 

Form is Maya and its name Ignorance! God is the Sea, and the multi- 
formed waves, Maya. The one is unchanged and unchangeable and yet 
this charges into Multiform waves which are but appearances. But it is on 
acco an of these chat ges and appearnces, dualistic knowledge, and ignor¬ 
ances, and sorrow and Samsara results, and the One Infinite Existence 
which is eter ally pure becomes finite and impure ! It is on account of these 
apfearaices, God becomes ’a man, a dog, a worm; and but for these 
appearances God would reynain a God. What converts indeed a Divinity 
into a brute cannot be umdtil and nonexistent, and of no moment as 
unreal and non-existent, and of no moment as denoted by the use of the 
word ‘but’ in the sentences quoted above. If these changes and appear- 
air«*s are vital, how t an the One Infinite Existence be called unc hanged 
and t.behan 'eaUe Voo ? And what constitutes the real difference lie tween 
changeable and ur.«hangeab'.e? The very tirst definitions which the 
beginner iri Piiysi al Sclen e meets with are al>out ‘stable’ and 'unstable 
e»]uilil>riums*, in natuie. 'flic ‘stable’ i that which remains unaffected 
and without change of form by the surrounding forces of nature. 1 Unsta- 
b>‘ L ea lly affected by tho_.c very same forces and their forms aic cacity 


• t 


t 



220 


Si v ajnana siddiiiyAr 


[Bk. III. 


changed. And as examples are given, ‘solids’, lor the ‘stable’, and 
‘liquids’ and ‘gases’ for the ‘unstable’. And what is here called the 
unchanged and unchangeable? It is the sea-water, which physicists 
expressly call unstable and unchangeable? And yet there is no congruity 
in the comparison, and no contradiction in terms! It is the sea-water that 
is called here unchangeable and unchanged, which is ever the sport of the 
elements and the sun and the moon, which changes with each gust of the 
wind and with each phase of the sun and the moon 1 • This ever-changing 
and tempest-tossed and ‘discoloured waters of the deep, are they to be 
compared with the unchangeable Infinite One ! The horrors of an howling 
tea who has not read of, if one has not actually witnessed? And that 
true poet of-nature makes his Miranda truly wish 
" Poor souls, they perished 1 
Had 1 been any God of power, < 

1 would have sunk the sea within the earth.” 

So we would have wished too there was no sea, and no God, if all 
our sufferings aed sorrows, poverty and misery, hatred and all the evils of 
our Samsaya-siigaya and ignorance, were but appearances of this One God ! 

And then again, on the analogy as explained above, what little of 
power and self-dependence ( Svatantvam ) is left to this One Infinite Exist- 

4 

ence? Is it self-luminous and self-dependent or is it the sport of every 
chance ? The sea that is played on by every wind and tide cannot be 
said to have any power and independence. Much less this God •who is 
played on by Maya and ignorance ? Our Svami eloquently asks, “suppose 
the wave subsides, will the form remain”? But suppose we ask “u’hen 
will the wave subside ’’ ? What answer will our Svami return to this 
question ? The waves will subside when the winds subsided. When 
will the winds subside ? Echo answers whep? When will Maya and 
Avidya leave us? When our Ivanna ceas£s. When will our Karma 
cease ? Echo answers when ? 

The inherent fallacy in the use of this analogy as above stated is in 
taking the large body of sea-water as representig God. Though popular 
use justifies us in taking the sea-space and everything contained in it as 
the sea, yet the true sense of the sea is the sea-space, containing water 
and everything else, the all container, the fohnless, changeless and 
unchanging and infinite space. In this view how beautiful is Saint 
Meykapdun’s simile as explained by Kavr.ndaiva VoUolZr and how full of 
meaning. 


4 


C 4 


I 



A. III.] 


>UPAK?HA 


22 I 


—?UTRA VII. 

HENCE GOD 15 SV AT ANTE A AND SOIL 1^ AS V AT ANTE A. 

4. The soul is called qualified Chit and Sat, as it knows 
when taught and is eternal. God is eternally Pure and Free 
and Intelligent and by His grace, He frees the souls of their 
impurities. 


(i 3i —sv €exx ~ grrszxn ixsox d5S3r.ro 

Guii^x ^j'bsc&tiszr — ^sni—aSt—tr 
'jjlL*CG zrih qusQuit uxu 2 xGunxti 
3-$p£t'*xesz. ” , 

V _ 

•The Sea is Sivam, Water is the Soul; Sait is Agava Mala, Avidya 
or Ignorance; Ka.Vna is the Wind ; the feelings of ‘ 1 ’ and ‘ Mine’ (Pasu 
Bodha or Pasu Jhana j are the waves. The First cause of all, in accord¬ 
ance with your Karma ever makes you revolve, as does a top, in various 
births in conjunction with yoijr external and internal senses.’ 

In this view, God’s Supreme Omnipresence and Immanence in nature 
is positively brought out and his Supreme Self-dependence and Svatan- 
tratvam is net destroyed ; while the soul is not left without freedom of 
will and without means and hopes of salvation. By effort and practice, 
he can put down his Pasubodha or Jhana. and become balanced in good 
and bad acts (Karma), submitting himself to the Will of the Lord, then 
he can reach the condition of Perfect Calm (Nirvana lit. non-flowing as 
water or airj. What for? To reflect the Glory and Light of the Supreme 
I^ord and to lose himself in that Glory and Light. Look at the incom¬ 
parable words of Saint Tirumular. 

" ti-evnjpp Cf QpxhsnJrr 

Q* "tevxjrji seo2& ^ery^n^Qxrr'. 

U P H fl-fCSll—Gtun'GcCT. ” 

"O Ye bools, who attempt to speak of the unspeakable, 

Can you reach the limits of the limitless Sea ? 

Aj tue wavele. b Tilled water of the deep, 

If you ico/h p'ace ol mind, 

'I hen &urel) will the 1-ord with bunded hair 
Apj^-a: to >ou hi fati tr G.u:». 



Adhikarana I. 


TIIK WAY J.N'ANA IS IMPARTED TO Till: fOt’L. , 

I- J List as the King's son taken and brought up among 
savages did not know himself to be different from the others till 
his true father came, and separating him from his wild associates, 
acknowledged him as his own, and had him respected even as 
himself. So also, does our Lord appearing as the Gracious Guru 
separate the sorrowing soul, which is caught amoeg the savages of 
the live senses and is unable to know his own greatness or that of 
this Friend from its sensory environments, and purifying it of its 
dross and transforming it even into His own Glory, places it under 
1 lis KU »werv Foot. 


HOW Dll-TISRENT SOl’LS ARE SHOWN GRACE. 

•2. 'I he souls are divided into three classes namely Vijfiina- 
kalar, Pralayakalar and Sakalar. They have respectively attached 
to them, Anava Mala , Anava Mala and Karina Mala, Anava 
Mala and Maya Mala. To the first two classes of souls, the 
Supreme with limitless grace shows Himself in His Niradhara 
condition and removes their mala by the two kinds of His Sakti- 
nipada (called Tivara and Tlvaratara)'. To the Sakalars, He 
shows Himself in the form of the Guru when their mala had 
become balanced, and removes their sins by ipeans of the four 
kinds of Zahtinipcida . 

2. Both Vijfianakalars and Pralayukalars have burnt up their Guua 
body, formed of Prakrit! matter, by the strength of their tapas and yoga. 
The Vijuanakalar had also burnt up Karma, and his Aijava or individual- 

V/ 

ity alone exists and which separates him from Stvain. And when this 
individuality also ceases, the supreme union is established. The Vijiiiina- 
kalars are of various grades called Pakkuvar (f ully matured) and Apakkuvar 
(not fully matured;. The latter divide themselves into Uttama, Madhyama 






*iatoryV T KIXDS OF dik-'ha. 

3. Different \v; e dsilj which the Acharya removes sin are 
Nay ana Diksha (by likarJ/e), Spars a Diksha (by the touch; 
Vdchaka Diksha (by Viruhing Mantras), Manasa Diksha (by 
identifying himself with o'Chela), Sash a Diksha (by imparting 
instruction), } 'oy'a Diksha iby entering the Che’.a’s soul by Vogt). * 
The forms of Hotri Diksha (sacrincial Dikslu) are also various , 
and they are’divided int <3 Juana and Kriya DikMias. jliana Diksha 
are mental acts; Kriya Diksha is given \vtf.h the aid of Homa and 
sacrifices. Kri)a Dikslu again subdivides itself into Bijam and 
Xirbijam. 

and Ad'iair.a and Vijuanakalakevalas. The Uthmas are the Apusadasivas 
and have material bodies formed of Sadakya tatva. The Mahhyamas are 
the Ashtavidyeivdras and dwell in ISvaro tatva. The Adhamas are lire 
Mahamantras, who dwell in budaka-vidya tatva. Yijuiinakala kevalas 
dwell below this tatva and above Atuddha Maya. The Airusadasivas and 
Yidyesvaras become lords of c.eation etc., also. 

The Pra]ayakalars dwell in the regions of the Kalati tatvas and own 
an eight-fold body ( Puri-ashtaka;, and are divided into three classes. 

TTie bakalars dwell m the regions below Mulaprakriti and comprise 
ali living beings, men, Asuras and Devas up to Vishnu and are of three 
classes. 

ba ! tinifSda is the "descending of the God’s Grace, His Chitsakti or 
divine light.” As this light enters more and more into the soul, by the 
rubbing off of th dirt and uneven edges (mala; which surround the pure 
crystal, (soul;, the more and moil* docs it shine, when finally it is indistin- 
guishably covered up and clothed by the divine light and becomes one 
with it. The four kinds ore Manila, Mandatara, 1 ivara, and '1 tvaratara. 
These four tire presided over respectively by Nivrittisakti, Pratislitasakti, 
Vidyasakti and bantisakti. bee Table of Tatvas appended herewith and 
the Tamil commentaries for more detailed information regarding the 
different classes of souls. 

3. Diksha rs from a root • Di * meaning to shine. The original use of 
the word is in connection with the soma sacrifice and meant the initiatory 
rite of con.<,cmtion. In the days of the Mahaoh.uat, the word had under¬ 
gone a < l ar,,e loi.x-jtvnt on lire change of religion.* p Jity it>elf. It 
meant the innutoiy nlc ol puiil.cuh'-u Lc'oic the Chela ij gi’.en his 






22 4 


bl VAJNANW S1DD 


[Bk. III. 


X1HBIJA DIKSHA DE 

4. Nirbija Diksha is wbat can 1 en to children, to the 

very young and very old people, and J. men and worldly men, 
and the sick. 1 he Acharya’s son anc ; novices (Samavi) are 

U fadesam. And we quote the following passage from Mahabharata 
(Anusasana Parvam 85 ) wherein Lord Krishna himself describes how he 
got his Diksha, from Upamanyit Maharislfi who recounts to him the 
glories of Him, who is the Lord of Sacrifices a d Vows and who gives him 
certain mantras and asks him to recite them continuously. “ Eight days, 

O Bharata, passed there like an hour, all of us thus being occupied with 
talk on Mahadeva. On the eighth day I nr.dcr:oc.<t the Diksha, according 
to due rites, at the hands of that Brahmana (Upamanyu). I received the 
statY from his hands. I underwent the prescribed shave. 1 took up a 
quantity of Kuca blades in my hand. I wore rag for iny vestments. 1 
rubbed my person with ghee. I encircled a cord of muiija grass round my 
loins. For one month 1 lived on fruits. The second month 1 subsisted 
upon water. The third, the fourth and the fifth months, I passed living 
upon air alone. 1 stood all the while supporting myself on one foot, and 
my arms also raised upwards and foregoing sleep the while.* 1 then 
beheld, O Bharata, in the firmament an effulgence, O son of Panda, 1 saw 
a cloud looking like a mass of blue bills, adorned with rows of cranes, 
embellished with many a grand rainbow, with flashes of lightning, and 
the thunder-fire looking like eyes set on it. Within that cloud was the 
puissant Mahadeva Himself of dazzling splendour, accompanied by His 
spouse Uma.” 

And it is our contention that in the Mahabharata days, the Agama 
rites had replaced or were replacing the 4 old sacrificial rites of the Vedas, 
and modern India differs very little from the days of this period but for , 
the rise of the new sects. And the Saivitcs all over India forming nearly 
ninety per cent of the population retain the c same traditions; and the 
initiatory rites of Saivas of to-day are also called Diksha, accompanied 
formally by Homa and Yajna, the various forms of which are discussed 
in the next stanzas. 

4. The division here is into what is called Samaya, Visesha and 
Nirvana Diksha. Those who are entitled to Samaya Diksha are those in 
the Dasa and Satputramarga. The Sahamargis are entitled to VLesha 
Diksha; and Jiianamargis to Nirvana Diksha. 

* Our readers will recall the famous pose of Arjuna in his tapas at 
Kaiutsa as lepiesented in “The Seven Pagoda.” 


t 

( * 4 

< 


4 


c 



A. IP 


SUPAX5HA — SUTRA Y11I. 


223 


purified by '.he initiatory re'igious rites (Famayacharal and are 
taught to perform the daily rites as far as possible. These belong' 
to the ciass of Niradhikara initiates. Those who go up higher arc 
Adhikara initiates. Nirvana Piksha is also of two kinds. Satyo 
Nirvana which leads one at once into Moksha and Asatyo 
Nirvana which leads him oniy after the parting with the body. 

Tim VARIOUS HORMS OH SS&ljA DiKsli'. 

. » ' 

5. To the highly advanced in learning and character is 
granted the excellent Sabija Piksha. \ hey are taught the Nifya, 
Xaimittika and Kfmiya duties, and become clothed with authority 
as S'lthakas, (Chelas) and Ac ha ry as. and attain freedom. 1 hey 
are also called Lokadharmhis, and Aivadharmims. The division 
into Samava, Yisesha an*I Nirvana and Abhisheka comprise the 
above. 

THE PURPOSE Oh DlXSJlA IS THE P’CKi r ’.C.Vi:CN OI THK AL'HVAS- 

0. I lara destroys the births of the three claves of people 
mentioned above, by removing their mala, by purifying their 
Adhvas by means of the Kriys. or Juana Piksha. '1 he pure 
Adhvas ^pmh-r>) are six jn number, naively, Mantra, Pada, Yarpa, 
bhuvana, Tatva, and Kalii. Of these the lower one is pervaded 
by the one above in the above mentioned order. '1 lie last, Mala is 

✓ v v 

pervaded by bakti, and bakti’s place is m Sivuni. 

THE AIJHVAS AS MAXI JESTED BY THE .\TVJ<nTt AND PK.’I ISMTIIA KAI \$. 

7. '1 he first five Adhvjis are evolved from the five Kaias. 

From the Nivritti Mala’ are evolved Mantras two, Pada twenty - 

5. S-.tya duties comist in bathing and ablutions, worship of God, 
and keeping tip of tl/; sacred hick etc. N.iinntiika consist in consecrating 
i.nage 0: ( jod, in periorming Dll.shit, and imparting Ur owledgc to disci- 
p’o. Kamy.i (onsjsts in Jafram and Foj.’i with intent to a quire powers, 
bathakas are only entitled to perform Niiya and K.imy.i ; t!v Acharya 
< an porhxrn a’l the three. I-okadhairniyi Pikdia is v...at < an be given to u 
GnJiailiia. bivadharnnni can only be gi anted to a N.u.-hnka Hm!irnt<*h.lri 
by a Nai*n;iKA lirahn a r.ari. I ; or further detail:,, the reader is re 1 erred 
:c the cOTirrcntary c/ jranaprakkCar. 

, lr( r.rl/il 01 «M t't ' 'bond P lfirnt from the cori’meni.iiien. 


• » 


# 


226 


51 va in Ana sidiujivAk 


[13k. in. 


eight, Varna one, Bliuvana ioS, Tatva one, namely earth, and its 
deity is Brahma. From Pro! is/it'id Kala are evolved Mantras 
two, Pada twenty-one, Varna twenty-four, Bhuvana fifty-six, 
Tatvas twenty-three; and its deity is Vishnu. 

THE ADliVAS AS MAN1 TESTED BY VIDVA AND SANT1 K.U.AS. 

8. Fram the Vidya Kala are evolved Mantras two, Pada 
twenty, Vania seven, Bliuvana twenty-seven, Tatvas s.even, and its 
deity is the imperishable Rudra. From Santi Kala are evolved 
Mantras two, Pada eleven, Varna three, Bhuvana eighteen, and 
Tatvas three, and its deity is Mahesvara. 

( THK ADHVAS AS M A^'lFli TED BV SANTVATiTA KALA. 

v 

9. From the Slntydfita Kala are evolved Mantras three, 

Pada one, Varna sixteen, Bhuvana fifteen, Tatx'as two, and its 
deity is Sadasiva. ' Hence the total number of Mantras is eleven, 
Pada eighty-one, Varna fifty-one, Bhuvana 224, 1 atva thirty-six, 
and Kala five. f 

now the nirrr.KUNT kinds ok karma are destroyed 

15V THE Dl\ INK GCKC. 

10. 'Fhc Karma performed by the souls by mind, speech and 
body are destroyed by these being made to eat the fruits through 
their cause, the six Adhvas. After the eating thereof, the Anava 
Mala is matured and the souls reach a stage of sufficient develop¬ 
ment when God appears as the Guru, and destroys the Akamya 
Karma, so that it may not lead to futpre births, and also the 
Anava mala. The Prarabdha Karma is destroyed by the purific¬ 
ation of the Adlwas, and by experience in the body. 


10. So that it follows that both Sancliita and Prarabdha Karma can 
only be destroyed by man’s own individual efforls by purifying his facult¬ 
ies (Adhvas) and by tasting the fruits of both good and evil. It is then 
the jnana;harva appears and perfects him with his bare touch, by sun¬ 
dering the Karma root, and Mala loot. Hence the importance of the 
pmiiiviUion ui the .iV.’ ias. 


4 


I t 


( 







A. II. 


St’P.VrMIA—SUTRA VUI. 


22J 


Adhikarana II. 


THE VARIOUS STACK- IN' ON.'.’s RELIGIOUS EVOLUTION. 

M. If one leaving the alien religions, enters the orthodox fold 
and plods through the paths of Smritis and various Asramas and 
their duties, practices rare Tapas, and learns rare Vidyas, and’ 
masters the Vedas and understands the excellent Purlin as, and 
reaching a blear knowledge of the truths of the Vedas (Vedanta) 
steps beyond, he will then reach the heights of the Saiva 
Siddhanla. And after practising Charya, Kriya, and Yoga, he 
will reach the foot of Siva by means of Jnana. 

THE DIFFERENT ENDS OF AU'FERENT PEOPLE. ’ 

12. People be'ieve that the pleasures derived in the company 
of young arid beautiful damsels is the highest Mtikti. Others 
believe a residence in the different heavens as the highest Mukti; 


11. Every one must at or.e time or other either in the present life or 
in the past pass and have passed through these various phases of thought 
and action. At all times and in all ages, and in all countries, there have 
been people who have hail no thought except for themselves and their 
p'ea-ures, who have denied any other existence but this, who have denied 
the existence of any soul or God, who have cared more for the letter of 
the law and the forms of religion than for the spbit, who have lost their 
head and heart in endless learning and vain disputations, and who mistake 
symbols for truth. The path of reaching truth is indeed difficult but as 
men’s capacities and developments are varied they cannot but remain in 
these conditions till their mind is opened out and liberated. And tho 

really tiue and universal religion must recognise the necessity fer all 

» 

t*c*>e stages and beliefs and provide for them. The paths of Charya, 
Kriya, Yoga, etc., open out only after' reaching a truly developed religious 
an I • ptritual sentiment, and then most religious emotion i:; ready distinct 
in kind from mere intel.e'lion or perception of certain bate truths, Nitya* 
tntya-vivekam etc , ami hen e the latter shotted not be confounded with 
the above, and itt p^’acc i. very low in the s ale of one’s spiritual 
dcve.op'i 'M.L 

12. Ica h belief and a lion i- on'c j 1 ‘nl on the particular ends in life, 
wht h ci b oi? gradually p!a.e.» before l^imcelf; and each one thinks his 




biVAjXANA ?inninvAR 


[Bk. 111. 


22S 

others postulate the annihilation of the five Skandas as the end ; 
and others again, the becoming possessed of the eight attributes ; 
others postulate a condition analogous to stone ; and others, 
Viveka, (knowledge of oneself as God); and others say that the 
becoming of the true form of God is the end. What we postulate 
• is that the reaching of the Foot of God is the true Mukti. 

i 

THE DEFINITION’ OF A UNIVERSAL RELIGION’. 

' <• 

I 3. <$&**;>**£* 

3 tt/Gt—iTiir G'njSi.' Cjn lo < a > n. errucvsytAlcjpp.'sb 


ideal is the best and would not be convinced that it is not the best. As 
you stay in g mango grove, you f vvill find different persons entering it with 
certain definite objects. Some come in to carry away the dropped fuel, 
and twigs and dead leaves. Others come in for the bunp.hes of the leaves, 
others came in to gather the fallen young raw fruit eu 3, and others again 
for the ‘fully grown unripe fruits, -and others go in for the fruits. Some 
have greater relish for the unripe fruits than for the ripe fruits: (especi¬ 
ally the taste gets peculiarly developed among pregnant women who will 
not be satisfied by the offer of the most tasty fruits ); and some have a 
liking for fruits with a dash of sourness in it. And when people eat fruits, 
some think it sweet to bite and eat the fruit whole. Some are particular 
how they clean it; and cut it and some would press the juice carefully 
and then alone taste it. There is no accounting for tastes as we say; and 
each derives some pleasure and profit no doubt and yet any honest thinker 
cannot fail to see that there are various degrees of pleasure and profit, 
differing in quality and quantity. 

The eight attributes of Jainism is Ananta-jfianam, 

Ananta-darSar.am, Ananta-vuyara, Ananta-Sukfiam, Nir-namam, JNir-got- 
ram, Nir-ayusbyam, Sakala-samyata-bhavaili. In Kura), chap. 1, v. 9, 
where the word at&r(gc&ppa&r occurs, Parimelalagar, that prince among 
commentators, interprets the word according to the Saivagamas rejecting 
other interpretations : •■jjpp self-dependent, ^nuo/c-dcPar 

6u the immaculate in body, 'gfrajpesus self-luminous, 

QpppQP&m rrpev all-kno;ving, tgt.u.stiuir&Qai uirr i <s>totf!esr cter- 

t 

nally free, GujQ^szi— corn all-gracious, GujjiiiStiAi&ruQpzxt—eau) limitless 
bliss. It requires indeed very little trouble to refute the fallacious belief 
that Saint Tiruva])uvar was. a Jain or a Buddhist,. 




A. If.] 


supaksha 


229 


—SUTRA VIII. 


U. ’,7y- _Z U JL TcsT* __x Sj*-U ~ r »£7 • < 'l iF cxF' cC P v>Y 

^ <£7 i.- .7 ^5 ^ cr-jl sv Lv£l joS srr p 

£ S c7> oL»* ^5) 2.*0 -L/SV oV ? (2sO~l — 75 £F&T5? 

f .T-iSt JL~<2 f'* T? tJMJM <f? PJhUJJ>^..'F 7 ?JT^TJ\ 

^ r * Vw' * ^ 

pf J5 cJt ZJj 3V» «J\23tiV liJ c\ cV !T JO LC fP L/G’x.C Vt £j 

1ZJ £. c£> .S'lX w> cL Gg _T S5Z* <*> cD i7 ixF t-2- 'i> ^ L£ i—*£, 

13. Religions and postulates and text books are various, 
and conilict’ one with the other. It is asked which is the true 
religion, which the true postulate, and whfch the true book. That 
is t he true Religion, Postulate and Book , which not conflicting 
wit/: this or that, comprises reasonably everything within its own 
folds . Hence all these are comprised* by the Vedas and Saivaga- 
mas. And the-.e two latter are imbedded under the sacred Foot 
of 1 Iara. ‘ 

THE IMPORTANCE OK VEDAS AND AG AM AS. 

la. As they expound all the truths, the Vedas and .Agamas 
are caikd “ Mudal Nul,” “ Revealed Books.” Their immeasurable 
meanings are given out duly by those who possess the Grace of 
God. Others try to interpret them according to their own settle 


13. No one c.nn cavil at the definition herein given, though they 

y* 

may not agree with the position that Saiva Siddhanta is the supreme 
religion. And we confess to not having received a better defiinition. 
Idsowhere we have written on the historical and universal aspects of 
baivaism; acd ue need or.ly ask to-day why books like SivajiUnabodham 

and 1 ayuiTunavar’s poems are Accepted by all the different schools as 

* 

expressing t..cir own truths. A distinguished Madhva friend of mine 
to'd me after he read through bivajiianabodhain that he was mistaken 111 

1 / 

suppo ing that 1 wa« an Advaiti. A learned and zealous biivaislujava 
schoar l..i wintcn a key or ini ros- 0[>c to the twelve iiolcas of the same 
Loo«. A * 1 a 1 1 followers ot Sartkaia treat i: only as one of their own 
Loo 


r x. V 



tl 

i- d'- 

l.ncd as 

]>MW \r\ 

j d of 

ail 

rn 

y; ♦ -» 

1 

non . 

t* W* «/U l 

. ( « 1 

n tf 

e»i 

( oi 

•u ur s, 

deta»> 

1 . n * 1 

» «* u 

/" 

tl GU 

•,h h./lev. 


■ 

** .« 
lit .4 

VI* 




tH* Books rcv'-a’ed by the bunreme 
•lal Pit!' ns Books agreeing with 
but vatying it necevaiy in otiic* 
ing Loth ttie above, y»*t may conuun 


I 


I 


I 



SIVAJNANA >11)01 II Y*\R 


m. in. 


230 

and found various schools. Smnlis and Puranas and Kaja Sastras 
etc., form “ Val.i Nul” (au^js/rso), “Guidebooks”. The Vedanta 
and Upahgas form “ Sarbn Nfil” “aid books” Nothing- 

can compare however with the Vedas and Agamas. We cannot 
find anything to say to those who would assert otherwise. 

WHAT ARE PURVAP AKS11A AND SIDDHANTA WORKS? 

^ v" ( 

15. The only real books are the Vedas and Saivagamas. All 
other books are derived from these. These two books were eter¬ 
nally revealed by the Perfect God. Of them, the Vedas are general, 
and given out for all; the Agamas are special and revealed for the 
benefit of the blessed, and they contain the essential truths of the 
Vedas and Vedanta. Hence all other books are Purvapaksha 
books and the Sivagamas alone are Siddhanta Works? 

THE COAI. OF SIDDHANTA. 

16. In the Siddhanta, the Supreme Siva has graciously 
revealed that He will, even in one birth, make His devotees Jivan- 
muktas, after removing their Mala, by bathing them in the Ocean 
of Juana and making them drink of Bliss, and freeing them of all 
future births, will place them under His Feet of Final Mukti. Yet 
how mad is the world in not believing these Holy words and 
falling into sin and perdition by saying all soils of things. 

THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SUPREME GOD. 

17. He is the Supreme Lord, in whom all Intelligence, all 
Power, and all Beneficence is inherent. His Omniscience is mani¬ 
fest by His Revealed Works, the Vedas,and Agamas. His Omni- , 
potence is manifest by His granting the deserts of those who follow 
and don’t follow His commands. As He removes their Karma by 

making them eat their twin fruits, He is benbficent. We behold 

✓ t 

all these Glories in Our Lord Siva. 

THE FOUR MAKGAS OF REACHING COD. 

iS. T he four ways of reaching God are Sawnarga, Saha- 
marga, Salputrauiarga and Dasamarga . T'he -e four mfirgas are 

17. The very symbols of God h>iva show forth His glorious Power, 
as the author of creation, development and Regeneration, Tiiolkavam, 
and Bliss. 



I 


C • 





A. II.] 


SLTAKSI1A—SUTRA VIII. 


23 I 


also called Juana and Yoga, Kxiya and Charya-padas. The)' will 
respectively lead one to Sdyujya, Sdrupya, Samipya and SCtloka 
Mukti. The first kind of Mukti attained by lfiftna-marga is the 
final Bliss, \Para-mukti) the rest are called Pada-mukti. 

LJ.lSAM AkOA LXPLAINT.O. 

19. \Ya=hir.g and cleaning God’s Temples, culling flowers 
and making various garjands for the adornment of God, founding 
flower-gardens, and lighting temples, and praising God, and obey¬ 
ing the commands of God’s devotees, after bowing and humbly 
receiving their orders, all these are the duties of the Dasamarga, 

and those who work in this path will surely reach Sivaloka. 

» * 

SATPVTR AM AR GA LXPLA1XLG. 

?o. Taking, the fresh and fragrant flowers, Pupa and D>pa, 
Tiruman jana. and food, a id purifying in all the five different ways, 
and establishing God s symbol ( and invoking God’s 

Presence the-ein as A’.! Intelligence and Light, and worshipping 
the same in all love, and praying to God and praising Him, and 
performing also Agnihotra etc., all these comprise ihe duties of 
Krivclmarga. '1 hey who, observe the^e duties daily will reach 
God’s Presence. 

SA11AMAkCA LX 1 'LA 1NLD. 

21. In Sahamarga, one ha-, to control his senses, stop his 
breath-., and fix his mind, and explore the secrets of the six 
Atihara* and know their Q-ods, and passing beyond into the 

21 . The eight forms of Yoga are Yan;a, Niyama, .'Uam, Prjnayai:;a, 

I rut a'era, Pl-uraya, Din t> a, Sa-ttudhi. Of these, the last five arc only 

wU 1 o:ill in the text, ami thc’hist three are assnmed. 

, » 

Ya • t cons'Lli in Ahnusa, St-tj a i:, lefraimng from theft, celibacy or 
il-i.*tily, mer-lfiilnetj, do\oid of deceit!illness, contentedness, coinage, 
ta^i .• ittle fexxi, and purity. 

.V a ia con ists in jvnforn ing 7u/iit, and Jafan, and I’nitum, believ¬ 
ing in Ood, and wort flipping Hun, and reading and meditating on the 
isa -tia , being •iful, learful of evil, and intelligent. 

’ll'- i at arc .S 'ft *./--/■ <7, Co : h' noia, I'/trloi-naVil, l',rjui"a, 
i j' I l‘ti i •> P 4*t •, ,i ,u .'./aw ii a a. 


I 


I 


* 


t 


alVA.IN.W \ SinPJllYAR 


[Bk\ HI. 


2 >2 

regions of the bright Chandramapdala, one has to drink deep of 
the An;vita filling his eyery pore, and dwell fixedly on -the 
Supreme lights. If one performs this Yoga of eight kinds, his 
sins will fall off and he will get the form of God I iimself. 

SANMAKGA RNFLAINRD. 

22. In Sanmarga, one studies all the various arts and sciences 
and Vedas and Puranas and the different religions, and after rating 
all other knowledge as low, the holds oil to the truth of Tri- 
pa dart ha and finding the Path of reaching God Siva, and realising 
the non-distinction of J hat uni, JTiana and Jucya , lie becomes one 
with God. Such great men reach Sivam. 

DIFFERENCE OF* JNANA AND KARMAMAKG.VS. 

23. Reding Jnana Sastras, and teaching an$l explaining them 
to others, learning them from others, and pondering over their 
purport, these constitute Jnana worship or Yajiia. and will lead 
one to the Feet of the Lord. Pure Karma-yajna, Tapas-yajfia, 
Japa-yajna, and Dhyana-yajna are each one superior to the one 
below, and will only induce Bhoga. Hence Jnana worship is 
alone pursued by all those who know th$ Mokshamarga. 

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THOSE WHO ENTER SAMADI11 
AND THOSE WHO DO NOT, 

24. Listening to words of wisdom, medita’ing on them, 
clearly perceiving the truth, and Sam ad hi arc the four forms of 
Jnana. Those who attain to Samadhi at once attain Moksha. 
1 hose who do not come up to this condition become Lords of the 
1 leavenly worlds and enjoy great bliss, and by the grace of God, 
are reborn in good families, and by the grace of Juanacharya attain 
to bamadhi, and the Feet of the Lord. 

DIFFERENCE OF VEDIC AND AGAMAMARC. AS. 

25. Those who perform deeds of charity, Karma-yajnas, 
Pilgrimages to Holy-waters, observe Asrama duties, and perform 
Tapas, Santi-vratas, and Karma-yoga will attain to the Highest 
worlds and will be reborn in no time. Those who perform Jnana- 
y< ga and Knya and Charya will attain to Pada Mukth and at the 


A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA Mil. 


2 * * 

end of time, if they do not yet deserve God’s grace, they will be 
reborn and will attain to Siva by Jhanamarga. If they deserve 
God's grace, they will at once attain God’s Feet. 

THE MERIT OF GIFTS TO S1VAJNANTS. 

26. Even if very slight gifts are made to Sivajfianis, these 

will increise like the earth into mountains, and the donors will be 

> 

prevented from falling; into the ocean of births, and will enjoy 
supreme happiness in the higher worlds, and losing their sin, they 
will get one more holy birth, and will even without going through 
Charya, Kriya, and Yoga attain supreme knowledge and the Lotus 
Feet of the Lord. 

SUPREME MOKSHA IS ALONF. ATTAINABLE BV JNANA 

27. The Vedas, Agamas and Puranas proclaim that by 
Juana alone is attainable Moksha, and yet what can we say to 
tho>e fools who assert otherwise. By Ajnana (Karma) is begotten 
I'handam, (attachment). By'true Juana is attained freedom. As 
the darkness Hies away before light, so Ajiiana vanishes, and with 
it Bhandam. and freedom is attained. By Jnana, we do not mean 
the Jnana proclaimed by all kinds of low dogmatists but the 
Knowledge and Love of the One True God. 

27. The language of this stati/a is plain. The Highest bliss is alone 
attainable by the attainment of the Highest Jnana. The other Margas, 
Charya, Kriya and Yoga are only steps leading up to Juana. The first 
two Margas are usually tailed ,‘Bhaktimiirgas by other schools but the 
word Bhakti is so '.■ague in Its acceptation that it is not taken here to mean 
a particular Marga. TV, word is as loosely applied as the word jT.dna, 
and v.hat is real Bhakti abd what is real Juana has to be determined. 
Hu; as a matter of fact, Bhakti or love of God in any sense is essential in 
all the four Margas we have indicated above. It is love that guides the 
Charya van, KriyavAn and Yogi and Jnfini. Without this essential love, 
al! their acts would only be bare hypocricy. And Jnana or knowledge 
too, is implied in our bhavanas in the lower MArgas. But this knowledge 
n rr.orc an-! more symbol.c in the Jov.er stages, and as we ascend in 
spiritual po «cr and genuine love, it will Ik? ome n.oru and moie real. 
'1 he greatest fal’a y underlies in contra-ting Bh.ul.li and Jnana. ’J heic is 
3 ° 





SlVAjNAXA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. IIL 


2 ; * 


no contrast at all but each one involves and implies the other. In social 
relations whether as master and sen-ant, parents and children, friends, 
lovers and the loved, the relation will be unintelligible and a sham, if 
mutual knowledge and love does not exist. And the more one knows the 
other, his or her goodness and love, the more he comes to love the other. 

• Love is in fact the fruition of knowledge. And the Highest Juana is 
when we do know and recognise, how loving God is, how great His 
Love is, passing the love of master and parent rnd friend and lover,* yea 
passing the love of one-self,* how 

“Though man sits still and takes his ease 
God is at work on man ; 

So means, no moment unemployed 
To Bless him, if he 'can.” — Young. 
or as Saint Tayumanavar puts it, 

** £ &37 33737 Q^ST ^ ^S77S£ £77 H^LC £77 Sr'SuQuQ^ 

a SsSSTUcT&l QSUSI7Z S3X&. »7cV Q &.Q V/337 
S U£ £77 ZQZ £, 3737 -£ 3 L — 3\7 - iS Q3 5 G £.77337 ^jZ . 

‘The witness who guards me with his loving grace, 

The One, the Ocean of Xirguna who, ever)' wink of time, is 
engaged in doing nothing but good to me.’ 

The fact is we can know only and truly when we can fully realise 
God’s inmost nature, that God is Sivam, “God is Love.” 

(75 irn rj 
'g.S&Qu ? oL'JLZ 'vilit i 

The ignorant think God and Love are .different, 

None know that God and Love are the same, 

When they know God and Love are the same 
Then will they enter God as Love. 

As it is, it is the proud boast of baiva Siddhanta that It is a universal 

* Saint Manikkavachakar frequently addresses God as sweeter than 
bis own mother. And what is more Saint Appar says, 

“ c srsrr r, v Qs-sssS 33? .l .7 f 3 A tev 

l 

CT r>S SrT O zs 5 GZ? J- 17 ^ cl. cXy cJf ST. 

•There is nobody who is mare loving than myself 
Yet th^rc L one moie loving than inybe.iV 


1 

c * 


c 







A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA — SUTRA VIII. 


2 35 

THE MANIFESTATION OF THE GURU. 

2S. r XJ 3 .1 c fi X a SO 6\> SCT [— x G G 

^t_r,Gr>j$i_G G-a^Qfiassr^axiuGuirsu 
<£y. T U 'cXj LC »T^f !7SjT &}\ fi; G(XJSZ fi) 

^fM.q?lTo 3T LUIS^lUTzS p Qr*>6BrryiQg[TZ3rp£ 

gF.fijj^TcSssih Gfi.nsx pui pa sp/iQ pirssrjp.x> * 

* G~sso e^sosG-xsosva.i /•ar'gjcjrC’ar Qfinssrjpib 

• G ~ ? 2j •5?) U lj ufixi^p/XlT lU'jStT-SSjlSiJrT QtUISI(3jlh 

tszxps^eso Qxiscsor.Qp £ Qfiassrptib. 

2S. Just as the crystal emits fire when brought before the 
sun, so when the Divine Guru, out of the fulness of His Grace, 
appears before one, there will arise .^Sivajuana in him. 1 hen will 
he see Sivam, and his own real self and the whole world in him¬ 
self. 1 hen w T il)>he perceive God as the smallest of the small and 
the greatest of the great, and the Soul of all souls. 

THE RESULT OF THE GURU’S MANIFESTATION. 

29. When they are ’sufficiently developed and receive the 
grace of God, ( Sattinipada) and wisdom, they are graciously taught 

religion and philosophy at once, comprising all schools of philosophy anil 
all kinds of Bhakti and Juanamfirgas and yet differing from them all. 
“ All and not all,” (ctG.sk.ix.iLi «^'5vaa,'L caL) is at once a characteristic of 
the Divine Ideal of the Siddhintis as of their Religion. 

“ yfjrgl' 7 'Jidr/i G UJlXSTp)(xt'70 Jj,70rir2cj7 IL'/ixiS pt-'‘lQ : ” 

* Thou art not aught in the universe. Xor is there aught save Thou. 

Who can know Thee T 

28 . Cf. C11JUUL-Svi4 fi'x gr /JcT 7 677 UlLi—IlQu pG pfZT 

“ GupptS G zG x usx-xu, 'ZssrGug kfi xnzuLujix&azjGi—sir 
<s ’ciziL— -/ i t & Js <£z' XjXiLiuG lS psni JLjixi riaQisir 
u Stt7 &g.ix <idaGi—ca 4 

*.l rj Isa Vr-biur i i*C"/7 5/,T 
fi XCS.X l.C. i ff<- fi fi SO tSZX'G ur 2 3 

Iiur ting the veil of Maya, I gained the sight of Pure Juana, 
Gaining, Oh Truth ! 1 saw myself and saw others 
1 saw everything in that condition 

I»! they v.ho di 1 not have sight of '1 hee are men v.ho did not 
know thcn.-c \ e . 



236 


SlVAlNANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


by the Guru ; and by practice of such teaching, they will attain to 
the condition of Perfect Samadhi. Then will they become Jtvan- 
muktas in this world. They will have neither likes nor dislikes. 
They will treat a potsherd and gold at the same value. They will 
so unite with God that they will never leave God, and God will 
never leave them ; and dwelling in Him, they will perceive only 
God in everything. •> 

THE PROCESS OF UNION WITH* GOD. 

30. ^ifl\unss>j 3 ujflav&flfl uj fla ms# sirQ<*i 

ajfls^fifesr evfl<Lirr 2 fi ujfl&g} 

(gfliunCfi qsjfl fi fik fi& AS6aarsja,QssrnSiD 

<■*_( euirt—zQfi igsmp&jz}(j^usauujnSlfl 
iSfljjnfi Raisbr^Ccesr lS fl&gtQfiirssr flu 

iSgu^r,# QupQu>6>)6un,i fir <<ss)'u pQ finstrfl • 

Q'i fltujQsv uSa»suQujso 6 vn u> 6 v'bvaro© 

t§ e&Q just & ib Qpnsn fl&svBsr tB on fid rjfSnQ’it. 

30. Removing your ignorance bom of understanding (with 
the bodily senses), and perceiving, without perception (by the 
lower manas), by the Grace of God, the Supreme Intelligence in 
his higher self, and seeing Him without seeing, and without the con¬ 
junction of the Antahkaranas and Avasfhus, if you melt yourself 
in God, then will the Supreme Siva, who is inseparable from 
everything, appear to you separately, and as one and different 
from all the world and as Niradhara. 

30. This is the famous stanza which both Saint Tayumanavar and 
the author of Siva-bhoga-saram had made the 'subject of Supreme Praise. 
“ unisS/fli&jn’Qf>viv6vn‘b un flsSQfififi fifi e v 
eFfifl fi find Qud&stGsrujL$5 )uj& jnQ^.-BnQsrresTtGpQ'srrn .” 

The whole world’s knowledge, in half a stanza 

He revealed, Oh when shall 1 reach his golden feet. 

— St. Taytmar.avar. 

“ utrn sSBfifi j#iQ 6 vw(\'(ru> uddfifi fliu^fifloSQ^ 
eflreS^fi fiuunfl Qutrjgnh." — Siva-lhoga-sHram. 

God’s Niradhara transcendency is thus defined ( in Tintkkalirruppajivar 
(flgiibiB/i jDthuu^ujtrny ( 

“ ^ i'iuut—nfiGud^svrtii uj2&nfi fled ?uj 
fidaSfi fit Q ( si,c3r2Vg> , S.i> fir ddir7fi — 




A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA — SUTRA VIII. 


237 

THE NATURE OF TOE UNION. 

31. Good Karma will lift one into higher births and worlds ; 
bad Karma into lower ones. As such, sundering both, by the 
wisdom obtained by the virtue of worshipping the Sacred Being, 
and without entering into future birth in this world and lower and 
higher worlds, the person, who becomes a Jivanmukta in this . 
woi*ld. does not care where the sun shines, and feels no want, and 
leaving his bddy, enters the Fulness of Supreme God, and becomes 
one with that Fulness and all in all. 

TOE NATURE OF JJVANMUKTAS. 

32. They who attain to Jnana-samadhi, have neither likes 
nor dislikes ; they desire nothing ; they’care not for social etiquette, 
and Tapas and A^rama rules, and Dhana. They have no impurity 
in their hearts. 1 'hey care not for religious marks. They do not 
follow the lead of their bodily and mental senses. They have no 
bad qualities and no creed and no caste. They become like chil¬ 
dren and mad men and possessed persons, and they may delight in 
singing and dancing also. 

THE SAME. 

» 

33. They require not the aids of place, time and postures. 
They perform actions without any thought of the results ; their 
minds do not move like a swing; they never leave the Feet of 
Lord, in all their daily actions, in walking and sitting, in sleeping 
or waking, in eating or starving, in purity or impurity, in wealth or 
poverty, in pain or pleasure, in enjoyment or separation, in like or 
dislike, though these actions may or may not be performed like 
any other person. J , 

£QuitQi&Tt—Genr Gun^ungju 

Qpac.* %gc#n3u.ah." 

“ Ur.crcatc, immanent in everything and yet remaining separate from 
everything, and yet becoming one with that which becomes one with it, 
this is the Nirodhara." 

31. Jfuinapraka^ar deals fully in his commentary on the different 
views regarding the nature of the union in Moksha postulated by various 
schools. 


< 


% 






238 


blVAjXAXA SIDDIIIVAR 


[Bk. III. 


A PARTICULAR UPAS ANA TO REACH FAMADHt. 

34. If you have not yet reached this condition, then perceive 
the truth of everything being in God and God being in everything, 
and control your internal senses, and practise what your Jfiara- 
guru has graciously taught you and reach God who is immanent 

, in yourself. Reaching Him, your human faculties will all be con¬ 
verted into Divine faculties. Try to realize the transcendent Being 
even in your waking condition. Then also your Sivanbhuti will 
become your Svanubhyti. 

THE GREATNESS OF THE jIVANMUKTAS. 

35. Those who can realize the Supreme Being even in their 
waking condition, they are the saints who have attained to Sarva 
Nivritti, or absolute renunciation. And how are we to describe 
their greatness? They even in this life have Treed themselves 
from all bonds, -and obtaining Sivam, have become God them¬ 
selves. Even if they rule and enjoy as crowned kings they will 
have no attachment to this world. r Jf one does not reach this 
Samadhi, even if they get rid of all external bonds, he will enter 
birth and his mala will not be destroyed. 


Adhikarana III. 


IS THERE ANUBIIUTI IN MOKSHA? 

3C. If you say that nothing can be perceived when we lose 
our senses, no; nothing can be perceived by those who have not 
seen the True. The immature virgin cannot understand what love 
is. When two lovers unite in joyfuj embrace, their pleasure 
cannot be expressed in words. They alone can know. Those 

34. This is the famous Dhahara Upasana set forth in most Upani- 
shats. See p. 208, vol. II, of Siddhanta Dipika. 

36. As nature avoids vacuum, so the soul cannot exist unless it be 
filled in by the world or God. So to get freed fiom the world, the only 
means is to get into the eternal Bliss of God. If not so filled, the soul will 
again revert back and fall into the world. Such are the logical results 
which flow from the views of Buddhists and Mayavadis, and honest 






A. III.] 


SUPAKSHA — SUTRA VIII. 


239 


without the aid of God’s grace cannot know themselves. If any 
such say they have perceived God with their ordinary senses, it is 
all a delusion. If they are possessed of God's Grace, they can 
perceive themselves and God without perception. If they dont, 
their births will not cease, and the Anava cannot be sundered. 

people like Mrs. Besant do not shrink from stating plainly such a conse¬ 
quence. To them, the concluding words of every Upanishat "There is 
no return, there is no return," are mere comforting words. There is no 
end to births, and “ there is an ever-recurring necessity of Samsara." 
But the true Advaita-Siddhantis’ position is different. He prefers to 
believe that the words of the Upanisht are true and not empty words. He 
strengthens his position both by logic and experience. St. XinwalJuvar 
not content with stating the position here taken by Sr. Arul Nandi once 
states it twice. ^ 

'‘upjrsup ppg&x up/Stser iuuupir:p 
up2. J-5 up2.r cSi—p 5.” 

Desire the desire of Hint who is desireless, 

Desire His Desire, so that desires may leave you. 

h 5^7 <*." rri /2 ti—Q&.n ijSszr wppifi £ 

••nrtpai <? <T.f pQ Cr/ru." 

Knowing your true support, you leave your (earthly) support, then 
will that ill that binds you leave you alone, fully destroyed. 

Cf. The Vcdic Texts: 

" By Meditating, the Muni goes to the source of all beings, the wit¬ 
ness of all, beyond all darkness *’ (Kaivalya Upanishat). 

“ By churning with Jhana alone docs the wise man burn up the bond" 
(I’ala; (ibid;. 

" Knowing the Deva,.the shining one, he is released from all bonds.” 
(Ikcasj (Sveta. Up. i-8.) 

"Knowing Him, It>a, they become immortal." Ibid. iii. 7. 

" When men should roll up the ether like a hide, then only, without 
first knowing Siva, there could be an end of pain. (Svct. Up. vi. 20). 

"*Ihe knower of Brahman rea< hes the Supreme." (Tail. Up. 11. li. 1). 

"Knowing Siva, he passes into |>cacc for ever." (bvet. Up. iv. 14). 

"A man who h;tj ieft all grief Itchind, • ees the Majesty of the Lord 
the Pa-* 1 n’,e« , by the (ii.tcc of the ( reatoi." (Ibid, m 20). 

l or f urt‘ cr ttcatment of the jiibjcei see the " Note on Nitvaijn." 





240 


SivajnAna siddhiyar 


[Bk. III. 


Adhikarana IV. 


ONE MEANS OF GETTING FKEED t THERE IS NO RETURN FOR THE FREED. 

37. Knowing the nature of the soul to be like the mirror 
reflecting various colours, and that it reflects in itself all the 
. actions of the internal and external senses, and knowing that such 
reflections of the senses are no part of himself, and distinguishing 
his own real beautiful self by the Grace of God from the false 
colours of the senses, <the seer of such truth will unite with the 
Lord and will never after leave Him, like the rushing waters of the 
river breaking its banks and reaching the ocean, become one with 
it and can never more retun). 

37. The author merely echoes the cone luding words of the Upanishats 
when he says that there is no return for the freed soul/ a subject discuss¬ 
ed by Badariiyana in his concluding sutras. Note the use which our 
Saint has made of the analogy of the Rivers and the Ocean, and the 
absurd use of it made by Prof. Duessen. (Vide pp. 85 to 87, vol. Ill, S D.) 

The rough and discoloured diamond or crystal or muddy and dis¬ 
coloured water stands for the soul; and the roughness and discoloration 
and rust stand for the malas eternally attached to them. But it is possible 
to get freed from this dirt and discoloration. By polishing and rubbing 
and filtering (process of births and deaths) the rough diamond can be 
made smooth and clear, and the muddy water can be made crystalline. 
What is the result ? The light that was not seen before is seen now and 
enjoyed and it is for this light alone that we prize the diamond, so much 
so that we call them ‘Brilliants.’ But is this light and brilliance its own? 
Where was it when it was covered 'by dust. Where is it when the 
brightest diamond is kept in darkness ? The fact is, the light is not its 
own, it comes from another source, it enters it and permeates it and covers 
it so fully that the crystal is indistinguishable from it. When the diamond 
is covered by dirt etc., the dirt etc. prevented the Kght from entering it. 
When it was in darkness, no light was in union. So in bandha, our maya 
and mala prevent us from seeing the Light; the Light will enter us more 
and more, the more and more we get freed from this dirt; till at last the 
Jlvanmukta becomes all Light and all God. The fatal fallacy committed 
by Mayavadis is in taking the reflected Light as Jiva or Jivatma. It is not 
Jiva. The Jiva is the crystal or water. They say the reflection or light 
is God and this is quite correct (" pemuaf)i SI ggnlujUlpp ” 

—Appar). The identifying of Jiva with God will be like identifying 


< 


€ 




A, IV.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA VIII. 


241 


THE NATURE OF GOD*S OMNIPRESENCE. 

3 S. If God is everywhere, (and everything), then there is no 
necessity for our reaching Him. If He is not everywhere, then He 
is not God. His connection is like that of the soul in the body. 
The eye can see all other organs but they cannot see the eye ; the 
soul can only understand the various tatvas in union with them. 
By the grace of the Lord alone, will he attain to the Patijiiana. 
Then will he be like the blind man who gets his eye-sight restored 
to him, and perceives God as the Light of Light. 

TO GET FREED FROM VASANAMALA. 

39. Just as when you drop a stone into a pond covered with 
moss, the waters get cleared for a’while and covered again, the 
Mala, Maya and Karma will become detached from the man when 
he is attached to God; they become attached to him, again other¬ 
wise. Those who dwell on the Feet of the Lord with love and 
steadiness will never lose their samadhi. To those who cannot 
always fix their minds ‘on God, we will give another means 
whereby they can cut their bonds asunder. 

water or crystal with Light. But in Moksha, we still reach a process of 
identification as when we name a diamond, a brilliant. So indeed the 
Advaita Siddhantis always declare that the freed Jiva is Siva. What 
occurs is, the individuality of the crystal or water or the river is lost and 
what is actually perceived is the Light or God. In Moksha, there is feel¬ 
ing and there is perception of God but there is no consciousness of such 
feeling or perception. When consciousness enters, there will be duality. 

When there is no • ons.iousness, there is absolute oneness or Advaitam. 

» 

The following is pure language of science and is equally applicable to 
the case before us. » 

“ When a river enters the sea, it soon loses its it becomes 

merged in the body of the ocean, where it loses its current, and where 
therefore it has no power to keep in suspension the sediment which it had 
brought down from the higher lands.” ('I he story of a piece of coal p.42 
N'ewnes ). When the individuality, the feeling of * I ’ and ‘mine’ Ahahkara 
or Agava is lost, the soul merges in God, and becomes indistinguishable, 
the Karmic force is lost, and it cannot revert back (»cv*>*L9.'3'L9<d«a/n0 u \ 

— f ev-rarti) and become incapable of sinning, and cannot leave the Feet 
of the Lord. See further note to chap. vi. " Light of Grace.” 




SUTRA IX. 


Purification of the Soul. 


< <•> 

Adhikarana I. 

c 

MEDITATE ON SR1PANCJIAKSH ARA. 

r. Him, who cannot be understood by the Pasu and Pasajiiana, 
if you cannot reach, not possessing sufficient Patijfiana and love 
in your heart, and are separated from his Divine Foot, you can 
reach Him, if you regard the alluring world as a, mi rage and get 
free from its clutches. If you again meditate constantly according 
to law on the Sri-Paiichakshara, The Supreme will graciously 
enter your heart, driving away your darkness. 

PAS A AND PASUJN'ANA DEFINED. 

V 

?. Pasujhana consists of the knowledge of the Vedas, Sastras, . 
Smptis, Puranas and Arts, and of the Mantras from Asabhai, 
Vaikhari to Nadha; these have effect of inducing future births. 

The Ahambrahnmsmi Knowledge is Pasujfiana as the Pasu be¬ 
comes bound in a body, has to learn and know from others, and 
one by one. The Supreme Siva knows alone without extrane¬ 
ous aid. 

t ‘ 

EXTINCTION OF SENSES IS NO MOKSHA, 

3. If you hold that the extinction of thd senses is alone Mukti, 

then we may as well hold that the eggs of fisheG and fowls, and 

seeds, and persons dead and in a swoon, in sleep and in yoga, and 

while bitten by a serpent are all in Mukti condition ! If you would 

compare the Samadhi condition to the condition of Light, when 

one’s shadow gradually lessens and disappears under one at noon, 

even then the darkness will not vanish and'this Juana is also 

< 

3. In the latter case, no account is taken of the JnanaSurya and 
hence there will be 110 removal of darkness. 







SUPAKSHA—SUTRA IX. 


A. III.] 


243 


PaSujfiana. Know then without knowing, the feet of Him who 
burnt the Tripura and then you will bum your faults away. 

THE NECESSITY FOR DIVINE GRACE'. 

4. Why we say that God can be reached only by the 
aid of His Wisdom Foot, is because, He can never be reached by 
our human speech, thought, or action, because His Foot represents 
IJie Light of His Wisdom, and because it is by the aid of His 
Foot Grac?, the soul »is freed from the doubt whether he is one 
with his bodily organs or senses, and is shown his real self. 

HOW COD MANIFESTS HIMSELF. 

5. aSS&g.'Sij s sir <z Barr d a irgzp 

a j &5ZT E.'<f cTT £ GSiiCa /T t 

e.ssnu 2 .jj'j> (V-jStTpZgp/i geiz^an datr^ss) 

g}iSrd(&i$ijn Qu.n0cu2£cTxiij atT^^fr^a) 
aezTL-rejisT pZzrssn lLl$. tLjj$0i.anLLi$.d 

adz •G~rr J 5d a zezr dsar tilpussr 

Ga~ ci> xjcit & $ pa sizr L-is. *k-L-jhunath 

a?gy & ( 5 ) fiuU'Jl.'jS)G&.<ri'£Q£;, 

5. The eye that sees all cannot see itself nor the internal 
sense that guides it. These internal senses cannot know them¬ 
selves nor the soul. The soul itself which enjoys cannot know 
itself nor the One who is the Soul of his soul. Hence, Siva, the 
All-seer, manifests Himself to the soul, and shows him his own 
Self, and though unseen by the senses stands by the eye of all. If 
you know Him thus, and sc*i Him in your heart and join His Foot, 
the Pasa will drop off.’ Sven if the Pasa joins you, stand fast in 
11 L Foot. 


Adhikarana II. 


MOV/ UI.ISS lb CONFERRED. 

6. If one stands steadfast in the path, leaving the acquisition 
of the ci^ht attributes and eight powers, (Siddhis) alone etc. the 
worlds of Brahma and other Gods ; and passing the bonds of the 



244 


SIVAJN’AN’A S1DDH1YAR 


[Bk. III. 


six adhvas and rejects all these as the veriest lie, then will He who 
has neither ups nor downs, who has no limiting qualities and is 
not conceivable by any person, who has desires of His own, enter 
your heart Himself, filling it with boundless love, and bless you 
with the rarest joy. 


Adhikarana III. 

_ < f 

THE TRUE EXPLANATION’ OF ' TATVAMASI.’ 

7. & 63 Crt—G) 8 z$>Sll <* 637 $IT^SV)d 

SL^unQp^mare^Qo) QssresrdaQr^d a 
Q^nessi^Q^'S Qp3rrg.g&i6i?(n? esB^r 

Q-FnaQiAGsruunsSaap Qp n sir gv susor Q&i/Sasr/S 
eSesstL^a§n uiGvXJaQGrrdvevrrij aQi—jzt'jjnGsrpjSsor c 
eS l-Qldit y $!ay logiQuirsv <af icevsa$iL/iDSBi-tLjih 

UbOcU G&H l£)637 P ^ ^ (63) C? fcoJ *>j' tp! 

uirsSdaaQairdi^cy^lu unaj^esfidan^essr. 

7. Seeing ourselves different from the seen world, and from 
the unseen God, and loving Him in all humility, and from His 
intimate connection with us, if we meditate that 4 1 am He then 
will He appear to us, as one with us. As the poison leaves one 

7. Soham = Sa-f Aham, meaning *1 and That’ or ‘I and He’. 
Hatnsa is another form of it (Aham + Sa); This Soham is regarded as 
a mantra, based on the Mahavakyas for practice or Bhavana or Sadhana 
and not for proof. The principle is based bn that formulated by western 
psychologists to the effect that, by practice and in some mental disorders, 
the idea itself becomes an actuality. The principle enunciated by Saint 
Meykandan is (‘ ’); the soul or mind becomes that with 

which it identifies itself. It becomes pure matter, body, when it identifies 
itself as body; and when it identifies itself as Param, it becomss the 
Param. 

“ ^cxneujsQpni—^ig’G&p ixir^sTuu^OLDiu^^rresra 
<g ffggnaflG?(gzri/_ .y fisSa u^ir^anQerreir^QeniT.’!, 

‘Oh! for the day, when I shall become one (Advaita) with* the ever¬ 
lasting Truth and Wisdom as I am one ^Advaita) with Anava/’ 








A. III.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA IX. 


245 


by the snake-charmer’s meditation of Garuda so will our sins fall 
off and purity be attained. This is the reason why the old Vedas 
teach us to practice the Mantra ' 1 am He 

THE PANCHAKSHARA. 

✓ 

8. Knowing in the Light of Sri-Panchakshara, his subordina¬ 
tion to God, and seeing His Form also in the Panchakshara, and 
doing Anga-kara-nyasa {touching the parts of the body with the 
hand) with tl.*e Panchakshara, and worshipping God in the heart 
of the soul with the Panchakshara, and reaching the Frontal Brow 
which is difficult of reach, and pronouncing the Panchakshara 
according to law, the Lord will appear to the soul, even as the 
invisible planets Ragu and Ketu appear in the sun and the moon. 

ANOTHER SADHAXA. 

9. As regards the lotus of the heart, its root is the navel, its 

stalk are the tatvas from the earth, its calyx is the Mohini or lower 

✓ 

Maya, the eight petals are the Suddha-Vidya, the markings in these 
petals are the eight Aksharas* the stamens are the Is vara, Sadasiva 

■*” v' 

and their Saktis. The pistil and ovary is the Sakti-tatva. And 
above this Sakti is seated the Supreme Siva. And worship Him 
knowing this Supreme condition. 

THE EFFECT OF Tilth INTERNAL WORSHIP. 

10. This internal worship or Yajfia is regarded as Mukli- 
sadhana, because it purifies the soul. Using sandal, flowers, Diipa 
and Dipa and Manjana and food with esoteric meaning, and wor¬ 
shipping Him in the Heart; as'one thinks and thinks of 1 lim with 
Jfiana, He will gradually enter your heart, as does the light when 
the mirror is cleared and pleaned. 1 hen the impurities will all 
disappear. - 

8 . The mysteries and the details of this have to be learnt through 
the Guru. 

10. The sandal symbolises Vairftgya; flowers, the eight external virtues 
such as abstaining from killing etc., being the control of the external 
sen-cs;— L)ufa, incense, Is pride, which has to be offered up; Dtpa, light 
is one’s intelligence ; the 'I ir:niM 7 jai.a, water, L contentedncss; foodie 
onc’j egoism. 




246 


SIVAJNANA SIDDIIIVAR 


[Bk. III. 


ANOTHER MEANS.' EXTERNAL WORSHIP. 

11. If one desires to worship God externally, let him take the 
flowers fallen under the tree and worship and praise the Supreme 
Siva in some visible symbol in the same manner as in internal 
worship. Let him be resigned, thinking that he himself is not 
responsible for good and evil, and let him see God in everything 
without making distinction of internal or external worship. 'Ghis 
will constitute the great merit of superior .Bhaktas. , 

THE f ,EFFECT OF SUCH WORSHIP* 

12. God will show His Grace removing one’s mala, if one 
worships and sees God present everywhere as fire in wood, ghee 
in milk, jpice in fruit and qil in seeds; such worship will dispose 
God to enter his heart and remove his mala and convert him into 
His own Form and dwell in him in all His glory, just as the iron 
is converted into the form of the fire itseif. 








SOTRA X. 


Pasatchaya. 

o 

I 

Adhikarana I. 

WHY AKAMYAKARMA CANNOT AFFECT THE jlVANMl'KTA. 

1. The good or evil which he performs will redound only on 
those who do good or evil to him. His faults will vanish when, 
by soham-relation, he becomes one with God, and dedicates all 
acts to Hara, and stands fixed in this posture. And God also will 
hold all his acts as His own and everything done to him as done to 
Himself and will remain united to him driving away his faults. 
The greatest sins, when committed in this condition of all love, 
will only be good service and not otherwise. 

BECAUSE THE JlVANML'KTA IS DEVOID OF THE FEELING OF ‘ I ’ AND ‘MINE.’ 

2. As he burns away by the fire of his wisdom the feeling of 
‘I’ and ‘Mine,’ that ‘I did this,’ ‘others did that,’ and stands 
steadfast in the path, the Subtle One manifests Himself to him, and 
drives away his karma. To him who retains this feeling of self, 
God is non-apparent, and he eats the fruit of his karma and the 
karma will induce other births. Unless again, he possesses the 

v- 

' Sivajtiana, he cannot drirc away the feeling of ‘ I ’ and ‘ Mine.’ 


• ’ Adhikarana II. 

a way wnr.N nn is again constrained by ms senses. 

3. Know well that though these senses are united to you, yet 
they arc not controlled by you, and that they do so by the 
command f-f the Supreme Controller; worship the Feel of Him 
\\ ho own >ou and the sen e->; bum these pa-sions by the Grace 
of Cod ; and tc And even then if you are led astray, be 





248 


SIVAJNANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


resigned that you have nothing to do and that it is the result of 
previous karma. Then the Akdmyakarma will not be generated 
and you will not be born again. 

GREATNESS OF GOD’s BENEFICENCE AND SIVARPANA. 

4. God is not partial. He makes each ore reap his own 
deserts according as he performs good or evil out of his feelicg of 
self. When one loses his self, then God guards him from the 
contact of all karma. Such people say “ O Lord, all our acts are 
after Thy Will. Thou dwellest in us and doth actuate our acts 
and dost actually perform them too! I have no will of my own. 
Thy Will alone shall prevail! " From such people, all karma will 
flee away'of itself. 

THE GREATNESS OF SIVAJNANA. r 

5. Pilgrimage to distant lands, dwelling in forests and caves; 
starving oneself, prolonging one’s life indefinitely, all these will 
be of no use if they don’t possess Pure Wisdom, and they will 
be lost again. When they possess this Sivajhdna , then even 
though seen sporting with damsels very fair, decked in fragrant 
flowers, their heart will be imbedded ‘in the Feet of the Blessed 
Lord and will rest in Bliss. 


5. The idea is beautifully expanded by Saint Tayumanavar in the 
following stanzas:— 

chief fl<£ 1 

Qa nsh(sr?,@ zyi Lci.t <5 

/dQQ f<6mfSe&SVL- iLjiSV^jQeU 
eu&'SQug)/ GufT^nh QaerrSerr 
el'lLi—ll'$ ulLl-u uspQurrev $e\ 6i]£jj 
llQC pQun s?ld QsuTeo iuQf 

zS&GzpQup q g! evipQpevr tip Qf g) em gasTO 
Qsu'&tTuSg# unTeva, i&ir, * 

Oku errxfl'fa' jjor.L-d srrii c^^iliSiQae^L^tu slchi emu) 
cS'hrrujoL^. fPdSeSt zpi lj 





A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA X- 


249 


THE PRINCIPLE ILLUSTRATED. 

6 . The fire will not bum him who is versed in Agnistambha. 
The poison will not hurt him who is skilled in medicines and 
Mantras. The good and evil will not attach to thejnanis even 
though they may perform all kinds of acts. Even the effects of 
former acts will cease with this life. The pot smells for a time • 
even after the assafaetida is removed, and the wheel turns round 
for a time ’after the potter removed his hands. Similarly the 
effects of past karma (the Vdsanamala) may affect the Jivan- 
mukta for a time but all will vanish with his body. 

•Sssraz’g'fea iDjnsur 
^lSQ'JjZcZT jXcE><Si£L^a.T'X/ 

4?irz.ut? t—negi*esr< t—f $ gJsuiLnesr 

We add the translation from the pen of the Hon’ble. P. Ramanathan 
k.c., c.m.g., of Ceylon.* 

While I live in shady graves, fragrant with fresh-blown flowers, 

While I drink'cool and limpid water, and disport mvsclf therein; 

While I find enjoyment in sandal-scented breezes, which move 
through the court-like gentle maids ; 

While I revel in the day-like light of the glorious full-moon ; 

While I feast on dishes of various flavours seeming tempered with 
ambrosia; 

While I am passing off into sleep after much merriment, bedecked 
with garlands and perfumed with Scent ;— 

Grant to me, O Siva, Who art true, spiritual, and blessed, all filling, 
impartitc, and substrat6 of all,—Grant to me the boon of never 
forgetting Thy Grace (so as to avoid the perils of worldly 
enjoyment;. > 

» 

6 . '*■*!£IL* cS (Tt'd■* n 

an r Gu/T0 \iQcer 

" lie still, losing speech, said He, Oh mother, I know not its 
meaning.”— St. Aruxagirinathar. 

" Be silent to the Lord and wait patiently for Him. (I\ S. xxxvn. 7.) 

“Truly my soul is 'dent to the Ioml.” (P. S. lx. i.) 

* — _ 

* from his “ Myttcrj of CcJitnrss", whi h form in fact a beautiful 
cxpo-iiion of thu b-tru and the next, and which evuy one of our ladders 
imr-t read. 


3 2 





25° 


§IVAJNANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


V 

The original Sutra in Sivajfianabodham is as follows: 

'gqaijQ&sr girQezir luirSa j c g/iQisfB 

C?uj4 0)© uSempusssfi tBps 

w 6 vu)ITS®il> ps3rG(tt) / 8u) sutseeS^anuSdrQp. 

The highest injunction is to stand still and do God’s will, and 
become One with him. Unless this stage is reached, his sins cannot leave 
him. Unless the soul merges its individuality or Egoism or Will in,.the 
person of the Universal Will, karma connot cease, and birfjis will result. 
So long as there is the play of his own Egoism, the superior Light cannot 
act on it. Tho pure glass is darkened by the dross of individual will and 
unless this is removed, the full blaze of the Shining One cannot illumi¬ 
nate it and convert it into itself. All actions are not prohibited, but even 
the most virtuous acts unless dedicated to God and done as following His 
Will, will only produce more karma; and any act that he may do, even 
the most heinous one, if done out of obedience to Godr's will ceases to be 
such ; and even the human law exempts lunatics and children as the acts 
are not done by their will but by some will outside themselves. This 
Highest doctrine of Hinduism is what is .stigmatized as the doctrine of 
Quietism and grossly misunderstood by our own people and by the 
Westerns. The doctrine is so high and subtle that it is plain it cannot 
be understood by the ordinary Lol<ayata> rolling in purely mundane efforts 
and enjoyments. Neither can it be understood by people who cannot 
understand Christ’s precious teaching to show the enemy your other 
cheek; though they repeat in their daily prayers •' Thy Will be done.” 

That this Highest Advaita doctrine is also the Highest teaching of 
Christ can be easily shown. Christ leads his believers to regard him and 
God as their master and their Lord in the beginning; and slowly is reached 
the doctrine that God is our Father, and we are all his children. But 
when he is nearing his end, he draws his disciples closer to him and tells 
them that they shall henceforth not be called his servants but that they are 
his friends; and the greatness of this relation is expressed by the state¬ 
ment “greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life 
for his friends (St. Jonn xv. 13 and 14). And yet a closer union is taught, 
a union quite indistinguishable from the advaita union postulated by 
Saiut Meykandan, a union which is complete in^itself yet in which the 
soul is strictly subordinate. 

“ Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of 
itself, except it abide in the Vine, no more can Ye, except Ye abide in me. 



A II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA X. 


2 5 r 


I am the Vine and ye are the branches. He that abideth in me and I in 
him, the same brin^eth forth much fruit; for without Me ye can do 
nothing. If a man abideth not in me he is cast forth as a branch, and is 
withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are 
burned." (St. John xv. 4 to 6). And after giving his disciples a final 
injunction to love one another, uQsnStuff of twelfth sutra) Christ 

prays to God. "That they all may be one; as thou Father art in me; 
and I jn thee,, that they aiso may be one in us. I in them, and thou in 
me that they may be made perfect in me.” (St. John xvn. 22-23). “On 
that day ve shall know that I am in my father and ye in me, and I in 
you." (St. John xtv. 20), which recalls the famous lines in the sacred 
utterances of St. Maipikkavachkar. 

t-tat-. Lins? ^esrrDSsrSeS(Ti=d^ib ’ • 

e _ s : j t—Lcrjj <5 'Soj e>& 1 ^ 0 ^^ ; 

'g.’if.G us.1 0 ld 

©.air 

nSofcir 

Ljfiunii Gu'rzsrpsrtlucvgG puj 
Qf'3.vnQp*Qe& azsi3(TTfg) 

QplS-l^UO e 6CT G5V -b Qpt£rfX?GBrQ*). 

“The Mistress dwells in midmost of Thyself ; 

Within the Mistress centered dwellest Thou; 

Midst of thy servant if ye Both do well, 

To me thy servant ever give the Grace 

Amidst thy lowliest servants to abide; 

Our Primal Lord, Whose Being knows no end; 

While dwellest in the sacred golden porch, 

Still present to fulfil my heart’s content." 

(From the translation of Dr. G. U. Pope.) 

The word v.ODi—'undn -''is very expressive. It means complete posses- 
s : ou and ownership of the other, so that the other is indistinguishable 
from owner. And Christ stands lor this psot—ujadr who is all Love, 
whose Love to us is all-absorbing and more than a father’s and mother’s, 
and which permeates us through and through, if only we will allow our¬ 
selves to be influenced by this Love, without interposing our own will and 
egoism. And this highest and inner teaching of Jesus Christ is hardly 
realised by the ordinary Christian Church-goer; and the Rev. Andrew 
Murray fears that there are many earnest followers of Jesus from whom 
the mcanii g of tin* teaching with the blessed c.xpcrien' e it promises is 



252 


SIVAJXAXA SIDDHIVAR 


[Bk. III. 


very much hidden. “ While trusting in their Saviour for pardon and for 
help, and reaching to some extent to obey him, they have hardly realised 
to what Closeness of Union , to what intimacy of fellowship , to what won¬ 
drous Oneness of life and interest , He invited them when He said, “Abide 
in me.” This is not only an unspeakable loss to themselves, but the 
Church and the World suffer in what they lose.” He attributes this to 
ignorance, and ignorance in the orthodox Church and failure on their 
part to preach this higher doctrine and he “is confident that if the 
orthodox church preached ( this with the same distinctness and insistancy 
as the doctrine of atonement and pardon through bis blood is preached, 
that many would be found to accept with gladness the invitation to 
such a life, and that its influence would be manifest in their experience 
of the purity and the power, 'the love and the joy, the fruit bearing, 
and all the blessedness which the Saviour connected with abiding in him. 
These references are from his preface to his beautiful work entitled 
“ Abide in me ” and the whole book is a commentary and exposition of 
the text “ Abide in me” from St. John. The whole book should be read 
to know how much meaning is in these -simple words, but the table of 
contents will give an idea of the same. 

Abide in Christ: 


1. All ye who have come to Him. 

2. And ye shall find Rest to your 

souls. 

3. Trusting Him to hecp you. 

4. As the Branch in the vine. 

5. As you come to Him by faith. 

6. God himself has United you to 

Him. 

7. As your Wisdom. 

8. As your Righteousness. 

9. As your Sanctification. 

10. As your Redemption. 

11. The crucified one. 

12. God Himself will stablish you 

in Him. 

13. Every moment. 

14. Day by day. 

15. At this moment. 


16. Forsaking all for Him. 

17. Through the Holy Spirit. 
iS. In stillness of soul. 

19. In affliction and trial. 

20. That you may bear much fruit. 

21. So will you have Power in 

Prayer. 

22. Anti in His Love. 

23. As Christ in the Father. 

24. Obeying P^is commandments. 

25. That your joy may be full. 

26. And in Love to the Brethren. 

27. That you may not give. 

28. As your strength. 

29. And not in self. 

30. As the Surely of the Cove¬ 

nant. 

31. The Glorified One. 




A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA — SUTRA X. 


2 53 


And it is seen how far these approximate to the thoughts and their 
order as given out by our Acharyas. 

The way to peace and rest does not lie in our seeking and desiring 
for it. The secret of perfect rest is in entire sum: der to Cod. “Giving up 
one’s whole life to him, for him alone to rule and order it,* taking up His 
yoke, and submitting to be led and taught, to learn of Him,- abiding in • 
Him to be and do only what he Wills; —these are the conditions of disci- 
pleship" (p. ig.) l( Uuiorl with Himself and so with the father is His 
Highest object.” (p. 20.) “O yield yourself this very day to the Blessed 
Saviour in the surrender of the one thing he asks of you: Give up your¬ 
self to abide in Him. He Himself will work it in you. You can trust 
Him to keep you trusting and abiding.” (p. 29); 

“ ^smxirssrsLrT n 

ujnpr.Siu GresrZcST efl-ipicQ Qsvprm 
pirn's ppusQui. 

“Only abide in me; Thou art weak ; but I am strong; thou art poor, 
but I am rich. Only abide in me ; yield thyself wholly to my teaching 
and rule; simply trust my love, my grace, my promises. Only believe; 

I am wholly thine; 1 am the vine; thou art branch. Abide in me.” (p. 34.) 

In the lesson for the eleventh day, the text from Galatians is quoted. 
“Iam cru-ified with Christ, nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ 
livethinme” brings out the force of the texts “ GiwSp.ig) £cuLLmxrsuT r 
etc.’i quoted above. The ‘ I’ dies and yet not the soul; and yet the soul 
is not seen, is not consciousness of its existence. What alone subsists 
and is felt and is enjoyed is the One God. 

Q<r issf'dv-azpgpziaisfe. 0 p’lid^ilpdjiQpnssr^nguci 
"isrruQuQ i p'LfSo p £<xQcsr 

jp s jjcvtev ■jjzst flQ^nczr 
ujnQ 7 t £a 2 zir ajpldSpLjnH 3. 

“ The entire surrender of all self-will (the feeling of * I ’ and ' Mine ’), 
the complete denial to the flesh of its every desire and pleasure, the 
perfect separation from the world * in all its ways of thinking and acting, 
the losing and hating of one's life, the giving up of self and its interests for 
the sake of others, this is the dispo- ilion which marks him who has taken 

1 

* Su:h 4x10; I • are called by the ptople who aie in the centre of the 
world instead of being ‘centied’ in God, mad or eccenhic (i.e., out of the 
world’s centre.; 




254 


SlVAjNANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


up Christ’s cross who seeks to say, I am crucified with Christ; I abide in 
Christ, the Crucified One.” (p. 83.) 

s'jjsisr llitssbt 1 _ aseNsssfl?<sn uwask sj esar d a c\>ii passer i—§2iQld 

ujujesrurrGssT L—Q^sS'tserd^ppQp unseen— aL'SsflaSssrQLceo 
u>uj&)urr6m<3 LDpJpsirstr ®.n<F&unsaeT Qi—Gst getjGnt—uj 
OcFtOGVlX/fToSOT t_ evlTunISLp Q p ek®Gr COST lb Q-utlLi—ItQuiT. 

f 

When He, His spouse whose eyes shine bright, mixt with my soul, 
And made me His, deeds and enviroments died out; 

Upon this earth confusion died; all other mem’ries ceased; 

How all my doings died, sing we, and beat TejUtiam. 

Qjtr sir© ldl.® LcaQ^puatuiipusesrQai^.Grnu) 
pnGSTQauLi— G$Gnfld&e$uuf}ujnp pserGauitugpd 
s^sstQslL ®uSaQ&LL<SGxsT/TsyQ&LL Qi—GsrgUGTGrQpuQuniu 
itaasrQ'Sil. i—Surrua^Lp QpsrrQ&rsseru) Qanu-i—nQficn, 

Though Ether, Wind, Fire, Water, Earth should fail, 

His constant Being fails not, knows no w-eariness, 

In Him, my body, life, and thought anu mind were merged 
How all my self was lost, sing we, and beat TeJJepam. 

(Tiruvachaka: £a/(?<gj)i_es>t_Q/ Refuge in God.) 

pitg^LOL^Hg! pGSQp\X>\£lkgl £ 

®8plLoy$li @ em&(TT ) u)i£li$iL.<SBr 
Q'lTgpiuLfJisg) u>etsrQpu)y$ligd 
leirgruiMy^ipeaU) cBtT&sr jfiQtuQesr, 

(, pjf)iQpeir iSpsS u^pQsiGn^piLO uitfld 
S ifj.iCc peer st—ey^vaGpi QunGsr^Qeer^sr 
«$y ipn.ii@6sff unit&SQp b QsueeerQi—Gsr 
Q^ifj^^rrrrLfsaii—uj Q&i^esJsaemQi—QGn . l '* 

“ And the secret of a life of close abiding will be seen to be simply this; 
As I give myself wholly to Christ, I find the power to take Him wholly 
for myself; and as I lose myself and all I have for Him, He takes me 
wholly for Himself and gives Himself wholly to me.” (p. 119). 

pkp^JGsr pr&rH&tTS Qancssn—Qpdir peer^eerd 
^rkiasnsunn QsaQceir &g)$n 
epQunGsrflsosvrr ^.t.ipue QupQpshr 
(^ujirgiii Qupp QpnskQpserunee 





A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA X. 


255 


ff iaD^Gu QaajSiv O^/reirL-.Ga-LD Qu^uiT&r 
^q^uQu(^r giezp a jsnp PaQzsr 
€7ie tz^Qjj ^.(_e tit—ZiGsr si*L-.trii 

ujr err? = p@svQ&?,a f&S'CufiGp t 

n What thou hast given is thee; and what hast gained is Me; 

O Sankara, who is the knowing one ? 

’ I have obtained the rapturous Bliss that knows no end ; 

Yet now, what one thing hast thou gained from me? 

Our Peruman, Who for Thy shrine has". taken my heart 
£ivan, Who dwellest in Perunturai’s Courts ! 

My Father, and my Master ! Thou hast made this frame 
Thine Home; for this I know no meet return.” 

1 » 

And we are tempted to quote the whole of the lesson for the 1 Sth day 
“ Abide in Christ, In stillness of Soul," as it is the chapter most pertinent to 
the subject in hand. However we quote the following paras : 

“ There is a view of Christian life in which it is regarded as a sort 
of partnership in which Gc$ and man have each to do their part. It 
admits that it is but little that man can do, and that little defiled with sin; 
still he must do his utmost,—then only can be expect God to do His part. 
To those who think thus, it is extremely difficult to understand what 
scripture means when it speaks of our being still and doing nothing, of our 
resting and waiting to see the salvation of God. It appears to them a pcr- 
ftd contradiction, when we sfeah of this quietness and ceasing from all effort 
as the scent of the highest activ'ty of man and all his lowers. And yet this 
is what scripture does teach. The explanation of the apparent mystery 
is to be found in this, that when God and man are spoken of as working 
together, there is nothing 6f the idea of a partnership between the two 
partners who each contisbutc their share to a work. The relation is a 
very different one. ^The tYue idea is that of Co-oferat on founded on 
subordination. As Jesus was entirely dependent on the Father for all Ilis 
words and all His works, so the believer can do nothing of Himself. 
What he can do of himself is altogether sinful. He must therefore cease 
entirely from his ov.n doing, and wait for the working of God in him. As 
he ceavs from self-effort, faith assures him that God docs what He has 

1 

undertaken, and works in him. And what God docs is to renew, to 
sanctify and waken all hi* energies to their Highest power. So that just 
in proportion a- he yields himself a truly pa_,sivc instrument in the hand 



256 


blVAjNANA SIDDHIYAR 


[Bk. III. 


of God, so will he be weilded of God as the active instrument of 
His Almighty Power. The soul in which the wondrous combination 
of perfect passivity with the Highest activity is most completely 
realized, has the deepest experience of what the Christian life is.” 
(pp. 127 and 128). 

“ It is a soul silent unto God that is the best preparation for knowing 
Jesus, and for holding fast the blessings He bestows. It is when'che 
soul is hushed in the silent awe and worship, 'before the Holy Presence 
that reveals itself within, .that the still small voice of the blessed spirit 
will be heard.” Dost thou in every deed hope to realise the wondrous 
union with the Heavenly Vine ? know that flesh and blood cannot reveal 
it unto thee, but only the Father in heaven ‘ Cease from thine wisdom.’ 

i* ( 

Thou hast but to bow in the confession of thine own ignorance and 
impotence ; the Father will delight to give thee the teaching of the Holy 
Spirit. If but thine ear be open, and thy thoughts brought into subjection 
and thine heart prepared in silence to wait upon God, and to hear what 
He speaks. He will reveal to thee His Secrets. And one of the first 
secrets will be the insight into the truth, that as thou sinkest low before 
Him, in nothingness and helplessness, in a silence and a stillness of soul 
that seeks to catch the faintest whisper of His Love, teachings will come 
to thee which thou never hadst heard, before' the rush and noise of thine 
own thoughts and efforts. Thou shalt learn how thy great work is to 
listen, and hear and believe what he promises ; to watch and wait and 
see what He does ; and then, in faith and worship and obedience to yield 
thyself to His work, who worketh in thee mightily.” 

“ Then there is the restlessness and worry that come of care and 
anxiety about earthly things; these eat away <the life of trust and hep the 
soul lihe a troubled sea. There the gentle whispers of the Holy comforter 
cannot be heard." “ Above all there is the unrest that comes of seeking 
in our own way and in our own strength the spiritual blessing which 
comes alone from above. The heart occupied with its own flans and efforts 
for doing God's Will and securing the blessings of abid ng in Jesus must 
fail cont'nually. He can do His work perfectly only when the soul 
ceases from its work. He will do His work mightily in the soul that 
honors Him by expecting Him to work both to will and to do.” 

“cQanj-'vgmJHesiam 
* &Q II ggti LLlTS!n&!L'gi L£60rd>siT 




A- I!.] 


SUPAKSHA—SUTRA X. 


257 


,-gj S3 3Ut _ LJl _£: fi 'll G.’(n&j5?G3'U'E3sir 

^S3 3sSi—aSt— ^-s-i jelczGld” 

Cease ye from desire ! cease ye from desire! 

Even such desire as the desire to know God. 

With each desire there follows a sorrow! 

As each desire is given up, there is Bliss. 

pp Qpirszren*) x/snsj Q^iuiLjrtpui/r.ieir^n eh 

I • 

cd ©,<5 nssrG3/D£<3G5)Z sn Gzrsvn ($=Qan 
^s^D-ujt/D UrGur.p F Qg&fi&ni t<s@l/ 
n rj (T7.i ^.Toir ljiP 3=6^1—GtuaGesr, 

Oh ye fools ! who attempt to speak of the unspeakable. 

Can you tind the limits of the limbless deep ? 

To him, who attains rest as the waveless sea. 

Will the Ljrd of the Braided Hair manifest Himself.” 

— Tirumantram. 

Such is the peculiar teaching held out in the scriptures of the East 
and the West. But such torching is naturally reserved for the most 
enlightened and highly developed soul in its highest stage of ascent. 
These occupying the lowest flat cannot understand and grasp the won¬ 
drous \ision which will break on him at the top. He will naturally take 
shelter in the shady nooks and corners on the path, not knowing what 
dangers v. ill lurk in those corners, and not knowing that ere long he will be 
assailed by the most cruel storms and tempests. The Sainted Pilgrim, on 
the other hand, even though such storms beset him for part of the way, 
will never be daunted and will never lose his tiust in God but will even 
consider them as God’s own blessings ; and ere long, passing the region 

of clouds and winds, and storms and tempests, will pass into the cverlast- 
✓ 

ing Glory of Sivam from V.hich there will be no return. 





SUTRA XL 


Patijnana — Bhakti Lakshana. 


Adhikarana I. ' 

1I0VV GOD “INSTRUCTS THE FREED ?OUL. 

r. As the soul enables the eye which by itself cannot see, to 
see, and itself sees ; Just so, when the sou) becomes freed from the 
body and purified, Isa enables the soul to know and Himself 
knows. With this knowledge if one loves God, he will become 
freed, purified even in this body; and becoming /freed of all Pasa, 
will dwell under the Lotus Foot of Hara, enjoying endless 
Sivanubhava. 

THE JIVANMUKTAS PERCEIVE GOD AL'ONE AND NO SECOND. 

2. They who see the Param by Parajnana will alone see 
Param and nothing else. The knowledge of anything else than God 

i 

is various and differing Ignorance. The knowledge derived by 
hearing and reading is also confused knowledge as its source is the 
higher Maya. The knowledge of Jfiaturu, Jnana and Jfieya is 
Sahkalpa or Bhava Jnana and not real. The true Jfiana is what 
transcends all these, Sivajiiana. Hence, the Jivanmukta perceives 
Sivam alone. 

< « 

THE BODY CANNOT PERSIST IN MUKTI. 

3. If it is asserted that as the body js'etemally renewed from 
birth to birth, from the karmic sukshma body,' even in Mukti the 
blessed souls will remain clothed in an eternal form, our reply is, 
that this Mukti can only be a Pada Mukti and is an insufferable 
condition. If there is a body, then will arise Karma and Maya and 
other Malas. The body proceeding from the Manas has a begin¬ 
ning in reference to its cause, which may be said to be eternal. It 
is useful as a medicine to destroy our Mala. When the malady is 
removed, the body dies with it. 


< 


• t 


c 


« 


i 


1 


I 






SUPAKSHA—SUTRA XI. 


259 


A. I.] 

HOW THE JIVANMUKTA FEELS FREE FROM MALA. 

4. When the soul unites itself to the unknowable Wisdom 
true, then Sivam lights it up and the soul becomes a Jivanmukta. 
Just like the poison counteracted by medicine, and darkness sub¬ 
dued by light, and dirt in the muddy water is removed by the clear¬ 
ing nut, the Mala present in the Jivanmukta becomes innocuous- 
without being destroyed; and persisting till the body lasts, it vanishes 
with’the body itself without attaching itself to any other body. 

SOME OBJECTION'S MET. 

5. If it is stated that the Anava-Mala being Anadi could 
not be destroyed, or if it can be destroyed, the soul also must go 
with it, it is not so. We see the topper stand as cbpper even 
after its original verdigris is fully removed by the contact of the 
Parisavedi (the\Alchemist’s stone). And so, the soul gets rid of 
its mala by union with the Sthanu (the ever-enduring or the self¬ 
content). But if it is stated that soul’s attaining purity alter 
getting rid of mala is alon£ mukti, and that it is not necessary for 
it to unite itself with God, then we say no. The darkness veiling 
the earth vanish (from our vision) when the sun enters, and not 
before. Hence, the Mala will only disappear when united to the 
Sacred Foot. 

THE ANAVAMALA DOES VANISH COMPLETELY FOR MUKTAS. 

6. Kvcn though the paddy is united to the bran and husk 
from the very beginning, yet you can understand the condition 
when they become separated: In fact, they are not present in the 
pure rice. From the separated husk, etc., no new paddy can be 
generated ; they separate^off completely gradually. I Ience, when 
united to the beneficicnt Sivam, the Mala and Karma and body 
disappear from the soul. It, however, is united to the bound soul, 
and hence may be called eternal. 

THi: INSEPAKAlSLENKSS OF THE SUPREME. 

7. i he souls cannot think or act without the aid of the 
Lord-, grace at any time. I he Lord entering the soul’s heart, 

7 Sc»: for ful explanation ot the analogy of Vo.jtl at.tl Louionaut 
“Stia'ic* in bai.a buldh.inta*’ pp 53 to G2. 



t 


26 o 


SIVAJNANA S1DDH1YAR 


[Bk. III. 


actuating its thought and action is present all in all. These souls 
cannot reappear unless willed by Him. He stands to them as the 
letter ‘A’ stands to the rest of the letters. Therefore how can the 
Freed Soul be separated forom Hara’s Foot. 


Adhikarana II. 

r 

4 ( 

god’s omnipresence and transcendency. 

8. If God is omnipresent, He should be seen by every body. 

No. To the blind, even the Sun is dark. To them who do not 
possess the eye of God’s grace, even Light will be dark. As the 
sun brings '*to bloom the wtll-matured lotus, so does the Lord 
grant the eye of wisdom to. the well-developed souls and appear to 
them as the Light of Lights. « 

SOME CONCEPTIONS OF MUKTI-UNION REFUTED. 

9. If it is stated that God is like the tree’s shade which is 
sought by the tired way-farer, we sa$ r ‘ No’. Then the seeker 
will become the Master (the First Cause). If yet it is staled 
that the soul becomes one with God, by the soul becoming des- • 
stroyed, then no union is possible of that which is destroyed to 
another. If it was not destroyed in Mukti, then too, there is no 
Mukti. If it was not destroyed after union, then what is it which ex¬ 
periences Mukti. If the destruction of Self is regarded as Mukti, it 
conflicts with the principle that the Soul is eternal. If it is likened 
to the union of water with water,- then too they become equal 
which they are not. 

SOME FURTHER CONCEPTIONS. 

10. When the copper is touched by the Alchemist’s stone, it 
becomes one with Gold. So does the soul become one with our 
God, when it loses its mala, so you say. No, God is not like 

8 . It is not that God cannot be perceived everywhere, but we wilfully 
shut our own eyes by the pride of our self or egoism. 

10. The famous American Professor who ha,s succeeded in making 
artificial, chemical gold is said to have stated that all that he pouid assure 
the public was that it was like gold and possessed all the properties and 
did not possess the characteristics of the baser metals. So too, all that 






A. II.] 


SUPAKSHA — SUTRA XI. 


26 l 


Gold. He, like the stone removes the dirt, and places the soul 
under His Golden Foot. The stone which removes the dirt from 
the copper is not itself Gold. The Lord of the Gods does alone 
possess the powers of Creation, etc. And the Freed Soul is alone 
capable of enjoying Bliss. 

THE TWO INTELLIGENCES. 

* rr. If it be stated that God and Soul being both intelligences 
(Chit), they are one; we say ‘ No God is Gracious Intelligence 
(Aru 1 -chit) and the soul is that one which partakes of this Grace. 
God is the Intelligence Who in order to remove the soul’s mala, 
evolves things through various births and leads it into Moksha. 
The soul is the one which is subjected to the processes of evolu¬ 
tion, etc. God is the Intelligence which is self-luminous and illu¬ 
mines others; an<d the soul is the one which receives such light and 
knowledge. Hence, though God and Soul are in union inseparably, 
they are not one and the same. For instance, can the soul and its 
Buddhi, though both inteWgent, be equal ? To the soul, as chit, 
the buddhi is achit. So also to the God as chit , the Soul is achit. 

THE TRUE NATURE OF THE UNION ILLUSTRATED. 

12. As magnet attracts a piece of iron, so God draws unto 
Himself the Soul, and converts it into His own Form, as iron on 
fire, and destroys its Mala, as the wood is destroyed by the fire 
(rising from and enveloping it), and unites with it, as the salt with 
water, and subjects and transcends it as Alchemist's stone curbs 
gold, God transcends all and is in the Final Bliss. I Ie remains 
united and undistinguished as mixed syrup of cane-sugar, honey, 
milk and sweet fruit, aqd sugar-candy. 

—" ^ -r ■ ■ - 1 ■ 

v.e can say is that the freed soul is like God, and does not possess the 
weakness of humanity. We do not care as to what it is really, so long as 
we arc freed from our evils, and eternal bliss is vou r hsafed to us. The 
last statement about the freed soul is to avert the possibility of there exist¬ 
ing too many first causes. If it was so able, its individuality should lx: 
different from that of Gods which is fatal to its Advaita union. Lower 
being* attaining Apara-mukti can have much power but not those attain¬ 
ing Para-mukti. Such a freed soul can never return to the earth, can 
never return. 






SUTRA XII. 


Nature of the Sanctified. 


Adhik&rana I. 

HOW TI1H SANCTIFIED PERCEIVE THE IMPERCEPTIBLE 
AND DELIGHT IN HIM. 

i. The Sivajiianis getting rid of the three pdsas which 
prevent them from uniting themselves to the Lotus Feet of the 
Supreme, and joining the company of God’s devotees, and wor¬ 
shipping them and the forms in temples as His Form, and singing 
their praises, and dancing in delight, and becoming fully conscious 
of the superiority of Sivajiianis and the inferiority of others, and 
bowing low only to the devotees of the crescent-crested God, they 
roam about the world. 


Adhikarana II. 

LOVE GOD’S DEVOTEES AND OBEY THEM. 

2. They love not God, who love not His devotees; they love 
not others, neither do they themselves., What is the good of 
talking about such senseless corpses ? Leave off their company as 
their union will lead you again into births and deaths. Seek in 
love God’s true devotees, taking their wishes a^ commands, speak 
humbly, and stand steadfast according to their gracious directions, 
and worship and bow to them and delight and dance. 

2. The full force of the last two stanzas are brought out in the follow¬ 
ing Mantra: 

He who sees, perceives and understands this, loves God, delights in 
God, revels in God, rejoices in God, he becomes a Svaraj, (an Autocrat or 
Self-Ruler) he is lord and master in all the worlds. But those who think 


4 


X 


i 







A. III.] 


SUPAKSHA — SUTRA XII. 


263 


Adhikarana III. 


god’s devotees are god himself. 

3. As God dwells as the soul of soul in each human body 

designed for the purpose of reaching the Imperceptible One, and 

infuses His own Intelligence into them therefor, the form of His 

devotee is His Form. As he dwells in Sivonam Samadhi, he is 

* > 

even God Himself. As he reaches Him in his heart following the 
directions of the Guru, he is God Himself. When he and his 

differently from this, live in perishable worlds, and have other beings for 
their rulers. (Chhandogya Up. vii. 25-2). 

C/. Saint Appar. 

a n x? 5 a (s^ld (^tp-xievGevn ib 15 u&gsi a nib 

a ns *"£i&SL-c:uuQL—n id 

tcrruGu >7 J3 tSzssfl ju j$Qujn ud uz&fiG&n^dvGsunjD 
0^ znuQiD 

^rricnirsQu* pesrsmLujnenr 

aiisnap <f'£jiQajs£7@GnL£ G'junn&npiio 
GsnuonpGi r anG)iDvhLtistrnajncun£ 

Qsn LinitG^n a Gsgl u^iSbornQ'jj (Zjgx SG^)Gld. 

€7s&£r*i7fi9 tui7&.»rd(§ uSani—Qdurr u)di'Q«vn 

iflcnfiev* p5Q evils Qspi ;ira/rg uQgv2z u<f 

Qafzr&irrj) ajpG) pb&in QanQaun iteoGsyn 

FQjQuQLcneh p>(n&n$.QiU Qa nuQupQ^io 
(gttpijont^Qaja id d* (? 6 v n uj&zQp 
ay jp l 9est) ilt* it QapGeuryPi ^LlQL^nuf.u Qun$r,n. 

Cf. Saint MagikkavSchakar. 

G pcu5Q*n Qjfi’jja G p o:Q / ej(7sr 

QaTgAjtQun uuig? 4 n p f irp^np 

(if a :5 Gan sapo ienrp Qff&ajsrr Qft f (ft 
QffRCzp LLfTjf rrtrjii) Lz/ri^fl/T^, 

*u~6j5Q*c Ocr csrZcrpnm d Q* ndf i^ntkr 
a n irk h (*)L0 'ijdvGto nth tan ndiG 7 n h 
C la *9 ? ^jr jd, /lzv 19 h in a q n nG r n h h 

Q L Js 7 fiffit (*)(&L-t* ft n 9 . ujchGmnGtL, 


\ 




SIVAJNANA siddhiyAr 


[Bk. III. 


264 


vision fail altogether, he is without doubt, God. If such is the 
greatness of the God’s devotees, worship them with love to get rid 
of the bonds of sin. 


WORSHIP THE FORM IN TEMPLES AS GOD HIMSELF. 


4. They perceive God who perceive His form placed in 
temples as Himself. They perceive Him also who meditate on 
Him in the Mantric form. They who worship Him who is omni¬ 
present in their own heart, perceive God also. To these Bhaktas, 
He appears as does the'fire when churned or as the milk which 
cannot be perceived before it flows from the teats when milked. 


THE ORDER OF WORSHIP AND WORSHIPPERS. 


5. The practices of the four paths Juana, Yoga , Kriya and 
Charya are all God’s Will. Thejnani is entitled to practise in 
all the four paths; the Yogi from Yoga downwards; the Kriyavan 


4. This gives the Sadhana and Phalam of the three classes of Margis. 
The first class, the Charyavans require the grosser form of Symbolic wor¬ 
ship; the KriyCivans can take to the mantric worship or prayer form; the 
Yogis practise heart-worship. But the next verse shows, the followers of 
the higher are not required to give up the lower forms and they do 
generally practise the lower forms just to keep their bodily and mental 
organs engaged till the body is worn out. 

Cf. the famous verse of Saint Appar. 

<a9 pQp iSuSesrear uirsSlpu® QtstuQuirso 
iLGmp'v SasTgiKcii<zh ixtuxsissii-f Q&trjghun<sbr 
a- ( ©a/(? < ®/Ta> isuifSeemrretf suSpj * 1 (Gpz&r 
(wpis eutrijSd amL^iuQpm 6sflp@(cLD. 

I yf 

which of course follows the famous verses in the Svetasvatara Upanishat. 

“ One’s body taking for the lower stick, and for the upper, Om, by 
meditation's friction well sustained, let one behold God, there lurking as 

’ u 

it were.” 

“As oil in seeds, butter in cream, water in springs, and in the fire- 
sticks fire, so is God found in the soul, by him who seeks for Him with 
truth and meditation.” 

The point is though fire or milk is present in the whole body of the 
wood or cow, yet when we want to realize it we realize it only at certain 
points. Nay, the Immensity of the Being is so great that it is impossible 
to perceive It as It is. And, after all, till the final stage is reached our 
knowledge cannot but be symbolic, 


I 


t 




C 4 


c 





A. IV.] 


SUPAK^HA 


— SUTRA XII. 265 

car. practise Kriya and Charya ; the Charyaviin is alone entitled to 
practise Charya. So that the faultless Jliana-guru is the Guru of 
all the Margis. He is God Himself. Worship Him accordingly. 


Adhikarana IV. 


, THT NECESSITY OF A GURU. 

6. By means of Mantras, medicines, Yoga practices and 
herbs and medicinal stones, and other such means as are set forth 
in the Tantras, one can secure the knowledge of the Vedas and the 
SJAtras, knowledge of past, present and future, and the endless 
occult powers. But the knowledge of God can only be secured by 
the grace of the Guru, and not by any other means. Kven the 
above-mentioned powers can be secured by the Guru’s grace. 

THE DIFFERENT WAY" OF GRAGE BY THE GURU. 

7. i uJjj^cUosr^yQssTsn^ix 

uizrnzz j9 a.2 srfirs. ui nuuesr (vj>2 c"3t pzt^ 

;zr^rn?- i iAvlQsz Qusr^j. 

cu -ua.’srf? 

iS:<£ 3 jj euTj&zi a.n<£)z S s > r ' v ■ir 

.iS jje^tSQ sr, A j. u/r ~ & i 

u f~ * $ zz-Q-fn u.nQunjt> f s,Qu.'jj~ 

1 > s f *gil unifjp.ifnQez, 

If one does worship his gracious Guru, as the Para- 
i rahmam, a-> Para-bivath, and Para-Jliana, and as all the manifest- 
at'f-i o iara, then Guru becoming God Himself will convert the 
d- tip e into !.i=> Horm By means of touch, thought and sight, in 
the -amc way as the fowl and tortile and fish hatch their eggs by 
touch and thought and sight respectively. 

May the Grace of Arul-Nandi descend on all! 






< 






i, 



f. 


i. 


< 


r 




I' 


/ 



4 


I 


4 


4 


* 




( 


Glossary and Index. 


[XCTE. — L. denotes terms used in Logic , which are used and 
explained in the first book. The numbers indicate the pages 
and the references are given where the subject matter is 


more or less dealt with.] 

A 

Abhiva, 3. Non existence. 

Abheda, 103. Oneness. 

Abhidharma, 25. Cede of morality. 

Abhinna. Oneness. 

Abhinna-Chit-baktid The Intelli¬ 
gence which is one with God. 

Abhisbeka. Bathing in water. 

Achala. Unchanging. > 

Achaitanya, 39 \ 

Achit, 203, 213 Xon-Intelligent. 

A<*hetana 

Adhnrma. Opposed to virtue. 

Adhikara. Authority. 

Ad likarana, 123. An argument 
comprising: ( 1) Vishaya —The 
proposition, (2) Sanuaya —The 
doubt or objections, (3) Punv.- 
fa'sha —The Theory refuted, ("4) 
Sidd . r.ia —I he Theory proved 
or r tab'ished and ($> Suntati — 
The ■■•-jucQce in the argument. 

Ad iva-*, 223. Lit. Path. Physical 
c..\ c<ope« of the soul through 
which it ascends up. 

Ad'ti. A \'edic Godd**ss, correspon¬ 
ding to the* unnnd Kudrajaguest. 

Adri*hf, :wn. U”n perceived. 

Advaita. 163. Non-diffcrent, An- 
anya. 


y 

Advaita-lakshana. Nature of Ad¬ 
vaita. 

Advaita-siddhanta, 64. 

v 

Ad' - aita-siddhantis. baiva Siddhan- 
tis. 

Adhyanta-bhava, 4. L. 

Agalya. A Rishi’s wife who was 
seduced by India. 

Agastya. A great Rishi. 

Aghoram. Pleasant; not fearful. 
Agni. Fire. 

Agnihotra. Fire sacrifice 
Ahankara, 181. Egoism, Anava, 
one of the three impurities. 
Ahahkuravadi. An egoistic person. 
Ahambrahmasmi, 96. ‘ I become 

God.’ 

Ahimsa,24. Abstention from killing. 
Ahitam. Pain. 

Ahiiman. A Zoroastrian God. 

Ahura. The same. 

Aikyam, 164. A mode of sameness. 
Aitlgam, 3. Tradition, L. 

Aj.t. Birthless. 

A j liana. Ignorance. 

Akshara, 199. Letter; Imperishable. 
AJavai. Logic. 

Amlnlam. Court; Hall. 

Auiiita. Immortal; ambrosia. 
Anirita Bindhu. Name of an Upa- 
ni >hat. 



268 


sivajnAna SIDDHIYAR 


Anadi. Eternal, Beginningless. 
Anadi-mukta, 72. Soul ever-free. 
Anantar, 132. A class of Gods of 
the order of the Pra]ayakalars. 
Ananta-darsanam. Limitless sight. 
Ananta-Jnanam. Endless wisdom. 
<■ Ananta-sukham. Limitless bliss. 
Ananta-Viryam. Limitless power. 
Ananya, 163. Non-different; in¬ 
separable, Advaita. , 

Andaja, 33. Born of eggs. 

Anisa, 200. Soul. 

Anirvachana 1 Indescriba- 

Anirvachaniyam 126 J ble. 

Ahgas, Parts. 

Anantasana. One of the Yoga 
postures. 

Anvaya-anumana, 6. L. 
Anyonya-bhava, 4. L. 

Anumana, 2. Inference. L. 
Anugraha, 135. Grace, 1. 

Anvaya. L. 

Anubhava, 59.1 _ 

Anubhuti. 238. } Experience. 

Antas Satvam. Inner purity. 
Annamayakosa, 94. See Kosa. 
Ariu Sadasivas. A class of Gods 
belonging to the order of Vijtla- 
nakalas. 

Anuvaka. A division of the Veda. 
Anu, 29, 204. Atom. 

Antaryami. The immanent. 
Anusasana parva. A chapter of 
Mahabharata. 

Anyataj iiana. L. 

Antahkarana, 10, 104, 198. Inter¬ 
nal organs likes manas, etc. 
Apanaya, 8. L. 

Apurva, 86. Not ordinary; Not 
easily known. 


A para Mukti, 131. A lower kind 
of Moksha. 

Apakkuvar. Beings not spiritually 
advanced. 

Aru pa, 26, 135. Formless. 

Arupi, 1, 32. One without Form. 

Anatta, 57. The doctrine of Bud¬ 
dhists denying the existence of 
the sohl. " 

Arthapatti, 2. L. 

Arjuna, 9. A Hero of the Maha¬ 
bharata. 

Arhatship, 57. Seership. 

Aru], 26. Grace. 

Aru] Sakti. Grace of God. 

Ardhanarisvar?. God, half Isvara 
and half Uma. 

Artha. Wealth. 

Aruga, 66 . The Person adored by 
Jains as God. 

V' 

Arunandi Sivacharya. The author 
of this book. 

1 

Arunagirinadar, 61. A great yogi, 
the author of Tiruppngal and 
Kaniarai.ubhuti etc. 


Asatya. Untruthfulness. 

Asatvada, 28 ^ 

Asat, 108, defined, 215 | 
Asat-sat-vada, 28. y c 
Asat-asat-vada, 28 | 

Asatya Nirmana J =1 "S ~ 

Asanas, 96 Yoga postures. 

Ashta Sakti 
Ashta Murti 
Ashta Vidyesvaras. A class of the 
order of Pra]ayakalas. 

Asoka, 54. Well-known Buddhist 
Indian Emperor. 

Astinasti, 31, 39. Yes and No; a 
doctrine of the Jains. 


v . 

G r-« 

u B 

-c E w 
o 3 
o ’3 

in 


Eight Powers of God, 
Eight Forms of God. 




< 


GLOSSARY AND INDEX 


Asuras. Classes of mortals opposed 
to the Devas. 

Asuddha Maya, 17S, 1S3. Impure 
Maya, the secondary evolute of 
matter. 

Asuddha Adbvas. Impure adhvas. 

Atharva Veda, iog. The 4th Veda. 

Atisukshma. Most subtle. 

AtyantabhaYa. L. 

Avatars, 116. Incarnations. 

Avichcha. Avidya, Anava. 

Avidya Ignorance, Anava. 

Avasthas, 95, 20S, 209, 210. Con¬ 
ditions of man in bis physical 
body. 

Avyakta, 129. I'nmanifest; Pri¬ 
mordial. 

Avyakrita. Not made. 

Ayan. Brahma. 

Ayonija. 35. He who is not born 
of the womb. 

A 

Abhasa. Modification. 

Achara. Conduct. 

Acharya Teacher, Guru. 

Adharas. Physical supports or 
envelopes. , 

Adimulam. The First Cayse. 

Agama, 2, S, 46. The twenty-eight 
Sivagamas ; the Veda. . 

Agama-pranru^a. Sruti pramapa ; 
one of the three modes of proof; 
authority. 

Ajtvaka, 72, 74. One of the Jain 
sects. 

A-jAaiakti, 13}. Power of God. 

Aka$, lit her. 

Akamiya. S'* Karma. 

Ananda, 1. Bliss. 


269 

Ananda-maya-kosa. One of the 
physical sheaths of the soul. 

Anava, Anava-mala, 134. Defined, 
1S5. One of the three Impuri¬ 
ties of the Soul; Ignorance; 
Egoism. 

Apastambha Sutras. Code cf ritu- . 
als framed by Apastambha. 

Arambhavada. One of the Maya- 
vada schools. 

Asrams, 9. Social orders. 

Atma, 27, 28, 29, 43. Soul. 

Atma Bandham, 67. Bond attach¬ 
ing to the soul. 

Atmatatva, 183. See Tatva. 

Ayur Veda. Book of Hygienics. 

B 

Balarama. Brother of Krishna. 

Bhagavan. Lord. 

Bhakti Marga. Path of Love. 

Bhanda. Bond, limitation. 

Badarayana. The author of Ved¬ 
anta Sutras. 

Bhavana. Mode of thought, mode 
of worship, Sadhana. 

Bhavana Skanda, 26. One of the 
five Skandas of the Buddhists ; 
Tendencies. 

Bhashyakara. Author of a com¬ 
mentary. 

Bhaskaracharya, 105. An expoun¬ 
der of Parinamavada. 

Bha{$acharya, 82. A redactor of 
Purvamtmamsa doctrines. 

Bhcda. Different. 

Bhcdabhcda. Different-non-differ- 
cnt. 

BhikshSdana. Mendicant ; Form 
assumed by God in vanquishing 
'laruk.tvana Kishis. 


270 


sivajnAna siddhiyAr 


Bhoda. Knowledge. 

Bhoga, 141. Enjoyment; Bliss. 

Bhiita, 181. Ahankara united to 
Tamas (Guna). 

Bhutarupa, 26. Material Form. 

Bhuvana, 132. Worlds. 

Bothi. The sacred fig tree. 

Brahma. One of the Hindu Trinity; 
the author of creation. 

Brahmacharya, 24. The life of a 
bachelor. 

Brahmajhana. Divine Wisdom. 

Brhmananda, 64. Divine Bliss. 

Brahma Sutras. The Sariraka Mi- 
mamsa Sutras ; otherwise called 
Vedanta Sutras ascribed to Bada- 
ra.yai.ia. 

Brahmotsava, 146. The principal 
festival to God in Hindu temples. 

Brihaspati, 9. The guru of Indra, 
the reputed author of the Char- 
vaka system. 

Buddha, 3, 14, 27. The author of 
Buddhism. 

Buddhi, 10, 1S1. Intellect. 

C 

Chandas. One of the six angas, 
relating to Vedic metre. 

Chandogya. One of the principal 
Upanishats. 

Chandramapdala. The world of 
the moon. 

Ch.'uvaka, 9. Materialist. 

Charyu, 71. j^One of the Four 

Charyapiida. j Paths of Salvation. 

Chaitanya, 39. Intelligence. 

Chaturthi. Fourth day of the ti this. 

Chelas. Disciples. 

Chit, 1, 203. Intelligence. 


Chitachit, 203. Sat-asat; Soul. 

Chi takas, 2. The plane of Intelli¬ 
gence. 

Chitsakti, 136. God’s Intelligence, 
considered as His power. 

Chitsorupi. God having Intellect 
for His Form. 

Chitambaram, 55. Same as Giit- 
akas. ' 

Chitta, 183. Mind. 

D 

Dahara Upasana. Worship of God 
in the heart, in man’s soul. 

Daksha, in, 153. Son of Brahma. 

Dakshayani, 153. Uma, daughter 
of Daksha. 

Dakshinilmurti. God Siva when 
He assumed the form of Guru to 
teach the sons of Brahma. 

Damaraka. 131. Drum. 

Darsana. Vision. 

Dasamarga. Same as Charyamarga 
or pada. 

Deva. God. 

Devaram, 136. The principal 
Hymn book among Saivas, com¬ 
posed by Saints Jnanasambantha 
Vagisa and Sundara. 

Dharma, 34, 35. Virtue, code of 
Religioh, of ethics. 

Dharaiia. Ons of the. eight kinds 
of Yoga. 

Dhyana. Meditation ; One of the 
eight kinds of yoga. 

V 

Dhurjati. Siva. 

Dipa. Light. 

Digambara, 66. A sect of Jains. 

Divyagamas. The sacred Saiva 
A gam as. 


271 


GLOSSARY AND INDEX 


Diksha, 223. The initiation and 
spiritual ceremonies a disciple 
goes through to secure salvation. 

Drishtam. Virion. 

Dravidabhashya. The famous 
Tamil commentary on Sivajhana 
bodham by Sivajhana Yogi. 

Thavya, 24. Substance. 

Du pa. Incense. 

Durgapuja, 150. The worship of 
Siva’s Sakti during the Dasara 
festival. 

G 

Gandha. Sandal paste. 

Gandharvaveda. Science of music. 

Gane^a, x, 122. Son of God, Pra- 
nava symbolised. 

Garudamantra. The Sacred sylla¬ 
ble for contemplating the’Deity 
Garuda. 

Gautama, 27. Buddha. 

Ghora I Fearful. 

Ghoram 1 

Gita, 25, 58, 63, 103. The famous 
episode in Mahabharata. 

Gomukhusana. One of the Yoga 
postures. 

God Kumara. God Subramanyu, 
son of God Siva. ■> 

I 

Gri'na tha. 1 he house-holder. 

I 

Gupa, 24, 29, to. AttribuD, attri¬ 
bute of matter. ’ 

Gupi, 29. 'I he thing or person 
posies ing an attribute. 

Guru, 235. Teacher. 

Guhyam. Secret. 


✓ 

Hara. God Siva. 

I fari. God Vi hpu. 


Havis. Oblation. 

Hetu, 6. Reason. 

Hiranya. Gold. 

Hitam. What is pleasurable or 
good, 

Homa. Sacrifice. 

Hotri Diksha. One of the Saivite 
rites. 

Hridayam. Heart. 

I 

Ichcha, 1, 99. Will. 

Ichchasakti, 2. God's power as 
•Will. 

Irupa-Irupahtu. The other work 
composed by St. Arunandi Siva- 
charya. 

Iruvinaiyoppu. Karmasamya or 
becoming balanced in good and 
evil. 

lyama or Yama, 231. One of the 
eight kinds of Yoga. 

I 

]Sa. 2. j 

liana. God, Siva. 

livara 

J 

Jada, 127. Matter. 

J^g ra > 95 - \ Waking state. 

Jagravastha. ) 

Jaina, 66. A follower of Jainism. 

Jainism, The Religion of Jains. 

Jaimini, 53. The author of Purva* 
mlmamsa system. 

Japam. Meditation, worship. 

Jtva (defined 193) j Soul, Atma, Sat- 

Jivatma. J asat, Chitachit. 

jtvanmukta, 57, 237. The soul 
that had l>ecome freed while the 
body exi ts. 


\ 


35 


2/2 5iVAJNAN'A 

Juana (defined) 198, Wisdom, 
knowledge, Intelligence. PaSa 
Jnana =The knowledge of the 
senses etc., as one’s soul. PaSu 
Juana = The knowledge of one’s 
self; the Ahambrahmasmi know- 
, ledge. Pati Juana **The know¬ 
ledge of God as the all in all; 
the entering into that Divine Self. 
Jfianakanda, 8. Portion of the 
Vedas and Agamas treating of 
the paths of Salvation. 

Jnanapada or Jnanamarga. Path 
of knowledge. « 

Jnanasambandha. One of the Saiva 
Samaya Achuryas. 

Jnanendriya, 94, 1S1. Sense organs 
like the eye etc. 

Jfianasakti, 1. God’s Intelligence. 
Jfiani. Sage or Seer. 

Jfianadiksha, 223. One of the kinds 
of Diksha. 

Jnanaprakasar, 101. One of the 
commentators on Sivajnanasid- 
dhiyar. 

Juaturu, 93. I The knower 
Jnata, 29. J 

Jneya, 29. The object known. 
Jyoti. Light. 

K 

V" 

Kailasa. The Sacred Siva Hill. 
Kaivalya. The state of Bliss. 
Kaivalya Upanishat. One of the 
Upanishats. 

Kala, 6, 132, 179. One of the 36 
tatvas. They divide themselves 
into five kinds: Nivritti, Pratish- 
tha, Vidyft, Santi and Santyatita. 
Ka]i. Lit. meaning Fire; Mayasakti, 
Sivasakti. 


siddhiyAr 

Kalidasa. The great Sankrit dra¬ 
matist. 

Kalpas. One of the 6 Vedic ahgas. 
Kama. Desire. 

Kamadeva. The God of Love, 
Manmatha. 

Kilmya. Karmic. 

Kannudaiya Vajlalar, 71. A great 
Tamil SAge, author Of Olivilodu- 
kkam, 

Kaman Pandigai. Feast in honour 
of Cupid. 

Kandaranubhuti, 61. A precious 
little Tamil poem composed by 
Arunagirinathar. 

Kapila, V3. The^reputed author of 
Sahkhya philosephy. 

Kapilavastu. The birth place of 
Buddha. 

Karma, it, 17, 19, 20, 32, 42, difin- 
ed 167, 175. 

Karmendriyas, 94, 181. Physical 
organi like)the hands etc. 
Karmakanda. The portion of the 
Vedas or Agamas treating of 
rituals. 

Karmasamya. Being balanced in 
good and evil, Iruvinaiyoppu. 
Ka'raikkalammaiyar, 35. One of 
. ' the 63 Saints author of the Ar- 
puda T.iruvandadi, etc. 
Karanavastha. Condition of the 
Soul in a subtle body; Sukshma- 
vastha. 

Kartikai. The name of the month 
Nov.—Dec. 

Katchi. Vision. 

Kesava. G6d Vishnu. 
Kevalavastha. The driginal con¬ 
dition of the Soul, before evolu¬ 
tion. 


/ 


t 


GLOSSARY AND INDEX 


2/3 


FCoIas, 206. Physical envelopments 
of the Soul, 5 in number, called 
Annamaya, Pranamaya, Mano- 
maya, Vijnanamya and Ananda- 
maya. 

Krishna. An avatar of God Vishnu. 
Kriya, 1, 71. Power, work, rituals. 
KrYyasakti, 2. God as Power. 
Kriyapada. 'One of the four margas. 
Kshanabhahga. Destruction from 
moment to momeut. 

Kshatriyas. One of the four Hindu 
castes. 

Kudila. Otherwise called Kunda- 

lini Sakti. The Suddha-mayu 

tatva. , 

Kumara. God Subramanya. 

Kumarasamhita, 142. Kalidasa’s 

famous epic relating to thp birth 

of God Subramanya. 

Kundalakesi, 29. One of the five 

Tamil classics by a Jain author. 

Kunti. Mother of Pandava Princes. 

Kun Pirdiya. The Papdiya king 

whose disease was cured by St. 

Triujf.aDasambandhar. 

Kuj;a]. The sacred moral treatise 

in Tamil by St. Tiruvajluvar. 

Kurukshetra. The famous battl.e- 

fie.d where the Kurus and Pun- 

davas fought. * ^ 

* * 

L 

Lalita-ahasranama. The thousand 
names of SivaSakti. 

Ia>kayata, 3, 9. Materialist. 

M 

> 

Mttdhavacharya. The famous och- 
arya v. ho commented on the Ved¬ 


anta sutras, and propounder of 
the Dvaita philosophy. 

Madbyamika, 24, 50, 51. 

Madhyama. One of the four vaks. 

Mahabali. The king whom God 
Vishnu as Vamana vanquished. 

Maharishi. Great sage. 

Mahayana, 49. One of the Bud¬ 
dhist schools. 

Mahat.> Buddhi; one of the thirty 
six tatvas. 

Mahadevi. The great Goddess, 
Parvati. 

Mahavira. The author of Jaina 
system. 

Mehesvara, 64. God Siva. 

Mahabharata, 46. The great Indian 
epic and Itihasa. 

Mabu Akas. The unconfmed at¬ 
mosphere or Ether. 

Mahalakshmi. The Sakti of God 
Vishnu. 

Mahasarasvati. The Sakti of God 
Brahma. 

Mai. God Vishnu. 

Mala, 20. Impurity, generic name 
like Pasa for Anava, Maya and 
Karma. 

Malaparipakam. The maturity of 
mala; the second step in soul’s 
emancipation of the mala bon¬ 
dage. 

Mamakura. The feeling of me and 
mine. 

Mapikkavu^agar, 55. One of the 
four Saiva Samaya Acharyas, 
author of Tiruv.ichaka. 

Mapimekhnlai, 25. One of the 
great Tamil classics, by a Bud¬ 
dhist author. 


274 


blVAjNAXA SIDDHIYAR 


Mantra, 5, 8. A sacred syllable or 
syllables for meditation. Portion 
of the Veda. 

Mantrarajam, 1. The king of man¬ 
tras. Pranava is socalled. 

Mantramurti, 156. 

Manomayakosa, 94, 206. See Kosa. 

Maruts. Vedic deities. 

Margas, 230, 231, 232. The differ¬ 
ent ways of reaching God, called 
Charya, Kriya, Yoga and Jnana 
otherwise called Dasamarga, Sat- 
putramarga, Sahamarga and San- 
marga, also divided into Karma 
and Jiianamargas etc. 

Matsya purana. One of the 18 
puranas. 

Mauna, 74. Silence. 

Maya, 20, 129, (defined 179). One 
of three impurities or bondages 
(Pasa) of the soul. 

Mfiyabhandam. Bondage of Maya. 

Mayavadi, 49, 93. Hindu Idealist. 

Mayan, 113. God of Vishnu. 

Mayeya, 118. One of the 5 malas. 

Medhapatim. Lord of sacrifices. 

Meykandadeva, 59, 123. The fam¬ 
ous author of Sivajnanabodham 
in Tamil and the expounder of 
Saiva Advaita Siddhanta. 

Mimamsaka. The follower of Pur- 
vamimamsa philosophy. 

Misrama. Mixed. 

Moha. Desire. 

Mohini. Other name for Mulapra- 
kriti. 

Moksha, 67. Release from bond¬ 
age, Mukti. 

Mokshanandam, 97. Bliss of 
Moksha. 


Mudalnul. The first book, the re¬ 
vealed book. 

Mukti, 19, 23. Same as Moksha. 

Mdlaprakriti, 80, 180. Same as 
Frakriti, Pradhana, gross matter 
forming the 24 tatvas. The 12 
tatvas above it, form Asuddha 
and Suddha maya. 

Mur tarn. 'Form. 

Murti, 132. He who has Form ; 
God, Deva. 

N 

Nadha, 131. The highest ot the 
36 tatvas. 

Nama, 24. Naive. 

Namarupa Praparicham, 8S. World 
composed of Name and Form. 

Namaskanda. One of the Buddhist 
elements. 

Nannul. A Tamil treatise on 
grammar. 

Nandi, 124. The chamberlain of 
God Siva, the first great teacher 
after God Siva himself who re- 
vealed the Saiva Religion. 

Narayana. God Vishnu. 

Navabheda, 184. The nine forms 
of God. 

Kigandu. Lexicon. 

Nigama, 8/ L. 

Nigrahasthan, 8, L. 

Nikandavadi, 66. One of the Jain 
schools. 

Ninmala or Nirmala. The imma¬ 
culate God. 

Nilakantha Sivacharya, 163. The 

v» I 

famous Saiva commentator on 
the Brahma sutras. 

Nirguna, 1. Without the qualities 
of Satva, Rajas and Tamas. 


/ 


GLOSSARY 

Xirgotram. Without gotram. 

Niradhara. The absolute. 

Nirakara. The same. 

Xirisvara Sankhya. The atheistic 
Sankhya school of philosophy. 

Nirnamam. Without name. 

Xirvikalpa, 5. L. Freedom. 

Nirukta. One of the Vedic adgas. 

XirvachaLa, 94. Beyond speech. 

Nirvana, 26, 57. Annihilation, the 
end postulated by Buddhists. 

Xirvikari, 160. One who is with¬ 
out change. 

Xitya. Eternal. 

Xiyama, 231. One of the S kinds 
of Yoga. 

Xiyati, 179. One of the 36 tatvas. 

Nyaya. Reason, Logic. 

Xyayika, 3, 132. Logician. 

P 

Pada, 132. One of the* Adhvas 
—meaning word. Evolutes of 
matter. 

Padamukti. Physical Heaven, tem¬ 
porary abodes of Bliss. 

Padarthas. Entities. 

Paisanti, 131. One of the 4 vachs. 

Paksham, G. L. ’ 

Paficharatri, 113. A Vaishnava. 

Pahcharatra Agamas. The Vaish- 
nava Agamas. 

Pancbakosa, 95. Sec Kosa. 

Pafichakancbuka. The five coats, 
formed of Kal.t, etc. 

I’auchakritya. '1 he 5 acts of God 
including Srishp (dreation), Sti- 
thi ('protection), Samhar? ( reso¬ 
lution ), 'J irobh iva (<"oncca 1 mcnt), 

Anugraha fUli s). 


AND INDEX 2/ 

Panini, 131. The great Sanskrit 
grammarian. 

Papam, 67. Sin. 

Paramukti. Everlasting Bliss. 

Paravach. One of the Vachs. 

Paramanu, 127. The subtle atom. 

Pararthanumana, 5. L. 

Parasurama. One of the Avatars 
of Vishnu. 

Paras^kti, 2. The great &akti of 
the Lord. 

Para-tantra, 35. One who is con¬ 
trolled by another. 

Parapaksha, 9. The theories of 
schools other than one’s otvn. 

Paramesvara, 48. God. 

Paramariika, 94, 101 Things re¬ 
garded in the absolute. 

Paramatma, 27. God as opposed to 
Jivatma, Soul. 

Paramartha. The Highest Truth. 

Parimelajagar. The famous com¬ 
mentator on the sacred Kura]. 

Parinama, 87. Theory of evolution. 

Parinamavada, 103. See Parinama. 

Parisesha, 3. L. 

Parigraha-sakti. Power of God not 
inherent in Him. 

Parvati. Goddess Umfi. 

Partha. Arjuna. 

Pasu, 23, 193, 205. Soul. 

Pasu-lakshana. The nature of the 
Soul. 

Pasa, 23, 59. See Mala. 

Pasupati. God Siva. 

Pasatchaya, 1, 59, 247. The free¬ 
dom from Mala or Impurity. 

Pati, 23. Lord Siva. 

Pati-juana, 1, 59. 258. See Juana. 

Patitva I^ordship. 

Patanjala. The school of Yoga. 

V 

I 


in 


2/6 


Siv.ajxAna SIDDHIYAR 


Pauranika. A follower of the Pau- 
ranic school of Thought. 
Periyapurapa, 55. The History of 
the Saiva Saints in Tamil com- 

v t 

posed by St. Sekkilar. 

Pipilika. One of the Buddhist 
' arguments; like creeper. 

Pitakas, 24. The canonical books 
of the Buddhists. 

Prabhava, 4. L. 

Prabhakara, 86. One of the Purva- 
mimamsa school. 

Pradhana, 200. ^ Gross matter or 
Prakriti, 109. J Maya of the low¬ 
est order. 

Pita, 1G1. The pedestal. 
Prajayakalas, 222. One of the 3 
classes of souls with Anava and 
Karma mala alone 
Pramada, 4. L. 

Pramana, 3, 4. Prool. L. 
Pramithi, 4. L. 

Prameya, 4. L. 

Prana, 197. Breath, Life. 

Pranava, 1, 199. The sacred sylla¬ 
ble Om. 

Pranamaya-kosa, 94. See Kosa. 
Prilnayuma. See Yoga, 232. 
Prana-vayu, j 31. The life breath. 
Prapaucha. The world. 

Prarabdha, 20. 1 _ 

1) - 1 ji i 1 See Karma. 

Prarabdha karma. J 

Pratishtakala. See Kala. 

Pratidhvamsa-bhava, 4. L. 

Pratijna, S. L. 

Pratyaksha, 3. L. 

Puja. Worship. 

Puyyam, 67. Virtue, good. 

Puranas. The Sacred Histories 

of the Indian Religion. 

Purusha, in, 180. Soul, person. 

/ 


Purohit. The priest. 

Puriyashtaka, 181. The subjective 
body of the soul formed of the 5 
tanmatras and Manas, Buddhi 
and Ahahkara. 

Purvamimamsa, 82, 127. A Vedic 
school of philosophy. 

Purvadarsana-Anumana, 8. L. 

Purvapaksha. The argument re¬ 
futed. 

R 

Ruga, 180. One of the 36 tatvas. 

Rajas, 80. One of the 3 gunas. 

Ramayapa. The famous Itihasa 
with Rama for'its hero. 

Ramanuja, 56. The expounder of 
Vaishnava school of philosophy 
and commentator on the Brahma 
Sutras. 

Rudra. Siva. 

Rudrabhfimi. The burning ground. 

Rftpa, 26, 135. Form. 

Ruparupa, 155. Fortn-nc form. 

Rupi, 1, 12, 32. One with form. 

Rupctrupi, One with form-no form. 

Rupa-skanda. One of the five 
Skandas or material elements 

t 

.according to Buddhists. 


Sadhana. Means of Salvation. 
Sadushtayam. The four. 

Saguna. Attached to the 3 gunas 
Satva, Rajas and Tamas. 
Sahamiirga. See marga. 

Saint SundarK. One of the four 
Saiva Samaya Acharyas. 

Saint Appar. Do. 

Saint Jnfmasambandha. Do. 


GLOSSARY AND INDEX 


2/7 


Saloka-mukti. The Bliss of heaven 
in which the soul is resident in 
Heaven with God. 

Samanya. Ordinary, general. 

Samadhi. One of the eight kinds 
of Yoga. 

Sambhava, 3. L . 

Sambandhar. Otherwise called 
Jnanasambandhar or Tiru-Juana- 
sambandhar. 

Samhara, 1, 114, 135. Destruction, 
Resolution. 

Samavaya, 164. Inherent connec¬ 
tion like fire and heat. 

Samipya. Dwelling near God in 
Heaven. 

Samsargabhava, 4. ^ L. 

Samsara-sagara. The Ocean of 
Life in the world. 

Samanya, 5. L. 

Samudaya. The collection. 

Samuduyavada, 132. A view of 
union postulated by Buddhists. 

Sahgraha, 24. Congregation. 

Sanatkumara. Son of Brahma, 
and disciple of God Siva and one 
of the first teachers of Saiva 
Religion. 

Sankhya, in. The school of phi¬ 
losophy by this name. > 

Sinkhya karika. The aphorisms 
which explain the Sunkhya Phi¬ 
losophy. 

SanmArga. See Marga. 

Sanuna, 3G, 41. Theories of pro¬ 
duction of life for one another 
according to Buddhists. (I)lpnka 
Santana, 'Iara Santana, Pipllika 
Santana.}' 

Sirayuja. Bom of body. 

Sapaks .am, fi. /.. 


Sarbu-nul. The works that follow' 
the Revealed works of God. 

Saptabhangi, 31. Astinasti doctrine 
of the Jains. 

Sarupya. Dwelling in God’s Hea¬ 
ven with God’s form as His. 

Sarvasvatantra, 35. One who con¬ 
trols all. 


See Satvada. 


Descent of 


Sat, 1, 10S. The True. 

Sat-asat. Soul, which is neither 
Sat nor A sat (matter.) 

Satvada, 2S. One of the 7 kinds 
of the Sapta Bharigi Nyaya. 

Sat-,sat-vada. 1 

Sat-asat-vada. j 

Satyam. Truth. 

Sattinipada. The 
God’s Grace. 

Satputra-marga. See Marga. 

Satva, So. Gur.a. 

Sautrantika Buddha, 24. A sect of 
the Buddhists. 

Savikarpa, 4. L. 

SaiyOgam. One of the different 
kinds of relations between objects. 

Sayujva. The real moksha-Bliss 
from which there is no return. 

Shadadhva-murti. He whose form 
is the six Adhvans. 


Siddha. One who has attained 
the Psychic powers of the Yogi, 
a Yogi. 

Siddhanta Dipika. A Monthly 
Journal published by the Mey- 
kandan Press in which Sivajnana 
Siddhiyar originally appeared. It 
is now in its 13th year. 

Skandapurara. One of the eight¬ 


een pur..ijns. 

Skanda-ashp. The festival in honour 
of God Skanda or Subramanya. 


278 


SIVAJNANA S1DDH1YAR 


Skambha. The Sacrificial Post 
in the Atharva Veda addressed 
as God Himself. 

Smasana. Crematorium. 

Smritis. The books prescribing 
one’s duties in Hindu Religion. 

Soham. ‘I am that’ the same as 
Tatvamasi Bhavana. 

Sohambhavana. The same. 

Srishti. Creation. 

Sthanu. God. * 

Stithi, i, 135. Protection or deve¬ 
lopment. 

Sthula, 38. Gross. 

Sthuladama'vach, 132. One of the 
Vachs. 

Stula sarira. The gross body. 

Subramapya. 122. God Skanda, 
Son of God. 

Sukshma, 38, 131. Subtle. 

Sukshma sarira. Subtle body. 

Sukshma vach, 132. One of the 
Vachs- 

Sukshmadara vach. Do. 

Suhrita. The well-wisher. 

Sunyam. Void, non-apparent. 

Sunyavadis, 49, 128. A class of 
Bnddhists. 

Supaksham. One’s own Theory. 

Sushupti, 95. \ The 3rd avastha 

Sushuptyavastha J of the soul, deep 
sleep. 

Sutra, 26. 1 A string of aphorisms 

Sutta, 25. J or verses. 

Svanubhuti. Svanubhavam. The 
experience of the soul in its high¬ 
est condition. 

Svapna, 95. Dream. 

Svapnavastha. Dream condition. 

Svaprakasa, 93. Self-luminous. 

Svampara-prakasa. Self-luminous 
and illuminating others. 


Svarta anumana, 5. L. 

Svayambhu. One without origin. 

Svayamjyoti. Self-luminous Light* 

Svabha Linga, 3. L. 

* 

S 

Sabda, 87. Sound. 

Sabda Brahmavadi, 87, 154. 'The 
Purvamimamsaka. ‘ 

v 

Saivagamas. The 28 works of the 
Saivas revealed by God. 

V' 

Saiva-Siddhantam. The philoso¬ 
phy of the Agamas. 

Saiva, 191. A follower of Saiva 
Religion. 

v 

Sakalar. On^. of the three orders 
of souls. 

v» 

Sakti, 122, 158. Power of God. 

v* 

Sakti-bheda, 184. Different kinds 
of Sakti. 

V* V* e 

Sambhu. God Siva. 

V* * 

Sankara, 56. ^One of the com- 

Sahkaracharya. ( mentators on the 
Brahma Sutras and expounding 
the Ekatmavada Theory. 

Santikala, I3 2.1 See Ka]a 

Santyatitakala > 

Sivam, 20, 160. God. 

•Seshvara, 29, 30. Theistic school 
of philosophy. 

v t 

Sivalinga. The symbol of God. 

Sivaloka. Brahmaloka or the Hea¬ 
ven in which final Bliss is secured. 

Sivajiiana. Divine Wisdom or 

knowledge. 

Sivajiianabodham. The famous 
Agama wcirk translated by Saint 
Meykapdadeva into ‘Tamil. 

Sivagamas. The books revealed 
by Lord Siva. 


/ 

t t 


GLOSSARY and index 


279 


Sivajnani. One who has attained 
to Sivajfiana. 

Sivajnana-yogi. The famous 
Tamil Grammarian, poet and 
philosopher and author of com- 
mentaries on Sivainanabodha and 
Siddhiyar. 

O* — J V 

SivJcharya. Teacher of the Saiva 
faith. 

Siva-sama vadis. A school of 
Saiva philosophy. 

Sivarpana. Dedication. 

V ^ 

Siva-tatva. See Tatva. 

Siva-sat. God as Sat and know¬ 
ledge. 

Sri Kasivilsi Sentir^Lthaiyar. The 
great Saivite writer, who has 
translated §rikan*ha’s Saiva 
Bhashya on the Vedanta sutras 
into Tamil. 

Srikaethar. See Xilakanta Siva- 
c’narya. 

Sri Pai'chakshara. The J sacred 
mantra of five syllables; Xama- 
Sivaya or Sivayanama. 

Suddha. Pure. 

Suddh.tsuddha mlya. Called also 
A'uddha Maya composed of the 
Vidya tatvas. 

Suddha may.Vakti, 132. Material . 
power of God composed of the 
Siva tatvas. 

v* j 

Suddhiivastha. Pure condition of 
the soul freed from matter. 

S rapadma, 117. The Asura des¬ 
troyed by God Kumara. 

Sv^taja, 33. Born from sweat. 

Sve* 1 vatara Upani h;tt. One of 
the principal Upariishats form¬ 
ing one of the Pad ha Rudra. 

W' 

Sv't rnbara. A cM of the Jain . 

Z f > 


T 

Tadatmya, 163. One becoming the 
other. 

Taijasa, 1S1. One of the evolutes 
of matter or Prakriti. 

Tamas, 80. See Guna. 

Tanmatras, 181. See Tatva. 

Tantra. 5, 8. One of the divisions 
of Agama Pramana. 

Tapas, 67. Ascetic practices. 

Tarkikas. Logicians. 

Turukavana, 91. The forest where 
certain Rishis performed Tapas 
and where they were vanquished 
by God as Bhikshacjana. 

Tatpurusha. One of the Brahma 
mantras. 

Tatvamasi. One of the Maha 
vakyas. * That Thou art.’ 

Tatva. Are evolutes of matter or 
Maya divided into 36 classes. The 
highest is called Suddha-maya or 

V 

Kudila or Kundalini Sakti. Prom 
this there are five Tatvas called 
Siva Tatvas The middle most is 
called Suddhasuddha or Asuddha 
maya with seven evolutes like 
Kala etc. From one of these 
arises Asuddha maya or Mohini, 
Mulaprakriti or Prakriti, or Pra- 
dhana with 24 gross evolutes 
from Buddhi. Sec the Table 01 
Tatvas. 

Tatvatrayam. A text-book of tho 
Vaishijavas. 

Taitlinya Upanishat. One of the 
prin ipal Upanishats. 

'1 ayununavar. A great Tamil 
b'imt of the 17th century. 

'I irodhana. A jiower of the Lord 
which veils the souls. 


2 So 


SIVAJNAN\ S 1 DDH 1 YAR 


Tirobhava £>akti. The same. 

Tirobhava. Same as above. 

Tiruvachakam. The famous work 
of St. Mapikkavachakar. 

Tiruvannamali. The famous place 
in South Arcot District where in 
the Shrine, Gcd is worshipped as 
Fire. 

Tiruvadavurar purapam. The his¬ 
tory of Saint Mapikkavachakar. 

Tiruva]]uvar. The great' Tamil 
moralist, the author of the Sacred 
Kuj;al. 

Tiruvarutpayan. One of the four¬ 
teen Siddhanta Sastras. 

Tirumantram. The famous work 
of 3000 verses composed by St. 
Tirumular. 

Tirumular. One of the 63 Saiva 
Saints. 

Trodayi. Same as Tirobhava. 

Tripadarthas. The three entities 
Pati, Pasu and Pasa. 

Tripura asuras. The Asuras with 
3 forts vanquished by God £iva. 

Tripura samharam. The destruct¬ 
ion of Tripura. 

Trimurti, 157. The Trinity. 

Tryambaka. The Three-eyed. 

Turiya, 95. The fourth condition 
of the soul, beyond Sushupti. 

Tiriyavastha. The same. 

Turiyattta. The fifth condition of 
the soul 

Turiyattta avastha. The same. 

U 

Uma, 40. Goddess Parvati. 

Umaptisivacharya. One of the 4 
Santana Acharyas and author of 
8 out of the 14 Siddhanta Sastras. 


Uma Haimavatl. Daughter of 
Himbtparvata Maharaja. 

Upadesa, 5. L. 

Upadesam. The spiritual instruc¬ 
tion. 

Upasana, 238. Worship. 

Upamana, 3. L. 

Upameya. L. , 

Upamanyu. The Risfii who.gave 
initiation to Sri Krishpa. 

Uttama. The Highest. 

V 

Vach. The evolutes of matter from 
Suddha maya. 

Vadana. Same^as Vedana. Sense 
experience. 

Vami, 12. I Follower of Varna 

Vamachari. J marga. 

Vamana. The Dwarf incarnation 
of God Vishpu. 

Vaikari. One of the Vachs. 

Vamadeva. A Vedic Rishi. 

Varanasi. Kasi or Benares. 

Vasana. What becomes attached 
to man as a result of sense expe¬ 
rience or Karma. 

Vasanamala, 241. The same. 

Vaikari vach. One of the Vachs. 

.Vaibhashika, 24. One of the fol¬ 
lowers pf Buddha. 

Vaiseshika. One of the 6 systems 
of Hindu philosophy! 

Varna. Caste or colour. 

Vaikuntam. The abode of God 
Vishnu. 

Vasuki. The serpent with which 
as rope the Gods churned the 
milky ocean. * 

Vasudeva. God Vishpu. 

Vasana-linga-anumana, 8. L. 


GLOSSARY AND INDEX 


Vayu. Air or Wind. 

Vayu-purana. One of the eighteen 


puranas. 

Vahini. A river. 

Vayu-samhita. A portion of the 
Vayu purana or Siva Maha 


Purana. 

Veda, 46. The Highest authorita¬ 
tive book among Hindus. 
Vedana. Same as Vadana. 

Vedana skanda, 26. See Vadana. 
Venantins. Usually those who are 
Hindu Idealists. 

Vibhu, 204. Omnipresent. 


Vidya, 179. 1 g ee Tatva 

\idya-tatva. 5ee Iaua * 

Vijnanaskanda, 26. One of the 
elements according to Buddhism. 

Vijfianamayakosa, 94. See Kosa. 

Vijrlanakalars, 222. The Highest 
order among souls possessing 
only Apava-mala. 

Vinayaka, 1. God Gapesa. 

Vindhu. The 2nd of 36 Tatvas. 

Vinaya. One of the canonical 
works of Buddhists. 


Viruddhabhiisha. Absurd language. 
Virabhadra. A manifestation of 
God Siva who destroyed the 
Daksha’s sacrifice. 

Vishnu, 114. One of tfie Hinda 
Trinity. * 

Visvudhika, 139. ,God who is be¬ 
yond the world. 


2S1 

Visvakarana, 140. God who is the 
cause of all. 

Visvantaryami, 140. God who is 
present in all. 

Visvasvarupi, 140. God who is the 
form of all. 

Visesba, 5. L. 

Vivartana, 88. Vivarta, one of the 
idealistis schools, who say souls 
and the worlds emanate from 
God’. 

Vipaksham, 6. L. 

Vratam. Fast. 

Vyatireka-anumana,6. L. 

Vyapakatvam. Omnipresence. 

Vyavahara. As opposed to Para- 
marthika; relatively. 

Vyapaka, 4, 205. Omnipresent. 

Vyapti, 4. L, WTiat is contained. 

Vyapya, 4. L. 


Y 

Yajna, 64. Sacrifice. 

Yajurveda. One of the foui' vedas. 

Yama, 131. One of the 8 kinds of 
Yoga. 

Yoga, 71. Psychical and Spiritual 
practices of eight kinds, see full 
description in p. 1 31. 

Yogapada, 8. See marga. 

Yogi, 6. One who practices Yoga. 

Yogachara, 24. One of the schools 
of Buddhism. 





t 


/ 


r 





ERRATA. 


PAGE LINE 

4 

29 

C5 J 

47 

50 
06 
69 
/I 
76 
7 S 

79 

53 

5 4 

80 

100 

101 

103 23 presense 

111 S fs 

115 23 everyhere 

119 21 cerainly 

121 12 familirize 

123 8 Goden * 

124 9 succssion 

126 14 mnst 

130 35 forme 

1-9 32 Arul-Sakri 

141 3 au 

143 Heading A. I* 

143 7 Rig V la 

143 27 drscribed 


READ 

antecedent non-existence 

insentient 

animals’ 

and 

delusion 

Statement 

with 

could 

excellent 

the 

conclusions 

intelligent 

course 

substance 

real 

it 

presence 

is 

everywhere 

certainly 

familiarize 

Golden 

succession 

must 

from 

Arul-Sakli 

an 

A. 11 . 

Rig Veda 
described 


5 r 
1». 

7 
21 
2 1 
1 

7 

33 

4 

'y “ 

CO 

IO 

17 

29 

27 

17 


FOR 

antecedentn on-existence 

insensient 

animal’s 

aud 

delusian 

Statemeet 

wtih 

conld * 

exellent 

rhe 

cnclusions 

intelligcut 

source 

substance 

rca 

in 



errata 


PACE 

LINE 

152 

28 

152 

2S 


23 

162 

22 

162 

27 

166 

1 / 

166 

35 

i/i Headin 

172 

0 

a 

182 

2 

188 

11 

191 

28 

198 

2 

204 

33 - 

207 

24 

207 

26 

213 

20 

213 

24 

223 

25 

229 

21 

250 

1 / 

231 

12 

231 

27 

232 

2 

232 

13 

242 

15 

243 

24 

260 

4 


FOR 

the 

down words 
of of Vimarsa 
tke 

peopie 

conned ton 

Parcchcha 

A. 111 . 

Devotin 

from 

ysrse 

moderare 

conscirus 

in 

differ cm 

wiil 

buld 

Such 

th 

uot 

hy 

explaineg 

assnmed 

eyery 

Reding 

without 

by 

forom 


READ 

the 

downwards 
of Vimarsa 
the 

people 

connection 

Parechchi 

A. 11 . 

Devotion 

or 

verse 

moderate 

conscious 

r 

is 

different 

wijl 

bulb 

such 

the* 

not 

hy 

explained 
assumed 
^ every 
Reading 
without 

r 

as • 
from 



STUDIES 

S AIV A-SIDDHANTA 

A collection of twenty-four essays in 360 pages embodying 
the critical researches and deep learning of the Author in the field 
of Indian Religion and Philosophy. 

BY 

Sriman J. M. NALLASVAMI PILLAL B.A., B.L. 


Rs. 3 6 or s 1 25 or 5sh. Post free. 

Contents. 

A glance at the following transcript of the list of contents 
will convince any reader of the clear way in which the principles 
and tenets of the Saiva-Siddhanta are laid down in his collection. 


c>* 


l'he Union of Indian Philoso¬ 
phies, an extinct from the 
“ Mail ” 


Flower and Fragrance 
T he Light of Truth or the 
L’nmai Yilakkam 
House of God 
An Another Side > 
Tattvas and Beyond 
The Nature of the Divine 
Personality 

Vowels and Consonants 

(iod and the W orld 

The *1 wo (Icms 

Pome a-per t-> of the God I lead 

Adiiamuhurtam 

» 

An I pani=hat '1 ext 
I hf' Svetasvatara Upani-hal 
A ( hapter from the Rural 
"1 he Analogies'in the Gita 


l'he Tree of Knowledge of 
Good and Evil 
l'he Four Paths 
The Personality of God accord¬ 
ing to the .Saiva-Siddhanta 
Advaita According to the 
Saiva-Siddhania 
The Saiva Religion and the 
Saiva Advaita Siddhanlu 
Philosophy 
The Nature of Jiva 
Sri Parvatam 

SaivaKin in It-. Relation to 
other systems 


The Book. "Studies in Saiva-Siddh.mta ” iN Ro\.il ()ctavo, 
ron’ai: G- > page-*, exclusiv* of 10 page-, oj introdiujion l»v 
Dr. Y. Y. Ramai an, >i.\, P11. 1 >. etc., etc. and is printed on 
Feather we ght j^aper. It it lvnik bound in < olh and stamped 
in gold.. 


To the Sub ^rnbcrs of the Siddhrnln Dipika 

R'.. 2 6 or Si 00 or dsh. Pok! free. 

Atr'j to. J he I'iiWi tier, Si.ii/hmiiu Jjt/>ik,t, Muiiiti 

9 % 


.\'.C- 





STUDIES IN SAIVA SIDDHANTA 
SELECTED OPINIONS. 


The Rajput Herald, London, says: “Mr. J. M. Nallaswami Pillai. b.a.,b.o., has 
published a book entitled, “Studies in Saiva Siddhanta," which lays down clearly 
tire principles and tenets of the Saiva Siddhanta. Mr. Nullaswn mi, as far as we 
know, is the best scholar in Tamil religious literature and, as such, most fitted to 
expound the Saiva religion, which for the chief part lies buried in r thc Tamil 
language .” 

Extract from J. N. Farquhar’s letter addressed to Mr. J. M. Nallaswami 
Pillai : “ I have just arrived in Calcutta. During my tour 1 have read with the 

very greatest interest a large portion of your " Studies ,# in l he Siddhanta Philo¬ 
sophy, also yonr. pamphlet on Saint ,*\ppar and the fragments of Nilakantha’s 
commentary. I write to express to you my very deep gratitude for your kindness 
in having answered my questions and having given me these pieces of literature. 
I hope to carry on my studies in the Siddhanta when I reach r Englaml a month 
hence.” 

Extract from the "Madras Mail" dated the 6th March, 1912. “ Studies in 

Saiva Siddhanta”—Mr. J. M. Nallaswami Pillui has njade Saiva Siddhanta Philoso¬ 
phy his special field of research for over two decades, with the result that he is 
now looked upon us one of the acknowledged authorities on all questions relating 
to .he subject. He has written end spoken a greet deal regarding the doctrines of 
iht school, and his “Studies in Saiva Siddhanta” now issued in aoolleotod form [the 
Me/kao'lan Pross, Madras] will be welcomed as an authoritative exposition based 
* ine author’s critical researches and deep learning. The essays embodied in the 
work have all appeared at one lime or another in the Siddhanta Dipika, the Madras 
Iteview, the New Reformer and the pages of other periodicals, and have been 
widely read and appreciated by students in this country and in the West. The 
headings of the chapters, “ The Tattvas and l^eyond,” “ The Nature of Divine 
Personality.” “ God and World,” “Some aspect* of Godhead,” “ The Tree of know¬ 
ledge of Good and Evil,” e<c. ? etc., give u good idea of the scope of the work. 
Mr. Nulla s\v» mi Pillai's treatment of these Is lucid nmf scholarly and ought to 
suggest lines of research work to others interested in the subject.” , 

Extract from the "Indian Patriot" 23rd and 24lh February, 1912. 
“ Studies in Saiva Siddhanta” is a recent contribution to the Philosophic* literature 
of the world. It is from the pen of Mr. J. M. Nallaswami Pillai, b.a., B.n., who is 
n well-known figure in the field of original research into the mysteries of the past. 
The book embodies his labours in that direction for a period of fourteen years and 
contains the several papers he contributed, from time to Mine, to three of the 
monthlies of this Presidency. Even a cursory reader will he struck* with the 
depth of his scholarship; f>r the exposition of his theme, he appears to haye 
utilised all the available literature on it, both scientific and philosophic*, both 
ancient and modern. A profound student of Tamil, ho ha* not sp.»iW pains to 


i % 


i 




V 


indent largely upon tlie several text-, that bear either directly or iudircctly upon 
it. His range of investigation extends from the remotest portion of the Vidas to 
the most modem of scientific truths. The book is remarkable for the close reason¬ 
ing which he adopts, for the apt citations which he makes to bear out his 
contention, and tor the happy illustrations which he brings in to make clear the 
several questions of controversy. To some extent, it is unique in us much as the 
learned writer treads upon a ground which very few modern savants have trodden 
in the exposition of the broad principles that underlie the subject . . * ” 

Extract from the “New Reformer " Vol, VI. No. II. 'Studies in Shiva 
S;lJnj.ntA r ’—The p»pers that make up thib book originally appeared in the 
Siddnanra Dipika, Madras Review and the New Reformer. They represent Mr. 
J. M. Xallitswaini Pillai s contribution to the study of Siddhanta during the last 
fourteen years besides his translations of Sivajnanubodhani etc., and embody his 
critical researches and deep learning in the field of Indian Religion and Philosophy. 
By these >vorks the author ha« established his rir>ht to be called u great, student of 
Ta* :1 letters and a reliable interpreter of the Siddhanta. The principles and 
ter ets of the S-iiva Si bill an* a are clearly explained in this book. \\c heartily 
r**jr.r»md it t > all irmrilcmeii interested in the study of Siddhanta Philosophy. 
It i« i.*a?!y bound in cloth and stamped in Hold and can be had of the Publisher, 
Tn»- Sid Ib'mta Dipika, Madras. X. C. 

Exlract from the “ Christian College Magazine “ Vol. XII. No. 4. “ Studies 

in Snivel Siddhanta’ —Thi- is a collection of papers in English which form, in 
t'ic words of the introduction, “the harvest of twenty \mtrs’ ceaseless 
m car^h in a n?!] f philosophy an 1 mysticism, by one who is ncknowiedged 
on all nan is o be on of the mo.-t well-informed interpreters of the Tiiiml 
d«v*Jopment of tb* 7 ' f <t Again c School of T ii„ light." of the pi.prrs 

o r if n-ik v apn^red a.-, I • . \ »r<* in the Sid<i 1 *• 11 t < Pipika or the Eigl t of Truth, 
vr irlj JI it Mu ler t nun^uded to OrienUil students in his Six Systems of 
Johan Pm.o^op v. Some others appeared in the Mfdras Review and the 
My** R* >rm-r. Mr. J M. Sml t-swami Pdla;, a l^sHiriot Mhmsiff, has. amidst* 
4 \* 1; 1 it "3 of hio ofifue, foin/1 time to contribute laigclj to the e>;j o- 

' f t• f S uv* S f lh«ut i'Pr*■ 1.,-sonny and H-Iignn of which he is one of 

t 1 • f . t «ri* ts’ulc *s. Whi • itwi.l f bc mrcss*iry to a<tm:t that there u re 
** 4 \ of tie Vi. a hide 4 a, irlc’.t #• M . J M. Nr I la • u mni lhll.ii, it 

r d t w.t* o 11 f«* * r of c uUr idicLion, tlu t tier' it no one who Jins 

'•! « " g * \ ;t •object * > v 11 1,. 11 313 kI\ 01 . c\l an tivid\. As wiil be 

m- . r\ h, ) o,# p, r,«.r % r.*»«o f t • p.j« f mu 1 in t u volume an not tli^* 
f* ' . r,o iJ 1 , i»" inn P'tui, nor are th**n tin* bulk of them, He 

h** E :• %•* i *• *« 1 T»m . b" ♦ •, \nd In- actiuu«*H hive not ceased. 

V« «r* * • 11* * * I I rv 1 V »P a 1 M to ho *tr>re * f kr nw b dq^ and to |ii* 

f ^ t lw ' « i**«* n ( •md m 1* i\ ««M 4ijir *t Lo1»:j\i the fnnls of Ini' m idor 

b' . 1 1 n < ; # / 1 * * 



THE S1DDHANTA DIPIKA. 

The only monthly Journal that is devoted to the Universal and eclectic 
Religion Saivaisui—thc Religion of Love and to the unearthing the 
treasures of Tamil Literature , History and arts. The Journal is 
the organ of the S aiva Siddhanta Maha Sawn jam and sister Subahs. 

Annual Subscription Post free is Rs. 4/~ or S I’25 or sh. 5/6. 

SELECTED OPINIONS. 

Professor Max Muller says : —“ Nor should their labour be restricted 
to Sanskrit texts. Jn the South of India, there exists a philosophical 
literature which, though it shows clear traces of Sanskrit influence, 
contains also or gir.al indigenous elements of great- beaut v a d of great 
importance for historical purposes. Unfortunately, few scholars only 
have taken up, as yet, the study of the Draviuian languages and 
literature, but young students who complain that there is nothing left 
to do in Sanskiit literature would, I believe, find their labour amply 
rewarded in that held. 

“ Buff such Journals as The Light of Truth or the Siddha ta Dipiha... 
have been doing most valuable service. What we want are texts aid 
translations , and any information that can throw light on the chronology 
of Indian Philosophy.” 

Dr. G. U. Tope M. A., D. D. writes: — “ To us Ancient Tamil Liter¬ 
ature has always been a very favourite subject and in the high-ways 
and by-ways of Tamil Poetry and legend, there is very much to reward 
the sympathetic, student. 

“ Sa va Siddhanta Philosophy is the choicest product of the Dravi- 
dian intellect.” 

Rev. Mr. Goodwill.fo’lows with the remark :— “ Those who have 
studied the system unanimously agree that this eulogy is not a whit 
too enthusiastic or free-worded. That the system is eclectic is at once 
apparent.” 

Rev. Mr. Goodwill speaks of its eclectic character and one will 
perceive that the word “eclectic ” is but the translation of the words 
Siddhanta Sara and Satnaiasa. Arc) we offer a proof of this from the 
mouths of some great Oriental Scholars who never heard of the 
Siddhanta. 

Rev. Mr. IV. Gondii writes in the “ Christian College Magazine” xx. 
9 as follows:— 

“There is no School of thought and no system of faith or worship 
that comes to us with anything like the claims of the Saiva Siddhanta. 

“ This system possesses the merits of a great antiquity. In the 
Religions world, the Saiva System is heir to all - that is most ancient in 
South India, it is the Religion of the Tamil people by the side of which 
every other form is of comparatively foreign origin. 

“ In the largeness of its following, as well as in regard to the anti¬ 
quity of some of its elements, the Saiva Siddhanta is, beyond any other 


vn 


form, the religion of the Tamil people and ought to be studied by all 
Tamil Missionaries. 

“ We have however left the greatest distinction of this system till 
last. As a system of religious thought, as an expression of faith and 
life, the Saiva Siddhar.ta is by far the best that South India possesses. 
Indeed it would not be rash to include the whole of India, and to 
maintain that judged by its intrinsic merits, the Saiva Siddhanta re¬ 
presents The high wafer,nark of 1: dian Thought and Indian Life, apart 
of course from the influences of Christian Evangel.” 

Rev. G. M. Cobban writing in the *• Co temporary Review ” said “ We 

find much truth both in books and men ; so’much as to surprise the 

student and delight the wise Christian Teacher.” He wrote to us that 

> he translated long ago Tiruvarutfayar. or Light of Grace of St. Umapati 

Sivacharva and which he still loved. 

' . * * 

Mr. V. Kasipfillai, Proctor a d Sot ary, Jaffna, says;—“There is no 

doubt pour Journal supplies a great want and all Tamils ought to be 
proud of it but unlike Europeans, our Tamils do not appreciate good 
solid work. It will take very long before they can really appreciate 
such works. The difficulty with us is payment but 1 hope your Journal 
will be encouraged as it has established a reputation." 

Walter Gcr : Old, M. R. A.S. writes : —“ Your excellent, erudite and 
interesting Journal.” 

The Raj fut Herald, Lor don, writes: —“All the articles are highly 
instructive, interesting and inspirational, and we cannot compare The 
Siddhar.ta Difiha to any existing magazine in India except, perhaps, 
the Vcdic Magazine, etc., etc.” 

Mr. J. M. Sallasuamy Pillai one of the great exfounder of the 
fhilosofhy in the Modern World, says: —“ The Saiva Religion is the 
oldest in India and is based on the Vedas, Agamas, Itihasas and 
Puranas and has the largest foil oWing.” 

Extract from the letted of Mr.' R. W. Frazer, Professor of Tamil, 
7 elugu and High Proficiency Sanskrit in the University of London to the 
Publisher : —“ I have obtained permission to send you for review in the 
S ddhd’.ia Difiko and fora note about the great monumental Encyclo¬ 
paedia of Religion and Ethics now appearing in Great Britain, an 
advance copy of my article on the Saiva Siddhanta. I do this because 
of rny profound regard for your Siddhanta Difiha and for the great work 
,t u doing in a r.ohle sfirit of self-sacrifice to bring to light some of the 

great literary treasures 5f 'I amil kind.May the Goddess of 

l-earning confer prosjx:rity on the Siddhanta Difiha, and may its 
lupporters in your land know that their labours are being followed 
tlcttly in the West.'’ 

App'y to : — 7!k Publisher, Siddhanta Difiika, Madras, N.C. 


i 



ESSENTIALS OF * 





% 


% 


HINDUISM 


BY 

S. Sabharatna Mudaliyar 

Deputy Fiscal, Jaffna. 

ROYAL 8vo. 380 PAQES. 

Feather Weight Paper. Bound in Cloth and Gold. 

A very comprehensive book on Hindu Philosophy 
very lucidly and clearly written. Every one inte¬ 
rested in knowing TRUTH should possess a copy. 

PRICE, Re. 3-8-0. Post Free. 

To Subscribers of the Siddhanta Dipika, 

T{S> 3-0-0. post prep. 


For copies apply, to -— 

The Publisher, 

“THE SIDDHANTA DIPIKA,” 


MADRAS, N.C. 









