===== Internet Archive OCR: Siva_Jnana_Botham_1927_djvu.txt =====

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION 
OF 


SAINT. MEIKANDA DEvA NayanNar’s 


SIVA _JNANA BOTHAM. 


WITH REFERENCE TO 
St Siva Jnana Yogigal’s Siva Jnana Badiyam, 
WITH QUOTATIONS FROM 
Siva Jnana Siddhiyar and Sivaprakasam 


and other Jnana Sastras 


RETIRED DEPUTY COLLECTOR. 
ARCOT HOUSE, PUTHUR, 
TRICHINOPOLY. 


TRICHINOPOLY 
JANANUKOOLA PRESS 


1927 
(Price Rupees Two per copy.) 


U4 


Q 613% 23) 
w2-T 


hei TRARS 
RECITRARS 


Siva Jnana Botham (faejrerCurs) consists of 
twelve sutras. The original is in Sanskrit. Saint Mei- 
kanda Devanar, a Jivanmukta, translated the same into 
Tamil. This contains more than the original in Sanskrit. 
It is not a literal translation but the truth is enunciated in 
a more extended but terse and cryptical form. Saint Siva- 
jnana Yogigal has written a Badiam (79-5) on this and 
it is with reference to this Badiam that the present transla- 
tion is attempted. 


There is already a translation of Siva Jnana Botham 
into English by the late Saiva Sidhantist Nallaswamy Pillai 
(this is probably out of print) but the reasons fer the 
present translation will be apparent when one has gone 
through this translation, as the sense of the sutras is given 
with reference to practical experience:—More need not 
be said by way of apology.. 

Vedanta-Sidhanta Sastras are all written in Pari- 
bashai (ufureaz) similar to code language and unless 
this Paribasha is known, it will not be possible to clearly 
understand the Sastras. The different works on Vedanta- 
Sidhanta by saints, i-e-, those who became Jivanmuktars, 
contain the one and only secret, i-e-- that God or Brahm 
dwells in all living beings in a particular form (2-5), that 
this form is given multifarious names such as Love, Jnana, 
Arul, Panchatcharam. Letter, Word, Ancheluttu, Arivu, 
Om, Omkaram, Piranavam, Nada-bindu, Adi, Thal, 


| _ Kalal, Kundali, Sivam-sakti, etc., and that unless Brahm 


or God is known in this form there can be no union of 
soul or Jiva with Brahm. 


2 


Siva Jnanasiddhiar and Sivaprakasam are Sastras 
explanatory of and supplementary to Sivajnanabotham 
and these three should be read side by side. 

Saint Meikanda Devanar has divided each sutra into 

parts for purposes of dissertation and has given expla 
natory statements, reasons and illustrations under each 
sutra in addition to the purport of each sutra, in order 
to make the sutras intelligible and understandable. A 
reference to the literal translation into Tamil of the original 
Sanskrit by Pundit Kuppuswamy Raja of Tanjore (nota 
Jivanmukta) which will be given under each sutra in the 
present translation, will show how far Saint Meikanda 
Devanar (a Jivanmukta) has exceeded the limits of the 
original Sanskrit and has gone into the spirit of the whole 
matter. : 
To make the translation more clear and intelligible, 
stanzas bearing upon the same point will be quoted from 
Sivajnana Siddhiar and Sivaprakasam and other Sasitras as 
well with explanations. 

he importance of the three Sidhanta-Sastras 1s given 
in the following stanzas by Saint’ Kannudaya Vallalar 
(som amcn1_ui cvarorovTT, FouciGrare Oloiovr tr.) 

“agree Curgssero Qerudoum S16 a 

Gag rer As Suite C 6 D&—Fas opr oor 

Curg sag Ouse sr Cur gs sre Fs Sore 

ars erox agerhart 665). . (1) 

“mp dran® ors gi i gieer eto Sin 7 

Ger pp PaiIrares O eres gatev— 2 plda 

YAEGCA FUMNPSS DS {HSS 5 26 prev 

PEGE BE Sujen Door goo.” (2) 

The present translation is made chiefly with a view 
to make Sivajnanabotham accessible to those who are 
ignorant of the Tamil language and enable others to make 
an earnest study of Vedanta-Sidhanta sastras. 


3 


Sivajnana Botham is intended for all (Sakalars) who 
are bound by the three malams of Anavam, Kanmam, 
and Maya and not for Piralayakalar and Vijjnanakalar. 

All human beings are Sakalars (#s@7), The division 
and treatment of Sivajnanabotham by Saint Meikanda 
Devanar are given below for easy reference. 

Ist Sutra: Proof of the existence of } 
Pathi or Brahm or God, Proof | General chap- 


2nd Sutra: Proof of the .cxistence 1 Chapters. | tors dealing with 
of Pesam. { 


Ghee ~ the Mupporul; 

3rd Sutra: Proof of the existence of Lies DA Pathi, Pasu 
Pasu or Soul or Jiva. J ie & 

4th Sutra: The Nature of Pasu or) Nature Pasam. 
Soul or Jiva. Ghenters! — 

5th Sutra: The nature of Pasam. [ ae | Ours 

6th Sutra: The nature of Pathi or | Qos soon aera, 
Brahm.or God. 5) Gui. 

7th; Sutra The special characte- } | 


ristics of Pasu or Soul | Chapters 

or Jiva who is heir to dealing 

Mukti. | with the Special or 
8th Sutra: Jnana. revealed by | Truth Chap- 

Brahm to the Soul as + ters dealing 


means 
for 


the means of his re- attaining with the 
“ demption. union. . Mupporul; 
: a i, P 
9th Sutra: The purification of the Pathi, Pasu 
EIT 3 Gor and Pasam. 
Pasu or Soul by Pan- gue L 
chatcharam or jnana. J alk ee nat 
10th Sutra: Pasu or Soul’s Victory ) Chapters Bait, 
e a . cs 
over Pasam. dealing ! Gana 
with the a 
llth Sutra: The Soul becomes a Victory eal : a 
jivan Muktha. eaattainec| iste as 
by the soul eg ARIE 


12th Sutra: Whata Jivan Muktha — 
should do to attain Uwesr 


Videkamukti. Qua, ) 


4 


Siva Jnana Botham, Siva Jnana Siddhiyar and Siva 
Prakasam treat of Jivanmukti. In fact the burden of 
Vedas, Agamas, Puranas and all Jnana Sastras is Jivan 


Mukti- 


Jivan Mukti is the attainment of immortality or union 
with Brahm in this life and in this body (but metamor- 
‘phosed by Arul), without death. 

A Jivanmukta lives in this world for atime till his 
Prarabda Vinai (9272115 a2) ig exhausted and con- 
sumed. During this period he will be a Loga Guru (Gare 
6g). Then he discards his metamorphosed body at will 
when the Prarabda Vinai is consumed and becomes a 
Videka Mukta (&3s5 (e557) or disembodied mukta or — 


Paramuktan- 


as 
Lope. 
rk ioe} j 


MANGALA VALTHU—PRAISE@ar-rna 
(WE SaTaitlps Bi.) VA r 


SVAVITE SILPEV, Lov 
Avera sy aRoflus 
Quraevrt @) der evr 


maar 1 eesroue mr.” 


The supreme being who shines in the minds of Jivas 
(Souls) and who assists Jivas in conquering Pasam through 
His Arul, which is like a bow as big and splendid as the 
mountain Meru, graciously bestows His feet upon Jnanis 
-who wear them in their mind asa garland as a sign of 
victory over Pasam. 

The literal meaning of Kal-Al (¢% 4) is a stone- 
banyan tree. In Paribasha or Figurative language, 
Kal-Al means ‘Mind’’. This will be evident 
from what Thayumanaswamy says in his Ananda 
kalippu (gars ssa), 

S$. 12, “wearSun sa <4e oT rE oT OC (g” i.e. To me my 
mind is the Kal-Al. 

Unless the Jiva conquers Pasam, he can have no 
union with Brahm or God. This he can accomplish 

- only by means of Arul or Panchatcharam. 

Jnani is one who has found Jnana and has become 

united with Brahm. 

The feet of Brahm is the Tirumani (S@Gueaf) or body 
of Brahm which is the Panchatcharam. 


AVAYADAKKAM—PROLOGUE: 
(9/oe.i1i_&&tb, ) 

(6 SLDEOLD B BIT H G7 SEOUL) OPL_W SOO gyoor raul 
EILDEMLD P_GNL_cOLD GTENLD (HELP — HLDEw LD 
pom soma; o1_ wBenum g swdev 
LIGRT TT OOLD, Gaorml; L| peor.” 

Those who have attained Mukti or union after finding 
“OcIf” and “Brahm” will not ridicule this work. For 
they, as Brahm, hold me in their grasp: No attention 
will be paid to others who may criticise this work as they 
have not found ‘Self’ and “Brahm” and as they hold 
different and false views about “Self” and “Brahm” just 
like the congenital blind men who went to see the 
elephant. 

The religion taught in Sivajnanabotham is the only 
true religion, as it lays stress upon Jivas finding 
“Self” or “Brahm” in their body for the attain- 
ment of union with Brahm. The other religions are 
all foreign as they have not found ‘‘ Self or Brahm ”’ 
just like the blind men im the elephant story. 

If one finds “‘Self’”” he can find “‘ Brahm” and then 
he can have union. 

( gomlorujih GCSE ENTS gH eo0 ei Gowri sair_7@ eorev 

Yer kor 35 sac STE, Grout Apri SS rerer.” 

If one finds “Self” and the support of ‘Self’ which 
is Brahm the Chief, he can become that Chief or 
Brahm, and will cease from the cycle of births. 


(Kaivalliam-Tatwa Vilakka Padalam.) 


3 Ist SUTRA: 
PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF PATHI OR 
BRAHM OR GOD. 


“geet Malar 5 s1Gai apitb DO AMC pPeH oreo UTE , 
Carp ju GHC wu ene, LOG BION BIT LD ; 
2G BLD 45) GT GBT LD @) IT Lyvauir.’” 

The demonstrable universe or the universe which 
consists of various things and books (treating of different 
subjects), and can be pointed out as he, she, it, or this or 
that, is subject to three operations of creation, preservation 
and destruction; or, appearance, existence and disappear- 
ance. This phemonenal universe which issues from 
Brahm and stays through Him is absorbed by Him and 
then reissues from Him on account of the eternal “Malam”’ 
of the souls, i. c., in order that Brahm may redeem them. 
The learned will say that the end is the beginning or the 
Absorbefacient is the First Canse. 

PURPORT .— swaerc STIR eujator up geoCus sore 
2 ML Fa Qaravec. 

This universe has the Destroyer or the Absorbefacient 
as the Originator or Chief. 

This sutra is divided into three parts for purposes of 
dissertation. 

(QD xa4arer Hoar | g1Q eu epilb Yo aeipadoorentouG ss. 

(2) Sarpsu BRCu Was 2 oT SLD. 

(3) 255 3§. 

PART I—DISSERTATION, 
Hae, Haar 2 g30ay apn Deo auelpal oor onnu5) cor. 
This phenomenal universe is subject to three operations- 

STATEMENT.— atr@Qe_or girls Qu oGHSS) qorQ mer gy 

Fw. Guge e pusS) 5) Sereapen_s go. 


8 


This universe which can be pointed out as _ this man, 
that woman, this thing and that thing is subject to creation, 
preservation and destruction as it consists of different 
minor parts which can be individually separated. 


What are matter and many will appear, stand and die. 
What are known and perceived by Atma or Soul- 
knowledge (jar =2Ha)) as distinguished from 
Brahma-knowledge (971b0 aj) are subject to the 
three operations. 


The only one who is not subject to these three opera- 
tions is Brahm. He is a combination of Formed 
and Formless (¥@, ©) and his Form is Arul 
(Grace) or Panchatcharam or Anbu (Love). Sutra V1 


deals with the nature and character of Brahm. 
REASON.—G srppeph pb e aren geruTGw Bi_ & seS amr: 


Because appearance and destruction pertain to what 
is seen to exist- ; 


ILLUSTRATION ,— 


“450 G) FDI PSFOHib WwmruUuTses 
Cu sri ASureb Oup SenuiWIe0—g er@ ar 
gad Do Cera) eo gsr Qmsaair Ord 
Aor Per piih eearrtOi._orer ourusmga"” 

Appearance and destruction (beginning and end) 
are the material causes (#770012) of those that exist, 
e.g. The five elements. We see further, from our own 
personal experience different classes of things appear- 
exist and die at different seasons. In the same way the 
universe which is seen by us to exist will die when its 
time comes. (Plants grow during winter and die duriag 
summer-) 


! 


PART II—DISSERTATION. 
“Cari SuDBCu g0m@ eorgri.” 

The universe which appeared will be absorbed and 
then reproduced. 

STATEMENT._Qef 9QaG@oar saarrg Goran se pusS 
ufcvreo 

There is no regeneration or reproduction except 
through the Destroyer or the Absorbefacient, i.e., Brahm - 
who caused the destruction or absorption. 

REASON,.— ‘940596 Csrpp Berend 1’ 

Because what is not, cannot appear. 

ILLUSTRATION ,— 

“Qalsssachy) Qo £5 STL: s eT 
Qa & soir gor grG aia%erO in — Qed & & gn 
ASHADSGvmoNher Hi Yurgsou; 2 Sev gi 
YEBBujto QSujoTly eG" 

What is absorbed is in the Absorbefacient and will 
again appear from the Absorbefacient in the same way 
as it was absorbed. There is no actual destruction but 
only absorption and the re-appearance is on account of 
the Malam of Jivas, in order that Brahm may free them 
of Malam. It is wrong to suppose that the absorption jis 
by Maya or Pirakiriti. If Maya is the absorbe-facient, 
then Maya and her evolutes should always remain unabsor- 
bed. But as a matter of fact, Maya disappears during 
Piralayam or Sankaram (Svarwi2—eaerrin,) So it is the 
all powerful Brahm who is the Absorbefacient or Destroy- 
er and not the unreal or mythical Maya. 

REASON. —. 
“poor spHF Oru Sarion DF Orwell Zu cram touesr ** 
There is no action possible to a thing in existence 


except through an author. 
2 


10 


SUMMARY.—The universe exists, as itis seen. What 
is not, cannot be seen, like the horn of a hare. The uni- 
verse stays and so it exists and as it exists, it has a maker. 
Whatever comes into existence has an author, like the pot 
and potter. Whoever brings a thing into existence is the 
author of it. Brahm is the author of the universe as he 
brings it into existence and Brahm is the Absorbefacient 
as the universe is absorbed by Him and brought into 
existence again. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. — 
“ QS SOT TPN (pir SST STTSLDTLD 
YS SOSA D Od Boul aor d—al GF BLOT LD 
Can Bag giiyapuisure CasiOGaas sTarDar® s ge 
armor warCure @oflrig,”” (1) 
Just as no sprout will appear from a seed alone 
unless there is moist earth, so nothing will spring from 
Maya alone unless Brahm joins Maya. Maya is supported 
by Brahm’s Thal (i.ec., fect) and by the combined action 
of Brahm and Maya (Sivam and Sakti) the universe is 
produced, Sb» far as the appearance, disappearance and 
reappearance of Jivas are concerned they do so as the 
result of their previous kanmas or actions It is Brahm 
who gives Jivas suitable bodies according to their good or 
bad actions or kanmas; just as a worm is changed into a 
wasp. (Here seed is compared to Maya, the moist earth 
to Brahm and the sprout’to the universe)- 
“ Cnréara Cora® Osry_ gs a50C p aT 5 Slo 
srésigs Aor gots Fo san® Gennaicr—waare s 
SOT _ BST OAT TAS BOOT FETA OT TS 
SOL AMY Bmw, Qa e._B,”" : (2) 
Brahm creates, preserves and destroys by a mere 
wish or by His mere will; while a potter has to desire, 
think and act with the aid of his Andakaranas (mind, 


1 


buddi, chittam and akankaram). Brahm creates without 
creating, preserves without preserving, and destroys with- 
out destroying, by His mere wish or will. Just as one is 
bound by time, place and space, in his waking state 

(Nanavu or Jagrat state), and is free from all these res- 
trictions or limitations in his dreaming state (Swapna state 
or Kanavu) the potter is bound by desire, thought and 
action in the making of a pot, while Brahm is free from 
them in the making of the universe. 

PART III—DISSERTATION. 
“aii 5b BP 
“The end is the beginning.” 

_ The being who destroys is the one who creates and 
preserves. The God of destruction is the First God. The 
God who absorbs is the First God. 

STATEMENT.“ QoleemarrCu wpsQocn p gi.” 


Destruction is First or Absorption is First. 

REASON .-“‘a@e GorrarGu GruGprin a-_Oanrt en 4 ex 
snsrss Gor apuaong & 56 S)rf oar a) 5) movrev,” 

Because the material universe which can be pointed 
out as this, that, etc., and the Souls (Jivas) in it which 
cannot know anything independently, have no inherent 
right in themselves except through Brahm, the destroyer 
and Absorbefacient who knows everything without being 
taught like souls. 

ILLUSTRATION.— 

“ gorpor area eo s7& der pail p 
QT PT gees Med Donal map FV—aem Marr 
FCDUPSN; BSN FDOTEQeT pl, LIB 
are pO SsTiplh um Glb wae.” 

The material universe (¢7fwe) Qrugpe or 2/Ce gers 
Qr.@;Fb) and the Souls (C#sert) GauUE5) cannot move 
and have their being independently as the former is mat.’ 


12 


ter and the latter are bound by ignorance and cannot know 
anything unless taught. They have their being through 
“the One” who is neither the Kariaprabancham nor the 
Sedanaprabancham and they have their end in the same 
** One,” as they are all absorbed by Him. The end or 
the absorption is the beginning. But so far as the souls 
(Sedanaprabancham) are concerned, though they are 
eternal like Brahm, they are always subject to Brahm 
both in Betham and Mukti or Bondage and Release. 


MALAM (toax.) 


Malam is Anavamalam (or Egoism) which binds the 
souls. This is not separately dealt with here, as it is 
fully treated under Sutra IV by Saint Meikanda Devanar. 

(a) The Sutra asliterally translated from Sanskrit 
by Pandit Kuppuswamy Raja. 

Quem, ge, 90 Cpgsou amass UGUyjo1_ Fs 
arfuin srariuO sare 265 DG #7 SS12 oor; WTS wi gn 
arhuur@eGwot 4g Hg FS STAdat © oo1_ui gsi. Git 
Cura; Hsal SST Qéaror uO eaBiors ual § si icnt_& 
Bongo. Ose FHeETTD OFiiuaicr ST TERT alm. 

The perceptible universe has a Karta or Creator as it 
is seen. Whatever comes into existence has a Karta or 
Creator, like a pot. The Creator of the universe, destroys 
the seen universe and reproduces it. So the Destroyer 
becomes the Cause. 

(b) The corresponding Sutra from Sivajnana Siddhiar. 

ee eGal@eo.1oGs8 eadper pints FOr 2 vaGinderrin 

CUTLIP? Dal h HI, Hear pl, Guile gies sT Ce 

Suan acparest GC acer Ob ; STO PSO TF MWTEa 

DGEACD YonSypss Fs giHucell Pap.” 


13 


The universe which consists of parts and is seen is 
subject to the three operations of creation, preservation 
and destruction. This will not be possible unless there 
is an author. This author is the Brahm who is the 
beginning and the end or the Creator and the Destroyer- 
This Brahm who is eternally free from Pasam, though He 
absorbs the universe, reproduces it, for the sake or salva- 
tion of souls or Jivas whothough eternal like Brahm are 
bound by Pasam. 

(c) Corresponding Sutra in Sivaprakasam. 

“ems0nur amaS@ O._mansS per pear _pi 

aor er@, Aor wyeraliay ROG ; Qeor epitn 
LDOVLD EHV Oot STSHlb: & CHavlb wor 
agas Suras QFde sr ser gplh, 
HAND ACE Fer wreow wit gev4r syd, 

2 BYSSET SHAUL wid 2 Naar sr.iLIT @pILb, 
Aaadsr Nev wa7pae_cy 5p mer gyi, 
Aor@Qpeneujin Hef sBOccr Aiwer srCer.” 

The whole universe which consists of parts and can 
be pointed out as he, she or it appears, stays and disap- 
pears at the proper time. The universe which disappears, 
reappears for the sake of souls who are bound by Malam 
and for their redemption. As bodies taken by Jivas (Souls) 
appear and disappear, as Maya is matter and has no 
independent action, as souls in themselves are too igno- 
rant to take the bodies suitable to their kanmas and as 
bodies have no separate existence, except through the sup- 
port of souls, it is only Brahm the Pure who brings about 
everything. 


14 


sie IInp SUTRA: 
PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF PASAM. 
“ gaCusrGoruri QHZ, 
Curae are yhu, gcxoruG9ev 
GaeaDoo wD) 51D iooar'S wm.” 

Brahm who is one with the soul (like the sesame seed 
and oil), who is different from the soul (like the salt and 
and water) and who is the soul within the soul (like the 
body and the soul) causes the souls (till the time of their 
redemption) to disappear and reappear and gives them 
suitable bodies according to their kanmas or actions and 
enforces His orders with regard to them through his 
gaolers who are'the two actions of good and bad; Virtue 
and Vice; Yoranflui, wand, which the souls transact at the 
instance of His Sakti (48) or Kundali (@#-_9) who is 
always inseparable from Him. 

PURPORT Yorgi ouain amor DOTS 5150). 

This sutra deals with the reasons for the cycle of 
births of the souls as well as the universe. (The reason 
for dealing with the subsequent creations or births of 
the absorbed universe including the souls andnot their 
first creation, is that Pathi, Pasu and Pasam are eternal 
and have no beginning and their first coming into exis- 
tence cannot be understood by any except Brahm). 

This Sutra is divided into 4 parts. 
(2) yonaSus SiG crusts: 
(2) geader Daj ZaruvIen ; 
(3) Cure are fu, 
(4) Qcemr wD 6» 6 &eNos of Ope, 
PART I—DISSERTATION, 


yonaGu gr eruri—Brahm is all the souls. 
STATEMENT;— geir@ @aeuroriréeor LINGLE (Lp Seveu oor 
aTCorund SiG. 


15 


Brahm stands as all the countless souls. (This state- 
ment is the same as the expression Tatwamasi-ssga1f 
Adu-Nee-Anai 27 € geil; That thou art or you have 
become that.) 

REASON: 9/3 g835 crorm GetanrCa aceQueratle 
Onn 4. OagarendIe, 2551 Asi corp QeraGe 
YoRu6T Ss Sonu eam & stu, 


The word “Adwaitam” does not mean singleness 
or oneness, as the idea of oneness or singleness can- 
not exist unless there is something else to compare it 
with. The word by itself simply denies separateness. 


“ Adwaitam” is a term used for expressing the 
relation between Brahm and the soul. Though according 
to nomenclature, the words Brahm and Soul imply two 
things, they are not two and at the same time they are not 
one. Adwaitam means not being two (Qza creo), 
_Brahm and Soul are not one and they are not two. The 
one is within the other. 

ILLUSTRATIONS;— 

(1) “a. Oaupmcitfid arem(ipi Qarei aren tb 
QU Garg Cur pss or abt cot lau oir HG gpi_tg. 
Yost eoriotB@Nwresr ; eB arip Da! @poT_t_t gy; 
AHAioT 2 OT LOoTL) Hevev spy LoITLd Da.” 


A person’s body is given a name and when the 
person’s name is called it is not the body which answers 
but the soul within him. In the same manner, Brahm 
remains attached to the soul without any difference. But 
He is not the soul and the soul is not Brahm. Brahm’ is 
both the soul and not the soul. 

(2) “gerOnerp OstaCparan, pon@ pu; useurn 
gro ps; urs sS 51 Olraram; spor Herape 
Hjssreiscr QHarapin ysrauIT Ber me} 

Ba2rn 50 ser anid QRES-” 


16 


What is called “One” is only one and that ‘“ One” 
ts Pathi or Brahm. What is one called Pasu (soul) is 
yourself, bound by Pasam. If there is no vowel “9” 

(A) (ysqju97) there will be no letters. In the same way 

if there is mo Brahm, who is ‘‘ 7he One,” there will be 


nothing. So says Irukku Veda (Rig Veda.) 


(Brahm is a ‘‘thing” in the form of Panchatcharam. 
Everything that goes on in this world is due to this thing: 
Remove this Brhma-Vastu, there will be nothing). 

(3) “1 aot Cow jl PanFuy Lh CuiTaes LLpip gI@] Lb 

GT SOOT ax] LD FON OUU DG LITSD OT FLOM Lh— 9 07 OTD 5 THT 
YS BAGO FH DHE OFT spostO) ool @) HI 
HS BMS LO OT OT GH (9 tj Bag” 

The Omnipresent Thal (feet) of Brahm, i.e., Brahma- 
Vasthu is Adwaita, like the tune and sound and the fruit 
and its sweetness. So the Vedas will say that Brahm or 
Brahma-Vastu is not one but Adwaita (not being two). 

(4) “27a@arO Cor 6 Suman 55 DEED SLT 

2 ss o. BAouk sm Aor mI— DAD oor oD) & 
arCor eatin, sO Cweor eon iclL] HRV 


wtCer eo wOsoriic, @or pi.” 


Like a stone firmly imbedded in melted wax, Brahm 
and Atmas (souls) are well soldered together and 
cemented and cannot be thought of seperately. Brahm 
is all souls (Atmas) without any division or idea cf 
separation. When my soul is purified by Panchatcharam 
and Brahm enters into me as Joti (Light), 1 become a 
Jivanmukta and then I will say that I am all souls. 


The soul’s labouring under the idea that it is separate 
and distinct from Brahm is due to ignorance and darkness 
caused by Anavamalam. When the soul is free from 
this darkness, this distinction will disappear. 


7 


PART II—DISSERTATION. 
<¢ gp iovoruoor (3) haf ZooruD sor 2 

The two kanmas (Virtue and Vice) happen through 
Anai (922r) or Sakti, Kundali or Energy of Brahm. 

STATEMENT.—Qaf QararernrsaonaG 2S paw 
alo gcouruRest euhLd. 

The two kanmas or actions, good and bad or Virtue 
and Vice happen to souls through the Sakti of Brahm. 

The happening is to the soul and not to the body. 
This statement explains why (if Brahm is in every soul) 
there should be so much difference between various souls 
why some acre intelligent, some dull; some rich and some 
poor, some healthy and some unhealthy and some attain 
Mukti soon and some late, etc. Kanmas or actions play an 
important part in the soul’s attainment of union with Brahm. 
The souls gain experience and intelligence by the results 
of various good and bad actions in various births and the 
development of the souls depends upon them. Kanmas 
(actions) themselves are matter and cannot happen to 
souls by themselves. The souls are completely under the 
influence of the Sakti or Energy of Brahm and whatever 
actions they perform are through the Sakti of Brahm, 
though each soul thinks that it is he who has brought 
about particular good or bad actions. Brahm and his 
Sakti are inseparable and the Kanmas of Jivas should be 
traced to Sivam-Sakti and it is Brahm and His Sakti who 
nurture the souls in the field of Kanmas and educate them 
till they begin to feel and recognise them (Kanmas) alike. 
This is called the maturity of Kanmas or [ruvinai Oppu, 
(QajBeer griy), treating the good and bad actions alike 


and getting an aversion to them both. 
REASON .— 


“ag BEhonuis STLMITE LMG STG. TB: 
HOU HUT SF QeGeeruraaren.’” 


18 


Just as the ruler of a city enforces his orders in respect 
of his subjects, through his gaolers, Brahm enforces his 
orders in respect of Souls (Jivas) through his gaolers called 
the two kanmas or actions (i.e.,) Virtue and Vice, through 
His inseparable Anai called Sakti. 

ILLUSTRATIONS.— 

“oe ros Caerpp euIrcemrjth sJe)a)t 69) oor 

ecto grin (phOsiidAor e crorant_Gai—auair am vey oor 
Qetiuat Qe Sriswicr oBZon & GLb Qeui Gurren 


@etiacr ; Qswd xlrur Oeor pt.” 


What exists or what is present in the soul is Sanchita 
Kanmas, the past accumulated Kanmas. Every soul should 
as a necessity reap the fruits of these Kanmas whether 
good or bad (i.e.,) every soul should experience joy or 
sorrow according as his past kammas were good or bad. 
For the accomplishment of this purpose, the souls take 
bodies according to the decree of Brahm. Kanmas them- 
selves are Jadam or matter and cannot preduce the 
results. ltis the Brahm who produces the results just 
like a ploughed field yields harvest to the farmer. 


This lIlustration proves the existence of Kanmas. 
Pasam is divided into Anavam, Kanmam and Maya. 
Kanmam is as eternal as Anavam and Maya. Kanmas 
are divided into three; Sanchita, Prarabda and Agamia, 
(4q% 24, Gorm, .ge7-Su), Sanchita Kanma or San- 
chita Vinai is the immediate cause of souls taking bodies. 
When a soul has taken a body it experiences joy or 
sorrow as the result of his previous good or bad actions 
and in the course of experiencing these joys and sorrows 
which is called Prarabda Kanma or Prarabda Vinai, 
further good or bad actions are committed. These are 
called Agamia Kanma or Agamia Vinai. It is because 
the soul thinks that he is the Actor or Kartha and that he 


19 


alone produces these good or bad actions’ that these are 
accumulated against him to be reaped in the next birth. 
In the next birth these accumulated Agamia Kanmas 
become Sanchita Vinai. It will naturally be asked how 
souls committed actions before they were given bodies. 
The answer is that the souls are burdened with Kanmas 
eternally in the same way as they are bound by or burden- 
ed with Anavam and Maya eternally. This is a mystery 
similar to the mystery of seed and tree. No body can say 
except Brahm, whether seed was first or the tree. The 
Kanmas with which the souls are burdened eternally should 
be consumed and expiated. This is done by the souls 
taking bodies and in the course of their lives in this world 
further kanmas are accumulated and this is the cause of 
the cycle of births to which every soul is subject. Till the 
Kanmas are matured, the souls should have rebirth, 

ILLUSTRATION (2),— 

** geitiorcnus Cecio sone 2) aa Zoot Gh T STLOE oT DEG; 
AMAT OUI IG HLD LIFTED S LIT — 9) ca Zoe en iLie's 
Cumngn Oo Drreofe marrGro 
ATE or OG 5 Cover rT QB.” 

The souls are ignorant and are in darkness and cannot 
themselves take the bodies suitable to their Kanmas. 
Actions or Kanmas are matter and cannot give suitable 
bodies to the souls. Just as iron is attracted by magnet, 
bodies are given to the souls suitable to their Kanmas 
(particular kanmas attract particular bodies) under the 
decree of Brahm. No body else can perform this task. 


ILLUSTRATION (3).— 
© Aad @GMyw dap OeuwiIeflev SOM DL) Lb 
Gerad 1 5) ser pi, O sr oreninCu_aicre9, 


Lo, STIDId ToT Matalin, aiararevTed, Osos euro 
3) J ? 


yor Gers@peu Suggs.” 


20 


The husk attached to paddy and the verdigris attach- 
ed to copper are not new but eternal and ancient. In 
the same way Maya, Malam and Kanmam (Pasam) attach- 
ed to souls are eternal and nobody can give their origin. 
They are not new and they have had no beginning. They 
have their origin in Brahm. Maya, Malam and Kanmam 
will perform their functions in the mere presence of 
Brahm just as lotus flowers open and fade in the pre- 
sence of the sun. 


- PART III_ DISSERTATION. 


? 


“ Cura@ara} yds”, 


To disappear and reappear in uninterrupted succes- 
sion. , 
This dissertation is to prove that souls which take 
bodies in this world will successively disappear and reap- 
pear, through the influence of Sakti or Energy of Brahm, 
in order that they may reap the fruits of their past lru- 
vinai (Q@eiter), Virtue and Vice (1srenflu and wai), 

STATEMENT.—“@aatl Quaroror& sor Lor ALD DS gah L"” 

The souls with accumulated past Kanmas will again 
and again disappear and reappear for reaping the fruits 
of their actions. . 

REASON.—‘‘ Carpogpn # pi 2 ON oT SDSS, 

aon ST Se Q)ereniwwsTev,”” 

Because reappearance or rebirth is possible only to 
those things which can by nature disappear and appear 
even after absorption. | 
ILLUSTRATIONS.— 

UgemL Kernels Koran rave) 1 61 LD Dh SI 

Aor th 2S gTOAri9 eya—sor Ore, Ga-_O, 

eoraG eC erp, coro sams Oeer pi, Loerth 


sorer aupto E(Howv BMT oT.” 


* 


21 


When the organs die, i.c., when the body dies, the 
soul in it goes either to Swarka or Naraga in conjunction 
with the Sukkuma body (incorporeal body), to experience 
pleasures or pain, as the case may be, according to its 
good or bad actions in the past, forgets its past history 
Just as one forgets in the dreaming state (Swapna state) 
what he does in the waking state (Jagrat or Nanavu), and 
then when the appointed time comes, it discards the body 
it took in either Swarka or Naraga and being driven or 
forced by the mind, enters a womb to take a corporeal 
body in this world along with the Sukkuma body, to 
reap the fruits of his past kanmas or actions yet remain- 
ing to be reaped. : 

All souls should pass through three Avastas or states 
before they are finally released and united to Brahm. These 
states are Kevala, Sakala and Suttam. (Gsaa, see, 
* £5), In the Kevala state, the soul is dull and action- 
less as it is completely hidden by the Anava-Malam. 
It is then in an unembodied state. At the appointed time 
it is gradually joined to Tatwas or Karu-vigals and begins 
to shine, through the influence of Maya. After joining 
Karana body, Kanjuga-body and Guna body, it joins 
Sukkuma body. It is only after joining the above four 
incorporeal bodies that it takes Tula-body or corporeal 
body. When the soul is thus joined to Karuvigals or 
Tatwas, it has gained the Sakala-state, embodied state. 
It is only in the Sakala state it will gradually gain know- 
ledge of Brahm and Self and will aspire to get release, 
Union with Brahm is the Sutta State, disembodied state, 
Sukkuma body is otherwise called Puriyatta body (jum 
@gem) and it consists of the five senses and mind, 
Buddhi, and Ahankaram—altogether eight Tatwas. Swarga 
and Naraga are other Andas (.7r_tb) or Worlds, to which 
the souls go only temporarily, either for long or short 


22 


periods and not heaven and -hell as they are ordinarily 
understood. When a soul enters a womb again, it may 
take a different body from the one it had when it left 
this world, or it may enter a womb in a country different 


from the one it lived in, in its former Tula body or it may. 


be born with knowledge different from the knowlege 
it had in the previous birth. 

ILLUSTRATION (2).-— 

“ gralser Car gifiain, seacraw Cap 
gern GuTMelMhtd 2yLIL) ROTLyLo—Lis ef ost 
GUTary arene & Serr 17 Ons ge 
<_ g; eonerin Gunn 939."" 

(This illustration is to refute the theory that all souls 
good or bad join Brahm, when they leave a body, just as 
the air confined in a pot joins the atmosphere when the 
pot is broken. 

The different illustrations given in the Vedas to show 
the manner in which souls leave a body, have to be under- 
stood differently. The illustration of a snake shedding its 
skin and taking another body, that showing that one does 
not remember in the dreaming state what takes place 
during the waking state and that of an expert Yogi enter- 
ing other bodies by his yoga power and leaving them at 
will, apply to the souls leaving a Tula body, corporeal body. 
The illustration of the pot-air and the atmospheric air 
apply to the souls leaving the Sukkuma body, the incor- 


poreal body, at the time of redemption: This will not. 


happen in a visible manner. 
PART 1V—DISSERTATION. 
** gy caver ue 6 &E cor 0) 5) Dp Geb.’” 
It (Brahm) will be inseparable from Anai or Sakti. 
(This dissertation is to show that Brahm or Sivam 
does everything with His Sakti or Energy or Kundali and 
that they are both inseparable, 


=! 


S 


23 


STATEMENT,— 
ce Qo saNear oD A peer p.” 


Brahm and His Anai or Sakti are inseparable, 


The following stanzas from Sivajnana Siddhiar may be 
read in this connection. 
(a) “eg Gare org BB sr eG; Faipb 9a ee 
FSR GT ot Of Sus Gib; She es your oot eu svavir tb 
FS Sujib Patpur@b; ¢gG stor £55 gaCarr 
FE Sib; ¢aecrCocmigm Qowatnte, £4 5)50Cen"” 
Tt is Sakti which is Nadam, Bindu etc., and it is Sivam 
who is Sakti, Nadam,; Bindu etc. All the visible forms in 
the world are produced by Sivam and Sakti together. Sakti 
is the Energy of Sivam. Whatever Sivam wills, Sakti will 
become that. 
(b) “yma gt FS GWT Qrem sora Hy DCG oD) & 
Ascjor Fudat,; »eseGoalor Se £5 SuDevee.” 
Arul (Grace) is Sakti of Brahm. There is no Sivam 
without Arul. Without Sivam there is no Sakti. 
The Sakti of Brahm is His Arul (Grace). This is His 
Panchatcharam (v@5#rTu £012), 
REASON. “salar raid Gara Qs 2 Ofer Dé 
FavAuT Qu 5) perros.” 


As Brahm is neither one nor many but Omnipresent. 
«(This shows the inseparability of Sivam and Sakti.) 
ILLUSTRATION .— é 
“ TH LL or Cf ot Marenal ROT oot I; Qran Ot_oreahe 

oT Riper erer pi; orapO pai gnib— 9) Boor 

AOA TJarorer MV, QuTcHO CHOC ITH mF os 

AAU EH GOLD, <Qpaw IT Ld; IT Dei.” 

As Brahm is Omnipresent, He cannot be reckoned 
as one. If He is considered as two (as Sivam and Sakti) 
He cannot be Omnipresent. Pasu (the visible animate 


24 


world) and Pasam (the visible inanimate world.) cannot 
exist without Him. The separate existence of Pasu and 
Pasam is incompatible with the Omnipresence of Pathi or 
Brahm. Every thing is subject to Him. Just as the Sun is 
called Kadirone (#9Grre, Luminary) with reference to 
itself and Kadir (#57, Ray) with reference to other objects, 
Brahm the Great Luminary is called Sivam with reference 
to Himself and Sakti (His ray) with reference to other 
objects. Pasu and Pasam are the belongings of Pathi and 
they are always subject to him. They cannot exist without 
Him. 

This illustration shows the relation between Pathi 
and Arul (Sivam and Sakti) on the one hand and Pathi 


and Pasu, Pasam on the other. 


The same Sivasakti is according to its various func- 
tions called Parasakti (uz7=3), Dirodana Sakti (S@ar srear 
#6); Icha Sakti (Q@##r=3S), Jnana Sakti (@raresS), 
Kirya Sakti (@fu7=35)) etc., and it has various names 
such as Para vindu, and Abara vindu. etc., In the same 
way Sivam is called Paranadam and Abaranadam etc. 


(a) The Sutra as literally translated from Sanskrit. by 
Pundit Kuppusamy Raja. 
(Mn Suie. nasSausCamaets af setatBu Aas, 
ess Sir Samia gaOaron®, F&aAam a) QDHREE Id Foor 51 
Qeaurau 6 F5RI@s Sarsense Barat sting Sor wflur 
6 Stor yayrhs a, Fibers g Goons ew Gay ar. 

The Supreme Sivam who is not different from the 

universe by His Omnipresence, stands apart from the 
universe and with His Sakti called Anai carries on His 


work with regard to souls according to the development 
of their Kanmas. 


(b). The corresponding Sutra in Sivajnana Siddhiar. 


Daal 


— } 
\ 


25 
“padsor wr®, Cagpts, e-- ayurl, petumu pa, 

yoSar ailtasa sors st Goerider Dts HOF S; 

SWACOHLU, Dano gos. srsOsigs Mors e1C or 

Aoaei sve Hai merc baer O gm.” 

The Pure and Supreme, Omnipresent Brahm, who is 
one with the souls, different from the souls and soul within 
souls, dwells in:all the countless souls in the form of Sakti, 
superintends the two Kanmas, Virtue and Vice of livas 
brought about by His Sakti and stands as a great Light, 
without any of the taints attached to souls. 

The universe (2.640) mentioned in this Sutra refers 

to Sedana Prabancham or souls. 

(c) Corresponding Sutras in Sivaprakasam. 

Kcomonh srl, Ag SoTW, QHnornvs Sev BpeS) 

QRA Zari ar Fo owsons Sorex witsons 

ADIN DST SBIarf, IOALIATTW, Df Bee 

AOS Hap CUTSHSEM DHE ZI OUP, 

Yaron wie yhs gg CuréQGeaur ajont_ SS TW 

Lem Tmin Amor weOurTsln Ours Russa BHeTTSVY 

eardorajin plu gse@o Qmor 2ap Au u41 glo 

2 POOLED UFATESID GOR OTLIUT 2 AOMTHS FS.” (1) 

The Souls are countless and Eternal. They are 
enveloped in the darkness of Anavamaiam and take bodies 
through the Arul of Brahm as males, females or neuter, (the 
Souls themselves are genderless) according to their good or 
bad actions and in the course of their lives as such, pass 
through various kinds of joys and sorrows and commit 
further good or bad actions and move continually between 
Swarkas and Naragas in order to reap the fruits of their 
good or kad actions and when their Anavamalam is 
matured, Brahm, by means of His Sakti or Arul which 
shines in every soul, removes the envelop of darkness 
and admits them to His feet. This, the learned in the 


Truth will say, is the characteristic of Souls. 
4 


26 


ES SUTCS FSH CHTOMF FL aTGld ; Aa a plo x 

ESD aorox Depid: (“perder s SSMOT waelsor aire 

[ester GOH: orHiG som _ GO Bojor 5p) 

oa s 90m Qa ar_Oin aiort gofiGurrev, i@rps5G 5” (2) 

The Pure Sakti is the Jnana Fire. This Sakti has 
no existence without Sivam. Like the bright sun which 
drives away darkness before his glorious and expanding 
light, the Sakti takes delight in destroying the three 
Malams of the Souls (Anavam, Kanma and Maya) and 
admits them tothe feet of Brahm, i.c., it enables Souls 
to become united to Brahm. 

(d) Pasam consists of Anavam (Malam), Kanmas 
and Maya. In the Ist Sutra, the existence of Anavamalam 
is proved. In this Sutra the existence of Kanma and Maya 
is proved. 

(prem, LOTLDT enw, LOTT osm Lb Qj ZoruD oot aurienco 

yu put cr G ivaytb wocnetleha Glajoririls 6) DHLo 5 

LpTGnws, LOT LOGO, LOT LITeN ILD QDapAderuGer eurwionro 

gp QyeuGih om G iw ay apo cpotlusrus 5) ep.” 

Maya, Anavam (the Greater Maya) and Kanmas wiil 
keep the sou! in darkness, when he is in bondage and is 
ignorant of “Self”. But when Truth is known to him (by 
Brahm), they will change into light. 

(Sivaprakasam) 

(e) The “Anai” xeferred to in the Sutra.is Maya or 
Sakti or Kundali or Arul or Energy of Brahm, 

(f) When it is said that Souls take bodies, it does 
not mean that they take human bodies only. Bodies mean 
the bodies of from worm to man. 


27 


IIIR>D SUTRA. 
PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF 
SOUL OR PASU OR JIVA. 
“oars; QwO sar mcar, cro gic_a ora Dolor, 
Binrjvrer, posal 9) SMe, STL 
ear Misr Gas conic, oom 5.7 B_s0IT SoM om, 
wrunr Quis Sao & oD anor gpos wir,’ 


Atma or soul isa fact and it dwells in the Maya 
machinery of body. Its existence in the body is proved, 

(a) As our Soul (Atma) intelligence discards every- 
thing else as nat soul. 


(5) As we say “It is my body.” 


(c) As the sou! knows things through the five senses 
(which are only un-intelligent doors), 


(7) Asthe soul knows things in sleep when the 
senses are inactive. 


(e) As the body has no actions and has no experience 
of pleasure and pain in sleep, and 


(f) As the scul which remembers and forgets things, 
knows things only when led by Brahm (intuitively). 


The existence of the intelligent Pasu or Soul is 
proved in this Sutra with reference to the 
unintelligent body, in the same way as in the Ist 
Sutra the existence of Pathi or Brahm is proved 
with reference tothe unintelligent universe). 


This Sutra is divided into seven parts for purposes 
of dissertation with reference to the 6 reasons 
given in the Sutra itself and the 7th part relates 
tothe refutation of ‘‘the combination of Kandas 
theory,” followed by some sections of Buddhists, 


28 


PART I—DISSERTATION. 
< gpomLpiT Qa gem pol) oar" 

As it is said that there is no soul. 

This dissertation refutes those who say ““There is no 

soul.” 

STATEMENT.— 

Krom® gerint Bevo som pales Qos T eo gy.” 

Atma or Soul exists as it is asserted that it does not 
‘exist. 

REASON .—o ay 9) Zoor ub <2) 651 9 aor) (9 Gor AQ gQerwr 
QaoO sor p OP pug sr sod ox 2 HSA Ost iwT air id. 

The intelligence which says “body is not soul”, 
“senses are not soul,” ‘‘andakaranams are not soul’, 
“the happenings of pleasure and pain are not soul’ and 
so “there is no soul’”—this intelligence is soul. 


ILLUSTRATION .— 

‘<_sar mo Opesblosr peor gon guy ._O Ages pss 
HarGmcsr mer 51; gS oe 3) Far & gLb—§) xr oor sp 
er uomibCure sTL_1_ore, FMA LDTeous SUE ; 

Shurip were ; soil.” 

After discarding everything one by one as not soul, 
there remains ‘‘ one” in your body as Anjeluthu (2p Qe 
ass). This Anjeluthu is you or soul. As you (soul) 
reflect everything to which you happen to be attached, 
like crystal, you are neither Maya (Pasam) nor Pathi 
(Brahm). You are quite separate from either of them. 

Anjeluthu is Si, Va, Ya, Na, Ma (A. a, w, m, ww), 
This is Panchatcharam. This Panchatcharam is a “thing”’ 
(Brahma-Vastu 921110 aevg) and the five letters are not 
ordinary letters but represent the 5 functions of Panchat- 
charam or the five elements in it. Si (©) represents Sivam; 
Va (#) represents Arul or Sakti; Ya (w) represents Atma 


29 


. or soul; Na (+) represents Durothai or Maya, and Ma (~) 

- represents Anavamalam. The soul (w) remains between 
Si & Va (@-a) on the one side and Na and Ma (5-t») on 
the other. These 5 elements can be reduced to three; Si 
and Va as Pathi (Brahm), Ya as soul (Pasu) and Na and 
Ma as Pasam. The soul or Pasu is thus betwixt Pathi and 
Pasam. Solongas he is attached to Pasam he is in 
bondage. When he severs his connection with Pasam, he 
becomes attached to Pathi or Brahm and gets release. 


Panchatcharam is the Tirumani or body of Brahm. 
Without this Panchatcharam, there will be no Panchakri- 
tiam; (Five operations: @@7424., D9), swerrn, SCrrurann, 
2 87% viz, Creation, Preservation, Destruction, Veil- 

k- ing and Mercy). Panchatcharam is all in all. These 
letters not being ordinary letters, there is no use uttering 
these letters singly or in combination and there is no 
virtue in intonation. Panchatcharam is a “thing” (Vastu) 
and it should be taken if one wants to avoid the cycle of 

- births. 
“o pp GSSu Huo, pgwere cireo._asahe 
FD gtd Oumar Bi oor FoIuiT g—in hp gC wair 
Foot, Dor, a, o Norr, PCat sb, wevid, 


wrQ Qaipssepfear _9jo0._ourt.” (1) 
r The signs of the letters will die but the meaning of 
the letters in the different languages will not die. The 


meaning of the unblemished 5 letters forming the Pan- 
chatcharam is Sivam, Arul, Soul, the beautiful Dirotham 
(Maya) and Malam. This you should understand. 
“<AEHOFIPSCS QSL DeVere 9) Mlnen Muyid 
ABO ip SC & 2 Hy w1 om wer $ giid— YCOF ep SC x 
YOST SBTC ALP, UTMAUE SLD DLILIT SVT Ld 
Gunes sip tb (tp Buyin.” (2) 


30 
All the 28’ Agamas and the 4 Vedas are Panchatcha- 


ram. The 18 Puranas are Panchatcharam. The merry 
. dance of Sivam-Sakti, (e., Panchakritiam is Panchat- 
charam. The silent Paramukti, above all Tatwas is also 
Panchatcharam. 
(Unmai Vilakkam by . Saint Manavasagam—K adanthar) 
< GFF EP SATOH Yio oorear 150 Bulb, 
WHOF pS SSH DDT BG SGHFTHSE LD, 
WoripssrOu 2557 FS&ZT1D, 
"sare swam Sor geo Dons wT oor.”” (3) 
Nandi rests on Ancheluthu; 
Panchatcharam rests on Ancheluthu ; 
The round letter is formed by Ancheluthu ; 
Brahm rests within Ancheluthu ; 
(Tirumandiram by Saint Tirumular) 


PART II—DISSERTATION. 


“Sr cor _giL_Olav sar a8) oar” 


As we say “my body” 

This dissertation refutes those who say that body 

is the soul. 

STATEMENTS— 

(1) “Dao of oot gto or oor Doll oot Qpon Lo eo ae.” 

The intelligence within us which says “This is my 
body” is soul. This intelligence does not say “| am 
body,” “Iam hand,” “I am leg” etc., but “ My body” 
“My hand,” “‘ My leg”’ etc., 

This “ My” is soul. 

(2) or oot Ls §) or cor Ln coor GTO DSLITH GTS S , or cor IT) ev or 
Apu gion grader, 21.g18 a! -3/I@UIT @BTLOIT @uiT LD. 

As we distinguish things outside us and separate 
from us, as “My town,” ‘‘ My house” etc., the intelli- 


31 


gence which says “‘ This is my body ”’ thus distinguishing 
the body from “I” is soul. The “I” is Atma. 

ILLUSTRATION.— 

“‘crer) or PLDT L_19 6s OT GOT 1, OT g OF OF GD) 5] 

Oo BI HOT F] C9. OME, STH, UIT & 6 &—er cor ear _pILb 
coro Hasan pi eer sg 8 Sear 

e orale, AomouSoungio ecvorr.?? 

Because you say ‘‘ Mine,” and do not say “not mine” 
and because you stand apart and say “ My hand,” ‘‘ My 
leg,” “ My body,” and ‘‘ My mind”, the hand, leg, body 
and mind are not you (the Soul). If you consider deeply 
you will find that you the soul are different from them all. 


PART III—DISSERTATION. 
“CipLyver 2) see,” 
Because it knows the fine senses. 
(This is to refute those who say that the 5 senses 


or'Indirias are the soul) 

STATEMENTS. — 

(1) “Qo Buyer 2D sBer QTL Bor ga.” 

Soul exists as itis the one which knows all the 
senses. (Soul exists distinct from the senses as we 
- say “My senses,” thus distinguishing the senses from 
the soul.) 

(2) Suiye@mSu es), whe, GU, TF, Bh 5Haer, BoB P 
unset port pHs O) sre p Durrentoud sr, Qacnas Se ord B1b 
WU ge aDugecn sraden 3 gCal JolalT on Lteurii. 

Each of the five organs (for hearing, touching, seeing, 
tasting and smeiling) knows only one sense. The sight 
organ cannot hear; the hearing organ cannot see and so 
on. There is one thing in your body which knows all 
the senses brought by the different sense organs. This 
one is soul, | 


32 

ILLUSTRATION .— 

“ pot D5 & @srerpsurgsr@ BL aineteh 

or pit vent AMEE ODELpSO S— Hort DH HO 

eorenG sun@ea 31 ; sn SSA soorB 

o creme, sjenal, ar pardn, wit.” 

The five sense organs in the body which can know 
only one sense each and not more than one and are 
varied in such a manner that one sense cannot know 
what is brought by a different organ—these organs are 
guided by the Ancheluthu. The intelligence in your body 
which is cognisant of this is the soul (you): You are not 
the five senses which perform five different functions. 
This, you should consider. 


PART IV—DISSERTATION. 
TNC EIT 22:0 ge8 or” , : 
Because it knows in the quies-cence of the five senses. 
This is to refute those who say that it is the Sukku- 
ma body or the Puriyatta body, which cognizes 
all the five senses and not the soul. 
STATEMENTS .— 
(1) “Qef POSE YA soa Mow wre or gi.” 
The intelligence which knows the dreaming state 
(swapna) when the sense organs are inactive is the soul. 
In the dreaming state, the five senses are quiescent 
and the intelligence which knows the dream, 
which is not brought by any of the five senses, is 
the soul. 
(2) senders, sora soir TOWert Dili, Sova 19 evOLoost DIL 
B pu gion #1 668 ear 2) gia Dalal eo Loi aul LD. 
The intelligence which says in the waking state 


“| dreamt” or “ | did not dream’”’ is the soul. Dreams 
are remembered in the waking state only in a hazy 


33 


‘manner and not accurately. If it was the Sukkuma or 
the Puriyatta body, which knew the dream, there should 


._ be no haziness in remembering it afterwards. Because 


there is haziness in reciting the dream, it is the Soul 
which knows the dream and not the Puriyatta body, 

ILLUSTRATION.— 

“gaat Aa Sor muri B2Qut decor grirSi_ouEe 
saa Gar, sjaraj._9o OFor pr_mB— soa Boar 
CaGaporma Garan® SSrumrig, Honore soor 
LoT Ded, ©1_ Sud, Lop pI.” 

In the dreaming state, the five senses are inactive, 
though the organs are present. The Soulis active then 
and is quite cognizant of what is going on. In passing 
from the waking to the dreaming state, the Soul leaves 
the Tula body, enters the Sukkuma or Puriyatta body and 
roames about experiencing pleasures or pain. Then 
when it comes back to the waking state, it leaves the 
Sukkuma body and re-enters the Tula body and remem- 
bers its actions and experiences in the dreaming state 
very indistinctly. Hence the Soul is not the Sukkuma 
body or Puriyatta body. If it was the Sukkuma body which 
dreamt, then there ought to be a clear remembrance of 
what happened in the dreaming state. 

PART V—DISSERTATION. 
6 BoOTLIIGQ 6) BGT LO a Gar uN eaten Loud cor 7? 


As the body has no actions and there is no experience 
of pleasure or pain in dreamless sleeping state (sushupti). 


(This is to refute those whosay that Prana-Vayu 
(\G2remr aru) or the air which plays in respiration is the 
Soul), 

STATEMENT.— : * 

(1) * QemAhé sanuge ecomg DerPonsnuier gyorco4r 
867 Zi. ‘ 

2 


34 


Though there is respiration in sound sleep or dream- 
less sleeping state (Sushupti), there is no experience of 
pleasure and pain and the body and karurvigals are 
without any action. Hence there is a Soul separate from 
the body, the karuvigals and respiratory air. 


(2) @@a@a9_sa Qaus goruLb, Fares Ira BS 
QeneninuIer, gOnarshi_sg Bors gorubd Fdaurd pu 


gor grader 2 gSa) Dalal TooriwTour ip. 


In sleep, when the senses are inactive: the Maya body 
does not experience any pleasure or pain and has no 
action though there is respiration. In the waking state 
there is experience of pleasure and pain and action. So, 
the one who is cognizant of both states is the Soul. 


ILLUSTRATION.— 
sonore uy LD QaarGo, ari_O.tOnes SIT CD)O F 
2_ GOT 19 a Goor uF oar a5) 2 UIT & Ferrer —H oooTL_ Du. 
e oremtin Cam ecnO, mw ; gone g 21a pemtante 
B_Gion GITLb © oor 1g Bat Banas.” 


This body which knows and feels only in the presence 
of the Soul cannot know and feel any thing unless there are 
experiences of pleasure and pain by the soul itself and 
unless the Soul is active. In sleep, whether in the dreaming - 
state (Swapna) or inthe dreamless sleeping state (sushupti) 
the respiratory air is in play; but it does not know that 
‘tis in action. So, that which is able to take cognizance 
of the inactivity of the Karuvigals and the activity of the 
respiratory air in sleep, is the Soul. It is only when the Soul 
is unabsorbed and is joined with Karuvigals, that the 
body will experience pleasure and pain and will be in 
action and not otherwise, quite apart from the play of the 


respiratory air (Pranavayu). 


35 
PART VI—DISSERTATION. 


sami gs ecm sAcr, As it (soul) knows only when 
instructed by Brahm. | 

(This is to refute those who say that Braham ( God) 
is the Soul. 

STATEMENT.—— 


(1) Dah eon gs vot gol or yom WoT eon ga.” 

Soul exists as it knows when instructed by Brahm. 

In the Kevala state (or unembodied state) the Soul is 
dull and actionless as it is not joined to Karuvigals. It has 
no knowledge then as it is completely hidden by Anava- 
malam. It is only when it is clothed with Karuvigals by 
Brahm and passes from the Kevala to the Sakala state 
(embodied state) that the Soul begins to acquire knowledge 
Brahm is not subject to these limitations as he is Omnisci- 
ent. So Brahm is not the Soul. 

QQ) gacr oii srmspaWa cro yAASs 9155s) eu 
Csaur Aougion srador 2 Gar salar orion aire. 

Brahm is Omniscient and is not subject to forgetful- 
ness. The intelligence of the Soul is limited and it is also 
subject to forgetfulness. Brahm does not require any 
teacher to teach Him any thing, while the Soul is in need 
of a teacher and knows things only when taught by 
Brahm intuitively. ; 

ILLUSTRATION.— 

«9 MG gtd 9 DaC suTud, Aur gi 
Degen Buy rA BO, sym I B— 9) 1 6 5 
ot gn? 2 Malin sor Gb; Quowseri_resr spor w)eor 
YB, 2) 51 50 O oor oot gpd 251d.” 

What is that which knows things carried by the 
senses only piece-meal and cannot know simultaneously 
all the things carried by all the five senses together > What 


36 


ts that which knows only when taught? What is that 
which is anxious to know things > What is that which 


forgets what it once knew? What is that which cannot 
concentrate upon anything continuously but only off and. 
on? What is that which is subject to the five states of 
censciousness (Jagrat, Swapna etc)? What is that which 
is sucked in and absorbed at the place called Iladam ? 
It is not the Brahmn, the Ommiscient. If one who 
knows the Truth ponders deeply, he will find that like 
the sun which is different from the eye, this thing is quite 
different from the Great Intelligence and is called Soul 
or Ego and it has the natural tendency to partake of the 
nature of anything to which it is attached. 


PART VII—DISSERT ATION. 
6 gest LDIT gon,” 
The soul is separate— 


This is to ‘refute two sections of Buddhists i.e » 
Soutrantikar and Wybadikar who are called 
Samukanma Vathigal; according to whom the 
whole universe will be brought under Pura- 
chamudayam and Akachamudayam (uu pFFEpsT 
wid, wyerepsrut), Purachamudayam relates 
to earth etc. which are said to be caused by 
Parama Anus, (urwr ax)éeor ) or Atoms. These 
Atoms are of 4 kinds; earth atom, water atom, 
Gre atom and air atom. A combination of these 
atotas will produce earth, water, fire and air. 
: Akachamudayam relates to Chittam and Chitta- 
padudi (@ 52: @se1u@GS). They are produced 
by 5 kinds of Kandas (sie), These 5 Kandas 
are called Uruvam (@@@"»), Vedanai (Gag), 
Jnanarn (eter), Kuri (@8), and Vasana 


(ars%or), Vhe body, senses etc. are called 


37 


Uruvakandam (e-caés%sib), The intelligence 
which feels Uruvakandam is called Jnana- 
kandam (@tTaréae5gu). Pleasures and pains 
experienced from this knowledge are called 
Vedanakandam (Ga s%rs55), The names 
applied to persons and things are called Kuri- 
kandam (@#4s% 51). The knowledge of per- 
sons and things from their names is called 
Vasana-kandam (a7%0é555), Uruvakandam 
is placed under Purachamudayam and the re~ 
maining four are placed under Akachamudayam. 

STATEMENT, — 

“Doh wtTwr QusHs sSanB syot gerinT eon gi.” 


The Soul is not a combination of the 5 Kandas as 
stated by these Buddhists but remains in the Maya 
machinery of body as a separate entity. 


The body is Maya and all the Kandas are Maya. 
They are all transient and perishable. But the 
Soul is eternal and imperishable. 
REASON.— 2a oT GaaGay Quutdupp Ap pers. 
Because they have each a separate and different name 
to distinguish them from the Soul. (The Maya matters 
which compose the body and the 5 Kandas have eacha 
different name.) 
ILLUSTRATION.— 
Cstounr ®) warromrsElb ST sone) LoiTenu, 
Agourerrin, SuCwE.uiTv— -H/eev Wi TLD 
HTB HOODS (por qnarrs gw Big) 2) 5) F SoulrLy 
srox 915 So Couap@lb sion.” 
If you are able to find the Tat as or Karuvigals 
trom Kalai’ to ‘‘ Earth,’ you will then know that they 
are Maya and transient. If you first understand Jnana 


38 


remain quiescent and ponder, you will find that they are 
all Maya matter though they serve like a lamp;- you are 
quite different from them, just as the eye is different from 
the lamp. 


Tatwas or Karuvigals (Categories) are considered as 
24, 36, 96 and above. Of these, 36 Tatwas are . 
Major and the remaining Minor. The 36 Tatwas 
are as follows. 


Atma Tatwas 24 f(a) The five Elements: “ge U1. 


YD FS BALD. Earth, water, fire, air, ether. 
(b) The five Sense organs-2@WOur pear. 
(@7TGors SAuasor), 

(c) The five Senses-@1ysersar. (ge 

wt & Sens). 
(d) The five Kanmendriams. (#2 

Bins Sifluigiear). 
(e) The four Andakaranams, -/%54 

KIN EEA ). 


(Kalam, Niyadhi, Kala, Viddhi. Ara- 
Vidya Tatwas7 | kam, Purudanand Maya. 471, 
As Run ss glam sor. } Bu, stv, Mgengs, 20 TELb, L{ChL_or, 


{| wresus. 


Ge Tatces By Suddaviddai, Iswaram, Sadakkiam, Sakti, 


Aa ss galwsor and Sivam. #45 @sos, mova, 


Fr eTaSuil, $55, Fad, 
Sivam is first and from Him all the other Tatwas are 
‘only an extension. 
(a) The Sutra as literally translated from Sanskrit by 
Pandit Kuppusamy Raja. 
ssgaban cradorapmpyb, Qanerwerm, amos 
Der pi corp bE HST BID, ear_atHashsa wunengs (crorO som 
gin sero) Ger gGssdssorgin, Qs Siunasaller 


39 


g0ésurGu Oeriuc gs Sls 9 P sor gid, epsss Hao Cure 
A ect on Lous QLD, FT6Gr eS 1) Dujs BSoren.0uIGh SST QLD, 
shies Seo wirQer sy OsrpQurcmonrSu) senotBu Sars 


LO ®_o gle 


As all the Tatwas are discarded one after another as 
not Atma, as there is egoism in the body, as dreams are 
known when the senses are at rest, as there is no ex- 
perience of pleasure or pain in sleep, and as there is a 
capacity to know in Jagrat, there is Jivatma in the body. 


(6) The corresponding sutra in Sivajnana Siddhiar 
eGororiuiGa gis ee. darCanar gsr ep pe, 
Gein gin OFreneprore Ori Ssenm._u eT Bu, 

LUuve) Wild Vewru Mou vrsxr sow. MSH; wrrs&ev, 

BIQGeHTObn Beragso gu eerew gifwurZ str. 

What is called Soul exists in the body, but is quite 
separate from it. It is endowed by Brahm with three 
faculties; [chai, Jnana, and Kiriya (Qs, qyreri, Siew) 
which are the embodiments of Sakti. It experiences 
pleasures and pains according to its past Kanmas and 
is subject to 5 Avastas, (Jagrat, Swapna, Sushupti, Turiam 
and Thuriyatheetham). Its separate existence from all 
Tatwas is established, as it alone remains in Turiyathee- 
tham after all the Tatwas are left behind one after 
another, as it passes from Jagrat to Thuriyeethatham. 

In Thuriyatheetham, even the respiratory air (Piranavayu) 
is left behind and the Soul alone remains. This 
will be the experience of Jivanmuktars. 

(c) Corresponding Sutra in Sivaprakasam. 
“QeM55Ob eo. gimnmale Cerise enrude pi 

IH55 Fe) Hipsgip, pon pin 4m: 7 Buy sesrsnLo 

1D) (5 BOD) (LI ChFC BOO Qu Bu nev & IT EVE L1asahl 

e ph gson 25 sipeorenin euIT sO sear eonrl s goers pm.” 


40 
The Soul is in the body. Through the doors of the 


senses, it experiences joys and sorrows as the result of 
its Kanmas. At the same time it does not know “Self” 
which experiences things, and the Sakti or Arul of Brahm 
which brings them about. When he is thus in ignorance 
or bondage, he will be subject to 5 Avastas or states of 
consciousness (ie.,) Jagrat, Swapna, Sushupti, Turiam and 
Turiyatheetham on account of the Eternal Malam which 
binds him. Jn Thuriyatheetham he will be rid of Tatwas 
or Karuvigals and will be alone. This is the nature of 


the Soul. 


This stanza should be read also under Sutra 4 infra. 


= 


4\ 


IVtH SUTRA: 

THE NATURE AND CHARACTER OF PASU OR 
SOUL OR JIVA. 

DIG gH MOT LD ap BO eyes nas oi; sen eu 

FADS 5, SUewre caer OV FBIOTIT 5; 

HOFER Tse TLL Ass py YFG SECS.” 

The Soul is not one of the Andakaranams, It is nei- 
ther Manas nor Buddhi, nor Chittam nor Akankara. The 
Soul does not know and feel anything in its Kevala state 
as it is hidden by the Eternal Anavamalam, So, in order 
to make it active and shine, it has been made by Brahm 
to meet and join the Andakaranams in the course of its de- 
velopment and like a King who is assisted by his ministers 
in the administration, the Soul carries on its activities 
through the Andakaranams and passes through the 5 
Avastas of Jagrat, Swapna, Sushupti, Turiam and Turia 
theetham. 

eré@8gin (sore), Banca (sera), epi, sifu, 
sfiut$s>, Avastas mean states of consciousness. 

PURPORT:— 

“Dea 3)" 
This is the same as the other. 
In Sutra 3, the existence of the Soul was established. 
In this Sutra, its nature is given in extenso. 
This sutra is divided into 3 parts for purposes of 
dissertation. 
(1) #6 séaram lb You DDO) @y oo Moo I; 
(2) esr Maar aud cn td FEF LON FS) TT 55, HOW FDS BI. 
(3) gqenéer Ce tuiuAar DGFAUSM SEC gw. 
PART I—DISSERTATION. 
“DSS BILD Yar D a) cot Gp oor M oor I.’ 
It (the soul) is not one of the Aadakaranams. 


% 


42 


This dissertation is to refute those who say that An- 
dakaranas are the soul either singly or collectivley. 


STATEMENT.— 

mor® @)eva Toor Lor eu oot I Wo ssarorrasontujeror 06 
YU sS) ssuerr Assman qe poor pi- 

The Soul established in Sutra 3 is neither Manas nor 
Buddhi, nor Akankaram nor Chittam. 


Andakaranas are of two kinds. The inner and outer 
Andakaranas. The inner Andakaranas are Kalam, 
Niyadi, Kalai and Arakam. As nobody contends 
that these are the Soul, these are not dealt with. 
The outer Andakaranas which are Manas, Bud- 
dhi, Akankaram and Chittam are alone dealt 
with here. 


REASON, yma 57D Qrereuorn Aon s1Grareuoru 
> Devired. 

Because the Andakarnams shine as Chit (spirit) (®32) 
with reference to the Tatwas below them such as the five 


senses and remain dull as Achit (matter) (2/84) with 
reference to what is above them i.e., the Soul. 


it is true that the Andakaranas each performs a func- 
tion. In this respect they are Chit (4a) (spirit) but they 
do not know that they are performing this function. It is 
the Soul which takes congnizance of the difierent functions 
of the Andakaranas. Hence the Andakaranas ‘are Achit 
(34%) matter. 


The functions of the Andakaranas are:— 


(a) Manas—thinks and doubts; 
(b) Chittam—weighs; 
(c) Byddhi—decides, 


f 


43 


(d) Akankaram—starts to decide, stands per- 
plexed and executes when Buddhi decides. The Anda- 
karanas are ordinarily understood to be the Soul, in the 
same manner as the prime ministers of a king are called 
kings by courtesy. ; 


ILLUSTRATIONS.— 
(1) ‘wari Sarre) 2_oorl eA Loot an) Lyvesr Gor; 
nor §) toastLyaestle) 2ysv6v a" —LoeotG Loew 
a SSO scien p 2 cfarid 2 aI Ged, 9 Sooo 
2 Sa Gd SLO Sorou peg.” 


The senses know things through the mind (manas) and 
its companions, who are above the senses. Senses are not 
the Andakaranas. Jn the same manner the Andakaranas 
know things through the Soul who is above them and the 
Andakaranas are not the Soul as they do not know what 
function they each perform, which is known only to the 
Soul. Different kinds of thoughts and ideas will spring 
up inthe Soul! like the waves of the sea, through the 
Senses and the Andakaranas. 

(2) ‘Rede sre Ag ew, Ogehur gris gywsrolD, 
Ly 6 Susy Opis SI, woot Lo BI— Li §) 5 1, 
QaaGan sTSar ganfls gy eorarin QarCaimptn ; 


yaGagiu Gurgeure, 208.” 


It is the Soul which weighs things as Chittam, thinks 
and wavers as Manas, stands perplexed like Akankaram 
and decides as Buddhi- The Andakaranas cannot act 
independently of the Scul. Like Time which gives us 
hours, days, weeks, months and years in conjunction with 
the Sun, Vicon and the Stars, the Soul plays the part of 
the different Andakayranas in conjunction with each of 
them. The Soul is, however, not the Andakaranas just 
as Time is not day, week, etc. 


44 


(3) “arr, > srrb, sJemerrtb ys; 
netrin borin; Ags sd Bs gw j—uar Sai poo , 
BT geld Por aulgeumid ; mTIg-6) DrowreuLolTLn ; 
Gurg so SenrCu Gurer gp.” 


The letter Akaram (e797) directs Akankara. The 
letter Ukaram (#7912) directs Buddhi. The letter Maka- 
ram (wars) directs Manas. Bindu (39%) directs Chittam 
and Nadam (#7,81b) directs the Soul. If these 5 are con- 
sidered jointly without dis-integration, they are of the 
form of Pranavam (.9rerau2). Thoughts and ideas will 
spring up and change constantly in the Soul through these 
5 (4, &, w, s7 812, Asm) in the same way as the waves 
of the sea rise and fall without intermission. 


This will be clear to those who understand the 4 
Vakku (a74@); Sukkumi, Bysanti, Matimi, and 
Vykari (GFGow, muss@, wS Siow, mast), The 
4 Vakku are nothing but different transformations 
of the same Panchatcharam or Logos. Pranavam 
is the same as Panchatcharam. 


(4) “croton gnarrgSer €e1Gaiwrb 
somahu Ab gQeat® wl gs gIs—Sar ote 
uel suor wTGer® ure 2 9@ swan 


DST, © Tid, DST EST” 


The deities who guide the five component parts of 
the (above mentioned) immmeasurable Pranavam or Om or 
Omkaram are the following. Makasan guides Bindu, 
Sadasivam Nadam, Brahma Akaram, Visnu Ukaram and 
Rudhra Makaram. Unless the Soul joins the five letters 
referred to and the five deities and the four Andakaranas 


(14-in all), it will remain as dull and dormant ‘as matter 
and will not act. 


45 


This will be comprehensible only to those who are 
able to restrain the two airs, Pranavayu (the respiratory 
air) and Apanavayu (the air which escapes through the 
anus). These adepts are none but Jivanmuktars, “Om” 
is made up of the three letters A. U. M. (-- ©, “-) 

PART II—DISSERTATION. 
QS OAT MHUTAID, FEFOVS HOMITH BOA Ff F5HSH- 

Though the Soul is not one of the Andakaranas, it 
was made to meet and join them, as it is ignorant on 
account of the Inborn Malam. 


This dissertation is to explain why the self-refulgent 
and light-imparting Soul is unable to act except 
by joining the “Andakaranas who are not self 


refulgent as the Soul and who receive light only 
‘from the Soul. 


STATEMENT. — : 
QA Quarcrwt FsFnn Ss Fes 0 omTraar yi. 
This Soul is sunk in ignorance on account of the 
Eternal and Inborn Malam. 


This statement implies that the Moola Malam or the 
Root Malam referred to in the {st Sutra, not only 
keeps the Soul in ignoranee in the Kevala State 
but also causes it to pass through the 5 Avastas 
of Jagrat etc. in the Sakala state. The Root 
Malam has these two fuctions. 


REASON.— 

Ag slor Elo Hor sFoTw wnops He QarOs pp 
eorex. Because it (the Root Malam) stands hiding the Soul 
as a Jnana-Blind (or Loving blind). 

This “Reason” explains why the Soul. which 
remains dull and inactive in the Kevala state 
on account of Malam wakes up and begins 


46 

activity in the Sakala state when joined with 
Karuvigals or Tatwas. If the Root Malam is 
‘an ordinary Veil or Blind it will keep the soul 
in igcorance at all times. But the Root Malam 
is a Jnana-Blind (which correctly means a Blind 
caused by Love). Panchakritiam (UG}*#8@s S10) 
consists of Creation, Preservation, Destruction, 
Blind or Veil and Grace. (@qjazy., DS, emarri, 
HCrrunraun, 2 eéGr510). Drobavam (GC arrest) 
or Blind included in Panchakritiam is the Jnana- 
Drotakam referred to in this “Reason,” Pancha- 
kritiam is the work (dance) of Brahm. So this 
Jnana Blind is also the work of Brahm. The 
Root Malam keeps the Soul in ignorance only 
till the time for Anukraham or Mercy (Ym@¢ 
@retr) arrives. Jnana (@s7@rb) is one of the 
names of Panchatcharam in Parisbashai. 


ILLUSTRATION.— 
‘inruT gon Gorsaribd, wo MietorLd ST Ewe? Fe 
BUT STL Qsrsy; I gaa gINTW_ a wi 
Aral gor F Sor ene now PS ay qpes~apid sir _1_MmGuTry 
SOCOM OND BoD) 9am Fv HTT.” 


Like the fire-wood and Ioad-stone which hide the 
fire in them, the Root-Malam hides the Soul eternally 
and prevents him from knowing what he is. But Maya “ 
serves as light, shows him what he is by developing his 
intelligence. Unless Maya assists the Soul in this res- 
pect, he will have no knowledge. 


This illustration shows how Anavamalam stands with 
the Soul as Adwaita from time eternal and how Anava- 
malam and Maya act and intersact for the benefit and 
development of the Soul. 


47 


PART I1I—DISSERTATION. 

“gener, Sreoriiis Beso) WRF HUTOHSSS B.” 

The King-Soul with his Andakarana prime-ministers 
is subject to five Avastas- 

STATEMENT.— 

Qh Qaarsiuoré e1&8a1, Oeriiucril, H1psH, su, 
Shur E swtwyerer uGhFla SS) Sen) 4) DGLd. 

This Soul which was in ignorance in the Kevala state 
on account of Malam undergoes the five Avastas of 
Jagrat, Swapna, Sushupti, Turiam and Turiyatheetham 
when it is joined to Andakaranas, in the Sakala state. 

REASON.— 

“3g sTer UNOEFTEHUSSeor won pr gs 
Voanu CerenQurw &ppeviresr.” 

Because the Soul though Omnipresent is enveloped 
by WVialam and takes the form and characteristics of the 
Tatwas (Karuvigals) to which he is attached by Brahm. 

(a) ‘garsOsraidorsror grata 2D FT TTT oT 5 

suadsn sORors atriagsroer 1 Nurerss; 
SOEOSOH 1) HVT BIH FS ZIM A OF OO HLT ; 
HVSOS I Moul@jw Dreavip pamost@ oor.” 

The Soul has no independent intelligence and cannot 
join the Tatwas of his own accord. The Tatwas which 
are unintelligent doors cannot join the Soul of their own 
accord. ‘The Soul who has no independent intelligence 
takes the form and characteristics of the Tatwas to which 
he is attached. It is only when Brahm joins the Soul to 
Tatwas that the Soul will have action and experience. 
(Sivaprakasam-) 

(6) Just as a king who has prime-ministers has also 
other retinue, the Soul-king has other retinue as follows. 
(This is given in ‘“Jnanamirtham” (@7@427 #4);— 


48 


In the Ear—Watchmen. 
va Body—Spies. 
» Eyes—Messengers. 
»  Mouth—Immediate attendants: 
» Nose—Prohits. 


| 
vo | 
[ 

1 


In the Tongue—Cavalry men- 
Legs—Elephant warriors. 
Arms—Chariot warriors: 
Anus—Infantry- 

» Sex organs—Commandants. 


The Action 


organs: 
22 


The ten Airs or Vayus (i.c.,) Pranam, Apanam, 
Udaman, Viyanan, Samanan, Nagan; Kurman, Kirukaran, 
Devadattan, and Tananjeyan are the relations. 


Hearing, touching, seeing, tasting, smelling, speech, 
walking, giving, passing. urine and stool, and enjoying 
sexual intercourse are the many followers. The Soul will 
assume the form and character of each and every one of 
these as occasion arises. 


ILLUSTRATION.— 

(1) “ga paaruripa gg; eGaderujid «Ti Gudesf sv ; 

| Osa phew Ass QOsus gs; wes paw 
Reus ST 5 QySIV; STL SF gargar F) 
Godwin §) Aero Can.” 

PROSE ORDER.— 

“ner gi s0 altar G Onur Soc p Tuwse2 cows FT; 
saris garae 5) CuuuwrS) Bi 1sorgCag Bonu grb; 
Qsug 5 ASS Qe ox p Seruy; 
mriauieie euI7Gomrujtb; Dc poss orp.” 

In the Jagrat, 34 Tatwas and the Soul at work. These 
are Gnanandrias (5), Kanmendrias (5), Tanmatri or sen- 
ses (5), Speech etc. (5), Airs (10), Andakaranams (4), and 
Soul (1). The place assigned is Netri or Puruvam, In Swa- 
pna, 24 Karuvigals and the Soul are at work. These are 


49 


Tanmatri-senses (5), Speech etc,, (5), Airs (10), Anda- 
karanas (4), and Soul (1). The place assigned is Kandam, 
In Sushupti, Chittam, Pranavayu and the Soul are at work, 
The place assigned is Idayam. In Turiyam, Pranavayu ~ 
and the Soul are at work. The place assigned is Nabi. 
In Turiyatheetham Soul alone reigns. The place assigned 
is Mulam. 


The places mentioned here do not refer to any part 
of the human body. These places are in Pachatcharam. 

(2) “Dor_sCs FT EBT SED 5 or) S)use_ on om Lp 

Qom_éCs Sigasong origi; Mor ses 
gaan Riu 31 25 1 DST sort giGal 
yaaap io aso 3.3) BEG” 

In the same way as the Soul leaves behind him Karu- 
vigals, set after set when he proceeds from Jagrat to Thu- 
riyatheetham, he takes back the Karuvigals when he 
returns from Thuriyathatham to Jagrat. This is in the Sakala 
state. Inthe Sutta state also, the would-be Jivanmukta 
will pass through 5 Avastas or states of consciousness 
which is however different from these. This will be found 
in the Special chapters (Sutras, 7-12). The Jivan-mukta 
enjoys Sushputi (the state of dreamless sleep) in Jagrat 
(the waking state) whichis called Nanavil Sushupti Nili. 
(screen Fpl Biz) : 

The states of conciousness in the Sutta state or pure 
state are in- reference to the Dasakariyam or Dasa Avas- 
tas (sFarfuis, s¢2j0 50 5-Dasam-Ten) fee 
Dasa Kariam are-the following:- 

(1) Tatwa Roobam or Pasa Roobam, 

(sS.gel ehuww—wnFenutb) 

(2) Tatwa Darisanam or Pasa Darisanam, ; 

(sg Ssileeris—ute sheer) 
7 


50 


(3) Tatwa Sutti or Pasa Sutti (ss aqaa5) ~ 
—urs ag) B 

(4) Atma Roobam or Pasu Roobam. 

(oor eo eHLILD—LIe EMLILD) 

(5) Atma Darisanam or Pasu Darisanam 

(359010 6 Foor b—_ a wif Four Lb ) 

(6) Atma Sutti or Pasu Sutti (game s5—uss 5S) 

(7) Siva Roobam or Pathi Roobam 

(Fagjuu—u Rex) 
(8) Siva Darisanam or Pathi Darisanam 
(Gai gh ¢orir—t 8) sf xeon) 
(9) Siva Yogam (@aGwra.w) 
(10) Siva Bogam (GarSurasir) 

When Jnana is revealed to Jiva by Brahm (Sutra 8), 
he will gradually get a clear knowledge of Pathi, Pasu and 
Pasam which are called ““The Mupporuil’”’ (Three things). 
These three things are in Panchatcharam. When the Jiva 
acquires a clear idea of this Mupporul, he will gradually 
discard Pasam or [Tatwas, will gradually come to know 
what he really is and who Pathior Sivam is and will finally 
be merged in Pathi or Sivam, which is called Siva Bogam. 

These ten Kaciams or Avastas are brought under the 
recognised five Avastas of Jagrat, Swapna, Sushupti, 
Turiam, and Turiyatheetham; but these Avastas in the 
Sutta state are pure and untrammelled by Karuvigals or 
Tatwas and are entirely unlike the ordinary jagrat etc. 
The classification is as follows. 

Tatwa Roobam, Tatwa Darisanam, Tatwa Sutti and 
Atma Roobam are called Fure jagrat (Semmes ¢raGauw) 
as the Jiva has come to know ‘ Self” and the differentia- 
tion between him (Pasu) and Tatwas (Pasam), Atma 
Darisanam is “ure Swapna (orwe Gereiortd) and is 
also called Siva Roobam because when the Jiva realizes 


51 


« what “ Self" really is, he is said to have found Sivam of 
Brahm at the same time. as he and Brahm are found 
as Adwaita in the same place (i.e.) Panchatcharam. Atma 
Sutti or the Purification of Atma or Soul by Arul or Pan- 
chatcharam is Pure Sushupti and Pure Turiam (feu 
FUSS, Horie sifu), This is at the same time Siva 
Darisanam and Siva Yogam, The union of Jiva with 
Brahm or Sivam is Pure “uricatheetham (Gere sifu S stb) 
and is also called Siva Bogam. (Vide Panchatchara pogh- 
toda in Pandara Sastra—vewre erg Baum, ugyrrssors 
Licodlapan_) 


(a) The Sutra as translated from Sanskrit by Pandit 
Kuppusamy Raja:— . 
pi Sa@oou Bsr wh sssror SS) spin Cougporasentt gpd 
ws GAuid srr ayidGura 1356 @O ny Wag HA Gon SuTB 
LYomrawn GSO BOSSI. GHrors @fenurster 2 cnL_wi 
ADL wasos VHS aid SHIUI@)asor. 

The Soul otherwise called Jiva, though he is different 
from Andakaranas, is Joined to them like a king with his 
minister. Though naturally Omniscient and Omnipresent, 
he is hidden by Anavamalam and is subject to five avastas. 

(b) Corresponding sutras in Sivajnana Siddhiar: 
(1)eortaciaaranQincr alley gotten pg om ples rir QaaGCa yp 

aajfoer F5ib Qeudact ToT Gib YObg, Joa I s2 ysGry 
L{SOT BLD &_ aT smawrsSrs ps sc7u9 eyo Curae 
Qoaor 57d Bou p Door ouapis, “WIT SST, OT COT EN OT oor Li 351 Bf aot LIT.” 

If it is the Andakaranas who know things, they are 
not cognizant of each other's performances. It is the Soul 
which says “I? and “Mine”, that is cognizant of the four 
functions performed by the Andakaranas, that controls 
these functions, and which leaves the different Tatwas or 
Karuvigals as it passes from Jagrat state to [Turiatheetham. 
So the Soul is different from Andakaranas. 


52 


(2) ‘Hen GQer@ vaehCur gai wii oreo cor YxCur S\vebev 
so_OsrHb SOG @ srarguO_Os Geren 

Hoi sHio sMCuW.95 5 ps Fehler, oj Gur gown 

2. deha YHEFAGOS O0 piio oult srao4res.” 

A king who returns to his palace from a stroll 
followed by his retinue leaves behind him at the appointed 
places all his retinue from the ministers downwards and 
enters the zenana, leaving only a guard at the door of the 
innermost room. In the same manner the Soul-king 
leaves behind him the Tatwas, his retinue, set after set, 
when he passes from Jagrat to Turiyatheethan, placing 
only the respiratory air as guard at Turiam. 


(c) Corresponding Sutra is Sivaprakasam. Read the 
Stanza quoted under Sutra 3. 


53 


VtH SUTRA. 
THE NATURE AND CHARACTER OF PASAM. 
“HoroGQu core sg Ounweurs sxrepsS 
yrs is Our; gmsne Cures 
args center «8 saRar 
STG SU SOL UETES SMASU.” 

The five Senses and other Karuvigals or Tatwas 
cannot know and feel anything unless they are quickened 
by the Soul. The senses and Tatwas do not know what 
part they play and how they play. In the same way the Soul 
cannot know and act unless it is quickened by the Sakti 
of Brahm or Arul. The Soul however does not know that 
he is Omnipresent and that he is quickened by Arul. By 
Sakti being the quickener, Brahm, Sakti’s inseparable 
Consort does not become an active Operator. The mere 
presence (#545) of Brahm makes the Soul active through 
Sakti, just as iron plays in the presence of magnet. 

PURPORT.—_Qaaraurssehli $55 £035 (CPB @_UISTTLb 
DONT FBS. 

This Sutra declares ‘‘the Graciousness of Brahm to- 
wards the Soul.” 

The Arul referred to in the Sutra is the Dirodana 
Sakti (@Crrgre +38). By the mention of some 
only of the Tatwas in the Sutra all other Tatwas 
are included. 

This Sutra is divided into 2 parts fer purposes of 

dissertation 

(1) BeribQw era gg, Quows, aru, somr, pas 

Hors SOG SO wir. 
(2) sigh canter super. 
PART I—DISSERTATION. 
forid9u eororgsg Guu, aw, sam, pseq Horas He 
Sur. 


The five senses and other Tatwas cannot grasp 

anything except through the Soul. 

This dissertation is to refute the Sankia philosophy 
according to which the Soul stands apart, that 
in its presence Buddhi knows things through the 
senses and that the Soul does not undergo the 
Avastas alony with the Tatwas. 

STATEMENT.— 

‘mom® Gupta Sx HpaTlLoTalTa) 2 GOTT. 

The five senses know things through the Soul (and 

not as stated in Sankia philos»phy) 

ELLE = 
*¢ gyou DB) @o) oor BoriT DDD FBS Leer nenel 
Soa paren muyid Bc aAusr ain aT aot? 


a9 


Because the senses can feel nothing except in con- 
junction with the Soul. 

ILLUSTRATION.— 

BinQur Nenu owt garry eat A) es 
BirQumr Maser e_otrarip YA PusrorTio—B wOrir udev 
ST eS se ST CO) G1; SIT apyic@ on Lh ST EO Ged 
EMT GOD) H SOOT 5 CGsarr Oxf.” 

Though the Soul controls the five senses and miles over 
them like a King, the senses do not know the Soul. If 
they act simply in the presence of the Soul as stated by 
Sankiam, then the senses should be aware of the presence 
of the Soul. This, in fact, they are not aware of. So, it 
should be established that unless the Soul joins them, 
they will know nothing. Unless there is actual conjunc- 
tion between the Soul and the senses there will be no real 
knowledge. This is evident from the Swapna state or 
the dreaming state (Qeriusar saionms), So it should be 
admitted that the Soul does not know without the senses 
and the senses do not know without the Soul, Their ser- 
vices are reciprocal. . 


= 


55 


PART II—DISSERTATION. 

“ gTLb Bld e_omri aos sO gino youn son sour” 

The soul does not know that it is quickened by Sakti 
or Arul. 

This dissertation is to refute the theories of Iswara- 
avikara-Vadis and others of their opinion (#2 acSera 
aur §)sar). 

STATEMENT. Qo @ giao sug Up gsarGea ecm. 

This (Soul) too knows through its Chief, the Brahm. 
(Just as the senses know through the Soul, the Soul knows 
through Brahm) 

REASON. _Qaarcrurs sa@Gea ear «Sumer 
Guregs ST gird serdor v_onrrr gi 6p Movi oor. 

Because the Soul does not know “Self’’ and the Brahm 
who is its support, in the same way as the senses do not 
know themselves and the Soul who is their support. (This 
is to show that the Soul by its mere conjunction with the 
senses does not know things and it can know only 
through Brahm.-) 

ILLUSTRATIONS.— | 
(1) “wer aiGocr oro QuId wp pasin Cri_o 55g 

oT eT gin wen Duler Qwewps 1—Oen corer Raucar 

FT GD), Gor inaldorwira) Boor 5) 1 (6) (DG BIST OWT, 

ore ener, Hover 3 sen SUI csp.” 

You have forgotten the saying of the Vedas that the 
universe and the Soul will sport in the mere presence of 
Sivam or Brahm. The Sivam or Brahm referred tu is only 
a means like the eye. The Soul is in action on account 
of its Kanmas. Sivam or Brahm will not experience Asat 
(matter), as no Asat will stand before Him who is Sat 
(spirit. )- : 

The reason for the repetition of the name “‘Sivam” 
thrice in the illustration is to show him in His three 


56 

capacities. The first “Sivam’ in whose presence the 
universe plays as well as the Soul, shows that He is the 
author of eternal bliss (Guferw strane), The second 
“Sivam’’, who is stated to be the Eye, shows that He is 
Omniscient (qo) merrderer), The third “‘Sivam” in whose 
presence Asat will not stand, shows that He will not 
experience Asat (a7useremnuier), as He is the personi- 
fication of Purity. 

(2) “QawiGurer gehiGe 20a) Sarat 31 

Qewi Currier gers BorCure—Quuliweretld 

sar®, Car_G, co an@, ou9i sg, 2-0 9/Pujid Brbd.yfars 

sa® 21 eH wor SUVS STomT.” 

The stars which shine through the Sun and which are 
swallowed up by the Sun do not become the Sun itself. 
In the same way the soul who is ever within the orbit of 
Brahm, knows things with Him and through Him, 
yet does not become Brahm (Adwita). This Adwaita 
relationship between Brahm and _ the Soul is like that 
between the Soul and the senses which see, hear, taste, 
smell and touch with the Soul and through the Soul. 

(3) “senor, FF DG AHFSES, ues p 

AGH Deu or oor 5) 9 20 — _9) Tov car 05) 

Hacr sorSp Qerer ; AHorsan onl Hor oy a 

QrACutea 8p@Go gro aung.”’ 

Arul is Enternal and Anadi (-7¥@ 3). This Arul is Sakti 
(Kundali), Energy of Brahm. Thereis no Arul without 
Brahm and there is no Brahm without Arul. To those 
Pakkuvars (U&@@7) who have been fortunate enough to 
get the Arul eye, Brahm will be like the sun. 

This is to show how Souls who are within Brahm 
are in action without any corresponding action 
on the part of Brahm. Brahm or Sivam has 
Arul as His Sakti. Sivam and Sakti are 
inseparable. They are co-existent,ico-eval and 


57 
co-eternal. Though Brahm is quiescent, His 
Sakti is very active. The movements and action 
of the Souls are all due to the influence of Sakti, 
the inseparable partner and consort of Brahm. 
Arul is the same as Panchatcharam. The mean- 
ing of Arul or Panchatcharam will be revealed 
to Pakkuvars by Brahm. It is only when a person 
has understood the meaning of Arul or Panchat- 
charam, that he will be able to understand “Self” 
and Brahm and his union with Brahm who is 


always within his Soul & within his body, will be 
possible, 


(a) The Sutra as literally translated from Sanskrit by 
Pandit Kuppusamy Raja:— 


Qe Ahumser Paguims%n Kaze Su BD ener 9) IB ss peor, 
YFP ou ainsi oor 5B m Be eo. F LDL 4a@a) ov | OB cx ap oor, 
HY5OQ” Aacr GerfurarQaetior, AarAunraneir. Ye 
Faro 9 F as Foor SBT BLD BT LDD Foor = Ceo tug Cure Qe oI 
saBorapos. 

Indirias (senses) know things through Jiva the Soul. 
The Soul too does not know things by itself. It knows 
things through Brahm. Brahm does not for this reason 
become an Operator; Brahm makes the Jiva play in His 
presence, just like the magnet makes the iron play 
before it. 

(6) The corresponding Sutra in Sivajnana Siddhiar:— 

‘Qurd, yer, sromQuwevevirtd YR) AG go, 
yO smT: syomaSuCuren YUMOTsaa _o/lor F gd 
OF DEGb Aaa peo ACTIN ou Zoar & iT eon), 
OCD Haier Queer aA gy YO 5 g19 isos.” 

The Senses, Karanas, and other Tatwas know things 
through the Soul (Puruda) but they do not know them. 
selves and the Soul which guides them. In the same way, 


Aororenas 


OF BILD 


58 


the Soul experiences things and reaps the fruits of its 
actions (Kanmas) according as they are set in motion by 
the Drodana Sakthi (S@2z7s7e #55)), the partner of the 
Omnipresent Brahm and yet the Soul does not know 
itself-and the Sakti of Brahm who sets things in motion. 
Though the Senses and the other Tatwas do not know the 
Soul, the latter is ever present with them and makes them 
act. In the same way, though the Soul does not know 
Brahm who is ever present with him, Brahm who. makes 
the Soul know him, when heis rid of Pasam, is ever pre- 
sent with the Soul, knowing him and making him know 
things. 

The position of Brahm in this respect is very clearly 
put by Saint Karaikal Ammayar in “ Arpudatiruvandadi’’. 
(Sterrsarey 2 bemcowirir YOU ss S65 wT SH), 

Q) “aPer migrSer, 2 DAuTor sr oor 

a Soris 4 OBes ap om #16 ot — 2) Bear p 
QrowsQurGenn £1 er, MRFLT, UIT, Bree, 
AIOUMMHEHS STS oor .2aucsr.”” 

It is Brahm who knows things. Jt is He who instructs 
(the Soul). It is He who as Arivu or Intelligence knows 
everything. It is He who is the Panchetchara Porul (97m 
aon s—Uugretagru Quran), the Truth. He is the Light, 
Earth, Ether and All. 

(2) “2@@ar PB MVOSAT b Qari g 2 Feo 

YH 2 at Davin mics ST ey N—ACHar To 
Airis Dun han Cons Gin of Hujoo._Cwiresr-or mer oor gud 
SI LIDUT Oh wT ao goo 5.” 

Iris Arul which rules the world. It is Arul which 
causes the cessation of births. [have been fortunate to 
see Panchatcharam through Arul. It is Arul which is all 
to me always. 

(c) The corresponding Sutra in Sivaprakasam: 


59 


(1) “eg@eertasrenwur sab; pQrrcRL er corre 
wpa sop) ZT anid; nen Gaon gidHerwaroh & 
SHUUST 50 Bor ayip; e uM F_ ior Hevl gytb, 


Ager eo. gia, AAG 2 SusicotS wp.” 


The body cannot know things as it is unintelligent 
matter, The senses cannot know things as they can each 
experience things only one at atime. The Andakaranas 
cannot directly know things, as they can experience only 
such of the things as are brought to them through the senses. 
The respiratory air (Qeremr anuj) cannot know things as it 
is unintelligent matter. The Soul which is confined within 
this bedy according to its Kanmas can know things only 
through Brahm. 


(2) <a DGaeha aTIvn8 aa; sa7O poh sJena1 eriber on Foor, 
YMacws eo Fain sara ICs Koti Bonougsrld orvevr en ; 
AAU I Hujth FIM Athena Qercsrestl, gi csr 
YOM sb; FET Woe gag Fons Be 7Car.” 


If the Soul can know things independently by itself, it 
does not require the senses; as its doors. If the Soul is an 
unintelligent entity, what good can the senses do to it? 
The senses cannot furnish intelligence to the Soul as the 
senses are themselves unintelligent. If the Omniscient 
Brahm can be said to furnish intelligence to the Soul then 
the Soul by nature must be unintelligent matter. The All- 
knowing Brahm will not supply intelligence to an unintelli- 
gent matter. So it is certain that the Soul is an intelligent 
entity by nature. 


(7) The heading of this Sutra is ‘The nature and 
character of Pasam’’. Pcesam consists of Anavamalam, 
Kanmas and Maya. The nature of Anavamalam has been 
dealt with in Sutra 4 The Arul referred to in this Sutra, 
is Drodana Sakti. Maya and Kanmas are only the instru- 
ments or agents of this Drodana Sakti and a descrip- 


x 


60° 


tion of Drodana Sakti or Arul in the Sutra and disserta- 
tions, covers also a description of Maya and Kanmas 
and so they are not separately dealt with. 


(ce) From a delineation of the nature and character 
of Anavamalam, Maya and Kanmas (Pasam), ky Saint 
Meikanda Devanar in Sutras 2, 4 & 5 and the dissertations 
under them, it will be evident that though they may 
appear to be hostile to the Soul, when viewed superficially, 
they are really benefactors of the Soul in their respective 
spheres in the Jong run, in as much as they help the Soul 
in his education, discipline and development, in his march 
towards the attainment of union with Brahm. Herein lies 
the ‘* Graciousness of Brahm towards the Soul,’ given as 
the purport of the Sutra. The “Anai’’ referred to in 
Sutra 2, as the Prime—mover of the Kanmas of Jivas is the 
Sakti or Energy of Brahm. The ‘Jnana Drotakam,” 
which the Root Malam assumes in hiding or blinding the 
Soul as established in Dissertation I] of Sutra 4 is also the 
Sakti or Energy of Brahm. And the Arul referred to in 
this Sutra as the Quickener of the Soul is also the Sakti 
or Energy of Brahm. So it is clear that the Principle 
underlying Anavam, Kanmas and Maya is “ Brahm— 


Sakti” or “‘ Sivam-—Sakti” or ‘‘Brahm—Arul” or “God— 


Grace”’. 


61 


VitH SUTRA: 


THE NATURE AND CHARACTER OF 
PATHI OR BRAHM OR GOD. 
“(@ cori B_(R FSO eohe ; ve carrtg QerenwiIen ; 
QoaSpwrrog, Pus serGwer, 
BQror® amaIn Qansé Grd wer give.” 


If Brahm is a thing which can be seen and known 
like the universe it will be perishable matter or Asat 
(+4). If Brahm cannot be seen and known in any way, 
then He will be Suniam or Cipher and becomes non-existent 
like the “hare’s horn.’ He is neither Asat nor Suniam nor 
Sat. He cannot be known and at the same time He can 
be known. So, Jnanis who have found Him will say 


that He is “Siva Sat” (Gea) or a Sat which can be 
known. 


Brahm cannot be known by Pasa-Jnanam (ure 
@7 ere) and Pasu-Jnanam (v#@jrerb), But He 
can be known by Pathi-Jnanam (US@5rarib, Gar 
@T eb). Panchatchara Porul (u@5¢m_eacQumrcparr) 
or Brahma Vastu (9th aevgi) is Formed and 
Formless (4, ©). So Brahm is Aru-Ury 
(3 ®@) and can be known. This meaiis 
that Brahm cannot be known by the Soul with 
his Soul-knowledge and Worldly knowledge, 
But He can be known when he reveals Himself 
to the qualified Soul. : 


PURPORT.—*3a35 33g aworOs gomig ase 
51569 DD. 


This Sutra distinguishés between Sat and Asat 
(4s), YF 53i). 
This Sutra is divided into two parts for dissertation 


62 


(1) eam sesQschn, eomrrtg Qarenuufer or 
Larrea 955); Comrrg orofler Qerenwudes, 
(2) Q@gSnex s00g FausssrCwer Qrar® asco sud cr 
QDorsew wor mos. 
PART I—DISSERTATION. 
“po omit Oh TON FSG; conta g) otovllan Q)aremiouGesr’ 


If (Brahm) can be seen, known and felt He is Asat; 
If He cannot be seen, known and felt He is non-existent. 

STATEMENT. —7200@ o/ ASN 9 Dwi 1 FG (# 
Ou Qurgar) 3s s- 

What can be known by Atma-knowledge or Soul 
knowledge (as distinguished from Brahm-knowledge) 
is Asat or matter. 

REASON. 9a 7 GQrareur derSp 199 sre) 
Ap pave. 

Because Asat, matter (universe), stands clear and 
defined but has no light in itself. (It gets light from 
something else which is the Mupporul or Aru! or Panchat- 
charam.) 

ILLUSTRATION.—(1) y#aa0uTW ? Cao 8; 9 Pade 
THOT HES STHid; Ouowisovrr_mesr gues. 

Oh, you, that are ignorant of the nature of Asat, 
listen. What is known by your Soul-knowledge is all 
Asat. This you will understand clearly if you find what is 
Truth or Siva-Sat. 

From the phrase “QuwWaeamr_ror, gue” (If Truth is 
found) it is clear that Truth or Brahm can be found and 
that it is at the same time, very difficult to find. 


There are many stanzas which declare the possibility 
of finding Brahm or Truth. 


63 


(1) “xcpohens gar sC % 2) Huser Ld, aera @) GIL 
OQ sGHaravri, ReaiGoor HrorerO Fu Buse Ree sujet Gor 
waA@arairin Pmasaacot® auriperin; 9 mainruT 


Qqoororin Ohssorgr, 29 uCary. Geese Gi.” 


Though Brahm cannot be ordinarily known, He can 
be known through Arul from the teachings in Agamas. 
The “‘thing’” taught in Agamas can be known by. medita- 
tion. From meditation ‘‘the thing’’ can! be clearly ‘fseen™ 
without any confusion through Sivajnana, “From. this 
clear position, Pasam, the cause of birthsican be conquered. 
From the victory over Pasam, you can join the company 
of Saints and enjoy Sivananda Anubudi (@arerss 2 gy 
445), Eternal Bliss. 

(Sivajnana Siddhiar; Saint Arulnandi Sivachariar). 

(2) “xyeadlosr DO Garioiyzib eT aptots G); 2 Botley 

seryarMa@Quapl san QonSu sor 
EE oor (peor ; DY GID BD D & ST SHS or promi Dart; 
Napa 9 peat Aor & gion Aine.” 


This our body is called Brahmapuram, because 
Brahm dwells in it. In the body there is a “thing” 
called Takara Kakanam or Takara Pundareegam. which 
shines in the mind. This is the Brahm referred to 
"by all the Vedas. This Brahm will hasten to those who 
dearly wish to rest from their births, (‘‘ Takaram ’’ means 
light or of little weight). Kakanam is something like ether. 
Takara Kakanam is a thing which is light like ether. 
Pundareegam is lotus. Takara Pundareegam is light- 
lotus. (Tatuva Royaswamy’s Brahma Geeta.) 

(2 Ly) FCO ECCT & 66 opera Gen ppensus Laem 5 Furi 5 wo 
Geah srw, 2evrenwwTl, As srw, Zort sow HMw somap 
@tiwunt yyreorioras Ga Glor 9, UsuS Tw, 2 of Cara Ea/LD, 

Guiluw rassrd Oesete SrwyrOuer Cuut Qupns ww,” 


64 


As Brahm is above all Tatwas, He cannot be known 
to human beings. This Brahm is Truth, Chit, Bliss and 
Perfection. This our body which has the great privilege 
of housing this Brahm in it, is called Brahmapuram on 
that account. 

(Chidambarapuranam—Saint Paranjothi) 

(4) a Puri@urGerns soot sPaire; sno sexs! goa 
Hf Dip LOT GOHo 2jver. 

He is not a thing who cannot be known by Jnana or 
Arivu. At the sametime He is nota thing who can be 
known by Jivas bound by Pasam, 

(Saint Kannudaya Vallalar). 
(5) “CO 505 sondQsranZ. oa S)K rotGevr@ BIT GOT (Lp & gpytd 

C506 Cs0_T ens Cgallor stor aiGor C5u.& somr® 

[QsramG_onr. 

I have searched for Him and fsund Him whom 
Vishnu and Brahma seached for in vain. | have searched 
for Him and found Him within me. 

(Tiru Jnana-Sambanda-Swami—Devaram) 

(6) 6p e_ LoiD@eor (Lp ost esr Lb DEps 5 oor DRG S 5 oor, 

21 _ini9) aye @ar Gar ae gmOuTCHer senrG1_oor, 
a_uyoser esse Caria Gara ros, oro 
a Der uTohaes CesriyBeC peor.” 

_Formerly I considered my body a great nuisance 
and an encumbrance. Then ] found an “Eternal Thing” 
in my body. I found Brahm making a temple of my body. 
‘?”" live in my body and protect it. 

_ (Saint Tirumular—Tirumandiram) 


ILLUSTRATION:—(2) yxgeord? BAe orapsand, eer 
ao, Gui sC eG, pilosr sonauIerazioTg Qriy. 


65 
Oh! you (soul) who are not Asat but are endowed 
with intelligence! Do not be astounded because you are 
asked to consider the universe (which appears to be per- 
manent) Asat, unreal and perishable. If you ponder, you 


will find that the universe is as impermanent as the 
writing on water, a dream and mirage. 


PART I (a)—DISSERTATION. 


RD wmrrT sg) crater Beremouler, ie., If Brahm cannot be 
known, He is suniam or non-existent. 
Saint Meikanda Devanar has not dealt with this portion 
in his dissertation, as it is accepted by all that a 
thing which cannot be known is non-existent. 
Saint Ayul Nandi Saivachariar however, deals with it 
in his “Sivajnana Siddhiar.”’ 

“e amarsQumcner #56 some) DALI GH veo , Git apn 
yor, arpa DEFar a QuTdKs sai Beraplb ; sratt pip 
SOA F SHIOLD oper MD HH FMV ; all oot SSB 
Qararr 150 sre _ujin wTewsdsipwire uF gioG um gyn” 

If a thing (Brahm) which cannot be known is Sat 
(<%=), then it cannot join us and we cannot also join it 
at any time, in spite of all the interminable Kanmas we 
undergo. So we profit nothing by a thing which cannot be 
known, just as no one is profited by aerial flower or the 
tortoise’ hair. The flower cannot be made into a garland 
_and the hair into a rope. Because both are non-existent. 

(This Sutra also shows that Brahm is a knowable 
thing.) 

PART II—DISSERTATION. 
“OmMapadas, Pssst Cwoesr 
Qrar® nomsIn QomrsGHin wor avon.” 

Brahm is neither Asat nor Suniam (non-existent). He 
can both be known and not known. As He is knowable 
by Jnanis, He is called Siva-Sat (Guess). 


66 


As the {st dissertation deals with the nature of Asat, 

this one deals with the nature of Sat. 

STATEMENT: — @oof Qa s oor® sornomicuj Het ara 
wees Carernms Botp giCal £% sTwWYaror Peu@ioeor 1 
© OTT LIT Dl. 

The Being who is neither Sat nor Asat, who is incom- 
prehensible and who is beyond speech and mind of 
the ignorant Soul, is Siva Sat (@¢%.) and can be known 
through Jnana. : 

REASON _Orare sR aéGU GrarGss Casm@Bas Garon 
wren 4dr e S59 meq DrarelesentoiT apt. 


Because a thing or object which is within the -com- 
prehension of human knowledge, does not require any 
extra aid to understand it by and a thing or object which 
is above the comprehension of human knowledge can 
never be known. Brahm does not fall within any of the 
above two categories, as He can be known though incom- 
prehensible. 

ILLUSTRATION. — 

(1) ‘craromMi £5 For DI, HF SBorMmoworayd, ores 

Sarr eoujst@ & arp oor (linus Kor LT osT — GT ovo arotl 
AO Qa wrtob HF FH G0; $SSTLL, 
Oo puir, Cio, Rarer grarrin.”’ 

If Brahm is neither Sat nor Asat and if one who 
has found the Truth says that Brahm is in his eye, then it 
will be Asat, if he takes cognizance of it as other than his 
“Self”, The Siva Sat or Brahm who is above all.compre- 
hension isthe Truth and this Truth is the Thal or Foot of 
Brahm. (‘‘Thal” or ‘‘Foot,” is “‘Grace.”) 

(2) “eomru IF FST SEO Hor poman gs; qpereny 

Sams ST syorarus; MuIer—e_ on hibe_ehe) 
Sronrovt._ 1d; Cuowssxrr_ ror Perey wv_ooril wovired 


Srogeam. Tus ST exer oh.” 


67 


All the Tatwas or Karuvigals which are felt and 
known by you (Soul), are Asat (matter) and these cannot 
know the First Cause. You (Soul) yourself who know 
things through Tatwas cannot know the First’ Cause. If 
you (Soul) know and feel the First Cause or Brahm as 
distinct and separate from you, just as you know other 
objects, then you and Brahm will be two and this will be 
of no use for your salvation. One who has found the 
Truth, will know the First Cause or Arul (#8) and will 
know himself as well, not as distinct from the First Cause 
or Arul but as being within it. 


(8) “SuraresC ion gros oF 6 SIT LD; Lire Ga) B SO uwedhlev 
UTasLoTLd; Hot pooh WIL g1ITLE—LIT a & FEO SL! 
LITA SSNS TOT croratic) LimaisloTtb; HeEsresr Hor1 ev 
uToSstiug UFD; Qevu4rep.” 


It you imagine Brahm with your mind (as something 
according to your fancy) then Brahm will be Asat. If you 
imagine Brahm without the mind, é.c., without thinking of 
anything to represent Him, then there is at least imagina- 
tion. If you imagine Brahm in a third manner, then He 
will be zero. If you imagine ijim in your imagination, 
then too there is imagination. The truth is, you cannot 
imagine the unimaginable Brahm, as one within your 
comprehension. He can be imagined only in His real 
form of Arul or ‘Panchatcharam. Otherwise He will be 
simply Zero and sinners will not be benefited by one 
who is Zero. 


Brahm as Brahm is beyond ail imagination. You can 
imagine a thing only when you can give it a form. 
Brahm as Sivam-Sakti has a real form. This form 
is Arul or Panchatcharam. If there is to be union 
with Brahm, this form of Brahm should be 


known. 


68 


(4) S29 8u Qrear avs; ag <3) D) a OST Ga) 
YOu rer; 9 Daf sporer oat :— 9 May & (5S 
S018 eames samo Nuit OrouiQuicsresrs 
Sri a WHNaDe gy soonr®.’’ 

PROSE ORDER.- - 

‘<9 ou Zoro aover; ha soene (gor 2) Mere) 
Buin _ron; 9 Dolor (gers AG) e_cronror 260 ox 
HOU Tor; Ay Mays (Qorin1 MaysH) erro ® Hox epler 
Quowi 1 Suréscr creer? Sa (gern ada) score gu 
SITLL ay.” 

Brahm and Atma (Soul) are Adwaita and they are not 
two. Brahm is not distinct and separate from Atma to be 
known as other objects. Atma and Brahm though Adwaita, 
the former cannot know the latter with his Atma-know- 
ledge. Brahm is the Great Intelligence. The Atma 
intelligence which is very small is within the Great Intelli- 
gence. What is the good of the eye which cannot find’ 
the Great Intelligence (the Truth) which is the instrument 
of Atma intelligence?. Atma intelligence cannot find Brahm. 
The finite cannot find the Infinite. 

(5) ‘g9aGact an garpap; 2 goer Daw 
AY BO acer p Dui Hay tpar G1 _— 9 g1Qeiest py 
AYMu QDrowri ovr; YaH yDaar Appa 
aOujis 9 ANCar Faitpwri.” 

Brahm is not such a one as can be specifically defined 
as “It”. In Mukti (Union), the Soul (Atma) will know 
“jt” as Brahm. At the same time Brahm and Atma are 
not two but Adwaita. In Mukti, the Atma, the small 
intelligence will be conscious that it is within the Great 
Intelligence. ‘This Great Intelligence (Arivu), is Sivam or 


Brahm. 
In Bondage too the Soul is within Brahm, but the Soul 


does not know it, as it is hidden by Anava- 
malam. But in Mukti or Union when the Soul 


69 

is delivered from Pasam, it will know that it is 
within Brahm and that it is not distinct from 
Brahm. Both in Bondage and Release, the 
relationship between Brahm and the Soul js 
Adwaita. But while in Bondage, the Soul is not 
conscious of the relationship, in Release it be- 
comes conscious of ithis relationship. This is 
Mukti or Union. 

(a) ‘The Sutra as translated from Sanskrit by Pandit 
Kuppusamy Raja :— 

FibLyour Bu (# SovaleHLi@p or) Flaseor gicmLitr, 4 SaRAwi ib 

61 ool oor (Sremrin_t 6g ooh), Fo ab SO ODIUTID: (1p6v.9- 
MLD Feat Lirey neueRiear Aus ZeOToH(DLIT LD). BwHPuwd srohlesr 
(sramini@ai_gy crete), ers (2D Aes Mus) AOOLWLITID; gay 
Brera Cams, 2g Te1g FIRS EC OID, AS go 50m eoLD 
UTS HOUSFSS 5TCOS HY QS yr shar. 
If the form of Sivam or Brahm cannot be seen, He is 
non-existent like the barren woman's son. If His form 
can be seen, then He becomes unintelligent matter. He is 
neither, but Sat and Chit and can be known, This is the 
knowledge of Jnanis, 

(6) The corresponding Sutra in Sivajnana Siddhiar. 

of Day ond Out Gerr rex; Daye sai eo OT @ot Got Gor 
YAOMm Ger HFS BHF SST, yDur gs a Dargp rr; STD 
Os NFawn QrovOben De ASO s1@ Feary MHew, 
Oni spb £SSoriporcrt ae SO seri Aer Dita.” 

The question is whether Brahm is a knowable thing 
or a thing unknowable? If Brahm is a thing which can 
be imagined and seen by the eyes, then it willbe perish- 
able like the objects in the universe. If Brahm cannot 
be known, He is non-existent and Zero. Then it will be 
vain to say that a knowledge of Brahm will give Mukti or 
Union. If it is argued that Brahm cannot be ‘seen by the 
eyes, bui can be seen or imagined by the mind, then, as 


70 


mind and other karanas, being matter cannot stand before 
the Omniscient Brahm, it cannot be said that mind can 
grasp Him. The truth is that Brahm, though He cannot 
be comprehended by the mind, is not an unknowable 
thing. Heis Chit and Sat and can be known by Siva- 


Jnanam. 
(c) Corresponding Sutra in Sivaprakasam. 


“sQumesS HaLp QFFrepror 
Do pahcou se 0 5dr AinwortG wal 
ott hwsieom Hie paws 
Aor guns 51 5As HoT Ss) 
& O@urefl Mor 5g Zo LoTenuie rads 
QarOdisrOarer, San, Sem, Lyoror, Cuiratb, 
FOOQup ApA Zu gOSHir Cwosh 
Mpweu Gilson, eHor1 Oup Durer.” 

Brahm joins Icha Sakti, Jnana Sakti, and Kiriya 
Sakti produced by Para Sakti and taking Arul (er) 
or Grace as his body, joins the Suttamaya, the resort of 
Nadam, Bindu and others, and produces Vedas and Aga- 
mas; He also ordains Dhanu, Karana, Puvana, Bogam, 
through Asuttamaya and finally absorbs them. This 
form of His or Body which Creates and Absorbs is called 
“Formless” ‘“‘Formless and Formed” and ‘‘ Formed” 
(05, -2-@, 2-H). (Dhanu is body; Karanas are Tatwas; 
Puvanam is the universe and Bogam is experiences ) 

(d) Corresponding Sutra in “ Tiru-Undiar” by Saint 
Uyyavanda Devanar, 

( georlTl WTGhip 2) Sel civ cRor 
Farum asso sorgwe Sup 
ZI@QDES SH SOSH MS Srp" 

The Formless, Incomprehensible and Impersonal 
Brahm, has taken a Form on our account and has 
become Personal and Comprehensible, so that we may 
find Him and become one with Him. (This Form is Arul, 
Grace or Panchatcharam), 


t_< 


71 


Vilru SUTRA: 
THE SPECIAL CHARACTERISTIC OF PASU OR SOUL, 
WHO IS HEIR TO MUKTI. 


“uiTenouustD Romrlws tb FSO 5357; ale 

F505 9 Surg; 355 Orga AHuTg; 

QaAper ahaa gs, QrorG gor perro.” 

Brahm is Siva-Sat. As Sat, He is all in all. Nothing 

will stand before Sat as a separate entity. In the presence 
of Sat all is Zero. Brahm as Sat cannot find anything 
separate from and outside Himself which can be pointed 
cut as he, she or it. So Brahm or Pathi cannot know 
and experience Asat (matter) or the universe. Asat 
(matter) or Pasam which has no intelligence cannot know 
and experience Pathi or Brahm (Sat), whois all Intelli- 
gence, Omniscient. There is one thing, however, which 
combines the nature of both Sat and Asat. This is Pasu, 
Soul or Atma who is Sat-Asat, (#45) and is the 
connecting link between Sat and Asat or Pathi and 


-Pasam. Pasu or Soul can experience Pasam on the one 


side and Pathi on the other. 
PURPORT. — 
CO pas dCrIT MeL LOTS SV 51569 Pm” 
This Sutra is complementary to the 6th Sutra. The 
VI Sutra dealt with Sat and Asat. This deals with Sat 
—Asat. 
This is divided into 3 parts for dissertation :-— 
1. wep aiuyto oP wi Lb F505 ET; gaol D F505 9 MuT gs; 
2 we hgi (Hy) Qos Aur gs; : 
8 QDEGow aHal cag; QrarG or Bows. 
PART I—DISSERTATION. 
Curcmouujin HRONUNE SOs RI; gaDpr ses 2 Our gg.” 
In the presence of Sat there is complete vacuity. 
So, Sat will know nothing, as there is nothing but empti- 
ness to know. 


72 


STATEMENT .— 
‘gmOs ¢¢50li_ga FS sg) GrarRurg,” 
Pasam which is Asat will not appear or shine before 
Pathi or Sat. 
REASON..— 
‘QuiluGenh sg Quml iQrarriuoris Op pens.” 


Because what is unreal (Asat cr Pasam) will not 
stand before whai is real (Sat or Pathi) when the latter 
begins to shine. 

ILLUSTRATION .— 

“gy srohwitAaym oo in yar DOSNT oor pi avr A oor (np Lb 

YyorRMudarsr YF SoOSS Fait HaiC or — oo Ohusor & 

ST BOOT oussr(lpsr; SE Tiper Omar's 

LOT @8B) Ye SS) a coo 1p) aw.” 

Pathi or Brahm (Sat) cannot know or feel anything 
as different from Him, as He is everything. Both Pasu 
(Soul) and Pasam (Maya etc,) are coalesced within Brahm 
or Pathi and they do not stand apart from Pathi, for 
Him to reckon them as anything. If Pathi were to know 
Pasam, He will know it as within Him and not as distinct 
from him. Because, the worthless Asat will not be visible 
before Him, just as darkness will nct be visible in the 
presence of the Sun. 

PART tI—DISSERTATION. 
‘F639 (yay) Qos; 2) Auir gy,” 
As Asat has no intelligence, it will not know Sat. 
STATEMENT,— 
“ah HFEF) DEG 2 corralos my.” . 
Asat has no intelligence. 


Here Tatwas (or Tatwa Prabancha—Tatwa Universe 
— sso! Gaig5e) are dealt with as all other Prabanchas 
(universe) are admitted by all to have no intelligence. 


73 


REASON. —a1 S72 ep ISHM ay sevr oor. 

Because Tatwas (being also matter) cannot have any 
imagination. 

ILLUSTRATION. — 

“CumsCat br orang ag7nCun EQ 10) poor 5 
Cull gC at se sarGbd QupPwunGIo—oar gs swoon & 
sanBerrart Dre MuIe #7 agyid ys s Hexen; 
sarbonianlt QearvO sors stow.” 

One who approaches a mirage to quench his thirst. 
finds that it is unreal and not water when he js actually 
upon it. In the same way one who has not learnt the 
Truth from his'Guru (Brahm), will consider the universe 
around him real and will not find any unreality about it. 
But when once he learns the! Truth from Brahm, his Guru, 
he will know that the universe around him is Asat 
and unreal. 

PART III[--DISSERTATION, 
DeBoer sa Hao gg, QrarO 2.076 gperwr, 

The Pasu or Soul who is neither Sat nor Asat has two 
kinds of know-ledge as he can know Pasam or Asat on 
the one side and Pathi or Sat on the other side. 

This dissertation is to show that there is some thing 
between Pathi and Pasam in the shape of Pasu 
to know them both, as Pathi and Pasam cannot 
approach and know each other. 

STATEMENTS: 

(1) Qo Qa D p or 2 Major 51 Q)Texr._ vir Op asr Loir. 

Just as the sun and the objects which it shows 
cannot know each other, Pathi and Pasam cannot know 
each other. And like the eye which can know both the 
sun and the objects, the Soul can know Pathi (Sat) and 
Pasam (Asat). ! The eye is neither the sun nor the objects. 
In the same way, Pasu (Soul) is neither Pathi (Sat) nor 


Pasam (Asat), but can know both. So Pasu is Sat-Asat. 
10 


74 
(2) QarDrairig Srujin 2 Dargri, ou eure p Dau 


aDa, Oram or ur giapersrujsrot 9 g Bos, —s\alauTesrtoT eure: 

The intelligence (Arivu) which can know both Pathi 
and Pasam, the intelligence which understands when 
taught (like a disciple), and the intelligence which is 
attached to Pasam during Bondage and experiences it and 
which is attached to ?Pathi in {Mukti and experiences it 
this intelligence (Arivu) is Pasu or Soul. 

ILLUSTRATIONS: 

(1) ‘52 Grars eran YL) FU— BU DOL Bi) Hf sor cor 

AGO GAUL 9/50 (7 GFld © 1 GO _b—$ _I|HO_ Har) & 
Carers) 21 order ga, Csrera7 gs Sever sy 
Csroxpe wor weorihGured OsTé eH.” 

The Pasu or Soul which can study intricate Philoso- 
phies is neither Aru (9%) or Sat nor Uru (2c) or Asat 
and it is different from either of them. The truth is that 
Pasu or Soul can be known only by its attachment to 
either Asat (Pasam) or Sat (Pathi) and cannot be known 
as a separate entity apart from them, Jike the smell of a 
flower. It will be found merged in Pasam or Asat in 
Bondage or in its Betha state (Qu S52) and merged in 
Pathi or Sat in the Mukti state (@~s@ él). It is a thing 
which cannot stand by itself. 

(2) “nuwéso apm was Be Asohé gud 

Quurggiot &, ee arenas CuRe, 265 g110%; 
bud a Oeuied Sor ear Sword) Carn YF SDS 
STOO BI NLT OLD ST om.” 

Like a person who is unconscious and recovers when 
proper medicine is administered, Pasu or Soul is in a 
trance (in its Betha or Ajjnana state) and has the intelli- 
gence to understand things when taught by Brahm. But 
during Bondage he cannot know everything fully, thinks 
differently at different times and is also subject to forget. 


75 


fulness. So he cannot be Pathi or Sat who is Omniscient 
and who does not require a teacher. At the same time 
Pasu or Soul is not Asat as it is he who reaps the fruits 
of his past Kanmas and not the universe which is Asat. 
The Soul is in a peculiar position. He will remain as Asat 
when untaught and become Sat when taught. 

This shows that the relation between the Soul and 
Brahm is that of disciple and teacher. 

(3) “Guuig eran sarah AoruT 3 HF & ST EY 
AHCHGHT orl ; @ arerib 2 Cooor 5 VS /1 GOT: —@) wil G5 GFT @or Lb 
arCer aorasiCm, sam s._& Er aonyeCure 
STM, THOT (Lpetaur) x SIT oor 

PROSE ORDER.—4@Q5qjTorb we 8 sraerer Qo Gr ERT oor 
(Gaegs) sorefle Mor Lim ga Oow) GF @RT er Ld 2 arauesr@ p 
AICor Sarat EF e cnyeiCruirer, PTT (HEKCH Tard) aruyor per 
aT, eorerls (gos torenas) YT BG Fava. 

As Ajjnana is Asat, it will make no headway against 
Jnana which is Siva-Sat. But this Ajjnana adheres to the 
Soul, as it remains in a trance when untaught by Brahm, 
just as salt adheres to the water in the ecean and not to 
the ocean itself. Phis has been the case from time eternal. 

(Salt is compared to Ajjnana or Pasam, water to Soul 
or Pasu and the ocean to Pathi or Brahm.) 

(a) The Sutra as translated from Sanskrit by Pandit 

Kuppusamy Raja: — 

“HF SST oor eg. 61 Goriepein FS s7@u A senu Fag Ses 
per WarRunr gy ; QDrue5eu, Red ores etd Yodlra Qin, 
LOT MoT Geer I your; Drugrein, Aan Breer. gery 2 evorie 
vase cToG ey, Dalai sto 2. Fg gaat sir Gaugp tn.” 

The universe which is Asat will not stand and 
before Siva-Sat. The universe and Sivam will not 
each other. The Soul which knows t 
from Sat and Asai, 


shine 


know 
hem both is different 


76 


(b) The corresponding Sutca in Siva-jnana Siddhiar: 
“<E5, BED, SMa ST Bei SF; Bist FSS LDF & FILET DI 5 
DE SOE ES FHSS Aer SIO Grover osrcsT lb, 
PSG. a DSs Aaorg, e Surg sori Bly 
wa sHOw Sarppi 61 ppt worl cotlev ame Gum itt” 


The Soul which can know what is Sat and what is 
Asat cannot know itself as a distinct individuality. It is 
not a zero (Suniam) or non existent on that account. The 
smell of the flower is not visible as the flower and is not 
on that account non-existent. It is contained or merged 
in the flower. Inthe same way, the Soul which is neither 
Sat nor Asat identifies itself with Asat (Pasam) when it 
is attached to it and in Bondage, and identifies itself with 
Sat (Pathi) when it becomes attached to it, in Release. For 
this reason Pasu or Soul which is eternal is entitled to be 


called Sat-Asat. 
(c) The corresponding Sutra in Sivaprakasam: 


KESADROMNAD HFS HHATM HOUT BH ; HF SOS 

ney hs SEE ES BGs ee 
F 5S; Dojo ofl ier ss oor BOW COLDS GT LL— LF BOO BF 

= 6 gil_oot Boor Dp (6 Bi LD SMO OUITY FSF’. 

Pasam which is Asat cannot know Brahm as Sat; 
Brahm, who is Sat and Omniscient and who contains both 
Pasu and Pasam within lim need not know Pasam asa 
separare entity. [he Sat which is able to know Pathi (Sat) 
and Fasam (Asat) is the Soul or Pasu. He is like the eye 
which, when joined to darkness, does not become dark- 
ness and when joined to light does not become light, but 
which remains distinct from both darkness and light. This 
Pasu or Soul is called Sat-Asat, because it has the poten- 
tiality of discarding Pasam or Asat, when it is joined to 


Pathi or Sat. 


77 


(d) Inthis Sutra, Brahm shows the Soul what he 
really is and this is showing him his Atma Roobam (4™ 
emuitd), See note under Sutra 4. When “ Atma” is made 
plain to the Soul it impliedly means that Tatwa or Pasa 
Roobam (4sle-uiree5ud) is also shown at the same 
time. 


78 


Villt1 SUTRA 
JNANA IS REVEALED BY BRAHM TO THE SOUL 
AS THE MEANS OF HIS REDEMPTION 

“Bin joCarMeo 29uTe sor aio bO) woo BS 

SOP SY SHUTS gas Gaol oon gs; o_O 

youonubsrcmuni§Ier, s76Tsipw Qe giGu.” 

Through the meritorious deeds done in previous births 
and through the due performance of Sariyai, Kiriyai and 
Yogam (¢faw, Sfenw, Cur 1b) in previous births, Brahm 
or Pathi who has been all along watching him and 
guiding him unknown to him as Andariyami (2/4 s@wiJd), 
finding that he has become a Pakuvan (wé@aer) and 
fitto know “himself,’’ reveals Himself to the Soul as 


his Guru or Teacher and tells him ‘Oh! Son of Brahm: 


i 


Oh! my son, you have been till now nurtured by the five ~ 


wild men, (the senses) and you have completely forgotten 
your real state through the control and influence of these 
wild men, (the senses). When the Soul realises his slavish 
position and realises also his true status, he rebels against 
the influence of the five senses, gives up his attachment 
and connection with Pasam and adheres to Pathi or Brahm, 
and is united to Brahm. The Soul which was a stranger 
to Brahm in his Betha state (state of ignorance and 


bondage) becomes one with Him in his Mukti state (or state 


of release) and is united to the Kalal (<2) or “Foot” 
of Brahm, being no longer a stranger, 

PURPORT,.— 

Ghent & S)eoor 2 GOTCRLD (Lpen em tnuD) Gost 2 OT & 5 FOV. 

This Sutra declares the circumstances is which Jnana 
is revealed to the Soul by Brahm. (This is called Atma 
Darisanam. (9 sifieserio). Vide note under Sutra 4. 

The revelation of “Jnana’’ by Brahm as Teacher is 

only the initial step towards the Soul’s final 


79 


redemption and union. The Soul does not 
become united to Brahm, as soon as “ Jnana” is 
revealed to him. He has to undergo a long course 
of training and purification before the union 
takes place. It takes some years for the union 
to take place. Jnana referred to here does not 
mean wisdom, as it is ordinarily understood. 
Jnana, Arul, Love, Panchatcharam, Tal, Kalal, 
Adi, etc. are all synonyms. 


This sutra is divided into 4 parts for purposes of 
dissertation:— 


1. sagSebhla comes; 
2. sibEp sd GOHawT jour HH; 
8. pints Carhea suis soon aor gs; 
4, ALO, sera wuherenru9 sor ayroreips OF gl. 
PART—DISSERTATION 
6 xorg Goflcd eam ss” 
The revelation of Jnana "depends upon past Tapaz, 


or dutiful disciplinary devotion. 

STATEMENT;— 
ond QDusreiwtsse@nsG ppAeuges Sl or EhTesrlp 
5) & (LpLp. 3 
P3 Jnana the means of redemption will become known 


to qualified souls as a reward of their past Tapaz or 
meritorious performances in past births. 


Jnana is revealed to the soul by Brahm when the soul 
becomes qualified to knowthe Truth. Good ac- 
tions performed in this-birth alone are not enough. 

REASON.— ; 


Gop, few Siur out sa ecoré Qeu st), war Qoor Tur Bus 
Gl Gon GH STW Weer Zi Curse 50 6S Qari railseTresr. 


80 


Because Sariyai, Kiriyai and Yoga will not themselves 
give Moksha or Release but will only lead to the discovery 
of Jnana, the good way («#07 ELD), 

The Tapaz referred to in the statement means Sariya, 
Kiriya and Yoga. None can expect redemption 
by the mere performance of Sariyai, Kiriyat and 
Yoga. This will only qualify a Soul for the 
revelation of Jnana by Brahm. Jnana is the 
Sadhanam (#71) or means of redemption. 

ILLUSTRATION:— 
(1) “sagQeuerr cronmm SACHS EEG BI 
ial GhOFW ga LID P QILILITTT & S— FU GHOF UNS 
5 DFT wv as DEE Chior Sw 5 TOT GOON GONE 
Shapt ete Fred gor sam B? 

The Souls who have excelled in Tapaz in this world 
will invariably goto Devaloka or Swarka (#a7610) and 
after experiencing the results of their good deeds here, 
will be born again in this world ina religious family 
in order that they may reap the fruits of their good and 
bad actions in the past, which yet remain to be consumed 
and in order that they may throw off any remaining 
false attachments. It is only then that ‘ Jnana” will become 
known to them which will give them Release. This will 
be evident from the works of the learned (Jivanmuktars) 
who have written them from their own personal experience. 

(2) AS gs aar® Ger ain WALT Get Hau 

Qos 5 gi al a Zar uF) cor 1Lb— Don & & 
Ops guiieo QouIn gag eTet 
WGhajargnld ChTer Sons ahs)” 

The pleasures and joys one experiences as the result 
of his good actions are similar to the pleasures one 
experiences when his hunger is satisfied. The pleasure 
of eating is only temporary as everyone who has eaten 


Y 


ja 


81 


well, becomes hungry again. In the same way, the 

enjoyment of pleasures as the result of good actions 

is only evanescent and not permanent. If one finds the 

futility of good actions alone for gettting Mukti and 

if he gets “ lruvinai Oppu” (Q@aaer gr) as the result 

of his Upaya (27) Sariya, Kiriya and Yoga, he will 

discover Jnana. If he does not get “Iruvinai Oppu” in 

this manner, in that birth, he will get it in the next and 

through imperishable Tapaz (Q»9% gas) which are 

True Sariya, True Kiriya and /rue Yoga (& reno Fon, 

paren Sflenw, 2 aTaLo Gwe) which are founded on 

Jnana, will attain union as well. The pleasures one 

experiences as the result of imperishable Tapaz are perma- 

nent and Jasting and the Soul who has reached this stage 

will not become hungry again as it will be enjoying also 

the Nectar cr Amudu (2s) flowing from Sushimuni 
(a Blepearr). 

‘lruvinai Oppu’ means the maturity of Kanmas or 

“R anma Paribagam”’ (#70 ulus), Bad actions 

produce bad results and good actions good 

results. The pains in the one case and the 

pleasures in the other are both temporary and 

evanescent. So good actions alone will not 

enable a Soul to have union with Brahm. The 

Soul should come to the stage of looking at 

both good and bad actions equally and he 

should have a dislike to them both equally as 

they are both fetters though one is golden and the 

other iron. This is the maturity of Kanmas, or “lru- 

vinai Oppu’’.The pleasures one enjoys as the result 

of his good actions are Sittinbam (#@p0) small 

pleasures. The lasting pleasure which is called 

Perinbam (@u#esreuc), immeasurable pleasure, will 


be attained only through Jnana, What are called 
lt 


82 


Sariya, Kiriya and Yoga are of two kinds:— 
Upaya (eu) or Artificial Sariya, Kiriya and 
Yoga and Unmai (2 72:2) or Real Sariya, Kiriya 
and Yoga. Worshipping an unknown God in 
churches, temples and mosques etc., in the 
ordinary way, making pilgrimages, bathing in 
what are considered sacred rivers and meditating 
upon an unknown God in different postures and 
according to each one’s fancy are called Artificial 
Sariya, Kiriya and Yoga. The Real Sariyai is full 
belief or Faith in the efficacy of Panchatchara- 
Porul (u@er_esiOuraer) and taking it. The 
Real Kiriyai is the performances of services in 
connection with the purification of the body and 
soul as the result of taking Jnana. The Real Yoga 
is thesame as Sivoham (#G@a7sib) i.e, identifying 
oneself with the known Brahm. The True Jnana 
is the cessation of all activities both mental 
and bodily and becoming one with the known 
Brahm. The True Sariya, Kiriya, Yoga and 
Jnana are respectively called Dasamarga, 
Sarputramarga, Sagamarga and Sanmarga 
(STs san, FHYSHO wimrssib, FH Wii SHLD, 
eorimTTaéetn), The relation between Brahm and 
the Soul is that between “master and servant 
in the Dasamarga peiod, when True Sariya is" 
performed. In the Sarputramarga period when 
the True Kiriya is per formed, it is that between 
father and son. In the Saga Marga period, when 
the True Yoga is performed the relation is that 
between friend and friend. In Sanmarga period 
there is union with Brahm and Dwaitam (4 410) 
is lost. In the first period one gets Salogam i.e., 
The Soul finds itsefin the same place as Brahm 


83 


i.e. in thePanchatchara-Porul. In the second pe- 
riod one gets Sameepam (7a) t.e. Brahmicomes 
nearer at Sushimunai. In the third period one 
attains Sarupam (£7¢pub) or transformation 
when Brahm enters the body in the form of 
Jothi (G27) Light, through Sushimuna- This 
is Jivanmukti period. In the last stage the Jivan- 
mukta becomes Videka Mukta or Disembodied 
Mukta and enjoys Sayuchiam (#7uj#@uwb) or 
Eternal bliss. Along with ‘Iruvinai Oppu’ one 
will get ‘Malaparibagam’ (waufured) and ‘Sathi- 
nipatham’ (+498ur7 gw). ‘Malaparibagam’ is the 
wearing away of Anavamalam (grained) and 
Sathinipatham is the fall of Sakti or Maya. These 
have 4 grades or stages corresponding to the four 
periods referred to above and these are Manda- 
Taram, Mandam, Deeviram and Deeviratharam 
(ws e571D, we sid, Sar, FAs sa); more slow, 
slow, haste snd more haste. The power of Sakti 
or Maya will gradually fall off and vanish 
as well as that of Anavamalam when the Soul 
passes from the first to the last stage. The 
progress however, is slow but sure. 
PART I1—DISSERTATION. 
 BIDUP SO GQ wre s” 

The revelation is made to the Soul by his own Guru, 
Brahm. ; 

STATEMENT, — 

QAP QaarawrssonsGs SOG pPsv s1Cor Hairs 
D_ GOTT fF GILD. 

After the due performance of Sariya, Kiriya, and 
Yoga, and when the Sou! has qualified himself, his own 
Chief and Support, the Brahm, will teach him the Truth 
as Guru or Teacher, 


84 


In the Ist Dissertation it was shown that Jnana 
cannot be revealed excent by Brahm. In the pre- 
sent one the nature of Brahm as Guru is shown. 

REASON ,.— 

<a 51 ea eer eas orsarciu GeregQuru spp 


On our. 


Because this Guru lives in the soul self as his body 
without any distinction between himself and the Soul, just 
as the soul lives in the human body. 


ILLUSTRATION.— 

(1) QowiGpgrrore ST Gor eile ujio AGE GHTaT ENT ES; 
ECKERT HF FSVTSS YS HATH aUTLI—ONLD iL) GH HT GT Lb 
Deor quovril & str; 27 OL Dror UIT BV SH 
(LPoor Gp GOTT 5 SID BT or SHaurucpesr”. 

Brahm will make known Jnana to Vijjnanakalars 
from within them; to the Piralayakalars from before them 
as Guru; and to the Sakalars He will make known Jnana 
in the guise of a human being as Guru. 


There are three grades of Souls; Vijjnanakalars, 
Piralayakalars and Sakalars. Vijjnanakalars are 
bound only by Anavamalam. Piralayakalars are 
bound by Anavam and Kanmas. Sakalars are 
bound by ‘Anavam, Kanmam and Maya. The 
redemption of the first two sets is made quite 
differently from that of Sakalars (See last stanza 
under the last Sutra). All human beings are 
Sakalars and are bound by Anavam, Kanmam 
and Maya. Brahm first enters as Joti the puri- 
fied body of a Jivanmukta and thus takes the 
form of a human being. He remains in the 
world in the guise of a Jivan-mukta till the attain- 
ment of Videka-mukti and gives Mukti to such of 


- 85 


the Sakalars as are fit and qualified. The persons 
into whom Brahm enters are called Avatars. No 
one is born into this world as an Avatar at birth, 
ILLUSTRATION.— 
(2) “gASBéscrer 2) Dur vor maar 
Qe Duj.orin aperGar Gon psor—OmauIa; 
GP ouycor_w GQernQasrorerii, Garerua gs Sex af Qr_cor 


Go paa FHT Fp Qararuail ae y 


Atmas (Souls) cannot understand things unless they 
are taught by Brahm and taken along the way towards 
Mukti, step by step. These Sculs possess varying 
degrees of intelligence and their progress towards Mukti 
will depend upon these varying degrees. Vijjnanakalars 
and Pralayakalars do not require the study of Jnana 
Sastras or Vedanta-Siddhanta philosophies, as they are 
already far advanced and they can attain Mukti as soon 
as Truth is imparted ‘to them by Brahm. But in the 
case of Sakalars who are full of ignorance, a study of the 
Sastras is quite necessary even after the revelation of the 
Truth and Brahm, as Guru, will make the same intellgible 
to them from within and give them Mukti when the 
proper time arrives. 

(38) “Qeaeear apieciua gilb sameat hid ah Slanipu4re 

BVT? QorauTiota; HN LpoGiuTev—@)evevr 

ana Serapéer ura Deurs 5 gros 

ematas Caro sar 2 pg.” 

Oh? you worthy disciple! The milk and tears which 
were hidden within the women and which did not issue 
till now, issue from the woman as soon as achild is born, 
through excessive love for the child. In the same way 
Brahm who is always within the Soul like water and its 
shadow but who is invisible on account of His Form- 
lessness, appears in the guise of a Jivan-Mukta in human 


86 


form, through excessive love for such of the Sakalars 
as are fit and qualified to know the Truth. Otherwise nobody 
will know Him in. this world. 

PART III—DISSERTATION, 

Bini Gane 9fuiT ms oor arent” 

You (Soul) have been nurtured by the wild men (who 
are the five senses) and are in a stupor owing to their 
influence over you. 

STATEMENT:— 

QA Qaarsroraasr Bujeorias sor ra Lowel &  &LDeALN 
Lypooor mT Hl, 

These Souls which have sufficient intelligence to learn 
and understand things when taught by Brahm are ina 
state of stupor through the influence of the five senses and 
are not in a position to know themselves. 

REASON:— 

Dron au gIT Lb vohwacd i. asmerbGurea STL_y Poo DSST1_Y. 
Bp Mevir ear 

Because like crystal which loses its own brightness 
and colour by taking the colour of the nearest objects, the 
Soul loses its own nature by being overshadowed by the 
five senses and expresses itself only in terms of each 
sense. 

ILLUSTRATION: — 

“eref paar Orb uyeb@ure O% Bfub 
sora pC to STL_ OG FOO & (Dest 15g] —L1 631 GON D & ILI 
Quminijeter Ca poms gi, QuTuW@Orususs Qipwseovt LM ost 
QntiOuTG_@s CO BOUL Ghd, Camp’ 

The Soul should first know that his general unreal 
nature is to exhibit like crystal, the characteristics of the 
Senses and other Tatwas attached to him and then he 
should find out, that the varying characteristies of the 
and Tatwas Senses are not real and that they iare different 
from his own real nature. If he once finds out his own real 


87 


nature, then he will become the possession of the “True 
Thing”, Brahm and his general unreal nature will depart 
from him. 
PART IV—DISSERTATION 
“AO, gqeorohuWoroonuIer sreraeipe Org” 
The Soul leaves his connection with the Senses and 
other Tatwas and joins the ‘Foot’ of Brahm as he is no 


stranger to Him, the moment he severs his Connection 
with Tatwas. 


STATEMENT.— 

Qt Qaarauwr sserter Or Bhugs Gor Cacpairer 
aroma, sig ipso Furs gens —2/Zouty. 

The Soul, who is not able to know what he is, on 
account of the stupor caused by the Senses and other 
Karuvigals, as soon as he findsthat he is quite different 
from theTatwas through the teaching of his Guru, Brahm, 
joins the “Foot”’ of his Chief and Support. 

REASON.— 

‘cars a 31DaRe sl georCw willh gidem wires” 

Because just as the mother earth is the support of the 
man who falls from a swing which breaks, Brahm or Pathi 
is the natural support or resting place of the Soul who 
slips away from Tatwas or Pasam. 

ILLUSTRATION.— 

(1) ‘Fea pOeuuBerp Oe apiorycrcf or, eoreri 
FenpQeiiyor e carte ST % g1—Re pei_O 
soa Ieo Ora pm goSure, Berm gi 
erode 3761 UT ESOS © m1” 

Like the water of the river which is obstructed from 
flowing onward by a bund, but which flows towards the 
sea and becomes one with the sea, as soon as the 
obstructing bund is removed, the Soul who is freed from 
the obstructing Pasam, through the teaching of Brahm, 


88 


soars naturally towards Brahm and is permanently united 
to his “Foot”. There is no going back (ie.,) This Soul will 
have no more births. : 

(2) “ormaGas g1Qe safe oui gieuTcey sar; 

Qaa@malcar CaS pa Qe pudaet—er aia) (may lp 
& oor irev AMUUMEBAT BIT CW); 2) BVM CLV IF 
SH SUS DSTO, HSELLV” 

If Pasu Jnana and Pasa Jnana are the same as 
Pathi Jnana,ithen no Soul need aspire to join the “Foot” 
(s7er) of Pathi or Brahm. If Pathi Jnana is different 
from Fasu and Pasa Jnana, this will be derogatory to 
the Omnipresence and Omniscience of- Pathi (Brahm). 
All the sense organs are not the same. The eye is 
superior to all the other organs as the eye can go out and 
see thinys while the other senses can feel only things that 
reach them. (The eye can see distant objects, while the ear 
can hear only the sound which reaches it; so also is 
the case with other senses). If a blind man gets back 
his sight, his joy will be immense and will know no 
bounds. In the same way if the Soul which is now 
blind, gets his eye opened by Pathi-Jnana, he attains 
Pathi’s ‘Foot’ and his joy knows no bounds. Pasu Jnana 
and Pasa Jnana are only a variety of Pathi Jnana, and 
when the Soul has his eye opened by Pathi, both Pasu-Jnana 
and Pasa Jnana are simply transformed into Pathi Jnana, 
as Pasu-Jnana and Pasa Jnana cannot exist apart from 
Pathi Jnana. 

(3) “@uw@u7 BuGeor yomoOn oyid syoeeo? Recon 
Binur Deus: _@O DIG Dower, FS C1 —ABiDOw1T MiG esr, 
Saarés utAGure, 6 wb. sos oibeuill er 
8 resi Coot 18 1615 15) Coons gs)? 

Oh? you (Soul) the far advanced in the knowledge 
of Self or Brahm and who are almost free of Pasam ? (Safr 
srsoo Shs srr £ SS sul s Gpen_SurCer!), you have 


89 


now known that you are not the 5 Senses and other Tat- 
was. You had better give up your connection with them 
and firmly attach yourself to Brahm. You should adhere 
to Brahm in the same way as a Sakala (#e=7) is attached 
to the five senses and as the moss which spreads over the 
face of water (ina pool or tank) and does not lose its 
cohesion even if disturbed temporarily by wind or other 
causes. If you so adhere to Brahm, Malam, Kanmam and 
Maya will leave you. But if for any reason, they disturb 
and molest you, you had better constantly think of the 
Brahm to whom you adhere and ignore them. 
(a) The Sutra as translated from Sanskrit by Pandit 
Kuppusami Raja: 
YORE Korii gh Bt soiree wer cofluscér (uTsQuieuesr), 
Bld EpPSVa@o sor SHM@mo “DsGluaserror CanraGorr@ 
REWIGG sg, eondor § PaQ@ucrm 21 Mb sriGer% ? cre gu 
Cur fsa cael, Qocde Sfus Carteara&@, 96 Aus 
HNvoT Suey, SMI Soler Faron aes & Gar 201 Boor a7 oor » 
The fortunate Soul who has become qualified through 
the performance of Sariya, Kiriya and Yoga in the past 
many births being informed by his own Chief, the Brahm 
as Guru “You have not known yourself to be Sivam or 
Brahm on account of your association with the wild men 
(the senses)’, leaves his connection with the senses and 
joins Sivam, being no longer a stranger to Brahm. 
(6) The corresponding Sutra in Sivajnana Siddhiar: 
“percruer Serinser Conf sCo sme 
ants Hager 9 Dung wus 8 pcs) 
QDerera epiin “er ainscrs Qwas _p yeudie 9A & ge) 
QuGean@uitOs 51 @@sS CugywrGure 
sromorius Broirjeo Cau_o epee 1 Os 
BOM VTL YOuTs sup sro guicd 
Lert Bpilb HHUSHAHAM haus g seule & se 
LOD LOS DW) 5 HT) &&) Wore &E ip srauLiesr ”? 
12 


90 


A King’s son is taken and brought up by wild men. 
He is ignorant of his real position, remains apathetic and 
conducts himself as one of the wild men. The King his 
father appears before him and tells him “You are not the 
son of these wild men, but you are my son,” separates him 
from the wild men and makes him one like himself. In the 
same way Brahm, through Arul (Grace) as Guru, informs 
the Soul who is entangled in the toils of the wild men of the 
five senses, and who does not know “‘Self’”’ and “Brahm”, 
of his real character, wipes off his Malam through Arul 
or Jnana, separates him from the senses, makes him one 
like Himself and places him under His beautiful “F oot.” 

(c) Corresponding Sutra in Sivaprakasam: 

“giri_ Oip #mrontOliviresr Davrtorsuie sO) ew) G0) STL) 
Brg Dap aga GhT oor Lb gay BOL GP OVIT GIB); (LOD COT LD 
Fig UFASAE_HSN GOO, Bier 2 HAT Wass 
RLY Ob Qapor pb4B, Gon psLpo Smguors »” 
Without Karuvigals or Tatwas the Soul cannot know 

anything. At the same time it is not possible for the Soul 
to get Jnana through these Karuvigals. Through the perfor- 
mance by the Soul of Tapaz, in previous births, Brahm 
appears to the Soul in the form of Arul (Grace) as Guru, 
separates him from the Karuvigals and makes him reach 
His ‘‘Foot’’. . 
(J) Corresponding Sutra in Sarvajnanotra Agama 
(Gag C@sar weve), 
“769 auer Qatinen ph. Aon a7 D Suite 
UFUNFSTD WoO 5 Gi Pass ga! Mor tN DBs HD, 
QVM b BIO Cio @ & & ai oor 06 SoS STD 
Qori_ FHSTIN BLSEGID a_armi sure, Gi hoywW 
Fi VA) COT Hie 5 COT alcreuiar Dan pono Sg) aon 5) 5 
SUcAuLor Gut IG ure, wb Br &@ fan w1u5 cov 
Fah GSEMSAGINUTN, WV SO S bane 
Fassianwb Cewans, ONT WL HOTU H Cw” 


foal 


91 
The God-like nature of the Soul is hidden by Malam, 


just as ghee is hidden in the milk. Brahm as Guru in the 
form of Spirit-maiter (Arul or Jnana), removes his Malam 
when he performs the True Sariya, Kiriya and Yoga by 
means of Arul and makes him Brahm, just as a man 
bitten by a poisonous snake and who remains unconscious 
is brought to his senses by the proper application of 
mandiram and medicine by the physician and just as 
metals are changed into gold by the application of intense 
heat and sublimation: 


(ec) The Revelation of Jnana is Atma Darisanam or 
Realization of ‘Self’ by the Soul. This is at the same 
time Siva Roobam (Vide ncte under Sutra 4). Because 
both the Soul and Brahm are in the same “Jnana” or 
“Panchatcharam”’,. 


92 


IXtH SUTRA: 


THE PURIFICATION OF THE PASU OR SOUL 
BY MEANS OF PANCHATCHARAM OR JNANA. 


§Der so SHOW, LITFLD P_ORTTTLI u Beau 

Gras sarahioh > Aton gs wrig 

PIs glo gs CsT Ss OseTLLITELD QHUs 
semoAipwrinsG, AG) cram anid BECP Se S” 


The Soul (Pasu) who cannot see ‘‘Self’’ though 
endowed with eyes and Pasam which is matter (Asat), 
cannot find Brahm. If the eyes which are blemished with 
Malam, are changed into pure eyes through Jnana and_ if 
Panchatcharam is taken and meditated upon, Pasam 
(Malam, Kanmam and Maya) will disappear like the 
elusive and fleeting mirage and Pasu will escape from the 
stormy ocean of births and take shelter under the cool 
shade of Pathi or Brahm. 

PURPORT.— 

ATF SH urrayory cLemrgs Hs”. HFIP pI. 

This Sutra deals with the way in which Atma or Soul 
is purified. 

Unless the Soul is purified by Jnana or Panchatcha- 
ram, there will be no Brahma Darisanam or Siva- 
Darisanam (97 gfeerb, Fa sfizor), Vide note 
under Sutra 4. Atma Sutti or purification and 
Brahma Darisanam go together. Atma or Soul 
is now covered with Malam whichis just like the 
alloy(verdigris) which covers copper and unless 
this alloy is washed out, Brahm will net appear 
to the Soul in the form of Joti of Jotis (Light of 
Lights) which is the form He takes when he 
enters a human body. (Vide Sivajnana Siddhiar 
Sutra 8, Stanza 38 and Sutra 11, Stanza 8) 


93 


‘si This Sutra is divided into three parts for purposes of 
dissertation. 
(1) \‘caorésam, ured 2 com TT LILI Hoo Ww 
Hier sacor cniletl h Anens wiry.” 
(2) ‘eorg gts Cat sQgore) umretb Qs 
| samerhipevtin 118). 
(3) “PRQuain ami 3G OFep SCs.” 
PART !—DISSERTATION. 
“genom FEO, LITE Bsr rT) 11 Seow 
Hors sarcntiohm Bien we reirig”” 
The Pathi or Brahm who cannot be seen or known by 
Pasu and Pasam, should be seen and known by the Jnana 


PY Eyes or by Jnana. 


STATEMENT: —mam@® sap st @FT en aaain SOO GO) G VEIT BOOTH | 
See the First who cannot be seen by Pasu and Pasam 
with Jnana Eyes. 


[‘Jnana* means Sivajnanam or Brahma Jnanam. 
This is the same as Panchatcharam]. 


REASON:--2jver ara, ug Ss Cateruwrus (8) fb Devirenr. 


Because, though He is beyond the grasp of mind and 
speech, He is “ Sivasat’’ who can be known. (This is 
dealt with in Sutra V]) 

> ILLUSTRATION, — 
(1) “erg. Gur, cerGur, BODY FSC STH Lp wir 
Cs. crler sy NSucr, Osi gsaMaE—GTy —oNo5r 
SAHODSN Foam CoruyHsorG, FoolwSSI Goo! 
ToT gn cron 9) Hourl Bat pi”. 

I searched for me in my nadis, bones, nerves, blood 
and phlegm but did not find “Myself,” so says the 
the ignorant Soul; but if the Soul knows ‘“‘Arul” 
or the Soul of Souls in his body, he will find not 


94 
only “Self’’ but also Pathi or Brahm. “What are 


we to say of those who are unable to find this 
Arul or Jnana which is ever with them ? 


This is to show that Brahm can be known by Jnana, 
though He cannot be known by the ordinary 
intelligence: 


(2) sri Sam om FIT GTEC); BVT coy FHF 
KML _ TW BOOT SOO SH SOUS CR) ;—HMTL_19. I) 
D_ GN OT HG GUTH ST CW) 5 e_arat & Gast Bow Goo)! 


Sor alot Sor Corot SH parevr’’. 


The eye which sees things cannot see itself and 
cannot also see the Soul through whom it sees. The Soul 
itself which is the instrument of the eye does net see 
itself. The Pathi whe is the eye of the Soul lurks in the 
Soul. Find Him in the Soul. 


PART II—DISSERTATION. 
Me gg USC BT SO Sorry WITH Ep hou 
sobrontlpavrini §)” 
When the Soul is freed of Pasam which is like the 
Will-O’-the-wisp, it resis under the cool shade of Pathi. 


’ STATEMENT.— 


‘Daf weg sTujarToT AMO SCUBHET HF SOF DSTO, 
ear gm & Dug ronGerenuQuer gimra pur pp 


If the reflection of the adjacent things seen in crystal 
is discarded as illusory and impermanent, the real colour of 
the crystal will be seen. In the same way if the Universe 
composed of matter is discarded as illusory and im- 
permanent, being only the reflection of the Brahma-Mirror 
which is the Panchatchara Porul, in every living being 
Brahm, the Permanent Thing will be seen. 


xX 


95 


REASON. — 

“Def sr £ stuysrar WIG SOS WF 50) GoM MI SITom 
ear sri A pig rae remniOrwer 0.37, Coup MuieriiT Bus oust on 
Cusmatr Carp Mudcat SPUGer eorgsru ADs Lig & 


QerenuLTs oor wire,” 


When the colours seen in the crystal are rejected 
as not its real colour but the colours of the things placed in 
juxtaposition, the permanent colour is found to be the 
colour of the crystal alone. In the same way when the 
Soul rejects the Universe composed of matter (Asat) as 
unreal and illusory, what remains Permanent is Jnana 
or Brahma Sorubam (@jTerQerep_uL, GawGle remus). 

ILLUSTRATION .— 

(5) Dar Gnu, Sesrooe@oyli, 6d Swsro0 5 6 oil, 

Seurwrw (5) 350 0 FOB CLp 25 6) eu GoT — BY PL) Lb Cure 
BQ “Paris sor ps gi C sir ona7 en? 
aATCoripsy saruder ore gs.” 

The Incomparable, Sole and Solitary Chief who is 
without Gunas (moods), who is without blemish and 
who is Eternal bliss itself, is the Sole protector and resource 
of the Soul. And will he not appear tothe Soul in a 
miraculous manner as an inseparable intelligence, giving 
up His incomprehensibility, if the Soul first relinquishes 
all his connection with the Tatwas (Karuvigals)? Answer: 

~He will certainly appear. 


(a) His appearence in a miraculous manner is in the 
form of Joti (a7), Light atthe place called 
Sushimuna (# Sqr). If Panchatcharam is taken, 
the palate will become hardened and a conical 
protuberance will be formed above the Uvla 
(207 =) after some years. This is called Sushi- 
muna or Brahma Randaram (97096010), 


96 


[This is the place where the tenth hole was and was 
closed in the sixth month when the embryo was 
‘nthe womb. This closed-up hole should be 
re-opened by Jnana Fire or Love or Jnana or 
Panchatcharam, so that Brahm may enter into 
the mouth as Joti or Light]. 

Then when the Soul and the human body he inhabits 
are purified by Jnana (The Holy Fire), Sushi- 
muna (#@r) will open after some more years 
and Brahm will enter into the mouth in the form 
of Joti. This Joti though it will be tiny, will have 
more refulgence than thousands of Suns. This 

Joti is called Sushimuna Joti («Pye Gar$), 
Puruvamya Joti (Y@aenuwnw Ser 5), Chenni Chudar 
(Qecroflea_t), Netrikan (Gap Heer) etc. When 
this Joti appears, the human body is transformed 
and becomes ethereal. This transformed human 
body becomes the residence of Brahm, and the 
owner of the human body becomes a Jivan- 
Mukta (gar Mweser), This Jivan-Mukta is an 
Avatar and becomes a Loga-Guru (¢»7 (CH) or 


World Teacher. 


(6) Gunas or Moods are of three kinds; Sattwa, 
Rajas and Tamas; When Sattwa predominates, Rajas 
and Tamas will be subservient and the Soul will be 
religiously inclined and seek after Truth. When Rajas . 
prevails, the other two will be subservient and the Soul 
will hanker after riches, fame and worldly pleasures. 
When Tamas predominates, the other two will be sub- 
servient and the Soul immersed in ignorance and dark- 
ness will act brutishly. These Gunas are due to the 
influence of Sakti. 

Brahm is above all these Gunas and hence he is 
called Nirguna (#7 é@resr). 


4 


97 


ILLUSTRATION.— 

(2) “alg eomtagsirea 9. fF SO) som oF 
Flt. Qoluyo gg FSC Sarat —H#1 19. 
PONTE ES Sy FHSVV; O_o ODEN FON B oD 
Yorn s sen QuTiche Os Cur.” 

If the Universe and Tatwas which can be pointed out 
as this or that by the ordinary intelligence are fully rea- 
lized to be Asat and relinquished on that account, what 
remains, is certainly Sat. You, the Soul who found them 
to be Asat, one after another are not the Great Intelligence, 
the Sat. After relinquishing the Asat, if you adhere to 
Brahm, the Great Intelligence and become His ‘property, ~ 
your Atma or Soul-intelligence (g70 2ja;) will go away. 


- So you are not Asat. If you are neither Sat nor Asat the 


natural inference is that you are Sat-Asat. 

ILLUSTRATION.— 

(3) “somos gorpaQpadi Os sarO srs ors, 
<2/ e001 L_Goor Hor wre QPL ZITO TL I— 1 1680 _ Cant 
cao so SS 5ST or ADT y 2 SS woHlor; ew soy 
ror gf Sidi ooura gron” 

If you give up the Universe and Tatwas as not Sat 
but Asat and if you constantly practise Sivoham Bavanai 
(ASarsi uraizer) by means of Jnana, Malam, Kanmam 
and Maya which are in-born in you, will leave you imper- 


= ceptibly, just like the poison leaves a man bitten by a 


venomous reptile, on the snake charmer contemplating 

upon Garuda, the kite and transforming himself into the 
kite in his imagination. 

Sivoham Bavanai (@Ga7at ura) or Soham Bavanai 

is the constant contemplation of oneself as 

Brahm or Sivam. Sivoham means “| am Sivam.” 

When the Soul has found his real “ Self*’ and 


when he “is discarding the Universe and Tatwas 
13 


98 


as Asat one after another, he should practise 
Sivoham Bavanai; i. e. In all his actions, in all 
his speech and in all his thoughts, he should 
consider that it is Brahm who does everything 
from within him and that there is no such thing 
as a separate Soul or individual ‘I.’ There 


should be a complete identification of the Soul 
with Brahm. 


PART IIJ—DISSERTATION, 
“ADQuam al YoOFpse Ss” 
Administer and contemplate upon Ancheluttu or 
Panchatcharam, “According to Law.” 
STATEMENT, — 
Qo Gadi ga ufugsésrg9s ASU 2 Fst SH ; 
(ps4). 
Now that you are relinquishing Pasam and have found 
Pathi in the form of Arul or Jnana or Panchatcharam, you 


should utter (apply) the Panchatcharam or Arul or Jnana, 
“ According to Law.” 


The terms Ucharikka, Oduga, Yennuga and Yettuga 
(eéehes, PHS, THT ays, a) used in this 
connection, mean apply or administer and not 
pronounce. 


Panchatcharam represented by Si, Va, Ya, Na, Ma, 
(@, a, w, *, 2) is also Arul or Jnana. The letters 
are not ordinary letters but they represent the five 
diferent contents of the Panchatchara Porul (v@% 
gm_eru@ur@er), Si (#) represents Sivam, or 
Brahm,: or Pathi; Va (@) represents Arul, or 
Sakti or Kundali or Energy of Sivam; Ya (v) 
represents the Soul or Pasu; Na (*) represents 
Drodana Sakti and Ma (“) represents Malam. 


a 


99 


These five when reduced to three as Pathi (Si, 
Va), Pasu (Ya) and Pasam (Na, Ma,) are con- 
tained in the Panchatchara Porul. So there is 
no use simply uttering these letters singly or in 
combination as is ordinarily done. Panchatcha- 
tam is a “Thing” and in addition to its being 
called Arul (Grace), Jnana, Amudu, Love, Om 
and by many more names, it is also called Mandi- 
ram (“2S)7), This is the Sadhana (#7 gon) 
prescribed for the Soul’s Redemption or Release: 
And unless this “Thing” is found and taken, 
Redemption or Release is impossible. A few 
stanzas bearing on this, will be quoted. 
(1) “2008 9 pA GenA wren oor AIT; 2 PPRaresr 
LHNN FUME Durr Kid; BELOIT LOC5 EB 
Oerada UgET Ss ID oror_p Fh Bipsw MuGi9- apt 
Yoo? er Cuter oarnSurrt, s¢ACw sur,” 
Oh ! the Sole one who resides at Kachi! The beloved 
Jiva (Soul) is eternally sickly from the troublesome disease 
of births; The most able and gratuitous physician is the 
Ancient Sivam (Brahm). Though the Vedas loudly pro- 
claim that the good and effective medicine is Panchatcha- 
ram, the unlearned do not know that you are a “Thing”. 
(2). aeRFear wer AGardap a7 wr Said <AuIosr Qader ; 
ACHAN Boop, cH, 39, FCrreas, Aderemrans; wp 
DEAN @Qrexr cor AC orTd so Hg Yd, el 915 
AGAY Qromren_ x%erujQuanaper, s£ACw sibuGon” 
The Sole one at Kachi said. ‘‘If duly considered there 
is no Mandiram other than the five letters ‘(Si, Va, Ya, 
Na, Ma).. These letters contain Sivam, Arul (Sakti), Soul, 
Drodai and Malam. [If the last two (Na, Ma) are got rid 


of by means of Arul, the Soul will join the first two 
(Si, Wa).”’ 


100 


(3) “0% Sawer git HEOFEPSCS; HOS Lot Siar & Soir 

Le g@Qurqpenyls STL_!-, Qn air ig oor afucn_ sg, 

(prgith Brewis ear a Sonu 5B p% gi eur UpsBss SN oy 

BH GOT SOL GS SLILICT seGseeAGu siiiCer.” 

Mandiram is Ancheluttu. The Sole one who resides 
at the sounding Kachi and who is the father of Ganapathy 
revealed the five things contained in the Mandiram, put 
an end to the sway of Dredai and Malam (Na, and Ma), 
or Pasam, opened the doors of Sivam and Arul (Si and Va) 
and gave me (Ya) the incomparable Mukti. 

(Saint Kannudaya Vallalar : Sivagama Kachi Malai). 

(4) “06 Someor oom ORT wus HGS or p wrest ! 
in Samar To SI ps Sop or DI STonr, 
WiGrmasoirag! DASOSip™s aTujanal 
wi Br FO Fujeor_ AI SEG tomer Lp garde G ws” 

Oh! you foolish men who drink toddy and take opium 
as Mandiram and become tipsy! Understand that Mandi- 
ram is not the juice of any tree. Itis a noble Aerial Fluid. 
There is no death for those who drink it. 

(5) “06 Sree a0 per Louse Best uti gor ! 
wi Grascr spoT woll ssCurg @eradkSan ? 
wi Do mesor etaapCar, DRS SC HH B_wpGer, 
wi Parison ral gi, Lem % Sex sO spss ew.” 

Oh! men whe study Mandiras and get confounded ! 


What is the good of the Mandiras you study when you - 


die? You cannot repeat them then. The Mandiram is in 
you and the Sacred Liquid ‘is also within you. The Mandi- 
ras are the five letters in the Soul. 
(Saint Sivavakkiar; Sivavakkiam). 
(6) §‘eyreorib 1 A5C SIs G wives Bevreen ; oret Cen gitb 

cireorinan guy a1 vrai 5) @oys0— CHT oot Lo $A 

gamma 21 CuIGhLd STULd a QlarT Gio 

eco re). 21 AT SIF LD 2 oom”, 


= 


101 


There is no death for those who ky 
who take this drink daily and satisfy thf 
finds Jnana, his body and Soul will b 
you take any thing at all, take this drink, 

(St. Thiruvalluva Nayanar; Ina 
REASON ,— 

Qan' aorssonaG ero GrarA s gy x2 
CawyGarm ypuCurea Coré@pap Caré@ 
4.5 6S GSD OsaraQarars, 


fengthened. If 
ich is Amudu. 


Just like a worm which had hitherto lived upon mar- 
gosa (a bitter tree), will have a tendency to look towards 
it, even if it is allowed to live upon Sugar cane (a sweet 
plant), the Soul will have a tendency to look towards 
Pasam with affection, even after the Revelation of Jnana 
by Brahm. To overcome this tendency, the taking of 
Panchatcharam is prescribed as a medicine. 

ILLUSTRATION. — 

(1) aoOsip gs sro ooranb sro eomemmaan® 0a, 
AGOM PS STA 97 FH 5g, OSU) sh Be — EOF ips ST 
Qa IIe Oru? erin, Cargo ey rrofaGe, 

HOt @HiDCFL_@ib Dag.” 

The Soul should find that he isthe property of Brahm 
through Panchatcharam, feed the Brahm within him with 
Panchatcharam, raise the Jnana Fire (Kundali Sakti) with- 
in due course and practise Sivoham Bavanai; and if he 
does all these systematically, he will become the real 
of Brahm property and become His Adiyan (-9-w7e) 
or servant. 

(a) The unblemished oblation (or Archana Porul--yr& 

€ ents Qurc5er) is Love or Panchatcharam, The 
Soul should know “himself’’ the worshipper, 
“the Brahm’ whom he worships and the 
‘ oblation acceptable to Him. Then only his 
worship will have effect; otherwise not. 


102 
(1) Sues Cel) som BxruyiD, Waser 


Foo HWVEOLIL|LD, Qon Mauesr yeorOeu 
BF DQurHerujic, 9 Goss, ew 
Czas shoes Q eof uG acer @ orev” 
One should know through the Arul of Brahm “himself ”* 
the worshipper, the “Brahm” whom he worships and the 
“unblemished oblation’’ He takes. 


(Sivaprakasa Swamigal-Prabulinga Leela) 


(2) “BevGwasturn, g95Gai Fars asp 
LTA Du! Bld ST ERS alsa QS GF—EF 1p Mb 
wyorSiy 91IC.aeb, yoru mevrevcHs Corus LD, 
wyorCu maa gs Swictpwr i.” 


The body is the temple; The Intelligence in it is Siva- 
lingam. It is the unalloyed and unblemished ‘ Love” 
which is Ointment, Oblation and Food acceptable to the 
Brahm whom Vishnu and Brahma sought in vain. 


(St. Kannudaya Vallalar) 


(6) If Brahm within the body is fed withLove or. 
Panchatcharam, Jnana Fire (Kundali Sakti) will be stirred 
up within; Sushimuna will open when this Fire reaches 
the boiling point and Brahm will appear as Joti. 

CE CTHLTHA (HOB BTL & Foor w5Oayatr 
Son ibiy sus Qeinuigerws wireor 

Sram s Qmas, 6, HTS Beored tpc ig Cu 
SMaQiup eerenHes, 

uGga ws Mog so BHorrer Gerons Car 
uNass, CaS) Oe gy 

Us AOI OOS SaSD YS9Sw voMQsrame 
LIF BOOS C16 OFT GIG KOO; 

Ae Aarnmsan sHien pt sFCu, 


Res owit oat 5 G@ea.” 


103 

Oh, Dakshanamurthi! O my Chinmayananda Guru! 
[ was in a sickly condition in the midst of the den of the 
body which came out of the womb, and was covered 
with Malam like the copper covered with alloy. In Thy 
infinite mercy, You raised up the Jnana Fire within me, 
melted me in that Fire and when | had sufficiently become 
mellow to receive Thee, you touched me with your Arul 
Kuligai, entered the mountain of my head, made me as 
pure asthe purest gold and also made me your own. 
How can | express my gratitude to Thee for this ? 


(Thayumana-Swamigal-Chinmayananda Guru) 


(c) About stirring up Jnana Fire or Kundali Sakti, 
read also Varaha and Yoga Kundali Upanishads of 
Krishna Yajur Veda translated into English by Theoso- 
phist K. Narayanasami lyer. 

ILLUSTRATION :-— 

(2) ‘‘Qagiaiev LIT GAY TT HOUE Hort. 1 HHH 
Aico 59 siTextle) Flas aor & 2007 mR) Lt—$ B_ HBO 
STL TSO) pCap a DS SmVSET HOLA oor 
Aon Bree Bd, “O5) BGC OSS.” 

If you (Soul) contemplate upon Brahm sufficiently 
long as the result of taking Panchatcharam, He will 
appear to you, just as the planets Raghu and Khedu, 
which are not visible at other times, become visible during 
the eclipse of either Sun or Moon; and make you His 
own, just as the fire makes the iron its own, when the 
jron becomes redhot. 


ILLUSTRATION. — 
(3) “ner Ips Haw, Loo, Fon B Rev LILb 
oT ere RET FT Rai(Lplb— Ha ovatled 
SLU THUTLD GT FSWT, FS RLU Sor HOT Cw) Lb 
AeouGHevirin yeFRaor sro mn.” 


104 
Panchatcharam contains all the 36 Tatwas (Atma 
Tatwas 24; Viddiha Tatwas 7; and Siva Tatwas 5) and 
Brahm is seated upon these Tatwas. Realize the im- 
portance of Panchatcharam in this manner when you 
take it and meditate upon it. 


(a) The Sutra as translated from Sanskrit by Pandit 
Kuppusamy Raja: 

Bp gs Rujo.Curer, Ragyrer Gamapuiennd gBsgiT 
aru sao gH, rele stag wo smu Aurujero Haus 
Sas gridunowpig, FagsSpsaofuunrer Outw@umrcer 
Sar 2) Dus, storm eanqanieA Curerp Oumusmoordt eRu9 Ger 
&_ 0, FasCurpoarea Ger snag ssearuCGuny, 9a 
Suiororp ugstlei Curgotar utrssag ar aiar. 

The intelligent Soul should, through Jnana, recognize 
the Brahm who is within him as Andariyami, as a non- 
stranger to him, give up all false knowledge as mirage, 
receive (take) the Panchatchara Porul and contemplate 
upon it that he may become steadfast. 

(6) (Brahm is called Andariyami because He does 
everything, though He does nothing. 

“em _wOsiorgei_umre or gid Capmadie DCora s 
Sen _YIG6 gb QaR* Soe crmauji e1wu4ri gs 
&bOsapHiur aos Sara QewsnsuGcs 
Hom _wais Qeuyorracr zs wt Owaag.” 


Brahm is Andariyami as He stands both as the owner 
and the owned without any distinction, as He is in this 
world and is not in this world, as He makes anything 
and everything His vehicle, ina mysterious and incompre- 
hensible manner and as He does everything though He 
does nothing. a 

(Tatwa Raya Swamigal-Brahma Geeta (s¢aaurrw 
sariesr, Gri Gene), 


105 


(c) The corresponding Sutra in Sivajnana Siddhiar: 
¢ LITE ERT ON FST QD LIF CFT oor FHT SLD 

urriudias oritussr uSerrer sa0Cev 

CreQu71Ob eon $05 arg Cure 

6ppEp hawt s baie Cur Sox 

YOF SH 2 vsQuatn sums sC sor@Qwsr pI 

YMG BM H5O HGS Su WIT Gd; Dei apd 

QOFHHD APCFOSOS MHUuy 2 Fshaa 

Lanse s YRS SMC LIT, ero Ocwevr Qu.” 

The Lord of Lords who cannot be known by Pasa 
Jnana and Pasu Jnana should be found through Pathi 
Jnana and the Soul should be able to rest in the shade 
of His Foot, when he has found this Pathi Jnana. As the 
Soul will be drawn towards the universe or world, on 
account of the longstanding habit, even after he has 
found the Pathi Jnana, it may be possible to rest in the 
shade of Brahm, if he gives up the world as false and 
unreal as mirage. As thisis an impossible feat without 
putting the mind under control, the sounding Panchatcha- 
tam should be taken to curb the mind, In that case, 
Brahm will enter into him and remove all blemishes. 


(d) The sounding Panchatcharam (gqmea@b 3e;Oeup 
#1) refers to Silamhosai (#»2@urem*), (Sound of Nadam) 
which the Soul will hear when the Jnana Fire or Kundali 
- Fire is raised within the body. This is a sign that the 
Soul as well as the body is being purified. This Silam- 
bosai or sound of Nadam will grow in intensity and 
duration and change into a variety of melodies from feeble 
to sonorous and in the end will be so powerful as to 
drown all outside noises. 

(1) “ SaqFFow Cures eda Neus orm 
AGS sles GIG _eor wsBup 
Catu 9H sabon pesup” 


106 
Nada Bindu will begin tu sound for joy when the Soul 
is on its way to join the ‘‘Foot” of Brahm and as a sign of 
the purification of the Soul. You (Soul) should follow this 
sound and contemplate upon Brahm without falling into 
pitfalls on the way. 
: (Uyyavanda Devanar-Tiru-Undiyar.) 
(2) § gA@Querp x2&GohuGer saree 
Yor ror. ug msolorVeTlh Qe ores ; 
CuodhOumen go oS srt Revi IGeyme 
Ca gris Fos Oriuia Ca_@u; 
nada 6s sng Or Aula Carrom 
GGUM oT RSID HH SOME; 
STAM SD BST FF SWI EHH 
FST LM oorcnir WIR aooT Sty.” 
The whole universe moves by the flame of the fire 
of the Spirit (Brahm). The Silambosai which is the sound 
~ of Vedanta and which dances everywhere will sound in 
the ears. If this sound is heard it is a sign that the ‘Six 
Adarams”’ (the Guru) are being purified. If the Adarams 
are purified you can enjoy perfect and eternal Bliss. 
(Agat-Easar Purana Kaviyam; 9/#4847 yrorsrauib), 

(3) Read also Hamsa Upanishad of Sukla Yajur 
Veda and Nada-Bindu Upanishad of Rig Veda translated 
by Theosophist K. Narayanaswami Iyer. They speak 
of the sounding of Nada Bindu and the different notes of 
the sound. 

(e) Manoliam (wS@aw) or the cessation of the 
activities of the mind is absolutely essential for union with 
Brahm and this is not possible unless the Mupporul or 
Panchatcharam is taken and the Soul is purified. 

(1) “Cgpdur wr nCags 4s SCagpu 
C sapine sii Biey® Feupoire_ Core 
STOLL woesrLn Lilrest asus Gl oar apev 
dororenzuGure LayoBe 2vaut 105; 


107 


HOI Hay. Cor toon en wij Moor 
@auurs St_19_ oot Gu oor Fo Be Hw 
Cartur we geTCn 2 Nmussl_y- 
At ate crohQuero CoaarGr,” 


Will there be any peace of mind, if Mind and Buddhi 
go their different ways? Those who give free rein to 
their Minds will wander in this world like thieves. The 
one who is able to bind his Mind with the Intelligence 
will be a Siddha (#57) and one who is able to bind 
the Intelligence with Mind will be a Jnani (Philosopher). 

(Aswani Devanar-Sivayoga Kalpam) 
(Ge BHD oor a5r aan) 3D L— Lie) & Sen Sev 
C eur ara CO BET F ia eTy, 
AGI Serer, 3 nDuTE LIT ESOS BOK; 
AGW BOQ SUT STD QLMGb, DSHS STOP SS” 

[turned from my evil ways through the power of 
Brahma Vastu (Panchatcharam) and became the child of 
Brahm. What you should practise is this:—‘“Take Brahma- 
Vastu and youcan bring your Mind under control and 
you will have other powers too.” 

(Sundara Anandar-Sutta Jnana) 
(8) “Curé@wemaytb Qaraysidi1s gb tL} MLbL]Lb2_er @HLD 
ara einas ain apy aAverO sro p am gaih ga 
sr aGle; iwCapevuUld s1Gor Sh; of Crs SmME SCS 
YSGib; 2 pipsair? AsraGaren 5s ger eS." 

A “ Thing’? (Panchatchara Porul) which has neither 
births nor deaths, no night or day (Kevala-Sakalam), no 
inside or outside, no speech, no form, and no end, will 
_ constantly press upon me (Soul) and will give me control 
over my Mind asa natural consequence and will make 
me one with Him, Ohl! the Six Faced! this Ecstasy is inex- 
pressible. 

(St. Arunagiri Nadir's Kandar Alankaram) 


108 


(c) Corresponding Sutra in Sivaprakasam: 

« goo SCrrgw Cows YE QIoT( pi) F, a, “par@s 
gosQaror; soar BDSHA oF 51 21 CROT PUG Bar 
earFoou moO; wr, Wy, OHHg UTS &_ PLAS 
FFA TeoTgee; Ss SHCumshaor cr.” 


In order that Anavamalam and Dirothi may leave 
you, you should administer the Panchatcharam consisting 
of Si, Va, Ya, Na, Ma. In that case Na and Ma 
(D: irothi and Anavamalam) will die and Aru! (Va) will 
grow in you. Then Arul (Va) will give you Sivam (Si). 
You the neble Seul (Ya) will then with the support of 
Arul (Va) become one with Sivam (Si) or Brahm. This 
is the Merit and Glory of the SACRED LETTERS. 


109 


XtH SUTRA: 
PASU’S (SOUL'S) VICTORY OVER PASAM. 
“gaCGer srCorun@u 2150015, 
TEOS, Don pricohl Os 
Low, LoTenus Ber SenO cucveosru9 6 Gp” 

Now you have known your real status (that you have 
nothing to do with Pasam, and that you are Adwaita with 
Pathi or Brahm) and you have been taught to consider 
the universe unreal, to take Panchatcharam and meditate 
upon it and to practise Sivcham Bavana. As a further 
step towards union with Brahm, you (Soul) are now asked 
to give up all idea of Dualism (Dwaita) or your Separate 
Individualism. Consider yourself nonexistent, sacrifice 
your Egoism (Self pride) or Anavam or “1” ism, stand in 
the purely Adwaita capacity and realise all your doings, 
whether of action, speech or thought (wert, air é@, srw) 
as those of Brahm within you. If you loyally and firmly 
carry out these instructions, Pasam consisting of Malam 
(Anavam), Maya and Kanmas will desert you and will 
not further molest you. This will be your Victory over 
Pasam. ; 

To explain scan: ‘Trai Pani Nittal "(Q@p usmié pp) 

means, a few stanzas will be quoted. 
(1) “gsearsOser giOsunpo gs srar a gairi & p@er, 
Bn sor Hoer eto eu9orwy ev anG, o pw, 71h 
BI O)SITEBSCOTU ID BTEOSEE OFWs, 
Suswp Sor Serdar s G16 saehO as oor 
QuGg@e FaGurse Ques Cue Qn8 Osa” 

If the Soul gives up all his individual doings and 
stands as Brahm, the same Brahm will assume the body 
occupied by the particular Soul as is own, eat, sleep and 
walk as the Soul, pass through life as the Soul and without 
any distinction between Himself and the Soul, will make 


110 


the Soul Himself. This is what is called the exalted Siva 
Bogam (fa:Gurain). 

(St. Umapathi Sivachariar-Unmai Neri-Vilakkam). 

(2) “mOsuapo Qaesnrm 3 pp9eer, wT sos 

smdeun star Quer msSup 
sortaGu ge sror Qusr w6Sup.” 

_ If we consider that Brahm is the Sole doer, that the 
Souls are Akartha (2je7Ta 7), that all the doings of the 
Souls are really those of Brahm and give up all idea of 
‘1 or Separate Individualism, then Brahm will swallow 
up such Souls and make all their doings His own. Ifa Soul 
entirely gives himself up to Brahm, the latter will also 
give Himself up to the Soul. (The Soul can attain this 
only by means of Arul.) 

(St. Uyyavanda Devanar-Tiru-Undiar) 

(3) ‘Pasraps8a war DupsG@ar%m Quip, 
Fal QUO ga oT oom Mat & or Ditb,—RAaicor al sor gu 
cTaOeu a srGarn@ sor oir, Qa nono & 
suQeuaré Qararant tent gen” 

Whoever realizes that Brahm or Sivam alone is the 
Sole Doer and that there is no separate being as Individual 
“1,” that all the knowledge the Soul possesses is that 
of Brahm, asthe Souls cannot know anything without 

Him, that the Souls being Akarta (non-agents) they have 
no independent action and that whatever they do, whether 
speech, action, or thought are those of Brahm and 
entirely gives up all idea of “Self” or Individualism, 
will become that Brahm. 

(St. Uyyavanda Devanayanar Tirukkalittu Padiyar) 

(4) “eaGala sraOru Qadvarire oA GGw, 6 Sus 

p_emonflar pics Fudd 65 OFliB an mpQuar_piib 

Aoaas 51T OrunderoiaGcr gi, 2a Fu ver cor mith 


Aaararta 5 Adora arvetid Fw HG SIS oor” 


Wi 
“All my doings in this world are yours and J have 
no independent action. As you do everything from within 
me, all my doings good and bad are yours and whatever 
good and bad others do to me are also your doing.” If 
one realizes like this by means of Arul, he will not be 
molested ;by Kanmas i.,e., there will be no accumulation 
of Kanmas against him for future births. 
(St. Arulnandi Sivachariar-Sivajnana Siddhiar)] 
PURPORT.— 
“CUT FFOLUILD LIT GOILDT QM © ONT Sg GV 5,569 0 pi”? 

This Sutra deals with how Pasam is conquered or 
destroyed, by the Soul. 

This Sutra is divided into 2 parts for purposes of 

dissertation. 

1. gaGer sreorur@u 2150659, ra@®. 

2. BQoouehéps, wo, wre sade O anh ZeruWGerG p. 
PART 1—DISSERTATION. . 
CgeaCorgroruTau 605i), 75 ons” 

The way to become one with Brahm being known, 
you (Soul) should stand as Brahm without distinction. 

STATEMENT.— 

monOey ure ren Qoararenorenis Ber p (pen mentor esr 
aco _ Fg SEODES DS. 

In the same way as and for the same reason as 
Brahm stands as the Soul, the Soul in turn should stand 
as Brahm. 

REASON.— 

gonato 8psCer “wren” -‘‘erer gr” ores gpyib QE HES 
ADM Maori Fur GSES o[Corujrsovress 

Because, if the Soul stands like that, the Satoale, 
of “1’’ and ‘ ‘Mine’ * will die and the Soul- will embrace 
the illustrious “Foot” of Brahm. 


112 
The idea of “1” and “ Mine” is a disastrous disqua- 
lification for the attainment of Union. This 


false idea should go by means of Arul and it is 
only then, that Union is. possible. 


(1) “wires” ‘oreo gy” cromu SH POs guid 
GT OT LPap amr; 9) .g Howramtley Go Bev 
STOUT S Fal Sap Bp; 

Soar QorsGawb Sapte 5.” 


So long as the Jiva (Soul) is swayed by the ideas of 
“1° and “Mine,” he will not find Jnana. If he does not 
get Jnana, the abysmal universe (world) will allure him 
and the stainless Brahm will not shine. 


(2) “eps aint mitperS corp 55S ZL) 
Mpa Soars Cuan rw gs Ser 
Q ps Sig-0 ‘wire’ ‘cron’ O sor. gtd Banoo 
Le D5 HOw; ss DP won ps HOSiw1 wre?” 
It is only when the mind which revolves like a wind- 
mill is immersed in the great Brahm who has no beginning 
and end, the Self-pride of “1”? and ‘ Mine” will vanish. 
Otherwise it will not. 
(3) “Qj tiger srid eucj ‘wren’ ‘er oot ovr ev; Bau 
AGAZruTY adn QerGur@ gare; 
QDeplor ‘usren’ cra DaApatlen Qerdv; 
QapBeoor QoQovatle QadoG mcr.” 


By the false ideas of “I” and “Mine”, the 2 
Kanmas, Virtue and Vice will spring. It {is Virtue and 
Vice which bring about joy and sorrow. Ifthe false ideas 
of “I and “Mine” vanish, there will no Virtue and 
Vice. If there is no Virtue and Vice, there will no 
births. | : 
(Sivaprakasa Swamigal-Prabu Linga Leela-Manolia kadi) 


=. 


113 
ILLUSTRATION.— 


“pre, “ae,” cer D crear alerts Gis IO 2 orld 2 eerl_15e 
Star cror per ier ACu, stor gauTl—“sTex” orem per DI 
QaQec psrGCor ot ath Saiargs Sorry os 5 
QHoOvcw p sTejb Qenp.” 

Self pride or Egoism or Tarpotham (##Surg) will 
be prominent in those (Atheists) who say “I am all in 
all” as if there is no Brahm, just in the same way as in 
those who say “I” and “He’’, thus distinguishing the 
Soul from Brahm. The Soul who is eager for the Union 
should completely sacrifice his Individual ‘“‘I”’ and should 
be completely merged in and identified with Brahm. 
Then he becomes Brahm Himself. If one completely 
gives up his Individual “I’’ and sincerely feels that he 
is Brahm Himself, then Brahm will shine in him, as all in 
all, with the Soul completely absorbed and swallowed up 
and will make the Soul feel certain that he is not separate 
from Brahm. 

PART II—DISSERTATION. 


Qeopue 1s, wa, wreas sId@Daa Moi m. 

If the Soul considers all his doings as those of Brahm, 
Malam, Maya and Kanma will be destroyed. 

STATEMENT:— Qall Qapueil agarg dps. 

When the Soul considers all his doings as those of 
Brahm, he should stand firm in that conviction without 
any wavering or flinching. 

REASON :— 

HUT HHMTVVN SI Hosen Dujid GFuwuTE)saSalr, 2WEHEHT 
erin, Serio DaCeRwitait sev ear. 

Because when the Soul realizes:that he does every- 


thing through the Arul or Sakti of Brahm and not inde- 
15 


1f4 


pendently of his own volition, Ajjanana or Maya and 
Kanmas will not enter into his doings. 


The Soul should realize that all his movements (i.c.) his 
Icha, Jnana, and Kiriya. (Q#ene, @rem, @ Aloo) 
or Will, Knowledge and Action are in response to 
theimovements or Icha, Jnana and Kiriya of Arul 
or Sakti and are not independent. 

ILLUSTRATION :— 

(1). “srmes Qa Bfusn ; BibapuIerve ; ais) 
BTLOVN 5 BITLptd 27 epcn1_ento—wiT @ Lest ooh ost 
Tes gid Heroin Den prooAuimnrsg Qor%ra oor 
(pos off Foor 15 5 hour oor per.” 

The Souls are not Indirias or Senses and Indirias 
are’ not Souls. The Indirias are stimulated by Brahm 
and not by the Souls. The Souls are not Dhanu, Karana, 
Puvana, Bogam (the body, karanas, universe and ex- 
periences). The Indirias and Dhanu, Karana, Puvana, 
Bogam, experienced by the Indirias are Maya process and 
they are all the property of Brahm. The Souls are also 
the property of Brahm and have no independent right. If 
one understands this and realizes that all what he does is 
through the Arul or Sakti of Brahm, he will not accumu- 
late Agamia Vinai for the future by his present doings 
and his Prarabda Vinai (what he experiences now) will 
not harm-him in any way. 
ss ILLUSTRATION.— 

(2) “rib srors oT 550 Flvaiy 5 esd 
FIG SIOLe STS gr, FouDvgnwée—F0T i Fig WITT 
srasT@rOrig ; Dor smact Mia sro OarO san 
Biss BT prewar, ae.” 

It is the duty of the good to protect those who come to 
them for refuge. Brahm who protects those who resoit' to 
Him for refuge, is impartial. In the case of those who 


M5 


have resorted to Him, He does not allew the accumula- 
tion of Agamia Kanmas, and also wipes off their Prarabda 
Kanmas. Those who have not sought His refuge cannot 
claim and share these advantages and they should reap 
the fruits of all their actions. 

[The same idea is found in Sivajnana Siddhiar] 

“sorbevr@oit, GT Bt & mT) PaO 6S STT Bidens 

SI OSES ZlorocT HaiT stn Orisa Sor sas ea 
mop. Cor Dor@eruscAZar ven" 9 ops @yil! 
BEOETin AZarwiarcow 151i 19.50 LILI sor.” 

Brahm, the Chief, makes the Soul who has resorted 
to Him through Jnana, Himself, and protects him from the 
effects of his own actions (Kanmas) and the actions 
(Kanams) of others towards him which remain to be con- 
sumed. He is thoroughly impartial in this respect as the 
same boon is riot granted to those who have not resorted 

‘to him. 
ILLUSTRATION :— 
(3) “Qagefarmgin svwCure crrofuired 
aOsiicider, wire pari 9 entb— Gor Qe ial Foor 
LoTemLujt_or HVOT SI, oppacr ster OuowiiQuna~Cer 
HU HEH e.omrchin year”? 

As there is a slight and thin smell of asafoetida in a 
vessel in which it was kept but washed, Prarabda 
Vinai, Dhanu, Karana, Puvana, Bogam and Agamia Vinai 
along with Maya may slightly assail a Soul who is 


advanced in the practice of ‘‘ Sivoham Bavani”’ and who .-: 


stands in “Irai Pani,’ but they will do him no harm as 
he is gradually becoming one with the Bramah-Vastu 
and as this realization of his, will make him staunch and 
unwavering. 
ILLUSTRATION: — 
(4) ‘pomomer®) Calarge BDper 58 alo, 
Litt wrLLT LWrFOFQ s gid Li sill gph or esr aaof 


116 


Dror 319. pitiait, Bid_ysvooh p © eeor pit 
ayant Sve Baart 1506 ” 

A yogi who knows the science of overcoming fire 
and who is fire-proof and an expert rider, will not come 
to any harm even if one sits in the midst of the fire and 
the other rides a restless war horse. In the same way 
one who has found the “Foot’’ of Brahm and is being 
united to that “Foot” and is staunch and unfaltering in 
the feeling of one-ness with that “ Foot,”’ will not be 
endangered even if he yields to the pleasures of the senses. 

ILLUSTRATION.— ; 

(5) “eseear7 Quiisomcrar, FSS Gono sronfley 
Debs od ure 5 DA Ds—a sDEG 
aha Dharapsr QmarCura aor, #5 Soo 
AWREMOM UTM, FHS CoT aT QyrG.” 

One who has found his real status of Sat-Asat and 
finds the Sakti or Arul of Brahm in all that goes on in 
the world and in him, will not be influenced by Pasam 
(Malam, Maya and Kanmam), in the same way as dark- 
ness will not stand before a brilliant light. Such a Soul 
will have no Jeaning towards Pasam (Asat) but will 
adhere to Pathi (Sat). 

(a) The Sutra as translated from Sanskrit by Pandit 
Kuppusamy Raja:— 


Gagranb Gupp Asse, FasCsr@ BsBugms - 


AO bsnl, yeAaor arg gre gor g1 AGS GuGdor 2 oo1_us 
APBD, WH, wiTeous IpsoIuaHeped UP PLisu_T Fai@o is, ovay ee 
LID BOO 5 LJ OL LIG Go) Boar 07 oo. 

The Soul who has received Jnana, who feels his 
Oneness with Brahm, who feels the influence of Brahm 
in all His doings and who has detached himself from 
Malam, May, etc., is confirmed in the feeling of Oneness 


with Brahm. 


7 


(6) The corresponding Sutra in Sivajnana Siddhiar 
“Sarr e vB @) sin 21/951 Oe sSQacverrld 
QDs 29 41 Qo gme@Gs Qeligrt uncleneujn; 
Har Daugwis Searmapenp aacB 
HreriicP ule Ser Di _ajin 2% gitb (Ppp; 
Fa opin Qasr S oreverrid cronQeus 5) Ques gd, 
Oe sg TMS Dou MsGHF OF SO For MID, 
alle YEN 21 C)S dor mOarar ar; umame 


ur gs 50 5F OF Bi goth craluTrSaaOC tn.” 


Whatever a Soul (advanced in the practice of Sivoham 
Bavanai, etc.) does in this world,!whether good or bad, 
will attach themselves to those Souls who do him good 
or bad. There will be no accumulation of Agamia Vinai, 
so long asthe Sou] remains steadfast in the feeling of 
Oneness with Brahm and considers all his doings as 
those of Brahm, Brahm will also adopt all this Soul’s 
doings as His own and those doings of others towards this 
Soul as against Himself and remain one with this Soul, 
so that no actions (Kanmas) may be counted against him. 
Even if the Soul does anything wrong out of love, Brahm 
will reckon it as His own doing. 


(c) The corresponding Sutra in Sivaprakasam: 

LG STON 2 DS BI 10) HDS Lplp Lb oTAEIE 

£5 Fur eT Sur gs; Qa ss oroowC ire Pou ChE (HL, 

ssb ASshrors sx1650rapssHoheCa 

absaroior Oruertes on Suir Cu SwitCar. 

In the Soul’s struggle to disconnect himself from 
Pasam, there cannot but be at least faint attacks from 
Pasam, just as the asafoetida pot emits a thin smell 
even after the drug is removed. But if the Soul persists 
in taking the Panchatchara-Arul which has no beginning 
and end and continues firm in the contemplation thereof 
such attacks will be ineffective & futile. 


118 


(7) When a person undertakes an arduous task 
by some exceptional means, he expects some definite 
result. In the same.manner, the Jiva or Soul who takes 
up the most difficult and Herculean task of conquering 
Pasam and becoming united with Brahm by the Excep- 
tional means of Jnana or Arul revealed to him by Brahm, 
is also rewarded with definite results. The first is his 
Victory over Pasam or Darkness as enunciated in this 
Sutra (Urgapur ; Qameir BS). Ghe second ‘is his gaining 
or embracing the “Foot” of Brahm and entering into Light 
(PauviBum; goiGerésr) as detailed in the subsequent 
Sutra 11. By his victory over Pasam, he ceases to be 
Soul and by embracing the “Foot” of Brahm, he be- 
comes one with Brahm and becomes a Jivanmukta. 


(e) The realization of “Oneness” with Brahm as 
Adwaita and the realization that Brahm is the Sole-doer 
and that Soul is always Adwaita with Brahm is Sivayogam 
(Gay Surat). (Vide note under Sutra 4). This is what is 
meant by the expressions “‘Yeganagi, and ‘‘Irai Pani nirka” 
(c2@2, Qen pref A=) in the Sutra. 


pod 


H9 


XItH' SUTRA: 
THE SOUL BECOMES A JIVAN:MUKTA, 

! ST GOL Som coy S(HSS5TL Oid oerioGcire, 

ETM B oror Sei SeROND sri, 
gwar yarniar sre sip Oe giGw.” 

Just as the Soul’ shows things to the eye; Brahmi: shows: 
the Soul what he really is and how He and the Soul: work 
conjointly together, as Adwaita, The Soul and: the eye 
cannot act independently of each other but always act 
together as Adwaita. In the same way Brahm and 
the Soul do not act independently of each other bit 
always act as one, in the Adwaita capacity. The Soul 
should be immensely grateful to Brahm for disclosing to 
him this Joint Partnership and Adwaita Relationship as 
his Guru (Teacher) and in reciprocation thereof, he should 
“ Unceasingly take Anbu” (Love or Panchatcharam) and 
contemplate upon it. In that case, he will embrace the 
“Foot”’ of Brahm, 

PURPORT.— 

urCurareg Ful sm Sar 2 Carer tL Lo IT opt O_O & gy HOV 
Ds po. 

This sutra shows how the Soul embraces the illus- 
trious “Feet” of Brahm or Parameswara. (This is the 
attainment of Jivanmukii), 


This Sutra is divided into 2 parts for purposes ‘of 
dissertation. 
(1) ‘67 gpd sor aMS@G om_Ow eordGurH, 
FIO CMM SOSH STL_OS STL.” 
(2) “aster guor yorQer src ape OF giGw.” 
PART I—DESSERTATION 
Sir apn Sor ope GS er! Orn ce oribGurey, 
SNOT Coton Sen B& STi 9's sires ob.” 


120 


The Soul sees “ Self’? as shown to him by Brahm, 
in the same way as the Soul shows things to the eye. 

STATEMENT.— 

(1) rarn@ ga gb Joppa Aw gsong eam. 

Brahm also goes through and partakes of the experi- 
ences of the Souls. (This is for the sake of the Souls. This 
statement explains the Adwaita Relationship between 
Brahm and Souls.) 

REASON.— 

Qaaranrsscr Qatar sews s, Daron puyld 
AuGuir ysovren. 

Because these Souls cannot experience anything 
except in conjunction with Brahm. (Just as the eye cannot 
see anything except in conjunction with light). 

ILLUSTRATION.— 

(1) “86m gsuj psa comm g Hal D DIG T ot BI 
Ba gidGure Aer Mem Chin sor ox —B vs Gor wy 
garOeperapls uml 5 Horio: gaTotG id; oTeNa Glo 
amQ@porgel umiéeG eons gi.” 

Each of the five senses feels only one thing at a time 
and one sense cannot feel what another sense feels. 
The Soul experiences things through the senses only one 
at a time and not together. But Brahm who is in all the 
Souls, can feel at the same time all what each Soul 
experiences. 

(2) “gawrus AC p Qeuruig sor por prema 
CGuraurtugsrer Aéors SOUT Deo ot —a SoTL 
ecrer S Ror sox Em Gor, Com Hairs, e_ot Shem p 
oral SET STEOHC@ CD.” 

Brahm who is the Soul’s eye and knows all what 
each Soul knows and feels, appropriates the actions and 
doings of Jivanmuktars as his own or as Siva Bogam (Gas 


121 


Cust), in as much as the Jivanmuktars have no Indivi- 
dualism and are confirmed in the feeling of Oneness with 
the “ Feet" of Brahm. 


In the case of Jivanmuktars Atma Bogam is changed 
into Siva Bogam or Brahma Bogam. 
PART II—DESSERTATION. 
Hoor BoOTF yYoiIer gwrcraipa Qs giGw. 

By Unceasingly feeding Brahm with Love or Amudu, 
in return for the inculcation by Brahm of the Joint Partner- 
ship and Adwaita Relationship between Himself and the 
Soul, the latter will reach the ‘‘ Foot’ of Brahm, 

STATEMENT, — 

BAG vsRI Qa woarg css oer gs Furs sons 
Dy Sever tL LD. 

The Soul will embrace the illustrious ‘ Foot” of 
Brahm by sufficiently feeding Him with Bakti or Love or 
Panchatchara-Arul, without any forgetfulness, in return 
for disclosing to him, his Joint Partnership ‘and Adwaita 
relationship with Brahm. 

REASON. .— 

yaa wrhude Me OriCart QewGiinwer An sg 
8b pevires. 5 

Because Brahm is Adwaita with Souls and is‘no stran- 
ger to the Souls and brings about the consequences of the 
actions of the Souls, He admits to His “Foot” the Soul 
who feeds Him with Love or Bakti. 

ILLUSTRATION .— 

(2) “ smesor Card D9 antd YAS or #1 CTS, 
QarsanCor ures srr eq © F I — Oy |B GIT & SOOT GB) SV 
LN EF EOS CSG, USY SHOT Sead grins Cures 
Coes So sor gpemitihsrt Car,” 

16 


122 


It is pitch darkness to the blind even if the sun 
stands in front of them. The Souls who are blind with 
Pasam stand in the same position to Brahm. To put it in 
other words, Brahm will not be known to those who 
are not qualified, who have not become Pakkuvars (wé@ar) 
as they are still under the Rule and Influence of Pasam. 
Bui to those who are Pakkuvars or qualified, to whom 
Panchatchara-Arul has been revealed and who have 
been unceasingly taking the Panchatchara-porul or 
Amudu or Anbu (Love), Brahm will appear clearly and 
change their Soul knowledge into Brahm-knowledge, just 

as the sun opens the lotus-bud in season. 
(2) ‘wer gb QGer oHari gary, gs Isr 
WATADID BIC wos gs g)— gon off oor 
ad SAH nMUIs SIG Sie as GOFWLIai i oar, ew se 
FoILUIN; Ashu Fre. 

The more plentifully Amudu-Anbu is taken, the 
more pleased Brahm will be towards that Soul and 
drive away the Malam to which he is subject from the 
very beginning, as the full moon drives away darkness; 
and will draw that Soul to Himself and hold him fast just 
as the magnet draws iron to itself and holds it. This, He 
does without any effort, as the whole thing takes place 
in His mere Presence (#445). So Brahm does not 
come under the category of an Actor. 

(3) “sR#aa poor, eotarth BA & SOY Gorey g; 
BA SAS Fo, parazal Gedo; — oF & g11nev1b, 
<DLILITOT Ub $B enGer, sort sco g16FL_LoMlb 
SLND SH (PLD FF oo HLPOv uy 


If the Soul-knowledge dies, the Soul also dies and 
there can be no union with Brahm. If Soul-knowledge 
does not die, then also there can be no union. The truth is, 
if Malam, Kanmam. and Maya which are the begetters of 


123 


. Soul-knowledge die, the Soul straightway joins Brahm like 
the salt which dissolves in water, and becomes His 


property. Brahm will not then depart from him but will 

hold him fast. 

(4) “Qurcrarcraper QarameapBea Yys@QerOn@, Gurus s 
SE omtCor owl gas eno LT v—(L post au air 
Lo FS Hor we. gs e_arorth wh Ives oot amitb 
WAS BAS FOF OQND, aT FZ. 


If the clouds which hide the sun are driven away by 
winds, the sun comes out in its glorious splendour. In the 
same way, if Malam which now hides the Soul is driven 
away by Arul-Sakti, the Soul emerges from Ajjnana in his 
natural splendour. When hidden by Malam, Soul-know- 

* ledge is small knowledge asthe sun hidden by clouds is 
only dimly seen. But if Malam disappears through Arul 
or Panchatcharam, Soul-knowledge becomes Brahm- 
knowledge, the Soul is swallowed up in Brahm and 


becomes Omnipresent. 


(a) The Sutra as translated from Sanskrit by Pandit 
Kuppusamy Raja: 

EDIE GE HS ET_BOOIT sth STRUT Stk Sw Tal ; 9/0 
aT FwoTyYsRS ST Oeil ayib STATUT silo Paenaires ; A sovirev 
ASoraysgy Lush wacysr IsFAach FH i 0T(Cwedr or) 
ud Suis FC Fis Casas @ in. 

It is the Soul which shows things to the eye and which 
sees things and it is Brahm who shows things to the Soul 
and who sees them. So let the Soul do supreme Bakii or 
Love to Brahm, his Patron. 


(c) The corresponding Sutra in Sivajnana Siddhiyar: 
“Csr Pp Sasa #da5eya, gous 


SIi_1_seorg Bin FeMsOLOuUjeni_u HOUT amy H 


124 


Cau outer & sag OurGure, 

weer OUITS HSST_S sary Qasr ; 9) 560s 
Buje 2 Payor wey ssr4C ew 

eA enrn QeAWuI s/601_ 65 pe pur@s, 
uoTwOnerink aS, scomory 2 Smee ; 


Tap Far guanb wHHsQaronrG _ ” 


As the Soul shows things to the eye and itself sees 
the things, Brahm shows things to the Soul and himself 
sees the things. The Soul should understand this 
Adwaita relationship between him and Brahm and 
stand firm in the gratuitous support of Brahm. With 
this conviction frm in him, he should do Him Love or 
Anbu (Feed Him with Anbu or Love), Imthat case, the 
Soul will be united to Brahm even in this life, in this body, 
though he has become entitled to attain eventually Videka- 
muthi (disembodied Mukti) on account of the progress 
he has made in the knowledge of Mupporul. Brahm will 
remove all his Malam, Maya and Kanmam and place him 
in the shelter of His ‘‘Foct’’. The Soul will then be en- 
joying Eternal Bliss. 


(c) The expression “SjwaoT gary” (Unceasing Love) 
should be clearely understcod. Anbu, Bakti, Adaravu, 
Panchatcharam, Arul, Jnana, Pranavam, etc., are all 
synonyms. Anbu (Love) in the Abstract as it is ordinarily 
understood is not what is meant in the Sutra. The Anbu 
(Love) mentioned in the Sutra is Anbu in the Concrete. 
It has already been shown that Panchatcharam, Arul 
Mandiram etc. area “ thing” Brahma-Vastu. Love is 
a Thing. It is a “ Thing”’ which Brahm likes because He 
is Love. Brahm lives within us as Love and whoever 
really loves Him in the abstract should feed Him with this 
“Love” in the Concrete, i. ¢., this “Love” should be 
eaten. 


125 


A Soul who is on the way to become a Jivan-mukta 
will take this “Love” in three forms at three stages. In 
the first stage, this “Love” is taken in Tula (are) form. 
Then it is called Tula-Mandiram (sre 1% Sid) oy Tula 
Panchatcharam (91% w@perc_erin) or Uru Unavu (Uru 
Food+2.g5 2are). It is picked up whenever it overflows 
and taken openly. This is the Ancheluttu (Panchat- 
charam) referred to in Sutra 9. In the second stage this 
“Love” oozes into the system. It is then called Sukkuma 
Mandiram (@#@uw wh S01) or Sukkuma Panchatcharam 
(GF@Guw ve;erc_erid) or Aru-Uru-Unavu (Aru-Uru-F ood- 
ACh-2-@-e_sray), |t is this which is called *“Unceasing 
Love” (ajw0r sjo011) in this Sutra. In the third stage 
when the Sushimuna (#p%r) bursts open and 
the Joti appears, this “Love” will drip as nectar from . 
this Joti. It is then called Parama Mandiram (wow we 
Br) or Mukti Panchatcharam (ys ugem_erw), Aru 
Food or Aru Unavu (4 eee) or Pranava Amudu 
(‘Sree (p57). It is this which is implied in the expres- 
sion “ 9Huaaa)@,” ‘ wash out the Malam” in Sutra 12. 
In the first stage the Soul or Jiva attains Salokam 
(#7Gersu). Heis an ordinary man then. In the second 
stage he attains Sameepam (¢mSur). He becomes a 
Mukta then. In the third stage, he attains Saroopam 
(=Te5U) and becomes a Jivan-Mukta. As a Jivan-Mukta, 
he lives upon this nectar till he attains Videka Mukti 
(8S se (ps8) or disembodied Mukti or Sayuchiyam 
(eruj#Gunb). 

A few stanzas bearing on this will be quoted:— 

(1) ws Bras, ares, oumg,r, wren slow) 

AGHLBGM, GHEGOWOMUL, Tp MIG SEL, 
FHSTUTFAUDTU ASF) Sh DgIOLDd ; 
GeQgurerer Hapswre G&S) ohio ; wir 


126 


wiGré sre Docienrs wap HohG we, 

Lorex Lyeo1_w) LITclp  H) weal 5 HOw.” 

Mandiras will be Tula, Sukkuma, and Param and 
will be taken in three different modes such as Vasaka 
(openly), Upanchu (Secretly but unconsciously) and Mana- 
dam (Secretly but consciously). Tula Mandiram will give 
some kinds of Sithi. Sukkuma-Mandiram will give Yoga 
Sithi. Parama Mandiram will put a stop to births and 
give Videka Mukti. 

(Sarva Jnanotra Agama-s7a GTC @ sar 2, 1bib). 

(2) “e.qpanorid ecarGar Qui Br eT Ld; 

eulb Bors Ratlen © 5A tor & Sr ion in; 
saints Lara DRsS wor & Saws 
ayDAchn AaraGHhir; 2% £ 
@_(ThavLDT LD aarCe FaMHa@ih gel ; 
Pils DivypssGs GNSS, 
DHauortb © om 2a IDPS SHEGU SSL, 
crat Bonne AO 9ACw.” 

The Tula Food (Uru Food) is taken openly; the 
Tula and Sukkuma Foed (Uru-Acu Food) combined gives 
only a taste in the Soul: the Sukkuma Food (Aru Food) 
gives contentment and will shine in the Soul, The Vedas 
say that the Tula food pertains to Jivas or ordinary 
mortals,: the Tula-Sukkuma Food pertains to the Mukta 
and the Sukkuma Food pertains to the Jivan-Mukta (i.e.) 
When one takes the Fula Panchatcharam . he is an 
ordinary mortal. When he takes the Sukkuma Panchat- 
charam, he becomes a Mukta. But when he takes the. 
Parama Mandiram, he becomes a Jivan-Mvkta and im- 
mortal. What is called Tula-“Sukkuma Food in Sutta 
Sadakam is called Sukkuma Mandiram in Sarva Jnanotra 
Agamam and what is called Sukkuma Food in Sutta 
Sadakam is called Parama Mandiram in Sarva Jnanotra 


Agamam. 


127 


(3) “g Qowr oor Fe ooOwWuU al Gh FB Beira ooruIer 
Qa@odrrr gs 51 CinQureh § 51.5 
soror ger Sor AS aBon. a@t_ gr mtn 
SE5C 577 ITAA Bipsip, 
D001 GOT GO) Chm BiLpesr O19 al SILD 
Dei beer in <° gp”? 
Dihowsohle Carpow wi sSrw4rs 
Qungse Sac ips fuG s” 


Lowitor 


When “Sivoham Bavanai’” is properly practised, 
Prarabda Vinai disappears, and the mortal turned im- 
morial lives upon the ‘“‘Pranava Amudu” which percolates 
into him without intermission. His body is then trans- 
formed and he appears as a human being only for the 
sight. “This is the state of a Jivan-mukta,” 


(St. Kumara Devar-Sutta Sadakam; +s g¢rg61b.) 


(4) “ge7Cai urwresr DDL) BT Hi; 
4 Bo@ <2) Dou oor & 0 LWIT Hib; 
ASTD Ol Fos 9} MC wuraer; 
2 ZS Go ov Bera CLPVLoT Hin; 
gerGea GaGa, S, sooo, me cst 
oT ay DOT CRED; 2 a8) &HLb OY DOVES BIT GIRLD 
gerGa sor ASG; g soTCa 
aor & Saab gerGai apworGw? 


Adaravu or “ Love” is the Parama Dharma (Sacrifice). 
~ It is the Beginning, Middle, End and All; The giving of 
those who have no “ Love” is not Dharma (Sacrifice). So, 
Adaravu is the First Cause. It is this ‘‘ Thing’? Adaravu 
which is Maya, Soul and Brahm (Pasam, Pasu and Pathi). 
It is Adaravu which will procure the “‘Foot’’ of Brahm 
which gives all knowledge. So, for every thing Adaravu is 
the Root Cause. 


(Siva tates Gir, Bab.) 


128 


(5). “sye1t@ sr esr_py ib LoD Ph EFAal@wor os 

Qnwerp Duar 2 ANMdvevrr; 

AMACuU Faw SHHSoOw [J Sst 
Gopuper Cummi; 

ATWAGT Lai geene of G)_crdenr 
Glerv6Q@ menaiQuicverrin 

ASTUBTID Sp FA epee ee 
Huet voor sos.” 

They are ignorant who understand “Love” as one 
and Brahm as another. Those who have known Brahm 
in the form of “ Love’’, have received the Arul of Brahm. 
Those who say that the troublesome birth (a merry life) is 
heaven or Moksha, have not eaten the Amudu called Love 
and they are strangers to Truth. 

(Sorubananda Nilayam in Perunthirattu; Q=erqurearss 
B)B0WiLD.) 

(6) ‘‘e aren Lp séercini Aer, Sess aya or 

Qurerert Yup sTOwer m6 Sip 
Garw 6 sOwesr ms Si1 9.” 

If you give up all false attachments and if your mind 
is brought under control, the inexhaustible nectar will flow 
in your body and permeate your whole body and you will 
become Brahm. There will be no more molestation from 
Malam, Maya and Kanmas. 

(St. Uyyavanda Deva Nayanar-Tiru Undiyar) 


(7) “ qmOQu gb Bwsoriro,....... 
(je Qpen sera AP ST Hs Curp 9,” 

You have let the river of ‘Love’ overflow its bunds 
and you have now become to me Supreme Amudu. Praise 
be to Thee. 

(Manikkavasaka Swamigal: Potri Tiruvagaval). 


129 
(8) “ yarens Gs sorter Woo h SHAT g1080 enfle 
Horr en ise Cours ayiort.” 
If one closes his Uvula and eats the nectar, there he 
will become the Chief of the Gods. 
(9) “gwsrawre sors gO gorentl 
CGurmarenieee iis gi.” 


If one takes the Amudu in the Vessel of ““Omkaram”’, 
he will have no death. 
(St. Ouviyar-Kural: gorsawrr Ger), 
(10) “ uUFAw Kean mare peri wiesr 
Dee gitd sran8or HlorQuicsr p 2 1Ovumaper, 
2 FAS GDS 1p g1, © ORT CRS HS D0 gw 
marries g, ari Dpate gz.” 
Brahm, the Priest kept a ‘“Thing” (Panchatcharaporul) 
in therwest i.e., in the upper part of my bodys and asked 
me to remember it with fondness. It is the “Foot’’ he then 
placed below my crown and above my Uvula. I keep my 
mouth shut and am silent. 


(St. Tirumular-Tirumandiram.) 
Giese eo FAu sa SC ip, D_ GT CO) AI HOsTo DG 
Ouse eprom (oraarceorwr) Doie@an paGen?” 


“Oh! my Lord. Is it you who have come asa great 
Light (Joti) below my crown and above my Uvula?”’ 


(St, Kaduveli Siddar-Purana Jnana.) 
(12) “p ¢AConr, 2 arar GoD) al oat Cin ev ar Bor éCaMu, STD, 
Qeoeupp Krone: G 1a aid O sifu srr, 
WEF DLL aMAs GFHeoOTSSE GHG one F Hig ev 
2 FAIe orfujescerS) eorGerrotioow ser ay Cw.” 
A light is burning below the crown and above the 
Uvula. It will be known to the Jnanis who have given up all 


attachments. If you control the mind of the horse through 
17 


130 


Arul, you can see the inner Light which will burn under 
the crown. 
(St. Sivavakkiar-Sivavakkiam.) 
(2) B LiLy $1 5 OO L_@yi_ oor Cs5@F 55), 
eo eairen miele 2 es, Curs& s &, 
Qureers wriiensu gs Bor iCuir eb, 
sarang Qvrdouwuws, Fu Hevrder, 
FPudrurie Oar gi@om urea, 
Curse gr aGeut gin Berd B)sveZv, 


CurerQnerp £5 5umCe sronevrGw.’’ 


As soon as Joti appears (over the Uvula), the body is 
transformed and the mortal has attained Jivan Mukti. 
Pranavayu (respiratory air) ceases to work and the Jivan 
Mukta becomes endowed with the eight Siddhis (Ashta 
Siddhis). Self pride or Tharpotham will be #ettered, as the 
result of taking Amudu or Arul. Maya will disappear. 
There will be neither thirst nor hunger. There is no more 
the sway of the treacherous Pasam. There will be no 
inclination towards false pleasures. The Sakti, who is 
called ‘‘Mouna”’ (the Silent) will be seen there. 

[St, Nandiswara Mahamunivar-‘* Karukkidi’’] 


(14) For Knowing more about the opening of Sushimuna 
in the Palate or Melana, which is called Melana Mandiram 
(Gwe@n0s5§)7b), read Dhyana Bindu Upanishad of Sama 
Veda and Yoga Kundali Upanishad of Krishna Yajur Veda 
translated into English by Theosophist K. Narayanaswamy 
lyer. 

(d) Corresponding Sutra in Sivaprakasam: 

“LIT ELDITLD GhT OTH BMT QLD, LIL_TLIG Gh ET HBT gid 
FCT DUI Gpeorr @2) GI; QowP B4/HoT STOOD woororenl 
CSF Dip EQOA ps te SppHOat Sis, Certs, 
CreCurG ecurussg Apiug Hit Lape.’ 


131 


Brahm cannot be known by Pasa Jnana and Pasu 
Jnana. If one gets Arul or Jnana of Brahm, his small 
Soul-knowledge will go and he will become one with 
Brahm by means of “Love”. This is called Jnana Nishti 
or Union by means of Jnana. 


(e) The union of Soul with Brahm, referred to in this 
Sutra is Siva Bogam (@a@urs), Vide note under Sutra 4. 
Jivan Mukti is Siva Bogam. 


132 


XlltH SUTRA: 


WHAT A JIVAN-MUKTA SHOULD DO TO ATTAIN 
VIDEKA-MUKTI. 
‘'@enuer Garenaper Gere gil, 

HibioeE &LS &), yor iOar® tof §); 

Lore2) Crwir i695 sarlT Can_ap, 

BOWE BT gpitd 9/9G) oo cor & QstapCw. 

The Jivan Mukta, into whom Brahm has entered as 

Joti or Light, through the supply of plenty of “ Love,” will, 
(during the time he remains in this world till he besomes 
a Videka-Mukta or till he casts aside his body) be drawn 
towards Pasam on account of long habit (i4T orator ), 
Though he has been purified by Jnana, still, Malam, Maya 
and Kanmas will tempt him now and then to go astray 
and stand as obstactles towards his attaining Videka- 
Mukti or fullimmersion in the Sustaining ‘Foct’ of Brahm. 
He should wash out these three kinds of impurities with 
Jnana-water or Love or Panchatcharam. (The nectar which 
flows through Sushimuna is meant here). He should 
further associate with those Saints who are already immers- 
ed in the Sustaining ‘Foot’ of Brahm, through the supply 
of Pure Love, join their society and consider their Disguise, 
and the Temple in which they live as Brahm Himself, for 
the sooner attainment of disembodied Mukti. 


This Sutra applies to Jivan Muktars only and not to 
ordinary mortals. The Saints or Lovers of Brahm ~ 
who have already become one with Brahm, are 
not now in this world to be seen by mortal eyes and 
they are all in the same place as Brahm as Ad- 
waita. Brahm is in Brahma- Vastu or Panchatchara 
Porul and all the Saints and Lovers are in this 
Panchatchara Porul. This Panchatchara Porul 
is in all living beings gifted with eyes. The 


133 


Vedam (Ga) or Diguise of Saints is the 
“Tirumani” or Body of Brahm which is 
Panchatchara Porul. The Temple which is the 
Residence of Brahm is also Panchatchara Porul. 
So, this Sutra enjoins u; on the Jivanmukta the 
constant asscciation with this Panchatchara 
Porul now in the form of Joti within him which 
contains all the Saints along with the Brahm 
and does not tell him to treat the ordinary 
Siva-devotees and Siva temples as Brahm. The 
temples are all intended for beginners for the 
performance of Artificial Sariya and Kiriya (@o7w 
shies se, @Aeow) and for the development of the 
Souls in the lower stages. Neither Brahm nor the 
Saints dwell in any Temple, Mosque or Church. 
Brahm does zot live in any building built by man. 
“ gear@o eerr_tin AGipg soreSo Amsey 5 
LerCsrule ee aay srw — he loeirw) 
yerCamGa eorer actu!” 
(St. Kudambai Siddar.) 

My dear! who is the one who resides in the perishable 
temple created by man who is only the creature of Brahm? 

Answer:— None. 

PURPORT.— 

YR Reem herp uSeaus Ws 9 sey sscan® au wr oy 
LOTS BBN 51569 9 mi. 

This sutra says how the incomprehensible Brahm 
is seen and adored in a comprehensible manner by the 
Jivan Mukta. 

Brahm who was till now in the Panchatchara Porul 
of the Jivan-Mukta in an incomprehensible form, assumes 
a comprehensible form as Joti at the Sushimuna and thus 
makes Himself visible to the Jivan-Mukta. 


134 


This Sutra is divided into 3 parts for purposes of 4 
dissertation:— 

(1) “Qsiwat Corenqger CerQovr__T 

Hyidiny 215 LS By” 
(2) yer an iB” 
(3) “wre pCoub wi sar Can_tpin Boru HIT spied 
yrOcron & Osrap in” 
PART 1—DISSERTATION. 

‘Qeinnat Cxreraper CrrQe 17 toinenmelS @.” 

Wash out Pasam which stands in the way of a Jivan . 
Mukta becoming a Videka-Mukta or Paramukta and 
tmmersed in the Sustaining “ Foot ’’ of Brahm. 

This dissertation enjoins what the Jivan-Mukta should , 
do when his mind (eter or 2M@e}) travels 
towards worldly things, on account of long habit. 

STATEMENT :— 

Cor gQomrait, wire; ar otlu@ wer anid lowh sors 
Been 

The Jivan-Mukta should get rid of Anavam, Maya 
and Agamia Kanma, lest they should influence him and 
make him go astray. 

REASON.— 

6 _gnGl ST LD Gh CT SOS C_OOTMT S FT Fl 
ANChCHT OT BOG O_O FGI Loreayiroar.”” 

Because they will lead him towards wrong and im- 
preper ways and not towards right and proper ways. 

ILLUSTRATION.— 

1 epTemAL) LITOULD Gurcpégi QaerenAwuiprd 
LDGRT Lp VD LOT@D UIST GOT LDIT BOLL LD—& ORT GvaAT LI 
yonoprara STL Orb Qarairanrey tpi, Qderpoor tb 
Quuwig, GHTahéarar, A@.” 


135 


The True Jnani should have nothing to do with 
Kanmas producing Virtue and Vice or likes and dislikes, 
Maya consisting of from Earth to Maya Tatwa and 
Anavam which raises improper feelings. You, a Jivan- 
mukta should completely give them up and avoid their 
approach. 

During the Jivan-mukti period when the Jnani lives 
in this world in his transformed body, he should 
ignore Anavam, Maya and Kanma, if they at any 
time assail him, 

PART II—DISSERTATION. 
“6 geruiOsrT® toi? g).” 
Associate with Anbars (Lovers). 


Whenever desires arise, the Jivan-mukta should not 
yield but continue closely in the company of 
Saints or Anbars. This dissertation is to show 
what the Jivan-mukta should do if his desires 
or will (Q#a#) travel towards worldly things. 

STATEMENT:— “Qole Gan geteGorr® Qeommg@e.” 


The Jivan-mukta should associate with Siva-Baktars. 


These Siva-Baktars or Siva Devotees or Lovers are 
those who have already become united to Brahm 
as Videkamuktars. They are not to be met 
with in this world in human body. They will 
all be found in the Joti which the Jivan-mukta 
will find at the Sushimuna in his mouth. He 
should have constant intercourse with them to 
avoid contact with the world (i.e ,) He Should 
be constantly engaged in the contemplation of 
this Joti- 

REASON :— 


; : : : Oe 5 a5 
$6 DEVOUT & TIT JCI AM BOB CWI F BINT YL HOV oot 


136 


Because those who have not become Saints or Devo- 
tees or Baktars will lead the Jivanmukta astray and infect 
him with evil communications. 


This shows that Jivanmuktars should not at all 
associate with the men and women of the world 
who have not understood Brahm. 

ILLUSTRATION :-— 

‘‘pudsgas Sen. ovmeotle af (pser 
AouGert s6Rprge Cereneai— pri; 95 git 
UsET Dor ser user e_emrtae@nev 2 co Hib 
Qui gear Cineir Bader.” 

The Prarabda Kanmas (92796 cSaer) which yet 
remain to be consumed and annihilated will not harm a 
True Devotee (i., a Jivanmukta), who has been taught 
by Brahm Himself as Guru, who in his association and 
intercourse with other True Devotees forgets himself and 
behaves like a mad-man through superabundant joy and 
who has completely abandoned the society of men and 
women of this world whose association was likely to 
make him forget the immense boon he has received from 
Brahm and make him fall again into the pit of birth 
from which he has just been raised. 

PART III—DISSERTATION, 

“orp Cau wPiseT Ca_cpl sows S17 epyip 
ayroorcrs Osrip@r.”’ 

To avoid the influence of Malam the Jivan-Mukta 
worships as Brahm, the Disguise of the True Devotees 
who have become disembodied Muktas through a good 
supply of Love and the Alayam (Temple) where Brahm 
resides. 

This dissertation is to show what the Jivan-Mukta 

should do when he feels inclined to act or do 
something (@few or Gewev), Alayam (gw) and 


137 


Lingam («91») do not mean the ordinary temples 
and the images kept there. Alayam or the Resi- 
dence of Brahm is our body and the Lingam is 
the Intelligence or Jnana or Panchatchara Porul in 
it. Refer to stanza quoted in Part Ill Sutra IX. 
Read also what Saint Tirumular says in his 
*'Tirumandiram.” | 
“oe arama QucpaGariGe, eecor 21 LoL] Qavwito, 
area Garr era rus GaTLyroureo, 
Oscars Osea grt aqr Fart RacMe std, 
sorart) Yuet &h gi:b siripr Loxllor 66 a.” 

The mind or the Soul is the noble altar; the body made 
up of flesh and bone is the temple and the mouth is 
the gateway of the tower to the gratuitous donor, ie., 
Brahm. To the Jnani who has understood the Truth, 
the Jiva or the Soul is the Siva-lingam or Intelligence. The 
false five senses are the transformed, in-extinguishable 
Light. 

Our body is the Outer Temple of Brahm and the 

Panchatchara Porul or Leve or Arul or Jnana in 
: the body is the Inner Temple of Brahm. The 
Alayam or the Temple referred to in the Sutra and 
in this Dissertation is the Inner Temple or the 
Panchatchara Porul or Love or Arul or Jnana. 

STATEMENT.— : 

. “Bel ussrg BaRCar gms, Rarvuse Suto 


urGwnrrQarcré sonr® aupu@e me 


~ 


The Jivan-Mukta should next see clearly and adore as 
Brahm, the Holy Disguise of the True Devotees or Lovers 
and Their and Siva’s Residence or Mansion. He should 
have no doubts about this. 


The True Devotees are not in this world in human _ 


form. They have all been merged in the Brahma- 
18 


138 


Vastu (9riaee e.g) or Panchatchara-Porul when 
they became Videka-Muktas. They are all 
now Adwaita with Brahm. Their Holy Disguise 
cannot therefore be seen with human eyes. 
This Holy Disguise is nothing but Panchatchara 
Porul in all living beings. This the Jivan-Mukta 
alone will be able to see and not the ordinary 
mortals. The Residence or Mansion of Brahm 
is not any temple, however grand it may be. 
The Panchatchara Porul in all living beings is 
His Mansion or Inner Temple. The Jong and 
short of the whole matter is that the jivan-Mukta 
should recognize the Panchatchara-Porul in all 
living beings as Brahm and be kind to all living 
beings whether men or animals, high or low; 
good or bad. This is prescribed as a means to 
give free play to his inclination, if any to act. 

REASON .—_‘‘Jarear wp MadRmsoha Oren remus Aor p, 
sours BQ. ge sp n9rarewr 5) © eviresr.” 

Because Brahm stands as a Shining Light in these 
places alone (Holy Disguise and Mansion) and quite 
differently in other places (i. e.,) though Brahm is 
Omnipresent and Immanent, He can be found only in the 
Panchatchara-Porul which is called “ The Holy Disguise 
of Lovers” and ‘Siva Alayam.” Compare the futile 
attempts of Brahma and Vishnu to find the Supreme Being * 
in the heavens and earth, when He ought to be searched 
for in the body and not elsewhere. 

ILLUSTRATION. — 

(1) Csr guemriGacrn ¢ sr gHoas sre s gis 
SOO BOM SoM Get QHsSOTA— Soo ayer Heb 
Cre SBT SWuUTH Aspss Si QawGure, 

LUTE & BITS Slesr ap its §),”” 


139 


Brahm becomes visible, like ghee in the curd, to 
those Devotees or Lovers of His, who have understood 
Him in the Form in which He dwells in them and in all 
animate beings (##auwliQumrdar), for the very purpose of 
being known and understood and keeps them firm in His 
Ubiquity. But to those who are bound by Pasam, He will 
be invisible like the ghee in the milk. 

(2) “sem Oger, wiGr gard ati she s308Ca mn 
2 VTL_ AVG LITA (5) GOT (DIRT IT LOT —& OT L_ BY (Th 
ATCT BUT HTM enw, ST RaU4ris & O Hr S @) 
PTO AUTUIS BT copia Four eH.” 

Fire is latent in firewood and is not visible but when 
the firewood is subjected to friction it becomes visible. 
In the same way, Brahm is immanent in all inanimate 
things (#TurLiQura7ar) also and is invisible, but will become 
visible if one knows how to raise Him up. This is 
however unnecessary as He is in the Form of Panchat- 
chara Porul in all living beings, so that the Souls may 
have Intelligence and attain Mukti finally. If any one is 
able to find Him in the Form in which He dwells in him, 
He will certainly become visible to him. 

PART IV—DISSERTATION 
Kt; Q)arr HHS; asus. 

Give up; Associate ; Adore. 

This dissertation is supplementary to the first three 
dissertations, wherein the Jivanmukta is asked 
to give up Pasam, associate with True Devotees 
and adore the Holy Disguise of the Devctees and 
the Mansion of Brahm. 

STATEMENT, — 

‘oof QarcD_usetle apuGs’. 


Next, visit and adore these places. 


140 


These places refer to places where “* Love flourishes” 
(erty Aoruyr Qtr) and they are the Diguise of True 
Devotees and the Mansion of Brahm which are one and 
the same, ie., Panchatchara Porul. ‘Give up” and 
“Associate” (Kaliga and Inanguga) have the same 
purpose and are included in this. 


Brahm is immanent in all things both animate and 
inanimate and on account of His mysterious 
existence, He is both those things and not those 
things. Now the Jivanmukta has found the 
immanency of Brahm in all things both animate 
and inanimate, when Brahm entered into him as 
Joti. With . the aid of this Joti, a Jivanmukta 
is able to see the whole universe at one view, 
from where he is. 

(1) “sramCar Gehl amie SON & sr Cw@aGarsas 

yon Casco Qa axor_ ra Quimm@er aver id Oana 117116 BT GoMILD; 

gar ou SC wGnr sha 3 DedueA@ gem aT extn, 

CsramGal pwr gTmé QeT empl SIT axpy is 51 ooo .”” 


When the Arul Kuligai leaps into the mouth, the 
Jivan-Mukta sees not only the whole universe but Brahm 
also there in the Joti within. 

(2) “sr gyCw eorGaGar®, s¢Oroord 9) muGuTe0 
Liao Lp wos (Lpingp oor Nts Lyon 1 oor us T GLb; 
CsrapGw CoraQudsri; * ch Bul ar apy ay 57 api lb; 

2} agin GC eatbCuirsir, aft ov Lo Ags agutCr.” 

When the Arul Kuligai jumps into the mouth, there 
will be a great Joti there; all the impurities will be washed 
off; the mind will be absorbed in Brahm, the Perfect; the 
whole universe as well as the end of all Vedas will be 
seen there; the body has become immortal and the Jivan- 
Mukta can play all the “Eight Siddhis”’. 

(Saint Konkana Nayanar Vadakaviam). 


141 


The Eight (8) Siddhis are: Anima, Mahima, Ilakima, 


Karima, Piratti, Pirakamiam, Easatwam and WVasiatwam 
(Jjemfior, wir, Qv@.wr, #fror4, 99755), Gorarhuin, FF Sg 
aulh, Aus saith ). 


45 


Anima:—Brahm as _ Panchatchara-Porul entering 
even the smallest living being as an atom. 

Mahima:—The power of being found in all the 36 
Tatwas from Earth to Sivam. 

Ilakima:—Being found as heavy as Meru (Mountain) 
but being very light when taken. 

Karima:—Being found as light as an atom but 
being found very heavy when taken. 


Piratti:—The power to move between the Tulakkan 
and the Sutchakkan i.e., between the Pathala- 
logam and Brzhmalogam. 


Pirakamiam:—The power to enter other bodies, live 
in the air, and bring within reach anything 
wanted. 


Easatwam:—The power to create, preserve, and 
destroy and make the planets such as sun etc. do 
His bidding. 

Vasiatwa-n:—Bringing under His command birds, 
animals, budas, men, etc. 


(8) “seraflCo eradevrib QaqRequorBa 


STS sTAVor H Jy a OLD Q) Hv CyB a 
LQaot eohaw sor cLpast oot a oat BU GHHM 
Gufs (py tgs gor aTipéonary ur.” 


If the whole universe is found within me and if I am 


found in everything in the universe and if | become One 
without beginning 2nd end, | have finished a great task. 


(Tatwa Raya Swamigal “ Padutorai”’ ut ® ge p). 


142 


This Verse of Tatwa Raya Swamigal’s contains the 
pith of the whole Jivanmukti Doctrine. If we take the 
outer universe as the Macrocosm, the Panchatchara Porul 
in every living being from the smallest worm to man, 
is the Microcosm (i.e.,) The whole outer universe and all 
the activities therein are contained in miniature in the 
small Micrccosm of Panchatchara-Porul. This is not visible 
to mortals. But when this small Microcosm of Panchat- 
chara Porul is changed into Joti or Light, the Jivanmukta 
is able to see the whole universe within him and himself 
in everything in the universe. This is the proof that a 
mortal has attained Divinity and has become Omni- 
present. 

After finding the presence of Brahm in everything, 
the Jivan-mukta should next realize the absence of Brahm 
in everything (except the Panchatchara Porul) because 
Brahm is ‘Yes’ and “No”. In order to accomplish 
this, the Jivan-mukta is asked to migrate into anything and 
everything he wants to investigate and thus satisfy himself 
of the absence of Brahm in everything which is aot “Arul’’. 
This he has the power to do, as this feat is one of the 
Eight Siddhis he was endowed with, when the Joti entered 
into him. 

(4) “Gr@ sy Fistor oroag Farr 

BT Nsh Ss CSTV £STFTFLD;— oT ox op 
aerasrs Fc ga Sar LOT LjOF, FCHFTIB 
SHSEDD #55 Fw §).” 

The bath of a Jnani or Jivanmukta is the Jnana- 
Nishta or full immersion in Arul. His observances are 
the taking of any Form he likes so that he may investigate 
for himself how he stood in his former different births. 
His puja is to eat whatever is given him. His pure 
Samadhi is to roam through the whole universe from where 


143 


he is, to verify that he asa Jnani or Jivan-mukta has no 
time and space and is Omnipresent. : 


(Sorubananda Swamigal—Sorooba Saram) 
REASON :— 
“BIW, BITE (LP Suviror a Don ps Bt grout QU GHLD L{ChL_oor 
HYOMUTHT UT DM, DBIL{L epiot sev ost.” 
Because the Soul who is identified with the different 
parts of the body such as nerves, nadis, etc. and is yet 
not those members but stands apart as Soul (the Puruda). 


In the same way Brahm who is everything, is not 
everything but only Brahm. As Immanent, He 
is everything. As Transcendent, He is nothing. 
As Uru (2) or Formed, He is Immanent. As 
Aru (-/@) or Form-less, He is Transcendent. 

ILLUSTRATION :— 

(Q) ‘ 9g& BQacrD I 2) slaIcdeTeT, BOT LTT BG 

AD QB THM YH Fujtb Hevov4rot—QusT gay Soha 

YS BI SDT SV, YEOH (phon SaG in} 

5 BAS)? gost IooC Ss ip,” ; 

Though Brahm is immanent in everything both 
animate and inanimate, He is neither different from them, 
(no bedam; @usAe%) nor same with them (no abedam; 
2@ugievé) nor same with and different from them (No 
bedabedam; CGug7GugsHe&), He is common to all these 
three dictums and stands in His adwaita capacity in relation 
to all. And though both animate and inanimate things 
are only His reflection and though both animate and 
inanimate things are His own property, you, a Jivan-Mukta 
who have become an expert in this Adwaita philosophy, 
should adore Brahm only in the place where “ Love 
flourishes”’ (i.e.) in Panchatchara-Porul where alone He 
can be found and not elsewhere, as others do; because you 
were all along His property and more so now. 


144 


> 


Brahm is “Love” and “Panchatchara-Porul” and 
this “ Thing’’ flourishes in a particular place in 
all living beings who have eyes. The Jivanmukta 
is enjoined to visit these beings whatever they 
may be and wherever they may be, so that He 
may be in constant touch with Brahm and the 
Saints who are found in all living beings from 
man to worm throughout the universe. 

(2)  Bverwre sj 5.57 Alor sours, GhT ear Lb 
Ader F Aes 950 Deru — Bloor Fx 
Gla sons sry sO sripCe 2.51 6 aEp lb; 

YO SST QBosiie Car ip.” 

Though the Jivan-mukta has been washed of Malam, 
Kanmam and Maya, yet during his stay in the world for 
exhausting his remaining Prarabda Kanmas he may be. 
drawn towards them on account of old habit (arr) and 
these will operate as obstacles to his fully realizing the 
Adwaita Philosophy or Adwaita Jnana. And in order to 
exhaust his Prarabda Kanmas quickly, he should associate 
with Saints or the True Devotees of Brahm by making 
them partake of the nectar which drips from the Joti 
within. In that case the Adwaita Jnana will attain its 
full growth sooner. 

(3) “sorter 9AM SDS STO STEVE Oeu 51800 

Gar Sor wos 50 Den puis) g1—(Lpanr earau@ oor 
BIG oor SIDE OF gin, CO FULD TOT Di 6 Goto 
ure AsTipma cei.’ 

It is the duty of the Jivanmukta to ever remember the 
great favour done to him by Brahm by showing him what 
““Self’’ is and by making him one with Himself. if he 
forgets Him and goes back to the worldly pleasures 
during his Jivan-mukti period, it will be an unpardonable 
sin. (The sins he committed during Bondage, out of igno- 


145 


rance will be forgiven but not this sin after Release). 
Further, though Brahm has made the Soul like Himself. 
the Soul is ever the property, both in Bondage and in 
Release, of Brahm and the Jivan-mukta should fully realize 
this and should not become proud of the attainment of 
Jivan-mukti and should do nothing to offend Brahm during 
his Jivanmukti period. He should have no will of his own 
and he should do only such things ashe is directed to do by 
Brahm. This will hasten his attainment of Videkamukti. 
-~ WHO ARE ENTITLED TO STUDY THIS TREATISE. 
“BaGuer ain gis sr? Aion eont Corea 

wehesrcpi } BOM UTES & GN —Aapovor -_M Lb 

op o3T_DILb Qacmn® poe eir@ Qa POT Hou ov 

Qa De gre Upioeiw Wora@.” 

Oh? you Disciple, who have been chanced from Jiva 
into Sivam (From Soul to Brahm), who is the end of both 
Vedanta and Siddhanta? Brahm gives Mukti to Vijjnana- 
kalars (Souls who are bound only by Anavamalas) 
by simply directing His Arul look towards them from their 
intelligence. In the case of Pralayakalars (who are bound 
by Anavam and Kanmas), He gives them Mukti by 
standing in front of them as Guru and by looking at them, 
touching them and speaking to them. These two classes 
of Souls need not study this Treatise. Sakalars (who are 
bound by Anavam, Kanmam and Maya) should study this 
Treatise but they cannot understand it unless they are 
taught by Brahm Himself from within or by Brahm, in the 
guise of a Jivan-Mukta. _ 

(a) The Sutra as translated from Sanskrit by Pandit 
Kuppusamy Raja:— 

“apa Sie Qurdh. OiFiccri ohsorter £& gS s Gor Uool_% Fi 
sats Car sSdruin Ra gous Sern uGsssar_ovasr. 
Qoaantg Rag rer Curgs@iwer gi Qs greIa enFeur il Ss A or 


us Bier Bs,” ae 


= 


146 


To attain Videka-Mukti let the Jivan Mukta associate 
with the Saints who are Siva Jnanis and enjoy their Disguise 
and: Residence of Brahm. — Understand that this is what is 
taught in Siva Jnana-Botham about Union with Brahm. 


(bd) Corresponding Sutra japivainada Siddhiyar:— 


“Qenanas srolldmract CeaQere mr 

Pnons op eFeor Corr Oe, Wei Q_, 
Lmsat sid GaSe. souma@ar devin 

yrerarCa Ost ip Ben me5A, H9-Ciuiriy., 
THERM Win apauleHrb orohSurieGevrth, 

WIT Oi BE CroavrG @ Qiwer A) pitores Ou S)s, 
Bwiseor Cpr <HYIg wir <9 Cir oer pI 

- P46 S0ar, Ragpraré Ors Buje Cura.” 


To overcome the old attractions which will stand as 
obstacles to his attainment of Videka-Mukti, the Jivan- 
Mukta will associate with the Lovers of Brahm or the Saints, 
enjoy their Disguise and their Residence as Brahm Him- 
self, will sing and dance through excessive joy, will think 
with reasonable pride and joy the great position he has 
gained over others and at the same time consider his 
lowliness when compared with the greatness of the Saints 
or True Lovers of Brahm, who are already immersed in 
His Foot (i.e.) who have already become Videka-Muktas. 
Thus the Jivan-Mukta will spend his time in this werld in 
all humility asthe Servant of the Servants of Brahm, till he* 
attains Videka-Mukti 


(c) Corresponding Sutra in Sivaprakasam, 


3a DILo eos Gerrans, Aion DAD s & 5S 
Sa@i_, bmareyo Soom Bm Qiu, Crus 
CsrEQmia 3555 WB, aos gor QoaOuTrOas, Cx Cr 
Sagar sT7HS TESO STATE OUI, gisoPCateg.” 


4 


147 


In order to prevent the approach of the harmful Maya 
and in order to be rid of the three Kanmas in the three 
ways (By the sacred look, giving up of the body and Jnana) 
and in order to be disencumbered of the Eternal Anava- 
Malam, the Jivan Muktas who are free trom Pasam, will 
find themselves fully immersed in Atul or Love, strength- 
ened in the conviction of Oneness with Brahm and will 
be enjoying Eternal Bliss without any cares, with Love 
within them. 


(d) The Truths enunciated by Saint Meikanda Deva 
Nayanar, in this Treatise, are not merely Speculative or 
Theoretical but Dogmatic and Authoritative, as he speaks 
from his own personal experience, as a Jivan-Mukta and 
not as an ordinary mortal. The quotations from other 
Jnana Sastras are also Authoritative, as emanating from 
similar Jivan-Muktas. 


148 


ast 2 CONCLUSION. | 
Brahm is a “‘Thing"’ or “Substance” (avg, Qurcper), 
If one knows this ““Thing” he will know everything. This 
“Thing” is the First Cause and the universe is its effect. 
Unless this “ Thing” is known, it is impossible to know 
“ Self "and “ Brahm,” it is imposible to understand the 
Jnana Sastras and it is imposible to haye Union with 
Brahm. 
(1) “srrantwrin am@urenrs sant 5 Sor 
STAunoTin Lidalin Baler HaTL_T GHD; 
PIM wT warden py) coms, 24 Sos 
QeGu STNwimsen GrevirTLy OWT GTS LITE 
al Tororaadg Fos sCaraM ; 7SSa 
SMTi som tb 2 Vol smoauso ASUS, 
GTR woT in Hew Marr, 2 vO VeTLD 
‘Ysorw pS a 2 Dei 37 OWoLLIOuT dhatran Los T 6 aor.”” 
_. If one finds the “Thing” which is the ‘Cause’, he has 
found the many things which are its effect, just as cne who 
finds the clay is able to know the many kinds of pots 
which are its effect. The Cause which is Permanent is 
Sirchat (@*3a), A Small Satand the whole universe is its 
effect. So if one knows this “Thing” which is “Perfection, ” 
he will understand the wh-le universe and its ramifications 
without any. mistake. This is the nature of that “Thing”. 


(Botha Ratnagaram; Gu7rgr3@ 20.5 in Perunthirattu) * 
e 


(2) “sre” or apd “Quran” a7 eS grit ey TOO BESTS”? BIT Go) MT 
‘“sren” er guid “Quran s” sarCr_irr, “GET or ETL iT eunrir. 
Those who do not find the “Thing” which is “T’, cannot 
find the ‘Jnana-Spirit’ or Jnana-Air and those who have 
found the “Thing” which is “I’’, will become Jnana-Spirit 
or Jnana-Air i.e: They will become Brahm. 


(Chidambara ‘Swamigal Vasitta Tirattu; arFi. ¢ S72: @) 


149 
The real meaning of “I” is Brahm who is the Universal 
“I", The Jiva or Soul who is the individual “I” 
has no right to call himself “‘I’’ till he attains 
Union with Brahm. 
(3) «6 oT LIGLIT het Some Bld Caiman, devi1jtD, 
@g Suto, sora oorwir®, 
auG Carer pin Ger HNCu, er erp 
(Cperor ST, © ons e omnia Daw, 
aswOourger Car 286 sur gseere 
QT eT KG 155 FST; HB 
GuowiGur7,xen srGer eiiGur her agmiomis 
Aorwacvred Cagfevr enwiignevd” 
If one knows the “‘ Thing” which is in his eye and 
.. which is the Cause of the appearance, stay and disappear- 
ance of every object in the universe and which is Eternal, 
Unspeakable and Impassible, then he will know everything; 
‘ as itisthis “True Thing’ which shines as different and 
multifarious objects and as there is nothing else besides. | 
(Tatwaraya Swamigal-Brahma-geeta; 91Ge@s) 


MAHAVAKYAS—W4rairé &uaascr 
OR 


THE FOUR GREAT MAXIMS OF THE VEDAS. 
1. Tatwamasi—That art thou. 
ssgni—.3g © enw. 
is 2. Twamtatasi— Thou art that. 
QsrhsS5A—E 35) Yow. — 
3. Twam Brahmasi—Thou art Byahin! 
QsrinGsrA—F tQaript Bou. 


4. Aham Brahmasmi—I am Brahm. 
eb Darinsyen8—ares Grind yes er. 


pp Cotsen Csawt Doagemps, 0...) 


