===== Internet Archive OCR: Spiritual Talks By Swami Brahmananda 1911 - Ramakrishna Mission_djvu.txt =====

: Digitization by oath Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


a 


= TIBRARY 


` Š oe vane Ashram 


ri Smic ait Gh eke Codlea 


—_— 


~ 


*. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


c 
7 Rii yw vik ura fasai) 


\ 


me 3 k s3 3 ae + ; PEZ i Ki q 
IS i eee Cae ap ae 5 aK 
ie te CE ES s Á 5 


SCO. In Pubic Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi ` 


2 


Digitization by eGangotri.and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


18 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


meditation the Mantra would rise from 
within, spontaneously, without any effort. 
(Rather excited) One must repeat the 
Mantra at least fifteen to twenty thousand 
times a day, then only one will get some 
results. One is sure to get it. One must 
practise first before one says that one is not 
progressing. But then one must practise 
Japa with a little attention. People don’t 
practise and simply say, ‘Why am I not 
progressing spiritually ??.”’ 

“The mind gets purified after hard 
Tapasyé. Without regular practice nothing 
can be attained. Both purity and impurity _ 
are in the mind. When a man sees defects 
in others his mind first gets polluted. What 
does he gain by finding faults in others? He 
hurts himself by that. From my childhood 
I could not find faults in others. That one 
thing I have never learnt in life. Forgive- ` 
ness itself is a great Tapasya. Remember 
one thing. If you want peace of mind then 
give up fault-finding. Tf you find fault at 
all find out your, own faults and short- 
comings. Learn to treat everyone as your 
own. No one is alien to you, the whole 
world is yours.” 

Disciple: ‘Mother, some’ devotees say, 
“The starting of Sevdsramas, hospitals, 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


. . > 
Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding bi NRE 


THE HOLY MOTHER PLAT 


syllable at the time of the initiation. The 
. spiritual powers flow from the Guru to the 
disciple or vice, versa. That is why after 
initiation of a disciple one gets ill, for one 
has to take the sins of the disciple. That 
is why Rakhal is reluctant to initiate people. 
He says that immediately after initiating 
“people he gets ill. But if the disciple is good 
` the Guru is benefited thereby. Some people 
get a sudden spiritual awakening immediate- 
ly after initiation, but that depends upon 

, one’s Samskaras (past tendencies). 
Disciple: ‘Well, Mother, these visions, 


a < 


are they subjective or objective?” P| 

Mother: “Everybody says that they are I. 
subjective, but I have seen visions with | 
these physical eyes. At Kamarpukur! I Er 
used to see a young girl with dishevelled hair | 


and a garland of beads round her neck always 

- keeping company with me wherever I went. 
_ It was only after I had practised severe / 
austerities at Belur in Nilamber Babu’s house iw 
that I ceased to see the vision any more. 
“Tf the mind is pure why will not one ~vet i 
concentration? Why will not one see Gad- io 
visions? After practising Japa forsor 
time one will find i 4 
i ys he sits fo “ 


312 
* Srij Ramakrishna’s Lab eae, : 
No.4 


yii 
; 5 i Shri Ma Anandemayee Ashra 


cco. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


THE HOLY MOTHER 19 


publication of books and magazines, keep- 
ing of accounts etc., ete. are not in keeping — 
with a Sadhu’s. ideal. Did Sri Ramakrishna 
ever do such things? It is a pity such works 
are thrust on young men who join the Order 
with a spirit of dispassion. Tf one is to do 
work, it must be work like Japa, meditation, 
ritualistic worship, ete. The other kinds of 
work are full of worldliness and turns one 
away from God.’ ” 

Mother: ‘Don’t give them any hearing. 
If one does not work what will one be doing 
all through the day? Is it possible for one 
to meditate day and night? Sri Rama- 
-rishna’s case was different. It is because 
rou are doing work of public utility that you 
wre getting your daily bread. Otherwise you 
vould have had to go begging from door to 
‘oor for your food and thereby your health 
‘ould have broken down. Moreover, who 
zer“ gives alms to SAdhus nowadays as of 
ore? Do not pay any heed to such 
-iticism; do as Sri Ramakrishna guides 

>u. 2 The Math will go on on these lines. 
nose who cannot accommodate themselves 

Ots will have to leave the organization. 

‘Mani Mallick, on his returning from a 

urimage, went to see the Master. The 
„Ster asked him, ‘Well, did you meet 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


t4 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


20 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Sadhus?? He replied, ‘Yes, but then they 
ask for money.’ The Master in reply 
said, ‘Well, how much money after all did 
they ask of you. Probably a pice or two 
for smoking hemp or tobacco. That much. 
You want best dishes, best suite of rooms, 
a well arranged bed, etc., ete., while he 
wants but a pice for smoking. Will he not 
have even that much. Will you people 
have the monopoly of all enjoyments and 
will he not have even a pice worth of 
smoke.’ ” 

Disciple: ‘‘What restrictions should one 
observe with respect to food ??? 

Mother: ‘The Master used to advise his 
devotees to refrain from Shraddha food,! for 
such food is detrimental to Bhakti. With 
the exception of that you can take any food 
after offering it to the Lord. Whatever you 
take offer it to the Lord first and then take 
it as His Prasid. If you do that your blood 
will be purified and if the blood is purified 
your mind will get purified.” 

Disciple: What part of the day is suited 
for meditation ?” 

Mother: “Early morning ‘and evening i.e. 
when night passes into day and day into 


* Food offered to the manes. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu ae MoE-IKS 
21 


THE HOLY MOTHER 


night; these are the best hours for medita- 
tion. One should meditate regularly at fixed 
hours for who knows when the auspicious 
moment will come, when one will have a 
vision of the Divine. Such a moment comes 
suddenly without any premonition. So one 
should keep to the routine however much 
one’s mind might be disturbed.” 

Disciple: ‘‘But then there are the worries 
of work and the question of health. Again 
the mind is sometimes calm and sometimes 
very ruffled.” 

Mother: ‘‘Of course, if one gets ill, one 
can’t help it; but if he is troubled too much 
by work on any particular day, then it is 
enough if he just remembers the Lord and 
makes his salutations to Him. As regards 
the mind getting ruffled now and then, it is 
quite natural, for it is within Nature and as 
such it has its own ebb and flow.” 


LIBRARY 


A m 
Shri Shri Ma ¢nzedcomayee Ashra 


BANARAS 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 
: 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


C60. In Public Domain. Sri Sri eB DenUAMA yee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


SPIRITUAL TALKS 
BY SWAMI BRAHMANANDA © 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


' 
l 
i 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


|3 A 


SPIRITUAL TALKS 


By Swami Brahmananda 


22nd May, 1911. 


Eight o’clock at night. The disciple and 
L. were sitting before Swami Brahmananda 
at Balaram Bose’s at Baghbazar in Calcutta. 

L. said to the Swami: ‘‘Maharaj, I have 
been thinking of asking you a question for 
some time. Is it true that you saw some 
spirits in the Udbodhan Office a few days 
before the passing away of Swami P. pe 

Swami: ‘Yes, I did. I sometimes see 
spirits. One day from upstairs I saw two 
very tall and robust figures standing near the 
western staircase. They looked man-like, but 
there was a weird and bizarre aspect about 
them. They disappeared very soon; but the 
sight made me anxious. I enquired if any 
one had seen there a ghost before. No, they 
had not. I saw such spirits once or twice 
again’; and I felt that some evil was imminent. 
I felt very sad at heart. A few days after 
P. passed away. 

“I saw a spirit in this house also, near the 
yonder stairs. I felt that this presaged evil. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


26 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


I went away to the Math. A few days after, 
S.’s wife died.” 

Disciple: ‘I am told you saw a spirit also 
at Dacca.” 

Swami: “Yes, in that house where we 
stayed. On the second day of our arrival 
there, I saw it, looking like a Mussulman, 
standing at the door. This made me sad, and 
I thought I would leave the house if I saw it 
again. But it did not appear any more. 
Much singing of the Holy Names went on 
there. That is perhaps why it fled. Evil 
spirits cannot stand the name of God.” 

Disciple: ‘It was this spirit perhaps 
which prompted S.’s son to commit suicide. 
There was no apparent reason for his action. 
But the boy was feeble-minded, and probably 
could not stand the spirit’s persuasions. 

“I have heard of a family in which a lady 
committed suicide by hanging herself from 
the branch of a mango tree. Another lady, 
after that, began to gaze at the tree and one 
day suddenly committed suicide by hanging 
herself from that very tree. Another girl also 
began to gaze at the tree in a similar way. 
A strict watch was kept over her. She was 
asked why she gazed at the tree. She said : 
‘Someone from the yonder branch has been 
calling me to come and hang myself.’ The 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 27 


tree was at once cut down; and there was no 
further trouble.” 

L.: ‘Maharaj, have you seen any more 
of them?” 

Swami: ‘I have seen both good and evil 
spirits. While I was at Dakshineswar with 
the Master, a man at the Temple fell very 
ill. There was no one to look after him, so 
I nursed him for a few days. One night as 
I was sitting near him, his suffering became 
intense. I did not know how to mitigate his 
suffering. So I thought that I would repeat - 
the Lord’s name for his relief. After I had 
made Japa for some time, a kind of slumber 
fell upon me and I saw a vision. A girl 
about twelve years old came and stood near 
me. Lasked her: ‘Will he get cured?? She 
nodded and replied, ‘Yes’ and vanished. 
From the very next day, the patient began 
to recover. 

“J also saw a good spirit while I was living 
at Brindaban. The house where I lived was 
in a lane which was called the ‘Ghost Lane.’ 
Hari Maharaj (Swami Turiyananda) occupied 
the next room to mine. It was my habit in 
those days to get up at midnight and practise 
Japa. I would often notice the spirit of a 
Vaishnava standing by me telling his beads. 
I saw him almost every night and was not 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


ee 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


28 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


afraid. One night, being very tired, I was 
sleeping heavily. Suddenly someone gave 
me such a push that I was thrown off my 
bed; and I heard someone saying: ‘Get up. 
It is already twelve. Won’t you make Japa?’ 
The push roused me. I heard the temple- 
music indicating midnight play. If I were 
not awakened in this fashion, I could not 
have got up at twelve that night. 

“I had a beautiful vision also at Benares. 
They were singing the Râm-nâm in the main 
hall of the Sevâsrama. The singing of the 
first invocations had just begun when I saw an 
old man enter slowly and sit by the picture 
of Sri Rama. I had never seen him before, 
so I looked at him twice or thrice; and a few 
moments after I saw him no more. I then 
remembered that Mahavir (Hanuman) comes 
wherever the name of Rama is sung. Prob- 
ably it was he that came. Tulsidds also had 
a similar vision.” 

Disciple: ‘What was that, Maharaj?” 

Swami: “‘Tulsidâs used to pour water 
every day at the foot of a tree in which 
lived a spirit. Highly pleased, it appeared 
before Tulsidis one day and said: ‘I 
am very pleased with you. Tell me what 

you want.” He said: ‘I want only the 
vision of Rama. Can you tell me how I can 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 29 


get it? It replied: ‘It is not for me to get 
you that vision. But I may give you a 
suggestion. There is a place in Benares 
where the Ramayana is read every day. 
Mahavir attends the reading regularly. 
Take refuge in him, he can help you in 
having the vision of Rima.’ ‘But how shall 
I recognize him?’ ‘He arrives first, in the 
guise of an old Brahmana, sits in a particular 
corner and is the last to leave.’ 

‘Tulsidâs accordingly went to the place and 
saw Mahavir come and sit as indicated by 
the spirit. When Mahavir was about to 
leave, Tulsidâs clasped him by the feet and 
said: ‘I have recognized you. Graciously 
tell me where I can get the vision of Rima.’ 
After much entreaty Hanumin said: ‘Go to 
Chitrakut mountain. There you will see 
him.’ : 

‘“Tulsidâs went to Chitrakut and one night, 
in deep forest, he heard the-sound of music 
coming from afar. He enquired about it and 
was told that it was the singing of Ramlila. 
He went and found the place and saw Rama, 
Sita and others sitting (he thought they were 
actors) and the singing of Ramlilé going on. 
When he came back, he told others how he 
had enjoyed the singing of Ramlilé on the 
mouritain-top. They said: ‘Are you mad? 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


30 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


There is no habitation there. It is deep 
wilderness. How can there be Ramlila 
there?? ‘Tulsidis understood. He had 
actually seen Rama !’’ 

The Disciple bowed at the feet of the 
Swami and left. . 


25th April, 1913. 

The disciple was able with some difñculty 
to meet the Swami alone at the Belur Math 
to ask him some personal questions. He 
said: “Maharaj, I am finding it impossible 
to calm the mind.” 

Swami: ‘Practise a little meditation and 
Japa every day. Never stop for a single day. 
The mind is like a restless child, it wants to 
run away. You must bring it back again and 
again and apply it to the meditation on the 
Lord. Go on this way for two or three years, 
and then an inexpressible joy will fill your 
mind. Meditation and Japa appear dry in 
the beginning. But still you must engage 
the mind in the contemplation of the Deity, 
like swallowing a bitter medicine. Slowly 
spiritual joy will grow in you. People work 

so hard to pass examinations! To realize 

God is even easier than that. Only let them 

call on Him with a calm cheerful heart.” 
Disciple: ‘Sir, your words fill me with 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


„Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 81 


hope. But: sometimes I feel very much cast 
down; and I think that all my spiritual prac- 
tices must be in vain since they have brought 
me no higher experience.” 

Swami: “No, no, there is nothing to 
despair of. Work must have its effect. If 
you go on repeating His name, be it whole- 
heartedly or half-heartedly, it must produce 
results. Practise with diligence. Practise 
regularly for some time—you will have peace 
and joy. Meditation gives not only mental 
peace but also physical health—you will 
have less of disease. So one must practise 
meditation even for physical improvement.” 

Disciple: ‘‘Mahardj, is it necessary to 
receive a Mantra from a Guru? Cannot 
one practise wholeheartedly according to one’s 
spiritual mood ?”’ 

wami: “Initiation into a Mantra helps 
‘concentration of mind. Otherwise your 
mind will change and fluctuate : today you 
will like the Kali-form, tomorrow the Hari- 
form and next day perhaps the formless 
aspect of God. And thus your mind will not 
be concentrated upon one. . - ate 

In the evening the Swami spoke about a 
lady who had established a girls’ school in 
Calcutta. She was fastidious in certain 
respects and did not trust anyone and was 


| CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
82 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


easily irritable. No servant stayed with her 
long and the few men who had been assisting 
her were leaving her one by one, The Swami 
said: ‘‘This is nothing but a mania. If one 
wants to do everything oneself, one loses one’s 
entire energy in trifling details, and cannot 
maintain a cool head in the essentials. Karma. 
Yoga is very difficult. One must have a cool 
brain, and very much of renunciation and dis- 
passionateness. Otherwise work drags one 
down. One becomes truly entitled to work 
only after God-realization. It is very difficult 
to work with women. They somehow want 
to dominate over:-you.”’ 


30th April. 

It was afternoon at the Belur Monastery. 
The disciple asked the Swami: ‘‘Mahar4j, 
I have been asked to repeat the name 
‘of the Lord and meditate on Him at the 
same time. But I cannot meditate at all. 
And this often makes me extremely dejected. 
I have found that I can meditate in three 
different ways: first, I can concentrate my 
mind on some particular part of the object of 
meditation—on His feet, eyes, or face; 
secondly, I can concentrate on Him part by 
part, from His feet to head and head to feet, 
and repeat the process several times; and 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 
= ir’ 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 338 


thirdly, I can simply meditate on the whole 
of Him as sitting on the lotus of my heart. 
As regards the third process, I find that I 
cannot visualize His image clearly, but only 
shadow-like. Nevertheless the feeling that 
He is sitting in my heart gives me great joy. 
Kindly tell me which is the most effective 
among these three processes.” 

Swami: ‘It is better you put these ques- 
tions to your Guru. It may be my answers 
will not be identical with hers. She will soon 
come to Calcutta. ... It is natural that 
you feel depressed now and then. I also 
once felt like that while I was at Dakshi- © 
neswar. I was very young then, and -the 
Master was about fifty years old. Naturally 
I could not always speak out all I felt-to him.. 
One day I was meditating in the Kali temple.. 


I could not concentrate my’mind. This made ~ f 


me very sad. I said to myself: ‘I have 
been living here so long, yet I have achieved: 
little. What shall I be doing here then? 
Very well, I shall not tell anything to the: 
Master. I shall wait two or three days more.. 
If I find that my condition has not changed’ 
by then, I shall return home. There I shall! 
have many things with which to occupy my” 
mind.2 So I thought and returned to 
the Master’s room. The Master was then 
3 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi ` 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


84 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


walking in the verandah. On seeing me he 
entered his room. It was our custom to 
salute him after returning from the Kali 
temple and then take a spare breakfast. 
Accordingly I saluted him. But as I stood 
up he said: ‘As you returned from the 
shrine, I found that your mind was as it 
were enmeshed.’ I understood that he knew 
all. So I said: ‘You know everything. 
Yes, my mind has become really like that.’ 
He then wrote something on my tongue. And 
at once all my previous feelings vanished from 
my mind and I was overwhelmed with an 
inexpressible joy. f 

“So long as I lived with him, I used to have 

spontaneous recollection and contemplation 
of God. An ecstatic joy used to fill me 
always. That is why one requires a powerful 
Guru—one who has realized God. The Guru 
and disciple should test each other for a long 
time before the Guru initiates the disciple. 
Otherwise there may be regrets afterwards. 
For this is no passing relationship. 

“Tf any one wants to be my disciple, I at 
first send him away. If he persists, I give 
him a Holy Name and ask him to repeat that 
Name one thousand times every day for one 
year. I have found that many are frightened 
away even by this prescription. ... One 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 35 


has to work hard in initiating a disciple. 
First of all, one must find out the real Mantra 
and Ishta of the disciple; and that is a hard 
task. One day, a man came to be initiated by 
me. I thought that if I could know his Ishta 
in meditation, I would initiate him, otherwise 
not. So [I satin meditation. After an hour’s 
meditation, an image arose in my mind. The 
disciple afterwards said that that indeed was 
the Divine form he liked best. . . . Nowadays 
most men do not do anything after initiation. 
It is not good to initiate one and all indis- 
criminately. 

“Go on practising hard. At first spiritual 
practice appears to be drudgery—like learning 
the alphabet. By and by you will have 
peace. For two or three years I do not 
listen, if any one complains that he has not 
attained anything by initiation. After that 
he himself acknowledges that he is progres- 
sing. ‘There is nothing to be worried about. 
Practise for two or three years. Then you 
will see for yourself.” 


1The psychic and psychological development 
of a man makes the worship of a particular aspect 
of the Divinity most suitable for his spiritual 
growth. God in that aspect is his Ishta. Every 
such aspect has a corresponding mystic formula. 
That is the Mantra. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
36 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


4th May. 


The Swami was speaking with several 
monks and devotees at the Belur Math. K., 
a lawyer, asked the Swami several questions 
relating to his Sadhané. The Swami said in 
reply : 

“Tt is no use hurrying oneself. Until the 
right time comes, it is of little avail. The 
condition of mind before the favourable time 
arrives, is really painful. The mind is swept 
alternately by hope and despair, smiles and 
tears. But if you can secure an efficient 
spiritual guide, he may, by means of certain 
spiritual processes, push your mind above this 
level. You may not, however, be able to 
stand it, if you are pushed up untimely and 
too high ; for example, take the case of Mathur 
Babu. Oh, what superhuman powers did he 
(the Master) not possess! At that time we 
thought that it was merely a peculiar power 
with him, but could never conceive the nature 
of it. Now we feel what a wonderful power 
that was. One day I said to him: ‘Sir, I 
cannot get rid of lust. What shall I do?’ 
He touched me in the region of the heart, 

muttering certain indistinct words. All lust 
vanished from me for ever! I have never 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 37 


felt its existence since then. Do you feel 
the wonder of it? 

“Prânâyâma and other Yogic practices are 
not suitable to the present times and condi- 
tions. One must observe complete Brahma- 
charya in order to practise them. One’s food 
must be absolutely pure, Sattvika, and one 
must be guided by an expert teacher. Medi- 
tation, Dhyana, is at first nothing but strug- 
gling with the mind, bringing it again and 
again from its flights to the sacred feet of the 
Lord. This very soon heats the brain. There- 
fore, in the beginning one must not exert the 
brain too much, or hold the breath too long. 
When one gets real meditation, one can easily 
continue for three or four hours; then one will 
feel extremely refreshed in body and mind 
after meditation as after a sound, deep sleep. 

“The mind is intimately related to the 
body. Ifthe stomach is upset, you can never 
have good meditation. Hence it is that 
there arc so many restrictions about food. 
The stomach should be filled half with food 
and a quarter with water, the other quarter 
being left vacant for passage of air. 

“Do not distress the mind by thinking of 
sins. For however great a sin might be, it is 
great only in the eyes of men and not of God. 
His one glance can scatter off the sins of 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


38 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


millions of births. But of course there is the 
effect of Karma. If you do any wrong action, 
you must suffer from disquiet of mind and 
other consequences. 

“The spiritual practices of the Vaishnavas 
are nice. They contemplate on the Lila of 
Sri Krishna from morning till night. This 
relieves monotony. But I have noticed that 
dressing and living like a woman, in the spirit 
of a lady-friend of Sri Radha, often leads to 
a fall.” 


Middle of May. 


After morning meditation, the Swami 
was sitting in his room at the Belur Math. 
Some monks and the disciple were seated 
before him on the floor. The Swami said: 
“Ask me whatever you want to know.” 

Disciple: ‘‘Maharij, how can one be 
devoted to the Lord?” 

Swami: ‘‘By association with devotees. 
You must observe their ways and follow the 
same in your life. You must put questions 
to them and get your doubts solved. 
Merely listening to what they say of their 
own accord will not do. You must practise 
continence (Brahmacharya) and Sâdhanâ, 
otherwise spiritual instructions will not 

fructify in your life. Merely by reading the 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 89 


scriptures, you cannot grasp their true mean- 
ing. Read Sri Sri Rémakrishna Kathémrita 
(The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna) and similar 
other books and try to understand their 
meaning. The more you will read, the newer 
and deeper will be the import you will dis- 
cover in them. The Sâdhaka (aspirant) 
understands one way by hearing of God from 
others, but differently by practising Sadhana, 
and still more differently by realizing God. 
Nag Mâhâsâya (Durga Charan Nag, a disciple 
of Sri Ramakrishna) said beautifully : ‘What 
is the use of rowing if the boat is anchored ?? 
This rare human birth is useless if you do not 
try to realize the Lord. Sankara says that 
the human birth, the desire for liberation 
and the shelter of a sage—these three only 
a very fortunate few have. There was 
another saying of Nag Mahasaya : ‘It is easy 
to attain fame, but very difficult to give it 
up. He who can renounce it is a real 
Sadhu.’ ” 

A Devotee: ‘‘How can one conquer lust??? 

Swami: ‘By repeating His name and by 
contemplating on Him. Do you under- 
stand ?”’ 

Devotee: ‘“‘But I cannot conquer it in 
any way.” 

Swami: “Then marry. Always reason. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


40 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Others accomplish many things, why not 
you? You must. Call on Him in what- 
ever ways you like—meditate on Him, repeat 
His name, or sing His praise. Do not doubt, 
do not lose self-confidence.”’ 

Disciple: ‘“The Master used to say that 
one should go into solitude or to a quiet 
corner and cry unto the Lord. Which should 
we emphasize—going into solitude or associat- 
ing with the devotees ?” 

Swami: ‘If you meditate in solitude, the 
mind will easily go inwards, it will be less 
disturbed by foreign thoughts. But you 
must always and everywhere associate with 
the devotees. Until you have advanced a 
little, you cannot live in perfect solitude. 
Many have gone mad by seeking absolute 
solitude prematurely. As I said the other 
day, one cannot be in complete solitude until 
the mind is lost in Samadhi and God. 
One benefit of the society of Sâdhus is 
that you can observe their character. You 
cannot be as impressed by reading books as 

by observing Sâdhus. Adhar Ch. Sen (a 
disciple of Sri Ramakrishna) often used to 
come to the Master in company with a school 
sub-inspector. The latter gentleman often 
used to have a kind of trance. One day 
shortly after they had arrived, the Master 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 41 


went into Samadhi. His face was lit up with 
a divine smile, as if he could not contain the 
great joy within him. On seeing this, Adhar 
Babu said to his companion: ‘By seeing 
your trance, I conceived a disgust for it—it 
seemed to suggest a great suffering within 
you. Can the Divine ecstasy ever cause 
pain? The blissful ecstasy of the Master has 
opened my eyes. I would have found it 
impossible to come here. any more, if his 
trance also had been like yours.’ 

«A man once visited Trailinga Swami. 
While returning, he thought that since the 
Swami did not speak, it was no use going to 
him. Nevertheless he paid him another visit 
and sat near him. The Swami suddenly 
began to cry piteously. Then suddenly again 
he began to laugh ecstatically. On seeing 
this, the man thought: ‘Oh, what I have 
learnt today I could not have gathered even 
from a thousand books. When I shall be as 
restless for God as when the Swami cried, I 
shall see Him. And when He will shower 
His grace on me, I shall enjoy as much bliss 
as the Swami did when he laughed.’ ” 

A Devotee: ‘The other day you said that 
it was no use hurrying oneself, that one must 
wait for the proper hour. Should we then 
give up yearning for the Lord?” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


42 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


wami: ‘I may have said so in another 
connection. What I meant by ‘hurrying 
oneself? was a temporary fit of restlessness, 
erying and other outward manifestations. 
Such fits pass off in a few days, and then the 
man is lost in despair and lethargy and gives 
up all search for God. As for instance the 
ease of G. Once he practised much Sadhana. 
But now he has conceived the idea of study- 
ing Sanskrit grammar and becoming a 
scholar. Perhaps he wants to have fame by 
talking learned things.” 

Disciple: ‘*The Master used to say that 
if we dig a well at different places, we 
cannot get water.” 

Swami: “Yes, it is so. One must stick 
on. If the restlessness is due to real love for 
God, even if one does not realize God, one 
cannot forget Him. Even if he does not see 
God for millions of lives, he will still steadily 
call on Him. Swamiji (Swami Vivekananda) 
has said, ‘A little awakening of the Kundalini 
is dangerous.’ Unless the Kundalini rises to 
the higher planes, lust, anger, and other low 
passions become very powerful. That is why 
the Vaishnava Sâdhanâs as a lover or friend 
are dangerous. Constantly dwelling on the 
love-relations between Sri Krishna and Sri 

Radha, they cannot control their lust and 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 43 


are degraded. I know of one who practised 
this way for a long time, but afterwards 
married a bad woman. One, therefore, 
should not in the beginning study books on 
Sri Krishna’s love-relations with the Gopis. 

“Ts it easy to meditate? If you happen to 
eat a little too much, you cannot concentrate 
your mind. Meditation is possible, if you 
can keep lust, anger, and all other passions 
under control. If any of them grows strong, 
you cannot have meditation. It is easy to 
buy two pice worth of cow-dung cakes and 
ignite and sit within them.' But real 
Tapasya is to restrain the passions and not 
give vent to them. This indeed is the 
highest Tapasyi. Do not be cast down if 
bad thoughts occasionally arise in your mind. 
Brush them aside.” 


27th May. 
The disciple was listening to the Swami 
at the Belur Math. The Swami said : 


«Oh, how deep was the Master’s devotion 
to truth! If he happened to say that he 


1 This is a kind of austerity called Panchatapa. 
Four fires are burnt in four corners—sometimes 
a complete circle of fire is also made—and one sits 
in the centre meditating or repeating Mantras, 
while the sun burns overhead. Thus passes the 
whole day. This practice is sometimes continued 
for days together. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


44 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


would not eat any more, he could not, even 
if he was hungry. Once he said that he 

- would go to Jadu Mallik’s, but afterwards 
forgot about it. I also did not remind him. 
At night after supper he remembered the 
appointment. It was then quite late in the 
night, but he must go. I accompanied him 
with a lantern in hand. When we reached 
the house, we found it closed and all asleep. 
The Master then pushed back the doors of 
the parlour a little and placed his foot once 
inside the room and came away. 

“He could see the inside of a man by merely 
looking at his face as though he was looking 
through a glass pane. Whenever a visitor 
came he would look him over from head to 
foot, and he would understand all. And 
then he would answer his questions. 

“Even great saints sometimes cannot give 
up egoism. Even Bhaskarananda Swami (of 
Benares) showed me his photograph and said : 
‘See, my picture is being sold!’ But the 
Master! When Keshab Sen wrote about him 
in his paper, he forbade him. 

“One day the son of a public woman came 
to Dakshineswar. The Master was sleeping 
in his room. The man entered and touched 
his feet. The Master at once started up, as 
if some one had thrown fire on him. He 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 45 


said: ‘Tell me frankly all the sins that you 
have committed. If you cannot, go to the 
Ganges and speak them out loudly. You will 
be freed from them.’ But the man was ill- 
fated, he could not.” 


28th May. 

At night the Swami, Ramlal (a nephew of 
Sri Ramakrishna), and a few devotees were 
sitting on the upper verandah of the main 
building of the Belur Monastery. 

Ramlal: ‘The other day T. of Belgharia 
(a prominent householder disciple of the 
Master) came to Dakshineswar. He is now 
employed at Sealdah. He has married a 
second wife and has many children. He 
seems to be much entangled. He has lost 
his former beautiful appearance.” 

Swami: ‘What a pure mind he had in 
those days! Even now he has it. The 
Master selected his men with great care. 
N. possessed such a high spiritual state, 
but the Master said: ‘If that be so, 
why does not his cloth glide off his waist ?” 
When he learnt that N. had ten thousand 
rupees deposited in a bank, he remarked : 
‘That is why it is so. He who is calculating 
would be lost.’ ” j 

A Devotee: “Maharaj, it is all so very 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


46 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


mysterious! N. and T. were such advanced 
souls, and they were also blessed by the 
Master, yet they went wrong. Some believe 
that whoever has seen the Master is saved. 
Ram Babu also held that view.?? 

Swami: ‘His case was exceptional. He 
had such tremendous faith ! And towards 
the end, he renounced everything in pursuit 
of his spiritual mood. Others only profess 
faith, but they do not possess it... . 

“And merely seeing a great soul won’t do. 
One must meditate and assimilate, one must 
have discrimination and dispassion. . . 

“Ah, how joyfully we lived with the Master 
at Dakshineswar! Sometimes he would con- 
vulse us with side-splitting laughter by his 
witty talks. What we now cannot realize 
by meditation, we then attained auto- 
matically. If My mind went wrong by even 
a little, he would understand it from my 
appearance; and he would pass his hand over 
my chest and set it right. And how free I 
was with him! One day I was rubbing 
oil on his body in the semi-circular western 
porch. For some reason I got angry with 
him. I threw away the bottle of oil and 
strode off with the intention of never return- 
ing to him. I went out of the Temple and 
came near Jadu Mallik’s garden-house. And 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI BRAHMANANDA - ~ 47 


then I could not proceed further. I sat 
down. Meanwhile he had sent Ramlal to 
call me back. When I came, he said: ‘Did 
you see? Could you go? .. ? 

“Once I did a wrong thing and became 
extremely penitent. I went to confess it to 
him. He asked me to follow him with his 
water-jug. While returning, he said: ‘You 
did this yesterday? Never do so any more.’ 
I was dumb with wonder. How could he 
know? 

“Another day, when I returned from 
Calcutta, he said: ‘Why can I not look 
at you? Have you done anything wrong?’ 
‘No,’ I replied—I had forgotten that I had 
told a fib. ‘Did you tell any lie?’ he asked 
me. Then I remembered I had.” 


ist June. 


It was a Sunday afternoon at the Belur 
Math. Many devotees were sitting before 
the Swami. One of them asked: ‘“‘Mahârâj, 
how can one have yearning for the Lord?” 

Swami: “You must first purify your 
mind by keeping company with the Sâdhus 
and devotees and receiving instructions from 
your Guru. Next you must practise hard 
Sadhand. Only then would you feel an 
yearning for God. One requires a teacher 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


48 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


even when one wants to learn stealing. And 
this sublime Brahma-Vidyé—Knowledge of 
Brahman—does it not require a teacher to. 
acquire it?” 

Thus the Swami spoke for a time and 
then said: “When you go to a Sadhu, 
you must ask him questions. Ask me 
whatever you want to know.” 

Devotee: ‘How can one have peace ?” 

Swami: “By loving God, and by having 
true faith in Him. You cannot have it at 
the very beginning. At first there must be 
great restlessness; your heart will be full 
of anguish at not having yet realized the 
Lord. But it is all right; the more thirsty 
you are, the better you will relish water. 
You must create restlessness, if there is 
none. When men no longer find any joy in 
the world, they feel restless and then they 
are attracted towards God.” 

Devotee: “How can one have love for 
God?” 

Swami: “By trying to realize Him through 
singing His name and praise and praying 
to Him. Thus have the saints realized Him.” 

Devotee: “Can I not realize God, while 
in the world?” 

Swami: ‘Does anyone live outside the 
world ?” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


=e 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 49 


Devotee: ‘I mean, while living with one’s 
family.” 

Swami: ‘Say that. Yes, you can. But 
with difficulty.” 

Devotee: ‘‘May one renounce the world 
when one feels Vairâgya?” 

Swami: ‘Yes.’ He ought to. And that 
indeed is true Vairdgya, this dispassionateness 
for all worldly things. When once you have 
it, it never dies; on the other hand, it grows, 
like fire. After one has once come out of 
the world, one never wants to go back to 
it.” 

Devotee: “Can I not do without a 
Guru?” 

Swami: “I think not. No, you can 
never do without him. Who is the Guru? 
He who points out the path to your Ishta 
(Chosen Deity) by, say, giving you a fixed 
Name to repeat. You may have many 
Upagurus, subsidiary teachers. The real 
Guru will tell you which Sâdhanâ to practise, 
and he will advise you to keep the company 
of devotees. Formerly, it was customary for 
the disciple to live in the house of his Guru, 
so that the Guru could watch over the dis- 
ciple and the disciple could serve the Guru, 
and if the disciple went wrong, the Guru 
could bring him back to the right path. 

4 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


50 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Therefore, you should never make one your 
Guru, unless he is a knower of Brahman, or 
very highly advanced in spirituality.” 

Devotee: ‘But how am I to know that 
a person is such?” 

Swami: ‘You will know if you live with 
him for some time. The Guru also can then 
observe you. If you have much hankering 
after the world, which it would be difficult to 
check, he must not initiate you, but send 
you back. If you want to make anyone your 
Guru, live near him for some time and watch 
his ways. The system of hereditary Gurus 
has this advantage that the Guru and the 
disciple both know each other’s family history 
well. 
` “Practice is the means of concentrating 
the mind. . Pranayama, breath-control, is 
also one of the means. But it is not safe 
for a householder—if one is not continent, one 
falls ill; and one must have nutritious food, 
a fine place, and pure air. In order to have 
meditation and concentration, you must 
practise in solitude; the more you will try, 
the more you will achieve. Wherever you 
find conditions favourable, say, if there is 
a fine scenery, sit down to meditate. Seek 

Him, and renounce Kamini-Kanchana, lust 
and gold. But first renounce internally. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Ta 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 5l 


These are evanescent. Take your mind off 
them. 

“God is with form and is also formless and 
He is also above form and formlessness. 
What does Vedânta mean by saying that 
Brahman is true and the world false? That 
the world as we see it now is false. The 
world vanishes in Samadhi, but you feel that 
you are experiencing a great joy. The 
Rishis experienced that absolute joy. What 
exists in Samadhi cannot be explained. 
Then there is no longer ‘I? or ‘thou’ but 
only Sachchidananda—Existence-Knowledge- 
Bliss Absolute. 

“If you ask me: What is the proof of 
God? I say that the Sâdhus have stated 
that they have realized God and they have 
also pointed out the way to His realization. 
The Master used to say: ‘Merely saying 
“hemp,” “hemp” will not intoxicate you. 
You must procure hemp, prepare it and take 
it, and then wait a little. Only then would 
you feel the intoxication. Even so merely 
saying ‘‘God,”? “God” will not make you 
realize Him. You must practise Sâdhanâ 
and then wait a little.’ ” 

Devotee: ‘‘While making Japa (repetition 
of the name of God), I sometimes forget to 
do so. Why is this?” 


` CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


52 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


ra 


Swami: ‘‘Patanjali has said that this is 
an obstruction to Yoga. To meditate is to 
think and become conscious of Him. When 
meditation will be intense, when God will 
actually reveal Himself, you will have 
Samadhi. If you attain Samadhi, the joy 
of it will persist for a long time, some say 
for all times. 

“Sri Chaitanya sent one of his disciples to 
Rai Ramananda. The disciple found him 
rolling in luxury. But as soon as the name 
of the Lord was uttered, love welled forth 
from his heart like a fountain. It is said that 
unless one is a Sadhu one cannot know a 
Sadhu, just as a petty brinjal-seller cannot 
know the value of a diamond. If anyone 
realizes a high spiritual state through 
Sadhana, he himself can know it. 

“During meditation think that desires for 
worldly things are worthless. This will leave 
a good impression on the mind. As you 
drive away the desires from your mind, good 
thoughts and feelings will come up. If you 
see lights or hear supernatural sounds during 
meditation, know that you are going on 
rightly. But do not attach any importance 
to these lights and sounds, though they are 

good signs. While meditating in a solitary 
place, you may sometimes hear the sound Om 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi ` 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI BRAHMANANDA 53 


or the ringing of bells or natural sounds from 
afar. 

“If Sankara prayed to the Divine Mother 
saying: ‘Thou art my refuge, O Mother!’ 


ai 

oF it was only as an example for the men of 
the world—to teach them that God can be 
realized through every means.” 

3 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


pe 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SPIRITUAL TALKS 
BY SWAMI PREMANANDA 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


| 
j 


ae CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


Swami Premananda 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


(02010) 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Sy Swami Premananda 


29712. 


Swami Premananda, one of the foremost 
disciples of Sri Ramakrishna, was in chatge 
oi the Belur Monastery. The Swami was 

very attractive personality and seemed 
almost to-exhale purity and love. 

ter Lie noonday meal, he began to speak 
1ustasticaily of Sri Ramakrishna to the 
uosciibled monks and devotees. 

wami: “Seeing that the Master liked 
emon much, Youin (Swami Yogananda) used 
tn bring him a lemon every day. One day the 
Master said to him: ‘Wherefrom did you 
get the lemon yesterday? I could nui take 
it.’ Yogin knew that the Master could not 
take things brought from evil and impure 
persons. But he had brought the lemon 
from the same plant from which he had 
bronght the other lemons. Why was it, 
then, that the Master could not take i 
Yogin felt much perturbed and began to 


ra 


look out for the canse. After a careful — 
enquiry he came tò knew that charis: 
` % 

ne a, a 

* ai 

ang 

sc Rey 

eS 


In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


tami Premananda 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SPIRITUAL TALKS 
By Swami Premananda 


8th May, 1912. 


Swami Premananda, one of the foremost 
disciples of Sri Ramakrishna, was in charge 
of the Belur Monastery. The Swami was 
a very attractive personality and seemed 
almost to exhale purity and love. 

After the noonday meal, he began to speak 
enthusiastically of Sri Ramakrishna to the 
assembled monks and devotees. 

Swami: ‘“‘Seeing that the Master liked 
lemon much, Yogin (Swami Yogananda) used 
to bring him a lemon every day. One day the 
Master said to him: ‘Wherefrom did you 
get the lemon yesterday? I could not take 
it.” Yogin knew that the Master could not 
take things brought from evil and impure 
persons. But he had brought the lemon 
from the same plant from which he had 
brought the other lemons. Why was it, 
then, that the Master could not take it? 
Yogin felt much perturbed and began to 
look out for the cause. After a careful 
enquiry he came to know that the orchard 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


58 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


from which he used to bring the fruits had 
changed hands on the day previous to 
the incident—the lease had expired. He 
received permission to get the fruits from 
the former lessee. On that particular day, 
therefore, that permission did not hold, and 
it was really a theft, though unconscious. 
“The Master could see the very mind of 
the donor in the things given him. He 
could not take any food which was conta- 
minated by the least sin. How wonderful 
was his purity! He could not tolerate the 
touch and approach of any impurity. There- 
fore, if you want to realize him, you must 
make your heart absolutely pure. All the 
passions will have to be conquered. Whoever 
will come here must become an ideal man. 
You must remember that you are his children. 
But do not let this make you proud. Pride 
must be given up once for all. Maharaj 
(Swami- Brahmananda) says that sometimes 
he feels as if he is not of this world. The 
Master also used to say: ‘With whom shall 
I speak if Naren and Rakhal are not by me? 
They are of very pure mind—they are 
Narayana Himself; I feel my lips burning 
if I talk with worldly ‘persons.’ What 
purity! You must be all as pure as he.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 59 


At night, after the service in the shrine, 
the Swami sat downstairs in the main build- 
ing. The disciple asked him, “‘Kindly tell 
me how I can realize the Master.” 

Swami: “You have seen the Holy 
Mother and have received her blessings, 
Why should you worry?” 

Disciple: ‘*But, Maharaj, I cannot at all 
make my mind calm. Please tell me how 
I can make it calm.” 

Swami: ‘* ‘This is not a sweet in the 
hand of a child that you can coax it out of 
him.’ But don’t worry. The Master used to 
say, ‘I see an ocean in a drop.’ If we 
proceed towards him a single step, he will 
approach us by a thousand steps. Take 
refuge in him and repeat his name. Gradual- 
ly you will realize him.” 

Disciple: ‘‘Mah&raj, I am told that with- 
out renouncing the world, one cannot get 
his grace.” 


Swami: (Sternly) ‘“What have you, which 
you can renounce? Remain in whatever con- 
dition and wherever he keeps you. You cannot 
realize him by doing anything. Through his 
grace everything is possible. Many practise 
hard Tapasya and yet do not realize his grace, 
while others very easily get it.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


60 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


6th June. 


In the afternoon the disciple was sitting 
with S. by the side of the Ganges, when 
the Swami came there. S. was a sweet man 
and naturally attracted the love of the 
Swami. The Swami began to tell him of 
the love the Master bore towards them. 
He said: “My mother would not allow 
me to stay at my village home even during 
holidays, for fear that I might mix with 
bad boys and spoil myself. But she .would 
cry when I returned to Calcutta. The 
Master also used to cry when I returned 
from Dakshineswar to Calcutta. Oh, how 
can I explain to you how he used to love 
us? He would go to Calcutta in a carriage 
in order to feed Purna. He would wait 
near the school where Purna read, send some- 
one to bring him, and then feed him with 
delicacies. He would say: ‘What is this 
that has happened to me? You have not 
even a mat’ to receive me. Yet I am 
restless to see you!’ One day he was found 
outside Balaram Babu’s house where I used 
to stay. Balaram Babu was not at home. 
The Master did not enter the house for fear 


* People in the East squat and so use carpets 
or mats in their drawing rooms, and not chairs, to 
recelve people, 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 61 


of rebuke. He had come to see me! After- 
wards someone called him in. His love 
knew no bounds and one drop of it could 
fill us full. Everyone thus thought that he 
was the most beloved of the Master. He 
used to say: ‘I can stand everything ex- 
cept egotism.’ That is why when he wanted 
to meet anyone, he sent Hriday beforehand, 
to see if the man was proud. He has left a 
mould for us. We have now to knead the 
clay of the mind, eliminating all stones and 
rubbish from it and cast it in the mould; 
and a beautiful form will easily emerge. He 
came for the whole world.” 

Disciple: ‘‘Please tell us of your experi- 
ence when you first met the Master.” 

Swami: ‘On the night of my first visit 
to Dakshineswar, myself and another devotee 
slept on the verandah outside the Master’s 
room. I could not sleep well because oi 
the shoutings of the night watchmen. At 
last I had a little sleep. But just then the 
Master came to us, nude, with his cloth 
rolled under his arm. He woke us up and 
said: ‘Do you know Narendra? He is a 
very good boy and lives at Simla.’ He is 
well up in music, studies, and everything. 


1A particular quarter of Calcutta. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


62 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Ask him to see me once. I want to see him 
very much. Tell him to come tomorrow in 
a carriage—the hire shall be paid from here.’ 
So saying he left us and we lay down again. 
We were about to fall asleep when he came 
again and said: ‘Do tell him to come once. 
My inside is being clawed like the earth 
clawed by a cat. Ask him to come to- 
morrow positively. Will you?’ When he 
went away, I thought within myself: ‘How 
deeply does he love him! And the boy does 
not come to see him! How cruel and 
wicked !? Very soon the Master came again 
and began to entreat us to tell Narendra to 
come, and praised him highly. Thus the 
whole night passed. 

“Another night I was sleeping in the 
Master’s room. At dead of night I woke 
up and found the Master going from one 
end of his room to the other, saying : 
‘Mother, I do not want this. Do not bring 
me honour from men. Don’t, Mother, don’t. 
I spit on it.’ He said this and ran like a 
mad man in the room. I was filled with great 
wonder. I thought: ‘How strange! People 
are so eager for fame, and he is entreat- 
ing the Mother not to give it to him! Why 
is this happening before me? Is it for my 
personal edification?’ >” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 63 


29th October. 


A young man who had lately entered the 
Order was finding it inconvenient to continue 
his Sâdhanâ at the Belur Math on account 
of its being crowded. He wanted to go to 
Benares and so had gone to Calcutta to beg 
his train-fare. The Swami did not like tbis. 
When the new monk returned from Calcutta, 
he said to him : 


“Are you not ashamed to beg—you, a 
young man? You are a Sâdhu—walk all 
the way to Benares. Do you think you will 
go comfortably to Benares and repeat the 
Lord’s name a few times and the Lord will 
hasten to you? God cannot be realized so 
easily. ‘O my mind, dost thou think thou 
wilt attain the Divine Mother with thy hypo- 
critical love? She is not a sweet in the hand 
of a child that thou wilt coax it out of him !’ 
Boys have nowadays a fancy to give up work, 
as if they have all become Sukadeva. This is 
the result of reading Kathdmrita (The Gospel 
of Sri Ramakrishna by M.). M.’s books 
record the conversations of a few days only. 
‘Call on the Lord in solitude!’ That is all 
right. But who weeps for Him? Who can 
weep for Him? Sattva and Tamas both 
look alike. Tamas begets sleep, laziness and . 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by, eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


64 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


aversion for work. Swamiji (Swami Viveka- 
nanda) used to say: ‘The country is 
immersed in Tamas. Like a delirious 
patient, it is thinking that it is all right 
and does not want to take any medicine. 
I have found the remedy. It is now 
necessary to apply it. Poisonous drugs are 
the remedies for delirium, so is Rajas the cure 
for Tamas. We must bring Rajas into the 
country in order to free it from Tamas.’ 
Vairâgya (dispassion) and Tamas are quite 
different things. 

“Go and study. We shall bear your 
expenses. ... You must have the know- 
ledge of the Sastras, if you want to realize 
God. Though the Master did not know how 
to read and write, yet he heard many books 
read out to him. And he remembered every- 
thing. At the Cossipore Garden, Sasi 
Maharaj (Swami Ramakrishnananda) was 
Once reading to him the Adhyatma 
Ramayana in the original Sanskrit. Swamiji 
asked him: ‘Sir, you do not know 
how to read and write. Do you under- 
stand anything of this Sanskrit read- 
ing?’ The Master replied : ‘Though I have 
not read myself, I have heard many things. 
And I know the meaning of every word.’ 

. Everything about him was unique. One day 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 65 


Dr. Mahendra Sarkar came to the Master at 
Shyampukur at about 10 in the morning and 
left at about 8 or 4 in the afternoon. On 
seeing this Mani Mallick said: ‘Sir, one day 
there was music at Kristodas Pal’s. All the 
big people of Calcutta came to the party. 
Dr. Sarkar also came but rose to leave after 
some five minutes. On being requested to 
stay a little longer, he said: ‘No, I cannot, 
I have much work to do, I cannot stay 
longer.” That same Mahendra Sarkar spent 
today five or six hours apparently for 
nothing !—This is certainly strange l ” 


May, 1913. 


A scripture class used to be held in the 
Visitors?’ Room at the Belur Math every 
afternoon at three (except on Sundays), in 
which the monks as well as the visitors used 
to join. Once during the first week of May, 
the Swami said at the end of the class: 

“One day Gosainji (Vijaya Krishna 
Goswami) came to the Master and begged 
him to free him from lust. The Master 
touched him. That touch produced wonder- 
ful results. On another occasion, another 
came and said to Sri Ramakrishna: 
‘Sir, I feel so attracted by my wife that I 
cannot devote my mind to any other thing. 

5 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


66 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


All my business is going to rack and ruin. 
Please change my mental condition.’ ‘Very 
well,’ the Master replied, ‘bring some fruits 
one day. I shall eat up your Maya.’ When, 
however, the fruits were brought, the Master 
could not eat them, for though he tried, he 
could not raise them to his lips. I am told 
the man suffered a great deal on account of 
his wife afterwards.” 

Ramlal (nephew of Sri Ramakrishna) 
came from Dakshineswar. He had long 
lived with and served the Master and 
had often sent him into ecstasy by singing 
devotional songs. He was, therefore, dearly 
loved by the Order of Ramakrishna. In 
course of conversation he said : 

“Formerly, the Master and Hriday used 
to live in the large room of the Kuthi (a build- 
ing in the Dakshineswar Temple) and the 
Master’s mother used to sleep in an adjoin- 
ing small room. Many nights they used to 
hear a man with shoes on going up and down 
the stairs, and opening doors and windows. 
It was a ghost—possibly of a European. For 
the Kuthi had been a European residence 
before the Temple was built. The Master 
used to say: ‘We cannot say that this world 
is entirely false. For we are actually seeing 
it with our eyes. Nor can we say that it is 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 67 


real. For just see how this garden has 
changed. Formerly it was a graveyard, and 
this Kuthi, the house of a European. But 
now! And some days after, this Temple 
also will vanish, and who knows what will 
come next?’ 

“One day he said to me: ‘Once I had a 
vision, in which I saw many dancing round 
the Divine Mother, clapping their hands and 
crying ‘Victory to Kali!’ ‘Victory to Kali!’ 
and Rani Rasmani standing in the south- 
west corner of the room. Among those 
dancing were Mathur, Sambhu, Balaram, 
Jaygopal Sen and others, also some white 
men and women whom I do not know yet.’ ” 

Swami: “They were Westerners. A 
Western lady came here one day. When 
she was shown the relics of Sri Ramakrishna, 
she began to cry. She took a small bit of 
one of the mementos. She said she would 
ever keep it in her bosom.” 

At night a class was held on Raja Yoga. 
When it was over, the Swami said to the 
monks: ‘‘Merely reading all these things 
.won’t do. You must meditate on these and 
build your life accordingly. None of you 
who have come here through the grace of 
the Lord, are insignificant. You are all lion- 
cubs. It won’t be enough for you to say 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


68 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


to people that you know this and that or thar 
Swamiji has said so and so. You must 
demonstrate the validity of these teachings 
by your own life. Everyone of you must 
be a model of renunciation, discrimination, 
and _ passionlessness.”? 


14th May. 


At the Belur Monastery, the Swami said 
at the end of the afternoon class : 

“One must have true Nishtha—steadfast, 
wholehearted devotion and attachment to 
that aspect of God which one has chosen to 
realize. But let that not produce repulsion 
for the other aspects. I was once told a 
story, which was true. There was a rich man 
who nad the image of Mother KAli installed 
in his home. The Goddess used to be wor- 
shipped with rich offerings everyday. One 
day a Vaishnava-came and bowed before the 
image and addressing it said: ‘Sister-in- 
law, how is my elder brother ?”2 The Master 
of the house understood the attitude of the 
Vaishnava. He welcomed him and gave 


*Some Vaishnavas are so fanatical that they 
refuse to look upon Siva, the consort of Kali, as 
the Lord Himself and want to consider Him as 
only a devotee of Vishnu, and as such their 
spiritual elder brother. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 69 
$ J 


him a seat, and in order to teach him a 
good lesson, called one of his men to his 
side and asked him to prepare a dish of 
pungent yam. The dish was accordingly 
prepared and served to the Vaishnava. He 
did not know that it was yam and so 
pungent. He took one morsel and at once 
felt a burning sensation in his mouth. The 
host asked: ‘Sir, why are you not taking 
any more?’ ‘Sir, he replied, ‘it is yam.’ 
‘Sirrah, thy elder brother could take and 
digest potfuls of poison’ and thou canst not 
take one dish of yam? Hallo, who is there? 
Bring me a stick. I must break this rascal’s 
head if he does not eat all the yam.’ The 
Vaishnava was humbled to the dust. He 
prayed earnestly to be pardoned and promised 
never to speak of Siva in that fashion again. 
The man was then feasted properly and sent 
away with solemn warning not to be so 
bigoted again. 

“But if the Nishtha is true and devoid of 
hatred for other Gods and Goddesses, it 
leads quickly to Divine realization. The 
Master once told us a story: ‘There were 
two brothers. The younger was the devotee 


1 Refers to Siva’s drinking the poison which arose 
from the ocean when it was churned by the gods 
and demons for nectar. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


70 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


of Gopiala, Child-Krishna, and the elder of 
Kali. Once a nice bunch of plantains grew 
in their garden and each of them thought 
that as soon as it would get ripe, he would 
offer it to his Deity. In course of time the 
fruits got ripe, but the younger brother 
happened to be absent from home. The elder 
brother plucked them and offered them to 
Kali. When the younger brother returned 
and learnt that the plantains had been 
offered to Kali, he got furious and went with 
a stick to the shrine of Kâli to break Her 
image. But as soon as he entered the shrine, 
he found that there was no Kâli but the 
image of Gopala installed on the throne! 
He was struck with deep remorse. He 
thought he had by mistake entered the shrine 
of Gopâla. He came out and went into the 
other shrine with the stick in hand. But lo, 
there also he found the image of Gopâla ! 
Then the truth dawned on him. He under- 
stood that He who was Gopâla was also Kali. 

“One who has realized God cannot be 
bigoted. Take the case of Vijaya Krishna 
Goswami. He was a Brahmo, but after- 
wards he gave up the Brahmo Samaj and 
practised Tapasy& and dressed himself like 
a Vaishnava. One day he said humbly to 
Sri Ramakrishna: ‘Sir, many want to 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 71 


receive initiation from me. Should I initiate 
them?? ‘Why not?’ the Master replied. 
‘You are a descendant of Advaita Prabhu 
(one of the foremost disciples of Sri 
Chaitanya), you are as such born as 
a Guru. You can, of course, initiate.’ 
When Swamiji returned from America, 
Goswamiji sent for him. He himself 
could not come, for he was not doing 
well. When Swamiji went to his place, 
Goswamiji vacated his seat and asked him to 
sit thereon. When Swamiji remonstrated, 
he said: ‘I know how he (Sri Ramakrishna) 
used to look upon you. How can we under- 
stand your proper worth?’ ” 


Last Week of May. 


A monk was reading Sri Sri Ramakrishna 
Kathdmrita (The Gospel of Sri Rama- 
krishna by M.) in the Visitors’ Room of the 
Belur Monastery. In course of the reading 
the Swami said in reference to Kedarnath 
Chatterjee (2 devotee of Sri Ramakrishna) : 

“Formerly he used to live at Lahore and 
was a Brahmo. He had deep love for God. 
One day the thought of not having realized 
God so pained him that he went to jump 
from the top of a hill to kill himself. A 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


72 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


cowherd boy saw him and said, ‘What are 
you doing?’ Thus obstructed he eagerly 
asked the boy, ‘Shall I realize God?’ The 
boy also said, ‘Surely you will.? Kedar 
took this assurance as from God Himself, and 
he returned to Bengal. 

“While on his way to Calcutta, he by 
chance got down at Bally and drawn as it 
were by an invisible force, came to Sri 
Ramakrishna at Dakshineswar.’? 

Reader: “There are two different ver- 
sions of the meeting of Chaitanya and Rai 
Ramananda.” 

Swami: “Why should you believe every- 
thing? Believe only in the authoritative 
books. ... You must have great strength 
of mind.” 

The Swami sang : 

“O Mother, if I but die with Thy holy 
name on my lips, then must Thou save this 
helpless child of Thine. 

‘I care not if I have killed the sacred cow 
or the holy Braéhmana, or even the child in 
its mother’s womb. Oh, I care not if I have | 
sinned by drinking, or even by killing a 
woman. 

‘In spite of these darkest sins, I know 
I can verily become Brahman, if I but die 
with Thy holy name on my lips.’ 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA l 78 


“But you must not infer from this that 
you are to sin now and take the name of 
the Mother at the moment of death. Unless 
you repeat Her name even from now with 
great faith and strength of mind, you will not 
even remember it at the moment of death. 

“The essence of Sri Ramakrishna’s teach- 
ing is that one should givè up all pride and 
egotism. A little meditation is no good. 
God cannot be realized through such luke- 
warm moods. One must yearn deeply, one 
must become restless. 

“Just as the Lord has covered us with 
His May&, He also graciously incarnates 
Himself and practises Sâdhanå in order to 
show how we are to rend asunder the Maya. 
He Himself is also breaking the creations of 
Maya. A man once went to a garden with 
his several sons. The sons played about. 
Some plucked flowers, some plucked green 
cocoanuts, but one went to angle in the 
tank. When it was evening, the man called 
all his sons. All came except the one who 
was fishing. The father sent for him again 
and again but he would not come—he was 
deeply absorbed in catching fish. When it 
was quite dark, the father himself went, 
broke the fishing rod to pieces and dragged 
the boy to the carriage. Thus does the Lord 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


74 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


come from time to time, shatter our play- 
things and drag us to Him.” 


30th May. 


In the afternoon, in the Visitors? Room 
at the Belur Monastery, the disciple was 
listening to the reading of Sri Sri Rdma- 
krishna Kathdmrita (The Gospel of Sri 
Ramakrishna by M.). Someone said that 
Sri Ramakrishna used to accept one as disci- 
ple only after proper enquiry—after observ- 
ing his ways, manners, and physiognomy and 
asking about his people and if he was free 
from debts. On hearing this the disciple 
said: ‘Then it is not true that all were 
recipients of his grace. There is a song 
about the Master, in which a devotee sings 
that however degraded one might be, one 
would have the shelter of the Master’s blessed’ 
feet. Is this not true, then??? 

Swami: “Why not? He showered his 
grace on Girish Chandra Ghosh and even 
on many prostitutes. One day the ladies of 
Balaram Babu’s family were sitting before 
the Master in his room, when a prostitute 
named Ramani passed along a road close by. 
The Master called out to her and asked : 
“Why don’t you come nowadays?? The 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 75 


ladies were scandalized to hear the Master 
talking with a prostitute. 


“Shortly after the Master took them to 
visit the shrines. When they reached the 
Kali temple, the Master addressed the 
Mother saying: ‘Mother, Thou indeed hast 
become the prostitute Ramani. Thou hast 
become both the prostitute and the chaste 
woman!’ The ladies understood that they 
were wrong in hating Ramani, that the 
Master spoke with her, knowing her to be 
the Mother Herself and that they had 
nothing to be unusually proud of their 
chastity, for it was all due to Her will.” 


Disciple: ‘‘The Master might have been 
all right in not hating the prostitute. But 
unless we hate the prostitutes, how shall we 
live away from them? At least we must 
pity them even if we do not hate them.” 


Swami: ‘‘Why should you hate? Even 
pity comes out of egotism. Have you not 
heard the Master’s stories of the tiger- 
Narayana and the elephant-Nardyana? Ii 
we are to live away from a tiger and an 
elephant, are we to hate or pity them? Salute 
them from afar, thinking that it is through 
the will of God that they are what they are 
and that it is through His will again that you 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


76 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


are what you are, and that His will can in a 
moment redeem them for ever and drag you 
down. Destroy your pride and egotism once 
for all. The prostitute Ramani has now’ 
become a great devotee and sheds tears in 
remembrance of the Master.” 


17th June. 


Tt was again at the Visitors? Room at the 
Belur Math. After the afternoon class on 
Sri Sri Ramakrishna Kathdémrita was over, 
the Swami said: 

“Every Sddhaka must take up a definite 
attitude towards God and stick to it. He 
must maintain it under all conditions. There 
are many Bhiavas (attitudes) possible. The 
Master practised all Bhavas—as a friend, a 
lady-friend and a sweetheart of the Lord, 
and also in the attitude of Balarama, the 
brother of Sri Krishna. One can also practise 
the Bhava of Mahadeva. 

“One must have intense indifference to the 
world and deep hankering after the Lord—‘I 
must realize Him even in this birth, even 
now!’ No slow process! Remember this 
carefully : Work is no use if you do not get 
immersed in Him. Make your heart a 
temple of the Lord and install Him there. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 17 


Take His name: and for ever lose yourselves 
in Him.” 

Next day the mother of the Swami visited 
the Math. After she had rested a little, the 
disciple asked her: ‘“‘When the Master 


asked you to give him your son, what did he 
actually say?” 


She replied: ‘“‘He said: ‘Give me your 
son. I feel much pleased even when he gives 
me a glass of water.’ I said: ‘Does any- 
body give away her son for nothing?’ He 
then smiled and replied: ‘What shall I give 


you? May you have devotion to your Chosen 
Deity P ” 


29th and 30th June. 


The Swami had come on a visit to Rarhi- 
khal in East Bengal, and was staying at 
the ancestral home of Sir J. C. Bose. The 
residents of the village were celebrating the 
birthday of Sri Ramakrishna and there was 
great enthusiasm among all sections of 
people. Men, women, boys, girls, Hindus, 
Mussulmans, all came to visit the Swami 
and everyone felt a deep love and attraction 
for him. A villager, who was a teacher in 
a Dacca school, was narrating his family 
mishaps to the Swami. The Swami said : 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


78 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


“There was a Brahmo gentleman, named 
Mani Mallick, who used to visit the Master. 
His eldest son had seen the Master in the 
Church of Keshab Chandra Sen and had said 
to his father: ‘He seems to me to be a true 
Sadhu. Go and visit him.’ When Mani 
Mallick came to the Master, the Master said 
to him: ‘Are you not —’s father? You 
look like that.’ Then that son died. Mallick 
was overwhelmed with grief and came to 
the Master for relief. At first the Master 
said: ‘Indeed, what can you do? The 
bereavement of a son is no trifling thing,’ and 
so on. He then sat silent for a while, after 
which he began to sing, clapping his hands : 
‘To arms! To arms! O man, Death enters 
thy home in battle array !’ ete. Before he 
left, Mallick said to the Master : ‘My mind is 
quite peaceful now. Now I do not feel 
miserable.” 


Next day the Swami said, addressing the 
monks who had accompanied him: “TI am 
overjoyed to see their (of the villagers) 
enthusiasm. The Master fed us so often with 
sweets, and loved us so much ! That made us 
go to him. But what have they got? They 
have merely read of him in books. And yet 
how full of joy and enthusiasm they are! 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI PREMANANDA 79 


In this hot sun they went to the station and 
themselves carried all loads, barefooted and 
bare-headed. And they are cooking for all. 
They also serve cholera patients and un- 
touchables and thus rid themselves of 
all pride, egotism, and fear. And they 
are quite mindful of their studies also. 
All this fills me with a great joy. It 
is to see these things that I hasten to these 
parts, and not to earn name and fame 
for myself. What am I doing? The 
Master himself has done everything already. 
Swamiji (Swami Vivekananda) once said : 
‘The Master will be worshipped in every home. 
Go forth, all of you, and spread his name 
everywhere.’ Otherwise what shall I, an 
ignorant man, preach?. .. When I see all 
this, I think within myself: ‘This body will 
perish one day. What is the good of remain- 
ing at home for the sake of health? If my 
presence serves any purpose of the people, 
let me suffer all the troubles of travel and 
movement. I don’t mind.’! Otherwise why 
should I undergo all the troubles of irregular 


1 Just on his return to the Belur Monastery 
from this visit, the Swami had a severe attack 
of cholera. He suffered for a long time from 
Kala-azar contracted during one of his visits to 
Eastern Bengal and may be said to have died of it. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


80 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


meals and sleeplessness? You see yourselves, 
there is no pleasure in these. 

“In these places I actually see what the 
Master and Swamiji had prophesied before. 
You have not to do much. Just observe 
these things carefully, and you will learn to 
love the Master automatically. Is it easy to 
meditate and repeat His name continually? 
Impossible. Therefore meditate as long as 
you can and devote the rest of the time to 
selfless service for others. Thus gradually 
will your mind be purified and be attached to 
the Lord.” 

The Swami thus narrated his early life in 
course of another conversation : 

“My mother used now and then to shut 
herself up in a room and meditate all day. 
Ii we happened to return home from Calcutta 
on those days, we had to live in a neighbour- 
ing house, and meet her next day. She was 
very strict in her discipline. She would 
never allow us to stay with her in the village 
home, lest that might spoil our education. 
But she would never utter a harsh word to 
her daughters-in-law or even to servants. . . . 
I was very naughty as a young boy. So 
I have got some scars on my head. Swamiji 
used to say, ‘He is no boy, who has no 
scars on his head.’ ” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 81 


5th March, 1916. 


It was the annual general meeting of the 
Ramakrishna Mission. When the agenda of 
the meeting had been gone through, the 
Swami thus spoke to all present : 


“Elephants have two sets of teeth, one 
outside—the tusks, and another inside, to 
munch food. The activities of our Mission 
are like the elephant’s tusks. Whatever 
work you may do—conducting Sevâsramas 
or doing relief work, unless you have 
character, all will be in vain. What is 
wanted is character, purity, steadfast 
devotion to God. If you have them, you 
will prosper, otherwise you will totally fail. 
(To the lay members) It is no good being 
only members of the Mission. You must 
build up your own character, you must make 
the whole world your own through love, so 
that people may find inspiration from your 
selflessness, renunciation, and purity. You 
must drive away all egotism and pride from 
your heart and consider yourselves as 
servants of the Lord and thus serve humanity. 

“Our Master never sought name and fame, 
and so they have come to him in profusion. 
Swamiji (Swami Vivekananda) often said in 
his later life that he was disgusted with 

6 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


82 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


name and fame. Be you all men of 
character. Do you grow into gods. Only 
then would the work of the Mission prosper. 
This is my earnest prayer to you all.” 

After this the meeting was dissolved. 

That night, after meal, the Swami came 
and sat on the bench on the ground floor 
overlooking the Ganges, and thus spoke to 
the monks and devotees gathered before 
him : 

“In the world the mind is scattered on 
various things, on Kama (lust) and Kanchana 
(gold). It is the function of AvidyA (Ignor- 
ance) not to allow the mind to be concen- 
trated. But our task is to concentrate it. 
Sadhana is nothing but the bringing together 
of the scattered mind. So long as there 
is the least desire the mind cannot be 
absorbed in God. Along with meditation and 
repetition of the Lord’s name, we must reason 
keenly and carefully—we must search out the 
desires hiding in the dark corners of the 
mind and drive them away. This is what is 
called in the Gita as ‘saving the self by the 
self.’ Thus we are to conquer the mind, We 
shall then find the Peace Everlasting within 
ourselves and become sages. Simply meditat- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 83 


ing or repeating God’s names, without any 
effort at rooting out the desires, will not do. 

“During my last visit to Dacca, I used to 
talk day and night with the devotees.1 This 
would often cause insomnia. Of course I 
would repeat and explain only the words of 
the Master—I knew myself nothing—yet I 
could not sleep at night. That was because 
I am but a small ‘vessel’. But we have seen 
the Master going again and again into ecstasy 
and Samadhi—it was so natural with him. 
No impure person could ever live with and 
wait on the Master. I could not have 
lived with him without his grace. Now I 
wonder how I could do so.? 

“One day he went to see the performance of 
the Chaitanya-lild at the Star Theatre. Before 
he went, he said to me: ‘If I fall into 
Samadhi there, people would all turn towards 
me and there would be disturbance. If you 
find me about to go into Samadhi, talk to 
me about various other things.? But when 
he went to the Theatre, he could not stop 


* The Swami had lately returned from his tour 
in the company of Swami Brahmananda and 
others. z 

* The Swami was for a long time a personal 
attendant of the Master, who considered him the 
purest of his disciples. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


84 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Samadhi, try as he could. I began to repeat 
the name of God and then slowly he came 
round. Such superconscious states were 
natural with him, and he had to struggle 
hard in order to hold his mind down to the 
normal plane. But small ‘vessels’ as we are, 
we have to practise variously and hard in 
order to attain the state of Samadhi. For 
us it is so difficult.” 


8th March. 

It was 8 p.m. Some monks and lay 
devotees had assembled in the Visitors? Room 
at the Belur Math and were listening to the 
reading of Swami Vivekananda’s works. 


When it was over, Swami Akhandananda 
(a direct disciple of Sri Ramakrishna) said, 
“From tomorrow I shall teach them the 
Upanishads.” At that the Swami remarked : 

“What other Upanishads would you teach 
them when there is the living Upanishad? 
The life of the Master is the living, flaming 
Upanishad. None could have understood the 
meaning of the Radh&-Krishna cult if Sri 
Chaitanya had not been born and demons- 
trated it in his life. Even so, the Master is 
the living demonstration of the truths of the 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 85 


Upanishads. The Upanishads have been 
current for many centuries and people also 
have been reading them. And yet they bow 
down to our illiterate Master and accept his 
words as gospel truths. He never read the 
Upanishads or any other book. Yet how 
is it that he could explain those subtle and 
complex truths in so simple and straight a 
manner? If you want to read the Vedas, 
you have to commit the grammar to memory 
and read various commentaries, in which 
every commentator has sought to explain the 
texts in his own way. Innumerable scholars 
have been arguing over the texts without 
coming to any conclusion. Our. Master, how- 
ever, has in very simple language explained 
all those truths, and his words are extant. 
When you have such a living fountain 
before you, why dig a well for water?” 

The day before, the birthday. of Sri Rama- 
krishna, twelve of the novices had been 
initiated into Sannyfisa. Today they begged 
a rupee of a lay devotee, hired a boat and 
went to the Dakshineswar Temple. The 
Swami did not like this. He said to them: 

“You shaved your heads (became monks) 
but yesterday, and you already think that you 
are beyond all disciplinary restrictions? 
Unless one observes disciplinary rules, can 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


86 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


one go beyond them? Those who have 
renounced, who are Sannydsins—they are 
the teachers of men. And you, having 
renounced, have become such. But how is 
it that you begged money today to pay for 
the boat-hire? Is that spirituality? If you 
were so eager to see the place of the Master’s 
Sadhana, why, instead of begging money, 
did you not go to Bally and beg the ferry- 
man to take you over, or swim across the 
Ganges? Or you could have walked all the 
way via the Howrah bridge. Then I would 
have known that you are indeed fit to be 
teachers of men. You are thinking that you 
will have Maths and from there would spread 
the ideas of the Master, and that otherwise 
the Master’s ideas would vanish from the 
earth! You may build as many Maths as 
you like, or you may take Sannydsa, but if 
you have no spirituality, all will be in vain. 
On the other hand, those who are not build- 
ing Maths or taking Sannyasa, the house- 
holders—if they have spirituality and live the 
true life, will surely be worshipped by people 
even though they may not wear the ochre 
robe. Whoever will assimilate the ideals of 
the Master in his life, be he a Sannyasin 
or a householder, will be great. The Master 
himself is spreading his own ideas. Never 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 87 


think that if you Sannydsins do not preach 
his ideas, these will not be known! Rather 
thank your stars that you have better oppor- 
tunities than the householders and are living 
in the blessed company of these great souls 
(the direct disciples of the Master).’’ 
Swami Akhandananda: ‘‘Six of us at one 
time lived in the same cottage at Hrishikesh 
for nearly two months. This very much 
astonished the other Sâdhus of the place. 
They said to us: ‘How do you brother- 
disciples live together? If only two of us, 
brother-disciples, should live for two days 
together we would begin to quarrel.’ Once I 
told this to Vijaya Krishna Goswami at 
Brindaban. He was overjoyed to hear me 
and said: ‘There is nothing surprising in 
this. It is no ordinary thread that binds you. 
Was your Master an ordinary man and 
Sadhu? Had he been an ordinary man, could 
he have trained you Calcutta boys up in 
this fashion? I do not wonder that there is 
such love and union amongst you.’ >? 
Swami: “I tell you for a fact, I am 
not enamoured of the mere ochre cloth, I 
want renunciation and dispassion. I very 
much appreciate the life of Nag Mahasaya 
(Saint Durga Charan Nag—a disciple of Sri 
Ramakrishna). He did not wear the ochre 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


88 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


cloth, and yet what a great soul he was 
and how great was his renunciation ! 

“When I visited Dacea last time, I went 
to Nag Mahâsâya’s place before I left. One 
of his friends told me that a Brahmana used 
to come to his house to read the Bhagavata. 
He would read a verse and Nag Mahâsâya 
would expound for a long time. Pandits 
read the Bhagavata, but ‘Nag Mahâsâya 
had actually realized the truths it contained 
and they were, therefore, as vivid to him 
as any sensible object. His father, however, 
would not like his long exposition. He would 
get angry and say: ‘Well, won't you 
allow me to listen to the reading of the 
Bhagavata?? Nag Mahâsâya was infinitely 
patient. He would remain silent.” 

Swami Akhandananda: ‘Suren Mukherji, 
afterwards Baba Premananda Bharati, was 
devoted to the Master. He used to visit the 
Baranagore Math for some time. He went 
to preach Hinduism in America. Once he 
went on a visit to Nâg Mahâsâya’s village. 
As soon as Nag Mahaséya saw him, he 
began to dance in joy raising his hands and 
crying out: ‘Calcutta !? ‘Calcutta !? That is 
to say, he had come from the very place where 
the Master used to live. Sri Gouranga also, 
you know, went into ecstasy when he learnt 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI PREMANANDA 89 


that the musical instrument called khol which 
is played in devotional music, was made of 
the clay of the village he was just then 
visiting.’ 

“You will be surprised to hear of 
the hard austerities Swamiji (Vivekananda) 
practised. When he was wandering as an 
itinerant monk all over India, I would follow 
him sometimes. In those days, before he left 
for America, he used to carry with him a 
coarse blanket, and a bag full of books weigh- 
ing about twenty seers. Once he fell on hard 
days at Limdi, when a poor Brahmana gave 
him shelter. He lived with him for a few days. 
The Maharajah of Limdi, in the mean time, 
came to know of his greatness and requested 
him .to come to his palace and live there. 
But Swamiji refused lest his removal to 
the palace might cause pain to the Brihmana. 
The Maharajah, however, used to send him 
various royal dishes, and the poor Brahmana 
also would partake of them.” 


"The clay of the village was used for making 
the khol and this again was used in the singing 
of the Lord’s name. Thus the village gave, though 
remotely, a suggestion of the Lord. But even this 
was sufficient in his case to bring on the ecstasy. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


CCO. In Public Domain, Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SPIRITUAL TALKS 
BY SWAMI TURIYANANDA 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Eyni Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


å 4 Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


£ 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


„Digitization ‘by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


F s Swami Turiyananda 


` 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SPIRITUAL TALKS 
by Swami Turiyananda 


I 
rth une, 1915. 

cand S.t: “One may have any amount 
o+ Samadhi and Dhyana (spiritual concentra- 
tion and meditation), but one must never 
ierget to love Him. What is the use of this 
life if one does not love Him?” 

Swami: ‘*Yes, one is bound to admit that 
‘when one feels oneself as body, one must 
consider oneself as the servant of the Lord; 
when one thinks oneself as the Jiva, the 
individualized soul, one must consider oneself 
as a part of Him; and when one feels oneself 
as the Atman (Self), one is the same as the 
Lord Himself.’ 

“How can a man who runs for a remedy 
at the slightest suffering, refuse to submit 
to the Lord?” 

Sri Ramakrishna Kathdmrita (The Gospel 
of Sri Ramakrishna) was being reac. The 

_ Swami observed : 


Swami Shivananda, ancther direct disciple of 


Se Ramakrishna. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


da 


= 
a 
c 
ii 
= 
5 
= 
E 
y 
2 
A 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SPIRITUAL TALKS 
By Swami Turiyananda 


I 
7th June, 1915. 


Swami S.: “One may have any amount 
of Samadhi and Dhyana (spiritual concentra- 
tion and meditation), but one must never 
forget to love Him. What is the use of this 
life if one does not love Him?” 

Swami: ‘‘Yes, one is bound to admit that 
‘when one feels oneself as body, one must 
consider oneself as the servant of the Lord; 
when one thinks oneself as the Jiva, the 
individualized soul, one must consider oneself 
as a part of Him; and when one feels oneself 
as the Atman (Self), one is the same as the 
Lord Himself.’ 

“How can a man who runs for a remedy 
at the slightest suffering, refuse to submit 
to the Lord?” 

Sri Ramakrishna Kathdmrita (The Gospel 
of Sri Ramakrishna) was being read. The 
Swami observed : 


1! Swami Shivananda, another direct disciple of 
Sri Ramakrishna. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


94 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


*““Dakshineswar was in those days as 
divine and blissful as Kailasa.2 From 
morning till one in the afternoon, all were 
busy preparing for the worship of the Deities 
and then worshipping them; while Sri 
‘Ramakrishna himself was always talking 
about God, and people sat  spell-bound 
listening to him. The atmosphere vibrated 
with thoughts of God. Even his jokes and 
funs related to God and culminated in 
Samadhi. He would rest after the midday 
meal, but only for a short while. The rest 
of his day was given to discoursing about 
God. In the evening he would visit the 
Kali temple and there fan the Mother, 
then return to his room reeling under divine 
intoxication. He would often ask those who 
practised Sâdhanâ if they felt a kind of 
intoxication in the morning and evening. ... 
At night there was scarcely any sleep for 
him. No sooner had he lain down than he 
would get up and rouse all who slept in 
his room, saying, ‘Do not sleep so much. 
Get up and meditate.” He would then lie 
down again and get up by early dawn and 
recite the names of God in his inimitable 
Sweet voice. Others also would get up and 


° The celebrated abode of Siva. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 95 


sit down to Japa and meditation. Now and 
then he would go up to them and correct 
their postures.” 


10th June. 


Swami: ‘In. order to realize the Self, 
you have to scale the highest peak of 
renunciation.” 


1ith June. 

Swami: “Is it easy to detach the mind 
from all objects? Only a hero can do that. 
The external objects are ever trying to enter 
into your mind and conquer you. In the 
mind itself there are many layers, one upon 
another. It is no use merely closing the 
eyes and ears.” 


13th June. 

Swami: “X wants to finish studying 
Raja Yoga quickly. But we poured out our 
very life in this quest. We have been doing 
this ever.since our childhood. Yet even now 
the mind has not been purified. There are 
still attachment and hatred in it. ... O 
Lord, make me the servant of the servant 
of Thy servant! 

“Egotism is no good; it is extremely 
pernicious. Egotism is like drinking wine, it 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


96 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


leads astray the senses. The Master used to 
say that water accumulates only in a low 
Jand. Only in humility the good qualities 
of the mind and heart become manifest. 
Pride always holds the head high. That 
which is elastic and unbreakable like steel, 
that indeed is strength. He alone is strong, 
who can live in harmony with different 
natures in ‘a spirit of amicable compromise. 

“Make yourself for ever His, then there 
will be no more fear. Swamiji (Vivekananda) 
used to say, ‘Since you have been born 
on earth, leave a lasting mark on it.’ At the 
Baranagore Math he said, ‘Let me tell you, 
our names will be recorded in history.’ 
Swami Yogananda ridiculed him. But 
Swamiji replied: ‘Well, well, you will see. 
I can convince everyone of the truths of 
Vedanta. If you will not listen to me, I 
shall go to the Pariah villages and teach 
Vedanta to the villagers.’ 

“If you want to preach, you must also 
give something. Preaching is not merely 
lecturing to a class or explaining a book. 
You have to give them something. There- 
fore you must accumulate spirituality before- 
hand.... And never pride yourself on 
your having gained control over the 
passions. If you do, they will at once raise 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 97 


their heads. Ever pray to him, ‘O Lord, 
save me from them.’ 

“There are several obstructions to 
concentration: Laya, Vikshepa, Kashaya, 
Rasasvada. Laya is the mind being over- 
come by Tamas (inertia)—the mind falls 
asleep and loses consciousness. Most aspir- 
ants are held down by Laya. Vikshepa 
is the scattering of the mind on multifarious 
objects. Kashâya is finding meditation dis- 
tasteful—one feels disinclined to meditate. 
But one must still persist. Rasâsvâda is 
the mind being fascinated by the vision of 
divine forms and refusing to ascend 
higher. ... Passions will last so long 
as the body lasts. But through His grace 
they cannot raise their heads.” 


15th June. 


Swami: “It is no good merely working. 
Work is drudgery if there is no spiritual 
feeling behind it.” 


16th June. 


Sri Ramakrishna Kathémrita (The Gospel 
of Sri Ramakrishna by M.) was read. In 
one passage Sri Ramakrishna was mentioned 
as saying: “It is not true that He can be 


ry 


í 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


98 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


realized through work. But through unselfish 
work grows the eager longing to realize Him. 
This eager longing draws down His grace 
and then man realizes Him.” 


Apropos of this, the Swami said: “ʻA little 
casual reading of the scriptures and a little 
meditation are not enough to realize the 
Lord. You must yearn to see Him. The 
heart must pant and pine for Him. The 
Master said to us: ‘It is because I had such 
intense longing for the Mother that She gave 
me every convenience—She gave me this Kali 
Temple and Mathur Babu.’ If there is 
sincere longing for God, everything becomes 
favourable.’ 


“There is no other way than Bhakti.” 


Swami S.: ‘‘Quite true. Meditate on His 
lotus-feet ; the senses will withdraw of them- 
selves and the mind will lose itself in Him. 
Râmprasâd says in a song that devotion is at 
the root of all spiritual achievements. Ram- 
prasad was in a sense the ideal of Sri Rama- 
krishna. The Master used to say: ‘Mother, 
Thou hast revealed Thyself to Ramprasad; 


1 Son-in-law of Rani Rasmani, foundress of the 
Temple. He served the Master with great devo- 
tion and proved helpful to him in many respects 
during his Sadhana. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 99 


why shouldst Thou not to me? The 


Master’s teaching is Bhakti tempered with 
Jnâna.” 


20th June. 


wami: “When will that day come 
when the very utterance of the name of God 
will bring tears to my eyes?’ (To the dis- 
ciple) Do you ery when you take His name? 
Ah, what a supernal condition! Just con- 
sider!—The very utterance of His name 
makes you cry!” 


wami S.: “When I first used to go to 
the Master, I would often feel inclined to. 
ery. One night I cried much on the river- 
side near the bakul tree. Just at that time 
the Master in his room was enquiring where 
I had gone. When I returned to him, he 
asked me to sit down and said: ‘The Lord 
is greatly pleased if one cries to Him. The 
tears of love wash away all mental impurities 
accumulated through ages. It is very good 
to ery to God.’ 

“Another day I was meditating in the 
Panchavati grove. My concentration became 
very deep. Just then the Master came towards. 
me from the side of the jhâu tree. As soon as 
he looked at me, I burst into tears. The 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


100 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Master stood still. T felt something creeping 
up inside my bosom and I was overcome by 
an irrepressible fit of shaking. The Master 
remarked that this crying was not for 
nothing, it was a sort of ecstasy. I then 
followed him to his room where he gave me 
something to eat. The awakening of the 
Kundalini! was an easy matter for him. He 
could do this even without touching, by 
merely standing near by.” 


21st June. 


Swami: “Man is trying hard to make 
himself happy. But nothing succeeds unless 
He wills it. Freedom can be realized in two 
ways, by identifying oneself with Him and 
by living in eternal self-surrender to Him. 
There can be no freedom of will away from 
Him. 

“Reliance on one’s apparent self leads to 
ruin. To presume to be all-knowing is 
extremely harmful. Self-reliance or self- 
confidence means faith in the Higher Self, 
To persist in remaining what one already is 


* Kundalini=the “coiled-up ” the spiritual 

; t iled- ower 
lying dormant in Mulâdhâra ‘centre at the hotter 
of the feu) hich when rouse , forces its way to 

e brain, when man attains the realizati 
Transcendental Reality. a GUE 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 101 


or in holding on to one’s preconceived 
Opinions at any cost—such self-importance is 
bad.” 


22nd June. 


Swami: ‘‘One must have the capacity to 
love. Oh, how madly we used to love in 
our boyhood! I loved my brothers so much 
that the thought of renouncing them to 
become a Sannyasin, used to make me cry. 
But afterwards the Master snapped these ties 
one by one. He asked S.: ‘Whom do you 
love?’ S. said: ‘I do not love anyone.’ 
‘Oh, you dry fellow !? the Master remarked.” 


24th June. 


Swami: “You can never be emancipated 
by adoring a man as man—you must look 
upon him as God. However great he may 
be in spiritual wisdom and dispassionateness, 
however highly endowed he may be with 
spiritual powers, the worship of him will not 
effect your liberation, if you do not perceive 
him as God Himself. Without such a cons- 
ciousness, his worship may serve to commu- 
nicate to you his spiritual qualities and 
powers, but nothing more. If you worship 
a Divine Incarnation, knowing him as such 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


102 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


or not, he will surely grant you God-realiza- 
tion. Sisupfla attained God-realization even 
by hating Sri Krishna. The Gopis realized 
God even though they considered Sri Krishna 
as only their lover. A Gopi was shut up in 
her room by her husband. Her intense 
anguish at being separated from Sri Krishna 
destroyed her sins; and: the joy she felt by 
meditating on him destroyed her religious 
merits (Punya); and she was liberated.” 

Disciple: ‘‘But we are told that when 
devotion grows intense, one forgets the 
Divine majesties of God.” 

Swami: “That is after the devotee has 
realized God. He then carefully obliterates 
all consciousness of Divine powers in order 
to approach Him closer and closer. The 
Gopis were not ordinary human beings. 
Theirs were spiritual bodies.... Conti- 
hence is essential for Divine realization. If 
one can maintain Brahmacharya for twenty- 
eight years, one will realize Bhakti, Jnana, 
everything. Lust is called Manasija, ‘born 
in the mind’. Only a hero can conquer the 
‘senses and go beyond them to the super- 
conscious planes. 

“I do not agree with you if you consider 
stubbornness as strength. Stubbornness is a 
cloak for weakness. The weak put it on in 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 103 


order to hide their weakness. Real strength 
knows how to bend and yet regain its true 
position.” 


26th June. 


Swami: ‘Swami P. has written: ‘We 
are not living on the plane of surmise, but 
of actual perception? ... We must 
remember from time to time why we 
renounced the world and test ourselves if we 
are really progressing towards the goal.” 


27th June. 


Swami: ‘His (Sri Ramakrishna’s) initia- 
tion was no ordinary thing—he would wake 
up spiritual consciousness at once. He 
‘would write some characters on the tongue 
and the disciple would feel something 
heaving up, wave after wave, within his 
chest. He asked me if I would like to have 
Abhisheka (TAntrik initiation). I said, ‘I do 
not know.’ ‘Then you need not have it,’ he 

> replied. Once when I was returning from 
the Kali temple, after saluting the Mother, 
he said about me, ‘His “‘home’’? is that 


1 By ‘home’ he evdiently meant that aspect 
of Divinity, which a disciple’s inherent tendencies 
and potentialities indicated to be the ideal which 
he was consciously or unconsciously seeking to 
realize. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


104 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


high Power from which proceed name and 
form.’ 

“I felt an intense longing for liberation. 
I wanted very much to realize God even in 
this very life.” 


28th June. 

Swami: “We have seen with our own 
eyes and heard with our own ears. The 
tremendous enthusiasm of Swami Viveka- 
nanda for God-realization used to dumbfound 
us and make us despair of ourselves, in spite 
of all encouragement and assurance from the 
Master. And we would think that this life 
would go in vain, without realizing God. 
But at last favourable days came through 
the grace of the Master. 

“You will be struck dumb with wonder 
if I tell you the story of Swami Vivekananda’s 
wandering days—the life of extreme renuncia- 
tion he then lived. Once in those days he 
wrote to me that he was passing his days 
‘like the crows, feeding himself—devoid of 
self-respect—at the house of others in great 
fear.’ ??1 


p 


*A quotation from the Vairâgya-Satakar 
Bhartrihari. Extreme selt abneranon and mae 
abasement are the sine qua non of true Vairâgya 
passionlessness and renunciation, He who pos- 
sesses nothing, to him alone the Lord comes, 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 105 


29th June. 
Swami: ‘“ ‘None else, He alone is my all 
in all’—when you will feel like this and will 
x not rely on anything, then will you be right. 
Now you are depending on earthly things, on 
wealth, man, and learning. Even great 
scholars get mad by a single screw getting 
loose in the brain. We do not rely on God. 
We rely on our money, our relations, our 
friends. But ‘O king, know that He is the 
treasure of those who have nothing.’ When 
nothing will intervene between you and Him, 
then you will realize Him. Sri Krishna had 
broken all the ties of the Gopis. But their 
sense of shame still remained. That tie also 
he broke at last. When the Lord sees that 
man is finding it hard to give up anything 
for Him, then He Himself takes it away. 
‘O Lord, take all things away from me, even 
those that I have kept hidden in my inmost 
heart.’ ‘If, O man, thou wilt cross the ocean 
of relative existence, thou must give up 
s desires for earthly things.’ 

“The Master used to say, ‘Do whatever 
you like after making the knowledge of 
oneness your own.’ That is to say, 
know the Lord as the soul of your soul, 
the life of your life, the eye of your eye, and 
love Him. Nothing else than this, such as 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


106 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


asking things of God, is true devotion. 
Supreme devotion cannot be had so long as 
there is the slightest desire in the mind.” 

My Master was read. Apropos of the 
passage, ‘‘Do you think that a man firmly 
convinced that there is a Reality behind all 
these appearances, ... One who is infinite 
bliss, a bliss compared with which these 
pleasures of the senses are simply playthings, 
can rest contented without struggling to 
attain It??? the Swami said: 

“Just see! Our God is only a verbal affair. 
A little meditation, a little Japa—this is a 
poor sort of life. The heart must burst 
hungering for Him. An intense anguish must 
fill it and life should seem to go out without 
Him—only then it will be right. 

“Nothing short of complete self-surrender 
to Him will do. You call Him the Inner 
Controller (AntaryAmin), omniscient, and 
omnipresent, and yet you are afraid to sur- 
render yourself to Him! ‘Thinkest thou 
that thou wilt realize Mother by thy hypo- 
critical devotion? No, no, this is not a 
sweet in a child’s hand that thou wilt cajole 
it out of Her.? You cannot deceive God. 
He sees all... . ‘Thou art the doer, not 
I; Thou art the mechanic, I am the machine.’ 
.... Tam a jealous God.’ If you love 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 107 


‘anything else than God and do not renounce 
all for Him, you cannot realize Him.’ 


30th June. 

Swami: ‘‘Nobody wants Him. Men want 
to get rid of their misery, to enjoy life. To 
conceive a ‘motiveless’ love for Him is very 
difficult. ... I knew a man who used to 


ery for solitude. But one day he asked, 
“Shall I marry again?’ ” 


Ast July. 

Swami: ‘‘Whenever Swamiji (Viveka- 
nanda) said ‘I’, he identified it with the all- 
‘comprehensive ‘I’, When we say ‘I’, we 
identify it with the body, the senses, and the 
mind. Hence we have to say ‘the servant I’, 
‘the devotee I.? Swamiji would never identify 
his ‘I’ with any adjunct of the Self—he 
would identify himself with Brahman and 
go beyond body, mind, and intellect. This 
‘was his central and normal mood, and in 
that he used to pass the greatest part of his 

$ time. But such a mood does not come to 
us. We are living separate from Him. 
Hence we have to say ‘Thou’ and ‘Thine’ 
in reference to God.” 

Disciple: ‘In order to realize the cosmic 
‘J’, should those who are dualistic in spiritual 
practice, study books on Advaita?” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


108 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Swami: “The Master used to say, ‘Do 
whatever you like after making the know- 
ledge of oneness your own. The true 
devotees always. say ‘Thou’ and ‘Thine’, R 
that is to say, ‘O Lord, Thou art every- 
thing, and everything is Thine.’ Wherein 
does this differ from Advaita? But if a 
devotee says ‘I’ and ‘mine’ and feels himself 
separate from and independent of Him, it 
is an extremely harmful dualism. Such a 
devotee is greatly deluded. The Master 
would often repeat ‘Not I, not I’, ‘Thou, 
Thou’, ‘I am Thy servant, I am Thy 
servant’, A devotee must completely 
renounce all ‘I’ and ‘mine’. How often Ram- 
prasad engaged himself in a loving quarrel 
with the Divine Mother and coaxed and 
cajoled Her! Such an intense and condensed 
spiritual mood must be realized—like water: 
condensed into ice. Only then can we have 
a vision of His Divine forms. Gopâler Mat 
saw Gopal following her gathering fire-wood 
for her, and Sri Ramakrishna saw Raémlala” 
going about with him. It is the intensity 


pone fe the chiet kdy disciples of Sri Rama- 
rishna. 2e used to have constant visi 
Gopâla (Child Krishna). Pee ya roi aR 
* Sri Ramakrishna worshipped Ramlalé or Child 
Raima for some time. At that time he used to see 
Him constantly. (See Life of Sri Ramakrishna). 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 109 


of spiritual feeling that counts. Whether 
you believe in His form or formlessness it 
does not matter. ‘O lotus, what kind of 
-love is thine? Thou givest only the smile of 
thy face to the sun thy husband. But thy 
honey thou yieldest to the bee!’ If one 
considers God to be all in all, how can one 
find joy in worldly things??? 


3rd July. 

Swami: “Eating, sleeping, fear, and 
sexual intercourse—these are common features 
‘of both animal and man. The speciality of 
man is that he has knowledge and can distin- 
guish right from wrong. The lower a man 
is, the greater is his joy in sense-objects. The 
higher he is, the greater is his pleasure in 
knowledge—a subtle joy which low natures 
cannot appreciate. See how they are spend- 
ing their days in drinking, hunting, and run- 
ning after women—just like beasts. What 
advantage is gained, being born a man, if 
we do not refine and elevate our faculties? 
Those who have a refined mind can never 
stoop to these things. 

“You want to go to the West? What is 
the use of making the mind out-going? 
Absorb yourself in meditation and be lost in 
Him. It would be excellent if you could 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi . 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


110 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


spend five years in exclusive meditation of 
the Master. Then the West and here would 
become one. 

“ ‘I do not care a rap for history or other 
things—God is everything.’—What a beauti- 
ful saying! . .. The stick of ego is lying 
on the waters of Sachchidénanda. This is 
making the waters appear as divided. Desires: 
create the ego. Desires keep us apart from 
God. But one day we shall have to erad- 
icate all desires and call on Him. What if » 
the body goes while calling on Him? 

“However great a man may be, whatever 
great deeds he may be doing, some day he 
will have to be desireless. After that, of 
course, he may work again through the will 
of God. But if you work at the command of 
a Mahapurusha, a man of realization, to 
whom you have surrendered your all’ and 
who seeks your good, work will not tighten. 
your bondage; on the other hand, it will 
break it. Always pray to Him that you may 
not forget Him. Pray: ‘Do not give me 
such work to do, as will make me forget 
Thee; and wherever Thou keepest me, may 
I ever remember Thee !? 

“But do not say to Him: ‘Give me 
this’, ‘Do not give me that.’ Tt will be a. 
selfish prayer. When you want to do one: 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 111 


thing and do not want to do another, you 
allow your ego to come in. Some there are, 
who are afraid of work and try to avoid it. 

A That makes their bondage and selfishness 
lasting. Pray to Him for Bhakti. But be 
ever ready to obey His commands. Pray: 
‘May I keep Thee in mind under all condi- 
tions! May I never fall into any other com- 
pany than that of Thy devotees !? ” 


. th July. 


Swami: ‘‘We must know once for all that 
everything happens at His will. Many clever 
persons were born in this world. But what 
has been their end? Everything comes about 
and is destroyed at His will. This organiza- 
tion of ours—will this last for ever? No, 
this also will one day be degraded and then 
the Lord will have to incarnate again. 


“A Brahmana is a spiritual beggar. He 
must not provide even for two days. He 
must be completely absorbed in God. 


x “The Master used to think meanly of those 
who lived with women. He used to say that 
they had no substance in them... . 


“Those who have not good reasoning 
powers, become easily biased towards one 
side. Swamiji had equally the power to 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


112 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


explain and to feel. ‘He knew the defects 
of people and yet forgave them.” 

Disciple: ‘*‘Cannot the mind remain alert 
and awake of itself??? > 

Swami: ‘‘But can that state come auto- 
matically? You must practise first. Try 
consciously to correct yourself first, then you 
will find that your mind has become its own 
monitor. People want to reach that state 
at once. The pure portion in you is God 
Himself. The impure portion is yourself. 
When you say ‘I’ you really mean that im- 
pure portion. The more you will think of 
Him, the more He will grow in you, and at 
last the impure portion will vanish com- 
pletely. : 

“There are some who are extremely 
reserved. They raise high walls around 
them and do. not allow anyone to see their 

- Inside. This is very bad. One cannot 
realize God without being frank and sincere.’ 


7th July. 


Swami: ‘The more you will free yourself 
of egotism and become His instrument, the 
more you will realize peace. The more you 
will feel that God is the only doer, not you, 
the more will your heart be filled with 
peace.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 113. 


9th July. 


Swami: ‘At first we also thought Nirvana 
to be the highest state of realization. How 
often the Master rebuked us for this! He 
used to say that it was a mean conception. 
I would be amazed to hear him call Nirvana 
a mean conception.”? 


18th July. 


Swami Vivekananda’s lecture on Vedint- 
ism was read. The Swami said : 

“His words have melted away into the air. 
With all your renunciation and your learn- 
ing, what have you been doing? Days are 
passing, but you are simply vegetating. 
Who ever feels or Says as the Master did at 
the end of each day, ‘O Mother, the day 
is gone, yet I have not seen Thee! You 
are damp, spiritless, and inactive. Do you 
not feel your blood wax hot when you read 
the words of Swamiji? ‘Who is living-dead ? 
He who is effortless.” You are twenty-seven 
years old. Swamiji said that he had achieved ó 
everything by his twenty-ninth year. 

“But you are not to blame. You do as 
you see. We are also not working hard 
enough. We say we are old and diseased. 
But that is all nonsense and lame excuse. 
We saw Swamiji working hard till the end. 

8 


i CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


114 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


During his last illness, he would press a 
pillow to his chest in order to relieve 
breathing difficulties, but he would still roar : 
‘Arise! awake! What are you doing?’ If 
the body is to go, let it go working. Rous- 
ing the Divinity in yourself and in others— 
that is the ideal. 

“If you are convinced of its truth, then be 
up and doing. Go out at once. Put off 
everything else. Now or never. Go to 
Uttarkasi and live there by the side of the 
Ganges and cry to Her saying, ‘Mother, I 
want only Thee, I want nothing else.’ Pre- 
pare the mind even now for living such a life. 
Work and everything else will be considered 
afterwards.” 


20th July. 


Swami: ‘You will have to work your 
mind yourself. Others cannot do that for 
you. The Master has said again and again: 
‘You must try a little. Only then will the 
Guru reveal the Truth.’ Let me tell you 
from our experience that if anyone advances 
towards Him a single step, He advances 
towards him ten ‘steps. This is our personal 
experience. If you do not exert, none can 
do anything for you. 

“The Great Ones point out the way. Is 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 115 


that little help? If you tell us your difficul- 
ties, we can help you. We also have travel- 
led the same path, so we can tell you about 

à it. Does one want that the butter should 
be churned out and held before one’s lips >— 
Even then he keeps his mouth shut! Have 
we to feed him also? This is a mental 
disease, Styâna (idleness)—the mind refuses 
to labour or do anything. 


“Do you ask, ‘Will not the Lord do any- 
thing for His devotee?? Yes, He will. But 
you will have to become a devotee first, you 
must learn to feel devotion for Him. And 
devotion, Bhakti, is no trifling thing. You 
have to give Him your mind, life, everything. 
If you cannot do that, then cry to Him for 
not having attained Him, for not loving Him. 
People have to shed potfuls of tears before 
they can earn money. If you do not do that 
for God, why should He do anything for you? 
Little does He care! If you feel miserable 
for want of Him, know that He is very near 

e to you—you will soon have His vision, you 
will soon attain infinite bliss. 

“You must analyse your mind very care- 
fully. The Master asked me to increase my 
lust infinitely. I was amazed to hear it. 
He then explained: ‘What is lust? It is 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


116 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


the desire to get. Then desire to get Him 
and strengthen this desire greatly.’... 

“Everyone wants to exhibit his good side 
and conceal his defects. Whoever can speak 
out his own faults frankly, will get rid of 
them. It is not easy to confess one’s weak- 
nesses. If anyone can, know that he has 
worth in him. 

“You must make everyone your own. 
The more you will approach God, the more 
you will become frank, sincere, and generous. 
Our Master was the very personification of 
guilelessness and sincerity. 

“He who has realized the Personal God 
can also realize the Impersonal, if he so wills. 
But he often retains his ‘I’ in order to taste 
the love and bliss of God. He also has the 
knots of his heart sundered and has realized 
his real nature. He does not seek Nirvana. 
He is no longer afraid of the world. He who 
wants Nirvana laboriously works his way to 
the goal, ever anxiously protecting himself 
against the world. But is it not better to. 
be afraid of nothing? 

“The Lord of the devotee can be both 
angry and pleased. The Master used to say 
that he could not bear the sight of egotistic 
persons. Those who go tò God without 
seeking Nirvana are Isvarakotis.?? 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 117 


In course of a letter which the Swami 

wrote that day to a devotee, he observed: 

“If you are miserable for not having realized 

a God, the more this mood grows, the more 

you will earn His grace. Intensify it still 

more. But if your misery is due to other 
reasons, then carefully shake it off.?? 


29th July. 


Swami: ‘*Why will you not realize Him? 
Surely you will. Or why have you come 
here? Cry to Him—make Him restless. 
Strike your head on the ground till it breaks 
(in the agony of your soul). Tell Him: 
‘Thou art the Inner Controller. Look within 
me, see if there is anything.’ Even to pray 
to Him thus is something.” : 


30th July. 


Swami: ‘The Master one day spoke thus 
about his throat-disease. He was asked if he 
felt the affections in his throat. The Master 

e replied : ‘What foolish things you say! 
Does the body ever attain Sidhuhood? It is 
the mind that becomes such.’ Unless the 
mind remains unaffected, a mere Spartan-like 
fortitude does not count much—you feel the 
pain, only you suppress its outward expres- 
sion. If you feel that all pains and suffer- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


118 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


ing are of your body, not your own, and that. 
you are separate from the body, only then are 
you right. 

“You must finish all your spiritual prac- 
tices long before old age and decrepitude 
overtake you. ‘What is the use of digging 
a well, when the house is already on fire?’ 

“Mere suppression of passions helps little. 
There must be a high ideal. along with self- 
restraint. Without a high ideal, the passions 
will find another outlet. You must give 
them a new direction, then you will be auto- 
matically rid of them. ‘Take refuge in Me 
and control the senses.? As for example. 
lust. Think that you are His child. Why 
should you be so low as to be lustful? Or 
think that you are ever pure. 

“To stand on one’s own legs means to 
rely on that ‘I’ which comprehends the 
cosmic ‘I’, not on the ‘I’ which thinks that 
it is so-and-so and has passed so many exami- 
nations ete.—to stand on this is of no use.. 

“Work should be looked upon as a Yajna, 
a sacrifice. The whole work should be done 
perfectly, even as one would perform a sacri- 
fice. Every work should be considered a 
Sadhana, a means to God-realization. Only 
thus would character be formed.” 

Swami S.: “Tt is very good to meditate 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 119: 


before sleeping and pass into sleep while thus 
meditating. V— used to have very deep 
meditation. But the moment the Master 

à would touch him, he would wake up looking 
at him. Nityagopal used to pass very often 
into deep ecstatic states. His eyes would 
roll up and his chest would turn quite red. 
And when he would meditate, all blood would 
rush to his face and it would look red. The 
Master used to say to him: ‘Not so much, 
not so much. You must also keep to the 
common human ways.’ ” 

Swami: “TI tell you from my inmost 
heart, I can this moment go away even as I 
am now, without caring to look about to see 
how things are left behind. Even now I can 
live on alms. Without this conviction I shall 
be undone. 

‘Man always seeks advantage. He has 
been doing it not only in this life but also in 
many previous lives. Mukti (emancipation) 
is nothing but giving up seeking advantage. 

. Man wants to avoid suffering; he is always 
sparing himself. Swamiji used to say that 
man wants only to gossip. 

“This (Sannyâsin) life is no fun. One 
must live very cautiously. One must be very 
alert and circumspect. One must never retal- 
iate, one must always endure. If you retal- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


120 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


iate, it must rebound on you. It is no child’s 
play. The Sannyasin’s life is an attempt at 
going beyond all life. He alone will be saved, 
who will dwell constantly on good thoughts.’’ 


20th August. 

Swami: ‘Meditation begins with the uni- 
fication of the meditator, the object of medi- 
tation, and the act of meditation, when the 
idea of separation between them is oblitera- 
ted. When Japa has become automatic, 
when a portion of the mind ever repeats 

_ the Name of itself, one may be said to have 
advanced a little in Japa. In all cases the 
‘I’ must be forgotten. 

“At one time I felt that even every foot- 
step of mine was through His power and that 
I was nothing. I clearly felt this. This 
feeling lasted for some days. 

“Never expect anything from anyone. 
But always give. Otherwise a sense of dry- 
ness will overtake you. I have seen many 
Sédhus who are dry and who think that 
because they have become Sadhus they have 
nothing to do with others. ... But you 
must not give your mind to anyone. That 
you must give only to God. That is why 
you have not married. Pray crying to Him, 
‘O Lord, may I love Thee with all my heart !? 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 121 


The Master would instruct us to work with 
the hands but to keep the mind ever on Him. 

“God is not partial. His grace is on all, 

> the good and the evil, just as rains fall equally 
on all places. Whoever tills the land reaps the 
harvest. If anyone says that he is specially 
beloved of the Lord, that is his own idea and 
attitude. He says so from the experience of 
his own life. But it is not true. 

“There is another attitude, according to 
which God keeps some in bondage and 
releases others. But who can assume this 
attitude? Only he who has realized every- 
thing as one and who feels His mercy even 
amidst great sorrow. 

“There is a third attitude: Whatever is 
good is His, and whatever is bad is the result 
of our own Karma. If we continue this atti- 
tude, we may eventually get rid of the ego.” 


7th September. 


Swami: “The Jnânis meditate in the 
* head, the Bhaktas in the heart. We general- 
ly find so. But when as a result of medita- 
tion in the heart, spiritual consciousness 
expands, there is no more any fixed location 
of meditation. 
“The Master had two moods: Sometimes 
he said that he did not like Divine forms, not 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


122 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


even Kali, and his mind would be immersed 
in the Absolute. At other times, he said that 
he could not do without Divine forms, and 
he would say to the Divine Mother that he 
did not want to see Her formless aspect or 
have Brahma-jnana. He who rejects every- 
thing and gets lost in the formless Brahman 
is one-sided. The Jnâni is afraid of rebirth 
lest he be caught in the meshes of Ignorance. 
But the expert player is not afraid of any- 
thing. Similarly, he who has realized only 
the forms of God, but not His formless 
absolute aspect, is also one-sided. 

“It is said in the Puranas that the Divine 
forms survive even the dissolution of the 
entire universe. As the Master used to say, 
there are places where the ice does not melt. 

“Do not accept any gifts from anyone. 
For the gifts will harm you, they will take 
away your independence. He alone can 
accept, who feels no obligation, whose mind 
is not affected, who feels them as gifts from 
God Himself. You may accept gifts only from 
good men who would not interfere with your 
independence and seek to control you. 

“Tt is very difficult to truly understand the 
intricacies of the mind without being an ad- 
vanced Sâdhaka. How many are the ways 
in which the mind is deluding us! If anyone 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 123. 


points out the delusions, we find excuses for 
them! We do not understand how many 
kinds of self-love are in us. It is no joke to 

à submit to anyone—not outwardly, but in 
spirit. 

“Swami Vivekananda was once reading 
the Bible. He was in those days a vege- 
tarian. When he read of Jesus’s flesh-eating, 
he did not like it. But at once he thought : 
‘Oh, how proud I have become because I am 
living on vegetables!’ We read a lot, but 
can feel, retain, and assimilate little. Once 
the Master said to Girish Ch. Ghosh: ‘What 
are you talking of Brahma-jnina! Sukadeva 
saw and touched the Ocean of Brahman. 
And Siva drank only three handfuls of Its 
water and became a Sava (corpse).’ Girish 
Ghosh clasped his head and exclaimed : 
‘Stop, sir, say no more. My head is reeling.’ 

“Formerly my nerves were very fine, and 
I had great powers of explaining things. 
Whenever anyone put me a question, I 

« could see everything from its very origin to 
its outer expression—I could see from what 
motive he spoke and why. And there was a 
flood of light in a single word of mine. 

“I used to observe absolute silence during 
the Navaratri. I would feel a sort of intoxi- 
cation and the mind would be one-pointed. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


124 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


I have done what one being .born a man 
should do. My aim was to make my life 
pure. I used to read a great deal, eight or 
nine hours daily. I read many Puranas and 
then Vedanta and my mind finally settled on 
Vedanta. The Master said jokingly to me: 
“Tell me something of Vedanta. Does not 
Vedanta say that Brahman is true and world 
false? Or does it say anything else? Then 
give up the false and take the true.’ This 
was a turning-point in my life.” 


4th November. 


Swami: “I travelled widely in the early 
‘days. I went towards the Narmada, alone, 
without a pice with me, and I slept anywhere. 
I went via Allahabad, Chitrakut, Rewa and 
Jubbalpore, all on foot. Whenever I travelled 
I kept a place of pilgrimage in view and 
found out my way by enquiring of people. 
I went next to Hardwar, Hrishikesh, Uttar- 
kasi, ete. I thought of not coming down 
from the mountains. I lived happily in the 
Gharwal hills, totally forgot the existence of ` 
‘the world, and aimed only at God-realization. 
I meditated and read a great deal. But 
Swamiji made me come down. I met him at 
Meerut. Some seven or eight of us lived 
together at Delhi. Then Maharaj (Swami 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 125. 


Brahmananda) spoke of visiting Jawalji and 
asked me to accompany him. So I went with 
him to Jawalji, Gopinathpur, Baijnath,. 
a Pathankot, Multan, Gujranwala, Montgomery 
and so on. And then we came down to: 
Bombay via Karachi. At Bombay we met 
Swamiji about to embark for America. He- 
said that the Parliament of Religions at 
Chicago was all for him, as though he saw 
the future. He asked me to return to the: 
Math and to allow Mahârâj to travel alone. 

“I stayed for some time at Mt. Abu. From 
there I went to Ajmere and Pushkar and then 
to Brindaban where I stayed for six months. 
The next six months I passed at Lucknow.. 
Then I went to Ayodhya. At Ayodhya 
Mahapurush (Swami Shivananda) met me: 
and asked me to come to the Math. 

“Though I travelled much, I also studied 
much all along. At Brindaban I studied a 
great deal of Bhakti scriptures. It is not 
good to wander much if you do not at the 

á same time continue your Sadhana. 

“In the Jagannath temple at Puri, 
suddenly a sound came to my ears and my 
heart was filled with a great joy so much so 
that I felt like walking in the air. The- 
sound continued in various strains. My 
whole mind felt attracted. I then remember- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


126 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


ed what I had read of Anahata Dhvani 
(music of the spheres as it is called) and I 
thought it must be that. 

“At Ujjain, I was one night sleeping under 
a tree. A storm came and suddenly some 
one touched me on the body. I got up and 
at once a branch fell where I had slept. 

“When I first read the verse in which it 
is said that life is meant for the realization of 
Jivanmukti, I leapt in joy. For that indeed 
was the purpose of my life. 

“ ‘The first door of Yoga is the control 
of speech, non-acceptance of gifts, non- 
expectation, desirelessness and love of soli- 
tude.’ This verse had a great influence on 
me. Formerly I used to talk much. When 
I read it I thought, ‘What! I have not 
entered even the first door of Yoga!’ and I 
resolved that I would control my speech. 
I did not talk with anyone, lived by myself 
-and acted as I thought best. And I did not 
utter a single word during the nine days of 
the Navaratri. 

“It was Sankara who moulded my life. 
Before I came to the Master, a single verse 
of Sankara used to lift me a step up and give 
me a flood of light. In those days I used 
to find much new meaning in the verses. 
‘What is Parigraha (acceptance of gifts) P 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 127 


Even if you do not accept any gilt, there 
may, still be Parigraha. To think of means 
for the future, that is Parigraha. Birth and 
rebirth, all follow from Parigraha. We are 
already thinking of ways and means for the 
future. Wherever our mind is, there we also 
are. If you do not have Parigraha, where 
would your mind be? Naturally on the 
Atman itself. This one practice of Apari- 
graha can take you to the highest. 

“Once I was sitting alone by the Ganges 
after my companions had left. I began to 
meditate and after some time it struck 


2 o’clock. Then someone suddenly said, 


‘Come, let us go home.’ These words seemed 
to club me on the head. I understood that 
they had come from my mind itself. There 
was really no home. But the mind had been 
thinking that there was a home where I was 
to return. I then determined that I would 
destroy this tendency of the mind. 

“Oh, those days are coming to my mind. 
While I lived at Srinagar Ghat, I used to 
rise very early and bathe. Then I would sit 
in meditation and afterwards read. At 
eleven, I would rise and procure some food 
in an hour. Then I would again begin medita- 
tion and Japa. And thus every day. It was 
there that I committed eight Upanishads to 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


128 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


memory. I would meditate on every verse 
I read and what an indescribable joy it was ! 
I used to read the commentary of Sankara 


and the gloss of Jnânânanda. And much À 
further light used to come through medita- 
tion.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 1938 


without performing, will be waiting for you— 
only to appear again. Face the brute! You 
can’t save yourself by flight. Taking up the 
monastic life will be advantageous, while the 
householder’s life is disadvantageous—such 
considerations are futile. You cannot come 
to the next stage without performing the 
duties of the previous one. Aspire after higher 
things but never shirk the present duties. 
Don’t do that. The case of those who live a 
celibate life from their boyhood is different. 
They have come with such good Samskaras 
that even if they. live in the world, they will 
live there as Sannyâsins. You are what you 
are—you cannot jump to a higher stage. 
Avoidance is not good, nor is it possible. Do 
your duties in the world but think of God all 
the while. The case of the woman in love 
who thinks always of her lover in all her 
daily duties is an illustration in point. One 
must pray from the bottom of one’s: heart 
to have a steadfast devotion for God. To 
make oneself fit, association with Sadhus 
and occasional retirement into solitude are 


butter first, and then only it won’t get mixed 
up by remaining in water. The greatness of 
13 + 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


194 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


a Sadhu is in proportion to the amount of 
self-examination he has made—to the degree 
of intimate knowledge he has of his ins and 
outs. Self-examination is a very difficult 
task. It is extremely difficult to detect the 
tricks that the mind plays. Great God!” 


5th July. 


It is drizzling today, but the heat is very 
oppressive. 

Swami: “It is very troublesome to sleep 
in the verandah—there is not a breath of air. 
(To Swami A.) Well, what’s the use of 
taking all this trouble? They are doing so 
much for this body, but is it any way the 
better? wai awig —The body is but 
fragile.’ ” 

The talk drifted on to the orphanage at the 
Sevdsrama and the education of the boys. 

Swami: ‘‘The country has taken up the 
idea of the Sevasrama. Don’t you see how 
many Sevadsamitis are being started? Now 
we can stand by and let the thing be in the 
background. I had a talk about this with 
Swami Saradananda. We have not as yet 
been able to do anything in the field of educa- 
tion. This work should be taken up now.” 

Swami Á.: “Sir, in the verandah of our 
Boys’ Home we can start a class for day 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 195 


scholars, but then the difficulty is that the 
boys, when they come to understand that 
they have neither to pay school-fees nor fines, 
lose sight of their interests so much that they 
begin to be very irregular.”? 

Swami: ‘‘They should be warned and 
expelled. D— Babu also wishes that such a 
school be started. — has offered some land 
for it, and the girls’ school has already been 
opened. He is now in want of capable 
teachers for boys. 

“Well, I don’t find really capable men. 
There are so many graduates now, but 
one vainly looks for that spirit in them. Iam 
not for any sweeping remark, but the 
majority are a bit wayward. Their idea is 
that when they have left home they should 
by all means avoid work. They think of 
doing their bit of allotted work, and no more. 
Some, again, remark that these are Swamiji’s 
ideas and not Sri Ramakrishna’s. Goodness 
gracious! Are Swamiji’s views different from 
6 Sti Ramakrishna’s? If any has doubts, why 

doesn’t he come forward and have them 
solved? Discussions are always beneficial. 
Do you know —? He also holds the same 
view. When I was lying seriously ill at the 
Holy Mother’s place in Calcutta, I used to 
have long discussions with him. He would 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


196 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


say, ‘Let us first find out the truth through 
contemplation, and then we shall work.’ 

“Everybody says he would practise medi- 
tation and Japa. But does he really do à 
that? And is this the only way to realiza- 
tion? To be in the Order and not accept its. 
creed is very bad. One must see what the 
creed is. They would take all the advantages 
of the Mission but won’t accept its creed. 
The spirit of Swamiji—that he would be born 
a hundred times simply to serve others—this: 
is the creed of the Mission, which they should 
by all means accept. Otherwise why should 
they be in it? Are there not lots of monks? 
Let them beg their food and meditate.”? 


6th July. 

The Swami was seated in the verandah sur- 
rounded by Brahmacharins and SannyAsins. 

Swami : “With whatever evil tendencies. 
one may come, one is sure to improve in 
holy company. As when you go to an otto 
shop, the scent will enter your nostrils, à 
whether you will it or not. Well, people are 
not often inclined to associate with holy 
persons, and few have the capacity to do so. 
Sri Ramakrishna would be talking and the 
devotees listening, but their companions. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


oo 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 197 


would whisper, ‘Well, let us go, how long 
will you be listening?’ The devotees of 
course would have no inclination to leave, 
and their friends would say in exasparation, 
“So you remain here, we shall be waiting in 
the boat.” How beautifully would Sri Rama- 
krishna describe this ! 

«Well, holy association is bound to produce 
good effects, for life only can communicate 
life. Nothing but a round body can give a 
round shadow. Life can give much more 
than writing can. What a tremendous 
difference is there between reading and hear- 
ing a lecture! In writing, also, the more 
life one puts into it, the more effective it 
becomes. Look at Swamiji’s writings and 
those of other Swamis. Personality is the 
chief thing. It is only a handful of men who 
are directing this world—the rest follow like 
sheep. On his return from his travels all the 
world over Swamiji remarked, ‘Democracy 
isa myth. Only a handful of men rule every- 
where.’ 

“A country goes to ruin when it fails to 
produce the right type of men for its task. 
Ours is a religious country. She has all along 
been producing saints. Show me one period 
of her history when she has failed in this. A 
single life has been inspiring thousands of 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


198 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


people—and that for centuries! Look at 
Nanak. Look at Kabir. See how long 
Tulsidés has been swaying this part of the 
country (United Provinces). 

“Today a lady came to me who has recent- 
ly been widowed. I had a talk with her 
about Sri Ramakrishna. Her people had 
invited Swami Premananda to their place. 
Her husband’s brother is a graduate who is 
conducting a school in his village. He is an 
honorary worker. A new spirit has come 
into the country. It will take time, it is 
true, but undoubtedly there is a stir all over 
the land. Formerly there was not the bold- 
ness of speech that we meet with now.” 


8th July. 


Swami: “It is very difficult to get rid of 
bad influences, if once they have a hold on 
the mind. If the youths are convinced of the 
utility of chastity and the evils of its oppo- 
site, they may afterwards marry and turn 
out decent citizens. Those who are spiri- X 
tually bent are free from temptation, for 
chastity is the bed-rock of spirituality. Un- 
less one is chaste, the mind is never steady. 
‘The body is formed of the elements and is 
swayed by thought. If the mind-stuff is 
disturbed the elements are destroyed. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 199 


Therefore it should be carefully protected. 
A steady mind-stuff only can give rise to a 
bright understanding.”+ 


“The best element in our body is pre- 
served by chastity. If there is no chastity 
the mind-stuff becomes unsteady. Then 
the image of the Chosen Deity (Ishta) is no 
more clearly reflected in it. Sri Ramakrishna 
used to say, ‘If the coating of mercury is all 
right, then the mirror gives a perfect image 
but if there is any break, the image is 
defective.’ What is the mind-stuff? It is 
that which gives rise to thought—where the 
first impression is received. So it is clear that 
if the very source of thought is agitated, 
meditation is out of the question. We 
simply go on reading ‘mind-stuff (Chitta), 
mind, intellect,’ but which is which, one has to 
understand by diving deep into the interior. 
It is difficult to escape if the mind-stuff has 
already received bad impressions. Hence 
the Lord says in the Gité: ‘Therefore, O 
Arjuna, first control the organs and kill the 
wicked lust, which destroys both Knowledge 
and Realization.’ Look at the immensity of 
the evil! 

«© If the mind, which is outgoing in its 


1 Vivekachudémani. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


200 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


= 


activities, is ever so slightly deflected from the 
Ideal, it goes down and down, even as a play- 
ball inadvertently dropped at the head of a 
staircase goes down bumping from one step to h 
another !?* How it goes down, and down, 
till it reaches the extreme limit of the fall 1” 

Q: ‘Does one attain to the knowledge of 
Brahman by practising chastity for twelve 
years at a stretch?” 

Swami: ‘Undoubtedly. Through the 
power of Ojas* the knowledge of Brahman 
unfolds itself. The Knowledge already 
exists, we have only to unfold it. If you can 
Maintain your chastity for twelve years, the 
mind gets steady, with the result that the 
Knowledge unfolds itself. What power but 
this helped Swamiji to revolutionize the 
world! About Keshab Chandra Sen Sri 
Ramakrishna used to say, ‘Had Keshab 
renounced the world, he could have done 
much more work.’ 

“Swamiji used to tell us, ‘Do you think A 
I only lecture? I know I give them some- ü 
thing solid, and they know they receive some- 
thing solid.” In New York Swamiji was 
lecturing to a class. Oh, the tremendous 


; Avadhuta Gita. 
Sexual energy converted into spiritual energy. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA — 20) 


effect of it! K. said that while listening to 
the lecture he felt as if some force was draw- 
ing the Kundalini up, as at the time of medi- 
tation. After the lecture was finished (it 
took an hour) K. announced that he would 
hold a question class. Most of the audience 
had gone after Swamiji’s lecture. Swamiji 
rebuked—saying, ‘A question-class after this ! 
Do you want to spoil the effect of my lec- 
ture?’ Just see! Oh, what a Power Sri 
Ramakrishna left for the world in Swamiji ! 
Hasn’t he changed the very thought-current 
of the world? Think of the strength of one 
whom nothing could attract. Once a monk 
frankly told me that for eighteen years he had 
been grinding Vedanta, but was not yet 
above the temptation of sex. His mind had 
evidently imbibed some impressions. To 
root out impressions is an uphill task. But 
if one has the determination to say, ‘What if 
I have once done something wrong? Now I 
know what it is; so I won’t do it any more’, 
then one can get through. About monks 
Swamiji used to say, ‘A Sâdhu can have all 
his faults forgiven, but unchastity is un- 
pardonable. He must be strictly continent.’ 
Swamiji moved amongst ladies—beauti- 
ful, rich, and gifted—but none could attract 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


202 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


him. Rather he attracted them to himself. 
Can you conceive it? 

“A householder devotee once had a nice 
experience. He had drunk freely and was very 
excited. He stopped his carriage before a 
house of ill fame and went up the stairs. At 
the head of the staircase before the door he 
found Sri Ramakrishna standing! He fled in 
shame. Unless God saves us, there is no 
way out. Blessed are those who have no 
evil impressions upon their minds—whom 
He protects. They alone are saved. None 
can escape from this by personal exer- 
tions. But then Sri Ramakrishna used to 
say, ‘If you are sincere, Mother will set 
everything right.” There must be sincerity— 
it won’t do to profess one thing and meditate 
on another. You may pass for an honest 
man before others, but you cannot hood- 
wink yourself. You are your own witness. 
So, if you pray to the Lord, with your whole 
heart, He cannot but listen—take my word 
for it. But you must not be a hypocrite. 
Swamiji used to say, ‘Such a man allows 
himself to fall into the trap and then laments 
his fate.’ What’s the use of weeping after 
the deed is done? Say like a hero, ‘I wont 
do it any more!? Then only will the Lord 
come to your help. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 2038 


“There is no creature more despicable than 
a person subject to passion. To what indig- 
nities he puts himself! Thank your stars 
that you have escaped its influence. Even 
men of light and leading give way to it. 
There is a story of a king who was very 
henpecked. One day a friend touched on this 
weak point of his, and from that time he tried 
to correct himself. He came to his inner 
apartments, but talked little with the queen 
except on important matters. He was very 
grave. The queen undertsood everything. 
The king was taking his meal, and the queen’s 
pet cat was nibbling at his plate. He was 
trying to drive the animal but it would not 
keep away. The queen thereupon tauntingly 
reminded him that the animal had enough 
indulgence already, and was not to be beaten 
off now. One cannot remove a pest that has 
already got indulgence. One must hold the 
reins tight in one’s own hand, and never 
relax them. Otherwise the case is hopeless. 

“Swamiji used to say, ‘Ready to attach 
and ready to detach any minute!’ We take 
up a work and get attached to it—we cannot 
detach ourselves from it. But this should 
not be. We must have the power to give 
up at will—to leave everything behind, for 
nothing is really ours. Look at Sri Rama- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


204 SPIRITUAL TALKS 
krishna. Hriday was ordered to clear out of 
Dakshineswar. The Durwan came and said 
to Sri Ramakrishna, ‘You will have to leave 
this place.’ ‘What do you mean? It is not 
I, but Hriday,’ replied Sri Ramakrishna. 
The man said, ‘No, my’ master has ordered 
that both of you should go.’ This decided 
the question. He put on his slippers and 
moved towards the gate. Trailokya Babu! 
saw this from the concert room, ran and fell 
at his feet, saying, ‘Sir, why are you going? 
I have not asked you to quit.’ Without 
speaking a word Sri Ramakrishna came back. 
Just see, there was not a bit of animus in 
his renunciation. And how we raise a dust 
over our deeds! Had we been in his place, 
we would surely have given the Babu a piece 
of our mind. But Sri Ramakrishna said 
nothing—he was as ready to go away as to 
return. 

“He used to be shabbily dressed, so much 
so that one day a man mistook him for a 
gardener and ordered him to pluck a rose for 
him, which he immediately did. Some time 
after, that very man came to know about his 
mistake and stammered out an apology. At 
this Sri Ramakrishna said that there was 


i Grandson of Rani Rasmani. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 205 


nothing wrong in it, as one asking for help 
should be assisted by all means! Isn’t it 
grand? Again, look at Swamiji. He gave 
away everything not to his disciples but to 
his brother-disciples. Among the first trustees 
of the Math you will find only his brother- 
disciples, and not one disciple. He used to 
live upon a private fund, for as he said, ‘I 
have given away everything.’ Once he wrote 
to me, ‘Now that I have given everything to 
you, I am at peace.’ What a wonderful man ! 
You could have seen his influence, had you 
been to the West. He himself used to say, 
‘My work will be more in the West; thence it 
will react on India.’ 


“One day he was very much annoyed and 
said, ‘I see I have to conduct the whole music 
single-handed—to sing and play the instru- 
ments and do everything myself, with none 
to help me!’ 

“Sri Ramakrishna knew a lot about 
things. Girish Babu once said to him, 
‘You are my superior in every respect—even 
in wicked things.’ At this Sri Ramakrishna 
said, ‘No, no, it is not so. Here (meaning 
himself) there are no Samskfras. There is a 
world of difference between knowing a thing 
by actual experience and learning about it 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


206 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


through study or observation. Experience 

leaves impressions on the mind which it is 

very difficult to get rid of. This is not the 

case with knowledge through study or á 
observation.’ ” 


9th July. 

The Swami was talking to a boy; he 
asked him : 

“You practise meditation, don’t you? 
Meditation can be on divine forms as well as 
on Om. As one goes on meditating, the 
mind gets absorbed in Om. TATA AAA | 
As one goes on ‘repeating Om and reflecting 
on its meaning,’ the mind becomes steady, 
that is to say, it does not give it up. 
“Through surrender to God all the obstruc- 
tions to the concentration of the mind are 
destroyed and one realizes one’s Self.’ 

“Then Patanjali says about the obstruc- 
tions to Yoga. What are those distracting 
influences? They are as follows: One may 
get diseased. Either one becomes mad or has à 
some serious illness that prevents any further 
progress. Lassitude is inaction of the mind 
or torpidity. Doubt is cogitating whether a 
thing is of this kind or that—whether a partic- 
ular course of action will produce the desired 
results or not. Not doing that which will 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 207 


a 


lead to Samadhi or Yoga is inadvertence. 
Laziness is the want of proper care or exertion 
owing to an excess of Tamas or dullness. 

à Attachment is attraction for sense-objects. 
Delusion is mistaking one thing for another. 
Not reaching the higher states of Samâdhi is 
what is called non-attaining of heights. There 
is one more, viz. the inability to stay on in 
a particular state of Samâdhi already 
attained. These disturb the mind and 
prevent Yoga. All these obstructions are 
removed if one meditates on Om. But then, 
a man may not at all be disposed to 
meditate ! 

“When one suffers from biliousness, even 
sugar-candy tastes bitter. But that is the 
medicine for it. If one regularly uses it, the 
disease will disappear and the sugar-candy 
also will taste sweet. Similarly with the name 
of God. If a man under nescience repeats 
it every day, even as a medicine, in time it 
becomes sweet. The trouble will go and he 

A will also be able to taste the sweetness of the 
$ Lord’s name. It will destroy the very roots 
of the disease of nescience. Therefore one 
should practise repeating it even against one’s 
wishes. He who gives it up is lost. The 
Gitâ says, “The mind, O Arjuna, is controlled 
by practice and non-attachment.’ It also 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
. 208 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


says, ‘One should slowly withdraw one’s mind 
from sense-objects through patient discrim- 
ination. Fixing the mind on the Self, one 
must no more think of anything else.’ á 

“The author of the Yoga-Sutras says, ‘By 
carefully persisting in practice, for long and 
without intermission, the concentration 
becomes steady.? We must attain to a 
steady concentration. The young plant 
needs to be hedged round, but when the tree 
is big, it requires protection no more. 
We must have steadfastness to the ideal. - 
As soon as we decide that a certain course is 
right, we must resolve to give up our life for 
it. We must have decision in our character. 
‘O Arjuna, the decisive judgment here is one, 
but people of unsettled minds have innumer- 
able varying ideas.? We must decide on a 
particular course and devote our whole life 
to it. 

amaaa: —‘From continence comes 
strength.” We must make ourselves fit, Before 
taking up any work, make yourself fit for it. by 
Because Ramamurti has stopped a running 
motor car, would it be proper on my part 
to try to do so? It would be foolish. 
But it is not an altogether impossible feat, 
If one watches how he does it, and makes 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 209 


oneself gradually fit, then one can do it, as 
Gobar is doing. Most people do not know 
their own strength. It was Jâmbavân who 
a roused the power of Hanumân. Angada 
asked the monkeys as to which of them 
would be able to cross the sea for the sake of 
Râma and return after finishing his work. 
Someone said he could go but not return. 
Then Jâmbavân said, ‘Here is one who can 
both go and return.’ Then he narrated the 
valiant deeds of Hanuman—how immediately 
after his birth he had jumped to the sun to 
catch it. This had the effect of rousing 
Hanumin’s self-confidence. He started on 
i his aerial journey. On the way, Suramâ, 
f 


assuming the shape of a serpent, confronted 
him and said, ‘Pass through my mouth 
before you go.” Hanuman first saluted her 
and said, ‘Now I am going on Râma’s errand. 
Let me finish it first. On my return I shall 
pass through your mouth.’ See how courte- 
ous he was. The line of least resistance. 
E ss Surama said, ‘No, you must do it now.’ 
Hanuman was in a fix. He increased his 
; bulk, but Suramâ, too, did the same. Each 
`; vied with the other in increasing the stature. 
Finding it was of no use, Hanumân suddenly 
contracted his body to a tiny size and passed 
through. 
14 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


210 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


«The best servant is he who acts in 
anticipation of his master’s wish; he who 
acts after the orders are issued is the mediocre 
servant; and the worst servant is he who gets 
the order but neglects to carry it out. 

“Couriers were being sent out in search of 
Sité. Everyone started. But Hanuman, 
before leaving, asked for credentials. From 
this Rama understood that he would succeed. 
He whispered to him the required message. 
Reaching Lanki, Hanuman gave ample proof 

` of his bravery, by humiliating Ravana. 

“Books on Yoga say that all power is in us. 
We must control the mind through proper 
discipline, then only will its powers be mani- 
fested. For the accumulation of spiritual 
power absolute continence is needed. 

“It is very difficult to be a disciple. 
Haven’t you heard the story? A man 
wanted to be a disciple. He went to a Guru 
and said, ‘Sir, make me a disciple.’ The 
Guru replied, ‘Will you be able to be one? 
A disciple has to draw water, fetch wood and 
serve the teacher. Will you be able to do 
all this?? Then the man said, ‘And what 
has the Guru to do?’ The teacher replied 
‘Not much to speak of. He sits at ease and 
now and then gives a little instruction. 
That’s all.? Then the man said, ‘If you 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 211 


think it difficult for me to be a disciple, why 
don’t you make me a Guru instead ?? How 
funny, everybody wants to reap the harvest 
without sowing the seed. The fit man over- 
comes his defects bit by bit. If you try to 
do it all of a sudden, you won’t succeed, for 
they will persist. Therefore one should with- 
draw the mind slowly. 

« ‘There the sun does not shine, nor the 
moon, nor stars, nor even lightning. So fire 
is nowhere. It shining, everything else 
shines. Through its lustre all this is shining.’ 
We have mixed up the subject and the object. 
They can be separated. I am the subject— 
not the object. The whole universe up to 
Buddhi (intellect) falls under the category 
of the object. q& quna we gaq —‘There 
being no further cause, the First Cause is 
uneaused.? How much must they have 
thought who first discovered these truths ! 

“Discrimination must be thorough, or it is 
hs of no use. Children often say, ‘Heaven bear 

witness !? What a funny idea! They have 
picked up the phrase from someone. They 
do not reason on the idea, so they say it. 
“As a bird flies to the sky with its two 
wings, so we must have the two wings of 
discrimination and renunciation to climb to 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


212 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


the edifice of Liberation. If one has real dis- 
crimination and renunciation, one is safe. A 
man runs after water in a mirage only so long 
as he mistakes the mirage for real water. 
Once the delusion is broken, nobody goes 
after a mirage for water. The truth about it 
is that he only escapes whom the Mother Her- 
self holds by the hand. Sri Ramakrishna 
used to say, ‘A finger-print is clear when the 
ink is all right, and if it is bad the impression 
also is bad. Spiritual instructions make a 
lasting impression on the mind that possess- 
es discrimination and renunciation, and when 
there is a deficiency in these the impression 
produced is proportionately small. 


Afternoon. 


Alluding to spiritual exercises such as con- 
centration and meditation the Swami said: 
“aa yaaa AT I— When the mind is with- 
drawn from all other objects except one and 
fixed on the latter, then the succession of 
similar impressions on that object is called 
meditation.” And, as Swami Vivekananda 
used to say, ‘Fixing the mind on some 
particular object like a lump of dough is 
called concentration.’ 

“Nothing drops from the skies all of a 
sudden. Why don’t all have concentration ? 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 213 


Because they don’t fulfil the conditions neces- 
sary for it, viz. absolute continence. This 
is known as strength. What can you expect 

d of one who lacks this strength? The long 
and short of it is that one must have full 
self-control. The Gité says: ‘In My opinion, 
Yoga is impossible for one who has no 
self-control. But one who has controlled his 
senses may, if he tries, get at it by adopting 
the proper means.’ 

“People follow their own whims and fail to 
get good results. The scriptures are there, 
but they won’t look into them. Nor would 
they listen to the teacher. In the end they 
become unfit for Yoga. ‘One who is moder- 
ate in food and pastime, in his effort for work, 
and in sleep and wakefulness—for such a man 
Yoga puts an end to all miseries.’ 

“If one has some disease, it will pass off; 
but one must keep his spiritual practices 
going.” 


» 10th July. 

Swami (Singing): ‘‘ ‘Everything depends 
on Thy will, Mother, Thou actest as Thou 
pleasest.”? Nowadays I am intensely liking 
this idea. This idea appeals to me more 
and more as days pass by. Good and evil— 
Thou art both. Through Thy will they come 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


214 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


to pass. The Lord has good work done by 
those whom He will raise, and again, bad 
work by others whom He will degrade. 
‘Thou makest the lame scale mountains and 
the elephant stick in a quagmire.’ ‘The 
mind—poor thing !—is not to blame. Kali is 
the juggler’s daughter that makes it dance as 
She pleases.’ There is a relief in the thought 
itself, that behind all this there is a Power 
which guides everything. But the rational- 
ists won’t admit this view. They will say, 
‘Can an effect be produced without a cause?’ 
But the other party will reply, ‘He is the 
Cause of all causes.’ 

“Formerly I, too, would not admit this 
and had heated discussions over it with Swami 
Adbhutaénanda in particular. I used to say, 
‘If God acts according to His sweet will, He 
becomes a despot. Is He an autocrat like 
the Czar of all Russia? He is just, merciful 
and benign.” He would reply, ‘Well, it is 
good that you are thus defending your God 
against all blemish. It is excellent.’ 
What a nice answer! He spoke from the 
suprarational standpoint. But from the 
rationalistic standpoint it is open to much 
criticism. It strikes at the root of free-will. 
So long as one has only theoretical knowledge 
such a view is dangerous. One really quali- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 215 


fied to take that standpoint never takes a 
wrong step. 

“In my boyhood, when I saw a puppet- 
show and heard a puppet scream, I thought 
that it actually made that sound. The pup- 
pets seemed to move of their own accord. 
But later on I was disillusioned to find that 
some one pulled the wires from behind the 
screens. 

“Nowadays the theory of Mahâmâyâ, or a 
Universal Force manipulating everything, 
appeals to me very much. 1 haven’t got 
words to tell you how I like it. It is because 
the mind has accepted the truth of it. 
Swamiji also in his later days used to have 
great faith in Mahâmâyâ. To be like an auto- 
maton in Her hands is easier said than done. 
If we submit to Her, She never fails 
to protect us. With the advance of age there 
comes a time when, instead of leaning on the 
theory of causation, we naturally resign our- 
selves to the Divine Mother. 


11th July. 

Swami: “The idea of the millennium, 
even though it may never be fulfilled, is 
commendable. The poet, Surendra Nath 
Mazumdar, says, it can come to pass only 
‘when men will be like women in their 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


216 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


nature.’ He is a very fine poet. You may 
laugh at these lines, but I read them in my 
boyhood and I never laughed.” 

One of the audience said that the passage 
in question referred only to the softer feel- 
ings of women, not to their effeminacy. 

Swami: ‘Quite so. The poet says, ‘Man 
is but a beast of burden; how absurd, then, 
for him to be inflated with pride!’ Men are 
mere drudges—they pass their lives in 
shouldering the burden of the family; and 
it is no easy matter for them to manifest the 
grace of women—this is what the poet 
means.”’ 

Someone: ‘Sir, everyone says that 
women lead to hell and so forth. But had 
they written books, they would also have 
painted men exactly in the same colours.” 

Swami: “They are doing it! Don’t you 
see how they are giving tit for tat in the 
West? The scriptures have not condemned 
women as a whole. They have distinguished 
between higher and lower types of women. 
Sri Ramakrishna also used to speak in the 
same way. The woman who always drags 
aman towards sense-gratification is of the 
lower type, while she who helps a man 
Godward is of the higher type. The stric- 
tures of the Sâstras are on the former class 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 217 


of women. You certainly do not praise one 
who is always dragging another towards 
sense-gratification. Therefore the Sdstras 
advise aspirants to keep away from such 
women, even from those who associate with 
them. Don’t you notice the great influence 
of association? When we were at school, 
some boys while returning home used to 
enter an opium-smokers’ den and try to pose 
as drunkards. Opium-smokers, you know, 
have a dread for drunkards. One of the 
boys, however, in so doing, himself turned 
into a confirmed opium-smoker! See the 
dreadful consequences ! 


‘Impressions, once formed, are most diffi- 
cult to root out. Sometimes they even work 
jn the form of somnambulism. Swamiji once 
described the marvellous workings of this 
state. He cited an instance of a Western 
woman who in sleep used to open graves, 
take away things and put them under her 
bed. On waking she remembered nothing of 
all this. A girl who had not learned even the 
alphabet, used to deliver fine lectures in 
sleep. Had this been in our country, it would 
have been taken as a case of possession by 
evil spirits. But it was in the West; so they 
began a research, and it was ultimately found 
that some ten or twelve years back, the girl 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


218 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


had worked as a maid with a scientist who 
was in the habit of: lecturing and reading 
aloud. There they discovered a relation of 
cause and effect. 

“In Calcutta, a young man of character, 
learning, and intelligence set himself to re- 
forming women of ill-fame. A girl unfolded 
to him her tale of woe, which moved his 
heart. He then became inextricably attached 
to her. One must not be too bold, for there 
is always a chance of danger. 

“I know of another incident which is very 
wonderful. It is not a piece of information 
picked up from books—I was an eye-witness 
to it. A Bengalee graduate, a monk, of great 
renunciation, was a class-friend of Swamiji, 
through whom we came to know this monk. 
He prided himself on being a perfect master 
of his senses. He used to beg money for 
lepers and for people ailing from foul 
diseases, and serve them. He used to say 
to us: ‘Swamiji is the only one amongst 
you who has got brains. You may be Sâdhus, 
but none of you have brains.’ He did not 
believe in the authority of the Sfstras, and 
used to say, ‘If we too write books, they will 
be just as good Sastras.’ He was much given 
to argumentation. His boldness too was 
remarkable. People made much of him, and 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 219 


deservingly too. Once I had to see him at 
Allahabad. He frankly told me that he had 
just had a fall. I rebuked him for his giving 
way to temptation at such an advanced age. 
He then disclosed to me everything, how 
being under the impression that he was 
proof against temptation he got befooled by 
a wicked woman. Pride humbled him. 
In such matters one must never be daring. 
Hence the clear note of warning in the scrip- 
tures against them.” 


18th July. 

Swami: ‘Swamiji used to bring with him 
all sorts of people to Sri Ramakrishna. At 
this the Master would say : ‘What worthless 
people do you bring—one-eyed, lame, and so 
forth? You don’t know good people from 
bad people—don’t bring anyone and every- 
one.’ 

“Swamiji always used to help the weak. 
He would say: ‘The weaker the man, the 

P more help should he get. If a Brâhmana boy 
needs one teacher, engage four such for a 
Pariah.? What a grand statement ! 

“Once Sri Ramakrishna was very angry 
with a lady devotee. He asked all of us not 
to go to her house or eat from her hands. 
He also asked her not to come to Dakshi- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi. 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


220 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


neswar. Against this serious injunction of 
his, who would dare visit her house? 
Swamiji, however, said to Swami Shivananda 
one day, ‘Come, let us have a walk.’ In the 
course of the walk he came to the lady’s 
house and wanted something to eat. The 
lady was beside herself with joy and fed him 
heartily. After this Swamiji went to Sri 
Ramakrishna and told him what he had done. 
Sri Ramakrishna said, ‘Well, I forbade you 
and yet you went there and ate!’ Swamiji 
replied, ‘Well, what harm was there? I have 
also invited her to come here.’ 

“Once he importuned Sri Ramakrishna for 
the sake of Hazra. The Master was then at 
Cossipore. Swamiji would not leave him—his 
persistent demand was, ‘You must do some- 
thing for him—must bless him.’ Sri Rama- 
krishna said, ‘He will have nothing now, but 
he will have it at the time of death.’ It actu- 
ally came to pass. Swamiji was a believer at 
heart in grace and things of that sort. 

“L. used to fall asleep early, and once 
Sri Ramakrishna was very much vexed at it. 
He wanted to remove him from Dakshi- 
neswar. But Swamiji interceded and the 
matter ended peacefully. It was for this 
reason that L. used to say, ‘If anyone is 

i really a prother-disciple, it is Vivekananda.’ 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 221 


“Once a boy came to the Math to stay. 
Everyone was against it. Swamiji said, ‘Sri 
Ramakrishna could read a man’s heart, so 
his opinion as to admitting a man or other- 
wise used to be correct. But I have not this 
power. So I am prepared to give a chance 
to all. If you, like Sri Ramakrishna, know 
how to read one’s mind, well, you may decline 
to admit the boy.’ 

“Then he asked everyone his opinion on 
the matter. When my turn came I said: ‘I 
have marked this well that none can live here 
whom Sri Ramakrishna does not like to have. 
Those who are to stay will stick, and those 
who are not, will go away.’ At this Swamiji 
remarked: ‘Well said. It is an excellent 
plan.’ The boy was admitted but left after 
a few days. 

“Even men like Girish Babu’ had a place 
with Sri Ramakrishna, who could fit in with 
everybody. But what we do is to try to 
mould all according to. our own ideas. 
Whereas he used to take everybody where he 
was and push him forward. He never dis- 
appointed anybody by failing in the attempt 
to mould him according to his own light. He 
had a distinct relation with each devotee and 


1 The celebrated actor-dramatist of Bengal, who 
had been an out-and-out Bohemian. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi . 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


222 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


maintained that throughout. Through 
humour he would teach them a good deal. 
Ah, what a teacher he was! Where can one 
‘get a teacher like him? 

“Swamiji, too, was a great humorist. 
One day I was working with a knife when its 
tip broke, and I was sad. Seeing this 
Swamiji said: ‘Well, a knife has always an 
end like that. It certainly won’t have an 
attack of cholera or typhoid!’ At this I 
laughed out. Didn’t he put it beautifully? 

“When a mother teaches her child, how 
deep the impression is! Though she does 
not give out that she is teaching, by her 
words alone the best teaching is imparted. 
Well, there is that great love behind. A 
teacher should put himself in line with the 
mentality of the pupil. Then only will the 
instruction be effective. 

Once a gentleman came to Sri Rama- 
krishna from Jubbulpore. He was a scholar, 
an M.A., and was very frank, but he had 
an agnostic turn of mind. ‘So he had much 
discussion with Sri Ramakrishna. He con- 
fessed that he had great mental unrest, but 
he would not pray to God, because, as he 
said, there was no proof of His existence! 
Sri Rramakrishna said to him, ‘Well, I sup- 

i pose you have no objection to praying like 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 223 


this, “I£ Thou really art, then listen to my 
prayer.” If you pray like this, it will do 
you good.’ The gentleman thought over it 
and then said that he had no objection 
to that sort of prayer. Sri Ramakrishna 
asked him to follow the advice and come to 
him again. The gentleman came again. He 
was a changed man. Touching Sri Rama- 
krishna’s feet, he wept as he said, ‘You have 
saved me!’ Swamiji also once transmitted 
faith in God into Kidi’s* mind by a touch. 

Kidi was a great agnostic before that. 

“Swamiji really had the power to help 
others. He had no jealousy. But that’s 
where we are put into difficulties. We are 
always afraid lest anybody tops over us. 

But he was too great for that sort of 

fear. He had not the least bit of jealousy. 

He used to say : ‘Help everyone forward from 

where he is, and if you can, supply his 

particular deficiency. But if you can’t, don’t 
try to drag him to your own level.’ 

A “How wonderfully Sri Ramakrishna taught 
each man so as to remove his particular 
wants! He used to illustrate it saying: ‘A 
mother has made various curries out of a 

. fish. She doesn’t give all her boys the same 


1A pet name given by Swamiji to his disciple 
Singaravelu Mudaliar. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


224 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


thing. She gives to each what would exactly 
suit his stomach.’ The Master followed this 
in practice also. i 

“Swami Yogananda once heard reproaches 
against Sri Ramakrishna. He pocketed the 
affront and reported the matter to the 
Master. Hearing this the Master said, ‘They 
abused me and you kept quiet!’ And he 
rebuked the Swami. 

“Again, some time after this event, one day 
Swami Niranjanananda was coming to Dak- 
shineswar by boat. A numberof people in it 
were criticizing Sri Ramakrishna. The Swami 
was exceptionally strong. He at once came 
out of the cabin and placing his legs across 
began to roll the boat saying: ‘You are 
abusing Sri Ramakrisona. I shall now sink 
this boat. I would like to see who dares 
to oppose me.’ They were all frightened, 
and besought him to stop. When Sri 
Ramakrishna heard this he said: ‘You 
fool, if they abused me, what was that to 
your Let everybody say what he likes, 
what matters it to you?’ 

“You see the fun! The teaching was 
different, according to the recipient’s need. 
Where can you find a teacher like him??? 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 225. 


14th July. 
wami: “‘Everything is hypnotism—the 
play of Mâyâ. Have you seen hypnotic 
h performances? A man under hypnotic spell 
swims on land if he is given the suggestion. 
The Divine Enchantress (Mahâmâyâ) has. 
hypnotized us all. Vidyâ Maya and Avidya 
Maya (leading respectively to knowledge 
and ignorance) are both hypnotism. We 
have to destroy the one with the help of 
the other, for knowledge is the opposite of 
ignorance. You know Swamiji’s story. A 
jackal ate a part of a Mohammedan’s food. 
Now the jackal is considered very unholy 
among the Mohammedans. The man went to 
a Mullah and sought his advice on the point. 
The Mullah said, ‘Dogs are the enemies of 
jackals. So if you can have the food eaten 
by a dog, then it will become pure again.’ 
(Laughter.) One has to destroy Avidyâ by 
Vidyé—ignorance by knowledge.’? 
Question: ‘‘Is something else needed to 
e destroy Vidyâ again?” 

Swami: “No. Vidyå leads a man to 
the Reality and itself ceases to be. Don’t 
you remember Sri Ramakrishna’s parable of 
the three robbers ???? 

*A man was attacked in a forest by three 


tobbers who seized all he had. One of them 
15 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


rl 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


226 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


15th July. 

Swami: ‘There is a mention of the Uttar- 
âyana! in the Mahabharata. Bhishma was 
waiting for the Uttariyana. By this no 
particular time is meant. It only shows that 
Bhishma had the power to die whenever he 
chose. The scriptures do nct mean by the 
word Uttarayana any time at all—it only 
means the Deva or deity identifying himself 
with that time. We can well understand 
this. It is like people coming forward tc 
receive a distinguished visitor. I am 
reminded of an incident in this connection. 

«B, got news that his father was ill. 
Before he reached the place, the gentle- 
man had expired. As soon as he stepped 
into the room, he saw a shining figure. He 


-wanted to kill him, but another interposed. Se 
they tied his hands and fect and left him. Shortly 
after, the third robber came, and setting him 
free, conducted him to the high road, within sight 
of his house. Out of gratitude the man wanted 
to invite him to his house, but the kind robber 
declined, saying that he would then be caught 
by the police. The Master compared the three 
Gunas—Tamas, Rajas, and Sattva—to these three 
robbers respectively. Tamas kills, Rajas binds, 
and Sattva sets free. But it too is a robber—it 
cannot stand before Realization. Here Vidya 
represents the Sattva. 

ìi Lit. the six months of the sun’s northward 
course. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 227 


wrote to me that first he thought that 
perhaps it was his father waiting to meet him. 
But suddenly the idea flashed to his mind 
that it might be some angel come there to 
escort the departing soul. B. of course won’t 
tell an untruth; he is not the man to do so. 
Besides, f can very well understand such 
things as the following statement of the 
Gita : 

& ‘Fools do not perceive when the soul 
departs from the body, or lives in it, or 
enjoys things through the help of the Gunas. 
But wise men see it doing all this.’ 

“Swamiji used to say, ‘He who has seen 
even a ghost is much greater than a mere 
book-learned Pundit’—because he has got an 
opportunity to form a conviction about the 
future life.” 


16th July. 

Swami: “When I was dining today it 
at once struck me that bread won’t agree 
with me, still I took it. Just see the fun 
of it! We know that a certain course 
of action is wrong, but we do it all 
the same. Such is the magic spell of the 
Divine Mother! Again, a certain action 
appeals to us while performing it. Haven’t 
you heard that story—TIt is beginning 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


228 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


to taste nice as I eat it?? A son who 
had returned home from service was taking. 
his food. The old mother had cooked many 
things for him. The son said: ‘Oh, mother, 
what’s this that you have cooked? It is 
simply horrible? At this moment his wife 
came in and said: ‘What do you mean? 
Well, it’s all my cooking!’ ‘Indeed!’ ex- 
claimed the startled young man. Then after 
a while he said, ‘Ah, it begins to taste nice 
as I eat it? (Laughter.) 

“Nothing really is of any use in the world 
—people only go madly hither and thither in 
search of things in the fond hope of getting 
them. 

“There lived a courtesan in the kingdom of `“ 
Janaka. One night she—poor woman—was 
waiting in suspense hoping that someone or 
other would pay her a visit. When it was 
about two o’clock and no one turned up, 
she gave up all expectation. She said to 
herself : ‘There is no other more unfortunate 
woman in this whole kingdom than myself. 
Alas, what tortures have I not suffered, 
deluded by hope! Enough! Let me now 
go and retire.’ Saying this she retired for the 
night. An Avadhuta (itinerant monk) was 
near by. He saw all this and said apostro- 

phizing the woman : ‘You have given up all 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 229 


hope and are happily asleep. I bow to you. 
You are my teacher.’ Saying this he went 
away. 3 
“I saw in the papers that Sir James Meston 
found himself in a pretty fix. He said: 
“Such a great storm (the Mohammedan con- 
quest) blew over the Hindu Society, but how 
could it retain its individuality by absorb- 
ing all? Whence could such vitality come? 
The Mohammedans proselytized at the point 
of the sword, but still they could do nothing 
to injure it l 
«Qur relations are with Brahman. It is 
therefore quite in the fitness of things that 
we should possess vitality. Sir James says, 
“The Hindus will adapt themselves well to 
the democratic form of government, too.’ 
The authorities perhaps thought that when 
the Hindu Society was given a democratic 
government, it would lose much of its 
strength. But that was not to be.”” 
Someone: “They say that though they 
P have failed to make us actual converts to 
Christianity on a large scale, yet they have 
succeeded in christianizing our ideas as a 
whole.”’ 
Swami: ‘The race idea is becoming so 
prominent that some day they may even 
eschew Christ as an Asiatic! They have now 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


230 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


got their philosophy of the Superman. Well, 
you have seen during the last war what a 
state of things Supermen could bring about ! 

“I have received a letter from Babu. 
He wrote that to me when his son died. 
From his letter I could clearly see what the 
Gità meant by ‘that grief which shatters the 
senses.’ He is reading the Tantras now. 
The Tantras are practical, while the Upani- 
shads are theoretical. In many respects the 
Tantras go ahead of the Upanishads. For 
instance, you have the Upâsanâ (meditation 
or worship) in the Tantras, which is very 
grand. Show me the man who has not 
recognized Sakti (the Lord’s Power). Sri 
Ramakrishna used to say, ‘Even the Incar- 
nations worshipped Sakti and then, with Her 
grace, they preached religion.’ 

“Sankara, too, was a great believer in Sakti.. 
He has written numerous hymns to Her. 
You know that story, I suppose. One day 
Sankara was returning from his bath in the 
Ganges. He had not much faith in Sakti 
then. Sakti lay down on his way in the 
form of an old woman, and when Sankara 
came, she told him about her miseries. 
Sankara touched her. But immediately all 
his power vanished. He then understood 
that this was Sakti, and began to sing Her 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 231 


praises in a hymn. That was the origin of 
the Ananda Lahari. Waving pleased Sakti 
with that hymn, he got back his power. 

“The Mahimna Stotra is the best of 
all hymns. I used to read it daily while 
at Kankhal. I also read Madhusudan’s com- 
mentary on it. There was a Gandharva 
called Pushpadanta who, treading on some 
flowers that had been offered to Siva, lost 
his power of going through the air. Then he 
chanted those verses and got back his power. 
It is a grand hymn.” 


19th July. 


Someone informed the Swami that Chameli 
Puri, a celebrated monk living at Benares, 
had breathed his last. 

Swami: ‘‘When?” 

Someone: ‘Yesterday afternoon.” 

Swami: ‘Do any of you know more 
details? He was very old too—l08 years. 
For sixty years he lieved in that very 
garden. How spirited he was! Because, 
as you know, he was a perfectly chaste 
man. I went to see him once. He was utter- 
ing, ‘Siva Kedar! Siva Kedar!’ What 
a tremendous strength was in that call! The 
death of such people is like a ripe fruit drop- 
ping off of itself from the tree. They don’t 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


232 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


feel any pain. Well, I am fifty-four, and the 
world appears so old to me. But he was 108 
years of age—just double that of mine—and 
how very old must thé world have appeared ` 
to him! He must have known a lot of the 
old history of Benares. A— Babu looked 
after him for three or four years. He told 
me that when he had first gone to see the 
monk, the latter had said to him: ‘I am 
fasting the whole day. What has the Mother 
sent through you? Give it to me and I shall 
eat it.’ Ever since that he supplied him 
with food. His assistant, Pandit —, used to 
go to the monk’s place daily with food. 

*“*Pandit— has a long nose. Can you tell 
me what a long nose stands for? You must 
have read in Napoleon’s Biography how he 
says, “Had I a few men with long noses, I 
could have done everything.’ A long nose 
is a sign of great faithfulness. 

“There is another Sadhu here named Magni 
Baba, near the Asi Ghat. He too is very 
old. He has been living long at Benares. 
He is a Naishthika Brahmacharin, and a 
good scholar, but of the orthodox type. He 
got to that stage which is called in the scrip- 
tures Vidvat Sannyâsa, when monasticism 
comes naturally to a man. He has great 
vitality in him, and gets rid of serious attacks 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 233 


of illness without much effort. Once he was 
seriously ill, which hampered his attending 
to all the duties of a Brahmacharin. Then 
he went to the bank of the Ganges and him- 
self took the vow of Sannyfsa according to 
the scriptural rites. I have seen him a 
number of times. He is always absorbed 
in contemplation, which perhaps has brought 
him the title of Magni Baba (‘the absorbed 
monk’). The orthodox attitude has both 
advantages and disadvantages. 

“I was reading about Hirananda’s life 
today, and liked it very much. He, too, was 
a disciple of Sri Ramakrishna, and was much 
liked by the Master. During his last illness, 
Hirananda came from Sindh to see him. He 
brought some sweets and loose trousers for 
Sri Ramakrishna, who wore the trousers for 
a day. One day he set Hirananda to argue 
-with Swamiji. The latter spoke from the 
standpoint of knowledge, while Hirananda 
spoke from the standpoint of devotion. He 
did not argue. He was a disciple of Keshab 
Babu also.” 

Noticing some birds moving in search of 
food on the lawn near by, the Swami said : 
‘They have got their young ones; so they 
are in search of food. How marvellous ! 
‘They. won't eat the food themselves, but will 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


234 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


take it to their young ones. Again, as soon 
as these are grown up a little, they will peck 
at them and drive them away. They are 
doing the Divine Mother’s work. See how 
She is having Her work done through them. 
‘Thou dost Thy work, Mother; but people 
only lay claim to it.” 

“Animal bodies are for the experience of 
pleasure or pain only (the result of past 
work). No fresh work (Karma) can be done 
through them. When the present body is 
gone, animals will take on another body by 
drawing upon the storehouse of their past 
work (Sanchita Karma). Animals have no: 
conscience, hence they have no merit or 
demerit. They have obviously got intelli- 
gence, but there it ends. Only men can do 
fresh work, because they have got a cons- 
cience. They only have got the idea of 
bondage, which other creatures have not. 
Only when there is the idea of bondage, can 
there be uny real effort for Liberation. Don’t 
you see how a prisoner struggles for release? 
It is only when there is the idea that the 
world is a bondage, that a man can strive for 
Liberation. His failure to understand this. 
takes him through the endless cycles of births. 
and deaths. 


1A line from Ramprasid. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 235: 


“You, of course, know the story of a bird 
called Homa which Sri Ramakrishna used 
to relate. As soon as the young bird is 
hatched and has its eyes opened and sees- 
that it is falling to the ground, it straight- 
way flies up. Therein lies the way to safety. 
There are men also, who, as soon as they 
are conscious of their position, go straight up. 

‘Sri Ramakrishna used to say, “The granny 
likes the play to go on.’ I said to him: ‘But 
what of that? Why should 7 play?’ He 
at once rebuked me saying: ‘Bah! How 
selfishly you talk! The whole bliss is in the 
continuance of the game. The granny dis-- 
likes those players who prefer to loiter about 
her. But she stretches forth her hand to- 
one who after a vigorous play comes back 
to touch her. Haven’t you noticed how, in 
a game of dice, the expert player sometimes 
gives up an invulnerable position willingly ? 
He plays again and by a few masterly throws 
a gets back to his former position.’ 

J asked him if this was possible. He- 
answered : ‘Yes, quite possible. Must not 
a man believe in the infinite power of God? 
Can a man who, when a fish-bone gets stuck 
in his throat, touches the feet of a cat in 
humble supplication and makes obeisance to' 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


286 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


a date tree, dare deny God?! What do you 
mean? Well, you prattle about knowledge, 
but He has subjected man to the curse oi 
sleep which renders him so helpless that even 
a dog might kick him in that state and he 
not know anything of it!’ 

«Ah, how forcibly he would impress things 
‘on us !”? 

News came just then that the Holy 
Mother’s condition was gradually becoming 
critical. When the letter was read out to the 
Swami he remained grave for a few minutes, 
„and then said : 

“Everything in this world has a dissolu- 
tion. You won’t find anything in it that 
escapes this fate. Death is but another 
name for dissolution. The authors of our 
Sastras say that everything that has an origin 
must die. A thing, according to the sage 
Yaska, is born, exists, grows, attains 
‘maturity, decays, and dies. Whatever has 
a birth—every creature, and plant too—is 
subject to this sixfold transformation. Do 
you find any departure from this rule any- 
where? The authors of our Sâstras have 
-pronounced the last word on this as on other 
allied subjects. Their doctrine of reincarna- 


1 The reference is to the belief that by such a 
-conduct the person concerned gets rid of the bone. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 237 


tion is very grand. The Christians have 
nothing corresponding to it. Their idea 
is that when a man dies and is buried, his 

> soul lives for a long time in that grave. 
Then, on the Day of Judgment following the 
destruction of the world, Jesus Christ will 
take his seat on the right side of the Lord; 
the angels will take ail the souls out of their 
graves, and those about whom Jesus will say, 
‘I know them,’ will be sent to heaven, while 
those of whom he will deny any knowledge, 
shall have eternal damnation. What a 
dreadful thing! Many a lady in the West 
with naive faith, feels very miserable if her 
child dies before baptism. For the Protes- 
tants believe that one who is not baptized 
is doomed to eternal damnation after death. 
The Roman Catholics have a place called the 
purgatory, through which, they believe, even 
the unbaptized souls can pass to heaven. 
How far Vedanta has saved the people of 
the West, well, they only know. 

a “About the doctrine of reincarnation they 
say that it is very logical, for there ought 
to be a chance for all. If one fails to attain 
the goal in a single birth, one can’ make up 
for it in the next, and so on. Here you have 
no idea what a revolution Swamiji has 
brought about in the world. He has changed 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


"238 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


the entire thought-current of the West. The 
New Thought movement had its rise and full 
play just after his preaching those doctrines. 
Western philosophy can bear no comparison 
with Hindu philosophy. Our sages declared 
long ago the final conclusions on the subject. 

“At Almora, the chief clergyman used to 
say to F., ‘The reason why we cannot make 
any impression on the Hindus is because of 
their philosophy.” You can’t find anywhere @ 
philosophy like ours. 

“The authors of our scriptures reached 
unity, beyond which, of course, there is no 
progress. ... The more people are learn- 
ing to think the more are they reluctant to 
accept the Bible. With Emerson there 
sprung a new sect in the West called the 
Unitarians. They, tco, have a fine litera- 
ture of their own. The Unitarians say, ‘I 
Jesus is the son of God, so are we.’ Well, 
the great war has shown which way they are 
going in the West. Their only goal is 
enjoyment, and you know materialism can 
never lead to any permanent good. 

“How beautifully has Tulsidis expressed 
it: ‘Where the Lord is, there is no desire; 
and where there is desire, there the Lord is 
not. Both can never co-exist, like the sun 
‘and darkness.’ In Bengal, too, there has 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


a 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 239 


recently grown up a party for combining 
Yoga and Bhoga—-spirituality and material- 
ism.” 
5 One of the audience referred to an article 
i in a magazine, refuting the idea expressed by 
Tulsidâs and attacking Sankara. He also 
referred to a letter published in another 
journal, seeking to harmonize ‘spirituality and 
materialism. The Swami heard the letter 
read out to him, and at the end remarked : 
“I like the concluding portion of it. But 
the writer has no idea about Maya. The 
highest attainment of philosophy is the theory 
of Maya. People won’t study Sankara, 
but would criticize him! There are two 
quotations from the Gita in that letter, and 
both are misquoted. What a good deal 
of worthless stuff they circulate along with a 
little that is good! But you see, they, too, 
have their appreciators among the people. 
To be frank, I cannot follow what they mean 
to say. Fools are not wanting who with- 
a out understanding a bit of Sankara dare 
criticize him. What nonsense does the writer 
mean? Nowhere has Sankara said that we 
must all fly to the woods. He himself has 
done a world of good. Just study his life. 
We are all in the world, and where can 
we go, leaving it aside? But doing good to 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
240 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


the world is not an end in itself. The world 
will remain as it is. As Sri Ramakrishna. 
used to say, it is but a dog’s tail, which 
won't straighten up. In trying to help the 
world, you help yourself—you realize your 
Freedom. Whenever Sankara has argued, 
he has silenced all his adversaries with the 
greatest ease. But he himself was a wor- 
shipper of Sakti, in whom he had perfect 
belief. His very hymns prove this. It 
requires the finest intellect to understand 
Sankara, and where this is wanting you have 
only childish prattle.” 


21st July. 


News came this morning of the Holy 
Mother’s passing away. It cast a pro- 
found gloom upon the minds of all. The 
Swami also is in a reserved mood. He is, 
besides, indisposed, and has taken nothing 
till now. He has his usual audience in the 
room, but everyone is silent. The Swami 
broke the stillness with a Bengali song: 
e ‘Listen, my mind, a whole load of guilt is 
on thy back—the legacy of thy evil actions.’ 
Sorrow everywhere! I am seriously thinking 
of discontinuing idle talk, and observing 
silence. Of what use is it to talk unless one 
can speak what one really thinks? 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 241 


“ ‘Every day before our very eyes our 
term of life is wearing out, and youth is 
decaying. Days once past never return, and 
Time is crushing the universe. Fortune, too, 
is fickle like the play of ripples on the surface 
of the water, and life itself is brief like 
lightning. Therefore, © Lord, Thou refuge 
to all, protect me who have taken shelter 
at Thy feet, before it is too late.’ 

“There was a rich man at Muttra, who was 
in the habit of entertaining any new Sadhu 
that came to the town. He would take him 
to his house and feed him with delicacies. 
When I went to Muttra, some Sâdhus advised 
me to go to him, saying that there was a 
good arrangement for food, and all that. So 
I went to him. There were other Sâdhus too. 
It is customary on such occasions for the host 
to discuss some spiritual topics with the 
Sâdhus after meal. So he asked me, ‘Sir 
how can one get Vairdgya (dispassionate- 
a ness)?? I at once replied, ‘Well, I could have 

told you that, if I had it myself. Had I 
possessed it, do you think I would have come 
to you begging for food?’ The reply greatly 
pleased the Sâdhus, who said, ‘You have 
answered beautifully.» The man, too, did 
not ask any further questions. 

16 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
242 STIKITUAL TALKS 


‘Everywhere you find selfishness, and 
nothing but that. Take, for instance, my 
own ease. I say, and think too, that perhaps 
I am free from selfishness. But it is there, 
all the same. Great Lord!” 


25th July. 

A Bengali youth Vaisya by caste has 
recently come to Benares, leaving home. He 
has put on the ochre cloth of his own accord. 
His mother is living. When he had asked 
her permission to renounce the world, she 
had told him that she only liked to see him 
happy, whatever path he chose. The youth 
has come to meet the Swami. 

Hearing all about him the Swami said : 
“Vairigya is indeed a great thing. Your 
mother, too, does not oppose your inclina- 
tions. You are unmarried, and have got very 
few ties in the world. You are young and 
healthy, and your physique, too, indicates 
self-control. Those who are sexually pure 
take some fifty years to root out the sex- 
impulse; while those who have led an in- 
different life take several lives to do it. It 
is such a difficult task! You have put on the 
ochre cloth. So people of all the four castes 
will bow to you, and this means spiritual 
harm. Give up the ochre cloth. As for 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 243 


initiation, it must be taken from a very 
competent man; otherwise it produces bad 
results. And what is initiation? Any name 

e of the Lord that appeals to you, you may 
take up whole-heartedly, and that will serve 
the purpose. Pray to Him sincerely, and He 
will provide everything. It is because I 
feel interested in you that I advise you so 
particularly. 

“Look here. As your mother is intent on 
your happiness, so you, too, should try to 
make her happy. Go home, and try to please 
your mother. We are all apt to forget that 
we, too, have been babes. We seldom think 
of the helpless state in the mother’s womb. 
See how the just-born kid has found out its 
mother’s milk unaided! How quickly it 
learns to frisk about and nibble the grass 
it lives upon—all with its own effort! Man 
alone is so helpless! If the mother fails 
to cover it even for a short time, it 
is done for! 

= “The ideal must be very high, but it is 
wrong to form an inordinate estimate of one’s 
own powers. Our powers increase as we 
prove our fitness. 

“Embracing the monastic life is not a joke. 
Sri Ramakrishna used to say, ‘That man 
alone is fit for the monastic life who can 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


244. SPIRITUAL TALKS 


allow himself to fall from a palmyra tree 
without moving his limbs.’ Is that an easy 
thing? Don’t you see how we are tram- 
melled with a hundred ties? Go home and 
serve your mother. It will benefit you 
spiritually.” 


26th July. 

Swami: “The Gité is a splendid book. 
Though it is a Smriti, it is often classed 
among the Upanishads, for it contains all their 
essential teachings. Haven’t you noticed 
how, under each chapter, is written, ‘In . 
the Upanishad of the Gita? &c.? The Gita “ 
is called ‘Srimad-Bhagavad-Gitopanishad.° 
Therefore the sages have said, ‘A single 
plunge in the waters of the Gité removes the 
dirt that has accumulated from birth to 
birth.” The body and the mind have been 
stained with the dirt of countless past lives, 
and it is all washed away by a bath in the 
waters of the Gité. It won’t do merely to 
have a superficial knowledge of the book, 
you must dive deep. You will understand 
the Gita all the better if you first go through 
the Upanishads.” 

The Swami got animated as he spoke on 
the Absolute state and allied topics, and 
suddenly looking at those present said, 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 245 


“Therefore the poet declared, ‘May it never 
fall to my lot to talk about poetry to one 
who is innocent of it? °> Everybody felt 
ashamed at heart for having achieved so little 
in life, and kept quiet. The Swami broke the 
tension of the moment by changing the topic. 
He said: ‘It is refreshingly cool now. Oh, 
what a dreadfully hot weather we have just 
passed through! Atmospheric heat and cold 
are not things of a permanent nature. They 
come and pass away. Havn’t you read in the 
Gita: ‘It is the contact with sense-objects, 
O Arjuna, that gives rise to the sensations of 
heat and cold, of pleasure and pain; these are 
subject to origin and destruction. So you 
must bear them.’ Since these are mere 
sensations, the Lord advises us to put up 
with them. You know Sri Ramakrishna used 
to say, “In the (Bengali) alphabet each sound 
is represented by one, or at the most, by 
two letters, but there are three letters in the 
S group.’ This means that we must bear and 
forbear. He who does this survives, but he 
who does the opposite surely comes to grief.’ 


1 The letters 4, w, and y are pronounced in the 
same way in Bengali. The imperative of the 
Sanskrit root gg to forbear, has for its Bengali 
equivalent a, which is also pronounced as one 
of these letters. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


246 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


What a terrible heat we have had, and now it 
is so cool! A sea is no more than a mud- 
puddle when you have crossed it. All 
anxiety and trouble are at the initial stage.” 

After a short pause he continued: “‘It is 
a very difficult task to speak, for the same 
statement is variously understood by differ- 
ent people, and sometimes they are found 
to suffer in consequence. Real monks and 
sages never say anything to cause any pain 
to others. They therefore make only general , 
statements that are calculated to help human- 
ity. Still you must have noticed how troubles 
arise over them. It is not everybody that 
appreciates humour; one has to speak 
guardedly. 

“Ah, what a fund of humour we found 
in Sri Ramakrishna! It was unique. One 
day Keshab Babu was to call at Dakshi- 
neswar. Even before the appointed time, 
Sri Ramakrishna put on a red-bordered 
cloth, covered his body with a decent chddar, 
and with his lips crimsoned by the chewing of 
betel, began to pace the verandah of his room 
in expectation of Keshab. When Keshab 
saw him in that state he remarked, ‘Ah, 
today you have dressed yourself with extra- 
ordinary care. What is the matter?’ 
‘Why,’ replied Sri Ramakrishna smiling, 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI TURIYANANDA 247 


‘today I have to charm Keshab! That’s why 
all this trimming.’ At this Keshab began 
to laugh. 


“Swamiji also was very humorous. But his 
humour was nothing in comparison with Sri 
Ramakrishna’s, which used to create side- 
splitting laughters. He would say, ‘I keep 
people in the right mood by introducing 
secular topics now and then.’ Once a 
Brahmo devotee referred to Keshab Chandra 
Sen and Pratap Mazumdar, in their very 
presence, saying that they were like Gau- 
ranga and Nityananda. Sri Ramakrishna 
was close by. Keshab asked him, ‘What 
then are you?’ Sri Ramakrishna at once 
replied, ‘I am the dust of your feet.’ At 
this Keshab said, ‘He is never to be caught 
napping.’ 

“It was Sri Ramakrishna who taught the 
Brahmos to salute in the proper fashion. The 
idea of the motherhood of God was also his 
gift to the Brahmo Samaj. 

“Every word of Sri Ramakrishna was ins- 
tinct with a wonderful power. He used to 
snatch the hearts of people, as it were. The 
Americans like heart-to-heart talk very much. 
It is much more effective with them than 
lectures.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


245 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Gradually the talk drifted on to devotion 
and devotees. 

Swami: “There is a story about Siva and 
Parvati. One day, at Mt. Kailas, they were 
playing at dice, when Siva broke off in the 
midst of the game and went out. But He 
returned immediately, and so Parvati asked 
Him the reason for this sudden exit and 
return. Siva answered, ‘Well a devotee of 
Mine, having fallen among some robbers, at 
first took refuge in Me. But before I reached 
the spot, I found that he had himself taken 
up a stone to throw at the robbers. At this 
I came away.’ The Lord’s grace doesn’t 
manifest itself unless one absolutely resigns 
oneself to Him. It is no easy thing to 
surrender oneself to the Lord, and that whole- 
heartedly. They say that a devotee always 
beholds the Lord. It is quite true. In the 
Bible it is written: ‘For whosoever hath, to 
him shall be given, and he shall have more 
abundance : but whosoever hath not, from 
him shall be taken away even that he hath.’ 
All this is very true. Just look at the 
question broadly, from the standpoint of our 
physical health, for instance. A man who 
has a good health improves by degrees, and 
little irregularities seldom affect him. But 
a man in bad health may take all pre- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI TURIYANANDA 249 


cautions possible, and yet fail to maintain 
his already poor health. A slight irregularity 
teils upon him badly. This is the case every- 
where. It is a law of nature. 

“But there is another side of the question. 
The Lord is the protector of the humble— 
their friend and helper. It is, however, 
very difficult to be humble. Humility does 
not come so long as there is any egotism left. 
Sri Ramakrishna would often tell of the 
sweeper woman. Well, her work is, as you 
know, the lowest that could be imagined, but 
no sooner does she possess an ornament, than 
her vanity knows no bounds. Don’t you see, 
there is an ocean of difference between the 
lowness of position due to worldly circum- 
stances and the humility of a devotee—that 
meekness of spirit which leads him to consider 
himself lower than even a blade of grass? 
‘Thou art guiding me by the hand, O Lord !? 
—this is no mere poetry. 

“In the Gité we have, ‘They speak 
of an eternal Aswattha tree (i.e. relative 
existence) rooted above and branching 
below, whose leaves are the Vedas; he 
who knows it is a knower of the Vedas.’ 
You see, there is no mention here of the 
Brahman. How then can a man be a knower 
of the Vedas by simply knowing this relative 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee. Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


250 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


existence? Well, let us see. ‘Rooted above’ 
means emanating from the Paramatman, and 
*Aswattha? means that which will not last till 
tomorrow, i.e. transitory. So the meaning of 
the verse comes to this: ‘One who has 
known relative existence to be such—that is, 
has definitely understood its transitoriness— 
is a knower of the Vedas.’ Isn’t it all right 
now ?”? 

Repeating the next sloka he pointed out 
that one must have dispassionateness to cut 
off that tree of relative existence. Then he 
went on to the next verse: ‘‘ ‘Then that 
Goal is to be sought for, going whither the 
Wise return no more’: Isn’t it so? But 
here a difficulty seems to present itself. How 
is it that they return no more? Don’t we 
hear it said that we have all come from 
Brahman? How then can we help returning 
from that to this relative plane again? When 
we have once come down from a state of 
union with the Absolute, isn’t there every e 
chance of our returning again to the relative 
plane, after our attaining to that in this life ?” 

The Swami answered the question indirect- 

_ ly, by referring to the case of the Adhikârika 
beings, that is, those entrusted with the 
management of the world. He said: 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI TURIYANANDA 251 


“Their case is different. They come with 
perfect knowledge from their very birth. It 
is only they who can come down again from 
a state of union with Brahman. For this 
purpose they allow some little trace of desire 
to remain in their mind.! 


“What is that ‘Eternal Goal’ like? Ah, 
how beautifully the Lord puts it: ‘That the 
sun does not illumine, nor the moon, nor 
fire. That is My Supreme Abode, going 
whither they return no more.’ 

“In the life of everyone there comes 
satiety after a prolonged enjoyment of sense- 
objects. If at that time one happens to 
come in contact with a saint, one advances 
towards the goal. Dispassionateness first 
originates by seeing the evil clinging to sense- 
objects. Until a man begins to see the dark 
side of life, no spiritual advice is of any avail 
to him.” 


27th July. 
“Tn Samadhi there is complete destruction 
of the mind, but it must be the Nirvikalpa 


1 So in one sense they are not wholly merged in 
Brahman. Ordinary beings are absolutely unified 
with Brahman at the time_of Videhamukti, or 
dissolution of the body after Realization. So there 
is no more re-birth for them. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


252 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Samadhi. To transcend the mind is to mani- 
fest the intellect fully. It is not that the 
mind is altogether annihilated, but the mind 
which formerly had relations with the 
phenomenal world is gone. Sri Ramakrishna 
used to say that the pure mind and the pure 
Self are one. The mind gets purified as soon 
as its worldly character is destroyed. A pure 
mind is that which, fully believing in the 
unity of Self, sees the same Atman in all, 
and deals with them accordingly. In the 
Gité and the Upanishads you will find that 
words like dit: waaa, umag: (meaning steady 
and well-balanced) are repeatedly used. Such 
a state comes when the mind has become 
pure.” 


28th July. 


Swami: At the time of death an outer 
power struggles with the inner power. These 
two powers are not different. They are like 
concentric circles, the bigger one trying to 
destroy the other. Once when I was at the & 
point of death at Puri, I perceived this 
distinctly; as if I had one foot outside the 
door and another inside. I could sce both 
sides. Death is no more terrible when there 
is no attachment. One must keep out attach- 
ment. All the trouble is due to love being 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 253 


centred on specific objects. When you dive 
into the Ganges you don’t feel any weight, 
although there are tons of water overhead. 
But one feels so burdened when one places a 
pot of water on one’s head! Even the spine 
may give way. You may love all the beings 
in the world and be net at all under bondage, 
but the moment you allow your love to be 
centred on any special object, you are bound. 
If you can get rid of these loads, then only 
can you attain to Peace and Liberation. 
Constant discrimination sharpens the in- 
tellect. Truth reveals itself to a man who is 
always discriminating to attain it. One must 
always keep the sword of discrimination ready 
at hand. The Lord says in the Gita that we 
must cut down the deep-rooted Aswattha (of 
Samsâra or the relative world) with the 
sword of non-attachment, and seek to enter 
that blessed state from which there is no 
return. 

“When the pigeon saw that all his mates 
had fallen into the trap, he was overcome 
with delusion, and allowed himself to follow 
suit. It is thus that men fall into 
delusion and die. ‘Such is the charm the 
Divine Enchantress has spread, that every- 


1 Story from Bhagavata, Book XI, Ch. vii. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


‘Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


to 


54 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


one is caught in it. Not to speak of petty 
creatures, even the Supreme-Gods like 
Brahmâ and Vishnu are infatuated.’ Not 
only the common run of men, even the Jnânis 
lose their heads, through the will of the Divine 
Mother.” 

He quoted from the Durgâ Saptasati some 
verses showing how the Divine Mother, 
through Her unthinkable power, projects, 
maintains, and dissolves the universe, deludes 
even the greatest, and again, out of Her 
grace, confers liberation on people. Then he 
said: “If you succeed in purifying the mind, 
everything is set right. The pure-minded 
have things pre-arranged for them in the 
external world. They find everything ready 
for them. 

“When Swamiji went to America for the 
first time, I accompanied him from Mt. Abu 
to Bombay. In the running train, Swamiji 
said to me in all seriousness, ‘Well, all that 
preparation that you see going on (in 
America) is for this (pointing to his own x 
body). My mind tells me so. You will see 
it verified at no distant date.’ 

“Take for instance the case of Sri Rama- 
krishna. The Kali Temple at Dakshineswar 
was kept ready for him. All that arrange- 
ment was made for him beforehand.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 


19 
Se 


Sth December. 


In the morning some members of the Order 
gathered about the Swami, and the talk 
drifted on to Swamiji (Swami Vivekananda) 
and his message to the country. 

Swami: “As Swamiji would say, ‘Religion 
is the very life of India. Even now it is so. 
What has India been doing all this time if 
not producing saints? India will have to 
preach religion throughout the whole world.’ 
The words of Swamiji cannot but turn out 
true. India will surely rise again. Swamiji 
once remarked : ‘This time I have left nothing 
unsaid.” Yes, he has said everything, and 
his ideas are now being worked out... . 
The introduction of selfless service in the 
country by Swamiji is a wonderful thing. 
I believe India will surely rise. If we have 
not the good fortune to see that in our life- 
time, it will come to pass later on. Other- 
wise the advent of personalities like Sri 
Ramakrishna and Swamiji becomes meaning- 
ha less. Swamiji prophesied many times about 

` the future glorious mission of India in unmis- 
takable terms, and his prophecy cannot prove 
false. There is already a good beginning.” 
In the afternoon, a small audience 
gathered in the Swami’s room, and there 
was the usual Bhâgavata class. After the 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


256 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


class the Swami said, ‘“There are three kinds 
of sins—sins committed through deeds, 
words, and thought. In consequence of 
these sins, men after death attain the 
inanimate state, are reborn as birds, beasts, 
and wretched creatures in the lowest strata 
of human society respectively. 

“It is in the human body that the gates 
to Freedom open. So every man should be 
on his guard and make a good use of his life. 
Enjoyment is possible in other bodies also, 
but Freedom is not. 

“Attachment to the body is the last and 
strongest bondage. The- parental affection 
of monkeys is very great. The mother 
carries the dead body of her young one even 
after the flesh has dropped off and the 
skeleton alone is left. But even they, as all 
other animals, forget everything about their 
young oncs when their own life is at stake.” 


7 


20th December. 


Swami: “By silent and continued prayer L 
and meditation one should create in the mind 
a subconscious current, and it will go on 
working at all times—even in sleep. Not 
that one will have no dream, but the current 
thus generated will be supreme, working 
imperceptibly within. During this SAdhani 


è 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MES: 


SWAMI TURLYANANDA 257 


one should not mix with too Many persons‘ 
or engage in useless talk.” 


e 21st December. 


Swami: ‘Sri Ramakrishna used to say,. 
ʻA man will be born as many times as he 
has sex-connections.’ And in each of these 
births there is a great likelihood of having 
that connection over again. So there is. 
the endless round of births and deaths. 
The only remedy against that is to take 
refuge in the Lord and give up that clinging 
to flesh with a firm determination saying 
‘T won’t do it again.’ In that case, all the 
sins done previously will be forgiven. But 
4 person must not play the hypocrite. Then 
all the old sins will come down upon him 
- and exact their dues with compound interest. 
A true devotee cannot have a permanent fall. 
Even if he falls, he is bound to rise again 
through the grace of the Lord. Eternal 
damnation! Nonsense! I do not believe it. 
God has His work done even by the apparent 
lapse of a devotee.” 


The conversation then turned to compas- 
sion and attachment. 

Swami: ‘There is a gulf of difference 
between compassion and attachment. A 

17 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


‘258 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Sadhu must have compassion and not attach- 
ment—the idea of ‘me’ and ‘mine’, for that 
is the root of all bondage. The Master had 
great love for Swamiji and others like him, 
for he could see a greater manifestation of 
Divinity in them than in others. He was 
fully conscious of that, so there was no fear 
of bondage in his case. 


“Even saints may slip and become bound, 
as for instance, Jada Bharat.! Self-exertion 
is needed to snap the bondage. It is 
self-exertion that brings about quick results; 
otherwise there is no knowing when success 
will come. ‘Last birth’ means that one will 
realize God in this very life. Ignorance is 
without beginning, for one cannot trace its 
origin. 

“Once Girish Babu put the question to 
the Master, ‘Why have you to practise so 


‘Jada Bharat was a great monarch in one of 
his previous births. In that birth when he 
retired in his old age from the duties of the 
King to lead a life of contemplation in a forest 
he became attached to the young one of a 


‘deer which had lost its mother. As a result he 


turned away from God and in his next birth was 
born as a deer. In his birth after that he was 
again born as a man and attained realization. 
In this last birth he was known as Jada Bharat 
for he lived as one inert and idiotic for fear of 
getting bound again by worldly ties. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI TURIYANANDA 259 


hard? The Master replied: ‘You know, 
there is eternal union of Hara (Siva) with 
Gauri. Still, why did she practise so much 
Tapasyé? All that was as an example to 
others. If I do so much, others will do at 
least one-sixteenth part of it?? Is it not so?” 


+ 22nd December. 


The conversation was about the supreme 
knowledge. 
wami: “Words of supreme knowledge 
carry no meaning to an ordinary man with 
a limited vision. Through discrimination the 
ordinary sense-knowledge vanishes. Take for 
example this house. It is nothing but a 
conglomeration of atoms; so is the body. 
Discrimination pushed further will reduce 
even the atoms to one entity—the Absolute 
_ Existence. As Sri Ramakrishna would say: 
‘The palmyra tree is true and not its branches 
or fruits, for they drop off. Brahman alone 
is real; the world is changing. Taken as a 
4 whole, it is Brahman that comes to be true. 
Knowledge is, so long as ignorance is. In 
fact, when ignorance goes away knowledge 
also vanishes with it. Knowledge is simply 
a means to an end and not the end itself. 
It is Brahman alone that exists. When we 
say that Brahman is Absolute Existence- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


260 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Knowledge-Bliss we do not mean that 
Brahman is actually that, but that that is. 
the nearest approximation. Brahman is not 
untruth; it is not ignorance; it is not misery. 
To explain this, Brahman is described as 
Absolute Existence-Knowledge-Bliss. But, 
truly speaking, Brahman is beyond the reach 
of words and thought. 

“There is a place even in this body, where 
the mind being pitched, one can perfectly 
be at ease. What is required is a change of 
the angle of vision. There is no escape from 
trials and difficulties by flying from them.”” 


25th December. 


The talk this day was on retirement. It 
had been introduced as a spiritual discipline 
by the Swami at the Santi Asrama, California, 
U. S. A., when he had been there. > 

Swami: “The American devotees coming 
up and living there used to call it ‘talking 
with the Self.’ It helped them much spiritu- 
ally, and they used to acknowledge it. But 
it was a rule that none was to remain with 
himself for more than three days. Once a 
lady, Miss B—, retired without my knowl- 
edge. I myself was then living like that, 
occupying an outhouse of the Asrama at a 
distance. G—— was the only other male: 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 261 


inmate at that time, and he used to bring me 
a cup of tea, a little toast, ete. for my food. 
Of course, I made an exception in my case 

o and was to be in retirement for a week. 
That lady made up her mind to be in 
seclusion for a week and observe the vow of 
silence and constant meditation with scanty 
food like myself. The seclusion soon became 
too much for her, and she was about to be 
out of her mind. I was then observing the 
vow of silence in my solitary cell. But 
something like a premonition told me that 
an untoward event was going to happen. I 
felt uneasy and had to come out on the fifth 
day of my retirement. Miss B—- was being 
served by a young woman. Her condition 
was really serious. I sent for her, and when 
she came I gave her a good scolding. She 
admitted her mistake and begged to be 
pardoned. I was thinking of asking her to 
go away. But afterwards finding that she 
was repentant I let her remain. 

a “She herself said afterwards, ‘I was about 
to die. Had I not been made to come out 
I would have actually died.’ The lady was 
a woman of exceptional parts. For fourteen 
years she had been a platform speaker, 
addressing’ various audience. At the age of 
sixty-two she had founded an institution 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


262 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


called ‘The Home of Truth’? and had con- 
ducted it for some years. But she was very 
conceited. 

“There were many like her, distinguished, 
but self-opinionated. Of course, they were 
all sincere. They would wonder and say: 
‘Swami! How can you manage to keep 
together so many conflicting temperaments 
and train them? We watch carefully every 
movement of yours, but find nothing defec- 
tive in your conduct. This is as it should 
be.? To manage an organization well, one 
must behave like a mother, full of love and 
consideration. 

“I was so sorry to hear that K—— had 
left the Order. At the Sânti Asrama I had 
similar experiences. Many times I had to 
scold the inmates. K—— was ill on the 
eve of his departure. He pined for home 
and wanted to be served as tenderly as at 
home. Of course, he did not get that treat- 
ment and went away. It is not unnatural 
that a novice should think like that when he 
falls il]. But as he grows old in wisdom and 
experience, he learns to adapt himself to his 
environment and to the rigid life of a Sadhu. 

“What is needed is love. Even beasts 
appreciate it. It cannot be that a sensible 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 263- 


being like man will not understand it. ‘Why 
does the lamb love Mary? Because Mary 
loves the lamb.’ ” : 


28th December. 


A householder devotee and a few monks. 
of the Mission were present before the Swami. 
The devotee was talking about the visions of 
his brother-in-law who used to see his chosen 
Deity in dream or meditation and was com- 
missioned to worship his wife as mother. 
But the wife being of a different temperament 
would not let him. 


Swami: ‘Tell your relative to pray to 
the Lord, and He will change the mind of 
his wife. 


“His work is going on all right. We know 
very little of His Lila. In how many ways 
does He help man and push him forward ! 
At first He presents supernatural phenomena 
before him and thus strengthens his faith. 

è In short, whatever is done by Him is for the 
good of all.” 


Then the talk was about service. 

Swami (Turning to S.): “To serve crea- 
tures as God is a grand thing. But mere 
theorizing will not do. It must be done 
practically, so that it may help one to 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


264 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


the realization of the Ideal—the manifesta- 
tion of the Divine potentialities. Those who 
profess to be the children of Sri Ramakrishna 
must have Yoga, Bhakti, Karma, Jnana, 
nay, everything. For, Sri Ramakrishna 
Stands for the synthesis and harmony of all 
religious paths. The spiritual growth of a 
person following a particular line was the 
rule in the past. But now one should have 
an all-round development combined with a 
magnanimity of heart to tolerate others.” 

From this the conversation drifted on to 
self-surrender. 

Swami (Addressing N.): “We can be at 
perfect peace if we can resign ourselves to 
the Lord. Let Him do what He thinks best. 
It is foolishness to dictate terms to Him as 
regards His dealings with us. Once you have 
surrendered yourself at His feet, there should 
be no room left for the assertion of your 
individual will. He knows what is best for 
you. Even if you pray for what is not 
desirable, He will do the right thing by you.” as 


31st December. 


It was the birthday of the Holy Mother, 
and many devotees were present in the 
Swami’s room. Referring to the recent pain 
he had in his toe he remarked: ‘There is 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURLYANANDA 265 


no knowing why such a thing happens or 
why it increases or decreases. People hazard 
some patchwork of an explanation, but 
everything in the universe there is a great 
Divine Mother. I have realized that behind 
everything in the universe there ‘s a great 
Power at work. And She is all good. Even 
the worst suffering a man undergoes is due 
to Her will. And it is ultimately for his 
good, for such suffering removes countless 
past impressions from his mind. 

“Man has to his credit the actions of 
many previous births, which must work 
themselves out. Nothing particularly wrong 
has been committed in this life. But there 
are the accumulated sins of many past lives. 
These sufferings are due to them.” 

X.: “Tt might also be a case of vicarious 
punishment.”’ 

Swami: ‘“‘Yes, some people argue .that 
way also. Formerly I had not much belief 
in such a theory—that one suffered for the 

be sins of another. Now I fully believe in it. 
‘One can easily increase the happiness or 
decrease the misery of another. The extent 
to which one can so help another depends 
upon one’s spiritual powers. The lives of 
Sri Ramakrishna and the Holy Mother have 
strengthened my belief.’ 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


266 SPIRITUAL TALKS 
3rd January, 1921. 

Swami: “The great power of Sri Rama- 
krishna and Swamiji is at the back, so the 2 
work of the Mission is going on smoothly, 
and new recruits are coming. 

“Nowadays I advise all to stick to their 
posts. One must stay somewhere. .So it is 

- best to continue where increased experience 
will give greater facilities for work.” 


4th January. 

The Swami was reading Vichitra Jagat 
(The Wonderful World) by the late Principal 
Ramendra Sundar Trivedi. Eulogising the 
author he remarked : 

“One can explain a thing if only one has 
a clear grasp of it, which is the outcome of 
concentration. Better still is meditation. 
At Srinagar I used to meditate on the 
Upanishads. It was a charming occupation. 
In this way eight Upanishads (the first eight) 
were committed to memory. What is medi- £ 
tation but absorption in a subject? By 
concentrating on a subject, its inner secrets 
are revealed. i 

“First you have to prepare the mind. 
After that, any subject to which you may 
apply it will stand explained. The method 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI YURI YANANDA 267 


of controlling the mind is by seriously watch- 
ing it for some length of time. It can be- 
done both by love and by discipline, accord- 
ing to circumstances. The mind should be: 
under your control—it must not be allowed 
to ride on you, for then the tables will be 
turned. 

“Even the least attachment for anything: 
gives the mind a loop-hole to direct you as 
it pleases. You become a slave to it, which 
is not the case if you are unattached. Lust, 
attachment, and the like are one and the 
same thing, varying only in intensity. ‘There- 
fore first control the senses, O Arjuna, and 
conquer lust which destroys one’s knowledge 
and realization’ (Gita). One must turn the 
mind away before it gets attached to any 
object. Otherwise it becomes an impossible 
task afterwards.” 

Referring to a noted person the Swami 
observed: ‘‘What will mere words do if 
there is no character behind them? That 
is the great stumbling-block for all. Sri 
Ramakrishna would say: ‘Almost all have 
been caught in the snare of sex-attraction. 
Only a few have been saved by the Divine 
Mother.’ It is a most dreadful attachment.. 
People are all right so long as they do not 
come under its influence. A man under 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


1268 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


its spell can stoop to anything. ‘Lust and 
gold,’ and ‘the palate and sex-impulse’ are 
short expressions denoting the same thing. 
If one gives up these enjoyments, one 
verily renounces the world. One who can 
.do this indeed sets at naught the whole 
world.” 


‘6th January. 

Swami: ‘The world is a dreadful place. 
‘Only falsehood reigns here. For a Sadhu 
truth is everything. If he gives up truth, 
he can progress no more. Innocent lies are 
untruths all the same.” 


-Sth January. 


Referring to somebody’s slackness as 
regards truth the Swami said: ‘Truth is 
‘God. Falsehood is Maya. One gets every- 
thing by holding on to truth. Sri Rama- 
krishna taunted Pandit Sivanath Sastri 
with the words, ‘You are all such sane 
people, but how can you speak an untruth? t 
You call me insane, but never does an 
untruth escape my lips!’ Wishing to keep 
the incident of the Kalighat priest’s kicking 
him a secret, the Master asked Hriday (his 
nephew) to elicit from him a promise not 
to mention it to anybody. Hriday at first 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 269: 


objected. But Sri Ramkrishna made him 
elicit the promise from him three times, and 
then remarked, ‘Now it will never escape my 

a lips.’ For the good of the priest he thus 
put himself under a vow to observe silence: 
on the matter. 

“He once had an engagement with Sj. Jadu 
Mallick. But he forgot about it, being 
engrossed in conversation with a number of 
visitors. At 11 P.M., when he was about to 
retire for the night, he suddenly remembered 
it. Immediately he had a lantern lighted, 
and accompanied by Swami Brahmananda, 
went to the garden. Finding the gate 
closed, he put one foot in and shouted, 
‘Here I have come.’ He had given up 
everything, but could not give up truth. 

“Tt is a tremendous ordeal to abide by 
truth. A good deal of sacrifice is needed. 
To keep something secret, saying, ‘I won’t 
tell it,—is also a kind of untruth. To be 
absolutely frank and open in one’s dealings 

- is real truthfulness. 

“How dreadful is this realm of Maya! 
What stormy billows on it! One can watch 
it calmly only if one succeeds in removing 
oneself from it, is non-attached. Otherwise 
there is a great danger. But it is very 
difficult to remove oneself from it.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


-270 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


9th January. 

Swami (To one who wanted to leave 
Benares): ‘‘Do not be restless. Only the 
other day you came from Calcutta. If 
you go now, it will be setting a bad 
example. Control the mind, be not con- 
trolled by it. Surrender yourself to Him 
alone, your everything—your body, mind, 
and soul. ‘O my Mind-bird, why fly from 
tree to tree tasting different fruits? Have 
thy eternal nest on One who can offer thee 
the Greatest Fruit.’ ”’ 


The conversation then turned on the power 
of the Mantra. 

Swami: ‘‘Yes, one can cure disease by 
the power of mystic formulas. But by His 
will, I have learnt to have greater faith in 
Him Who is at the back of that power.” 


D.: “Kindly make my mind free from 
sex impulse.” 

Swami: “Look to the Atman, not to the 
body. Practise fixing the mind always on p7 
the Atman. ‘One gets attached to objects 
by constantly thinking of them. ` From 
attachment comes longing, and from longing 
-anger.’ 

“Anger is a concentrated form of lust. It 
makes one lose one’s head completely. Lust 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI TURIYANANDA 271 


does not so absolutely overwhelm the mind. 
Never think of transient things. That way 
you can escape attachment. 
“Once in America, a lady came to see me. 
I at once divined her mind and asked her 
if she had anything to tell me. She was very 
glad that I understood her. She told me 
that her husband was very sensual, but she 
herself had not the least inclination for that 
sort of life. She said, ‘I allow my husband 
freedom to go to whomsoever he likes; only 
. let him not trouble me.’ To that I replied : 
‘You are very nice! You started life 
together, and now you want to drive him 
away! Live with him and try to reform 
him by your advice.’ She burst out into tears 
at my words—she understood. And though 
for a time they lived together, she could not 
hold on to the last, she separated, but never 
married again. 
“In America men work very hard; they 
necessarily seek enjoyment of the senses. And 
- they have no other idea of enjoyment than 
that. Hence it is that they are so excessively 
lustful. The women labour less and some are 
intellectual. Therefore perhaps they have 
less of the sex impulse. 
“While there, I was once repeatedly sent for 
by a woman. She was the mistress of a man 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


272 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


who was a perfect rogue and would not allow 
her to go out. She begged me earnestly to 
go and see her once. She persuaded the man 
to allow my visit. He agreed on the express 
understanding that the interview would take 
place in his presence. He sat a little apart, 
and the woman .came out of her room and 
shook hands with me. I stood up, and hold- 
ing her hand in mine for about five minutes, 
I willed that her mind be purified and have 
pure tendencies. We then sat down and 
chatted for some time on spiritual topics 
without minding in the least the presence of 
the ‘man. The man became furious and 
exclaimed, ‘You should know this is America.’ 
‘What of that?? I said, ‘I know it is 
America.’ The effect of this visit was 
_ astonishing. The woman overcame his influ- 
ence and having extricated herself from 
him lived apart. She had said after the 
handshake: ‘I am filled, my difficulties are 
solved. I feel that I am pure, I have known 
what womanhood means.’ 
“The Lord endows religious teachers with 
a special power which descends through a 
succession of disciples. Or why, if they are 
Only like common men, should people seek 
them? It is to do His work that He so 
endows the preachers. But if they utilize 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 273 


the power for selfish purposes, they are 
deprived of it. Other powers such as oratory 
may remain, but the saving power departs 
from them. The power survives even after 
the completion of the work for which God 
granted it. Only it wanes a little. But by 
misuse it is completely lost. Oh, the tremend- 
ous will power I used to feel then! It is all 
His wonderous play !°? 

He quoted from the sixth chapter of the 
Gita, interspersing the recitation with beauti- 
ful and illuminating comments : i 
a ‘Through whatever reason, the restless, 
unsteady mind wanders away, let him, 
curbing it from that, bring it under the 
sway of the Self alone.’ 

“With unflagging perseverance the mind 
must be again and again brought back to the 
Atman. It is the nature of the mind to be 
fickle and restless, like a naughty child that 
has to be pulled back by the ear to its studies. 

- The mind must be carried even beyond the 
> Buddhi, the determinative faculty, directly to 
the Atman. Of course, repeated and incessant 
efforts are necessary, but the mind at last 
will come under your control and remain 
calmly fixed on the Atman. At first you are 
to transcend Tamas, then Rajas, and finally 
you are to go beyond even Sattva itself. 

- 18 


™s¢CCO0. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


274 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Then you realize the Self as pervading every- 
thing. You find that He alone exists, and 
nothing else. And that is called the state of 
Transcendental Consciousness. 


‘The senses, the mind, and the intellect— 
we shall have to capture all these outposts 
of consciousness, and thus conquer lust. 
Lust, anger, and avarice—these are but 
different forms of the same thing. They are 
the eternal enemies of the Jnini, and des- 
troyers of knowledge and wisdom. Join the 
senses to the Lord. That is the way to teach 
the senses a lesson.” è 


D. referred to Sri Ramakrishna’s bringing 
about sudden transformations in the lives of 
drunkards and sensual men. At that the 
Swami said: ‘‘Yes, these are all true. To 
some, however, he would allow an interval. 
‘Enjoy yourself,’ he would say to them, ‘you 
won’t croak long now that you have been 
bitten by a poisonous serpent.’ 


“If you are in touch with the Atman, you 
are safe.” 


11th January. 


Swami: “Last evening I had a rise of 
temperature. My attendants had at first 
concealed it from me, and declared it was 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


P 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 275 


99:20. When the truth was out, they excused 
themselves by saying that they had read 
it wrongly. ‘Where ignorance is bliss, it is 
folly to be wise.’ But ignorance is never 
beneficial. Knowledgs is the only real thing. 
And as Gaudapâda says, when Knowledge 
comes, all duality vanishes. It is this dual 
consciousness which is at the root of all evils. 
With the destruction of duality, all fear 
departs. ‘The sense of duality is the father 
of all fear.’ ‘Verily, O Janaka, hast thou 
attained to fearlessness !? 

“It is no use reading the scriptures unless 
you practise what they say. The Books have 
been there from time immemorial! During 
our wanderings in the Kangra valley, Mahârâj 
(Swami Brahmananda), and myself—I was 
then about twenty-six years old-~met a 
Sidhu aged about forty-two, very sincere 
and unsophisticated. He said: ‘I have 
been studying Vedanta for the last sixteen 
years. But even now the sight of a woman 
relaxes my self-control, just as the thought 
of tamarind makes the mouth water!? He 
was quite right. What is there in a book? 

“‘Chandasoka, highly enraged with a man, 
pursued him sword in hand. The man 
sought refuge in a monastery, and the Abbot, 
though fully conscious of the risk, granted 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


276 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


him asylum. When Asoka came and enquir- 
ed about the man, the Abbot admitted that. 
he was there—he could not tell a lie. 
‘Surrender him to me,’ said the Emperor. 
‘No, sir, came the bold reply. This made 
him so furious that Asoka at once lifted his 
sword to strike him. To the great wonder of 
the Emperor, the monk stood his ground 
unflinching without the faintest sign of fear 
or movement of muscle. The Emperor asked 
him, ‘How is it that you do not quake 
before death?? ‘Why should I? Whose 
death do you mean?’ And thus they dis- 
cussed, and at last Chanddsoka became 
Dharmasoka. For the Emperor had keen 
intelligence, and he understood. 

“*Vedanta as prevalent in some parts of the 
Punjab is of a loose sort. ‘I am Brahman’, 
they say, and go on doing all sorts of 
things as if these did not affect them. Dis- 
crimination, according to them, is not a sign 
of Knowledge. Even the womankind hold 
this view. And sometimes vile things are 
done in the name of Vedanta. 

“You know the story of a Sadhu who came 
to live in the Panchavati at Dakshineswar. 
Gossip went round about his character, and 
it reached at last the ears of Sri Ramakrishna. 
And when he remonstrated with him, the 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 277 


Sadhu said, ‘If the world is unreal, are my 
slips of character alone real?? Sri Rama- 
krishna replied, ‘I spit upon such knowledge 
‘as thine !? Falsehood should never be allowed 
to flourish. 

“The common man takes to those activities 
which tend to perpetuate the bond of attach- 
ment. And this is true of the whole world. 
The only exceptions are the Sâdhus, who have 
found out the evanescence of the world and 
renounced it. Knowledge dawns when dis- 
crimination is perfect.” 


12th January. 


Swami: ‘‘How difficult to hold the mind 
for ever above the world! It wants to come 
down. It is indeed very hard to escape the 
grip of desires. As Sri Ramakrishna would 
say: ‘Even he who has no one to call 
his own rears up a cat and creates homely 
attachments.’ 

“Realization !—Ah, how wonderful it is! 
‘The mere thought of the Lord fills one with 
joy—who can measure the bliss of seeing Him 
face to face? 

** *In the ocean of Brahman filled with the 
nectar of Absolute Bliss, what is to be shun- 
ned and what accepted, what is other (than 
oneself) and what different? I do not see or 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Prust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


278 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


hear or know anything in this. I exist as the 
Self, the Eternal Bliss—distinct from every- 
thing else.’ * 


14th January. 


Apropos of the Bhégavata class held yester- 
day, the Swami said: ‘‘What a fine advice 
Prahlada gave to his companions! He says : 
‘Worship the Lord even from childhood. 
This body is extremely despicable; the 
saving grace is that it helps realization of the 
Lord.’ And how boldly he declared to his. 
father that none had taught him to love God, 
neither his teachers nor even he himself! 
This love of God, he says, is attainable only 
through the grace of the devotees. The 
father exclaimed, ‘Who is this? He will be 
my death, I fear. Even Brahma and Vishnu 
quake before me, but he argues fearlessly with 
me! Kill him! 


“Perhaps you are thinking that it is ficti- 
tious. No, it is all true. Prahlada is not 
dead, he still lives. He lives in every devo- 
tee’s heart, in yours and in mine. When such 
stupendous efforts failed to kill him, how can 
he ever die? Did he not realize himself as 
pervading everything? Read the Vishnu 
Purana ; there you will find that his monistic. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURLYANANDA 279 


consciousness made even blocks of stones 
float on water ! 

“An excellent book again is the Chandi! 
The philosophy of the Chandi has established 
the unity of Brahman and Sakti. ‘She the 
Divine Mother is the Absolute and yet the 
relative in the form of the universe. She 
pervades everything.’ Mahâmâyâ has veiled 
everyone with delusion that Her play may 
continue undisturbed. She vouchsafes both 
worldly enjoyment and spiritual emancipa- 
tion. Such is the theme of the book. King 
Suratha and the merchant Samadhi worship- 
ped the Mother for three years before they 
realized their desires. 

“How is it that we know, and yet cannot 
act? This is due to Her Maya. She must be 
propitiated. ‘She being propitiated grants 
the boon of Freedom.’ Aye, without Her 
grace, no man can get out of this net-work 
of illusion. Only through worship can the 
common man realize the supreme beatitude, 
the state of universal consciousness. There 
is no other way. 

**Speak to others even as you speak to your- 
self. That is to say, know every one as your 
own self. Do you ever get angry with your- 
self? Even so behave with others. But that 
would be possible only when you see your 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


280 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


own self existing in others. This is the spirit 
which underlies Swamiji’s doctrine of the wor- 
ship of the poor, the forms of Narayana. 
Indeed, there is a plane of consciousness 
where everything appears as one’s own self. 
And when one reaches that plane, there is 
no more any confusion for him.” 

The conversation then turned on Babu 
Ishan Ch. Mukherji’s wonderful charities. 
Ishan Babu was a devotee of Sri Rama- 
krishna; and Sri Ramakrishna had asked him 
to renounce those beneficent works and direct 
his whole mind to God. 

Swami: ‘Even in such charities, there is 
a subtle selfishness. He doubtless had an eye 
on fame. That is why he could act as an 
umpire or leader. Very difficult indeed is 
unselfish work !*? 

N.: “The work that we (the monks of 
the order) do—is it not also selfish in that 
way? Some say that we work driven by 
our own inclinations.’’ 

Swami: ‘True, you are guided by your 
own inclinations ; but done in the right spirit, 
your work will bear an exactly opposite fruit 
to what will accrue from selfishness.”? 

N.: “Some are doubtful whether our 
works are really Sri Ramakrishna’s works.” 

Swami: ‘Then why do they work? The 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 281 


distinction that the works are Swamiji’s and 
not Sri Ramakrishna’s is irrational. Swamiji 
did not preach even a single idea of his own. 
Bold indeed must be he who would differen- 
tiate between Swamiji and Sri Ramakrishna ! 

“Some look upon these works as inferior 
to meditation. They do not know what 
they say. What is meditation? Why is 
itt so highly looked upon? Because it is 
the way to the soul’s union with God. 
Now let us see what Swamiji who initiated 
the works meant.’ Did he ask you to merely 
attend on the patients or to worship Narayana 
in and through them? How then is this wor- 
ship of Nârâyana different from meditation? 
It may be one cannot serve in this spirit, but 
one has no right therefore to call it inferior. 
Swamiji proclaimed this new path after realiz- 
ing the Self as immanent in all things. But 
people do not understand it, and so want to 
move in the old grooves of spiritual practice. 
Three days of such service done in the right 
way will bring about spiritual realization. 
Such indeed has been the experience of every- 
one who has tried it. K— has told me that 
in those days when he was working in the 
hospital, he would always feel highly lifted 
up in spirits. Is not every man God Himself? 
“The Lord abides in every heart.’ If one fails 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


282 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


to realize this, it is one’s own fault, none 
else’s. 

“Once when I made known to Sri Rama- 
krishna that my life’s ideal was to attain 
Nirvana, he reproved me for entertaining 
such a low ideal. He said: ‘The ordinary 
man yearns for Nirvana. Have you not seen 
in a game of dice how cautiously the neophyte 
moves his pieces, keeping them in pairs to 
escape being checkmated, and how anxious 
is he. to reach ‘home’! But the expert 
takes no caution. He deliberately turns 
down his pieces even when very near ‘home’ 
so that the play might go on. And the dice 
become so attuned in his hands that he can 
cast any number he likes. Yes, the ‘expert’ 
remains in the world and yet enjoys its fun.’ 
I was extremely astonished at the statement, 
and on my expressing a doubt, he reassured 
me that it was quite possible through the 
grace of the Mother. ‘She graciously makes 
the dice so attuned,’ he said metaphorically.”? 

N.: ‘You once told us that the joy of 
one day’s company with an Incarnation was 
enough compensation for the sufferings of a 
whole life.” 

Swami: ‘Yes, it is true. An hour of con- 
gregational singing in the company of the 
Master used to fill us with such an exuberant 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 283 


joy that we would feel transported, as it were, 
into an ethereal region. But now even medi- 
tation fails to evoke that celestial bliss, or 
even a semblance of it. That bliss would 
abide in us for a week continually. We used 
to feel intoxicated, though we did not know 
the why or how of it. Who will believe it? 
It is difficult to convince anyone. Yet I 
must speak out. 

“The ordinary man seeks Nirvana because 
he has suffered. But he does not know 
the tremendous joy there is in Divine com- 
munion. 

“One day I arrived at the Dakshineswar 
Temple when the Master was taking his 
dinner. A number of cups containing various 
preparations were set before him. Some- 
one may have thought these an unbecoming 
luxury, fit only for a Rajasic life. Sri Rama- 
krishna at once said: ‘Well, the tendency 
of my mind is ever towards the Infinite. It 
is by such Rajasic devices that I hold it 
down to the lower planes, otherwise I could 
not have talked with you.’ ‘How strange !’ 
I said to myself on hearing him, ‘others seek 
to attain Sattva by overcoming Rajas through 
rigorous discipline of food, whereas he has 
to forcibly check his mind from rising to the 
Sattvic plane !’ 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


284 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


“Out of infinite mercy, he once vouchsafed 
me the realization that every action and 
movement of his, nay, even his footfall was 
meant for the good of others. 


“People have only a superficial idea of 
the meaning of selfless action, not a clear 
grasp. For, if they are once convinced, how 
can they ever resist practising it? Only the 
self-deluded talk glibly of having understood 
it. Complete surrender to Truth is an indis- 
pensable condition of selfless action. 


‘It is desires that obstruct spiritual realiza- 
tion. Could we but surrender ourselves 
wholly to Him! But no, we only partly rely 
on Him, and partly on our own effort lest 
He should not do the whole thing. 


(To R) “Tell us something about God.” 

R.: “We can recite only from the Bhâga- 
vata of the Kali Yuga! (He meant news- 
papers.)”? 

Swami: ‘‘Why do you think like that? 
How can there be any Kali Yuga for a 
devotee? (To others) R. sometimes says 
very nice things. The other day he told me 
a dream of his. It seemel almost real and 
deeply impressed me.” 


R., who was persuaded to recount it, said : 
“I dreamt that Sri Ramakrishna was very 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 285 


ill, and that the dissolution of his body was 
imminent. The disciples were very much 
cast down, and the Holy Mother was crying 
in an inner apartment. I had an idea in those 
days when I had this dream that a Divine 
Incarnation and man differed only in the 
degree of power. And as I stood before Sri 
Ramakrishna I thought within myself whether 
the love of his disciples could not induce him 
to preserve his body a little longer. No 
sooner had the thought crossed my mind than 
he said: ‘Look here, there is a great differ- 
enc@ between God and men. Do you know 
what men are like? They are like persons 
walking a short distance into the waters of the 
ocean, reaching at most to the breakers with 
extreme difficulty and then coming back.’ 
And as he said this, I actually saw an infinite 
ocean spread before me, with men moving on 
the water, most of whom were very close to 
the sands, and only one or two had gone as 
far as the first breakers. Sri Ramakrishna 
continued, ‘But God can cross it and return 
in a moment.’ And at once I saw him cross 
the sea and come back! He then said to 
me: ‘The mind of an Incarnation of God 
always tends towards the Infinite. Only a 
particle of His mind attends to the universe 
of which the devotees form a very minute 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


286 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


portion indeed. How can they hold down 
my mind ?’ 

“The Holy Mother also used to say the 
same thing. She once said: ‘My mind 
always wants to soar into the Infinjte. I have 
to forcibly keep it down on a lower plane by 
various devices. They talk of my attach- 
ments! They do not know that I can in 
a moment sever all ties P ” 

Swami: ‘I heard a beautiful story relating 
to her, told by herself. After the passing 
away of Sri Ramakrishna, she was once 
crying, when he appeared before her and 
said: ‘How is it that you cry? Do you 
think I am gone? Here I am! I have, as 
it were, passed from one room to another, 
that’s all. You may not see me physically, 
but you know in many ways that I exist.’ ”’ 


15th January. 

Swami was arguing in fun with D. to prove 
the superiority of Bhakti over Jnana. He 
quoted from the Sri Chaitanya-Charitémvrita: 
“ The Jnani, ignorant of the bliss of Divine 
love, like a crow tastes the margosa fruits 
of Jnina. But the devotee, knowing the 
mystery of Divine love, like a cuckoo tastes 
the mango-blossoms of Love.” The margosa 
{fruit is bitter to the taste, and being a 


4 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 287 


mature product of the tree, has no further 
development and soon withers away. But 
the mango-blossom has a glorious future 
before it. It will grow and ripen into a 
luscious fruit; it implies progressiveness. 

“Jnina fully evolved becomes Bhakti. 
Practice of Knowledge leads the mind higher 
and higher, beyond the bounds of duality. 
But true Bhakti is its own end. Wherever he 
be, the devotee is ever full of the nectar of 
love and bliss Divine. 

“Knowledge is necessary in the first stages 
of spiritual life to master the senses. After- 
wards it is one continuous enjoyment of the 
beatific love of God. 

“And how beautiful are these words of 
Thomas 4 Kempis: ‘Speak, O Lord, for Thy 
servant heareth. Silence, all ye teachers! 
And silence, ye prophets! Speak Thou alone, 
O Lord, unto my soul!’ 

“c (Come, O mind, let us evade lust and 
other passions, and live by ourselves.’ But 
how difficult to evade them! It is these 
which have made brutes of men! 

“Sri Ramakrishna once asked a Pandit to 
discourse on some scriptural topic. The 
Pandit went on for more than an hour 
expounding the doctrine of Triputibheda 
(the dissolution of the difference between 


| 
I 
1 
| 
CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


288 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


knowledge, knower and the thing known). 
At the end, Sri Ramakrishna remarked, 
‘Nicely indeed you have spoken. But all I 
know is that I have my Mother and I am 
Her son.’ ” 


21st January. 

The conversation turned on ancient civili- 
zations. T. remarked that the Indian, 
Chinese, Egyptian and Persian civilizations 
were the most ancient. 

Swami: “They hold that the present 
civilization of mankind is the outcome of the 
evolution of the amoeba. I would tell the 
Americans that though we admit evolution, 
yet we hold that the civilized man has always 
existed. I would challenge them to show a 
single civilization which did not result from 
contact with another civilization.” 

T.: “Yet, Mahâråj, the Hottentot is still 
the same Hottentot.” 

R.: “But it may be that a great man 
suddenly appeared amidst an uncivilized. x 
people and gave them light.” 

Swami: “As a matter of fact, great men 
are never born like that. Savage races are 
always found to have become civilized by 
contact with civilized races. 

“The highest ideal of civilization is the 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 289" 


realization of the Self as existing in all beings. 
` “He who judges of pleasure and pain every- 
where by the same standard as he applies to 
himself, that Yogi, O Arjuna, is regarded 
as the highest.’ That realization, however, 
comes only after Nirvikalpa Samâdhi.” 


B.: “But when a man has realized the 
Personal God in the Savikalpa Samadhi, he 
finds Him abiding in everything. Is not that 
also the realization of Universal Oneness??? 

Swami: ‘There are stages in realization.. 
Swamiji used to say that India never felt the 
want of the Jivanmukta (the living-free). He 
said that he had himself seen at least fifteen 
or sixteen of them; and that even in the 
darkest days of India, spiritual giants were 
born.”? 

R.: “Indeed, a land inhabited by three 
hundred millions of people—and by more in 
the past—persistently aspiring after spiritual 
realization, cannot know the want of such 
seers. India is, as it were, the shrine of the 
world, and contemplation of God its principal 
occupation.”’ 


Swami: “It was the opinion of Swamiji 
that all heart and no brain is preferable to: 
all brain and no heart. He used to say that 
the heart does everything.” 

19 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


290 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


T.: “I do not believe in this theory.” 

Swami: ‘You cannot build up life with- 
out the living touch of an ideal life. The 
Bhiagavata is always insisting on the company 
of the good and the devout. Sankara has no 
doubt laid particular stress on the Jnana 
aspect. But Vedanta upholds the necessity 
also of a spiritual teacher. Life can be 
kindled only from another life.” 

T.: ‘‘Fortunately we have the lives of 
Sri Ramakrishna and Swamiji and yourselves 
before us. Thus we can know the true ideal 
and the true significance of the scriptures.”’ 

Swami: “Indeed the lives of seers are the 
proof and demonstration of the scriptures.’’ 


2th January. 


One of the Swami’s toe-nails had come off 
of itself. Referring to this, he said, ‘““Thus 
is the body left behind, and the soul flies 
off, though, of course, not unperceived ;—the 
mind, the ego feels its departure. ‘The great 
elements, egoism, intellect, and also the un- 
manifested, the ten senses, desire, aversion, 
pleasure, pain, the body, intelligence, forti- 
tude—these briefly described constitute the 
Kshetra (the Field) and its modifications.’ 
The Kshetrajna (soul) alone is real, and its 
reality makes the Kshetra—the body, mind, 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI TURIYANANDA 291 


‘etc.—appear as real. In his last birth, man 
‘becomes conscious of the Truth, knows God 
and succumbs no more to egoistic delusions. 

“Attachment and aversion are at the root 
‘of all evil. Hence the injunction to relin- 
quish them. For, free of them, one can do 
with impunity whatever one likes. 

“One attains Knowledge through the grace 
of the great sages. ‘Through the grace of 
the great ones or of the Lord,’ says the 
scripture. ‘Then one feels a strong yearning 
for emancipation from the world, and the 
Cosmic Will makes circumstances favourable 
to him. 

“The Jiva is bound. Like a tethered cow 
he is free to a certain extent only, not fully. 
But he is emancipated if he utilizes that 
limited freedom in a proper way. He does 
not do it, but rather abuses it in various 
ways. 

“Each man has his own world and sees the 
same Substance in a different way. Realizing 

n the Self in all things, one attains to Peace 
Eternal.” 


26th January. 

Swami (Referring to-D. who was present): 
“We is daily going down into Tamas, becom- 
ing more and more Jazy in the name of 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


292 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Sadhana. They think that inaction in itself 
is the ideal. If it be so, why, then the 
wall also should be considered to have 
attained Samadhi. Should not one transcend z 
all dualities? To maintain one’s mental 
balance under all circumstances, to remain 
absolutely unmoved,—that indeed is the 
goal! 

“« Worship of Nârâyana’™—how exquisite ! 
This is the characteristic of the present age. 
Meditation and work both are excellent, if 
properly done. They are equally good. 

“The idea once prevailed that Swamiji has: 
preached differently from Sri Ramakrishna. 
That idea is considerably discredited now. 
Practice of medicine is bad if you seek 
remuneration. Selflessly done, it leads to 
salvation. They say that work binds. Well, 
if it binds, it also unbinds. What kind of 
meditation is this, half an hour in the morn- 
ing and half an hour in the evening! Must 
not there be an uninterrupted flow through- ” 
out the day? Closing eyes for a few minutes. 
and spending the remaining day in gossip ! 
One must try long and hard, only then can 
one have realization. * 

“As you sow, so you reap. If you want 
anything, start seeking it at once. You may 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


rd 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu - Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 293 


not be able to do the best, but do as best 
as you can. Now or never!” 


2nd February. 


N— read out the first half of the Mundaka 
Upanishad. At the end the Swami observed : 
“Only the One exists, nothing else. We see 
Him as men, animals, birds, insects, plants, 
ete. If we only think correctly, we shall find 
that there is no such differentiation in Him. 
How we imagine an ego and slave for its 
gratification! Each has his own world which 
accompanies him beyond death. It is enjoy- 
ment and the desire for it that obstruct true 
Knowledge,—freed from them we can have 
Knowledge this moment. Are we not Knowl- 
edge Itself? But alas, it is so hard to 
renounce the joys of the world! 

“Unless we are willing to understand, none 
can convince us. There was a king who 
promised the gift of half his kingdom to any- 
one who would teach him the preparation of 
puffed rice. Many came and explained and 
demonstrated, but at the end the king 
would always say that he did not understand. 
How could he?—He simply would not! We 
are also like him. Who does not know that 
the world is transitory? But we refuse to 
feel convinced lest we also have to give away 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


294 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


‘half the kingdom’—the enjoyments of the 
world.” 

N.: “But this hugging of sorrow, is it 
not also a sort of madness?” 

Swami: ‘Yes, it is. But as a spiritual 
discipline it has great value, it purifies the 
mind. 

‘Merely saying ‘I am Brahman’ is no use 
as long as there is the least ignorance left in 
you. You must worship God. The Mother 
being pleased by worship grants both enjoy- 
ment and Freedom. ‘Take refuge, O king, 
in Her, the Great Goddess. Being propitiat- 
ed, She grants both worldly prosperity and 
spiritual emancipation.’ 

«© What if Brahma, Vishnu or Siva teaches 
thee? Unless thou forgetest everything, 
thou canst not be established in Self-realiza- 
tion.” 

« The whole universe, being but an effect 
of Brahman, is in reality nothing but 
Brahman. Its essence is That, and it does 
not exist apart from It. He who says ‘it 
is’, is still under delusion—he babbles like: 
one asleep’.”’ 


4th February. 


The Swami spoke enthusiastically om 
service and work. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 295 


Swami: ‘Work done in the spirit of 
service can lead one as surely to the Goal as 
meditation and Japa. 


‘The Gitâ read between the lines, is found 
to emphasize work. There is a deeper mean- 
ing behind its saying that the Jnâni has no. 
work to do. It means that he has not, like 
the ordinary worker, any egoistic feeling 
attached to his work. 

“All those old ideas that the Sannyâsin 
should renounce all works except begging, can 


no more satisfy us, especially after we have 
been enlightened by the life and teachings 
of the Master and Swamiji. They have 
thrown a new light on these things, they 
have given a new expression to the ancient 
light.” 

Hearing that a certain work was incon- 
venienced for want of a trained worker, 
Swami said: ‘‘Never mind. Do your best. 
Work yourself to death, if need be. Nothing 
but good will come of it. 


* 


“I am against our work being done by paid 
men. Better you wind it up.... Go on 
working, ready to sacrifice even life for the 
Master’s work. I am sure he will provide all 
necessary help in time. Do not worry. 


e 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


-296 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


“I do not at all like the idea of separating 
work from worship. Work is worship. All 
work is His service. I have seen that people 
who practise Tapasyâ in solitude often 
become selfish. But the worker has to mix 
and live with many for the sake of his work 
and has thus to cultivate patience, sympathy, 
love and selflessness. Besides Upâsanâ (wor- 
ship) also is work, and its fruits also have 
to be dedicated to the Lord.” 


11th February. 

Swami: ‘J. came to see me some time 
ago. He is a staunch believer in Purusha- 
kâra—free-will and free agency. I put the 
other side, that of destiny, before him. I 
said : ‘We have seen both these aspects, and 
therefore look upon the Divine will as the 
stronger factor. You perhaps have not scen 
failure in life. That is why you are so 
emphatic about free-will.’ But he frankly 
and naively upheld his thesis. He came to 
congratulate us on our works of service. 
When I said that they were possible through 
the grace of God, he replied, ‘No, not through 
God’s will, but through your own efforts.” 
He remarked that Sâdhus have brought ruin 
on the country by preaching Vairagya! But 
he is a fine man and I like him.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURTYANANDA 297 


12th February. 


Swami (Referring to Y.): “He wants 
to put by some money before retiring from 
the world. The idea of begging one’s food 
frightens him. But then, his won’t be true 
renunciation. ‘Wander about living on alms.’ 
Begging is holy, it teaches reliance on God. 
And one comes to feel that all places are 

` His and that one gets only what and when 
He gives. One cannot otherwise get rid of 
fear and reliance on men. 


“Some are alarmed at the idea of sharing 
their things with others. There was a Sâdhu 
who lived in a forest. To him once came a 
king seeking God, having renounced his king- 
dom. The Sâdhu beċame alarmed at this 
prospective partner of his daily bread. So 
he said to the king: ‘You must give up all 
company. Go deeper into the forest where 
you will have perfect solitude.’ The king took 
the words in an earnest spirit and left him 

© and retired into the deep forest. In a short 
while there came a man bearing food for two 
persons, out of which he gave the usual 
portion of bread to the Sidhu. The Sidhu 
found that the man had reserved a gold dish 
laden with delicacies and asked him whom it 
was meant for. ‘It is for him,’ he replied, 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


298 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


‘who was a king.’ The Sadhu flared up :: 
‘What! mere bread for me who am so old a 
Sadhu and all these delicacies for a novice !” 
The man said: ‘I do not know anything. y 
But he who sent me has said that if you are 
not satisfied with the bread, you can take to 
the scythe.” The Sidhu, before he renounc- 
ed, had been used to mowing the grass. The 
idea was that if he and the king did not feel 
content with their present life, they might 
go back to their old occupations, the Sidhu 
to grass-moving and the king to his kingdom. 
Why then should not the king be carefully 
served ? 

“This is a fine story, profoundly significant. 

“It was in the first days of the Santi 
Asrama. The railway station nearest to the 
Asrama was fifty miles off, and the nearest 
neighbour, a postmaster, five miles away. 
Water had to be carried up in barrels from 
a place three miles distant. When I ob- 
served these conditions I felt extremely 
dejected. How, I thought, could about a 
fifteen people live in a place like this? 
Anxious thoughts filled my mind in the 
morning. At night I had a kind of vision 
in which I saw a mother-bird feeding her- 
young one as described in the Chandi, and 
I was given to understand that the Mother- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 299 


had pre-arranged everything. Next day 
came a friend of one of the party, who was 
a water-diviner. 

“In the meantime I had a good rebuke 
from a lady member for my anxiety, who 
said that I had less understading than even 
‘Baby’ inasmuch as I had no faith in the 
Mother. ‘Baby’ was the name given by 
Swamiji to a very devout girl. The rebuke 
seemed to me to have come from Mother 
Herself. It so happened that the water- 
diviner returned after two hours’ stroll in 
the Asrama grounds and reported that there 
were as many as three sources of water there. 
The nearest source was chosen, and he dug 
a little and discovered a fine spring of water. 
And thus everything was set right in the 
Santi Asrama. 

«It is He who is doing everything. Only 
the One exists, none else. It is extremely 
difficult to see ‘the Atman in all things and 
all things in the Atman,’ and ‘God as existing 
equally in all beings.’ We talk glibly about 
it and preach it to others. But how very 
hard to practise it! Everything is within us. 
Joy and sorrow have no objective existence. 
We project joy from within us and associate 
it with certain things. 

‘The Jnani speaks and thinks of the ‘T as 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


800 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


identical with the Atman. We identify it 
-with the body. To perceive the Divine in 
-One’s consciousness is nothing but merging 
the ego in the Atman. ‘As pure water poured 
into pure water, becomes the same, sc 
‘becomes the self of the sage, O Gautama. 
-who knows the unity of the Atman.’ 

“The Jnâni who has realized Oneness. 
‘behaves in the world in the same way 
as we do when we happen to bite our 
‘tongue—we are not angry with the teeth. 
So long as we do not know the real 
mature of the image, we are deceived by it. 
But once we know its nature, we are no 
donger taken in, though we see it again and 
-again. So also the Jnâni who knows the 
nature of the world is not deluded by it. 

“The difference between the Savikalpa and 
the Nirvikalpa Samadhi is one of degrec 
of bliss, not of kind. For in both of them. 
the soul revels in God. The Nirvikalpa 
Samadhi is full of the infinite joy of Self- 
knowledge. It is not a barren vacuity. 

“When one has attained Liberation, onc 
realizes the pure love without any ulterior 
motive. It is a love devoid of every thought 
sof the power and glory of the Beloved. It 
is a love such as the Gopis bore to the child 
Krishna. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 301 


“The Adhikarika Purushas, the prophets- 
and Incarnations, that are born to uplift the- 
world, have not to suffer the bondage of’ 
Karma. Their incarnation is not due to- 
their past actions but to the will of God 
that they may serve mankind. Indra and’ 
other gods are lords of ‘spheres of enjoy- 
ment’ and they have their fall. But the 
Jivanmuktas, the ‘living-free’, are all-power- 
ful. It is true the Brahma-Sutras have 
stipulated that they cannot create or destroy 
the world, these functions belonging to God. 
But it is not that they lack the power to- 
create etc., they simply do not want to- 
create. Possession of all powers is a sine 
qua non of the attainment of Mukti. 

“Sri Ramakrishna said that Siva had 
taken one sip from the Ocean of Brahman, 
Suka had touched it, and Narada had only 
seen it from a distance. 

“Someone has written expressing his dis- 
approval of the constant festivity that has 

à characterized the stay of Mahârâj (Swami 
Brahmananda) here. But how can it be- 
otherwise? The Bhâgavata says, ‘Those 
who realize the eternal presence of the Lord 
in their heart, are endowed with perpetual 
good and beauty, and their life is imbued. 
with an eternal festive joy.’ 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
302 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


“Râmânuja came to where Surdas lived, 
and found him daily complaining to the 
Lord of his sufferings and sorrows. He said : 
‘Why, O Surdâs, do you thus complain of 
your sorrow to God? Sing His glory.’ That 
is how Surdâs came to compose his hundred 
thousand verses in praise of the Lord. 
Surdâs who had been blind regained his eye- 
sight afterwards. 

“It is God who does everything. Rightly 
does Tulsid’s say that profit and loss, life 
and death, fame and slander, all are His 
gifts. Yes, He is the only doer. But the 
plan of the world is not all for Mukti, but 
also for Bhoga, enjoyment. Thus people 
plod on through joy and sorrow till they 
‘wake up’ and are emancipated. God is the 
motive power behind both virtue and vice. 
And behind all these is His beneficent will. 
Every action thus tends to an Ultimate 
Good. 

“The world is full of bewildering variety 
and is extremely complex. All pheno- 
mena are the effect of Triguna. But there 
is a higher state beyond them, which has 
been realized by Paramahamsas. Whoever 
sees the underlying unity amidst these 
varieties has peace eternal. For then there 
is neither loss nor profit nor good nor evil. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 308 


We have been reading these few days of the 
selfish prayers in the Rudrâdhyâya: ‘Do 
not destroy my cows. Ever turn thy benig- 
nant face on me. Come putting aside thy 
bow and arrows. And humble my enemies 
and chastise them.’ Well, such prayers come 
out of selfishness. But when one is rid of 
body-consciousness, one does not feel these 
desires. The highest conception is to think 
that everything is He. Failing that, it is 
best to think that He is the real agent behind 
all actions and He is causing us to act. 


“Sri Ramakrishna used to say that one 
becomes fit for Sannyâsa only by having 
been a king in a previous birth and enjoyed 
life. Then only is one imbued with true 
dispassionateness from the very beginning of 
life. Is Sannyâsa a mere form? Our idea 
was that a Sannydsin is very rare. For no 
ordinary man is he whom Maya has released 
from her bondage. When I saw three 
thousand monks at Hrishikesh, then did I 
truly feel the difference between a true and 
a formal monk. A mere ochre garb does 
not constitute Sannyasa. 


“They want Sannydsa early in order to 
evade work. Our Master did not empha- 
size Sannyfsa so much as realizing God. But 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


304. SPIRITUAL TALKS 


it is true he was emphatic that knowledge of 
God is not possible without renunciation.”’ 

Someone: ‘But Swamiji strongly empha- 
sized the necessity of Sannydsa.”’ 

Swami: “Yes, he did. But he also. 
initiated the institution of service. You 
must take him in toto, which you do 
not. Some there are who refuse to work. 
They want, to use the Master’s words, to 
have the ‘butter? put into their mouth, 
they will not churn it out themselves. 
Everything must be given them ready-made ! 
That is why initiation into Sannydsa does 
not conduce to progress. 

“Unless we dedicate ourselves to the service 
of others, we can do little good to them. 
Infinite sympathy and patience are necded. 
A bad health is a great impediment, it often 
causes mental irritation. 

“Was not Swamiji Sattvika, of a calm and 
dispassionate mind? Who was ever so 
Sattvika as he? My impression of him is 
not derived from hearsay, but from constant < 
companionship and ocular evidence. I have 
seen him sitting at meditation at nine in 
the evening, quite insensible to the bitter 
stings of swarms of mosquitoes, and rising 
from it at five in the morning to take an early 
bath. It seemed as if Siva himself was medi- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Eri 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 305: 


tating, so deeply absorbed and unconscious of 
the external he would be! Self-control and. 
balance—these are characteristics of Sattva. 
Swamiji saw that India could not redeem her- 
self unless she passed first through Rajas or 
activity. That is why he preached the 
doctrine of selfless work which is Rajas or 
activity inspired and controlled by Sattva 
or mental poise and dispassionateness. 
**Sattva gives self-control, Rajas evokes. 
activity and Tamas degrades. Tamas. 
must be changed into Rajas or activity. 
Tamas is like drowsiness in snow—fatal. If 
one takes a fatal dose of opium, he should 
be forcibly kept from falling into sleep, even 
by physical torments; for to sleep then is. 
to die. Indians are going down in Tamas: 
under the pretext of Sattva. Swamiji tried. 
hard to whip them into activity.” 
Someone: ‘‘Why this degradation ?” 
Swami: “The reason is quite apparent— 
they have strayed away from the ideal.” 


17th November. 


Disciple: ‘How to control the senses??? 
Swami: “What do I know? (After a 
pausc) ‘My only refuge is Thy name, 
O Mother Syâmâ, . . 2 ‘Never forget the 
name of Sri Durgâ. ... Why dost thou 
20 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


306 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


forget Her, O my mind! Just utter the 
‘name of Sri Durga. . . .’ 

“Can you for once stop all talk and vigor- 
ously repeat only the name of God? Well, 
„you see, you cannot expect to accumulate 
‘unless there is something already in the store. 
‘The man who lives from hand to mouth 
cannot store up anything. But if anyhow by 
hard labour he can once lay by something. 
his store goes on increasing rapidly. Similar 
is the case even in the field of religion. For 
a period work hard, and try to store up some- 
thing. Always repeat the name of God— 
while taking meals, while at bed, or when 
you are at your seat. Just close your lips 
and be busy only with the repetition of the 
name of God. The Master would cite the 
example of the compass. The needle of a 
compass always points to the north. You 
may turn the needle away, but as soon as 
you let go the hold, it again points to 
the north. Your mind also should be so 
moulded. If somebody comes and diverts ~ 
your mind to any other topic, as soon 
as he leaves you, the mind should be again 
repeating His name. Just see—so long I 
was talking with you; as soon as I have 
stopped speaking, the song is going on 
within, “Why dost thou, my mind, become . 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 307 


forgetful? Just repeat the name of Sri 
Durga’-—exactly what the mind was doing 
before the conversation began. And you 
must do everything quite secretly, so that 
nobody comes to know of it. 

“People say, ‘What He wishes, will come 
to pass.’ Well, will the wish arise in Him, 
without any struggle on your part? Only 
when the wings are tired does a bird sit 
on the mast of a ship for rest. Only when 
you have struggled your utmost will real 
resignation come.” 

Disciple: ‘*‘What method should I follow 
as regards repeating His name?” 

Swami: ‘There is nothing to be bothered 
about methods. Just think, ‘I am Thy 
child, Thou art my Mother.’ Talk with Her 
in the same way as you are talking with 
me. She knows your heart. She is indeed 
within all.” 

' Disciple: ‘Should one pray also??? 

Swami: “Yes, you should be praying 

> too.” 

Disciple: ‘‘My only prayer is that my 
mind may always remain fixed on Him— 
that I may never forget Him.” 

Swami: “‘Surely you should have that 
kind of prayer. You must say: ‘Why 
should I forget Thee? I have given up 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


308 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


everything only with the object of praying 
to Thee. May Thou in compassion see that 
I do not forget Thee.’ ” 

Disciple: ‘Should I take to devotional 
songs also?” 

Swami: “Yes, you should have devo- 
tional songs also. Else spiritual practices 
become monotonous. But then in the 
beginning special stress should be given on 
Japa. You should practise one thing at a 
time. 

“Be up and doing. Once the mind is. 
brought under control, there is no more 
fear. It is the mind which creates all 
troubles. You may be working with hands, 
but the mind should always be repeating 
His name. Mere mechanical repetition of 
His name, while the mind is wandcring— 
this kind of thing will not do. Both mind 
and lips should repeat His name. Mental 
Japa is the best.” 

Disciple: “Tf we mix with people, every- 
thing becomes upset.’’ “4 

Swami: ‘Avoid company so long as the 
mind is not under control. And when the 
habit has once been formed, there is no harm 
in .mixing with people. 

“To pray to Him also is a form of work. 
You should do that with all your heart and 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 309 


soul. Rob Him of His peace, as it were, 
by your constant and incessant prayers. 
When the child weeps only a little, the 
mother does not think of coming. But when 
the child cries itself hoarse and knows no 
stopping, then the mother comes and takes 
it in her arms. 

“Everything is due to His will. ‘Praise 
or dispraise, honour or dishonour—every- 
thing comes from Thee.’ 

‘Regarding my illness, R. said, ‘It is all 
due to Karma.’ At once I replied, ‘It is 
said in the Chandi, Thou art Karma, Thou 
art Dharma, Thou art non-Dharma.’? Karma 
etc., all come from Her. She alone is with- 
out beginning and without end. Is there 
anything else without beginning? It is only 
to give an explanation to the people that 
one has to say, Karma is without beginning, 
etc. Health or disease, good or evil—every- 
thing comes and goes according to Her will. 
This is the final truth. He only can under- 

> stand this, to whom She Herself reveals this 
truth. If you are determined not to under- 
stand, I have no power to make you 
convinced. 

“That everything happens at Her will, 
one must actually realize in life: else a mere 
intellectual belief is of no avail. That is our 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


310 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


resting place, as it were; when we receive 
blows from the world, we get peace from 
this thought. 

“What is meant by spiritual practice? 
It is nothing but an attempt to identify one- 
self with the one ultimate Reality, -which 
alone exists. There is only One without a 
second. Perception of unity is Knowledge, . 
perception of variety is ignorance. Because 
we have separated ourselves from That, all 
troubles ensue. If one can surrender oneself 
wholly to Him, there is real peace. You 
cannot find peace in anything else. The more 
you go towards Him, the greater is the peace. 
Ultimately you will have to rest in Him. 
Are you in fact separate from Him? You 
find yourself separate, because you think so; 
else you are nothing but He. 

“Success or failure, everything rests with 
Him. 

“Satan was greatly vaunting of his power. 
So God sent him to tempt Job. Satan went 
to Job and said, ‘Just worship me, and I. 
will give you greater wealth and prosperity.” 
Job replied, ‘Get thee hence, Satan.’ Enraged 
at this Satan destroyed his all; one by one 
he lost his children and finally he himself 
fell a victim to leprosy. Even then Satan 
did not cease tempting him. At this Job. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 3lt 


said, ‘The Lord gave, and the Lord hath 


taken away; blessed be the name of the 
Lord.’ ” 


27th December. 


Swami: ‘* “He is really a saint who has. 

tasted the bliss of Rama. 

What has he known, who has not 

known Rama?” 

**Tulsidas has said that four things are very 
essential in the world: association with holy 
people, taking the name of God, kindness,. 
and the spirit of service. 

“Association is the root cause of every-- 
thing. ‘From association grows attachment,” 
says the Gité. There is a saying: Tell me 
what company he keeps and I will tell you 
what he is. Association with holy people 
purifies the mind. But they must be really 
holy men. . The outward garb alone does: 
not make a man holy. He is really a holy 
man, who has made God his own. If one: 
realizes God, to him the world is a paradise 
and everything in it yields whatever he 
desires.”’ 

The Swami was reading a Bengali book, 
Vaijndnik Jagat, by Srijut Ramendra Sundar 
Trivedi. Referring to the book he said = 
“The author has tried to show that every- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


312 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


thing is growing according to the law of the 
survival of the fittest. Yes, this theory holds. 
good in the lower stages, from amoeba t 
man; for up to this self-interest is the 
principal thing. But after the human stage 
is reached, no longer is the theory true. Now 
the goal is to reach God. And the more one 
can forget his self, the nearer he approaches 
God. 

“Swami Vivekananda once told me: 
“From the very nature of things, it is 
difficult to understand anything of the world. 
And now after lifelong labour it seems that. 
I have known a little and when I think of 
giving that knowledge to others, the call 
has come from Above: Come away, just 
come away—don’t bother yourself about 
teaching others. It is not the will of the 
Granny that the play should be over.’ 

“His family members were in hard condi- 
‘tion. Once, one of his brothers came to see 
him at the monastery at Baranagore. Swamiji 
abused him right and left and drove him off. 
At this I took the boy aside and sympathetic- 
ally treated and comforted him. Then I] 
asked Swamiji, ‘Why did you abuse the boy 
so much?’ Swamiji replied, ‘You think 
I have no feeling, that I am heartless; is it 
not?’ I was completely silenced. Then he 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI TURIYANANDA 313 


said : ‘You see, if I show my love for them 
even to a little extent, it will not be possible 
for me to stay here; they will all come and 
give me all sorts of troubles. I would like 
to see that my brothers and sisters—all my 
relations are dying of hunger, while I am 
taking the name of God. In that case only 
shall I know that I have real love for Him.’ 

“‘Saradé (Swami Trigunatitananda) wanted 
to leave the monastery and go home. Swami 
Brahmananda was dissuading him, saying: 
‘Why should you go? Where will you go 
leaving Narendra? Have you got from any- 
one else the kind of love that you get from 
Narendra? I can also go home and live 
there if I like. But then it is solely the love 
of Narendra that keeps me here.’ ” 


4th February, 1922. 

Dr. K. of Cossipore has come to Benares 
with the idea of becoming a Sannydsin and 
is putting up in the Advaita Asrama for some 
-days past. 

Swami (Addressing K.): “When once 
God is realized, all religious practices seem 
like children’s play with dolls. In the play 
children say, ‘This is my bride, this is my 
husband.’ They give one doll in marriage 
‘to another. This playing with dolls is but 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


314 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


the forecast of the actual play they will have 
in life. And when they get real husbands, 
all their joys are with them, the dolls are 
all put aside; who then cares for them > 
Similarly, when God is realized, all religious. 
practices are left behind. As Sri Rama- 
krishna used to say: ‘The bridegroom is 
expected, so a bride dresses herself nicely, 
combs her hair, does many things to look. 
. beautiful with the expectation of getting a 
husband. But when she gets one, everything 
is neglected—where is: the necessity for all 
these things then?’ ” 


10th March. 

Doctor B. was telling a visitor (pointing 
to the Swami and us), “They are all Sidhus.”’ 

Swami: (With a smile) ‘Yes, Sadhus in 
form, no doubt. But, then, Sadhuhood does. 
not consist in clothes and dresses. The mind 
must attain Sidhuhood. And that is a very 
difficult task. ‘Set fire to desires and burn 
them to ashes; that will make a nice wash- “4 
ing material (for the mind).’ 

“The name of God removes the dirt of 
the mind. As impurities in water settle 
down at the bottom, when Nirmali (a kind 
of fruit) is put into it, in the same way, all 
impurities in the mind pass away on one’s. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 315. 


constantly repeating the name of God. ‘A 
very serious disease it is, O Mother Divine; 
I know not whether I shall live or‘die: I 
have got a distaste for Thy name, day and 
night.’ To have a distaste for God’s name 
is the greatest mishap. 

“(Addressing Dr. B.) To develop a dis- 
like for food is a kind of disease, is it not 
the opinion of the medical science ?”’ 

‘Dr. B.: ‘There never comes a distaste for- 
sense-enjoyments.”’ 

Swami: “That is true, indeed. You eat 
your fill—loading your stomach to its utmost 
capacity. It satisfies your hunger for the 
time being; but soon the same hankering- 
for food comes again. Only a temporary 
cessation it is—not a permanent one. Of all 
enjoyments, the one possessing the greatest 
attraction is that of sex. All enjoyments are 
called Bhoga, but sex-enjoyment is called 
Sambhoga enjoyment par excellence. But 
even that is controlled if one knows how 
to discriminate. 

«The other day a doctor came—a very- 
nice man. He said, ‘The mind gets averse 
to all enjoyments, but not to that (meaning . 
sex).’ I said, ‘Pray. to God.’ He replied, . 
‘There is no desire to pray even.’ He: 

seemed to be a very nice man. Unhesitat-- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


“316 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


ingly he laid bare all that was in his mind 
before a Sidhu. I said, ‘All right, enjoy 
the sourness of the hog-plum. In time it will 
-go.? Sri Ramakrishna used to say, ‘“Hog- 
plum is all peel and stone; it has no pulp 
„and causes colic when taken. But then ii 
has got an attractive taste. So is this world.’ 
Where is happiness in the world ?—it is fuli 
-of sufferings, an abode of misery. Sri 
Krishna said to Arjuna, ‘Those who take 
refuge in Me alone, cross over this Maya.’ 
Anticipating Arjuna’s question, ‘If by taking 
refuge in You, one can escape from the 
clutches of Maya, why do not people dc 
‘that?? Sri Krishna said, ‘Where is the 
-chance of that? I have, on the other hand, 
got My Maya, which does not allow peopic 
to take refuge in Me.’ Tulsidés used to say. 
“When there is fever in the body, one wil! 
have a dislike even for palatable food.’ I: 
the same way, so long as one is in sin, one’s 
“mind will not move towards God. 

“The mind must be made pure. Ar. 
impure mind is one which has got a great 
attachment to sense-enjoyments; whereas the 
«one which has got a great measure of dis- 
~passionateness is pure.”” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI TURIYANANDA 317 


{ath April. 

Swami: ‘‘Man’s mind generally works in 
the three lowest planes: it travels up and. 
down amongst those three only. Food, sleep 
and sexual pleasure: it does not gener- 
ally like to rise above these planes. The 
mind of some rises up to the plane of the- 
heart. Then one gets the vision of light. 
The next is the ‘throat plane’. If the mind. 
soes there, the world seems to be unreal. 
Even from these two planes the mind comes 
down; such is the force of the downward 
pull. But when the mind rises from the- 
throat to the ‘plane of the eyebrow,’ it does 
not come down again below the heart. The- 
mind next goes to the ‘plane of the brain.’ ”’ 

Swami J.: ‘They say one gets the vision 
of light, when the mind rises to the ‘throat-- 
plane.? What kind of light is that?—Is it 
very luminous?” 

Swami: ‘Yes, one sees light. But, then, 
it is not any gross light—it is the light of” 
knowledge. 

‘The sun does not shine there, nor the- 
moon nor the stars nor these lightnings; 
not to speak of this fire. He shining, all 
shines after Him. By His light all this- 
shines.’ Here, to think that Brahman is a. 
big light, which bedims the light of the sun 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


318 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


and the moon, will be a mistake. "The 
passage means that He existing, the whole 
universe is manifested. 

“Man is entirely absorbed in sense-enjoy- 
ments. Eating, sleeping, and sexual plea- 
sure—in these he spends his whole life. Sri 
Ramakrishna used to say: ‘Big rice- 
merchants put parched rice ete. at the very 
door, lest the rats enter the store-rooms. As 
soon as the rats come, they set themselves 
to eating those things; inside there are the 
bags of rice; of them the rats get no scent. 
In the same way, the Divine Mother has kept 
men deluded with tempting things, gold and 
lust. Men cannot go beyond them and get 
at the rice-bags, i.c. God. This world is 
like a labyrinth. Once one enters it one 
finds no way out. With human birth there 
comes an opportunity to get out. But of 
what avail is it? Man forgets all, busy with 
things pertaining to the senses.”’ 


30th April. -4 

Swami J.: “Many give up spiritual 
practices at last out of sheer weariness.” 

Swami: ‘‘Why, none gets weary of sense- 
enjoyment! In that everybody is full of 
energy—people are even ready to borrow 
energy from others and get sense-enjoyment. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI TURIYANANDA 319 


Yayati borrowed youth from his son and 
enjoyed the world for a thousand years. The 
talk of getting tired comes only with 
regard to spiritual practices! That is all 
nonsense. They have no liking, they get no 
taste—hence they feel tired. After going 
through spiritual practices for some time, 
they think, ‘No result is found here, we had 
been better off in our worldly life.’ 

“Rather than besmearing the body with 
mud and then undergoing the trouble of 
washing that, is it not better to keep at a 
safe distance from mud? But how many can 
do that? So Sri Ramakrishna would say that 
it is better to have a little of worldly enjoy- 
ment. But then it must be accompanied with 
due discrimination. Through this cycle of 
birth and death one is gradually moving 
towards Him.” 


th May. 


Swami: “What a great power is imbed- 
ded in words! Though we may be repeating 
that all is unreal, that this world is false, 
yet suppose I tell you a harsh word it dis- 
turbs your mind. When there is so much 
power in evil words, why should there not 
be power in the Vedic dicta (I am Brahman, 
etc.)? But as we have no faith in the Vedic 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


se 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


320 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


dicta or Mantras, they do not become effec- 
tive in our life. Words, again, are of two. 
kinds—spoken and written. Something is. 
written in a letter. On reading that, you 
will have a reaction, good or bad, in your 
mind. And again—how funny !—there will 
not be the same effect upon each and all. 
Some will be affected, some not. Those who 
are concerned with the particular thing— 
they only will be affected. While we dis- 
criminate, it seems that there is nothing, but 
a moment after, everything comes. If there 
is no object of sense-enjoyment in front of 
you when you discriminate, you may feel that 
you have no weakness. But as soon as the 
object of temptation comes, you are upset. 
We discriminate, no doubt, but after doing 
that for some time, we give up the habit. 
And the result is this. One must be estab- 
lished in discrimination. One must dwell in 
that. Without that no result will come. He 
is indeed wise, whose mind does not react 
though the objects of enjoyment come before w 4 
him. This is the test. When your mind 
has attained to that Stage, then only you 
can be sure that it is all right. 

“Duality is nothing. It has come only 
from ` here (pointing to his heart). It 
vanishes, if one will only shake it off with 


l 
i = 
CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi | 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 827 


a will. If one does not want sense-enjoy- 
ment, jf one hates the approach of any 
thought of it in the mind, of their own 
accord: will all desires for sense-objects fly 
away. Suppose I do not like the company 
of a particular individual, do not talk with 
him, thus showing my constant dislike for 
him, then in a few days he of his own accord 
i will stop coming to me. One succeeds in 
driving away the desires for sense-enjoyments, 
if only one makes an effort for that. It is 
because we cling to sense-objects that desire 
| for them does not leave us. 

f 


“There was a king and he had a friend 

—a holy man. The king would very often 

say to his friend: Just release me from this 

worldly bondage, just make me free. The 

holy man would give him instructions. But 

‘yet the king was persistent in his request : 

“Just make me free.’ One day the holy man 

firmly caught hold of a pillar and repeatedly 

began to request the king, ‘Friend, just dis- 

entangle me.’ The king said, ‘Why don’t 

you let go the hold?’ The holy man replied, 

‘No, you must disentangle me.’ The king 

replied: ‘A great fun indeed; you yourself 

have clasped the pillar tightly and at will 

you can leave it off; but no, you will request 

me to come to your rescue. Why don’t you 
21 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


B22 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


yourself give it up?? Then the holy man left 
the pillar and said to the king, ‘It is the 
same case with you. You yourself are clasp- 
ing the world and yet you constantly request 2 
me to release you from it. Why don’t you 
yourself give it up?’ The king understood. 

**M.’s eldest son died, M.’s wife came to 
Sri Ramakrishna and began to weep bitter 
tears. I was then near by. He sternly said 
to M.’s wife, seeing her weep so much, ‘At 
-other times you talk of knowledge, devotion, 
etc.; where are these things now gone? 
Have they vanished now?’ His words 
greatly appealed to me. 

“Often if you thus speak sternly to a 
person in grief or sorrow, it becomes very 
effective—the influence of Tamas goes off 
at once. At the time of happiness every- 
body can remain calm, can discriminate, but 
‘one is established in it only if one can remain 
so even in adversity. At that time man 
has to summon up great strength. If he 
yields to weakness then, grief will overwhelm 4 
him—will altogether ruin him.” 


‘9th May. 


Swami: “Tt is very hard indeed to con- 
trol the mind. But that must be done 
anyhow; there is no other way. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi F 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 323 


“One should have great determination. 
We must control the mind and not allow the 
mind to control us. Here is my towel. With 
this I shall rub the body at my pleasure; 
similarly we ought to be able to use the mind 
according to our will. We should ride the 
horse and not allow the horse to ride us. 
Let there be no reversal of the right 
process. The horse before the cart and not 
the cart before the horse. Swami Viveka- 
nanda would say, ‘The mind must be made 
like a lump of earth; wherever I shall throw 
it, it must stick.” 


13th May. 


wami: “There is something in this body, 
which is ever free and’ untainted by sin—sin 
cannot even touch That. If you can give 
up the idea that you are a Jiva and be one 
with That, then there is no longer any 
fear. Lust and anger are the character- 
istics of Jivahood—by gradually freeing 
itself from this lust and gold, the Jiva 
at last becomes one with God. From 
constant thinking of evil things, of lust and 
gold, man’s body also becomes changed—the 
facial expression gets changed. After com- 
mitting a sin, however much you may try to 
hide it, all will be in vain, your very face will 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


824. SPIRITUAL TALKS 


betray you. Even an ordinary man will be: 
able to find you out, not to speak of those- 
who know thought-reading. It is the eyes. 
which give the clearest indication. The 
appearance of those who commit dacoity or 
murder, is altogether of a different kind. 
Have you not marked that? A man with a 
very beautiful appearance becomes very ugly- 
looking by committing heinous deeds; where- 
as a great sinner, who, perhaps through the 
grace of some holy man, turns over a new 
leaf, begins to look beautiful. I have seen 
these things with my own eyes. 

“Conquer lust. Assert your independence. 
Conquer lust even before it can conquer you. 
Once the lust gets control over you, you are 
done for. It is just like what happens in 
wrestling feats. In wrestling, if once you 
fall below, you are done for. Through discri- 
mination and devotion to God one can be 
free from lust. With the gradual increase of 
love for God, lust, anger, etc. wane out. \ 
While going to visit Sri Ramakrishna, as. 
soon as I would enter the gate of the 
Dakshineswar Temple-garden I would feel a 
palpitating sensation in the heart. Many 
would feel like that—because the thought of 
going near a very holy presence would create 
in us a sense of awe. When one goes to. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURLYANANDA 825 


a holy presence, one’s sins within begin to 
tremble.” 

Disciple: ‘What about those who had no 
sin in their mind? Did their heart tremble __, 
too P?? : 

Swami: ‘Yes, it did. For who was there 
so pure as Sri Ramakrishna? Even the 
purest among us was insignificant in com- 
parison with Sri Ramakrishna. When any 
contrary thought would cross my mind, he 
would at once detect that and say, ‘Why do f 
you look so? Perhaps this is the reason.’ y 
And what was my wonder, he would say 
exactly the real thing. How fearless is he, 
whose conscience can say that he has done no 
wrong !” 


5th June. 


Swami: “If anyone would lose anything, 
Sri Ramakrishna would be very much 
annoyed. Once Hazra lost a towel in the 
Ganges. At this Sri Ramakrishna was much 
displeased and he said to him, ‘I am often 
beyond the normal plane of consciousness; 
still I have never lost anything. And you are 
So forgetful P : 

“What is wanted is dependence on 
God. One must surrender everything to 
Him. It is absolutely necessary that one 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


326 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


should completely surrender oneself to Him. 
Without that no success is possible; know it 
for certain, no success is possible. Having 
fully surrendered yourself to Him, live con- 
tentedly in whatever condition He places you.. 
The path of self-surrender is open to all; but 
none sees it, none follows it. 

“People always seek advantages. They 
are always after physical comfort—their one- 
thought is how to live well or eat well. Does. 
anybody really want God? One must be 
ready to lay down one’s very life for Him- 
You must give your whole mind and body 
to Him—even more than that, if possible.. 
Whenever He gives you any work to do. 
do that with all your heart and soul, concen- 
trating all your powers on that. That done, 
He will perhaps give you another task to do. 
Finish that also to the best of your ability. 
Be thus ready to devote your whole life to: 
His work. In that case only, may He grant 
you release after a few trials.” 

“If you want to be a SannyAsin, you must 
give up altogether the habit of planning for 
yourself. You must depend on Him fully, 
you must completely surrender. yourself to 
Him. It will not do to keep anything at 
your own disposal. Body, mind, heart, soul— 
everything should be given away to Him— 


ot 
to 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 327° 


to be done with, as He likes. If the body 
needs looking after, He will do it. 

“While I was at Langal (a place near 
Hardwar), I fell seriously ill. G. wanted to: 
send information to the Math at Belur. At 
this I warned him: ‘Take care. If I learn 
that you have written any letter, then even 
in this state of health I will leave this place.” 
There it was that I said, ‘The Ganges water . 
is the medicine and the Lord Himself is the: 
physician.” It was not mere pretension. I 
really felt so.” 

Disciple: ‘Diverse thoughts distract the- 
mind—how to drive them away ?” 

Swami: ‘‘The more you think of Him, the- 
more will other thoughts pass away. The 
Master used to say, “The more you go towards. 
the East, the further will the West recede- 
from you.’ As the waters of the Ganges flow’ 
in one continuous current towards the ocean,. 
so should your thoughts run towards Him. 
Tf you can continue thus for some time.. 
everything will be all right—the mind will 
automatically flow to Him. 

“Write on your mind in bold characters,. 
‘No Admission’. Then afterwards there will 
come a time, when you will be in a position 
to say, ‘Come one, come all.’ It is because: 
T keep the doors open that .people come to 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


7328 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


‘me. If I close them, how can they come? 
Why should you allow other thoughts to come 

* and disturb your mind? It is only because 
you allow them to come that they come. In 
the beginning, you will not be able to 
perform meditation and Japa always—other 
things are necessary; a little meditation, a 
little Japa, some reading from the scriptures, 
singing devotional songs for some time— 
various methods to remember Him alone. 
After practising this way for some time, you 
will be able to think of Him and concentrate 
your mind on one point. 

“Mere theoretical knowledge will not do. 
We know everything, but do nothing. 
Swamiji (Swami Vivekananda) used to say, 
“We know so much that it would have been 
better to know a little less.’ Do something, 
just do something. Nobody likes to take the 
trouble of doing anything. You have to 
work hard yourself. It is not possible for 
-another man to work for you by proxy. 

“You can be relieved of a load on the head 
by another person, but if you feel hungry. 
you yourself will have to eat—your hunger 
will not be appeased if somebody else takes 
food for you. 

“The Master used to sing, ‘Mind, struggle 
unto death. Can any pearl be found in knee- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS . 


SWAMI TURIYANANDA 329 


‘deep waters? If you want to realize Him.. 
-dive down into the very depths of the ocean.’ 
“At one time, we practised hard. Even 
now there is such a Samskfra that at will we 
can get absorbed in spiritual practices.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SPIRITUAL TALKS 
BY SWAMI SHIVANANDA 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


eGangotri,and Sarayu Trust. 


Funding by MoE-IKS 


- 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


Swami Shivananda 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi — 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SPIRITUAL TALES 
By Swami Shivanand: 


23rd March, 1919. 

Some college students had come io se. 
Belit Monastery. The Swami was Bat 
tae eastern verandah of the main build: 
overlooking the Ganges. The si Re h 
just finished their University examinain: 
and were preparing to go home for it. 
vacation. 

Swami: ‘You have a long vacation bel. 
you. How are you going to spend it? Wi. 
is the ase of spending it in merry-making a0 
playing at cards? Taving come to this pi 
‘take a few of our ideas and iry to work the 
our. Raise a small fund amongst yi wus ett 


bus a fow home pawe memnes, ang 


you go home serve the sick amd the poai 


sity by giving them medicine eae: 
vv F ing them. Freely mix emh nie. 


ute vt classes Ki Ligure ibont ther wel- 3 
fare and their wants. 1 you do this and ine 
iddition nurse them when ‘they ate Hi and 
them medicines, then they = feel very 
hi Runa m he sont also for 
Give them oral instruction in History, 


| 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


Swami Shivananda 


“CO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi | 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


he 


SPIRITUAL TALKS 
By Swami Shivananda 


23rd March, 1919. 


Some college students had come to see the- 
Belur Monastery. The Swami was sitting in 
the eastern verandah of the main building 
overlooking the Ganges. The students had | 
just finished their University examinations 
and were preparing to go home for the 
vacation. i 

Swami: ‘You have a long vacation before 
you. How are you going to spend it? What 
is the use of spending it in merry-making and 
playing at cards? Having come to this place 
take a few of our ideas and try to work them 
out. Raise a small fund amongst yourselves, 
buy a few homeopathie medicines, and when 
you go home serve the sick and the poor of 
the locality by giving them medicine free and 
by nursing them. Freely mix with the 
depressed classes and inquire about their wel- 
fare and their wants. If you do this and in 
addition nurse them when they are ill and 
give them medicines, then they will feel very 
much obliged. Run a night school also for* 
them. Give them oral instruction in History, 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


336 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Moulana Shaukat Ali came here. They went 
into the shrine.’ 
Disciple: ‘““Yes, Maharaj, I also think that 3 

unless people of all creeds are allowed to visit 

the shrine of the Master, how can we main- 

tain the all-comprchensive ideal of the Master, 

and how can people regard him as the teacher 

of all religions? Of course, one must be 

clean if one wants to go into the shrine. 


“An Englishman one day visited the Dacca 
Centre of our Mission. When he was told of 
the Master’s teachings on the harmony of 
religions, he asked: ‘Can I enter into your 
shrine?’ ‘Certainly you can,’ I replied, ‘but 
you have to take off your shoes.’ ” 


21st May. 

It was Sunday, about 8-30 at night. At 
the Belur Math, the Swami was sitting in the 
outer verandah of the main building, over- 
looking the sacred Ganges. Some monks 
were sitting or standing near him. One of 
them asked him in course. of conversation : 

“Is it true that the amulet of the Master, 
which is worshipped here, was given to him 
by your father?” 


Swami: “While the Master was suffering 
from an excruciating burning sensation all. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SHIVANANDA 337 


over his body, my father asked him to wear 
an Ishta-kavacha! on his person. It is that 
same Ishta-kavacha.”? 


A Devotee: “Were you at that time at 
Dakshineswar ??? 


Swami: “I was not even born then. It 
happened during the days of the Master’s 
Sadhani. My father used in those days 
to visit Dakshineswar now and then. He 
used to practise as a pleader at Barasat. 
In fact he was connected with many land- 
lords including Rani Rasmani as a legal 
practitioner, and used to earn a good deal of 
money. He was a great Tantrika SAdhaka. 
I remember how he used to invite many 
Tantrika Sâdhakas from Kamakhya, paying 
all their expenses, and worship the Divine 
Mother and practise Japa. I remember one 
Sadhaka who used to sit at Japa with a 
bottle of wine. He would drink a little from 
time to time and continue Japa throughout 
å the night. 


“I, however, did not know that my father 
visited Dakshineswar. I learnt it afterwards 
from the Master. ‘The Master generally never 


! An amulet containing an inscription of the 
mystic formula pertaining to his Chosen Deity or 
Ishta-devatâ. 


22 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


888 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


asked anyone about his home affairs. One 
day, however, he asked me: ‘I don’t know 
why, but I feel a desire to ask you 
about your people. Where is your home?’ 
I mentioned my village. ‘Who is your 
father?? ‘Kanai Ghosal,’ I replied. On 
hearing this he exclaimed: ‘Oh! he was a 
great Sidhaka. He used to practise Japa in 
the Kâli temple here, wearing a red silk cloth. 
He used to bring a man with him, who would 
sit behind him singing Mother’s songs, and 
tears would trickle down your father’s face. 
And as he would come out of the temple, with 
his eyes all red, he would seem to me like a 
veritable Bhairava. At that time I had a 
terrible burning sensation all over my body. 
It was so intense that all the hair on my body 
was burnt. I said to your father: ‘You 
know many things. Can you tell me how 
I can get rid of this burning sensation?’ He 
advised me to put on the Ista-kavacha, and 
that relieved me.’ ” 

A Monk: “Who made the Kavacha for 
the Master?” 


Swami: That I do not know. This is all 
that the Master told me.” 


A Monk: ‘‘Where did you first see the 
Master? At Dakshineswar?’’ 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


pre 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SHIVANANDA 339 


Swami: “No, at the house of Rama 
Babu.’ A relation of Rama Babu used to 
work in the same office with me. He would 
visit the Master and often tell us about him 
at the office. I used to practise Sidhana 
even as a boy. I was attached to Brahmoism 
in those days, and I read about the Master 
in Keshab Babu’s paper, Dharma-tattva. I 
did not, however, know the exact location of 
Dakshineswar or the way to it. I was after- 
wards told by Rama Babu’s relation that it 
was opposite Bally Khal. 

“One Saturday that gentleman informed 
me that the Master would visit Rama Babu’s 
house that day, and that I could see him if 
I went there. I said: ‘The place is very 
near to where I stay. I shall surely go.’ 

“Tor a long time I had been eager to know 
the nature of Samadhi. I wanted very 
much to know what it exactly was. I ques- 
tioned many people, but none could explain 
it to me. Only one man said: ‘None can 
realize Samâdhi in this age. I have seen only 
one man who has it—he is Ramakrishna 
Paramahamsa of Dakshineswar.? 

“Anyhow, I went that evening to Rama 
Babu’s house. I found the Master sitting in 


' Ram Chandra Datta, a prominent lay disciple 
of the Master. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


3840 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


a room crowded with people. The Master 
was scarcely conscious. I saluted and sat 
near him. You can well imagine my surprise 
when I heard him talking eloquently on a 
subject which I had been so eager to know 
about—Samadhi P? 

A Monk: “What did he say about 
Samadhi that day?” 

Swami: ‘I do not remember it in detail. 
But I remember that he dwelt on Nirvikalpa 
Samadhi and said that very few can attain it 
and that if one attained it, one’s body 
dropped off in twenty-one days. 

“I did not have any talk with the Master 
on that occasion. A month after, I went to 
Dakshineswar and became known to him.” 


7th July, 1928. 

The Swami has been ill for some time. 
One of the devotees asked him, “How are 
you, sir, this morning ?”’ 

Swami: “Not quite fit. But then, 
nothing better can be expected. This body 
has become old. I am pulling on somehow 
through His grace. And should we, after 
all, be anxious about the body? I am not 
anxious about it at all. If it just serves 
my spiritual practices, that is sufficient. The 
Sadhu who is anxious about his health or is 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


_- 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI SHIVANANDA 341 


afraid of death, is no SAdhu at all. He is 
only preparing himself to be one; he has not 
yet become a Sâdhu. I shall be satisfied if 
it goes on in this way. Let Him keep this 
body as long as He likes, if He thinks of gett- 
ing anything done through it. As for myself, 
I am always ready for His call.” 


13th January, 1930. 


A devotee first paid his respects to the 
Swami and then went to the Shrine.. At this 
the Swami said: “That is not proper. First 
one should go to the Shrine and worship the 
Lord and then come here. ‘With His light 
all this shines’; ‘He shining, everything else 
shines.’ These trees, plants, flowers, devo- 
tees, myself, and everything belong to Him. 
Their existence depends on His existence. 
Apart from Him nothing exists. He is 
Existence Absolute. In Him exists this 
manifoldness particularized by names and 
forms as various objects—as Hari, Ram, the 
sun, the moon, ete. Because He exists, these 
depending on Him exist. He is Existence- 
Knowledge-Bliss Absolute. If Existence has 
no Knowledge it is no Existence at all. 
What is Existence is Knowledge. Again, 
where there are Existence and Knowledge, 
there is Bliss also. For what is misery? It 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


342 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


is the absence of real Knowledge. So where 
there is Knowledge there is no misery but 
Bliss.’? 


14th January. 

Swami: “If one practises meditation 
and Japa regularly along with work then 
there will be no trouble. We have to work, 
that is certain. But then if one does not 
practise meditation, Japa, ete. along with 
work, then one will not be able to work 
in the right spirit. The whole trouble is with 
‘me’ and ‘mine’, which always seeks com- 
fort. Meditation and Japa are absolutely 
necessary—there should be no lapse in: them. 
Then only can one hope to progress. When 
you meditate, think that you and He alone 
exist, and forget everything else—work, 
Order, Math, ete. Gradually you have to 
forget even your own existence. If work 
makes the mind impure, it is no good work 
but an evil one. 

“The right kind of service is possible only 
When one sees God in the person served. 
But it is difficult to have this knowledge at 
the outset. So to start with one has to 
depend on the words of one’s Guru and take 
it on faith. We must have faith in Swamiji, 
who has propounded this doctrine of service. 


= 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI SHIVANANDA 343 


The Master’s life is the aphorism, as it were, 
and Swamiji’s is the commentary on it. 
Swamiji formulated this doctrine of service 
seeing God in everything, from several inci- 
dents in the Master’s life. The Master had 
on more than one occasion made Mathur 
Babu serve the poor. 

“Mahârâj (Swami Brahmananda) used to 
say that if one devotes a small part of one’s 
mind te work and gives the rest to God, even 
then one can turn out enough work. You 
must be constantly thinking of Him. 
Tulsidâs says, ‘Let the hands work but let 
the lips utter His name’.’? 


26th January. 


Disciple: ‘‘How to avoid low thoughts?” 

Swami: ‘Low thoughts will come and go. 
Don’t mind them. Through His grace, as a 
result of constant practice you will get 
strength. Devote your whole mind to Japa, 
meditation, worship, and study of the scrip- 
$ tures, whichever appeals to you for the time 
being. The Lord will set everything right. 
Sri Ramakrishna never liked one-sidedness. 
He was always for many-sidedness.”’ 

Disciple: “Does an Incarnation continue 
to live in the subtle body for the good of the 
devotees even after the gross body dies?’’ 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


344, SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Swami: ‘Certainly. He continues to. 
live in that way till the end of the cycle. 
How long does the gross last, after all? The 
subtle existence is absolutely necessary.”’ x 

Disciple: ‘‘How to meditate?” 

Swami: ‘‘One has to’ meditate on the 
different centres in the Sushtimna (the nerve 
current flowing through the spinal column). 
In the heart one has to meditate on one’s 
chosen Deity as sitting on a red lotus with 
twelve petals, and in the head on the Guru 

<. as seated on a white lotus with thousand 
'+%.. petals. These meditations help Japa and 
~*~ therefore should be practised.” 


8th February. 

Hearing that a few were practising hard 
austerities the Swami said: ‘You cannot 
realize God through Tapasy4, sacrifice, 
charity or study of the scriptures. He alone 
realizes Him on whom descends His grace. 
But then you have on the other hand, ‘This 
Atman cannot be realized by the weak.’ 
One who is weak and effortless cannot 
realize Him. The Giti lays stress on 
personal effort (Purushakdra). ‘The self 
must be raised by the self, so let not one 
weaken this self. For this self is the friend 
of oneself, and this self is the enemy of 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


— 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI SHIVANANDA 345 


oneself.’ One has to liberate oneself from 
bondage, one should never be despondent. 
Here ‘self? means mind, intellect, ete. 


21st February. 


Disciple: ‘Does dispassionateness (Vai- 
râgya) depend on spiritual practices??? 

wami: ‘No. It depends upon past 
impressions (Samskaras). One gets it only 
when one is free from all desires and not 
otherwise. If any desire is left in the mind 
this spirit of renunciation cannot come. 
It comes through enjoyment tempered with 
discrimination. And of course, there is need 
for spiritual practice too. But the one thing 
necessary is His grace. That is why the 
Master used to pray: ‘O Mother, I do not 
know any spiritual practice. Please be 
gracious unto me.’ Without the Lord’s grace 
no spiritual practice is possible. No one 
works independently. Everyone works as 
directed by Him. He is the mechanic and 
the rest are mere machines. But it is very 
hard to remember all this. If one has this 
idea then one gets beyond all good and evil. 
If the Mother is gracious, then everything is 
possible—dispassionateness, spiritual prac- 
tice, etc. The Lord has two powers, Vidya 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


À Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


346 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Sakti (knowledge) and Avidyâ Sakti (ignor- 

ance). If He removes from us the influence 

of the latter and helps with the former, then 
everything goes on well. So pray, ‘Mother, x 
be gracious unto me.’ If Her grace is there 
nothing is impossible.” 


22nd March. 

Seeing one despondent in his spiritual prac- 
tices the Swami said: ‘That is not good. 
Don’t yield to despondency. It makes the 
mind restless. Always think that you are 
all blessed, that. you are the children of the 
Lord. If evil thoughts come to your mind, 
don’t pay any heed to them. There are 
impressions of past lives in the mind and 
now and then they come to the conscious 
plane. Have strength. There is no fear, you 
will get everything in time. Mere mechanical 
Japa does not help much. You must have 
love for the Lord. But then even mechanical 
Japa has some results, for after all it is the t 
Lord’s name that is being repeated. But the 
main thing is love for the Lord with the idea 
that He is our father, mother, friend, 
master, everything. You must have some 
such relationship. While practising Japa you 
must sit at ease and be calm.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 
C —————— ~ D: 


SET 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI SHIVANANDA 347 
2nd April. 


A devotee who had been abroad for long, 
came to see the Swami. Seeing the Swami’s 
broken health he burst into tears. s 

Swami: ‘When the Buddha was about to 
attain Parinirvana, Ananda was overwhelmed 
with grief. At this the Buddha said: ‘Why 
are you crying, Ananda? This life lasts for 
fifty or sixty years or at best a hundred years. 
But I am going to attain eternal life after 
this’.’? 

The topic drifted on to the vexed question 
of caste and the Swami replied: ‘Let caste 
remain as a social institution. What is that 
to us. The Master used to say that there is 
no caste among devotees. They all formed a 
separate caste. We are Sannydsins and so 
have nothing to do with caste.” 

Disciple: ‘‘What is the relation between 
Guru and the Ishta? Are they one??? 


å wami: “Guru and Ishta (chosen Ideal 
or Deity) are one. But then so long as you 
are in the relative world, bounded by name 
and form, you have to accept them as 
separate. When Knowledge comes, you will 
find that the two are one. This Knowledge 
one gets after hard austerities.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


348 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


14th July. 


Disciple : ‘‘How is it that sometimes evil 
thoughts come to the mind? ; 


Swami: ‘*That is quite natural. Pray to 
the Lord for strength, Knowledge, and 
dispassionateness. Pray to Him with all your 
heart for His grace, and for devotion and 
faith. It is not possible for everyone to 
practise hard austerities, but then, through 
prayer everything is attained. Now and 
then a desire for enjoyment may be felt. 
Never mind, it is nothing; discriminate and 
renounce such desires. 

“Desire begets misery, to be without 
desires is bliss. Desire for enjoyment no 
doubt has to be given up.° But then all 
desires are not to be given up. It is only 
material desires that are to be given up. 
But the desire to realize God, the desire for 
Knowledge and devotion are not to be given 
up.” . 

Disciple: ‘Why is it so hard to medi- ~4 
tate ?”? 

Swami: ‘You must have introspection. 
You must study your own mind, otherwise 
how can you remove all impurities from it? 
If you find it difficult to meditate, be prayer- 
ful. It is not possible at the beginning to 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI SHIVANANDA 349 


have a clear image of the chosen Deity 
(Ishta) during meditation.” 


8th August. 


Swami: ‘In this struggle for life there 
will always be hope and fear. Life without 
struggles is no life at all. If man has a 
continuous flow of happiness and sense- 
enjoyment, then he will never think of 
higher things,—about God, soul, ete. And 
how does such a life differ from that of the 
brutes? But if there are only fear and 
misery, they dwarf his growth—they do not 
allow him to progress.” 


13th August. 


“Swami: “If you meditate on God with 
form, He Himself will reveal to you His real 
nature. There is something beyond form. 
This (what we see) is gross. Beyond this 
is the subtle, and then comes the causal, 
and so on. It is very difficult to meditate 
on the formless. The Vedas prescribe Akasa 
(ether or space) as a symbol of the formless 
God. Other symbols like the ocean etc. may 
also be taken, but Akfisa is better. ‘He is 
minuter than the minutest and greater than 
the greatest.’ He resides in the heart of man 
as consciousness. But then one has to start 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


‘Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


850 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


with some form. There is no question of 
inferiority or superiority in this—it is a ques- 
tion of temperament. Whatever appeals to 
one is the best for him. Form melts into the 
formless and again the formless takes a form. 
God is both with form and without form, and 
again beyond both. It is not possible to 
know Him with this mind. He can be 
comprehended only by the pure mind. The 

. Master used to say, ‘The pure mind and the 
Self are one.’ That mind in which there 
are no mentations or desires, cannot be 
. 4, Called mind. Then there exists only an all- 
ee pervading consciousness, power, or Brah- 
£ _ man—whatever you may call it. That again 
takes form according to the temperament of 

the devotee. All this is hard to comprehend. 

Tf one be not constantly engaged in selfless 
work, study of scriptures, worship, Japa, and 
meditation, it is not possible to comprehend 

the truth of Vedanta. If there is His grace, 
these things come of themselves and one 
feels inclined to practise all these things. 
Without His grace one becomes averse to 
His name, finds no taste for it, and all 
talk about God becomes unbearable. The 
Lord’s grace is already on him in whose 
mind thoughts about God arise spontaneous- 

ly. There is nothing like higher or lower as 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI SHIVANANDA 351 


between God without form arid with form. 
Everything is He. It is the same Ganges 
that you have at Kalighat, Dakshineswar, 
Benares, Allahabad and Hardwar.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


ee : _ Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


main. Sri Sri ANnandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


A 
SPIRITUAL TALKS ; 
BY SWAMI SARADANANDA 
3 


238 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


w Ñ S = 3 r pa ý 
j potd by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
ame G a 
a k- 2: = 


Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


a 


- Oa e ati | h + 
Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
à 3 -oe : 
EN S EAS ra 


BS 
| a 


4 
J 


lomain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi E. 


Fh; 1 
i : > 
Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 4 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


ayy Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


$ H: -i Swami Saradananda 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


SPIRITUAL 
Ey Swami Son: fey 


I : 

Disciple : “— instructs his ii: 
practise Japa without tal: iig by 

such observances sompnia y z: i 
>a 


a cami: “The ` Master tt pee 
re! tigicn easy. People were bati n ee 
uncer the Weight of rules j: omy i Nka 
To repeat the Lord’s name @ji +> oe praan 
Him no special time and pis =” neia 
sary. In whatever condition c i ay be. 
one can take His name. ‘The Me “never 


used tio give too much impe wiance 4 these 


exterual observances. As to means. adopti h 


whichever suits you best. If you like Gat 
with form, that will also lead you to the mai. 
If you like God without form, well and ooo. i; 
stick to it and you will progress. W soy 
doubt His very existence, ther betior pal 
the question to Him thus: “T do not know 
whether Thou existeth or not, whethes Thou 
art formless or with form. Do Thon make 
known to me Thy real nature. As to 
changing of clothes, taking bath. and other 
external observances, if you can observe 
them, well and good; if not, go on calling 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust Funding by MoE-IKS 


ie 


4 
t 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


— 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


Swami Saradananda 


~ CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 
Ba > 


i 


Digitization by eGangotri and ‘Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SPIRITUAL TALKS 


By Swami Saradananda 


| 

Í 

| E 

| Disciple: “‘— instructs his disciples not to 
i practise Japa without taking bath ete. Are 
| such observances compulsory ? 

| Swami: “The Master came to . make 
| religion easy. People were being crushed 
| under the weight of rules and regulations. 
| To repeat the Lord’s name and to worship 
| Him no special time and place are neces- 
sary. In whatever condition one may be, 
j one can take His name. The Master never 

| used to give too much importance to these 

| external observances. As to Means, adopt 

whichever suits you best. If you like God 

with form, that will also lead you to the goal. 

If you like God without form, well and good ; 

stick to it and you will progress. If you 
{ 

| 

4 


-doubt His very existence, then better put. 
; the question to Him thus: “I do not know 
whether Thou existeth or not, whether Thou 
art formless or with form. Do Thou make 
known to me Thy real nature.” As to 
changing of clothes, taking bath, and other 
external observances, if you can observe 
them, well and good; if not, go on calling 


rape 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
356 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


on Him without paying much attention to 
all these. The Master once sang a song to 
me and told me, ‘Assimilate any one of these 
ideas and you will reach the goal.’ The song 
runs as follows : : 

‘O Lord, Thou art my everything, the 
sole support of my life, the quintessence of 
reality. There is none else besides Thee in 
this world whom I can call as my own. 

‘Thou art happiness, peace, help, wealth, 
knowledge, intellect, and strength; Thou 
art the dwelling house and the pleasure 
garden; Thou art the friend and relative. 

‘Thou art this present life, the sole 
refuge; Thou art the life hereafter and the 
heaven; Thou art the injunction of the 
scriptures, the Guru full of blessings, and 
the store of infinite bliss. l 

‘Thou art the way and the goal; Thou 
art the creator and preserver and the wor- 
shipped; Thou art the father that punishest 
Thy child, the loving mother and the store- 
house of infinite bliss art Thou.’ ” 

Disciple: “What do you think about 
astrological calculations as to auspicious and 
inauspicious moments ?”? 

Swami: ‘Sri Ramakrishna used to observe 
these things. He believed in auspicious and 
inauspicious times. And because he used to 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


YY -. nme 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


to 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 357 


observe these things we too observe them. 
But then, these calculations, nowadays, are 
not absolutely correct. There have been 
many changes in the position of the cons- 
tellations and planets, but these calculations 
have not been corrected accordingly. So I 
do not observe them so much in these days.” 

Disciple: “The Master used to say that 
Srâddha food is harmful to Bhakti. Why 
is it so?” 

Swami: “The object of food is to build 
a strong body and a fine intellect. Unless 
the body and the mind are pure it is not 
possible to go through spiritual practices. 
It is the food offered to God that builds 
a pure body and mind. The Srâddha food 
is offered to the manes and not to God 
and as a result instead of building a pure 
mind and body it affects people otherwise. 
Food builds the body and the mind and 
the nature of the food also affects them.’ 
In Chaitanya’s life we have a case where 
an ordinary man who happened to touch 
him in a state of ecstasy was also over- 
powered by religious emotions. He was 
prescribed to take Srâddha food to get over 
these emotions and as a matter of fact this 
food did put an end to that person’s ecstatic 
moods.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


358 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Disciple: ‘*Why is the time of an eclipse 
considered auspicious for the practice of 
Japa?” 

Swami: ‘‘Man becomes thoughtful when 
such a natural phenomenon takes place. 
Eclipse brings about a great change in the 
sphere of nature. At such a juncture when 
nature passes from one condition to another, 
the mind becomes calm and so the time is 
favourable for the practice of Japa and 
meditation.” 

Disciple: ‘‘Have any realized God through 
mere work?” 

‘Swami: “Through selfless work the mind 
gets purified. And when the mind becomes 
pure, there arise Knowledge and devotion 
in it. Knowledge is the very nature of the 
Self but being covered with ignorance it is 
not manifest. The object of selfless work is 
to remove this covering. As a matter of 
fact Knowledge dawns as soon as the mind 
becomes pure. In the Mahâbhârata you 
have the story of the chaste lady who 
attained Knowledge through service to her 
husband and through other household duties. 
In the Gitâ also you find, ‘By work alone 
Janaka and others attained perfection.’ Not 
one but many attained perfection through 
work, for the text adds ‘and others?.?? 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


| Digitization by eGangotri ang Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
| SWAMI SARADANANDA 859 


Disciple: ‘Does work here mean Japa, 
meditation, ete. ??? 

Swami: “No. That meaning is given by 
the commentators. If it were so then Sri 
Krishna would have asked Arjuna to ring 
bells and wave lights before an image of 
God. Instead, he made him fight.” 

Disciple: ‘Did Arjuna fight without any 
sense of ego, as an instrument in the hands 
| of the Lord?” 

Swami: “Certainly. If the ego persists 
even after the vision of the Universal Form, 
then of what use is the vision? Arjuna says, 
‘My delusion is destroyed and I have regained 
memory through Thy grace’.” 

Disciple: “What is the meaning of the 
word ‘memory’ in that verse?” 

Swami: ‘Arjuna had forgotten the teach- 
ings of the scriptures and of the Guru. All 
those principles, adhering to which Arjuna 
was progressing he had forgotten, overcome 
by delusion. Fear, love of relatives, and 
respect for his elders had created this delu- 
sion. The Advaitists interpret ‘memory’ as 
‘the regaining of the consciousness of his real 
nature’. They too have given a very fine 
interpretation. 

“When the Vaishnavas progress in their 
spiritual practice and reach the Advaita 


yi 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


360 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


consciousness, they avoid it and try to keep 
permanently a relationship with the Lord. 
They consider that to become one with Him 
is an obstacle in their way and so the 
moment they get a scent of this conscious- 
ness they become alert to ward it off. In fact 
to Santa-bhiva, or the peaceful devotion, 
which is the culmination of Advaita SAdhana, 
they give the lowest place. They develop 
the emotional side and direct it towards the 
Lord—this they think to be the highest goal. 
From the highest pitch of emotion we have 
the Madhura-bhiva or the sweet conjugal 
relationship with the Lord.” 

Disciple: ‘*What is the meaning of the 
verse, ‘Relinquishing all Dharmas take 
refuge in Me alone’ ete. ?” 

Swami: “Here Dharma means ritualistic 
works, Japa, ete. Tilak interprets it as the 
Dharma spoken of in the Mahabharata, viz. 
service to parents, guests, ete. But this is 
not correct, for even through such service 
some attained Knowledge. His interpreta- 
tion of the Gitâ is one-sided, for he wants 
to show that the object of the whole Gitâ 
is to establish the superiority of the path of 
work. The Giti praises highly self-effort 
(Purushakârâ). In this verse the Lord hints 
that this self-effort has a limit.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 
SWAMI SARADANANDA 861 


Disciple: “Which is the best season for 
spiritual practices?” 

Swami: ‘The rainy season is not suited 
to them. One gets drowsy when one tries 
to meditate. We experienced this. In that 
season the mind becomes more restless. 
Winter is best suited for meditation. Those 
who want to meditate must take healthy and 
substantial food. Ghee, butter, etc. are 
good.” 

Disciple: “‘Why is the Kundalini imagin- 
ed to be like a snake?” 

Swami: “I am not sure of the exact 
reason; probably because of the impressions 
of myriads of lives heaped up in coils or of 
the upward motion of the awakened Kundalini 
which is in a zig-zag way like that of a 
serpent. Describing the Kundalini the Master 
once said, while in ecstasy, ‘Have you seen 
the serpent?’ ” 

Disciple: ‘What is the nature of the 
meditation on the formless??? 

ra wami: The meditation of the Lord in 
the Sahasrira, which you do at the time of 
Bhuta Suddhi in ceremonial worship, is 
meditation on the formless. When you do 
not like any form meditate on the formless. 
If the meditation on the form of the Guru 
is more appealing at any time then better 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


362 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


meditate on the Guru, for the Lord mani- 
fests through the Guru.” 

Disciple: ‘‘Is mechanical repetition of the 
Mantra of any use?” 

Swami: “The Tantras say that through 
the repetition of the Mantra, realization is 
attained. I should think so.” 

Disciple: ‘I am trying to follow all your 
instructions, but somehow I find that I am 
not quite at home in my spiritual practices. 
Sometimes they are mechanical without any 
life in them.” 

Swami: “If you follow the same routine 
every day it is but natural that you should 
feel so sometimes. But then on those days 
when you like any particular portion of the 
Sadhana, devote yourself to that and let 
the other parts go. In this way probably 
you may be neglecting particular practices 
for three or four days at a stretch. But 
that does not matter. When you renew 
these practices you will find delight in them. 

«Before you meditate think of the Master. 
If you do that you will see that whatever 
you do will yield good results. Sometimes 
think that he is in everything and every- 
where. That you are, as it were, immersed 
in him even as a pot is immersed in the 
ocean. Think thus: ‘That Supreme State 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


{i 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 363 


of the all-pervading Deity the sages realize 
for all time like the sky extending as far as 
sight can go.’ He knows everything about 
you. You cannot hide anything from him. 
He knows even your inmost thoughts. 

“Of course one is much benefited by 
regular practice. If one practises regularly 
for some time every day, one gains strength 
and finds pleasure in spiritual practices.” 

Disciple: “XI have read much about the 
Master. Through books I have been able to 
know much about his life. Yet when I 
think of his life I do not find pleasure in it. 
Why is it so?” 

Swami: “To find pleasure in anything 
both the brain and the heart must unite. 
Through mere intellectualism one does not 
get pleasure. Everything becomes lifeless. 
Ii what you have read about the Master 
appeals also to your heart then alone you 
will get delight by thinking on his life. He 
would then scem to be living.” 

Disciple: ‘‘Is it due to want of imagina- 
tion then?” 

Swami: ‘All your doubts will get them- 
selves solved in time.” 

Disciple: ‘‘Formerly I was eager to give 
up service and devote myself wholly to 
spiritual practices. Now I do not feel such 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


864 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


hankering. There is no desire for change 
of environment. But then I find that the 
mind is more and more attracted towards 
Japa and meditation and the reading of the 
scriptures. How is it that I do not have 
nowadays that former longing for solitude?” 

Swami: “What of that? The scriptures 
say that if one can attain Knowledge through 
spiritual practices even when he is engaged 
in work then one need not give up work. 
Have you not heard of Dharma-Vyadha? 
Even the work of a butcher he did not think 
to be bad after he had attained Knowledge. 
If the mind is drawn towards Him then 
where is the need for change of environ- 
ment? When nothing is possible without 
His will, then what is the use of planning? 
It is better to depend on Him and do as 
He makes us do. Moreover, if you change 
your environment it will require an effort to 
get yourself adjusted to the new conditions. 
Therefore let the environment remain as it 
is. In these circumstances go on calling on 
Him. When, through His will, the environ- 
ment will change, then accept it.” 

The question of Karma Yoga was raised by 
someone, and the Swami said: ‘* ‘You have 
no right to the results of your work’, the 
result depends on various factors among 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 865 


which your effort is only one. The aspirant 
must try all means for the fulfilment of his 
immediate duty but should not get dis- 
appointed if he is not successful. For though 
one of the factors may be fulfilled well, yet 
the work may not turn out successful for 
want of the other factors. Hence to do one’s 
best and be at peace without being anxious 
about the result is called Karma Yoga.” 

Disciple: ‘‘Does ‘Renouncing every under- 
taking’ (Gita) mean the renunciation of all 
work or the performance of work without the 
idea of Ego?” 

Swami: ‘‘Do the work in hand to the 
best of your abilities. You have to plan or 
utilize various means for the fulfilment of 
this work. But then do not take in fresh 
work. Do to the best of your abilities that 
work which has fallen to your share. It is 
not good to take up work aggressively. If 
you take up work like that you will find that 
you cannot perform any of them well. As a 

é- result you get worried and your mind is 
upset.” 

There was a talk on the refraction of light 
and the Swami in the course of conversation 
said: “When I was travelling by train 
through Gujerat I used to see water on either 
side of the line extending for miles and miles. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


366 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


I wondered whence so much water could 
come? But afterwards it struck me that it 
must have been the mirage. 

«After one realizes God, the world 
seems to be a mere appearance like the 
mirage. There is nothing in it that can 
attract one. Just as one who sees water in 
a mirage knows full well that there is no 
water there; so also, though the world of 
names and forms is there, one knows that it 
is all May4, an illusion. 

“First, you have to attain Knowledge. 
After attaining Knowledge when one returns 
to this world of diversity, one will see every- 
thing as before but will no longer be attached 
to anything in it. Before realizing the 
illusion one hopes for water in a mirage, but 
when one realizes its nature, though one may 
be seeing the mirage, one no longer expects 
any water in it. So also, though the world of 
diversity would still have to be experienced 
after Knowledge, yet one no longer takes it to: 
be real and so has no longer any attachment à 
for it. 

“Science has reduced our attachment for: 
many things. Take for instance, the pheno- 
menon of colour. In reality no object has 
any colour of its own. The solar light is com- 
posed of seven different colours. Different 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 867 


objects absorb different colours of this light 
and reflect the rest of these spectral colours. 
Those colours that are reflected give the colour 
to that object. We are attracted by the 
beauty of coloured objects, but in reality its 
beauty depends on the light of the sun. If 
we remember this, then we can no longer be 
attracted by them. That which to us is now 
beautiful may lose its beauty due to change 
of conditions. As a matter of fact objects 
do lose their beauty. 

“Take again the case of touch. In reality 
we have but one organ and that is the sense 
of touch. Sight, hearing, smell, taste—all 
these depend upon touch or contact. With- 
out contact none of these experiences is possi- 
ble. The Gité also says, ‘Enjoyments that 
are of contact born give birth to misery.’ 
Sound according to time and place is experi- 
enced as either sweet or harsh. Sound is 
carried through air. So here also there is 
the necessity of touch or contact with the 
ear.” 


II 
31st January, 1925. 
B: “‘Mahârâj, the Master has exhorted 
us to ‘make the thought tally with speech.’ 
What does it mean?” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


368 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Swami: ‘That you must be sincere, that 
your inner life should tally with the outer.” 

B: “It is naturally so. Whatever we 
speak we think in our mind.” 

Swami: “But is it not rare? We utter 
the name of the Lord superficially, too 
superficially. We say, ‘I am Thy servant; 
Thou art my Master; Thou art my Lord; I 
have renounced all for Thee; I call Thee, 
Lord, come unto me.’ But we harbour 
withal all sorts of evil thoughts in the mind. 
This won’t do. As you speak, so you must 
think. This means, while you take the name 
of the Lord think of Him alone. Sri Chai- 
tanya used to say, ‘That is verily That.’ 
That is to say, Name is verily God Himself. 
They are inseparable.” 

B.: “Well, Maharaj, is mere repetition of 
Name enough in the beginning? We do not 
get concentration in the initial stage.” 

Swami: ‘So it is. But the Idea corres- 
ponding to the Name slowly grows.” 

D.: “We have the infinite compassion of 
the Master and Swamiji upon us. You too 
have showered blessings on us. Yet we do 
not seem to be making any appreciable 
progress.”’ 

Swami: “Compassion and blessing un- 
doubtedly are there. But can deep-rooted 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


ĉe 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 369 


Samskéras (past impressions) be erased in a 
day? They are erased gradually. You have 
renounced home for the sake of God—this 
itself is an attainment. You are surely 
progressing, and you will do so more and 
more. The Master and Swamiji have infinite 
compassion on us. Make up your minds 
now and plunge into Sâdhanå (spiritual 
practice). You will then see for yourselves 
whether you progress or not. You must 
labour hard before you realize the Truth.” 

B.: “What are we to do if any other 
image than that of the Ishta (Chosen Deity) 
appears during meditation ?”? 

Swami: “Think then that the Ishta has 
appeared in that form. Thus the form will 
slowly disappear and the Ishta will reappear.”? 

M.: ‘Should we do so whatever be’ the 
form that appears?” 

Swami: - “No. Do this only when the form 
of a saint appears.” E 

M.: “What about an ordinary form?” 

Swami: “Drive that resolutely away, 
and try to reinstall the image of the Ishta 
° with all your might. How can you meditate 

on a shoe-maker’s shop if it suddenly comes 
and distracts your mind ?” j 

S.: “The Master used to say, ‘After 
making the knowledge of Oneness your own 


24 


t] 


ae 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


370 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


you can go wherever you like.” What does 
it mean ?” 

Swami: ‘Not ‘Go wherever you like’, but 
‘Do whatever you like.’ He meant evident- 
ly that after attaining Supreme Knowledge 
one cannot commit any evil deed. How can 
one who has realized God or attained Knowl- 
edge: through discrimination, renunciation, 
love, devotion and purity, do mischief? 
Such a man necessarily can do no wrong.” 

R.: “Is it possible to attain the knowl- 
edge of Oneness through Sâkâra Upâsanâ 
(worship of Divine Forms)?” 

Swami: “Why not? It leads to the 
knowledge of Oneness in time.” 

B.: “How does it culminate, Maharaj? 
Is it that immanence of God is realized in all, 
or does everything disappear completely ?” 

Swami: “Both. You will understand it 
as you progress in your Sddhan&. Practise, 
and you will feel. What’s the use of idle 
talk? Take to Japa and meditation for 
some time at least. Otherwise, it will be like > 
the utterance of the Punjabee Sâdhus, ‘Tulsi 
is verily my own nature’ and then enjoying 
palatable dishes. Labour hard and you will 
know everything in time. No use putting 
such abstruse questions. It will lead to 
nothing. Everyone talks but no one does 


CCO. In Public Domain, Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 371 


anything. Exertion brings its own reward. 
Why not practise as per instructions??? 

B.: “Maharaj (Swami Brahmananda) has 
said, ‘Meditate in the heart.’ By ‘heart? what 
particular spot is meant??? 

Swami: ‘(Placing his hand on the heart) 
This is what we usually mean,—the pit of 
the stomach. This is the heart. Here one 
should meditate on the Ishta, seated on a 
red lotus of eight petals. The image of the 
Guru in a white lotus should be meditated 
upon in the head above the eye-brows.”? 

I.: ‘Who is an Isvarakoti?”’ 

Swami: “I am not an Isvarakoti that I 
can properly explain it.” 

H.: “I wish to know what the scriptures 
say about it.” 

Swami: “Isvarakotis come to the world to 
fulfil some divine missions. They are born 
with perfect Knowledge. Such were sages 
like Narada, Sukadeva, and others. Accord- 
ing to Vedanta they are born with the veil 
eg of Mayi.”’ 

H: ‘What is then the difference between 
a Jivanmukta and an Isvarakoti??? 

Swami: ‘*An ordinary Jiva has to attain 
everything through tremendous exertion. 
When he reaches the Advaita stage he can 
no longer return to the ordinary plane of 


CCO. In Public Domain: Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


372 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


existence. But Isvarakotis are born with 
Incarnations for the good of the world with 
Mâyå’s veil outside but perfect. Knowledge 
within. They can come down even from the 
Supreme State. But is it possible for ordi- 
nary souls??? 

H.: “What is an Incarnation? Is he 
always conscious of his real nature?” 

Swami: “Yes, he is always established in 
perfect Knowledge. But according to his 
sweet will, he occasionally puts on the veil 
of Maya.”? 

H.: ‘‘What is then the significance of his 
spiritual Sadhana ?” 

Swami: ‘*Putting on the veil of his 
own choice he feels wants like ordinary 
mortals. This explains his Sâdhanâ etc. 
Do you know what others are like? They 
are like salt dolls which go to sound the 
depths of the sea. They get dissolved in the 
sea water and never return.” 

K.: ‘‘Maharaj, is it due to the difference 
in power or Knowledge?” 

Swami: “It is due to the difference in 
power (Sakti). You know what the Master $ 
said about it. Three men were taking a walk 
in a lawn. Suddenly they heard sweet sounds, 
music, etc. inside a big enclosure near the 
lawn. Finding no door to go into the enclo- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 873 


sure, one of them fetched a ladder and got 
upon the wall with great difficulty. He saw to 
his amazement that there was a wonderful 
performance of dance, music, and the like. 
Overwhelmed with delight, he at once leapt 
inside without saying anything about this to 
his companions. The second man also went 
up and leapt in like the first. But the 
third behaved differently. Standing on the 
wall he also saw what was going on inside. 
But he considered, ‘Should I be so selfish as 
to enjoy this alone? No. Let me call 
others. Let them come and see and enjoy.’ 
So thinking, he descended, called many 
people together and told them of what he 
saw inside the walls. Incarnations are like 
this. It is due to difference in the manifesta- 
tion of Sakti. It is a great heart alone that 
can share with others what it acquires after 
hard struggle. What a renunciation! What 
a patience! All these show the degrees of 
Z manifestation of power.” 

s B.: “Mahârâj, did Totâpuri reach the 
Advaita state?” 

Swami: “(After a pause) Why do you ask 
such a question? Am I Tot&puri that I 
should know everything about him? You 
can easily find out from books which deal 
with these things.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


374 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


B.: ‘I ask this because you have just said 
that it is Isvarakotis and Avataras alone that 
can return to the normal plane after reaching 
the Advaita consciousness in the Nirvikalpa 
Samadhi.”? 

Swami: ‘“‘Why? What happens with the 
Jivanmuktas? They also live after attaining 
Knowledge. It is a thing of realization alone. 
Mere questions don’t help. Be pure. Give 
up evil thoughts and work hard. Gradually 
you will come to understand everything. It 
is impossible to understand these things with- 
out intuitive knowledge. Practise hard. 
Don’t take up spiritual practice in the spirit 
of forced labour.’’ 

R.: ‘You have placed heavy work of the 
Mission upon our shoulders. How can one 
devote oneself completely to Sâdhanå with 
such heavy work?” 

Swami: (To R) “Heavy work, indeed! 
Don’t you realize that had there been no 
such work, you would not have done even 
what little you are doing now? Give up 3 
work for a single day if you can. Take meals 
from the Chhatra and practise hard. Let me ‘ 
see how far you can proceed. You won’t be 
able to do this even for a day. After a few 
days you will be idling away your time. 
Swamiji started these works for the service of 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 375 


humanity—service with the fullest knowledge 
that man is a veritable symbol of the Lord. 
This is a new path—a simple, easy path. But 
this does not suit you! Why not leave work 
and see the result? You will fail to do even 
what little Sidhan& you are putting in in the 
midst of work. Now you are performing self- 
less work, but if you give it up, you will plunge 
headlong into selfishness. This will be the 
result. Don’t you see how hard people in 
the world have to work! Why not enter into 
the world and see the fun? Many people are 
at their wit’s end simply for serving their 
parents. Give one a sumptuous meal with- 
out any work, because one prefers to practise 
Sâdhanâ! This won’t do. One can certain- 
ly again one’s goal even in the midst of 
work. Is there any shade of difference bet- 
ween spiritual practice and the work of the 
Mission, which is the Master’s work? One’s 
longing for spiritual practice loses much of 
its keenness when work is abandoned. As 
long as there is obstruction in the path, there 
is manifestation of power. So long as one 
lives in one’s home, one’s desire to become 
a Sadhu remains intense. But how long do 
good intentions prevail after one has become 
a Sadhu? (Keeping silence for a while) 
Various causes such as regular study, special 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


376 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


care of parents, marriage affairs, etc. offer 
obstruction, and consequently the power is 
increased. But when one renounces home, 
one thinks that the goal has been reached 
and struggles no more. Take for instance an 
embankment. Water presses hard to break 
away as long as there is the embankment. 
But when it finds a way out it is spread all 
over. Nothing is left of that force. Being 
scattered all over, the concentrated force is 
lost.” f 

K.: “It may also finally stop without forc- 
ing a way out and thus lose all its strength.” 

Swami: “Yes, sometimes it is actually 
so. But that is rare. Power seeks channels 
for its manifestation, and gathers force in 
the midst of obstructions. The Mantra that 
you have received—why not repeat it regular- 
ly? But this none of you will do. Follow 
your Guru’s instructions. How many of you 
do it? At most one sits for half an hour, 
that too not in a calm mood and tells the 
beads as if it is a drudgery and then gets up. 
This won’t help. Who has been following 
the rules after receiving the Mantra? One 
nowadays takes a fancy for Sannyâsa. This 
seems to be your usual way. Sannyâsa means 
an inward unfoldment. Mere formality cannot 
go far. Is there anything in formality? One 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 377 


must make oneself fit for Sannydsa. This 
requires an inward growth. How many people 
work in a true spirit? Working like a day- 
labourer—what can it pay? It is the spirit— 
that we are serving Narayana in human forms 
and that the Ishta is in all men—that counts 
in the Jong run.” 

B.: “Is it possible to visualize the Ishta 
and the external objects at the same time?” 

Swami: ‘‘The idea is that the Ishta is 
visible in so many forms, the Ishta is in 
everything, as the Master himself saw the 
Divine Mother in everything. 

(After a pause) “Strive, strive, exert 
yourself.”” . 

K.: ‘‘Maharaj, we do not see God. How 
can we love Him without seeing Him? How 
can we love a Being who is unseen and whose 
very existence is doubtful?” 

Swami: ‘‘Act according to the instructions 
of the Guru. If you can strictly follow what 

2 the Guru has prescribed for the realization of 
Y God, everything will be smooth at last. 
Meditation comes afterwards. If one fails 
to meditate, one should go on repeating 
the Mantra very earnestly. (To B.) 
Do you follow what the Guru has enjoin- 
ed upon you? Who practises even half 
of what the Guru has instructed? If you 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


378 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


practise, surely you will get your reward. 

Do you know Purascharana of the Mantra? 

A Mantra becomes ‘conscious’ (kinetic) when 

you repeat it a lac of times at a time. The 3 
utterance of the Mantra in a proper spirit 

even for once purifies the mind. Instantly 

the mind becomes delighted and blissful.” 

K.: ‘Will it do to repeat it a lac of times 
a day?” 

Swami: “That will certainly be very 
good. Repeat a lac of times or even ten 
thousand times according to your capacity. 
Even five thousand times is good if the 
Mantra is a big one, or even two thousand 
times if the Mantra is too big a one.” 

H.: ‘‘Maharaj, it will take five to six 
hours to repeat Gayatri one thousand times.”? 

Swami: ‘All right, if the Mantra is too 
big, why not repeat at least a thousand 
times? One should rise at dawn every day 
and practise. If the Mantra is comparative- 
ly small, at first repeat two thousand times, 
then slowly increase the number. This will 4 
do. No one practises, everyone whiles away 
his time. Strenuous practice is wanted before p 
you can succeed. 

“(To B.) Labour hard, and success is 
sure. Everyone finds time for eating and 
sleeping, but not for spiritual practice.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram‘ Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 379 


February, 1925. 


Swami: (To K.) “What do you read 
nowadays P”? 

K.: “Adhyâtma Ramayana.” 

Swami: ‘Good. The Master liked it 
much. Many portions of it he got by heart. 
He had a wonderful memory. He was a 
Srutidhara of the first order,—he could 
remember anything he heard but once. 
Swamiji (Swami Vivekananda) was one of 
the second order, i.e. he had to read or hear 
anything twice and then only he would 
remember it.” 

B.: ‘‘Maharij, how does one get this 
wonderful power? Is it that their minds are 
fine or subtle, or is there any other reason ?” 

Swami: ‘‘Sure. These people have a 
great control over their mind. To whatever 
thing they apply their mind, it at once gets 
stuck to it. It requires a great power of 
concentration. Whatever they say or hear 
but once they remember for years. 

(After a short pause.) “Of the ‘Six 
treasures’ (viz. calmness of mind, control 
over the senses, etc.) Sraddha or single- 
minded devotion is one. What really counts 
in the spiritual domain is this unswerving 
faith—faith in the words of one’s Guru, in 


van 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


380 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


the Lord, in the Scriptures. ‘The Guru has 

asked me to do such and such thing, if I 

act up to his instructions I am sure to attain 
success, it can never be otherwise.’ Such 4 
burning faith in the words of the Guru is 
what is really required. 

“What’s the difference between a Sruti- 
dhara and an ordinary man? A Srutidhara 
can focus all the powers of his mind to a 
point, whereas the mental forces of an ordi- 
nary man are all scattered and he has not 
the power to focus them on one thing. The 
mind of the worldly people is divided over 
many things. If they get married half the 
mind goes to the wife, and the greater portion 
of what remains goes to the children, money, 
property, etc. The little that is still left is 
scattered over things of enjoyment. It is 
almost an impossible task to get it concen- 
trated to a point. The Master would compare 
the mind to a packet of mustard seeds. ‘If 
the packet is once untied the seeds get 
scattered in all directions. How difficult it 
is to collect them again! Some are perhaps 
lost for ever.’ But absolute faith makes the e 
impossible possible. 

(After a pause.) “The Reality must not 
be lost sight of. One must have a tight hold 
over it—the Truth, the only abiding thing 


a- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 381 


in this fleeting world. The Master once 
told Hari Maharéj (Swami Turiyananda), 
‘You are studying Vedanta. What’s the 
essence of it? Brahman alone is true and 
the Jagat (the world) is false. Isn’t it? Or 
anything else? What you require is the 
essence; throw off everything else.’ The 
Master first heard what the great saints of 
different sects and faiths had to teach, then 
one day he collected a good number of scrip- 
tures, made a garland of them and having 
put it on danced for a while and then tore 
the books to pieces and threw them off. You 
get a letter requesting you to send certain 
things to the writer, when you get the things 
and send them on, you have no need of the 
letter. The Truth is what we require—the 
essence of this universe.” 


June, 1926. 

Disciple: ‘‘Maharaj, will not Kama (lust) 
cease P?? 

Swami: “It will; slowly it will pass away. 
Repeat the holy name of the Lord and it will 
o pass away.” 

October, 1926. ; 

Disciple: ‘‘Maharaj, at the time of medi 
tation, I can fix my mind neither on the 
Ishta nor on the image of the Guru.”? 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


382 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


Swami: ‘It will be of no avail to say 
that you cannot. You must practise regular- 
ly. Incessant efforts are required. There is 
no other way out. Every day at fixed hours, 
in the morning and evening, you are to 
practise diligently. Keep a portrait of your 
Ishta before you and try to meditate.’’ 

Disciple: ‘“‘What if I fail to observe 
strict punctuality? If I cannot sit to medi- 
tate at the proper hour?’ 

Swami: ‘‘There is no harm, if you cannot 
be punctual for a day or two. But you should 
always remember Him and think of Him, 
while engaged in work. Do it.” 

Disciple: ‘Well, can the desired object 
be attained by mere work if Japa and 
meditation are absolutely given up?” 

Swami: “It can be attained provided one 
works in the proper spirit. But ordinarily it 
is not possible. Spiritual practices are essen- 
tial.”? 

Disciple: “How many times shall I repeat 
the holy name?” 

Swami: ‘‘As many times as you can.” 

Disciple:, “Frequently evil thoughts arise e 
in the mind. How can one be saved from 
them?” 

Swami: “One should drive them away 
resolutely. You have read in the Gita, ‘The 


à- 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


SWAMI SARADANANDA 383 


Self is: attained by continual practice and 
renunciation.” There is no other way. Sur- 
render yourself to the Lord. Make Him 
your own, and evil thoughts will pass away. 
It is absolutely necessary to make Him your 
own.” 


Disciple: “Frequently even at the time 
of meditation Kâma (lust) makes its appear- 
ance vigorously.” ) 


Swami: ‘‘Never mind. It comes to all. 
Surrender yourself to the Lord and drive it 
away . But carefully abstain from such food 
as irritates the stomach and is not easily 
digested.” 


Disciple: ‘‘What is the meaning of our 
Mantra?” 


Swami: ‘‘May God who is the creator, 
sustainer, and destroyer of the creation, 
remove my sorrows.’ This is the signific- 
ance of all Mantras. Have faith in Him; 
otherwise even thousands of explanations 
will be of no use. Pray to Him and love 
Him.” 


Disciple: “Do Prânâyâma, Asana, etc. 
help to remove the impressions of the mind ??? 


Swami: “Nothing particular can be 
achieved through them. One may derive 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


384 SPIRITUAL TALKS 


some benefit. The more you will love God, 
the more will the mind come under your 
control.” 

Disciple: ‘‘Maharaj, I like to meditate 
on the Guru. The thought about the Ishta 
does not come to my mind usually. So I 
meditate on the Guru. Will it not do?” 

Swami: “No. Why should you make 
things so easy? After meditating on the 
Guru, meditate on the Ishta as well. But 
if you feel a special yearning for the Guru, 
you may devote a greater length of time to 
him. If you cannot meditate on the Ishta 
just think that He is. That also will give 
you peace.” 

Disciple: I have heard that the two are 
essentially one. Why then will it not be 
sufficient to meditate on one?” 

Swami: ‘No. When you will attain that 
state, when you will realize the oneness of 
the two, then alone you can think in that 
way. Why should you make things too 
easy ??? 

Disciple: ‘Is Japa to be practised with 
meditation or after meditation ?” 

Swami: “It is to be practised with 
meditation. As you progress you will under- 
stand how with the intensity of meditation 
Japa stops automatically.” 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


es: 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


INDEX 


. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


INDEX 


Achamana, 14. j 
Adbhutananda, Swami, 


214. 

Adhikarika beings, 250- 
251, 300. ; 

Akhandananda, Swami, 
84, 88. 

Amulet, which cured 
Sri Ramakrishna, 
336-338. | 

Ananda Lahari, origin 
of, 231. 


Anger vs. lust, 270-271. 
Animals, and Karma, 
234. 
Asana, 5. 
Avadhuta and the 
courtesan, 228-229. 
Association, influence of, 
270; holy, benefit 
of, 40-41, 196, 290, 
311. 
Astrology, 356-357. 
—and Ramakrishna, 
356. 
Attachment, 252-253. 
—and detachment, 
203. : 
—vs. compassion, 
257-258. 
Begging, spiritual bene- 
fit of, 297. 
Belurmath shrine, 335- 
336. 
—and Ali brothers, 
335-336. 


Benares, spiritual at- 
mosphere of, 152. 
Bhakti, how to have, 

38, 47-48. 
—only thing needed, 
173. 
Bharati, Baba Prema- 
nanda, 88. 
Bhaskarananda, Swami, 


44, 

Birds, and the Divine 
Mother’s work, 
233-234. 

Bose, Sir J. C., 77. 

Brahmacharya, 102, 198, 
200, 208, 210, 257. 

Brahman, 259-260. 

Brahmananda, Swami, 
about himself, 33-34, 
36-37, 46-47. 

—method of giving 
initiation, 34-35. 

—Sri Ramakrishna 
on, 58, 188. 

—Swami Premananda 
on, 58. 

—his vision of 
Mahavir, 28; of 
spirits, 25-28. 

Caste, and devotees, 
B47. 

Chaitanya, S ri, and 


weeping for God, 
153. 

—and Rai Rama- 
nanda, 52. 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


386 INDEX 


—his control of the 
palate, 168-169. 
Chimeli Puri, 231-232. 
Chastity, see Brahma- 

charya. 

Chatterjee, Kedarnath, 
yearning for God, 
71-72. 

Christ, 141-142. - 
—would-be victim of 
race hatred, 229. 

Civilization, 288-289. 

Continence, see Brahma- 
charya. 

Creation, human, two 
theories of, 175. 
Datta, Ramchandra, 46. 
Death, 236, 252, 290. 
—Christianity on, 237. 

Delusion, see Maya. 

Depression, of mind 
and spiritual prac- 
tice, 31, 346. 

Desires, must be given 
up, 110-111. 


Dharma, meaning of, 
360. 
Disciple, harder to 


become, 210. 
Discrimination, 211, 253, 
0. 


—and renunciation, 
211-212. 
Dispassion, see Vairigya. 
Dualism, harmony be- 
tween monism and, 
108. 
Duality, source of all 
evil, 275 


Egotism, 95-96. 
Emerson, and 
arians, 238. 
Evolution, to what ex- 
tent true, 311-312. 
Fault-finding, 18. 
Food, directions about, 
20, 37. 
Frankness, and spiri- 
tuality, 112, 116. 
Free-will, 100. 
Gifts, acceptance of, 
122, 126-127. 
Ghosh, Girischandra, 
and Sri Rama- 
krishna, 74, 123, 
205-206, 221. 
—Swami Turiyananda 
on, 1833-134. 
God, and human sins, 
3, 37-38. 
—and past Karma, 9. 
—and the problem of 
evil, 121. 
—cause of all causes, 
214, 
—love for, 93. 
—nature of, 51. 
—power of faith in, 
182-183, 142-145, 
—proof of, 51. 
—very few want, 107. 
—vision of, 15; sub- 
active or objective, 
—will of, is all, 111, 
265, 302, 309-310. 
—worship of, with 
forms, 370. 


Unit- 


@ 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


ô 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


INDEX 


God-realization, experi- 
ences after, 366. 


—first, and world 
next, 188-190. 

—one should while 
young try for, 118. 

—through lust, 
anger, and differ- 
ent feelings, 159- 
160. 

—way to, 6, 30, 59, 
73, 95, 98-99, 105- 
107, 113-114, 117, 
130-131, 148, 176, 
190, 291, 826, 344- 
345. 


Gopâler Mâ, her vision 
of Gopal, 108. 

Gopis, love for Sri 
Krishna, 159. 

Goswami, Vijoykrishna, 


and Sri Rama- 
krishna, 65, 70-71, 
87. 


Gunas, influence of, 305. 
Guru, and Ishta, 347. 
—faith in the words 


of, 379-380. 

—how to find out a 
true, 50. 

—need of, 34, 47-48, 
49-50. 


Happiness, on what it 
depends, 166-167. 
Hemans, Elizabeth, de- 

nies Samskâras, 174. 
Humility, 249. 
Hindu society, vitality 
of, 229 


a 


387 

Hirananda, of Sindh, 
233. 

Holy Mother, about 
herself, 4, 8, 12, 17, 
286. 

—how far responsible 
for her disciples, 
132. 

Impressions, power of, 
217. 

Incarnation of God. 
difference between 
man and, 255, 
372-373. 


—how long He re- 
mains in the subtle 
body, 343-344. 

—significance of, 73- 
T4. 

—what is an, 372. 

—worship of, 101-102. 


India, essentially a 
religious country, 
197-198. 

—future of, 255. 
—spiritual greatness 
of, 139, 289. 
Initiation, signifi c- 


ance of, 15-17, 31, 
242-243. 


Ishta, vision of, and 
external objects, 
877. 

Iswarkoti, 116, 371-372. 
ifference between 


a Jivanmukta and, 
371 


Jada Bharata, 258. 
Japa, 6, 30, 314. 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


388 INDEX 
—how to practise, Magni Biba, 282-233. 


9-10, 17-18, 
51, 120, 308. 
—significance of, 131. 
Jivanmukta, 874. 
—and Iswarkoti, 872. 
Jnina, and Bhakti, 
286-287. 


14-15, 


Jnini, behaviour of, 
300. 

Kabir, 138. 

Kankhal Sevishrama, 


its origin and 
growth, 155-156. 

Karma Yoga, how to 
practise, 32, 97, 149, 
864-365, 377. 

Krishna, Sri, Tapasya 
of, 151. 

Kundalini, 361. 

—how to awaken, 5, 


Laziness, mistaken for 
religiosity, 63-64. 
Life, aim of, 7, 109. 
—four orders of, 
182-183. 
Love, 262-263. 
—and spirituality, 101. 
Lust, how to conquer, 
89-40, 96-97, 115, 
118, 169, 201, 202, 
203, 257, 270-271, 
274, 324, 381, 383. 
—and love, 158-159. 
—and old age, 157-158. 
—difficult to conquer, 
167-168. 
—psychology of, 158. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Mallik, Mani, 19, 65. 


—how consoled by 
Sri Ramakrishna, 
78. 

Man, more important 
than money, 154- 
155. 


—opportunity for get- 
ting Freedom, 256. 
Mantra, power of, 270. 
—Purascharana of, 
378. 
Miya, how to destroy, 
225. 
—play of, 225, 
253-254. 
Mazumdar, 
nath, 215. 
Meditation, directions 
about, 5, 20-21, 30, 
37, 43, 52, 120, 206, 
208, 212-213, 344, 
848-351, 355, 361-363, 
869-370, 
—and physical health, 


227, 


Surendra- 


—of the Jninis and 
Bhaktas, 121. 
—at the time of 
eclipse, 358. 
Memory, the secret of, 
379, 


Meston, Sir James, on 
Hindu society, 229. 

Millennium, will come 
when, 215-216. 

Mind, delusive nature 
of, 122-193, 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


INDEX 389: 


—different states of, 
177, 317. 

—difficult to control, 
95. 

—how to calm, 30, 
59, 267, 278, 322- 
323, 327-328. 

—impressions of, how 
to remove, 383-384. 

—when it becomes 
the monitor, 112. 

—pure and impure, 
316. 

Mirabai, and Sanatan, 
163. 
Money, and 


spiritual 
life, 45. 


Monism, all cannot 
stand, 140. 

Mukherjee, Ishan- 
chandra, and 
charitable works, 
280. 

Mukti, meaning of, 


119. 
Nag  Mahasaya, 39, 
88-89, 185-136. 
Napoleon, on long 
noses, 232. 

Niranjanananda, Swami, 
and Sri Rama- 
krishna, 224. 

Nirviina, not the high- 
est state, 113, 282, 
283. 

—not wanted by de- 

votees, 116. 

Nishthâ, and bigotry, 
68-70. 


Nityagopal, 119. 

Over-confidence, leads 
to moral fall, 218- 
9) 

Peace, and God-reali- 
zation, 134-135. 
—how to have, 48, 

112. 


Powers, obstacle to 
spiritual progress, 
171-173. 


Prahlad, in what sense 
still alive, 278. 
Prânâyâma, 5, 7-8, 50. 
—not suitable to the 
present age, 37. 


Preacher, and special 
power from God, 
272-273. 

Preaching, real, 96. 

Premananda, Swami, 
about himself, 60- 
61, 80. 


—his advice to the 
monks of the Belur- 
math, 67-68. 

—his enthusiasm for 
preaching the mes- 
sage of Sri Rama- 
krishna, 79-80. 


—on the ideal of 
Sannyiisa, 85-88. 
Punishment, vicarious, 

265 


Purusha, and Prakriti, 
161-163. 

Ramakrishna, Sri, and 
Brihmo Samaj, 
247, 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


390 


—and Ramprasad, 98. 

—and the mother of 
Swami Viveka- 
nanda, 77. 

—detachment of, 204. 

—a Srutidhar of the 
first rank, 379. 

—effect of seeing him 
in his physical 
body, 46, 132. 

—essence of his teach- 
ing, 99, 264. 

—how he protected a 
devotee, 202. 

—humility of, 204-205. 

—his knowledge of 
Sâstras, 64-65. 

—love amongst the 
disciples of, 87. 

—his love for sinners, 
74, 

—his love of truth, 
44, 268-269. 

—his method of ini- 
tiation, 103. 

—his method of train- 
Ing, 221-224. 

—on human love, 101. 

—on leaving the 
world, 182, 186, 188. 

—on Sidhus begging 
money, 19-20. 

—on Sakti worship, 
230. 

—on woman, 216. 

—his insight into 
men, 221. 

—his power of obser- 
vation, 205. 


INDEX 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


—purity of, 58. 

—reason for his hard 
Tapasya, 259. 

—reminiscences of, by 
Ramlal, 66-67 ; 
Swami Brahma- 
nanda, 36, 43-45, 
46-47 ; Swami Pre- 
mananda, 57-58, 60, 
61-62, 64-66, 81, 83- 
85; Swami Turiya- 
nanda; 94-95, 113, 
116, 121-122, 187-188, 
203-204, 246-247, 258, 
274, 283-284, 287-288, 
322, 325. 

—sayings of, 15, 40, 
51, 69-70, 96, 105, 
108, 111, 114, 121, 
122, 123, 124, 130, 
131-132, 137, 148, 
172-178, 176. 202, 
212, 295, 235, 240, 
243, 245, 249, 252. 
257, 259, 267, 277, 
301, 303, 314, 316, 
319, 328, 350, 355, 
369-370. 

—spiritual power of, 
99-100, 201. 
—his struggle against 

lust, 157. 

—suffers from the 
effect of Karma, 9. 

—why he felt bodily 
pain during throat 
disease, 117-118. 

—vision of Rimlala, 
108. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


D. 


‘CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Sankara, and 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


INDEX 391 


Ramakrishnananda, 

Swami, 151. 
—Swami Turiyananda 
on, 149. 

Ramakrishna 

266. 
—creed of the, 196. 
—philanthropic works 

and the ideal of 

Sanny4sa, 19, 280. 
—regarding the con- 

duct of its lay and 
monastic members, 

81-82. 

Re-incarnation, do c- 
trine of, 286. 

Religion, must not be 

__ one-sided, 122. 

Restlessness, 270. 

—and true longing 

for God, 41-42. 
—in spiritual life, 48. 

‘Sidhanf, see spiritual 
practice. 

Saint Francis of Assisi, 
142. 

Samadhi, experiences 
in, 51, 52, 25l, 
277-278. 

—Savikalpa and Nir- 

vikalpa, 300. 

Samskiras, 174. 


Mission, 


Sakti 
worship, 53, 230, 
240. 
—misunderstood by 
many, 239-240. 

‘Sannyiisa, and 
nence, 201. 


conti- 


—ideal of, 
303, 326-327. 

—Sri Ramakrishna 
and Swami Viveka- 
nanda on, 803-304. 

Sannydsin, and body 

attachment, 340-341. 

—and pilgrimage, 5. 

—and householder, 
177. 

—how he should live 
his life, 3-4. 

uy he often falls, 


119-120, 


Saradananda, Swami, 
about himself, 356. 

Sarkar, Dr. Mahendra- 
lal, and Sri Rama- 
krishna, 65. 

Sastras, knowledge of, 
necessary, 64. 

—a nd realization, 
67-68. 

—useless without 
practice, 275, 381. 

Sastri, Sivanath, 268. 

Scepticism, a stage on 
the way to God, 
147-148. 

Science, how helpful in 
religious life, 366- 
367. 

Self-confidence, real and 
false, 100-101, 118. 

Self-examination, 194. 

Self-exertion, 258, 291. 

—and destiny, 179- 
180, 187, 191-192. 
-—and divine will, 296. 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


392 INDEX 


Self-surrender, 248, 264, 
325-326, 364. 
—a logical necessity, 
235-236. 

—and free will, 214. 
—strength of 215. 
Sen, Adharchandra, 40. 
Sen, Keshabchandra, 

and Sri Rama- 
krishna, 246-247. 
—Sri Ramakrishna 
on, 200. 
Senses, control of, es- 
sential for spiritual 


progress, 169-170 ; 
how to have, 170- 
171. 


Sense-enjoyment, a 

snare, 318. 
—how to conquer the 
desire for, 320-322. 
Service, 263-264. 
—directions 
842-343. 

Sex-attraction, 267-268, 
315. 

Shivananda, Swami, 
about himself, 99- 
100, 339-341. 

—father of, 337-338. 

Sinners, hatred of, 
comes from pride, 
75-76. 

Sins, effects of, 256. 


about, 


—how to conquer, 
190-191. 

Siva,: symbols of, are 
true, 8. 


Speech, right method 
of, 246, 279-280. 
Spirituality, cannot be 

combined with matce- 
rialism, 238-239. 
Spiritual life, signs of 
progress in, 184. 
Spiritual practice, and 
solitude, 6, 40. 
—directions about, 7, 
35, 40, 76-77, 82-83, 
256-257, 292, 294, 
805-308, 328, 342-343,. 
361, 367-869, 371, 
377-378, 382, 384. 
—of the Vaishnavas,. 
38, 42-43. 

—surely_ brings its. 
reward, 136-138. 
Srâddha food, and devo- 

tion, 357. 
Strength, real, 96, 102- 
103 


—belongs to Brah- 

man, 178. 

Students and social 
work, 333-335. 

Subject and object, 211. 

Superman, 229-230. 

Tantras, compared with 
Upanishads, 230. 

Teaching, secret of, 
222. 

Theory, and practice, 
139, 142. 

Thoughts, impure, 
remedy for, 6, 343, 
848, 382. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


ne 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


INDEX 393 


Tilak, and the Gita, 
360. 

Titiksha, 244. 

Trailanga, Swami, 41. 

Truthfulness, 268-269. 

Tulsidas, 188, 288, 289. 
—reason of his Vai- 
ragya, 158-159. 
—his vision of Rama, 
28-30. 

Turiyananda, Swami, 
about himself, 95, 
101, 103-104, 119, 
120, 123-128, 145-147, 
213-215, 235-286, 241- 
242, 252, 265, 266, 
271-272, 282, 324-325, 
327, 329. 

—his advice to one 
desiring to renounce 
the world, 186-194, 
242-244. 

—in atheistic mood, 
146-147. 

—on Chandi, 279; 
darwinism, 175-176; 
Gitâ, 243; Hindu 
Sâstras, 236, 238; 
Mahimna Stotras, 
221. 

—reminiscences of 
Santi  Ashrama, 
America, 260-262, 
298-299. 

Upamanyu, 150. 

Uttarfiyana, meaning 
of, 226. 

Vairdgya, 49, 164, 251, 
345-346. 


Vaishnavas, creed of 
the, 360. 

Vediinta, how to read, 
163. 

—and  Pseudo-Ved- 
inta, 178-174, 276- 
277. 

Vichér Sdgar, 174, 

Vivekananda, Swami,. 
austerities of, 89, 
104. 

—a friend’s opinion 
about, 218. 

—confident about his 
mission, 96, 125, 254. 

—his power of detach- 
ment, 81-82, 205. 

—his enthusiasm for 
realizing God, 104. 

—humour of, 222. 

—his influence in the 
West, 205, 237-238. 

—influence of his: 
lectures, 200-201. 

—not in conflict with 
the message of Sri 
Ramakrishna, 195, 
281, 292. 

—on democracy, 197 ; 
supernaturalism, 
277 ; uplift of India, 
64. 


—overflowing sym- 
pathy of, 219-221. 
—purity of, 201-202. 
—sayings of, 42, 64,. 
96, 130, 151, 202, 
203, 212, 328, 328. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


394 INDEX 

—self-surrender of, 292, 294-296, 334, 
215. 382. 

—source of his power, ay for, 6, 80, 
200. . 

—spiritual ver of, —selfless, 284. 
oe ae —value of, 63-64, 98, 

—Sri Ramakrishna 374-376. 


on, 58, 148, 191. 
—struggle of, 
fil his mission, 205. 
—Swami Turiyananda 
on, 107, 111-112, 
118-114, 123, 177, 
223, 304, 312-313. 
—Vijoykrishna Gos- 

wami on, 71. 
Woman, what type of, 
condemned by the 


scriptures, 216-217. 
Words, power of, 319- 
320. 


Work, and God-realiza- 
tion, 358-359, 36-1, 
—and meditation, 2 281 


4 


to ful” 


“ 


World, a granny’s play, 
235. 
—how false, 51. 
—when to renounce, 


49, 
Worldly life, 11-13. 
—and God-realization, 
48-49. 
Worship, of. saints, 
~ When beneficial, 101. 


Yoga, obstacles to, 97, . 


4. 206-207 ; remedy for, 
$i 207-208, 
—which is best, 149. 


Yogananda, Swami, 96. 


—rebuked by Sri 


Ramakrishna for his’ 


meeckness, 224. 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


4 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by 


` CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Añandamayee Ashram Collection, Varan 


Digitization by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. Funding by MoE-IKS 


A 


CCO. In Public Domain. Sri Sri Anandamayee Ashram Collection, Varanasi 


