===== Internet Archive OCR: vedantasutraswit00badaiala_djvu.txt =====

The  Brahmavadin  Series. 


THE  SKI-BHASHYA. 


PUBLISHED   BY 
M.  C.    A  L  A  S  I  N  G  A  P  P  E  R  U  M  A  L,    B.  A. 

The   "  Bra  h  mavadiu"  Pr  e  ss, 
TRIFLJCANE,  MADRAS. 


TH£ 

VEDArtTA-SUT-RAS 


WITH     THE 


SRI-SHASHYA 


OF 


Translated    into    English 

BY 
M.  RANGACHARYA,    M.A., 

AND 
M.  B.  VARADARAJA  AIYANQAR,    B.A.,  B.L. 

VOLUME  /. 


,  a     r  a  s : 

THE   "  BRAHMAVIDIN  "   PRESS. 

1899. 
(  AH  Rights    Reserved.  ) 


THIb    VOLUME 

IS     DEDICATED     TO 

The  Right  Honourable  Professor  F.  Max  Mullen, 

by    the 
TRANSLATORS 

in  grateful  recognition  of  his  valuable  services  rendered 
to  the  cause  of  Sanskrit  Literature. 


2052105 


PREF    CE. 


THIS  is  the  first  of  the  three  volume?  in  which  it  is  pro- 
posed to  bring  out  an  English  translation  of  Rama, 
nujacharya's  Sri-Bhashya,  his  well-known  commentary  on 
the  Vedanta-Sfitras  of  Badarayana.  The  Veddnta  of  India 
has  now  fully  established  its  title  to  occupy  a  prominent  place 
among  the  various  systems  of  philosophy  known  to  the 
world  ;  and  one  aspect  of  it  commonly  called  the  Adwaita- 
Vedanta  has  long  been  familiar  to  European  scholars,  and 
has  even  met  with  fair  recognition  at  their  hands.  Rama- 
nujacharya's  Sri  tthdshya,  is  an  exposition  of  the  Visishtd- 
dwaita  aspect  thereof,  and  it  well  deserves  to  be  quite  as 
widely  known  and  appreciated  as  the  Adwaita-Veddnta  of 
Sankaracharya.  The  Visishtddwaitins  represent  a  school 
of  Veddntic  thought,  of  which  Sankaracharya  himself  has 
taken  cognisance  in  his  writings,  and  there  is  evidence  to 
shew  that  it  must  have  come  down  in  the  form  of  an  un- 
broken tradition  from  very  ancient  times.  The  Bhagava- 
tas  and  Pancharatras,  who  have  obviously  played  a  very  im- 
portant part  in  the  history  of  Hindu  religion,  are  in  all 
probability  the  original  system-makers  of  this  school, 
which  appears  to  be  as  old  as  the  Upamshads  themselves. 
The  Upamshads  and  the  Bagavadgitd  teach  both  jttana 
and  bhakti  ;  that  is,  they  teach  that  both  wisdom  and 
worship  are  capable  of  forming  the  means  for  the  attain- 
ment of  salvation.  All  along  in  'our  history  some  seekers 
after  truth  and  salvation  may  be  seen  to  have  relied  more 
upon  wisdom  than  upon  worship,  while  others  have  relied 


more  upon  worship  than  upon  wisdom.  This  division  in 
religious  thought  is  truly  representative  of  two  dissimilar 
innate  tendencies  in  human  nature,  and  the  Bhagavatas 
belong  to  the  latter  class.  How  far  the  Vi'sishtadwaita 
school  interprets  the  Upamshads  and  the  Bagava,dgita 
aright  is  thus  a  question  to  which  each  earnest  student  of 
the  Veddnta  has  to  find  his  own  answer.  The  discussion 
of  the  various  Veddntic  problems  dealt  with  in  this  volume 
is  so  full  and  so  well  expressive  of  the  fundamental  con- 
clusions embodied  in  the  §rl-8k&shya  that  it  gives  the 
volume  a  characteristic  completeness,  in  spite  of  its  being 
only  a  part  of  the  whoie  work.  It  is  therefore  expected 
that  students  of  Indian  philosophy  and  Hindu  religion  will 
find  this  volume  to  be  interesting  and  instructive. 

For  the  purposes  of  this  translation  we  have  consulted 
three  editions   of  the   Sri-Bhdshya — the   Madras  edition 
printed  in  Telugu  characters,  the  Benares  edition  in  Deva- 
nagari  characters,  and  the  incomplete  Calcutta  edition,  also  in 
Devanagari  characters  and  published  by  the  Asiatic  Society 
We  have   found  the    Madras   edition   the   most  accurate 
among  these,  and  have  accordingly  followed  it  in  our  trans- 
lation.   The  style  of  the  Srl-Bkdshya  is  severely  argumen- 
tative and  controversial,  and  it  is  also  technical  and  terse. 
We  have,  however,  tried  our  best  to  make   the  translation 
smooth   and   intelligible    without   any    way  sacrificing  its 
faithfulness  to  the  original.     The  additions  and  alterations 
needed  to  make  the  English  rendering  full  and  accurate  are 
all  enclosed  within   curved   brackets  ;  and   the  references 
to  the  various  quotations  and  authorities  cited  in  the  work 
are  generally  given  within  square  brackets,  a  few  of    these 
references  being  also  given  in  foot-notes.     Foot-notes  have 
been   sparingly   given,   and   only   in  places   where  it  was 
thought  they  were  absolutely  necessary  for  the  elucidation 


Ill 

and   proper   understanding   of  the  text   of  the  translation. 
With   the   object   of  enabling   the   readers   to   make  out 
easily  the   nature   and   the  relations    between   the   vari- 
ous   parts    of    the    closely    reasoned    arguments  to   be 
found  in   this   volume,   we   have   given   in  the  beginning 
an   analytical   outline   of  the  contents  of  the  volume.     A 
table  showing   our   system   of  transliteration   and   a   list 
containing  the   abbreviations    used   by   us  are   given   at 
the  end  of  the  volume.     The  word  dtman  is  used   in  Sans- 
krit to  denote  the  Brahman  as   well  as  the  jiva  ;  hence  it 
has  been  translated   as  Self  where  it   denotes  the   former 
and  as  self  where  it  denotes  the  latter  ;   and  the  pronouns 
who   and   which   have   been   more  or  less  indiscriminately 
used  in  relation  to  both  of  them.     The  word   karman   has 
been  uniformly  used  in  the  form  of  karma,   and   its  plural 
is   given  as   karmas,   as   these   forms   seem   to  have   be- 
come  fairly    current   in    English.     The  printing  work  has 
had  to  be  done  somewhat  hurriedly,  and  a  few  errors  have 
unavoidably  crept  in.     The  more  serious  ones  among  them 
are  pointed   out  and   corrected  in  a  list  of  errata  appended 
hereto.     We  do  not   know    how  far  our  English  rendering 
of  the  Sri-B  flashy  a  is   all   that   it   should  be,  but  we  have 
spared  no  pains  to   make   it   as   good  as  we  can.     We  are 
well  aware   that  it  is  capable  of  much  improvement  ;  and 
yet  it   may   not   perhaps   be   too   much  to  hope  that  our 
attempt  to  present   faithfully   in   English   the  thoughts  of 
one  of  India's  great   teachers  and  religious  reformers  will 
be  productive  of  some  good  in  the  way  of  helping  on  the 
world's  appreciation  of  India's  philosophic  integrity  and 
religious  earnestness. 

NOVEMBER,  1899.  )  M.  R. 

MADRAS.  )  M.  V.  B. 


CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  I. 

PART    I. 

PAGE. 

1.  Analytical  outline  of  contents    ...  i-lxxv. 

2.  Adhikarana      I.            ...           ...  i. 

3-            „                H 257. 

4.            „                III 264. 

5-            „                IV 284. 

6.            „                V 328. 

7-            „                VI 346. 

8.  „                VII 400. 

9.  „                VIII 409. 

10.            „                IX.         ...           ...  417. 

n.           „               X.           ...          ...  419. 

12.  ,,               XI.         ...          ...  425. 

13.  List  of  Abbreviations  ...           ...  437. 

14.  Table  of  Transliteration           ...  439. 

15.  Addenda  et  Corrigenda.           ...  441. 


AN  ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  THE 
CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  |. 

In  the  Introduction  to  his  Veddntadipa  Ramanuja 
summarises  the  teachings  of  the  Vedanta  to  the  following 
effect : — Of  the  three  ultimate  entities  known  to  philosophy, 
the  intelligent  individual  soul  is  essentially  different  from 
non-intelligent  matter  ;  and  God,  who  forms  the  Supreme 
Soul  of  the  universe,  is  absolutely  different  from  the  indi- 
vidual soul.  The  essential  differences  thus  existing  between 
matter,  soul  and  God  are  intrinsic  and  natural.  God,  who 
is  the  same  as  the  Supreme  Brahman,  is  the  cause  of  the 
universe  ;  and  the  universe,  which  is  made  up  of  matter 
and  soul,  is  the  effect  produced  by  Him.  Matter  and  soul 
form  the  body  of  God  ;  and  this  body  is  capable  of  exist- 
ing in  a  subtle  as  well  as  in  a  gross  condition.  God  with 
his  subtle  body  constitutes  the  universe  in  its  causal  condi- 
tion ;  and  with  His  gross  body  He  forms  the  created 
universe  itself.  The  individual  soul  enters  into  matter  and 
thereby  makes  it  live  ;  and  similarly  God  enters  into 
matter  and  soul  and  gives  them  their  powers  and  their 
peculiar  characters.  The  universe  without  God  is  exactly 
analogous  to  matter  without  soul ;  and  in  the  world  as  we 
know  it,  all  things  are  what  they  are,  because  God  has 
penetrated  into  them  and  rules  and  guides  them  all  from 
within,  so  much  so  that  all  things  are  representative  of 
Him  and  all  words  denote  Him  in  the  main. 

The  first  part  of  the  first  chapter  of  the  Vedanta- 
Siitras  of  Badarayana  deals,  says  Ramanuja,  with  the 
question  of  what  constitutes  the  cause  of  the  world  ;  and 


ii  ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS. 

this  volume  contains  his  commentary  on  the  aphorisms 
making  up  that  first  part.  They  are  intended  to  demon- 
strate that  the  Prakriti  (non-ego)  and  the  Purusha  (ego) 
of  the  Saftkhyas  do  not  constitute  the  cause  of  the  world, 
but  that  the  cause  thereof  is  the  omniscient  and  omnipot- 
ent God  Himself  who  is  wholly  pure  and  abundantly  full 
of  all  auspicious  qualities.  Those  aphorisms  are  as  follow:-— 

1.  Then  therefore  the  enquiry  into  the  Brahman. 

2.  (The  Brahman  is  that)  from  whom  (proceed)  the 
creation,  &c.,  of  this  (universe). 

3.  (That  the  Brahman  is  the  cause  of  the  creation, 
&c.,  of  the  universe,  follows  altogether  from  the  scripture ), 
because  the  scripture  forms  the  source  (of  the  knowledge 
relating  to  Him). 

4.  That  (viz.  the  fact  that  the  scripture  forms  alto- 
gether the  source  of  the  knowledge  relating  to  the  Brah- 
man] results,  however,  from  (His  constituting)  the  true 
purport  (of  the  scripture). 

5.  Because  the  activity  imported  by  the  root  iksh 
(to  see  i.  e.  to  think]  is  predicated  (in  relation  to  what 
constitutes  the  cause  of  the  world),  that  which   is   not 
revealed  solely  by  the  scripture  (viz.  the  pradhana)  is  not 
(the  Sat  or  the  Existence  which  is  referred  to  in  the  scrip- 
tural passage  relating  to  the  cause  of  the  world). 

6.  If  it  be  said  that  it  (viz.  the  import  of  the  root 
iksh,  to  see)  -is  (here)  figurative,  (it  is  maintained  that)  it 
cannot  be  so  ;  because  there  is  the  word  Atman  (or  Self 
mentioned  in  the  context). 

7.  Because  (also)  it  is  taught  (in  the  context)  that 
he  who  is  firmly  devoted  to  That  (viz.  the   Sat)  obtains 
final  release. 

8.  Because  also  it  is  not  declared  (in  the  context) 
that  it  (viz.  what  is  denoted  by  the  word  Sat  or  Existence) 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS.  iii 

deserves  to  be  discarded. 

9.  Because  (also)  there  would  then  be  the  contradic- 
tion of  the  proposition  (enunciated  in  the  context). 

10.  Because  (also)  there  is  (mentioned  in  the  context) 
the  withdrawal  (of  the  individual  self)  into  its  own  cause 
(/.  e.  into  the  Sat}. 

11.  Because  there  has  to  be  a  similarity  of  import 
(between  the  passage  under   reference  and  the  other  pas- 
sages relating  to  the  cause  of  the  creation,  &c.,  of  the  world). 

12.  Because  also  it  is  revealed  (in  the  very  LTpanishad 
in  which  the  passage  under  discussion  occurs,  and  in  other 
Upanishads,  that  the  Supreme  Self  is  the   cause  of  the 
universe). 

13.  That  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  Anandamaya 
(is  the  Brahman);  because  there  is,   (in  the  context),  the 
repetition  (of  various  grades  of  bliss  which  culminate  in 
the  Anandamaya  or  the  Highest  Bliss). 

14.  It  may  be  said  that  owing  to  there  being  the 
affix  (may at)  significant  of  modification  (the  Anandamaya) 
is  not  (the  Brahman}\  but  it  is  not  (right  to  say)  so; 
because  that  (affix  mayat)  signifies  abundance. 

15.  Because  also  He  (the  Anandamaya)  is  declared 
(in  the  context)  to  be  the  cause  of  that  (which  forms  the 
bliss  of  the  individual  souls). 

1 6.  (Because)  also  that  same  Being,  who  is  denoted 
by  the  words  of  the  mantra  (in  the  context),  is  declared 
(there  to  be  the  Anandamaya). 

17.  He  who  is  other  (than  the  Brahman)  is  not  (that 
Being  who  is  denoted  by  the  words  of  the  mantra),  because 
(in  such  a  case)  there  would  be  inappropriateness. 

1 8.  Because  also  there  is  (in  the  context)  the  decla- 
ration of  difference   (between  the  individual  self  and  the 
Brahman}. 


iv  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

» 

19.  Because  also  His  will  (is  in  itself  the  cause  of 
creation),  the  pradhdna  is  not  needed  (by  Him  in  the  act 
of  creation  just  as  it  is  needed  by  the  individual  self). 

20.  (Because)  also  it  (viz.  the    scripture)    declares 
(that)  his  (/.  e.  the  individual  self's)  acquisition  of  that 
(bliss  takes  place  when  he  is)  in  (association  with)  this 
(Anandamaya). 

21.  He  (/.  e.  the  Person)  who  is  within  (the  Sun  and 
the  eye  is  the  Brahman],  because  His  attributes  are  de- 
clared (in  the  context). 

22.  And  He  is  different  (from  the  Sun  and  other  in- 
dividual selves),  because.,  also  there  is  the  declaration  of 
difference  (between  the  Brahman  on  the  one  hand,  and 
the  Sun  and  other  individual  selves  on  the  other). 

23.  That  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  Akasa  (is  the 
Brahman},  because  His  peculiar  characteristics  (are  men- 
tioned in  the  context  in  relation  to  what  is  denoted  by 
that  word). 

24.  For  that  same  reason  (which  has  been  given  in 
the  case  of  the  Akdsa),  He  who  is  denoted  by  the  word 
Prdna  (also  in  the  context  is  the  Brahman}. 

25.  That  which  is  denoted  by  the  vrordjyotis  (is  the 
Brahman),  because  there  is  the  mention  of  (His)  feet  (in  a 
connected  context). 

26.  If  it  be  said  that,  on  account  of  the  metre  (known 
as  the  gdyatrl]  being  mentioned  (in  the  context,  the  Light 
or  Jyotis  described  above  is)  not  (the  Brahman),  it  is  not 
(right  to  say)  so  ;  because  the  teaching  (here)  relates  to  the 
concentration  of  the  mind  (on  the  Brahman)  conceived  as 
that  same  (gdyatri)  :  indeed  the  scripture  declares  it  ac- 
cordingly. 

27.  Because  also  it  is  appropriate  only  thus  to  de- 
clare that  (intelligent)  beings  and  other  objects  form  the 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  o?  CONTENTS,          v 

feet  (of  the  Gayatri). 

28.  If  it  be  said  that,  on  account   of  there  being  a 
difference  between  the  (two)  teachings  (given  in  the  con- 
text, what  is  denoted  by  the  wordjyotis  or  Light)  is  not 
(the   Brahman),  it   cannot  be  (right  to  say)  so  ;  because 
even  in  both  those   (teachings)  there  is  nothing  that  is 
contradictory  (of  each  other). 

29.  That  which  is  denoted  by   Prdna   (Indra  and 
other  such  words  is  the  Brahman],  because  it  is  so  under- 
stood in  the  sequel. 

30.  If  it  be   said  that,   oir  account   of  the   speaker 
(Indra)  declaring  himself  (to  be  the  object  of  worship,  what 
is  denoted  by  the  words  Indra  and  Prdna  is)  not  (the 
Brahman,  it  is  replied  that  it  cannot  be   so);    because 
there  is  here  (in  this  context)  the  mention  of  a  multitude 
of  attributes  belonging  to  the  Inner  Self. 

31.  And  the  teaching  (in  the  context)  is,  as  in  the 
case  of  Vamadeva,  in  accordance  with  the  view  found  in 
the  scripture. 

32.  If  it  be  said  that,  on  account  of  the  characteris- 
tics of  the  individual  self  and  of  the  principal  vital  air  (be- 
ing mentioned  in  the  context)  there  is  no  (reference  to  the 
Brahman  here  at  all,  it  is  replied  that)  it  cannot  be  (right 
to  say)  so  ;  because  the  worship    (of  the  Brahman}  has  a 
threefold  nature ;  because  (elsewhere)  this  (threefold  nature 
of  His  worship)  is  taken  for  granted  ;  and  because  here 
(/.  e.  in  the  present  context  also)  that  (same  kind  of  wor- 
ship,) may  be  appropriately  referred  to. 

In  accordance  with  the  general  fashion  of  Indian 
writers,  Ramanuja  begins  his  Srl-Bhdshya  with  a  stanza 
in  praise  of  God,  wherein  he  lays  particular  stress 
on  man's  duty  of  love  and  devotion  to  God,  preferring  this 
love  and  devotion  even  to  the  wisdom  of  the  understand- 


Vi  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   O$  CONTENTS. 

ing.  Then  in  another  stanza  he  speaks  of  the  traditionally 
ancient  character  of  the  teachings  contained  in  the 
Veddnta-Sutras,  and  gratefully  recognises  the  value  of  the 
services  rendered  by  early  teachers  in  preserving  and 
handing  on  those  teachings,  in  accordance  with  which  he 
himself  undertakes  to  interpret  the  Veddnta-Sutras.  (Vide 
page  i).  After  declaring  that  his  own  explanation  of  the 
Sutras  is  in  accordance  with  the  interpretation  given  by 
'  ancient  teachers ',  such  as  Bodhayana,  Dramida,  Taiika, 
&c.,  he  commences  the  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  the 
first  aphorism — "  Then  therefore  the  enquiry  into  the 
Brahman"  The  words  of  the  Sutra  are  taken  into  consi- 
deration one  after  another,  and  their  meaning  and 
grammar  are  both  clearly  explained  (pp.  2  to  4).  He  then 
gives  what  is  called  the  Vakyartha  of  the  Sutra,  this 
Vdkydrtha  being  the  full  meaning  that  is  conveyed  by  the 
aphoristic  sentence  as  a  whole.  In  keeping  with  the 
division  of  the  revealed  scripture  of  the  Hindus  into  the 
Karmakdnda  and  i\\Qjfidnakdnda,  there  are  two  systems  of 
philosophic  enquiry  known  as  the  Karma-mlmdmsd  and 
the  Brahma-mlmdmsd.  The  former  of  these  is  what  may 
be  called  a  philosophy  of  sacrificial  rites,  and  the  latter  is 
a  philosophy  that  deals  with  the  metaphysical  foundations 
of  the  universe.  The  historical  relation  between  the 
Karmakdnda  or  the  Old  Testament  of  the  Vedas  and  the 
Jttanakdnda  or  the  New  Testament  thereof  is  one  of 
antecedence  and  sequence.  And  here  this  first  aphorism 
is  interpreted  to  mean  that,  immediately  after  acquiring 
the  knowledge  of  the  philosophy  of  Vcdic  sacrificial  rites, 
the  study  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Brahman  has  to  be 
begun,  for  the  reason  that  ritualistic  works  yield  only 
small  and  unenduring  results  while  the  'knowledge'  of 
the  Brahman  gives  rise  to  immortality  and  eternal  free- 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.  Vll 

dom.  Bodhayana  is  quoted  in  support  of  this  interpreta- 
tion, and  on  his  authority  the  two  Mimdmsds  are  declared 
to  form  parts  of  one  science  (page  5).  Since  every  Indian 
Arya  is  enjoined  to  learn  the  Karmakdnda  as  well  as  the 
Jildnakdnda  of  the  Vedas,  it  may  be  argued  that  the  study 
of  the  Karma-mimdmsd  is  quite  superfluous.  In  answer 
to  this  view  it  is  pointed  out  that,  in  that  injunction,  learning 
the  Vedas  means  nothing  more  than  merely  learning  them 
by  heart,  and  that  such  learning  is  efficacious  in  making 
them  serve  better  whatever  purpose  they  are  intended  to. 
serve,  and  also  in  giving  rise  to  a  prima  facie  impression 
that  ritualistic  works  yield  insignificant  and  impermanent 
results  while  there  is  a  mention  made  in  the  Upanishads 
of  the  attainment  of  everlasting  immortality  (pp.  6 
to  8).  Then  Veddntic  texts  are  quoted  to  show  the  destruc- 
tibility  of  the  results  of  mere  ritualistic  works  and  the 
indestructible  character  of  the  results  arising  from  the 
knowledge  of  the  Brahman,  and  it  is  concluded  that  the 
study  of  the  Karma-mlmdmsd  must  precede  the  study  of 
the  Brahma-mlmdmsd  ("pp.  8  to  10). 

Having  thus  stated  his  view  of  what  meaning  the 
word  then  conveys  in  this  first  aphorism,  Ramanuja  states 
the  objections  against  his  view  with  the  object  of  meeting 
them  so  as  to  justify  his  own  interpretation.  A  statement 
of  objections  that  is  given  with  an  intention  to  meet  them 
is  called  a  Purvapaksha  ;  and  the  objection  against  Rama- 
nuja's  interpretation  of  the  word  then  here  is  known  as  the 
Laghu-purvapaksha  or  the  '  small  objection ',  in  as  much 
as  there  is  a 'great  objection '  coming  later  on  as  against 
his  interpretation  of  the  word  therefore.  In  this  '  small 
objection '  the  opinions  of  Saiikara  and  Bhaskara  are 
shown  to  contradict  each  other,  and  Sankara's  opinion  re- 
garding the  meaning  of  the  word  then  is  summarised  thus  :— 


Vlll  ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

The  cause  of  the  bondage  (of  the  soul)  is  merely  the 
perception  of  distinctions,  which  is  based  on  unreality 
and  has  its  origin  in  the  avidyd  (or  ignorance)  that  veils 
the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman ;  this  bondage  itself 
is  unreal ;  solely  by  reason  of  its  unreality  it  is  de- 
stroyed to  the  very  roots  by  means  of  knowledge ;  the 
knowledge  that  (so)  destroys  (the  bondage)  is  derived 
out  of  (scriptural)  passages  such  as  "That  thou  art" 
&c.;  works  are  of  no  use  in  causing  the  origination  of  such 
knowledge  in  its  own  true  nature,  or  in  producing  the 
effect  of  this  knowledge  that  is  so  derived  out  of  such 
passages,  but  the  use  of  works  consists  only  in  (producing) 
the  desire  to  know  (the  Brahman}]  and  the  use  of  works  - 
is  to  be  found  in  causing  the  increase  of  sattva  or  the  qua- 
lity of  goodness — an  increase  resulting  from  the  destruction 
of  rajas  and  tamas  or  the  qualities  of  passion  and 
darkness  respectively,  which  form  the  roots  of  sin  ;  and 
therefore,  having  in  view  only  this  use  of  works, 
it  is  declared  in  the  scripture--"  Brahmanas  desire  to 
know,  &c."  Hence,  on  account  of  the  uselessness  of  the 
knowledge  of  works,  the  aforesaid  fourfold  means  alone 
has  to  be  stated  to  be  the  necessary  antecedent  of  the 
enquiry  into  the  Brahman  (pp.  10  to  15.). 

Then  follows  what  is  called  the  Laghn-siddhdnta  or 
the  '  small  conclusion  ' — that  is — the  answer  to  the  '  small 
objection'.  In  this  answer  it  is  pointed  out  that  it  is  not 
the  mere  knowledge  of  what  the  scripture  says  that  tends 
to  the  removal  of  ignorance  and  the  attainment  of  immor- 
tality, but  that  devotion,  meditation  and  worship  alone  can 
produce  such  a  result.  It  is  here  shown  how  a  purely  in- 
tellectual realisation  of  the  truth  cannot  eradicate  the 
innate  tendencies  towards  error,  and  how  the  word  know- 
ledge is  frequently  enough  used  in  the  scriptures  to  mean 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONSENTS.  ix 

the  same  things  as  devotion,  meditation  or  worship.  Tanka 
is  quoted  in  support  of  this  view  and  in  support  of  the 
contention  that  the  innate  tendency  towards  error  can  be 
cured  only  by  work  and  worship.  It  is  further  shown  that 
the  fourfold  mental  and  moral  equipment,  which,  accord- 
ing to  Sankara,  ought  to  precede  the  study  of  the  Vedanta  t 
can  be  acquired  only  with  the  help  of  devotion,  meditation 
and  worship,  and  that  ritualistic  elements  such  as  the 
UdgilJia,  &c.,  are  also  referred  to  in  the  Vedanta  for  the 
reason  that  they  are  helpful  to  meditation  and  to  the 
acquisition  of  the  needed  mental  and  moral  equipment 
mentioned  above  (pp.  15  to  27.). 

The  meaning  conveyed  by  the  word  therefore  is  then 
fully  taken  into  consideration,  and  the  Mahd-prtrvapaksha 
or  the  f  great  objection  '  against  the  view  of  Ramanuja,  as 
given  by  the  followers  of  Sankara,  is  fairly  fully  stated  (pp. 
27  to  53.).  The  main  question  dealt  with  in  this  Purvapa- 
ksha  naturally  bears  upon  what  it  is  that  forms  the  cause  for 
leading  us  to  enquire  into  the  Brahman,  and  why  it  is  that 
the  enquiry  into  the  Brahman  has  to  be  begun  and  con- 
ducted ;  and  the  opinion  of  the  Adwaitin  on  this  question 
is  given  to  the  effect  that  the  study  of  the  Vedanta  has  to 
be  undertaken  to  remove  the  avidyd  or  ignorance  that  is 
at  the  root  of  the  world's  manifestation  of  variety,  so  as  to 
attain  the  knowledge  of  the  oneness  of  the  self  with  the 
Brahman,  who  is,  by  nature,  eternal,  pure,  self-luminous 
and  free  (p.  53.).  The  various  points  mentioned  in  this 
1  great  objection '  are  the  following  :— The  unqualified 
absolute  Brahman  alone  is  real ;  all  other  things  are  only 
assumed  to  exist  in  Him,  and  are  therefore  unreal  (pp.  27- 
30.).  Unreality  is  that  which,  being  grounded  upon  what 
is  perceived,  is  liable  to  be  stultified  by  means  of  the 
knowledge  of  things  as  they  .are  ;  and  the  world  of 

B 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

phenomena  is  based  upon  ignorance  or  avidya,  and  is  hence 
such  an  unreality  (pp.  30-32.).  Knowledge  destroys  this 
ignorance  which  forms  the  foundation  of  our  world-percep- 
tion ;  and  the  knowledge  which  so  destroys  ignorance  and 
the  consequent  bondage  of  unreality  is  the  knowledge  that 
the  self  or  the  alman  of  the  individual  is  one  with  the 
absolute  Brahman  (pp.  32-33.).  Scriptural  authority  is  all 
along  aptly  quoted  in  support  of  every  one  of  these  points. 
It  is  then  shewn  how,  when  there  is  conflict  between 
scripture  and  perception,  the  former  is  of  stronger  authority 
and  is  capable  of  stultifying  the  latter  (pp.  33-35.).  There 
being  scriptural  passages  which  deal  with  the  one  absolute 
Brahman  and  those  which  deal  with  the  phenomenal 
world  of  variety  and  distinctions,  it  is  shown  how  the 
former  passages  are  of  stronger  authority  than  the  latter, 
and  how  it  is  even  possible  for  some  portions  of  the  scrip- 
ture to  stultify  other  portions  thereof  (pp.  35-37.)'  Then 
the  meaning  of  the  definitive  scriptural  sentence — '  The 
Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infinity ' — is  discussed 
from  the  Adwaitic  stand-point,  and  it  is  shown  how  that 
sentence  defines  the  absolute  attributeless  Brahman  as  He 
is  essentially  in  Himself  (pp.  37-42.).  So  far  it  is  a  discus- 
sion of  the  meaning  of  scriptural  passages.  After  this  the 
Adwaitic  position  is  argued  out  on  independent  lines.  At 
first  it  is  brought  out  that  perception  apprehends  only  pure 
and  unqualified  existence,  and  that  the  distinction  between 
things  neither  belongs  to  their  essential  nature  nor  consti- 
tutes any  attribute  of  existence  in  itself  (pp.  42-44.).  It  is 
then  pointed  out  that  all  external  objects  are  invariably 
apprehended  as  compounded  of  existence  and  experience, 
that  in  all  perceptive  cognitions  existence  alone  unvary- 
ingly persists,  while  the  differentiating  peculiarities  of  things 
are  seen  to  vary  from  thing  to  thing,  and  that  therefore  pure 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS.  xi 

unqualified  existence  alone  is  real,  and  that,  in  as  much  as 
this  compounded  experience  too  persists  like  existence  in  all 
perceptive  cognitions,  experience  also  constitutes  the  reality 
and  has  to  be  the  same  as  existence  itself  (pp.  44-46.).  And 
the  experience  which  thus  constitutes  the  reality  is  there- : 
after  declared  to  be  so  self-evident  as  to  be  the  cause  of  its 
own  knowability  as  well  as  of  the  realisation   that  it  is 
knowable  (pp.  46-48.).     Then  it  is  shown  that  this  experi- 
ence or  what  is  otherwise  called  consciousness  is,  on  account , 
of  its   self-evident  nature,  eternal,  unoriginated,  immodi- 
fiable  and  undifferentiated,  and  that  it  is  the  same  entity 
as  the  alman  or  the  self  (pp.  49-51.).    Finally  the   question 
of  personality  is  taken  up  for  consideration,  and  it  is  argued 
that  the  alman  or  the  self  is  not  the  same  as  the  knowen 
in  as  much  as  the  idea  of  knowership  in  relation  to  the  self 
is  the   result   of  the  limitation  imposed  upon  the  intelli- 
gent principle  of  consciousness  by  the   material  principle 
of  egoity  known  as  ahankdra,  and  in  as  much  as  again 
self-experience  is  possible   even    when    there    is  no    no- 
tion  of  egoity,  as  during  dreamless  sleep,  swoon,  &c.  It 
is  further  argued  that  the  internal  self  is  a  mere  witness, 
and  as  such  must  be   different  from  the  knower  which 
is  the    same   as  the  ego    or    the  thing   '!';  and    it     is 
then  shown  that  this  limitation  of  personality  cannot  be 
an  attribute  of  the  self  which  is  pure  and  undifferentiated 
intelligence,  and  that  in  the  beatific  state  of  final  release 
the  self  is  free  from  the  limitation  of  personality,  even  as  it 
is  found  to  be  so  free  in  the  condition  of  dreamless  sleep. 
The  one  intelligent    and  undifferentiated  principle  of  con- 
sciousness being  thus  shown  to  be   the   only  reality,  it  is " 
arrived  at  that  the  reason  for  undertaking  the  study  of  the 
Vcdanta  is  to  understand  the  nature  of  this  reality,  other- 
wise known  as  the  Brahman,  and  to  realise  that  everything 


Xli  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

which  is  in  any  manner  whatsoever  different  from  it  is 
wholly  unreal  (pp.  51  to  53.)  The  Mahd-purvapaksha  or 
the  '  great  objection '  is  here  brought  to  an  end. 

Then  begins  the  Mahd-siddhdnta  or  the  '  great  con- 
clusion '  of  Ramanuja  and  his  school  regarding  the  mean- 
ing of  the  word  therefore   in   the  first  aphorism.     The 
meaning  conveyed  by  this  word  is  thus  expressed  (p.  242.) 
in  Ramanuja's  own  words  : — "  Mere  ritualistic  works  yield 
only  small  and  transitory  results.     On  the  other  hand, 
such  works   as    constitute   the  worship   of  the   Highest 
Person,  and  are  performed  without  attachment  to  results 
yield  an  infinite     and  ever-enduring  result  in  the  form 
of  that  experience  of  the  real  nature  of  the  Brahman 
which  is  caused  by  the  origination  of  the  knowledge  which 
is  the  same  as  steady  meditation  or  worship.     Both  these 
cannot  become  known  without  a  knowledge  of  the  true 
nature  of  works.    Without  such  knowledge  there  can  be 
no  rejection  of  mere  ritualistic  works  as  they  ordinarily 
are,  and  no  subsequent  adoption  of  them  in   the   form 
pointed  out  above.    Therefore,  for  this  very  reason,  the 
enquiry  into  the  Brahman  has  necessarily  to  be  conducted." 
This  conclusion  is  arrived  at  only  after  meeting  fully  all 
the  points  raised  against  it  in  the  '  great  objection  '.    And 
they  are  met  one  by  one  in  the  following  order.     To  start 
with  it  is  shown  that  one's  own  experience,  logical  infer- 
ence, revelation,  and  definite  as  well  as  indefinite  percep- 
tion, and  all  the  other  accepted  criteria  of  truth  prove  only 
such  things  as  are  qualified  by  attributes,  and  that  there  is 
really  no  means  of  proving  the  thing  which  is  absolute  and 
unqualified.  In  this  connection  the  nature  of  wJhat  is  called 
definite  and  also  of  what  is  called  indefinite  perception 
is    distinctly   explained,  and  the  view  which  maintains 
that  there  is  both  difference  and  non-difference  between  a 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS.  xiii 

thing  and  its  qualifying  attribute  is  shown  to  be  wrong 
(pp.  53-60.).  Next  the  position  that  perception  must 
apprehend  pure  unqualified  existence,  in  as  much  as  it 
cannot  have  differentiation  for  its  object  and  in  as  much 
as  it  is  difficult  to  define  differentiation,  is  taken  into  con- 
sideration and  criticised  ;  and  it  is  argued  in  reply  that 
perception  does  apprehend  distinctions,  that  distinctions 
so  apprehended  establish  the  difference,  not  only  be- 
tween one  qualified  thing  and  another,  but  also  between 
the  distinguishing  attributes  themselves,  and  that  there- 
fore the  apprehension  of  particularity  has  necessarily 
to  be  admitted  in  connection  with  every  state  of  con- 
sciousness. It  is  further  shown  that  the  senses,  which 
naturally  cannot  perceive  pure  unqualified  existence, 
perceive  only  the  configurations  of  the  attributes  of 
things,  and  that  it  is  these  configurations  that  con- 
stitute the  logical  genera  and  at  the  same  time  denote 
whatever  forms  the  distinction  between  things  (pp.  60-64.). 
Then  it  is  pointed  out  how  it  is  erroneous  to  hold  that  jars 
and  other  such  specific  objects  are  unreal,  the  reason  for 
their  unreality  being  that  they  do  not  persist  before  con- 
sciousness in  all  perceptions,  and  how  again  it  is  not 
possible  for  experience  or  consciousness  to  be  the  same 
as  the  one  unqualified  and  absolute  existence  (pp.  64-65.). 
Afterwards  the  self-luminous  character  of  experience 
is  properly  explained,  and  it  is  shown  how  experience 
does  not  cease  to  be  experience  when  it  becomes  cap- 
able of  being  itself  experienced  (pp.  65-67.).  The  con- 
tention that  experience  or  consciousness  has  the  character 
of  an  unoriginated  entity  is  then  contradicted.  It  is  argued 
that  the  absence  of  what  is  called  the  antecedent  non- 
existence  of  experience  does  not  prove  its  unoriginated 
character,  because  there  is  no  rule  which  binds  experience 


XIV  ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

to  deal  only  with  such  objects  as  aie  existent  at  the  same 
time  with  itself;  and  accordingly  memory,  logical  inference, 
revelation  and  yogic  perception  are  shown  to  relate  to 
things  which  belong  to  a  different  time  from  that  of  their 
own  existence  or  duration  (pp.  67-69.,).  The  reasoning 
involved  in  the  supposition,  that  the  antecedent  non-exist- 
ence of  consciousness  is  not  at  all  made  out  by  perception, 
is  then  pointed  out  to  be  untenable ;  and  it  is  shown  that 
perceptual  consciousness  is  conditioned  by  time,  and  that 
none  of  our  cognising  states  of  consciousness  can  be  eternal 
or  objectless  (pp.  69-71.).  Even  during  sleep,  trance,  and 
conditions  of  intoxication,  consciousness  cannot  be  absolute 
and  altogether  objectless,  as  there  is  no  recollection  what- 
soever of  our  having  at  any  time  had  any  experience  of 
such  consciousness.  In  all  its  states  consciousness  is  asso- 
ciated with  the  idea  of  the  ego,  is  definite  and  relates  to 
particular  objects;  and  hence  it  cannot  be  unoriginated  and 
eternal  (pp.  71-72.).  And  then  the  immodifiable  character 
of  consciousness  is  contended  against,  and  it  is  shown  that 
it  cannot  be  undifferentiated  (pp.  72-74.).  The  position 
that  consciousness  can  have  no  qualifying  attributes  is 
next  disproved  (pp.  74-75.).  Afterwards  the  question 
whether  consciousness  is  the  same  as  the  self  is  taken  up 
for  consideration  and  criticism,  and  it  is  explained  that 
consciousness  cannot  indeed  be  the  same  as  the  conscious 
subject,  and  that  this  conscious  subject  is  permanent  while 
the  attribute  of  consciousness  belonging  to  that  subject 
is  liable  to  be  originated  and  destroyed ;  and  then  it  is 
demonstrated  that  the  idea  of  an  unfounded  and  object- 
less consciousness  being  the  same  as  the  self  is  contradict- 
ed by  cognition,  and  that  in  consequence  pure  experience 
or  absolute  consciousness  alone  cannot  be  the  highest  real- 
ity (pp.  75-77-) • 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE    OF  CONTENTS.  XV 

After  this  the  discussion  of  the  problem  of  the  soul's 
personality  is  commenced  from  the  stand-point  of  Rama- 
nuja,  and  it  is  at  first  pointed  out  that  what  consti- 
tutes the  subjective  self  or  the  soul  of  the  individual  is 
nothing  other  than  the  ego  which  is  here  called  the 
thing  '/';  similarly  the  thing  '  thoit'  or  the  objective 
world  forms  the  content  of  the  notion  of  the  non- 
ego  ;  such  being  the  case,  how  can  the  knower  and  the 
known  be  identical  ?  (pp.  77-79.)-  If  the  thing  '  I  '  is 
the  self,  then,  like  the  self,  it  must  be  intelligent  and  have 
at  the  same  time  intelligence  to  constitute  its  essence  ;  and 
it  is  explained  and  illustrated  how  the  thing  T  may  be 
both  intelligence  and  intelligent  at  the  same  time.  Then 
scriptural  and  other  authorities  are  quoted  to  shew  that 
the  self-luminous  self  is  always  the  knower,  but  that  it  is 
never  mere  luminousness  (pp.  79-81.).  Consciousness  is 
like  luminosity,  and  must  necessarily  belong  to  a  luminous 
self ;  this  self  is  the  intelligent  thing  T,  and  the  luminosity 
or  intelligibility  of  consciousness  itself  is  due  to  its  associa- 
tion with  the  self  which  is  undoubtedly  the  knowing  ego 
(pp.  81-83.).  Having  thus  shown  that  intelligence  forms 
the  essence  as  well  as  an  attribute  of  the  thing  T,  the 
view  of  the  Adwaitin — that  the  idea  of  knowership  is  fal- 
sely superimposed  upon  the  undiffereritiated  and  intelligent 
principle  of  consciousness  by  ignorance  or  avidyd — is  next 
contended  against.  It  is  first  shown  that  the  knowership 
of  the  ego  cannot  be  due  to  illusion,  for  the  reason  that 
the  thing  T  and  its  knowership  are  both  separately  and 
simultaneously  cognised,  unlike  the  mother-of-pearl  and 
the  silver  superimposed  thereon.  It  is  next  shewn  that  this 
knowership  of  the  ego  cannot  be  said  to  be  due  to  the 
common  error  of  mistaking  the  body  for  the  self  (pp.  83-84.). 

does  this  knowership  belong  to  the  material  principle 


xvi  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS. 

of  egoity  known  as  ahankara,  in  as  much  as  subjectivity 
can  in  no  way  belong  to  objective  matter.  The  knower- 
shipofthe  self  does  not  contradict  its  immodifiable  nature, 
and  need  not  therefore  be  supposed  to  be  due  to  modifia- 
ble matter  in  any  form  (pp.  84-87.).  /  Ahankara  or  the 
material  principle  of  egoity  cannot  be  supposed  to  have 
acquired  the  attribute  of  knowership  either  as  a  result 
of  the  reflection  of  the  self's  intelligence  thereon,  or 
as  a  result  of  its  contact  with  the  knowing  self  (pp. 
87-88.).  Moreover,  this  supposed  illusion  of  know- 
ership cannot  be  due  to  the  material  principle  of  egoity 
being  the  revealer  of  immaterial  consciousness,  in  as 
much  as  the  relation  of  the  revealer  and  the  revealed 
between  any  two  things  is  mutually  exchangeable  and 
cannot  exist  when  there  is  any  incompatibility  in  nature 
between  them.  Xor  is  it  appropriate  to  hold  that  ahah- 
kdra  reveals  consciousness  at  the  same  time  that  conscious- 
ness reveals  ahankara  ;  because  it  is  not  possible  to  under- 
stand what  this  revelation  of  the  self  through  ahankara 
may  mean,  in  as  much  as  the  self  is  not  within  the  province 
of  the  senses  and  nothing  can  therefore  serve  as  the  means 
of  bringing  it  into  relation  with  them  (pp.  88-90.).  Nor 
again  can  the  idea  of  the  ego  be^due  to  the  material  princi- 
ple of  egoity,  on  the  score  that  this  principle  and  this  idea 
derived  therefrom  are  useful  in  removing  whatever  ob- 
struction there  is  for  our  knowing  the  self.  Indeed  in  no 
sense  can  there  be  a  revelation  of  immaterial  consciousness 
by  means  of  the  material  principle  of  egoity  (pp.  91-92.). 
Then  it  is  argued  that  the  nature  of  revealers  is  not  to 
reveal  the  revealable  thing  as  though  it  were  within  them- 
selves, and  it  is  finally  concluded  that  the  subjective  self 
itself  forms  the  thing  '  I '  which  is  in  no  way  other  than 
the  knower  (pp.  93-94.)-  The  idea  of  the  ego  which  is 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.  XV11 

thus  intrinsically  associated  with  the  self  does  not  get  dis- 
sociated from  it  even  in  deep  sleep  ;  because  at  the  time  of 
waking,  the  self  shines  forth  in  one  and  the  same  continuous 
form  of  the  thing '  I ',  even  when  we  feel  that,  while  asleep, 
we  knew  nothing  at  all,  and  that  we  did  not  know  even 
ourselves  (pp.  94-96.).  The  position  that  the  self  is  a  mere 
witness  is  explained  not  to  mean  that  it  is  a  witness  only 
of  ignorance;  for,  to  be  a  witness  is  certainly  the  same  as  to 
be  a  direct  knower,  and  even  in  sleep  and  other  such  states 
the  self  is  luminous  and  shines  forth  as  the  ego  (pp.  96-97.). 
In  the  final  state  of  beatific  release  also  the  self  continues 
to  persist  as  the  thing  T;  scripture  also  declares  that  it 
does  so  persist,  and  God  Himself  is  revealed  to  us  as  a  dis- 
tinct Person  (pp.  97-100.).  The  material  principle  known 
as  ahaftkara  is  indeed  included  among  the  things  that  go 
to  make  up  our  bodies  ;  and  it  is  called  by  that  name  be- 
cause it  forms  the  cause  of  the  imposition  of  the  idea  of 
the  ego  upon  the  body.  This  false  idea  of  the  ego  is  sub- 
ject to  stultification,  while  the  ego-hood  of  the  self  is  real 
and  incapable  of  being  stultified.  Therefore  the  thing  '  I ', 
which  is  the  knower,  is  alone  the  self  (pp.  100-101.). 

The  next  point  taken  up  for  consideration  is  the  position 
of  the  Prtrvapakshin  that,  when  there  is  conflict  between 
scripture  and  perception,  the  former  is  of  stronger  authority 
as  a  criterion  of  truth,  for  the  reason  that  the  latter  is 
grounded  upon  error.  It  is  here  shown  that  it  is  not  possible 
to  make  out  definitely  what  that  misguiding  cause  is  which 
makes  perception  false  and  erroneous;  it  is  shown  that 
whatever  makes  perception  erroneous  must  necessarily  tend 
to  make  the  scripture  also  erroneous,  and  that  the  scripture 
which  is  thus  based  upon  error  cannot  certainly  stultify  per- 
ception. It  cannot  be  proved  that,  unlike  perception,  the 
scripture  is  incapable  of  being  misled  by  an}*  cruise  of  error 
C 


Xviii  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE    OF    CONTENTS. 

such  as  avidya  for  instance  ;  and  the  phenomenal  know- 
ledge derived  from  the  scripture  is  in  no  way  different  from 
the  phenomenal  knowledge  obtained  through  perception. 
Nor  can  it  be  maintained  that  the  teaching  of  perception 
is  stultified  by  the  teaching  which  is  given  in  the  scrip- 
ture, while  this  latter  teaching  is  not  so  stultified  by  the 
former,  and  that  in  consequence  the  scripture  is  not  false 
and  erroneous  ;  for,  error  is  error  even  when  it  continues  un- 
stultified  (pp.  101-105.).  There  are  certain  analogies  general- 
ly given  to  shew  that  the  scripture,  which,  being  based  upon 
avidya  or  ignorance,  is  unreal,  may  form  the  means  for  the 
attainment  of  the  highest  reality  known  as  the  Brahman  ; 
and  these  analogies  are  all  one  after  another  pointed  out 
to  be  not  at  all  suited  to  the  case  under  consideration,  in 
as  much  as  it  is  seen  that  in  every  one  of  them  a  real  re- 
sult is  derived  from  a  real  cause.  When  auspicious  and 
inauspicious  dreams  give  rise  to  good  and  bad  results  in  life, 
the  dreams  are  indeed  as  really  existent  as  the  results  they 
give  rise  to.  When  magic,  medicinal  herbs,  incantations, 
&c.,  give  rise  to  illusions  which  cause  fear,  love  and  other 
emotions,  the  illusions  are  as  real  as  the  emotions 
themselves.  Death  may  result  from  a  suspicion  of 
snake-bite  and  of  poisoning  ;  here  the  suspicion  is  as 
real  as  the  death.  The  reflected  image  of  a  thing  is 
as  real  as  the  thing  itself.  Dreams  are  real  even  in  the  ab- 
sence of  the  reality  of  the  objects  corresponding  to  them, 
in  as  much  as  what  is  required  to  make  anything  the  ob- 
ject and  the  basis  of  any  cognition  is  merely  the  manifes- 
tation of  that  thing  to  consciousness  in  some  manner  or 
other  (pp.  105-107.).  Even  in  the  case  of  the  apprehen- 
sion of  the  sounds  of  letters  by  means  of  the  correspond- 
ing written  signs,  there  is  no  cognition  of  the  real  by 
means  of  the  unreal.  When  things  are  cognised  by  means 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS.        xix 

of  sketches  and  pictures,  there  is  at  the  basis  of  the  cogni- 
tion a  real  similarity  between  the  things  and  their  represen- 
tations. The  apprehension  of  the  real  and  absolute 
Brahman  by  means  of  the  unreal  and  phenomenal 
teachings  of  the  scripture  cannot  also  be  proved  on 
the  analogy  of  the  apprehension  of  the  absolute  un- 
differentiated  sound  known  as  Sphota  with  the  help 
of  its  numerous  phonetic  differentiations  or  nadas. 
Although  the  unreality  of  the  scripture  is  not  such  as  may 
be  due  to  its  absolute  non-existence,  it  is  difficult  to  arrive 
at  the  knowledge  of  the  noumenal  reality  by  means  of  the 
phenomenal  teachings  of  the  scripture.  Nothing  that  is  un- 
real can  ever  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  that  which  is 
real  (pp.  107-110.). 

After  this  the  proper  meaning  of  various  passages  in 
the  Upanishads  is  taken  into  consideration,  and  it  is  shewn 
that  their  Adwaitic  interpretation  is  not  accurate  and  allow- 
able. The  passages  first  taken  into  consideration  are — 
"Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was  in  the  beginning", 
from  the  Qihdndogya-  Upanishad  ^ — "  And  that  is  the 
higher  knowledge  by  which  that  Indestructible  Being  is 
known",  from  the  Mimdaka-Lrpanis/md,—-and  "The  Brah- 
man is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infinity",  from  the  Taitti- 
riy a- Upanishad  ;  and  it  is  proved  that  these  do  not  relate 
to  the  absolute  and  unqualified  Brahman,  and  that  the 
grammatical  equation  to  be  found  in  the  last  passage  is 
intended  to  establish  that  one  and  the  same  thing,  namely, 
the  Brahman  is  characterised  by  more  than  one  attribute 
(pp.  1 10- 1 1 2.).  Does  the  statement  that  the  Brahman  is 
one  only  without  a  second  mean  that  the  Brahman  is 
not  associated  with  a  second  thing  even  in  the  form  of  a 
quality  ?  It  is  shewn  that  it  does  not  mean  such  a  thing, 
and  that  the  scriptural  passages  which  speak  of  the  Brah- 


xx         ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS. 

man  as  unqualified  only  declare  that  He  is  free  from  the 
qualities  appertaining  to  material  nature.  There  are  also 
many  passages  which  speak  of  the  Brahman  as  qualified* 
and  these  declare  that  He  is  intrinsically  possessed  of  all 
the  auspicious  and  divine  qualities.  And  His  possessing  the 
divine  qualities  is  not  contradicted  by  the  non-possession 
of  the  qualities  that  appertain  to  material  nature  (pp.  1 1 2- 
ii 6.).  The  Ananda-valll  of  the  Taittirlya-Upanishad 
teaches  the  Brahman  to  be  possessed  of  qualities,  and  in 
doing  so  agrees  with  passages  in  the  dihdndogya-  Upanishad', 
and  the  Kena-  Upanishad  (II.  3.)  does  not  declare  that  the 
Brahman  forms  no  object  of  knowledge,  in  as  much  as  this 
Upanishad  has  to  agree  in  meaning  with  the  Taittirlya- 
Upanishad  and  the  Mnndaka- Upanishad  wherein  it  is 
declared  that  the  Brahman  has  to  be  known  and  is  cap- 
able of  being  known  (pp.  116-119.).  The  passage  in  the 
Brihadaranyaka-Upanishad — "  Thou  shalt  not  see  the 
seer  of  the  sight,  nor  think  the  thinker  of  the  thought  "- 
is  next  shown  not  to  negative  the  seer  and  the  knower  as 
distinct  from  sight  and  knowledge ;  and  then  the  state- 
ment that  the  Brahman  is  bliss  is  interpreted  to  mean 
that  the  Brahman  is  indeed  the  Blissful  Being  (pp.  119- 
I2i.).  Finally  it  is  pointed  out  that  the  Upanishadic 
passages  which  negative  distinctions  do  not  contradict 
those  other  passages  which  postulate  distinctions,  in  as 
much  as  the  world  which  is  full  of  distinctions  has  the 
Brahman  for  its  Self  and  has  in  consequence  an  organic 
oneness  of  nature  ;  and  it  is  shewn  that  the  author  of  the 
Vcdanta-Sulras  is  also  of  this  same  opinion  (pp.  121- 
124.). 

The  question,  whether  the  Smritis  and  the  Puranas 
teach  the  attributeless  Brahman  to  be  pure  intelligence 
and  the  only  reality,  is  next  examined  in  detail  ;  and  at 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS.  XXI 

the  very  commencement  passages  are  quoted  from  the 
Bhagavadglta  and  the  Vishnu- Pur  ana  to  show  that  the 
Highest  Brahman  is  full  of  all  auspicious  qualities  and 
free  from  all  evil,  and  that  the  world  which  is  the  mani- 
festation of  His  glory  is  as  real  as  He  is  Himself  real  (pp. 
124-129.).  Then  the  passages  relied  upon  by  the  Adwai- 
tins  to  prove  their  peculiar  monistic  position  are  all  inter- 
preted in  full  accordance  with  their  respective  contexts  and 
in  obedience  to  all  the  accepted  rules  of  interpretation, 
.  and  it  is  concluded  that  in  all  the  sastraic  works  there  is 
no  establishment  of  that  thing  which  is  devoid  of  attributes, 
no  establishment  of  illusoriness  in  regard  to  the  total- 
ity of  perceivable  objects,  and  no  negation  of  the  natural 
differences  between  the  individual  soul  and  non-intelligent 
matter  and  the  Lord  (pp.  129-156.).  Incidentally  it  is 
pointed  out  how  necessary  it  is  to  amplify  and  support  the 
meanings  of  Vedic  and  Veddntic  passages  by  means  of  the 
Itihdsas  and  the  Pnrdnas,  and  how  among  these  latter  the 
Vishnu-Purdna  is  highly  authoritative  (pp.  134-135.). 
The  statement  found  in  the  Vishnu-Purdna  (II.  14.  31.), 
to  the  effect  that '  dualists  see  things  wrongly,'  is  shewn  to 
negative  only  that '  dualism  '  which  postulates  a  difference 
in  kind  between  one  individual  soul  and  another,  but  not 
that  other  '  dualism  '  which  believes  in  the  natural  distinc- 
tion between  the  ultimate  entities  known  as  God,  soul, 
and  matter  (pp.  142-144.).  In  accordance  with  this  view 
a  few  more  Purdnic  passages  are  explained  ;  and  the  con- 
clusion is  arrived  at  that,  in  the  same  way  in  which  there 
is  no  essential  identity  between  the  body  and  the  indivi- 
dual self,  there  is  also  no  essential  identity  between  one 
individual  self  and  another,  and  that  similarly  there  is  no 
essential  identity  between  the  individual  selves  and  the 
Supreme  Self.  That  there  is  no  substantial  unity  between 


xxii  ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

the  individual  selves  and  the  Supreme  Self  is  further  con- 
firmed by  references  to  Upanishadic  passages  and  to  aphor- 
isms in  the  Veddnta-Sntras  (pp.  144-148.)  At  last  the 
question  of  what  the  sastras  say  regarding  the  nature  of 
the  individual  self  in  the  beatific  condition  of  final  freedom 
from  all  association  with  matter  is  discussed  clearly,  and  it 
is  established  that  in  that  condition  the  released  individual 
self  does  not  become  identical  in  essence  with  the  Supreme 
Self,  but  that  it  only  acquires  most  of  the  auspicious  and 
divine  qualities  of  the  Supreme  Self ;  and  it  is  shewn  that 
the  Brahman  whom  the  individual  self  is  said  to  attain  in 
the  state  of  moksha  is  not  mere  attributeless  intelligence, 
that,  on  the  contrary,  He  is  full  of  goodness,  power,  and 
glory,  and  that  the  individual  self  becomes  one  with  Him 
then  for  the  reason  that  he  attains  the  highest  degree  of 
equality  with  Him  and  is  free  from  the  bondage  of  karma 
(pp.  148-156.). 

Now  begins  the  criticism  of  that  theory  of  the  Adwai- 
tins  according  to  which  a  beginninglessly  old  '  ignorance ' 
known  as  avidya  or  mdyd  is  held  to  be  at  the  root  of  our 
perception  of  the  differentiated  phenomenal  world,  and 
according  to  which  also  such  an  avidya  has  necessarily  to 
be  admitted  on  the  authority  of  the  scripture  and  has  to  be 
understood  to  be  a  certain  something  which  is  neither  a 
positive  entity  nor  a  negative  non-entity.  Seven  difficul- 
ties are  pointed  out  to  be  in  the  way  of  this  theory  being 
true.  The  first  of  these  is  called  Asray&nupapatti,  and 
deals  with  the  difficulty  of  finding  something  for  this 
'  ignorance  '  to  reside  in.  In  as  much  as  the  self-hood  of  the 
individual  self  is  itself  projected  by  avidya,  it  is  argued  that 
this  avidya  cannot  reside  in  the  individual  self  and  thus 
give  rise  to  the  illusion  for  which  it  is  held  to  be  responsi- 
ble. And  in  as  much  as  the  Brahman  has  the  essential 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF    CONTENTS.  xxiii 

nature  of  self-luminous  intelligence,  it  is  shewn  that  on  no 
supposition  can  the  ttrahman  be  the  seat  of '  ignorance. ' 
This  supposed  avidyd  therefore  can  have  no  abode  to  reside 
in  (pp.  156-161.).  The  next  difficulty  in  the  way  of  the 
theory  of  mdyd  is  that  this  supposed  '  ignorance  '  cannot, 
as  maintained  by  its  upholders,  conceal  the  Brahman  whose 
essential  nature  consists  entirely  of  luminosity ;  for,  the 
concealment  of  such  a  luminosity  must  mean  nothing  other 
than  the  destruction  of  the  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman 
Himself.  This  difficulty  is  known  as  Tirodhdndnupapatti 
(page  1 6 1.).  The  third  difficulty  is  called  Swarupdnupapatti 
and  deals  with  the  essential  nature  of  this  avidyd.  As 
long  as  it  is  a  thing  at  all,  it  must  either  have  the  nature 
of  a  reality  or  the  nature  of  an  unreality.  But  it  is  not 
admitted  to  be  a  reality ;  and  it  cannot  be  an  unreality, 
for,  as  long  as  a  real  misguiding  error,  different  from 
the  Brahman  Himself,  is  not  admitted,  so  long  it  is 
not  possible  to  explain  this  theory  of  illusion  (pp.  161- 
162.).  The  fourth  difficulty  in  the  way  of  this  theory 
of  illusion  is  called  the  Anirvachaniyatwdnupapatti, 
and  points  out  how  it  is  not  possible  for  the  illusion-pro- 
ducing avidyd  to  be  incapable  of  definition  either  as  an 
entity  or  as  a  non-entity.  All  cognitions  relate  to  entities 
or  non-entities  ;  and  if  it  be  held  that  the  object  of  a  cog- 
nition has  neither  the  positive  characteristics  of  an  entity 
nor  the  negative  characteristics  of  a  non-entity,  then  all 
things  may  become  the  objects  of  all  cognitions  (pp.  162- 

163.) 

Naturally  the  next  question  that  is  here  discussed  is — 
whether  there  is  any  means  by  which  this  curious  avidyd 
is  brought  within  the  range  of  our  cognition ;  and  it  is 
shewn  that  there  is  no  means  of  proof  by  which  such  an 
avidyd  can  be  arrived  at  and  established,  This  difficulty 


XXIV  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS. 

in  the  way  of  the  theory  of  maya  is  spoken  of  as  Pra- 
mananupapatti ;  and  its  discussion  is  started  with  the  plau- 
sible supposition  that  the  '  ignorance '  known  as  avidyd 
is  capable  of  being  directly  experienced  and  has  thus  the 
nature  of  such  a  positive  entity  as  cannot  be  contradicted 
by  the  witnessing  principle  of  intelligence,  and  that  it  is 
therefore  quite  consistent  with  reason  to  realise  that  this 
avidya  is  definitively  associated  with  the  thing  T.  And  it 
is  further  shewn  here  supposititiously  that  it  is  possible  to 
establish  by  logical  inference  also  that  there  is  an  '  igno- 
rance '  or  avidya  which  does  not  mean  a  mere  negation 
of  knowledge  but  is  itself  a  positive  entity  of  some  sort 
(pp.  163-167.).  These  suppositions  are  then  replied  to 
one  after  another.  It  is  first  shewn  that,  so  far  as  the 
relation  to  the  intelligent  internal  self  is  concerned,  there 
can  be  no  difference  between  the  ignorance  that  is  a  mere 
non-existence  of  knowledge  and  the  other  supposed  '  igno- 
rance' which  has  the  nature  of  a  positive  entity  (pp.  167- 
168.).  It  is  then  argued  that  in  the  cognition — 'I  am 
ignorant;  I  do  not  know  myself,  nor  do  I  know  another' — 
what  is  experienced  is  only  that  ignorance  which  is  the 
antecedent  non-existence  of  knowledge  (pp.  168-169.).  It 
is  next  shown  that  the  Brahman  can  have  no  experience 
of  any  kind  of  avidya,  and  that,  if  it  be  a  positive  entity, 
there  can  be  no  removal  of  it  by  means  of  any  knowledge 
(pp.  169-171.).  The  Brahman  cannot  be  a  witness  of 
'  ignorance ';  because  it  is  impossible  for  Him,  whose  essen- 
tial nature  is  absolute  self-experience,  to  acquire  the  char- 
acter of  a  witness  without  the  concealment  of  His  own  true 
nature.  And  the  Brahman,  who  is  without  parts  and  with- 
out attributes,  and  who  is  pure  luminosity  itself,  cannot 
at  all  be  concealed  (pp.  171-172.).  This  supposed  con- 
cealment of  the  Brahman  by  means  of  ignorance  cannot 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.  XXV 

even  be  an  indistinct  manifestation  of  His  altogether 
luminous  and  self-evident  nature.  In  as  much  as  it  is 
possible  for  us  to  have  an  illusion  without  a  really  existing 
basis  for  it  to  be  imposed  upon,  and  without  a  positive 
misguiding  cause  for  that  illusion  to  be  produced,  the 
world-illusion  does  not  necessarily  prove  a  positive  'igno- 
rance' (pp.  172-174.).  Accordingly  the  avidyd  of  the 
Adwaitins  cannot  be  proved  by  perception.  It  cannot  be 
proved  by  logical  inference  either ;  because  the  syllo- 
gism that  is  intended  to  prove  this  positive  'ignorance'  is 
also  seen  to  prove  the  other  unacceptable  ignorance,  and 
because  also  the  illustrative  example  found  in  the  body  oj 
the  syllogism  is  defective.  Moreover,  there  are  faultless  coun- 
ter-syllogistic statements  which  go  to  shew  that  every  one 
of  the  Ad  wait  ins  predications  about  his  avidyd  is  wrong  and 
untenable.  The  predication,  that  this  positive  avidyd  is 
capable  of  being  removed  by  knowledge,  cannot  be  main- 
tained on  the  analogy  of  fear  and  other  such  positive  emo- 
tions disappearing  as  soon  as  it  is  known  that  they  are 
due  to  a  false  cause  ;  because  the  positive  emotion  here  is 
not  destroyed  by  a  subsequent  stultifying  knowledge,  but 
disappears  of  itself  on  account  of  its  own  transitoriness. 
Therefore  the  logical  process  of  inference  also  cannot  estab- 
lish that  f  ignorance '  which  has  the  nature  of  a  positive 
entity  (pp.  174-179.).  The  hypothesis  of  mdyd  is  next 
taken  into  consideration  in  relation  with  the  five  theories 
of  perception  known  to  Indian  philosophy.  Things  be- 
come manifest  to  consciousness  through  perception,  and 
their  manifestation  may  either  correspond  completely  to 
the  reality  or  it  may  not.  Thus  all  the  five  theories  of 
perception  get  reduced  into  two — that  according  to  which 
perception  presents  to  consciousness  the  thing  as  it  is,  and 
that  again  according  to  which  perception  presents  tp 
D 


XXVI          ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS. 

consciousness  the  thing  as  it  is  not.  Of  these  two 
theories  the  former  which  is  realistic  is  shewn  to  be 
true  on  the  authority  of  tradition  and  scriptural  teach- 
ing, and  illusion  and  its  stultification  are  accounted 
for  by  means  of  the  belief  that  every  thing  in  the  uni- 
verse has  the  characteristics  of  every  other  thing  therein 
(pp.  179-186.).  Scriptural  and  traditional  authority  is 
quoted  to  prove  that  even  dream-perceptions  are  realistic. 
Then  a  number  of  exceptions  apparently  contradicting  this 
realistic  theory  of  perception — such  exceptions  as  the  yel- 
low appearance  of  white  things  to  the  jaundiced  eye,  the 
circle  of  fire  produced  by  the  rotation  of  a  fire-brand, 
<&c., — are  all  explained  so  as  to  show  that  all  perceptions 
are  undoubtedly  realistic  (pp.  186-191.).  The  objects  cor- 
responding to  all  perceptions  are  real ;  only  some  percep- 
tions are  experienced  by  certain  particular  persons  only  and 
last  only  for  a  short  length  of  time,  while  others  are  experi- 
enced by  all  generally  and  have  a  longer  duration. 
These  latter  stultify  the  former,  as  stultification  is  com- 
monly understood  ;  and  a  true  theory  of  perception  does 
not  at  all  stand  in  need  of  a  positive  avidya  (pp.  191-192.). 
It  is  next  shewn  that  the  scriptural  authorities  relied  upon 
by  the  Ad  wait  ins  to  prove  that  there  is  an  avidya,  which 
cannot  be  described  either  as  an  entity  or  as  a  non -entity, 
are  all  to  be  explained  otherwise,  and  do  not  therefore 
tend  to  establish  in  any  way  such  an  avidya  (pp.  192-197.). 
The  Itihasas  and  the  Puranas  are  also  shewn  to  give  no 
support  to  the  theory  of  maya,  in  as  much  as  all  such  pas- 
sages in  them  as  seem  to  lend  any  support  to  this  theory 
have,  when  properly  considered,  to  be  interpreted  other- 
wise (pp.  197-210.). 

The  sixth  difficulty  in  the  way  of  this  theory  of  the 
world  being  an  illusion  produced  by  mava  is  then  fully 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS,     xxvii 

discussed,  and  it  goes  by  the  name  of  Nivartakdnup&paUt. 
This  difficulty  is  in  relation  to  the  idea  that  the  cessation 
of  avidya  or  'ignorance'  takes  place  solely  by  means  of  the 
knowledge  which  has  the  attributeless  Brahman  for  its 
object ;  and  it  is  at  first  pointed  out  here  that  there  are 
many  scriptural  passages,  which  do  not  teach  the  Brahman 
to  be  attributeless  and  unqualified,  but  teach  on  the  con- 
trary that  He  is  possessed  of  attributes  and  qualities. 
Then  it  is  shewn  that  the  grammatical  equations  found  in 
the  sentence — '  That  thou  art' — and  in  other  similar  sen- 
tences do  not  denote  the  oneness  of  any  attributeless  thing, 
in  as  much  as  every  grammatical  equation  has  to  denote 
a  thing  which,  while  being  only  one,  is  capable  of  existing 
in  two  forms.  It  cannot  be  established  that  the  gramma- 
tical equation  in  'That  thou  art'  is  intended  to  give  rise 
to  the  stultification  of  any  illusion  due  to  avidya  ;  it  sim- 
ply shows  the  Brahman  to  be  capable  of  existing  in  two 
different  modes  or  forms.  On  this  supposition  alone  can 
all  the  scriptural  passages  be  harmoniously  interpreted 
(pp.  210-214.).  The  universe  is  the  body  of  which  the 
Brahman  is  the  Soul,  and  Vcdantic  passages  clearly 
declare  that  all  things  have  acquired  the  character  of  being 
things  and  of  being  expressible  by  .means  of  words,  only 
by  reason  of  their  having  been  entered  into  by  the  indivi- 
dual selves  which  are,  in  their  turn,  entered  into  by  the 
Brahman  as  forming  their  Self.  Thus  the  totality  of  all 
the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent  beings  becomes  the 
same  as  the  Brahman  on  account  of  the  relation  of  the 
body  and  the  soul  existing  between  them  (pp.  214-217).  A 
grammatical  equation  can  denote  neither  an  absolute  iden- 
tity nor  an  absolute  and  discrete  dissimilarity  be- 
tween the  things  mentioned  therein.  Hence  those  who 
maintain  that  there  is  only  one  attributeless  -thing  in  the 


xxviii      ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS. 

whole  universe,    those  who  maintain  that  there  i*   both 
difference   and  non-difference  at  the  same  time  between 
the     Brahman     and     the     individual    souls,    and     also 
those    who  maintain    that    there   is   absolute  difference 
between    the   individual    souls    and    the    Brahman   will 
all  find  that  such  teachings  regarding  the  sameness  of  the 
Brahman  with  the  individual  soul  as  are  found  in  the 
Vcddnta  are  all  aimless  and  meaningless  (pp.  217-219.). 
However,  to  those  who  maintain  that  the  whole  world 
forms  the  body  of  the  Brahman  all  those   Veddntic  teach- 
ings, which  declare  that  the  Brahman  Himself  constitutes 
the  whole  world,  are  sure  to  appear  as  appropriate  expla- 
nations of  the  truth.     Grammatical  equations  can  and  do 
point  out  the  attributive  character  of  material  adjuncts ; 
and  the  equation  that  a  man  is  an  individual  self  cannot 
have  a  merely  figurative  significance,  in  as  much  as  the 
human  body  has  to  form  in  this  case  a  mode  of  the  indivi- 
dual self.    And  the  word  which  denotes  a  mode  of  the  in- 
dividual self  denotes  the  individual  self  also.    Accordingly 
the  words  god,    man,  &c.,  include  the  individual  self  in 
their    import.     The    individual    selves   form    the    body 
of  the   Highest    Self,  and    hence    possess  the  character 
of  being    His    modes.    Thus   all    the   words  which  de- 
note   individual   selves  include  the  Highest  Self  also  in 
their   import.      Consequently   all  things  may  be  gram- 
matically   equated    with    the    Brahman  (pp.    219-224.). 
This  position  is  then  more  fully  explained  and  supported. 
All  non-intelligent  things  constitute  the  objects  of  enjoy- 
ment, the  intelligent  things  are  the  enjoyers  thereof,  and 
the  Brahman  is  their  Supreme  Ruler  ;  therefore  they  are 
distinct  from  one  another  in  nature,  as  may  be  made  out 
from  various  passages  in  the   Upanishads  and  the  Bhaga- 
vad-Glla  (pp.  224-227,).   Both  the  intelligent  and  the  11011- 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS.       xxix 

intelligent  things  form  the  body  of  the  Brahman  and  have 
no  separate  existence  from  Him  ;  they  are  in  consequence 
subject  to  His  control.  Since  in  this  way  the  intelligent 
and  the  non-intelligent  things  are  seen  to  be  the  modes  of 
the  Highest  Person,  it  is  easy  enough  to  understand  how 
the  scriptures  teach  that  He  Himself  exists  in  the  form  of 
the  world  in  its  condition  of  cause  as  well  as  in  its  condi- 
tion of  effect.  Although  the  non-intelligent  thing,  the  intel- 
ligent thing,  and  the  Brahman  are  distinct  from  one 
another  in  nature,  the  world  must  accordingly  have  the 
Brahman  for  its  material  cause  ;  and  the  Brahman  who 
thus  enters  into  the  production  of  an  effect  retains,  never- 
theless, His  own  immodifiable  nature  quite  unaffected,  in 
as  much  as  there  is  and  need  be  no  transformation  of  His 
nature  in  the  process  of  producing  the  effect.  Such  being 
the  case,  the  statement  that  He  is  attributeless  means  that 
He  is  free  from  all  evil  qualities,  and  the  statement  that 
He  possesses  the  nature  of  intelligence  means  that  He  i.s 
self-luminous  and  can  be  described  only  as  intelligence  in 
essence.  The  manifoldness  of  things  which  is  negatived  in 
the  Vcddnta  is  only  -such  manifoldness  as  is  due  to  the 
non-realisation  of  that  oneness  of  the  universe  which  results 
from  the  fact  of  the  Brahman  forming  the  Soul  thereof. 
Only  when  interpreted  thus  can  all  the  apparently  conflict- 
ing scriptural  passages  be  seen  to  agree  with  one  another  ; 
and  the  theory  of  may  a  which  imposes  ignorance  on  the 
Brahman  is  therefore  unfounded  ;  and  similarly  the  theory 
which  subjects  the  Brahman  to  limiting  conditions  is  also 
unfounded.  The  Highest  Person  is  the  one  embodied  Being, 
and  matter  and  soul  constitute  His  embodiment.  Thus 
He  is  Himself  all  the  three  real  entities — God,  soul  and 
matter.  Consequently  the  knowledge  which  has  an  attri- 
buteless Brahman  for  its  object  is  impossible  and  cannot 


XXX  ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

be  the  complete  knowledge  of  truth  ;  and  obviously  such 
an  impossible  knowledge  of  the  oneness  of  the  attributeless 
Brahman  cannot  be  the  remover  of  the  avidyd  postulated 
by  the  Adwaitins  (pp.  227-238.). 

The  last  difficulty  pointed  out  by  Ramanuja  in  the 
way  '  of  this  theory  of  may  a  is  called  Nivnltyanupapalti '; 
and  it  points  that  the  '  ignorance  '  postulated  by  the  Adwai- 
tins has  to  be  irremovable.  The  individual  soul's  bondage 
of  '  ignorance  '  is  determined  by  karma  and  is  a  concrete 
reality.  It  cannot  therefore  be  removed  by  any  abstract 
knowledge.  Divine  worship  and  divine  grace  can  alone 
cause  the  freedom  of  the  soul,  and  to  know  God  is  to  seek 
salvation.  According  to  the  Adwaitins  the  differentiations 
of  the  knower,  the  knowledge,  and  the  known  thing  are 
all  unreal ;  and  even  that  knowledge  which  is  capable  of 
removing  avidyd  has  to  be  unreal  and  has  to  stand 
in  need  of  another  real  removing  knowledge.  Xor 
indeed  can  that  '  knowledge '  which  forms  the  essential 
nature  of  the  Brahman  constitute  the  knowledge,  the 
birth  of  which  means  the  destruction  of  avidyd.  More- 
over the  knower  of  this  knowledge  cannot  be  the 
unreal  and  superimposed  individual  self;  nor  can  that 
knower  be  the  Brahman,  unless  such  knowership  belongs 
to  Him  by  nature  and  is  not  unreal.  No  knower  will  ever 
destroy  himself  as  knower  by  means  of  the  knowledge  he 
knows,  and  the  knowership  of  the  Brahman  cannot  itself 
be  equivalent  to  avidyd.  For  all  these  reasons  the  remov- 
al of  the  Adwaitins  hypothetical  'ignorance'  is  quite  impos- 
sible (pp.  238-241.). 

Thus  the  Mahd-siddhdnta  is  brought  to  a  close  ;  and 
it  is  concluded  that,  as  mere  ritualistic  works  yield  only 
small  and  transitory  results,  the  enquiry  into  the  Brahman 
has  necessarily  to  be  conducted  so  that  we  may  know  how 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.         XXxi 

we  are  to  worship  Him  and  thereby  attain  Him  and  Im- 
mortality (pp.  241-242.), 

Then  comes  forward  another  objector,  the  Mimdm- 
saka,  who  says  that  the  enquiry  into  the  Brahman  need 
not  be  conducted  at  all,  in  as  much  as  such  an  enquiry 
cannot  produce  the  result  which  is  expected  of  it.  His 
objection  is  called  the  Adhikarana-pftrvapaksha,  and  is 
largely  based  upon  linguistic  thought  and  reasoning.  He 
says  that  the  true  signification  of  a  word  is  always  to  de- 
note an  action,  and  the  import  of  the  Vedas  consists  in 
the  actions  they  prescribe.  The  Vcdanla  cannot  be  author- 
itative like  them  and  cannot  teach  the  Brahman,  for  the 
reason  that  the  meaning  of  the  word  Brahman  is  independ- 
ently established  otherwise  than  as  an  inference  from 
actions.  The  physical  expression  of  the  emotions  caused  by 
listening  to  spoken  .sentences  cannot  enable  us  to 
tletermine  the  meanings  of  words,  in  as  much  as  many 
things  may  give  rise  to  similar  emotions.  Neither  the 
etymology  of  a  word,  nor  its  relation  to  other  words 
in  a  sentence  can  enable  us  to  ascertain  its  mean- 
ing independently  of  all  action  ;  because  both  these 
methods  of  interpreting  words  are  obviously  depend- 
ent upon  action.  Moreover,  mere  verbal  statements  can- 
not produce  any  kind  of  practical  conviction  and  activity, 
and  volition  alone  is  the  cause  of  all  voluntary  activity. 
Therefore  that  which  induces  voluntary  activity  has  to  be 
the  thing  that  is  expressed  by  words,  and  thus  it  is  but  pro- 
per that  action  forms  the  thing  which  is  to  be  learnt  from  the 
Vcdas.  The  Brahman  is  neither  an  action  nor  anything 
that  is  definitely  related  to  an  action  ;  and  the  knowledge 
of  such  a  Brahman  cannot  give  rise  to  any  infinite  and 
eternal  result  in  the  shape  of  immortality.  On  the  other 


XXxil         ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

hand,  ritualistic  works  themselves  are  declared  in  the 
Vedas  to  be  capable  of  yielding  eternal  and  indestructible 
meritorious  results.  Therefore  the  enquiry  into  the  Brah- 
man need  not  at  all  be  undertaken  (pp.  242-246). 

The  answer  to  this  objection  is  called  Adhikarana- 
siddJuinta,  and  it  leads  us  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
enquiry  into  the  Brahman  has  necessarily  to  be  con- 
ducted. The  linguistic  argument  of  the  Pfirvapakskm  is 
here  met  by  pointing  out  distinctly  that  the  relation  be- 
tween words  and  their  meanings  is  not  primarily  made  out 
by  means  of  any  inference  from  the  actions  to  which  the 
utterance  of  words  generally  does  give  rise.  Certain 
things  have  somehow  acquired  certain  names,  and  the  re- 
lation between  such  things  and  their  names  is  dependent 
upon  usage  and  is  of  itself  naturally  established  without 
the  help  of  any  inference.  The  use  of  language  is  taught 
to  children  by  their  elders  ;  and  which  words  denote  which 
tilings  is  distinctly  and  frequently  enough  pointed  out  to 
the  young  learners  ;  thus  they  learn  to  associate  the 
words  with  the  things.  The  meaning  of  words  is  primari- 
ly made  out  only  in  this  fashion  ;  it  may  in  some  rare 
cases  be  made  out  also  with  the  help  of  gestures.  There- 
fore the  rule  that  the  meaning  of  words  is  only  to  denote 
actions  is  not  binding  (pp.  246-247).  Even  if  the  Vedas 
denote  only  actions,  all  such  actions  are  seen  to  relate  to 
the  worship  of  the  Brahman  so  that  thereby  He  may  be 
attained;  and  hence  the  knowledge  of  the  true  nature  of  the 
Brahman  and  His  attributes  is  helpful  to  actions,  and  the 
Vcdanta  which  deals  with  the  Brahman  has  to  be  studied 
accordingly  (pp.  248-249).  Even  in  sentences  like — l  Bring 
the  ox',  the  significance  of  words  is  not  to  be  inferred  from 
'  action  ';  for,  this  <  action '  has  to  be  aimed  at  by  the  voli- 
tion of  the  speaker,  and  all  activity  proceeds  from  the 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.        XXX111 

dependence  of  the  accomplishment  of  desire  upon  effort. 
Volitional  desire  has  to  be  expressed  by  means  of  language 
before  it  is  worked  out  into  'action';  and  this  'action'  itself 
cannot  be  the  thing  desired,  and  it  is  not  also  capable  of 
being     defined     as    that     which     is     accomplished     by 
volition     and    which    is     also    the    principal    object    of 
volition    (pp.    249-252.).      Even    when    we   take    Vcdic 
commandments    into    consideration    we    find    that     the 
action  denoted  by  the    verb  in  them    is  not  the  object 
that  is  to  be  accomplished  by    obeying  them  ;  nor    is 
this  object  the  Apurva  that  is  produced  by  performing 
the  action  denoted  by  the  verb  of  command.    It  must 
be  some  desirable  and  pleasing  object  like  Swarga  or  it 
must  be  the  avoidance  of  pain.    A  commandment  is  no 
pleasure  in  itself,  and  is  not  anywhere  described  as  such 
in  the  Vedas ;  and  the  mandatory  passages  found  in  the 
Vedas  relate  only  to  such  actions  as  are  indicated  by  the 
verbs  that  give  the  command.    Therefore  commandments 
are  not  obeyed  and  worked  out  merely  for  themselves. 
Sacrifices  and  other  such  works,  enjoined  by  the  scripture 
and  denoted  by  the  verbal   roots  in  the  scriptural  com- 
mandments,    have  all  the  character  of  constituting  the 
worship  of  the  Highest  Person  who  is  the  internal  ruler  of 
all  gods  ;  and  the  result  aimed  at  by  those  works  flows  to 
us  altogether  from  that  Highest  Person   Himself  (pp.  252- 
255.).    The  knowledge  of  the    meaning    and   nature    of 
Swarga  is  necessary  on  the   part  of  him  who  performs 
the  Jyotishtoma  sacrifice,  in  as   much   as   Sivarga  is  the 
object    to    be    attained    and  the  sacrifice    is  the  means 
therefor.      Similarly     the      Vcddntic    Brahman    is     the 
highest  object  to  be  attained  by  man,  and  Vcdic1  works' 
are    only    the    means    to    attain   Him.    The    statement 
that    the    Qlidturmasya    sacrifice     yields     indestructible 

E 


XXXIV       ANALYTICAL    OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

results  is  not  to  be  understood  literally,  as  there  are 
many  explicit  statements  in  the  scripture  to  the  effect 
that  the  results  derived  from  the  performance  of  ritualistic 
works  as  works  are  unimportant  and  unenduring.  Accord- 
ingly it  is  concluded  that,  although  the  meaning  and  nature 
of  Brahman  are  self-established  and  underived  from  any 
'  action',  the  study  of  the  Vedanta  which  teaches  such  a 
•Brahman  has  necessarily  to  be  commenced  and  conducted 
(pp.  255-256.). 

The  discussion  of  the  one  aphorism  making  up  the 
J ijnasadlukarana  is  thus  brought  to  a  close. 

Like  the  first,  the  second  aphorism  also  makes  up  a 
t  whole  Adhikarana,  the  object  of  which  is  to  point  out 
Avhat  that  Brahman  really  is  who  is  stated  to  be  the 
object  of  all  Veddntic  study  and  investigation.     The  aphor- 
ism itself  runs  thus  : — "  The   Brahman  is  that  from  whom 
proceed  the  creation,  &c.,  of  this  universe."    After  explain- 
ing the  grammar  and  the  meaning  of  the  words  in  the 
aphorism,  the  question  whether  it  gives  any  admissible 
•definition  of  the  Brahman  is  taken   up  for  consideration  ; 
and  the  position  of  the  Purvapakshin  that  it  does  not  give 
any  such  definition  is  first  stated.     This  aphorism  is  based 
on  a  passage  in  the  Taittiriyopanishad  (III.  i.  i.)  wherein 
the  Brahman  is  declared  to  be  the  creator,  the  preserver, 
and  the  destroyer  of  the  world  ;  and  the  question  is  wheth- 
.  er  these  characteristics  of  creation,   &c.,  are   competent 
to  define  Him.     The  characteristics  of  universal  creation, 
preservation  and  destruction  cannot  define  the  Brahman  ; 
'because  Brahman  may  be  a  common  noun,  and  because 
also  these  attributes  being  more  than  one  may  thus  denote 
more  than  one  Brahman  as  in  the  instance — "  The  ox  is 
that  which  is  broken-horned,  hornless  and  fully  horned,1' 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS,      xxxv 

Xor  can  the  attributes  of  creation,  £c.,  give  rise  to  any 
accidental  characterisation  of  the  Brahman,  in  as  much  as 
all  accidental  characterisations  denote  onl}*  such  things  as 
have  already  been  definitively  characterised  in  some  form 
or  other,  and  in  as  much  as  it  is  not  possible  to  establish 
that  there  is  any  definitive  characterisation  of  the  Brah- 
man quite  independently  of  the  passage  referred  to  in 
the  aphorism.  Therefore  it  is  not  possible  to  know  the 
Brahman  by  means  of  any  definition  (pp.  257-259.). 

To  these  objections  it  is  replied  that  the  characteris- 
tics of  universal  creation,  &c.,  mentioned  in  this  aphorism 
are  well  suited  to  give  us  an  accidental  characterisation  of 
the  Brahman,  and  suited  also  to  give  a  definition  of  the 
Brahman.  It  is  not  right  to  say  that  the  Brahman 
is  not  at  all  known  to  us  otherwise  than  through  the  char- 
acteristics of  universal  creation,  &c.;  etymology  itself 
teaches  us  that  He  is  a  Being  who  is  characterised  by  Su- 
preme Greatness  and  Growth  and  in  the  Upanishadic  pas- 
sage under  reference  He  is  spoken  of  as  a  well  known  Be- 
ing. His  greatness  is  really  due  to  the  fact  of  His  being 
both  the  instrumental  and  the  material  cause  of  the  universe, 
and  the  Brahman  who  is  known  to  be  all  this  may  well  be 
denoted  by  the  characteristics  of  universal  creation,  &c. 
(pp.  259-261.).  These  characteristics  of  universal  creation, 
&c.,  are  also  capable  of  defining  the  Brahman,  in  as  much 
as  they  need  not  denote  more  than  one  Brahman.  In 
the  definition  of  the  ox  given  above,  all  the  three  defining 
attributes  are  seen  to  conflict  with  each  other ;  and  thus 
they  tend  to  denote  more  than  one  ox.  In  the  given 
definition  of  the  Brahman  there  is  no  such  contradiction 
between  the  attributes,  for  the  reason  that  the  world's 
creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  take  place  at 
different  times.  The  attributes  of  universal  creation, 


XXXVi       ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

&c.,  define  the  Brahman  to  be  the  only  cause  of  the 
universe,  and  the  scriptural  passage — "  The  Brahman 
is-  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infinity" — denotes  His  essen- 
tial nature  to  be  different  from  that  of  all  other  things  ; 
and  indeed  there  is  no  fallacy  of  reciprocal  dependence 
between  these  two  ways  of  knowing  the  Brahman. 
Thus  the  attributes  of  universal  creation,  &c.,  do  de- 
fine the  Brahman,  and  He  is  quite  capable  of  being 
understood  by  means  of  a  definition  (pp.  261-263.").  Con- 
sequently the  Brahman  cannot  be  a  mere  attributeless 
Being  ;  etymology  gives  Him  the  characteristics  of  Great- 
ness and  Growth,  this  aphorism  defines  Him  as  the  Cause 
of  the  Universe,  and  other  aphorisms  endow  Him  with  the 
power  of  'seeing',  &c.  These  aphorisms  and  the  scriptural 
passages  on  which  they  are  based  do  not  constitute  any 
authority  for  holding  the  opinion  that  the  Brahman  is  an 
altogether  attributeiess  Being.  Logic  deals  with  the  simi- 
larities in  the  distribution  of  attributes  among  entities, 
and  cannot  of  course  prove  an  attributeless  thing.  Finally, 
it  is  not  possible  to  interpret  this  aphorism  to  mean  that 
the  Brahman  is  the  cause  of  the  illusion  of  phenomena  ; 
because  this  illusion  has  to  be  based  upon  avidya,  and  the 
Brahman  cannot  be  identical  with  it,  but  has  to  be  a  wit- 
ness thereof.  To  be  such  a  witness  implies  that  He  has 
the  character  of  homogeneous  luminosity,  whereby  He 
ceases  to  be  attributeless;  and  to  deprive  Him  of  this 
characteristic  attribute  of  luminosity  is  to  convert  Him  into 
nothingness  (pp.  263-264.). 

The  third  Adhikarana  also  contains  only  one  aphorism 
which  runs  thus  :— "That  the  Brahman  is  th&  cause  of  the 
creation,  &c.,  of  the  universe,  follows  altogether  from  the 
scripture  ;  because  the  scripture  forms  the  source  of  the 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.       XXXV11 

knowledge  relating'to  Him."  The  aim  of  this  aphorism 
is  to  shew  that  the  Brahman,  as  defined  in  the  previous 
aphorism,  can  be  made  out  only  by  means  of  the  Vedanla, 
and  that  there  is  no  other  means  of  knowing  Him.  The 
meaning  of  the  aphorism  is  as  usual  explained  and  then 
the  question  it  relates  to  is  taken  up  for  discussion.  Against 
the  above-mentioned  view  of  the  Vcddntin  that  the  scrip- 
ture alone  forms  the  source  of  all  our  knowledge  relating 
to  the  Brahman,  the  Mlmamsakas,  the  Naiyydyikas,  and 
the  Vaiscshikas  are  the  prominent  orthodox  objectors ; 
and  the  position  of  the  Mlmdmsaka  is  given  at  first,  after 
stating,  however,'the  general  objection  that  the  Brahman 
is  capable  of  being  made  out  by  other  means  of  proof  than 
the  scripture,  and  that  the  scripture  has  in  consequence  no 
special  meaning  or  authority  in  this  matter.  The  Mlmdm- 
saka agrees  with  the  Vcddntin  so  far  as  the  revelational 
authority  of  the  scripture  is  concerned,  but  holds  that  the 
scripture  is  an  inviolable  authority  in  relation  to  ritualistic 
'works'  also.  Therefore  he  naturally  contends  that  the 
Brahman  cannot  be  proved  either  by  perception,  or  by  in- 
ference. External  perception,  internal  perception,  zndyogic 
perception  are  all  shown  to  be  incapable  of  proving  the 
Brahman;  audit  is  next  pointed  out  that  neither  deduction 
nor  induction  can  establish  the  Brahman  (pp.  265-267.). 
Here  the  Naiyydyika  comes  forward  and  says  that  the 
world  is  seen  to  be  made  up  of  component  parts,  and  is 
thus  a  produced  effect.  Whatever  is  a  produced  effect 
necessarily  implies  a  competent  producing  agent,  and  such 
an  agent  is  the  Brahman.  Moreover,  the  world  that  is  pro- 
duced out  of  non-intelligent  matter  cannot  but  be  subject  to 
the  control  of  a  single  intelligent  being,  who  has  to  be  the 
Brahman  in  this  case.  Accordingly  He  is  capable  of  being 
proved  by  logic  (page  267.).  At  this  point  the  Mimdmsaka 


XXXViii     ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OI-'   CONTENTS. 

joins  issue  with  the  Naiyydyika  and  points  out  that  certain 
material  bodies  are  not  produced  by  those  who  control  or 
enjoy  them,  that  certain  other  material  bodies,  when  their 
parts  are  seen  to  be  organically  put  together,  do  not  stand 
in  need  of  any  intelligent  agent  to  control  their  working, 
and  that  there  is  no  reason  shown  why  in  the  case  of  the 
world  the  controlling  intelligent  being  has  to  be  only  one, 
and  has  also  to  be  other  than  the  individual  selves  whose 
existence  is  admitted  on  both  sides.  Then  the  argument 
that  every  produced  effect  implies  a  competent  agent  to 
produce  it,  and  that  the  world  is  such  a  produced  effect 
is  criticised  ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  criticism  it  is  distinct- 
ly shewn  that  this  kind  of  design  argument  necessarily 
makes  the  world  appear  too  much  like  a  man-made  thing 
and  makes  the  Brahman  Himself  become  too  much  like  a 
human  being,  while  there  is  really  no  impossibility  in  the 
way  of  the  individual  selves  themselves  satisfying  the  de- 
mands of  this  argument.  Here  a  warning  is  given  that 
from  this  it  should  not  be  understood  that  the  Mlmdmsaka 
is  of  opinion  that  logic  is  of  no  use  whatsoever  in  acquir- 
ing a  true  knowledge  of  the  Brahman.  His  opinion  is 
that  logic  is  useful  in  understanding  the  sdstras  aright,  and 
that  apart  from  the  sdstras  there  is  really  no  means  by 
which  God  can  be  proved  (pp.  267-271.).  And  now  the 
Vaiscshika  intervenes  as  against  the  Mlmdmsaka  to  shew 
that  God  is  capable  of  being  proved  solely  by  means  of 
the  process  of  logical  inference.  The  material  world  is 
made  up  of  constituent  parts  ;  it  is  inert  and  gross,  and  is 
nevertheless  set  in  motion  and  has  a  definite  form  ;  therefore 
it  cannot  but  be  a  produced  effect.  To  infer  a  producing 
agent  from  the  fact  of  there  being  a  produced  effect  is 
never  unjustifiable — not  even  when  we  do  not  know  the 
producibility  of  the  effect  and  the  productive  competency 


ANALYTICAL    OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.       XXXIX 

of  the  agent.  Both  these  are  rightly  inferred  from  the  nature 
of  the  effect  itself.  Thus  we  arrive  at  God.  The  distri- 
bution of  pleasure  and  pain  to  individuals  in  accordance 
with  the  merit  and  demerit  .of  their  karmas  cannot  take 
place  of  itself.  Hence  a  Person  who  is  capable  of  award- 
ing skilfully  the  fruits  of  karmas  in  accordance  with  the 
various  karmas  themselves  is  also  to  be  necessarily  postu- 
lated. It  is  not  right  to  hold  that  the  individual  selves 
themselves  are  the  producing  agents  of  the  world  and  the 
distributors  of  the  fruits  of  karmas,  as  their  power  and 
knowledge  are  seen  to  be  inadequate  to  serve  such  a  pur- 
pose, and  as  the  inferred  cause  must  in  every  way  be 
competent  to  produce  the  observed  effect.  Nor  is  it  right 
to  maintain  that  this  design  argument  proves  the  inferred 
creator  of  the  world  to  be  too  human  and  to  be  thus  devoid 
of  the  qualities  of  omniscience  and  the  lordship  of  all 
things.  Non-omniscience  and  non-lordship  do  not  affect 
the  producibility  of  things  ;  and  if  they  are  not  found  in 
association  with  the  producing  Creator,  surely  there  is 
nothing  wrong  in  it.  This  design  argument  does  not  fail 
even  on  account  of  the  fact  that  God  has  no  material  body 
in  the  way  in  which  human  agents  have  bodies.  The  will 
of  God  which  is  based  on  His  mind  is  alone  the  active 
agent  in  creation ;  and  His  mind  is  eternal  and  unassociat- 
ed  with  matter.  Accordingly  God  can  be  conclusively 
proved  by  logic.  However,  it  cannot  be  proved  that  He 
is  both  the  instrumental  and  the  material  cause  of  the 
world,  in  as  much  as  that  which  forms  the  material  cause 
is  seen  to  be  extremely  different  from  that  which  forms  the 
instrumental  cause  (pp.  271-277.). 

This  position  of  the  Vaiseshika  is  then  taken  up  for 
final  disposal,  and  it  is  shewn  that  his  design  argument  is 
defective  in  many  ways.  The  world  and  its  various  parts 


xl  ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

are,  no  doubt,  produced  effects  ;  but  there  is  really  nothing 
in  the  logic  given  above  to  prove  that  they  were  creat- 
ed by  one  agent  at  one  particular  time.  All  the 
things  in  the  world  do  not  possess  the  character  of 
being  a  single  produced  effect,  and  a  single  agent 
cannot  be  proved  to  be  their  Creator.  On  the  score  that 
individual  souls  cannot  be  the  creators  of  our  wonderful 
world,  and  on  the  score  that  it  is  inappropriate  to 
assume  many  individual  souls  to  have  been  agents  in 
the  act  of  creation,  it  is  not  right  to  argue  that 
there  must  be  only  one  Creator  of  the  world.  Through 
the  highly  increased  influence  of  their  adrishta,  individual 
souls  can  and  do  produce  certain  particular  created  effects. 
The  conceptions  of  the  simultaneous  origination  of  all 
things  and  the  simultaneous  destruction  of  all  things  do 
not  deserve  to  occupy  the  position  of  proved  truth  ;  and  a 
single  person  who  is  capable  of  creating  all  things  at  once  is 
nowhere  known  to  exist,  and  cannot  be  logically  inferred, 
unless  logical  inference  can  make  the  improbable  probable 
and  the  impossible  possible.  And  scripture  also  contradicts 
the  idea  that  all  produced  things  have  only  one  producing 
agent.  God  is  not  subject  to  karma,  and  is  not  actuated 
by  the  '  qualities '  of  saliva,  rajas,  and  tamas  ;  He  can 
therefore  neither  desire  creation  nor  produce  creation. 
Further,  He  is  without  a  material  body  and  is  devoid  of 
all  perceivable  activity ;  and  an  agent  who  produces 
through  mere  desire  is  unperceived  and  is  hence  unin- 
ferrible.  Consequently,  the  Brahman  who  is  the  Highest 
Person  can  be  proved  only  by  the  sastras ;  and  it  is  not 
opposed  to  reason,  as  shall  be  shewn  later  on,  that  He  is 
the  material  cause  as  well  as  the  instrumental  cause  of  the 
whole  universe,  although  there  are  portions  in  it  which 
cannot  be  proved  to  be  made  up  of  constituent  parts.  Thus 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS.  xli 

the  scriptural  passage  on  which  this  aphorism  is  based  is 
amply  authoritative  and  abundantly  full  of  import,  in  as 
much  as  the  Brahman  cannot,  by  any  other  means  of 
proof,  be  cognised  as  the  creator,  the  preserver,  and  the 
destroyer  of  the  world  (pp.  277-284.). 

The  fourth  Adhikarana  also  is,  like  the  previous  three, 
made  up  of  only  one  aphorism;  and  it  runs  thus  : — "That, 
viz.  the  fact  that  the  scripture  forms  altogether  the  source 
of  the  knowledge  relating  to  the  Brahman,  results,  how- 
ever, from  His  constituting  the  true  purport  of  the  scrip- 
ture." Now,  although  the  Brahman  cannot  be  cognised 
by  any  means  of  proof  other  than  the  sdstras,  is  He  after 
all  really  established  by  the  sdstras  ?  This  is  the  question 
which  is  discussed  under  this  aphorism.  After  interpreting 
the  words  of  the  aphorism,  some  passages  from  certain 
Upanishads  are  quoted  to  shew  that  to  teach  the  Brahman 
is  the  only  aim  of  the  sdstras;  and  then  it  is  formally 
stated  that,  although  He  does  not  import  any  activity  or 
cessation  from  activity,  He  alone  constitutes  the  true  pur- 
port of  the  Veddnta.  Here  the  Mlmdmsaka  comes  for- 
ward with  his  objection  that  all  sentences  have  their 
finality  in  some  utility  or  other,  either  as  relating  to 
voluntary  activity  or  cessation  from  activity,  or  as  relating 
to  knowledge  ;  that  no  sentence  is  thus  capable  of  import- 
ing things,  the  ideas  corresponding  to  which  are  already 
naturally  established  ;  and  that  consequently  the  Veddnta 
cannot  establish  the  Brahman,  the  idea  corresponding  to 
whom  is  already  naturally  established  (pp.  284-287.). 

This  objection  is  answered  by  the  NishprapaficJiikara- 

na-niyoga-vddin  who  holds  that  the    Upanishads  give  us 

the   commandment  to  non-phenomenalise  the  Brahman, 

and  that  therefore  they  relate  to  action  and  have  their 

F 


Xlii  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

finality  in  utility.  Even  if  the  Brahman  is  self-evident, 
there  is  nothing  wrong  in  His  being  made  the  object  of  an 
'action'  so  that  He  may  be  realised  in  the  non-phenomenal 
form  (pp.  287-288).  The  Mlmdmsaka  contends  against  this 
view  also,  and  says  that  all  those,  who  maintain  like  him  that 
the  syntactical  meaning  of  sentences  is  a  commandment, 
must  also  be  prepared  to  distinctly  point  out  like  him,  in 
every  case  under  consideration,  the  commandment,  the 
attribute  of  the  person  to  whom  the  commandment  is  direct- 
ed, the  special  object  of  the  commandment,  the  manner  of 
carrying  out  the  commandment,  the  details  of  procedure 
to  be  adopted  in  carrying  it  out,  and  the  person  who  is  to 
carry  it  out.  It  is  fully  possible  to  do  this  in  connection 
with  Vedic  commandments  all  of  which  enjoin  the  perform- 
ance of  ritualistic  works.  There  is,  for  instance,  the 
commandment  bearing  upon  the  Jyotishtoma  sacrifice ;  this 
commandment  is  to  be  found  in  the  Yajiirveda  ;  the 
attribute  of  the  person  to  whom  the  commandment  is 
directed  is  the  desire  to  attain  Sioarga  ;  the_special  object 
of  the  commandment  is  the  Jyotishtoma  sacrifice  ;  the 
yajamdna  or  the  sacrificer  is  the  performer  thereof ;  and 
the  manner  of  performing  it  and  the  details  of  procedure 
to  be  adopted  in  so  performing  it  are  all  distinctly  laid 
down  in  authoritative  works  relating  thereto.  But  in  the 
case  of  the  supposed  Ved antic  commandment  enjoining  the 
non-phenomenalisation  of  the  Brahman,  it  is  not  possible 
to  specify  any  attribute  as  that  which  has  necessarily 
to  belong  to  the  person  to  whom  the  commandment  is 
directed  ;  nor  is  it  possible  to  know  in  this  case  what  the 
special  object  of  the  commandment  is,  in  as  much  as  this 
special  and  immediate  object  of  the  commandment  has  to 
be  different  from  the  final  aim  thereof,  in  the  way  in  which 
the  Jyotishtoma  sacrifice  is  different  from  Swarga.  Further, 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS.        xliii 

this  supposed  Vcdantic  commandment  cannot  but  be  useless 
and  absurd  ;  and  the  details  of  procedure  to  be  adopted  in 
carrying  it  out  are  indeed  nowhere  to  be  found  in  the 
sdstras.  Therefore  the  Vedanta  gives  no  commandment 
enjoining  the  non-phenomenalisation  of  the  Brahman 
(pp.  288-293.). 

Then  the  Dhyana-myoga-vadin  comes  forward  with 
his  objection  against  the  contention  of  the  Mlmamsaka, 
and  declares  that  the  Vedanta  is  authoritative  in  teaching 
us  the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman  by  means  of  the  injunc- 
tion bearing  upon  His  meditation.  The  Dhydna-niyoga- 
vddm  is  he  who,  while  agreeing  with  the  Mlmdmsakain 
holding  that  the  scripture  cannot  be  of  any  authority  in 
relation  to  anything  the  idea  corresponding  to  which  is 
already  naturally  established,  maintains  at  the  same  time 
that  the  Vedanta  is  nevertheless  authoritative  in  relation 
to  the  Brahman,  in  as  much  as  it  gives  a  commandment 
enjoining  the  meditation  of  which  He  forms  the  object. 
This  commandment  enjoining  meditation  implies  the  thing 
to  be  meditated  upon,  and  that  thing  is  no  other  than  the 
Brahman,\\\\QSQ  real  nature  also  is  described  in  the  Vedanta. 
The  Brahman  alone  is  real  while  all  else  that  is  different 
from  Him  is  unreal.  Accordingly,  when  there  is  contradic- 
tion between  distinction  and  non-distinction,  the  latter 
alone  is  the  reality  ;  and  the  final  beatific  release  of  the 
soul  is  the  same  as  its  becoming  identified  with  the  Brah- 
man. The  achievement  of  this  identification  is  not  possi- 
ble without  the  help  of  that  meditation  which  entirely 
relates  to  Him  (pp.  293-295.). 

Here  the  Adwaitin  begins  to  oppose  the  Dhydna-niyoga- 
vddin^hd  says  that  the  freedom  of  the  soul  from  the  bond- 
age of  avidyd  can  and  does  result  merely  from  the 
knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  scriptural  sentences, 


xliv        AfcALYficAL  oufLiKE  OF  CONTENTS. 

and  that  the  final  beatific  release  of  the  soul  must  be  such 
as  cannot  be  accomplished  under  an  injunction,  in  as  much 
as  any  possible  fresh  accomplishment  of  it  will  certainly 
imply  that  it  is  non-eternal.  Final  release  or  moksha  is 
the  same  as  the  unembodied  condition  of  the  soul,  and  this 
unembodied  condition  is  its  essential  nature  and  is  hence 
eternal  and  uncreatable.  To  accomplish  anything  anew 
must  mean  either  its  origination,  or  attainment,  or  modifi- 
cation, or  refinement ;  and  it  is  not  possible  to  predicate 
any  of  these  things  in  regard  to  moksha.  The  knowledge 
of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sentences  does  not  therefore 
produce  moksha,  but  only  removes  the  obstructions  which 
are  in  its  way.  Final  release  follows  immediately  after 
the  knowledge  of  the  Brahman  is  acquired,  and  does  not 
stand  in  need  of  anything  that  has  to  be  produced  by  obey- 
ing a  commandment  given  in  the  sdstras.  The  sdslras 
declare  all  phenomenal  distinctions  to  be  unreal  and  to  be 
manufactured  by  avidya,  and  the  commandment  enjoining 
meditation  is  useful  only  in  helping  us  to  understand  well  the 
syntactical  meaning  of  scriptural  sentences.  Immediately 
after  the  knowledge  of  truth  is  acquired,  the  bondage  of 
unreality  must  necessarily  give  way;  and  to  be  released  from 
this  bondage,  one  need  not  wait  even  till  the  falling  off  of 
the  body.  It  has  thus  to  be  made  out  that  moksha  is  not  a 
thing  that  can  be  accomplished  by  obeying  the  command- 
ment relating  to  meditation,  and  that  the  Brahman  is  not 
hence  implied  in  that  commandment ;  indeed  He  is  inde- 
pendently taught  and  known  (pp.  295-301.). 

This  contention  of  the  Adwaitin  is  next  met  by  the 
Dhydna-niyoga-vadin.  He  says  that  the  phenomenal 
bondage  of  the  soul  is  a  concrete  reality  and  is  actually 
perceived  to  be  such.  Mere  abstract  knowledge  of  any 
kind  is  wholly  incompetent  to  remove  this  bondage  ;  and 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS.         xiv 

the  knowledge  derived  from  the  scripture  is  no  exception 
in  this  matter  and  cannot  destroy  the  sensory  perception, 
of  differentiated  phenomena.  Moreover,  meditation  can- 
not be  the  means  of  knowing  the  syntactical  meaning  of 
scriptural  sentences,  in  as  much  as  the  Brahman  has  to  be 
known  before  He  can  be  meditated  upon  ;  nor  can  it 
produce  the  knowledge  which  relates  to  the  oneness  of  the 
self  with  the  non-phenomenal  Brahman,  because  it  has 
itself  to  pre-suppose  many  phenomenal  entities.  If  it  were 
possible  to  destroy  the  bondage  of  avidyd  merely  by  the 
knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  scriptural  sentenc- 
es, the  commandment  enjoining  meditation  would  become 
purposeless.  The  bondage  of  phenomenal  unreality  can- 
not, however,  be  so  destroyed  ;  and  it  follows  as  a  matter 
of  course  thatftvanmukti,  or  the  soul's  release  from  such  a 
bondage  even  while  it  is  in  the  embodied  condition,  is 
altogether  impossible.  The  idea  ofjivanmukti  is  illogical, 
and  is  opposed  to  scripture  ;  it  is  discarded  by  a  great 
teacher  like  Apastamba.  Accordingly,  bondage  comes  to 
an  end  only  after  death  and  by  means  of  that  injunction 
which  relates  to  meditation  and  which  produces  the  direct 
knowledge  of  the  Brahman.  What  is  accomplished  under 
this  injunction  relating  to  meditation  is  not  final  release 
itself,  but  it  is  the  removal  of  the  obstructions  to  final 
release  ;  therefore  this  injunction  cannot  give  a  non-eternal 
character  to  moksha.  Obeying  this  injunction  purifies  the 
mind  ;  the  mind  so  purified  realises  the  Brahman  directly; 
and  there  is  nothing  in  the  scripture  to  shew  that  He 
cannot  be  made  an  object  of  meditation.  Therefore  the 
bondage  of  phenomenal  unreality  comes  to  an  end  only  by 
obeying  the  commandment  which  enjoins  meditation  and 
the  final  result  of  which  is  the  direct  realisation  of  the 
Brahman  (pp.  302-309.). 


xlvi  ANALYTICAL  OUTLlNt   OF  CONTENTS. 

At  this  point  the  Dhydna-niyoga-vadin  anticipates  the 
objection  of  the  Bheddbhedavadins,  according  to  whom 
there  is  no  contradiction  between  distinction  and  non- 
distinction,  and  the  Brahman  is  thus  the  seat  of  both  dis- 
tinction and  non-distinction  at  the  same  time.  Every 
object  that  we  perceive  is  suggestive  of  similarity  as  well 
as  of  diversity.  When  a  thing  is  realised  as  the  cause 
of  another  thing,  there  is  the  realisation  of  similarity 
or  non-distinction  between  them ;  for  instance,  when 
clay  is  made  out  to  be  the  cause  of  a  pot,  we  see  that  there 
is  non-distinction  between  the  clay  and  the  pot.  Similarly, 
when  a  thing  is  realised  as  representative  of  a  genus,  there 
is  the  realisation  of  non-distinction  between  that  thing  and 
the  other  things  belonging  to  that  genus.  On  the  other 
hand,  when  a  thing  is  realised  independently  in  its  condi- 
tion as  an  effect  or  in  its  condition  as  a  particular  individual, 
there  is  the  realisation  of  distinction  between  it  and  other 
things.  Thus  it  is  nothing  uncommon  to  realise  the  same 
thing  as  the  seat  of  both  distinction  and  non-distinction  at 
the  same  time.  In  every  process  of  recognition  also  there 
is  the  realisation  of  both  distinction  and  non-distinction  in 
relation  to  one  and  the  same  thing  (pp.  309-31 1.).  It  cannot 
be  maintained,  however,  that  the  commonly  current  superim- 
position  of  the  idea  of  the  self  on  the  body  indicates  that 
there  is  both  distinction  and  non-distinction  between  the 
body  and  the  self ;  because  it  is  the  unstultified  idea  alone 
which  everywhere  proves  things.  The  idea  of  the  serpent 
falsely  perceived  in  a  rope  is  soon  stultified,  and  cannot 
prove  any  non-distinction  as  really  existing  between  the 
serpent  and  the  rope.  Similarly  the  idea  of  the  self  arrived 
at  in  relation  to  the  body  is  stultified,  and  cannot  prove  any 
non-distinction  between  the  self  and  the  body.  Accord- 
ingly,  the  individual  self  is  not  absolutely  distinct  from  the 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE    OF  CONTENTS.         xlvii 

Brahman  ;  it  is  both  distinct  and  non-distinct  from  Him  ; 
and  there  is  ample  scriptural  authority  to  prove  this  (pp. 
311-314.).  In  the  state  of  final  beatific  release  the  indivi- 
dual self  has  to  be  absolutely  identical  with  the  Brahman  ; 
and  non-distinction  alone  is  thus  natural,  while  the  distinc- 
tion of  the  individual  selves  from  the  Brahman  as  well  as 
from  each  other  is  due  to  limiting  conditions.  The  karma 
of  the  individual  self  gives  rise  to  these  limiting  conditions, 
and  they  in  their  turn  give  rise  to  karma.  The  stream  is 
thus  kept  up  ;  and  according  as  the  Brahman  is  or  is  not 
subject  to  these  limiting  conditions,  He  is  realised  to  be 
distinct  or  non-distinct  from  the  individual  self.  The  spatial 
ether  is,  for  example,  distinct  or  non-distinct  from  the  ether 
in  a  pot  according  as  it  is  or  is  not  limited  by  the  walls  of 
the  containing  pot  (pp.  314-317.). 

The  position  of  the  Bhcddbhedavddin  so  stated  is  then 
attacked  by  the  Dhydna-niyoga-vadin.  The  idea  of  non- 
contradiction between  distinction  and  non-distinction  is 
shown  to  be  illogical  and  untenable,  and  it  is  pointed  out 
that  in  every  perception  it  is  realised  that  a  particular 
thing  is  of  a  particular  nature.  Here  the  characterising 
thing  is  the  genus  and  the  characterised  thing  is  the  parti- 
cular individual.  The  individual  self  is  not,  however,  real- 
ised as  belonging  to  the  genus  Brahman,  and  cannot 
therefore  be  both  distinct  and  non-distinct  from  the 
Brahman.  Non-distinction  is  based  upon  the  sdstras ; 
and  distinction  is  due  to  avidyd,  which  being  unreal,  is  in- 
capable of  tainting  the  Brahman.  It  is  inconceivable 
how  the  supposed  limiting  conditions  really  do  limit  the 
Brahman  who  is  only  one  and  indivisible  and  homogene- 
ous. The  individual  self  cannot  be  a  bit  of  the  Brahman 
cut  off  from  Him  by  limiting  conditions ;  it  cannot  be 
such  a  part  of  the  Brahman  as  is  not  cut  off  from  Him  and 


xlviii         ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS. 

is  still  associated  with  limiting  conditions  ;  nor  can  it  be 
the  Brahman  Himself  in  essence,  though  subject  to  limiting 
conditions  ;  nor  finally  can  it  be  the  limiting  condition 
itself.  Thus  non-distinction  between  the  Brahman  and 
the  individual  self  is  alone  the  reality,  and  the  Vcddnta  is 
authoritative  in  relation  to  the  essential  nature  of  the 
Brahman,  in  as  much  as  the  knowledge  thereof  is  needed 
as  a  complement  to  the  injunction  relating  to  meditation 

(pp.  3I7-323-)- 

Now  the  Mimdmsaka  comes  forward  to  meet  finally 
the  'Dhydna-niyoga-vddin  and  maintains  that,  although  the 
knowledge  of  the  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman  is  need- 
ed as  a  complement  to  the  injunction  bearing  upon  medita- 
tion, there  is  indeed  nothing  to  show  that  Veddntic  passag- 
es import  anything  that  is  really  existent.  In  connection 
with  the  commandment  enjoining  the  realisation  of  the 
Brahman  as  a  Name,  we  find  that  the  completion  of 
meditation  is  possible  even  when  its  object  is  a  mere 
mental  concept  corresponding  to  which  there  may  or  may 
not  be  any  external  entity.  The  Vcddnta  is  devoid  of 
utility  in  the  form  of  inducing  activity  or  cessation  from 
activity  ;  and  even  when  it  is  granted  that  it  induces  the 
activity  of  meditation,  it  is  incapable  of  establishing  the 
reality  of  the  Brahman,  in  as  much  as  an  object  of  medi- 
tation need  not  always  be  real,  and  in  as  much  as  the  idea 
corresponding  to  the  word  Brahman  is  already  naturally 
established  and  known  (pp.  323-325.). 

And  at  last  the  Veddntin  comes  forward  and  proves 
his  case  as  against  the  Mimdmsaka,  and  points  out  that 
the  Veddnta  which  teaches  that  Brahman,  who  is  the 
highest  object  of  attainment  for  all,  cannot  be  said  not  to 
have  its  finality  only  in  utility.  Such  scriptural  passages 
a.s  relate  to  activity  and  cessation  from  activity  may,  on 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.  xlix 

the  other  hand,  be  said  not  to  have  their  finality  in 
utility  ;  because  they  give  rise  merely  to  that  kind  of 
knowledge  which  can  be  utilised  only  so  long  as  there 
are  desirable  objects  to  attain.  But  Vcddntic  passages  en- 
able us  to  know  that  individual  souls  acquire  unlimited  and 
unsurpassed  bliss  at  the  time  otmoksha,  and  enable  us  also 
to  know  that  they  continue  for  ever  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  such  bliss.  Therefore  there  is  really  no  end  to 
the  utility  of  the  knowledge  produced  by  the  Veddnta. 
To  know  this  invitingly  attractive  and  worthy  nature  of  the 
highest  object  of  human  pursuit  is  to  be  impelled  to  seek 
it  so  as  to  find  it ;  and  herein  is  the  utility  of  the  Veddnta. 
This  utility  cannot  indeed  be  well  based  merely  on  such  an 
abstract  conception  of  the  Brahman  as  has  no  reality  to 
correspond  to  it.  If  it  be  shewn  that  the  Ifpanishads  do 
not  teach  the  real  existence  of  the  Brahman,  then, 
although  they  may  give  rise  to  the  conceptual  knowledge  of 
the  Brahman,  they  can  have  no  finality  in  utility.  There- 
fore the  Brahman  is  really  existent,  and  the  chief  end  of 
the  Veddnta  is  to  teach  us  to  know  Him  (pp.  325-328.). 

The  fifth  AdJiikarana  consists  of  eight  aphorisms, 
commencing  with  the  fifth  and  ending  with  the  twelfth. 
The  object  of  this  Adhikarana  is  to  establish  that  what  is 
declared  to  be  the  cause  of  universal  creation,  &c.,  in  the 
Veddnta  is  not  Prakriti  or  primordial  matter  with  all  the 
potentialities  assigned  to  it  by  the  Sdnkhyas  •  but  that  it 
is  that  omniscient  and  omnipotent  Being  who  has  been 
denoted  by  the  name  of  Brahman.  The  cause  of  the  world 
is  spoken  of  as  Sat  in  .the  CJihdndogya-Upanishady  and 
the  word  Sat  means  Existence.  Does  this  word  Existence 
denote  the  Pradhdna  or  Prakriti  of  the  Sdrikhyas,  or 
does  it  denote  the  Brahman  ?  The  doubt  arises  that 
G 


1  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE    OF   CONTENTS. 

it  may  denote  the  Pradhana ^  in  as  much  as,  whatever 
thing  and  whatever  general  nature  thereof  exist  in  the 
condition  of  a  cause,  that  same  thing  and  that  same 
nature  thereof  have  to  exist  also  in  the  condition  of  an 
effect,  and  in  as  much  as  the  world  which  is  a  produced 
effect  and  is  hence  made  up  of  the  qualities  of  saliva,  rajas 
and  tamas  cannot  therefore  have  the  non-material  'qua- 
lity-less' Brahman  for  its  cause.  If  the  undifferentiated 
Pradhana- is  not  taken  to  be  the  cause  of  the  world,  it  is 
impossible  to  understand  how,  by  knowing  a  certain  single 
thing,  all  things  become  known,  as  it  is  declared  in  the 
scripture  ;  and  it  is  impossible  also  to  understand  why  the 
statement  relating  to  the  cause  of  the  world  is,  as  given  in 
the  C/ihandogya-  Upanishad,  in  the  form  of  a  proposition 
and  an  illustration.  In  reply  to  such  a  supposition  it  is 
pointed  out  in  the  first  of  the  eight  aphorisms  of  this 
Adhikarana  that  the  Existence  spoken  of  as  the  cause  of 
the  world  cannot  be  the  Pradhana,  because  the  activity 
of  seeing  and  thinking  is  predicated  in  relation  to  it. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  cause  has  necessarily  to  be  in 
natural  conformity  with  the  effect ;  and  the  Highest  Per- 
son who  owns  all  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent 
things  in  their  subtle  state  as  His  body  is  certainly  in 
natural  conformity  with  all  produced  effects,  as  taught  in 
the  Upanishad s  and  as  maintained  by  the  Sfitrakara  him- 
self. The  passage  dealing  with  the  cause  of  the  world  in 
the  Qhhandogy }a-  Upanishad  is  not  really  in  the  form  of  a 
syllogism,  as  the  middle  term  is  altogether  wanting  ;  and 
hence  it  surely  cannot  be  that  that  passage  mentions  the 
logically  inferrible  Pradhana  to  be  the  cause  of  the  world 
(pp.  329-334.).  The  second  aphorism  in  the  Adhikarana 
is  intended  to  show  that  the  activity  of  'seeing  '  predicated 
in  relation  to  the  Sat  which  forms  the  cause  of  the  worlcl 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS.  li 

is  not  to  be  interpreted  figuratively,  in  as  much  as  that 
Sat  is  spoken  of  as  the  Atman.  The  teaching  in  the 
Qihandogya-Upanishad  (VI.  8.  7.)  has  in  view  the  world 
which  is  made  up  of  intelligent  and  non-intelligent  things, 
and  points  out  that  the  Sat  is  the  Atman  or  the  Self 
thereof ;  and  surely  the  non-intelligent  Pradhdna  cannot 
be  the  intelligent  Atman.  The  omniscient  Brahman  alone 
can  be  the  world's  Atman,  and  can  also  see  and  think 
(pp.  334-336.).  The  third  aphorism  of  the  A dh ikarana 
gives  another  reason  \\~hy  the  Sat  that  is  mentioned  to  be 
the  cause  of  the  world  cannot  be  the  material  Pradhdna, 
and  that  reason  is  that  it  is  taught  in  the  context  that  he 
who  is  firmly  devoted  to  that  Sal  obtains  final  release  as 
a  result  of  his  devotion.  What  one  worships  here  on 
earth  determines  what  one  attains  finally  ;  and  to  attain 
the  Pradhdna  is  not  to  obtain  moksha,  but  it  is  to  get  into 
the  bondage  of  samsdra.  Indeed  the  Vcddnta  is  not  so 
unkind  as  to  impel  us  to  get  into  this  bondage  (pp.  336- 
337.).  The  fourth  aphorism  here  assigns  another 

reason  why  the  causal  Sat  cannot  be  the  Pradhdna  ;  and 
that  reason  is  that  Svetaketu,  who  was  desirous  of  attain- 
ing moksha,  is  taught  in  the  context  that  he  is  the  same 
as  the  Sat,  which  certainly  cannot  mean  that  he  was  mere 
matter ;  for,  if  he  were  the  same  as  the  Pradhdna,  he 
could  obtain  no  moksha,  and  the  idea  of  his  being  the 
same  as  the  Sat  would  deserve  to  be  discarded.  But  it  is 
not  taught  that  it  is  to  be  so  discarded  (page  337.).  The 
next  aphorism  gives  the  fifth  reason  why  the  causal 
Sat  is  not  the  Pradhdna;  and  in  it  it  is  pointed  out  that, 
if  the  Sat  were  the  Pradhdna,  there  would  then  be  the 
contradiction  of  the  proposition  enunciated  in  the  context 
to  the  effect  that,  by  knowing  a  certain  single  thing,  all 
things  become  known.  This  arises  out  of  the  fact  that 


Ill 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS. 


non-intelligent  matter  cannot  give  rise  to  the  intelligent 
individual  souls,  and  cannot  be  their  cause ;  and  hence, 
by  knowing  it,  all   things   cannot   become  known  (page 
338.).        The  next  aphorism  is  based  on  a  passage  in   the 
Qihdndogya-Upanishad  (VI.  8.  i.),  in  which  it  is  declared 
that   a   sleeping  person   is   in   union   with   the  Sat,  and 
that    while    asleep    he    withdraws    into   his   own    cause 
and    is   also   absorbed   into   his   own    cause.      Here   the 
Sal  is  the  cause  into  which  its  effect,  namely,  the  indi- 
vidual self  withdraws  ;  and  the  non-intelligent   Pradhana 
does  not  deserve  to  be  the  cause  of  the  individual  self. 
Until  final  release  takes  place  the   individual  self  is  asso- 
ciated with  names  and  forms  ;  in  moksha  and  at  the  time 
of  deep  sleep  he  is  embraced  by  the  Brahman  and  gives 
up  names  and  forms.     It  is  thus  that  he  withdraws  into 
his  own  cause,  and  the  Sal  has  therefore  to  be  the  Brahman 
(pp.  339-341.)-        The  next  aphorism  maintains  that  the 
cause  of  the  world  cannot  be  the  Pradhana ,  because  the 
Sal  which  is  mentioned  here  as  the  cause  must  have  the 
same  meaning  as  whatever  is  elsewhere  in  the  scripture 
declared  to  be  the  world's  cause.  In  a  number  of  scriptural 
passages  the  Lord  of  All  is  taught  to  be  the  cause  of  the 
world,  and  this  causal  Sal  cannot  therefore  be  other  than 
the   Lord   (pp.   341-342.).        The   last   aphorism   of  the 
Adhikarana  says  that  more  than  all  it  is  actually  revealed 
in  the  Qihdndogya  and  other  Upanishads  that  the  Supreme 
Self  is  the  cause  of  the  universe,  and  that  the  causal  Sal 
cannot    at    all    mean    in    consequence    any  thing  other 
than   that    Supreme    Self,    who    is   the    Highest   Person 
and  is  also  the  Brahman  that  has  to  be  enquired  into  in 
the  Veddnta.        In  conclusion  it  is  pointed  out  at  the  end 
of  this  Adhikarana  that  the  import  of  it  as   a   whole   is 
against  the  position  of  the  A dwaitins,  according  to  which 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS.          liii 

the  Brahman  is  a  mere  attributeless  intelligence  and 
luminosity.  Here  the  Brahman  is  declared  to  be  associat- 
ed -with  the  real  attribute  of  'seeing',  and  His  character 
as  a  witness  cannot  therefore  be  unreal.  The  'seeing'  and 
thinking  Brahman  must  be  an  intelligent  being,  and  to  be 
an  intelligent  being  is  to  possess  the  quality  of  intelligence. 
To  be  devoid  of  this  attribute  of  intelligence  is  to  be  the 
same  as  the  non-intelligent  Pradhdna,  which  surely  the 
Brahman  is  not.  In  the  same  way  in  which  the  Brahman 
cannot  be  attributeless,  He  cannot  also  be  mere  luminosity 
or  intelligence.  Indeed  luminosity  or  intelligence  is  that 
which  makes  itself  and  other  things  fit  to  be  realised  by  a 
cognising  mind  ;  and  a  thing  which  is  devoid  of  all  attri- 
butes cannot  possess  this  capacity.  To  grant  that  the 
Brahman  has  such  a  capacity  is  the  same  as  to  admit  that 
He  is  none  other  than  the  all-powerful,  all-knowing,  and 
all-good  God  ;  and  an  attributeless  entity  cannot  but  be  a 
mere  nothing  that  is  totally  unrealisable  (pp.  342-346.). 

The  sixth  Adhikarana  is  \\\z,Anandamayadhikarana, 
and  contains  also  eight  aphorisms  from  the  thirteenth  to 
the  twentieth.  The  object  of  the  last  Adhikarana,  known 
as  the  Jkshatyadhikarana,  is  to  prove  that  the  Brahman 
declared  to  be  the  cause  of  the  world  is  not  the  same  as 
the  Pradhdna  of  the  Sdnkhyas  ;  and  the  Anandamayddhi- 
harana  shews  that  that  Brahman  is  different  from  the  in- 
dividual sell  also.  This  Adhikarana  is  based  on  the  Anan- 
davalll  of  the  Taittirlya-Upanishad,  and  the  first  aphorism 
here  runs  thus: — "That  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  Anan- 
damaya  is  the  Brahman;  because  there  is,  in  the  context, 
the  repetition  of  various  grades  of  bliss  which  culminate 
in  the  Anandama\a  or  the  Highest  Bliss."  Here  the 
doubt  arises  whether  this  Anandamaya  is  the  Highest  Self 


liv  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

who  is  different  from  the  individual  self  commonly  known 
as  thejlva,  or  whether  the  Anandamaya  is  the  jlva  him- 
self. It  can  be  made  out  from  the  context  in  the  Taittl- 
rlya-  Upamshad  that  the  Anandamaya  denotes  the  Brah- 
man who  is  the  cause  of  the  world  ;  and  whether  this 
Brahman  is  different  from  the  jlva  or  not  has  therefore  to 
be  determined  by  making  out  what  the  Anandamaya 
means.  According  to  the  Saitkhyas  the  association  of  the 
individual  self  with  matter  is  the  cause  of  all  creation,  and 
individual  selves  may  accumulate  the  merit  of  karma  to 
such  an  extent  as  even  to  become  presiding  deities  at  the 
commencement  of  what  is  called  a  creating  kalpa  or  cycle. 
Hence  they  are  the  Purvapakshins  here,  and  hold  that  the 
Anandamaya  is  the  individual  self.  They  say  that  since  the 
Anandamaya  is  declared  in  the  Taittirlya-  Upamshad  to 
be  associated  with  an  embodiment,  it  cannot  be  anything 
other  than  the  individual  self.  Again,  the  fact  that  what 
is  declared  to  be  the  cause  of  the  world  is,  in  scriptural 
passages,  grammatically  equated  with  the  individual  self,  is 
evidence  to  them  that  the  individual  self  itself  is  the  cause  of 
the  world.  The  individual  self  can  'see'  and  think  ;  and  its 
final  object  of  attainment  is  freedom  from  association  with 
matter,  in  as  much  as  such  freedom  from  the  bondage  of 
matter  and  ignorance  constitutes  its  essential  nature  and 
its  bliss.  With  the  object  of  pointing  out  this  essential 
nature  of  the  individual  self,  the  Taittiriya-Upanishad 
says  that  the  Anandamaya  is  different  from  the  body 
(annamaya),  different  from  the  life  inside  it  (prdnamaya), 
different  from  the  mind  within  (manomaya],  and  different 
even  from  the  understanding  therein  (vijndnamayd}.  The 
Anandamaya  is  thus  the  innermost  entity  in  the  body, 
and  is  the  same  as  the  individual  self  (pp.  3^6-350.). 
Here  the  Adwaitin  steps  in  with  his  interpretation  of  the 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTEXTS.  Iv 

Anandamaya.  According  to  him  the  Anandamaya  is 
not  different  from  the  Brahman  who  is  the  seat  of 
joy,  pleasure,  satisfaction  and  bliss,  all  of  which  are 
described  to  be  His  constituent  parts.  The  Brahman  is 
of  such  a  nature  as  distinguishes  Him  from  all  other  things, 
He  is  the  innermost  essence  of  all  and  is  called  the  Atman. 
The  idea  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the  Adzvaitin  is  that 
the  individual  self  is  not  essentially  different  from  the  Brah- 
man who  is  altogether  one  only  without  a  second,  and  that 
this  secondless  Being  is  the  Anandamaya.  The  Adzvaitin 
then  meets  a  possible  objection  to  the  effect  that  the  Ananda- 
maya may  not  be  the  Brahman,  but  may  be  something  else; 
and  he  distinctly  shews  that  the  Anandamaya  must  not 
only  mean  the  Brahman,  but  also  must  indicate  that  the 
Brahman  is  extremely  different  from  pain,  even  as  He  is 
different  from  all  things  other  than  Himself.  The  differ- 
entiation of  the  individual  selves  from  the  Brahman  and 
from  each  other  is  due  to  avid  yd;  otherwise  there  is  no 
difference  between  the  essential  nature  of  the  individual 
self  and  that  of  the  Brahman.  Viewed  in  relation  to  its 
essential  nature  the  individual  self  deserves  to  be  called 
the  Anandamaya  quite  as  much  as  the  Brahman  does ;  and 
it  is  appropriate  in  the  context  to  interpret  the  Ananda- 
maya as  that  individual  self  which  is  not  in  essence 
different  from  the  Brahman  (pp.  350-353.). 

Thus  both  the  SaAkhyas  and  the  Adtvaitins  maintain, 
in  their  own  respective  ways,  that  the  Anandamaya  is 
nothing  other  than  the  individual  self.  At  this  point  it  is 
shewn  that  the  aphorism  quoted  above  indicates  clearly 
that  the  Anandamava  must  mean  the  Brahman,  who  is 
distinctly  other  than  the  individual  self.  The  reason 
assigned  for  this  is  that,  in  the  Taittiriya-Upanishad, 
there  is  a  graded  repetition  of  several  kinds  of  bliss, 


Ivi  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS. 

ill  an  order  in  which  eiich  succeeding  bliss  is  a  hundred 
fold  of  the  bliss  preceding  it,  so  as  to  reach  that  bliss 
which  forms  the  summit  of  an  unsurpassable  condition. 
This  last  bliss  is  not  possible  to  the  individual  self,  and 
denotes  therefore  the  Brahman  who  alone  can  be  its 
abode.  Accordingly  this  Upanishad  declares  the  Ananda- 
maya  to  be  different  from  the  vijfianamaya,  which  latter 
has  necessarily  to  mean  the  same  as  the  individual  self. 
The  word  vijftanamaya  cannot  mean  mere  intellect  or 
understanding ;  for,  if  it  be  so  interpreted,  the  affix  may  at 
that  is  found  in  it  would  be  meaningless  ;  it  really  means 
the  knower  or  the  individual  self.  It  is  true  that  in  the 
passage — "  The  vijftdna  performs  the  sacrifice  " — the  word 
vijttana  stands  for  vijildnamaya ;  but  it  has  to  be  borne  in 
mind  that  words  which  denote  the  essential  attributes  of 
things  are  often  used  so  as  to  denote  those  things  them- 
selves ;  besides,  there  are  grammatical  rules  according  to 
which  the  word  vijilana  has  to  mean  an  intelligent  agent 
but  not  mere  intelligence.  The  vijilana  that  performs  the 
sacrifice  is  indeed  an  agent,  which  the  mere  intellect  or 
understanding  can  never  be  ;  and  this  same  vijfldna  is  also 
said  to  own  a  body  as  its  home.  The  Madhyandinas  and 
the  Kanvas  have  two  separate  recensions  of  the  Brihadd- 
ranyaka-  Upanisliad.  In  the  recension  of  the  latter  there  is  a 
particular  passage  (III.  7.  22.)  in  which  the  word  vijftdna 
occurs;  and  in  the  corresponding  passage  in  the  recension  of 
the  former  it  is  found  that  the  word  dtman  is  used  instead  of 
the  word  vijfldna.  This  decides  that  the  vijndna  which  is 
used  in  the  place  of  the  vijfidnamaya  can  be  nothing  other 
than  the  individual  self,  and  the  word  vijfidnamaya  itself 
very  appropriately  denotes  the  individual  self.  Therefore 
the  Anandamaya,  which  is  positively  declared  to  be  differ- 
ent from  the  vijfidnamaya,  cannot  denote  the  individual 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.  Ivii 

self,  but  must  denote  the  Brahman  who  is  other  than  the 
individual  self  (pp.  354-358.). 

Then  this  other  position  of  the  Purvapakshins — that, 
because  the  Being,  who  is  declared  to  be  the  cause  world,  is, 
in  a  numbe.1(of  scriptural  passages,  seen  to  be  grammatically 
equated  with  the  individual  self,  the  Anandamaya  has  to 
be  the  S5<vhe  as  the  individual  self — is  taken  up  for  consi- 
deration and  criticism.  The  individual  self  is,  no  doubt, 
an  intelligent  being  ;  but  that  being  cannot  have  the  power 
of  creating,  preserving,  and  destroying  the  world  in  accord- 
ance with  his  own  will.  The  scripture  and  the  Sutrakara 
are  both  agreed  on  this  point,  and  the  individual  self  is 
essentially  different  from  the  Brahman.  The  grammatical 
equation  between  the  Brahman  and  the  individual  self 
cannot  denote  that  both  of  them  are  essentially  the  same  ; 
it  is  indeed  impossible  for  the  all-knowing,  all-powerful, 
and  all-good  Brahman  to  be  essentially  the  same  as  the 
ignorant,  weak,  and  impure  individual  self.  Nor  can  it  be 
maintained  reasonably  that  a  grammatical  equation  is 
appropriate  only  when  either  of  the  two  equated  things  in 
it  is  taken  to  be  false  ;  for,  in  the  case  of  the  Brahman  and 
the  individual  self  equated  with  each  other,  it  is  not  easy  to 
decide  to  which  of  them  such  a  falsity  belongs.  Of  course 
the  Brahman  is  not  unreal.  The  individual  self  may  be  so, 
on  the  supposition  that  the  Brahman  appears  falsely  as  the 
individual  self  owing  to  the  superimposition  of  avidyd ; 
but  this  would  make  the  Brahman  contradict  Himself. 
This  supposition  cannot  be  forced  on  us  to  make  the 
grammatical  equations  in  the  scripture  significant ;  for, 
what  is  inappropriate  and  opposed  to  reason  should  not  be 
assumed  even  for  the  purpose  of  making  the  scripture  ap- 
propriate. This  supposed  association  of  the  Brahman  with 
evil  cannot  at  all  be  a  reality;  and  if  it  be  held  that  His 
H 


Iviii          ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

attributeless  character  frees  Him  from  such  an  association, 
it  frees  Him  also  from  His  association  with  all  that  is  good 
and  auspicious,  and  indeed  makes  all  things  unreal  so  that 
there  remains  nothing  that  is  to  be  known  through  know- 
ing the  Brahman.  The  proposition  that,  by  knowing  a 
certain  single  thing,  all  things  become  known,  does  not 
surely  denote  that  all  things  are  unreal.  Against  cannot 
be  held  that  the  unreality  of  all  things  is  due  to  the  fact 
of  their  being  modifications  of  the  one  real  thing  which  is 
attributeless  intelligence.  Theattributelessnessofthe.5ra#- 
man  is  itself  contradicted  by  the  scripture  ;  and  in  the  equa- 
tion— '  That  thou  art ' — neither  the  That  nor  the  thou  can 
denote  an  attributeless  thing,  unless  indeed  both  these 
words  are  interpreted  figuratively  (pp.  358-366.).  This 
difficulty  of  having  to  interpret  both  the  words  in  a  gram- 
matical equation  figuratively  cannot  be  got  over  by  main- 
taining that  the  purpose  of  a  grammatical  equation  is  not 
at  all  to  denote  any  attributes,  but  is  merely  to  denote  the 
oneness  of  the  thing  referred  to  therein  ;  because  the  func- 
tion of  a  grammatical  equation  is  to  predicate  in  relation 
to  a  thing,  either  affirmatively  or  negatively,  by  means  of 
certain  words  that  that  same  thing,  which  has  already  a 
particular  form  denoted  by  some  words,  is  also  possessed 
of  a  certain  other  form.  Only  when  one  of  the  two  attri- 
butes mentioned  in  a  grammatical  equation  contradicts  the 
other,  is  it  right  to  interpret  figuratively  either  of  the  two 
words  denoting  those  attributes,  in  as  much  as  the  gram- 
matical equation  has  to  denote  only  one  thing  as  character- 
ised by  two  consistent  attributes.  Nor  again  can  it  be 
maintained  that  the  words  of  a  grammatical  equation  can- 
not import  oneness  in  relation  to  the  things  they  denote, 
on  the  ground  that  the  thing  correlated  to  any  one  attribute 
is  distinct  from  the  thing  which  is  correlated  to  any  other  attri- 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF    CONTENTS.  lix 

bute.  This  would  be  so,  provided  only  that  the  mere  correla- 
tion of  a  thing  to  two  attributes  is  opposed  to  the  oneness  of 
that  thing.     Such  is  not  always  the  case  ;  when  the  two  at- 
tributes are  contradictory,  then  they  can  not  meet  in  one 
and  the  same  thing.       Many  consistent  attributes  may 
and  do  meet  in  one  and  the  same  thing  ;  thus  it  is  that 
grammatical  equations  become  significant,  and  thus  again 
it  is  that  the  perdurability  of  all  perceived  external  objects 
can  be  maintained  (pp.  366-371.).     That  the  words  in  a 
grammatical  equation  have  all  the  power  of  denoting  a 
single  thing,  which  is  characterised  by  many  attributes,  is 
further  shewn  to  be  borne  out  by  Jaimini  in  his  Mimfimsd 
aphorisms  ;  and  the  Vcdic  commandment — "With  the  red, 
tawney-eyed  heifer,  one  year  old,  let  him  purchase  the 
soma  plant " — >is  discussed  fully  from  the  stand-point  of 
Jaimini.    The  conclusion  here  arrived  at  and  illustrated  is 
that,  in  any  particular  sentence  forming  a  grammatical 
equation,  a  thing,  which  is  characterised  by  one  attribute 
or  two  attributes  or  many  attributes,  is  denoted  by  certain 
particular  words  used  in  agreement  either  with  the  kdraka 
case-affixes  or  with  the  nominative  case-affix  ;    that  it  is 
made  out  by  means  of  the  grammatical  equation  that  the 
thing  so  characterised  by  all  the  attributes  is  only   one  ; 
and  that  this  one  thing  is  associated  with  the  action  deno- 
ted by  the  verb  forming  the  predicate  of  the  sentence. 
Two  minor  objections  against  this  conclusion  are  then  dis- 
posed of,  namely,  that,  in  a  grammatical  equation  in  which 
a  substance   is   mentioned,   a  word   denoting  a    quality 
merely  denotes  that  quality  but  not  a  thing  as  qualified 
by  that  quality,— and  that,  as  the  purchase  of  the  soma 
plant  is  completely  concluded  with  the  exchange  of  the 
one  year  old  heifer,  its  redness, has  no  necessary  relation  to 
this  transaction  of  purchase   (pp.  371-377.)' 


k  ANALYTICAL    OUTLINE  OF    CONTENTS. 

In  accordance  with  the  conclusion  so  arrived  at 
regarding  the  import  of  a  grammatical  equation,  the  scrip- 
tural .sentence — '  That  thou  art  '• — is  interpreted  so  as  to 
shew  how,  by  means  of  the  word  '  thou '  also,  it  is  the 
Highest  Self  alone  that  is  denoted  as  forming  the  internal 
ruler  of  all  individual  selves.  This  interpretation  is  sup- 
ported by  means  of  the  teaching  given  in  the  scripture  re- 
garding the  differentiation  of  names  and  forms.  The 
Brahman  wishing  to  become  manifold  created  the  world. 
All  the  individual  souls  in  the  world  entered,  each  ac- 
cording to  its  karma,  into  such  material  embodiments 
as  were  most  suited  to  them.  Then  the  Brahman  Him- 
self entered  into  these  souls  so  as  to  become  their  internal 
ruler.  Thus  it  is  that  all  things  have  become  things,  and 
that  all  significant  words  denote  the  Highest  Self  as  asso- 
ciated with  non-intelligent  matter  and  the  intelligent 
individual  self  (pp.  377-379.)-  Scriptural  authority  is  then 
sufficiently  quoted  to  prove  that  the  whole  world  accord- 
ingly forms  the  body  of  the  Brahman,  and  that  He  Him- 
self constitutes  the  Self  thereof ;  and  it  is  thence  arrived 
at  that  all  things  form  modes  of  the  Highest  Self,  and  that 
words  denoting  non-intelligent  material  things  as  well  as 
words  denoting  intelligent  individual  selves  finally  import 
the  Highest  Self  Himself.  Therefore  in  the  sentence— 
'  That  thou  art ' — the  grammatical  equation  of  the  word 
'  That '  with  the  word  '  thou ',  which  also  thus  denotes  the 
Highest  Self,  has  certainly  a  primary  and  natural  signific- 
ance ;  and  there  is  no  need  at  all  to  adopt  here  any  figura- 
tive interpretation  of  any  kind  whatever.  As  long  as  the 
material  embodiment  of  a  thing  may  happen  to  be  one  of 
its  modes,  it  is  not  right  to  hold  that  it  is  only  words  denot- 
ing generic  and  other  qualities  that  can  be  grammatically 
equated  with  words  denoting  substances.  In  the  case  of 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS.         Ixi 

a  thing  which  can  exist  as  the  mode  of  another  thing, 
the  existence,  persistence,  and  realisation  of  that  thing  are 
invariably  associated  with  this  other  thing.  According!}-, 
the  words  which  usually  denote  such  things  as  are  such 
modes  denote  also  the  things  which  are  characterised  by 
those  modes.  The  material  characteristics  of  the  body  do 
not  taint  the  embodied  individual  soul ;  similarly  the 
weaknesses  and  deficiencies  of  individual  souls  do  not 
affect  the  Brahman  who  is  their  Soul.  In  the  grammati- 
cal equation — '  That  thou  art ' — the  word  '  That '  denotes, 
therefore,  the  Highest  Self  as  the  all-knowing,  all-power- 
ful, and  all-good  cause  of  the  world  ;  and  the  word  '  thou ' 
also  denotes  that  same  Supreme  Self  as  having  for  His 
body  an  embodied  individual  self.  This  interpretation 
of  this  grammatical  equation  is  quite  absolutely  faultless  ; 
and  it  denotes  at  the  same  time  that  the  individual  self 
which  is  a  mode  and  hence  an  attribute  of  the  Highest 
Self  is  for  that  very  reason  different  from  the  Highest 
Self.  The  word  Anandamaya  has  to  denote  this  Highest 
Self;  therefore  it  can  neither  denote  the  independent 
individual  self  of  the  Sdtikhyas,  nor  that  other  individual 
self  of  the  Adwaitins  which  is  in  essence  identical  with  the 
Supreme  Self  (pp.  379-383)- 

The  contention  of  the  Purvapakshins — that  the 
grammatical  equation  of  the  word  denoting  the  Brahman 
with  words  denoting  individual  selves  is  calculated  to  prove 
the  Anandamaya  to  be  the  same  as  the  individual  self- 
is  thus  finally  disposed  of ;  and  their  other  contention — 
that,  since  the  Anandamaya  is  declared  in  the  scripture 
to  be  associated  with  an  embodiment,  it  cannot  be  any- 
thing other  than  the  individual  self — is  then  taken  up  for 
disposal.  It  is  no  doubt  true  that  the  Anandamaya  is 
declared  to  be  the  embodied  self of  the  vijft&namaya  ;  but 


Ixii  ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

it  is  also  declared  that,  in  the  series  consisting  of  the 
annamaya  t  the  prdnamaya,  the  manomaya,  the  vijndna- 
maya  and  the  Anandamaya,  the  embodied  self  of  that 
which  succeeds  is  the  same  as  the  embodied  self  of  that 
which  precedes ;  and  the  Brahman  who  is  the  cause  of 
the  world  is  spoken  of  in  this  Taittiriya-  Upanishad  itself 
as  the  Self  of  the  whole  series  of  created  beings.  More- 
over it  is  distinctly  stated  in  the  Subdla-  Upanishad  that 
all  the  constituent  principles  of  the  universe  form  the  body 
of  the  Highest  Self.  Therefore  it  is  this  Highest  Self 
Himself  who  forms  the  embodied  Self  of  the  annamaya, 
the  prdnamaya,  the  manomaya  and  the  vijndnamaya  ;  and 
the  Anandamaya  is  Himself  the  embodied  Self  of  Himself. 
Thus  the  Supreme  Self  also  has  an  embodiment ;  He  alone 
is  the  unconditioned  and  ever  blissful  Embodied  Self. 
This  is  the  reason  why  the  sdstra  which  deals  with  the 
Brahman  is  known  to  worthy  persons  by  the  name  of  the 
'Science  of  the  Embodied  Being.'  Consequently  the 
Anandamaya  is  the  Highest  Self,  and  is  undoubtedly  dis- 
tinct from  the  individual  self  (pp.  383-386.). 

In  the  next  aphorism  another  objection  against  the 
above  interpretation  of  the  Anandamaya  is  answered.  In 
the  word  Anandamaya  there  is  the  affix  known  as  mayat. 
According  to  Sanskrit  grammar  this  affix  generally  signifies 
modification,  although  it  may  occasionally  denote  abun- 
dance as  well.  In  the  context  the  affix  mayat  is  uniformly 
used  so  as  to  signify  modification.  Therefore  the  word  Anan- 
damaya cannot  be  interpreted  to  mean  any  thing  that  is 
immodifiable.  Even  if  it  be  granted  that  the  mayat  here 
denotes  abundance,  there  is  the  difficulty  that  an  abun- 
dance of  bliss  implies  at  least  a  modicum  of  misery. 
Therefore  it  is  the  modifiable  individual  self  who  is  subject 
to  misery  that  is  denoted  by  the  word  Anandamaya. 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.  Ixiii 

Such  is  the  position  of  the  Pilrvapakshin,  and  it  is  counter- 
acted by  this  aphorism  which  says  that  the  may  at  here  signi- 
fies only  abundance.  In  the  giaded  repetition  of  the  various 
kinds  of  bliss,  the  highest  unsurpassable  bliss  happens  to 
be  that  which  is  attributed  to  the  Anandamaya  ;  and  the 
Anandamaya  must  therefore  mean  the  immodifiable  and 
ever  blissful  Brahman.  In  the  context  the  affix  mayat 
cannot  be  uniformly  interpreted  to  mean  modification,  in  as 
much  as  the  \vordprdnamaya  has  to  be  interpreted  to  mean 
the  same  thing  as  the  word  prdna  means,  or  to  mean  that 
which  has  the  activity  of  the  prdna  in  abundance.  It  is  as 
common  to  use  the  affix  mayat  in  the  sense  of  abundance  as 
it  is  to  use  it  in  the  sense  of  modification.  An  abundance  of 
bliss  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  modicum  of  misery  ;  on 
the  other  hand  it  only  implies  the  negation  of  the  smallness 
of  bliss.  The  scripture  says  distinctly  that  the  Brahmanis 
wholly  free  from  sin  and  from  misery.  The  unsurpassably 
large  amount  of  bliss  belonging  to  the  Brahman  implies 
also  the  smallness  of  the  bliss  belonging  to  others  ;  and  it 
is  not  right  to  hold  that  the  individual  self  is  a  modifica- 
tion of  bliss,  in  as  much  as  the  knowledge  and  the  bliss  of 
the  individual  self  are  only  in  a  state  of  contraction  when 
in  the  condition  of  samsdra.  Therefore  also  the  Ananda- 
maya is  different  from  the  individual  self  and  is  the  same 
as  the  Supreme  Self.  (pp.  386-390.). 

The  next  aphorism  says  that  the  Anandamaya  is  not 
the  individual  self,  in  as  much  as  He  is  declared  to  be  the 
cause  of  bliss  to  all  individual  selves.  The  source  of  bliss 
cannot  be  the  same  as  he  who  receives  bliss  therefrom  (pp. 
390-391.).  The  fourth  aphorism  in  the  Adhikarana  says 
that  that  same  Brahman,  who  is  denoted  by  the  words  of 
the  mantra  which  begins  with — 'The  Brahman  is  Existence, 
Knowledge,  Infinity/ — is  spoken  of  as  the  Anandamaya, 


Ixiv  ANALYTICAL    OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS. 

and  that  therefore  the  Anandamaya  cannot  be  the  indivi- 
dual self.  The  Brahman  is  the  object  to  be  attained  by 
the  individual  self  who  is  the  worshipper,  and  the  object  of 
worship  cannot  be  the  same  as  the  worshipper  (pp.  391- 
392.).  The  next  aphorism  gives  another  reason  why  the 
Anandamaya  cannot  be  the  individual  self ;  and  that  is — 
that  there  is  inappropriateness  in  supposing  that  the 
Anandamaya  is  any  thing  other  than  the  Supreme  Self. 
It  may  be  maintained  by  a  Purvapakshin  that,  although  it 
is  true  that  a  worshipper's  object  of  attainment  is  necessa- 
rily different  from  the  worshipper  himself,  here  the  Brah- 
man, denoted  by  the  words  of  the  mantra  referred  to  above, 
is  not  a  different  thing  from  the  individual  self.  The 
mantra  is  intended  to  teach  that  the  Brahman  and  the 
individual  self  are  both  one  and  the  same,  and  that  both 
of  them  have  the  same  essential  nature  of  attributeless  and 
undifferentiated  intelligence.  Therefore  the  Anandamaya 
denotes  only  this  essential  nature  of  the  individual  self.  The 
inappropiiateness  in  maintaining  a  position  like  this  is— 
that  unconditioned  omniscience  will  have  to  be  attributed 
to  the  individual  self,  which  has  no  omniscience  at  all  in 
its  bound  condition  of  samsara.  Even  the  released  indi- 
vidual self  cannot  have  such  unconditioned  omniscience  as 
can  'see'  and  think  in  many  ways,  so  as  to  create  the  world 
thereby,  and  make  the  Brahman  manifold.  Accordingly  the 
Anandamaya  has  to  denote  the  Brahman,  who  is  the  Su- 
preme Self  and  is  other  than  the  individual  self.  That 
speech  and  mind  cannot  grasp  the  Brahman  does  not 
mean  that  He  is  really  attributeless,  in  spite  of  the  scrip- 
ture attributing  to  Him  innumerable  auspicious  qualities  ; 
it  only  means  that  speech  and  mind  cannot  prove  Him.  It 
is  said  that  the  unsurpassable  Bliss  of  the  Brahman  may 
be  known,  and  that  to  know  it  is  to  cease  to  have  any  fear 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.  l.KV 

Irom    anywhere.     Thus   the   Brahman  described    in  the 
mantra  has  characteristics  which  are  other  than  those  that 
constitute  the  essential  nature  of  the  individual  self;  and 
the    Anandamaya  cannot  again  for  this   reason  be   the 
same  as  the  individual  self  (pp.  392-396.).        The  next 
aphorism  says  that  the  Anandamaya  is  different  from  the 
individual  self,  for  the  reason  that  the  Taittiriya-Upanish- 
ad  itself  declares    that  the    individual    self   is    different 
from    the    Brahman,     (pp.  396-397.).        There  is  again 
another  reason  given  in  the  next  aphorism  to  shew  why 
the    Anandamaya  cannot  be    the    individual   self.     The 
Brahman    merely  wills,  and    there  arises  creation  ;  and 
He  does  not  stand  in  need  of  any  association  with  non- 
intelligent   matter  in  the   course  of  His    willing  such  a 
creation.     But  no  individual  self  that  is  capable  of  engag- 
ing in   creation   can   ever  do   so   without  being  in  asso- 
ciation    with    matter    (page    397.).      The    last    reason 
why    the    Anandamaya    cannot    be  the    individual    self 
is  given  in  the  last   aphorism  of  the  adhikarana.    Since 
the   bliss   of  the  individual    self  is    the   result    of  that 
self's   association  with    the  Anandamaya,  the  bliss-giver 
cannot  be  the  same  as  the  bliss-receiver.     That  the  Brah- 
man is  the  supreme  home   of  bliss  and  that  He  is  Bliss 
Himself,  so  that  without  Him  none  can  have  any  bliss  of 
any  kind,  is  amply  borne  out  by  scriptural  authority.     The 
j'lva,  or  the  individual  self,  is  not  taught  to  be  such  an  en- 
tity ;  and  therefore  the  conclusion  of  the  Adhikarana  is 
that  the  Brahman,  who  has  been  made  out  to  be  a  differ- 
ent entity  from  the  pradhdna  or  non-intelligent  matter,  is 
also  a  different  entity  from  the  jiva  or  individual  self  (pp. 
398-399.). 

The  seventh  adhikarana  is  called  Aniar  adhikarana, 
\ 


Ixvi  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS. 

and  consists  only  of  two  aphorisms.  This  and  the  follow- 
ing four  adhikaranas,  belonging  to  the  first  part  of  the 
first  chapter  of  the  Vedanta-Si'itras,  are  intended  to  estab- 
lish that  the  Brahman  is  different  from  certain  particular 
non-intelligent  entities,as  also  from  the  Sun,  Prajapati,Indra 
and  other  such  individual  selves,  who  have  attained  god- 
hood  and  are  in  possession  of  peculiarly  valuable  merit 
due  to  their  respective  karmas.  The  first  aphorism  of 
the  Antaradhikarana  says  that  the  Person,  who  is  declared 
in  the  scripture  to  be  within  the  Sun  and  within  the  eye,  is 
the  Brahman  Himself,  in  as  much  as  such  attributes  as 
belong  only  to  the  Brahman  are  seen  to  be  applied  to  that 
Person.  The  Sankhyas  are  again  the  Pftrvapakshins  here, 
and  point  out  that  this  person  is  declared  to  be,  like  an  in- 
dividual self,  associated  with  a  body ;  and  they  contend 
that  individual  selves  themselves  may,  through  the  accu- 
mulated merit  of  their  karmas,  acquire  omniscience,  omni- 
potence, and  all  the  other  sovereignties  which  are  attributed 
to  the  Brahman,  and  that  there  need  be  nothing  called 
the  Supreme  Self  as  distinct  from  the  individual  self.  Ac- 
cording to  them  it  is  only  a  highly  meritorious  individual  self 
that  is  the  person  within  the  Sun  and  within  the  eye  (pp. 
400-402.).  In  answer  to  the  Sdtikhyas  it  is  first  pointed 
out  that  "This  same  above-mentioned  Person  is  risen  above 
all  sins,"  and  that  to  be  so  free  from  sin  is  to  be  free  from 
all  subjection  to  the  influence  of  karma.  No  individual  self 
is,  by  nature,  free  from  the  influence  of  karma  ;  and  the 
Brahman's  freedom  from  the  influence  of  karma  is  indeed 
the  basis  of  all  the  auspicious  qualities  and  sovereignties 
that  are  attributed  to  Him  as  being  natural  to  Him.  To 
possess  these  things  thus,  it  is  altogether  impossible  for 
any  individual  self.  Therefore  the  Person  within  the  eye 
and  within  the  Sun  cannot  be  an  individual  self.  That  this 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.  Ixvil 

Person  is  declared  to  be  associated  with  a  body  does  not 
prove  that  He  must,  in  consequence,  be  only  an  individual 
self;  because  it  is  possible  for  Him  who  wills  the 
truth  to  will  His  own  association  with  a  body.  Indeed 
there  is  incompatibility  between  His  essential  nature, 
which  is  free  from  the  influence  of  karma,  and  His  associa- 
tion with  a  material  body,  which  is  always  controlled  by 
karma  ;  but  then  His  body  need  not  at  all  be  material.  That, 
with  the  .object  of  favouring  His  worshippers,  He  often 
assumes  suitable  divine  forms,  that  nevertheless  He  is  free 
from  the  qualities  belonging  essentially  to  material  Prakri- 
ti,  and  that  the  body  which  is  at  any  time  assumed  by 
Him  is  immaterial  and  divine,  are  all  capable  of  being  well 
established  by  means  of  the  scriptures.  Consequently,  He 
who  abides  within  the  brilliant  orb  of  the  Sun  and  within 
the  eye  is  the  Highest  Self  Himself,  who  is  different  from  the 
Sun  and  other  individual  selves  (pp.  403-408.).  Then 

the  other  aphorism  in  the  adhikarana  draws  attention  to 
the  fact  that  the  scriptures  themselves  have  declared  this 
Highest  Self  to  be  different  from  the  sun-god  and  other  such 
individual  selves  ;  and  in  proof  of  this,  passages  are  quoted 
from  the  Brihaddranyaka-Upanishad  and  from  the  Snbdla- 
Upanishad  •  and  finally  the  adhikarana  is  brought  to  an 
end  with  the  conclusion  that  the  Supreme  Self  is  altogether 
different  from  all  the  individual  selves  from  the  four-faced 
Brahma  downwards  (pp.  408-409.). 

The  Aka'sddhikarana  contains  only  one  aphorism 
which  says  that  what  is  denoted  by  the  word  Akd'sa  in  the 
Chhdndogya-Upanishad  (I.  9.  .1.)  is  the  Brahman,  in  as 
much  as  His  peculiar  characteristics  are,  in  the  context, 
mentioned  in  relation  to  what  is  denoted  by  that  word.  Sat, 
At ma n,  and  such  other  words  have  already  been  shewn  to 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS. 

denote  the  Brahman,  who  is  the  cause  of  the  world  and  the 
home  of  all  auspicious  qualities  and  divine  sovereignties. 
Here,  it  is  pointed  out  that  the  word  Akasa  is  also  used,  in 
the  passage  referred  to  above,  to  denote  that  same  Brah- 
man. The  Pfirvapakshin  here  contends  that  the  word 
dkdsa  must  be  interpreted  to  mean  nothing  other  than  the 
material  element  of  akasa  or  ether.  No  one  has  any  right 
to  interpret  a  word  so  as  to  make  it  have  a  meaning  which  is 
other  than  its  usual  significance;  and,  when  it  is  said  in  the 
scriptures  that  all  beings  are  born  out  of  the  akasa,  what 
is  meant  to  be  taught  is  that  the  whole  world  has  been 
evolved  out  of  the  material  element  known  as  ether.  The 
qualities  of (  seeing ',  thinking,  and  willing  are  attributed 
to  the  cause  of  the  world  only  figuratively.  The  word  sat 
also  means  the  material  element  known  as  dkdsa,  and  the 
word  at  man  also  may  legitimately  be  interpreted  to  mean 
the  same  thing.  That  dkdsa  is  sometimes  pointed  out  to  be 
a  produced  effect,  does  not  go  against  its  being  the  cause  of 
the  world ;  because  it  is  capable  of  existing  both  in  the 
unevolved  and  the  evolved  conditions.  This  view  agrees 
also  with  other  statements  in  the  scripture  regarding  the 
dkdsa  ;  therefore  the  Brahman  is  not  other  than  the  well 
known  element  of  akasa  (pp.  409-413.).  Against  this 

contention  it  is  argued  that  the  Upanishadic  passage  on 
which  this  aphorism  is  based  assigns  to  Akd'sa  such  attri- 
butes as  cannot  appropriately  belong  to  the  element  ether. 
This  element  cannot  be  the  cause  of  all  things,  in  as  much 
as  the  intelligent  individual  self  cannot  be  born  out  of 
non-intelligent  matter;  it  cannot  be  greater  than  all  things, 
because  to  be  greater  than  all  things  is  to  be  unconditioned  ; 
nor  can  it  be  the  best  refuge,  as  long  as  it  is  merely  that 
non-intelligent  thing  which  deserves  to  be  discarded  and  the 
attainment  of  which  forms  no  desirable  aim  of  life.  It  is 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE    OF   CONTENTS.  IxJX 

not  right  to  say  that  the  word  dkdsa  cannot  be  interpreted 
to  mean  anything  other  than  the  well  known  material 
element  ether  ;  for,  in  the  context,  that  word  is  used  so  as 
to  denote  a  thing  that  has  been  already  described.  The 
thing  so  described  is  the  Brahman  ;  and  in  as  much  as  He 
possesses  the  power  of  illuminating  things,  He  is  very 
appropriately  called  Akdsa.  The  forced  adoption  of  an 
interpretation  that  is  against  the  context  is  in  no  way 
reasonable.  It  is  true  that  the  word  dtman  is  occasionally 
used  so  as  to  denote  a  non-intelligent  thing,  but  the  gene- 
ral rule  is  that  it  has  to  denote  an  intelligent  entity  ;  and 
the  scripture  ascribes  to  what  forms  the  cause  of  the  world 
such  attributes  as  belong  only  to  an  intelligent  being.  It 
is  thus  a  settled  conclusion  that  the  omniscient,  omnipo- 
tent and  omnipenetrative  Brahman  alone  is  denoted  by 
the  word  Akdsa  in  the  context  referred  to  above  (pp. 


The  Prdnddhikarana  is  a  short  one  containing  only  one 
aphorism,  which  says  that  the  word  Prdna  also  is  used  in 
the  CJihdndogya-Upanishad  to  denote  the  Brahman.  Here 
prdna  cannot  mean  merely  life  or  vital  air,  in  as  much  as 
it  is  used  to  denote  a  thing  that  has  been  otherwise  describ- 
ed, and  in  as  much  as  it  is  characterised  to  be  an  entity 
into  which  the  world  enters  and  out  of  which  the 
world  comes.  Seeing  that  most  things  are  dependent 
upon  /i/e,  we  cannot  interpret  this  causal  Prdna  to  mean 
life.  Stocks  and  stones  and  the  essence  of  the  intelli- 
gent individual  self  are  all  pervaded  by  the  Brahman, 
and  are  thus  dependent  upon  the  Brahman  ;  but  there 
is  no  life  or  physical  vitality  in  them.  Therefore  the 
word  Prdna  also  denotes,  like  the  word  Akasa,  that 
all-knowing,  all-powerful,  and  all-good  Brahman  who 


Ixx          ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS. 

alone  can  be  the   cause  of  the  universe  and  be  its  final 
home  of  refuge  (pp.  417-418.). 

There  are  four  aphorisms  in  the  Jyotir-adhikarana,  and 
they  are  intended  to  show  that  the  word  Jyotis  and  the 
word  Gdyatrl  are  both  used  in  the  Qihdndogya-  Upanishad 
to  denote  the  Brahman  who  is  the  cause  of  the  world.  It 
may  be  held  that  the  word  Jyotis  means  the  oridinary 
light  that  counteracts  darkness,  in  as  much  as  no  particular 
characteristics  specially  belonging  to  the  Highest  Self  are 
mentioned  here  as  being  in  association  with  the  thing  de- 
noted by  that  word.  This  Jyotis  is  also  mentioned  to  be 
the  same  as  the  digestive  heat  of  the  stomach,  and  even 
ordinary  light  is  quite  capable  of  being  characterised  by 
great  splendour.  The  ordinary  well  known  light  itself  is 
therefore  the  Brahman  which  forms  the  resplendent  cause 
of  the  world.  Against  this  view  the  first  aphorism  in  this 
adhikarana  says  ihatjyolis  or  'Light'  here  denotes  the  High- 
est Person  Himself,  as  there  is  the  mention  of  His  feet  in  a 
connected  context.  It  is  said — "All  beings  make  up  His  one 
foot ;  His  three  immortal  feet  are  in  the  Highest  Heaven." 
This  means  that  all  created  beings  indicate  only  a  quarter 
of  His  power  and  greatness  and  glory,  while  the  remaining 
three  fourths  are  not  made  manifest  in  our  visible  universe 
at  all.  They  are  in  the  Highest  Heaven,  and  this  'Light' 
is  said  to  shine  beyond  that  Highest  Heaven.  When  it  is 
taught  that  this  Highest  Person  conceived  as  '  Light '  has 
to  be  meditated  upon  as  forming  the  digestive  heat  of  the 
stomach,  it  does  not  prove  that  Jyotis  cannot  denote  the 
Brahman.  In  the  Bhagavad-gltd  the  Lord  has  actually 
compared  Himself  to  this  digestive  heat  (pp.  419-421.). 
The  mention  of  the  feet  here  is  also  in  relation  to  the  Gdyat- 
rl}  which  again  is  declared  in  the  CJj.handog\a-  Upanishad 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.  Ixxi 

to  be  the  Brahman  and  to  form  the  cause  of  all  things. 
The  second  aphorism  of  this  Adhikarana  says  that  this 
word  Gdyatrl  does  not  mean  the  Vedic  metre  known  by 
that  name,  but  denotes  the  Brahman  Himself.  It  is 
taught  that  one  of  the  ways  of  meditating  on  Him  is  to 
conceive  Him  as  the  Gdyatrl  metre,  which  has  four  feet  even 
as  He  has  His  four  feet.  To  use  words  which  ordinari- 
ly denote  metres  in  some  other  special  sense  is  not  un- 
common, and  the  word  viraj  is  so  used  in  this  same  Chhan- 
dogya-Upanishad.  Therefore  Gdyatrl  also  means  the 
Supreme  Self  who  is  the  cause  of  the  world  (pp.  421-423.). 
The  next  aphorism  gives  another  reason  why  the  word 
Gdyatrl  has  here  to  be  understood  to  mean  the  Highest 
Person  Himself.  As  in  the  case  of  the  Highest  Person, 
so  in  the  case  of  the  Gdyatrl  also,  it  is  pointed  out  that  it 
has  four  feet  and  that  all  beings  make  up  only  one  of  these 
four  feet.  Therefore  again  the  word  Gdyatrl  must  denote 
the  Brahman  Himself  (pp.  423-424.).  The  Jyotis  or 
'Light'  mentioned  above  is  said  to  shine  beyond  the  Highest 
Heaven,  and  the  three  immortal  feet  of  the  Highest 
Person  are  taught  to  be  in  the  Highest  Heaven.  In  the 
former  statement  the  Highest  Heaven  indicates  a  boun- 
dary, while  in  the  latter  it  indicates  a  position  of  locar 
tion.  The  last  aphorism  of  this  adhikarana  says  that, 
nevertheless,  there  is  no  incompatibility  here  to  vitiate  the 
conclusion  that  Jyotis  really  means  the  Highest  Person. 
That  Highest  Person  in  the  Highest  Heaven,  who  is  pos- 
sessed of  unsurpassable  splendour,  is  Himself  the  Light 
which  is  resplendent  beyond  the  Highest  Heaven.  There 
is  scriptural  authority  for  this  way  of  harmonising  the 
above  two  statements.  Consequently  it  is  quite  faultless  to 
say  that  it  is  that  Supreme  Person  Himself  who  is 
denoted  by  the  word  Jyotis  or  'Light'  (pp.  424-425.), 


XXll  ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS. 

The  eleventh  Adhiharana  is  known  as  the  Indraprd- 
n&dhikarana,  and  consists  of  four  aphorisms.    This  adhika- 
rana  is  mainly  based  on  passages  to  be  found  in  the  Kau- 
shUaki-Brdhmana-Upanishad.      In  one  of  them   Pratar- 
dana,  the  son  of  Divodasa,  is  said  to  have  gone  to  the  abode 
of  Indra  and  there  to  have  been  told  by  him  to  choose  a 
boon.     On  Pratardana  saying  that  on  his  behalf  Indra 
himself  may  choose  such  a  boon  as  is  most  beneficial  to 
man,  Indra  is  declared  to  have  said — "  Indeed  I  am  the 
Prdna  and  the  Omniscient  Self.    Worship  and  meditate  on 
me  as  life,  as  immortality."     Here  Indra  is  seen  to  desig- 
nate himself  as  Prdna  and  to  affirm  that  he  is  himself  a 
worthy  object  of  worship  and  meditation.    Here  the  doubt 
naturally  arises  whether  this  Indra  who  calls  himself  Prdna 
is  merely  the  individual  self  known  as  the  god  Indra,  or 
whether  he  is  the  Supreme  Self  who  is  other  than  any  indi- 
vidual self.        The  first  aphorism  of  the  Adhikarana  main- 
tains that  the  words  Indra  and  Prdna  denote  the  Supreme 
Self,  in  as  much  as  on  that  supposition  alone  the  sequel  be- 
comes appropriate,  wherein  it  is  said  that  this  Prdna  is  the 
Omniscient  Self  who  is  blissful,  undecaying  and  immortal, 
(pp.  425-427.).        The  context  of  the  passage  quoted  above 
makes  it  quite  clear  that  it  is  the  god  Indra  who  is  the  speak- 
er therein,  and  as  if  for  recognition  and  identification  he  also 
calls  himself  here  as  the  slayer  of  Tvashtra  ;  and  when  he 
says  that  he  himself  is  a  worthy  object  of  worship  and  me- 
ditation, it  cannot  be  that  the  word  Indra  denotes  any  thing 
other  than  the  god  of  that  name.        The  second  aphorism 
here  gives  the  reply  to  this  objection,  and  says  that  it  cannot 
be  so,  because  there  is  in  the  context  the  mention  of  a 
multitude  of  attributes  belonging  to  the  Inner  Self.    The 
Kaushitaki-Brdhmana-Upanishad  says  that  Prdna  is  the 
support  of  the  whole  universe  that  is  made  up  of  intelligent 


ANALYTICAL  OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS.        Ixxiii 

and    non-intelligent    things.         This    quality    of    being 
the  support  of   all    things  can  be  appropriate!)'  attributed 
only    to    the   Highest    Self  who    is  the   Internal   Ruler 
of  all  things.    To  be  the  worthy  object  of  such  worship  as 
leads   to   final   release   and  immortality,    to   be    the   im- 
peller   of   all    activities,    to    be    the    support    of  all,  to 
be  the   Lord  of  all,  and  to  be  blissful,  undecaying  and 
immortal,  are  all  attributes  belonging  to  the  Inner  Self ; 
and  they  are  ascribed  to  Indra  and  Prana.   Therefore  the 
words  Indra  and  Prana  denote  the  Supreme  Self  Himself 
here  (pp.  427-430.).        How  can  Indra  presume  that  he  is 
the  possessor  of  all  these  attributes  of  the  Inner  Self?        The 
third   aphorism   here   gives   the   answer  to  this  question. 
That  Indra  looked  upon  himself  as  the  Highest  Self  is  in 
accordance  with  the  teaching  given  in  the  saslras,  and  in 
accordance  with  what  Vamadeva  is  said  to  have  done  when 
he  realised  and  saw  the  Brahman.     After  realising  that  the1 
Highest  person  is  the  Internal  Ruler  of  all  things,  and  that 
the  universe  is  His  body,  Prahlada  is  also  said  to  have 
declared  that  he  was  all  things  himself  and  that  all  things 
existed  in  him  (pp.  430-432.).        The  characteristics  of  the 
individual  self  and  of  the  principal  vital  air  are  mentioned 
clearly  in  the  context  wherein  the  words  Indra  and  Prana 
occur.  Therefore  these  words  cannot  denote  the  Brahman, 
who  is  different  from  the  intelligent  individual  selves  and 
from  non-intelligent  matter,  and  who  is  also  the  cause  of  the 
world.  The  last  aphorism  of  this  adhiharana  gives,  however, 
the  reply  to  this  supposition,  by  pointing   out   that  it   is 
allowable  to  worship  and  meditate  on  the  Brahman  in  three 
ways,  that  those  three  ways  of  worship  and  meditation  are 
assumed  to  be  proper  in  the  context  here,  and  that  one  of 
those  three  ways  is  actually  adopted  therein.    The  Brah- 
man  may   be   worshipped  in   His  essential    unembodied 
J 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF   CONTENTS. 

nature,  or  He  may  be  worshipped  as  an  embodied  being  ; 
and  in  this  latter  case  He  may  be  conceived  and  meditat- 
ed upon  either  as  an  individual  self  or  as  a  material  object 
Wherever  particular  individual  selves  and  particular  mate- 
rial objects  are  found  so  described  in  the  scripture  as  to  be 
in  association  with  the  peculiarly  characteristic  attributes 
of  the  Supreme  Self,  or  wherever  the  words  denoting  those 
individual  selves  and  material  objects  are  seen  to  be  gram- 
matically equated  with  words  denoting  the  Supreme  Self, 
—in  all  such  cases  what  is  intended  to  be  taught  is  the 
worship  and  meditation  of  the  Brahman  as  forming  the 
Inner  Self  of  all  those  intelligent  and  non-intelligent  en- 
tities. Accordingly  the  words  Indra  and  Prana  also  de- 
note the  Supreme  Self  (pp.  432-435.). 

Thus  ends  the  commentary  on  the  first  part  of  the 
first  chapter  of  the  Vedanta-Siitras.  The  first  Adhikarana 
establishes  the  need  for  the  study  of  the  Veddnta  and 
points  out  the  purpose  of  such  a  study.  The  second  gives 
a  definition  of  the  Brahman.  The  third  points  out  that 
this  definition  has  altogether  to  be  based  on  the  scripture. 
The  fourth  says  that  the  scripture  accordingly  forms  the  only 
source  from  which  a  knowledge  of  the  Brahman  is  to  be 
derived,  in  as  much  as  the  Brahman  is  the  one  thing  which 
it  throughout  aims  at  teaching.  These  four  Adhikarana^ 
contain  only  one  aphorism  each,  and  together  they  denote 
the  need  and  the  main  object  of  Vcddntic  studies. 
The  fifth  Adhikarana  establishes  that  the  Brahman,  who 
has  been  defined  to  be  the  cause  of  the  creation,  preserva- 
tion and  destruction  of  the  whole  universe,  is  other  than 
the  purely  material  Pradhdna  of  the  Sdfikhyas.  Thus  the 
Veddnta  does  not  believe  in  what  may  be  called  the  omni- 
potence of  matter,  and  there  are  eight  aphorisms  given  to 
sh,ew  that  matter  cannot  be  the  creator  of  the  world.  Then 


ANALYTICAL   OUTLINE   OF  CONTENTS.          K'XV 

the  eight  aphorisms  of  the  sixth  Adhikarana  demonstrate 
that,  according  to  the  teaching  given  in  the  Upanishads,  the 
cause  of  the  creation,  preservation  and  destruction  of  the 
world  is  not  only  not  matter,  but  it  is  not  also  any 
one  of  the  individual  souls  existing  in  the  universe.  The 
Brahman  who  is  the  Highest  Person  is  the  Creator  ;  and 
He  is  distinct  from  matter  and  distinct  from  soul.  •  Then 
the  remaining  five  Adhikaranas  shew  that  it  is  only  this 
Brahman  who  is  mentioned  as  the  Person  within  the  Sun 
and  the  eye,  and  who  is  denoted  in  various  contexts  in  the 
Upanishads  by  the  words  Ahasa,  Prana,  Jyotis,  Gayatrl 
and  Indra-and-Prdna.  Accordingly  it  is  proved  that  the 
Prakriti  and  the  Purusha  of  the  SfitikhyaS  do  not 
constitute  the  cause  of  the  world,  but  that  the  cause 
thereof  is  the  omniscient  and  omnipotent  God  Himself 
who  is  wholly  pure  and  abundantly  full  of  all  auspicious 
qualities. 


SRT-BHASHYA. 


CHAPTER.  I. 

PART    I. 

May  my  understanding  assume  the  form  ofloving  de- 
votion to  that  Highest  Brahman  who  is  the  Home  of 
LakshmT, x  and  to  whom  the  creation,  preservation,  de- 
struction, &.C.,  of  all  the  worlds  is  (mere )  play,  whose  main 
resolve  consists  in  the  protection  of  ho?ts  of  multiform 
subordinate  beings,  and  who  is  specially  seen  to  shine  forth 
in  what  constitutes  the  head*  of  the  IViftfx. 

May  the  fair-minded  god-like  ones  of  the  earth  drink 
in  daily  the  speech-nectar  of  the  son  of  Parasara — <the 
nectar)  which  has  been  churned  out  of  the  heart  of  the 
milky  ocean  of  the  Upanishads,  and  quickens  such  souls  as 
have  lost  hold  of  their  life  in  God  through  the  excessive 
flaming  forth  of  the  fire  of  sawsara*  — (may  they  drink  in 
that  nectar)  which  has  been  carefully  preserved  by  ancient 
teachers  and  has  (hitherto )  been  held  at  a  distance  (from  us 
all )  on  account  of  the  mutual  conflict  of  many  schools  of 
thought,  and  which  is  now  brought  within  the  reach  (of  all ) 
by  means  of  (our)  appropriate  words. 

i.  Lakshml  is  the  name  of  the  god-  wives  of  Vishnu. 

dess  of  fortune,  mercy  and  beauty.  She  J.     The     Cpaxisiiiiiis    are     looked 

is  otherwise  known  as  Sri,  and  is  re-  upon  as  forming  the  head  of  the    I'f- 

garded  in  Hindu  Mythology  as  the  Jos,  and  are   also  known  as  the  IV- 

wife    of  Vishnu    or    Narayana.     In  dJnia. 

the     Taitt.     Tlr.     in     the       passage  :.    Samsarx   mean?    the  circuit   of 

"  Hrisrfa    tf  Lakshni'sctia   patnyau,"'  mundane   existence   consisting  of  fre- 

l>oth    Lakshml,  and  HrT  or  modesty  quent  births  and  frequent  deaths  ami 

j>er?onified.    are    spoken    of    a<    tho  all  their  consequences. 


2  SRI-BHASHYA.       [Chap.  L  Part.  L 

Ancient  teachers  (such  as  Dramidacharya  and  others) 
abridged  that  extensive  commentary  on  the  Brahma-Su- 
tras* which  was  composed  by  the  venerable  Bodhayana.  * 
In  accordance  with  their  opinion,  the  words  of  the  sfilras 
(i.  e.  aphorisms)  are  (here)  explained. 

ADHIKARANA.  I. 

Jijftdsddhikarana. 
Sutra  I.     At  ha  to  Brahmajijnasa. 

Then  therefore  the  enquiry  into  the  Brahman. 

Here  the  word  then  is  used  in  the  sense  of  coming  im- 
mediately after  ;  the  word  therefore  is  used  in  the  sense 
that  that  (enquiry)  which  has  been  concluded  (viz.  the 
enquiry  into  the  Karma-kdnda* )  is  the  reason  (for  under- 
taking the  present  enquiry).  With  him  who  has  (first) 
studied  and  learnt  the  Vedas  with  all  their  limbs7  and 
head,  and  who,  through  realizing  that  the  mere  knowledge 
of  (ritualistic)  works  gives  small  and  transitory  results,  has 
the  desire  for  final  release  born  in  him — (with  him),  the 
desire  for  that  knowledge  of  the  Brahman,  which  is  pro- 
ductive of  infinite  and  eternal  results,  is,  indeed,  of  subse- 
quent origin. 

Brahmano  jijildsd—  Brah majijnasa.    Brahmanas,  the 

4.  Brahma-Sutras  is  another  name  7.  In  the  same  way  in  which   the 
for  the  Veddnta-Sutras  of  Badarayana.       Upanishads   are  looked  upon   as   the 

5.  Accordingly,  Bodhayana  is  called  head  of  the  Vedas,  the  science  of  Sik- 
the   Vrittikara    or  the   author  of  the  s/id  or  phonetics,  which  deals  with  the 
\\itti.                                                     ~  proper  pronunciation  and  euphony  of 

6.  The  Karma-kanda  is  that  section  words,     grammar,    metrics,    Xirukta 
of  Vedic  scriptures  which  includes  the  which  deals  with  the  etymology  and 
Manlras,   the   Brahmanas   and    such  proper  meaning  of  Vedic  words,  astro- 
portions   of  the  Aranyakas   as   deal  uomy,  and  Kalpa  or  the  code  of  litur- 
with  rituals  and  their  performance.  gy,  form  the  six  limbs  of  the  Vedas. 


Adhik.  /.  Silt,  i.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  3. 

genitive  of  the  word  Brahman^  has  (here)  the  objective  sig- 
nificance, in  accordance  with  the  special  rule — "  The  geni- 
tive followed  by  a  word  having  a  krit*  affix  is  used  to 
denote  the  agent  or  the  object."  [Pdnini.  II.  3.  65.].  Even 
if  the  genitive  is  taken  as  expressing  relation  in  gener- 
al", the  objective  significance  (of  the  genitive)  is  well  esta- 
blished (here),  because  the  desire  to  know  requires  an  ob- 
ject. Yet  again,  because  what  is  made  out  by  the  direct 
denotative  power  (of  the  genitive  in  accordance  with 
Pdnini.  II.  3.  65.)  is  more  acceptable  than  what  is  ob- 
tained by  a  process  of  inference  (in  accordance  with  Pdnini. 
II.  3.  50.,  where  the  genitive  is  declared  to  be  capable  of 
expressing  relation  in  general) -  the  genitive  (here)  has  to 
be  understood  in  the  objective  significance.  It  should  not 
be  supposed  that  because  there  is  the  rule — "  The  genitive 
prescribed  specially  for  particular  words  is  not  to  be  com- 
pounded"— [Pdnini.  II.  2.  10.  Vdrtika.'],  this  genitive  in 
the  objective  significance,  (being  one  such),  is  prohibited 
from  being  compounded  (with  other  words);  for,  there  is 
the  rule  of  counter-exception  (to  this),  viz.  "  The  genitive, 
with  a  krit  following,  is  to  be  compounded."  [Pdnini.  II. 
2.  9.  Vdrtika.~\ 

By  the  word  Brahman  is  denoted  the  Highest  Person 
who  is,  by  nature,  devoid  of  all  evil,  and  is  possessed  of  hosts 
of  auspicious  qualities,  which  are  innumerable  and  unsur- 
passed in  excellence.  For,  everywhere  (/.  c.  in  all  contexts) 
the  word  Brahman  is  seen  to  derive  its  meaning  from  the 

8.  See  Paitini  III.  I.  93.  Kridatih.  a.  A'ril  is  an  affix  used  to  form   nouns 

Whenever  a  rule  affecting  a  root  ob-  from  roots.     And  a  word  ending  with 

tains  scope  for  its  operation,  then  the  a  A'rit  affix   (A'ridanta)  is  also  called 

affix  which  it' applied   to  that  root  in  a   A'rit.     The  woi d  Jijflasa  is  a    vei- 

accordance  with  that  rule,  and  is  other  bal    noun  and  is  taken   to  be  a   A'rit 

than  verbal  personal  affixes  such  as  here. 

mi,  si,  tt,  is  called  a  A'ril.     Generally,  y.  See  rCinini.  II.  3.  50. 


4  SRI-I3HASHYA.    \Chap.  L  Part.  L 

association  of  bnhativa,  i.  c.  greatness,  (with  the  thing 
denoted  by  it)  ;  and  whatever  greatness  is,  by  nature  as 
well  as  by  qualities,  unsurpassed  in  excellence,  that  is  its 
primary  and  natural  meaning10.  And  He  (who  possesses 
such  greatness)  is  alone  the"  Lord  of  All.  Hence  the  word 
Brahman  is  primarily  used  to  signify  Him  alone.  In  cases 
where,  on  account  of  the  association  of  a  small  modicum  of 
that  quality,  other  things  than  He  are  meant  (by  the  word 
Brahman],  it  must  be  used  in  a  secondary  sense  ;  because 
it  is  improper  to  postulate  a  variety  of  meanings  (for  it),  as 
(it  is  improper)  in  the  case  also  of  the  word  Bhagaval 1  * . 
For  the  sake  of  attaining  immortality,  He  alone  has  to  be 
desired  and  to  be  known  by  (all)  those  who  are  afflicted 
with  the  three  miseries12.  Hence,  the  Lord  of  All  is  in- 
deed the  Brahman  \vho  forms  the  object  of  (our  present) 
enquiry. 

Jijnasa  is  (literally)  the  desire  to  know.    As  (every) 
desire  has  for  its  basis  the  thing  to  be  desired,  here,  that 

10.  In  Indian  literature  it  is  held      the  fact  of  such  men  possessing  more 
that  the  power  of  words  to  denote       or   less   the    godly    qualities   of    the 
meanings  is  of  three  kinds,  vis.  de-       Divine    Lord. 

notative,    figurative  and    purportive.  12.  The    'three  miseries'  are    the 

The  purportive  signification  of  words  three  kinds  of  miseries  known  as  the 

is  by  some  maintained  to  be  different  Adhyatmika  i.  e.  those  which  are  due 

from  the  suggestive  signification,  and  to   one's  self,    the  Adhidaivika,  those 

accordingly  the  power  of  words  is  also  that  arise  out   of  deities     or  are    of 

said     to    be   fourfold.      See   Kavya-  supernatural    origin,    and    the  Adhi- 

prakasdi  chapters,  II.  &  III.  bhautika,  those  that  arise  out  of  natur- 

11.  The  word  Bhagavat  means  the  al  causes   and  beings.     For  example, 
Divine  Lord.     It  is,  however,    used  fever  and  other  such  diseases,  anger, 
frequently  enough  as   a  term  of   re-  desire,  and  other  such  passions  form 
spect  in  association  with  the  names  of  the  misery  known  as  the  Adhyatmika. 
great  and  holy  men,   such  as  Vyasa,  Thunder,  storm,    lightning,  &c.,  pro- 
Bodhayana,  &c.  It  is  held  that  in  all  duce   the    Adhidah-ika    misery.     The 
such   cases   the   applicability   of  the  Adlribhaulika      misery     results     from 
word  as  a  term  of  respect  is  due  to  ghosts,  devils,  &c. 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  /.]        SRI-BHASHYA.  5 

very  knowledge  (of  the  Brahman],  which  is  the  thing  desir- 
ed, is  enjoined. 

What  is  said  is  this  : — As  the  (ritualistic)  works  learnt 
from  the  earlier  part  of  the  Mimdmsd  are  capable  of 
producing  only  small  and  transitory  results,  and  as  the 
knowledge  of  the  Brahman,  conclusively  dealt  with  in  the 
latter  part  (thereof),  is  capable  of  producing  infinite  and 
indestructible  results, — for  this  reason  alone,  immediately 
after  the  antecedent  knowledge  of  works,  the  Brahman 
has  to  be  desired  and  known.  Says  the  Vrittikdra  (Bodha- 
yana)  therefore  : — "  The  desire  to  know  the  Brahman 
comes  immediately  after  the  acquisition  of  the  knowledge 
of  (ritualistic)  works  is  completed."  Moreover,  he  says,  in 
the  following  manner,  that  between  the  Karma-mlmdmsd 
and  the  BraJima-mlmdmsd  there  is  a  sdslraic  (/.  e.  scienti- 
fic) unity  (whereby  the  antecedence  of  the  Karma-ml- 
mdmsd is  implied)  : — "  This  Mimdmsd  of  the  Embodied 
(/.  c.  of  the  Brahman)  is  composed  so  as  to  be  one  with 
that  of  Jaimini  (/.  c.  the  Karma-mlmdmsd)  which  consists 
of  sixteen  specific  chapters  ;  and  so  there  is  the  establish- 
ment of  sdstraic  unity  between  them."  Hence  the  differ- 
ence between  the  Pilrva-mimdmsd  and  the  Uttara-mi- 
mdmsd  is  due  to  the  difference  in  the  subject-matter  taken 
up  to  be  propounded,  like  the  difference  between  the  first 
six  and  the  second  six  chapters  (of  the  Pfirva-mlmdmsd), 
as  also  like  the  difference  between  one  chapter  and  another 
(of  either  of  the  Mimdmsds).  The  Mlmdmsd-sdstra  (as  a 
whole),  beginning  with — "  Then  therefore  the  enquiry  into 
riharma**,  (i.  c.  duty) "— {Pur.  Mini.  I.  i.  i.]  ;  and 
ending  with—"  There  is  non-return,  according  to  scripture ; 

13.  D/iaftna  or  duty  is  defined  in       commandment." 
the  Purva-mlmSmsJl  to  be  "  that  thing  Chodanalakshanortho  dharmah. 

which    hus  the   characteristics    of  a  [Jaimini's /'«;•*•«-;/// wjwj«.  1. 1.  2.]. 


6  SRI-BHASHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  /. 

there  is  non-return,  according  to  scripture "--[  Vcd.  Snt. 
IV.  4.  22.],  has  a  certain  order  of  sequence  (in  the  treat- 
ment of  its  subject)  in  accordance  with  the  peculiarity  of 
the  topics  dealt  with  (therein). 

Accordingly,  by  the  statement — "  The  Veda  (Swd- 
dhydya)  has  to  be  learnt" — \Taitt.  Ar.  II.  15.],  the  mental 
reception,  by  means  of  oral  recitation,  of  the  collection  of 
syllables  known  as  the  Veda,  which  is  denoted  by  the  word 
Swddhydya,  is  enjoined  in  the  very  beginning.  And  if  it  be 
asked,  "  Of  what  nature  is  that  learning  through  oral  reci- 
tation and  how  is  it  to  be  gone  through  ?" — we  reply  as 
follows  : — The  requirements  (for  learning  the  Vedas)  are 
enjoined  by  means  of  this  passage,  viz.  "  A  Brahmana  of 
eight  years  of  age  should  be  initiated  (as  a  Vedic  student) 
and  be  taught  (to  repeat  the  Vedas) — "[Sat.  Br.  ?]  ;  as 
also  by  means  of  the  teaching  about  special  preparatory 
and  purificatory  ceremonies  and  restrictions  (as  to  time, 
place,  food,  &c.) — such  as  are  laid  down  in  this  passage 
among  others,  viz.  "  Having,  according  to  scriptural  injunc- 
tions, made  preparations  to  begin  (to  learn  the  Vedas) 
either  (on  the  full  moon  day)  in  the  month  of  Srdvana  (/'.  e. 
July-August)  or  (on  the  full  moon  day)  in  the  month  of 
Praushthapada  (/.  c.  August-September),  and  having  be- 
come fitted  (therefor),  a  Brahmana  should  learn  the 
Vedas  for  four  months  and  a  half."  \Manu.  IV.  95.]. 
Thus  it  is  understood  that  learning  the  Vedas  turns  out  to 
be  the  mental  reception  of  a  collection  of  syllables,  and 
consists  in  their  recitation  by  the  teacher  followed  by  the 
after-recitation  (of  the  pupil),  who  is  in  the  habit  of  observ- 
ing special  preparatory  and  purificatory  ceremonies  and 
restrictions,  and  who  has  been  initiated  by  a  teacher  born 
of  noble  lineage,  accustomed  to  pious  observances,  possess- 
ed of  spiritual  qualities,  and  also  having  a  thorough  know- 


Adhik.  I.  Snt.  /.]       SRi-BHASHYA.  7 

ledge  of  the  Vcdas.  Learning  the  Vcdas  is,  moreover,  a 
samskara  (/.  c.  a  refinement  or  an  exaltation  of  excellence) 
in  relation  to  the  Vedas,  since  it  is  seen  that  Swadhydya 
forms  the  object  (of  such  a  samskara)  in  the  passage — 
/The  Veda  has  to  be  learnt."  \Taitt.  Ar.  II.  15.].  Sams- 
kara (/.  c.  refinement  or  exaltation  of  excellence),  it  is  well 
known,  is  the  means  of  qualifying  (a  thing)  for  the  fulfil- 
ment of  other  objects  (than  those  for  which  it  is  suited 
without  that  samskara).  And  it  is  proper  for  the  Vcdas 
to  be  worthy  of  samskara  (/.  c.  of  getting  their  excellence 
exalted),  because  (when  so  qualified)  they  enable  us  to 
know  (the  nature  of)  duty,  wealth,  desire  and  final  release, 
which  form  the  fourfold  objects  of  human  pursuit ;  and 
(they  enable  us  to  know  also)  the  means  of  accomplishing 
them.  And  again  (they  are  worthy  of  such  samskcira), 
because,  in  the  way  of  a  mere  silent  repetition  (of  prayers), 
cS:c.,  they  form,  even  as  they  are  verbally,  the  means  of 
accomplishing  those  (objects  of  human  pursuit).  Thus  the 
injunction  as  to  learning  the  Vedas  finally  comes  to  mean  a 
mere  mental  reception  of  a  collection  of  syllables,  after 
(reciting)  certain  mantras1*  and  (obeying)  certain  regula- 
tions. 

Because  the  Vcdas,  as  learnt  by  oral  recitation,  are,  of 
their  own  nature,  seen  to  give  us  knowledge  of  purposeful 
(/.  c.  fruit-giving)  things,  the  person  who  has  learnt  the 
Vcdas  perceives,  in  the  first  instance,  those  purposeful  (fruit- 
giving)  things  which  are  disclosed  to  him  by  the  Vedas  so 
learnt ;  and  then  betakes  himself,  of  his  own  accord,  to 
the  '  hearing '  ('/.  c.  the  study )  of  the  Mimamsd  which  is  of 

14.  A  Mantra  is  interpreted  to  properly,  a  hymn  or  prayer  address- 
mean  ;i  sacred  formula  and  its  ed  to  a  deity,  and  is  supposed  to 
thought  which  protect  the  thinker  possess  mystic  and  supernatural 
thereof  from  all  danger.  It  is,  powers. 


8  SRI-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

the  nature  of  an  enquiry  into  Vedic  texts,  having  for  its 
result  the  determination  of  the  special  character  and  mode 
of  those  (purposeful  and  fruit-giving)  things.  There  (/.  c. 
in  the  Vedas),  after  the  true  nature  of  the  injunctions  re- 
garding works  has  been  ascertained,  he  observes  the  insigni- 
ficant and  impermanent  character  of  the  result  of  works. 
And  then  because,  from  the  passages  of  the  Upanishads 
which  are  a  part, of  the  Vedas  learnt  by  oral  recitation,  a 
prima  facie  mental  impression  about  an  infinite  and  per- 
manent result  in  the  form  of  immortality  arises,  he  there- 
fore becomes  qualified  for  the  study  of  the  Mlmdmsd  of  the 
Embodied — (the  Mlmdmsd}  which  is  such  an  enquiry  into 
Vcddntic  texts  as  results  in  the  determination  of  the  nature 
of  that  (immortality). 

Accordingly,  Vcddntic  texts  declare  the  destructibility 
of  the  results  of  mere  works  and  the  indestructible  charac- 
ter of  the  results  arising  from  the  knowledge  of  the  Brah- 
man:— "Just  as  the  world  obtained  by  works  perishes 
here,  so  also,  there,  the  world  obtained  by  merit  perishes." 
[C/ihdnd.  Up.  VIII.  i.  6.].  "To  him  that  (world  obtained 
by  works)  indeed  comes  to  an  end."  [Brih.  Up.  III.  8.  10.]. 
"  It  is  not  reached  by  the  non-eternal  (works)."  [Kat/i. 
Up.  II.  10.].  •'  Frail,  indeed,  are  these  floats  in  the  form 
of  sacrifices."  [Mnnd.  Up.  I.  2.  7.].  "  Having  examined 
the  worlds  obtained  by  works,  let  a  Brdhmana  acquire 
freedom  from  all  desires.  The  changeless  is  not  (gained) 
by  the  changeable ;  to  know  that,  let  him  approach,  with 
fuel  in  hand,  a  preceptor  who  is  learned  in  the  Vedas  and 
has  a  sure  footing  in  the  Brahman.  To  him  (/.  e.  to  such 
a  pupil)  who,  with  restrained  senses  and  fully  tranquilled 
mind,  has  thus  appoached  him  (7.  e.  the  perceptor),  that 
wise  man  (the  Guru)  should  speak  of  that  knowledge  of 
the  Brahman  by  which  the  ever-existent  and  indestructible 


Adhik.  I.  Siil.  /.]       SRi-BHASHYA.  9 

Person  (Puritsha)  is  known."  [Muni.  Up.  I.  2.  12  &  13.]. 
Should  speak  of  has  (here)  the  same  meaning  as  should 
teach.  "  He  who  knows  the  Brahman  attains  the  High- 
est." [Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.].  "He  comes  not  to  death 
again  who  s  ies  that  One."  [  ?  ].  "He  who  sees  (that 
One)  does  not  see  Death."  [Qihand.  Up.  VII.  26.  2.]. 
"  He  (who  knows  the  Brahman)  becomes  free."  [Qtihand. 
Up.  VII.  25.  2.].  "  He  who  knows  Him  thus  becomes 
immortal  here.  There  is  no  other  path  for  the  attainment 
of  final  release."  [Taitt.  Ar.  III.  12.7.].  "  Knowing  the 
individual  self  and  the  Impeller  (/.  e.  the  Brahman)  to 
be  separate,  and  being  therefore  blessed  by  Him,  he  attains 
immortality".  [Svct.  Up.  I.  6.].  To  the  same  effect  there 
are  also  other  texts. 

It  may,  however,  be  said  that  Swarga  (the  celestial 
world  of  enjoyment)  and  other  such  results  of  works,  the 
destructibility  of  Sioarga  and -of  such  other  things,  and  im- 
mortality as  the  result  of  the  worship  of  the  Brah- 
man— are  (all)  undoubtedly  made  out  merely  by  learning 
the  Vcdas  with  their  limbs;. and  that  (therefore)  he,  who 
( having  so  learnt  the  Vedas)  is  desirous  of  obtaining  final 
release,  may  at  once  betake  himself  to  the  enquiry  into  the 
Brahman  immediately  afterwards.  What  then  is  the  reason 
for  the  (alleged)  necessity  of  the  (previous)  enquiry  into  (ritu- 
alistic) duty  (dhanna)  ?  If  so  asked — we  reply — "Let 
him  not  enter  on  the  study  of  the  MlmAmsd  of  the  Embo- 
died also,  since,  by  merely  learning  the  Vcdas  with  their 
limbs,  all  things  become  known."  It  may  be  again  said, 
however, — "  True,  there  certainly  arises  a  prima  facie  no- 
tion (of  all"  those  things  mentioned  above)  ;  still,  as  a 
sentence  is  capable  of  definitely  importing  a  true  meaning 
only  when  it  is  supported  by  logic,  this  notion,  even  though 
it  at  first  sight  aprears  of  itself,  does  not  transcend  doubt 
2 


io  SRI-BHASHYA.    [Chap.  I.  Fart.  L 

and  wrong  apprehension.  Hence  to  determine  that  (true 
meaning),  an  enquiry  into  Veda  itlc  passages  has  to  be 
undertaken."  If  so,  (we  rejoin)-—"  You  please  see  to  it 
that  the  enquiry  into  (ritualistic)  duty  also  has  to  be  un- 
dertaken for  that  very  same  reason." 

But  it  may  be  said  again  (by  the  Ptlrvapakshin,  ' 5 
or  the  objector)  as  follows  : — Whatever  the  enquiry  into 
the  Brahman  invariably  desiderates,  that  very  thing  should 
be  stated  to  be  the  antecedent  subject  of  enquiry  (here). 
The  enquiry  into  the  Brahman  does  not  desiderate  the  en- 
quiry into  (ritulistic)  dut)r  (dharma),  becuuse  in  the  case 
of  him  who  has  learnt  the  Veda/ita,  although  he  may 
have  (previously)  obtained  no  knowledge  of  (ritualistic) 
works,  the  enquiry  into  the  meaning  of  Ved antic  passages. 
is  quite  possible  and  appropriate.  In  this  same  (  Vcddnta) 
are  discussed  those  uf.d  :anas  or  forms  of  worship  which  are 
based  upon  the  Udgitha  (/.  e.  the  sacred  syllable  Om),  £c., 
and  are  in  themselves  a  part  of  fritua.isticj  works.  If  it 
be  held  that  one  who  has  not  obtained  the  knowledge  of 
works  is  incapable  of  performing  them  ('/.  e.  of  going  through 
those  forms  of  worship),  then,  whoever  thinks  so  is  ignorant 
of  the  import  of  the  Science  of  the  Embodied.  In  this  sci- 
ence, it  is  aimed  to  propound  the  knowledge  of  the  oneness 
of  the  Atman  (i.  e.  of  the  Self),  for  the  purpose  of  destroying 
that  false  knowledge,  which  is  the  source  of  all  (kinds  of) 
misery  to  him/vvho  is  sunk  in  the  ocean  of  the  sorrows  which 
arise  out  of  the  samsara  (or  the  circuit  of  mundane  exist- 
ence), that  is  made  up  of  biitli,  old  age,  death,  &c.,  and  have 
for  their  cause  the  perception  of  the  various  distinctions 
which  are  due  to  the  beginningless  avidya,  (or  ignorance). 

1$.  This  objector  is  the  Adwaitin  necessary  preliminary  to  the  study 
who  is  of  opinion  that  the  Karma-  of  the  Jndna-kandu  or  the  Ved- 
kdnda  need  not  be  studied  as  the  a»ta. 


Adhik.  I.  Snt.  /.]       SRI-BHASHYA.  it 

How,  then,  is  the  knowledge  of  works,  which  depends  upon 
distinctions,  of  any  use  to  such  a  person  ?  On  the  contrary 
it  is  positively  unfavourable  (to  him).  Moreover,  the  dis- 
cussion of  the  Udgitha,  &c.,  really  forms  a  part  of  (the  study 
of)  works  ;  and  yet  as  it  (viz.  that  discussion)  is  closely  allied 
to  what  constitutes  knowledge,  it  is  also  (incidentally)  con- 
ducted here  (in  the  Vcdn>ita).  Indeed,  it  (/.  c.  the  conduct 
of  that  discussion  here)  is  i.ot  due  to  any  direct  relationship 
(of  antecedence  and  sequence).  Hence,  whatever  is  desidera- 
ted by  what  forms  the  principal  subject  of  this  science --that 
very  thing  has  to  be  mentioned  as  its  antecedent.  (The  Bhd- 
skarlyas  may,  however,  here  interpose  and  say) — "  True  ; 
but  the  knowledge  of  works  alone  is  what  is  desiderated 
by  it,  because  it  is  declared  that  final  release  (or  moksha)  re- 
sults from  knowledge  that  is  added  to  works.  He  (the 
Sfitra-kdrd)  also  says  :  '  There  is  need  of  all  (works),  be- 
cause there  are  scriptural  statements  enjoining  sacrifices, 
&c.;  just  as  (the  harness  is  needed)  in  the  case  of  the 
horse.'  [  Ved,  Snt.  III.  4.  26.].  Moreover,  when  the  desi- 
derate \  works  are  not  (themselves-)  made  out,  it  is  not 
possible  to  know  the  distinction,  as  to  with  which  (of  them) 
there  is  to  be  the  cumulative  association  (of  knowledge \ 
and  as  to  with  which  it  is  not  to  be.  Hence  that  (viz. 
karma)  alone  is  the  antecedent  (subject  of  enquiry)."  This 
view  (we  mention)  is  not  proper,  because  the  cessation  of 
ignorance  (or  oiavidyd)  is  due  soie.y  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  Brahman,  who  is  pure  intelligence  and  hostile  to  all 
characterising  attributes.  In  reality,  final  re.ei.se  is  merely 
the  cessation  o.  ignorance.  How  can  works  which  are  subject 
to  endless  distinctions  arising  from  the  peculiarities  due 
to  tiie  various  conditions  ana  stages  of  iLe,  (arising)  from 
the  ojjects  which  tlie^e  have  in  view  and  from  the  means 
o/  accomplishing  them,  as  also  Irom  the  man  her  of 


12  SRI-BHASHYA.        [C/w/.  /.  Part.  L 

accomplishing  them— (how  can  such  works)  become  the 
means  for  the  destruction  of  ignorance,  which(destruction) 
is,  by  nature,  nothing  other  than  the  cessation  of  the  percep- 
tion of  all  distinctions  ?  Scriptural  texts  also  say  that  works 
are  an  obstruction  to  final  release,  inasmuch  as  their  results 
are  of  a  transitory  nature  ;  and  (they  further  say)  that  know- 
ledge alone  forms  the  means  of  final  release.  "  To  him  that 

O 

(world  obtained  by  works)  indeed  comes  to  an  end."  [Brih. 
Up.  III.  8.  10.].  "  Just  as  the  world  obtained  by  works  per- 
ishes here,  so  also,  there,  the  world  obtained  by  merit 
perishes."  \±hhand.  Up.  VIII.  1.6.].  "  He  who  knows  the 
Brahman  attains  the  Highest."  [Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.].  "He 
who  knows  the  Brahman  becomes  the  Brahman  indeed." 
[Muni.  Up.  III.  2.  9.].  "  After  knowing  Him  alone,  one 
transcends  death."  [Svet.  Up.  III.  8.].  To  the  same  effect 
there  are  also  other  texts. 

Besides,  it  has  been  observed  that  vidya  (or  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Brahman)  is  dependent  upon  karma,  such  as 
sacrifice,  &c.  Now,  it  (viz.  karma)  is  (by  nature)  hostile  to 
what  forms  the  principal  subject  (of  the  Brahma-mim&nsa)\ 
from  this  fact,  as  well  as  from  a  careful  consideration  of  the 
words  of  the  scriptural  passages  (enjoining  karma},  it  follows 
that,  through  previously  purifying  the  internal  organ  (or  the 
mind),  it  (viz.  karma)  is  useful  in  producing  the  desire  to 
know  (the  Brahman),  but  not  in  producing  the  fruit  (in  the 
form  Oi  fnoksha  resulting  from  the  knowledge  of  the  Brah- 
man)\  and  it  is  therefore  that  the  word  vividishanti  (which 
means  they  desire  to  know)  is  mentioned  in  the  scriptural 
passage  (under  reference,  viz.  Tame  tarn  VeddnuvacJiancna 
Brahmana  vividishanti  yajiljna  dd:iena  tapasana'sakena.) 
\Erih.  Up.  IV.  4.  22.].  The  scripture  itself  declares  in 
the  following  manner  that  after  the  desire  to  know  (the 
Brahman)  has  come  into  existence,  tranquil'ity,  &c.,  consti- 


Adhik.  I.  Snt.  /.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  13 

tute  the  inborn  means   for  the  evolution  of  knowledge  :— 
"  Tranquilled  in  mind,  with  the  senses  restrained,  having 
given  up  desires,  resigned  and  patient,    and  absorbed  in 
abstract  meditation,  let  a  man  see  the  Self  in  the  self." 
\_Brih.    Up.  IV.  4.   23.].     Therefore,   after  the  desire  to 
know  (the  Brahman)  is  thus  born  in  one,  whose  sins  have 
been  destroyed  by  means  of  works  done  in  hundreds  of 
previous  births  without  attachment  to  any  particular  result, 
(one's)  avidya  (or  ignorance)  is  removed  by  means  of  the 
knowledge  derived  from  such  passages  as  the  following 
among  other*  : — "  Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was 
in  the  beginning,  one  only  without  a  second."  \_Qihilnd.  Up. 
VI.  2.  i.]  :  "The  Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge,  In- 
finity."    [Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.]  :  "  He  is  without  parts,  He 
is  without  actions  and  tranquil."      [Svet.  Up.   VI.   19.]: 
"  This  dtman  (the  self)  is  the  Brahman."      [Brih.  Up.  II. 
5.  19.  &  IV.  4.  5.]*«:    "  That  thou  art."     [Qihdnd.  Up. 
VI.  8.  7.]. 

'Hearing'  (sravana),  'reflection'  (manand)  and  '  steady 
meditation'  (nididhyasana)  are  useful  for  the  purpose  of 
knowing  the  meaning  of  (scriptural)  sentences.  'Hearing'  is 
to  receive  ideas  which  are  supported  by  logic— from  a  pre- 
ceptor who  has  perceived  the  truth  that  Veddntlc  passages 
declare  the  knowledge  of  the  oneness  of  the  Self.  .'Reflection' 
is  rationally  to  fix  in  one's  self  that,  in  a  certain  particular 
way  alone,  the  idea  thus  taught  by  the  teacher  is  true. 
'  Steady  meditation  '  is  the  incessant  contemplation  of  this 
very  idea  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  that  beginningless 
innate  impression  (raiand)  of  distinctions  which  is  hostile 
to  this  (knowledge  of  the  oreness  ot  the  Self).  The  know- 
ledge of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  scriptural  sentences 

16.  Vide  also  Mil/id    Up.  I.  2. 


14  SRl-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.^I. 

removes  the  ignorance  for  avidyd)  of  him  whose  innate  im- 
pression of  distinctions  has  been  removed  by  '  hearing ',  &c.; 
and  so  whatever  is  desiderated  by  that  '  hearing '  which  is 
of  this  nature,  should  be  .  ta  ed  to  be  the  necessary  ante- 
cedent (of  the  enquiry  into  the  Brahman).  And  that  (which 
is  so  desiderated)  is  this  fourfold  means,  namely,  (i)  the 
discrimination  between  the  eternal  and  the  non-eternal 
things,  (2)  tranquillity  of  the  mind,  restraint  of  the  senres, 
and  an  abundance  of  other J  7  (similar)  means,  (3)  the  re- 
nunciation of  the  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  (o"  actions)  here 
and  hereafter,  (4)  and  the  desire  for  final  release  ;  because 
without  this  (four  old  mean*)  it  is  impossible  for  the  desire 
to  know  (the  Brahman)  to  co.ne  into  existence.  Fro:n  the 
very  nature  of  the  subject  itself,  this  alone  is  made  out  to 
be  the  ne:e>sary  antecedent  (here). 

Wnat  has  bec.i  said  is  this  :  That  the  cause  of  the  bon- 
dage (of  the  soul)  is  merely  the  perception  of  distinctions, 
which  is  based  on  unreality  and  has  its  origin  in  the  avidyd 
(or  ignorance)  that  veils  the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman  ; 
that  the  bondage  itself  is  unreal ;  that  solely  by  reason  of 
it-*  inre-ility  it  is  destroyed  to  the  very  roots  only  by  means 
of  knowledge  ;  that  the  knowledge  th.it  (so)  destroys  (the 
bondage)  is  derived  cut  of  (scriptunv)  passages  such  as 
"That  thou  art"  [Qihand.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.],  &c.  ;  that 
works  are  of  no  use  in  causing  the  origination  of  such 
knowledge  in  its  own  true  nature,  or  in  producing  the 
effect  oi  this  knowledge  mat  is  so  derived  out  of  such 
pas<ag3s,J  but  that  the  use  of  works  consists  only  in 
(proaiuing)  the  desire  to  know  (the  Brahman)  ;  and  that 
it  (viz.  the  use  of  works)  is  to  be  found  in  causing  the 

17.  i  These    other    similar    means       patience,    s.imiil.idna     or     equanim- 
are  :  uparati,    or    cessation    from   all       ity,  and  sraddha  or  faith, 
d  .13  ires,    titiksha   or  resignation     and 

i 


Adhik.  L  Srtt.  /.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  15 

increase  of  saliva  (/'.  c.  the  quality  of  goodness) — (an  in- 
crease) resulting  from  the  destruction  of  rajas  and  tamas 
(or  the  qualities  of  passion  and  darkness  respectively) 
which  form  the  roots  of  sin  ;  and  that,  therefore,  having  in 
view  (only)  this  use  (of  works),  it  is  declared  (in  the  scrip- 
ture) -— -"  Brlhmanas  desire  to  know  &c."  \_Brih.  Up. 
IV.  4.  22.].  Hence,  .on  account  of  the  uselessness  of  the 
knowledge  of  works,  the  aforesaid  fourfold  means  alone  has 
to  be  stated  to  be  the  necessary  antecedent  (of  the  enquiry 
into  the  Brahman). 

Regarding  this  (view)  it  is  said  (in  reply)  as  follows  :— 
The  statement  that  the  cessation  of  ignorance  in  itself 
constitutes  final  release,  and  that  it  results  solely  from 
the  knowledge  of  the  Brahman  is  admitted  (by  us).  It  has 
(however)  to  be  discriminated,  of  what  form  that  know- 
ledge is  which  it  is  desired  to  enjoin,  by  means  of  Vedantic 
passages,  for  the  purpose  of  removing  ignorance — whether 
what  is  to  be  learnt  fro  n  n.  scriptural  sentence  is  merely 
the  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  that  s-en- 
te:ic3,  or  whether  it  is  knowledge  which  is  based  thereon 
and  }.-•  the  sume  as  worship.  It  is  surely  not  the  knowled  ;e 
arising  out  of  (the  syntax  of)  sentences,  because  such  (know- 
ledge) results  logically  from  the  sentence  itself,  even  with- 
out an  injunction  (enjoining  that  knowledge),  and  because 
also  the  removal  of  ignorance  does  not  result  from  just  so 
much  alone.  Moreover,  it  should  not  be  urged — that,  when 
the  innate  impression  (vaiand)  of  distinctions  remains  unre- 
moved,  the  Vedantic  sentence  does  not  give  rise  to  that 
knowledge  which  is  destructive  of  ignorance  ; — that  even 
if  it  (viz.  such  knowledge)  come  into  existence  (thus),  it  is 
nothing  wrong  if,  all  at  once,  the  perception  of  distinctions 
does  not  cease  for  all,  as  in  the  analogous  case  of  the  per- 
sistence of  the  perception  of  two  moons  even  when  the 


1 6  SRI-BHASHYA.     {Chap.  I.  Part.  /. 

(real)   oneness   of  the   moon  is  known  ; — and  that  even 
though  it  (/.  e.  the  innate  impression  of  distinctions)  has 
not  ceased  to  be,  since  its  roots  have  (already)  been  cut, 
it  is  powerless  to  bind  (the  self)  :  because  it  is  impossible 
for  knowledge  not  to  come  into  existence  when  the  neces- 
sary materials  for  it  are  available  ;  and  because  even  where 
there  is  the  wrong  innate  impression,  it  is  seen  that  the 
knowledge  which  stultifies  (such  impressions)  results  from 
the  teaching  of  trustworthy  preceptors,  and  from  the  bases 
of  logical  inference,  &c.     It  is  not  possible  for  you  to  say 
that  even  when  there  is  the  knowledge  of  the  meaning  of 
Vcddntic  passages,  the  perception  of  distinctions  continues 
to  be,  owing  to  the  existence  of  a  small  vestige  of  the 
beginningless  innate  impression  (of  distinctions);  because 
this    innate  impression,   itself  forming  the  means  for  the 
production  of  the  perception  of  distinctions,  is  of  the  nature 
of  an  unreality,  and  is  (therefore)  removed  at  once  by  the 
genesis  of  true  knowledge.     If,  even  after  the  origination  of 
knowledge,  there  be  no  removal  of  that  (innate  impression) 
which  is  unreal,  then  there  can  be  nothing  elc'e  to  remove 
it ;  and  therefore  there  will  never  be  the  removal  of  this 
innate  impression  (yawna^.   To  say,  that  the  perception  of 
distinctions  which  results  from  such  innate  impressions  has 
its  roots  cut  and  still  continues  to  exist,  is  childish  talk.   In 
the  case  of  the  perception  of  two  moons  (when  there  is 
only  one  in  reality)  and  in  the  case  of  other  such  things, 
even  though  the  stultifier  (of  such  a  perception)  is  near  at 
hand,  the  persistence  of  the  false  perception  is  not  contra- 
dictory to  reason  ;  because  the  really   existing   darkness 
and  such  other  misguiding  things,  forming  the  cause  of 
(such)  false  perception,  are  not  (thereby)  destroyed,  owing 
to  the  fact  that  they  are  not  injuriously  affected  by  (true) 
knowledge.     But  the  effects  in  the  form  of  fear,  &c.,  (due 


.drf/Vi  /.  Sfil.  /,]      SKI-BH4SHYA.  17 

to  such  a  false  perception  of  a^serpent  in  a  real  rope,  &c.») 
disappear,  when  they  are  put  an  end  to  by  powerful  means 
of  true  knowledge  (such  as  the  verbal  testimony  of  a  trust- 
worthy person,  and  so  on).  Moreover,  the  genesis  of  know- 
ledge can  never  take  place  in  those  who  hold  that  that 
genesis  of  knowledge  results  from  the  removal  of  the  fit*- 
nate  impression  of  distinctions.  The  innate  impression  of 
distinctions  is  beyond  measure,  (in  strength),  by  reason  of 
its  accumulation,  from  beginningless  time  ;  bat  the  mental 
conception  which  is  hostile  to  it  (/,  c.  to  the  innate  imp resr 
don  of  distinctions)  is  weak  ;  therefore  the  removal  of  that 
(innate  impression  of  distinctions  or  y&iana)  is. .not  possible 
by  means  of  this  (hostile  mental  conception  or  bhiijanS'). 
Hence  that  '  knowledge  '  alone  which  is  different  from  the 
knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sentences,  and  u 
imported  by  words  such  as  dhyiina  (meditation),  ufawna 
(worship),  &c.,  is  what  it  is  desired  to  enjoin  by  means  of 
Vedii:itic  passages., 

To  that  same  effect  are  the  (following)  scriptural 
texts  :— "  Having  discovered  (Him),  let  him  practise  know- 
ledge," \Vjfllya  prajftii.n  kurvita* — Brih.  Up*  IV.  4. 
2i.,].  "  Having  discovered  (Him),  let  him  know."  [Ann-. 
t)/.fyj!  v:j.t:!3t:.~'J%k.iuJ^Up.  VIII.  12.  6.].  "  Meditate  on 
tho  Self  as  the  Qoi."  [jOm'iti  eva  dttmlnam  dhyayatha. — 
Muni.  Up..  II,  2.  6,J,''V -".Having  perceived  That,  one  w 
freed  from  the  jaws'of'death."  '  [Ni.ch.iyya  tan  mrityumu-, 
kh.ii  'pramiicjyate. — Ka^'CU'p.lll.  15.].  ^  Let  him  worship 
the  self  aloiie  as  the  object  "to  be^attained."  [Atmjnam 
evx  lokani  upX$ita*~—B£iA.  Up.  I.  4.  15,].  "  Veril}-,  my 
dear  one,  the,Sglf  has  to;be  scan,  h|ts,.|p  :be  Jieard, .  has  to 
be  reflected  upon,  has- to-be  steadily  .-meditate;!  upon;'-' 
^Af;n3'i<3  are  srotavyo  mantavyo  'hididhy(l:itavyCih:~-B'rifa 
Up*  II,  •}•  5-}-  ,  "  K'rJlA3 /^Q 'be  s blight "after^He'.ll^' txi-^- 
3 


rs  '£R!-BHASHYA.   {Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

specially  desired  and  known."  [Soiweihtavyassavijififal- 
tavyah. — ^Iiernd.  Up.  VIII.  7.  i.].  To  this  same  effect  there 
are  also  other  similar  scriptural  passages.  The.-e  (passages) 
have  to  import  the  same  meaning  as  nididhyfistfayyaA, 
&c.}  8  ;  accordingly,  on  account  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
syntactical  meaning  of  (scriptural)  sentences  being  helpful  to 
dhyXna  for  meditation),  the  passages  F//#.//rt  pra,  ft.l'n 
kurvita,  Anuvidya  vija-ia'i  and  others,  (drst)  re-affirm 
(the  need  for)  that  (knowledge)  by  means  of  (the  words) 
anu-jidya  a.ndvij'fl.iya,  and  then  they  enioin  dhydna  by  means 
of  pra-'fll  n  kurvita  and  vijdnfi'i.  Srotavyah  also  gives 
a  restatement  (of  the  need  for  knowing  the  syntactical 
meaning  of  sentences) — because  the  need  for  'sravaiKt 
(or  '  hearing ')  arises  of  itself  from  the  tact  that  a  person, 
who  has  learnt  the  Vedas  with  a  view  to  attain  desirable  ob- 
jects, S2es  that  the  Vedas  are  capable  of  affording  instruction 
in  regard  to  such  desirable  objects,  and  then  betakes  himself, 
of  his  own  accord,  to  the  '  hearing '  of  the  Vedas  for 
definitely  ascertaining  what  those  objects  are.  ManiavycJt 
also  means  (such)  a  restatement,  because  manana  (of 
reflection)  serves  the  purpose  of  fixing  in  the  mind  what 
has  (already)  been  '  heard.'  Therefore,  it  is  dhytim  for 
meditation)  alone  that  is  enjoined  (here).  Says  (the  Sutra- 
ktird]  also—"  Frequent  repetition  (is  to  be  practised),  as  it  is 
?o  taught."  \_Ved.  Snt.  IV.  i,  r.].  Therefore,  this  vedana 
for  knowledge),  which  it  is  desired  to  enjoin  as  a  means 
of  obtaining  final  release,  bas  to  be  understood  in  the 


I?.  The  meanings  of  the  Sanscrit  having   understood  (Him);    vijtn&i 

words  used  in  the  context  here  are  a«  «=let  him  know  ;  prajil'tm   kurvtta= 

foMcf^s-.—Hijid.hy.lsitmvych^.i-^  to  U  let  him  practise  knowledge  ;  iro.'avycft 

teidi'y  meditate.!  upon  ;   anitvidya=  «has  to  be  '  hear  1 ' j 
having   Ji»ctn-creJ  (Iliij  >, 


Adhik.  L  SuL  i.]        SRI-BHASHYA.  if 

sen*e  of  up.l  '.ana  (or  worship).  For  knowledge  '(vidi)  and 
worship  (npa ://)  arc  seen  to  be  used,  the  one  for  the  other, 
in  the  beginning  and  the  conclusion  of  Vedantic  passages 
such'  as  the  following: — "Let  him  worship  (up'dsHa)  the 

mind  as  the  Brahman,    {^hdnd.  Up.\\\.  18.  i.]; He, 

who  knows  (veda)  thus,  shines  and  warms  up  through  fame, 
greatness  and  spiritual  glory."  \Qihand.  Up.  III.  18.  6.]. 
"  A«,  indeed,  he  is  not  all  this,  he  does  not  know  (veda). 

Let  him  worship  (iip5iita\  Him  as  the  self  itself."  \_Brih. 

Up.  I.  4.  7.].  And — "  He  who  is  the  knower  of  that  Brah- 
min (yastad  veda),  and  that  (Brahman)  whom  he  knows 
(yatsa  veda) — both  these  have  been  explained  to  you  by 

me.     \QjhH:id.  Up.  IV.  i.  4.]; Reverend  sir,  that  deity 

whic'i  you  worship  (up.lsse),  commend  that  deity  unto 
me."  [2hhdnd.  Up.  IV.  2.  2.]. 

Further,  dhyana  (or  meditation)  is  of  the  form  of  a  succes- 
sion of  memories  (or  remembrances),  which  is  unbroken  like 
a  stream  of  oil.  For,  firm 'memory  is  declared  to  be  a  means 
of  final  release  in  this  passage,  viz.  "The  memory  becomes 
finn  ;  when  such  memory  is  obtained,  there  is  the  loosening 
of  all  knots."  [Qihand.  Up.  VII.  26.  2.].  And  such  memory 
is  of  the  same  form  as  direct  perception,  because  it  (viz. 
the  above  passage)  has  to  agree  in  meaning  with — "  When 
He  who  is  the  highest  and  lowest  is  seen,  the  knot  of 
the  heart  is  broken,  doubts  are  all  shattered,  and  his 
actions  (or  karma}  perish."  {Muni.  Up.  II.  2.  8.].  This 
being  the  case,  it  is  decided  by  means  of  this  passage — viz. 
"  The  Self,  my  dear  one,  has  to  be  seen,  &c,"  \_Brih.  Up. 
II.  4.  5.]— that  steady  meditation  (nididhyfaana)  has  the 
:-ame  character  as  direct  perception.  Moreover,  memory  has 
the  character  of  direct  perception,  because  it  is  (simply) 
an  intc.isific.ition  (of  the  process)  of  mental  concep- 
tion. 


Sfif  -IVHASHVA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 


'  '  All  thii  ttas  been  well  explained  by  the  V 
lie  says":—  f'  Vedana  (or  knowledge)  is  w/J  ;rtwtf  (or  worship), 
nnce  it  is  so  mentioned  in  the  scriptures  as  to  refer  to  that." 
It  has  thereby  been  explained  that  the  vedana  (or  knbw- 
ledge)  which  is  enjoined  in  "all  the  Upanishads,  as  the 
means  of  attaining  final  release,  is  (the  same  as)  nfaiana 
(or  worship).  After  stating  the  position  of  an  opponent 
to  the  effect  that  religious  contemplation  has  to  be  gone 
through  only  once,  for,  by  so  doing,  the  intention  of  the 
scripture  is  fully  carried  out,  as  in  the  case  of  praya^a'-* 
xnd  other  such  sacrificial  offerings,  it  is  finally  determined 
by  him  (z.  c.  the  Vatyahii-a),  in  the  passage—  "  From 
the  word  npd;anay\t  is  conclusively  established  (that  vcda~ 
na  or  knowledge  means  upft  lana  or  worship)"—  that  vedana 
frequently  repeated  is  the  means  of  final  release.  In  the 
passage  —  "  'Ufntana  (or  worship)  is  the  same  as  firm  me- 
mory, as  it  is  seen  so  to  be,  and  as  it  is  so  declared  in  the 
Hcriptiures  "  —  it  is  explained  by  him  that  that  very  same 
vedana  (or  knowledge),  which  is  of  the  form  of  ufasana  (Or 
worship),  has  the  character  of  firm  memory.  Such  memory 
i-  declared  to  be  the  same  as  seeing  ;  and  (for  it)  to  possess 
the  nature  of  seeing  is  the  same  as  to  have  the  character  of 
direct  perception.  Scripture  thus  specifies  the  memory 
which  has  been  proved  to  possess  the  character  of 
direct  perception,  and  to  be  the  means  of  final  release  : 
"  This  Self  is  not  reached  either  by  reflection  (pravcchana 
which  means  manana\  or  by  steady  meditation  (medka  or 

19.  The    Vakyakara  who  is  frequ-  offerings.      Thes?  praya^a    offerings 

cntly  quoted   by  Ra  nanuja   in    his  and  others  like  them  cannot  be  offer- 

SrJ-Bkdtfya  &    Vedartha-saiigraAa  is  ed  more    than  once  in  any  one  parti- 

known  as  Tanka.   .  .  cular  sacrifice.     Vid^  Pur.  Mini.   XI. 

;o.    Pray^as  are  the  fore-o.Tcrings,  I.  29  to  37. 
as  opyoi:,}  to  Aituy'i  <ti  or  the  after- 


A  dhik  .  I.  S'ti.  i  .]       S'RiiBH  :\  s  IIY  A.  it 

ndldhya  -and)','  01  "  by  largely  '  he'aring'^tnV  scriptures. 
Wno;iiso3vef  'He  chooses,  "by"  him  alone  is  "He  readied. 
To  him,  this  Self  reveals  Hi*  own  form."  '  "[Muni.  Lfp.'Ul. 
2.  3.].  By  means;  of  this  passage  it  is  "(first)  stated  'that1  mere 
'hearing/  reflection  arid  steady  meditation  form  ^"means1  for 
the  attainment  of  the  Self,  and  then  it  iij"  "declared  that 
whomsoever  this  Self  chooses,  by  Kim  alone  is  He  reach- 
eJ.  For,  it..  is  indeed  the  dearest  'one  'that'  becomes 
worthy  to  be  chosen.  To  whomsoever  He  is  unsirrpassing- 
ly  dear,  he  alone  is  the  dearest  to  Him.  It  is  "stated  by  the 
Lord  Himself,  in  the  following  manner,  that  'the  'Lord 
Himself,  of  His  own  accord,  so  acts  as  'to  "cause  His  dearest 
one  to  attain  Himself  :  —  "To  those  who  areldesirous  of  ''an 
eternal  union  with  Me,  and,  accordingly,  worship  Me,  I  'give 
with  love  that  faculty  of  understanding'  by  wm'cTi"  they  come 
unto  Me."  [B.  G.  X.  i'b.1;  He  has  al.^o'said--^  Indeed,  I 
am  inexpressibly  deuf  to  him  who  has  knowledge  uof  Me, 
and  he  is  dear  to  Me."  [B.  G.  VII.  17.].  Hferi^what'is 
said  i.4  this  :  —  He  alone;  to  -'whom  this  memory'  of  the'fdrm 
of  direct  perception  is  of  itself  ine"xpressibly."de<if,  by  rea- 
so.i  of  the  inexpressible  dearaess  of  'the  '  object  Of  that 
memory  —  (he  alone)  is  fit  "to  be  chosen  by  *  the  "Highest 
Self;  and  so,  by  him  alone  is  "the  Highest  Self  attainable. 

Firm  memory  of  this  same  diameter  is  denoted  by  the 
word  bhakti  (devotion)  —  because  the  'word'  bncffit  is  :  syno- 
nymous with  upaiana  (vvorship)V  For  this  Very  "reason, 
it  is  declared  by  the  Sriitis**  and'the^wni^  "as  'follows  : 
"Knowing  Him  alone,  one  fransceiids  ''death!"  \Sv<?f.''Upt 

•    .':      •;•  •••-       ••'^-'  ->':••• 

•-•-  -•—•  -  '     --   •:;;i;:::'.  j$  •;?.•  ••> 

21.  The  bruits  and  the  Sni'itis  to-  work,  Smjriti  is  so  used^  as  16  signify 
Aether  form  the  scripture  of  the  Hin-  all  except  tfre'  Vedic  'portion  of  Hindu 
•lus.  Sruti  means  Vedic  revelation;  Scripture,  and 


.ind  Smriti.  ordinarily  means.the  me-  .  is  referr.ed  to  under    the    name,  of 
trical  luv-txjokb.      But  here,'  m'thib     -Sn.rid. 


22  SRI  BHASHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  2. 

III.  8:.X  •"  He  who  thus  knows  Him  becomes  immortal 
liere.  There,  is  no  other  path  lor  the  attainment  of  final 
relent."  [Ta\tt.  A  •.  III.  12.  7;].-'-  "  It  is  not  posible  to 
free  Me,,  with  the  help  of  the  '-facias,  through  the  practice  of 
religious  austerity,  through  the  giving  of  gifts,  or  through 
sacrifices,  in  the  same  manner  in  which  you  have  seen  Me 
(now).  O  Arjuna,  destroyer  of  foes,  it  is  possible  really 
to  know,  to  see,  and  to  enter  into  Me,  such  as  I  am  now, 
exclusively  by  means  of  bhakti."  [B.  G.  XI.  53  &  54]. 
"That  Highest  Person,  O 't on  of  Pritru,  is  attainable  ex- 
clusively by  bJiakti"  [B.  G.  VIII.  22].  &c.,  &c. 

It  will.  be.  demonstrated  later  on  in  connection  with 
(the  sutra  which,  says) — "There  is  need  of  all  (works),  le- 
cau.-e  there  are  scriptural  statements  enjoining  sacrifices  &c.; 
just  as  (there  is  the  need  of  the  harness)  in  the  case  of  the 
horse"— [Vc'd.  Sfti.  III.  4.  26.] — that  works  such  as  sacri- 
fices, &c,  fornrthe  means  of  attaining  the  firm  memory  of 
the  aforesaid  character.  No  doubt,  the  sacrifices,  &c.,  referred 
to  in  the  scriptural  passage — "(Brihmanas)  desire  to  know 
6:c"~ [Br'.h.  Up.  IV.  4.  22.] — are  of  use  in  originating  (in  us) 
the  de.-ircj.  to  know  (the  Brahman}.  But  yet,  since  such  vc- 
dana  (knqwledge)— as  is  of  the  form  of  meditation,  and  is 
practised-  every  day,  and  acquires  increased  excellence 
through  repeated  practice,  and  is  continued  up  to  the  time 
of  departure  from  this  li.e — is  of  itself  the  means  of  attain- 
ing the  Brahman  ;  for  the  production  oi'  that  (vedana},  all . 
the  works  appertaining  to  the  dsramas  (or  the  various  stages 
of  life)  have  to  be  gone  through  as  long  as  life  lasts.  He  (the 
SMra+feFra)  also  says  (the  same  thing)  in  the  following  and 
other  aphorisms  : — "(Meditation  has  all  along  in  the  mean- 
while to  be  gone  through)  up  to  the  time  of  death,  for  it  is 
BO  declared  in  the  scripture  "—[Fed.  5/v/.  IV.  i.  12.]  :  "But 

22.  Vide  also    r&  SamA.  .TXX".   iS.       ar.c!  TiUt.  .?r."m.  13.  I. 


'Adhik.  I.  Sfd.  i."\      SKI-DHASHYA,  2-3 

the  Agnihotra,  £c.<  (have  to  be  performed)  polely  for  pro- 
ducing that  (viz.  vidyd  or  knowledge),  because  it  is  so  stated 
in  the  scripture  "— [  Ved.  Sut,  IV.  i.  16.]  :  and  "(Works 
have  also  to  be  performed)  because  of  their  helpfulners 
(in  the  production  of  knowledge)."  \_Vcd.Sfit.  III.  4.  33.]. 

The  Vdk\akd:-a  also  says  in  the  following  manner 
that  firm  memory  is  the  outcome  of  discrimination  and 
other  such  qualities  : — "That  (viz.  firm  memory)  TesulU 
wholly  from  tvircka)  discrimination,  (vimoka)  freec.om, 
(abhyaia)  practice,  (kri\a)  work,  (kalydia)  attsp;  iciousr.es?, 
(anavasdia)  absence  of  weakness,  and  (anuddharsha)  ab- 
sence of  excessive  merriment ;  because  it  is  only  so  pcfc*ible, 
and  because  also  there  is  scriptural  authority  to  that  effect." 
He  also  explain*  the  true  nature  of  discrimination ,  £c,, 
thus:  "Discrimination  means  fherej  the  purification  of 
the  body  by  means  of  the  food  which  is  not  impure, 
either  because  of  its  own  nature,  or  because  of  its  source, 
or  because  of  ?my  (other)  sf  ecial  cause."  The  scriptural 
authority  for  thte;  is — "  When  the  food  is  pure,  the  mind 
(/.  c.  the  internal  organ)  becomes  pure,  when  the  mind 
i.«  pure,  thera  is  firm  memory."  [^Julnd.  Up.  VII.  26.  2.]. 
"  Freedom  is  the  absence  of  clinging  to  desires."  The  scrip- 
tural authority  for  this  is—"  Tranquilled  in  mind,  let  him 
worship  (the  Brahman}!'  [2&ka;id.  Up.  III.  14.  i.].  "Prac- 
tice means  the  worshipping  of  (God)  the  Home  of  Good- 
ness again  and  again."  The  scriptural  authority  quoted  by 
the  Bhd^hyahdra  (i.  c.  the  Commentator  Dramidacharya) 
in  support  of  this  is  here  taken  from  the  Smr:t: — ".Always 
with  the  mind  fixed  on  His  form,  &c."  [B.  G.  VJII.  6.\ 
11  Work  means  the  performance  of  the  five  great  sacrifice:-, 
&c.,  according  to  one's;  abilities."  The  scriptural  auth'ojity 
for  this  is—"  He  who  per lorms  \vcjkc  in  the  right  'manrer 
i«  the  best  of  tha.'C  who  know  the  E 


24 


Up.  III..  t,-4:]  :  also—  "  Bralwanas  desire  to  know  Him 
by  ,  red;  ing  the  Vedast  by  sacrifices,,  by  giving  gifts,  by 
religious  austerities  associated  with,  fasting."  ["ZfrvA.  Up. 
IV.  4.-  22,].  "  Auspiciojusness  .consists  iri  truth,  uprightness, 
mercy,  .liberality,  harmlessnes?,  and  in  not  coveting  an- 
other;*, property-"  The  ...  scriptural  authority  for  this  is  — 
"  He  .4$£<y$  Beached  through  truth."  [l\fiind.  Up*  IIJ.  i.  5.], 
and-."  To.  thefli,  alone  comes  thi.s  fruitipn  of  the  Brahman 
f^^^.t^r*  £"/•  *'>l6']v  "  Weakness  is 
ss  qlthe  mind,  due  to  the  melancholy  which  is 
born  QUt;O,fl-bievuntQwardness  of  time  and  place,  and  the  recol,- 
lectioi^  QfrSptTowful  things,  &c.  Us  opposite  is.  the.  absence 
of  •weakness."  X^^'cript^ral  authority  lor  this  is  —  "  This 
Self  is  not  4Q:  be.  attained  by  one  who  is  devoid  of  strength/' 
[Mitnl.  -Up.  III.  -2»>4.].'  "Excessive  merriment  is  the  glad- 
ness derived  from  the  opposites.of  those  (qualities  which  give 
rise  to;  mw$cllfi  .•  /./  c*  -weakness).;;  ancl  the  opposite  of  that 
(gladness)  -is  the  absence  pf  excessive  merriment."  That  is 
to  say  ,  excessive  joy  ?.!so  is  obstructive  (to  the  p.  reduction  of 
the-  knowledge  of  the  Brahman).  The  scriptural  authority 
for  this  is—"  Tran.quijled  in  mind,  with  the  senses  restrain- 
ed, &c.'—  [Brih  .  Up.  IV.  4.  23.].  What  is  said  is  this— 
that  to-'  him,  who  is  thus  given  to  observe,  scriptural  regula- 
tions, the^  genesis  of  knowledge  comes:  altogether  through 
the  per  foTmance  of  works  enjoined  in.  connection  with  the 
(various)  ti'sramas  (or  stages,  of  life).  To  the  same;  effect 
is  another,  scriptural  passage  :—  "•  Vid\ti;ii  ch.widytim  cha  yas 
tadv£dobhay.am'$3hal  avidyayd  mrityum  tlrh\l  vidyay.~t- 
inritJtritisnJitc."  [h.  Up.  il.]  Here  what  is  denoted  b/ 
the.wx)rd  avidyais  the  vcrk  which  is  enjoined  in-  conr.ec- 
tioa:.  with  "the.  castes,  and  the  dsramas  •;..  ayidyQyd  rnean.sv 
byrmeans:of.  -work  ;  mritytvn  .denotes  the  effects  of  tho 
j-a«t>w-prk  wlticlr  b  -ob^trj^liv^  to  the  goKesL;  af.-kn^.vlel^e  ^ 


Adhik.  I.  S»l.  /.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  25 

tirtvd  means,  having  destroyed  ;  vidyayd  means,  by  means 
of  the  knowledge  (of  the  Brahman} ;  amritam  denotes  the 
Brahman;  and  (asnute)  means, he  attains.  [.=He  who  knows 
both  vidyd  (knowledge)  and  avidyd  (work)  together,  first 
destroys  by  means  of  (present)  avidyd  (or  work,)  the  effects  of 
the  past  work  (or  karma)  which  is  obstructive  to  the  genesis 
of  knowledge,  and  then  attains  the  Brahman].  The  avidyd 
which  is  said  to  be  the  means  of  destroying  the  effects  of 
past  karma  is  other  than  vidyd,  and  is  the  same  as 
the  work  (karma)  which  is  enjoined  by  the  scriptures.  To: 
that  effect  is  this  passage  : — "  Having  the  knowledge  of  the 
Brahman  as  the  object  in  view,  he  also  relied  upon  (the 
scriptural)  knowledge  (of  works)  and  performed  numerous 
sacrifices,  in  order  that  he  might  destroy  the  effects  of  past 
karma  by  means  of  (present)  avidyd  (or  work)."  [  V.P.Vl.  6. 
12.].  Work  which  is  obstructive  to  knowledge  is  of  the  form 
of  merit  and  demerit.  Both  these  are  denoted  by  the  word 
papa  (sin),  as  they  produce  undesirable  results,  in  consequ- 
ence of  their  obstructiveness  to  the  origination  of  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Brahman.  Its  (viz.  sin's)  obstructiveness  to 
(such)  knowledge  is  by  way  of  the  increase  of  rajas  and 
tamas  (passion  and  darkness),  which  act  as  obstructions  to- 
pure  unmixed  sattva  (goodness)  that  forms  the  means  of 
producing  (that  same)  knowledge.  That  papa  (or  sin) 
is  obstructive  to  the  origination  of  knowledge,  is  under- 
stood from  the  scriptural  passage — "  He  of  Himself  in-, 
duces  him,  whom  He  wishes  to  lead  downwards,  to  do 
work  which  is  not  good."  \Kaush.  Up.  III.  9.]  It  is  de- 
clared by  the  Lord  Himself  in  the  following  and  other 
passages  that  rajas  and  lamas  veil  true  knowledge  and 
that  sattva  is  the  means  of  (acquiring)  true  knowledge  : — 
"  Knowledge  results  from  sattva."  [Z?.  G.  XIV.  17],  And 
therefore,  to  give  rise  to  the  genesis  of  knowledge,  sinful 
4 


26  SRi-BHASHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

work  (karma)  has  to  be  destroyed.  Its  destruction  results 
from  duty  (dharmd)  performed  without  attachment  to  re- 
sults. To  that  effect  is  this  scriptural  statement2  3 — "  By 
means  of  duty  (dharma)  he  gets  rid  of  papa  (or  sin)."  \M. 
Nar.  22.  i.].  Thus  that  knowledge  which  is  the  means  of 
attaining  the  Brahman  desiderates  all  the  works  enjoined 
in  connection  with  the  various  dsramas  (or  stages  of  life). 
Hence,  as  the  knowledge  of  the  true  nature  of  the  works 
so  desiderated,  and  also  the  knowledge  of  the  small  and 
impermanent  character  of  the  results  of  mere  works,  are 
(both)  conclusively  dealt  with  in  the  Karma-mlmamsd— 
that  (Mimamsa)  alone  has  to  be  mentioned  as  the  necess- 
ary antecedent  of  the  enquiry  into-  the  Brahman, 

Moreover,  the  discrimination  of  the  eternal  and  the 
non-eternal  things*-,  &c.,  do  not  come  into  existence  without 
the  '  hearing '  of  the  (whole  of  the)  Mimamsa  ;  because, 
without  coming  to  a  decision  regarding  the  particulars  bear- 
ing on  the  fruits  (of  works),  on  the  means  (of  performing 
them),  on  the  modus  operandi,  and  on  the  persons  qualified 
(to  perform  them),  it  is  difficult  to  understand  the  true 
nature  of  works,  their  results,  the  permanence  or  imper- 
manence  thereof,  and  the  eternity  of  the  self,  and  such 
other  things.  That  these  also  (viz,  the  discrimination  of  the 
eternal  and  the  non-eternal  things,  &c.,)  form  the  means 
(for  acquiring  the  knowledge  of  the  Brahman},  is  understood 
from  their  prescribed  auxiliary  use  ;  and  their  prescribed 
auxiliary  use  is  learnt  from  scriptural  passages,  from  the 
bases  of  logical  inference,  &c.  This  (use  of  works)  has  to  be 
made  out  from  the  third  chapter  (of  the  Pftrvamimdmsd.) 

The  worship  of  the  Udgitha,  &c.,  although  it  (merely) 
serves  the  purpose  of  adding  to  works,  really  stands  in. 

23.  £  The  reference  given   above  is       the  Upanishads. 
according  to  Jacob's    Concordance   to 


Adhlk.  1.  Silt.  /.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  27 

need  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Brahman,  because  it  (viz. 
that  worship)  has  to  assume  the  form  of  the  contempla- 
tion of  the  Brahman,  and  so  has  to  be  discussed  here  (i.  e. 
in  the  Brahma-mlmdmsd)  alone.  And  those  works  also 
(viz.  the  worship  and  meditation  of  the  Udgltha,  &c.),  per- 
formed without  attachment  to  results,  produce  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Brahman  ;  and  because  they  thus  come  to  re- 
semble that  (knowledge)  in  character,  they  are  very  appro- 
priately dealt  with  here  alone.  And  it  is  agreed  on  all 
hands  that  they  (viz.  the  meditation  of  the  Udgltha  and 
other  such  meditations)  depend  upon  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  nature  of  (ritualistic)  works. 

What  they  (the  Purvapakshms^  *   or    the  objectors) 
further  say  is  as  follows:— 

The  Brahman  alone,  who  is  pure  intelligence  and 
hostile  to  all  characterising  attributes,  is  real ;  all  other 
things  than  Him,  such  as  the  varied  distinctions  of  the 
knower  and  the  known  and  the  knowledge  arising  there- 
from, &c.,  are  merely  assumed  to  exist  in  Him  and  are 
unreal :  because,  by  means  of  the  following  and  other 
sdstraic  passages  which  are  devoted  to  the  teaching 
of  the  true  nature  of  the  principal  subject  (of  the  Brahma- 
mlmdmsa),  it  is  declared  that  the  Brahman  alone  who  is  pure 
intelligence  and  devoid  of  attributes  is  real,  and  that  all  else 
is  unreal : — "  Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was  in  the 
beginning,  one  only  without  a  second."  [Ckhdnd.  Up. 
VI.  2.  i.]  ;  "  And  that  is  the  higher  knowledge  (vidyd]  by 
which  that  Indestructible  Being  is  known— that  ( Be- 
ing) which  is  invisible,  which  cannot  be  seized,  which  has 
no  family  (or  which  has  no  name),  which  has  no  colour,  no 
eyes,  no  ears  :  That  which  has  no  hands  and  no  feet,  and 

24.  These  Purvapakshins  or  object-       as  the  Maya-radius. 
ors    are   the  Adwailins    known  also 


28  SRI-BHASHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

That  which  the  wise  see  as  the  source  of  all  beings,  is  the 
eternal,  the  omnipresent,  the  all-pervading,  the  extremely 
subtle,  and  the  imperishable  One."  [Mund.  Up.  I.  r. 
6.]  ;  "The  Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infinity." 
[Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.]  ;  "He  is  without  parts,  without 
actions,  tranquil,  and  without  fault,  without  taint."  [Svet. 
Up.  VI.  19.];  "  He  who  is  of  opinion  (that  that  Brahman) 
is  unknown — to  him  (He)  is  known  ;  he  who  is  of  opinion 
(that  that  Brahman]  is  known  to  him — he  does  not  know 
(Him)  :  (because)  to  those  who  know  well,  (He)  is  un- 
known ;  to  those  who  do  not  know  well,  (He)  is  known." 
[Ken.  Up.  II.  3.]  ;  "Thou  shalt  not  see  the  seer  of  the 
sight  nor  think  the  thinker  of  the  thought."  [Brih.  Up. 
III.  4.  2.];  "The  Brahman  is  bliss."  [Taitt.  Up.  III.  6. 
i.]  ;  "  That  which  is  all  this  is  this  Self."  [Brih.  Up.  IV. 
5.  7.] ;  "  There  is  nothing  here  that  is  many  and  varied. 
He  who  sees  this  world,  as  though  it  were  varied, 
-obtains  death  (mrityii)  from  death."  [Brih.  Up.  IV.  4. 
19.  &  Kath.  Up.  IV.  10.]  ;  "But  where-  there  is  duality, 
:as  it  were,  there  one  sees  another ;  but  where  to  one  all 
this  becomes  the  Self,  there  who  shall  see  whom  by  what, 
and  who  shall  know  which  by  what  ?"  [Brih.  Up'.  II. 
4.  14.  £  IV,  5.  15..];  "Modification  (i.e.  vikdra)  is 
(mere)  name  having  its  origin  in  speech  ;  that  it  is  all 
clay  is  alone  the  reality."  [Qihdnd.  Up.  VI.  i.  4.]; 
"  For  whenever  he  perceives  in  Him  even  the  smallest 
distinction,  then,  indeed,  there  is  fear  for  him."  [Taitt. 
Up.  II.  7.  i.]  ;  "  Not  even  on  account  of  the  peculiarity  of 
situation  can  the  twofold  characteristics  (viz.  positive  and 
negative)  belong  to  the  Highest,  for  everywhere  (That  is 
taught  to  be  without  distinctions)."  [Ved.  Sut.  III.  2.  u.]; 
"  But  it  (/.  e.  the  world  of  dreams)  is  altogether  a  mere 
illusion,  on  account  of  its  being  of  an  unmanifest  nature." 


Adhik.  I.  Silt.  /.]     SRI-BHASHYA.  29 

Ved.  Sut.  III.  2.  3.];  "That  in  which  difference!*  have 
vanished,  which  is  pure  existence,  which  is  beyond  the 
sphere  of  speech,  which  is  self-knowing — That  is  the  Intelli- 
gence, called  Brahman  by  name."  [F.  P.  VI.  7.  53.]; 
"  (I  bow)  to  Him  alone  who  in  reality  is  of  the  nature 
of  Intelligence  and  is  absolutely  pure  (/.  e.  devoid  of  all  attri- 
butes), and  who,  nevertheless,  exists,  in  consequence  of  (our) 
illusive  vision,  in  the  form  of  material  objects."  [F.  P.  I.  2. 
6.] ;  "O  Lord  of  the  universe!  Thou  alone  art  the  only  reality, 
and  there  is  none  other."  [F.  P.  I.  4.  38.];  "  This  which 
appears  embodied  belongs  to  Thee  who  art  of  the  nature  of 
Intelligence  ;  and  those  who  are  not  Yogins  (i.  e.  those 
who  are  ignorant)  look  upon  it,  on  account  of  (their) 
illusive  perception,  as  though  it  formed  the  world.  All 
this  world  is  of  the  nature  of  Intelligence.  Ignorant 
men  look  upon  it  as  though  it  were  made  up  of  material 
things,  and  are  tossed  to  and  fro  in  a  flood  of  illusions. 
Highest  Lord !  Those  who  know  what  is  knowledge, 
and  whose  minds  are  pure,  look  upon  the  whole  world 
as  being  made  up  of  Intelligence  and  as  consisting  of 
Yourself."  [F.  P.  L  4.  39  to  41.];  "Although  He  is  to  be 
found  in  one's  own  body  and  in  that  of  all  others,  Intelli- 
gence, which  is  one  and  simple,  indeed,  constitutes  His 
reality.  Dualists  see  things  wrongly."  [F.  P.  II.  14.  31.]; 
"O,  thou  the  best  of  kings,  if  there  were  any  other  like  me 
or  an}'  other  unlike  me,  then  alone  would  it  be  proper  to 
say  that  such  an  one  is  me  and  such  an  one  is  not  me.1' 
[F.  P.  II.  13.  90.];  "It  is,  in  consequence  of  the  difier- 
ence  due  to  the  holes  in  a  flute,  that  the  distinctions  named 
shadja™,  &c.,  (corresponding  to  the  pitch  of  the  sound) 

25.  Shadja  is  the  name  of  the  first  The   seven  notes    of  the  scale   hare 

note  of  the  gamut  and  corresponds  to  the    following    names    in    Sanskiit  : 

the    symbol    do  in  do,  re,  mi,  fa,  sol,  sfiadia,  rishabka.  gandhara,  w 

ta,  si,    which    are    jrjven    in     Indian  panchanta,  dan'ata,  nnhddha. 
music  thus  :   sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa.  da,  ni. 


30  SR!:BHASHYA,     [Chap.  L  Part.  I. 

result  to  the  air,  which  pervades  all  without  distinction; 
just  so  is  it  the  case  with  the  Highest  Self."  [V.  P.  II. 
14.  32.]  ;  "  He  is  myself,  and  He  is  yourself,  and  all  this 
is  the  same  as  the  Self.  Give  up  the  illusion  of  distinc- 
tions. Thus  taught  by  him,  that  great  king  saw  the  High- 
est Reality  and  gave  up  distinctions."  [F  P.  II.  16.  23  & 
24.] ;  "  When  the  knowledge,  which  gives  rise  to  distinc- 
tions, has  undergone  complete  destruction,  (then)  who  will 
create  the  unreal  difference  between  the  self  and  the  Brah- 
man?' [F.  P.  VI.  7.  96.];  "O  Gudakesa2*,  in  the  form  of 
the  individual  self,  I  exist  within  the  heart  of  all  beings." 
\B.  G.  X.  20.] ;  "  O  Bharata,  know  Me  also  as  the  knower 
of  the  body  (/.  e.  as  the  individual  self)  in  all  bodies."  [/?.  G. 
XIII.  2.];  " There  does  not  exist  any  being,  moveable  or 
immoveable,  which  is  without  Me."  [5.  G.  X.  39.]. 

Unreality  is  that,  which,  being  grounded  upon  what  is 
perceived,  is  liable  to  be  stultified  by  means  of  the  know- 
ledge of  things  as  they  actually  are;  as,  for  instance,  it  can  be 
made  out  in  the  case  of  the  (falsely  perceived)  serpent,  &c., 
having  for  their  foundation  a  (real)  rope,  &c.  The  assump- 
tion of  the  existence  of  that  (serpent)  there  (i.  e.  in  the 
rope)  is  due  to  something  wrong  that  misguides  us.  Similar- 
ly, owing  to  a  certain  something  that  misguides  us,  all  this 
world  which  is  made  up  of  the  distinctions  of  gods,  animals, 
men,immoveable  things,  &c.,is  assumed  to  exist  in  the  High- 
est Brahman  whose  essence  is  pure  Intelligence ;  and  it  (viz. 
the  world)  is  liable  to  be  injuriously  affected  by  the  know- 
ledge of  the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman  as  He  is,  and  has 
therefore  the  character  of  unreality.  And  that  something 
which  so  misguides  us  is  the  beginningless  ignorance  (avidya) 

26.  Guddke'sa  is  one  of  the  names  of      conquered  sleep,  or  one  who    has  a 
Arjuna.  Vide  also  B.G.I.  24.,  II.  9.  &       profusion  of  hair. 
XI.  7. Literally  it  means  one  who  has 


Adhik.  I,  Sill.  /,]       SRI-BHASHYA.  3.1 

which  is  the  cause  of  the  varied  and  wonderful  superimpo- 
sitions  that  veil  the  true  nature  (of  the  Brahman),  and  is 
(itself)  unfit  to  be  described  either  as  existence  or  as  non- 
existence.      From   the  following  and  other  passages  it  is- 
evident  that  the  Brahman  Himself,  who  is  devoid  of  attri- 
butes and  is  pure  Intelligence,  has  His  true  nature  veiled 
by  the  beginningless  ignorance  which  is  unfit  to  be  describ- 
ed either  as  existence  or  as  non-existence,  and  He  thereby 
perceives  the  manifoldness  existing  within  Himself : — "  For 
they  (i.  e.  the  creatures)  are  drawn  away  (from  the  Brah- 
man) by  means  of  ignorance  (awita—avidyd^)"     \Qjhdnd. 
Up.  VIII.  3.  2.];     "Those  who  are  (dependent  on  them- 
selves) have  ignorance  ;  their  desires  remain  unfulfilled." 
\Qihdnd.  Up.  VIII.  3,  i«J;    "Then  there  was  neither  exist- 
ence nor  non-existence,  there  was  darkness  (lamas =avid- 
ya)\  at  first,  Intelligence  was  veiled  by  darkness."   [R.  V.  X. 
129.  i   &  3.]  ;27  "Know  then  that   Prakriti  (Nature)  is 
mayd,  and  the  great  Lord,  the  Mdyin  (i.  e.  the  possessor  of 
the  mayo)"   \Svet.  Up.  IV.  10.];  "Indra  (/.  e.  the  Highest 
Lord)  is  known  to  assume  many  forms  through  the  power 
of  illusions  (mayo)"     \_Brih.  Up.ll.$.  19.];     "My  mdya 
is  difficult  to  transcend."     [B.  G.  VII.  14.];     "When  the 
individual  soul,  that  has  been  asleep  under  the  influence  of 
the  beginningless  mayd,  wakes  up,    (then  he  knows  the 
Unborn  One)."     [Mdnd.  Up.  II.  21.]. 

To  the  same  effect  are  the  following  passages : — "  Be- 
cause the  Lord  is  of  the  nature  of  Intelligence,  therefore  He 
has  the  All  for  His  form.  But  He  is  no  material  thing. 
Know  then  that  the  distinctions  of  mountain,  ocean,  land, 
&c.,  are  indeed  born  out  of  Him  and  are  the  outcome  of  the 
display  of  illusion  in  Intelligence.  But  when,  after  all  the 
effects  of  works  are  destroyed,  there  remains  Intelligence 

27.  Vide  also  Taitt.  Br.  II.  8.  9. 


32  SRI-BHASHYA.     [Chap.  L  Part.  1. 

alone  in  Its  own  true  form,  pure  and  devoid  of  evil,  then  in- 
deed cease  to  exist  those  fruits  of  the  tree  of  illusion  (saftkalpa 
—  avidyd}  which  form  the  distinctions  of  things  in  things."  [  V, 
P.  II.  12.  39.  &  40.] ;  "  Therefore,  at  no  time  and  in  no  place, 
can  there  be  any  group  of  things  other  than  Intelligence, 

0  thou,  twice-born  one.    The  One  Intelligence  is  appre- 
hended in  many  ways,  by  those  whose  minds  are  variously 
constituted  on  account  of  the  variety  of  their  own  actions. 
The  Intelligence  which  is  pure,  devoid  of  evil,  devoid  of 
sorrow  and  is  free  from  contact  with  all  greed,  &c.,  is  one 
and  always  one,  is  the  Highest  and  the  Highest  Lord  ;  He 
is  Vasudeva,  other  than  whom  there  is  nothing.  Thus  have 

1  told  you  of  what  is  real  existence,  and  how  Intelligence 
is  real  and  all  else  unreal ;  and  I  have  told  you  also  that 
this,  which  is  phenomenally  realised  well  for  practical  pur- 
poses, is  indeed  that  on  which  the  world  is  dependent".     [  V. 
P.  II.  12.43  to  45'] 

The  following  and  other  scriptural  passages  speak  of 
the  destruction  of  ignorance  (avidyd},  by  means  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  oneness  of  the  self  with  the  Brahman, 
who  is  devoid  of  characterising  attributes  and  is  pure  In- 
telligence : — "  He  comes  not  to  Death  (mntyu)  who  sees 
that  One".  [  ?  ];  "He  who  sees  that  One  does 
not  see  Death".  [Qhhdnd.  Up.  VII.  26.  2.];  "  For,  indeed, 
when  he  obtains  fearless  support  in  that  which  is  invisible, 
incorporeal,  undefinable,  homeless,  then  he  obtains  fearless- 
ness." [Taitt.  Up.  II.  7.  i.];  "  When  He  who  is  the  high- 
est and  lowest  is  beheld,  then  the  knot  of  the  heart  is 
broken,  doubts  are  all  shattered,  and  his  karmas  perish." 
[Mund.  Up.  II.  2.  8.] ;  "He  who  knows  the  Brahman  be- 
comes the  Brahman  indeed."  \Mund.  Up.  III.  2.  9.]: 
"  He  who  thus  knows  Him  transcends  death  (mntyu  — 
avidyd} ;  there  is  no  other  path  for  the  attainment  of  final 


Adhik.  I.  Sfit.  /.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  33 

release." — [Svct.  Up.  III.  8.];  &c.  Here  aviciyd  (ignorance) 
is  denoted,  by  the  word  mrityu,  as  in  this  speech  of  Sanat- 
sujata  : — "  I  say  that  false  perception  is  death  (mrityu}, 
and  I  also  say  that  right  perception  is  always  immortality." 
[M.Bh.  V.  41.4.]. 

"  The  Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge  (or  Intelli- 
gence), Infinity" — [Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  "The  Brahman  is 
Knowledge,  Bliss" — [Brih.  Up.  111.9.28.],  these  and  other 
such  probative  passages  (in  the  Vcddnta}  conclusively  est- 
ablish the  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman  to  be  free  from  at- 
tributes ;  and  the  knowledge,  that  this  (Brahman}  is  ident- 
ical with  the  (individual)  self,  results  logically  from  the 
following  and  other  scriptural  passages:— "And  he  who 
worships  another  deity,  thinking  that  that  (deity)  is  one, 
and  he  another,  he  does  not  know."  [Brili.  Up.  I.  4. 
10.];  "  He  (the  self)  is  not  all  this.. ..Let  him  worship 
Him  as  the  self  itself."  \Brili.  Up.  I.  4.  7.];  "That  thou 
art."  [Qihdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.];  "Reverend  deity,  I  am 
you,  reverend  deity,  thou  art  me."  [  ?  ]  ;  "Therefore 
whatever  I  am,  that  is  that  (deity),  and  whatever  that 
(deity)  is,  that  am  I."  [Ail.  Ar.  II.  2.  4.  6.].  (The 
Sfttra-kara}  also  says  the  very  same  thing  thus : — "  But 
they  (viz.  the  Jabalas)  worship  (the  Lord)  as  the  self, 
and  they  (viz.  the  scriptural  texts)  make  us  comprehend 
(it  as  such)."  [Vcd.  Silt.  IV.  i.  3.]  Similarly,  the  Vdk- 
yakdra  also  says — "The  Lord  is  to  be  comprehended 
as  nothing  other  than  the  self,  since  everything  is  assum- 
ed to  exist  in  Him."  Thus  by  means  of  this  knowledge 
of  the  oneness  of  the  self  and  the  Brahman,  the  de- 
struction of  the  bondage  of  unreality  and  of  its  cause 
comes  on  quite  appropriately. 

However,  it  may  be  asked — how  is  that  cessation  of 
all  distinctions,  which  is  contrary  to  perception,  accomplish- 


34  SRI-BHASHYA.    [Chap.  7.  Par  I.  L 

ed  by  the  knowledge  that  is  derived  out  of  the  scripture  ? 
—or,  how,  (for  instance),  by  means  of  the  knowledge 
1  This  is  a  rope,  not  a  serpent ',  is  the  destruction  of  the 
serpent-perception  effected — (the  destruction)  that  has  to 
contradict  what  is  actually  perceived  ?  Here  (/.  e.,  in 
the  instance  of  the  serpent  falsely  perceived  in  the  rope) 
there  is  contradiction  between  two  perceptions ;  there, 
however,  (the  contradiction  lies)  between  perception  (on 
the  one  hand)  and  the  scripture  based  upon  perceptions 
(on  the  other).  Under  these  circumstances,  when  there  is 
contradiction  between  two  equally  strong  things,  how  can 
there  be  between  them  the  relation  of  the  stultified  and 
the  stultifier?  If  it  be  said  in  reply  that  it  (viz.  the  rela- 
tion of  the  stultified  and  the  stultifier)  results  from  the 
fact  of  the  former  (/.  e.  the  thing  stultified)  being  produced 
by  a  misguiding  cause,  and  the  latter  (i.  c.  the  stultifier) 
not  being  so  (produced)/ — then,  this  same  (contention) 
is  equally  applicable  to  the  case  of  scripture  and  percep- 
tion also.  What  is  said  is  this : — The  cause  of  the  rela- 
tion of  the  stultified  and  the  stultifier  »is  neither  similar- 
ity, nor  dependence,  nor  independence  (in  respect  of  any 
two  things) ;  because  it  is  not  possible  to  stultify  (for 
instance),  the  direct  perceptual  knowledge,  (of  the  single- 
ness of  the  flame  in  a  lamp)  by  means  of  the  inference  2  8 
regarding  the  (constantly)  changing  character  of  flames.  In 
this  case,  the  oneness  of  the  flame  is  undoubtedly  made  out 

28.     The  body  of  the   syllogism   in  the  moment  of  its  extinction)  is  born 

regard    to     this    inference    is    given  and  extinguished  from  moment  to  mo- 

as    follows : — Madhyakshanaparampa-  ment,  because  it  also  shares  the  de- 

ravartinl  jicalapratikshanam  utpatttii-  structibility  of  the  lit  portion  of  the 
ndsarati,    rartyavayavavind'situ<ayogal,    .  wick,  in  the  same  way  in  which  the 

prathamacharamakshanaj-unllavat.  That  flame  is  seen  to  do  so  during  the  first 

is  to  say  : — The  flame  burning  during  moment  of  its   birth  and  the  la?t  mo- 

the  successive  moments  intermediate  ment  of  its  extinction. 
(between  the  moment  of  its  birth  and 


Adhik.  I.  Sat.  /.]        SRI-BHASHYA.  35 

by  means  of  direct  perception.  Such  being  the  case,  when 
there  is  contradiction  between  two  means  of  knowledge, 
then,  that  one  happens  to  be  the  stultified,  the  logical  re- 
sult of  which  it  is  possible  to  realise  otherwise,  while 
that  other  happens  to  be  the  stultifier,  (the  logical  result 
of)  which  cannot  be  otherwise  established,  and  is,  more- 
over, singular  and  undoubted.  That  this  is  the  relation  of 
the  stultified  and  the  stultifier  is  established  in  all  cases. 
Therefore,  it  is  but  proper  that  the  cessation  of  that 
bondage,  which  is  of  the  form  of  varied  superimpositions 
resulting  from  direct  perception,  &c.,  which  allow  room 
for  possible  errors,  does  take  place  by  means  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  oneness  of  the  self  with  the  Brahman, 
who  is  unmixed  Intelligence,  destitute  of  attributes,  eternal, 
pure,  free,  intelligent,  and  self-luminous — (the  knowledge) 
that  results  from  the  scripture  which,  being  in  accordance 
with  the  tradition  that  is  beginningless,  endless  and  unbro- 
ken, does  not  admit  of  the  smallest  error,  and  is  (as  a 
means  of  knowledge)  singular  and  undoubted  (in  value). 
But  in  regard  to  direct  perception,  which  apprehends  the 
world  of  distinctions  resulting  from  varied  superimpositions, 
the  defect  (or  misguiding  cause)  known  as  avidyd  (or  igno- 
rance), which  mainly  consists  of  the  beginninglessly  old  in- 
nate impression  of  distinctions,  is  admissible  and  has  its 
scope. 

However,  stultification  may  possibly  result  to  those 
scriptures  (or  sastras)  also,  which  are  free  from  all  de- 
fects on  account  of  their  being  in  accord  with  the  beginn- 
ingless, endless,  and  unbroken  tradition ;  because  they  deal 
with  distinctions  in  such  passages  as—"  Let  him  who  is  de- 
sirous of  Swarga  (or  the  celestial  world  of  enjoyments) 
perform  the  Jyotishtoina  sacrifice."  - 9  Yes ;  and  the  sastra 

29.  Vide  Taitt.  Sam'i.  VII.  4.  i  to  12.     and  Pur.  Mini.  IV.  4.  39  to  41, 


36  SRI-BHASHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

that  deals  with  final  release  is  of  singular  and  undoubted 
authority;  there  fore,  it  (viz.  the  sdstra  dealing  with  distinct- 
ions) is  certainly  stultified  thereby,  in  the  same  way  in 
which  the  sdstraic  injunction  3  °  (imposing  a  penance)  for 
an  earlier  disconnection  (between  the  officiating  priests 
connected  together  in  a  chain  in  the  performance  of  the 
Prdtassavana  sacrifice)  is  stultified  (by  the  injunction 
relating  to  the  later  disconnection),  when  an  earlier  and  a 
later  disconnection  do  take  place.  In  Veddnlic  passages 
also  this  same  rule  holds  good  in  respect  of  those  injunc- 
tions which  relate  to  the  worship  of  the  qualified  Brah- 
man, because  the  Supreme  Brahman  is  devoid  of  attributes 
(and  has,  therefore,  to  be  realised  after  the  qualified  Brah- 
man is  known). 

But  it  may  be  asked,  how  there  can  be  the  stultification 
of  the  following  and  other  sdstraic  statements  which  are  in- 
tended to  teach  the  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman : — "  He 
who  understands  all  and  who  knows  all" — \Muitd.  Up.  I. 


30.     In  the  sacrifice  known  us  the  for  distribution  among  ,the  priests). 

Pratassavana,  five  Kitwiks  (or  official-  and  then  the  whole  thing  is  to  be  per- 

ing  priests)  move  one  behind  the  other,  formed  over  again.    I f  the  Pratiharlr1 

taking  hold  of  each   other's  girdle.  disconnect  himself  from  the  Prastotri, 

The /V<w/0/r/ takes  hold  of  the /I  ay/war-  then   the  expiation  prescribed  there- 

yu  from  behind,  the  Pratihartn  takes  for  is,    that   all   the    property  of  the 

hold  of    the  Prastotri  similarly,   the  sacrificer  should  be  distributed   then 

Udgaln  takes  hold  of  the  Pratihartn  and  there.     If  both  the  Udgatri  and 

similarly,    the   Brahma  priest   takes  the   Prastotri  disconnect    themselves 

hold  of  the  Udgdtn  in  the  same  man-  from  the  chain  of  priests,   one  after 

ner,  and   the    Yajamdna    takes   hold  another,in  the  same  sacrificial  act,then 

of   the    Brahma,    priest.     While    so  the  expiation  prescribed  in  the  case  of 

moving,  if  the  Udgdtn  disconnect  him-  him  who  disconnects  himself  later  on 

self  from  the  Prastotri,  then  the  expia-  has  alone  to  be  gone  through,  but  not 

lion  prescribed  therefor  is,  that  the  the  expiation  prescribed   in   the  case 

sacrifice  so  interrupted  has  to  be  com-  of  the    earlier   disconnection.     Vide 

pletcd,  -without,  however,  distributing  Pur.  Mini.  VI.  5.  49  to  jb. 
the  dakshind  (or  the  money  intended 


Adhik.  I.  Sru.  i.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  37 

i.  9.  and  II.  2.  7.];  "His  supreme  pcnver.is  revealed,  in- 
deed, as  varied,  natural,  and  as  consisting  of  knowledge, 
strength,  and  action." — [Svef.  Up.  VI.  8.];  "He  who  desires 
the  truth  and  He  who  wills  the  truth"— \Qhhdnd.  Up.  VIII. 
i.  5.];  £c.  If  so  asked,  we  answer  that  it  (viz.  such  stul- 
tification) results  from  the  power  of  the  passages  relating 
to  the  non-qualified  (Brahman).  What  is  said  is  this :— The 
following  and  other  similar  passages,  viz.  "  That  which 
is  neither  gross,  nor  atomic,  nor  short,  nor  long" — \Brih. 
Up.  III.  8.  8.],  "The  Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge, 
Infinity."—  [Tailt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  "That  which  is  with- 
out attributes,  without  taint" — [A.  M.  J\rtlr.  7.],  31 
declare  that  the  Brahman  is  Intelligence,  eternally  un- 
changeable, and  devoid  of  all  attributes  :  while  others 
(declare  that  He  is)  qualified.  There  being  (thus)  a  conflict 
between  (these)  two  kinds  of  passages,  it  is  nothing  wrong  if, 
according  to  that  very  rule  which  is  applicable  to  the  dis- 
connection (in  the  'chain  of  priests),  the  passages  relating 
to  the  non-qualified  (Brahman)  are  found  to  be  more 
powerful,  for  the  reason  that  these  (latter)  desiderate  the 
(predication  of)  qualities,  and  have,  therefore,  to  come  into 
operation  after  (the  passages  which  relate  to  the  qualified 
Brahman). 

But  if  it  be  said  that  in  the  passage — "  The  Brahman 
is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infinity" — knowledge,  &c.,  are 
declared  to  be  the  attributes  of  the  Brahman,  it  is  replied 
that  it  is  not  so ;  because  there  has  to  be  oneness  in  the 
meaning  (of  these  words)  due  to  the  fact  of  their  being 
grammatically  equated.  If  it  be  (again)  said  that  even 
in  describing  that  which  is  characterised  by  many  attri- 
butes, oneness  in  the  meaning  (of  the  words  used  to  describe 
it)  is  not  opposed  to  reason,  then,  (it  has  to  be  said  that) 

31.     See  also  Adh,  up.  6B. 


38  SRI-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

whoever  is  (so)  ignorant  of  the  denotative  power  of  words  is 
(foolish  like  sheep  which,  being  fit  for  sacrifices,  are)  beloved 
of  the  gods.  Oneness  in  meaning  implies  that  all  the  words 
(in  a  grammatical  equation)  denote  the  same  thing.  When- 
ever a  thing  that  is  characterised  by  attributes  is  described 
(in  words),  then,  the  difference  in  meaning  between  those 
(various  characterising)  words,  in  accordance  with  the 
difference  in  the  characterising  attributes  (they  denote),  is 
unavoidable  ;  and  therefore  (such)  oneness  in  meaning  does 
not  result  (here).  If,  however,  it  does  result  even  as  against 
this,  then  all  the  words  cannot  but  have  a  synonimity  in 
meaning,  in  as  much  as  they  have  (all)  to  denote  one  and 
the  same  characterless  thing.  But  listen  attentively  how 
there  can  be  no  (such)  synonimity  even  when  they  import 
one  and  the  same  thing.  It  is  settled  that  (in  a  grammati- 
cal equation)  there  is  oneness  of  import,  and  hence  it  is 
that  the  one  particular  thing  (mentioned  therein)  has  the 
power  of  being  denoted  by  the  opposite  of  what  is  contra- 
dictory to  the  meaning  of  the  several  words  (used  in  that 
equation).  It  follows,  therefore,  that  all  the  words  (in  a 
grammatical  equation)  have  (their  own)  meanings,  and 
have  oneness  of  import,  and  are  not  synonymous.  What  is 
said  is  this: — The  Brahman,  who  has  to  be  understood 
as  He  really  is,  is  of  a  nature  which  is  the  opposite 
of  all  things  other  (than  Himself).  All  things,  which 
are  fthusj  by  nature  opposed  to  Him,  are,  in  the  result, 
negatived  by  these  three  words  (viz.  existence,  know- 
ledge, and  infinity}.  Of  these,  the  word  existence  refers  to 
the  Brahman  as  being  other  than  that  thing,  which,  on 
account  of  its  being  subject  to  modifications,  is  unreal ; 
the  word  knowledge  refers  (to  the  same  Brahman}  as  being 
other  than  that  thing,  which  is,  by  nature,  non-intelligent, 
and  the  luminosity  of  which  is  dependent  upon  other  things ; 


Adliik,  L  Snt.  /.]      SRI-BHASHYA,  39 

and  the  word  infinity  refers  (also  to  Him)  as  being  other 
than  that  which  is  limited  by  time,  by  space,  and  by  its  own 
definite  character  as  a  thing.  Moreover,  this  logical  exclu- 
sion (of  all  that  is  not  a  thing  from  what  is  that  thing) 
forms  no  positive  or  negative  characterising  attribute 
thereof,  but  means  the  Brahman  Himself  who  is  not  any 
thing  other  (than  Himself).  Just  as,  in  the  case  of  whiteness 
or  any  other  such  thing,  the  logical  exclusion  of  it,  from 
blackness  or  any  other  such  thing,  gives  the  true  nature 
of  that  particular  thing  itself  (viz.  whiteness  or  any  other 
such  thing),  but  forms  no  new  characterising  property  (of 
that  whiteness  or  any  other  such  thing);  so  also,  these 
three  words,  by  indicating  that  the  one  particular  thing 
(mentioned  in  the  given  grammatical  equation)  is  oppos- 
ed by  nature  to  all  things  different  from  itself,  are 
abundantly  full  of  meaning,  have  one  and  the  same  import, 
and(yet)  are  not  synonymous.  Therefore,  it  has  been  de- 
monstrated that  the  Brahman,  which  is  one  only,  is 
self-luminous  and  is  free  from  all  characterising  attri- 
butes. 

It  is  only  when  the  meaning  of  this  sentence  is  thus 
propounded,  that  there  will  be  agreement  in  sense  between 
it  and  the  following  passage  among  others  :— "  Existence 
alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was  in  the  beginning,  one  only, 
without  a  second."  [C/ihdnd.  Up.\l.2.  i.].  The  passages — 
"Whence  indeed  all  these  beings  are  born — "\_Taitt.  Up. 
III.  i.i.];  "  Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was  in 
the  beginning."—  [Qhhand.  Up.  VI.  2.  i.];  "  Indeed  the 
Self,  this  one  only,  was  in  the  beginning." — [Ail.  Up.  I.  i.] 
—these  and  other  similar  passages  define  the  Brahman  as 
the  cause  of  the  world  ;  and  His  essential  nature  is  here 
described  to  the  effect  that  "  The  Brahman  is  Existence, 
Knowledge,  Infinity."  Under  these  circumstances,  in  ac- 


40  SRI-BHASHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  7. 

cordance  with   the   rules 2  which  enforces  faith   (in    the 
truthfulness  of  all  that  is  said  about  any  one  thing)  in  all 
the  recensions  of  the  Vedas,  it  is  the  Brahman  Himself, 
who  is  without  a  second   and  excludes    (from   Himself) 
(all)   similars    and  dissimilars,   that   is  to  be   made  out 
in  all  the   passages  which   characterise   Him   i;o   be  the 
cause  (of  the  world).  That  essential  nature,  which  is  (here) 
intended  to  be  propounded,  and  belongs  to  the  Brahman, 
who  is  without  a  second  and  is  pointed  out  to  be  the  cause 
of  the  world,  has  (therefore)  to  be  explained  so   as  not  to 
contradict  this  (aforesaid  characterisation).     The  .scriptural 
text  relating  to  His  being  without  a  second  does  not  admit 
the  existence  of  any  second  thing  even  in  the  form  of  a 
quality.    Otherwise,  there  will  be  a  contradiction  also  of 
the    statement    which    says — (He  is)    "  untainted"   and 
"  devoid  of  attributes,"  &c.  Therefore,  this  passage  which 
defines  (the  Brahman}  denotes  only  That  which  is  indi- 
visible and  homogeneous. 

It  may  however  be  said  that  there  is  an  indicative33  (or 
figurative)  sense  in  the  use  of  the  words  '  Existence,' 
'  Knowledge,'  &c.,  since,  by  losing  their  own  proper  mean- 

32.     This  rule  termed  the  Sarra'sd-  sacrifices  in  accordance  with  any   re- 

kltdpratyayanyaya  may  be  explained  cension,  because  the  essential  nature 

as  follows: — The  rituals  known  as  the  of  those     sacrifices    has    'to  be     the 

new-moon    and    full-moon   sacrifices  same      throughout.       Consequently, 

are  mentioned   in   several   recensions  the  new-moon  and  full-moon  sacrifices 

of  the    Vedas   such   as   Kdthaka,  Kd-  are  not  different  in  the  different    re- 

nva,     Mddhyandina,     TaittirTya,    &c.  censions  of  the  Vedas.     Similarly,  all 

Kach    of  these   recensions   mentions  the    statements  made  about  any  one 

only  a  few  of  the  characteristics  of  particular  thing  in  all  the  recensions  of 

those  sacrifices,   and   those  that    are  the  Vedas  have  to  be  taken  together 

mentioned  in  any  one  of  them  are  not  as  really  characterising  that  particular 

all  mentioned  in  the   others.     Never-  thing  in  each    recension.  Vide   Pftr. 

theless,  all  the   characteristics   men-  Mlm.  II.  4.  8  to  32. 

tioned  in  all  the  recensions  have  to  33.     Vide  supra  \i.  4.  note  10. 
be  put   together  in  performing  those 


Adhik.  1.  Silt.  /.]     SRI-BHISHYA.  41 

ings,  they  express  the  nature  of  that  thing  which  excludes 
the  opposite  of  what  they  denote.  This  is  nothing  wrong, 
because  the  purportive  power  (of  words)  is  stronger  than 
their  denotative  power.  It  is  surely  agreed  on  all  hands 
that  the  purpose  of  a  grammatical  equation  is  to  be  found 
solely  in  (its)  oneness  (of  import.)  Again,  it  may  be  said 
that  all  the  words  (in  a  sentence)  are  not  commonly  seen 
to  be  used  in  a  figurative  sense.  What  of  it  ?  Such  use  is 
not  seen  in  the  case  of  even  a  single  word,  when,  (in 
adopting  the  purely  denotative  sense  of  the  words),  there 
is  no  contradiction  of  the  purport  of  the  sentence.  After  it 
has  been  determined  that  such  and  such  is  the  main  purport 
of  a  group  of  words,  which  are  used  together  (in  a  sent- 
ence), then,  for  the  purpose  of  removing  any  contradiction 
(which  the  purely  denotative  sense  of  the  words  may  give 
rise  to)  in  relation  to  that  (purport),  (to  adopt)  the  figura- 
tive interpretation  in  relation  to  two,  or  three,  or  all  (the 
words),  is  in  no  way  wrong,  just  as  (it  is  not  wrong  to  do 
so)  in  relation  to  any  one  (word).  This  is  so  admitted  by 
(all)  those  who  take  their  stand  on  the  sastras.  Those34 
who  maintain  that  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sentences  is 
to  be  finally  found  in  action,  acknowledge  that  all  the 
words  that  are  found  in  the  sentences  of  ordinary  language 
possess  the  figurative  significance  ;  because  (according  to 
them)  the  mandatory  and  other  verbal  forms  such  as  the 
I  in  &<;.,  35  are  primarily  used  so  as  to  signify  the  produc- 
tion of  the  (new  unperceivable  principle)  aprirva*Q.  The 

34.  These  are    the  Prdbhakaras —  It  is  said  to  be  a   new  and  invisible 
a  school  of  Mimfimsakas  who  hold  the  something,  representing  either  an  im- 
position that  words  have  a  meaning  perceptible  afterstate  of  a  work   per- 
only  in  so  far  as  they  express  actions  formed  in  obedience  to  a  command- 
er are  associated  with  actions  in  one  inent,  or  the   state   immediately  ante- 
way  or  another.  cedent  to  the  production  of  the  result 

35.  Lin  is  the  verbal  form  of  the  of  that  work.    In  either  case,  this  new 
potential  mood,  and  it  is  also  used  in  principle  is  of  itself  held  to  be  enough 
the  sense  of  the  imperative  mood.  to  produce  the  good    or   the  bad    re- 

36.  This  apuri'a  is  otherwise  called  suits  of  works. 
aftf ishta  by  the   followers   of  Jiumini, 


42  SRI-BHA.SHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

action  signified  by  verbs  is  (only)  figuratively  made  known 
by  means  of  (their)  mandatory  and  other  forms.  And 
those  other  words,  which  (being  different  from  verbs)  de- 
note their  own  meanings  which  are  dependent  upon  action, 
have  also  their  primary  sense  undoubtedly  in  producing  the 
unperceivable  principle  apurva ;  and  hence  to  declare  that 
they  are  (also)  significant  of  action  like  verbs  is  (to  make 
them)  altogether  figurative.  Therefore,  there  is  nothing 
wrong  in  (adopting)  the  figurative  interpretation  of  even  all 
the  words  (in  a  sentence),  if  it  is  to  serve  the  purpose  of 
counteracting  the  contradiction  of  the  purport  of  sentences. 
Therefore  the  Vcdanta  is  undoubtedly  expressive  of 
all  these  conclusions,  and  is,  in  consequence,  unquestion- 
ably authoritative. 

Moreover,  it  has  been  stated  (above)  that,  in  the  event 
of  there  being  a  conflict  (of  the  sdstras)  with  perception, 
&c.,  the  sdstras  are  more  powerful.    It  is  only  when  there 
is  any  (such)  conflict,  that  the  higher  authoritativeness  (of 
the  sdstras)  has  to  be  asserted.     But  there  is -no  (such) 
conflict  noticeable  at  all,  because  perception  (also)  appre- 
hends the  Brahman  who  is  devoid  of  attributes  and  is  pure 
existence.  It  may  be  asked,  how  it  can  be  said  that  percep- 
tion apprehends  pure  existence,  seeing  that  it  has  for  its 
objects  a  variety  of  things,  as  when  (it  is  perceived)  that  ajar 
exists,  that  a  cloth  exists,  and  so  on.     If  (in  perception) 
there  be  no  apprehension  of  distinctions,  then  all  percep- 
tions will  relate  to  only  one  object,  and  will,  accordingly, 
be  the  cause  of  only  one  realisation,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
knowledge  which  results  from  a  continuous  stream  (of  simi- 
lar perceptions).  (This  is,  no  doubt,)  true ;  and  it  shall  be  ex- 
amined here  accordingly.  How  are  existence  and  its  differen- 
tiation made  out  when  it  is  realised  that  a  jar  exists  ?  Both 
these  realisations  cannot  indeed  have  perception  for  their 


Adhik.  I.  Silt.  /.]     SRI-BHA.SHYA.  43 

basis  ;  because  they  result  from  knowledge  born  at  different 
times,  and  because  also  perceptual  knowledge  lasts  only 
for  a  moment.  Therefore,  it  has  to  be  ascertained  whether 
that  which  forms  the  object  of  perception  is  the  (essential) 
nature  of  things  or  (their  apparent)  differentiation.  Since  the 
apprehension  of  differentiation  very  naturally  pre-supposes 
the  apprehension  of  the  essential  nature  of  things,  and  also 
(pre-supposes)  the  remembrance  of  the  correlatives  of  that 
(differentiation),  for  this  very  reason  it  has  necessarily  to 
be  admitted  that  sense-perception  has  the  essential  nature 
of  things  for  its  object ;  and  so,  differentiation  is  not 
apprehended  by  means  of  sense-perception.  Therefore, 
the  realisation  of  distinctions  is  altogether  based  upon 
error. 

Again,  that  something  which  is  known  as  differentiation 
is  not  capable  of  being  defined  by  those  who  know  the  sci- 
ence of  logic.  Indeed,  differentiation  does  not  constitute  the 
essential  nature  of  things.  Otherwise,  when  the  essential 
nature  of  a  thing  is  perceived,  then,  in  the  same  way  in 
which  there  results  the  realisation  of  that  essential  nature, 
there  will  have  to  result  (also)  the  realisation  of  the  dis- 
tinctions differentiating  it  from  all  other  things.  The  re- 
alisation that  one  thing  is  different  (from  another)  desider- 
ates the  remembrance  of  correlatives  ;  therefore,  it  should 
not  be  urged  that,  even  when  the  essential  nature  of  things 
is  apprehended,  there  happens  to  be  no  realisation  of  dis- 
tinctions, for  want  of  the  remembrance,  at  that  very  time,  of 
the  correlatives  of  that  (differentiation)  ;  for,  surely,  it  is 
not  allowable,  on  the  part  of  him  who  holds  that  differentia- 
tion is  not  at  all  distinct  from  the  essential  nature  of  things, 
to  posit  that  (before  realising  differentiation)  it  is  necessary 
to  know  the  connected  correlatives ;  because,  (according 
to  him)  the  essential  nature  of  things  and  its  differentiation 
have  both  the  character  of  not  being  different  from  that 


44  SRI-BHISHYA.       [C//o/>.  /.  Part.  L 

essential  nature.  And  if  there  is  no  need  to  know  any 
correlatives  in  the  case  of  the  realisation  of  the  essential 
nature  of  things,  so  also  must  it  be  in  the  case  of  the  re- 
alisation of  differentiation.  And  the  statement  that  a  jar 
is  different  (from  other  things),  must  then  be,  like  the 
statement  that  the  hand  is  the  hand,  an  identical  proposi- 
tion (affirming  the  admitted  identity  between  the  jar  and 
its  differentiation  from  other  things). 

Nor  is  (differentiation)  a  qualifying  attribute.  If  it 
have  the  character  of  a  qualifying  attribute,  then  it  has 
necessarily  to  be  accepted  that  it  (viz.,  this  qualifying 
attribute)  is  distinct  from  that  essential  nature  of  things 
(which  is  qualified  by  it).  Otherwise,  it  (viz.  differentia- 
tion) will  certainly  be  the  same  as  the  essential  nature  of 
things.  If  it  be  granted  that  there  is  a  distinction  (between 
the  essential  nature  of  things  and  its  differentiating  attri- 
butes), then  in  regard  to  this  differentiation  (which  has 
been  hypothetically  taken  to  be  a  qualifying  attribute),  its 
own  character  as  a  differentiation  forms  its  qualifying  attri- 
bute, and  in  regard  to  this  also,  (it  being  again  different 
from  the  essential  nature  of  things,  its  own  character  as  a 
differentiation  fonns  its  qualifying  attribute,  and  so  on) ; 
thus  (arises)  a  regressus  in  infinitum.  Moreover,  (if  it  be 
held  that  differentiation  is  a  qualifying  attribute),  then,  there 
will  also  be  the  logical  fallacy  of  reciprocal  dependence ; 
for,  there  will  then  result  the  apprehension  of  (individual) 
differentiation  when  there  is  the  apprehension  of  things 
as  characterised  by  (their)  generic  and  other  (such)  qualities, 
and  there  will  (similarly)  arise  the  apprehension  of  things 
as  characterised  by  (their)  generic  and  other  (such)  qualities 
when  there  is  (merely)  the  apprehension  of  (individual) 
differentiation.  Therefore,  differentiation  being  difficult  of 
definition,  perception  brings  to  light  pure  existence  alone. 


Adhik.  L  Si'tt.  i.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  45 

Again,  from  the  instances  such  as  a  jar  exists,  a  cloth 
exists,  a  jar  is  experienced,  and  a  cloth  is  experienced, 
—it  is  seen  that  all  external  objects  are  invariably 
apprehended  as  compounded  of  existence  and  experi- 
ence. Now,  in  all  cognitions,  existence  alone  is  seen 
to  persist  always,  and  so  it  alone  is  the  reality  ;  and 
the  differentiating  attributes  (which  are  specific  of  jars, 
cloths,  &c.,)  are  all  unreal,  on  account  of  their  having  to 
be  (one  after  another)  excluded,  as,  for  example,  the 
(falsely  perceived)  serpent  in  a  (real)  rope  (is  excluded). 
That  is  to  say,  the  rope  is  the  (real)  entity  and  forms  the 
persistent  basis  (of  all  the  false  perceptions) ;  and  the 
(falsely  perceived)  snake,  crack  in  the  earth,  stream  of 
water,  &c.,  are  all  unreal,  in  as  much  as  they  are  all  liable 
to  be  excluded  one  after  another. 

To  this  it  may  be  objected  thus:—  In  the  case  of  the  (false- 
ly perceived)  snake,  £c.,  in  a  (real)  rope,  the  snake,  &c.,  are 
of  an  unreal  nature,  because  (the  perception  in  regard  to 
them)  is  stultified  by  knowing  the  actual  reality  of 
their  basis,  such  as  the  rope,  &c.,  through  making  out  that 
it  (viz.  the  thing  perceived)  is  a  rope  but  no  snake  ;  but  not 
because  those  (perceptions)  are  one  after  another  excluded. 
And  the  reality  of  the  rope,  &c.,  is  not  due  to  their  persist- 
ence all  along,  but  is  due  to  their  remaining  unstultified  (even 
by  the  knowledge  of  what  forms  their  basic  reality).  But,  in 
the  present  instance,  how  can  there  be  unreality  in  regard 
to  jars,  &c.,  the  perceptions  whereof  are  not  (so)  stultified  ? 
This  objection  is  thus  answered  : — The  logical  exclu- 
sion— well,  it  has  to  be  ascertained  of  what  nature  that 
(exclusion)  is.  Is  it,  (for  example,  of  the  nature  of)  the 
non-existence  of  cloth,  &c.,  in  the  cognition  that  a  jar  ex- 
ists ?  If  so,  it  must  be  concluded  that  the  stultification  of 
(the  cognition  of)  cloth,  £c.,  results  from  this  (cognition) 


46  SRI-BHASHYA.        [Chap.  1.  Part.  L 

that  a  jar  exists.  Hence  logical  exclusion  is  such  a  nega- 
tion of  (the  cognition  of)  objects  as  is  based  upon  (such  a) 
stultification.  And  this  kind  of  (exclusion)  establishes  the 
unreality  of  those  objects  which  are  (so)  excluded.  Pure 
existence  alone,  being  unstultified,  persists  all  along,  like 
the  rope  (for  example,  in  the  falsely  perceived  instances  of 
the  snake,  the  crack  in  the  earth,  &c.,  referred  to  above). 
Therefore,  all  that  is  other  than  pure  existence  is  unreal. 
And  the  syllogistic  statement  (here)  is  as  follows  :— 
Existence  is  real,  because  it  continues  to  persist  all  along, 
like  the  rope,  &c.,  in  the  instances  of  the  rope-serpent,  &c., 
(above  referred  to).  Jars,  &c.,  are  unreal,  because  they 
are  (all  one  after  another)  excluded,  like  the  (falsely  per- 
ceived) snake,  &c.,  that  have  for  their  basis  the  (real)  rope, 
&c.  Such  being  the  case,  it  is  only  experience,  which  con- 
tinues to  persist  all  along,  that  constitutes  reality,  and  it 
(viz.  experience)  is  existence  itself. 

It  may,  however,  be  said  again  that  pure  existence, 
being  the  object  of  experience,  is  different  from  it.  It  is  not 
so,because  (all  such)  differentiation  has  already  been  set  aside, 
as  not  forming  the  content  of  perception,  and  as  being  diffi- 
cult of  definition.  And  for  this  same  reason,  the  idea  that 
existence  forms  the  object  of  experience  can  not  be  in 
agreement  with  any  authoritative  position  in  logic.  There- 
fore existence  is  the  same  as  experience.  And  this  (experi- 
ence) is  self-evident,  (simply)  because  it  has  the  nature  of  an 
experience.  If  it  have  any  other  proof  (than  itself),  then, 
there  will  be  room  to  characterise  it  as  no  experience,  in  the 
same  way  in  which  jars  and  such  other  things  (are  not  exper- 
ience). Further,  it  is  not  possible  to  posit  the  necessity  of  one 
experience  for  (making  out)  another  experience,  because  it 
(viz.  experience)  is  capable  of  becoming  evident  merely  by 
its  own  existence.  Indeed,  experience,  while  it  exists,  is  not 


Adhik.  I.  Sul.  /.]       SRI-BHISHYA.  47 

found  to  be  incapable  of  becoming  evident  like  jars,  &c., 
(which  are  incapable  of  becoming  evident  simply  because 
they  exist).  Otherwise,  (/.<?.  if  experience  be  found  to  be 
incapable  of  becoming  evident  simply  through  its  existence), 
it  will  have  to  be  acknowledged  that  it  has  its  knowabi- 
lity  dependent  upon  something  other  than  itself. 

Then  perhaps  you  hold  as  follows: — Even  in  the 
case  of  an  experience  that  has  (actually)  come  into 
existence,  it  is  merely  the  object  (of  that  experience) 
that  is  brought  to  light,  as  (for  instance)  when  a  jar  is 
experienced ;  because  no  one,  who  knows  that  a  certain 
particular  thing  is  a  jar,  also  experiences  at  that  very  same 
time  experience-in-itself,  which  forms  no  object  (of  experi- 
ence) and  is  not  of  the  nature  of  what  may  be  (externally) 
pointed  to  by  the  word  '  this.  Therefore,  in  the  same  way 
in  which  contact  with  the  eye  and  other  similar  senses  is 
the  cause  of  the  production  of  the  knowability  of  jars  and 
other  external  objects,  an  (external)  entity  alone  forms  the 
cause  of  the  production  of  that  same  knowability  in  rela- 
tion to  experience.  Immediately  afterwards,  (that  is,  after 
perceiving  an  object)  experience  is  inferred  from  the  logical 
basis  of  distinct  knowability  which  is  momentarily  associa- 
ted with  that  object.  If  that  be  so,  it  may  be  said  that  ex- 
perience, which  is  intelligence,  acquires  the  nature  of  non- 
intelligence.  What,  then,  is  the  nature  of  this  intelligence 
known  to  be  ?  Surely,  it  cannot  be  the  invariable  associa- 
tion of  knowability  with  its  own  existence,  because 
(such  knowability)  is  found  to  exist  (also)  in  association 
with  pleasures,  &c.  Indeed,  pleasures,  &c.,  while  they 
exist,  are  never  unfelt.  Therefore,  experience-in-itself  is 
not  experienced  by  itself,  on  account  of  the  impossibility  of 
such  a  thing  (taking  place),  in  the  same  way  in  which  (it  is 
impossible)  for  the  finger-tip,  which  feels  all  other  things  by 


48  SRI-BHISHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

touch,  to  perceive  itself  by  touching  itself. 

(To  all  this,  it  is  thus  replied):— That  knowability 
which,  like  colour,  &c.,  forms  a  property  of  objects,  and  is 
other  than  experience,  is  not  (at  all)  known  to  exist; 
moreover,  it  is  not  proper  to  assume  (the  existence  of)  a 
property  called  knowability,  when  it  is  possible  to  realise 
all  things  by  means  of  that  experience  alone  which  is  ad- 
mitted by  both  (sides)  ;  for  these  reasons  all  this  (above 
contention)  is  simply  the  foolish  display  of  the  intelligence 
of  him  who  has  not  himself  understood  the  peculiar  nature  of 
experience.  Consequently,  experience  is  not  made  out  by 
means  of  inference,  and  is  not  also  made  evident  by  any 
other  means  of  knowledge.  But,  on  the  contrary,  exper- 
ience, which  proves  all  things,  proves  itself,  and  the 
sj'llogistic  statement  here  is  as  follows  : — Experience  is 
that  in  respect  of  which  its  own  characteristic  property 
and  the  realisation  thereof  are  (both)  independent  of  any 
thing  else;  because  it  (viz.  experience)  forms,  through 
its  association  (with  another  thing),  the  means  of  having 
that  property  and  that  realisation  in  connnection  with  that 
other  thing;  whatever  is,  by  its  own  association  (with 
another  thing),  the  means  of  giving  rise  to  a  characterising 
property  and  its  realisation  in  that  other  thing,  —that  is 
seen  to  be  independent  of  all  other  things  in  the  matter 
of  that  (property)  and  that  (realisation)  in  reference  to 
itself.  For  instance,  there  is  the  case  of  colour,  &c.,  in 
relation  to  visibility,  &c.  Colour,  &c.,  while  producing  by 
means  of  their  own  association,  visibility,  &c.,  in  the  earth 
and  such  other  things,  are  not  themselves  dependent  upon 
the  association  of  colour,  &c.,  for  the  production  of  visi- 
bility, &c.,  in  relation  to  themselves.  Therefore,  exper- 
ience is  itself  the  cause  of  its  own  knowability  as  well  as 
of  the  realisatoin  that  it  is  knowable, 


Adhik.  I.  Si'fl.  /.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  49 

This  same  experience  which  is  self-luminous  is  also 
eternal,  because  antecedent 3  7  non-existence  and  other 
non-existences  are  absent  (in  relation  to  it.)  And  such 
absence  (of  non-existence)  certainly  results  from  the  self- 
evident  nature  (of  experience.)  Indeed,  it  is  not  possible 
to  make  out  the  '  antecedent  non-existence'  of  self-evident 
experience,either  by  itself,or  by  other  means.  Experience — 
if  it  have  to  cause  the  knowledge  of  its  own  'non-existence' — 
does  not,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  cause  such  knowledge,  while 
it  is  itself  existent.  While  it  is  existent,  simply  because 
there  will  (otherwise)  be  contradiction,  its  '  non-existence' 
cannot  exist.  And  so,  how  can  it  cause  the  knowledge  of 
its  own  '  non-existence'  ?  Similarly,  even  when  not  exist- 
ent, it  (viz.  experience)  does  not  cause  the  knowledge  (of  its 
'  non-existence').  How  can  experience,  being  itself  non- 
existent, become  the  means  of  proving  its  own  'non-exist- 
ence '  ?  Nor  is  it  possible  to  know  it  (viz.  ( non-existence ') 
by  other  means,  because  experience  is  not  the  object  of 
anything  other  than  itself.  The  means  of  proof,  that  can 
prove  the  '  antecedent  non-existence '  of  this  (viz.  ex- 

37.     Non-existence  (or  abhara)  is  but  is  incapable  of  having  an  end.  For 

of  four  kinds  viz.  pragabhava,  pradli-  example,   when   a   pot  or  any  other 

wamsai&dva,   anvonyabhdva,    and   at-  such  thing  is  destroyed,  this  particu- 

yantabhzva.  Prdgabhava  or  antecedent  lar   non-existence   comes    into   being 

non-existence  exists  antecedently  to  and  thereafter  persists  for  ever.  Anyo- 

the  production  of  an  effect  such  as  a  nydbhdva    or    mutual     non-existence 

pot ;  that  is,  the  pot  is  non-existent  means  that  in  any  one  thing  there  is 

before  it  is  produced.  Thus,  this  non-  the  non-existence  of  another,  as  when 

existence    is   incapable   of  having   a  it  is  said  that  a  pot  is  not  a  cloth.  This 

beginning    but    capable    of    having  coincides  with  what  is  generally  known 

an     end.       Pradhwamsdbhava  is   the  as  'difference.'  Atyantdbhdv a  or   abso- 

non-existence  consequent  on  the  des-  lute  non-existence  is  that  kind  of  non- 

truction  of  a   thing  such   as  a  pot ;  existence  which  negates  the  existence 

that  is,  the  pot  is  non-existent  after  it  of  a  thing  at  all  times.    For  instance, 

is  destroyed.    So  this  particular   non-  the  horns  of  a   hare  are  non-existent 

existence  is  capable  of  having  an  origin  at  all  times, 

7 


50  SRI-BHASHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  1. 

perience),  has  to  prove  such  '  non-existence  '  after  making 
out  objectively  what  experience  really  is.  It  is  not  possible 
to  know  its  '  non-existence '  by  other  means,  because  it  is 
self-evident,  and  is  not  therefore  capable  of  being  perceived 
definitely  as  an  external  object,  so  as  to  say  '  This  it  is. 
Hence,  it  cannot  be  said  that  experience  is  originated,  as 
there  is  the  absence  of  'antecedent  non-existence'  in  rela- 
tion to  it.  Therefore,  it  has  also  none  of  those  other 
modifications  38  of  the  produced  thing,  which  are  invariably 
associated  with  origination.  This  un-originated  experi- 
ence does  not  admit  of  any  manifoldness  (or  variation) 
within  itself,  because,  in  relation  to  it,  there  is  the  realis- 
ation of  what  is  contradictory  to  the  predication  (of 
such  manifoldness  /.  e.  the  realisation  of  non-origination). 
Indeed,  that  which  is  not  originated  has  never  been 
seen  to  be  manifold  (or  varied  in  character).  More- 
over, distinction  and  such  other  things,  are  (themselves) 
capable  of  being  experienced  (/.  e.  of  becoming  the 
objects  of  experience),  and  cannot,  therefore,  be  the  qualify- 
ing attributes  of  experience,  in  the  same  way  in  which 
colour  and  such  other  things  are  not  (such  attributes).  There- 
fore, as  experience  is  of  the  nature  of  experience  alone, 
nothing  else  that  is  capable  of  being  experienced  can  be  its 
qualifying  attribute.  For  whatever  reason  consciousness 
is  devoid  of  all  distinctions,  for  that  same  reason,  it  has 
not,  for  its  basis,  a  knowing  subject  called  the  dtnmn  (or 
the  self),  which  is  different  from  its  own  essential  nature 
(as  consciousness).  Therefore,  and  also  because  it  has  an 
intelligent  nature,  that  very  thing  (viz.  consciousness), 

38.  These  modifications  aie  stated  Mr.  I.  I.  3.     They  are  :  Origination, 
to  be  six  in  number  and  are  given  as  existence,    modification,  increase,  de- 
follows  : —  'Shad  bharai'ikai'a  bhavan-  crease    and    destruction.     Vide   also 
////'  Varshyayanih  jay  ate  asti  viparina-  V.  P.  I.  2.  II, 
mil  ft'  varddhate  apakskiyatt  rinalvailh" 


.Adhik.  L  Sru.  /.]       SRI-BHASHYA.  51 

which  possesses  the  character  of  being  sell-luminous,  itself 
constitutes  the  atman  (or  the  self).  Non-intelligence  also, 
which  is  invariably  concomitant  with  what  is  not  the  self, 
and  is  logically  excluded  from  consciousness,  indeed,  nega- 
tives (the  view)  that  consciousness  (itself)  does  not  consti- 
tute the  atman. 

It  may,however,  be  said  that  the  (self's)  character  of  being 
the  knower  is  established  by  the  cognition  '  I  know'*  It 
is  not  so;  it  results  from  illusion,  in  the  same  way  in  which 
the  characteristics  of  silver  are  (illusorily  perceived)  in  a  bit 
of  the  mother-of-pearl.  Because  experience  does  not  poss- 
ess the  property  of  being  the  subject  of  any  predication,  of 
which  it  is  itself  the  object;  therefore,  this  character  of  being 
the  knower  is  (simply)  super-imposed  (upon  consciousness), 
in  the  same  way  in  which,  when  one  says  '  I  am  a  man,'  the 
love  of  sell",  due  to  the  feeling  that  a  thing  is  one's  own,  is 
(superimposed)  upon  the  altogether  external  lump(of  matter) 
that  is  characterised  by  the  generic  and  other  properties  of 
the  thing  called  man.  To  be  the  knower  is,  in.  fact,  to  be  the 
same  as  the  subject  of  the  predication  of  knowing.  And 
it  (viz.  this  knower-ship)  is  subject  to  modification,  is  non- 
intelligent  and  is  seated  in  the  knot  of  the  evolved  principle 
of  egoity  known  as  the  ahaftkdra.  3  9  How  can  this  become 

39.     Ahahkara  forms  the   third  of  dial    Prakriti  is  held   to  give  rise  to 

the   twenty-four   material   principles  the  Mahal   or   the    'Great   Principle' 

that   go   to  make   up    the   objective  which  is  also  known   us  Buadlri,  per- 

world    according   to    the    Sahkhyas.  haps  for  the  reason  that  the  cognisa- 

The  Purusha  or  the  soul  is  the  twenty-  blity   of  the  external  world  by   the 

fifth   principle,  differing  from  all   the  Purusha  is  due    to    it.     Out  of   this 

material  principles  on  account  of  its  Mahat  is  evolved  the  principle  known 

intelligent  character.     The  notion  of  as   Akahkara,   which    is   a   kind    of 

egoity   is  here  held  to  be  due  to   the  'mind-stuff'  responsible  for  our  sense 

association  of  this  intelligent  princi-  of  egoity  and  for  the  production   of 

pic  with  matter  or  Prakrili.     Primer-  the  senses  and  the-  mind,  £c. 


§2  £RI-BHA~SHYA.      [Chap.  L  Part.  7, 

possible  in  relation  to  the  immodifiable  witnessing  principle, 
the  dtman,  which  is  entirely  made  up  of  pure  intelligence  ? 
The  quality  of  being  the  subject  of  a  predication  and  other 
such  qualities  do  not  form  the  attributes  of  the  self,  simply 
because  they  are,  like  colour  and  such  other  things,  realis- 
able by  means  of  direct  perception.  It  is  seen  that  there 
is  self-experience,  even  when  there  is  no  notion  of  egoity, 
as  during  dreamless  sleep,  swoon,  &c.;  therefore,  the  self 
does  not  fall  within  the  sphere  of  the  notion  of  egoity.  If 
the  property  of  being  the  subject  of  a  predication  as  well  as 
the  property  of  being  the  object  of  the  notion  of  egoity  be 
(both)  admitted  of  the  self,  then,  as  in  the  case  of  the  body, 
(which  possesses  both  these  properties),  it  is  difficult  to 
avoid,  (in  relation  to  the  self),  the  resulting  attribution  of 
non-intelligence,  externality,  and  non-self-hood,  &c.  It  is, 
indeed,  well-known  among  those,  who  follow  the  well- 
established  criteria  of  truth,  that  the  self,  which  is  the  en- 
joyer  of  Sivarga  and  other  similar  fruits  of  the  actions  of 
the  body,  is  different  from  the  body,  which  falls  within 
the  sphere  of  the  notion  of  egoity,  and  is  generally  well 
known  to  be  the  subject  of  predications.  And,  similarly, 
it  has  to  be  understood  that  the  internal  self,  the  witness, 
is  altogether  different  from  the  knower,  which  is  the  thing 
T.  Thus  the  principle  of  egoity,  which,  though  non-intelli- 
gent, reveals  the  self  to  be  the  same  as  the  immodifiable 
experience,  does  reveal  it  as  constituting  its  own  basis. 
The  nature  of  revealers  is  to  reveal  the  revealed,  as  though 
they  (/.  e.  the  revealed  things)  were  within  themselves  (/.  c. 
the  revealers).  Indeed,  a  mirror,  a  sheet  of  water,  a  mass 
of  matter,  &c.,  (respectively)  reveal  a  face,  the  orb  of  the 
moon,  and  the  outline  of  a  cow,  &c,,  as  though  these  were 
(actually)  within  them.  The  illusion  '  I  know';  is  due  to 
this  same  fact.  Do  not  ask  how  experience,  which  is 


Adhik.  L  Sfit.  /.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  53 

self-luminous,  can  be  revealed  by  the  non-intelligent  prin- 
ciple ofegoity,  which  is  itself  revealed  by  that  (experience); 
surely,  it  is  seen  that  the  palm  of  the  hand,  which  is 
revealed  by  a  beam  of  the  sun's  rays,  itself  reveals  them  (at 
the  same  time).  Indeed,  the  rays  of  the  sun  passing 
through  the  holes  of  a  window  are  frequently  seen  to  be- 
come more  brilliant  by  means  of  (their  contact  with)  the 
palm  of  the  hand,  which  is  (itself)  revealed  by  them.  In 
the  cognition  '  I  know',  for  whatever  reason,  this  knower, 
which  is  the  thing  T,  forms  ho  real  attribute  of  the  self, 
which  is  pure  intelligence ;  for  that  same  reason,  it  (viz. 
the  thing  T)  does  not  find  its  way  into  the  states  of  dream- 
less sleep  and  final  release.  Indeed,  here  (in  these  states), 
by  reason  of  the  cessation  of  the  super-imposition  of  the 
thing  T,  the  self  shines  forth  altogether  in  the  form  of 
pure  and  natural  experience.  It  is  only  in  consequence 
of  this  fact  that  one  who  has  risen  from  deep  sleep  observes 
sometimes — '  I  did  not  know  even  myself.  Thus,  conscious- 
ness alone,  which,  in  reality,  is  destitute  of  all  distinctions 
and  alternations,  which  is  destitute  of  attributes  and  is  pure 
intelligence,  which  is  homogeneous  and  eternally  unchange- 
able, manifests  itself,  through  illusion,  as  wonderfully  and 
variedly  manifold  in  the  forms  of  the  knower,  the  known, 
and  knowledge.  Therefore  (the  study  of)  the  whole  of  the 
Vcddnta  has  to  be  undertaken  to  remove  the  ignorance, 
which  is  at  the  root  of  this  (manifestation),  so  as  to 
attain  the  knowledge  of  the  oneness  of  the  self  with  the 
Brahman  who  is,  by  nature,  eternal,  pure,  self-luminous 
and  free. 

This  opinion  of  persons  who  are  devoid  of  those  spe- 
cial qualities  which  make  one  worth)'-  of  the  choice  of  the 
Highest  Person  who  is  taught  in  the  Upanishads — of  those 


54  SRI-BHASHYA.     {Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

(person*)  whose  understanding  is,  in  its  entirety,  tainted 
with  the  innate  impression  of  beginninglessly  ancient  sins, 
and  who  are  ignorant  of  the  essential  nature  of  words  and 
sentences  and  their  correct  meanings,  and  (are  ignorant) 
also  of  such  sound  logical  processes  as  enable  (us)  to  pro- 
ceed rightly  (in  our  reasonings),  and  as  are  (at  the  same 
time)  based  upon  perception  and  all  other  (well  known) 
criteria  of  truth, — (this  opinion  of  such  persons)  is  found- 
ed upon  that  kind  of  unsubstantial  and  variedly  fall- 
acious reasoning  which  is  not  applicable  to  any  other 
similar  case  as  an  alternative  ;  and  it  therefore  deserves 
to  be  disregarded  by  all  those  who  are  conversant  with 
that  knowledge  of  truth,  which  is  based  upon  percep- 
tion and  all  other  such  criteria  of  truth  as  are  supported  by 
logic. 

And  this  conies  out  in  the  following  manner  :— 
Those,  who  maintain  the  view  4°  that  there  is  a  thing 
which  is  devoid  of  attributes,  cannot  say  what  criterion 
there  is  to  prove  that  thing  which  is  so  devoid  of  attributes  ; 
because,  all  the  criteria  of  truth  (that  form  the  means  of 
logical  proof)  deal  (only)  with  such  objects  as  possess  attri- 
butes. And  the  convention  that  obtains  in  their  own  school, 
that  it  (viz.  the  thing  devoid  of  attributes)  is  established  by 
one's  own  experience,  is  counteracted  by  the  fact  of  such  ex- 
perience having,  (nevertheless),  the  qualification  of  being 
witnessed  by  the  dtman  (or  the  self) ;  because,  all  experi- 
ence relates  to  objects  which  are  qualified  by  some  attri- 
bute or  other,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  specific  cognition  '  I 
saw  this.  If  it  have  to  be  demonstrated,  by  some  specious 
reasoning  or  other,  that  an  experience,  while  it  is  being  ex- 
perienced, is  without  attributes,  although  it  is  (in  fact)  pos- 

40.  Vide  supra  pp.  27  et;scq. 


Ad/iik.  /.  Silt,  i.]     SRI-BHASHYA.  55 

sessed  of  attributes, — it  can  be  so  demonstrated  only  with 
the  help  of  such  natural  qualifying  attributes  as  are  peculiar 
to  that  (experience)  itself,  and  are  different  from  its  own 
existence.  Therefore,  even  thus,  it  continues  to  be  qualifi- 
ed by  means  of  its  own  qualifying  attributes,  which  form 
the  basis  of  such  demonstration,  which  are  different  from 
its  own  existence,  and  are  also  peculiar  to  itself.  Under 
these  circumstances,  it  is  only  some  attributes  that  are 
denied  in  relation  to  a  thing  which  is  (already)  qualified 
by  other  attributes  ;  therefore,  the  thing  which  is  devoid 
of  attributes  can  in  no  way  be  proved. 

To  consciousness,  indeed,  belongs  the  quality  of  illum- 
inating external  objects  as  well  as  the  quality  of  self-lum- 
inousness,    because    perception    becomes  possible  to  the 
knower  (only)  in  the  way  of  bringing  external  objects  to  the 
light  (of  consciousness).     We  will,  in  our  own  turn,  explain, 
with   great   clearness   of  judgment,   that,   (even)    during 
dreams,  conditions  of  intoxication,  and  swoons,  experience 
is  altogether  qualified.    There  are,  undoubtedly,  many  at- 
tributes, in  regard  to  experience,  such  as  eternity,  &c.,  which 
are  also  admitted  by  you  (our  opponent).    And  it  is  not 
possible  to  declare  that  these  also  constitute  the  thing-in-it- 
self  (which  is  pure  and   simple) ;    for,  even   if  they   are 
taken  to  constitute  the  (attributeless)  thing-in-itself,  we  find 
that  there  are  conflicting  views  in  regard  to  its  various 
modes,  and  every  one  tries  to  establish  his  own  position 
by  means  of  such  of  its  modes  as  are  approved  of  by  him. 
Therefore,  it  has  to  be  stated  that  that  thing  is  certain- 
ly qualified  by  such  attributes  as  accord  with  the  accept- 
ed criteria  of  truth. 

Verbal  testimony  (/.  e.  revelation)  also  possesses  the 
power  of  denoting  only  such  objects  as  are  qualified  by  attri- 
butes, because  it  is  extant  in  the  form  of  words  and  sentences 


56  SRI-BHASHYA.    [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

A  word  is,  in  fact,  the  result  of  the  combination  of  roots 
and  terminations.  There  is  difference  between  the  mean- 
ing of  the  root  and  that  of  the  termination,  and  it  is  there- 
fore unavoidable  that  words  denote  only  such  things  as 
are  qualified  (by  attributes).  And  the  difference  between 
words  binds  us  to  a  difference  in  (their)  meaning.  A  sent- 
ence, which  is  a  collection  of  words,  gives  expression  to 
the  peculiar  relations  existing  between  the  meanings  of  the 
several  words  (therein),  and  is  hence  incapable  of  denoting 
any  object  which  is  devoid  of  attributes.  Verbal  testi- 
mony is,  therefore,  no  authoritative  means  of  proving  the 
thing  which  is  devoid  of  attributes. 

Perception,  which  is  differentiated  into  the  divisions 
of  the  indefinite  and  the  definite,   has  not  the  power  of 
being  the  means  to  prove  the  thing  which  is  without 
attributes.     Definite  perception  has  for  its  object  only  that 
which  is  qualified,  because   it   relates   wholely  to  objects 
that    are  characterised  by  many    things   such  as    (their) 
generic  and  other  properties.     Indefinite  perception  also 
certainly  relates  to   qualified   objects,  because    all    those 
things  which  are  experienced  in  it  (viz.  in  indefinite  per- 
ception) are  found  to  be  synthetically  put  together  in  defi- 
nite perception.     Indefinite  perception  is,   indeed,  known 
to  be  the  perception   of  that  which   is   devoid  of  some 
particular  attribute  or  other,  but  not  (the  perception)  of 
that  which  is  devoid  of  all  attributes  ;  because  the  percep- 
tion of  such  a  thing  is  not  seen  to  occur  at  any  time,  and 
because  also  it  is  impossible.    Surely,  all  cognition  is  pro- 
duced in    association    with    some    defining   attribute   or 
other,  so  as  to  denote  that  a  particular  thing   is  of   a 
particular  nature.   The  perception  of  anything  is  impossible 
apart  from  the  configuration  of  its  characterising  attributes, 
(in  the  same  way  in  which  it  is  not  possible  to  perceive,  for 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  /.]      SRI-BHISHYA.  57 

instance,  an  ox)  apart  from  the  triangular  face,  the  dewlap, 
and  such  other  things  (as  go  to  make  up  its  configuration). 
Hence,  indefinite  perception  is  the  first  outline-perception 
in  relation  to  things  which  are  of  the  same  kind ;  and  it 
is  said  that  the  second  and  the  following  outline-percep- 
tions are  definite  (perceptions).  Here,  in  the  first  outline- 
perception,  the  generic  properties  of  the  ox  and  of  such 
other  objects  (of  perception)  can  not  be  made  out  to  poss- 
ess (in  relation  to  them)  the  property  of  continued  persist- 
ence. The  possibility  of  making  out  such  continued  per- 
sistence is  to  be  found  only  in  connection  with  the  second 
and  the  following  outline-perceptions.  The  generic  proper- 
ties of  the  ox  and  of  other  similar  objects  of  perception 
constitute  the  configuration  of  the  thing  which  is  ap- 
prehended in  the  first  outline-perception  ;  that  these 
(generic  properties)  possess  the  character  of  continued  per- 
sistence, is  conclusively  made  out  in  the  second  and  follow- 
ing outline-perceptions ;  and  so  the  second  and  following 
outline-perceptions  are  characterised  as  being  definite.  The 
first  outline-perception  is  characterised  as  being  indefinite, 
because  the  continued  persistence  of  such  generic  proper- 
ties of  the  ox  and  of  other  similar  objects  of  perception,  as 
constitute  the  configuration  due,  (for  instance),  to  things  like 
the  dewlap  &c.,  is  not  apprehended  in  that  first  outline- 
perception,  but  not  because  there  is  (in  it)  no  apprehen- 
sion of  the  generic  and  other  properties  which  together 
go  to  make  up  a  (perceptive)  configuration.  Even  in  the 
first  outline-perception,  it  is  only  such  a  configuration,  that 
constitutes  the  thing  which  is  apprehended,so  as  to  be  able  to 
say  that  it  is  of  a  particular  form  ;  for,  the  generic  and  other 
properties,  which  constitute  such  a  configuration,  have  no 
characteristics  other  than  those  apprehended  by  the  sens- 
es, and,  further,  the  configurated  cannot,  as  a  matter  of 


58  SRi-BHXSHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

fact,  be  apprehended  apart  from  the  configuration.  There- 
fore, just  as  the  configurated  and  the  configuration  are 
always  apprehended  (together  in  perception),  so  also,  in 
the  second  and  following  outline-perceptions,  the  generic 
properties,  such  as  those  of  the  ox  and  of  other  objects,  are 
always  made  out  to  possess  the  character  of  continued  per- 
sistence (in  relation  to  those  objects).  Consequently,  they 
(/.  e.  the  second  and  following  outline-perceptions)  un- 
doubtedly possess  the  character  of  being  definite.  Thus, 
perception  can  never  have  for  its  object  the  thing  which  is 
devoid  of  attributes. 

For  these  same  reasons,  the  theory  which  maintains 
(the  thing  perceived)  to  be  distinct  and  non-distinct  (at  one 
and  the  same  time)  has  also  been  throughout  set  at  naught. 
In  the  cognition,  'This  thing  is  of  this  nature'  (Idam 
ittham),  how  is  it  possible  to  get  any  idea  regarding  the 
identity  of  the  concepts  denoted  by  the  words  id  am 
(which  means  this  thing)  and  ittham  (which  means  of  this 
nature)  1  Of  these  two,  the  concept  denoted  by  the  word 
ittham  refers,  (for  example),  to  the  configuration  characteris- 
ed by  the  dewlap  and  such  other  things  relating  to  the  ox ; 
and  the  object  possessing  these  characteristics  is  denoted  by 
the  word  id  am.  Thus  the  identity  of  these  two  concepts  is 
contradicted  by  perception  itself.  Accordingly,  the  thing, 
which  is  perceived,  is,  even  in  the  very  beginning,  perceiv- 
ed, as  if  it  is  altogether  excluded  (and  is  thus  different)  from 
all  other  things.  And  this  exclusion  is  due  to  the  fact  that  a 
perception,  which  makes  out  a  particular  thing  (such  as  an 
ox  or  any  other  object)  to  be  of  a  particular  nature,  is  in- 
variably associated  with  a  particular  configuration  (of  at- 
tributes), such  as  that  which  is  made  up  of  the  generic  pro- 
perties, &c.,  of  the  ox  or  of  any  other  object.  In  all  cases 
wherein  the  relation  of  the  qualifier  and  the  qualified  is 


Adhik.  L  Sut.  /.]       SRi-BnlSHYA.  59 

perceived,  it  is  quite  clear,  by  means  of  that  perception  it- 
self, that  they  are  quite  distinct  from  each  other.  It  being 
so,  a  stick,  an  ear-ring  and  other  such  objects,  possessing 
distinct  configurations  of  their  own  and  existing  in  them- 
selves, may  occasionally  happen,  however,  to  be  here  and 
there  the  characterising  adjuncts  of  some  other  object  (than 
themselves).  But  the  generic  properties  of  the  ox  and  of 
other  such  objects  become  cognisable  things  only  by  rea- 
son of  their  making  up  the  configurations  of  (those)  ob- 
jects, and  hence  they  form  the  attributes  of  substances. 
In  both  these  cases  (viz.  in  the  case  of  the  separable  ad- 
juncts, such  as  sticks,  ear-rings  &c.,  and  in  that  of  the  in- 
separable attributes,  such  as  the  generic  properties  of  the 
ox  and  of  other  similar  objects),  the  relation  of  the  qualifier 
and  the  qualified  is  one  and  the  same.  And  it  is  for  this  very 
reason  (/.  e.  because  both  separable  and  inseparable  adjuncts 
possess  alike  the  power  of  qualifying  things),  that  there  re- 
sults also  the  perception  of  the  difference  between  them 
(/.  e.  between  the  qualifier  and  the  qualified).  There  is 
however,  this  much  of  peculiarity.  Sticks  and  other  separ- 
able adjuncts  are  capable  of  being  perceived  as  existing 
separately  ;  whereas  the  generic  properties  of  the  ox,  &c.; 
are  systematically  incapable  of  it  (/.  c.  of  being  perceived 
as  existing  separately  from  the  thing  they  qualify).  Hence, 
the  statement,  that  the  differentiation  of  things  is  contra- 
dicted by  perception,  can  be  made  only  by  ignoring  the 
true  character  of  perception.  Indeed,  it  is  agreed  on  all 
hands  that  the  true  character  of  perception  is  to  denote 
that  a  particular  thing  is  of  a  particular  nature.  All  this 
has  been  clearly  enunciated  by  the  Sfitrakara  in.  the 
aphorism — "  It  cannot  be  true,  because  it  is  impossible  (for 
contradictory  attributes  to  exist  at  the  same  time)  in  one 
and  the  same  thing."  [Vcd.  Sf/t.  II,  2.  31.], 


60  SRI-BHASHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

And,  in  as  much  as  perception  has  thus  qualified 
things  for  its  objects,  inference  also,  relating  as  it  does  to 
such  objects  as  are  qualified  by  the  relations  observed  in 
perception,  &c,  has  to  deal  only  with  qualified  things. 

Even  where  there  is  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the 
number  of  the  various  means  of  knowledge,  all  the  means 
of  knowledge,  accepted  by  all,  deal  with  this  same  (qualifi- 
ed) thing.  Therefore,  by  no  means  of  knowledge  can 
there  be  the  establishment  of  the  thing  which  is  devoid 
of  attributes.  Whoever,  while  he  is  himself  relying  upon 
the  natural  qualifying  attributes  of  a  thing,  declares  that 
that  very  thing  is  devoid  of  attributes, — he  does  not  know 
the  contradiction  in  terms  to  be  found  in  his  own  speech, 
as  when  one  enunciates  the  barrenness  of  one's  own 
mother. 

It  has  been  stated  above4  T  that,  because  perception  ap- 
prehends pure  existence,  it  cannot  have  differentiation 
for  its  object ;  and  that  differentiation  is  difficult  to  define, 
because  it  does  not  admit  of  any  one  of  the-several  alternat- 
ive views  (in  regard  to  its  own  nature).  This  (opinion) 
also  has  been  driven  away  (as  untrue),  on  the  ground  that 
perception  has  for  its  object  only  such  things  as  are  charac- 
terised by  generic  and  other  properties,  and  (also  on  the 
ground)  that  generic  and  other  properties,  by  reason  of 
desiderating  their  correlatives,  form  the  means  of  realising 
the  distinctions  between  themselves  and  the  (distinctions 
between  the)  things  (qualified  by  them).  What  has  been 
admitted  by  you,  (our  opponents), — in  the  case  of  conscious- 
ness and  in  the  case  of  colour  and  other  such  qualities, — to 
the  effect  that  they,  being  the  cause  of  particular  realisa- 
tions in  regard  to  other  objects  (than  themselves),  are  also 

l.     Vide  *«//•<»  pp.  42  &  43. 


Adhik.  I.  Sat.  /.]      SRI-BHA.SHYA.  61 

the  cause  of  such  realisations  in  regard  to  themselves, — that 
certainly  holds  good  in  the  case  of  differentiation  also.There- 
fore,  there  is  neither  the  fallacy  of  regressus  in  infinitum 
nor  the  fallacy  of  reciprocal  dependence.42  Even  if  percept- 
ual knowledge  last  only  for  one  moment,  yet,  during  that 
very  moment,  the  generic  properties  which,  (for  example), 
belong  to  the  ox  and  other  such  objects,  which  are  the  same 
as   the  distinctions    between  those  things  and  constitute 
their  configurations,— they  are  (all)  apprehended  ;  therefore, 
there  is  nothing  else  here  (/.  e.  in  perception)  that  remains 
to  be  apprehended  in  any  other  moment.     Moreover,  if 
perception  apprehend  pure  unqualified  existence,  then  there 
would  result  the  contradiction  of  such  (definite)  cognitions 
as  are  realised  in   the  instances,     'A  jar  exists'  and    '  A 
cloth  exists.'    If  differentiation,  which  is  a  thing  other  than 
pure  existence,  and  consists  of  generic  properties  and  such 
other  attributes  as  go  to  make  up  the  configurations  of  things, 
be  not  apprehended  by  perception,  why  does  one  who  is 
in  quest  of  a  horse  turn  away   at  the  sight  of  a  buffalo  ? 
If  pure  existence  alone  be  the  object  of  all  cognitions,  why 
are  not  all  the  words  which  are  associated  with  the  objects 
of  all  those  cognitions  remembered  in  each  one  of  those 
cognitions  ?  Further,  if  the  two  states  of  consciousness,  re- 
lating to  a  horse  and  to  an  elephant  (respectively),  have 
the  same  thing  for  their  object,  then  (the  apprehension  of) 
whichever  of  them  is  perceived  later  on  would  merely  be  the 
apprehending  of  the  already  apprehended,and  so  there  would 
be  the  absence  of  any  difference  (between  them) ;  therefore, 
there  would  be  nothing  (here)  to  distinguish  it  (/.  e.  the  latter 
state  of  perceptive  consciousness)  from  memory.  If,  in  every 
state  of  consciousness,  the  apprehension  of  particularity  is  ad- 

42.     Vide  supi'a  p.  44. 


62  SRI-BHASHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  1. 

mitted,  then  surely  it  will  have  to  be  admitted  that  percep- 
tion has  qualified  things  for  its  object.  If  all  states  of 
consciousness  have  the  same  thing  for  their  object,  there 
will  then  be  the  apprehension  of  all  things  by  means  of  only 
one  state  of  consciousness,  and,  in  consequence,  there  will 
have  to  be  the  non-existence  of  persons  affected  with  blind- 
ness, deafness,  &c. 

Moreover,  pure  unqualified  existence  is  not  surely  ap- 
prehended by  the  eye,  because  it  apprehends  colour,  things 
possessing  colour,  and  all  such  things  as  are  characterised 
by  inherent  association  with  anything  that  has  colour.  Nor 
(is  pure  existence  apprehended)  by  the  sense  of  touch, 
because  it  has  for  its  object  things  possessing  tangibility. 
The  sense  of  hearing  and  the  other  senses  also  have  not 
pure  existence  for  their  object,  but  have  for  their  object 
the  characterising  attributes  of  sound,  taste,  and  smell. 
Therefore,  here  (/.  e.  in  this  world)  there  is  nothing  to  be 
found  which  can  apprehend  existence-in-itself.  If,  solely 
by  means  of  perception,  there  be  the  apprehension  of  pure 
existence  which  is  devoid  of  attributes,  then,  the  scripture, 
which  also  relates  to  it,  will  have  to  deal  with  a  result  already 
arrived  at  by  some  other  means  of  knowledge,  and  will 
therefore  acquire  the  character  of  what  gives  expression  to 
a  mere  tautological  repetition.  And,  for  the  same  reason, 
there  would  also  result  cognisability  in  regard  to  the 
Brahman  which  is  pure  existence.  You  have  yourself 
admitted  that  in  such  a  case  (/.  c.  when  the  Brahman 
becomes  cognisable)  non-intelligence,  destructibility,  &c., 
(would  result  to  it  also).  Therefore,  perception  certainly 
has  for  its  object  only  such  things  as  are  qualified  by 
differentiation  which  is  constituted  by  the  configurations  of 
things  and  has  for  its  basis  their  generic  and  other  pro- 
perties, 


Adhik.  I.  Sftl.  /.]       SRI-BHISHYA.  63 

There  is  nothing  other  than  'this  perceptive  configuration 
which  is  seen  to  be  capable  of  giving  rise  to  the  impression 
that  several  things  are  of  only  one  form  ;  and  it  is  possible 
to  realise  the  generic  properties,  such  as  those  of  an  ox 
and  of  other  objects,  merely  by  means  of  that  (configur- 
ation) alone.  And  again,  even  when  it  is  held  that  the  gener- 
ic properties  of  things  are  distinct  from  their  ;  (corresponding) 
configurations,  the  perception  of  configuration  has  unavoid- 
ably to  be  admitted.  Therefore,  this  (perceptive)  configur- 
ation alone  constitutes  the  genus  (in  logic).  Configuration 
is  well  known  to  be  that  which  constitutes  a  thing's  own  pecu- 
liarity, and  so  it  has  to  be  (severally)  synthesised  by  percep- 
tion in  accordance  with  the  thing  that  is  perceived.  Because 
the  realisation  that  one  thing  is  different  from  another  results 
solely  by  means  of  the  apprehension  of  their  (respective) 
generic  qualities,  and  because  no  other  thing  than  generic 
properties  is  observed  (when  such  differentiation  is  perceiv- 
ed), and  because  also  they  (viz.  the  generic  properties)  are 
admitted  as  well  by  him  who  maintains  that  (differentiation) 
is  distinct  (from  generic  properties), — therefore  (/.•<?.  for  all 
these  reasons),  generic  properties  such  as  those  of  an  ox 
and  of  other  objects,  alone  constitute  differentiation. 

It  may,  however,  be  said  that,  if  generic  and  other 
properties  alone  constitute  differentiation,  then,  as  soon  as 
they  are  apprehended,  there  will  be  the  realisation  of 
differentiation  also,  in  the  same  way  in  which  they  are 
themselves  realised.  True,  differentiation  too  is  so  realised, 
through  the  realisation  of  the  generic  properties,  (for  in- 
stance), of  the  ox  and  of  other  such  objects.  Indeed,  the 
generic  iproperties,  such  as  those  of  an  ox,  &c.,  are 
different  from  all  things  other  than  themselves,  because,  as 
soon  as  the  generic  properties  such  as  those  of  an  ox,  &c., 
are  apprehended,  there  results  the  removal  of  all  other 


(q  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I  Part.  L 

impressions  of  similarity  as  well  as  (the  removal)  of  their 
realisation.  Surely,  the  negation  of  non-differentiation  results 
wholly  from  the  apprehension  of  distinctions.  However, 
in  the  realisation  '  This  is  different  from  that,'  the  declara- 
tion made  in  regard  to  these  mutually  exclusive  correlatives 
(viz.  '  this  '  and  '  that')  desiderates  (each  of)  those  (corre- 
lativesj;  it  is,  therefore,  said  that  the  realisation  that  one 
thing  is  different  from  another  is  dependent  upon  correlat- 
ives. 

The  statement  made  above  43  to  the  effect  that  jars 
and  other  such  specific  objects  are  unreal,  because  they  do 
not  persist  before  consciousness  in  all  perceptions, — this  is 
an  erroneous  assumption  on  the  part  of  one  who  has  not 
rightly  considered  the  relation  of  the  stultified  and  the 
stultifier,  and  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  properties  of  logical 
exclusion  and  continued  persistence  (in  regard  to  percep- 
tions). In  fact,  the  relation  of  the  stultified  and  the 
stultifier  arises  only  when  there  is  a  contradiction  between 
two  cognitions ;  and  then  (/.  e.  when  it  arises),  there  is 
certainly  the  exclusion  of  that  which  is  stultified.  Xow, 
in  regard  to  (perceptions  which  relate  to)  jars,  cloths,  &c., 
there  is  no  (mutual)  contradiction  at  all  (between  them); 
because  they  are  different  from  one  another  in  point  of 
time  and  place.  If,  when  the  existence  of  a  thing  (is 
perceived)  in  relation  to  any  particular  place  and  any 
particular  time,  its  non-existence  (also  be  perceived,)  in 
relation  to  the  same  place  and  the  same  time,  then  there 
is  contradiction.  And  in  such  a  case,  that  which  is  the 
stronger  (of  the  two)  becomes  the  stultifier,  and  there 
arises  the  negation  of  the  stultified.  If  a  thing,  which  is 
experienced  as  existing  in  relation  to  a  certain  time  and  a 

4?.  Vide  supra  p.  ^.5, 


Adhik.  I.  Sul.  /.]       SRI-BHASHYA.  65 

certain  place,  is  perceived  to  be  non-existent  in  relation  to 
a  different  time  and  a  different  place,  (then)  there  is  no 
contradiction ;  and  so,  how  can  there  be  the  relation  of  the 
stultified  and  the  stultifier  in  such  a  case  ?    Or,  how  can  it 
be  said,that,  what  has  been  (already  once)  negatived  in  one 
instance,  is  (again)  to  be  negatived  in  another  instance  ? 
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  the  rope-snake  and  other 
(illusorily   perceived)   things,   there   is  the  perception  of 
their  non-existence  in  that  very  place  and  that  very  time 
(wherein  they  are  also  perceived  to  exist);  therefore,  there 
arise  contradiction,  stultification  and  logical  exclusion.  The 
logical  exclusion  of  a  thing,  (which  is  perceived  in  relation 
to  a  particular  place  and  a  particular  time),  from  a  differ- 
ent place  and  a  different  time,  is  not  thus  seen  to  be  in- 
variably concomitant  with  unreality  ;  and  therefore,  mere- 
ly to  possess  the  quality  of  being  logically  excluded,  (so 
as  not  to  persist  before  consciousness  in  perception),  does 
not  constitute  the  cause  of  unreality.     The  statement  that 
existence  (alone)  is  real,  because  it  is  persistent  (before 
consciousness^,  is  in  itself  evident,  and  does  not  stand  in 
need  of  any  means  (such  as  perception)  to  prove  it.  There- 
fore, pure  existence  alone  is  not  the  thing  (which  is  appre- 
hended in  perception). 

There  is  the  relation  of  subject  and  object  between 
experience  and  any  particular  entity  (which  is  experienced); 
thus  the  difference  (between  them)  is  established  by  per- 
ception, and  is  incapable  of  being  stultified  ;  therefore  this 
(contention)  also  has  been  set  at  naught,  namely,  that  ex- 
perience itself  is  existence. 

It  has  been  further44  stated  that  experience  possesses 
the  quality  of  self-luminousness.  This  is  true  in  the  case 

44.  Vide  snprtt  p.  4(1. 
9 


66  SRI-BHISHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

of  the  self,  which  is  the  knower,  only  at  the  time  it  brings 
external  objects  to  the  light  of  consciousness.     But  there  is 
no  rule  to  the  effect  that  it  is  so  at  all  times  in  the  case  of 
all  (persons)  ;  because  the  experience  of  others  forms  (to  us) 
the  object  of  such  inferential  knowledge  as  is   based  upon 
the  acceptance  and  rejection  (of  things  in  accordance  with 
their  own  likes  and  dislikes)  ;  and  also  because  it  is  seen 
that  one's  own  past  experience  becomes  even  an  object   of 
knowledge,  as  when  (one  says)  '  I  had  known'.     If,  in  this 
way,  it  is  not  possible  to  say  that  experience  is  self-evident, 
it  is  also   wrong  to  declare  that,  if  experienced,  it  loses 
the  character  of  an  experience ;  because  the  character  of 
being  no  experience  at  all  would  thereby  result  to  one's 
own  past  experiences  and  the  experiences  of  others,  on  the 
score  that  they  are  themselves   experienced.     And  if  it  be 
not  granted  that  the  experiences  of  others  can  be  made  out 
(by    us)    by    means   of  the   process   of  inference,   there 
would  then  result  the  non-apprehension  of  the  relation 
between   words  'and   their   meanings,  in   consequence   of 
which   there  would  arise  the  cessation  of  the  use   of  all 
words.     Further,  it  is  only  after  making  out  by  means  of 
inference  that  the  teacher  is  possessed  of  knowledge,  that 
an  approach  to  him  is  made  (by  the  pupil);  and  this  too 
would  thereby  become   impossible.     It  cannot  be  that 
(experience)   ceases  to  possess  the   character  of  an   ex- 
perience, merely  because  it  becomes   the   object   of  an- 
other experience.    The  character  of  an  experience,  indeed, 
consists  in  the  fact  that,  while  it  lasts,  it  is  luminous  (/.  e. 
intelligible)  solely  by  means  of  its  own  existence,  to  that 
which  constitutes  its  basis,  (/'.  e.  to  the  self)  ;  or,  it  consists 
in  the  fact  of  its  being  the  means  of  proving  (the  exist- 
ence of)  its  objects  solely  by  means  of  its   own   existence. 
Although  these  two  ("characterisations  of  experience)  are 


Adhik.  I.  Sftt.  /.]     SRI-BHISHYA.  67 

capable  of  being  realised  in  an  experience  other  than  one's 
own,  they  do  not  (thereby)  fall  away,  seeing  that  they  are 
(at  the  same  time)  established  by  means  of  one's  own  ex- 
perience ;  and  so  this  character  of  an  experience  does  not 
disappear  (in  relation  to  any  experience,  even  though  it 
becomes  the  object  of  another  experience).  And  jars,  &c., 
certainly  do  not  possess  the  character  of  an  experience, 
(simply)  because  they  are  devoid  of  this  (above-mentioned) 
nature  (of  an  experience),  but  not  because  they  are  cap- 
able of  being  experienced.  Similarly,  when  an  experience 
is  incapable  of  being  experienced,  then  it  is  difficult  to 
avoid  the  result  that  it  is  not  at  all  an  experience ;  because 
the  flowers  imagined  to  grow  in  the  sky  and  other  such 
imaginary  objects,  which  are  not  capable  of  being  experienc- 
ed, constitute  no  experience  (at  all).  If  it  be  said  that 
the  sky-flower  and  other  (such  purely  imaginary)  things 
are  not  experience,  because  they  are  non-existent,  but  not 
because  they  cannot  be  experienced,  then  let  it  be  held 
that,  in  the  case  of  jars  and  other  similar  things  also,  it  is 
.the  fact  of  their  not  being  opposed  to  'non-intelligence' 
which  binds  them  to  the  condition  of  their  being  no  experi- 
ence, but  not  the  fact  of  their  incapability  to  be  experi- 
enced. Should  it  be  said  that,  when  an  experience  is  cap- 
able of  being  experienced,  then,  like  jars  and  other  objects, 
it  would  acquire  the  character  of  not  being  opposed  to  'non- 
intelligence,'  then,  surely,  as  in  the  case  of  the  sky-flower 
and  other  (imaginary)  objects,there  would  certainly  result  to 
it  (/.  c.  to  experience),  even  when  it  is  not  capable  of  being 
experienced,  the  quality  of  not  being  opposed  to  'non-intelli- 
gence'. Hence  it  is  ridiculous  to  say  that,  if  it  (viz.  experi- 
ence) is  capable  of  being  experienced,  then  it  has  not  the 
character  of  an  experience. 

Again,  the  view  in  which  origination  \*  denied  to  cpn.- 


68  SRI-BHASHYA.       [Chap.  L  Part.  L 

sciousness  which  is  self-evident,  on  the  score  of  the  absence 
of  its  antecedent  non-existence4  8  and  other  non-existences, 
—this  view  is  very  much  like  the  presentation  of  a  stick 
(for  purposes  of  guidance)  to  one  who  is  blind  by  another 
who  is  born  blind.  It  is  not  possible  to  speak  of  the  absence 
of  (such)  antecedent  non-existence,  on   the  ground  that 
.there    is    nothing    which   can  apprehend  it ;   because   it 
(viz.   that  antecedent  non-existence)   is  apprehended  by 
experience  itself.     If  it  be  asked,  how    experience,  at  the 
same  time  that  it  exists,  can  give  us  the   contradictory 
knowledge  of  its  non-existence,  it  is  replied  that  there  is 
no  rule  which  binds  experience  to  deal  only  with  such 
objects  as  are  existent  at  the  same  time  with  itself;  for 
then  there  would  result,  to  past  and  future  occurrences,  the 
quality  of  being  no  objects  (of  experience  at  all).     But  if 
you   say    that  the    antecedent    non-existence   and  other 
non-existences  (in  relation  to  an   experience),  while  they 
are  being  made  out,  are,  as  a  rule,  found  to  exist  simultane- 
ously with  that  (experience),  it  is  asked  in  return — "Did 
you  perceive  this  state  of  things  in  any  case  ?"     Then  (/.  c. 
if  it  be  possible  so  to  perceive  them),  surely  on  account  of 
that  very  perception,  antecedent  non-existence  and  other 
non-existences  are  proved  to  exist  (in  relation  to  experi- 
ence). Thus  there  can  be  no  denial  of  such  antecedent  non- 
existence  (in  relation  to  experience).     However,  who  is 
there  but  is  insane  that  will  say  that  a  thing's  antecedent 
non-existence  is  existent  simultaneously  with  that  (thing) 
itself? 

Indeed,  this  is  the  natural  condition  of  the  perception 
which  is  born  of  the  senses— that  it  has  the  power  of  appre- 
hending the  thing  which  is  existent  simultaneously  with 

+f.  Vide  supi\i  p,  49, 


Adhik.  /.  Sftl.  /.]      SRI-BHA.SHYA.  69 

itself,  but  such  is  not  also  (the  condition)  of  all  kinds  of 
knowledge  and  of  all  means  of  true  knowledge ;  because 
in  the  case  of  memory,  inference,  revelation,  yogic**  per- 
ception, and  the  like,  it  is  observed  that  there  is  the 
apprehension  of  the  thing,  the  existence  of  which  belongs 
to  a  time  different  (from  that  of  their  own  existence). 
Hence  also,  no  instrument  of  knowledge  is  ever  dissociated 
from  what  is  to  be  discerned  by  it.  The  relation  of  an 
instrument  of  knowledge,  to  the  thing  that  is  to  be  discern- 
ed by  it,  does  not  consist  in  the  absence  of  the  dissocia- 
tion of  that  (instrument  of  knowledge)  from  the  thing 
which  exists  at  the  same  time  with  itself;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  (such  relation)  consists  in  the  negation  of  the 
unreality  of  that  particular  form  of  any  particular  thing 
which  is  discerned  in  association  with  any  particular  time, 
place,  and  other  such  (determining)  conditions.  Thus  the 
position  that  memory  does  not  deal  with  external  objects, 
because  even  when  the  external  object  (to  which  it  refers) 
has  disappeared,  memory  is  seen  to  continue, — this  is  also 
set  at  naught. 

It  may,  however,  be  said  : — The  antecedent  non-exist- 
ence of  consciousness  is  not  at  all  made  out  by  perception } 
because  such  (non-existence)  does  not  exist.  Nor  is  such 
(non-existence)  made  out  by  the  other  means  of  proof, 
because  (in  relation  to  it)  the  basis  of  logical  inference 
and  the  other  limbs  of  syllogistic  reasoning  are  absent. 

46.  This  is  the  perception  which  to  the  conception  in  the  mind  of    him 

peculiarly  belongs  to  the  Yogin,  who,  who    practises    it.      Yctdri'sl    bhiivanti 

by  withdrawing  the  mind  into  itself  yatra  s'ddhirbhavati  tadri'si.     There  is, 

and  concentrating  it  on  its  own   con-  however,  an  opinion  which  maintains 

ceptions,  has  succeeded  in  actualising  that    Yogic    perception   is  .a   separate 

those  conceptions  in  the  form  of  di-  means  of  knowledge,    and   gives  rise 

rect  perceptions.    The  realisation  that  to  realisations  which  arc  not  possible 

results  in  Yoga  is  said  to  correspond  otherwise. 


7o  SRi-BHlSHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

Indeed,there  is  to  be  found  here  no  such  basis  of  inference  as 
is  invariably  associated  with  the  antecedent  non-existence 
of  consciousness.  Revelation  also  is  not  at  all  seen  to  deal 
with  it  (/.  c.  with  such  antecedent-  non-existence).  Hence, 
the  antecedent  non-existence  (of  consciousness)  cannot  be 
proved,  because  there  is  really  no  means  of  proving  it. 
To  this,  it  is  replied  thus  :— If,  abandoning  the  peculiar 
support  of  the  self-evident  nature  (of  consciousness),  you 
rely  upon  the  absence  of  the  means  to  prove  that  (non- 
existence),  then  it  would  be  well  for  you  to  stop  the 
discussion,  bearing  in  mind  that  that  (same  non-exist- 
tence)  is  established  by  the  negative  proof  of  non-cognition 
relating  to  a  necessarily  associated  thing. 

Moreover,  perceptual  knowledge,  which  during  the  time 
that  it  exists,  proves  (the  existence  of)  its  objects,  such  as 
jars  &c.,  is  not  seen  to  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  their 
existence  at  all  times.  Therefore,  the  existence  of  jars  and 
such  other  objects  during  periods  antecedent  and  subse- 
quent (to  their  perception),  is  not  made  out  (by  means 
of  perception).     Such  non-cognition  is  seen  to  be  due  to 
perceptual  consciousness  being  conditioned  by  time.  If  per- 
ceptual consciousness,  which  has  jars,  &c.,  for  its  objects, 
is  itself  made  out  to  be  unconditioned  by  time,  then,  the 
objects  of  (that)  consciousness,  such  as  jars,  &c.,  would  also 
appear  to  be  unconditioned  by  time,  and  so  would  be  etern- 
al. If  (this)  consciousness  which  is  self-evident  be  eternal,  it 
should  of  itself  appear  to   be   so   eternal.      But  it  is  not 
so  made  out.    Similarly,  if  the   inferential   and  the   other 
cognising  states  of  consciousness  are  made  out  to  be  un- 
conditioned by  time,  then  they  would  make  their  objects 
also  appear  unconditioned  by  time  ;  and  so  all  such  objects 
would  become  eternal ;  for  every  object  has  a  nature  which 
correspond^  to  the  state  of  consciousness  (that  represents 


Adhik.  L  Sut.  /.]    SRI-BHISHYA.  71 

it).  Again,  there  is  no  objectless  consciousness,  in  as  much 
as  such  a  thing  is  unknown.  Indeed,the  self-luminous  nature 
of  consciousness  has  been  demonstrated  solely  by  means 
of  the  fact  that  perception  brings  external  objects  to  the 
light  of  consciousness.  If  consciousness  have  not  the  power 
of  bringing  external  objects  to  light,  there  would  result 
to  it  the  absence  of  self-luminousness ;  in  consequence  of 
this  (absence  of  self-luminousness),  and  also  in  consequence 
of  the  fact  that  experience  is  incapable  of  being  experienced 
by  any  other  experience,  consciousness  itself  would  become 
a  mere  nothing. 

Further,  it  should  not  be  stated  that  during  sleep,47 
conditions  of  intoxication,  swoons,  &c.,  totally    objectless, 
absolute  consciousness  alone  shines  forth  ;  because  such  a 
statement  would  be  invalidated  by  the  negative  proof  of 
non-cognition  relating  to  a  necessarily  associated  thing.     If 
during  these  states  also,  experience  is  experienced,  then,  at 
the  time  of  waking,  there  will  have  to  be  its  recollection.  But 
there  is  no  such  thing.     It  may,  however,  be  said  that  it  is 
not  commonly  seen  that  an  object  which  has  been  experienc- 
ed, is,  as  a  rule,  remembered  ;  and  therefore,  how  can  the 
absence  of  recollection  prove  the  non-existence  of  the  (cor- 
responding) experience  ?  It  is  stated  (in  reply  to  this)  that, 
provided  there  are  no : such  powerful  causes  as  the  dissolu- 
tion of  the  body,  &c.,  which  remove  all  innate  mental 
impressions,   then    uniform    non-remembrance   establishes 
only  the  non-existence  of  experience.     Surely,  the  non- 
existence  of  experience  is  not  proved  solely  through  the 
uniform  absence  of  any  remembrance  thereof ;  because  it 
is  possible  for  one  who  has  just  risen  from   sleep  to  real- 
ise by  means  of  introspective  observation  alone  that  all  the 

4".  Vide  an/n-a  pp.  52  &  5?. 


72  SRI-BHISHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

while  he  did  not  know  anything.  Moreover,  it  is  not  pos- 
sible to  say  that,  even  when  experience  exists,  the  uniform 
non-remembrance  thereof  is  due  either  to  want  of  associa- 
tion with  objects  or  to  the  destruction  of  the  principle  of 
egoity;  because,  the  non-experience  of  some  one  thing  (such 
as  a  jar)  and  the  non-existence  of  another  thing  Csuch  as  a 
cloth;  do  not  constitute  the  causes  of  the  non-remembrance 
of  some  other  experienced  object  (such  as  a  wall). 

It  will  be  explained  presently  that,  in  those  states  also 
(namely,  sleep,  intoxication,  swoon,  &c),  the  idea  of  the  ego 
continues  to  persist.    It  has,  indeed,  been  stated  already 
that,  during  sleep  and  other  similar  states,  it  is  possible  to 
have  such  experience  as  is  definite  and  relates  to  particular 
objects.    What  has  been  so  stated  is  really  true.     Indeed, 
that  (experience)    is  self-experience.    And  it  will  be  est- 
ablished further  on  that  that  (self-experience)  is  definite 
and  relates  to  particular  objects.  But,  here,  only  such  consci- 
ousness as  is  altogether  objectless,  and  is  without  a  basis,  is 
denied.     If  mere  consciousness  alone   is  said  to  be  self- 
experience,  (we  say)  it  is  not  so,  because  it  will  be  explain- 
ed hereafter  that  it  (viz.  consciousness)  is  dependent  upon 
(some  thing  else  as)  its  basis.     Hence  it  cannot  be  said 
that,  because  experience,  while  it  exists,  does  not  establish 
its  antecedent  non-existence,   (such)   antecedent  non-exis- 
tence is  disproved.     In  explaining  the  possiblity  of  experi- 
ence being  experienced,  its  incapability  to  be  proved  other- 
wise (than  by  itself)  has  also  been  negatived.  Therefore,  the 
non-origination  of  consciousness  merely  on  the  ground  that 
there  is  no  proof  of  antecedent  non-existence  and  other  non- 
existences  in  relation  to  it — that  is  not  supported  by  logic. 
What  has  been  stated48  already  to  the  effect  that,  on 

48.  Vide  snbra  p.  50. 


Adhik.  I.  Sfit.  /.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  73 

account  of  there  being  no  origination  of  consciousness,  other 
modifications  are  also  negatived  in  relation  to  it, — that  also 
is  unreasonable  ;  because  such  reasoning  is  too  wide  and 
inconclusive,  holding  good  in  the  case   of  antecedent  non- 
existence  also.      In  fact,   although  it  has  no   origination,  it 
is  seen  to  be  capable   of  destruction.      If,  (for  the  pur- 
pose of  meeting  this  difficulty),  this  (proposition)  is  qualified 
by  saying  (that  it  holds  true  only)  in  the  case  of  entities^ 
then,  indeed,  (your)  skilfulness  in  logical  reasoning  becomes 
quite  manifest.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  avidyd  (or  ignorance), 
which  is  accepted  by  you,  is  mi-originated ;  and  it  is,  never- 
theless, the  seat  of  a  variety  of  modifications,  and  is  also 
put  an  end  to  after  the  origination  of  true  knowledge.     If 
you  say  that  all  its    modifications  are    unreal,    then,   is 
there,  according  to  you,  any  modification  which  has  the 
nature  of  reality,  so  that  this  qualification  (thus  limiting 
the  scope  of  the  proposition  mentioned  above)  may  become 
significant  ?   But  this  (kind  of  modification  that  has  the 
nature  of  reality)  is  surely  not  acknowledged  by  you. 

Again,  what  has  been  already49  stated  to  the  effect  that 
experience  does  not  admit  of  any  differentiation  in  regard 
to  itself,  on  account  of  its  being  unborn, — that  'also  is  un- 
founded :  because  the  self  which  is  undoubtedly   unborn  is 
seen  to  be  differentiated  from  the  body,  the  organs  of  sense, 
and  other  such  things  ;  and  also  because  it  has  necessarily 
to  be  accepted  that  the  self  is  different  from  the  admitted- 
ly beginningless  avidya  (or  ignorance).     If  you  say  that 
this  differentiation   is  itself  of  the  nature  of  unreality,   (we 
ask),  did  you  anywhere  observe  any  differentiation  which 
has  the  nature  of  reality  and  is  the  necessary  concomitant 
of  origination  ?     Indeed,   if  ignorance  be   not  in   reality 

49.  Vide  supra  p.  50. 
10 


74  SRI-BHASHYA.   [Chap.  I.  Part.  /• 

distinct  from  the  self,  then,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  ignorance 
itself  may  become  the  self.  In  maintaining  the  distinctions 
between  such  perceivable  objects  as  are  realised  in  unstulti- 
fied  perceptions,  the  distinction  between  the  perceptions 
themselves  is  established  ;  in  the  same  way  in  which  the 
distinction  between  the  various  kinds  of  the  process  of 
cutting  (is  established)  by  means  of  the  distinction  between 
the  things  cut  (accordingly). 

Moreover,  the  statements30  already  made  to  the  effect 
that  consciousness,  which  is  altogether  of  the  nature  of  con- 
sciousness, can  have  no  qualifying  attribute  that  is  itself 
capable  of  being  objectively  perceived  by  consciousness,and 
that  such  (attributes)  cannot  qualify  consciousness  merely 
because  they  are  objectively  perceivable, — both  these  also 
are  not  absolutely  conclusive,  because,  in  relation  to  it  (viz. 
consciousness),  there  are  the  attributes  of  eternity,  self-lu- 
minousness,  &c.,  which  are  well  established  by  the  authori- 
tative criteria  of  knowledge,  and  are  also  admitted  by  your- 
selves (our  opponents).  Neither  do  these  (attributes)  consti- 
tute pure  consciousness,  because  they  are  in  their  essential 
nature  distinct  (from  consciousness).  Indeed,  consciousness 
is  that  which,  solely  by  means  of  its  own  existence,  makes 
intelligible  to  that  which  constitutes  its  own  foundation, 
any  external  object  whatsoever.  Self-luminousness  con- 
sists in  being  luminous,  in  consequence  of  a  thing's  own  ex- 
istence, to  that  which  constitutes  that  thing's  own  found- 
ation ;  luminosity  (or  intelligibility)  is  that  (quality)  which  is 
common  to  all  intelligent  and  non-intelligent  things  alike, 
and  makes  them  fit  to  be  practically  realised;  eternity  is,  in- 
deed, existence  through  all  time;  unity  is  limitation  by  the 
number  one  ;  &c.,  &c.  Even  when  these  (qualifying  attri- 

50.   Vide  supra  p.  50. 


Adhik  1.  Sut.  i.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  75 

butes)  constitute  the  negation  of  non-intelligence  and 
other  such  things  (as  have  to  be  excluded  from  consci- 
ousness), then,  even  as  such,  they  form  the  qualifying  at- 
tributes of  consciousness  ;  therefore,  it  is  inevitable  that 
this  reasoning  becomes  too  wide  (and  inconclusive)  in  as 
much  as  they,  nevertheless,  continue  to  be  the  attributes  of 
consciousness.  If,  for  the  reason  that  consciousness  is  op- 
posed to  non-intelligence,  and  other  such  qualities,  (merely) 
on  account  of  their  being  different  from  its  own  essential 
nature,  neither  a  negative  nor  a  positive  qualification  can 
be  admitted  in  relation  to  it,  then,  the  (various)  statements 
severally  negating  those  ("qualities)  will  have  to  import 
nothing  at  all. 

Then,  is  consciousness  provable  (as  existent)  or  not  ?  If 
provable,  it  must  be  characterised  as  being  possessed  of  attri- 
butes. If  not,  it  becomes  a  mere  nothing  like  the  '  sky- 
flower'  and  other  (imaginary)  objects.  If  you  say  that  the 
proof  itself  is  consciousness,  it  has  to  be  asked  whose  that 
(proof)  is,  and  to  what  it  refers.  If  it  do  not  belong  to  any 
one,  and  be  not  in  regard  to  some  thing,  then  that  (proof) 
is  no  proof.  Indeed,  proving,  like  son-ship,  belongs  to  some 
one  and  is  in  relation  to  some  thing  (or  person).  If  it  be  said 
that  (the  proving)  belongs  to  the  self,  (we  ask)  who  this 
self  is.  Was  it  not  stated  by  you  that  it  (viz.  the  self)  is 
consciousness  itself  ?  Yes,  it  was  so  stated ;  only,  it  is  a 
wrong  statement.  And  this  can  be  made  out  thus.  How  can 
that  consciousness,  which,  by  reason  of  its  making  a  number 
of  objects  intelligible  to  a  person,  is  related  to  those  (objects) 
and  to  that  (person),  experience  that  it  is  itself  the  self? 
What  is  said  is  this  :— Experience  is  that  which,  solely  by 
means  of  its  oWn  existence,  possesses  the  quality  of  making 
a  thing  fit  to  be  realized  in  relation  to  what  constitutes  the 
basis  of  that  (experience)  itself;  it  has  other  names,  such  as 


7  6  .SRI-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  1.  Part.  1. 

knowledge  (jiland),  comprehension  (avagati*),  consciousness 
(samvid),  and  the  like  ;  it  always  relates  to  an  object  and  is 
a  particular  attribute  of  the  experiencing  self :  and  again  it 
is  well  known  to  all  as  possessing  the  qualification  of  being 
witnessed  by  the  self,  as  when  (one  says),  'I  know 
a  jar,'  '  I  understand  this  thing,'  '  I  am  conscious  of  a  cloth/ 
&c.  Indeed,  it  is  on  account  of  its  possessing  this  aforesaid 
nature,  that  self-luminousness  has  been  postulated  in  relation 
to  it  even  by  you.  This  (experience)  which  relates  to  an 
object  and  is  a  particular  attribute  of  the  subject  (of  the 
predication  of  knowing),  cannot  possess  the  quality  of  itself 
being  the  subject  (of  any  predication),  quite  as  much  as  (it 
cannot  possess)  the  quality  of  being  the  object  (thereof). 

Accordingly,  the  ,permanent  character  of  this  subject 
(of  the  predication  of  knowing)  is  directly  ascertained ;  and 
origination,  existence,  and  destruction,  in  relation  to  that 
attribute  which  belongs  to  this  subject  and  is  called  consci- 
ousness, are  also  ascertained  to  be  true,  in  the  same  way  in 
which  they  are  (so  ascertained)  in  the  case  of  pleasure,  pain, 
&c.  The  permanent  character  of  this  subject  (of  the  predi- 
cation of  knowing,)  is  indeed  established  by  that  kind  of  per- 
ception which  leads  to  the  recognition  of  identity,  as  (when 
one  says),  "This  is  that  very  thing  which  was  formerly  expe- 
rienced by  me."  Origination  and  other  such  things  are  also 
established  in  regard  to  consciousness,  by  the  cognitions  '  I 
know/  '  I. had  known/  'The  knowledge  which  I,  the  know- 
er,  had,  is  now  lost';  and  where  then  is  its  oneness  (with  the 
self)  ?  If  consciousness,  which  is  thus  destructible  moment 
after  moment,  be  admitted  to  be  the  self,  then  it  becomes 
impossible  indeed,  to  have  the  recognitive  cognition — "I  saw 
(again)  on  the  next  day  that  (same  thing)  which  was  seen  on 
the  previous  day."  Surely,  there  is  no  possibility  of  the  recog- 
nitive cognition  by  one  person  of  any  thing  experienced  by 


Adhik.  I.  Sftt.  /.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  77 

another  person.  Again,  when  experience  is  admitted  to 
be  the  self,  and  eternity  too  is  predicated  of  it,  then  also 
there  will  similarly  arise  the  absence  of  the  cognition  leading 
to  recognition.  Indeed,  the  cognition  which  leads  to  recogni- 
tion, as  for  instance  (when  one  feels), '  I  myself  experienced 
this  formerly  also,' — that  establishes  the  experiencing  sub- 
ject to  continue  unchanged  in  antecedent  and  subsequent 
intervals  of  time,  but 'does  not  prove  pure  unconditioned 
experience.  Surely,  you  also  do  not  accept  that  experience 
is  the  same  as  the  subject  who  experiences ;  experience  is 
merely  experience  (to  you).  It  has  already  been  stated  (by  us) 
that  that  unfounded  or  objectless  something  which  is  called 
consciousness  cannot  exist,  because  there  is  absolutely  no 
knowledge  (of  such  a  thing).  Thus  the  view,  that  that  same 
consciousness,  which  is  indeed  admitted  by  both  of  us,  is  the 
self  itself,  is  contradicted  by  cognition ;  and  all  the 
specious  arguments,  which  were  intended  to  demonstrate 
that  such  pure  experience  alone  is  the  highest  reality,  have 
also  been  thus  completely  refuted. 

It  may  however  be  said  again  thus: — In  the  idea 
of  the  ego  to  be  found  in  the  cognition  'I  know  (this),' 
that  which,  (not  being  objective),  is  not  denoted  by 
the  word  'this,'  and  which  is  homogeneous  luminosity  and 
is  the  thing  denoted  by  chit  (or  intelligence), — that  is  the 
self;  now,  the  idea  of  the  ego,  resulting  from  the  cogni- 
tion '  I  know/  acquires,  by  reason  of  its  being  made  lumin- 
ous in  that  (intelligence)  through  the  strength  of  that  (in- 
telligence), the  characteristics  of  the  thing  'thou'  (or  of  the 
non-ego) ;  and  it  is,  therefore,  other  than  pure  intelligence, 
and  means  certainly  the  thing  'thou'  (or  the  non-ego).  It  is 
not  (right  to  say)  so ;  simply  because,  (in  such  a  case),  that 
perceptual  knowledge,  in  which,  as  when  one  says  'I  know 
(a  thing)/  there  is  (between  the  knowing  and  the  knower) 


78  SRI-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

the  relation  of  an  attribute  to  the  possessor  thereof,  -that 
would  itself  be  (thereby)  contradicted.  Moreover, — "  If  the 
thing  T  (or  the  ego)  is  not  the  self,there  will  be  no  subject- 
ivity to  the  self.  For,  the  subjective  thing  is  distinguished 
from  the  objective  thing  by  means  of  the  idea  of  the  ego.  In- 
deed, he  who  is  desirous  of  final  release  Retakes  to  the  'hear- 
ing' &c.,  (of  the  scriptures),  with  the  intention  that  he  may 
himself  become  devoid  of  all  misery,  the  enjoyer  of  infinite 
bliss,and  free.  If  any  one  holds  that  final  release  consists  in 
the  destruction  of  the  thing  T  (or  of  one's  own  personality), 
then  such  an  one  will  surely  get  away  from  even  the  merest 
scent  of  the  discussion  bearing  upon  the  topic  of  final  release. 
Xo  one,who  believes  that,even  after  he  ceases  to  exist,there 
is  some  kind  of  consciousness  which  is  other  than  himself, 
will  ever  make  any  attempt  to  attain  that  (kind  of  conscious- 
ness as  his  goal  after  death)  It  is  only  by  being  associated 
with  the  self,  that  this  (consciousness)  has  its  own  existence, 
has  its  own  character  as  consciousness,  and  its  other  qualifi- 
cations. When  this  association  with  the  self  is  severed, 
consciousness  itself  ceases  to  exist;  in  the  same  way  in  which, 
in  the  absence  of  the  cutter  and  the  object  to  be  cut,  there 
can  be  no  cutting  or  any  other  such  process.  Hence  it  is 
settled  that  the  thing  '  I,'  which  is  also  the  knower,  is  the 
subjective  self.  The  scripture  also  says — 'My  dear  one,  by 
means  of  what  is  one  to  know  the  knower?'  [Brih.  Up.  IV. 
5.  15.].  The  £/;//•/// also  says — 'Whoever  knows  this  (bod}'), 
him  they  call  the  kshctrajila.'  [B.  G.  XIII.  2.].  The 
Sutra-kdra  also  says  the  same  thing  opening  it  with  the 
aphorisms — '  The  individual  self  is  not  (produced)  as 
there  are  no  scriptural  statements  to  that  effect'—  \Ved. 
Srit.  II.  3.  18.],  and  '  For  that  very  reason,  (the  individual 
sell)  is  the  knower.'  [Ved.  Silt.  II.  3.  19.].  Therefore  it  is 
decided  that  the  self  is  not  pure  and  unqualified  conscious. 


Adhik.  I.  Sal.  /.]       SRI-BHASHYA.  79 

ness."  Indeed,  the  thing  '  I '  is  of  itself  established  by  the 
notion  of  the  ego  ;  the  thing  '  thou '  is  the  content  of  the 
notion  of  the  non-ego.  It  being  so,  to  say  that  the  knower, 
who  is  realised  when  one  says  '  I  know,'  is  the  non-ego,  is, 
moreover,  a  contradiction  in  terms,  very  much  like  the 
statement — '  My  mother  is  barren.' 

Again,  this  knower,  the  thing  '  I,'  has  not  its  luminos- 
ity dependent  upon  anything  else,  because  it  possesses 
self-luminousness.  Indeed,  to  be  self-luminous  is  to  possess 
the  character  of  intelligence.  Whatever,  like  the  flame  of 
a  lamp,  possesses  the  character  of  luminosity,  that  possesses 
its  own  light  independently  of  anything  else.  For,  surely, 
the  flame  of  a  lamp  and  such  other  self-luminous  things, 
seeing  that  they  are  made  to  shine  out  by  means  of  the 
power  of  their  own  light,  can  not  possess  nqn-lurnjnousness, 
nor  (can  they  possess)  the  character  of  having  their  lumin- 
osity dependent  upon  anviliing  else.  What  then  are 
they  ?  The  flame  of  a  lamp  has  the  nature  of  light,  and 
certainly  shines  of  itself,  and  also  makes  other  objects 
shine  by  means  of  its  own  radiance. 

What  is  said  is  this : — One  and  the  same  substance  tejas 
(or  the  material  element  of  light  and  heat)  exists,  for  in- 
stance, in  the  form  of  luminosity  as  well  as  in  the  form  of  that 
which  is  luminous.  Though  luminosity  forms  an  attribute 
of  the  thing  which  is  luminous,  nevertheless,  it  is  the  sub- 
stance tejas,  and  nothing  else.  It  is  not  a  quality  like 
whiteness,  &c.,  because  (unlike  them)  it  can  exist  elsewhere 
also  than  in  what  constitutes  its  basis,  and  because  also  it 
is  itself  the  possessor  of  colour.  As  it  is  of  a  different 
nature  from  whiteness  and  other  such  qualities,  and  possess- 
es the  quality  of  luminosity,  it  is  undoubtedly  the  substance 
tejas  and  nothing  else.  If  a  thing  brings  to  light  its  own 
nature  as  well  as  other  things,  it  is  thereby  said  to  possess 


8o  SRJ-BHASHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

luminosity.  And  the  practical  realisation  of  this  (luminosity) 
as  a  quality  necessarily  results  from  its  invariably  having 
that  (substance  lejas)  for  its  basis,  and  also  from  its  forming 
a  dependent  constituent  thereof.    It  is  not  that  the  compo- 
nent parts  of  its  basis  (/.  e.  of  the  substance  tejas),  becoming 
scattered  and  getting  into  motion,  are  spoken  of  as  light; 
for,  (under  such  a  supposition),  there  would  be  the  destruc- 
tion of  gems,   of  the  sun,  and  of    other    such   luminous 
bodies  (through  their  mere  shining).    And  in  the  case  of 
the  flame  of  a  lamp  also,  there  would  at  no  time  be  the 
perception  of  an  united  whole.   Indeed,  it   is  not  possible 
to   say  that    lamp-flames,  whose  component    parts   have 
the  nature  of  becoming  scattered,   do   invariably  get  col- 
lected together  into  a  whole  only  to  the  extent  of  four 
inches,  rise  up,  and  then  spread  about,  at  the  same  time 
and  in  the  same  form,  horizontally  and  upwards  and  down- 
wards.    Hence,  it  is  ascertained,  that  lamp-flames  which 
possess    luminosity    are    produced  and    destroyed    every 
moment ;  because  there  is,  (for  their  production),  the  order- 
ed convergence  of  sufficient  causes  (such  as  wicks,  oil,  &c.,), 
and  because  also,  on   the   destruction    of  those   (causes), 
they  (/.  e.  the  flames)  are  themselves  destroyed.  That  light 
acquires  greater  brilliance,  greater  warmth,  &c.,  near  its 
own  source,  is  capable  of  being  proved  by  direct  perception, 
in  the  same  way  in  which,  heat  &c.,  are  (seen  to  be  greater 
in  intensity)  near  fire,  &c.  In  this  same  manner,  the  self, 
which  is  wholly  of  the  nature  of  intelligence,  is  (also)  charac- 
terised by  the  attribute  of  intelligence. 

Indeed,  to  possess  the  character  of  intelligence  is  to 
be  self-luminous.  To  that  effect  are  the  following  and 
other  scriptural  texts  : — "  Just  as  a  solid  lump  of  salt  has 
neither  inside,  nor  outside,  and  is  altogether  one  whole 
mass  of  taste,  so  also,  my  dear  one,  he,  this  self,  who  has 


Adhik.  I.  .Sut.  /.]     SRI-BHA.SHYA.  81 

neither  inside  nor  outside,  is  altogether  one  whole  mass  of 
knowledge,  and  is  altogether  made  up  of  intelligence." 
\Brih.  Up.  IV.  5.  13.]:  "Here,  this  purusha  becomes 
self-luminous."  [Brih.  Up.  IV.  3.9  &  14.]:  "There  is  no 
disappearance  of  the  knowledge  of  the  knower."  [Brih. 
Up.  IV.  3.  30.] :  "  Then  whoever  feels  'I  smell  this', — that 
is  the  self."  \Qh1idnd.  Up.  VIII.  12.  4.]:  "Who  is  the  self? 
He  is  that  person  who  is  luminous  in  the  proximity  of  the 
prdnas  and  the  heart,  and  wholly  consists  of  knowledge." 
\Brih.  Up.  IV.  3. 7.] :  "He  is,  indeed,  the  s'eer,  the  hearer,  the 
taster,  the  smeller,  the  thinker,  the  knower,  the  doer,  and  is 
the  person  who  is  made  up  of  intelligence."  [Pr.  Up.  IV.  9.] : 
"  By  means  of  what,  my  dear  one,  is  one  to  know  the 
knower."  [Brih.  Up.  IV.  5.  15.]:  " This  person  (/.  e. purusha) 
surely  knows."  [  ?  ] :  "  Whoever  sees  (that  One)  sees  not 
death,  nor  disease,  nor  the  state  of  sorrow."  [Qt/iand.  Up. 
VII.  26. 2.] :  "He  is  the  Highest  Person..;  he  (in  His  presence) 
does  not  mind  this  body  which  has  had  birth."  [CJihdnd. 
Up.  VIII.  12.  3.]:  "  In  this  same  manner,  all  these  sixteen 
kalas* ' ,  which  belong  to  the  seer  and  are  dependent  on  the 
Purusha,  meet  their  end  after  attaining  the  Purusha." 
[Pr.  Up.  VI.  5.]:  "Different  from  this  which  consists  of 
mind  is  the  inner  self  which  consists  of  understanding." 
[Taitt.Up.  II.  4.  i.].  And  the  Sutra-kdra  also  says  in  the 
sequel-"For  that  very  reason,'  (the  self)  is  the  knower."  [  Ved. 
Sut.  II.  3.  1 8.].  Therefore,  this  self,  which  is  self-luminous, 
is  indeed  the  knower  always,  it  is  not  mere  luniinousness. 

51.      Vide   Pr.    Up,    VI.  4.    where  (10)     Food,  (11)  Strength    of  body 

these  are   enumerated   as    follows: —  and  of  the  senses,  (12)  Austerities  and 

(1)  The    principal    vital   air  Prdtta,  penance,    Tapas     (13)     The     sacred 

(2)  Faith,  i.  e.  belief  in  the  reality  of  hymns  or  Mantras  (14)  Works   (sac- 
God    (Sraddha)  (3)    Ether,   (4)  Air,  rificial  and  other)   (15)    Sivarga   and 
(5)    Light,    (6)    Water,    (7)  Earth,  other  such  results  of  works    (i6J  The 
(8)    Mind, '1(9)     The    ten    fnth-iyas,  names  of  Sivarga  &c. 

II 


82  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

Luminosity,  as  in  the  case  of  the  luminosity  of  lamp- 
flames  and  other  similar  objects,  must  necessarily  belong  to 
something,  simply  because  it  possesses  the  character  of  lum- 
inosity. Therefore,  consciousness  in  itself  is  not  capable  of 
becoming  the  self.  Moreover,  those  that  know  the  power 
and  import  of  words  say  that  the  words  samvid  (conscious- 
ness), anubhfiti  (experience),  jUana  (knowledge),  &c.,  are 
words  implying  relation.  It  is  not  seen  either  in  ordinary 
language  or  in  the  scripture  that  the  verbs  to  know,  &c., 
are  at  all  used  without  an  object  or  without  a  subject. 

What  has  been  stated3  2  to  the  effect  that  consciousness 
itself  is  the  self,  because  it  possesses  the  quality  of  intelli- 
gence,— in  regard  to  that  (statement),  this  has  to  be  asked, 
namely,  what  it  is  that  is  meant  by  intelligence.  If  it  be 
replied  that  it  is  the  possession  of  that  luminosity  which  is 
due  to  the  mere  fact  of  a  thing's  own  existence,  then,  in  . 
that  case,  such  an  explanation,  being  also  applicable  to  the 
flame  of  a  lamp,  is  too  wide.  If,  as  apart  from  consciousness, 
this  quality  of  luminosity  is  not  granted  at  all,  there  will 
then  result  the  fallacies  of  inconclusiveness  and  contradic- 
tion.53 Moreover,  (the  definition  that  intelligence  means) 
the  possession  of  that  kind  of  existence  which  is  invari- 
ably associated  with  luminosity  (or  intelligibility), — that 
has  been  already  declared  to  be  invalid,  because  it  is  too 
wide,  being  applicable  also  to  the  case  of  pleasures,  &c.  If  it 
be  said  that  pleasures  and  other  such  feelings,  although  in- 

52.  Vide  supra  pp.  50  &  51.  cause,    not    toadmit    luminosity    as 

53.  Inconclusiveness  results,     be-  apart   from  .consciousness,   which    is 
cause,  without  knowing  luminosity,  as  itself  defined  by  means  of  the  idea  of 
apart  from  consciousness,  any  defini-  luminosity,  is  the    same  as   to  admit 
tion   of  consciousness   in   which   the  that  that  luminosity  is   a  peculiarly 
idea  of  luminosity  is  involved,  must  characteristic   attribute  of  the    con- 
necessarily  prove  meaningless  and  in-  sciousness  which  has  been  taken  to  be 
conclusive.  Contradiction  results,  be-  attributeless. 


Adflik.  L   Sut.  I.]         SRl-BHlSHYA.  83 

variably  associated  with  luminosity,  are  like  jars  and  other 
objects,  made  luminous  (or  intelligible)  to  a  thing  other 
than  themselves,  and  are,  in  consequence,  non-intelligent, 
and  thereby  constitute  the  non-self ;  (it  is  asked  in  return) — 
( Is  intelligence,  then,  luminous  to  itself  ?'  It  also  is  always 
luminous  to  another  thing,  the  knower,  which  is  the  ego 
in  the  cognition  'I  know';  in  the  same  way  (in  which 
happiness  is  luminous  to  a  thing  other  than  itself)  in  the 
cognition  '  I  am  happy.'  Hence,  the  intelligence  which 
has  the  character  of  self-luminousness  is  not  proved  to 
exist  in  relation  to  consciousness.  Therefore  that  intelli- 
gent thing  '  I ',  which  is  proved  to  itself  by  the  mere 
fact  of  its  own  existence, — that  alone  is  the  self  (or  the 
atman}. 

The  luminosity  of  consciousness  also  is  dependent  upon 
its  association  with  that  (self).  Indeed,  analogously  to  the 
case  of  pleasures  and  other  such  feelings,  the  intelligibil- 
ity of  consciousness  to  the  self,  which  constitutes  its 
own  basis,  and  its  un-intelligibility  to  other  things  (than 
the  self),  are  (both)  wholly  due  to  that  (association  with 
the  self.)  Therefore,  the  self  is  not  pure  consciousness 
itself,  but  is  undoubtedly  the  ego,  the  knower. 

Again,  what  has  been  urged3  4  to  the  effect  that,  because 
no  illusion  is  possible  without  a  basis  (for  it  to  be  imposed 
upon),  experience,  which  is,  in  truth,  unfounded  in  any  thing 
else  and  is  objectless,  constitutes  the  reality,  but,  neverthe- 
less becomes  manifest,  through  illusion,  as  the  knower  ;  just 
as  the  mother-of-pearl  is  made  out,  (through  illusion), 
to  possess  the  characteristics  of  silver; — this  (view  also)  is 
incorrect.  If  it  were  correct,  then,  the  experiencing  sub- 
ject, namely,  the  ego,  would;  in  consequence  of  its  being 

54.  Vide  supra  p.  51, 


£4  SRI-BHA.SHYA.        [Chap.  L  Part.  L 

equivalent  to  experience  (itself),  appear  in  the  form — '  I 
am  (myself)  experience';  in  the  same  way  in  which  silver 
and  other  (illusorily  perceived)  things  are  made  out  to  be 
nothing  other  than  the  lustrous  substances  which  are  plac- 
ed in  front  of  us.  But,  here,  this  same  experience,  which  is 
itself  separately  cognised,  qualifies  some  thing  else,  namely, 
the  ego,  just  as  a  stick  qualifies  (or  characterises)  Devadat- 
ta  (when  he  is  holding  it.)  It  is  indeed  thus  that  there 
arises  the  cognition, — '  I  experience.'  Such  being  the  case, 
how  can  the  cognition  '  I  experience,'  while  showing  the 
ego  to  be  qualified  by  experience,  be  declared  to  relate 
entirely  to  this  qualifying  attribute,  namely,  experience, 
as  if  one  may  say  that  the  cognition — 'Devadatta 
is  the  possessor  of  a  stick '  relates  merely  to  the 
stick  ? 

What  has  been  further  stated53  to  the  effect  that  the 
(self  s)  quality  of  being  the  knower  is  seen  to  come  out  only 
in  relation  to  him  who,  thinking  that  he  is  stout  and  so  on, 
mistakes  the  body  for  the  self,  and  that  this  (knowership)  is 
therefore  unreal, — this  (also)  is  incorrect ;  because  there 
would  then  result  unreality  to  experience  also,  which  is 
maintained  by  you  to  be  the  self,  in  as  much  as  (such 
experience  also)  is  cognisable  only  by  him  who  possesses 
that  (mistaken  notion  of  the  body  being  the  self.)  If  it 
be  said  that  there  is  no  unreality  in  relation  to  experience, 
in  as  much  as  it  is  not  contradicted  by  that  knowledge  of 
truth  which  stultifies  all  other  things  (than  truth),  then,  in 
that  case,  certainly  (the  self's)  quality  of  being  the  knower 
is  not  also  unreal,  on  account  of  the  absence  of  that  same 
stultification. 

Then  again  it  has  been  said  thus :—  It  is  not  possible 

55.  Vide  supra  pp.  51  &  52. 


Adhik.  L  Sut.  /.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  85 

to  postulate,  in  the  case  of  the  self  which  does  not  admit 
of  modifications,  the  quality  of  being  the  knower,  which 
is  the  same  as  being  the  subject  of  the  predication  of  know- 
ing.    Thus,  this  quality  of  being  the  knower,  which  is  of 
the  nature   of  a  modification  and  is   non-intelligent,  rests 
in  the  knot  of  the  material  principle  of  egoity   which  is 
capable    of  modifications   and   is  itself  a  modification   of 
prakriti  (i.  e.  nature).      Hence,  knowership  does  not  be- 
long to  the   self,   but   belongs  to  this   material  principle 
of  egoity,  which  constitutes  an  internal  organ.     Indeed,  the 
quality  of  being  the  subject  of  predications  and  other  such 
qualities,  are  all  attributes  of  perceivable  objects,  just  as 
colour   and    other    such   qualities    are.      If    the    quality 
of  being  the    subject    of  predications    and    the    quality 
of  being  denoted  by  the  idea  of  the  ego  are  (both)  admit- 
ted in  relation  to  the  self,  then,  as  in  the    case    of  the 
body,  so  also,  in  the  case  of  the  self,  there  would  result 
(to    it)    non-selfhood,    objectivity,    non-intelligence,    &c. 
All  this  is  not  right ;  because,  this  material  principle  of 
egoity  which  constitutes  an  internal  organ  (of  the  body), 
is,  like  the  body,  possessed  of  non-selfhood,  the  character 
of  being  a  modification  of  the  prakriti,  perceivability,  ob- 
jectivity, the  character  of  being  utilised  by  other  things 
than  itself,  and  other  similar  characteristics;  and  because 
also,  the  quality  of  being  the  knower  has   the   peculiar 
character  of  belonging  always   to   an    intelligent    thing. 
What  is  said  is  this : — Just  as  the  body  and  other  simi- 
lar   objects    are,   by  means    of  their  perceivability,    ob- 
jectivity, and  other  such  characteristics,  distinguished  from 
whatever  is  characterised  by  the  opposites  of  these  (charac- 
teristics), viz.  the  quality  of  being  the  perceiver,  subjectivity, 
and  the  like  ;  so  also,  the  principle  of  egoity  which  is   ot 
the  nature  of  an  internal  organ,  being  made  up  of  the  same 


86  SRI-BHA.SHYA.    \Chap.  1.  Part.  I. 

substance  (as  the  body),  is  distinguished  by  those  very  cha- 
racteristics (of  perceivability,  &c.,)  from  that  (which  is 
characterised  by  the  other  attributes  of  being  the  perceiver, 
&c).  Hence,  the  quality  of  being  the  knower  does  not, 
like  the  quality  of  being  consciousness,  belong  to  this 
principle  of  egoity,  for  the  mere  reason  that,  (if  it  did),  there 
would  thereby  be  the  contradiction  of  its  own  nature.  Just 
as  the  quality  of  being  consciousness  is  not  admissible  in  re- 
lation to  the  principle  of  egoity,  which  is  the  object  of  that 
(consciousness),  so  also  the  quality  of  being  the  knower 
can  not  be  admitted  in  relation  to  what  constitutes  the  ob- 
ject of  (knowledge)  itself. 

Moreover,  the  quality  of  being  the  knower  is  not  of 
the  nature  of  a  modification.  The  quality  of  being  the 
knower  is,  indeed,  the  same  as  the  quality  of  being  the 
seat  of  the  attribute  of  intelligence  ;  and  intelligence,  being 
the  natural  attribute  of  this  eternal  thing  (viz.  the  self),  is 
(itself)  eternal.  And  he  (the  Sutrakara)  speaks  of  the 
eternity  of  the  self  in  the  following  aphorism  and  in  others, 
— "The  self  is  not  (a  produced  thing),  as  there  are  no  scrip- 
tural statements  to  that  effect."  [Ved.  Siit.  II.  3.  18.].  In 
the  aphorism  — "  For  that  very  reason,  (the  self)  is  the 
knower."  [Ved.  Sut.  II.  3.  19.], — by  mentoning  the  (self  to 
be)  knower  he  declares  that  it  is  natural  for  the  self  to  be  the 
seat  of  intelligence.  It  has  been  stated  that  there  is  no- 
thing wrong  in  the  (self),  which  is  itself  of  the  nature  of 
intelligence,  being  (at  the  same  time)  the  seat  of  intelligence; 
just  as  (there  is  nothing  wrong)  in  gems  and  other  simlar 
objects,  (although  they  are  made  up  of  the  material  element 
of  heat  and  light),  being  themselves  the  seat  of  luminosity. 
We  will  establish  farther  on  that  intelligence, which  of  itself 
is  unconditioned,  is  capable  of  contraction  and  expansion. 
Hence,  in  the  state  of  the  knower  of  the  body  (/.  c.  as  the 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  /.]      SRI-BHISHYA.  87 

embodied  individual  self),  it  exists,  owing  to  its  past  ac- 
tions (or  karmas),  in  a  contracted  condition,  (the  contrac- 
tion thereof)  varying  in  degree  in  accordance  with  the 
nature  of  those  particular  actions ;  and  that  (state  of  con- 
traction or  expansion)  is  regulated  by  means  of  the  sens- 
es. The  statement  about  the  rising  and  the  setting  (of 
intelligence)  is  made,  having  regard  to  this  aforesaid  pass- 
age of  intelligence  through  the  door- way  of  the  senses.  In 
the  matter  of  this  movement  of  the  intelligence,  there  cert- 
ainly results  (to  the  self)  the  quality  of  being  an  agent ; 
but  that  quality  is  not  natural  (to  it),  being  due  to  its  kar- 
mas (or  past  actions);  and  so  the  self  has  undoubtedly  an 
immodifiable  nature.  Knowership,  which  is  of  this  afore- 
said nature,  belongs  only  to  the  self,  whose  essential 
character  is  intelligence ;  and  consequently,  this  knower- 
ship  cannot  possibly  belong,  at  any  time,  to  the  non-intelli- 
gent principle  of  egoity  (/.  c.  ahaftkard). 

If,  however,  it  be  said  that,1  in  regard  to  this  principle  of 
egoity,  whose  essential  nature  is  non-intelligence,  there  is 
the  possibility  of  (its  acquiring)  the  quality  of  knowership, 
on  account  of  its  proximity  to  intelligence  and  the  conse- 
quent reflection  (of  qualities)  therefrom, — it  is  asked  in 
return — what  is  this  reflection  of  intelligence  ?  Does  the 
reflection  of  the  principle  of  egoity  fall  upon  consciousness, 
or,  does  the  reflection  of  consciousness  fall  upon  the  princi- 
ple of  egoity  ?  It  (viz.  the  reflection  of  the  principle 
of  egoity)  does  not  fall  upon  consciousness,  because  knower- 
ship is  not  admissible  in  regard  to  consciousness.  It  (viz. 
the  reflection  of  consciousness)  does  not  fall  upon  the 
principle  of  egoity,  because  it  is  impossible  for  that  (princi- 
ple of  egoity),  which  is  admittedly  non-intelligent,  ever  to 
possess  the  quality  of  knowership,  and  because  also  both 
(consciousness  and  the  principle  of  egoity)  are  not  capable 


88  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I  Part.  I. 

of  being  perceived  by  the  organ  of  sight.  And  surely,  no 
reflection  is  seen  to  take  place  in  relation  to  invisible 
objects. 

Then  again,  it  may  be  urged  that  the  quality  of  being 
the  knower  results  from  contact  with  intelligence,  in  the 
same  way  in  which  the  heat  in  a  lump  of  iron  results 
from  contact  with  fire.  It  cannot  be  so  here,  however ;  be- 
cause knowership  is  not  admitted  to  be  an  intrinsic  quality 
of  consciousness;  for  that  same  reason,  this  quality  of  know- 
ership cannot,  from  contact  with  it,  result  to  the  principle 
of  egoity,  nor  can  it  be  apprehended  (in  relation  to  that 
principle).  Since  knowership  cannot  at  all  be  predi- 
cated of  the  principle  of  egoity  which  is  non-intelligent, 
there  cannot,  through  contact  with  it,  result  to  conscious- 
ness the  quality  of  being  the  knower,  nor  can  there  arise 
(thus)  the  apprehension  of  that  (quality  of  being  the 
knower)  in  relation  to  consciousness. 

What  has  been  further  stated56  to  the  effect  that  both 
of  them  (viz.  consciousness  and  the  material  principle  of 
egoity),  do  not,  in  reality,  possess  the  quality  of  knower- 
ship, but  that  this  material  principle  of  egoity  is  the 
revealer  of  experience,  and  consequently  reveals  that  expe- 
rience as  though  it  were  within  itself,  in  the  way  in 
which  mirrors  and  other  such  revealers  do;— this  (also)  is 
not  right ;  because,  the  self-luminous  dtman  cannot  appro- 
priately be  held  to  be  revealed  by  the  non-intelligent 
principle  of  egoity.  This  has  been  declared  thus: — "It 
does  not  stand  to  reason  that  the  principle  of  egoity,  whose 
nature  consists  in  non-intelligent  materiality,  reveals  the 
dtman  which  is  self-luminous,  in  the  same  way  in  which  (it 
does  not  stand  to  reason  to  hold  that)  a  dead  ember 

56.     Vide  supra  pp. 52  &  53. 


- 


Adhik.  I.  Snt.  /.]       SRi-BHlSHYA.  89 

(reveals)  the  sun."  \_A.  S.].37  Indeed,  all  things  have 
their  cognisability  dependent  upon  self-luminous  experience. 
It  being  so,  those,  who  know  the  self,  ridicule  the  idea  that 
the  non-intelligent  principle  of  egoity,  the  luminosity  of 
which  is  dependent  on  that  (experience),  reveals  that  same 
experience,  the  luminosity  of  which  is,  (on  the  contrary), 
neither  producible  nor  destructible,  and  itself  forms  the 
means  by  which  all  things  are  cognised.  Moreover,  since 
there  is  incompatibility  between  the  nature  of  the  material 
principle  of  egoity  and  (the  nature)  of  experience,  and 
since  also  there  will  result  to  experience,  (when  it  hap- 
pens to  be  a  thing  revealed  by  ahafikdrd),  the  char- 
acter of  being  no  experience  at  all,  —  there  cannot  be  the 
relation  of  the  revealer  and  the  revealed  (between  them). 
This  has  been  stated  thus  :  —  -"  The  relation  of  the  revealer 
and  the  revealed  (between  any  two  things)  is  mutually 
exchangeable,  and  cannot  exist  when  there  is  any  incompat- 
ibility in  nature  (between  them).  If  the  self  be  capable  of 
being  revealed,  it  would,  like  a  jar,  (for  instance),  acquire, 
in  consequence,  the  character  of  being  no  experience  at 
all."  [A.  5.] 

Again,  it  is  not  very  appropriate  (to  hold),  in  regard  to 
consciousness,  that  it  is  revealed  by  the  principle  of  egoity, 
which  is  itself  revealed  by  consciousness,  just  as  a  beam 
of  the  sun's  rays  is  revealed  by  the  palm  of  the  hand,  which 
is  itself  revealed  by  that  (very  beam  of  rays);  because,  in 
this  instance  itself,  there  is  really  no  revelation  of  the  beam 
of  the  sun's  rays  by  means  of  the  palm  of  the  hand.  Surely, 
on  account  of  their  progress  being  obstructed  by  the  palm  of 


57.     This    stanza    occurs    in     the  manuja's  reasonings  in  ihe 

.3/w*a«<A/to'ofYamunacharya,  the  lead-  karana  are  based  upon  the  writings 

er   of  SrI-Vaishnavism  in  South  India  of  Yamunacharya,  as  it  may  be  made 

just  before  Ramanuja.     Much  of  Ra-  out  from  a    study  of  his  Siddhitraya* 

12 


QO  SRI--BHASHYA.      \Chap.  1.  Par  1. 1. 

the  hand,  the  rays  become  increased  (through  reflection 
and  scattering)  and  are  themselves  very  clearly  perceived; 
thus  the  palm  of  the  hand  cannot  possess  the  character  of 
a  revealer  (of  the  sun's  rays),  in  as  much  as  it  simply 
serves  to  increase  them  (thus). 

Yet  again,  of  what  nature  is  that  revelation  which  is 
effected  by  the  principle  of  egoity  in  relation  to  this  self  (or 
the  atmwi),  the  essential  nature  of  which  is  the  same  as 
that  of  consciousness  ?  It  is  not,  surely,  origination,  be- 
cause it  (viz.  the  dtmmi)  is  self-established,  and  it  is  in  con- 
sequence impossible  for  it  to  be  originated  by  any  thing 
else.  Xor  does  it  (viz.  such  revelation)  consist  in  making 
that  (self)  intelligible,  because  it  (viz.  the  self  which  is  the 
same  as  experience)  is  incapable  of  being  experienced  by 
any  other  experience.  And  for  this  same  reason  there  can 
be  nothing  that  is  of  use  as  a  means  for  experiencing  that 
(self).  It  (viz.  this  sort  of  instrumental  utility  of  a  thing)  is 
indeed  of  two  kinds.  It  consists  either  in  serving  as  the 
means  which  brings  the  object  of  knowledge  into  relation 
with  the  perceiving  senses ;  just  as — in  the  matter  of  the 
apprehension  of  generic  qualities,  one's  own  face,  and  such 
other  things — the  individual,  the  mirror,  and  such  other 
things  (respectively)  form  the  means  of  bringing  (those 
generic  qualities,  that  face,  and  those  other  things)  into  rela- 
tion with  the  senses.  Or,  it  (viz.  such  instrumental  utility) 
consists  in  serving  the  purpose  of  removing  the  impurity 
found  in  one  who  is  desirous  of  acquiring  knowledge ;  just 
as  tranquillity,  self-restraint,  and  such  other  things  are^ 
(in  the  way  of  removing  the  impurities  of  him  who  is  desi- 
rous of  true  knowledge.auxiliary)  to  the  science  which  is  the 
means  of  knowing  the  supreme  reality.  It  is  therefore  de- 
clared accordingly  :  -"As  it  (viz.  the  ego)  is  not  within 
the  province  of  the  senses,  nothing  can  serve  as  the  means 


Adhik.  L  Sut.  /.]       SRI-BHA.SHYA.  91 

of  bringing  it  into  relation  with  them."38 

Moreover,  even  if  it  be  allowed  that  experience  is  cap- 
able of  being  experienced,  it  is  not  proper  to  say  that  the 
ego  is  useful  as  a  means  for  experiencing  that  (experience). 
Indeed,  it  (viz.  such  instrumental  utility  thereof)  may  con- 
sist in  the  removal  of  any  obstruction  to  the  origination  of 
the  experience  which  is  thus  capable  of  being  experienced  ; 
in  the  same  way  in  which  lamp-flames  and  other  luminous 
things  serve,  in  relation  to  the  organ  of  sight,  as  instruments 
for  the  removal  of  the  deep  darkness  which  is  an  obstruc- 
tion to  the  origination  of  the  perception  of  colour  and 
other  qualities.  But  here  (/'.  e.  in  the  case  of  experience 
or  consciousness)  there  is  no  such  removable  obstruction. 
Surely,  in  the  consciousness  which  is  the  same  as  the  al- 
man,  there  is  not  anything  to  be  found  which,  while  being 
an  obstruction  to  the  origination  of  the  knowledge  of  that 
(atman),  is  capable  of  being  removed  by  the  •material 
principle  of  egoity.  If  it  be  said  that  there  is  (the 
obstruction  offered  by)  ignorance  (which  has  to  be  remov- 
ed),— it  is  replied  that  it  is  not  right  to  entertain  such 
an  opinion,  for  the  reason  that  it  is  not  admissible  to  hold 
that  ignorance  (or  avidyd)  can  be  removed  by  the  material 
principle  of  egoity  (or  ahatlkara).  Indeed,  what  removes 
ignorance  is  not  anything  other  than  knowledge.  Moreover, 

58.  Only  the  first  half  of  the  sioka  self  the    knovver     and    therefore    this 

from  the  Htmasiddhi  is  quoted  above,  (knower)  cannot   be  purified  by  that 

but  the  other  half  also  is  pertinent  to  (ego)  itself."    It  is,  in  accordance  with 

the  context.      And  the  whole  sloka,  this  opinion  of  Yamunacharya   so  ex- 

\vhen      translated,      runs      thus   : —  pressed,  that  Ramanuja  argues  out  the 

"  As   it  (viz.  the  ego)    is  not  within  impossibility  of    anything  proving  a 

the   province   of  the  senses,   nothing  helpful  instrument,  in    either    of   the 

ran  serve  as  the  means  of  bringing  it  two     ways     mentioned    above,    in    the 

into  relation  \\ilh  them.  The  ego  is  it-  mailer  of  the  realisation  of  the  a/man. 


92  SRI-BHA.SHYA.    [Chap.  L  Part.  1. 

it  is  not  possible  for  ignorance  to  have  consciousness  for  its 
basis,  because  it  would  then  have  the  same  basis  for  itself  as 
knowledge  has,  and  because  also  its  objects  would  then  be 
the  same  as  those  of  that  (knowledge).  Ignorance  cannot 
exist  in  the  witness  who  is  pure  unqualified  consciousness, 
and  is  free  from  the  condition  of  being  the  knower  as  well 
as  that  of  being  the  object  (of  knowledge).  Just  as  jars 
and  other  similar  objects  cannot  form  the  seat  of  ignor- 
ance, because  they  are  not,  even  in  the  least,  the  seat  of 
knowledge,  so  also  pure  unqualified  consciousness  cannot  be 
the  seat  of  ignorance,  for  the  reason  that  it  too  is  not  the 
seat  of  knowledge.  Even  if  consciousness  be  taken  to 
be  the  seat  of  ignorance,  that  same  (consciousness),  which 
is  (also)  taken  to  be  the  self,  cannot  form  the  object  of 
knowledge  ;  therefore  the  cessation  of  the  ignorance  which 
is  found  in  it  (viz.  in  this  consciousness)  cannot  be  brought 
about  by  means  of  knowledge.  Knowledge,  indeed,  removes 
always  the  ignorance  which  relates  to  its  own  objects,  as 
in  the  case  of  the  rope  and  other  things  (where  the  false 
knowledge  of  the  snake,&c.,  in  relation  to  the  rope,  &c.,  is 
removed  by  the  true  knowledge  of  the  rope  as  rope).  Hence, 
the  ignorance  which  has  consciousness  for  its  basis  can  never 
be  destroyed  by  any  thing  whatsoever.  It  will  be  stated 
further  on  that  the  true  nature  of  this  ignorance,  which  is 
not  capable  of  being  described  either  as  an  entity  or  as  a 
non-entity,  is  altogether  difficult  of  definition.  And  because 
this  ignorance,  which  is  of  the  nature  of  the  antecedent 
non-existence  of  knowledge,  is  not  an  obstruction  to  the 
origination  of  knowledge,  it  cannot,  through  causing  its 
own  destruction,  serve  as  an  instrument  for  producing  that 
knowledge.  Hence  there  can  be  no  revelation  of  experience 
by  the  material  principle  of  egoity  in  any  manner  whatso- 
ever, 


Adhik.  I.  Sfit.  /.]     SRI-BHASHYA.  93 

Moreover,  the  nature  of  revealers  is  not  to  reveal  the 
revealable  thing  as  though  it  were  within  themselves ;  be- 
cause such  (a  revelation)  is  not  seen  in  the  case  of  lamp- 
flames  and  such  other  self-luminous  things,  and  because 
also  knowledge,  the  instrument  of  knowledge,  and  all  that 
helps  that  (instrument  of  knowledge  in  the  production 
of  knowledge)  are  all  of  such  a  nature  as  is  consistent 
with  the  realisation  of  things  as  they  are.  And  this 
fact  is  proved  by  the  rule  which  declares  that  self-evident 
things  prove  themselves.  Again,  mirrors  and  other  things 
are  not  the  revealers  of  faces  and  other  objects,  but  (only ) 
form  the  means  to  produce  that  cause  of  erroneousness 
which  (for  instance)  consists  in  the  bending  back  of  the 
ocular  aura  (to  one's  own  face.)  And  it  being  so,  all  false 
appearances  arise  from  such  a  cause  of  error.  But  the 
revealers  are  (really)  such  things  as  are  like  the  aloha'0* 
(or  the  ocular  aura).  Further,  here,  in  the  present 
instance,  it  is  not  possible  for  the  material  principle  of 
egoity  to  impose  any  such  error  upon  the  self-luminous 
consciousness.  The  logical  genus  represents  the  typical 
form  of  the  individuals  (that  go  to  make  it  up);  and  it  is 
therefore  that  it  appears  to  be  contained  in  the  individuals, 
but  not  because  it  is  revealed  by  the  individuals.  Hence, 
to  give  rise  to  the  apprehension  of  consciousness  as  abiding 
in  the  material  principle  of  egoity,  which  forms  an  internal 

59.  "^loka  which  has  been  transhit-  are  due  to  reflection  is  supposed  to 
ed  here  as  Ocular  Aura  is  a  kind  of  be  cauced  by  the  mirror  or  any  other 
influence,  which,  proceeding  from  the  reflecting  surface  bending  back  this 
eye  and  falling  upon  external  objects,  dloka  •  and,  accordingly,  a  man  sees 
is  supposed  to  make  them  visible.  his  own  face  in  a  mirror,  because  the 
According  to  this  theory  of  vision,  dloka  from  his  eyes  goes  to  the  mir- 
the  eye  sees  only  such  objects  as  are  ror,  is  there  bent  back,  and  finally  re- 
touched, as  it  were,  by  its  own  dloka  ;  turns  and  falls  on  his  own  face, 
ihe  perception  of  the  images  which 


94  SRi-BniSHYA.        {Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

organ,  there  is,  indeed,  nothing  which  can  serve  as  a  means, 
either  in  itself  or  through  causing  an  error.  Thus  the 
quality  of  being  the  knower  doe.s  not  belong  to  the  mate- 
rial principle  of  egoity,  nor  is  there  any  impression  to 
the  effect  that  it  does.  Therefore,  the  subjective  self  is 
the  thing  T,  which  is  of  itself  made  out  to  be  the  knower; 
but  is  not  pure  unqualified  consciousness. 

It  has  also  been  stated  already  that,  on  the  dis- 
appearance of  the  idea  of  the  ego,  consciousness  cannot 
acquire  the  subjectivity  (of  the  self).  Although,  (during 
deep  sleep),  the  thing  '  I '  for  the  ego)  does  not,  owing  to 
its  being  overpowered  by  the  quality  of  darkness  (or  lamas), 
and  owing  also  to  the  absence  of  the  experience  of  external 
objects,  distinctly  and  clearly  manifest  itself,  still,  because 
the  self  shines  forth  (as  before)  in  one  and  the  same  contin- 
uous form  of  the  T  at  the  time  of  waking,  there  is  no  dis- 
appearance of  the  idea  of  the  ego  even  in  deep  sleep.  It  has 
to  be  stated  that  the  experience  which  is  accepted  by  you 
does  also  shine  forth  in  that  very  same  form.  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  no  one,  who  has  risen  from  sleep,  introspectively 
realises,  as  existing  simultaneously  with  the  condition  of 
sleep,  any  experience  which  is  of  the  following  form,  name- 
ly, ".I  who  am  (pure)  consciousness  which  is  free  from  the 
notion  of  the  ego,  and  the  nature  of  which  is  hostile  to  all 
other  tilings,  have  (all  this  while)  remained  as  a  witness  of 
ignorance."  The  introspective  realisation  of  one  who  has 
risen  from  sleep  is,  indeed,  to  the  effect — "I  have  slept 
happily."  By  means  of  this  process  of  introspective  realisa- 
tion, it  is  made  out  that  even  at  that  time  (/.  c.  during 
sleep)  the  self,  which  is  the  thing  '  I ',  possesses  the  quality 
of  being  the  enjoyer  of  happiness  as  well  as  the  quality  of 
being  the  knower.  It  should  not  be  urged  that  the  realisa- 
tion is  simply  to  the  effect-—"  I  so  slept  then  as  to  feel 


Adhik.  I.  Sftt.  /.]       SRI-BHISHYA.  95 

happy  now";  because  that  realisation  is  not  at  all  of  such  a 
form.  Moreover,  (it  may  be  said  that)  a  person  who  has 
risen  from  sleep  realises  by  introspection  the  very  thing 
which  was  experienced  (by  him)  before,  and  then  observes 
—'This  was  done  by  me'.  'This  was  experienced  by  me,' 
'I  said  this';  and  that,  therefore,  it  is  not  right  to  think 
that  the  -quality  of  being  the  enjoyer  of  happiness  cannot 
be  consistently  applied  to  the  ego,  on  account  of  the 
impermanent  character  of  this  ego  which  is  the  self.  But 
if  it  be  said  (in  reply)  that  he  also  realises  by  introspection 
-—'All  this  while  (during  my  sleep)  I  knew  nothing  at  all,' 
(we  ask)—  'What  (follows)  then '?  If  it  be  said  that  'nothing 
at  all'  means  (here)  the  negation  of  all  things,  it  is  replied 
that  it  can  not  be  so,  for  the  reason  that  the  thing  '  I/  the 
knower,  must  continue  to  persist  when  one  can  say  '  I 
knew,'  (even  though  his  knowledge  relates  to  nothing).  In 
fact,  this  negation  here  relates  only  to  knowable  objects. 
If  the  negation  by  means  of  the  word  'nothing'  here 
relates  to  the  entire  totality  of  things,  then  that  experience 
also,  which  is  admitted  by  you  (to  be  existent  during 
sleep),  will  have  to  be  denied.  Now  (it  is  held  that)  the  sell7, 
which  is  the  knower,  and  constitutes  the  thing  'I'  which  is 
continuously  existent  even  during  sleep,is  (first)  introspect- 
ively  realised  as  the  T  (or  the  ego);  and  that  that  (ego) 
is  then  denied  by  means  of  the  cognition — 'I  knew  nothing 
at  all.'  Thus,  this  same  introspective  realisation — 'I  knew 
nothing  at  all.'--- is  made  to  prove  the  reality  of  that  know- 
ledge which  is,  however,  denied  to  exist  at  that  time  of 
sleep),  and  (to  prove)  also  the  unreality  of  the  thing  '  I ', 
which  is  the  knower  and  is  continuously  existent ;  and  let 
such  a  thing  as  this  be  proved  only  to  the  gods  (who  do  not 
reply  to  arguments  and  criticism). 

If  it  be  said  that  when  one  observes — 'I- did  not  know 


96  SRI-BHA.SHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

even  myself  (in  sleep)',  the  continued  existence  of  the  thing 
*  I  '  also  is  not  then  apprehended,  it  is  replied  that  you  —  the 
pftrvapakshins—do  not  know  even  the  contradiction  (thus 
arising)  between  your  own  experience  and  your  own  de- 
scription (of  it).  Indeed,  this  experience  and  its  description 
are  to  the  effect  —  '  I  did  not  know  myself.'  If  it  be  ask- 
ed what  it  is  that  is  negated  in  the  word  (  myself,  it  would 
be  indeed  a  pertinent  question  put  by  you.  It  is  thus 
answered.  It  is  not  the  essential  reality  of  the  continued 
persistence  of  the  thing  '  I  ',  which  is  the  knower,  that  is 
denied  (here).  But  (what  is  denied  is)  that  the  thing  (  I  ' 
which  is,  at  the  time  of  waking,  made  out  to  have  been 
continuously  existent,  is  characterised  by  caste,  and  the 
various  stages  of  life,  &c.  When  it  is  said  '  I  did  not  know 
myself,'  the  real  import  (of  that  utterance)  has  to  be 
distinctly  ascertained.  The  import  of  that  particular  portion 
(of  the  sentence)  which  is  denoted  by  '  myself  is  the  thing 
'I  '  which  is  characterised  by  such  peculiarities  of  caste  &c., 
as  are  continuously  applied  to  it  in  the  condition  of  wake- 
fulness.  The  import  of  that  (other)  portion  (of  the  sent- 
ence) which  is  denoted  by  '  I  '  is  the  ego,  which  is  well 
known  to  exist  in  the  condition  of  self-absorption  as  alto- 
gether consisting  of  indistinct  self-experience.  The  form 
of  this  experience  is  indeed  to  this  effect,  viz.  '  I  did  not 
know  even  -myself,  as  being  asleep,  and  as  possessing  a 
particular  nature.' 

Moreover,  your  position60  indeed  is  this,  that,  in  deep 
sleep,  the  self  exists  as  the  witness  of  ignorance.  To  be  a 
witness  is  certainly  the  same  as  to  be  a  direct  knower  ; 
and  one  who  does  not  know  cannot  at  all  possess  the 
character  of  a  witness.  In  the  scripture  as  well  as  in  the 


60.  Videwf^rap.  53. 


Adhik.  I.  Snt.  i.}      SRI-BHISHYA.  97 

world,  it  is  the  knower  alone  that  is  spoken  of  as  the 
witness.  Mere  knowledge  is  not  (the  witness).  The  vene- 
rable Panini  also  declares  thus  : — "  The  word  witness  is  an 
appellative  term  and  means  the  person  who  directly  sees." 
\_Pdnini.  ¥.2.91.].  The  word  w  if  ness  is  used  always  in 
the  sense  of  one  who  knows.  And  this  aforesaid  witness, 
who  is  realised  when  one  says  '  I  know/  is  undoubtedly 
the  thing  ' I '  ;  and  it  being  so,  how  can  the  thing  ' I'  be  not 
known  to  exist  then  (/.  c.  during  deep  sleep)  ?  Therefore^ 
it  is  a  settled  conclusion  that  the  thing  '  1',  being  luminous 
to  itself,  shines  forth  invariably  as  the  '  I ' ;  and  so,  even  in 
sleep  and  other  such  states,  the  self  is  luminous  and  un- 
doubtedly shines  forth  as  the  ego. 

Again  what  has  been  stated6  '  to  the  effect  that  in  the 
state  of  final  release  the  thing  '  I '  does  not  continue  to 
persist — this  (also)  is  not  good.  If  it  do  not  (so  persist),  then 
final  release  would,  in  other  words,  come  to  mean  the  enun- 
ciation of  the  destruction  of  the  self.  Moreover,  the  thing 
T  is  no  mere  attribute,  so  that,  even  after  its  cessation,  the 
essential  entity  may  remain,  as  it  does  in  the  case  of  the 
removal  of  ignorance.  On  the  contrary,  the  thing  '  I'  is  it- 
self the  self;  and  intelligence  is  its  attribute  ;  because  intelli- 
gence is,  indeed,  apprehended  to  be  the  attribute  of  the  thing 
'  I'  in  the  cognitions  f  I  know ',  and  '  Knowledge  has  come 
to  me.'  Further,  he  who  considers  the  self  to  be  afflicted 
with  the  ddhydtmika*-  and  other  miseries,  saying — 'I  am 
sorrowful/  and  in  whom  the  desire  for  final  release  is  born 
to  the  effect  (of  making  him  feel) — 'How  may  I  become 
tranquilled  and  devoid  of  sorrow,  setting  aside  the  whole  of 
misery,  so  that  it  may  never  occur  again  to  me/ — such  a  man 
alone  strives  for  the  attainment  of  that  (release).  Should 
he,  however,  come  to  think-'  I  shall  be  no  more,  if  I  utilise 

v  6l.  Vide  supra  p.  53.  62.  Vide  supr*  p.  4.  n.  12, 


98  SRi-BniSHYA.       {Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

the  means  (for  the  attainment  of  release)/  —he  would  flee 
away  from  even  the  semblance  of  any  discussion  bearing 
upon  the  topic  of  final  release  ;  and  then  the  whole  science 
treating  of  final  release  would,  (through  want  of  scope), 
become  unauthoritative,  because  there  would  be  none  at 
all  having  the  needed  qualification  (for  the  attainment  of 
final  release).  It  may  be  said  that  that  mere  luminousness 
alone,  which  is  indicated  by  the  word  '  I ',  remains  in  the 
state  of  final  release  ;  but  then  of  what  use  is  it  ?  Xo  one, 
whose  actions  are  based  upon  right  understanding,  will 
ever  make  any  attempt  (to  obtain  final  release)  with  the 
knowledge  that  even  though  his  ego  ceases  to  exist, 
something  which  is  mere  luminousness  remains.  Therefore 
the  thing '  I '  itself,  which  is  made  out  to  be  the  knower,  is  the 
subjective  self.  And  this  subjective  self,  even  in  the  state  of 
final  release,  shines  indeed  as  the  1 1',  because  it  is  luminous 
to  itself  Whatever  is  luminous  to  itself,  that  always 
shines  forth  as  the  T.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  self,  which 
is  subject  to  the  round  of  births  and  deaths,  is  admitted  by 
both  the  contending  parties  to  be  possessed  of  such  lumi- 
nousness. Whatever  does  not  shine  forth  as  the  T,  that  is 
not  luminous  to  itself,  like  jars  and  other  similar  objects,  for 
instance.  This  self  in  the  state  of  final  emancipation  is 
luminous  to  itself.  Therefore  it  (viz.  the  self)  shines  forth 
always  as  the  'I'.  Ignorance,  transmigration,  &c.,  cannot 
be  said  to  result  to  that  (released  self),  in  consequence  of 
its  thus  shining  forth  as  the  T,  because  they  (viz.  ignor- 
ance, transmigration-,  &c.,)  are  opposed  to  the  condition 
of  -final  release,  and  because  also,  the  notion  of  the  '  I '  is- 
not  the  cause  of  ignorance  and  such  other  things.  Ignor- 
ance, indeed,  is  either  not  to  know  a  thing  as  it  is,  or  to 
know  it  other  than  as  it  is,  or  to  know  it  as  contrary  to 
what  it  K  The  essential  nature  of  the  self  consists,  indeed, 


Adhik.  I.  Silt,  i.]     SRI-BHA.SHYA.  99 

in  being  the  T;  and  so  the  notion  of  the  '!',  which  is  of 
the    nature  of  the  knowledge  of  the  self  itself,    cannot 
cause  ignorance  ;  and  how  can  it  cause  the  condition  of 
transmigration  ?   On  the  contrary  that  (notion  of  the  '  I '), 
being  opposed  to  it   (viz.    ignorance),  certainly  destroys 
it.     (The  subjective  self  shines  indeed  as  the  '  I '  even  in 
the  state  of  final  release),  also  because  the  experience  of 
that  self  is  seen  to  have  been  altogether  in  the  form  of  the 
'I',  in  the  case  ofVamadeva  and  others  who  had  their 
ignorance  destro)red  in  its  entirety  by  means  of  the  direct 
realisation  of  the  Brahman  as  constituting  the  Self  of  all.  It 
is,  indeed,  heard  declared  in  the  scripture  to  the  following 
effect: — "  After  seeing  this  (Brahmaii),  the  sage  Vamadeva 
experienced — I  have  become  Manuandthe  sun  also."  \Brih. 
Up.  1.4.  ID.];   "I  alone  exist  and   will  exist."   \Alh.  Up. 
I.  i.].     The  Highest  Brahman,  who  is  not  ignorant  of  any 
thing  which  is  distinct  (from  Himself),  and  who  is  denoted 
altogether  by  the  import  of  the  word  '  Sat '  (/.  e.  existence), 
is  also  (seen  to  be)  accustomed  to  the  same  usage  (of  per- 
sonality) in  the   following   scriptural  passages  :— "Indeed, 
I  (will  enter)  these  three  deities."   \Qlhand.  Up.  VI.  3.  2.]; 
"  May  I  become  manifold  and  be  born."     [Qihdnd.  Up. 
VI.  2.    3.];     "He  thought — May  I   create   the   worlds." 
[Ait.  Up.  I.  i.].     Again  that  same  (association  of  person- 
ality with  the    Highest   Brahman]   may  be  seen  in  the 
following  and  other  passages  also  :— "  Because  I  transcend 
the  destructible  and  am  also  superior  to  the  indestructible, 
therefore,  I  am  known  as  the  Highest  Person,  both  in  the 
world  and  in  the   scripture."  \_B.  G.  XV.  18.]  ;     "  I  am 
the  Self,  O  Gudakesa."« »  \_B.  G.  X.  20] ;     "  It  is  not  that  I 
did  never  exist."  [B.  G.  II.  12.];   "  I  am  the  source  as  well 
as  the  end  of  the  whole  world."    {LB.  G.  VII.  6.].  I  am  the 

63.  Vide  supra  p.  30.  n,  26. 


loo  SRI-BHA.SHYA.       [Chap.  L  Part.  1. 

source  of  all;  everything  goes  forth  from  Me."  [B.  G.  X.  8.] ; 
"  I  am  their  deliverer  from  the  deadly  ocean  of  the  circuit 
of  mundane  existence."  [B.  G.  XII.  7.];  "  I  am  the  seed- 
giving  father."  [B.  G.  XIV.  4.];  "  I  know  the  past  things." 
[B.  G.  VII.  26.]. 

It  ma}*,  however,  be  asked—"  If  the  '  1'  constitute* 
the  self,  then,  how  is  it  that  the  principle  of  egoity  is 
declared  by  the  Lord  to  be  among  the  things  that  go  to 
make  up  the  material  embodiment  (or  kshetra  of  the 
individual  self)  as  in  the  following  passage  : — '  The  great 
elements,  the  principle  of  egoity,  the  buddhi  or  the  princi- 
ple known  as  mahat,  the  prakriti (all  these  thrown 

together  have  been  declared  to  make  up  this  changeful 
material  embodiment)'  ?"  \B.  G.  XIII.  5.].  It  is  thus  said 
(in  reply  to  this): — In  all  declarations  regarding  (His)  essen- 
tial nature,  the  teaching  is  given  (by  Him  only  in  the  first 
person)  as  '  1',  and  the  essential  nature  of  the  self  is  also 
apprehended  in  that  very  same  form  (viz.  as  the  ' I'  or  the 
ego);  therefore,  the  true  nature  of  the  subjective  self  is  surely 
in  the  form  of  the  '  1'.  It  is,  indeed,  declared  by  the  Lord 
Himself  that  the  principle  of  egoity,  which  is  one  of  the 
various  modifications  of  the  prakriti,  is  included  among 
the  things  that  go  to  make  up  this  material  embodiment. 
And  it  is  called  the  principle  of  egoity  (or  ahatikara) 
because  it  forms  the  cause  of  the  imposition  of  the  idea  of 
the  ego  upon  the  body,  which  is  other  than  the  self.  And 
again  the  etymology  of  this  word  ahaflkara  (which  means 
the  principle  of  egoity)  is  to  be  made  out  on  the  supposition 
that  the  affix  termed  chvi*  4  has  become  applicable  here  on 
account  of  (our)  assuming  as  really  existing  what  does  not 
so  exist.  Moreover,  this  same  ahafikara,  which  (often)  forms 

64.  Vide  Paniiti.  V.  4.  50.  Varlikn. 


Adhik.  7.  Sat.  i.]      SRI-BHASHYA.  toi 

the  cause  of  disesteem  in  regard  to  men  of  position,  and 
is  otherwise  named  pride,  is  often  declared  in  the  scripture 
to  be  worthy  of  rejection.  c3  Therefore  such  idea  of  egoity 
as  is  not  stultified  by  any  thing  is  directly  within  the  pro- 
vince of  the  self  itself.  That  other  idea  of  egoity,  which  is 
within  the  province  of  the  body,  is  certainly  ignorance. 
To  the  same  effect  it  has  been  declared  by  the  reverend 
Parasara  (also) : — "C  thou,  worthy  son  of  thy  family,  listen 
also  to  the  teaching  regarding  the  true  nature  of  ignorance 
as  well.  It  is  the  imposition  of  the  idea  of  the  self  on  that 
which  is  no  self."  \_V.  P.  VI.  7.  10.]  If  mere  consciousness 
alone  constitute  the  self,  then,  the  body  which  is  not  the 
self,  but  which  is,  (nevertheless),  mistaken  for  the  self, 
would  illusorily  appear  as  mere  consciousness,  but  not 
appear  as  the  knower.  Therefore,  the  thing  '  1 ',  which  is 
the  knower,  is  alone  the  self.  It  has  been  taught : — "Thus, 
the  self  which  is  the  knower  shines  forth  as  the  '  I',  because 
it  can  be  so  established  by  direct  perception,  and  because 
the  aforesaid  arguments  and  scriptural  texts  are  applicable 
so  to  prove  it,  and  because  also  ignorance  cannot  (really) 
be  associated  with  it."  \_A.  S.~\  To  the  same  effect 
is  this  passage  : — "The  self  is  other  than  the  body,  the 
senses,  the  mind  and  vitality ;  and  is  self-evident.  It  is 
eternal,  all-pervading,  different  in  each  body,  and  happy  in 
itself."  \_A.  S.]  To  be  self-evident  is  to  be  self-luminous  ; 
to  be  all-pervading  is  to  possess  the  power  of  getting  into 
the  inside  of  all  inanimate  things  by  reason  of  its  own 
extreme  subtlety. 

It  has  been  stated  66  that  sense-perception,  which  em- 
braces all  distinctions,  is  grounded  upon  error  and  is,  in  con- 
sequence, liable  to  give  rise  to  false  knowledge  ;  and  that 

65.   Vide  B.  C.  XVI.  18.  M>.  Vide  siifra  \>\\  33  to  35* 


102  SRI-BHA.SHYA.         [Chap.  1.  Part  1. 

therefore  it  is  apt  to  be  stultified  by  scripture.  Here,  it  has 
to  be  questioned  what  this  error  is,  grounded  whereon, 
perception  becomes  capable  of  giving  rise  to  false  knowledge. 
If  it  be  replied  that  the  beginninglessly  old  innate  impression 
of  distinctions  itself  is,  indeed,  the  cause  of  error,  then  it  is 
asked  whether  it  has  been  already  ascertained  elsewhere  that 
this  innate  impression  of  distinctions  possesses,  like  'dark- 
ness',07 &c.,  the  character  of  being  the  cause  of  (our)  appre- 
hending things  as  being  other  than  what  they  really  are.  If 
it  be  said  again  that  this  is  made  out  by  that  same  (afore- 
said) scriptural  stultification  (of  perception),  it;  is  replied 
that  it  cannot  be  so,  for  the  reason  that  the  logical  fallacy 
of  reciprocal  dependence  would  thereby  result  (in  the 
following  manner).  When  it  is  settled  that  scripture 
gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  that  thing  which  is  devoid 
of  all  attributes,  then  (alone)  is  it  demonstrable  that  the 
innate  impression  of  distinctions  forms  the  misguiding  cause 
of  error  (in  relation  to  perception);  and  again,  when  the 
innate  impression  of  distinctions  is  proved  to  be  of  the 
nature  of  a  misguiding  cause  of  erroneous  perception,  then 
(alone)  is  it  demonstrable  that  scripture  gives  rise  to  the 
knowledge  of  that  thing  which  is  devoid  of  all  attributes. 
Moreover,  if,  by  being  based  upon  the  innate  impression  of 
distinctions,  perception  gives  rise  to  such  knowledge  as  is 
other  than  the  reality,  then  scripture  also,  being  similarly 
based  thereon,  would  acquire  the  same  character  (of  giving 
rise  to  false  knowledge).  It  may  be  urged  again  that, 
although  based  upon  error,  the  scripture  forms  the  stultifier 
of  perception,  in  as  much  as  it  is  the  means  of  that 
knowledge  which  is  destructive  of  all  the  distinctions 
apprehended  in  perception,  and  is  therefore  of  stronger 

67.  Vide  infra  p.  104.  n.  69..  where       name  also  of  an  eye-disease, 
this  darkness  is  explained    to  be    the 


Adhik.  1.  Sut.  /.]      SRI-BH.ISHYA.  103 

authority  as  a  criterion'of  truth;  if  so,  it  is  replied  that  it  can 
not  be  so,  because,  when  it  is  known  that  it  (viz.  scripture) 
is  based  upon  error,  the  idea  that  it  is  stronger  as  a  criteri- 
on of  truth  can  serve  no  purpose.  For,  when  the  fear 
caused  by  the  false  perception  of  the  snake  in  a  real  rope 
is  found  to  exist  in  a  man,  that  fear  is  not  seen  to  cease  even 
after  he  is  told — '  This  is  no  snake,  do  not  be  afraid ' — by 
another  who  knows  that  he  is  labouring  under  an  illusion. 
That  scripture  is  based  upon  error  can,  however,  be  thought 
of  only  at  the  time  of  'hearing'  it;  because  reflection,68 
£c.,  consist  in  practically  realising  that  knowledge  of  the 
oneness  of  the  Brahman  and  the  self,  which  is  destructive 
of  all  the  distinctions  apprehended  at  the  time  of  '  hearing.' 

Again,  by  what  means  have  you  come  to  know  what 
the  scripture  is  and  how  it  is  incapable  of  being  erroneous, 
while  perception  is  capable  of  being  erroneous  ?  That  self- 
evident  experience  (of  yours)  which  is  devoid  of  all  attributes 
cannot,  indeed,  give  rise  to  this  knowledge,  because  it  is  whol- 
ly objectless  and  because  also  it  can  lend  no  special  support 
to  the  scripture.  Xor  does  sense -perception  (give  rise  to 
this  knowledge),  because,  being  based  upon  error,  it  relates 
to  what  is  other  than  the  reality.  The  other  means  of  proof 
(such  as  inference,  &c.,)  being  themselves  based  upon  that 
(perception),  cannot  also  (give  rise  to  that  knowledge). 
Hence,  on  account  of  the  unavailability  of  any  means  of 
proof  to  establish  your  own  position,  there  can  be  no  proof 
of  the  position  accepted  by  you. 

It  may,  however,  be  said  that  we  also  have  to  make 
use  of  (such)  means  of  proof  and  (such)  objects  of  know- 
ledge as  appertain  to  the  phenomenal  world.  But  what  is 
this  which  you  call  phenomenal  ?  If  it  be  said  that  it  is 
that  which  results  from  first  impressions,  and  is  then  made 

68.  "  Reflection  &c."  means  reflection  and  steady  meditation, 


j04  SRT-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I  Part.  I. 

out  to  be  (really)  otherwise  when  examined  by  means  of 
appropriate  reasoning,— it  is  asked  in  reply,  of  what  use 
that  can  be.  Even  though  it  be  accepted  as  a  means  of 
proof,  it  cannot  effect  what  a  means  of  proof  has  to  ac- 
complish, because  it  is  capable  of  being  itself  stultified  by 
appropriate  reasoning. 

Again  it  may  be  said  that,  although  both  scripture  and 
perception  are  based  upon  ignorance,  the  objects  of  percep- 
tion are  found  to  be  stultified  by  the  scripture,1  while  the 
object  of  the  scripture,  namely,  the  Brahman,  which  is  the 
only  existence  without  a  second,  is  not  seen  to  be  so  stultified 
subsequently;  and  that,  in  consequence,  the  Brahman  alone, 
which  is  pure  experience  and  devoid  of  all  attributes,  is  the 
highest  reality.  To  say  so  is  wrong,  because  whatever  is 
based  upon  error,  even  though  it  continues  unstultified,  can 
be  demonstrated  to  possess  the  character  of  unreality. 
What  is  said  is  this : — All  those  men,  for  instance,  who  are 
affected  by  timira6  °,  who  do  not  know  that  they  are  them- 
selves so  affected  by  timira,  who  dwell  in  such  mountain 
caves  as  are  inaccessible  to  other  men,  and  who  are  free 

(>().  Titnira  commonly  means  dark-  and  invades  the  third  coat  of  the  eye, 
ness,  and  is  here  used  to  denote  it  comes  to  be  known  as  kdcha.  In 
obviously  a  disease  of  the  eye.  In  this  disease  the  eye  is  always  directed 
the  Sabdakalpadruma  of  Raja  Radha-  upwards,  and  the  vision  is  hazy  and 
kanta  Deva,  it  is  said  that  this  dis-  often  coloured  ;  faces  appear  noseless, 
ease  itself  is  called  '  darkness,'  be-  single  objects  appear  multiplied,  and 
cause  it  darkens  vision.  According  straight  objects  appear  crooked,  &c., 
to  Vabhata  who  is  quoted  here,  this  &c.  When  kdcha  grows,  it  leads  to 
disease  affects  the  fourth  coat  of  the  blindness.  On  pages  16  &  lO2,we  have 
eye,  obstructs  vision  in  all  directions,  translated  timira  as  darkness,  so  that 
and  finally  causes  blindness.  In  this  it  may  mean  either  the  ordinary  dark- 
disease,  it  is  said,  that  single  objects  ness  resulting  from  want  of  light,  or 
appear  double  or  multiple,  and  that  the  eye-disease  known  as  aarkness, 
short  objects  appear  long  and  vice  because  both  these  act  as  misguid- 
,  Sic.,  Sic.  If  the  disease  grows  ing  causes  of  false  perception. 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  /.]      SRI-BHISHYA.  105 

from  all  other  causes  of  error  in  vision,  such  as  the  eye-disease 
kdrha,  &c.,  have  without  distinction,  the  perception  of  two 
moons  (when  there  is  only  one  in  reality),  as  they  are  all 
equally  subject  to  that  misguiding  cause  (of  false  perception) 
which  is  known  as  timira  ;  here,  there  is  no  apprehension  of 
any  stultifier  (of  such  a  perception),  and  (yet)  it  cannot  for 
that  reason  be  other  than  false ;  accordingly,  the  moon's 
duality,  which  forms  the  object  of  that  (perception),  is  also 
undoubtedly  false.  Indeed,  an  error-producer  is  that  which  is 
the  cause  of  false  knowledge.  In  this  same  manner,  the 
knowledge  of  the  Brahman,  although  free  from  the  notion 
of  any  thing  that  may  stultify  it,  has  to  be  undoubtedly 
false ;  and  with  it,  its  object,  which  is  the  BraJiman,  (has 
also  to  be  false);  because  that  (knowledge)  is  (held  to  be) 
based  upon  ignorance.  And  the  forms  of  the  sj'llogistic 
statement  in  this  connection  would  be  as  follow  : — (i). 
The  Brahman  which  is  (now)  the  subject  of  discussion 
(between  us)  is  unreal,  because  it  is  the  object  of  the 
knowledge  which  is  produced  in  one  who  is  possessed  of 
ignorance ;  as,  for  example,  the  phenomenal  world,  (ii). 
The  Brahman  is  false,  because  it  is  the  object  of  know- 
ledge (or  experience);  as,  for  example,  the  phenomenal 
world,  (iii).  The  Brahman  is  unreal,  because  it  is  the 
object  of  that  knowledge  which  is  produced  by  false 
causes  ;  as,  for  example,  that  same  phenomenal  world. 

Moreover,  it  should  not  be  urged  that  the  unreal  per- 
ception of  elephants  and  other  objects  arising  in  dreams  do 
form  the  cause  of  the  attainment  of  real  good  and  evil  (in 
life);  and  that  it-is  not  opposed  to  reason  to  hold  that,  simi- 
larly, the  scripture,  which,  being  based  upon  ignorance,  is 
unreal,  forms  the  means  for  the  attainment  of  the  object 
which  is  known  as  Brahman  and  constitutes  the  highest 
realit  :  because  the  conition  arisin  in  dreams  is  not  at  all 


io6  SRi-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.L 

of  an  unreal  nature.  Indeed,  here  (in  dreams),  there  is 
unreality  only  in  relation  to  the  objects  (perceived  therein), 
because  stultification  is  seen  only  in  relation  to  them,  but 
not  in  relation  to  the  perception  itself.  Surely  there  is  not 
born  in  any  one  the  belief  that  will  make  him  feel — "  That 
conscious  state  itself  which  was  experienced  by  me  during 
dreams  is  non-existent."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  idea  of 
stultification  here  is  in  the  form — "  The  conscious  state  is 
existent,  but  the  objects  (thereof)  are  non-existent." 

That  knowledge  which  consists  of  illusions,  and  is  caused 
by  the  incantations  (mantras}  and  medicinal  herbs,  &c.,  of 
the  enchanter,  is  quite  real  and  forms  also  the  cause  of  love 
and  fear  ;  because,  in  this  case  also,  the  knowledge  (or  the 
conscious  state  so  produced)  remains  unstultified.  That 
perception  of  the  snake,  &c.,  which  is  imposed  upon  the 
rope,  &c.,  and  is  produced  by  means  of  the  misguiding 
causes  relating  to  the  objects  of  perception  and  the  perceiv- 
ing senses,  &c.,— that  is  also  truly  existent  and  forms  the 
cause  of  fear  and  other  emotions.  The  impression  resulting 
from  the  proximity  of  the  snake  to  one's  self,  to  the  effect 
that  one  has  been  bitten  (by  it),  even  when  not  so  bitten,— 
this  also  is  undoubtedly  real.  The  idea  giving  rise  to  a 
(false)  suspicion  of  poisoning  is  also  certainly  real,  and  forms 
the  cause  of  death.  The  reflected  appearance  of  the  face,  &c., 
in  water,  &c.,  is  a  really  existing  thing,  and  forms  the 
means  of  ascertaining  the  particular  characteristics  found  in 
the  face  which  is  a  really  existing  thing.  The  reality  of 
these  various  states  of  consciousness  is  conclusively  estab- 
lished, in  as  much  as  they  have  an  origin,  and  also  form 
the  causes  of  actions  which  are  determined  by  motives. 
If  it  be  asked,  how,  even  in  the  absence  of  the  elephant 
and  other  objects  (perceived  in  dreams),  the  forms  of  cog- 
nition relating  to  them  can  be  real,  we  reply  that  that 


Adhik.  L  Sat.  i.]      SRI-BHISHYA.  io; 

(question  itself)  is  not  right ;  because  these  forms  of  cogni- 
tion merely  require,  as  a  rule,  some  object  (whether  it  be 
real  or  unreal)  to  depend  upon,  and  to  relate  to.  For,  what 
is  required  to  make  a  thing  the  basis  and  the  object  of  any 
cognition,  is  merely  the  manifestation  of  that  thing  (to 
consciousness) ;  and  there  certainly  does  exist  such  a  mani- 
festation under  the  influence  of  the  misguiding  cause 
(which  is  productive  of  such  manifestation).  However, 
that  (thing  which  is  so  made  manifest  to  consciousness),  is, 
when  stultified,  conclusively  proved  to  be  unreal.  And  it 
has  been  already  declared  that  that  cognition  which  conti- 
nues unstultified  relates  certainly  to  the  reality. 

Further,  in  the  case  also  of  the  apprehension  of  the 
sounds  of  letters  by  means  of  (the  corresponding)  written 
signs,  there  is  no  cognition  of  the  real  by  means  of  the  un- 
real, because  the  written  sign  itself  is  really  existent.  To 
this,  it  may  be  objected  that  the  sign  is  taken  to  be  of  the 
same  nature  as  the  sound,  and  is  thus  the  cause  of  the 
cognition  of  the  sound  here,  but  that  its  identity  in  nature 
with  the  sound  is  unreal.  This  is  not  so;  because  the  unreal 
(or  non-existent)  nature  of  the  identity  (of  the  sign)  with 
the  sound  cannot  form  the  means  (of  producing  such  a 
cognition).  Indeed,  it  is  not  seen,  nor  is  it  possible,  that 
what  does  not  exist,  and  is  not  cognisable,  can  form  the 
means  (of  proving  any  thing).  Again,  it  may  be  said  that 
the  imposition  of  the  idea  of  the  alphabetic  sound  on  that 
(written  sign)  is  the  cause  (of  the  apprehension  of  the  sound 
with  the  help  of  the  sign).  If  it  be  so  held,  then,  there 
would  not  be  here,  (as  you  contend),  the  cognition  of  the 
real  by  means  of  the  unreal,  simply  because  that  (super- 
imposed) idea  is  (itself)  real.  Moreover,  there  would  then 
result  also  the  oneness  of  the  means  of  proof  with  the 
object  to  be  proved,  because  both  of  them  possess  the  same 


io8  SRI-BHISHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  I- 

character  of  being  the  cognition  of  alphabetic  sound.  And 
again,  if  a  written  sign  forms  the  means  (for  the  cognition 
of  an  alphabetic  sound),  by  reason  of  its  supposititious  and 
unreal  identity  in  nature  with  that  sound,  then  it  is  easy 
enough  for  any  one  sign  to  be  so  supposititiously  and  un- 
really  identical  in  nature  with  all  the  alphabetic  sounds  ; 
and  thus  there  will  have  to  result  the  cognition  of  all  the 
alphabetic  sounds  by  looking  at  any  one  written  sign  of 
a  letter.  Then  again,  it  may  be  said  that,  just  as  there  is 
the  convention  of  using  '  Devadatta '  and  other  nominal 
words  in  relation  to  particular  masses  of  matter,  so  also, 
there  is  the  convention  of  associating  a  particular  sound, 
which  is  perceivable  by  the  ear,  with  a  particular  written 
sign,  which  is  perceivable  by  the  eye ;  and  that,  conse- 
quently, a  particular  written  sign  is  the  cause  of  the 
cognition  of  a  particular  alphabetic  sound.  Well  then, 
there  is,  in  that  case,  the  cognition  of  the  real  by  means 
of  the  real,  because  both  the  written  sign  and  the  (phonet- 
ic) convention  are  of  a  real  nature.  The  cognition  of  the 
real  wild  ox  by  means  of  the  written  outline  of  the  wild  ox 
is  founded  upon  similarity,  and  this  similarity  is  itself  real. 
Again,  there  is  no  cognition  of  the  real  by  means  of  the 
unreal,  even  in  the  case  where,  by  means  of  particular 
phonetic  differentiations,  the  one  undifferentiated  sound 
(known  as  sphota)  7  °  is  seen  to  become  the  means  of 
apprehending  a  variety  of  meanings;  because  this  one  un- 
differentiated sound  is  revealed  by  numerous  phonetic 

70.  This  is  what  is  known  as  the  expressed   by  sounds  are  traceable  to 

Sphota  of  the  grammarians,  according  that  one  eternal  sound.     The  Pitrva- 

to  whom,  this  Sphota  which  is  eternal  mimamsa  also  ascribes  eternity  to  all 

is  '  the  cause  of  the  manifestation  of  Vedic  sounds.      Vide  Pur.  Mini.  I.  I. 

all  sounds,' and  so  they  hold  that  all  5  to  23.  Vide   also    Manu.  I.    31.    & 

the   things  in  the   world    which    are  Taitt.  Br.  II.  2.  4.  2. 


Adhik.  I.  Sul.  i.]      SRI-BHA.SHYA.  109 

differentiations  (or  nadas),  and  forms  the  cause  of  the 
origin  of  the  knowledge  of  a  variety  of  meanings,  owing 
to  the  apprehension  of  its  relation  with  various  meanings, 
according  as  they  are  severally  revealed  by  the  various 
phonetic  differentiations  (thereof).  It  is  not  also  proper  to 
hold  that  sound  possesses  (at  all)  the  undifferentiated 
character  of  unity  ;  because  ga  and  the  other  phonetic 
elements  of  language,  which  undoubtedly  import  meanings, 
do  themselves  constitute  sound,  in  as  much  as  they  (alone) 
are  perceived  by  the  ear. 

Therefore,  by  means  of  the  scripture,  which  is  false, 
it  is  difficult  to  arrive  at  that  knowledge  the  object  of 
which  is  the  real  Brahman. 

An  objection  may,  however,  be  raised  against  this 
conclusion  to  the  following  effect : — The  scripture  is  not 
false,  in  the  same  way  in  which  the  flowers  imagined  to 
grow  in  the  sky  (are  false) ;  because  it  is  made  out  to  be  a 
real  entity  (or  sat)  before  the  knowledge  of  non-duality  (is 
born).  Indeed,  it  is  only  after  the  knowledge  of  the  truth 
is  born,  that  the  scripture  acquires  the  character  of  being 
untrue.  And  then  it  is  that  the  scripture  can  not  form  the 
means  of  knowing  the  Brahman,  which  is  pure  intelligence 
and  is  devoid  of  all  distinctions.  When  it,  however,  does 
form  such  a  means,  then  the  scripture  is  really  existent, 
for  the  reason  that  it  is  then  made  out  to  be  so  existent.  To 
this  objection,  it  is  replied  that  it  cannot  be  so ;  because, 
when  the  scripture  does  not  really  exist,  to  make  out  that 
it  does  exist  is  false.  What  (follows)  then  ?  Then  (follows) 
this  : — In  consequence  of  the  unreality  of  the  knowledge 
produced  by  the  unreal  scripture,  there  will  result  unreal- 
ity to  the  Brahman  also  which  forms  the  object  of  that 
(knowledge) ;  in  the  same  way  in  which,  owing  to  the  fals- 
ity of  the  knowledge  of  fire  inferred  by  means  of  aqueous 


no  SRI-BHASHYA.     [Chap.  L  Part.  1. 

vapour  wrongly  perceived  to  be  smoke,  the  fire  also  which 
forms  the  object  of  that  (inferential  knowledge)  is  unreal. 
Moreover,  the  absence  of  any  subsequent  stultification  (of 
the  scriptural  knowledge  of  the  Brahman  after  it  is  actual- 
ly produced)  is  not  also  proved ;  because  such  stultification 
of  that  (scriptural  knowledge)  is  really  to  be  found  in  the 
statement  (of  some  7 '  Buddhists)  that  nothingness  alone 
is  the  reality.  If  it  be  -  said  that  that  (statement)  is 
based  upon  illusion,  it  is  replied  that  it  has  been  already 
declared  by  you  that  this  (scriptural  knowledge)  also  is 
based  upon  illusion.  Indeed  the  absence  of  any  such 
stultification  is  to  be  found  only  in  relation  to  that  (state- 
ment that  nothingness  is  alone  the  reality) !  We  have  now 
done  with  the  ridiculing  of  such  ill-founded  and  fallacious 
reasoning. 

What  has  been  urged7  2-by  t\\e  Pfirvapakshins— to  the 
effect  that  Veddnta  passages  such  as  "  Existence  alone,  my 
dear  child,  this  was  in  the  beginning" — [Qhhdnd.  U'p.  VI.  2. 
i .] ,  and  the  like,  are  intended  to  establish  that  thing  alone 
which  is  devoid  of  attributes  and  is  of  the  uniform  nature  of 
intelligence, — this  (view  also)  is  incorrect ;  because  in  the 
way  of  proving  the  proposition  7  3  that,  by  knowing  a  cer- 
tain One  Thing,  all  things  become  known,  it  is  declared 
that  the  Highest  Brahman,  which  is  denoted  by  the  word 
Sal  (or  Existence),  is  the  material  cause  of  the  world, 
is  the  efficient  cause  of  the  world,  is  omniscient,  omnipot- 
ent, wills  the  truth,  pervades  all,  supports  all,  controls  all, 
and  is  characterised  by  innumerable  other  auspicious  quali- 
ties ;  and  that  the  whole  world  has  that  (Brahman)  for  its 

71.  These  are   the   Madhyamikas  ;  of  refutation, 

rind  the  -statement   quoted   above    is  72.  Vide  supra  p.  27. 

also  mentioned  in  the  Sdiikhya   apho-  73.  Vide    Chhdnd.    Up.    \'\.    \.    3. 

ristns  of  Kapila.  I.  44.,  for  the  purpose  wherein  this  proposition  is  given. 


Adhik.  I.  Si'tt.  /.]     SRi-BHlSHYA.  HI 

Soul  ;  and  that,  in  consequence,  the  context  (wherein  the 
above  scriptural  passage  occurs)  proceeds  to  teach  Sveta- 
ketu  that  he  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  Brahman  thus 
described.  Indeed,  this  subject  is  discussed  (by  us)  at 
length  in  the  Vedartha-sangraha  74.  In  this  work  also 
\Ved.  Sut.  II.  i.  15.],  in  the  section  treating  of  the  origin  of 
the  world,  this  (subject)  will  be  discussed  well  with  great 
clearness.  In  this  passage  also,  namely, — "And  that  is  the 
higher  (knowledge)  by  which  that  Indestructible  Being  (is 
known)"-[3f»j(rf.  Up.  I.  i.  5],  the  evil  qualities  appertaining 
to  matter  (or  praknti]  are  first  negatived  (in  relation  to  the 
Brahman),  and  then  it  is  declared  that  the  Highest  Brahman 
possesses  innumerable  auspicious  qualities  such  as  eternity, 
omnipresence,  subtlety,  all-pervasiveness,  indestructibility, 
the  quality  of  being  the  source  of  all,  omniscience,  and  so  on. 
By  means  of  this  passage  also,  namely, — "  The  Brahman 
is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infinity" — [Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.], 
that  thing  which  is  devoid  of  attributes  is  not  arrived  at,  be- 
cause the  fact  of  their  (/'.  e.  of  Brahman,  Existence,  Know- 
ledge, and  Infinity)  being  grammatically  equated  has  to  be 
understood  to  mean  the  denotation  of  some  one  thing  which 
is  characterised  by  more  than  one  attribute.  Indeed,  (for 
words)  to  be  grammatically  equated  is  to  import  only  one 
thing  through  a  variety  of  significations.  Regarding  the  use 
of  these  words  so  as  to  import  only  one  thing,  either  by  signi- 
fying those  qualities  which  form  the  primary  and  natural 
meaning  of  the  words,  '  Existence,'  '  Knowledge ',  &c.,  or 
by  denoting  the  opposite  of  what  is  contrary  to  each  of 
those  particular  qualities,  a  difference  between  their  signi- 
fications has  necessarily  to  be  accepted.  Here,  however, 

74.  Vide   pp.   20   to  60,    Vedartha-       malacharya  and  A.  K.  Yijayaragha- 
safigraha,      edited     at     Madras,    in       vacharya. 
Teliigu  characters,  by  Messrs  J.  Tirq- 


H2  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

there  is  this  much  of  peculiarity.  In  one  case,  the  words 
have  their  primary  and  natural  meaning  ;  and  in  the 
other,  they  have  a  figurative  significance.  To  be  opposed 
to  what  is  ignorance,  &c.,  does  not  surely  constitute 
the  essential  nature  of  the  entity  Brahman;  for,  (if  it  did), 
the  true  nature  of  (that)  Brahman  would  be  full}"  made  out 
by  means  of  only  one  word,  and  the  use  of  the  other  words 
would,  in  consequence,  be  meaningless.  Moreover,  under 
such  a  circumstance,  there  will  not  be  any  grammatical 
equation  between  these  words,  for  the  (mere)  reason  that 
those  words,  all  of  which  denote  only  one  thing,  cannot 
have  a  variety  of  significations.  Furthermore,  a  variety 
of  qualified  conditions  results  to  one  and  the  same  thing 
from  a  variety  of  qualifying  attributes,  and  consequently 
the  words  (in  a  grammatical  equation)  acquire  a  variety  of 
meanings;  and  this  is  not  incompatible  with  their  being 
grammatically  ,equated,  because  an  equation  between 
words  is,  indeed,  intended  to  establish  that  one  and  the 
same  thing  is  characterised  by  more  than  one  attribute. 
In  fact,  grammarians7  3  declare  that  a  grammatical  equation 
(between  words)  means  that  words  having  a  variety  of 
significations  are  used  so  as  to  import  only  one  thing. 

It  has  been  further  urged — by  the  Pi'irvapakshins — to 
the  following  effect : — In  the  passage,  "  One  only  without 
a  second" — [Qhhand.  Up.  VI.  2.  i.],  the  word  advitlya 
(which  means  without  a  second)  does  not  admit  of  (the 
Brahman)  being  associated  with  a  second  thing  even  in 
the  form  of  a  quality.  Hence,  according  to  the  rule70  which 
enforces  faith  in  all  the  recensions  of  the  Vcdas,  it  has  to 

75.  Vide  Kaiyyata's  commentary  on  yyata  under  Fdnini  r.  2.  42.,   runs  as 

Patanjali's    Maha-Bhashya,     \riddhy-  follows     : — Bhinnapraivittinimittayuk- 

dlinika  and  also  the   portion   relating  tasya  anekasya  labdasya  ekasmin   urthe 

to  Panini  I.  2.  42.    The  definition  of  a  irittis  sdmdnadhikaranyam. 

grammatical  equation  as  given  by  Kai-  76.  Vide  supra  p.  40.  &  n.  32. 


Adhik.  I.  Silt.  /.]      SRI-BHISHYA.  113 

be  admitted  that  the  passages  which  relate  to  (the  Brah- 
man as)  the  cause  of  the  world,  are  all  intended  to  estab- 
lish that  Thing  which  is  without  a  second.  The  defini- 
tion of  that  Brahman,  which  is  characterised  as  the  cause 
of  the  world,  and  is  without  a  second,  is  given  here  to  this 
effect  : — "The  Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infini- 
ty." \Tailt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.].  Hence  that  Brahman,  which 
it  is  intended  to  define,  is  certainly  devoid  of  attributes. 
Otherwise,  there  would  be  the  contradiction  of  all  such 
statements  as  (declare  the  Brahman  to  be)  '  without 
attributes',  'without  taint ',  [Ad/i.  Up.  68.],  and  so  on. 

To  hold  so  is  not  appropriate,  because  the  word 
advitlya  is  intended  to  establish  the  possession  of  won- 
derful powers  by  the  Brahman,  who  is  the  material  cause 
of  the  universe,  by  pointing  out  that  there  is  no  other  who 
is  the  ruler  thereof  and  is  different  from  Himself.  Similarly, 
the  following  among  other  passages,  viz.  "  It  thought,  may  I 
become  manifold  and  be  born;  It  created  the  element 
lejas." -\Q!ihand.  Up.  VI.  2.  3.],  also  makes  known  the  pos- 
session of  such  wonderful  powers  (by  the  Brahman).  If  it  be 
asked,  how  by  the  unqualified  statement  (that  the  Brah- 
man is)  advitlya  for  without  a  second,)  the  negation  merely 
of  any  other  cause  (than  the  Brahman)  is  made  out,  (it  is 
said  thus  in  reply) : — The  Brahman,  who  is  desirous  of  creat- 
ing, is  the  material  cause  of  the  world,  as  declared  in  the 
passage—  "  Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was  in  the 
beginning" — [C/thand.  Up.  VI.  2.  i.].  And  in  accordance 
with  the  very  nature  of  the  production  of  effects,  some 
other  cause  (than  the  material  one)  is  also  then  naturally 
thought  of  in  the  mind,  and  that,  consequently,  the  word 
advitlya  negatives  only  that  (other  cause).  Indeed,  if  it 
be  taken  that  all  things  (other  than  the  essential  Brahman) 
are  negatived  (by  the  use  of  that  word  aduitiyq),  eternity 

1$ 


H4  SRi-BulSHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

and  other  qualities  which  are  accepted  by  you,  and 
which  you  desire  to  establish  (in  regard  to  the  Brahman], 
would  also  be  thus  negatived.  In  the  present  instance, 
the  rule  7  7  which  enforces  faith  in  all  the  recensions  of  the 
Vedas  produces  results  contrary  to  what  you  desire  ;  be- 
cause, omniscience  and  other  qualities  mentioned  in  all 
the  recensions  of  the  Vedas  in  relation  to  what  forms 
the  cause  of  the  world,  have,  (in  accordance  with  that  rule) 
to  be  brought  together  here.  Hence,  it  is  understood,  even 
from  the  nature  of  the  passages  relating  to  (the  Brahman 
as)  the  cause  of  the  world,  that  it  is  the  qualified  thing  alone 
which  is  declared  in  the  passage — "The  Brahman  is 
Existence,  Knowledge,  Infinity."  \_Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.j. 
Moreover,  there  does  not  thus  arise  any  contradiction  of 
the  passages  which  describe  the  Brahman  as  being  free  from 
attributes,  because  these  passages  such  as,  "(He  is)  without 

attributes without  taint"— [Adh.  Up.  68.],     "(He  is) 

without  parts,  without  actions,  tranquilled" — [Svet.  Up. 
VI.  19.],  and  others,  deal  with  qualities  which  appertain  to 
prakriti  (i.  c.  nature),  and  which  (therefore)  deserve  to  be 
rejected  (in  any  description  of  the  Brahman). 

Those  scriptural  texts  also,  which  maintain  that  the 
essential  nature  of  the  Brahman  is  pure  unqualified  intelli- 
gence, declare  that  that  Brahman  has,  fat  the  same  time), 
the  essential  nature  of  intelligence.  By  this  much  (it  is  not 
meant)  that  pure  unqualified  intelligence  which  is  devoid 
of  attributes  is  alone  the  reality  ;  because  he  who  is  the 
knower  can  alone  possess  the  essential  nature  of  intelligence. 
Indeed,  it  has  been  already  stated  that  it  is  proper  for  him 
alone  who  is  of  the  essential  nature  of  intelligence,  to 
be  the  seat  of  intelligence  ;  analogously  to  the  case  of 

77.  Vide  supra  p.  40.  n.  32. 


Adhik.  1.  Silt.  /.]        SRi-BHlSHYA.  115 

gems,  of  the  sun,  of  lampflames,  &c.,  (which,  being  them- 
selves of  the  nature  of  the  luminous  element  tejas,  are  also 
the  seat  of  luminosity).  Indeed,  all  the  scriptural  texts 
declare  (in  relation  to  the  Brahmaii)  that  He  is  undoubted- 
ly the  knower. 

The  following  and  other  scriptural  passages  declare  that 
auspicious  qualities,  like  the  quality  of  being  the  knower, 
are  natural  to  the  Brahman  who  is  Himself  of  the  essential 
nature  of  intelligence,  and  also  that  (the  Brahman),  is  (at 
the  same  time),  destitute  of  all  such  qualities  as  deserve 
to  be  rejected  : — "  He  who  understands  all  and  who  knows 
all  "—[Mund.  Up.  I.  i.  9.];  "  It  thought" —\Qihand.  U'p. 
VI.  2.  3.];  "This  same  deity  thought" — [Qihdnd.  Up. 
VI  3.  2.];  "  He  thought — may  I  create  the  worlds  " — [Ail. 
Up.  I.  i.];  "The  Eternal  among  the  eternals,  the  Intelligent 
among  the  intelligent,  who,  though  One,  fulfils  the  desires 
of  the  many" — \Kath.  Up.V.-i^.  &  Svel.  Up.  VI.  13.]; 
"  The  two  unborn,  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent, 
(are)  the  Lord  and  the  non-lord" — [Svct.  Up.  I.  9.];  "May 
we  know  that  highest  adorable  God  who  is  the  ruler  of 
the  worlds,  who  is  the  greatest  Lord  being  the  highest 
of  Lords,  who  is  the  highest  Deity  among  deities, 
and  who  is  the  highest  Protector  among  protectors. 
He  has  neither  the  body  nor  the  senses  and  organs, 
and  there  is  seen  neither  His  equal  nor  His  superior. 
His  supreme  power  is  revealed,  indeed,  as  varied,  natural, 
and  as  consisting  of  knowledge,  strength,  and  action."- 
\_Svet.  Up.  VI.  7  &  8.] ;  "  This  Self  is  devoid  of  sin,  is  free 
from  old  age,  free  from  death,  free  from  sorrow,  free  from 
hunger,  free  from  thirst,  and  desires  the  truth  and  wills  the 
truth."—  [Qthand.  Up.  VIII.  i.  5.  £  VIII.  7.  i  £3.].  In 
the  portion  beginning  with  '  devoid  of  sin  '  and  ending 
with  'free  from  thirst/  this  (last)  passage  negatives  (in 


ill 


SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  L  Part.  1. 


relation  to  the  Brahman)  all  evil  qualities ;  and  then  it 
mentions  the  auspicious  qualities  of  the  Brahman  by 
means  of  the  expressions  "  desires  the  truth,"  and  "  wills 
the  truth";  and  in  itself  it  (thus)  discriminates  between 
the  meaning  of  the  passages  which  deal  with  the  Brahman 
as  unqualified  and  that  of  passages  which  deal  with  the 
Brahman  as  qualified.  Therefore  there  is  no  contradiction 
between  the  passages  which  speak  of  the  Brahman  as  qua- 
lified and  again  as  unqualified,  and  it  can  not  hence  be 
suspected  in  the  least  that  either  (of  those  two  sets  of 
passages)  depends  upon  and  relates  to  unreality. 

This  scriptural  passage   (from  the  Taiitiriya-Upanishad , 
viz.  II.  8  &  9.  Annvakas)  78  begins  by  describing  the  auspi- 


78.  The  Atiuvakas  here  referred  to  run 
as  follows  : — ''  'Through  fear  of  Him 
the  wind  blows  ;  through  that  fear 
the  sun  rises  ;  through  fear  of  Him 
fire  and  Indra  (perform  their  duties), 
and  Death  runs  as  the  fifth.'  Now, 
what  follows  is  an  enquiry  into  (the 
nature  of)  bliss : — Let  there  be  a. 
young  man,  noble  and  well  versed  in 
the  Vet/as,  very  quick  and  active,  firm 
and  strong,  and  let  the  whole  of  this 
earth  full  of  wealth  belong  to  him,  that 
is  the  unit  of  human  bliss,  and  like- 
wise of  the  sage  who  has  a  sure  foot- 
ing in  the  fWr/s,  (and  has  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Brahman),  and  is  free 
from  desires.  One  hundred  times 
that  human  bliss  is  the  unit  of  the 
bliss  of 'human'  Gandharvas,  and  like- 
wise of  the  sage  who  has  a  sure  foot- 
ing in  the  Vedas  and  is  free  from  de- 
sires. One  hundred  limes  that  bliss 
of  'human'  Gandharvas  is  the  unit  of 
the  bliss  of  'divine'  Gandharvab  and 


likewise  of  the  sage  who  has  a  sure 
footing  in  the  Vedas  and  is  free  from 
desires.  One  hundred  times  that 
bliss  of  'divine'  Gandharvas  is  the 
unit  of  the  bliss  of  the  Fitris  who 
have  acquired  long-enduring  worlds, 
and  (it  is)  likewise  (the  unit)  of  the 
sage  who  has  a  sure  footing  in  the 
Vedas  and  is  free  from  desires.  One 
hundred  times  that  bliss  of  the  Pitris 
who  have  acquired  long-enduring 
worlds  is  the  unit  of  the  bliss  of  the 
Devas  born  in  the  world  known  as 
"Ajana,  and  (it  is)  likewise  (the  unit 
of  the  bliss)  of  the  sage  who  has  a 
sure  footing  in  the  Vedas  and  is  free 
from  desires.  One  hundred  times 
that  bliss  of  the  Devas  born  in  the 
world  known  as  Ajiina  is  the  unit  of 
the  bliss  of  the  gods  known  as 
Karma-devas  who  have  become  gods 
(Devas)  through  (the  performance  of 
sacrificial)  acts,  and  (it  is)  likewise 
(the  unit)  of  the  sage  who  has  a  sure 


Adhik.  I.  Sul.  i.]      SRi-BnlsHYA. 


117 


cious  qualities  of  the  Brahwan,s'dymg  "Through  fear  of  Him, 
the  wind  blows";  then  it  speaks  of  the  unsurpassable  bliss  of 
the  kshetrajna  (or  the  soul),  in  a  regular  order  of  increasing 
succession,  saying — "That  which  is  a  hundred  times,  &c."; 
and  then  it  declares  with  very  great  regard  the  infinitude 
of  the  auspicious  qualities  of  the  Brahman,  saying — "Who- 
ever knows  the  bliss  of  that  Brahman,  without  being  able 
to  attain  whom  speech  returns  with  the  mind,  &c." 

The  passage  which  makes  known  the  result  of  the 
worship  of  the  Brahman,  viz.  Sosnutc  sarvdn  kdmdn  saha 
Brahmand  vipaschitd — \_Taitt.  Up.  II.  "i.  i.],  speaks  also 
of  the  infinitude  of  the  qualities  possessed  by  the  Highest 
Brahman  who  is  intelligent.  (The  prose  order  of  this  sentence 
runs  thus) — Vipaschitd  Brahmand  saha  sarvdn  kdmdn 
samasnutc.  The  word  kdma  is  derived  from  the  root  ka m  to 


footing  in  the  Vedas  and  is  free  from 
desires.  One  hundred  times  that 
bliss  of  the  gods  known  as  Karma- 
deras  is  the  unit  of  the  bliss  of  the 
(original)  Devas  (to  whom  alone  sacri- 
fices are  offered)  and  (it  is)  likewise 
(the  unit)  of  the  sage  who  has  a  sure 
fooling  in  the  Vedas  and  is  free  from 
desires.  One  hundred  times  that 
bliss  of  the  (original)  Devas  is  the 
unit  of  the  bliss  of  Indra,  and  like- 
wise of  the  sage  who  has  a  sure 
footing  in  the  Vedas  and  is  free  from 
desires.  One  hundred  times  that 
bliss  of  Indra  is  the  unit  of  the  bliss 
of  Brihaspati  and  likewise  of  the  sage 
who  has  a  sure  footing  in  the  Vedas 
and  is  free  from  desires.  One  hund- 
red times  that  bliss  of  Brihaspati  is 
the  unit  of  the  bliss  of  Prajapati  and 
likewise  of  the  sage  who  has  u  suic 


footing  in  the  Vedas  and  is  free  from 
desires.  One  hundred  times  that 
bliss  of  Prajapati  is  the  unit  of  the 
bliss  of  the  Brahman,  and  likewise 
of  the  sage  who  has  a  sure  footing  in 
the  Vedas  and  is  free  from  desires.  He 
who  is  in  i\\z  punis/ia  and  He  who  is 
also  in  the  sun,  (both)  are  one  and  the 
same  Being.  He  who  knows  this,  after 
departing  from  this  world,  reaches  the 
Self  which  consists  of  'food,'  reaches 
the  Self  which  consists  of  vitality, 
reaches  the  Self  which  consists  of 
mind,  reaches  the  Self  which  con- 
sists of  understanding,  and  reaches 
(finally)  the  Self  which  consists  of 
bliss.  Accordingly,  the  following  sloka 
is  given  : — '  Whoever  knows  the  bliss 
of  the  Brahman,  without  being  able 
to  attain  whom,  speech  returns  with 
the  mijid,  he  need  notfcur  anything."' 


iiS  SRI-BHISHYA.       [Chap.  1.  Part.  L 

covet  and  means  that  which  is  covetable,  /.  c.  auspicious 
qualities.  The  meaning  (of  the  passage  accordingly)  is  that 
he  (the  successful  worshipper)  attains  along  with  the  (intelli- 
gent) Brahman  all  those  (auspicious)  qualities.  The  word 
'  with  '7  9  (is  used)  to  bring  out  prominently  the  (possession 
of)  qualities  (by  the  Brahman],  as  it  is  brought  out  in  con- 
nection with  the  Dahara-vidyd  8  y  viz.  "What  exists  within 
that  (small  space  inside  the  heart),  that  has  to  be  sought 
after."  [Qi/iand.  LTp.  -VIII.  i.  i.].  That,  between  wor- 
ship and  its  result,  there  is  a  similarity  of  nature,  is  proved 
conclusively  by  the  scriptural  passage  which  says. — "  Of 
whatever  nature  a  man's  worship  is  in  this  world,  of  that 
same  nature  that  man  becomes  after  death."  \_Ctih  and. 
Up.  III.  14.  i.]. 

If  it  be  said  that  by  means  of  the  passage — "  He  who 
is  of  opinion  (that  the  Brahman]  is  unknown, — to  him  (the 

Brahman]  is  known to  those  who  know  well,  (He) 

is  unknown  " — [Ken.  Up.  II.  3.],  the  Brahman  is  declared 
to  form  no  object  of  knowledge,  it  is  replied  that  in  such 
a  case  there  ought  not  to  be  any  teaching  to  the  effect  that 
final  release  results  from  knowledge,  as  (it  is  found  declared) 
in  the  following  passages  : — •"  He  who  knows  the  Brahman 
attains  the  Highest"- [Taitt.  Up.  II.  1. 1.],  "He  who  knows 
the  Brahman  becomes  the  Brahman  indeed  " — \JMund.  Up. 
III.  2.  9.].  The  scriptural  passage — "  Whoever  knows  the 
Brahman  as  non-existent,  he  becomes  non-existent  indeed. 

79.  Vide  Pdnini.  II.  3.  19.  meditated  upon  is  declared  in  the  con- 
So.  Dahara-vidyd  is  that  vidyd  or  text  to  be  the  '  Self  who  is  devoid  of 
form  of  worshipping  the  Supreme  sin,  is  free  from  old  age,  free  from 
Brahman,  which  consists  in  medi-  death,  free  from  sorrow,  free  from 
tating  on  Him  as  dwelling  in  the  hunger,  free  from  thirst,  and  desires 
small  etherial  space  within  the  heart.  the  truth  and  wills  the  truth.'  Vide 
In  connection  with  this  rii/ya  or  form  also  M.  Ndr.  X.  7.  &  XI.  7. 
of  worship,  the  Brahman  who  Jus  to  be 


Adhik.  I.  Snt.  /.]     SRI-BHISHYA.  119 

Whoever  knows  the  Brahman  as  existent,  him,  therefore, 
they  know  as  existing" — -[Taitt.  Up.  II.  6.  i.] — speaks  of 
the  destruction  of  the  self  and  the  continuance  of  the  self  as 
resulting  (respectively)  from  the  non-existence  and  the  exist- 
ence of  that  knowledge  the  object  of  which  is  the  Brahman. 
Therefore  all  the  scriptural  texts  enjoin  only  that  knowledge 
which  relates  to  the  Brahman,  for  the  purpose  of  attain- 
ing final  release.  And  the  knowledge  (so  enjoined)  is  of 
the  nature  of  worship,  and  it  has  been  already  stated  that 
the  object  of  such  worship  is  the  Brahman  who  is  possessed 
of  attributes.  In  the  passage — "  Without  being  able  to  at- 
tain Him,  speech  returns  with  the  mind  " — [Taitt.  Up.  II. 
9.  i.] — it  is  declared  that  the  Brahman  is  infinite,  is 
possessed  of  innumerable  attributes,  and  is  incapable  of 
being  measured  by  speech  and  mind  as  possessing  any  defi- 
nite magnitude  ;  and  then  it  is  said  of  those,  who  suppose 
that  they  have  any  definite  knowledge  of  the  Brahman  to 
the  effect  that  the  Brahman  is  of  such  and  such  magni- 
tude, that  they  do  not  know  the  Brahman  well  and  have 
no  correct  opinion  (of  the  Brahman],  because  the  Brahman 
is  immeasurable.  Otherwise,  in  the  passage — "  He  who 
is  of  opinion  that  (the  Brahman)  is  unknown — to  him  (the 

Brahman)  is  known to  those  who  know  well,  (He)  is 

unknown." — [Ken.  Up.  II.  3.],  the  statement  about  (the 
Brahman)  being  rightly  made  out  and  (the  Brahman}  be- 
ing well  known  would  meet  with  contradiction  in  that  very 
same  context. 

It  has  been  stated8 '  —by  the  Pfirvapakshins — that  the 
scriptural  passage — "(Thou  shalt)  not  ^see)  the  seer  of  the 
sight,  nor  (think)  the  thinker  of  the  thought."  [Brih.  Up. 
III.  4.  2.],  negatives  the  seer  and  the  knower  as  distinct 

8l.  Vide  supra  p.  28, 


120  SRl-BHiSHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part,  I. 

from  sight  and  knowledge.  This  (objection)  is  invalidated  by 
understanding  that  what  the  passage  teaches  is  as  follows  :- 
"Understand  that  it  is  only  fallacious  reasoning  which  arrives 
at  the  conclusion  that  the  knower  has  the  essential  nature 
of  ignorance,  on  the  ground  that  his  quality  of  sentiency 
is  of  an  accidental  character  ;  and  then,  do  not  look  upon, 
and  do  not  think  of,  the  self  as  such  (in  reality),  but  look 
upon  the  self,  who  is  the  seer  and  the  knower,  as  being 
also  surely  of  the  nature  of  sight  and  knowledge."  Or  the 
meaning  of  the  passage  is  this  : — •"  Set  aside  the  individual 
self  who  is  the  seer  of  sight  and  the  knower  of  knowledge 
and  then  worship  the  Highest  Self  alone  who  is  the  Soul 
within  all  beings."  Otherwise,  there  will  be  the  contradic- 
tion of  the  following  and  other  scriptural  passages  (relating 
to  the  Brahman)  as  the  knower : — "  My  dear  one,  by  what 
means  has  one  to  know  the  knower?"  [Brih.  Up.  II. 
4.  14.]. 

What  has  been  urged8 2-by  the  Pftrvapakshins—tQ  the 
effect  that  from  the  passage — "The  Brahman  is  bliss." 
[Taill.  Up.  III.  6.  i.],  the  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman 
is  (made  out  to  be)  pure  bliss, — that  is  met  by  saying 
that  this  passage  declares  the  essential  nature  of  the 
Brahman,  who  is  the  seat  of  knowledge,  to  be  knowledge 
(itself).  Indeed,  that  conscious  state  which  is  agreeable 
is  said  to  be  bliss.  The  meaning  of  the  scriptural  passage— 
"The  Brahman  is  intelligence,  bliss  "-  [Brih.  Up.  III.  9. 
28.],  is  that  that  state  of  consciousness  which  is  of  the  nature 
of  bliss  is  alone  the  Brahman.  Hence,  also,  results  that 
uniform  homogeneity  of  nature  (in  relation  to  the  Brahman) 
which  is  advocated  by  you.  It  has  been  already  stated 
that,  in  regard  to  this  Brahman,  the  true  nature  of  which 

83.  Vide  supra  p.  28, 


AdJuk.  1.  Sui.  /.]     SRI-BHISHYA.  121 

is  intelligence  itself,  the  quality  of  being  the  knower  also 
is  undoubtedly  established  by  hundreds  of  scriptural  texts. 
In  the  same  manner,  by  means  of  these   distinct   state- 
ments also— "That  is  the  unit  of  the  bliss  of  the  Brahman" - 
[Taitt.  Up.  II.  8.  13.],  and"  Whoever  knows  the  bliss  of  the 
Brahman,  £e.,"     [Taitt.  Up.  II.  9.  i.],  (it  is  established 
that)  the  Brahman  is  not  mere  bliss,  but  is  the  blissful 
One.    To  be  the  Knower  is/indeed,  to  be  the  blissful  One. 
Again,  it  has  been  affirmed83  that  the  negation  of  dis- 
tinctions (in  regard  to  the  Brahman]  is  asserted  in  various 
ways  in  the  following  passages  : — "  But  where   there  is 
duality,  as  it  were,"- [Brih.  Up.  II.  4.  14.  tS:  IV.  5.  15.]  ; 
"  There  is  nothing  here  that  is   many  and   varied.     He 
who  sees  this  world,  as  though  it  were  manifold,  obtains 
death   from    death." —-[Brih.    Up,  IV.  4.    19.     &  Kath. 
Up.  IV.    10.]  ;     "  But   where    to  one   all  this   becomes 
the    Self,    there    who     shall    see    whom    by    what  ?"— 
[Brih.  Up.  II.  4.    14.  &  IV.  5.  15.].     This  (objection)  is 
invalidated  when  it  is  made  out  that  the  whole  universe, 
which  is  the  effect  of  the  Brahman  and  has  that  (Brahman) 
for  its  internal  ruler,  is  one  with  (the  Brahman  Himself) 
in  as  much  as  it  has  that  (Brahman]  for  its  Self,  and  that 
the  manifoldness    contrary  to  that  (oneness)   is  what  is 
negatived  in  those  (passages)  ;  but  that  other  manifoldness 
of  the   Brahman    which   is  grounded    upon  His    volition 
to  be  born  as  many,  in  accordance   with  the  scriptural 
passage     "  May  I  become  manifold  and  be  born"—  [Tail I. 
L"p.  II.  6.  i.  &  Qihdnd.   Up.  VI.  2.  3.],  and  which  (mani- 
foldness) is  (again)  well  established  by  the  scripture,— that 
is  not  negatived.     If  it  be  said   that,  by  reason   of  the 
negation    of  manifoldness,  all   this   (scriptural    authority) 

83.   Vide  supra  p.  28. 


122  SRI-BHISHYA.  [Chap.   /.    Part.    I. 

relates  to  things  which  are  unreal;  then  it  is  replied  that  it 
is  not  so  ;  because,  after  predicating  in  relation  to  the 
Brahman  such  manifoldness  as  cannot  be  made  out  by  per- 
ception and  all  the  other  means  of  proof,  and  as  is  difficult  of 
realisation,  to  say  that  that  same  thing  (viz.  manifoldness) 
is  negatived  (in  relation  to  the  Brahman)- -this  is  indeed 
matter  for  laughter. 

It  has  been  stated8  4  that  in  accordance  with  the  passage 
— "  For,  whenever  he  perceives  in  Him  even  the  smallest 
distinction,  then  there  is  fear  for  him  "  [Taitl.  Up.  II.  7. 
i.],  fear  comes  to  him  who  sees  manifoldness  in  the  Brah- 
man. This  is  wrong  ;  because  the  .continued  meditation 
of  the  manifoldness  of  that  (Brahman)  is  taught  to  be  the 
means  of  tranquillity  in  the  following  passage:  "Let  a  man 
meditate,  having  been  tranquilled  by  the  knowledge-  -'All 
this  indeed  is  the  Brahman;  all  this  is  born  in  It,  is  absorbed 
into  It,  and  lives  in  It.'"  [Qihdnd.  Up.  III.  14.  i.].  Accord- 
ingly, here  (in  this  passage),  tranquillity  is  taught  to  result 
from  the  continued  meditation  of  the  fact  that  it  (viz.  the 
world)  has  that  (Brahman}  for  its  Self,  in  as  much  as  the 
work  of  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  proceed  from 
Him  in  regard  to  the  whole  world.  Therefore,  the  conti- 
nued meditation  of  the  fact  that  the  world  which  is  full  of 
differentiations  owing  to  the  varieties  of  gods,  animals, 
men,  immoveable  objects,  and  other  things  that  are  (all) 
really  existent  (therein),  has  the  Brahman  for  its  Self, 
forms  the  cause  of  tranquillity  ;  and  is  hence  the  cause  of 
the  attainment  of  fearlessness ;  and  so  there  can  be  no  room 
to  suppose  that  it  (viz.  such  meditation)  forms  the  cause 
of  any  fear.  If  so,  it  may  be  asked,  why  it  is  declared - 
"  Then  there  is  fear  for  him."  [Taitt.  Up.  II.  7.  i.].  To  this 

84.  Vide  supra  p.  28. 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  /.]      SRI-BHISHYA.  123 

it  is  replied  thus  : — When  that  support  in  the  Brahman 
which,  in  the  passage — "  For,  indeed,  when  he  obtains 
fearless  support  in  that  which  is  invisible,  incorporeal, 
indefinable,  homeless,  then  he  obtains  fearlessness."- 
\_Taitt.  L7p.ll.  7.  i.],  is  declared  to  be  the  cause  of  fearless- 
ness, is  interrupted,  then  there  results  fear.  To  the  same 
effect  it  is  declared  by  the  great  sages  in  the  following 
and  other  passages  : — "  If  Vusudeva  is  not  meditated  upon 
(at  least)  for  the  short  interval  of  a  mnhilrta  83  or  even 
lor  a  mere  moment,  that  is  loss,  that  is  great  weakness, 
that  is  illusion,  and  that  is  unnatural  activity."80  The  (word) 
anlara  (which  is  in  the  first  passage  quoted  above)  means 
breach  of  continuity  in  the  meditation  that  has  its  support 
in  the  Brahman,  and  is  indeed  its  interruption.8" 

It  has  been  urged  8S  that,  in  the  aphorism  begin- 
ning with-  "Not  even  on  account  of  the  peculiarity  of 
situation  "—  [  Ved.  Silt.  III.  2.  1 1.],  he  (the  Stlirakdra)  men- 

85.  A  Mii/iiirla  is  one-thirtielli  p;irt  S;.  'I  he  passage  from    the  7'aiftirf- 
of  a  day  i.e.  a   period  of  48  minutes,  \a-L~panishad  [II.   7-    !•],  which,   ac- 
a  day  being  equal  to  24  hours.     It  is  cording   to   the  Adivaitins,   negatives 
however   used  to    denote   any  short  manifoldness  in  relation  to  the  lirah- 
space  of  time.  man  is  interpreted  by  them  thus  : — 

86.  This  passage,  in  all  probability,  "  For  whenever  he  perceives  in  Him 
occurs  in  more    than   one    Vais/ntava  even  the  smallest  distinction,  then,  in- 
Pnraiia,  and   is    to  be   found   in    the  deed,    there    is   fear  for  him."     Here 
following  form  in    the    Garuda-Purd-  the  word  anlara  is  understood  to  mean 
na  : — Sd  hcinih  tat  mahat  chhidramsa  distinction.       But      Ramanuja     takes 
cjia  andhajadamiikata  \  yat  mu/uli-lain  ihis   same    word    to    mean    brtach   of 
kshaiiam  vdapi    '\dsudevah  na  cjtint-  continuity    or   interruption,   and   inter- 
yate\  [CCXXX1V.  23.].  "If  Vasude-  prets  the  passage  thus  : — "  For  when- 
va  is  not  meditated  upon   (at   least)  ever  he  causes  the   smallest   intermp- 
for  the  short   interval   of  a   inuhurtti  lion   in    the   meditation   that  i.>  based 
or  even   for  a.  mere  moment,  that  is  on    Him,   then   indeed   there  is  fear 
loss,  that  is  great  weakness,  and  that  for  him." 

is  blindness,  dullness  and  dumbness."          88.  Vide  supra  p.  28. 


124  SRi-BHASHYA.        [Chap.  L  Part.  I. 

tions  the  Brahman  to  be  devoid  of  all  attributes.  This  is 
not  so  ;  because  there  lie  speaks  of  the  Brahman  as  being 
undoubtedly  possessed  of  attributes.  And  it  has  been  said 
that  in  the  aphorism  beginning  with — "  But  it  is  a  mere 
illusion  "-— [  I fed.  Sut,  III.  2.  3.],  the  objects  experienced  in 
dreams  also  are  declared  to  be  mere  illusions,  because  they 
are  different  from  the  things  which  are  experienced  in 
the  wakeful  state.  But  therein,  he  (the  Sulrakard}  says 
that  they  also,  like  the  objects  experienced  in  the  wakeful 
state,  possess  the  characteristics  of  reality. 

What  has  been  asserted  89  to  the  effect  that,  in  the 
Smrilis  and  \\\ePurdnas  also,  pure  intelligence  alone,  which 
is  devoid  of  attributes,  is  taught  to  be  real  while  all  else- 
is  unreal,  —that  (again)  is  incorrect. 

"  Whoever  knows  Me  as  the  unborn,  as  the  begin- 
ningless,  as  the  great  Lord  of  the  world  "-— -[Z?.  G.  X.  3.]. 
"All  beings  abide  in  Me  and  I  do  not  abide  in  them. 
And  the  beings  do  not  also  abide  in  Me.  See  my 
sovereign  glory  and  power.  The  protector  of  all  beings, 
I  do  not  abide  in  beings.  My  will  is  the  producing 
cause  of  all  beings."  [B.  G.  IX.  4  &  5.]-  "I  am 
the  source  as  well  as  the  destruction  of  the  whole  world. 
O  Dhananjaya  ;  there  is  nothing  else  higher  than  Me.  All 
this  (creation)  is  strung  on  Me  like  a  number  of  gems 
on  a  thread."  [B.  G.  VII.  6  £  7.].  "I  stand  support- 
ing the  whole  world  by  a  small  part  (of  my  power)." 
[B.  G.  X.  42.].  "The  Highest  Person  is  another  ;  and  He 
is  called  the  Highest  Self  who,  having  entered  the  three 
worlds  as  the  Imperishable  Lord,  supports  (them).  Be- 
cause I  transcend  the  destructible  and  am  also  superior  to 
the  indestructible,  therefore  am  I  celebrated  in  the  world 

89.  Vide  sn/ira  pp.  29  \  30, 


Adhik.  I.  Silt,  i.}      SRI-BHA.SHYA.  125 

and  in  the  Vcdas  as  the  Highest  Person."  [/?.  G.  XV.  17. 
cS:  1 8.].  "O  sage!  He  (\r/..  the  Lord)  transcends  the 
/»m/T///9°  (which  forms  the  natural  and  material  founda- 
tion) of  all  beings,  (transcends)  all  its  modifications,91  all 
the  blemishes  (arising  out)  of  its  qualities.92  He,  who  is 
the  Self  of  all,  has  passed  beyond  all  veils,93  and  by  Him  is 
pervaded  all  that  is  within  the  inside  of  the  universe.  He 
is  of  that  nature  which  is  characterised  by  all  the  auspicious 
qualities  ;  He  has,  by  a  small  part  of  His  own  powers, 
held  up  the  whole  creation ;  He  assumes  at  His  will  any 
desirable  and  worthy  form,  and  He  htfs  accomplished  the 
good  of  the  whole  world.  He  is  the  one  collection  of 
splendour,  strength,  sovereignty,  great  powers  of  know- 
ledge, excellent  heroism,  and  other  such  qualities.  He  is 
high  among  the  highest,  and  in  Him,  who  is  the  Lord  of  the 
higher  and  the  lower,  are  never  found  the  afflictions  and  all 
other  such  undesirable  things.  He  is  the  Lord  in  the 
individual  form  and  also  in  the  form  of  the  totality  ; 
He  has  an  unmanifest  nature  and  also  a  manifest  nature. 
He  is  the  Lord  of  all,  the  Seer  of  all,  the  Knower  of  all. 
He  possesses  all  powers,  and  is  known  as  the  highest 
Lord.  That,  by  means  of  which  that  Brahman  who  is 
devoid  of  all  evil,  pure,  high,  devoid  of  all  blemishes 
and  is  of  one  form,  is  either  seen  or  attained — that 

90.  This  is  the  Arvatla  which  i.s  that  organs    of  activity,     the    mind,    the 

state  of  primordial    nature    that   ini-  gross  elements    and    the  subtle  ele- 

niediately  precedes    the    evolution  of  mcnts. 

the    various  constituent  elements  of  92.  These  are:  fi)  Sa/fra,   the  quu- 

the   universe.  lity  of  goodness  ;  (2)   Rajas,  the  qua- 

(jl  These  'modifications'  arc  the  con-  lily  of  passion  ;  (3)  Tantas,  the  quali- 

stituent  principles  of  the  universe  such  ty  of  darkness. 

as  the  Mahal  or  the  'great  principle',  93.   These  'veils'  arc:  flj  Karma  or 

the     A/iaiik,fi-ii  or    the    principle    of  ignorance,     (2)      \'il>anti    or    'innate 

cgoity,   the  organs  of  perception,  the  impressions.'  &c. 


126  SRI-BHASHYA.       {Chap.  I.  Part.  1. 

is  called  knowledge  and  all  else  (is  called)  ignorance." 
[V.  P.  VI.  5.  82  to  87.].  "O  Maitreya!  The  word 
Bhagavat  (Divine  Lord,)  is  used  to  denote  the  High- 
est Brahman  who  is  pure  and  is  well  known  as  the  pos- 
sessor of  great  sovereignty,  and  is  the  cause  of  all  caus- 
es. The  syllable  bha  is  associated  with  two  meanings, 
vix.  that  He  makes  all  materials  ready  (Tor  creation),  and 
that  He  is  the  upholder.  Similarly,  the  meaning  of  the 
syllable  ga,  O  sage,  is,  that  He  is  the  leader  (/.  c.  the  pre- 
server), the  destroyer,  and  the  creator.  Bhaga  (which  is 
made  up  of  these  two  syllables)  is  an  affirmation  (in  rela- 
tion to  Him)  of  the  (following) ,  six  (qualities)  in  their  en- 
tirety, namely,  sovereignty,  heroism,  renown,  glory,  know- 
ledge and  dispassion.  The  meaning  of  the  syllable  va  is  to 
the  effect  that  all  beings  abide  in  Him,  who  is  the  Self  of 
all  beings  and  is  also  the  Self  of  all,  and  that  He  (abides ) 
in  all  beings  and  is  therefore  imperishable.  Knowledge, 
power,  strength,  sovereignty,  heroism,  splendour — all  these 
are  fully  expressed  by  the  word  Bhagavat  •  only  evil  (un- 
desirable) qualities  and  other  such  things  are  not.  Such,  O 
Maitreya,  is  this  important  word  Bhagavat.  (It  is  applied) 
to  Vasudeva  who  is  the  Highest  Brahman,  and  is  not  appli- 
.cable  to  others.  Here,  this  word,  denotes,  by  convention, 
a  thing  deserving  of  worship,  and  is  not  used  in  its  secondary 
sense ;  elsewhere,  indeed,  it  is  used  in  its  secondary 
sense."  [F.  P.  VI.  5.  72  to  77.].  "Wherever,  O  king, 
all  these  powers94  are  [established,  there  i-<  another  great 
Form  of  the  Lord,  which  is  different  from  His  Universal 
Form,  He,  out  of  His  own  playfulness,  causes  that  (Form 

(34.  These  are    the  three    path's  or  power   of   the   individual    self,    and 

powers,  viz.  the  Vishnu-'sakti  which  is  the  third  power  is  that  which  is  deno- 

the  power  of  Vishnu  and  is  the  high-  ted   by    the   word  avidya.   or  karma. 

ct>t,     the    fCs/ulrajfla-iakti     or      the  Vide    V.  /'.  VI.  f.  Oi  to  70. 


Adhik.  1.'  Sul.  /.]      SRi-BniSHYA.  127 

of  His)  which  is  endowed  with  all  power*,  to  become  act- 
ively  manifest  under  the  names  of  gods,  animals,  and  men. 
That  (activity)  is  (intended)  for  the  good  of  the  worlds  and 
is  not  produced  by  means  of  karma  (/.  c.  the  effect  of  works 
operating  upon  Him).     The  activity  of  that  unknowable 
(Brahman)  is  all-pervading  and  is  of  an  irresistible  nature." 
[K  P.  VI.  7.  70  to  72.].     "The   highest   abode    called 
Vishnu  is,  in  this  manner,  stainless,  eternal,  all-pervading, 
imdecaying  and  free  from  all  evil."     [F.  P.  I.  22.  53.]. 
"The  Supreme  Self  is  high  among  those  that  are  high  and  is 
the  highest ;  and  is  firmly  established  in  the  self  (of  all  be- 
ings) and  is  devoid  of  the  defining  attributes  of  form,  co- 
lour, &c.   He  is  free  from  waste,  destruction,  modification, 
growth,  and  birth  and  is  capable  of  being  spoken  of  abso- 
lutely as  that  which  always  is.     Because  He  abides  every- 
where and  all  things  abide  in  Him,  therefore  He  is  called 
Vasudeva  by  the  learned.     That  Brahman  is  the  highest,  is 
eternal,  unborn,  indestructible,  imperishable  and  is  always 
of  one  nature,  and  is  pure  through  the  absence  of  evil.    That 
alone  is  all  this  and  is  possessed  of  a  manifest  and  an  un- 
manifest  nature.     Moreover,  It  exists  in  the  form  of  Purii- 
sha  (or  Person)  as  well  as  in  the  form  of  Time."     [  V.  P.  I. 
2.  10  to' 14.].     "The  praknli  (/.  <>.  nature)  which  has  been 
spoken  of  by  me  as  possessing  a  manifest  and  an  unman  ifest 
nature,  and  the  pnnisha  (/.  e.  the  self),  are,  both  of  them, 
absorbed  into  the  Highest  Self.    And  the  Highest  Self  is 
the  support  of  all,  and  is  the  Highest  Lord.    He  is  celebra- 
ted under  the  name  of  Vishnu  in  the   Vcdas  and  in  the 
Vedanta."      \_V.P.  VI.  4.39   CS:  40.].     "That  Brahman 
has  two  forms, viz.  the  embodied  and  the  unembodied.  These 
two  possess  (respectively^  a  destructible  and  an  indestruct- 
ible nature,  and  are  found  to  exist  in  all  beings.     The  inde- 
structible is  that  Highest  Brahman,  the  destructible  is  the 


128-  SRi-BnlSHYA.      \Chap.  I.  Part.  7. 

whole  of  this  world.  The  whole  of  this  world  is  the  mani- 
festation of  the  power  of  the  Supreme  Brahman,  in  that 
same  way  in  which  spreading  light  is  (the  manifestation)  of 
the  fire  located  in  a  particular  spot."  [_V.  P.  I.  22. 
55  t°  57-] •  "  The,  power  of  Vishnu  is  called  the  higher, 
that  known  as  the  kshelrajna**  (/.  c.  the  individual  self),  is, 
similarly,  the  lower  (power).  Another  named  avidva  (igno- 
rance) and  karma  is-said  to  be  the  third  power,  by  which, 
O  king,  the  all-pervading  power  known  as  the  kshetrajila 
is  completely  enveloped.  The:power  known  as  the  kshetra- 
jila  acquires,  on  account  of  its  being  covered  by  that  (avidyd 
or  karma),  all  the  ever-recurring  miseries  belonging  to  the 
circuit  of  mundane  existence,  and  exists  in  all  beings  in  dif- 
ferent degrees,  O  thou,  protector  of  the  earth."  [  V.  P.  VI.  7. 
6 1  to  63.].  "O  thou,  the  most  intelligent  one,  the  mutually 
interrelated  prakriti  and  purusha  (/.  c.  nature  and  soul)  are 
encompassed  by  the  power  of  Vishnu  which  pervades  all 
beings  as  their  Self.  That  same  power  (of  Vishnu)  is  the 

cause    of   their    separation    and    interrelation Just 

as,  from  a  mass  of -water,  the  wind  bears  away  hun- 
dreds of  minute  drops  without  itself  being  moistened  (by 
them),  so  also  is  that  same  power  of  Vishnu  (related)  to 
all  that  is  of  the  nature  si  prakriti  and  puntsha"  [T.  P.  II. 
7.  29  to 3 1.].  "O  thou,  the  best  of  sages,  all  this  world 
above-mentioned  is  undecaying,  eternal  and  is  subject  to  the 
alternations  of  expansion  and  contraction,  birth  and  de- 
struction." [F.  P.  I.  22.  60.]. 

By  means  of  these  and  other  such  passages,  the  Highest 
Brahman  is  (first  of  all)  declared  to  be,  by  nature,  free  from 

95.  The  individual   self  goes    under       hhetra  i.  e.  of  the  material  body,  with 
the    name   of  kshetnijfia,  because,    in     .  which  u  is  associated. 
;hat  condition,  it  is  the  knower  of  vhe 


Adhik.  I.  Sftt.  /.]     SRI-BH.ISHYA.  129 

even  the  smallest  taint  of  all  that  is  evil,  and  to  possess  that 
nature  which  is  characterised  by  all  the  auspicious  qualities, 
and  to  be  engaged,  out  of  free  sportiveness,  in  the  creation, 
preservation,  destruction,  inter-penetration,  control,  &c.,  of 
the  world  ;  and  then  all  the  intelligent  and  non-intelligent 
existences  (in  the  universe),  which  exist  in  all  conditions 
and  are  undoubtedly  real,  are  stated  to  be  of  the  same  form 
as  the  Brahman  owing  to  their  constituting  His  body, 
because  the  words  sarlra]  (embodiment),  rftpa  (form),  tanu 
(bod}'),  am'sa  (part),  sakti  (power),  vibhuti  (glory),  and 
the  like,  are  used  (in  the  above  passages),  and  because  also 
they  are  equated  with  'That'  (viz.  the  Brahman}  ;  and 
then  the  intelligent  thing  (viz.  the  self),  which  forms  the 
glory  of  that  (Brahman},  is  said  to  exist  (freely)  in  its  own 
essential  nature,  and  also  (to  exist)  in  the  form  of  the 
kshctrajiia  owing  to  its  association  with  non-intelligent 
matter ;  and,  (lastly),  it  is  laid  down  that  in  the  condition 
of  the  kshctrajfia  it  (viz.  the  self)  is  veiled  by  the  avidyd 
(or  ignorance)  which  is  of  the  nature  of  meritorious  and 
sinful  actions,  and  that  it  has,  in  consequence,  no  unbroken 
remembrance  of  its  own  natural  condition  as  intelligence, 
but  continuously  thinks  (of  itself)  as  existing  in  the  form 
of  things  which  possess  a  non-intelligent  nature.  Therefore, 
it  is  made  out  that  the  Brahman  is  possessed  of  attributes, 
and  that  the  world  which  is  the  manifestation  of  His  glory 
is  undoubtedly  real  also. 

In    the   passage  -~"  That   in    which   differences   have 
vanished"— [F./*.  VI.  /.~53.]>oc  it  is  declared  that  the  true 

96.  Yida  supra  p.  29,  where  the  trans-  nished,  which  is  pure  existence,  which 

lation  of  this  passage,  in   accordance  is  beyond  the  sphere  of  speech,  which 

with  the  interpretation  of  the   Adwai-  is  self-knowing — That  is  the  Intelli- 

tins,  is  given    in    full    as   follows  : —  gence.  called  Brahman  by  name." 
"  That   in  which  differences  have  va- 


130  SRl-Bn.vSHYA.      [Chap.  L  Par/.  I. 

nature  of  the  self,  even  when  it  is  united  with  particular 
modifications  of  the  prakriti,  such   as  gods,  men,  &c.,  is 
inexpressible  by  words  like  god,  £c.,  which  denote  distinc- 
tions in  relation  to  it,  because  it  is  devoid  of  intrinsic  'dis- 
tinctions ;  and  that  it  is  to  be  defined  as  wholly  consisting 
of  intelligence   and  existence ;   and  that  it  is  self-knowing, 
and  is  invisible  (even)  to  the  mind  of  one  who  has  gone 
through  the  practice  of  yoga  (/.  r.  mental  concentration 
and  meditation).  Therefore,  from  this  (passage)  the  negation 
of  the  world  does  not  follow.     If  it  be    asked,   how  this  is 
arrived  at,  we  reply  that  it  is  thus: — In  the    context97 
(wherein  this  passage  occurs),  yoga  is  stated  to  be  the  only 
remedy  to  bring  about  the   cessation   of   the  circuit  of 
mundane  existence;  then  the  constituent  parts  of  the   yoga 
are   mentioned  up   to  pratyahara  ;08  and  then  with  the 
intention   of  pointing  out   a  good  and  worthy  object   for 
the  purpose  of  accomplishing  dharana**  (or  concentration), 
the  two  forms  of  the  Highest  Brahman  i.  c,  Vishnu,  which 
are  denoted  by  the  word  power — sakti — are  declared  to 
consist  of  the  divisions  of  the  embodied  and  the  unembodied. 
Then  again  the  division  called  the  embodied,   that   is  the 
kshetrajfta,  which  is  associated  with  non-intelligent  matter 
and  is  encircled  by  that  ignorance  (or  avidyd)  which  is  known 
as  karma  and  forms  the  third  power  (of  Vishnu),  is  affirmed 
to  be  bad  and  unworthy  (for  purposes  of  meditation)  on  ac- 
count of  its  being  connected  with  the  three1  °°  (undesirable) 
conceptions  :  afterwards,  the  character  of  being  a  good  and 

97.  Vide    V.  P.  VI.  7.  100.  These  conceptions  are: — (i)thc 

98.  Pratyahara  means  the  withdraw-  conception  that  we  become  the  Brah- 
nl  of  the  senses  from  external  objects.  man  Himself;  (2)  the  conception  that 

99.  DharanT,  means  steady  concen-  we  merely  do  the   work  ;  (3)  the  con- 
tration  of  the  mind  on  a   particular  ception  that  we  become  the  Brahman 
object.  and  do  the  work. 


Adhik.  I.  Stil.  i.]       SRI-BHA.SHYA.  131 

worthy  object  (to  help  concentration)  is  denied  (also)  in  re- 
lation to  the  second  division  called  the  unembodied,  which  is 
devoid  of  ignorance,  is  separate  from  non-intelligent  matter, 
and  is  altogether  of  the  form  of  intelligence,  on  account  of 
its  being  an  object  worthy  to  be  meditated  upon  only  by 
accomplished  yogiiis,  and  on  account  of  its  being  incapable 
oi  proving  a  support  to  the  mind  of  a  beginner  in  yoga,  and 
also  on  account  of  its  being  devoid  of  uncaused  intrinsic 
purity:  (lastly),  the  embodied  (universal)  form  (of  the  Brah- 
mati)  which  is  the  seat  of  His  three  powers,  viz.  the  higher 
power  which  is  this  (above  mentioned)  unembodied  (form 
of  the  self),  the  (other)  lower  power  which  is  the  (self's) 
embodied  form  called  the  kshctrajfta,  and  ignorance  (or 
avidya)  which  is  of  the  nature  of  karma  and  is  known  as 
the  third  power  and  which  forms  the  cause  of  leading  the 
self,  which  is  of  the  nature  of  the  higher  power,  to  assume 
the  condition  of  the  kshetrajfia — (this  embodied  form  of  the 
Brahman]  which  is  peculiar  to  the  Divine  Lord,  and  is 
ascertained  by  means  of  Vcddnta  passages  like—"  He  is  of 
sunlike  lustre."  \Svct.  Up.  III.  8.  &  B.  G.  VIII.  9.]— 10> 
(this)  is  declared  to  be  the  good  and  worthy  object  (for  the 
accomplishment  of  dharana).  In  this  context,  the  passage 
— "  That  in  which  differences  have  vanished  &c. "  [  V.  P. 
VI.  7.  53.],  is  intended  to  show  that  the  self  which  has  the 
pure  unembodied  nature  is  unfit  to  be  a  good  and  worthy 
object  (for  the  accomplishment  of  dharana).  According!}-, 
it  has  been  stated  (in  the  same  work,  viz.  VisJmu-Purana):— 
"O  king!  That  (unembodied  -form  of  the  Lord)  is  not  fit 
to  be  meditated  upon  by  one  who  begins  the  practice  of 
yoga"  [V.  P.  VI.  7.  55].  "The  highest  home  which  is 
the  second  (unembodied  form)  of  Him  who  is  called  Vishnu 

101.  Vide  also  Taitt.  2r.  III.  12.  f. 


132  SRI-BHASHYA.     [Chap.  L  Part.  1. 

is  fit  to  be  meditated  upon  by  yogins Wher- 
ever, O  king,  all  the.se  powers  are  established,  there 
is  another  great  Form  of  the  Lord,  which  is  different 
from  His  Universal  Form".  [V.  P.  VI.  7.  69  &  70.].  In 
the  same  manner,  after  stating  that  the  (four-faced) 
Brahma,  Sanandana,  and  others  who  are  beings  inside 
the  universe,  are  unfit  to  be  good  and  worthy  objects, 
(to  help  concentration)  owing  to  their  being  covered  by 
means  of  ignorance  (or  avidya),  the  character  of  being 
(such  a)  good  and  worthy  object  is  denied  by  the  venerable 
Saunaka  in-  relation  also  to  those  bound  souls  in  whom 
knowledge  is  originated  only  later  on  by  means  of  yoga, 
and  who  have  (thus)  realised  their  true  nature,  for  the 
reason  that  they  are  themselves  devoid  of  uncaused  intrinsic 
purity.  It  is  stated  (by  Saunka)  in  the  following  and  other 
passages  that  the  natural  and  peculiar  form  of  Vishnu,  who 
is  the  Highest  Brahman,  can  alone  be  (such  a)  good  and 
worthy  object  (for  the  accomplishment  oidharana}  : — "Be- 
cause all  living  things  from  Brahma  to  a  clump  of  grass,  that 
are  within  the  world,  are  within  the  grasp  of  the  ever  chang- 
ing circuit  of  mundane  existence  caused  by  karma,  there- 
fore, they  are  not  helpful  in  meditation  to  those  that 
meditate.  Indeed,  they  are  all  in  ignorance  (or  avidya}  and 
are  subject  to  the  ever-recurring  succession  of  births  and 
deaths.  Those  also  in  whom  knowledge  of  truth  is  born  later 
on  are  not  at  all  helpful  in  meditation.  Their  knowledge 
of  truth  is  not  natural  to  them,  because  it  is  derived  from  an- 
other source.  Therefore  that  pure  Brahman  is,  alone,  by 
nature,  full  of  (such)  knowledge."  [  V.  DhS  °  ~  CIV.  23  to  26] . 
Consequently  in  this  passage  (viz.  V.  P.  VI.  7.  53.  "That 

102.  This    Vishnu-Dharma  forms  a       is  said  to  have  been  taught  by  S.iuna- 
portion  of  the  Bfiaris/iyat-Puranx  and       ka. 


Adhik.  L  Silt,  i.]     SRl-BHASHYA.  133 

in  which  differences  have  vanished  ",  &c.,)  the  negation  of 
distinctions  is  not  brought  out. 

Also  in  the  passage — "(I  bow  to  Him  alone)  who  in  real- 
ity is  of  the  nature  of  intelligence,"  &c.,  \V.  P.  I.  2.  6.],1  °s 
unreality  is  not  established  in  relation  to  the  whole  aggre- 
gate of  those  objects  which  are  distinct  from  intelligence,  be- 
cause therein  only  this  much  is  stated,  viz.  that  the  false  ap- 
prehension of  the  self,  which  is  of  the  nature  of  intelligence, 
in  the  form  of  gods,  men,  and  such  other  objects,  is  a  mere 
illusion.  Indeed,  if  it  be  said  that  the  false  apprehension  oi 
the  mother-of-pearl  as  silver  is  an  illusion,  it  does  not 
follow  that  all  the  collection  of  silver  in  the  world  becomes 
thereby  unreal.  There  is  the  appearance  of  unity  between 
the  Brahman  and  the  world  due  to  the  fact  of  their  being 
grammatically  equated  (in  the  sdslras);  and  it  may  be 
urged  that  it  is  an  illusion  to  apprehend,  in  consequence, 
the  Brahman  whose  essential  nature  is  Intelligence,  in  the 
form  of  things  (other  than  Intelligence);  and  if  it  beheld 
that  when  it  is  so  urged,  the  whole  collection  of  things  in 
the  world  would  acquire  the  character  of  falsity,  (it  is  de- 
clared in  reply  that)  that  (opinion)  is  wrong  ;  because, 
that  Vishnu  who  is  the  Highest  Brahman,  who  is  devoid 
of  even  the  smallest  taint  of  all  such  evil  things  as  igno- 
rance and  the  like,  who  is  identified  with  all  the  auspicious 
qualities,  and  is  the  owner  of  great  sovereignty,  is  taught 
in  this  saslra,  and  it  is  thus  impossible  to  have  any  illusory 
vision  in  relation  to  Him.  Moreover,  it  will  be  presently 
established,  that  the  declaration  of  unity  (between  the 

103.  This  passage  has  been  already  gence    and   is   absolutely   pure   (/.  e. 

translated  from   the   stand-point    of  devoid   of  all  attributes),  and   who, 

the  Adwattint  and  is  to  the  following  nevertheless,  exists  in  consequence  of 

effect : — "(I  bow)  to  Him  alone  who  (our)   illusive  vision  in    the  form   of 

in  reality  u  of  the  nature  of   Intclli-  material  objects.''     Vide  supra,  p.  29. 


134  SRI-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  /.  Part.  1. 

Brahman  and  the  world)  resulting  from  the  fact  of 
their  being  equated,  does  not  admit  of  .stultification  and  is 
not  opposed  to  reason.  Therefore  this  passage  also  [viz. 
V.  P.  I.  2.  6.]  does  not  stultify  the  natural  reality  of 
external  objects. 

Accordingly,  from  this  scriptural  passage,  viz.  "  From 
whom  all  these  beings  are  born,  in  whom,  when  born, 
they  live,  and  whom  they  enter  when  they  perish  ;  do  thou 
desire  to  know  that  well;  that  is  the  Brahman"— -[Taitt. 
Up.  III.  i.  i.],  it  may  be  concluded  that  the  cause  of  the 
origin,  &c.,  of  the  world  is  the  Brahman,  ;  but  then  we 
learn  from  the  sdstraic  commandment,— "The  Veda  should 
be  amplified  and  supported  by  the  Itihasas  and  the  Pura- 
nas, '  ° 4  because  the  Veda  is  afraid  of  him  who  has  little 
learning  that  he  would  do  it  wrong." — [M.Bh.  I.  i.  264.], 
that  amplification  and  confirmation  are  necessarily  to  be 
effected  with  the  help  of  the  Itihasas  and  the  Purdnas  in 
relation  to  what  is  taught  (here  in  the  above  scriptural 
passage).  To  amplify  and  support  is  indeed  to  elucidate 
the  meanings  of  the  Vedic  passages  which  are  known  to 
oneself  by  means  of  the  sayings  of  those  who  know  all 
the  Vedas  and  their  meanings,  and  who  have,  by  the 
great  power  of  their  yoga,  directly  perceived  the  things 
constituting  the  truth  of  the  Vedas.  Amplification  and 
confirmation,  indeed,  have  necessarily  to  be  effected  (in 
connection  with  the  import  of  Vedic  passages),  because 
it  is  difficult  to  understand  the  meanings  of  all  the  passages 

104,  An  Itihasa  like  the  Jidrrtayatta  lion    of    form-possessing    conscious 

or  the  Maha.bha.rata.  is  a.  work  pur-  and  unconscious  bodies,  genealogy  of 

porting  to  deal  with  ancient  history.  the  gods  &c.,  periods  of  time  known 

Purdiias  are  works  which  treat  of  the  as  the  Ma.mjuantaras,  and  the  history 

five  topics,  viz.  primordial  creation  or  of  the  dynasties  of  kings, 
evolution  of  matter,  primordial  crea- 


Adhik.  I.  Sni.  /.]     SRI-BHISHYA.  135 

found  in  all  the  recensions  of  the  .  Vedas  by  knowing  only 
a  small  part  thereof,  and  it  is  in  consequence  impossible  to 
attain  certainty  without  that  (amplification  and  confirma- 
tion).  Here  (/.  c.  in  the  context  Wherein  the  passage — "(I 
bow  to  Him  alone)  who  in  reality  is  of  the   nature  of 
Intelligence  " — occurs),    Maitreya.'desires  to  get   his   own 
knowledge  of  the  teachings  of  the  Vedas  amplified  and 
supported  at  the  hands  of  the  reverend   Parasara,   who 
was  in  possession  of  that  knowledge  of  the  reality  of  the 
Highest  Divinity  which  he  had  obtained  from  Pulastya  and 
Vasishtha  as  a  boon  bestowed  upon  him,  and  questioned 
(Parasara)   thus  : — "  Again   I  wish  to  hear  from  you,  O 
thou,  the  knower  of  religion  and  duty,  how  this  world 
came  into  existence,  and  what  will  become  of  it  again. 
O  thou,   glorious  one,  what  does   the   world   consist  of? 
O  thou,  reverend  one,  whence  (came)  all  this  moveable 
and  immoveable  creation ;  how  and  where  was  it  hidden, 
and   into  what  will  it  be  absorbed?"     [F.P.I,   i.  4  & 
;.].     By  means  of  these  and  other  passages,  the  particular 
nature  of  the  Brahman,  the  characteristics  of  the  different 
kinds  of  His  glory,  the  nature  of  worshipping  Him,  the 
particular  results  (of  such  worship)  are  all  here  questioned 
about.     In  the   question  regarding  the  particular  nature 
of  the  Brahman,  the  efficient  and  material  causes  ( of  the 
world)     are    enquired    about    in    the    query     "  Whence 
(came)  all  this  moveable  and  immoveable   (creation)  ?"  ; 
(therefore),  in  the  query — "What  does  it  consist  of  "--it  is 
asked  of  what  nature  that  world  is  which  is  the  object  of 
creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  ;   and  the  reply  to 
this  is— "And  the  world  is  that  (Brahman)."    [-F!  P.  I.   i. 
31.].     This  sameness  (of  the  world  with  the  Brahman)  is 
due  to  the  invariable  association   (of  the   world  with  the 
Brahman)  on  account  of  His  constituting  the  Self  (there- 


136  SkKBRvSHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

of)  as  its  internal  ruler;  but  is  not  due  to  the  oneness  in 
substance  between  the  subject  and  the  predicate  (in  the 
proposition  "And  the  world  is  that  Brahman}"  ;  because 
the  equation  (between  the  world  and  the  Brahman]  in 
the  passage  "  And  the  world  is  that  (Brahman)"  forms 
the  reply  to  the  question  "  What  does  it  (/.  a.  the  world) 
consist  of  ?  "  The  affix  may  at  in  yanmavam  (i.  e.  what 
does  it  consist  of)105  does  not  denote  modification;  other- 
wise, this  separate  question  would  (relate  to  what  has  al- 
ready been  asked  and  thus)  be  purposeless.  Xor  is  it  used 
in  the  sense  of  importing  that  very  thing  itself  which  is 
denoted  by  the  word  to  which  it  is  affixed,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  word  prdna-maya, '  ° c  because  the  reply — "  And  the 
world  is  that  (Brahman)"  -would  be  inappropriate  (in  such 
a  case).  Indeed,  in  such  a  case,  the  reply  should  have  been 
"(And  the  world  is)  Vishnu  Himself."107  Hence  that 
(affix  mayaf)  imports  only  the  abundance  (of  that  thing 
which  is  denoted  by  the  word  to  which  it  is  attached). 
(Here)  the  affix  may  at  is  (used)  in  accordance  with  the 
rule  which  says — ",The  affix  may  at  is  (to  be  employed) 
wherever  an  abundance  of  a  thing  has  to  be  expressed." 

105.  That  part,  of  the  sloka  which  answer — "  And    the    world    is     that 
contains  the  affix  mavat  is  as  follows  :  Brahman" — posits  two  different  enti- 
—  Yanmttyam    hi  jagat    brahman  ya-  ties,   and  it  would  become  an  identity 
lah  ch_i  etat  cfiaracjiaram.  if  the   affix   mayat  were   to   have    no 

1 06.  Here  i.e.  in   the  word  prana-  significance.     When  it  is  possible   to 
rnaya,  the  affix   may  at  gives   to   that  make  the  affix  mayaf  signiikant,  that 
word    the    power    of   importing    that  interpretation  in  which  it  loses  all  sig- 
very  thing  which  is  denoted   by  the  nificance,  as  it  would  do  if  the  above 
word  priini  itself;  cf.    Pranamayam  supposition  were  right,  is.  not  held  to 
atmanam    itpasaiikramya.     Taitt.  Cp.  be  correct  according  to  the  accepted 
III.  IO.  5.  rules    of    interpretation     in  '\'e<ld ntic 

107.  The  equation  between  the  Bra/i-       literature. 
man  and  the  world,  contained  in  the 


Adhik.  L  Sftt.  /.]      SRI-BHISHYA.  .137 

[Pdnini.  V.  4.  21 J.  Certainly,  the  whole  world  being  the 
body  of  that  (Brahman)  is  abundantly  full  of  Him.  There- 
fore it  is  settled  that  the  equation  in  the .  statement — "And 
the  world  is  that  (Brahman}"— made  in  reply  to  the  question 
— "  What  does  it  consist  of  ?"— results  from  there  being,  bet- 
ween the  world  and  the  Brahman,  the  same  relation  as  there 
is  between  the  body  and  the  soul.  Otherwise,  all  these 
questions  and  answers  would  not  be  appropriate  in  the 
sdstra  which  is  admitted  to  be  devoted  to  the  establish- 
ment of  that  thing  which  is  devoid  of  all  attributes  ;  'and  the 
sdstra  which  is  intended  to  be  an  explanation  of  that  thing 
would  also  be  thus  inappropriate.  Indeed,  in  such  a  case, 
to  the  one  question  of  the  form  "  What  is  the  ba'sis  of  the 
illusion  of  the  world  ?" — there  would  be  only  one  answer  in 
this  form,  viz.  "Pure  intelligence  that  is  devoid  of  all  attri- 
butes." If  the  equation  (contained  in  the  statement — "And 
the  world  is  that  Brahman'}  denote  the  unit}'  of  substance 
between  the  world  and  the  Brahman,  then  the  fact  of  His 
being  the  sole  seat  of  myriads  of  auspicious  qualities  such 
as  the  quality  of  willing  the  truth,  &c.,  as  well  as  the  fact 
of  His  being  the  opposite  of  all  that  is  evil,  would  be  stulti- 
fied,and  the  Brahman  would  also  become  the  seat  of  all  evil. 
It  will  be  established  later  on  that  the  fact  of  (the  Brah- 
man and  the  world)  being  equated  denotes  primarily 
the  same  relation  (between  them)  as  there  is  between  the 
soul  and  the  body.  Hence,  by  means  of  the  passages 
commencing  with  "  (The  Supreme  Self)  is  high  among  those 
that  are  high  and  is  the  Highest",  &c.,  \_V.P.  I.  2.  10.], 
(Parasara)  proceeds  to  explain  in  extenso  the  idea  briefly 
conveyed  in  the  stanza — "  The  world  came  into  existence 
from  the  will  of  Vishnu,  and  it  is  altogether  existent  there- 
in. He  is  the  cause  of  the  preservation  and  destruction  of 
this  world,  and  the  world  is  Himself."  [F.  P.  I.  i.  31.]  ; 
IS 


I38  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  L  Part.  I. 

and  with  that  object  in  view,  he  first  bows  to  the  Divine 
Lord  Vishnu,who  is  in  His  own  natural  form  and  is  the  High- 
est Brahman,  by  repeating  the  stanza  commencing  with— 

"(I  bow)  to  the  Immutable "  [V.P.  I.  2.  i.];108  and 

then  again  he  bows  to  the  same  (Vishnu)  who  is  existent  in 
the  form  of  the  trinity  made  up  of  Brahma  (the  creator), 
of  His  own  incarnation  (as  Vishnu),  and  of  Siva,  and  (is  also 
existent  in  the  form  of)  prakriti  (or  nature),  Time,  kshe- 
Irajfta  (or  the  individual  self),  the  aggregate  creation  and 
the  individual  created  beings.  In  that  context,  this  stanza, 
which  begins  with- — "  (I  bow  to)  Him  (alone)  who  is  in 
reality  of  the  nature  of  intelligence,"  speaks  of  the  nature 
of  that  Highest  Self  which  is  in  the  form  of  the  individual 
entities  known  as  kshetrajftas.  Therefore,  here  (/.  e.  in 
this  stanza),  the  thing  which  is  destitute  of  attributes  is 
not  taught. 

If  the  sdstras  relate  to  the  establishment  of  that  illu- 
sion which  is  based  upon  the  Brahman,  whose  nature 
is  (pure  and  simple)  intelligence  devoid  of  attributes, 
then  the  objection-—"  How  is  it  posssible  for  the  Brahman 
who  is  without  qualities,  who  is  unknowable,  pure  and 
devoid  of  evil  by  nature,  to  be  the  agent  in  the  acts  of 
creation,  &c.,109  (of  the  world)?"—  [V.  P.  1.3.  i.]—  would 
be  inappropriate  here  ;  and  similarly  its  invalidation  as 
given  in  the  following  passage,  would  also  be  (inappropri- 
ate)—" O  thou,  the  best  of  ascetics,  there  are,  in  all  things, 
powers  which  cannot  be  brought  within  the  sphere  of 
thinkable  (or  explicable)  knowledge,  and  for  that  very  same 

108.  The  whole  of  this  stanza  is  as  is  the  '  conqueror '  or,  in  other  words, 
follows  :— "(I  bow)  to  the  Immutable  the  possessor  of  all." 
Vishnu  who   is  eternally   pure   and  109.  The  et  cetera   here  implies  pre- 
forms the   Highest  Self,  who  has  a  servation  and  destruction   in    relation 
uniformly   homogeneous  nature  and  to  the  world. 


Adhik.  I.  &e£.  /.]        SRI-BHASHYA.  139 

reason,  those  acts  of  creation,  &c.,  constitute  the  inherent 
(inexplicable)  powers  of  the  Brahman,  as  heat  (constitutes 
the  inherent  power)  of  fire."  [F.  P.  I.  3.  2  &  3].  Indeed, 
if  that  be  the  case  (/.  e.  if  the  sdstra  relate  to  the  establish- 
ment of  illusion  as  aforesaid),  then  the  (above  mentioned) 
objection  (in  regard  to  the  sdstra  declaring  the  thing  that 
is  devoid  of  attributes ),  and  its  refutation  would  (severally) 
run  thus  : — (i).  How  is  it  that  the  Brahman  which  is 
devoid  of  qualities  becomes  the  agent  in  the  acts  of  creation, 
&c  ?  (ii).  The  creation  proceeding  from  the  Brahman  is  not 
real,  but  is  manufactured  by  illusion.  But  the  objection 
really  is  to  this  effect — "  The  work  of  creation,  &c.,  is  seen 
in  association  with  those  who  possess  the  qualities  of 
saliva, ' ]  °  £c.,  who  are  imperfect,  and  are  bound  by 
karma ;  and  so,  how  is  it  possible  for  Him  who  is  devoid 
of  the  qualities  of  saliva,  &c.,  who  is  perfect,  who  is  not 
bound  by  karma,  and  who  cannot  have  any  association 
with  karma, — (how  is  it  possible  for  such  a  Person) — to  be 
the  agent  in  the  acts  of  creation,  &c  ?  And  the  answer  to 
this  objection  also  is  really  to  this  effect — "  The  union  of 
all  powers  in  the  Brahman,  who  is  distinct  from  all  perceiv- 
able things  and  is  altogether  of  the  aforesaid  nature,  is 
not  incompatible  with  reason,  in  the  .same  way  in  which 
the  association  of  the  power  of  heat,  &c.,  with  fire,  &c., 
which  are  distinct  from  water,  &c.,  (is  not  incompatible 
with  reason). 

,     The  statement1 '  J — "  Thou  alone  art  the  only  reality, 
&c.,"  [F.  P.  I.  4.  38.],  does  not  also  speak  of  the  unreality 

1 10.  These  are  :  Satlva,  goodness,  has  been  already  given  as  follows  : — 

ftajas,  passion,  and  7'awas,  darkness.  "O  Lord  of  the  universe  !  Thou  alone 

ill.  This  is  half  of  the  stanza,  V.  P.  art  the  only  reality  and  there  is  none 

I.  4.  38.     And,  its  meaning  according  other." 
to  the  Adwtutifts  (vide  p.  2().  sii/»-a'). 


140  SRI-J3HA.SHYA.      [Chap.  L  Part.L 

of  the  whole  (world),  but  (speaks  only  of)  the  unreality  of 
that  thing  the  existence  of  which  is  (held  to  bej  independ- 
ent of  That  (viz.  the  Brahmaii),  the  reason  being  that  the 
whole  (world)  has  that  (same  Brahman}  for  its  Soul.  He  (i.e. 
Parasara)  declares  again  the  same  thing  thus — "  That 
greatness  by  which  all  this  moveable  and  immoveable 
(creation)  is  pervaded  is  Thine."  [  V.  P.  I.  4.  38. ].112 
Because  all  this  moveable  and  immoveable  (creation)  is 
pervaded  by  Thee,  therefore,  all  this  has  Thee  for  its  Soul; 
and  so  there  is  nothing  other  than  Thee.  Hence,  as  being 
the  Self  of  all,  Thou  alone  art  the  only  reality.  Hence 
(also)  it  has  been  stated  that  what  constitutes  Thy  great- 
ness is  Thy  omnipenetrativeness.  Otherwise  it  should 
have  been  stated  that  it  (viz.  Thy  omnipenetrativeness)  is  an 
illusion;  and  the  expressions1  ]3  <O,  Lord  of  the  Universe', 
'  Thou/  £c.,  would  then  have  a  figurative  (or  second- 
ary) significance;  and  there  would  be  the  contradiction 
of  the  context  wherein  the  Divine  Lord's  great  boar  in- 
carnation is  glorified  as  He  is  sportively  lifting  up  the 
earth  (from  beneath  the  waters). 

The  whole  world  is,  as  if  by  its  Soul,  pervaded 
by  Thee  who  art  of  the  nature  of  intelligence,  and 
constitutes  Thy  body;  therefore  those,  who  do  not  pos- 
sess the  means  of  perceiving  (the  world)  as  having 
Thee  for  its  Soul,  make  out  through  illusory  percep- 
tion that  this  (world)  is  altogether  made  up  of  gods, 
men,  and  other  such  things ;  accordingly,  he  (/.  e. 
Parasara,)  says  in  this  connection — "This  which  appears, 


112.  This   is  the  second  half  of  the  thus  in  the  Sanskrit  original: — Para- 

stanza  V.  P.  I.  4.  38.  m^rthah  tvam  eva  ekah  tta  anva/i  asti 

113.  These  expressions  are  contain-  j iga'ah pate  \   tava  e>>liah  niahimft  yena 

ed   in    V.    P.    I.    4.   38.,   which   runs  rya/>!anl  elat  chardfhnram.\ 


Adhik.  I.  Snt.  /.]     SRi-BnlSHYA.  141 

&c.  [V.P.  1.4.39.]."* 

To  perceive  the  world,  which,  in  reality,  has  Thee  for 
its  Soul,  as  made  up  of  gods,  men,  and  other  such  things 
is,  no  doubt,  an  illusion  in  itself;  but  the  perception  which 
apprehends  the  individual  souls,  that  have  the  nature  of 
intelligence,  as  though  the}"  were  made  up  of  gods,  men, 
and  other  such  material  configurations,  is  also  an  illusion; 
accordingly,  he  (/.  c.  Parasara)  says  in  this  connection— 
"All  this  (world)  is  of  the  nature  of  intelligence,  &c." 
[V.P.  1.4.40.]  "3 

Those  who,  on  the  other  hand,  are  intelligent  and 
understand  the  self,  the  nature  of  which  is  intelligence,  and 
whose  minds  are  well  purified  by  the  acquisition  of  what 
gives  rise  to  the  experience  that  the  whole  (universe)  has  the 
Divine  Lord  for  its  Soul, — they  perceive  that  all  this  world 
has  the  characteristics  of  the  body,  being  (itself)  made  up  of 
such  particular  modifications  oiprakriti  (or  nature)  as  gods, 
men,  &c.,  and  then  look  upon  it  as  constituting  Thy  body, 
and  as  having  Thee,  who  art  different  from  the  body  and  hast 
the  essential  nature  of  intelligence,  for  its  Soul :  accord- 
ingly, he  (i.e.  Parasara)  says  in  this  connection— " Those 
who  know  what  is  knowledge,  &c." — [  V.  P.I.  4.  41.].' 16 

114.  This  stanza  is  understood  by  rant  men  look   upon  it   as    though    it 
the    Adivaitins    as    follows: — "  This  were  made  up  of  material  things,  and 
which    appears  embodied  belongs  to  are  tossed  to   and   fro  in  a  flood  of 
Thee  who  art  of  the  nature  of  Intelli-  illusions."    Vide  supra  p.  29. 

gence  ;  and  those  who  are  not  Yogins  116.  This  stanza  as   interpreted  by 

(i.e.   those   who  are    ignorant)    look  \heAdwaitins  has  been  already  given 

upon  it,  on  account  of  (their)  illusive  as  follows  : — "Highest  Lord!     Those 

perception,  as  though  it  formed   the  who  know   what  is    knowledge,   and 

world."     Vide   supra  p.  29.  whose  minds  are  pure,  look  upon  the 

115.  This  stanza  is  interpreted  by  whole  world  as    being  made    up    of 
the  Adwailins  thus: — "All  this  world  Intelligence  and  as  consisting  of  Your- 
is  of  the  nature  of  Intelligence.  Igno-  self."  Vide  supra  p.  29. 


142  SRI-BHA.SHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

Otherwise,  among  the  stanzas,  there  would  be  a  redundant 
repetition  ;  the  words  (therein)  would  acquire  a  figurative 
(or  secondary)  significance  ;  there  would  be  the  contradic- 
tion of  things  (as  made  out  by  perception  and  the  other 
means  of  knowledge),  the  contradiction  of  the  context,  and 
also  the  contradiction  of  the  purport  of  this  sdslraic 

work.117 

In  this  stanza  also,  namely,— "Although  he  is  to  be 
found  in  one's  own  body  and  in  that  of  all  others,  (intelli- 
gence) which  is  one  and  simple,  &c.," — [  V.P.  II.  14.31.],' ' 8 
what  is  meant  is,  that,  while  all  the  individual  selves  are 
similar  in  nature  for  the  reason  that  they  solely  consist  of 
intelligence,  the  perception  of  duality  (or  difference)  in 
relation  to  individual  selves,  as  though  they  (also),  owing 
to  their  association  with  certain  material  masses,  which  are 
particular  modifications-  of  the  prakriti  and  are  known 
as  gods,  men,  &c.,  had  the  nature  of  gods,  &c., — (that 
perception  of  difference)  is  unreal.  The  duality  (or  difference) 
found  to  exist  in  relation  to  masses  of  matter,  and  (the 
duality  or  difference)  found  to  exist  in  relation  to  indivi- 
dual souls  are  not  in  fact  denied  (here).  The  meaning  is, 
that  the  thing  called  the  self,  which  exists  in  (association 
with)  the  varied  and  wonderful  masses  of  matter  known 
as  gods,  men,  &c.,  is  all  alike ;  and  to  that  same  effect 
it  has  been  declared  by  the  Lord  (Himself)  in  the  following 
and  other  similar  passages: — "The  learned  look  alike 

117.  The  sastra:c  work  here  mention-  Adwaitins  are  made  to  quote  this 
ed  is  the  Vishnu- Pur  ana  of  Paras'ara  stanza  as  follows  :—"  Although  He  is 
from  which  the  above  stanzas  [I.  4.  to  be  found  in  one's  own  body  and 
38  to  41.3  as  well  as  others,  are  all  in  that  of  all  others,  Intelligence 
quoted,  as  the  references  given  above  which  is  one  and  simple  indeed  con- 
show,  situtes  His  reality.  Dualists  see 
1 1 8.  Vide  supra  p.  29.  where  the  things  wrongly." 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  i.]      SRI-BHISHYA.  143 

upon  a  dog  and  upon  an  outcast  (or  a  Chanddla)" — [B. 
G.  V.  i8.];119  "Indeed,  the  brahman  (i.  e.  the  indi- 
vidual soul  here)  is  (by  nature)  devoid  of  all  evil  and 
is  alike  in  all  beings."— [/?.  G.  V.  19.].  Accordingly, 
in  the  passage, — "Although  he  is  to  be  found  in  one's 
own  body  and  in  that  of  all  others,  &c.," — [V.  P.  II.  14.  31.], 
the  distinction  between  one's  self  and  that  of  another  is 
also  distinctly  mentioned  as  existing  in  relation  to  the 
thing  which  is  other  than  the  body  (viz.  the  individual 
soul). 

In  this  passage  also  which  begins  with — "  If  there  were 
any  other  like  me  or  any  other  unlike  me  " — [V.  P.  II.  13. 
90.],' 20  the  essential  identity  of  individual  souls  is  not 
taught,  because  it  is  not  admissible  to  use  the  word  para 
(which  means  another  like  me)  and  the  word  any  a  (which 
means  another  unlike  me]  in  one  and  the  same  sense,  as 
though  the  statement  meant — "  If  there  were  any  one  other 
than  me  other  than  me."  There  (/.  c.  in  that  passage),  the 
word/ara  (which  means  another)  denotes  the  self  which  is 
distinct  from  one's  own  self;  and  in  as  much  as  that  (self) 
also  is  altogether  of  the  nature  of  intelligence,  the  word  an- 
ya  (or  different)  means  the  negation  of  any  other  nature  (to 
the  self  than  that  of  intelligence).  What  is  said  is  this  : — "  If 
some  individual  self  other  than  my  own  self  be  of  a  differ- 
ent nature  from  intelligence  which  is  my  nature,  then,  it  is 

119.  The  whole  of  this  stanza  is  as  tadd     eshah    ayam    ay  am    cha    any  ah 
follows  : — "  The   learned    look    alike  vaktum  evam  api  ishyate.\     Vide  supra 
upon  a  person  who  has  an  abundance  p.  29.  where  the    Adwaitins  interpret 
of  know  ledge  and  humility,     upon  a  it  as  follows  : — "Q    them,    the    best 
Brahmana,  a  cow,  an  elephant,  a  dog,  of  kings,    if    there    were    any  other 
and  an  outcast."  like  me,  or  any  other  unlike  (or  differ- 

120.  This  sloka  runs  thus  in    the  ent  from)  me,  then  alone  would  it  be 
Sanskrit   original : — Yadi  anyah   ash  proper  to  say  that  such  an  one  is  me 
parahkahapimattahpdrthh'Qsatttima  \  and   such  an  one  is  not  me," 


-J44  SRI-BHISHYA.    {Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

possible  to  mention — '  I  am  of  this  nature,  he  is  of  a  diff- 
erent nature.'  But  it  is  not  seen  to  be  so,  because  all  ("the 
individual  selves)  are  wholly  of  the  nature  of  intelligence, 
and  are  therefore  undoubtedly  alike  in  nature." 

In  this  passage  also  which  begins  with — "It  is  in  conse- 
quence  of  the   difference   due   to  the  holes  in   a  flute", 
[V.  P.  II.  14.32],'  - *  what  is  declared  is  that  the  difference 
of  character  in  relation  to  the  individual  selves  is  not  due  to 
their  essential  nature,  but  is  due  to  their  having  entered  the 
(various)  masses  of  matter  known  as  gods,  £c.;  and  it  is  not 
(declared  herein)  that  all  the  selves  are  one  (in  essence).   In 
the  illustrative  example  also,  there  is  no  substantial  sameness 
between  the   particles  of  air  which  are  associated  with  the 
several  holes  (of  the  flute),  but  there  is  only  similarity  of 
nature  (between  them).     Indeed,  those  (particles  of  air)  are 
all  of  one  character,  because  they  possess  the  same  aerial 
nature  ;  and  they  have  a  variety  of 'names  'such  as  shadja, 
&C.,1  --  because  they  pass  out  through  a  variety  of  holes. 
In  the  case  of  the  individual   selves  ,  also,  the  variety  of 
names,  such  as  gods,  &c.,  results  in  a  similar  way.     The 
things  which  form  portions  of  the  elemental  substances  fire, 
water,  and  earth  are  one  in  nature  with  those  substances, 
on  account  of  their  being  themselves  made  up  of  those 
particular  substances  ;   (but  really)  there  can  be  no  essen- 
tial identity  between  them  (/.  c.  between  the  part  and  the 
whole).     Thus  it  has  necessarily  to  be  accepted    that  the 
various  particles  of  air  are  also  distinct  from  each  other  in 
essence,  (though  similar  in  nature). 

121.  This  stanza  is    found    on  pp.  ing  to  the  pitch  of  the  sound)   result 

29  &  30.  to  the  following  effect : — "  It  to  the  air,  which  pervades  all  without 

is,  in  consequence  of  the  difference  due  distinction;     just    so    is  it  the   case 

to  the  holes  in  a  flute,  that  the  distinc-  with  the  Highest  Self." 

tions  named  Shadia  &c.,  (correspond-  122.  Vide  supra  p.  29.  n.  25. 


Adhik.  I.  Sill.  /.]      SRi-BHiSHYA.  145 

In  the  stanza1 2  3  which  begins  with—"  He  is  myself  and 
he  is  yourself"  [V.  P.  II.  16.  23  &24.],he(/.  e.  Parasara) 
recalls  to  mind,  by  means  of  the  word  'he',  the  aforesaid 
character  of  intelligence  belonging  to  all  -the  individual 
selves;  then  concludes,  from  myself,  yourself,  &c.,  being 
(here)  grammatically  equated,  that  intelligence  alone  con- 
stitutes the  character  of  the  things  denoted  by  myself ,  your- 
self, &c.;  and  he  at  last  says — "  Give  up  that  illusion  of 
distinction  between  individual  selves  which  is  based  upon 
the  distinction  of  such  material  forms  as  gods,  &c." 
Otherwise,  in  relation  to  that  (self)  which  is  to  be  taught 
here  as  being  essentially  different  from  the  body,  it  would 
not  be  appropriate  to  point  out  those  differentiations  (in  the 
forms  of  /,  thou,  &c.,)  that  are  .to  be  found  in  the  state- 
ment that  /,  thou,  and  all  this  have  the  essential  nature  of 
the  self.  And  it  is  not  also  possible  for  the  words  7,  thou, 
&c.,  to  be  the  accidental  indicators  (of  the  nature  of  the 
self),  because  they  are  grammatically  equated  with  what 
constitutes  the  thing  that  has  to  be  so  indicated  by  means 
of  accidental  attributes;  that  is,  (because  they  are  equated) 
with — all  this  has  the  essential  nature  of  the  self.  It  is  said 
that  he  (viz.  the  person  so  taught)  acted  up  to  that  teach- 
ing, and  "gave  up  the  idea  of  distinction  after  seeing 
the  highest  reality."  If  it  be  asked,  how  this  conclusion  (of 
ours)  is  arrived  at,  (we  reply)  that  it  is  arrived  at  because 
the  teaching  has  reference  to  the  process  of  discrimination 
between  the  body  and  the  soul.  And  that  (teaching)  begins 

123.  This  stanza  runs  in  the  Sans-  supra  thus  :— "  He  is  myself,  and  He 

krit  original   as  follows  :— Salt  a/iam  is  yourself  and  all  this  is  the  same  as 

sa  cjMj.vam  sa  cha  sarvam  etat  atma-  the   Self.       Give   up   the    illusion    of 

su-arfipam  tyaja  bhedamoham  \  itJniah  distinctions.     Thus  ;taught    by    him, 

tt'na    sa    rajavaryah     tafyiija    bhedam  that    great    king,    saw    the    Highest 

paramarthadrishtih\   This  stanza  has  Reality  and  gave  up  distinctions," 
been    already   trajislate.d    on    p.  .30, 

19 


146  SRI-BHA.SHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

thus  : — "  Because  the  body  which  is  characterised  by  head^ 
hand,  &c.,  is  distinct  from  the  puntsha  (i.-e.  the  self)"—  \V . 
P.  II.  13.  89.].' 2* 

The  stanza123  beginning  with — "  When  the  knowledge 
which  gives  rise  to  distinctions", — [F.  P.  VI.  7.  96.]  is  also 
not  intended  to  establish  the  essential  oneness  in  the 
nature  of  individual  selves.  Xor  (is  it  intended  to  estab- 
lish the  essential  oneness)  of  the  individual  self  and  the 
Supreme  Self.  The  essential  oneness  of  the  indivi- 
dual selves  is  negatived  in  the  manner  already  stated. 
There  is  also  no  essential  identity  between  the  individual 
self  and  the  Supreme  Self,  in  the  same  way  in  which 
(there  is  no  essential  identity)  between  the  body  and 
the  individual  self.  To  this  effect,  indeed,  are  the  fol- 
lowing and  other  Veddntic  passages  : — "  Two  birds,  which 
possess  similar  attributes  and  are  inseparable  friends,  cling 
to  the  same  tree ;  one  of  them  eats  the  sweet  pippala 
fruit,  while  the  other  shines  in  splendour  without  eating 
at  all."  \Mitnd.  Up.  III.  i.  i.];  "Those  who  know  the 
Brahman,  and  who  have  worshipped  the  five  fires  and  also 
the  trinachiketa  fire,  declare  that  there  are  the  two  that 
enjoy1  ->c  the  reward  of  works  in  the  world  of  good  deeds, 
that  they  have  entered  into  the  cave  (of  the  heart),  in  the 
transcendentally  excellent  ether  of  which  they  reside  and 
are  as  shadow  and  sunlight."  [Kath.  l?p.  III.  i.]  ;  "He 
who  has  entered  within,  is  the  ruler  of  all  things  that  are 
born,  and  is  the  Self  of  all."  [Taitt.  At:  III.  24.].  In  this 

124.  The    latter  half  of  this  sloka  where  it  is  given  as  follows  : — "When 
is  to  the  following  effect : — "  There-  the  knowledge    which    gives    rise    to 
fore  which  of  these  am  I  to  designate  distinctions  has   undergone    complete 
hy  this  name  of  T?"  destruction,  (then),    who    will  create 

125.  This  stanza  has  been  already  the    unreal    difference     between    the 
translated  while  stating  the   position  self  and   the  "Brahmanl" 

of  the   Adwat'tins.^Vide  supra  p.   30.          126.  Literally,  drink  in. 


Adhik.  L  Sut.  /.]     SRi-l3HASkYA.  147 

sdstraic  work  (also,  viz.  the  Vishnu-Purdna),  the  distinction 
(betwen  the  individual  self  and  the  Supreme  Self)  is  declar- 
ed in  the  following  manner  :  —  "  O  sage  !  He  (viz. 
the  Lord)  transcends  the  praknli  (wliich  forms  the  natur- 
al and  material  foundation)  of  all  beings,  (transcends)  all 
its  modifications,  and  all  the  blemishes  (arising  out)  of 
its  qualities.  He,  who  is  the  Self  of  all,  has  passed  be- 
yond all  veils,  and  by  Him  is  pervaded  all  that  is  within 
the  universe.  He  is  of  that  nature  which  is  characterised 
by  all  auspicious  qualities....  He  is  high  among  the  high- 
est, and  in  Him,  who  is  the  Lord  of  the  higher  and  the  lower, 
the  afflictions  and  all  other  such  undesirable  things  have  no 
place."  [  V.  P.  VI.  5.  83  to  85.]  ;  '  -  7  "  Another  (power)  named 
avidya  (or  ignorance)  and  karma  is  said  to  be  the  third 
power  by  which,  O  king,  the  all-pervading  power  known  as 
the  kshetrajfia  is  completely  enclosed."  '  -  8  [  V.  P.  VI.  7.  6  1 
&62.]:  and  (the  same  difference  is  taught)  in  the  following 
aphorisms  also,  viz.  —  "And  both  of  them  (i.e.  both  the  recen- 
sions Qt\\\QBn]iaddranyaka-(Jpa)iishad,  viz.  the  Kdnmi  and 
the  Madhyandina]  speak  of  it  (/.  c.  of  the  individual  self)  as 
being  different  (from  the  internal  Ruler  who  is  the  Highest)." 
[Ved.  Sut.  I.  2.  21.];  "And  on  account  of  the  declaration 
of  difference,  (the  Supreme  Self  is)  different  (from  the  indi- 
vidual self)."  [Ved.  Sui.  I.  i.  22.]  ;  "(The  Brahman  is)  in- 
deed other  than  (the  individual  self),  because  of  the  (scrip- 
tural) declaration  of  difference  (between  them)."  [  Ved. 
Sut.  II.  i.  22.].  Moreover,  the  following  and  other  Veddnt- 
ic  texts,  viz.  —  "  He  who  dwelling  in  the  self,  is  within  the 
self,  Whom  the  self  does  not  know,  Whose  body  is  the 
self  and  Who  internally  rules  the  self.  —  (He  is  your  Self 
&c)."  [Mddh.  Bnh.  Up.  III.  7.  22.];  "He  is  embraced  by 


127.  Vide  supra,  p.  125.  I2S.  Vide  mifra  p.  133 


148  SRI-BHASHYA.    [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

the  omniscient  Self."  [Brih.  Up.  4.  3.  21.];  "He  is  ridden 
upon  by  the  omniscient  Self."  [Bn'/i.  Up.  IV.  3.  35.], 
determine  that  the  essential  nature  of  the  individual  self 
and  that  of  the  Supreme  Self  are  both  of  a  mutually  exclu- 
sive character.  (For  all  these  reasons  there  can  be  no 
substantial  unity  between  the  individual  self  and  the 
Supreme  Self). 

Moreover,  in  the  case  also  of  one  who  has  been  releas- 
ed from  avidya  by  adopting  the  means  (intended  therefor), 
there  cannot  be  essential  unity  with  the  Supreme  Self, 
(which  is  incapable  of  being  the  seat  of  avidya  or  ignorance); 
because  that  which  is  capable  of  being  the  seat  of  igno- 
rance can  never  acquire  the  character  of  what  is  (naturally ) 
unfit  to  be  the  seat  thereof.  To  the  same  effect,  it  is  taught 
in  the  following  passage  : — "  If  it  be  held  that  the  identity 
of  the  Highest  Self  with  the  individual  self  is  the  highest 
truth,  it  is  wrong  (to  hold  so);  because  any  substance 
which  is  different  from  another  cannot  indeed  acquire  the 
character  of  that  other  substance."  [V.  P.  II.  14.  27.].  Be- 
•  sides,  it  is  stated  in  the  BJiagavad-Gltd,  that  a  released 
soul  attains  only  His  character,  (but  not  His  essential  na- 
ture) :  — "  Depending  upon  this  knowledge,  those  who  at- 
tain sameness129  of  nature  with  Myself  are  not  born  at  the 
time  of  creation,  and  are  not  hurt  at  the  time  of  dissolution." 
[B.  G.  XIV.  2.].  Here  (/'.  c.  in  the  Vishnu-Pnrdna)  also, 
there  is  the  following  passage  to  the  same  effect : — "  O 
sage,  that  Brahman,  by  His  own  power,  makes  this 
worshipper,  who  is  deserving  of  a  change  of  state  for 
the  better,  acquire  His  own  nature  in  the  same  way  in 
which  a  magnet  makes  the  metal  acquire  its  own  magnetic 

iJ<j.  The  idea  is  that  the  released       one  in  substance  with   the  Supreme 
soul  possesses  the  same  nature  as  the       Self. 
Supreme  Self,  but  does  nut  become 


Adhik.  1.  SuL  /.]     SRI-BHASHYA.  149 

character."  \V.  P.  VI.  7.  30.].  The  word  tltmabhdva  (in  this 
stanza) '  3  °  means  His  own  nature.  Surely,  the  thing  which  is 
attracted  does  not  become  identical  with  that  which  attracts. 
Says  (the  same  thing  the  Sutrakara)  also  thus  : — "Except 
in  the  matter  of  the  activity  relating  to  (the  creation  &c., 
of)  the  world,  (the  released  souls  possess  all  the  powers 
belonging  to  the  Lord),  because  (the  Lord  Himself  forms) 
the  topic  of  the  contexts  (wherein  the   above-mentioned 
activity   is  referred  to),  and  because  also  (the  individual 
souls)  are  not  mentioned  (therein)."  \Ved.  SuL  IV.  4.  17.]; 
"  And  on  account  of  the  characteristic  of  equality  (between 
the   individual   self  and   the   Supreme    Self)  being  solely 
confined  to   enjoyment  "-—\_Ved.  Si'tt.  IV.  4.  21.];     "And 
on  account  of  (the  Brahman)  being  taught  to  be  that  which 
is  to  be  approached  by  the  released  (souls.)"—  [  Ved.  Sut. 
I.  3.  2.].   The  Vritti  also  (of  Bodhayana)  states  it  thus  : -- 
"  Except  in  the  matter  of  the  activity  relating  to  the  creation 
of  the  world,   (the  released  soul)is  equal  to  the   Highest 
Light  (/.  c.  to  the  Brahman}."  And  the  commentator  Drami- 
da  also  says — "  On  account  .'of  close  association  with  the 
Deity,  he  who  is  devoid  of  the  body  (/.  e.  the  released  soul) 
may  become  capable  of  enjoying  all  desirable  objects  like  the 
Deity  Himself."  (To  the  same  effect)  are  also  the  following 
and  other  scriptural  texts  :  — "Those  who  depart  from  here, 
after  having  known  the    Self  and  also  His  eternal    and 
auspicious  qualities,  for  them  there  is  free  movement  in 
all  the  worlds."     \Qihdnd.   Up.  VIII.i.  6.]  ;     "He    who 
knows  the  Brahman  attains  the  Highest."    [7a///.  Up.  II. 
i.i.];     "He  attains,  with  the  intelligent  Brahman,  all  the 

130.  The  stanza  quoted  above  runs      iitHianah     laklyH     loliain    ak 
thus: — ^tmalhavam  nayati  entim    tul      yathii\ 
brahma    dliydyinam    nnine  \  vik&ryam 


I5o  SRi-feHiSHYA.     [Chap.  L  Part.  L 

auspicious  qualities."  [Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.]  ;  "He  (/.  c.  the 
released  self),  having  reached  that  Self  which  consists  of 
bliss  and  moving  about  in  all  these  worlds,  enjoying  what- 
ever things  he  likes,  and  assuming  whatever  form  he  likes, 
(sits  down  singing  this  saman. — Hd,  vnhd,  vftha,  vft)." 
[Taitt.  Up.  III.  10.  5.];  "He  moves  about  there."  [Ckhdnd. 
Up.  VIII.  12.  3.];  "Bliss  indeed  is  He.  Having  ob- 
tained this  very  Bliss,  he  becomes  blissful."  [Taitt.  Up.  II. 
7.  i.]  ;  "  Just  as  flowing  rivers  disappear  in  the  sea  losing 
their  name  and  form,  so  also  the  wise  man,  freed  from 
name  and  form,  reaches  that  Divine  Person  who  is  higher 
than  the  highest."  [Mund.  Up.  III.  2.8.];  "Then  the 
wise  man,  shaking  off  merit  and  demerit  and  being  untaint- 
ed, attains  the  highest  degree  of  equality  (with  the  Brah- 
man)" [Mund.  Up.  III.  1.3.]. 

In  the  following  and  other  aphorisms — "  Bliss  and 
other  qualities  (have  to  be  assumed  in  all  the  vidyds}  ^  31 
because  the  possessor  (of  those  qualities  happens  to  be  the 
same  Brahman  in  all  the  vidyds)." — [Ved.  Sfit.  III.  3.  1 1.]; 
"  Because  they  (viz.  the  vidyds)  do  not  differ  in  their  re- 
sults,there  is  freedom  of  choice  (in  regard  to  them)." — [  Vcd. 
Snt.  III.  3.  57.], — it  is  stated  by  the  Sntrakara  himself  that 
the  qualified  Brahman  alone  is  the  object  of  worship  in  all 
the  vidyds  relating  to  the  Supreme  Being,  that  the  result  (of 
all  such  meditations  or  forms  of  worship)  is  of  one  and  the 
same  nature,  and  that,  therefore,  there  is  freedom  of  choice 

131.    The  Vidyas  are  forms  of  vvor-  danavidya.  is  a  form  of  worship  taught 

ship.      For    example,  the    Sad-vidyd  to  Pratardana  by  Indra  in  Kaush.  Up. 

taught  to  Svetaketu   in  Chhand.   Up.  III.      The   Daharavidya    is    another 

VI.  is  that  form  of  worship  in  which  form   of  worship  in  which  the  Bra/i- 

the  'Brahman  is  taught  to  be  worship-  man   is   taught  to  be  worshipped  as 

ped     as     the     self-existent    Soul  of  ^  residing    within    the     -null    etherial 

the  universe.     Similarly  the  Prahir-  space  of  the  heart.  CJihand,  Up.  VIII. 


Adhik.LSui.i.]       SRi-BHlSHYA.  151 

in  regard  to  the  vidyds.  By  the  Vakya-kara  (Taaka)  also, 
in  the  passage — "  That  (object  to  be  attained)  is  what  is 
possessed  (of  qualities),  because  worship  relates  to  that  which 
possesses  qualities" — it  is  stated  that  the  qualified  Brah- 
man alone  is  worthy  of  being  the  object  of  worship, 
and  that  there  is  freedom  of  choice  in  regard  to  the 
vidyds  (relating  to  the  attainment  of  the  Brahman).  This  is 
also  similarly  explained  by  the  commentator  (Dramidachar- 
ya)  in  the  passage  beginning  with1  3- — "  Even  when  one  is 
bent  upon  meditating  on  (the  Brahman  as)  pure  existence." 
This  passage — "  He  who  knows  the  Brahman  be- 
comes the  Brahman  indeed." — \_Mimd.  Up.  III.  2.  9.],  has 
to  import  the  same  thing  as  the  following  and  other 
passages: — "Freed  from  name  and  form,  he  reaches  the 
Divine  Person  who  is  higher  than  the  highest." — \Mund.  Up. 
III.  2.  8.];  "Being  untainted,  he  attains  the  highest  degree 
of  equality  (with  the  Brahmaii}'.' — [Mttnd.  Up.  III.  i.  3.]; 
"  Having  reached  the  Highest  Light  (/.  e.  the  Brahman)  he 
(/.  e.  the  released  soul)  manifests  himself  in  his  own  true 
form." — [Qthand.  Up.  VIII.  3.  4.)  ; — therefore,  here  also, 
one,  who  is  freed  from  the  name  and  form  that  belong  to 
prakriti  (or  nature)  and  who  is  destitute  of  the  distinctions 
resulting  from  that  (name  and  that  form),  is  said  to  possess 
the  same  character  as  the  Brahman,  for  the  reason  that  he 
also  is  (then)  solely  of  the  nature  of  intelligence.  Moreover, 

132.    This    passage    is   quoted    in  pure  existence,  one  should  not  steudi- 

full  in  the  Vedartha-sahgraha  of  Rama-  ly  pursue  in  one's  own  mind  merely 

ntija    and    it    runs     thus  : — Yadyapi  a   collection    of  qualities  as  unassoci- 

sntrjntto    no,  nirbhugnadan'atam  gxnv-  ated  with  the  Deity  ;  even  then,   one 

gnn.tm    manasftnudkavet   tathapyantar-  worships  that    Deity  alone  which  is 

gunameva  devatiim    bhajata  iti  tatrafli  possessed  of  qualities,  and  so,  in  such 

sagunaira       deratd     prilfiyatf.         Its  a   case  also,  that  deity  alone  which  is 

meaning  is: — Even  when  one  is  bent  possessed  of  qualities  is  attained, 
upon  meditating  on  the  T$rqhman  as 


152  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

when  one  thing  possesses  the  same  nature  as  another,  then 
the  experession  that  this  thing  is  the  same  as  that  other 
has  a  real  and  natural  significance,133  as,  in  the  instance, 
"  This  (thing)  here  is  an  ox."  Here  also  (i.e.  in  the  Vishnii- 
Puranci)  in  the  passage — "  O  king,  that  which  leads  (us)  to 
the  object  of  (our)  attainment  (viz.  the  Brahman]  is  know- 
ledge. Similarly,  what  has  to  be  led  (unto  the  Brahman]  is 
the  individual  self  in  whom  all  the  bhdvanas*  34  are  extin- 
guished." \V.  P.  VI.  7.  93.], — it  is  (first)  declared  that,  by 
meditating  on  the  Highest  Brahman,  the  individual  self, 
who  is,  like  the  Highest  Brahman,  freed  from  all  the  bha- 
vands,  that  is,  from  the  three.1  35  bhavanas,  namely,  karma- 
bhdvand,  brahma-bhdvand  and  nbhava-bhdvand,  becomes 
worthy  to  be  led  (unto  the  Brahman]  ;  then  in  the  pas- 
sage— "O,  thou,  the  twice-born  one,  the  kshctrajila  (or  the 
individual  self)  is  the  owner  of  the  means  (for  obtaining 
final  release),  and  knowledge  is  the  means  which  is  thus 
at  his  disposal.  After  accomplishing  the  end,  namely,  final 

133.  Vide  supra  p.  4.  n.   10.  the  mind-substance.    The  three  lihava- 

134.  Bhai'anas  mean  here  the  innate  tiasor  wrong  conceptions  referred    to 
tendencies    for   indulging   in    wrong  above  are: — (i).  The  conception  that 
conceptions   regarding   the   ultimate  we  merely  do  the   work,  (2)  the  con- 
nature  of  things.     In  Indian  psycho-  ception    that  we  wholly  become  the 
logy,  a  fi/idvand  is  spoken  of  as  a  sams-  Brahman,      and    (3)    the    conception 
kdra  i.  e.  as  an  innate  impression  or  that,  on  the  other  hand,    we   do   the- 
an  innate  tendency.  Memory  (smriti)  work  and  also  become  the  Bra/iman.  It 
and   bhdvand  (conception)   are   both  seems  to  be  held  here  that,  in  religion, 
classed   as  samskdras,  and  curiously  it  is  as  wrong  to  rely  solely  upon  the 
enough  elasticity  (sthitiathdpaka)  also  performance  of  prescribed  duties,   as 
is  spoken  of  as  a  samskdra  ;  the  idea  to    believe  in  the  possibility  of  our 
being  that,  just  as  the  elasticity  of  attaining    identity    in    essence    with 
bodies   is  no  more   than  a  tendency  the  Supreme  Self;  because   the  perfec- 
impressed  upon  the  particles  of  those  tion  of  the  individual  indeed  constitutes 
bodies.so  also,  memory  and  conception  the  true  goal  of  every  true  religion. 
are  innate  tendencies  impressed  upon  135.  Vide  nn.  100.  &  134.,  supra. 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  i.}      SRI-BHISHYA.  153 

release,  it  (/.  e.  that  knowledge)  will  cease  to  operate  as  a 
means,  having  fully  performed  its  functions." — [V.  P.  VI. 
7.  94.], — it  is  stated  that  the  means,  which  is  in  the  form 
of  the  meditation  of  the  Highest  Brahman,  ceases  to  oper- 
ate as  a  means,  after  having  fully  performed  its  function  in 
the  way  of  causing,  to  the  individual  self,  the  attainment  of 
its  own  nature  which  is  free  from  all  the  bhavands ;  and 
then  it  is  said  that,  in  consequence,  meditation  should  be 
practised  till  the  accomplishment  of  the  end  in  view ;  and 
then  at  last  the  essential  nature  of  the  released  self  is  thus 
described  in  the  following  passage  : — 136  "  Having  then 
attained  the  state  which  corresponds  to  the  nature  of  that 
{Brahman},  he  (viz.  the  released  self)  becomes  '  non-differ- 
ent '  from  the  Highest  Self,  and  distinctions  (in  relation  to 
him)  are  the  products  of  his  ignorance."  [V.  P.  VI.  7.  95.]. 
(Here)  the  word  tadbhdva  means  the  bhava  of  the  Brah- 
man, that  is,  His  nature ;  (but  it  does)  not  (import) 
substantial  unity  (between  the  individual  self  and  the  Sup- 
reme Self);  because,  if  it  did,  the  second  word  bhava,  in 
the  expression  tadbhdvabhdvamdpannah,  would  be  of  no 
use,  and  because  also  there  would  then  arise  the  contra- 
diction of  the  teaching  given  before.  Whatever  constitutes 
the  condition  wherein  the  Brahman  is  completely  free  from 
all  the  bhavanas,  the  attainment  of  that  is  the  attainment  of 
the  state  corresponding  to  the  nature  of  that  {Brahman). 
When  one  has  (thus)  attained  that  state,  then  one  becomes 
'noo-different'  from  the  Supreme  Self,  that  is,  one  becomes 
free  from  difference.  This  (individual  self),  by  reason  of  its 
possessing  the  nature  of  intelligence,  is  itself  of  the  same 
character  as  the  Supreme  Self,  and  hence  its  difference  from 

136.  This  passage  is  as  follows  in  the       adsau    paramatmana  \  bhavatyabhedt 
original : — Tadbhav  ibhavamapanws  ta-       bheaa'scjka  tasyajilanakrito  bhavet\ 
?0 


154  SRI-BHISHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

Him  consists  in  its  having  the  form  of  gods  and  other 
(material  embodiments).  The  association  of  this  (individual 
self)  with  such  (an  embodiment)  results  from  the  ignorance 
which  is  of  the  nature  of  karma,  but  is  not  due  to  its  own 
essential  nature.  When  karma,  which  has  the  nature  of 
ignorance  and  forms  the  root  of  all  distinctions  in  the  form 
of  gods,  &c.,  is  destroyed  by  means  of  the  meditation  of 
the  Highest  Brahman,  then  that  distinction  of  gods,  &c., 
ceases  to  be,  owing  to  the  cessation  of  the  cause  thereof; 
and  accordingly,  he  (/.  e.  the  released  soul)  does  not  differ 
(from  the  Brahman}.  It  is  thus  stated  in  this  passage:— 
"But  the  distinction  of  one  individual  self  (from  other  simi- 
lar selves)  which  are  all  of  the  same  nature  results  from  the 
external  covering  of  karma.  When  the  distinction  of  gods, 
&c.,  (in  relation  to  them)  ceases  to  exist,  the  covering 
altogether  ceases  to  exist,  and  indeed  he  alone  remains.'' 
I  V.  P.  II.  14.  33.].  The  same  thing  is  explained  elsewhere 
thus  : — "  When  knowledge  which  produces  distinctions  has 
undergone  complete  destruction,  (then)  who  will  create  the 
unreal  difference  between  the  self  and  the  Brahman?'  [V. 
P.  VI.  7.  96.].' 87  (Here)  the  word  vibheda  means  various 
kinds  of  distinctions,  such  as  those  which  are  found  in  the 
(varied)  forms  of  gods,  animals,  men  and  immoveable  things. 
This  same  thing  is  stated  by  Saunaka  also  thus: — "This 
fourfold  distinction  also  is  dependent  upon  false  know- 
ledge." [  J7.  Dh.  C.  20.].  The  meaning  is  this: — Ignorance, 
otherwise  called  karma,  forms,  in  regard  to  the  individual 
self  which  is  of  the  nature  of  intelligence,  the  cause  of 
the  various  kinds  of  distinctions,  such  as  gods,  &c.;  and 
when  it  is  totally  destroyed  by  means  of  the  meditation 

137.  This  stanza  is  as  follows   in       mano   bhedam    asantam    kah    karish- 
the    original: — Vibhedajanake    jilane      yati\     Vide  supra  p.  30. 
n<fs<im  atyaittikfim  gate  \  atmapo  brah- 


Adhik.  I.  Sat.  /.]    SRI-BHASHYA.  155 

of  the  Highest  Brahman,  then  who  is  there  that  will  per- 
ceive, between  the  individual  self  and  the  Highest  Brahman, 
the  distinction  that  consists  injiaving  the  forms  of  gods,  &c., 
which  owing  to  the  non-existence  of  the  cause  thereof,  has 
itself  become  non-existent  ?  In  this  very  work  itself  (/.  e.  in 
the  Vishnu-Pur  ana)  it  has  indeed  been  stated  that "  An- 
other (power)  named  avidyd  and  karma  (forms  the  third 
power  of  the  Brahman}"  \V.  P.  VI.  7.  6i.].188  In  the 
passage — "And  know  also  the  kshetrajfta  (or  the  individual 
self)  to  be  the  same  as  Myself."— [B.  G.  XIII.  2.],  and 
in  others,  the  declaration  of  oneness  (between  the  indivi- 
dual self  and  the  Supreme  Self)  is  based  on  the  (Brah- 
man) constituting  the  Self  of  all  in  the  form  of  their  internal 
ruler.  Otherwise,  there  would  arise  the  contradiction  of 
the  following  and  other  passages  : — "  The  destructible 
is  (made  up  of)  all  created  beings,  and  it  is  stated  that 
the  indestructible  is  the  eternally  unchangeable.  Different 
from  these  is  the  Highest  Person."  [B.  G.  XV.  16  & 
17.].  In  this  very  work  (viz.  the  Bhagavad-Glta),  it  is 
explicitly  stated  by  the  Lord  Himself  that  He  is  the  Self 
of  all  in  the  form  of  their  internal  ruler,  as  for  instance, 
in  the  passage — "  O  Arjuna,  the  Lord  exists  in  the  region 
of  the  heart  of  all  beings."  [B.  G.  XVIII.  61.],  and  also 
in  the  passage — "  And  I  am  also  seated  in  the  heart  of 
all."  [B.  G.  XV.  15.].  The  same  thing  is  also  declared 
in  the  passage — "  O  Gudakesa,  I  am  that  Self  who  is 
established  in  the  interior  of  all  beings."  [B.  G.  X.  20.].1 39 
In  fact,  (here),  the  word  bhuta  denotes  the  body  which 
includes  the  self  also.  Because  He  is  the  Self  of  all,  for 
that  very  reason,  all  things  constitute  His  body  ;  and 
hence  their  separate  existence  is  negatived  in  the  passage 

138.  Vide  supra  p.  128.  the    original:—  A/itim<itintl     guddkcla 

139.  This  passage  is  as  follows  in      sarvaMiitasayasthitak. 


156  SRI-BHASHYA.     [Chap.  L  Part.  L 

—"That  exists  [not  which  is  without  (Me)."  \B.  G.  X.  39.]. 
This  passage  contains  the  summary  of  the  Lord's  sovereign 
glories,  and  has  therefore  to  be  understood  to  possess  such 
a  significance  (as  has  been  given  above).  Next  to  this,  it 
is  stated — "Whatever  thing  is  full  of  glory,  or  of  wealth,  or 
of  power,  know  thou  that  particular  thing  to  proceed  from 
a  part  of  My  splendour." —  [B.  G.  X.  41.],  and  "I  stand 
supporting  the  whole  world  by  a  small  part  (of  My  power)." 
[B.  G.  X.  42.].  Therefore,  in  all  the  sastraic  works,1  4°  there 
is  no  establishment  of  that  thing  which  is  devoid  of  attri- 
butes, nor  is  there  the  establishment  of  illusoriness  in  regard 
to  the  totality  of  perceivable  objects,  nor  also  is  there  the 
negation  of  the  natural  difference  between  the  individual 
self,  non-intelligent  matter,  and  the  Lord. 

It  has  been  also  declared141 — by  the  Purvapakshins — to 
the  following  effect: — The  whole  universe,  with  its  infinite 
distinctions  in  the  form  of  the  ruler  and  the  ruled  and  the 
like,  is  the  result  of  the  superimposition  of  error  on  an  attri- 
buteless  and  self-luminous  thing.  And  that  error  is  the  be- 
ginningless  ignorance  (or  avidya)  which  .cannot  be  defined 
either  as  existent  or  as  non-existent,  and  which,  (neverthe- 
less) is  the  cause  of  those  varied  and  wonderful  illusory  pro- 
jections that  conceal  the  true  nature  of  things.  And  that 
avidya  has  necessarily  to  be  admitted,  because  there  is  the 
following  among  other  scriptural  texts  (to  prove  it): — "For 

140.  The  saslras  are  works  of  religious  Itihdsa     deals   with    ancient  history, 

authority  and  include  four  different  and  the  Puranas   are  semi-historical 

kinds  of  them,  known  by  the  names  of  works  containing  also  myths  and  le- 

Sruti,  Smriti,  Itihdsa  and  Pu.ra.na   in  gends  which  are  intended  to  illustrate 

the  order  of  their  importance.  Srutt  is  important  principles  of  religion  and 

revelation  and  is  made  up  of  the  Vedas  conduct. 

and  the  Upanishads,  &c.  Sni^iti  embo-  141.  Vide  s«/ra  pp.  27,  30,  &  31. 

dies  tradition   and   the  sacred    laws. 


Adhik.  L  Sal.  /.]       SRI-BHASHYA.  157 

they  (/.  c.  the  creatures)  are  drawn  away  (from  the  Brah- 
man) by  means  of  ignorance." — [C&hdnd.  Up.  VIII.  3.  2.]; 
because  also  there  would  (otherwise)  result  in  regard  to 
the  Brahman  the  impossibility  of  His  being  one  with  the 
individual  self,  in  accordance  with  what  is  learnt  from 
the  grammatical  equation  found  in  the  passage — "That  thou 
art" J  4  2— and  in  others  like  it.  That  (avidyd)  again  is  no  real 
entity,  because  in  relation  to  it  there  is  no  illusion  and  no 
stultification  (of  illusion).  And  it  (viz.  that  avidyd)  is  not  a 
non-entity  either,  because  (in  relation  to  it)  there  is  no  ma- 
nifestation and  no  stultification  (of  manifestation) .  ]  4  3 
Therefore  those  that  know  the  truth  hold  that  this  avidyd 
(or  ignorance)  is  different  from  both  these  alternative  ways 
of  looking  at  it. 

This  (view)  is  improper.  Indeed,  residing  in  what,  does 
it  (viz.  avidyd)  produce  illusion  ?  Surely,  (it  does)  not  (pro- 
duce illusion),  itself  residing  in  the  individual  self;  because  the 
self-hood  (of  the  individual  self)  is  itself  projected  by  avidyd 

142.  Vide  Chhand.  Up.    VI.   9.   4  ;  being  an  entity,  is  capable    of  being 
VI.  10.  3;   VI.  ir.  3;  VI.   12.   3;  VI.  perceived  as  a  rope,  or  as  something 
13.  3;  VI.  14.  3.  VI.   15.  3;  VI.  16.  3.  other  than  the   rope,  for  instance,  as 

143.  The  way  in  which  the    object  a    snake.      This     perception    of  the 
of  any  notion  is  made  out  to  be  either  snake   in    the    rope    is    an    illusion 
a  real  entity  or  a  non-entity  is  given  which  is  capable  of  being  stultified,and 
in  this  brief  formula:  Sannabadhyate,  the  rope  is  thus  an  object  of  illusion 
asannaprattyate,  which  means  that  the  as  well  as  of  the  stultification  of  that 
perception  of  the  real  entity  is  never  illusion.     The  horns  of  a  hare,  being 
altogether    stultified,    and    that    the  non-existent,  are   of  course    incapable 
non-entity  is   never  really  perceived.  of  being  perceived.  Nevertheless,  they 
In     the     passage  above,    avidyd  i.e.  are  manifest  to  the  mind,  in  as    much 
ignorance,    is  said  to   be  neither    an  as  they  constitute  the  object  of  a  notion 
entity   nor   a   non-entity — neither  an  corresponding  to  them,  and  also  of  the 
entity  like  a   rope,    nor  a  non-entity  stultification    of   the     reality  of    the 
like  the  horns  of  a  hare.     The   rope,  contents  of  that  notion. 


158  SRi-lBHASHYA.      \_Chap.  L  fart.  1. 

(or  ignorance).  Neither  (does  it  produce  illusion),  itself  resid- 
ing in  the  Brahman  ;  because  He  has  the  essential  nature  of 
self-luminous  intelligence,  and  is  thus  opposed  to  avidyd  (or 
ignorance).  Moreover,  it  is  admitted  (by  you)  that  it  (viz. 
avidyd}  is  destroyed  by  knowledge.  "  If  ignorance,  which 
has  the  nature  of  unreality  and  is  removable  by  knowledge, 
may  veil  the  Highest  Brahman  who  has  the  nature  of 
intelligence,  then  who  is  there  that  is  competent  to  be  its 
remover  ?  If  it  be  said  that  to  know  the  Brahman  to  be 
(pure)  intelligence  is  what  (really)  removes  ignorance,  (we 
say)  that  it  (viz.  such  knowledge)  also  cannot,  like  the  Brah- 
man, certainly  be  the  remover  of  avidyd  (or  ignorance);  be- 
cause, it  (viz.  that  knowledge)  makes  that  same  (Brahman] 
luminous  (/.  e.  intelligible).  If  it  be  possible  to  have  the  cog- 
nition that  the  Brahman  is  (pure)  intelligence,  there  would 
then  result  cognisability  (to  the  Brahman};  but,according  to 
your  own  saying,  it  must  be  that  the  Brahman  should  not 
possess  the  (cognisable)  character  of  an  experience".  J  4  4 
If  it  be  said  that  that  knowledge,  which  is  to  the  effect 
that  the  Brahman  has  the  essential  nature  of  intelligence, 
is  the  destroyer  of  that  avidyd  (or  ignorance),  but  not  that 
(other)  knowledge  (or  intelligence)  which  constitutes  the 
essential  nature  of  the  Brahman,  we  reply  that  it  is  not  right 
to  hold  so ;  because  while  both  possess  in  common  the 
power  of  bringing  the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman  to 
light,  it  is  not  possible  to  make  out  any  differentiating 
peculiarity  (about  them)  to  the  effect  that  one  of  them 
is  contradictory  of  avidyd  (or  ignorance),  and  that  the 
other  is  not.  What  is  said  is  this  : — Whatever  is,  by  means 
of  that  knowledge  which  is  to  the  effect  that  the 

144.  The  above  quotation  is   in  all       famous  Yamunacharya  known  in  the 
probability   from  the  Nyayatattva.   of       Tamil  land  as  Alavandar. 
Is'atliarauni.  the   grandfather   of  the 


Adhik.  1.  Sfit.  i.]     SRI-BHA.SHYA.  159 

Brahman  has  the  nature  of  intelligence,  made  out 
to  be  the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman, — that  becomes 
evident  of  itself  on  account  of  the  self-luminous  character 
of  the  Brahman ;  and  so,  in  the  matter  of  contradicting 
avidyd  (or  ignorance),  there  is  no  differentiating  peculiarity 
about  the  knowledge  (or  intelligence)  which  constitutes 
the  essential  nature  (of  the  Brahman},  or  about  that  (other) 
knowledge  whose  object  is  that  (essential  nature  of  the 
Brahman}. 

Moreover,  according  to  you — the  Pflrvapakshins,  the 
Brahman  whose  essential  nature  consists  of  experience  is 
incapable  of  being  experienced  by  any  other  experience; 
and  so  (to  you)  there  can  be  no  knowledge  which  has  that 
(Brahman}  for  its  object.  Therefore,  if  knowledge  (or  in- 
telligence) is  held  to  be  contradictory  of  avidyd,  then  He 
(viz.  the  Brahman]  is  of  his  own  nature  opposed  (to  that 
avidyd};  and  thus  it  is  not  possible  for  that  (avidyd  or  igno- 
rance) to  reside  in  the  Brahman.  The  mother-of-pearl  and 
other  such  substances,  (on  which  illusions  are  superim- 
posed), are  themselves  incapable  of  bringing  their  own  real- 
ity to  light,  and  are  not  opposed  to  the  ignorance  which 
relates  to  themselves;  therefore  they  require  some  other 
knowledge  for  the  removal  of  that  (avidyd  or  ignorance). 
But  the  Brahman  constitutes  the  reality  of  Himself,  as 
established  by  His  own  self-experience ;  and  so,  He  is 
opposed  to  that  ignorance  which  relates  to  Himself.  For 
this  very  reason,  it  (viz.  that  ignorance  which  relates  to  the 
Brahman}  does  not  further  stand  in  need  of  any  other 
means  to  remove  it. 

However,  it  may  again  be  said  that  the  knowledge  of 
the  unreality  of  what  is  other  than  the  Brahman  is  op- 
posed to  this  ignorance.  But  it  is  not  so.  (Here)  it 
has  to  be  discriminated  whether  this  knowledge  of  the 


160  SRl-BHISHYA.     \Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

unreality  of  what  is  other  than  the  Brahman  is  opposed 
to  the  ignorance  of  the  real  nature  of  the  Brahman,  or, 
whether  it  is   opposed  to  that   (other)  ignorance   which 
is    to    the    effect    that    the    world    is  real.     Surely,  this 
(knowledge)  is  not  contradictory  of  the  ignorance  which 
relates  to  the  real  nature  of  the  Brahman,  because  it  has 
not  that  (real  nature  of  the  Brahman}  for  its  object.  Indeed, 
there  arises  contradiction    only  when  (both)    knowledge 
and  ignorance  have  one  and  the  same  thing  for  their  object. 
The  (true)  knowledge  that  the  world  is   unreal  is  contra, 
dieted  by  the  ignorance  (or  false  knowledge)  that-the  world 
is  real.  By  that  (knowledge  which  establishes  the  unreality 
of  the  world),  only  that  ignorance  is  contradicted  which 
leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  world  is  real.     Hence  the 
ignorance  relating  to  the  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman 
surely  continues  to  persist.  It  may  be  said  that  the  ignorance 
which  relates  to  the  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman  is  in- 
deed to  the  effect  that  He  has  a  second,and  that  that  (igno- 
rance) is  removed,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  by  the  knowledge 
of  the  unreality  of  what  is  other  than  that  (Brahman],  and 
that  the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman  is  made  out  by  self- 
experience.      But  this  is  not  so.     If  it  is  established  by 
self-experience  that  the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman  is  to 
be   without  a  second,  then  there  can  arise  neither  that 
ignorance  which  is   opposed  to   that   (true  nature)    and  is 
to  the  effect  that  He  has  a  second,  nor  can  there  arise  any 
stultification  of  that  (ignorance).   If  it  be  said  that  this 
secondlessness  is  an  attribute  (of  His),  we   say   it  is  not 
so  ;  because  you  have  yourselves  declared  that  the  Brah- 
man is  essentially  of  the  nature  of  (pure)  experience,  and 
is  thus  free  from  all  attributes  that  are  capable  of  being 
experienced.    Therefore,  solely  on  account  of  (such)  in- 
compatibility, the   Brahman,   whose    essential  nature    is 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  /.]      SRl-BniSHYA,  161 

intelligence  cannot  be  the  abode  of  ignorance  (or  avidya). 

Moreover,  he  who  declares  that  the  Brahman,  whose 
essential  nature  entirely  consists  of  luminosity,  is  (never- 
theless) concealed  by  avidyd  (or  ignorance), — by  him  is 
declared  the  destruction  of  nothing  other  than  the  very 
essential  nature  of  the  Brahman  Himself.  The  conceal- 
ment of  luminosity  means  either  the  obstruction  of  the 
origination  of  luminosity  or  the  destruction  of  existing 
(luminosity).  Since  it  is  admitted  that  this  luminosity  of 
the  Brahman  is  incapable  of  being  a  produced  thing,  the 
concealment  of  luminosity  (here)  means  only  the  destruc- 
tion of  luminosity. 

Then  again  it  is  said  that,  on  account  of  a  misguiding 
thing  resident  in  itself,  this  objectless  and  self-luminous 
experience  which  is  not  dependent  upon  anything  else, 
realises  itself  as  having  an  infinite  number  of  abodes,  and 
as  having  an  infinite  number  of  objects  to  experience  ; 
and  here  it  has  to  be  determined  whether  this  misguiding 
thing,  which  is  resident  in  that  (experience)  itself,  is  of  the 
nature  of  a  reality,  or  is  of  the  nature  of  an  unreality. 
Surely,  it  is  not  a  reality,  in  as  much  as  it  is  not  admitted 
(by  you)  to  be  so.  Nor  is  it  an  unreality.  For  if  it 
were  an  unreality,145  it  (viz.  this  misguiding  thing)  must 
be  acknowledged  to  be  either  the  knower,  or  the  known 
object,  or  the  knowledge.  Surely,  it  is  not  knowledge,  be- 
cause distinctions  in  relation  to  the  essential  nature  ofknow- 

145.     The     distinctions     in     the  thing  which  is  the  result  of  such  maya 

universe  in  the  forms  of  the   knower,  or    ignorance    has  to    be    made  out 

the  known  object  and  the  knowledge  either  as  the  knower  or  as  the  known 

are  held  by  the  Adwaitins  to   be  due  object  or   as    the  knowledge,    which 

to  maya.    Consequently   any   unreal  togetherimake  up»the  visible  universe, 
21 


1 62  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

ledge  (or  consciousness)  are  not  admitted  (by  you);  and 
because  also  unreality  is  not  admitted  (by  you)  in  relation 
to  consciousness  itself  which  forms  the  basis  of  illusion,  lest 
such  (an  admission)  should  give  room  to  the  hypothesis 
of  the  Madhyamikas.1^  The  knower,  the  known  object, 
and  the  knowledge  (or  consciousness)  conditioned  by  them 
(both),  may  themselves  be  characterised  as  constituting  the 
misguiding  error  (for  the  reason  that  they  are  conditioned); 
but  then  they  require  another  error  at  their  root  (to  make 
them  conditioned  and  erroneous) ;  and  thus  arises  a  regres- 
sus  in  infinitum.  And  then,  wishing  to  avoid  this  (difficul- 
ty), you  may  say  that  the  really  existent  experience  itself, 
which  is  the  same  as  the  Brahman,  forms  this  misguiding 
error.  And  if  the  Brahman  Himself  form  the  misguiding 
error,  then,  the  appearance  of  the  phenomenal  universe 
would  itself  be  dependent  upon  that  (Brahman).  What  is 
the  use  of  assuming  (in  such  a  case)  another  avidyd  (or 
ignorance)  which  is  similar  in  nature  to  the  phenomenal 
universe?  If  the  Brahman  Himself  have  the  character  of 
the  misguiding  error,  (then),  owing  to  His  eternity,  there 
would  be  no  final  release  (to  the  individual  self).  There- 
fore, as  long  as  a  real  misguiding  error,  different  from  the 
Brahman  Himself,  is  not  admitted,  so  long  it  is  not 
possible  to  explain  (the  theory  of)  illusion. 

Again,  what  is  the  meaning  of  the  (alleged)  impossi- 
bility of  definition  (in  relation  to  avidyd)  ?  It  may  be 
said  that  this  consists  in  its  (?'.  e.  avidyd's)  having  the 
characteristics  neither  of  an  entity  nor  of  a  non-entity; 
if  so,  such  a  thing  is  sure  to  be  incapable  of  definition,  be- 


146.  The  Madhyamikas    are  Nihi-       30.  for  a  fuller  discussion  and  criti- 
listic  Buddhists.  Vide  Ved.  Sitt.  II.  2.      cism  of  their  theory. 


Adhik.  I.  Sill,  i.]    SRi-BHlSHYA.  163 

cause  there  is  no  means  of  knowing  a  thing  of  that  kind. 
What  is  said  is  this  : — The  whole  of  the  totality  of  things 
has  to  be  established  as  existent  (only)by  means  of  (mental) 
cognitions,  and  all  cognition  relates  to  entities  or  non-enti- 
ties. And  if  it  be  held  that  the  object  of  a  cognition,  which 
vhas  (thus)  to  relate  to  entities  or  non-entities,  has  neither 
the  characteristics  of  an  entity  nor  those  of  a  non-entity, 
then  all  things  might  become  the  objects  of  all  cognitions. 

It  may  be  again  stated  here  as  follows  : — A  certain 
particular  thing  which  conceals  the  true  nature  of  all  things, 
which  is  the  material  cause  of  various  internal  and 
external  superimpositions,  which  is  itself  incapable  of  being 
defined  either  as  an  entity  or  as  a  non-entity,  which  is 
denoted  by  the  words  avidya,  ajftdna,  &c.,  and  which  is  it- 
self capable  of  being  removed  by  the  knowledge  of  the  real 
nature  of  things, — (such  a  thing)  is  indeed  made  out,  by 
means  of  perception  and  inference,  to  be  altogether  existent 
in  the  form  of  an  entity,  in  as  much  as  it  happens  to  be  dif- 
ferent from  the  antecedent  non-existence147  of  knowledge. 
The  superimposition  of  such  distinctions,  as  egoity  (or 
knowership),  knowledge,  and  the  thing  known,,  on  the 
internal  self,  the  essential  nature  of  which  is  concealed  by 
that  (avidya)  itself,  and  which  (however)  is  (really)  un- 
changeable and  is  made  up  of  self-luminous  intelligence,— 
(such  a  superimposition)  has  for  its  material  cause  the 
"Brahman  who  is  conditioned  by  that  (same  avidya). 
For  the  reason  that  there  are  various  particular  states 
of  that  same  (avidya),  there  also  arises,  in  regard  to 
the  world  which  is  itself  a  super-imposition,  the  further 
superimposition,  which  consists  of  (the  falsely  perceived) 

147,  Vide  supra  p.  49.  n.  37. 


164  SRI-BHA.SHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  /. 

snake,  silver,  &c.,  that  are  capable  of  being  stultified 
by  (correct)  knowledge,  and  consists  also  of  the  (correct) 
knowledge  relating  to  all  the  various  particular  things 
(in  the  world1).  And  the  fact  also,  that  all  things  which 
possess  the  nature  of  unreality  have  that  (avidya)  for 
their  material  cause,  is  made  out  by  the  force  of  the. 
reasoning,  that,  of  a  thing  which  is  unreal,  the  cause  also 
deserves  to  be  certainly  unreal.  Indeed,  the  perception 
which  has  for  its  object  that  avidya,  which  forms  the  cause 
(of  such  a  world),  is  a  direct  manifestation  (of  avidya)  to 
consciousness  to  the  effect — "  I  am  ignorant,  I  do  not 
know  myself,  nor  do  I  know  another."  But  this  (direct 
perception  of  ignorance)  has  not  for  its  object  the  antece- 
dent non-existence  of  knowledge;  for,  that  (antecedent 
non-existence)  is  made  out  with  the  aid  of  the  sixth  means 
of  proof,1  48  whereas  this  (perception  of  ignorance)  is  quite 
as  direct  as  when  (one  feels)  "  I  am  happy."  Even  when  it 
is  granted  that  non-existence  (of  knowledge)  is  capable  of 
being  directly  experienced,  this  experience  can  not  deal 
with  the  non-existence  of  knowledge  in  the  self ;  because 
there  is  the  knowledge  (of  such  non-existence)  even  at  the 
time  of  this  experience,  and  because  also,  if  it  (viz.  such 
knowledge)  were  not  existent  then,  there  would  be  the  im- 
possibility of  making  out  that  there  was  no  knowledge. 
What  is  said  amounts  to  this  : — In  this  experience— 

148.  The    six      means     of    proof  the   non-existence    of  things.     It  is 

are: — (l).  Pratyaksha,  perception    by  said  that,  according  to  this  last,   we 

the  senses;  (2)  Anutnana,interence;  (3)  make  out  the  non-existence  of  a  pot, 

Upamana,  analogy  or  comparison ;  (4)  for  instance,  by    not   perceiving   it. 

Sabda  or  3ptavacAana, verbal  testimony  There    are  also  three  other  means  of 

or  revelation;  (5)  A rthapatti,   circum-  proof  known  to  Indian  philosophers, 

stantial  presumption;  (6)  A  nupalabdhi  namely,     SamMava,       equivalence; 

or  Abhavapratyaksha,  negative  proof  Aitihya,    tradition    or   fallible   testi- 

of  non-cognition  intended  to  establish  mony  ;  and  Cheshtd,  gesture. 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  /.]       SRI-BHA.SHYA.  165 

'  I  am  ignorant ', — is  there  or  is  there  not  any  cognition  of 
the  self,  namely,  the  '  I ',  as  the  thing  which  has  the  non- 
existence  of  knowledge  for  its  characterising  attribute,  and 
also  (is  there  or  is  there  not  any  cognition)  of  know- 
ledge as  the  thing  which  is  opposed  to  ignorance  ? 
If  there  is,  then,  wholly  owing  to  self-contradiction, 
it  is  impossible  to  have  any  experience  of  the  non- 
existence  of  (all)  knowledge.  If  there  is  not,  then  that 
experience  of  the  non-existence  of  knowledge  cannot 
at  all  come  into  existence,  in  as  much  as  it  depends  upon 
the  knowledge  of  the  thing  characterised  by  that  (non-exist- 
ence of  knowledge)  and  also  upon  the  knowledge  of  the 
thing  which  is  contrary  (to  the  same  non-existence  of 
knowledge).  This  objection  holds  good  eqflially  in  the 
case  where  non-existence  of  knowledge  is  taken  to  be  dedu- 
cible  by  inference,  and  also  in  the  case  where  it  is  taken 
to  form  the  object  that  is  to  be  establshed  by  the  means  of 
proof  known  as  abhdva  (or  anupalabdhi}.*  **  When,  how- 
ever, it  is  granted  that  this  avidya  (or  ignorance)  has  the 
nature  of  an  entity,  then,  even  though  there  is  the  know- 
ledge of  that  thing  which  has  this  (non-existence  of  know- 
ledge for  its)  characterising  attribute,  and  also  (the  know- 
ledge) of  that  thing  which  is  contrary  (to  the  non-existence 
of  knowledge),  it  has  to  be  admitted  that  there  is  no  con- 
tradiction (between  this  knowledge  and  that  avidya  or 
ignorance  which  is  not  merely  the  negation  of  knowledge, 
but  is  a  positive  entity  of  some  sort).  Therefore,  this  ex- 
perience— '  I  am  ignorant ' — relates  only  to  that  avidya  (or 
ignorance)  which  has  the  nature  of  a  (positive)  entity. 
Again,  it  may  be  objected  that,  although  (this)  ignorance 

149.  Anupalabdhi    is    the    negative      blish  the  non-existence  of  things, 
proof  of  non-cognition  intended  to  esta-       Vide  supra  n.  143. 


1 66  SRi-BnlSHYA.      [Chap.  L  Part.  1. 

(or  avidya)  has  the  nature  of  a  (positive)  entity,  yet,  it  is  con- 
tradicted by  the  witnessing  principle  of  intelligence,  the 
nature  of  which  is  to  make  the  truth  of  things  manifest.  But 
this  is  not  right.  The  witnessing  principle  of  'intelligence 
does  not  deal  with  the  truth  of  things,  but  deals  with  this 
ignorance ;  for,  otherwise,  the  manifestation  to  consciousness 
of  all  such  things  as  are  unreal  would  be  impossible.  Indeed, 
(this  positive)  ignorance  (or  avidya)  is  not  removed  by  that 
knowledge  which  has  (that  same)  ignorance  for  its  object ; 
and,  accordingly,  there  is  here  no  contradiction  (between 
this  positive  entity  called  ignorance  and  the  knowledge  of 
that  same  '  ignorance '). 

And  again  it  may  be  said  : — This  ignorance,  although 
it  possesses  the  nature  of  an  (independent)  entity,  becomes 
a  thing  that  is  directly  cognisable  by  the  witnessing  prin- 
ciple of  intelligence,  only  in  definitive  association  with  a 
particular  (external)  object.  And  the  object  here  (which  by 
association  defines  this  ignorance)  is  itself  capable  of  being 
established  independently  of  any  means  of  proof.  There- 
fore, how  can  this  ignorance  (or  avidya),  which  is  defi- 
nitively associated  with  the  thing  ( I ',  (that  is  not  an  exter- 
nal object),  become  a  thing  cognisable  by  the  witnessing 
principle  of  intelligence  ?  There  is,  however,  nothing  wrong 
in  this.  The  whole  of  the  totality  of  things  is  made  up  of 
objects  which  are  cognisable  by  the  witnessing  principle  of 
intelligence,  either  in  the  form  of  known  things  or  in  the 
form  of  unknown  things.  It  being  so,  there  is  need  of  the 
interposition  of  a  means  of  proof  to  prove  only  that  thing 
which  happens  to  be  known  as  non-intelligent.  But  to 
prove  the  thing  which  is  intelligent,  subjective  and  self- 
evident,  there  is  no  need  of  the  interposition  of  (such)  a 
means  of  proof.  Therefore,  the  presentation  of  this  thing 
(viz.  the  thing  '  I ')  to  consciousness,  as  that  which  is  al- 


Adhik.  I.  Sftt.  i.]      SRI-BHISHYA.  167 

ways  definitively  associated  with  avidyd  (or  ignorance)  is 
quite  consistent  with  reason.  And  consequently,  by  means 
of  direct  perception  which  is  supported  by  logical  reason- 
ing, this  ignorance  (or  avidya)  is  made  out  to  have  indeed 
the  character  of  a  positive  entity. 

This  ignorance  (or  avidya)  which  has  the  nature 
of  an  entity  is  established  by  means  of  inference  also  thus : 
—That  knowledge,  which  is  obtained  with  the  help  of  the 
accepted  means  of  proof  and  (the  nature  of)  which  is  the 
subject  of  dispute  (between  us),  has,  for  its  antecedent  in 
time,  another  existent  thing  which  is  different  from  the 
antecedent  non-existence  of  that  (knowledge)  itself,  and 
veils  the  objects  of  that  same  (knowledge),  and  is 
capable  of  being  removed  by  that  (very  knowledge),  and 
is  existent  in  the  same  place  as  that  (knowledge)  ; 
because  it  brings  to  light  objects  which  were  unknown 
before,  and  is  thus  like  the  light  of  the  lamp-flame  first  lit 
up  in  the  midst  of  darkness.  Darkness  is  merely  either  the 
absence  of  light  or  the  absence  of  the  perception  of  colour, 
but  is  not  a  substance  ;  and  if,  (on  this  supposition),  it  be 
asked  how  it  is  that  it  is  put  forth  here  as  an  illustration 
to  prove  that  ignorance  (or  avidya)  which  has  the  nature 
of  a  positive  substance,— it  is  replied  that,  because  darkness 
is  perceived  to  possess  the  conditions  of  density,  thinness, 
&c.,  and  because  also  (it  is  perceived)  as  having  colour,  it 
cannot  but  be  a  distinct  substance.  Therefore  this  (argu- 
ment here  advanced)  is  unobjectionable. 

To  all  this,  we  make  the  following  reply  : — In  the  cog- 
nition— '  I  am  ignorant,  I  do  not  know  myself,  nor  do  I 
know  another,' — that  ignorance  which  has  the  nature  of  an 
entity  is  not  made  out  either  by  perception  in  itself  or  (by 
perception)  as  supported  by  logical  reasoning.  The  contra- 
diction, that  has  been  pointed  out  in  relation  to  (the  ignor- 


168  SRI-BHISHYA.     {Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

ance  which  forms)  the  antecedent  non-existence  of  know- 
ledge, applies  equally  well  to  this  (other)  ignorance  also 
which  has  the  nature  of  an  entity.  Is  the  internal  subject 
(viz.  the  ego)  made  out  or  not  made  out  to  be  that  which  is 
definitively  distinct  from  ignorance  by  forming  the  abode 
and  the  object  (thereof)  ?  If  you  hold  that  it  is  so  made 
out,  then  when  it  is  so  made  out,  how  can  there  remain 
yet  that  ignorance  of  it  which  is  capable  of  being  re- 
moved by  the  knowledge  of  its  true  nature  ?  If  you  hold 
that  it  is  not  so  made  out,  then,  how  is  it  possible  to  expe- 
rience the  ignorance  which  is  not  associated  with  the  ne- 
cessary concomitants  of  an  abode  and  an  object  ? 

Then  again,  it  may  be  said  that  the  opposite  of  igno- 
rance consists  in  the  distinct  manifestation  of  the  true 
nature  (of  the  ego),  and  that  (to  us  however)  there  is  that 
apprehension  (of  the  ego)  the  true  nature  of  which  is  in- 
distinct ;  and  that,  therefore,  even  when  there  is  the 
knowledge  of  that  (ego)  which  forms  the  abode  and  the 
object  (of  this  positive  ignorance),  there  is  no  contradiction 
at  all  in  experiencing  such  ignorance.  Indeed,  if  this  is 
true,  the  antecedent  non-existence  of  knowledge  also  forms 
the  object  of  that  (ego)  the  true  nature  of  which  is 
distinct,  (/.  e.  this  antecedent  non-existence  of  knowledge 
is  thus  like  your  '  positive  ignorance ').  And  the  know- 
ledge of  the  abode  of  this  (negative  ignorance  also),  as 
well  as  of  what  constitutes  its  contradiction,  relates  to  that 
(ego)  the  true  nature  of  which  is,  (of  itself),  indistinct^ 
Therefore,  (in  upholding  your  '  positive  ignorance  '),  there 
is  nothing  special,  apart  from  the  stubborn  adherence  to 
your  own  views. 

Even  that  ignorance,  which  has  the  nature  of  an  enti- 
ty ,is,  while  it  is  being  made  out  as  ignorance,  really  depend- 
ent upon  other  (correlated)  things;  just  as  the  apprehension 


Adhtk.  2.  Snt.  /.]      SRI-BHISHYA.  169 

of  the  antecedent  non-existence  (of  knowledge)  is  (so  de- 
pendent). Accordingly,  ignorance  may  be  either  the  absence 
of  knowledge,  or  what  is  different  from  that  (knowledge), 
or  what  is  the  opposite  of  it.  In  the  case  of  all  these  three 
(ways  of  looking  at  ignorance),  the  need  for  making  out  the 
true  nature  of  that  (knowledge,  the  absence  of,  the  differ- 
ence from,  or  the  contradiction  of  which  constitutes  ignor- 
ance) has  necessarily  to  be  admitted.  Surely,  in  making  out 
the  true  nature  of  darkness,  there  is  no  need  of  light. 
Nevertheless,  when  that  (darkness)  has  to  be  made  out 
to  be  the  same  as  that  which  is  the  opposite  of  light, 
there  certainly  is  needed  the  (previous)  knowledge  of 
light.  The  ignorance  admitted  by  you  is  never  realised 
as  it  is  in  itself,  but  is  merely  realised  as  that  which 
is  not  knowledge.  Such  being  the  case,  it  (viz.  the 
ignorance  assumed  to  be  a  positive  entity  by  you)  is 
as  dependent  upon  knowledge  as  (is  the  idea  of)  the  non- 
existence  of  knowledge.  And  the  antecedent  non-existence 
of  knowledge  is  admitted  by  you  also,  and  it  is  moreover 
understood  by  all.  Therefore,  it  has  to  be  granted  that,  in 
the  cognition  '  I  am  ignorant,  I  do  not  know  myself,  nor 
do  I  know  another,'  what  is  experienced  is  only  that  ante- 
cedent non-existence  of  knowledge  which  is  accepted  by 
both  of  us. 

Moreover,  the  experience  of  ignorance  (or  avidyd)  is 
not  possible  to  the  Brahman,  whose  essential  nature  is  alto- 
gether made  up  of  eternal,  free,  self-luminous  and  uni- 
form intelligence  ;  because  He  is  Himself  of  the  nature  of 
self-experience.  If  it  be  said  that,  even  the  Brahman,  whose 
essential  nature  is  self-experience,  perceives  ignorance  (or 
avidya)  when  that  essential  nature  of  His  is  concealed,  it  is 
asked,  what  it  is  to  have  the  concealment  of  one's  own  essen- 
tial nature.  If  it  be  replied  that  it  is  the  possession  of  an 
22 


i;o  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

unmanifest  nature,  it  is  asked  again  how  that  Brahman, 
whose  essential  nature  is  self-experience,  can  possess 
an  unmanifest  nature.  If  it  be  again  said,  in  reply,  that  it  is 
possible  for  that  Brahman,  whose  essential  nature  is 
self-experience,  to  acquire  an  unmanifest  character  through 
the  influence  of  something  other  than  Himself,  then,  as  has 
been  already  stated,  there  would  result  to  the  Brahman 
the  destruction  of  His  own  essential  nature,  owing  to  the 
influence  of  that  other  thing  ;  because  (according  to  you) 
luminosity  (or,  in  other  words,  manifest  intelligibility)  has 
to  constitute  the  essential  nature  of  that  (Brahman),  owing 
to  the  fact  that  an  attribute  called  luminosity  is  not  ac- 
knowledged (by  you  in  relation  to  the  Brahman}.  Again, 
this  ignorance  (or  avidya),  which  forms  the  cause  of  the 
concealment  of  the  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman, 
conceals  the  Brahman,  only  after  it  is  itself  experienced 
(by  the  Brahman}  ;  and  it  is  after  (thus)  concealing  the 
Brahman,  that  it  in  itself  becomes  the  object  of  His 
experience.  Thus  there  arises  the  logical  fallacy  of  re- 
ciprocal dependence.  If  it  be  said  that  it  (viz.  avidya) 
conceals  (the  Brahman}  only  after  it  is  experienced  (by  the 
Brahman},  it  would  follow  that  that  Brahman,  whose  essen- 
tial nature  is  not  concealed,  Himself  experiences  that  igno- 
rance (or  avidya).  .  Then  the  hypothesis  of  concealment 
would  be  purposeless,  as  also  the  hypothesis  of  this  (con- 
cealing) ignorance  itself ;  because  it  must  be  possible  for 
the  Brahman  to  perceive  the  world  also  which  is  acknow- 
ledged to  be  the  result  of  ignorance  (or  avidya),  in  the 
same  way  in  which  (it  is  possible  for  Him)  to  perceive  this 
ignorance  (or  avidya). 

Further,  does  the  Brahman,  of  Himself,  experience  this 
ignorance,  or  (does  He  experience  it)  through  the  influence 
of  something  other  than  Himself  ?  If  it  be  said  that  He 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  /].    SRI-BHA.SHYA.  171 

of  Himself  (experiences  it\  we  reply  that,  because  the  ex- 
perience of  ignorance  is  thus  associated  with  the  essential 
nature  of  the  Brahman,  there  can  be  no  release  (from  it). 
Or,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  Brahman,  whose  essential 
nature  is  experience,  acquires  thus  the  character  of  being 
the  experience  of  ignorance,  there  will  arise  the  destruction 
of  the  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman  Himself,  through 
the  knowledge  which  is  destructive  (of  that  ignorance  or 
avidya);m  the  same  manner  in  which  the  perception  of  silver 
(in  a  mother-of-pearl)  is  destroyed  by  means  of  the  know- 
ledge which  stultifies  the  falsely  perceived  silver.  If  the 
Brahman  experience  ignorance  (or  avidya)  through  the 
influence  of  something  other  (than  Himself),  what  is 
that  other  thing  ?  If  it  be  said  that  it  is  another  igno- 
rance for  avidya  ),  there  would  result  the  fallacy  '  3  °  of 
regressus  in  inftnitum.  If  it  be  (again)  said  that  after  hav- 
ing concealed  the  Brahman  Himself,  it  (viz.  ignorance  or 
avidya)  becomes  the  object  of  experience,  then  it  is  re- 
plied that,  in  such  a  case,  like  kdcha* 5 J  and  other  causes  of 
false  perception,  this  ignorance  (or  avidya)  also,  through  the 
mere  fact  of  its  own  existence  as  an  entity,  conceals  the 
Brahman  ;  and  that,  in  consequence,  there  will  be  no 
removal  of  ignorance  (or  avidya}  by  means  of  knowledge. 
It  may  be  said  again  that  this  ignorance  (or  avidya) 
is  itself  beginningless,  and  that  it  causes  the  Brahman  to 
be  the  witness ' 5  2  of  (that  ignorance)  itself,  at  the  same 


150.  Because    this  other  ignorance  ignorance  produces  the  concealment  of 
would  have  to   depend  upon   a   third  the  Brahman  at  the  same  time  that  it 
ignorance,  which  again  would  have  to  causes  Him  to  be  a  witness  of  itself, 
depend  upon  a  fourth,  and  this  again  and    so    there    is    no    such    fallacy 
upon  a  fifth,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.  as  requires  thepostuhuion  of  a  series 

151.  Vide  supra  p.  104.  n.  69.  of  avidyds. 

152.  In  this  case,  one  and  the   same 


i;2  SRi-BHlSHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

time  that  it  also  (produces)  the  concealment  of  the  essential 
nature  of  the  Brahman,  and  that  there  is,  in  consequence, 
no  room  for  fallacies  like  regressiis  in  uifinitum,  &c. 
But  it  is  replied  that  this  is  not  right  ;  because  it 
is  impossible  for  the  Brahman,  whose  essential  na- 
ture is  self-experience,  to  acquire  the  character  of  being 
a  witness  without  the  concealment  of  His  own  true  na- 
ture. If  it  be  said  in  reply  that  (the  true  nature  of  the 
Brahman)  is  concealed  by  some  other  cause  (than  igno- 
rance or  avidya),  then,  it  is  pointed  out  that  the  beginning- 
lessness  of  this  ignorance  (or  avidya]  is  (thereby)  given  up, 
and  the  aforesaid  fallacy  of  regressiis  in  infinitum  also 
follows.  If  one,  whose  essential  nature  is  altogether  uncon- 
cealed, acquires  the  character  of  being  a  witness,  then  that 
one  cannot  possess  the  character  of  being  altogether  the 
basis  of  self-experience. 

Furthermore,  when  the  Brahman  is  concealed  by 
ignorance  (or  avidya),  does  not  that  Brahman  shine  forth 
even  a  little  ?  Or  does  He  shine  forth  a  little  ?  On  the  former 
supposition,  the  Brahman,  whose  essential  nature  is  pure 
luminosity,  becomes  non-luminosity;  and,  as  it  has  been 
already  stated  more  than  once,  He  (thus)  acquires  the  cha- 
racter of  a  mere  nothing.  On  the  latter  supposition,  it  is 
asked,  which  is  the  part  concealed,  and  which  is  it  that 
shines  forth,  in  the  Brahman  who  is  uniformly  Exist- 
ence and  Intelligence  and  Bliss  throughout  ?  As  it  is  im- 
possible for  a  thing,  which  is  destitute  of  parts,  destitute 
of  attributes,  and  is  pure  luminosity,  to  have  two  distinct 
forms,  concealment  and  luminosity  cannot,  at  one  and  the 
same  time,  exist  together  in  that  thing. 

Then,  again,  it  may  be  urged  that,  when  concealed  by 
ignorance  (or  avidya),  the  Brahman  who  is  uniformly  Exist- 
ence and  Intelligence  and  Bliss  throughout,  appears  like 


Adhik.  I.  Si'tt.  /.]     SRI-BHA.SHYA.  173 

a  thing  which  has  an  indistinct  nature.  Then,  of  what  nature 
is  the  distinctness  and  indistinctness  of  that  thing  the 
essential  nature  of  which  is  pure  luminosity  ?  What  is  said 
is  this  : — Whatever  is  possessed  of  parts,  whatever  is 
possessed  of  attributes,  whatever  forms  the  thing  illum- 
ined by  luminosity,  —  the  complete  manifestation  of 
that  thing  is  distinct  manifestation.  That  manifestation 
in  which  a  few  of  the  attributes  (of  a  thing)  are 
absent  is  indistinct  manifestation.  It  being  so,  whatso- 
ever aspect  of  the  thing  is  unknown,  in  that  aspect, 
there  is  the  absence  of  luminosity  ;  and  for  that  very  rea- 
son, there  can  be  no  indistinctness  in  relation  to  luminosity. 
Whatsoever  aspect  of  the  thing  is  known,  in  that  aspect 
the  luminosity  relating  to  it  is  undoubtedly  distinct.  Hence, 
under  all  circumstances,  there  can  be  no  indistinctness  in 
relation  to  what  constitutes  luminosity.  Even  in  per- 
ceiving an  external  object  as  it  is,  even  then  indistinct- 
ness consists  in  not  knowing  a  few  of  the  attributes 
belonging  to  it.  Therefore,  when  the  Brahman  who  is 
not  the  object  of  perception,  who  is  devoid  of  attri- 
butes, and  is  pure  luminosity,  is  of  Himself  completely 
manifest  in  His  own  true  nature,  then  that  indistinctness, 
which  consists  in  the  non-perception  of  a  few  of  His  attri- 
butes and  which  is  said  to  be  the  result  of  ignorance  (or 
avidya),  cannot  at  all  exist  (in  relation  to  Him). 

Moreover,  does  this  indistinctness  which  is  the  result  of 
ignorance  (or  avidya)  disappear  at  the  rise  of  the  knowledge 
of  truth,  or  does  it  not  ?  If  it  does  not  disappear,  then 
there  cannot  be  the  beatific  state  of  final  release.  If  it  dis- 
appears, then  it  has  to  be  determined  of  what  form  the 
reality  is.  If  it  be  said  that  it  has  a  distinctly  manifest  na- 
ture, then,  it  is  asked,  whether  or  not  this  distinctly  mani- 
fest nature  existed  before  (that  reality  was  veiled  by  igno- 


174  SRI-BHA.SHYA.      [Chap.  1.  Part.  I. 

ranee  or  amdya}.  If  it  did  exist  before,  then,  (in  relation 
to  that  reality),  there  cannot  be  that  indistinctness  which 
is  the  result  of  ignorance  (or  avidya),  and  (there  cannot  be) 
also  the  disappearance  of  that  (same  indistinctness).  If  it 
did  not  exist  before,  then  the  beatific  state  of  final  release 
acquires  the  character  of  an  effect,  and  thus  becomes 
impermanent. 

And  it  has  been  already  stated1 33  that  this  ignorance 
(or  avidya)  cannot  exist,  simply  because  its  abode  cannot 
be  defined.  Moreover,  even  he,  who  maintains  that  illu- 
sion has  an  unreal  misguiding  cause  at  its  root,  will  find  it 
difficult  to  establish  that  illusion  does  not  arise  without 
a  (really  existing)  basis  (for  it  to  be  imposed  upon);  because 
illusion  is  possible,  even  when  its  basis  is  unreal,  in  the 
same  way  in  which  that  illusion  is  possible  when  the  mis- 
guiding cause  producing  the  illusion  and  (the  reality  form- 
ing) the  seat  of  (such)  a  misguiding  cause  are  (both)  unreal. 
And  from  this  (possibility  of  illusion  without  a  real  basis) 
there  will  only  follow  the  nothingness  of  all  things. 

What  has  been  stated  already  to  the  effect  that  ignor- 
ance (or  avidya),  which  has  the  nature  of  an  entity,  is 
established  by  the  logical  process  of  inference  also, — that 
is  not  right;  because  (such)  a  logical  process  of  inference  is 
impossible.  But  it  may  be  said  that  the  inference  intended 
to  establish  this  has  already  been  given.  True,  it  has  been 
so  given;  but  it  is  wrong  ;  because,  in  (establishing)  the  ig- 
norance (accepted  by  you),  the  middle  term  of  the  syllo- 
gism1 84  proves  also  that  other  ignorance  which  is  not  accep- 
table (to  you),  and  is  hence  unfavourable  (to  you).  There 
(/.  e.  in  your  syllogism),  if  it  (viz.  the  middle  term)  does  not 

153.  Vide  supra  pp.  157.  et  seq.  syllogism  is  given  in  full. 

154.  Vide  su^ra  p.  167.  where  this 


Adhik.  I.  Snt.  /.]      SRi-BniSHYA.  175 

form  the  means  of  proving  that  other  ignorance,  then  it  ceas- 
es to  be  absolute.1 53  If  it  does  form  the  means  of  proving 
that  (ignorance)  also,  then  this  other  ignorance  prevents 
(the  Brahman]  from  becoming  the  witness  of  the  ig- 
norance (or  avidya  accepted  by  you)  ;  and  consequently, 
the  hypothesis  of  (a  positive)  ignorance  (or  avidya)  becomes 
purposeless. 

Moreover,  the  illustrative  example136  is  deficient  in 
regard  to  the  middle  term,  because  the  light  of  the 
lamp-flame  does  not  really  possess  the  power  of  illumin- 
ing such  things  as  were  unknown  before.  Indeed,  every- 
where, it  is  intelligence  alone  that  possesses  the  power 
of  illumining  (things).  For,  even  when  the  lamp-flame  is 
in  existence,  in  the  absence  of  intelligence,  there  will 
be  no  illumination  in  relation  to  objects.  The  senses 
also  are  merely  the  means  of  producing  knowledge ; 
but  they  do  not  possess  the  power  of  illumining  (things). 
The  light  of  the  lamp-flame  possesses  only  the  power 
of  being  helpful  to  the  knowledge-producing  sense  of 
sight,  through  removing  the  darkness  which  obstructs 
(the  production  of  knowledge).  The  current  notion 
that  the  lamp-flame  is  an  illuminator,  depends  upon  its 
being  a  serviceable  means  to  the  sense  of  sight,  which  is 
engaged  in  the  production  of  that  knowledge  which  illu- 
mines (things).  It  may  be  said — "  The  light  of  the  lamp- 
flame  has  been  cited  by  us  as  an  illustration,  not 
because  we  admit  it  to  possess  the  same  illuminating 

155.  If  the    middle  term    of    the  prove  the  ignorance  or  avidya  which 

syllogism  here  prove  an  ignorance  or  is  other  than  the  positive  one  under 

avidya,  other  than  what  has  the  na-  discussion,    then   the   reasoning    be- 

ture  of  a   positive   entity,  then  the  comes  too  narrow.  In  either  case,  this 

reasoning  becomes  too  wide.  If  the  syllogism  cannot  but  be  fallacious, 
same  middle  term  do  not,  however,  156.  Vide  supra  p.  167. 


176  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

character  as  knowledge  has ;  but  because  we  admit  that 
knowledge  itself  has  the  power  of  causing  such  illumina- 
tion as  conies  after  the  removal  of  what  conceals  its  own 
object."  This  is  not,  however,  right.  Surely,  the  charac- 
ter of  an  illuminator  does  not  consist  merely  in  the  re- 
moval of  what  obstructs  (illumination);  but  (consists) 
wholly  in  the  definite  presentation  of  things  (to  conscious- 
ness), or,  in  other  words,  (it  consists)  in  making  things  fit 
to  be  realised.  And  this  (power)  belongs  only  to  intelligence. 
If  the  power  of  illumining  things,  that  were  not  illumined 
before,  is  admitted  in  relation  to  such  things  also  as  are 
helpful  (in  the  production  of  knowledge),  then,  surely 
the  power  of  illumining  things  not  illumined  before  has 
to  be  admitted  in  relation  to  the  senses  also,  because,  (in 
the  production  of  knowledge),  they  are  helpful  in  the 
highest  degree.  If  it  be  so  admitted,  then,  because,  (in 
producing  knowledge),  they  (viz.  the  senses)  are  not 
preceded  in  time  by  some  other  thing  capable  of  being 
removed  by  them,  the  middle  term  (in  your  syllogism) 
ceases  to  be  absolute.  And  now  let  us  have  done  with 
this  (kind  of  criticism .) 

And  in  this  connection  there  are  the  following  counter- 
syllogistic  statements  : — That  ignorance  (or  avidya),  which 
is  the  subject  of  dispute  (between  us),  has  not  for  its 
abode  the  Brahman  who  is  pure  intelligence  :  because  it 
(viz.  that  avidya)  possesses  the  character  of  (illusory)  non- 
knowledge,  * 3  7  like  the  (illusory)  non-knowledge  which  re- 
lates to  the  mother-of-pearl,  &c  ;  indeed  this  has  the  know- 
er  for  its  abode.  That  ignorance  (or  avidya),  which 
is  the  subject  of  dispute  (between  us),  does  not  conceal  the 

157.  Non-knowledge   is  used  here      ledge,  or  the  opposite  of  knowledge, 
so   as   to  denote,    either  false  know-      or   what  is   other   than  knowledge. 


Adhik.  I.  SfU.  /.]     SRI-BHA.SHYA.  177 

Brahman  who  is  pure  intelligence  :  because  it  possesses 
the  character  of  (illusory)  non-knowledge,  like  the  (illusory) 
non-knowledge  which  relates  to  the  mother-of-pearl,  &c  ; 
indeed  this  conceals  (only  external)  objects.  That 

ignorance  (or  avidya),  which  is  the  subject  of  dispute  (be- 
tween us), is  not  capable  of  being  removed  by  knowledge: 
because  it  does  not  possess  the  power  of  concealing  the  ob- 
jects of  knowledge.  Whatever  non-knowledge  is  removed 
by  knowledge,  that  (non-knowledge)  conceals  the  objects  of 
knowledge,  like  the  non-knowledge  relating  to  the  mother- 
of-pearl,  &c.  The  Brahman  is  not  the  seat  of  ignorance 
(or  avidya),  because,  (according  to  you),  He,  like  pots,  &c., 
does  not  possess  the  qualit3r  of  being  the  knower.  The 
Brahman  is  not  concealed  by  ignorance  (or  avidya)  ;  be- 
cause He  is  not,  (according  to  you),  an  object  of  knowledge. 
Whatever  is  concealed  by  non-knowledge,  that  has  to  be  an 
object  of  knowledge,  like  the  mother-of-pearl,  &c.  The 
Brahman  is  not  that  ignorance  (or  avidya)  which  is 
capable  of  being  removed  by  knowledge  ;  because  He 
is  not  an  object  of  knowledge.  Whatever  non-knowledge 
is  capable  of  being  removed  by  knowledge,  that  (non-know- 
ledge) is  an  object  of  knowledge,  like  (the  non-knowledge 
relating  to)  the  mother-of-pearl,  &c.  That  knowledge 
which  is  acquired  with  the  help  of  the  accepted  means  of 
proof,  and  (the  nature  of)  which  is  the  subject  of  dispute 
(between  us,)  has  not,  for  its  antecedent  in  time,  any 
ignorance  (or  avidya)  which  is  different  from  its  own 
antecedent  non-existence  ;  because  that  (knowledge  also) 
possesses  the  character  of  such  knowledge  as  is  ob- 
tained with  the  help  of  the  accepted  -means  of  proof; 
like  the  knowledge  which,  being  derived  with  the  help  of 
the  accepted  means  of  proof,  proves  (according  to  you) 
the  ignorance  (or  avidya)  that  is  admitted  by  you.  Know- 


178  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

ledge  cannot  be  the  destroyer  of  an  entity;  because 
it  possesses  the  "character  of  knowledge,  even  when  it  is 
not  associated  with  the  manifestation  of  any  particular 
(constructive  or  destructive)  power.  Whatever  happens  to 
be  the  destroyer  of  an  entity,  that  is  seen  to  be  either  the 
knowledge  or  the  non-knowledge  which  is  associated  with 
the  manifestation  of  a  particular  power,  like  the  knowledge 
which  is  possessed  by  the  Lord,  and  by  Yogins  and  others, 
or  like  the  (non-knowledge  which  is  found  in  a)  club  and 
other  similar  objects.  That  ignorance  (or  avidyti)  which 
has  the  nature  of  an  entity  is  not  capable  of  being  destroy- 
ed by  knowledge;  because  it  possesses  the  nature  of 
an  entity,  like  pots,  &c.,  (which  are  not  destroyed  merely 
by  any  knowledge). 

It  may  be  said  again  here  that  we  (actually)  see  the 
(subsequent)  stultifying  knowledge  destroy  fear1 58and  other 
such  emotions,  which  are  (positive  entities)  caused  by  the 
previous  (false)  knowledge  (of  a  serpent  superimposed  upon 
a  rope,  for  instance).  But  that  is  not  right.  Indeed,  the 
disappearance  of  those  (emotions  of  fear,  &c.,)  is  not  due 
to  knowledge  ;  because,  being  transitory,  they  themselves 
go  out  of  existence,  and  because  also,  when  their  cause  is 
removed,  they  never  recur  again.  Their  transitoriness  is 
made  out  from  the  fact  that  they  are  experienced, 
like  knowledge,  only  in  the  presence  of  that  which  brings 
them  into  existence,  and  also  from  the  fact  that  they 
are  not  experienced  otherwise.  And  if  fear  and  other 

158.  This  is  an  oil-quoted  illustra-  in   a  rope,  and  that  they  can    be  de- 

tion  of    the  2iwaitins.     They  hold  stroyed  by  the  knowledge  of  the  real- 

tha.t   fear   and  such    other  emotions  ity.  So  also  ignorance  or  avidya  has  the 

are  of  the  nature  of  positive  entities,  nature  of  an  entity   and  can  be  de- 

and  may  arise  from  illusory  causes  stroyed  by  the  knowledge  of  the  Brah- 

like  the  false  perception    of  a   snake  man. 


Adhik.  I.  Sftt.  i.]      SRI-BHA.SHYA.  179 

such  emotions  are  not  transitory,  then,  in  a  continuous 
succession  of  the  same  mental  impressions  which  form  the 
cause  of  fear  and  other  such  emotions,  every  one  of  those 
mental  impressions  will,  without  any  difference  whatever, 
act  as  the  cause  of  the  production  of  fear  and  of  other  such 
emotions  ;  and  thus  there  will  be  room  for  many  fears  (to 
arise  without  cessation  from  the  same  cause  to  the  same 
person)  :  and  therefore  also  (they  cannot  but  be  transitory). 

By  the  mention  of  purposeless  qualifications  in  the 
statement  that  (knowledge)  has,  for  its  antecedent  in  time, 
another  existing  thing  which  is  different  from  the  antece- 
dent non-existence  of  that  (knowledge  itself),1 39  your 
wonderful  skill  in  using  words  is  indeed  well  shown  forth. 

Therefore,  by  means  of  the  logical  process  of  inference 
also,  there  cannot  be  the  establishment  of  that  ignorance 
(or  avidyd)  which  has  the  nature  of  an  entity. 

It  will  be  stated  presently  that  ignorance  (or  avidya) 
cannot  be  established  by  scriptural  evidence  as  well  as  by 
the  evidence  of  circumstantial  presumption  in  relation  to 
the  interpretation  of  the  scriptures.  This  proposition1  cu 
also,  namely,  that  the  cause  of  a  thing,  which  is  unreal, 
is  also  certainly  unreal,  will  be  disproved  by  the  logical 

159.  Vide  supra  p.  167.,  where  ignorance  or  avidya.  is  a  positive  en- 
the  statement  in  which  these  qua-  tity,  but  not  simply  the  negation  of 
lifications  occur,  runs  thus; — "That  knowledge.  This  idea  that  it  is  an  en- 
knowledge,  which  is  obtained  with  the  tity  is  expressed  by  the  use  of  the  word 
help  of  the  accepted  means  of  proof  vastu  which  means  an  existent  thing, 
and'  (the  nature  of)  which  is  the  Therefore  it  is  pointed  out  in  the 
subject  of  dispute  between  us,  has  for  argument,  here,  that  all  the  qualifica- 
its  antecedent  in  time,  another  existing  tions  attached  to  that  word  vastu  so 
thing  which  is  different  from  the  an-  as  to  make  it  signify  an  entity  are 
tecedent  non-existence  of  that  (know-  redundant  in  as  much  a?,  of  itself,  it 
ledge)  itself."  The  object  of  the  stale-  signifies  an  entity, 
ment  above  quoted  is  to  prove  that  160.  Vide  supra  p.  164. 


i8o  SRI-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

arguments  that  are  appropriately  given  in  the  section101 
which  begins  with  the  aphorism. — "(The  Brahman]  is  not 
(the  cause  of  this  world)  being  different  from  this  world 
&c."  [Ved.  Sut.ll.  1.4.]. 

Hence,  there  can  be  no  perception  which  has  that 
indescribable  ignorance  (or  avidyd]  for  its  object.  It  (viz. 
that  ignorance)  can  not  be  admitted  to  be  of  such  (inde- 
scribable) nature  even  though  (in  relation  to  it),  there  are 
perception,  illusion,  and  stultification.  Whatever  becomes 
manifest  to  consciousness,  that  alone  forms  the  object  of 
perception,  illusion,  and  stultification.  It  is  not  proper  to 
assume  that  what  is  not  arrived  at  by  means  of  these  modes 
of  manifestation,  as  well  as  by  means  of  any  other  mode  of 
manifestation,  forms  the  object  of  these  (very  modes  of 
manifestation).  It  may  be  said  again,  thus: — There  is  the 
perception  of  silver,  &c.,  in  the  mother-of-pearl,  &c.; 
and  even  at  the  time  of  this  perception  there  is  the 
stultification  to  the  effect  that  it  (viz.  silver)  is  not  in  exist- 
ence (there);  and  one  thing  cannot,  possibly,  appear  like 
another  :  for  all  these  reasons,  it  has  to  be  assumed  that 
a  new  indescribable  "something  in  the  form  of  this  silver 
becomes  manifest  under  the  influence  of  a  misguiding  cause. 
But  it  is  not  right  to  say  so  :  because,  even  when  such  an 
assumption  is  made,  the  appearance  of  one  thing  like  an- 
other is  not  avoided;  and  because  it  is  possible  to  have 
perceptual  manifestation,  volitional  activity,  illusion,  and 
stultification  (of  illusion),  only  when  it  is  admitted  that 
it  is  possible  for  one  thing  to  appear  like  another  ;  ajid 
because  also  it  is  improper  to  assume  the  existence  of  a 

161.  This  section  comprises  sutras  man    is    not  the  cause  of  this  world, 

II.  I.  4  to  12.  and  goes  by  the  name  being  different  from  this  world  ;  and 

of  the     'Vilakshanat-wadhikarana,    on  such  difference  is  made  out  from  the 

account  of  the  first  sutra  in  the  sec-  scripture." 
tion  being  as   follows: — "  The  BraA- 


Adhik.  /.  Sftl.  /.]       SRi-BniSHYA.  181 

thing  which  is  absolutely  unseen  and  has  no  originating 
cause  whatsoever.  Indeed,  this  (silver)  which  is  assumed 
(by  you)  to  be  indescribable  is  not  perceived  (then  at  the 
time  of  the  illusion)  to  be  indescribable,  but  (is  perceived) 
to  be  nothing  other  than  real  silver.  If,  (however),  it 
appeared  to  be  altogether  indescribable,  then,  there  would 
be  no  room  for  illusion,  for  stultification,  and  also  for 
volitional  activity.  Hence,  you  also  have  to  admit  the 
view  that  it  is  only  the  mother-of-pearl  and  other  such 
things  which  appear  to  consciousness  in  the  form'  of  silver 
and  other  such  things  ;  because,  when  one  thing  does  not 
appear  like  another,  it  is  not  possible  to  have  (the  related) 
manifestation,  volitional  activity,  stultification,  and  illusion 
(in  connection  with  things),  and  because  also  it  is  not 
possible  to  avoid  that  (kind  of  otherwise-manifestation). 

Moreover,  even  those,  who  hold  other  opinions 
regarding  the  manifestation  of  things  to  consciousness,  have 
necessarily  to  accept  the  appearance  of  things  otherwise 
than  as  they  are,  although  they  may  have  gone  very  far  (in 
their  course  of  reasoning).  According  to  the  view1  c  2  which 
says  that  what  becomes  manifest  to  consciousness  is  mere 
non-existence,  (this  non-existence  has  to  appear)  in  the  form 
of  existence.  According  to  the  view163  which  says  that 
what  becomes  manifest  to  consciousness  is  merely  the  idea, 
(this  idea  has  to  appear)  in  the  form  of  objects.  According 
to  the  view104  which  says  that  what  becomes  manifest 
to  consciousness  is  the  non-apprehension  (of  the  differ- 

162.  This   refers    to   Nihilism    or  The     names   of  the   several    khyahs 
the  view  of  the  Madhyamikas.  or  theories  of  perception    are    given 

163.  This  refers  to  Idealism,  or  the  in    this    commonly    quoted     sloka — 
view  of  the  Yogacharas.  "^.tmakhydtiyasatkhydtirakhydtihkhydtir- 

164.  This    is    the  view  of    those  anyathd  \      iathdnirrachartakkydtirily- 
•who   are    known    as    Akfiydtivadiits.  etatftfty!3tifaHckal:am\\ 


182  SRI-BHA.SHYA.      {Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

ence  (between  two  things),  the  characteristic  of  one  thing 
has  to  appear  as  the  characteristic  of  another  tiling,  and 
two  perceptions  have  to  appear  as  only  one  ;  and  even  on 
the  supposition  that  there  is  no  object  corresponding  to  this 
erroneous  perception,  (a  non-existent)  object  has  to  appear 
as  existent. 

Moreover,  he,  who  holds  the  view  that  here  (/.  e.  in  the 
mother-of-pearl)  a  kind  of  new  and  indescribable  silver  is 
born,  has  also  to  state  the  cause  of  the  origin  of  that  (silver). 
It  (viz.  the  cause  of  the  origin  of  that  silver)  can  not  be  the 
mere  manifestation  of  that  silver,  because  that  (manifesta- 
tion) has  that  (same  silver)  for  its  object,  and  so  cannot 
itself  come  into  existence  before  the  production  of  that 
(silver).  That  (a  particular  manifestation)  has  arisen  with- 
out relating  to  any  particular  object,  that  that  (manifestation 
itself)  has  afterwards  produced  that  (object),  and  then  has 
made  it  its  own  object,— this  is  indeed  the  teaching  of  very 
great  men!!  Again  (it  may  be  said  that)  it  (viz.  the  cause 
of  the  origin  of  that  silver)  is  an  error  (or  defect)  found  in 
the  senses,  &c.  This  is  not  so,  because  it  (viz.  such  a  cause 
of  erroneous  perception)  abides  in  the  person,  and  so 
cannot  have  the  power  of  producing  an  effect  that  is  found 
in  relation  to  external  objects.  Then  again  it  is  not  the 
senses  (that  form  the  cause  of  the  origin  of  such  silver), 
because  they  are  the  means  of  producing  knowledge.  Xor 
are  the  wrongly  affected  senses  (the  cause  of  the  origin 
of  that  silver),  because  they  also  are  capable  of  giving 
rise  to  something  peculiar,  only  in  relation  to  that  know- 
ledge which  is  produced  by  themselves.  That  the  beginning- 
less  ignorance  (or  avidya)  constitutes  the  cause  (of  the  pro- 
duction of  that  silver)  has,  indeed,  been  already  disproved. 

Again,  how  is  it  that  this  indescribable  and  newl}* 
produc'ed  totality  of  things  is  made  to  be  the  object  of  the 


Adhik.  I.  SuL  i.]     SRi-BulSHYA.  183 

notion  and  of  the  word  which  denote  silver  and  other  (such 
falsely  perceived)  objects,  but  is  not  made  the  object  of  the 
notion  and  of  the  word  which  denote  pots  and  other  (cor- 
rectly perceived)  things?  If  it  be  said  that  it  is  due  to  their 
similarity  with  silver  and  other  (such  falsely  perceived)  ob- 
jects, then  let  the  notion  and  the  word  (which  denote  this 
new  and  indescribable  totality  of  things)  denote  that  (tota- 
lity) to  be  the  same  as  that  (silver  and  other  such  things 
which  are  perceived  to  be  unreal).  If  it  be  said  that  it  is  due 
to  their  association  with  the  genus  of  silver  and  of  other 
(such  falsely  perceived)  objects,it  is  asked  whether  this  genus 
is  real,  or  whether  it  is  unreal.  Surely,  it  cannot  be  real ; 
because,  (in  such  a  case),  it  cannot  be  (inseparably)  asso- 
ciated with  what  is  unreal.  Nor  can  it  be  unreal;  because, 
(then),  it  cannot  be  in  (inseparable)  association  with  what 
is  real,  and  because  also  it  is  not  possible  for  the  notion  and 
the  word  which  denote  reality  to  be  made  to  denote  that 
which  is  unreal.  Thus  we  have  had  enough  in  the  way  of 
criticising  unripe  and  fallacious  reasoning. 

On  the  other  hand,  (the  truth  is  as  follows): — "The 
opinion  of  those  who  know  the  Vcdas  is  that  all  knowledge 
is  real,  because,  according  to  the  Srutts  and  the  Smritis, 
every  thing  may  become  manifest  in  the  form  of  every  other 
thing.  At  the  commencement  of  (the  portion  dealing  with) 
creation  and  the  other  acts  (of  the  Lord)  which  are  preced- 
ed by  His  volition — 'May  I  become  manifold' — [QJthand. 
Up.  VI.  2.  3.] — it  is  urged  in  the  Sruti  itself— '(I  will  make) 
each  of  these165  tri-partite'.1 66— [Qt/iand.  Up.  VI.  3.  3  & 

165.  These,    namely,     the    things  constituted  as  to  possess  the  character 
fire,  water  and  earth.    Vide    Chhand.  of    all    the  three   elements   of  tfjas, 
L'p.  VI.  2,3  £  4.  water,   and  earth.     This  composition 

166.  Tripartition    is     the     process  is  said  to  be  caused  at  the  beginning  of 
by  which  each  one  of  the  three  things  creation.     Vide   Qi/idnd.    Up.  VI.  3. 
namely,    fire,    water  mid  earth  is  so  4  &  $.     Thus,  when  the  thing  fire  is 


184 


SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 


4.].  Thus,  indeed,  the  tri-partition  (of  the  elements)  is 
made  out  by  direct  revelation.  The  red  colour  of  fire 
is  the  colour  of  (the  element)  tejas,  the  white  (colour  of 
fire,)  is  (the  colour  of  the  element)  of  water,  and  the  black 
(colour  of  fire)  is  (the  colour  of  the  element)  of  earth.1  cr 
Thus  this  tripleness  of  form  is  shown  by  the  Sniti  itself 
to  exist  in  relation  to  fire  itself.  It  is  so  stated  in 
the  Vishnu- Pur  ana***  also  at  the  commencement  of  (the 
portion  dealing  with)  creation,  in  the  following  and  other 
passages: — 'Then  they  (viz.  the  constituent  elements169 

divided  into  two  equal  parts,  one  of  \vhichpreponderatesovertheothers. 
these  halves  is  found  to  be  made  up  of 
the  element  of  fire;  and  if  the  other 
half  be  again  subdivided  into  two 
parts,  one  of  these  would  be  seen  to  be 
made  up  of  the  element  of  water,  and 
the  other,  of  the  element  of  earth. 
Such  is  the  case  also  with  watery  and 
earthy  things.  Hence  50  per  cent  of 
the  thing  fire,  is  made  up  of  the  ele- 
ment tejas,  25  per  cent,  of  the  ele- 
ment of  water,  and  25  per  cent,  of  the 
element  of  earth.  To  this  thing  the 
name  of  fire  is  given,  because  in  it  the 
element  tejas  preponderates  over  the 
other  two  elements.  Similarly  that 
thing  is  called  water  in  the  composi- 
tion of  which  the  element  of  water 
preponderates  over  the  other  two 
elements  of  tejas  and  earth.  And 


that  thing  is  called  earth  in  the 
composition  of  which  the  element  of 
earth  preponderates  over  the  other 
two  elements  of  tejas  and  water.  In  this 
manner  every  thing  in  the  world  may 
be  said  to  contain  every  other  thing  in 
the  world,  but  it  derives  its  name  from 
that  element  in!  its  composition 


167.  ViteChhand.UpXl.i.  I  to 6. 

168.  Vide  V.  P.  I.    2. 

169.  The      constituent      elements 
or    Ttlttvas   of    the  universe    are    as 
follow  in    the  descending  order: — (/) 
Pradhdna    or    Prakriti,    nature,    (2) 
Mahal  or  Buddhi,  the  '  great  principle', 
(?)     Ahahkdra   or  egoity;  the    Tan- 
matras  or  the  subtle  and  rudimentary 
elements  characterised  by  (4)   Sabda, 
sound,  (5)  Spar'sa,  touch,    (<J)  Rupa, 
form   or  colour,  (7)  Rasa,    taste,   (<¥) 
Gandha,  smell  ;  the  grosser   elements 
corresponding  to  these  Tanmatras  are 
(9)   Akasa,     ether,    (id)     Vdyu,    air, 
(//)   Tejas,  light    or  heat,    (72)  Ap, 
water,  (/j)  Sahghata  or  Prit/uv?,   the 
earth  ;   (14)   the  mind  ;  the  senses  of 
(75)  Sro/ra,  hearing,  (16)  Ttak,  touch, 
(77)  Chakshus,  sight,  (18)  Rasa,  taste 
(19)    Gandha,     smell  ;    and    the  or 
gans    of  (20)   speaking,    (27)  work- 
ing,   (22)   walking,  and    the   organs 
connected  with    (2j)  defalcation  and 
(24)  reproduction.    The  2$th  element 
is  the  individual  soul,  which  is  beyond 
the  \Pratriti,  in  the  ascending  order. 


Adhik.  I.  Sul.  /.]       SRI-BHISHYA.  185 

themselves)  possessing  varied  powers  were,  while  sepa- 
rate, wholly  unable  to  create  beings,  without  (themselves) 
having  been  thrown  together.  Having  secured  combination 
with  each  other,  and  abiding  in  each  other,  the  elements, 
that  begin  with  the  universal  principle  known  as  the 
mahat  and  end  with  the  (well  known)  particular  principles, 
have  gone  to  make  up  the  universe  indeed.'  J  ~  °  Further, 
the  Sutrakara  (viz.  Badarayana)  also  has  similarly  spoken 
of  the  tripleness  of  form,  belonging  to  the  elements,  to 
the  effect  that,  although  all  created  things  consist  of 
the  three  elements  (of  lejas,  water  and  earth),  still  the 
mention  of  water  as  the  name  of  a  particular  thing  is 
due  to  the  preponderance  of  that  element  in  it ;  ' 7 '  and 
thus  arises  a  difference  of  names  (in  relation  to  things). 
The  wise  hold  that  the  direction  of  the  Sruti  to  use  the 
putlka  plant  in  the  absence  of  the  soma  plant  is  due  to 
the  presence  of  the  constituents  of  the  soma  (in  the 
pntlka).  The  use  of  wild  rice  (for  offerings)  in  the 
absence  of  cultivated  rice  is  due  to  (the  wild  rice)  possess- 
ing the  characteristics  of  the  cultivated  rice.  That  which 
is  found  to  form  a  part  of  any  (homogeneous)  substance — 
that  alone  is  similar  (in  essence)  to  that  (substance).  The 
presence  of  silver,  &c.,  in  the  mother-of-pearl,  &c.,  is  thus 
taught  by  the  Sruti  itself.  The  difference  in  the  names  of 
things  such  as  silver,  mother-of-pearl,  &c.,  has  preponder- 
ance for  its  cause.  Moreover,  the  mother-of-pearl,  &c., 
are  perceived  as  being  similar  to  silver,  &c..  Hence,  the 
presence  here  (/.  c.  in  the  mother-of-pearl)  of  that  (viz. 

The  SaiiJihvas  admit  only  these  25  tall-  the   .Mahal  downwards,  vide  supra   n 

ngf  or  principles.   The  VeJantins  how-  169.    These  are  called  universal  pi  in 

ever  add  the  Brahman  as  the  26th  tat-  ciples,  and  the  remaining  sixteen  arc 

Ira,  above  and  beyond  the   individual  called  particular  principles.  Vide  V.T. 

soul.  Cf.  M.  B/i.  II.  223.  &  Manu.  1.  I.  2.  52  to  54. 

170.   For  the  seven  principles   from  171.    Ved.  $t~it.  III.  I.  2, 


1 86  SRI-BHISHYA.    [Chap.  I.  Part.  /, 

silver)  is  determined  by  perception.  Sometimes,  on 
account  of  a  defect  in  the  sense  of  sight,  &c.,  the 
silver-part  (in  the  mother-of-pearl)  is  apprehended  without 
the  shell-part ;  and,  accordingly,  one  in  quest  of.  silver 
begins  to  act  in  obedience  to  volition.  When  the  defect  is 
removed,  and  the  shell-part  of  the  mother-of-pearl  is  appre- 
hended, that  (volitional  activity  in  regard  to  silver)  ceases. 
Therefore,  the  perception  of  silver  &c.,  in  the  mother-of- 
pearl,  &c.,  is  real.  The  relation  of  the  stultified  and 
the  stultifier  also,  (existing  between  these  perceptions),  re- 
sults from  the  preponderance  of  the  one  (perception)  over 
the  other,  according  as  the  apprehension  of  the  preponder- 
ance of  the  mother-of-pearl  (over  the  silver)  is  partial  or 
complete.  Therefore,  this  (relation  of  the  stultified  and 
the  stultifier)  is  not  dependent  upon  their  relating  to  unreal 
things  and  real  things.  The  rule  that  every  thing  has  the 
characteristics  of  every  other  thing  is  thus  established." 
In  the  condition  of  dreams  also,  according  to  the  merit 
and  demerit  of  living  beings,  God  Himself  creates  corres- 
ponding objects,  which  are  capable  of  being  perceived  by 
certain  particular  persons,  and  which  come  to  their  end  after 
a  certain  particular  length  of  time.  To  this  same  effect  is 
the  following  scriptural  text  relating  to  the  condition  of 
dreams :  "There  (i.e.  in  the  condition  of  dreams),  there  are 
no  chariots,  no  horses  to  be  yoked,  and  no  roads.  But  He 
creates  the  chariots,  the  horses  to  be  yoked,  and  the  roads. 
There  is  no  bliss,  no  happiness  and  no  joy,  but  He  creates 
bliss,  happiness  and  joy.  There,  there  are  no  puddles,  no 
lakes,  and  no  rivers,  but  He  creates  the  puddles,  the  lakes, 
and  the  rivers.  Indeed,  He  is  the  creator."  \Brih.  Up.  IV. 
3.  10.].  Although  these  things  are  not  at  that  time  (of 
dreaming)  capable  of  being  perceived  by  all  persons  other 
(than  the  dreamer),  yet  the  Lord  creates  such  things 


dhik.  L  Sat.  /.]    ^Ri-BHisHYA.  187 


to  be  perceived  only  by  each  particular  (dreaming)  per- 
son. Indeed,  He  is  the  creator.  That  kind  ofcreatorship  is 
appropriate  to  Him  who  wills  the  truth  and  whose  powers 
are  wonderful.  This  is  the  meaning  (of  the  above  scriptural 
text).  Again  (it  is  stated  in  the   scripture  thus)  :—  "  That 
Person,  who,  engaged  in  creating  things  according  to  His 
free  will  and  pleasure,  is  ever  wakeful,  while  all  these  are 
asleep,—  That  is  the  Brilliant  One,  That  is  the   Brahman, 
That  alone  is  called  the  Immortal.  All  the  worlds  abide  in 
Him,  and  there  is  none  to  transcend  Him."     [Kath.   Up. 
V.  8.].  The  Sftlrakdra  also,  (first  of  all)  in  these  two  apho- 
risms, namely,  "In  the  intermediate  state  (/.  e.  in  the  dream- 
ing state),  there  is  creation,  for,  it  (vi/.  the   scripture)    says 
(so)."  —  [Vcd.Sni.  III.  2.  i.],      "And  some  (say  the  indivi- 
dual self  is  the  creator,   sons  and  others  (being  the   things 
created)."  {Veil.  Silt.  III.  2.  2.],  —  supposes  the    individual 
self  to  be  the  creator  in  relation  to  the  things  seen  in  dreams; 
then  by  means  of  this  aphorism,  namely,  —  "But  it  (viz.  all 
that  is  seen  in  dreams)  is  merely  the  may  a  '  7  -  (of  the  Lord 
but  not  the  creation  of  the  individual  self),  because  they 
(viz.  the  attributes  of  willing  the  truth,  <£c.,)  have  not 
their  nature  manifest   in   full  (the  individual    self  in    the 
samsdra  state)."  —  [  Vcd.  Sill.  III.   2.  3.],  —  and  by  means 
of  other  aphorisms,  he  shows  that  the  individual  self  cannot 
have  the  characteristics  of  the  creator,  because  the  natural 
characteristics  of  willing  the  truth,  &c.,  belonging  to  the 
individual  self,  are  all  unmanifest  there  in  the  samsara  state. 
This  wonderful  creation,  created  so   as  to  be  capable  of 
being  perceived  by  certain  particular  (dreaming)  persons, 
altogether  proceeds    from   the    Lord.      Seeing  that  the 
scripture  says—"  All  the  worlds  abide  in  Him."  [Kath.  Up. 

172.  A/dyd  here   means  wonderful  creation. 


i88  SRi-BHlSHYA.      {Chap.  1.  Part.  1. 

V.  8],  it  is  made  out  that  the  Supreme  Self  is  Himself  the 
creator  there  (/.  e.  in  dreams).  Thus,  he  (the  Sutrakard) 
disproves  (the  supposition  with  which  he  started).  To 
him,  who,  sleeping  in  a  room  or  in  any  other  place,  ex- 
periences a  dream,  it  is  possible  to  go  to  another  country 
with  his  own  body,  to  be  crowned  there  as  a  king,  to  be 
decapitated,  and  so  on.  These  are  the  results  of  his  karmic 
merit  and  demerit,  and  are  possible  only  in  consequence  ot 
the  creation  of  another  body  having  the  same  form  and 
configuration  as  the  body  that  is  in  the  state  of  sleep. 

But  in  the  (perception  of  the)  yellow  conch  and  other  such 
things  (by  the  jaundiced  eye),  the  ocular  rays1 73  combined 
with  the  bilious  substance  existing  in  the  eye  are  brought 
into  association  with  the  conch  and  other  such  things.  The 
whiteness  belonging  to  the  conch  is  not  apprehended,  be- 
cause it  is  overpowered  by  the  yellow  colour  belonging  to 
the  bile.  Hence,  as  in  the  case  of  the  conch-shell  covered 
with  gold,  there  is  the  perception  that  the  conch  is  yellow. 
The  bilious  substance  and  the  yellow  colour,  belonging  to  it, 
are  veiy  subtle,  and  are  not  therefore  apprehended  by  the 
standers  by.  But,  by  him  who  is  (thus)  afflicted  with  bilious- 
ness, they  are,  though  subtle,  apprehended  well,  because 
they  have  proceeded  from  his  own  eyes  and  are  thus 
in  very  close  proximity  (to  him).  They  are  also, 
though  at  a  distance,  apprehended  by  means  of  the 
ocular  rays,  which  possess  that  peculiar  power  which 
is  due  to  having  apprehended  them  (in  close  proxi- 
mity ).  A  crystal  gem  lying  close  to  a  china  rose 
is  apprehended  to  be  red,  because  it  is  overpowered 
by  the  brilliant  coloration  of  that  (china  rose).  Al- 
though the  (coloured)  brilliance  of  the  china  rose  radi- 

173.  Vide  supi  a.  p.  93.  n.  59. 


Adhik.  L  Sffl.  /.]      SRl-BHlSHYA.  189 

ates  in  all  directions,  yet  it  is  apprehended  with  great 
clearness,  only  when  it  is  in  association  with  a  transpar- 
ent substance  (like  the  crystal  gem).  Thus,  this  (redness 
of  the  crystal  gem)  is  capable  of  being  established  by 
perception.  Again,  the  perception  of  water  in  a  mirage  pos- 
sesses the  character  of  reality,  because  water  is  (always) 
found  in  association  with  both  the  elements  oflcjas  and  earth, 
and  because  there  is  (here,)  no  apprehension  of  lejas  and 
earth  on  account  of  some  defect  in  the  sense  organs,  and 
because  also  there  is  the  apprehension  of  water  through  the 
influence  of  some  unseen  agency.  Also,  in  regard  to 

the  circle  of  fire  produced  by  the  rotation  of  a  fire- 
brand, the  perception  of  that  (circle)  is  right!}'  caus- 
ed, in  consequence  of  there  being  no  apprehension 
of  the  interspaces  (between  any  two  successive  positions 
of  the  fire-brand),  owing  to  the  very  rapid  motion 
of  the  fire-brand  and  its  consequent  association  with  all  the 
parts  (of  the  circumference).  Even  in  the  perception  of  this 
circle,  there  is  indeed  such  apprehension  of  certain  parti- 
cular objects  in  association  with  certain  particular  posi- 
tions, as  is  attended  with  the  non-apprehension  of  the 
interspaces.  In  the  case  of  some  positions  there  is  the  non- 
apprehension  of  interspaces,  for  the  reason  that  the  inter- 
spaces are  themselves  absent.  In  other  positions,  there  is  the 
non-apprehension  (of  interspaces)  on  account  of  the  rapid- 
ity of  motion.  Such  is  the  difference  (between  them). 
Therefore,  this  (perception  of  the  circle  of  fire)  is  based  upon 
reality.  The  perception  of  one's  own  face  in  the  mirr- 

or and  in.  other  such  things  is  also  based  upon  reality.  The 
rays  proceeding  from  the  eye  are  stopped  and  reflected 
in  their  movement  by  the  mirror  and  other  such  things;  and 
thus,  they  first  apprehend  the  mirror  and  other  such  things, 
and  then  apprehend  one's  own  face  and  other  similar 


SRi-J3HisHYA.     {Chap.  1.  Part.  L 

objects.  In  this  case  also,  on  account  of  the  rapidity  of 
movement  (of  the  ocular  aura),  there  is  no  apprehension 
of  the  interspace  (between  the  mirror  and  the  image), 
and  consequently  there  is  such  a  perception.  Also  in 

regard  to  the  illusion  relating  to  direction  in  space,  since 
any  other  region  of  space  may  be  actually  found  to 
exist  in  this  (region  of  space),  that  other  region  of  space  is, 
through  the  influence  of  some  unseen  agency,  apprehend- 
ed as  if  unassociated  with  this  region  of  space.  There- 
fore the  apprehension  of  one  region  of  space  as  another 
is  also  based  upon  reality  itself.  liven  in  the 

case  of  the  perception  of  two  moons  and  other  such 
perceptions,  there  is  a  division  caused  in  the  movement 
of  the  aura  proceeding  from  the  eye,  owing  to  timira,  l 1  * 
pressure  with  the  fingers,  &c.,  and  hence  there  arises  a 
variety  in  the  means  intended  to  help  (the  apprehension 
of  the  moon,).  Thus  a  duality  of  the  means  which  are  in- 
dependent of  each  other  forms  the  cause  of  the  two  ap- 
prehensions of  the  (one)  moon.  Of  this  (duality),  one  means 
apprehends  the  moon  in  its  own  place.  But  the  second 
one,  being  somewhat  crooked  in  its  movement,  first 
apprehends  the  region  near  to  the  moon  and  then  appre- 
hends the  moon  there  as  dissociated  from  its  own  place. 
Therefore,  in  the  apprehension  of  the  moon  in  association 
with  two  regions  at  the  same  time,  there  arises,  on  account 
of  the  variety  in  the  apprehension,  a  variety  in  the  form 
of  the  thing  apprehended;  and  there  is  also  the  absence  of 
the  apprehension  of  unity.  Thus  there  is  this  particular  per- 
ception to  the  effect  that  there  are  two  moons.  The  asso- 
ciation of  that  (moon  which  is  perceived  in  a  place  other 
than  its  own),  with  that  place  which  is  other  than 

174.  Vide  supra  p.  104.  n.  69. 


Adkik.  I.  SnL  /.]       SRl-Bii.\siiYA.  IQI 

its  own,  is  due  to  the  incessant  apprehension  of  (that) 
other  place  and  of  the  moon  as  unassociated  with  its  own 
place.  Therefore,  the  two  apprehensions  of  the  moon 
which  are  associated  with  two  regions  are  also  real.  On 
account  of  there  being  a  duality  in  the  apprehension,  the 
duality  of  the  form  which  is  apprehended  in  relation  to  the 
moon  is  also  real.  However,  it  may  be  held  (here) 
that  of  the  two  apprehensions  of  the  moon  which  are  cha- 
racterised by  two  different  qualifications,  only  one  moon 
has  to  be  the  object.  But,  in  such  an  apprehension,  there 
is  no  power  possessed  by  the  eye  itself  (to  reduce  it  to 
only  one  apprehension),  as  (there  is)  in  the  case  of  the 
recognitive  cognition  ;  and  so  the  ocular  perception 
(of  two  moons)  continues  to  remain  as  such.  Although 
both  the  eyes  form  (only)  one  means  intended  to  help  (the 
apprehension  of  things),  nevertheless,  we  have  to  assume 
from  the  effect  produced  (in  this  case  of  double  vision) 
that  the  aura  proceeding  from  the  eye  becomes  changed  into 
two  means  intended  to  help  (the  apprehension  of  things), 
for  the  reason  that  it  (viz.  that  aura)  is  split  up  by  timira  and 
other  such  misguiding  causes.  But  when  the  misguiding 
cause  is  removed,the  moon,  as  associated  with  its  own  region, 
becomes  known  by  means  of  only  one  apprehension. 
Therefore,  the  belief  arises  that  the  moon  is  only  in  one 
place.  This  duality  of  the  means  is  due  to  the  misguiding 
cause  ;  the  duality  of  apprehension  is  due  to  that  (duality 
of  the  means);  the  duality  in  the  form  of  the  thing  appre- 
hended is  due  to  that  (duality  of  apprehension).  According- 
ly, it  (viz.  this  explanation)  is  faultless.  Therefore 
it  is  a  settled  conclusion  that  the  totality  of  all  perceptions 
is  (altogether)  based  upon  reality. 

Criticisms    of  the  other    theories   of  perception    are 
fully  given  by  those  who  maintain  those  (various)  theories 


192  SRi-BHlSHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

themselves,  and  so  no  attempt  is  made  (here)  in  the  way  of 
(discussing)  them.  Or  rather,  what  is  the  use  (of  indul- 
ging) in  too  many  forms  of  discussion  of  this  kind?  To 
those  who  accept  the  whole  collection  of  the  criteria  of  truth 
known  as  perception,  inference,  and  scripture,  and  who  ac- 
knowledge that  Highest  Brahman  who  is  understood 
by  means  of  the  scripture,  who  is  devoid  of  the  least 
taint  of  all  evil,  who  is  possessed  of  hosts  of  innumer- 
able auspicious  qualities  unsurpassed  in  excellence,  and 
who  is  omniscient  and  wills  the  truth —  (to  them), 
what  is  there  that  cannot  be  proved  and  what  is  there  that 
cannot  be  accomplished  ?  Indeed,  the  Divine  Lord,  who  is 
the  Highest  Brahman,  creates  the  whole  of  this  world  to 
suit  the  merit  and  demerit  of  the  individual  souls,  so  that  it 
may  be  enjoyed  (and  endured  by  them).  Accordingly,  by 
Him  there  are  created  certain  things  which  form  the  common 
objects  of  experience  to  all,  and  are  capable  of  being 
experienced  as  the  experience  of  (harm ic)  results  in  the  form 
of  pleasures,  pains,  and  states  of  indifference  to  pleasures 
and  pains;  and  (by  Him  are  also  created)  certain  other  things 
which  are  the  objects  of  the  experience  of  certain  particular 
persons  only,  and  which  last  only  for  a  certain  length  of 
time,  and  are  to  be  experienced  as  subject  to  various  specific 
conditions.  It  being  so,  the  relation  of  the  stultified  and 
the  stultifier  (between  these  two  sets  of  things)  is  due  to 
the  one  constituting  the  object  of  the  exprience  common  to 
all,  and  the  other  not  constituting  such  an  object. 
Thus  the  whole  (argument)  is  perfectly  appropriate. 

Then  again  what  has  been  urged1 7  •'  to  the  effect  that 
(the  a;<id\'a)t  which  is  unlit  to  be  defined  either  as 
an  entity  or  as  a  non-entity,  is  established  by  revelation, 

175.  Vide  supra  pp.  30  &  31. 


Adhik.  I.  SM.  /.]     SRi-BHlSHYA.  193 

—that  is  not  right ;  because  in  the  following  scriptural 
passage — Anritena  hi  pralyndhafr  t  * — and  in  others,  the 

word  anrita  does  not  denote  what  is  indescribable.  Indeed, 

• 

the  word  anrita  denotes  what  is  not  rita.  The  word  rita 
expresses  karma'11'1  (or  the  fruits  of  action),  because  it  is 
stated178  in  the  scripture  that  "there  are  the  two  enjoy- 
ing rita  (or  the  fruits  of  action)."  Rita  is  that  karma 
which  is  free  from  attachment  to  fruits,  which  consists  in  the 
worship  of  the  Highest  Person,  and  the  fruit  of  which  is  the 
attainment  of  that  Person.  Here  (in  the  passage  under 
discussion),  anrita  is  the  karma  which  is  different  from  this 
(rita),  and  (therefore)  has  samsara^1*  for  its  result,  and  is 
(thus)  opposed  to  the  attainment  of  tlie  Brahman.  This  (we 
learn)  from  the  scriptural  passage1 8° — "They  (/.  e.  the  crea- 
tures) do  not  obtain  this  world  of  the  Brahman,  being 
drawn  away  by  anrita"  Also  in  the  passage181  — 

"  Then  there  was  neither  existence  (sat)  nor  non-existence 
(asat)" — the  words  sal  and  asat  refer  to  intelligent  and  non- 
intelligent  objects  as  produced  by  the  secondary  particular 
creation  ; J  8  2  because  this  passage  is  intended  to  establish 
that  the  two  things,  which,  as  found  at  the  time  of  creation, 
are  denoted  by  the  words  sat  and  /ya/183  and  form  the 

176.  Vide  supra  pp.  31  &  157.  This  is  180.  Vide  Chhdna.  Up.  VIII.  3.  2. 

apparently  a  quotation  from  Cjihdnd.  181.    Taitt.  Br.  II.  8.   9.   &   R.    V. 

Up.  VIII.  3.  2. — "For  they  (/'.  e.  the  X.  129.  I  &  3.  Vide  supra  p.  31. 
creatures)  are  drawn  away  (from   the  182.  This  is   the  creation   of  form- 

BraAman)  by  means  of  anrita."  possessing  conscious  and  unconscious 

177.  Rita  may  also  mean  religious  bodies  taking  place  after  the  creation 
duties   or    works   performed    in   this  of  undifferentiated  primordial  matter, 
life,  truth,  law,  &c.  183.  Vide  Taitt.  Up.  II.  6.  I.,  where 

178.  Vide  Kath.  Up.  III.  I.  the    individual    self  which  is  intelli- 

179.  The  word  samsara  means  the  gent  and  the  non-intelligent   Prakriti^ 
ever-recurring    succession    of   births  or  nature  in  its  undifferentiated  pri- 
and  deaths  and  the  consequent  cotHi-  mordial  state,  are  respectively  called 
nuance  of  the  bondage  of  the  soul.  Sat  and   Tyat,  for  the  reason  that  the 


194  SRI-BHISHYA.       \Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

differentiated  intelligent  and  non-intelligent  objects  pro- 
duced by  the  secondary  particular  creation,  are,  at  the 
time  of  universal  dissolution,  absorbed  into  the  thing  which 
is  denoted  by  the  word  tamcis^ 8  4  and  constitutes  the  undif- 
ferentiated  primordial  non-intelligent  matter.  In  this 
(passage),  there  is  no  mention  made  of  anything  which 
is  said  to  possess  the  character  of  being  indescribable  either 
as  an  entity  or  as  a  non-entity  ;  because  only  the  absence, 
at  a  particular  time,  of  the  things  denoted  by  the  words  sat 
and  asat  is  (herein)  mentioned.  What  is  denoted  by  the 
word  tamas  here  is  made  out  to  mean  undifferentiated 
primordial  non-intelligent  matter  from  another  scriptural 
passage  (also)  which  is  to  the  effect — "The  avyakta ' 8  3 
is  absorbed  into  the  akshara  ;  the  akshara  is  absorb- 
ed into  the  tamas."  [Sub.  Up.  II.].  By  the  word 
tamas  is  denoted  the  subtle  state  of  that  prakriti  which 
is  made  up  of  undifferentiated  primordial  non -intelligent 
matter  ;  this  is  indeed  true.  But  if  it  be  said  that  this 
(prakriti}  is  denoted  by  the  word  may  a,  as  in  the  passage 

individual  self  is  incapable  of  under-  erentiated    state,    it     is    called     the 

going,  any  transformation,   and    the  Avibhakta-tamas  ;  in  its  first  differen- 

non-intelligent  Prakviti  is  capable  of  tiated  state,  it  is  called  the  Vibhakta- 

undergoing     transformations    at    all  tamas;  in  its  next  state,  it  is  called 

times.  the  Akshara  in  which  even  the  quali- 

184.  Tamas  is  one  of  the  names  of  iies  ot  Sattva,Rajas  and  Ta mas  are  not 
the  Pradhana  or  the  Prakriti  in  its  seen  to  be  differentiated  and  in  which 
undifferentiated  primordial  state. Vide  it  is  also  said    to  be   promiscuously 
Sub.    6^.11.   In  this   state,  it  is  said  mixed  up  with  the  individual  self;  in  its 
to  be  very  subtle,  so  that  it  cannot  be  last  state,  it  is  called  the  Avyakta  in 
easily  distinguished  from  the  indivi-  which  the  differentiation   of  the  three 
dual  self  with  which  it  is  invariably  Gunas  has  begun  to  take  place.    From 
associated.  this  Avyakta   proceeds  the   principle 

185.  Four  different   states    of  the  known  as  the  Mahal,    from  this  again 
Prakriti  or  nature  are  mentioned  in  proceeds  the  principle  called  Ahah- 
Sub.  Up.  II.     In  its  primary   undiff-  kqra  or  egoity  ;  and  so  on. 


Adhik.  L  Si'tt.  /.]      SRI-BHA.SHYA.  195 

"  Know  then  that  prakriti  is  mdyd."  [Svct.  Up.  IV. 
10.],  and  that  it  is  therefore  indescribable;  it  is  replied  that 
it  is  not  so,  because  the  word  mdyd  is  not  known  to  ex- 
press what  is  indescribable.  If  it  be  said  (again)  that 
the  word  mdyd,  being  synonymous  with  unreality  (/.  c. 
ignorance  or  avidya},  expresses  what  is  indescribable,  it 
is  replied  that  this  (also)  is  not  right.  Indeed,  the  word 
maya  does  not,  in  all  cases,  denote  unreality  (/.  e.  ignorance 
or  avidya)  ;  because  the  word  may  a  is  used  to  denote  the 
weapons  of  Rdkshasas  and  A  suras  which,  surely,  are  real- 
ly existent  things.  Accordingly,  there  is  this  passage  :— 
"  The  thousand  may  as  (or  wonderfully  created  weapons)  of 
Sambara  were  destroyed  one  after  another  by  that  quickly 
moving  (discus  of  the  Lord)  in  guarding  from  injury  the 
body  of  the  boy  (Prahlada)."  [V.  P.  I.  19.  20.].  Hence  the 
word  maya  denotes  the  creation  of  wonderful  things. 
Prakriti  also  is  called  by  the  name  of  maya,  because  it 
certainly  possesses  the  power  of  creating  wonderful  things. 
The  scriptural  passage — "  Out  of  this  (prakriti ),  He, 
who  is  the  owner  of  the  mdya  (i.  e.  the  Lord),  creates 
this  world  wherein  another  being  (viz.  the  individual  self) 
is  bound  down  by  mdyd''— \Svet.  LTp.  IV.  9.] — also  points 
out  that  the  prakriti,  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  mdya, 
possesses  the  power  of  causing  the  creation  of  wonder- 
ful things.  The  Highest  Person  is  called  the  May  in,  simply 
because  He  is  the  owner  of  that  (mdya),*  86  but  not  because 
He  is  characterised  by  ignorance  (or  avidya).  Indeed,  it 
is  stated  in  the  scriptural  passage — "  And  in  that  (world) 
another  being  (viz.  the  individual  soul)  is  bound  down  by 
mdyd"  \Svet  Up.  IV.  9.],  as  also  in  the  passage — "When 
the  individual  soul,  that  has  beetf  asleep  under  the  influence 

186.  The    word  miya  means  either       lion.  It  also  means  skill,   knowledge, 
wonderful  powers  or  wonderful  creu-       &c. 


ig6  SRi-BHiSHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  1. 

of  the  beginningless  mdyd,  wakes  up,  (then  he  knows  the 
Unborn  One)." — \_Md\id.  Up.  II.  21.],  that  the  individual 
soul  is  bound  down  by  mdyd  (i.  e.  by  nature).  In  the  (follow- 
ing) scriptural  passage  also — "  Indra  (i.e.  the  Highest  Lord) 
is  known  to  assume  many  forms  through  mdyds  (or  His 
wonderful  powers  of  creating  things)"—  \Brih.  Up.  II.  5. 
I9-]>1 87the  wonderful  powers  (of  the  Lord)  are  denoted  (by 
the  word  mdyd}.  Indeed,  it  is  only  for  this  reason  that  it  is 
said — "  He  (/.  e.  the  Lord)  shines  very  much  like  tvashtn 
(L  e.  the  creator)."  [R.  V.  VI.  47.  19.].  Indeed  nothing 
shines  forth  that  is  overpowered  by  unreality  (viz.  ignor- 
ance or  avidya}.  Even  in  the  passage — "  My  mdyd 
is  difficult  to  transcend." — [B.  G.  VII.  14.],  it  is  stated 
that  it  (viz.  mdyd)  consists  of  qualities ;  therefore,  what 
is  denoted  (by  mdyd}  is  that  prakriti  itself  which  is 
made  up  of  the  three  qualities  (of  sattva  or  goodness, 
rajas  or  passion,  and  tamas  or  darkness).  Thus,  by  means 
of  the  scriptures,  there  is  no  establishment  of  that  ig- 
norance (or  avidya)  which  cannot  be  described  either  as 
an  entity  or  as  a  non-entity. 

Nor  (is  that  ignorance  or  avidya  established)  by  means 
of  the  inappropriateness  (which,  in  the  absence  of  ignorance 
or  avidya,  would  result)  in  relation  to  the  teaching  of 
unity  (between  the  individual  self  and  the  Supreme  Self). 
For,  in  the  passage1 88 — "That  thou  art," — there  is  the  teach- 
ing of  unity  between  the  individual  self  and  the  Supreme 
Self;  yet  we  do  not  see  here  any  such  inappropriateness  as. 
forms  the  cause  for  assuming  that  ignorance  (or  avidya) 
which  is  contrary  to  (the  nature  of)  the  Brahman  who  is 
referred  to  in  the  context,  who  is  known  here  by  the  word 

187.  Vide  also  R.  V.  VI.  47.  18.       7.  &  also  n.  142  supra. 

188.  Vide   QhhdnJ.    Up.  VI.  8. 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  i.]      SRi-BHlSHYA.  197 

'  That ',  who  is  omniscient,  and  who  wills  the  truth,  and  is 
the  cause  of  the  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  of 
all  the  worlds.  The  teaching  of  unity  (here,)  is  very  ap- 
propriate, because  by  the  word  '  thou '  also,  fas  by  the 
word  'That'),  is  denoted  the  Brahman  whose  body  is  the 
individual  soul.  By  the  scriptural  passage — "  Entering  in 
along  with  this  individual  self  which  is  (also)  the  same  as 
Myself,  I  evolve  the  differentiation  of  names  and  forms."- 
(CTihdnd.  Up.  VI.  3.  2.] — it  is  stated  that  all  things  pos- 
sess names  and  forms  only  to  the  extent  that  they  include 
the  Highest  Self.  Hence,  there  need  be  no  assumption  of 
ignorance  (or  avidyd)  in  relation  to  the  Brahman. 

In  the  Itihdsas  and  the  Puranas*8*  also,  the  discus- 
sion regarding  any  avidyd  that  is  related  to  the  Brahman  is 
nowhere  to  be  found.  Nevertheless,  it  may  be  said  as 
follows: — The  passage1  9°  beginning  with — "The  Lights  are 
Vishnu" — [V.  P.  II.  12.  38.] — lays  down  the  proposition 
that  the  Brahman  is  the  only  reality ;  then  the  passage 
beginning  with191 — "Because  the  Lord  has  the  nature 
of  Intelligence,  therefore,  He  (has  the  All  for  His 
form)" — explains  that  the  world  which  is  differentiated  by 
the  distinctions  of  mountains,  oceans,  lands,  &c., 
is  the  result  of  the  display  of  avidyd  in  relation 

189.  Vide     supra     p.     136.       n.  191.  Vide   supra    p.  31.  where    the 
140.                                                                Adwaitins  are    made    to   quote    this 

190.  The   whole   of    this    passage  passage  thus  : — "  Because  the   Lord 
is    as    follows : — "  The    Lights     are  is     of    the    nature    of    Intelligence, 
Vishnu,  the  worlds  are  Vishnu,  the  therefore    He  has   the    All    for   His 
forests    are    Vishnu,   the   mountains  form.     But  He  is  no  material  thing, 
and  the  regions  of  space,  the    rivers  Know  then  that  the  distinctions,  of 
and   the   seas,   all    that     is    existent  mountain,  ocean,  land,  &c.,  are  indeed 
and  all  that  is  non-existent,  are  all  born  out  of  Him  and  are  the  outcome 
He  alone,  O  thou,    the   best  of  Brah-  of     illusion     in     Intelligence."       V, 
manas  !"  P.  II.  12.  39. 


198 


SRI-BHASHYA.      '[Chap.  I.  Part.  L 


to  the  Brahman  whose  essential  nature  is  altogether  In- 
telligence ;  afterwards  the  passage192  beginning  with— 

"But  when (there  remains  Intelligence  alone)  in  its 

own  form,  and  pure,  (then  indeed  cease  to  exist  the  fruits 
of  the  tree  of  illusion)" — confirms  that  it  (viz.  the  world) 
is  the  result  of  the  display  of  ignorance,  by  means  of  the 
fact  that,  at  the  time  when  the  Brahman,  whose  true 
nature  is  Intelligence,  exists  in  His  own  natural  state,  there 
is  to  be  found  no  distinction  whatever  between  things  ; 
thereafter  by  means  of  the  two  stanzas,  one  beginning 
with1  93 — "  Is  there  any  (external)  object " — and  the  other 
beginning  with194 — Mahl  ghatatvam  (which  means  "the 
mud,  the  formation  of  a  pot  out  of  it,") — the  unreality  of 
the  distinctions  between  things  is  stated  even  from  the 
stand-point  of  the  perception193  of  the  world ;  then  the 


192.  This  again  has  been  quoted 
according  to  the  Adwaitins  on  pp.  31 
&     32    supra,     thus : — ''  But     when, 
after  all  the  effects   of  works  are    de- 
stroyed, there     remains    Intelligence 
alone  in  Its  own  true  form,  pure  and 
devoid  of    evil,    then    indeed    cease 
to  exist   those   fruits   of  the  tree  of 
illusion,     which     form     the    distinc- 
tions of   things  in  things."       V.   P. 
II.  12.  40. 

193.  The    whole     of    this     pas- 
sage       is        to         the        following 
effect   : — "  Is   there     anywhere     any 
(external)    object    which      is    with- 
out   beginning,     middle     and     end, 
which  is  always  uniform,  and   which, 
moreover,  undergoes  changes  of  state, 
and  which  frequently  is  not  what  it 
was.     If  such  a  thing  there  be,  how 
can  it  indeed  be   the  reality  ?"    'V.  P, 
II.  12,41. 


194.  This  passage  may  be  translat- 
ed   thus  : — Those  who,   through  the 
influence  of  their  own  Karmas,  are  pre- 
vented  from  having  correct    notions 
regarding    (the   nature    of)   the   self 
— by    them  are    seen  (those  various 
states  of  matter  such  as)  the  mud,  the 
formation  of  a    pot  (out    of  it),  the 
breaking  (up  of  that  pot)  into    two 
halves,  its  turning  into  particles,  their 
turning  into  dust,  and  this  again  into 

atoms.  (This  being  so),  tell  me 
whether  this  (matter)  can  be  the  (un- 
changeable) reality.  V.  P.  II.  12.  42. 

195.  According    to      the    Ad-wai- 
tins,  the  true  nature  of  perception   is 
to  apprehend  the  one  Reality  which 
exists  at  all  times,  but  not   to  appre- 
hend  those    distinctions  which   make 
up  the  world  and  are  all  super-impos- 
ed on  the    Reality  by   Ignorance  or 
Avidyd.  Vide  supra  pp.  42  &  43. 


Adhik.  7.  Sal.  i.]      SRI-BHISHYA.  199 

stanza  beginning  with1  9C — "Therefore,  (there  can  be)  noth- 
ing other  than  Intelligence" — sums  up  the  already  enunciat- 
ed unreality  of  whatever  is  different  from  the  Brahman;  then 
by  means  of  the  passage1  97  beginning  with — "The  one  In- 
telligence... (is  apprehended  in  many  ways)" — it  is  made 
clear  that  one's  own  karma  alone  is  the  basis  of  ignorance 
(or  avidya}  which  is  the  cause  of  the  perception  of  differ- 
ence in  relation  to  the  Brahman  whose  true  nature  is  In- 
telligence ;  then,  by  means  of  the  passage J  9  8  beginning 

with — "The  Intelligence  which  is  pure (is  one)." 

—the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman,  who  has  the  character 
of  Intelligence,  is  examined;  and  (lastly)  by  means  of  the 
passage1 " — "(Thus)  have  I  told  you  of  what  is  real,  &c." — 
the  truth  has  been  taught  to  you  to  the  effect  that  the 
Brahman  whose  true  nature  is  Intelligence  is  alone  real  and 
nothing  else  (is  real);  that  everything  else  is  certainly  unreal; 
and  that  the  reality  of  the  world  and  all  other  things  is 
merely  phenomenal.  And  such,  indeed,  is  seen  to  be  the 
teaching  (given  in  the  Vishnu-Purdna  in  the  portion 


196.    This        passage     is      found  which  is  pure,  devoid  of  evil,  devoid  of 

quoted  on  p.  32.  supra  as  follows  : —  sorrow,  and  is  free  from  contact  with 

Therefore,     at    no   time     and  in  no  all  greed, &c.,  is  one  and  always  one,  is 

place,    can    there   be   any   group   of  the  Highest  and  the  Highest  Lord  ; 

things    other    than    Intelligence,    O  He  is   Vasudeva,    other   than   whom 

thou,  the  twice-born  one.      V.  P.  II.  there  is  nothing.  V.P.    II.  12.44. 

12.  43.  199.  This  again   is   quoted    on   p. 

197    This      is     the    second     half  32.  supra    as    follows : — Thus     have 

of  the  passage     V.  P.   II.   12.  43: —  I    told    you    of     what    is    real    ex- 

The  One  Intelligence  is  apprehended  istence,  and  how  Intelligence  is  real 

in  many  ways  by  those  whose  minds  and  all  else  is  unreal  ;    and    1   have 

are  variously  constituted  on   account  told  you  also  that  this  which  is  phe- 

of  the  variety  of  their  own  Karmas.  nomenally  realised  well   for  practical 

198.  This    passage    runs    thus  on  purposes  is  that  on  which  the  world 

p.     32.     supra  : — The      Intelligence  is  dependent.    V.  P.  II.  12.  45. 


200  SRT-BHISHYA.     \Chap.  I.  Part,  L 

named  Bhuvanakosa).* ° ° 

All  this  is  not  right.  Here,  after  explaining  in  extenso  the 
nature  of  the  world  which  is  conceived  to  be  an  unopened 
flower-bud,  another  form  of  it  that  was  not  mentioned 
before  is  set  forth  briefly,  beginning  with201  "Listen."  In 
the  world  which  is  made  up  of  the  intelligent  and  the  non- 
intelligent  things,  that  intelligent  part,  the  individual  pecu- 
liarity of  which  is  beyond  the  sphere  of  speech  and  mind 
and  which  is  known  to  itself,  and  which,  being  entirely  of 
the  nature  of  intelligence,  is  untouched  by  any  modifica- 
tions of  matter,  (that  part)  is  expressed  by  the  word  'exist- 
ence', for  the  reason  that  it  is  indestructible.  But  the  non-in- 
telligent part  undergoes  a  variety  of  modifications  caused  by 
the  karma  of  the  intelligent  part,  and  is  destructible;  and  it  is 
(therefore)  expressed  by  the  word  'non-existence'.  And  both 
form  the  body  of  Vasudeva,  the  Highest  Brahman,  and  have 
Him  for  their  Self.  Therefore,  this  form  (of  the  Lord)  is 
(thus)  briefly  described  here.  Accordingly,  in  the  passage— 
"  That  water202  which  is  the  body  of  Vishnu,  from  that,  O 

200.    Bhuvanako'sa    is  the  name  which    live   in    them   (has   also  been 

given  to    chapters   I    to   12.    of    the  described),     Listen   again  to  another 

second  Am'sa  of  the    Vishitu-Puratia,  description  which  is  brief, 

because   in  these    chapters  the  world  202.     Here  wafer  is  used  so  as  to 

is    described    under    the    conception  mean   the    primordial  substratum  of 

of  a  lotus-bud.  Vide    V.  P.  II.  2.  10.  the   whole   universe    known    as    the 

201.     Vide   V.  P.    II.  12.  36.  This  Brahmanda;  because  water   has   been 

stanza     and   the      stanza   preceding  held  to  be  the  first  created  thing,    and 

it     are     as    follow  : —  Thus,     then,  in  it  the  Self-existent  Lord   is  said  to 

the   situation     of  the   earth   and   of  have  placed  the  seed  which  became  a 

the  Lights,  of  the  divisions    of    the  golden  egg.    Out  of  which  was  born 

terrestrial  world,     and  of  the  oceans  the  four-faced   Brahma,   the  creating 

and  of  the  mountains,  has    all  been  deity.    Hence  primordial  matter   and 

described  at   length,   as  also   of   the  all     its     evolved     modifications     are 

lowlands      between      the      principal  denoted  by  the  word  water  here.  Cf. 

mountains,       and      of      the     rivers.  also  Manu  I.  8  &  9,  et  seq. 
Moreover,    the    nature  of  the   beings 


Adhik.   I.   Sill.   /.]        SRI-BHISHYA.  201 

Brahmana,  sprang  the  earth,  lotus-shaped,  together  with  its 
mountains,  oceans,  and  all  other  such  things." — \V.  P.  II. 
12.  37.] — it  is  said  that,  because  water  forms  the  body  of 
Vishnu,  the  world  also,  being  a  modification  of  water,  forms 
the  body  of  Vishnu,  and  that  Vishnu  is  the  Self  of  that 
(world).  Hence,  he  (Parasara)  says  that,  of  the  grammatical 
equation  which  is  itself  an  explanation  of  the  teaching  of 
identity  (between  the  individual  self  and  the  Supreme 
Self)  as  found  in  all  scriptures,  and  which  is  also  dealt 
with  in  the  passage203  beginning  with — "  The  Lights  are 
Vishnu" — (of  that  equation)  the  foundation  is  nothing 
other  than  the  relation  of  the  soul  and  the  body  (be- 
tween the  Brahman  and  the  universe).  In  this  sastraic  work 
(viz.  the  Vishnu-Pur  and)  itself,  even  earlier  (than  in  this 
context^,  this  very  thing  is  mentioned  more  than  once 
thus  :— "They  are  all  His  body"—2  ° 4  "The  whole  of  that  is 
the  body  of  the  Lord."-2  ° 5  "  Being  indestructible,  He  alone  is 
the  Self  of  all  beings,  and  has  the  form  of  the  universe."206 
This  identity  (between  the  individual  self  and  the  Supreme 
Self),  as  consisting  of  the  relation  of  the  body  and  the  soul, 
is  taught  by  the  equation  stated  in  the  passage  beginning 
with—"  The  Lights  are  Vishnu."  Here,  the  thing 
which  has  the  nature  of  existence  and  (the  thing)  which 
has  the  nature  of  non-existence,  both  of  which  are  found 
in  the  world,  are  spoken  of  as  forming  the  body  of 

203.  Fide  supra  p.  197,  n.  190.  which  contains  this  statement  and  is 

204.  Vide      'V.  P.     I.     22.    86.  to  the  following    effect  : — Whatever 
The    whole    passage  containing  this  forms  the  instrumental  cause  of  any 
statement  runs  thus  : — "  Here,  there,  created   thing   which    is   created    by 
or   anywhere  else,    whatever    things  any  living  being,  the  whole  of  that, 
exist  embodied  and  unembodied,  they  O    Brahmana,    is   the   body    of   the 
are  all  His  body."  Lord. 

205.  Fide     V.    P.    I.     22.    38.  206.    Vide    r.  P.  I.  2.  69. 

26 


202  SRI-BHISHYA.      \_Chap.I.Part.I. 

Vishnu,  and  as  having  that  Vishnu  for  their  Self.  This  (viz. 
the  individual  soul)  is  of  the  nature  of  existence;  that  (viz. 
praknti  or  matter)  has  the  nature  of  non-existence.  The 
reason  for  this  (viz.  prakriti)  having  the  nature  of  non- 
existence  is  given  thus: — "Because  the  Lord  is  of  the 
nature  of  Intelligence,  therefore,  He  (has  the  All  for  His 
form)".2  °7  The  natural  form  of  the  Lord,  who  is  established 
as  the  Self  of  all  the  individual  souls,  is  Intelligence  alone  ; 
but  it  is  not  the  form  of  things  such  as  gods,  men,  and  other 
embodied  objects;  and  because  this  is  so,  therefore,  the  forms 
of  non-intelligent  matter  such  asgods,men,ocean,land,  and 
other  such  things  are  the  result  of  the  display  of  His  intelli- 
gence, and  are  based  upon  the  continuous  apprehension  of 
the  self-differentiations  of  that  (self)  which  is  known  as 
existence,  and  which  has  altogether  the  nature  of  intelli- 
gence ;  they  (viz.  those  differentiations)  are  in  .the  form  of 
gods  and  other  material  embodiments ;  that  is,  they  are 
based  upon  karma  which  (in  its  turn)  is  based  upon  the 
continuous  apprehension  of  the  forms  of  gods  and  other 
material  embodiments  (in  association  with  the  self).  This 
is  the  meaning  (of  the  stanza  under  discussion).  From  this, 
it  is  implied  that,  because  the  non-intelligent  thing  is  the  seat 
of  transformations  according  to  the  karma  of  the  individual 
soul,  therefore  it  is  expressed  by  the  word  'non-existence', 
and  that  all  else  is  expressed  by  the  word  'existence'.  He 
(Parasara)  explains  this  same  thing  in  the  passage208  be- 
ginning with — "But  when (there  remains  intelligence) 

in  its  own  true  form,  and  pure, (then,  indeed,  cease 

to  exist  the  fruits  of  the  tree  of  illusion,)."  When,  after 
the  destruction  of  all  the  karmas  which  form  the  basis  for 
the  continuous  apprehension  of  the  self-differentiations  (of 

2O7-  Vide  supra  p.  31,  &  also  n.  191,       also  n.  192. 
308.     Vide   sttf»-a   pp.  31  &  32,    & 


Adhik.  I.  Sfit.  i.]       SRI-BHISHYA.  203 

the  self)  in  the  form  of  gods,  &c.,  the  thing  which  is  called 
the  self,  and  the  nature  of  which  is  pure  intelligence, 
becomes  free  from  evil  and  perfectly  pure  and  assumes 
its  own  natural  form,  then,  among  things,  there  will 
not  be  those  distinctions  of  things  which  are  intended 
for  the  '  enjoyment '  of  the  (self),  and  which  are  them- 
selves the  results  of  the  karma  that  is  at  the  root 
of  the  supposition  that  the  self  is  identically  the  same  with 
material  forms,  such  as  those  of  gods,  &c.  Those  modifi- 
cations of  the  material  entity,  which  are  in  the  form  of 
gods,  men,  mountains,  oceans,  lands,  &c.,  and  which  form 
the  objects  of  enjoyment  among  those  things  known  as 
gods,  &c.,  and  which  are  wrongly  taken  to  be  the  same  as 
the  self, — they  cease  to  exist  when  the  karma  which  forms 
their  basis  is  destroyed.  Therefore,  the  meaning  is  that 
the  non-intelligent  thing,  which  is  capable  of  being  found  in 
certain  particular  states  which  last  only  for  a  time,  has  to  be 
denoted  by  the  word  'non-existence',  and  that  all  else  has  to 
be  denoted  by  the  word  'existence';  because  this  (latter)  is,  at 
all  times,  altogether  of  the  form  of  self-evident  intelligence. 
Accordingly,  in  the  passage  beginning  with — "  Is  there  (any- 
where) any  (external)  object,"209 — he  (Parasara)  says  that 
the  non  -intelligent  thing  is  to  be  denoted  by  the  word 
'  non-existence'  alone  ;  because,  every  moment,  it  becomes 
altered  in  form  and  is,  in  consequence,  found  in  conditions 
which  last  only  for  a  time.  Indeed,  that  thing  which  is 
always  uniform  and  which  is  without  beginning,  middle 
and  end,  is  that  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  'existence'; 
because  it  is  not  proper  to  think  of  it  as  non-existent  at 
any  time.  Nothing  that  is  non-intelligent  is  seen  any- 
where to  be  of  that  description.  In  the  passage  beginn- 

2og.     This  is  the   fiibl  half  of     V.  P.  11,  12,  41.  Vide  supra  p.  198.  11.193. 


SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  1.  Part.  1. 

ing  with210 — "(Is  there  anywhere  any  external  object) 
which,  moreover,  (undergoes)  changes  of  state" — he 
(Parasara)  says  what  it  then  (really)  is.  That  thing  which 
undergoes  changes  of  state  every  moment, — that  gives  up 
its  former  states  one  after  another,  as  it  passes  into 
latter  states  one  after  another  ;  and  so,  when  it  is  in  any 
one  of  its  former  states,  it  can  not  be  in  simultaneous  as- 
sociation with  any  one  of  its  latter  states.  Hence,  at  all 
times,  it  is  to  be  denoted  by  the  word  '  non-existence ' 
alone.  That  it  has,  indeed,  to  be  so  made  out,  is  declared  in 
the  passage211  beginning  with  Mahl  ghatatvam.  Those 
who,  through  their  own  karmas,  are  found  in  the  form  of 
gods,  men,  &c.,  and  are,  in  consequence,  prevented  from 
having  correct  ideas  regarding  the  (nature  of  the)  self,— by 
them,  the  non-intelligent  thing  which  is  the  object  of  their 
'  enjoyment '  is  perceived  to  undergo  transformations  every 
moment.  The  meaning  is  that  it  is  actually  experienced 
(to  be  of  such  a  nature).  This  being  the  case,  is  there 
any  non-intelligent  thing  which  is  seen  to  be  always  in 
the  same  state  and  to  be  without  beginning,  middle  and 
end,  and  thus  deserves  to  be  denoted  by  the  word  '  exist- 
ence '  ?  The  intended  conclusion  is  that  there  is  no  such 
thing.  Because  this  is  so,  therefore,  the  non-intelligent 
thing,  which  is  different  from  the  self  the  true  nature  of 
which  is  intelligence,  is  never  and  nowhere  fit  to  be 
denoted  by  the  word  'existence'.  Accordingly,  he  (Parasara) 
gives  the  passage21  2  beginning  with— "Therefore,  (at  no 
time  and  in  no  place  can  there  be  any  collection  of 

210.     This  is  the  latter  half  of  the  P.   11.12.42. 

passage    V.  P.  II.   12.  41.  Vide  supra  212.    This  is  the  first  half  of  stanza 

P-  J98-  n-  '93-  F.    P.  II.   12.  43.     Vide    supra  p. 

2X1.     Vide  supra  p.  198.  n.  194.   V.  199.  n.  196, 


Adhik.  L  Sut.  /.]     SRI-BHA.SHYA.  205 

things)  other  than  intelligence."  But  the  self  has  every- 
where the  uniform  nature  of  intelligence,  and  is,  in  con- 
sequence, essentially  opposed  to  the  distinctions  known  as 
gods,  &c.  Nevertheless,  those  who  think  of  the  self  itself 
as  being  differentiated  by  those  distinctions  known  as 
gods,  &c.,  which  are  based  upon  the  various  kinds  of 
karma  performed  by  themselves  and  form  the  cause  of 
their  entering  into  the  bodies  known  as  gods,  &c., — (they) 
imagine  (the  self)  to  be  so  varied  in  nature  as  to 
correspond  to  each  of  those  particular  forms.  Accord- 
ingly, he  (Parasara)  says  in  the  passage2 '  8 beginning  with-— 
"The  one  intelligence  is  apprehended  in  many  ways" — that 
the  conception  of  those  distinctions  is  not  due  to  anything 
in  the  essential  nature  of  the  self  (itself).  Indeed,  the  essen- 
tial nature  of  the  self  is  free  from  karma  ;  and  for  that 
very  reason,  it  is  untouched  by  prakriti  (or  nature)  which 
acts  as  a  taint.  Therefore  again,  it  is  dissociated  from  all 
evil  qualities  such  as  sorrow,  ignorance,  greed,  and  the  like. 
It  is  one,  because  it  is  not  capable  of  increase  and  de- 
crease ;  for  that  very  same  reason,  it  is  always  in  the 
same  state  ;  and  forming  the  body  of  Vasudeva,  it  has 
Him  for  its  Self,  because  there  is  nothing  which  has  not 
Him  for  its  Self.  Accordingly,  he  (Parasara)  gives  the 
passage — " The  intelligence,  which  is  pure,... (is  one)."21* 
The  intelligent  thing,  being  always  in  the  same  state,  is 
denoted  by  the  word  'existence'.  But  the  non-intelligent 
thing  is  every  moment  subject  to  modifications,  and  is  thus 
always  subject  to  destruction  ;  therefore  it  is  always  fit  to 
be  denoted  by  the  word  'non-existence'.  The  world,  which 
is  thus  made  up  of  these  intelligent  and  non-intelligent 

213.     This  is  the    second  half  of          214.       V,    /».     u.     I2     ., 
stanza   V-  P.   II.  12.  43.   Vide  supra      supra  p,  199,  n.  198, 
p.  199.  n.  197. 


5o6  SRi-BHlSHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  7. 

things,  forms  the  body  of  Vasudeva,  and  has  Him  for 
its  Self.  Thus  the  reality  of  the  world  is  very  well 
explained.  For  this  same  purpose,  (Parasara)  gives  the  pas- 
sage2 ' 3  beginning  with — "Thus  (have  I  told  you)  of  what  is 
real."  Here,  (this  explanation  of  what  is)  real  (sal- 
yam)  and  unreal  (asatyaui)  concludes  the  topic  the  con- 
sideration of  which  was  begun  in  the  passage216 — "All 
that  is  existent  and  all  that  is  non-existent  (are  Vishnu)." 
This  thing  (viz.  the  self)  is  altogether  of  the  nature  of  in- 
telligence, and  is  thus  similar  throughout ;  and  its  essen- 
tial distinction  (from  other  selves)  is  inexpressible  by  means 
of  words.  And  it  is  this  thing  alone  which,  when  mixed 
up  with  non-intelligent  matter  and  thus  brought  within 
the  material  world,  acquires  those  distinctions  in  the 
form  of  gods,  men,  &c.,  as  required  for  the  proper  practi- 
cal realisation  of  things.  Of  these  (distinctions)  which 
so  exist,  the  cause  is  stated  to  be  nothing  other  than 
karma.  Accordingly,  he  (Parasara)  gives  the  passage— 
"  And  (I  have  told  you  also)  that  this  is  that."2 '  7  He  ex- 
plains this  very  same  thing  in  the  passage  beginning 

215.  This  passage  V.  P.  II.   12.  45.  era     sarvatn    yadasti    yanndsti     cha 
is  as  follows  in    the  original  : — Sad-  vipravarya  ||    Here,     the     expression 
bhdra    evam     bhavato      mayoJcto  jild-  yadasti  means  all  that  is   existent  and 
nam    yathd  satyam   asatyam   anyat  \  the    expression   yanndsti    means    all 
Its  meaning  is  : — Thus  have  I   told  that  is  non-existent. 

you    of  what   is   real  existence    and  217.     Vide    V.  P.    II.    45.       This 

how    intelligence  is  real  and  all  else  passage  is  as  follows  in  the  original  : 

is  unreal.  Vide  supra  p.  32.  &  n.  199.  — Etattu     yal    samvyavaharabhutani 

2 16.  These  expressions  occur  in  V.  tatrdpichpktatn       bhuvanasritam      te\\ 
P.  II.  12.  38.  Vide  supra  p.  197.  n.  190,  According    to     the     Advaaitim,     the 
where  it  has  been  already  quoted  in  meaning  of  this  passage  has  been  al- 
full.     This  sloka  is  as  follows  in  the  ready  given(vide  supra  p.32,&  n.i99,)as 
original  : — -Jyotimshi      vishnur     bhu-  follows  : — "  And  I  have  told  you  also 
vandni  vishnur  vandni  vishnur  girayo  that  this   which   is  phenomenally  re- 
aisarc/iii   \     nadyas    samuiirdscja     sa  alised  well  for   practical  purposes   is 


Adhik.  I.  Sfit.  /.]      SRi-BnlSHYA. 


207 


with2 ' 8— "(The  karmas  which  are  made  up  of)  the  sacrifice, 
the  sacrificial  animal,  &c."  He  says  in  the  passage  beginning 
with2 '  9 — "And  this  which  (I  have  described  to  you  to  be  the 
world, — to  this  indeed  goes  he  who  is  altogether  under  the 
influence  of  karma )," — that  the  object  of  the  know- 
ledge that  the  world  is  real  is  to  induce  the  effort  to 
secure  the  means  for  the  attainment  of  beatific  release. 

Here  (/.  e .  even  in  this  context),there  is  not  seen  any  one 
appropriate  word  used  to  denote  that  Highest  Brahman 
who  is  devoid  of  attributes,  or  (to  denote)  that  ignorance  (or 
avidyd]  which  is  resident  in  that  (Brahman]  and  is 
incapable  of  being  defined  either  as  an  entity  or  as  a  non- 
entity, or  (to  denote  that)  the  world  is  manufactured  by 
that  (avidya).  The  karma  of  the  individual  selves  is 
opposed  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  of  things,  and  is 


that  on  which  the  world  is  depend- 
ent." This  interpretation  is  here  cri- 
ticised by  Ramanuja.  According  to 
him,  the  meaning  of  this  passage,  as 
made  out  from  the  context  in  which 
it  occurs,  is  to  the  following  effect : — 
And  I  have  told  you  also  that  this 
individual  self,  the  nature  of  which 
is  pure  intelligence,  when  mixed  up 
with  non-intelligent  matter,  and 
thus  brought  within  the  world,  is 
that  which  causes  those  distinc- 
tions which  are  required  for  the 
proper  realisation  of  things  in  the 
form  of  gods,  men,  &c. 

218,  The  whole  of  this  pas- 
sage is  as  follows :-The  ~f\armas  which 
are  made  up  of  the  sacrifice,  the  sacri- 
ficial animal,  the  sacrificial  fire,  all 
the  officiating  priests,  the  Soma  juice, 


the  gods,  and  the  heavenly  world  of 
pleasure,form  the  (commonly  adopted) 
path,  and  in  it  are  seen  (the  forms  of 
gods,  &c.),  and  the  results  of  these 
format  are  the  enjoyments  of  the 
earthly  world  and  of  the  other  parts 
of  the  universe.  F.  P.  II.  12.  46, 

2ig.  This  sloka  V.  p.  \\.  T2. 
47.,  runs  thus: — "And  this  which 
I  have  described  to  you  to  be 
the  world, — to  this,  indeed,  goes 
he  who  is  altogether  under  the 
influence  of  Karma.  Knowing  the 
impermanent  character  of  the  fruits 
of  Karma,  one  has  to  aim  at  that 
which  is  firm,  unchangeable  and 
always  uniform,  so  that  one  may 
thereby  surely  enter  into  Vasu- 
deva." 


208  SRi-BnlSHYA.     {Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

declared  to  be  thus  the  cause  that  makes  the  self,  the 
nature  of  which  is  pure  intelligence,  experience  such  varied 
conditions  as  those  of  gods,  &c. ; — and  it  is  also  declared  to 
be  the  cause  that  makes  non-intelligent  (inert)  matter 
undergo  (all  its)  transformations  ;  moreover,  the  words 
existence,  non-existence,  reality  and  unreality  are  (all)  in- 
capable of  denoting  that  thing  which  cannot  be  defined 
either  as  an  entity  or  as  a  non-entity  :  for  these  reasons, 
the  whole  world  which  is  expressible  by  the  words  existence 
and  non-existence,  and  is  made  up  of  intelligent  and  non- 
intelligent  things,  constitutes  the  .body  of  the  Most  High, 
the  Highest  Lord,  the  Supreme  Brahman,  namely,  Vishnu. 
The  words  non-existence  and  unreality  are  the  opposites  of 
existence  and  reality,  therefore,  by  means  of  them,  only 
unreality  or  non-existence  is  made  out,  but  not  indescrib- 
ability.  The  words  non-existence  and  unreality  which  have 
been  applied  to  the  non-intelligent  thing  are  not  here  used 
to  denote  what  is  a  mere  nothing  or  what  is  false,  but  are 
used  to  denote  destructibility.  It  is  only  this  destructibil- 
ity  which  is  set  forth  in  the  passages  beginning  with220 
" Is  there  any  (external)  object"— and  also  with221  Mahl 
ghatatvam.  (In  regard  to  our  view),  there  is  neither  want 
of  proof  nor  stultification  by  means  of  right  knowledge; 
because  what  is  experienced  in  one  form  at  one  time 
is  perceived  to  be  otherwise  at  another  time  by  reason 
of  a  certain  transformation  (thereof),  and  it  is,  in  consequ- 
ence, spoken  of  as  non-existent.  Indeed,  to  be  a  mere 
nothing  is  to  be  unworthy  of  any  association  with  any 
means  of  proof.  And  if  a  thing,  which  is  experienced  as 
existent  in  relation  to  a  particular  place  and  time,  is  also 
perceived  as  non-existent  in  relation  to  that  same  place  and 

22O.    Vide   suprq.  p.  198.  n.  193.       221.  Vide5»/rap.  198.  n.  194. 


Adhik.  I.  Silt,  i.]       SRl-BHISHYA.  209 

time,  then  there  is  stultification;  but  not  when  a  thing 
experienced  at  one  time  is,  through  transformation  and 
other  such  causes,  made  out  to  be  non-existent  at  another 
time  ;  because  (in  this  latter  case)  there  is  (really)  no  con- 
tradiction owing  to  there  being  a  difference  in  the  time  (of 
the  two  opposite  experiences).  Therefore  there  is  no  fal- 
sity (here  at  all). 

What  is  said  is  this  :— The  thing  known  as  the  self  is 
essentially  of  the  nature  of  intelligence  ;  it  is  without  be- 
ginning, middle  and  end,  and  is  always  in  one  and  the  same 
natural  condition  ;  therefore,  it  is  always  and  of  itself  ex- 
pressible by  the  word  existence.  But  the  non-intelligent 
thing,  which  forms  the  object  of  the  '  enjoyment '  of  the  in- 
dividual selves,  is  subject  to  transformation  and  destruction? 
in  accordance  with  the  karma  of  those  (selves),  and  so  is 
always  full  of  the  import  of  the  word  non-existence  ;  there- 
fore it  is  expressible  by  the  words  non-existence  and  unreality. 

This  same  thing  is  also  stated  in  the  following  pass- 
ages :-"Whatever,  even  by  a  change  of  time,  does  not  undergo 
such  a  change  of  name  as  arises  out  of  transformations  and 
other  similar  causes,  what  is  that  object,  O  king,  what  is  it?'' 
[V.  P.  II.  13.  ioo.];  "The  wise  acknowledge  that  what  is 
indestructible  forms  the  reality  ;  and  that,  no  doubt,  is  non- 
existent, which  is  produced  by  destructible  things."  [  V.  P. 
II.  14.  24].  Unreality  has  been  declared  to  be  the  realisa- 
tion of  the  conception  of  pure  existence  in  relation  to  a  thing 
which  is  found  to  be  existent  or  non-existent  in  accord- 
ance with  particular  conditions  of  place,  time,  and  activity. 
The  realisation  under  the  conception  of  pure  existence  be- 
longs (rightly)  only  to  the  self,  and  so  it  is  declared  to  be  real- 
Further,  from  the  listener  Maitreya's  repetition  (of  the 
teaching  listened  to  by  him)  in  the  sloka  which  says — "It 
has  been  taught  to  me  how  all  the  three  worlds  exist  sup- 


210  SRi-BHISHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

ported  by  Vishnu,  and  how  intelligence  is,  by  pre-eminence, 
the  reality." — \V.  P.  II.  13.  2.],  it  is  made  out  that  the 
foundation  of  the  grammatical  equation,  contained  in  the 
passage222  beginning  with — "The  Lights  are  Vishnu", 
is  the  relation  of  the  soul  and  the  body  (between  the 
Brahman  and  the  universe),  that  the  intelligent  and  non- 
intelligent  things  are  denoted,  as  a  rule,  by  the  use  of  the 
words  existence  and  non-existence,  that  intelligence  has  a 
natural  condition  uncaused  by  karma  and  is  thus  pre-emi- 
nent, and  that  the  non-intelligent  thing  is  not  pre-eminent 
for  the  reason  that  it  undergoes  transformations  which 
are  due  to  the  karma  of  that  (intelligent  self). 

What  has  been  urged223 — by  the  Pnrvapakshins — to  the 
effect  that  the  scriptures  speak  of  the  cessation  of  ignorance 
(or  avidya)  as  taking  place  by  means  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  attributeless  Brahman  alone, — that  is  not  right;  for, 
(in  such  a  case)  there  would  be  the  contradiction  of  the 
following  and  many  other  scriptural  passages  : — "  I  know 
this  great  Person  of  sun-like  lustre  who  is  beyond  darkness. 
He  who  thus  knows  Him  becomes  immortal  here;  there  is 
no  other  path  for  the  attainment  of  final  release."  [  Taitt. 
Ar.  III.  12.  7-];224  "All  the  nimeshas***  were  born  out 
of  the  Person  who  has  the  lustre  of  lightning."  \M.  Ndr. 
1.8.];  "There  is  no  ruler  over  Him;  His  glory  is 

222,  Vide  supra  p.  197.  n.  190,  1/18    kashtha=- 1/540     kald=  1/16200 

223,  Vide  supra  p.  32.  kshana=i\i 94400 muh 27^/0=1/5832000 

224.  Vide  also    \aj.  Sam/i.  XXX.  day  =7/i35th  of  a  second,  a  day  being 
1 8.  Cf.    Taitt.  2r.  III.  13.  I  ;  B.  G.  equal   to  24    hours.      According     to 
VIII,  9;  Swtf.  Up,  III.  8.  &  VI,  15.  V.  P.  I.  3.  8,  9  &  10,  a   nimesha  is= 

225.  A   nimesha   is  a   twinkling  of       1/15   A&&Af=I/45O    kala=  1/1350° 
the   eye   considered  as  a  measure   of      mukurta—llifi^txa  day=l6/75th  of  a 
time.      According    to   some,    it   is=       second. 


Adhik.  I.  Sfit.  i.]       SRI-BHA.SHYA.  211 

indeed  great."  [M.  Ndr.  I.  10.];  "Those  who  know 
this  Person,  they  become  immortal."  \M.  Ndr.l.n.']. 
It  i.s  only  because  the  Brahman  is  possessed  of  attri- 
butes, that  all  the  scriptural  passages  declare  that  final 
release  results  solely  from  the  knowledge  of  the  Brahman 
as  possessed  of  attributes.  It  has  been  already  stated  that 
the  probative220  passages  also  prove  only  that  Brahman 
who  is  qualified. 

The  grammatical  equation,  found  in  the  passage227— 
"  That  thou  art" — and  in  other  similar  passages,  has  no  re- 
ference to  the  oneness  of  any  attributeless  thing,  because 
the  words  'That'  and  'thou'  have  the  power  of  denoting 
the  Brahman  as  qualified.  Indeed,  the  word  '  That '  points 
to  the  Brahman  who  is  omniscient,  who  wills  the  truth, 
and  who  is  the  cause  of  the  world  ;  because  in  the  pas- 
sage— "That thought — 'May  I  become  many'" — [Qfehdnd. 
Up.  VI.  2.  3.],  and  in  other  similar  passages,  it  is  He  who 
forms  the  subject.  The  word  '  thou '  which  is  equated 
with  '  That '  sets  forth  the  Brahman  whose  body  is  that  in- 
dividual self  which  is  associated  with  non-intelligent  matter; 
because  a  grammatical  equation  has  to  denote  only  one 
thing  which  exists  in  two  forms.  If  these  two  forms  are 
given  up,  then  the  equation  will  have  also  to  be  given  up ; 
because,  (when  those  two  forms  are  given  up),  there  will  be 
no  difference  in  the  significations  (of  the  words  '  thou '  and 
'That'),  and  because  also  there  will  then  have  to  be  a^ figura- 
tive (or  secondary)  signification  in  relation  to  both  these 
words.228  And  when  it  is  said — 'This  is  that  Devadatta', 

226.  Such  as  "The  "Brahman  is  Ex-  grammatical  equation  to  be  right,  it  is 
istence,  Knowledge,  Infinity."    Taitt,  necessary  that  it  should  not  be  a  mere 
Up.  11. 1. 1. Vide  supra  pp.  m.et  seq.  identity,  and  also  that  the  words  equat- 

227.  Vide  Chhand.   Up.  VI.  8.  7,  &  ed  in  the, equation  should  not  all  have 
n.  142.  supra.  figurative  or  secondary  significations. 

228.  For  a  Samaiiadliikaranva  or  a 


212  SRI-BHA.SHYA.     \_Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

there  is  no  secondary  signification  (in  relation  to  all  the  equa- 
ted words);  because  there  is  no   contradiction  in  perceiv- 
ing identity    (in    relation    to    Devadatta)    as   associated 
with  a  past  and  a  present  time.    The  contradiction  arising 
from  the  same  thing  being  found  in  different  places  is  re- 
moved by  the  difference  in  time.  (If,  in  the  equation — 'That 
thou  art',  the  two  forms  of  the  one  thing  referred  to  in  it 
be  given  up),  there  would  then  be  a  contradiction  of  the 
beginning    of    that  context    wherein    it  is   said — "That 
thought, — 'May   I   become    many' ";229the    proposition 
that,  by  knowing  one  thing,   all  things    become  known, 
would  also   thus  become   inappropriate  ;  and  He  whose 
true  nature   is  intelligence,   who    is   devoid   of   all    evil, 
who  is  omniscient,  and  whose  nature  is  characterised  by 
all  the  auspicious  qualities,  would  thereby  acquire  ignorance 
(or  avidyd)  and  (would  become)  the  object  of  all  the  innu- 
merable wrong  aims  of  life  which  are  produced  by  that 
(ignorance  or  avidya}.    If  the  equation  (here)  implies  the 
stultification  (of  a  previously  existing  wrong   conception), 
then  the  two  words  'That'  and  'thou'  have  to  figuratively 
signify  a  basis  (for  the  super-imposition  of  that  wrong  con- 
ception) and  the  removal  (of  that  super-imposition).  These 
figurative  significations,  &c.,  constitute  those  defects  (which 
have  been  referred  to   above).    There  is,   however,  this 
much  of  peculiarity.  Here,  there  is  the  unavoidable  forced 
assumption  of  a  stultification  which  is  not  realised  in  the 
same   way  in  which  it  is  realised  in  the  cognition — "  This 
Cmother-of-pearl)  is  no  silver";  and  there  is  also  the  impossi- 
bility of  a  stultification  (arising),  because  the  word  '  That ' 
does  not,  beyond  expressing  merely  a  basis  (for  the   super- 
imposition  of  a  wrong  conception),  denote  any  attribute  (of 
that  basis,  so  as  to  contradict  such  a  super-imposition).  If  it 

229.  Vide  Chhdnd.  Up.  VI.  2.  3. 


Adhik.  L  Sfti.  /.]      SRI-BHA.SHYA.  213 

be  said  that  the  word  '  That '  denotes  the  unveiled  nature 
of  what  was  formerly  veiled,   (it  is  replied  that  it  is)  not 
CSQ)  ;  because  when  first  the  basis  itself  is    unknown,   illu- 
sion and  its  stultification  which  are  dependent  thereon  are 
impossible.   If  it  be  said  (again)  that  the  basis  which  forms 
the  seat  of  illusion  is  itself  unconcealed,  then  that  very 
nature  of  the  basis  would  be  contradictory  to  illusion  ;  and 
therefore  when  that, (basis) becomes  clearly  known  (by  means 
of  the  import  of  the  equation  under  reference),  then  there  can 
absolutely  be  no  illusion  and  no  stultification,  as  both  of  them 
are  dependent  on  that  (basis).  Consequently  it  is  difficult  to 
establish  an  illusion  and  its  stultification  (in  relation  to  the 
grammatical  equation  'That  thou  art '),  when  a  really  exist- 
ing attribute  and  its  concealment  are  not  admitted  (to  be 
denoted  by  the  word  'That')  over  and  above  (its  denoting) 
the  basis  (for  that  attribute  and  its  concealment).     Indeed, 
when  a  basis  which  is  merely  of  the  fonn  of  a  person,  for 
instance,  is  being  perceived,  and  when  the  really  existing  at- 
tribute of  royalty  (which  belongs  to  that  person)  and  which 
is   other  than  that  (basis)  is  concealed,   it  is   only   then 
that  there  can  be  the  illusion  of  (that  person)  being,  (say),  a 
wild  hunter ;   and  there  will  be  the  cessation  of  that  (illu- 
sion) on  explaining  that  the  attribute  of  royalty  (belongs 
to  that  person),  but  not  on  merely  explaining  that  basis 
(to  be  a  person) ;  because  that  (basis),  being  (itself)  plainly 
visible,  does  not  stand  in  need  of  being  explained;  and 
because  also,  there  can  be  no  destruction  of  illusion  (when 
merely  the  basis  is  thus  explained).  The  two  words  ('That' 
and    'thou')  mainly  signify    the   Brahman    who    is  the 
cause  of  the  world,  and  who  has  the  individual  soul  for  His 
body.     It  has  been  (thus)  established  that  the  grammatical 
equation  (here)  is  due  to  the  fact  of  there  being  the  denota- 
tion of  one  and  the  same  thing  as  existing  in  association  with 


1 14  SRI-BHA.SHYA.     [Chap.  L  Part.  /. 

two  (different)  modes  (or  forms).  (By  means  of  this  gram- 
matical equation)  another  peculiar  characteristic  in  relation 
to  the  Brahman,  who  is  devoid  of  all  evil,  and  whose  nature 
is  characterised  by  all  the  auspicious  qualities,  is  established 
in  the  form  of  His  being  the  internal  ruler  of  all  individual 
souls;  and  (this  conclusion)  is  completely  in  harmony  with 
the  beginning  of  the  context  (in  which  this  grammatical 
equation  occurs).  Thus  also  there  results  the  demons- 
tration of  the  proposition230  that,  by  knowing  one  thing,  all 
things  become  known;  because  the  Brahman,  who  owns  the 
intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent  things  in  the  subtle  state 
as  His  body,  is  Himself  an  effect  (in  the  form  of  the  Brah- 
man] who  possesses  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent 
things  in  the  gross  state  as  His  body.  (According  to  our  in- 
terpretation) there  is  also  no  contradiction  of  other  scriptu- 
ral passages  such  as  the  following  : — "  (May  we  know)  Him 
who  is  the  highest  and  greatest  Lord  of  lords." — [Svet.  Up. 
VI.  7.] ;  "  His  supreme  power  is  revealed  indeed  as 
varied."—  \Svet.  Up.  VI.  8.];  "  He  (/.f.lthe  Lord;  is  devoid 
of  sins,  He  desires  the  truth  and  wills  the  truth." — \_Qhhand. 
Up.  VIII.  1.5.  &  VIII.  7.  i.]. 

If  it  be  asked  in  what  manner  the  subject  and  the 
predicate  in  the  sentence  '  That  thou  art '  are  particularised, 
it  is  replied  that  there  is  (really)  nothing  predicated  here 
of  anything;  because,fin  the  (earlier)  statement231  itself— 
"  All  this  has  that  (Brahman)  for  its  Self" — [±khdnd.  Up. 
VI.  8.  7.],  it  (viz.  the  predication  of  oneness)  has  been  al- 
ready arrived  at.  Indeed  the  sdstra  has  a  meaning  only 

230.  Vide    Chhdnd.    Up.   VI.    I.  3.  Chhatid.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.    where  we  read 

wherein  this  proposition  is  given.  — "All   this  has  That   for    its    Self. 

231,  This    statement  occurs  in  the  That  is  Existence,  That   is  the   Self, 

context    earlier   than   the  grammati-  That   thou   art,  O  Svelaketu." 
cal    equation    'That     Thou   art',   in 


Adhik.  I.  Sftt.  /.]       SRi-BHlSHYA.  215 

in  so  for  as  it  relates  to  what  has  not  been  already  arrived 
at.2 s *     Here,  (/.  c.  in  this  statement),  by  means  of  the 
expression  '  all  this',  the   world  with  the  individual  souls 
is  first  pointed  out ;  it  is  then  declared,   by  means  of  the 
expression   '  has    this    (Brahman)    for    its     Self,     that 
this   (Brahman)   is  the  Self  of  that    (world)  ;   and    the 
reason  for  it  is  given  in  the  passage  which  says — "All 
these   things   which   are  born,   my  dear  one,  have  their 
origin  in  the  sat  (i.  e.  in  the  Existent  One),  have  their 
abode  in  the  sat,  and  are  established  in  the  sat."   \Qihanti. 
Up.  VI.  8.  4  &  6.],  as  (it  is  also  given)  in  the  passage  which 
says — "  Let  a  man  (meditate),  being  tranquilled  in  mind 
by  the  knowledge  that  all  this,  indeed,  is  the  Brahman, 
that  all  this   is  born  in  Him,  is  absorbed  into  Him,  and 
lives    in    Him."    \Chhand.   Up.  III.    14.   i.].     Similarly, 
other    scriptural  passages  also  speak  of  the  identity  of 
the  Brahman  with  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent 
things,  which  are  different  from  Him,  as  being  nothing 
other  than  the  relation  of  the  soul  and  the  body  (between 
them).  Among  others,  they  are  as  follow  : — "  He,  who  has 
entered  within,  is  the  ruler  of  all  things  that  are  born  and 
is  the    Self   of  all."      \Taitt.  Ar.  III.   24.];     "He  who, 
dwelling  in   the   earth,   is   within  the   earth,    whom  the 
earth  does  not  know,  whose  body  is  the  earth,  who  inter- 
nally rules  the  earth, — He  is  thy  internal  ruler  and  immor- 
tal Self."     \Brih.  Up.  III.  7.  3.];     "  He  who,  dwelling  in 
the  self,  is  within  the  self,  whom  the  self  does  not  know, 
whose  bod}7  is  the  self,  and  who  internally  rules  the  self, — 
He   is  thy   internal   ruler  and  immortal  Self."      \Mddh. 
Brih.  Up.  III.  7.   22.];     "He  who  is  moving  within  the 
earth, whose   body   is   matter   (mrityu  or  prakriti], 

232.     Cf.    Pur.  Mim.  III.  4.  15.  &  X.  4,  22, 


216  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

whom  matter  (prakriti}  does  not  know, — He  is  the  internal 
Self  of  all  beings,  He  is  devoid  of  all  sins,  He  is  the  Divine 
Lord,   He  is  the  one  Nlrayana."     [Sub.    Up.   VII.  i.]; 
"  Having  created  that  (viz.  the  world),  He  entered  into 
that  same  (world);  having  entered  into  that  same  (world), 
He  became  the  sat  and  the  tyat" - 3  3     [Taitt.  Up.  II.  6. 
i.].     In  this  context   also  by  the  statement — "Entering 
in   along  with  this   individual   self  which    (also)    is   the 
same  as   Myself,   I  evolve  the   differentiations  of  name 
and    form."     \Qhhand.     Up.   VI.   3.   2.], — it  is   declared 
that  all  things  acquire  the  character  of  being  things,  and  of 
being  expressible  by  means  of  words,  only  by  reason  of 
their  having  been  entered  into  by  the   individual  selves 
which,  (in  their  turn),   have   the    Brahman  for  their  Self 
Because  the  statement—"  Having  entered  into  that  (world) } 
He    became    the    sat  and  the    tyat"— has    to    possess 
the   same   meaning  as   this  (statement  above  viz.   that  all 
this   has  that  Brahman  for  its  Self),   it   follows   that  the 
individual  self  also  has    the    Brahman  for  its  Self  wholly 
owing  to   the   fact   of  the  Brahman  having  entered  into 
it.   Hence,  it  is  concluded  that  the  whole  totality  of  beings 
which  is  made  up  of  the  intelligent   and  the  non-intelli- 
gent things  is  identical  with  the  Brahman,  only  because 
of  the  relation  of  the  body  and  the  soul  (existing  between 
them).     Hence  all  that  is  different  from  the  Brahman  be- 
comes an  entity  only  through  constituting  His  body  ;  and 
accordingly,  the  word  also  which  denotes  that  (entity  or 
thing)  imports  its   (full)  meaning  only  when  it  includes 
that  (Brahman").    Therefore  it  is  a  demonstrated  conclu- 
sion, that  all  words  have  severally  the  power  of  denoting 
the  Brahman,  as  in  association  with  the  thing  denoted   re- 

233.  Vide    supra   p.    193.    n.    183.       ing   to  Jacob's     Concordance     to   the 
The  reference  given  above  is  accord-       Upanishads. 


Adhik.  I.  Sat.  /.]      SRI-BHISHYA. 


217. 


spectively  by  every  one  of  them,  in  accordance  with  that  im- 
port of  theirs  which  is  made  out  by  popular  usage.  Thus 
the  import  of  the  proposition,  enunciated  to  the  effect  that 
"  All  this  has  that  (Brahman)  for  its  Self",  is  specially 
summed  up  by  means  of  the  grammatical  equation — "That 
thou  art." 

Hence  it  is,  that,  in  the  case  of  those  who234  maintain 
that  there  is  only  one  attributeless  tiling,  and  in  the  case 
of  those  who23-"  maintain  that  there  is  difference  and  non- 
difference  (between  the  individual  soul  and  the  Brahman), 
and  also  in  the  case  of  those  who236  maintain  that  there  is 
absolute  difference  (between  the  individual  soul  and  the 
Brahman),  all  such  teachings  regarding  the  identity  be- 
tween the  Brahman  and  the  individual  soul,  as  are  given  by 
means  of  grammatical  inequalities2  3  7  and  by  means  of  gram- 


234.  These  are  the  Adiuaitins  who 
are     of    opinion    that    the   Brahman 
who  is  devoid  of  all  characterising 
attributes  is  alone  real,    and  that  all 
else  is  unreal. 

235.  These    are  the   Bhdskartyas 
and  Yadavaprakaslyas.     The   former 
of  these  maintain  that  the  difference 
between  the  individual  self  and   the 
Brahman  is  due   to   limiting   condi- 
tions,  and  that,    on   the  removal    of 
those   conditions,  the  individual  self 
becomes  one  with  the  "Brahman.    For 
instance,  the  spatial  ether  in  its  origi- 
nal  state   is     unconditioned,    but   it 
may  get  conditioned  by  the   material 
outline    of  a  pot  or   any   other  such 
thing.     The  ether  within   the   pot  is 
compared  to  the  individual  self.     On 
the  destruction  of  the  pot,  the  ether 
in   the    pot   becomes  one  with    the 

28 


spatial    ether  which  is  compared  to 
the  Brahman. 

The  latter,  viz.  the  Yadavapraltdl'i- 
ras,  hold  that  just  as  one  portion  of 
a  lump  of  clay  may  be  converted  in- 
to pots  and  dishes,  while  another 
portion  remains  as  clay  pure  and 
simple,  so  also  the  Brahman  evolves 
the  individual  selves  out  of  a  portion 
of  Himself,  the  other  portion  remain- 
ing undifferentiated,  so  that  He  is 
both  distinct  from  the  individual  selves 
and  also  non-distinct  from  them. 

236.  These    are     the    Vaiseshikas 
who  hold  that  the  Brahman  is  entire- 
ly distinct  from  the   individual  selves. 

237.  A  grammatical  inequality  may 
be    exemplified     by — Tasya  esha  evi 
sdrlra  dtmd  which  means — "The  em- 
bodied   Self  of  that  is  He   Himself." 

Taitt.  U/>.    II.  3.    i.     Here  the  won! 


2i8  SRT-BH.ISHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

matical  equations,  will  amount  to  having  been  completely 
thrown  away.  When  there  is  only  one  thing  in  existence, 
in  relation  to  what  (other  thing)  can  there  be  the  teaching 
of  its  identity  ?  If  it  be  replied  that  that  (identity)  is 
only  in  relation  to  that  same  (thing),  it  is  rejoined — that 
that  (identity  of  the  one  existent  thing  with  itself)  has 
been  already  made  out  from  the  scriptural  text238  relied 
upon  by  yourselves  (  i.  e.  the  Adwaitins),  and  that  there  is 
thus  nothing  which  remains  to  be  learnt  from  (a  fresh 
statement  of)  identity.  If  it  be  said  again  that  it  is  the 
destruction  of  the  superimposed  differences  (which  forms 
the  purpose  of  the  teaching  of  this  identity),  it  is  replied 
that  it  has  been  already  pointed  out  that  that  (purpose) 
cannot  be  accomplished  at  all  by  means  of  the  identity 
found  in  the  equation — '  That  thou  art'.  Moreover,  (this) 
grammatical  equation  indicates  two  (different)  modes  (or 
forms)  in  relation  to  the  Brahman,  and  thus  proves  what 
is  altogether  unfavourable  (to  this  monistic  position). 
And  according  to  the  opinion  of  those  who  maintain  that 
there  is  both  difference  and  non-difference  (between  the 
individual  self  and  the  Brahman),  the  Brahman  Himself 


tasya  (meaning  of  tha')  stands  in  the  II.    I.  i.,     "The  Brahman  is    Exist- 

genitive  case  /'.  e.  in  a  different  gram-  ence,  Knowledge,  Infinity."   The  idea 

matical  case  from  that  of  the  words  is  that,  since  this   text  itself  declares 

esha     (He),   x.irtra    (the   embodied),  that  the  one  existing  thing  is  identi- 

dtman  (the  Sell), all  of  which  stand  in  cal  with  itself,  no   more  teaching  as 

the  nominative  case.      However,    in  to  identity    is    necessary  and   conse- 

a  sentence    forming   a    grammatical  quently    the     grammatical    equation 

equation,  all  the  words  have  to  bs  in  li  Tji-.it   thou   art,"    is     meaningless, 

the  same  grammatical  case  as  in  Sat-  The  text  referred  to  here  may  also  he 

vam  jflanam  anantam  lii-a/ima.  AilaJatmyant    idam     sarvam,      which 

238.    This   text   is,  among  others,  means  that  all  this    has    Him    for  its 

stated  hy    the  Sriitaprakd'sikachdiya,  Self,    in     as    much    as    the   equation 

to  be  nothing  other  than   Tail/.    Uf>.  '  That  thou  art '  comes  after  this, 


Adkik.  I.  Sul.  /.]     SRI-!BHA.SHYA.  219 

has  to  be  in  association  with  limiting  conditions;  and  conse- 
quently all  the  blemishes,  which  are  found  in  individual 
souls  and  are  due  to  those  (limiting  conditions),  will  tend 
to  taint  the  Brahman  Himself.  Therefore,  all  the  teach- 
ings which  teach  the  identity  of  the  individual  soul .  with 
the  Brahman,  who  is  characterised  by  the  utter  absence 
of  all  blemishes  and  possesses  all  the  auspicious  qualities, 
will,  solely  owing  to  self-contradiction,  amount  to  having 
been  wholly  thrown  away.  And  again,  according  to  the 
opinion  of  those  who  maintain  that  the  difference  and 
non-difference,  (between  the  individual  soul  and  the  Brah- 
man), are  both  natural  (/.  c.  uncaused  by  any  limiting  con- 
ditions whatsoever),  it  has  to  be  admitted  that  the  Brahman 
Himself  acquires  (quite  naturally)  the  condition  of  the 
individual  soul,  and  thus  all  the  blemishes  (belonging  to  the 
individual  self)  will  become  as  natural  (to  Him)  as  (His 
own)  auspicious  qualities.  Consequently,  to  teach  the 
identity  Cof  the  individual  soul)  with  that  Brahman,  who 
is  devoid  of  all  blemishes,  is  certainly  inconsistent.  Fur- 
ther, according  to  the  opinion  of  those  who  maintain  that 
there  is  absolute  difference  (between  the  individual  soul 
and  the  Brahman],  it  is  impossible  to  have  any  kind  of 
identity  between  things  which  are  so  altogether  different; 
and  it  is  for  this  very  reason  that  the  teachings  which  teach 
the  identity  of  the  Brahman  and  the  individual  soul 
become  inappropriate.  Thus  (in  this  case)  the  whole  of  the 
Vedanla  will  have  to  be  given  up  as  meaningless. 

However,  according  to  those  who- a9  maintain  that,  as 
proclaimed  in  all  the  Upanishads,  the  whole  world  forms 
the  body  of  the  Brahman,  all  those  teachings  which  teach 

239.  These  are  the    Vi'sishtaduiaitins       intelligent  individual  selves  as  well  as 
who  hold  that  the  Bra/iinan   has  the       tlje  non-intelligent  matter  a>  His  body. 


220  SRI-BHASHYA.        [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

that  the  Brahman  Himself  form*  the  whole  world  become 
appropriate   explanations   (of  the   truth).    A  grammatical 
equation  which   expresses  that,  through  the  influence  of 
karmas,  an  individual  self  has  become  an  ox,  a  horse,   a 
man,  or  a  god,  is  generally  seen,  in  popular  usage  as  well 
as  in  the  scriptures,  to  possess  a  real  and  natural  signifi- 
cance; because,  like  generic  characterisations  and  qualities, 
substances  also  may  become  the  attributes  (of  things)  when 
they  constitute  the  bodies  (of  those  things).     Moreover, 
the   fact  that  generic  characterisations  and  qualities  are 
merely  the  modes  of  substances  forms  the  basis  of  gramma- 
tical equations  like — 'The  ox  is  broken-horned',   and  'The 
cloth  is  white'.    Seeing  that  the  material  masses,  which  are 
characterised  by  the  attributes  of  man  and  of  other  forms  of 
physical  embodiment,  become  intelligible  things  only  when 
they  constitute  the  modes  of  the  individual  self,  the  gram- 
matical equation  which  says  that  the   individual  self  has 
become  a  human  being,  a  male,  a  eunuch,  or  a  female,  is, 
in  all  cases,  equally  appropriate.    Therefore,  the   basis  of 
grammatical  equations  is  altogether  this  (kind  of)  modality, 
but  does  not  consist  of  generic  characterisations  and  other 
such  things  all  of  which  exclude  each  other.  Indeed,  when 
such  substances  as  are   capable   of  existing  in  themselves 
form  the  attributes  of  (other)  substances  occasionally  and 
in  special  cases,  then  there  is  seen  the  use  of  an  affix 
having  the  force  of  matitp,-*®  as  in  the  instances  of  dandin 
(one  who  possesses  a  danda  or  a  stick)  and  kuniialin   (one 
who  possesses  a  kwidala  or  an  ear-ring).     Such  is  not  the 
case  with  substances  which  are  incapable  of  existing  in  a 
condition  in  which  they  may  be  separately  perceived.  The 

240.    When  one  who   possesses  a      is  nini,  which  signifies  the  possession 
stick  (dani^a)  is  called  a  danfyn,  the       of  a  thing, 
affix  having  the  force  of  via/up   here 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  /.]       SRI-BHA.SHYA.  221 

attributive  character  of  those  (substances)  is  to  be  conclu- 
sively made  out  only  by  means  of  grammatical  equations. 

Here,  however,  it  may  be  said  thus  : — In  the  case 
where,  through  the  influence  of  karmas,  an  indivi- 
dual self  has  become  an  ox,  a  horse,  a  man,  a  god,  a  male, 
a  female,  or  a  eunuch,  the  material  embodiment  known  as 
man  and  the  other  (material  embodiments)  are  all  held  to  be 
the  modes  of  that  individual  self;  in  the  same  way  in  which  j 
when  it  is  said — 'The  ox  is  broken-horned  and  hornless',  'The 
cloth  is  white',  'The  cloth  is  black',  generic  characteristics 
and  (other)  qualities  (form  the  modes  of  the  substances 
they  qualify).  If  it  be  so  held,  then,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
genus  and  the  individuals  (belonging  to  it),  so  in  the  case 
of  the  body  and  the  individual  self  also,  there  must  be,  as 
a  general  rule,  the  simultaneous  perception  of  the  mode 
and  the  possessor  of  the  mode.  But  it  is  not  seen  to  take 
place  thus.  Indeed,  as  (they  do  perceive)  the  generic 
characteristics  (of  the  ox  and  of  other  beings),  simultaneously 
and  in  inseparable  association  with  what  those  characteris- 
tics qualify,  so,  people  do  not,  as  a  general  rule,perceive  the 
material  embodiments  like  those  of  man,  &c.,  simultane- 
ously and  in  association  with  the  individual  self,  so  as  to 
make  out  that  they  are  entirely  dependent  upon  the 
individual  self.  Hence,  the  grammatical  equation  which 
says  that  a  man  is  an  individual  self  has  a  merely  figurative 
signification. 

But  this  is  not  right.  The  material  embodiments  like 
those  of  man,  &c.,  possess,  equally  with  generic  and  other 
qualifications,  the  character  of  being  entirely  dependent  on 
the  individual  self,  the  character  of  being  serviceable  only 
to  that  (self),  and  the  character  of  being  the  mode  of  that 
(self).  The  character  of  their  being  altogether  dependent 
upon  the  individual  self  alone  is  made  out  from  the  destruc- 


222  SRI-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  I.  fart.  L 

tion  of  the  body  (taking  place)  on  the  separation  of  the  indi- 
vidual self  (from  it).  The  character  of  their.being  service- 
able to  the  individual  self  alone  (is  made  out)  from  the  fact  of 
their  existing  merely  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  the  karma  of  that 
(self).  Also,  the  character  of  their  being  the  modes  of  that 
(self  is  made  out)  from  the  knowledge  that  they  constitute 
the  attributes  of  the  individual  self,  as  in  the  instances  of 
a  god  and  a  man.  This  is,  indeed,  the  reason  why 
(genetically  significant)  words  like  ox,  £c.,  have  their 
meanings  so  as  to  include  the  individuals  (belonging  to  their 
respective  genera).  Being  devoid  of  this  aforesaid  nature, 
such  (words)  as  danda  (stick),  kundala  fear-ring)  and  others, 
have  an  affix  possessing  the  force  of  matup  (attached 
to  them)  when  they  form  attributes,  as  in  the  instances  of 
dandin  (the  possessor  of  a  stick)  and  kundalin  (the  possessor 
of  an  ear-ring).  The  material  embodiments  like  those  of 
gods,  men,  &c.,  possess,  of  their  own  nature,  the  charac- 
ter of  being  dependent  upon  the  individual  self  alone,  the 
character  of  being  serviceable  to  that  (self)  alone,  and 
the  character  of  being  the  mode  of  that  (self)  alone; 
it  is  therefore  that  the  grammatical  equation,  which  says 
that-an  individual  self  is  a  god  or  a  man,  is  freely  current 
in  popular  usage  as  well  as  in  the  scriptures.  There 

is,  as  a  general  rule,  the  simultaneous  perception  of  the 
genus  and  the  individual  (belonging  to  it),  because  both  of 
them  are  capable  of  being  apprehended  by  the  eye  ;  but 
the  individual  self  is  not  apprehended  at  the  time  of  the 
ocular  apprehension  of  the  body,  because  the  individual 
self  is  not  capable  of  being  apprehended  by  the  eye.  Do 
not  say  that  a  thing,  which  is  capable  of  being  appre- 
hended as  existing  separately,  cannot  have  mere  modality 
to  constitute  its  own  nature  :  because,  it  is  made  out  that, 
like  generic  and  other  qualifications,  the  body  also 


Adhik.  I.  S/lt.  /.]       SRI-BHASHYA.  223 

possesses  altogether  the  nature  of  being  a  mode  of  that 
(self),  owing  to  its  being  solely  dependent  upon  that  (self), 
and  owing  to  its  being  solely  serviceable  to  that  (self),  and 
owing  also  to  its  being  an  attribute  of  that  (self).  And 
it  has  been  stated  that  the  law  of  simultaneous  perception 
is  dependent  upon  the  knowability  (of  the  mode  and  of  the 
possessor  of  the  mode)  by  means  of  one  and  the  same 
perceiving  apparatus.  Thus  the  eye  cannot  apprehend 
the  possession,  by  the  earth  and  other  substances,  of 
smell,  taste,  and  other  qualities,  although  these  (qualities) 
naturally  belong  to  them.  Similarly,  although  the  body, 
which  is  capable  of  being  apprehended  by  the  eye,  possesses 
fully  the  nature  of  being  a  mode  of  the  individual  self,  yet, 
it  is  not  so  apprehended,  because  the  eye  does  not  possess 
the  power  of  apprehending  the  individual  self.  Merely  on 
account  of  this  much,  the  body  cannot  be  destitute  of  the 
character  of  being  a  mode  of  that  (self).  The  basis  of  the 
grammatical  equation  (between  the  body  and  the  indivi- 
dual self)  is  nothing  other  than  (the  body)  possessing  the 
character  of  being  altogether  a  mode  of  that  (self). 

Moreover,  that  word,  which  is  ca'pable  of  denoting  (the 
body)  as  a  mode  of  the  individual  self,  denotes  that  body 
to  be  the  mode  of  the  individual  self  at  the  same  time  that  it 
denotes  the  individual  self  also.  It  may,  however,  be  said 
that,  solely  in  accordance  with  the  practical  usage  of  words, 
it  is  only  the  body  that  is  apprehended  by  means  of  the 
word  '  body',  and  that  therefore  the  word  '  body  '  does  not 
possess  the  power  of  including  the  individual  self  also  in 
its  meaning.  To  this  it  is  replied  that  it  is  not  so  ; 
because,  (here,  /.  c.  in  the  case  where  the  word  '  body ' 
denotes  merely  the  body),  that  body,  which  is  nothing 
other  than  a  mode  of  the  individual  self,  is  specifically 
mentioned  with  the  object  of  pointing  out  its  distin- 


224  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

guishing  feature  as  a  thing.  Therefore,  the  word  '  body  ' 
is  a  definitively  determinative  word,  like  the  words 
1  ox-ness  '  (/.  c.  gotva],  '  whiteness',  ( quality',  '  form',  &c. 
Consequently,  like  the  words  '  ox  ',  &c.,  the  words,  '  god', 
1  man',  &c.,  include  the  individual  self  in  their  import. 
Similarly,  the  individual  selves,  which  are  associated  with 
material  forms  like  those  of  god,  man,  &c.,  form  the 
body  of  the  Highest  Self,  and  hence  possess  the  char- 
acter of  being  His  modes.  Therefore  all  the  words 
which  denote  the  individual  self  include  the  Highest 
Self  also  in  their  import.  Consequently,  all  the  intel- 
ligent and  the  non-intelligent  things  possess  the  character 
of  being  things,  solely  because  they  are  the  modes  of  the 
Highest  Brahman  ;  and  that  is  why  they  are  so  spoken  of 
in  practice  as  to  be  grammatically  equated  with  that  (Brah- 
man}. This  matter  is  fully  proved  in  the  Vedartha-san- 
graha. a  4 '  He  (viz.  the  Sutra  kara)  speaks  of  this  very  iden- 
tity, which  has  the  character  of  the  relation  between  the 
soul  and  the  body,  in  the  aphorism — "  But  they  (viz.  the 
Jabalas)  worship  the  Lord  as  the  self,  and  they  (viz.  the 
scriptural  texts)  make  us  comprehend  (it  as  such)." 
[Ved.  Siit.  IV.  i.  3].  And  the  Vakyakara  also  says,—2*2 
"  The  Lord  is  to  be  comprehended  as  nothing  other  than 
the  self." 

The  truth  here  is  this.  Some  of  the  scriptural 
passages,  such  as  the  following  among  others,  speak  of  the 
distinction  in  nature  between  the  non-intelligent  thing 
(prakriti),  the  intelligent  thing  (or  the  individual  sell),  and 
the  Highest  Brahman,  as  consisting  in  their  possessing, 
(respectively)  ,the  character  of  being  the  object  of  enjoyment, 

241.  Vide  Veddrtha-sahgraka  pp.   20       charya    and    A,     K.    Vijayaraghava- 
to  60,    edited   at    Madras  in   Telugu       charya. 
characters   by   Messrs.  }.    Tirtimala-          242.  Vide  supra   p,  33. 


Adhik.  I.  Snt.  /.]     SRI-BHA.SHYA.  225 

the  character  of  being  the   enjoyer,   and  the  character  of 
being  the  Supreme  Ruler  : — "Out  of  t\\\z(praknti  or  nature), 
He  who  is  the  owner  of  the  mdya  (i.  e.  the  Lord)  creates  this 
world  wherein  another  being(viz.the  individual  self)  is  bound 
down  by   mdya."—  [Svet.  Up.  IV.  9.];  "Know  then  that 
prakritiis  mdya,  and  the  great  Lord  the  May  in  (i.  e.  the  pos- 
sessor of  the  mdya)." — [Svet.  Up.  IV.  10.];    "The  destructi- 
ble is  the  prakriti ;  the  immortal   and  the  indestructible  is 
the  hara  (i.  e.  the  individual  self);  and  the  Lord  alone  rules 
over  the  destructible  (prakriti}  and  the  individual  self."- 
\Svet.    Up.   i.   io.]; — here,   by  the  expression   that  'the 
immortal  and  the  indestructible  is  the   hara,'  the  enjoyer 
is  pointed  out ;  he  (viz.  the  individual  self)  is  (called)  the 
hara  because  the  individual  self  utilises  the  prakriti  as 
an  object  of  his  own  enjoyment; — "  He  is  the  cause,  He  is 
the  Lord  of  what  is  the  lord  of  the  senses   (/.  e.  of  the  jiva 
or  the  individual  soul);  He  has  no  progenitor  and  no  su- 
perior."— [Svet.  £//!>.  VI.  9.];"  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  prakriti 
(nature)  and  of  the  individual  soul  and  is  the  regulator  of  the 
qualities."2  *  ^—[Svet.  Up.  VI.  16.];  "  He  is  the  Lord  of  the 
universe,  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  individual  souls,  and  is  eter- 
nal, auspicious  and  inexhaustible." — [M.  Ndr.  XI.  3.] ;  "The 
two  unborn,  the  Intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent  (are) 
the  Lord  and  the  non-lord." — [Svet.  Up.    i.  9.]  ;     "The 
Eternal  among   the   eternals,  the    Intelligent    among  the 
intelligent,  who,  though   One,   fulfils   the   desires  of  the 
many."— \Kath.  Up.V.  i$.&  Svet.  Up.  VI.  13.];  "Knowing 
the  enjoyer,  the  object  of  enjoyment  and  the  Impeller,"- 
[Svet,  Up.  I.  12.];     "One  of  them  eats  the  sweet  pippala 
fruit,  while  the  other  shines  in  splendour  without  eating  at 

243.     These  qualities  are  the  well-       primordial  prakriti  becomes  differenti- 
knovvn  Sattva,  goodness,    Rajas,  pas-       ated. 
sion  and  Tamas,  darkness,  by   which 

29 


226  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  1.  Part.  I. 

all."—  [Svet.  Up.  IV.  6.  &  Mund.  Up.  III.  i.  i.];  "Knowing 
the  individual  self  and  the  Impeller  to  be  different,  and  being 
therefore  blessed  by  Him,  he  attains  immortality."  [Svet 
Up.  I.  6.];  "  There  is  one  unborn  female  being  (aja)  which 
is  red,  white  and  black,  and  which  produces  numerous 
offspring  of  the  same  kind  as  herself;  there  is  another  male 
being  (aja)  who  loves  her  and  is  close  to  her;  there  is  still 
another  male  being  (aja)  who,  after  having  enjoyed  her, 
gives  her  up."  [Svet.  Up.  IV.  5-];244  "On  the  same  tree,  the 
purusha  (i.  e.  the  individual  self)  sits  immersed  in  grief,  and, 
being  ignorant  and  powerless,  he  feels  sorry.  When  he  sees 
another,  the  Lord,  to  be  fully  satisfied,  then  he  (also),  reliev- 
ed from  grief,  attains  His  greatness."  [Svet.  Up.  IV.  7.]. 
(To  the  same  effect  are)  the  following  passages  in  the 
Smriti  also : — "This  prakriti  of  Mine  is  divided  into  eight2  4  5 
parts  in  the  form  of  the  ahafikara,  &c.  This  is  My 
lower  prakriti.  Know  that  to  be  My  higher  prakriti  which 
is  other  than  this  (lower  one),  and  which  consists  of  individu- 
al selves.  By  it,  this  world  is  supported,  O  thou,  mighty-arm- 
ed one!"—  [B.  G.  VII.  4  &  5.];  "All  created  beings, O  son  of 
Kunti,  enter  into  My  prakriti  at  the  end  of  each  kalpa,z*Q 
and  at  the  beginning  of  each  kalpa  I  again  send  them  forth. 

244.  The  female  being  referred  to  in  fire,air  and  ether  (or  aka'sa)\  the  mind; 
this  passage  is  the  Prakriti  or  primor-  the  principle  known  as  the  Mahat  or 
dial  nature;  the  first  male  being  is  the  "Buddhi,  and  the  Ahahkdra, 
individual  soul  in  the  samsdra   state;  246.  A  Kalpa  is  a  period   of  time 
the  second  male  being  is  the   indivi-  equal  to  4,320,000,000  solar  years.    It 
dual  soul  in  the  released  state.     The  is  a  day  of  the  creating  Brahma  and 
three  colours  red,  white,   and  black,  his  night   also  is  equal   to   the   day. 
are  explained  as  signifying  the  three  At  the  beginning  of  each  Kalpa,  the 
Gunas  or  qualities,  viz.  Rajas,  Sattva,  creation  of  the  world  is  said  to  begin 
and  Tanas,  respectively.  and  at  the  end  of  each  Kalpa  happens 

245.  These  eight  parts  are  the  five  the  destruction  of  the  whole  world, 
elements,    viz.     the     earth,     water 


Adhik.  /.  Sfit.  i.]     SRI-BHASHVA.  227 

Transforming  My  ownprafoiti,  I  send  forth  again  and  again, 
the  whole  of  this  collection  of  beings,  which  is  itself  not  free, 
in  as  much  as  it  is  under  the  influence  of  praknti."  [B.  G. 
IX.  7  &  8.]  ;  "  Presided  over  by  Me,  prakriti  gives 
birth  to  all  this  movable  and  immovable  creation.  Indeed, 
for  this  reason  it  is,  O  son  of  Kunti,  that  the  world  goes  on 
undergoing  transformation." — [B.  G.  IX.  10.];  "And 
know  that  the  praknti  and  the  purusha  are  both  beginning- 
less."  [B.  G.XIII.  19.];  "My  womb  is  the  great  brahman. 
(or  prakriti) ;  in  it  I  place  the  embryo  ;  .he  origin  of  all 
beings  proceeds  from  that,  O  Bharata."  [.?.  G.  XIV.  3.]. 
That  great  brahman  of  Mine  which  is  the  source  of  this 
world  and  is  called  the  praknti,  and  which  is  a  subtle  and 
non-intelligent  entity, — in  it,  I  place  the  embryo  known 
as  the  intelligent  thing.  From  thence,  that  is,  from  the 
connection  between  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent 
things  which  is  caused  by  Me,  there  results  the  origin  of 
all  these  beings  which  begin  with  the  gods  and  end  with  the 
immovable  things,  and  which  are  all  thus  mixed  up  with 
the  non-intelligent  thing.  This  is  the  meaning  (of  the  last 
quoted  sloka). 

Similarly,  several  other  scriptural  passages  declare  that  the 
Highest  Person  forms  the  Self  (of  all),  and  that  the  intelligent 
and  the  non-intelligent  things  have  no  separate  existence 
from  Him;  because  those  intelligent  and  non-intelligent 
things,  which  exist  in  the  form  of  the  enjoyer  and  the  thing 
enjoyed,  and  which  exist  also  in  all  conditions,  constitute  the 
body  of  the  Highest  Person,  and  are,  in  consequence,  subject 
to  His  control.  They  are  those  which  begin  with — "He  who, 
dwelling  in  the  earth,  is  within  the  earth,  whom  the  earth 
does  not  know,  whose  body  is  the  earth,  and  who  internally 
rules  the  earth — (He  is  thy  internal  ruler  and  immortal 
Sell)"; — and  conclude  with — "He  who,  dwelling  in  the  self, 


228  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

is  within  the  self,  whom  the  self  does  not  know,  whose 
body  is  the  self  and  who  internally  rules  the  self,  He  is  thy 
internal  ruler  and  immortal  Self."  \Madh.  Brih.  Up.  III. 
7.  3  to  22.].  To  the  same  effect  is  the  passage  beginning 
with — "  He  who  is  moving  within  the  earth,  whose  body 
is  the  earth,  whom  the  earth  does  not  know" — and  (end- 
ing with) — "  He  who  is  moving  within  the  akshara,  whose 
body  is  the  akshara,  whom  the  akshara  does  not  know  ; 
He  who  is  moving  within  the  mrityu  for  prakritf)  whose 
body  is  mrityu,  whom  mrityu  does  not  know  ; — He  is  the 
internal  Self  of  all  beings,  He  is  devoid  of  sins,  He  is  the 
Divine  Lord,  He  is  the  One  Narayana."  [Sub.  Up.  VII. 
i.].  Here,  the  word  mrityu  means  that  subtle  non-intelli- 
gent thing  which  is  expressed  by  the  word  lamas?*"1  be- 
cause in  this  very  Upanishad  it  is  stated — "The  avyakta 
is  absorbed  into  the  akshara  and  the  akshara  is  absorbed 
into  the  lamas."  [Sub.  Up.  II.],  and  (because)  it  is  stated 
also  (elsewhere) — "He,  who  has  entered  within,  is  the 
ruler  of  things  that  are  born  and  is  the  Self  of  all."  [Taitt. 
Ar.  III.  24.].  Thus  the  Highest  Person  Himself,  who, 

by  having  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent  things 
existing  in  all  conditions  as  His  body,  owns  them  as  His 
modes,  exists  in  the  form  of  the  world  in  its  condition 
as  cause  as  well  as  in  its  condition  as  effect.  Accordingly, 
with  the  object  of  making  this  very  thing  known,  some 
scriptural  passages  say  that  the  world  in  its  condition  as 
cause  and  also  in  its  condition  as  effect  is  He  Himself. 
They  are  tho^e  which  begin  with — "Existence  alone,  my 
dear  child,  this  was  in  the  beginning,  one  only  without  a 
second.  It  thought — 'May  I  become  manifold  and  be  born.' 
It  created  tejas."  [Qihand.  Up.  VI.  2.  3.],— and  (end  with) 

247.     Vide  supra,  p.  194.  n.  184. 


Adhik.  I.  Sftt.  i.]       SRI-BHISHYA.  229 

— "All  these  things  which  are  born,  my  dear  one,  have  their 
origin  in  the  sat  (i.  e.  in  the  Existent  One),  have  their  abode 
in  the  sat,  and  are  established  in  the  sat....A\\  this  has 
That  (Brahman]  for  its  Self.  That  (Brahman]  is  existence. 
He  is  the  Self.  That  thou  art,  O  Svetaketu."  \Qhh  and. 
Up.  VI.  8.  4,  6  &  7.].  To  this  effect,  there  is,  among  others, 
the  following  scriptural  passage  which  begins  with — "  He 
willed — -'May  I  become  manifold  and  be  born.'  He  perfor- 
med tapas.  Having  performed  tapas,  He  created  all 
this" ; — and  concludes  with — "While  being  the  unchangeable 
individual  self  (satyd)  and  the  changeable  matter  (anritd) 
He  has  remained  true  to  His  own  nature."  [  Taitt.  Up. 
II.  6.  i.].  That  distinction  in  nature  which  exists 

between  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent  things  (on 
the  one  hand),  and  the  Highest  Person  (on  the  other 
hand),  and  which  is  learnt  from  other  scriptural  passages 
as  well,  is  brought  to  mind  here  also,  (/.  e.  in  the  following 
passage) — "Entering  into  these  three  deities248  along 
with  this  individual  self  which  is  (also)  the  same  as  Myself, 
I  evolve  the  differentiations  of  name  and  form." — [Qihand. 
Up.  VI.  3.  2.], — and  also  in  the  passage — "Having  creat- 
ed that,  He  entered  into  that  same  (world).  Having 
entered  into  that  (world),  He  became  the  sat  and  the 
tyat He  became  the  intelligent  thing  and  the  non- 
intelligent  thing.  While  thus  being  the  unchangeable 
individual  self  and  the  changeable  matter,  He  has  re- 
mained true  to  His  own  nature."  \Taiti.  Up.  II.  6. 
i.].  The  idea  that  the  individual  soul  has  the  Brah- 
man for  its  Self,  as  made  out  from  the  expression— 
"  Entering  along  with  this  individual  self  which  is  (also) 

248.     These  are  the  elements  tejas,       the  very  first  things  created   by  the 
water   and   earth.     They   are  called       presiding  Deity  of  the  universe, 
deities  because  they  are  said   to  be 


230  SRI-BHISHYA.       [Chap.  1.  Part.  /. 

the  same  as  Myself—  [Qihand.  Up.  VI.  3.  2.],— that 
is  understood  to  be  dependent  upon  the  relation  of  the 
soul  and  the  body  (existing  between  the  Brahman 
and  the  individual  self);  because  that  expression  has  to 
import  the  same  meaning  as  this  expression — "Having 
entered  into  that  (world),  He  became  the  sat  and  the  tyat, 
(He  became)  the  intelligent  thing  and  the  non-intelligent 
thing."  [Taitt.  Up.  II.  6.  i.].  That  differentiation  of  names 
and  forms  which  is  exactly  of  this  very  kind  is  mentioned  in 
this  passage  also,  namely,  "  Indeed,  this  was  then  undiffer- 
entiated.  It  has  been  now  differentiated  by  means  of 
names  and  forms."  \_Brih.  Up.  I.  4.  7.].  Thus  He  who 
exists  in  the  condition  of  effect,  and  who  exists  in  the 
condition  of  cause,  and  who  owns  the  intelligent  and  the 
non-intelligent  things  in  their  gross  and  subtle  states  as  His 
body, — He  is  the  Highest  Person  alone.  Therefore,  for 
the  reason  that  the  effect  is  nothing  other  than  the  cause 
^modified),  and  that,  in  consequence,  the  effect  becomes 
known  when  the  cause  is  known,  the  desired  knowledge 
of  all  things  as  resulting  from  the  knowledge  of  one  thing 
is  possible  and  very  appropriate.  In  the  passage — "Enter- 
ing into  these  three  deities  along  with  this  individual  self 
which  is  (also)  the  same  as  Myself,  I  evolve  the  differentia- 
tions of  name  and  form  "—all  the  non-intelligent  things 
are  referred  to  by  the  expression  'the  three  deities'; 
and  then  the  differentiation  of  names  and  forms  is  said 
to  result  from  the  fact  of  the  individual  souls,  which  have 
Him  for  their  Self,  entering  into  those  things.  Thus,  all 
significant  words  signify  only  that  Highest  Self  who  is 
associated  with  the  individual  selves  which  are  themselves 
associated  with  non-intelligent  matter.  Therefore  the 
equating  of  the  word  which  denotes  an  effect,  with  the  word 
which  denotes  the  Highest  Self  in  the  condition  of  cause, 


Adhik.  I.  Snt.  /.]       SRI-BHISHYA.  231 

has  a  real  and  natural  significance.  Thus  that  Brahman, 
who  owns  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent  things  in 
their  gross  and  subtle  states  as  His  modes, — (He)  is  Himself 
the  effect  and  the  cause  ;  and  accordingly  the  world  has 
the  Brahman  for  its  material  cause.  The  Brahman 

Himself  forms  the  material  cause  of  the  world,  for  the 
reason  that  that  Brahman,  who  owns  the  intelligent  and 
the  non-intelligent  things  in  their  subtle  state  as  His  body, 
constitutes  the  cause  (of  all) ;  nevertheless,  by  virtue  of  the 
material  cause  (of  the  world)  being  a  composite  thing 
(made  up  of  the  individual  souls,  the  prakriti  and  the 
Brahman}  the  non-mixing-up  of  the  natures  of  the  Brah- 
man and  of  the  intelligent  as  well  as  of  the  non-intelligent 
things  is  perfectly  possible  and  appropriate.  Thus,  for 
instance,  although  a  variegatedly  woven  cloth  has  for 
its  material  cause  a  mixture  of  white,  black  and  red  threads, 
the  association  of  whiteness,  &c.,  is  to  be  found  con- 
fined only  to  the  region  where  a  particular  kind  of  thread 
exists  ;  and  accordingly,  in  the  condition  of  effect  also,  there 
is  no  fusion  of  the  colours  in  all  the  parts  (of  the  cloth). 
Similarly,  although  the  world  has  for  its  material  cause  the 
mixture  of  the  intelligent  thing  and  the  non-intelligent  thing 
and  the  Lord,  nevertheless,  in  its  condition  as  an  effect  also, 
there  is  no  fusion  of  the  characteristics  of  the  enjoyer,  of 
the  thing  enjoyed,  and  of  the  controller,  &c.  These  threads 
which  are  capable  of  existing  independently,  when  they  are 
occasionally  brought  together  by  the  will  of  man,  acquire 
the  character  of  a  cause  and  (also)  the  character  of  an  effect. 
But  here  (/.  e.  in  the  case  of  the  world)  there  is  this  much 
peculiarity,  namely,  that  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelli- 
gent things  existing  in  all  conditions  acquire  their  character 
of  being  things,  only  because  they  form  the  modes  of  the 
Highest  Person  through  constituting  His  body,  and  that 


232  SRi-BHlSHYA.       {Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

therefore  the  Highest  Person  who   has  those  things  as  His 
modes  is  always  denoted  by    all  words.     The   existence 
of  distinctions  in  nature  and  their  non-mixing-up  are  both 
alike  here  (/.  e.  in  the  case  of  the  production  of  the  world) 
as  well  as  there  (i.  e.  in  the  case  of  the  production   of  the 
variegatedly  woven  cloth).     This  being  the  case,  although 
the  Highest  Brahman  enters  into  the  production  of  an 
effect,  there  being  no  transformation  of  His  own  nature, 
the  immodifiability  (of  the  Highest  Brahman]  is  well  est- 
ablished. The  condition  of  an  effect  is  also  very  appropriate 
(in  relation  to  the   Brahman],  for  the  reason  that  He  is 
the  Self  of  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent  things  in 
their  gross  state,  when  they  are  differentiated  by  the  divi-  • 
sions  of  names  and  forms.     Indeed,  to  become  an   effect  is 
nothing  other  than  passing  into   another  condition.     The 
scriptural  statements  regarding  the  attributelessness  (of  the 
Brahman}  are  also  appropriate  because  the  Highest  Per- 
son is  not  in  association  with  evil  qualities.     This  scrip- 
tural passage a  4  9  which,   in  the  portion — "  He   (/.   e.    the 
Self)  is  devoid  of  sins,  is  free  from  old  age,  free  from  death, 
free  from  sorrow,  free  from  hunger,  free  from  thirst,"- 
negatives  all  evil  qualities  (in  relation  to  the  Brahman), 
and  then  lays  down  in  the  portion—"  He  (the  Self)  desires 
the  truth  and  wills  the  truth  " — the  auspicious  qualities  (of 
the  Brahman}-, — (this  scriptural  passage)  alone  settles  that 
the  negation  of  qualities,  which  is  declared  elsewhere  in 
the   scriptures  and  is  understood  to  be   applicable   in  a 
general  sense,  relates   (only)  to  evil   qualities.  The 

statement  that250  the  Brahman  possesses  the  nature  of 
intelligence  is  quite  appropriate,  because  it  amounts  to  say- 
ing that  the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman  who  is  omnisci- 

249.  Vide  Cti/iand.  Up.  VIII,   I.  5.  250.    Vide    F.  P.   I.   2.  6.    &   also 

&  VIII.  7.  I  &  3.  Balnmchppanishad. 


Adhik.  I.  Siit.  /.]     SRi-BHlSHYA.  233 

ent  and  omnipotent,  who  is  opposed  to  all  that  is  evil,  and 
who  is  the  mine  of  all  auspicious  qualities,,  is  capable  of 
being  described  only  as  Intelligence,  and  that  He  has  the 
nature  of  intelligence  for  the  reason  that  He  possesses  self- 
luminousness.  The  following  and  other  scriptural  passages, 
namely,  "  He  who  understands  all  and  who  knows  all"- 
[Mund.  Up.  I.  i.  9.],  "  His  supreme  power  is  revealed,  in- 
deed, as  varied  and  natural  and  as  consisting  of  knowledge, 
strength,  and  action." — [Svet.  Up.  VI.  8.],  "  My  dear  one, 
by  what  means  has  one  to  know  the  knower." — [Brih.  Up. 
II.  4.  14.], — teach  that  the  Brahman  is  the  knower;  and 
this  passage, — "  (The  Brahman  is)  Existence,  Knowledge, 
(Infinity)."— [Taitt.  Up.  II.  1. 1.],  and  others  (teach  that  the 
Brahman]  has  the  essential  nature  of  intelligence,  because 
He  can  be  described  only  as  Intelligence,  and  because  also 
He  is  self-luminous.  In  the  passages—"  He  willed— 

'May  I  become  many.1"—  [Taitt.  Up.  II.  6. i.]," It  thought— 
'May  I  become  many.'" — [Gkhand.  Up.  VI.  2.  3.],  "  It  is 
differentiated  by  means  of  names  and  forms." — \_Brih.  Up. 
I.  4.  7.],— (it  is  declared)  that  the  Brahman  Himself 
exists,  of  His  own  free  will,  in  various  modes  by  reason 
of  His  possessing  the  wonderful  unchangeable  things  and 
changeable  things  as  His  body  ;  and  that,  in  consequence, 
the  manifold  nature  of  such  things,  as  are  opposed  to 
Him  and  as  have  not  the  Brahman  for  their  Self,  is 
unreal.  Therefore  it  is  this  (unreal  manifoldness  of  things) 
that  is  negatived  in  the  following  and  other  passages  : — 
"  He,  who  sees  this  world  as  though  it  were  manifold  (or 
varied),  obtains  death  from  death.  There  is  nothing  here 
that  is  many  and  varied."—  [Brih.  Up.  IV.  4.  19.  &  Kath. 
Up.  IV.  10.];  "But  where  there  is  duality,  as  it  were, 
there  one  sees  another ;  but  where  to  one  all  this  becomes 
30 


SRl-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  /.  Part.  I. 

the  Self,  there  who  shall  see  whom  by  what,  and  who 
shall  know  which  by  what  ?"— [Bnh.  Up.  II.  4.  14.  & 
IV.5.  15.].  On  the  contrary,  it  is  not  also  that  manifold 
modality  of  the  Brahman  which  is  due  to  His  assumption 
of  various  names  and  forms,  which  is  established  in  scrip- 
tural passages  such  as  "  May  I  become  manifold  and  be 
born"—  \_Taitt.  Up.  II.  6.  i.  &  C&hand.  Up.  VI.  2.  3.],— 
and  in  others,  and  which  (again)  is  due  to  His  own  free  will, 
—(it  is  not  this  manifold  modality)  that  is  negatived.  This 
(manifold  modality)  is  proved  to  be  existent  in  the  com- 
mencement of  even  that  passage  which  negatives  (mani- 
foldness)  by  saying — "But  where  to  one  all  this  becomes 
the  Self,  &c."  \_Brih.  Up.  II.  4.  14.  &  IV.  5.  15.];  and  (it 
is  also  established  to  be  existent)  by  means  of  the  follow- 
ing and  other  passages  :— "He  who  knows  all  things  to  be 
apart  from  Him,  him  will  all  things  abandon." — \Brih. 
Up.  II.  4.  6.  &  IV.  5.  7.];  "That  which  is  this  Rig-Veda 
is  the  breath  of  Him  /.  e.  of  this  great  Being."  [Sub. 
Up.  II.].231  Thus  there  is  no  contradiction  whatsoever 
in  relation  to  all  those  scriptural  passages  which  speak  of 
such  distinctions  in  essence  and  in  nature  as  exist  between 
the  intelligent  thing  (or  the  individual  soul),  the  non-intelli- 
gent thing  (or  praknti)  and  the  Lord;  and  (there  is  no 
contradiction  also)  in  regard  to: those  scriptural  passages 
which  speak  of  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect  (as  exist- 
ing between  the  Brahman  and  the  universe)  and  (also 
in  regard  to  those  which  speak)  of  the  identity  of  the 
effect  with  the  cause.  The  relation  of  the  body  and  the 
soul  exists  at  all  times  between  the  intelligent  thing  (or 
the  individual  soul)  and  the  non-intelligent  thing  (or 
praknti,  on  the  one  hand),  and  the  Highest  Self  (on  the 

251.   Cf.  Bnh.  Up.  II.  4.  10. 


Adhik.  1.  Sui.  /.]    SRI-BHASHYA.  235 

other).     This  is  made  out  by  means  of  the  scriptural  pass- 
ages which  declare  that  those  things  which  form  the  body 
(of  the  Lord)  acquire,  when  in  the  condition  of  cause,  that 
subtle  state  which  is  incapable   of  being  differentiated  by 
means  of  names  and  forms,  and  acquire  (again),  when  in 
the  condition  of  effect,  such  a  gross  state  as  is  capable  of  that 
(differentiation  by  names  and  forms).        Therefore  there  is 
to  be  seen  no  room  whatsoever  for  maintaining  the  view2  5  '-' 
which   imposes   ajildna   (or  ignorance)  on   the  Brahman. 
And  the  view253  which  brings  about  distinctions  in  the 
Brahman   Himself  by  means  of  limiting  conditions,  and 
all  those  other  views,  which  are  based  upon  fallacious 
reasoning  and  are  contradictory  to  (the  teaching  of)  all  the 
scriptures,  (are  also  untenable).    The  intelligent  thing  (or 
the  individual  soul),  the  non-intelligent  thing  (or  matter), 
and  the  Lord,  are  all  proved  by  means  of  special  scriptural 
texts  to  be  possessed  of  independent  characteristics;  and  they 
are  also  proved  by  the  scriptures  themselves  to  constitute 
respectively  the  modes  (of  the  Brahmaii)  and  the  possessor 
of  those  modes,  for  the  reason  that  there   is  (between  the 
intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent  things  on  the  one  hand 
and  the  Lord  on  the  other  hand)  the  relation  of  the  body 
and  the  soul.     In  regard  to  these,  other  scriptural  pass- 
ages prove  (the  consequent)  relation  of  effect  and  cause, 
and  also  prove  (the  resulting)  identity  of  the  effect  with 
the    cause.     Indeed,    there    is   no   contradiction   in   this. 
For  instance,  the  mandatory  passage,234  which  says  "  (Let 
him  perform)   the  new-moon  sacrifice  and  the  full-moon 
sacrifice,"  lays  down  in   one  commandment  that,  on  the 
part  of  him  who  is  desirous  (of  Swarga)?**  it  is  obligatory 

252, This  view  is  held  by  the  Aitwailins.        254.  Vide  Taitt.  Sani/i.  11.2.5. 
253-  This  is  the  view  of  the  B/ias-       255.     Swarga   is  the  celestial  world 
karlyax.  of  enjoyments. 


[Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

to  perform  the  six  sacrifices  beginning  with  the  Agneya 
which  have  all  separately  come  into  existence  from  the 
various  scriptural  passages2  5<5  relating  to  their  origin,  and 
which,  nevertheless,  have  fallen  into  two  groups  in  accord- 
ance with  the  two237  passages  that  refer  to  their  grouping. 


256.  The  names  of  the  six  sacrifices 
are  Agneya,  Agnishomiya^  the  two 
Aindras,  Aindrdgna,  and  Updm'su. 
The  passage  relating  to  the  origin 
of  the  Agneya  sacrifice  is  given  in 
Taitt.  Samh.  II.  6.  3.  3.  to  the  effect 
Yadagneyoshtiikapalomdvdsydydm  ch_a 
paurnamttsydin  chlehyuto  bhavati. 
This  means  that  the  sacrifice  .known 
as  the  Zgaeya,  in  which  eight  clay 
cups  are  used  for  the  purpose  of 
making  offerings  to  the  god  Agni, 
and  which  is  to  be  performed  on  the 
days  of  new-moon  and  full-moon, 
never  fails  to  be  successful  in  produ- 
cing the  desired  results.  The  pass- 
age relating  to  the  AgnlshomTya 
sacrifice  is  as  follows  : — Tdbhydmeta- 
magnlshomlyamekdda'sakapdlam  pur- 
ttamdse  prdvachchhat.  Taitt,  Sam/i. 
II.  5.  2,  3.  That  is  to  say,  he, 
I  ndra,  gave  to  Agni  and  Soma,  on 
the  full-moon  day,  that  portion  of  the 
sacrificial  offering  which  is  known  as 
Agtiishomiya  wherein  eleven  clay  cups 
are  used  to  make  offerings  to  the 
deities.  The  two  sacrifices  known  as 
the  Aindras  are  mentioned  in  the 
passages  : — A  ittdram  dadhyamdvasyd- 
ydm.  Taitt,  Samh,  II.  5.  4.  I.;  Am- 
dram  payotndvdsydydw.  These  mean 
respectively  that  the  A  indra  saci  i- 
ficc,  consisting  in  the  offering  of 


curds,  is  to  be  performed  on  the  new- 
moon  day,  and  that  the  other  A  indra 
sacrifice  consisting  in  the  offering  of 
milk  is  also  to  be  performed  on  the 
new-moon  day.  The  sacrifice  known 
as  Aindrdgna  is  given  in  Taitt.  Samh, 
II.  5.  to  the  effect  that  the  Amdrd- 
gna  sacrifice  which  consists  in  the 
offering  of  curds  in  eight  clay 
cups  is  to  be  performed  on  the  new- 
moon  day.  The  Updmlu  sacrifice  is 
given  in  the  passage — Tdvabrutdvag- 
nlshomdvdjyasyaiva  ndvupdnt'sii  pur- 
namdsydm  ya/att.  Both  Agni  and 
Sotna  said — "  Perform  for  us  on  the 
full-moon  day  the  sacrifice  known 
as  Upam'su  andVonsisting  in  the  offer- 
ing of  ghee."  All  these  six  passages 
enjoin  in  six  separate  commandments 
the  performance  of  all  the  six  sacri- 
fices mentioned  above. 

257.  The  performance  of  all  these 
six  sacrifices  is  again  enjoined  in  two 
commandments,  viz,  Ya  mam  vidvdn 
purnamdslm  yajate\  Ya  evam  vidvdn 
amdtdsydm  yajate.  Taitt.  Samh, 
I.  6,  9,  I  &  2.  "  He  who  knows 
thus  performs  the  full-moon  sacri- 
fice, he  who  knows  thus  performs 
the  new-moon  sacrifice."  Thus  the 
six  sacrifices  become  reduced,  as  it 
were,  to  two. 


Adhik.  L  Sut.  /.]     SRI-6HA.SHYA.  237 

Similarly,  the  following  and  other  scriptural  passages  declare 
separately  that  the  intelligent  thing  (viz.  the  individual  self), 
the  non-intelligent  thing  (viz.  matter  or  prakriti},  and  the 
Lord  are  distinct  in  essence  and  in  nature  : — "The  destruct- 
ible is  the  prakriti,  the  immortal  and  the  indestructible  is 
the  hara  (i.  c.  the  individual  self),  and  the  Lord  alone  rules 
over  the  destructible  {prakriti}  and  the  individual  self."- 
[Svct.  Up.  I.  10.];  "  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  prakriti  and  of 
the  individual  souls,  and  is  the  regulator  of  the  qualities."238 
[Svet.  Up.  VI.  1 6.];  "  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  world,  the 
Lord  of  the  individual  souls.  The  Highest  Self  is  Nara- 
yana."  [M.  Ndr.  XI.  3.].  Then  the  following  and  other 
scriptural  passages  declare  that  the  intelligent  thing  and  the 
non-intelligent  thing,  existing  in  all  conditions,  form  the  body 
of  the  Highest  Self  and  that  that  Highest  Self  constitutes 
the  Self  of  those  things  : — "(He)  whose  body  is  the  earth," — 
\Sub.  Up.  VII.  i.];  "(He)  whose  body  is  the  individual 
se\f,"—[MadJi.  Brili.  Up.  III.  7.  22.];  "  (He)  whose  body 

is  the  avyakta,... whose  body  is  the  akshara,*** He  is 

the  internal  Self  of  all  beings  ;  He  is  devoid  of  all  sins, 
He  is  the  Divine  Lord,  He  is  the  one  Narayana."—  \Sub. 
Up.  VII.  i.].  Then  again  the  following  and  other  scriptur- 
al passages—"  Existence  (or  Sat}  alone,  my  dear  child, 
this  was  in  the  beginning" — [Qihdnd.  Up.  VI.  2.  i.]; 
"  All  this  has  that  (Brahman}  for  its  Self  (or  Atman}" — 
[Chhdnd.  £//.'•  VI.  8.  7.] ;  "  All  this,  indeed,  is  the  Brah- 
man''— [Qihdnd.  Up.  III.  14.  i.];— declare,  by  means  of 
words  like  Sat,  Brahman ,  Atman,  &c.,  which  denote  the 
Highest  Self  who  is  the  Embodied  Being,  that  the  Highest 

258.     The  '  qualities '  are  the   well      darkness. 

known  three  qualities  of  Saliva,  good-  259.    Vide  sup  fa  p,  194.  n,  185. 

ness,  Rajas,    passion,    and   Tamas, 


238  SRI-BHASHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

Self  who  is  one  only,  who  is  in  the  condition  of  cause,  and 
who  is  also  in  the  condition  of  effect,  is  Himself  all  the 
three260  (kinds  of  real)  entities  which  are  separately  made 
out.  There  is,  indeed,  nothing  wrong  in  denoting  that 
Highest  Self,  who  owns  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelli- 
gent things  as  His  body,  by  the  word  Paramdtman  ;  in  the 
same  way  in  which  (there  is  nothing  wrong)  in  denoting  a 
particular  individual  self,  that  has  the  figure  of  man  for  his 
body,  by  the  word  dtman,  as  when  it  is  said  (in  relation  to 
a  man)—"  This  individual  self  is  happy."  Therefore  let 
this  overlong  discussion  come  to  an  end. 

Again  what  has  been  further  stated2  c '  (by  the  Puroapak- 
shins)  to  the  effect  that  it  is  right  to  hold  that  the  cessation 
of  ignorance  (or  avidya)  takes  place  solely  by  means  of 
the  knowledge  of  the  oneness  of  the  self  and  the  Brahman, 
—that  is  not  right ;  because  the  bondage  (of  ignorance) 
is  real  and  is  thus  incapable  of  being  removed  by  knowledge. 
How  is  it  possible  to  predicate  unreality  in  relation  to  this 
bondage  which  consists  in  the  (individual  self)  entering  into 
bodies  such  as  those  of  gods,  &c.,  owing  to  its  meritorious 
and  unmeritorious  karmas  and  is  of  the  nature  of  the  ex- 
perience of  the  pleasures  and  pains  that  arise  out  of  that 
(embodiment)  ?  It  has  been  already262  explained  that  the 
cessation  of  the  bondage  which  is  of  this  nature  is  attain- 
able by  that  grace  of  the  Highest  Person  which  is  conse- 
quent on  His  being  pleased  with  the  worship  that  is  offer- 
ed in  the  form  of  loving  devotion  (by  the  worshipper). 
As  that  knowledge,  which  is  accepted  by  you,  and  (ac- 
cording to  you),  relates  to  what  is  different  from  things  as 

260.  These  are  : — the  Pralrili  or          261,  Vide  supra   pp,  32  &  33. 
matter,  the  individual   self, -and  the          262,     Vide  supra  pp.    2o,  21  &  22. 
Supreme  Self. 


Adhik.  1.  Sut.  i.}     SRI-BHISHYA. 

they  are,  is  of  an  unreal  nature,  the  consequence  (thereof) 
is  only  the  intensification  of  the  bondage;  because  the 
sastra-03  says — "It  is  false,  because  an  object  which  is 
different  from  another  cannot,  indeed,  acquire  the  character 
of  that  other  object."— and  because  also,  in  the  following 
passages  — -  "  Different  from  these  is  the  Highest  Per- 
son."- -[B.  G.  XV.  17.]  ;  "  Knowing  the  individual  self  and 
the  Impeller  to  be  different" — [Svet.  Up.  I.  6.],— it  is 
taught  that  the  knowledge  relating  to  the  Brahman, 
who  is  different  from  the  individual  self,  and  who  is  the 
internal  ruler  thereof,  is  the  means  of  obtaining 
the  final  release  which  possesses  the  characteristics  of  the 
highest  object  of  human  pursuit.  Moreover,  that  know- 
ledge which  is  capable  of  removing  (ignorance  or 
avidya),  and  which  is  accepted  by  you,  is  itself  unreal. 
Therefore,  (to  remove  it),  some  other  remover  has  to  be 
sought  and  found.  If  it  be  said  that  this  knowledge,  which 
removes  (ignorance  or  avidya),  removes  that  whole  totality 
of  distinctions  which  is  opposed  to  itself,  and  then,  being 
itself  momentary,  perishes  of  itself, — it  is  replied  that  it  is 
not  so.  As  its  essence,  its  origin  and  destruction  are  all 
false,  some  other  (knowledge),  which  is  capable  of  removing 
that  avidyd  (or  ignorance)  by  which  (its)  destruction  and 
the  hypothesis  in  relation  to  it  are  (both)  falsely  assumed, 
has  to  be  sought  and  found.  If  it  be  said  (again)  that  the 
destruction 2c4of  that  (knowledge  which  removes  avidyd)  is 
nothing  other  than  the  manifestation  of  the  true  nature  of 
the  Brahman  Himself,  it  is  replied  that,  in  that  case,  there 

263.  Vide  supra  p,  148.  where  this  ent  from  another   cannot,  indeed,  ac- 

stanza     is     quoted     as     follows  : —  quire  the  character  of  that  other  ob- 

"  If  it  be  held  that  the  identity  of  the  ject,"      V.  P.  II.  14.  27, 

Highest  Self  with  the  individual  self  264.     This    is    the     non-existence 

is  the   highest  truth,  it   is  false,   be-  consequent  on   the  destruction  of  a 

cause     an     object    which    is  differ-  thing.     Vide  supra  p.  49,  n,  37, 


240  SRi-BniSHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  /. 

will  be  no  origination  of  that  knowledge  which  removes 
(ignorance  or  avidya);  for,  as  long  as  what  constitutes  the 
destruction  of  a  thing  continues  in  existence,  so  long  there 
is  no  possibility  of  the  origination  of  that  thing.  Moreover, 
it  is  asked  who  it  is  that  is  the  knower  of  this  knowledge, 
which  relates  to  the  negation  of  all  that  is  different  from 
the  Brahman,  who  is  Himself  pure  intelligence.  If  it  be 
replied  that  that  (knower)  is  merely  a  superimposition, 
then  it  is  replied  that  it  cannot  be  so ;  because  that 
(knower)  forms  the  object  of  the  knowledge  which  is 
calculated  to  remove  (avidya),  and  consequently  deserves 
to  be  negated ;  thus  there  is  no  possibility  of  that 
(knower)  being  (also)  the  agent  (in  the  removal  of  ignorance 
by  means)  of  that  (knowledge  which  is  calculated  to 
remove  ignorance).  If  it  be  said  (again)  that  that  (knower) 
is  of  the  nature  of  the  Brahman  Himself,  it  is  asked 
whether  the  knowership  of  the  Brahman  is,  so  far  as  it 
relates  to  that  knowledge  which  removes  (ignorance), 
natural  or  superimposed.  If  superimposed,  then  this 
(superimposition)  and  the  other  avidya  on  which  that 
(superimposition)  is  based  cannot  form  the  objects  of  that 
knowledge  which  is  calculated  to  remove  ignorance  ;  and 
therefore  it  (viz.  this  superimposed  knowership)  certainly 
continues  to  persist.  If  some  other  knowledge  that  is 
calculated  to  remove  (ignorance  or  avidya)  be  admitted, 
then,  since  that  (knowledge)  also  is  subject  to  the  three- 
fold differentiation  (of  the  knower,  the  thing  known,andthe 
knowledge),  there  would  result  a  regressus  in  inJinitum-G5 

265.      Because     this      knowledge  ledge  has  to  be  assumed  to  remove  it, 

that  is  calculated  to  remove  the  avidya  and  again  another  to  remove  each  such 

or   ignorance,     which    superimposes  knowledge  so  assumed  in   succession, 

knower-ship,     is   itself    based    upon  Thus    there  will    result    an    infinite 

another  ai<idya\  and  so,  another  know-  series  leading  to  no  end. 


Adhik.  I.  Sfit.  /.]     SRI-BHA.SHYA.  241 

in  relation  to  the  knower.  If  this  (knowership)  be- 
longs, by  nature,  to  the  Brahman  Himself,  then  our 
view  must  find  acceptance  (with  you).  The  statement, 
that  the  knowledge  which  removes  (ignorance  or  avidya) 
and  the  knower  of  that  (knowledge)  are  (both)  different 
from  the  Brahman,  and  are  therefore  included  among  those 
things  that  deserve  to  be  removed  by  that  (knowledge) 
itself,  is  as  ludicrous  as  the  statement  which  makes  out 
that,  in  saying  that  Devadatta  has  cut  off  all  that  is  above 
the  surface  of  the  earth,  the  cutter  and  the  process  of  cutting 
relating  to  this  very  same  cutting  action  (of  Devadatta)  are 
also  to  be  included  among  the  things  cut  off  (by  Devadatta). 
That  knower  who  is  superimposed  cannot  himself  become 
the  agent  in  the  act  of  producing  the  knowledge  which  is  cal- 
culated to  remove  (ignorance  or  avidya),  and  which  (again) 
forms  the  cause  of  his  own  destruction;  because  one's  own 
destruction  is  not  an  object  of  human  pursuit.  If,  more- 
over, the  destruction  of  that  (superimposed  knowership)  is 
admitted  to  be  the  same  as  the  (manifestation  of  the)  true 
nature  of  the  Brahman,  then,  there  will  be  no  room  at  all 
for  the  assumption  of  the  avidya  and  the  other  such  things 
and  (also  for  the  assumption)  of  the  perception  of  distinc- 
tions as  consequent  thereon.  Therefore,  let  us  have  done 
with  this  (criticism) ;  it  amounts  to  beating  with  a  club  him 
who  has  been  already  killed  by  fate. 

Therefore,  as  the  bondage  (of  samsdra)  is  based  upon 
that  ajttana  (or  ignorance)  which  is  of  the  nature  of  a 
stream  of  beginningless  karma,  the  destruction  of  that 
(ajnana}  results  only  from  that  knowledge2  66  which  possess- 
es the  characteristics  already  mentioned  (by  us).  The 

266.     Vide  supra  pp.  17  to  22. 

31 


242  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

production  of  that  (knowledge)  is  the  result  of  the  per- 
formance of  those  duties  which  are  appropriate  to  the 
various  stages  and  conditions  of  life,  and  are  characterised 
by  the  (spiritual)  refinement  due  to  that  peculiar  know- 
ledge of  the  real  nature  of  the  individual  self,  which  mani- 
fests itself  in  the  form  of  the  daily  practised  worship  of 
the  Highest  Person. 

This  being  so,  mere  (ritualistic)  works  yield  (only) 
small  and  transitory  results.  On  the  other  hand,  such 
works  as  constitute  the  worship  of  the  Highest  Person,  and 
are  performed  without  attachment  to  results,  yield  an  infi- 
nite and  ever  enduring  result  in  the  form  of  that  experience 
of  the  real  nature  of  the  Brahman  which  is  caused  by  the 
origination  of  the  knowledge  which  is  the  same  as  steady 
meditation  (or  worship).  Both  (these)  cannot  become 
known  without  a  knowledge  of  the  true  nature  of  works. 
(Without  such  knowledge),  there  can  be  no  rejection  of  (mere 
ritualistic)  works  as  they  ordinarily  are,  and  no  subsequent 
adoption  of  them  in  the  form  pointed  out  above.  Therefore, 
for  this  very  reason,  the  enquiry  into  the  Brahman  has 
necessarily  to  be  conducted  immediately  after  the  enquiry 
into  works  ;  and  hence  it  has  been  stated  (by  the  Sutra- 
kdrd)— "Then  therefore,  &c."  [Ved.  Sut.  I.  I.  I.].267 


Under  these  circumstances,  another  pfirvapakshin  268 
may  hold  the  following  opinion  : — 

It  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  power  of  a  word  to 
signify  a  meaning,  except  by  means  of  the  use  it  is  put  to 


267.  This  sutra  is  in  full  as  follows:-  268.     These  Piirvapakshins  are  the 

'  Then    therefore  the    enquiry   into       Mlmdmsakas  known    as  the  Prabha- 
the  Brahtnan"  karas.    Vide5«/fa  p.  41.  n,  34. 


Adhik.  L  Sut.  i.'\    SRI-BHASHYA.  243 

by  such  (speakers  and  responsive  listeners)  as  are  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  significations  of  words.  And  accordingly, 
the  true  signification  of  a  word  is  only  to  denote  an  action; 
because  it  is  with  the  object  of  denoting  actions  that  words 
are  actually  made  use  of.  Consequently  the  import  of  the 
Vedas  is  merely  in  the  form  of  actions.  Therefore,  the 
Veddnta  is  not  capable  of  occupying  the  position  of  autho- 
rity in  relation  to  the  Highest  Brahman  whose  meaning  is 
already  established  (otherwise  than  as  an  inference  from 
actions). 

Moreover,  in  regard  to  those  sentences  which  relate 
to  things  that  have  an  already  established  signification,  as 
when  they  speak  of  the  birth  of  a  son269  and  other  such 
happy  incidents,  it  is  not  possible  to  determine  that,  through 
the  joyous  expansion  of  the  face  resulting  from  the  attain- 
ment of  a  desired  object,  and  through  other  such  indi- 
cations (alone),  they  (viz.  those  sentences)  form  the  means 
of  importing  a  special  meaning  ;  because  the  things  which 
are  productive  of  joy  are  existent  in  all  the  three  (different) 
times  (viz.  past,  present,  and  future),  and  are  (indeed)  end- 
less in  number ;  and  because  also  (in  the  present  case  of 
the  birth  of  a  son)  there  is  the  possibility  of  its  association 
with  other  joy-giving  things  such  as  an  auspicious  and 
lucky  moment  (of  birth),  an  easy  and  happy  delivery,  and 
so  on. 

Further,270  that  a  word  has  the  power  of  denoting  a 
thing  which  has  an  already  established  import, — (this)  it  is 
not  possible  to  determine  by  means  of  the  fact  that  the 
meanings  of  ununderstood  words  and  terminations  are 

269.     The  Mlmamsakas  mentioned  Bhatta. 

above   criticise  thus  this    example  of  270.  Here  again,  the  same  Mtnidm- 

the  birth  of  a  son,  which  is  cited  by  the  sakas    criticise  this  example  cited  by 

or  the  followers  of  Rumania-  the  Naiyyayikas. 


244  SRI-BHASHYA.     {Chap.  1.  Part.  L 

made  out  either  by  ascertaining  their  etymological  signific- 
ance, or  by  ascertaining  the  meaning  of  the  other  (re- 
lated) words  fin  a  sentence);  because  that  (ascertainment 
of  the  etymological  significance  of  ununderstood  words  and 
terminations,  as  well  as  that  ascertainment  of  the  meaning 
of  the  other  words),  relates  to  a  number  of  words  known 
to  denote  actions,  and  is  (therefore)  the  same  as  determin- 
ing a  particular  variety  of  those  (actions). 

And  again,271  it  cannot  be  maintained  that,  in  the 
case  of  the  person  who  is  afraid  of  an  (illusorily  perceived) 
serpent,  the  fear  of  the  serpent  is  seen  to  disappear  immedi- 
ately after  he  hears  the  words — 'This  is  no  serpent,  this  is  a 
rope',  and  that  therefore  this  (statement  'This  is  no  serpent, 
this  is  a  rope')  forms  the  means  of  knowing  the  absence  of 
the  (illusorily  perceived)  serpent;  because,  in  this  case  also 
there  are  many  causes  for  the  cessation  of  the  fear,  such  as 
those  which  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  that  this  thing  (viz. 
the  illusorily  perceived  serpent)  is  devoid  of  motion,  devoid 
of  poison,  is  inanimate,  and  so  on;  and  it  is  not  thus  pos- 
sible (for  that  statement  alone)  to  produce  this  special  con- 
viction in  particular  (viz.  that  the  illusorily  perceived  ser- 
pent is  a  mere  rope). 

It  may  again  be  said  as  follows : — 27  2  On  the  strength 
of  the  universal  concomitance  of  volition  with  voluntary 
activity,  it  is  made  out  that  words  give  rise  to  that  know- 
ledge which  induces  volitional  activity.  Thus  every  word 
relates  to  an  action,  and  so  all  the  words  (in  a  sentence) 
denote  only  a  conjointly  determined  action.  Consequently, 
it  is  not  possible  to  conclude  with  certainty  that  the  signi- 
ficant power  of  a  word  consists  only  in  denoting  its  own 

271.  The  example  which  is  cited  here  cite  and  criticise  the  position  of 

by  the  Adwaitins  is  here  criticised  by  Vachaspati  who  is,  in  all  probability, 

the  MTmamsakas  above  mentioned.  the  Mimdmsaka  known  as  VSchas- 

372.     The  very  same  Mltndmsakas  pati  Misra. 


Adhik.  L  Sftt.  /.]    SRI-BHASHYA.  245 

meaning  in  association  with  that  of  the  other  (words  in  the 
sentence).  The  desire  to  accomplish  one's  own  wishes  forms 
the  cause  of  voluntary  activity  through  giving  rise  to  voli- 
tion, but  not  by  itself  ;  for,  (otherwise),  there  would  be  no 
possibility  of  voluntary  activity  in  regard  to  the  desire  to 
accomplish  such  wishes  as  relate  to  the  past,  to  the  future 
and  (even)  to  the  present.  For,  as  long  as  the  belief  which 
is  to  the  effect  —  "Without  my  own  effort,  it  is  not  possible 
for  me  to  accomplish  the  fulfilment  of  my  desires  ;  there- 
fore it  has  to  be  accomplished  by  my  own  actions  "  —  is  not 
produced  in  one,  so  long  one  does  not  put  forth  voluntary 
activity.  Consequently,  volition  alone  is  the  cause  of  vol- 
untary activity.  And  accordingly,  that  which  induces 
voluntary  activity  is  itself  the  thing  which  is  expressed  by 
words;  therefore  action  alone  constitutes  the  thing  that  is 
to  be  learnt  from  the  Vedas.  Thus  indeed  there  can  be  no 
acquisition  of  the  infinite  and  eternal  results  which  are  of 
the  nature  of  the  attainment  of  the  Brahman  (whose 
significance  is)  already  naturally  established  ;  and  it  is 
declared  in  the  following  passage  among  others,  namely, 
"  Those  meritorious  results  of  works  which  accrue  to 
him  who  performs  the  ch&turmdsya  2  7  3  sacrifice  are  indeed 
indestructible."  —  \_Ap.  Sr.  VIII.  i.  i.],  that  works 
alone  are  capable  of  producing  permanent  results;  for  all 


273.     Chaturmdsya    is    the     name  moon  of  slshdd/iafo)  and  the  Sdkante- 

given  to  three  seasonal  or  four-month-  dha  which  is  performed  on  that  same 

ly     sacrifices    which  are    performed  day  of  Kartifta.     The  sacrifice  known 

at  the  Pan'ans  or  commencement  of  as  the    Sundsirtya  is  considered  by 

the  three  seasons,  the  spring,  the  rainy  some  to  be  a    fourth    Qhaturmasya^ 

season  and  the  autumn.    These  sacri-  but  the  exact  time  of  its  performance 

ficesare:  —  (i)  The  Vai'svadeva  which  is  not    known.      All  these  sacrifices 

is  generally   performed   on  the  full-  belong  to  the  larger  subdivision   call- 

moon  of  Phdlguna,  (2)the    Varunafra-  ed   Haviryajila.     Vide   Sat,   Br.    II, 

gh&sa  which  is  performed  on  the  full-  5. 


246  SRI-BHA.SHYA.     {Chap.  I.  Part.  1. 

these  reasons  it  is  improper  to  undertake  that  enquiry  into 
the  Brahman  which  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
inconsiderable  and  impermanent  character  of  the  fruits  of 
works,  (and  gives  rise  also  to  the  knowledge)  of  the  infinite 
and  ever  enduring  character  of  the  fruits  that  result  from 
'knowing'  the  Brahman. 

To  all  this,  the  following  is  the  reply  : — Those  who 
are  guided  by  the  accepted  criteria  of  truth  do  not  highly 
value  that  opinion  according  to  which  that  manner  of  ap- 
prehending the  relation  between  words  and  their  meanings, 
which  is  known  all  the  world  over,  is  discarded,  so  as  to 
give  rise  to  the  belief  that  words  have  the  power  of  pro- 
ducing the  knowledge  of  only  such  significations  as  are  not 
commonly  current  in  the  world.  Indeed,  children  under- 
stand the  relation  between  words  and  their  meanings  in 
the  following  manner.  Mothers,  fathers,  and  others  frequent- 
ly indicate  with  (their)  fingers  (to  children  their)  manias, 
papas,  maternal  uncles  and  others,  as  well  as  the  moon, 
(domesticated)  animals,  men,  beasts,  birds,  serpents,  &c., 
with  the  object  of  telling  (the  children  that  they  should) 
know  a  particular  person  (to  be  such  and  such),  and  know 
a  particular  thing  (to  be  such  and  such);  then,  by  means  of 
the  particular  words  used,  they  (viz.  the  children)  largely 
learn  those  particular  meanings ;  and  then  they  perceive 
that  the  knowledge  which  associates  every  one  of  those 
particular  words  with  their  particular  meanings  very 
gradually  arises  in  themselves.  Afterwards  they  come  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  use  of  those  words  with  those 
significations  forms  the  foundation-principle  according  to 
which  words  acquire  their  character  of  being  signific- 
ant ;  because  no  other  relation  is  seen  to  exist  between 
words  and  their  meanings,  and  because  also  there  is  no 


Adhik.  I.  Snt.  /.]     SRi-BHlSHYA.  247 

knowledge  of  any  person  who  fixes  by  convention  (the 
relation  between  words  and  their  meanings).  And  when, 
in  regard  to  words  other  than  those  the  meanings  of 
which  are  already  known,  they  (/.  e.  the  childern)  are,  in 
addition,  taught  by  speakers  (who  are  well  acquainted 
with  the  meanings  of  words)  that  a  particular  word  has 
a  particular  meaning,  only  then  do  they  come  to  know 
the  meanings  of  all  the  words  ;  and  afterwards,  for  the 
purpose  of  imparting  their  ideas  to  others,  they  make  use 
of  a  number  of  sentences  which  give  expression  to  those 
ideas. 

In  another  way  also  it  is  very  easy  to  understand  the 
relation  between  words  and  their  meanings.  (For  instance), 
a  certain  person,  by  means  of  the  movements  of  his  hands 
and  other  gesticulations  asks  another  to  go  and  tell 
Devadatta  that  his  father  is  doing  well.  Then  this  (other) 
person,  when  engaged  in  so  informing  (Devadatta)  makes 
use  of  the  words — "  Your  father  is  doing  well."  A  (third) 
person  who  is  standing  near  and  is  desirous  of  learning  the 
meanings  of  words,  and  who,  like  a  dumb  man,  is  well 
conversant  with  the  details  of  gesticulation,  learns  that  this 
person  is  called  upon  so  to  inform  (Devadatta),  follows  (him), 
and  then  listens  to  the  words  which  are  made  use  of  in 
giving  that  information  ;  and  at  last  he  thus  arrives  at  the 
conclusion  that  a  particular  word  signifies  a  particular 
meaning.  Therefore  the  rule  that  the  meaning  of  words 
is  only  to  denote  actions  is  not  binding.  Accordingly,  the 
Vcdanta  signifies  the  Highest  Brahman  (the  import  of  the 
words  signifying  whom  is)  naturally  established,  and  (it) 
also  (signifies)  that  worship  which  relates  to  Him  and  yields 
unlimited  results.  Consequently,  that  enquiry  about  the 
Brahman,  the  aim  of  which  is  to  find  out  that  (Brahman 
and  that  worship  relating  to  Him),  has  necessarily  to  be 


248  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

conducted. 

Even  if  the  Vedas  are  denotative  of  actions,  the  en^ 
<|uiry  into  the  Brahman  has  indeed  necessarily  to  be 
conducted.  How  is  that  ?  Because  they  (viz.  the  Vcdas) 
yield  results  which  flow  from  the  actions  that  relate  to 
such  worship  as  is  taught  in  the  following  and  other  scrip- 
tural passages  : — "  Verily,  my  dear  one,  the  Self  has  to  be 
seen,  has  to  be  heard,  has  to  be  reflected  upon,  has  to  be 
steadily  meditated  upon."—  [Brih.  Up.  IV.  5.6.];  "He 
has  to  be  sought  after,  He  has  to  be  specially  desired  and 
known." — [C&hand.  Up.  VIII.  7.  i.];  "  Having  discovered 
Him,  let  him  practise  knowledge." — [Brih.  Up.  IV.  4.  21.]; 
"  There  is  in  it  the  small  etherial  space.  What  exists  with- 
in that  (small  etherial  space),  that  has  to  be  sought  after, 
that  has  to  be  well  understood." — [C&hand.  Up.  VIII.  1. 1.] ; 
"  There  also  is  the  blissful  small  etherial  space.  What- 
ever is  within  it,  that  has  to  be  meditated  upon." 
— [M.  Nar.  X.  7.] :  and  because  also,  it  is  declared  in  the 
following  scriptural  passage — "  He  who  knows  the  Brah- 
man  attains  the  Highest." — [Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  as  well  as 
in  other  similar  scriptural  passages,  that  the  Brahman  is 
attained  as  a  consequence  (of  those  results  of  worship). 
Therefore  the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman  and  His  attri- 
butes are  made  out  only  as  being  helpful  to  actions,  in  the 
same  way  in  which  (the  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the 
thing  to  be  attained  is  helpful  to  action)  in  the  analogous 
case  of  Swarga*1*  which  is  in  itself  a  particular  place  of 

274.     The    Vedas     give     the    in-  agreeableness"  is  helpful  in  producing 

junction — "  He,  who  desires  to  attain  the  desire  for  the  attainment  of  Swar- 

Swarga,  shall  perform  the  Jyotishtoma  ga  and  is,  in  consequence,  helpful    in 

sacrifice";  and  the  statement  given  causing  the  performance  oltiiQjyotish- 

elsewhere  describing    the    nature  of  toma  sacrifice  in  obedience  to  the  in- 

Sivarga    as    that   world    "in    which  junction  relating  to  it. 
Vhere  is  no  heat,  no  cold  and  no  dis- 


Adhik.  I.  Sfd.  /.]    SRI-BHISHYA.  249 

such  pleasure  as  is  unmixed  with  pain,  and  also  in  other 
similar  cases;  (it  is  found  to  be  so  helpful)  in  the  case  of 
the  pre-eminence27*  which  is  to  be  derived  from  the  per- 
formance of  the  nocturnal  salras-76  and  (also)  in  the  case 
of  that  relation  of  cause  and  effect  which  exists  between  the 
reviling  and  beating277  (of  the  Brahmanas)  and  the  fine 
of  a  hundred  gold  coins  (prescribed  therefor). 

Even  in  sentences  like — "  Bring  the  ox",  the  signific- 
ance of  words  does  not  relate  to  actions,  because  the  'action' 
thought  of  by  you  is  difficult  of  definition.  Indeed,  your 
( action '  comes  into  existence  after  the  volition  (in  relation 
to  it),  and  is  (simply)that  which  is  aimed  at  by  that  volition. 
To  be  that,  which  is  aimed  at  by  volition,  is  to  be  the  object 
of  volition.  And  to  be  the  object  27  8of  volition  is  to  be  that 
which  (that)  volition  most  desires  to  attain.  And  that 
which  is  most  desired  to  be  attained  is  pleasure,  or  the 
avoidance  of  existing  pain  by  its  means.  This  being  so,  if 

275.  Again,  the     Vedas  give,    in  also  mentioned   in  Vedic  literature, 
one  place,  the  injunction — "  He  shall  277.  And  again,  the    Vedas   prohi- 
perform     the     nocturnal    sacrifices."  bit  the  reviling  and  the  beating  of  a 
Elsewhere,  the  result  of  the   perfor-  Brahmana  by  means  of  the  injunction- 
mance  of  nocturnal  sacrifices  is  stat-  "  Therefore,    let  him  not    revile  and 
ed  to  be  the  attainment  of  eminence,  beat  a   Brahmana.''  Taitt.    Sam/i.  II. 
as,    for   instance,    in    the   passage —  6. 10.  2.     The  effect  of  violating  this 
"Those,  indeed,   who   perform   these  injunction   is   given  in  the  following 
nocturnal  sacrifices,  they  attain  emi-  passage     : — "  He    who    reviles    and 
nence."     This  passage  is  helpful  to  beats  (a  Brahmana),  let  him  be  punish- 
action  in  as  much  as  it  stimulates  the  ed    by    the  fine  of  a    hundred  gold 
desire  to   attain  eminence,  and  thus  coins."      Taitt.    Samh.   II.   6.    IO.    2. 
leads  to  the  performance  of  those  noc-  This    passage     mentions    the    result 
turnal  sacrifices.  Vide  Pur,  Mini.  IV.  flowing  from  disobeying  the  injunc- 
3.  17  to  19.  tion,  and  thus  is  helpful  in  producing 

276.  A  Satra  is  a  long  sacrifice       the  desire  to  act   in  accordance  with 
or  sacrificial  session  lasting,  accord-       the  above  prohibition. 

ing  to  some,    from  13  to    100  days.  278.    Vide    Panini    I.    4.  49.,    for 

Satras   of  many   years'  duration  are       this  definition  of  karma  or  object. 

32 


250  SRI-BHISHYA.     \Cliap.  I.  Part.  L 

a  person,  who  desires  to  have  pleasure,  &c.,  perceives  that 
these  things  cannot  be  acquired  -without  any  effort  on 
his  own  part,  then,  that  person  is  seen  to  act  voluntarily 
like  one  who  is  desirous  of  putting  forth  effort.  Thus, 
regarding  that  which  is  the  object  of  desire,  it  is  nowhere 
seen  that  to  possess  the  characteristics  of  the  thing  aimed 
at  by  volition  is  anything  other  than  to  have  its  (own)  ac- 
complishment dependent  on  (that)  volition.  And  an  object 
of  desire  possesses  the  character  of  what  stimulates  (the 
accomplishment  of  that  desire),  only  in  so  far  as  the 
accomplishment  (of  that  object  of  desire)  is  dependent  upon 
effort ;  because  (all)  activity  proceeds  only  from  this 
(dependence  of  accomplishment  on  effort). 

Moreover,  to  be  aimed  at  by  volition  is  not  to  be  that 
which  is  agreeable  to  men;  because  pleasure  itself  (which 
is  no  action)  is  that  which  is  agreeable  to  men.  Further, 
the  cessation  of  pain  does  not  possess  the  (positive) 
character  of  being  what  is  agreeable  to  men.  Indeed,  the 
discrimination  between  the  true  nature  of  pleasure  and  pain 
is  to  the  effect  that  what  is  agreeable  to  men  is  pleasure, 
and  that  what  is  disagreeable  to  them  is  pain.  Pain  is 
that  which  is  disagreeable;  and  hence,  its  cessation  becomes 
a  desirable  thing,  but  not  because  that  (cessation)  is  (in  a 
positive  way)  agreeable.  Indeed,  the  existence  of  a  thing 
in  accordance  with  its  own  true  nature,  in  a  condition 
which  is  free  from  the  association  of  what  is  agreeable  as 
well  as  of  what  is  disagreeable,  constitutes  the  cessation 
of  pain.  Therefore  action  and  (all)  other  similar  things, 
which  are  different  from  pleasure,  cannot  possess  the 
character  of  what  is  agreeable.  Moreover,  it  (viz.  action) 
also  cannot  be  what  is  agreeable,  even  on  account  of  its 
aiming  at  pleasure ;  because  it  is  itself  of  the  nature  of  pain. 
Even  when  it  aims  at  pleasure,  there  is  only  the  mere 


Adhik.  I.  Sut.  /.]     SR!-BHISHYA.  251 

desire  to  appropriate  that  (pleasure).  Further,  to  be 
what  is  aimed  at  by  volition  is  not  to  be  that  prin- 
cipal thing  which  has  (that)  volition  subordinate  to 
itself;  because,  on  your  side,  the  character  of  being 
(such)  a  principal  thing  has  not  been  defined.  And 
since  the  character  of  being  so  subordinate  (to  a  principal 
thing)  is  the  same  as  to  be  capable  of  being  invariably 
influenced  by  the  volition  which  is  set  in  motion  in 
obedience  to  the  purposes  of  another, — it  is  not  thereby 
made  out  that  the  character  of  being  (such)  a  prin- 
cipal thing  is  to  be  that  which  is  oppositely  correlated 
to  that  (subordinate  thing).  For,  if  it  were  so,  the  volition 
would  not  possess  the  character  of  what  is  so  subordinate  ; 
and  that  which  is  to  be  accomplished  by  it  would  not,  in 
consequence,  have  the  character  of  a  principal  thing.  And 
again,  for  the  reason  that  the  character  of  being  a  subordi- 
nate thing  is  (simply)  to  be  capable  of  producing  that  prac- 
tical activity  which  is  intended  to  serve  the  purposes  of 
another,  it  cannot  be  said  that  that  another  forms  the  princi- 
pal thing  ;  because  the  character  of  being  what  is  aimed  at 
(by  volition)  is  all  that  is  to  be  defined  (here),  and  because 
also  the  master  too  is  seen  to  be  capable  of  producing  the 
activity  which  is  intended  to  serve  the  purposes  of  the  ser- 
vant. But  if  it  be  said  that  the  master,  in  accordance  with 
his  own  desire,puts  forth  voluntary  activity  even  in  the  mat- 
ter of  feeding  the  servant,  it  is  replied  that  this  is  not  right ; 
because  the  servant  also,  out  of  his  own  desire,  puts  forth 
voluntary  activity  in  the  matter  of  feeding  the  master. 
Thus  the  true  nature  of  'action'  itself  has  not  been  defined; 
and  it  is  improper  (to  hold)  that  what  is  correlated  to 
'action',  (as  the  thing  to  be  accomplished  -by  it),  is  the  sub-1 
ordinate  thing,  and  that  what  is  correlated  to  this  (subor- 
dinate thing  as  the  owner  thereof)  is  the  principal  thing. 


252  SRl-BH&SHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

Also,  to  be  what  is  aimed  at  by  volition  is  not  the  .same 
as  to  constitute  the  utility  of  volition.  The  utility  of  the 
volition  of  a  person  is  indeed  nothing  other  than  that 
utility  which  leads  to  the  origination  of  his  volition  ;  and 
he  is  himself  actuated  by  desire.  Therefore,  the  thing 
aimed  at  by  volition  has  not  been  definitely  shown  to  be 
other  than  the  thing  desired.  Consequently,  it  is  cer- 
tainly difficult  to  demonstrate  that '  action '  consists  in 
being  that  which  is  accomplished  by  volition  as  well  as  in 
being  the  principal  object  of  volition. 

Moreover,  a  commandment  also  is  different  from 
pleasure  and  the  cessation  of ;  pain,  both  of  which  are 
immediate  objects  of  desire;  therefore  its  desirability  and  the 
possibility  of  its  being  accomplished  by  volition  are  both  due 
wholly  to  its  forming  a  means  of  attaining  those  (objects 
of  desire  which  are  in  the  form  of  pleasure  and  the  cessation 
of  pain).  It  is  for  this  very  reason  that  it  (viz.  the  command- 
ment) is  other  than  the  verb  (denoting  action).  Otherwise, 
(the  action  denoted  by)  the  verb  itself  would  form  the  object 
to  be  accomplished.  The  object  of  accomplishment  ex- 
pressed by  the  litl-"*9  and  other  verbal  forms,  in  harmony 
with  their  use  along  with  the  word  swargakdma  (in  the 
Vedic  commandment  Jyotishtomena  sivargakdmo  yajetd), 
is  nothing  other  than  the  attainment  of  Swarga  ;  therefore 
the  object  of  accomplishment  here  is  that  new  and  invisi- 
ble something  itself  (known  as  apfirva),"0  which  is  other 
than  the  ephemeral  action  (of  sacrificing),  and  which 
causes  the  enduring  attainment  of  Swarga.  Accordingly, 
the  import  of  this  new  and  invisible  something  (apurva)\\a.* 
indeed  to  be  made  out  by  imagining  it  to  be  the  means  of 
attaining  Swarga.  Thus  it  is  said  here  that  that  object 

379.  Vide  sifra  p.  41.  n.  35.        280.  Vide  supra  p.  41.  n.  36. 


Adhik.  L  Sut.  /.] 

which  is  to  be  accomplished  is,  at  first,  arrived  at  independ- 
ently of  all  other  things;  and  then,  for  the  purpose  of  up- 
holding this  independent  character  (of  that  object  of 
accomplishment),  it  is  said  that  it  is  only  ilieapftrva  which 
later  on  becomes  the  means  of  causing  the  attainment  of 
Swarga.  Surely  this  is  ludicrous ;  because  that  word 
(viz.  yajetd)  which  denotes,  while  in  association  with  the 
word  swargakdma,  the  object  of  accomplishment,  cannot 
at  first  denote  the  independent  character  (of  that  object  of 
accomplishment);  and  because  also  that  independent  thing, 
which  is  different  from  pleasure,  from  the  cessation  of 
pain,  and  from  the  means  of  attaining  them,  is  not  seen  to 
be  capable  of  being  accomplished  by  means  of  volition. 

And  again,  what  is  this  usefulness  of  the  command- 
ment ?  If  it  be  said  that,  like  pleasure,  commandment 
(also)  possesses  the  character  of  being  agreeable,  (it  is 
asked)  whether  commandment  constitutes  pleasure ;  for 
pleasure  alone  is  what  is  agreeable.  If  it  be  said  (again)  that, 
like  some  particular  kind  of  pleasure  or  other,  it  is  also  a 
peculiar  pleasure  that  is  synonymous  with  commandment, 
it  has  to  be  explained  what  means  of  proof  there  is  to 
establish  this.  If  it  be  said  that  one's  own  experience  is 
the  means  of  proof,  it  is  seen  not  to  be  so  ;  because  even, 
you  do  not  experience  in  any  definite  manner  any  pleasure 
arising  out  of  the  experience  of  a  commandment,  in  the 
same  way  in  which  (you  experience)  the  pleasure  arising 
out  of  the  experience  of  (pleasurable)  external  objects. 
If  it  be  said  that  a  commandment  is  declared  by  an  autho- 
ritative regulation  to  be  an  object  of  human  pursuit,  and 
that  it  is,  therefore,  carried  into  effect  subsequently,  it  is . 
asked  what  that  authoritative  regulation  is  which  says 
that  a  commandment  is  an  object  of  human  pursuit. 
It  is  not  the  (law-imposing)  voice  of  the  people ; 


254  SRi-BHlSHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

because  that  (voice  of  the  people  which  imposes 
a  commandment)  relates  to  work  which  is  identical 
with  pain  ;  and  because  also  it  merely  declares  (the  com- 
mandment) to  be  worthy  of  being  carried  into  effect  by 
volition,  only  in  so  far  as  it  forms  a  means  for  the  attain- 
ment of  pleasure  and  other  such  things.  Nor  is  it  the 
voice  of  the  Vedas,  for  that  also  enjoins  the  duty  to  be  per- 
formed only  as  a  means  for  the  attainment  of  Swarga  and 
other  such  things.  It  is  neither  the  daily  obligatory  nor 
the  occasionally  obligatory  injunction  (of  the  Smritis} ;  be- 
cause that  also  possesses  its  power  of  importing  it  (/.  c.  a 
commandment),  only  through  the  knowledge  of  (that)  new 
and  invisible  something  (or  apiirvd)  which  is  found  in  the 
sentence2  8  J  containing  (the  word)  swargakdma.  Therefore, 
as  now  stated,  it  is  unavoidable  that  that  (injunction  of  the 
Smritis}  also  implies  the  performance  of  works,  (only)  for  the 
attainment  of  pleasure  and  other  such  things.  Those 
works,  the  results  of  which  are  systematically  temporal, 
bear  fruit,  as  soon  as  they  are  performed,  in  the  form  of 
plenty  of  food,  healthiness,  and  such  other  things  which 
are  enjoyed  then  (and  there) ;  and  consequently  there  is  no 
knowledge  of  the  experience  of  that  pleasure  which-  in 
contradistinction  to  them  has  the  nature  of  (the  working 
out  of)  a  commandment.  Thus  we  have  no  means 
whatsoever  to  prove  that  a  commandment  is  a  pleasure. 

Even  in  the  explanatory  and  eulogistic  allegories  and 
fables  found  in  the  Vedas,  282you  do  not  generally  sec  the 


281.  This     sentence      is—Jyotish-  and  prayers,  &c.  Vidlns  are  injunctions 
totnena  swargakdMio  yajeta.  i.  e,  rules  laying  down  the  performance 

282.  The   'Veda  consists,  according  of   particular    rites.     Arthai'daas  are 
to  the  opifiion  of  the  Allwainsakas,   of  explanatory  remarks  on  the  meaning 
three  parts,  viz.  Mantras,    ViJ/iis    and  of  Mantras  and  the   purpose  of  rites, 
Arthavcidas.  Mantras  are  sacred  hymns  and  consist  of   Ninda  or  censure  i,  (• 


Adhik.  I.  Silt.  /.]    SRI-BHA.SHYA.  255 

description  of  the  various  modes  of  that  pleasure  which  has 
the  nature  of  a  commandment,  in  the  same  way  in 
which  (you  there  see)  the  description  of  the  various 
modes  of  the  pleasure  which  relates  to  Swarga  and 
such  other  things.  Therefore,  it  is  finally  con- 

cluded that,  even  in  those  passages  which  give  out 
only  injunctions,  the  lift  and  the  other  inflectional 
forms  of  the  verb  denote,  as  established  by  the  science  of 
grammar  itself,  the  fact  that  the  meaning  of  a  root  relates 
to  nothing  other  than  what  is  to  be  accomplished  by  the 
activity  of  the  agent.  Under  the  aphorism — "  From 

Him  (comes)  the  fruit  (of  our  works),  because  (such  a  thing) 
is  appropriate."— [ Ved.  Sut.  III.  2.  37.],  it  will  be  est- 
ablished that  sacrifices  and  other  such  things,  which  are 
denoted  by  the  verbal  roots  (used  in  scriptural  command- 
ments), possess  the  character  of  constituting  the  worship  of 
the  Highest  Person  who  is  the  internal  ruler  of  gods  like 
Agni  (Fire),  &c.;  and  that  the  accomplishment  of  the  re- 
sults aimed  at  (by  such  works)  comes  from  that  Highest 
Person  (who  is  so)  worshipped. 

Therefore  it  is  conclusively  proved  that  the  Veddnta 
teaches  the  Highest  Brahman  (the  import  of  the  words 
denoting  whom  is)  naturally  established.  Accordingly,  the 
endlessness  and  the  eternity  of  the  fruits  resulting  from 

controversial     remarks  ;     Samsci   i.  e.  manas,    &c.       Under    the    head     of 

eulogium  or 'recommendation';  Purd-  Purakalpa  come  the  numerous  stories 

kalpa   or   the   account    of     sacrificial  of  the  fight  between  the    Devas  and 

rites  in  former  times;    Parakriti  i.   e.  the  Asuras,    as  also  the  legends  con- 

the  ac  hievement  or  the  feat  of  another.  cerning   the  sacrifices    performed  by 

This  last  comprises  the  stories  about  the  gods.     Thus  Arthavdda  includes 

certain    performances    of     renowned  all    the    explanatory   and    eulogistic 

Srotriyas  or  sacrificial  priests,     about  allegories,   fables,  £c. 
gifts  presented    by    kings    to  Brah- 


256  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

the  worship  of  the  Brahman  are  also  proved.  In  the  case 
of  the  chzturmasya'1 8s  sacrifice  and  other  such  (ritualistic) 
works  also,  it  is  taught  that  mere  works  yield  unenduring  re- 
sults ;  and  therefore  it  has  to  be  understood  that  the  teach- 
ing regarding  (their)  indestructible  results  is  meant  to  be 
indicative  of  (their)  relative  superiority,  as  in  the  follow- 
ing among  other  passages  where  the  scripture  says,— 
"  This  vayu  (air)  and  (this)  antariksha  (ether)  are  immor- 
tal." \_Brih.  Up.  II.  3.  3.].284  Thus,  mere  works  yield 
inconsiderable  and  unenduring  results,  and  the  knowledge 
of  the  Brahman  yields  infinite  and  ever  enduring  results. 
Consequently,  it  is  maintained  that  it  is  proper  to  com- 
mence that  enquiry  into  the  Brahman  the  fruit  of  which  is 
the  determination  of  that  (knowledge  of  the  Brahman}. 

283.  Vide  supra  p.  245.  n.  273  its    results  last  longer  than  those  of 

284,  The  idea  intended  to  be   con-  any  other  kind   of  'work'.     Similarly, 
veyed  here  is  this  : — There  are  expli-  the    immortality     of  air    and    ether 
cit   statements   in  the   scriptures   to  implies  that  they  are  less  mortal  than 
the  effect    that   the   results   derived  other  things.     For  the   general  state- 
from   the   performance   of  ritualistic  •  ment  regarding  the  impermanence   of 
works  are  impermanent.     This  gene-  the  results   of  'works', — vide  Chhand, 
ral  proposition  allows  no  room   for  Up.   VIII.  I.   6.,   where   it   is   said — 
exceptions,    and     the      ChdturmSsya  "Just  as  the  world  obtained  by  works 
sacrifice  is  no  exception  to  the  rule.  perishes     here,    so    also,    there,    the 
Therefore  the  statement  that  it  yields  world  obtained  by  m2rit  perishes." 
permanent  results  can  only  mean  that 


Adhik.  II.  Sftt.  2.}     SRi-BHlSHVA.  257 

ADHIKARANA.  II. 

Janmddyadhikarana. 

To  point  out  what  that  Brahman  really  is  which  is 
stated  to  be  the  object  of  the  enquiry  here,  he  (the  Sfttra- 
kara]  says — 

Sutra  2.     Janmadyasya  yatah. 

(The  Brahman  is  that)  from  whom  (proceed)  the 
creation,  <£c.,  of  this  (universe). 

The  word  janniadi  means  creation,  preservation,  and 
destruction.  The  attributive  compound285  (here)  denotes 
that  (collection  of  things)  which  is  characterised  (as 
having  'creation'  at  its  beginning).  The  word  asya 
denotes  the  world  which  is  constituted  in  an  unthinkably 
varied  and  wonderful  fashion,  and  which  is  mixed  up  with 
(all)  the  individual  souls,  beginning  with  Brahma  and 
ending  with  a  clump  of  grass,  each  of  which  has  its  own 
particularly  assigned  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  (of  karmas) 
limited  to  particular  times  and  places.  The  word  yatah 
denotes  that  that  Highest  Person  who  is  the  Lord  of  all, 
who  possesses  a  nature  which  is  hostile  to  all  that  is  evil, 
who  wills  the  truth,  who  possesses  innumerable  auspicious 
qualities,  such  as  knowledge,  bliss,  &c.,  who  is  omniscient, 
omnipotent,  and  merciful  in  the  highest  degree,  and  from 
whom  proceed  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction, — 
(it  denotes  .that  that  Highest  Person)  is  the  Brahman. 
This  is  the  meaning  of  this  sfttra. 

There  is  the  scriptural  passage  which  begins  with — "The 
celebrated  Bhrigu,  son  of  Varuna,.  approached  his  father, 
saying  '  Reverend  sir,  teach  me  the  Brahman '", — and  con- 

385.  Vide  Patanjali's  Maha-Bhashya  on  Panini  \.  \,  27  ;  II.  2.  24  ;  VI.  I.  I. 

33 


258  SRi-BHlSHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

eludes  with—"  From  whom  all  these  beings  are  born,  by 
whom,  when  born,  they  are  all  preserved,  and  to  whom  they 
go  when  they  perish, — do  thou  desire  to  know  that  well  ; 
that  is  the  Brahman"  \Taitt.  Up.  III.  i.  i.].  Here  there 
arises  the  doubt  whether  or  not  it  is  possible  to  know  the 
Brahman  definitely  by  means  of  this  passage.  It  is  perhaps 
held  that  it  is  not  possible.  The  words  creation,  &c.,  do  not, 
indeed,  define  the  Brahman  by  constituting  His  charac- 
terising attributes ;  for,  (if  they  did),  there  would  result 
the  predication  of  non-unity  in  relation  to  the  Brahman,  in 
consequence  of  His  being  characterised  by  many  attributes. 
Indeed  to  be  the  characterising  attribute  (of  a  thing)  is  to 
be  that  which  distinguishes  it  (from  other  things).  It  may 
be  urged  that  in  the  instance, — "Devadatta  is  brown,  youth- 
ful, red-eyed,  and  symmetrical  in  form", — there  is  seen  only 
one  Devadatta,  although  there  are  many  characterising 
attributes  (in  relation  to  him);  and  that,  similarly,  in  the 
case  here  also  there  is  only  one  Brahman.  It  can  not 
be  so.  In  that  case,  all  the  characterising  attributes  meet 
in  only  one  individual,  because  the  oneness  (which  relates  to 
Devadatta)  is  made  out  through  other  means  of  proof. 
Otherwise,  even  in  that  case,  the  predication  of  non-unity 
would  be  unavoidable  on  account  of  this  distinguishing 
character  (of  those  attributes).  But  here,  (in  the  case 
under  discussion),  it  is  intended  to 'define  the  Brahman  by 
means  of  this  same  (collectively  given)  attribute  (of  creation, 
&c.,);  accordingly,  that  predication  of  plurality  in  relation  to 
the  Brahman,  which  results  from  a  variety  of  distinguishing 
attributes,  is  unavoidable  for  the  reason  that  the  oneness  of 
the  Brahman  is  not  made  out  by  other  means  of  proof. 
If  it  be  said  that  that  oneness  is  made  out  here  also,  because 
the  word  -Brahman  {in  the  scriptural  passage  under 
discussion)  is  only  one, — it  is  replied  that  it  cannot  be  so 


Adhik.  It.  Sut.  2.]     SRI-BHASHYA*  259 

made  out.  If,  to  a  person  who  does  not  know  any  indivi- 
dual ox,  and  who  is  desirous  to  know  (the  ox),  it  is  given 
out — "  An  ox  is  that  which  is  broken-horned,  hornless  and 
fully  horned", — there  will  then  be  the  apprehension  (by 
him)  of  a  plurality  of  individual  oxen,  owing  to  there  being 
a  variety  of  distinguishing  attributes,  such  as  the  posses- 
sion of  broken  horns  and  so  on,  although  the  word  ox 
is  used  only  once;  accordingly,  there  must  be  many  indivi- 
dual Brahmans.  For  this  very  reason  it  is  not  possible 
for  these  characteristics  (of  creation,  &c.,) .  to  constitute 
even  collectively  the  definition  of  the  thing  which  it  is 
intended  to  define.  Nor  can  (these  attributes  of  creation, 
&c.,)  point  out  (the  Brahman}  by  constituting  (His) 
accidental  characteristics,  because  there  is  no  apprehension 
(of  the  Bra hman]  in  any  other  form.  Indeed,  all  acci- 
dental characteristics  are  seen  to  be  the  means  of  appre- 
hending, under  a  different  form,  a  thing  already  known  in 
some  one  particular  form;  as  in  the  following  among  other 
instances,  namely, — "  Where  there  is  that  crane,  that  is 
Devadatta's  field."  And  it  may  be  said  that  the  creation, 
&c.,  of  the  world  form  accidental  characterisations  in  rela- 
tion to  Him  who  has  already  been  made  out  by  means  of 
(the  passage) — "The  Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge, 
Infinity."  \Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.].  But  it  is  not  right,  for  the 
reason  that,  in  relation  to  these  two  passages  which  define 
the  Brahman,  there  results  the  fallacy  of  reciprocal  depend- 
ence ;  in  as  much  as  the  form  (of  the  thing  to  be  defined) 
denoted  by  either  (of  those  passages)  is  dep-endent  upon 
that  which  is  denoted  by  the  other.  Therefore  it  is 

not   possible  to  know  the  Brahman  by  means   of  any 
definition. 

To  this  it  is  said  in  reply  as  follows  :— It  is  possible 
to  know  the  Brahman  by  means  of  the  creation,  preserv- 


26o  SRi-feHASHYA.     \Chap.  L  Part.  L 


ation,   and   destruction    of  the  world,   which  (together) 
constitute     (His)   accidental    characteristics.      Moreover, 
there  can  be  (here)  no  non-apprehension  of  the   Brahman 
due  to  the  non-apprehension  of  a  form  (in  relation  to  Him), 
other  than  the    form    which  is  characterised  by    these 
accidental  characteristics.      Indeed,   that  which  is  charac- 
terised   (here)  by  means  of  accidental   characteristics   is 
Greatness  unsurpassed  in  excellence;   and  it  is   Growth 
also,  because   the  root286  brih  (to  grow)  is  capable  of  that 
meaning.     And  the  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction 
of  the  world  constitute  the  accidental  characteristics    of 
that  (Brahman  thus  made  out  to  be  Greatness  and  Growth). 
By  the  expressions  —  '  from  whom',  '  by  whom  '  and  '  (to) 
whom',  the  cause  of  the  creation,  &c.,  (of  the  world)  is 
pointed  out  (in  this  passage)  as  though  it  is  a  well  known 
thing  ;   and  it  is,  accordingly,  restated  here  in  conformity 
with  that  well  known  knowledge.    And  the   fact  of  (that 
cause)  being  thus   well    known  is  due  to  the  only   one 
thing,  which  is  expressed  by  the  word  '  Existence'  (or  sat), 
forming  the  instrumental  and  the  material  cause  (of  the 
world),  as  it  is  given  in  the  passage  —  "  Existence  alone, 
my  dear  child,  this    was    in  the  beginning,   one    only, 
without    a     second  .......  It    thought  —  'May     I     become 

many  and  be  born'.  It  created  tejas."  [Cfrhdnd.  Up. 
VI.  2.  i  &  3.].  And  this  (fact  of  the  Brah  man  forming 
the  instrumental  and  the  material  cause  of  the  world) 
results  thus  :  from  the  statement  that  this  'Existence  ' 
was  one  only  in  the  beginning,  there  is  the  predication  of 
the  character  of  a  material  cause  (in  relation  to  that  only 
one  thing)  ;  and  from  the  expression  '  without  a  second', 
there  is  the  negation  of  any  other  presiding  deity;  and 

8.86.  SeeAt.i.  Up.  4.  &  also    V.  P.  III.  3.  22. 


Adkik.  12.  Silt.  2.]     SRi-^HASHYA.  261 

again  from  the  statement—"  It  thought,  'May  I  become 
many  and  be  born';  It  created  tcjas " — there  is  the 
declaration  of  only  one  (Being  as  constituting  the  deity 
presiding  over  creation).  Hence  that  is  the  Brahman 
from  whom  proceed  the  creation,  preservation,  and  destruc- 
tion of  the  world  ;  consequently,  the  attributes  of  creation, 
preservation  and  destruction  define  the  Brahman  to  be 
that  thing  which  is  their  own  instrumental  and  material 
cause.  The  Brahman  is  understood  to  be  that  Greatness 
which  consists  in  possessing  omniscience,  the  quality  of  will- 
ing the  truth,  and  wonderful  powers  and  so  on,  which  are  all 
implied  in  His  being  the  instrumental  and  the  material 
cause  of  the  world  ;  and  for  this  reason  also  there  does  not 
arise  the  inappropriateness  which  is  due  to  the  non-realisa- 
tion of  another  form  (in  relation  to  the  Brahman},  because 
creation,  &c.,  constitute  the  characteristics  (of  the  Brah- 
man) so  realised. 

There  is  nothing  wrong  in  creation,  &c.,  forming  even 
the  defining  characteristics  (of  the  Brahman),  in  as  much 
as  they  are  (His)  attributes.  Even  those  attributes  which 
form  the  defining  characteristics  (of  a  thing)  denote  that 
thing  which  is  contrary  to  what  is  characterised  by  their 
opposites.  Even  when  the  [thing,  which  it  is  desired  to 
define,  happens  to  be  (only)  one  and  has  its  essential 
nature  unknown, — (even  then  for  that  one  thing)  to  be 
characterised  by  many  attributes,  which  do  not  conflict 
with  each  other,  does  not  imply  any  differentiation  (in 
relation  to  it)  ;  because  all  the  characterising  attributes  are 
seen  to  relate  to  one  and  the  same  thing,  and  are  thus 
applied  together  to  one  and  the  same  thing.  But  the 
attributes  of  being  broken-horned,  &c.,  (mentioned  before 
in  relation  to  the  ox),  indicate  different  individual  oxen, 
solely  by  reason  of  the  contradiction  (existing  between 


262  SRI-BHASHYA.       [Chap.  L  Part.  L 

the  attributes  themselves).  But  here  (i.e.  in  the  case  of 
the  Brahman]  the  attributes  of  creation,  &c.,  do  not  con- 
tradict (each  other)  owing  to  the  difference  in  the  time  (of 
their  occurrence).  The  Brahman,  who  is  the  cause  of  the 
creation,  £c.,  of  the  world,  is  apprehended  from  the  passage 
which  begins  with — "  From  whom  all  these  beings  are 
born  " — \TaitL  Up.  III.  i.  i.],  and  deals  with  the  cause  of 
the  universe  ;  and  the  scriptural  passage — "  The  Brahman 
is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infinity." — \_Taitl.  Up.  II.  i.  i.], 
— denotes  that  essential  nature  of  His  which  is  different 
from  all  other  things.  Here  the  word  '  Existence '  denotes 
the  Brahman  as  possessing  the  state  of  the  unconditioned 
being.  By  this  (word)  the  non-intelligent  thing  (or  matter) 
which  is  subject  to  modifications,  and  the  intelligent  thing 
(or  the  individual  soul)  which  is  associated  with  it  are 
(both)  excluded ;  because  these  two  (things)  are  not  cap- 
able of  unconditioned  existence,  owing  to  the  fact  that  they 
are  capable  of  existing  in  various  states  so  as  to  assume 
various  names.  The  word  '  Knowledge '  denotes  (in  rela- 
tion to  Him)  the  eternal  and  uncontracted  condition  of 
pure  intelligence.  By  this  (word)  the  released  souls  are  ex- 
cluded (from  the  definition  of  the  Brahmaii),  owing  to  the 
fact  that  their  intelligence  must  have  been  at  one  time  in  a 
contracted  state.  The  word  '  Infinity  '  denotes  that  essen- 
tial nature  (of  His)  which  is  free  from  the  limitations  of 
space,  of  time,  and  of  being  some  one  particular  thing 
(among  others).  This  essential  nature  (of  the  Brahman) 
is  possessed  of  attributes,  and  therefore  (His)  infinity  is  the 
consequence  of  (His)  nature  as  well  as  qualities.  By  this 
(word)  are  excluded  (all)  those  freed  individual  souls  whose 
nature  and  qualities  are  not  unsurpassed  (in  excellence), 
and  who  are  distinct  from  the  two  classes  of  things 
already  excluded  (from  the  definition  of  the  Brahman)  by 


Adluk.  II.  Sftt.  2.]     SRI-BHISHYA.  263 

means  of  the  first  two  words  (Existence  and  Knowledge)  ; 
because  characterising  attributes  possess  the  power  of  ex- 
clusively defining  things.  Therefore,  by  means  of  this 
passage,  namely,2  8  7  "The  Brahman  is  Existence, Knowledge, 
Infinity",  that  Brahman,  whose  true  nature  is  made  out 
from  the  creation,  &c.,  of  the  world,  is  defined  as  being 
different  from  all  other  things;  and  thus  there  is  (here)  no 
fallacy  of  reciprocal  dependence.  Consequently,  it  is  a 
settled  conclusion  that  the  Brahman  who  is  the  cause  of 
the  creation,  &c.,  of  all  the  worlds,  who  is  untainted,  who 
is  omniscient,  who  wills  the  truth,  and  who  is  omnipotent, 
is  capable  of  being  understood  by  means  of  a  definition. 

Those  again  who  say  that  the  object  of  the  enquiry 
(here)  is  the  attributeless  thing, — according  to  their  view, 
the  aphorisms288 — "  (Then  therefore)  the  enquiry  into  the 
Brahman" ',  and  "(That  is  the  Brahman}  from  whom  (pro- 
ceed) the  creation,  &c.,  of  this  (universe)." — would  be  inap- 
propriate ;  because  there  is  (here)  the  etymological  expla- 
nation289 that  the  Brahman  is  unsurpassed  Greatness  and 
Growth  ;  and  also  because  that  same  Brahman  is  declared 
(herein)  to  be  the  cause  of  the  creation,  &c.,  of  the  world. 
Similarly,  in  the  groups  of  succeeding  aphorisms,  as  well  as 
in  the  groups  of  scriptural  passages  quoted  under  those 
aphorisms,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  association  of  the 
powers  of 'seeing',  &c.,  is  predicated  (in  relation  to  the 
Brahman}.  Hence  the  sfitras  (or  aphorisms)  and  the 
scriptural  passages  quoted  under  those  aphorisms  do  not 
constitute  any  authority  for  that  (/.  c.  for  holding  the  view 
that  the  object  of  the  enquiry  here  is  the  attributeless 
thing).  Logic  also  is  no  means  of  proving  that  thing 


287.  Tatit.  Up.  II.  I.  I.  289.  Vide  supra  n.  286. 

288.  Vide  Ved.  Sit'.  1.  I.  I  &  2. 


264  SRi-BHlSHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

which  is  devoid  of  characterising  attributes ;  because  it290 
deals  with  such  a  thing  as  is  associated  with  the  character- 
istics of  that  which  forms  the  basis  of  logical  inference,  and 
which  is  invariably  concomitant  with  the  characteristics  of 
the  thing  to  be  proved.  The  thing  which  is  devoid  of 
characterising  attributes  is  not  established  even  according 
to  your  own  imaginary  position  that  the  Brahman  is  that 
from  whom  proceeds  the  illusion  regarding  the  creation, 
&c.,  of  the  world ;  because  thereby  it  will  have  to  be 
admitted  that  ignorance  (or  avidya)  is  the  source  of  this 
illusion,  and  that  the  Brahman  is  the  witness  of  this 
ignorance.  Indeed,  (He)  is  said  to  be  a  witness  simply 
because  (He)  has  the  character  of  homogeneous  luminosity. 
And  luminosity  is  a  characteristic  which  distinguishes  (the 
possessor  thereof)  from  what  is  non-intelligence,  and  it  has 
the  nature  of  what  makes  itself  and  other  things  fit  to  be 
realised  (by  the  mind).  If  this  be  so  (admitted),  then  there 
results  (to  the  Brahman]  the  condition  of  being  qualified 
by  characterising  attributes.  If  this  be  not  (so  admitted), 
there  would  be  no  luminosity  at  all,  and  there  would  be 
only  nothingness. 

ADHIKARANA.     III. 

Sdslrayon  itwddh  ika  rana . 

It  has  been  stated  that  the  Brahman,  who  is  the 
cause  of  the  creation,  &c.,  of  the  world,  is  capable  of  being 
made  out  from  the  Veddnta.  This  is  improper.  Indeed, 

290.  The   meaning  is  this: — In  a  mountain  is  fiery,because  it  smokes", 

syllogism,  the  minor   term    is   found  the  minor  term   '  mountain  '  is  asso- 

associated  with  the  characteristics  of  ciated  with  the  characteristics  of  the 

the  middle  term  which  is  associated  middle  term  '  smoke  '  which  again  is 

with  the  characteristics  of  the  major  associated  with  the  characteristics  of 

term.    Thus  in  the  syllogism,  "  The  the  major  term  '  fire'. 


Adhik.  III.  Sul.  j.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  265 

that  (Brahman)  is  not  established  by  (  Veddntd)  passages, 
because  He  is  established  by  means  of  logical  inference. 
To  such  a  supposition,  he  (the  Sfitrakara)  says  in  reply 

Sutra  3.  Sastrayonitwat. 

(That  the  Brahman  is  the  cause  of  the  creation,  &c., 
of  the  universe,  follows  altogether  from  the  scripture), 
because  the  scripture  forms  the  source  (of  the 
knowledge  relating  to  Him). 

He,  in  relation  to  whom  the  scripture  forms  the  source, 
or  the  instrument  (of  knowledge),  or  the  means  of  proof,— 
He  is  trie  scripture-sourced  one.  And  the  state  of  His 
being  so  scripture-sourced  is  His  scripture-sourcedness. 
From  that,  (that  is),  from  the  sastra  having  the  character 
of  being  the  means  of  acquiring  the  knowledge  relating  to 
the  Brahman,  the  Brahman  has  that  (sastra)  for  (His) 
source.  The  Brahman  is  altogether  beyond  the  senses,  and 
so  does  not  form  the  object  of  any  means  of  proof,  such  as 
perception,  &c.;  and  the  sastra  alone  forms  the  means  to 
prove  Him.  Consequently,  the  scriptural  passage  beginning 
with— "From  whom  all  these  beings  are  bom" — \_Taitt. 
Up.  III.  i.  i.], — certainly  teaches  that  Brahman  who  is 
of  the  nature  already  described.  This  is  the  meaning  (of 
this  sfitra). 

It  may,  however,  be  said  here  thus  : — Indeed,  it  is 
not  possible  for  the  Brahman  to  be  that  which  has  the 
sastra  as  the  means  of  proving  Him;  because  the  Brahman 
is  capable  of  being  made  out  by  other  means  of  proof. 
And  the  sastra*9*  has  a  meaning  only  in  so  far  as  it  relates 
to  what  has  not  been  already  arrived  at. 

What292  then  is  the  means  of  proving  that  (Brah- 

291.  Cf.   Pur.  Mlm.  III.  4.  12,   &          292.  Here,     the     objector    is     the 
HI.  5.  21.  Vide  supra  n.  232.  Mlmcinnaka, 

34 


266  SRT-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  /. 

man),!  Surely,  it  is  not  perception.  It  (viz.  perception) 
is  of  two  kinds;  that  which  is  born  of  the  senses,  and  that 
which  is  born  of  yoga  (or  introspective  realisation  through 
mental  concentration).  The  (perception)  which  is  bora  of 
the  senses  is  of  two  kinds,  namely,  outside-born  (or  exter- 
nal) and  inside-born  (or  internal).  The  external  senses 
give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  such  of  their  own  objects  as 
are  fit  to  be  brought  into  contact  (with  them)  in  the  usual 
way;  and  accordingly  they  do  not  produce  the  knowledge 
which  relates  to  that  particular  Person  who  is  capable  of 
directly  perceiving  all  things,  and  is  (also)  capable  of 
bringing  them  into  existence.  Nor  does  the  internal 
(perception  prove  the  Brahman};  because,  in  relation  to 
external  objects  (naturally)  distinct  from  pain,  pleasure, 
&c.,  which  are  (all)internal,  it  cannot  operate  independent- 
ly of  the  external  senses.  Even yogic  perception298  does 
not  (prove  the  Brahman}.  It  (viz.  yogic  perception)  results 
from  the  utmost  intensification  of  mental  conception,  and 
although  it  has  the  character  of  a  clear  presentation  before 
consciousness,  it  is  nothing  other  than  the  mere  remem- 
brance of  previously  experienced  things;  and  it  is,  therefore, 
no  (separate)  means  of  proof.  Under  these  circumstances, 
how  can  it  have  the  character  of  direct  perception,  seeing 
that  there  is  no  cause  to  make  it  deal  with  things  other 
than  those  (to  which  that  remembrance  and  that  concep- 
tion relate)  ?  If  it  did  deal  with  such  things,  it  would 
acquire  the  character  of  an  illusion.  Inference  also, 
whether  arrived  at  through  the  particular  wajr  of  deduction 
or  arrived  at  through  the  generic  way  of  induction,  is  not 
(the  means  of  proving  the  Brahmaii).  (Inference)  arrived 
at  through  the  particular  way  of  deduction  is  not  (the 

293,  Vide  supra  p.6g.  n.  46, 


Adhik.  III.  Sut.  j.]   SRI-BHISHYA.  267 

means  of  proof  here),  because  there  is  no  knowledge  of  its 
relating  to  anything  which  is  beyond  the  senses.  There 
is  also  no  such  basis  of  inductive  inference  as  is  seen  to  give 
rise  to  a  generalisation  and  as  is  invariably  associated  with 
that  particular  Person  who  is  capable  of  directly  perceiving 
all  things  and  of  actually  bringing  those  (things)  into 
existence. 

It  may,  however,  be  again  objected  thus  : — 294  (The 
idea  of)  the  world  being  a  produced  effect  is  invariably 
associated  with  (the  idea  of)  there  being,  (in  relation  to 
it),  an  agent,  who  knows  thoroughly  its  material  cause,  its 
auxiliary  implements  of  production,  its  disposal  and  its 
purpose.  The  idea  also  that  the  world  is  produced  by 
the  non-intelligent  thing  (or  matter)  is  invariably  associated 
with  the  idea  of  its  being  subject  to  the  control  of  a  single 
intelligent  being.  Indeed,  all  produced  effects  such  as 
pots,  &c.,  are  seen  to  be  associated  with  a  producing  agent 
who  knows  their  material  cause,  their  auxiliary  implements 
of  production,  their  disposal  and  their  purpose.  (For 
example),  one's  own  body,  which  is  produced  out  of 
non-intelligent  matter  and  is  free  from  disease,  is  indeed 
subject  to  the  control  of  a  single  intelligent  being.  The 
world  is  a  produced  effect,  because  it  is  made  up  of  compo- 
nent parts. 

It  is  replied  (to  this)  as  follows  : — What  is  it  (for  a 
thing)  to  be  subject  to  the  control  of  a  single  intelligent 
being  ?  It  is,  surely,  not  to  have  the  origin  and  the  exist- 
ence (of  that  thing)  subject  to  the  control  of  that  (being)  ; 
for,  then,  the  illustrative  example  (given  above)  will  be 
found  to  be  defective  in  regard  to  that  which  is  to  be 
proved.  Indeed,  one's  own  body,  which  is  free  from 

^94.  The  objector  here  is  one  who       NaiyyUyikcu   and  believes  in  the  value 
partly    accepts   the  doctrines   of   the       ot  the  '  design  argument*. 


26S  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  /. 

disease,  has  not  its  origin  and  existence  subject  to  the 
control  of  a  single  intelligent  being  ;  because,  to  all  (those) 
intelligent  beings,  such  as  the   wife,  £c.,   who  are  the 
enjoyers  of  that  body,  the  origin  and  the  existence  of  that 
(body)  appear    to  be  due  to  something  that  is  unknown. 
Moreover,  the  body  which  is  organically  made  up  of  con- 
stituent parts  does  not,  for  the  purpose  of  existing  in  the 
form  of  a  complete  whole  the  constituent  parts  of  which 
are  inherently   associated  together,  stand  in  need  of  an 
intelligent   being    over  and    above   the   peculiar    putting 
together  of  its   constituent  parts.      And  that   (kind  of) 
existence,  which  is  characterised  by  life,  can  not  possibly 
be  predicated  in   relation  to    the    earth,   the    ocean,    the 
mountain,  &c.,  which  are  all  admitted  to  fall  into  the  same 
class  fas  the  body)  ;  and  hence,   we  find  that  there  is  no 
(kind  of)  existence  that  is  of  a  uniform  nature  and  is  found 
to  be  alike  in  the  case  under  consideration  as  well  as  in 
other  parallel  cases.     If  it  be  said  that  (for   a  thing)  to  be 
subject  to  the  control  of  a  (single  intelligent)  being,  is  the 
same  as  to  have  its  movements  determined  by  that  (single 
being),  then,  this  (lawj  is  seen  to  be  transgressed  in  the  case 
of  heavy  chariots  and  stones  and   trees  and  other  such 
objects,  which  are  all  capable  of  being  moved  only  by 
many  intelligent  beings, — (although  they  are  all  produced 
out  of  non-intelligent  matter  and  have  thus  to  be  under- 
stood  in  accordance    with  the   above   hypothesis   to  be 
subject  to  the  control  of  a   single  intelligent  being).     If  it 
be  said  that  it  (viz.  the  fact  of  being  produced  out  of  non- 
intelligent  matter)  is  the  same  as  to  be  simply  dependent 
upon  intelligent  beings,  then,  there  arises  the  fallacy  of  prov- 
ing the  proved.   Moreover,  it  is  proper  to  admit  that  the  in- 
dividual souls  alone,  which  are  accepted  by  both  parties, 
do  possess  the  quality  of  being  agents ;  because  there  is 


dhik.    lL  Sui.  j."|  SRI-BHA.SHYA.  269 

(the  support  of)  simplicity  (in  favour  of  such  an  admis- 
sion). And  it  is  not  right  to  hold  that  it  is  impossible 
for  the  quality  of  being  an  agent  to  exist  in  relation  to 
the  individual  souls,  since  they  do  not  know  the  material 
cause,  &c.,  (in  regard  to  the  production  of  things)  ;  for,  all 
the  individual  souls  are  in  possession  of  the  power  of  direct- 
ly perceiving  the  material  cause  (of  things)  such  as  the  (ele- 
ment) earth,  &c.,  and  (also)  the  auxiliary  means  (of  produc- 
ing them),  such  as  sacrifices,  &c.  Accordingly,  the  (element) 
earth,  &c.,  and  sacrifices,  &c.,  are  directly  perceived  by  them 
now.  In  relation  to  the  intelligent  beings  (viz.  the  individual 
souls),  there  is  (indeed)  no  impossibility  of  the  quality  of 
being  an  agent,  even  in  the  absence  of  the  direct  perception 
of  that  unseen  something293  which  is  expressed  by  the 
word  apfirva  and  by  other  words,  and  has  the  nature  of  the 
power  which  results  from  sacrifices,  &c.,  that  form  the  auxi- 
liary means  (of  producing  things) ;  because  the  production  of 
a  thing,  does  not  stand  in  need  of  such  direct  perception.  In- 
deed, the  direct  perception  of  that  which  has  power  is  alone 
useful  in  causing  the  production  of  anything.  It  is  the  know- 
ledge alone,  but  not  the  direct  perception,  of  power  that  is 
(here)  useful.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  potters  and  others  do  not 
begin  their  work  of  making  jars,  water-pots,  and  such 
other  things,  only  after  having  directly  perceived  the 
power  of  those  things  (which  form  the  auxiliary  imple- 
ments of  production)  ;  in  the  same  way  in  which  (they 
perceive)  the  rod,  the  wheel,  and  the  other  things  that 
form  the  auxiliary  means  to  the  performance  of  their  work. 
And,  in  the  case  of  those  intelligent  beings  (or  the  indivi- 
dual souls)  who  are,  in  accordance  with  the  sdstras,  under- 
stood to  possess  the  particular  kind  of  power  which  results 

295.  Vide  supra  p.  41,  n.  36,  Vide  also  Piir.  Mini.  11.  I.  I  104. 


270  SRI-BHISHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

from  sacrifices,  &c.,  it  is  not  (at  all)  inappropriate  here 
that  they  do  the  work  (of  producing  things).  Moreover, 
that  thing  the  making  of  which  is  possible  and  the  know- 
ledge relating  to  the  material  cause,  &c.,  of  which  is  also 
possible, — that  thing  alone  is  seen  to  have  (been  produced 
by)  an  agent  who  knows  those  (possibilities).  But  the 
earth,  the  mountain,  the  great  ocean,  &c.,  are  things 
the  making  of  which  is  impossible  (to  individual 
.souls),  and  the  knowledge  of  the  material  cause,  &c., 
in  relation  to  them  is  also  impossible  (to  individual  souls); 
therefore  they  are  not  made  by  intelligent  beings  (or  the 
individual  souls).  Hence,  it  is  only  such  a  quality  of  being 
a  produced  effect  as  is  found  in  association  with  a  thing 
which  is  like  jars,  water-pots,  and  other  objects  resembling 
them,  which  is  itself  capable  of  being  made  (by  individual 
souls),  and  the  material  cause,  &c.,  relating  to  which  are 
(all)  capable  of  being  known  (by  them), — (it  is  only  this 
quality  of  being  a  produced  effect)  that  is  competent  to 
establish  that  an  intelligent  maker  (or  agent)  must  have 
necessarily  preceded  (the  production  of  that  thing).  Fur- 
ther, such  a  produced  effect  as  a  pot  or  any  other  similar 
object  is  seen  to  have  been  caused  by  one  who  is  not  the 
lord  of  all,  whose  knowledge  and  power  are  very  limited, 
who  has  a  body,  who  is  provided  with  auxiliary  imple- 
ments of  production,  and  whose  desires  are  unfulfilled  ; 
accordingly,  this  means  of  proving  an  intelligent  agent  (in 
relation  to  the  world),  from  the  fact  of  the  world  possess- 
ing the  .  characteristics  of  a  produced  thing,  establishes  an 
intelligent  agent  who  is  altogether  of  the  above-mentioned 
nature ;  and  thus  it  proves  unfavourable,  for  the  reason 
that  it  establishes  in  relation  to  the  Person  intended  to  be 
proved  here  (as  the  agent  in  the  act  of  creation)  the 
opposites  of  omniscience,  the  lordship  of  all,  and  other 


Adhik.  III.  Snt.  j.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  271 

such  qualities.  Moreover,  owing  to  this  much  alone,  it 
cannot  be  said  that  all  logical  inferences  have  to  be  given 
up  (in  this  matter).  If  a  thing  which  has  to  be  proved 
by  logical  reasoning  falls  (also)  within  the  scope  of  some 
other  means  of  proof,  then  all  such  mistaken  characteristics 
(in  relation  to  that  thing),  as  are  arrived  at  on  the  strength  of 
the  bases  of  logical  inference,  are  contradicted  by  that  (other) 
means  of  proof ;  and  hence  those  (characteristics)  cease  to 
be.296  But  here,  in  the  case  of  Him  who  is  the  thing  to  be 
proved,  who  is  incapable  of  being  dealt  with  by  all  other 
means  of  proof  (than  the  sastras),  and  who  is  skilled  in  the 
creation  of  all  the  worlds,  all  the  attributes,  which  are,  as  a 
rule,  invariably  associated  with  Him  and  are  made  out  by 
means  of  direct  and  converse  processes  of  logical  inference, 
are,  without  exception,  rightly  found  to  be  relevant  and 
admissible  ;  and  they  continue  to  remain  as  such,  because 
there  is  no  other  means  of  proving  (Him)  by  which  these 
attributes  may  become  stultified.  Therefore,  how  is  the 
Lord  to  be  established  without  the  dgamas  (or  sastras)  ? 

Here  (again),  they  (viz.  the  purvapakshinsY*7  say  as 
follows  : — It  is  not  possible  to  deny  the  fact  that  the 
world  is  a  produced  effect;  simply  because  it  is  made  up 
of  constituent  parts.  And  the  following  are  the  syllo- 


296.  For  example,  a  traveller  who  capable  of  being  made  out  by  means 
has  missed  his  way,  and  is  overtaken  of  logical  inference  as  well  as  by 
by  darkness,  happens  to  see  at  a  dis-  means  of  direct  perception  ;  and  the 
tance  the  ignis  fatuus  ;  and  mistaking  infeired  existence  of  the  habitation  is 
it  to  be  some  kind  of  light  lit  up  by  contradicted  by  means  of  the  per- 
man,  he  draws  the  inference  that  a  ceived  non-existence  thereof.  Only 
human  habitation  must  be  found  thus  can  the  conclusions  of  logic  be- 
near  the  light.  He  moves  on  in  the  come  stultified. 

direction  of  the  light,  and  at  last  per-  297.  The    Pnrvapakshins   here  are 

ceives  no  such  habitation.    Here,  the  the   Vai'stshikits, 
existence  of  the  human  habitation  is 


SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

gistic  statements  (in  regard  to  this  position): — (i)  The 
earth,  the  mountain,  &c.,  which  are  (all)  the  subject  of 
discussion  (here),  are  produced  effects, — because  they  are 
made  up  of  constituent  parts  ;  as  is  the  case  with  pots,  &c. 

(2)  Similarly,  the  earth,  the  ocean,  the  mountain,  &c.,  which 
are   (all)  the  subject  of  discussion  (here),    are    produced 
effects, — because,  being  themselves  gross,  they  possess  the 
power  of  being  set  in  motion  ;  as  is  the  case  with  a  pot. 

(3)  The  body  and  the  world,  &c.,  are  produced  effects,— 
because,  being  themselves  gross,  they  have  a  definite  form; 
as  is  the  case  with  a  pot.        In  the  case  of  such  substances 
as  are  made  up  of  constituent  parts,  we  do  not  find  any 
characteristic,  other  than  the  fact  of  their  being  made  up 
of  constituent  parts,  which  uniformly  defines  the  state  of  a 
produced  effect  so  as  to  point  out  what  is  (really  so)  pro- 
duced and  what  is  not.     If  it  be  said  that  the   possibility 
of  (such  things)  being  made,  and  the  possibility  of  knowing 
their  material  cause,  &c.,  are  found  invariably  associated 
with  the  fact  of  things  being  produced  effects, — it  is  replied 
that  to  hold  so  is  not  right.     Even  in  the  case  of  things 
which  are  accepted  to  be  produced  effects,  the  knowledge 
and  the  power  (relating  to  the  maker  of  the  produced 
thing)  are  inferred  from  the  product  itself.  Elsewhere  also, 
the  fact  of  a  thing  being  a  produced  effect  is  made  out 
through  its  being  made  up  of  constituent  parts  and  through 
such  other   (causes).     Hence,  those   two    things  (viz.   the 
knowledge  and  the  power  of  the  producer  of  an  effect)  are 
certainly    capable    of  being    established     (by  inference). 
There  is,  thus,  no  peculiarity  here.    Accordingly,  in  the 
case  of  jars,  water-pots  and  other  made  things,  a  person, 
after  knowing  that  they  are  produced  effects,  makes  out, 
by  means  of  inference,  the  knowledge  and  the  power  which 
are  found  in  the  producing  agent  and  are  needed  for  the 


Adhik.  III.  Silt,  j.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  273 

making  of  those  things.  And  (such  a  person)  sees  the 
palace  of  a  king  which  he  had  never  before  seen,  and 
which  is  wonderfully  planned.  Then,  by  means  of  the 
peculiarity  in  the  arrangement  of  its  parts,  he  arrives  at 
the  conclusion  that  it  is  a  produced  effect ;  and  immediate- 
ly afterwards  he  learns  by  inference  the  wonderful  nature 
of  the  knowledge  and  the  power  possessed  by  the  producer 
(of  that  palace)  for  (the  purpose  of  producing)  it.  There- 
fore, if  the  character  of  being  a  produced  effect  is  established 
in  the  case  of  the  body,  of  the  world  and  such  other  things, 
then,  a  particular  Person,  who  is  capable  of  directly  per- 
ceiving and  of  creating  all  things  as  well  as  of  performing 
other  actions  in  relation  to  them,  is  certainly  proved. 
Moreover,  in  the  case  of  intelligent  beings  (?'.  e.  the  indivi- 
dual souls),  the  enjoyment  of  pleasure  and  pain  is  based 
upon  merit  and  demerit  (respectively)  ;  however,  these  two 
things  (viz.  merit  and  demerit)  are  not  themselves  intelli- 
gent, and  are  not  presided  over  by  any  intelligent  being  ; 
hence  they  are  not  themselves  capable  of  being  the  means 
of  yielding  the  fruits  (of  karma).  Accordingly,  some 
particular  Person,  who  is  capable  of  skilfully  awarding  all 
fruits  in  accordance  with  all  the  (various)  karmas,  has  to 
be  postulated  ;  because  hatchets  and  other  instruments, 
which  are  themselves  not  intelligent,  are  not,  for  instance, 
seen  to  be  the  means  of  producing  the  sacrificial  pole  and 
such  other  things,  when  not  presided  over  by  a  carpenter, 
even  though  the  proper  place,  the  proper  time,  and  the 
numerous  other  accessories  (for  making  them)  are  all 
available  and  at  hand.  The  case  of  the  seed  becoming  the 
sprout  and  all  other  similar  cases  (also)  fall  within  the 
scope  of  this  case  under  discussion ;  therefore  to  maintain 
any  variation  in  logic  in  relation  to  them  is  to  display  that 
ignorance  which  belongs  to  demons  learned  in  the  scriptures. 

35 


274  SRI-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

For  the  very  same  reason,  the  statement  which  main- 
tains that  the  above  logic  has  to  vary  in  the  case  of  pleasure 
and  other  such  things  is  (also)  quite  similar  in  character.298 
Further,  it  is  not  proper  to  assume,  for  the  sake  of  simplici- 
ty, that  this  kind  of  presidentship  belongs  to  the  indivi- 
dual souls  themselves,  which  are  admitted  by  both  parties  ; 
because,  in  their  case,  it  is  conclusively  established  that 
they  do  not  possess  the  power  of  perceiving  what  is 
subtle,  what  is  hidden,  and  what  is  far  away.  Indeed,  in 
all  cases,  the  hypothesis  has  to  be  altogether  in  accordance 
with  the  perception.  And,  in  the  case  of  the  Lord  of  all, 
there  can  be  no  demonstration  of  powerlessness,  as  (there 
is)  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul.  Therefore,  it  is 
not  impossible  to  prove  Him  by  other  means  of  proof  (than 
the  scripture).  He  (the  Lord)  is  proved  to  be  arrived  at  as 
the  cause  of  a  produced  effect  which  is  invariably  associat- 
ed with  an  efficient  producing  agent ;  and  hence  He  is 
surely  made  out  as  naturally  possessing  the  power 
of  directly  perceiving  and  controlling  all  things.  What 
has  been  already  stated299  to  the  effect  that,  by 
postulating  the  absence  of  lordship,  &c.,  (in  relation 
to  the  agent  of  creation),  there  results  the  fact  of  prov- 
ing, (in  relation  to  that  agent),  the  opposites  of  certain 

298.  Pleasure  and  other  sensa-  As  the  hatchet  has  to  be  handled  by 
lions  and  emotions  give  rise  to  their  the  carpenter,  so  also  these  sensations 
corresponding  physical  expressions.  and  emotions  have  to  be  felt  by  an 
These  expressions  are  therefore  pro-  intelligent  being  ;  otherwise,  there 
dnced  effects  having  those  sensations  can  be  no  physical  expression  corres- 
and  emotions  for  their  cause.  And  ponding  to  them.  Consequently, 
the  sensations  and  emotions  are  not  even  here  the  predication  of  the 
themselves  intelligent  agents. ~f  It  may  intelligent  agent  cannot  be  avoid- 
therefore  be  argued  that  all  produced  cd. 

effects  need  not   have  an   intelligent  299,  Vide  supra  p.  270. 
agent  engaged  in  (producing  them. 


Adhik.  IH.  Sat.  j.]  SRi-&HisHYA.  275 

(desired)  attributes,  —  that  is  due  to  the  ignorance 
of  the  various  processes  of  logical  inference  ;  because 
all  the  attributes  which  are  found  to  exist  together  in  ana- 
logous and  parallel  cases,  but  do  not  themselves  form  the 
cause  of  producing  the  effect  (in  question),  are  not  found  to 
exist  in  the  thing  to  be  proved.  What  is  said  is  this  :— 
Anything  which  has  to  be  produced  (or  made)  by  any  one 
requires,  for  its  production,  that  its  producer  should  have 
the  power  of  producing  it,  and  have  also  the  knowledge  of 
its  material  cause  and  of  the  auxiliary  means  (needed  for 
producing  it).  It  does  not  require,  (on  his  part),  the  incap- 
ability of  producing  other  things  and  the  ignorance  in  re- 
gard to  other  (causes  and  means);  because  they  (viz.  this 
powerlessness  and  this  ignorance)  do  not  form  the  cause 
(of  what  he  has  to  produce).  When,  indeed,  the  production 
of  a  thing  is  possible  by  means  of  the  power  of  producing 
it  and  by  means  of  the  knowledge  of  its  material  cause  and 
of  the  accessories  (needed  for  producing  it),  the  ignorance, 
&c.,  of  other  things  do  not  in  any  way  affect  (the  produc- 
tion of  it) ;  and  hence  they  do  not  deserve  to  form  the  cause 
of  its  production,  merely  on  the  score  that  they  are  seen  to 
be  in  some  way  related  (to  that  cause).  Moreover, 

do  (that)  ignorance  and  that  other  thing  (viz.  powerless- 
ness)  which,  relating  to  objects  other  than  the  thing  to  be 
produced,  are,  (according  to  you),  capable  of  affecting  the 
production  of  a  thing— (do  they)  relate  to  all  (such  pro- 
ducible) things,  or  do  they  relate  to  only  a  few  (such) 
things  ?  Surely,  they  cannot  relate  to  all  (such)  things, 
for  it  is  not  right  to  say  that  potters  and  others  do  not 
know  anything  other  than  what  has  to  be  produced  by 
them.  Nor  do  they  relate  only  to  a  few  (such)  things  ; 
because  there  is  no  definite  rule  to  settle,  in  the  case  of 
every  one  of  all  the  agents,  \vhat  particular  kind  of  ignorance 


276  SRI-BHISHYA.    {Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

and  powerlessness  he  is  to  have,  and  there  result*,  in 
consequence,  a  straying  away  from  the  hypothesis  to 
postulate  ignorance,  &c.,  in  relation  to  all  things.  There- 
fore, the  fact  that  non-lordship  and  other  such  attributes, 
which  do  not  affect  the  producibility  of  things,  are  not 
found  in  association  with  what  is  to  be  proved  (/.  e.  with 
the  Creator),  does  not  (indeed)  prove  the  contrary  (of  what 
is  to  be  proved).  It  may  be  said  that,  since  potters 

and  others  are  seen  to  possess  the  power  of  controlling  the 
use  of  rods,  wheels,  &c.,  only  with  the  help  of  their  bodies, 
it  is  therefore  impossible  for  the  Lord  who  has  no  body  to 
become  the  controller  of  the  material  cause  of  the  world 
and  of  the  auxiliary  means    (needed  for  producing  it). 
In  such  a  case,  it  is  replied  that  it  is  not  right  to  hold  so, 
because  the  expulsion  and  destruction  of  ghosts,  demons, 
poisons,  &c.,  found  in  the  bodies  of  others  are  seen  to  re- 
sult solely  with  the  help  of  the  will  (of  the  magician,) 
If  it  be  asked,  how  the  Lord  who  has  no  body  can  Himself 
have  that  will  which  makes  others  act,  it  is  replied  that 
the  will  is  not  dependent  upon  the  body,  in  as  much  as  the 
body  does  not  form  the  cause  of  the  will.     The  mind  alone 
is  the  cause  of  the  will,  and  that  is  admitted  to  be  found  in 
the  Lord  also;  because,  from  the  very  same  fact  of  (the 
world's)  being  a  produced  effect,  His  mind  also  is  arrived 
at  (by  us  through  inference),  in  the  same  way  in  which  His 
knowledge  and  power  are.    If  it  be  said  that,  since  he  alone 
has  the  mind  who  has  the  body,  the  will  born  of  the   mind 
belongs  only  to  him  who  has  the  body, — it  is  replied  that  it 
cannot  be  so;  because  the  mind  is  eternal,  and  the  mind 
continues  to  exist  even  after  the  destruction  of  the  body,  and 
is  not,  in  consequence,  invariably  associated  with  it.      Thus, 
the  individual  soul  who  is  under  the  influence  of  merit  and 
demerit,  and  who  is  possessed  of  power  and  knowledge,  is 


Adhik.  III.  Sffl.  j.]  SRI-BHA.SHYA.  277 

not  competent  to  produce  such  effects  as  the  creation  of 
the  body,  the  world,  &c.,  which  are  all  characterised  by 
a  peculiarly  wonderful  arrangement  of  (their)  constituent 
parts.  Consequently,  that  particular  Person,  namely,  the 
Lord,  who  is  clever  in  the  creation  of  all  the  worlds, 
whose  knowledge,  power,  and  lordship  are  unthinkable  and 
immeasurable,  who  is  without  a  body,  who,  merely  by 
means  of  the  instrument  of  volition,  has  established  this 
infinite  and  wide  world  of  wonderful  arrangements, — (such 
a  Lord)  is  established  solely  by  means  of  the  logical  process 
of  inference.  Therefore,  in  as  much  as  the  Brahman  is 
capable  of  being  conclusively  made  out  by  a  means  of  proof 
(other  than  the  scriptures),  this  scriptural  passage  (viz. 
"From  whom,  all  these  beings  are  born,  &c.",)  does  not 
establish  the  Brahman.  Moreover,  it  is  seen  that  only 
two  very  extremely  different  things,  namely,  the  mud  and 
the  potter,  constitute  the  material  and  the  instrumental 
causes  (of  a  pot).  It  is  not  further  proper  to  suppose  that 
the  spatial  ether  and  such  other  things,  which  have  no 
constituent  parts,  possess  the  character  of  a  produced  effect. 
Consequently  it  is  not  possible  to  establish  that  the  only 
one  Brahman  constitutes  (both)  the  material  and  the 
instrumental  causes  of  the  whole  world. 

If  it  be  thus  argued,  we  make  the  following  repty  : — 
The  scriptural  passage300  relating  to  the  origin,  &c., 
(of  the  world)  certainly  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
Brahman  as  possessing  the  above-mentioned  characteristics. 
Why  ?  Because  the  Brahman  is  to  be  proved  solely  by 
means  of  the  sastras.  What  has  been  stated  to  the  effect 
that  the  whole  world  is  a  produced  effect,  in  as  much  as  it  is 
made  up  of  constituent  parts  and  (possesses)  other  allied 

300.     Vide  Taitt.  Up.  III.  i.  I. 


2/3  SRi-BnisHYA.      [Chap.  /.  Part.  1. 

(characteristics);  that  a  produced  effect  is  seen  to  be  invari- 
ably associated  with  a  special  agent  suited  to  the  production 
thereof ;  and  that,  therefore,  some  one  who  is  clever  in  the 
creation  of  all  the  worlds,  and  in  knowing  their  material 
cause  and  the  auxiliary  means  of  producing  them,  has  to  be 
inferred;— this  is  improper:  because,  though  the  earth,  and 
the  great  ocean,  &c.,  are  produced  effects,  there  is  no  proof 
to  show  that  they -were  created  by  one  (agent)  at  only  one 
particular  time.      Again,  all  the  things  (in  the  world)  do 
not  possess  the  character  of  constituting  a  single  produced 
effect,  in  the  same  way   in  which  a  pot  does    (possess 
such  a  character),  so  that  there  may  be  one  agent  (to 
produce  them  all)  at  one  and  the  same  time  ;    because,  in 
the  case  of  produced  things,  which  are  quite  distinct  from 
one    another,    there    is    the   perception  of  difference    in 
time  and  of  difference  in  agents  ;  and  there   is,   in  conse- 
quence, no  apprehension  of  any  rule  laying  down  only  one 
particular  agent  and  one  particular  time  (in  regard  to  the 
production  of  things).    Again,  in  as  much  as  the  individual 
souls  are  incapable  of  creating  the  wonderful  world,  and 
in  as  much  as  it  is  inappropriate  to  assume  many  (individual 
souls  to  be  the  creators  of  the  world),  when,  on  the  strength 
of  the  world  being  a  produced  effect,   an  agent  differ- 
ent from  those  (individual  souls)   has  to  be  assumed  (as 
the  creator  of  the  world)/ — merely  on  this  score  it  is  not 
right  to  hold  that  there  must  be  only  one  agent  (in  the  matter 
of  creating  the  world) :  because,  owing  to  the  fact  that  those 
individual  souls  themselves  who  have  increased  their  special 
merits  are  seen  to  possess  wonderful  powers,  and  owing  also 
to  the  fact  that  to  them  alone  there  is  the  possibility  of  the 
fruition  of  that  highly  increased  influence  (of  the  karmas) 
which  is  known  as  adrlshta,*01  it  is  appropriate  for  each 

301,  Vide  supra  p,  41.  n.  36. 


Adhik.  III.  Sat.  j.]  SRI-BHISHYA,  279 

of  those  (individual  souls)  to  form  the  cause  of  producing 
particular  and  distinct  created  effects;  and  it  is  not,  in  con- 
sequence, proper  to  assume  (as  the  agent  in  the  act  of 
creation)  a  person  who  is  distinct  from  them  and  is  quite 
unseen.  Again,  the  (conceptions  of  the)  simultaneous  origin- 
ation of  all  things  and  the  simultaneous,  destruction  of  all 
things  do  not  deserve  to  occupy  the  position  of  proved 
truth  ;  because  such  a  thing  is  not  seen  (to  occur), 
and  because  creation  and  destruction  are  seen  to  take 
place  only  one  after  another  in  order,  and  because  also, 
even  when  the  simultaneous  origination  and  destruction 
of  all  things  have  to  be  assumed  owing  to  the  fact 
of  their  being  produced  effects,  there  is  nothing  wrong 
in  supposing  that  those  acts  (of  creation  and  destruction) 
take  place  in  accordance  with  what  is  ordinarily  perceived 
(to  be  the  case).  Therefore,  if  it  is  the  agency  of  one 
intelligent  being  (in  regard  to  the  production  of  all  things) 
that  is  to  be  established,  then,  there  is  no  invariable  asso- 
ciation of  the  produced  character  of  things  (with  such  a 
single  producing  agent).  Moreover,  the  subject  of  the  dis- 
cussion (vi/.  such  an  intelligent  being)  will  (then)  have  to 
possess  attributes  generally  unknown  to  be  possessed 
by  him,  and  the  given  example  (of  the  pot)  will  be 
defective  in  illustrating  the  thing  to  be  proved  ;  because 
such  a  single  person  as  is  capable  of  creating  all  things 
is  not  known  to  exist.  I  fit  is  only  an  intelligent  agency 
that  is  to  be  established,  then  there  results  the  fallacy  of 
proving  the  admittedly  proved.  Is  this  character  of  being 
a  produced  effect,  which  is  intended  to  prove  some  one 
being  who  is  possessed  of  omniscience  and  omnipotence, 
—(is  this)  found  in  relation  to  all  such  things  as  are  pro- 
duced at  one  and  the  same  time  ?  Or  is  it  found  in  rela- 
tion to  all  such  things  as  are  produced  one  after  another 


280  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  1. 

in  order  ?  If  it  be  found  in  relation  to  all  things  which 
are  held  to  be  produced  at  one  and  the  same  time,  then 
(owing  to  the  hypothesis  being  untrue)  the  character  of 
being  a  produced  effect  would  itself  remain  unproved  (in 
relation  to  the  world)  ;  and  if  it  be  found  in  relation  to 
all  things  which  are  held  to  be  produced  one  after  another 
in  order,  then,  it  would  be  established  that  they  must  be 
produced  by  many  agents,  and  there  would  be  the  conse- 
quent contradiction  (of  what  is  to  be  proved  here).  Under 
these  circumstances,  in  proving  the  agency  of  (only)  one 
being  (in  relation  to  all  produced  things  in  the  world),  there 
is  not  only  the  contradiction  of  perception  and  inference, 
but  (there  is)  also  the  contradiction  of  the  scriptures  ;  for, 
we  see  it  mentioned  (separately)  in  the  scriptures  that  the 
maker  of  the  pot  is  born,  and  also  that  the  maker  of  the 
chariot  is  born.302 

Moreover,  all  produced  effects  such  as  bodies,  &c.,  are 
seen  to  be  associated  with  pleasures,  &c.,  which  are  them- 
selves the  produced  effects  of  the  qualities  of  goodness, 
&c.3°3  Therefore,  it  has  necessarily  to  be  admitted  that 
all  produced  effects  result  from  the  qualities  of  goodness, 
&c.  The  qualities  of  goodness,  &c.,  which  form  the  source 
of  the  wonderful  variety  of  produced  effects,  are  indeed  the 
special  characteristics  found  in  the  (producing)  cause.  It 
is  (only)  in  consequence  of  the  modification  of  the  internal 
organ  (or  manas)  of  the  person  who  is  possessed  of  those 
(qualities)  that  it  becomes  appropriate  to  declare  that  those 

302.  The  idea  is  that,  if  all  things  scriptures  contradict  the  idea  that  all 
are  produced  only  by  one  agent,  the  produced  things  have  only  one  pro- 
maker  of  the  pot  cannot  be  different  ducing  agent. 

from  the  maker  of  the  chariot.     The  303.  These  are  the  three  well  known 

scripture  mentions    these  separately  qualities  of  Sattva,    goodness,    Rajas, 

so  as  to  imply  that  the}'  are  different  passion  &  Tamas,  darkness, 
from  each  other.      Accordingly,  the 


Adhik.  III.  Snt.  j.]  SRI-BHA.SHYA.  281 

produced  effects  result  from  those  (qualities).      And,  in  the 
case  of  such  a  person,  the  possession  of  those  (qualities;  is 
due  to  karma. s°4     Therefore,  for  the  very  commencement 
of  any  particular  work,  as  the  producing  agent's  knowledge 
and  power,  his  association  with  karma  (also)  has  necessari- 
ly to  be   admitted  to  form,  indeed,  the  cause  of  a  produc- 
ed effect.     (It   has  necessarily   to  be    so  admitted),  for 
the   reason   that   the   wonderful  nature   of  (the  agent's) 
knowledge  and  power  is  (itself)    due  to  karma.      Even 
when  it  is  held  that  desire  is  the  cause  of  the  commence- 
ment of  work,  it   is  not  possible  to  give  up  the  (agent's) 
association  with  karma,  for  the  reason  that  that  (desire), 
which  is  specially  characterised  by  its  relation  to  some 
particular  object  or  other,  is  itself  due  to  the  qualities  of 
goodness,  &c.     Therefore  the  individual  souls  alone  be- 
come the  agents,  and  some  one  else  who  is  distinct  from 
them  cannot  be  established  (as  agent)  by  means  of  logic- 
al inference.  And  the  syllogistic  statements  (in  this 
connection)  are  as  follow  : — (i)  The  body,  the  world,  &c., 
have  the  individual  souls   for  their  (producing)   agents  ; 
because  they   possess  the   character    of  being    produced 
effects,  (even)  as  a  pot  does  :  (2)   The  Lord   is   no   agent 
(in  the  act  of  creation) ;  because  He  has  no  purpose  (in 
creation),  just  as  released  souls  (have  not):  (3)  The  Lord 
is  no  agent  (in  the  act  of  creation)  ;   because   He   has  no 
body,  just  as   those  same  (released  souls  have  not).  And 
this  (last  reasoning)  is  not  fallacious  in  being  too  widely 
applicable  to  the  case  of  individual  souls  getting  to  preside 
over  their  own  bodies,  because,  in  such  a  case  also,  there 
is  the    (previous)  existence   of  the  beginningless    subtle 
body  (in  association  with  those  souls) :  (4)   Time,    about 

304.  The  word  karma  here  means       the  effects  of  those  actions, 
actions   done  in    previous  births  and 

36 


282  SRi-BHlSHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  1. 

which  there  is  difference  of  opinion,  can  never  have  been 
devoid  of  (created)  worlds  ;  because  it  possesses  the 
character  of  being  time,  (even)  like  the  present  time. 

And  again,  does  the  Lord  perform  work  with  a  body, 
or  (does  He  do  so)  without  a  body  ?  Surely,  (He  does) 
not  (do  so)  without  a  body ;  because  it  is  not  possible  for 
him  who  has  no  body  to  be  an  agent.  Even  mental 
actions  are  possible  for  him  alone  who  has  a  body  ;  be- 
cause, although  the  mind  is  eternal,  the  released  souls  are 
not  known  to  be  characterised  by  those  (mental)  actions. 
Nor  indeed  (does  He  perform  actions)  while  possessing  a 
body  ;  because  it  (viz.  the  embodied  condition  of  the  Lord) 
does  not  admit  any  of  the  possible  alternative  views  (in 
regard  to  it).  Is  that  body  (of  the  Lord)  eternal  or  non- 
eternal  ?  Surely,  it  is  not  eternal ;  for,  if  that  (body) 
which  is  made  up  of  constituent  parts  be  eternal,  there 
would  be  nothing  wrong  in  the  world  also  being  eternal ; 
and  consequently,  there  would  be  no  proving  of  the  Lord. 
Nor  also  is  that  (body)  non-eternal ;  because  that  which  is 
different  from  it  and  forms  (in  its  own  turn)  the  cause  of  that 
body  can  not  then  be  existent.  If  it  be  said  that  He,  (the 
Lord,)  is  alone  the  cause  (of  His  own  body),  it  is  replied 
that  it  cannot  be  so  ;  because  it  is  impossible  for  him  who 
has  no  body  to  be  the  cause  of  that  (viz.  his  own  body). 
If  it  be  said  that,  (at  the  time  of  creation),  He  acquires  a 
body  by  taking  unto  Himself  some  body  other  than  His 
own,  it  is  replied  that  it  cannot  be  so  ;  because  this  will 
lead  to  the  fallacy  of  regressus  in  infinitum.  Is  He 
full  of  activity  or  is  He  devoid  of  all  activity  ?  He  is 
not  full  of  activity,  because  He  has  no  body  at  all.  Nei- 
ther does  He  who  is,  like  a  released  soul,  devoid  of  all 
activity,  perform  any  work.  If  it  be  maintained  that  the 
world  which  is  a  produced  thing  has  for  its  (producing) 


Adhik.  111.  Sat.  j.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  283 

agent  one  whose  activity  is  only  to  desire,  then  the  sub- 
ject of  the  discussion  (viz.  the  creating  agent)  will  have  to 
possess  attributes  generally  unknown  (to  be  possessed  by 
such  as  he)  ;  and  the  given  example  will  be  defective  in 
illustrating  the  thing  to  be  proved.  Therefore,  the  pro- 

cess of  logically  inferring  the  Lord,  in  accordance  with 
what  we  perceive,  is  itself  stultified  by  having  to  accord 
with  what  we  actually  see.  Consequently,  the  Highest 
Person  who  is  the  Lord  of  all,  and  is  the  Highest  Brah- 
man, is  proved  only  by  the  sastras.  And  the  sdstras 
declare  Him  to  be  entirely  distinct-  from  all  the  things 
which  are  cognised  by  all  the  other  means  of  proof,  to  be 
an  ocean  of  such  unsurpassingly  great  and  noble  qualities 
as  are  made  up  of  omniscience,  the  quality  of  willing  the 
truth,  and  numerous  other  similar  qualities,  and  to  be 
possessed  of  a  nature  which  is  in  itself  hostile  to  all  that 
is  evil;  and  hence  there  cannot  result,  (in  relation  to  Him), 
even  a  tittle  of  that  defect  which  is  due  to  any  similarity 
with  those  things  that  are  established  to  be  existent  with 
the  help  of  the  other  means  of  proof. 

It  has  been  stated  already — by  the  pftrvapakshin — 
that  the  identity  of  the  material  and  the  instrumental 
causes  (of  produced  things  )  is  not  actually  perceived,  and 
that  the  character  of  being  produced  effects  cannot  be 
established  in  relation  to  spatial  ether  and  such  other  things 
as  are  not  made  up  of  (various)  constituent  parts.  Even 
this  is  not  opposed  to  reason ;  and  it  will  be  proved  so 
under  the  aphorisms—"  (The  Brahman  is)  also  the  mate- 
rial cause  of  the  world,  because  (His  being  so)  does  not 
disagree  with  the  example  given  to  illustrate  the  proposi- 
tion." [Ved.  Snt.  1.4.  23.];  and— "The  spatial  ether  is 
not  (a  produced  thing)  on  account  of  the  absence  of 
scriptural  statements  to  that  effect."  \Ved.  Snt.  II.  3.  i.]. 


284  SRI-BHISHYA.       {Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

Therefore,  it  is  a  demonstrated  conclusion  that  the 
scriptural  passage,  which  begins  with — "  From  whom  all 
these  beings  (are  born)" — [Tailt.  Up.  III.  i.  i .],  proves  the 
Brahman  to  be  possessed  of  the  above-mentioned  charac- 
teristics; for  the  reason  that  He  is  not  cognisable  by  any 
other  means  of  proof,  and  is,  in  consequence,  to  be  dealt 
with  solely  by  the  sdstras". 

ADH1KARANA.  IV. 

Samanvayddhikarana. 

Although  the  Brahman  is  not  cognised  by  any 
means  of  proof  (other  than  the  sdstras),  nevertheless,  the 
sdstras  may  not  prove  the  Brahman,  the  idea  correspond- 
ing to  whom  is  ,naturally  established  in  as  much  as 
He  does  not  import  any  activity  or  cessation  from  activity. 
In  answer  to  such  a  doubt,  he  (the  Sfitrakdra]  says  : — 

Sutra  4.     Tattu  samanvayat. 

That  (viz.  the  fact  that  the  scripture  forms  altogether 
the  source  of  the  knowledge  relating  to  the  Brahman) 
results,  however,  from  (His  constituting)  the  true  purport 
(of  the  scripture). 

The  word  however  is  intended  to  remove  the  doubt 
raised.  The  word  that  denotes  the  fact  that  the  sdstras 
form  indeed  the  means  of  proving  the  Brahman.  How? 
From  (His  constituting)  the  true  purport  (of  the  scripturej. 

(His  constituting)  the  true  purport  (of  the  scripture)  is  (the 
same  as  His  being)  the  highest  object  of  human  pursuit; 
because,  the  Brahman  who  is  the  highest  object  of  human 
pursuit  is  alone  intended  to  be  denoted  (by  the  sdstras}. 
All  the  Upanishadic  passages  such  as  the  following  and 
others  have  to  be  interpreted  to  mean  this  very  same 


Adhik.  IV..  Snt.  ./.]   SRI-BHA.SHYA.  2^5 

thing  : — "  From  whom  all  these  beings  are  born" — \Taitt. 
Up.  III.  i.  i.];  /'Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was 
in  the  beginning,  one  only,  without  a  second" — \Qhhand. 
Up.VI.  2.  i.];  "It  thought — 'May  I  become  manifold  and 
be  born'.  It  created  tejas." — [C/ihdnd.  Up.  VI.  2.  3.]; 
"The  Brahman,  indeed,  this  one  alone  was  in  the  beginn- 
ing"— \Brih.  Up.  I.  4.  ii.];  "The  Self,  indeed,  this  one 
alone  was  in  the  beginning"--  \Brih.  Up.  I.  4.  17.]; 
"  From  that  same  Self,  indeed,  the  spatial  ether  came  into 
existence." — \_Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.];  "Indeed  Narayana 
alone  then  \vas" — \_Mah.  Up.  I.];  "The  Brahman  is  Exist- 
ence, Knowledge,  Infinity."— \Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.];  "The 
Brahman  is  bliss." — \Taitt.  Up.  III.  6.  i.]. 

Moreover,  those  collections  of  words  (that  make  up 
the  scriptural  passages)  are  capable  of  denoting  such  well 
established  things  as  are  made  out  in  accordance  with  the 
natural  process  of  deriving  the  meanings  of  words,  and  the 
true  purport  of  those  (passages)  is  the  Brahman  who  is 
the  cause  of  the  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  of 
all  the  worlds,  who  is  hostile  to  all  that  is  evil,  and  who  is 
an  ocean  of  innumerable  noble  qualities,  and  has  the  nature 
of  unsurpassed  bliss  ;  and  it  cannot  be  that  they  (viz.  such 
scriptural  passages)  deal  with  things  other  (than  the  Brah- 
man}, seeing  that  they  are  (while  so  denoting  the  Brahman] 
devoid  of  utility  either  in  the  way  of  inducing  activity  or 
cessation  from  activity  ;  for,  every  one  of  all  the  means  of 
proof  has  its  finality  in  giving  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  that 
which  forms  its  own  particular  object.  Again,  the  operation 
of  a  means  of  proof  is  not  determined  by  utility.     Utility, 
indeed,  is  determined  by  the  means  of  proof.  Further,  that 
(viz.  the  scriptural  passage)  which  is  free  from  all  concern 
with  inducing  activity  or  cessation  from  activity  can  not  be 
said  to  be  devoid  of  utility;  because  it  is  seen  to  be  related 


286  SRI-BHASHYA.     {Chap.  L  Part.  1. 

to  one   of  the   objects  of  human  pursuit.     For  instance, 
in  passages  like — "A  son  is  born  to  you", — "This  is  no 
serpent",  which  deal  with  matters  of  fact  (without  import- 
ing any  activity  or  cessation  from  activity),  it  is  seen  that 
they  are  (also)  possessed  of  utility  in  the  way  of  ('produ- 
cing) joy  and  (causing)  the  removal  of  fear  (respectively). 
Here,  he  (viz.  a  Mlmdmsaka  Purvapakshin]  says  :— 
The  Veddnta  passages  do  not  establish  the  Brahman, 
because  the  sdstra,  which  is  incapable  of  importing  any 
activity  or  cessation  from  activity,  is  (thus)  purposeless.  No 
doubt  perception  and  the  other  means  of  proof  have  their 
finality  in  giving  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  of  things. 
Nevertheless   the   sdstra    (or    the    scripture)    must  have 
its  finality  in  utility.     Neither  in  popular  usage  nor  in  the 
Vcdas  do  we  see  the  use  of  any  sentence  that  is  purpose- 
less.    It  is  not  possible  for  a  sentence  to  be  made  use  of, 
or  to  be  listened  to,  without  there  being  some  utility  or  other 
in  view.    And  that  utility  is  made  out  to  have  the  nature 
of  the  acquisition  of  what  is  desirable  and  of  the  getting 
rid  of  what  is  undesirable  by  means  of  voluntary  activity 
or  cessation  from  activity,  as  is  seen  in  the  following 
and  other   instances  : — '  One  who  is  desirous  of  wealth 
should  go  to  the  palace  of  a  king ' ;  '  One  whose  digestion 
is  weak  should  not  drink  (too   much)  water';     'One  who 
is  desirous  of  Swarga   should  perform   (the  Jyotishtoma] 
sacrifice';  'One  should  not  eat  onions'. 

Moreover,  it  has  been  already  stated  to  the  effect  that, 
even  in  the  case  of  the  statements — "A  son  is  born  to 
you",— "This  is  no  serpent,  but  a  rope",  and  in  other 
similar  (statements),  all  of  which  deal  with  things,  the  ideas 
corresponding  to  which  are  already  naturally  established, 
there  is  seen  the  association  of  utility  (with  those  state- 
ments) in  the  form  of  (the  production  of)  joy  and  the  removal 


Adhik.  IV.  Snt.  ./.]  SRi-BHISHYA.  287 

of  fear,  &c.  Here,  it  lias  to  be  discriminated  whether  the 
attainment  of  utility  results  from  the  fact  of  the  birth  of  a 
son,  and  so  on,  or  from  the  (mere)  knowledge  thereof.  If  it 
be  said  that  a  thing,  although  existing,  is  of  no  utility  when 
unknown,  and  that  therefore  it  (viz.  the  attainment  of  uti- 
lity) results  from  the  knowledge  thereof; — then,  even 
when  the  thing  itself  is  non-existing,  utility  must  result 
merely  from  the  knowledge  (regarding  that  thing).  Thus, 
although  the  sdstra  has  its  finality  in  utility,  nevertheless, 
it  (Viz.  the  sdstra}  is  no  means  of  proving  the  existence 
of  things  in  as  much  as  it  does  not  relate  to  things  (but 
relates  to  knowledge  merely).  Therefore,  all  sentences 
have  their  finality  in  some  utility  or  other,  either  as  re- 
lating to  voluntary  activity  or  cessation  from  activity,  or 
as  relating  to  knowledge.  Hence,  no  sentence  is  capable 
of  importing  things,  the  ideas  corresponding  to  which  are 
already  naturally  established.  Consequently  the  Veddnta 
passages  do  not  establish  the  Brahman,  the  idea  corres- 
ponding to  whom  is  already  naturally  established. 

Here  another  (p&rvapakskin)***  may  say  : — The  Ved- 
dnta passages  also  are  the  means  of  proving  the  Brahman 
solely  by  reason  of  their  relating  to  actions.  How  ?  Be- 
cause the  Brahman  becomes  the  object  of  a  command- 
ment, which  relates  to  the  destruction  of  the  phenomenal 
world,  and  is  to  the  effect  that  the  Brahman — who  is  (in 
Himself)  non-phenomenal,  who  has  no  second  and  is  uni- 
form intelligence,  and  who,  nevertheless,  appears  to  be 
in  association  with  the  phenomenal  world  owing  to  the 
influence  of  the  beginninglessly  old  ignorance, — should  be 
realised  as  non-phenomenal.  What  is  that  commandment, 

305.  Namely,  the  NishprapancJiikarananiyogavcidin. 


288  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

which  relates  to  the  Brahman  who  is  uniform  intelligence, 
and  is  to  be  realised  by  means  of  the  destruction  of  the 
phenomenal  world  that  is  found  to  exist  in  the  (differentiat- 
ed) condition  of  the  knower  and  the  known  ?  (That  com- 
mandment is  to  be  found  in  the  following  and  other 
passages)  : — "  Thou  shalt  not  see  the  seer  of  the  sight,  nor 
think  the  thinker  of  the  thought".— \Brih.  Up.  III.  4.  2.]. 
The  meaning  is  that  the  Brahman  should  be  realised  as 
pure  and  simple  experience  which  is  devoid  of  the  distinc- 
tion of  the  knower  and  the  known.  Even  if  the  Brahman 
is  self-evident,  there  is  nothing  wrong  in  (His)  being 
made  the  object  of  an  action  so  as  to  realise  (Him) 
in  the  non-phenomenal  form. 

It  is  wrong  to  hold  so — (says  the  Mlmamsaka)^06He, 
who  maintains  that  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sentences 
is  a  commandment,  has  surely  to  point  out  what  the  com- 
mandment is,  the  attribute  of  the  person  to  whom  the  com- 
mandment is  directed,  the  special  object  (of  the  command- 
ment), the  performance  thereof,  the  details  of  the  proce- 
dure to  be  adopted,  and  the  performer  (of  the  command- 
ment). Among  these,  the  attribute  of  the  person  to  whom 
the  commandment  is  directed  is,  indeed,  incapable  of  being 
postulated  fin  regard  to  this  commandment  of  realising  the 
Brahman  as  non-phenomenal).  And  that  (attribute)  is  of 
two  kinds  as  causal  and  as  resultant.  It  has  to  be  discrimi- 
nated here  what  the  attribute  of  the  person  is  to  whom 
this  commandment  is  directed,  and  whether  it  is  causal  or 
resultant.  If  the  experience  of  the  truth  regarding  the 

306.  The  Mimamsaka  is  the  main  holds  that  the  Upanishads  give  us  the 

objector  against  the    Veddntin   in  this  commandment  to  non-phenomenalise 

Adhikarana.     The     Mimamsaka    re-  the  "Brahman.     Then  the  Mimamsaka 

futes  from  his    own   stand-point  the  is  himself  refuted  by  the  Veddntin. 
Nishprapa  nchikarqnaniyogavqdin   who 


Adhik.  IV.  Sul.  ./.]  SRl-BH.lSHYA.  289 

essential  nature  of  the  Brahman  constitutes  the  attribute 
of  the  person  to  whom  the  commandment  is  directed,  then, 
this  (attribute)  cannot  be  causal  ;  because  it  has  not  already 
become  available  (to  him),  unlike  life,  &c.,  (which  have 
so  become  available,  and  form  the  necessary  conditions 
preceding,  for  instance,  the  performance  of  the  agnihotra 
sacrifice  as  long  as  life  lasts,  in  accordance  with  the  Vcdic 
injunction—-"  One  should  perform  the  agnihotra  sacrifice 
as  long  as  life  lasts").807  However,  if  that  (attribute)  be 
causal,  then,  owing  to  its  being  eternal,  there  would  be 
room  for  the  performance  of  what  constitutes  the  special 
object  of  that  ever  obligatory  (commandment)  even  after 
the  attainment  of  final  release,  in  the  same  way  in  which 
the  agnihotra  sacrifice,  &c.,  which  are  dependent  upon 
life  (are  to  be  performed  as  long  as  that  life  lasts).  Nor 
also  is  that  (attribute  which  has  the  character  of  the 
experience  of  the  real  nature  of  the  Brahmati)  resultant  ; 
because,  by  being  the  result  of  the  working  out  of  a 
commandment,  it  has,  like  Swarga,  &c.,  to  become 
non-eternal.  Again  what  is  the  special  object  of  the 
commandment  here  ?  If  it  be  said  that  it  is  the  Brah- 
man Himself,  it  is  replied  that  it  cannot  be  so  ;  because 
He,  being  eternal,  cannot  be  produced  anew,  and  because 
also  He  is  not  imported  by  any  verbal  form  signifying  an 
action.  If  it  be  said  that  the  non-phenomenal  Brahman 
is  the  thing  to  be  worked  out  (under  the  commandment), 
then,  although  He  is  (thus)  the  thing  to  be  (immediately) 
accomplished  (under  the  injunction),  He  forms  the  final 
result  itself  (of  the  injunction).  He  cannot  form  the 
special  object  of  the  commandment,  because  He  is  not 
imported  by  any  verbal  forms  signifying  an  action.  More- 


soy.    Vide 

37 


290  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

over,  what  is  it  that  has  to  be  accomplished  (under  the 
injunction)  ?  Is  it  the  Brahman,  or  (is  it)  the  destruction  of 
the  phenomenal  world  ?  It  is  not  the  Brahman\  because 
He  is  ever-accomplished,  and  because  also  there  would 
result  non-eternity  (in  relation  to  the  Brahman  if  he  had 
to  be  accomplished).  Nor  is  it  the  destruction  of  the 
phenomenal  world  (that  has  to  be  accomplished  under  the 
injunction).  Then,  indeed,  the  Brahman  would  not  be  the 
thing  to  be  accomplished  (under  the  injunction).  If  it  be 
said  that  the  destruction  of  the  phenomenal  world  itself 
forms  the  special  object  of  the  commandment,  it  is  replied 
that  it  cannot  be  so ;  because  that  (destruction)  is  the  final 
result  (to  be  achieved  under  the  commandment)  and  cannot 
hence  form  the  immediate  object  of  the  commandment. 
Indeed,  the  destruction  of  the  phenomenal  world  is  itself 
the  beatific  release  (of  the  bound  soul) ;  and  that  is  the 
final  fruit  (of  the  injunction).  And  if  this,  (however), 
form  (also)  the  immediate  object  of  the  commandment, 
then  the  destruction  of  the  phenomenal  world  would  be 
due  to  the  carrying  out  of  the  commandment,  and  the 
commandment  would  be  carried  out -by  the  destruction 
of  the  phenomenal  world.  There  would,  in  consequence, 
be  the  logical  fallacy  of  reciprocal  dependence. 

Further,  is  the  phenomenal  world,  which  has  to  be 
put  an  end  to,  false  or  real  ?  If  it  be  of  a  false  nature,  then 
it  has  to  be  put  an  end  to  by  right  knowledge  alone,  and 
consequently  the  injunction  (to  do  something)  would  be 
of  no  use  whatsoever.  If  it  be  said  that  the  injunction, 
after  producing  the  knowledge  which  puts  an  end  (to  the 
phenomenal  world),  thereby  puts  an  end  to  the  pheno- 
menal world, — (then,  it  is  replied  that)  this  (knowledge) 
results  from  the  scriptural  texts31'8  on  which  you  yourself 

308.     Such  as  Erik.  Up.  III.  4.   2;      Chhand.  Up.  VI.  2,  i;  Brih.   Up.  IV. 


Adhik.  IV.  Sut.  4."]  SRi-l3HisHYA.  291 

rely,  and  that  there  is  therefore  no  use  for  this  .com- 
mandment. Moreover,  the  whole  phenomenal  world 
which  is  false,  and  is  distinct  from  the  Brahman,  is  stultified 
by  means  of  the  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of 
scriptural  sentences.  Consequently,  the  commandment, 
with  all  its  accessories,  is  itself  non  est.  If  the  phenome- 
nal world  happens  to  be  the  thing  which  is  to  be  destroyed, 
then,  does  the  commandment,  which  is  intended  to  bring 
about  the  destruction  of  the  phenomenal  world,  relate  to  that 
which  is  the  same  in  nature  as  the  B 'rah man  ?  Or  (does  it) 
relate  to  that  which  is  different  from  Him  ?  If  it  relate  to 
that  which  is  the  same  in  nature  as  the  Brahman  Himself, 
then,  (He  being  eternal),  the  very  existence  of  the  phenome- 
nal world  that  is  to  be  destroyed  would  indeed  be  impossi- 
ble, for  the  reason  that  the  destroyer  thereof  is  eternal;  again 
in  such  a  case  (that)  commandment  would  become  eternal, 
and  it  would  not  be  possible  for  it  to  be  accomplished  by 
working  out  its  immediate  object.  Or  (the  commandment 
may  relate  to)  that  which  is  different  in  nature  from  the  true 
nature  of  the  Brahman.  Since  that  (commandment)  is  to 
be  fulfilled  by  working  out  its  immediate  object  which 
consists  in  the  destruction  of  the  whole  phenomenal  world, 
the  person  who  has  to  carry  out  (the  commandment)  is 
also  destroyed  thereby.  Consequently,  there  is  no  estab- 
lishment (of  the  injunction)  for  want  of  a  (personal)  found- 
ation (for  it)  to  rest  upon.  Since,  by  merely  working  out 
that  immediate  object  (of  the  commandment)  which  con- 
sists in  the  destruction  of  the  phenomenal  world,  all  that 
is  different  from  the  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman  be- 
comes destroyed,  what  is  known  as  moksha  or  beatific 
release  cannot  be  the  final  fruit  obtained  by  (obeying) 

.j.  19;  &c,,  which  are  quoted   by  you       rddin   to   show    that    the     "Brahman 
i,  c,    the  Nishprapaiithikarananiyoga-       alone  is  real  and  the  world  unreal, 


292  SRi-B'HisHYA.     [Chap.  L  Part.  L 

the  commandment.309 

Moreover,  in  regard  to  such  a  performance  of  the 
commandment  as  leads  to  the  destruction  of  the  phenome- 
nal world,  there  are  to  be  found  no  details  of  the  pro- 
cedure to  be  adopted ;  and  whatever  (commandment)  is 
(thus)  unassisted  (by  the  details  of  procedure),  that  cannot 
be  carried  out.  Consequently,  there  can  be  no  perfor- 
mability  (in  relation  to  the  commandment  under  consi- 
deration). If  it  be  asked  how  there  is  (here)  the  absence 
of  the  details  of  procedure,  it  is  pointed  out  that  it  is  thus:— 
The  details  of  procedure  in  regard  to  this  (commandment) 
are  either  of  a  positive  character  or  of  a  negative  character. 
Such  (details  of  procedure)  as  are  of  a  positive  character 
are  divided  into  the  different  classes  of  those  that  bring 
about  the  corpus  of  the  performance  and  those  that  (merely) 
render  help  to  the  performance.  And  both  these  kinds  are 
not  admissible  (in  this  case).  Indeed,  like  the  stroke 
of  a  heavy  club,  &c.,  (which  destroy  a  pot  or  some 
such  thing),  there  is  not  seen  (here)  anything  that  is  (by 
its  operation)  capable  of  putting  an  end  to  the  whole 
phenomenal  world.  Therefore,  these  (details  of  procedure) 
are  not  (of  a  positive  character  and)  thus  perceivable.  Nor 
also  is  it  possible  for  a  completed  performance  to  stand  in 
need  of  any  accessory  help  for  the  production  of  the  thing 
to  be  accomplished  (by  that  performance)  ;  because  (in  such 
a  case),  owing  to  there  being  the  (associated)  existence 
of  the  thing  which  helps  (the  performance),  it  is  not 

309.  The  distinction  between  what  desirous  o.f  obtaining  Suarga  shall 
is  called  the  immediate  object  of  a  perform  the  Jyotishtoma  sacrifice. 
commandment  and  what  constitutes  Here  the  Jyolishtoma  sacrifice  is  the 
its  final 'fruit  may  well  be  illustrated  immediate  object  of  the  command- 
in  connection  with  the  Vedic  com-  inent,  and  Siuarga  is  its  final  fruit, 
uuindment  which  says  that  he  who  is 


Adhik.  IV.  $fit.  4.]  SRi-BHis.HYA.  293 

possible  to  (distinctly)  realise  the  essential  nature  of  such 
a  performance  (of  the  commandment)  as  consists  in  the 
destruction  of  the  whole  phenomenal  world.  If  it  be 
said  that  to  know  the  Brahman  to  be  without  a  second 
produces  the  corpus  of  the  performance,  which  consists 
in  the  destruction  of  the  phenomenal  world,  then,  by  that 
same  (knowledge),  final  release  which  is  in  the  form 
of  the  destruction  of  the  phenomenal  world  is  attained  ; 
accordingly,  it  has  been  already  stated  that,  (in  conse- 
quence), there  remains  nothing  to  be  accomplished  by 
the  performance,  &c.  If  (the  details  of  procedure 
are)  of  a  negative  character,  then  solely  owing  to  their 
being  non-existent,  they  do  not  produce  the  corpus 
of  the  performance ;  nor  do  they  help  it.  Therefore,  it 

is  not  possible  (to  hold)  that  this  injunction310  relates  to 
the  non-phenomenal  Brahman. 

Again,  another  (purvapakshin}**1  may  say  as  fol- 
lows:— 

No  doubt,  the  Vcddnta  passages  are  of  no  authority 
as  relating  to  the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman,  the  idea 
corresponding  to  whom  is  already  naturally  established. 
Nevertheless,  the  true  nature  of  the  Brahman  is  cer- 
tainly proved  (by  means  of  them).  How  ?  On  the 
strength  of  the  commandment  enjoining  meditation. 
Thus,  indeed,  do  the  scriptures  declare : — "  Verily, 

my  dear  one,  the  Self  has  to  be  seen, has 

to  be  steadily  meditated  upon,"—  \Brih.  Up.lL^.  5-];312 
"  The  Self  who  is  devoid  of  sins;...  He  has  to  be  sought 
after,He  has  to  be  specially  desired  and  known". — [Gfahand. 

310.  Brih.  Up.  III.  4.  2.  &c.  ni\of>ar&lin. 

311.  This  objector  is  the  Dhyana-  312.  Vide  also  ttri/i.  Up.  IV.  $•  6. 


294  SRI-13HA.SHYA.      \Chap.  L  Part.  L 

Up.  VIII.  7.  i.];  "Meditate  on  Him  as  the  self  itself." 
[Bnh.  Up.  I.  4.  7.];  "Let  him  meditate  upon  the  Self 
alone  as  the  object  to  be  attained."  \_Brih.  Up.  I.  4.  15.]. 
Here  the  commandment  which  certainly  relates  to  medi- 
tation implies  the  thing  to  be  meditated  upon  ;  because 
the  meditation  which  forms  the  special  object  of  that  ( com- 
mandment) is  itself  capable  of  being  defined  solely  by 
means  of  the  thing  to  be  meditated  upon.  And  that 
thing  to  be  meditated  upon  is  the  Self,  as  it  is  shown  by  the 
scriptural  passages3 '  3  relied  upon  by  yourselves.  If  it  be 
asked  of  what  nature  He  (/.  e.  the  Self)  is,  then  (it  is  replied 
that),  by  way  of  stating  the  peculiarity  of  His  true  nature, 
the  following  .and  other  similar  passages  become  authori- 
tative, as  being  complementary  to  the  injunction  relat- 
ing to  meditation,  and  that,  therefore,  those  (passages) 
do,  indeed,  denote  by  implication  the  true  nature  of 
the  Brahman  who  is  included  within  the  body  of  the 
meditation  which  forms  the  special  object  of  the  in- 
junction (here): — "The  Brahman  is  Existence,  Know- 
ledge, Infinity." — \_Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.];  "Existence 
alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was  in  the  beginning."- 
\Qihand.  Up.  VI.  2.  i.].  Therefore,  by  means  of  the 
following  passages,  namely,  "One  only  without  a  second" 
—\Chhdnd.  Up.  VI.  2.  i.];  "That is  Existence, He  is  the 
Self,  That  thou  art,  O  Svetaketu."—  \Qihdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.]; 
"There  is  nothing  here  that  is  many  and  varied." — \_Brih. 
Up.  IV.  4.  19.];— as  well  as  by  means  of  other  passages, 
it  is  made  out  that  only  the  essential  nature  of  the  Brah- 
man is  undoubtedly  real,  and  that  all  else  that  is  different 
from  Him  is  unreal.  Distinction  is  apprehended  by 

313.  See  BfiA.  Up.  III.  4,  2  11.4.  karananiyogavCidin  who  has  quoted 
5.  &  IV.  5.  6.  The  Dhydnaniyoga-  Brih.  Up,  III.  4-  2,  wherein  the  Self 
vadin  criticises  the  Nishprapailchi-  is  mentioned. 


Adhik.  IV.  Sfit.  ,/.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  295 

perception  and  the  other  means  of  proof,  as  well  as  by 
means  of  the  sastra  which  relates  to  works  and  rests  upon 
distinctions.  When  there  is  mutual  contradiction  between 
distinction  and  non-distinction,  then,  since  it  is  also  possible 
for  the  perception  of  distinctions  to  be  based  upon 
the  beginninglessly  old  ignorance  (or  avidya),  it  is  decided 
that  the  absence  of  distinctions  alone  is  the  reality.  It 
being  so,  by  means  of  the  injunction  relating  to  such  a 
meditation  of  the  Brahman  as  gives  rise  to  the  direct 
perception  of  Him,  that  final  release  is  obtained  which  is 
the  same  as  becoming  the  Brahman,  who  is  devoid  of  all 
the  manifold  distinctions  due  to  ignorance,  who  is  without 
a  second  and  is  uniform  intelligence.  Moreover,  it  cannot 
be  proved  with  the  help  of  Vcddnta  passages  that  it  is 
possible  (for  us)  to  become  the  Brahman  merely  by  means 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  scriptural 
sentences ;  because  such  a  thing  is  not  known  to  take  place, 
and  because  also  the  (actual)  perception  of  a  variety  of  dis- 
tinctions continues  to  persist  (even  after  the  acquisition 
of  such  a  knowledge).  Under  these  circumstances,  the  in- 
junction314 regarding'  hearing',  &c.,315  becomes  purpose- 
less. 

(Here),  again,  it  may  be  said3 ' G  thus: — It  is  seen  that 
the  fear  which  is  due  to  the  (falsely  perceived)  snake  ceases 
by  means  of  the  teaching — "  This  is  a  rope,  (but)  not  a 

314.  This  injunction  is    "Brih.    Up.  that  the  ISrahman  alone  is  real  and 
If.    4.    5     or  IV.  5.  6    wherein  it   is  all  else  unreal  ;  in  the    same    way  in 
declared  that    "  The  Self  has  to  be  which  the  snake  falsely  perceived  in 
heard,  to  be  reflected    upon,   and  to  a  rope  is  unreal  while  the  rope  alone 
be  steadily  meditated  upon."  is  real.   The    Dhyananiyogaradin    here 

315.  '  Hearing',  &c.,  1\  e.  'hearing  ',  states   in    anticipation   the    objection 
reflection,  and  steady  meditation.  from  the  stand-point  of  the  Adwaitin 

316.  This  is  the  well  known  exam-  before  refuting  it. 
pie  of  the  Adwaihn  who  is  of  opinion 


296  £RI-BHISHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

snake."  And  like  the  snake  (falsely  perceived)  in  the 
rope,  the  bondage  of  the  world  also  is  of  a  false  nature. 
Consequently,  it  must  be  capable  of  being  stultified  by 
knowledge.  Therefore,  it  is  proper  (to  hold)  that  freedom 
from  such  (bondage)  results  wholly  from  the  knowledge 
derived  from  scriptural  passages,  but  not  from  (working  out) 
any  commandment.  If  final  release  be  capable  of  being 
accomplished  under  an  injunction,  then  there  would  be  non- 
eternity  in  relation  to  it  also,  as  (there  is)  in  the  case  of 
Swarga,  &c.  But  the  eternal  character  of  final  release  is,  in- 
deed, acknowledged  by  all  the  disputants. 

Moreover,  the  merit  and  the  demerit  (of  works)  have 
the  power  of  giving  rise  to  their  effects  only  in  the 
way  of  producing  such  bodies  as  are  fit  for  the  enjoyment 
of  those  particular  effects.  Therefore,  they  (viz.  merit  and 
demerit)  must  inevitably  possess  the  character  of  giv- 
ing rise  to  samsara,3*7  the  nature  of  which  consists 
in  an  association  (of  the  individual  souls)  with  the  four3 '  8 
kinds  of  bodies  commencing  with  Brahma  and  ending  with 
the  immovable  things.  Therefore,  final  release  is  not 
capable  of  being  accomplished  by  merit.  To  the  same 
effect  is  the  following  scriptural  passage  : — "  To  him  who 
is  and  has  a  body,  there  is  no  destruction  of  the  pleasing 
and  the  unpleasing  ;  the  pleasing  and  the  unpleasing  touch 
not  him  who  is  and  has  no  body."  [C/}hdnd.  Up.  VIII. 
12.  i.].  Thus,  regarding  final  release  the  nature  of  which 
is  to  be  without  a  body,  it  is  declared  that  there  are  no 
pleasing  or  unpleasing  effects  produced  by  merit  and  de- 
merit. Therefore,  it  is  made  out  that  the  unembodied 

317.  Samsara  is  the  circuit  of  mun-  318.  The   four  kinds  of  bodies  are 

dane  existence.     In  other  words,  it  is  those  of    gods,    men,    lower   animals 

the  ever-recurring  succession  of  births  and  of  immovable  things   (Sthdvarj). 

and  deaths,  and  the  consequent  con-  Vide  supra   p.  154.    Cf.   also    V.  Dh, 

tinuance  of  the  bondage  of  the  soul.  C.  20. 


Adhik.  IV.  Sat.  ./.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  297 

condition  cannot  be  accomplished  by  merit.  And  in  the 
way  in  which  a  particular  result  is  to  be  accomplished 
by  means  of  a  particular  commandment,  the  unembodied 
condition  cannot  be  accomplished  by  means  of  the  injunc- 
tion relating  to  meditation  ;  because  the  unembodied  condi- 
tion constitutes  the  essential  nature  (of  the  self)  and 
is  not,  therefore,  a  thing  which  is  to  be  accomplished.  The 
following  and  other  scriptural  texts  declare  the  same  thing 
thus  :— "  Knowing  Him  to  be  the  unembodied  One  who 
exists  in  non-eternal  bodies,  (knowing  Him)  to  be  the  Self 
which  is  great  and  omnipresent,  the  wise  man  does  not 
grieve." — \Kath.  Up.  II.  22.];  "  Indeed  He  is  pure,  with- 
out life,  without  mind." — \Mund.  Up.  II.  i.  2.];  "Indeed 
this  Person  is  devoid  of  attachment," — \Brih.  Up.  IV.  3. 15.]. 
Therefore,  final  release  which  is  the  same  as  the  unembo- 
died condition  is  eternal,  and  is,  in  consequence,  incapable 
of  being  produced  by  .merit.  To  the  same  effect  is  the 
following  scriptural  passage :— "  That  which  is  other  than 
merit  and  demerit,  that  which  is  other  than  this  effect  and 
cause,  that  which  is  other  than  the  past  and  the  future, 
say,  if  thou  seest  that."  [Kath.  Up.  II.  14.]. 

Again,  it  is  surely  impossible  to  predicate  in  regard  to 
final  release  that  capability  of  being  accomplished  (anew), 
which  (accomplishing)  is  four-fold  in  the  forms  of  origina- 
tion, attainment,  modification,  and  refinement.  It  is  not 
capable  of  being  originated;  because  final  release,  being  of 
the  nature  of  the  Brahman,  is  itself  characterised  by  eter- 
nity. Nor  is  it  capable  of  being  attained  (anew)  ;  because 
the  Brahman  Himself  is  of  the  nature  of  the  self,  and 
hence  it  (viz.  final  release)  has  the  character  of  being  ever 
attained.  Nor  also  is  it  capable  of  being  modified ;  be- 
cause non-eternity  would  result  to  it  thereby,  as  (there 
is)  in  the  case  of  curds,  &c.  Nor  again  is  it  capable  of 
38 


[Chap.  I.  Part.  /. 

being  refined.     Refinement,  indeed,  is  accomplished  either 
by  the  removal  of  defects  or  by  the  addition  of  excellence. 
Surely  it  (viz.  refinement)  cannot  be  (produced  here)  by 
the  removal  of  defects,  on  account  of  the  eternal  purity 
of  the  Brahman.    Nor  is  it  (viz.  refinement)  to  be  (ac- 
complished here)  by  the  addition  of  excellence,  because 
(the  Brahman  is)  of  the  nature  of  such  excellence  as  cannot 
be  added  to.     By  reason  of  its  being  eternally  immodifia- 
ble,  it  cannot  form  the  object  of  any  action  which  takes 
place  either  in  itself  or  takes  place  in  others;  thus  no  refine- 
ment can  be  effected  (in  relation  to  it),  as  (it  is  effected)  in 
the  case  of  mirrors,  &c.,  by  the  action  of  rubbing  ;  and  the 
self  is  not  purified  by  the  act  of  bathing,  &c.,  which  relate 
to  the  body  ;  but  (what  is  so  purified  is)  that  egoistic  agent 
which  is   caught  hold  of  by  ignorance  (or  avidya)  and 
is  in  association  with  that  (body)  :  and  to  him  (/.  c.  to  that 
agent)  alone  belongs  the  enjoyment  of  the  result  of  that 
(act  of  bathing).     But  the  egoistic  agent  himself  is  not  the 
self,  because  he  has  that  fself)  for  his  witness.     Similarly, 
the  words  of  the   scriptural  hymn  also  declare  :— "  One  of 
them  eats  the  sweet  pippala  fruit,  while  the  other  shines  in 
splendour  without  eating  at  all."  [Mund.  Up.  III.  1. 1.].319 
Moreover,  the  essential  nature  of  the  self  is  distinctly  made 
out  to  be  different  from  the  egoistic  agent  who  is  caught 
hold  of  by  ignorance  (or  avidya), — (it  is   made   out)  to 
possess  such  excellence  as  cannot  be  added  to,   to  be 
eternally  pure    and  to   be    immodifiable,  from    the   fol- 
lowing scriptural   passages  :— "The  wise  say  that  what 
is   associated  with  the   body,  the   senses,   and  the   mind, 
forms  the    enjoyer." — \_Kath.    Up.   III.   4.];     "The    one 
Lord  is  hidden  in  all  beings,  pervades  all,  and  is  the  inter- 

319.  See  also  Svet.  Up.  IV.  6, 


Adhik.  IV.  Sut.  ./.]  SRI-BHA.SHYA.  299 

nal  Self  of  all  beings ;  He  is  the  presiding  deity  over  ac- 
tions, and  lives  in  all  beings  ;  He  is  the  witness,  the  intel- 
ligent one,  who  is  absolute  and  devoid  of  qualities." — [Svet. 
Up.  VI.  ii.  &  Brah.  Up.  III.];  "He  understood  Him  to 
be  bright,  bodiless,  scatheless,  without  sinews,  pure,  and 
untouched  by  evil." — [7r.  Up.  VIII.].  Hence,  owing  to 
its  being  of  the  nature  of  the  Self,  final  release  is  not  a 
thing  that  can  (thus)  be  accomplished  (anew). 

It  may  be  asked — If  so,  what  is  it  that  is  accomplished 
by  means  of  the  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of 
sentences?  We  say  (in  reply)  that  it  is  merely  the  removal 
of  the  obstruction  to  final  release  (that  is  so  accomplished). 
To  the  same  effect  are  the  following  and  other  scriptural 
passages  :— "  Thou  art  our  Father  who  enablest  us  to  cross 
to  the  other  shore  which  is  far  away  from  Ignorance." — \Pr 
Up.  VI.  8.];  "  I  have,  indeed,  learnt  the  Sastras  thus.  He 
who  knows  the  Self  crosses  the  ocean  of  misery,  only  with 
the  help  of  venerable  teachers  like  yourself.  Venerable 
sir,  I  who  am  so  (destitute  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Self) 
feel  very  grieved.  May  you,  venerable  sir,  enable  me,  who 
am  so,  to  cross  over  to  the  other  shore  (of  the  ocean  of 
misery)." — \Qhhand.  Up.  VII.  i.  3.];  "To  him  whose  sins 
have  been  destroyed,  the  venerable  Sanatkumara  shows 
the  other  shore  of  darkness." — \_CJj,hand.  Up.  VII.  26.  2.]. 
Therefore,  the  removal  of  the  obstructions  to  that  final  re- 
lease, which  is  certainly  eternal,  is  accomplished  by  means, 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  scriptural 
sentences.  But  (such)  removal,  although  capable  of  being 
accomplished  anew,  has  itself  the  nature  of  that  non-exist- 
ence320 which  follows  destruction  ;  and  hence  it  cunnot 
have  an  end.  The  following  and  other  scriptural 

3-!O.   Vide  snfifit  |>.  49.  n,  37. 


3otf  SRI-BHISHYA.    [Chap.  L  Part.  1. 

statements,  namely,  "  He  who  knows  the  Brahman  be- 
comes the  Brahman  indeed." — \Mund.  Up.  III.  2.  9.], 
"  He  who  thus  knows  Him  transcends  death." — [Svet.  Up. 
III.  8.  &  VI.  15.], — declare  that  final  release  follows  imme- 
diately after  the  knowledge  (of  the  Brahman),  and  (so') 
oppose  the  interposition  of  any  injunction  (bearing 
upon  meditation).  Moreover,  it  (viz.  final  release  or 
the  attainment  of  the  Brahman)  does  not  acquire  the 
character  of  a  produced  effect,  either  by  being  the  object 
of  the  act  of  knowing,  or  by  -being  the  object  of  the  act 
of  meditation ;  because  such  a  character  of  being  the 
object  of  both  (these  acts)  is  negatived  in  the  following 
and  in  other  scriptural  passages: — "  It  is  certainly  different 
from  the  known,  and  is  also  different  from  the  knower."- 
[Kcn.  Up.  I.  3.];  "  By  Whom  one  knows  all  this,  by  what 
is  He  to  be  known?"—  \Brih.  Up.  II.  4.  14.  & IV.  5.  15.]; 
"  Know  thou  That  alone  to  be  the  Brahman,  not  this 
which  they  worship." — \Ken.  Up.l.  4,  5,  6,  7  &  8.].  By 
this  much,  it  does  not  also  follow  that  the  sdstras  have 
no  object  whatsoever;  because  the  sdstras  relate  to 
the  removal  of  distinctions  manufactured  by  ignorance. 
Indeed,  the  sdstras  do  not  deal  with  the  Brahman  as 
possessing  definitely  discernible  characteristics  ;  but,  while 
declaring  the  true  nature  of  the  internal  (subjective)  self 
which  is  no  (exterral)  object,  they  put  an  end  to  the  distinc- 
tions which  are  in  the  form  of  the  knowledge,  the  knower, 
and  the  object  of  knowledge,  and  which  are  all  manufactur- 
ed by  ignorance  (or  avidyd).  To  the  same  effect,  there  is, 
among  others,  the  following  sdstraic  injunction  : — "  Thou 
shalt  not  see  the  seer  of  the  sight,  &c."  [J3rih.  Up.  III. 
4.  2.].  Further,  it  should  not  be  (supposed)  that  the 
cessation  of  bondage  results  wholly  from  knowledge, 
and  that  consequently  the  injunction  relating  to  'hear- 


Adhik.  IV.  Sut.  ./.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  30! 

ing ',  &c.,  is  purposeless ;  because  they  (viz.  'hear- 
ing ',  reflection  and  steady  meditation)  form  the  means 
of  understanding  the  syntactical  meaning  of  scriptural  sen- 
tences, by  causing  us  to  turn  away  from  all  such  distrac- 
tions as  relate  to  things  other  than  the  Brahman  and 
are  (all)  due  to  our  own  nature. 

Again  it  should  not  be  urged  that  the  cessation  of  bond- 
age is  not  seen  to  take  place  by  means  of  knowledge  alone  ; 
because  bondage  is  of  a  false  nature,  and  it  is  not  hence 
possible  for  it  to  remain  (even)  subsequently  to  (the  birth  of) 
knowledge.  For  this  same  reason  it  is  not  right  to  say  that 
the  cessation  of  bondage  takes  place  only  after  the  falling 
off  of  the  body.  Indeed,  the  cessation  of  the  fear  due  to 
the  falsely  perceived  serpent  does  not  require  any  destrug- 
tion  of  a  serpent  beyond  the  (mere)  knowledge  of  the  real- 
ity of  the  rope.  If  the  association  of  the  body  (with  the  self) 
were  of  the  nature  of  a  reality,  then  there  would  be  the 
necessity  for  its  destruction.  But  that  (association),  being 
distinct  from  the  Brahman,  is  not  of  the  nature  of  a  real- 
ity. It  is  known  that,  to  him  whose  bondage  has  not  ceas- 
ed, knowledge  is  not  born  ;  because  the  effect  of  know- 
ledge is  not  seen  (in  relation  to  him).  Therefore,  whether 
the  body  exists  or  not,  immediately  after  knowing  the 
syntactical  meaning  of  sentences,  one  is  undoubtedly  releas- 
ed (from  bondage). 

Consequently,  final  release  is  not  capable  of  being 
accomplished  by  the  injunction  relating  to  meditation  ;  and 
hence,  the  Brahman  is  not  proved  to  be  dependent  upon 
the  injunction  relating  to  meditation  ;  but  (He  is  establish- 
ed) by  means  of  the  following  scriptural  passages  which 
altogether  relate  to  Him  : — "  The  Brahman  is  Exist- 
ence, Knowledge,  Infinity." — \Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.]; 
"That  thou  art."— \_Qihdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.];  "This  self 


302  SRI-BHISHYA.     \Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

is  the  Brahman'.'—  \Brih.  Up.  II.  5.  19.  &  IV.  4.  5.].a21 

This  (position)8  2  2  is  not  right ;  because  it  is  not  possible 
for  the  cessation  of  bondage  to  take  place  merely  by  means 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sentences. 
No  doubt,  the  bondage  which  is  of  a  false  nature  is  cap- 
able of  being  stultified  by  knowledge.  Nevertheless,  as 
that  bondage  is  directly  perceived,  it  cannot  be  stultified 
by  that  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sentences 
which  is  of  an  indirect  (abstract)  nature ;  because,  when 
the  direct  perception  of  a  snake  is  existent  in  relation 
to  the  rope  and  other  such  things,  it  is  not  seen  that  the 
removal  of  fear  takes  place  merely  by  that  indirect  (ab- 
stract) knowledge,  which  is  contradictory  of  the  serpent 
and  is  produced  by  the  teaching  of  trustworthy  persons 
to  the  effect — "  This  is  no  serpent,  this  is  a  rope."  And 
the  teaching  of  trustworthy  persons  becomes  the  cause 
of  the  removal  of  fear,  only  by  happening  to  be  the  cause 
of  such  activity  as  results  from  the  direct  perception  of 
the  reality  of  things.  Accordingly,  a  person  who  has 
fled  away,  taking  fright  at  the  sight  of  the  serpent 
falsely  perceived  in  a  rope,  begins  to  see  the  reality  of 
things  by  means  of  the  teaching  of  trustworthy  persons  to 
the  effect — "This  is  no  serpent,  this  is  a  rope";  then 
he  sees  that  (rope)  itself  directly,  and  then  becomes  free 
from  fear.  Moreover,  it  is  not  right  to  say  that  verbal 
testimony  of  itself  produces  such  knowledge  as  has  the 
nature  of  direct  perception ;  because  it  (viz.  verbal  testi- 
mony) does  not  possess  the  character  of  an  organ  of  sense. 
Among  the  apparatuses  of  knowledge,  the  senses  alone  form 

321.  Vide  also  Mand.  Up.  I.  2.  tion  against    his  views  raised    above 

322.  Here  begins    the    Dhydnani-      by  the  Adwailin, 
yogaviidin 's  refutation     of    the  objcc- 


Adhik.  IV.  Sr/t.  y.]   SRI-BHISHYA.  303 

the  means  of  direct  perception.  And  in  the  case  of  that 
person  whose  sins  have  not  been  destroyed  by  the  perfor- 
mance of  works  without  attachment  to  their  fruits,  and 
who  has  not  turned  away  from  external  objects  by  '  hear- 
ing', reflection,  and  steady  meditation,  the  Vedic  text 
alone  cannot  produce  direct  knowledge.  Even  when 
(that)  person  has  the  obstructions  fin  the  way  of  his  ac- 
quiring knowledge)  removed,  and  is  devoted  to  those  things 
(viz.  'hearing',  reflection,  and  steady  meditation),  it  is  not 
possible  (for  him)  to  have  that  (direct  knowledge  from 
verbal  testimony  alone) ;  because  the  senses,  which  (alone) 
form  the  special  apparatus  of  (direct)  knowledge,  are  not 
seen  to  transgress  their  limitations  in  regard  to  what  con- 
stitutes their  object. 

Moreover,  meditation  is  no  means  of  knowing  the 
syntactical  meaning  of  sentences;  because,  (in  such  a  case), 
there  will  arise  the  fallacy  of  reciprocal  dependence, — in  as 
much  as  the  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sen- 
tences must  be  born  before  there  can  be  the  meditation  of 
its  object,  and  meditation  must  be  completed  before  there 
can  be  the  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sen- 
tences. And  it  should  not  be  ("urged)  that  meditation  and 
the  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sentences  re- 
late to  different  things.  If  they  did  so,  then  meditation 
would  be  no  means  of  producing  the  knowledge  of  the 
syntactical  meaning  of  sentences.  Indeed,  the  medita- 
tion of  one  thing  cannot  lead  to  the  fruition  of  another 
thing.  It  is  unavoidable  (to  hold)  that  meditation,  which 
is  the  same  as  an  unbroken  flow  of  memory  relating  to 
a  thing  that  is  known,  has  invariably  to  be  preceded  by 
the  knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sentences ; 
because  there  is  no  other  means  by  which  the  knowledge 
relating  to  the  Brahman,  who  is  the  object  of  medi- 


304  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chop.  I.  Part.  I. 

tation,    can  be  produced.  Further  it  is  not  right 

to  say  that  the  knowledge  which  is  at  the  root  of  medita- 
tion is  derived  from  a  different  set  of  passages,  while  the 
knowledge  which  relates  to  the  removal  (of  ignorance)  is 
derived  from  passages  like — "  That  thou  art."  \_Chhand.  Up. 
VI.  8.  7.].  Does  this  knowledge  which  is  at  the  root  of 
meditation,  and  is  derived  from  a  different  set  of  passages, 
relate  to  the  same  thing  as  that  to  which  the  knowledge 
derived  from  passages  like — "  That  thou  art",  &c.,  relates  ? 
Or  does  it  relate  to  a  different  thing  ?  If  that  (knowledge) 
relates  to  the  same  thing  (as  this),  there  results  the  already 
stated  fallacy  of  reciprocal  dependence.  If  that  knowledge 
relates  to  a  different  thing  (from  what  this  knowledge 
relates  to),  then  it  is  not  possible  to  prove  that  by  means 
of  meditation  there  arises  the  fruition  of  what  this  (latter 
knowledge)  relates  to.  Further,  meditation  pre-supposes 
many  phenomenal  entities  like  the  object  of  medita- 
tion, and  the  agent  of  meditation,  &c.  Consequent- 
ly it  is  of  no  use,  so  far  as  we  see,  in  producing  that 
knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sentences  which 
relates  to  the  oneness  of  the  self  with  the  non-phenomenal 
Brahman.  Therefore,  the  commandments  enjoining  '  hear- 
ing', reflection,  and  steady  meditation  are  certainly  useless 
to  him  who  maintains  (the  view)  that  the  destruction  of 
ignorance  (or  avidya)  takes  place  merely  by  means  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  syntactical  meaning  of  sentences. 

For  whatsoever  reason,  direct  (perceptual)  knowledge 
(of  things)  is  not  produced  by  means  of  scriptural  passages, 
and  ignorance  (or  avidya)  remains,  in  consequence,  unde- 
stroyed  by  means  of  the  knowledge  of  the  syntactical 
meaning  of  scriptural  sentences, — for  that  very  same  rea- 
son, the  idea  -that  (the  self  s)  release  from  the  bondage  (of 
samsfira)  takes  place  even  while  in  this  life  is  also  driven 


Adhik.  IV.  Sitt.  ./.]     SRI-BHISHYA.  305 

away  (as  untrue).  And  what  is  this  release  from  bondage 
even  while  in  this  life  ?  It  may  be  said  that  it  is  release 
resulting  (to  the  self)  even  in  the  embodied  condition  ;  but 
then  such  a  statement  will  be  self-contradictory  in  meaning 
like  the  statement— " My  mother  is  barren";  because  it 
has  been  declared  by  yourself,  with  the  help  of  scriptural 
passages,  that  to  be  embodied  is  to  be  in  bondage,  and  that 
to  become  unembodied  is  to  obtain  release.  And  again  it  is 
not  (right  to  say)  that,  when  the  appearance  of  the  associ- 
ation (of  the  self)  with  the  body  is  in  existence,  then,  who- 
ever has  the  belief  that  (such  an)  appearance  is  false, — to 
him  there  is  the  destruction  of  (this)  association  with  the 
body.  If  (his)  association  with  the  body  is  destroyed  by 
the  belief  that  it  is  false,  how  can  there  be  release  to  him 
even  when  he  has  the  body  ?  That  release  (from  embodi- 
ment) which  results  to  one  after  death  is  also  undeniably 
the  destruction  of  the  false  appearance  of  one's  being  asso- 
ciated with  a  bod}r.  Then  what  is  the  peculiarity  about 
this  release  which  takes  place  even  while  in  this  life  ? 
Moreover,  it  may  be  said  that,  in  whomsoever  this  false 
appearance  of  his  (self)  having  a  body  persists  even  after 
the  stultification  (of  that  falsity),  just  like  the  false  percep- 
tion of  two  moons  (persisting  even  when  one  knows  that 
there  is  only  one  moon), — (it  may  be  said  that)  such  a  per- 
son is  he  who  is  released  even  while  in  this  life  :  if  so,  it  is 
replied  that  it  cannot  be  so  ;  because  this  stultifying  know- 
ledge relates  to  all  things  other  than  the  Brahman.  To- 
gether with  the  false  appearance  of  (the  self)  having  a  body, 
the  blemishes  resulting  from  ignorance  (or  avidya)  and  from 
'  work '  (or  karma)  and  from  other  such  things,  which  are  all 
the  causes  (of  the  false  appearance  of  the  self  s  embodiment 
itself),  are  all  stultified  by  that  (stultifying  knowledge) 
alone  ;  and  thus,  it  is  not  possible  to  say  that  (any) 
39 


$of>  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

stultified  thing  does  persist.  But  in  the  case  of  (the  percep- 
tion of)  two  moons  (when  there  is  in  reality  only  one 
moon),  that  defect,  which  is  the  cause  of  such  a  false 
appearance,  is  no  object  of  the  stultifying  knowledge  which 
is  to  the  effect  that  the  moon  is  only  one  ;  and  hence  it  is 
not  thereby  stultified.  Consequently  the  persistence  of  the 
false  appearance  of  two  moons  is  proper.  Moreover,  this 
scriptural  text,  which  says — "  So  long  as  he  is  not  freed 
(from  the  body),  so  long  there  is  delay  ;  then  he  will  be 
blessed." — [Clihdnd.  Up.  VI.  14.  2.], — declares  that,  in  the 
case  of  him  who  observes  the  form  of  worship  known  as 
the  Sadvidya,3-3  final  release  stands  in  need  of  only  the 
falling  off  of  (his)  body;  and  thus  it  prohibits  the  (occurrence 
of)  release  even  while  in  this  life.  This  aforesaid  release 
even  while  in  this  life  has  been  discarded  by  Apastamba 
also  in  the  following  aphorisms  :— "  Giving  up  the  Vedas, 
this  world,  and  the  other,  one  should  seek  the  Self.  It  may 
be  said  that,  on  knowledge  arising,  there  is  the  attainment 
of  bliss;  but  that  is  negatived  by  the  scriptures.  If  the  at- 
tainment of  bliss  were  possible  on  knowledge  arising,  then, 
even  here,  one  should  not  have  miser)r.  By  this,  the  other 
(also)  has  been  explained."  [Ap.  Dh.  II.  21.  13  to  17.]. 
By  these  (aphorisms),  (the  opinion  that)  final  release 
(occurs)  by  means  of  mere  knowledge  alone  is  also  discard- 
ed. Therefore  that  release,  which  has  the  nature  of  the 
removal  of  all  distinctions,  does  not  result  to  one  who 
is  alive.  Consequently,  bondage  comes  to  an  end  only 
by  means  of  that  injunction  which  relates  to  meditation, 
and  which  produces  the  direct  knowledge  of  the  Brah- 

323    This  is   a    form    of  worship  meditated   upon   so   that  He  may  be 

taught   to   Svetaketu   by  his  father.  realised   as   the  self-existent   Soul  of 

Vide  Chhdnd.   Up.  VI.,  wherein  it  is  the  whole  universe, 
given  that  the  Supreme  Self  is  to  be 


Adhik.  IV.  Sut.  4.]   SRI-BHASHYA.  307 

man.  No  non-eternal  character  can   result  to  final 

release  simply  on  the  score  that  it  is  accomplished 
in  accordance  with  an  injunction  ;  because  what  is  (so)  ac- 
complished is  merely  the  removal  of  the  obstructions  fto  fin- 
al release).  Further,  the  cessation  of  bondage  is  not  caused 
directly  by  the  injunction  (itself)  ;  but  (it  is  caused)  by 
the  direct  knowledge  of  the  Brahman  who  is  non-pheno- 
menal, and  who  is  homogeneous  intelligence.  And  the 
injunction  produces  this  direct  knowledge.  If  it  be  asked 
how  an  injunction  ma}'  be  the  cause  of  producing  know- 
ledge, it  is  asked  in  reply,— how  do  your  'works'  performed 
without  attachment  to  results  form  the  cause  of  the  pro- 
duction of  knowledge  ?  Tf  you  say,  (that  they  do  so), 
through  the  purification  of  the  mind, — I  say  that  it  is  the 
same  in  my  case  also.  It  may  be  said  again  (by  you) 
that,  in  your  case,  knowledge  is  produced,  by  means  of 
the  sdsiras,  in  the  mind  which  is  (already)  pure,  but  that, 
in  my  case,  that  thing  has  (indeed)  to  be  pointed  out  which 
forms  the  apparatus  for  producing  knowledge  in  the  mind 
which  is  purified  by  the  injunction.  If  so,  we  say  in  reply 
that  that  mind,  which  is  purified  by  the  injunction 
relating  to  meditation,  is  itself  the  means  for  the  pro- 
duction of  knowledge.  If  it  be  asked  how  this  is  made 
out,  we  ask  in  reply, —  how  is  it  made  out  in  your  case 
that  the  mind  becomes  pure  by  means  of  'works'  and  that 
by  means  of '  hearing  ',  reflection,  and  steady  meditation, 
the  sastras  produce  that  knowledge,  which  is  stultifica- 
tory  (of  ignorance),  in  the  pure  mind  of  him  alone  who 
has  turned  away  from  all  other  tilings  than  the  Brahman  ? 
You  may  answer  that  it  is  (so)  made  out  by  means  of  the 
following  and  other  scriptural  passages  : — "  They  desire  to 
know  (the  Brahman]  by  sacrifices,  by  giving  gifts,  by  reli- 
gious austerities  associated  with  fasting." — [/>/'///.  L7h. 


308  SRi-BtilSHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

IV.  4.  22.];    "(The  Self)  has  to  be heard,  has  to  be 

reflected  upon,  has  to  be  steadily  meditated  upon."- 
[Brih.  Up.  IV.  5.  6.];  "  He  who  knows  the  Brahman 
becomes  the  Brahman  indeed." — [Mund.  Up.  III.  2.  9.]. 
If  so,  I  reply  that,  in  my  case  also,  in  accordance  with  the 
following  among  other  scriptural  passages,  namely — "  (The 
Self)  has  to  be... heard,  has  to  be  reflected  upon,  has  to  be 
steadily  meditated  upon." — [Brih.  Up.  II.  4.  5.  &IV.  5.6.]; 
"  He  who  knows  the  Brahman  attains  the  Highest." 
\_Tailt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.] ;  "  He  (/.  <?.  the  Lord)  is  not  apprehend- 
ed by  the  eye  nor  even  by  speech." — [Mund.  Up.  III.  i. 
8.] ; "  But  He  (the  Lord)  is  apprehended  by  the  pure  mind." 
— [  ?  ];  "He  (the  Lord)  is  apprehended-  by  the 
heart,  by  steady  wisdom,  and  by  the  mind." — \Kath.  Up. 
VI.  p.];324 — it  is  made  out  that  the  mind  becomes  pure 
by  means  of  the  injunction  relating  to  meditation,  and 
that  the  mind  (so)  purified  gives  rise  to  the  direct  know- 
ledge of  the  Brahman.  Thus  it  (viz.  the  whole  argument) 
is  faultless. 

If  you  say  that  by  means  of  the  scriptural  passage— 
"  Not  this  which' they  worship!" — [Ken.  Up.  1. 4.  et  seq],— 
the  character  of  being  the  object  of  meditation  is  denied 
(in  relation  to  the  Brahman],  it  is  replied  that  it  cannot  be 
so.  The  fact  of  the  Brahman  being  the  object  of  medita- 
tion is  not  denied  (herein),  but  the  fact  that  the  Brahman 
is  distinct  from  the  world  is  declared  in  this  passage.  The 
meaning  of  this  passage325  is  this: — "This  world  which 
people3'-6  here  worship, — that  is  not  the  Brahman.  Know 

324.  Vide  also  Suet,  Up.  III.  13.  &      brought  into  existence  ;  but  not  this 
M.Ndr.  I.  ii.  which  they  worship."     Vide  Ken,  Up, 

325.  The  whole  of  this  passage  runs      I.  4.  et  seq. 

as  follows  : — "  Know  thou  Him  alone  326.  Literally,  living  beings  (prani- 

to  be  the  Brahman  who   is   not  made       nak), 
out  by  speech  and  by  whom  speech  U 


Adhik.  IV.  Sru.  4.}  SRI-BHISHYA. 

thou  Him  alone  to  be  the  Brahman  who  is  not  made  out 
by  speech,  and  by  whom  speech  is  brought  into  existence." 
Otherwise,  the  statement — 'Know  thou  Him  alone  to  be 
the  Brahman — would  be  contradicted,  and  the  injunction 
enjoining  meditation  would  become  purposeless. 

Therefore  the  whole  of  the  bondage,  which  is  made  up 
of  unreality  and  is  of  the  nature  of  the  phenomenal  world 
consisting  of  the  knower,  the  known,  &c.,  comes  to  an  end 
by  means  of  that  very  injunction  which  enjoins  medi- 
tation, and  the  result  of  which  is  the  direct  realisation  of 
the  Brahman. 

It  is  also  asserted  by  some3  97  that  there  is  no  contra- 
diction between  distinction  and  non-distinction.  This  is 
improper  ;  for  distinction  and  non-distinction  cannot  meet 
together  in  one  and  the  same  thing,  as  heat  and  cold,  light 
and  darkness,  &c.,  (can  not  so  meet).  (To  this)  it  may  be 
said  again  as  follows  : — 

The  whole  of  the  totality  of  things  is  indeed  estab- 
lished by  perception  and  all  things  are  apprehended  as 
distinct  and  non-distinct.  There  is  non-distinction  (when 
they  are  looked  upon)  as  constituting  causes  and  as  consti- 
tuting genera  (and  species),  and  there  is  distinction  (when 
they  are  looked  upon)  as  constituting  effects  and  as  consti- 
tuting particular  individuals.  The  contradiction  existing 
between  sunlight  and  shadow,  &c.,  is  characterised  by 
their  not  being  found  together,  and  by  their  having  a  divers- 
ity of  abodes.  But  in  the  case  of  causes  and  effects,  as 
well  as  in  the  case  of  genera  and  (their)  individual  mem- 
bers, both  those  (characteristics)  are  not  found ;  but,  on 

327.  This  position  is  maintained  by       plained  in  full  before  it  is   contradict- 
the  BhdstarTyas   and    it   is    here  ex-       ed.     Vide  $«/**  p.  217.  n.  235. 


310  SRI-BHA.SHYA.      [Chap.  L  Part.  I. 

the  contrary,  one  and  the  same  thing  appears  in  two  forms 
as  (when  it  is  said) — '  This  pot  is  clay', — '  This  ox  is  brok- 
en-horned',—'  This  ox  is  hornless'.  And  in  this  world 
there  is  nothing  that  is  generally  seen  to  have  only  one 
form.  Nor  is  non-distinction  seen  to  be  that  which 
destroys  distinction,  as  when  fire  and  such  other  things 
(consume  and  destroy  the  distinction)  of  grass  and  such 
other  things;  accordingly,  there  is  no  substantial  contra- 
diction (between  distinction  and  non-distinction)  ;  for,  that 
object  which  exists  in  the  form  of  clay,  gold,  ox,  or  an 
equine  animal,  &c.,  may  itself  exist  (also)  in  the  shape  of 
a  pot,  a  crown,  a  broken-horned  (ox),  or  a  mare,  &c. 
There  is  no  fiat  of  the  Lord  to  the  effect  that  non-distinc- 
tion and  distinction  should  (respectively)  constitute  the 
singular  characteristics  of  the  thing  (genus)  which  is  non- 
distinct,  and  of  the  thing  (individual)  which  is  distinct.  If 
it  be  said  that  there  is  oneness  of  form  (in  relation  to  those 
things),  because  it  is  so  perceived  ;  then  let  it  be  admitt- 
ed that  there  are  also  the  two  forms  of  distinction  and 
of  non-distinction  for  the  same  reason  that  they  are 
also  perceived.  Indeed,  when  things  such  as  pots,  dishes, 
broken-horned  (oxen),  and  horn-less  (oxen),  &c.,  are 
perceived,  a  person  who  has  his  eyes  wide  open  is  not  able 
to  discern  (any)  distinction  (in  each  of  his  perceptions)  to 
the  effect — '  This  is  clay,  that  is  pot',  and  '  This  is  the 
general  property  of  the  species  ox,  but  this  is  the  indi- 
vidual ox'.  On  the  other  hand,  his  perceptions  are 
only  to  the  effect — '  This  pot  is  clay', — '  The  ox  is  broken- 
horned'.  If  it  be  said  that  he  does  discern  distinction 
(in  each  of  his  perceptions),  on  the  score  that  the  cause  and 
the  class  are  made  out  from  the  knowledge  of  their 
persistence,  while  the  effect  and  the  individual  are  made 
out  by. means  of  the  knowledge  of  their  power  of  logical 


Adhik.  IV.  Silt.  ./.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  311 

exclusion,  it  is  replied  that  it  cannot  be  so  ;  because  (such) 
a  distinction  in  character  is  not  perceived.  Indeed,  even 
those  who  observe  very  minutely  do  not  perceive,  in  rela- 
tion to  the  thing  placed  before  them,  any  distinction  in 
character  to  the  effect — '  This  is  what  persists  '  and  'This  is 
what  excludes'.  Just  as,  in  the  case  of  an  effect  and  of  an 
individual,  (both  of)  whose  oneness  (with  the  correspond- 
ing cause  and  the  corresponding  genus  respectively)  is 
well  perceived,  the  idea  of  oneness  is  born  (in  the  mind); 
so  also,  in  the  case  of  what  has  a  cause  and  belongs 
to  a  genus,  that  idea  of  oneness  is  born  without  any  differ- 
ence whatsoever.  It  is  exactly  similarly  that  the  recogni- 
tive  cognition,  which  is  to  the  effect — '  This  is  that  same 
thing',  is  born  even  in  regard  to  all  such  objects  as  are  ex- 
tremely different  from  one  another  owing  to  (differences 
in)  space,  time,  and  the  characteristic  form.  Therefore,  in 
as  much  as  (all)  things  appear  as  having  certainly  two  na- 
tures, the  enunciation  of  any  extreme  difference  between 
the  cause  and  the  effect  as  well  as  between  the  genus  and 
the  individual  is  contradicted  by  perception. 

It  may  be  again  said  that,  as  in  the  instances — '  This 
pot  is  clay',  '  This  ox  is  broken-horned', — (so  also)  in  the 
instances—'  I  am  a  god',  '  I  am  a  man',  there  is  the  per- 
ception of  oneness  owing  to  there  being  a  grammatical 
equation  ;  that  in  consequence  there  is  distinction  and  non- 
distinction  between  the  self  and  the  body  also  ;  and  that, 
accordingly,  this  declaration  of  distinction  and  non-distinc- 
tion acts  like  the  flame  of  fire  set  to  (consume)  one's  own 
house.  This  statement— (we,  the  Bhdskarlyas,  say)— is 
the  outcome  of  undeveloped  wisdom  regarding  grammatical 
equations  which  establish  distinction  and  non-distinction, 
and  regarding  (also)  the  knowledge  of  the  real  meaning  of 
those  (same  grammatical  equations).  Thus,  for  instance, 


3i2  SRI-BHISHYA.     \jChap.  I.  Part.  L 

it  is  the  unstultified  idea  alone  which  everywhere  proves 
things.  But  the  imposed  idea  of  the  self,  existing  in  (inti- 
mate) association  with  gods  and  other  (material  embodi- 
ments), is  contradicted  by  all  the  means  of  proof  which 
establish  the  reality  of  the  self ;  and  that  (idea)  does  not 
prove,  (in  consequence),  the  non-distinction  between  the 
self  and  the  body  ;  in  the  same  way  in  which  the  idea  of 
the  serpent  (falsely  perceived)  in  a  rope,  &c.,  (does  not 
prove  any  non-distinction  as  existing  between  the  serpent 
and  the  rope).  And  the  grammatical  equations,  which  are 
to  the  effect—'  The  ox  is  broken-horned', — '  The  ox  is 
hornless',  are  not  seen  to  be  stultified  anywhere  by  any- 
thing ;  hence  there  is  no  exaggeration  in  (our)  statement. 
For  these  same  reasons,  the  self  also  is  not  totally  dis- 
tinct from  the  Brahman.  On  the  other  hand,  as  being 
a  part  of  the  Brahman,  it  is  (both)  distinct  and  non- 
distinct  (from  Him).  It  being  so,  non-distinction  alone 
is  natural,  and  distinction  is  due  to  limiting  conditions. 
If  it  be  asked  how  this  is  made  out,  it  is  replied  (that  it  is 
made  out)  by  means  of  the  following  and  other  scriptural 
texts:— "That  thou  art."— \Chhand.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.]; 
"  There  is  no  other  seer  than  He."— -[/fr///.  Up.  III.  7.  23.]; 
"This  self  is  the  Brahman" '—[Brih.  Up.  II.  5.  19.  & 
IV.  4.  5.  &  Mand.  Up.  I.  2.].  Non-distinction  (between 
the  self  and  the  Brahman}  is  declared  in  the  hymn  which 
relates  to  the  Brahman  and  forms  the  Samhitopanishad 
of  the  Atharvanikas  ;  and  it  says,  after  introducing  the 
subject-matter  of  the  topic  by  mentioning  the  Brahman  to 
be  these  two,  namely,  the  Earth  and  the  Heaven,  that  "  The 
fishermen  are  the  Brahman,  the  slaves  are  the  Brahman, 
and  these  gamblers  are  also  the  Brahman,  man  and 
woman  are  born  out  of  the  Brahman  ;  women  are  the 
Brahman,  and  man  also  (is  the  Brahman}."  And  distinction 


Adhik.  IV.  Silt.  4.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  313 

(between  the  self  and  the  Brahman]  is  also  declared  in 
the  following  and  other  scriptural  passages  : — "The  Eter- 
nal among  the  eternals,    the  Intelligent  among    the  in- 
telligent,  who,   though   One,   fulfils    the    desires    of  the 
many."— [Kath.   Up.  V.  13.  &  Svet.  Up.  VI.  13.];     "The 
two  unborn,  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent  (are) 
the  Lord  and  the  non-Lord." — [Svet.   Up.  I.  9.];    "An- 
other (viz.  the  Lord)   also  is  seen  to    be  the  cause   of 
their  association  with  the  qualities  of  the  'works'  (which 
lead   to  samsdrd)  and   the    qualities   of  the  self  (which 
lead  to  beatific  release)." — [Svet.   Up.  V.  12.];    "He  is 
the  Lord  of  the  praknti  and  of  the  individual  soul,  and 
is  the  regulator  of  the  qualities  ;  He  is  the  cause  of  sam- 
sdra,  of  final    release,  of  existence,  and  of  bondage."- 
[Svet.  Up.  VI.  1 6.];     "He  is  the  cause,  the  Lord  of  what 
is  the  lord  of  the  senses  (/.  e.  of  the  jiva  or  the  indi- 
vidual soul)."— [Svet.   Up.  VI.   9.];     "One  of  them  eats 
the  sweet  pippala  fruit,  while  the  other  shines  in  splen- 
dour without  eating  at    all."— [Mund.  Up.  III.    i.   i.  & 
Svet.  Up.   IV.  6.];    "  He  who,  dwelling  in  the  self,  &c."— 
\Mddh.  Brih.  Up.  III.  7.  22.];     "  He  is   embraced  by  the 
omniscient    Self   and  knows  nothing  that  is  external."- 
[Brih.  Up.  IV.  3.  21.];  "  He  is  ridden  upon  by  the  omni- 
scient Self  and  goes  away  giving328  up  his  body." — [Brih. 
Up.  IV.  3.  35.];  "  Knowing   Him  alone,  one  transcends 
death."     [Svet.  Up.  III.  8.].    Therefore,  (both)  distinction 
and  non-distinction  have  necessarily  to  be   admitted  be- 
tween the  individual  self  and  the  Supreme  Self.  It  being  so, 
non-distinction  is,  however,  made  out  to  be  natural,  because 
the  scriptural   passage — "  He  who  knows  the  Brahman 
becomes   the  Brahman  indeed." — [Mund.   Up.  III.  2.  9.], 

328.   The  word  used  in  the  original       S.iiikara  to  mean  groaning  along. 
is   utsarjan   which    is  interpreted   by 

4° 


314  SRI-BHISHYA.     {Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

— and  others  like  it  declare  that,  in  the  condition  of  final 
release,  the  individual  self  acquires  the  nature  of  the 
Brahman  ;  and  because  also  the  passage — "  But  where 
to  one  all  this  becomes  the  Self,  there  who  shall  see  whom 
by  what  ?" — \Brih.  (7p.ll.  4. 14.  &  IV.  5.  15.], — negatives 
the  apprehension  of  the  Lord  then  as  being  different  (from 
the  individual  self). 

However,  it  may  be  said  that  even  then  distinction 
is  perceived  in  accordance  with  the  scriptural  passage 
which  speaks  of  the  association  (of  the  individual  self  with 
the  Brahman),  and  is  to  this  effect—"  He  attains  with  the 
omniscient  Brahman  all  the  auspicious  qualities." — {Taitt. 
U'p.  II.  i.  i.];  and  that  he  (the  Sutrakard)  also  says  the 
same  thing  in  these  aphorisms — "  Except  in  the  matter  of 
the  activity  relating  to  (the  creation,  &c.,  of)  the  world, 
(the  released  souls  possess  all  the  powers  belonging  to  the 
Lord);  because  (the  Lord  Himself  forms)  the  topic  of  the 
contexts  (wherein  the  above-mentioned  activity  is  referred 
to),  and  because  also  (the  individual  souls)  are  not  mention- 
ed (therein)." — [Ved.  Sut.  IV.  4.  17.];  "And  on  account 
of  the  characteristic  of  equality  (between  the  individual 
self  and  the  Supreme  Self)  being  solely  confined  to  (the 
matter  of)  enjoyment." — {Vcd.  Si'tt.  IV.  4.  21.]..  (But) 
this  is  not  so  ;  because  the  distinction  of  the  individual  self 
(from  the  Brahman)  is  denied  by  hundreds  of  scriptural 
passages  such  as — "  There  is  no  other  seer  than  He."- 
{Brih.  Up.  III.  7.  23.], — and  others.  By  means  of  the 
passage — "  He  attains  with  the  omniscient  Brahman  all 
the  auspicious  qualities." — [Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.], — what  is 
said  is  that  he  enjoys  the  Brahman  along  with  all  (His) 
desirable  qualities  that  is,  he  enjoys  the  Brahman  posses- 
sed of  all  those  qualities.  Otherwise,  the  phrase  "  with  the 
(omniscient)  Brahman"  would  lead  to  the  Brahman  be- 


Adhik.  IV.  Sftl.  ./.]   SRI-BHISHYA.  315 

coming  unimportant.  If,  by  means  of  the  aphorism— 
"  Except  in  the  matter  of  the  activity  relating  to  (the 
creation,  &c.,  of)  the  world,  &c.",  the  released  souls  are 
made  out  to  have  a  distinct  existence  (from  the  Brahman), 
then  it  is  the  same  as  stating  (that  these  individual  souls 
have  a)  deficiency  of  lordship.  For,  otherwise,  there  will 
be  the  contradiction  of  this  aphorism  among  others,  name- 
ly,— "  (Only)  after  attaining  the  Highest  Light,  is  there 
the  manifestation  (of  the  individual  self's  own  nature ;  as 
may  be  inferred)  from  (the  use  of)  the  word  '  own '." — 
[Ved.  Silt.  IV.  4.  i.].329  Therefore,  non-distinction 
(between  the  self  and  the  Brahman)  is  alone  na- 
tural. 

But  the  distinction  of  the  individual  selves  from  the 
Brahman  as  well  as  from  each  other  is  due  to  limiting 
conditions,  such  as  the  intellect,  the  senses  and  the  body. 
Although  the  Brahman  is  not  made  up  of  constituent  parts 
and  is  found  everywhere,  yet  there  certainly  results  dis- 
tinction even  in  relation  to  the  Brahman  by  means  of  the 
limiting  conditions,  such  as  the  intellect,  &c.,  just  as  (dis- 
tinction results)  in  the  case  of  the  spatial8  3  °  ether  by  means 
of  (limiting  conditions  like)  pots,  &c.  And  there  is  (here) 
no  fallacy  of  reciprocal  dependence  to  the  effect  that  there 
is  the  association  of  limiting  conditions  like  the  intellect, 
&c.,  with  the  Brahman  who  is  already  differentiated,  and 

329.  The  passage  which  is  the  basis  330.  The  ether  which  exists  within 

of  this  aphorism  and  contains  the  word  a  pot  (jghatakdsa}  is  said  to   be   comli- 

own     (or   sva)     runs    thus  :—Pai-ail-  tioned  by  the  pot.  On  the  destruction 

jyotii'iipasampadya  svina  riipen.ilrinn/i-  of  the  pot,  the  ether    which  was  with- 

padhyatel^jkhdnd.  Up.  VIII.  12.  2.].  in   it  becomes  one    with  the  spatial 

"After  attaining  the  Highest  Light(/>.  ether   outside  (in,ihjkii'.n),    which,    in 

the  Bra/iiiian),  lie  (the  individual  self)  itself,   is  unconditioned, 
becomes  manifest  in  his  on'it  nature." 


316  SRI-13HISHYA.      \Chap.  L  Part.  I. 

that  there  is  differentiation  in  relation  to  the  Brahman  by 
means  of  His  association  with  limiting  'conditions  like 
the  intellect,  &c. ;  because  the  limiting  condition  and 
its  association  (with  the  Brahman]  are  (both)  due  to 
karma  ;331  and  because  also  the  stream  of  that  (karma] 
is  beginningless.  What  is  said  is  this  : — By  means 

of  the  individual  self  which  is  held  in  bondage  by  its 
past  karma,  there  is  produced  that  limiting  condition 
which  is  found  in  association  with  that  (self)  itself;  and 
karma  (is  produced)  by  the  (self  s)  being  associated  with 
that  (limiting  condition)  :  thus  there  is  nothing  wrong 
(here),  in  as  much  as  the  relation  between  karma  and 
(these)  limiting  conditions  is  beginningless  in  accordance 
with  the  argument332  derived  from  the  seed  and  the 
sprout.  Therefore,  it  is  the  non-distinction  of  the  indivi- 
dual selves  from  each  other  as  well  as  from  the  Brahman 
that  is  certainly  natural. 

But  distinction  arises,  however,  from  limiting  condi- 
tions. The  distinction  also  of  these  limiting  conditions  from 
each  other  as  well  as  from  the  Brahman  is  natural,  like 
(their)  non-distinction;  because  these  limiting  conditions  are 
not  subject  to  other  limiting  conditions,  and  because  also,  if 
these  (latter)  be  admitted,  there  would  result  a  regrcssus 
in  infinitum.  Consequently,  according  to  the  karma 
of  the  individual  selves,  such  limiting  conditions  are 
produced  (in  relation  to  the  Brahman}  as  have,  indeed, 

331.  Here  karma  means  the  effects  this     condition     produces     another 
of  past  works,  karma,  this    karma  another   limiting 

332.  A   seed    produces    a    sprout  condition,  and   so    on.     Thus  there 
this   sprout   produces    another   seed,  can  be  no  beginning  to  the  relation 
this  seed  another  sprout,  this    again  which    exists    between    karma    and 
another  seed,  and  so  on.    Similarly  a  limiting  conditions. 

karma  produces  a  limiting  condition. 


Adhik.  IV.  Sut.  4.]  SRi-BnlsHYA.  317 

a  nature  which  is  (both)  distinct  and  non-distinct  from  the 
Brahman. 

(In  reply  to  this),  it  is  said  here*»3  thus  :— 
It  has  been  stated  that  the  whole  collection  of  Vcd- 
dntic  passages  relate  to  the  injunction  regarding  the  medi- 
tation of  the  Brahman  who  is  without  a  second,  and  is 
existence,  knowledge  and  bliss ;    that  consequently  it  is 
non-distinction  which  is  made  out  by  means  of  Vcddntic 
passages;  and  that  distinction  is  made  out  by  means  of  the 
sastras  relating  to  'works',  as  well  as  by  means  of  percep- 
tion, &c.,  which  are  all  dependent  upon  distinctions  ;  and 
that,  (under  these  circumstances),  non-distinction  is  alone 
the  reality,  because,  there  is  mutual  contradiction  between 
distinction  and  non-distinction,  and  because  also  the  per- 
ception of  distinctions  may  result  even  from  the  beginning- 
lessly  old  ignorance  (or  avidya)  as  its  source.     But  what 
has  been  stated  there   (in  that   context)    to   the  effect 
that  there  is  contradiction  between  distinction  and  non- 
distinction,  for  the  reason  that  both  of  them  are  estab- 
lished by    perception, — that  is  improper.     Indeed,  for  a 
thing  to  be  distinct  from  another  thing  is  the  same  as  that 
thing    having    characteristics    which    are    different    from 
those  of  the  other  thing  ;  and  non-distinction  is  the  con . 
dition  opposite  to  this.    Who  is  there  that  is  in  his  senses, 
and  will  speak  of  the   existence  in  one  and  the  same 
place  of  those  two  things   (viz.  distinction  and  non-dis- 
tinction) which  have  (respectively)  the  nature  of  a  parti- 
cular condition  and  of  the  opposite  of  that  particular 
condition  ?      If  it  be  said  that  non-distinction  exists  in 
the    form    of   the    cause    as    well    as   in    the    form    of 

333.  Hercunder,  the  Dhyanaiiiyoga-       B/iiiskarTyas  stated  above, 
vddin   refutes    the     position    of    the 


318  SRI-BHA.SHYA.      [Chap.  L  Part.  I. 

the  genus,  and  that  distinction  exists  in  the  form  of  the 
effect  as  well  as  in  the  form  of  the  individual,  and  that, 
owing  to  there  being  (such)  a  difference  between  their 
forms  there  is  no  contradiction  (between  them), — it  is  repli- 
ed that  it  is  not  (right  to  say  so);  because  such  (a  position) 
does  not  admit  of  any  one  of  the  possible  alternative  views 
(in  relation  to  it).  Does  he  who  says  that  there  is  no  con- 
tradiction (between  distinction  and  non-distinction)  owing 
to  the  difference  in  the  form  of  their  appearance, — (does 
he)  hold  that  distinction  exists  in  one  particular  form, 
while  non-distinction  exists  in  another  paiticular  form  ? 
Or  (does  he  hold)  that  both  of  them  are  to  be  found 
in  one  thing  which  is  capable  of  adopting  both  those 
forms  ?  In  the  first  alternative,  distinction  belongs  to  the 
individual  and  non-distinction  belongs  to  the  genus,  and 
hence,  no  one  thing  has  both  these  forms  (of  distinction  and 
non-distinction).  If  it  be  said  that  the  genus  and  the 
individual  are  both  one  and  the  same  thing,  then  (the 
contention),  that  there  is  no  contradiction  (between  them), 
in  as  much  as  there  is  a  difference  in  the  form  of  their 
appearance,  will  amount  to  have  been  given  up.  It  has 
been  already  stated  that  it  is  contrary  to  reason  for  one 
and  the  same  thing  to  have  its  own  peculiar  charac- 
teristics and  (also)  their  opposites.  And,  in  the  second 
alternative,  there  are  two  forms  which  are  mutually  con- 
tradictory, and  the  thing  with  which  they  are  associated  is 
unknown.  Hence,  even  if  a  third  form  (other  than  the 
jdti  or  genus,  and  the  vyakti  or  the  individual)  be  admitt- 
ed, there  would  be  only  the  proving  of  the  mutual  distinc- 
tion between  (all)  the  three  forms,  but  no  (proving  of  the) 
absence  of  distinction  (between  them).  If  it  be  said  that 
that  non-contradiction  (between  distinction  and  non-dis- 
tinction), which  it  is  sought  to  maintain  by  the 


Adhik.  IV.  Silt.  ./.]   SRI-BHISHYA.  319 

(supposition   of)   two   forms,   is   the  same  as  being  (both) 
distinct  and    non-distinct    from    the    thing  which  forms 
the   abode  of  those   (two   forms), — it  is  asked  in   reply 
how  the  two  forms,    which   abide   in   a  thing  and   are 
themselves    (thus)    different    from  (that)    thing,   can   be 
capable   of  introducing  into  that  thing  hostile  attribut- 
es (at  the   same   time).       Of  what    nature    is    non-dis- 
tinction then  ?     If   the    two    forms    (on    the  one  hand) 
and  the  thing,  (on   the    other    hand),    which    possesses 
them  are   admitted    to    be    (distinctly)   two    in    nature, 
then,  there  would  be  the  necessity  for  another  form  that  is 
capable  of  holding  them  together.     Consequently,  there 
would  be  the  fallacy  of  regrcssus  in  infinitum.  .  Moreover, 
there  is  the   apprehension   of  an    admitted    oneness    in 
relation  to  the  perception  of  individuals  ;  similarly,  how- 
ever, in  regard  to  that  thing  also  which  has  (its)  similars, 
there   arises  no  such  perception  as    is   characterised  by 
oneness ;   because   all   perception  arises   only   as   relating 
to    the    characteristic    modes    (of   things)     and    to    the 
things  characterised   by   those  modes,  to  the  effect  that 
a  particular  thing  is    of  a   particular  nature.      In   such 
(a  perception),   the    thing    which    characterises    is    the 
genus,  and  the  thing  which  is  characterised  is  the  indivi- 
dual (belonging  to  that  genus);  and  therefore  perception 
has  not  (only)  one  form.     For    this    same  reason,    the 
quality   of  being   (both)   distinct  and  non-distinct  from 
the  Brahman  is  not  possible  in  relation   to   the   indivi- 
dual  self  also.     Accordingly,  the  perception  of  distinction 
is  solely  based   upon   the   beginninglessly  old  ignorance 
(or    avidya),    in    as  much    as  non-distinction    is    based 
on  the  sdstras  (the  logical  result  of  which  is)  arrived  at  in- 
dependently (of  all  other  means  of  knowledge). 

It   may  be   said  that,  if  such  be  the  case,  the  Brah- 


320  SRI-BHISHYA.       {Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

man  Himself  would  possess  ignorance,  and  that  conse- 
quently the  evils  of  birth,  old  age,  death,  &c.,  resulting 
from  that  (ignorance)  would  taint  (Him);  and  that  for 
the  same  reason  the  following  and  other  scriptural  texts, 
namely,  "He  who  understands  all  and  who  knows 
z\\"—[Mimd.  Up.  I.  i.  9.  £  II.  2.  7.];  "This  Self  is 
devoid  of  sin."— [Qterf.  Up.  VIII.  i.  5.  &  VIII.  7. 
i  &  3.],  would  also  be  contradicted.  But  this  is  not 
right  ;  because  the  evils  of  ignorance,  &c.,  are  not 
real.  But,  in  as  much  as  you334  do  not  admit  (the 
existence  of)  things  other  than  the  limiting  conditions 
and  the  Brahman,  the  association  of  those  limiting 
conditions  with  the  Brahman  Himself  and  the  evils  of 
(His)  constituting  the  individual  self,  of  (His)  being 
(thus)  ignorant,  &c.,  (all  of)  which  result  from  that 
(association),  would  all  occur  (according  to  you)  in  reality. 
Indeed,  these  limiting  conditions,which  are  associated 
with  the  Brahman  who  is  without  constituent  parts 
and  indivisible,  do  not  get  into  association  (with  Him) 
either  after  cutting  Him  or  after  dividing  Him.  But, 
on  the  contrary,  they  are  associated  with  His  essential  na- 
ture, and  hence  they  work  out  their  effects  within  Himself. 
You  may,  however,  hold  that  the  Brahman  limited 
by  conditions  is  the  individual  self;  and  that  that 
(individual  self)  is  atomic  (in  size);  that  its  atomic 
character  is  due  to  the  atomic  (or  non-pervasive)  nature 
of  the  manas  which  is  one  of  the  limiting  conditions  ; 
that  this  limiting  condition  is  beginninglessly  old  ; 
and  that,  therefore,  the  evils,  which  are  associated 
with  the  thing  that  is  limited  by  conditions, 

334.  You  means    the   Bhaskariyas       these,  they  do  not  admit  the  existence 
who   admit   only   the    "Brahman  and       of  anything-  else, 
the  conditions  limiting  Him.  Beyond 


Adhik.  IV.  Suf.  4.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  321 

are  not  associated  with  the  Highest  unconditioned  Brah- 
man. If  so,  it  has  to  be  asked  whether  the  individual  self 
which  is  atomic  in  size  is  a  bit  of  the  Brahman  cut  off 
(from  Him)  by  limiting  conditions  ;  or  whether  it  (viz. 
the  individual  self)  is  any  such  special  part  of  the  Brah- 
man as  is  not  at  all  divided  from  the  Brahman  and  is 
(nevertheless)  associated  with  that  limiting  condition  which 
is  characterised  by  the  atomic  size  ;  or  whether  it  is,  in 
essence,  the  Brahman  Himself  in  association  with  limiting 
conditions ;  or  whether  it  is  some  other  intelligent  being 
associated  with  limiting  conditions  ;  or  whether  it  is  the 
limiting  condition  itself.  As  the  Brahman  is  incapable  of 
being  divided,  the  first  alternative  cannot  be  assumed;  and 
(if  it  be  assumed),  there  would  be  a  beginning  (in  time)  to 
the  individual  self ;  indeed  cutting  off  means  the  splitting 
of  an  already  existing  thing  into  two.  In  accordance  with 
the  second  alternative,  a  particular  part  of  the  Brahman 
Himself  is  associated  with  limiting  conditions,  and  hence 
all  the  evils  arising  out  of  limiting  conditions  accrue 
to  Him  alone  ;  and  when  a  limiting  condition  is  detached 
and  transferred  (from  one  part  of  the  Brahman  to  another), 
then,  owing  to  the  fact  that  it  is  not  possible  for  the  limit- 
ing condition  to  carry  with  itself  that  part  of  the  Brahman 
which  was  associated  with  itself  (before),  and  owing  also 
to  the  fact  that  the  part  of  the  Brahman  which  is  associat- 
ed with  limiting  conditions  varies  from  moment  to 
moment,  both  bondage  and  final  release  have  to  be 
taking  place  every  moment.  If  it  were  possible  (for  the 
limiting  condition)  to  carry  with  itself  (that  part  of  the 
Brahman  with  which  it  is  associated),  then,  since  the 
Brahman  is  indivisible,  the  whole  (of  the  Brahman)\\o\\\A 
have  to  be  so  carried.  If  it  be  said  that  a  thing  which  has  no 
constituent  parts  and  is  all-pervading  cannot  be  (so)  carried, 


322  SRI-BHASHYA.    [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

then  the  statement  already  made  to  the  effect  that  the 
limiting  condition  is  detached  and  transferred  must  itself  be- 
come an  error.  When  all  the  limiting  conditions  are  asso- 
ciated with  the  (various)  parts  of  the  (one)  undivided  Brah- 
man, then,  since  all  the  individual  selves  form  such  parts 
of  the  (one  undivided)  Brahman,  they  will  have  all  to  be 
put  together  and  realised  as  one.  If,  owing  to  their  form- 
ing (His)  various  parts,  there  can  be  no  putting  them  to- 
gether (so  as  to  cause  their  coalescence),  then,  even  after 
the  limiting  conditions  are  detached  and  transferred,  there 
can  be  no  coalescence  of  even  a  single  part  (freed  from 
limiting  conditions  with  the  unconditioned  whole).  In  ac- 
cordance with  the  third  alternative,  the  essential  nature  of 
the  Brahman  Himself  assumes  the  state  of  the  individual 
sell",  through  association  with  limiting  conditions ;  and 
hence  there  can  be  no  establishment  of  the  unconditioned 
Brahman  as  apart  from  that  (individual  self),  and  there  will 
have  to  be  only  one  individual  self  in  all  bodies.  In  ac- 
cordance with  the  fourth  alternative,  the  individual  self 
is  (by  nature)  altogether  different  from  the  Brahman,  and 
therefore  the  idea  that  the  differentiation  of  the  individual 
self  (from  the  Brahman]  is  due  to  limiting  conditions  will 
amount  to  have  been  given  up.  In  accordance  with  the 
last  alternative,  the  view  of  the  Charvakas383  themselves 
will  come  to  have  been  accepted.  Therefore,  on  the 
strength  of  the  sastras  declaring  that  there  is  non-disinc- 

:   335.    The  Charvakas  are  the  mate-  regarded   as  atheists  by  the  orthodox 

rialists  of  Hindu  philosophy.     Their  in    matters    of     Vedic    faith.        The 

sceptical  doctrines  were  handed  down  Charvakas  believe  only  in  one  crite- 

to  Charvaka  and   his    followers    by  rion    of    truth,     namely,    perception. 

one  Vachaspati  or  Brihaspati.     Their  According   to     them     non-intelligent 

opinions  are   embodied   in    what  are  matter    itself    is    the  cause    of  crea^- 

called  Bqrhaspatyz-sutras.    They  are  tion. 


Adhik.  tV.  Silt.  4.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  323 

tion  (between  things),  it  has  to  be  accepted  that  all  distinc- 
tions are  based  upon  ignorance  (or  avidya)  alone. 

Accordingly,  although  the  sastras  are  authoritative 
only  in  so  far  as  they  relate  to  utility  either  in  the  form 
of  activity  or  of  cessation  from  activity,  it  is  established 
that  Vcdantic  passages  are  authoritative  in  relation  to  the 
essential  nature  of  the  Brahman  (also),  in  as  much  as 
they  are  needed  as  a  complement  to  the  injunction  relat- 
ing to  meditation. 

This  (view)  also  is  improper.830  Even  though  it  be 
granted  that  they  are  needed  as  a  complement  to  the 
injunction  relating  to  meditation,  there  is  no  authoritative 
proof  that  Vcdantic  passages  import  anything  that  is  real. 
What  is  said  is  this  : — Do  the  passages  relating  to  the 
essential  nature  of  the  Brahman  possess  authoritativeness 
in  relation  to  that  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman,  by  im- 
porting the  same  thing  as  the  injunction  relating  to  medi- 
tation (does)  ?  Or  (do  they  do  .so)  independently  and  of 
their  own  accord  ?  If  they  have  (such)  oneness  of  import, 
then  they  must  refer  mainly  to  the  injunction  relating  to 
meditation  ;  and  thus  it  is  not  possible  for  them  to  aim  at 
denoting  the  essential  nature  of  the  Brahman.  If  the}' 
import  a  different  thing  (from  the  injunction  relating  to 
meditation),  then,  since  they  are  devoid  of  utility  in  the 
form  of  inducing  either  activity  or  cessation  from  activity, 
they  certainly  cannot  have  any  (real)  meaning  at  all. 
Moreover,  it  should  not  be  urged— that  meditation  has  the 
nature  of  a  flow  of  memory,  and  is  capable  of  being 

336,  Hereunder  the  Mimamsaka*  by  the  Sutrak&ra.  in  \7ed.  6V/A  I.  I. 
who  is  the  main  objector  against  the  4.,  refutes  the  position  of  the  D/iyana- 
views  intended  to  be  propounded  nyogavaJin. 


$24  SRI-BHASHYA.      \Ciiap.  L  Part.  L 

definitely  described  only  by  means  of  what  constitutes  the 
thing  that  is  to  be  remembered  ; — and  that,  if  it  be  asked 
what  the  particular  object  of  remembrance  in  connection 
with  this    injunction   bearing    upon   meditation  is,  then, 
the  following  passages — "All   this  is  that  Self." — \_Brih. 
Up.  II.  4.  6.  &  IV.  5.  7.];     "The  Brahman  is  omnisci- 
ent."— \Brih.  Up.ll.$.  19.];     "The  Brahman  is  Exist- 
ence, Knowledge,  Infinity."—  \Taitt.   Up.  II.   i.  i.J,  and 
other  such  passages  point  out  the  essential  nature  and  the 
peculiar  characteristics  of  that  (object  of  remembrance),  and 
thus  acquire  the  sameness  of  import  with  that  (injunction 
relating  to  meditation),  and  become  authoritative  in  estab- 
lishing the  reality  of  the  thing  (imported)  :  because,  al- 
though the  injunction  relating  to  meditation  is  necessarily 
dependent  upon  what  forms  the  object  of  remembrance, 
yet  the  reality  of  the  thing  to  be  meditated  upon  is  not 
absolutely  needed,  for  the  reason  that  the  completion  of 
meditation  becomes  possible  even  with  the  help  of  a  cer- 
tain thing  which  is   unreal,   as  in  the  case   of  the  injunc- 
tion337 enjoining  the   realisation   of  the   Brahman  as  a 
Name.    Thus  it  is   arrived   at   that  the  Brahman  is  not 
proved  by  means   of  the    scriptures  ;  because    Veddniic 
passages  are  devoid  of  utility  in  the  form  of  inducing  either 
activity  or  cessation   from   activity  ;  and  because,  even 
when  needed  as  a  complement  to  the  injunction  relating  to 
meditation,  they  have  their  finality  only  in  denoting  the 
essential  nature  of  the  particular  object  of  meditation  ; 
again  because,  even  when  they  are  capable  of  having  an 
independent  import,  there  is  to  be  found  in  merely  know- 
ing (their  meaning)   the  whole  range  of  their  utility,  as 
is   the   case   with   sentences  (uttered)  to  gratify  children, 

337.  Vide   Chhdnd.  Up.  VII.   1,  J,  where  this  injunction  is  given, 


Adhik. 'lit.  Sat.  ./.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  $2$ 

sickly  persons,  and  other  such  people  ;  and  because  also 
they  (viz.  Vcdantic  passages)  cannot  point  out  the  real- 
ity of  those  things  the  ideas  corresponding  to  which  have 
been  already  naturally  established. 

In  this  connection,  it  is  laid  down  (by  the  Sntrakdra ) 
- -"  That  (viz.  the  fact  that  the  scripture  forms  altoge- 
ther the  source  of  the  knowledge  relating  to  the  Brahman] 
results,  however,  from  (His  constituting)  the  true  pur- 
port (of  the  scriptures). "3 as  The  word  samanvaya  means 
the  proper  purport,  that  is,  such  a  purport  as  constitutes  an 
object  of  human  pursuit.  The  meaning  is  that,  owing  to 
the  fact  that  the  Brahman  who  is  the  highest  object  of 
human  pursuit  and  whose  very  nature  is  unsurpassed  bliss 
forms  the  purport  (of  the  scriptures)  by  constituting  the 
thing  that  is  to  be  denoted  (by  them),  that,  namely, 
the  fact  that  the  scripture  forms  the  means  of  proving 
(the  Brahman},  is  undoubtedly  established. 

The  whole  collection  of  Vcdantic  passages  teaches 
the  Brahman  who  is  the  highest  object  of  attainment,  in 
as  much  as  His  essential  nature  is  devoid  of  all  evil  and 
consists  of  unsurpassed  bliss  ;  and  whoever  says  that,  never- 
theless, it  (vix.  that  collection)  has  not  its  finality  in  uti- 
lity, because  it  does  not  lead  to  either  activity  or  cessation 
from  activity,  (he)  says,  (as  it  were),  that  a  person  who 
dwells  in  a  palace  is  destitute  of  all  usefulness  in  as 
much  as  he  does  not  get  into  a  dog-kennel. 

What  is  said  is  this  :— Individual  souls  have  the  know- 
ledge of  their  own  nature  as  well  as  of  the  reality  of  the 
higher  and  the  lower  truths  that  are  concealed  by  the  veil  of 
that  ignorance  which  is  the  same  in  nature  as  the  beginning- 
lessly  old  karma  ;  they  exist  in  the  form  of  gods,  Asuras, 

338,  This  is    \ed.  Sut,   I.  I.  4.  and  is  us  follows  :— Tatlu  samamnyat. 


326  SRi-BnlSHYA.    [Chap.  L  Part.  L 

Gandharvas,  Siddhas,  Vidyddharas,  Kinnaras,  Kimpuru- 
shas,  Yakshas,  Rdkshasas,  Pisdchas,  men,  beasts,  birds, 
reptiles,  trees,  shrubs,  creepers,  grass,  and  other  (material 
embodiments);  they  are  differentiated  by  the  distinctions 
of  the  male  sex,  of  the  female  sex,  and  of  sexlessness,  and 
have  their  own  specially  appointed  supporters,  protectors 
and  special  objects  of  enjoyment :  and  (under  these  cir- 
cumstances) that  passage  alone  has  its  finality  in  utility 
which  teaches  that  there  exists  the  Highest  Brahman 
who,  by  means  of  His  own  essential  nature,  character 
and  qualities,  greatness  and  activity,  causes  to  these 
(individual  souls)  unlimited  and  unsurpassed  joy  at  the 
time  when  there  happens  to  be  no  difference  between  the 
(personal)  experience  of  (the  Brahman]  Himself  and 
the  experience  which  these  (souls)  have  in  their  released 
state  (of  beatitude).  But  that  (other  kind  of)  passage, 
which  relates  to  activity  and  cessation  from  activity,  has 
not  its  finality  in  utility,  in  as  much  as  it  gives  rise  to  that 
knowledge  which  can  be  utilised  only  so  long  as  there  are 
(desirable)  objects  to  be  attained.  When  it  is  desired  to 
know  how  the  Brahman  who  is  of  this  nature  is  to  be  at- 
tained, then,  worship  (or  npdsand)  is  enjoined,  as  the 
means  of  attaining  the  Brahmanfty  the  words  vcdana,  &c., 
(meaning  knowledge,  &c.,)  in  the  following  passages  :— 
"  He  who  knows  the  Brahman  attains  the  Highest."- 
\Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.];  "  Let  him  worship  the  Self  alone  as 
the  object  to  be  attained." — \Brih.  Up.  I.  4.  15.].  This 
(utility  of  the  teaching  given  by  Veddntd)  is  analogous  to 
the  case  of  a  person  who,  on  hearing  the  statement  that 
there  is  hidden  treasure  in  his  house,  comes  to  know  of  the 
existence  of  (such  a)  hidden  treasure,  (thereby)  becomes 
pleased,  and  then  tries  to  get  at  it.  It  is  also  analogous 
to  this  other  case  : — A  young  prince,  while  engaged  in  play 


Adhik.  IV.  SfiL  y.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  327 

with  (other)  lads,  gets  out  of  the  palace,  and,  straying  from 
the  right  road,  is  lost,  and  is  taken   by  the  king  (to  be  so 
lost).  (The  prince)  himself  does  not  know  his  (own)  father, 
is  brought  up  by  a  Brahmana  of  merit,  and  is  made  to  learn 
(all)  the   Vedic  scriptures.    When  he  is  sixteen  years  of 
age  and  is  the  possessor^9  of  all  auspicious  qualities,  he 
hears  a  statement  made  by  a  very  worthy  person  to  this 
effect :— "  Your  father  is  the  lord  of  the  whole  World,  and 
is  blessed  with  the  qualities  of  dignity,  liberality,  affection, 
excellent  behaviour,   heroism,  bravery  and  overwhelming 
strength,  £c.     He  is  waiting  in  the  best  of  cities  solely 
with  the  desire  to  see  you,  (his)  lost  son."     When  (the 
prince  hears  this  statement),  he  becomes  then   and  there 
full  of  unsurpassed  joy  by  realising  (within  himself) — "  I 
am  indeed  the  son  of  a  person  who  is  alive,  and  my  father 
is  abundantly  blessed  with  all  kinds  of  wealth."     The  king 
also, — on  hearing  that  his  own  son  is  alive,  is  healthy,  is 
beautiful  to  look  at,  and  is  conversant  with  all  that  has  to 
be  known, — becomes  like  one  who  has  attained  all  the  ob- 
jects of  human  pursuit;  and  thereafter  he  tries  to  get  him 
(/.  c.  the  son)  back.    And  at  last  they  both  meet  together. 
Such  also  is  (this  utility). 

Again  what  has  been  stated— by  the  purvapakshin — to 
the  effect  that  Vedantic  passages  relate  to  things,  the  ideas 
corresponding  to  which  have  been  already  naturally  estab- 
lished, and  are  hence  no  means  of  proving  the  real  exist- 
ence of  the  things  imported  (by  them),  but  are  ;like  the 
sentences  which  are  uttered  for  the  gratification  of  children, 
sickly  persons  and  other  (such  people),  in  as  much  as  their 
utility  has  its  finality  only  in  (producing)  the  mere  (men- 
tal) knowledge  of  that  (to  which  they  relate); — that  is 

339.    The  word  used  in  the    text  is       metaphorically   used     to   signify   an 
akara,  which     means   a  mine.     It  is      inexhaustible   source  of  anything. 


328  SRi-BHlSHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

wrong.  When  the  absence  of  the  reality  of  the  thing 
imported  (by  a  sentence)  is  definitely  determined,  then, 
even  if  that  (thing)  be  (mentally)  known,  it  cannot  serve 
any  useful  purpose.  In  the  case  of  children,  sickly  people 
&c.,  joy  &c.,  are  produced  by  the  illusion  that  the  thing 
(imported  by  the  sentences  uttered  for  their  gratification) 
is  really  existent.  If,  at  the  time  when  such  (illusory) 
knowledge  is  existent,  the  conviction  should  arise  that 
the  thing  imported  is  really  non-existent,  then  joy,  &c., 
would,  (in  consequence),  disappear  that  very  moment.  If, 
in  the  case  of  the  Upanishadic  passages  also,  it  be  deter- 
mined that  they  do  not  denote  the  real  existence  of  the 
Brahman,  then,  although  they  give  rise  to  the  (conceptual) 
knowledge  of  the  Brahman,  there  would  be  (to  those 
passages)  no  finality  in  utility. 

Therefore,  it  is  a  demonstrated  conclusion  that  the 
scriptural  passage,  which  begins  with — "  From  whom 
all  these  beings  are  born" — [Taitt.  Up.  III.  i.  i.],  de- 
clares that  that  Brahman — who  is  the  only  cause  of  all 
the  worlds,  who  is  devoid  of  even  the  smallest  taint  of  all 
that  is  evil,  who  is  the  abode340  of  innumerable  auspicious 
qualities,  such  as  omniscience,  the  quality  of  willing  the 
truth,  &c.,  and  who  is  bliss  unsurpassed  in  excellence, — 
is  really  existent. 

ADH1KARANA.    V. 

Ikshatyadhikarana. 
Sutra  5.  Ikshaternasabdam. 

Because  the  activity  imported  by  the  root  Jksh  (to 
see  /.  e.  to  think)  is  predicated  (in  relation  to  what  con- 
stitutes the  cause  of  the  world)  that  which  is  not  reveal- 

340.  Here  again  the  word  used  in  the  text  is  akara.  Vide  supra  n,  339. 


Adhik.  V.  Sftt.  5.]    SRI-BHISHYA.  329 

ed  solely  by  the  scripture,  (viz.  the  pradhana)  3  4 1  is  not 
(the  Sat  or  the  Existence  which  is  referred  to  in  the  scrip- 
tural passage  relating  to  the  cause  of  the  world). 

It  has  been  already  stated  that  that  Brahman,  who  is 
taught  in  the  scriptural  passage  which  relates  to  the  cause 
of  the  world  and  which  begins  with — "  From  whom  all 
these  (beings  are  born)"— \Taitt.  Up.  III.  i.  i.],— (that 
Brahman]  who  is  omniscient,  who  is  omnipotent,  who  is 
hostile  to  all  that  is  evil  and  forms  the  only  seat  of  all  the 
auspicious  qualities, — has  to  be  enquired  into.  Now, 
by  means  of  this  aphorism — "  Because  the  activity  im- 
ported by  the  root  tksh  (to  see  i.  e.  to  think),  is  predicat- 
ed (in  relation  to  what  constitutes  the  cause  of  the  world), 
that  which  is  not  revealed  solely  by  the  scripture  (viz.  the 
pradhana)  is  not  (the  Sat  or  the  Existence  which  is  refer- 
red to  in  the  scriptural  passage  relating  to  the  cause  of  the 
world)", — and  by  means  of  other  aphorisms,  it  is  declared 
that  the  scriptural  passages342  which  mention  the  cause 
of  the  world  do  not  possess  the  power  of  denoting  the 
pradhana  and  other  similar  things  which  are  cap- 
able of  being  established  by  the  process  of  logical  in- 
ference. This  is  what  is  revealed  in  the  Qtfiandogya  :— 
"  Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was  in  the  begin- 
ning, one  only,  without  a  second It  thought — 'May 

I  become  manifold  and  be  born'.  It  created  tejas, 
&c."  [Chhand.  Up.  VI.  2.  i,  2,  et  seq.].  Here  the 
doubt  arises  whether  that,  which  is  the  cause  of  the  world 
and  is  denoted  by  the  word  Existence  (or  Sat),  is  the 

341.  The    Pradhana   of  the   Sah-  universe. 

khyas  is  what  is  otherwise   known  as  342.     The    passages   forming    the 

the  Prakriti,  It  is  Nature,  or  the  self-  basis  of  this  Adhikarana  are  contain- 

evolving  material  substratum  of  the  ed  in  Chhdnd.  Up.  VI. 

42 


.  330  SRf-BHlSHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

pradhana  which  has  been  mentioned  by  others  and  is  cap- 
able of  being  established  by  logical  inference,  or  whether  it 
is  the  Brahman  who  possesses  the  characteristics  already 
stated?  It  is  perhaps  held*  *  a  that  it  is  the  pradhana. 
Why  ?  The  passage — "Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this 
was  in  the  beginning,  one  only,  &c." — speaks  of  the  causal 
condition  of  that  thing  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  'this', 
which  constitutes  the  thing  to  be  enjoyed  (or  endured)  by 
intelligent  beings  (viz.  the  individual  souls),  and  which  is 
made  up  (of  the  qualities)  of  sattva  (goodness),  rajas  (pas- 
sion), and  tamas  (darkness),  and  which  (again)  exists  in 
variously  modified  forms  such  as  the  ether,  &c.  Indeed,  a 
thing  which  exists  in  the  condition  of  a  cause  acquires  the 
character  of  an  effect  merely  by  getting  into  another  con- 
dition. Whatever  thing  and  whatever  (general)  nature 
(thereof)  exist  in  the  condition  of  a  cause,  that  same  thing 
and  that  same  nature  (thereof)  exist  also  in  the  condition 
of  an  effect.  Moreover,  a  produced  effect  is  made  up  (of 
the  qualities)  of  sattva,  &c.  Therefore  that  pradhana  in 
which  these  qualities  are  held  in  a  state  of  equilibrium344  is 

343.  The  Sahkhya   is   the  f-Hrra-       Rajas  represents  the  condition  of  act- 
pcikshin,  or  the  objector  here.  ive     up-building   heterogeneity,    the 

344.  According    to   the   Sahkhyas,  want  of  equilibrium  in    which   is    the 
the  evolutionary  processes  of  creation  cause    of  the   progress   of  evolution, 
are   possible  only   when  there  is  he-  And  Tamas  represents  that  other  con- 
terogeneity  in  the  constitution  of  the  dition  which  causes  the   evolved   uni- 
Prakriti.     This  heterogeneity  is  the  verse    to    tend    towards     dissolution, 
result   of  the   differentiation   of  the  These  three  terms  aie  also  used  with 
Pratriti   into    the    three     Gunrts    of  a  psychological  significance,  which  is 
Sattva ,  fiafas,   and     'lamas.      When  partly  figurative  but  is   more  largely 
this    differentiation  ceases,  or   when  due  to  the  belief    that  the  material  of 
there  is  homogeneity  in  the  constitu-  the  body  of  the   incarnating  soul  de- 
tion  of  the  Pra(riti,  there  can  be   no  termines  largely   the     nature  of  the 
creation  and  no  evolution.     Sattta  re-  mental  and  moral  qualities  possessed 
presents  the   condition    of  completed  by  it  in  the   embodied  condition,  and 
development  and  perfect  equilibrium.  that  this  material    itself  is  so   chosen 


Adhik.  V.  Sat.  5.]     SRi-BniiSHYA.  33! 

alone  the  cause  (of  the  universe).      That  same  (pradhdna) 
is,  in  the  passage—"  Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this 
was  in  the  beginning,  one  only,  without  a  second  ",— de- 
clared to  be  that  undifferentiated  existence  which  has  ab- 
sorbed into  itself  all  differentiating  peculiarities.     It  is  for 
this  reason  that  a  cause   and  its  effect  have  no  (essential) 
difference  between  them.     Only  thus  can  this  proposition 
become  appropriate  (which  says)  that,  by  knowing  one 
thing,  all  things  become  known.     Otherwise,  there  would 
further  be  a  complete  difference  between  the  thing  intend- 
ed to  be  illustrated  and  the  example  of  the  lump  of  clay 
and  of  the  produced  effects  thereof,  which  are  (all)  given 
as    an    illustration    in   the    scriptural  passage  that  begins 
with — -"Just  as,  my  dear  child,   by    one   lump  of   clay, 
&c." — [Ulihdnd.  Up.\\.  1.4.].  Therefore,  in  the  scriptural 
passage   which   relates  to   the  cause  of  the  world,  nothing 
other    than    the  pradhdna    taught    by    the    great  sage 
Kapila  is  mentioned.        Moreover,  this  passage  (now  under 
discussion)  contains  a  proposition  and  an  illustration,  and 
thus    it    has    surely   the     form    of   a    logical    inference. 
Consequently,    what  is   denoted   by   the  word   Existence 
(or   Sat)  is  nothing  other  than   that  (pradhdna)  which  is 
capable  of  being  proved  by  -inference   (to  be  the  cause 
of  the  world). 

If  it  be  so  held,  it  is  stated  (in  reply)  thus :— "Because  the 
activity  imported  by  the  root  iksh  (to  sec  i.  e.  to  think),  is 
predicated  (in  relation  to  what  constitutes  the  cause  of  the 
world),  that  which  is  not  revealed  solely  by  the  scripture 
(viz.  the  pradhdna)  is  not  (the  Sat  or  the  Existence  which 
is  referred  to  in  the  scriptural  passage  relating  to  that 
cause  of  the  world)."  That  which  is  not  revealed  solely 

;ih  to  suit  the  Karma,  ul  the  incarnating  i>uul. 


332  ^Ri-BHlSHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

by  the  scripture  is  that  in  relation  to  which  the  scripture 
alone  does  not  form  the  means  of  proof.  It  is  that  which 
is  capable  of  being  established  by  the  process  of  logical 
inference.  The  meaning  is  that  it  is  the  pradhana.  That 
(pr  ad  hand)  is  not  denoted  by  the  scriptural  passages  relat- 
ing to  the  cause  of  the  world.  Why  ?  Because  the  act- 
ivity imported  by  the  root  Iksh  (to  see  i.  e.  to  think)  is 
predicated.  That  is,  because  the  root  iksh  is  used,  in  the 
scriptural  passage — •"  It  thought — May  I  become  manifold 
and  be  born." — [Qihdnd.  Up.  VI.  2.  3.], — to  denote  a  parti- 
cular kind  of  activity  in  relation  to  what  is  imported  by  the 
word  Existence  (or  Sat).  And  it  is  not  possible  for  the  non- 
intelligent  pradhana  to  be  associated  with  the  activity  of 
seeing  (i.  e.  of  thinking).  Therefore,  what  forms  the  import 
of  the  word  Existence  (or  Sat)  is  that  Highest  Person  who 
is  capable  of  so  ( seeing ',  and  who  is  a  particular  intelligent 
Being  that  is  omniscient  and  omnipotent.  Accordingly,  in 
all  contexts  which  relate  to  creation,  the  act  of  creation  is 
invariably  preceded  by  the  act  of  '  seeing'  (/.  e.  of  thinking), 
as  in  the  following  and  other  scriptural  passages  : — "  He 
thought—'  May  I  create  the  worlds'.  He  created  these 

worlds."     [Ait.  Up.  I.  i  &  2.];  "  He  thought He  created 

the prdnas."     [Pr.  Up.  VI.  3  &  4.]. 

It  may,  however,  be  said  here  that  the  cause  has 
necessarily  to  be  !in  natural  conformity  with  the  effect. 
That  is  true  ;  and  the  Highest  Person  who  is  omniscient 
and  omnipotent,  who  wills  the  truth,  and  who  owns  the 
intelligent  as  well  as  the  non-intelligent  things  in  their 
subtle  state  as  His  body,  is  certainly  in  natural  conform- 
ity with  all  produced  effects.  For  example,  the  follow- 
ing scriptural  passages  say  the  same  thing: — "  His  supreme 
power  is  revealed,  indeed,  as  varied,  natural,  and  as 
consisting  of  knowledge,  strength,  and  action." — [Svct.  Up. 


Adhik.  V.  Sift.  5.]     SRI-BHASHYA.  333 

VI.  8.J ;  "  He  who  understands  all  and  who  knows  all 
and  whose  tapas**5  consists  of  knowledge" — \Mund.  Up. 
I.i.  9.];  "He  whose  body  is  the  avyakta*^  whose 

body  is  the  akshara whose  body  is  mriiyu,  He  is  the 

internal  Self  of  all  beings."—  [Sub.  Up.  VII.].  And  this 
will  be  fully  explained  under  the  aphorism — "  (The  Brah- 
man is)  not  (the  cause  of  the  world),  because  (He  is) 
different  (from  this  world)"—  [Ved.  Sftt.  II.  i.  4.], 
and  also  under  other  aphorisms.  Here,  (however),  it  is 
maintained  that  the  scriptural  passages  relating  to  the 
creation  of  the  world  are  not  capable  of  importing  the 
pradhana.  The  logical  objections  in  regard  to  what  actu- 
ally forms  the  import  (of  those  passages)  will  be  invalidat- 
ed in  that  same  context  (in  which  this  above-mentioned 
aphorism  occurs). 

What  has  been  stated  to  the  effect  that  this  passage 
(viz.  Clihand.  Up.  VI.  i  &  2.)  is  decidedly  in  the  form 
of  a  logical  inference,  on  account  of  its  containing  a  propo- 
sition and  an  illustration, — that  is  not  right;  because  there 
is  not  given  in  it  any  basis  of  logical  inference  (  /.  c.  the 
middle  term).  When,  by  means  of  the  passage — "  (Did 
you  ask  for  that  teaching)  by  which  what  is  not  heard  be- 
comes heard"—  [Qthand.  Up.  VI.  i.  3.],  it  is  desired  to 
teach  how  by  knowing  (a  certain)  one  thing  all  things 
become  known,  then,  the  example  (of  the  clay,  &c.,)  is 
indeed  made  use  of  merely  to  show  the  possibility  of  such 
a  thing — to  him  who  is  of  opinion  that  such  a  thing  is 

345.      The   word   tapas  ordinarily  not  mean  penance  or  austerities,    and 

denotes   penance  and    religious  aus-  it  is  generally  interpreted    to    mean 

terities.      It    is    frequently    said    in  His  inner  mental  effort  of    thinking 

Vedic  and  Vedantic  literature  that  be-  and  willing  which  has  been  at  the  root 

fore     creation     the     Creator     per-  of  all  creation, 

formed  tapas.     Surely  this  tapas  can-  346,   Vide  supra  un.  184  &  185. 


334  SRI-BHISHYA.    [Chap.  1.  Part.  1. 

altogether  impossible.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  solely  for  the 
reason  that  the  activity  imported  by  the  root  iksh  (to  sec 
i.  e.  to  think),  is  declared  (in  relation  to  what  forms  the 
cause  of  the  world),  it  is  made  out  that  there  is  not  even 
the  remotest  mention  of  any  logical  inference  (here). 

It  may  again  be  said  thus  : — It  is  not  that  main  and 
natural  significance  of  '  seeing ',  which  is  found  to  exist  in 
intelligent  beings,  that  is  mentioned  here ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  is  a  figurative  significance  of  'seeing' 
(that  is  implied  here);  because,  in  the  following  scriptural 
passages — "  That  fire  saw  " — {Qihand.  Up.  VI.  2.  3.], 
"Those  waters  saw  " — [Qihand.  Up.  ¥1.2.4.], — there  is 
the  association  of  a  figurative  'seeing'  (with  the  pradhana). 
Moreover,  it  is  common  to  apply  figuratively  the  attributes 
of  intelligent  beings  to  non-intelligent  things,  as  in  the 
instances, — "  The  paddy  crops  are  expecting  the  rains  ", — 
"  By  means  of  the  rains  the  (sown)  seed  became  exceed- 
ingly gladdened." 

Therefore,  after  stating  the  supposition  that  the 
'  seeing '  (here  mentioned)  may  be  figurative,  he  (the 
Sfttrakard)  disproves  it  (thus). 

Sutra  6.  Gaifi.asihennatmasabdat. 

If  it  be  said  that  it  (viz.  the  import  of  the  root  Iksh,  to 
see)  is  (here)  figurative,  (it  is  maintained  that)  it  cannot 
be  so;  because  there  is  the  word  Atman  (or  Self  mentioned 
in  the  context).347 

What  has  been  stated  (above)  to  the  effect  that,  since 
there  is  the  association  of  a  figurative  '  seeing '  (with  the 

347.    The  Upmushodte  context   re-       the  sixth  Prapcithaka  of  the  (._hhand- 
luting  to  this  section  is  the   whole  ol       ogya-Upanishad, 


Adhik.  V.  Sut.  6.]    SRI-BHASHYA.  335 

pradhana),  this  predication  of 'seeing'  in  relation  to  Exist- 
ence (or  Sat)  also  is  figurative,  and  is  intended  to  denote 
that  condition  (of  the  pradhana)  which  invariably  pre- 
cedes creation, — this  is  not  right;  because,  in  the  following 
passage  (occurring  in  that  context) — "  All  this  has  That 
for  its  Self;  That  is  Existence;  That  is  the  Atman  (or the 
Self)."—  [Qihand.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.],— that  which  is  denoted  by 
the  word  Existence  (or  Sat)  is  (also)  denoted  by  the  word 
Atman  (or  Self).  What  is  said  is  this: — That  teaching,  which 

is  found  in  the  passage — "All  this  has  That  for  its  Self. 

That  is  the  Self."—  [Qihand.    Up.  VI.  8.  7.],— has  in  view 
the  world  which  is  made  up  of  intelligent  and  non-intelli- 
gent things,  and  points  out  that  the   Sat  (or  the  Exist- 
ence) is  the  Self  thereof ;  and  it  (viz.  such  a  teaching)  can- 
not be  appropriately  given  in  relation  to  the  (purely)  non- 
intelligent  thing  pradhana.     Thus   the    elements  of   fire 
(tejas),  water,  and  earth  have  also  the  Highest  Self  for  their 
Self.    Therefore  the  words  tejas,  &c.,  are  also  significant 
of  the  Highest  Self  alone.    Accordingly  there  is  the  fol- 
lowing scriptural   passage  : — "  Indeed  entering  into  these 
three  deities  along  with  this  individual  self  which  is  (also) 
the  same  as  Myself,  I  evolve  the  differentiation  of  names 
and  forms."     [JJihand.  Up.  VI.  3.  2.].     And  from  this  it 
follows   that   tejas   and   the   other  elements   acquire   the 
character  of  being  things  and  also  the  capability  of  assum- 
ing their  own  particular  names  wholly  as  a  consequence 
of  the  Supreme  Self  entering  into   them.     Therefore  in 
these  statements  also,  namely, — "  That  fire  saw"; — "Those 
waters  saw"— -\3ihand.  Up.  VI.  2.  3  &  4.],— the  predica- 
tion of  '  seeing '  has  its  primary  and  natural   significance. 
Consequently,  in  the  statement — "  It  saw  " — [Qihand.  Up. 
VI.  2.  3.],— the  supposition,  which  gives  a  figurative  signi- 
ficance (to  '  seeing ')  even  a*  a  consequence  of  the  associa- 


336  SRI-BHISHYA.    [Chop.  I.  Part.  I. 

tion  (of  that  '  seeing '  with  the  pradhdna),  is  altogether 
dispelled  (as  wrong).  Such  is  the  meaning  of  this 
aphorism. 

What  is  denoted  by  the  word  Existence  (or  Sat]  is  not 
the  pradhdna,  for  the  following  reason  also  : — • 

Sutra  7.       Tannishthasya  mokshopadesat. 

Because  (also)  it  is  taught  (in  the  context)  that  he 
who  is  firmly  devoted  to  That  (viz.  the  Sat)  obtains  final 
release. 


After  the  scriptural  sentence — "  That  thou  art"- 
[CJihdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.], — teaches  Svetaketu,  who  is  desir- 
ous of  attaining  final  release,  that  the  Sat  is  to  be  continu- 
ously meditated  upon  as  the  Atman  (or  the  Self),  this 
(other)  sentence — "  As  long  as  he  is  not  freed  (from  the 
body),  so  long  there  is  delay  ;  then  he  will  be  blessed."- 
\Qihand.  Up.  VI.  14.  2.] — tells  him  that  in  the  case  of 
the  person,  who  is  firmly  devoted  to  that  (Sat  or  One  Exist- 
ence), final  release,  the  nature  of  which  is  the  attainment  of 
the  Brahman,  is  delayed  only  till  the  falling  off  of  the  body. 
And  if  the  non-intelligent  pradhdna  had  been  taught  to  be 
the  cause  of  the  world,  then  it  would  not  have  been  appro- 
priate to  teach  that  the  continuous  meditation  of  it  as  the 
Self  forms  the  means  of  attaining  final  release.  And  accord- 
ing to  the  passage  —  "  Of  whatever  nature  a  man's 
worship  is  in  this  world,  of  that  nature  he  becomes  after 
death." — \Qihdnd.  Up.  III.  14.  i.], — there  must  result 
to  him,  who  is  firmly  devoted  to  that  (pradhdna), 
nothing  other  than  the  attainment  of  that  (same)  non-in- 
telligent thing  (or  the  pradhdna).  Moreover,  the  sastra 


Adhik.  V.  Sut.  8.~\         SRI-BHISHYA.  337 

(or  the  scripture),  which  is  much  more  affectionate  (to- 
wards us)  than  even  thousands  of  mothers  and  fathers, 
cannot  teach  (us)  to  attain  that  non-intelligent  thing  (or 
pradhdna)  which  forms  the'  Cause  of  (our)  being  attacked 
by  (our)  well-known  three  miseries.  348  Indeed  those  who 
maintain  that  the  pradhdna  forms  the  cause  of  the  world 
do  not  acknowledge  that  final  release  results  to  him  who 
is  firmly  devoted  to  (that)  pradhdna. 

Again  the  pradhdna  is  not  (what  is  denoted  by  the 
word  Sal  or  Existence]  for  the  following  reason  also  :— 

Sutra  8.  Heyatvavazkanachcha. 

Because  also  it  is  not  declared  (in  the  context)  that 
it  (viz.  what  is  denoted  by  the  word  Sat  or  Existence) 
deserves  to  be  discarded. 

.  If  the  pradhdna  alone  were  that  cause  (of  crea- 
tion) which  is  denoted  by  the  word  Sat  (or  Existence}, 
then  (the  idea  of)  Svetaketu,  who  was  desirous  of  attain- 
ing final  release,  being  the  same  as  that  (Sat)  would 
be  opposed  to  (his;  final  release,  and  should  therefore  have 
been  taught  (to  him)  to  be  only  such  (an  idea)  as  altogether 
deserved  to  be  discarded.  And  that  is  not  done.  On  the 
contrary,  in  the  following  passages,  namely,  "That  thou 
art,"—  \_Chhdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.7.];  "So  long  as  he  is  not 
(freed  from  the  body),  &c."—[C&Iiand.  Up.  VI.  14.  2.],- 
it  is  taught  that  that  (idea  of  his  being  the  same  as  the 
Sat}  is  necessarily  such  as  deserves  to  be  adopted  (by 
him). 

348,  Vide  supra  p.  4.  n.  12. 

43 


SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

The  pradhdna  is  not  (what  is  denoted  by  the  word 
Sat  or  Existence)  for  the  following  reason  also:— 

Sutra  9.     Pratljnavlrodhat.3*9 

Because  (also)  there  would  then  be  the  contradiction 
of  the  proposition  330(enunciated  in  the  context). 

If  the  pradhdna  were  taken  to  be  the  cause  of  the 
world,  there  would  also  be  the  contradiction  of  the  propo- 
sition (enunciated  in  the  context).  Indeed,  in  the  very 
beginning  of  the  scriptural  passage  (under  reference),  the 
proposition  is  enunciated  that,  by  knowing  a  (certain) 
single  thing,  all  things  become  known.  And  that  (propo- 
sition,) has  to  be  justified  solely  by  means  of  the  fact  that, 
from  the  knowledge  of  the  causal  Sal  (or  Existence),  the 
world,  which  is  its  produced  effect  and  is  made  up  of 
the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent  things,  becomes 
known  ;  and  the  reason  (for  this)  is  that  a  cause  and  its 
effect  are  not  different  from  each  other.  But  the  whole 
collection  of  intelligent  beings  (viz.  the  individual  selv- 
es) cannot  be  the  effects  produced  out  of  the  pradhdna ; 
and  consequently,  by  knowing  the  pradhana,  the  know- 
ledge relating  to  the  whole  collection  of  intelligent  beings 
cannot  result ;  thus  this  (proposition  itself)  would  be  con- 
tradicted if  the  pradhdna  be  taken  to  be  the  cause  of 
the  world. 


349.  This  Sutra  is  not  commented  is  to  the  effect — "  Did  you  ask   for 
tipon  by  Sankara  and  by  Anandattrtha  that  teaching  by  which   what  is   not 
in  their  commentaries  on  the  Vedanta-  heard   becomes   heard,  what    is  not 
Sutras.  thought   becomes   thought,   what    is 

350.  This  proposition  is  contain-  not  known  becomes  known,  ' 
ed   in      Chhand.     Up.    VI.    i.  3.    and 


Adhik.  V.  Srit.  /o.J    SRI-BHA.SHYA,  339 

The  pradhana  is  not  (what  is  denoted  by  the  word 
Sat  or  Existence  in  the  scriptural  passage  under  discussion) 
for  the  following  reason  also  :— 

Sutra  10.  Svapyayat. 

Because  (also),  there  is  (mentioned  in  the  context), 
the  withdrawal  (of  the  individual  self)  into  its  own  cause, 
(/.  e.  into  the  Safr. 

This  scriptural  passage,  namely, — "Know  from  me,  my 
dear  child,  what  deep  sleep  is.  When  any  person  is 
known  to  be  asleep,  he  is  then  in  union  with  the  Sat.  He 
withdraws  into  his  own  cause.  Therefore  they  say,  lie 
sleeps,  because  he  is  absorbed  into  his  own  cause  (i.e.  into  the 
Brahman}:'— [Qihdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  i.]— relates  to  that 
very  subject  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  Sat.  It 
declares  that  the  individual  soul,  who  is  asleep  and  is  in 
union  with  the  Sat,  has  withdrawn  (himself)  into  his 
own  cause ;  that  is,  that  he  has  been  absorbed  into  his  own 
cause.  And  (the)  dissolution  (of  a  thing)  is  (its)  absorption 
into  (its)  own  cause.  Moreover  the  non-intelligent  pra- 
dhdna  does  not  deserve  to  become  the  cause  of  the  individual 
soul.  The  meaning  of  the  scriptural  statement — "  He  with- 
draws into  his  own  cause," — \Chhdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  i.], — is 
that  the  individual  soul  goes  back  only  unto  the  Supreme 
Self.  It  is  declared  in  the  scriptural  passage351  relat- 
ing to  the  differentiation  of  names  and  forms  that  that 
Brahman  Himself,  who  has  the  intelligent  thing  (or  the 
individual  soul)  for  His  body  and  forms  its  Self,  is  denoted 
by  the  word  jlva  (which  ordinarily  means  the  individual 
soul).  By  means  of  the  statement—"  He  is  then  in  union 
with  the  Sal;  He  withdraws  into  his  own  cause."— [Chhcind. 

351.     Vide  (J.hdnd.  U/>.  VI    3.  2. 


340  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

Up.   VI.  8.   i.] — it  is  taught  that   that  Brahman  who 
is  denoted  by  the  word  jlva  is  free  from    (any)   asso- 
ciation  with    names    and    forms   at  the    time    of   deep 
sleep  also,  as  (He  is)  at  the  time  of  universal  dissolu- 
tion ;  and  (He)  is  hence  to  be  denoted  merely  by  the  word 
Sat  (or  Existence).     To  the  same  effect   it  is  stated  in 
similar  contexts  (elsewhere)  that,  owing  to  his  (/.  e.  the  in- 
dividual self's)  not  being  associated  with  names  and  forms, 
he  is  embraced  by  Him  who  is  omniscient;  and  consequently 
it  is  said  that,  "  When  he  is  embraced  by  the   omniscient 
Self,  he  does  not  know  anything  that  is  external  nor  any- 
thing that  is  internal."    \_Bnh.  Up.  IV.  3.  21.].   Indeed,  un- 
til final  release  takes  place,  the  individual  self  is  associated 
with  names  and  forms  ;  and  it  is,  therefore,   that  there  is 
born  (in  him)  the  knowledge  of  objects  other  than  him- 
self.   At  the   time  of  deep    sleep  he  certainly  gives  up 
names  and  forms,  and  is  embraced  by  the  Sat  (i.  e.  by  the 
Brahman] :  and  again,  in  the  wakeful  state,  he  becomes 
associated  with  names  and  forms  and  assumes  (for  himself) 
a  particular  name  and  a  particular  form.    This  is  clearly 
stated  in  other  scriptural  passages,  namely, — "  When  he 
(/.  e.  the  individual  self)    is  asleep,  he  sees   no   dreams 
whatsoever;  and  he  becomes  one  wholly  with  that  Prdna 

(or    Brahman] From    that    Self, 

the  prdnas  proceed    each  towards    its    (own,)  place."- 
[Kaush.  Up.  IV.  19.].  To  the  same  effect  is  the  following 
scriptural  passage  also — "Whatever  these  beings  are  here, 
(/.  c.  in  the  state  of  separation  from  their  cause),  whether  a 

tiger,  or  a  lion,  or  a  wolf,  or  a  boar, 332  or  a 

fly,  or  a  mosquito, — that  they  become  again  and  again." 

'    352,  The    quotation  here   is    not       "  or  an  insect  or  a  moth." 
Tomplete,  the  portion  omitted  being 


Adhik.  V.  Sut.  //.]    SRI-BHA.SHYA.  341 

\Qihand.  Up.  VI.  9.  2.  &  VI.  10.  2.].  And  a  similar 
scriptural  text  also  says  that  the  individual  soul  who  is  so 
in  deep  sleep  "  is  embraced  by  the  omniscient  Self."  \Brih. 
Up.  IV.  3.  21.].  Therefore,  He  who  is  denoted  by  the 
word  Sat  (in  the  scriptural  passage  under  discussion), 
is  that  Highest  Person  alone  who  is  the  Highest  Brah- 
man, who  is  omniscient  and  is  the  Highest  Lord.  The 
Vrittikdra  (Bodhayana)  says  the  same  thing  thus : — 
"  In  the  scriptural  text — •'  Then  he  is  in  union  with 
the  Sal.' — this  (viz.  the  fact  that  the  Sat  is  the  Brahman 
who  is  the  cause  of  the  world)  is  conclusively  made  out 
by  means  of  (the  creatures)  withdrawing  (into  the  Sal) 
and  returning  (from  the  Sat);  and  the  scripture  also  says 
that  '  He  (the  individual  self)  is  embraced  by  the  omnisci- 
ent Self.'" 

The  pradhdna  is  not  (what  is  denoted  by  the  word 
Sat)  for  the  following  reason  also  : — 

Sutra  11.  Gatisamanyat. 

Because  there  has  to  be  a  similarity  of  import 
(between  the  passage  under  reference  and  the  other 
passages  relating  to  the  cause  of  the  creation,  &c.,  of  the 
world). 

Whatever  is  the  import  of  the  following  among  other 
passages  relating  to  the  creation  of  the  world,  namely,— 
"The  Self,  indeed,  this  one  only  was  in  the  beginning.  No- 
thing else  lived.333  He  thought — 'May  I  create  the 
worlds.'  He  created  these  worlds." — [Ait.  Up.  I.  i  & 
2.];  "  From  that  same  Self,  indeed,  the  spatial  ether  came 

353.    Literally,    winked  or  opened  Us  eyes. 


342  SRI-BHASHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  1. 

into  existence,  from  the  spatial  ether  the  air  (came  into 
existence)  ;  from  the  air,  the  fire  ;  from  the  fire,  the 
waters;  and  from  the  waters,  the  earth." — \_Taitt.  Up. 
II.  i.  i.]  ;  "That  which  is  this  Rigveda  is  the  breath 
of  Him,  that  is,  of  this  Great  Being."—  [Sub.  Up.  II.]— a54 
(whatever)  is  (their)  signification, — from  the  similarity 
(of  import)  with  that,  that  is,  from  the  sameness  of  meaning 
(which)  this  (passage  under  reference)  is  to  have  with 
that  (signification) — (it  has  to  be  inferred  that  the  pra- 
dhdna  is  not  the  Sal).  In  all  these  (above  passages) 
also,  the  Lord  of  all  is  made  out  to  be  the  cause  (of 
the  world).  Therefore  here  (/.  c.  in  this  passage)  also  it 
is  definitely  determined  that  the  Lord  of  all  is  alone  the 
cause  (of  the  world). 

The  pradhdna  is  not  (what  is  denoted  by  the  word 
Sat}  for  the  following  reason  also  : 

Sutra  12.  Srutatva  ^h^a. 

Because  also  it  is  revealed  (in  the  very  Upanishad  in 
which  the  passage  under  discussion  occurs,  and  in  other 
Upanlshads,  that  the  Supreme  5elf  is  the  cause  of  the 
universe). 

Indeed,  in  this  very  Upanishad  (viz.  the  Chhdndogya}, 
in  the  following  passages,  namely, — "  Entering  in  along 
with  this  individual  self  which  is  (also)  the  same  as  Myself, 
I  evolve  the  differentiation  of  names  and  forms." — \Qihdud, 
Up.  VI.  3.  2.],  "  All  these  things  which  are  born,  my 
dear  one,  have  their  origin  in  the  Sat  (i.  e.  in  the  One 
Existence),  have  their  abode  in  the  Sat,  and  are  established 
in  the  Sat."—  \Qihdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  4  &  6.],  "All  this  has 
this  (Brahman}  for  its  Self.  That  (Brahman}  is  Existence. 

354.  Vide  supra  n.  251. 


Adhik.  V.  Sut.  12.]     SRI-BHISHYA.  343 

He  is  the  Self."—  [Qihdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.],  "  Whatever  there 
is  here  as  existent  and  whatever  there  is  as  non-existent  in 
relation  to  him,— all  that  is  contained  in  Him."— [Qihdnd. 
Up.  VIII.  i.  3.],  "In  Him,  all  desires  are  contained."— 
\Qihand.  Up.  VIII.  i.  5.],  "  This  Self  is  devoid  of  sin,  is 
free  from  old  age,  free  from  death,  free  from  sorrow, 
free  from  hunger,  free  from  thirst,  and  desires  the  truth, 
and  wills  the  truth."-- -\Chhand.  Up.  VIII.i.  5.  &  VIII. 
7.  i  &  3.]»— it  is  declared  that  that,  which  is  denoted 
by  the  word  Sat,  is,  in  consequence  of  its  possessing 
the  same  character  as  the  Self,  capable  of  causing  the 
differentiation  of  names  and  forms  and  possesses  (the  qua- 
lity of)  omniscience,  (the  quality  of)  omnipotence,  the 
quality  of  being  the  support  of  all,  the  quality  of  being 
devoid  of  sin,  &c.,  the  quality  of  desiring  the  truth,  and 
also  the  quality  of  willing  the  truth.  To  the  same  effect 
are  the  following  and  other  scriptural  passages  found  else- 
where also  : — "  He  has  none  as  His  lord  and  (none)  as 
His  ruler  in  the  world  ;  and  He  has  no  characteristic  body 
whatsoever.  He  is  the  cause  and  is  the  Lord  of  what  is' 
the  lord  of  the  senses  (/.  e.  of  the  jlva  or  the  individual 
soul);  He  has  no  progenitor  and  no  superior."— [Svct.  Up. 
VI.  9.];  "The  omniscient  Lord  who  creates  all  beings 
gives  them  names,  and,  calling  them  (by  those  names),  He 
ever  continues  to  be." — \Taitt.  Ar.  III.  12.  7.];  "He, 
who  has  entered  within,  is  the  ruler  of  all  things  that 
are  born,  and  is  the  Self  of  all." — \Taitt.  Ar.  III.  24.]; 
"  He  is  the  Self  of  the  whole  universe  and  is  the  best 
refuge  ;  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  world,  the  Lord  of  the  indi- 
vidual souls  ;  whatever  thing  there  is  in  this  world,  either 
seen  or  heard,  Narayana  pervades  all  that  within  and 
without  and  so  remains  for  ever".—  \M.  Nar.  XI.  3  £  5.]; 
"  He  is  the  internal  Self  of  all  beings,  He  is  devoid  of  all 


344  SRI-BHA.SHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

sins,  He  is  the  Divine  Lord,   He  is   the  one   Narayana.' 
[Sub.  Up.  VII.  i.].  Therefore  the  scriptural  passage 

which  mentions  the  cause  of  the  world  is  not  capable  of 
importing  (as  such)  the  pradhdna  and  other  similar  things. 
Consequently  it  is  settled  that  that  Narayana  alone — who 
is  omniscient  and  omnipotent,  who  is  the  Lord  of  all 
lords,  who  is  devoid  of  even  the  smallest  taint  of  all  that 
is  evil,  who  is  the  great  ocean  that  receives  the  flood  of 
all  the  collections  of  (all)  the  innumerable  auspicious  qua- 
lities which  are  unsurpassed  in  excellence,  who  is  the 
Highest  Person,— He  alone  forms  the  one  cause  of  the 
universe  and  is  the  Brahman  that  has  to  be  enquired  into. 
For  the  same  reason  it  has  to  be  understood  that  the 
contention,  which  maintains  that  the  Brahman  is  pure  in- 
telligence devoid  of  characterising  attributes,  has  also  been 
set  at  naught  by  the  Sutrakara  with  the  help  of  these 
(above  quoted)  scriptural  passages ;  because  it  is  establish- 
ed (by  him)  that  that  Brahman,  who  is  to  be  enquired 
into,  is  associated  with  the  real  attribute  of  'seeing',  &c., 
which  forms  the  main  and  natural  significance  of  the  root 
iksh,  (to  'see').  Indeed,  according  to  the  contention  which 
maintains  that  that  (which  is  the  cause  of  the  world) 
is  devoid  of  characterising  attributes,  even  the  character  of 
a  witness  (/.  e:  of  one  who  'sees')  has  to  be  unreal  (as 
applied  to  that  cause).  That  the  Brahman,  who  is  to  be 
made  out  from  the  Vcdanta,  has  been  enunciated  to  be 
the  object  of  the  enquiry  (here),  and  that  He  is  intelligent, 
are  (both)  declared  by  means  of  this  aphorism  among 
others  ;  namely, — "Because  the  activity  imported  by  the 
root  zksh  (to  see  i.e.  to  think]  is  predicated  (in  relation  to 
what  constitutes  the  cause  of  the  world),  that  which  is 
not  revealed  solely  by  the  scripture  (viz.  the  pradhana}, 
is  not  (the  Sat  or  the  Existence  which  is  referred  to  in 


Adhik.  V.  SuL  12.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  345 

the  scriptural  passage  relating  to  that  cause  of  the  world)." 
Vcd.  Sftt.  I.  i.  5.].  To  possess  the  character  of  an  intel- 
ligent being  is  known  to.be  the  same  as  to  possess  the 
quality  of  intelligence.  And  accordingly  that  which  is 
devoid  of  the  attribute  of  'seeing'  (or  thinking)  has  exact- 
ly the  same  nature  as  \hzpradhana. 

Moreover,  according  to  the  position  which  maintains 
that  the  Brahman  is  pure  luminosity  devoid  of  charac- 
terising attributes,  it  is  difficult  even  to  establish  that  He  is 
(such)  luminosity.     Luminosity  (or  intelligence)  is  indeed 
known  to  be  that  particular  thing  which  is  capable  of  mak- 
ing itself  and  other  things  fit  to  be  realised  (by  the  mind). 
The  thing  which  is  devoid  of  attributes  does  not  possess  both 
these  characteristics,  and  it  certainly  has  in  consequence 
the  character  of  a  non-intelligent  thing  like  a  pot  or  any 
other  similar  object.   If  it  be  said  that,  even  though  it  does 
not  possess  both  these  characteristics,  it  is  as  good  as  if  it 
had  them,  it  is  replied  that  it  cannot  be  so.    To  be  as  good 
as  if  it  had  them  is  indeed  nothing  other  than  (for  it)  to  be 
able  to  do  what  they  are  capable  of  doing.     On  admitting 
the  possession  (by  the  Brahman}  of  the  quality  correspond- 
ing to  this  capability,   the   position  which  maintains  the 
attributelessness  (of  the  Brahman)  will  indeed  amount  to 
have  been  given  up.  Again,  if  it  be  urged  that,  on  the  autho- 
rity of  the  scripture,    this    one    particular   characteristic 
quality  (of  capability)  has  to  be  admitted,  then  indeed,  for 
that  same  reason,  omniscience,  omnipotence,  the  quality  of 
being  the  Lord  of  all  lords,  the  quality  of  being  the   abode 
of  all  auspicious  attributes,  the  quality  of  being  hostile  to 
all  that  is  evil,  and  all  other  similar  qualities   will  have  to 
be  admitted.     Again,   to   possess  a  capability  is  the  same 
as  to  be  able  to  produce  a  particular  effect ;  and  •  that 
(possession  of  the  capability)  has  to  be  definitely  determined 

44 


346  SRf-BittSHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

solely  by  means  of  (its)  produced  effect.  When  (such)  a 
particular  produced  effect  is  incapable  of  being  proved, 
then  the  possession  of  that  capability,  which  has  to  be  defi- 
nitely determined  solely  by  means  of  that  (effect),  becomes 
also  incapable  of  proof. 

Further,  according  to  him  who  maintains  (the  Brah- 
man to  be)  an  attributeless  entity,  it  is  impossible  to  prove 
(that  the  Brahman  possesses)  the-character  of  being  a  thing 
at  all ;  for,  it  has  been  already  335pointed  out  that  percep- 
tion, inference,  revelation,  and  one's  own  experience  deal 
with  things  which  are  possessed  of  attributes. 

Therefore,  it  is  conclusively  established  that  that 
Highest  Person  alone,  who  is  capable  of  '  seeing '  and  of 
willing  to  the  effect3  3  6-'May  I  become  manifold  in  the  form 
of  the  world  which  is  made  up  of  wonderful  intelligent 
and  non-intelligent  things',— that  (Highest  Person  alone)  is 
He  who  has  to  be  enquired  into. 

ADHIKARAXA.   VI. 

Anandamayddhikarana. 

It  has  thus  been  pointed  out  how  the  Brahman,  who 
is  to  be  enquired  into,  is  distinct  from  the  pradhdna  which 
is  (merely)  an  object  to  be  enjoyed  (or  endured)  by  intelli- 
gent being*  (/>.  by  individual  souls),  which  is  non-intelligent 
in  its  own  nature,  and  which  consists  of  the  qualities  of 
saliva  (goodness),  rajas  (passion),  and  tamas  (darkness). 
Now,  it  will  be  declared  that  the  Brahman,  who  is  hostile 
to  all  that  is  evil  and  who  is  unsurpassed  bliss  itself,  is 
distinct  (both)  from  the  subjective  self  who  is  pure,  and 

355.  Vide  supra  pp.  54  to  60.  Chhana   Up.  VI  .2.  3. 

356.  Vide    Taitt.  Up.   II.  6.  I.  & 


Adhik.  VI.  SnL  /j.]  SRi-BHisHYA.  347 

also  (from  the  subjective  self)  who  is  under  the  influence 
.pf&z/v/zaaud  is  (thus)  impure,  owing  to  his  being  immersed 
in  the  ocean  of  varied  and  endless  miseries  resulting  from 
his  association  with  the  prakriti  which  is  made  up  of  the 
three  qualities  (of  saliva,  &c.). 

Sutra  13.  Anandamayobhyasat. 

That  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  Anandamaya  (is 
the  Brahman);  because  there  is,  (in  the  context),  3  8Uhe 
repetition  of  various  grades  (of  bliss  which  culminate  in 
the  Anandamaya  or  the  Highest  Bliss). 

Starting  (the  exposition  of)  the  subject-matter  of  the 
context  in   the   passage— "This  purusha   a38   is   thus   a 
modification    of    the    essence    of   food ",  —  \Taitt.    Up. 
II.   i.    i.j,     the   Taittinyas  recite — "Different  from  this 
which  consists    of  understanding  (or  knowledge)   is   the 
(still)   inner  Self,   the   Anandamaya   (or  That  which  con- 
sists of  Bliss)."     \Taitt_.  Up.  II.  5.  i.].     Here  the  doubt 
arises    whether    this    Anandamaya  is  the   Highest   Self, 
who  is  different  from  the  individual  self  that  is  subject  to 
bondage  and  release,  and  is  generally  denoted  by  the  word 
jlva;  or  whether   (the   Anandamaya  is)   that  (individual 
self)  himself.     It  is  perhaps  thought  right  to  hold  3  3  9  that 
it  is  the  individual  self.    Why  ?   Because,  in  the  passage— 
"  This  itself  is  the  embodied  Self  of  that   (which  consists 
of  understanding  or  knowledge)." — [Taitl.  Up.  II.  5.  i.]  — 
it  is  declared  that  the  Anandamaya  is  associated  with  an 
embodiment.     Indeed  the  embodied  one  is  that  individual 

357.  The  context  here  is  Taitt.L'p\\.         359.    The  Purvafaks/iin  or  the  ub- 

358.  The  word  Purusha    is     here      jector  here  is  the  Sdfitftya. 
intci^reted  to  mean  the  body. 


34$  SRi-feHisHYA.      [Chap.  /.  Part.  I. 

self  who  is  in  association  with  the  bod}*.  It  may  how- 

ever be  said  that  the  scripture  has  (here)  the  aim  of  show- 
ing what  that  happiness  is  which  is  enjoyed  by  the 
Brahman,  who  is  declared  to  be ' the  cause  of  the  world; 
and  that,  (with  that  object  in  view),  it  refers  in  the 
beginning  to  what  consists  of  food,  &c.;  and  that,  going 
on  step  by  step,  it  finally  teaches  that  that  same  cause 
of  the  world  is  what  consists  of  Bliss.  And  that  which 
is  the  cause  of  the  world  has  been  stated  to  be  the 
omniscient  Lord  of  all,  because  it  is  revealed  in  the  scrip- 
tural sentence — "  It  saw  " — [Qihdnd  Up.  VI.  2.  3.]— 
that  that  (cause)  is  capable  of  the  activity  of  '  seeing ' 
(/.  e.  of  thinking).  True,  it  has  been  (so)  stated ;  but  that 
(cause  of  the  world)  is  nothing  other  than  \\\Q  jiva  (or 
the  individual  self);  because,  in  the  passages — "  Entering 
in  along  with  this  individual  self  which  is  (also)  the  same 
as  Myself,  &c."—[£&hdnd.  Up.  VI.  3.  2.];  "That  thou 
art,  O  Svetaketu."— [Chhdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.],— that 
which  is  pointed  out  to  be  the  cause  of  the  world  is 
seen  to  be  grammatically  equated  with  the  individual 
self.  A  grammatical  equation  is  indeed  intended  to 
give  the  teaching  of  oneness  (about  the  things  equated 
therein);  as  in  the  instance—"  This  is  that  Deva- 
datta", — and  in  other  (such  instances).  And  that  act  of 
creation  which  is  invariably  preceded  by  '  seeing '  (/.  e.  by 
thinking)  is  certainly  appropriate  to  the  intelligent  indivi- 
dual self  (also).  Therefore,  by  means  of  the  passage — "-He 
who  knows  the  Brahman  attains  the  Highest." — [Taitt.  Up. 
II.  i.  i.],  that  essential  nature  of  the  individual  self,  which 
is  (altogether)  free  from  association  with  the  non-intelli- 
gent thing  (viz.  matter),  is  taught  to  be  the  (final) 
object  of  attainment.  The  definition  of  that  essential 
nature,  which  is  free  from  association  with  the  non- 


Adhik.  VI.  Sat.  13."]  SRi- 


intelligent  thing  (matter),  is  said  to  be  this,  namely,  "  The 
Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infinity."  [Taitt. 
Up.  II.  i.  i.].  Indeed  final  release  is  nothing  other 
than  the  attainment  of  this  nature  (by  the  individual  self); 
because  —  "  To  him  who  is  and  has  a  body,  there  is 
no  destruction  of  the  pleasing  and  the  unpleasing;  the 
pleasing  and  the  unpleasing  touch  not  .him  who  is  and  has 
no  body."  \Qihdnd.  Up.  VIII.  12.  i.].  Hence,  that  essen- 
tial nature  of  the  individual  self,  which  is  free  from  igno- 
rance (or  avidyd)  and  is  referred  to  in  the  very  beginning  (of 
the  context  under  reference),  —  (that)  is"  taught  to  be  the 
Anandamaya  (or  that  which  consists  of  bliss).  According- 
ly, with  a  view  to  indicate  the  essential  'nature  of  the  indi- 
vidual self,  the  body  is,  in  accordance  with  the  manner 
of  pointing  out  the  moon  with  the  help  of  (an  apparently 
contiguous)  branch  of  a  tree,  first  of  all  pointed  out  in  the 
statement  that  the  purusha  is  made  up  of  food  —  \Taitt. 
Up.  H.i.  i.];  and  then  the  five-fold  prana  existing  within 
that  (body)  and  forming  its  support,  then  the  mind  existing 
even  in  the  interior  of  that  (prana}  and  then  the  intellect 
existing  within  that  (mind),  are  all  mentioned,  each  in  its 
particular  place,  in  an  order  helpful  to  ready  apprehension, 
—by  means  of  the  expressions  (that  the  purusha  is) 
prdnamaya  for  that  which  consists  of  prana),  is  manonmya 
(or  that  which  consists  of  mind),  and  is  vijildnamaya  (or  that 
which  consists  of  understanding  or  knowledge);  afterwards, 
the  individual  self  which  exists  in  the  interior  of  all  these 
things  is  taught  in  the  passage—"  Different  (from  the  vi- 
jndnamayd)  is  the  inner  self,  the  anandamaya'.'  [Taitt. 
Up.  II.  5.  i.];  and  then  it  (i.e.  the  context  under  reference) 
brings  to  a  close  the  series  leading  to  the  internal  self. 
Consequently,  it  is  definitely  determined  that  what  is  (here) 
taught  is-^that  the  essential  nature  of  the  individual  self 


350  SRI-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  L  Part.  1. 

itself  is  that  Brahman  which  is  referred  to  in  the  very 
beginning  of  the  context  in  the  passage — "  He  who 
knows  the  Brahman  attains  (the  Highest)." — \_Taitt.  Up. 
II.  i.  i.],  and  that  that  same  (essential  nature  of  the 
individual  self)  is  the  dnandamaya  (or  what  consists  of 
bliss).  It  may  also  be  said3C°that,  in  accordance  with 

the  scriptural  statement — "  The  Brahman  is  the  tail  and 
the  support." — \_Taitt.  Up.  II.  5.  i.],the  Brahman  is  made 
out  to  be  other  than  the  Anandamaya  (or  that  which  consists 
of  bliss).  But  it  can  not  be  so(made  out).  TheBrahman  Him- 
self who  is  (here)  conceived  to  have  the  form  of  an  embodied 
person  (or  purushd)  is,  in  harmony  with  His  own  peculiar 
nature,  represented  to  be  possessed  of  the  head,  the 
arm  and  the  tail.  Just  as,  in  the  scriptural  statement 
beginning  with — "This  is  its  head"— [7a///.  Up.  II.  i.  i.], 
the  body,  which  is  a  modification  of  food  and  is  an  organic 
whole  made  up  of  constituent  parts,  is  described  as  possess- 
ing the-head,  the  arm  and  the  tail  which  are  (all)  its  own 
constituent  parts  and  are  not  different  from  itself;  so 
also,  the  Brahman  too,  who  consists  of  bliss,  is  described  by 
means  of  joy,  &c.,  which  are  [not  different  from  Him- 
self. It  being  so,  on  account  of  His  being  the  seat  of  joy, 
pleasure,  satisfaction  and  bliss,  which  are  (all)  described 
to  be  (His)  constituent  parts,  the  Anandamaya  who  is  an 
indivisible  whole  is  spoken  of  as  "the  Brahman  who  is  the 
tail  and  the  support."  And  if  anything  other  than  the  Ananda- 
maya (or  what  consists  of  Bliss)  had  been  the  Brahman, 
then  it  would  have  also  been  described  to  the  effect  that 
"  Different  from  this,  indeed,  which  consists  of  Bliss,  is  the 
(still)  inner  Self,  the  Brahman."  And  it  is  not  so  described. 
.What  is  said  is  this: — The  Brahman,  who  is  referred  to  in 

360.     This  objecti'oiv  against  the  Sdhkhya  proceeds  from  the  A  du -ailm* 


Adhik.  VL  Snt,  /j.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  351 

the  very  beginning  (of  the  present  context)  in  the  passage — 
"  He  who  knows  the  Brahman  attains  the  Highest ". — 
[Taill.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  is  by  means  of  the  definition  given 
in  the   passage^01 — "  The  Brahman  is  Existence,  Know- 
ledge, Infinity  "  declared  to  possess  such  a  nature  as  distin- 
guishes  Him  from   all   other  things;  and  then  that  same 
Brahman  is   mentioned  by   the   word  Atman    (or  Self) 
in    the    passage — "  From    that    same    Self,   indeed,  (the 
spatial   ether    came    into    existence)",—  \Taitt.    Up.    II. 
i.    i.];  and   then   the  scriptural   passage,  which   explains 
self-hood  to    consist    in    being  the    innermost    (essence) 
of  all,   gradually    passes   in   review  the  pranamaya  and 
other  such  things  which,  owing  to  each  of  them  being  more 
and  more  within,  are,  one  after  another,  represented  to  be 
the  self  of  those  things  which  are  denoted  as  the  annamaya 
and  so  on ;  and  then  (lastly)  what  is   pointed  out  by  the 
word  Atman  (or  Self),  in  the  scriptural  statement — "Differ- 
ent (from  the  vijnanamaya}  is  the  inner  Self,  the  Ananda- 
maya" — \Taitt.    Up.  11.5.1.],   is  made  to  have   its  final 
meaning  in  (denoting)  the  Anandamaya  (or  what  consists 
of  Bliss).     Therefore,  by  means  of  (the  use  of)  the  word 
At  man  (or  Self),  it  is  definitely  determined  that  the  Brah- 
man  who  is   referred   to  in  the  very  beginning  (of  this 
context)  is  the  Anandamaya  (or  what  consists  of  Bliss) 
It  may  again  be  said  as  follows  : — After   stating  that 
"the  Brahman  is  the  tail  and  the  support" — \Taitt.  Up.  II. 
5.  i.],  it  (viz.  the  context  here)  points  out,  by  means  of  this 
(j/0£fl)-"Whoever  knows  the  Brahman  as  non-existent,  he 
becomes  non-existent  indeed;  whoever  knows  the  Brah- 
man as  existent,  him,  therefore,  they  know  as  existing." 
\Taitt.  Up.  II.  6.  i.],  that  the  existence  and  non-existence 

361.     Tatti.  Up.  II.  i.  i. 


352  SRl-BniSHYA.      [Chap.  7.  Part.  L 

of  the  self  result  (respectively)  from  the  knowledge  and  the 
ignorance  relating  to  the  Brahman,  but  not  from  the 
knowledge  and  the  ignorance  relating  to  the  dnandamava 
(or  what  consists  of  bliss).  Further  it  is  not  appropriate 
to  have  any  doubt  in  relation  to  the  knowledge  of  the  exist- 
ence and  non-existence  of  such  an  dnandamava  as  is 
known  all  the  world  over  to  consist  of  joy,  pleasure,  &c. 
Therefore  this  sloka  (mentioned  above)  is  not  given  in  re- 
ference to  the  Anandamaya  (or  what  consists  of  Bliss). 
Accordingly  the  Brahman  is  other  than  the  Anandama- 
ya (or  what  consists  of  bliss).  But  it  is  not  (right  to 
say)  so.  Just  as,  after  making  the  statements — "  This  is 
the  tail  and  the  support." — [Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  "The 
earth  is  the  tail  and  the  support." — [Taitt.  Up.  II.  2.  i.], 
"The  Atharudngirascs  (or  the  hymns  revealed  by  the  Athar- 
vas  and  Angirases)  are  the  tail  and  the  support." — [Taitt. 
Up.  II.  3.  i.],  "The  ma  has  (or  splendour)  is  the  tail  and 
the  support.". — [Taitt.  Up.  II.  4.  i.], — the  slokas  commenc- 
ing with-"  All  the  creatures  are  produced  from  food  (anna}" 
—[Taitt.  Up.  II.  2.  i.],  are  all  given  in  their  respective 
contexts  so  as  not  to  denote  merely  the  tail,  but  so  as 
to  denote  the  (whole)  body  which  is  made  up  of  food,  &c.;  so 
also,  here  too,  this  sloka  which  says — "  He  becomes  non- 
existent indeed,  &c." — relates  to  the  Anandamaya,  but  does 
not  relate  to  the  tail  which  is  different  from  the  Ananda- 
maya. Even  when  the  Anandamaya  is  itself  taken  to  be 
the  Brahman,  it  is  certainly  appropriate  to  have  the  doubt 
regarding  the  existence  and  non-existence  of  that  bliss 
which  is  (in  itself)  undefinable  but  is  (merely)  described  as 
consisting  of  joy,  pleasure,  &c.  The  unknowability  of  that 
Brahman  also  who  is  spoken  of  as  the  tail  is  altogether 
due  to  (His)  consisting  of  undefinable  bliss.  If  it  be 
said  that  the  Anandamaya  is  not  the  Brahman,  because 


Adhik.  VI.  Sut.  73.]   SRI-BHISHYA.  353 

the  Brahman  does  not  possess  the  head  and  other  such 
constituent  parts;  it  is  replied  that  the  tail  also  cannot 
be  the  Brahman,  because  the  Brahman  does  not 
possess  the  nature  of  being  a  tail,  and  (does  not  also 
possess)  the  nature  of  being  a  support.  It  may  (here) 
be  said,  however,  that  the  expression — 'the  tail  and  the 
support '  is  a  merely  indicatory  description  of  the  Brah- 
man, in  as  much  as  He  forms  the  basis  of  that  thing  which 
is  illusorily  caused  by  ignorance  (or  avidya).  Then, 
indeed,  to  possess  joy  as  the  head,  and  other  things  as 
other  parts  (of  the  body)  will  (also)  form  an  indicatory 
description  of  that  Brahman  who  is  different  from  pain  and 
consists  of  bliss.  The  result  is  this  : — In  the  passage — "The 
Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infinity." — \_Taitt.  Up. 
II.  i.  i.],  He  is  declared  to  be  different  from  all  things 
which  are  other  than  Himself,  which  are  subject  to  modi- 
fication, and  which  are  non-intelligent  and  definable  ;  and 
the  statement  that  He  is  Anandamaya  teaches  that  He  is 
different  (also)  from  pain.  And  for  this  reason  the  affix 
mavat  found  in  (the  word)  Anandamaya,  which  relates  to 
the  Brahman  who  is  indivisible  and  wholly  consists  of 
uniform  bliss,  has  to  be  understood  to  denote  the  same  thing 
as  the  word  to  which  it  is  affixed  (viz.  the  word  Ananda),  in 
the  same  way  in  which  (that  affix  has  to  be  understood)  in 
the  word  prdnamaya.  The  individual  self,  who  is  differen- 
tiated into  the  varied  and  wonderful  divisions  manufactured 
by  ignorance  (or  avidya)  and  consisting  of  gods  and  other 
such  (embodied)  beings,— has  such  an  essential  nature  as  is 
indivisible  and  homogeneous  and  forms  the  only  seat  of 
pleasure  ;  and  he  is  accordingly  called  Anandamaya  (or 
that  which  consists  of  bliss).  Consequently  this  Ananda- 
may  a  is  the  subjective  self. 

45 


354  SRI-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

If  it  be  so  argued,  we  say  in  reply — "That  which 
is  denoted  by  the  word  Anandamaya  (is  the  Brahman],  be- 
cause there  is,  (in  the  context),  the  repetition  (of  various 
grades  of  bliss  which  culminate  in  the  Anandamaya  or  the 
Highest  Bliss)."  [Vcd.  Silt.  I.  i.  13.].  The  Anandamaya 
(or  That  which  consists  of  Bliss)  is  the  Highest  Self. 
Why  ?  Because  there  is  a  (graded)  repetition  (of  bliss). 
In  the  passage  beginning  with  — "  Now  this  is  an  in- 
vestigation into  bliss." — [Taitt.  Up.  II.  8.  i.]  and  ending 
with — ''  From  Whom  speech  'returns,  &c.  " — [Taitt.  Up. 
II.  9.  i.], — bliss  is  continuously  repeated,  in  an  order  in 
which  each  succeeding  (bliss)  is  a  hundredfold  of  the  bliss 
(preceding  it),  so  as  to  reach  that  (bliss)  which  forms  the 
summit  of  an  unsurpassable  condition.  This  (last  bliss) 
is  not  possible  to  the  individual  self  who  is  capable  of  en- 
joying (only)  a  small  and  limited  amount  of  pleasure  which 
is  mixed  with  endless  miseries;  and  it  (viz.  this  bliss),  in 
consequence,  denotes,  as  forming  its  abode,  the  Highest 
Self  Himself  who  is  hostile  to  all  that  is  evil,  who  is 
the  only  seat  of  all  auspicious  qualities  and  is  quite  distinct 
from  all  other  things  (than  Himself).  Accordingly,  the 
following  passage  says  —"Different  from  this  which  consists 
of  understanding  (or  the  vijAdnamaya)  is  the  (still)  inner  Self, 
the  Anandamaya  (or  That  which  consists  of  Bliss)." 
[Taitt.  Up.  II.  5.  i.].  The  vijttanamaya  (or  that  which 
consists  of  understanding  or  knowledge)  is,  indeed,  the 
individual  self,  and  not  merely  the  intellect ;  because,  by 
means  of  the  affix  may  at,  a  distinction  is  implied  (between 
vijilana  and  vijnanamaya}.  But,  in  the  case  of  the  word 
prdnamaya,  it  is  accepted  as  a  matter  of  necessity  that  that 
(affix  mayat)  imports  the  same  thing  (as  the  word  prdna  to 
which  it  is  affixed).  Here  (in  vijflanamayd)  however,  in 
as  much  as  it  is  possible  for  the  individual  self  to  possess 


Adhik.  VI.  Silt,  /j.]  SRi-BHiSHYA.  355 

it  (/.  c.  v/jflana,  or  understanding),  it  is  not  right  to 
make  that  (affix  mayaf)  meaningless.  We  have  al- 
ready mentioned  that  the  individual  self,  in  the  bound  and 
released  conditions,  is  nothing  other  than  the  knower.  And 
it  will  be  stated  presently  362how,  in  the  case  of  the  (word) 
prdttamaya  and  others,  the  affix  may  at  is  capable  of  being 
(fully)  significant.  It  may  be  asked,  how,  if  such  be 
the  case,  the  use  of  the  word  vijflana  itself  (to  denote  the 
individual  self)  is  appropriate  in  the  sloka  which,  beginning 
with — "The  vijiiana  performs  the  sacrifice." — [  Taitt.  Up.  II. 
5.  i.],  relates  to  the  vijft&namaya  (or  that  which  consists 
of  understanding).  It  is  nothing  wrong  to  speak  ofvijfidna 
(or  understanding)  as  constituting  the  essential  nature  of  the 
individual  self  who  is  none  other  than  the  knower;  because 
he  possesses  self-luminosity,  and  because  also  the  essential 
nature  of  the  knower  (too)  has  to  be  described  only  by 
means  of  (his)  knowledge.  Indeed  those  words,  which  denote 
such  attributes  as  are  descriptive  of  the  essential  nature  of 
things,  import,  by  means  of  ;(those  same)  attributes,  the 
essential  nature  also  of  that  thing  which  is  the  possessor  of 
those  attributes  ;  like  ox  and  other  words  (which  by  means 
of  the  general  attributes  they  denote  import  also  the  essen- 
tial nature  of  the  thing  to  which  they  belong).  Or,  in 
accordance  with  the  (grammatical)  aphorism — "  The  kntya 
affix  3C3  lyut  has  more  than  one  significance." — \_Pdnini. 
III.  3.  1 1 3.], it  has  to  be  accepted  that,  (in  the  case  of  the  root 
jtta,  to  know,  associated  with  the  suffix  vi),  the  affix  lyut 
denotes  the  agent.  Or,  accepting  that  it  (viz.  the  root  jtia 
to  know)  belongs  to  the  group  of  roots  commencing 
with  nand  (to  please),  the  affix  lyur  has  to  be  understood, 

362,  See  under  aphorism  14  infrt.      And}  may  denote  the  agent  or  the 

363.  The   Rntya  affix  Lyut  (i.    e.      object  or  impersonal  activity, 


356  SRi-BmsHYA.      \_Lhap.  I.  Part.  /. 

(in  the  case  of  the  root  jna  to  know),  to  denote  the  agent, 
in  accordance  with  the  (grammatical)  aphorism,  which  begins 
with  (the  group  of  roots  commencing  with)  nand,  (to 
please),  and  (the  group  of  roots  commencing  with)  grah,  (to 
seize),  and  which  prescribes  (the  affixes)  lynr,  &c.,  (to  those 
respective  groups  of  roots).  \_Panini.  III.  i.  134.].  3C4 
And  it  is  for  this  very  reason  that  it  is  declared  in  the 
scriptural  passage — "The  vijfiana  performs  the  sacrifice, 
and  it  also  performs  the  karmas"  \Taitt.  Up.  II.  5.  i.], — 
that  the  vijflana  possesses  the  quality  of  being  the  agent  in 
performing  sacrifices,  &c.  Indeed  it  is  not  possible  for  the 
mere  intellect  to  possess  the  quality  of  -being  an  agent. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  in  relation  to  what  is  made  up  of 
food  (/.  c.  the  annamaya]y  as  also  in  relation  to  other 
(similar)  things  which  are  all  non-intelligent,  which  are 
all  serviceable  to  intelligent  beings,  and  which  are  all 
mentioned  before  the  vijilanamaya  (is  mentioned  in  the 
context),  there  is  no  declaration  of  that  quality  of  agent- 
ship  which  forms  (exclusively)  the  attribute  of  intelligent 
beings.  For  the  same  reason,  the  scriptural  passage — 
"(He  /.  c.  the  Supreme  Person  became)  the  intelligent 
thing  and  the  non-intelligent  thing." — [Tailt.  Up.  II.  6.  i.] 
— separately  points  out  the  intelligent  thing  (or  the  in- 
dividual self)  and  the  non-intelligent  thing  (or  matter) 
by  means  of  their  characteristic  peculiarities  of  having  a 
home  and  of  being  homeless  (respectively);  and  accord- 
ingly this  (passage)  indicates  by  means  of  the  word 

364.      That    is   to   say,    the   affix  applied  to  the  group  of  roots  begin- 

Lynr  is  to  be  applied  to  the  group   of  ning  with  Pack  to  cook.     By  the  ap- 

roots  beginning  with  Nand  to  please;  plication'    of     these    several     affixes 

the  affix  nttti  is  to  be  applied  to  the  nouns  signifying   agents  are    derived 

group  of  roots  beginning  with   Grali  from  these  several  roots. 
U>  seize;  and  the  affix  AcJi  is  to  be 


Adhik.  Vl.  Silt.  /j.]   SRI-BHISHYA. 


(i.  c.  knowledge  or  understanding)  the  intelligent 
being  who  possesses  that  (vijHdnd)  as  his  characteristic 
quality.  Accordingly,  in  the  Brahmana  363  which  relates 
to  Him  who  is  the  Internal  Ruler  of  all,  the  Madh- 
yandinas  —  who  mention  the  alternative  passage  which 
is  to  the  effect  —  "He  who,  dwelling  in  the  self,  &c." 
-\Mddh.  Brih.  Up.  III.  7.  22.],  in  the  place  of  that 
passage  which  is  stated  in  other  words,  in  the  recension  of 
the  Kanvas  to  the  effect  —  "  He  who,  dwelling  in  know- 
ledge (or  understanding),  &c."  —  \Kan.  Brih.  Up.  III.  7. 
22.],  —  make  it  clear  that  what  is  denoted  by  the  word 
vijndna  (or  understanding),  as  contained  in  the  recension  of 
the  Kanvas,  is  (nothing  other  than)  the  individual  self. 
The  neuter  gender  used  in  the  case  of  the  word  vijfiana 
denotes  that  it  is  intended  to  point  it  out  as  a  thing. 
Therefore  the  Anandamaya  (or  That  which  consists  of  Bliss) 
is  accordingly  different  from  the  individual  self  consisting 
of  intelligence,  and  is  the  Highest  Self  who  exists  within 
that  (individual  self).  Although,  in  the  sloka  —  "The 

vijfidna  performs  the  sacrifice,  &c."  —  \Taitt.  Up.  II.  5.  i.], 
mere  knowledge  alone  is  mentioned  but  not  the  knower  ; 
nevertheless,  by  means  of  the  statement  —  "  Different  (from 
the  manomaya)  is  this  inner  self,  the  vijftdnamaya  (or  -that 
which  consists  of  knowledge)."  —  {Taitt.  Up.  11.4.1.],  —  it 
is  the  knower  himself  who  possesses  that  (vijndna  or 
knowledge)  that  is  taught  (to  be  the  individual  self).  For 
example,  although  merely  the  food  is  mentioned,  in  the 
following  sloka,  namely,  —  "All  creatures  are  produced  from 
food,  &c."  —  {Taitt.  Up.  II.  2.  i.];  nevertheless,  in  this  (other) 
passage,  namely,  —  "This  same  embodied  person  (purusha) 

365,      This  is  the  seventh  Bra/i-       "Bnhadaninyaka-Upanisliad. 
of   the   third   chapter   of    the 


358  SRi-BHlSHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

is  thus  what  is  made  up  of  the  essence  of  food." — [Taitt. 
Up.  II.  i.  i.],  it  is  not  merely  the 'food  that  is  pointed 
out;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  (what  is  pointed  out)  is 
that  which  is  made  up  of  that  (food),  -that  is,  what  is  a 
modification  thereof.  Bearing  all  this  in  mind,  the  Siitra- 
kdra  himself  says  (almost)  immediately  afterwards,  (that 
the  Anandamaya  is  different  from  the  individual  self)— 
"  Because  (also),  there  is,  (in  the  context),  the  declaration 
of  difference  (between  the  individual  self  and  the  Brah- 
mati)."  [Ved.  Snt.  I.  1.18.]. 

It  has  been  stated  (by  the  Ptirvapakskiri)  to  the  effect 
that  what  forms  the  cause  of  the  world  is  also  none  other 
than  what  possesses  the  essential  nature  of  -the  individual 
self,  on  the  ground  that  He  who  is  mentioned  to  be  the 
cause  of  the  world  is  (again)  pointed  out  by  being  gramma- 
tically equated  with  the  individual  self  in  the  scriptural 
passages — "  Entering  along  with  this  individual  self  which 
is  (also)  the  same  as  Myself,  &c." — \Qthdnd.  Up.  VI.  3.  2.], 
and— "That  thou  art'—{Qi/iand.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.];  and  (it 
has  also  been  stated)  that,  bearing  this  in  mind,  that 
essential  nature  of  the  individual  self  itself,  which,  at 
starting,  is  referred  to  in  the  passage — "  He  who  knows 
the  Brahman  attains  the  Highest." — [Taitt.  Up.  II.  1. 1.], 
is  taught  to  be  the  Anandamaya  (or  that  which  consists 
of  bliss)  owing  to  its  being  distinct  from  pain.  This 
is  not  right ;  because,  although  the  individual  self 
possesses  the  nature  of  an  intelligent  being,  it  is  not  possi- 
ble for  it  to  be  associated  with  that  varied  and  wonderful 
act  of  creation  which  is  invariably  preceded  by  his  own 
volition  fas  forming  the  cause  thereof),  in  accordance  with 
the  passage — "  It  thought —  'May  I  become  manifold 
and  be  born';  It  created  tefas."  \Qhhdnd.  Up.  VI.  2.3.]. 
Under  the  aphorisms — "  Except  in  the  matter  of  the  activ- 


Adhik.   VI.  Sut.  /j.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  359 

ity  relating  to  (the  creation,  &c.,  of)  the  world  " — [  Ved. 
Sut.  IV.  4.  17.], — and — "  And  on  account  of  the  character- 
istic of  equality  (between  the  individual  self  and  the 
Supreme  Self)  being  solely  confined  to  (the  item  of)  enjoy- 
ment"— [Ved.  Sut.  IV.  4.  2i.],— it  will  be  established  that, 
even  when  he  (the  individual  .self)  is  in  the  pure  and  free 
condition  (of  release),  he  cannot  have  the  activity  relating 
to  (the  creation,  &c.,  of)  the  world.  If  it  be  asked,  how, 
when  the  Brahman  who  is  the  cause  of  the  world,  is  not 
admitted  to  possess  the  same  essential  nature  as  the  indi- 
vidual self,  the  grammatical  equation  in  the  statements — 
"(Entering  along)  with  this  individual  self  which  is  (also) 
the  same  as  Myself" — \Qhhand.  Up.  VI.  3.  2.], — and — 
"That  thou  art."— \_Qihand.  Up.VI.\S.  7.],— would  be 
appropriate  ;  it  is  asked  in  reply,  how  the  Brahman — 
who  is  devoid  of  even  the  smallest  taint  of  all  that  is  evil, 
who  wills  the  truth,  who  is  omniscient  and  omnipotent, 
who  possesses  the  whole  collection  of  innumerable  auspi- 
cious qualities  unsurpassed  in  excellence,  and  who  is  the 
cause  of  all  things, — can  acquire  that  essential  nature  of  the 
individual  self  which  is  full  of  thinking  and  blinking,  and 
(full)  of  all  other  similar  activities  resulting  from  the  karma 
which  is  the  abode  of  endless  and  varied  miseries.  If  it  be 
said  that  it  (viz.  the  grammatical  equation)  becomes  appro- 
priate when  either  of  the  two  (equated  things)  is  taken  to  be 
false,  it  is  asked — Pray,  to  which  (does  that  falsity  belong)? 
Does  it  belong  to  that  (individual  self)  which  is  associated 
with  evil,  or  to  that  (Supreme  Self)  the  essential  nature 
whereof  is  hostile  to  evil  and  forms  the  only  abode  of  all 
auspicious  qualities  ?  If  it  be  said  that  the  Brahman,  who  is 
hostile  to  evil  and  forms  the  only  abode  of  auspicious  qua- 
lities, constitutes  the  basis  of  the  beginningless  ignorance 
(or  avidytf),  and  thus  appears  falsely  to  be  associated  with 


360  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

evil,  and  that  this  (apparent  association  with  evil)  is  false 
in  nature;  then  it  amounts  to  making  a  self-contradictory 
statement  to  the  effect  that  the  Brahman  is  hostile  to  evil 
and  forms  the  only  abode  of  auspicious  'qualities,  and  be- 
comes, (at  the  same  time),  owing  to  His  iforming  the  basis 
of  the  beginningless  ignorance  (or  avidya)   the  abode  of 
such   false   appearances    as  give  rise  to  endless   miseries. 
Indeed  to  be  associated  with  evil  is  nothing  other  than 
to  be  the  basis  of  ignorance  (or  avidya),  and  to  be  also  the 
abode  of  such  false  appearances  as   lead  to  the   miseries 
resulting  from  that  (avidya] .    To  be  associated  with  them 
(viz.  with  avidya  or  ignorance  and  its  effects)  and  to  be 
hostile  to  them  are  certainly  contradictory  of  each  other. 
In  spite  of  this  being  so,  do  not  say  that  there  is  no  contra- 
diction, for  the  reason  .that  that  (association  with  avidya 
or  ignorance  and  its  results)  is  of  a  false  nature.  Whatever 
is  of  a  false  nature, — that  certainly  constitutes  a  wrong  aim 
of  life  ;  and  you  yourself  say  that  (the  study  of)  the  whole 
of  the  Vedanta  is  commenced  for  the  destruction  of  that 
(wrong  aim).  And  the  association,  with  such   a  wrong  aim 
of  life  as  deserves  to  be  set  at  naught,  is  undoubtedly 
contradicted  by  that  nature  (of  the  Brahman)  which  is  hostile 
to  evil  and  forms  the  only  abode  of  (all)  auspicious  qualities. 
It  may  be  said— What  shall  we  do?  The  proposition  that,  by 
knowing  one  thing,  all  things  become  known  has  been  en- 
unciated in  the  passage — "(Did  you  ask  for  that  teaching) 
by  which  what  is  'not  heard  becomes  heard  ?"     [Chhand. 
Up.  VI.  i.  3.];  and  then,  in  the  passage  beginning  with— 
"Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was  in  the  beginning" 
—\Qihand.  Up.  VI.  2.  i .] ,  it  has  been  declared  that  the  Brah- 
man is  the  only  cause  of  all  the  worlds  ;  and  in  the  passage 
—"It  thought— '  May   I  become  manifold  ?" —\Cfrliand . 
Up.  VI.  2.  3.],   (it  has  been   declared)   that  He  possesses 


Adhik.  VI.  Silt,  ij.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  361 

the  quality  of  willing  the  truth  ;  and  afterwards,  by  means 
of  the   grammatical  equation,  contained  in  the  passage— 
"  That  thou  art"— [C£totf.  Up.  VI.  8.  7],  it  has  been  pre- 
dicated in  relation  to  that  same  Brahman  that  '  That '  is 
one  with  the  individual  self  who  is  the  abode  of  endless  mise- 
ries :  and  now,  because  this  (oneness)  is  incapable  of  being 
otherwise  explained,  it  has  to  be  assumed  that  the  Brah- 
man Himself  is  the  basis  of  ignorance   (or  avidya)  and  of 
other  such  things.     If  it  be  so  said,  it  is  replied  that  what 
is  inappropriate  and  opposed  to  reason  should  not  be  assum- 
ed even  for  the  purpose  of  making  the  scripture  appro- 
priate.      Then  again  it  may  be  said  that  (His)  association 
with  evil  is  indeed  a  reality,  but  (His)  possessing  the  char- 
acter of  being  the  only  abode  of  (all)  auspicious  qualities 
is  of  the  nature  of  an  unreality.     Then  this  sastra,  which 
has  been  promulgated  with  the  object  of  saving  such  intel- 
ligent beings  (or  individual  souls)  as  are  tormented  by  the 
three366   miseries,    saves    them   well  enough   indeed  by 
teaching  them  that,  in  relation  to  Him  (viz.  the  Brahman], 
the  torment  of  the  three  miseries  is  alone  real  while  (His) 
character  of  pure  and  unmixed    auspiciousness  is  super- 
imposed by  illusion  !  !     And  again    with    the    desire    of 
avoiding  this    erroneous    conclusion    it  may  be  said,  re- 
garding the  Brahman,— that  His  possessing  the  character 
of  the  individual  self  and  of  one  who  is  misery-stricken, 
&c.,  which  are  all  different  from  His  essential  nature  of 
pure  and  attributeless  Intelligence,  must  be  assumed  to  be 
false ; — and  that  similarly  His  possessing  the  quality  of 
willing  the  truth,     His  being  the  abode  of  auspicious  qua- 
lities, His  being  the  cause  of  the  world,  and  His  other  such 
qualities  also  (have  all  to  be  assumed  to  be  false).     If  you 

366.  Vide  supra  n.  12. 
46 


362  SRI-BHA.SHYA.     {Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

say  so,  how  wonderful  must  be  your  skill  in  thinking  out 
the  meanings  of  sentences  !  The  proposition  that,  by 
knowing  one  thing,  all  tilings  become  known,  cannot  at  all 
hold  good,  when  all  things  are  taken  to  be  unreal,  in 
as  much  as  all  the  things  that  have  to  be  known  will  then 
be  non-existent.  If,  in  the  way  in  which  the  knowledge 
in  relation  to  the  one  thing  is  real,  the  knowledge  relating 
to  all  things  also  is  equally  real  and  is  included  in  that 
(knowledge  relating  to  that  one  thing),— then  indeed,  it  is 
possible  to  say  that,  by  knowing  that  (one  thing),  all 
things  become  known.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  by  knowing 
the  really  existent  mother-of-pearl,  the  silver  that  is  super- 
imposed upon  that  (mother-of-pearl)  and  is  unreal  does 
not  become  known.  It  may  be  again  said  that  the  mean- 
ing of  the  proposition  that,  by  knowing  one  thing,  all 
things  become  known  is  this  :— that  thing  which  is  attri- 
buteless  is  alone  real  and  all  else  is  unreal.  Then 
surely  it  would  not  have  been  declared  in  the  scripture 
thus  : — "  (Did  you  ask  for  that  teaching)  by  which  what 
is  not  heard  becomes  heard,  what  is  not  thought  be- 
comes thought,  what  is  not  known  becomes  known  ?"3?7 
\Qjhand.  Up.  VI.  i.  3.].  The  meaning  of  this  passage 
is  indeed  this  : — when  that  one  thing  is  heard,  all  that 
which  was  unheard  becomes  also  heard.  If  the  real  ex- 
istence of  that  one  thing  alone,  which  is  attributeless 
and  is  defined  to  be  the  cause  of  the  world,  had  been  en- 
unciated in  the  proposition,  then  the  illustrative  example 
given  to  the  effect — "Just  as,  my  dear  child,  by  one 
lump  of  clay,  all  that  is  made  of  clay  becomes  known  "- 
(Qhhand.  Up.  VI.  1.4.), — would  also  have  been  found  to 

367.  But  it  would  have  been  de-  are  (taught)  to  be  of  a  false  nature, 
clared  to  the  effect — "  Did  you  ask  or  by  which  all  things  become  stul- 
for  that  teaching  by  which  all  things  tifiecl." 


Adhik.  VI.  Snt.  ij.]  SRI-BF.A.SHYA.  363 

be  inappropriate.  Indeed  what  is  illustrated  (here)  is 
that,  by  knowing  the  lump  of  clay,  all  the  modifications  of 
that  (clay)  become  known.  It  may  be  said  that  here  (z.  e. 
in  this  illustration)  the  unreality  of  the  modifications  is 
also  implied.  But  then  the  unreality  of  these  modi- 
fications of  clay  could  not  have  been  such  a  conclusive- 
ly proved  thing  to  the  pupil*88  (Svetaketu),  as  the 
(illusorily  perceived)  snake  in  the  rope  and  other  (such 
falsely  perceived)  objects  (would  have  been).  According- 
ly, to  illustrate  the  import  of  the  proposition  enunciated, 
it  could  not  have  been  -appropriate  to  introduce,as  if  they 
had  been  well  known,  the  examples  beginning  with— 
"Just  as,  my  dear  child,  &c." — \Qtliand.  Up.  VI.  1.4. 

5   &   6.J.369 

Moreover  it  cannot  be  said  that,  previous  to  the  gene- 
sis of  the  knowledge  produced  by  the  scriptural  passage — 
"That  thou  art."— [G&terf.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.]— and  by  other 
similar  passages,  we  have  any  such  criterion  of  truth,  either 
with  or  without  the  support  of  logic,  as  gives  rise  to  the  know- 
ledge of  that  unreality  which  is  associated  with  all  modifica- 
tions. This  subject  will  be  dealt  with  under  the  aphorism 
— "  (The  world)  is  not  different  from  that  (Brahman),  be- 
cause (it  is  so  made  out)  from  the  (group  of)  passages  having 
the  word  'beginning'  at  their  commencement."  [  Vcd.  Sut. 
II.  i.  15.].  Accordingly  there  are  the  following  and  other 
similar  passages: — "Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was 

368.  Literally,  one  who  is  desirous      all  that  is  made  of  gold  is    known  ; 
of  '  hearing '  i.  e.  of  learning.  and  just  as,  by  knowing  one  pair  of 

369.  These  are  three  illustrations  (iron)  nail-scissors,   all   that  is  made 
given  in  Chhand.  Up.Vl.  I.  4 .5  &  6,,  of  iron  is   known  :    exactly    similarly' 
and  are  to  the  following  effect : — Just  by     knowing    the     One      Existence- 
as,  by  knowing  one  lump  of  clay,   all  namely,    the   Bra'unan,    all     that     is 
that  is  made  of  clay  is  known  ;  just  evolved  out  of  Him   becomes  knowi). 
as,  by  knowing   one  nugget  of  gold. 


364  SRI-BHASHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

in  the  beginning,  one  only,  without  a  second." — \Qihdnd. 
Up.  VI  2.  i.];  "It  thought — 'May  I  become  manifold 
and  be  born.'  It  created  tej'as." — [Qfihand.  Up.  VI.  2. 
3.];  "  Indeed,  entering  these  three  deities  along  with 
this  individual  self  which  is  (also)  the  same  as  Myself,  I 
evolve  the  differentiations  of  name  and  form." — [Qlihdnd. 
Up.  VI.  3.  2.];  "  All  these  things  which  are  born,  my  dear 
one,  have  their  origin  in  the  Sat  (i.  e.  in  the  One  Existence), 
have  their  abode  in  the  Sat,  and  are  established  in  the  Sat." 
-{Qlihdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  4  &  6.];  "  All  this  has  That  for  its 
Self." — \CIihdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.].  And  by  means  of  these, 
innumerable  characteristic  attributes  (in  relation  to  the 
Brahman}, — such  as  are  capable  of  being  made  out  solely 
by  means  of  the  sdstras, — are  predicated  ;  and  (those  predi- 
cations) are  the  following  and  others  : — This  world  has  the 
Sat  (or  the  Brahman]  for  its  Self ;  before  the  time  of  crea- 
tion it  is  destitute  of  the  differentiation  of  names  and  forms; 
in  the  matter  of  creating  the  world  the  Brahman,  who 
is  denoted  by  the  word  Sat  (or  Existence},  does  not  stand 
in  need  of  any  cause  other  than  Himself ;  He  is  at  the 
time  of  creation  possessed  of  that  characteristic  volition 
which  is  peculiar  to  none  other  than  Himself  and  is  to  the 
effect — "  I  will  myself  become  manifold  in  the  form  of 
endless  immovable  and  movable  things"  ;  in  accordance 
with  His  volition,  creation  is  characterised  by  a  peculiarly 
well  defined  arrangement  of  endless  and  wonderful  entities; 
the  differentiation  of  endless  names  and  forms  results  from 
the  entrance  of  the  individual  self,  which  has  (the  Brah- 
man] Himself  for  its  Self,  into  all  the  non-intelligent 
things  ;  and  all  things  other  than  (the  Brahman]  Himself 
have  Himself  for  their  basis,  have  Himself  for  their  abode, 
are  capable  of  activity  through  Himself,  live  by  none  other 
than  Himself,  and  are  established  in  Himself,  In  other  con- 


Adhik.  VI.  Sut.  7j.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  365 

texts  also  such  qualities  as  are  all  incapable  of  being  made 
out  by  all  other  means  of  proof  (than  the  sastras)  are  in  a 
thousand  ways  declared  to  be  found  in  association  with 
Him  ;  and  they  are,  among  others,  the  quality  of  being  de- 
void of  all  that  is  evil  so  as  to  be  wholly  free  from  sin  and  of 
such  other  evil  things,  the  quality  of  omniscience,  the  quali- 
ty of  being  the  Lord  of  all,  the  quality  of  desiring  the  truth 
and  the  quality  of  willing  the  truth,  the  quality  of  possess- 
ing that  unsurpassed  bliss  which  forms  the  cause  of  the  bliss 
that  belongs  to  all  (others).     (In  the  passage  '  That  thou 
art '),  the  word  'That'  points  out  the  Brahman,  who  forms 
the  subject  of  the  context  and  is  characterised  by  endless 
attributes,  which  are  (all),   in  this  manner,  not  within  the 
province  of  any  other  means  of  proof  (than  the  scripture) ; 
and  to  say  that  that  (word)  is  intended  to  teach  only  that 
thing  which  is  devoid  of  attributes  is  to  talk  incoherently 
like  a  mad  man  ;  because  it  is  (so  very)  inappropriate  (to 
say  so).    And  the  word  '  thou '  denotes  the  individual  self 
who  is  associated  with  the  condition  of  being  in  samsdra 
(or  the  circuit  of  mundane  existence).     If  this  (word)  also 
be  intended  to  denote  that  (thing)  the  essential  nature  of 
which  is  free  from  all  attributes,  then  its  own  real  significa- 
tion would  have  to  be  given  up.     Moreover  it  has  been 
already369  pointed  out  that  concealment  by  ignorance  (or 
avidya)  is  indeed   not  possible  in  relation  to  that  thing 
which  is,  by    nature,    attributeless    and    luminous ;    the 
reason  is  that,  (if  it  were  possible),  it  would  lead  to  the 
destruction  of  the  essential  nature  (of  that  thing)  itself  and 
to  other  such  (inconsistencies).  Again  in  such  a  case,  in  re- 
gard to  both  the  words  '  That '  and  '  thou '  which  are  found 
in  the  grammatical  equation  ('  That  thou  art)',  their  main 

370.  Vide  supra  p.  161. 


SRi-BHlSHYA.       [Chap.  1.  Part.  L 

and  natural  significance  has  to  be  given  up,  and  in  conse- 
quence a  figurative  significance  (in  relation  to  both  of 
them)  has  necessarily  to  be  accepted. 

Further,  it  may  be  said  thus  : — The  (words)  which  are 
found  in  a  grammatical  equation  are  not  at  all  capable  of 
importing  (any)  thing  which  has  the  character  of  a  special 
attribute,  because  they  are  all  intended  to  denote  only 
one  thing.  And  solely  from  this  there  results  the  negation 
of  attributes  which  gives  rise  to  the  denotation  of  the  one- 
ness of  the  thing  itself.  Therefore  there  is  no  room  for 
any  figurative  interpretation  (here).  For  example,  in  the 
instance — "  The  lily  is  blue" — the  two  words  (  blue  and 
lily)  are  intended  to  point  out  the  oneness  of  that  thing 
which  is  characterised  (by  what  they  denote);  and  there- 
fore the  quality  of  being  a  lily  and  (the  quality)  of  being 
blue  are  not  both  meant  to  be  spoken  of  (here).  If  they 
were  (so)  meant  to  be  spoken  of,  then,  indeed,  there  would 
result  the  denotation  of  the  oneness  of  that  form  which  is 
characterised  by  the  quality  of  being  a  lily,  with  that 
(other)  form  which  is  characterised  by  the  quality  of  being 
blue.  But  this  cannot  be.  Indeed  that  (one)  thing  (which 
is  imported  by  the  grammatical  equation)  is  not  character- 
ised by  (what  is  signified  by)  the  word  lily,  which  is  (it- 
self) in  the  form  of  what  is  characterised  by  blueness  ;  be- 
cause there  would  (otherwise)  be  room  for  the  rela- 
tion of  reciprocal  inherence3  7  J  between  a  class  and  a  quality. 
Therefore  what  is  denoted  by  the  grammatical  equation 
(here)  is  merely  the  oneness  of  that  thing  which  is  (at 
once)  characterised  by  the  quality  of  being  blue  and  the 
quality  of  being  a  lily.  For  example,  in  the  instance,— 

371.  The  class  would   have  to  be       fart,  it  is  the  quality    that  is  inhcr- 
inherent  in  the  quality  and  the  qua-       cut  in  the  class, 
lity  in  the  clasa.       As  a    matter    ol 


Adhih.  VI.  Sut.  /j.]  SRf-BHlSHYA.  367 

1  This  is  that  Devadatta' — it  is  not  possible  for  the  gramma- 
tical equation  to  denote  that  a  person,  who  was  in  associa- 
tion with  a  past  time  and  a  far  off  place,  is  existing  in  that 
very  same  condition  in  association  with  a  near  place 
and  the  present  time  ;  accordingly,  what  is  denoted  by  the 
grammatical  equation  (here)  is  merely  the  oneness  of  that 
essential  nature  (of  the  person)  which  is  characterised  by 
(its)  association  with  both  (those)  times  and  both  (those) 
places.  Although  that  quality,  which  is  made  out  at  the 
time  of  hearing  a  single  word  such  as  '  blue '  or  any  other, 
is  not,  on  account  of  contradiction,  denoted  (by  that 
word)  at  the  time  when  it  is  grammatically  equated  (with 
any  other  word  or  words);  nevertheless,  as  it  denotes  a 
main  part  of  the  thing  which  is  intended  to  be  denoted  (by 
the  grammatical  equation),  there  is  no  figurative  signifi- 
cance (in  relation  to  it).  On  the  other  hand  there  is 
merely  a  desire  not  to  mention  (any)  thing  which  constitu- 
tes a  quality  (of  that  one  thing  which  forms  the  import  of 
the  equation).  This  indeed  is  the  nature  of  a  gramma- 
tical equation  in  all  cases.  Therefore  there  is  nothing 
wrong  (here). 

This  aforesaid  (argument)  is  of  no  value.  Indeed  in 
all  sentences  what  is  to  be  understood  is  merely  those 
particular  relations  which  are  found  between  the  things 
imported  by  the  words  (in  those  sentences),  and  which 
have  arisen  in  accordance  with  the  proper  process  of  mak- 
ing out  the  meanings  of  words.  Even  when  they  are  used 
in  a  grammatical  equation,  words  like  '  blue  ',  &c.,  denote 
the  thing  which  is  characterised  by  blueness,  &c.,  as  estab- 
lished in  accordance  with  the  proper  process  of  making 
out  the  meanings  of  words  ;  and  (they  denote  that  thing) 
in  its  relation  with  the  (other)  things  denoted  by  the 
Other  words  (therein).  For  instance,  when  it  is  saicl — 


368  SRI-BHASHYA.    [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

1  Bring  the  blue  lily/ — what  is  brought  is  a  thing  which 
is  characterised  by  blueness,  &c.  Again,  when  it  is  said— 
"  A  herd  of  elephants,  which  is  excited  with  ruttishness 
(madamudita],  exists  in  the  Vindhya  forest  (or  Vindh. 
yatavi)" — what  is  pointed  out  is  only  that  thing  which 
is  characterised  by  the  attributes  denoted  by  the  two 
words  (madamudita  and  Vindhyatavi).  In  the  same  man- 
ner, in  Ved antic  passages  also  wherein  grammatical  equa- 
tions are  mentioned,  what  is  to  be  understood  is  that 
Brahman  who  is  undoubtedly  characterised  by  all  (those) 
particular  attributes  (which  are  denoted  by  the  various 
words  in  those  grammatical  equations).  Moreover, 

when  it  is  desired  to  mention  an  attribute  (as  qualifying 
a  thing),  it  is  not  that  a  thing,  which  has  a  form  already 
characterised  by  some  attributes,  is  (again)  to  be  character- 
ised by  some  (other)  attributes ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  essential  nature  (of  that  one  thing  itself)  is  to  be 
characterised  by  all  the  attributes.  Accordingly — "A 
grammatical  equation  (between  words)  means  that  words 
having  a  variety  of  significations  are  used  so  as  to 
import  only  one  thing."372  The  function  of  a  gram- 
matical equation  is  to  predicate,  (in  relation  to  a  thing), 
either  affirmatively  or  negatively,  by  means  of  certain 
words  that  that  same  thing  which  has  already  a  particular 
form  denoted  by  some  words  is  also  possessed  of  a  cer- 
tain other  form  :  as,  in  the  instance — "  Devadatta  is 
brown,  youthful,  and  red-eyed,  without  mental  weakness, 
without  money,  and  without  fault."  And  where,  by 
the  words  of  a  grammatical  equation,  any  two  attributes 
are  mentioned  which  are  not  capable  of  being  consistently 
applied  to  one  and  the  same  thing,  even  there  it  has 

372.  Vide  supra  n.  75. 


Adhik.   VI.  Sut.  13.]  SRl-BHlSHYA,  369 

necessarily  to  be  accepted  that  (only)  one  of  the  two 
words  (signifying  those  attributes)  can  not  have  its  main 
and  natural  significance,  but  not  both  of  them  ;  as  in  the 
instance, — "  The  man  of  the  Valilka  country  is  a  go373 
(or  a  brute)."  In  the  instance — 'The  lily  is  blue' — and 
in  others  like  it,  there  is  no  contradiction  of  the  co-exist- 
ence of  two  attributes  (in  one  and  the  same  thing,);  and 
hence  what  is  denoted  (there)  is  only  one  thing  as  charac- 
terised by  two  attributes. 

Again  you  may  hold  as  follows:  --What  is  pointed  out 
as  being  correlated  to  (any)  one  particular  attribute  is 
distinct  in  nature  from  what  is  correlated  to  some  other 
attribute.  Accordingly,  even  though  (the  words  in  a  gram- 
matical equation)  are  found  in  the  same  grammatical  case, 
it  is  not  (thereby)  possible  for  them  to  import  oneness  (in 
regard  to  the  thing  they  denote),  as  (it  is  not  possible)  in 
the  case,  for  instance,  of  (the  words)  pot  and  doth.  There- 
fore (the  words  in  a  grammatical  equation)  are  not  capable 
of  denoting  (only)  one  thing  as  characterised  by  many 
attributes.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  essential  nature 
(of  a  certain  thing)  that  is  first  explained  by  means  of  the 
attributes  (denoted  by  the  words  in  the  grammatical  equa- 
tion); and  it  is  subsequently  (to  this)  that  they  (viz.  those 
words)  become  capable  of  denoting  the  oneness  of  that 
(thing). 

It  may  be  so,  provided  (only)  that  the  mere  correla- 
tion (of  a  thing)  to  two  attributes  is  opposed  to  the  one- 
ness, (of  that  thing).  This,  however,  is  not  seen  to  be  the 
case.  Indeed,  what  stands  in  the  way  of  the  oneness  (of 

373.  The     original  here    is  Ganr-  What  is  to  be  noted  in  this  illustru- 

vahikah,  and  the  word  Vdhlka  is  also  lion  is  that  the  word  go   iinsteacl   of 

interpreted  to  mean  the  person  who  meaning    an    ox    as  usual    means    a 

is  outside  the  pale  of   Vedic  religion.  senseless  brute. 

47 


370  SRI-BHA.SHYA.    {Chap.  1.  Part.  I. 

a  thing)  is  only  the  association  (of  that  thing)  with  two  such 
attributes,  as  are  not  capable  of  meeting  together  in  one 
and  the  same  thing  that  is  to  be  characterised  by  (those) 
attributes.  And  (such)  incapability  (of  meeting  together 
in  one  and  the  same  thing)  is,  in  the  case  of  the  character- 
istics of  the  pot  and  those  of  the  cloth,  established  by 
other  means  of  proof.  But,  in  the  instance — '  The  lily  is 
blue ' — and  in  others  like  it,  no  such  contradiction  is  per- 
ceived ;  in  the  same  way  in  which  no  contradiction  is 
perceived  in  the  case  where  the  attribute  of  owning  a  stick 
and  the  attribute  of  wearing  an  ear-ring  (are  both  found  in 
association  with  one  and  the  same  person),  and  also  in  the 
case  where  the  attribute  of  having  a  form,  the  attribute  of 
having  a  taste,  the  attribute  of  possessing  a  smell,  £c., 
(are  found  in  association  with  one  and  the  same  thing).  It 
is  not  merely  that  there  is  no  (such)  contradiction  whatso- 
ever :  but  the  association  (of  a  thing)  with  two  attributes 
(denoted  by  two  words  in  a  grammatical  equation)  certain- 
ly proves  (also)  that  a  grammatical  equation  has  the  power 
of  importing  a  single  thing  through  the  difference  in  the 
significations  (of  the  words  used  therein).  Otherwise, 
there  would  be  no  reason  to  use  more  than  one  word  to 
indicate  merely  the  oneness  of  the  essential  nature  (of  a 
thing);  and  thus  there  would  be  no  grammatical  equation 
at  all.  If,  irrespective  of  their  own  relation  (to  themselves 
and  to  the  thing  they  qualify),  the  attributes  (denoted  by 
the  words  in  a  grammatical  equation)  be  taken  to  denote 
only  the  accidental  characteristic  of  the  essential  nature 
(of  that  thing), — then,  that  thing  would  be  sufficiently  well 
marked  out  by  only  one  (such  accidental  attribute);  and, 
in  consequence,  all  other  accidental  attributes  would  cer- 
tainly become  meaningless.  If  another  form,  characterised 
by  (these)  other  accidental  attributes,  be  admitted  (in  rela- 


Adhik.  VI.  SuL.  7j.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  371 

tion  to  the  essential  nature  of  that  thing),  then,  there 
would  be  room  for  saying  that  it  (/.  c.  that  essential  nature) 
is  a  qualified  thing.  Again  in  the  instance — '  This  is  that 
Devadatta',  there  is  not  even  the  slightest  room  for  (any) 
figurative  (or  secondary)  interpretation  ;  because  there  is 
no  contradiction  (to  be  thereby  got  over),  in  as  much  as 
that  thing,  which  at  a  past  time  was  in  association  with  a 
particular  far  off  place,  may,  without  any  contradiction, 
exist  at  the  present  time  in  association  with  a  near  place. 
Indeed  it  is  by  means  of  this  very  reason  that  those  who 
maintain374  the  perdurability  of  external  objects  prove 
through  the  recognitive  cognition — '  This  is  that  person', 
that  a  thing  which  has  been  in  association  with  two  differ- 
ent periods  (or  points)  of  time  is  (really)  one  and  the  same. 
Otherwise,  there  would  be  a  contradiction  between  the 
(same)  perceptions  (belonging  to  different  times),  and  all 
things  would  in  consequence  acquire  the  character  of  be- 
ing transient  in  existence.  And  the  contradiction  result- 
ing from  the  association  (of  one  and  the  same  thing)  with 
t\yo  different  places  is,  however,  invalidated  by  the  differ- 
ence in  time. 

For  whatever  reason  the  words  used  in  a  grammatical 
equation  possess  the  power  of  denoting  a  single  thing 
which  is  characterised  by  many  attributes, — for  that  very 
same- reason,  the  exchange  (in  return  for  the  so  ma)  of  the 
heifer,  which  is  one  year  old  and  is  characterised  by 
redness,  &c.,  is  enjoined  as  the  thing  that  has  to  be  done 
under  the  commandment — "With  the  red,  tawney-eyed  hei- 
fer, one  year  old,  let  him  purchase  the  soma  plant."  [Taitt. 
Samh.  VI.  i.  6.  7.].  And  it  is  accordingly  stated  thus: — 

3/4.     As  against   the   Saugalas  or      external  things  are  transitory, 
IkiddhibU     who    maintain     that    all 


372  Ski-BHlsHYA.     [Chap.  L  Part.  I. 

"Because  the  substance  (heifer)  and  the  quality  (redness) 
are  associated  with  one  and  the  same  action  (of  buying  in 
the  above  passage),  there  is  the  binding  rule  that  they  shall 
together  denote  one  and  the  same  thing."  [Pfir.  Mlm.  Ill 
i.  12.].  The  pfirvapaksJiin  (or  the  objector)  here  is  of 

the  following  opinion: — No  doubt,  the  word  'red'  denotes 
the  quality  of  redness  which  is  contained  in  substances,  for 
the  reason  that  quality  also,  like  genus  (or  jdli)  possesses 
the  singular  character  of  being  a  mode  of  substances. 
Nevertheless,  in  relation  to  the  redness  (here),  there  is  no 
rule  compelling  its  invariable  association  with  the  one  year 
old  heifer;  because  it  is  not  possible,  (in  one  commandment), 
to  enjoin  two  things  to  the  effect — "  Let  him  purchase 
'  with  the  one  year  old  heifer,  and  let  that  (purchase)  be 
made  in  exchange  for  a  red  one."  And  for  this  reason,  the 
sentence  is  to  be  broken  up  where  the  word  arunayd  (i.  c. 
red]  occurs,  so  as  surely  to  denote  without  distinction  that 
redness  which  is  contained  in  all  the  things  mentioned  in 
the  context  as  necessary  (for  the  sacrifice).  The  use  of 
the  feminine  gender  in  connection  with  the  word  'red' 
is  intended  to  denote  (in  a  general  way  all)  the  things 
which  are  mentioned  as  necessary  in  the  context  and 
which  are  of  all  genders.  Therefore,  in  relation  to  the 
redness  (here),  there  is  no  rule  compelling  its  invariable 
association  with  the  one  year  old  heifer.  In  reply 

to  this  it  is  stated  as  follows  : — "  Because  the  substance 
(heifer)  and  the  quality  (redness)  are  associated  with 
one  and  the  same  action  (of  buying),  there  is  the  bind- 
ing rule  that  they  shall  together  denote  one  and  the 
same  thing."  \Pur.  Mlm.  III.  i.  12.].  By  means  of  the 
grammatical  equation  (in  the  passage  above  quoted),  the 
words  arunavft  and  ekahdyanyd,  which  (respectively)  de- 
note the  thing  that  is  characterised  by  redness  and  the 


Adhik.  VI.  Sfd.  13.}  SRI-BHASHYA.  373 

thing  that  is  only  one  year  old,  are  made  out  to  import 
one  and  the  same  thing ;  and  this  being  the  case,  the  thing 
heifer  which  is  one  year  old  and  the  quality  of  redness 
are  (both)  declared  by  that  very  word  aninayd  to  be  relat- 
ed to  each  other  in  the  form  of  the  qualified  and  the  qua- 
lifier ;  and  there  is  nothing  opposed  to  reason  in  their  be- 
ing (thus)  associated  together  in  relation  to  one  and  the 
same  action  of  buying;  consequently,  it  is  unavoidably 
necessary  for  redness  to  be  associated  with  the  one  year 
old  heifer  which  forms  the  means  for  the  purchase  (of  the 
soma  plant).  If,  like  the  association  of  the  act  of  buying 
with  the  one  year  old  heifer,  the  association  of  redness 
also  (with  it)  is  to  be  definitely  made  out  by  means  of  the 
(mandatory)  sentence  itself,  then  the  (one)  sentence  will 
have  to  be  construed  as  having  two  meanings.  But  this  is 
not  found  to  be  the  case.  By  means  of  the  word  '  red ' 
(arunaya)  itself,  the  thing  which  is  characterised  by  red- 
ness is  expressed  ;  what  is  made  out  by  its  being  gramma- 
tically equated  with  the  word  ckahdyanyd  (7.  c.  the  one 
year  old  heifer)  is  merely  the  fact  that  that  thing  is  the 
one  year  old  heifer ;  and  its  association  with  this  quality 
is  not  (what  is  so  made  out).  Indeed,  a  grammatical  equa- 
tion imports  nothing  other  than  the  oneness  of  that  thing 
which  is  characterised  by  (many)  attributes.  The  defi- 
nition of  a  grammatical  equation  is  surely  as  follows 
—"A  grammatical  equation373  (between  words)  means 
that  words  having  a  variety  of  significations  are  used 
so  as  to  import  only  one  thing."  It  is  certainly  thus 
that  the  statement — '  The  cloth  is  red  '—and  other  such 
statements  constitute  (each)  a  single  sentence  owing  to 
(the  words  in  them)  importing  only  one  thing.  Indeed 

37;,.     Vide  !>upra  n.  75. 


374  SRI-BHASHYA.    {Chap.  L  Part.  L 

(here)  the  function  of  this  sentence  consists  in  (denot- 
ing) the  association  of  the  •  cloth  with  the  predication 
expressed  by  the  verb  '  to  be'.  But  its  association  with 
the  red  colour  is  expressed  merely  by  the  word  red.  What 
is  definitely  made  out  by  the  grammatical  equation  is  only 
this  much,  —that  the  cloth  is  that  substance  which  is  asso- 
ciated with  the  red  colour.  Thus  it  is  nothing  wrong  to  say 
—that,  (in  any  particular  sentence  forming  a  grammatical 
equation),  a  thing  which  is  characterised  by  one  attribute, 
or  two  attributes,  or  many  attributes  is  denoted  by  certain 
particular  words  used  in  agreement  either  with  the 
karaka  case-affixes370  or  with  the  nominative  case-affix  ; 
and  that  it  is  made  out  by  means  of  the  granuriatical 
equation  that  the  thing  so  characterised  by  all  the  attri- 
butes is  only  one;  and  that  this  one  thing  is  associated  with 
the  action  denoted  by  the  verb  (forming  the  predicate  of 
the  sentence).  (To  illustrate  this)  there  are  the  following 
instances : — "  Devadatta  is  brown,  youthful,  red-eyed, 
possesses  a  stick,  and  wears  an  ear-ring "-  -"  Let  him 
make  the  curtain  by  means  of  the  white  cloth  "—  "  Bring 

376.     The  word  Karaka  expresses  instrumental   case;    (4)    Sampradana, 

the  relation  of  a  noun  to  the  verb  in  the    recipient    of   the     object    of    a 

a  sentence.     There  are  six  such  rela-  .  gift  ;  this    is  the    idea  expressed  by 

tions   according  to   Panini,  viz.    (i).  the    dative  case;  (5)    Apciddna,   abla- 

Karman,  the   object  or  the  idea   ex-  tion  /.  e.  the  departure  or  removal  of 

pressed  by  the  accusative  case;    (2).  a  thing  from  a  fixed  point ;   this  is 

Jfarana,  the  instrument  or  the    idea  the  idea   expressed    by   the    ablative 

expressed  by  the  instrumental  case;  case  ;    and  (6)   AdhikaraM,   location 

(3).    A'ar/f/,  the  agent  expressed  by  or  the  place  of  action,;    this   is   the 

the   instrumental    case  ;  if    not   ex-  idea  expressed  by  the  locative  case- 

pressed  by  the  instrumental  case,  it  The    genitive    or   possessive   case   is 

is  not  considered  a  Karaka  when  ex-  not  considered  a  Karaka^  because  it 

pressed    by  the  nominative  case;  the  expresses  the    relation     between  two 

agent  and  the  instrument  are   both  nouns  but  not  the  relation   between  a 

capable   of  being   expressed   by   the  noun  and  a  verb. 


Adhik.  VI.  Sill,  jj.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  375 

the  lily  which  is  blue  "— "  Bring  the  blue  lily 
"  Bring  the  cow  which  is  white  and  which  possesses  beauti- 
ful eyes  " — "  Let  him  offer  the  sacrificial  cake  of  rice  (puro- 
dd'sa)  in  eight  clay  cups  to  Agni  who  shows  the  way." 
\Taitt.  Sam /i.  II.  2.  2.  i.].377  And  the  same  is  the  case 
with  the  scriptural  passage — "  With  the  red,  tawney-eyed 
heifer,  one  year  old,  let  him  purchase  the  soma  plant." 
\Taitt.  Samh.  VI.  i.  6.  7.]  What  is  said  is  this  :— Just 
as,  when  it  is  said — "  Let  him  cook  the  rice  in  a  vessel  by 
means  of  fire-sticks," — one  single  action  denoted  by  the 
verb  is  made  out  to  be  simultaneously  associated  with 
different  words  which  are  in  more  than  one  kdraka  case, — 
so  also,  at  the  very  time  when  any  particular  kdraka 
relation  is  made  out  (in  a  grammatical  equation),  every 
such  kdraka  relation  as  is  mentioned  in  the  group  of 
words  forming  the  grammatical  equation  is  perceived  to  be 
characterised  by  many  attributes  at  once  :  and  thus  it  is 
that  each  (such  relation)  agrees  with  the  verb.  In  this 
there  is  nothing  opposed  to  reason,  and  there  are  the  follow- 
ing and  other  similar  instances  (to  show  it) : — "  Let  the 
clever  cook  cook  the  food  prepared  with  milk,  in  a  proper- 
sized  vessel,  by  means  of  dry  fire-sticks  got  out  of  the 
khadira  tree  (Acacia  Catechu). 

What  has  been  (by  implication)  stated  to  the  effect 
that  a  word,  which  denotes  a  quality  and  is  used  in  a  sen- 
tence in  which  a  substance  has  been  already  mentioned, 
denotes  merely  a  quality,  and  that  therefore  the  word  'red' 
(arunayd)  in  the  sentence  (given  above)  denotes  nothing 
other  than  a  mere  quality, — that  is  not  appropriate;  because 
it  is  not  anywhere  seen,  either  in  popular  usage  or  in 
the  VedaSy  that  a  word,  which  denotes  a  quality  and  is 

377,     Vide  also  Ait.  £/-.VIf.  8, 


376  SRI-BHISHYA.    [Chap.  I.  Part.  1. 

grammatically  equated  with  (another)  word  denoting  a 
substance,  imports  merely  a  quality.  It  is  even  wrong 
to  say  that  a  word,  which  denotes  a  quality  and  exists  in 
a  sentence  in  which  a  substance  has  been  already  mentioned, 
denotes  merely  a  quality  ;  because,  in  the  instance — "The 
cloth  is  white" — and  in  others  like  it,  although  a  substance 
is  made  mention  of,  what  is  denoted  (by  the  sentence)  is 
nothing  other  than  a  substance  which  is  characterised  by  a 

quality.  In  the  following  instance,  namely,  "  The  white 

belonging  to  the  cloth",378  the  non-apprehension  of  the 
cloth  which  is  characterised  by  whiteness  is  due  to  the 
mention  of  the  words  in  dissimilar  grammatical  cases;  but  is 
not  at  all  due  to  a  substance  having  been  already  men- 
tioned (in  the  sentence).  Adopting  that  same  instance, 
we  may  speak  of — '  The  white  part  belonging  to  the  cloth', 
—or  some  sucli  thing.  In  this  case,  the  words  (sukla  i.  e. 
white  and  bhaga  i.  e.  part)  are  (both)  used  in  the  same 
grammatical  case,  and  what  is  therefore  apprehended  is  a 
substance  which  is  characterised  by  whiteness. 

What  has  been  further  stated  to  the  effect  that,  since 
the  purchase  (of  the  soma  plant)  is  completely  concluded 
with  the  exchange  of  the  one  year  old  heifer,  (its)  redness 
lias  no  necessary  relation  whatsoever  to  this  transaction  of 
purchase, — that  also  is  inappropriate  ;  because  a  word, — 
which  denotes  a  quality  (such  as  redness)  and  is  found  in 
a  grammatical  equation  along  with  any  other  word  denot- 
ing a  substance  that  is  not  characterised  by  any  quality  op- 
posed (to  the  quality  already  referred  to),— expresses  that 

378.     The  Sanskrit    equivalent  of  in  the  genitive  case,  and  siiklah  is  in 

this   as   given   in   the  original  is  as  the    nominative    case.      Thus    there 

follows: — Palasva      siiklah.       Pata-  are  two  dissimilar  grammatical   cases 

5)'«  is  the  genitive  of  pala   and   so  is  here. 


Adhik.  VI.  Snt.  /j.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  377 

quality  as  abiding  in  that  (substance) ;  and  hence  there  is 
nothing  wrong  in  such  a  quality  being  associated  with  the 
action  denoted  by  the  verb  (in  the  sentence).  Moreover,  it 
having  been  established  by  means  of  the  foregoing  argu- 
ment that  the  quality  of  redness  has,  according  to  gram- 
mar, a  certain  relation  to  the  substance  (/.  e.  to  the  one  year 
old  heifer),  the  conclusion  (of  the  pftrvapakshiri)  was  accord- 
ingly given  to  the  effect  that,  since  substance  and  quality 
are  not  (separately)  capable  of  serving  as  the  means  for 
purchasing  (the  soma  plant),  it  is  proved  by  implication 
that  they  are  both  mutually  related  to  one  another  :  that 
also  is  inappropriate.  Therefore  the  meaning  of  this 
(Pftrva-Mlmatnsa  aphorism)  is  nothing  other  than  what 
has  been  given  above  (by  us). 

Accordingly,  in  the  grammatical  equation — 'That  thou 
art'  and  in  others  like  it,  the  teaching  of  oneness  has  to 
be  brought  out  without  giving  up,  even  in  the  least,  the 
qualifications  denoted  by  both  the  words  ('That'  and  'thou'). 
But  this  is  not  possible  for  him  who  does  not  admit  the 
Highest  Self  (or  the  Brahman)  to  be  hostile  to  all  that 
is  evil,  to  form  the  only  abode  of  all  the  innumerable 
auspicious  qualities,  and  to  be  a  separate  Being  from  the 
intelligent  individual  soul,  which  is  capable  of  existing  both 
in  the  pure  and  in  the  impure  condition  and  is  subject  to 
endless  miseries  superimposed  by  the  beginningless  igno- 
rance (or  avidya).  Since  it  has  to  be  accepted  that  the 
words  used  in  a  grammatical  equation  are  intended  to 
denote  the  oneness  of  that  thing  which  is  characterised  by 
such  attributes  as  are  given  (therein),  it  may  be  said  that, 
even  when  one  admits  (the  Highest  Self  as  described 
above),  the  association  with  all  those  evils  that  belong  to 
what  is  denoted  by  the  word  '  thou '  will  tend  to  affect 
the  Highest  Self.  But  it  is  replied  that  it  is  not  (right  to 


SRT-BHASHYA.     \Chap.LPart.L 

say.)  so;  because,  by  means  of  the  word  'thou'  also,  it  is  the 
Highest  Self  alone  that  is  denoted  as  forming  the  internal 
ruler  of  the  individual  selves. 

What  is  said  is  this  :— The  Highest  Brahman— who  is 
denoted  by  the  word  Sal  (or  Existence),  who  is  devoid  of 
even  the  smallest  taint  of  all  that  is  evil,  who  possesses, 
together  with  the  quality  of  willing  the  truth,  the  whole 
collection  of  innumerable  auspicious  qualities  unsurpassed 
in  excellence,  and  who  forms  the  cause  of  all  things, — willed 
to  the   effect — 'May  I  become  many';  then  He  created  in 
order  the  whole  world  consisting  of  (the  elements  of)   fire, 
water,  earth,  and  of  such  other  things  ;  then,  in  that  world 
existing  in  the  form  of  the  wonderful  material  configura- 
tions known  as  gods,  &c.,  He  caused  the  whole  series   of 
intelligent  individual  souls  to  enter  into  such  material  em- 
bodiments as  were  suited  to  their  own  respective  karmas 
so  that  they  might  (^severally)  constitute  the  self  (of  those 
embodiments);  then  He  Himself,  wholly  of  His  own  ac- 
cord, entered  into  the  individual  selves  so  as  to  form  their 
internal  Self ;  and  then  He  introduced  the  differentiation 
of  names  and  forms  among  the  material  embodiments  which 
are  known  as  gods,  &c.,  and  which,  being  of  this  nature, 
are  composite  and  include  Him  also  within  themselves.  The 
meaning  is  that  He  caused  the  composite  mass,   which  is 
altogether  of  this  nature,  to  assume  the  character  of  a  thing 
and  also  to  become  capable   of  being  denoted  by  words. 
In  the  passage — 379   "(Entering  along)  with   this  indivi- 
dual self  which  is  (also)  the  same  as  My  self,  the  expression 
— '  with  this  individual  self  which  is  also  the  same  as  My- 
self ', — shows  that  the  individual  self  has  the  Brahman  for 
his  Self.    And  it  is  made  out  that  the  individual  self  has 

379.  Vide  Ch/iand,  Up,.\1,  3.  2, 


Adhik.  VI.  Silt.  /j.j  SRI-BHISHYA.  379 

the  Brahman  for  his  Self  for  the  reason  that  .the  Brahman 
has  entered  into  this  individual  self  so.  as  to  constitute  his 
Self;  because  in  the  context  in  which  the  passage380 — "He 
created  all  this,  whatever  there  is.  Having  created  it,  He 
entered  into  that  same  thing.  Having  entered  into  it,  He 
became  the  sat  and  the  /va/."381 — occurs,  the  two  things, 
namely,  the  intelligent  thing  and  the  non-intelligent  thing, 
which  are  denoted  by  the  expression  '  all  this ',  are  sepa- 
rately pointed  out  by  means  of  the  words  sat  and  tyat,  as 
also  by  means  of  the  words  vijilana  and  avijttdna ;  and  then 
the  Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  entering  even  into  the 
intelligent  thing  (viz.  the  individual  self).  Therefore  it 
has  to  be  understood  that,  owing  to  the  differentiation 
of  names  and  forms  having  taken  place  in  this  manner,  all 
significant  words  denote  the  Highest  Self  as  associated 
with  the  non-intelligent  thing  (matter)  and  with  the  (in- 
telligent) individual  self. 

Moreover,  by  means  of  the  passage — "All  this  has 
That  for  its  Self."—  \CJihdnd.  Up.  VI.  8.  7.],  the  world  which 
is  associated  with  the  intelligent  things  for  the  individual 
selves)  is  (first)  pointed  out  as  '  all  this ',  and  then  it  is 
declared  that  He,  (the  Lord),  is  the  Self  thereof.  And 
since  the  Brahman  forms  in  this  manner  the  Self  of 
all  the  intelligent  things  and  the  non-intelligent 
things,  the  whole  world  together  with  all  the  intelligent 
individual  selves  forms  His  body.  And  to  this  effect  there 
are  these  other  scriptural  passages: — "  He,  who  has  entered 
within,  is  the  ruler  of  all  things  that  are  born,  and  (He)  is 

380.  Vide    Taitt.     Up.     II.   6.     I  home  and  the  Ani/ayana  or  the  .horne- 

.The  continuation   of  this    passage  is  less,  the    1'ijtldna  or  the  intelligent 

as  follows: — "He  became  the  Nirukta  thing  and  the  AvijMna  or  the  non- 

or  the  defined  and  the  Anirukta  or  the  intelligent  thing,  &c." 

undefined,  the  Nilayana  or  what  has  a  381,     Vide  supra  n.  185. 


380  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

the  Self  of  all."— [Taitt.  Ar.  III.  24.]; "  He  who,  dwelling  in 
the  earth,  is  within  the  earth,  whom  the  earth  does  not 
know,  whose  body  is  the  earth,  and  who  internally  rules 

the  earth, — He  is  thy  internal  ruler  and  immortal  Self. 

He  who,  dwelling  in  the  self,  is  within  the  self,  whom  the 
self  does  not  know,  whose  body  is  the  self,  and  who  inter- 
nally rules  the  self, — He  is  thy  internal  ruler  and  immortal 
Self."— \_Madh.  Brih.  Up.  III.  7.  3  to  22.];  "He  who  is 

moving  within  the  earth,  whose  body  is  the  earth, He 

who   is   moving   within   the   waters,   whose   body  is  the 

waters He  who  is  moving  within  the  akshara, 

whose  body  is  the  aksharq,***  whom  the  akshara  does 

not  know He  is  the  internal  Self  of  all  beings,     He 

is  devoid  of  all  sins,  He  is  the  Divine  Lord,  He  is  the  one 
Narayana."  [Sub.  Up.  VII.  i.].  These  and  other  passag- 
es first  point  out  that  the  whole  world  together  with 
the  intelligent  individual  selves  constitutes  His  body,  and 
then  they  teach  that  the  Highest  Self  forms  the  Self  of  that 
(world).  Therefore  those  words  also,  which  denote  the  in- 
telligent things  (or  the  individual  selves),  denote  the  High- 
est Self  alone  who  forms  the  Self  also  of  the  intelligent 
things  and  has  these  intelligent  things  for  His  body  ;  in 
the  same  manner  in  which  those  words  which  denote  the 
non-intelligent  configurated  material  masses  known  as  gods, 
&c.,  denote  only  those  individual  selves  who  have  those 
particular  masses  of  matter  for  their  bodies.  (To  illustrate 
this)  there  are  the  following  and  other  (examples)—  "  The 
four  who  perform  the  sacrifice  known  as  i\\Q  pattehadasardtra 
acquire  god-hood."383  The  meaning  is  that  they  become 
gods. 

In  the  case  of  words  which  denote  material  embodi- 

382.     Vide  supra,  n.  185.  383.  Vide  3r.  Sr.  XI.  2,  9. 


Adhik.  VI.  Silt.  13.]  SRi-BnlsHYA.  381 

ments,  it  is  right  (to  say)  that  they  also  include  in  their  im- 
port that  which  is  the  embodied  ;  because  a  material  em- 
bodiment possesses,  in  relation  to  the  embodied,  the  cha- 
racter of  being  a  mode  (thereof);  and  because  also  those 
words  which  denote  modes  include  in  their  import  the 
things  which  are  the  possessors  of  those  modes.  Indeed 
what  is  meant  by  a  mode  is  that  aspect,  which  is  made  out 
to  be  of  a  particular  nature,  and  which  is  in  relation  to  the 
thing  that  is  denoted,  when  it  is  said — "This  thing  is  of  this 
nature."  That  (mode)  is  necessarily  dependent  upon  that 
thing  ;  hence,  the  knowledge  of  that  (mode)  is  necessari- 
ly dependent  upon  that  (thing) ;  consequently,  it  is  proper 
(for  that  mode)  to  include  (within  its  significance)  that  very 
thing.  Accordingly,  even  the  word  which  denotes  that 
(mode)  includes  that  (thing)  in  its  import.  It  is  for  this  very 
reason  that  ox,  horse,  man,  and  other  such  words,  as  are 
denotative  of  particular  genera  and  are  the  modes  of 
particular  masses  of  matter,  include  in  their  import 
the  masses  of  matter  which  are  (respectively)  character- 
ised by  (those)  modes.  And  any  such  mass  of  matter, 
constituting  the  body -of  an  intelligent  individual  soul, 
forms  his  mode.  Similarly,  even  those  intelligent  individu- 
al souls,  who  have  particular  masses  of  matter  for  their 
bodies,  form  modes  of  the  Highest  Self.  Therefore  they 
(/.  c.  those  words)  finally  include  in  their  import  the  High- 
est Self  Himself.  Thus  the  Highest  Self  Himself  is  denot- 
ed by  all  words.  And  consequently  the  grammatical 
equation  (of  the  word  'That'),  with  the  word  ('thou'),  which 
(so)  denotes  the  Highest  Self,  has  certainly  a  primary  and 
natural  significance. 

It  may,  however,  be  said  (here)  thus  : — It  is  only  such 
words  as  denote  genera  and  qualities  that  are  seen  to  be 
grammatically  equated  with  words  denoting  substances  ; 


382  SRI-BHASHYA.     [Chap.  L  Part.  1. 

as,  in  the  instances, — '  The  ox  is  broken-horned  ', — ( The 
candied  sugar  is  white '.  And  in  the  case  of  such  substanc- 
es as  form  the  modes  of  other  substances,  the  affix  having 
the  force  of  matup3  8  4  is  seen  to  be  applied  to  them  (when 
they  are  used  in  grammatical  equations);  as  in  the  instances 
ofdapdin  (or  one  who  is  the  possessor  of  a  stick)  and  kunda- 
lin  (or  one  who  is  the  wearer  of  an  ear-ring).  But  it  is  not 
right  to  say  so.  Neither  the  genus,  nor  the  quality,  nor 
the  substance,nor  any  single  one  of  these  can  make  a  gram- 
matical equation  (fully)  significant ;  because  each  of  them 
may  stray  into  the  other.  In  the  case  of  a  thing  which  can 
exist  as  the  mode  of  another  thing,  the  existence,  persist- 
ence, and  realisation  (of  that  thing)  are  invariably  associat- 
ed with  this  (other)  thing.  Hence  the  words  which 
denote  that  (mode)  possess  the  power  of  denoting  the 
substance  which  is  characterised  by  what  is  denoted  by 
themselves.  Consequent!)7,  it  is  certainly  proper  for  them 
to  be  grammatically  equated  with  the  word  which  denot- 
es that  substance  as  characterised  by  an  attribute  different 
(from  what  they  themselves  denote).  Where,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  desired  that  a  substance,  which  is  capable  of 
being  realised  separately  and  exists  in  itself,  should  form, 
somewhere  and  at  some  time  the  mode  of  another  sub- 
stance,— there,  the  affix  having  the  force  of  matup  becomes 
applicable.  Thus  it  (/'.  c.  the  position  here  maintained) 
is  faultless. 

Therefore  the  words  T,  'thou',  and  others,  which  in 
themselves  specially  denote  the  individual  self,  signify  the 
Highest  Self  Himself,  owing  to  the  individual  selves  also, 
who  are  associated  with  the  non-intelligent  thing  (matter), 

384.  This    affix    has  the  sense  of .     the  same  signification.     This  is  the 
possession.     The  affix   nint  also  has       affix  used  in  Dandin  and  Kund<iltn< 


Adhik.  VI.  Sr/i.  TJ.]  SRT-BHA.SHYA.  383 

forming  a  mode  of  that  (Highest  Self);  the  reason  for  this 
is  that  they  thus  constitute  the  body  of  the  Highest  Self. 
And  this  (view)  is  summed  up  in  the  grammatical  equation 
—That  thou  art'.  Such  being  the  case,  in  consequence  of 
the  individual  self  (thus)  standing  in  the  relation  of  the 
body  to  the  Highest  Self,  those  peculiar  attributes  which 
belong  to  the  individual  self  do  not  affect  the  Highest 
Self;  in  the  same  way  in  which  childhood,  youth,  and 
other  such  conditions,  which  are  associated  with  one's  own 
body,  do  not  affect  the  individual  self.  Therefore,  in  the 
grammatical  equation — '  That  thou  art ',  the  word  '  That ' 
denotes  the  Highest  Self  who  is  the  cause  of  the  world, 
who  wills  the  truth,  who  is  the  abode  of  all  auspi- 
cious qualities,  who  is  devoid  of  even  the  smallest  taint 
of  all  that  is  evil ;  and  (the  word)  'thou'  also  denotes 
that  same  (Supreme  Self)  as  possessing  for  His  body 
that  embodied  individual  self.  Accordingly,  the  gramma- 
tical equation  ('That  thou  art')  has  a  primary  and  natural 
significance ;  there  is  no  contradiction  of  the  context 
(wherein  it  occurs);  there  is  no  contradiction  of  any  one  of 
all  the  scriptural  passages ;  and  even  the  slightest  taint  of 
ignorance  (or  avidyfi)  and  of  other  evils  does  not  become 
possible  in  relation  to  the  Brahman  who  is  free  from  im- 
purity and  forms  the  only  abode  of  auspicious  quali- 
ties. Since  the  fact  of  (the  Brahman)  being  gramma- 
tically equated  with  the  individual  self  also  imports  in  this 
manner  that  He  is  different  from  the  individual  self  who 
forms  His  attribute, — therefore  the  Anandamaya  (or  He 
who  consists  of  Bliss),  who  is  the  Highest  Self,  is  different 
from  the  individual  self  who  consists  of  knowledge  (or 
understanding). 

What  has  been  stated  above383  to  the  effect  that,  in 

',   385.  Vide  the  objection-statement  supra  pp.  347  &  348. 


384  SRI-BHISHYA.    [Chap.  L  Part.  I. 

the  statement — "This  itself  is  the  embodied  Self  of -that 
(which  consists  of  knowledge  or  understanding)" — \Taitt. 
Up.  II.  5.  i.],  the  dnandamaya  (or  he  who  consists  of 
bliss)  is  declared  to  be  associated  with  a  body,  and  that 
it  is  not  thus  possible  for  him  to  be  other  than  the 
individual  self; — that  is  not  right  :  because,  in  this  con- 
text, by  means  of  the  statement — "  The  embodied  Self  of 
this  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  former."  \Taitt.  Up.  «II. 
3.  i.  II.  4.  i.  &  II.  5.  i.],  it  is  declared  in  each  case  that 
the  Highest  Self  Himself  is  the  embodied  Self  (of  all). 
How  ?  Because  the  Highest  Brahman  who  is  other  than 
the  individual  self,  and  who,  in  accordance  with  the  scrip- 
tural statement—"  From  that  same  Self,  indeed,  the  spatial 
ether  came  into  existence." — \Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  is  known 
to  be  the  supreme  cause  of  the  whole  series  of  created  ob- 
jects such  as  the  spatial  ether  and  other  things,  is  (Himself) 
taught  to  be  the  Self ; — it  is  (therefore)  made  out  that  the 
spatial  ether  and  other  things  including  the  annamaya  (or 
what  is  made  up  of  food),  which  are  all  different  from  Him, 
constitute  His  body.  And  by  means  of  the  following  passage 
belonging  to  the  Subdlopanishad — "  (He)  whose  body  is 
the  earth.... whose  body  is  the  waters,.... whose  body  is 
the  fire.... whose  body  is  the  air whose  body  is  the  spa- 
tial ether....  whose  body  is  the  akshara.... whose  body  is 
mrityu  (i.e.  prakriti  or  nature), ....He  is  the  internal  Self  of 
all  beings,  He  is  devoid  of  all  sins,  He  is  the  Divine  Lord, 
He  is  the  One  Narayana."  [Sub.  Up.  VII.  i.], — it  is 
clearly  stated  that  all  the  constituent  principles  of  the 
universe  form  the  body  of  the  Highest  Self.  There- 
fore, in  this  very  passage,  namely, — "  From  that  same 
Self,  indeed,  (the  spatial  ether  came  into  existence)  '- 
[Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  what  is  made  out  is  that  the 
Highest  Self  Himself  forms  the  embodied  Self  of  the 


Adhik.  VI.  Sat.  /j.]    SRI-BHISHYA.  385 

annamaya  (or  what  is  made  up  of  food).     The  context 
speaks  of  the  pranamaya  (or  what  consists  of  prdnd)   in 
the  passage — "  He  who  is  (the  embodied  Self)  of  the  for- 
mer— He  Himself  is  the  embodied  Self  of  this."     \_Taitt. 
Up.   II.   3.    i.].     The  meaning  is  that   He  who  is  the 
embodied  Self  of  the  annamaya  mentioned   before,    and 
who    forms    the    supreme    cause    (of  the    universe),    as 
established  by    means    of   other    scriptural  passages,   -is 
Himself  the   Highest  Self;     it  is  He  alone  who  is   the 
embodied  Self  also  of  the  pranamaya  (or  what  is  made 
up  of  pritna).    In  this  manner  it  (viz.  the  context)  has  to 
be  understood  in  the  case  of  the  manomaya  (or  what  con- 
sists of  mind)  and  the  vijflanamaya  (or  what  consists  of 
knowledge).     But  in  regard  to  the  Anandamaya  (or  that 
which  consists  of  bliss),  the  indicative  expression886 — "  He 
Himself" — \Taitt.  Up.  H.6.I.] — is  given  to  show  that  He 
has  none  other  for  His  Self.     How  is  that  ?     In  the  fore- 
going manner,  it  has  been  made  out  that  the  Highest  Self 
Himself  is  the   embodied    Self  of  ;the    vijftdnamaya   (or 
what  consists  of  knowledge)  also.    This  being  the  case,  if 
it  be  said  that  He  who  is  the  embodied  Self  of  the  vijfi-a- 
namaya   (or    what    consists    of   knowledge)   is   Himself 
the  embodied  Self  of  the  Anandamaya  (or  what  consists  of 
bliss)  also:  then,  the  Anandamaya  who  is  made  out  by  the 
repetition  (of  the  word  'bliss '),  to  be  the  Supreme  Self  will 
Himself  have  to  be  understood  as  forming  the  Self  of  the 
Supreme  Self.  Accordingly  the  whole,  collection  of  intelli- 
gent and  non-intelligent  things  which  are  different  from 
Himself  constitute  His  body.    He  alone  is  in  consequence 
the   unconditioned  embodied    Self.      It    is  for  this    very 

386.  This  expression  is  contained  Himself  who  is  (the  embodied  Self) 
in  the  passage — "  The  embodied  Self  of  the  former  (which  consists  of  un- 
of  this  (which  consists  of  bliss)  is  He  derstanding)." 

49 


386  SRI-BHA.SHYA.      [Chap.  /.  Part.  I. 

reason  that  this  sdstra  which  is  promulgated  in  relation 
to  the  Highest  Brahman  is  called  by  worthy  persons 
as  the  Science  of  the  Embodied.  Consequently  the 

Anandamaya  who  is  the  Highest  Self  is  undoubtedly  dis- 
tinct from  the  individual  self  who  consists  of  knowledge. 


He  (a  pfirvapakshhi)  might  say  (here)  as  follows  :— 
This  Anandamaya  is  not  different  from  the  individual  self, 
because  the  affix  mavat  which  signifies  modification  is 
found  to  be  used  (here).  The  affix  mayat  is  taught  to 
possess  the  significance  of  modification  in  the  (grammatical) 
aphorism  which  (for  the  first  time)  introduces  (its  modifi- 
catory significance)  by  saying — "  The  affix  mayat  also 
is  used  in  these  two  (significations)" — \_Pdnini.  IV.  3. 
143.];  and  (it  is)  also  (taught)  in  the  aphorism  which 
is  to  the  effect — "  It  (viz.  the  affix  mayat)  is  always 
used  (in  the  sense  of  modification)  after  the  words 
known  as  the  vriddhas  387  and  after  the  group  of  words 
beginning  with  sara."  [Panini.  IV.  3.  144.].  And  this 
word  Anandamaya  is  a  vriddha.  It  may  (again)  be  said 
(here)  that  the  affix  mayat  has  also  the  power  of  signifying 
abundance,  because  it  is  taught  (to  have  that  signification)  in 
the  aphorism — "  The  affix  mayat  is  (to  be  employed)  wher- 
ever the  abundance  of  a  thing  has  to  be  expressed."  \Pdnini. 
V.  4.  21.];  for  example,  where  it  is  said — "The  sacrifice  is 
abundantly  full  of  food  (annamaya)" — that  (affix  mayat)  has 
this  (signification)  alone.  It  is,  (however),  not  right 

387.  The  definition  of  this  word  is  lengthening)  is  a   VridJha,  as  in  the 

given  in  Pdnini  I.   I.  73.    That  word  word  Ananda  where  the  first  vowel  is 

the  first  vowel  of  which   is  subjected  a  lengthened  a. 
to  the  process  known  as  Vridd/ti  (/'.  e. 


Adhik,  VI.  Sftt.  7^.]  SRI-BHA.SHYA.  387 

to  say  so.  It  (viz.  the  affix  mayat}  in  annamaya  is  seen 
in  the  very  beginning  (of  this  context)  to  possess  the 
significance  of  modification.  Therefore,  according  to  the 
propriety  of  interpretation  suited  to  the  context,  it  is 
right  for  this  (affix  mayat  in  the  word  Anandamaya}  also 
to  have  nothing  other  than  the  signification  of  modifi- 
cation. Moreover,  even  if  it  (viz.  the  affix  mayat}  have 
the  signification  of  abundance  (in  Anandamaya},  the 
character  of  being  other  than  the  individual  self  cannot 
result  to  that  (Anandamaya}.  Thus,  when  it  is  said  that 
one  is  abundantly  full  of  bliss,  it  is  indeed  unavoidable  (for 
that  one)  to  be  mixed  up  with  misery  ;  for  an  abundance 
of  bliss  implies  the  possession  of  a  small  modicum  of  misery. 
Indeed  to  be  an  individual  self  is  nothing  other  than  to 
be  associated  with  misery.  Therefore  it  is  right  (for  the 
affix  mayat}  to  have  only  that  significance  of  modification 
which  is  arrived  at  in  accordance  with  that  propriety  of  in- 
terpretation which  is  suited  to  the  context.  Furthermore, 
in  popular  usage  as  in  the  instances  mrinmaya  (or  what 
is  made  up  of  clay),  hiranmaya  (or  what  is  made  up  of 
gold),  darnmaya  (or  what  is  made  up  of  wood),  and  in 
other  such  instances — and  in  the  Vcdas  as  in  the  instances 
of  the  semicircular  vessel  which  is  made  of  leaves  (parna- 
rnayl},  and  of  the  ladles  which  are  made  of  the  wood 
called  saml  (samimayyaft),  and  of  the  girdle  which  is 
made  of  grass  (darbhamay'i}  and  in  other  such  instanc- 
es,— the  affix  mayat  is  very  frequently  used  in  the  sense 
of  modification ;  and  consequently  that  (sense)  alone 
comes  to  the  mind  at  the  very  outset.  And  the  individual 
self  does  certainly  possess  the  character  of  being  a  modi- 
fication of  bliss.  To  that  (individual  self)  who  is  in 
himself  of  the  nature  of  bliss,  the  condition  of  being  found 
in  the  state  of  samsdra  is  nothing  other  than  becoming 


388  SRI-BHASHYA.      {Chap.  L  Part.  L 

a  modification  of  that  (bliss).  In  as  much  as  the  affix 
mayat  which  denotes  modification  is  found  to  be  used  (in 
the  case  of  the  word  dnandamaya},  the  dnandamaya  (or 
what  consists  of  blissj  is  accordingly  nothing  ,other  than 
the  individual  self.  After  stating  this  (objection)  thus, 
he  (the  Sutrakdra)  invalidates  it  (as  follows)  :— 

Sutra  14.    Vikarasabdanneti^henna   pra^huryat. 

It  may  be  said  that  owing  to  there  being  the  affix 
(mayat)  significant  of  modification,  (the  Anandamaya  is 
not  (the  Brahman);  but  it  is  not  (right  to  say)  so ;  be- 
cause that  (affix  mayat)  signifies  abundance. 

This  (above-stated  position  of  the  Pfirvapakshin)  is 
not  right.  Why?  Because  of  there  being  the  significance  of 
abundance.  That  is,  because  there  is  an  abundance  of  bliss 
in  the  Highest  Brahman,  and  because  also  it  is  possible 
for  the  affix  mayat  to  signify  abundance.  What  is  said  is 
this  : — This  Bliss  is  resident  in  the  Brahman,  because  it 
is  not  possible  for  the  individual  self  to  be  the  abode  of 
that  Ananda  (or  bliss)  which  is  continuously  repeated  in  an 
order  in  which  each  succeeding  bliss  is  a  hundredfold  of  the 
bliss  (preceding  it).  It  being  so  determined,  the  Ananda- 
maya (or  That  which  consists  of  Bliss)  must  be  the  High- 
est Brahman,  because  there  can  be  no  modification  in  rela- 
tion to  that  Brahman,  and  because  also  it  is  possible  for 
the  rule  regulating  the  use  of  the  affix  mayat  to  operate  so 
as  to  signify  abundance  also.  Even  on  account  of  the  propri- 
ety of  interpretation  suited  to  the  context,  and  on  ac- 
count of  the  frequency  of  its  use  (in  the  sense  of  modi- 
fication), the  affix  mayat  cannot  (here)  have  the  signi- 
ficance of  modification;  because,  (if  it  did),  there  would  be 
the  contradiction  of  the  context.  Moreover  (this)  propriety 
of  interpretation  suited  to  the  context  has  been  given 


Adhik.  VL  Sut.  /./.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  389 

up  even  in  relation  to  the  word  pranamaya  itself;  because, 
in  the  case  of  that  word,  it  is  not  possible  (for  the  affix 
may  at)  to  import  modification.  Thus,  in  this  case,  the 
vayu  (or  vital  air),  which  usually  has  a  five-fold388  activity, 
becomes  capable  of  being  denoted  merely  by  the  word/ra- 
namaya,  for  the  reason  that  it  is  in  possession  of  the 
activity  of  the  prdna,  or  for  the  reason  that,  among  the 
five  activities  known  as  the  prdna  (or  the  vital  activity), 
the  apana  (or  the  excretory  activity),  &c.,  the  activity  of 
the  prdna  is  here  in  abundance.  Again,  it  cannot  be  said 
that  the  affix  mayat  is  not  largely  used  in  the  sense  of 
abundance  ;  because  it  is  so  seen  in  the  following  and  other 
instances — "  The  sacrifice  is  abundantly  full  of  food  (anna- 
may  a)"—"  The  journey  is  abundantly  full  of  carts  (sakata- 
mayi). 

What  has  been  stated  above  to  the  effect  that  an  abund- 
ance of  bliss  necessarily  implies  the  existence  of  a  small 
amount  of  misery, — that  is  not  right.  Indeed  the  abund- 
ance of  a  thing  is  the  same  as  having  an  exceedingly  large 
amount  of  it,  and  this  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  exist- 
ence of  another  thing.  On  the  other  hand,  it  implies  the 
negation  of  the  smallness  of  that  thing  itself.  The  exist- 
ence and  non-existence  of  that  other  thing  have  to  be  made 
out  by  other  means  of  proof.  And  in  the  present  case,  the 
absence  of  such  other  things  is  made  out  by  this  other 
means  of  proof  found  in  the  scriptural  passage — "He  who 
is  devoid  of  sin." — \Qihdnd.  Up.  VIII.  7.  i.] — and  in 
others  like  it.  Under  these  circumstances,  only  this 
much  can  be  said,  that  the  exceedingly  large  amount 
of  the  bliss  belonging  to  the  Brahman  necessarily  implies 

388.  The  five  activities  are  of  the  Samanct  or  digestive  activity,  the 
Prdita  or  the  principal  vital  activity,  Vydna  or  circulatory  activity  and  the 
the  Apdnn  or  excretory  activity,  the  Uddna  or  respiratory  activity. 


390  SRI-BHASHYA.     [Chap.  /.  Part.  /. 

the  smallness  of  the  bliss  belonging  to  other*.  And  in  the 
passage  beginning  with — "That  is  one  unit  of  human  bliss." 
—\Taitt.  Up.  II.  8.  i.],— this  (fact)  is  declared  to  the  effect 
that,  in  comparison  with  the  bliss  belonging  to  the  indi- 
vidual self,  the  Bliss  belonging  to  the  Brahman  is  in  an 
unsurpassable  condition  and  is  exceedingly  large. 

What  has  been  further  stated  to  the  effect  that  it  is 
possible  for  the  individual  self  to  become  a  modification  of 
bliss, — that  also  is  not  appropriate.  That,  in  the  way  in 
which  clay  becomes  modified  into  the  form  of  pots,  &c., 
the  individual  self,  whose  essential  nature  consists  of  know- 
ledge and  bliss,  becomes  modified  into  some  form  or  other 
is  against  all  scripture,  tradition  and  logic.  And  it  will  be 
established  hereafter889  that,  in  the  condition  of  samsara, 
his  knowledge  and  bliss  are  (merely)  in  a  contracted  condi- 
tion under  the  influence  of  karma.  Therefore  also,  the 
Anandamaya  (or  That  which  consists  of  Bliss)  is  different 
from  the  individual  self  and  is  the  Supreme  Brahman. 


The  Anandamaya  (or  That  which  consists  of  Bliss)  is 
different  from  the  individual  self  for  the  following  reason 
also  :— 

Sutra     15.     Taddhetuvyapadesa^h^ha. 

Because  also  He  (the  Anandamaya)  is  declared  (in 
the  context)  to  be  the  cause  of  that  (which  forms  the 
bliss  of  the  individual  souls). 

"  If  this  Akdsa  (i.  e.  the  Brahman]  be  not  Bliss,  who 
indeed  is  there  that  can  live,  and  who  that  can  enjoy  ? 

389.     Vide  Sri-B6as/iya  under    Ved.  Sut.  111.  2.  3. 


Adhik.  VI.  Siil.  16.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  391 

For  He  Himself  causes  bliss,"  \Taitt.Up.  II.  7.  i.].  In 
this  passage,  by  means  of  the  statement—'  He  Himself 
causes  bliss ' — it  is  declared  that  He  is  the  cause  of  bliss  to 
the  individual  selves.  Therefore  it  is  to  be  understood 
that  this  bliss-giver  who  is  the  Anandamaya  is  that  High- 
est Self  who  is  different  from  the  individual  self  that  is  to  be 
blessed.  And  it  will  be  stated  presently  that  the  Ananda- 
maya  Himself  is  here390  denoted  by  the  word  Ananda  .(or 
Bliss.) 

The  Anandamaya  is  different  from  the  individual  self 
for  the  following  reason  also  :— 

Sutra  16.     Mantravarnikameva  ci_a  giyate 

(Because)  also  that  same  Being,  who  is  denoted  by 
the  words  of  the  mantra  3  9 1  (in  the  context),  is  declared 
(there  to  be  the  Anandamaya). 

That  same  Brahman  who  is  denoted  by  the  words  of 
the  mantra,  which  begins  with — "Tbe  Brahman  is  Exist- 
ence, Knowledge,  Infinity." — \Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i  ],  is  spok- 
en of  as  the  Anandamaya.  And  that  (Anandamaya]  is  the 
Highest  Brahman  who  is  different  from  what  constitutes 
the  essential  nature  of  the  individual  self.  And  according- 
ly, by  means  of  the  passage—"  He  who  knows  the  Brah- 
man attains  the  Highest." — \Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  it  is 
pointed  out  that  the  Brahman  is  the  object  that  is  to  be 

390.  Vide  Sri-Bhashya  under  J-W.       highest   ether  ;  and  he   who    knows 
Sut.  I.  I.  20.  infra.  (Him  thus)   attains    along    with  the 

391.  This  mantra  is  to  the  follow-  Omniscient    "Brahman  all  the   auspi- 
ing  effect :  "  The  "Brahman  is    Exist-  cious  qualities."     Taill.  Up.    II.  j.  I. 
ence,    Knowledge,    Infinity ;    He    is  The  word  Mantra  means  a  metrical 
hidden  in  the  cave  of  the  heart,  in  the  composition, 


392  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

attained  by  the  individual  self.  In  (the  sentence) — "  This 
is  stated  in  relation  to  That."— \_Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],(the 
word)  '  That '  means  the  Brahman.  Having  that  (Brah- 
man) in  view,  that  is,  accepting  Him  as  the  thing  to  be 
taught,  this  rik  (or  verse)  is  repeated  by  those  who  study 
the  Vedas.  The  meaning  is  that  the  subject  mentioned  in 
the  brdhmanaag*is  clearly  explained  by  means  of  this  man- 
tra. The  object  to  be  attained  by  the  individual  self  who 
is  the  worshipper  is  certainly  the  Brahman  who  is  entirely 
distinct  from  him.  And  immediately  afterwards  (in  the 
context),  by  means  of  the  succeeding  brahmanas  as  well 
as  the  mantras,  beginning  with  the  passage — "  From  that 
same  Self,  indeed,  the  spatial  ether  came  into  existence  ."- 
\Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  this  same  (thing)  is  clearly  expound- 
ed. Therefore  the  Anandamaya  is  different  from  the  indi- 
vidual self. 


Here  he  (a  purvapakshin)  might  say  thus : — No 
doubt,  He  who  has  to  be  attained  (by  the  individual  self) 
must  be  different  from  the  individual  self  who  is  the 
worshipper.  Nevertheless,  the  Brahman  denoted  by  the 
words  of  the  mantra  (above)  is  not  a  different  thing  from 
the  individual  self ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  He  is  that  pure 
essential  nature  of  the  aforesaid  worshipper  himself,  which 
is  devoid  of  even  the  smallest  taint  of  all  evils,  which  is 
devoid  of  attributes,  and  which  is  pure  undifferentiated 
intelligence.  That  same  (essential  nature  of  the  individual 
self)  is  clearly  brought  out  by  means  of  the  mantra  begin, 
ning  with — "The  Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infini- 

392.  A  Brafimana  is  a  prose  consists  also  of  a  miscellaneous  collec- 
commentary  on  a  Mantra  or  a  metrical  lion  of  Mantras  and  Brahmanas  like 
composition.  The  Taittiriyobanishad  the  Tdittirlya-SQmhitQ  itself,, 


Adhik.  VI.  Sftt.  77.]  SRl-BHlSHYA.  393 

ty."  \Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.].  That  same  (essential  nature  of 
the  individual  self)  again  is  known  to  be  devoid  of  attri- 
butes owing  to  its  being  beyond  the  province  of  speech  and 
mind,  in  accordance  with  the  passage — "  Without  being 
able  to  attain  Him,  speech  returns  with  the  mind."  \Taitt. 
Up.  II.  9.  i.].  Hence,  it  is  that  same  (essential  nature  of 
the  individual  self)  which  is  denoted  by  the  words  of  the 
mantra  (under  reference).  Consequently  the  Ananda- 
maya  is  not  other  than  that  (essential  nature  of  the  indi- 
vidual self). 

To  this  he  (the  Siltrakdra]  gives  the  following  reply:— 

Sutra  17.    Netaronupapatteh. 


He  who  is  other  (than  the  Brahman]  is  not  (that  Being 
who  is  denoted  by  the  words  of  the  mantra],  because 
(in  such  a  case)  there  would  be  inappropriateness. 

He  who  is  different  from  the  Highest  Self  and  is 
denoted  by  the  word  jlva  (which  means  the  individual 
self),  is  not,  even  in  the  state  of  final  release,  that  Being 
who  is  denoted  by  the  words  of  the  mantra.  Why  ? 
Because  there  is  inappropriateness;  that  is, — it  is  not  possi- 
ble for  such  an  individual  self  to  have  unconditioned  omni- 
science (yipasclLittva}.  This  very  same  unconditioned 
omniscience  is  indeed  meant  to  be  explained  by  the  reference 
to  the  quality  of  willing  the  truth  in  the  passage — "  He 
desired — '  May  I  become  many  and  be  born'."  [  Taitt. 
Up.  II.  6.  i.].  Omniscience  (inpaschittva]  is  indeed  the 
possession  of  such  an  intelligence  as 'sees'  in  man}'  ways. 
After  eliding  the  syllable  vat  forming  a  part  of  the  word 
pasyat,  the  word  vipa'scliit  is  derived  from  it ;  because  it 
(viz.  the  word  vipa'schif)  belongs  to  the  group  of  words 
50 


394  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

beginning  with  prishodara.s*>s  Omniscience  is  certainly 
possible  to  a  released  individual  self.  Nevertheless,  as 
that  same  individual  self  has  no  omniscience  in  the  state  of 
samsara,  it  is  not  possible  for  him  to  possess  uncondition- 
ed omniscience.  The  released  individual  self,  who  has  at- 
tained the  state  of  pure  undirrerentiated  intelligence,  can- 
not at  all  possess  this  omniscience  ;  because  he  does  not 
'see '  in  a  variety  of  ways.  Such  is  (the  inappropriateness). 
It  has  been  already394  pointed  out  that  the  thing 
which  is  devoid  of  attributes  cannot  be  made  out  by  any 
accepted  criteria  of  truth  whatsoever.  If  the  passage — 
"  (Without  being  able  to  attain)  Him,  speech  returns  (with 
the  mind)."  —  [ Taitt.  Up.  II.  9.  i.]  -declare  the  return  of 
speech  and  mind  from  the  Brahman  (without  attaining 
Him),  it  (surely)  can  not  thereby  become  capable  of  giving 
rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  attributelessness  of  (that)  Be- 
ing. But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  will  merely  tell  us  that 
speech  and  mind  form  no  means  of  proving  that  (Being). 
And  accordingly,  He  will  acquire  the  character  of  a 
mere  nothing.  Beginning  with  the  statement3  ° 5 — "He 
who  knows  the  Brahman  attains  (the  Highest)",  it  is 
mentioned  (in  the  scripture)  that  the  Brahman  is  omni- 
scient, that  He  is  the, cause  of  the  world,  that  He  is  the 
only  abode  of  knowledge  and  bliss,  that  He  is  the  bestow- 
er  of  bliss  on  all  other*,  that  He  is,  of  His  own  free  will, 
the  creator  of  the  whole  world  made  up  of  the  intelligent 
things  and  the  non-intelligent  things,  that  He  forms 
the  Self  of  the  whole  series  of  created  things  by  enter- 
ing into  them,  that  He  is  the  cause  of  fear  and  of 
fearlessness,  that  He  is  the  ruler  of  the  wind,  the  sun,  &c., 
that  He  possesses  that  bliss  which  is  unsurpassed  in  the  or- 

393.  Vide  Pdnmi  VI.  3.  109.         395.  Taitl   U/>.  II.  i,  i. 

394.  Vide  supra  pp.  54  to  60. 


Adhik.  VL  Sul.  /;.]  SRJ-BHISHYA.  39$ 

cler  in  which  each  succeeding  bliss  is  a  hundredfold  of  the 
bliss  immediately  preceding  it,  and  that  He  is  many  other 
such  things.  And  it  is  the  idle  talk  of  a  deluded  person 
to  say  that  the  Brahman  is,  after  all  (these  are  mentioned), 
declared  to  be  incapable  of  any  proof,  in  as  much  as  speech 
and  mind  cannot  operate  (so  as  to  give  rise  to  any  know- 
ledge) in  relation  to  the  Brahman.  By  means  of  the  word 
Ananda  (or  Bliss)  in  the  expression  "  He  who  knows  the 
Bliss  of  the  Brahman  " — \Taitl.  Up.  II.  9.  i.],  this  passage 
refers  to  the  Bliss  pointed  out  by  the  word  yat  in  the  ex- 
pression— "  (Without  being  able  to  attain)  that  (Bliss) 
speech  returns  (with  the  mind)"—  \_Taitt.  Up.  11.9.  i.J; 
it  then  says  that  that  Bliss  is  related  to  the  Brahman 
by  distinctly  mentioning  that  it  belongs  to  the  Brahman; 
and  if,  by  saying  '  he  who  knows',  it  then  speaks  of  the 
knowledge  of  that  same  Bliss  which  is  beyond  the  province 
of  speech  and  mind, — it  will  be,  like  the  bellowing  noise  of 
an  old  bull  and  other  such  things,  (altogether)  meaningless, 
and  will  not  at  all  fall  within  the  class  of  what  are  called 
sentences.  Accordingly,  it  (vix.  this  passage)  proceeds  to 
give  the  definite  measurement  of  the  excellence  of  the  Bliss 
of  the  Brahman  in  that  order  in  which  each  succeeding 
bliss  is  a  hundredfold  of  the  bliss  (immediately  preceding 
it);  and  then  speech  and  mind  return  from  Him  (without 
attaining  Him)  on  account  of  that  (Bliss,)  being  incapable 
of  (such)  definite  measurement.  And  it  is  this  that  is 
stated  in  the  expression — '  (Without  being  able  to  attain) 
that  (Bliss)  speech  returns  (with  the  mind)'.  It  is  said 
that  he  who  knows  that  Bliss  of  the  Brahman,  which  is  in 
this  manner  incapable  of  definite  measurement,  need  not 
have  any  fear  from  anywhere.  Moreover  it  is  undoubtedly 
very  clear  that  this  omniscient  Being—who  is  denoted  by 
the  words  of  the  mantra  (under  reference),  and  who  is 


596  SRi-fcHisHYA.    [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

subsequently  declared  in  the  passage  beginning  with — "He 
desired,  £c." — \Tailt.  Up.  II.  6.  i.],  to  have  of  His  own  free 
will  thought  it  fit  to  create  and  preserve  the  world,  to  be 
the  internal  Self  of  the  world,  £c.,— has  in  consequence 
characteristics  other  than  those  which  constitute  the  essen- 
tial nature  of  the  released  individual  self. 


For  the  following  reason  also,  the  Anandamaya  (or 
that  which  consists  of  bliss)  is  different  from  the  individual 
self,  who  is  capable  of  existing  in  both  the  states  (of  bond- 
age and  of  final  release). 

Sutra  18.  Bhedavyapadesachc[a. 

Because   also  there  is  (in  the   context)   the   declara 
tion  of  difference  (between  the  individual  self  and  the 
Brahman). 

The  scriptural  context,  which,  beginning  with  the 
statement — "From  that  same  Self,  indeed,  the  spatial  ether 
(came  into  existence)." — \_Toitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  explains 
the  Brahman  denoted  by  the  words  of  the  mantra  (above 
quoted),  teaches,  by  means  of  the  passage — "  Different  from 
this  which  consists  of  understanding  (or  knowledge)  is  the 
(still)  inner  Self,  the  Anandamaya." — [Taitt.  Up.  11.5.1.], 
that  He  is  different  from  the  individual  self  also;  in  the 
same  way  in  which  (He  is  different)  from  anna  (food), 
prana  (principal  vital  air),  and  manas  (mind).  Therefore 
it  is  made  out  that,  owing  to  the  declaration  of  (this) 
difference  (between  the  Anandamaya  and  the  individual 
self),  this  Being,  who  is  denoted  by  the  words  of  the  mantra 
(under  reference)  and  is  the  Anandamaya,  is  certainly 


Ad/ilk.    VI.   Slit.   79.]   SRl-£>HA.SHYA.  397 

different  from  the  individual  self. 

For  the  following  reason  also,  (the  Anandamayd)  is 
different  from  the  individual  self. 

Sutra  19.     Kama ^h^  a  nanumanapeksha. 

Because  also  His  will  (is  in  itself  the  cause  of  crea- 
tion), the  pradhana  aoc  is  not  needed  (by  Him  in  the 
act  of  creation  just  as  it  is  needed  by  the  individual  self). 

In  connection  with  the  act  of  creating  the  world,  it  is 
impossible  for  the  individual  self,  who  is  subject  to  the  influ- 
ence of  avidyd  (or  ignorance),  to  avoid  the  necess- 
ity of  being  associated  with  that  non-intelligent  thing 
(viz.  matter)  which  is  denoted  by  the  words  dnumd- 
•nika,  pradhana,  &c.  Indeed,  it  is  only  in  this  man- 
ner that  the  four-faced  Brahma  and  others  form  the 
cause  of  the  world.  In  the  present  instance,  however, 
the  creation  of  wonderful  intelligent  and  non-intelligent 
things  is,  in  the  statement — "  He  created  all  this,  what- 
ever there  is." — \Taitt.  Up.  II.  6.  i.],  declared  to  take 
place  solely  from  that  will,  which  belongs  to  Him  who 
is  devoid  of  any  association  with  the  non-intelligent  thing 
(pradhana),  and  which  is  referred  to  in  the  statement-"  He 
desired  (/.  c.  willed), — 'May  I  become  manifold  and  be 
born.'"  [Taitt.  Up.  II.  6.1.].  It  is  accordingly  made  out  that 
the  Anandamaya  does  not,  while  creating  the  world,  stand 
in  need  of  any  association  with  the  non-intelligent  thing 
pradhana. 

396.  The  word  ~Anumd,na  means  cause  of  the  world.  Like  the  word 
literally  that  which  is  capable  of  be-  Anumdnika,  it  denotes  the  Pradhana 
ing  made  out  by  inference  to  be  the  of  the  Sdhk/tyas, 


398  SRI-BHISHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

The  Anandamaya  is  different  from  the  individual  sell 


for  the  following  reason  also  : 


Sutra  20.  Asminnasya  cj[a  tadyogam  sasti. 

(Because)  also  it  (viz.  the  scripture)  declares  (that) 
his  (/.  e.  the  individual  self's)  acquisition  of  that  (bliss 
takes  place  when  he  is)  in  (association  with)  this 
(Anandamaya). 

'  In  this'  means — in  the  Anandamaya.  '  His '  means— 
of  the  individual  self.  '  The  acquisition  of  that '  means— the 
acquisition  of  bliss.  *  It  declares',  that  is,  the  scripture  de- 
clares. 

It  is  said—  "  Bliss  indeed  is  He.  Having  obtained  that 
very  same  Bliss,  he  (the  individual  self)  becomes  blissful." 
\Taitt.  Up.  II.  j.  i.].  The  meaning  is  this:— When  it  is  de- 
clared that,  by  attaining  the  Anandamaya  who  is  denoted 
by  the  word  Bliss,  that  being,  who  is  apt  to  be  de- 
noted by  the  word  jlva  (which  means  the  individual  self), 
becomes  blissful, — then,  who  but  a  mad  man  will  say  that, 
by  attaining  whichever  (Being)  whoever  becomes  blissful, 
he  is  himself  that  same  (Being)  ?  It  has  been  thus  deter- 
mined that  the  Anandamaya  is  the  Highest  Brahman, 
and  hence  it  is  that  that  same  Anandamaya  is  denot- 
ed by  the  word  Ananda  (or  Bliss)  in  the  following  and 
other  scriptural  passages  : — "  If  this  Akdsa  be  not  Bliss"- 
\Taitt.  Up.  II.  7.  i.];  "The  Brahman  is  Knowledge,  Bliss." 
—[Brih.  Up.  III.  9.  28.];  in  the  same  way  in  which  the 
vijilanamaya  (or  what  consists  of  knowledge)  is  (denoted) 
by  the  word  vijftana  (or  knowledge.)  It  is  for  this  very 
reason  (of  our  having  to  interpret  Ananda  as  Anandamaya) 
that  there  is  given  a  distinct  indication  (to  that  effect) 


Adhik.   VI.  Snt.  20.]  SRi-BHISHYA.  399 

in  the  passage — "He  who  knows  the  Bliss  of  the  Brahman 
(need  not  have  any  fear  from  an)7 where)."  [Taitt.  Up.  II.  9. 
i.].  And  it  is  for  this  same  reason  again  that  the  result  (of 
such  knowledge  of  the  Bliss  of  the  Brahman]  is  pointed  out 
in  the  statement — "He  reaches  that  Self  who  is  the  Ananda- 
maya" -—[Taitt.  Up.  II.  8.  i.].  Moreover  the  annamava 
(or  what  is  made  up  of  food)  and  the  other  things, 
which  have  been  mentioned  in  the  earlier397  annvaka 
are  recapitulated  in  the  later3  9  8  annvaka  to  the  follow- 
ing effect : — "  Let  him  know  the  anna  (or  food)  as  the 
Brahman."  [Taitt.  6^.111.2.1.];  "Let  him  know  the 
prana  (or  the  principal  vital  air)  as  the  Brahman."  {Taitt. 
Up.  III.  3.  i.];  "Let  him  know  the  manas  (or  mind)  as 
the  Brahman."  [Taitt.  Up.  III.  4.  i.];  "Let  him  know 
the  vijttana  (or  knowledge)  as  the  Brahman."  \_Taitt.  Up. 
III.  5.  i.].  Hence  it  is  made  out  that,  in  this  statement  also, 
luimely,  "  (Let  him  know)  the  Ananda  (or  Bliss)  as  the 
Brahman." — [Taitt.  Up.  III.  6.  i.],  it  is  the  Anandamaya 
Himself  that  is  taught  (by  means  of  the  word  Ananda).  And 
for  that  same  reason,  even  that  (/.  c.  the  later  annvaka) 
is  concluded  by  the  statement—"  He  (i.e.  the  released  self) 
having  reached  that  Self  which  consists  of  Bliss  (Ananda- 
wrtw)...(sits  down  singing  this  sfiman — //«,  Vilha,  Vf/ha, 
I'//)."  [Taitt.  Up.  III.  10  5.]. 

Therefore,  it  is  a  demonstrated  conclusion  that  that 
Highest  Brahman,  who  is  a  different  entity  from  what  is 
apt  to  be  denoted  by  the  word  pradhana,  is  also  a  different 
entity  from  that  (other)  entity,  which  is  capable  of  being 
signified  by  the  word  j'iva  (which  means  the  individual 
self). 

397.  The   eailier    Awtrata  is  the  398.    The    later    Antirdta    is    the 

"A/iaiidavalli — Chapter   II  of  the T^///.       B/irigura/.i — Chaptei  III    of  the  same 
Ut>.  Tailt,   Up. 


400  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  /.  Part.  I. 

ADH1KARANA.   VII. 

A  ntaradhikarana. 

It  is  certainly  not  possible  for  the  individual  selves — 
who  possess  very  little  merit — to  create  the  world  out  of 
their  own  free  will,  to  be  associated  with  unsurpassable 
bliss,  to  form  the  cause  of  fear  and  of  fearlessness,  &c. 
Nevertheless,  such  a  thing  may  surely  be  possible  in  the 
case  of  the  Sun,  Indra,  Prajapati,  and  other  such  (individual 
selves)  who  possess  peculiarly  valuable  merit. 

He  (the  Sfdrakara}  disproves  this  aforesaid  supposi- 
tion thus  :— 

Sutra  21.  Antastaddharmopadesat. 

He  (/.  e.  the  Person;  who  is  within  (the  Sun  and  the 
eye  is  the  Brahman),  because  His  attributes  are  de- 
clared (in  the  context).  3" 

It  is  revealed  in  the  Chhdndogyct  thus  : — "  This  Person 
who  is  seen  within  the  Sun, — He  is  brilliant  like  gold, 
has  a  golden  beard,  and  has  golden  hairs,  and  is  altogether 
golden  even  to  the  very  tips  of  His  nails.  His  two  eyes 
are  like  the  lotus  just  opened  by  the  sun.  His  name  is 
High.  This  same  above-mentioned  Person  is  risen  above 
all  sins.  He  who  knows  (Him)  thus  rises  indeed  above  all 
sins.  The  Rik  and  the  Saman  are  the  two  psalms  in 

praise  of  Him This  is  what  relates  to  Him  as  He  is 

in  the  gods.     Now  this  is  what  relates  to  Him  as   He  is  in 

399.  The    context  referred  to  here  is  Chhandogyaml'panishad.  f,  6  &  7. 


Adhik.   VII.  Sftt.  21.]    SRI-BHISHYA.  401 

our  selves Again,  that  Person  who  is  seen   within 

the  eye,  He  is  that  same  Rik  and  that  same  Saman,  He  is 
that  (Sktha,*OQ  that  Yajus  and  that  Brahman.  The  form 
of  this  above-mentioned  Person  (in  the  eye)  is  the  same 
as  the  form  of  that  (other  Person  in  the  Sun).  The  psalms 
in  praise  of  that  other  (Person)  are  (the  same  as)  the  psalms 
in  praise  of  this  (Person).  The  name  of  that  (other  Person) 
is  the  name  of  this  (Person)  also."  [Qihand.  Up.  I.  6.  6  to 
8.  &  I.  7.  i  to  5.]. 

Here  the  doubt  arises  whether  this  Person  who  exists 
within  the  eye  and  the  bright  orb  of  the  Sun  is  that 
same  individual  self  who  possesses  such  sovereignties  as 
result  from  an  accumulation  of  the  merit  of  works,  and 
who  is  capable  of  being  denoted  by  Sun  and  other  such 
words ;  or  whether  He  is  the  Supreme  Self  who  is  other 
than  that  (Sun).  It  is  perhaps  thought  right  to  hold  that 
He  is  that  same  individual  self  who  has  accumulated  the 
merits  of  his  works.  Why  ?  Because  it  is  declared  that 
that  (Person)  is  associated  with  a  body.  Indeed  it  is 
possible  only  for  the  individual  selves  to  be  associated  with 
a  body.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  for  the  purpose  of 
experiencing  pleasure  and  pain  in  accordance  with  the 
results  of  works  that  there  is  the  association  (of  the  self) 
with  a  body.  It  is  surely  for  this  very  reason  that  final 
release,  which  is  free  from  association  with  karmas,  is 
declared  in  the  following  passage  to  be  capable  of  attainment 
in  the  bodiless  condition: — "To  him  who  is  and  has  a  body, 
there  is  no  destruction  of  the  pleasing  and  the  unpleasing  ; 
the  pleasing  and  the  unpleasing  touch  not  him  who  is  and 
has  no  body."  [Qthand.  Up.  VIII.  12.  i.].  Moreover  it  is 

400.     An     Uktha  is     a    verse  be-       audibly  or  inaudibly  as  opposed  lo  the 
longing  to  the  subdivision   known  as       Slonias  which  are  sung- 
the  Sas/ras  which  are    recited    either 

51 


402  SRT-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  1. 

possible  for  an  increase  of  knowledge  as  well  as  an  increase 
of  strength  to  take  place  from  the  greatness  of  the  merit  of 
works.  For  this  same  reason  the  lordship  of  worlds  and 
desires  is  appropriate  only  to  such  (an  individual  self  as 
has  so  made  his  own  merit  great).  And  for  the  same  reason 
again  (it  becomes  appropriate  for  him)  to  be  the  object  of 
worship,  to  be  the  giver  of  the  fruits  of  works,  and  also  to 
be  useful  in  causing  the  attainment  of  final  release  by  pro- 
ducing the  annihilation  of  sins.  Even  among  men,  those 
who  have  accumulated  merit  are  seen  to  be  very  great  in 
consequence  of  (their)  knowledge,  power,  £c.  The  Siddhas 
and  the  Gaudharvas  are  greater  than  they.  Even  greater 
than  these  are  the  gods.  Still  greater  are  Indra  and  others. 
Accordingly,  some  one  among  Brahma  and  the  others 
from  him  downwards  attains  in  each  halpa^^  the  above- 
mentioned  sovereignty  as  a  consequence  of  (his  own) 
special  merit  ;  and  thus  performs  even  the  work  of  the 
creation,  &c.,  of  the  world.  Therefore,  the  scriptural 
passage,  which  deals  with  what  forms  the  cause  of 
the  world  and  with  what  forms  the  internal  self  of  the 
world,  &c.,  relates  only  to  this  being  who  has  specially 
increased  his  merit  and  is  (thereby)  omniscient  and  omni- 
potent. Hence  there  is  nothing  that  is  called  the  Supreme 
Self  as  distinct  from  the  individual  self.  This  being  the 
case,  the  scriptural  passage — "  That  which  is  neither  gross, 
nor  atomic,  nor  short,  &c." — \Brih.  U'p.  III.  8.  8.]  and 
others  like  it  are  intended  to  import  the  essential  nature 
of  the  individual  self.  And  those  scriptures  which  deal 
with  final  release  are  intended  to  teach  the  essential  nature 
of  that  (individual  self)  and  also  (to  teach)  the  means 
of  attaining  that  (pure  essential  nature). 

4.01.     Vide  supra  p.  226.  n.  246, 


Adhik.  VII.  Sill.  21.}  SRi-BHlSHYA.  40 3 

If  it  l)e  so  held,  it  is   stated   in   reply — "  He  (i.-c. 
the  person)  who   is  within  (the  Sun  and  the  eye  is  the 
Brahman),  because  His  attributes   are   declared   (in   the 
context)."     \_Vcd.   Silt.   I.    i.  21.].     That  Person   who  is 
perceived    within   the  Sun  and    within   the   eye — He    is 
the   Supreme  Self,  and  is  other  than   the   individual   self. 
Why  ?     Because  His  attributes  are  declared  (in  the  con- 
text).    That  attribute   which  it  is  impossible  for  the   in- 
dividual self  to  possess,  which  belongs  only  to  Him  who  is 
other  than  the  individual  self  and  is  the  Highest  Self,  and 
which  imports  the  quality  of  being  devoid  of  sin,   &c., 
—that    is    taught    in    the   statement    beginning    with — 
"  This  same  above-mentioned  Person  is  risen    above  all 
sins."     [Qihand.  Up.  I.  6.  7.].  Indeed  to  be  devoid  of  sin 
is  to  be  free  from  karma.     The  meaning   is   that  it  is   to 
be  free  from  even  the  smallest  amount  of  subjection  to  the 
influence   of  karma.       As   a  matter  of   fact,    individual 
selves  are  subject  to  the  influence  of  karmas,  in  as  much  as 
they  have  to  experience  pleasures  and  pains  in  obedience 
to  their  kannas.    Therefore,  the  quality  of  being  free  from 
all  sin  forms  the  attribute   of  the   Supreme   Self  Himself, 
who  is  other  than  the  individual  self.     Based  upon  this 
(quality)  and  conditioned  by  His  own  essential  nature  are 
—the  quality  which  relates  to   the  lordship  of  worlds  and 
desires,  the  quality  of  willing  the  truth,  £c.,  the  quality  of 
being  the  internal  Self  of  all  beings,  which  are  all  His  own 
attributes.     Says  the  scripture  to  the  same  effect — "This 
Self  is  devoid  of  sin,  is  free  from  old  age,  free  from  death, 
free    from    sorrow,   free   from    hunger,    free   from   thirst, 
and  desires  the  truth  and  wills  the   truth."     [Qihand.  Up. 
VIII.   i.  5.  &  VIII.  7.  i   &  3.].   And  similarly  there  is 
the   passage — "  He    is  the   internal   Self    of   all    beings, 
He  is  devoid   of  all    sins,    He  is  the  Divine  Lord,  He 


404  SRI-BHISHYA.       [Chap.  L  Part.  1. 

is  the  one  Xarayana."  \Sub.  Up.  VII.  i.].  To  be  cap- 
able of  creating  all  the  intelligent  and  non-intelligent 
things,  in  conformity  with  the  quality  of  willing  the  truth 
as  stated  in  the  passage — "  He  desired, — May  I  become 
manifold  and  be  born."  \_Taitt.  Up.  II.  6.  i.],  to  form  the 
absolute  cause  of  fear  and  of  fearlessness,  to  possess  that 
unsurpassable  bliss  which  is  devoid  of  the  limitations  due 
to  apprehension  by  speech  and  mind, — these  and  such 
other  attributes,  which  are  natural  and  are  not  capable  of 
being  acquired  by  means  of  karmas,  are  impossible  for  the 
individual  self  to  possess. 

What  has  been  stated  to  the  effect  that,  owing 
to  there  being  the  mention  of  the  association  with  a 
body,  the  Person  (referred  to  in  the  scriptural  text  quoted 
above)  is  not  other  than  the  individual  self,— that  is  not 
right.  Indeed,  association  with  a  body  does  not  establish 
(any)  subjection  to  the  influence  of  karmas ;  because 
it  is  possible  for  Him  who  wills  the  truth  to  have  the 
association  with  a  body  merely  through  His  own 
will.  It  may  again  be  said  thus  : — The  body  is  known 
to  be  that  aggregate  of  the  elements  which  are  modifica- 
tions of  the  prakriti  (or  matter)  made  up  of  the  three402 
qualities.  And  association  with  it  cannot,  in  accordance  with 
His  will,  result  to  that  Person  who  is  devoid  of  sin  and 
who  wills  the  truth  ;  because  such  (an  association)  cannot 
be  an  aim  of  (His)  life.  And  he  who  is  subject  to  the 
influence  of  karmas,  and  who  is  totally  ignorant  of  his  own 
essential  nature,  cannot  possibly  avoid  that  association 
(with  the  body),  in  consequence  of  his  having  to  enjoy  the 
results  corresponding  to  his  works,  even  though  he  does 
not  like  it.  It  would  be  so,  provided  (we  grant)  that  His 

402.  Vide  supra  n.  344. 


Adhik.  VII.  Sul.  21.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  405 

body  is  made  up  of  the  three  qualities  and  is  a  modification 
of  the  prakriti  (or  matter).  But  that  (body)  is  in  accord- 
ance with  His  own  desire,  and  is  suited  to  His  own  nature, 
and  is  altogether  non-material ;  and  thus  the  whole  (of  our 
argument)  is  appropriate.  What  is  said  is  this  :*— 

There  are  myriads  of  innumerable  auspicious  qualities  which 
are  natural  in  themselves,  and  are  unsurpassed  in  excellence, 
and  belong  to  that  Highest  Brahman  Himself  who  is 
entirely  distinct  from  all  other  things  (than  Himself),  by 
reason  of  His  possessing  that  nature  which  is  wholly  made 
up  of  infinite  knowledge  and  bliss,  and  which  is  hostile 
to  all  that  is  evil.  In  the  very  same  manner,  there  is 
(to  Him)  a  natural  and  divine  form  also,  which  is  in  accord- 
ance with  His  own  desire  and  is  suited  to  Himself,  which  is 
uniform,  unthinkable,  immaterial,  wonderful,  eternal  and 
faultless,  and  which  is  the  home  of  endless  collections  of 
unsurpassable  qualities  such' as  splendour,  beauty,  fragrance, 
tenderness,  elegance,  youthfulness  and  the  like.  With  the 
object  of  favouring  His  worshippers,  He  (/.  c.  Narayana) 
causes  this  same  form  of  His  to  assume  such  a  configura- 
tion as  is  suited  to  the  understanding  of  each  of  those 
(worshippers)— Narayana  who  is  the  ocean  of  bound- 
less mere}',  sweet  disposition,  affection  and  generosity, 
who  is  free  from  even  the  smallest  taint  of  all  that  is  evil, 
who  is  free  from  all  sin,  who  is  the  Highest  Self,  the  High- 
est Brahman,  and  the  Highest  Person.  By  means 
of  these  passages,namely, — "Existence  alone,  my  dear  child, 
this  was  in  the  beginning"—  \Cbhand.  Up.  VI.  2.  i.], 
"  The  Self,  indeed,  this  one  only  was  in  the  beginning.". — 
[Ait.  Up.  I.  i.],  "Indeed,  Narayana  alone  then  was,  and 
not  the  (four-faced)  Brahma  nor  Isana", — \Mah.  Up.  I.]— 
and  by  means  of  others,  (the  Brahman]  is  made  out  to  be 
the  only  cause  of  all  the  worlds ;  and  the  essential  nature 


406  SRI-BHISHYA.    \Chap.  L  Part.  L 

of  that  Highest  Brahman  is  understood  to  be  of  this 
(above-mentioned)  character  with  the  help  of  such  passages 
as — -"  The  Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infinity." 
\_Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  "The  Brahman  is  knowledge  and 
bliss."  \_Brih.  U'p.  III.  9.  28.].  In  the  following  and  other 
scriptural  passages,  namely,  "  (That  which  is)  without 
attributes,  without  taint."— \_Adh.  Up.  68.],  "(This  Self) 
is  devoid  of  sin,  is  free  from  old  age,  free  from  death,  free 
from  sorrow,  free  from  hunger,  free  from  thirst,  and  desires 
the  truth  and  wills  the  truth."— \Qhhdnd.  U'p.  VIII.  1.5. 
VIII.  7.  i  &  3.],  "He  has  neither  body  nor  senses,  and 
there  is  seen  neither  His  equal  nor  His  superior  ;  His 
supreme  power  is  revealed  indeed  as  varied  and  natural 
and  as  consisting  of  knowledge,  strength,  and  action." 
—\Svet.  Up.  VI.  8.],  "(May  we  know)  that  highest  and 
greatest  Lord  of  lords,  who  is  the  highest  Deity  of  deities." 
—[Svet.  Up.  VI.  7.],  "  He  is  the  cause,  the  Lord  of  what 
is  the  lord  of  the  senses  (/.  c.  of  the  jiva  or  the  individual 
soul);  He  has  no  progenitor,  and  no  superior." — [Svet.  Up. 
VI.  9.],  "The  omniscient  Lord  who  creates  all  beings,  gives 
them  names,  and,  calling  them  (by  those  names),  ever  con- 
tinues to  be." — \Tailt.  Ar.  III.  12.  7.],  "I  know  this 
great  Person  of  sun-like  lustre  who  is  altogether  beyond 
darkness." — \Taitt.  Ar.  III.  12.  7.],  "All  the  nimeshas 
were  born  out  of  the  Person  who  has  the  lustre  of  light- 
ning." [M.  Nar.  I.  8.] ;  (in  these  and  other  passages),  they 
(i.e.  the  scriptures)  deny— that  the  Highest  Brahman 
possesses  such  qualities  as  belong  to  prakrdi  (or  nature) 
and  as  deserve  to  be  discarded  ;  (they  deny)  that  He  is 
associated  with  a  body  made  up  of  prakriti  and  (thus) 
worthy  of  rejection,  and  that  He  has  any  association  with 
the  condition  of  being  subject  to  the  influence  of  karma  > 
which  has  that  (association  with  the  body)  at  its  root ; 


Adhik.  VIL  Snt.  21.}   SRI-BHISHYA.  407 

and  then  they  declare  that  He  possesses  auspicious  quali- 
ties and  has  a  beautiful  form.  To  bless  His  worshippers, 
the  Divine  Lord  who  is  all-merciful  makes  this  same  afore- 
said natural  form  of  His  assume,  in  accordance  with  His 
own  desire,  the  configurations  of  gods,  men,  &c.,  so  that  it 
may  have  that  appearance  which  is  suited  to  the  under- 
standings of  those  (worshippers).  The  scripture  speaks  of 
this  same  fact  thus: — "Although  He  is  unborn,  He  is  born 
in  various  ways."  [Taitt.  Ar.  III.  12.  /.].  And  the  Smriti 
also  (says  the  same  tiling)  thus  : — "Although  I  am  unborn, 
and  inexhaustible  in  My  own  nature,  and  although  I  am 
the  Lord  of  all  beings,  taking  up  My  own  prakriti,  I  am 
then  born  again  and  again,  by  means  of  My  own 

mdyd for  the  protection  of  the  good  and   for   the 

destruction  of  evil-doers."  [£.  G.  IV.  6  &  8.].  Indeed 
the  good  (here)  are  the  worshippers.  The  principal 
object  of  accomplishment  is  nothing  other  than  their 
protection.  But  the  destruction  of  evil-doers  is  an 
object  of  secondary  importance,  because  that  is  possible 
(to  Him)  even  by  merely  willing  it.  The  expression  '  My 
own  prakriti  means  His  own  peculiar  nature.  The  mean- 
ing is — "Taking  up  His  own  peculiar  nature,  but  not  (taking 
up)  the  nature  of  those  who  are  in  samsdra,  (He  is  born 
again  and  again)."  The  meaning  of  the  expression  'by 
means  of  My  own  mdyd'  is  by  means  of  that  mental  power 
which  is  of  the  nature  of  His  own  will.  Lexicographers 
read  the  word  mdyd  as  synonymous  also  with  knowledge 
(or  jfidna)  as  when  they  say  mdyd  vayunam  jildnam.  [Vide 
Nir.  III.  9.].  Moreover  the  venerable  Parasara  speaks  (of 
this  form  of  the  Lord)  thus  :— "Wherever,  O  king,  all  these 
powers  are  established,  that  is  another  great  form  of  the 
Lord,  which  is  different  from  His  Universal  Form.  He,  out 
of  His  own  playfulness,  makes  that  (form  of  His),  which  is 


408  SRl-BHASHYA.     {Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

possessed  of  all  powers,  actively  manifest  under  the  names 
of  gods,  animals  and  men.  That  (activity)  is  (intended) 
for  the  good  of  the  worlds  and  is  not  produced  by  means 
of  karma  (i.  e.  by  means  of  the  effect  of  works  operating 
upon  Him)."  [F.  P.  VI.  7.  70  to  72.].  And  in  the 
Mahabhxrata  it  is  thus  stated  that  even  the  incarnated 
form  (of  the  Lord)  is  not  made  up  ofprakriti  (or  matter):— 
"  The  body  of  this  Highest  Self  is  not  a  configuration  of 
the  collection  of  material  elements."  Hence  the  Highest 
Brahman  Himself  is  the  possessor  of  that  form  which  is 
of  this  description,  and  so  this  (form)  also  is  His  own 
attribute.  Consequently,  He  who  abides  within  the 

brilliant  orb  of  the  Sun  and  within  the  eye  is  the  Highest 
Self  Himself  who  is  other  than  the  Sun  and  other  indivi- 
dual selves. 


Sjtra  22.    Bhedavyapadesa^Jchanyah. 

And  he  is  different  (from  the  Sun  and  other  indivi- 
dual selves)  because  also  there  is  the  declaration  of 
difference  ("between  the  Brahman  on  the  one  hand  and 
the  Sun  and  other  individual  selves  on  the  other). 

The  difference  of  this  Highest  Self  from  the  sun-god 
and  other  individual  selves  is  declared  fin  the  scriptures). 
The  following  scriptural  passages  also, namely, — "He  who, 
dwelling  within  the  Sun,  is  within  the  Sun,  whom  the  Sun 
does  not  know,  whose  body  is  the  Sun,  who  internally 
rules  the  Sun — (He  is  thy  internal  ruler  and  immortal 

Self) He  who,    dwelling  within 

the  self,  is  within   the   self,  whom  the  self  does  not  know, 
whose  body  is  the  self,  who  internally  rules   the  self — (He 


Adhik.  VIII.  Sfd.  2j.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  409 

is  thy  internal  ruler  and  immortal  Self)."[J/#(?//.  Bnh.  Up. 
III.  7.  9  to  22.];  "(He)  whose  body  is  the  akshara.... whom 
the  akshara  does  not  know,... who  is  moving  within  the 
mrityu  (or  pra kriti),  whose  body  is  mrityu,  whom  mrityu 
does  not  know, — He  is  the  internal  Self  of  all  beings,  He  is 
free  from  all  sins,  He  is  the  Divine  Lord,  He  is  the  one 
Xarayana."  \Sub.  Up.  VII.  i.] — (these)  first  point  out 
that  the  individual  selves  form  the  body  of  this  Highest  Self 
who  is  free  from  sin,  and  then  declare  that  He  forms  the 
internal  Self  of  them  all.  Therefore  it  is  an  established 
conclusion  that  the  Supreme  Self  is  altogether  different 
from  all  the  individual  selves  from  the  four-faced  Brahma 
downwards. 


ADHIKARANA.  VIII. 

Akasddhikarana. 

in  the  passage  — "  From  whom  all  these  beings  are 
born"  - -[ Taiit.  Up.-lll.  i.  i.],it  is  made  out  that  the  Brah- 
man is  the  cause  of  the  world.  With  the  object  of  satisfy- 
ing the  desire  to  know  what  that  cause  of  the  world  is,  that 
cause  of  the  world  has  been  pointed  out  in  general  terms 
(such  as  Sat,  Atman,  &c.,)  in  the  following  passages  :— 
''Existence  (or  Sat)  alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was  in  the 
beginning." — [Qhhdnd.  Up.\{.  2.  i.];  "  It  created  tcjas'- 
[Qihand.  Up.  VI.  2.  3.];  "The  Self  (or  Atman),  indeed, 

this  orte  only  was  in  the  beginning He  created  these 

worlds." — [A it.  Up.  I.  i  &  2.];    "Indeed  from  that  same 
Self  (or  Atman}   the   spatial  ether  came  into  existence." 
[Taitt.  Up.  II,  i.  i.];  and  it   has  the  nature  of  such  a 
52 


4io  SRJ-BHA.SHYA.     {Chap.  1.  Part.  I. 

special  entity  as  is  characterised  by  the  peculiarities  indicat- 
ed by  the  attribute  of '  seeing '  and  the  attribute  of  bliss  : 
consequently  that  (cause)  has  been  declared  to  be  the 
Brahman  who  is  different  from  the  pradhana  (or  matter), 
and  from  the  individual  self,  and  from  other  such  things. 
Now,  in  the  aphorism — "  That  which  is  denoted  by  the 
word  Aka'sa  (is  the  Brahman},  because  His  peculiar 
characteristics  (are  mentioned  in  the  context  in  relation  to 
what  is  denoted  by  that  word)." — [Ved.  Sut.  1.  i.  23.]— 
and  in  other  aphorisms  (following  it),  which  make  up  the 
remaining  portion  of  this  quarter  (of  the  first  chapter),  it 
(viz.  that  cause  of  the  world)  is  denoted  by  means  of 
(certain)  particular  terms  such  as  Akd'sa,  &c.;  and  then- 
even  in  discussions  bearing  upon  what  constitutes  the  cause 
of  the  world,  and  upon  what  possesses  the  sovereignty  of 
the  world,  and  upon  such  other  things, — it  is  the  Brahman 
Himself  who  is  declared  to  be  the  entity  that  is  different 
from  those  intelligent  and  non-intelligent  things,  which  are 
well  known  to  be  denoted  by  akdsa  and  other  words,  and 
(it  is  IJe  Himself)  who  is  (also  declared  to  be)  possessed 
of  the  characteristics  mentioned  already. 

Sutra  23.  Akasastalllngat. 

That  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  Akasa  (is  the 
Brahman],  because  His  peculiar  characteristics  (are 
mentioned  in  the  context403 in  relation  to  what  is  denoted 
by  that  word). 

It  is  revealed  in  the  Chhdndogya  to  this  effect: — "What 
is  the  goal  of  this  world  ?  And  he  (Pravahana)  says  in 

403.     The  context  referred  to  here  is  CjihUnd.  Up,  I.  9. 


Adhik.  VIII .  SuL  23.]  SKi-l3HASHVA.  411 

reply — It  is  the  Aka'sa  ;  all  these  beings  are,  indeed,   born 
out  of  the  Akdsa;  they  go  unto  the  Aka'sa  at  the  end ;  as  the 
A kdsa  is  greater  than  all  these  beings,  the  Aka'sa  is  the  best 
refuge."     \Chhand.  Up. 1.  9.  i.].     Here  the  doubt  arises 
whether     it  is    the    well    known     element  o^ dkdsa  (or 
ether)  itself  that  is  denoted  by  the  word  Akdsa,  or  whether 
it  is  the  Brahman  Himself  as  having  the  above-mentioned 
characteristics.  It  is  perhaps  held  that  it  is  the  well  known 
element  of  dkdsa.     Why  ?  In  the  case  of  any  thing  that 
has  to  be  made  out  altogether  by  means  of  a  word,  that 
same   meaning  (of  it),  which  is  established  in  accordance 
with  the  proper  process  of  deriving  the  meanings  of  words 
and  which  is  expressed  by  that  word, — that  alone  has  to 
be  accepted.    Hence,  the  well  known  element  of  dkdsa 
(or  ether)  is  itself  the  cause  of  the  whole  world  which  is 
made  up  of  the  totality  of  (all  the)  movable  and   immov- 
able beings.   Therefore  the  Brahman  can  not  be  other  than 
that  (dkdsa).     However,  it  has  been  already  pointed  out 
that  the  Brahmanis  distinct  from  the  non-intelligent  thing 
(matter)  as  well  as  from  the  (intelligent)  individual  self,  for 
the  reason  that  He  performs  such  acts  of  creation,  &c.,  as 
are  invariably   caused   by  (His)    '  seeing'   (/.   c.  willing). 
True,  it  was  (so)  pointed  out ;  but  that  (statement)  is  not 
right.    Accordingly,   when   it  is  declared  that — "  He  from 
whom  all  these  beings  are  born — That  is  the  Brahman"  - 
\_TaiU.  Up.  III.  i.  i.],   then,  it  may  be   specially  desired 
to  know  what  that  particular  entity  is  which  is  the  cause 
of  the  birth,  &c.,4°4  of  all  those  beings  that  are  born;  in 
such  a  case,  that  special  entity  is  made  known  by  means 
of  the    passage   beginning   with — "All  these   beings  are 
indeed  born  out  of  the  dkdsa" — [C/ihdnd.  Up.  I.  9.   i.]; 

404.    Birth,  ere.,  means  birth,  subtciilaliou  and  destruction. 


SRI-^HASHYA.     \Chap.  L  Par  I.  I. 

thus,  the  cause  of  the  origin,  £c.,  of  the  world  is  definitely 
determined  to  be  nothing  other  than  the  dkdsa.  It  being 
so,  Sat  and  other  words  which  possess  a  general  signific- 
ance, and  which  are  mentioned  in  the  following  passage 
among  other  passages  also,  namely, — "  Existence  (or  Sat) 
alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was  in  the  beginning" — [Qihdnd. 
Up.  VI.  2.  i.],— denote  that  same  special  entity  dkdsa.  In 
the  passage — "The  Self  (or  the  Atinan),indeed,  this  one  only 
was  in  the  beginning." — [Ait.  Up.  I.  i.] — and  in  others, 
the  word  Atman  is  also  used ,  to  signify  that  same  thing 
(dkdsa).  Indeed  that  word  Atman  also  is  not  restricted 
to  mean  only  intelligent  beings.  For  example,  there  is  the 
instance — "The  pot  is  mriddtmaka  (or  made  up  of  clay)." 
Since  the  word  Atman  may  be  derived403  from  the  root  dp 
to  pervade,  the  word  Atman  also  signifies  the  dkdsa  (or  the 
ether)  quite  absolutely.  Hence,  when  it  is  thus  determined 
that  the  dkdsa  itself  is  the  Brahman  that  forms  the  cause  of 
the  world,  then  the  activity  of  '  seeing ',  &c.,  have  to  be 
understood  in  their  figurative ,  sense  so  as  to  suit  that 
(element  of  dkdsa}.  If  the  cause  of  the  world  had  been, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  denoted  only  by  Sat  and  other  such 
general  terms,  then,  in  accordance  with  the  import  of 
'  seeing ',  &c.,  (predicated  in  relation  to  it),  that  cause 
would  have  been  specially  made  out  to  be  nothing  other 
than  a  particular  intelligent  being.  But  by  the  word  dkdsa 
itself  a  characteristic  entity  is  definitely  pointed  out ; 
and  thus  there  is  nothing  else  that  has  to  be  particularly 
understood  (to  be  its  import)  as  arising  from  the  natural- 
ness of  its  meaning  (in  the  context).  Indeed,  it  may  be 
said  (here)  that,  in  the  passage — "  From  the  Self  the  dkdsa 
came  into  existence."—  [ TaitL  Up.  II.  i.  i.],  the  dkdsa 

405 .     See  Sjttifr/Vtf-  Upanishad.  J 1 1 , 


Adtiik.Vltf.SM.2j.']  SRI-&HASHYA.  413 

itself  is  made  out  to  be  a  produced  effect.  True  ;  in  fact, 
vdyn  (air)  and  all  other  such  things  exist  in  two  conditions, 
namely,  the  subtle  condition  and  the  gross  condition.  Of 
these  the  subtle  condition  of  the  element  of  dkdsa  consti- 
tutes the  cause;  and  its  gross  condition,  the  effect.  The 
meaning  of  the  passage — "  From  the  Self  the  dkasa  came 
into  existence."- -{Taitt.  Up.  II.  i.  i.]— is,  that  from  its 
subtle  form,  it  became  changed  into  its  own  gross  form. 
By  means  of  the  passage  beginning  with — "  All  these 
beings  are,  indeed,  born  out  of  the  dkdsa." — [Qihdnd.  Up. 
I.  9.  i.],  it  is  declared  that  the  whole  world  derives  its 
existence  from,  and  has  its  dissolution  in,  the  dkdsa  itself ; 
hence  it  is  determined  that  that  same  dkdsa  is  indeed  the 
Brahman  that  forms  the  cause  of  the  world.  .For  whatever 
reason  the  Brahman  is  not  other  than  the  well  known 
element  of  dkdsa,  for  that  same  reason  the  (following  scrip- 
tural) statements — "If  this  dkdsa  be  not  bliss,  &c." — [Taitt. 
Up.  II.  7.  i.],  "  The  akdsa  is,  indeed,  the  evolver  of  name 
and  form."  [Clihdnd.  Up.  VIII.  14.1.] — and  other  such  (state- 
ments) are  also  (seen  to  be)  very  appropriate.  There- 
fore the  Brahman  is  not  other  than  the  well  known 
element  of  dkdsa. 

If  it  be  so  held,  we  reply  (thus): — "That  which  is 
denoted  by  the  word  Akdsa  (is  the  Brahmati),  because 
His  peculiar  characteristics  (are  mentioned  in  the  con- 
text in  relation  to  what  is  denoted  by  that  word)."  [  Ved. 
Sut.  I.  i.  23.].  That  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  Akdsa 
is  that  Highest  Self  Himself  who  has  the  characteristics 
already  mentioned,  and  who  is  a  different  entity  from  the 
non-intelligent  and  well  known  element  of  dkdsa  (or 
ether).  Why  ?  Because  His  peculiar  characteristics  (are 
mentioned  in  the  context  in  relation  to  what  is  denoted 
by  that  word).  To  be  the  only  cause  of  all  the 


414  SRi-fiuisrivA.       [Chap.  L  Part.  L 

worlds,  to  be  greater  than  all  others,  to  be  the  best  refuge, 
&c., — which  are  all  the  characteristics  of  the  Highest 
Self, — are  found  mentioned  (in  the  context  under  reference). 
Indeed,  it  is  not  possible  for  that  non-intelligent  thing, 
which  is  usually  denoted  by  the  well  known  word  akasa, 
to  be  the  cause  of  the  world  ;  because  it  is  not  possible 
for  an  intelligent  thing  to  be  the  produced  effect  of 
that  (non-intelligent  thing).  And  to  be  the  best  refuge  is  to 
be  that  highest  object  which  is  worthy  of  being  attained 
by  intelligent  beings  ;  and  to  be  this, — it  is  not  possible  for 
that  non-intelligent  thing  which  deserves  to  be  discarded 
and  which  is  opposed  to  all  the  desirable  aims  of  life.  And 
to  be  greater  than  all  is  to  be  unconditioned  ;  it  is  to  be  so 
great  by  means  of  all  the  auspicious  qualities  as  to  remain 
unsurpassed  by  all.  To  be  this  also, — it  is  not  possible  for 
the  non-intelligent  thing. 

What  has  been  stated  to  the  effect  that  a  specially 
characteristic  thing  is  mentioned  by  means  of  the  word 
Akdsa,  in  response  to  the  query  to  know  what  that  parti- 
cular object  is  which  forms  the  cause  of  the  world,  and 
that,  in  consequence,  every  thing  else  (in  the  context)  has 
to  be  explained  so  as  to  exactly  agree  with  that  (akdsa) 
itself, — that  is  improper  ;  because,  in  the  passage. — "  All 
these  beings  are,  indeed,  born  out  of  the  Akdsa"—  \CMhdnd. 
Up.  I.  9.  i.],  that  (Akdsa)  is  pointed  out  as  if  it  were  (a 
thing)  already  well  known.  Indeed,  to  mention  a  thing  as 
if  it  were  well  known  implies  that  there  is  some  other 
means  of  knowing  it.  And  the  other  means  of  knowledge 
(here)  are,  indeed,  the  following  passage  and  other  similar 
ones  : — "  Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  this  was  in  the 
beginning."  [Qihdnd.  Up.  VI.  2.  i.].  And  they  declare 
the  Brahman  to  be  altogether  the  same  as  has  been  al- 
ready mentioned.  Accordingly,  the  Brahman  established 


Adhik.  VIII.  Sfit.  2J.]   SRI-BHISHYA.  415 

by  those  (passages)  is  pointed  out  by  the  word  Akasa  as  if 
it  were  a  well  known  thing.  And  it  is  also  possible  for 
the  Highest  Brahman  to  be  denoted  by  the  word 
Akdsa,*°Q  in  as  much  as  He  possesses  the  power  of 
illuminating  things,  that  is,  in  as  much  as  He  is  lumin- 
ous to  Himself  and  also  causes  other  things  to  shine. 
Further,  this  word  Akasa,  even  when  it  is  capable  of 
importing  a  particular  (well  known)  entity,  denotes  that 
particular  non-intelligent  thing  which  it  is  not  possible 
to  think  of  as  forming  the  cause  of  the  intelligent  thing. 
Such  excerpts  from  scriptural  passages  as  the  following 
among  others,  namely,  —  "  It  thought  "  —  \Qhhand.  Up.  VI. 
2.  3.]  —  "He  desired  —  May  I  become  manifold"  —  \Taitt. 
Up.  II.  6.  i.],  enable  us  to  know  that  peculiar  Being 
who  is  characterised  by  the  attribute  of  omniscience  and 
the  attribute  of  willing  the  truth,  &c.;  and  now  to 
cause,  by  means  of  that  (akdsd),  the  import  of  those  scrip- 
tural passages,  which  are  capable  of  proving  that  (Being), 
to  be  other  than  what  that  (import)  really  is,  —  this  is  not 
(certainly)  within  the  province  of  correct  reasoning.  Simi- 
larly, it  is  not  also  possible  to  make  the  common  import 
of  those  numerous  passages,  which  are  capable  of  denot- 
ing that  peculiar  Being  thus  characterised  by  peculiar  and 
endless  attributes,  become  something  other  than  what 
that  (import)  really  is,  through  the  influence  of  a  single 
passage  which  is  merely  a  restatement  (of  something  that 
has  been  already  taught). 

It  has  been  stated  that  the  word  Atman  is  not  absolute- 
ly restricted  to  mean  intelligent  beings,  because  it  is  seen 
(to  be  used  otherwise)  in  the  instance  —  "  The  pot  is  mrid- 


406.  The   word   ^Aka'sa.   is  derived       luminous  to  itself  and  also  that  which 
from  the  root  Ka's  to  shine  and    is       causes  other  things  to  shine. 
Interpreted    to  mean   that   which    is 


416  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

atmaka  (or  made  up  of  clay)."  In  reply  to  this  it  is  said 
thus  : — No  doubt,  the  word  Atman  is,  in  some  cases,  used 
even  so  as  to  denote  things  other  than  what  is  intelligent. 
Nevertheless,  the  word  Atman  is  very  largely  used  so  as  to 
denote  that  (intelligent  entity)  which  forms  the  correlative 
of  the  body.  Consequently,  that  intelligent  entity  it- 
self which  is  correlated  to  the  body  is  made  out  to  be 
mentioned  in  the  follo.wing  and  other  passages,  namely,— 
"  The  Self  (or  Alman),  indeed,  this  one  only  was  in  the  be- 
ginning."—  [Ait.  Up.  I.  i.];  "From  the  Self,  the  dkasa  (or 
the  spatial  ether)  came  into  existence."  \Taitt.  Up.  II.  i. 
i.].  For  example,  although  the  word  go  (i.  e.  ox)  may  ex- 
press many  things,  that  thing  alone  which  has  the  dewlap 
and  other  such  (characteristics)  is  naturally  and  of  itself  ap- 
prehended thereby,  on  account  of  its  being  largely  used  (to 
signify  that  thing):  and  to  apprehend  its  other  meanings,  it 
is  necessary  to  have  a  special  mention  made  of  each  (of  those 
meanings)  in  particular.  Similarly,  each  of  the  following 
and  other  particular  scriptural  passages,  namely,  "  He 
thought — May  I  create  the  worlds."—  \A it.  Up.  I.  i.J,  "  He 
desired,— May  I  become  manifold  and  be  born." — [Tailt. 

Up.  II.  6.  i.] — themselves  confirm  that  it  (viz.  the  word 
Atman)  signifies  nothing  other  than  that  intelligent  entity, 
which  is  of  itself  arrived  at  (from  the  common  use  of  that 
word)  and  forms  (also). the  correlative  of  the  body. 

Thus  the  Brahman — who  forms  the  only  cause  of  all 
the  worlds,  and  who  is  characterised  by  many  such  wonder- 
ful attributes,  as  are  peculiar  to  none  other  than  Himself, 
and  as  are  made  out  by  means  of  excerpts  from  scriptural 
passages, — is  Himself  established  by  means  of  the  passage 
beginning  with — "  Existence  alone,  my  dear  child,  &c." 

—\Qihand.  Up.  VI.  2.  i.].  And  it  is  thus  a  settled  con- 
clusion that  (that  Brahman)  Himself  is  pointed  out  by 


Adhik.  IX.  Sftt.  24.]  SRi-BiusHYA.  417 

means  of  the  word  Akd'sa,  in  the  passage  beginning  with— 
"  All  these  beings  are  indeed  (born  out  of  the  Akdsd)"- 
\Qbhdnd.  Up.  I.  9.  i.],  as  if  He  were  already  well  known. 


ADH1KARANA.  IX. 

Prdnddh  ikarana , 
Sutra  24.     Ata  eva  praiah. 

For  that  same  reason  (which  has  been  given  in  the 
case  of  Akasa),  He  who  is  denoted  by  the  word  Prana 
(also  in  the  context* or  is  the  Brahman]. 

After  commencing  the  context  by  means  of  the  state- 
ment—" O  thou  prastotri,  that  deity  which  invariably 
attends  the  prastdva,  &c.", — 4°8  it  is  revealed  in  the 
Qihandogya  to  this  effect  : — "  Which  is  that  deity  ?  He 
said—'  Indeed  it  is  the  Prana.  All  these  beings  certainly 
enter  into  the  Prana  (to  be  absorbed  into  it)  •  they  are 
evolved  out  of  the  Prana.  This  is  that  deity  which  invaria- 
bly attends  t\\Qprastdva.  And  if,  without  knowing  that  deity, 
you  had  sung  (your)  psalms  of  praise,  your  head  would 
have  fallen  off':'—[Cbhand.Up.I.  10.  9.  &  I.  n._4  &  5.]. 
Here  the  word  Prdna  also  denotes,  like  the  word  Akdsa,\\\e 
Highest  Self  Himself  who  is  other  than  the  ordinarily  well 
known  prdna  (or  vital  air);  because  this  (prdnd]  is  described 

407.  The  context  here  referred  to  by  the  Prastolri  who  is  the  assistant 
is  Chliand.  Up.  I.  io&  if.  of  the  Udgatri  or    the  chanter  of  the 

408.  Prastava  is  the  prelude  or  the  Samaveda. 
introductory  words  of  a  Sdinan  sung 


418  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

(in  the  context),  as  if  it  were  a  well  known  thing,  by  means 
of  the  characteristics  of  the  whole  world  entering  into 
it  and  coming  out  of  it,  tS:c.,  which  are  not  (at  all)  common 
to  it. 

However,  there  may  also  be  an  additional  objection 
(here)  to  the  effect  that,  since  the  whole  of  the  totality  of 
beings  is  seen  to  have  its  existence  and  activity  depend- 
ent upon  the  pram,  the  ordinarily  well  known  prana 
(or  vital  air)  itself  deserves  to  be  pointed  out  as  the  cause 
of  the  world.  And  the  invalidation  (of  this  objection) 
is  to  the  effect  that  the  statement — "  All  these  beings 
certainly  enter  into  the  Prana  (to  be  absorbed  into 
it),  they  are  evolved  out  of  the  Prana'.' — \Chhand. 
Up.  I.  ii.  5.]— can  not  be  appropriate  in  relation 
to  stones  and  sticks,  as  also  in  relation  to  the  essen- 
tial nature  of  the  intelligent  thing  (viz.  the  individual 
self);  because  it  (viz.  that  prana}  does  not  exist  (in 
them).  Therefore  the  word  Prana  (here)  denotes  the 
Highest  Brahman  Himself  for  the  reason  that  it  is  to 
be  understood  as  that  which  gives  life  to  all  beings. 

Consequently,  it  is  a  demonstrated  conclusion  that  the 
Highest  Brahman  Himself — who  is  altogether  different 
from  the  ordinarily  well  known  dkdsa  (or  ether),  prana  (or 
vital  air),  and  other  such  things,  who  is  the  only  cause 
of  all  the  worlds,  who  possesses  infinite  myriads  of  auspi- 
cious qualities,  such  as  the  quality  of  being  free  from  sin, 
the  quality  of  omniscience,  the  quality  of  willing  the  truth, 
&c., — is  denoted  (here)  by  such  words  as  Akasa,  Prana, 
&c. 


Adhik.  X.  Sut.  25.]    SRI-BHISHYA.  419 

ADH1KARANA.  X. 

Jyotiradhikarana. 

Hereafter,  by  means  of  the  aphorism — "  That  which 
is  denoted  by  the  word  Jyotis  (is  the  Brahman],  because 
there  is  the  mention  of  (His)  feet  (in  a  connected  context)  "- 
\_Ved.  Siit.  I.  i.  25.]  and  by  means  of  the  other  aphorisms 
(following  it),  it  is  declared  that  that  Jyotis  (or  Light), 
which  is  characterised  by  at  least  a  certain  unsurpassa- 
ble quality  invariably  associated  with  what  constitutes  the 
cause  of  the  world,  and  which  is  also  denoted  by 
Indra  and  other  words  that  are  ordinarily  well  known  to 
refer  to  other  things,  is  the  Highest  Brahman  Himself. 

Sutra  25.   Jyotiszttaranabhidhanat. 

That  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  Jyotis  (is  the 
Brahman),  because  there  is  the  mention  of  (His)  feet  (in 
a  connected  context). 

It  is  revealed  in  the  Qihdndogya  to  this  effect: — "  Xow 
that  Light  which  shines  beyond  this  Highest  Heaven,  be- 
yond all  the  things  in  the  universe,  beyond  the  whole  uni- 
verse, in  the  highest  worlds  than  which  there  are  no  higher 
worlds,  that  is  that  same  Light  indeed  which  is  within 
this  person."  [Qihdnd.  Up.  III.  13.  7.].  Here  there  arises 
the  doubt  whether  that  thing  which  is  denoted  by  the 
word  Jyotis  (or  Light),  which  is  associated  with  unsurpassa- 
ble brilliance  and  forms  that  same  well  known  light  which 
belongs  to  the  sun-god  and  others,— (whether  that)  is  the 
Brahman  that  forms  the  cause  of  the  world  ;  or  whether 
that  (thing)  is  the  Highest  Person,  who  is  altogether 


420  SRI-BHA.SHYA.    {Chap.  I.  Part.  1. 

distinct  from  the  aggregate  of  intelligent  and  non-intelli- 
gent things,  who  i.i  the  highest  cause,  who  has  un- 
limited splendour,  who  is  omniscient  and  wills  the 
truth.  It  is  perhaps  thought  right  to  hold  that  it  is  the 
ordinarily  well  known  light  itself  (which  is  denoted 
by  the  \vordjyotis).  Why  ?  Because,  although  it  (viz. 
Jy 'otis)  is  described  as  if  it  were  an  already  well  known 
thing,  there  are  not  found  mentioned  in  the  passage  in 
which  it  occurs  any  such  characteristics  as  are  invariably 
associated  with  the  Highest  Self,  in  the  same  way  in  which 
(they  are  seen  to  be  so  associated)  with  (what  is  denoted 
by)  Akdsa,  Pram,  and  other  such  words ;  and  it  is  not, 
in  consequence,  possible  to  derive  (from  that  context)  any 
knowledge  which  leads  to  the  recognition  of  the  Highest 
Person  (therein)  :  and  because  also  that  (Jyotis  itself)  is 
taught  to  be  the  same  as  the  digestive  heat  in  the 
stomach.  The  ordinarily  well  known  light  itself  has 
(thus)  to  be  the  Brahman  that  forms  the  cause  of  the 
world  ;  for,  there  is  associated  with  it  (also)  that  unsur- 
passable splendour  which  is  invariably  concomitant  with 
what  constitutes  the  cause  (of  the  world). 

If  it  be  so  held,  we  state  in  reply — "  That  which  is  de- 
noted by  the  word  Jyotis  (is  the  Brahman),  because  there 
is  the  mention  of  (His)  feet  (in  a  connected  context)." 
[Vcd.  Snt.  I.  i.  25.].  That  '  Light',  which  is  described  as 
being  related  to  the  Highest  Heaven  and  is  associated 
with  unsurpassable  splendour,  is  the  Highest  Person  Him- 
self. Why  ?  Because,  in  the  passage — "  All  beings  make 
up  His  one  foot ;  His  three  immortal  feet  are  in  the  High- 
est Heaven." — \_Qhhdnd.  Up.  III.  12.  6.],  all  beings  are  de- 
clared to  form  the  foot  of  this  same  entity  who  is  in  rela- 
tion with  the  Highest  Heaven.  What  is  said  is  this  :— - 
In  the  passage — "  That  Light  which  is  beyond  the  Highest 


Adhik.  X.  Sut.  26."]    SRI-BHA.SHYA.  421 

Heaven,  &c." — [Qihdnd.  Up.  III.  13.  7.],  the  peculiar  char- 
acteristics of  the  Highest  Person  are  certainly  not  mention- 
ed; nevertheless,  it  is  recognised  that,  since  the  Highest  Per- 
son is  mentioned  in  a  former  passage  (in  the  same  con- 
text) as  being  related  to  the  Highest  Heaven,  this  Light 
also  which  is  related  to  that  Highest  Heaven  is  that  Person 
Himself.  And  in  the  teaching  that  that  (Jyotis}  is  one 
with  the  digestive  heat  of  the  stomach,  there  is  nothing 
wrong ;  because  it  (viz.  that  teaching)  is  a  command- 
ment enjoining  the  continued  meditation  of  that  (Highest 
Person)  in  the  form  of  that  (digestive  heat)  for  the 
purpose  of  attaining  the  fruition  of  a  desired  result. 
And  that  the  digestive  heat  of  the  stomach  has  the 
character  of  that  (Highest  Person)  is  declared  by  the 
Lord  Himself  in  the  passage — "  Becoming  the  vaisvd- 
nara,*Q*  I  dwell  in  the  bodies  of  all  living  beings." 
[£.  G.  XV.  14.]. 

Sutra  26.     Chhandobhidhananneti*tenna    tatha^Le- 
torpa».anigamat  tathahidarsanam. 

If  it  be  said  that,  on  account  of  the  metre  (known  as 
the  gayatrj]  being  mentioned  (in  the  context,  the  Light 
or  Jyotis  described  above  is)  not  (the  Brahman),  it  is  not 
(right  to  say)  so  ;  because  the  teaching  (here)  relates  to 
the  concentration  of  the  mind  (on  the  Brahman)  conceiv- 
ed as  that  same  (gayatrlY.  indeed  the  scripture  declares 
it  accordingly. 

In  a  former  passage  (in  the  same  context),  the  metre 

409.  This  is    an  epithet  of    Agni  sage — ''This  Fire  which  is  within  man 

or  Fire.     Here,    this    word    denotes  and  by  which  food  is  digested — that  is 

the  digestive  heat  of  the  stomach   in  the  1'aih'a nam. "  Brih.   Up.  V.  9.1, 
accordance   with   the  scriptural   pas- 


422  SRI-BHASHYA.       [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

known  asthe^-diya/r/is  mentioned  in  the  statement — "The 
Gdyatri  indeed  is  all  this." — [C&hand.  Up.  III.  12.  i.];  and 
this  Rik  verse  also,  which  is  then  quoted  after  the 
statement — "  Therefore  this  same  (Gdyatri  known  as 
the  Brahman]  is  also  declared  in  a  Rik*10  verse."- 
\Qhhdnd.  Up.  III.  12.  5.]  to  the  effect—"  Such  is  His  great- 
ness."— [Clihdnd.  Up.  III.  12.  6.],— relates  to  (that) 
metre :  hence,  here  (/.  <?.  in  the  passage  under  discussion) 
there  is  no  mention  of  the  Highest  Person.  If  it  be  so 
held,  (it  is  replied  that)  it  cannot  be  (right  to  maintain) 
so, — "Because  the  teaching  (here)  relates  to  the  concen- 
tration of  the  mind  (on  the  Brahman)  conceived  as  that 
same  (gayatri)."  Here  it  is  not  merely  the  metre 
(gdyatri}  that  is  denoted  by  the  word  Gdyatri ;  because 
it  is  impossible  for  what  is  merely  a  metre  to  form 
the  Self  of  all.  But  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  taught 
here  that  the  mind  as  concentrated  on  the  gay  air  I  is  to  be 
applied  to  the  Brahman  Himself.  The  meaning  is— 
that,  for  the  purpose  of  attaining  the  fruition  of  the  desir- 
ed result,  it  is  taught  in  relation  to  the  Brahman  that  He 
is  to  be  continuously  conceived  and  meditated  upon  as 
being  similar  to  the  gdyatri.  And  from  the  passage— 
"  All  beings  make  up  His  one  foot ;  His  three  immortal 
feet  are  in  the  Highest  Heaven  "*-— \j3ihand.  Up.  III.  12. 
6.],  there  arises  a  similarity  between  the  Brahman  who 
(thus)  has  tour  feet  and  the  gdyatri  which  also  has  four 
feet.  And  the  •  gdyatri  (metre)  with  four  feet  is  met  with 
occasionally,  as  in  the  following  instance  :— 

Indrassachipatih  \ 
Valenaplditah  || 

Duschyavano  vrishd  \ 

410.     Vide  A'.  V.  X.  90.  3. 


Adhik.  X.  Sut.  27.]    SRI-BHASHYA.  423 

Samitsu  sdsahih  ||41 1 

"  Indeed  (the  scripture  declares  it)  accordingly  " — that  is 
— elsewhere  also  a  word  which  ordinarily  denotes  a  metre  is 
used  to  denote  other  things,  in  consequence  of  its  simi- 
larity with  them  ;  for  example,  in  connection  with  the 
vidyd  (or  the  form  of  worship)  in  which  the  vital  air 
is  enjoined  to  be  meditated  upon  and  worshipped  as 
having  the  quality  of  absorbing  all  things  at  once  into 
itself,  it  is  declared,  in  the  passage  beginning  with— 
"Now  these  five  and  the  other  five  make  ten.''—412 
[Chhdnd.  Up.  IV.  3.  8.],  that  "this  same  (ten-syllabled 
metre)  virdj  (which  consists  of  ten  constituent  parts)  is 
that  which  eats  the  food  (consisting  of  ten  parts)." 
\Qhhand.  Up.  IV.  3.  8.]. 


For  the  following  reason  also,  what  is  denoted  by  the 
word  Gdyatrl  is  the  Brahman  Himself: 

Su  tra  27.    Bhu  tadipada vyapadesopapa tteschaiva m . 

Because  also  it  is  appropriate  only  thus  to  declare 
that  (intelligent)  beings  and  other  objects  form  the  feet 
(of  the  Gayatrj}. 

411.  Halayudhabhatta  quotes  these  Indrcillacfripatih  \ 

lines  almost  as  they  are  given    above  Valena  vllitah  || 

in  his  commentary  under  the  following  Du'sckyavano  vrisha  \ 

aphorism   of  Pingala   in  his  work  on  Lamatsu  sasahih  || 

Sanskrit  prosody:     "Adyam  cjiatushpat  412.      The     first    five    are — Vayn, 

ritubhih.     Here  the  metre  known  as  air,  Agnr,   fire,  %ditya,  sun,   Chanara, 

Gdyatrl   is   said    to   consist   of  four  moon,  and  Ap,  water;  the  second  five 

parts  of  six  syllables  each.     And  in  are — Pran.i,  breath,  Viik,  speech,  Cha- 

illustration     of     this    the    following  kshus,  sight,  Srotra,  hearing,  and  J/<r- 

example  is  given  ; —  was,  mind- 


424  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  1.  Part.  1. 

After  pointing  out  the  (intelligent)  beings,  the  earth, 
the  body,  and  the  heart  (to  form  the  feet  of  the  Gayatrl), 
there  is  this  teaching  which  is  given  to  the  effect — "  This 
above-mentioned  (Gayatrl}  has  four  feet." — \Chhdnd.  Up. 
III.  12.  5.];  and  such  (a  teaching)  can  be  highly  appropriate 
only  in  relation  to  the  Brahman  Himself,  who  is  (here) 
denoted  bv  the  word  Gdvatri. 


Sutra  28.  Upadesabhedannetiehennobhayasminnapy' 
avirodhat. 

If  it  be  said  that,  on  account  of  there  being  a  differ- 
ence between  the  (two)  teachings  f  given  in  the  context, 
what  is  denoted  by  the  word  Jyotis  or  Light)  is  not  (the 
Brahman),  it  cannot  be  (right  to  say)  so ;  because  even 
in  both  those  ('teachings)  there  is  nothing  that  is  contra- 
dictory (of  each  other). 

In  a  former  passage  (in  the  same  context),  namely, — 
"  His  three  immortal  feet  are  in  the  Highest  Heaven 
(divi)."—\Chhand.  Up.  III.  12.  6.],  the  Highest  Heaven 
(dyii)  is  pointed  out  as  the  position  of  location  ;  and  here 
(/.  e.  in  the  passage  under  reference),  viz.—"  Beyond  the 
Highest  Heaven,  (divak}" — \Chhand.  Up.  III.  13.7.],  it 
(viz.  that  Highest  Heaven)  is  indicated  to  be  a  boundary ; 
and  thus  the  teaching  has  different  forms.  Consequently 
that  Brahman  who  is  declared  in  the  previous  pas- 
sage cannot  be  recognised  in  the  subsequent  one. 
If  it  be  so  held,  (it  is  replied  that)  it  cannot  be  so ; 
because  even  in  (regard  to)  both  those  teachings  there  is 
a  similarity  in  the  nature  of  their  import,  and  there 
is  thus  nothing  to  hinder  such  a  recognition.  For  an 
(analogous)  example,  there  is  this  instance— "The  hawk 


Adhik.  XL  Silt.  29.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  425 

is  on  the  top  of  the  tree,"  and—"  The  hawk  is  above 
the  top  of  the  tree."  Therefore,  the  Highest  Person 
Himself,  who  is  possessed  of  unsurpassable  splendour,  is 
declared  to  be  that  Jyotis  (or  Light)  which  is  resplend- 
ent beyond  the  Highest  Heaven.  And  the  Highest 
Person  is  declared  to  have  four  feet  in  this  passage, — "  Such 
is  His  greatness.  Greater  than  that  is  the  Purusha.  All 
beings  make  up  His  one  foot.  His  three  immortal  feet 
are  in  the  Highest  Heaven."  [R.  V.  X.  90.  3.  &  Qt/iand. 
Up.  III.  12.  6.]:  and  He  is  also  declared  to  have  an  im- 
material form  in  the  passage — "  I  know  this  great  Person 
of  sunlike  lustre  who  is  beyond  darkness." — [Taitt.  Ar. 
III.  12.  7.];  and  the  splendour  belonging  to  such  (a 
Person)  is  also  non-material.  Consequently,  it  is 

faultless  to  say  that,  owing  to  His  possessing  that  (splen- 
dour), He  Himself  is  denoted  by  the  word^vo//s  (or  Light 
here). 


ADH1KARANA.  XL 

Indrapranddhikarana . 

It  has  been  stated  that  that  which  is  associated  with 
unsurpassable  splendour,  which  is  denoted  by  the  \\ordjyo- 
tis  (or  Light),  and  which  is  pointed  out  as  if  it  were  a  well- 
known  thing,  is  the  Highest  Person  Himself.  Now,  he  (the 
Sfitraktira]  say  si  that  what  are  denoted  also  by  Indra, 
Prdna  and  other  such  words,  and  are  declared  in  the  scrip- 
tures to  constitute  objects  of  worship,  owing  to  their  forming 
the  means  of  attaining  that  immortality  which  is  invariably 
associated  with  what  constitutes  the  cause  of  the  world,— 
(they)  are  (all  the  same  as)  the  Highest  Person  Himself, 
54 


426  SRI-BHISHYA.    [Chap.  I.  Part.  I. 

Sutra  29.     Pranastathanugamat. 

That  which  is  denoted  by  Prana  (Indra  and  other 
such  words  is  the  Brahman),  because  it  is  so  understood 
in  the  sequel. 

In  the  Kaushltakl-Brdhmana,  the  context4'3  dealing 
with  the  vldya  (or  form  of  worship)  taught  to  Pratardana 
is  begun  with  the  passage — "  Now  Pratardana,  the  son 
of  Divodasa,  went  to  the  favourite  abode  of  Indra  by 
means  of  battle  and  valour"  ;  and  therein  it  is  remarked 
by  Pratardana  to  Indra,  who  had  asked  him  to  choose  a 
boon, — "  You  yourself  choose  for  me  that  boon  which  you 
think  is  most  beneficial  to  man";  and  thereafter,  it  is 
declared  thus  (in  the  same  context) : — "  He  said — 'Indeed, 
I  am  the  Prana  and  the  omniscient  Self.  Worship  and 
meditate  on  me  as  life,  as  immortality'."  [Kaush.  Up.  III. 
i.]. 

Here  the  doubt  arises  whether  this  Being,  who  is  de- 
noted by  the  words  Indra  and  Prana  to  be  the  object 
of  such  worsh'ip  as  is  most  beneficial  (to  man),  is  the  indi- 
vidual self  himself  j  or  whether  He  is  the  Supreme  Self  who 
is  other  than  the  individual  self.  It  is  perhaps  thought 
right  to  hold  that  that  (Being)  is  the  individual  self  him- 
self. Why  ?  Because  the  word  Indra  is  ordinarily  well 
known  to  denote  only  a  particular  individual  self,  and  the 
word  Prana  also  which  is  grammatically  equated  with 
that  (word  Indra)  signifies  that  same  (individual  self). 
When  this  individual  self  having  the  name  of  Indra  was 
told  by  Pratardana  to  the  effect — "  You  yourself  choose 
for  me  that  boon  which  you  think  is  most  benefi- 

413.      The  context  referred  to  here       Bra/imana-Ufianishad. 
is  the  third  chapter  of  the  Kaushitakl- 


Adhik.  XL  Silt,  jo.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  427 

cial  to  man." — [Kansk.  Up.  III.  i.],  he  (/.  c.  Indra) 
taught  the  worship  of  himself  as  being  the  most  beneficial 
by  saying — "  Worship  me."  [Kaush.  Up.  III.  i.].  And 
what  is  most  beneficial  (here)  is  nothing  other  than  what 
forms  the  means  for  the  attainment  of  immortality.  That 
the  worship  of  that  (Being),  which  is  the  cause  of  the 
world,  forms  the  means  for  the  attainment  of  immortality, 
is  made  out  from  this  passage — "  So  long  as  he  is  not  freed 
(from  the  body),  so  long  there  is  delay ;  then  he  will  be 
blessed."  [Qihdnd.  Up.  VI.  14.  2.].  Therefore  the  well 
known  Indra  himself  who  has  the  nature  of  an  individual 
self  is  that  Brahman  who  forms  the  cause  of  the  world. 

To  this  supposition  there  is  this  reply  — "  That 
which  is  denoted  by  Prdna  (Indra  and  other  such  words 
is  the  Brahman}\  because  it  is  so  understood  in  the  sequel.'' 
[Ved.  Sfit.  I.  i.  29.]  This  Being  who  is  denoted  by 
the  words  Indra  and  Prdna  is  not  merely  the  individual 
self;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  He  is  the  Highest  Brahman 
who  is  a  different  entity  from  the  individual  self;  because  it 
is  only  on  such  a  supposition  that  that  meaning  in  the 
sequel  becomes  appropriate  which  is  derived  from  the 
grammatical  equation  of  what  is  in  the  very  commence- 
ment denoted  by  the  words  Indra  and  Prdna  with  the 
words  dnanda  (blissful),  ajar  a  (undecaying),  and  amrita 
(immortal),  as  mentioned  in  the  scriptural  passage— 
"  That  same  Prdna  is  the  omniscient  Self  who  is  blissful, 
undecaying  and  immortal."  [Kaush.  Up.  III.  9.]. 


Sutra   30.     Navakturatmopadesaditichedadhyatm&- 
sambandhabhu  mahyasmin. 

If  it  be  said  that,  on  account  of  the  speaker  (Indra) 
declaring  himself  (to  be  the  object  of  \vorship,  \vhat  i£ 


428  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  L  Part.  L 

denoted  by  the  words  Indra  and  Prara  is)  not  (the  Brah- 
man, it  is  replied  that  it  cannot  be  right  to  say  so);  be- 
cause there  is  here  (in  this  context)  the  mention  of  a  mul- 
titude of  attributes  belonging  to  the  Inner  Self. 

What   has  been  stated  to  the  effect  that  He  who  is 
denoted  by  the  words   Indra   and  Prdna  is  the  Supreme 
Brahman^  in  as  much  as  He  is  that  same  entity  that  is  im- 
ported by   the  passage — "  He  is  blissful,  undecaying,  and 
immortal." — \Kaush.  Up.  III.  9.], — that  is  not  appropriate; 
because  Indra,  who  is  the  speaker  in  the  passages — "Know 
me  alone." — [Kaush.  Up.   III.  i.j  and — "I  am  the  Prdna 
and  the  omniscient  self.  Meditate  on  me  as  life,  as  immor- 
tality."— [Kaush.  6^.111.1.], — teaches  Pratardana  that  he 
himself,  who  is  made  out  to  be  of  the  nature  of  an  indivi- 
dual self  on  account  of  his  having  killed  Tvashtra  and  of 
having  done  other  (such  acts)  as  are  stated  in  the  following 
passage  among  others — namely— "I  killed  the  three-headed 
Tvashtra", —  [Kaush.    Up.   III.    i.],    is  undoubtedly   the 
object  of  worship  (sought  after).     Hence,  it  having  been 
understood  in  the  beginning  (of  the  context,)  that  he  (Indra) 
is  a  particular   individual  self,    the  conclusion    (of    that 
context)  with — "He  is  blissful,  undecaying   and  immortal, 
&c." — [Kaush.  Up.  III.  9.] — has  (necessarily)  to  be  inter- 
preted in  conformity  with  that  (commencement). 

When  it  is  so  held,  he  (the  Siitrakdra]  disproves  (such  a 
supposition)  by  saying — "  Because  there  is  here  (in  this 
context)  the  mention  of  a  multitude  of  attributes  belong- 
ing to  the  Inner  Self."  That  related  quality  which 
exists  in  the  Self  is  the  attribute  of  the  Inner  Self.  Its 
'  multitudinousness '  is  its  abundance.  The  meaning  is  that 
it  is  manifold.  This  manifoldness  of  the  related  quality 
results  from  the  manifoldness  of  the  things  which  are 


Adhik.  Jf/.  Stf/.  jo.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  429 

related  to  the  Self  so  as  to  be  contained  in  Him.  And 
this  (manifoldness  of  attributes)  is  indeed  possible  only  in 
relation  to  the  Highest  Self  taken  to  be  the  speaker  here. 
Thus,  in  the  passage — "  Just  as,  in  a  chariot,  the  circum- 
ference (of  a  wheel)  is  fixed  to  the  spokes  and  the  spokes 
are  fixed  to  the  nave,  so  also  these  subtle  material  elements 
(bhulamatras)  are  made  to  depend  on  the  subtle  intelli- 
gences (prajilamatras],  and  the  subtle  intelligences  are 
made  to  depend  upon  the  Prana.  This  same  Prana  Him- 
self is  the  omniscient  Self,  who  is  blissful,  undecaying, 
and  immortal."  \Kaush.  Up.\\\.  9.], — the  whole  collection 
of  non-intelligent  things  is  denoted  by  the  word  bhntamatra\ 
then  by  means  of  the  word  prajftdmatra  the  whole  series 
of  intelligent  individual  selves  is  denoted  as  forming  the 
support  of  those  (non-intelligent  things) ;  then  it  is  pointed 
out  that  the  subject  of  the  context  denoted  by  the  words 
Indra  and  Prdna  forms  the  support  of  those  (intelligent 
individual  selves)  also  ;  and-  (finally),  it  (viz.  that  context) 
teaches  that  that  same  Being  is  "blissful,  undecaying,  and 
immortal."  The  meaning  is,  that  this  quality  of  being  the 
support  of  all  the  things,  which  consist  of  the  intelligent 
and  the  non-intelligent  entities,  is  appropriate  only  in 
relation  to  that  Highest  Self  who  is  a  different  entity  from 
the  individual  self. 

Or,  in  the  expression — "  Because  there  is  here  (in 
this' context)  the  mention  of  a  multitude  of  attributes  be- 
longing to  the  Inner  Self, "— '  the  attributes  of  the  Inner 
Self  are  those  attributes  which  are  the  peculiar  charac- 
teristics of  the  Highest  Self.  Their  'multitudinousness', 
that  is,  their  manifoldness  is  indeed  found  'here',  that  is,  in 
the  present  context.  Accordingly,  at  the  outset  it  is  made 
out  in  the  passages — "  You  yourself  choose  for  me  that 
boon  which  you  think  is  most  beneficial  to  man,"— [Kaush, 


J6  SRi-BHisHYA.      [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

Up.  III.i.]  and— "Worship  me."—  [Kaush.  Up.  III.i.],  that 
the  Indra,  who  is  denoted  by  the  word  Prdna,  is  the 
object  of  that  peculiar  worship  of  the  Highest  Self,  which 
forms  the  means  for  the  attainment  of  final  release.  Simi- 
larly, to  be  the  Impeller  of  all  activities,  in  accordance  with 
the  passage — "He  of  Himself  induces  him,  whom  He  wishes 
to  lead  beyond  these  worlds,  to  do  work  which  is  good  ; 
He  of  Himself  induces  him,  whom  He  wishes  to  lead 
downwards,  to  do  work  which  is  not  good." — \_Kaush.  Up. 
III.  9.],  is  also  an  attribute  of  the  Supreme  Self.  So  also 
to  be  the  support  of  all,  in  accordance  with  the  passage— 
"  Just  as,  in  a  chariot,  the  circumference  (of  a  wheel)  is 
fixed  to  the  spokes,  and  the  spokes  are  fixed  to  the  nave, 
so  also  these  subtle  material  elements  are  made  to  depend 
upon  the  subtle  intelligences,  and  the  subtle  intelligences 
are  made  to  depend  upon  the  Prdna," — \_Kansh.  Up. 
III.  9.]' — is  an  attribute  of  Himself.  Similarly  again  those 
attributes,  which  are  found  mentioned  in  the  passage— 
"  This  same  Prana  Himself  is  the  omniscient  Self  who 
is  blissful,  undecaying  and  immortal. " — \Kaush.  Up. 
III.  9.],  belong  to  that  Supreme  Self  Himself.  And 
these  (attributes)  also,  namely,  that  "  He  is  the  Lord  of 
all  the  worlds "  and  that  "  He  is  the  Lord  of  all  "- 
\_Kansh.  Up.  III.  9.],— are  possible  only  in  relation  to 
the  Supreme  Self.  Consequently,  in  as  much  as  the 

attributes  of  the  Supreme  Self  are  here  abundantly  men- 
tioned, it  is  the  Supreme  Self  Himself  who  is  denoted  by 
the  words  Indra  and  Prdna  here. 

To  point  out  how  under  such  a  circumstance  it  be- 
comes appropriate  for  Indra,  who  is  well  known  to  be  of 
the  nature  of  an  individual  self,  to  teach  that  he  himself 
is  the  object  of  worship, — he  (the  Sutrakdra]  says  ;— « 


Adhik.  XL  Silt,  j/.]  SRI-BHISHYA.  431 

Stitra  31.     SSstraJ>'ish^yatJpaJeso  Vamadevavat. 

And  the  teaching  ^in  the  context)  is,  as  in  the  case  of 
Vamadeva,  in  accordance  with  the  view  found  in  the 
scripture. 

This  teaching,  which,  in  the  statements — "  Know  me 
alone"— \_Kaiish.  Up.  III.i.]  and — "Worship  me"-[Kaush. 
Up.  III.  i.],  is  given  to  the  effect  that  his  own  self  is  the 
Brahman  who  has  to  be  worshipped,is  not  derived  from  that 
self-knowledge  which  is  obtained  from  other  means  of  proof 
(than  the  scripture);  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  result 
of  the  self-knowledge  which  is  derived  from  the  scripture 
itself.  What  is  said  is  this:— In  accordance  with  the  follow- 
ing and  other  similar  passages,  namely, — "  Entering  in 
along  with  this  individual  self,  which  is  (also)  the  same  as 
Myself,  I  evolve  the  differentiations  of  name  and  form  "• 
[ZVidtid.  Up.  VI.  3.  2.J,  "  All  this  has  That  for  its  Self."— 
\Qhhand.  Up.  VI.S./.],  "  He  who  has  entered  within  is  the 
ruler  of  all  things  that  are  born,  and  is  the  Self  of  all."- 
[Taitt.Ar.  III.  21.],  "He  who,  dwelling  in  the  self,  is  with- 
in the  self,  whom  the  self  does  not  know,  whose  body 
is  the  self,  and  who  internally  rules  the  self,  &c." — \Madh. 
Brili.  Up.  III.  7.  22.],  "  He  is  the  internal  Self  of  all  beings, 
He  is  devoid  of  sin,  He  is  the  Divine  Lord,  He  is  the  One 
Xarayana." — [Sud.  Up.  VII. i.],  he  (/.  c.  Indra)  had  in  mind 
that  the  Supreme  Self  owns  the  individual  selves  as  His 
body,  and  knew  also  that  the  words  7,  thon,  and  others, 
which  denote  individual  selves,  include  the  Supreme  Self 
Himself  within  their  import ;  and  thereafter,  by  means  of 
the  scriptural  statements — "  Know  me  alone" — \_KausJi. 
Up.  III.  i.]  and— "Worship  me  "— [A'aws//.  Up. III.  i.] 
he  taught  that  none  other  than  the  Supreme  Self  who  has 
(Indra)  himself  for  His  body  forms  the  object  of  worship. 


432  SRI-BHISHYA.      [Chap.  1.  Par  I.  1. 

"As  in  the  case  of  Va  made  va. "  That  is,  Vamadeva 
realised  that  the  Highest  Brahman  forms  the  internal 
Self  of  all  things  and  that  all  things  form  His  body,  and 
that  those  words  which  denote  material  embodiments  in- 
clude the  embodied  in  their  import ;  and  then  he  -indicated 
the  Highest  Brahman  who  has  himself  (/'.  e.  Vamadeva) 
for  His  body  by  the  word  '  I ';  and  (lastly)  he  taught,  with 
the  help  of  a  grammatical  equation  with  that  (T),  that  he 
(himself)  was  Manu,  the  sun,  &c.,  in  the  following  and  other 
passages  : — "  After  seeing  this  (Brahman],  the  sage 
Vamadeva  experienced — I  have  become  Manu  and  the 
sun  also." — [Brih.  Up.  I.  4.  10.],  "  I  am  the  sage  and 
seer  Kakshlvat."  [R.  V.  IV.  26.  i.].  And  Prahlada  also 
says  the  same  thing  thus: — "Since  the  Infinite  One  exists 
in  all  things,  I  am  also  none  other  than  He  ;  all  things 
proceed  from  me,  I  am  all  things  and  all  things  exist  in 
me  who  am  eternal."  [F.  P.  I.  19.  85.]. 


After  previously  stating  an  objection  (that  may  be 
raised  against  his  position),  he  (the  Sutrakdra)  gives  below 
the  reason  why,  in  this  context,  the  words  that  denote  the 
individual  self  and  denote  also  certain  non-intelligent  things 
(such  as  the  prana  or  the  principal  vital  air)  are  used  to 
denote  the  Highest  Brahman  who  forms  the  object  of 
worship. 

Sjtra    32.     Jlvamukhyapranalingannetlchennopasa- 
traivldhyadasritatvadihatadyogat. 

If  it  be  said  that,  on  account  of  the  characteristics 
of  the  individual  self  and  of  the  principal  vital  air  (being 
mentioned  in  the  context),  there  is  no  (reference  to  tlje 


Adhik.  XL  Silt.  J2.]  SRI-BHASHYA.  433 

Brahman  here  at  all,  it  is  replied  that)  it  cannot  be 
(right  to  say)  so;  because  the  worship  (of  the  Brah- 
man) has  a  threefold  nature;  because  ( else  where)  this 
(threefold  nature  of  His  worship;  is  taken  for  granted  ; 
and  because  here  (/.  e.  in  the  present  context  also)  that 
(same  kind  of  worship)  may  be  appropriately  referred  to. 

The  characteristics  of  the  individual  self  are  mention- 
ed in  the  following  and  other  passages  : — "  Let  no  man 
specially  desire  to  know  what  speech  is,  let  him  under- 
stand who  the  speaker  is." — [Kaush.  Up.  III.  8.];  "I  killed 
the  three-headed  Tvashtra ;  I  handed  over  the  devotees, 
(named)   Arunmukhas  to  the  wolves." — [Kaush.  Up.  III. 
i.].    The  characteristics  of  the  principal  vital  air  are  given 
in  the  following  passages  : — "  So  long  as  the  prana  dwells 
in  this  body,  so  long  surely  there  is  life." — [Katisk.   Up. 
III.  i.];  "Now  indeed  the  sentient  prana,  firmly  taking 
hold  of  this  body,  makes  it  rise  up." — [Kansk.  Up.  III.  2.]* 
If  it  be  said  that,  in  consequence,  there  is  here  (/.  e .  in  this 
context)    no    mention    (really)  of  a  multitude  of  attri- 
butes belonging  to  the  Inner  Self,  (it  is    replied  that)  it 
cannot  be  so  for  this  reason,  namely,  that  the  worship 
(of  the  Brahman)  has  a  threefold  nature.      The  denota- 
tion (of  the  Brahman}  by  means  of  certain   particular 
words  (in  this  context)  is  meant  to  teach  the  threefold 
nature  of  (His)   worship.      The  meaning  is  that  it  is 
meant  to  serve  the  object  of  teaching  the  three  kinds  of 
continued  meditation  (in  relation  to  the  Brahman},  name- 
ly, the  continued  meditation  of  the  Brahman  as  forming 
the  only  cause  of  all  the  worlds  in  accordance  with  His 
own  essential  nature  ;  the  continued  meditation  (of  the 
Brahman]  as  having  the  whole  series  of  enjoyers  (or  the 
individual  selves)  for  His  body  ;  and  the  continued  medi- 
55 


434  SRI-BHISHYA.     [Chap.  I.  Part.  L 

tation  (of  the  Brahman]  as  having  the  enjoyable  (material) 
things  and  the  auxiliary  (material)  helps  to  enjoyment  for 
His  body.  This  same  threefold  continued  meditation  of 
the  Brahman  is  taken  for  granted  in  other  (scriptural) 
contexts  also.  In  the  following  and  other  passages, 
namely, — "The  Brahman  is  Existence,  Knowledge,  Infi- 
nity."— \Taitt.  Up.  II. 1. 1.]—  and  "The  Brahman  is bliss."- 
\_Taitt.  Up.  III.  6.  i.],  the  continued  meditation  (of  the 
Brahman]  as  He  is  in  His  own  essential  nature  (is  taken 
for  granted).  In  the  following  and  other  passages,  namely, 
— "  Having  created  it,  He  entered  into  it;  having  entered 
into  it,  He  became  the  sat  and  the  tyat,  the  defined  and 
the  undefined,  the  possessor  of  a  home  and  the  homeless 
one,  the  intelligent  thing  and  the  non-intelligent  thing. 
While  being  the  unchangeable  individual  self  (satya]  and 
the  changeable  matter,  He  has  (nevertheless)  remained  true 
to  His  own  nature."  [Taitt.  Up.  II.  6.  i.],— the  continued 
meditation  (of  the  Brahman]  as  having  the  enjoyers  (or 
the  individual  selves)  for  His  body  and  also  as  having  the 
enjoyable  (material)  things  and  the  (material)  auxiliaries  of 
enjoyment  for  His  body,  (is  taken  for  granted).  The  mean- 
ing is  that  here,  that  is,  in  the  (present)  context  also,  this 
threefold  meditation  of  the  Brahman  is  appropriate.  What 
is  said  is  this  : — Wherever  particular  individual  selves  from 
the  four-faced  Brahma  downwards  and  particular  non- 
intelligent  things  from  the  prakriti  downwards  are  found 
mentioned  in  association  with  the  peculiar^  charac- 
teristic attributes  of  the  Supreme  Self, — or  wherever 
the  words  denoting  them  (/.  e.  those  intelligent  indivi- 
dual selves  and  those  non-intelligent  things)  are  seen  to  be 
grammatically  equated  with  the  words  denoting  the 
Supreme  Self; —  in  all  such  cases,  what  is  intended  to  be 
taught  is  the  continued  meditation  of  the  Brahman  as  form- 


Adhik.  XL  Sat.  j2.]  SRi-fiHiSHYA.  435 

ing  the  Inner  Self  of  those  particular  intelligent  and 
non-intelligent  entities.  Consequently,  it  is  an  established 
conclusion  that  he  who  is  denoted  by  the  words  Indra 
and  Prdna  here  (/.  c.  in  the  context  under  reference  J  is 
the  Supreme  Self  Himself,  who  is  a  different  entity  from 
the  individual  selves. 


END  OF  VOLUME  I. 


Printed  at   The  Enihmarddin  Press,  Triplicane,  Madias, 


ABBREVIATIONS  USED  IN  THIS  VOLUME. 

A.  M.  Nar.=Atharva-Mahanarayana-Upanishad. 

Adh.  Up.=Adhyatma-Upanishad. 

Adhik.=Adhikarana. 

Ait.  Ar.=Aitareya-Aranyaka. 

Ait.  Br.=Aitareya-Brahmana. 

Ait.  Up.=Aitareya-Upanishad. 

Ath.  Up.  =Atharvasira-Upanishad. 

A.  S.=Atmasiddhi  of  Yamunacharya. 
Ap.  Dh.  =Apastamba-Dharma-Sutras. 
Ap.  Sr.= Apastamba-Srauta-Siitras. 
As.  Sr.= Asvalayana-Srauta-Sutras. 

B.  G.==Bhagavad-Glta. 

Brih.  Up.  =Brihadarany aka-Upanishad. 

Brah.  Up.  =Brahma-Upanishad. 

Chhand.  Up.=Chhandogya-Upanishad. 

Is.  Up.==Isa.vasya-Upamshad. 

Kath.  Up.=  Katha-Upanishad. 

Kan.  Brih.  Up.=Brihadaranyaka-Upanishad, 

Kanva  recension. 
Ken.  Up.— Kena-Upanishad. 
Kaush.  Up.==  Kaushltakl-Brahmana-Upanishad. 
M.  Bh.=Mahabharata. 

M.  Nat.  =Taittir!ya-Mahanarayana-Upanishad, 
Mali.  Up.=Maha-Upanishad. 
Manu.=  Manusmriti. 
Madh.  Brih.  Up.— Brihadaranyaka-Upanishad, 

Madhyandina  recension. 
Mand.  Up.=Mandukya-Upanishad. 
Mund.  Up.  =Mundaka-Upanishad, 


438  ABBREVIATIONS. 

n.  =  foot-note. 

nn.= foot-notes. 

Nir.=Nirukta  of  Yaska. 

Panini.=Ashtadhyayi  of  Panini. 

Pur.  Mlm.=Purva-Mlmamsa  aphorisms  of  Jaimini. 

Pr.  Up.=Prasna~Upanishad. 

R.  V.=Rigveda-Samhita. 

Sat.  Br.=Satapatha-Brahmana. 

Svet.  Up.==Svetasvatara-Upanishad. 

Sub.  Up.=Subala-Upanishad. 

Sut.=Sutra. 

Taitt.  Ar.=Taittiriya-Aranyaka. 

Taitt.  Br.=TaittirIya-Brahmana. 

Taitt.  Samh.  =Taittirlya-Samhita. 

Taitt.  Up.=Taittirlya-Upanishad. 

V.  Dh.=Vishnu-Dharma. 

V.  P.=Vishnu-Purana. 

Vaj.  Samh.=Vajasaneyi-Samhita. 

Ved.  Sut.=Vedanta-Sutras  of  Badarayana, 


v.j 


THE  FOLLOWING  is  THE  SYSTEM  OF  TRANS- 
LITERATION ADOPTED  IN  THIS  WORK. 

Vowels.  Equivalents  and  Pronunciation. 

3T  a               in  mica. 

3TT  a                 „  father  (father). 

\  i                ,,  give. 

$  i                „  police  (police). 

^  u                „  put. 

3J  u                „  rule  (rule). 

55  ri                „  gridiron  or  critique. 

5KT  ri                „  the  above  prolonged. 

<3[  Iri                „  revelry  (revel ri). 

<s%  In               „  the  above  prolonged. 

q;  e                 „  prey. 

^  ai               „  aisle. 

3TT  o                „  note. 

^  au  like  ou  „  loud. 

Consonants.    Equivalents  and  Pronunciation. 

^  k                in  kind. 

5ST  kh              „  ink-horn  (inkhorn). 

»T  g               -  „  gun. 

U  gh                „  log-hut  (loghut). 

^  ri                 „  king  (king). 

=3  ch  such. 

^  chh             „  church-hill  (churchhill). 

^  j                  „  jump. 


440                     TRANSLITERATION. 

Consonants.    Equivalents  and 

Pronunciation. 

^            Jn               n 

hedge-hog  (hejhog). 

^             ft                n 

singe  (sifij). 

f              t                 „ 

cat  (cat). 

^             ?h               a 

ant-hill  (anthill;. 

*              d 

dance  (dance). 

^             dh 

red-haired  (redhaired). 

^             ?               „  " 

bind  (bind). 

*              t   liketh    „ 

kith. 

S        th 

nuthook  (more  dental). 

^             d  like  th  „ 

this. 

^             dh 

adhere  (more  dental). 

^              n 

riot. 

t              P 

pot. 

^             ph             „ 

uphill. 

^             -b 

bear. 

^             bh 

abhor. 

.    5R[              m               „ 

map. 

?         y 

royal. 

^         r          a 

rod. 

^        i           ,> 

like. 

3[                  V  &  W          „ 

waver. 

7T              s                „ 

sure  (sure). 

^             sh             „ 

rush. 

^             s               a 

sir. 

K             n               a 

hear. 

h    (aspirate)      Symbol  for  the  sibilant  called 
visarga,  or  substitute  for  final  s. 


ADDENDA  ET  CORRIGENDA. 


Page 

i 
viii 

16 
48 
86 

95 
124 
132 
146 

184 

204. 
203 
209 

215 
228 

247 
256 
317 

343 
347 

352 
388 
407 


Line 

For 

Read 

I4th  from  below 

his 

His 

1  3th         ,, 

fourfold  means 

I  fourfold  moral 

f                       means 

5th 

darkness' 

'  darkness  ' 

tst           „ 

realisation 

realisation 

nth        ,, 

mentoning 

mentioning 

6th 

time  of 

time  (of 

22nd  from  above 

worid. 

world, 

I5th 

Saunka 

Saunaka 

27th         „ 

111.24. 

III.2I. 

2nd          ,. 

expression 

expression 

7th  from  below 

or 

or- 

(right  hand  column) 

7  m           „ 

denoted  by 

denoted  simply  by 

25th  from  above 

is 

is  always  to  be 

loth  from  below 

by 

by  means  of 

22nd  from  above 

111.24 

IIt.21. 

20th           „ 

111.24. 

111.21. 

4th           „ 

childern 

children 

7th  from  below 

the  general 

a  general 

1  8th  from  above 

there  is  contra-  |  there  is  no  con- 

diction 

J      tradiction 

7th  from  below 

111.24. 

III.2I. 

gth  from  above 

of  various 

(  (of  various 

grades  fof 

)      grades  of 

9th          ,. 

Bliss 

bliss 

1st           „ 

111.24. 

111.21. 

9th           „ 

(the  Ananda- 

)  (the  Ananda- 

maya 

)      may  a) 

n                 )• 

12.7 

I3-I. 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

Los  Angeles 
This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


SEP  2  41 
JUL  27 19 


Form  L9-Series  444 


A     000  085  997     5 


