===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.203736.Sri-Ramakrishna_djvu.txt =====

Sri Rama and Krishna full of Love Supreme^ 

To bless the world did take a single traffie. 

And brought irora Hea*en Love's Ganga^s sucreu 

stream, 

And bore Sri Ramakrishna’s holy name, 





PEBFAOE. 


Thirty-four years have rolled down the stream 
of time, since the spirit of Bhagawan Sri Rama- 
krishna left the mortal coil. But the wave of 
spirituality his life raised, has splashed the 
distant shores of America and Europe and is 
resurgent still in all its native potency in the 
thought-life of the different countries of the civi- 
lised world to-day. In India, his name has become 
a household word, a symbol of hope and a sacred 
mantra to conjure with. In other countries, his 
life-long Sadhana and unique spiritual realisations 
have dispelled much of the thick gloom of despond- 
ency and unbelief in matter spiritual, which were 
gathering through these ages of materialism and per- 
version, His inspired utterances have brought light 
where utter darkness prevailed before, solace to 
many a suffering soul and peace to many a dis- 
tracted mind. The life which could produce such 
a marvellous influence within such a short period 
of three decades, it is needless to say, is frought with 
unprecedented potency, whose full depth and signi- 
ficance, it will take ages to reveal before humanity, 
To-day the world is in the throes of revolution 



Vi 


of thought-life ; the ideals are in the melting- 
pot; as if a huge wave of change is sweeping 
over the whole of humanity. It is specially so 
in India. And the shining soul — the messenger of 
the new gospel of life, who stands upon the crest 
of this wave is Bhagawan Sri Ramakrishna. 

/ The real quest of the soul of modern tinae is 
fgr the true ideal of democracy — the ideal that is 
truly founded on the rock of the equitable basis of 
life, and not the one which is based on the quick 
sand of human passions, and which gets its orienta- 
tion from the policy of eijpediency and utility alones, 
apd has no bearing to the ultimate value ot life. 
Humanity is slowly awakening to the conscious- 
ness that the ultimate value of life and its abiding joy 
QOnsist not in possession ai?d domination — not in the 
realisation of the super-man of the German concept, 
but in the perfect freedom of soul in the Harmony 
pf Life. And it is obvious to all who bestow any 
serious thought over it that such an ideal of demo- 
cracy is essentially spiritual, and Bhagawan Sri 
Ramakrishna has proved by his life and precepts 
that such 'an ideal can actually be lived on this 
earth, and h^ts shown ajso how to do so. His 
message has beep fundamentally a message of 
Spirit, of freedom and harmony ; and need we say 
that therein lies tbe real salvation of man ? 



Descriptions of this wonderful life were given 
to the worid by hi$ various disciples and admirers 
from time to time in different languages, since his 
disappearance from the earth. But none of them 
embodied a detailed account of this wonderful life. 
Only a few years back, His Holiness Swami Sarada- 
nandaji, one of the chosen disciples of the Great 
Master and the present Secretary of the Ramakrishna 
Mission, feeling the necessity of such a biography, 
brought out five volumes in Bengali under the 
title of Sri Sri Rantakrishna Leela-prasanga which 
contains many unpublished details of the life of 
the Master and can fairly be called an exhaustive 
treatment of the subject, considering the paucity of 
available facts of the early days of Sri Ramakrishna 
and of the period of his Sadhana. But the book 
itself has not been completed yet in Bengali, Swami 
Saradanandaji himself wanted to write an English 
version of his Bengali work, and in fact he wrote 
also some chapters of it, which appeared in the 
two periodicals of the Mission, the Prabuddha 
Bharata and the Vedanta Kesari. But owing to 
his illness and various other causes, he could not 
continue it. The anxiety of the general public outside 
Bengal to know more details of the wonderful life of 
the Master than what is embodied in the fragmentary 
dissertations of MaxMulIer, Swami Vivekananda 



and others on the subject was felt keenly. And 
we thought we would be doing some service to our 
eager readers, if we can present them at least with 
an English translation of the beautiful Bengali 
biography of the Master, written by Swami Sarada- 
nandaji. So we have made bold to bring out the 
present volume which contains the original writing 
of the Swamiji up to its 115th page, the rest being 
translations from the volume designated as Valya- 
jeevanat of his Bengali work. Our excuse for the 
eagerness to bring out the present volume while the 
original author is happily still alive among us, is in 
the urgent need of such a publication, and our 
apology in the devotion to the Great Master and 
in the service to his devotees. 

The present volume contains the accounts of his 
early life till the 16th year of his age, which was 
wholly spent in his village home at Kamarpukur 
among his playmates and relations. The next volume 
will present the readers with the detailed description 
of the next twenty years of his life which were spent 
in the intensity of spiritual Sadhana. And subsequent 
volumes will embody the later period of his life de- 
picting him as the prophet of the new dispensation. 

Sri Ramakrishna Math,*) 

Mylapore, Madras, ^ SHARVANANDA. 
Sth December 1920. J 



LETTER OF SRIMIT SWAHI SABABAHiNBlJL 


I am glad you have taken up the translation 
of the Bengali life of the Master to satisfy the 
eage mess of the English- knowing general public, to 
learn all that is possible of that towering persona- 
lity. And I wish you every success in your under- 
taking. I wish I could do it myself but I have not 
yet been permitted — and who knows whether I 
shall ever be in a position to do so or not ? 

I have gone through the forms and I am fairly 
satisfied with your rendering. 


With blessings and best wishes, 


Yours affectionately, 
(Sd.) SARADANANDA. 




CONTENTS. 


Introduction 

Indian Thought on the Universal End of 
Religion and Philosophy 
Yugadharma and the Great Master 
Chap. — 


I Forewords and the Ancestral 
abode at Derypore 

II A friend-in-Need... 

III Life at Kamarpukur 

IV Khudiram’s Pilgrimage to 

Gaya and his Extraordinary 
Dream 

V Chandra’s V ision and the Birth 

of Gadadhar ... 

VI A few words on the Unique 


Experiences of Gadadhar ’s 
parents 

VII The Early Days of Gadadhar.. 
VIII In the Dawn of Youth 
Appendix A ... 




li 


B 

C 


Page 

-28 

1 

12 


29 

42 

47 

61 

69 


77 

91 

127 

149 

160 

164 


• «i 




SRI RAMAKRISHNA, THE 
GREAT MASTER. 

INTRODUCTION. 

I 

Indian Thougfht on the Universal End of 
Religrion and Philosophy. 

A great impetus has come in the West on the 
comparative study of religion and philosophy since 
the last decade of the Nineteenth Century. The 
valuable researches of the Oriental Scholars of 
Europe, the influence of societies which range them- 
selves under the titles of Spiritualism and Theoso- 
phy — or of those which springing up later, claim to 
have found the way to rouse the dormant finer 
forces of the human mind and go by the names of 
Christian and Divine Sciences, of Metaphysical 
healing and so forth— the practical results, which 
were the natural outcome of the unique assembly 
of the Parliament of Religions, held at Chicago, 
America, i n 1893 — and many other things have 
been pointed out as reasons for the same. But 



2 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


whatsoever might have helped to bring it about » 
the watchful reader has undoubtedly noted in it 
the growth and gradual development of a new 
tendency of the Western mind to find out, if 
possible, the ultimate universal end to which man 
is progressing through the various systems of 
philosophy and religion which are to be found in 
any country in the world. 

A closer examination again, of the causes which 
have led the minds of the West in this new direc- 
tion, has revealed the presence of a most important 
factor in them all. For on going to analyse and 
find out what contributed most to their attraction 
and influence, we have always been confronted 
with the fact that they owe the same to their 
acceptance of some one or more ideas from the 
master minds to whom India gave birth in ancient 
times. It can rightly be said therefore, that the 
present attempt of the West to search for the 
ultimate end of religion and philosophy, has been 
ill a great measure due to the dominating influence 
of Indian thought, whether that is being always 
recognised or not. 

Such being the case, it behoves us to inquire 
what India has said on the subject, in the past, and 
still more, to inquire what she has contributed in 
that line during the present age. For, that gre 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


indeed had been her contribution to the world in 
the past along this line of thought, there are ample 
facts to prove ; and for that reason, justly, the 
modern learned opinions of the world are unani- 
mous in allotting to her the exalted position as the 
storehouse of philosophy and the motherland of 
religions. For is it not true, that she gave 
birth to a religion in the past, which still helps 
to illumine the lives of the majority of the human 
races that inhabit the globe ? Is it not true, that 
she, through her dynamic activities in the field of 
religion, sent even in that dark age, her mission- 
aries to all over the then known world,*— to Thibet, 
China and Japan on the one side, and to Egypt, 
Asia Minor, Greece and the far Caucasus and 
Siberia on the other ? And above all, is it not 
true, that she formulated such a perfect system of 
philosophy in that remote period of history, that it 
still holds spell-bound the master minds of the pre- 
sent age,— a philosophy, which helped man not only 
to scale the dizzy heights of Teason/^'but which, 
making itself accepted as the highest form of 
religion, gave him power and courage to jump 
across the chasm that yawns for ever between the 
regions of the iknowable and the unknowable, and 
find out the solution of the mystery of his life and 
existence on this earth ? 



4 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


The gre^t mass of India’s religious literature 
after the Vedas and the Upanishads, have a most 
significant fact common to them, in the marked 
line of distinction that they have always drawn, 
between the Sanatana and the Yugadharmas — 
between the eternal, universal religion that ever 
remains the same without getting affected by the 
conditions of time, place and other environments, 
and the religion that is suited to particular periods 
of time, to especial social conditions and to the 
limited capacities of those who are to carry it 
out into their lives. That, indeed, points to 
the fact that, time there was, when India as 
well, had to ponder and come to her own 
conclusions regarding the final goal of various 
systems of philosophy and religion, which came 
into existence within her own domain. And in 
spite of such singular instances of experience in the 
lives of afew-Vedic Seers, as are found expressed in 
the words of the Rig-Veda— ‘ Existence is one, 
although sages have called it variously — we find 
the Seers-of the Upanishads holding views on the 
subject different from one another, and jsealously 
promulgating the dualistic, the qualified-monistic or 
the monistic solution of the problem. The first 
serious attempt therefore, to grapple with the ques- 


* UcK wfetn ifrar j Rijr. yea. i— 164 . 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


5 


tion, is to be found not until we come down to the 
age of the Uttara-Mimamsa and the Bhagavad-Gita. 
The sage Vyasa classified the super-conscious ex- 
periences of the Vedic sages and drew his famous 
aphorisms of the Vedanta Philosophy at the time, to 
show that those are driving at a purely monistic end; 
and the great author of the Bhagavad-Gita, appear- 
ing a generation after, put fresh life into the classic 
teachings of Vyasa by his own brilliant life and 
example, and proved for the first time before the 
world, that the duties of the daily routine of human 
life and the highest end of philosophy and religion, 
need not be at variance, that both lead to the same 
goal which is purely monistic in end, and that the 
schools of philosophy and religion which advocated 
dualism and qualified-monism, though they might 
have led some to the realisation of the absolute 
truth, are to be regarded generally, as hinderances 
in the path of perception of that truth, and are 
to be followed by their votaries with a certain 
amount of reserve and caution, remembering always 
that the goal in every case is pure and simple 
monism. 

But now came a period of free thinking in 
philosophy, and the harmonising conclusions ofVyasa 
and the author of the Bhagavad-Gita, based as they 
were on the Vedic revelations, were not only being 



6 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


questioned, but the super-conscious experiences of 
the Vedic sages also, were set at naught by the 
Buddhistic and some other schools of philosophy 
that sprang up at the time. Of these, the Buddhistic 
schools alone had considerable influence in the 
country, for a long time, founded as they were on 
the splendid life of renunciation and super-conscious 
realisation of Bhagavan Buddha. But with the wan- 
ing of the influence of that life in time, they became 
stranded on the shoals of Scholasticism, as will be 
readily seen from the doctrines, preached by them, 
as regards the constant intermittency of’ self- 
consciousness in man, and the highest end of life to 
consist in reducing the same to utter nothingness I 
The great genius of Bhagavan Sankara was 
needed at the time to drag India out of the dangers 
of such scholasticism. And he did the same by bring- 
ing her back to the revelations of the Vedas and the 
Upanishads, and showing her clearly that the 
variance in the super-conscious experiences of the 
Vedic sages is but superficial, and that in spite of 
the same, there is to be found in them a gradual 
growth of thought culminating in pure monism. As 
an evidence of the same, he pointed out the fact that 
the sages who attained the highest plane of super- 
consciousness* had invariably the same kind of 
experiences and expressed them always in almost 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


7 


identical language I and so the attainment of that 
monistic truth must be the end of every sys- 
tem of religion and philosophy. It is clear there- 
fore that Sankara brought the solution of the 
problem, we have been discussing, nearer to its 
final conclusion than what was done before his 
time ; and according to him, the essence of the 
Sanatana or Eternal religion is to be defined as the 
attainment of that stage of super-consciousness, 
where the dual vision in us ceases entirely by the 
help of the N irvihalpa-Samadhi or perfect con- 
centration. 

The ancient Masters in India have always reco- 
gnised various stages or planes of super- consciousness, 
attainable by the devotee through different degrees 
of intensity in the concentration of his mind, as will 
be readily seen by going through the aphorisms of 
the sage Patanjali, the great authority on the sub- 
ject. And the attainment of the highest of those 
planes through perfect or most intense concentra- 
tion, consists in gaming within one’s own self, the 
glorious vision of unity or ddwaita which forms the 
core of the eternal and universal religion. 

But the question arises, why should the attain- 
ment of that stage of super-consciousness be itegard- 
ed as the ultimate end of all religions ? The answer 
which India can readily offer to it is, because th^ 



8 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


devotees of even the most dualistic religions have 
been seen to come in time, to the attainment of that 
stage of super-consciousness by proceeding along 
their own path of devotion and worship. The 
Buddhist, the Christian, the Mahommedan and the 
votaries of every other great religion on earth, have 
come to that. Else how do we account for Buddha’s 
experience of his individual self getting merged in 
the Prajna-paramita or the infinite intelligence, — or 
that of Christ, as ‘ I and my Father are one’, — or 
of the experience of some of the Mahommedan 
sages, as ‘ Anal-hak ’, — * the Deity is my own 
self,? Religion has ever been regarded by the Indian 
masters as intensely practical, and a sincere practice 
of it, has always led man ultimately to this self-same 
experience. India, of all countries on earth, has recog- 
nised this from very old times, and as an evidence of 
that, we find that the Vedic commentator Yaska 
noticed and laid down the fact that, ‘the attainment 
of the highest plane of super-consciousness is not al- 
ways confined to the votaries of Aryan religion adone, 
but instances of the same are to be found sometimes 
among those professing the non-Aryan religions 
•even.* 

The attainment of the highest stage of super- 
consciousness has been held in India to be not only 
the end of greligion, but in it, has also been found 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


the goal to which philosophy is driving man through 
all her various systems. Philosophy, according to 
the old masters in India, can never be considered 
as separate from religion, and the attempt to do so 
would in their opinion, end in leading the human 
mind to an atrophy of reason and utter confusion of 
understanding in regard to the mysteries of life and 
existence, and the origin of the creation. 

Such in short, is the solution of the problem 
which India advanced down to the time of Sankara. 
But it did not go without a contradiction, especially 
from the qualified monistic school of Ramanuja and 
other teachers, who flourished later, and who based 
their philosophy on a different interpretation of the- 
self-same revelations of the Vedic Sages on which 
Sankara had based his own monistic school. And in 
time, the practice of offering different interpretations 
to the super-conscious experiences of the Vedic 
sages, to support one’s own school of philosophy, 
became the fashion of the day ; and the dualistic- 
schools of thought also produced their own, like the 
rest, in support of themselves. It must be told, how- 
ever, to the credit of the teachers of the qualified* 
monistic school, especially of Ramanuja, .that they 
advanced the highest possible solution of the rela- 
tion of the Brahman with the human soul and the 
universe, that can ever be given by human reason 



10 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


without its attaining the highest stage of super-con- 
sciousness, viewing the latter two as forming in- 
separable parts of the Universal, the Brahman. It 
must be said nevertheless, that the history of philo- 
sophy in India from the age of Sankara down to 
the end of the eighteenth century, is full of minute 
records of, not unoften, far-fetched interpretations 
of the experiences of the Vedic seers, which rendered 
the question of finding the end of religion and 
philosophy more than ever, hopeless during the time. 
The advent of the nineteenth century brought in 
its wake, quite a new state of things, in the realms 
of religion and philosophy in the country. With the 
birth of a Seer of thought of the first order, the 
inter-penetrating power and magnitude of whose 
living realisations are, as it were, the culmination of 
the chain of super-conscious experiences, beginning 
from the Vedic age down to our own times, of all 
the sages and the masters that were born in the 
country, — she has become able, not only to hold her 
own against the rapid encroachments of the tidal 
wave of materialism that visited her shores from 
t he far West, but to send all over the world the 
mighty proclamation that her vigils of the past in 
searching after the universal end of religion and 
.philosophy, have at last been crowned with success ; 
— that dualism, qualified-monism and monism are 



THE GREAT MASTER, 


11 


each in itself true, as successive stages on the way 
to the realisation of that great goal, -that philosophy 
and religion lead men always from truth to tru th, 
from lower to higher and the highest truth, —and 
that all the different forms of religion that exist o r 
will ever come to exist in the world, are and will he , 
every one of them, true, in the sense that each one 
of them does and will represent a path leading to 
that ultimate goal. 

Reader ! we shall make bold to relate to you , 
as best as we can, the account of this wonderful li fe 
of super-conscious realisations, in spite of the trep i- 
dations that we feel in our heart, considering the 
stupendous task before us and our own short-com- 
ings. For such indeed, are the lives of the Great 
Masters that they have always drawn the worship- 
ful reverence of the people of all ages and climes ; 
and of such, has it been told in the Bhagavad-Gita, 
that they come to fulfil the universal necessity of 
the age in which they are born. And have not the 
demands of the present age of unbounded scepticism 
and materialism, in the field of religion, all over the 
world, pointed clearly to the necessity of the 
advent of such a Master? 



IL 


Yu^adhama and the Great Master. 

Before proceeding to deal with the life of the 
Master, it is necessary to tell the reader a few 
more words about Yugadhama^ about its relation 
to the Sanatana Dharma and to those whom 
India has regarded as the great masters or teachers 
in the field of religion. We have already stated 
that the forms of religion which a people is found 
to profess at different periods of its existence to- 
meet the demands of higher stages of progress, 
attained by it through the process of evolution, 
have been designated in India from very early 
times as Yugadhamas, It is clear therefore, that 
such forms of religion can never remain the same, 
but must always be changing. They must change 
as the physical and mental capacities of the units 
composing a people, become gradually unfolded, 
and leading them to attain higher stages of 
development, bring forth different conditions in 
social, moral and spiritual fields. For they become 
empowered then, as it were, to have glimpses of 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


13 


reality in relation to the present and the beyond, 
from different and higher angles of vision, and 
struggle to express and adjust everything in life in 
accordance with those, and thus new forms of 
religion are being evolved out of the old ones which 
they used to profess before. 

Human consciousness exists always in a graded 
plane, said a great philosopher of the West, so that 
the visions of reality that we get from one point of 
it, can never coincide with those that we receive 
from its other points. The same may be told with 
equal accuracy of the consciousness of a people. 
For is it not made up entirely of the sum total of 
consciousness of the individuals comprising that 
people ? Therefore, whatsover is found to be true 
for the former, will equally be found to be true 
for the latter also. Such being the case, the 
religious consciousness of a people is bound to be in 
the same way and to rise likewise through the 
process J of evolution, to higher and higher visions 
of the truth beyond; and its visions of one plane 
will never be exactly what they are in the other 
planes ; and the forms through which that con- 
sciousness will naturally come to express those 
higher visions of the truth during its upward 
journey, will be. the Yugadharmas ; and through 
many such will it progress to realise at last the 



14 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


absolute truth of the Sanatana or Eternal religion. 
Therefore, from the standpoint of the people or a 
collection of individuals, the Yugadharmas can well 
be looked upon, as stages through which the reli- 
gious consciousness of a people rises to the attain- 
ment of the absolute truth, resting in each of them 
for a while for gathering strength for another foi^ 
ward move and fresh climb towards the goal. And 
from the standpoint of the individual, they can be 
described as the concrete aspects of religion which 
the human mind gets, before reaching to the abstract 
and absolute aspects of the same. For, here in the 
field of spirituality also, the procedure of men’s mind 
has always been along the same line as in other 
branches of human knowledge, namely, from the 
concrete to the abstract, and from that ultimately 
to the;beyond. The Yiigadharmas however, must 
fulfil some more conditions according to Indian 
scriptures, as we shall see presently. 

The past history of the world gives ample 
evidence to the fact that the Samskaras or ideas 
that guided a people’s thoughts and actions in 
o>id times, had been changing all along until they 
have come up to what they are at present; and that 
even, now, they are going through the same process; 
that the laws that governed a people of yore, had to 
be changed many a time, on account of the 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


15 


changes that came from time to time, with regard 
to that people’s ideas on the social, the moral and 
the religious fields ; and that, what were regarded 
by that people as virtue in former times, have come 
to be looked upon later, in many instances, as vices. 
'!^e horse and bull sacrifices of the Vedic times, 
the custom in old times in India, of living with 
one’s husband’s brother until the birth of a child, 
when there had been no issue of the marriage on 
account of the husband’s becoming disabled through 
disease or otherwise, the custom in Europe in the- 
past, of the newly- wedded bride of a serf, to share 
the same bed with the liegelord of her husband for 
a day, before she could live with him, which used 
to go by the name of the law of Marquoit, and many 
other old customs of Asia and Europe, may be cited 
as examples of the same. They go to show that 
different samskaras or ideas have controlled and 
guided men’s conduct in different ages, and the 
growth of the individual as well as of the people 
have always been seen to have followed the same 
path, howsoever slowly they might have moved to* 
wards progress and enlightenment. And what is^ 
true of one people in the face of the earth is true of 
every other. For nature works uniformly through 
them ail, in spite of the differences that come to 
our notice when we go to compare them, one 



16 


SRr RAMAKRISHNA, 


'With the other. And the variety between them 
with respect to growth and development, can clearly 
be accounted for, by considering the fact that all of 
them have not yet reached the same plane through 
the process of evolution. 

But in spite of such slow growth of the 
individual and the people, as history gives evidence 
of, none can deny the fact that all the ethical codes 
that hold us spell-bound to-day, and all the great 
religions which the world has seen up to the present, 
had been given birth to by the peoples and societies 
■of old. And that in spite of all imperfections in 
them, they produced teachers of spirituality who 
realised the highest truth in the field of religion, 
not only for themselves, but discovered ways un- 
traversed by men before, and led others to attain to 
the direct realisation of that truth ; — men, whose 
lives had been as beacon lights to guide the weary 
steps of their fellow beings in the dark, and whose 
loving words had and still have power to capture 
the hearts of the masses, though they had been first 
uttered ages and ages ago. 

India had the good fortune of producing many 
such teachers from time immemorial, aye, even from 
the Vedic ages. Owing to that fact, and guided bj 
the influence of^those great lives, she decided of old, 
to build the life of her people on a spiritual basis. 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


17 


She was content at first to call them by the general 
designation of * Rishi* or Seers of things transcend- 
<»ing the senses. But as time rolled on and the 
appearance of such teachers became frequent in her^ 
she began to ponder over their lives and compare 
their super- sensuous experiences and came to her 
< own conclusions regarding them. It was then, that 
she discovered the purpose which these teachers 
serve in the plan of the universe, their relation to 
their fellow-beings, the time when the world can 
surely expect their advent and many other facts 
relating to them. It was then, that she could 
classify them into the various orders of the Jivan- 
muktas or those who had been in bondage before 
but have become free in this life by realising the 
highest truth for themselves, — ^the nityamukias or 
those who had never been in bondage but have 
accepted the same willingly, for a short time to 
show others the method of how to realise the truth 
by following the paths prescribed in the Scriptures, 
— the Avatar as or the great masters who on account 
. of the great spiritual power they manifest in life, 
by discovering new ways to the realisation o 
the highest super-conscious truth and persuading 
"'Masses of their fellow beings to walk in them, are: 
looked upon as direct incarnations of Isvara, the. 
Ruler and Controller of the universe in whom we live„ 



18 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


move and have our being. It is interesting to note 
the development of the idea of the avatara or God- 
incarnation through the whole range of the Hindu 
Scriptures. In the Vedas and the Upanishads we 
come across the idea of monotheism or of one God 
creating and ruling over the universe. Moreover 
there are revelations of such ideas also that He in 
His infinite grace and mercy makes the pure among 
men see things transcending the senses and the 
intellect of ordinary mortals, and the idea too that 
the spiritual preceptor should be reverenced and 
worshipped as a special manifestation of the Diety 
inasmuch as the spiritual power in Him in its essence 
could come directly from the Deity alone. But 
nowhere do we find in them the idea that the creator 
immanent in the universe incarnates Himself in 
special human forms for the purpose of bringing 
enlightenment to the human kind. It stands to reason 
however that the fact of attaining the state of super- 
consciousness in which alone is possible all religious 
realisation, was established in India even at that 
early period. Arid that it was really so, can he 
gathered from the fact that the great philosopher of 
India, Kapila, who probably appeared at the end of 
the Vedic times really disbelieved and refuted 
the personal idea of the Deity, but could not 
4o the same with regard to the existence of that 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


19 


higher state of consciousness. Thus it will be 
found that Kapila denied the existence of a personal 
God ruling over the universe at all times, and 
attempted to establish the idea that some there 
are among men who when about to reach perfect 
liberation, feel a ' strong desire in them to do 
good to their fellow-beings, which finally hinders 
them from attaining to their real Selfhood — the 
state of the unconditioned Ptirusha ; and that get- 
ting identified with Prakriti or the creative prin- 
ciple, they come to feel themselves as all-powerful, 
and as rulers of the universe for sometime. And 
these souls are, according to Kapila, the rulers of 
the universe. And the one amongst them who is 
nearest to liberation becomes thus the God of the 
Universe for a Kalpa or cycle of time. He then 
gets perfectly liberated and the turn comes for 
another to take his place. Thus the idea of a 
personal controller of the universe has been admitted 
by Kapila, though he dispensed with the idea of a 
personal creator of it. 

It is easy to see from whai has been stated 
above that the sage Kapila, in spite of his denying 
the idea of the existence of a personal Deity helped 
none the less to develop the idea of Avatar a or 
God-incarnation. For, while it was- easy for an 
atheist to keep to the fine line of demarcation th U 



20 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


he drew between the idea of the personal Deity 
and the idea of Super-men ruling over the universe, 
one after another, it was not so for those who 
entertained devoutly the idea of a personal God. 
The chances were that such people would unite 
their ideas of the Deity with the idea of the super- 
man-ruler of Kapila, and that the idea of God- 
incarnation would follow next as the necessary 
conclusion. 

After Kapila, came the highest flight of India 
in the region of philosophy in the Vedanta. With 
it was introduced a perfect reconciliation between 
the personal and the impersonal ideas of the Deity. 
For, it taught people to look to the various person- 
al aspects of God which they had been entertaining 
as limited views of His real nature which is imper- 
sonal, and that the highest personal view of Him 
that man can have, is in conceiving Him as the sum 
total of all individual souls and all nature, sentient 
and insentient, as expressed in the second sutra of 
the Vedanta philosophy the One in 

and from whom is the birth, the stay and the 
dissolution of the universe. 

The idea of the super-man-ruler of Kapila also , 
was taken up by the Vedanta with a certain 
reserve. For, while advocating the idea that all 
powers come to the liberated, it reserved the 



THE GREAT I MASTER. 


21 


powers of creating and dissolving the universe for 
the Supreme Ruler, the personal and impersonal 
Deity, — Whom it preached. And for the liberated, 
who through strong compassion in them felt 
deeply for the liberation of his fellow-beings, it 
stated that they willingly keep themselves engaged 
in the task for a few incarnations even after 
liberation. Such beings are designated by it as 
Adhikarikas or liberated men born of their own 
will with certain missions to carry out in their lives, 
for the good of the world. 

Again, going to solve the riddle of all ages, 
the Gordian knot of philosophy, in its attempt to 
explain the purpose of the Lord in creating the 
world, it came out with its famous answer that the 
universe is produced by the play of the Infinite 
with Himself — in the aphorism 
— and that the perfect and infinite Lord can have 
no other purpose in view in doing so. But from 
the human stand-point, it stated in unison with 
Kapila, the distinct purpose of creation to be the 
attainment of liberation or perfection by the human 
kind, through realisation of the highest super- 
conscious state. 

- Thus the Vedanta, though it did not enter 
into the discussion of the details of it, supported 
the idea of God-incarnation, leaving it to others to 



22 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


get it developed and settled in all its details, lateu 
And it did not take long for those others to come to 
the task. For, now came the age of the SmiritB 
and the Puranas, and the authors of them took iip 
the subject vigorously in their hands and developed 
the idea of avatar a or God- in carnation as we fmd 
it to be in vogue in the present times. The age of 
the Puranas was an age of popularising the V edanfic 
doctrines of religion, and it was soon found out by 
the leaders of the age that nothing held captive 
the popular imagination better than the idea 
that the impersonal Lord, the One, undivided 
Ocean of Existence, Knowledge and Bliss, Who 
manifests Himself as the Universe, in His innate 
compassion for the human kind, becomes not only 
the personal God, but is born again and again of 
his own will among them, not through bondage of 
Karma but for the sole purpose of carrying libera- 
tion to their very doors. Thus the order of men 
who were known formerly as adhikarikas and 
believed to be born with the mission of discovering 
new paths to super-consciousness, came to be 
looked upon henceforth as the direct incarnations 
of the Deity. The old Vedic idea of worshipping 
the spiritual preceptor, then supplying its own 
quota to this new development of thought, brought 
the idea of God-incarnation to its present state of 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


2S 

completion. Even Buddhism, which flourished 
later had to take up this key-note in order to popu- 
larise the laws laid down by its founder. For, in 
the Lalita Vistara we find, the Lord Buddha des« 
cribed as descending of His own will from the 
highest heaven, the Tushitapur, amongst the 
weary travellers of this waste of the world, to 
bring comfort and consolation by showing them the 
way out of the same. And He did so, they said, 
on account of His unbounded compassion for 
them. And Sankara, the great and gifted preacher 
of the Vedantic doctrines who appeared in 
the wake of the downfall of Buddhism, and to 
whom is attribiiti.d justly the origin of the form of 
Vedic religion current in India even up to the 
present day, defended the idea of avatar a or God- 
incarnation in his commentary on the Bhagavad- 
Gita. He said therein that the Lord though 
impersonal in nature, appears to us sometimes as if 
born of human parents and possessed of a human 
body and mind, as He did in the case of Sri 
Krishna, to formulate and establish new ways 
leading to super^consciousness, and He does so 
when he finds it necessary to fulfil an universal 
demand of an age. 

Such in short, may be regarded as the history 
of the origin and development of the idea of avatar a 



24 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


or God-incarnation in the Hindu scriptures. It 
is necessary for the present, to make the reader 
familiar with its details, so as to enable him to 
judge and decide for himself the question of who 
should be regarded as such in the field of spirituality. 
And nowhere indeed, do we find the problem so ably 
handled as by Sri Krishna in the Bhagavad-Gita 
and by Vyasa in his Parana, entitled the Srimad- 
Bhagavatam.^ 

A short summary, therefore, of the same will 
serve our purpose sufficiently here. But before 
entering into it, we want to impress upon the mind 
of the reader what we have just seen to be the 
most significant features by which a Yuga-dhanm 
should be distinguished ; namely, first, that it 
should come to fulfil a persistent and universal spi- 
ritual demand of the age in which it is discovered 
and promulgated ; and, secondly, that its powers to 
make one realise the highest state of super-consci- 
ousness when followed with intense devotion and 
sincerity should be demonstrated before the people 
of that age by a master-mind by carrying it out 

- * Though the present form of this Parana is ascribed by many 

to the genius of the great scholar Bopa-Deva, the famous author 
of the Graromer “ Mugdha-Bodha,” yet the current belief is that 
he was not the^author of it but simply produced it out of his 
memory when not a single volume of this Purana of Vyasa could 
he found in the country. 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


25 


practically in his own life in such a way as to have 
not the least shade of a doubt regarding the same. 
These are the claims which a Yuga-dharma must 
always fulfil along with those which we have men- 
tioned erelong in the present discourse, before it 
can establish itself in the fold of religion and be 
accepted by the people as a way to perfect enlight- 
enment. It is necessary to remember the above, 
otherwise, any ill-conceived and impracticable 
theory advanced by any man in the field of religion 
will be mistaken for a Yuga-dharma, Therefore 
Yuga-dharinas can be defined as ways discovered 
by masterminds in the field of religion from time to 
time, to lead people with particular tendencies pro- 
duced by different groups of Samaskaras in them, 
to the highest stage of super-consciousness. 

We proceed now to consider briefly, the 
qualities, which according to the Hindu Scriptures, 
have always been found in the master-minds that 
gave birth to Yuga-dharmas in the past, in the 
religious History of India. The first and foremost 
of these is that they are born free. The endless 
struggle and hardship which they undergo to 
discover the hitherto unknown path to super- 
consciousness are prompted to them always by 
their desire to enrich the lives of their fellow-beings, 
and not from any selfish motive whatsoever. 



26 


SRI ramakrishna, 


Indeed every action in their lives proceeds from 
such a motive. 

Secondly, they are born endowed with perfect 
memory. This enables them to remember their 
former births and the deeds which they accom- 
plished in those. It helps them besides to remem- 
ber always the utterly transitory nature of human 
life and its enjoyments and makes them run to the 
goal as fast as possible. And by means of this 
power they are able moreover, to compare the 
present with the past and find out the direction 
along which the development of people’s minds has 
proceeded hitherto and the means which would help 
them to grow and reach the goal quickly in future. 

Thirdly, they are the discoverers of new paths 
in the field of religion. 

Fourthly, they are able to transmit knowledge 
to their fellow-beings simply by touching them or 
even by their will-power 

Fifthly, they are able to perceive clearly the 
Samskaras or tendencies produced by past hurwas 
of their fellow-beings at the very first sight, although 
they are never eager to make a show of that power 
to others ; and that helps them to know instantly 
what would help each one of them to reach easily 
the highest stage of superconsciousness. Thus they 
are the born spiritual guides of the human kind. 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


27 


And, lastly i they are conscious of their mission 
all through their lives. 

Such, in brief, are the elements which go to 
make the Avataras or God-incarnations, and they 
alone are looked upon in India as the Great Masters 
in the field of religion. And when “ religion goes 
down and irreligion prevails” on the face of the 
earth, when blinded by the false glamour of the 
vanities of the world people come to look upon the 
creature comforts of this “two days’ ” existence as 
the be-all and the end-all of human life, and when 
losing belief in God, the soul and the future- 
existence, they are led away from their real 
nature, the blissful state of the unconditioned 
Reality, to grope in the dark in endless misery 
by false teachers and prophets, then and then 
alone is the time to look out for the advent 
of such Great Masters. The religious history 
of the world bears testimony to the fact that 
it has really been so in the past-“that a 
Krishna, a Buddha, and a Jesus were born in such 
times as the fulfilment of the demands of those ages. 
And the Scriptures of India make the bold procla- 
mation before the world that it will ever be so in- 
future. For such is the law that regulates the 
world of spirit that governs the mundane affairs of 
this material universe. The Srimad-Bhagavatam 



28 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


has given the account of more than a score of such 
Great Masters who were born in India at different 
ages ; and has ended by saying that many such :will 
be born again in future as necessity arises, 't.v 
And has the life of the Master of whom we are 
going to give an account here, fulfilled those condi- 
tions ? Has He discovered a new path to the 
highest super-consciousness and demonstrated that 
in his own life in the aforesaid way ? Was He 
conscious of His mission all through His life—and 
did He fulfil the universal demand of the present 
time ? — Reader, listen, and decide then for 

yourself. 



CHAPTBE L 


Forewords and the ancestral abode at 
Dereypore. 

The student of Indian History is familiar with 
the fact, how during each transition period of the 
country, spiritual teachers of great importance have 
arisen and guided the people to save their national 
inheritance, “ the spiritual basis of collective life 
and conduct,” on which they had been established 
from very early times by their Scriptures, the Vedas. 
The advent of Sri Krishna during a time when the 
dominant Kshatriya or military power of the country 
tried to subvert that basis by controlling the 
spiritual power exerted by the Brahmin teachers,— 
the birth of Buddha at a time when the spirituality 
ot the Brahmin teachers had degenerated into mere 
elaborate observance of external sacrifices, rites and 
ceremonies, — the appearance of Sankara during the 
downfall of Buddhism — all these are notable in- 
stances of the aforesaid fact, which the tradition 
of the country holds before the gaze of the enquiring 
reader. 



80 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


Coming down to periods where History illu- 
mines the path of the enquirer and he feels himself 
on more solid ground, we find no less display of 
that curious fact ; Ramanuja, the great teacher of 
Qualified Monism, appeared in 1150 A.D. — a period 
during which the mighty Moslem power had first 
entered the country and was struggling to establish 
itself there as a permanent factor. In the North, 
again, arose the great Guru Nanak and Sri Chait- 
anya, both of whom were contemporaries of Babar, 
the great Mogul who established himself on the 
throne of Delhi by winning the first battle of Pani- 
pat in 1526 A.D. against the Afghan Lodies and 
started a line of his own which for a period of about 
two and a half centuries ruled over the destiny of 
almost the whole of India, 

Such are the facts that reveal themselves dur- 
ing the time when India was overrun by the 
Mohammedans and indeed those were times when 
the country passed through great transitions. For, 
India at the time became gradually conscious of the 
fact that the Mohammedan element had come to 
remain in the land, and that through peace and 
adversity, through friendship and enmity, was going 
to influence the habits, the character, the language 
and the literature, nay even the religious ideas of 
her people at large. She found out, moreover, that 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


31 


the gradual process of Aryanisation through which 
the vedic religion was fusing together in one homo* 
geneous whole, the various races and creeds that had 
come to dwell in her in long past ages, had met with 
a check before that new ruling power; and that she 
would have not only to find out and adapt the way of 
assimilating the same, but to adjust herself in such 
a way that she could do so and also preserve the 
hallowed ideals for which she had striven so long. 
Such were some of the problems during the Moham- 
medan occupation of the land, which its religious 
reformers had to solve for the benefit of the people, 
and that the country had been guided aright during 
those troublous times, we gather from the fact of the 
toning down of the fierce fanaticism of the first 
Islamic invaders, in Babar and his successors. 

But India was destined to pass through a 
much greater transition in later times when the 
great Empire of the Moguls fell into pieces after 
the third battle of Panipat in 1761 ‘ A.D., and the 
rule of the country gradually slipped into the hands 
of the British. For, at this time came the avalanche 
of the materialistic ideas and principles of life which 
were so foreign to the land, audit looked for a time, 
as if the very foundation of the collective spiritual 
life of the people was going to be undermined and 
destroyed by them. Never in the history of India 



32 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


did the prospect of such a ruin overshadow her 
people as during the time when it was decided by 
her British rulers that her people should have to 
receive the benefits of the Western methods of 
education through the medium of the English 
language. Whatever might be urged in praise of 
that great reform introduced into the country during 
the government of Lord W. C. Bentinck (1828- 
1836 A.DO—and we are not slow to appreciate the 
great merit, of the same — it must also be told of it, 
on the other hand, that it did somehow spread a 
sort of baneful hypnotising influence over the people 
of the land. For, within a very short time after 
its introduction, we find, as a result, that the majo- 
rity of the people thus educated, lost all faith in 
their former religious beliefs and institutions, and 
strove to mould everything Indian after the Western 
model. 

None can say how far the country would have 
proceeded along this line of self destruction by imi- 
tating Western methods without the attempt to 
assimilate them, had it not been for the strong 
check that it received from an opposite power com- 
ing from an un-recognised and unlooked for quarter 
namely, the seemingly dead bones of the religion of 
the country. 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


33 


And the opposition set up by it, came not as 
ordinarily in the shape of protest and condemnation 
but in the positive, direct and the stronger way of 
the building of an ideal life entirely according to 
the old Indian methods without any help whatsoever 
from what the West could offer, and the patient, 
silent living of that life before the eyes of the 
people, to let them have the opportunity of realising 
for themselves the utility and the practicality of the 
old time-hallowed methods. 

Thus, during the greatest of all her transition 
periods, India has been saved again as in former 
times, by the birth of a Seer of the*first order, and 
it is curious to note that he was born in the self- 
same year, namely, the year 1836 A.D., in which 
Lord Bentinck retired from the field completing his 
various benign reforms including the one on the 
education of Indian youths, and leaving Sir Charles 
Metcalf in his place to carry out the same. But 
strange as has been the coincidence of the time of 
the organised introduction of English education on 
the land with its hypnotic influence on the people 
and the advent of one whose life has been predestin- 
ed, as it were, to oppose the evil influences of the 
former, it came none the less in the course^of fulfil- 
ment of the promise of Sri Krishna to the people in 
the Bhagavat Gita, that they should be blessed 



34 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


^iin guides like his ownself whensover necessity 
would arise for the same as we shall see presently 
from the record of events of this wonderful life. 

About the time when the British power had 
established itself permanently in Bengal and was try- 
ing to introduce itsoY>m administration into the land 
under the guidance of its first Governors-in-General 
Lord Clive and Warren Hastings that a Brahmin 
family belonging to the middle class in Hindu 
Society, had been living in the village of Dereypore, 
situated a little to the east of the place where the 
extreme western portion of the Hoogly district juts 
into the adjoining districts of Midnapore and Ban- 
kura. The “Chatterjee” family was living there for 
several generations past and was regarded highly by 
the people of the village on account of the truthful- 
ness, charity and staunch religious principles of its 
members. Manik Ram the head of the family at 
the time was living in comparative opulance on his 
income from the fifty acres oi cultivated fields which 
he had inherited from his ancestors. The rumours 
of the defeat of Serajuddaulah, the Nawab of 
Bengal in the battle of Plassey in 1757 and the 
transfer of the Dewani of the province to British 
hands in 1759, must have reached the village when 
Manik^ Ram was quite young, But the incident of 
the terrible famine that devastated Bengal in 1770i 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


35 


must have left a deep and harrowing impression 
upon his memory, for he was about twenty years 
old at the time and had a direct knowledge of the 
sufferings of his neighbours and of his own family 
on account of it. But then, of the compulsory 
abdication of the treacherous Nawab Mir Jaffer and 
the accession of his son-in-law to the throne of 
Murshidabad, the fall of Mir Kassim in the battle 
of Buxar in 1764 A.D., the depredations of the 
Bhonsla family of the Marbattas of Nagpore and 
the defeat which the Marhatta power had suffered 
on the field of Panipat in 1761 A.D,— and of all 
such events of the time, which had helped to 
change considerably the destiny of India, Manik 
Ram and his neighbours were perhaps perfectly 
ignorant. For, sovereigns came and sovereigns 
went,— the rulership of the country changed hands 
a hundred times from ages immemorial, but the 
mild, industrious, home-loving and obedient rural 
people of the Bengal villages thought always that 
they had nothing to do with such big concerns 
and remained occupied in their blissful innocence 
with their own peaceful pursuits and religious 
observances. 

Be that as it may, Manik Ram must have 
married as was customary with his people, some- 
time after he had passed his teens and become 



36 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


gradually the father of three sons and a daughter, 
of whom the eldest was born probably in 1775 
A,D., about five years after the terrible famine. 
The family following the Vaishnava cult worshipp- 
ed Sri Ramachandra as its tutelary God from a 
long time, so Manick Ram named all his children 
after that Deity. Thus the eldest born was named 
Khudi Rama or ‘the little Ramab the daughter who 
came next was called Ramseela or ‘ devoted to 
Rama’ and the two sons who followed, were named 
Nidhi Ram and Ram Kanai respectively. 

The children of Manik Ram were all brought 
up in Accordance with the best traditions of a 
Brahmin family. They received their initiation in 
the three R’s in the village pathasala and were sent 
then to the neighbouring chaiuspathis or Toles to 
receive a knowledge of Sanskrit grammar, literature, 
Ruranas, Smritis or codes of Hindu laws and cus- 
toms, with perhaps a little of astronomy and astro- 
logy. The eldest of them, Khudi Ram, with whom 
we are most concerned here in this narrative, got 
married after finishing his education at about the 
age of twenty four. His sister Ramseela must have 
been married long before that event ; — for, as the 
reader knows, Hindu girls are generally betrothed 
at a very early age, though they continue to live 
with their parents until they come of age. So 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


37 


Ramseela was married at an early age to Bhagbat 
Banerjee of a well-to-do family of the village 
Selampur in the District of Midnapore. 

Khudi Ram became the head of the family in 
course of time on the decease of his father and was 
held in great respect by his neighbours on account 
of his piety, uprightness, charity and strength of 
character. It is said that he had made pilgrimages 
even in that age (when there was no rail-road in 
the country) to Ayodhya and Brindavana, but of 
that we are not quite certain. It is true neverthe- 
less, that he had a very great devotion for his 
family deity Bhagavan Ramachandra, and never in 
his life tasted food until after performing his daily 
worship of Him. He used to manage the affairs of 
the family with the help of his two younger 
brothers who also got married in time and every 
thing went on peacefully as it did during the time 
of his father. 

It is a blessing to win the affections of a noble 
woman in this world, so Khudi Ram must have felt 
himself more than happy at this period of his life. 
For, Chandramoni, or Chandra, — as she was called 
generally by her friends and acquaintances, the wife 
of Khudi Ram, was indeed a noble woman. Loving 
and dutiful she had the knack of forgetting herself 
entirely in the joy of helping others even from her 



58 


SRI RAMAKRISHKA, 


tender youth. Thus she had endeared herself not 
only to her husband’s family but was loved by all 
who came across her path. To crown the happiness 
of the family she became the mother of a b oy 
about the year 1805 A, D. and it made her feel 
henceforth as if she was the mother of all the 
children of the neighbourhood. The happy mother 
called her first born by the name of Ram Kumar or 
the ‘child Rama.’ 

Little as were the wants of this Brahmin 
family, those had been met more than sufficiently 
by their income from the produce of their fields. 
Thus they could not only afford to advance 
hospitality to their neighbours on festive occasions 
and help the stranger and the poor at all times by 
supplying them with food and shelter for a few 
days, but were able to lay by something for their 
own use at all future contingencies, as for instance 
the days of drought and scarcity. Thus time rolled 
on for several years more in peace and plenty, and 
the even flow of their lives was seldom broken 
except on occasions of the addition of new members 
to the family from time to time, in the event of a 
boy or a girl born, or the celebration of a marriage 
or of some religious observances. 

Chandra became the mother again of a girl 
about the year 1810 and named her Katyayani ; 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


39 


and Ramseela, the sister of Khudi Ram who had 
become the mother in turn of a boy and a girl some 
time ago and named them Ramchand and Heman- 
gini, respectively— gave the latter in marriage to 
Krishnachandra Mukherji of the village of Sihar, a 
place situated a few miles to the north-west of 
Dereypore. It is said that Khudi Ram was very 
fond of this girl and so her marriage was celebrated 
at her uncles’ home at Derey instead of at her 
paternal residence at Selampore, as it ought to have 
been. 

The brightest day has its night, and the most 
peaceful life its dark days of adversity. The cloud 
that, hurled the thunderbolt and brought ruin to 
Khudi Ram’s peaceful days, arose now in an un- 
locked for quarter of the horizon in about the year 
18 IS in the shape of a request from the landlord of 
the } lace, who had his abode in the adjoining village 
of Sa':beria. This Zemindar was a most unscrupu- 
lous man who had never stopped from gaining his 
ends by fair means or foul. And woe to the tenant 
who roused his ire for just or unjust reasons ; he 
would then get himself embroiled in endless troubles 
and lawsuits and in a short w^hile find himself 
dispossessed of everything that he had and ousted 
from the village in utter helplessness. Such a man 
was Ramanandf Roy, and numerous were the 



40 


SRI RAMAKRTSHNA, 


stories that people whispered in their fear to one 
another about his dark deeds. The man died 
without leaving any issue and the people in their 
relief saw the hand of God in it, but that came long 
afterwards, Ramananda out of an old grudge 
picked up a quarrel now with a neighbour of Khudi 
Ram and in order to secure his condemnation in the 
suit that he got up against him, invited Khudi Ram 
to give false evidence on his own side. Khudi Ram 
met his proposal with intense disdain with the 
result that he also was unfairly implicated in a 
protracted law suit within a short time. Rama- 
nanda Roy won the suit in the end and honest 
Khudi Ram after meeting the expenses of the same 
found himself, at about his fortieth year, dispossessed 
of every vestige of property — even his ancestral 
house and fields I In their utter ruin the members 
of the Chatter jee family must have held a hurried 
council and it was decided that they should disband 
themselves and depart for ever from the village 
which knew them long, to keep themselves away 
from further revenge of the wicked Ramananda. 
Bitter indeed was the parting day when the two 
younger brothers left Dereypore to live with their 
respective fathers-in-law, and Khudi Ram and his 
devoted wife bade adieu to their ancestral abode 
and with their young boy and girl, turned their 



THE GREAT MASTER, 


41 


reluctant steps eastward to a different village at 
the invitation of a kind friend. All that were left 
behind now to tell to future generations of the 
sad story of the Chatterjees, were the temple of 
Siva and the big tank adjoining it— and they are 
known even to this day as the temple and the tank 
belonging to the Chatterjee family. 



CHATER IL 


A Friend in Need. 

About three miles to the east of Dereyporet 
there stands a cluster of villages, known even to 
this day as Sripur, Kamarpukur and Mukandapur, 
The three lie in such close proximity to one another 
that for all practical purposes they may be regarded 
as one and are referred to generally by the name of 
Kamarpukur by the people of the surrounding 
neighbourhood. They cover an area of about four 
square miles and are on the latitude 87®-42’ with a 
longitude of about 22®-54.’ They* stand at the 
crossing of four roads which lead to Burdwan about 
thirty miles to the north, to Arambagh about 
twelve miles to the east, to Midnapore and Puri on 
the south and to Raniganj on the west. The roads 
must have been made during the Pathan and 
Moghul rule of Bengal for military purposes— at 
least some of them. The big tanks or dighh at 
regular intervals, the ruins of a structure for keep- 
ing elephants, the battlefield of Mogulmari, the 
ruins of the old fort of Mandaron and the triumphal 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


43 


gateway with Persian inscriptions on it a few miles 
to the west of the same, bear witness to the fact. 

Kamarpukur must have known better days and 
had a bigger population in old times than it has at 
present. The vast ruins of brick-built houses, 
temples and wall-enclosures that greet the eye of 
the traveller at every step in the village attest to 
the fact The facility of communication with 
Burdwan, Midnapore and Calcutta on account of 
the well-built roads helped the place to carry on 
formerly a brisk local trade. Thus instead of being 
entirely a rural village, it supported a good number 
of artisans, traders and mechanics in former times. 
One can find signs of the same in the declining local 
industries of hookah-pipes made of ebony, Dhutis 
and napkins etc,, with which its people carry on 
trade even to this day with Calcutta and other re- 
mote parts of the country. The place had its regular 
fair twice a week from days primeval, when the 
people of the surrounding villages assembled in it to 
buy or sell food-grains, vegetables, clothes, medi- 
cines, ropes, mats, wicker baskets and all sorts of 
necessary household articles. The ‘ hat ’ or fair is 
still held on Tuesdays and Saturdays. 

The presence of numerous temples dedicated 
to Siva and Vishnu, bears testimony to the religious 
tendency of the people. Temples dedicated to 



44 


SRI ramakrishna, 


Dharma or Buddha also are not rare, though the 
name has lost its former significance and the god is 
being looked upon by the people at present as one 
of the many incarnations of Vishnu. Less than a 
generation ago the car festival in honour of the god 
was usually celebrated in the village with great 
eclat. And the villagers still tell you the story 
how the wheels of the big car got stuck into the 
deep ruts of a muddy road and it capsized and broke 
on such an occasion, how the broken parts were 
then destroyed by the white ants in an incredibly 
short space of time and finally how the people 
looked upon it as the will of the god Dharma to 
discontinue the festival. Be that as it may, the three 
villages still have three separate places for the wor- 
ship of Dharma, though the worship of Siva and 
Vishnu in the form of Sri Krishna seems to have 
grown much during later years. 

Kamarpukur belonged formerly to the estate of 
the Rajah of Eurdwan. The Rajah had made a grant 
of it to his spiritual preceptor sometime ago. Thus 
the people of the three villages acknowledged tlie 
Goswami family as their Zamindar in the time of 
which we are speaking, A scion of the family, 
Gopilal by name, had built a big temple near the 
market place and dedicated the same to Sri Krishna. 
Sukhlal, possibly a descendant of Gopilal, was the 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


45 


head of the family in 1814 A. D. Unlike the Zamin- 
dar of Dereypore this man was held in high respect 
by the villagers on account of his piety, charity 
and nobleness of mind. He had his residence at 
the western extremity of the village. And the ruins 
of his house and his brick*built tomb (Samadlii) on 
the side of a big tank close by, are pointed out even 
to-day. He died probably in 18*24. His son Krishna- 
lal then fell on evil days and had ultimately to sell 
his Zamindary rights on the village to the Laha 
family about thirty years after his father’s death. 
The Goswami family must have retired from that 
village from the time elsewhere and the Lahas 
remain to this day the Zamindar of the place. 

Sukhlal Goswami had a genuine friendship for 
Khudiram, the head of the Chatterjee family of 
Dereypore, and was sorely grieved to learn of the 
dire misfortune that had befallen him through his 
just quarrels with the wicked Ramananda. He 
immediately came forward to help his friend in 
trouble and invited him to come over and live with 
him at Kamarpukur. Khudiram saw the hand of 
God in the kind offer of his friend and accepted it 
with all gratefulness. Thus a few days after the 
event at Dereypore we find Khudiram settled in 
a thatched hut at Kamarpukur close by his friend’s 
residence. And Sukhlal was not only content to 



46 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


let his friend have the cottage but made over to 
him about half an acre of the most fertile of his 
own fields known to this day as Lakshmi-jala, to 
enable him to support his little family in future. 



CHAPTER IIL 


Life at Kamarpukur. 

The feelings of Srijut Khudiram can better be 
imagined than described when at the age of thirty- 
nine he came to settle at Kamarpukur. Fate had 
indeed been hard with him to take away at one 
stroke ail that he possessed and leave him entirely 
at the mercy of others — and that, for no fault of hiS 
own, but for his scruples to become an instrument 
in the hand of the wicked to bring undeserved wrong 
on the heads of his simple and weak neighbours. 
Yet through all the bitterness and despair that well- 
nigh overwhelmed him during the dark days of per- 
secution and of sorrow for separation from those 
whom he held near and dear, he felt from time to 
time the calm and unwavering assurance of the 
inner man in him that he had done well in not 
yielding to the tempter. The good had been look- 
ing up to him with admiration and a feeling akin to 
awe, and the selfish, the worldly and the bad, held 
his conduct to ridicule but he heeded not theii 
praise or blame. Had it not been for that assurance 



48 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA. 


within he could hardly have been 'able to hold 
himself firmly to the path that he chose for himselL 
And yet he felt for the time being too stunned by 
the blow when it came. But he blamed none, not 
even the wicked Ramananda, for all that had be- 
fallen him, when he recovered himself from the 
effects of the same. For, had he not heard from 
the scriptures that man reaps in his present incarna- 
tion what he had but sown in the past ? And had 
not the Deity whom he worshipped, the pure and 
immaculate Sri Ramachandra, suffered more than 
any man has done ever, while He made His sojourn 
through this ‘ Vale of tears’, to bring home to men 
that sufferings and miseries are sure to visit all here 
below and are the best of all teachers ? Then, when 
he thought of the unaccountable way in which help 
had come to him in his darkest moment, his heart 
became full of thankfulness towards his God and he 
felt that he w^ould never be left forsaken, come 
whatsoever to make his cup of misery fuller than 
ever ; and along with that came the determination 
in him never to swerve from the path of righteous- 
ness in future. Thus we find him living at present 
at Kamarpukur from day to day without making 
any plans for the future and passing bis days in 
company with his wife like a Vanaprastha ” or 
recluse of old, in worship and devotion. He kept a 




KHUDIRAM’S COTTAGE. 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


49 


little hut separate for the purpose and passed many 
hours of the day within the same in practising exer- 
cises helpful to concentration, in prayers and in 
deep contemplation of and communion with his 
Ishtam or that expression of the Deity to which he 
had been directed by his spiritual preceptor as being 
especially helpful to quicken and stimulate his 
spiritual impulses. 

The wants of the family were few and Khudi- 
ram, who had a sort of practicality peculiar to him- 
self though regarded by many as a visionary, made 
up his mind never to increase them. The little plot 
of land which his friend Sukhlal had given him, 
began to produce rice more than sufficient to sup- 
port the family throughout the year ; and it was 
customary with him during the seed-times to offer 
especial prayers to the Deity and sow a few' paddy 
plants with his own hands in the field uttering the 
w'ords “Glory to the heroic Scion of Raghu !“, 
before he engaged hired labour to finish its cultiva- 
tion. And strange as it may appear, the story runs 
in the family that the field had never failed him 
even at times when drought and scarcity prevailed 
throughout the land 1 The plot of land is called 
even to this day, as Lakshmi-jala or the land be- 
longing to the goddess of wealth, for that very 


reason. 



SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


5Q 


Secure of the produce of his field, Khudiram 
found that he could devote himself henceforth to 
plain living and high thinking towards which he 
felt himself drawn strongly by the present state 
of his mind. The climate of Bengal in which 
so little is needed to keep body and soul to- 
gether and the old custom of India which made 
society responsible for providing the necessaries 
of life to the real spiritual aspirant, helped him 
much to do so. For, his neighbours who had 
enough to spare would send to him, unasked, what 
they thought might be wanted for his little family, 
But here also Khudiram had set up strong barriers 
in the way of accepting presents, so that he might 
not lose his self-respect and independence of mind 
and above all, that he could teach himself the 
lesson of looking to God, and never to men, for 
help and comfort even in little things. And the 
rules that governed his conduct in this direction 
were firstly ^ that he would never accept anything 
from one who was not his equal in society as 
regards the circumstances of birth ; secondly^ that 
he would never accept anything even from such a 
person, in case he disregarded the open injunctions 
of the scriptures in order to earn the creature com- 
forts in life ; and thirdly, that he would never 
accept anything even from one equal to him in 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


51 


birth, in case that person took money from one to 
whom he gave his daughter in marriage ; for, that 
he regarded as tantamount to selling one’s daughter. 
Strange as the last of the above conditions may 
sound to the reader, it will appear in a new light 
when he considers the fact that the custom of 
marrying one's daughter to the party who paid the 
most, had prevailed in this part of Bengal until it 
had become a regular evil, and Khudiram and others 
of his opinion bad to set their faces against it in 
this manner to rouse self-respect in the mind of the 
misguided fathers and make it peremptory in them 
to correct themselves. 

Impressed by his recent misfortune with the 
idea of the transitory nature of wealth and pros- 
perity in this world, Khudiram gave up for ever 
the idea of struggling to regain his former posi- 
tion and devoted himself entirely to the leading 
of the higher life in the light of the scriptures. 
Things transpired as if guided by some higher 
power to confirm him in that decision. It 
was at this time that he gained the image of his 
tutelary Deity Raghubira^ in a mysterious way« 
Happening to return, one day, to Kamarpukur aftei 
visiting a distant village on business, he felt tired 
and began to rest a while underneath a tree on the 
side of the road, which lay across awide field. Over- 



52 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


come by fatigue and slumber he now dreamt as if 
his own hhtam, the divine Ramachandra, was 
standing before him and telling him that He would 
like to go to his house and bless him and his family 
always with His benign presence there. Overjoyed 
at this unexpected turn of events he was overwhelm- 
ed with sorrow the next moment to think of his 
poverty, and besought with tears in his eyes not 
to do so, for he had not the means to serve Him 
properly. At this the Deity seemed to be very 
pleased and insisted on going with him, assuring him 
that He w^Quld never feel offended, for He knew that 
he would serve Him to the best of his ability. Khu- 
diram then awoke to wonder at this extraordinary 
dream. The spot where he saw his own Ishiam in 
his dream seemed to be the one close to the place 
where he was lying, and on going to make a closer 
inspection of it, his eyes fell on what seemed to be a 
little stone image lying by the side of a venomous 
cobra. But undaunted he went to the spot and 
found the cobra gone and the image lying as he had 
seen before. But, Oh, the wonder, when he found 
the image turn out on examination to be really of 
the divine Ramachandra, of whom he had dreamt a 
little while ago 1 The devotee in him believed from 
that moment, that it was indeed Sri Ramachandra 
whom he had seen, and believed also in the promise 



the great master. 


53 


that He would henceforth bless his home and re- 
main with and protect him in a special sense. With 
a heart full of the ecstasy of devotion and awe, he 
hastened to his home with the image and placing it 
in the hut in which he performed his meditations, 
told the event to his faithful wife. 

Khudiram seemed to have made rapid strides 
towards spiritual realisations at this period of his 
life. The accounts which we have found of him, 
state that his noble figure used to glow literally 
with the fervour of devotion when he repeated his 
invocation to Gayairi in his daily prayers in the 
morning and at night. He frequently saw the vision 
of mother Sit ala os a sweet girl leading and help- 
ing him while he busied himself daily with his task 
of gathering flowers for his worship at break of dawn. 
And he practised truthfulness so strictly in every 
thought, word and deed that people came to the 
belief that no untruth could cross his mind or pass 
out of his lips even in jest; and such was the love and 
reverence they felt for the man whose ways of life 
were so different from theirs, who welcomed poverty 
and rejoiced to see others happy, who blessed and 
helped all who came to him for advice and guid- 
ance, and settled all disputes among them with 
justice tempered with kindness— that they gradual- 
ly came to look upon him as a veritable seer whose 



54 


SRI RAMAKRfSHNA, 


every word could not but be true. They stood up in 
reverence whenever he passed by their houses, 
never allowed themselves to talk foolish things be- 
fore him and would wait to take their bath in 
the waters of the big tank, Haldarpukur, as long as 
he was bathing in it. 

If Khudiram made such a wonderful impression 
on the minds of his neighbours, his : wife, the sweet 
and graceful Chandra, did none the less. But the 
impression that she made was of a different nature 
altogether. For they found in her the mother, 
who was ever careful to look after the comforts of 
even the lowest of them, and would sacrifice her 
time and what little she had to feed and clothe them 
whensoever they were ill or in want. The children 
of the neighbourhood engaged her especial attention 
and their mothers found in her always such ready 
sympathy, that they would assemble in her hut in 
their leisure moments and would seek her advice 
and help in their troubles. -Thus her great mother’s 
heart made her the centre of a large family, as it 
were, in the village. The elderly ladies of the 
neighbourhood felt themselves attracted towards 
her as to their own daughters ; and for those who 
were equal to her in years she had in reserve such 
genuine friendship that they longed to be in her 
company always. 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


55 


Ail those and more came to Chandra naturally 
as she became accustomed to her new mode of 
living and environments. But inured to plenty, it 
was hard for her at first to face life thus with 
nothing else but a stock of deep trust in God. And 
had it not been for her brave and truly devoted 
husband, she would most surely have broken down 
in the attempt. For days there were when such 
dire want stared her in the face that she knew not 
how she would be able to cook her next meal for 
her husband and children, in spite of her observing 
the strictest economy and depriving herself even 
of the bare necessaries of life. And Khudiram 
knowing by her looks what was in her heart 
would encourage her by saying, “ Are we not 
under the protection of the all-powerful Raghu- 
vira and ought we not to observe fast on the 
day on which we are not able to offer Him any- 
thing ? So be of good cheer and make up your 
mind to starve with Him as your companion if such 
be His will Chandra, who had perfect trust in 
her noble husband, felt then as if the burden had 
been taken away from her and went about joyfully 
in her daily round of duties. And strangely enough 
presents in the shape of food grains and vegetables 
would always reach her on such occasions from 
unexpected quarters and she found that Raghmira 
^as indeed looking after them ! 



56 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


The faithful heart of Chaiidra and her simple 
devotion raised her sometimes to mental planes 
where she would see visions of gods and goddesses. 
It must be a subjective aifair with her, as all visions 
are, in which the intense fullness of concentration 
of the mind on a single train of thought finds relief, 
as it were, in projecting it outwards. Yet it showed 
none the less that she had been advancing uncon- 
sciously towards the habit of thinking deeply on a 
subject, a habit which in its culmination leads one 
to the goal of realising the highest spiritual truth 
of the oneness of Being. It is stated that she had 
such a vision once of Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, 
at this period of her life. 

The eldest boy Ramkumar who was about 
fifteen years of age at present had been receiv- 
ing instructions in Sanskrit grammar and general 
literature and also in Smriti or the Hindu 
Laws, by joining the tola or chatuspathi after be- 
coming familiar with the three R’s under the village 
pedagogue. He was also helping the family 
by earning something by conducting the puja or 
worship of the tutelary gods in the vocation of 
a priest, in a few private families of the neighbour- 
hood. 

It is stated that Ramkumar went one day to 
perform the worship of the goddess Lakshmi to the 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


67 


village of Bhursuba, a mile to the north of Kamar- 
pukur. It was a full-moon night and as the goddess 
was being worshipped at an advanced hour in the 
evening, he was rather late in returning home. Chan- 
dra getting anxious for the safe return of her boy, 
waited as long as she could on the threshold of her 
hut, then went slowly to the crossing of the road 
leading to Bhursuba with the intention of asking any 
one who might chance to come from that direction 
about him. She scanned with eager eyes the meadow 
through which the road lay, but finding none 
approaching, waited and fell to musing. She awoke 
suddenly from her reverie by the sound of footsteps 
of one coming from the direction of Bhursuba, to 
find a beautiful lady dressed gaily as if for some 
festive occasion, and having curious ornaments and 
jewelry of great value on her, approaching her all 
alone I On her drawing near, she accosted her with 
the inqniry of her boy and the lady replied that 
she had met him a little while ago and that he 
would be returning shortly. The simple-hearted 
Chandra thanked her heartily and then getting 
anxious for the safety of the lady in turn, asked her 
not to travel all alone, at that late hour and invited 
her to be her guest for the night. The lady 
replied that she could not accept her kind offer as 
she had to visit certain people that night, but 



58 


SRI ramakrishna, 


promised to come to her sometime. She then 
wended her way by the side of Chandra’s home and 
entered a by-path that led to the house of her 
wealthy neighbours, the Laha family. Chandra 
thinking within herself that she had lost her 
way, hastened to the spot to help her with direction 
about the road but could not find her again, though 
she searched her everywhere round the place. 
And even as she was engaged in this fruitless task, a 
strong feeling suddenly took possession of her, that 
she had seen and spoken ere long to none else but to 
the Mother Lakshmi Herself, — and that She had 
deigned to visit her thus to offer her consolation 
about her boy! When Chandra was repeating this 
vision to her husband with a heart full of grateful 
devotion, her boy Ramkumar entered the threshold 
of the home. 

Thus passed ten years at Kamarpukur and a 
few were the • events that broke the even tenor 
of the life of this little family during the time. The 
betrothal of Katyayani, the daughter of Khudiram, 
to Kenaram Banerjee of Anur, a village about two 
miles to the north, and the marriage of Ramkumar 
with the sister of the same person (Kenaram), were 
among them. Then there was the sad event, of 
the death of Sukhlal, sometime during the period, 
—the friend who had been so faithful to^Khudiram 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


59 


up to the last. But at this time, the family met a 
slight turn of fortune in the betterment of its finan- 
cial condition, partly by the earnings of Ramkumar, 
who had finished his education by this time, and 
partly by the monthly help that began to come to 
the family regularly from Ramchand,son of Ramsila, 
the sister of Khudiram, who had become a muhtiar 
(lawyer) and joined the bar of Midnapur. Khudiram, 
as we have told already, was very fond of Ramchand 
and used to pay visits to him and his family at 
Salempur from time to time. And the story runs in 
the family, how after starting once for that place on 
such a visit, he travelled actually more than half the 
distance and then postponing it, returned to Kamar- 
pukur with a basketful of fresh young leaves of 
the Bel tree that grew by the side of the road, solely 
for the purpose of offering them to Siva, as he could 
not find such fresh leaves to offer to Him for some 
days past, it being the month of February when 
that kind of trees shed their old leaves. 

The management of the affairs of the family 
having fallen on Ramkumar, Khudiram was able to 
turn his attention at present to other directions. 
He felt now a strong inclination within himself 
to travel about for sometime, leaving all cares 
behind. Accordingly he planned a pilgrimage 
on foot to Ramesvara, in the southern-most 



SRI RAMAKRISHNA* 


part of India. He started early in the year 
1824 for this purpose and did not return to 
Kamarpukur until sometime during the next year. 
It is said that the ling a image of Siva named 
Ramesvara that is still to be seen at the house of 
Khudiram, was brought by him during this pilgri- 
mage. The year following saw the birth of the 
second son of Khudiram, and the new-born babe 
was named Ramesvara in remembrance of the event 
of his birth a little after the return of his father 
from the pilgrimage to the sacred shrine of that 
namei 



CHAPTER IV. 

Khudiram’s Pilgrimage to Gaya and his 
Extraordinary Dream 

According to the Hindus, the beautiful God- 
dess of Fortune is extremely fickle ; so there is 
no knowing when she would turn her back 
towards one whom she has been favouring with 
her smiles, or when she would begin to bestow 
favours upon one, whom she has been neglecting 
hitherto. To the little family of Khudiram however, 
who had an especial share of her frowns for years 
successively, she did not cast much of a favourable 
look until at present, when their financial affairs 
were placed on a much better footing. For during 
the years that follow^ed the pilgrimage of his father 
to Ramesvara, the earnings of Ramkumar increased 
steadily and the fame of his being a competent 
knower of the Smritis (codes and old usages) began 
to spread around. It seems moreover, that he had 
earned a little reputation at the time by his 
knowledge of astrology. For the story runs in the 
family how Ramkumar, who had inherited the 
devotion and the psychic temperament of his 



62 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


parents, was favoured with a vision one day, of the 
Divine Mother, whom he worshipped daily, appear- 
ing before him and touching his tongue with power 
while he was in meditation ; and from that moment 
he was enabled to see future events and tell people 
about them before they actually took place. It is 
said, that he foretold thus, the death of his wife, 
and said that she would meet her death as soon as 
she would become the mother of a child 1 And 
strangely enough, she died when at the age of thirty- 
six she gave birth to her only boy, Akshaya 1 
Numerous other instances are cited by the family 
even to the present day, about Ramkumar’s power 
of predicting future events ; but we need not enter 
into their enumeration here. Sufficient for our 
purpose to know that he helped to increase the in- 
come of the family not only by his knowledge of the 
scriptural laws but also by making use of the power 
that he possessed of seeing future events. For it 
endowed him with a special aptitude in the eyes of 
the people to conduct services and ceremonials for 
propitiation of the gods in the interest of those that 
were in trouble or were seized by incurable maladies. 
Thus passed ten years, one after another, and Khudi- 
ram finding himself free to devote his time and 
energy entirely to religion, made plans for a visit to 
the shrine of Gaya in the year 1835 A. D, 



THE GREAT MASTER, 


63 


Hridayaram, son of Hemangini, the favourite 
niece of Khudiram, related to us a strange event as 
the immediate cause of the undertaking of the 
pilgrimage. Katyayani, the eldest daughter of the 
family became obsessed, he said, by an evil spirit 
at the time. And when Khudiram had told it in 
the name of God, to depart elsewhere leaving his 
daughter free, it promised never to come near her 
again, but entreated him at the same time to liber- 
ate it in turn, from the dreadful state of bondage to 
which it had brought itself by its evil deeds in 
the past, by olfering prayers for its sake at the 
shrine at Gaya. Kind-hearted Khudiram took pity 
on the sad plight of the spirit and agreed readily to 
its proposal. Be that as it may, the story goes very 
little beyond supporting the fact that all the mem- 
bers of the little family of Khudiram, were possessed 
of finely sensitive , nerves and had their psychic vein 
open in some form or other. 

The pilgrimage to Gaya was undertaken by 
Khudiram at the age of sixty. Tail, slim and fair, 
and graceful of form, he was blessed besides with 
an iron constitution. He did not hesitate now to 
perform the journey to that distant place on foot, 
even at that advanced age, and started early in the 
year, so that he might reach his destination by the 
beginning of March after a short visit to Benares^ 



64 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


As an orthodox Hindu, he believed firmly in 
the injunction of the scriptures that offerings and 
prayers made at the shrine of Gaya during the 
‘sweet * month of Chaitra (March), bring infinite 
blessings to the departed spirits of one’s ancestors. 

It is impossible to realise in these days of hurry 
and bustle, the joy that used to thrill the pilgrim’s 
soul in India, in old times. The mild climate of 
the country, the beautiful scenery that caught his 
eyes at every step, the life in the open air in harmony 
with Nature and with all ideas of responsibility that 
troubled and worried him at home, dropped for 
the time being-all combined to bring home to his 
mind a sense of freedom which he had not tasted 
since his days of childhood. The shackles of artificia- 
lity which grow round one as one advances in years, 
would drop off one’s soul on such an occasion, and 
the spirit asserting itself over matter would make one 
think deeply on the Whence, Why and Wherefore 
of all human affairs. Again, the uncertainty of 
getting much of the creature comforts on the way, 
and the dangers that beset the roads, brought in the 
idea of man’s helplessness and the wisdom of 

* The Chaitra oe the last month of the Hindu year, has been 
d6signa.t6d in old' Sanskrit literature as the month of ^Madhu' or 
sweetness, the literal meaning of the word being ‘ honey.’ It might 
have been so named on account of its being the last month of the 
sgring-tide. 



•THE GREAT MASTER. 


65 


dependence on the Lord, to the pious mind, which 
it seldom .experienced in the safe surroundings of its 
daily life amongst friends and relations. Thus a 
deep sense of calm and repose used to pervade the 
mind of the pilgrim, as he wended his way slowly, 
day after day, to realise the fulfilment of the long 
cherished desire of his heart. And thus rivers and 
rocks, shrines and images of hoary antiquity, nay, 
the very stones and the dust of the places of 
pilgrimage, were idealised, worshipped and surround- 
ed with a bright halo by the devotion of the 
faithful devotee. 

Such must have been the experiences of Khudi- 
ram as he approached the portals of the old city of 
Gaya, the place which had a tradition and fame for 
sanctity of its own dating from even the pre- 
Buddhistic era. For did not the mighty Buddha 
prefer the hilly tract of Gaya-sirsha for his medita- 
tions and austerities to all other sacred places ? And 
does not the meaning of that name itself, ^the head 
of Gaya,’ point unmistakably to the existence of a 
longstanding tradition before his time ? 

About a month passed for Khudiram in offer- 
ing prayers and observing customary ceremonials 
in the minor shrines in the hills and plains around, 
before the priest directed him to do the same 
in the central temple of the place, containing 

5 



66 


SRI RAMAKRISHNAj 


the hallowed relics of the foot-print of the 
Lord. It is natural that he should find himself 
overcome with emotion at the very sight of the 
holy relics, aye, he could almost see with eyes open 
what he was directed to meditate upon, the vast 
conclave of the spirits of the departed, and amongst 
them his own ancestors, standing in worshipful 
reverence around the throne of the mighty Saviour 
of souls, Who has taken upon Himself the task of 
saving mankind from going for ever into evil ways, 
and in His great mercy has left His foot-print and 
the privilege of worshipping the same for poor, 
self-forgetful mortals. Then after worshipping that 
•effulgent Being, when he began to do the same to 
the members of the assembly in whose line he had 
taken his birth and presented them with his humble 
offerings, he felt himself instilled with the peace 
that ‘passeth all understanding’ in the joy of re- 
union in the Lord, the essence of infinite love, with 
those who had passed out of this earthly life long 
long ago. 

The ceremony ended, and after prostrating 
himself before the sacred relics with tears of devo- 
tion in his eyes he came away to his humble lodg- 
ings to pass the rest of the day. But his mind dwelt 
with fondness ^ain and again on the bright vision 
that had come to him within the holy precincts of 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


67 


the shrine. And at night when he laid himself to 
rest, the self-same vision came to him in sleep, a 
hundred times brighter and more vivid than 
what it had been during the day. Amidst 
the hushed silence of devotion in the great con- 
clave of the departed, he heard a voice calling him 
by his name with infinite tenderness and compassion. 
He looked forward in wonder to find what it meant, 
when to his surprise he found that the great Saviour, 
the effulgent Being, who formed the central figure of 
the assemblage was Himself addressing him 1 With 
trepidation and awe, and all his mind concentrat- 
ed, Khudiram now heard the inspiring and hopeful 
words — “I take my birth again and again to save 
the human kind ; I find for them new ways to 
Dharma (the goal to be attained through religion) 
to bring them to Perfect Enlightenment ; the time 
has come for Me to be born again soon to fulfil that 
purpose, and I shall honour your humble devotion 
and love for Me by appearing as your child I” 

Khudiram, entirely taken aback at this won- 
derful proclamation, felt elated nevertheless, at the 
great honour that was thus accorded him. But 
remembering his poor circumstances and his un- 
worthy self, the very next moment, he began to 
plead with a heavy heart to decline the privilege. 
For, he was then overcome with the idea that it was 



SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


not in his power to serve the Divine-child in the way 
that It should be done ! And while he was in the 
midst of his pleadings the dream vanished and he 
awoke with a sudden start. 

The strange dream created such a deep impres- 
sion on the mind of Khudiram that he could not 
understand for some minutes after awakening, 
whether he was in this world or in that of the 
departed. Then, when he became perfectly conscious 
of the real situation, he went on thinking deeply 
within himself to find out the answer to the ques- 
tion, was it really the phantasy of the overburdened 
brain that had haunted him thus erelong, or something 
higher that appeared through the mercy of the 
Deity? For, the belief prevailed among the religiously 
inclined of his countrymen that dreams relating to 
God or the great Saviours, which left such strong 
impression on the mind, were to be regarded as 
visions obtained from higher planes of consciousness, 
and going to be realised in the near future. Khudi- 
ram decided in the end to keep quiet about the 
affairs and to wait and watch carefully the turn of 
events in his future life. 



CHAPTER V. 


Chandra's Yision and the Birth of Cadadhar. 

Khudiram returned to his native village some*' 
time in April next. The first thing that drew his 
attention, within a short time of his arrival, was the 
change that seemed to have come upon his dear wife 
during his absence. She appeared to him like one 
transformed by divine touch, overflowing with the 
fulness of sympathy of the heart for everyone 
around. Possessed always of an active tempera- 
ment, she had kept herself buoyant hitherto in 
ministering to the wants of her little family and in 
looking after the proper arrangement of the daily 
offerings and sacrifices to the family Deity Sri 
Raghubir. But now the mother in her would not 
be content to remain within those bounds and would 
make her constantly look after the wants and com- 
forts of her poor neighbours even before those of 
•the family. And though it did not mean a neglect of 
those whom she called her own, nevertheless it was 
often at the cost of great perscmal sacrifice that she 
ould help them. For she herself was not rich and 



70 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


had notmuch to give away after meeting the wants 
of her own family. Khudiram found that she would 
not partake of her daily meals before enquiring 
first, personally, whether her poor neighbours had 
enough to eat on the day. And if she found that 
for some reason or other any one of them had not 
been able to procure it, she would privately give 
her own meal away ; and that she would do 
even for the beggars who visited her doors. 

Then, as days passed, Khudiram became aware 
also of the strange turn that her devotions to God 
had taken at that time. For, instead of looking up to 
the family Deity with awe and reverence as she used 
to do before, she would regard and love Him as her 
own eldest child, Who could never feel offended with 
the . shortcomings of His poor and weak mother. 
An unwonted sweetness also surrounded her daily 
dfuties about the v orship-room. Strong emotions 
would overcome her at times in the midst of them, 
and she could see visions of strange gods and god- 
desses appearing before her as lovely little children 
addressing her in sweet familiar w^ords and asking 
sometimes for food offerings. 

But the astonishment of Khudiram knew no 
bounds on the day that his simple-minded wife told 
him of the strange experiences that had come to her 
while he had been to Gaya. She said, I had a 





THE GREAT MASTER. 


n 


dream one night that you had come; and that 
before I could know if you had entered the 
room, I found you locking me within your 
loving embrace and! felt so happy ! But on looking 
up to your face the next moment, I found that 
you had been so transformed as I could hardly re- 
cognise you. Your appearance seemed to be more 
like the effulgent forms of those whom we worship 
than of any man I had ever seen. A strange feeling 
then possessed me as if I was in another’s embrace. 
I shrieked and struggled to free myself, and in the 
attempt, I awoke with a sudden start to find me 
alone in my bed shivering all over with fright and 
dismay ! Then again, a few days later as I was 
standing one day with my 'poor companion Dhani, 
the daughter of our blacksmith neighbour, before 
the temple of Siva in front of our cottage, I was so 
startled to find the image alive 1 It began to 
emanate ethereal waves of exquisite, supernatural 
light at first slowly and then with a rapidity which 
can hardly be imagined. The waves filled the 
room, then gaining in volume and strength suddenly 
darted towards me like the mighty bore in 
the river, and • deluged me completely as I was 
struggling to get away — and I fell down on the 
ground losing my consciousness 1 I awoke to find 
myself in the arms of my companion, who however 



n 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


was' perfectly unaware of what had taken place. 
But instead of feeling weak for it, I felt myself 
stronger than eve " and borne up with a strange 
elation of spirit. I have the impression since then as 
if a part of the self-same waves is still withinme,mak- 
f did before while in the family wayl’’ 

Strange as were the dream and the vision, 
Khudiram could not but feel in them a confirmation 
of his own wonderful experience at Gaya. He told 
her that he too had been blessed with some strange 
vision of late, which seemed to point to the fact of 
the birth of the Divine child in the family in the 
near future ; but it was best not to relate such 
experiences to every one. So Chandra kept quiet, 
though the fullness of her heart shone on her face 
and made her look tender and graceful, more than 
ever before j and it soon transpired that she was 
really in the way to maternity even at that ad- 
vanced age of forty-five. 

Days and even months passed in cheerful 
performance of duties with a perfect resignation to 
the Lord, and at last the time arrived when Chandra 
would soon be blessed with the birth of one, whose 
coming into the world was heralded to her by such 
strange visions and experiences. She felt happy and 
withal anxious for the future turn of events. For, 
who can ever feel certain about things which are 
beyond the farthest limits of reason ? 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


78 


It was on the morning of the sixth day of the 
month oi Falgun, corresponding to the 17th day of 
the English calendar month of February, 1836 A.D. 
— the beginning of spring-tide in Bengal, when all 
nature was revelling in the fresh waves of life and 
energy that had newly come upon it, that Chandra 
felt as if she could no longer perform her daily duties 
in the worship-room and the kitchen. She grew 
anxious for there was none to take her place in their 
performance on the day, and she expressed her 
fear to her husband. But Khudiram assured her 
that it could not be so, that howsoever ill she might 
feel, the Divine child would never enter the world 
by creating a disturbance in the services of the 
Deity. And strangely enough, Chandra felt herself 
stronger than ever from that very moment, and 
attended to all her duties throughout the day* 
Nevertheless, everything was kept in readiness for 
the advent of the child, and Dhani was requested to 
sleep with her during the night. 

All went on well until past midnight, and in 
that auspicious mystic hour when it was giving 
place slowly to the awakening of a new day, 
Chandra felt sure that the time had come, and 
removed herself with the help of her companion to 
the hut in which she had her oven for boiling 
paddy and the husking machine. For, besides the 



74 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


two rooms in the cottage which served as bed-rooms 
to Khudiram and Ramkumar, there was not a single 
place in it which could be used for her lying-in* 
Slowly as the eastern horizon was becoming aglowed 
with crimson in spite of the darkness that was still 
brooding over the earth below, she gave birth to 
the child whose advent was awaited with so much 
solicitous tenderness and anxiety by her. Having 
helped the mother, when Dhani came to look for 
the new-born babe she was startled to find that the 
child had slipped gradually away into the cool oven 
and was lying there besmeared with its ashes ! The 
sacred sound of the conch-shell then announced to 
the world the advent of the child, and the ladies of 
the rich Laha family who had been great friends to 
Chandra and who had come there on hearing that 
she was unwell, found to their astonishment that 
*the baby looked almost as big as a child of six 
months!’ 

The necessary rites were performed then on 
the sixth day of the birth of the child ; and the 
ceremony of taking the babe out of the room to 
look, for the first time, at the moon and the wide 
world, took place when it was about three weeks* 
old. Then after propitiating the gods, the child 
was given the name of Gadadhara (the Wielder of 
the Club), in memory of the strange dream that came 



THE GREAT MASTER. 75 

to its father while he was at Gaya to worship the 
footprints of Gadadhara or Vishnu. 

The astrologers were called in next to read the 
pre-natal influences that would help or hinder to 
shape the life of the babe in the world, and they 
prophesied great things after necessary calculations 
about its future life. They said that the child 
would not only have a strong religious consciousness 
to liberate himself from the bonds of M ay a, but 
would discover a new path to liberation for the good 
of the many and would pass his days in a temple 
surrounded by many seekers after religion and would 
be looked upon by men as the Deity-incarnate. He 
would thus be a strong spiritual light to illumine 
the minds of men and would help to establish the 
religious consciousness which had grown dim in the 
world. 

. Next, the ceremony of giving the first diet of 
boiled rice, the food which the child would have to 
take for nourishment as long as he would be in this 
life, took place when he was six months’ old. 
Khudiram was able with the help of his rich 
Zamindar friend Dharmadas Laha, to feed not only 
the gentry of the village but also a great number of 
poor people who came to his doors on the occasion. 
And the child grew in loveliness as days passed on 
in such a way as to hold in fascination all the ladies 



76 


SRI RAMAKRTSHNA, 


of the neighbourhood, who would henceforth create 
an opportunity to visit Chandra every day a^: some 
hour or other, simply for the pleasure of taking her 
beautiful baby into their arms for a while, and they 
said that the little Gadadhar became extremely 
naughty as he grew in years. 



CHAPTER VL 


i few words on the Unique Experiences of 
Gadadhara’s Parents. 

We have recorded the fact of some unique 
experiences occurring in the lives of Khudiram and 
his wife before the birth of Gadadhara. There are 
some more of the kind to relate to the reader before 
we proceed to express our humble opinion on them. 
The simple-minded rural people of the village and 
Khudiram's own relations, whom we found still 
living when we first visited Kamarpukur in 1887 , 
soon after the passing away of Sri Ramakrishna, had 
narrated them to us. The words of such people would 
not satisfy, perhaps, the modern idea of competent 
evidence, but the fact that they had no axe of their 
own to grind by relating such stories, and that they 
had very little idea then of the unique greatness of 
the Master, even from hearsay, go a great length to 
convince the unbiassed mind that those facts should 
have our careful consideration. Moreover, we should 
always remember that the qualitative value of what 



78 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


we call competent evidence, would always vary 
according to the predisposition of the mind that 
goes to test it, and that wherein the mind sets 
against itself not to accept anything beyond the most 
ordinary of human experiences, is as much a hind- 
rance to arriving at truth, as the mind that always 
holds itself ready to receive anything and everything 
and is marked down with the designation*credulous.* 

Besides the descendants of Khudiram’s own 
children, we had the good fortune of meeting the 
sons and a daughter of Dharmadas Laha, the 
survivors of the family of the Pynes, who had seen 
better days and were greatfriends of the Chatterjees, 
and also the members', both male and female, of 
various other families who were connected more or 
less intimately with the Chatterjee family during 
the birth and childhood of Gadadhara. They gave 
their evidences in support of the unique experiences 
independently and without any selfish motive 
whatsoever. What could she, for instance, have 
expected of us when Prasanna, the widowed 
daughter of Dharmadas Laha, the rich Zamindar 
friend of Khudirara— whom we had the good 
fortune to meet several times, related to us, such 
facts as the following 

“ Chandra was looked upon by me and my 
companions as a queer woman and as one perfectly 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


7 9 

unacquainted with the ways of the world, for 
telling U3 all her extraordinary visions and ex- 
periences. She not only saw gods and goddesses and 
held conversations with them, but used to smell 
sometimes exquisite fragrance of fld|^ers and incense 
where there was none, and heard frequently the 
tinklings of a child’s anklet about her while she 
was deeply engaged in her household duties, 
before the birth of Gadadhara. 

“ She used to have such strange experiences at 
times, even after the child was born. Well do we 
remember the row that she made one day by calling 
us all and her husband too because as she said, she 
found the child so heavy that she could not manage 
to lift it to her arms with her utmost effort ! And 
still, on another day she entreated her husband and 
every one whom she knew to call in the assistance 
of an able exorcist, for she saw her sleeping child, 
who was seven months old at the time, transformed 
into a big man for a while ! She fancied that ghosts 
were playing such tricks with her baby in this 
manner and feared they might finally take it away 
from her. We, of course, always laughed at her for 
her such wild fancies and fears.” 

When asked if she knew anything of Chandra’s 
vision before the Siva-temple, she said, “ Don’t I ? 
and didn’t I warn her solemnly not to repeat that 



80 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


and the dream in which she fancied herself to be 
in another’s arms, for the wicked might go to the 
length of imputing a bad character to her ? 
But still she would go on repeating them sometimes 
before her friends— such a self-forgetful, confiding 
and unsuspecting nature had Chandra 1” 

The late learned Professor Max Muller in his 
little book entitled “Sri Ramakrishna, His Life and 
Teachings,” in dealing with these unique experi- 
ences in the life of Gadadhara*s parents, has discuss- 
ed at length, on the fact of the growth round a 
nucleus of ordinary facts, of accretions by what he 
calls “the dialogic process”. He has gone to the 
length of suggesting that such accretions must have 
taken place around Chandra’s vision before the 
Siva-temple and transformed it gradually into its 
present form, making it appear very much like the 
fact of the immaculate conception of the Blessed 
Virgin, the mother of Jesus the Christ. 

The only reason he advanced for such a sugges- 
tion, is the fact that the disciples of Sri Rama- 
krishna were almost all of them well versed in 
English and acquainted with the Christian idea 
of the immaculate conception ; that in their sub- 
conscious attempt to look up to the greatness of 
their Guru or spiritual guide in every respect, they 
had gone on transforming unawares words and 



THE GREAT MASTER, 


B1 


phrases in their narrative of the vision little by 
little, while they repeated it amongst themselves or 
for the enlightenment of the new proselytes. And 
the changes that appeared at first to be insignifi- 
cant and were overlooked and tacitly accepted, 
assumed perceptible proportions in a short time, 
though they themselves were perfectly innocent in 
their gradual introduction and acceptance of them. 
With due deference to the learned Professor, 
we must say that he has missed or overlooked a 
strong point against his statement of the case. For, 
if it be true that the disciples of Sri Ramakrishna 
were gathered from the class of men who had re- 
ceived a tolerably good western education, then it 
goes without saying that they had acquired at the 
same time, the western habit of careful statement 
of facts ; and for the reason of that they would 
have been the persons least likely to lay them- 
•selves open to “the dialogic process. “ The fact 
is that they heard of the vision before the Siva 
temple first from the lips of the Master while he 
spoke to them about his mother and her strange 
visions from time to time, and then had it corro- 
borated by such persons at Kamarpukur who 
were most likely to know of it. Again as the Hindu 
scriptures, the Puranas in general, are full of in- 
stances of different degrees of immaculate conception 
6 



82 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


we do not see the force of the argument that the 
disciples of Sri Ramakrishna had to go to the 
Christian Purana, the Holy Bible, to get'^their idea 
of it. 

A close examination of the Hindu scriptures 
will reveal to us the fact that while they acknow- 
■ ledged universally the occurrence of extraordinary 
experiences in the lives of the parents of great reli- 
gious geniuses who were regarded in later times as 
incarnations of Isvara or the Ruler of the Universe, 
they did not hold it necessary that their birth in 
each case should take place through supernatural 
process. The parents of Rama, of Krishna,, of 
Buddha and of all the other Incarnations had all 
had unique experiences, more or less, before and 
after the birth of their noble sons, and yet the 
Puranas have not recorded the fact that their 
mothers had borne them through such a process. 
Again the fact of immaculate conception has been 
explicitly recorded by them in certain cases of indi- 
viduals who were not as great. As an instance of 
the latter kind we may point out to the reader the 
birth of Kama, the noble hero of the Mahabharata. 
It is a well-known fact that Kunti the mother of 
the hero, gave birth to this child of hers through 
' the touch of the Sun-god and yet retained her 
virginHy, and getting married afterwards became 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


83 


the mother of the five Pandava brothers. Consider- 
ing the facts stated above, the conclusion seems to 
us to be inevitable that the Hindu scriptures rather 
point to the fact that the extraordinary experiences 
that come in the lives of the parents of Incarnations, 
do not go against the possibility of natural process 
through which human births take place. 

The conclusion at which we have arrived above 
by our examination of Hindu scriptures, is in har- 
mony with the mandates of reason and the dis- 
coveries of modern science besides. For the theory 
of heredity which supports the fact of noble parents 
having noble progeny, if acknowledged to be true, 
will drive us to conclude that the minds of the 
parents of a Krishna, a Buddha and a Jesus, must 
have lived and moved in much higher planes than 
those of ordinary humanity. And does not the rise 
of the mind to higher planes of thought and unsel- 
fishness enable us to get glimpses of things which 
the ordinary sense-bound mind can never have ? 
Thus the theory of heredity leads us to acknow- 
ledge the occurrence of the unique experiences in 
the lives of the parents of the Incarnations as 
quite probable# 

The Hindus, who believe in transmigration, 
however, do not go to the theory of heredity to 
find the final solution to the problem of what causes 



8^ SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 

men to be born with different degrees of power- 
physical, mental, moral and even ^spiritual. 
Heredity according to them, can find the answer 
only to the material side of it, but not to its 
spiritual counterpart. For, it has nothing to say 
when the problem is pushed a step forward into the 
form,— what causes particular individuals to go to 
parents who can transmit to them particular physi** 
cal and mental capabilities ? The answer to it, they 
hold, can only be found in the theory of the indivi- 
dual Karma, which makes one fit to receive a parti- 
cular kind of heredity. 

But on going to examine the lives of the great 
religious geniuses, the Hindu mind came face to 
face with facts, whichxould not be explained by 
this theory of heredity and individual Karma even. 
For Karma, which is only a finer form of the theory 
of cause and effect, can be said to exist only in cases 
where the effects produced are of the nature of their 
causes. For the effect is the cause transformed 
and, therefore, there cannot be anything in it that 
is not in the cause itself. But the lives of the 
Incarnations appear on examination, to be so dissi- 
milar in nature to those of their parents who have 
to supply the causal link of heredity, both in regard 
to the quality and the quantity of power expressed 
in them, that it is not possible to regard them 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


85 


as related to each other in the form of cause and 
effect. For where do we find even a thousandth 
part of the purity, unselfishness, love for their fellow 
beings and spirituality that a Krishna, a Buddha 
and a Jesus manifested, in the lives of their respec- 
tive parents? There were hundreds of Kshatriya 
chieftains and thousands of carpenters living almost 
the same kind of life at the time, as did Vasu- 
deva, Suddhodana and Joseph, the fathers of 
Krishna, Buddha and Jesus respectively. There- 
fore, nothing can be more unreasonable than to 
suppose that the lives of the Incarnations are 
but the necessary effects of such ordinary lives. 
And then again, if it be said by those others who 
believe in Karma that the lives of the parents supply 
only the material conditions through which Karma 
operates to bring about effects in the present lives of 
Incarnations commensurate with causes in their 
previous lives, who will explain how even after the 
destruction in their present lives of the whole 
Karmic chain of cause and effect with the bondage 
of Maya, the fact of constantly doing good to 
humanity remains as a residuum, as it were, defying 
explanation by any theory of causation ? This resi- 
duum, unaffected by the law of Karma and distinct- 
ly beyond the plane of its operation, forms the real 
purpose of these divine lives and consequently 



86 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


the real explanation of their birth. The Hindu 
scriptures, therefore, have come to the conclu- 
sion that such giant personalities could not have 
come to the world through the ordinary pro- 
cess of Karma or causation, even when combined 
with the operation of heredity, and that they in 
fact, were beyond all bondage of Karma and must 
have appeared in the world out of their own free 
choice to do good to humanity. Then as time 
went on, the belief in the existence of an omnipot- 
ent, omniscient, independent and immanent as well 
as a personal ruler of the creation, made people to 
look upon the Incarnations as but different manifes- 
tations of that self-same Being, Who in His infinite 
grace takes birth from time to time among men by 
accepting human limitations, to enlighten and 
liberate them from the bondages of life. 

Such in short is the history of the development 
of the theory of Incarnation as we find it in the 
present day, in the whole range of Hindu philo- 
sophy. It remains for us to see now, whether this 
theory is compatible or not with the subject of the 
present discourse, namely, the birth of the Incarna- 
tions through the ordinary process and the fact of 
their parents having unique experiences at the time 
of their appearance. It is evident from what has 
been stated above that the Hindu scriptures deny 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


87 - 


the bondage of Karma lo the Incarnations them- 
selves butjiot to their parents. Therefore everything, 
besides the event of giving birth to such powerful 
personages, in the lives of the latter, must occur 
not through any kind of supernatural process but 
as results of their previous Karma or in other 
words, through the operation of the ordinary law 
of cause and effect. But the latter event would 
take place in their lives only through the grace of 
the Lord. Now the question is, does that grace 
presuppose any standard of fitness in its recipients? 
The answer given to it has always been in the 
negative, if we do not bring into account the one 
universal condition common to all religious aspirants 
that there should be an intense struggle in their 
minds to proceed Godward. 

The explanation of grace has thus been placed 
beyond the limits of human reason, for it depends en- 
tirely on the Supreme Will which is above all condi- 
tions of causation. But the effects of it have been 
recorded; and it has been found out that in every case 
it uplifted the mind of its recipient to higher planes 
of thought and unselfishness, and enabled it to have 
glimpses of things transcending the sensuous plane. 
Thus the occurrence of extraordinary experiences 
in the lives of the parents of the Incarnations is 
not only supported but confirmed by the theory. 



88 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


Again, when we consider the fact that the birth 
of the Incarnations through compassion is altogether 
a free act of condescension on the part of the Deity, 
for raising and enlightening the human kind, it is not 
possible for us to set a limit to the depth of human 
level to which He would come down for the 
purpose. Therefore the argument that sets up 
immaculate conception as necessary to His appea- 
rance in the human plane, loses its force com- 
pletely. The Hindu scriptures on the other hand 
assert that when the Deity condescends to take His 
birth among men, He assumes the frailties and 
weaknesses common to the human kind, and by 
transcending those by intense struggle sets up an 
ideal before men that they might also follow in order 
to liberate themselves from such bondages. It is 
evident therefore, that to ascribe any kind of 
super-natural power to the Incarnations which they 
do not earn here as a result of their intense struggle 
to conquer the flesh and the frailties of the mind 
— or to make them appear in the human plane with 
such singular advantageous conditions as the 
ordinary run of humanity can never have, would 
be, according to the Hindu scriptures, an attempt 
to baffle the very purpose for which the Deity 
.undergoes Incarnations, And does not the theory 
of immaculate conception in its attempt to ward 



THE GREAT MASTER. 8^ 

off the touch of carnality from the birth of the 
Incarnations, suggest at the same time the circum- 
stance of their starting in this life with such un- 
equal advantages as regards purity and power? The 
Hindus, therefore, can understand the greatness of a 
Jesus depending entirely on the will of the Father 
and suffering crucifixion at the hands of the 
Pharisees and the Sadducees, while he could have 
called in legions of angels to help him to bafHe their 
machinations— but cannot very well do so when his 
advent into the world is described to have taken 
place under conditions which equipped him with 
advantages which are not granted to even a single 
individual of the human kind. 

The reader must not imagine however, from 
what has been stated above as the outlook of the 
Hindu scriptures on the theory of God-incarnations, 
that there is no record of cases in them of mani- 
festations of supernatural powers or of extraordinary 
conditions of birth in regard to them. The miracles 
stated to have been performed by Sri Krishna from 
almost the very day of his birth, the conception of 
the widowed lady who gave birth to Sankara, by 
the powerful touch of the God Siva, and various 
other instances of the kind, would have gone against 
us, had we attempted to do so. Our point of 
contention in the above discourse has been to 



VU SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 

impress on the reader the fact that the Hindu scrip- 
tures, while they acknowledge the occurrence of 
extraordinary cases of birth and of manifesta- 
tions of super-human power in several of the 
Incarnations, do not hold them to be inevitably 
necessary in the formation of their lives; that they 
have recorded certain cases as God-incarnations in 
spite of there being no display in them of such 
extraordinary births and powers, and that they 
seem to support the fact that unique experiences 
had entered and would enter into the lives of the 
parents of all the Incarnations even though they had 
taken or would take their birth in this world in the 
common human way. The humble opinion we 
have arrived at, therefore, by our examination of 
the Hindu scriptures on the subject, is that the 
theory which regards super-human births to be 
necessary to God-incarnations, must have been a later 
growth ; and that the record of the strange experi- 
ences that came invariably to their parents 
before and after their birth, and a great deal of 
which can be explained to have occurred in the 
natural way with the help of the Yoga philosophy 
of the Hindus— must have contributed much to 
the growth of the same in the hands of the ignorant 
and the credulous. 



CHAPTER VII. 

The Early Days of Gadadhar. 

It is wonderful always to watch the gradual 
unfoldment of a child’s mind as it comes into contact 
with the outside world, day after day. And, in case 
where the object of that study is no ordinary but a 
highly precocious one, as the mind of our little 
Gadadhar, the sentiment of wonder verges often to 
that of rapturous awe as before a miracle. The 
child observes, imitates, thinks and struggles to 
express itself as much as we do, only perhaps with 
this difference that it does all these things mechani- 
cally ; or, in other words, it is guided and led into 
them by the impulse of the habit that has grown 
upon it all through the long series of its past Incarna- 
tions. That goes to explain again, how every child- 
mind looks at things and events of life from an 
angle of vision peculiarly its own; since the very 
day of its entrance into its present Incarnation, 
every child begins to observe the outside world, takes 
suggestions from its various phases according to its 



92 


SRI ramakrishna, 


capacity, and ultimately forms and expresses its own 
conclusions about them, in a manner quite different 
from the rest of the world. 

The parents of Gadadhar, who had to watch 
over the growth of undoubtedly one of the most 
precocious child-minds of the age, must have noted 
early with ever-increasing wonder how it used to 
form its likes and dislikes of persons and things in 
a manner peculiarly its own, how on many an occa- 
sion it used to enquire about them in a way that 
pointed most certainly to the depth into which it 
entered within itself in its cogitations about them, 
and how at times it would flash forth its own views 
and conclusions about them most unexpectedly, like 
an elderly man. They had found out moreover, on 
more than one occasion, that their little Gadadhar 
would resist most stubbornly if an attempt were 
made to make him accept ways or do things through 
fear of punishment, while otherwise he would be 
quite amenable to reason and love. Thus with 
the passing of days, they had the pleasure to find 
that the child of their old age was growing into a 
healthy little boy whose unique ways of looking at 
persons and things, combined with its habits of 
fearlessness, truthfulness, and other virtues promised 
for him a great future. And did not the wonderful 
visions they had of him before and after he was 



THE GREAT MASTER, 


93 


born point to that ? Thus with joy and trepidation 
they performed the ceremony of initiating the boy 
in the three R’s, as soon as he reached his fifth year 
and also invoked upon him the blessings of the 
Goddess of learning and fine arts, the divine 
Mother Sarasvati. From that day, the little 
Gadadhar was sent daily to ih.Q pathasala (lit. reading 
room) or the neighbouring village school, which 
used to have its sittings in the spacious Natmandapa 
or the hall for musical and theatrical performances 
on festive occasions,, of the Laha family, the Zemin- 
dar or the landlord of the village. 

From what we have gathered from the various 
sources of the early days of Gadadhar’s life, we have 
been struck with the wonderful qualities of the 
heart that he manifested from the very beginning. 
All the accounts of these days of his life are unani- 
mous on the point that he used to attract everyone 
towards him by his winning ways. The elderly 
ladies of the neighbourhood used to love and r^ard 
him as one of their own children, the boys and girls 
of his own age would always be led by him in their 
sports and pastimes, and even grown-up people 
would feel so much attracted after meeting him once, 
that they would invite him into their own families 
and send him presents as token of their love, every 
now and then. As an instance of the same, we can 



94 


SRI RAMAKRISHNAj 


relate the visit of our little Gadadhar to a well-to- 
do family at Bhursubo, a village situated about a 
mile to the north of Kamarpukur. The headman of 
the family was perhaps the richest landlord within 
many miles around and had earned a great repu- 
tation for himself on account of his liberality and 
large-heartedness. It is said even to this day, how 
on more than one occasion he invited to his place 
a hundred thousand men of the Brahmin class 
alone from many a mile around, and made elaborate 
arrangements for feeding and providing them 
each with suitable presents! The poor and the lowly 
always found his hospitable doors open to give them 
a hearty welcome, and his kind heart and 
liberal hand ever ready to help them on every emer- 
gency. The big tanks that he excavated in and 
about his village, such as, the *elephant-tank,’ the 
‘pleasure- tank,’ etc., for the benefit of the people, 
the large mango-groves that he planted and dedicat- 
ed to the use of his poor neighbours, the temples 
that he erected in the neighbourhood, and various 
other things that still bear the stamp of his name- 
all go to prove that he did not bear the title of Raja 
in vain. 

Now it so happened, that Raja Manick Chandra 
Banerjee knew Khudiram, the father of our little 
Gadadhar, for a long time and valued highly the 



THE GREAT MASTER, 


95 


friendship of that poor but proud and austere 
Brahmin who had preferred abject poverty to 
falsehood'and the creature-comforts of life, and had 
borne it so bravely in silence and submission without 
demeaning himself by asking favours from his rich 
but lukewarm friends. He watched his career with 
great interest, invited him frequently to his own 
place, was never officious to come forward with his 
help, having regard for his sensitive disposition, and 
sought his disinterested advice on many an impor- 
tant occasion of his own life. Thus the two men 
of rare and genuine merit, who were so wide apart 
from each other as regards status which wealth 
created for them in society, met frequently on equal 
terms and esteemed and respected each other 
on account of 'the manly qualities they both 
possessed. And thus Khudirara who always felt 
himself free in company with Raja Manick, took 
his little boy Gadadhar wdth him on one of such 
visits, thinking if would please his friend to see the 
little one, with whom he had been blessed so late 
in life, Now, little Gadadhar behaved himself in 
such a way on the occasion that he became quite a 
favourite with the Raja and all his household since 
that day ; and they henceforth used to take him 
over to Bhursubo regularly and loaded him with 
valuable presents on his return. It is said that 



‘96 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


Ramjaya, the brother of the Raja, once remarked 
to Khudiram : ** Brother, your Gadadhar is not an 
ordinary child ; the divinity within shine's so clear 
through his little body and mind that he makes us 
feel as if we are before the Divine-child Gopala, we 
worship 1” And strange as it may appear, our little 
Gadadhar who was less than five years old at the 
time, never felt nervous to go and visit the family 
of the Raja, all alone, or sometimes with a servant 
whom he did not know before. 

So, our little Gadadhar knew no fears even 
from his earliest days, and not only was he not 
afraid of approaching strangers, but with his radiant 
smile, his bright answers to questions and preco- 
cious remarks, and above all, his loving and endear- 
ing ways, would make them feel as if he were 
of their own kith and kin. It is said that he 
was fearless in other ways also, and would always 
feel undaunted where others of his own age became 
invariably nervous and frightened. As an instance 
of the kind, we shall narrate here a little incident 
that happened in the family about this time. We 
have told the readers already, how all the relatives 
of Khudiram had the psychic temperament. His 
wife Chandra, his son Ramkumar, his daughter 
Katyayani, and even his sister Rarasila who used 
to visit the family from time to time, had all more 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


97 


or less the temperament. Of those, the last one, 
Ramsila, would lose herself so completely in her 
meditations of the goddess Sitala, as to feel herself 
identified with the goddess on some days and would 
speak and behave on such occasions, as one pos- 
sessed by that Higher Being. It is said that she 
used to look quite different from her ordinary self 
at these times and always excited the feeling of 
awe and reverence and fear and wonder in the heart 
of every one who saw her, with her predictions 
and blessings and powers of healing diseases. The 
family would treat her on such occasions as the 
goddess herself and would listen and obey her 
commands implicitly. Now, Gadadhar, who was 
very fond of his aunt, had the first opportunity of 
seeing her in one of these strange moods when he 
w^as less than five years old. It is said, that he 
became much astonished at first to find her behaving 
so differently, but instead of getting frightened, 
remained near and watched her carefully and at 
last whispered to his mother : ** It would be such a 
fun if the one, who possesses my aunt now, would 
come upon me, for then I shall be able to see things 
as she has been seeing !’* 

Even from this time Gadadhar showed great 
aptitude for imitating perfectly the voice and man- 
ners of others in fun and proved to his parents that 



98 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


he possessed dramatic powers and a great sense of 
humour. Again, his father w^s greatly astonished 
to find that he possessed such a wonderful and 
tenacious memory as to be able to repeat everything 
that he had been once told and to retain it in his 
mind for ever. It was the custom in Hindu families 
to make little boys learn the genealogical tables 
of their forefathers and little verses in Sanskrit, in 
salutation to various gods and goddesses. They were 
told, besides, stories from the two great national epics, 
the Ramayma and the Mahahharata even before 
they were formally initiated into the mysteries of 
the three R’s. And little Gadadhar had not only 
learnt these things from his father’s lips, but could 
repeat besides, verbatim, some portions of the Ben- 
gali version of the epics by simply hearing his 
father reading them, even before he learned the 
alphabets. And we can well imagine how eagerly 
he looked forward to the time when he would be 
able to read the sacred epics himself like the rest 
of the family. He mastered the alphabet quickly 
and made such strides after joining the school that 
in less than a year he was Me to read the Bengali 
versions of them as well as all the other Bengali 
books that he could lay his hands on. Indeed from 
that time forward he dived deep daily, in those 
sacred books, the fountain-head of every Indian 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


99 


inspiration of later times, and the poet in him 
pondered and brooded over the noble characters and 
their doings in such a way as to make of them 
living and moving personalities around him. His 
powerful imagination would at times Spread its golden 
wings over immense gaps of time and space and carry 
him over to the doors of the palaces of Ayodhya or 
Hastinapur to witness the magnanimous deeds 
of Rama, his faithful Sita and his devoted brother 
Lakshmana, or the noble doings of the five Pandava 
brothers. Thus passed the days of our little Gada- 
dhar after he had joined the school, with absorbing 
interest in the sacred books and the characters 
contained therein and they helped to educate and 
mould his young head and heart rapidly, and in 
accord with the old Indian ideals, even from this 
time. 

The folklore of the villages around had a deep 
attraction for! our little Gadadhar, besides the 
great epics. Bengal had always been great for 
poetical culture and its poetry had flowed mainly 
through the two distinct sacred channels of the 
cult of the worship of the Divine motherhood and 
that of the worship of Krishna and his beloved 
Eadha. The miraculous doings and stories of self- 
manifestation of the local deities of many villages 
also, used to attract the imagination of the poets 



100 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


and their verses and hymns were being widely 
circulated by the swarm of beggars who sang them 
to the edification of the people as they daily visited 
the doors of every family of the villages around for 
alms. Manuscripts of some of these stories and 
hymns could be found at the time and our little 
Gadadhar used to get hold of these and made copies 
of them, some of which are still to be found 
preserved in the family and in the Ramakrishna 
Math, at Belur in the district of Howrah in Bengal. 
Legends, such as those of the Divine Mother Yoga- 
dya of Kshiragram, who it is said had been brought 
over by Mahavira, the devoted Monkey-general of 
Rama after killing Mahi-Ravana, the brother of 
Ravana, the demon-king of Ceylon, and placed 
in that village since that time — of the famous 
image of Siva at Tarakeswar, a village about 
eighteen miles east of Kamarpukur — or of that of 
the big tank about ten miles from Khudiram’s 
place and known even to this day as the tank of 
Ranajit Ray, the man, who, it is said, had such 
unique devotion towards the Divine Mother that 
She appeared in the family for a time as his own 
little daughter-legends such as these, and their 
number was numerous, had great fascination for 
the mind of our little Gadadhar, His young eyes 
shed tears while he used to read them and his 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


101 


young heart felt a deep yearning for a sight of the 
Divine Moijier. And thus he passed many hours 
and days even from this time in trying to imagine 
the wonderful beauty of the Divine Mother and Her 
great compassion towards the devotees or the great 
love of the Lord Krishna towards the simple- 
hearted shepherd boys and girls in the shady and 
beautiful groves of Brindavan, 

It must not be imagined however, from what 
we have said before, that our little Gadadhar 
became so much absorbed in his study of the sacred 
epics and the folklore of his age that he took no 
interest in plays and sports as is natural to a child 
of his age. With all his high propensities and his 
precocious mind, he was entirely a child of nature 
and did instinctively the proper things. Therefore, 
as it was natural for his vigorous mind to get 
concentrated deeply on the subject of his study, so 
it was natural also for it to become the same in 
sports and pastimes which he enjoyed, and it is 
said that none of his companions excelled him in 
climbing trees, in swimming, running and in 
pursuit of games, such as, ‘hide and seek,’ ‘hadu-du- 
du,’ ‘hunsh-hunsh* etc., and none ever excelM 
him in devising new games and playing all sorts of 
boyish pranks, such as, robbing orchards, or teasing 
and fighting people who became angry with them 



102 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


on account of their noisy mirth and fun or in doing 
things which disturbed the elderly people and 
which they were forbidden to. do. Indeed, in all such 
matters, our little Gadadhar always had his 
companions. 

As an instance of the kind, we may tell the 
reader of the incident which took place one day in 
the ladies* bathing at Haldarpukur, the big tank 
close to the house of our little Gadadhar. The boys 
were having one of their ‘ripping’ times in the water 
on the day, to the great inconvenience of the ladies, 
when an elderly lady, who was muttering her prayers 
after her bath, as was the custom, became very much 
annoyed with them and told them in angry words 
to leave the place and have their sport in that 
part of the tank where men used to have their 
bath, for she said, it was not proper for boys to be 
prying about in places where the ladies had their 
bath. And when little Gadadhar asked her why 
it was not proper, she scolded him vehemently all 
the more and threatened to get him punished by 
reporting his behaviour to his parents. Little Gada- 
dhar, who did not see any impropriety in the affair, 
came thenceforth daily for a few days to the place 
and watched the ladies secretly to find out the 
reason why he was scolded. At last the matter 
reached his mother’s ears, who knowing beforehand 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


lOS 


that her boy was not amenable to threats, 
appealed to his heart and asked him whether it 
was prope\ for him to do a thing by which she 
herself as well as all of her sex felt their dignity 
greatly humiliated, namely, to watch them while 
they bathed. And little Gadadhar now understood 
the reason and never did the thing any more. 

The all-absorbing interest of Gadadhar in 
the ideal characters of the epics and his constant 
brooding and concentration on them brought about 
however, a most unlooked-for result, as soon as he 
reached his seventh year. Bengal being the richest 
rice producing province in India, the people of her 
rural villages have always fed their boys with that 
article of food. Besides the two meals of boiled 
rice during the course of the day, the boys were 
given fried rice and fried paddy, sometimes 
sweetened with molasses, at breakfast and tiffin times. 
And boys and girls' about the age of our little 
Gadadhar would often carry their simple breakfast 
in small wicker-baskets and eat them in the open, 
sitting together or walking here and there and 
chatting with one another. The cottage of Khudirara 
being on the western outskirts of the village, close to 
the paddy fields in that direction, Gadadhar would 
often eat his breakfast as he roamed about in the 
fields. As he was doing the same one summer 



SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


1 4 

morning, he noticed the rise of a thunder-cloud in 
the distant horizon. It began to spread rapidly cover- 
ing the blue expanse of heaven and looked^ ^o sombre 
in its black grandeur that the poetic sense in him 
became thoroughly roused by it. As if to complete 
the charm of the scene, just then rose a flock of 
cranes from the neighbouring fields and in their 
measured flight spread their snow-white wings as a 
relief against the deep dark sky, raising such a 
beautiful contrast that the inmost soul of the boy 
was thrilled with rapture. He watched and watched 
forgetting all about his breakfast, until at last his 
mind was so much absorbed in the contemplation of 
the beauty of the gcene that he lost all conscious- 
ness for a while of all his surroundings and even of 
his own body I A kind neighbour happening to walk 
in that direction found the boy lying in that 
condition by the road-side, with his breakfast strewn 
all around, and carried him home to his parents. 
He regained his consciousness, however, within 
a short time and when asked what ailed him at the 
time, heasserted strongly that it was no ailment what- 
soever, only that his mind getting thrilled with a deep 
sense of pleasure on looking at the beautiful sight 
became lost somehow in the same. His parents, 
however, would not believe his statement and taking 
it to be the first appearance of some serious malady 



THE GREAT MASTER, 


105 


took him to the physician’s and kept him in the 
house for a few days to give him complete rest. But 
as a second attack of the kind did not come upon 
him soon, and he looked as strong and healthy as 
ever, the seriousness of the affair gradually faded 
away from the minds of the family, and he was 
permitted ere long to go to the school and do every- 
thing else as he had been doing before. 

The seventh year, however, had in store a 
deep sorrow for our little Gadadhar. For his father 
Khudiram, whose health had been failing rapidly 
of late, died while he was on a visit to his sister’s 
place at Salempur on account of the Durgapuja 
festival, celebrated annually with great eclat by the 
family. His eldest son, Ramkumar, and his sister’s 
son, Ramchand, for whom he had always the most 
genuine affection, were by his side at the time and 
the last words that he ever uttered were a deep and 
devoted call on his tutelary Deity Raghavir, to 
whose hands he commended himself before the 
supreme moment came. Khudiram died in 1843 
A. D., when he was sixty-eight years old. 

The sensitive nature of Gadadhar was deeply 
affected by the incident of his father’s death. For, 
he had already begun to appreciate the greatness of 
his father’s character by comparing it with that of 
others in his own way even at this early age. It is 



106 


SRI ramakrishna, 


natural, therefore, that the great void created 
in his heart by the event, made him think as deeply 
as he could at the time, on the problem oi life and 
death. His fondness for frequenting solitary places 
increased and he passed many an hour- in the lonely 
fields and on the cremation-ground by the side of the 
little rivulet close to his place, (known to this day 
as the ‘Bhutir Khal’ or the canal of the departed 
spirits), and in the adjacent mango-grove planted 
by the Raja Manick, He felt himself drawn besides 
more than ever to the study of religious litera- 
ture, for therein, he found the teaching about the 
transitory nature of human life, a truth which had 
come home to him with such force quite recently. 
And we can well imagine how he used to spend 
many hours of the day in studying them by himself 
or in company wdth his mother to soothe her aching 
heart — for, child as he still was, he could yet find 
that life had lost all its former sweetness for his 
dear mother on account of the sad event. 

Strange as it may appear to us, the boy came 
to have at this time a great fascination for the life 
of those who had renounced the world. He began 
to frequent the Dharpiasala or the shelter erected 
for the use of the pilgrims and poor wayfarers, 
by the ^amindar of the village, and cultivate the 
acquaintance of the itinerant monks who used to 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


107 


rest here for a few days on their way to and from 
pilgrimage of Puri or Jagannath. It so happened 
that a band of such monks stopped here for some 
weeks at the time, on account of the illness of some of 
their members, and Gadadhar found his opportunity.. 
He tried to gain their hearts by doing little things 
for them, and bringing them presents of some articles 
of food at times from his own family. The Sadhus,. 
greatly pleased with the kindness and devotion of 
the boy, told him many a story of their travels in 
return, and taught him the ways of meditation and 
also how to lead the higher life sanctioned by 
the Scriptures. The child became gradually so fond 
of them that he began to spend all his leisure hours 
in their company, watching them as they performed 
their daily worship or cooked their simple meal to 
offer to the Deity or sat in meditation before the 
sacred fire at nightfall, or chanted hymns in praise 
of the Lord. The story runs in the family that his 
fondness for them increased so much that he dressed 
himself one day like them and came to his mother 
to show her how well he looked in that garb. The 
mother pleased at first with this strange fancy 
of her boy, grew anxious afterwards on his 
account. For was not the belief current in the 
village, that the wandering monks often swelled 
their ranks by enticing away youths and sometimes 



108 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


boys also of his age ? Little Gadadhar tried to 
persuade her to give up such ideas by teljing her 
that the Sadhus were god-fearing holy men and 
could never do such mean things. But the mother’s 
heart of Chandra knew no rest from that day until 
the time came when the Sadhus left the village for 
good after blessing her boy. 

The monotonous round of life in the village 
used to be broken many a time during the year 
by religious festivals, celebrating the anniversaries 
of various village-gods. In March, for instance, 
there was the celebration of the anniversary of 
Shivaf known as the Charaka-Puja ; in May or 
June, the chanting of the name of Hart or Vishnu 
continually for three successive days and nights, 
—called the Chabbisha Prahara ; in July, there 
was the car-festival — also of Vishnu, Then there 
were days for worshipping the Qo^6&ssManasa^ the 
GodDharma, and also Lakshmi, the goddess of 
wealth, by placing her on a heap of newly grown 
paddy, fresh from the fields at about the hour of 
dusk, — ^for did not the paddy-fields form the prin- 
cipal source of income to the people of the place ? 
Besides, there was the national religious festival of 
India celebrated with special eclat everywhere in 
Bengal, namely, the worship of the Divine Mother 
Durga. Thus the village appeared brisk and cheerful 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


109 


on many a little occasion. Each one of those 
celebrations had its own speciality, with certain 
characteastics again which were common to them all 
Athletics and staff-playing, for instance, formed an 
invariable part of the Shi’oa-itsihdXoiChara'kaFujai 
as the special feature ; the observance of a tender 
regard for all living creatures formed part of every 
Fishnu-iestiYol; although the performance of religious 
dramas in the open and without the help of a stage 
and its paraphernalia — called the y air as — was held 
alike in both kinds of festivities. The sensitive^ 
devotional nature of Gadadhar felt a special thrill 
during all those festive occasions, but the feature 
in them all which delighted him the most was 
the musical performances or yatras. His study 
of the religious literature gave him a special 
aptitude to understand them and the poet and 
musician in him found himself transported for the 
time into the dreamland of unspeakable beauty, 
harmony and ecstasy. A proper recognition of the 
bright and the dark passions that controlled human 
life and its fitful events, thus came to Gadadhar 
early in life through the help of these musical 
performances, but his intense imagination combined 
with his constant brooding over such things brought 
forth an unforeseen development in his mind of 
which we shall speak presently. 



110 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


Little over a mile to the north of Kamarpukur, 
there stands the little sanctuary of the Goddess 
Vishalakshii (literally, one with large ey^s) in the 
village of Anur, The name of the Goddess has been 
held in deep veneration in the villages around from 
very old times. And the simple village folks flocked 
to her for help, to get themselves free from incura- 
ble diseases, as well as for the fulfilment of their 
heart’s desire in many little things. The number of 
women votaries, of course, had always been greater 
than that of men, and as these villages of rural 
Bengal had never been subjected to the strict rules 
of Purdaht women of every rank could be seen to tra- 
vel alone or in company with others of their sex, to 
the place from a distance of even ten miles or more. 

Gadadhar who was eight years old by this 
time, had one day joined such a party of worshippers, 
going to visit the sanctuary. The party was made 
up mostly of ladies whom he knew ; and Prasanna, 
the widowed daughter of the Zemindar of 
Kamarpukur, who was very fond of him, was also one 
of it. So the boy felt quite at home and entertained 
them with songs of the Divine Mother and with 
reciting stories from the Puranaa at their request. 
Thus each one of the little party felt a great fervour 
of , religious enthusiasm as they wended their way 
cheerfully through the lonely fields. 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


Ill 


But an unexpected turn of events filled their 
hearts with fear and anxiety as they neared 
their destination. For Gadadhar suddenly lost 
ail outward consciousness and fell into a deep 
trance. The ladies, who had never experienced 
such a thing before, took his case for a sunstroke, 
and some ran to the neighbouring pond for water 
and others began to fan him after placing him 
under the cool shade of a tree. But they were all 
surprised to find that the boy^s face was radiant 
with a heavenly smile, and the calm dignity and 
self-possession of it inspired awe in their simple 
hearts! Then the suggestion came from one amongst 
them, might it not be that the Divine Mother 
whom they were going to worship, had deigned to 
manifest herself in Her inscrutable ways, through 
the pure body and mind of Gadadhar to bless them 
all? Else why did the boy instead of looking 
miserable seem thus to be full of ecstasy, . 
appearing quite like one possessed by a supernatural 
being ? 

Thoughts like these, though they might be 
held up to ridicule by the iconoclastic agnosticism 
of the present day, appeared like self-evident truths 
to the modest and faithful hearts of the country- 
women. They sat round the boy and began to 
chant the name of the Mother with deep devotion. 



112 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


And before they had proceeded long in this way, 
Gadadhar came to his ordinary senses again. The 
delighted ladies then asked the boy whaf had made 
him so strange, he replied that he hardly knew 
anything, but it seemed to him as if his mind 
suddenly getting concentrated on the thought 
of the beauty of the Divine Mother, while he 
was chanting Her name, lost all its outer bearings, 
and its movements became finally confined to an 
indescribable vision of beauty and delight. And 
strange as it may appear to us, Gadadhar did not 
feel any physical weakness after the experience 
and was able to go to the sanctuary, and returned 
home with the ladies as if nothing had happened 1 
And now came the time when Gadadhar must 
undergo the ceremony necessary to put on the 
sacred thread, so that he might be initiated into 
the study of the Vedas as far as possible, and above 
all that he might worship and realise the Supreme 
Being in himself and the universe, by entering into 
the spirit of the central mystery contained in them. 
The occasion is looked upon among the Hindus 
as a memorable one from time immemorial ; for 
has not the noviciate to bind himself on that 
day to give up forever the life in the flesh and 
live for purity, light and truth alone in accor- 
dance with the principles laid down in the 



THE GREAT MASTER, 


113 


Vedas? And has he not to promise to be truth- 
ful in thought, word and deed, abstemious in his 
habits, ob^edient and faithful to his teacher and to 
live the life of plain living and high thinking from 
that day ? Thus it is looked upon as the occasion 
in which the boy has to undergo a new birth 
in a higher plane of existence, and so the term 
Dvija or the twice-born is applied to the class who 
receive the initiation. And as a part of it, is 
also prevalent the custom that an elderly woman 
of equal rank to the mother of the boy should have 
the privilege of looking after his simple wants from 
the day of his entrance into the higher life by 
pouring the first dole of rice as alms into his newly- 
acquired ‘begging-bowl.’^ 

Now the daughter of the blacksmith, Dhani, 
who had long been a great friend of the family and 
who indeed had been the nurse of Gadadhar since 
the day he was born, when she heard that her sweet 
little protege was going to have the sacred thread of 
the twice-born, yearned in her heart to have the pri- 
vilege of giving him the first dole of alms on the 
occasion. She knew it well that she would not be 
supported in this by the custom of the family ; yet 
fondly as she loved the boy, she could not give up 
the idea and her heart became heavy with grief, 

•Lit, BeggiDg sack. 




114 


SRT RAMAKRISHNA, 


The quick perception of Gadadhar who was no less 
fond of this poor woman, soon found out the cause 
of her sorrow and he determined to make her happy 
by fulfilling her desire. The story runs in the family 
how in spite of stern protests from his elders he re- 
mained so firm in his purpose that they had 
ultimately to change their mind and allow poor 
Dhani to give him the first dole of alms on the 
occasion, and that this occurred while the boy was 
only nine years old. 

Gadadhar was now allowed the privilege of 
worshipping and serving the family deity Raghuvira 
and he did so with great eagerness. For he 
had long been familiar with the accounts of the 
wonderful way in which his father found the image 
in a dream, of how the family had been blessed 
since in every way, and how his parents had 
often had the good fortune to be favoured with 
super-sensuous visions and perceptions through 
serving the God. No wcmder then that he proceed- 
ed to his new lask with all the ardour and devotion 
that his tmture was able to summon to the occasion 
with the sure expectation that he also would be 
favoured ere long wkh such visions and experiences. 
This does not mean, however, that he began to lead 
a visiona£y life from this time forward. He went 
to the school, led his playmates in everything that 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


115 


they all did, pursued his studies of the sacred litera- 
ture, practised the arts of painting and clay-model- 
ling at leisure and did everything as he used to do 
before. But in the hours that he spent in worship- 
ping the image, his strong imagination combined 
with his natural power of concentrating his mind 
made him rise to such heights of meditation that he 
lost consciousness of all his surroundings and his 
unfettered and untrammelled mind lived and moved 
for the time with the living ideal which the image 
always stood for. And ere many months had passed, 
his mind became accustomed to soar to those higher 
regions of peace and silence which the worldly- 
minded dread to enter in their dreams even, and 
began to see light where they would only see * ‘dark- 
ness piled upon darkness” with the help of their 
poor imagination. The events which followed go 
to prove what has been stated above. 

The ceremony of investiture with the Sacred 
Thread being over, there came a great change, 
as we have hinted above, in the inner life of 
the boy, Gadadhar, with the quickening of a new 
impulse and a new aspiration for the destiny he 
was born to fulfil An incident which soon occurred 
after that sacred ceremony drew the attention of 
the rural mind of the village towards the spiritual 
potency of the boy. Once in connection with the 



116 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


performance of some obsequies, there was sum- 
moned a great assembly of learned Panhts in 
house of the Zemindar of the village. Laha Babu; 
and as usual there arose a hot discussion among the 
scholars on a certain religious point None oi 
them could come to any definite conclusion, in spite 
of much scholarly disputations and wranglings..Just 
then young Gadadhar crept in and slowly sug^ 
gestedto one of the Pandits if the problem could 

not have been conveniently solved in a particular 

wav The learned scholar was taken by surprise 
■ To hear such a wonderful solution of_ that much 
disputed question, and that too coming from a 
young boy of nine years old; and *6 Jandi s 
LprL was shared by the whole assembly when 
they came to know of it. so much so, that some 

Ihl being over-joyed at this prodigious nature o. 
the boy, took him up into their lap and caressed 
him. This incident made Gadadhar rise greatly in 
estimation of the simple folks of his village. 

In passing, we may point out here a g 

.hilarity in this incident of the Master’s life to 

that of Jesus Christ when as a young oy ^ 

lL»hlv«lh. Doctor oi the J=.»h 

faith by explaining before them the true import of 

their Scripture in the temple of Yave- 

The incident that followed next was of still 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


117 


greater indication of the unfoldment of his spiritual 
nature. It was on the holy occasion of Sivaratri 
when Gadadhar came to experience the Divine com- 
munion and God-vision in Samadhi for the third 
time, and it came about in the following way : As it 
is usual with the devout Hindus to fast on that day 
and spend the whole time, specially the night, in 
the worship of the Great God Mahadeva, young 
Gadadhar with all the zeal of a novitiate deter- 
mined to observe the day in fast and vigil. He 
thought he would spend the whole night in worship 
and constant communion through meditation on the 
Lord. But it so happened that in a house of a 
particular rich neighbour * of his, there was to be 
the performance of a country drama, the yatraj 
of some piece referring to the greatness of the Lord 
Siva. The drama was arranged in order to help 
the devotees of the village to keep vigil and pass the 
night cheerfully in thought of the great God. But 
as chance would have it, there arose difficulties in 
doing the performance, at the eleventh hour. The 
person who was to take the part of Siva fell ill all 
on a sudden, and the proprietor finding no other 
proper substitute thought of giving up the perfor- 
mance altogether. And the news was very 

* Mr. Sitaiaatli Pain was a iciaad of fche fafehec of young 
Gada<ihar’s fciand Gangavishnu Laha. 



118 


&RJ RAMAKRBHNA, 


dishfeartenkg to the expectant villagers. The- elders 
held a council how to make the performance possi- 
ble. While they were discussing about ft, it was 
suggested by some of the younger folks, that ‘Gadai’ 
could act the part very well and there was none in 
the village who could do it better. So it was 
decided at once that Gadadhar should be summoned 
for the purpose. And it was not very long before 
the decision was carried into practice. A number 
of young boys> friends of Gadadhar, eagerly ran to 
bis house and pressed him to take part in the perfor- 
mance. It was the fore part of the night and 
Gadadhar had just finished the first worship 

and was sitting in meditation. When the matter was 
told to at first he refused to stir out of his wor- 
ship room thai night, but subsequently he had to- 
yldd to the importunities of his f riends and came- 
to* the place of drama. He was taken to the green* 
room and some of his play-mates took great delight in 
dressing him up* , as Siva. But the icka of imper- 
sonation: as suggested by his dress of long-matted 
locks, tiger the Rud^ahha- bead and the holy 
asfees^ stirred up such a deep emotion in his heart 
and' turned his mind so profoundly towards the 
real Siva#* that witen his turn came to appear,- he 
could only move out with great difficulty. And 
next, when the proprietor began to chant the 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


119 


prayer to Siva before him, he lost all consciousness 
of his surroundings and stood like a statue. The 
only visiSle sign of life in him was the trickling 
down of devotional tears from his eyes. At first it 
was taken by the audience as part of his acting and 
so he received a shower of applause from them for 
its naturalness. But subsequently, when some 
minutes passed away and he did not speak or move, 
they grew impatient and one or two of the elders 
came near, only to find him perfectly unconscious. 
They thought he had swooned and so tried 
some means to bring him back to consciousness 
again, but to no avail. His trance could not be 
broken. Therefore at last they had to stop the 
performance for that night and Gadadhar was 
carried in that state to his house. We have heard 
that the trance lasted for the whole night in spite 
of all anxieties and efforts of his relations to break 
it. Some say that it continued even lor three 
days. 

After this incident, this kind of trance began 
to occur often. During the time of worship, or when 
engaged in meditation, or when listening to some 
devotmnal songs relating to the glories of godb 
and goddesses, he would often feel his mind 
in as it were, and lose for some t»c all external 
consciousness in the thought ol G^d. At times the 



120 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


trance used to be so deep that his body became 
perfectly inert like a corpse. When enquired 
how he felt during those unconscious states, he 
used to say that he beheld some divine visions 
and his mind was absorbed in the very bliss 
of them. His mother and other relations became 
very much concerned at this ; but after some 
time when they found that those trances were not 
telling upon the health of the boy in any way, on 
the other hand he was feeling ever more cheerful 
and buoyant, the anxiety slowly waned away from 
their minds. Moreover, by constant occurrence of 
this state, the boy got used to it and it became al- 
most optional to him. Besides, during those trances 
Gadadhar perceived many new truths about gods 
and goddesses, which gave him immense joy at 
heart and made him always look forward for such 
states, instead of being afraid of them. 

As a natural consequence of these trances, a 
great religious change came over the boy, his spirit- 
ual fervour getting whetted by the visit of each of 
these moods; and henceforth he began to join 
whole-heartedly all the different religious cere- 
monies in connection with the various tutelary 
deities of the village. And his inborn catholicity 
wedded with the higher spiritual impulses born of 
those God-visions, made him look upon all the 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


121 


different gods and goddesses of the village with 
equanimity and profound devotion which contained 
the seed ot the glorious realisation of harmony of 
religions of his after-life. Further, the customs of 
the village might have had some effect upon his 
nature in this matter. Unlike other places, here in 
Kamarpukur, bitter sectarianism could never make 
any inroad upon the rural minds, the people 
although nominally belonging to different sects, 
used to have most cordial feelings towards each 
other, holding each other’s religious scruples and 
ideals with equal reverence. And this fact is notice- 
able there even to-day. 

But although the religious nature of Gadadhar 
was developing in such an uncommon way through 
these events, his education did not keep pace with 
it. Having seen the narrow worldly ways and mean 
mundane attachment of the learned scholars of 
his place, possibly the boy began to foster a kind 
of apathy in his mind towards such knowledge as 
those scholars possessed. For, henceforth, the keen 
insight of the boy made him search for the 
motive of every action of others. Having kept his 
father’s wonderful spirit of renunciation, devoutness, 
truthfulness and high character as the standard 
before him, he would naturally proceed to judge the 
value of the conduct of these scholars, and find 



122 


SRI RAMAKRISHNAj 


them greatly wanting. Nay, more, he probably 
found out thus the motives and ideals of all persons 
around him quite divergent from what he'' consider- 
ed the true. Further, he must have noticed how 
the people having taken this unreal world as the 
only reality to be hugged, roll in innumerable mise- 
ries of life, and ah, the pitiable sight of it ! — all 
these considerations might have made him deter- 
mined to cut out quite a different course for his life. 
Perhaps my readers would think that I am 
presuming too much for young Gadadhar ; that for a 
boy of eleven or twelve years of age, it is not possible 
to have so much of keen insight and power of judg- 
ment as to come to such a lofty decision. But 
we must remember that although it might be im- 
possible for an ordinary young boy of that age, yet 
for Gadadhar it was so possible, as he was born 
with extraordinary intellect and mental powers, 
his later life has shown to the world in unmistakable 
terms his uncommon prodigious nature. Therefore, 
it was not unlikely for him to have harboured such 
ideas even in that young age. So, however absurd 
it might appear to us now, for the sake of truth 
we must record all that we have come to know 
of this wonderful life after judicious enquiry. 

However, though Gadadhar never felt within 
himself any keen thirst for such education, yet he was 



THE GREAT MASTER* 


123 


regularly attending his school as before and acquired 
some efficiency in reading and writing his own 
mother-todgue. He developed a particular liking, as 
has been already mentioned, for the study of religious 
books like the Ramayana and the Mahabharata ; 
and when he would read these books, his devout 
melodious tone used to weave a charm upon his 
hearers. The ignorant village folks used to express 
their eager desire to hear the recitation of these 
sacred books from his mouth ; and kind-hearted 
Gadadhar was ever ready to acquiesce to their 
requests. In this way, his co- villagers like Sitanath 
Pain, Madhu Yugi and others used to invite him 
often to their own respective houses and hear him 
read in an assembly of both sexes, these scriptures 
with great devotion and rapture. 

But Gadadhar made very poor progress in 
other subjects of his study. For instance, in 
math^atics, for which all along he had not much 
partiality, he scarcely advanced beyond ^mple 
fractions and simple rule of three of Arithmetic. 
After his tenth year, when his spiritual develop- 
ment brought forth those involuntary super- 
consdous trances, his relatives mistook them for 
ordinary fits, and being much concerned about his 
healih they would not insist upon his going to the 
village school regularly, and used to give perfect 



124 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


freedom to the boy as regards the manners of his 
study. The teacher also was not very strict with 
Gadadhar. So it happened that his study assumed 
a slackened pace that time. 

Thus a couple of years passed away and 
Gadadhar attained his twelfth year of age. His 
second elder brother Rameswara and his sister 
Sarvamangala reached their twenty-second and ninth 
years respectively. And so Ramkumar, having seen 
them attain the marriageable age, married his second 
brother to the sister of Srijukta Ramsadaya Ban- 
-erjee of the village, Gourhati, and Sarvamangala 
to Ramsadaya himself. Thus contracting the two 
reciprocal marital alliances, Ramkumar saved the 
family from the dire consequences of the dowry 
system. 

Besides these marriages, there happened 
another incident in the family to break the even 
tenour of their life. In spite of age, Ramkumar's 
wife had had no issue, which had made every 
body think her barren. But now she was in the 
family way. The news roused a mixed feeling 
of joy and fear in* the minds of the family members, 
because it was predicted by Ramkumar himself 
that his wife would not survive the birth of her 
child. But however, from that time forward there 
■came a great change in the fortune of Ramkumar. 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


125 


All those avenues of earning his livelihood which 
were once so gay and fruitful, became now dark and 
shady. Hfs health too began to fail him. His 
profession suffered much curtailment. His wife 
also began to evince strange conduct. It was 
customary in the family from the good old 
time of his father that excepting the young children 
and the diseased, no one could take anything 
before the worship of the family god Raghuvira. 
But his wife began to violate this honoured 
custom which produced a good deal of appre- 
hension in his mind as a foreboding of the 
sad event. Moreover, she became very peevish 
and quarrelsome which caused much disturbance 
of the peace of the liousehold. She paid no heed 
nor showed any respect even to the words of her 
husband and mother-in-law. But they all put up 
with her strange conduct thinking of her enceinte 
condition. 

Though Rameswar, the second brother, had 
enough education by this time, yet he could not 
earn anything to help the family. Thus in spite of 
the gradual increment of the members o£ the 
- Chatterjee household,- the means of livelihood be^an 
to diminish; day by' day. This troubled Ramku- 
mar hot to a little extent; he strained his brain to 
invent various ways of earning to. meet the bare 



126 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


necessities of the family, but somehow or other 
they came to naught, as if some one was frustrating 
all hisi attempts from behind. And so^Ramkumar 
was overwhelmed with cares and anxieties. 

Thus days and months passed and the time for 
■confinement of Ramkumar’s wife approached, and 
with it increased also the fear of his mind in re- 
membrance of his past vision about the danger. 
At last, some time in the year 1255 B. S. (1849 
A. D.), she gave birth to a son and passed away 
shortly after, in the confinement room itself. This 
event robbed away all cheerfulness of the family 
for some time and spread a dark pall of gloom over 
it. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

In the dawn of Youth. 

Ramkumar bore the bereavement of his wife 
patiently ; yet there was no end to his evil days. 
The straitened circumstances of his family threaten- 
ed to crush him down under their dead weight. The 
little income from his priestly profession began to 
get attenuated day by day, and along with it grew 
the spectre of want overshadowing the family. 
The little plot of land of Lakshmijala still 
yielded the same quantity of paddy, yet there were 
thousand other needs of the family, besides the few 
morsels of food, to meet. Besides, his little mother- 
less child Akshoya had to be nursed and its little 
wants to be looked after. So, he had to meet all 
these imperative demands of the family even by 
running into debt. And debts began to grow ever- 
more as days rolled on. All efforts of Ramkumar 
to thwart its calamitous onset were of no avail. His 
friends and relations advised him then that his pros- 
pect might be brightened if he would go elsewheer. 



128 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


His smitten heart also took up the suggestion 
with all eagerness. For, nearly thirty years he 
had passed his sunny days in that house with 
one whose memory now appeared to be lingering, 
like the soft after-glow of the parted sun, on 
everything that he beheld around him. So he 
thought, peace of mind rested for him only on his 
being away from such surroundings: But which place 
would be more profitable for him to go, Burdwan or 
Calcutta, he discussed. At last it was settled to go 
to the latter place. His friends told him that many 
of his co-villagers had improved their fortune by 
going to the metropolis. They further hinted at the 
fact that a man of his attainment would surely 
succeed by going there, where even men of lesser 
ability could build up their fortune immensely. So, 
a short while after his wife's death, Ramkumar 
having entrusted his family affairs to his brother 
Rameswar, came to Calcutta and opened a toll at 
Jhamapookoor. A large number of students began 
to flock round him to get instructions in the differ- 
ent branches of the Sanskrit study. 

Thus the death of Ramkumar ’s wife brought 
in its wake a great change in the Chatterjee family 
of Kamarpukur. The old mother, Chandra Devi, 
was compelled once again to undertake all the duty 
of a houseyrife ; the task of nursing the young 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


129 


babe of Ramkumar also fell upon her. Though 
there was the wife of Rameswar to help her in 
the household work, yet she was too young 
to be of much aid. The worship of the tutelary 
deity Raghuvira, the nursing of Akshoy, the duties 
of the kitchen, — all these kept her fully engaged for 
the whole of the day without giving a moment’s 
respite or rest. Though it was neither easy nor 
comfortable for her to bear the heavy burden of 
such household duties at this fifty eighth year of 
her age,* yet with humble resignation she bore 
them all, taking it to be the will of the Lord, Raghu- 
vira. 

In his turn, Rameswar now being saddled with 
the responsibility of looking after the pecuniary 
affairs of the family, busied himself in trying to 
make at least both ends meet. But, although 
he was learned, he could not earn much. 
Moreover, he was no exception to the general devout 
nature of the family ; so whenever he happened to 
meet any religious person, he used to devote not 
only hours and days in his company, but his slender 
purse also to remove any want of the sadhu. Thus 
it was not possible for him either to earn much for, 
.or pay off the debts. of, the family. He was in the 

♦ &xmati Chandra Devi was born in the year 1197 and died 
in 1282 B, S. at tha 85th year of her age. 



130 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


world as a householder, yet he was incapable of 
conserving or husbanding his resources ; on many an 
occasion he would outstrip his means. 

Neither he could afford to pay much attention 
to the education of Gadadhar. In spite of his 
great love for his youngest brother, he had never 
bestowed any attention to his study, partly owing 
to the fact that his eldest brother was hitherto 
looking after all these details of the family life, and 
partly perhaps because it was not after his tempera- 
ment. But now, as much of his time was taken 
away in earning his livelihood, his want of time 
deepened his temperamental indifference into posi- 
tive neglect in the matter. Moreover, having 
noticed the religious tendencies of the boy and good 
graces of his head and heart which had endeared 
him to all, he must have fondly concluded 
that such a boy could not go wrong, that his native 
propensities would never take him astray. So it 
happened that after Ramkumar’s departure to 
Calcutta, Gadadhar, when reached his thirteenth 
year, became like one without a guardian, and follow- 
ed freely wherever and howsoever his native inclina- 
tions directed him. 

We have already said that. the keen insight of 
Gadadhar did not fail to detect the hidden motive 
behind every action of the worldly persons. 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


131 


Therefore it was quite patent to him that the kind 
of knowledge, the ordinary scholars seek in schools 
and colleges is not meant to illumine the heart or 
elevate their character, but only ■ to gain some 
position and honour in the society, as well as to 
pave the way for worldly prosperity. Again, he must 
have noticed, though young as he was, that these very 
persons dowered with fortune and fame could at best 
lead a life of luxury, but failed to attain that devo- 
tion to truth, that strength of character and glory 
of piety, which he had beheld in his own revered 
father. Further, his natural instinct must have 
revealed to him in all its bareness the utter imper- 
manency of this worldly life. Had he not seen, as he 
used to tell of these in his later life, how two 
brothers forgetting all their ties of blood and drown- 
ing their natural affection in the pool of selfishness, 
would come forward with a tape in hand to divide 
and demarcate their ancestral field and say, ‘this side 
is mine’ and ‘that side is yours’? And the very same 
brothers would not be spared many years of life to 
enjoy their properties which they had seized with so 
heartless selfishness. Therefore it was but natural 
for such a boy to grow indifferent towards such 
“bread and butter winning education,” and seek the 
contentment of the soul and grace of the Deity, taking 
them, like his father, as the highest goal of life. 



132 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


Hence, from that time forward though he used to go 
to his school now and then — that too more for the 
company of his friends than for study, — yet most of 
his time, he began to spend in the worship of his 
family God, Raghuvira, and in helping his mother 
in the household work. 

Thus Gadadhar was compelled to stay at home 
for a longer time in the day than before. And the 
ladies of the neighbourhood who would come to his 
mother in the noon to have a friendly chat, would 
often seize the opportunity of making Gadadhar 
sing them some devotional songs or read out some 
religious book or recite some hymns. The more he 
would comply to their requests, the more would 
they urge him to do the same — so fascinating were 
his manners and voice ; so much so, that such sing- 
ings and recitals came to be counted among his 
daily duties. Besides, seeing the eagerness of the 
ladies he would even act out some of the dramas 
which he might have learnt from the professionals 
of the place or sing samkirtans or devotional boul 
songs. While enacting the different parts of a parti- 
cular drama he would himself impersonate the 
different characters and speak in different tones 
befitting the respective characters that would cause 
a roar of laughter among his audience of the fair 
sex. Sometimes he would amuse them by acting 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


133 


the burlesque of a farce or in imitating the 
ludicrous manners of some known persons of the 
village, ^hus the boy Gadadhar won the affec- 
tions of these ladies and exerted a peculiar influ- 
ence over them. It was quite probable that they 
might have heard all the stories of divine visions and 
experiences in relation to his birth; and more, they 
themselves witnessed the extraordinary spiritual 
trances that little Gadai fell into whenever there 
was an occasion to stir his religious emotions ; 
and his burning God-devotion, his all-exclusive 
absorption in the reading of the scriptures, his 
silvery voice, peeling out songs in ecstatic joy in the 
praise of the Lord, — all these must have touched 
their soft hearts and evoked in them a feeling of love 
and reverence for the boy. We have heard that 
Prasannamayi, the daughter of the local Zemindar, 
and other elderly women of the neighbourhood used 
to love him dearly as their own son taking him to 
be the manifestation of Bala Gopal. Others of a more 
tender age feeling a peculiar attraction towards him 
used to look upon him as a dear friend and felt the 
charm of SaJthya hhava. Most of these women 
were Vaishnava by faith and their poetic instincti 
fostered by the Vaishnava traditional culture, would 
naturally prompt them to look upon this fair look 
ing boy, with all his charming manners, as something 



134 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


divine and adorable. And the more such feelings 
deepened into their heart, the more did they seek 
his company, and even his counsels in thefr respec- 
tive private matters. Moreover, at that time, his 
manners and behaviour were so truly feminine that 
the women at times would forget that he was of the 
sterner sex and confide all their secrets to him and 
treat him as one belonging to their own sex. 

Being prompted by his innate Prakriti bhavaf 
he told us afterwards, there arose a desire in his 
mind : He heard that the Gopis (the Shepherd 
girls of Brindavan) attained Lord Sri Krishna as 
their husband through intense prema, and it was 
possible only because they had the woman’s body, 
and he thought, that he too could have been blessed 
with the same rare divine privilege through his 
intense God-love, had he been a woman. Thus he 
coD^dered his male body as a great obstac e in his 
way to realising God through Madhura hhava. He 
mused that if he were to be born again he would be 
born as a girl and incarnate in a Brahmin’s house 
with beautiful appearance and long hairs. She would 
become a virgin widow, and would not look upon 
any one save Lord Sri Krishna as her husband. There 
would be a little plot of land around her little hut 
and a small means of subsistence also. There would 
be an old woman only as her guardian and none else 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


135 


to keep company. In that little plot of land she would 
grow with her own hands, some vegetables and there 
would be’also a cow which she would milk herself. 
Further, she would have a spinning wheel too. And 
the fancy of the boy would stretch further to ima- 
gine that after the day’s work she would sit in the 
verandah of the hut and while spinning the wheel, 
she would sing in praise of Lord Sri Krishna. 
And when the sombre shadow of evening would des- 
cend on earth, she would take the butter and sweets 
prepared from the cow’s milk and would cry 
her heart out for Sri Krishna, feel the bitterest 
pang of separation from the Lord and pray with 
the deepest emotion of heart to Him to come 
and accept her offerings. And lo 1 Sri Krishna 
in the form of a beautiful cowherd boy would 
slowly creep in and would accept her offerings 
of devotion. And thus he would be coming to 
her everyday without being noticed by anybody 
and she would enjoy the divine company of the 
Lord, Though this dream of Gadadhar was not 
literally fulfilled, yet materialised in another form 
in his after life which we shall see when we come 
to the Sadhana period of his life. 

In pursuance of this kind of proclivities of 
his mind, at times, he would actually dress himself 
as a woman and play the parts of women characters 



136 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


of a drama. Specially when he would enact 
the parts of Radha or any of her famous sakhis^ 
the ladies would often request him to pfit on the 
dress of a woman. And his imitations of the 
womanly manners used to be perfect. From this 
we can understand how minutely the boy used to 
observe the manners and behaviours of women. 
Sometimes in fun he would dress himself as a village 
lass and go to the neighbouring pond called Hal- 
darpukur to fetch water with a pitcher on his loins 
just after the women of the place. And no one 
could recognise him in that garb. 

In this connection we may relate here a funny 
incident that took place at that time. We have 
already mentioned the name of a rich gentleman of 
the village, Sitanath Payin. His house was very 
near to that of Gadadhar, And there were a num- 
ber of other prosperous houses belonging to men of 
the same Vanik caste of Sitanath. So the whole of 
that quarter of the village was known as Vanik' 
Palli. And many women of these Vanik families were 
friends of Chandra Devi and used to frequent her 
house and hold leisurely conversations. It was they 
who grew into admirers of Gadadhar in the afore- 
said manner. These women sometimes used to in- 
vite Gadadhar to their own respective houses and 
request him to enact some drama or sing some 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


137 


devotional songs ; -specially the ladies of Sitanath’s 
house used to love him much and invite him to 
their hous'b often. Sitanath Payin himself had a 
very great partiality for Gadadhar. Thus almost 
all the Vanik houses of the place had a free access 
to Gadadhar. Only one family behaved otherwise. 
It was the house of the rich merchant Durgadas 
Payin. Though he had much liking and respect for 
young Gadadhar, yet he did not like to loosen the 
purdah custom of his family on any account. He 
prided himself over the fact that no one could know 
anything of the inner apartments of his house, nor 
see the female members of his family. Moreover, 
he used to decry such persons like Sitanath who 
would not observe the purdah custom rigidly. 

One day Durgadas was bragging himself of 
the rigidity of his Purdah system and Gadadhar 
was present there. Having heard the vaunting of the 
man, the young boy, calmly interposed, “ Women 
cannot be saved merely by the Purdah system.. 
Their best protection is only in their good educa- 
tion and God-devotion. If I like I can see every* 
thing and know everything of the inner apartments 
of your house.” But Durgadas growled with a, 
touch of vanity, “ Well, let me see how you can.” 
** Well, you shall see,” so replying Gadadhar cama 
away from him that day. Afterwards one day 



138 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


without anybody’s knowledge, the boy wore a 
dusky cloth and silver bangles after the fashion of a 
weaver woman, took a small basket in* his arm, 
covered his face with a veil and went to the house 
of Durgadas from the side of the village market 
just at sunset. At that time Durgadas was sitting 
with his friends in the outer apartment. And 
Gadadhar in that disguise went straight to him and 
told that he was a weaver woman, belonging to 
another village and came in the morning to sell 
her thread in the market. But now she found all 
her companions gone away deserting her. She had 
been put thereby into a great fix and would be much 
obliged if he could give her a shelter in his house 
for the night. Durgadas without being able to 
recognise him in this disguise and taking him to 
be really a weaver woman put a few ques- 
tions about the village the latter came from, 
and then told him to go in and ask for 
shelter from the ladies. Gadadhar thanked him for 
the kindness shown and entered the inner apart- 
ment, There too he said the same story to the 
ladies and created much sympathy in their mind by 
various pleasant talks. Seeing the tender age of 
the weaver woman and being much pleased at her 
sweet conversations, the ladies of the house gave her 
their permission to stay for the night, and having 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


139 


shown a place for her nightly rest served her some 
repast. Gadadhar sat there and while doing justice 
to the littld food given to him, he began to observe 
minutely all female members of the house and scan 
their manners with great scrutiny. He never 
missed a word of their conversation, and at times 
himself also joined in their talk by dropping in a 
question here and an answer there. In this wise 
two or three hours passed. A.nd in his own 
house his mother not finding him return till 
so late an hour in the evening, sent his second 
brother Rameswar in search of him. As he often 
used to go to the Vanik quarter she asked him to 
search him there. Rameswar first went to Sita- 
nath’s house and not finding him there began to 
pass by the side of Durgadas’s house while loudly 
shouting out his name. Gadadhar having heard 
his voice from inside, bawled out in answer, even 
from that inner apartment of Durgadas^s house, that 
he was coming, and ran out of the house. Then 
Durgadas came to know everything of the boy*s 
trick and though at first he was much offended to 
see himself and his family thus deceived by the 
pranks of a boy, yet he could not fail to admire the 
naturalness of Gadadhar’s disguise. Next day when 
Sitanath and other neighbours of Durgadas came to 
know of the incident, they were very much pleased 



140 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


and congratulated Gadadhar on his success in 
defeating the pride of Durgadas. This incident so 
deeply impressed the ladies of Durgada^s house in 
favour of Gadadhar that thenceforward they also 
used to appear before the boy whenever he hap- 
pened to go to Vanikpalli and enjoy his perform- 
ances and songs. 

Thus, we find, Gadadhar attracted the affec- 
tion and esteem of all the ladies of the neighbour- 
hood. We have heard that sometimes he used to 
get spiritual trances while reading the scriptures 
or singing devotional songs in the house of Sitanath 
Pay in, and "at those times the ladies of the family 
used to worship him with devotional offerings, 
taking them to be God’s manifestation in the boy. 

Now and then, we had occasions to hear of this 
superb influence that young Gadadhar wielded over 
the heart of the ladies of his place. In the begin- 
ning of 1299 of the Bengal era, Swami Rama- 
krishnananda and some of us went on pilgrimage to 
Kamarpukur and there we were fortunate enough 
to meet Srimati Rukmini, one of the daughters of 
Sitanath Payin. At that time her age was about 
sixty years, and we recount below what she told us 
personally about the influence young Gadadhar had 
over them. She related, “Our house is a little away 
from this place to the north, almost within a visible 



the great master. 


141 


distance. At present it is in a great dilapidated 
condition owing to our poor circumstances, but 
when I was seventeen or eighteen years of age, 
my father’s family was in great prosperity. My 
father was Sitanath Payin and his was a big joint- 
family. Including all my cousins and sisters we 
were nearly eighteen young girls in the house, all 
of them almost of the same age, just emerging 
from adolescence into prime of youth. Gadadhar 
was our playmate from the very time of our 
infancy. So, he was our great ‘ chum.* And 
even when we attained age he often used to 
come to our house and had free access even to our 
inner apartments. My father had a great love and 
veneration for him and used to look upon him as an 
emblem of his Deity. If some of his friends re- 
marked how he could allow Gadadhar to enter into 
'his inner apartments when he had a number of 
young girls in his house, my father used to reply 
** Well, there is no fear of that. You may 
rest in peace. .1 know Gadadhar very well,” and 
that would silence them. Gadadhar used to relate 
to us stories and anecdotes from the Puranas and 
other scriptures, and amuse us with his usual 
witticisms. Almost every day we heard such 
things from him and that used to give us good 
cheer in performing our house-hold duties. As long 



142 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


as he used to be near us, we never knew how time 
flew, so joyous an absorption did he bring upon us 
by his charming conversation. If it ha])pened any 
day that he did not turn up, we used to feel much 
anxiety about him, thinking that some illness 
might have prevented his coming. And our heart 
knew no peace or contentment until some of us 
went out of our house under the plea of fetching 
water or some other business and bring the news 
about him. Every word of his appeared to us as 
imbued with nectar. Therefore the day he did 
not come to our house, we missed him very much 
and used to pass it in conversation about him 
only.’^ 

His empire of influence was not confined within 
the narrow bounds of the inner apartments of ladies 
only. But his versatile prodigious nature, his 
sympathetic affability and loving heart used to 
attract to him even men of all grades and ages. 
All those places where young and old folks of the 
village used to congregate every evening to hear the 
recitals of holy scriptures or singing of some 
devotional songs, he often used to attend. And 
whenever he was present on such occasions, he 
used to infuse a new spirit and inspiration into the 
performances, and all present felt wonderful joy 
which they did not feel otherwise. For, very few 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


143 


were there who could read or explain the passages of 
Scriptures with such intense devotion and fervour^ 
or could sing with such melodious voice and 
dance the ecstatic dance. And again in mother-wit 
few surpassed him, — his comic acting, and 
burlesque used to amuse his audience as no one 
could. So, all persons were very much attracted 
towards him and used to look forward to his 
coming to such places in the evenings. Gadadhar 
also always used to frequent these resorts of rural 
devotion and amusement. 

Even in that young age seeing his wonderful 
precocity bf intelligence and keenness of insight, 
many elderly persons used to take advice from 
him about their household matters; pious men 
seeing his spiritual trances and fervour of devotion 
would seek his opinion about their respective 
spiritual culture. We hear, a few persons like 
Srinivasa Sankhari and others of his village looked 
upon Gadadhar even from that time as their spiri- 
tual guide. Such was the universal love and regard 
that young Gadadhar commanded among his 
co-villagers. Only the hypocrites and the wicked 
had no liking for him. Perhaps it was so, because 
the keen penetration of the intelligence of the boy 
could easily pierce through their garb of falsity 
and detect their ugly nature and wicked motives, 



144 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


and his truthful brave heart would not spare them 
from exposing their real colour before every one. 
No, that was not all, sometimes he hsed to hold 
them up to ridicule by caricaturing their false ways 
before others. These used to put them to shame 
and scorn of their compatriots. And so, no doubt, 
it generated a great bitterness of feeling in their 
heart against Gadadhar, but they were too afraid 
to do any injury to the boy owing to his extraordi- 
nary popularityi 

It has already been mentioned that Gadadhar 
having realised well within himself the fruit- 
lessness of the sort of education that the 
ordinary schools and institutions impart, resolved 
that he would have nothing to do with such, kind 
of education ; yet he kept on dropping in now and 
then into )mFaih(isalaf and it was just for the sake 
of his friends. For, his playmates and fellow 
students like Gaya Vishnu and others used to love 
him very dearly and look upon him as their leader 
in all matters. But the heart of Gadadhar, 
instinct with higher emotions and aspirations, 
ulways sought an opportunity to relieve himself 
from any connection with the school. And now 
an opportunity presented itself to him to sever 
that connection. Having seen the wonderful 
dramatic capacity of Gadadhar, some of his friends 






THE GREAT MASTER. 


145 


proposed to open a theatrical party with Gadadhar 
as its head and conductor. Gadadhar acceded to 
their request, but a great difficulty arose in the way 
of accomplishing this purpose of the youngsters ; 
they were all young boys and if their guardians would 
come to know anything of this matter, they were 
sure to be censured on that account and so, the 
whole affair of the party, including the rehearsals, 
had to be conducted in such a place which would be 
hidden from any possible notice of the guardians. 
And such a place they could not find out conveni- 
ently. There was the big mango grove called 
Manick Raja’s mango orchard in the vicinity of the 
village. And Gadadhar told them that the grove 
would serve their purpose admirably. And at once 
it was settled that all the boys would scamp away 
from the school at a particular hour of the day and 
congregate there in the grove for the purpose. 
Within a short time under the intelligent leader- 
ship and guidance of Gadadhar, the young boys of 
the village banded themselves into a well-formed 
dramatic club and many of them attained good 
proficiency in enacting their respective parts. 
And from day to day the solitary air of the mango 
grove used to resound with the cheery voice and 
melodious songs of these youngsters. Needless to 
say that young Gadadhar had to take the hero’s 



146 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, 


part in every piece and had also to make up for 
the shortcomings of other actors by his own 
inventive genius. Here too, we have heard 
Gadadhar used to fall into the spiritual trances at 
times while enacting the religious dramas. 

Now, this theatrical party used to take away 
much of his time and attention, so he had very 
little leisure to devote to other things. We have 
already said that the boy had a very great aptitude 
for drawing pictures. Once at about this time, he 
went to see his youngest sister, Sarvamangala, at 
her husband’s place. As he entered her house he 
found her sitting by the side of her husband and 
nursing him. Subsequently after his return to his 
village Gadadhar drew a picture portraying the 
sight he saw at his sister’s place. And the faithful- 
ness of the likenesses of his sister and her husband 
was striking. All the family members admired the 
picture. For the art of clay modelling also, he had 
a very great aptitude, and he attained much effici- 
ency in modelling the images of different gods and 
goddesses, Many a time he would make himself 
such images and worship them in the proper man- 
ner along with his friends. 

Besides these there was another occupation for 
young Gadadhar and it was to give company to the 
young motherless baby, Akshoy. While Chandra 



THE GREAT MASTER. 


147 


used to be engaged in the performance of household 
duties, Gadadhar would nurse and look after the 
baby or carry it about in his laps. 

Thus three more years rolled away and Gada- 
dhar reached his seventeenth year of age. In the 
meantime Ramkumar was labouring hard to better 
his fortune in Calcutta, and the number of students 
of his Chaiuspathi was fairly on the increase. He 
usually used to come at every spring season to his 
village for a few days to see his mother and 
brothers. He must have noticed during such short 
visits the indifference and neglect of Gadadhar to- 
wards his study and that made him too much 
concerned about him. It was in the year 1262 of 
the Bengal era, 1856 A. D., when Ramkumar came 
to his village as usual to see his people, he decided 
to take Gadadhar with him to Calcutta and keep 
him there for his study. Apart from the con- 
sideration of better educational prospect of the boy, 
there was another purpose in the mind of Ram- 
kumar in taking the boy to Calcutta. Along with 
the increase of his school work in Calcutta, there 
grew also many other aspects of his profession which 
he could not conveniently manage without detriment 
to the former. So he was badly in need of an 
assistant, and he thought Gadadhar could assist him 
much in the matter. Having come to this decision 



148 


SRI RAMAKRTSHNA) 


he made the proposal to his youngest brother ask- 
ing him to go with him to Calcutta. When Gada- 
dhar heard that he was required to help'' his eldest 
brother whom he revered as his father, he had no- 
thing to say against the proposal, though he had his 
own opinion about the sort of education his brother 
was going to give him at Calcutta. But he kept it 
within himself at that time. However, subsequent- 
ly on a good auspicious day both the brothers, 
Ramkumar and Gadadhar, set out for Calcutta. 
And all the blissful currents of joy and merriment 
that flowed in the little village of Kamarpukur 
making Gadadhar as the centre came to a sudden 
stop thereafter. His co-villagers and friends felt 
a great void in their heart, and the fond mother 
Chandra missed him the most. 



Geneology df Sri Ramakrishna. 

Mauikram Oh alter ji 


APPENDIX A, 



Eamlal Lakshmi Sivaram 



APPENDIX B. 

i portion of the Horoscope of Sri Bamakrishna 
By Narayana Chandra Jyotirbhushana; 


SWRg 1 Ho 1 M 
1 I I '^cp5g^4T- 

M, 







fS^q qq' 


^ IKIFI ’TWlI 3ftq^ 

^ 3 im\ 3 tR 


swto:) 

«ra^ 31?^ B5q=q% aiHM PI^ q q^iWqli l fiq^ 

#vV %. '■sr . 


^i^rar^fiwiw: I gT q»iifefeMiu - <K^if^<.^M -^ sfKm- 

spfi ^■soA— 



^ 1 

o I n’ 


^3t§^8 



1 ! 

1 \^ 



\l 

« 

^8 


<K 

W 


r 


8e> 


W 

8? 

8^ 



8^ 

n 

8<i 

88 



\\ 

\ 

\s 


^rraif: 



w* 



152 


%o \ 

^ «tq<i(r^lft; ! \l 

C I ^1 


gfeiFtii^ #r g>#^ 1 

gw ?f^#r I 

^sTFR^ ^ #% g I 
w ti^iKWMg; h: 
V(Hlq«-Hii'tl'^t9 W I 


fli5ig^ws4 rnwRiwi^; I 

^ ¥#5iif|i ^ g^pr; II 

^ gg^fil^wT ^TOcrngw: cicw ^ II 
Sri Ramakrishna was born in the year 1886 
A.D., on the 2nd day of the bright fortnight of the 
month when the sun was in the Zodiac of Agnarius 
(Kumbha) (17th February), early in the morning at 
about 5 A.M. His birth took place when it was 
Siddhi Yoga owing to the auspicious union of Sukla 
Dwftiya with Purvabhadrapada Nakshatra, His 
natal star was Purvabhadrapada, (Pegasi) the 



163 


twenty-fifth lunar mansion. In his J anmalagna^ ia. 
in the Zodkc at the time of his birth, there was the 
conjunction of the three planets, viss,^ the Sun, the 
Moon and the Mercury (Surya, Chandra and 
Budha)t and the other three planets, namely, Venus, 
Mars and Saturn (Suhraj Mangala and Shani) are 
in exaltation in the 12th, 10th, the 7th houses respec- 
tively. And again, according to the sage Parasara, 
the planets Rahu and Ketu (two other ascending 
nodes of the moon) also occupied the highest posi- 
tions as they were in the and and 8th houses res- 
pectively; Jupiter [Brihaspati) occupied the 3rd 
house and so it had a tendency towards ascendency 
{Tungavilashi)* The result of this natal arrange- 
ment of the planets is, according to the Bhrigu 
Samhifat that the man becomes the head of a reli- 
gious movement, virtuous, highly honoured, always 
engaged in doing virtuous deeds ; he lives in a 
temple, and gets a large following of disciples ; he 
is called a great man by all, and is born of the 
spirit of Lord Narayana ; he is worshipped by all. 



APPENDIX C. 


Chronoloiioal Table of the incidents referred to 
in the book. 


Incidents 

B.S. 

A.D. 

Bitth of Khudiram 

1181 

1775 

Birth of Ohandra Devi 

1197 

1791 

Marriaga of Khudiram with Chandra— 

Khudiram was then 24 years old and 

Chandra only 8 years, (Chandra died in 

1282 B.S, at the age of 86) 

1205 

1799 

Birth of Ramkumar 

1211 

1805 

Birth of Katyayani . . 

1216 

1810 

Khudiram came to live at Kamarpukur 

1220 

1814 

Marriages of Ramkumar and Katyayani ... 

1226 

1820 

Khudiram' s pilgrimage to Rameswaram ... 

1230 

1824 

Birth of Rameswar 

1232 

1826 

Khudiram’s pilgrimage to Gaya— (he was 

then 60 years old)... 

1241 

1835 


Birth of Sri Ramakrishna.^ 

,v (6feh Fhalguna, i.e., the month of Kumbha, 

* ShuMa Paksha, Purvabhadrapada NaJc- 
shatTa,J)w^iya Tithi, 17th Fetraary, Wed- 


nesday, early in the morning) 

1242 

1836 

Birth of Sarvamangala 

1245 

1839 

Death of Khudiram at the age of 68 years, 
than Sri Ramakrishna was 7 years old . . 

1249 

1843 

Marriages of Rameswar and Sarhamangala.. 

1254 

1848 

Birth of Ramkumar’s son, Akshoya, and the 
death of his wife. Then Ramkumar was 

44 years old 

1265 

1849 

Ramkumar came to Calcutta and opened the 
iol 

1256 

1850 

Sri Ramakrishna came to Calcutta and began 
to live at the Jhamapokur Ghatuspathi 

1259 

1858 




