===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.69899.Studies-In-Saiva-Siddhanta_djvu.txt =====

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
ARCH/EOLOGICAL SURVEY^ OF INDIA 

CENTRAL 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 

ACCESSION NO { £ d >o3 

CALL No. -^- S ' / / Pit 


s 


s 





STUDIES IN SAIVA-SIDDHANTA 




STUDIES 


C 



SAIVA-SIDDHANTA 



BY 

J. M. N ALL AS V AM I PILLAI B.A., B.L. 

DISTRICT UUNSIFF, MADRAS PRESIDENCY 

- - ‘V"- ' 

WITH AN INTRODUCTION 

by 

V. V, RAMANA SASTRIN, Ph. D. 

p ,/.St (IOND) ; O.M.D.S.F.V. (BERLIN) ; M.O.S.M.F. (PARIS) ; ETC., ETC. 



MADRAS 

AT THE MEYKANDAX PRESS 
19 11 


All Ri'ihh Yt'i?rvtd 


v4/ 



CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGKU# 

LIBRARY, NLW L>ELHI. 

Am. Ko . ... MH 



PUBLISHER’S NOTE. 


The following appeared originally in the Siddhanta Dipika, 
Madras Review and the New Reformer and they represent my 
father’s contribution to the study of Siddhanta during the 
last Fourteen years, besides his translations of Sivajnana - 
bodhant, Sivajnana Siddhiyar, Tiruvaruipay an and Tirumular’s 
Tirumantiram etc. and embody his critical researches and deep 
learning in the field of Indian Religion and Philosophy. As 
the earlier volumes of the Siddhanta Dlpika are out of print, 
these are now published in a collected form for the first time 
at the pressing request of numerous readers of the Siddhanta 
Dlpika. I hope to issue as soon as possible the other works of 
my father. I hope that my father’s great labours in the field 
of South Indian Literature, Philosophy and Religion will be 
fully appreciated by the ready sale of this edition. 


Madras 

1911 


J. N. RAMANATHAN. 



CONTENTS, 


J. 1M 

. N AU.ASVAiri PlI.LAI 

Frontisp 

iece . 

Introduction 

• 

i— 

-xvi 

i. 

F LGWJ-.R AND F r agrance 


1 

2 . 

The Light of Truth ok the Unami Vilakkam 


5 

3 ■ 

The House of God ( Illustrated ) 


13 

4 - 

Ax Another Side 


21 

5- 

The Tattv as and Beyond 


r* 

23 

6 . 

The Nature of the Divine Personality ... 


42 

7 . 

Vowii.s and Consonants 


53 

8. 

God and the World 


6 3 

9 - 

The Two Gems 


7 1 

10 , 

Some aspects of the God-head 


81 

II. 

Ashtamuhurtam 


93 

12. 

An L" panish at Text 


104 

13 ' 

The Svetas vatara Upanishat 


109 

x 4 - 

A Chapter from the Kural 


146 

I 5 - 

The Analogies in the Gita 


159 

i6. 

The Union or Indian Philosophies 


169 

i/- 

Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil 


185 

1 8. 

The Four Paths 


202 

19 - 

The Personality of God according to the 

Saiva 



Siddhanta 


223 

20. 

Advaita according to Saiva Siddhanta 


244 

21. 

The Saiva Religion and the Saiva Advaita Sid- 



dhanta Philosophy 

. . . 

273 

22. 

The Nature of Jiva 

... 

31- 

23 - 

Sri Parvatam ( Illustrated ) 

... 

33 ^ 

24. 

Saivaism in ITS relation to other systems 

... 

347 







INTRODUCTION. 


The assemblage of papers that make up the present volume, 
records the harvest of twenty-years’ ceaseless research in a field of 
philosophy and mysticism, by one who is acknowledged on all 
hands to be one of the most well-informed interpreters of the 
Tamil developments of the great Agamic school of thought. His 
translations into English of the Tamil redactions of the Sivajnuna- 

v 

bodha and the Sivajmnasiddhi , and of the Tiruvarulpayan bring 
together a mass of explanatory and illustrative material that imparts 
a freshness and a purity to his performance, elements that we either 
totally miss, or descry with but exceeding dimness, in the parallel 
undertakings of the Rev. H. R. Hoisington and the Rev. Dr. G. U. 
Pope, and more recently of the Rev. H. A. Popley. The claims 
of Mr. J. M. Nallasvami Piilai are thus well established as an 
excellent student of Tamil letters, and a thoroughly reliable inter- 
preter of the phase of the Agamanta that is developed and perfected 
in the magnificent writings of the Tamil mediaeval scholastics, 
divines and saints, among whom Meykandan was, perhaps, the 
foremost in point of learning, spirituality and power of suasion. 
Those mediaeval schoolmen were preceded by the earlier Teachers 
of eminence, like Vagisa, Sundara, Sambandha and Manivachaka, 
men who taught bv example, rather than by pounding precepts and 
arid logomachy, as they took their stand on an actual knowledge of 
the “ mysteries of the Spirit”, and never on bare mental brilliance; 
while mighty spirits like Mala, combined in them the traits of 
exemplary ethical observance and compelling spiritual inculcation. 


1! 


INTRODUCTION 


which hardly left the ripe Soul without ihe pabulum that was 
imperative for its upward growth or unfoldment, and eventual 
Spiritual Freedom. The object of the present Volume is to open 
up some of these veins of the purest Agamic gold, in a style of 
genial didactics and multi-coloured presentation, veins which, 
although referred by our author for the most part to the Tamil 
mines of Saiva literature, would, on a further following up, yet 
prove to belong to a system of strata, more ancient in point 
of time, more remote in point of place, and more precious in 
point of composition and structure. The gold that is dug out 
of the veins, is of remarkable quality, be it in the shape of 
ores, nuggets or ingots, and the reader will be richly repaid 
for diving into the book, since each paper therein is devoted to 
a central idea, which is consistently worked out and explained 
with ample grace and ease of diction, and he may consequently be 
sure to emerge from its perusal, palpably editied on many of the 
moot-points of the Hindu Philosophy, as conned with the aid of the 
search-light of the Agamic dogmatics that is preserved for us in 
ancient and mediaeval Tamil. It is by no means easy to enter into 
the genius of the Agamanta, if one is not conversant with its right 
traditions which, by the very manner of their preservation and com- 
munication in India, are not of easy access to European scholars. A 
remarkable instance of failure to enter into the spirit of the Agamic 
teaching, on account of this disability, is seen in the faulty inter- 
pretation put by the Rev. Dr. G. U. Pope on the cardinal doctrine 
of Agamic mysticism, Sakti-nipdta. The late Oxford professor 
of Tamil, clever as he was as a skilled translator of the Kural, 
the Naladiyar and the Tiruvdfagant, is quite wide of the mark 
when he explains Sakti nipata as “ cesssation of energy ” in the 
Introductory Essay prefixed to his edition of the Tiruvaragam. 
The explanation calls to mind an analogous instance in which a 



INTRODUCTION' 


111 


European Sanskritist, unaware perhaps of the bearings ot the 
expression, rendered the collocation ; Parama-hamsa ’ into ‘ great 
goose The strictly pedagogic purist may endeavour to justify 
such puerile versions on etymological grounds, but they stand 
" self-condemned as mal-interpretations reflecting anything but 
the sense and soul of the original. Such lapses into unwitting 
ignorance, need never be expected in any of the essays contained 
in the present collection, as our author is not only a sturdy 
and indefatigable researcher in Tamil philosophic literature 
illuminative of the Agamic religion, but has also, in his quest 
after Truth, freely utilised the services of those indigenous 
savans, who represent the highest water-mark of Hindu traditional 
learning and spiritual associations at the present-day. 

It is a remarkable irony of circumstance that, beyond sporadic 
attempts of uncertain value, no serious endeavour has as yet been 
made to give to the educated public a connected conspectus of the 
length and breadth of the teachings contained in the Saivagamas. 
The Rev. Dr. G. U. Pope, the Rev. H. R. Iloisington, the 
Rev. T. Foulkes and Dr. Karl Graul of an earlier generation, and 
some English clerics of a more recent date, such as the Rev. 
H. A. Popley, the Rev. G. E. Phillips, the Rev. W. Goudie, 
the Rev. A. C. Clayton, and a few others, have now and again 
tried to expound the Tamil phase of the philosophy to the best of 
their lights, although unable to fully divest themselves of their 
Christian leanings and prepossessions. The bed-rock of the Agamic 
philosophy and mysticism, has to be delved into, through Sanskrit, 
and delvers for that purpose have, so far, been few and far between. 
Even in the otherwise pregiant treatise recently put forth in 
German by Dr. M. Winternitz on the History of Indian Literature, 
Geschichte der indischen Litteratur , Erster Band, the only mention 
that is made of the Agamas is in regard to the Sakta-tantras, 



IV 


INTRUDE TION 


which he simply calls 'Tantras’. In other words, he details a 
few Tantras which are Saktic, and though Saivagamas are not 
related to the Sakta-tantras by any organic community of thought 
or descent, such a detailing is, at any rate, indicative of the recent 
extensions made, by European scholars of light and leading, to 
the province of Indological research which hitherto has observed 
a sort of water-tight orthodoxy of scope. It is to be hoped that 
when a second edition is called for of that German work, Dr. M. 
Wintemitz will not be slow to avail himself of the materials 
afforded by the Agamas, and thereby add to the post-Vedic chapters 
of his book. At the same time, it is clear that Dr. Paul Deussen, 
another German Sanskritist and metaphysician of superb accom- 
plishments and talents, gives indications of a knowledge of the 
Saiva darsana. In his masterly digest of the Monistic Idealism of 
Sankara, published in German, Das System des Vedanta , Zweite 
A I if: age, he refers to the Bhashya of Srikantha on the Brahma- 
Sutras (the related portions were translated by me from German 
into English for the Brahmavadm in 1907-08), and in his more 
recent work on the post Yedic Philosophy, issued in the same Euro- 
pean language, AUgemeine Geschichte der Philosophic , Erster Band, 
Dritte Abteilung, Die nachvedische Philosophic der Inder, he devotes 
a chapter to the Saiva-darsana. There is however nothing to show 
that Prof. Deussen has dived into the Agamic literature at first-hand, 
as he has for instance, done, into the Aupanishadic, in the course 
his descent into the wells of the ancient Aryan Monism. Further, 
the Agamas have their own interpretations to offer as regards 
the cardinal precepts and teachings of the archaic Upanishats, 
and hence a thorough grounding in the Agamas, and in such of 
the Puranas as have visibly felt the influence of, or been nurtur- 
ed on the same soil as, the Agamas, will altogether place the 
student on a new standpoint, and the Aupanishadic teachings 



m rodi rriux 


in a new perspective, that is to say, in a setting that will be differ- 
ent to what has till now been considered, by the orthodox school 
of European orientalists, as the purely Yedantie view of the 
entire arcanum or scheme of Indian metaphysics. Consequently, an 
independent study of the Agamas, untrammelled by any prior 
predilections, will prove of inestimable value to those orientalists 
who would be glad to investigate de novo whether the Aupanishadic 
teachings will not bear any other philosophic interpretation than 
the one accorded to it heretofore by the so-called accepted 
schools of Hindu philosophy. Again, in the last important 
work that Max Muller published previous to his death, The 
Six Systems of Indian Philosophy , though there are indications 
that he knew of the existence of the Agamanta in both Sanskrit 
and Tamil, there is nothing to show that he went into, or 
was conversant with, the details of the Saiva-darsana as 
developed in the Divyagamas. Dr. Georg Biihler had, it is said, 
an idea of making quite a study of the treatises in Sanskrit 
that were based on the Agamas, as far as they concerned the 
Spanda and the Pratyabhijna phases of the Saiva-darsana, but 
his loss came off all too soon in 1898. And so, Dr. L. D. Barnett 
is perhaps the only extant European orientalist that has for some 
years past been taking an abiding interest in the study of the 
literature relative to the Saiva-darSana in Sanskrit, and it must 
be said to his lasting credit that he is not only a thorough- 
going Sanskrit scholar, but is also an accomplished student of 
the Dravidian vernaculars, and his writings bear an unmistakable 
stamp of very good acquaintance with the works bearing on 
most of the phases of the Agamanta, to wit, the Pratyabhijna, 
the Vira Saiva and the Suddha Saiva (the parent of the system 
developed by Mevkap'Hn in Tamil). He has translated into 
English the Paiamarthasara of Abhinavagupta (a Pratyabhijna 



VI 


INTROI >1 .(.TIOX 


work and edited other Saiva works in Sanskrit. Another 
Pratyabhijna work, by name Sivasutravimarsini, has recently 
been englished by Mr. P. T. Srinivasa Iyahgar. Dr. Wilhelm Jahn 
seems to take a lively interest in Agamic research, (Zeitschrift 
der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, Band lxv, pp. 380 
et seq., q. v.), which imports great future possibilities therefor 
at his hands, and Dr. F. Otto Schrader will not be long in coming 
out with an edition of the Maharthamanjari (a Pratyabhijna 
work), to which I have been desired to append an English 
translation, with critical and exegetical notes. The task of 
continuing the translation of the Mrigendra-Agama from the 
point where Mr. M. K. Narayanasvami Aiyar left it, has de- 
volved on me as a matter of friendly office, and though I have 
not been able to make any large progress with the continu 
ation, by interruptions of an unlooked-for description, yet, it 
is hoped that the entire translation may soon be ready. A 
totally new translation into English of Nilakantha’s Brahma- 
Sutra-bhashya, with Appaya’s Sivarkamanidlpika which is its 
elaborate scholium in Sanskrit, has already been undertaken 
by me, but, it will, in any case, take some time to finish it. That 
translation will be fortified with rich critical apparatus, illustrative 
and explanatory notes, and special introductions in which a digest, 
in English, of the essential portions of most of the Agamas now 
available, will, for the first time, be unreservedly incorporated. 
The above is all that may be said to have been achieved, or 
to be near within an ace of achievement, in the matter of .the 
elucidation of the Saiva-darsana. 

On the purely expositional side, the doctrines of the Agamas 
have found a reverent and apt interpreter in the scholar-sage 
Mr. P. Ramanathan, whose writings it is not possible to surpass 
either in this peninsula or beyond, for either clarity of thought 



INTRODUCTION 


VII 


or directness of appeal. But, unfortunately for scholars, he has 
not chosen to write on the subject more often or copiously than 
his writings would lead the reader to expect. On the other 
hand, the literature and the mysticism of the Agamas have also 
had theit; share of travesty and mockery, in a new-fangled work 
on Indian Philosophy, recently brought out by Mr. P. T. Srinivasa 
Ayyahgar. The last production is a curious mixture of laborious 
learning and hoaxing horse-play which will neither appeal to the 
scholarly philosopher nor the humour-loving general reader. Save 
for some bibliographical bits of varied character and uncertain 
authority, the book is a failure as a genuine resume of the 
factors that enter into the constitution of the many mystic and 
metaphysical cults that have over run the post-Vedic India; and 
worst of it all, the chapters of the book, relative to the Agamas and 
the Saiva darSana, are vitiated, in places, by gross misinterpreta- 
tions, and, in others, by mistakes of fact begotten of the direct ignor- 
ance. As a piece of performance, the book is obviously inspired 
by a desire to synthetically emulate, in the realm of Hindu philo- 
sophic investigation, the divergent achievements of Westerns like 
Dr. Paul Carus and Prof. David Masson. And how little the author 
has succeeded in his endeavour, might be transparent to any one who 
would only care to read with some attention the chapters bearing on 
the Saiva dogmatics and the Saivagamas. The Christian Literature 
Society is daily engaged in its storming operations against 
one phase or another of Indian Thought, so that an occasional 
devil’s advocate from within, certainly fulfils a momentous function 
in the economy of academic investigation. In that sense, at any 
rate, such an author as Mr. P. T. Srinivasa Ayyangar ought to be 
welcomed, instead of being tabooed as unworthy of a piecemeal 
examination, and 'sober analysis. 

The Agamas contend that they constitute the truest exegesis of 



VI 11 


INTRODUCTION 


the Vedas, and their origins are certainly as ancient as those of 
some of the classical Upanishats. If the fire-worship be regarded as 
the ritual inculcated in the Vedas, as the outer symbolism of spiritual 
truths, the temple worship may, on its side, be also said to assume 
a similar importance in regard to the Agamas. The Agamas bring 
. in temple worship as only a further concomitant of fire-worship, the 
one being regarded as an ancillary' adjunct to the other. The only 
1 difference the}' introduce in the elements of fire-worship is the 
deletion of animals as objects of sacrifice. The higher interpretat- 
ions put upon the sacrificial act in many of the Upanishats, are ail 
to be found in the Agamas. though the latter lead up to those inter- 
pretations through the symbolism of fire-worship, as worked out 
along the channel of temple-worship. For the rest, it will be seen 
that in India at the present-day, there is hardly a Hindu that does not 
observe some kind of temple worship or another, which points to 
the conclusion that the Agamas have had, in one form or another, 
a universal hold upon the continent of Hindu India, and that their 
influence tells. It may be easy to point to specific passages of 
the Vedas, and thereby put up a thesis that they do not con- 
template temple- worship. Be that as it may. it will be equally easy 
to demonstrate that the Agamas are the legitimate outcome of the 
j teachings promulgated by the Vedas, and that the more important 
portions thereof, that is to say, the purely mystic and philoso- 
phical, were in every way anterior to such as deal with the 
rites of temple-worship and the technique of sacred architecture. 
Hence, the course of development on Agamantic lines points to 
the inception of the Vidya and the Yoga padas of the Agamas, 
as the next great stride after the stratification of the earlier 
Upanishats; and the Vidya and the Yoga padas did, in their 
turn, gradually necessitate the outer rites of symb'dlism, in view of a 
congregational worship adapted to the needs of the average man with 



INTRODUCTION 


IX 


3 heart within him. Those liturgic rites were enshrined in the 
remaining padas of the Agamas, and the places for the perform- 
ance of such rites, became the temples. There are, for instance, 
^Agamas in which the order of arrangement of the padas, follows 
exactly J;he chronology herein explained ; while there are also 
others in which the arrangement is reversed, due possibly to a 
later deliberate desire to follow logic of theoretic sequence in 
preference to the order of natural evolution. Temples are very 
ancient institutions, though only less ancient than the Upa 
nishats of undoubted antiquity. And there is no doubt that, 
though the first impulse to tern pie- worship had come from the 
Kashmirian Region, the institution flourished in South India with 
considerable pomp and circumstance. The construction of the sacri- 
ficial pavilion for the performance of the Srauta rites, is, as made out 
from the Sulba-Sjtras, chiefly astronomical in design and import. 
And not less so is that of the temple, every part of which has an 
analogue with either an astronomical phenomenon or a zodiacal 
convention. And this astronomical significance of the temple- 
symbolism, runs, in some of the Agamas, side by side with the 
spiritual import that we have learnt to associate with the same 
symbolism. There are also phases of the Saiva-dar§ana in which 
the temple-worship is not regarded with favour, either because 
it is not considered directly contributory to one’s spiritual uplift- 
ment and eventual Emanciption, or because it proves, at a specific 
stage, an out-worn and jejune observance unsuited to the spiri- 
tual wants of the votary. 

The Agamas have branched out from the same stem of the 
Vedic tree that produced the earlier Upanishats, and were at one 
time as wide-spread in India as the Upanishats themselves. Like 
the UpamshatsT*the Agamas also became, in course of centuries, the 
basis of a number of creeds which, though unanimous in accepting 



X 


IXTRODL’Cl I OX 


the essentials of the Agamic teaching, were divergent as regards 
rituals, observances and minor unessential details. The earliest con- 
cretion of the Agamic ‘doctrines as a code of systematic dogmatics, 
had its birth in Kashmir, under the name ofSpan<laand Pratyabijna 
darsanas, which gradually swayed the whole of the trans-\’indhyan 
Upper India. It is not a safe procedure to associate, as some do, the 
early origins of the Lakutisa-Pasupata with those of any the phases 
of the Saiva-darsana that recognises the Saivagamasas its infallible 
scriptures of authority, since the dividing-line between the two 
forms of faith, is formed by the circumstance that the Lakutisa- 
Pasupata (which, at present, is confined to the upper parts of the 
Bombay Presidency), does not take its stand on the Saivagamas. 1 he 
. stream of the Pratyabbijna and the Spanda flowed south, and became 
; the parent of the Vira-Saiva system that, in its turn, grew influen- 
' tial in and round about the Deccan. An earlier current of the 
Pratyabhijna and the Spanda had, in the meantime, found its way 
into South India, to form the nucleus of what later on, in the 
days of the mediaeval theologians, became the compact system 
of the Suddhasaivadarsana. The philosophy that is at the back 
of all these three darSanas, is the Agamanta which is known by 
various names, the chief of which being the appellation Saiva- 
Siddhanta (*= ‘ the logical conclusion established by the Saiva- 
darsana ’). 

i The three philosophic Categories which the Agamanta recog- 
jnises, are Nature, Soul and Spirit. The entire economy of the 
present Dispensation is under the active control of the Spirit, and 
is especially designed by Him in view to the ‘emancipation of 
the Soul. Nature is multi-coloured and many-vestured, and is 
the material cause of not only the outer universe, which hides, 
within the immensity of its bosom, countless hosts of sidereal 
systems, but also of our body, with all its grosser, and subtler 


INTRODUCTION 


XI 


divisions and components, its instruments of knowledge and 
action, its proclivities and tendencies, in which the SouT- lives 
as in a cottage. The Spirit is immanent in both Nature and Soul, 
! and is in fact their Guiding Principle. He is thus the Soul’s Soul 
I It is nothin the power of the SfliiL to lead an independent existence, - 
; either it must remain in unwitting communion with Nature, over- 
powered by Her blandishments, or in conscious Fellowship with the 
Spirit, an intermediate state being thus practically denied to it. If it 
ceases to gravitate towards Nature, it must lean on to the Spirit. 
The s:imsura-chakra is the Soul's orbit, which represents the resul- 
tant of two forces continually acting upon it. The orbit certainly 
shrinks up towards the Spirit, when the Soul would not be attracted 
by Nature. The Soul has the ability to know both Nature and 
Spirit, as it is possessed of sentiency, an attribute which it only shares 
in common with the Spirit. But it cannot be cognised by Nature, 
as She lacks sentiency ; and, for the same reason, the senses and 
the mind, which are fashioned out of insentient Nature, cannot 
cognise the Soul. Nor has it usually an opportunity to cognise 
as such, its own true lineaments, because of its ceaseless and 
indistinguishable communion with either Nature or Spirit, a com- 
munion which prevents the Soul from identiiyingits genuine linea- 
ments. The Sou i is possessed, in other words, of the remarkable 

tendency of ever appearing in the colours of either of the two 
other Categories that chances to be in association therewith for 
the nonce, since, as we have shown, it is, for one thing, seldom, 
if ever, in a state of complete aloofness from both Nature and 
Spirit, and cannot, for another, associate with either of those 
Categories, without its being indistinguishabiy merged in, or its 
becoming one with it. Consequently, the Soul ordinarily sees in 
itself either Nature or spirit, but not its own lorm- it is beginning 
lessly entangled in the fascinations- of Nature, and the Spirit 



INTRODl'f TION 


xii 

carries on His five-fold operations with a “ body of pure sentieit 
Energy ” — the outcome of His own free-will — solely to disentangle 
it from those ruinous fascinations. The universe that we see 
around us, has Nature for its material cause, the Spirit for its 

> - t 

efficient cause and His “ body of pure sentient Energy for its 
instrumental cause. Nature is specially superintended by the 
Spirit, in order that she, aibeit insentient, may the more rigorously 
and consistently exhibit the law of desert and causality, in 
relation to the Soul. The law of causation is really the inherent 
and eternal property of Nature. As long as the Soul chooses 
to e i joy the company of Nature, so long wifi Her law of causality 
and desert hold the Soul tight within its meshes. But Her con- 
nexion with the Soul is, after all, but temporary, though She is, 
by Herself, eternal. It is also possessed of an ingrained perversity 
that is inherited from Nature, and hence eventually eradicable, 
whereby it mistakes its sensuous or sensual wallowing in the 
“ la * of Nature ” for its appointed Goal, and thus converts its 
Spirit-given instruments of Emancipation, formed out of Nature, 
into effective engines of its own perdition. The award of Spiritual 
Freedom is always made by the Spirit to the Soul by an act 
of Grace', and when the moment for that award (which involves 
a complete Emancipation from its bondage to Nature) has arrived, 
the Spirit reveals Himself to the Soul in any manner He pleases, 
and blessess it with //is Eternal Fellowship of ineffable power and 
joy. The above, in short, is the plainest summary of the central 
truths of the Again ant a, when shorn of all learned technicalities, 
and it will not be difficult to see how simple the whole teaching runs. 

We' shall now look at some of the Agamic teachings a little 
fnore closely. The three categories, Nature, Soul and Spirit, are, 
as we have already seen eternal, that is to say, are without either 
start or finish; but the Soul and Nature are under the control of 



INTRODUCTION 


XU1 


the Spirit, and have nothing like absolute independence of action 
which the Spirit alone enjoys to the full. The Spirit is an embodi- 
ment of love and compassion, or, as it is sometimes expressed, is no- 
thing but Life, Light and Love. The Souls are infinite in number, 
but a broacTTnarshalling brings them under three classes, with 
reference to the varying grades of their bondage to Nature. Nature 
is governed by ceaseless cycles of periodic manifestation and dis- 
solution, cycles which turn out, however, to be of many sorts and 
conditions, when regard is had not only to the extent of or the 
interval between the periods, but also to the specific charac- 
ter, phase or grade of the manifestations and dissolutions. 
Manifestation is simply a process of becoming patent, while 
Dissolution, that of becoming latent. Nature ever endures, librat- 
ing between a condition of grossness and ponderability on the 
one hand, and subtlety and imperceptibility on the other. She 
is per se inert, and every cycle of Her activity is only rendered 
possible, by the peculiar impact she receives from the Spirit and 
His immanence in Her. The essential active attribute of the 
insentient Nature, is Her rigid adherence to the law of causation 
and desert, both physically and morally, and it the statement be 
made that She is the Spirit-appointed material instrument of the 
Soul’s Salvation, all we are to understand therefrom is, the Spirit 
requires the Soul to seek its Emancipation only by wedding Nature i 
and thereby passing the ordeal of causality. But the elaborate 
processes which Nature daily employs to bring in more and more 
Souls as Her suitors, in order that they may be schooled under the 
law of causation, are indeed very inscrutable, although exceedingly 
seductive. She first seduces the Soul into Her company by Her 
irresistible fascinations, and finally tires it by Her inexorable law of 
causality, whidrat the same time reveals Her inward gruesomeness 
to the deceived Soul. The Soul then rates Her at Her proper 



XIV 


INTRODUCTION' 


worth , when She also, in Her turn, becomes a penitent and obe- 
dient instrument at its hands, by letting go Her hold of causality 
on the Soul. And thus Nature proves successively a seducer, a 
task-master and a servant, in relation to the Soul, in accordance 

l 

with the degree of spiritual progress attained by it. The Soul is 
originally stupefied with the darkness of involved or inchoate 
Nature and, in that condition, remains tossed about in Her unfathom - 
able womb till the Spirit quickens it, so that it may take its chance 
towards its permanent Spiritual Freedom, bv consciously contacting 
Nature. At each Dissolution, the unemancipated Soul reverts to the 
“ womb of Nature,” and awaits its return to the highway of sam- 
s.ira, with Her next Manifestation. The Salvation of the Soul, 
when once attained, is permanent and irrevocable, but, the uncons- 
cious stupor in which it is primarily plunged, has no beginning. How 
the Soul comes by that oblivion, or, what amounts to the same 
thing, how it gets to be begiuninglessly entangled in Nature, cannot 
be satisfactorily explained, and any endeavour to do so, however 
deftly managed, will be simply landing oneself in a vicious 
circle of ad infinitum regressus. In other words, the Soul’s 
state of bondage has no beginning, but has an end, while the 
Soul’s Spiritual Freedom has a definite beginning, but no end. It 
is at this point the doctrine of the Agamanta becomes hard of 
comprehension to those who cannot accept it solely on the testi- 
mony of the saints that “ know ” the “mysteries of the Spirit”. Be 
it remarked however en passant that similar difficulties face us 
when we endeavour to examine other systems of philosophy put 
forth in India. There is hardly a philosophy or reasoned system 
without a cornering difficulty that is hydra-headed and protean- 
shaped, which, if it be deftly eschewed from one part of our dis 
cussion, certainly threatens us with paralysis, if nttt positive extinc- 
tion, of thought, in another. 



INTRODUCTION 


XV 


The Tgamic mysticism makes quite a speciality of the sub- 
jective processes connected with the Soul's Emancipation. On the 
principle that the “ cottage ” in which the Soul lives, is a minified 
copy or replica of the outer Nature, and the active Spirit behind 
Nature, i% again the Soul’s Soul, a graduated course of spiritual dis- 
cipline is prescribed, quite replete with apt methods to suit the Soul 
in every one of its stages, whereby it is first trained to enter upon a 
minute examination of the constitution and functions of Nature, 
through a detailed and searching inspection of its own “ cottage ”, 
and then taught to slowly and steadily disentangle itself from the 
enmeshments of Nature, and is finally left in a condition fit for the 
Grace of Emancipation from the Spirit. The disentanglement 
from the meshes of Nature, is briefly marshalled as ten-fold 
(da§a-karyani), the condition of the Soul in its different grades 
of bondage to Nature, is ear marked as eighteen-fold (ashta- 
dasa-avasthah), the course of Nature’s manifestation is regarded 
as six-fold (shad-adhvanah), the mood of Nature is proclaimed 
as five-fold (paiicha-kalah) and so on, and, in this fashion, many 
a precious hint is dropped in the Agamas, not only with re- 
ference to the procession of Nature in Her manifestation, and Her 
precession in Her involution, but also in connexion with Her unsus- 
pected methods of seducing the unwary Soul, and with the only 
ways of keeping Her at Her proper vocation, to wit, as an obedient 
handmaiden of the Spiritward-bound Soul. All these, however, but 
make for a preparation to await the appearance of the Spirit, Who, 
at the right moment that is only known to Him, suddenly opens the 
door of His Kingdom (Saiikarapura) upon the ever-expectant Soul, 
and admits it to His never-ending Fellowship ( Ananya-sdytijya ). 

So much for an imperfect summary of a system of ancient thought, 
philosophy and •mysticism, to an exposition of which, the various 
papers, now brought together for the first time, in book-form, from 



XVI 


INTRODUCTION* 


the periodicals in which they originally appeared, have addressed 

themselves. The only mood in which the themes tackled by our 

author in this book, must be approached, is one of reverence and 

devotion, that was so eloquently pleaded for, recently, in the stirring 

< 

address delivered by the Hon. Mr. V. Xrish lasvami Aiyar before the 
Convocation of the Madras University, an address which, though pri- 
marily addressed to “ boys,” has yet graver lessons for “old boys ”, 
as these are, in truth, no better ihan babes in the wide “school of 
Nature”. 

Madras, | 

/ jtli Dec. igi i. j 


V. V. RAMANAN. 



FLOWER AND FRAGRANCE. 


A FLORAL WREATH. 


What is there in Nature so full of beauty and so symbolic 
of the heart’s purity, innocence, and love and joy, as the tiniest 
flower of the field ? What reflects the great Divine Beauty and 
the Divine Loveliness and the Divine Harmony more than the 
lowliest blossom of the dale ? The freshness, the symmetry 
and the delicate tracery of those flowers, how they appeal to 
man’s inmost nature and how inspiriting they are! Need we 
wonder therefore that they have attracted, not more than what 
they are entitled to, we should say, the attention and love of the 
Oriental ; and they enter largely into his enjoyments, his 
Religion and Philosophy. They hold a considerable place in 
Oriental symbology, and the Indian has loved to illustrate his 
great truths from flowers. No ceremonies can be performed 
without flowers ; and he loves to deck with them the Presence 
of his Heavenly Father and he calls out to his brethern, 

S' S g IS Q fSaf! J? iTa IT-ar 
<g/ A a Ssot 
uS;J3l£cv.t -yrsu 
(Lppjghuir^Gtu). 

O Ye who wish to attain Peace of mind 
If Ye, our Father of Arur, worship 
With Flowers of Bhakti, 

Then will Ye attain Mukti. — ( Devaram ). 

The flower in its three-fold character of flower, colour and 
fragrance appeals to him as the visible presence of That which 
is Sat, Chit and Ananda. 



2 


FLOWER AND FRAGRANCE. 


“ y ajssVsjjT ib ssnxsssr ll Gi-trsv ^awijuGuirpaSciru 

L£b? Q/05T CaLCfiJcBVc <x!TS^3Ti cA'Cl? ^ 

“ Like the flower, its colour and its fragrance 
The Lord as Sat, Chit and Ananda assumes form,” 

says the author of “ Tiruvilaiyadal Puran,” a work, by the 
way, noted for its charming diction and great powers of clear 
description. 

Our Saint Appar addresses this Divine Form as ‘ O ! Thou 
cow, the five products of the cow, O ! Thou intelligence, Thou 
agni, Thou sacrificial food, Thou tongue, words proceeding 
from the tongue, Thou Lord, present in the heart of the four 
Vedas, Thou flower, fragrance present in the flower, Thou joy 
of flower present in the hearts of the freed, Thou Deva, Deva of 
of Devas, Thou Effulgent Sun, Lo! Such is Thy Divine 
Presence 

To the philosophic and highly devout Mariikkavachaka, the 
delicate connection of the flower and its fragrance has appealed 
in another light and he sings of “ His greatness, in filling all 
inseparably and surpassingly like the fragrance of the flower", 

“ Qun&srgvujaisQ 

Quin flsup$<ss>piigl QldvSuliQu 

In another place, he compares this very connection to the 
connection of body and soul and in comparing both to the con- 
nection of the Param, distinguishes them at the same time : 

a .pp euirdeDSid) CT2/^j/QuflT0sfr jigitusv) 

upp evtreuGpirir S'&xuSsuitu uffilQuir^eir 
^juQun q^sir uirmrQp 
QupptaLlT Qupp UlLlGBrg] JgH£!ri(gl(Shil 
iSsfpaQ&np (apafhunQw 
ujpg, t^s)6aaS)p3sr esn$-.uiflp 

^^3=tuia ssbu—iiQia, L 

“ Like the soul present in the body, and the fragrance in the 
flower, The Supreme (Param) pervades them and surpasses all. 



FLOWER AND FRAGRANCE. 


3 


The fools, not perceiving this truth, simply delight in enjoying 
the fruits of their own Karma. The words of these, my Father 
has taught me not to listen, by making me his slave and has 
drawn me to the societ}^ of his Bhaktas. This miracle has been 
permitted to me to see ! ” 

• 

Though God’s connection with us is compared to the 
connection of the soul and the body, yet in this case, the 
omnipresence of the soul is still confined to the body and the 
connection yields the soul only a fancied pleasure, and not 
a real and lasting one, differing thereby from the Supreme who 
pervades all and surpasses all and who is ail Love and all Bliss, 
ready to impart this Love and Bliss to those who understand 
him as such ; and when this undying love (*sfiunn is 

possessed, then, that very moment, “the fragrance of Sivam 
(Love, Ananda) will blow out of the flower of Jiva ”, 

“ &&igrui(gyarQetr f aiwesa l'd up pgr.” — (TirU)Utdar.) 

That great Yogin, Tirumular, is very prolific in the use of 
the simile of the flower, and amidst a variety of such we select 
one in which he piles his flowers (of Rhetoric) thick, one over the 
other, to express the omnipresence of the most Supreme : 

“ My Lord and my King is present, united in ajl, like 
feeling in air, sugar in the cane, butter in milk and the sweet 
juice in the fruit and the fragrance in the blossom ”, 

“ &ireSI&£.T &ln &(Vjun3evfljb SLLis/.iLjih 

urraSsnji&r GmujiL/ii,, uipppp aflzpQpib 

jbpQpLD Qi~ir spGfTGsr 6J LruS&np 
&ITSl)vV G)<cBTin(3)ii) &GVI5 Jftf /$<s isT(Vrj>(% ssr 

Our Saint Tayumanavar, whose felicity in epithets and 
phrase-making, we will some-day illustrate, uses most happy 
language in this connection, in invoking that Rock of Love: 

“O! Thou support of the devoted who attain to the 
limitless Yoga-Samadi by the one word (of their Divine Guru), 
when they vie'w’ this vast world as the Supreme Bliss! O! 



4 


FLOWER AND FRAGRANCE. 


Though loving friend of even my lowly self ! O ! Thou Rock 
of joy, uniting with and showing in all bodies and the world 
and the souls, like the fragrance playing on the half-blown flower 
shaped like the half-parted, elegant and sweet-toned tinkling 
bells on children’s feet ”, , 

The comparison of the half-opened flower (in the jasmine 
for instance) in which the fragrance is the sweetest and sharpest, 
to the sweet bells with half-parted mouths tied round children’s 
feet, is most happy and delicious. 

Nakkirar is a very ancient author said to belong to the last 
Sahgham or College of Pandits in Madura and he has, 

“ Lo! my Lord of Kailasa, which soars high above all, with- 
out any other higher than itself, is present in all, like the mean- 
ing in the word, and the soul in the body, and the fragrance in 
the flower 

We will weave into this growing wreath one more flower 
culled from the garden (Sivabhogasaram) of the founder of the 
Dharmapura Matt, inasmuch as it illustrates the meaning of 
‘Advaita ’ clearly. 

“ The advaita relation of God and the perfected Soul in 
Mukti is like the advaita relation existing always between fire 
and wood, heat and water, sweetness and honey, fragrance and 
flower , akas and wind 

Mightily diffident as we are of achieving any thing without 
the Grace (Arul «sy<3«r) of the Most High, and without the 
spirits of the sanctified filling our inmost soul, we have helped 
ourselves to these holy flowers of His Bhaktas, to make a wreath 
and lay at the fragrant Lotus-Feet of Him, Who has never been 
known to forsake His devotees and pray to Him in all love and 
in all humility, to crown our humble efforts with success. 



THE LIGHT OF TRUTH 


OR, 


UNMAI VILAKKAM 

* OF 

TIRUVADIGAI MANAVASAGAM KADANDAR. 


This short treatise consisting of 54 Stanzas is one of the 
Fourteen Siddhanta Sastras, and its author is said to be 
Tiruvadigai Manavasagam Kadandar, one of the 49 disciples 
of St. Meykandan. That he was a native of Tiruvadigai and 
a pupil of St. Meykandan is certain, but there are no other 
particulars available about his life-history. That he must have 
been an advanced sage is evident from the name ( svjj<mu 3 uujiT ) 
he bears, which means “he who has passed beyond thought 
and speech.” 

The author tries to expound in these few pages, the truth 
of the Sacred Agarnas, without going into argumentation, just 
so much as is sufficient for the aspirant after spiritual Truth, 
to bring the teaching into actual daily practice. The}' are in 
the form of questions addressed to the Teacher St. Meykandan 
and answers elicited from him. The later part of the treatise 
explains the truth of the Pahchakshara and Sri Nataraja 
Symbols. We hope the book will be of use to many. 

I. iLiTSLDj/rsu suLg^ir 

G6UT £7)LCj £$ vV-X ■5(^2 351 JT jk,} C'jOT !Jj/F 1 3T, 3 tT 

Q^iriitglsmiSjbsmjB'SJX.ji'ScBTu 
uk&LDpu LjkSjhLjsir esisuuurrui. 

We place Him, in our heart, the Five-armed God in strong 
rut, of russet colour, tusked mouth, and pot-belley ; so that 
we may be freed of our ignorance and be enabled without fault 
to spread the' Light of Truth, to be gathered from the Sacred 
Agarnas. . . 



6 


UNMAI VILAKKAM. 


2 . QuirhsnLLi^-u Qundjujsjb^u Quir&iriw <gu GuiTQ^itrrr 
QjuustnUd Qm'ii&etsn—.nij eSeasrsssruuLD — GuirdjsmLi^tr 
Qldujujit ^IjT^GenssurGsasnij eSgg&ir 

ea sudj'jjff s^rrsn' Q&lLi—Q&t. 

O Thou, my teacher, that, perceiving the truth, showdsf 
the truth of Supreme Knowledge and Bliss after removing the 
falsehood, by proving it to be false ! 

O Thou, Truth, that will not give out false-hood, 

O Thou, that residest in Tiruvennainallur, 

Hear, O Thou, my humble petition, and deign to 
answer my queries ! 

3. O, my Teacher, explain to me the following! 

What are the 36 tatvas? What is Anava ? 

What is that Karma which arose even then ? 

What am I who seem to differ from these? 

Who art Thou ? What is the Lord’s Sacred Dance 
and what is the truth of the Panchakshara ? 

4. O my son, who is immersed in Bliss-ful Yoga, hear 
what I am now imparting to you in accordance with the 
teachings of the Supreme Agamas, graciously uttered of yore, 
by the Supreme Siva. 

5. The earth’s form is a four-sided figure. The water is 
j of the form of a crescent. The fire is of the form of a triangle 
^always. The air is a six sided-figure. The Akas is a circle. 
l ! And the soul gets a body formed of these. 

6 . The colour of these is golden, white, red, black, smoky- 
coloured, respectively and their letters are sv, su, a, uj, 

7. Their symbols are diamond-sword, the lotus-flower, 
svastika , the six spots, and Amrita-bindu respectively. So the 
old Agamas declare, O my Son. 

» 8. The Gods for the elements Earth etc., are Brahma, 

I Vishnu, Rudra, Mahesvara and Sadasiva ; and their functions 
] are respectively Creation, Sustentation, Regeneration, giving 
Rest, (Tirobhava) and showing Grace (Anugraha).' * 



UN'MAI VILAKKAM. 


7 


i 9. Brahma creates ; The lotus-eyed Vishnu protects ; 
1 Rudra destroys, and Isa gives them rest ; and Sadasiva shows; 
5 grace always. 

. 10. The Earth is hard, w ater cool, and fire hot, ajt, flows 

hither and thither, and Akas gives room to all. V . 

11. We have now set forth the number and quality of the 
ele ment s. If we are to tell you about thelive deceitful Percep- 
tionsT“they are the desire-producing Sound, Touch, Sight, 
Taste apd Smell. 

12. Hear the enumeration of the JTi dnendr iyas ! Know them 
to be the ear, the skin, the eye, the tongue and the nose, which 
perceive the low sensations in this low world. 

13 and 14. The ear perceives sound through Akas. The 
body perceives touch through the air. The eye perceives light 
■ through fire. The tongue perceives taste through water. And 
the nose perceives smell through the earth. So the Agamas 
declare. They who conquer these senses secure the Bliss-ful 
Nirvana. 

15. The Kapmendriyas giving rise to speech etc., are mouth, 
feet, hands, anus and the genital organs. 

16. The mouth speaks through the aid of Akas ; ’the feet 
\ move through the aid of air ; the hands work through the aid 

of fire; the anus excretes through the aid of water; the genital 
organs give pleasure through the aid of earth. 

1 7. Hear now the enumeration of the Ant^hkaranas ! They 
are Manas, Buddhi, Ahankara and Chitta. They respectively 
perceive, reason, linger and reflect. 

18. The foregoing _24- tnttvas are stated by the ancient 
Agamas to be the Atma-tattvas. Hear, now the Vidya^ta ttvas. 
expounded by pie. 

19. Time, Niyati, Kala, Vidya, Raga, Purusha, Maya, 
this is their order. Hear now their nature with attention. 



8 


L'NMAI V1I.AKKAM. 


20. Time, measures the past, gives enjoyment in the pre- 
sent, and contains new store for the future. Niyati - tattva 
fixes the order and sequence of Karma. Aa/ 3 -tattva induces 
action. I'uiya- tattva induces intelligence. The Purusha-tattva 
induces perception of the five senses. And Maya induces 
doubt and ignorance. 

21. We have now stated the Vidya-tattvas. Hear now the 
SuddhaH&ttvas ! They are Sudd’na-Vidya, Isvara, Sadasiva, 
Sakti and Siva tatvas. 

22. * Suddha-Yidya induces more intelligence than action. 
Isvara-tattva induces more action than intelligence. Sadasiva- 
tattva induces them both in equal proportion. Sakti-tattva 
induces action, and Siva-tattva induces Jnana alone. 

23. t We have now fully stated the 36 Tattvas. Hear 
now about the two kinds of Mala, Anava and Karma. Stated, 
Anava induces ignorance ; Karma Mala induces you to identify 
yourself thoroughly with the chain of pleasures and pains. 

24. O Thou rare Teacher, Thou hast explained to me the 
nature of the 36 Tatvas, and .vnava and Karma. Deign now to 
show me the nature of myself who seems to differ and not differ 
from these. 

25. Hear well what I state! Achit cannot subsist before 
Pure Chit. Chit cannot perceive Achit. The Atma (Soul) is 
what distinguishes and perceives both Chit and Achit. So the 
Vedas declare without doubt. 


* Note . — All these 36 tatvas are component parts of the universe 
of matter (Maya;, all powerful and all intelligent, in union with which, 
the soul gets rid of its darkness, and regains its light. This Siva-tattva 
and Sakti-tattva etc., forming only nutter should not be confounded with 
the Supreme Siva and His Sakti. 

t Note . — This Karma as defined here is exactly what the Buddhists 
understand by the Individual Ego, or Individuality which of course sub- 
sists from moment to moment and is not anything subsisting permanently. 



UNMAI VILAKKAM. 


9 


2 6. Hear now how the 36 Tattvas cannot be conscious of 
themselves. The six kinds of taste cannot perceive themselves. 
So also the Tattvas do not know themselves. 

27. As a person has to taste these six kinds of taste and 
then perceive them, so you are the intelligent person who 
uniting with these Tattvas perceives each and all of them. 

28. “ Out of thine undiminished grace, hast thou shown 
me my nature. Explain to me Thy own Imperishable Form.” 
“As the Sun enables the eye to see, so will we enlighten you 
and your intelligence.” 

29. Know more. The senses cannot understand without 
the soul, and cannot understand the soul. So also do we 
enlighten you without your being able to perceive us. 

30. “As the Vowel letter ‘A’ is to the rest of the letters, 
so do we stand as the Life of all life. When we are not present 
in any soul, then will there be no light. So the good Agamas 
declare.” 

31. O Meykanda Natha, graciously expound so that I may 
understand the nature of the Sacred Dance with the sound of 
the five letters seen by the sages. 

32. “ O my son, hear ; The Supreme Intelligence dances in 
the soul formed of the letter ya, with a Form composed of the 
five letters Si, va, ya, na, ma, for the purpose of removing 
our sins. 

33. Hear now how the Dance is performed ! In His feet is 
na-, in his Navel is ma\ in His shoulders is Si; in his face is 
va ; in his Head is ya* 

34. | The Hand holding out protection is ya ; the hand 
holding the fire is na ; the foot holding down muyalaka is ma. 

* Note. — These letters have to be contemplated in those parts. 

JNote. — This -is another form of contemplating the Panchakshara. 



10 


UNMAI VILAKKAM. 


35. The arch ( 0 @ajir 9 ) over Sri Nataraja is Omkura ; and 
the akshara which is never separate from the omkara is the 
Filling Splendour. This is the Dance of the Lord of Chitambara. 
They understand this who have lost their self (Ahankara). 
Understanding, they leave their births behind. 

t 

36. Creation starts from the Drum. Protection proceeds 
from the Hand of Hope. The Fire produces Destruction. From 
the Foot holding down proceeds Tirobhava; the Foot held 
aloft gives mukti. 

37. By these means, Our Father scatters the darkness of 
may a, burns the strong karma, stamps down mala (Anava) and 
showers grace, and lovingly plunges the soul in the Ocean of 
Bliss. This is the nature of His Dance. 

38. The Silent Jnanis, destroying the three kinds of mala 
establish themselves where their selves are destroyed. There 
they witness the Sacred Dance filled with Bliss. This is the 
Dance of the Sabhanatha whose very form is Grace. 

39. The One who is past thought and speech assumes 
graciously the Form composed of the Panchakshara in the 
Dancing Hall ol Pardsakti, so as to be seen by His Consort, Uma, 
Haimavati. They never see births who see this mystic Dance." 

40. O my gracious Guru ! Thou hast explained to me 
beautifully the nature of the Nadanta Dance. Let me now 
know the nature of the Panchakshara. Can they be one with 
the letters which are perishable ? 

41. “The Symbols of these letters may be perishable but 
not their connotation in any language. The meanings of the 
five letters respectively are God, His grace (Sakti), Soul, 
Tirobhava, and Mala. 

42. God, Grace, Soul, Tirobhava, and Mala are the purport 
of the five letters (Sivayanama). If pronounced beginning with 
na, you will not obtain Grace. You will obtain It when you 
pronounce It begining with Si. 


UNMAI VILAKKAM. 


II 


43. If this beautiful Pauchdkshara is meditated upon, the 
soul, getting rid of its Anavamala will land in the Region where 
there is neither light nor darkness, and there, God’s Grace 
(Sakti), will unite it to Sivam. 

* 44. If the PaTichdkshara is pronounced with the letters 

denoting* the two malas, then will he not get rid of his three 
malas, and obtain Bliss. If pronounced otherwise acccording to 
law, your judna will be boundless and you can live in Bliss. 

45. In the PaTichtikshara , are found the Agamas and the 
Vedas, given out by the gracious God. In it, are found the 
Puranas. In it, is the Blissful Dance. And in it, is found the 
silent Mukti, which passes beyond all. 

46. The Agamas declare that the nature of the union 
secured by the Muktas is like that of the fruit and its taste, fire 
and its heat, the musical composition and its tune. 

47. The Vedas with truth declare that as the various Tattvas 
are found united inseparably in the bound condition, so the souls 
in the freed condition will dwell as one with God. 

48. As the moon’s light is indistinguishable in the Light of 
the Sun, so will the soul unite itself to the foot of the Supreme 
Lord and plunge itself in Bliss. 

49. If it be said that the soul had to go and unite itself to 
God, then the Omnipresence of Siva will be destroyed. If God 
is said to have united Himself to the soul, then they must 
be different. But what then is the Truth ? The position is like 
that of the Sun which surrounds the man who had lost his 
blindness.” 

50. Thou tellest me that the Supreme one, who is past 
thought and speech, is gracious and suffers no taint, and that 
like this Pati, the Phi it and PdSa arc also eternal. Prove this 
in Mukti also. 

51. “O my Son, Hear how they are in Mitktil He who 
enjoys the Supreme Bliss is the soul. He who imparts this 



12 


UN4IAI VILAKKAM- 


Supreme Bliss is the First Cause. That which increases this 
happiness is MALA. Understand this in all love.” 

52. “O my Father, let me know the unfailing means of 
securing this Mukti ?”. “Hear me state this! They who 
regard and worship the Guru , Lihga, and GOD’S DEVOTEES) 
as the incomparable God, will not suffer births and deaths.” 

53. “ Melting in Love, as the cow that had calved recently, 
the Jivan-muktas will take strong hold of the Guru, Linga and 
Bhaktas, and will be possessed of great love to them, which 
will destroy their sins.” 

54 - suiryiiQ^eBr ^/Q^LLaL-Qec ueussL—eSsti 

eSyiizQjg uj'Ssoiliitu)®) (SiD^enfluSen — 

QeuesirQssiinu^ &Qeti esmeer Qtoiu&asjrt— isir^Qesr 
iLjasBrssHD is ■geuuutuQeBriLl/bjDi. 

O, Meykanda-N atha, the fruit of True Penance, Who 
dwellest in both Tiruvenneynallur and Svetavana, O, Ocean 
of Grace, I have been saved by thee, saved from being tossed 
about in the Ocean of Sorrow. 




-A 




THE HOUSE OF GOD. 


“YE ARE THE TEMPLES OF GOD.’' 


“ ^,^'JJITlu /5®a^Lcffs) luGtraUsvn ^uars^LonSd 
Q&ir&shuiTuj &.a&rrrst]LDirQg Qpassr t£hu Quir^re^LnirSu 
QujglujtT Qtu&icnQu Quaiir 2®£1 ldit uj/rigsyjfl'Su 
(Sun tghuiT $p(Sjiplei i&ou QuirgiiEt_ti> Quap/SQu^p/3. 

O, Thou, the Beginning, the Middle, the Limitless Limit, 

The Light, and the Wisdom, and All Things Manifest, 

The Indivisible One, The Female and the Male. 

Glory, Glory to Thy Dance in Tillai, 

The Intellectual Region of Universalism. 

spu'Ssar si—ihpQ&npl e (nfisstsrQ iu iLK^euwrrS 
■Sjp^ps Qsirsoiip. iu(njiA<ss>rr> &up^l<snQu.svinjc> 
mpus e8QujnLotLiT(3ji £sl ppii> u^ippianSssrpa 
QuapLju. eerL—(ShQfilj@s!rp y®<stpa) Qutrp/SQurrpfl. 

O, Thou, the Light from which speech and thought turn back. 
The very Form of Grace, The Wonderful Presence, 

The Cnown resting on the rare Vedasiras, 

In the beautiful Chit-Sabha of Chit-Para-Vyoma, 

Thou dost dance delightedly. Glory, Glory, to Thy tinkling Foot 

0«T(7y^r g/D6ty0(ajjTuj ,°y (VjSwnu @iT6Br& 

Gan(Lpispir3 tugi&wiui 9^-pps amp. 

Sear^Qm tmtsmiuQiu^ttw ^leaneziu iisS 

iSeBT^ssrujn sjSlujaieoeimrr r8’l£isiuQuitrtQm(&r r FLD 7 
iL&sTQrps eSeisrussi-p piri—sudoeo 

LoessfiQujQujeir askfQsasr u>iru>(njihQp mirs^<suni 
sebr(ir?<5$6Br Si^/0/5^7 Qu-iresr^narr 

t&soiepp SeBTQpp^etarrd si—Qm lULDuQsQp, 



14 


THE HOUSE Of COD 


O Thou Imperishable Triple Form, and Formless ! O Thou Supreme, 
Intelligence working steadfast in the six forms of Religion ! 

Who could know Thee after raising the curtain of M-ya. ? 

Thou dost dance in the hearts of Those who think of Thee, 

Sj Thou art the Priceles /Jewel ; iThou my eye ; 

Thou, the Supreme Panacea; 

Thou the Ocean of Chinmudra Wisdom, 

Who didst teach the four ancient sons, 

Manna Jiiana from under the Sacred Banyan Tree 
Thou, the Deva of Devas. 

The first two verses we quote from Saint Sekkilar’s 
Periyapuran and the last from Saint Tuyuinanavar, in praise of 
the famous Temple at Chidambaram and the sacred mysteries 
contained therein. We have elsewhere observed that even if 
we have lost our books on Veda and Vedanta, we could evolve 
the whole thing again from the symbols we possess, provided 
we had the tiny key to unlock these sacred mysteries. The 
hoariest and most ancient wisdom is thus enshrined in these 
unmistakable symbols, and when we understand them aright, 
we are enabled to test and know which is the true Philosophy 
and which is the true Religion, surrounded as we are to-day by a 
multitude ol Religions and Philosophies conflicting in themselves 
and yet claiming to be the most ancient and the truest. It is 
the mos’t unfortunate thing, in India and in Indian Religion, that 
the same books and the same texts furnish the authority and the 
sanction for every existing phase of belief and thought, and 
when this fact is coupled with such a blind ignoring of what 
is past and what is modern, and when the materials for applying 
such an historical test are not very considerable, the task of 
deciding which is the true interpretation and which is false, is 
rendered very difficult, though not impossible, and the value of 
a test as indicated above, cannot be lost sight cf. In interpreting 
documents, the rule ought no doubt to be, that where the words 
are plain and unambiguous, the plain meaning of the words 
ought to be made to prevail, and no casuistry could be allowed 
to mar the effects of its plain meaning. It is only when the 



THE HOUSE OF GOD. 


15 


words are ambiguous, any interpretation as to its real meaning 
by other evidence is permissible at all. Then, again, when we 
begin to enquire into the truth of an\^ particular custom and 
tradition, we find how difficult it is to arrive at an uniform 
conclusion, when we have to rely on mere oral evidence ; and 
any documentary evidence (we use it in the strictly legal sense) 
if available, is of the utmost importance, and the older the 
document, the greater the value thereof. Then, again, consider 
the difference between the verbal accounts of a dozen people 
who witnessed a particular scene all at the same time, and the 
actual scene photographed by an ordinary Kodak. We might 
be sure to discover discrepancies and contradictions in the oral 
testimony, though it might be perfectly honest. Of course, 
there might be exceptionally trustworthy witnesses, as there 
might be untrustworthy cameras. The test we have proposed 
above, may, as such, be seen to possess all the elements of an old 
and ancient document, and a trusty camera. And the more so, 
when we know, as a matter of fact, that the written language of 
the primitive mankind consisted of pictures only. The most 
ancient Sumerian, the Chaldean, the Egyptian and the Chinese, 
were all pictorial languages; and it is well known that these 
were the people who have tried to leave their highest thoughts 
on religion and philosophy behind them, in pictures and’statuee 
and monuments. 

In proceeding therefore to unravel the mysteries connected 
with our symbolism, we must confess that the task is not one 
which we can conscientiously think of adequately discharging. 
In attempting the impossible therefore, we have no other excuse 
than the one which Sage Sekkilar had before him : 

“ ly sqeairu uifipnuScgnb 

“ Though impossible to reach its limits, 

Insatiate- Jove drives me to the task.” 

Before we .do so however, we have to get clear of two sets 
of men, who pester us often with their cant. One of such will 



1 6 


THE HOUSE OE GOD. 


raise the cry of sectarianism, and the other, with the catch-word, 
revivalism. There are some very estimable people belonging 
to both these classes, we admit, as well as their sincerity, but 
with most it is all mere cant, pure and unmitigated cant. They 
believe neither in the one nor in the other ; they have neither 
inclination nor wish to study and think, and pause and enquire 
into the truth of things. They are themselves sectarians, so 
blind that they will not acknowledge themselves to be such. 
They start with the inborn conviction that this is trash and they 
have no patience with those who will honestly differ from them, 
and they clutch at a word, a phrase, to kick up a dust, with the 
evident object of besmearing the other side. No doubt, there is 
a sort of scepticism which we prize much, a scepticism which 
will lead one to doubt and inquire into the truth of things and 
not to scorn and scoff at everything. And in our inmost heart, 
we do not wish to wound the feelings of a single person, of 
whatever shade of opinion he may belong to. And is not 
the present enquiry solely devoted to reach ‘the region of 
universalism,’ “ Pu/r^/ir-ssTT.,” where, in the words of our Sage 
Tayumanavar, 

“ uscttuiP.iu loost^.lL L.rrrr^-cs Gv/r^cg 

GTcVTUini T.5 1 L&l(ThZ(5j G} £ 6VoO, ( L , d" S QTT 

erj=f ifmj'S-S'SuiTS'Gtyii:, jrtHpuk" ? 

every religionist comes and bows in adoration of the One 
Supreme, saying they see no symbols of any creed but all 
AkSs ? And he states in the previous lines that he reached this 
region, after looking in vain in every creed and in every path 
for that Pure Spirit which seeks to reconcile with the path of 
noblest knowledge, all the bitter conflicting creeds and religions. 

i( r^ewLLmr <%■$ (&F,n <ssr id tsl<c$r G)urT(7TjSfrrrL0£S : gy 
<fwuj &>e:Q><£ j£lj Qun Qj)(Gfr} <5 £ rr 

WoST LD(T & 6 S 8 T SVl>t 30 . 9t 

And the place is worth a trial visit even to-day, for 
does not Tayumanavar record his experience,' that his stony 



THE HOUSE OF GOD. 


17 


heart melted into love and bliss, the moment he saw the Holy 
Presence ? 

el assrintrass Q&d^&Qfsir Qsusbt&qlo pnQeur 
aej&L-.eiii-. <gb)Zbt ik ^ th sncseru. euir^LO." 

This 'has not been his experience only, of believers alone. 
Ages back, scoffers and atheists have felt the power of this 
Presence, and it is recorded of the great Atheist Guru, Jaimini, 
that when he approached, all his unbelief left him, and he 
composed his song of Vedapadastava. And though there are 
thousands of temples all over the land, the heart of every true 
believer nas always turned, with love and longing, to this centre- 
spot. And it is believed that Chidambaram occupies a central 
geographical position between the northern and southern 
extremes of India, including Ceylon. And corresponding to this 
position in the macrocosm, Arumukha Navalar observes that, 
in the human microcosm also, the place points to the region of 
Sushumiia between Ida and Pingaja nSdts. There is another 
centre of heat and vitality and light in the human body, and 
that is the heart. And the heart is the most vital and delicate 
organ in the whole system. Every other organ requires its 
help for its nourishment and upkeep. It is saved and protected 
from many an ill, by its position, which every other organ is 
exposed to; but that is because that, whereas life can be 
prolonged even after injury to every other organ, life ebbs 
away the instant the heart is injured. And then, is not the heart, 
the seat of love, love pure and undefiled ? Pity, kindness, mercy, 
grace, are all different shades of this one Love, =sy«arq, Bhakti, 
faith. Is there anything else that can compete with this 
Supreme Principle? Knowledge, you may exclaim, with its seat 
in the brain. We dare say, ‘not.’ The slightest injury to the 
heart completely paralyses the brain. And the pulsation in 
the brain itself rises and falls with the beat of the heart itself. 
It is the one organ-m the body which is ever active, and knows 
no rest, when everything else, including the brain, undergoes 
rest. And in human nature also, what is there which love 


3 



V 


18 TilE HOi/SE r-r COT 3 . 

cannot quicken? It can give life to the despairing and the 
lifeless, strength to the weak, courage to the coward ; and 
instances have not been wanting to show what extraordinary 
feats of intellect, love has been the cause of. The whole world 
is bound by the heart, much more than by the intellect alone. 
And Mrs. Humphrey Ward has portrayed in glowing words 
the difference between the man of the intellect and the man of 
the heart in her Robert Etsanere. There, the man of the intellect 
pines, in secret and in his pride, for that very touch which 
makes the whole world kin. And it is in this heart, all mankind 
have liked to build a temple for the Most High. And the only 
requisite is, that this heart be pure. And the moment this 
heart is pure, there the light from the Invisible Aka 5 will shine, 
dispelling the darkness that blinds the eye, and enabling it to see. 

“ Qsueiflujtrear /fsr«irx«3r Qaofk'® A; 

Qairraftajir0ui sesst u$ raiT-iis QuJenPei rgx ewraja/sir ss.Ta&d” 

“Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.” 
said the Lord Jesus. And the sage who composed the Taittiriya 
Upanishat sang long before him: “Satyam jhanam anantam 
Brahma, Yo veda nihitam guhayam Paramevyoman, So’snute 
sarvan kamantsaha, Brahmana vipaschiteti 

“He who knows Brahman, which is Sat, which is Chit, and 
which is endless (Bliss), as hidden in the cave (of the heart) in 
the highest Akas, he enjoys all blessings as one with the 
Omniscient Brahman.” And the most mystical and oldest of 
the Upanishats, the Chhandogya, also repeats the same 
instruction. “ Would you like to know what that one thing 
is, which you have to search for and to know? And when 
you have to search for it, how 7 to know 7 it ? Hear ! There 
is the Brahmapura (body), and, in it, the Uahara (palace) of 
the lotus (Pundarika) of the heart, and, in it, that Antar-Akasa. 
Now, what exists in this Akaka . That is to be sought after, 
That is to be understood. 

“As large as this Akasa is. so large is.thjit 7\kaSa within 
the heart. Both heaven and earth are contained in it ; both 



THE HOUSE OF GOD. 


19 


Fire and Air ; both Sun and Moon; both Lightning and Stars; 
and whatever there is of Him in this world, and whatever 
is not, all that, is contained within it.” (VIII, 1. 123) In an 
earlier chapter, this Supreme Being is called “ The Intelligent, 
Whose body is Prana, Whose form is Light (Jyotis), Whose 
thoughts are true, Who is like the Akasa (omnipresent and 
invisible], from Whom all works, all desires, all sweet odours, 
and tastes, proceed ; the Atma within the heart, smaller than a 
grain of rice, smaller than a grain of barley, smaller than a 
mustard-seed, smaller than a canary-seed, or the kernel of a 
canary-seed ; also the Atma within the heart, greater than the 
Earth, greater than the Sky, greater than the Heaven, greater 
than all these Worlds.” (III. 14. 223). In a later passage, the 
Upanishat says that “ He who is called Akasa is the revealer of 
all forms and names ; That within which these forms and names 
are contained, is the Brahman, the Immortal, the Atma.” 
(VIII. 13. 1.) The following verse occurs in the Katha (I. 2. 20.), 
the Svetas vatara (III. 20.) and the Taittiriya-mahopanishat, and 
the same is reproduced in the Sivamahapurana. 

“ Smaller than small, yet greater than great, in the heart 
(Guha) of this creature, Atma or Isa doth repose: That, free 
from desire, He sees, with His grief gone, the Lord and His 
might, by His favour.” In the Kaivalyopanishat, the ’same is 
reproduced, in the following words : “ Beyond the heavens, yet 
shining in the heart (Guha] of his creatures, Him the sages, free 
from desire, reach.” Sri Krishna also imparts this most secret 
of secrets to his pupil, “ that Isvara dwelleth in the hearts of all 
beings, O Arjuna, by his maya, causing all beings to revolve, 
as though mounted on a potter’s wheel,” and importunes him 
to tlee to Him to secure Supreme Peace by His Grace. The 
manner of occupying this seat or dwelling place is elsewhere 
referred to, in the XHIth and IXth discourses, 32nd and 6th 
verses respectively, and these three or four verses bring out the 
whole of the Upanishat thoughts. 11 As the Omnipresent Akusa 
is not soiled, by reason of its subtlety, so, seated everywhere in 
the body , the Seff is not soiled.” “ The support of beings, and not 


20 


THE HOUSE OF GOD. 


rooted in beings, my Atma is their efficient cause ; as rooted in 
the Akcisa, the mighty air moves everywhere, so, all things 
rest, rooted in me.” This Supporter, Permitter, Spectator and 
Enjoyer, is styled Mahesvara, Paramatman and Parama- 
Purusha, in verse 22, chapter XIII. Another verse in the ChhUn- 
dogya says that Gayatri is the body and the heart* because 
in it all the spirits are established. No wonder, therefore, that 
in almost every page of the Tamil Veda, and the writings of the 
later Tamil Saints, God’s truest dwelling place, His house, 
His palace, His seat, is universally referred to as the human 
heart. “ S'Sssruueuir LceerQiL Q^ir'jStsvnsQsrrseBn-ena.'’ And SO it is that 
the famous Shrine we are speaking of, is, by preeminence called 
“,@0i(2WiiSe «”,* “The beautiful House,” inasmuch as it is also 
called the “Pundarika Vidu” “ ^esaru-lf $< 3 ® ” , “the House of 
lotus”, or “ Dahara Vidu” also. And, to-day, we will stop, after 
identifying this Golden Palace in Chidambaram with the 
“Human Heart” spoken of in the most ancient writings, and 
we will speak of the Great King and Lord, Who is the Dweller 
in this Palace and His characteristics, in a future issue. 

[* It is interesting to note that the chief Temple in Mecca is called 
‘ al Caaba,’ literally meaning, • The House ’ and the Hebrew word for the 
great Temple at Jerusalem also meant simply, ‘ The House,’ “ The House 
of God.’ f ] 


LOTUS OF THE HEART. 


If the real nature of the Lotus of the Heart is examined, its stalk 
will be the 24 tattvas, beginning with earth ; its petals, vidya-tattvas and 
suddha-vidya ; its pollen, the 64 kalas of Isvara and Sadasiva ; its ovary, 
Sakti, the essence of kalas; its seeds, the 51 forms -of nadam ; and the 
arul-sakti of the Lord Siva rests on it (as fragrance). 

(Sivajuanabodham IX. 3. c ) 



AN ANOTHER SIDE. 


We refer to an article entitled ‘ Wisdom and Worship ’ in 
an issue of the BrahmavSdin dated 5th June 1897. The first 
paragraph is devoted to the statement and exposition of the 
two postulates of existence, according to the Sankhyas, namely 
Nature and Souls, and the next paragraph shows how untenable 
this theory is, in the view of the Vedantin, and the article 
proceeds in its first half to expound the view of the Vedantin, on 
the same subject. As the article deals with some of the most 
fundamental questions connected with Hindu Philosophy, we 
proceed to-day to examine some of these statements contained 
in the first part of the article only, leaving the question of 
worship to be discussed hereafter. According to Sankhya, 
there is Nature (Pradhana), which changes and manifests all 
phenomena, and there are an infinite number of Souls, which 
being simple cannoc change, and must, therefore, be different 
from Nature. Nature works out all phenomena for the liberation 
of the Soul, and Liberation consists in the Soul discriminating 
that it is not nature (Pradhana). The Soul is omnipresent also. 
The Vedantin answers that this is not a perfect sytem. If 
Nature is simple, and the Soul is also simple, there will be two 
simples, and the Soul being omnipresent, Nature must be 
omnipresent also, and then Nature will be beyond time, space 
and all causation, and no change is possible as such in Nature. 
There is thus an impossibility of having two simples and 
two absolutes. How does the Vedantin solve this problem ? 
His solution is this : — “ Because, according to the Sankhyan 
there must be a Soul apart from Nature, for the reason that 
Nature in all her modifications, from gross matter up to chitta, 
or the intellect, is simply insentient (even the mind-stuff being 
insentient), so, there must be some sentient being as the motive- 
power behind Nature, making the mind think and Nature 



22 


AN ANOTHER SIDE. 


work. Now, says the Vedantin, this sentient being, which is 
behind the whole universe, is what we call God, and conse- 
quently this universe is not wholly (the italics are ours) 
different or apart from Him. It is but Himself, Who has some- 
how (the italics are ours; become this universe. He is not only 
the instrumental cause of the universe, but also the 'material 
cause thereof. A cause is never altogether different from its 
effect, and an effect is but its own cause reproduced in 
another form.” All Yedantins accept these propositions, it is 
stated, namely first, that God is both the instrumental and 
material cause of this universe, .and that everything that exists 
is He ; and secondly, that Souls are also part of God, sparks of 
that Infinite Fire, and an Upanishat Text is quoted in proof of 
this. No, it is said further down, it is no spark, but the burning 
log itself, in as much as Brahman can have no parts. ‘ Then 
how can there be so many souls ?’ We are led into another 
simile, the oft-repeated simile of die Sun and its myriad reflect- 
ions in different particles of water: “so ail these Souls are but 
reflections of Brahman and are not real. They are not the real 
‘I,’ the One undivided Being; men, women, brutes are mere 
reflections of Him, and are unreal.” There is but one Infinite 
Being, and he appears as ‘you’ and ‘me’, and the appearance of 
distinctions, is all a delusion. This apparent division of Him is 
caused by looking at Him through the net-work of time and 
space and causation. The Ego is He, the Non-Ego is He. They 
are not part of Him, but the whole of Him. “It is the Eternal 
Knower Who stands behind aii phenomena; He Himself is the 
phenomena. He is both the subject and object, He is the Ego 
and the Non-Ego.” Here we might pause, before we proceed 
to the rest of the paragraphs. 

In the first place, we must beg leave to state that the 
criticism of the Sahkhya proceeds on a mere word-quibble; the 
word that is translated ‘simple’ is, we believe, ‘Avyaktam,’ that 
source of fruitful dispute between a number -of learned heads, 
like the late Mr. T. Subba Rao, the Light of the East , the 
Thinker and the Brahmavddin itself etc., etc., i. c., where 



AN AN< .TrtE,! Mil’S. 2 T, 

the word occurs in the Gita. The whole mistake is, no doubt, 
due to not remembering that this word, and others like 
Prana, Purusha, Atma, Kshetra, etc., are used in the older 
works in a number of acceptations, and any argument based 
on such a verbal semblance, is sure to end in fatal error. 
Now in regard to this word ‘ Avyakta ’, it is used in the 
ioth sutra of the Sankhya-Karika, to distinguish Mulaprakriti 
from its own products ; and the Commentator no doubt says 
that the distinction might apply to the Soul also. The word 
might itself be applied to the Soul, but then it only means, 
‘ uncaused ’ and ‘ causeless ’. And Colebrooke translates it as 
‘undiscrete ’. The 3rd Sutra makes clear this distinction in the 
very beginning, “ Nature is no production; seven principles are 
productions and productive ; sixteen are productions (unpro- 
ductive). The Soul is neither a production nor productive.” 
Herein lies all the difference, between the Soul as Avyakta and 
Nature (Pradhana) as Avyakta, and the mental and sensory 
planes. Nature itself occupies a higher position, is more per- 
vasive than the Intellect, and Intellect is more pervasive than 
the senses, and so on. That is to say, Intellect is omnipresent, 
and senses are not, when in relation to the senses themselves. 
But Intellect is not, when in relation to Pradh&na, and Pradhana 
is omnipresent so far as regards its own productions, but' its 
omnipresence is nothing when in the presence of the Soul, since 
the latter is the superintendent, the enjoyer, and the former 
ceases to exist when the Soul is in a state of abstraction. As 
such, the word ‘omnipresence’ itself is a relative term, as ‘space’ 
itself is, and it is absurd to conclude that since both are called 
simple and omnipresent, ergo, they must be two absolutes, and 
two such impossible things. We will explain ourselves more 
fully. Take, for instance, the five senses, the eye, the ear, etc. 
The eye covers a certain sphere in its operation, but it is limited; 
it cannot comprehend what the ear can perceive, and the ear 
cannot do what the nose can feel, and so on. Each sense, in fact, 
is limited and unpervasive ; but take the Intellect in connection 
with this. The Intellect is omnipresent. It both sees and hears and 



24 


an another side. 


smells etc. It covers a greater sphere, and all the spheres covered 
by its own productions, the senses. But take the intellect 
(Buddhi) itself in its relation to the Soul. The Soul is sentient 
and Buddhi is insentient. The latter is nowhere, when the Soul 
is in itself. As such, the Soul is more really omnipresent than 
Pradhana or Nature. That is to say, there are different planes of 
existence, and different grades of Vyapaka Vydpya. The one 
lowest is VySpya, and the one higher is Vyapaka, and this higher 
itself is Vyapya when compared with something higher than 
itself, and so on,. till we arrive at a Being, Who is most omni- 
present and beyond Whom our thought and mind cannot pene- 
trate. This view of the Sankhyan has no doubt not presented 
itself to the Vedantin, and what the latter has however in his 
mind is the old riddle, how can two things co-exist, and one be 
omnipresent ? Like all such riddles, this is based on a fallacy, in 
not taking note of the facts above presented, about the essential 
difference between Pradhana and the Soul. The riddle supposes 
that two things are of the same kind, of the same quantity, 
length, breadth, width and of the same density or tenuity &c. If 
they are so, no doubt it will be an impossibility. But we contend 
that things of different densities and tenuities can fill and overlap 
one over the other, and much more so when one is sentient and 
Chit, and the other is non-sentient and Achit. For instance, there 
can be no two things so contrary in Nature as Light and Dark- 
ness. And do they co-exist or not, or are they one and the same ? 
To the objection of the Vedantin, that darkness is no padartha, we 
have only to instance the recent discoveries of our own Hindu 
Scientist, I mean Dr. Bose, who could demonstrate the presence 
of invisible rays of light in a pitch-dark room by means of his 
instrument. What does this mean? The ray of light has been 
so thin as to be swallowed up in the grosser darkness. 
When a lamp is brought, it could dispel the darkness itself; 
but, only within a certain radius. Then a bigger light, a gas- 
light, an electric light of a vast number of candle powers ; but 
all these pale away before the brilliant light of the Sun. There 
is, thus, such a merger of one,. the less powerful,- in one more 



AN ANOTHER SIDE. 


25 


tenuous : are not all these summed up in the simple sentence 
“ Nachichchitsannidhau ”, ‘ luir^asuiLj 1 c^^stujld cFc£'kd/£; ff ’, ‘ In the 

presence of the Sat, every thing else is siinyam (non-existent 
— non-apparent’? 

Saint Meykanda Deva adds ‘ As before the Perfect and 
Eternal Intelligence, the imperfect and acquired intelligence 
(falsehood) is shorn of its light, it is therefore established that in 
the presence of the Sat, Asat loses its light.” And the illustration 
implied in this, is amplified in the following verse, “ Evil (Asat) 
ceases to exist before Him, as does darkness before the Sun.” 
The term Asat has itself been the parent of many misconceptions, 
in the East and in the West, and different interpreters of 
Sankara explain it in different ways. Here is what a critic of 
Paul Deussen says, “ Kant is mostly credited with having 
proved that there is something behind or beneath the “reality ” 
of our senses, which these cannot fathom, (sifjgyfliuir). The 
European scientists say sneeringly : What of that ; if we cannot 
get at it, let us ignore it! And on the other hand, the 
Neo-Kantian Metaphysicians say : No, this is the only reality ; 
therefore, all the rest is useless rubbish, only fit for momentary 
amusement : and that is all. 

“That is the Western conception ot the Indian term Maya 
(Asat), indeed a rubbish conception. And mistaken by this 
illusion, Western philosophers have declared that Eastern 
philosophy and particularly Vedantism and Buddhism, are 
‘ Akosmism ’ i.e., they deny the existence of the universe 
altogether. An incredible absurdity ! Is not the real meaning 
of Sankara easy enough to understand ? Every one knows that 
there are different states of consciousness ; that of an animal is 
different from that of a man, that of a savage different from 
that of a savant, that of a waking man different from that 
of a dreaming man, and all these are different from that of 
a sage in Samadhi. Now, it is a matter of course, that the 
‘reality ’ of a waking man is different from that ‘reality ’ which 
he conceives as such when he is dreaming, and both are 



26 


AN ANOTHER SIDE. 


veiy different from that ‘ reality ’ or those different states of 
‘ reality ’ of which he becomes conscious when he enters 
Sushupti and Turiya, and all these are, again, other ‘real- 
ities ’ than that as which the Mukta ‘ realizes ’ Arman. Viewed 
from the standpoint of any of these different states of con- 
sciousness, all the other conceptions of ‘ reality ’ appear as 
Maya, as illusion or as unreal. The material scientist, to- 
gether with most European philosophers, would even not 
hesitate a minute to declare the alleged realisation of Atman 
an illusion, although he would not deny that this might be 
some state of consciousness.” 

And, by the way, he objects to translating Avidya as 
ignorance or nescience, but as not-Yidya or not-yet-wise or 
other-than-wise. That is, Asat does not mean non-existent, but 
not-Sat or other-than-Sat. This is Sankara’s view according to 
Dr. Hubbe Schleiden ; and this is the view we have taken 
trouble to expound above, and yet how many followers of 
Sankara hesitate before reading Maya as illusion and delusion, 
and Avidya as ignorance and nescience. In the very article 
under review, we read in one sentence that each soul is a spark, 
a part ; in the next sentence, no, it is not a part, but the whole 
of Brahman. In the very next sentence, all these souls are 
but reflexions of Brahman , and are not real. “ Men, women 
and animals &c., are but reflexions of Him, and are unreal in 
themselves” If they are mere reflexions, and unreal, how is it 
reconcilable with the statement, that each soul is not even apart 
but the whole of Brahman. The whole argument is made up 
by the use of similes and by not sticking to one, but by jumping 
from one into another, to meet the difficulty arising in the former. 
Either the argument must proceed on simple facts and 
inferences, and without the use of similes, or, when it is 
attempted to be proved solely from figures, then no apology 
should be presented that it is only a figure, and it should not be 
strained. The simile was expressly used for demonstrating to 
the ignorant, how the thing is possible and conceivable, and 
when the ignorant man following the simile, asks if the same 



AN ANOTHER SIDE. 


27 


antecedents are present in the thing compared, to warrant the 
conclusion, what answer does the Vedantin give him ? “ This 
apparent division of Him (as ‘ you ’ and ‘ me ’ and the dog) is 
caused by looking at Him, through the net-work of time, space 
and causality.” ‘Looking at Him’ indeed! When? And by 
whom ? How is this ‘looking at Him,’ and this delusion possible, 
before the actual division itself? The operation of the division of 
Him into ‘ you ’ and ‘ me ’ and animal, must precede the 
operation of ‘ you ’ and ‘ me ’ &c., looking upon each other and 
Him delusively. Does the delusion come in before the evolution 
of ‘Brahman’ into ‘you’ and ‘me’ and ‘animal,’ or after such 
evolution? To any thinking being, it must occur that this 
delusion must have occurred before, and not after ; and the 
Brahmavadin sees this, and states below that there will be in 
the universe a final duality, Atman and delusion (mark here 
and elsewhere the word delusion is simply used as a synonym 
for Maya), and this objection is brushed aside on the ground 
that delusion is no-existence, and that to call it otherwise is idle 
sophistry ! And yet ‘ you ’ and ‘ me ’ and others, were all this 
while under a delusion ! Were we or were we not? Is that a fact 
or a delusion itself? Is the evolution of God into men, women 
and animals, is that a fact or not? If a fact, is the question, 
‘how is this evolution brought about,’ a possible question or 
an impossible question ? If not a fact, why is the statement 
made in another paragraph, that there are perfect men and 
imperfect men, men like Christ, Buddha and Krishna, who have 
to be worshipped, and men, like ourselves, who have to worship 
them. This evolution of God into man and animals, is put in 
one place on a possible and rational basis, in that God wants to 
know Himself, wants to see Himself and realize Himself by means 
of His reflexions (why and'wherefore it is not stated), in as much 
He cannot know and see Himself otherwise, in the same way as 
we on earth cannot see our face, except in a mirror ! Again, we 
ask, is the distinction between a perfect man and an imperfect 
man real or not? And does our learned brother contemplate 
the possibility’ of seeing his beautiful face distorted in a 



28 


AN ANOTHER SIDE. 


mirror ?♦ Whose fault was this ? It was our brother’s fault in 
not choosing a good mirror. And does he mean to attribute to 
the Most Intelligent such fault, in not choosing such a vessel in 
which He can see Himself and know Himself to the best advan- 
tage ? The Perfect cannot seek to know Himself in the imperfect 
and the ignorant, the wicked and the sinful, the sorrbwing and 
the suffering. If all this is a play of His and no such distinction, 
as the imperfect, the wicked and the sinjul and the sorrowing 
and the suffering, exists, and all this is a hallucination, myth, 
non-existence (we use his own choice words), why should any man 
aspire to be a good man, a perfect man, a Jivan-mukta? Why 
should he realize, his identity with the Absolute? God, in trying to 
realize Himself (for His sport or for what ?), became man and 
woman and brute ; and look at the bother of this man, woman or 
brute, doing good acts, acts without attachment, real iapas, yoga 
and jnana to realize his identity with the Absolute ! What guar- 
antee is there that, after all this bother, a Jivan-mukta may not 
again be differentiated from the Absolute into a man, woman or 
animal? How senseless and vain all these efforts seem, how 
ignoble, the purpose of creation and evolution? To the question 
why does the Perfect become the imperfect, which question our 
brother states in all its various forms, vulgar and highly philo- 
sophic,. our brother’s answer is that this question is an impossi- 
ble one, and it should not be put at all! We have already 
pointed out how inconsequential this question and answer is. 
But the same question has been put in, and answers, attempted 
by learned men who are of our brother’s ilk ; and these answers 
are various and conflicting in themselves. Of these, Svami 
Vivekananda gets most glory. His answer is ‘ I do not know.’ 
Mr. Mukhopadhyaya replies that the Svami is wrong, and that 
the Perfect does not become the imperfect, God does not become 
man. Man is only a reflexion and as such cannot be God. 
According to the Brahmavadin man is a reflexion, is unreal ; 

* We have seen in the Bangalore Palace of His Highness, The 
Maharaja of Mysore, a number of mirrors in which one’s face is distorted 
in the ugliest and most horrible manner. 



AN ANOTHER SIDE. 


29 


but the unreality itself is unreal, and as such man is God. 
And so no question arises of the Perfect and the imperfect. 
According to Paul Deussen, the answer is, ‘ the never ceasing 
new creation of the world is a moral necessity, connected with 
the doctrine of samsara, “A moral necessity for Atman ? What 
a contratfidio in adjecto ! ” exclaims his critic*. “ Atman as we all 
agree is that which is beyond all necessity and causality, 
that is, causality reigns or exists only in our manifested 
world, of individual consciousness of any sort.” And the critic’s 
own explanation is that existence is the manifestation of the 
will to exist, and this will is trishnd , tanha, the desire for enjoy- 
ment. Well, whose will, we ask ; who desires for enjoyment ? 
The Absolute, the Sachchidananda, or any other ? What, call 
this hell, an earth, an enjoyment for Him? We leave our learned 
Doctor to fight out Professor Deussen by himself, and proceed to 
state another learned lady’s opinion. If we remember correctly, 
she said, Ishwara evolves into man and brute, to gather 
experience, to improve himself by means of his animal sheaths, 
and that there could be no perfect Brahman, at any time ; It 
goes on improving Itself, day after day. That if the Veda 
repeats the cry that there is a Bourne from which there is no 
return, no return, it is a mere make-believe. And all these are 
learned expounders of Sankara’s school, and who is right? 
Can we ask this question, or is our question captious ? The 
Sidahantin’s answer is the question itself is based on a 
fallacy, an assumption. The fact assumed is that the Perfect 
becomes the imperfect. Is this a fact proved ? Does God really 
become man and brute ? What is the proof of this, let alone 
Vedic texts and the desire to reach a high-sounding philosophic 
unity ? It is this fancied desire to generalize everything into 
One, that led the Greek philosophers to postulate number and 
water and fire, as the Final and Ultimate Cause of all things. 
Why not leave bad, good and evil as they are ? Why should 
you refer the evil to the good, impure to the pure? Will not 

* Dr. HubBe Schleiden at page 227, January 1895, ‘The Theosophist.’ 


30 


AN ANOTHER SIDE. 


silence in this respect be golden ? Will not maunam in this 
case be real jZanam ? 

Well, we will here go back to our statement of what the 
Sankhyan meant when he postulated a Pradhana and a Soul or 
souls. The learned Editor of the “ Light of the East ” has 
evidently fallen into an error when, in his account of the ancient 
sankhya system, he opines that according to the ancient Sankhya 
and the Gita, there is only one Purusha and not many purushas. 
The mistake is due to the fact that, in the enumeration of the 
padarthas, the singular only is used; a mere technical usage, as 
in the phrases, Jiva-Isvara-Jagat, Chit-Achit-Ishwara, Pati- 
Pasu-Pasa. All the words used are in the singular, and it 
cannot mean that the respective schools mean to postulate only 
one Jiva, one Chit or one Pasa. In explaining each, the 
explanation will be given that the jiva or souls are many. In 
the same way, in the earlier sutras of the Sankhya, Purusha in 
the singular is used, but the subsequent sutras proceed to state 
that the purushas are multitudinous. Pradhana is real and it 
is the cause, and its effects, the phenomena, are also real, as the 
effect subsists already in the cause, and as our learned brother 
approvingly puts it, an effect is its own cause reproduced in 
another form ; and we hope the following sentence from Dr. 
Brown’s lectures, will equally meet with our brother’s approval. 
“That the form of the body is only another name for the relative 
position of the parts that constitute i(, and that the forms of the 
body are nothing but the body itself.” If so, why should the 
cause be considered real, and the effect unreal, as against the 
view of Sankhyan by Vedantins ? If the Maya is phenomenon and 
effect, why should it be unreal, when the substance and cause is 
real ? The relation of cause and effect has, however, to be kept 
separate from the relation of s ubstance and phenomenon, and these 
two, from the questions of reality and delusion. In the second 
paragraph, however, our brother identities the Sankhyan’s 
Pradhana with his own Maya and the Sankhyart’s Purusha with 
his own God or Brahman. If so, why attempt any criticism of 
the Sankhya ? It is all a quibble about words. They practically 



AN ANOTHER SIDE. 


31 

postulate the same and mean the same things. Then, why is it 
that the Sankhya is called by Sankara, ‘N iris vara Sankhya ’ 
‘Godless or Atheistic Sankhya and the Philosophy of the Gita 
as Sesvara Sankh3’a or the Theistic Sankhya. The word 
Sankhya meaning primanlj 7 number, meant with Kapila and 
Krishna 3. theory or philosophy. Compare for instance a 
similar change in the Tamil word ‘sraar ’ meaning number, and 
in the verse “ada-sgsJj u-ipi cJcVOoasjr^gi," ‘ersitr’ meaning 
logic and philosophy. The following quotation from the Gita 
itself, will explain the difference between the two schools. 

“ There are ‘two Puntslias ’ in this world, one destructible and. 
the other indestructible, the destructible is sarvabhutdni ( all things), 
the indestructible is called the Kutastha.” (Chapter XV. 16.) 

Well, look how this verse runs; it mentions only two 
Purushas, instead of mentioning three, as arising from the next 
verse ; but there is a purpose in so mentioning two Purushas ; it 
is seemingly to reiterate the accepted postulate of the purva- 
paksha school, to enable it to state the siddhanta view, in the 
next verse which is : 

“ The ‘ parama Puntsha' is verily another, declared as the 
‘ Paramdtman ’, He who pervades and sustaineth the three worlds , 
the indestructible Is vara." 

Consider again the steps that follow one upon another in 
the next verse. 

“ Since I excel the destructible ( first Purusha ), and am more 
excellent than the indestructible ( second Purusha ), in the world 
and in the Veda, / am proclaimed Purushoitama ” ( third 
Purusha ). 

Be it noted here that the word Purusha simply means a 
category, a padartha, as when we speak of the Tripadartha or 
Tattvatrayam. Note again how in verse 19, chapter 13, the first 
two Purushas are mentioned as (by its more appropriate names) 
Prakriti and Purusha; and the same definition of these two is 
given in verses 20 and 21, as by the Sankhya ; and a further 
step beyond Kapila, is taken by Sri Krishiia in postulating, 


32 


AN ANOTHER SIDE. 


“ A spectator and permit ter, supporter and cnjoyer, Makes h- 
vara, thus is styled the Parainatman , in this body , the 
Paramapuritsha.' ’ 

And then a most beautiful passage about the distinction of 
these three Padarthas, and of the different Jiianas, pasajnana, 
Pusujnana, and patijhana, occurs. The Lokayata only knows 
his body, and has no knowledge of his own self or anything 
higher. According to the Nirlshvara Sahkhyan or the Vedan- 
tin, there are or seem to exist only two things, Prakriti and 
Soul, Maya and Atman, and liberation consists in distin- 
guishing his own self as different from a Prakriti or Maya 
(delusions). This is Pasujhana or Atmajnana. According to the 
Sesvara Sahkhyan, he sees and learns to distinguish Prakriti 
from his self, and his self from the Highest One (verse 29), as 
Akarta and Karta, and knowing the nature of this One, he 
reaches Brahman-hood, (verse 30 of Chapter 13). It is also to be 
remarked particularly that in the whole Gita, in innumerable 
passages, as in the one cited above, the knowledge of the 
Supreme, the devotion wholly to Him, is put forward as the 
highest path of attaining Liberation, and not the Atmajnana 
doctrine that the knowledge of the individual self, as implied 
in the phrase ‘know Thyself,’ is the highest attainment. We 
beg lejve again to quote Dr. Hubbe Schleiden, simply to show 
how thL latter theory is repugnant to the followers of Sankara. 
“ Indeed there can be no more fatal error than to believe with 
those furthest advanced Western philosophers that jTidnam , 
or Moksha means nothing else but the intellectual conception, 
Monism (Advaita), nothing else but the intellectual enjoyment 
of a proud theory.” 

What we have said till now, will convince our readers that 
there is another side to these questions, and that they do not 
stand alone where the Sahkhyans and the Vedantins left them. 
According to this view, the S&nkhyans are correct, no doubt, so 
far as they go, in postulating Prakriti and Purusha, and the 
Vedantin is quite correct in his identification of these two with 



AN another side. 


33 


his Maya and Brahman. There is but a thin partition between 
the soul or man of the Sankhya, and the latter’s Brahman. In 
fact, man is God. In such identification of man with God, 
what results is, that man’s intelligence does not pass on to the 
postulating and realizing of a Higher Being than himself; and 
the Brahman of the Vedantin is only so in name. The third 
school postulates this third Padartha, differing from the soul 
or Atman of either school, whom the latter cannot know, except 
with the grace of the third Padartha, and though it might be 
correct to say that man cannot know himself, it will be 
blasphemous to say that God cannot know himself. This will 
be attributing a human imperfection to the most High and to 
limit His nature. How do we know that He cannot know 
Himself, when we cannot know our own selves, nor Him, without 
His Grace. Consider the following passage from Saint 
Meykanda Deva. “ When the soul unites itself to God, and 
feels His Arul (Love), God covers it with His Supreme Bliss 
and becomes one zvith it. Will He not know Himself, who is 
understood by the soul , through the intelligence of the soul? ” The 
next passage we are going to quote will show clearly that God 
has not manifested His glorious Truth to one people, and in one 
clime alone. “ Why may not the absloute Being be self- 
conscious? ” asks a Christian Divine in almost the same words. 
“ To deny this to Him, would be to deny to Him, one of the 
perfections which even finite beings may have.” * The 
question reamains, what then is the necessity for all this 
evolution and resolution. The answer is contained in a simple 
sentence in the first sutra of SivajhUnabodha, namely, ‘weay 
gioirpinb.' The second Padartha in our categories, and not the 
third, is imperfect, or more correctly, is shrouded by dross, 
which has to be removed like the colors on a crystal, so that, its 
own pristine purity may be apparent, and it can reflect aDd 
realize the Glory and Presence of God in all Its brightest 
effulgence. Thi? existence and resolution is due to the will of 


■* Rev. J. Jverach’s ‘Is God knowable?’ page 225. 
5 



34 


AN ANOTHER SIDE. 


this lower being, Atman, to perfect itself, and the Will of the 
Highest comes into play, to enable the soul to work out its own 
salvation. The Ichcha , Juana and Knyd Saktis of the Lord 
induces the icltcha , jna.ua and kriyH saktis of the individual soul, 
and herein is God’s Grace and Love and Omnipotence manifested. 
The exercise of the Divine Will is not for enabling Itself to exist 
free from samsara, not for perfecting Itself, not for knowing, see- 
ing, or realizing Itself, not for Its sport or pleasure, not for no 
purpose, but it is simply to help and aid the poor soul in its 
attempt to effect all these things. How well does our Saint 
Tayumanavar realize this conception of God’s great Bene- 
ficence in the following lines: 

“ jjjaDuKusrraya) S-usiT!T toajsopsi) QsiQ^ear gz 
§)tudarr$p (getzrdsL-.&irTuj @ 0 / 5 ^QwnssrQ p?' 

This view postulates three Padarthas, and it may be called 
Dualism, or Dvaita or anything of the sort, but how this view 
is the strict Advaita also, true monism, we will demonstrate 
in a future article *. 


f* See Paper on “Advaita according to Saiva Siddhanta.”J 



THE TATTVAS AND BEYOND 


“<}od is not this not this — Brihad Ar. Up. 

“Other than the known is God, other than the unknown 
too.” — SwetaS. Up. 

We present our readers to-day a table of the 36 tattvas 
derived from Maya, together with the other postulates of the 
Siddhanta school, with which they are connected in advaita 
relation. In Tamil, small tracts called katfalai exist, 

which describe and define these tattvas. These tattvas are vari- 
ously enumerated as 19 or 25 or 36 or 96. Both Siddhantins and 
Vedantins (Idealists) accept the number 36 or 96, but they differ 
in several particulars. ‘Thirty-six’ when still more analysed give 
‘ Ninety-six’. The more simpler form of the table is herein given, 
and this requires to be carefully studied. A careful and precise 
definition of these tattvas has to follow, but we do not attempt 
it here for want of space. Rev. Hoisington has translated one 
of these tracts, as also Rev. Foulkes of Salem. Both these 
books unfortunately are out of print. We will ' proceed to 
explain the table briefly, stating at the same time its points of 
difference from other Schools. We have to premise first, that 
the tattvas which are enumerated here are all produced out of 
and form sub-divisions only of Milyd and the term as such does 
not cover either Anava, or Karman or Atman or God. These 
tattvas form as it were different coats or vestures, of different 
texture at different times and at different stages, to the soul 
undergoing evolution with intent to rid itself of its coil (Anava) 
in strict accordance with the Law of Karma. These form how- 
ever no vestures for the Supreme Being and He is accordingly 
addressed as ‘ Tattvdiita' ‘Beyond the tattvas.’ The soul is 
also sometimes, called so, as lying outside the category of the 
thirty-six tattvas. But a distinction has however to be made bet- 
ween the twd. The soul, a subject, when united to the objective 



36 


THE TATTYAS AXD P.EYOXD. 


(material) body, heroines in a sense objective. But the supreme 
subject can never become obs-'clive. The enumeration of the 
tattvas begins from the lowest and the grossest, which is the 
earth. And philosophic enquiry also proceeds, and ought to 
proceed from the lowest, the things known, to the Highest, the 
Unknown. This is the pure inductive method. And* when we 
come to enquire of the manner in which this enquiry has proceed- 
ed, we will find that each school holds on to one or another of 
the tattvas or something else, as the highest and truest existence, 
and refuse to recognize that anything else can be real or true. 
As such we find lokayatas (materialists) occupy the lowest rung 
of the ladder. We say lowest from our standpoint, and we beg 
their pardon for saying so. In their own estimation, they are 
postulating the Highest possible existence, and every other 
postulate is only a hoax. The Lok'dyaia will only recognize the 
first four tattvas, earth, water, fire and air, and will not 
recognize even the Akas as a real element. The Buddhists 
and Jains also recognize only these four elements. If you point 
to existence of mental powers, the Lokayatas will refer all of 
them, as being merely functions of the brain or other organs of 
the body, and that all these functions are mere phenomena 
produced out of and caused by the bodily powers. We proceed 
a step .higher, and we come to those who admit the mental 
.powers to be substance, and would reduce all the bodily 
- functions and powers to mere phenomena, and assert that 
beyond this mind (Buddhi), nothing can there be. If you 
assert that there is such a thing as an Atman, they will think 
you are a fool ;.and if they want however to take you in, they 
will only assert that what we have all along believed m, as 
Atman and God, cannot be anything but this Buddhi, and they 
will call this by every name you have learned, to apply to what 
you regard as higher things. Passing beyond this Buddhi, we 
reach its immediate cause the Mulaprakriti. With most Indian 
theistic schools, they do not carry their notion Of matter beyond 
this Mulaprakriti, standing at the head of the first twenty-four 
tattvas. They fail to see that matter can assume even finer 



THE TATTVAS AND BEYOND. 


37 


and more intelligent forms than these 24 tattvas ; and as 
people, lower down, have mistaken the gross forms as Manas, 
and Buddhi itself as soul and God, these higher forms of matter 
have also been mistaken for soul and God ; and the mistake is 
made more natural, as the souls whose vestures are formed out 
of these rarer forms of matter, are more and more advanced 
spiritually and intellectually. It will be seen that what is called 
Guna (meaning merely quality) is the special essence of 
Malaprakriti or matter at this stage, and this Guna which 
divides itself as Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, does not pertain to 
any higher forms of matter than Mulaprakriti. And this 
Mulaprakriti forms the special vesture of the lowest classes 
of souls called Sa-kala. And these souls range from the greatest 
Gods to the minutest living germ ; each is clothed with the 
Gunas, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. The highest of these classes 
of souls are clothed with very great powers, and they become 
the lords of this universe in different manvantras. And these 
three beings are Rudra, Vishnu, and Brahma. And having 
regard to the greatness of these jlvas from our own low 
position, we need not wonder why people have often mistaken 
these jivas to be the Supreme God Himself. And a more 
grosser mistake was never made than when it is (foolishly) 
asserted that this Saguna-Rudra-/ iva is the Pati postulated 
by the Saiva-Siddhantins. And some of these latter class of 
people crow over the former, and say that the worship of this 
lower Brahm (Saguna-Rudra or Isvara) is all well for a time, 
but that is no good and cannot secure an)’ Moksha Sadhana and 
that the belief in the Nirguna Brahm is alone capable of freeing 
one from one’s bonds. But that is making very great stock out 
of the difference between Saguna and Nirguna beings. That this 
is not in fact any very important factor, will be made manifest 
from the fact that instead of one Nirguna Being, as believed iff 
by the Hindu Idealists, there are a host of such Beings, who 
possess no vestures formed of the three gunas. The higher 
orders of P ralaydkalas and Vijudnakalas are all Nirguna Beings, 
and they can never be born again as mortals or human beings. 



TATTVAS and BEYOND. 


3« 

The Safikhyas atxi Hindu Idealists postulate Mulaprakriti and 
the twenty-four tattvas derived therefrom, and fora twenty-fifth 
they postulate jlva (souls) or Atman. When the Atman (Brahm) 
otherwise Nirguna, becomes clothad with a Saguna body, it 
becomes a lower Brahm or Jiva, but when the question is 
asked how this is possible, some answer honestly «that they 
do not know, and others practice jugglery with words and 
phrases, and say that there is no such occurrence as the 
Nirgupa Brahm becoming a Jiva, and that if it appears so, 
it is all a delusion. But the other side argue that if this 
is not a delusion, but that there is a Jiva clothed in darkness, 
and if the other side would not postulate any being other than 
the Being who falsely appeared as Jiva, then the Atma they 
believe in, cannot be the highest, but only one of the lower Jivas; 
and the same mistaken identity is here manifest as in the 
positions of those who took matter or mind (Buddhi) or Indra or 
Brahma, Vishiiu or Rudra as the Highest Being. Before we 
pass on, we have to notice one class of Suguna-Vddins , who 
would not admit that God is Nirguna at all, and who seek to 
explain away all texts which refer to God as a Nirguna Being 
by saying that Nirguna simply means absence of bad qualities, 
and Saguna, presence of good qualites, Sattva; and when 
one is _ confronted with a text of the Gita itself, one’s highest 
authority, that God is devoid of all the three Gunas, he does 
not pause to take the plunge, that absence of the three Gunas 
does not negative the presence of the Sattva-Guna ! There is a 
whole-sale misreading of the texts, and all this quibbling is 
made necessary, simply because they would not brook the idea 
that the Saguna Being in whose worship they have become 
such strong adherents, should turn out after all to be not the 
Highest. Next above the Sa-kalas (Jivas) come the Pralaya- 
kalas who have a special body (Nirguna) formed out the tattvas 
No. 26 to No. 30, and it is so distinctive in kind and form and 
powers that it has been regarded as a .‘.separate tattva 
almost, called Purusha-tattva or Atma-tattva. This will make 
clear, passages which assert that AvyaktEt (unmanifested 



tattvas and beyond. 


39 


Prakriti) is greater than Atman and God, is greater than 
Avyakta. Here Atman does not mean soul, but this special 
Purusha-tattva. (What this comparative greatness and small- 
ness mean we have explained in our article on ‘An Another 
Side’ in explaining the meaning of Omnipresence, Vibhutva). 
All that constitutes, this Purusha-tattva, it will be noticed, 
proceed from Asuddha-Maya, and Asuddha-Mdyd itself is 
constituted as the thirty-first tattva. Mulaprakfiti issues 
from the thirtieth, Kata. The next five, the highest tattvas, 
constitute a different body, highly spiritual, for the highest 
order of souls, called VijTidnakalas, and they proceed from 
Suddha-Muya. The foremost in rank among these Vijnanakalas 
become Lords, Isvaras of the Universe, and they are variously 
called Mahesvaras, Sadasivas, Bindu and Nada. These 
two latter are so nearest God and so potent in their powers that 
they are almost called Siva and Sakti. And yet all these seven 
Isvaras, three of which are Sagunas (Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra) 
and four Nirguna (Mahesvara-Brahm, Sadasiva-Brahm, Bindu- 
Brahm and Nada-Brahm) are all souls united to ASuddha- and 
Suddha-Maya bodies; and in the Vedas and Upanishats, all these 
Saguna and Nirguna Gods, are spoken of as the Highest God, 
and special Upanishats are devoted to the praise of one or 
other of these Gods. And great confusion arises from the fact 
that from Rudra (one of the Trinity) upwards, all the different 
Isvaras are called by all the names of the most High, Rudra, 
Siva, Sankara, Sambhu, Bhava, Sarva, Pasupati etc. The 
reason for this identity in form and name appears to be that 
these ISvaras are in a sense immortal, and are not subject to 
human re-births as Sa-kalas, and that there are no possibilities 
of reversions among them, and they make a much greater 
approach to the Majesty of the most High, than other lower 
Beings. The four Avasthas — Jagra, Svapna, Sushupti and 
Turiya are all the conditions attaching to the human 
soul (Sa-kala), and not to the Pralaydkala and Vijhunakala. 
These latter classes of souls are not themselves subject to these 
Avasthas, which- mark the varying and diminishing conditions 



40 


tattvas and i.fyond. 


of the soul’s intellectuality. To cla->s God, the Param, as being 
in the Turiya-avastha condition* is sheer blasphemy. The 
Siddhantin argues that the Being postulated by the Purva- 
pakshin, if He is really in the Turiya-avastha cannot be the 
Highest, and that the latter is only mistaking a lower Being for 
the Highest. But the term Turiya or Chaturtha is frequently 
applied to the Supreme, as in the Text ‘ Sivam, Aavaitam, 
Santam, Chaturtham’ but it does not refer there to the avastha at 
all, but to the enumeration of the Paddrthas, (things or person), 
in special reference to the Trinity, (Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra). 
This essential difference and distinction between the Trinity 
and the ‘ Fourth ’ Being, is so much obliterated by the rise of 
new sects, from time to time, and is so little remembered and 
understood f now, and much less by European writers, that this 
has been the cause of a lot of unmerited abuse from the hands 
of unfriendly critics of Hinduism. In the last number of the 
Christian College Magazine, in noticing the life and writings of 
the Telugu Poet Vemana, the writer points out that God is 
there described as beyond the reach of the Trimurtis, Brahma, 
Vishnu and Rudra themselves, and that Vemana describes the 
Highest by such terms as Deva, Paramatma, Brahm and few 
others, and that he uses the term Siva to denote the Highest 
also, apd he fails to understand how this can possibly be, when, 
to-day, the term ‘Narayana or Vishnu ’ is used in the whole 
of the Telugu country, as the appellation of the most High, and 
he suggests a probable explanation that it might be due to 
Lingayit influence. But in the days of the Author of the 
Atharvasi'kha Upanishat and the Mahimnastotra, not to men- 
tion many others, which we have quoted at p. 36, no Lingayit 
sect had come into being, and yet their belief is exactly similar 
to that of Vemana. The brief survey we have taken of the 
tattvas will show what great force and real meaning there 
is, in the texts we have quoted at the head of our article. The 
* Vide table at p. 7 in “ Theosophy of the Vedas."”. Vol. I. 
t Those who understand it are unwilling to speak it out for fear of 
offending tlie feelings of other religious Sects. • • 



TATTY.'-'S AXD HEY'AXD. 


41 


enquirer as he proceeds from the knowledge of the visible to 
that of in\ isible powers in Nature and in man, and ascends to 
higher and higher knowledge, rejects the lower knowledge as 
‘not this ’, ‘ not this and transcending the manifested and un- 
manifested avyakta fboth Maya and Atma), knows “ The one 
God, in every Bh.lt a hid, pervading all, the inner AtmH of every 
alma, Inspector of all deeds, in Whom everything dwells (the 
Support), the Witness, Pure Intelligence, and Nirguna Being,”* 

“ Him, the Is vara of Isvaras, the Mahcsvara, the 
God Supreme of Gods, the King of Kings, the Supreme of the 
Supreme, the Isa of the Universe.” 

“The eternal of eternals, the Intelligence of every intelli- 
gence, who, the One, of many, the desires dispenses. Knowing 
that cause, the God to be approached by Sahkhya and Yoga 
etc., t and ‘Him having alored,’ the ‘Mortal from all Pasa 
(bonds) is free } 

We have referred to Saguna and Nirguna Beings, and 
these are often translated as personal and impersonal Beings, 
but the renderings are not perfectly accurate, and the usage 
of all these four terms are frequently very loose, and we hope to 
devote a separate paper for the definition and distinction of 
these terms. 


[* Svetas. Up. VI. n. 7 Svetas Up. VI. 7. j Svetas. Up. VI. 13.] 



THE NATURE OF THE DIVINE 
PERSONALITY. 


1 Satyam Jfianam Anantam Brahma.’ Tait. Up. ii. i 

* Bliss is Brahman.’ Tait. Up. iii. 6. 

‘ There is one Rudra only, — they do not allow a second — who 
rules all the words by his powers.’ — Atharva Siras. 

* God is Love.' 

We begin where we left off in our last ; and in discussing 
the nature of Saguna and Nirguna God, we will discuss the 
article of the Rev. Father Bartoli on ‘ God, a Personal Being ’ 
which appeared in our last two issues, and the Editorial ‘God 
and the Brahman ’ of the ‘ Brahmavudin ’ of 16th ultimo, and 
the lecture of Svami Vivekananda, published in the last Novem- 
ber number of the same magazine. These two parties occupy 
positions which seem almost distant as the poles, and altogether 
irreconcilable. The Rev. Father asks, ‘ Why this mockery ? 
Say with the fool that there is no God : that the existence of 
God is*a sham, a bubble, a false show, a cheat, a day dream, a 
chimera: because an Impersonal God is all this.’ The learned 
Svami on the other hand says “ The monistic theory has this 
merit that it is the nearest to a demonstrable truth in theology 
we can get. The idea that the Impersonal Being is in nature, 
and that nature is the evolution of that Impersonal, is the nearest 
that we can get to any truth that is demonstrable, and every 
conception of God which is partial and little and Personal is 
comparatively not rational.” In the editorial note on ‘God and 
Brahman,’ a novel and a very presumptuous and misleading 
distinction in the use of the words God and Brahman 
is attempted, and the article concludes by saying that the 
worship of God, in all truth and in all love will never 
lead one to Moksha. “God is for such, and the Brahman 



THE NATURE OF THE DIVINE PERSONALITY. 


43 


is for those whose goal is perfect rest in perfect freedom.” 
The presumption is in suppossing that all other religionists, 
except those of our learned brother’s ilk, do not postulate a 
Brahman, and that their path, not being the ‘ Soham ’ path 
(Paramahamsa) will not lead one to Moksha ; and it is also an 
unwarranted presumption in trying to restrict the use of the 
word God to what these people were till now calling the lower 
Brahman or Saguna Brahman or Personal God. The so-called 
Vedantists have an insidious way of recommending themselves 
to the favour of other people by bestowing judiciously, a pane- 
gyric here and a panegyric there, and, at the same time, they 
try to raise themselves above the shoulders of these others, and 
at the latter’s expense. They profess to be full of the milk of 
human kindness to professors of all creeds and sects, and would 
willingly take them under their folds, what for ? Only, so that 
these people may see that what they profess to teach is the 
only true path containing the only truth, and that the other 
paths are— well— only no paths at all— only it will bring them 
to the same point of birth and death, containing a so-called — a 
phenomenal truth. And then what is the truth of these people 
worth after all? In itself, it is so shaky, or they maul it 
so badly in their attempt to please every body that their 
truth (substance) becomes indistinguishable from untruth 
(phenomena) ; and this is exactly what the Svami’s Guru, the 
Paramahamsa, the Mahatman says. God — the Saguna — 

the Personal God is Maya or Sakti, indistinguishable as heat 
from fire and this God or Maya is as such one with Brahman, 
and so the distinction of Personal and Impersonal God is 
a distinction without a difference. (Prabhudda BhUrata 
f. log )\\ It will be seen from a reading of the Rev. Father’s 
article, and from how these words are used in the Brahmavadin 
and the Prabhudda Bhdrata, that all these parties use the 
word Saguna as fully equivalent to Personal, and Nirgunaas 
equivalent to Impersonal Being ; and a shade has never crossed 
these learned people’s minds whether such rendering is quite 
the truth. 



44 


THE NATURE OF THE DIVINE PERSONALITY. 


In our last we quoted a SvetaSvatara Mantra in which 
the One God is called Rirguna. To-day we quote a Gita verse 
in which God is called Nirguna. “Beginningless, without 
qualities (Nirguna) the Supreme Self iParamatman) Imperish- 
able, though seated in the body, O Kauntcya, worketh not, nor 
is soiled.”* And the whole of chapters 13 and 14 have to be 
read to know the precise meanings of Guna, Saguna and 
Nirguna. Verses 5 to iS (chap. 14) define and describe the 
Gunas and their varieties — Sattva, Rajas and Tanias. The three 
Gunas are Prakriti born. (14. 5., and 13. 19) from which are 
all action, causes and effects (13. 23) and from where are all 
bodies produced (14. 20.). Sattva is simply bodily (and mental) 
purity leading one to the desire of wisdom and bliss, (14.6), 
wisdom light streameth forth from the Sattvic Man ; and when 
he dies, he goes to the worlds of the Gods (Vijnanaloka) and 
he rises upwards. The Sattvic Man is still clothed in the 
material (Prakritic) body, and is not yet released from his 
bonds, not a Mukta. He is simply what the world esteems as 
a wise and great man. On the other hand Rajas engenders 
passion, engenders thirst for life and is united to action — greed, 
out-going energy, undertaking of actions, restlessness, desire — 
and he is again and again born among people attached to action. 
Tanias .engenders ignorance, delusion, sloth, indolence, darkness, 
negligence See., and he is born and enveloped in the vilest 
qualities. From this Prakriti and the three Gunas born of 
Prakriti, is distinguished the Purusha.f Prakriti is the cause 
of causes and effects and instruments; and Purusha is the 
origin of pleasure and pain i.e., experiences, and is attached to 
the qualities (guna) born of Prakriti, and by this attachment or 
Pasa undergoes birth and death. So the reason for its 
undergoing birth and death is its attachment to the Gunas, 

* Chap. xiii. 31, 

fin page 582. Brahuiaivtiui, Pu:uoha ; brahman, and Spirit are 
called synonymous terms. In page 2.7, Mr. Mdi.wL'va Sastrin’s Gita 
translation, Sankara says, Purusha, Jiva, Kshetraiha, Bhokta, are all 
synonymous terras. So Brahman anu. Ji\ a am cruonymous ;!! 



THE NATURE OF THE DIVINE PERSONALITY. 


45 


Sattva included. And the only way, this Purusha (our Brahma- 
vadin's Brahman), the Dweller in the body, can be freed from 
death unto everlasting' life is by crossing over the three Gunas, 
(14. 20) and by realizing that all action and change is the result 
of the three Gunas, (14. 19), and that he himself (Purusha) is 
actionless»or flawless (13. 29) and that there is One higher than 
the three Gunas (Prakriti), (14. 19), other than himself. The 
Highest Purusha, the Paramatman, He who pervadeth and 
sustaineth the three worlds, the indestructible Isvara, (15. 17), 
the Spectator, and Permitter, Supporter, Enjoyer, the Mahes- 
vara, and this Beginningless, Nirguna Paramatman cannot 
perish though he is also seated in the body, as the Purusha or 
Atma is seated, and is not attached to the three Gunas 
of which the bodies are created, and is not tainted nor 
soiled, as the Purusha was declared to be in verse (19, 20 
and 21 of 13th chapter), just as Akasa is not soiled, though 
present in each and every thing. The Purusha (the Brahma- 
vudin's Brahman , and our Jivutma) has also to realize, for effect- 
ing his freedom, that he and Prakriti are all rooted in this One 
and proceed from it, (13. 30) and though the One is neither 
rooted in Prakriti nor Purusha, being their efficient cause (9. 5); 
This one God, the Svetas vatara says, (the passage will bear 
repetition) is “hid in every Bhuta, pervading all, the inner Atmti, 
of every atma, Inspector of all deeds (spectator) in whom every 
thing dwells, (the support), the Witness, the Pure Intelligence 
and Nirguna Being; The Isvara of Isvaras, the Mahesvara, 
the God Supreme of God’s ; the king of kings, the Supreme of 
the Supreme, the Isa of the Universe.” “The eternal of 
Eternals, the consciousness which every being’s consciousness 
contains, who, one, of many, the desires dispenses — The cause.” 
“ There shines not the sun nor moon and stars, nor do these 
lightnings shine, much less this tire. When He shines forth all 
things shine *fter Him; By Brahman's shining, shines all here 
below. ’’ This same Being is described below as the all creator 
and protector, the refuge of all, who created Brahma himself 
and taught him his craft. This same Being is described by the 



4 6 


THE NATURE OF THE DIVINE PERSONALITY. 


Taittiriya Upanishat, as the only true and endless Intelligence, 
whose head is surely Love, Joy His right wing, Delight his left; 
Bliss his very self ; and Who is other than the Atman whom we 
know to be also Sat, Chit and Ananda. The Gita expressly 
speaks of God as being other than Purusha and Prakriti. The 
Svetasvatara also does the same. The Vedanta satras sum 
up the teaching of the Upanishats beyond all doubt in sutras 
17 and 21 of first pada of first chapter ; and in the preceding 
sutras, God is described as Love, Intelligence, the-inside-of 
(antas) of everything, the Light, the Person, the Powerful 
One. It is of Him, it is said by the Mundaka, that He perceives 
all, knows all, whose penance consists of knowledge ; of whom 
the Svetasvatara and Gita speak of having hands and feet on all 
sides, eyes and faces on all sides. Now this is the God, Who is 
described as the creator, protector and destroyer and the refuge, 
the Truth, the Intelligence, and Love and Biiss, Who is 
described as the supporter, spectator, seer and person, and 
Who is declared at the same time to be Nirguna, transcending 
both Prakriti and Purusha and Gods and Isvaras. Now 
we will ask our Reverend Father Bartoli if he will accept this 
Nirguna Being as the true God or the Saguna God or Is vara 
(the lower one referred to in Mantra 7, section vi of Svetasva- 
tara ; whom we showed in our table as forming the Sakala 
Jivas.) And, in fact, the personal God whom our learned 
contributor defines and describes is in fact none other than this 
Nirguna Being. The Christian ideal of God is also that He is 
the Creator of heaven and earth, the only one Truth and Light 
and Intelligence and changeless Substance who loves and 
cherishes His creatures and Who is the bridge to immortality 
and Who is different from His creatures. The Personal God 
of the Christian Theology does not mean a Being who undergoes 
change, is clothed in a material body as ourselves, who is born 
and dies (though they speak oi one inearr. , don for all lime to 
come) ever and anon, who has eyes, harms lar, ?u'.sos as we 
have, and w 7 hose intelligence and win mil power is finis e and 
limited as ours is. Of course, we ha^e to pD-n-oaf also, that 



THE NATURE OF THE DIVINE PERSONALITY. 


4 7 


we do not agree with those who falsely suppose that of the Nir- 
guna Being, even Sachchidananda cannot be predicated (if so 
where is the Being itself and what remains of it at all, and all our 
Reverend Father’s denunciations on the Impersonal God will 
apply even with greater force), that It is not Knowledge (con- 
sciousness} and Power (Jnana, Kriya Svarupam), and that It is 
not the author of creation and destruction and grace, and that this 
Nirguna God can neither know and love us ; nor can we lave and 
know Him either. All these and more are no doubt stated as an 
article of faith by the so-called Vedantists but the Editor of the 
Light of the East (a staunch Vedantist) ranks them as gross 
materialists and atheists; and we have quoted direct texts 
to show otherwise. Some of these so-called Vedantists also 
claim to have reached the knowledge of the highest by 
merely learning to speak of God in the neuter, as ‘It,’ ‘That’ 
and ‘ Brahman ’ and by regarding Him as formless and 
nameless. Nothing can be a greater delusion than this. This 
‘It’ of theirs is nothing but Jiva after all and one with the 
Universe. Says the Svami, “so the whole is the absolute, but 
within it, every particle is in a constant state of flux and change, 
unchangeable and changeable at the same time, Impersonal and 
Personal in one. This is our conception of the Universe, of 
motion and of God and this is what is meant by ‘Thou art 
That.’’ This may be what the Svami holds as true, but this is 
what we hold to be Pasa and Pasujnanarn, Materialism and 
Anthropomorphism. The Svami glibly enough talks of the 
absolute and its particles and the unchangeable and changeable 
Brahfnan. But did he forget the Vedic mantra that God is 
“partless, actionless and tranquil.” ? And the Svami’s guru 
fitly enough talks of Maya and Brahman as one. And what 
is Materialism pray ? And then what is this much vaunted 
attribute of Achala and Nischala (unchangeability) worth, 
when its every particle is undergoing change ? Man is seated 
and at perfect rest! Yet so many of his muscles and nerves are 
in the utmost active condition, and undergoing change and 
destruction, and the particles of his whole body are also under- 



43 


THE NATURE OF THE DIVINE PERSONALITY. 


going change, destruction and reconstruction, and his thoughts 
may wander and wander and create waste in the animal 
tissues. A pool of water may be at perfect rest but a single 
breath of wind can cause motion in every particle, and we do 
not call water a stable element ; and we do not aspire ourselves 
to the condition of rest and freedom described above. This 
is only a make-believe rest and stability. So, we must rate the 
Brahman (unchangeable and changing, of the Svami as only 
a being, (every chalana being undergoes rest at short or long 
intervals, out of sheer exhaustion) wilful, inconstant and un- 
stable, the mere toy of every passing whim, every passing 
breath. The Infinite and Limitless God whom the Brahmavadin 
pourtrays in such glowing colours to mislead the credulous 
few, whose throne is Space, and whose queen is Time, and who 
is limitless and infinite as space and time are limitless, must 
also share a similar ignoble fate. We never thought that we 
would have to correct our learned brother in regard to such 
a simple thing, as that, the very notion of time and space 
implies both limitation and finiteness. We have no need to 
turn over big treatises to find authorities for this statement. 
There is lying before us, a small and well written pamphlet of 
Dr. Peebles of America, entitled ‘The Soul’. In the very open- 
ing paragraph, we find the following lines, we quote it only to 
what a trite notion it has now become. “All beginnings in show, 
time and space necessarily have their endings. A creature which 
has its beginning in time is incapable of perpetuating itself or 
of being perpetuated through eternity. A line projected from 
a point in space has a further limit which no logic can carry to 
infinity." We have, on another occasion, pointed out that 
Infinite space and limitless time are contradictions in words. 
The absolute can never involve itself in space and time. If it 
does, there is no use of calling it the absolute and uncon- 
ditioned. And our bi other is quite right in saying that Know- 
ledge of This Brahman is only a misnomer (Jumyth we should 
say). Then again (in the same page 507), our brother says that 
1 the Brahman (It) is forxnlts^, for all forms intply a boundary’. 



THE NATURE OF THE DIVINE PERSONALITY. 


49 


Vainest of delusions ! But, does formlessness imply no boun- 
dary ? So many things in nature are invisible and have no 
form. If, by formless is meant unextended, such as mind etc., 
we know mind as a product of Mat'a is also limited. But by 
formless, they generally mean ‘Arapi,’ ‘invisible’; and invisibility 
is no g?eat attribute after all, as matter can also be formless 
and invisible. We have elsewhere pointed out the mistake of 
taking Form and formless as being respectively equivalent to 
Personal and Impersonal. To deny to God that he can take 
form is to deny his Omnipotence and limit his nature. The 
distinction is from our standpoint. When we begin to identify 
him with anything we know, from the lowest tattva to ourselves 
(Atma), then this is Anthropomorphic. The distinction does 
not rest on calling the supreme, as ‘Siva’, or ‘Shall’ or ‘Sham.’ 
‘He ,’ ‘She’ or ‘It.’ God has form. The Srutis declare so. God 
is formless, so also the Srutis say. He has form and has no 
form. This is because, His body is not formed of matter, but is 
pure Chit, or Intelligence. It is when we make God enter a 
material body, and say that he is born and dies, then it is we 
blaspheme Him and humanize Him and our conception becomes 
Anthropomorphi:. Some of the so-called Vedantists who 
are unable to distinguish between what constitutes God’s 
real nature and Anthropomorphism and Hindu syfnboiism 
mistake the ideal of God according to Saiva Siddhanta. Do 
they care to understand u r hy when describing God, they say 
He is neither male nor female nor neuter, neither he, she nor it, 
neither Rupi, Aiupi nor Ruparupi, and yet when thay address 
God, He is called Siva, Sivah or Sivam, ‘Rupam Krishna 
Pingalam,’ and worshipped as the invisible air and Akas. 
Professor Max Muller points out how with bewildering per- 
plexity the gender varies frequently from the masculine to the 
neuter in the Svetasvatara. Well, in the passage ‘it has feet 
and hands everywhere,’ if the neuter Brahman can have feet, 
why could not the Being with the feet & c. be described as He 
also. We describe all inanimate creation as it, and when we 
proceed to call the Supreme as It also, we transcend from 
7 



50 


THE NATURE OF THE I >1 VINE I'ERSONAUTY. 


Saguna to Nirguna !!! We have already cautioned against 
mistaking the Sakti of Saiva-Siudlanta to be Maya. It G this 
mistake that ha 3 been the frui ful source of all the degradation 
and vice of the northern JAiaac/iara. This Sakti is called most 
frequently in Tamil 'Ami Sakti’ (God’s manifesuition as Love 
or Gracej and the greatness of this ‘ Anil ' G thus beautifully 
described by Tirumular. — 

“ '■yS'oTTE0Li:7®jracriS)a.:t-' r ®a_.T/r 
c 'Ayntr ZQp ,r * j&lcCd ^ C ~ 
ffF cjSTT ’b?J a Qribj=b A F 3 z3Qjbl3jT 
Sf 0L 1 sea? (svsx e iti p. a', 7 2 s . ” 

“ Who knows the Power of this Aral by which Omnipresence is secured ? 
Who understands that this Love transmuted Herself into tasteful ambrosia? 
Who thinks that this Love — permeates subtly the five great operations 
(Panchakntya > ? 

Who knows that this Love has eyes on ail sides (is Omniscient.) ?” 

iSphAA (_0sftW awi 
ffOLpI un r n, ai&i/pTptiL/i, 

,gj ^ar/rzsr sursaripp j-trsQp&rtLte. 

ejgy 0 S'TfT'Oj'&C' 651 6ST(B A c. b p !T <>37 , 

Bom in Love, Bred up in Love, 

Changing, and resting in Love, 

Fed in the Supreme ambrosia like Love, 

The Nandi entered me as Love.” 

He says elsewhere that none knows that Love and God are the 
same. To go and identify this Supreme Love of God, which, 
like the emerald, covers everything with Her own Love, and 
imparts to each and every one its own peculiar beauty and 
power and grace and will, to Maya which, like darkness, plunges 
everything into ignorance and death, is real blasphemy and 
prostitution indeed. We will stop here the discussion so far 
as Saguna and Nirguna is concerned, and glance at the 
controversy as regai'ds Personal and Impersonal God, It is 
not very easy to get at the precise definition of these terms, and 
the quarrel seems to be more often a quarrel over words. One 
author for instance says that by Personality is implied and 
involved mortality, corporeality (material,) human volitionality. 
Another says that personality involves limitation. Is this so, 



THE NATURE OF THE DIVINE PERSONALITY. 


5 r 


and is this the proper connotation and denotation of the word ? 
If so, nobody need pause that God cannot be personal. But 
eminent men like Emerson and others say that it does not 
mean any such thing. To quote again Dr. Peebles, “ Person- 
ality in its common and outward acceptation is usually 
associated with appearance and outward character; but to such 
writers as Emerson, James Freeman Clarke, Frohsehammer, 
Elisha Mulford, Lotze etc., Personality has a far deeper meaning. 
The Latins used persona to signify personating, counterfeiting 
or wearing a mask. But personality in the sense in which 
Emerson employes it, signifies true Being, both concrete 
and spiritual. It alone is original Being. It is not limited. 
Personality is that universal element that pervades every 
human soul and which is at once its continent and fount of 
Being. Distinction from others and Limitation by them results 
from Individuality, not Personality. 

Personality therefore pertains to the substance of the soul 
and individuality to its form. And the Rev. J. Iverach also 
controverts very ably in his work, ‘Is God knowable ’ the 
idea of personality as at first stated, and argues that to 
say that the absolute and the unconditioned Being is personal, 
is not a contradiction in terms, such as a round square, but that 
it will be true, as when we say, a white oricrimson square. 
“ When we speak of the absolute, we speak of it as a predicate 
of pure Being, and what we mean simply is that the absolute is 
complete in itself, it has no conditions save the conditions 
contained in itself. When we speak of personality, we ascribe 
to it, Being, regarded as pure spiritual Being; and we simply 
mean that absolute personal being is and must be self-conscious, 
rational and ethical ; must answer to the idea of spirit. Why 
may not the absolute Being be self-conscious ? To deny this 
to Him would be to deny to Him, one of the perfections which 
even finite beings may have ? ” And Saint Meykanda Deva 
asked the same .Question several centuries before. (Sivajhana- 
botham, XI. Sutra i b.) And our Saint Tiruimilar a Ho staets 
the question in sitnnar terms. 



52 


THE NATURE OF THE DIVINE PERSONALITY. 


mnm rfiipzsrQp ^QFtsQ&srp p-j= < Sew 
wirasrjai&iT irfiuj'Sfi tawhSerh 
sslsst r£! i gmrQstr a -‘jS irsS chr rr> Q&jtsi-i 
prnsr^S ujrrsisr tSesrVsP'uj'TjiSwtrQp. 

“ That day I knew my God ; the same was not understood 
by the Devas. The Bright Effulgence, lighting insid&my body 
and soul, it is said, does not know. Who else can know them?” 

We will stop here for the present. We accept the view of 
personality as set forth by Emerson and others, in which case 
we must reject the notion of an impersonal, unintelligent and 
unconscious, unknown, unknowable, unloveable, and unloving 
nothing. The Christians and Mahomedans (there are some 
Sagunavatis among them also) have no need to fall shy of the 
Nirguna conception, though the Ramanujas and the Madhwas 
whose God being identified with Prakriti itself ( Vasudcva Para 
Prakriti) never rise above the Saguna Satt\ic conception. Some 
of the Vedantists halting between two stools contrive to fall most 
miserably, and theirview of a God, both Nirguna and Saguna, 
Personal and Impersonal is what, we have no good language to 
describe. None need be ashamed to proclaim truth, if it is 
truth. Why undertake the trouble of praising Krishna and his 
teaching to the skies, to say, after all, that Krishna (the late 
Mr. T.’ Subba Rao stated more plainly that he cannot be the 
incarnation of the absolute) is only for such who wish to be 
born again and again, and who consider the service of God as 
their Highest Felicity, and Brahman is for those whose goal is 
perfect rest in freedom. These very people will raise a howl, if 
the Saiva were to state the same truth, which by the way was 
stated long ago by Sri-Krishna himself that worship of Siva or 
Sivam alone would secure Sayujya (Moksha) and the worship 
of other gods (Isvara, Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, etc.), would 
only secure their respective worlds (Pada). There are some 
more questions which arise out of this discussion, and we reserve 
them for a future occasion. 



VOWELS AND CONSONANTS. 


(MIND AND BODY.) 


“ Of letters, the letter A, I am,” Gita. 

“ There is an alliance with matter, with the object or extended world ; 
but the thing allied, the mind proper, has itself no extension and cannot 
be joined in local union. Now, we have a difficulty in providing any 
form of language, any familiar analogy, suited to this unique conjunction ; 
in comparison with all ordinary unions, it is a paradox or contradiction ” — 
Bain. 

The quotation, we give above, is from Dr. Bain’s remarkable 
book ‘ Mind and Bod} 1 ,’ and the several chapters comprising 
the book are worth close study, even though we are not bound 
to accept the learned Doctor’s conclusions, and share in his 
hope that the philosophy of the future will be a sort of qualified 
materialism. The important thing is to get at his facts, as far 
as they can be arrived at by close observation and experiment, 
and such inference as are warranted by strict logic, which 
have been most thoroughly sifted, and about which therefore 
there can be no doubt. We will enquire, therefore, what are 
the proved facts concerning the nature of mind and body and 
their characteristics, and the nature of their connection, so far 
as they can be ascertained. Now as regards Mind, it is 
analysed into Feelings (including emotions), Will and Intellect. 
“ These are a trinity in unity ; they are characteristic in their 
several manifestations, yet so dependent among themselves that 
no one could subsist alone ; neither Will nor Intellect could be 
present in the absence of Feeling ; and Feeling manifested in its 
completeness, carries with it, the germs of the two others.” The 
ultimate analysis of a Feeling, being either a pleasure' or a pain, 
it is seen, however, that volition or thought could not, in any 


54 


VOWELS AND C< >Nr < ">NAXTij. 


sense, be confounded with Feefings. What Dr. Be in, however, 
means in the above quotation is that without t'ne acquisition of 
feelings, no volition or thought could arise first, that feelings 
are primarily all derived through the sensory organs and 
centres. And a pleasure is seen to be connected with an activity 
which tends to promote life (s-hS/ts'S^IQ^'L^s^) and a pain, 
to destroy life (s-uSiris^lQz-L^r.) which determine also in ethics, 
the nature of right (good) and wrong, Papam and Puny am. 
This principle is stated as the law of self-conservation. But 
there is a limit to all pleasures ; and even a pleasure may 
become painful, if only carried to excess. Another law exhibited 
in feelings, which applies also to thought, is what is called the 
law of relativity, namely that “ change of impression is 
necessary to our being conscious.” Either a feeling or a 
thought, only too long prolonged, becomes feeble and feeble, till 
it is blotted out altogether, and we are no more conscious of 
such feeling or thought ; and to become conscious again, we 
soon change this train, and then revert. The Tamil philoso- 
phers state this principle in the axiom ‘ AiSsanjqemrGi-sv, u>jdu 
uaku-irP ‘If there is thought there is forgetfulness also.’ Dr. 
Bain almost confesses that, both on the mental and physical side, 
the reason for the exhibition of this law is not very explicable. 
But Hindu philosophers take this fact as showing that man’s 
intelligence (-sy.oka/) is weak (9j> and it can become stronger 
and stronger, and become all thought by practice (Sadana). 
In Yogic practice, what comes first is more darkness, oblivion 
than light, but continuing in the same path, there dawns true 
light in the last resort, and the nature of the light is so often 
mistaken in the interval, so many shades of it breaking out. 
And our volition (5'4an^-Ichcha) determines our actions as 
impelled by Feeling or Intellect. Intellect is analysed into a 
sense of difference and sense of similarity, and Retentiveness or 
Memory. What are called variously as memory, reason, 
judgment, imagination, conception and others aje all resolvable 
into these three kinds. And difference lies at the very basis of 
our intellect. No knowledge and no intellectual operation is 


VOWELS AND CONSONANTS. 


55 


possible, if there is no difference in the constituent elements, if 
there is a mere sameness. If there was only one colour, the 
art of painting will be an impossibility ; if there was only one 
sound or tune, music, we could never hear. As it is, the law 
of relativity governs our very being. Sameness could give 
knowledge, only if there was difference, and hence the sense of 
similarity is also accounted an intellectual function ; and a great 
function it performs in the field of invention. And no high 
degree of intellectual power i=> possible, if we do not possess the 
power of remembering our past experiences and impressions. 
And one peculiarity of the human mind, may we call it a defect, 
may be also noted here, as based on the law of relativity already 
stated. The mind is not conscious of all the impressions, 
through all the sense organs, ail at once. A man does not 
become conscious of a sight, a touch, a sound, or a smell, all at 
once. There must be a transition from one to the other, however 
momentary it might be. And the case of an Ashtd:’ nddni is no 
exception to this. Assisted by a good memory, the more 
avaddnams he performs, the more time does he take. It will be 
noted that, in this analysis of mind, no distinction is drawn 
between a feeling and a consciousness of a feeling, a volition 
and a consciousness of a volition, a reasoning and the consci- 
ousness of reasoning. Both are taken to be identical and 
therefore needing no distinction. In Hindu philosophy’, they 
are distinguished and a mere feeling or willing or thinking is 
separated from consciousness of such functions, and the pure 
consciousness is taken as the soul or Sat, and the rest classed 
with body and the world as non-soul or Asat (other than Sat). 
And we will speak of this distinction more further on. From 
these mental functions, however, are contrasted the body and 
its functions and the so-called external world. This collectively 
called matter or the non-ego or the object, possess certain 
characteristics and properties which are not found in mind at 
all, such as breadth and length (order in place), extension, hard- 
ness and softness (inertia), weight (gravity), colour, heat, light, 
electricity, organised properties, chemical properties & e., &c., 



VOWELS ANT! CONSONANTS. 


5 6 

and the most important oi this is extension. Matter is extended , 
Mind is unextemled. Says Dr. Bain, 

“ We are in this fix ; mental states and bodily states are utterly 
contrasted ; they cannot be compared, they have nothing in common 
except the most general of ail attributes — degree, order in time ; when 
engaged with one we must be oblivious of all that distinguishes the other. 
When I am studying a brain and nerve communications, I am 
engrossed with properties exclusively belonging to the object 
or material world, I am unable at that moment (except by very rapid 
transitions or alterations, to conceive a truly mental consciousness. Our 
mentai experience, our feelings and thought have 1.0 extension, no place, 
no form or outline, no nrachanical division of parts ; and we are incapable 
of attending to anything mental, until we shut off the view of all that. 
Walking in the country in spring, our mind is occupied with the 
foliage, the bloom, and the grassy meads — all purely objective things. 
We are suddenly and strongly arrested by the odour of the May-blossom ; 
we give way for a moment to the sensation of sweetness ; for that 
moment the objective regards cease ; we think of nothing extended, we 
are in a state, where extension has no footing; there is to us place no 
longer. Such states are of short duration, mere fits, glimpses; they are 
constantly shifted and alternated with object states, and while they last 
and have their full power, we are in a different world ; the material 
world is blotted out, eclipsed, for the instant unthinkable. These 
subject-movements are studied to advantage in bursts of intense pleasure 
or intense pain, in fit of engrossed reflection, especially reflection on mental 
facts ; but they are seldom sustained in purity, beyond a very short 
interval; we are constantly returning to the object side of things — to the 
world whose basis is extension and place.” 

However widely these may differ, there is this remark- 
able fact about them that they are found united together in a 
sentient being — man or animal. And the exact correlation, 
correspondence or concomitance in these two sets of phenomena 
is what Dr. Bain takes very great trouble to show in several 
chapters. This we need not deny, as Dr. Bain fully admits 
that this conjunction and correspondence ddnot warrant us in 
stating that mind causes body o r tod cm n < ; but his 
position is that mind-body causes mind-bCdy. There is a 



VOWELS AND CONSONANTS. 


57 


duality in the very final resort and ultimate analysis, but a 
disembodied mind cannot be thought of, and he uses various 
expressions such as, an ‘undivided twin’ a ‘double faced unity,’ 
‘one substance with two sets of properties.’ & c. And we don’t 
see why Dr. Bain should ally himself with materialists if he 
is not going to call this one substance, not as matter altogether, 
but as only matter-mind or mind-matter ; unless it be that he is 
unable to prove himself the existence of mind except in con- 
junction with an organized body. This latter circumstance 
again causes no difficulty to the Siddhanti who postulates 
QP’jjQp^g^ssBr®,’ ‘ even in Mukti, none of the three 
padarthas are destroyed,’ and who no more believes in a 
disembodied mind than Dr. Bain, unless a body or an organism 
be taken to be the body composed of all the 25 lower tattvas. 
From the table given in No. 10 of the first volume of the SiddkCmta 
Dipika, it will be seen, that even the most spiritual beings 
have a body composed of Asudda or Sudda Maya, and we have 
also remarked, cautioning against the common mistake of call- 
ing matter dead, that these higher aspects of matter are so 
potent and active as to be often mistaken for God Himself. 
Passing from this point however, we now come to the question 
as to the nature of the union between this mind and body. 

When we talk of union, the suggestion that it is union in 

% 

place that is most predominant. And Dr. Bain lays great stress 
on the fact that such a local conjunction is not to be thought of, 
is impossible. There can be no union in place between an un- 
extended thing (as Chit), and an extended thing (as Achit) ; and 
all such expressions external and internal, container and 
contained are also misleading aud mischievous. The con- 
nection is not a causal connection. It is wrong to call such 
conjunction as one acting on the other, or as one using the 
other as an instrument. (The theory of occasional causes and 
of pre-established harmony are also antiquated now). The 
phenomenon is. a most unique one in nature; there is no single 
similar conjunction in nature, so that we may compare it by 
analogy, and there is no fitting language to express such 



VOWELS A \'D CONSONANT 4 -. 


5S 

conjunction either. The only adequate expression to denote a 
transition from an object cognition to a subject one is a change 
of state. Language fails, analogy fails, to explain this union, 
though in itself a fact ; and it remains a mystery in a sense, 
though to seek an explanation for an ultimate fact, can, in 
no sense, be logical ; and all that we can do has Jbeen done 
when we have tried to generalize the various sets of pheno- 
mena into the fewest possible number, and if we cannot pass 
to a higher generalization than two, we can only rest and 
be thankful. 

We are sure that this is a perfectly safe position to hold, 
and our object in penning this article is in no way to differ 
from this view ; only we fancy, we have an analogy in Tami], 
which will exactly answear the point and make the union more 
intelligible, besides bringing out the nature of mind and 
matter, in a much more favourable light, than from the stand- 
point of a mere materialist, qualified or otherwise; and we 
fancy we have been almost every day using language to 
describe this union, though the name in itself is a puzzle , and 
embodies both a paradox and a contradiction. Before we state 
them, however, we will state one or two facts, so far as they 
bear upon the relation of mind and matter, and which Dr. 
Bain states more fully in his Mental Science. It is that, all 
objectivity implies the subject-mind at the same time. “All 
objective states are in a sense also mental.” Unless the mind 
is present, though unconscious, you cannot have object know- 
ledge at all. We cannot have a pure objective condition at all, 
without the subject supporting it, as it were, though for the 
time being, it is nonapparent, is entirely blotted out. (S unyam). 
Or rather shall we say, though dissimilar, the mind has become 
thoroughly identified with matter. But mind can ascend to 
pure subjectivity, and it does not imply the presence of objects, 
as the object does the subject ; and in such a pure subjective 
state, where is the object ? It has become also non-apparent 
{Sunyam). Regarding the possibility, however, of matter being 
the primary element, there is this fact. Matter is found both as 



VOWELS AND CONSONANTS. 


59 


organic and inorganic, and what a world of difference is there 
between these conditions of matter? Is the peculiar organiza- 
tion given to it by the presence for the time being of mind in 
it or is it derived solely by its inherent power. We have 
admitted that the so-called dead matter might possess potentia- 
lities without number. Still, is there any sort of similarity 
between the inorganic properties exhibited by matter, and the 
organic or vital properties ? However this be, we will now pro- 
ceed to state our analogy. It is the analogy of vowels and 
consonants. We have quoted the Gita verse, but we look in vain 
even in Sankara’s commentary for the meaning we have tried 
to give it. Possibly Sankara would not give such an explana- 
tion, as it would conflict with his preconceived theory. So, if 
there was truth in it, it remained locked, and the key, altogether, 
remained with the Siddhanta writers. The most familiar 
example of the analogy occurs in the sacred Kural, in the very 
first verse of it. 

Qsu iUVl j. T? 

“ As ‘A' is the first of all letters. 

So the ancient Bagavan is the first in this world.” 

We might fancy an alphabet, in which the letter “A" is not 
the first, and if the point of comparison is merely* to * denote 
God’s order in place as the first, so many other analogies 
might be thought of. And Parimelalagar accordingly notes that 
the order is not order in place, but order in its orgin. It is the 
most primary and first sound that the human voice can utter, 
and it is also the one sound which is present in every other 
sound, vowel or consonant. All other vowels are formed by 
modifications of this sound. And what are vowels and 
consonants pray ? A vowel is defined as a sound that can be 
pronounced of itself, without the aid of any other sound. And 
a consonant is one which cannot be sounded, except with the aid 
of the vowel. Let us look more carefully into the nature of 
these sounds. .We every day utter these sounds, and yet we 



6o 


VOWEL? A XI) C OXSO.XaXTA. 


tail to recognize the mystery in their connection, solely on 
account of their familiarity. We try to utter £ A.’ It comes 
pure and simple, by the mere opening' of the mouth, without 
an)' modification whatever, and requires no other aid. But let 
us pronounce say ‘K.’ It is ‘Ke in English, in Tamil it is ‘Ka’, ‘s’ 
or ‘Ik’, ‘s’. There is a vowel sound present in it, ‘t’ or ‘a’ ‘i.’ 
Let us eliminate this vowel sound, and try to pronounce the 
consonant. Well, the task is impossible, you don’t get any con- 
sonant sound at all. In the consonant, therefore, there is always 
a vowel sound present, though we never consciously recognize 
its presence; though in Tamil, the symbolism is so highly 
philosophical, that we invariably mark its presence, even when 
we write purely consonants. We dot all our consonants as ‘d,’ 
‘a,’ &c. and the dot or circle represents in Hindu symbolism 
the letter ksy’. This dot or circle begins almost every one 
of the twelve vowels in the Tamil alphabet, and as to what 
the other curved and horizontal and perpendicular lines mean 
we will take another opportunity to explain. When we 
write ‘ d ’ therefore, the framers of the alphabet meant to 
represent how the vowel sound underlies the consonant, 
and supports it, and gives it its very being and existence. 
Such a mark is unneceesary when we write the vowel-con- 
sonant ‘ Ka’, 1 s ’, as we are fuly aware of its presence. In 
the pure consonant therefore, the vowel is implied and under- 
stood, though for the time being its presence is not detected, and 
it is completely identified with the consonant itself. We have 
been considering, at learned length, the nature of the union 
between mind and body, but have we ever paused to consider 
the nature of the union of the vowel and consonant ? Is there 
any such unique conjunction anywhere else in nature, where 
one subsists not, except in conjunction with the other. Except 
the inseparable conjunction, as above stated, we see that the 
consonant (pure) is no more derived from the vowel than the 
vowel from the consonant. There is much _ wider contrast 
between these, than between any two things in the world. 
The place of origin is distinct. ‘A’ is pronounced by the 



VOWELS AND CONSONANTS. 


61 


mere opening of the month. The tongue has to be brought 
into contact with the palate to pronounce ‘ k’ and this same 
act cannot produce the vowel. So the vowel cannot be said 
to cause the consonant, nor the consonant the vowel. Nor can 
we call the consonant and the connection themselves as false, and 
as a mere* illusion or delusion. So neither the principle of Pari- 
naraa nor Vivartana can apply to this connection. All that we 
can say of it is, that they are so connected and inseparable, and 
that no language can be possible, by vowels alone nor by conso- 
nants alone, and every consonant is at the same time a vowel- 
consonant, in which the vowel is apparent or non-apparent ; and 
though we can conceive of the vowels standing alone, to think 
of consonants as existing by itself is an utter impossibility. 
Now apply all this to the case of mind and body. Mind is the 
vowel, and the body (matter) is the consonant. Mind and body 
are as widely contrasted as vowel and consonants are. One 
cannot be derived from the other by Parinciina or Vivartana. 
Yet both are inseparably united, and though the mind occupies 
an independent position, can be pure subject at times, the body 
cannot subsist unless it be in conjunction with mind. Mind is 
always implied in body ; mind underlies it, supports it and 
sustains it, (if all this language derived from material cognition 
is permissible). When the mind is pure mind, the body is not, 
it is asat (Siinyam). When it is pure body, mind is present but 
non-apparent, it has become one with the body. The mind is 
there, but it conceals its very self, ils very identity, and it is as 
good as absent. And except at rare intervals, our whole 
existence is passed in pure objectivity, without recognizing 
the presence of the true self, the mind. The whole truth of 
these two analogous cases, the only two, are brought out in 
Tamil, in the most beautiful manner, by the same words being 
used to donote vowel and consonant as also mind and body. See 
what a light bursts when we name ‘s-uTir,’ (a_i_st). The 

word ‘ s - o Sit’, irfeans both a vowel and mind (soul) ; and ‘Qlbuj’ 
both body and consonant. Dr. Bain observes that the sense 
of similarity is the sense of invention and true discovery. The 



62 


VOWELS AND CONSONANTS. 


greatest discoveries in science have been made by catching 
such resemblances at rare intervals. And when the very first 
Tamil man called his vowels and consonants ‘s-aS.t’ ‘Qixh’ was 
he not a born philosopher and had he not comprehended the 
true nature of the union between mind and body, and vowels and 
consonants. The simile recieves its best exposition foe the first 
time in the hands of Saint Meykanda Deva, (vide Sivajnana- 
botbam, II. i. b. and notes pp. 12, 19 and 20), and his followers 
( vide Light of Grace pp. 7 and 8); and Saint Meykandan gives 
a name in the same verse for denoting this connection. This 
one word is Advaita. This word has been a real puzzle to 
many ; and so many renderings of it have been given. The 
Tamil Philosopher, however, explains it as meaning “pearrysirwec, 
a eiaru-.tr sir ptarjiAjesori! Adsrysi (neither one nor two nor 
neither), and which fully and beautifully brings out, therefore, 
the meaning of Dr. Bain's words that the connection is both a 
paradox and a contradiction. Very few outside the circle of 
Siddhanta School could be made to comprehend the truth of 
this paradox ; more so, when their mind is prepossessed with 
the truth of their own views. But we have always used the 
analogy of vowels and consonants with very great effect, and 
it has tended to make the subject much dearer than many a 
more learned argument. We have confined ourselves in this 
article to deal with the last two sets of phenomena in Nature, 
Mind and Matter ; and we will reserve to a future article, the 
Nature of the Higher powers we postulate, and their connection 
with the lower ones ; and a further amplification of the subject, 
together with the history of the question, in Indian systems of 
thought. 



GOD AND THE WORLD. 


THE ADVA1TA. 


The Vedic Texts Ekani evadvitiyam Brahma.' ‘Ekam Eva Rudro 
N ddvitiyaya thas teh' mean that there is only One Supreme Being without 
a second. And this One is the Pat hi and not the soul. You, who say 
ignorantly you are One with the Lord, are the soul, and are bound up 
with Pdsa. As we say without the (primary sound) ‘A’ all other letters 
will not sound, so the Vedas say, without the Lord, no' other things will 
exist.” SivajHanabotham (ii. i. b). 

“ ^etssreupQgnL-'Sg) uH/gLmasruLp. 
gtrssxeSQfSV) L-ggisStg ufrgj/trQsrr-i isirQeirir.” 

“ O for the day when I will be in advaita union with the unchange- 
able True Intellignce, as 1 am now in union with Anava [Paso]" ! 

Says Count Tolstoy, “ Religion is a certain relation established 
by man between his separate personality, and the endless 
universe or its source ; morality is the perpetual guiding of life 
which flows from this relation.” And as we have explained in 
our previous article, even knowledge of a thing means know- 
ledge of its difference and similarity with other things, its 
relation to things which are dissimilar, and to things which 
are similar, and from the knowledge of such relation, our 
further acts are determined. Say, if the object be a new 
fruit we had not seen before, if we find it related to the 
edible species, we try to eat it ; if not, we throw it away. 
If one should make however a mistake in the identification, 
from imperfect experience or knowledge, or misled by the 
nice and tempting appearance of the fruit, woe befalls him 
when he partakes thereof. All our good and evil flows accord- 
ingly, from our onderstanding rightly or wrongly, our relation to 



64 


GOD AND THE WORLD. 


men and things and society. And the highest philosophy and 
religion accordingly mean also knowledge and knowledge of 
the relation of the highest postulates of existence; and different 
systems arise as different kinds of relationships are postu- 
lated. In determining the respective views, imperfect observa- 
tion and experience, passion and prejudice, trammels created 
by heredity and society, have all their play ; and we have 
different moral standards followed by men, consciously or 
unconsiously, as resulting from their already formed con- 
victions. 

Proceeding on our own lines of discovering these relation- 
ships, we took with us Dr. Bain to help us on to a particular 
stage. He is a most uncompromising agnostic and materialist 
(qualified) and yet we were in perfect agreement with him all 
the way he took us, and if he refuses to go with us further, and 
sees pitfalls and dangers in such a path and is not willing to 
brave such, we can quite understand his motives and can only 
admire his honesty. So far as we went with him also, it was 
perfect sailing. We were well aware of things we were 
talking about, there was no mistaking them, the facts were 
all within our experience, and there was nothing in them 
which contradicted our experience, and we were not asked 
to believe things on credit, by appealing to intuition or 
authority. When reason failed, we were not referred to 
Smti ; and when Sruti failed, we were not referred to their 
own individual yogic experience; and when all these failed, 
no verbal jugglery was adopted ; and nothing was made 
to look grand by making it a matter of mystery. Our meaning 
is quite unmistakeable, and we use plain language and if 
it is not plainer, we shall try to make it so. 

We found, accordingly, that our present experiences and 
facts of cognition resolve themselves into two sets of facts, two 
grand divisions, totally distinct, and yet in inseparable relation, 
and we called them respectively mind and matter, ego and 
non-ego, subject and object, atma and pasa, chit and aclnt, sat 



COD AND THE WORLD. 65 

and asat. We noted their inter-dependence and inter-relation. 
As regards the nature of the relation itself, it was in a sense 
inexplicable. We could say positively that the relation is not 
one of causation or succession, not mere order in place, and it 
could not be that of the whole to its part, nor one acting on the 
other, or using the other as its instrument, nor that of container 
and contained, nor no relation at all ; and we could not thus 
picture this relation in any one of the modes known to us in 
our actual experience ; and the only analogy available to us in 
nature, mamely, that of vowels and consonants helped us a good 
deal to have some idea of this relation. It is not one, it is not 
two, and our Acharya asks us to keep us quiet, “ ejsLSIgeinQi-bsr 
^Lcii) «tiu;/r£iS(j5”. But still even this position requires a naming, 
and for want of a better name too, we use the word ‘ Advaita ’ 
to such relation. The word Advaitam implies the existence of 
two things and does not negative the reality or the existence of 
one of the two. It simply postulates a relation between these 
two. The relation is one in which an identity is perceived, and 
a difference in substance is also felt. It is this relation which 
could not easily be postulated in words, but which perhaps 
may be conceived and which is seen as two (Dvaitam) and at 
the same time as not two (Na Dvaitam) ; it is this relation 
which is called Advaitam (a unity or identity in duality) and 
the philosophy which postulates such relation is called the 
Advaita Philosophy ; and it being the highest truth also, it is 
called the Siddhanta (The true end). This view has therefore 
to be distinguished from the monism of the materialist and 
idealist, and from the dualism of Dr. Reid and Hamilton. But 
Dr. Bain and others of his school would regard themselves as 
monists, but in that case, the distinction between this monism, 
may we call it qualified monism, and the monism of writers 
before the advent of the present agnostic school must be 
carefully observed. There is no wrong in using any name for 
anything, but when particular associations have been already 
established, it serves no purpose except to confound ■ and 
confuse to use Old words with new- meanings introduced into 


9 



66 


GOD AND THF WORI.D. 


them. In a sense, this view is also the true monistic view. 
Say from the individual standpoint, when the man is in a pure 
objective condition, his mind becomes merged in the body ; the 
mind identifies itself thoroughly with the body and is not 
conscious of its own distinction from the body. By this process 
of merger and complete identification, the apparent existence is 
only one, that of the object ; when the mind is free from all 
object consciousness, the object world vanishes as it were, and 
there is only one fact present, and that is the mind, and nothing 
else. Without mind, however, nothing else can subsist, and 
when the mind is in its own place, nothing else is seen to sub- 
sist. And how appropriate does the interpretation of that oft- 
quoted and oft-abused Vedic text, ‘ Ekam evadviilyam Brahma ' 
by Saint Meykapdan seem now ! When we arrive at the postu- 
late of God, we arrive at the third padartha, and nobody 
has yet been found to postulate an existence, higher than 
these three. And these constitute the tri-padartha of most 
of the Hindu schools. They differ, no doubt, in the definition 
and description of these three entities, as also in the des- 
cription of their relationships. This third postulate could 
not be arrived at by direct perception, observation and experi- 
ment. We think however it can be proved by strict logical 
methocjs, by such proof as is possible, and we are at liberty to 
postulate it to explain the residuary facts unexplained by the 
Materialists and Idealists. If this postulate will explain facts, 
left unexplained by these people, and if it will not contradict 
any of the facts of human nature and probabilities, there is no 
harm in having it for a workable hypothesis. We believe 
also that the Materialists and Idealists leave many facts 
unexplained and that this third postulate is necessary to 
explain these facts. We, however, do not propose to go 
into this wide question now. We only propose to discuss 
God’s relation to mind (soul) and matter just at present. 
And the relation we postulate is the same as between mind 
and body which we have already postulated, and we call it by 
the same name ‘advaita’. And the couplet we have quoted from 


GOD AND THE WORLD. 


67 


Tayumanavar conveys the idea most beautifully, and the 
merit of expounding this beautiful view of ‘ advaita ' must in 
the first place be accorded to Saint MeykandUn whom Saint 
Tayumanavar himself extols as the Guirhsesan—irf 
wniL^^isSIfi GiLLiij&smi—iTasr," “The Seer of Advaita Truth”. 
God is related to the soul, as the soul is related to the world. 
God is the Pure subject, the Pure Ego, and the Soul is the 
pure object, non-ego. God is Sat (the true existence) ; Soul is 
Asat. As however we have called the world Asat, we are not 
willing to extend the term to soul also; and it, besides, occupies 
a peculiar postion between God, and Sat, on the one hand 
and the word, Asat, on the other hand ; and hence, the term 
Satasat has been applied to it. The term means that which 
is neither God nor the world (rnaya) but which, when joined to 
either, becomes completely identified with each. When united to 
the body, it is completely identified with the body, and when 
united to God, it is completely identified with God. We have 
already observed that when the soul is united to the body, it 
is completely identified with it, it has not ceased to exist, as the 
body ceased, when thesoul was in its own plane. The very 
existence of the body implied the existence of the soul, though 
for the nonce, the soul was not conscious of its separateness 
and individuality and distinction from the object or body. 
Just in the same way when the Jiva is in the Highest union 
with Sivam, the Jiva is not conscious of its separateness, and 
individuality and distinction from God. If this consciousness 
was present, there will be no union; and if the soul was not itself 
present, to speak of union in Moksha and Anubhava and Ananda 
will also be using language without meaning. And this charac- 
teristic of the soul is very peculiar. It is named kweanresn 

LQiT & t 5 V or • becoming one with that to which it is 

attached.' The Hindu Idealists try to arrive at the postulate of 
the soul precisely by the same mode of proof as is furnished in 
sutras 3 and 4 of. Sivajnanabodham, and arriving at this postulate 
which is found to be above the 24 tattvas, above the elements, 
above the tanmatras, above the jnana and Karmendriyas, above 



68 


GOP AXD THE WORLD. 


the four antahkarana, they have not paused to discover its fur- 
ther nature and characteristics, and have straightway proceeded 
to identify it with God, whom they have read of, in the Srutis, 
and have not tried to learn the relation between these two ; and 
all the absurdities of the Mayavada school are clearly traceable 
to its not understanding the nature of the soul arigflt. These 
further aspects of the soul and its relation to God are therefore 
well brought out in sutras 7, 6 and 5. And how this Jiva can 
possibly become Sivam and in what sense, is beautifully 
brought out in 6. 2. (e). 

Sj giQoimsgn QLCiTGBr/Dsiir jy jg'i.eiir r! QzuQns 
ujgiQniisBrpfi lu ^^apessrQ L^rr — S{ C'Qa jsst 
<§lfiajs&aeasn—®>su,SB)'E <s jSs^asSpjDsa 

cgy ^CLjLD/33su ff.ffl. IQpj.IT -JO. 

“God is not one who can be pointed out as “That.” If so, 
not only will He be an object of knowledge, it will imply a 
JMta who understands Him as such. He is not different from 
the soul, pervading its understanding altogether. The soul so 
feeling itself is also Sivam." 

Chapter II of Light of Grace has abo to be read in this 
connection; and Saint Umapati Sivacharya asks a question to 
bring out the importance of this great characteristic of the soul. 
“Are there not objects in this world which become dark in 
darkness and light in light ?” he asks, and the answer given by 
himself elsewhere is “the eye, the mirror and akas are such 
objects.” The eye loses its power of seeing in darkness, and 
recovers it in light ; and the others become dark or bright 
as darkness or light surrounds it. Saint Tayumanavar 
also refers to this peculiarity in several places and calls the 
SOul tufl © s-.nssr jr# ui&ujviLD uetfliKi-sfyssr 

uj&pgii. ‘You who are like the mirror or ’crystal removed 
of dust, becoming •/ the sf-lf-cgme nature »f one to whLh 



GOD AND THE WORLD. 


69 


it is joined.’ Here the Light is God, darkness is Maya and 
the Mirror or Eye or Akas is the soul. We all feel that 
there is a sentience which suffers this change from light to 
darkness. If this sentience is identified with God himself, 
surely, the change must descend on His head. We have not yet 
been able to understand (of course we are ready to confess we 
do not belong to the superior class of mortals said to possess 
‘ the sharpest intellects, a bold understanding’ to which ranks 
our brother of the Bralunavadin elevates himself — vide p. 749 
current volume) how when they postulate only one padartha, 
one self, and no jiva, how God can be saved from all the 
impurity and sins and ignorance present in nature. To say 
that the Sruti says that God cannot be tainted by such contact 
is only begging the question, and is no answer. To assert that 
the Infinite God by this false imposition, Avidya, had become 
divided into millions and millions of finite beings, and without 
stopping to make good this statement itself by proof except by 
giving an analogy, (which analogy is found to fail most misera- 
bly in most important details) and to assert with the same 
breath, that this sub-division is false, is a mere myth, a dream, 
that there is no universe, men or Gods, you or 1 and then to 
say further that you and I, Gods and men, and the world are 
all God seems to be the height of absurdity and not born of ‘the 
sharpest intellect, a bold understanding.’ If so, we must have 
altogether a different definitions of these terms. We will close 
this paper by quoting two verses from Saint Tirumular, and 
we challenge comparison with them, with anything else found 
in any writing ancient or modern to express the truth of the 
double aspect and relation we have been describing above, with 
the same aptness and richness of illustration. 

LL r & LL}cO r tr '&i f- &>■ _t (T lL $ I. fT */*•»» , 

Jii ; T.r £ JL’ JLd jr'X-.LUT'Gi 7 # 



7 ° 


GOD AND THE WORLD. 


ujjcs'sans iivsnpg pgi uirTQp&p^-f.&LD, 
ux^Sjlsiir wssifors figl unfr/Tfifi 

The tree was concealed in the mad elephant ; 

The tree concealed the mad elephant : 

The Supreme was concealed in the world ; 

In the Supreme was concealed the world. 

(Here tree means a wooden toy elephant). 

Gu/rasrSsw QurrssresrsssfiL^s^.esa ld, 

Ouj e&reaflsir LaG&pfc @ OurreBrsBressfiLj J s^esaril l 

^ffsor&a t gasrs xesm isjsan hld, 

^ssrenftasr LEemjsi gesr&nemiE^errtrj). 

The gold was concealed in the golden ornament ; 

The gold concealed the golden ornament. 

The T was concealed in its own senses ; 

In the T were concealed its own senses. 

These two verses, though they look similar, are not the 
same, and we will expound their meaning in our next. 


i 



THE TWO GEMS. 


(SAT AND SAT-ASAT). 


“ 6Ta/Oaua,7f ^saaraa^itj'LO ^esreuuS /bu(S •$ gnh 
^nxaesnunSihu <siun ujresr STLGU&aoffi,” 

“ To each and every one, His own nature imparting 
Our Lord stands alone, Supreme, full of Grace.” 

Tiruvachakam. 

We proceed to explain the two verses quoted from 
Tirumular at the close of our last article. The two verses 
seem so alike that unless they are looked into more closely, their 
meaning is likely to be lost. These verses explain in fact the 
Bhanda and Moksha conditions of the soul, and the soul’s 
ascent through various stages, called Taftva Darsanam, Atma 
Darsanam and Siva or Para Darsanam. The verse, “The gold 
was concealed in the golden ornament &c.” has to be taken 
first. The object before the seer is a golden ornament. The 
thing can be looked at from two different points of view, in 
two different aspects. It can be viewed as merely gold, and 
then we are solely engaged in looking at its colour, its fineness, 
specific gravity &c., and while we are so engaged, the other 
view of it, whether it is a brooch, or medal or a bracelet &c., is 
altogether lost to view. And in the same manner when we are 
viewing the object as a mere ornament, then all idea of the gold, 
its fineness & c. is lost. This happens when the object before us 
is one and the same, and neither the gold as gold, nor the 
ornament as ornament can be said to non-exist, in either case, 
can be said to be unreal or a mere delusion. We merely 
change our point of view, and we are ourselves under no 
delusion at either moment. The delusion is neither in the gold 
nor in the ornament nor in ourselves. The object before us is so 



THF TWO GEMS. 


7 - 

made that it possesses this double nature or aspect, so to say, 
and our own psychological structure is such that we can 
change from one to the other point. And each point of view 
has its own vantage ground. A person going to a jeweller’s 
shop cannot afford to lose sight of either point, and if he does, 
he is sure to make a bad bargain. What would W£ think of 
this man, if he goes into the shop with the firm idea, that, of the 
jewel he is going to buy, the gold is a mere name and delusion, 
or the ornament is a mere name and delusion. When 
bargaining, however, after he had once tested the fineness of 
the gold, and colour, he need trouble himself no more about it, 
and he can proceed to examine the shape of the ornament, 
its size 8cc. 

Taking this analogy, Tirumular proceeds to point out the 
same relation between the individual ego, the subject, and its 
objective senses. The word used is ‘ standing as it does 
for the individual ego, jiva, soul, pasu, or chit. The phrase 
V « ir $ tarn ■v.-s.-.trirl,’ also brings out the meaning of ‘.ss Sr,' and it 
cannot refer to the Supreme Biahman, as was interpreted by a 
Hindu Idealist. Of course he could not help saying so, as the 
being which he postulates above ‘ its senses ’ is 

God, the Supreme. Saint Tirumular was prophetic enough to 
see such a misinterpretation of his words, and it is therefore 
why he sung the next verse, “ Lcaopfifigi,” the tree was 

concealed &c.’ In our article on ‘Mind and Body’ we have 
fully discussed the relation which Saint Tirumular perceives 
between the Individual Ego, the soul and its bod}'- and senses. 
When the individual pasu lives a purely objective existence, by 
caring for his body, his comforts, his wealth, his pleasures, &c., 
his true self, the mind, is altogether identified with the world; and 
he himself lies buried, concealed. Look at the words, our Saint 
has selected. He does not cry false, false, delusion, delusion 
at every turn. He actually uses 1 ‘ uss>/D.ifS^,’ 

“concealed” and “is concealed”! Neither the soul nor the 
world is a myth, a delusion ; but only when the mind was in an 
objective condition, it was concealed by the object. When the 



THE TWO GEMS. 


73 


soul regains its own self, by forgetting the world, the world 
has not become a myth, only it lies concealed, merged in the 
soul itself. The thoughtless critic is apt to consider such 
distinctions, as mere wordy warfare, but no student of 
philosophy can easily afford to ignore the first principles of 
correct reasoning, by choosing his words, each one to express 
one particular idea and no other ; and many a specious and 
delusive argument has had its genesis in such ignorant and 
ambiguous use of words. To proceed, when the soul lies so 
concealed in the world, this constitutes its bandlia, bound 
condition, and the thing so concealing is called bandha or Pusa. 
When the soul learns to discriminate between its own nature 
and the nature of the world, and to rate the lower as its own 
worth, then it attains to Tattva Darsanam and Atma 
Darsanam. And the whole field of Ethics is evolved from our 
perception of these relations aright. When man perceives that 
the more he is attached to the world, the more his own faculties 
get clouded and he is led more into sorrow and suffering, and 
the more he frees himself from such attachment, the more he 
frees himself from sin and sorrow, and developes in himself his 
higher spiritual nature, then it is that his moral faculties are 
developed, and in course of time strengthened by constant 
practice. But then, there is this peculiarity about the jnind of 
man, which is nowhere noticed in any other system that we 
know of, and which we have already referred to in our last 
article, its intermediate nature between Sat and Asat, and 
which therefore gives it its name of Satasat and which 
peculiarity Kannudaiya Vcllaldr (author of Olivilodukkam) 
emphasises by using the expressive name of =sy A?, or herma- 
phrodite, neither male nor female, neither Sat nor /.sat. But 
the rule in Tamil grammer for determining the sex of the 
hermaphrodite is “ =fj Queasr^igiuuiyi^m 
£5^50 Qu<sk&a)^w.” ‘The sex follows the more predominating 
organs present,/ and so a hermaphrodite person will always be 
called either he or she and not it. The life of the individual soul 
is, as such, passed either as Asat or as Sat, and it has no life of 


10 



74 


THE TWO GEMS. 


its own. That is, it cannot exist by itself, independent of its 
relation with either Padartha. If either God or the world did 
not exist, the existence of the soul would be an impossibility. 
Saint Meykandan uses two analogies to illustrate the position. 
The soul is campared to an object suspended in air, and a flood of 
water. We cannot imagine an object suspended in afr without 
a support. If the support is removed, the object falls to the 
ground. Saint Mey-kandan had as such distinctly before him 
the question “why does an apple fall to the ground.” The 
actual example he had before him was a swing attached by a 
rope to a tree. The tree holds up the object by its own force. 
When this force is weakened and loosened, another force is 
brought into place, the force of the earth, gravity. The object 
was in fact held in between these two forces. The object must 
either be attached to the tree or to the earth. In spite of the 
enormous power of gravitation exerted by the earth, the tree 
was able to hold up the object for a time. Only for a time, for 
when the fruit matures, the tree cannot hold it up, however it 
may will to do so. The same act accomplishes the severence 
from the tree, and the bringing it to the earth. Just so, in the 
case of the soul. It is bound to Maya and Mala, so long the 
soul is not ripe. Before it is ripe, we do not perceive its 
brightness and sweetness. When the soul perfects itself, fed 
by the juices from the earth (the Grace of God) it finds its 
resting place in God. When it so finds itself, united, it 
becomes one with God, as the fruit itself when left alone 
becomes one with the earth. The flood again cannot stand 
still, unless it is held up by an embankment. When this 
embankment is breached, it will run on and on, till it finds its 
resting place in the broad arms of the ocean. Without either 
of these means of support, it will be difficult to restrain the 
fleeting soul. The embankment or the flood gates are the 
Maya support of the soul. The ocean is God. This support 
is called in Tamil upgn, a support, a bond of attachment, a rest, 
desire, love. It is this peculiarity which Saint Tiruvajluvar 
expresses in the following couplet, 



THE TWO GEMS. 


7 5 


uppis uppptrtjesr uprS^esr, tuuupjS^stsju 
upri:s t upp:eSi—p(^, 

which again is the mere echo of our Saint Manikkavachakar’s 
words. 

“ s-pjQju <3?p/Slp Qptri—ir eiiriiuuir&irQ.ysti i_/.-s(Ap 
uppl liStll U.T ?p3S>pL] uppp Ktrlupip.SillT3ir 
Up^StdJ Qurnrssns fiLO jp 0 ca /T6337 LCLCfT 1 GS)JJ 

This peculiarit}" of the soul we have been discussing above, 
has a tremendous bearing in connection with various philosophi- 
cal schools. The ancient Buddha and the modern Agnostic 
would not postulate this other support and resting place of the 
soul. And we find they are landed in Nihilism accordingly. 
The moment of perfection is the moment of annihilation to the 
Buddhist. Nay, with his modern Apostles, Mrs. Annie Besant 
for example, the cry of the Vedas, ; whence there is no return, 
there is no return” is merely a vain cry. There is no such 
thing as final perfection, beatitude or Moksha. The soul must 
roll on ever and anon, subject to the never-ceasing and ever- 
recurring evolution due to “ the moral necessity connected with 
the central and most precious doctrine of the exoteric Vedanta, 
the doctrine of Samsara.” Here of course we see the phenomenon 
of extremes meeting. The Vedanlist could not deny the 
possibility of the soul, attaining the so-called moksha, re- 
curring back into the cycle of evolution, as the orginal 
retrogression of Brahman into Gods and men, brutes and worms 
is itself not explicable by him. The Agnostic not believing in 
God, examines into the nature of the mind or soul and 
perceiving how intimately it is connected with matter, denies 
of course, its separate personality and independent existence ; 
and hence his denial of the soul’s immortality and future 
existence, when once its mortal coil is broken. In the case of 
the Vedantist, however, this peculiarity of the soul will alone 
furnish the excuse for his theory. And we have heard hones); 
Vedantists admit this as the only explanation of Sri Sankara’s 
otherwise untenable position. When in union with God, the 



THE TWO GEMS. 


76 

soul has lost not merely the consciousness of the world, the 
Asat, it loses also its self-consciousness, (not be it remarked its 
self-being) it loses also its consciousness of difference from 
God See., and the only perception that remains is the bare 
perception, the bare enjoyment of God, — the full manifestation 
and Presence of God, as Love and Bliss, alone is felt ; and in 
such a condition, Sahkara could say there is no second thing. 

“ Q<~65T£ u pjxyajrrL'^ Q&tuBg . 1 

Co ef [USB p(T SSI (Hj 

Sankara’s experience will therefore by only one-sided one, 
and the statement cannot stand as a matter of proof. The 
state of union with God is called Turiya or Para-Avasta, and 
in this condition, though the conscious perception of the world 
and soul may not be possible there, be-ness (existence) is not 
gone. And it is this condition, Saint Tirumular expounds in 
his next verse. 

ILU^3$) £ LCG®pg & JQ LOT SD p lU D < &oUT , 
i_t U p pi tool LDSo) p SB <r LLfT jT p LUfTTjisCT j 

Utfp&Dp LD35)pp p 3$ Uti'uQpp pL+pijj, 

UHp35)p U)35)pB p gtf UH S Qp p pL^.p J5, 

The tree was concealed in the mad elephant ; 

.The tree concealed the mad elephant. 

The world concealed the Supreme, 

In the Supreme was concealed the world. 

The Supreme is concealed in the world (not non-existent) 
the world is concealed in the Supreme (not non-existent ). In 
the sentences, ‘ I was concealed by the world, the world was 
concealed in me’, note the fact that there are only two 
names, two categories involved, namely I and the world, 
soul and maya. For an intelligent understanding of the 
proposition, no other category is required. But consider well 
the propositions, ‘ the world concealed the Supreme, the 
world is concealed by the Supreme’. These propositions could 
not be true as they stand, unless both these stand as 
objective to the seer, as in the illustration of the wooden-toy 



THE TWO GEMS. 


77 


itself. The wood of the toy cannot be conscious of its being 
concealed or not by the elephant form, nor the elephant of the 
wood. In human language and expression and argument, there 
is always an ellipsis and the suppression of the middle term. 
The first two propositions relating to the wooden-toy cannot be 
true as they stand but is only intelligible, when we supply the 
factor of the seer. So also, the propositions that follow, though 
the}' only contain the two categories Sat and Asat, involve the 
presence of a third, the Satasat. What we have stated above 
will explain the Sivajnanabotba Sutra, 

“ i urraoanijft, 0 ar$ u<J> _= a; 01 s ir^eSI m 
&$Q&iUffiuurTgJ, 

peer js) ireor t—evir ^seenor,” 

That we are concealed by our Maya covering is a fact, 
the sharpest intellect and the boldest understanding can- 
not get over it, quibble and juggle as it may, and this 
being a fact, “that we are here in ignorance, sin, misery, 
and that we know the way out of them, but the question 
of a cause for them is senseless.” * For nothing can be 
more senseless to ask for an explanation, when the tact to 
be explained is itself an ultimate fact. An, ounce of fact out- 
weighs a pound of probabilities, say the lawyers. And they 
only express a logical truth. But the proposition advanced 
by the Purvupakshi is that the jiva, being neither a part nor a 
different thing, nor a variation of Brahman, must be the 
Paramatman fully and totally himself, and as such is, clothed 
with such attributes as all-pervadingness, eternity, almightiness, 
exemption of time, space and causality, and that this jiva is 
hidden by the world f (maya and avidya) as the fire in wood, 
(or as Saint Tirumular would put it, wood in the elephant) 
and he asks what is the cause of this concealment ? Why should 
the perfect become deluded into the imperfect by avidya and 
ingorance ? Dr. Paul Deussen admits that here all philosophers 

* Paul Deussen’s Elements of Metaphysics, p. 334. 

t Ibid. p. 334. 



TAE TWO GEMS. 


/S 

of India (of his ilk — Sankara included) and Greece and every- 
where have been defective, until Kant came to show us that the 
whole question is inadmissible. We say ‘ ditto ’ also, whatever 
might be the learned Doctor’s understanding of Kant. The 
whole question is inadmissible, nay the whole proposition of the 
Purvapakshi on which this question is based is inadmissible, it 
is untrue, is not a fact. The fact is not true that the Supreme 
Brahman is concealed by Maya and Avidya, Dr. Deussen would 
put his unfortunate Brahman into the dock and arraign him of 
high crimes and misdemeanours (our friends are never concious 
of what gross blasphemy they are guilty of — our mind is 
extremely pained that we should even write so, for argument’s 
sake) and before proving his guilt, with which he charges him, 
he would indulge in irrelevant and irreverent talk, as to why and 
wherefore this Brahman committed these crimes. Any ordinary 
judge would rule his talk as senseless ; also, such talk from the 
accused’s counsel, kindly engaged by the crown, would be 
ruled as senseless, when the accused admits the charge, and 
there is besides overwhelming testimony as to his guilt, leaving 
no room for doubt. The case contemplated by the learned 
Doctor will find a parallel in some of those occasional cases 
of judicial murder. A greal crime had been committed, there 
is a great hue and cry, some body ought to be punished, ought 
to suffer for the unknown criminal. The Police run down some 
one they have long known, an old offender; witnesses (Pseudo- 
jnanis, with their Svanubhuti and esoteric experience) only 
flock in overwhelming numbers to prove the prisoner’s guilt; 
the weight of testimony is only crushing, the poor prisoner at 
the bar is simply dumb founded and cannot find speech to 
exculpate himself, however innocent he might be, and his 
silence counts for confession and he is condemned to die. Be- 
fore his bones are whitened however, the real criminal turns up, 
confesses his crime, and the first conviction is found after all 
to be based on a case of mistaken identity. We have already 
shown how liable is the soul to be mistaken for God, to mistake 
itself for God. Saint Meykapdan even where he teaches the 



THE TWO GEMS. 


79 


initiate to practice Sohambavana, cautions him before and after 
not to mistake himself for God. 

‘luirsasuiLjti (gGsfljjl jpSrSil.T.’ In the Presence of the Sat, all 
else is Sunyam. ’ Why, because, ‘ before the Perfect and Eternal 
Intelligence, (Truth) the imperfect and acquired intelligence, 
(the semblance) is shorn of its light,’ answers our Saint, and he 
illustrates it by saying that the Evil Asat ceases to exist before 
Him, as does darkness before the sun, and explains that Hara 
cannot know them as objects, as nothing is outside Him. How 
well this explanation fits in with the vedic text, “ There shines 
not the sun, nor moon, nor stars, neither these lightnings, much 
less this earthly fire. After Him, the Shining One, all things 
shine, by His Light is lighted this whole world ”* And when 
before this shining One, even the suns and moons pale, they dare 
assert that darkness, maya and avidya can dare lift up their 
heads and veil and conceal and dim His brightness, and that on 
account of this veiling, the shining One can become deluded 
and fancy Himself as Asat, this body and these senses, and this 
world. Well does the Siddhanti ask, can you show me a sun 
covered by darkness, for me to believe in a Brahman veiled by 
Maya or Upadhi. f No doubt the blind man says, the sun is 
hid by darkness ; he will not confess his own blindness and 
darkness, and transfers his infirmity to the Effulgent Sun. 
“After Him, all things shine, by His light is lighted the whole 
world.” Yes, O Lord, we are but broken lights of Thee. The 

* Svetas vi. 14. 

f C.f. “ @0sirOu(r^®^ S-LJ^nuaQeur&sr, 

LL^etrQuirfilii Jg tshhiDsisr." 

If there is a Sun by darkness veiled 

Then may a chit exist by ignorance veiled, mistaking the 
body for itself 

Having called Him Ninmala 

It is madness to impute to God, Avidya. 



oS 


THE TWO GEMS. 


little light that shines in each one of our souls is simply 
borrowed from Thee. Without this light, we are but the 
pieces of diamonds lying in darkness. In band'na, before the 
diamond is cut and polished, we cannot reflect Thy Glorious 
Light. We are the diamond crystals, Thou, the light shining 
in them, QsrGhnj&Pi'bSdsr e-d-L-SUpp G-jSH-lutQsst ! As crystal, we 
become light in light, and dark in darkness. •jL-ir‘2^trsrgu ujbpiesr 
peisr fehrp u i p u, p ll uaflz. lisra Thou art like the 

Light from the emerald, jnssyl, lighting and colouring every- 
thing it touches after itself. 

srajGia;a/;t pdrssLLiLfjj psir3.uS.p u'Sggi'j) 

grrZssrujiT'3'jj gutTusi ! 

The Diamond crystal (yDipsik sueisrssnL.r^j)) and the gem 
Emerland (.-jirhp^pcZr eusarazr-un i@i), these are the symbols used 
by the Siddhantis for the Soul and Sivam. Students of 
Science know the structural difference between those two 
bodies, as mediums or distributors of light. This Divine Light 
is Uma, (literally wisdom or light) that Lady wondrous fair, 
who showed to the astonished immortals, Her Royal Consort, 
and her colour is green emerald, and we will close this article 
by invoking her aid and quoting this passage from Kumara- 
gurupara which is poetic and philosophic at the same time. 

LJ 605 7 3 <olfl G) rs. IT yl LJ L. IT cJIQj or 'oi)T JO ) (TTjCs 

LJ IT or 11 Gif) d! 3 LJ I— 1 

ljgugtt s i^lo 5 zrrjiiT t-j 7- Cfr ffD (3riLtTL^_iupiTjj^ 

uQjjap/s* d icia^ictruj, 
gecxtas? gy iLStrSjpS^^p ?'rs>p uj'Gsnsiaeif) 

ps To^’67dio\//r J)r^TL:fTJJ 

rjc ssvrgpi) if ear fd 0 k Q trenjuG- n etsr GrydUijj 
r pj’TT C r.Sr p r l sJ lJ IT / T^3fT 'SI. S. 0.3 -1-' IT , o'-- • 

O Thou parrot-tongued Maid, 

The green Light from Thy body spreads, 

Converts the coral plants into green 
The big pearls into emeralds so many, 

And the winged swans floating on the cool waves 
Into so many sporting peacocks 
And thus explain the truth which the Vedas proclaim, 

‘ That after you, all things shine.’ 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE 
GOD-HEAD. 


“ Quem,<sn) «sr3iffQu_/gp/iii Qupfiiu&sr snsesra," 

“ Behold ! He is the male, the female and the neuter.” ! 

Tiruvachakam. 

“ Sivam santam, advaitam chaturtham manyante 

R^matapini Upanishat. 

Very often it happens, we have to write upon the same 
subject over and over again, and nobody need wonder why 
this should be so. We eat the same kind of rice and dish of 
vegetables, over and over again, day after day, from the year’s 
end to the year’s end, and yet, we never ask why this should 
be so. The answer is plain that this is the best and safest 
and most wholesome food we require, every day of our life, 
for its sustenance and nurture and growth. What applies 
to the body applies to the mind as well. The mind requires 
also some wholesome and safe and healthy pabulum for 
it to feed upon, also, every day, nay, every hour ; and 
you can starve the mind, as well as over-feed it ; and you 
may feed it on unwholesome and unhealthy food ; and these 
are irregularities which we should avoid, as we should 
avoid irregularities in diet. Wholesome food, however often 
we may repeat, ought not to tire any body. And this is 
necessary for another reason also. Man is circumstanced more 
or less by his environment ; all sorts of influences are brought 
to bear on him ; and these create doubts and misgivings even 
in the most well-regulated minds ; and the mind vacillates from 
one extreme to the other. It is therefore good that the mind 
is made to face .the same truth, ever and anon. And then, 
indeed, our memory is so weak, we forget what we learnt 
only yesterday ; and what fails to strike our imagination at 


ii 



82 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE GOD-HEAD. 


one time may attract it another time. Besides, errors and 
fallacies are repeated day after day, and it becomes necessary 
to repeat what we regard as truths as often. As such, we 
make no further apolog}' for going fully into a subject which 
we touched upon in our review of “ the Minor Upanishats,” in 
our introduction to the dvaivaiya Upanishat, and in *our article 
on the “Personality of God”. Very often, a controversy is 
carried on by means of names and words, and the whole fallacy 
lies in the different parties to the controvers)", understanding the 
word in as many different ways. We have seen how European 
writers differed in defining the word “ Personal ” and “ Im- 
personal ” ; and we have accepted the word “Personal” free 
from all implication of limitation or anthropomorphism and in 
the manner defined by Emerson, Lotze, Dr. Iverach &c. We 
have also noted the different ways of interpreting the word 
Saguna and Nirguna. One calls God Saguna, and interprets 
Nirguna in undoubted and authoritative passages as meaning 
merely “ devoid of bad qualities And in this sense Saguna 
must mean full of bad qualities-, and yet this one will only 
call his God Saguna and not Nirguna ; and he exhibits a clear 
prejudice against the word “Nirguna,” thus clearly making 
out that his interpretation is, after all, only a doubtful expedient 
at avoiding an inconvenient corner. We have, however, referred 
to its technical and original and philosophic acceptation, in 
that, Guna means the Guna tattva which is the name and 
characteristic of Miilaprakriti ; and this Guna comprises the 
three Gunas, Sattva, and Rajas and Tamas ; Saguna accordingly 
means clothed with Sattva and Rajas and Tamas, gross 
material qualities, and Nirguna means ifreedom from these 
three qualities or gross material veilings ; and the definition 
of God as Nirguna, and not as Saguna, does not therefore 
conflict with the literal and consistent acceptation of the two 
' words, or our idea of God’s Supreme Nature. By the way, 
an additional proof that our interpretation is correct is 
furnished by the fact that the Saguna Philosopher actually 
clothes his God with Sattva-Gupa. Comparisons are generally 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE GOD-HEAD. 


S3 


odious, but where principles are at stake they cannot be 
avoided altogether ; and we merely invite our readers’ attention 
to the two descriptions of God-head, given in the appendix to 
Dr. Muir’s “Metrical Translations from Sanskrit writers”, which 
are respectively summarised from the Svetasvatara Upanishat 
and Uttara*-Ramayana. You may omit the names, for they are 
accidents, due to our ancient religious history, and you may 
give the bare descriptions to our artist ; and we have no doubt 
he will draw two totally different pictures. No doubt, we admit 
their Saguna conception of God, and as for that, any bhdvand 
of God serves the purpose of the aspirant after a higher path 
to a great extent, on the well-known principle laid down by 
St. Meykandan, “ Choose the form which attracts your love most." 
But as we have pointed out alread 3 ', we do not remember at 
times that this is only a form, a symbol and not the truth 
itself, that truth is beyond one’s ordinary ken (“ semQppp qsu 
<gB)p atrLL&uj‘Jla)Qsti~<oiir — B-etrsirpgiemrrJSAp Qattsirotrsijdiui—trenr,’’), and 
that yet this vision is possible (“ ujir^/w $akQ i_«sr ”), 

(“ Ljss piupf^iipirdr Ljtfl&esH-QujiTQssr ”) when leaving our feeling 
of ‘ I ’ and ' Mine ’, destroying and annihilating our Pasu 
and PSsa nature “ asrssr QslLQ s^uSit — isnssr QslL^S ” and 

assisted by His Supreme Grace (“ we reach the 

place of peace, Nirvana (Literally non-flowing-as-air) ($zypujpp 
tfirGuirp Sii sap Qpetflajirp(Sj') * 

What we, therefore, here wish to lay down and impress 
upon our readers, is that, whatever names we may use, 
(“ zpQTjisitLDLD zpsbrpidPoGutrpcsj, ^u9jw ^(T^rsmoiiutTp- rsirij}Qpsir 

QsrreBsnli QjutlLl-itGuit ” — "Let us sing the thousand names of 
the One who has no name, no form, nothing ”), and though 
we may accept this form and that symbol for worship and 
practice (Sadhana), yet we hold rigidly to the principle that 
God is not man, covered by ignorance and matter, and God 
cannot be born as man, and clothed with Prakriti qualities. 
The rigid acceptance of this one principle alone, that God is Aja, 


* cf., “ Be still 'and know that I am God. — ” Book of Psalms. 



8 4 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE GOD-HEAD. 


{cannot be born) ought to distinguish and elevate the Siddhanta 
from all other forms of Religion. And the rigid acceptance 
of this one principle alone must prevent it from its degenerating 
into a superstition, and base idolatry, and man and fetish- 
worship. One great obstacle to the due recognition of the excel- 
lence of the Siddhanta is the obstacle thrown by certain names. 
We use certain names as denoting God and as comprising the 
characteristic attributes which we clothe Him with. But how 
can we help it ? We cannot forget our language, and its past 
traditions ; we cannot forget our religious past, however we 
might try ; and we cannot therefore coin new names, simply 
because some others want us to do so. And what need is 
there for doing so either ? If we use certain names, they 
were so used by 90 per cent of the Indian population for the 
last 30 centuries at least ; they were so used in the days of 
the Puranas and Itihasas, they were so used in the days of the 
Upanishat writers, and they were soused in the days of the 
Vedic writers. And some of these Mantras and texts have 
been used in the daily prayer of everybod}'. The publishers 
of “ The Theosophy of the Upanishats ” recommend to us 
the following mantra from the Taittiriya Upanishat for our 
dail}’- prayer : 

“Satyam Jnanam Anantam Brahma Anandarupam 

v v 

AmritamyW vibhuti Santam Sivam, Advaitam.” 

And what is there sectarian about the word “ Sivam ” 
herein? Evan an Upanishat of the Type of Ramatapini has 
this text with the same word, (quoting as it does the above 
Mantra of course), 

“ Sivam, Santam, Advaitam, Chaturtham manyante 

There is one thing about the word “Sivam". Sanskrit 
scholars say that the word in this form is not a neuter 
noun but simply an adjective, and accordingly translate 
it as gracious , benignant &c ; but it is remarkable that this 
word is always used in the Rig-Yeda and other Vedas and 
Upanishats in conjunction with the word kudra, Sankara 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE GOD-HEAD. 


85 


Bhava, &c., and that to denote the same personality and not any 
other. However this may be, the word (Semi>) Sivam is used 
clearly in Tamil as the neuter Form of Siva or Sivan (Seusbr), 
as Param (umb) of Para or Paran (usm), as Brahmam (iSjrtaw), 
of Brahman (eSsna ear), with no change of meaning in either form. 
That this 'accounts for the frequent change from one gender to 
another in describing the Supreme Being, even in the same 
Mantra, as in the Svetas vatara, we have already pointed out. 
That all these names are also declinable in the feminine gender 
without change of meaning we have also pointed out elsewhere. 
Whether we say Siva, Sivam, or Siva ; Sankara, Sahkararrq 
or Sankari ; Para, Param, or Para ; we denote the same 
Supreme Personality. We use these words, and in these forms 
of gender, as these are all the forms or symbols we perceive in 
the material universe. To us, therefore, these names are mere 
names and nothing more ; and we affix therefore no greater 
importance to one form in preference to another. Though 
Professor Max Muller would prefer to call God, in the neuter, 
“It ” and think it a higher name, we are thoroughly indifferent 
as to calling the supreme, as He, She or It ; and we accordingly 
with St. Manikkavachaka praise God, as 

Quessr^sjesur spic Qup pjiuzisr sneijrs” * 

“Behold! He is the male and the female and the neuter.” 

* And yet consider the following lines from the same ‘utterence.’ 
^esiQusisr ^jsSeun 
ujnijigeen tuiip xmuuuirdo Se&rp 
Q&J : <3S& : LDinoevIT l^SS) Z U-jQ LDGlfi QlUtSl&err 
@euQu(T7jLDiTebr eTihQu^uiiTsir Qpeurr Q&rrQev.” 

“My Father ! He became man, woman, and hermaphrodite, the Akas, 
and Fire and this final Cause, and transcending all these forms, stands 
the Supreme Siva, of the Body glowing like the flame of the forest. 
He is my Lord and the King of Gods ”. 

il Quem(Smf3 ujit^iiu eShundju iSpiiQsn&RQ&i 
eSIemfStsyS u$ p pHasr il] lo Qai^S 

£saaT(SOT)J Qp'pLDntu i§dsr (year 

“He became, ‘He’ and ‘She’ and ‘It’ and the Earth and Heaven, and 
is different from all these and stands as my dear Blessedness.” 



86 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE GOD-HEAD. 


These lines will be found repeated often and often in the Tiru- 
vachakam, Teraram and every other sacred writing in Tamil. 
Can similar lines be quoted from writers of any other school ? 
We dare say, not. But the older Upanishats contain similar 
thoughts, and that only proves our contention that the Siddhanta 
school but barely represents to day the oldest traditioss, and is 
the inheritor of the most ancient Philosophy. Of all Indian 
preachers, it was the late matakhandana Venkatagiri Sastrin 
that used to dwell on this universal aspect of the Siddhanta in 
respect of naming Him as ‘He’, ‘She’ and ‘It’, and he used to 
point out that all names of Siva are declinable in all the three 
genders without change of meaning, whereas other names do not 
admit of this change, and even if they do, the word is meaning- 
less or means something else. We do not know why some 
people prefer the neuter form to the masculine or feminine, when, 
in fact, it stands to reason that the male and female represent in 
each the perfection of organized and organic form, much more so 
than the neuter forms. If by calling Him, t ‘It ’, we mean to 
emphasize that God is sexless, we must also insist that God is 
genderless, and that he cannot be spoken of in the neuter gender. 
And the phrase, ‘‘^suasr^er^i ” “ Stripunnapumsaka,” ‘He, She, 
It,’ 'has become a technical phrase with us (see first sutra of 
Sivajnanabodham) to mean the whole of the material manifested 
universe and its various forms ; and in naming God with 
words and forms borrowed from matter, we cannot avoid using 
these words. But then, the difference between principle and 
symbol, truth and dogmatism, has to be perceived. We tried to 
make ourselves clear about this distinction about the “Soham or 
Tattvamasi” doctrine in our last; and in the subject we have 
been elucidating above, a similar distinction has to be perceived. 
One says, ‘ address God always as He’; and if you call him, 
‘ It,’ he says you are addressing a cold abstraction. Another 

■fThe genius of the English Language, reflecting as it does the 
Christian Religion does not allow us to call God, except in the masculine, 
though of course we have heard that they do not mean to say that God 
is a male like a man. 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE GOD-HEAD. 


87 


claims to have reached a higher Philosophy by refusing to call 
Him,* as ‘Him’ and by calling Him ‘ It.' Both seem to think that 
there is something degrading in calling Him as 1 She.’ But the 
feeling which induces the European to lift the female to almost 
divine honors, and the tenderest and most passionate of all our 
emotions * which cling round the word ‘ mother ought to 
enable one to realize our ideal of God as the ‘ Divine Sakti,’ f 
One who, St Manicka Vachaka says, “ is even more loving than 
my mother.” QuifignS nzyasL-iu gujQuq^iLCteBr "+ J, 

Where, of course, the truth is seen, there will be no more 
room for ignorant dogmatism, and any and all these modes of 
address will equally be acceptable to Him, if instead of 
uttering those bare words, we put into them, such love as will 
“make our bones melt.” and such as is described by our own 
Saint, in his '‘Qurrjb^^^l^sns a/so” “Pilgrim’s Progress ”. (p. 101. 
Siddhanta Dipika Vol. I.) 

We began our article with the object of quoting from 
our Lord Manikkavachaka some passages in which he 
addresses the supreme as “Sivam” in the Superlative Neuter 
of Prof. Max Milller, and the forgoing remarks will be sufficient 
to introduce those passages : 

“ @ii r Gi'&sisrs£if!uj &<svQld Qurrpfl.”^ p. 25. * 

“ Praise be to “ Sivam ” beyond reach of thought.” 

“ = gysan_i0sireir/ru) fca/G?u>.” p. 26, 

“ O Sivam ! who dwells in the heart of those who love Him.” 

* In calling God, ‘ He ’ and ‘ Him ’, we are following only the genius 
of the English language. 

Mrs. Flora Annie Steel speaks of Uma-Haimavati as the emblem of 
perfect wife-hood, mother-hood and mystical virginity. 

Consider the following lines also. 

“ GkurruurrL eissri^^^,ssr ^ut^inu 6T5S7OT0ii) Quit^Gsit” 

“ ^ nGuj iLjeir/rtssr Q>j<xiesiL-ihQfieisr ” 

+ We give the references from the well-printed and neat edition of 
Kancin Nigalinga Mudaliyar, 45, Bairagimatt Lane, Madras. 



33 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE GOD-HEAD. 


“ lS HLD pQj'Jjsosorrti; Q pQirr a lLqjlq 

G''g:fld(g)LDUi-f-pp<c 5 rr} 3 &sr i !r&a.'L}>'” p. 12. 

“ Sivam which stood unperceived by Hari, and Brahma and 
other Gods." 

“ vitGIiaj Scuix.'issra.'/r ” Ibid. 

“Losing one’s ‘I’ness became Sivam” 

“plppldfgui <#ajLi^ib.” p. 1 19. 

“ The sweet Siva Padam" (The Mahat Padam of the Upanishat ,”) 

“ <# 3 UU> CJ su air /_ tr hy ao ld rs/T(eTyLo pe<serQL_ziir p 125. 

“ I will not touch those who love not Sivam." 

“Sppicso LzgveSpgld Sail litsQ Quj’Zssnuiresisrt^ sr.” p. 1 5 3. 

“ My Father who took me to His embrace by making me Sivam, 
after cleansing me of my sin.” 

These are only a few out of a vast number, and this 
description is found also in the Devara Hymns and other sacred 
writings. Probably, if this aspect of Siddhanta had been 
present to the mind of Prof. Max Muller when he wrote his 
introduction to the Svetasvatara Upanishat, in refuting the 
argument that the Upanishat was a sectarian one, he need not 
have gone to the extreme of trying to establish an illusory 
identity between a Nirguna and a Saguna God. For, we do 
not, at* any rate, accept the Saguna God as God, the Supreme, 
at all ; for the Saguna God is only a God in name, but a Pasu 
or Soul in reality. And we here come to a great fallacy which 
is the source of a very grievous error. The error consists in 
interpreting such words as Isvara, MaheSvara, Paramesvara, 
Isa, ISana, MaheSa, Deva, Mahadeva, Hara, Rudra, Siva, 
Purusha, wherever they occur in the Upanishats, Gita &c., 
as meaning the lower or Saguna Brahman, and seemingly 
because these names are also applied to a God who is one of the 
Trinity or Trimurtis, Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra. But any 
ordinary student of the Saiva Siddhanta will perceive that the 
God they worship is not one of the Trinity, '.though called by 
the same name, and that their system speaks of Him, as the 
Turiyam and Chaturtham, both meaning fourth, and these 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE GOD-HEAD. 


89 


thoughts can be picked up from the most ancient and the 
most recent books in Tamil and in Sanskrit. The typical 
passage in the Upanishats is the one in the Atharvasikha. 

Dhyayeetesanam pradhyayithavyam Sarvam idam Brahma 
Vishnu Rqdrendraste sarve samprasuyante sarvani ohendriya- 
nicha saha bhutais, nakaranam Karananam dhata dhyata 
Karanahtu dhyeyas Sarvaisvarya Sampannas Sarvesvaras 

Sambhurakasa madhye Siva eko dhyeya : Sivankara : 

Sarvam annyat Parityaja Samapta atharvasikha. 

Taking another book at random, say the Mahimnastotra, 
which is reputed to be by a very ancient sage, in praise of 
Siva, we come upon the following passage also. 

“The mj'stical and immutable One which being composed 
of the three letters, A. U. M. signify, successively, the three 
Vedas, the three states of life (awaking, dreaming and 
sleeping), the three worlds (heaven, earth and hell), the three 
Gods (Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra), and by its nasal sound 
(ardhainatra) is indicative of thy fourth office as Supreme 
Lord of All, (Paramesvara) ever expresses and sets forth thy 
collective and single Forms. ” 

And we to day only propose to quote similar passages 
from only one book, and that the Tiruvachakam. 

The first passage is the one occuring on p. 26, which w T e 
have already quoted in reviewing the Minor Upanishats. Lest 
that the ‘three’ in this verse may be taken to mean Brahma, 
Vishnu and some other God than Rudra, our saint himself 
expressly sets forth his meaning more clearly in the following 
verse. 


Qp svrrQ&n 'gj/Stuirp Qpsu Qpwssr 
Q & (Lg ihQ uqy5l so & sir ujji&dsn wp<3s>jD 

QpeuiiQ&sr (sajiu/fienr p OppsusueisT Qpirpfi) 

(Lp pn <ss)p , llit piT[Gnju> unspQp iissp 


12 



90 


SOME ASPECTS OF THE GOD-HEAD. 


“Him the God of Gods not perceived by the king of Gods 
(Indra) 1 * * * Him the supreme king of the other Triad, who create, 
sustain and destroy the worlds; The first Murti, (the manifest 
God)* the Great Ancestor, m3 7 Father who consorts with the 
Divine Maid. 

Consider the following passages also. ‘ 

yiTT^Seir yiaiivag QfipraLLtTdj 

lSsbt cayiasru QugglTiurnji 

LLSBT'ttflSBT SU.TS3 :LX li] iU COrh Utl J s)lu2sST . ” 

“Him, The more ancient than the Triad , The End (of all 
things), and yet one who lasts behind all things,- the One with 
the braided hair 5 the King of our loved city Perundurai, The 
Heavenly God, and the Consort of Uma.” 

yC Qsilggyji Liui £ azstfiL Gun pu&>LLK jg 
tiirQsuqj) Qfeoe&hijLQ armena evyw nn^rLcsa/Du^Lo 
LLirQserru QjafihLjto a irrssrsu^u} ^trus^ujir^ 

G<?Gsu(Vj Q&euiy.aQ.s Q~shr jpir gniuGsnpgiwiS . 

In the following passage, He is identified with the Triad, 
in the same way as He is often identified with all the works of 
His creation, Earth, Air, Water &c, though those very 
passages say at the same time that He is not to be identified 
with the creature and created things, a doctrine which clearly 
cannot be mistaken for Pantheism. As a Christian writer 
points out, the Doctrine of Immanency of God in all nature is 
quite consistent with our idea of the Transcendency of God. 

“ i±](jTQpghrjrii’Xtr$ iLjesarneurfipirT^an'i^isussr.” p. 79 , 

“ He became the Triple Form (of the Triad), and yet 
remained the one who could not be perceived by the 
mind.” 

1 c.f ., the story in the Kenopanishat about Indra and other Gods 

being unable to know Brahman and being taught by Uma Haimavati 

(God’s grace) about the Supreme Brahmam. 

a Like ghee in butter milk, after churning with knowledge and love, 

* Kaparidin of the Rig-veda. 



SOME ASPECTS OF THE GOD-HEAD. 


91 


Qpi$-a]Lctr@uj ipai in/fiunr# 

SisgUT^QfSutf.ajirsir.” 

“ Himself the Beginning, the middle and the end, Him 
whose beautiful “ Mahat Padam" could not be perceived by 
the Three.", Also the following passages. 

lutTPt^ndsr 

Q^LbQuQ^LLtr&sr Qenessr lcso r irdsr uirpssi— svrresr, 

OtfL/Lja/Gurrib er ll(2u (T^llitsst !TiTG)asrsbrg)i, p. QJ, 

“ He of Arur, whom even Rudra, and Brahma and Vishnu, 
praised as ‘Our King, the King of'Gods.’ 1 

“ Qp&SHujQppSO ls(SeSp'^llLju:ir SS)L 

Qpen^x'SQs^fr ajirsbcraipp rSxnh." p. 95 . 

“Thou becomest the Foremost, the Beginning, the Middle, 
and the End and were not understood by the Triad. Who 
else can know Thee.” 

“ QpqrQppQ&o, ®DUJii)LjoVKg2 Qp&jfrs^QiLWrpesrd^ii, 
&it^QppQso." p 97 . 

The Impartite First, the First Cause or Source of the five 
senses, (the material universe), the Three Gods and myself 
(Soul).” 

“ QpwQpsuesr QLDiuQ^eneodsr Q peisrQu(T7jijrpsB)p tsrtuj&eZr 
QpBil TTjy/ Lc/S3iun^e) QppeoiuusiiiTesrip Qpirpphimshr 
’jjirsusnTuSevjiu) ^fssrurjeisr f) m l SG)iu!r [ GM)xieoirJ : Qa=n phuirear, 
jgrruju>rrLCSvn'd QjehreafixehreBfld&L^fTFGLD.’’ 

(“God of Gods, God of Truth, The Lord of South Perunturai 

The Lord of Bliss, The first cause whom the Three cannot know. 

The Glorious one whom none can know save those that love. 

His pure bloom-like feet my head does seek and glorify.”) 

“ Qpeu(rrj (Lpuupgl npsiifVj LDpG/rrj’L^jiip 
Gp.adjrjtb &iSuQu(rrjxiT£hr — LcirGen^ 

easn’-ics ; fQ p wik$S ySji&l slitit sLpJvaerr suisfiilds 
Qub‘L:uapQp nSdrru uS(&,w. 



92 


SOME ASPDCTS OF THE GOD-HEAD. 


(•' The Lord Siva, unknown by Devas all, 

The Three and Thirty-three — 

He that rides the Bull — 

His holy feet if here we seek and praise, 

Our bliss will sure increase.”) 

Yes, nothing can be truer than the thought expressed in 
this verse. 

The Highest conception that we can ever reach of God, 
describing as it does, His inmost nature, and of course the only 
way we can know Him, is that God is Love and Blessedness, 
Sivam.* 

And such a great scientist as the late Prof. Romanes has 
asked with truth: — “What has all the science or all the 
philosophy of the world done for the thought of mankind to be 
compared with one doctrine ‘God is Love’.” 


[* The word Nandi, a favourite word with St, Tirumular and others 
means also literally the Blissfull ; and our readers have to consider why 
we now call the Great Bull (Pasu) in front of God by the same 
name Nandi.] 



ASHTAMUHUBTAM. 


“ Antarichchanti Tamsena Rudram Promanishaya Krinanti 
Chikbaljya Chacham. (Rig-Veda.)” 

“,Those who meditate with love on the Supreme Rudra 
which is within all, they eat food. ” 

It is a noteworthy fact that our sages have often 
compressed a whole philosophy in a single word or phrase. 
We once before illustrated how pregnant was the naming 
of vowels and consonants as a -uSl.f and Oui, Sariri and 
Sarira, in regard to the question of the relation of God to 
the world. We take up to day another word which is the 
expansion of the same subject. This wordis“Ashta Murti ” 
It means Being having Eight Forms and is a synonym of Siva 
or Rudra. These Eight Forms are, Earth, Water, Fire, Air, 
Akas, the Sun and the Moon and Soul or Jiva or Pasu. 

By these Eight names are comprised the whole universe, 
both animate and inanimate. The only substance which these 
terms do not comprise is God ; and when therefore ’God is 
spoken of by His having these eight forms as His Body, then 
the relation of God to the world is clearly brought out, namely 
that of soul and body, which relation, of course, we have fully 
explained in our article on “ Mind and Body.” As soul in a 
body, He is in every thing, and hence called Visvantaryami ; 
and we have quoted a Rich verse above in which God (Rudra) 
is called Antaryami ; and innumerable passages are also 
scattered about in the body of the various Upanishats. As 
having the universe for His Form, God is called Visvasvarupi 

“ Visvarupiya vi Kamo NamaK” 

As giving rise to the whole universe from Himself, He is 
called Visvakaratia or Visvayonih. By the same way, as we 



94 


ashtajiuhurtam. 


often identify our own body with ourselves, God is frequently 
spoken of as the universe itself, and is accordingly addressed 
as Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Sky, the Sun and the Moon, and 
Soul. 

But there are clear passages to show that He^ is none of 
these. No one could seriously contend to day that where 
these Upanishats identify God with some of these inanimate 
forms, that earth or fire or any of these elements, and not the 
Ruler within or the Puller as He is called in Brihadaranya, is 
really God. But the texts identifying the Jiva with God has 
caused no amount of confusion, and these texts are quoted as 
standing authorities by a whole school of Indian philosophers, 
though texts can be quoted as frequently in which God is 
spoken of as different from the Jiva. As being none of these 
Eight and transcending all, He is called Visvadika. 

“ Visvadiko Rudra,” (Svetas). 

“ Who of the Gods is both the source and growth, the lord 
of all, the Rudra, mighty seer ; whoever sees the shining germ 
come into birth — may he with reason pure conjoin us.” 

“ Who of the Gods is over-lord, in whom the worlds are 
based, who ruleth over his creatures of two feet and four ; to 
God, the “ Who,” with (our) oblation let us worship give.” 

These follow naturally the text “ That sure is fire, That 
sun, That air, That surely moon, That verily the Bright, That 
Brahm, the waters That, That the Creator.” 

In the previous adhyaya, occurs the passage “ What is this 
all, far, far beyond, That Formless, gridless That.” "What 
God in fire, in water, what doth pervade universe entire, 
what in the plants, what in the forest lords, to Him, to God, 
Hail all Hail.” 

“This God, in sooth, all the quarters is; long, long ago, 
indeed, he had his birth, he verily (is now) within the germ. 
He has been born, he will be born ; hehind all who have birth 
he stands, with face on every side.” 



ASHTAMUHURT AM . 


95 


The famous passage in the seventh Brahmana, of the 3rd 
Adyaya, of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishat, brings out a full 
exposition of these Eight forms of God. In the third Mantra, 
Earth is said to be His body— 

YasyaprithivI sariram.” 

“ He \vho dwells in the earth, and within (or different 
from) the earth, whom the earth does not know, whose body the 
earth is, and who pulls (rules) the earth within, He is thy 
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.” 

And in Mantras, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12 and 22 the water, fire, air, 
sun, moon, AkaSa and Vijnana are respectively said to be His 
bodies. 

The passages are all similar to the one relating to the earth 
and we quote the last, however, in full. 

“ He who dwells in Vijnana, and within (or different from) 
Vijnana, whom Vijnana does not know, whose body VijTai&a 
is, and who pulls (rules) Vijnana within, He is thy Self, the 
puller (ruler) within, the immortal ”. 

Professor Max Muller translates Vijnana as knowledge, 
but he notes at the same time that those of the Madhyandina 
school interpret it as meaning the Atma or the soijl ; and 
according to the text in the samdua prakarana — “ yasyatma 
sariram ” — and from the Upa-Brahmanas we will quote below ? 
it will be seen that it is the correct interpretation. 

The other text in the Brihadaranya, makes it much 
clearer. “ God is to be seen, heard and contemplated and 
enjoyed in the soul. He is beyond the soul. His body is the 
soul, He penetrates into the recess of the soul.” Nothing can 
be clearer than this text. This Soul and soul, this Atma and 
atma, this Self and self (The confusion in thought arises from 
the name which originally meant the human spirit being applied 
to the Supreme -Spirit also), are the two birds which dwell in 
the tree (human body) ; these are the two which “enter into the 
heart, the excelleht divine abode ” and these are the two which 



96 


A5HTAMUHUR TAM. 


are in the “inside of” of the human eye. The confusion of 
using the same word to denote and connote two different 
things is really vicious, and later writings and the present 
day systems have dropped such uses altogether, and the 
beginning of such change in nomenclature, and precision in the 
use of words is seen in the Gita, and Atma is distinguished 
from Paramatma, Purusha from Purushottama or Parama 
Purusha. Verse 22 of Chapter 13, is a characteristic verse in 
this respect as it gives all these names and the true definition 
of Sat as distinguished from Sat-asat. 

“ Spectator, and Pfermitter, Supporter, Enjoyer, 

Mahesvara, thus is styled Paramatman ; 

In this body Parama Ptimsha” 

We have elsewhere observed how the sole purpose of the 
Putaijas and Itihasas is merely to explain the particular text 
of the Veda or Upanishat. The passage in the Upa Brahmana 
embodies the particular text and explains it. 

See how this passage, from Parasara Purana reproduces 
the words and meaning of the Rich text quoted above. 

“ Antarichchandiya Rudram Sadha Vantayam Manishya 
Kruhnanti Sihvaya tahirasa pumo Amritodakam 
‘ Antar Nachchantiya Rudram Bahvanu Sahitam Sivam 
Purusha Mavagritnanti Sikvayatanasamsayah.” 

The following passage from Skanda Purana also says 
that the Jiva is the body of god. 

“ Antary ami Sa Avisha Jivanam Paramesvarah ” 

“ That same ParameSvara is the Antaryami in all jivas 

Turning to Malubharata, the statement that God has these 
eight objects for His body and that the universe is His Form, 
that He is different from the universe occurs very frequently. 

We cite the following passages from, the Anusasana 
Parva, P. C. Roy’s edition: — 

“Him that hath universe for His form ” page. 49 



ASHTAMUHURTAM. 


97 


“Thou art of the form of all jlvas in the universe” 
page. 125. 

“Thou art the Lord of Jivas ” page 133. 

“Thou hast universe for thy form ” page 105. 

“ Thou.art He who has the whole universe for His limbs ” 
page 104. 

“ He pervades all things in the universe and yet is not seen 
anywhere ” page go. 

“ Agitating both Prakriti and Purusha by means of his 
energy (Sakti), He created therefrom the universal lord of 
creatures, Brahma.” 

“ He is both Sat and Asat.” 

“ He transcends both Prakriti and Purusha ” page 50. 

“ Thou art He called Sat of Sat ” page 127. 

“Having created all the worlds beginning with “Bhu” 
together with all the denizens of heavens, Thou upholdest and 
cherishest them all, distributing Thyself into the well-known 
forms numbering eight ” page 96. 

^ The poet Kalidasa in his bened ictory verse in Sak unt ala 
explains what thes e eight f orm s am ~ 

Isa preserve you ! He who is revealed 
In these eight forms by man perceptible — 

Water, of all creation’s works the first ; 

The Fire that bears on high the sacrifice 
Presented with solemnity to heaven ; 

The Priest, the holy offerer of gifts ; 

The Sun and Moon, those two majestic orbs, 

Eternal marshallers of day and night ; 

The subtle Ether, vehicle of sound, 

Diffused throughout the boundless universe, 

The Earth, by sages called, ‘ The place of birth 
Of all material essences and things,’ 

And Air, which giveth life to all that breathe. 

There is also this verse, for which we cannot find any 
reference, which gives eight names of God as He dwells in His 
eight forms. 

13 



98 


A5HTAMUHURTAM. 


“Prithivyo Bava, Apach Sarvah, Ague Rudrah, Vayur 
Bhimah, Akasasya Mahadevah, Suryas Yograh, Chandrasya 
Somah, Atmanah Pasupatih ” 

Note here that the word Hotri meaning the sacrificer or 
the Yajaman (master) of the sacrifice, stands for t utma, Jlva 
or Pasu. Hence the Lord of the pasu is called Pasupati. 
(Meda Pati) 

We quote a few more passages from Mahabharata. 

“ Thou art the eight Prakritis ; Thou art again above the 
eight Prakritis, everything that exists represents a portion of 
Thy divine Self”, page 99. 

The following passage explains why God should multiply 
Himself, why He should manifest Himself into these eight 
forms ; i. e., why God should bring about the evolution and 
creation of this world ; not of course, from any moral necessity 
connected with the doctrine of samsara; not of course, from 
His Will to exist and desire for enjoyment ; not of course, 
from a desire to see His own reflexion ; not, of course, from a 
necessity to seek His own salvation ; but that this evolution 
is necessitated for the improvement and salvation of the 
sin-covered soul. 

“ Know O Kesava, that this all, consisting of animate and 
inanimate existences, with heaven and other unseen entities, 
which occurs in these worlds, and which has the All-pervading 
Lord for its soul, has flowed from Mahesvara, and has been 
created by Him for the enjoyment of Jiva." page 70. 

The soul, in its Kevala condition, lies in utter and hopeless 
oblivion, and helplessness. The Lord Wills (Ichcha sakti) that 
these souls should reach salvation out of His pure Grace 
(Arul Sakti) ; and by means of His own Energy (Kriya sakti) 
He agitates and puts motion and life into Prakriti (Maya sakti) ; 
and Purusha (souls) and the whole of the manifested universe 
is brought forth from His womb. The souls in these material 
bodies act, and gain experience and knowledge, and finally 



ASHTAMUHURTAM . 


99 


effect freedom from the bondage of birth and death. Thus, the 
soul passes through its* sakala and athitha conditions ; and it is 
the fundamental tenet of every school of Hindu philosophers 
that unless the soul enters the cycle of samsara, that wheel of 
birth and death, the soul cannot reach Mukti. 

We close this paper with a few quotations from the 
Dravida Sruti bearing on the question under discussion. 
Our saint Tirumular says. 

(1) aar tLjuSirir LLfsssnrsiiiaS aj!t djQpsTzsr^ 

Q^s&ni au/iCjgp'E/g® ,©02^0 Qeuujessri—p 

piran lay (S pessrin^l ULjiiaL.ik 

pnasrQp^g paxsri—Qp lditSSsst (p/Qesr . 

The body and soul, and fire and far spreading 
Air and space, and earth, His form, 

The fixed sun, cool moon, transcending these, 

Yet stands He as the stupendous world. 

( 2 ) JglGBifU-l iLty-aQ&sr p &nppenssr 

eniLi—p (slesiffujesreo wrr£&> loitsit^ 

OumlifL n/u$/ri8%sv QujssrspiiJili sirjjusmu 
sil^isf-xisS Lf>i@'SST p soisr ssgy&su air^’Qu:. 

The wind that blows in eight quarters is He. 

The whirling flood and fire, huge earth and space, 

The sentient soul with these His bodily frame, 

He joins, and leaves, the God with the frontal Eye. 

From our Sainted Lady of Karaikal, we have the following 
verse. 

(i) cSyajQW id/0^i_if piuirsir ^wtrsutreisr 

jywQssr LjjJiiiusBrjti sirp^eunasr — ^jsnQesr 
^iLUDnear (®S)UjlL.i _ Qpapph] u)/nb@/ra>r 
lduj.^Q /fisBTgfgg/d) tsuiign . 

Two Lights, the fire and space is He 
The earth and water, air is He 
The soul, with these His eight forms 
He stands as Intelligence pure. 



IOO AS HT AM UK L' RT AM . 

The text of St. Meykanda Deva is that 

“God is Chit because He is omnipresent ” and unless He 
is pure Intelligence, He cannot be omnipresent. (See for fur- 
ther explanation, 2nd Sutra Sivajhanabotham, English edition 
page 11.) 

( 

Our Saint Pattinattar gives a most elaborate description in 
■the following Agaval — 

(§'ujsuiSlei!ftcg)i'3;£'5 

G)u/r ( Tjsz_63r(?ui='3stf QpsQu.'SsruQuirsSi p 
pp flaUntS 0SS£_C , !iJ,'? UJ^S&SS T 
QupflQlutT3ST(tr?LJ GujbG.Vf'PujjQjJ- 

L&asreaflasrSi pssi gisirggi^ssrfsinL—Quj 
wesr&r3ajsussiiri_3eir Q<?eisresfiiiSieisrsiii$-Gw 
uirsussbrutfl^) ueaBji^lpsirQ^’S 
Qpsusnsj : ~ : u.(j7)3<5sr jppQeorrrstn-Lt—ii 
P<oOStG^ss^s31uj[T JJ [ 5 p FT H FT S6037 G> LD 
■sSsmesmsuir(ippeaT QsuQ(rr?ifh~u:rF3 
G 3 FT 68&T (£} <goj p&Sl GfB (7 oMFSl &3T c?)5LD 

ersssTLf.sa^^lexrQi—irsir gge«L epGB)i—.Quj 
^tjSu!3lLjSal—IUS0(^ 6VaJ6Jf?LO£SBT£_S«CcU3 
ioss<sfi(Lpi$-uun & pzbS/o&r pn&BbsmwifsQs 
Q'urri£lujnQpmsf-Lu umq^pQpuSiiTuQu 
emzpeurrQiSiirreis^ Qfi^£^i3asrwmuQiimL^I 
euirssreuirQpp&jrr LDeisrsjpiiiSiTusriip 
s^nsBTL£la3(S^rTesrp Garrrp^SISeisr smi smirQai 
O/5 0/E/Suja^svSGsfl63r SnsaLDiLfSpp^UjD 
■SFQ^I&lSGplh'zSlflp epih Qp FT p pLL-,3 6biG(pL$Geo 
'gtiaDLD.spegiLDySIppepLb ^ihspesr QuiuFTs-QiLjUi 
@}G®LD &p eonhtsS ijipp s inih S&iretrfiujeoQu 

Gtehrr3<anoiQpp6WT @it/svLjisa3/_eiJ® oSO(SS)® 

^S3r l 29uj t ^7uL(0 {g)0suem£ujnS 
Qpp^sl pittas® ps$ tsrrsoeu'SiD&LJLSpaS 
^IP^lppanpiiiQuFrpS &u>ujQLoir,Sl 

zjCLgsvairS eressr enema ^Lpfip^lQajiTSl 
vszi^QujkGzl^I Giuesatisifi piiGpirisiQ 



ASHTAMUHURTaM. 


IOI 


criaiaoiujarraSei /? p autp-.&sr 

Pj Zjl Q'£5) ?LjClJ.T ''r *~'r- o' UJfT 'ju .LJ^S l — 0\£ 0 , 

O Thou Dweller in PCm, which beams 
As the face of the sea-girt Earth ! 

Who owns Thy Form beyond compare ? 

The Lightning’s flash Thy locks do show, 

The teeming Earth Thy Head does form. 

The Sun and Moon, and Fire, these three, 

Are Eyes that light Thy Divine Face. 

Thy cool bright wreaths are the countless stars. 

The sky where in the gods do dwell 

Thy broad Chest forms ; The Eight quarters, 

Thy shoulders strong. The broad sea Thy Vest. 

Thy Organ, Earth ; Feet the worlds below. 

The flowing wind Thy constant breath, 

The flawless sounds are all Thy words. 

The faultless wflsdom that is together found 
In Gods and Men is all Thy own. 

The teeming world lives and develops 
Vanishes and reappears, These Thy acts. 

The world, in life or death, awake, 

Or asleep, does show Thy Nature true. 

With these Thy Form, Thy one True spirit 
Dual becomes ; clothed in Gunas three, 

Art born as four ; Hast senses five, 

The six Religions, and seven worlds 
Dost become and art the Eight Gods. 

And thus for ages and ages progressing 
Whatever Thou unitest wflth 
That Thou dost sure become. 

The following is the favourite quotation from Tiruvachakam. 

Seviir O/s0uLjuSliT £eireS&il >Lj iSsvtruusQeorrebr 
Ljev-gf) twsaLD.i^Q^s) QL-etzrausmsiun uju LjGt%r ir & gpi§ ebr^ 
gpimQ& Q0esr00tT Q(SS)Q_ ^su^jQld 

usvsiiiT&l 'iSebr/Dsuir QpnQfsn wnt—irQLon. 

Earth, water, air, fire, sky, the Sun and Moon, 

The sentient man, these eight forms He pervades 



102 


ASHTAM UHURTAM . 


The seven worlds, ten quarters, He the One, 

And Many, He stands, so, let us sing. 

Saint Tayumanavar selects the following verse from St. 
Appar’s Devaram for special praise in his 

^.tuxtrsar (SB)QiL fitLjsi xnpsu-urS 
c g/(TFj3 c (!eULU §d Eieerrirh ism 

^sir^Lcir iulLi— qp&^^uj,t 8 u 
Q ufWjisevQfEi (&)ppQpijn Quesor sssjldit apto 
iSp0(J^Siji pihQpgSLjii pnQimuaS 
Qis(ms'?eo i Jjrr isir'^emurrS 

Su 9 rrLjSir tfsaL-UJUf-ssir iSekpsnnQp. 

As earth, tire, water, air and Ejaman 
As moon, the sun and space, as Ashta Murti, 

As goodness and evil, as male and female, 

Himself the Form of every form, 

As yesterday and to-day and to-morrow, 

My Lord with the braided hair stands Supreme. 

The following verse of St. Appar also explains how this 
Being who is the greatest of the great is so small also, as to be 
confined in ourselves. 


<oTLL(SQprrp0lajmu •Bear rfl .ugy&Qpir i£)£o 
6TLL*3&irsbr(3j6mp f£<?QGsninxiTzirpsisT'3siir 
ertL'SQpn'&'sliLi QuDwiSeapQaJtbQfiQwr 
enLQnpirp^liij QtxiwQpQm /rS/s^Cm. 

As Ashta Murti, He performs functions 

He, my Father and God, possessed of eight attributes 

He, the Ashta Murti is my Lord and Master 

He, the Ashta Murti is confined in me. 


Saint Jnana Sambanda has the following verse. 

rj/r0 ifQ<77r3 ueos^ifhre^iLjtii ueeBuiSS ujnsn& 

CWjTjci emiL/iSi] Quaresir seared QsueiraSuSp pteoifVGgBwiriii iSek^ir 
peer mfiQsu/rS euiifslySQ&QpuiLjeBrp Qsn tlL—irgu 
eun(nj;i pessn-iearsu (gg&jri-jjrih Opn^uuf-uja/g- &i(^ispnQa. 



A5HTAMUHURTAM. 


103 


As Earth, Water, the Sun and Moon and Sky. 

The flowing Wind, bright Fire and Hotri' He stands. 

Sirapuram, washed by the scented waters of Kottar 
They who praise, they will suffer no pain. 

And St. Tayumanavar himself pertinently asks why' when 
the earth, fiir & c are spoken of by the Vedas as God Himself, 
he should not himself be spoken of as God. 

(1) unm rj§ si urru s^sQojSste^^ 

^a/gn/io iSiLurLisarTsssr usnuryQa>. 

[2) ainvsajJJ liOxissrQsn onaippiDGzp Qj_ sirSsan^/f 
•girls'? Q^n AtsuiQjgrr ^irp^'L ujtitu bQud. 

Siva is also called Digvasas, Digambara, Nirvani, and He 
dances in Chitambara , and His person and limbs, as we have 
seen, represent each an element or portion of the universe. 
And this description of Him, we notice even from the Rig 
Veda downwards. The translator of Mahabharata frequently 
remarks that Siva is identified in those passages as the Supreme 
Brahman, but this identification has been going on ever since the 
very beginning. We can speak of an identification only when 
there is difference orginally. Would it not therefore be more 
proper to say that the words Siva and Rudra are merely the 
names, and His Form, the Form, of the supreme Brahmgn ? 

We cannot here omit to note the fact also that there are 
temples in India in which God (Siva) is worshipped in one or 
other of these eight forms. 

(^ts Earth, He is worshipped in Kanchi (Conjeeveram,) 
as Water, in Jambukesvaram (Trichinopoly) ; as Air in 
Kalahasti ; as Fire in Tiruvannamalai ; as Akas, in Chidambara ; 
as Sun, when everyone perforins Surya Namaskaram ;* as 
Moon, in Somnath; as Pasu or Atma, in Pasupati Temple 
in Nepaul. 


*My grandmother is even now, in her extreme old age, very regular 
in her Surya Namaskaram but she speaks of Him as ‘ Siva Surya-Kanne 
‘^l^n^fftujsseasrQesS! . ’ 



AN UPANISHAT TEXT 


Atmanam aranim kritva, prana vamcha Uttararapim Jnana 
nirmathanabhyasath, pasam dahatipanditah. 

In our Tamil edition was appearing an excellent translation 
of Kaivalyopanishat by that great Tamil and Sanskrit Scholar 
of Jaffna, Srimath Sent'ninathier, who is now staying in Benares. 
His commentary is a most valuable one, tracing as it does 
the passages in Kaivalyopanishat to similar passages in 
various other Upanishats. This Upanishat is by some called a 
sectarian and a modern one. This we deny, 'and we will take 
some other fuller opportunity to expound our views on the age 
of the Upanishats. At le..st this is older than the time of 
Sri Sankara who includes it among the Pahcharudram which 
he has commented on. The Mantra, “Atmanam aranim kritva, 
prana vamcha uttararanim jnana nirmathanabhyasath, pasam 
dahati pandithah,” following as it docs Mantra 13 and 14, 
Parti. Svetasvatara Upanishat. and with Mantra 11, above 
would "completely demolish the theory of that talented lady 
Mrs. Besant, that the Is vara evolves, and the sole purpose of 
His so evolving, is that He make Himself manifest from His 
unmanifest condition like butter from cream, lire from sticks &c. 
The passage as it occurs in her last beautiful Adyar lecture 
is as follows “ As salt in the water, in which it is dissolved 
(Chandogya VI, 14) as fire in the wood before the fire sticks are 
rubbed together, as butter in the milk that is brought forth by 
churning, (Svetas I, 14 to 19) as cream in clarified butter 
(Ibid IV, 14), so is Brahman concealed as the seif of every 
creature ” (Hinduism page 16). No doubt the form in which 
she has quoted herself has misled her. Thehpassages them- 
selves are these (we quote from Mr. Mead’s translation and 
from no other,) 



AN UPANISHAT TEXT. 


i os 


“ By knowledge of God, cessation of all bonds 
With sorrow s perishing, birth and death’s ceasing comes 
By contemplating him, with body left behind, 

AH Lordship Pure Passionless is He”. — Mantra II, 

How is this knowledge of God to be obtained ? 

The next verse says, 

“This is to be known as ever surely settled in the (self, 
soul) ; beyond this surely nought is knowable at all. When 
one hath dwelt upon what tastes, what is tasted, and what doth 
ordain, all hath been said. This is the three-fold Bruhm (Sat, 
Chit and Ananda) (Mantra 12).” The unbelieving may ask, 
“how do you say God is concealed in our soul, body, we do 
not see it. No it is not these.” The answer is given, illustra- 
ting it at the same time and explaining the mode of realization, 
in the next Mantra No. 13. 

“Just as the (outer) form of fire, withdrawn into its source, 
cannot be seen, yet there is no destruction of its subLle form, — 
once more indeed out of the upper and lower stick it can be 
drawn, — so both indeed are to be found, by means of the 
word’s power within the body.” 

This is more fully explained in the next Mantra. 

“ One’s body taking for the lower stick and for the upper 
One (the word), by meditation’s friction well sustained, let me 
behold the God, there lurking, as it were.” 

In the next Mantra, several similes are heaped together to 
illustrate the same subject. 

“As oil in seeds, butter in cream, water in springs, and in 
the fire sticks hre, so is that Self 1 Paramatma) found in the seif 
(jivat'na) by him who seeks for Him with truth and meditation. 
The Seif perva.’.i ?g . il, as butter milk pervades, in meditation 
and self-knowledge rooted, that Brahman, theme sublime of 
sacred teaching, of sacred teaching theme sublime”. 

We will quote again Mantra 16 in part IV, relied on by 
G 



io6 


AX ITPAMSIIAT TEXT. 


Mrs. Besant, as well as the Mantra preceding it, before we 
finish our comments. 

“Surely is He the guardian of all, in every creature hid, in 
whom the seers of Brahm. powers divine are (all) conjoined. 
Thus knowing Him, one cuts the bonds of death. Most rare, 
like as it were that essence rarer far than butter clarified, Him 
knowing (in his form) benign (Siva) in every creature hid, 
though One (yet) all embracing, knowing Him, God, from every 
bond one is free.” 

Any one reading these verses together as we have read 
them, will not fail to see that the theory of Mrs. Besant gets no 
footing here at all. This simply explains the way of Salvation 
of the bound soul (Jivatma), and the nature of the Supreme. 
The bound soul which cannot see the “the subtler than 
subtle Siva” (IV. 14), by pursuing the Sadana herein indi- 
cated, namely the search after Him with all one’s heart and 
with all one’s soul in all love and in all truth, with the 
aid of the divine Word, will surely behold the Supreme hid 
in himself, not the Supreme as himself, and then his bonds 
will be cut-off, and the darkness will vanish as the sun 
rises in one’s horizon. Butter is butter whether it remains 
in the milk or separately. It itself gains little in one condition 
or other, but it makes a vast deal of difference to the person who 
has to eat it. No sane man will think that it matters anything 
to the Supreme, whether He remains manifest or unmanifest 
but it matters a great deal to his creatures who are wallowing 
in the mirky darkness of sin and misery. There are those 
again who think Pasatchaya is alone that occurs in Moksha, 
and that the freed soul is in itself, and with no knowledge or 
enjoyment of any sort. No doubt the moment of Pasatchaya 
is also the moment when he recovers his own self (one of the 
two comprised in ‘both’,* of Mantra 1 3, the other being God) 

*Mr. Mead absurdly supposes that ‘both’ refers to the lower Brahman 
and higher Brahman, that the God of Mantra 14, is the lower Brahman 
or Isvara, the ‘self ’ of Mantra 15 and 16 is the higher Brahman. Reading 



AN UPANTSHAT TEXT. 


107 


and at the same moment is the Divine Effulgence cast full on 
him, enveloping him on all sides and swallowing him up 
wholly. “I know the great Purusha, sun-like beyond darkness 
Him and Him only knowing, one crosseth over death; there 
is no other path at all to go.” Mantra 8, Part III. 

Nothing can be clearer than this passage, as to the person 
seeking salvation, the object of the search, and the mode of 
attainment, and the only path of securing it. But is one’s 
powers all sufficient? No “smaller than small, yet greater 
than great in the heart of this creature the Atma (God) doth 
repose : That, free from desire, he (creature) sees, with his 
grief gone, the mighty Isa, by His Grace.” (Mantra 20 
Part III.) 

These two mantras are reproduced in the famous verse 
No. 7 in “ House of God” in Tiruvachakam, a valuable trans- 
lation of which was printed in Vol. I. p. 49, Siddhanta Dipika. 

“ Light of Truth that entering body and soul has melted all faults, 
and driven away the false darkness.” (Verse 3.) 

“ O Splendour that rises in my heart, as asking asking 1 melt.” 
(Verse 6.) 

“ This day in Thy mercy unto me, thou did’st drive away the dark- 
ness and stand in my heart as the Rising Sun, 

Of this Thy way of rising — there being not else but Thou — I thought 
without Thought, 

I drew nearer and nearer to Thee wearing away atom by atom 

Till I was One with Thee, O Siva, Dweller in the great holy shrine 

Thou art not ought in the universe ; Naught is there save Thou. 

Who can know Thee.” (Verse 7.) 

And let the reader ponder well again on the whole verse 7. 
Every blind man’s heart’s desire is to regain his eye-sight (His 
own self-atma) but suppose he regained his eye-sight, will the 
darkness be removed, which formerly pressed on his eye. Not 
surely, unless the Glorious Sun (God) deigns to show to him 

again these verses together, could any discover any difference in the 
nature of Godhead ‘in these Mantras ? 



io8 


AN UPANISHAT TtXT. 


in His Supreme Mercy. And the Sun is of course of no use to 
the blind man, so long as his blindness lasted So he has to 
realize himself by being balanced in pleasure and pain 
(Removal of his Egoism) and to realize His maker, till now hid 
in bis heart. And people have asked and will ask always, 
whether there is pleasure from this passage from bondage to 
Freedom. And Saint Meykanda Deva asks us to consider the 
case of the blindman passing from darkness to sudden Light. 
Will there be pleasure or not? Did it ever matter to the Sun, 
in any whit, when it was hid from the blindman, and now when 
it shines fully on his newly opened eyes! 

“ It was Thyself Thou did’st give and me Thou dij’st take, 

Beneficent Lord, who is the gainer ? 

Endless bliss I have gained. What hast Thou gained from me ? 

O Lord, that hast made my heart Thy temple, 

biva, dweller in the great holy shrine, 

O Father, Sovereign, Thou hast made Thy abode in my body. 
For it I have nought to give it in return.” * 

To remove ail doubts that the Being to be sought after is 
not one’s own self, the passage “ Atmanam Aranim Kfitva ” 
refers to the self (Atma) itself as the lower piece of firewood. 
In the Svetasvatara, it was the body that was the lower piece, 
in which case both, Soul and God could be realised, but gener- 
ally the phrases, in my body, in my eye, in my heart, in my 
mind, and in my soul mean almost the same thing, including soul 
and all below it- Our Saint Appar puts it in beautiful and un- 
mistakable Tamil the idea conveyed in these Upanishat Texts : — 
Tgr'-rg/r gl Lc'. - A un *?$ipu(D G/.s ujGL/tT 
Lcc^pu sargi eitA urr nxitij- Q ^ it SH tun asr 
&.jr<u,Ciir E(3Ti_L'4 , 6Kr/fo^ 1511$ p .tasj&ST 
(if "lit sMT'Ej'Si /lemi—JJQp&sr esfl p^Q ld . 

Like the tire latent in firewood and ghee in milk, 

Non-apparent is the great Light 

With the churner ot love and rope of knowledge 

One excites friction. He v, ill become manifest before him. 

* Vers* io oi the same Iruvachaka hymn. “ The House of God.”~ 



THE S YE T AS V AT AR A 
UPANISHAT. 


We are glad to say that Professor Max Muller has cleared 
the ground before us, of many misconceptions and fallacies 
which were entertained about this Upanishat. He meets in his 
own way the arguments adduced to show that this is a modern 
Upanishat and that it is a sectarian Upanishat, an Upanishat of 
the Sankhya and of Bhakti school and so on, and his conclusions 
are that “ no real argument has ever been brought forward to 
invalidate the tradition which represents it as belonging to the 
Taittirlya or Black Yajur Veda,” and he points out that it 
“ holds a very high rank among Upanishats ” and that its 
real drift is the same as the Doctrine of the Vedanta 
Philosophy. 

Professor Garbe and Macdonnell however, in their recent 
works, * speak of this as a Sivite compilation, and the latter 
scholar refers to the Upanishat itself ascribing the authorship to 
a sage called SvetaSvatara, unlike other Upanishats. But this 
is not characteristic of this Upanishat alone. The fifteenth 
khanda of the last Prapathaka of Chhandogya Upanishat also 
traces the line of teachers in a similar way and there is a similar 
statement in the Mandukya Upanishat and others. When each 
Hymn of the Rig Veda has its own author, it cannot be any 
surprise that each particular Upanishat should have an 
individual author; and we don’t suppose the Professor inclines 
to the orthodox view that the Veda and the Upanishats had no 
human authors, and were revealed. 

* Garbe’s Philosophy of Ancient India * 1S97) and Macdonnell’s 
History of Sanskrit* Literature (1900). 



no 


THE 5 VET AS VAT AT A UPAN1SHAT. 


In regard to the other and deep-rooted fallacy about its 
being a sectarian Upanishat, we shall speak here atlength. 

By taking this objection they mean to imply also that it 
is modern. And curiously enough we read of scholars ascrib- 
ing dates for the rise of these sects commencing from the tenth 
and twelfth centuries. Sir W. W. Hunter seriously con- 
tends that Sankara was the great Apostle of Saivism. But 
these writers do not see that the History of Hindu Religion is 
as ancient as the History of the Hindu Philosophy, and that 
the people must have had a popular religion, even, in the very 
days, these Upanishats were composed, and that the Puranas 
which embodied the essence of the Upanishat teaching existed 
in a popular form even in those ancient days, and the words 
Itihasa, Purana, occur even in the oldest Upanishats.* These 
Upanishats are quoted by name in the Puranas and particular 
passages are also commented on. 

And it will be an interesting study as to what was the 
religion of the people in the days of the Upanishats and Maha- 
bharata and Ram ay ana and of the Puranas, and to compare the 
same with the existing phases of Hindu Religion. We may 
briefly indicate our own conclusions on the subject, though we 
could not give our reasons in detail— to wit — that so far as any 
room for comparisons exist,— the traditions and beliefs and 
ceremonials and faith of the modern day Saivas (among whom 
may be included all Saktas, Ganapatyas and Srnartas), who 
form now the bulk of the Hindu Race, were exactly the same 
as those of the people of the days of the oldest Upanishats 
and Mahabharata and Ramayana. According to the opinions 
of many old scholars like Lassen, Wilson and Muir and others, 
the worship of Siva represented the cult of the Higher castes, 
Brahmans and Kshatriyas, and a text of Manu mentions that 
Siva is the God of the Brahmans, and it is remarkable how 
the picture of Siva is exactly the same as that of any ancient 

* Bi ihaJaranyaka-U p. 2-4-10 and 4-1-2 Maittnya-Up. 6-32 and 
33, Chhandogya-L'p. Vll. 1-2. 



THE SVETASVATAR A ['PANE-HAT. 


I I I 


Rishi (vide some of Ravi Varma’s pictures). Dr. W. W. 
Hunter remarks that Sankara i:i espousing Saivism combined 
in the system the highest Philosophy of the ancients and the 
most popular form of Religion. 

Regarding' the conception of Siva and its growth from 
Vedic times, scholars love to tell us that Rudra was nowhere 
called Siva in the Rig Veda and that he merely represented the 
storm God, with his thunder, lightning and the rains, rushing 
down from the snow-capped hills ; and that this Rudra slowly 
grew into Siva of the Hindu Triad, and scholars have not 
failed to remark about His composite and contradictory 
aspects. 

There is considerable truth in this, and we can clearly 
trace that in His person is slowly built up the conception of the 
various Vedic Deities, Indra and Agni, Varuna and Vayu, 
Surya and Soma, Vishnu and Brahma, and by the time the Vedas 
were arranged into Rig, Yajur, Saman and Atharvan, Rudra’s 
position as the God of gods had become assured ; and by the 
time of the earliest Upanishats, when the purely sacrificial 
Yajnas were being given up, the worship of Rudra-Siva 
supplanted the worship of the Vedic Deities, and instead of 
a blind worship of the elements, a marked distinction was 
drawn between the Supreme God who dwelt in these elements 
and gave them special power and glory, and this conception was 
stereotyped later on by Siva being called the Ashtamurti, the 
God who had for his body, the five elements, earth, air, water, 
fire and akas, sun and moon and the soul; and Siva has temples 
dedicated to him, in which He is worshipped in these eight 
forms. 

Rudra is derived by Sayana from the roots, Rudravayita, 
meaning ‘he who drives away sorrow.’ And consistant with 
this derivation, Rudra is called in the Rig-Veda itself, as the 
* bountiful’ and tfie ‘Healer’ possessed of various remedies (the 

* v 

later Vaidyanath) ‘benign’ and ‘gracious’. And the term Siva 
clearly appears in the following text of the Rig Veda (X, 92-9.) 



I 12 


Tiir. svf.taSvatara upanishat 


“ Stomanva adya Rudraya sikvase kshyadviraya namasa didhi- 
shtana yebhih Siva!: svavan eva yavabhirdivah sikshati sva- 
yaS-th nikamubhi.”* 

Those who are conversant with the actual performing of 
yajnas will know how the place of the respective priests, 
Adnvaryu, Hotri, and Udgatri and Brahman are fixed as well 
as the place of the various gods. And the chief place is 
assigned to Rudra and apart from other gods. This will 
clearly explain the force of the epithet of “ Medhapatim ” in 
Rig Veda, 1-43-4 “Gadhapatim, Medhapatim Rudram Jale- 
shabheshajam, tat samyoh sumnam imehi.” (We seek from 
Rudra, the lord of songs, the lord of Sacrifices who possesses 
healing remedies, his auspicious favour), as also “ king of 
sacrifices ” (Rig. 4-3.) And Medhapati is the same word as the 
more popular word Pasupati , Pasu meaning the animal offered 
in sacrifice, Yajna-Pasu, and symbolically representing the 
bound soul-jiva. As the Pati of all sacrifices, He is the fuifiiler 
of sacrifices, ‘Yajfia Stidham ’ (Rig. I. 114-4) and ‘Rudram 
yajnanam sa dadhis'ntim apasam ’ ( 111 . 2-5). As the God of 
gods, He is said to “derive His renown from Himself” 
‘Rudraya Sva yasase ’ His glory is said to be inherent, inde- 
pendent or self-dependant ‘ Svadhavane ’ (Rig. VII. 46-1.) 
He is also called Svapivata, which is variously explained as 
meaning ‘readily understanding’ ‘accessible.’ ‘gracious,’ ‘he 
by whom life is conquered, ‘he whose command cannot be trans- 
gressed,’ ‘thou by whom prayers (words) are readily received.’ 
He is called the father of the worlds,’ Bhuvanasya Pitaram,’ 
VI. 49-10, and the Rich story of His becoming the Father of the 
fatherless Maruts can be recalled in many a Puranic story, and 
local legend, and common folklore. 

* With reverence present your Hymn to-day to the mighty Rudra, the 
ruler of heroes, [and_ to the Maruts] those rapid and ardent deities with 
whom the gracious (Sivaf) and opulent (Rudra) who derives his renown 
from himself, protects us from the sky.” Say ana‘ takes ‘ Siva T i ’ as a 
substantive and interprets it as meaning Paramesvara ; and it seems 
strange that Muir should take it as an adjective. 



THE SVETASVATARA UP AXIS] I AT. 


1 1 3 

He is ‘ antar ichchanti — beyond all thought (VIII. 61-3). 
His form as described in the Rig Veda is almost the same as 
the Image of later days. He is called the Kapardin, with 
‘ spirally braided hair.’ He is of Hiranya Rupam ‘ golden 
formed’ and brilliant like the sun, and ‘shining like gold’ “Yah 
sukra iva *Suryo hiranyam iva ro chati ” (I. 43-5).* And in 
Rig Veda X. 136-1 to 7, He is the Long haired being who 
sustains the fire, water and the two worlds ; who is to the 
view the entire sky ; and who is called this ‘Light’ He is wind 
clad (naked) and drinks Visha (water or poison) and a Muni is 
identified with Rudra in this aspect. 

When we come to Yajur Veda, His supreme Majesty is 
fully developed, and He is expressly called Siva bj^ name ‘ Siva 
nama si (Yaj. S. 3-63) and the famous mantra, the Panchd- 
kshara, is said to be placed in the very heart of the three 
Vedas, (the name occurs in Tait. S. IV. 5, 1-41 ‘ namah 
sdmbave cha mayobave cha namah Sahkaraya clia mayas- 
karaya cha namah sivAya cha Sivdtaraya cha”). And the 
famous Satarudriyam which is praised in the Upanishats and 
in the Mahabharat forms also a central portion of this central 
Veda. And this is a description of God as the all, the all in all, 
and transcending all, ‘ Visvadevo, Visvasvarupo, Visvadhiko’ ; 
and any body can see that the famous passage in the Gita in 
chapters 10 and 1 1 merely parodies this other passage. These 
two chapters are respectively called Vibhuti Vis far a Yoga and 
Visvarupa Sandarsana Yoga which is exactly the character of 
the Satarudriya. The Yogi who has reached the highest state 
“ Sees all in God and God in all.” In the Satarudri)*a and in 
the whole Veda, Rudra is called Siva, Sankara Sambhu, I Sana, 
Is a, Bhagavdn , Bhava, Savva. Ugra, Soma, Pas ufati, Nilagi iva, 
GiriSa, Mahadcva and Mahcsvara. And the most famous 
mantra ‘ Ekam Eva Rudronadvitlyayu taste’ whose very exis- 
tence in the Vedas and Upanishats scholars doubted at one 

• * Note how often the Supreme is called the Golden-coloured, and 
Sunlike in the Upatnishats. 

15 



THE SVETASVATARA UPANISHAT. 


H4 

time, occurs in the Yajur Samhita (Tait.) in 1 Canto, 8 Prasna, 
6 Anuvaka, 1 Panc'nasat and this very mantra is repeated in 
our Upanishat, (III 2,) and it the 'Upanishats did not precede 
the Vedas, it will be seen how this mantra is the original of the 
other famous Upanishati mantra, “ Ekamevadvitlyam Brahma.” 
In fact, we doubt if the word ‘ Brahma’ occurs even bnce in the 
Rig-Veda as meaning God, and in the Yajur as meaning the 
Supreme Being. And Prof. Max Muller is no doubt correct 
in drawing attention to 'the fact that the conception of a mere 
Impersonal Self may be posterior to the conception of God as 
Siva, Rudra and Agni. And the texts we have above quoted 
will for once prove the danger of surmises as to the date of an 
Upanishat for the sole reason that it uses the words Siva or 
Isa or Isana and Rudra. 

In the days of the Veda and the Upanishats, these names 
Rudra, Siva, Sambhu, Mahadeva, Isa, Isana, Hara and Vishpu 
only meant the same as Deva or Brahman or Atman or 
Paramatman, and they had no prejudice against the use of the 
former set of words, as some sectarians of to-day would seem to 
have. In the Gita itself, the words Isvara, Isa, Mahesvara 
and Mahadeva and Paramesvara are freely used, and Siva is 
used in the Uttara Gita, though the modern day Vaishnava 
exhibits the greatest prejudice towards these names. 

One word about the different aspects of Siva. As we 
pointed out before, as the Idea of Rudra, as all the gods or the 
Powers of Nature, was fully evolved, in Him was also centralized 
the various aspects of Nature as good and bad, awful and 
beneficent. Kalidasa playfully brings out this idea in the 
following lines : 

“ The Gods, like clouds, are fierce and gentle' too 
Now hurl the bolt,’ now drop sweet heavenly dew 
In summer heat the streamlet dies away 
Beneath the fury of the God of day, 

Then in due season comes the pleasant rain 
And all is fresh and fair and full again. ” 


THE SVETASVATARA LTANISHAT. 


115 

However awful the aspect of a fierce storm, with its 
thunder and lightning, may be, yet no one can appreciate its 
beneficence more than the dwellers in the Indian soil, the land 
of so many famines. However fierce the sun may be, yet his 
existence is absolutely essential to the growth and maturity of 
all vegetation in the tropics. It will be noted that not only in 
the case of Rudra but in the case of other gods, their beneficent 
and malevolent powers are brought out in the Vedas. The 
Supreme Double Personality of Siva is thus explained in 
the Mahabharata by Lord Krishna himself. “Large armed 
Yudhishtira, understand from me, the greatness of the glorious, 
multiform , many named Rudra. They called Mahadeva, Agni, 
Sthanu, Mahesvara, one-eyed, Triyambaka, the Universal 
formed and Siva. Brahmans versed in the Veda know two bodies 
of this God, one awful, one auspicious ; and these two bodies 
have again many forms. The dire and awful body is fire, 
lightning, the sun: the auspicious and beautiful body is virtue, 
water and the moon. The half of his essence is fire and the other 
half is called the moon. The one which is his auspicious body 
practises chastity, . while the other which is his most dreadful 
body, destroys the world. From his being Lord and Great 
He is called Mahesvara. Since he consumes, since he is fiery, 
fierce, glorious, an eater of flesh, blood and marrow— he is 
called Rudra. As He is the greatest of the gods, as His 
domain is wide and as He preserves the vast Universe, — He is 
called Mahadeva. From his smoky colour, he is called Dhurjati. 
Since he constantly prospers all men in all their acts, seeking 
their welfare (Siva), He is therefore called Siva.”* And in 
this, we see Him as not only the destroyer but as the 
Reproducer and Preserver and as such the conception of Siva 
transcends the conception of Rudra as one of the Trinity. 

And it can be shown that the picture of God as the fierce 
and the terrible is not altogether an unchristian idea. 

*‘Siva’ is derived from ‘ Vasi ’ which occurs in Katha-Up. see 
Lalita Sahasranama Commentary under ‘ Siva.’ 



THE SVETASVATARA CPAXISHAT. 


ii 6 


The following paras, we cull from a book called “ The 
Woodlands in Europe” intended for Christian readers; and we 
could not produce better arguments for the truth of our 
conception of the Supreme Siva, the Destroyer and the Creator 
and the Preserver ( vide p. 6, Sivajnanabot'nam, English 
Edition). * 

“And how about the dead leaves which season after season, 
strew the ground beneath the trees? Is their work done 
because, when their bright summer life is over, they lie softly 
down to rest under the wintry boughs ? Is it only death, and 
nothing beyond? Nay; if it is death, it is death giving place to 
life. Let us call it rather change, progress, transformation. It 
must be progress, when the last year’s leaves make the soil for 
the next year’s flowers, and in so doing serve a set purpose and 
fulfil a given mission. It must be transformation , token one 
thing passes into another, and instead of being annihilated, begins 
life again in a new shape and form. 

“ It is interesting to remember that the same snow which 
weighs down and breaks those fir branches is the nursing 
mother of the flowers. Softly it comes down upon the tiny 
seeds and the tender buds and covers them up lovingly, so that 
from all the stern rigour of the world without, they are safely 
sheltered. Thus they are getting forward, as it were, and life 
is already swelling within them ; so that when the sun shines 
and the snow melts, they are ready to burst forth with a 
rapidity which seems almost miraculous. 

“ It is not the only force gifted with both preserving and 
destroying power , according to the aspect in which we view it. The 
fire refines and purifies, but it also destroys; and the same 
water which rushes down in the cataract with such over- 
whelming power, falls in the gentlest of drops upon the thirsty 
flower cup and fills the hollow of the leaf with just the quantity 
of dew which it needs for its refreshment hand sustenance. 
And in those higher things of which nature is but the type and 
shadow, the same grand truth holds good ; and from our Bibles 



THE b V ETA S V ATAR A CPAXISUAT. 


H7 


we learn that the consuming fire and the love that passeth 
knowledge are bui different sides of the same God: — Just and yet 
merciful ; that will by no means dear the guilty, yet shozoing 
mercy unto thousands." 

Badarayana also touches upon this subject in I., iii 40 
and we qu*ote below the Purvapaksha and Siddhhanta views on 
this question from the commentary ol Srikantha. 

“ Because of trembling (I, iii, 40). In the Katha-Vallis, in 
the section treating of the thumb-sized Purusha, it is said as 
follows : 

‘ Whatever there is, the whole world when gone forth (from 
the Brahman) trembles in the breath ; (it is) a great terror, the 
thunderbolt uplifted ; those who know it become immmortai. ’ 
(cit. 6, 2). 

Here a doubt arises as to whether the cause of trembling is 
the Paramesvara or some other being. 

(Purvapaksha) Here the Sruti speaks of the trembling of 
the whole universe by fear caused by the entity denoted by the 
word “breath.” It is not right to say that the Paramesvara, 
who is so sweet natured as to afford refuge to the whole 
universe and who is supremely gracious, is the cause of the 
trembling of the whole universe. Therefore, as the word 
‘thunderbolt’ occurs here, it is the thunderbolt that is the cause 
of trembling. Or it is the vital air which is the cause of the 
trembling, because the word ‘breath’ occurs here. Since the 
vital air causes the motion of the body, this whole world which 
is the body as it were, moves on account of the vital air. Then 
we can explain the passage “whatever there is, the whole world, 
when gone forth (from the Brahman) trembles in the breath. ” 
Then we can also explain the statement that “it is a great 
terror, the thunderbolt uplifted,” inasmuch as like lightning, 
cloud and rain, the thunderbolt which is the source of great 
terror is produced; by action of the air itself. It is also possible 
to attain immortality by a knowledge ol the air as the follow- 
ing Sruti says : ’ 



IIS 


THE SVETASVATARA UPANISHAT. 


“ Air is everything itself and the air is all things together ; 
he who knows this conquers death” (Bri. Up. 5-3-2). 

(Siddhanta) : — As against the foregoing, we say that 
Paramesvara himself is the cause of the trembling. It is 
possible that, as the Ruler, Paramesvara is the cause of trembl- 
ing of the whole universe and by the fear of His command all 
of us abstain from prohibited actions and engage in the 
prescribed duties; and it is by the fear of His command that 
Vayu and others perform their respective duties, as may be 
learned from such passages as the following : — 

“By fear of Him, Vayu (the wind) blows.” (Tait. Up. 2-8). 

Though gracious in appearance, Paramesvara becomes 
awful as the Ruler of all. Hence the Sruti. 

‘ Hence the King’s face has to be awful ! ’ (Tait. Bra 3-8-23). 

“ Wherefore as the Master, Isvara Himself is the cause of 
the trembling of the whole universe.” 

Before we enter into the discussion of the philosophic 
import of this Upanishat, we have to note the great difficulty 
felt nearly by all European scholars who are brought up solely 
in the school of Sankara in interpreting this Upanishat, a 
difficulty which has equally been felt with regard to the 
Philosophy of the Gita. Different scholars have taken it as 
expounding variously Sdhkhya and Yoga, Bhakti and Vedanta , 
Dualism and non- Dualism', and Professor Max Muller agrees 
with Mr. Gough in taking it as fully expounding the Indian 
idealism school of Vedanta. Professors Garbe and Mac- 
donnell characterise the philosophy as eclectic. Says the 
latter, (p. 405, History of Sanskrit Literature) : “Of the eclectic 
movement combining Sankhya, Yoga and Vedanta doctrines 
the oldest literary representative is the Svetas vatara upanishat. 
More famous is the Bhagavad Gita.* ” 

If ever there was such an eclectic school, Ijave these scholars 
paused to enquire who their modern representatives are ? Or 

* Monier Williams was the first to point this out: 



THE SVETAbVATARA UPANISHAT. I ig 

is it that there are no such representatives to-day ? The real 
fact is that this was the only true Philosophic creed of the 
majority of the people, and this philosophy has subsisted 
untarnished during the last 3000 years or more. During the 
Upanishat period, the schools whose existence could be dis- 
tinctly marked are the Lokayata or Ndstika, Kapila’s Suhkitya, 
Mimamsa of Jaimini, Nyaya ami Vaiseshika and Yoga. The 
first three were Atheistical and the latter Theistic. And of 
course all these were professed Hindus *, and none would have 
deviated from the rituals and practices prescribed for the 
Hindu, though academically speaking, he would have held to 
this or that view of philosophy. And this inconsistency is 
what strikes a foreigner even now in the character of the 
modern Hindu. Mrs. Besant aptly describes this as “ the 
Hindu’s principle of rigidity of conduct and freedom of 
thought All these schools were based on a certain number of 
tattvas or categories. The Nastika postulated four and only 
four tattvas, namely, earth, air, fire and water and would not 
even believe in Akas or ether. Kapila increased the mtmber 
of categories he believed in, to 19 which he grouped under 
Purusha and Pradhana. 1 'he Mlmumsaka believed practically 
in nothing more, though he laid stress on the authority 
and eternality of the Vedas. The next three theistic 
schools believed in 24 or 25 tattvas which they grouped 
under Purusha , PradhUna, and Isvara or God. As all these 
schools based their theoretical philosophy on a certain number 
of tattvas, t Sahkhya, the theoretic Pnilosophy, came to be 

* The Majority of every people and nation are virtually atheistic 
and materialistic, though professing a belief in God and conforming to 
the usages of society. 

t Tirumuiar, a Tamil Saint of about the first century A. C. thus 
distinguishes the schools existing in his time. “ The 96 tattvas or 
categories are common to all. 36 categories are special to the Saivas. 
28 are the categories’ 01 the Vedanti, 24 categories belong to Vaishnavas. 
26 categories are those of the Mayavadi.” The particular thing to be 
noted here is the distinction drawn between Vedanti and Mayavadi. 



120 


THE SVETASVATARA UPANISHAT. 


called oiiikhya as distinguished from the practical Religion 
and code of Morality. And during the Upanishat period and 
even in the time of the Mahabharata, the word had not lost its 
general significance. And it will be noticed when ascertaining 
what these various categories are, that, with the exception of 
the Xastika, all the other five schools believed in almost the 
same things, though the enumerations were various, except as 
regards the postulating of God. And even in this idea of God, 
there was practically very little difference between Kapila and 
Patanjali. To both of them, the freed Puntsha was equal to 
Is vara, only Kapila believed that no Is vara was necessary, 
for the origination and sustenance, &c., of the worlds ; but 
according to Patanjali, there existed an eternally freed Being 
who created these worlds and resolved them again into their 
original components. And in the Upanishat period, the Yoga 
school was the dominant cult and these Upanishats including 
the Svetasvafara and Kaivalya &c, were all books of the yoga 
school. And the theoretical or argumentative part of the 
philosophy or creed was calied by the name of Sahkhya and 
the practical part, Yoga. As this yoga postulated the highest 
end achieved by a study of the Vedas, which were set forth in 
these Upanishats, it was also coming slowly to be called 
Vedanta. That the word Upanishat was actually used as a 
synonym for yoga, we have an example in Ghandog, (i-i-io.) 
“The sacrifice which a man performs with knowledge, faith, 
and the Upanishat is more powerful.” Knowledge' or jhdn 
here meant the knowledge of the categories and their relation, 
which according to Kapila was alone sufficient to bring about 
man’s freedom. This, the Vedanta held to be insufficient, unless 
it was accompanied by earnestness and love and by the 
contemplation of a Supreme Being. This contemplation brought 
the thinker nearer and nearer to ihc abject of his thoughts, till 
all distinctions of object and subject were thoroughly merged 
(distinction of I and Mine] and the union or oiie-ness was reached 
and all bhanda or pasa vanished. This is the root-idea in both 
words ‘ Upanishat’ and ‘Yoga.’ Yoga means union, union of 



THE SVETASVATARA UPANISHAT. 


12 1 


two things held apart and brought together, when the bonds or 
fetters which separated fell off or perished. And L panishat is 
also derived from Ufa near, ni quite, sat to perish. Here also 
the nearing of two things, and the perishing of something is 
clearly meant. Of course, the two things brought together are 
the Soul land God, and the perishable thing is certainly the 
Pusa; and the Soul when bound by Pdsa is called Pasit 
accordingly 

This was the condition of the Philosophic thought down to 
the days of the Mahabharat, and we hold this was anterior to 
the rise of Buddhism and continued for some centuries after 
Gautama Buddha and till the time of Badarayana. It was 
during this time that the philosophy of India spread into and 
permeated the thought of Europe, and Professor Garbe has 
lucidly proved in his short History of “The Philosophy of 
Ancient India,” that the influence received by the Greeks down 
to the neo-Platonic school was almost Sankhyan in its char- 
acter. It was during this time again, that the blending of the 
Aryan and Tamilian in art and civilization and Philosophy took 
place (and we could not here consider how much was common 
to both, and how much each gained from the other). We have 
an exactly parallel word in Tamil to the word ‘Sankhya’ and 
this word is sraor en) which means both ‘number’ and ‘to think’, 
and both Attvaiydr and Tiruvalluvar use the words to mean 
logic and mataphysics : the primary science, on which all thought 
was built, being mathematics or the science of number. A 
systematic and historical study of the Tamil works will make 
good our position; and even to-day the most dominant cult in 
the Tamil is the Sahkhya and Yoga as represented in the 
Upanishats or Vedanta. This system must have been 
thoroughly establishad in the Tamil language and literature 
before the time of Chirist and before Badarayana ’s composition 
of the Sdriraka Sutras. So much so, when Badarayana’s 
system came into vogue in Southern India, it was recognized 
as a distinct school. As Badarayana professed expressly to 
interpret the Upanishat or Vedanta texts, his school of 
16 



1/22 THE sVETASVATARA VPAXISHAT. 

Philosophy was stereotyped by the phrase ‘ Vedanta' and by 
collecting all the texts in Tamil down even to the time of 
Tayumanavar (16th ceutury) containing references to Vedanta, 
we could prove what the special view of Badarayana was. 
This will also show that the exposition of Badarayana contained 
in the earliest Bhashy-a or commentary we possess in Sanskrit, 
namely, that of Srikantha, which was later on adopted almost 
bodily by Ramanuja, was the true view of Badarayana. This 
view we may sum up in Dr. Thibaut’s own words “If, now, 

I am shortly^ to sum up the results of the preceding enquiry as 
to the teaching of the Sutras, I must give it as my opinion that 
they do not set forth the distinction of a higher and lower 
knowledge of Brahman ; that they do not acknowledge the 
distinction of Brahman and Isvara in Sankara’s sense; that 
they do not hold the doctrine of the unreality of the world; 
and that they do not with Sankara proclaim the absolute 
identity- of the individual and the highest seif.” (p. ioo, 
Introduction to the Vedanta Sutras). 

And he proves also that this was consistent with the 
teachings of the Upanishats themselves. 

What gave it its special mark, however, is the peculiar 
relation which Badarayana postulated between God and the 
world, the product of Maya or Prakriti. Though he held on 
to the distinction of the Supreme and the Human Spirit, he 
stoutly fought against the old Sankbyan view (comprising 
nearly all the six schools we enumerated above) that Matter 
was an independent entity from spirit, though like Leibnitz he 
never denied its reality-. He held God was both the efficient 
and material cause of the Universe. This doctrine received 
accordingly^ its name of Parinama Vuda or Nimittopadana- 
kdrana Vada, while the Theistic Sankbyan systems stoutly 
maintained that God was only the efficient cause, though He 
was immanent in All Nature. As there was nothing inherently 
vicious and destructive to all true religion and morality in this 
system of Badarayana, the Tamil Philosophers welcomed this 



THE SVETA5VATARA UPANTSHAT. 


123 


view also and declared they did not see much difference in the 
two views and ends postulated by both the old and new school. 
And both Srikanta and Saint Tirumular expressly make this 
declaration. 

But there was one other view which was gaining ground 
ever sinc^ the days of Gautama Buddha, and which was 
connected with the peculiar theory of Maya or illusion. Buddha 
declared that all existence was momentary, that there was no 
world, no mind, no soul and no God, and that what really 
existed were the Skandhas, and when tins truth was perceived, 
all desire and birth and suffering would cease and then there 
would be cessation of all existence, Nirvana. And the 
Buddhists were accordingly called Maydvddis. But as the 
Buddhist theory destroyed the very core of the Indian national 
beliefs, and as it also afforded no stable ground for a national 
existence based on morality and religion, this was pronounced 
heterodox, but the seeds sown by him were not in vain, and a 
Hindu school of Mayavada slowly raised its head on the dying 
embers of this old effete philosophy. And its greatest exponent 
was Sankara. This Hindu school of Mayavada was in 
existence for several centuries before Sankara, but this was 
later than the time of St. Manickavachaka and earlier than 
Tirumular though both of them were anterior to Sankara. 
Sankara’s system is referred to as Mayavada in all the other 
Hindu prominent schools prevalent since the days of Sankara, 
and though South Indian followers of Sankara seem to entertain 
some prejudice against; the word, owing to the abuse made of it 
by their opponents, followers of Sankara in the North even 
to-day call it the Mayavada. And in some of its extreme 
forms, it was also called “ Prachchanna Baudd/iam.” The 
great learning and the towering intellect, accompanied by the 
austere life led by Sankara, created a great following among 
the Brahmans of the Saiva faith, and it made great strides in 
the time of his illustrious follower Sayana or Vidyaranya who 
combined in himself both temporal and spiritual power. And 
the first interpheters of Hinduism happening to be mostly 



124 


THE SVETASVATARA UPASXSHAT. 


Brahmans of this persuasion, during the century when Sanskrit 
oriental scholarship came into being, this view of Hindu 
Philosophy has gained most currency among European scholars. 
But there were not wanting scholars in the past like Colebrook 
and Wilson, and like Col. Jacob, Prof. Kunte, and Dr. Thibaut 
in the present generation, who hold that Muydvudd is not the 
real and true exposition of the Veda or the Vedanta. Prof. Max 
Muller than whom a more learned or earnest student of Indian 
Philosophy never existed, though he held very stoutly to the 
other view, slowly gave in, and has accepted Dr. Thibaut’s 
conclusions as correct. We may add that Professor Macdonnell 
reiterates the old view, and Prof. Deussen is the greatest 
adherent of Sankara at the present day. 

There is one other great factor in the growth of Indian 
Religion and Philosophy which we have taken no note of, all 
this time; and which receives no notice at all in the hands of 
European scholars. And this is the bearing of the Agamas or 
Tcintras. Such a well informed person as Svami Vivekananda 
has declared, “ as to their influence, apart from the Srouta and 
Smarta rituals, all other forms of ritual observed from the 
Himalayas to the Comorin have been taken from the Tantras, 
and they direct the worship of the Saktas, Saivas and 
Vaishn&vas and all others alike. ” But who were the authors 
of these works and when did they come into vogue, and 
what great power had they to monopolize the Religion of 
the whole of India ? T he same Svami observes. “ The 
Tantras, as we have said, represent the Vedic rituals in a 
modified form, and before any one jumps into the most absurd 
conclusions about them, I will advise him to read the Tantras 
in connection with the Brdhmanas , especially of the Adhwaryu 
portion. And most of the Mantras used in the Tantras will 
be found taken verbatim from these Brdhmanas. ” But it could 
be noted at the same lime, that whereas the Brdhmanas direct 
the use of these mantras in connection with the yajhas or sacri- 
fices, these Tantras direct their use in connection with the 
worship of some deity or other. And the object of Vedic sacrj- 



THE svetasvatara upanishat. 


125 


fices being well known to be only the first three Purushdrthas, 
by the worship of the various Powers of Nature, the object of 
Tantric or Agamic worship was the attainment of the fourth 
PurushUrta or Moksha. By the time we get into the Upanishat 
period, we could see how a new and spiritual interpretation 
was put tfpon the old Vedic sacrifices, and the uselessness of 
sacrifice as an end in itself was strongly declared. Says M. 
Barth : “Sacrifice is only an act of preparation. It is the best 
of acts, but it is an act and its fruit consequently perishable. 
Accordingly although whole sections of these treatises 
(Upanishats) are taken up exclusively with speculations on the 
rites, what they teach may be summed up in the words of 
Mundaka Upanishat. “ Know the Atman only and away with 
every thing else ; it alone is the bridge to immortality. The 
Veda itself and the whole cycle of sacred science are quite as 
sweepingly consigned to the second place. The Veda is not 
the true Brahman ; it is only its reflection ; and the science of 
this imperfect Brahman, this Sabda Brahman or Brahman in 
words is only a science of a lower order. The true science 
is that which has the true Brahman, the Parabraliman for its 
subject.” 

As the story in the Kena Upanishat will show, the most 
powerful of the Rig Veda deities, Indra, and Agni and’Vayu 
and Varuria were also relegated to a secondary place ; and the 
worship of the only One, without a second, the Consort of Uma, 
Haimavati, was commenced. The Kena Upanishat story is 
repeated in the Puranas, the Supreme Brahman is mentioned 
there as Siva and Rudra. And the story of Rudra destroy- 
ing Dakshas’s sacrifice, and disgracing the Gods who took part 
in the sacrifice, with the sequel of His consort, named then 
Ddkslidyani (the fruit or spirit of sacrifice) becoming reborn 
as Uma, (wisdom or Brahmajfian) Haimavati, would seem to 
go before the story in the Kena Upanishat. The story of the 
desecration of thej sacrifice of the Rishis of Darukavana by 
Siva and Vishnu would point to the same moral. So that, by 
this time, the backbone of the old unmeaning Vedic sacrifices 



126 


THE SVF.TASVATARA UPANTSHAT. 


petrified in the Godless school of Mimamsa was really broken ; 
and it was here that the Agamas stepped in and used the same 
old Mantras again but with a new force and significance, deleting 
whatever was unmeaning, and preserving only what was use- 
ful. It substituted also new symbols though preserving the 
old names. And from this time, therefore, Modern* Hinduism 
and Hindu system of worship may be said to have com- 
menced. But for these beginnings, we have to go far behind 
the days of the Mahabharata and the Puranas, for the Agama 
doctrines and rituals are fully bound up with these. 

A clear advance in the use of symbols was also made, at the 
same time effectually preserving the distinction between symbols 
and truth, by the use of proper words. The Sabd’na Brahman or 
the Prana va was only a symbol and not the truth, as fancied by 
the Mimamsakas, and it was called a mark or Linga. And the 
figured mark of the Pranava, (Linga is merely the Pianava as 
figured to the eye) the Linga, became the universal symbol 
of God and object of worship, as the Pranava in mantra or 
sound form was before. In the new system of worship, the 
Temples that were built were more on the models of the old 
yajfia-sala ; and the yupa stambha (Dhvaja-stambha) and 
Balipltha, Pasu (Ba^ava or Nandi) and the Gods in their 
various places were also retained ; and a Brahmotsava sup- 
planted virtually the old sacrifice.* In the field of philosophy, 
it did as much to systematise and build up into a whole what 

* In commencing and going through a Brahmotsava, the priests 
observe technically almost the same rituals as in commencing and o-oino- 
through a great sacrifice. There is a Yajila SHa in every Saiva Temple 
in which the Fire is started by the Dikshita and the Dhvaja Arohana is 
made by running up a flag with the figure of a bull (Pasu or Basava) on 
the Yupastambha and tying Kusa grass to the Post. The Pasu and the 
Kusa grass standing merely for the soul or jiva that was bound and 
offered in sacrifice. After Avarohana, the soul or Pasu becomes freed 
and is no more called Pasu, but is called God or Nandi — the blissful. It 
will require more space for us to draw out here the parallel between the 
Yajna Sala and a Hinckt Temple. 



THE bVEI A&VATARA UPANTSHAT. 


127 


was hitherto in scattered form and it did greater service in 
drawing out more fully the omui-penetrativeness and transcen- 
dency of God over both Chetana and Ackcta.ua PrapaTicha, the 
world of souls and the world of matter. The Postulate of God’s 
supreme Transcendency is the special effort of the Agama 
Philosophy' to make out, and as this was the Highest End and 
Truth, it was called Siddhanta par excellence as distinguished 
from the Vedanta which led up the aspirant only to certain 
spiritual stages. It divided all philosophy and religion into four 
paths or Mar gas, called respectively Chari ya, Kriya, Yoga and 
Jnana; and these were otherwise called Dasa Marga, Satputra 
Marga, Saha Marga and San Marga. In the exposition of these 
paths, it opened out a thoroughly reasoned system of practical 
Philosophy, neither contradicting our experience, nor causing 
violence to the most cherished of our sentiments, both moral 
and religious ; a system of thought which was progressive and 
built on an adamantine basis, step by step leading to higher 
knowledge; a system * which by preserving and pointing out 
the essential difference of God, Soul and Matter, established a 
true relation between them ; which led to the highest monistic 
knowledge, a system which was at once dualism and non- 
dualism, Dvaita and Advaita ; a system which appealed alike 

* Cf. Garbe, The Philosophy of Ancient India, p. 30. “ As for those 

who feel inclined to look down slightingly from a monistic point of view 
upon a dualistic conception of the world, the words of E. Roer in the 
Introduction of the Bhashaparichcheda (p. XVI) may be quoted : “ Though 
a higher development of philosophy may destroy the distinctions between 
soul and matter, “ that is, may recognise matter or what is perceived as 
matter, as the same with the soul (as for instance, Leibnitz did), 
it is nevertheless certain that no true knowledge of the soul is possible 
without first drawing a most decided line of demarcation between the 
phenomena of matter and of the soul This sharp line of demarcation 
between the two domains was first drawn by Kapila. The knowledge of 
the difference between body and soul is one condition, and it is also an 
indispensable condition, of arriving at a true monism. Every view of the 
world which confounds this difference can supply at best a one-sided 
benism, be it a spiritualism or an equally one-sided materialism.” 



THE SVETAS VATARA I'PAXISHAT. 


128 


to the peasant and the philosopher. Its system of practical 
Religion, calculated to secure the Highest End and Bliss, was 
also progressive, commencing from the simplest rituals in the 
adoration of God to the highest Yoga, adapted to the means 
and capacity of the lowest and the highest of human beings. 
Readers of Svami Vivekananda’s lectures would ‘have noted 
how these four paths are essential to any system of thought or 
religion which claims to be universal ; and it is the peculiar 
boast of the Agma or Tantra that it was the first to systematise 
this fourfold teaching. And it is in modern Saivism and in the 
Siddhanta Philosophy, this fourfold aspect of Religion and 
Philosophy is wholly and fully preserved. Saivism is a ritual 
marga, a bhakti marga, a yoga marga, a jiiana marga. And 
need we wonder that the Siddhanta Philosophy of to-day is as 
much a puzzle to outsiders, as the Philosophy of our Upanishat 
and the Gita? The Siddhanti’s definition of Advaita as 
‘neither one nor two nor neither’ will bring out the puzzle 
more prominently. It is a system of dualism, it is also a 
system of non-dualism, but it differs from the other schools of 
dualism and nondualism. What was upheld in the Siddhanta 
as mere paths or marga, or Sadhana or means to reach the 
Highest End, had come to be each and individually mistaken 
for the End itself ; what was upheld as the mere symbol of the 
Highest Truth had come to be mistaken for the Truth itself. 
What was declared as unprovable, indescribable, unknowable 
and unenjoyable as long as man was in the condition of 
bondage was held by these sectaries as proved and seen. What 
was the purest and most transcendent monotheism degenerated 
into a most crude anthropomorphism and blatant pantheism. 

Saivism is not anthropomorphic, but symbolic. How can 
it be otherwise, when it draws such minute distinction between 
God and Soul and Matter? And a system of symbolism is quite 
consistent with the Highest Transcendental Religion and 
Philosophy ; in fact, all our real knowledge is more truly 
symbolic than otherwise. In the view of the Siddhanti, the 
Upanishats, though they deal with all the four paths, are 



THE SVETASVATARA UPANISHAT. 


129 


especially the text books of the Yogapada or Sahamarga, where 
certain Bhavanas or Vidyas calculated to create and bring 
about the Highest Nirvana and Union, and Freedom from Pa§a, 
are more fully explained and illustrated. 

The above cursory view of the past history of the Indian 
philosophy will clear the ground a good deal for the proper 
understanding of our particular Upanishat in question. 

We maj' therefore state that the Svetasvatara Upanishat is 
a genuine Upanishat of the Black Yajur Veda, and is one of the 
oldest of its kind. It is not a sectarian Upanishat. It more 
properly belongs to the Yoga Pada stage of teaching, though 
the other Padas are also briefly touched and alluded to. It 
expounds both a theoretic philosophy and a practical religion, 
all-comprehensive and all-embracing ; a system which was at 
once Sahkhya and Yoga, dualistic and monistic, and appealing 
to all classes of society. 

It lays down the distinction of three padarthas or categories 
in clear terms. And these are, God, the many souls, and 
matter or Pasa. 

“Two birds, inseparable friends, cling to the same tree. 
One of them eats the sweet fruits, the other looks on without 
eating” (iv. 6) which is explained in less figurative language 
in the next mantra. 

“ On the same tree, man (Anisa) sits grieving, immersed, 
bewildered, by his own impotence. But when he sees the 
other, Isa, contented, and knows His glory, then his grief 
passes away. ” 

That this is the Highest teaching of the Rig Veda is 
pointed out in the next verse. 

“He who does not know that indestructible Being 
(Akshara,) of the Rig Veda, that Highest Ether (Parama 
Vyomam) whereiifi all the Gods reside, of what use is the Rig 
Veda to him ? Those only who know It rest contented.” 

*7 



130 


the Svetas. vat ara upaxishat. 


And need it be pointed out that the 6th verse is itself found 
in the Rig Veda (i, 164-20) and it is repeated in the Atharva 
Veda and the passage is so popular a one that Kalha (iii. 1) and 
Mundaka (iii. uj also quote it. 

These verses bring out the distinction of God and soul, 
Isa and Anisa, as the spectator and enjoyer respectively. The 
soul enjoys and performs karma while encased in the body, 
tree; but though God is immanent in the .soul and in the body, 
3-et the works and their fruit do not cling to Him and taint 
Him. After the due eating of the fruits, the soul knows the 
greatness of God, and his own insignificance, then his sufferings 
cease. 

The previous mantra (iv. 5) is also a famous and much 
debated passage, and it is badly translated by Prof. Max 
Muller. The translation by G. R. S. Mead and Chattopadhyaya 
is literal and correct. “Aye, that one unborn (Aja-soul) sleeps 
in the arms of one unborn (nature. Pradhana), enjoying (her of 
nature, red, white, and black), who brings forth multitudinous 
progeny like herself. But when her charms have been 
enjoyed, he (soul) quits her (prakriti) side, the unborn other, 
Anyata (Lord). ” * 

TKere is absolutely no mistaking this plain statement of 
the three Padartas as eternal, as well as their relation ; and all 
three are called Unborn, Ajn or uncreated. But the word to be 
noted here is the word 'other' 'Anya' which is almost a 
technical term or catch word to mean God, the Supreme. And 
it occurs again in (V. 1). 

“In the unperishable, and infinite highest Brahman, where- 
in the two, Vidya (Vijnana-Atma) and Avidya are hidden, 
the one, Avidya, perishes ; the other, Vidya, is immortal; but 
He who controls both Vidya and Avidya, is another 
(Anyatha).” And in the subsequent verges, this another 

* If we read “ he quites her side, for the other ” makes the sense 
complete. 



THE SVETASVATARA UPAXISHAT. 


131 

is clearly pointed to be the only One God, without a 
a second, the ruler of all, the generator of all, and the supporter 
(ripener) of all. This forms the subject of discussion in the 
hands of Badarayana in I, ii, 21. And the famous passage in 
Brihadaranyaka is referred to. “ He who dwells in Atma 
(Vjnana) and different from Atma, whom the Atma does not 
know, whose body Atma is, and who pulls (rules) Atma 
within, He is thy Atma, the puller within, the immortal ” 
(iii, 7, 22). 

In vi. 6, also God is called the Anya — the other. It occurs 
again in Gita, xv. 17. The previous verse postulates two 
entities of matter and soul, and the next verse proceeds to 
postulate “another.” “But there is another, namely, the 
Supreme Being, called Paramatma, who being the everlasting 
lsvara, and pervading the three worlds, sustains them.” That 
the very use of the word is solely to emphasise God’s trans- 
cendency over the world of matter and of souls, as against people 
who only postulated two Padarthas, or would identify God, the 
supreme lsvara, with matter or soul, is fully brought out in the 
next verse. 

“As I transcend the perishable (Pradhana) and as I am 
higher than even the Imperishable (soul), 1 am celebiated in the 
world and sung in the Vedas as Purusliottama. ” 

The commonest fallacy that is committed when the 
eternality of matter and souls is postulated, is in fancying that 
this, in any way, affects God’s transcendency and immanency. 
Though He pervades all and envelopes all, creates and sustains 
and takes them back again into Himself, though He is the God 
in the fire, the God in the water, the God who has entered the 
whole world, in plants and trees and in every thing else, (ii. 17) 
yet He stands behind all time and all persons, (vii. 16), and is 
beyond all tattvas. (Verse 15.) 

“ He is the ohe God, (Eko Deva), hidden in all beings, all 
pervading, the Antaratma of all things, watching over all 
works, dwelling ’ in all beings, the witness, the perceiver, the 



132 


THE SVETaSvaTARA UPANISHAT. 


Only One, Nirguna (Being) vi. n. And in Verse 1 6, he is 
called the first cause, himself uncaused, the all-knower, the 
master of Nature and Man. And by the supreme statement 
“Ekohi Rudra nadvittiya tasthe, (There is only One Rudra, 
they do not allow a second) the complete subordination of all 
other things to Him is clearly postulated. There *is nothing 
else in His presence, as no Asut can subsist in the Presence of 
the Sat, as no darkness can subsist in the presence of light. 
And Light, he is called (iii, 12) the Light, by which all other 
lights, the sun, the moon, and the stars and the lightnings are 
lighted, (vi. 14) and He is the great Purusha, like the Sun in 
lustre, beyond darkness, (iii. 8.) 

There is only one other passage which we have to quote 
while we are dealing with the three eternal postulates of this 
Upanishat. These are the Verses 8 and 9 in the first Adhyaya 
itself. In these also the distinctions between the Supreme God, 
and the bound soul, as Isa and Anlsa, Jna and Ajna, and the 
third, Pradhana, Unborn though perishable and ever changing, 
are finely drawn. 

In dealing with the personality of God, who is called in the 
Upanishats, as Deva, Hara, VaSi, Siva, Purusha, Brahman, 
Paramatma, Isa, and Isvara, &c,. we have to remark that the 
Upanishat makes no distinction between a Higher and a Lower 
Brahman; rather, there are no statements made about "the 
Lower God or Gods, except one verse in V. 3, where the 
Supreme Lord and Mahatma, is said to have created 
the Lords, and Brahma or Hiranyagarbha is referred to 
as such a lord. But ever}’ statement made to God, by any 
of the names, we have mentioned above, clearly refers to the 
one*, without a second, the Highest Brahman, who is also 

* Our learned Lord Bishop of Madras complains that the educated 
Hindu has only to choose one out of the six systems of Philosophy, and 
that he has no good practical religion and we kindi^’ invite his attention 
to this paper, and then judge for himself and see if Hindu Philosophy and 
Religion is, after all, really so poor. 



THE iVETASVATARA L’PANISHAT. I 33 

Nirguna. And in various passages, this Highest Being is 
said to create, sustain and destroy the worlds. What some of 
these people would not believe is, how a Being addressed as 
Hara and Siva, Isa and isvara could be the Nirguna Absolute 
Brahman. And they frequently associate this name with the 
Rudra or Siva of the Hindu Trinity. But it will be news to 
these people that even the Rudra of the Trinity is Nirguna 
and not Saguna. Absolutely no passage could be found in any 
of the Upanishats or even in the Purapas and the Itihasas, in 
which even the trinity Siva or Rudra is called Saguna. 
Sagutia means having Bodies (qualities) formed out of Prakriti, 
and when Prakriti is itself resolved into its original condition 
and reproduced by this trinity Rudra, this prakriti could not 
act as his vestment. 

But the Rudra and Siva of our Upanishat is clearly set 
forth in other Upanishats as the fourth, chaturtam and Titriyam, 
transcending the trinity ; and the secondless. 

“ Satyam Jnanam, Anantam Brahma, 

Ananda Rupam, Amritam Yad Vibhuti, 

Santam Sivam Advaitam." — (Tait Up.) 

“Sivam, Santam, Advaitam 

Chaturtham, manyante,” — ( Ramatapini ). > 

“ Dhyayeteesanaru, pradhyayedavyam, 

Sarvamidam, Brahma Vishnu Rudrendrasthe, 

Sarve Samprasuyante, Sarvanichendryanicha ; 

Sahabhutaih Nakaranam Karanam Dhata Dhyata 
Karanantu Dhyeyah Sarvaiswarya Sampannah 
Sarveswsrah Sambhurakasa Madhye. 

Siva eko Dhyayet: Sivankara, Sarvam 
Anyat Parityaja. — (Atharva Sikha). 

“ Adore the most adorable Isana. Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, 
Indra and others have an origin. All the senses originate 
with the elements-.! The first cause and cause.of causes has no 
origin. The Bestower of all prosperity, the Lord of all, 
Sambhu, He should be contemplated in the middle of the 



134 


THE SVETASVATARA UPANISHAT. 


Akasa Siva, the one alone, should be contemplated; the 

Doer of Good ; All else should be given up.” (Atharva Sikha) 
“ The mystical and immutable one, which being composed of 
three letters A., U., M., signify successively, the three Vedas, 
the three states of life (Jagra, Svapna and Sushupti), the three 
worlds (heaven, hell and earth) three gods (Brahlna, Vishnu 
and Rudra) and by its nasal sound (Ardhamatra) is indicative 
of Thy fourth office as the Supreme Lord of all (Paramesvara)* 
ever expresses and sets forth thy collective forms.” (Mahimna 
Stotra). And the same mistake is committed by outsiders in 
supposing that the God of the Saivas is only one of the trinity. 
Any book in Tamil and Sanskrit taken at random will at once 
disillusion him, and he will find that the only God held up for the 
highest worship is the highest Nirguna Parama Siva, and not one 
of the trinity. Great confusion is caused in the use of the words 
Nirgutjaf and Saguna, by translating them into impersonal and 
personal respectively. And Europea ns themselves are not agreed 
as to the use of these words. According to Webster, the word 
‘personal’ implies limitation, but other eminent persons like 
Emerson, Lotze, See., say there is no such implication. Till 
the acceptation of these words are therefore settled, we should 
not make confusion worse confounded, by rendering Nirguna 
and Saguna, as Impersonal and Personal. 

So far, there can be no doubt on the nature of the God-head 
described in our Upanishat. 

“ When there was no darkness, nor day nor night, nor Sat, 
nor Asat, then Siva alone existed (Siva eva Kevalah). That is 
the absolute, that the adorable (condition) of the Lord. From 
that too had come forth the wisdom of old — (jnanasakti). (iv, 18). 

* A Christian missionary writing to the Christian College Magazine 
wonders how Vanana, the famous Telugu poet, could speak of Siva as 
other than the Hindu triad, Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra. C/., Bartrihari's 
Satakas for the popular conception of Siva. 

fBy Nirguna, we mean ‘without Prakritic qualities ’ and by Saguna 
clothed in Prakritic qualities And God could therefore be both Nirguna 
and Personal in Emerson’s sense. 



THE SVETASVATARA UPANISHAT. 


135 


“ He is the eternal and infinite, Unborn Being, partless, 
action-less, tranquil, without taint, without fault, the Highest 
Bridge to Immortality (vi. 19). He is the causeless first cause, 
the all-knower, the all-pervader, the creator, sustainer and 
liberator of the world, the end and aim of all Religion and of all 
philosophy,' He is the ISvara of Isvaras, Mahesvara, the God 
supreme of Gods, the King of kings, the Supreme of the 
supreme, the Isa of the Universe” (vi. 7.) 

There is one other matter to be considered in the nature of 
the Divine Personality. God is spoken of both in masculine 
and in neuter, and that in the same verse, a peculiarity which 
is noticeable in modern Saivaism. And God is addressed in 
all forms as ‘He’ ‘She’ and ‘It.’ Sivah, Siva and Sivam.* 
And the reason is not as stated by Prof. Max Muller, in his 
note under Ver. 16, Chapter iii, that the gender changes 
frequently, according as the anther thinks either of the 
Brahman ,or its impersonation as “Isa, Lord.” To the Indian 
whether he addresses his God as Siva or Sivam, he is 
addressing the same Supreme Personality who is neither male 
nor female nor neuter, and there is no jar to him in the sense, as 
there will be to the Christian, w r ho could only think of and 
address God in the masculine gender. 

The Upanishat does not recognize any difference between 
the use of ' It ’ and .‘ He,’ and it does not contemplate that by 
using ‘ It ’ instead of ‘ He,’ a Higher Being is reached. 

Coming now to the nature of the soul, as set forth in this 
Upanishat, the first thing to be noticed is that the Jlva is very 
often spoken of as Atmd simply and distinguished from God. 
The other appellation it receives are Purusha, Anisa, Ajha, the 
Hamsa, Yidya, and these are to distinguish it from the other, 
the Paramatma, the Parama Purusha, Isa and Jha. 

This soul is bound, because he is not God (i. 8) because he 
is ignorant of himself, and of the self within him, (the 

♦Sivam in Sanskrit, they say, is not the neuter of Siva. But 
somewhow this neuter form is quite prevalent in Tamil. 



136 


THE SVETASVATARA UPANISHAT. 


Antaratma). This soul is not selfdependent (i. 2). This soul 
is confined in the Pitra (city-body) of nine gates, i. e., is limited 
and ‘flutters about is changeable, and he enjoys the fruits, 
pleasures and pains (even pains are a pleasure to him, the 
ignorant soul) and fondly clings to the body, and performs 
karma (iii, iS. iv. 5 and 6.) « 

“ But he who is endowed with qualities, and performs 
Karma that are to bear fruit and enjoys the reward of what- 
ever he has done, migrates through his own works, the lord of 
life, assuming all forms, led by the three gunas and the three 
paths ” (vi. 7). 

And yet this soul is of the image of God, is infinite and 
brilliant like the Sun, endowed with Ichcha and Jnana, and is 
sinless. 

The Supreme One who witnesses all his doings, dwelling 
within him, without Himself being tainted by the contact, helps 
to secure the ripening of his mala, and waits till the soul 
attains to that condition of perfect balancing in good and evil, 
(v. 5) by the performance of Chari ya, Krija and Yoga (good 
works, Penance and meditation) with love and knowledge and 
the syllable Prana va, he is blessed by the Lord (i. 6,) and God’s 
grace descends on him (vi. 2 1 and iii, 20) and he knows and 
sees, with Manas (the supreme grace of God — the spiritual eye) 
(v. 14) ‘The Purusham Mahantam Aditya Varnam, tamasalj 
parastat,’ and his fetters (Pasa) fall of, and sufferings cease and 
he enters the Bliss of the Supreme Brahman, and Eternal Peace, 

That Is vara Prasadam (iii. 20) or Anugraham or grace 
is necessary is a common belief of the people, and this doctrine 
is not peculiar to this Upanishat alone. The Katlia Upanishat 
puts the same doctrine in much stronger language, “That 
AtmS. (God) cannot be gained by the Veda, nor by under- 
standing, nor by much learning. He whom Atma(God) chooses, 
by him the Atma (God) can be gained.” (1. 2.123) i but even the 
supreme Almighty (God) cannot help him, if he had not turned 
away from wickedness, and is not tranquil, -subdued and at 



THE 5 V E T A 3 V A T A liA UPANISHAT. 


*37 


rest, dedicating ( Arpanam ), all his words, deeds and thoughts 
to God,.(i. 24). 

That the doctrine of Bhakti is found well set forth in the 
oldest Upanishats and the Vedas will be apparent by reading 
the texts collated by Dr. Muir in his learned “ Metrical 

I v 

translations from Sanskrit” under the heading of ‘ Sraddha 
and Bhakti . ’ By the way, this Sraddha and Bhakti is not 
to be understood as a manifestation of feeling only, at one stage 
of man’s spiritual evolution and unnecessary at another stage, 
but this love is essential to the aspirant whether he is a 
Dasamargi, Satputramargi, Yogamargi or Jnanamargi. That 
these four paths grow one, out of the other, and are not 
independent, and each one of these is hardly possible to reach 
without going through the lower rungs of the ladder, we have 
already pointed out above. 

The Upanishats, all of them, discuss the particular Upasana 
or Upasanas which are required for the salvation of the bound 
soul, and these Upasanas are called also Vidyas. 

Of these various Vidyas, what is called the Dahara 
Upasana or Vidya is the most favoured of all the Upasanas in 
the Svetasvatara and Chandogya, Brihadaranyaka, Katha, 
Mundaka and Kaivalya, Atharva Sikha and in the Bhagavad 
Gita. 

The references to this Highest Yoga practice are most 
numerous in the Upanishats and the sameness of the various 
references form the subject of discussion in the Vedanta 
Sutras (iii. 3. 23.) 

The famous passages are what occur in the Chandogya 
Upanishat, commencing with the sentences “There is the city* 
of Brahman” (viii. 1. 1). “All this is Brahman.” (iii. 14. 1 to 4). 
This worship or Yoga, consists in t he aspirant contemplating 
in his heart, the, Supreme one, as the Person of Light and 

* This City is exactly reproduced in modern symbolism in the 
Great Temple of Chidambaram. 

18 



133 


THE S VET AbV AT A R A UPANISIIAT. 


as AkaSt, as Satchidananda Paramcsvara, with the particular 
formula that “God is in all beings and all beings are in God.” 
And various synonyms are used to denote this heart of man, 
suck as Dahara (subtle) Guh.a (cave), Pundarika (lotus), 
Brahmapura (city), Hridaya (heart). 

_ • 

And the meaning of the words Akasa, and Vyoma has also 
to be carefully noted. They are synonymous and do not mean 
the Bhuta Akasa, nor the Mayasakti or Avidya, but as inter- 
preted by the Puranas themselves, they mean Chit or Jnana, 
or, Light or Grace, which is the Parasakti of the Supreme 
Isvara. That this Akasa is Chit and not Achit, is further 
proved by the phrases, Chitakasa and Chidambara, and this 
Chit Sakti is the Devatma-Sakti of our Upanishat, which is 
inherent and concealed in him, (i. 3.) and the supreme Sakti, 
which is revealed as manifold, inherent (Siva) and manifesting 
as Kriya and Jnana (vi. 8). It is this which is called Untd and 
Light and Bhargas t and Savitrl and Gayatri. And when we 
understand therefore, this .Akasa, as light and knowledge, the 
Supreme Sakti of God, its description as the highest light, the 
revealer of all forms, the Highest object of adoration, is clear. 
The description of God also as Akasa (Sakti) and as dwelling 
in AkijSa (Sakti) will not be conflicting, as no distinction is 
made between Sun and his light, much less between God and 
his Power. $ 

It is this Jnana Sakti who gives to the Chetana and 
Achetana Prapancha its form and shape and life and love and 
light; but the substance or Upadanaf out of which this 

f Cf. Mait. Up. vi. 7, “ Rudra is called Bhargas, thus say the Brah- 
man teachers,” cf. also vi. 28 last para. “The Shrine (Paramalaya) which 
consists of the Akas in the heart, the blissful, the highest retreat, that is 
our own, that is our Goal, and that is the heat and brightness of the Fire 
and Sun.” 

+ In the Yajur Veda, this God and Ambika are called Saha, which 
may mean equal or brother and sister. ■*' 

«i It is Badarayana’s view that there is no other Upadana except God 
and these worlds arise out of God Himself. When a tree springs out of 



THE SVETA§ VATARA UPANISHAT. 


139 


Prapancha is evolved is the Maya or Pradhana, which also 
dwelling in Him is drawn out and drawn in by the Supreme 
Power (Sakti) with just the ease and dexterity of a spider 
which spins out or in ; or of the magician who draws forth, out 
of an empty basket, fruits and flowers and sweets. The Maya 
(meaning ’also power) is also a Sakti of His, (Mayasakti), but 
differing from the other Sakti, Ichcha Jnana and Kriya, just as 
darkness differs from light. As darkness is necessary for rest 
and recuperation, so this power of God also works for our rest 
and recuperation and salvation. And God is called the Lord 
of Maya (Mayin) and “beyond” all forms of the tree, as 
transcending all the “Tattvas, Kala ” See., and as ‘trans- 
cending ‘ Pradhana.’ Why we are required to contemplate 
God as Akasa, Light or Chit is, that by this Light alone we 
can know Him, and as such Light; and it is as Light, Chit 
God is immanent in the world, and omnipresent. And this 
brings out again the reason why this Chit is called Akasa, the 
most subtle and invisible and omnipresent element we have 
in Nature. 

God is present in all nature and pervades it, as oil in seeds, 
butter i n ghee and fire in wood (i 15). And this all pervasive- 
ness is thus explained in a text of the Atharva Siras Upanishat 
— “ Why is it called Sarva Vyapi ? It is so called because like 
ghee diffusing and soaking itself through and through the 
Ruda (Milk or seed), it pervades every created thing through 
and through as warp and woof.” 

And as by reason of this pervasiveness, nothing could be 
imagined as existing out of Him, the whole is called also 
Brahman, the whole, with the parts and limbs and bodies (iv. 10) 
as the Chetana-Achetana Prapancha, has antahkarana as Chit 

the bare ground, we naturally suppose there was some seed imbedded in it 
without our knowledge, though the earth contained it and is essential for 
the support and growth of the plant. This is the Aupanishadic view. 
Badarayana would say that no seed is necessary and the earth alone is 
sufficient. 



140 


the Svetasvatara upamshat. 


Sakti, and Himself the Soul of this vast whole. And as all of 
us form but parts of him, we are also enjoined to be kind to one 
another, for, whatever we do to each other will be also done to 
His body. We quote the following from Srikantha Siva- 
charya’s commentary in which this point is discussed. 

“ All this is Brahman, as beginning, ending, an'd breathing 
in Him ; and therefore let a man meditate on him.” 

“This passage maybe explained as follows: The origin, 
existence and end of all this depends on Brahman. All this, 
both the sentient and insentient existence, is verily Brahman, 
and therefore let a man meditate on Brahman, tranquil in mind. 
Just as the water-bubbles which have their origin, existence 
and end in the ocean, are found to be only forms of that 
ocean, so too, that which depends for its orign, etc., on 
Brahman associated with Sakti must be made of Brahman and 
nothing else. Nothing distinct from him is ever perceived. 
Accordingly in the Atharva-Siras, it has been declared by 
lsana as follows: — 

“ Alone I was at first, (alone) I am and shall be 
There is none else distinct from Me.” 

And then was declared by him in the words “ I am Brahman, ” 
that the whole universe is his own form. And in the words 
“ He entered the more hidden from (or than) the hidden one ” 
&c., his entering into the universe is given as a reason for the 
whole universe being his own form. Thus this universe 
having no orign, existence or end outside Brahman, is not 
a quite distinct thing from Brahman. Accordingly the 
learned say: — 

“ His Saktis or energies (form) the whole world, and the 
Mahesa or the great lord is the energetic Saktiman. Never 
can energy exist distinct from the energetic. Unity of these 
two is eternal, like that of fire and heat, inasmuch as un- 
separateness always exists between energy and the energe- 
tic. Wherefore supreme energy belongs to the supreme 
Atman, since the two are related to each othef as substance and 



THE SVETASVATARA UPANISHAT. 


141 

attribute. The energy of heat is not conceived to be distinct 
from fire” and so on. 

Vayu-Samhita too says: (Parva, 25, ch. 18 and 19). 

« From Sakti up to earth, (the whole world) is born of the 
principle §iva. By him alone, it is pervaded, as the jar &c., by 
clay. His variegated Supreme Sakti, whose form is know- 
ledge and bliss, appears as one and many, like the light of the 
sun. ” 

The following passage of the Sruti speak of Para-Brahman 
as possessed of infinite powers of creating, ruling and maintain- 
ing the world, all inherent in him. 

“ His Supreme Sakti is spoken of as manifold, inherent, 
endued with the activity of knowledge and life.” (Svetas. 6-8). 

“ One verily is Rudra, — they were not for a second — who 
rules these worlds with the powers of the ruling.” (3-2). 

“ In short, on the authority of the Sruti, Smriti, Itihasa, 
Purana, and the saying of the learned, the Supreme Sakti 
whose manifold manifestation, this whole universe of Chit and 
Achit is, whose being is composed of Supreme Existence, Intelli- 
gence and unlimited by space and time — is inherent in the 
nature of Siva, the Supreme Brahman, and constitutes His own 
essential form and quality. Apart from Sakti, He cannot be the 
Omniscient, the Omnipotent, the cause of all, the all controlling, 
the all adorable, the all-gracious, the means of attaining all 
aspirations, and the omnipresent ; and, moreover, such grand 
designations as “ Mahesvara”, the Supreme Lord, “Mahadeva,” 
the Supreme Deity, and Rudra, the expeller of pain, cannot 
apply to him. Thus, it is Brahman whose body is the whole 
sentient and insentient universe, and who is denoted by 
all words. Just as the word ‘blue’ denotes not the blue 
colour only, but also the lotus which is of a blue colour, 
so does the word ‘universe’ also denotes Brahman. There- 
fore such passages as “All is Rudra verily” teach that 
Brahman is denoted by all words. Accordingly the passage 



142 


the SvetaSvatara UPANISHAT. 

“ All this, verily, is Brahman ” refers to Brahman whose body, 
the whole of the sentient and unsentient universe is. The uni- 
verse being thus a form of Brahman and being therefore not an 
object of hatred &c., let every one be peaceful at heart and wor- 
ship Brahman. This doctrine is clearly expounded even in the 
puraqic texts such as the following: — “The body of'the God of 
Gods is this universe, moving and unmoving. This, the Jivas 
(Pasus) do not know, owing to the mighty bondage. They say 
sentiency is Vidya, and insentiency Avidya. The whole uni- 
verse of Vidya and Avidya form no doubt the body of the 
Lord, the first cause of all ; for the whole universe is subject 
to Him.” 

“The word “ sat ” is used by the wise to denote the real 
and the good, ‘asat’ is used by Vedic teachers to denote the 
contrary. The whole universe of the sat and the asat is the 
body of Him who is on high. Just as, by the watering of the 
roots of a tree, its branches are nourished, so by the worship of 
Siva, the universe which is His body, is nourished. Atman 
is the eighth body, of Siva the Paramesvara, pervading all 
other bodies. 

“ Wherefore the whole universe is ensouled by Siva. If 
any embodied being whatsoever be subjected to constraint, it 
will be quite repugnant to the eight-bodied lord ; as to this 
there is no doubt. Doing good to all, kindness to all, afford- 
ing shelter to all, this they hold, is the worshipping of Siva,” 
and so on. 

“Brahman being all-Formed, it is but right to say “all is 
Brahman” and every one be peaceful and worship “ Brahman.” 
Wherefore it is Brahman who in the opening passage is stated 
to be the object of worship, that is also spoken of as manomtiya, 
as partaking of the nature of manas, and so on. Neither 
should it be supposed that the partaking of the nature of 
manas is a characteristic mark of a samsarin ;.for Brahman may 
limit Himself by assuming a shape which can form an object of 
worship. ” 



the svetasvatara upaxishat. 


*43 


“That which,” therefore, “eternally rests within the 
Atma,” (1 12), “dwells in the cave (of the heart) of all beings,” 
(iii n), “is the greater than the great, smaller than the small, 
hidden in the heart of the creature” (iii 20), “hidden in all 
beings; like the subtle film,” (iv 16), “and subtler than 
subtle ” (iv* 14), the wise should seize in the bod}- (heart) by 
means of the pranava, within himself, and by the drill of 
meditation and penance, (1-14), they should, ‘with the mind 
towards the heart,' ‘ love the old Brahman, by the grace of 
Savitri ’ (Light or Chit-Sakti) (1 1-7 and 8), ‘grasping by the 
Manas ’ (Sakti), (v 14), and perceive ‘by the heart, by the soul, 
by the mind,’ (iv 17), in the Highest Turiyatita plane, where 
Siva Dwells alone, the Eternal and the Adorable Light, this 
most Ancient of Days, Siva the Blissful and Benign Being, 
the great Purusha of sunlike brilliancy, dwelling in the Highest 
Vyoma, then their fetters (pasaj fall off, they will cross over to 
the other shore, after passing through the torrents that cause 
fear, (ii 8.) their darkness (Ahankara, Anaya) will vanish, and all 
material bodies (Ma}'a) will fall off, and they will enter into 
the supreme Bliss and Peace. 

The various steps, psychological and spiritual, by which 
the sanctification of the Soul is accomplished is stated beauti- 
fully in i. 10, “From meditating on Him, from joining Him, 
from becoming one with him, there is further cessation of all 
Maya (bodies-births) in the end.” In a most beautiful address 
on the famous text of St. Paul which runs, 

“ We, all, with unveiled face, reflecting as a mirror, the 
Glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image, from 
Glory to Glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit ”, 

Professor Henry Drummond, who is said to have revolu- 
tionized Christian thought in the last few decades, calls these 
the laws of reflection and of assimilation. He instances the iron 
which gets magnetized and becomes a magnet, and a mirror, 
getting rid of its dust, reflects the glorious light and becomes 
merged with it and lost. And lie remarks "All men are 



144 


THE SVETAS V AT AR A UPANTSHAT. 


mirrors — that is, the first law on which this formula is based. 
One of the aptest descriptions of a human being is that he is a 
mirror.” And our Upanishat contains fortunately the self- 
same description and illustration. 

“ As a metal disk (mirror), tarnished by dust, shines bright 
again after it has been cleaned, so is the one incarnate person 
satisfied and freed from grief, after he has seen the real (pure) 
Nature of himself.” “And when by the real nature of his self, 
he sees as by a lamp, the real nature of the Brahman, then 
having known the unborn eternal God, who transcends all the 
tattvas, he is freed from all fetters (pasa), (ii. 14 & 15). The 
first text would simply read, in Drummond’s language, “see, 
reflect and become God.” 

It only remains for us now to point out that the second 
verse of the first adhyaya is mistranslated by Roer, Max 
Mailer, Mead and others. They contain terms which are not 
known to the systems they are familiar with, and they are alone 
preserved in the Siddhanta system. The terms are 'Kala,' 

* Svabho,' ' Niyati,' 'Ichcha,' ' JJhula,’ l Yoni,’ ‘ Pttrusha,’ and 
they are also referred to as ‘ Yonisvabho ’ &c., in v. 4. and in 
vi. 1 '■Svabho' and 'Kald.' 

We stated that the different schools differed in the 
enumeration of the tattvas or categories but most of them 
stopped with Prakriti or Pradhana and Purusha, the highest 
in their list, the 24th and 25th principle (Vide, Sentinathaiyar’s 
Table of Tattvas, published in Madras 1899), but the Siddhanta 
school postulated above this, other tattvas or principles, making 
up the whole number into 36. These higher tattvas were, 
Ragam (Ichcha) Vidya, Niyati, Kdla , Kala, (constituting what 
is called the soul’s, the purusha’s Pancha Kanchukam), Maya, 
Suddha Vidya, Mahesvara, Sadasiva, Bindhu (or Sakti) and 
Nadam (Siva). And the terms used in our text is Kala, 
Svabho or Kala, Niyati, Ichcha, or Ragam, Bhuta or Vidya and 
Yoni or Suddha Maya, and Purusha or soul. That our 
interpretation is genuine we could show by quoting the 



the svetasvatara upanishat. 145 

authority of the author of a Purana, who at any rate is anterior 
to all the commentators whose explanations we now possess. 
The following occurs in Kailasa Samhita of Vayu Purana and 
it refers to the Svetasvatara text, 

“ Purushasyatu, Bhoktpltvam. Pratipamasya, Bhojariecha 
Prayatnatah. Antarahgatayatatva panchakam Prakirtitam. 
Nirgateh kala, ragascha Viciyacha Tadanantaram kala Chupan- 
chakamidam Mayotpannam Munisvara, Mayantu Prakritim 
Vidyan Maya Sruti etrita. Tajjanegetani Tattvani Struti 
Yuktani nasamsayah, Katasva bhavoni yatriti Cha Srutira- 
bravit etat panchakam evasya panchakanehuka Mudhyate. 
Ajanan pancha tatvani vidvanapi Vimudhadhih. Niyatyad- 
hastat prabrute ruparishthalj pumana3 f am Vidyatatvamidam 
proktam. 

The following verse occurs in the Brahmanda Purana : — 

“ Purushau Ni^-ati kalaragagcha kala Vid3. T echa mayaya” 

And this is from Vayu Samhita: “Maya Kalamavasrujat 
Niyatincha Kalam Vidyam Kalato Ragapurushau.” 


19 



A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 


Nobody who has the least insight into the pages of the 
sacred KuraJ will fail to endorse the remark of the veteran Tamil 
scholar, Rev. Dr. G. U. Pope, that this is a work unparalleled 
in any language. The merits of the work are so apparent that 
even at its very birth, it received the highest encomiums of the 
proudest scholars of the day, the Pandits of the far-famed 
Madura College or Sangam. The tradition that the author 
Was of low birth only heightens the value of the appreciations 
thus showered on him. One of the Collegians compares it to 
the Veda, and another says, unlike the Veda, Tiruvalluvar’s 
words do not lose their merit by anybody repeating them. One 
speaks of it as containing everything worth knowing, and 
another that there is nothing which is not contained in 
this work. One says that the words are sweeter than the 
Heavenly Ambrosia, and unlike the latter, can be partaken of 
by everybody. And as the poet utters these words even our 
own mouth begins to wat&r. Another says they are sweet food 
to the mind, sweet to the ear and sweet to the tongue, and the 
great panacea for the ills of Karma. One compares it to the sun 
which dispelling the deep darkness of ignorance, makes the 
lotus of the heart bloom forth. Another compares it to the 
lamp dispelling our mental darkness, with the oil-can of 
Dharma , and wick of Artha, and ghee of Kama, words of 
lection — the flame, and the short metres— the lamp-stand. Its 
brevity, not bordering on unintelligibility or ambiguity as do 
most of the sutras in Sanskrit, its perfection of expression and 
style, its deepness are all matters taken up for praise by these 
learned Collegians. And what is more, the poet Kalladar 
brings out in his verse its most prominent ‘character, its uni- 
versality. People wrangle about this or that being the truth, 
and they range themselves into various schools, but all are 



A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 


H7 


agreed about the truth of the words uttered by Tiruvajjuvar. 
And since his time, all religionists, Buddhists and Jains, Ipaivas 
and Vaishijavas have all claimed him as their own. And we 
need not enquire wherefrom he derived his truths. It is enough 
to acknowledge that it is perfection of Truth, if one can say so, 
a Perfect Ethical and Religious Code, a perfection of art and 
thought. Indeed, a close study of the work will bring out its 
perfect scientific basis and each part, and each chapter, and 
each verse is placed one after the other in a perfect chain of 
logical arrangement and argument. And may we hope that 
some ardent student of the Kural will work out from it a 
perfect theory of ethics, both private and international. 

One more remark, and this will introduce us to the chapter 
of the book we have taken up for translation and elucidation. 
It is usually remarked, following the main divisions of the book 
into Dharma, Artha and Kama sj/oh, Q„',T0c-rf, (gdruih, that the 
author has left out the discussion of the last Purushartha or 
Moksha, on the ground that religion is a matter which will 
give room for difference and dispute. But is it true that there 
are no universal truths of religion and did our author leave 
them unsaid ? His own contemporaries did not understand him 
as doing so, but have stated in their encomiums that he has 
explained all the four Purushartums and that he has shown the 
path to Moksha. And the Rev. Dr. Pope in his short paper on 
the Ethics of Kural holds that Tiruvahuvar bases his ethics on 
the grand truths of Tripadartha, Pathi, Pasu and Pasa. In 
fact, his creed is not a godless creed like that of the Jains or 
Buddhists. In this respect, there is disparity between the 
Naladi and this work. Our author’s God is the ‘ first Cause and 
Lord’ ‘ ^Silussuebr,’ He is ‘Intelligent,’ 'ara^aiir' ; He ‘resides in 
the heart of his creatures' ‘wsviraSia^QiuQ^eir,’ He is ‘Immaculate, 
untainted by likes and dislikes’, 'Q&ssaQ&sv QsuessrL^iT^swaSscir&sr,' 
He is the ‘ Lord pf Lords ’ and ‘king of kings ’ 1 ^aa^suasr,’ He 
is ‘incomparable’, ‘ ■j^aj^iDuSIffosvirfsindr,’ He is the ‘source of 
all Dharma and Beneficent', ‘ «#,ca7u$ rm.’ He ‘has eight 



148 


A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 


attributes’, 'srak^eempgirem’ (i.e. self-dependent or self-possesed, 
the Pure, Self-Luminous, the All Knowing, the Ever-Free, the 
Beneficent, the Infinitely Powerful, and Infinitely Blissful. 
Parimelalagar rejects all other interpretations of «6OT0 «otlo) and 
the Eternal Truth QiL'uuQun^isr and the Perfect and Good Being 
* QfiiQuir^ar.’* No amount of learning is of any good unless a 
man believes in the existence of God and worships His feet in 
all love and truth. And without such knowledge and such 
conduct, the mere attaining of ethical perfection is of no use 
(“ ” &c.) The true way to get rid of our bonds is 

to reach the feet of the Ever-Free. And these bonds are not 
mere myths but they are caused by our own ignorance, 
Avidya, Aharikara or Anava which is eternal, Anadi. And 
then, the chain of causation following karma into endless births 
and suffering is worked out, and the means or Sadana required 
to get freed from these bonds are fully shown, and of all the 
means, the greatest Sadana is to reach Him who is past all 
thought and speech ; and unless this is done, it is useless to 
hope to get our cares destro}md. And as all these principles 
are fully explained in chapter 36 on ‘ Q^uiL/exsrfr^eo ’ ‘How to 
perceive truth,’ we have translated the same below, adopting 
almost the language of Dr. G. U. Pope, together with the 
famous commentary of Parimelalagar, with some running 
notes, to show how far this is embodied in the Advaita- 
Siddhanta. Of course the language of the Kural is the 
language of the Saivite writers of the past 2000 years; and no 
wonder, the truths expounded by all of them should be 
the same. 

How to Perceive Truth? 

That is, we know the truth when we know the nature of 
Birth and Freedom (Moksha) and the causes thereof, free from 
error and doubt. This the Sanskritists call Tatvajnana. As 
this knowledge arises after desiring the desire of Him who has 

* Pandit Savariroyan derives ‘ Sivam ’ from ‘Qj‘l ’ and our Saint 
uses QfLLiQuiTQ^ar very frequently. 



A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 


149 


no desire, this chapter is placed in consequence after the 
chapter on 1 ‘Sanyasa.’ 

I. sosupstspu GulTf^QeireBT *1 asm 

LD(TTeiriTtSff) LOO (SKS)LJ S'fDULj. 

The delusion whereby men deem that the truth which is not, 

That is the cause of hapless birth. 

Parimelalagar’s Commentary. 

This delusion consists in believing such books and doctrines 
which hold that there is no rebirth, no fruits of both kinds of 
Karma, and that there is no God and suchlike, to be the true 
books and doctrines. This delusive belief is same as when one 
mistakes one thing for another, a block for a man, shell for 
silver, ld^At, delusion, wuuisi, SLewr/ha/, error, 

Avidya or ignorance are all synonymous words. As it is only 
sorrow that is reaped in all the four kinds of birth as Devas, 
men, animal and astrals, this couplet explains that birth is 
sorrowful and Avidya or error is its cause. 

Note. 

By altering only a single letter in the first line an ‘ *sy,’ ‘a ’ into 

1 e,’ (QurrfVjsireun) into Gt-zr^eiflov^vi) the meaning of the whole 
passage will be altered, and we will have a new system of philosophy 
directly opposed to our author’s. Instead of it being then the truth, it will 
become the opposite of it. This is the same question which has arisen in 
interpreting the negative prefix in the word ‘Advaita.’ This ‘a’ or ‘na’ is 
interpreted in two ways either as meaning ‘ g/dosu ’ ‘not’ or ‘ ffeuaj ’ 
‘no,’ though the distinction in the English equivalents will not be very 
apparent. This is its ‘ ^/sksa'-DuQurr^&r ’ or 1 Quir^Ar. ’ 

Siddhantins, of course, accept the former interpretation, and most 
followers of Sankara prefer the latter one. This latter view involves the 
negation of one of the two or may be both of the postulates in ‘ Advaita.’ 
Over this question, a huge war has raged and volumes have been written 
by the late Sri-la-Sri Somasundara Niyagar and his followers on 
one side, and the late Ratna Chettiyar and of his ilk on the other side. 
Anyhow, Saint TiruvaHuvar’s meaning is clear. He does not mean to 
repudiate anything as unreal or non-existent. To him, delusion or error 



ISO 


A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 


consists in mistaking one existent thing as the shell, for another existent 
thing as silver. To him, to know the truth, is to understand the true 
nature of each one thing. The question of reality or unreality does not 
come in. Only one must not mistake one thing for the other or doubt its 
nature. It will be sufficient requirement of the definition, if one under- 
stands the true nature of 'God and man and the world, and qpe need not 
beleive any of these to be unreal. One of such truths is that birth is 
sorrowful. This can be proved to be true. But one’s ignorance or 
delusion comes when one takes this actual sorrow as happiness. You think 
that with this body, there is an end altogether when in fact there are 
future births. Believing that there is no future life and future birth, one 
does not believe that there can be a soul; and if there is one, one thinks the 
body itself is the soul and believing so, all one’s energies in this world are 
directed solely towards what would procure the greatest pleasure and 
gratification of one’s senses, and one does not care what means one adopts 
provided one's passions are gratified. As it is, the whole foundation of 
morality will be undermined and one need have neither fear of men nor of 
God. All this is the result of want of knowledge of the true nature of his 
body and himself, and this ignorance is the cause of his birth. This 
ignorance is a fact, and to believe that this ignorance is itself unreal will 
be error or false knowledge. It is only when a man knows that he is 
ignorant, that he will learn and try to remove his ignorance. But can this 
ignorance be removed ? Yes. If so, how ? This question is answered 
in the next couplet. 

2. IlSsirULh LCQTjezr IE.SI 

u:irs-(Wj smL& iuajird(&j. 

Darkness departs and rapture springs to men who see 
The mystic vision pure from all delusion free. 

Parimelalagar’s Commentary. 

darkness is hell. ‘The mystic vision pure’ is the 
supreme object of knowledge. By this couplet is explained that 
by freedom is meant Niratisay&nanda and the Nimitta Kdrana, 
for this, the Supreme Being. 

Note. 

Darkness and ignorance, Light and knowledge have at all times and in 
all climes been used synonymously and no two things are so analogous in 



A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 1 5 1 

nature as these two pairs of words. When will darkness vanish ? When 
the sun rises. When will the sun rise ? After the night is past. When 
will ignorance cease ? When the source of all lights arises in his heart ? 
When will this be ? When he has attained to a well balanced mind 
(@C 5 a SSavQiu/ruLf). The Pasatchayam and Pathijnanam are distinct 
facts, though the first is not possible without the second. This couplet 
answers all those who say if the ignorance was eternally attachd to the 
soul, it cannot be removed, and even if it be removed what follows is 
only a blank and that no Divine Power is required to give one freedom. 
This couplet and verse 4 below w'hich gives a most distinct reply to the. 
Buddhist view will remove all doubts as to whether he is a Siddhanti or a 1 
Buddhist or a Jain. But some of these truths even when known to a 
man, doubt often oppresses him, environed by a host of dogmatists who 
each asserts his own dogma is the only truth. In the next couplet, it is 
stated that even this doubt is the cause of birth, and the means of getting 
rid of this doubt is also stated. 

3. ggi up>$sle$h S^Q-ssetfl.i 

eurtssr iseasBuj gisr.i—s gp . 

When doubts disperse and clearness is gained. 

Nearer is heaven than earth to sage’s soul. 

Parimelalagar’s Commentary. 

Doubt (sguj-o) is knowing a thing variously. That is 

doubting if there is or is not God and Karma and Rebirth 

and without definite belief in anything. This is the same 
as doubting a thing as water or a mirage, rope or a snake. 
As it is natural to every system to refute other doctrines 
and establish its own, the doubts arising from such a 
multitude of doctrines, those sages well practised in Yoga 
will remove, by their Svanubhuti or experience, and attain 
to real knowledge ; and hence they are called giux^leir 

£,si@pQ;gesfliipMT. As they reach higher and higher Yogic 

experience, their attachment to the world grows less and less ; 
hence, the author's statement that “heaven is nearer” etc. 
By this couplet is explained that doubtful knowledge is a 
cause of birth. 



I 5 2 


A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 


Note. 

Yoga is a means and not an end. Till Yoga merges into knowledge, 
no real knowledge is gained. Even the highest Yoga is no good, unless the 
final goal is reached from whence there is no return. The attainment of 
Yoga is really difficult, but this is not all. One can subdue his passions and 
desires, and control his senses, but unless he has the “ Vision pure,” ‘The 
only Truth,’ then this attainment will be only for a time, and the man 
will again be a prey to his senses. To meet this special Buddhist view 
that the attainment of mere extinction of all desires is Nirvana, and that 
there is no such thing as Brahma-Nirvana, is the special object of the 
next couplet. 

4. g) ay saw /r aedbrjgi'ii uuj'SsstQ jt 

Qtah^-jessrir eSsowu 

Five-fold perception gained, what benefits accrue 
To them whose spirit lacks perception of the True. 

Parimelalagar’s Commentary. 

Five-fold perception is the Manas. By ‘gained’ is meant, 
the controlling of the manes and concentrating of it in D&rana. 
As training of this alone is not sufficient, the author says there 
is no benefit, and he brings out by the ‘a-d,’ how difficult a feat 
even this attainment of Darana is. By these two couplets, the 
greatness of Pathijnana is explained by pointing out that with- 
out this attainment, no Moksha is possible. (And the nature of 
this Pathijnana is the subject of the next couplet). 

5. eiuQun^sir si g geisrstOiBfs giuSst y lluQup 0sfr 
QuiiljuQunQ^m saessru 

Whatever thing, of whatsoever kind it be, 

‘Tis wisdom’s part in each the real thing to see. 

Parimelalagar's Commentary. 

That is, one must perceive the truth immanent in every 
thing, after getting rid of our ordinary notions of them. In the 
phrase “ Q «n &Q f sramssr ujn'bsgrtisil. Q.fihu:rr:s^ an/o," 

the words may mean ordinarily the name of lpng Seraman of a 
particular description, but they may mean more particularly 



A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 


153 


the Tattvas from earth to Purusha. When examined and 
rendered into their final causes, what finally remains is none of 
this cause and effect, but the Highest Truth, and His knowledge 
is the true knowledge. By this couplet, is explained the nature 
of this true knowledge. 

Note 

This is one of the most oft-quoted couplets of Kura], and is put to 
more general uses than what is intended here. One has not to go far to 
discover the Supreme Being and know Him. He is in everything ; but 
one must lose light of the apparent to gain the real. God is in the earth 
but the earth is not God ; God is in water but water is not God, and so 
through every Tattva, and lastly, God is in the soul, but the soul is not 
God. When one has so learned to discriminate and distinguish, then only 
will he attain to PatijT.anam. In the next three couplets, the Sadana 
required for attaining this PatijuUiiam is given. And the first requisite 
is hearing or learning. 

6. ajb^em'S QicijuGuiTfV-it seisn—na i s'2svLju®a./i 

Lorbjficsor'i) ■nirsn G,s/S. 

Who learn and here the knowledge of the true obtain, 

Shall find the path that cometh not again. 

Parimelalagar’s Commentary. 

By ‘learn,’ the author means learning from every body and 
at all times. By ‘ here,’ the author brings out the greatness of 
human birth wherefrom alone one can attain Moksha. 

“The path that cometh not again” is the path to Moksha. 
The means or Sadana for knowing The First cause, the cause of 
one’s attaining Moksha are of three kinds: they are Gsefreti, 
Hearing or study, Reflection, urrw%xr, Bavana or Realis- 

v 

ing. (In Sanskrit Sravana , Manana and Nidhidyasana ). This 
couplet explains Sravana. 

Note. 

Though the commentator’s idea of what is to be learnt is very large, 
yet the correction conveyed in the following stanza of Naiad iyar is 
important. 


20 



154 


A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 


seosiS sesisriiS^j <* pusu.T xirJrPsv 

Q103050 iS 2snrs3p lSztsRu^i — Q ZcrztflSiisisr 

^irrd. ji p<sounsi\srju.'dj spuQcu i§QzrryS<jj 

uirgassut QjQjjS'jb Qrctflh&p. 

“ In this matchless verse,” says Dr. Pope, “ not a syllable could be 
spared ; while almost every word is common and easy, yet fs the very 
fittest, and is used in its exact meaning. It is somewhat archaic — has a 
fascinating air of mystery pleasantly exercises and amply rewards the 
students’ ingenuity; — seems dark at first, but once lit up, sparkles for ever. 

“This ssst — shore suggests a metaphor : ‘ learning is a shoreless — 
infinite —ocean.’ 

“ Then comes the simple antithesis, ‘ the learner’s days are few.’ In 
Tamil the use of the same root twice (in sAa3 and sidus.it ) and again in 
the third line (spuQs.) imports an added charm. 

“ Into these perfectly (to Tamil ears) harmonious lines is compressed 
a whole chapter . 

“The subject of study (stueS with a plural verb) is infinitely numer- 
ous ; but the learner’s days are few ; and if it be calmly thought out, men 
are liable to many diseases. [U szsfi, natural infirmities or ‘ bonds’ that 
enfeeble and restrict]. Youthful enthusiasm may lead men to anticipate 
great and varried triumphs ; calm reflection teaches them their natural 
weakness. So, men should learn with discrimination (T examin- 
ing closely things befitting (cgymx, suit, satisfy, gladden them) 

with intelligence, like that of the bird (the semi divine Hamsa, 

that drinks only the milk and leaves the water, when these mingled are 
presented to it ? ” 

7 . s^irggizir etrQpatetr jpeasriP'sbr ^yq^^^jsoiuiru 
Quttp^i .Afcn Q sxgbbt U- ir lS/du i_p 

The mind that knows with certitude what is (First-Cause) and 
ponders well 

Its thoughts on birth again to other life need not to dwell. 
Commentary. 

This explains ‘manana.’ 

8. LSpuQusisrgpi'jj Qu r sss)Lo£iiss SSpuQueisr zg/LD 

QslcQuo 0 sir at remu 

When the folly of desiring birth departs, the soul can view 

The exalted Home of The Good Being, this is wisdom true. 



A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 


155 


Parimelalagar’s Commentary. 

Birth and ignorance, and Exalted Home and Truth are 
really related as effect and cause, they are given inversely in 
this couplet. Of the five faults, as ignorance is the cause of 
even the other faults, the author has stated this as the cause of 
birth. A§ Moksha is higher, than all other things, it is spoken 
of as the ‘exalted.’ The First Cause is spoken of as the ‘Good 
Being,’ inasmuch as He is eternal without birth and death, as 
all other things are too insignificant to taint Him by their 
contacts, and as He remains the same without change or taint 
at all time, though immanent in all things. Hence also, He is 
spoken of above as the ‘True Being’ (Qw>LuQurr@6ir) and the 
Existent (avsrrsH^). The “viewing” is the soul losing its Mala 
by constantly realising or practising, do, Bavana) so 

that it may become one with God This Bavana 

is also called Samadhi or Snkla Dhydna. As it is commonly 
held by all schools of people that the soul when it leaves the 
body becomes that which it fancied at the time 
ujirelfiirGsrjpi t-'iraS ^f.&. 3 utr<u£ G pirsirjpu,irpsoirso ie., 
is born assuming that body to which it ymarned at the time of 
death), and so, too, as it is necessary for people who aspire after 
Moksha to contemplate on the Transcendent Being, so that their 
thoughts on birth may cease, there is no better means 1 than this 
Sadana for practice beforehand always. Thus Bavana. is 
explained in this couplet. 

Note. 

The commentator proves his thesis by taking the common form of 
belief held by all people. Every one believes that the form he sees, the 
object he is after, the idea which possesses him at the moment of one's 
death, will give him a similar form at the future birth, and stories are 
current about a rishi who was fondling a deer being born a deer etc. 
But these do not know on what principle this is based ; and except in the 
Siddhanta works, this principle is nowhere expounded. The principle 
involved regards, the nature of the Soul, which is stated briefly and 
tersely by St. Meykandan as ‘ <^ 57 sjgi ’ ‘ that, that becomes ’ 

as * eiieisiesa ' ‘that becomes that to which it is 


156 


A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 


attached ’ by St. Aru- Nandi, whi h is paraphrased again by St. 
Tayunianavar as 

“ jjitQ prrskpi upp's&r £ .ua.ur, pi 

uipxpi o uefF : s a ftenu 

‘ Like the dirt-removed crystal which becomes of the nature of that 
to which it is attached.’ St. Tiruvaljuvar himself has clearlf expressed 
this principle in the verse ,{ up&fi. Sec of the last chapter, 
and in the second verse of this chapter, and in the next verse 
esmlr.igj Sec ” and verses 4 , 5 , 7 and S of the first chapter, wherein he 
shows that unless the soul leaves its clinging to one, it cannot cling to 
another, from whence b deduced the principle [xps v iQ~rrLs.ksr r S r'acu/racrc) 
that the soul cannot have any independent existence or form unless it is 
clinging to one thing, (the world or body in Bandha) or the other (God in 
Moksha), and while so attached, it identifies itself so thoroughly, that it 
is impossible to discover its separate personality. Hence it was that a 
Tyndal, an Huxley and a Bain with all their minute anatomical, biological 
and psychological analysis were not able to discover a mind in the body 
different from the body, though they could feel that the result was not 
very satisfactory. The express language used by the commentator 
“ u-irklpirsksu utraSdS-su wki—gj *9je-.§i gfep-Esirthp Qfirskgujs” 

“lS puiS pQs gs&rrjj u/radfew Q sQppQuir(^LL'S Q.seucvuQu(rr, < 2eirQ , u uireSlp 
psa Qsuecadi'l” as will appear from the beautiful stanza we quote below 
from St. Arul Nandi, will show to whom he is indebted for the 
explantion.* 

ii 5 £osri rif ezo su uj A Q go <sk 

•£L^1 U 3CLp!5(r&H SvG> ol)dD SVT & is QJj pi £& (5 p 
QpusmLs^.Q^SQpstrpp'BiksrQpeiiffskpiCvuun Qsu 

Q fn&QLoearuusreS i<spQ ptrekjpisijzirG'-zjp'eisr r8 

ti & eoiujUjBV'E]&(o)3frG\)s\'n<£'${7t,i k $ sst p 'pick 

eSl—Wi^)lljLD^lQunS\isSiLe^SS)plijLD<SB)L^IJLjLb 

LJ683T £331 LDS99 p&^f^LDpl !5 fl 52F)(j;60r(ak>37 <oGJ 

l_J [T 3$ 3i irG) <3~ 9 ill) ip! F>! p) : — I U fTSlJp 50 p. /IW 6H0T 

The word u/raiSssr (Bavana) is important. Bavana, Sadana, Dhyana, 
Yoga are all more or less synonymous terms. It means practice by 
symbolic meditation or realization. You fancy fixedly yon are 
one with that and you become that. And this is the principle which 
underlies all the MuhavcJivas' ‘Tattvamasi &c. For f tiller treatment, 



A CHAPTER FROM THE RURAL. 


157 


see SivajTumabodham ; and The Siddhdnta DipikJ, Vol. II, the article ‘ Mind 
and Body.’ 

9 ^adi^essrdisgi s-on ■_/ Qai—QoiiT'^QTsr 
^nh^jnr s?/rr^0 Qirru. 

The true support who knows — rejects support he sought before 

Sorrow tSat clings shall cease and cling to him no more. 

Parimelalagar’s Commentary. 

‘^'Lpdsib’ ‘conduct or practice’ here means practice of Yoga. 
This Yoga is of eight kinds; Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, 
Pratyakara, Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi. Their explana- 
tions are too long to be given here. See them in the books on 
Yoga. ‘ The sorrows that cling to us’ are the fruits of Karma 
which have yet to be experienced, which are the result of 
infinite Karma performed in births dating from eternity, and 
which give rise to fruits already eaten in past births and in the 
present birth. “Shall cease and cling no more,” as they will 
vanish before Yoga and Jfiana like darkness before light. This 
Jains call ‘s-a/fuq.’ As even Good Karma is the seed of birth, 
it is called a ‘ disease.’ The author holds that births will cease 
when the Supreme is perceived by the above-mentioned three 
means. When the births cease, what can all the ills do, as they 
cannot cling to these jnanis well practised in Yoga, and there 
being no support, they will die. This is the purport of the 
stanza. 

Note. 

The word * &ni h-j ’ in the verse and ‘ u/bgn ’ in the previous chapter 
mean a support or hold. The soul has two such supports, one in Bandha 
and one in Moksha and without such supports it cannot stand. This 
may be compared to a piece of iron heid between two magnetic poles, one 
positive, and one negative, or better still to a fruit growing on a tree. 
The fruit is held up by the tree, so long and so long only, as it is raw and 
immature (undeveloped) but so soonias it is ripe, it reaches the ground 
(Force of gravity) ; fruit, as such, must be united to the tree or the ground. 
What happens is, as the fruit grows riper and riper, the sap of the tree 
does not rise up to the twig and the twig dies, and it falls off. So too as 



a Chapter from the rural. 


158 

man rises higher, and his desire of the world decreases, and the bonds are 
sundered, he drops into the Feet of the Lord, ^uir --L l-ld 

ujsS-jjiTiA." The author of explains 1 ^irin-jesurrsif ' 

as Dhyana, and ‘^/rruGf^ ’ as Samadhi, the highest Jnana- 

Yoga practices. In the next verse this Pasatchaya is further explained. 

10 - stride Gajsjaft lo’uss ‘SsnsuQpsir p • 

Cacti — ciQ riiQ CciBlTUJ* 

Parimelalagar’s Commentary. 

The eternal ignorance, avidyti, the consequent ahaukiira, 
the feeling of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ the hankering which desires this or 
that, the eternal desire of this or that object, and dislike or 
hate arising from unsatisfied desire, these five faults are 
enumerated by Sanskritists. The author enumerates only 
three, as ‘ Ahankara ' can be brought under ‘ Avidya ’, and 
‘hankering’ can be comprised under ‘Desire.’ As these faults 
are burnt up before Jnana-Yoga practices, like cotton before a 
wildfire, so the author speaks of the disappearance of the very 
names of these three faults. As those who do not commit these 
faults, will not commit good or bad Karma caused by them, the 
author states accordingly in this verse that they suffer no pain 
therefrom. Asa result of the attainment of True Knowledge, 
the ills of past births and of furture births are destroyed, and 
thus these two verses find a place in these chapter. We learn 
from this also, that what remains to those who have perceived 
the Truth is the present body and ills attaching thereto. 

Note. 

And the next chapter discusses the means of even getting rid of this 
bare bodily infirmity and of guarding against rvhat is called Viisard Mala. 



THE ANALOGIES IN THE GITA. 


Analogy* is very largely used in the elucidation and 
explanation of various principles in Oriental philosophy, and 
with more or less effect. In most cases, they serve a very 
important function, and many truths there are, which by reason 
of their dealing with the ultimate existences can alone be 
demonstrated by such analogies, and not by any other kind of 
proof. In the use of such analogies there are great dangers also, 
and the analogy may look so plausible that one is apt to be 
carried away by it, without noting the inherent flaws in it, and 
which a little closer investigation will clearly bring out. Care 
should, however, be taken to distinguish between analogies 
which are merely similes or metaphors, based on a mere 
semblance, and intended merely to bring home to our minds, the 
subject matter in a more impressive and clearer light, and 
analogies strictly so-called, intended as proof. In the latter case, 
mere semblance alone will not do, and there must be sameness in 
the various parts of the illustration and the thing illustrated. 
Neglect of this rule often leads to great confusion and error in 
thought. If for the particular inference desired, the antecedents 
conform to the antecedents in the analogy, the inference will be 
quite justified, if it conforms to the consequence in the analogy ; 
and it would be simply illogical to strain the illustration to other 
purposes and to extremes. Analogy at best is but an indifferent 
kind of proof, and where we do not take the proper precautions 
in using it, its value in philosophic argument will be almost 
nothing. Another source of error in the use of analogies by 
Indian writers is the brevity of expressions which is characteris- 
tic of such analogies, as we meet them in some of the most 
ancient books. Where the analogy is taken literally, without 
supplying the necessary parts and ellipses, they cannot but 
lead one astray. 



l6o THE ANALOGIES IN TIIE GITA. 

I 

There is one school of philosophers in India, who are 
inordinately fond of these similes and who at almost every step 
seek the aid of a simile to help them out of their position; and 
these similes have now only become too much hackneyed, and 
they pass from mouth to mouth, and even educated persons 
repeat them parrot-like, who would easily find out the fallacy, 
if the matter is only put before them for a moment. We 
expected at least those learned in the lore of the West to 
explain their subject instead of building all their argument on 
the strength of these doubtful similes and in this respect, even 
European scholars are not without reproach. For what shall 
we say of a scholar like Dr. Paul Deussen, if he gives expression 
to the following false analogy? Says he, “And then for him, 
when death comes, no more Samsdra. He enters into Brahman, 
like streams into the ocean : he leaves behind him n'ama and 
riipa, he leaves behind him individuality ; but he does not 
leave behind him his Atman, his Self. It is not the falling of 
the drop into the infinite ocean, it is the whole ocean, becoming 
free from the fetters of ice, returning from its frozen state to 
that what it is really and has never ceased to be, to its own all 
pervading, eternal, almighty nature.” In these few lines, he 
crowds together as may fallacies as there are words in it, and 
we have neither the time nor patience to indicate all of them. 
We will however point out the most glaring of them. The 
soul returning from its migrations to its resting place, its final 
goal was the stream returning to the bosom of the mighty 
ocean. When the stream joins the ocean, it loses its name and 
form ? Does it really do so, and if it did what of that, how is it 
in any way changed ? What we generally call a stream is a 
small body of water flowing between two banks. The water 
by itself without its local connection cannot be called the 
stream. The moment the water leaves its local connection, it 
ceases to be called stream. So it is not really the stream that 
flows into the ocean but that the water of the stream flowed 
into and mixed with the water of the ocean. What makes 
really the difference between the ocean and the stream is the 



THE ANALOGIES IN THE GITA. l 6 l 

difference in the largeness and smallness of the respective 
bodies, and the largeness and smallness of the receptacle. The 
water, in either receptacle, is acted on by the sun and wind, is 
tempest-tossed and discoloured and made muddy. The juggle 
by which the learned Doctor converts the stream water, nay a 
drop, into a mighty ocean is not manifest in the illustration. 
The drop or the stream water is the drop or the stream water 
in the bosom of the ocean though, for the time being, we are 
unable to distinguish its identity. When the identity is lost, its 
individuality is not seen, is lost in a sense also. The water 
remains as water and has not lost its ndma and rtipa, though 
this water gets other names by other accidents. It is the 
accident that determines the more specific name, and we will 
have to enquire how the thing acquired this accident or became 
parted from it. Then we come to the figure of the frozen ocean 
and the free ocean. Here is a jump from one figure to another. 
The bound soul was formerly the stream, and the freed soul the 
ocean. In either case, we observed above, the two bodies of 
water were subject to the same changeability and disabilities 
except that one was larger than the other. Now, the bound 
soul is the frozen ocean and the freed soul is the ocean after it 
had thawed. And the learned Doctor speaks of the fetters of 
ice. What does it matter to the ocean whether it was in a 
frozen condition or otherwise? How docs it cease to be 
almighty, all-pervading and eternal when it is frozen than 
when it was not ? One would think that if the ocean's wishes 
were to be consulted, it would much better like to be frozen 
tl an not, as it would not be subjected to the mercy of the 
Wind, and the Sun and the Moon. Water is water whether it 
remains a liquid or a gas or a solid substance. And it would 
be mere rhetoric to ascribe fetters to it. And this fetter is real 
or fancied, cither an evil or a good. If real and an evil, how 
did this fetter happen to be put on. If not, why try to get rid 
of the fetter ? The, fetter was put on by the ocean’s own will or 
by another will, more powerful still. If the ocean put it on by 
its own will, it may do so again, and there is no inducement for 


21 



i 62 


THE ANALOGIES IN THE GITA. 


anybody to try to get rid of 'this fetter, and “the strongest 
support of pure morality, the greatest consolation in the sufferings 
of life and death," would surely be undermined. If by 
another’s will, who is the greater than this Atman; no doubt 
the Paramatman, which ends in veritable dualism. In the case 
of the ocean itself, it did not become frozen by its Own will or 
power. As water, its nature is unstable and changeable, and the 
change is brought about by other causes. If we apply heat to it, 
its liquid condition disappears and it becomes a gas. Withdraw 
the heat, and the more you do it, the water becomes more solid, 
and in the arctic regions, where the sun, thousands of times 
more powerful than the ocean water, is altogether absent for 
several months, the water gets affected by cold and darkness, 
and gets fettered in ice. The learned Doctor failed to take 
stock of the antecedent agent, in the frozening or otherwise of 
the ocean, namely the sun, and hence his error. The Siddhantins 
take the water whether it be that of the smallest rill or that of the 
ocean as analogous to the soul, and the universal AkaS present 
both in the water of the stream and that of the ocean, as the Para- 
meSvara and Paramatman, the universal Supporter, and all- 
Pervader ; and the Glorious Sun is also God, whose pancha- 
kfitya is also felt on the ocean and stream water, in its making 
and increasing and dissolving, and under whose powerful Sakti 
the minor powers of Karma (wind and moon) also find play, 
and the whole cycle of evolution is set agoing. 

And it is this learned Doctor who spoke of the misinterpret- 
ing variations of Sankara’s advaita, known under the names of 
Visishtadvaita, Dvaita, etc, and it is the freqent boast of people 
of his ilk, that Sankara’s Advaita is the most universal and 
ancient system, whereas all other forms of Indian philosophy are 
only partial and sectarian and modern; and in the present 
paper, we propose to deal with this claim, to a certain extent 
by taking up the Gita, their most beloved Upanishat, and by 
merely taking the various analogies used by Lord Krishna, 
we will show, whether we find among them or not, any of the 



THE ANALOGIES IN THE GITA. 


I63 

favourite and hackneyed similes of this school, and whether the 
similes actually have any bearing on the special tenets of this 
school. 

The fTr,st_SUtale in the book occurs in chapter ii., 13. 

“Just.as in this bod}', childhood and youth and old age 
appertain to the embodied man, so also does it acquire another 
body. ” 

This is a popular enough simile, and its meaning is plain 
i>ut it cannot be construed as is done by Sankara, that the soul 
undergoes no change or is not affected by the change of avastas 
or change of bodies ; for it cannot be contended that the intelli- 
gence of Sankara is in the same embryonic stage as that of a 
new born babe, and the denial of this would also militate 
against all our ideas of evolutionary progress and the necessity 
for undergoing many births. In the previous verse, §ri 
Krishna postulated the existence of many souls, by asserting, 
neither did I not exist, nor thou, nor these rulers of men, and 
no one of us will ever hereafter cease to exist ; “ and he 
reiterates the same fact, in chapter iv, 5, where he alludes to 
his own former births, which fact is also mentioned by §ri 
Krishna himself again in the Anu 5 a.sa.na Parva and stated 
by Vyasa in the Yuddha Parva. By ‘I’ and ‘thou', and 

v 

‘ these ’, he clearly does not refer to their bodies as Sankara 
interprets. The next figure occurs in verse 22 of the same 
chapter, “just as a man casts off worn-out clothes and puts 
on others which are new, so the soul casts off worn-out 
bodies and enters which are new.” Similar instances are that 
of the serpent throwing off its skin, the n.ind passing from the 
conscious into the dream condition, and the Yogi into another 
body, which are given by Saint Meykanc an. The next one 
occurs in verse 58, where the. Sage withdrawing his senses from 
the objects of sense, is compared to the tortoise withdrawing its 
limbs, at the approach of anybody. The same simile occurs in 
Tiruvarutpayan. 

In chapter iii., only one illustration occurs, and this in verse 



164 


THE ANALOGIES IN THE GITA. 


3S, which we have often quoted. '• As fire is covered with 
smoke, as a mirror with dirt, as an embr3'0 is enclosed in a womb, 
so this is covered with it ” Sankara explains, “as a bright fire 

is covered with a dark smoke co-existent with it so this is 

covered with desire. ” ! The italics are ours. What ‘this’ and 
‘it ’ are, are seen to be, man and his wisdom-nature, Prakriti- 
guna— Rajas and Desire constraining one to the commission of 
sins. ‘Constrained.’ Sankara explains as a servant bj’ the King. 
Man is enslaved by his passion ; his wisdom is such that it is 
deluded b3 r unwisdom, ignorance (verse 40). Sankara leaves 
these passages quietl3 T enough but when explaining the similar 
passage (xiv, 5) “ Sattva, Rajas, Tanias, — these three Gunas, 
O might3' armed, born of Prakriti, bind fast in the bod3', the 
embodied, the indestructible,” Sankara sa3’s, “ now one ma}' 
ask: It has been said that the embodied is not tainted (xiii, 31). 
How then, on the contrar3 r , is it said here that the (Gunas) bind 
him ? We have met this objection b3 r adding ‘as it were’; thus 
‘ they bind him as it were’.” It would havebeen well for his repu- 
tation, if he had not raised the objection himself and tried to meet 
it in the way he has done. Wh}’ did not the Omniscient Lord 
Krishna himself add this ‘as it were,’ and leave these passages 
alone, apparently contradicting each other. In his explanation, 
he has omitted the force of ‘ fast ,’ and he has forgotten 
‘ Dragged and constrained ' and of the co-existent darkness and 
delusion of the former passage and explanation. There is one 
other passage relating to the soul and its bound condition 
namely verse 21 in chapter xiii itself. “ Purusha, as seated in 
Prakriti, experiences the qualities born of Prakriti-, “ attachment 
to qualities is the cause of his birth in good and evil wombs.” 
Lo, the Supreme Self r attaching itself to qualities born of 
Prakriti, constrained to commit sin, deluded by co-existent 
darkness, having to undergo births and deaths, and getting 
fettered and seeking salvation, and all this 4 as it ivere.' ! What 
a precious excuse would it not prove, this ‘-as it were,’ to the 
murderer, the forger, the liar, the thief etc.? Besides, Sankara 
identifies the embodied of verse 5, xiv, with the 4 dweller in the 



THE ANALOGIES IN THE GITA. 


165 

bod y ’ in xiii, 31. Even so far as forms of expression go, they 
are not altogether the same thing. It may be noted that the 
expression ‘embodied’ is always used in describing the soul, 
Jiva, and never to denote God. Though God is seated in the 
hearts of all, He is the Soul of Souls, and Light of Lights. He 
can never be called the 'embodied.' The expression 1 embodied ’ 
conveys itself the idea of attachment and bondage. Anybody 
reading verses 36 to 40 of chapter iii, and xiii, 21 ; xiv, 5, 20; 
and, verses iv, 14; ix, 9; xiii, 31 together, can fail to observe 
the utter contrast of the two entities ; and we appeal to 
common sense if Sankara’s ‘ ns it were ’ will do aw a}' with 
this distinction and contrast. This distinction and contrast 
is brought out in different chapters, in the same chapter 
and in contiguous verses, (xv, 16, 17, 18) nay in the same 
verse (v. 15). The word ‘ another ’ 1 Anyatlia' is itself a 
technical word, as ‘the inside of’ ‘ Ant as’ &c., and occurs 
in the Gita in other places and in a number of Yedic texts 
to denote God Supreme as distinguished from the souls 
and the world, the entities admitted by Kapila Sankhyas. 
Adhikaranas 4 to 9 of the Vedanta Sutra, and the texts quoted 
therein which appear in Vol. II, S.D. pp. 73 to 79, fully bear out 
our thesis. The apparent confusion caused by both the human 
spirit and the Supreme Spirit being spoken of as dwelling in 
the human body is altogether removed by the Mantras which 
speak of ‘ the two birds entering into the cave,’ 4 Rudra, 
destroyer of pain enters into me,’ 4 He who abides in the 
VijTidna,' 4 He who abides in the Atman,' ‘ higher than the high, 
higher than the imperishable,’ (cf. xv, 18, Gita). Leaving this 
subject for the present, we proceed. Chapter iv contains also 
only one simile, (37); “As kindled fire reduces fuel to ashes, O 
Arjuna; so does the wisdom fire reduce all Karma to ashes.” 
The next illustration occurs in chapter v. 16, and is a very 
familiar one, that of Sun and darkness. “ But in those in whom 
umvisdom is destroyed b}^ the Wisdom of the Self, like the Sun 
the wisdom illuminates That Supreme.” We have to read the 
previous passage together. “The Lord takes neither the evil 



THE ANALOGIES IN THE GITA. 


« 


1 66 

nor the good deed of any ; wisdom is enveloped by unwisdom ; 
thereby mortals are deluded.” 

Here ‘ wisdom ’ clearly means Atma, Atmajnan, Soul, 
Soul’s intelligence. This intelligence is covered by ajiiana, 
unwisdom. As contrasted with ignorance-covered soul, there 
stands the Pararr.esvara, untouched by evil, thougfh dwelling 
in the body. How is the Soul’s wisdom to get rid of the veil 
of unwisdom. If it was able to get rid of this wisdom by its 
own wisdom, it could have got rid of it the moment it wills so, 
and w r e will never hear of a soul in bondage. So the illustration 
explains how this is done. Unwisdom is destroyed not by the 
soul’s wisdom (spoken of merely as wisdom) but by Atmajnan, 
Brahmajnan, Sivajnan, leading to the perception and enjoy- 
ment of Sivanai)da, as the darkness covering the individual 
eye, flees before the Rising Glory of the Effulgent Sun, and the 
Sun while it dispels the darkness, at the same time enables the 
eye to exercise its own power of seeing (soul’s wisdom) and 
makes it see the Sun itself. The reader is requested to read 
the simile as explained, with Sankara’s own explanation and 
form his own conclusions. 

‘‘As a lamp in a sheltered spot does not flicker” is the 
simile of the Yogi in Divine Union. ‘ fslaswupp iirQi.rrco Si sap 
Qg&flsLrrir.” “Like the waveless sea-water, the jiiani attains 
clearness and calm” is another simile. The water and the 
lamp are by nature changeable, any little gust of wind (karma- 
mala) can make the one flicker and the other form into ripples. 
But the Sun, or Akasa (God) can neither flicker nor change. 
And this is exactly the simile in ix. 6. The simile in vii. 7 
demands however our prior attention. “ There is naught higher 
than I, O Dhananjaya, in me, all this is woven as a row of gems 
on a string.” Here the string is the lsvara, and the gems, other 
creatures and objects. Neither can the string become the 
gems, nor the gems the string; it only brings out the distinct- 
ion of the lower and the higher Padarthas spoken of in verse 
5 and how lsvara supports and upholds the whole universe, as 
a string does support the various gems. 



THE ANALOGIES IN THE GIT A. l6/ 

9 

The next simile already alluded to is in chapter ix, 6. “As 
the mighty wind moving everywhere rests in the Akasa, know 
thou that so do all beings rest in me.” And Lord Krishna 
states the truth explained by this as the Kingly science, the 
Kingly secret, immediately comprehensible ; and well may he 
say so, as tfiis explains the true nature of advaita. The verses 
4 and 5, have to be stated in full. “ By me all this world is 
pervaded, my form unmanifested. All beings dwell in Me ; and 
I do not dwell in them.” “Nor do beings dwell in me, behold 
my Divine Yoga! Bearing the beings and not dwelling in 
them is my Self, the cause of beings.” With this we might read 
also the similes in xiii, 32 and 33 “As the all-pervading Akasa 
is, by reason of its subtlety, never soiled, so God seated in the 
body is not soiled.” “ As the one Sun illumines all these worlds 
so does the Kshetri (not Kshetrajiia) illumine all Kshetra,” and 
the simile in xv. 8. “When the Lord (the jiva, the lord of the 
aggregate of the body and the rest — Ankara) acquires a body 
and when he leaves it, he takes these and goes, as the wind takes 
scents from their seats.” Here Paramesvara is compared to 
Akasa and the soul, jiva is compared to the wind ; and the 
• relation between God and Soul is the same relation as between 
Akasa and wind or things contained in AkaSa. And what is 
this relation ? Logicians and Siddhantins call this relation as 
Vyapaka Vyapti Sambandam, container and contained. We 
explained in our article on ‘ Mind and Body’ that this was not 
a very apt relation as it has reference to quantity, yet it is 
the best synonym and illustration of the Advaita relation, 
not Beda (Madhva), not Abeda, not Bedabeda (Ramanuja), 
not Parinama (Vallabha), not Vivaria (Sankara), but Vyapaka 
Vyapti relation. Taking the five elements, and the order of 
their evolution and involution, it is seen, how all the four evolve 
from and resolve into Akasa. But earth is not water, nor 
water earth, water is not fire nor lire water, fire is not air, nor 
air fire, none of these is Akasa nor Akasa any of these. 
And yet all solids can be reduced to liquids, and liquids, into 
gaseous condition and all disappear into Akasa. The one 



l68 THE ANALOGIES IN THE GITA. 

I 

lower is contained in the one higher, and all in Akasa, but 
AkaSa cannot be said to be contained in any of these, though 
present in each. Each one is more subtle and more vast than 
the lower element, and AkaSa is the most subtle and vastest 
and most pervasive and invisible (‘ my form unmanifested ’). 
Akasa is not capable of any change, though the* wind and 
water and fire and earth contained in it, can be contaminated by 
that to which it becomes attached. Wind carries off scents, 
and is subjected to all the forces of sun and moon. Water of 
the ocean becomes saltish, becomes frozen and becomes tempest- 
tossed. The lamp flickers and becomes smoky or bright, 
spreads a fragrant smell or otherwise, by the nature of the oil 
or wood it is burning. The very illustration of sea (space) 
water and winds, is used by Saint Meykandan in vii, 3-3 to 
illustrate ignorance not attaching itself to God but to the 
Soul- “ Ignorance will not arise from God who is the True 
Intelligence, as it is Asat (like darkness before sun). The 
soul which is ever united to God is co-eternal with Him. 
The connection of ignorance with the soul is like the connex- 
ion of salt with the water of the sea." The word ‘Akdsa’ 
by the w r ay is a technical word, like ‘another,’ ‘antas,’ 
‘jyotis’ etc. and is a synonym for God ( vide Vedanta Sutras I, 
1-22 and texts quoted thereunder and in the article ‘ House of 
God’, 1 Chit Ambara ’ in The Siddhdnta Dipikd, Vol. I. p. 153. 

The simile of streams and the sea occurs in xi, 28, to 
illustrate not the entering into moksha, but undergoing 
dissolution and death. The similes in xv, 1 and 2, the Ashvatha 
rooted above and spreading below, and in xvii, 61, that “ the 
Lord dwells in the hearts of all beings (jivas) O Arjuna, whirling 
by Maya all beings (as if) mounted on a machine,’ are the 
very last to be noted. These are nearly all the similes 
discovered in the Gita, and do we not miss here nearly all 
the favourite similes of the Mayavada school, and if so, 
how was it the omniscient Lord Krishna failed to use any 
one of them ? 





“THE UNION OF INDIAN 
PHILOSOPHIES.” 


“ All partitions of knowledge should be accepted, rather for lines t9 
mark and distinguish than for sections to divide, and separate, so that tha 
continuance and entirety of knowledge be preserved.” — Bacon. 

This saying of the greatest and wisest man of his age has 
now greater application in these days and in the land of 
Bharata, than it was in Bacon’s own days. It brings out 
clearly enough what the purpose and utmost scope of all 
knowledge can be, and the true principle of toleration and 
liberalism that ought to guide us in our search after knowledge 
and the ascertainment of truth. Unless we carefully sift and 
see what each is, wl ich is placed before us as knowledge and 
truth and for our acceptance, and mark their lines of similarity 
and difference, we will gradually emerge into a condition of 
intellectual colour-blindness ; we cease to know what is colour 
and what is knowledge and what is truth ; and the final result 
is an intellectual and moral atrophy and death. When in, there- 
fore, seeking to avoid such a catastrophe and suicide, we 
indulge in moral and intellectual disquisitions, the caution has 
to be borne in mind also that such differences in thought should 
never divide people in their mutual sympathies and their 
aspirations in the pursuit of the common good. There is 
no necessity at all for angry discussions or acrimonious 
language. Whatever the capabilities of the human mind 
may be, which may yet remain hidden, yet the human 
mind is in a sense limited. The laws of thought can be 
determined positively, and they are as fixed as possible. 
We can only thiijk on a particular question in a particular 
number of modes and no more, which in number, in their 
permutations and combinations, is fully exhibited. Difference 
22 



I/O 


THE UNION OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. 


in point of time, in clinic and in nationality have not affected 
thought in the least. People have given expression to the 
same moral sentiments, the same feelings ; and the same 
beauties in nature, and the similarities and the disparities that 
may exist, have been minutely noted by the poets of all lands. 
As such, it would not surprise us if the same theories about 
some of the grand problems of human existence have been 
discussed and held since man began to ask himself those ques- 
tions, and for ages to come, also the same theories will endure. 
The same stories have been told and the same battles have been 
fought over and over again, but we note also that the honors 
of the war have often rested and followed the predilections of 
the people and the eminence of the story teller for the time 
being. Theories and Schools of Philosophy have had each its 
own hey-day of life and glory, and each has had its fall, and 
a subsequent resurrection. Even in the course of a single 
generation, we see a thinker who is accounted as the greatest 
Philosopher of the day, as one who has revolutionized all 
thought and philosophy, discounted very much and pale before 
the rising stars, whose fads take the popular fancy. By these 
observations, we do not mean to discourage all theorizing but 
only to show the uselessness of any dogmatism upon any 
points, and we, more than ever hold that all partitions of 
knowledge are useful and should be accepted for consideration. 
We have ventured upon these observations as in these days, 
and in this land, what is considered as knowledge and jnanam 
and philosophy is all seeking a narrow groove and partaking 
of an one-sided character, and thereby tending to obliterate 
thought, ignoring the thin and delicate partitions obtaining 
between different kinds of knowledge and the consequences 
could not altogether be beneficial. This process of ignorance 
and obliteration has been going on for some time past, and has 
been mainly assisted by false or queer notions of what 
constitutes toleration and universalism. The ‘habit of trying to 
defend everything and explain away everything from one’s 
own preconceived point of view is clearly a' pernicious habit 



THE UNION' OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. 17 1 

intellectually and morally. The vain search after a fancied 
unity has ended in a snare often-times; and a similar attempt 
now a days to reduce every view to one view is purely a 
Procrustean method and fallacious in the extreme. Where is 
the good of such a procedure ? There could neither be profit 
nor pleasure in seeking such similaiities and uniformities in 
things that are essentially different. Will there be any good 
in such knowledge and reasoning as this ? Black is the same 
as red, because both are colours. A crow is the same thing as 
ink, as both are black. Such attempted unification of know- 
ledge is purely delusive and of no moment whatever. When 
again, commentators say and contend that a certain passage 
only bears out their interpretation and no other and that each 
one's own interpretation is the best, yet it must stand to 
common sense that these views could not all be correct nor 
could the author have intended all these meanings himself. 
Our Hindu commentators have often taken the greatest liberties 
with their author and they have often proved the worst 
offenders in forcing meanings upon words and passages which 
they and the context clearly show they do not bear. Yet we 
are often asked by some very tolerant people to accept every 
view as truth and to adopt their view as the greatest truth of 
all. As many of these ancient books are written and comment- 
ed on in an obsolete tongue and which very few could find time 
and trouble to master, this delusion has been kept up by a few, 
and people have often been led by the use of certain charmed 
names. But the illusions begin to be dispelled, as we get to 
understand what the real text is, in plain literal language, 
thanks to the labours of European Scholars, and without 
encumbering ourselves as to what this commentator and that 
commentator says. And some of these scholars and translators 
have been quite honest and outspoken in what they think as 
the true view as borne out by the text. And no scholar has as 
yet come forward to controvert the view taken by Dr. Thibaut 
as to how far Sankara’s views are borne out by the text of the 
Vedanta Sutras.’ We hope to discuss these, in course of time, 



172 


THF UNION OF INDIAN H-IILOSOF-HIFS. 


as the translation of Srikanta Bhafehya, we are publishing 
proceeds apace, by comparing and contrasting these ; it being 
only borne in mind now that Srikantha was the elder contem- 
porary of Sankara and the commentary of the former is the 
oldest of all those on the Vedanta Sutras now extant. We 
however propose to discuss in this article the questions in 
connection with the Bhagavad Gita which Mr. Charles John- 
stone has raised in his valuable paper we extracted in our last, 
from the Madras Mail, “The Union of Indian Philosophies.” 
He puts himself the question to which of the three Schools of 
Indian Philosophy’ — Sahkhya, Yoga and Vedanta, this book 
belongs, and says that his off-hand answer would be that it is 
undoubtedly one of the text books of the Vedanta school, one 
of the weightiest of them ; and yet, for all this, he thinks that 
there are other aspects of the Gita, and that there is very much 
in them which belongs to the Sahkhya, and even more that is 
the property of the Yoga school; and he explains below how 
the Gita, beginning with a ballad on Krishna and Arjuna, 
gradually expanded itself into its present form, incorporating 
into itself all the teachings of the Upanishats and the teachings 
of the Sahkhya and Yoga schools, together with puranic 
episodes of the transfiguration, which in the opinion of this 
writer ‘reproduces all that grim and gruesome ugliness 
of many’ armed Gods, with terrible teeth, which the Puranas 
have preserved most probably from the wild faiths of the 
dark aboriginals and demon worshippers of Southern India. 
We will deal with this last statement, which is a pure 
fiction later on; and the point we wish to draw particular 
attention to is this, that it has struck the writer as new and 
he gives it as new to the ignorant world that the Gita does 
not represent only Vfedaflta. To the Indian who knows any- 
thing of Indian Philosophy, this could not be news at all, as 
all the modern Indian schools, including Dvaita and Visishitad- 
vaita and Suddhadvaita, claim the book as-an authority and 
have commented on it too. But the European who has 
learnt to read the books ot one school of philosophy only (all 



THE UNION OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. 1/3 

• 

the books translated till now in English are books and com- 
mentaries of the Vedanta School), knows nothing of any other 
school of philosophy existing in India and what authorities they 
had, and has gradually come to deny the existence of even such; 
and young Indians educated in English deriving all their 
pabulum from such source have also been ignorant of any other 
phases of Indian Philosophy. We well remember an Indian 
graduate in arts and law ask us, if there was any such thing as 
a special school of Saiva Siddhaijta Philosophy. Of course, he 
wears Vibhuti and Rudraksha and worships Siva and he 
knows that the Great Guru Sankara was an avatar of Siva 
Himself and all the English books that treated of Hinduism 
only talked of the Vedanta Philosophy and his surprise and 
ignorance as such were quite natural. But as a result of the 
great upheaval that is going on, and the greater attention that 
is paid to the study of our philosophic and religious literature, 
even our own people have been slowly waking up to the truth 
of things. That stoutest adherent of Vedanta, the editor of the 
Light of the East was the first to yield and to point out in his 
articles on the ‘ Ancient Sankhya System ’ that the Gita 
expounded also the Sankhya system, though he tries to make 
an olla podnda of it by saying that Vedanta is Sankhya and 
Sankhya is Vedanta— that the Gita does not postulate ‘ many 
Purushas (souls). A Madras Professor declared in the Pachai- 
yappa’s Hall that in some of the special doctrines of the 
Vedanta, such as the doctrine of Maya, and the identity of the 
human Soul and the Supreme Soul etc., the Gita is silent. And 
our brother of the Brahmavudin also affirms in his editorial 
on ‘Maya,’ dated 15th August 1896, after stating that the 
word Maya scarcely occurs in the principal upanishats, and 
where it does occur, it seems to be used mostly in the old 
Vedic sense of power or creative power, declares, that “on 
the whole the attitude of the Bhagavad Gita towards Maya 
is similar to that of the Upanishats; and it is rather diffi- 
cult to evolve out of it the later Vfedaptic sense,” of illusion, or 
delusion. 



174 the UNION OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. 

c 

And when it is admitted also that the Buddhists were the 
first to deveiope the Maya theory of illusory nothings, who on 
that account were called Mayavadins by the other Hindus, 
and that Sankara only refined this idea, meaning an illusory 
nothing, into meaning a phenomenal something, though some of 
his later followers even went so far as to forget Sankara's 
teaching as to revert to the Buddhist idea of a blank negation 
and hence were called cry to-Bhuddhists (Prachchanna Bhaudhas), 
{vide p. 297-Vol. Brahmavadin and Max Muller’s lectures on 
Vedanta j, and our brother’s opinion being merelj’’ that in the 
Vedas and Upanishats and Gita, we have merely the germs of 
the later system of thought out of which was elaborated the 
Vfidantic theory of Maya, — a process of double distillation — the 
point is even worthwhile considering whether Gita has got 
anything to do with the Vedanta at all. And it can also be 
positively proved that it has no such connexion. To day we 
venture to go no further than what is admitted by the other 
side that Gita contains the exposition of other schools of 
philosophy which according to Mr. Charles Johnstone, postu- 
lates the reality and eternality of matter (Prakriti) and spirit 
(Purusba) and that the Purushas are without number and that 
there is one Supreme Spirit different from the souls. 

In understanding the word Sankhya as used in the Gita 
our writer falls into a mistake like many others that it means 
the Philosophy as expounded in the Sankhya School of 
Philosophy which is attributed to the Sage Kabila. We have 
shown in our article on ‘ Another Side 1 (vide pp. 21 to 34) 
that it meant no such thing, that it meant merely, a theory 
or a system or a philosophy or knowledge and that the 
Gita instead of having anything to do with Kabila’s Sankhya 
distinctly repudiates it and goes on to postutate its own 
differences, and this we showed by quoting several passages 
and that the proper name of the system evolved in the Gita is 
‘Sdshvara Sankhya, ’ as distinguished from Nireshvara Sankhya 
of Kabila. To say that this philosophy or the other grew out 
of this or that is pure fallacy, unless we have real historical 



THE UNION OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. 1/5 

• 

evidences about it. We might propound a riddle whether 
Theism or Atheism was first and which of these rose out of the 
other. You might argue that Theism was next and grew out 
of Atheism, as materialists (Lokayitas) only admit the eternal- 
ity of matter and would not admit of the existence of any 
other padarfha. And you might say they came next because 
they denied the existence of God admitted by Theists. Yet 
such is the argument covered up in statements frequently made 
that, of the six systems of Philosophy, one was first and the other 
arose out of it. They do not at all refer to any historical growth 
or chronological order. Even in the days of Rig Yfeda they 
believed in Gods and in one God, and we presume there were 
unbelievers also. Mr. Johnstone is also wrong in saying that the 
postulate of three powers of nature — we presume he means 
Satva, Rajas and Tamas— is peculiar to the Sankhya, as 
also the divisions of Jnatha, Jneyam and Jnanam. We fail to 
understand what he means by Sankhya Yoga reconciler. 
Sankhya, if Kabila’s (Pure atheism) postulated no God and 
Yoga postulated God. And is there any meaning where one 
talks of a book reconciling Atheism and Theism ? And of 
course, another writer talks similarly of Vfedanta-Sankhya 
reconciler. In every school there are certain postulates or 
padarthas which are affirmed and some w-hich are denied. 
Some postulate only one padartha, some two, some three and 
some none, and are we to talk of reconciling these, one with the 
other, simply because one of the postulates, very often things 
and their qualities which could not be denied by any one, is 
common to all or some ? This is often the kind of writing that 
passes for sound knowledge and liberalism and universal 
philosophy. We dare say the Vedanta as understood by San- 
kara was not even in existence at the time of the battle of 
Kurukshetra nor was it probably known to the writer of the 
Mahabharata and Gita, in his days whenever he wrote it. The 
whole Mahabharata has to be studied to know what the teach- 
ing of Gita is and in its historical surroundings. The phrase 
1 Sankhya and Yoga ’ is used throughout the Mahabharata as 



I/tJ 


THE UNION QF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. 


often as possible and in such conjunctions where the meaning 
is unmistakeable as referring to the postulate of a Supreme 
Being.* If Kabila t is praised by Krishna as the greatest 
among sages, it is because the same book Mahabharata 
shows elsewhere, how Kabila from being an atheist was after- 
wards converted to the knowledge of God, and 'as all such 
converts, he obtained greater glorification at the hand of his 
quandom opponents. And as we have shown elsewhere that 
the Gita is a clear controversial treatise, he could not do better 
than cite Kabila himself, who gave up his former faith, in 
refutation of the school of Atheistic Sankhya. Scholars have 
observed how the writer of the Uttara Mimamsa Sariraka 
Sutras spends all his energy and skill in refuting the Sankhya 
and only casually notices the other schools, it being the reason 
that in the days of Vyasa and Krishna the Atheistic saiikhva 
school was the most predominant, in the same way as in later 
times, Buddhism and Jainism came to have a larger share of 

* cf. The following passages in the Anusasana Parva. 

“ I seek the protection of Hun whom the >' ankhyds describe and the 
Yogir.s think of as the Supreme, the foremost, the Purusha, the Pervader of 
all things and the Master of all existent objects” &c. &c. 

“ I solicit boons from Him who cannot be comprehended by argu- 
ment, who represents the object of the bdi.khya and the Yoga systems of 
Philosophy and who transcends all things, and whom all persons convers- 
ant with the topics of enquiry worship and adore.” 

“ The which is Supreme Brahman, that which is the highest entity, 
that which is the end of both the Sankhyas and the Yogins, is without 
doubt identical with thee.” 

j cf. The same Parva pp. 140 and 141. P. C. Roy’s edition. 

“ After this, Kabila, who promulgated the doctrines that go by the 
name of Sankhya, and who is honoured by the gods themselves said — I 
adored Bhava with great devotion for many lives together. The 
illustrious deity at last became gratified with me and gave me knowledge 
that is capable of aiding the acquirer in getting ovqi* rebirth.” 

The Temple at the foot of Tirupatx hill is called Kabilesvara and is 
the place where tradition says the sage worshipped Bhava or Siva. 



THE UNION OF INDIAN' PHILOSOPHIES. 1/7 

• 

treatment in the hands of Hindu saints and writers. It has also 
to be noticed that the word Vedarjta nowhere occurs in the 
Gita or other Upanishats as meaning Sankara’s system and the 
Brahmavadin has, as such, trken a broader platform, in pro- 
perly including under the term, both Advaita of Sankara, the 
Dvaita and*Visishtadvaita systems and we now hear of Advaita 
Vedanta, Dvaita Vedanta See., though the Western habit of 
calling Sankara's system as VedaQta is still used confusingly 
enough by people, as in the passage we quoted above from the 
Brahmavadin ‘the later Vedantic sense.' (The other Indian 
schools, be it noted, do not indeed call Sankara’s system 
Vedanta or Advaita but have other names for it). 

Mr. Johnstone no doubt says that Krishna quotes directly 
from many Upanishats (one writer is carried away by his 
veneration for Gita to say that the Upanishats quote from the 
Gita!) and a number of verses, notably in the second book (we 
should like to know very much what they are), which have the 
true ring of the old sacred teachings, and yet art not in them (in 
which ?) as they now stand. And then he airs his theory that 
Vedanta is the peculiar birth-right of the Kshatriyas and not 
of Brahmans. The reason why this unacknowledged quota 
tions in the Gita and other similar books are found, i t s that 
every Brahman in the olden days had committed to memory 
the whole of the Vedas and Vedanta (Upanishats) and as such 
when they wrote and when they spoke, these old thoughts and 
verses very naturally flowed from their pen and their mouths, 1 ' 
and it is never the habit of the Indian scholar to quote his 
authority, chapter and verse. And we come to the fact that 
the whole of the chapters 9, 10 and 1 1 of the Gita is a mere 
reproduction and a short abstract of that central portion of the 
whole Vedas, called the Satarudriya of the Yajur Veda. What 
is called transfiguration is the V&vasvarupa DarSana, or the 

* We knew a Tamil Scholar who would gossip for hours together, 
the whole conversation interlarded with quotations from Kura ] and 
NalatUyar and an ordinary listener could not recognize that he whs 
quoting at all. 



1^8 THE UNION 01 INDIAN FHILOSOFHILb. 

i 

vision of the lord as the All, as manifested in the whole 
universe. One and all, the objects in the whole universe, good, 
bad, sat, asat, high and low, animate, inanimate are all named 
in succession and God is identified with all these and it is 
pointed out that He is not all these and above all these, 
“ the soul of all things, the creator of all things, the'pervader of 
all things" (Visvatmane Visva srijc visvam avritiya tishtliate.) 
This Satarudriyam* ought to be known to every Brahman 
more or less and it is the portion of the Vedas which is 
recited in the temples every day. The praise of the Satarudri- 
yam occurs throughout the Mahabharata, and most in Drona 
and Anusasana Parvas, and these parvas dealing as they do 
with various visions of God (Visvasvarupa Darsana) as granted 
to Rishis, Upamanyu, Vyasa, Narada, Kabila, and Krishna him- 
self on other occasions, contain the similar reproductions of the 
Satarudriya as in chapters 9 to 1 1 of the Gita. What is more 
important to be noted is that in the case of Krishna, he had got 
the teaching from Upamanyu Maharishi, and after initiation 
(Dlksha) into this mystery teaching and performance of tapas, 
he gets to see the vision himself, and he describes it as follows 
(vide page 87 to 91 Anusasanaparva. P. C. Roy’s translation). 

“ The hair on my head, O son of Kunti, stood on its end, 
and my eyes expanded with wonder upon beholding Hara, the 
refuge of all the deities and the dispdler of all their griefs. 

Before me that Lord of all the Gods, viz., 

Sarva, appeared seated in ail his glory. Seeing that lsana 
had showed Himself to me by being seated in glory before my 
eyes, the whole universe, with Prajapati to Ipdra, looked at me. 
I, however, had not the power to look at Mahadfcva. The great 
Deity then addressed me saying, “Behold, O Krishna and speak 
to me. Thou hast adored me hundreds and thousands of times. 

* Sri Krishna himself says “ Hear from me, O King, the Satarudriya, 
which, when risen in the morning, I repeat with joined hands. The great 
devotee, Prajapati created that prayer at the end of his austerity.” 
Anusasana Parva, chapter V. 



THE UNION OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. 179 

• 

There is no one in the three worlds that is dearer to me than 
thou.” And the praise by Krishna which follows is almost 
what Arjuna himself hymned about Krishna. Vyasa meeting 
Asvaththama after his final defeat tells him also that Kfishpa 
and Arjuna had worshipped the Lord hundreds and thousands 
of times. And does not this explain Krishna’s own words in the 
Gita that he and Arjuna had innumerable births (iv. 5). 

What we wish to point out is that this trasfiguration 
scene with its gruesome description which Mr. Jhonstone wants 
to trace to Pur&nic legends preserved from South Indian 
aborigines is, bj T express text and by the authority of Krishna 
himself traced to the second Veda ; and to say that the Yajur 
Veda, the central portion* of this Veda, should copy the holiest 
portion of the whole Vedas, as believed by the contemporaries 
and predecessors of Krishna, from the demonology of the South 
Indians, could only be a parody of truth ; and if this be true, 
this demonology of the South Indians, instead of a thing being 
repugnant must have been glorious indeed, to be copied by the 
Brahmavndins of Yajur Veda days. Western Scholars have 
only misread and misunderstood the nature of this transfigu- 
ration and VisvarUpa mystery, as they have misread the mystic 
Personality of Rudra or Siva Himself, whose ideal these scholars 
say, was also copied from the aborigines. To the credit of 
Mrs- Besant, be it said, she has understood both these mysteries 
better than any other European. Siva’s whole personality, with 
his eight forms, Ashtamuhurtams (see page 220 of the Siddhanta 

* It is believed and it is a fact that the PaTichatchara Mantra of the 
modern Hinduism is found in the very middle of the three Ytdas, Rig, 
Yajur and Saman, which fact is set forth in the following Tamil verse. 
QpucinGinfCU-isir ts(SLEeapitSeir Qf6sffsSQe»(lp stress ri_^F,®sv 
QvihetnLDfStT^tb i?(Sssaessrt—LD Q&rr&psTQg &tki@etDpJ$dsr 
«gyd>l£>/5®<F S'ElQ'Sa^tiSsBr QtyiflplsI'bGiu 

QunihtASi’iD cSytc/itogryaPei r QuirfflGtrrrsun'dsr ersuesr aoic.tfiJS. 

cf. The whole satarudriya passage quoted in sec. II. chap III. vol, 
vi. Muir’s Sanskrit t£xts. 



iSo THE UNION OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. 

c 

D'tpikH Vol. I, for full description) earth, fire, air etc., and his 
three eyes, as Soma, Surya and Agni, and His Head as AkaSa, 
and his eight arms as the eight cardinal points, his feet as Padala, 
and the sky as his garment, Digambara, and himself, a Nirv&ni 
and living in cemeteries and yet with his Sakti, Uma, a Yogi yet 
a Bhogi, all these give a conception of the supreme* Majesty of 
the Supreme Being which, no doubt, nobody can look up in the 
face. Does any ordinary person dare to look up nature’s secrets 
and nature’s ways in the process of destruction and creation and 
sustentation ? If so, he will be a bold man, a great man. Strip 
nature of its outside smooth and fragrant cloak and what do 
you see inside ? The picture is ugly, dirty and gruesome. Yet 
the scientist perceives all this with perfect equanimity, nay with 
very great pleasure. A small drop of water discloses to the 
microscopic examination multitudes of living germs, and these 
fight with one another, devour each other with great avidity. 
We drink the water. Plants drink up the water. Animals eat 
the plants, insects and animals devour one another. Man, the 
greatest monster, devours all. There is thus constant struggle 
of life and death going on in nature. And when this nature is, 
as thus, exposed to view in the transfiguration, and Arjuna 
sees before him this havoc, in the Person of the Supreme as the 
Destroyer, (‘ Devourer ' of Katha Upanishat) (and be it re- 
membered that this Yisvasvarupa Darsan is more gruesome in 
Gita no doubt, than similar ones presented in the Anus as ana 
Parva, as Kpishtia’s whole burden of advice in the Gita is 
simply to force Arjuna to fight and kill his foes, and to conquer 
his repugnance), a remark that it is derived from Puranic 
legends and aboriginal practices is altogether out of place. We 
hope to pursue this subject on a future occasion. 



THE UNION OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES.* 


In old India, as elsewhere, the n'.inds of the leading men were of 
many complexions ; so that we have great idealists, great thinkers of the 
atomic school, great nihilists, and great preachers of doctrines wholly 
agnostic. It is the custom to gather a certain group of these teachings 
together, with the title of the Six Philosophies ; while all others, consi- 
dered as heterodox, are outside the pale of sympathy, and, therefore, to be 
ignored. Chiefest among the outcast philosophies is the doctrine of 
Prince Siddharta, called also 3 -kya Muni, and Gautama Buddha. Of 
the others, it would be hard to find many students of more than three — 
namely, the Vedanta, Sakya, and Yoga : while the Vaiseshika, Nyaya, and 
first Mimamsa are little more than a name, even to professed students of 
Indian thought. They have their followers, doubtless ; but there has not 
been found one among them of such mental force as to give them a 
modern expression, or to show that they bear any message to the modern 
world. We shall speak, here, only of the three most popular among the 
orthodox schools : and this chiefly in connection with a single note- 
worthy book, — the Bhagavat Gita, or “ Songs of the Master." If we 
were asked, off hand, to which of the three schools the Bhagavat Gita 
belonged, we should most likely answer, off-hand, that it was, undoubtedly 
a text-book of the Vecanta, and indeed one of the weightiest works of the 
Vedanta School. For is it not commented on by the Great Sankara, 
chiefest light of the Vedanta, and does he not quote from it as of divine 
authority, a fully inspired scripture ? 

Yet, for all this, I think there are other aspects of the Bhagavat Git 5 
which show that this answer is too simple ; and that, while the Songs of 
the Master undoubtedly form a bulwark of Vedantic orthodoxy, there is 
very much in them which belongs to the Sankhya, and even more that is 
the property of the Yoga School. It seems pretty certain that the Bhagavat 
Gita has grown up gradually, beginning with a ballad on Krishna and 
Arjuna, much of which is preserved in the first book, and which suggests 
all through, the burden of Krishna’s admonition : Therefore fight, Oh 
son of Kunti ! It seems likely that the next element in the structure of 
the Bhagavat Gita is drawn from the great Upanishats, the Katha 
Upanishat more especially. And this suggests a very interesting 

» Extract from the Madras Mail, 23rd December 1897 by Charles 
Johnston, m.r.a.s., bx,s„ ret. 



I?2 THE UNION OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. 

I 

thought ; side by side with many direct quotations from the Upanishats 
: n our possession, there are a number of verses, notably in the second 
book, which have the true ring of the old sacred teachings, and yet are 
not in them as they now stand. And this suggests that we have only 
fragments ; that there was once much more, in the form of verses and 
stories, which made up the mystery teaching of the Rajput Kings, — that 
secret doctrine spoken of so clearly in the Upanishats themselves as the 
jealously guarded possession of Kshatriya race. The fourth book of the 
Bhagavat Gita fully endorses this idea, since Krishna traces his doctrine 
back through the Rajput sages to the solar King, Ikshvaku, to Manu, the 
Kshatriya, and finally to the sun, the genius of the Rajput race. And 
this, in connection with that teaching of successive re-births, which, we 
know' from the two greatest Upanishats, was the central point of the 
royal doctrine. So w'e are inclined to suggest that we have in many 
verses of the Bhagavat Gita, additional portions of the old mystery doctrine, 
parts of which form the great Upanishats. And it is quite credible that 
Krishna, — whom we believe to be as truly historical as Julius Caisai,— as 
an initiate in these doctrines did actually quote to Arjuna a series of verses 
from the mystery teaching, and that these verses are faithfully preserved 
for us to the present day. However that may be, there the verses are : a 
series of verses from the Upanishats, had a second series, entirely 
resembling these in style and thought. As a third element in the Bhaga- 
vat Gita we have the Puranic episode of the transfiguration, and, we 
must say, it reproduces all that grim and gruesome ugliness of many 
armed gods, with terrible teeth, which the puranas have preserved most 
probably from the W'ild faiths of the dark aboriginals and demon wor- 
shippers of Southern India. 

Finally, there is a very important element, into the midst of which 
the episode of the transfiguration is forcibly wedged ; and of this element 
we shall more especially speak. It consists of the characteristic Sunkhya 
doctrine of the three potencies of Nature completely developed along 
physical, mental, and moral lines A word about this doctrine, which 
we may, wdth great likelihood, refer to Kapila himself, the founder of the 
School His conception seems to be this; there is the consciousness in us, 
the spirit, the perceiver : and, over against this there is Nature, the 
manifested world. This duality of subject and object has great gulf fixed 
between its two elements, whose characteristics, wholly and irreconcil- 
ably opposed. Of the subject, the spirit, consciousness, we can only say 
that it perceives. To predicate of consciousness' any characteristic 
drawn from our experience of objects, such for instance as mortality,- 
beginning or end, is to be guilty of a cardinal errbr. Of Nature, the 



THE UNION OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. I&3 

• 

opposite element of existence, Kapila’s teaching, it seems, was something 
like this ; Nature may be divided into three elements : the substance 
of phenomena ; the force of phenomena ; and thirdly the dark space or 
void, in which phenomena take place. Take a simple illustration. The 
observer, with closed eyes, is the spirit or consciousness, not yet involved 
in Nature. He opens his eyes, and, instead of the dark space, or void, sees 
the world of Visible objects, or substance, and there is perpetual move- 
ment among the things thus observed. This is force, "lhuswehave 
the three elements of Nature, — the three qualities, as they are generally 
called,— which make up the central idea of Kapila’s cosmic system, and 
which are not to be found, in that shape, in any of the oldest Upanishats : 
they are, therefore, no part of the Vedanta, properly so called, but distinc- 
tively Sankhya teachings. Now, these distinctive teachings form a very 
important part of the Bhagavat Gita, and are woven into many passages, 
besides the chief passages already referred to, in the seventeenth and 
eighteenth books. Thus, as early as the second book, we have a reference 
to the Sankhya teachings : “The Vedas have the three Nature-powers as 
their object ; but thou, Arjuna become free from the three powers.” It is 
needless to quote the many passages that refer to the same teaching ; 
to the divisions of the knower, the knowing, the known ; the doer, the 
doing, the deed ; the gift, the giving, the giver ; and so forth, according to 
the three-Nature powers. All this is carried out with much intellectual 
skill, and dialectic acumen : but it has nothing in the world to do with 
the main motive of the book,— Arjuna’s action under the calamity of 
civil war ; and Krishna’s assertion of the soul, as the solution of Arjuna’s 
dilemma. 

There is also a very important element in the Bhagavat Gita, equally 
characteristic of the Yoga school, whose final exponent, though not, in 
all probability, its founder, was Patanjali, the author of the commentary 
on Panini’s grammar, who lived, it is believed, some three centuries be- 
fore our era. We do not regard the directions as to choosing a lonely 
place, a fawn-skin seat, over sprinkled kusha grass, and the fixing of 
the attention on the tip of the nose, as necesssrily, or most characteristi- 
cally belonging to the Yoga school, though they are undoubtedly 
important elements in that teaching. What seems more vital is the 
moral concept of action with disinterestedness, of action without 
atttachment, according to the primary motion of the will ; this teaching, 
it seems to us, is at once chaiacteristic of the Yoga system, and foreign to 
the spirit of the Upanishats ; for the Upanishats, so high is their ideal, are 
not greatly concerned with fallen man or the means of his redemption. 
They look on man aV an immortal spirit, already free and mighty, anu 



184 


THE UNION OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES. 


therefore needing no redemption. Man, needing to be redeemed, is a 
later thought ; one springing from a more self-conscious age. 

Now the connection of this thought with the Sahkhya philosophy is 
obvious, it regards man, the spirit, as ensnared by Nature, and con- 
sequently as needing release and, for the Sahkhya school, this release 
comes through an effort of intellectual insight. But this concept, man 
saved by intellect, is essentially untrue to life, where man lives not by 
intellect alone, or even chiefly, but by the will ; and it became necessary, 
granting our fall, to find a way of salvation, of redemption through the 
will. This way is the Yoga philosophy. It is the natural counterpart 
and completion of the Sahkhya and has always been so regarded, The 
pure spirit of the over-intellectual Sankhya becomes Lord of the 
more religious Yoga ; — using religion in the sense of redemption to the 
will. But, though thus complementary, the two systems might easily 
come to be considered as opposing each other ; and it seems to be part of 
the mission of the Bhagavat Gita — or rather, of certain passages forcibly 
imported into it, to reconcile the Sankhya and the Yoga once for all, and 
to blend these two with the Vedanta. 

We need only quote two passages, which are obviously due to the 
Sankhya — Yoga reconciler. The first is dragged into the middle of the fol- 
lowing sentence, and evidently has no true place there : “ If slain, thou 
shalt attain to heaven ; or conquering, thou sbalt inherit the land. There- 
fore rise, son of Kunti, firmly resolved for the fight. Holding as equal, 
good and ill-fortune, gain and loss, victory and defeat, gird thyself for the 
fight, and thou shall not incur sin. And thus there shall be no loss of 
ground, nor does any defeat exist ; a little of this law saves from great 
fear — the law, namely, that the slain in battle go to Paradise. Now 
into the midst of this complete and continuous passage has been inserted 
this verse : “ This understanding is declared according to Sankhya ; hear 
it now, according to Yoga.” Needless to say, the last part of it has as 
little to do with the Yoga philosophy as the first has with the Sankhya. 
Then again, in the next book, the third : “Two rules are laid down by me: 
salvation by intellect for the Sankhya ; salvation by works for the follo- 
wers of Yoga.” So that one part of the Bhagavat Gita is devoted to the 
reconciliation of these two complementary though rival schools. 



TREE OF KNOWLEDGE OF 
. GOOD AND EVIL. 




The following passages in the book of Genesis have 
reference to the subject in hand. “ And out of the ground made 
the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, 
and good for food ; the tree of life also in the midst of the Garden, 
and the tree of knowledge of good and evil" (ii. 9). “ And the Lord 
God commanded the man saying, ‘ Of every tree of the garden 
thou mayest freely eat. But of the tree of knowledge of good 
and evil thou shaft not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest 
thereof thou shall surely die” (ii. 16 and 17). “And they were 
both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed ” (ii. 
25). “And the serpent said unto the -woman “Ye shall not 
surely die. For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, 
your eyes shall be opened and ye shall be as Gods, knowing 
good and evil. And when the woman saio the tree was good for 
food, that it was pleasant to the eyes, a tree to be desired tct make 
one wise, she took of the fruit thereof and did eat, and gave also 
unto her husband with her, and he did eat. And the eyes of 
them both w T ere opened and they knew that they were naked.” 
(iii. 4 to 7). “Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply 
thy sorrow and thy conception ” “In sorrow shalt thou eat of 
it all the days of thy life.” (iii. 16 and 17), “And the Lord 
God said, Behold the man is become as one of us to know good 
and evil ; and now lest he put forth his hand and take also of 
the tree of life, and eat and live for ever. Therefore the Lord 
God sent him from the Garden of Lden (iii. 22 and 23). 

And now we a§k what are we to understand by this story? 
Are we to take it literally, as many would suggest, or are we 
to leave it as a mystery too deep for words to explain? And 

24 



1 86 


TREE OF KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL. 

< 

yet this is the mystery of mysteries, the original mystery by 
which we came to be born and to die. If we can here get a 
clue to our birth and death, can we not thereby unravel secrets 
by which we can surely prevent our death and rebirth, and 
gain everlasting life. And surely there must be an explanation 
for the words, Tree of life, and Tree of knowledge of good and 
evil, cannot be mistaken in their real import, and these cannot 
be identified with any earthly tree actually in existence. The 
Tree here is c'learl}- a metaphor signifying the soul’s True 
Being in freedom (moksha) and its false life in Bhanda, the light 
and shadow of our human existence. As bound up in the world 
the sum of our existence consists in our knowledge of likes and 
dislikes, of what conduces to our pleasure and what gives us 
pain, and our memory of both, and as Doctor Bain would define 
it, the sense of similarity and of difference and retentiveness. 
That is to say, our human knowledge is built up from our very 
birth, of a series of -acts and experiences which give us pleasure 
or pain, or make us indifferent, and our sense of them, and 
Desire and Will are also slowly built up. The greater the 
pleasure we fancy a certain act or experience gives us, the 
more do we desire its repetition or continuance ; the greater the 
pain we apprehend from an act, the more do we hate its 
repetition or continuance. But it happens also the greater the 
pleasure or the pain, the more prolonged its continuance, 
oftener it is repeated, the pleasure itself palls and we grow 
callous to the pain. Life may therefore be divided into a series 
of acts, or a sequence of them, one flowing from another, and 
close on each, each yielding a certain result or experience or 
fruit, be it pleasure or pain, good or evil. And God’s injunction 
was that we should not eat the fruit of the knowledge of 
good and evil or experience the pleasure or pain which will flow 
from our acts of good and evil, in this tree of wordly life. 

And one can ask, why it is we shonld not seek the bent of 
our inclination, why we should not secure the good in life, and 
the pleasure and happiness thereof, and avoid the evil, and the 
pain and suffering thereof, and the best knowledge that will 



TREE OF KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL. 1 8 / 

• 

secure to us to attain these ends ? And God’s injunction appears 
stranger, when it is seen that there is not only an injunction 
not to try to know the evil, but that there is also an injunction 
that we sholud not know the good. And to know the good, if 
not to know the evil, must at least appear to us to be our duty. 
And all our moral text books and lessons and sermons are 
intended to teach us this duty. And the fruits or acts result- 
ing from our knowledge of both good and bad are both for- 
bidden to man, and the punishment for disobeying this Law or 
Word of God is said to be death itself with the further penalty 
of being shut out of partaking of the ever lasting Tree of Life. 

And of course there may be no wrong in our knowing 
what is good for us and what is bad and in our desiring to seek 
the one and avoiding the other, provided we can knozv what is 
really good and what is bad, provided we can get what we 
desire and provided also that we can know what it is that we 
mean by the ‘ us ’ or ‘ I Do all persons understand what will 
really bring them good and what will bring them evil ? Is every 
act which gives pleasure at once a good, and every act which 
gives pain a wrong? When the child cries for sweets, and 
struggles hard against swallowing a bitter potion, is it really 
seeking its good and avoiding evil ? When the school-boy 
chafes under school-discipline and desires to sow his own wild 
oats, is he really avoiding pain and seeking pleasure ? Does the 
man of the world when he seeks power and pelf and resorts to 
all sorts of ways to gain that end really seek his own good, or 
when he chafes in a prison as a result of his previous actions, 
does he think that it is for his good ? And then again, when we 
seek pleasure and beyond our means, does not that really bring 
us suffering ? More than all, how many of us do rightly under- 
stand the 1 1 ’ and to which we want to minister ? To the great 
majority, the ‘I ’ means nothing more than the bare body, and 
the external senses, and is not the whole world engaged most 
strenuously in satisfying their bodily wants and appetites? How 
many are there who understand that they have a moral natuie, 
how many, that they have a spiritual nature? Even when we 



I$8 TREE OF KNOWLEDGE Or GOOD AND EVIL. 

£ 

do know that we have a moral nature and a spiritual nature, how 
many do try to act up to the requirements of their moral and 
spiritual nature, being more or less dragged and constrained by 
their worldly desire ! In our ideas of good and bad, don’t we 
confound our several natures, don’t we confound what is 
good for the soul with what is good for the body? To most of 
us, the world and our belly are our God and nothing more. 

Whence therefore this difference in people’s likes and dis- 
likes, whence their disability to suit means to ends, and their 
ignorance of their real selves, and mistaking of one for another ? 
Does it not show that there is an original want of understanding, 
a want of power, and a want of real knowledge, a serious defect 
in all sorts and conditions of men ? And when, from want of this 
knowledge, the first wrong step is taken, the first mistake is 
made, does it not lead to a series of falls, and succession of 
mistakes, and does not man commit more mistakes in his ignor- 
ance when he tries to rectify one error than when he leaves it 
alone ? 

We do not propose to answer the question, whence was 
this defect or ignorance in man, and what is its nature etc., 
For our present purpose, it is enough to know and recognize 
that this defect is in us in one and all ; that we are all full of 
faults and liable to err at ever}' step. And these defects were in 
Eve, the original woman, typical of the lowerj man (Adam 
meaning the Higher life of man, pulled down by the lower part 
of him.) And when Eve saw the tree was good for food, that is 
to say she only thought of what would give pleasure to her 
body and satisfy' her appetite, regardless of the consequences, 
just as a child wants to snatch the sweets from a confectioner’s 
shop. She saw that it was pleasant to the eyes: that is to say 
she only mistook what was not good as good * She saw it was 

* Quir^Greoeoev/bsQ/DU Quir^Qetreir gpem ^jti> 
ui(T$en rTfSSjti) uin^)uL^puL-\. 

The delusion whereby men deem that the truth which is Hot, 

That is the cause ©f hapless birth. 



IRIX Oh KNOWLEDGE OK GOOD AXl.i EVIL- I 89 

• 

a tree to be desired to make one wise* And when that most 
learned of the divines, full of his own knowledge and wisdom, 
wanted St. Meykandan to inform him of the nature of Anaya or 
Ahankara or Egoism, what was the reply he had got ? The 
True Seer replied that the Anava or Ignorance or Egoism 
stood before him disclosed. One desires to be wise, as Eve 
desired, then learns much and thinks himself wise, and this 
is the highest type of Egoism or Ignorance. 

So that it is clear that before Eve ate the forbidden fruit, 
she was ignorant and filled with Egoism or Anava To say 
that the serpent or the Devil misled her is to carry it one step 
behind. If she was wise she would not have been misled by 
the wiles of the tempter. If she knew beforehand what was to 
befall her, she would not have yielded to the words of the ser- 
pent, and disobeyed the word of God. She had as such no 
knowledge and no forethought. She was weak and ignorant even 
before the temptation. Being ignorant and weak, the moment 
the fruits of pleasure and pain were placed before her, she was 
dazzled, she was attracted, she seized them at once. And 
the devil, vanishes from the scene. The devil, we take it, merely 
represents this inherent weakness or ignorance or Anava in 
man and nothing more. Adam and Eve typify the mere babes 
of human creation. There is something in the merest baba 
which makes it desire to live, and learn and know. It tries to 
put everything into its mouth whether a piece of bread or 
a piece of chalk, and it wants to feel the anotomy of every play- 
thing it handles by pulling it to pieces. Can any amount 
of warning and advice prevent the baby from touching the 
flame of a burning candle ? The loving parent no doubt gives 
the warning ‘ Don’t touch, don’t touch,’ but the advice is all 
useless and the wise father usually allows it to get a singeing, 
enough for it to know the good and evil, the pain and pleasure 
thereof ; and he takes care that the baby is not burnt. Throw 


* Qev&sru Oa wavir 



igo TRtr. oi Kxowixrnt "i *;* »oi • and evil. 

* 

a briilianily coloured and glowing fruit of the strychnine tree, 
the baby wiil seize it and try to bite it, but the ever watchful 
father will take care to see that the baby does not swallow it. 
It is our love that prompts us to give instruction, advice, 
warning, and even chastisement, but all this will be thrown 
away if the soil itself is not good. And in our wisdom we re- 
cognise that all this is of no use, that the wayward child should 
be allowed to gain peace by tasting the bitterness “ of sorrow 
in all the days of its life.” So too, the All-loving Father in 
Heaven told Ada in and Eve what was not good for them, not to 
taste or desire the fruits of both good and bad acts, i. e, the 
pleasures and pains of this worid. But they would not bear it 
in mind nor listen. Did not God know that they would be 
tempted, and did he try to save them from the Devil ? No; he 
permitted them to be tempted. Nay, he willed them to taste 
the fruit as a father would take a child to touch ever so slighty 
the candle-flame. “ He whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth,” 

ii se^3nuSis.&Sii^sr ■oiis&LC Q3/rsGva,Gu,.Qufl^6Vff<*@65Wii; (?L/r si" . 

And the misery and suffering that flow from our tasting of 
the fruit of good and evil acts are merely for our chastening, 
and purification, and this can only be done in this existence and 
no other ; and the whole purpose and scheme of creation be- 
comes 'thus evident. (Sivajnanabodha first Sutra 
It is for the purpose of removing this defect or weakness or 
Anava or egoism in man that this life is given him, and every 
means which a loving Father can devise for his betterment is 
afforded him- But all such means do not influence each indivi- 
dual in the same way. The best of education, the purest of home 
influence, and the holiest of associations seem, actually thrown 
away on some people. They have a bent of their own, their 
own individuality, and this thrusts itself out under all shades 
and under all cloaks. This contradicts with the theory that 
human mind is a mere tabula rasa. Youth and white paper 
take impressions as the saying goes. Evolutionists seek here- 
dity to explain it. But it is now acknowledged that heredity 
does not explain all. The most model of parents have begotten 



TREE OF KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL. 1 9 1 

• 

the most vicious of children. Neither the Theologians of the 
west nor their scientist brethren have explained this aspect of 
the case, and we must confess this as the only one weak point 
in modern Christianity which their best defenders have not 
been able to strengthen. It will not require much thought to 
see that this story of man’s first disobedience, and of his tasting 
the fruit of that Forbidden tree is nothing more than the 
Doctrine of Karma as told by all the Indian schools of Philoso- 
phy, including the Buddhists. 

The knowledge of good and evil is good and bad Karma, 
sale and and the fruits thereof are the pleasures and 

pains derived from such acts. There is no harm in performing 
good and bad acts, but these acts should not be performed for 
the sake of the fruits, out of selfish desire or dislike. And the 
moment these are performed with such desire, the thirst (jya/r 
Trishna-Tanha) after such enjoyment increases, and the bonds 
of wordly existence are more and more made fast. The fruits 
of both are bad, and are compared to gold and iron-fetters and 
St. Tiruvaljuvar calls them its g.Qaf&ar i. r., “the 

two kinds of Karma, darkness covered.” It is significant how 
in the Indian Philosophic Schools the phrase eSSsmuuiuehr mse# so 
meaning eating the fruits of Karma is the commonest expression 
and one which exactly corresponds to the eating of the For- 
bidden fruit of good and evil in the Biblical accounts. More 
than this, the tree of good and evil fruits, one tree out of which 
both fruits are produced, is a common figure in the Upanishats 
and in the Tamil Siddhanta works. 

The following passages in Mundaka Upanishat iii. i to 4 
which are repeated in the Katha and Svetasvatra Upanishats 
and are derived from the Rigveda, explain the whole fully. 

1. Two birds, inseparable friends, cling to the same tree ; one of 
them eats the sweet fruit, and the other looks on without eating, 

2. On the same tree, man (a> 4 $a) sits grieving, immersed by his own 
impotence. But when he sees the other Lord (Isa) contented and knows 
His glory, then his grief passes away, 



I 9 2 


1REE OF KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL. 


3. When the seer sees the brilliant Maker and Lord of the world, 
and himself as in the womb of God then he is wise, and shaking off good 
and evil, he reaches the Highest oneness, free from passions. 

4. Life sure is He who flames through all creation. The wise man 
knowing Him reaches of naught else. He sports in God, in God finds his 
delight, yet he doth acts perform (truthfulness, penance, meditation &c.), 
best of God’s universe, he. 

5. This God is to be reached by truth alone, and meditation, by 
knowledge, pure and constant discipline. He is in body’s midst, made 
all of Light, translucent; whom practised men, sins washed away, behold. 

6. That heavenly-bright, of thought-transc ending nature, shines out 
both vast and rarer than the rare ; far farther than the far, here close at 
hand that too, just here in all that see nestling within the heart. 

7. By eye He is not grasped, nor yet by speech, nor by the other 
powers, nor by mere meditation, or even holy deeds. By wisdom calm, in 
essence pure, then not till then does one in ec stacy, Him free from parts, 
behold. 

The second maijtra is thus commented on by Srikantha- 
charya (vide Siddhanta Dipika Vol. 2, p. 74). The traditional 
interpretation of this passage is given as follows : 

“ The Jiva, bound by the shackles of beginningless Karma, having 
entered into many a body made of Maya (Physical matter) — each suited 
to the enjoying of a particular fruit — is subjected to a lot of incurable 
misery ; and unable to ward it off on account of his impotence, he does 
not know what to do and grieves. He is thus immersed in the ocean of 
grief, caused by his great delusion. When, however, by the Lord’s grace, 
he intuitively sees Him, who as the Impeller dwells within Himself, 
who is gracious to all who is ever associated with Uma (Love and Light), 
then he attains to the unsurpassed greatness of the Lord, free from all 
grief. Therefore though Siva, who .is independent and who has been 
free from samsara from time without beginning, is in contact with the 
body, he is not subject to its evils, as the Jrva is. Wherefore it is, that 
Jiva and Paramesvara are said to be in the cave of the heart.” 

St. Tirumular has the following stanza ; 

QJULj u.'ifg# iMGvrrugQiLCTeisTriGm® 

fiLDUn«S L' psm&l L j(&,ijL’6B3r £ • 



TREE OF KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL- 


195 


irt-jQs it air Qi—'L^lL t-.se; £gix ■i^£(L l © 

Q&wQue «3 QffSSrQpjj^^TTQLC." 

There is a fruit maturing from flowers of vanity. 

One bird partakes of it and another does not. 

If aimed with an arrow and driven away, 

Sure one can reach the golden seat of Siva. 

St. Maniekavachakar calls the tree exactly g!0a9S^ 
in the ‘ollowing beautiful passage 

^u$ar>L- eur&TTL. Quifjun'b /DsevuSp 

u,it iiita jf.i £-i £* sstljl _■ Qsirif "ipgei 

jsQj £ ID 5 So GTi j Q U it TIT !£ £ 

a t«(lg,L£ 'si.s^r 

(§'ga92«nr nine iili Conuif^ GjS|£$£>’ 
a_0©.’ ^/(TK^^QgiuLu-iT Gusevs® srd 
J^lfslsk GWiekp Stop iLLl$-.CLic_G$tji 
Qsof)a:Gcir.i garari' Qxrs-P SeapmSehr 
u.rtuuGnv.i *sr>:Q *fr es,c3sirS5»i._* (gjerrp^jei’ 
io 4Q r it j- Qj-.ekQi.cfir uStj/psSl Q<ee)i& 
jsj 0ct#Ssw eoajgps rr ^ekusSp $lL£)£ 

Q f mess <_ s_i fair ^LS £ £ kp 

Reiser !—££(TTj-lQu peer Qicsrir, gutless ! 

Meanwhile, the heavenly mighty stream 

Rises and rushes, crowned with bubbles of delight, 

Eddies around, dashes against the bank of our * embodiment,’ 

And twofold deeds of ours growing from age to age , — 

Those mighty tries , — roots up and bears away. 

It rushes through the cleft of the high hills. 

Is imprisoned in the encircling lake, 

Where grow the expanded fragrant flowers, — 

In tank, where rises smoke of the agil, where beetles hum ; 

And as it swells with ever-rising joy, 

The ploughmen -devotees in the held of worship 

Sow in rich abundance seed of love 1 

Hail, Cloud-Like God,* hard in this universe to reach ! 

— From Dr. Pope’s translation. 

* God, ‘like clouds is gentle and fierce too,’ nourishing both the 
wicked and good, and in time rooting up the wicked. 

25 



194 


TREE OF KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL. 


and St. PafjinattSr has a much more elaborate passage, in regard 
to the uprooting of this poisonous Mango tree, in 

Tiruvidai Marudur Mummanik-Kovai (io). 

The tree of knowledge of good and evil is the Karmic Life 
of the individual, made up of the accumulated acts performed 
by him remaining in a perfect and unchangeable chain' of causes 
and effects, following the man close like his shadow, as 
distinguished from the tree of life which is the light in him. 
It is this Karmic existence, this tree of shadow which the 
Buddhists postulated, and not anything like the tree of Life or 
the true soul postulated by the theistic Hindu Schools, and they 
recognized nothing higher than this inpermanent though 
continuous (as a stream) Karmic Life. To them, all existence 
seemed only as sorrow and evil, and complete cessation or 
annihilation of this Karmic existence, by the attainment of mere 
knowledge, constituted their highest end. To them there was 
no joy in life, and no means of attaining to such joy, as they 
would not recognize the all-loving Powers of the Supreme 
Lord, who could grant them such Joy, out of His immeasurable 
Grace. The Siddhaflta no doubt postulated with the Buddhist 
that his body (birth and death) must cease, his feelings must 
cease, -his life must cease, his understanding must cease, and 
that his egoism must cease. But how and whereby could this 
cessation be brought about? The means are set forth succinctly 
in the tenth and eleventh Sutras of Sivajhanabotha. 

‘ 1 £ /Tva. &T ±j[T£lu_ & *2 

U U&ssfi 't jt-iy 

L&obtX ~ &VJL' ;* 63T Q £ 3i;e\)^^5C T 'l £ Q rr , . ’ ’ 

As the Lord becomes one with ihe Soul in its human condition, so 
let the Soul become one with Him, and perceive all its actions 
to be His. Then will it lose all its Mala, Maya, and Karma. 

i> x n ggyj <s6ubr,agj<£0<£ a/rcl® (tfismlQuirevi 
s rreem njair peags airtLi—eSair 

m^. JJ $ IT cSy iS rc* Z tool £ if pi (k gli ■ 



TREE OF KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL. I95 

As the soul enables the eye to see and itself sees, so Hara enables 
the soul to know and itself knows. And this Advaita knowledge 
and undying Love will unite it to His Feet. 

They are, becoming one with God, and dedicating one’s 
acts to God, and unceasing Love and devotion to Him. By 
such dedication, one brings himself in harmony with the divine 
law, and loses his pride of self-knowledge, and his own ignor- 
ance and Karma cease to operate, the man’s whole being be- 
coming beauteous by the Flood of His Grace. As clearly 
distinguished from the Buddhist ethics and psychology, the 
Siddhapti belives that his salvation cannot be secured except 
by such self-renunciation, and love of the Supreme. 

“ {^(rfjaS'Osaru-iLB Q^jrir ig)«B > rosnasr 

GutTfTrjmQjptT L/atf 

“ QsuetxirS^eu Gsuemn^n-vnajuSsotrek &Hrra<g) 

■jj n snsrSuSQuyanuuSex -.' 1 

“L-pji* upppqrj&sr U'ijx&srujuupgi 
urjpn,up>jlpe£'L-/b(&i." 

“ iS rrj'hQusrssiijj Qu^eatc f.iijsp P jE’hGussrgpil 

'G £* -oQl 1 iT cTT" oS /7 GUST i I alj . 

'• ^6oai/f i'&iLir uQuirGu.irLpji^iri 

8- «Ba/ra^s@oi Q^rPs^q^uj Li -irqtjQor 
uSessriiSe^l Qiuei'eiir eyuS i e tLgj QpiSGj 
Quu^&iru l3puutp:&(Sj Soixa)0i5i3’ j a; 

Gpetfli taaKi.' 

,S / tflLG u'.'tZ r jpe 9 >xujso/r Pq.Qgbt 
t'*i_ it j 4* suffoifw" _■£,.£ i aalr c «« a 
lassies’ .jsorou. 

He is tiie one not comprehended by the Gods and the 
wise. He is the Life of all life. He is the supreme panacea 
for all the ills of the flesh ; and obeying His Law, no one 
knows death or birth. He is the shining Light of our dark 
existence. He is the one Joy, but not born of life, not born of 
Prakpiti guna, or the world and the transitory 7 ; and partaking of 
this Joy, our highest desires are completely fulfilled, unlike the 



196 


TREE OF KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL. 


joys of this world which ever create a flaming desire, a thirst 
after them, more and more like the unquenchable thirst of the 
confirmed drunkard. This supreme and resistless Joy as 
shown in other stanzas of the 1 House of God', QairnSiibfitguu’S&ih 
fills our hearts, like the flood brooking not its banks, when, in 
all humility and love, our body and heart melt in His .service. 

The contrast between the transient world’s joy and the 
Joy that transcends all states without end, /Ssu/i uj/isoq; 

ay.® <_ .g'ccrui, is well brought out in the following stanza by 
the s.une Saint Manickavachakar. 

0 2 to 37 g ^ lueircy&retrQ^ 7 ir s&suflji) pepteaz /emQ s. 

HZSBT p P g? lL Qu* iQ ITgl lL STiljQur a: 

i^essQssss ^etsrlsp Qjir.-ftijin 

^cafluLysa^ajrrgsiSi Q&6N Qs,: £ < gni>tS' . 

Taste not the flower-borne honey drop tiny as a millet seed. 

Sing thou of Him who showers honey of bliss 

So as to melt one’s very marrow- bones, 

While thinking, seeing and speaking aye and ever. 

When this joy fills him, then does he sport in God, delight 
in God as the Mundaka says, then “ does he love God, delight 
in God, revel in God and rejoice in God ” as the Chhafldogya 
puts it. In this condition of Svaraj, when he can exclaim * I am 
the glorious of the glorious ’ neither pain, nor pleasures of this 
world, nor the fruits of the forbidden tree, can touch or attract 
him, though he desists not from doing his duty, such as truth- 
fulness, meditation, tapas &c., and in this condition, even “ if he 
moves about there, laughing cr eating, playing or rejoicing (in 
his mind), be it with women, carriages, or relatives,” (chandog 
viii. 12. 3) these acts will not affect him, as fire cannot burn a 
man who is practised in agni-stumbha (see the principle stated 
in Sivajfiana Siddhiyar. X 5 & 6.) 

Compare this with the Christian aspiration to divine joy. 

“If to any the tumult of the flesh were hushed, hushed 
the images of the earth, and water and air, hushed also the ruler 
of heaven, yea the very soul be Lushed to herself, and by not 



TREE OF KXOWI.EDC E OF GOOD AND TVIL. 


1 97 


thinking on self surmount seif, hushed oil dreams and imagin- 
ary revelation, every tongue and every sign, and whatsoever 
exists only in transition, since if we could hear, all these say 
we made not to ourselves, but He made us that abideth for 
ever. If then having uttered this, they too should be hushed 
having rpused our ears to him who made them, and He alone 
speak not by them, but by Himself, that we may hear His 
word, not through any tongue of flesh, nor angels’ voice nor 
sound of thunder nor in the dark riddle of a similitude, but 
might hear Whom in these things we love, might hear his 
very self without these (as we too now strained ourselves and 
in swift thought touched on the eternal wisdom which abideth 
over all) — could this be continued on, and other visions of 
far unlike be withdrawn, and this one ravish and absorb and 
wrap up its beholder, and these inward joys, so that life might 
be for ever like that one moment of understanding which we 
now sighed after, were not this, enter in My Master’s joy ” 
(St. Augustine’s Confessions Book ix.) 

eutrsarQ&LL'S Lorr(7TjfZ wiriuii^geo liir Lcetig-QdstfLgpiG 
jStrair G&LLi—eflaiT'Sj -feUuu/Btun^ ^esreBiunugni^ 
eeiOTOaal Gena iti^QalL Qi—sii gg&r err Qp Jxsu auJ 
isireisrQ&LLi _ tkjir^irup-p G^eirQ^r sard) GsinLi—irG-ctr. 

While earth and air, water and sky and fire 

May change their nature, He changes and wearies not, 

In him, I lost my body and sense, my life and mind 
1 lost my self, I sing TeJJenam. 

&€6)S? LU P p QtfJTSST - -i oK) J7 A fT SGBT JLlT 

j&) €S) Jf 'JJ Jf) fT vi'cd ft JD tfPfcvZSip) 3Lu fr-S (<^j 

LffeA B -u 0 )5 ,<? V6BT . 

Ye fools ! that speak of the unspeakable, 

Can ye find the limits of the limitless one ? 

When as the’waveless sea one gains clearness, 

To him, will appear the Lord with braided hair. 



19? TRFE OF KNOWI.EDr.r Or GOOD AND EVIL. 

t 

Compare also. 

iZSBTQp^gilSg: 

asLsm-nif&ik a? £ijU§(7!}ini£i£_$!(—3sr 
eungsx^iQig! L££5rQpLcy$-5g]iSeBr 

/5irg»xyf}.i,ff6i0-o siTair tjJGujGesr . 

WheD deeds perished, and with it wealth, 

When flesh perished, and with it life, 

When mind perished, and its cause Akas, 

Then my ‘ I ' perished, I did not know. 

jx'uh SjjjSj; i~ ~rrS3Ca.L-.Att s&'JDJxlj 
Gt-jgia’ev psiG C?_j Qpei> p j? & 

.T ££ SJ *36 n 653 T £ & X cX iT iaO' "c ^ at 

g s vlterr i Jsi (fijLj QuesPssp&;n aGiQjjsj.uQa v. 

O, my Lord of Kafichi, when the elements, senses and sensations, 
The differing gunas and desires, and sense of time and space, 

When all these are lost in the blissful vision. 

Then am I freed from all evil and rest in peace. 

The original fall was brought about by disobeying God's 
Law, by opposing our will to his Will, and the only way of 
salvation consists in establishing the harmony of will between 
His and ours, and completely subordinating our will to His 
own, and allow His Will to be done as it is in heaven. 

When we were first created, we were just like children, 
fresh and innocent, fully trusting and depending on our loving 
parents, without caring for the morrow, fully obeying their 
dictates, and never asserting ourselves nor becoming self-willed. 
But the child preserves this condition only fora short time; it 
would not abide by the loving words of wisdom and warning- 
given to it, would know for itself ; and slowly its desire and 
self-will are developed, and in its ignorance and conceit, it 
accumulates the load of Karma. And unless we become again 
like children abiding in trust and faith completely on our 
Beloved Father, we cannot get rid of this sin and sorrow. And 
unless we become born again, we cannot see the Kingdom of 
heaven as declared by the same Jesus Christ, whom the world 
thought he was beside himself i. e., mad. And our St. Tayu- 



TREE OI‘ KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL. 


I99 


manavar likens the nature of the saintly 11 uneuGaa a 5 G ^- f dJ^.r 
utrspsaLcGuj&sr Se-cLS^^riresBiLn ^2 G.-f-Lsna uSitucGld” to 

the babies, and lunatics and men possessed. 

Karma or aJSsw simply means an act, and this act may give 
pleasure or pain and if it gives pleasure, it is called good and 
if it produces pain, it is called evil. Every good act is right 
and every evil act is wrong, or Punyam or papam, Virtue or sin. 
Sivajnana Siddhiyar defines punyam and papam as tmSa'sQpuiGfij 
p™, doing good to all sensient creatures and v-uSirsa^dj Q&djpSv 
doing evil to all creatures in the largest and broadest sense of 
the term, in the same way as any modern utilitarian philosop- 
her would define these terms, and we have no doubt that the 
definition is quite correct from any point of view. When we 
interpose conscience in the middle as a judge of good and evil, 
right and wrong, it is seen how varying the consciences of men 
are, and so we must necessarily seek a higher authority or test. 

Karma therefore signifies acts or series of acts or the 
aggregate of human experience, acting and reacting on each 
other ; and Law of Karma means the invariable order or Niyati 
which results, pain or pleasure attaches itself to a doer in 
accordance with the kind of acts performed by him, in accord- 
ance wilh the maxim 

e8&D/s# r #rT4o gsswaSfetnuib, “ He who sows must reap accordingly”. 

One result of this law is, that the respective fruits have to 
be enjoyed in a suitable body and this body is determined by 
the Karma performed by each, (Vide Sivajnanabotha II. 2 . ab) 
and if his previous Karma is good, he will get a good body, 
and if it is bad, he will get a bad body. And this accounts 
for the myriads of physical bodies in ever}- stage of develop- 
ment to the highest, from that of the amoebae to that of a 
Christ or Manickavacbakar, possessed of every varying mental 
and spiritual characteristics. The more good a man performs, 
the better and more developed body does he get, with the 
accompanying development of mind and heart, and the result of 
this privilege is,’ that he is enabled to get a purer and purer 



200 


'1 REE or KNOWS. F.DCF OF GOOD AND EVJL. 


body, which, the more it becomes pure, will reflect the Light and 
Glory of God; so that when man reaches his physical and mental 
perfection, he reaches the spiritual perfection of complete mer- 
ger in the supreme Light. And of all bodies, the human body is 
the one in which a man can work out his salvation, and therefore 
is he enjoined to take time by the forelock and do go,od while 
this body lasts, if not to secure salvation in this birth, atleast to 
secure a better body in w'hich he can carry on the good work. 

“ sreesresa tf?jj lS peS $ e&ssr -litscPi—lI iSpsSprresr 
uSiLMisl eift th £j'P pfig)3ireia 
$ui$ps& putStzB) Q»vul 9 psl' eirrLs^QiLJ 
a:fP9Q»\e&r. & C 

Among births numberless, that of man 
Is rare, rare indeed ; 

When this birth is lost, what will happen I know not. 

Hence pnesr&peud5p(rr: p pQpia 

g-trsiir.i pVsgrujIusar <u .neoQeorrfr unn-in Qic. 

O thou Supreme of Supreme, 

The good desiring to attain Sivajnana, ever perform good deeds and 
Tapas and make gifts. 

And so this doctrine of Karma instead of leading to quietism 
and indifference, inculcates a life of active beneficence “desiring 
the welfare of all ” and furnishes as good and sure a basis for 
perfect ethical conduct as any other system in the world. 

But even when doing good works, he is not to have any 
regard for the result, he is to do it without tasting the fruits 
thereof, as this tends to bind him to the world still by pro- 
ducing the physical body and will not effect his final release 
from this body ; and after performing evil and good, he attains 
to Qiuituli, becoming balanced in good and evil, pain 

and pleasure. This does not mean that he should so perform 
actions, that all his good actions will weigh as much as his bad 
actions, or doing as much punyam as papam, but it is attaining 
to a condition of viewing deeds either good or bad without 
either liking or disliking, a condition of being described as 
Qs. •wtr'Speo 3 j - cs*- 1 — n tr>:-c s ,i a# . In such a condition, man is not 



TREE OF KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL. 201 

} 

impelled or attracted by any thing which will give him plea- 
sure, he will not be deterred simply because it will cause him 
pain. Such objects of desire in the world are wealth, health 
and gratification, and we hate all those acts which will produce 
the opposite results. To such a person, wealth and poverty, 
food and poison, praise and blame, will be equally welcome, and 
one looks on all these as one looks on dust or chaff, without desire 
or aversion. It is when a man attains to this condition of 
Q&iasr Spsa QeueeBu—irstn^D or Qx-iruu, that he is led in pur- 

suit of the highest Ideals, to do the greatest acts of heroism, and 
the most magnanimous acts of self-sacrifice, and suffer the 
greatest martyrdom. The story of the churning of the Ocean 
is full of this meaning. The gods who were pained at their 
poverty, and desired wealth, came to reap the fire of the poison, 
which arose as a result of their own self-seeking, and the 
Supreme Being who appeared there, not for the sake of any 
reward, but for the sole purpose of saving the distressed gods, 
was not affected by the Poison which he swallowed. 

So that when God willed to create this earth and the 
heavens, it was not the result of a mere whim or play, it was 
not for his own improvement or benefit, it was not for his self- 
glorification or self-realization, but he willed out of his Infinite 
Love and Mercy towards the innumerable souls, who were 
rotting in their bondage, enshrouded in'Anava mala, without 
self knowledge and self-action, that they be awakened cut of 
their kevala (Qseu^i) condition and move into the cycle or evolu- 
tion, (j-asu), births and deaths, whereby alone they can effect 
their salvation. One helped on to this, by being given bodies, 
faculties &c., out of matter, they begin to do, accumulate 
karma, which has to be eaten fully before the 
the indifference to pain and pleasure, can be gained. In the 
process of eating the ‘bitter fruits’ and gaining (balance), 
one gathers experience and wisdom and the knowledge of 
Truth. And unless this Truth be gained, the soul’s salvation 
is a mere myth and nothing more. 



THE FOUR PATHS. 


RELIGION THEORETICAL AND PRACTICAL. 

Good deal of attention has been paid of late to the Theore- 
tical aspects of our Hindu Religion, and most people are familiar 
with the various systems of Hindu Philosopy— of the Dvaita, 
Yisishtadvaita and Advaita aspects in particular. And in such 
a study, one is likely to lose sight of the practical aspect of the 
Religion, and it is to this aspect, I wish to-day to draw your 
particular attention. 

DIFFICULTIES IN UNDERSTANDING HINDU RELIGION. 

To the ordinary foreigner, Hinduism appears as a fantastic 
combination of the grossest superstitions and the most dreamy 
speculations. Even the sympathetic student of our religion, 
though he is prepared to admire and appreciate particular 
aspects of our philosophy, looks down with pity on our so-called 
errors.. And one Christian friend put it to me whether, in 
Hinduism, we have any real and practical religion. Of course, 
to the onlooker, the contrast between Temple-worship and its 
attendant. festivals and the austerer practices of the Sanyasins, 
the ablutions and pujah of pious people and the * Tatvamasi ’ 
and ‘ Ahambrahmasmi ’ meditations of others, cannot but be 
bewildering. Even some of us are apt to look upon so much 
labour and money spent on Temples and in Temple-worship as 
so much waste, or we are prepared to relegate these practices 
to the illetirate lower orders, as we are pleased to call them. 
Can all these various practices have any real meaning and pur- 
pose or can they not ? Can all these be reduced to certain 
definite principles or not ? These are the Questions which I 
propose to discuss in this paper. 



THE FOUR PATH?. 


203 


DIFFERENT PATHS AND UPAS AN AS. 

Of course, we have read and heard people talk, about 
Karma-marga, Bhakti-marga and Yoga and jnana-margas, as 
though there is little or no bhakti, or bhakti is not wanted in 
other margas, as though there are no actions or duties attached 
to the others, or all those who do not follow the Jnanamarga 
are only ignorant people. Does men’s smearing themselves with 
ashes and namams, repeating God’s names, constitute bhakti ? 
Does not the relieving of the poor and infirm and the sick con- 
stitute part of one’s religious duties? Is it the highest duty of 
the Yogi and Jnani that he considers himself superior to others, 
and thinks that he will be polluted by the mere touch of others, 
and that he has achieved a great thing if he has injured none ? 

And then we have heard of different Upasanas and Vidyas, 
Sandilya, Dahara, Sakala and Nishkala and Saguna and 
Nirguna ; and there are people who would advocate the 
Sagupa against the Nirguna and the Nirguna against the 
Sagutia. 

To begin a statement of my views. Hindus hold as an 
axiom that no study is of any benefit unless it can lead one to 
the worship of the supreme One. 

‘‘ sppg fss)6un >u utuGesreirQsireo surev^assr 
3p-^s!T OpiTL'ir Qgesflasr,” 

And that we cannot be rid of the ills flesh is heir to, and 
cross the sea of births and deaths, and attain to everlasting joy 
unless we reach the feet of the Supreme Lord. 

“ Qsueasrblpso GsuGsat—nsmo cSurnr ssrisf- Q&sipr itJ 
QiLiresar’S u9&G3S)ua$vv.” 

GuQ K-Lfii—oV £hj2C±IT BSJiTIT 

j£sopa.‘&jrp, /rrf.T.T,” (The Kiiral). 

To get rid of our ills and to attain to His joy is our goal. 

That this human birth is given to us to work out our 
salvation and in this mundane plane, is admitted by all 
religions, Christianity included." 



204 


THE FOWR PATHS, 


L i9/l Srt*6S>.3 uS(eS;^^^ I 
GunirSySaa Q;<t? losliQ ojuS is g u yu9 
Kamila jA QsnarrQesrp &, vQ pear *j Qisird@2 

fd@uQu(jrji ^espiLjemfl&ffiL. ( TiruvSchaka ). 

How then can we attain to this end ? This is the consider- 
ation of the Practical Religion. And our systematic treatises 
devote considerable space to the treatment of this question. 
This is the chapter on Sadana in the Yedapta Sutras and in 
the Jsivajranabhodha. 

As a necessary prelude to this, the nature of the Deity 
and of the Soul has to be discussed. 

nature of god. 

According to the greatest sage of our TamiJ-land, Saint 
TiruvalJuvar, He is ^ and gfssyrarar, our Supreme Lord 
and Master, the author of our being and regeneration, He is 
the Pure Intelligence and the Transcendent one, eirsu /#&£*, and 
tA', He is without likes and dislikes, Gajs£sr(8p£<' 
Gojessn^nea cuSevirssr, dwells in our heart LMA).7 and He 
is the occean of love and mercy jujzi&mLfi ^-opsttizr. 

The Upunishats speak of Him as "the Highest great Lord 
of Lords, God of Gods, King of Kings, the Highest abode, as 
God, the Lord of the world, the adorable.” "He is the one Goa 
hidden in all beings, all pervading, the aptaratma of all beings, 
watching over all works, dwelling in all beings, the witness, 
the perceiver, the only one, the Nirgupa being. ‘His High 
Power (£aktt) is revealed as manifold, as inherent, acting as 
force and knowledge.” 

“ He is Siva (the Happy and Blissful). He brings good 
and removes all evil, the Lord of Bliss, as dwelling within the 
Atma the immortal, the support of all.” 

“Ho one has grasped Him above or across or in the middle. 
His form cannot be seen, no one perceives him with the eye.” 

“ That God, the maker of all things, the Paramattna, always 



THF. FOUR PATHS. 


205 


dwelling in the heart of man, is perceived by the heart, the soul, 
the mind. They r who know It become immortal.” 

“Those who, through heart and mind, know Him thus 
abiding in the heart, become immortal,” “ Satyam Jhanam 
Anantam Brahma Ananda Rupam Amritam YadVibhuti Shan- 
tam Sivam Advaitam.’’ “ He is the sat, chit and anand.” 

In the Gita also, He is spoken of as the Lord of Lords, 
Ishvara and Mahesvara, the spectator and permitter, supporter 
and enjover, the Paramatman, the supporter of elements, as 
devourer and causer. It is the light of lights and is said to be 
beyond Tamas. Wisdom knowable, wisdom gainable, centred 
in every heart. 

In the Advaita Siddhanta Sastras, He is called jys 
one with His Sakti, the 1 Siva Sat.’ 

a.evOasvTiifl'S Qsu^L ^pafijjirQajs s-S 

^/soSsvn eyuSjj&r &etsr'jjj$gi ^eswruSSesr^r,i^> Qfs-usog 
pteosn^L ^supjSar p6BraBLD£scr& Q&ujpeSearflppi’Q&x 
oUeosij&a i§ekuj£V?SB)S Sscrnjerssr ,-f ®.a/Tv*' r ie@ij. 

One with the world, and different, and both, The light transcendent, 

The Lord who guides souls innumerable, in obedience to His Will 
(Ajfia) and each one’s karma ; 

The Nirmala Being, untouched by the defects of His creatures ; 

Supreme He stands, secondless, pervading all. 

utziQp roQl(irj yVaj.® eff uec&oa flSajffgm logvoUSP 
ftwQpfB&j Q±nT/iQu!r<iu> fisifiuusnenreve^ir^Qear 
^ea>wQup aSenujg^iQuiir-srjy iJletDoj.iJ^L-ir ^ujotiiS^Qeer. 

Siva is neither a Rupi nor an Arupi. He is neither chit nor Achit. 
He does not create nor sustain nor perform other functions. He was 
never a Yogi nor a BhOgi. Though present in and pervading all these 
inseparably, yet he is of a nature different from ail these. 

,<?£»!_ ji'.A'iT SrlT'tyV ^,T 

-dLs-S. ,T 51'S 2-2.il tisrfjF.ai 



200 


•i ar f.'.r'K iwms. 

< 

&& jos rrerrp ^,3/ p io'jcr . ^ 
g ina.'gjsll} zsm pjS. esr & t,h ps)dr [c^-aSi-iii S'iEsbsjj GajGi'iuTo:. 

The form of this Sakti is Pure Intelligence. If asked whether 
Supreme Will and Power are also found in this Supreme Intelligence, yes. 
Wherever there is intelligence, there is will and power. As such, the 
Power and Will will be manifested also by the Supreme Chit Jakti. 

■= £ 'CJ“’ 7 ‘ ,T @co *2/ jdrpszrd 503siri$«jr r i9 
rpdr^-j p ? S-&2 IdsrptJ- ^pjg'jSs'j'Zs^ 

LC (TTj&f)2i<ST lU(XZ Ttrsi>3j.TLLltL — esrgjutbf) U£BTd SC.Vct i_L 

3'x./Ti:fli//r3'a/relSJ) <g)3s3a>\uCQL-rrso aSCajr. 

Hara has for His Sakti. Except as this Supreme Love and 
Grace, there is no Siva. Without Siva, there is no Sakti. Isa removes 
the hate of the Souls with his love, and grants them bliss, just as the Sun 
dispels the darkness, shrouding the eyes, with his light 

This supreme statement was reached in the famous lines of 
the great Tirumular. 

&.<av(tpj> ^ireorQu-firurr ^pisS'surir 

j)/dr-2u lc jfim jslvvi ,r 

*gysjrCG ?&JLUrsup^(t^ isfiipi^esr 
c&c&Ju uzir i prr'2 a. 

“God is Love” and that great agnostic teacher of science 
who died a sincere believer in God had stated truly, “what has 
all the science or all the philosophy of the world done for the 
thought of mankind, to be compared with the one doctrine 
“God is Love.”?” 

God is, as such, all Knowledge and all Love. 

NATURE OF THE SOUI.. 

To talk of the means to attain to this great goal, will be 
futile if we don’t understand the nature of man. From the 
statements in the first chapter of ihe Kurul, it may be deduced 
that man is ignorant and subject to births and deaths, and has 
likes and dislikes, and does sin and suffer, and he could not be 
compared to God in any way. The following texts bring out 
the distinction quite plainly enough. 



THE FOUR PATHS. 


207 


“ The knowing one (GodJ and the non-knowing (soul) are 
two, both unborn; one is Lord, the other non-Lord (anl§a).” 

“ Patim Yivasy-atmeswaram (Lord of the soul) Sasvatam 
bivam achyutam.” 

“He who dwells in the soul and within the soul, whom the 
soul does not know, whose body the soul is, who rules the soul 
within, He is thy soul, the ruler within, the immortal.’ 1 

“ But the soul Paramount is another. Who is proclaimed 
as the Paramatma, who — the infinite king— penetrates all the 
three worlds and sustains them. 

Since I do surpass the kshara, and even do excel the 
akshara, I am reputed the Purushottama.” 


A DIFFICULTY IN' REACHING THE GOAL. 


And here we are met by statements that God is unknowa- 
ble and imperceptible to our senses. He is past all thought and 
speech. 


e-.eDf±iQ&irsiir@sjB Qfixnsnetr 

semjiv/bjD Qfiirearesi/ui setDffsiressteuit^Qwti . 


( Tirumantra). 


And yet the upanishats say that when men should roll up 
the sky like a hide, then only without knowing Siva, there 
could be an end of pain. 

And St. Aru} Nandi Sivacharyar states the difficulty thus: 
“ If God is unknowable, then there can be no benefit from Him. 
He can never pervade us, neither can we unite with him in 
Moksha. He cannot perform the pancha-krityas for our benefit. 
His existence w'ill be like that of the flowers of the sky and of 
the rope formed of the hairs of the tortoise. 


And yet it must stand to reason that we cannot possibly 
know him if his nature is as we have described above. The 
moment we assert that we can know him, wc asset t that he 
becomes an object of our cognition, and as all Psychologists, 
Hindu and European, are agtecd, all objects of cognition are 
what is called Achit or Asat or matter. Here is St. AruJ Nandi’s 



20o 


the folr paths. 


statement: “ If you ask whether God is an object of knowledge 
or not, then know, if He is an object of knowledge, He will be- 
come Achit and Asat. All objects of cognition are achit; all 
objects of cognition come into being and are destroyed (being 
bound by time), they divide themselves into the worlds, bodies 
and organs (being bound by space) and enjoyments. , They are 
identified at one time by the intelligence as itself (bandha) and 
at another time (in moksha) are seen as separate ; and they are 
all products of Maya. Hence all such are achit or non-intelli- 
gent or Asat (other than sat).” 

As God is spoken of as the inner Ruler and Soul of Soul, 
whose body the Soul is, the knowing Soul is itself in the 
position of object to the True subject God, and the thinking mind 
cannot itself think thought, much less can the object perceive or 
think the subject. 

And if he cannot be known, He must be a non-entity, 
argues St. Arul Napdi. And this exactly is the position which 
Paul Carus takes in his pamphlet on the “ Idea of God.” His 
argument is exactly that of Saint Arid Nandi, that if God is 
knowable, he can only be known as an object, as matter, which 
will be absurd. But Paul Carus would however retain God 
as an'idea, or ideal, an abstract thing as redness or whiteness, 
a beautiful fantasy which will be useful. But as against this 
view, it is positively asserted by Saint Arul Nandi that He is 
not a non-entity and that He is Sat and Chit. As He is chit, 
He is not knowable, and yet He is a positive fact. 

How is then this psychological difficulty to be got over ? 

THE FIRST POSSIBILITY OF OVERCOMING THE DIFFICULTY. 

In the first place, it will be futile to think of knowing Him 
as different from ourselves as an object. Says St. Arul Napdi: 
“ As God is not different from the soul, as He is in the soul, as 
He is the thinker of all the soul’s thoughts, as in Him there is 
no distinction of I and mine, God cannot be perceived by the 
soul’s intelligence as different.” “God is not different from you 



THt roUR PATHS. 


209 


either as he is inseparably associated with you, and transcend 
all discriminating intelligence. As He is ever the inside of the 
soul, the soul can be said to be Sivam.” 

The first possibility of our becoming Him will lie, therefore, 
in the fact that we are inseparably associated with Him, and 
must thirtk ourselves as one with Him. We must not create 
distinctions between ourselves and Himself, interpose our will 
and thought, the feelings of ‘ 1 and mine.’ Then only will our 
will and thought come into rapport with Him. 

S74/6J)S ilSeZB/DUilsdi S ps 

-o^vxitsio'u ^ssrQ-ss)'Hl a'maiSsir uSeirQ p;. ", 

“ JHanfftuprri sirQunsu Sisn,s Q 
uetDfftupjflsnjii fireir urfiraDL-QxurQeer” . 

:o£sr Q p, Qs«6ar<*«ssr / ?"V — 

, *c/lC6trfj3T(&jgf}'nUtTiEl 'aZO cn X (T l l^L 

srenr^rrai uesifljj pxn jbffl — «gy«eir 
^esretsrrTFj&r Qai®rsir£jst(Trj£j5l eosup £ntmu}- , 

O mind, was it not for me, that God came under the 
banyan tree as silent teacher, and with dumb show of hand 
cured me of acts called my acts, and placed me in the blissful 
ocean of His grace. 

n Ke/suzniSL'iLjLC vsisr^yeir — 

ayflujirG^ &lLi 9 - Qtuesrsar >SsjnG6u unit peisr 
j^)0ar/T6or QurrQ^ar<£S>ji!n_^eosviTeo — <»6abri__ 

€T«5rSs5TipiS/ 46OT^L5V>G«Br«r6!I7'tjl. G,grTL$. 

“ By grace behold all things,” He said. Not understanding, 
by my intelligence I beheld differentiating. I saw darkness. 
I saw not even me, the seer. What is this, sister? 

*T 68T$68r ILj ib ^GST’^eCTlLjUD &T&T <£ 

Q £ war (633)^ <sueoar<saai i£! uekff 

G) & f\ &&€& SjjQ Qsii IT ■& fl €\)G>6\) r£f £S & 

Qjl s^Gei&r, 



210 


THE FOUR PATHS. 


“ Of me and thee, think not in thy heart as two. Stand 
undifferentiating.” This one word when He uttered, how 
can I tell, dear, the Bliss that grew straightaway from 
that word ? 

(From Saint Tayumanavar’s ^esnspastsBu^ ‘Revel in Bliss' 
— translated by P. Arunachalam Esq. m. a., of Colombo.) 

THE SECOND POSSIBILITY. 

The second possibility lies in the fact that God is not 
knowledge alone. If He was so, we cannot know Him for cer- 
tain. But as we have stated above, He is also all Love. It is 
in this Supreme fact that our salvation is based. This Love is 
in us, surrounds us on all sides, above, below, and all about us. 
His Love to us passes that of the mother, says Saint Manikka- 
vagagar. 

“ a iLQi—ir fflteiraa wear ppQfipai aibaaasr ” 

“ sl.( 750 uQu 00 SLoriE/gjafia- (ipaigsQsn assr(d 

u^spSaiBuj urnsiSQ^ssiirp pi—<mat—ev ” 

“ iSSenriiQpnjpnb aireearQi—ti pnj> Qu&isQ/urrgiih siuQungjw ^Tjsnrp 

Qpffluo LjfiarQasa s ^isppQpsirQ TarfliLjuD (SjenfhliLj&Di—zjrr or " 

“ puunQjj p a areas l- is pair Qis<ifa0d(^ii) peareaswuS^eir ” 

** a ear i— naira £ ajQ unaQ in gyti QuifiaruQeuarai us, 

Quail® p pgliiiiSlu L^aessrLEirdj ejseif(j}esjnujd@L-d(^es)pQujn 
isnQus<8$pQpaic eSq^Qpesr i^&uapiri(ga 

Q asr&iTQLD 

No selfish want prompts His love. His Love was ever 
with us from our first beginning to the very end. 

“ «s^0Oar®@io/rsBr euareaeuiu/Stunir 

^qfjQrrr jgatr'yypneBr^jib Qpcni 
0* sQfisiT ^n 
or im a ear iwisjeoi p a 

Who knows the Power of this Aru] by which Omnipresence is secured ? 
Who understands that this Love transmuted Herself ipto tasteful ambrosia? 



THE FOUR PATHS. 


21 r 


Who thinks that this Love* — permeates subtly the five great operations 

(PaSchakritya) ? 

Who knows that this Love has eyes on all sides (is Omniscient.)? ” 

“ ^/(VjaflpiSjDiB$Ll.<i> euetririhfihlQ 

^f(jfje<fiovy 5 liB£i?£iruuirir>/t! ldss) pis $ lL<£ 

^q^etrresrsun j Qp p p p iresr is p nptL.uf- 

iT'^SMSBTSOl' s pi JJ p /■ Vc S3T . 

Bom in Love, Bred up in Love, 

Changing, and resting in Love, 

Fed in the Supreme ambrosia of Love, 

The Nandi entered me as Love.” 

The mother’s love will not suffer, even if the child misbe- 
haves and does not deserve it. If we will therefore return His 
love, then our salvation is secured. 

“ *2/iuair ^ ear lSi esr <9 / it sir a geo Q<f£»Qu>,” 

(With undying love, enters the Feet of Hara) 

St. Tirumular sums up these foregoing facts in a beautiful 
verse. 

pea rjp uSpeaurli uSUopruitr Qxj Hearts 
tie&rjp/ cFlouj iSztr.snir ££@Qoj 
•Smjpi Qis tiipeispu unp pptreo 

Q&earpv&eiiLLnpeo Pppirip £p$Quj. 

Becoming one, without being one nor two, 

Becoming freed of Samaya Nirakira, 

Ascending by the Grace of our Loving mother, 

And becoming Sivam is Siddhanta Siddhi. 

LOVE, THE GREATEST THING IN THE WORLD. 

Now let us realize to ourselves how it is, that to know Him 
and become one with Him, we must love Him. Let us take 
our human relations. Is it by birth and caste, wealth and 
possessions, learning and knowledge, that one is brought nearer 
to another? Are not all these barriers dividing one from 



212 


THE EOLK PATHS. 


another? By all these means, one regards himself as raised above 
all other less favoured individuals. It is learning that puffeth 
up a man. The ‘ I ’ ness and ‘mine ness’ become more and 
more developed in these men. So these means can never lead 
one nearer to another. Then what other means have we? It 
is love, love in all its gradations from pity upwards. This 
is the greatest Thing in the world, as Prof. Drummond truly 
said. It is the ideal of both theistic and atheistic systems of 
the world. 

Love is the basis of all human society, the rock on which it 
is built. This will appear so from the mere heads of the 
chapters in @su«\>,2>-b in the sacred Kural. It is the one thing 
which binds man to man, the parent to the child, friend to friend 
and the woman to the husband. When this prevails, the 
distinctions created by birth, possessions, and learning, all cease. 
It is this which impels the servant to engage in his master’s 
service, the mother to sacrifice herself to the child, the friend to 
give his life for his friend, the lover to forget himself in the 
loved. All the noblest acts of heroism, philanthropy, and 
martyrdom, arise from this one source. It is this love which 
as we have seen, gives rise to the other great fact in Being, 
namely, Sacrifice. Even naturalists have discovered the connex- 
ion of these two facts, Love and Sacrifice, even in the case of 
lower animals. And should not this law hold good in higher 
realm than the animal and social ? And it is to lead to this end, 
we have all along been trying. 

KNOWLEDGE NECESSARY. 

And in this place, the importance of knowledge cannot be 
ignored. One has to enter a railway platform and watch one 
of the ever-recurring scenes. 

The compartments are crowded more or less. Fresh passen- 
gers try to rush into it. The persons, impelled of course by their 
own comfort, resist the intrusion. Actual fights ensue. Some 
of them try to get in somehow. They st#md for a while- 



the toi'R paths 


21 .t 

Those who have comfortable seats are pierced by their own 
hard heart and they pity and relent. A small space is found 
for the man who stands. They naturally soon after fall to 
conversation. They discover soon their mutual friends and 
relations, and by the time they leave the train, they become the 
most affectionate of people, and the parting becomes a sorrow. 
Whereby, was this mutual hate turned into love? It is by 
knowledge. We are ignorant, all of us, how intimately we are 
related to each other. We are all god’s servants, His children 
in fact, and may be, we can share in His fellowship. The whole 
world is ensouled by Him. We are members of His body, 
says Srikantha. 


THE TRUE WORSHIP. 

“Wherefore, the whole universe is ensouled by Siva. If any 
embodied being whatsoever, be subjected to constraint, it will 
be quite repugnant to the eight-bodied Lord; as to this, there is 
no doubt. Doing good to all, kindness to all, affording shelter 
to all, this they hold as the worshipping of Siva.” 

Here, in this last sentence of Srikantha, do we get at the 
real essence of all religion. What is Siva ? It is Love- What 
is worship of Him ? Loving Him. How can we love Him,, whom 
we do not know? Naj', we can know Him and do know Him 
though. We do not perceive each other’s souls or minds and 
yet, we love each other. It is the body we know, and it is on 
each other’s body we manifest all our love. We do willing 
service to the body only of our elders, masters, teachers and 
parents. It is on that body we love, we lavish all our wealth 
and labour. So can we worship and love Him by loving His 
Body which is the whole universe of Chetana and Achetana. 

'JtufrsS&'JBT FTfT 

& & TDS&rufT & &&a;: 'dfzvGusu stjt 

— /flCpur :'Lp?^srd - r ~Gxsr i $ a/r y — - 

&/S if S!T wdUJpjigiljKa J0 5 LaS&gB) 



214 


THE r’ljUR PATHS. 


&-i£*!esrir8)-L>fi‘±irrlj QjuiiexiQfiSsr sni^.’ 
a gisa&rgi^ Q 0a®Loaja sisn—Q&r L-jfitiju; 
euiiQu/TTiLiTSsr uetrefiSiu.-icth pqjarnQiij . 

' Thou dwell’st in all the elements,” tis said ; and yet 
‘ Thou goest not, not com’st the sages thus, have sung 
‘Their rhythmic songs. Though, neither have we heard; nor learnt 
Of those, that Thee by seeing of the eye, have known. 

Thou King of Pcrun-Tuy.ai , girt with cool rice-fields, 

To ponder Thee is hard to human thought. To us 
In presence come ! Cut off our ills ! In mercy make us Thine ! 
Our mighty Lord, from off Thy couch in grace atise ! 

As I pointed out above, knowledge is an essential requisite 
of our love. As knowledge grows, Love will grow. The more 
and more we understand our nearness to each other and to God, 
more and more will our love grow. The knowledge and love 
prevailing between master and servant is weaker than between 
father and son ; between friends it is higher, and in the case of 
lovers, it is highest. 


THE THIRD POSSIBILITY. 

1 must here point out a Psychological Law which I maj' 
state as the basis of this experience and which I may state as 
the third possibility. 

It is the peculiar nature of the soul or mind, whereby it 
identifies itself with the thing it is united to. This aspect is 
alone fully discussed in the Siddhapta Sastras. St. Meykandan 
calls it and in the commentaries as &trrnk00esr 

etigsureurLon^eo. St. Tayumanar paraphrases it as ujnQpnasr&iafbfBdr 
@icsuu(!!u The human soul is a mirror — a crystal. 
It becomes dark when darkness covers it. A man can be 
judged by his associates. He can be good or bad as his 
associates are. With the world in union, the soul has 
become identified with the world, and lost its individuality, 
in God, it has become Sivam losing its individuality. In the 



THE FOUR PATHS. 


2I 5 


• 

full glare of mid-day sun, I challenge one to see the mirror. 
What one will see if he has courage enough to see it, will be, 
the full radiance of the glorious sun, which will blind him 
at once. 

Says Professor Henry Drummond : “ All men are mirrors, 
that is th« first law on which this formula is based. One of 
the aptest descriptions of a human being is a mirror.” 

Professor Drummond states this Law as the Law of Reflec- 
tion and Assimilation, or Law of Influence, or Law of Identity 
as we may call it, <9jgi j/gi He instances the iron which 

gets magnetised and becomes a magnet " ^i^weaudsiriBpii jgjQpd 
QdrpcanQp'Sesr a mirror, getting rid of its dust, reflects the 
glorious light and becomes merged with it and lost. 

HOW THE SOUL MERGES AND LOSES ITSELF. 

Only one word about the meaning of the words « merging ' 
and ‘ losing,’ before I continue the thread. I quote from a text- 
book of science : — 

‘‘When a river enters the sea, it soon loses its individuality, 
it becomes merged in the body of the ocean, when it loses its 
current and when, therefore, it has no power to keep in suspen- 
sion the sediment which it had brought dovcn from the Higher 
lands." Please reread the lines in this way and the application 
will become clear. “ When the soul loses its individuality (its 
feeling of I and mine) Ahankaram or Apavam, it becomes merg- 
ed in God when it loses its karma, and when, therefore, it has no 
power to keep in suspension its mala, with which it was 
associated from the beginning. This losing of self is the real 
sacrifice, brought about by love. It is this sacrifice uaS, we are 
asked to make as we enter the Temple precincts and the 
moment we make it, our w will leave us and we will 

become the Blissful ^ivam. 

We likened the soul to the mirror and the following passa- 
ges from the upanishats may be considered. 



21 6 


THF FOUR PATHS. 


“ As a metal disc (mirror j, tarnished by dust, shines brigth 
again after it has been cleaned, so is the one incarnate person, 
satisfied and freed from grief after he has seen the real nature 
of himself.” “And when by the real nature of himself he sees 
as by a lamp the real nature of the Brahman, then having 
known the unborn Eternal God, who transcends all tattvas, he 
is freed from all pasa.” 

“From meditating on Him, from joining Him, from becom- 
ing one with Him, there is further cessation of all Maya in the 
end.” In Drummond’s language these verses read — “bee God, 
reflect God and become God.” 

Students of Darwin will have noted how powerful is the 
law of association and assimilation or identity in the animal 
and human evolution. Persons who are ever associated with 
pigs get piggy faces, and with horses horsey faces. In the case 
of a husband and wife, when they have been perfectly loving, it 
has been found, to- effect a complete assimilation of their facial 
features ^ir^uw. Such is the power of the human mind ; it can 
lower itself to the very depths of the brute or it can raise itself 
to the very height of Godhood. This law is spoken of in our 
text-books as the law of ‘ garudadhyanam.’ 

This brings us to the very end of our subject. 

We cannot know God really by all our religious rites and 
performances, repetition of prayers and formulas by saguna or 
nirguna worship, with or without idols, and even by the highest 
yoga, except when His grace and Love fills us all and we lose 
ourselves in this Love. 

Look at how St. Meykandan ridicules this idea of the Yogi 
that he knows God. 

“If it can be meditated, then as an object of our senses, it 
becomes Asat. If you regard it as not conceivable by our 
organs (internal and external), even then it is of'no use. If you 
contemplate it as beyond contemplation even .then it gives you 



THE FOUR PATHS. 


217 


* 

no benefit as it is a mere fiction. If you contemplate it as 
yourself, this is also fiction. Giving up these fictitious ideas 
of God, the only way to know Him is by understanding with 
His AruJ or Grace.” 

THE FOUR PATHS. 

So that all our understanding of Him till the final goal is 
reached will be merely fictitious, or use a better word, sym- 
bolical. The conception whether that of the Bhakta or Yogi, 
Hindu or Christian will only be symbolical. We introduce a 
real element into it when we introduce love in our conception of 
God. And this conception naturally divides itself into four 
forms, that of master and servant, parent and child, friend and 
friend, and lover and loved. All other conceptions can be 
reduced into these four. There are love and knowledge in all 
these different forms of Bavana or Sadana. As our Lord and 
master, we do Him and His bhaklas, loving service and 
obedience and reverence. In the master, we lose our own 
identity. To the father and mother, obedience and service and 
reverence and love in a greater degree is exhibited. To the 
friend we can say 1 1 am he,' ' he is myself,’ ‘ all mine are his ’ 
and ‘all his are mine.’ In real life, this ideal of friendship is rarely 
manifested. Our people could hardly appreciate the act of the 
saint who gave his wife to the bhakta who demanded her of him. 
How would you like the pourtrayal of Hall Caine of the lowborn 
and illiterate Manxeman who loved and continued to love more 
and more the high born and cultured aristocrat who betrayed 
him, cheated and robbed him of his betrothed, and forfeited all 
claims to regard and respect ? It was because his friendship 
on his own part was sincere and true. 

It is this ideal of the friendship and the Bavana required 
under it which reveals the meaning of the formulas of Tatva- 
masi and Aham Brahmasmi, given out as the maptras to be 
practised by the Yogi. In Ydga, the identity of Bavana is fully 
reached. Wfien we understand this fully, we can understand 
all the episodes in the life of St. Sundara, who was of the 
2b 



2lS 


THE FOUR PATHS. 


very image of Soma Sundara and whom God chose as his 
own ‘friend.’ 

sojifisn&iun'lj uSssifiju-u^i: iSesrsnQc^rrL Qu-iefc wi sxi—iv 

QsarLfspihirli tumbiG fiuiLjl 

LLraoiifQiuneiinaesm u assisu&yjjg giigireaai—n^esr u>£hiS<? it 
ejesjtfiQiueir L9rRibl§0iQxei!r ^imtes)0'P:eap&%siQ±i. t 

He, the seven notes, their joy, the sweet ambrosia, my very frier. d 
who is with me even in my mischiefs, my Lord who gave me my beauti- 
ful-eyed Paravai, my Lord of Aiur, how can I, the poor fool, be separated 
from Him ? 

In life, have you felt the hundredth part of this love for 
your friend, the gnawing pain at heart when you were 
separated and the boundless joy when you met ? 

These are then the four paths or margas, Charya, Kriya 
Y6ga and Jnana, otherwise called Dasa, Satputra and Saha 
and Sanmarga. And the various duties assigned under each, 
are only such as our love of the master or father or friend or 
lover will induce us to manifest in tokens of our love. These 
duties are meaningless except as tokens of our love and as 
disciplining us to love and love more God and his creatures. 

ersirClu eS uj£Lg$L- r £) 

Quneb r *cun p sasrafieu Qun j 8 vei£i : l‘iS 
^s3r2t- l <rS0© surds sshrfl 

tissrQunen ixssafluSSesr GiuhgGsurTeicr^)Qg. 

Even though, with bones for firewood, 

The flesh is torn to lines and burnt, like gold in fire, 

Except to those who internally melt themselves into Love, 

God is not accessible. 

These duties arc for the Dasa Margi, 

GT.-jfi usn ^uLSi-ev^eil QsirLfox 

(2 <£>'L£&-o\£\ Sg! grflg^d. S.IT li d. 

i_fcf V-cerf ®r.‘ fig 

g &P ^ £ IT \c.-5USig f: P or - a..’ .7 S ~ ^ t 



THE rOL'R PATHS. 


219 


The easy duties, lighting lamps, culling flowers, sweeping and wash- 
ing the temple, praising God and assisting in His service of abhishika, 
cooking food, constitute Dasamarga. 

Our Christian friends who regard our building temples and 
spending in ornaments and flowers, will scarcely realize why 
millions*of money are spent on churches and church decorations. 
The money spent in flowers on Easter and Christmas festivities 
in churches comes to a million or more each year. Christ 
rebuked the man who held the joint purse and who objected to 
Mary’s wasting that precious scented-oil on Christ’s feet. It 
was not the value of the oil that was worth anything, but the 
love that prompted that sacrific was worth all. 

But it is not by costly gifts alone, we can manifest our love. 

The duties of Satputra-margi are as follows, 

oV SL/TcT ^ oU if JL G'o 2 lS' ^ ,s£7 L CO 

pp .oppeuib sirrbjSB:^. lu pjiStcrsnj) 

— L — ^ p pi * 1 ? 3- p 6V '-Lip ph 
r p! j -L.l/T -b £-l-LT p -j_L1 . 

Puja, reading, recitirg prayers 

Japa, true tapas, and truth. 

Purity, loving, ottering food 

Constitute Satputramurga. 

Qupir pi iSd jastiT sjv b jz ~£'s3erZ?g-L,<*il 

Quirpr,co±)p^nL Ljova®- jjjtsad, i j3 

<rLJ p iT 3 vSOr L5i lOt'JSl — S XlLl ph -3-x i..T,r<e 

Purifying ourself by Adhara and Nacji Sodana, and becoming poss* 
essed of 18 Saktis, and entering the Temple of Jaanakasa (Chidambaram), 
and getting rid of one’s senses and mind is Sahanurga 

The tight forms of Yoga referred to are Yama, Niyama, 
A Sana, Pranavama, Pratyakara, Dharana, Dyana and Samadhi, 
and we note only here the definition of Yama and Niyama. 

Yama is Ahimsa, Satyam, refraining from theft, celebacy 
or chastity, m ertifulness, devoid of deceitfulness, comentedness > 



220 


THE TOUR PATHS. 


courage, taking littie food and purity. Niyama is performing 
tapas, japam, and vratam, believing in God, worshipping Him, 
reading and meditating on the Sastras, being cheerful, fearful 
of evil, and intelligent. 

The duties of Sanmarga are stated as follows. 

4 

££@uuj&'iL,t^e5r 

sSliurr^Q,s 

&.6ss: piUfsgipjsx 

iLisn&siinsir tglsoevjeoLL >u^e^r^d!iLirrrssQii>. 

Getting rid of one’s pasutvani and Pasa, becoming One with Pati, 
melting the heart which never melts, in love, entering the True Presence 
which one can never know', and standing steadfast there, are Sanmarga. 

These four sadanas are so arranged that one may lead into 
the other. And the forms and symbols in each are so chosen 
that, as one reaches the higher path, fresh meaning and fresh 
beauty and life burst forth, as his own intelligence and love 
ripen to receive the fresh life. 

The temple built of brick and mortar becomes the very 
soul and heart of the Ydgi and the Sivalinga becomes the 
Loving Presence and Light of the Supreme. The food usQ 
offered-by the devotee, gradually comes to mean the sacrifice of 
anava or pjbGun^-l. 

The beauty of such books as the Tiruva^aga, Devara and 
Tiruvaimoli, consists in this, that it furnishes the required 
mental and spiritual food to the illiterate and the most cultured 
minds. 

That these four paths are natural divisions, it will be 
readily perceived. The world’s great religions may be ranged 
under one or other of these heads. Mahomedanism and the 
ancient Judaism fall under the first division. It was the merit 
of Jesus Christ that he brought, into greater prominence, the 
Fatherhood of God. The following quotations from the Bible 
win show that the other paths are not unrecognized by Jesus 
Christ. 



THE FCl'R PATHS. 


221 


“ Yc cal! me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I 
am.” St. John. xiii. 13. 

“ Little children, yet awhile, I am with you ; a new com- 
mandment I give you. That ye love one another; as I have 
loved you, that ye also love one another.” xiii. 33. 34. 

‘‘If yd love me, keep my commandments, xiv. 13. 

“Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down 
his life for his friends.” xv. 13. 

“Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command }'ou.” 
xv. r 4. 

“ Henceforth, I call you not servants; for the servant 
knoweth not what the master doeth, but I have called you 
friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have 
made known unto you.” xv. 15. 

“Ye have not chosen me, but 1 have chosen you.” xv. 16. 

“That they all may be one; as THOU, FATHER, ART IN 
ME, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us**.” xvii. 21. 

“I in them, and thou in me that they may be made perfect 
in one***.” xvii. 23. 

When I spoke of these higher aspects of Christ’s teaching 
to a missionary, he observed to me that it only struck him'lately 
that fellowship with God was a higher spiritual condition than 
fatherhood of God. Among ourselves, the Madhwa system 
may be said to be pure Dasamarga. The Ramanujah in its 
popular aspects, is Dasamarga and Satputramarga and a little 
more. Sankara’s system will be Sahamarga. But the mistake 
is made, in not understanding that these truths are only sym- 
bolic and then, they are apt to become dogmatic. I have seen 
Christian friends contend that God is our real father, as Vedan- 
tins and Yogis may declaim that there is no other God but 
the self. 

A true and universal religion will combine all these various 
paths which are required and necessitated by the varying 
degrees of man’s intellectual and spiritual development. 



222 


THE FOUR PATHS. 


And then, we will not see the mote in our brother’s eye, 
and will live in peace and amity for ever. 

1 only need quote to you one verse from the Gita, where all 
these four paths are set forth. 

“Therefore, with bowing and body bent, I ask grace of thee, 
Lord and Adorable, as father to son, as friend to friend, it is 
meet, O Lord, to bear with me as Lover to Loved.”— I may 
also observe that Shivaism of to-day, which I regard as the true 
modern representative of the historic religion of the Gita and 
the Mahabharata period, combines all these four paths and its 
great Saints Appar, Jnanasambar^dar, Sundarar and Manikka- 
va$agar are regarded as teachers of these four paths. 

More than all this, I wish to emphasize the fact that love is 
the essence of all real Religion, and real worship of God is the 
worship of God’s creatures and loving them one and all without 
distinction of caste or creed, as observed by Sri Kaptha, and 
unless this is fully recognized and practised, no real spiritual 
progress is possible. 



THE PERSONALITY OF GOD 

ACCORDING TO THE SAIVA SIDDHANTA* 


It will be interesting to note that, it was about 12 years 
ago, we brought out our first work in English on the Saiva 
Siddhapta Philosophy from Tiruppattur, and we have continued 
ever since, to work hard at it, and, our translations of Siva- 
jnanabodham.’ ‘ Sivajnanasiddhiyar,’ ‘Tiruvarutpavan,’ along 
with our contributions to the Siddhafita Dipika, during the last 
ten years, and Dr. G. U. Pope’s ‘Tiruva^agam’ form the only 
bibliography on the subject in English. And we are glad to 
note that, within the last few years, considerable interest in the 
subject has been awakened, and several European missionaries 
have made a special study of the subject, and have discussed 
it before missionary societies and in the public press. We 
quote the latest opinion from the Christian College Magazine, 
Vol. XX, 9, from the pen of Rev. W. Goudie. 

“There is no school of thought and no system of faith or 
worship that come to us with anything like the claims of the 
Saiva Siddhapta. 

"This system possesses the merits of great antiquity. In 
the religious world, the Saiva system is heir to all that is most 
ancient in South India ; it is a religion of the Tamil people, by 
the side of which every other form is of comparatively foreign 
origin. 

“In the largeness of its following, as well as in regard to the 
antiquity of some of its elements, the Saiva Siddhapta is, 
beyond any other form, the religion of the Tamil people and 
ought to be studied 1 by all Tamil missionaries. 

* Reprinted froth the New F t former 1907. 



224 


THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


“We have, however, left the greatest distinction of this 
system till the last. As a system of religious thought, as an 
expression of faith and life, the Saiva Siddhanta is, by far the 
best that South India possesses. Indeed, it would not be rash 
to include the whole of India, and to maintain that, judged by 
its intrinsic merits, the Saiva Siddhanta represents the high- 
water mark of Indian thought and Indian life, apart, of course, 
from the influences of Christian Evangel.” 

And we had remarked in our introduction to ‘Tiruvarut- 
payan’ or ‘Light of Grace’: “And there can be no doubt that we 
have, in these works, the brightest and largest gems, picked out 
from the diamond-mines of the Sanskrit Yedantic works, washed 
and polished and arranged, in the most beautiful and symmetri- 
cal way, in the diadem of Indian thought.” 

Through want of active propaganda, by means of lectures 
and conferences, the subject is not properly brought to the 
notice of the English-educated public, and appreciated by 
them as it deserves to be ; and we are, therefore, much obliged 
to the editor for having allowed us to contribute a paper on 
the subject. 

Despite the opinion of a few European and Indian scholars, 
who would trace Saiva Siddhanta to a purely South Indian 
source, we have all along been holding that Saiva Siddhapta is 
nothing but the ancient Hinduism in its purest and noblest 
aspects; and it is not a new religion nor a new philosophy, and 
it can be traced from the earliest Vedas and Upanishats. We 
do not hear of anyone introducing Saivaism at any time into 
India, and the majority of Hindus have remained Saivaites from 
before the days of the Mahabharata. 

The ideal of the Highest God has, from the beginning, been 
centred round the person of Rudra, or Siva, and in the Rig 
Veda we find him described as the “Lord of Sacrifices and 
Prayers,” and we find this maintained, in the days of Valmiki, 
when beliefs in other deities were slowly gajning ground. 

Consistently with this position in the Rig Veda, the Yajur 
Veda declares that “There is only one Rudra', they don’t allow 



THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


225 


a second,” “Eka-eva-RudrO Nadvitiyaya tastelj” (kanda 8, 6, 
10 ). “He who is one is called Rudra,” “Ya Ekd Rudra Uchyati.” 
And St. Tirumular declares accordingly: 

5>33T®3. SET .vyCjoBr iiS 1SC& L-&16&8V ®5T (TJWT 

■olear peer sir Qpeir^^jiar anssr^smrrrii 

Qhjekjrssrm ^gteSrf!& pazrQeisrpgiiui;# 

p'Sudsr^njeeflQi fi/Tss e_eiss/fis0^i-l(?i_. 

1/ 

The only One is He ; The second is His Sweet Grace (Sakti). 

He stood in the Three ; He uttered the four (Dharmas). 

He conquered the five (Senses) ; He spread Himself out as the six 
(Adharas). 

He stood transcendent as the seventh, knowing the eighth. 

^fgisjr Q& i p!s> pmir wajrg ; yi pus 

'-U JE jv _j?yj31-’S3T p^vST SastSlSBr 

Qpggir UffiTuff^rQ^'r p'^Qj-nsuji u 

«g,:gr) •s.eoxpp-jh^f) &’?$shjnpQsv. 

1 Soharn' is Vedanta ; One only (without a second) is Siddhanta. 

In the imperishable Turiya, after seeing the self ( AtmadarSan), 

Thou unitest with the Parabrahman in Sivayoga. 

Thou canst attain the rare Siddhi, losing mala. 

“ God is only one. ” “ Siddhanta declares there is God alone 
without a second.” 

The first mantra, it will be noted, is not so well known 
as the mantra “ Ekamevadvitiyam Brahma ”, occurring in 
an Upanishat of the Sama Veda ; and Max Muller has 
shown that the use of such words as Rudra, Hara, Siva, 
to denote the Highest God, is much earlier than the use 
of such words as ‘ Brahman ’, ‘ Atman ’ and ‘ Paramatman 
and, in fact, these words do not occur in the Rig Veda 
at all to denote the Highest God. And we may also point 
out that the word * Nadvitiyam ’ occurring in the Yajur 
Veda is certainly a more ancient and original form of the 
word than ‘ Advitlyam ’, which has been obtained by the 
elision of the letter 'n 


2 9 



226 


THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


And St. Meykandan comments on this mantra in the 
following verse: — 

“ ejsBT © pssr p gj p-sirS foiirsisr ej>eis r Q us-eutdi 

^sirQ pasr/rjiun- px® %err -s rassr — zpe&riSsiir^ j>a\s 
«iy isiriitseiflssr^il «gy sss^‘iS f<<ssrQ ps* 

juj^Q^sSrjpiD i 

“The Vfedic text means there is only one Supreme Being 
without a second. And this one is the Lord. You who say 
‘ there is one,’ is the Pasu bound up in Pasa. The word 
‘ second-less’ means that, beside God, nothing else will exist, as 
when we say that there will be no other letters (consonants) 
when the vowel is not.’’ 

No consonant sounds can possibly be formed unless the 
vowel sound is uttered at the same time; and this will justify us 
in stating that the vowel is alone, without a second; and yet the 
vowel is not the consonant nor the consonant the vowel. When 
we utter the consonant sound (Q^L or e-<_ su aigpgi), the 

vowel and the consonant are linked in a peculiar, inseparable 
and eternal manner. This is the link or relation between our 
own human body and the mind (s_i_sv or Qlc-L and a-aiM). And 
from analogy we say there is a similar link between God and 
the world (including souls). And this link or relation is called, 
in the Saiva Siddhanta, ‘the Advaita,’ and the philosophy, 
postulating this peculiar link between God and man, is called 
the ‘Advaita Siddhanta Philosophy.’ 

But how does the One link Himself to the many, and be- 
come the many, and divide Himself among the many as it were? 
St. Tirumular postulates «sya/6sr 

“ He is the one ; the second is His Grace (AruJ)” This division 
of Him is brought about, because He is also Grace or Love. 
His Second is His Sakti. He is one with His Sakti or Love. 

<sy<sjrqti> &-&tQpuD ^2emG/L-.eisrufr iflaSgvnir 
^jarQu ^sujjiT3u^ir0 a>fli£ilsvtrir 
^ssrQuSeuiLiraj gi^’esr 



TIIE personality of cod. 


227 


“ The ignorant say. Love and God are different. 

None know that Love arid God are the same. 

When they know that Love and God are the same, 

They rest in God as Love.” 

And accordingly, also, St. Meykandan postulates his second 
Sutra, in which he declares that God is one and different from 
the world and the souls, as He is one with His Ajna-Sakti, 
which is all Power, all Intelligence, and all Will and all Love. 
And in the last argument, he show's that as God is Pure 
Intelligence, this one-ness, or union with the world, or omni- 
presence is possible. If He was not intelligent, but material 
or jadam, this could not be possible. 

As such, Sivajnanabodam contains the shortest definition 
of God as Siva-Sat, or Chit-Sat, or Sat-Chit. Sat denotes God 
as a Pure Being, in which aspect He can never reach us ; Chit 
or Aru} or Love denotes His aspect in which He can reach us, 
and we can know Plim. Sat is the sun, which we can never 
comprehend. Chit is the Light, one ray of which is enough to 
remove our darkness and enlighten us ; and but for that one 
ray of light, we can never know the Sun. 

All other conceptions of God follow from this essential defi- 
nition of God as ‘ Sat-Chit ’ and, if true, must conform to it. If 
not, they must be rejected as false. 

From the fact that He is intelligent, it follows also that God 
wills and acts. 

“ $u$3)Teuup-(jieuG p&zGifleo ^Tiresrwn(&jih y 

SuSjoif)^ QfJU'S) jSsbsu ^n’ssr^^arQ^.rrQsiisiretfies', 
$^T!TSlSrQf>vk St! 

63T Ln-65>/DUL§6tlT£?jlTgrj6Br 

“ The form of this Sakti is Unlimited Intelligence. 

If asked, whether supreme Will and Power are also found in this 
Intelligence, 

We answer, yes. Wherever there Is intelligence, there are Will 
and Power, 

As such, Power and Will will also be manifested by this Chit 
Sakti.'’ ‘ - ■ 



THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


2 28 

And He wills to create the worlds, He creates them, and 
resolves them, and reproduces them again and again. He could 
not do this purposelessly or out of His mere whim and pleasure; 
and, as we know He is all love, He could do it only out of such 
love, to help to lift up the erring and ignorant souls, by giving 
them their bodies and senses, so that they, themselves, piay will 
and act, and taste the bitter fruit of the tree of knowledge of 
good and evil, and be chastened and purified by suffering and 
sorrow, and learn to submit their will to the Will of the 
Supreme. 

And Kalidasa in his 1 Kumara Sambhava’ declares : — 

“ No selfish want e’er prompts a deed of mine : 

Do not the forms — eight varied forms — I wear, 

The truth of this to all the world, declare.” 


And these eight forms, he mentions in his invocation in 
* Sakuntala.’ 

“ ISa’ preserve you ! He who is revealed, 

In these eight forms, b}’ man perceptible. — 

Water of all creation’s works the first ; 

The Fire that bears on high the Sacrifice, 

Presented with solemnity to Heaven ; 

The Priest, the holy offerer of Gifts ; 

The Sun and Moon those two majestic orbs, 

Eternal Marshallers of day and night. 

The Subtle Ether, vehicle of sound, 

Diffused through the boundless universe, 

The Earth, by sages called the place of birth, 

Of all material essences and things, 

And Air which giveth life to all that breathe.” 


St. Appar has the following verse : — 

“ filLJnS 

@UI-C/T 6ST(g) QlLljfilLJ.’EI arrjDgLLCIfS 
^j/T^iSeviu i £'s,drsrffiU(EiiaS ( 2?© 

^SIT&IUI JJiLt— fy>iT l 3jshLin'3u 



THE PERSONALITY OF tiOD. 


2 29 

Qufi JCi Qpii'JjT pQpS G^J&Sr VT£X!rj!$‘ j 
iS 1 gir^XJj: ts3 

G? ^&¥eutuj ■jSstr^'S is irUetruaS 
iSiSlv'^nsr^-ssii—UiSf-Xsr ask psi-ir J p.” 

“ As Earth, Fire, Air and Ejaman (of sacrifice), as Moon, the 
Sun and Akas. as AshtamUrti, as goodness and evil, as male 
and female, Himself, the form of every form, as yesterday and 
to-day and to-morrow, my Lord with the braided hair stands 
supreme.” 

St. Manikkav a9agar has the following verse : — 

41 ScVuDiSfi QizfTj uLfiair £drsSg-uij Ss^ituusGs^nAr 

Ljcu^ujsnLC i^CS/GipS «Tas5rafS!D«x//rujui_(asjr/ri j57®£Br0>aor. 

Si-SvQ&G ?£ pi 2SiX U pG & bOl & & irG ZTpI tn I fi 

LJ S\)^i aQ fR SOT pSlIT^a &-n G ^SS )da <a X IT i — / tCd-C/T. 

Earth, Water, Air, Fire, Sky, the Sun and Moon, 

The sentient man, these eight forms, He pervades 
The seven worlds, Ten quarters, He the One 
And Many, He stands so, let us sing. 

He pervades th ese eight forms j they form His eight bodies 
and hence Siva is called Ashtamurti.*^ By this is established 
His Antaryamitvam or Omnipresence, or Immanence in all 
nature, as He is Chit. But He is beyond all these forms and 
beyond all nature and man. 

* As pervading these forms, He gets eight names also. The follow- 
ing verse is usually quoted but its source is not known. 

“ PrithivyO Bava, Apah Sarvah, Agne Rudrafi, Vayur BhSmah 
AkOsasya Mahadevah, Suryasya Ugrah, Chandrasya Somab, Atma 
nah Pasupatih.” 

Srikanthasivacharya comments on these names in his Bhashya 
on I. i. 2 . as follows : 

As to Brahman being the subject of eightfold appellation : The 
Supreme Brahman is the Being denoted by the eight appellations of 
Bhava, Savva, liana, PaSupati, Rudra, Ugra, Bhima, Mahadeva. Though 
He is denoted by all .words, He is designated specially by Bhava and 
other like words, indicative as they are of His Highest being : it does not 
follow that He is not designated by other words than ihese eight. 



THE PERSON iU ! V OF GOD. 


2 50 

The famous passage in thcyth Brahmana of the 3rd chapter 
in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishat deals with God being imma- 
nent in nature and in man. 

Brahman is called Blava because He exists everywhere at all times, 
the root “ bhu ” meaning satta or existence. We are taught that Brahman 
is the Existent, running through all things. Accordingly tha Sruti says ; 

“ Existent alone, my dear, this at first was, one only without a 
second.” (Chha. Up. vi, 2 ) 

“Truth (Existence), Wisdom, Endless is Brahman.” (Tait. Up. ii, 1.) 

“ hie who is existent, w'ho delights in Prana, whose joy is in 
manas. (Tait. Up. i, 6.1 

“The ineffable glory ” CMabanarayana Up. 24 ) 
and so on. As running through all things— as for instance “ jar existing ” 
cloth existing — it is evident that Brahman, the existent, constitutes the 
upadana or material cause of all. The jar, for instance, always associated 
as it is with clay, is said to be made out of clay, i.e., has clay for its 
upadana. Thus Brahman, the existent, is designated by the word Bhava. 

Brahman, the all destroyer, is designated by the word Sana, derived 
from the root “ Sri ” to destroy. Brahman is spoken of as the destroyer 
in the following passages : 

“ Hail ! hail ! therefore, to the Destroyer, to the Great Devourer ” 
(Atharvasiras Up.) 

“ To whom the Brahmanas and Kshatriyas (are as it were) but food " 
(Katha. Up. ii, 25.) 

Brahman is denoted by the word “ liana” the Ruler, as endued with 
the unconditioned supreme sovereignty, as revealed in the passage, “ Who 
rules these worlds with His powers of ruling.” (Atharvasiras Up.) 

As the Isvara or Ruler must have some beings to rule over, Brahman 
is denoted by the word Paiupati, Master of Pasus or subject beings (souls). 
Thus, the Sruti says . 

“ Whom — the four-footed as well as two-footed souls (pasus) — 
Pasupati, the Lord of souls, rules.” (Taittiriya Samhita III. i, 4.) 

As Pasus (souls) are so called because of pasa (bond), Pasu stands for 
both Pasu and Pasa. By this epithet, Brahman is shown to be the Ruler 
of chit, and adit, 01 matter and spirit. 

Brahman is called Pudra as expelling the majady of samsara, as we 
are told in the passage : 

“The knower of Atman crosses beyond grief*” (Chha. Up. vii. 1.) 



THE PERSONALITY Or GOD- 


231 


Beginning with the verse, “yasya prithivi Sarira, &e.” * * 
He who dwells in the earth, and within or different from the 
earth, whom the earth does not know, whose body (sarira) the 
earth is, and who rules the earth within, He is thy Atma, the 
Ruler within, the Immortal,” 1 and giving similar statements 

Brahman is called Ugra or Fierce, because He cannot be over- 
powered by other luminaries, as taught in the passage . 

“ Not there the sun shines nor the moon and stars.” (Sveta. Up. 
vi. 14.) 

As the regulator and the source of fear to all sentient beings, Brah- 
man is known by the name of Bhima or Terrible. The Sruti says; 

“ By fear of Him does the wind blow.” (Tait. Up. ii. 8.) 

As Great and Luminous, Siva is called Mahadeva. So the Atharva- 
siras Up. says : 

For what then, is He called Mahadeva? — As having abandoned 
all things, He is adored for His Atma-Juana or spiritual wisdom 
and for His yOgic glory ; wherefore He is called Mahadeva.” 

That Being called Siva, known as free from all taint of Samsara 
and as the repository of all that is good, is, because He is of such a nature, 
the cause of the birth &c., of the whole world, Since a Being of such a 
greatness can be the twofold cause of the world, That (Being called 
£>iva), endued as He is with such a greatness, is called Brahman. He 
has also been proved to be the seat of Bliss and such other attributes ; 
wherefore it is vain to raise the question whether Bliss etc., can constitute 
Brahman, each by itself. From the passage “ one should know Maya as 
Prakriti ”, it may be seen that Maya is the Prakriti or cause, that Maya 
being Isvara essentially, as taught in the concluding part of the 
sentence: 

“ And know Isvara as the possessor or the seat of the Maya.” 
(Svetasvatara Up. iv. 10.) 

Brahman, associated with the sukshma or subtle chit and achit, is the 
cause ; and Brahman, associated with the sthula or gross chit and achit, 
is the effect, therefore the Siddhanta or demonstrated conclusion is, 
that birth etc., of the universe form the distinguishing marks of 
Brahman. 

1 Amrita a word which frequently occurs in the description of God, 
is a name of Rudra, in the Rigvcda (I. 43-9). 

“ Whatever beingS are Thine, Amrita, in the Highest place of the law, 
on its Summit, in its centre, O Soma, cherish them, remember them* who 
honour Thee”! 



/ 


232 the personality of god. ( 

regarding water, air, fire, 8 cc. * * it ends with “ He who dwells 
in Vijnana (soul) and within or different from Vijnana, whom 
Vijnana does not know, whose body Vijnana is, who rules 
Vijnana within, He is thy Atma, the Ruler within, Immortal. 

That God is different from all nature and man is further 
brought out by the famous ‘ Nfeti, Ncti ’ verse of this same 
Upanishat (3-9-26), which Paranjoti Munivar translates and 
expands in the following lines : — 

j?G^ssrjjsnrsnj> = Q 
il£ir&(&L£<£&-ik'3!reir. 

“God Sundara who is described as ‘ not this ' 1 not this’ 

“ ^Jsxisv QuirffajsvevQsujri' LfajenrecstiS-eireri LtjsluSeir 

Qugbis&r ^js^eo eSsBBituesrfflSssrp L§ l 3 < $GuGuG®’6srj!>iQu(T££jrsa 
(cSu^iSiSt—i'g] g3u:rr£i' ai(G$&Qsue<fiGiiijsbruai_L-.eBTi£g)i'3 jb 
uir^s^isQi^&isu'hsir uSig ^s)^uairsi.iTsnsrujn tLj x&tG e.” 

“ The Sages declare, ‘ He is not the five elements, not the senses, nor 
sensations, nor the Andakaranas, nor the soul ; 

He is the deceitful nothing * w'hich the Vedas fail to discover”. 

The Supreme is adored as the Creator, Hara ; as Protector, 
Sankara ; as Destroyer, or Reproducer, Rudra ; and as Bliss- 
giver, Siva. God is called “ ign&r ” 5 as possessing 

* The word ‘ Ve\i ’ in Tamil means a ‘ void space ’ aud corresponds to 
the Telugu word 'Baffin’ which sage Vemana is very fond of using. 

* St. TiruvaJJuvar : 

(2-smrfloV Qun ffuS/b uPev Cfa. QjJsasrQeair p £ rtssr 

£rr¥si r euetariase^^^ev. 

Like the senses not enjoying the proper sensations 

Is useless the head, not bowing to the Lord with eight attributes. 

The Commentator Parimelalagar says, these eight are defined in 
the baiv&gamas. They are frequently mentioned in the Puranas also. 
Srikantha Sivacharya comments on them as follows in his Bhashya on 
I. i. 2. quoting the Vedic sources of these attributes. 

«« Admitted that birth etc., as attributes inhering in the universe, do 
not pertain to Brahman ; still, they rightly constitute the defining marks 
of Brahman as one closely connected with the universe. The Entity 
called Siva, possessed of the attribute of omniscience and so on and 



THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


2 33 


\ 


eight attributes and tbe\' are as follow: — Self-dependence, 
Purity, Self knowledge, Omniscience, Being Ever Free from 
Sin, Supreme Graciousness, Unlimited Bliss. 

denoted by the eight appellations, is said to be Brahman, the cause of the 
universe : and to that Entity alone. Bliss and all other like attributes 
point. The attributes referred to are Omniscience ( Sarvajtata ), Ever- 
contentedness ( nityatnptata ), Beginningless Wisdom ( Anadibodhata ), 
Independence ( Svatai.tr ata ), Never-failing Potency (NitydluptaSaktita), 
and Infinite Potency (Ar.antasaktita). 

Otnniscierce (Sarvajnata) consists in all tilings becoming objects of 
direct perception — of stainless intuitive experience — independent of all ex- 
ternal organs of sensation. It is known to inhere in Brahman, from such 
passages as : “ Who perceives all and who knows all, whose essence 
consists of knowledge." (Mupdaka-Upanishat. I. i. 4). Thus the cause 
(of the universe) is Brahman who knows the appropriate ways and means 
of building up the several bodies suited to all sentient beings for the reap- 
ing of the fruits of their multifarious acts. 

Evet-contei’tedness (nityatriptata) consists in being replete with un- 
surpassed Bliss, wherein there is not the slightest trace of distress. Hence 
the revelation “Bliss is Brahman” (Tait. Up. iii. 6). That Bliss (ananda) 
which— introduced in the words “ There is yet another Atman who is 
composed of Bliss,” (Tait. Up. ii. 5), and carried to the culminating point 
of unsurpassed Bliss by repeated multiplication in the passages beginning 
with “ Here follows the measuring of Bliss” and ending with “ that is the 
unit of Brahman’s Bliss” (Tait. Up. ii. 8), is the attribute of Para-Brah- 
man is figuratively spoken of as Brahman Himself in the passage “ Bliss 
is Brahman,” because of the abundance of Bliss in Him. Brahman who 
delights in enjoying such a Bliss is said to be ever contended. The en- 
joyment of this mighty Bliss on the part of Brahman is effected through 
mams only, not through external organs of sensation. Hence the passage, 
“ There is Brahman w'ho is akata-tarira (whose body is light), 
satyZtmai- (Himself the existent 1 prararama (whose joy is life), 
via; a-ai a:. da (delighted in the mind), savti-sa-mriddha (perfect in 
peace), and amritu (immortal).” Tait. Up. i. 6. 

Here by akasa— literally, that which shines all round, the Light— is meant 
the chit-ambara, the ether of spirit, the spirit-light : but not the material 
akasa or ether, because the latter can mark no distinction (*. e., the latter 
cannot serve to distinguish Biahman from other things in nature). The 
uhit-ambtira here referred to is that Supreme Power (Parama-Sakti), that 
highest cause, that ocean, as it were, from which spring up all the hosts 


3 ° 



2 34 


THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


Then follow questions whether God should be said to 
possess form or no form, whether He should be regarded as 
Sagutja or Nirguna, Personal or Impersonal, and so on. 

of bubbles, the mundane eggs of all groups. Brahman, whose form is that 
supreme light, is spoken of in the sruti as “ akaSa-sarirn." That chid- akaSa 
is the highest cause is known from such passages as the following: 

“ All these beings take their rise from Akasa and return into 
Akasa.” (Chha. Up. III. ix. i). 

“ He who is called Akasa is the reveaier of all forms and names” 
(Chha. Up. VIII. xiv. i.) 

Satyatman : He who is the Satta or existence. Pravarama, He who 
delights in Prana, the chit-amiara-Sakti, the Power of Spiritual light, the 
Basis of all, constituting Brahman’s own essential nature. Mana-ananda : 
He whose joy is in Manas (mind), not in the external organs of sensation. 
Here, too, “ ananda” refers to the spirit-light, the chit-ambara , the Prakriti 
or cause. Accordingly the Sruti says : 

“ Who could breathe if that Bliss, that Light, exsited not.” (Tait. 
Up. III. vii, i.) 

Santi -samriddha : He who has attained to Sivata, to Siva’s condition. 
Amrita : He who has been free from time without beginning. 

Thus, it is seen that Brahman who is essentially Existence, Intelli- 
gence and Bliss, and whose essential nature is the Supreme Light, enjoys 
the Bliss.of His essential nature by mind alone, independent of external 
organs of sensation, as implied by the epithet “ Mana-ananda.” This 
epithet also implies that the emancipated souls who have attained to the 
state of Brahman are possessed of the antah-karana or mind, the organ 
which acts independently of external organs, and by which they ex- 
perience the unsurpassed bliss of their essential nature. Wherefore, 
nityatripta or ever-contented is Brahman, enjoying the infinite Bliss of His 
essential nature by manas which is pure bodha-sakti itself the faculty erf 
knowledge which can act independently of external organs. That is to 
say, for Him there is no necessity for the slightest joy of the world (sam- 
sara) external to I limself . 

The possession of unsurpassed knowledge— which is svdtas-stddha, 
self-existing or inherent, — constitutes what is called a«adibodhatva or beg- 
inningless wisdom. Indeed, the autal; harana, jnana or knowledge, which 
is the organ whereby He enjoys the Bliss of His Own essential nature 
exists through eternity. Wherefore, Brahman is one of beginningless 
wisdom, inasmu li as knowledge which repels samsara exists through 



THE PERSONALITY OF GOD- 


235 


In regard to the question of form or no form, the SiddhaRta 
is positive that God is neither Rupi nor Arupi nor Ruparupi. 
“ Pevenr 9 4<£M>5\)s\>s5r” “ God is neither 

Rupi nor Arupi, neither soul nor matter.” It recognises that 
all Rupa and Arupa are forms only of matter which is objective 
to our senses, and God can never be objective to us, and cannot 
possess any of these material forms or bodies. The nature of 
matter is to limit, and God is the illimitable and can never be 

eternity ; He is ever free from the evil of samsara and is spoken Of in the 
Sruti as “ perfect in peace and immortal.” 

I r dependence (svatantrata) consists in freedom from servitude to others 
and from other marks of inferiority, and in all things other than Himself 
being brought under his own control. Independence of Brahman as the 
impelling agent of the universe of matter and spirit is taught in such 
passages as the following; 

“ There are two, one knowing (lsvara\ the other not knowing, 
both unborn, one strong, the other weak.” (Sveta. Up. i, 9). 

“ By knowing the enjoyer, the enjoyed, and the ruier &c.” (Sveta. 
Up. i, 12). 

“ But he who controls both knowledge and ignorance, is another.” 
(Sveta. Up. v, i 1). 

It is evident that because of His independence in all matters. Brahman 
is the author of all. 

The never-failing potency ( Nityaluptasaktitva ) consists in all po- 
tencies being inherent in His own nature. Accordingly, the Sruti says 
“ His Higher Power (Para-sakti) is revealed as manifold, as inherent, 
acting as force and knowledge.” (Sveta. Up. vi, 8), From this it follows 
that the potencies of the universe of spirit and matter are inherent in 
Brahman and that He is never without these specific attributes. 

The possession of unlimited potentialities is what is called Endless 
Potency (anantasaktita). It is in virtue of these endless potencies that 
Brahman is the producer and the ruler of the world. Accordingly it is 
revealed to us that 

“ There is one Rudra only. — they do not allow a second — who rule6 
all the worlds by His powers ” ; (Atharvasiras Upanishat). 

“ Who rules all these worlds by His supreme powers of ruling and 
producing. " (Atharvasiras Upanishat). 

As possessed of endless potencies, Brahman can be the material 
cause of the infinite universe. 



236 


THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


found by any material forms. Some would say God is Arupi, 
not realizing that matter is also formless as air, and nothing is 
gained by calling Him Arupi. The fact to be clearly borne in 
mind is that God cannot be objective to us, and possess mater- 
ial form. 

But if it is pointed out that Saiva Siddhapta «religion 
recognises forms of God and His appearances and acts, it is 
answered that these forms of His are not material but are 
purely spiritual forms formed of His great love and grace, and 
to be perceived not by the human mind but with the divine 
grace, ‘jyeu dr ^(j^smrQeo sneer (vyerr enexsi&S." St. Arulnandi says: — 

ptBp^isQsrtcssri— Q pear fogy pi ^ 

eufVjQwenfl oj^a^/s/ scssQu.rr j)0£^0 evneniQuiT gi 
Jse) 0(2 Uj6nft tLfuaJ'X QupQfupu: QjulSuj Qpehr jpi& i puj 
£(njQu.6xft ai^lsssuip s QrfiszT uS ssr i&isf-e^&nQ&sa . 

“ All these forms of His are assumed out of His supreme 
grace for destroying our evil bodies.’’ And how this is possible 
is shown in the following 

“ As He does not possess the defect as an object of per- 
ctption, and as He is possessed of absolute intelligence and 
power, as He is not possessed of likes and dislikes, the Nirmala 
God can assume any form out of His grace." And these forms 
are described in the following verse. “ His form is Love ; His 
attributes and knowledge are Love ; His five functions are 
Love ; His organs like arms, feet, &c., and His ornament like 
the crescent moon, &c., are also Love. These things are 
assumed by the Nirmala God, not for His own benefit but for 
the benefit of mankind.” With which compare the following 
verse from the Taittirlya Upanishat : — 

“ His head is surely Love ; joy His right wing ; delight 
His left, 

Bliss is His Self, Brahman whereon He rests.” 

The following beautiful hymn from St. Appar, and the text 
from the Mandukya Upanishat may also be read , — 

L£,<xrrcvT£pa<zr tun fr&saL— wear -a i7Q<FfrAr«9eu6wr«sr 



THE PERSONALITY OF COD 


2 ir 

puL/ssii—tassrAisvasr, p^ajssrsocvsir, 

ToSTit'OT 3BT ^040 5 63#SV6>j? 

ujuu!y-jjg3r ^jSu^(T^a.ear gj Assaesm sssr p ^ srsr . 
cSIsu&sTtT^Qsr aster (gj)=5<s -5 rrscsr u <% go sv ,tA 
tg£juuuf-ujssr ^tsusyQtjSue&r ^jwsusisr ssst a, gssr 
@ a/safliSO^ja/ QasrssrQp'Lgpli sirLS-Qi—ir^ssj'j^ . 

“ The Lord, with the braided hair, lives in the Kaftchi 
burial ground, with His beautiful Uma with pencilled eyebrows. 
He has no sin. He is not one of the mortals, and is not to be 
compared with any of them. He has no place, and is incompar- 
able. We can, with His grace alone as our eye, perceive Him, 
His form and nature, otherwise none can paint Him, in His real 
form and nature.” 

“ This Atma is not attainable by explanation nor yet by 
mental grasp, nor by hearing many times. By Him whom He 
chooses — by him is He obtained. For him, God, His proper 
form reveals.” (Mandukya iii, 2, 3.) 

It is to be noted also that the various forms in the temple 
are mere earthly symbols, necessary in our view for the ordi- 
nary human mind to grasp and follow the divine ideals, until 
the soul has advanced to a very high stage indeed. A mission- 
ary friend of ours wrote to say that as regards the use of sym- 
bolism, he found it necessary for the educated people, hut as 
regards its salutary effect on the illiterate people, he felt not 
convinced. This opinion will be found opposed to the common 
current of opinion on the subject, but yet it is true, in so far as 
it postulates the necessity of the use of symbols even as re- 
gards highly educated people. 

And we regard the various conceptions of God, as He, 
She and It, as conceptions derived from material forms, and as 
such not appertaining to His real essence, but the forms are 
accessary for our own easy conception of God : 

sSIojitSl.' iSpi Q&irafK2 j-i 
iceiiir gss)& *3 Tossed uS & @‘2vtr ity ,i> GstiyS ” 

“ He is male, female and neuter, earth and heaven and 
none of these.” 



238 


THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


“ Quskr sKpsB3ro.23jj.gp _o Qi-pji^ssr Qi.it ” 

“ Praise be to Him who is female and male and neuter.” 

Further, the words Saguna and Nirguna are usually tran- 
slated as personal, and impersonal, and we have often pointed 
out how vaguely and loosely these words are used, and pro- 
tested against this translation. We will first consider the words 
Saguna and Nirguna. It literally means “with guna,” and 
“ without gina.” One school of people would interpret it as 
meaning “ with good qualities,” and “without bad qualities,” 
and that this is absurd is seen from the fact that the two words 
are made to mean the same thing. The word “Guna,” how- 
ever does not mean any good or bad quality, but is a technical 
word as used by the Sankhya and Vedanta schools and as 
occurring in the Upanishats, Gita, etc. It means the three 
guijas, Satva, Rajas, Tamas, the qualities of Prakriti or 
Pradhana or matter ; and as such the words would mean 
“with material qualities" or “without material qualities". 
St. Tirumular uses the phrase “ poseur 2, mukkuna- 

pirgunam,” so that no mistake may be made of the word 
Nirgupam itself. 

=r.T <5 «jrGaj«or ? iiairso 

g fulfil Si QPpjD & 

^l£l2 & iLit'esc ^iiPujQlC. 

“Satva is condidon of wakefulness (Jagrata); Rajas is dream- 
condition (Svapna) ; Tamas is Sushupti ; the stainless 
Turiyam is Nirguna.” 

So also the Gita speaks of “ Thraigunyo Nirgupaha,” and 
it stands to reason that God cannot be “ Saguna,” clothed in 
matter or material qualities, and must be therefore, non-materi- 
al, Nirgupa. The Supreme God is, therefore, described in the 
Upanishats and Gita and Sivajnanabodham as Nirguna and 
not as Saguna, as in the following passages : — 

“ This one God is hid in every bnuta pervading all, the 
inner atmd of every utma, Inspector of all deeds (spectator) in 



THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


?39 


• 

whom everything dwells ('supporter), the witness, the pure In- 
telligence and Nirguna Being ; the Isvara of ISvaras, the 
MaheSvara, the God Supreme of Gods, the king of kings, the 
supreme of supreme, the “ Isa” of the universe. (Svetas). 

‘‘ Beginningless, Nirguna, Paramatman, Imperishable, though 
seated in the body, O Kaunteya, worketh not, nor is soiled (Gita 
13-31). Note Ramanuja explains Nirguna as destitute of satva 
and other qualities. 

“Will not the Lord, who is Nirguna , Nirmala, Eternal 
Happiness, Tatparam (transcending all things) and beyond com- 
parison appear to the soul when it gets rid of its tattvas such as 
aka§, etc? Will not He appear as a far transcending wonder 
and an inseparable light of its understanding?” (Sivajnana- 
bodham ix. 2. a.) But certain deities are stated to be Sagupa, 
as being clothed with pure Satva or Rajasa or Tamasa, and 
they should not be confounded with the Turiya murti or the 
Fourth, the chaturtha, the supreme Brahman ; these Saguna 
beings are merely certain souls from among Sakalars wielding 
very high powers and possessing still material bodies. 

“ Santam sivam advaitam chaturtham" (Ramatupini Up.) 

The word Nirguna is the same as the word “ gupatita,” 
beyond guna or matter.” The word, therefore, implies* non- 
material and therefore pure chit. Christian missionaries need 
not, therefore, shy at this word, and they should certainly drop 
the word “Saguna,” which technically means material. From 
the passages quoted above, especially from the verse from 
Sivajiianabodham, it will be seen that God is called “ Nirgupa,” 
“ Intelligence and Rationality and Consciousness,” are not 
denied to Him. This is made further clear in the following 
verses from St. Meykapdan and St. Tirurnular. 
exsutrr'L rSeirGp uSQsarujLQseir pe&rjp&ja jtli 
G un ■stcmii pirekaS'2eirip QuirpL9gs)eiir — sj&umu 

e-eirai p^I-sbr nem 1 gj) ; grjS5r Q^etrQ pan p 

E_«rr p pup <srr^s)(?@i e^ppi, 

“ When the soul becoming one with God and feels Him, 



2 4 0 


THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


He becomes the Supreme Bliss, as God becomes one with the 
soul. So understanding Him, will he not know with the soul 
what is understood by the soul?." 

■*r.gz r j££ sssrQjs uS/Tr-sS'eirn} 

Su it ssr j8 ibgir H LC'jji’SssT'r 

4>3LG8t g/drQ&r t^aSrrdSssrjri Qwtrgbsi &i_n 

$ rrenr l $]jti ar iSsir’Sesr 'un g fi'j-inQ z , 

“ That day 1 knew my God, the same was not understood 
by the Gods. The bright effulgence lighting the inside of my 
soul and body, it is said, does not know ! Who else can know ?” 

Of course, it is also said in these works that God ‘ cannot 
know' ‘ 6-,© o-essrsirLDpshir ' and it is pointed out by Siva- 
jnana Svamigal in his Dravida Maha Bashya that this only 
means that God’s consciousness is not like the consciousness of 
the individual man, which is limited, and cannot become cons- 
cious unless it forgets, and can only understand in relation 
(“ change is essential to consciousness”' — Bain). This human 
consciouness is called ^tlSswr/ra/. -God does not possess this 
limited His consciousness is what transcends all 

limitation and all relation and is absolute, as in His Akandakara, 
there is no distinction of this and that, there is nothing out of 
Him !‘ CijfT'iSsusjr ffl/ja9av«sr.” 

Coming to the question of God being personal or imperson- 
al, we are not quite sure in what sense our Indian writers use 
these words, but they mostly take it as meaning Saguija and 
Nirguna. There is some difference of opinion as regards the 
connotation of the words among European writers. Some use 
it as implying individuality and limitation ; others use it as not 
meaning individuality, and this is the more prevalent and 
cultured opinion. We take the following definitions from a 
vocabulary of Philosophy. 

Person : A being intelligent and free, every spiritual and 
moral agent, every cause which is in possession of responsibility 
and consciousness, is a person. In this sense, God considered 
as a creating cause is a person. 



THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


241 


“ The intimate relation of God, as Being, to all His attri- 
butes and to all His essence, constitutes the Divine Personality, 
which for God is His entire Being. God only exists for Him- 
self, in a manner infinite and absolute. God has relation en- 
tirely to Himself ; for there is no being out of Him to which he 
can have gelation. His whole essence is for Himself and this 
relation is altogether internal. The divine consciousness or 
personality embraces all that is in God, all of which He is the 
reason. “ Person as applied to Deity, expresses the definite 
and certain truth that God is a living being, and not a dead 
material energy.” 

Emerson says that personality signifies true being (Sat) 
both concrete and spiritual. It alone is original being. It is not 
limited. It is that universal element that pervades every human 
soul and which is at once its continent and fount of being. 
Distinction from others and limitation by them results from 
individuality (Ahankara or Anava) not personality (Sat). Per-' 
sonality pertains to the substance of the soul, and individuality 
to its form. Another Christian writer ^Rev. J. Iverach) points 
out that the absolute and unconditioned Being is Personal is 
not a contradiction in terms, such as a round square, but that 
it will be true as when we say a white or crimson square. 
“ When we speak of the absolute, we speak of it as a predicate 
of pure being ; we simply mean that the Absolute Personal 
Being is and must be self-conscious, rational and ethical, must 
answer to the idea of spirit. Why may not the Absolute Being 
be self-conscious ? To deny this to Him would be to deny 
to Him one of the perfections which even finite beings can 
possess.” 

St. Meykandan and St. Tirumular had stated the same 
question long ago, as we had shown. This self-consciousness, 
§)ujir)ems<Li6eerrs36trrtg!)£aj, and Qppg> Qpea ntr^eo, as We have shown 
above, is not to be confounded with the limited of the 

soul. 

As it is, Personality clearly means Sat and Chit, and nei- 
ther Saguna nor Nirguqa. Personality is opposed to Achit or 
3i 



242 


THE PERSONALITY OE GOD. 


Jada or irrational matter and relates to the substance, Saguna 
and Nirguna to the form, either as individual or otherwise — 
God can never become individualised as man, woman or brute, 
the limitation of the latter class of beings arising from its union 
with matter or Guna (Saguna). From this \iew, impersonal 
would clearly mean irrational, unintelligent and material, and 
we don’t believe any Indian writer would desire to use this 
word in relation to the Deity, if they only understood its 
signification. 

From the statement that God is Nirguna and not Saguna, 
it follows that God can neither have birth nor death. This is 
one of the central doctrines of Saiva Siddhapta, and in this 
respect it differs from all the existing forms of faith, whether 
Hindu or otherwise, except, perhaps, Muhammadanism and the 
Unitari .in form of Christianity. 

lSjduiSIjS tj.sjgiissr Qua e^/rsrenr 
S^/DulSsAI iurrsirr-i@ uSasru 
^><!>uiSleS Qprr ^uSg&r Gfin (Lg-pir-k 

LopuiSleS wnturr e&Qtj$gQp wriQu). 

" The unborn, with the braided hair, supreme grace, the 
undying, bestowing bliss on all, O thou worship ! If wor- 
shipped, thy Maya will vanish without doubt." (Saint 
Tirumular.) 

Of course, it must stand to reason that our soul itself is 
neither born nor can it die. What is born or what dies is the 
material body formed of Maya or Guna associated with it from 
the beginning. These repeated births and deaths occur on ac- 
count of the peculiar link subsisting between the soul and 
matter ; and, therefore, the souls comprising all Sakalars are 
called Saguna. This same peculiar link does not subsist 
between God and matter, and hence, He is Nirgupa. So it is, 
God can neither be born in the womb nor die. This peculiar 
doctrine of Saiva Siddhanta is what should elevate it to the 
highest rank of philosophy ; and the latest discoveries in science 
could not shake its foundation. 



THE eEk.OON.4UTY Of GOD. 


243 


One other feature of Saiva Siddhapta, in regard to the God- 
head, we will mention, before we close this paper. And that is, 
that the supreme Brahman of this school called Siva or Sivam 
is not to be confounded with the Hindu Trinity. God is peculi- 
arly denoted by the words Sivam, Sankara, Sambhu, Rudra 
(he who .removes sorrow), as they express the most spiritual 
nature of God as Love and All-beneficent. And that this is no 
sectarian conception of the Deity, and that the God of the Saiva 
Siddhaptis is the universal God of all the nations and all reli- 
gions is finally brought out by St. Arulnapdi Sivachariyar in 
his very first verse in * Sivajnana Siddhiyar.’ 

^ pi evens s sanupQpairs^ili ^jevevsva Quir^anrih Qev(/r?rsi 

(Sjjfiiugp &-&DL—,gj£trh Qevpnsjirsiseift&sr (Sj/SuSpipia 

s/SaSsafl GUfT/jefrireir LDGBrasfhuijesiLnQtuiT i—uu^tpS 

QsfSQev^i^jujn jp ifiebr/o Qevesrif. Qsekeaflesisvuuiriji. 

“ Let me place on my head the feet of Siva who stands as 
the goal of each of the six forms of religion, and who stands in 
the various forms conceived of by the various internal schools 
of Saiva faith, and yet stands beyond the conception of all 
Vedas and Agamas, and fills all intelligences with His love, and 
becomes my Heavenly Father and Mother and fills one and all 
inseparably.” 

To sum up, according to the true Vfcdapta Siddhapta Philo- 
sophy, God is Sat, Chit, Ana pda, not material nor enveloped in 
matter, Nirguna and Personal, ever blissful and All Love, and 
all His acts such as creation, &c., are prompted by such Love. 
He is neither He, She nor It, nor has He any material Rupa or 
Arupa, and He can reveal His grace and majesty to those who 
love Him. He cannot be born nor can He die, and as such, 
indeed, He is the Pure and Absolute and Infinite Being, able 
to lift up humanity wallowing in the bonds of mala, mays, and 
karma. To know Him as our true Heavently Father and Mo- 
ther and love Him as such is the onl} r panacea for all the evils 
of erring mankind. 



ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE 
SAIYA SIDDHANTA. 


In a former paper contributed to The Nezv Reformer we 
dwelt on the Personality of God as understood in the Saiva 
School; and we propose to dwell at length on the Advaita Philo- 
sophy, as expounded by the Siddhapta writers, and we crave the 
earnest attention of all students of Indian Philosophy ; and we 
confidently hope that as this philosophy is more and more under- 
stood, it is bound to win its way into the hearts and hopes of all 
sincere people of every religion. As we pointed out in our last 
paper, this philosophy has only been placed before the world at 
large without being hidden under a bushel, within a short time, 
and there is all the future before it, when it can shine like a 
beacon light from the summit of the loftiest hill. 

And first we have to point out that the word ‘Advaita,’ 
pure and simple, is used to describe their philosophy by all 
Siddhatpa writers ; and the word Visishtadvaita never finds 
place, in the Siddhaqta Literature. People who for the first 
time hear of this philosophy put it down at once as Visishfa- 
dvaita, without pausing to enquire into its real aspects. But, 
as we said above, all Saiva Siddharjtis call themselves strict 
Advaitis. Saint Meykandan uses the word ‘ Advaita ’ in his 
commentary on the second Sutra of Sivajnanabodham in the 
passage “ $ gieS pQu&isr p Q&nevQ&o ^jikiSaj srr p iznuS 

cl®,” and expounds his system of Advaita. In another place, 

J&kQll p 60 ^SGSSfl — Qpu>€®p€ijQLC pgldd ^}tU®ST uffpQ pQ£)' }]C Calls 

his system ‘ Advaita,’ and addresses his pupils as ‘ Advaiti.’ 

Saint UmSpati isivacharya uses it in the following intro- 
ductory verse in SivaprakaSam : — 

.L-U p Si iTJJ ds &&LLiUjpQ p ii tolfLi/TiAj 

qscuara&ffli'iscirfcuTE 'p^ecsflQL^j^M^upu , 



THE PERSONALITY OF COD. 


245 


iS puiSvuptriS^viiQsuafl QuirpGupQf<er j G =rrpQ -:^r (^rnGunp 
Qu^irQu^OfitSIcir/Su Qu^^trsoQ-irdaesr 
jy /S p $/D^S)su eS'fetrajprr nji—^iaSjd sszsrsssi @5 xeszr 
tglfiQsairstBQuajb 1 Shfteugi mp.gjsS'g LC/rgjg; 

&puAssr pntu Qeupiripp Qpetflsurtt etsi^a; 

Sppnip pj pe&itgp Gpiflds §&jb(y~o. 

“ \C 7 e expound here the beauty of Saiva Siddhapta, the 
cream of the Vedanta, zvhose excellent merit consists in its ex- 
position of the Advaita, postulating an inseparable relation like 
body and soul, eye and the sun, the soul and the eye, supported 
as it is by the Dharma of the highest authoritative books, and 
unlike the Bheda and Bhgdabheda and Abhgda relations illus- 
trated, respectively, by light and darkness, word and meaning, 
gold and ornament, set forth by other schools, and which is 
further supported by perfectly logical methods, and is light to 
the truth-seekers and darkness to others.” 

Saint Tayumanavar uses the word freely and has this 
verse in praise of his Parama Guru Saint Meykandan : 

Qutrtus 6 ixiri_rriT an <®ff)u Ljestlpuin wpgpeSp 
Gioinsaisr i_ ifirparif- OLneyisn GetriitirGemr. 

“Oh! for the day when I can reach the feet of my lord, 
who found the truth of the pure Advaita , and which cquld not 
be comprehended by persons dwelling in untruth.” There is 
another verse of his also in which he uses the word twice, 
illustrating and explaining the meaning of the word itself, and 
which will be discussed later on : 

^Bmr&jpGpirS ^jp^ieSpuirrenrut^. QiLiLte^^neurp 
p Leir^/BirQerr.iisirQ&rrr” 

“ Oh ! for the day when I will be in Advaita relation with 
God, as I am now in Advaita relation with Anava (the world).” 

Going back to the word itself, it occurs in the following 
passages of the Veda and Upanishats, and in a few other 
places : — 

“•Eka eva Rudro Nadvitiyaya tasthe ” (Yajur Veda-,- 4 . 8. 6.) 

“ Ekhohi Riidro Nadvitiyaya tasthe (Svetas Upanishat, 3, 2- 



24 r > ADVAITA aCCOUDI.NG TO THE bAlVA 3IDDH ANTA. 

f 

“ Ekamevadvhiyam” iChhandog Upanishat, 6, 2, i.) 

“Santam Sivani Advaitam Chaturtham Atma” (Mapdukya Upani- 
shat, 7.) 

“Amatras chaturtavya vakatika prapunchopasamas Sivodvaitavave.” 
The partless fourth, incompiehensibie, that ends ail going out. Siva- 
advaitam. (Mardukya Upanishat, 12.) 

The first two texts give the word in its original form, 

‘ Nadvitiyam,' and the word now in use has been got by elision 
of the initial 4 n’ ; and 4 11a ' is the negative prefix. The word 
literally means therefore no two, or not two. The word as 
used in the texts quoted above and as read with the context 
would not convey all the philosophic meaning which has been 
imported into it by the Acharyas of various schools, it simply 
meant there was no other person except the one mentioned at 
the time. In the first text, it meet an that there was only one 
God and no second God. However this be, we have to deal 

with the word as brought into use by the various schools. 

And the negative prefix has been taken to mean variously. 

This prefix is said to connote (1) @ 65 t®»ld or Abhava, positive 

negation, (2) «gy«jrsDu> Sadfisyam, and (3) d.jp>&%so or Virodha — or 
the opposite. Both in Sanskrit and in English, the same prefix 
or word is used to denote the first two meanings, but in TamiJ 
we havp two different words and to denote these 

two different meanings. If ir the word 4 Advaitam,’ the first 
meaning be taken, it would mean that one or other of the two 
or both would be non-existent, and it would mean one only out 
of the two or neither. Si vajnanasvamigal points out that 
almost all the Acharyas of other schools, including Sankara, 
Ramanuja and Madhva take it to mean ‘one,’ taking the 
‘Abhava’ meaning. If the Sadrisya meaning be taken, it 
would mean non-different or non-dual. This meaning is best 
explained and illustrated by taking the first stanza of chapter 
36 of the sacred Rural — entitled “How to Perceive Truth.” 

Qu!T(Vj&T *g>l^)€USl!jb'3S/D‘j GuITqQvi GST .JX (TJii 
/ T (. 58 ) WIT Qt>6cjUlS> 14 . 

The delusion whereby men deem that the truth which is not, 

That is the cause of hapless birth. 



ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE SAIVA SIDDHANTA. 247 

Here the word used is ^/eoec and the meaning is, of the two 
things before us, say a copy of Kuj;a} and a copy of Sivajnana- 
bodham, if one mistakes one book for the other, this would be 
delusion, Mityajnanam or false knowledge or Avid3'a or 
ignorance. Here the existence of two books is not denied. But 
if the words used were Ourr.^eb- ga^.a^css,® instead of Qun^&r 
then the meaning would be altogether altered, and 
it would mean, there being no copy of Kura} before us at all, 
we fancy there is a copy of Kura! before us. In the former 
case, the reality of the objects before us is not questioned. In the 
latter case, the reality of the object presented before us is denied. 
In the familiar example of shell and silver, both objects and ideas 
are real, and we can never have these conceptions, unless both 
were real and different. The delusion arises from the fact that 
we mistake one thing shell, for the silver which is not , and this 
arises also because on account of the resemblance which exists 
between these objects, shell and silver, or the two books, 
when there was no shell before us, the silver would present 
itself before us, this would illustrate the Abhava meaning, but 
ordinarily no such objector idea will present itself before us. 
This same difference will be felt throughout in the working of 
the two systems. One holds the world including the body and 
ths soul as real, but ordinarily, we often mistake the body for 
the soul, and minister to its wants instead of seeking the soul’s 
salvation. And so too, we mistake the soul for God. If we 
only understood the true nature of each of these, and under- 
stood the transient nature of the pleasures of the body, and 
gave them up for the eternal bliss of the union with God, our 
path would be clear. Saint Tiruvajjuvar follows up this view 
and states in his second stanza : 

^sbruwuuj&(&j u>(r^eir£isS 
uit&jrxsiTLLG uj&irrdfSj. 

“Darkness departs (with which we have been identifying 
ourselves before) and rapture springs to men who see the 
mystic vision pure, from all delusion free.” In this view, no 



248 


THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


attempt is made to deny the reality of the world and sin and 
ourself and God, but one is asked to discriminate one thing 
from the other. In the other view, there is no world, no sin, no 
soul, and all these fantasies arise. But there is no reply to the 
question ‘ How ? ’ 

However, let it be premised that the Siddhapta .writers 
take the negative prefix to mean not Abhava but 

Sadrisya ; and we will proceed to show how they 

develope their system. 

Count Tolstoy defines religion as “ a certain relation esta- 
blished by man between his separate personality and the 
endless universe or its source ; and morality as the perpetual 
guiding of life which flows from this relation.” And Siddhanta 
writers attempt to trace alike this relation between God and 
man and the world, and thereby discover the means or Sadana 
for our guidance whereby we can get rid of all pain and sin, 
And the first postulate is contained in two words in the second 
SQtra of foivajnanabodham. 

“ ^ssmjQiu /snQettnw: a ” 

‘•God is one with them, and different'' 

And Saint Arunapdi Sivacharya adds another relation, 

‘ one-and-different.’ Here then is involved ‘Abhfeda,’ ‘ Bheda,’ 
and ‘ Bhedabheda’ relations. But other schools postulate one or 
other of these relations, and the similes used are ‘gold and orna- 
ment’ to denote the Abheda relation, ‘ darkness and light ’ to 
denote Bhfeda relation, and ‘ word and meaning ’ to denote the 
Bhedabheda relation. And there can be no reconciliation bet- 
ween these views, and no meeting place between them. The 
Siddhapta postulates all these different relations, but by other 
similes, such as body and soul to denote Abheda, eye and the 
sun to denote Bheda, soul and the eye to denote Bhfidabhgda, as 
set forth above in the stanza quoted from Saint Umapati- 
Sivacharya, and yet so as not to be contradictory. There must 
therefore be something peculiar in this view which makes it 
possible to admit of all these different relationships or aspects, 



AD V AIT A ACCORDING TO THE S.UVA SIDDHANTA. 249 

and yet not to be self-contradictory, and to appear as one 
harmonious whole. And it is this peculiar relation which 
cannot be easily defined or described, that is denoted by the 
word ‘ Advaita.’ 

And Saint Meykandan accordingly discusses this word in 
his first argument. “ Ihe word Advaita cannot mean one-ness 
orEkamjno one can think of himself as one, and the very 
thought implies two things. The word simply denies the 
separateness of the two, Any anas ti, and hence God is said to be 
one with the souls,” that is to say, Advaita is Ananya or non- 
different. The relation is such, that though there be difference 
in substance, no separation is possible, and the word is used to 
emphasize its non-dififerent character. And he instances the 
case of a man and his body. Though these are different, yet 
man identifies himself with the body, owing to the inseparable 
connexion between the two, and so practically they are one or 
non-different. So too, the soul identifies itself with God, 
though God is not the soul, and the soul is not God ; and hence 
God is one, and not one with the soul. And in the second 
stanza, he develops this argument, and analyses the text 
' Ekamevadvitlyam ’ and illustrates it. 

“ tpsirQjrieiriDg} ps brQrnittsm pmQfD'-ipl u&sxnjj 
p^irQaoear p Mutj-jsQptJ iusimrAsr — 
j ySSjTiEia sBs kyih ja/iifi ifebtQ/rdu 

^sQsrujjg QgesrsgD 

“ In the Vedic text, ‘ Ekam ’ means that there is only one 
and that one is the Pati (Lord). You who say ‘ There is one ’ 
is the Posit, bound up in PQsa. The word ‘ Advaita ’ means 
that beside God nothing else will exist, as when we say that 
there will be no other letters (consonants) when the vowel ‘A’ 
is not.” And the meaning will be clear when the illustration is 
fully understood. The illustration is that of vowel and con- 
sonants i.e., s B-ihl/r and GWj or meaning soul and body. 

“ S-i—d'GwgpuSireL'Z'g/ pt k gx&gi f°£tuevQu.” 

"The vowel becoming one with the consonants is natural 
union,” is the N'annul sutra. 



250 


ADVAITA ACCORDING lO THE SA1VA blDDHANTA. 


And the illustration of body and mind or soul was 
what was stated in the first stanza.* So that we have two 

* We are glad to extract the following from Mr. Armstrong’s book, 

• God and the Soul ’ wherein he brings out the same analogy. 

“ But I would much rather put it in this way : the relation of the 
physical universe to God is, within certain limits, analogous to the 
relation of my body to myself. The movement of my tongue as I speak, 
of my eyes as I glance at my friend, of my hand as 1 write these words, 
proceeds from that stream of conscious energy which you may cal' my 
mind, my soul, my spirit, my will, or myself- Instantaneously the com- 
mand of my unseen self flows through my seen self and modifies its 
attitudes, its gestures, its several and separable parts. But the intimate 
connexion between myself and my body does not imply that 1 am my 
body or that my body is myself, the ‘Ego.’ If they are in absolute alliance 
they are also in absolute antithesis. Nor, even if you went on to imagine 
my body the absolute product of my own will, and its automatic and 
reflex action, the breath, the circulation of the blood, the beating of the 
heart, the growth of the hair and the nails to be the effect of my will, and 
my consciousness to be perpetually engaged in conducting these processes, 
would you be one step nearer identifying me, the 1 Ego,’ the self, with this 
body, but it would be other than the body, above and beyond it, transcend- 
ing it, of a nature belonging to a superior order to it, in another and a 
higher plane than it. Pleas the analogy home, and you have a safeguard 
against Pantheism. The universe may be thought of as the body of God 
but as it is gross to confound the body with the man, so it is gross to 
confound the universe with God. The soul is in the body only in the 
sense that its energies flow through the body ; a man’s soul (that is the 
man) is not in the body in any physical sense. The body is its organ and 
its instrument. 

But why do we shrink from Pantheism ? Not from dread of losing 
the physical universe in God, but from dread of losing our own souls in 
God. Pantheism only becomes deadly to vigorous religion and morality 
when it makes the man’s soul, the man’s self, a portion of God. Theism 
claims that the human soul is a free cause, a separate island of individual 
w ill in the midst of the gi eat ocean of the Divine Will. Leave usman 
confronting God, not absorbed in Him, and the conditions are preserved for 
the ethical life of the individual, and also for the communion of the soul 
with God, as another than itselt, the very possibility of which is destroyed 
if a separate personality is wiped out. On this matter of the otherness 
of man horn God, I hope to say moie in a later chapter.” 



ADVAiTA Af CORUING TO 'I HK SA1VA S1DDHANTA. 25 I 

• 

illustrations to describe the relation of God to the world, and 
these two illustrations going by the same name show that the 
relation between mind and body is what obtains between 
vowels and consonants. 

Visishtadvaita writers have no doubt used the illustration 
of mind jnd body but nowhere do they discuss the nature of 
this relation; much less do they seem to have apprehended the 
analogy of vowels and consonants. Doctor Bain discusses this 
question in his book on •* Mind and Bod}-,” and we wrote on 
the subject in the Siddhanta Dipika, Vol. II, page 13, and this 
is reproduced in pp. 52-63 of this book. 

So that whatever word we may use, the nature of this re- 
lationship is clear. If the Vedic texts postulate oneness, it is in 
a higher sense than what is understood in the current philoso- 
phies. In this position is reached a higher and truer Monism. 
We have shown how true it is that St. Meykandan stated that 
there is no other letter but ‘A.’ So it is, we can state ‘ There is 
nothing else but God,’ ‘Only one, without a second.’ This 
comes as the result of the Highest experience or Jnana or Sva- 
nubhava or Sivanubhava. And this is stated in the central 
stanza of Tiruva9agam, its Hr’uiaya sloka : 

4 !g)«arQnj«Br<5E s^arfl g.&retrp 

Q$(igid<3sr tr> tgiruSQn 3 

foloOfp $ bOT p 6?F T 3QLL iB^oSTLJLjp p 

S'ueatrp wp^ssrsnui 

Q^-ssrgn Qszkpggv&trlip Qp’xjigj Qpajhg a t^ld 

pi(T^u'3u(i^iB jastapn/anp SsvQsEr 

€ivso^e» mar fff G}jj7SBr r £ev¥eo 

njrr 0®Br3w7- iv^njSp utrQp.” 

“ This day in Thy mercy unto me Thou didst drive away the dark- 
nes and stand in my heart as the Rising Sun. 

Of this Thy way of rising— there being naught else but Thou— I 
thought without thought. 

I drew nearer aijd nearer to Thee, wearing away atom by atom, till 
I was One witli Thee, 

-Oh' §iva, Dwdler in the great 'Holy SBiiDe.'' ‘ 



2$2 ADVAITA AC CORDING TO THE SA1AA . 1 1 H)| 1 AVI A. 

r 

Thou art not aught in the universe, naught is there save Thou. 

Who can know Thee ? 

— ( from P. A’s Translation), 

As man nears God, he wears away atom b}- atom, so that 
at the moment of union, nothing of him is left and what is left 
is the Presence of the Supreme One only and the feeling of His 
Presence ; and no feeling or consciousness of feeling of himself 
or others. This feeling of the Presence and Bliss of God, is 
One and Advaita, and there is no consciousness of such oneness 
or Bliss, and duality will certainly arise the moment man re- 
gains consciousness. So what he is said to lose in fact atom b}- 
atom is his various conscious selves. 

“ SHX3StQ^lL<S LL!t 

£ irairQsLLi _ aSsi r/3& jeSuurfi ±nrp 

liMaar GxlLQ sm5/rQ<s<_!-® e.exsnr'ajQ.stl® 6Tenr&.srren (tfiihGutuu 

xrrebrQsLLt— etinuirtf-p QperrQerrestsriks QsitlLl.i\ Qo.it. ” 

“ Though Ether, Wind, Fire, Water, Earth should fail 

His Constant Being fails not, knows no weariness! 

In Him, my body, soul, and thought and mind were merged (lost), 

How all myself was lost, sing we and beat Tellenam.” 

( from Rev. Doctor G. U. POPE’s Translation). 

His bodily consciousness, His life-consciousness, His mental 
consciousness, all these alone constitute his individuality, the 
feeling of I and mine. This ‘I-ness’, ‘s/nss-’, is what has got to be 
rid of. So that when this ‘I-ness’ or individuality is lost, ‘isrrei r 
Q$LLi—<wrr, he becomes Sivam or God, ‘/sirosr QslLQ Beuwiresrajir 
What perishes of course is the Soul’s individuality or consci- 
ousness of ‘ I ness ’, inducing duality, but what subsists even in 
Moksha is the soul’s personality, which has Svanubhava or 
Sivanubhava, identifying itself with God. 

The soul in union with God becomes pure object (God) 
as it were, which is the true Monism of Science. Hence it is 
Saint Meykapdan states this paradox (xi. 2 . c.) : “ when be- 
coming one with God, if the soul perished, there will be 
nothing to unite with God, as it perishes. If it did not perish, 



ADVAITA ACCORDING To TH1' SAIVA SIDDHANTA. 


2 


it cannot become one with God. Just like the salt dissolved 
in water, the soul, after losing its mala, unites itself with His 
feet and becomes the servant of God (loses its ‘I ness’ or 
individuality). Then it will have no darkness (as separation).” 
The salt in its c^staline conditions constitutes its individuality. 
In that condition it is distinguished from water. But after it is 
dissolved in water, what is lost is its individual character and 
not itself or its substance or personality. 

The following sentence from a text-book of science will 
show how exact is our language: “When a river enters the sea, 
it soon loses its individuality, it becomes merged with the body 
of the ocean, when it loses its current, and when therefore it has 
no power to keep in suspension the sediment which it had 
brought down from the higher lands.” If re-read as follows, its 
application will become clear : “ When the soul loses its indivi- 
duality (feeling of ‘I’ ness, Ahankaram or Anavarn), it becomes 
merged in God, when it loses its Karma, and when therefore 
it has no power to keep in suspension its mala with which it has 
been associated from the beginning.” And this is the exact figure 
and language used by St. Meykandan in viii. 4 . a. 1 his losing 
of self is the real sacrifice brought about by love. It is this 
sacrifice, ueS, we are asked to make as we enter the Temple, and 
the moment we make it, our (Pasutvam) will leave us, 

and we will become the Nandi, the Blissful Sivam. 

That the Siddhanta marks the Highest Standard of Monis- 
tic I ruth is what is brought out by St. Tirumular also in his 
famous line sreargiyaj & yarn's ^ J>” 14 Vedanta 

postulates ‘Aham Brahmasmi,’ ‘I am Brahman,’ Siddhanta pos- 
tulates Tat (one) alone.” That is to say that the Siddhanta 
appeals fully and finally to only One Experience, the Bliss of 
God and One alone ; whereas the Vedanta has reference to the 
Sdham-paths whereby this experience is gained. And anyone 
can perceive that the Soham experience is a conscious one and 
a dual one or Dvaita. In this sense Siddhanta is Advaita 
and Vedanta js Dvaita. And what are considered as the 



254 


advaita according to tut. Suva siddhanta. 


strong-holds of Vedanta by followers of Sankara admit of easy 
interpretation by the Siddhantis. The question, as pointed out 
by Sivajnana Ybgi, did not arise absolutely as to whether 
padarthas were one or two. It arose in connection with the 
famous Mahavakya texts, ‘Aham Brahmasmi,' Tatvamasi, etc. 
Says he: — 

LopG pasrtesrGncr Jjji msSi &Qtnzar&pijs Qjirjb(&jiLi Gurr^Qw safip 
@tr ip sm&suQTjanjafSjj-rrT)) &rrtl.'£>gi-£, .§±irr3sbr(vr?jj, er-ii, §1 ®ffgr) 

SasrQpm, sr-.o, sunSebr/Dg/,' et-d, Qpa$L—wup jB $&7£u> ppgjeo 

lcS QppsSij . j LOSiiiSiiiTdSiUikieiiatcE Qssh—tniL^j 'gjjglGeussrugp fp(TrjQurrq£ar, 
iQudsrugi s?(trfGu nostro f offear , p^Gunp^ar ld jbG y pi Guir^sirn'u.iT iu rr® 
®«arj siasr gppd gou s /bg ei Lgd p pmsSasr =gy jjaf gp PLtrpp G&jo/eurruj, 
g/jSPsS ssisnsf-p^ opstTgirStu s&Qjl— QpEsxjpgipQeo ujggis&p 

QseiirggtiA Q^iTp^uQui0Q<arasr j^easnris^Qsaars. 

“ If you ask, what then is the meaning of the word Advaitam, I will 
show how §aiva Siddhantis explain it. On hearing the great texts called 
Mahavakya, Tatvamasi, etc., which are used in the three persons, we see 
that these sentences speak of ‘that’ as one substance and ‘Thou’ as ano- 
ther, and inquire how one can become the other. The answer is given to 
remove this doubt, by stating how one can become the other and it It at relation 
subsists between these two, and the word Advaitam is used to express this 
peculiar relation.” 

The word does not mean one or non-existence of two or 
more, but is used to express the peculiar relation that exists 
between two distinct things which can become one, and we 
had long ago called attention to this meaning in our very first 
work, and before we had any chance of seeing this luminous 
exposition of Sivajnana Yogi, and we observed, vide Sivajnana- 
bbdham p. 17 : 

“Though in all these cases, an identity is perceived, a diff- 
erence in substance is also felt. It is this relation which could 
not be easily postulated in words but which may perhaps be 
conceived, and which is seen as two (Dvaitam) and at the same 
time as not two (Advaitam); it is this 'relation which is called 
Advaitam , ‘a unity in duality,’ and the philosophy which postu- 
lates it, the Advaita philosophy.” 



A DVA1TA ACCORDING IQ Ti!K SAIVA S1DDHANTA. 


255 


Of all the mass of the Vedic and Theosophic literature that 
has come into existence during the last two or three decades, 
there is none that equal the writings of Professor Kunte for real 
insight into the nature of Hindu philosophy and critical acu- 
men. And his summar}’, added at the end of the first pada of 
the first Adh} aya of his translation of the Brahma Sutras, is a 
most beautiful and original one. Wonderful as it may seem, 
both Sivajiiana Yogi and Kunte exactly propound the same 
questions and give the same answer. He shows there are texts 
in the Upanishats which support the dualistic and monistic 
view, and the mainstay of the monists are the Mahil Yakya 
texts and these texts are the great stumbling block in the path 
of dualists, and he shows that their interpretation cannot bear 
an examination, because the texts evidently do not admit of it, 
and all that they say is simply beside the mark. 

“ What is to be done ? There are doubtless a few texts in 
the Veda which support the Pantheistic views. Most however 
support the Theistic principles. But so long as Pantheistic 
texts are not explained, the proposition that the Vedas do not 
teach Pantheism cannot be accepted. Again, the adjustment 
and the interpretation proposed by the Theists cannot be accept- 
ed because of their being far-fetched and forced. But we do 
not see how the few Patheistic texts come in the way of Theism, 
because we believe that though they be interpreted as the 
Pantheists do, yet they support Theism. How can this be ?" 
And he proceeds to show how this can only be understood in 
the light of Yoga. After instancing the various forms of Bhakti 
(Charya and Kriya), he sa^ s : “ But there is a special feature 
of such adoration — a feature not included in any of these. It is 
the ecstatic condition of the spirit, a condition which can neither 
be explained nor understood without an illustration. Let the 
reader realize the love a mother has for her child. A mother 
or her child sometimes experiences a state of mind, an indes- 
cribable state. That which either of them expresses can alone 
convey an idea of their feelings when they are in the ecstatic 
condition. The mother directly addresses the child thus, 'Oh, 



2C0 ADVAITA ACCORDING To THE J.UYA S1DDHANTA. 

- I 

my piece of Gold, Oh, my soul, Oh, my l.fe, can 1 eat you up?' 
'fisn pss^f^wms. rrGezr.’ Under these circumst. nces, 

the mother forgets that her body is different from that of her 
eniid, which experiences the same feeling. Such an identity is 
the form of the ecstatic condition of the mind. This is a special 
feature of adoration. This sort of ecstatic identity , the fogis fed. 
Hence in the Veda and in the Upanishats, the Pantheistic doc- 
trine of the identity of the human spirit and the Supreme Spirit, 
if enunciated, is enunciated in this way. Again the Brahma Sutra 
of Badarayaiia does not inculcate it.” And he explains further 
below. “The characteristic feature of the Indian Vedanta is its 
recognition of spirit-power, as it is explained in the Yoga Sutras 
which systematically lay down the following propositions : That 
the Supreme Spirit or God is related to the human spirit, that 
the human spirit has very great potential powers and that if 
certain methods of living be adopted, it can call out its powers 
and become actually able to know the past and the future, and 
that the spirit disenthralled from the flesh is ultimately absorbed 
m one sense into the Supreme Spirit. The Yoga system is pro- 
perly the backbone of the Vedanta.” 

And we had pointed out in another place, Personality of 
God, (pp. 223 — 243) that the Yoga PUda is not merely the back- 
bone of Vedanta, but it is Vedanta itself. 

It is not well understood that the word Upanishat really 
means the same thing as ‘Ydga.’ Yoga means the Sadana requi- 
red for bringing the Soul and God in Union; and the Upanishat 
is also the teaching of the Sadana whereby man comes nearer 
and nearer to God, by destroying the bonds that bind him. 
The root-meaning (upa = near, ni=- quite, sad = to perish) is hit 
off to a nicety in the famous line in Tiruva?agam quoted 
above. “ The house of God,” 7th verse, £)] Cn) r r- oST JYjf [T JJ 

Qph.hgidguisP y&srtfd, “ nearer and nearer to Thee I drew, wear- 
ing away atom by atom, till l was one with Thee." And in the 
passage in (Chandog, i. 1. 10) and in several others, the word 
Upanishat is used as a sjmonym for Yoga. And this derivation 



ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE SAIVA SIDDHANTA. 257 

really explains the scope of an Upanishat, a misunderstanding 
of which has led to no end of confusion. The Siddhanti takes 
the Upanishat as the text-book of the Yoga Pada or School. 

The higher stage or Pada being the Jfiana Pada, the words 
Upanishat, Vedanta, Yoga, Saha-Marga or Sohamarga or 
Hamsa-Marga are all synonymous ; and as Vedanta strictly 
means Yoga, the words Vedanta and Siddhanta are contrasted, 
Siddhanta meaning the jnana-Marga or Pada, though it 
embraces all the remaining Padas, Charya, Kriya, and Yoga. 
The practice involved in the Mahavakya- texts is this Soham 
Bhavana or Sivoham Bhavana, and when this practice is matur- 
ed, the soul stands in complete allegiance to the Supreme One, 
renouncing all idea of self and self-action; then can the soul say: 
“I am all the world," ajirQesr iLfevGaekuexflioor&i. (Sivajnanabodham, 
2-1-4). “ 1° me everything originated, in me everything esta- 

blished, in me everything merges. That secondless-Brahman 
am I. (Kaival. Up. 21).” 

As Professor Kunte speaks of the potential power of man by 
calling out which he can become one with God; Sivajnana Y&gi 
dwells at great length, and too frequently, on this special 
characteristic or power of man whereby man can be said to be- 
come God ; and this power is the power of the soul to become 
that to which it is united, in the language of St. 

Meykandan or, ■frrrnfp&ebr ajemrassnLirpj) and ajirQpirdsrpiupfldsr 
uSujeoun'u Sjbp sv in the language of St. Tayumanavar, and this 
power is likened to that of the crystal or mirror. 

Says Professor Henry Drummond : — 

“ All men are mirrors — that is the tirst law on which this formula (of 
sanctification or corruption) is based. One of the aptest descriptions of a 
human being is that he is a mirror.” This illustration is to be originally 
found in the Upanishats and Gita. 

“ As a metal disk (mirror) tarnished by dust shines bright again after 
it has been cleansed, so the one incarnate person satisfied and free from 
grief after he has seen the real nature of himself. And when by real 
nature of himself, he sees as by a lamp, the real nature of the Brahman, 
then having become the unborn eternal God who transcends all tattvas, 

33 



258 


ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE §AIVA SIDDHANTA. 


he is freed from all p&sa.” (Svetas Upanishat ii. 14, 15). “ From meditat. 
ing Him (abhidhyanath), from joining Him (yojanath), from becoming one 
with Him (tatvabhavat), there is further cessation of all Maya in the 
end.” (Svetas Upanishat i. 10.) “ As a flame is enveloped by smoke, as 
a mirror by dust, as an embryo is wrapped by the womb, so this (soul) is 
enveloped by it (desire). (Gita iii. 3.) 

And St. Meykandan has this stanza (viii. 3. a.) 

The principle of it receives its exposition in the Sankhya and in 
the Yoga Sutras, by means of this illustration of mirrors and 
colours. 

“Though it (soul) be unassociated, still there is a tinging 
(reflectionally) through non-discrimination ; [for there is not a 
real tinge in that which is unassociated (with tincture or any- 
thing else), still there is as it were a tinge ; hence the tinge is 
treated simply as reflection by those who discriminate the 
tinge from the soul which it delusively seems to belong to]. 

" As is the case with the Hibiscus and the crystal, there is 
not a tinge, but a fancy that there is such.” Sankhya aphorism 
vi. 27-28— Gablie’s Translation. 

In the words of Professor Max Muller, this is how the 
subject is treated in the Yoga Sutras : " Now if we ask what 
is the result of all this, we are told in Sutra 41, that a man who 
has put an end to all the motions and emotions of his mind, 
obtains, with regard to all objects of his senses, conformation 
grounded on them, or steadiness and consubstantiation, the 
idea being that the idea is modified or changed by the objects 
perceived, 'j/gr * 9 /g>suirgd>’ (i. 41). As a crystal when placed 
near a red flower, becomes really red to our eyes, in the same 
way the mind is tinged by the objects perceived” {Six Systems. 
P- 453)- 

This principle of mind identifying itself with the objects 
perceived, is stated in the following passages of the Upanishat 
also. 

“ Now a man is like this or that, according as he acts and 
according as he behaves, so will he be : a man 'of good acts will 



ADVA IT A ACCORDING TO THE SaIVA SIDDHANTA. 259 

become good, a man of bad acts bad. He becomes pure by 
pure deeds, bad by bad deeds. 

“ As is his desire, so is his will ; and as is his will, so is his 
deed. Whatever deeds he does, that he will reap. 

“ Whatever object man’s own mind is attached to, to that 
he goe^ strenuously with his deed. 

“ He who desires the Atman, being Brahman, he goes to 
Brahman. That Atrna is indeed Brahman.” (Brihat IV, iv. 5. 6.) 

Similar passages are found in the Mahabharata and the 
familiar statement of it in Sanskrit is : 

4 Yat Bhdvam tat Bhavati.' 

Hebert Spencer calls this union as one of absolute identity. 
And this is almost the language used by St. Meykandan 

4 ^gi sjgi ’. 

As the Upanishat writers, Sankhyans, and Yogins, and 
Siddhuntins state this principle and base on it their scheme of 
salvation, so does also Professor Henry Drummond in his 
remarkable address entitled "The Changed Life,” based on the 
text from St. Paul. 

44 We all, with unveiled face, reflecting, as a mirror, the 
glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image, from 
glory to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit.” He para- 
phrases the sentence as follows: 44 We, all reflecting, as a mirror, 
the character of Christ, are transformed into the same image 
from character to character — from a poor character to a better 
one, from a better one to one a little better still, from that to one 
still more complete, until by slow degrees the perfect image is 
attained. Here the solution of the problem of sanctification is 
compressed into a sentence, 44 reflect the character of Christ, and 
you will become like Christ.” or, as we will say, reflect the 
image of God in yourself, and you will become God-like, or God. 

But how is the poor character to be made better and better, 
or the reflecting image clearer and clearer? It is by cleansing the 
mirror (soul) freer and freer from dirt, and bringing it more and 
more in line with the effulgent light, that this can be effected; 



260 


ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE SA1VA S1DDHANTA. 


and when the mirror is absolutely perfect and nearest, the light 
shines brightest, and so overpowers the mirror, that the mirror 
is lost to view, and the Glory and Light of the Lord are felt. For, 
observes the learned Professor truly, “ What you are conscious 
of is ‘the glor}’’ of the Lord.’ And what the world is conscious 
of, if the result be a true one, is also the glory of the Lord. 
In looking at a mirror, one does not see the mirror or 
think of it, but only of what it reflects. For a mirror never 
calls attention to itself— except when there are flaws in it.” 
These flaws are the colours of the Siddhanti who compares 
them to the maya or body. In union with the body, it is the 
body alone that is cognized, and not the mirror-like soul. In 
union with God, the Glory and Light alone are perceived and 
not the mirror-like soul either ; and the Professor declares, “All 
men are mirrors — that is the first law on which this formula (of 
sanctification or corruption) is based. One of the aptest des- 
criptions of a human being is that he is a mirror,” and we must 
beg our readers to go through the whole pamphlet to note how 
beautifully he draws out this parallel. 

He notes the second principle which governs this process, 
namely, the law of assimilation or identification. “ This law of 
assimilation is the second, and by far the most impressive truth 
which underlies the formula of sanctification — the truth that 
men are not only mirrors, but that these mirrors, so far from 
being mere reflectors of the fleeting things they see, transfer 
into their own inmost substance and hold in permanent preserv- 
ation, the things that they reflect. No one can know how the 
soul can hold these things. No one knows how the miracle is 
done. No phenomenon in nature, no process in chemistry, no 
chapter in necromancy can even help us to begin to understand 
this amazing operation. For think of it, the past is not only 
focussed there in a man’s soul, it is there. How could it be 
reflected from there if it were not there ? All things he has ever 
seen, known, felt, believed of the surrounding world, are now 
within him, have become part of him, in part are him — he has 
been changed into their image.” 



ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE SA1VA SIDDITaNTA. 26l 

• 

These two principles in fact underlie our Mantra and 
Tafltra, our Upasana and Sadana, Bhavana, and Yoga, and our 
books instance the case of the snake-charmer chanting the 
Garuda Mantra in illustration of this second principle of assi- 
milation or identification. The Professor instances from Dar- 
win, how in the working out of this principle of association and 
assimilation or identity in the human and animal evolution, 
persons ever associated with pigs get piggy faces, and with 
horses, horsey faces. In the case of husband and wife when 
they have been perfectly loving, it has been found to effect a 
complete assimilation of their features. Such is the power of 
the human mind, both a demerit and a merit ; it can lower itself 
to the very depths of the brute, or it can rise to the very height 
of Godhood. This law is spoken of in our text books as the 
law of ‘ Garudadhyanam.’ The writer of the book “ Spiritual 
Law in the Natural World” (Purdy Publishing Company, 
Chicago) observes that all “who have made a study of the cause 
of all things have become so at one zvith it, as to have causing 
power, for it is an invariable rule, that we become like what we 
study or are closely associated with. We become so like people 
with whom we live constantly, that the expression of face and 
sound of voice grow similar, and even features grow alike. 
Sometimes a child will look more like its nurse than its mother.” 
And the whole book is an exposition of this principle, and it 
holds out as a Sadana for spiritual elevation, that a man should 
firmly believe that there is no world, no untruth, no sin, no 
sickness, no death, and he is a child of God, that there is only 
‘Truth, Power, Love, and Presence in this universe and nothing 
but this, that he is the reflection of God, the image and likeness 
of God, and then he can truly conquer sickness and death, and 
become truly the son of God. This is exactly the Sohambha- 
vana or Sivohambhavana. And the following verse of St. Aru- 
Jjapdi Sivacharya sums up the whole teaching : — 

“ sekuL-. eS&r.sj-j-aoGev ,ea>Qearear ^ otbrguitrfrsr; i 
sl^uuqp rs n meoGevQ ear ear 
Qsirsusi^Q^OjSl Qpstrg ^suebr sreareoflsbr jd tasvl-urrGev 
Q f it sQ J3S3T u uneS i 5 ^ G^irsarn^eieir Qsi; Sear jB 



2 62 advaita according to the Saiva sibdhanta. 

t 

e&sssns g$i LLC^m^Qeireoc^iTiEi s^i—fihuiTGsrpfilssr 

affi—Qm/n^oy iDgiQunsv affu>BOLoao#iq u;au/_!t/d> 

L1GXJT £ 2Q£_ LD&B (£)&{Gf7)L£> £21 (BIT Sg)Ca&57~ Crj<rJil £nr tpi 

uir-c£l£&& Q&irsognsv^a uirjsupsBjS'iair^estsr — (ix. 7.) 

“Say ‘ I am not the world, and am separate from it.’ Say 
also ‘ I am not the Unknowable Supreme One.’ Then unite 
with Him indissolubly by loving Him in all humility, and 
practise Soham (‘ I am He’). Then will He appear to you as 
yourself. Your mala will all cease, just as the poison is 
removed by Garudadhy&na , and you will become pure. So, it 
is, the old Vedas teach us to practise this marjtra ‘Aham 
Brahmasmi,’ ‘lam Brahman’.” 

As this right knowledge of non-difference and difference of 
ourselves from God and the universe is essential for our sal- 
vation, Srikantha discusses these questions in his Bhashya on 
the Sutras, II, i, 21-3, and we quote the whole of these passages, 
and he quotes and beautifully reconciles the numerous Bheda 
Srutis with the Mahavakya texts : — 

“ The Sutrakara raises and refutes an objection to the foregoing 
theory : — 

(Jiva) being mentioned (to be one with) the other, there follows an 
incongruity such as neglecting what is good. (II, i. 21.). 

(Objection) : Because in the words “ That thou art,” and “ this 
Atman is Brahman,” Jiva the effect, is mentioned as one with Brahman, 
because, it has been shown that they are not distinct from each other. In 
that case it would follow that the all-knowing and all-pervading Parames- 
vara dissolves the Universe for his own [good] and creates it for his own 
[evil]. Then it may be asked, how is it that Isvara, who is all-knowing 
and of unfailing will, and who knows that the pain of Jiva, who is no other 
than Himself, is His own pain, engages Himself in the creation of the Uni- 
verse, which as leading to Samsara is an evil, and does not abstain from 
creation for His own good. Accordingly, once it is proved that Jiva and 
Paramesvara are one, there follows this incongruity that Paramesvara, 
though all-knowiDg, is guilty of a want of sense in so far as he abstains 
from what is good to Himself and engages in what conduces to His own 
evil. Wherefore it does not stand to reason that Jiva and Isvara, the 
cause and the effect, are one. 



ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE §AIVA SIDBUANTA. 


263 


(Answer) : In reply we say as follows : — 

But the Cause is superior, because of the mention of a distinction. 
(II. 1. 22.) 

Though the cause and effect are one, the cause is declared in the 
Sruti to be superior to the effect, to the sentient and insentient universe, 
in such passages as the following : — 

“ Supesior to the universe is Rudra, the Mighty Sage.” 

So, a distinction is also made between Jiva and ParameSvara in the 
following passages: — 

“ But he who controls both — VidyS. and Avidya is — another.” 

“ The one God rules the perishable (Pradhanal and Atman.” 

" Thinking that the Atman is different from the Mover (the Lord).” 

“Two birds, inseparable friends, cling to the same tree.” 

“ Two Brahmans ought to be known, the superior and the inferior.” 

“ There are two, one knowing, the other not knowing : both unborn ; 
one strong and the other weak.” 

“ He is the eternal among eternals, the sentient among the sentient.” 

“ Having entered within, He is the ruler of the creatures.” 

“ Know then Prakriti is Maya, and the great Lord the Maym.” 

“ From that, the Mayin sends forth all this ; in that, the other is 
bound up through that Maya..” 

“ When he sees the other, the Lord is contented... then his grief 
passes away.” 

“ He is the master of nature and of man, the Lord of the three 
qualities.” 

“ Of these creatures, pasus, the Pasupati is the Lord.” 

Wherefore quite superior to the universe is Brahman, otherwise 
called Siva. 

(Objection) : By establishing non-duality in II. i. 15, and duality in 
II. i. 22, you have only proved duality and non-duality of Brahman and 
the universe. 

(Answer) : No : we do not establish that sort of Visishtadvaita which 
takes the form of duality and non-duality. We are not the advocates of 
an absolute distinction between Brahman and the universe as between a 
pot and a cloth, because of its opposition to the Sruti declaring that they 
are not quite distinct from each other. Neither are we the advocates of 
an absolute identity as of the mother-o’-pearl and silver, one of them being 
illusory ; for, it is opposed to the Sruti which points to a difference in the 
inherent attributes of Brahman and the universe. Nor do we hold to 
duality and non duality, which is opposed to the nature of things. On 
the other hand, we maintain that the unity of Brahman — as the cause and 



264 


ADVA1TA ACCORDING TO THE SAIVA SIDDHANTA. 


the effect — is like that of the body and of the embodied, or like that of 
the substance and its attribute. By unity of Brahman and the universe, 
we mean their inseparability like that of clay and the pot as cause and 
effect, or like that of the substance and its attribute. A pot, indeed, is 
not seen apart from clay, nor is the blue lotus seen apart from the colour 
blue. Similarly, apart from Brahman, no potentiality of the universe can 
exist ; nor is Brahman ever known apart from something else, .the former 
must ever be conditioned by the latter, and this latter is naturally one 
with the former. 

Wherefore, Brahman who is in no way separable from the universe is 
said to be one with the other. And there is a natural distinction between 
the two ; so that the Supreme Brahman is ever higher than the universe. 
As to their distinction as to the cause and the effect, it has been already 
explained in II. i. 9. Wherefore this theory is quite unopposed to the 
Srutis declaring distinction as well as non -distinction. 

And as in the case of stone, etc., it is incongruous (II. i. 23,). 

(Objection) : Under all conditions, Jiva and Isvara are one, because 
of the Srutis declaring non-duality. 

(Answer) : No, because of an incongruity. Jiva and Isvara cannot 
be identical, because, like the insentient stone, timber, grass, etc., the Jiva 
also is, on account of ignorance, etc., said to belong to quite a distinct 
class from the Isvara who is possessed of such attributes as omniscience. 
Therefore Isvara is a distinct entity from Jiva, Thus even the Jiva, senti- 
ent as he is, cannot be identical with Isvara owing to this difference, that 
the latter is superior. Much less can the insentient existence which is 
essentially different be identical with Isvara. From all standpoints of 
view, by Sruti, Smriti and Reasoning, we see that the omniscient and 
omnipotent Paramesvara is quite superior to the whole universe, sentient 
and insentient though, as His own emanation, it is not altogether distinct 
from Him. 

And he brings out the non-difference more by means of the simile of 
soul and body in his commentary on I. ii. 1. 

“ All this is Brahman, as beginning, and breathing in Him ; and 
therefore let a man meditate on Him.” 

This passage may be explained as follows : — The origin, existence, 
and end of all this depends on Brahman. All this, both the sentient and 
the insentient existence, is verily Brahman, and therefore let a man 
meditate on Brahman, tranquil in mind. Just as water-bubbles which 
have their origin, existence and end in the o:ean, are found to be only 
forms of that ocean, so, too, that which depends for its origin, etc., on 
Brahman associated with Sakti must be made up of Brahman and nothing 



advaita according to the saiva siddhAnta. 265 

1 

else. Nothing distinct from Him is ever perceived. Accordingly in the 
Atharvasiras it has been declared by Isana as follows : 

“ Alone I was at first, (alone) I am and shall be, there is none else 
distinct from Me.” 

And then was declared by Him, in the words “ I am Brahman,” that 
the whole universe is His own form. And in the words “ He entered the 
more hidden from (or than) the hidden one” etc., His entering into uni- 
verse is given as reason for the whole universe being His own form. 
Thus this universe having no origin, existence or end outside Brahman, 
it is not a quite distinct thing from Brahman. Accordingly the learned 
say: — “ His Saktis or energies form the whole world, and the Mahesa or 
the Great Lord is the energetic (Saktiman). Never can energy exist 
distinct from the energetic. Unity of these two is eternal, like that of 
tire and heat, inasmuch as unseparateness always exists between energy 
and the energetic. Wherefore the supreme energy belongs to the 
Supreme Atman, since the two are related to each other as substance and 
attribute. The energy of heat is not conceived to be distinct from fire” 
and so on. Vayu-Samhita too says . 

“ From Sakti up to earth (the whole world) is born of the principle 
Siva, by Him alone it is pervaded, as the jar, etc., by clay. His varie- 
gated Supreme loakti, whose form is knowledge and bliss, appears aS one 
and many, like the light of the sun.” 

The following passages of the Sruti speak of Para-Brahman as 
possessed of infinite powers of creating, ruling, and maintaining the 
world, all inherent in Him : 

“ His supreme Sakti is spoken of as manifold, inherent, endued with 
the activity of knowledge and life.” 

“ One verily is Rudra — they were not for a second — who rules these 
worlds with the powers of ruling.” In short, on the authority of Sruti, 
Smriti, Itihasa, Purana —and the saying of the learned, the Supreme 
Sakti — whose manifold manifestation, this whole universe of chit and 
achit is, whose being is composed of Supreme Existence, Intelligence and 
Bliss and is unlimited by space and time — is inherent in the nature of 
5>iva, the Supreme Brahman, and constitutes His own essential form 
and quality. Apart from Sakti, He cannot be the Omniscient, the Omni- 
potent, the cause of all, the all-controlling, the all-adorable, the all-gracious, 
the means of attaining all aspirations, and the Omnipresent ; and, 
moreover, such grand designations as ‘ Maiusvura,' the Supreme Lord, 
‘ Mahadcva ,’ the Supreme Deity, and ‘Rudra,’ the expeller of pain, cannot 

34 



2 66 


ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE SAIVA SIDDHANTA. 


apply to Him. Thus, it is Brahman whose body is the whole sentient 
and insentient universe, and who is denoted by all words. Just as the 
word ‘blue’ denotes not the blue colour only, but also the lotus which is 
of blue colour, so does the word ‘ universe’ also denotes Brahman. There- 
fore, such passages as “ All is Rudra verily ” teach that Brahman is 
denoted by all words. Accordingly the passage “ All this verily is 
Brahman”, refers to Brahman whose body the whole of the sentient and 
insentient universe is. The universe being thus a form of Brahman and 
being therefore not an object of hatred etc., let everyone be peaceful at 
heart and worship Brahman. This doctrine is clearly expounded even in 
the p uranic texts such as the following : — 

“ The body of the God of Gods is this universe, moving and unmov- 
ing. This, the Jivas (Pasus) do not know, owing to the mighty bondage. 
They say sentiency is Vidya, and insentiency Avidya. The whole uni- 
verse of Vidya and Avidya is no doubt the body of the Lord, the Father 
of all ; for the whole universe is subject to Him. The word ‘sat’ is used 
by the wise to denote the real and the good, and *asat’ is used by vedic 
teachers to denote the contrary. The whole universe of the sat and the 
asat is the body of Him who is on High. Just as, by the watering of the 
roots of a tree, its branches are nourished, so by the worship of Siva, the 
universe which is His body is nourished. Atman is the eighth body 
of Siva, the Paramesvara pervading all other bodies. Wherefore the 
whole universe, if ensouled by Siva, if any embodied being whatso- 
ever be subjected to constraint, it will be quite repugnant to the eight- 
bodied Lord ; as to this there is no doubt. Doing good to all, kindness 
to all, affording shelter to all, — this they hold, is the worshipping of 
Siva.” And so on. 

Brahman being all-formed, it is but right to say “ all is Brahman” 
and “ let every one be peaceful and worship Brahman.” Wherefore it is 
Brahman who in the opening passage is stated to be the object of wor- 
ship, that is also spoken of as manomaya, as partaking of the nature of 
manas, and so on. Neither should it be supposed that the partaking of 
the nature of manas is a characteristic mark of a samsarin ; for Brah man 
may limit Himself by assuming a shape which can form an object of 
worship. 

The slight difference there is between the way the subject 
is treated by Srikantha and that St. Meykandan has to be noted. 
Srikaptha calls this relation, following Badarayana as one of 
cause and effect and calls it as a peculiar Apiirva parinama , 
in which the efficient cause is not affected by the change, as in 



ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE §AIVA SIDDHANTA. 267 

an ordinary case of causation, and yet his illustration of soul 
and body, would seem to bring, if not quite, within causation 
at all. Sivajnana Yogi distinguishes between two kinds of 
T&dutmyam ■ One thing appears as two, as Guqi and Guna, 
substance and attribute. This is one kind. Again two things 
might t>e so connected as to be regarded as one. This is also 
Tadatmyam ; and this latter relation is what is called Advaita 
and the former relation is simply known as Tadatmyam ; and 
Srikantha would seem to conform himself to Tadatmyam first 
described. 

Professor Max M idler would not seem to understand the 
importance of the distinction between Kapila’s Sankhya and 
Patanjali’s Ydga called also Sfishvara Sankhya. He says, in his 
‘Six Systems of Philosophy,’ that the Sutra “Devotion to God” 
is not very important and is only one of the various means of 
obtaining Kaivalya. We have dwelt at length on the difference 
between the Nirvana as postulated by Buddha, and that the 
Siddhanti in our notes to Sivajnana Siddhiyar, Parapak^ham, 
under Buddhism, and also in our paper on the ‘ Tree of Know- 
ledge of good and evil.’ Buddhism postulated PaSatchaya, 
freedom from desire and pain ; but Siddhanta postulates, in 
addition, Patijnana, entering into the Brahma-Nirvana or 
Sivanubhava, and we have shown how, with all our effort, 
Pasatcliaya will not be practicable, unless there is Patijnana. 

The thing is best illustrated by the simile of crystal or 
mirror and colours, used by both Sankhyans and Ydgins. By 
the juxtaposition of a red flower with a mirror, the mirror is 
tinged by the reflexion of the red flower ; so the soul, when in 
relation with the world, is affected by the world ; and death and 
birth and pain arise. According to the Sankhyan, the soul will 
regain its freedom when it know r s that it is different from the 
colours reflected in itself, and it is not affected b}' the colours 
or reflexion; and the gaining of this knowledge is secured to it 
by the action of Pradhana itself. But is it possible for the soul 
to attain this knowledge by its own effort or the effort of the 


268 


ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE §AIVA S1DDHANTA. 


Pradhana ? If so, let us examine the illustration itself. The 
mirror and red flower came into juxtaposition, and the reflexion 
was caused on the mirror. 

But did they come into juxtaposition by the effort of the 
mirror or the effort of the red flower? Let us take it that some- 
how they came into juxtaposition, and could not help, coming 
into this position. Having been placed in juxtaposition, how 
could the reflexion now present on the mirror be removed ? 
Could this be done by any effort of the mirror or by any effort 
of the red flower? There being nothing but the Soul and 
Pradhana or mirror and red flower according to the Sankhyan, 
how could this release be effected ? It is clear that, under the 
circumstances stated by the Sankhyans, there is possibly no 
way out of the difficulty, and the juxtaposition must for ever 
remain fixed, and there can be no release and no freedom and 
no Moksha, unless it be in name. The ever recurring cycle of 
births and deaths should go on for ever and ever. But it being 
noted that the Yogins use the same figure, is there really no 
way' by which the mirror can get rid of this reflexion ? Yes, 
there is. But this will require a slight examination as to how 
the reflexion itself was caused. Suppose the position between 
the mirror and flower remained fixed as ever, could we see the 
reflexion at night? No. Why not? Because the essential 
condition of the reflexion itself being thrown on the mirror is 
the presence of light or the Sun. And it is the essential pre- 
sence of the Sun that we had forgotten all the time we were 
using the figure of the crystal and flower. Well, at night- 
time, when there is no reflexion and no knowledge of tingeing, 
this is the kfevala condition of the Soul. In this condition of the 
Soul, it is devoid of all ichcha and kriya and it is not even 
conscious that it is undergoing pain, wdthout knowing how 
to get rid of the pain. As the Sun dawns the reflexion is felt 
on the mirror, and by means of this conjunction, the Soul’s ichcha 
and kriya are aroused and it experiences both pleasure and 
pain, sins and suffers, and by suffering, gains experience 
and freedom. As the Sun travels over and over, and nearer and 



ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE SAIVA SIDDH ANTA. 2C9 

• 

nearer the crystal, the shadow of the red flower will grow less 
and less till, at noon-time when the Sun is at the nearest point 
to the crystal, it will be covered with a blaze of light that you 
cannot see, and the image of the flower will be lost. In the 
former position, the mirror was one with the red flower (Bhanda- 
one or Advaita in Anava,) and in the latter condition, the mirror 
was one with the Sun (Moksha-one or Advaita in God). This is 
the position of the Yogi or the Theistic Sankhya, and the import- 
ance of the doctrine of ‘ Devotion to God’ will now be manifest, 
Though ‘Chitta Nirodha’ * should necessarily precede it. [Cf. 
Dovaram}: the Soul by its own effort or that of Pradhana cannot 
get rid of its mala. Neither of them could be energized by their 
own will and power unless the Supreme Will and Power thought 
“may I become many” and so willed all creation and evolution. 
And the freedom from the world and desire and from the thirst 
after birth and death cannot be gained, unless the Soul rests its 
desire in God, or becomes devoted to Him. That this is the 
only way of securing freedom from mala is set forth distinctly 
in the tenth and eleventh sutras of Sivajnanabodha, treating as 
they do of Pasatchaya and Patijnana. These sadhanas are, 
becoming one with God, dedicating one’s acts to God and 
unceasing love and devotion to God. By such dedication and 
devotion, it brings itself in harmony with the Divine Law and 
loses its pride of self and self-knowledge; karma and ignorance 
cease to operate, the man's whole being becomes covered with 
the flood of His Grace. 

This love and devotion to God who is Love Himself begets 
joy and bliss which completely fulfils our highest desire, unlike 
the joys of the world, which ever and anon create a gnawing 
desire, a thirst after such more and more, like the unquenched 


* “ 'gyzevriL/rigP Aid 

nsuru Lja €Wsmt—QujiTiT g oQpsrretru LjarrsK«iT t ” 

“ The Ancient one who dwells in the heart-lotus of Jnanis who had 
controlled the five senses and killed the six foes, and w’hose heart 
blossoms with Love.” 



2/0 ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE §AIVA SIDOHANTA. 

t 

thirst of the confirmed drunkard. This supreme Bliss Rest 
and Joy fill our hearts like the flood brooking not its banks, 
when in all humility and love, our body and soul are devoted 
to His service. 

When this joy fills hitn, then does he revel in God, delight 
in God and rest in God as the Mundaka Up. (III. i. 4) puts it ; 
then does he love God, delight in God, revel in God and rejoice 
in God, and become a Svaraj, and Lord and master in all the 
worlds, as the Chandogya Up. (VII. 25. 2) puts it. 

In this condition of Svaraj, when he is fully God-filled, even 
when he moves about there laughing or eating, playing or 
rejoicing, be it with women, carriages or relations (Chandog. 
Up. VIII. 12. 3.), these actions will not affect him as fire cannot 
burn a man skilled in agni-stambha (See principle stated in 
Sivajnana Siddhiyar X. 5 and 6 ). 

This position has therefore to be clearly distinguished from 
the ethics and psychology of both Buddhists and Sankhyans. 
The Ybgi and the Siddhapti believe that true salvation can 
be secured only by such Self-renunciation and Love to God. 

That it is only possible to get rid of our mala by attaching 
ourselves to the Supreme Parame&vara is brought out also 
by St. TiruvaJluvar : 

“upgva uppp^eisr upfS^swuuu up/S^esru 
upgfS U p nry S$l—P(3j ”. 

“ Desire the desire of Him who is desireless. 

Desire His Desire so as desire may leave you.” 

“ & it rrLjeso trigs &ititl]Q$l- Qsvirrig&sir inp&iflp&i 
&tr tr p d tr &- ntT g Q /5 n u-i . 

“The true support who knows, rejects support he sought before, 
Sorrow that clings shall cease and cling to him no more.” 

“ t j§)0aS3sB7-iL/[2 Q&atr jg ) enpeueisr 

Gun (getrQ&ii Lj<£ipL]iflibgiTiT lctuUEi.'' 

“ The two kinds of dark karma will cease from one, 
whos oraise is, he is devoted to God.” 



ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE SAIVA S1DDHANTA. 2J I 

J 

Compare this with the Christian aspiration after Divine 

joy. 

‘ If, to any, the tumult of the flesh were hushed, hushed the 
images of earth, and waters, and air, hushed also the poles of 
heaven, yea the very soul be hushed to herself, and by not 
thinking on self, surmount self, hushed all dreams and imaginary 
revelations, every tongue and every sign, and whatsoever 
exists only in transition, since if any could hear, all these say, 
‘we made not ourselves, but He made us that abideth for ever.’ 
If then, having uttered this, they too should be hushed, having 
roused only our ears to Him Who made them, and He alone 
speak, not by them, but by Himself, that we may hear His 
Word, not through any tongue of flesh, nor Angel’s voice, nor 
sound of thunder, nor in the dark riddle of a similitude, but, 
might hear Whom in these things we love, might hear His very 
self without these (as we too now strained ourselves, and in 
swift thought touched on that Eternal Wisdom, which abideth 
over all) ; could this be continued on, and other visions of kind 
far unlike be withdrawn, and this one ravish, and absorb, and 
wrap up its beholder amid these inward joys, so that life might 
be for ever like that one moment of understanding which now 
we sighed after ; were not this, enter into thy Master’s joy ? 
{St. Augustine).' 

We have used above the illustration of crystal and colours 
whether that of the red flower or the variegated clouds. Pure 
water is crystalline in its nature and it reflects and refracts 
light just as a prism does*. This water is discoloured and 
affected by the dirt in it, and when our ahankara and the dirt 
subside, the water regains its own pure clear nature, and then 
the reflexion of the Supreme One fills it with His glory and this 
is the truth contained in the famous central verse (Hridaya 
§l6ka) in St. Tirumular’s Tirumaptiram. 

* In the famous spring at Mahanandi near Nandyal (Kumool District), 
you can see the actual phenomena of the refraction of light ; just as the 
water ripples in sunlight, all the colours of the rainbow can be seen on the 
bottom of the spring. 



272 


ADVAITA ACCORDING TO THE §A1VA SlDDHlNTA. 


a-sasajjbjD Qpnssreap iLjansQathu-i ^tpLoksnik 
aetaaiupp Qpnmeap asns&iresa s^ir^QixiT 
^ssuiupp irrQuneo Qiisap Qpetfisuirrr&g) 

Ljstair'ujb/3(T^i &trek Ljiflaesii— (SiuaQesr. 

O ye fools that speak of the unspeakable, 

Can ye see the limits of the limitless one ? 

To one whose mind gains clearness as the waveless sea* 
Will appear faultless the Lord with the braided Hair. 



THE SAIVA RELIGION 


AND 

SMYA ADYAITA SIDDHANTA PHILOSOPHY* 


Professor Max Muller, in his last great work on the “Six 
Systems of Hindu Philosophy’’, has remarked as follows : — 

“The longer I have studied the various s3'stems, the more 
have I become impressed with the view taken by Vijnana bikshu 
and others that there is behind the variety of the Six Systems, 
a common fund of what may be called National or Popular 
Philosophy, a large Manasa lake of philosophical thought and 
language, far away in the distant north and in the distant past, 
from which each thinker was allowed to draw for his own 
purposes." , 

And it would have certainly surprised him if one had told 
him that one need not go neither to the distant north nor to the 
distant past to discover what this National or Popular Philoso- 
phy was, from which each thinker drew his own inspiration, 
and a study of the two popular Hindu Religions of Modern 
India — we mean Saivaism and Vaishnavism — will convince any 
one that they inherit to-day all the thought and traditions of 
by-gone ages, as the Modern Hindus themselves represent 
lineally their old ancestors who were settled in Bharata Khaiida, 
since the days of the Rig Veda ; and their religion of to-day 
is as much a living faith, suited to all sorts and conditions 
of men, whether peasant or pandit, sinner or saved. 

SAIVAISM IS BASED ON THE VEDAS AND AGAMAS. 

Saivaism comprising in its fold Saktaism and Ganapatyam 
and worshippers of God Subrahmanya &c., counts among its 
followers, the majority of Hindus, and it accordingly claims to 
* A paper read before the Convention of Religions, at Calcutta, igog. 

35 



274 


THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


represent the old traditional and parent religion of the days of 
theVfedas and Upanishats, Agamas or Tantras, and Itihasas 
and Pur anas, and bases its authority on these ancient revealed . 
books and histories. It claims God Siva to be the author of the 
Vedas and Agamas. Says Sri Nilakanta Sivacharya in his 
Sutra Bashya : 

v t 

“ We see no difference between the Veda and the Sivagama. 
Even the Vedas may properly be called Sivagama, Siva being 
the author thereof. Accordingly Sivagama is twofold, one 
being intended for the three higher castes, the other being 
intended for all. The Vedas are intended for people of the 
three castes, and the other for all. Siva, alone as the author of 
the Veda, is declared in the following passages of Sruti and 
Smriti.” * 

“He is the Lord of all Vidyas,” 

“ (The Veda) is the breath of the Mighty Being.” 

“ Of these eighteen Vidyas of various paths, the original 
author is the wise Sulapani Himself. So says the Sruti.” 

V" 

It will be therefore important to trace Modern Saivaism 
from the traditions and thought and language of the past. 

ITS ANTIQUITY. 

The Supreme polity of the Veda is Sacrifice. Various Gods, 
Ipdra, Vayu, Varuna, Agni, Hiranyagarbha, Sbma, the Sun, the 
Moon, Vishnu and Rudra, are worshipped. Each is addressed 
as a most powerful deity, and his aid is invoked for all kinds 
of earthly blessing and freedom from evil. They are all sup- 
posed to represent various powers of nature, and to idealize 
man’s aspiration after the Supreme. Then we meet the text, 
“ Ekam Sat Vipra Bahudha Vadanti”; and who is this one? Was 
any one God recognised, above all others, as the Chief, as the 

l 3lcT. %^TOf>TWr. H4fd c Kl*jfcT l 

1 ‘ ’ ‘ areWfHTtTfreq HWqmfWTT? 

1 ‘ Rdrgtwrptwt i 3j^.Trmn:fcTgfcT: 1 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


27 5 

God of Sacrifices, as the Pati ? And we have the following 
texts from the Rig Veda. 

“Tasmat Rudrah Pasunamadhipatih ” * (Rig Veda). 

“Gathapatim Medhapatim Rudram Jalasha bheshajam Tat 
SamyOh Sumnamimahe.” t (Rig- 1 Ashta, 1 Mand, 26 Anu.) 

“\Veseek from Rudra, the Lord of Songs, the Lord of 
Sacrifices, who possesses healing remedies, his auspicious 
favour (Rig Veda I. 43. 4.) 

As the Pati of all sacrifices, He is the fulfiller of sacrifices, 
“ Yajna Sadham ” J (1. 114-4) and ‘Rudram yajnanam sadhad- 
ishtim abasam ’ (11 1-2-5). As the God of gods, He is said 
to “derive His renown from Himself” ‘Rudraya Svayasase’. 
His glory is said to be inherent, independent, or self-dependant 
God, ‘Svadhavane’ (Rig. VII. 46-1). He is also called Svapivata, 
which is variously explained as meaning ‘readily understanding’ 
‘ accessible,’ ‘gracious,’ * He by whom life is conquered,’ ‘ He 
whose command cannot be transgressed,’ ‘Thou by whom pray- 
ers (words) are readily received.’ He is called the ‘ fa’ther of 
the worlds,’ ‘ Bhuvanasya Pitaram,' § VI. 49-10, and the Rik 
story of His becoming the Father of the fatherless Maruts 
can be recalled in many a Puranic story, local legend, and 
common folklore. 

He is referred to in the text ll anter ichchanti" — (VIII. 61-3). 
His form as described in the Rig Veda is almost the same as 
the Image of later days. He is called the Kapardin, with 
‘ spirally braided hair.’ He is of ‘ Hiranya’ ‘ golden formed’ 
and ‘brilliant like the sun,’ and ‘shining like gold’ ‘Yah§ukra 

t irmTrf tr4TRT ^ snsiwura: 1 

i H I'-Hf M Lh Hf ?T! I 

— Rig, 1 Ashtaka, 1 Mandala, 16 Anuvaka. 

§ h i ilr ^ '4 zttl S y ffiT 1 

—Rig, 4 Ashtaka, 6 Mandala, 4 Anuvaka. 



276 


THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


I 


iva Suryo hiranyam ivarochati ’ (1-43-5.) And in Rig Veda, X. 
136-1 to 7, He is the ‘ long-haired being who sustains the fire, 
water and the two worlds ; who is, to the view, the entire sky ; • 
and who is called this ‘Light.’ He is Wind-clad (naked) and 
drinks Visha (water or poison) and a Muni is identified with 
Rudra in this aspect. t 

Rudra is derived by Sayana from the roots, Rut dravayita,* 
meaning ‘he who drives away sorrow.’ And consistent with 
this derivation, Rudra is called in the Rig Veda itself, as the 
* bountiful ’ and the ‘ Healer ’ possessed of various remedies 
(the later Vaidyanath) ' benign 1 and ‘ gracious.’ And the term 
Siva clearly appears in the following text of the Rig Veda 
(X. 92-9): “Stomant;a adya Rudraya sikvase kshyad-viraya 
namasa didishtana y&bhih Sivah t svavan fivayavabhir divah 
Sikshati svayasah nikamabhih.” 

(With reverence present ymur Hymn to-day to the mighty 
Rudra, the ruler of heroes, (and to the Maruts) those rapid and 
ardent deities with whom the gracious (Sivah) and opulent 
(Rudra) who derives his renown from himself, protects us from 
the sky.) 

If the Gods, Ifidra, etc., personified individually the diffe- 
rent powers of nature, in the supreme Personality of Rudra 
will be found combined all these different powers. He is a 
thunderer and storm-God, the father of the Maruts. He is 
Agni. He is Vayu. He is Varuna. He is Soma. He is the 
Sun and Moon. We have the high authority of Sayana that 
Soma means Sa-Uma. He deduces the story of Tripuradahana 


* fcPr.Jig: i?it. imiw \ 

— Vayu-Samhita, I. Chap. 28, vv. 35-36, (Bombay Ed.) 
Srikafitha says in the Bhashya : 

Haradatta says: 

t Sayana in his great Bhashya takes Sivah as a noun and not as 
an adjective as translated by most oriental Scholars.* 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


277 


and Vishapana from two texts in the Rig Veda. We have in 
the Rig Veda also the germ of the later Hindu Cosmology, in 
the? famous Nasadasaya sQktam ; and this is also the central 
text of Siva Sakti worship. 

“ In the beginning there was neither sat nor asat ; 

Then there was neither sky nor atmosphere above. 

What then enshrouded all this teeming universe ? 

In the receptacle of what, was it contained ? 

Was it enveloped in the gulf profound of water ? 

Then was there neither death nor immortality ; 

Then there was neither day, nor night, nor light, 

Nor darkness, only the Existent One breathed without 
breath self-contained. 

Nought else but he there was, nought else above, 
beyond. 

Then first came darkness, hid in darkness, gloom in 
gloom ; 

Next all was water, all a chaos indiscrete. 

In which the one lay void, shrouded in nothingness. „ 
Then turning inwards, he, by self-developed force 
Of inner fervour and intense abstraction, grew. 

First in his mind was formed Desire, (Ichcha-Sakti) the 
primal germ, 

Productive, which, the Wise profoundly searching say, 

Is the first subtle bond, connecting Sat with Asat.” 

In the Rig Veda also, we find the famous text which is 
repeated in the Atharva Veda and subsequently in the Sveta- 
Svatara Upanishat and also in the Katha and Muijdaka 
Upanishats, and which forms the chief stronghold of Indian 
Theism against Idealism. “Two birds, inseparable friends 
ding to the same tree. One of them eats the sweet fruits, the 
other ‘Anya ’ looks on without eating”. 

YAJUR VEDA. 

In the Yajur Veda the position of Rudra becomes more 
established as Pasupati and Lord of sacrifices and as The One 
without a second. ■ 



278 


THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


“ Pasunam sarma asi sarma yajamanasya sarma me yacha 
Eka Eva Ruciro Na DvitiySya Tasthe Akhusthe Ritdra 
Pasuli Tam Jushasva. Esha t6 Rudra Bhagah Saha Svahra 
AmbikZya tarn Jushasva Bheshajam Gave Asvaya Purushaya 
Bheshajam.” This text is repeated in the SvetaSvatara Upani- 
shat and is the original of the famous text in the Chhandogya 
Upanishat ‘ Ekamevadvitiyam Brahma Nadvitiyam is more 
ancient form than Advitiyam or Advaitam. And we know 
this is the central text of the Advaita philosophy. In this veda, 
His supreme Majesty is fully developed, and He is expressly 
called Siva by name ‘Sivonamasi’ (Yaj. S. 3-63) and the 
famous mantra, the Pahchakshara, is said to be placed in the 
very heart of the three Vedas (the name occurs in Tait. S. IV. 
5, 1-41 “ namah sambhave cha mayobave cha natnah Sahkardya 
cha mayaskaraya cha NAMAHSlVAYA cha Sivaiardya cha ”). 
And the famous Satarudrlyam which is praised in the Upani- 
shats and in the Mahabharat forms also the central portion of 
this central Veda. And this is a description of God as the all, 
the all in all, and transcending all, ‘ Visvadevo, Visvasvarupo, 
Visvadhiko’ ; and anybody can see that the famous passage in 
the Gita in chapters 10 and 11 merely parodies this other 
passage and these two chapters are respectively called Vibhuti 
Vistdra Yoga and Visvariipa Sandarsana Yoga which is 
exactly the character of the Satarudriya. The Yogi who has 
reached the highest state “ Sees all in God and God in all.” In 
the Satarudriya and in the whole Veda, Rudra is called Siva, 
Sankara, Sambhu, Isana, Isa, Bhagavan, Bhava, Sarva, Ugra, 
Soma, Pasupati, Nilagriva, Girisa, Mahadeva and Mahesvara. 

The word ‘ Pura ’* in the Upanishat technically mean ' the 
body.' Tripura means the triple bond (of the soul) and Tri- 
pura samhara means the destruction of our human bondage 
by the grace of God. 

“The fools say the ancient of days with the braided hair 


I — KaivalyOpanishat. 

I — Sveta Upanishat Chap. 3. 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


279 


• 

and the Ganga destroyed the three cities. The three Pura are 
the result of the three mala ; who knows what happened after 
(pasatchaya) ? ” — Tirumantiram. 

The story of Tripurasamhara is much more fully set forth 
in the Yajur Veda (6th Kanda, 2nd Prasna, 3rd Anuvaka and 
1 2th Mantra). 

Mahapuram Jayantiti ta is hum Samas Kurva to gniutn 
anikan Soman Salyam Vishum Tejanam the bruvan ka itnam 
asishatita Rudra iti aleruvan rudro vai Krura ; Somya twiti, 
sobravit Vararn Vrina ahatn cva Pasundm Adhipatirasdniti 
tasmdt rudrah Pasundm adhipatishlam rudrova Srijat Satisra 
Puro bhitva ebhyo : lokebhys Suran pranudata. 

“ There were the three cities of iron, silver, and gold 
(belonging) to Asuras. The gods not being able to win them 
(by fight) wished to win them by siege. (The great) say that 
He (the Brahmin &c.), who knows (what ought to be known) 
and he (the non-Brahmin &c.), who does not know — they are 
able to win by seige the great city which cannot be overtaken 
by fight : (then) the gods made an arrow composed of Agni 
as (the bottom hilt) Soma as (the middle) iron and Vishnu as 
(the top) and declared (consulted) who will discharge it, and 
determined Rudra, (was) able : He (the Rudra) said the boon 
was made over, I am the Lord of Pasus (both the two-footed 
and four-footed) ; So Rudra the Lord of Pasus discharged it, 
broke up these three cities, and blew them up all from these 
worlds.” * 

* It is clear from the Yajur Veda that there is a closer link between 
the Lord’s aspect as Tripurasamhara, as the burner of the three cities, 
and His other aspect as Pasupati, the Lord of the Pasus. In fact it is 
from the Lord’s aspect as Tripurasamhara, we come to know of His 
other aspect as Pasupati. The whole story of Tripurasamhara, with the 
earth becoming a chariot, the Sun and Moon forming its wheels, the 
four Vedas becoming its horses, the Kshetrajua Brahma its driver, the 
Vishnu, Agni and Soma becoming the portions of the arrow held in 
the hands of the Lord etc., is on the face of it symbolic. That 
this story is symbolic can be further gleaned from an earlier portion 




2SO 


THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


The importance of this lies in the fact that in the chief 
festival in each temple, called the Brahmotsava, the important 
event is the car-feast in which the charioteer is the four-headed 
Brahma, recalling and representing this old old story referred 
to in the Rig Veda and Yajur Veda. 

TheYajur Veda is the Central Veda and is a most im- 
portant one and as such more than ninety per cent of the 
Brahmins of to-day are Yajur Vedies. The occurrence of the 
words Pati, Pasu and Pasam should be noted as their signi- 
ficance will be referred to later on. 


of the Yajus-Samhita. The following texts occur in the 5th Kaijda 
of the Yajur- Veda : 

cmw ;rw: usrat, fcRsSr, 3FJ3T, etc., m aqr: * 13 : 

cTgTcT. 3|^Tga cTEU cT W- TTTRtRH Ha WtcT: iPpig- 

ctrTWrt I H^TrT.^l^T l 

qftm \ w scroti; >53: ad; dta: 3*3^13 a a^r a 
darm 1 a^ta: anaraaa^r a an: akrfn. 


Herp all the quarters (i.e., space) are said to be the arrows of Rudra, and 
the bows are the various periods of time, i.e., Eternity, and the Rudra 
Himself is the Spirit inhering in all things, bound by Space and Time, 

(Yajus, Kanda 5 ). In the Karnaparva, Mahabharata, we are expressly 
told that, that Time is represented by the Bow of the Tripuraghna. 

And what is Eternity 1 It is that which transcends the periods of past, 
future and present. 


Hence the same Bow is described as OMKARA 

The Supreme God made a bow of Omkara and a string of Savitri. 
As to what the grant of boon means, the following text makes it clear: 


“ The Patitvam or the Lordship of mine is as natural to Me as that of 
dependence or PaSutvam to you all, and it is this fact that is shown 
by my playing with you regarding the grant of boon.” It is like a Father 
playing with his children requiring them to say “ call me father ”. It is 
the acknowledgment of the utter dependence upon the Lord. 


THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


281 


THE UPANISHATS AND AG AM AS. 

As we noted above, the polity of the vedas was the per- 
formance of sacrifices. This was continued in the Upanishat 
period and the Brahmanas elaborated the Rituals. But at the 
same time, the worship of the many Gods was being given up 
in favouf of the one God, and the efficacy of sacrifices in general 
was being doubted, and a more spiritual form of worship was 
being substituted in its place, and the first departure is 
noted in the story given in the Kgna Upanishat. 

KENA UPANISHAT. 

“ Brahman obtained the victory for the Devas. The 
Devas became elated by the victory of Brahman, and they 
thought, ‘this victory is ours only’. Brahman perceived this 
and appeared to them. But they did not know it, and said : 
“ ‘What yaksha is this?' They said to Agni (fire): ‘O Jatavedas, 
find out what sprite this is.’ ‘Yes,’ he said. He ran towards 
it, and Brahman said to him : 4 Who are you ?’ He replied : 
‘ I am Agni, 1 am Jatavedas.’ Brahman said : ‘ What power 
is in you?’ Agni replied: ‘I could burn all whatever there is 
on earth.’ Brahman put a straw before him, saying : ‘ Burn 

this.' He went towards it with all his might, but he could not 
burn it. Then he returned thence and said : ‘ I could not 
find out what sprite this is.’ Then they said to Vayu (air) : 
‘ O Vayu, find out what sprite this is.’ ‘ Yes,’ he said. He ran 
towards it, and Brahman said to him : ‘ Who are you ? ’ He 
replied : ‘lam Vayu, I am Matarisvan.’ Brahman said : ‘ What 
power is in you ?’ Vayu replied : ‘ I could take up all what- 
ever there is on earth.’ Brahman put a straw before him, 
saying: ‘ Take it up.’ He went towards it with all his might, 
but he could not take it up. Then he returned thence and 
said: 1 1 could not find out what sprite this is.’ Then they 
said to Indra : ‘O Bhagavan, find out what sprite this is.’ 
He went towards it, but it disappeared from before him. 
Then in the same Akas, ether, he came towards a woman, 
highly adorned: it was Uma, the daughter of llimavat. He 
3 6 



282 


THE SA1VA RELIGION. 


said to her: ‘Who is that sprite?’ She replied: ‘It is 
Brahman. It is through the victory of Brahman that you 
have thus become great.’ After that he knew that it was 
Brahman.” 

This is a further step than the position in the Rig Veda 
where the Ekam Sat or Rudra Pasupati is identified in a 
manner with all the Gods. Here, he is not Indra or Varuna, 
Vayu or Agni. He cannot be comprehended of the Gods, though 
He is before them, and it was left to Uma Haimavati to point 
out the Supreme Brahman, as her consort. This story is 
frequently repeated in the Puranas * and the person of Rudra- 
Siva is introduced as Uma’s Lord. 

This is called the Brahanii Upanishat, and it introduces the 
grand thought “ he by whom Brahman is not thought, by him 
it is thought ; he by whom it is thought, knows it not.” 

This departure from the old polity of the Vedas to the 
worship of the One Supreme Brahman, Uma’s Lord, will be 
found illustrated further in the Puranas by the stories of the 
Daksha’s sacrifice and the Darukavana Risbis. Daksha, son of 
Brahma (Sabda Brahma or Vedas), simply means sacrifice and 
Dakshayapi meant the spirit of sacrifice. And so long as this 
spirit of sacrifice was devoted to the One Supreme Brahman, 
Siva, it was beneficial. But once this sacrifice was divorced 
from the worship of the One Supreme Brahman, represented 
in the person of Siva, the consort of Dakshayani, as Daksha 
tried to do, then this sacrifice was of no avail. When the spirit 
of sacrifice was divorced from the word, then Dakshayani died 
and was reborn as Uma Haimavati, the bearer of Brahma Jnana 
and was reunited to Siva. This reunion or rebirth of the old 
jnana is what is celebrated in every temple, in the important 
feast of Tirukkalyana, and is figured in the oldest sculptures in 
the Elephanta and Ellora cave-temples. In the Darukavana 
story, the Vfedic sacrifice was also divorced from the worship 
of the One Supreme Brahman. The Vedas represented the 


* Vide Vayu Samhita. II Chap. 3 and Siita Samhita, 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


Sabda Brahman, and the Rishis thought that no God was re- 
quired, and the worship of the Sabda Brahman was alone 
Sufficient for securing salvation. The bleating of the Sabda 
Brahman represented by the deer (unrdnABnp') was found in no 
way to reach God. 

Thq Svetasvatara Upanishat, the greatest authority of the 
Saiva School, repeats the text of the Yajur Veda“Eka Eva 
Rudro Nadvitlyaya Taste ”, and the philosophy of Advaita 
Siddhanta is fully expounded in this Upanishat. This Advaita 
is neither the Sarikhya nor the Yoga, neither Dvaita nor 
Advaita, as ordinarily understood. Hence, Oriental Scholars 
like Monier Williams, Professor Macdonnel and Garbe regard 
this Upanishat as the oldest representative of the ancient 
eclectic* school of Hindu philosophy. With this book they 
couple the Bhagavat Gita. 

The highest conception of the one God, ‘Eko Deva’ is, 
given here which, as Max Muller says, corresponds to the con- 
ception of God in the Christian theolog}'. “ He is the one God 
hidden in all beings, all pervading, the Antar Atma of all things, 
watching over all works, dwelling in all beings, the witness, 
the perceiver, the only One Nirguna.” ‘‘He is the eternal and 
infinite, unborn being, partless, actioniess, tranquil, without 
taint, without fault, the highest bridge to immortality.” 

“ He is the causeless first cause, the all-knower, the all- 
pervader; the creator, sustainer and liberator of the world, the 
end and aim of all religion, and of all philosophy. He is the 
Isvara of Isvaras, Mahesvara, the God Supreme of Gods, the king 
of kings, the supreme of the supreme, the J§a of the Universe. 
The sun does not shine there, nor the moon and the stars, nor 
these lightnings, and much less this fire, everything shines after 
Him; by His light all this is lightened.” God is nirguna; and as 
I have shown elsewhere, nirgupa does not mean impersonal, 

* Of the eclectic movement combining Sarikhya, Yoga and Vedanta 
doctrines, the oldest representative is the Svetasvatara Upanishat, more 
famous is the Bhagavat Gita (Macdonnell’s History of Sanskrit Lit, 
P- 4°5)- 



284 


THE SAIVa REUGIOX. 


and Saguna is not to be translated personal. Nirguna simply 
means beyond the three Gunas, Satva, Rajas, and Tamas, and 
Saguna means united to these three. Personality means, as 
Emerson and other Christian writers interpreted, ‘ pure spirit- 
ual being,’ ‘Sat’ and God can be personal and Nirguna, 
absolute. It follows also that God cannot be born as He is not 
united to matter. The meaning of the Rig Veda Sukta we 
quoted above is brought out in the following verse. “ When 
there was no darkness nor day nor night nor Sat nor Asat then 
Siva alone existed (Siva Eva Kevalah). That is the absolute, 
that is the adorable condition of the Lord. From that too had 
come forth the wisdom of old (Jhanasakti).”* After repeating 
the text about the two birds, this is how' it proceeds. “On the 
same tree man (Anisa) sits grieving, immersed, bewildered by 
his own impotence. But w'hen he sees the other Isa, contented 
and know's His glory, then his grief passes away.” | That this 
is th? highest teaching of the Rig Veda is pointed out in the 
next verse. “He who does not know- that Indestructible Being 
(Aksnara) of the Rig Veda, that highest Ether (Parama 
Vyomam) wherein all the Gods reside, of what use is Rig Veda 
to him? Those only who know' It rest contented.” } The other- 
ness of God (Anyata) referred to in the Rig Veda Mantra is 
brought out fully also in the following verses. “ Aye, that 
one unborn (Aja-soul) sleeps in the arms of one unborn (nature 
Pradhana) enjoying (her of nature, red, white and black), who 
brings forth multitudinous progeny like herself. But when 
her charms have been enjoyed, he (soul) quits her (prakriti) 
side (for) the unborn other, (Anyata) (Lord).” 


h (Sveta.) 

■ 4 1 MR it |S*i) R'tbii 't ! d y fil R I ^ : I 

jjTR RI sRMmiciTidRM/. II (Sveta 4—7) 
t m - r i R < fen A q 1 rtvH i 

— (Rig Veda 2nd Ashfaka, 3rd Adhyaya) 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


2S5 


“In the imperishable, and infinite highest Brahman, where- 
in the two, Vidya, (Yijnana-Atma) and Avidya are hidden, the 
one, Avidya, perishes; the other Vidya, is immortal; but He 
who controls both Vidya and Avidya, is another (Anyata).” * 
And in the subsequent verses, this another is clearly pointed 
out to be the “ only one God, without a second, the ruler of all, 
the generator of all and the supporter (ripener) of all.” This 
forms the subject of discussion in the hands of Badarayana 
in I. ii, 21. And the famous passage in Brihadaranyaka is 
referred to. “ He who dwells in Atma (Yijnana) and different 
from AtmH, whom the Atma does not know, whose body Atma 
is and who pulls (rules) Atma within, He is thy Atma, the 
puller within, the immortal ” (III. 7, 22). 

(3) The Supreme Mantra of the Veda or the Sabda 
Brahma is the Prana va or Omkara. It is ordinarily known that 
Om is a compound of the three letters A, U, and M, and that 
they represent the deities Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra. What 
is not known is that there is a fourth part of this § Omkara 
called its Ardha Matra sound, this is called the Chaturtam or 
Turiyam, and represents the supreme Brahman or Siva. This 
is brought out in several of the Upanishats and in the follow'- 
ing verses it is coupled with Sivam and Sambhu. 

“Sivam Santam Advaitam Chaturtam Manyante ”. 

— (Mandukya.) 

“ Dhyayetisanam pradhyayitavyam, Sarvamidam, Brahma 
Vishnu Rudrendrasthe, Samprasuyante, Sarvani chendriyani 
Sahabhutaih ; Nakaranam Karananam Dhata Dhyata ; Kara- 

* 1 

11 (Sveta 5— i)- 

§ gaw-wat 1 

it 

“Thus knowing all these things to be denoted by the Tri-matras, under- 
stand that Siva, the Atman of all, is denoted by the Ardha-matra,” (Vayu- 
Samhita IV Chap. 7, vide also Chap. 27 of Vayu-Samhita II in the 
Mahalinga Pradarbhavadhyaya.) 



286 


THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


nantu Dheyeyah SarvaiS varya sampannah SarveSvarah Sam- 
bhurakasa Madhye. Siva eko Dhyaj'at Sivankara Sarvam 
Anyat Parityaja. — (Atharva Sikha). 

The more popular Hymn in the Mahimnast&tra addressed 
to Siva brings out this idea. “ The mystical and immutable one 
which, being composed of the three letters ‘A’, ‘U’, ‘M’, signify 
successively the three Vedas, the three states of Life (Jagra, 
Svapna and Sushupti), the three worlds (earth, heaven and 
hell), the three Gods (Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra), and which 
by its ardha-matra is indicative of thy Fourth office, as Para- 
mesvara.” 

(4) * The Supreme Upasana of the Upanishat is the 
Dahara Upasana in the Hrid Pundarika, in the akas, Vyoma 
Paramalaya. '1 he Yogi has to think of the Supreme Brahman 
in the cave of the heart, in the midst of the Chidaka£a. The 
Taittiriya Upanishat speaks of this Brahman as of the form of 
Krishpa Pihgala. This Krishpa Pingalaf is identified as Uma- 
sahaya or Parvati Paramgsvara, in several of the Upanishats. 

This again is described as Jyotir (the supreme light ; 
(the jyotir Linga). 

(5) When the polity of the sacrifice was given up in favour 
of the worship of this Jyotir Linga, and the Symbolism of 
the sacrificial ground was invested with a more spiritual 
meaning, then we would seem to have arrived at the period of 
the Agamas, and our modern temple worship would seem to 
have been started. The Agamas brought into use the very 



( — 1 st Ashtaka, 1 st Mandala, 
8th Anuvaka. 1 Repeated in Mahopanishat.; 


t sWrROTWnr 



1 


Half with locks of long hair (female) half without dress (Digambara male) 
half with garland of bones (male) and other half with garland of the 
Nilotpala (female) — such a form of half male and female is called 
Krishnapingaja — Bhavishyat Purana, 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


287 


• 

same mantras, as pointed out by Svami Vivekananda,* in his 
famous address before the Chicago parliament of Religions, used 
in*the old sacrificial worship, into the new system of worship, 
and the offer of the self as a sacrificial oblation was made in the 
place of animal sacrifice. The Pasu was the animal in man and 
when it was offered as sacrifice in Jfiana Agni, it became the 
Nandi or Siva. 

PURANAS. 

The Puranas are the earliest interpreters of the Vfeda and 
the Upanishats. Whole passages from the Upanishats are 
quoted and explained. The principles are illustrated by stories 
and parables, and the Vgdic stories themselves are more ela- 
borated. All these explain the difference between the old and 
new system of worship and thought, bring out fully the differ- 
ence and distinction between the Supreme Brahman Siva and 
man, and illustrate the paths to salvation. These stories are the 
Daksha sacrifice, the churning of the milky ocean, and Tripura 
Samhara, Durga Puja etc. The Linga Purana specially deals 
with the birth of the Jyotir Linga. The largest number 
of Puranas are Saivaite, and the oldest of them is the Vayu 
or Siva Purana, as pointed out by Wilson. The Chhandogya 
Upanishat traces the wisdom of old from Skanda Sanatkumara 

— Chand. 

26th Karida,) and Skanda Purana accordingly deals with the 
same subject. The Uttara portions of some of the puranas are 
clearly later interpolations showing the rise of new sects and 
faiths. 

* “ The Tantras as we have said represent Vedic rituals in a mani- 
fold form, and before any one jumps to the most absurd conclusions 
about them, I will advise him to read the Tantras in connexion with the 
Brahmanas, especially the adhvarya portion. And most of the Mantras 
used in the Tantras will be found taken verbatim from these Brahmanas. 
As to their influence, apart from the Srauta and Smarta rituals, all 
other forms of ritual observed from the Himalayas to the Comorin have 
been taken from the Tantras and they direct the worship of the baktas, 
Saivas and Vaishriatfas alike.” 



288 


THE SaIVA RELIGION. 


ITIHASA. 

The only worship universal in the days ol Mahabharata 
was that of Siva and Siva Lihga, and we refer to the stories of 
Krishna’s and Arjuna’s Tapas, and the discussion between Asva- 
tthama and Yyasa. Most of the temples mentioned in the 
Aranya Parva are temples dedicated to Siva. 

MAHABHARATA. 

Oriental Scholars point out that the superior castes in the 
days of Mahabharata were following the worship of Siva, and 
we quote the following passage from Anusasana Parva, which 
explains at the same time Rudra’s different aspects, the benefic- 
ient and apparently terrible forms, as the Creator, Protector, 
and Destroyer. 

Lord Krishna says “Large armed Yudhishtira, under- 
stand from me the greatness of the glorious, multiform, many- 
named Rudra. They call Mahadeva, Agni, Isana, Mahfesvara, 
one-eyed, Tryambaka, the U 'niver sal-formed and Siva. Brah- 
mans versed in the Veda know two bodies of this God, one 
awful, one auspicious, and these two bodies have again many 
forms. The dire and awful body is fire, lightning, the sun; the 
auspicious and beautiful body is virtue, water and the moon. 
The Half of His essence is fire and the other half is called the 
moon. The one which is His auspicious body practises chastity, 
while the other which is His most dreadful body, destroys the 
world. From His being Lord and Great, He is called Mahes- 
vara. Since He consumes, since He is fiery, fierce, glorious, an 
eater of flesh, blood and marrow, He is called Rudra. As He is 
the greatest of the Gods, as His domain is wide and as He pre- 
serves the vast Universe, He is called Mahadeva. From His 
smoky colour He is called Dhurjati. Since He constantly 
prospers all men in all their acts seeking their welfare (Siva), 
He is therefore called Siva.” 

And it can be shown that the picture of God as the fierce 
and the terrible is not altogether an un-Christian idea. The fol- 
lowing paras, we cull from a book called “The woodlands in 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


289 


» 

Europe” intended for Christian Readers and we could not pro- 
duce better arguments for the truth of our conception of the 
Supreme Siva, the Destroyer, and the Creator and the Pre- 
server (vide p. 6. Sivajhanabodham, English Edition.) 

“ And how about the dead leaves which season after season 
strew thp ground beneath the trees ? Is their work done because 
when their bright summer life is over, they lie softly down to 
rest under the wintry boughs? Is it only death and nothing 
beyond? Nay, if it is death, it is death giving place to life. 
Let us call it rather change, progress, transformation. It must 
be progress when the last year’s leaves make the soil for the 
next year’s flowers, and in so doing serve a set purpose and 
fulfil a given mission. It must be transformation when one thing 
passes into another , and instead of being annihilated, begins 
life again in a new shape and form. 

“ It is interesting to remember that the same snow which 
weighs down and breaks those fir branches is the nursing 
mother of the flowers. Softly it comes down upon th^tiny 
seeds and the tender buds and covers them up lovingly, so 
that from all the stern vigour of the world without, they are 
safely sheltered. Thus they are getting forward, as it were, 
and life is already swelling within them. So that when the sun 
shines and the snow melts, they are ready to burst forth with a 
rapidity which seems almost miraculous. 

“ It is not the only force gifted with both preserving and des- 
troying poiver, according to the aspect in < which we view it. The 
fire refines and purifies but it also destroys, and the same 
water which rushes down in the cataract with such over- 
whelming power, falls in the gentlest of drops upon the thirsty 
flower-cup, and fills the hollow of the leaf with just the 
quantity of dew which it needs for its refreshment and sus- 
tenance. And in those higher things of which nature is but 
the type and shadow, the same grand truth holds good, 
and from our Bibles we learn that the consuming fire and the 
love that passetl} knowledge are two different sides of the same 
37 



290 


THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


God. Just and yet merciful , that will by no means clear the guilty, 
yet showing mercy unto thousands.” 

Badarayana also touches upon this subject in I. iii. 40 arid 
we quote below the Purvapaksha and Siddhanta views on this 
question from the commentary of Srikantha. 

“ Because of trembling (I. iii. 40). , 

“ In the Kathavallis, in the section treating of the thumb- 
sized purusha, it is said as follows : 

1 Whatever there is, the whole world when given forth 
(from the Brahman) trembles in the breath. (It is) a great 
terror, the thunderbolts uplifted, those who know it become 
immortal ’ (Cit. 6 , 2). 

“ Here a doubt arises as to whether the cause of trembling 
is the Paramesvara or some other being. 

“(Purvapaksha): — Here the Sruti speaks of the trembling 
of the whole universe by fear caused by the entity denoted by 
the word breath. It is not right to say that the Parames- 
vara, who is so sweet-natured as to afford refuge to the whole 
Universe and who is supremely gracious, is the cause of the 
trembling of the whole Universe. Therefore, as the word 
thunderbolt occurs here, it is the thunderbolt that is the 
cause of trembling. Or it is the vital air which is the cause 
of trembling because the word breath occurs here. Since the 
vital air causes the motion of the body, this whole world which 
is the body, as it were, moves on account of the vital air. 
Then we can explain the passage, ‘whatever there is, the 
whole world, when given forth (from the Brahman) trembles 
in the breath.’ Then we can also explain the statement that 
it is a great terror, the thunderbolt uplifted, inasmuch as 
lightning, cloud and rain, the thunderbolt which is the source of 
great terror are produced by action of the air itself. It is also 
possible to attain immortality by a knowledge of the air as the 
following Sruti says : 

' Air is everything itself and the air is all things together. 
He who knows this conquers death.' (Bri. Up* 5. 3. 2). 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


291 


“(Siddhanta) : As against the foregoing, we say that Para- 
mfisvara himself is the cause of the trembling. It is possible 
ttflat as the Ruler, Paramgsvara is the cause of trembling of 
the whole Universe and by the fear of His command, all of us 
abstain from prohibited actions and engage in the prescribed 
duties apd it is by the fear of the command that Vayu and 
others perform their respective duties as may be learned from 
such passages as the following : 

‘ By fear of Him, Vayu (the wind) blows’ (Tait. 14. 2. 8). 

“ Though gracious in appearance, ParameSvara becomes 
awful as the Ruler of all. Hence the Sruti. 

‘Hence the King’s face has to be awful’ (Tait. Bra, 3. 8. 23). 

“ Wherefore as the master, lsvara himself is the cause of 
the trembling of the whole Universe.” 

THE GiTA. 

The Bhagavat Gita epitomises the philosophy of the 
Svgtasvatara Upanishat. Oriental scholars link both together 
as expounding an eclectic school of Hindu Philosophy. In it, 
the words ISvara, Isa, Mahgsvara, Paramesvara, are used and 
in the Uttara Gita*, the word Siva is used not to denote the 
lower Brahman but the Supreme Brahman. 

THE RAM AY ANA. 

In the Ramayana , Rudra’s position as the Lord of sacri- 
fices is affirmed in spite of some dissentients, showing the rise 
of new faiths. The worship of Siva and Siva-Linga was 

*In the Anu Gita, Sri Krishna was asked by Arjuna to tell hifnthe Knowledge 
of Brahm as was given before — during the war. Sri Krishna replied: 

4-i 0-i n -H 'I G 'fd 1 I 

I did exhaust all ways of knowing the Bmhman and I am not able to 
recount to you all these again. I was then in deep-yoga and I then told 
you the knowledge.” And the real position of Krishna in reference to 
Arjuna is that of Guru to disciple. KTWffl^T*^. In the 

Uttara Gita, the Lord is certainly styled as the fourth : sJu'Mrfd'icflci ^ 



292 


THE SAlVA RELIGION. 


Universal as shown by the establishment of the temple at 
RameSvaram. 

THE SUTRAS. 

All the Sutrakaras recognise l§vara as the Supreme God and 
Piirusha. Sri Nilakantba’s Bhashyam* on the Brahma Sutras 
is the earliest commentary now extant ; as such it is entitled to 
the greatest weight and will be found to be the most accurate and 
reliable interpreter of the Vedanta Sutras, and Sri Nilakantha 
is the accepted authority by the Southern Saiva School. 

It is now proved by Thibaut and admitted by Max Muller 
that the interpretation of Sankara is not correct. Says Doctor 
Thibaut. 

“ If now, I am to sum up the results of the preceding 
enquiry, as to the teaching of the Sutras, I must give it as my 
opinion that they do not set forth the distinction of a higher 
and lower knowledge of Brahman ; that they do not acknow- 
ledge the distinction of Brahman and Isvara in Sankara’s 
sense ; that they do not hold the doctrine of the unreality of 
the world ; and that they do not, with Sankara, proclaim the 
absolute identity of the Individual and the Highest Self." 

“ The Upanishats no doubt teach emphatically that the 
material world does not owe its existence to any principle 
independent from the Lord, like the Pradhana of the Sankhyas ; 
the world is nothing but a manifestation of the Lord’s won- 
derful power and hence is unsubstantial (Asat) if we take the 
term substance (SatJ in its strict sense. And again every- 
thing material (Achit) is immeasurably inferior in nature to the 
highest spiritual principle from which it has emanated and 
which it now hides from the individual Soul. But neither 
unsubstantiality nor inferiority of the kind mentioned consti- 
tutes unreality in the sense in which the Maya of Sankara is 
unreal. According to the latter the whole world is nothing 
but an erroneous appearance as unreal as the snake for which 

a piece of rope, is mistaken by the belated traveller, and 
- — — . — ' % ' — — ' 

* English Translation published in vols. I to VII Siddhanta Dipika. 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


293 


• 

disappearing just as the imagined snake does as soon as the 
light of true knowledge has risen. But this is certainly not the 
impression left on the mind by a comprehensive review of the 
Upanishats which dwells on their general scope, and does not 
confine itself to the undue urging of what may be implied in 
some detached passages &c.” 

Says Professor Max Muller in his Life of Ramakfishpa 
Parama Hamsa : ‘ It is difficult to say which of the two schools 
was the more ancient and I am bound to acknowledge after 
Professor Thibaut’s luminous exposition that Visistadvaita 
interpretation is more in keeping with the Sutras of Badara- 
3 r ana.” 

Sri Nilakantha Sivacharya in his Bhashya quotes, with 
approval, this beautiful text from the Upanishats. “ Apivayas 
chandalah Siva iti vacham vadet tena saha samvadet, tena 
saha samvaset, tena saha bhunjit ” * which means: — “A chap- 
dala though a person is, if he utters the name Siva, converse 
with him, live with him, dine with him ”. • 

“ Wherefore the whole universe is ensouled by Siva. If 
any embodied being whatsoever be subjected to constraint, it 
will be quite repugnant to the eight-bodied Lord ; as to this 
there is no doubt. Doing good to all, kindness to all, affording 
shelter to all, this they hold as the worshipping of Siva,” 

During the Buddhist and Jaina period, it was Saivaism 
that was able to rise above the onslaught of these two creeds 
and vanquish them. The rise of the great Acharyas, St. Jnana- 
Sambandar, St. Appar, St. Sundarar and St. Mapikkavagagar 
was in this period. By the close of the ninth century, both 
Buddhism and Jainism had become inert and dead. 

The next few centuries saw the rise of the great teachers 
Sri Sankara, Sri Ramanuja and Sri Madhvacharya. Following 
them close, came the great Santana Acharyas, St. MeykapdanJ 


* cFT ti? cPT P? rPT ?ff ^Tiq. 

£ The author of S i vajT: fi naboih am . 



294 


THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


St. Arunandi,* St. Marai-J nana-Sambandar and St. Umapati 
Sivacharyar§ and modern Saivaism may be said to commence 
from that time. 

We will now begin the study of Modern Saivaism. Its 
/orm of ritualism and philosophy is determined in the South 
by the Agamas or Tantras, 28 in number, from Kamika to 
Vatula, called the Dakshina or Right-handed ; and the differ- 
ent temples in Southern India follow the rules prescribed in 
one Agama or another, though there are still some temples 
like the one at Chidambaram where the pure Vedic Rituals f are 
followed. This Agama Philosophy has also been greatly- 
developed and systematised in Tamil by a line of Teachers 
beginning with St. Tirumular,| St. Meykandan, St. Arunandi 
Sivachariyar, St. Marai-J nana-Sambandar and St. Umapati 
Sivachariyar. Both in the rituals and in the philosophy, 
the same mantras, forms and words derived from the old 
Vedic Times are used. For instance, the temple represents 
the old Yajna-§ala symbolising the human body-. The Siva 
LingaA (it is due to Svami Vivekanarjda to point out that 
this was no Phallic Symbol $ and this view was reiterated by 

* The authour of Sivapuina Siddhiyar. 

§ The author of Light of Grace and SivaprakaSam. 

f The pujas done in the Chidambaram are according to the paddhati 
of Patanjali ; who takes the one from Ssaivagamas and the Mantras from 
the Vedas, 

| The author of Tirumantiram. 

f See the fulli subject discussed with all the authorities in Siddhanta 
Dipika Vols. VI and VII . 

$ The Svami said that the worship of the Siva Lihga originated 
from the famous lingam in the Atharva Veda Samhita sung in praise of 
the Yupastambha, the sacrificial post. In that hymn a description is 
found of the beginningless and endless Stambha or skhamba and it is 
shown that the said Skhamba is put in place of the eternal Brahman. As, 
afterwards, the sacrificial fire, its smoke, ashes and flames, the soma plant 
and the ox that used to carry on its back the wood for the Vedic sacri- 
fice, gave place to Siva’s body, his yellow-matted hair, his blue throat, and 
bull, the Yupastambha gave place to the Siva Lihgam and was raised to 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


295 


Dr. Ananda K. Kumarasvami in his paper read before the His- 
torical Congress of Oriental Religions in which he shows 
that it is the least anthropomorphic of symbols,) takes the 
place of Rudra Pasupati and its form is that of the Pranava* 
and there is the Balipitha at the entrance to the temple with 
the Yupastambha f and the Pasu or animal offered in sacrifice 
in the form of the Bull. Every Brahmotsava still commences 
with a sacrifice, (the blood sacrifice is altogether given up in 
the South Indian Temples) and the Pasu, in effigy in cloth, is 
tied up to the Yupastambha and after the festival is taken 
down. The position of the bull or Pasu will be found to be on 
the other side (God side) of the Balipitha and Stambha, and it 
is not called Pasu but Nai)di (Blissful), God. Because, accord- 
ing to the phraseology of Saivaism, the Jiva or soul, once it 
had become freed, is no more called Jiva but Siva or Brahman. 
What had to be offered in sacrifice was not an animal but the 
Jiva; the soul called also the Ejaman of the sacrifice, had to 
offer his Jivtavam, his animal part of himself, his individuality 
or Ahankara or Avidya or Ignorance, and the Naivedyam in 
all temples is now interpreted as this PaSutvam, or Pasubho- 
dham as it is called. As soon as he enters the temple, he is 
asked to prostrate in front of the Yupastambha. This is his 

the High Devahood of Sri Sankara. In the Atharva Veda Samhita, the 
sacrificial cows are also praised with the attributes of the Brahman- In 
the Linga Purana, the same hymn is expanded in the shape of stories 
meant to establish the glory of the great Stambha and superiority of 
Mahadeva. Later on, he says, the explanation of the Siva Lingam as a 
Phallic emblem began in India in her most thoughtless and degraded 
times. 


* “ The whole Linga is the Omkara filled by Nada and Bindu. The 
base is Akara. The Kanta is Makara, and the round form Ukara”. 
Timmantiram. 



{ II — Ajitagama. 

The standard pole represents Pati, The flag or piece of cloth that is 
being raised to the top represents I’asu and the cord (made of grass) 
represents Pasa. ’ 



296 


THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


offer of his self as sacrifice and self-sacrifice thus becomes the 
centre of Hindu and Saivaite Philosophy, on which the whole 
process of salvation depends. This is the Arpapa or Sivarpapa 
referred to in Verse 5 7, Chap. 18 of Gita. 

The philosophy also retains the old language for its 
technical terms. Whereas the newer systems have su^h techni- 
cal terms as ‘ Chit, Achit, Is vara,’ ‘Jagat, Jiva, and Para;’ the 
Saiva-Siddhanta technical terms to denote these Padarthas or 
categories are Pati (God), PaSu (soul), and Pasa (bondage).f 


r ; In the hymn to the unknown God in the tenth Mandala of the Rig 
Veda, God is termed the Pati — which means Protector or Saviour coming 
from the root Pa, to protect. It strictly corresponds to the English term 
Providence. Even the term Isa or Isvara which simply means Ruler, 
does not bring out the Inner Narure of the Lord which is Love. Vide 
also the Brahma Sutra text because of the term Pati and 

others : Pasu, as Srjkantha Yogi explains, involves bondage in Pasa — 
“ 'TmU'-P'ET ” an( j p asa in its root meaning simply means 

“that which binds”. It means a noose or a cord only in its extended 
meaning of imagery. A man bound to a pole by means of cords, his 
hands and feet, neck and back being tied to it, can have no liberty 
and he is said to undergo pain. Pasa therefore does not simply mean 
“ limitation ” but is limitation wbLh involves pain or pain to the core. 
The Agamas explain the noose or a cord held in one of the ten hands 
of Sadasiva’s form as and “ tEWHlT -f.H'IUl'il ”. 

In Saivaistn the soul is symbolised as a cattle tied by means ol a 
rope to a pole. 1 his supposes the existence of a master to it. The Vayu- 
Samhita has . 

3SjrSJT:«?mErnyf treTTT ftTlIrlrU : I 






■M ill Jt'UlHISlFJ I 


Beings from Brahma to immovable things are termed Pasus. These are 
the Characteristics of all Pasus (i.e.,) that it is bound or tied by means of 
ropes that it chews the cud of Sukha and DuVkha (pleasure and pain) 
arising out ot its own acts, that it torms an instrument for the Lords to 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


297 


• 

Pa§a is the rope with which the Pasu is tied to the sacrificial 
stake and this is the word mostly used in the Upanishats also 
to describe Man’s bondage or Mala. “ Pasam dahati Panditah” 
(Kaivalya Upanishat). 

The Pati is accordingly described in the text-books as 
follows : 

■* 

This Pati is Param, neither Rupa nor Arupa, Nirguna 
without mark, Nirmala, Eka, Eternal, Chit of Chit, Achala, 
Infinite, Ananda, the unapproachable, the Goal, the least 
of the least, and the greatest of the great, Tat and Siva 
(. Sivaprakasa I.) 

SAIVA IS NIRGUNA AND PERSONAL. 

We have only to notice that the God postulated by Saiva 
Siddhanta is not Saguna, but Nirguna,* which as we have 
pointed out above means only above the three gunas, Satva, 
Rajas and Tamas, i.e., above Praknti i.e., non-material or Chit. 

NIRGUNA NOT TO BE TRANSLATED IMPERSONAL. 

We have condemned ever so often the translation of the 
words Nirguna and Saguna into Impersonal and Personal and 

play with in His Pafichakrityas, just as a cow is tied or released, that it 
has no wider vision (Agam) and is not master of its self (Anisa) and it 
is laid by a master, or Isvara, to heavenly regions or other places.” — 
Hence is the soul symbolised as a Pasu. !->ri Haradatta says ; 

PHd'^cT.q^-irl : qfdTPSWI h 

“Owing to dependence upon its master, the Atmans are Pasus and inde- 
pendence is the mark of thyself — the Pati and Isvara The term Mala 
applied to corrupting element has been more in vogue in classic works. 
Thus Patanjali has in his Yoga sutras ‘‘ <T^Tddidt. u lH?/TqcTI?I STH^l ” and, 
in the Manu-smriti we have r d ? '-T f t( T R M i I d m '-N M 1 it id I qr%tdl'dti l IT 9 HT 
II (Manu Chap. 2). And what is Mala? “ 

Mala is what intrinsically covers the Chit or the intelligence of the soul. 

* These three gunas stand for the three states Jagra, Svapna and 
Sushupti, and Nirguna therefore means Turiya or Chaturta. “Jagra is 
Satva, Rajas is Svapna, Tamas is Sushupti. Nirguna is therefore 
Turiya.” ' hriuua iiram. 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


298 

thus scare away the Christians from the Highest Conception of 
the Supreme, Personal is explained to mean ‘ Pure Being,’ the 
absolute, by Emerson and Lotze and other Christian writers 
and would correspond to our word Sat. And 1 have shown 
therefore that God can be both Nirgupa and Personal. 

God neither has form nor is formless as air, ( ideas all 
derived from matter, but He can assume any form suited to 
the conception of his Bhakta and these Forms are not material 
but as the text says, “His Form is produced out of Divine 
Grace or Love.” God is therefore not to be called Saguna 
simpty because He is spoken of as Uma-sahaya, Nilakantha, 
Sambhu, Uraapati, AmbikaPati &c., Lord of Kailas, as Siva, 
Hara, Rudra.* 

God is neither he, nor she, nor it, but He can be thought 
of in all these forms, as male, female and neuter ; and all specific 
names of Siva are declinable in all the three genders without 

* “It has been said, for instance, that the Svctasvaiara Upa.'.iskat is a 
sectarian Upanishat, because, when speaking of the Highest Self or the 
Highest Brahman, it applies such names to Him as Hara (I, 10), Rudra 
(II, 17. Ill, 2, 4. IV, 12, 21), Siva (III, 14. IV, 10) Bbagavat(III, 14), Agni, 
Aditya, Vayu Ac., (IV 2). But here it is simply taken for granted that 
the idea of the Highest Self was developed first, and after it had reached 
its highest purity was lowered again by an identification with mythological 
and personal deities. The question whether the conception of the High- 
est Self was formed once and once only, whether it was formed after all 
the personal and mythological deities had been merged into one Lord (Praja- 
pati), or W'hether it was discovered behind the veil of any other names in 
the mythological pantheon of the past, have never been mooted. Why 
would not an ancient Rishi have said; what we have hitherto called Rudra 
and what we worship as Agni, or Siva, is in reality the Highest Self, thus 
leaving much of the ancient mythological phraseology to be used with a 
new meaning ? Why should we at once conclude that the late sectarian 
worshippers of mythological gods replaced again the highest Self, after 
their fathers had discovered it, by their own sectarian names? If we adopt 
the former view, the Upanishats which still show these Rudras of the 
ancient temples, would have to be considered as more primitive even than 
those in which the idea of the Brahman of the Highest Self has reached 
its utmost purity.” — Max Mulkr, 



THE SAIVA REJ 1GION. 


299 


change of meaning Siva, Sivafi and Sivam,* Sambhu, Simbhavi 
and Sambhavam, Isa, l§a}j and lsanam &c. 

* §IVA IS NOT ONE OF THE TRINITY. 

The Pati or Siva of the Saiva Religion is not one of the 
Trimurtis, Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra and scores of texts 
could be quoted from the popular Tamil Hymn-books conveying 
the same idea as in the hymn of Mahimna Stbtra quoted above. 
God is ‘ Sivam Advaitam Santam Chaturtam.’ 

GOD CANNOT BE BORN IN MAN. 

As Siva is Nirgutia and Turtya, the Supreme absolute 
Brahman, it follows that God cannot be born as a man through 
the womb of the woman. That Siva had no avatSras or 
births is generally known. f This is the greatest distinction of 
the ancient Hindu Philosophy and of the Saiva School, making 
it a purely transcendental Religion, freed of all anthropomorphic 
conceptions. It was the late Mr. T. Subba Rao who in his 
"Notes on Bhagavat Gita" entered a vigorous protest against 
the conception of the Supreme Brahman having human avatSras 
and we regret that, in all the mass of current writings, no writer 
has thought fit to bring this view to prominence. But this 
absolute nature of Siva does not prevent Him from His being 
personal at the same time and appearing as Guru and Saviour, 
in the form of man, out of His Great Love and feeling for the 
sin and sorrow of mankind, and helping them to get rid of their 
bondage. 

REASON FOR CREATION. 

And this is the reason as shown in SQtra I., of Sivajnana- 
bodham, why God creates the Universe, and resolves it for the 
purpose of making the souls eat the fruit of the “ Tree of 
Knowledge of Good and Evil ” § (good and bad karma) and 
atta in salvation. _____ 

* This noun form occurs rarely in Sanskrit, but in Tamil, it is very 
commonly used as synonymous with the masculine form 1 Jsiva '. 

t 1 He has neither birth nor death neither 

likes nor dislikes. — V ayu-Sarnhitt. 

§ Vide pp. 185**301 anti. 



■300 


THE SAIVA RELIGION 


THE NECESSITY FOR A GURU. 

The necessity for human effort is postulated, but without 
God's appearance as the Divine Guru, in human form, and His 
Divine Grace, the final salvation is not possible. Man can but 
try and get rid of the cataract covering his eye, but that he 
shall enjoy the light of the Sun (Siva Surya) is independent 
of his effort ; and without the hope of reaching this Light 
(Sivanubhuti) a man can have but poor inducement to get rid 
of his cataract (Desire, trishna, the seed of birth), which veils 
him by making him undergo all the trouble and expense (tapas 
etc.), if the Doctor were to forbid him to see the Light after he 
regained his sight ; and darkness could not vanish unless 
Light entered.* 

DOCTRINE OF GRACE. 

The doctrine of Grace and Love i is the distinguishing 
feature of Saivaism, and God is accordingly defined by St. Tiru- 
mular in the following terms : 

, god is LOVE. 

“ The ignorant think that Love and Siva are different; none 
know that Love and Siva are the same ; when every one knows 
that Love and Siva are the same, they will rest in Siva as 
Love. ” — Tirumantiram. 

god’s IMMANENCE. 

As God ensouls the Universe of Nature and of Man, Siva 
is called the Ashtamurti, the eight-bodied Lord, and He gets a 
name as He dwells in earth, water, air, fire, akas, sun and moon 
and atman. 

* To those who would deny this Sivanubhuti, Svami Vivekananda 
replied by saying ‘ He jests at scars that never felt a wound’. 

qtfnIt?Trui«ITA FTWFWJT. II 

All His actions are the out-come of His love towards the souls wallowing 
in sin. Of what avail will the acts of creation and others be to Him 
Who is Paripurna, eternally contented, except for these who are in need 
of them? — Vayu-Samkita 



THE SAIVA RELIGION 


30 r 

“Ppithi vyobha vah , apassarvah, Agnerudran, Vayor Bhimah, 
Akasas3'a Mahadevah, Suryasyograh, Chandrasya Somah, 
Atmanah Pasupatih,”* 

The famous passage in the 7th Brahmana of the 3rd 
Chapter in the Brihadaranya Upanishat gives more forms than 
these as the Sarira of the Brahman, but in the Agamas and 
Puranas, these are reduced to eight, as comprising all other 
forms. 

god’s transcendence. 

As God is immanent in the Chetana and Achetana Prapan- 
cha as the soul of all, He.is identified with the Universe as the 
All , and }'et His transcendency is also brought out by such 
statements as ‘Antas’, ‘ Antara ’, ‘Anyata’, ‘Neti’ ‘ Neti.’ 

‘ They are in me, not I in them.’ “ Thou art not aught in the 
Universe, naught is there save Thou.” 

GOD IS SATCHIDANANDA. 

$iva is Sat Chit Ananda.f Somaskanda (Sa-Umaskanda) ; + 
Being, Light and Love. As Pure Being, the absolute, God is 
unknowable ; $ and as Light and Love. He links himbelf to 
Man; and it is possible to Man to approach Him through Love. 
god’s sakti is light and love. 

This Light and this Love are therefore called His Sakti, § and 

* W'WSiMw ; Tsrr.qTcr: 1 

5I^T?RSljfrrTR: I 

OTTOM II Vayu-Samhitaa Chap. 3). 

\ Vide Bishop Westcot’s definition, God, the Holy Ghost and Christ, 
as Spirit, Light, and Love. 

| Uma literally means Light or Wisdom. 

V ■v c 

§ Vide Brahma sutra florid i-qd^inn, and also Svet. text 

1 

^jjrvrnrsTTdt: ^diM^iw: 11 


302 


THF sAlVA RELIGION. 


as our Mother is ali these. This Sakti of God becomes the 
Mother of the Universe (Bhuvanasva Mataram) as Siva is the 
Bhuvanasya Pitaram.* >• 

St. Arunapdi accordingly describes Her as follows: — 

THIS LIGHT AND THIS LOVE ARE THE MOTHER. 

“She, who is l5a’s Kripasakti (Love and Grace), ■ Ichcha- 
Sakti, Kriya-Sakti, Jnana-Sakti, § and Tiropava-Sakti, who 
actuates all creation, sustentation and resolution, who is Rapa 
and Arupa and neither, who is the consort of Isa in these 
forms, who is all this world and all this wealth, who begets the 
whole world and sustains them; the Gracious Feet of this our 
mother , who imparts blissful immortality to souls, removes 
their bonds of birth and remains seated with our Father in 
the hearts of the Freed, let me lift up on my head.” 

Sakti is not mayA. S 

This Chit-Sakti (Uma, Durga)f Nirguija, is sharply dis- 
tinguished from Maya (Saguija) also a Sakti of the Lord ; and 
inasrrfuch as God is in a sense identified with His creation, as 
the Upadana Karana J of the Universe, inasmuch as it is His 

* tT'tw rerwcTow i 

cPTOWIhVj II Vayu-Samhita II. 

§ The description of Her as Ichcha and Kriya-Sakti follow from 
the first definition of Her as Chit, Jnana-Sakti. Says Arunandi: “The 
form of this Sakti is unlimited Intelligence. If asked whether Supreme 
Will and Power are also found in this Intelligence, we answer yes. 
Wherever there is Intelligence, there is Will and Power. As such. Power 
and Will will also be manifested by this Chit-Sakti.” 

8 She, the transcending One, the Chid- 

rflpa, the causer of all things : 3T3JlffaiTW5TKf;: She the 

Parasakti, the ancient One, the Chinmayi, and inhering the Lord Siva. 

f Literally, deliverer from evil, Mahishasura Mardhani; Mahisba mean- 
ing buffalo, is a symbol of Ignorance. 

+ The words Upadana does not occur in the Upanishats. The 
word ParhjSma occurs in the ^vetasvatara Upanishat: “ 

The ‘ Parinama ’ is also found in the 



THE §AIVA RELIGION. 


303 


Light that illumines all this world, so Our Mother is also 
identified with Maya, as Mahamaya.* 

This Maya is matter, the ‘object’ of Western philosophy, and 
comprises Tanu (the body), Karana (the sense, internal) Bhuvana 
(the world) and Bhoga (sensation) and is defined as follows: 

• MAYA DEFINED. ^ 

“ Indestructible, formless One, seed of all the worlds, Achit, 
all-pervasive, a Sakti of the Perfect One, cause of the souls, 
bodies, senses and worlds, one of the three Malas (impurities,) 
cause also of delusion, is lVJaya.” 

COMPOSED OF THIRTY-SIX TATTVAS. 

This May r a or Prakriti, or Pradhana of most Indian Schools 
comprise the 24 tattvas from earth to Buddhior 25 with Mula- 
prakriti, but the Saiva School f postulates 11 more tattvas 
above this 25; which are Kalam (Time), Niyati (order), Kala, 
Vidya, Raga or Ichcha, Asuddha-Maya, Suddha-Vidya, Sadak- 
yam, l§varam, Bindu or $akti, and Nada or Siva (Suddha 
Maya). 

text Badarayana Sutra I. 4, 27 and, Srtkantha Sivucharya in his Bhashya 
distinguishes it from the ordinary conception of Paiinama by calling it 
‘ Apurva Parinkma.’ 

cRt: fBr?r^rr?T u 

By the will of the Lord (Siva) Parasakti became one with Siva-tattva (a 
nonsentient primordial substance;, and thence, in the original creation is 
produced all as oil from sesamum. 

1 jFRfF? WTT 'cfdFrWHT II 

11 

RWWddfafa II 

All beings always know good and bad by means of Maya. 

f See for a full discussion of the 36 tattvas, Sri Kasivasi Seiitinatha 
Aiyar’s ‘ Saiva Siddhanta Tattva Prakasa Catechism’, published in the 
Siddhanta Dipika, Vol III, p. 205 d seq. Vide Authorities for 36 Tattvas. 

I Svet. Up. 

H I Svet. Up. 



3°4 


THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


This Suddha Maya is the Kutila or Kundalini Sakti of the 
Yogis, of which Miilaprakriti called also Kundalini is the 
grossest form. These higher tattvas, and their Powers can 
alone be perceived and realized by the Highest Siva Raja 
Yogis ; and they are so subtle as to be mistaken for the Light 
of the Mother Herself, as they reflect Her Light most perfectly. 

i 

MAYA DISTINGUISHED FROM AVIDYA. 

This Maya is again to be distinguished from Anava Mala 
(the technical * term in the Agamas for Ahankara, or Avidya or 
Ajhana or ignorance), and the definition and distinction are 
stated in the following verses by St.'Arunandi : 

avidyA or anava mala defined. 

“ Anava Mala, with its many Saktis, is One, pervading 
through the numberless Jivas, as the dirt in copper it binds 
them from jiiana and kriya. It also affords them the capacity 
for experience and is ever the source of ignorance.” 

distinction. 

4 

“ Do you say 1 there is no other entity as Mala (Anava) ; 
it is only the effect of Maya ’? Understand well, that Maya 
causes Ichcha, Jnana and Kriya to arise in the Jivas, but Anava 
causes the same to disappear. Anava is inherent in Jivas. but 
Maya is separate from them (as one’s ignorance and body can 
be called inseparable and separate), and besides manifesting 
itself as the Universe, forms the body, senses, worlds and 
enjoyments.” 

kevala, sakala and suddha or nirvana condition of the soul. 

According to the Purvapakshin, Maya is the cloud that 
hides the light of the Sun. But the Siddhantin answers, " You 

* The technical term to denote the Mala called Anava. 

MT^^TlSfld 'A rtN tfl H'-l I N i| I I ^ W Mrigendragama. 

t rngHHITYV-TTITgiT I 

ufrTI^^TT5TT^i5 fiw^lfff:; II SiddHanta baravaji. 



THE SaIVA RELIGION. 


3°5 


cannot speak of the sun being hid by the clouds, unless there 
is a seer. The cloud has no capacity to hide the sun but it has 
ptnver to hide the seer’s eye. This sun is Siva. The cloud or 
cataract in one’s eye is the Anava Mala; the seer or his eye is the 
Jiva or Atma or soul. When the soul is enshrouded by Anava 
Mala and is without action will and intelligence, it is its night 
— the Kevala State.* When God, out of His great love, sets 
him in evolution giving it the body and the worlds out of Maya 
for his enjoyment and experience, whereby his kriya §akti etc., 
are aroused, this is called its sakala condition. Anava Mala is 
night and darkness, and »Maya acts as the lamp-light — the 
power of million arcs is the Suddha Maya— in darkness. But 
when the sun rises, all darkness and night vanish and there 
is no need of any lamp, however powerful, and the soul is fully 
enveloped in that Supreme Splendour, that “Light of Truth, 
that, entering body and soul, has melted all faults and driven 
away the false darkness.” This is the soul’s Suddha or 
Nirvana condition. 

“ This day in Thy mercy unto me Thou didst drive away the 
darkness, and stand as the Rising Sum 

Of this, Thy way of rising — there being naught else but Thou — 
I thought without thought. 

I drew nearer and nearer to Thee, wearing away atom by atom, till 
I was one with Thee. 

O Siva, dweller in the great Holy Shrine, 

Though art not aught in the Universe, naught is there save Thou. 

Who can know Thee ? ” *1 

The above expresses the kernel of Saiva Advaita Siddhanta. 
This leads us naturally to the discussion of the nature of 
Advaita postulated by the Saiva School, and before we do so, 

* From start to finish, life consists of series of awakenings till the 
final goal is reached. Accordingly existence itself is five-fold. 

11 

Abuddha, Buddha, Budhyamana, Prabuddha and Snprabuddha. 

From St. Manikkavacagar’s Tiruvachakam. 

39 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


306 


we will glance at the nature of the Jivatma or soul itself, as 
this is essential to the understanding of the Advaita. 


SOUL DISTINGUISHED FROM SAT AND ASAT. 

The Sankhyans, Yogins, and Yedarjtins admit that the 
Purusha or Atma or soul is other than Prakriti and above Buddhi 
and 23 tattvas. There is confusion in trying to establish its 
relation to God. The soul is not a reflection nor a particle nor a 
spark of the Partless and Changeless Brahman,* nor one with 
Him. God is other than the soul. Even where the Sutrakara 
postulates Parinama, he does it only in reference to Ma} 7 a, but 
he postulates the difference of the Human Soul and the Supreme 
Soul : no harm would arise if we regard Maya as One with the 
Brahman as His inseparable Sakti, but all religion and moral- 
ity are sure to die, when we regard the soul the same as God.f 
There will be no way to account for the Presence of evil or 
ignorance in the world, and even when we try to whittle it 


I II Svet. Up. 

V- I (Svet. Up.) 

(Svet. Up.) 

rf let I 

d 1 1 ’"4 '. II 

(Rig-Veda 1st Mandala 22nd Anuvaka.) 
yfidRdd:T'EE 1 




II (Vayu-Samhita.) 


f This is pointed out by a Christian writer in the following words ; 

“ But why do we shrink from Pantheism ? Not from dread of losing 
the physical universe in God, but from dread of losing our own soul in 
God, Pantheism only becomes deadly to vigorous religion and morality 
when it makes the man’s soul, the man’s self, a portion erf God. Theism 
claims that the human soul is a free cause, a separate island of indivi- 
dual will, in the midst of the greatest ocean of the Divine Will. Leave 
us man confronting God, not absorbed in Him and the conditions are 
preserved for the ethical life of the individual and also for the communion 
of the soul with God as another than itself, the very possibility of which 
is destroyed if a separate personality is wiped out. On this matter of the 
Otherness of man from God, i hope to say more in a later chapter.” 
(‘God and Soul’ by Rev. Mr. Armstrong). 



THE 5 ALVA RELIGION. 


307 


away as an illusion, delusion or myth, the presence of this 
delusion has itself to be accounted for. Delusion is a conscious 
experience and the question, who is under delusion ? will arise. 
If the soul is other than God, other than Maya and is in bapdha 
or bondage, then the necessity for the creation of the world 
becomes intelligible. We therefore postulate three Padarthas, 
three pMnes of existence, or three centres, the plane of matter, 
the plane of souls and the plane of God. In the language of 
Euclid, God is the point, that which hath no parts, nor 
magnitude; that which is everywhere, in and out, above and 
below; the soul is the centre of the circle, and the circumference 
is the Maya that bounds. When this centre can rise up to the 
Point, then its Nirvana is possible. 

mahavakya texts.* 


But what are we to do with the Mahavakya texts ‘That 
Thou art,’ 1 1 become that,’ I am that’ etc? It will be noted that 
these texts are not discussed by the Sutrakara Badarayapa in 
the First Adhyaya relating to Pramana or Proof of the nature 
of the Padarthas, where he distinctly postulated the difference, 
but they are in the chapter on Sadana relating to the means of 
salvation. The Teacher tells the pupil to practise the Sadana, 
telling him that he is God (Tattvamasi), and the pupil accordingly 
practises Soham bhavana or Sivohambhavana, by repeating the 
mantra ‘Aham Brahmasmi’; there is consciousness, and consci- 
ousness of duality, of two Padarthas — Aham and Brahma. This 
is Dvaitam, the Yoga or Upanishat or Vedanta Pada. When 
by this practice of Sivoham, the consciousness can disappear 
then the soul can become One with God, Jnathru, Jnana 
and Jneya all disappearing (the Jnana or Siddhanta Pada). 
And the question arises how can this oneness be reached, how 
can the two become one? This becomes possible on account of 









U (Sarvajnanottaragama.) 



30S THE §AIVA RELIGION. 

the peculiar nature of the soul and its relation to God. This 
peculiar nature of the soul is alone discussed in the Yoga Sutras 
and in Saiva Siddhapta Text-books. And the peculiar relation 
between God and the Soul is called Advaita. 

nature of the soul. 

This nature of the soul consists in its becoming pne with 
whatever it is united to, losing its own individuality, and its 
not being able to exist independently, except in union with one 
or the other. It can onty be united to the world or to God. It 
can reach God only when it leaves the world. It cannot serve 
God and Mammon at the same time.' It is the caterpillar of the 
Upanishats, which leaves one leaf-stalk to gain another. And 
when it is united to one thing or the other like the mimicking 
caterpillar again, it is indistinguishable from the one or the 
other. It is the shadow of the one (Maya) or the light of the 
other (God) that completely hides its (Soul’s) individuality. So 
when in union with matter, with the body, it is so lost in the 
nerve-centres and so on, that the Scientific Agnostic fails to 
discover the soul, by the closest analysis. In union with God, 
the Pure Idealist finds no soul there. The soul identifies itself 
absolutely with the body or God, and its individuality or 
identity disappears but not its personality or being (Sat). 

MAN IS A MIRROR OR A CRYSTAL. 

This law of the Human mind called The Law of Garuda- 
dhyana is stated in the terms that we become like what we are 
associated with, and may be called the Law of Association or 
Identity, and Professor Henry Drummond calls it the Law of 
Reflection and of Assimilation, and likens man to a mirror or a 
crystal. “ All men are mirrors. That is the first law on which 
this formula (of sanctification or corruption) is based. One 
of the aptest description of a human being is that he is 
a mirror.” 

And we will find this is exactly the simile used by the 
Upanishats and the Siddhapta writers and the following extracts 
contain the illustration and the formula of sanctification. 



THE §A1VA RELIGION. 


309 


THE FORMULA OF SANCTIFICATION. 

“ As a metal disk (mirror) tarnished by dust shines bright 
again after it has been cleansed, so is the one incarnate person 
satisfied and freed from grief after he has seen the real nature 
of himself; and when by the nature of himself, he sees, as by a 
lamp, the real nature of the Brahman, then having known the 
unborn eternal God who transcends all tattvas, he is freed from 
all pasa.” ( Svetas Up. it. 14, 15). 

“From meditating (abhidyanatb) on Him, from joining 
(yojanath) Him, from becoming (tattvabhavat) one with Him, 
there is further cessation* of all maya in the end.” (SvetdS. 
Up. i. 10). 

And St. Meykandan has this stanza (viii. 3. a. ) 

“ The soul, who reflecting that the knowledge derived from 
the senses is only material like the colours reflected on a mirror, 
and that these colour-like sensations are different from itself, 
and, after perceiving next false knowledge as false, understands 
the Truth, will become one with God Who is different .from 
itself." 

The formula stated in plain terms would read : “ I see 
God, I reflect God, I become Godlike, Godly, God, I am 
God." 

The crystal or the diamond, unlike the Sun’s Light which 
it reflects though in its inner core it is pure, possesses the defect 
of being covered by dirt, mala, (Maya) and it is luminous (Chit) 
in a sense but unlike the Self-Luminous Sun, (Para-Chit); and 
either in darkness or the full blaze of the Sun, the identity of the 
mirror cannot be perceived, 

advaita defined.* 

We now come to the definition of Advaita. And we may 
say at once, all the Saiva Siddhanta writers describe their 
system as ‘ Advaita ’ pure and simple, yet people who hear 
ft casually described call it Visishtadvaita and fail to note its 


* See pp. 244,-272 anti. 



3^0 


THE SAlVA RELIGION. 


special features. Advaita is defined by St. MeykandSn as 
meaning Anyo nasti or Ananya * or inseparable; and his 
disciple calls the relation ‘ as neither one nor two.’ Advaita J, 
literally meaning not two, simply denies the separability or 
duality of God and soul and matter, but does not postulate 
Oneness by denying the existence of one or other Padartha or 
by postulating their mutual convertibility as in eaus&tion &c. 
Mind (unextended) is not matter (the extended); yet they are 
ever inseparable and found as one; how the unextended is 
present in the extended is the puzzle and the contradiction as 
stated by Doctor Alexander Bain. And the illustrations of 
mind and body, vowels and consonants + are used to denote 
their Advaita relation of God to the Universe of nature and 
of man. God is the Soul, whose body (Sarira) is the Universe 
of nature and man, as so well and forcibly put in the Brihad- 
Hranya Upanishat texts referred to above, beginning from 
Earth to Atma. 

‘ He who dwells in the earth, other than the earth, whom 
the earth does not know, whose garfra (body) the earth is, who 
rules the earth within, He is thy Atma, the puller within, the 
immortal.’ 


“He who dwells in Atma (Vijnana), other than Atma, whom 

3Tt,ddld'Hdl4ddlddl-<4H I 
’ d h, If 

Jdifd: I 

iT^TTdJI (Haradatta.) 

M. N. Dvivedi in his ‘ Monism or Advaitism ’ points out also that advaita 
does not mean Eka or Abhinna or Abhinna but Ananya and that this is 
the view of the Sutrakara. 

f Vide Sri kary ha's Basbya on Vedanta Sutras II, i. and 22. 


+ Dr. Bain complains that there is not even an analogy to illustrate 
this unique union of mind and body, but Saiva Siddhantins have this 
analogy of vowels and consonants to illustrate this union from the very 
beginning of their letters. 



THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


31 1 

Atma does not know, whose sarira the Atma is, who rules 
Atma within, He is thy Atma, the ruler within, immortal.” 
(HI. vii. 22). 

Here ‘ He is thy Atma’, simply means ‘He is the Soul’s 
Soul.’ 

And the analogy of vowel and consonant explains this 
relation fully. In Tamil Grammar, the words used to denote 
vowels and consonants are the same as the words meaning 
mind and body. And we find the following text to our sur- 
prise in the Taittirlya Upamshat (II. iv. 1.) 

. * — 

‘ Its consonants form its body ; its voweff, the soul (Atma).’ 

The vowels are those that can be sounded by themselves 
but the consonants cannot be pronounced without the aid of the 
vowel.* The consonants cannot be brought into being unless 
the vowel supports it ; and in union, the two are inseparable ; 
and One is the word used in the oldest Tamil Grammar to 
denote the union of the two. A vowel short has one matrai, a 
consonant (pure) half a matrai ; and yet a vowel-consonant has 
only one matrai, instead of one and a half. But the vowel is not 
the consonant nor the consonant the vowel. God is not one 
with the soul and the Universe, and yet without God, where is 
the Universe? 

“ Thou art not aught in the universe, yet naught is there 
save Thou." 

He is not one, nor different from the Universe, and 
this relation is called Ananya, Advaita. The Sutrakara 
brings out the nature of this relation which is neither 
one nor different in II. i. 15 and 22. The Saiva Advaita 
Siddhanta accordingly postulates that God is neither Ab- 
heda with the world, nor Bheda, nor Bhedabheda, as these 
terms are ordinarily under-stood, and yet He is one with 
the world, and different from the world, and Bheda-bheda. 

* ffrW'W.tTqn'rHi 3T^TT«IT*T-+,Hqd; 1 

Siva is situate with reference to all, as the letter A stands with reference 
to the letters. 



3 12 


THE SAIVA RELIGION. 


(SivajTidnabodham Sutra 2, Siva-jTianasiddhiyar II. 1.) And 
St. Meykandan declares accordingly: “You can indeed say 
God is One, without a Second, as when you say without th'e 
vowel ‘A ’ no other letters exist." This is a view of Advaitam 
or Monism, which is not ordinarily met with, which must 
appeal to the hearts and intelligence of the people 9f every 
nation and every religion and which I commend to your 
earnest consideration. 

PRACTICAL RELIGION AND FOUR PATHS. 

I will just glance at the practical aspect of Saiva Religion. It 
holds out four paths or margas for the spiritual aspirant, called 
Charya, Kriya, Yoga and Jnana,* or otherwise called Dasa- 
marga, Satputra-marga, Saha-marga and San-marga. When 
you want to approach God, you can approach Him as your Lord 
and Master, you can approach Him as your Father, or as your 
Friend or as your Beloved. The last is no marga at all but where 
the One-ness is reached fully and finally. There is return to 
birtlf, while one is in the first three paths. And these paths are 
so adjusted in an ascending scale to suit the intellectual, moral 
and spiritual development of the aspirant. The lowest and the 
highest have equally a place in this scheme and are given room 
for their development and progress. No one path is put in 
opposition to the other. It will be noticed this scheme differs 
from the so-called Karma-marga, Bhakti-marga, Yoga marga, 
and Jnana-marga, and the latter is no logical scheme at all but 
involves cross division. For it may be easily perceived that 
when one approaches his Maker, he must know Him as such 
(Jnana) and must love Him as such (Bhakti) and must adjust 

* 5IH%TcT^jfr I 

II (Vayu-Samhita.) 

“Charya, Kriya, 'tfoga and Jnana— these are styled the * four paths’ and 
these are eternal dharmas whereby one attains Me.” 

“ ” ( Vayu-Samhita I.) 

The higher dharmas, which are of four kinds viz : Charya and others are 
enumerated in the Saivagamas. 



THE §AIVA REI.IGION. 


3*3 


his conduct accordingly (Karma). In each condition therefore, 
Karma, Bhakti and Jnana are all together essentia], and from 
•the Dasa to the Sanmargi this Karma, Bhakti and Jfiana are 
progressive. There is no opposition, there is no parting away 
with one to follow another. So the practical Religion offered 
by Saivaism is all in all and for all. 

SAIVAISM IS AN ECLECTIC PHILOSOPHY AND 
AN UNIVERSAL RELIGION. 

Saiva Siddhanta, as representing the old Hinduism and 
with its chief scripture th§ Svetasvatara Upanishat and the Gita, 
claims to be an eclectic philosophy and an universal Religion; 
and the various points I have brought out above will show 
how it brings itself into agreement with every shade of opinion. 
Religion and Philosophy. It describes Philosophy accord- 
ingly by such terms as ‘Sara’, ‘Samarasa’, ‘Siddhanta’ meaning 
‘ essence of all,’ ‘true end,’ ‘the Truth’. And we invite the kind 
attention of every religionist assembled here to the definition 
of an Universal Religion given by St. Arul Nandi several 
centuries ago. 

“Religions, postulates and text books are various and 
conflict one with another. It is asked : which is the true 
, religion, which the true postulate and which the true 
book? That is the True Religion and postulate and book, 
which not possessing the fault of calling this false and this 
true and not conflicting with them, comprises reasonably every 
thing within its fold. Hence all these are comprised in the 
V£das and Agamas. And these are embedded in the Sacred 
Foot of Hara.” 

And we will close this paper with culling a few opinions 
of European Students of Saiva Siddhanta. 

The late Rev. Dr. G. U. Pope remarks: “It is the choicest 
product of the Dravidian (Indian) intellect.” “ The Saiva Sid- 
dhanta is the most elaborate, influential and undoubtedly th» 
most intrinsically valuable of all the religions of India.” 

40 



3H 


THE §AIVA RELIGION. 


Rev. Mr. F. Goodwill follows with the remark: “ Those who 
have studied the system unanimously agree that this eulogy is 
not a whit too enthusiastic or free-worded. That the system is. 
eclectic is at once apparent." 

Rev. W. F. Goudie writes in the Christian College Magazine 
(xx. 9) as follows: — 

“There is no school of thought and no system of faith or 
worship that comes to us with anything like the claims of the 
Saiva Siddhai)ta." 

“ This system possesses the merits of a great antiquity. In 
the Religious world, the Saiva system is heir to all that is most 
ancient in South India, it is the Religion of the Tamil people by 
the side of which every other form is of comparatively foreign 
origin." 

" In the largeness of its following, as well as in regard to 
the antiquity of some of its elements, the Saiva Siddhai)ta is, 
bey nd any other form, the religion of the Tamil people and 
ought lo be studied by all Tamil Missionaries." 

“ We have, however, left the greatest distinction of this 
system till last. As a system of religious thought, as 
an expression of faith and life, the Saiva Siddhaflta is by 
far the best that South India possesses. Indeed it would 
not be rash to include the whole of India, and to main- 
tain that, judged by its intrinsic merits, the Saiva Siddhapta 
represents the high water mark of Indian Thought and 
Indian life, apart, of course, from the influences of Christian 
Evangel.” 

. ITS ETHICAL BASIS 

Saivaism is based on the Highest morality. As a course 
in ethics usually precedes the study of Religion, the subject 
of ethics is not usually discussed in text-books on Religion. 
The greatest authority in Tamil is the sacred Kural by St. 
Tiruvalluvar translated into many European languages and 
pronounced by Rev- Dr. G. U. Pope as a book unparalleled 



THE §AIVA RELIGION. 


3*5 


in any language of the world. The Saivaism of the South 
holds to the ahimsa * doctrines as its chief pillar. 

* The eight flowers which the yogins are required to offer to Siva in 
their hearts are thus enumerated : 


cniqyRTTtjiy *rr3'iyW'm-f;R u 


Ahimsa. (abstention from killing), Indriya-Nigraha or Dharma (control of 
the senses), Kshama (forbearance), Daya (compassion), Jnana (Wisdom), 
Tapas (Austere life) and Satya (Veracity) — These are the eight flowers 
and of these Ahimsa or abstention from killing is the first ; Vide also 
Tirumalar’s Tinmantimm under the chapter Attapushpam. 

The eight characteristic marks of a Saivite are enumerated thus : 


ll*rl : i 


ffdfiWFPnSTT iffjTTWlTSTq It 

Love to God, peace of mind for ever, abstention from killing, control of 
the senses, gladness of the heart, veracity, abstention from stealing, and 
the leading of a pious life (Brahmacharya). ........ 

It is the settled principle of the Saivites that the abstention from 
killing conduces to the highest possible good. The Saivdgamas ’persist- 
ently puts this question. 

lErRr.sEWTflTffc I 


fTTdSTcRfaiL II 

Where is intoxicating drink and where is love to God (Sivabhakti) ? 

Where is the flesh- food and where is the propitiation of the Lord 
(Sivarchana) ? 

Indeed, Sankara stands far away from those who are addicted to 
drink and flesh-eating. 

The Vaytt-Samhita says that a Saivite is distinguished from the ordinary 
ignorant people by certain marks and acts and of these, abstention even 
from the smell of Madya (drink) and Mamsa (flesh) are reckoned as the chief. 

The Sivadharmo tiara Agama says : 




What merit a man does attain by severe penance on the summits of mount- 
ains, and also by Asvamedha, that merit he attains without any the least 
labour and difficulty by simply abstaining from drink and flesh-diet. 



THE NATURE OF THE JIVA.* 


The subject on which I propose to address you this 
evening is the nature of the Jiva, but coming as I do at tfie fag- 
end of the day, with the atmosphere at the burning point, 1 do 
not wish to inflict on you a long speech. The importance of the 
question admits of no doubt; and at any rate, this should engage 
our first attention before we attempt to solve problems as to 
the existence and the nature of God which are beyond our cogni- 
tion in a sense. And as I will show, the subject is so import- 
ant that when we had solved the riddle about man himself, we 
would have solved the riddle about the universe. The subject 
is treated under Sutra III of Sivajnanabodham, and in that 
masterly treatise of St. Arul Naqdi Sivachariyar, in all its pros 
and cons, but I will confine rr^self to the true position of the 
Siddhaptins as regards the nature of the Soul. There are two 
characteristics of it elaborated in our system. The first is 
called ^eo by St. Meykandan, and is paraphrased 

as ujirQ'smbrgii ujb/Sesr sign or Sppeo by St. Tayumanavar, 

which all mean that the soul becomes one with whatever it is 
attached to or associated with. That is to say, whatever its 
pwn nature or individuality may be, when it becomes united to 
another, it loses its own characteristics and individuality and 
partakes of the nature of the thing united to, and completely 
merges itself in the other. As illustrated in the proverb, 
“Yopthand white paper take all impressions”, the human 
mind is a tabula Rasa in which are imbedded the impressions 
which are received from out-side. Children catch the manners, 
habits and the peculiarities of their parents. Their very 
voice is imitated. Pupils copy many of the peculiarities of 
their teachers also. A Madras Tamilian settling in Tinnevely 

* A paper read before the Saiva Samayaohivriddhi Sabha, Palam- 
cotta, 19:0. 



THE NATURE OF THE JIVA. 


317 


would readily copy the very intonation in speech of the people 
around him. 

* ,?djGu/rsofri5 airaxsrugncyiji BairQ/n » 

•* * * 

^uj/raoiji snesurugn^LQ GlQp 

* * * 

The principle of this is stated by St. Tiruvalluvar also in the 
oft -quoted verse. 

“ iSir^ifirs & ib(ri?(&)LC lot h g iri(sj 

JiSi ‘JJGVLJ /T (TJj . 

“ The waters’ virtue changes with the soil over which they 
flow, so man’s mind changes with the company he keeps.” 
The water falling from heaven is colourless and tasteless, but 
as it touches the earth, it becomes sweet or brackish, dirty 
or discoloured, according to the nature of the soil, losing there- 
by its individuality and purity. So does a man become good 
or bad according to the association he forms. The law of 
association is stated in the words ‘ we become like what we 
study or are closely associated with.’ In Biology the wording 
out of this law is fully illustrated.* Darwin instances how 

* As analogous to this, I might instance the case of mimicry in plants 
and animals. Mostly for purposes of protection, insects and birds and 
animals assume the colour of their environment. W orms and insects feed- 
ing on green plants would assume the colour of the leaves or the wood of 
the plants and even assume the shape of leaf-stalks and twigs. The stick 
eater-pillars, the larvae of several species of moths, stand perpendicularly 
on twigs, and are indistinguishable from the short twigs in the same branch. 
In the case of the stick-insects which popularly are called ‘praying insects 
or spectres’ (Mantidoe) which being unable to move about, assume the size 
and shape of leaves, birds, and flowers, dried twigs, stalks of grass, accord- 
ing to the respective habitat, so as to deceive and catch their prey which 
consist of butterflies and other insects &c., which hop about these plants. 
I have seen specimens of walking-leaf insects, ODe resembling the leaves, 
stalks of the Vagai tree, one resembling exactly a stalk of ariali grass, 
the resemblance extending even to the dried ends of the blades of grass. 
These are called sprlaai—ijy, or wsmipuy, && by the 1 amils. 

As a plant changes colour from green to yellow, even so these in- 
sects change their >colour. The most remarkable case is that of the 



THE NATURE OF THE J1VA. 


318 

persons ever associated with pigs, get piggy faces, and with 
horses, horsey faces, in the case of a husband and a wife 
when they have been perfectly loving, it has been found* to 
effect a complete assimilation of their features. They might 
have started life with perfectly distinct facial features, yet their 
souls become one through love, and through the power of the 
soul, their bodies are also become one. The writer of the 
book Spiritual law in the natural world (Purdy Publishing 
Company, Chicago.) observes “ all who have made a study of 
the cause of all things have become so at one with it as to 
have causing power, for it is an invariable rule that we 
become like what we study or are closely associated with. 
We become so-like people with whom we live constantly that 

chameleon. It does not change colour from fright. When left in con 
finement, it rarely changes colour. But as it runs about, it changes [colour 
according to the colour of the surface over which it runs. As it runs 
over the bare soil, if the colour of the soil be red, it will become red ; if 
black it will become black. As it runs over the brown trunk of a tree, it 
changes into brown ; and when it reaches the green leafage, it changes 
into green. In the case of birds, their colour is determined from the 
colour of the soil &c., wherein they build their nests. It is to protect them- 
selves from birds of prey. In the case of lions, their grey colour is due to 
their habitat. In the African wilds, where there is little or no vegetation, 
these lions generally find their lair amidst small pieces of gray rocks, and 
while they stand beside these pieces of rock, the hunter could hardly 
distinguish them from the pieces of rock. Artists in their pictures even 
produce this effect. With regard to tigers which usually haunt thick 
forest glades, their black and yellow stripes are the. result of their environ- 
ment. These stripes imitate the alternate light and shade which falls 
slantingly through the leafage and the animal becomes indistinguishable 
thereby. If one observes closely the leaves of the orange tree, he would 
find things there which imitate closely the excreta of birds, black with a 
white tip. These are really live caterpillars which seek their mimicry to 
escape even the keen eyes of the birds that feed on them. There are 
flowers especially those of orchids which resemble butterflies (I have seen 
in the conservatories at Ooty and Peradeniya gardens orchid flowers 
resembling butterflies) and doves and pigeons, (bee for a treatments the 
protective resemblances or mimicry in insects, Chapters VI & VII in 
Romance of the Insect world by L. M. Badenoch). 



THE NATURE OF THE JlVA. 


3*9 


often the expression of the face and sound oi voice grow 
similar, and even the features grow alike. Sometimes a child 
will look more like its nurse than its mother ?.” This causing 
power of the mind or as Professor Kunte calls it, th & potential 
power of the man is its ^pppssremut, and lies at the 

root of all Upasanas and sanctification, and it explains also how 
we got at’ our bondage. If we were perfect, pure and free, 
how is it, we became imperfect, impure and bound ? To say 
that we did not bocome so, would be against all experience and 
common sense. To meet the question by saying that we do 
not know, would be begging the question and would be 
illogical. Have we evidence that the perfect became the 
imperfect ? How do we know then ? Aptavachanam and 
Sruti would be the last resort of philosophers of this school. 
Siddhantins could quote text for text from the Sruti also to 
show that man is not God, and the few texts that alone can be 
counted in favour of the other school would be found explained 
below. The Theory of the soul herein set forth would be 
found to explain how man got bound and impotent. The s»ul, 
different from the body, five senses etc., identified itself with the 
body, five senses &c., and on this mistaken identity, its actions 
flowed. He cared for the body. He did whatever gave 
pleasure to the body and the five senses, and avoided what 
gave him pain. In seeking these transitory pleasures of the body, 
he forgot his duties to others and to God, and he committed 
sins, Karma, good and bad. Desire — Tanha Trishna 

possessed his soul and man is dragged down,* as by force 
constrained. 

* Cf. Gita III 36, 37, 38, where the classical simile of crystal and 
colour is also brought out to explain the subject. “ But dragged on by 
what, does a man commit sin reluctantly indeed, O Varshpeya, by 
force constrained ? ” 

« The beloved Lord said ; It is desire, begotten by the rajas energy 
all consuming, all polluting. Know thou this our foe here on earth, 

“ As a dame is enveloped by smoke, or a tnitvov by dust, as an embryo 
is wrapped by the w<?mb. so this (man) is enveloped by it. 



320 


THE NATURE OF THE jIVA. 


This desire gives rise to births innumerable. St. Tiru- 
valluvar sums up them in the two verses. 

“ uTiiih Qsu^eif! uj'juis uSznsiiQpeir flasr * 

®/ra)U) Q«i_iC<s®x Q-enn.” 

When desire, aversion and error’s name are lost, then the 
disease shall cease.* . 

“ ^avrrQsueGru' Q ausveun syjS rr i 'SjLG srsr.^rrrsrr^u _c 
sslit^iiui ? muiismiL. eS ^ §:■ .” 

“ The wise declare through all the days, to every living thing, 

That ceaseless round of birth from feed of strong desire doth spring.” 

This srrwii is desire of pleasurable things (to the senses) 
and Oai@Grf? ‘is aversion to the things that do not give pleasure 
and is error as defined in the first verse of the same 

chapter. 

<• QuiTtyev eo sosupes>pu Giun(njQzirsk gjisserQiji 
w(VjatrrrfSB) ro/rjgrjiij i SpuLj.” 

, “ Men desire that as a thing when it is not. From this 
delusion does birth arise,” This uhu&sld, error or delu- 
sion is the Anava or Ahahkara or Avidya and we have 
elsewhere shown also its real nature. This delusion consists 
in not mistaking a thing to be existing when it is not, but 
in mistaking one thing for another. When no shell is really 
seen, a man fancies he sees silver, this will be delusion of one 
sort. When what he sees before him is really a shell, and he 
fancies it to be a silver, this will be another kind of delusion. 
When there is no world, no body, and he fancies this to be his 
all, his whole soul, this will belong to the first category. 
When there is a world and a body, and he identifies his soul 
with this body and world, this belongs to the second category. 
The first kind of delusion is what is called Mityavadam. The 
second theory is the true theory of Avidya as set forth by 

* The commentator observes that Sanskritists note faults as five 
Avidya, Ahankara, Desire, Aversion, and Attachment. This is stated in 
Yoga sutras n, 3. 



THE NATURE OF THE J1VA. 


321 


• 

St. TiruvaHuvar and accepted by Advaita Siddhantins. In this 
theory, there is no necessit}- to call anything Mitya or unreal, 
but we show how by mistaking one for the other which it is not, 
the error is started, and how all other things flow therefrom. 
This error or ignorance will not receive play but for the 
power of the mind above set forth. 

If a man does not possess this power of identifying 
himself with whatever he is united to, then, he could not 
mistake his body for his soul. Readers of Dr Bain’s masterly 
treatise on Mind and body would notice how he shows that 
mind though not exactly -»the same as the brain and body, 
though there is a correspondence and concomitance of both 
mental and bodily phenomena along the whole line, can in its 
objective condition become thoroughly identified with and lost 
in the body or brain centres. The mind is lost in the body, 
and yet without the mind, there could be no object. This 
power of mind in becoming one with the united object is also 
spoken of as its power of losing self. It loses its self, soul, and 
becomes the body. It loses its self and becomes God. ’ 

And this brings us to the question how by this power 
whereby he degrades himself to the very depths of the brute, 
he can rise to the very height of God-hood. This power of 
man becomes therefore a demerit and a merit at the same 
time. 

In considering this aspect of the case, it has to be noted that 
almost every religion, theistic or atheistic, prescribes certain 
code of religious and moral duties for attaining salvation 
and betterment, but no religion attempts to prove how the 
following of this or that religious practice elevates one. 
How Sadhana Chatushtayam, Guru-upadgsam, Tapas and 
Yoga can free one from sins and Avidya, is not explained. 
This is, however,* explained in the older y6ga and sankhya 
treatises and is elaborated in the Siddhanta Sastras. Both 
these older schools admitted the essential individuality of man 
and had to explain the real nature ui jiva, so as to lay down the 
4 r 



322 


THE NATURE OF THE J1VA. 


steps by which men can ascend up. They form, thus, the essen- 
tial foundation for Vedanta and Siddhaiita. Without this founda- 
tion, the higher schools cannot be explained. To dissociate 
Vedapta from Y6ga would be to build on sand. As 1 have else- 
where explained, Vedanta strictly so called, and as distinguished 
from Siddhanta, is really the Yoga marga (the words Upanishat 
and Ybga being synonymous) and Siddhaiita is jnana' marga. 
However as I said, both the YOgins and Sankhyans define man 
by this power of identifying oneself with the associated object, 
becoming Sarupya ; and their classical simile * is that of crystal 
and hibiscus flower, about which fnore anon. In regard to 
the process of sanctification, the power by which man came 
down has to tie reversed. Man identified himself with the 
body and became bound. This should cease. But how is he 
to cut himself from the eternal association with the body and 
the world from this pasa, as cucumber is severed from its 
vine ? He became low because he became associated with 
low things. Let him associate with high things and he can 
become high, f He' became mortal because he associated 
himself with mortal and transitory things like the body &c. 
Let him become one by the same power with the immortal, 
the amrita. § By associating with the body, he loved the 

* See Yoga sutras i — 41 and commentary thereon, Sankhya sutras- 
VI 27, 28. 

f Rudra is called Amrita in Rig Veda (I. 43. 9) 

“ Whatever beings are thine, Amrita (Rudra) in the highest place of 
the law on its summit, O SOma, cherish them, remember them who 
honour thee.” 

§ Cf. Gita “They who with mind fixed on me, ever harmonised worship 
me with faith supreme endowed, these, in my opinion, are best in yoga.” 
(xii. 2.) “Renouncing and subduing the sense, regarding everything equally, 
in the welfare of all rejoicing, these also come unto me.” 
(xii. 4.) “ Those verily who renouncing all actions in me and intent on me, 
worship meditating on Me, with whole hearted yoga,” (xii. 6.) “ These I 
speedily lift up from the ocean of death and existence, O Partha, their minds 
being fixed on me,” (xii. 7.) “ Place thy mind in me, in me let thy reason 
enter ; then without doubt thou shalt abide in me hereafter.” (xii. 8.) 



THE NATURE OF THE JlVA. 


3 2 3 


bodily pleasures. Let him cut asunder this desire and avers- 
ion, love and hate, like and dislike, then will he lose this 
*birth. But is it possible for him to cut off this desire by 
merely desiring the desirelessness ? Some philosophers opine 
that this is possible, but they speak without their book. Here 
it is, that the second characteristic of man which we spoke of 
before is brought into play, namely, upsaiQ&iruf-iirpi Jeueuneauj, 
not being able to exist without a support. It must support 
itself by clinging to the body and the world or to the Lord. 
If it must give up the world, it must cling to the Lord. If 
there is no God, the soul must go back to the world and 
again resume its round of births. It is a noteworthy feature of 
all systems which do not postulate the existence of a soul that 
they do not postulate God either. It will be seen how subtly 
Gautama Buddha avoids the question of the existence of the 
soul. This was so, inasmuch as he denied the existence of 
God. His followers followed the system to its logical con- 
clusion, and denied the existence of the soul or at any rate 
postulated its utter annihilation. What existed after? I^irvaija 
nothing, however much some scholars might try to prove to 
the contrary. The one exception was the Niri§vara Sankhyan 
who thought he denied God, the author of the universe, yet 
affirmed the separate existence of a soul. However as I said, 
the soul must exist in the world or in the Lord and all the 
religious and moral practices are prescribed for bringing about 
the dinging to the Lord, after the soul frees itself from the 
attachment to the world.* This latter attachment is by itself 
the means whereby he can effect his severance from the old 
attachment. 

“ upgu* upppa^esr up^S^ssr ujuupesjp 

uppts up>£u aSi—^0.” ( Kural 350.) 

* We know how difficult it is to give up some of our habits and 
often one is advised to take to some other habit less serious to cure one- 
self of the old habit. People take to chewing tobacco or smoking to get 
rid of the habit of snuffing. I know a doctor who advised one to take 
to opium to cure himself of the vice of drunkenness. 



324 


THE NATURE Of THE J1VA. 


“Desire the desire of Him who is desireless. 

Desire His desire so as desire may leave thee.” 

“ a/T/ryara hikgl girtrcfc.iL— Gwirqg'sfeisr istppi^ipgi 

gafrgtnr girUpQj Q.hnuj.” (Kural. 359.) 

“ The true ‘ support ’ who knows — rejects ‘ supports ’ he sought 
before — 

Sorrow that clings and all destroys, shall cling to him on 'more.” 

The commentator explains that the “ §:-Qgsgih" required for 
getting rid of the old desire for the world are the Ashtanga - 
ybga. The author had set forth in the preceding three verses 
Sravuna, Manana or Dhyana, and Qhavana (i-'ffa Ssw) as he calls 
it, as the three means of effecting freedom and union with God, 
and St. Tiruvalluvar describes God by the terms Qgb Qu/r@«r 
(Good being), 7 (The existent), QioajuQun ^etr (True being). 

And the commentator’s explanation of the world is also note- 
worthy, and he brings out the reason for the Bhavana. 

( pprrppdQsQg&flsirecaxuSsgr S p pLcndj . Qre near sro jjil. tt ppehrVsw QiLmenr 
Stub seopp &Sekm>LouSeisr giriigiru, gtrsbr erAaineL'pearpiLiib ggoig 7 SpSeirp 
QpppQurr^sfr eSaarjuSssrp! erttQpfnasrjp.LD epq^pGsnaninpptr pAtupfS ^g’Seerg 
Q 1 oG.jrr^Ar €7 ssr^n. QldA) QjtujuGuirQ^Qssrerrsnib s .err errQgesrs^b s ^./8 
lugirtsb ^^jup/SOkueur eij6MriT&. ggn&sBr<3»giL.naiigi, e_i iSrr pear 

enreS/geag Q<scl® sjjtGjS)® giajisnu! iqjl) @63)i_ayi_n gj unay^^sv). 

@ pfeergginr, Qiussreyii) gl uiresr QiDemenib s^gtiu. e-t-wiSesT ssf® 

0B JlIt eopgj m u Gg n esr gn uireSgsuutLi—^i, pn 

eorjrti QtDasrug! erAs-.ir giaxhuirpeSlebr, sSb/i—UjgiSLrrir&Q) 

amy/tgi iSpuiSlp Qg^tsumu unsufarr Qs'Spp Quti^lKS, QseuevuQurr^ 
'SsirGiu uir-sSppeo QeuesurQib,” ( Kural note 358.) 

It is called ( 3 # bGun^err (Good being), because it is eternal 
having no birth and m death ; it i 3 pure on account of its subtle 
nature and nothing can taint it by attachment ; and yet it is 
the first cause that pervading all, yet remains one, without 
change. Hence, God is called QaaLuQur and s -sifajj?, True 
Being and Existent. To see it, is the Bhavana tu become one 
with it, so that Avidya may be lost. As it is held as true by 
followers of all the different Agamas, that the soul when leaving 
the body at death, is re-born as that which it was- thinking upon, 



those who desired Moksha, should place their Bhavana on the 
Highest Truth, so that the Bhavana which is the cause of birth 
may be lost. This power of becoming one with the other is 
realty great and lies at the root of all. Tapas or Upasana or 
Bhavana is set forth by our author in two other places. In the 
chapter pcxvn) on ‘Tapas,’ he has this verse (5). 

Qsuesaru^tu (Ssumsny-'uri 'Si Qs’L^svit /t> Q~uj<iw 
ia&hsrQ qcjjsvu u3d. ( Kliral 265.) 

“ That what they wish may, as they .wish, be won, 

By men on earth are works of painful ‘ penance ’ done.” 

In chapter ( lxvii ) on ‘ Power of Action,’ we have this verse : 

eiaiarsssHuj Qsuemsenfhu!T:h Q&ujjgiu Gsi.essressfiujn'ir 
jSemsssfliLi hitsu Qufisbr. [ibid. 666 .) 

“ Whtever we think, ev’n as they think, men may obtain, 

If those who think can steadfastness of will retain.” 

I now go back to the point where I started from, namely, 
that by the very nature of this other characteristic of the soul, 
the necessity" for a supreme Lord is manifest. I always use 
a simile to illustrate as what would happen if there were no God. 
At fairs and festivals, a greasy pole with a hook at the top and 
a prize tied to it is one of the attractions. Of hundreds who 
attempt, rarely one gets to the top and takes the prize. Even he 
who had climbed to the top could not have retained his hold there 
for long, if there had not been the hook or u/bgisQiirS) to hold by; 
otherwise he would have slipped down by the pole again.* 

So if a religion or philosophy, however dignified it may 
be, offers us no God, there can be no real salvation nor nirvana 
nor freedom from births. After the mighty efforts made to 
purify and perfect oneself by desirelessness etc., he must sink 
back into the abyss of birth and death, again and again, must 
try and climb the ^greasy pole. To them, Isvara and men are 

* I might instance the Upanishat caterpillar which, by its power of 
mimicry jysi ,g^eu) concealing itself effectively in one leaf, 

catches hold of another before it gives up the other leaf to which it has 
been clinging already. 



326 THE NATURE OF THE jiVA. 

ever evolving and evolving, gaining experience ever and anon 
and the oft-repeated words of the Upanishat, “There is no 
return, There is no return ” have no meaning. These people 
though they might speak of a God, could not really mean God 
in the proper conception of the word. The ignorance of these 
two characteristics of the soul lies at the difficulty of both 
agnostics and idealists. In union with the body, the soul has 
become one with the body and its individuality is lost and it 
could not be discovered by an} r amount of physical and 
anatomical analysis. In union with God, it has become one 
with God and no trace of its individuality could be found there. 
So both declare there is no soul, and the latter declare that 
the soul we were cognizant of was God Himself. To them, of 
course, all talk of anubhava and svanubhava will be unmeaning 
also. To the Buddhist and Idealist, there is simply the 
tearing asunder of PaSa, and lo and behold ! there is nirvana 
and annihilation to the one, and God regains its own self to 
the other. But in either case, there is nothing to prevent 
that which arose from nothing or from God, from arising again 
and undergoing the never-ending round of samsara. To the 
latter, the only possible explanation for this evolution of God into 
man would be that furnished by Dr. Paul Deussen — necessity 
connected with the doctrine of Samsara. This would eventu- 
ally strike at the root of all necessity for bettering ourselves 
and weaken, at any rate, the moral and religious sanction. 
If, after all our effort to better ourselves, we should sink back 
again, why all this bother — Guru-upadg§am and tapas etc. ? 
Our glory is in God and we delight in His glory. He is our 
Redeemer and the fruit of redemption. But for our enjoyment 
in Him, there is no need for redemption at all. Our final 
consummation is in Him. As the Chhaiffiogya Upanishat puts 
it, " He who sees, perceives and understands this, loves God, 
delights in God, revels in God, rejoices in God, He becomes 
svaraj ; He is Lord and master in all the worlds.” 

I will now proceed to show how this conception of the soul 
as herein set forth affects our view of Dvaiia, Advaita and 



THE NATURE OF THE J1VA. 


327 


ViSishtadvaita. 1 have dwelt at length on this question on 
“ Advaita according to the Saiva Siddhanta” (pp. 244-272 ante). 
The question is, is the soul different from God or one with 
Him ? If different, what is the meaning of those Mahavakya 
texts, Ahambrahmasmi etc. ? The word Advaita, as 1 have 
shown, does not mean one, does not deny the existence of the other 
entities, But it simply denies the separability of the two, ananya 
or anyonasti. It postulates a peculiar relation between the two, 
that, though different, they can become one. How is this possi- 
ble? St. Meykandan suggests the puzzle; if they are two, they 
cannot become one ; if one, there can be no Svanubhogam. How 
is this puzzle to be solved ? The question is only possible when 
we bear in mind this peculiar characteristic of the* soul we have 
been considering. Though the soul and God are different, yet 
inasmuch as the soul becomes one with whatever it is attached 
to, losing its individuality and consciousness of self, so the soul 
when in union with God becomes one with It. This one 
is the God but not the soul. The subject is illustrated with 
the similes of mind and body, the vowel and the consonant. 

“ e-uSireuriQ pirssrjpisupluje^Qu ”, 

“It is a natural union when the vowel unites with the conso- 
nant as one ” is the A annul sutram (204). The word one has 
been used to describe this union of the vowel with the con- 
sonant. They are distinct and yet inseparable. No consonant 
can be thought of without the vowel. This is the meaning of the 
famous Hridaya sloka in Tiruva9agam. 

@«arQ l ©sar<ES0srft (GFrruSQp Q - /tott 

&65T p Is; e 8 rpG 0 T£ff)L£> ifcl'&SBTLJU po & tyo&T fbG p 65T UJ&jfT p iSl 

Q &dsrjp Q&ssrjpj cgysp/surriu Qpiu.i^i Qptu&gj 01(muQu(T^i 

[gjsmpiLj smp SeuQeur 

53&rjp Suj&fleotiJGSr {8 Qiuireh VJevSso tunQ&srfysBr iu/88/bunG a. 

“When the soul loses its various sheaths — body, senses, intelli- 
gence and consciousness of self («ne fr Q&lL®) — then, what stands 
forth as the Lord of the Heaven of Peace is the one Supreme but 
not the soul.” I quote here our learned Sivajnanayogi from his 
Dravida Bhdshya where he puts the whole question so pithily. 



TIIE NATURE OF THE jIVA. 


328 

“If you ask, what then is the meaning of the word ‘Advai- 
tam' ? I will show how Saiva Siddhantins explain it. On hearing 
the great texts called Mahavakya Tatvamasi etc., which are 
used in the three persons, we see that these sentences speak of 
‘ that’ as one substance and ‘ thou’ as another and enquire how 
one can become the other. The answer is given to remove the 
doubt by stating how one can become Ike other and what* relation 
subsists between the two and the word advaitam is used to explain 
the relation.” St. Umapati Sivacharya queries, “are there not 
objects in this world which become dark in darkness and 
light in light?” (Tiruvarutpayan ir. 3.) And the answer 
usually returned is, these are the eye, the mirror, the costal 
and the Akasam. The eye loses its power of seeing in darkness 
and recovers it in light. The others become dark or light 
as darkness or light surrounds it They are not lost in either 
case, but their individuality is lost and merged in one thing or 
the other. To these we may add also water, clear as crystal. 
But the classic simile I have stated in the beginning is the crystal 
or thq mirror. This is brought out in Sankhya sutra fvi. 28) and 
yoga sutra (1. 4).* Now let us inquire into the nature of the crys- 
tal or the mirror or the glass. There is before you, a picture of 
our late Sovereign Lord and King-Emperor (Blessed be his name) 

* I bring together here all the texts bearing on the subject. 

“Now a man is like this or that according as he behaves and so will 
he be. A man of good acts will become good, a man of bad habits bad. 
He becomes pure by pure deeds, and bad by bad deeds. 

“ As is his desire, so is his will ; and as is his will, so is his deed. 
Whatever deeds he does, that will he reap. 

“ To whatever object man’s own mind is attached, to that he goes 
strenuously with his deed. 

“ He who desires the Atman, being Brahman, he goes to Brahman. 
That atman is indeed Brahman ( Brihad. Up. iv. 5, 6). 

“ As a metal disk (mirror) tarnished by dust shines bright again after 
it has been cleansed, so is the one incarnate person satisfied and freed 
from grief, after he has seen the real nature of himself. 

“And when by the real nature of himself, he sees, as by a lamp, the real 
nature of the Brahman, then having known the unborn eternal God, who 
transcends all tattvas, he is freed from all pasa” (bveta. Up. a. 14, — 



THE NATURE OF "HE JIVA. 


3 2 9 


Edward VII. As you see it, you fail to see the glass that 
covers the picture. An ignorant rustic who had never seen 

• “ From meditating (abhidyanat) on him, from joining (yOjanat) Him, 
from becoming one with Him (tatbhavat), there is further cessation of all 
maya in the end.” {Sveta. Up. i. 10). 

“ A person becomes like those with whom he dwells and like those 
whom he reverences, and like to what he wishes to be.” ( Mahdbkdrata . 
Santi Parva ccc. 32) 

“ As a flame is enveloped by smoke, as a mirror by dust, as an embryo 
is wrapped by the womb, so this (soul) is enveloped by it (desire).” (Gita 
hi. 38.) 

“ Though it (soul) be unasspciated, still there is a tinging (reflection- 
ally) through non-discrimination, for there is not a real tinge in that 
which is unassociated (with tincture or anything else), still there is, as it 
were a tinge; hence the tinge is treated as simply a reflection, by those who 
discriminate the tinge from the soul which it delusively seems to belong to. 

“As in the case with the Hibiscus and the crystal, there is not a tiDge 
but a fancy there is such.” ( Sai.khya aphorisms vi. 27, 28, Garbe’s transla- 
tion.) 

“ In the case of one the transformations of whose mind have been 
annihilated, there is entire identity with and complete absorption In, the 
cogniser, the cognition and the cognised, as in the case of a clear gem 
(crystal).” {Yoga sutras 1. 41), 

uehrenflrn (cu;*/rLli 3 ii> ueifli.QaQund) §£ihj 3 fFiuj& 

^sisrstsfl/DQw solLGUld ^eas iillevriig/ — ussr 6 v 

• 2 i_fTujiju 6 \)Ssw' Qsn^etun iri _^i QumLOun luitjir QLoiu&esvn—iTebr 

QiDUJuQuo (Kjgeiitfrru) Qsugr, 

“ The soul which after reflecting that the knowledge derived from the 
senses is only material, like the colours reflected on a mirror, and that these 
colour-like sensations are different from itself, and after perceiving false 
knowledge as false understands the Truth, will become the servant of God 
Who is different from Asat.” (4 Meykardan. VIII. 3. a.) 

Qun (njvti tr<s$ Qpebrjpii^ sereins 
60 ldiooj (nSU iLi^gjeuir ld n trses 
gg.jjj : &jT 6 m waist 

s^^eofleu fliurreniLOf £ tusoDeo 
u. jrrQ^rre&gli ujb fleer .gear £ehrjpi 

ui gwgi'ih S IL 6 ST 

udrsjeui sever u.fleSs^jj oirssreOLtQsu.oajirm, 

4 2 



330 


THE NATURE OF THE JIVA. 


glass before or a picture framed in glass would positively deny 
that any glass-plate was there. But with all his denial born 
of his own direct perception (Svanubhuti), we know he is* 
wrong. Why is it so ? Because the glass once brought into 
conjunction with the many-coloured picture has lost its form, 
has lost itself so to speak; lost its individuality but not its 
substance. Remove the picture, jmu can see it by itself. 
But bring it into strong sun-light ; even then, you cannot 
see the glass but a strong blaze of light will dazzle your 
eyes.* So, the nature of a crystal or a mirror is, it becomes 
one with the form of whatever comes in contact with it, losing 
its own form. When covered with colour or dirt, it is indistin- 
guishable from* either the colour or the dirt. When flooded by 
light, it is indistinguishable from the light. Take the crystal by 
itself. It is pure and in a sense luminous, but its purity and 
luminosity do not prevent its being covered by dirt and becom- 
ing dark in darkness. This is its defect. And this purity and 
luminosity have to be distinguished from the purity and 
luminosity of the blazing sun and its light. Take a very 
large-sized pure diamond, the so-called brilliant, f Is this 
brilliance its own? If so, you must find it shining in utter 
darkness. But you will not be able to find it in darkness ; it 
will be utterly lost. This brilliance is not its own, and it is. 
derived from the sun-light or the lamp-light. This is the differ- 
ence between man and God. We are the crystals and He is the 
light reflected in the crystal. How well is this brought out by 
St. Appar in his phrase "QweserueifliiSm e-iLujiidpe Qfn^iQu.^&sr'\ 
“ O thou light imbedded in the white crystal ! " How well does 
Tennyson grasp the situation when he says “we are but broken 
lights of thee! ” Nay, not exactly so. “ We are only shining 

* As you drive about in the road between n and 12 forenoon, if you 
look at one of the Municipal lanterns, you will realise this. 

f The facets of the cut-diamond act as a prism and so refract the 
different colours of the sun’s rays. Crystal water has the same power and 
1 have seen the water refracting the different colours in the famous spring 
at the Mahanandi (Nandiyal, in Kurnool District.), 



the nature of the jiva. 


33i 


from borrowed light from thee.” Whatever good is in man is 
all derived from God’s light. In our Kfevala condition, we are 
•like the diamond buried in dirt and darkness. When brought 
to light, it is still covered by dirt and the more and more we 
cleanse it by turning it on the diamond cutter’s lathe, the more 
and more we let light into it. This is our Sakala condition, 
where we are able to exercise our will and intelligence with the 
grace of the Lord. When the whole diamond is polished and 
rounded, the full blaze of light will shine on it, and the diamond 
will be lost in the brilliance. This is the Suddha or Moksha 
condition. Bharjda results when this dirt covers it, and Moksha, 
when the dirt is removed. Nay, the latter condition is not the 
mere removal of dirt alone. There is the flooding of light — 
Anubhuti, Sivanubhuti or Svanubhogam. Would anybody 
appreciate a polished diamond if it will not reflect the light. 
See how well St. Anmagiri puts it : 

gp&irui&iifi'gjD L|Sarra/fl«r 

Qsjit Qpqfjitr iSsur^eBru^anrso 

3<B&ni) gi .*<*,• /TiiSsard/ssr * 

2uiir L$jDii&g>Qw. 

“O! Thou lover of the well adorned DevasC-na, 

O Muruga! with Thy kindly grace, 

The chains of desire are sundered in twaiD, 

And lo ! that unspeakable joy was born.” 

And consider the divine words of St. Tirumular. 

St.SD/r*J<E>,© Q^asiraD/D tLisngQ^iiiiLj Qpujrr&neir 
•saajiui ip O^iresisnjns <saoj<s(r6K!rsv/r0<3'tf>/T 
jsJao uujpp itQuitso Shiang Q ^e^surrrri^u 
Lj GOT H tu JD A CJ5 $ iT L_j ./> L — CujgCsJT. 

“ O Ye fools ! who speak of the unspeakable, 

Can ye find the limits of the limitless one ? 

When as waveless sea, ye attain clearness of mind, 

Then will the Lord with braided hair appear bright.” 

Why do we desire the purity of the crystal and the clear- 
ness of water ? Why do we love all that is loveable in nature ? 
Why do we Jove one another ? Why does a husband love his 



332 


THE NATURE OF THE JIVA. 


wife, a father his children, and so on? Is it because of these things 
themselves that we love them and ought to love them ? When 
we do, our bhandam is assured ; we begin to gather precious* 
stones, lovely objects and beautiful women all round us and 
strive hard to gather more and more. But when we recog- 
nize that it is not for these that we love them but for the 
Lord imbedded in them (OawjeflEsW Qt&n£lujireiir) 

who gives them their life and light and love, then will our 
thoughts be turned away from them, be fixed in the Light 
Adorable, and our Moksha will be realized.* It has also to be 
noted how this attachment of dirt to the crystal or the man 
is not one that goes to its core. If so, this dirt or defect could 
never be removed. It is not that man is by nature unintelli- 
gent and impure, and he grows more intelligent and better 
by education and evolution. But all the purity and perfection, 
all his powers are in him to the full : only they are veiled and 
covered by dirt, and once the veil is removed, he regains 
himself and sees his true form (Atma Dar§an) just for a 
moment when he feels in his Vibhutitvam (expanded nature) 
he is all that, and then merges himself in the Feet of the Lord. 
This distinction is important, as this marks the fundamental 
difference between Indian Philosophy and Western philosophy. 
This is why the Western philosophy of Evolution has been 
found to fail. The superstructure is all right but the founda- 
tion is all wrong. According to the theory of evolution, 
everything, every power of man is acquired by evolution, 
adaptation and survival of the fittest. But according to us, 

* Few understand that this is the real meaning of the famous passage 
in the Brihadaranyaka UpaniShai II (iv. 5). 

“ Verily, a husband is not dear that you may love the husband ; but 
that you may love God, the husband is dear. 

“Verily, a wife is not dear that you may love the wife ; but that you 
may love God, therefore a wife is dear. 

“ Verily, sons are not dear, that you may love the sons ; but that you 
may love God, therefore sons are dear. 

“ Verily, wealth is not dear that you may love wealth ; but that you 
may love God, therefore wealth is dear. 



THE NATURE OF THE JIVA. 


333 


* 

everything is there — all his powers of Ichcha, Kriya and Jfiana. 
He is also Satchidana^da, bat the powers are veiled and all 
th*e Panchakpitya and evolutionary powers are required to rid 
him of his veils. And when this veil is removed, his original 
form is attained.* Here again another caution is required to 

be borne in mind. 

• 

The soul no doubt regains its full powers of Ichcha, 
Kriya and Jfiana and becomes Satchidananda. But these have 
to be distinguished from those of the Supreme. And here it 
is where the Upanishat and other writings speak of the Freed 
soul and its greatness, th^ passages there are misunderstood, 
and identity of soul with God is sought to be made out. No 
doubt the identity of God and soul has been reached, and no 
doubt what is perceived in the freed soul is not the soul itself 
but the full Light of the Lord and the soul itself becomes 
merged in the overpowering Sivanubhoga, on account of the 
characteristic of the soul we have all along been considering. 
There is joy inseparable to the soul no doubt, but it is not^con- 
scious of such joy. It sees then without seeing; it hears then 
without hearing ; it smells there without smelling ; it tastes 
there without tasting: it thinks there without thinking. 
Once its consciousness enters into its feeling, there will be 
duality, and the Bliss will be lost : f 

* This will explain the phenomena of Kajidasa, Kamban and Shakes- 
peare breaking out into song and poetry, and not the theory of evolution. 

f This then is the meaning of the famous passage in Brihad. Up. xv. 
3. 23. “ And when there he does not see, yet he is seeing, though he does 
not see. For sight is inseparable from the seer, because it cannot perish. 
But there is then no second, nothing else different from him that he could 
see.” 

Professor Max Muller takes this avasta as sushupti, and he does not 
think that there is a condition transcending all the Avasthas — Turxyam 
and Turiyatitam. Thfe statement in this Mantra that he sees, is made so 
as to remove any misconception that ruay arise in the statement in mantra 
21, when he is said to know nothing that is without, nothing that is within. 
This would end in sunyam, but not so. There is enjoyment, feeling, and 
seeing but without’ seeing i.e., without consciousness. The figure gj ven 




334 


THE NATURE OF THE JIVA. 


These phrases therefore Q&arngi Q&lLl-go, Qfsir&strgi Qbs*$so 
S&xT'uiTgy S’Sesr^so (hearing without hearing etc.,) have reference 
to what is called ^ih-fle^eearrr^so (non-objective knowledge). 
Our ordinary knowledge involves the dual conception of 
object and subject. In this «th—y>e^sssr^e<d there is no duality, 
the distinction between object and subject, Jnathru but Jhfeya is 
lost, and there is knowledge or pleasure alone but no consci- 
ousness. And it is not possible either to know God as we 
know an object (auh-gey), for as the Upanishat puts it and 
all our Advaita Siddhantins declare: “How should he know him 
by whom he knows all this ? How should he know the knower ? " 
( Brliad Upanishat II, iv. 13). 

4 

“Thou couldst not see the (true) seer of sight, thou couldst 
not hear the (true) hearer of hearing, nor perceive the perceiv- 
er of perception, nor know the knower of knowledge. This is 
thy God (Atma) who is within all.” ( Brihad Up. Hit, v. 2).* 

there that of a man embracing his wife, is a favourite one with all mystics. 
Says, Uyy avail da Deva in Tirummdiyar, 33. 

Qupjo dr aQ 10 QuiBdruwn'mkiQs 

QpprDWfVjib urfljuipup 

OfiTar iun.^iinrr sacu Quehrri,'ih@;u<D 

Turn lower pleasure into one supreme, 

Then was the consummation reached, 

Then will maya sprout no more. 

* See how well the philosophy of this is brought out in Sutra vi. 8, 
by St Arunandi : — 

^S/drajfltij uSsvirGnuMjrrsgiiLD & ’ SeSssad S /bjnwnestnn 
Qpeor6tsB±] Qgvgogwt Qpesor gsSsnrruassrir jigi qhlq 

GTebr&rr^D ujirQzfirdrGt^op^iJ (a) bvtr 

'Sj js (^6)^).% ^ &D& oSiLDiudr ifffzfst t 

The principle involved is this. In the lower pleasure also, the high- 
est pleasure is reached when in the enjoyment thereof, all his senses and 
consciousness are hushed and there is bare enjoyment alone. Our Hindu 
writers thus explain the case of idiocy, imbecility and viciousness of 
children of healthy and highly intelligent and pious parents. Their minds 
were not at one, so their characteristics were not transmitted to the off- 
spring. This happens also in the case of drunken parents. The same mnd e 




THE NATURE OF THE J1VA. 


335 


“ As God is ananj’a with the soul, as He resides within the 
soul and as He, from within, enables you to know all that you 
know ; and in Him there is no distinction of I and mine, He 
cannot be perceived by the soul’s own intelligence.” 

It only remains for me to point out how this doctrine of 
the nature of Jiva or Pasu should commend itself to all 
intelligent minds. At any rate we are able to quote below the 
authority of the late Professor Henry Drummond who is said 
to have revolutionised Christian thought during the last 
forty years. His remarkable address entitled “ The changed 
Life " is based on the famous text from St. Paul. 

“ We all, with face unveiled, reflecting as a mirror the 
glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image from 
Glory to glory even as from the Lord the spirit ” is a veritable 
varthikam on the of St. Meykandan. 

He paraphrases the sentence as follows : “ We all reflecting 
as a mirror the character of Christ are transformed into the 
same image from character to character — from a poor character 
to a better one, from a better one to one a little better still, 
from that to one still more complete, until by slow degrees 
the perfect image is obtained. Here the solution of the 

is prescribed for the higher enjoyment also, as in the mantra before us. 
"t here too you have to hush up all your senses and thinking and conscious- 
ness, and then you become overpowered with the Bliss of the Lord alone. 
I quote below Mantra 21 also. 

“ This indeed is his (true) form, free from desires, free from evil, free 
from fear. Now as a man when embraced by a beloved wife knows 
nothing that is without, nothing that is within; thus this person when 
embraced by the intelligent God knows nothing that is without, knows 
nothing within. This indeed is his form in which his wishes are fulfilled 
in which God is his wish and in which no wish is left, free from sorrow ” 

The subject is treated in Tamil Literature under Agapportil, and 
Tinikkbvaiyar of St. JVIanikkava^agar is the highest expression of the 
Higher feelings. Read in this connection also St. Tayumanavar’s Revel 
in Bliss (translated into beautiful English by the Hon’ble Mr. P. Aruna- 
chalam of Colombo in Vol. 1. page 145. The Siddhanta Dipika, which 
brings out every one of the points discussed in this paper, 



( 


336 the nature of the jiva. 

t. 

problem of sanctification is comprised into a sentence, reflect 
the character of Christ, and you will become like Christ,” or 
as you will say, reflect the image of God in yourself, and yQu 
will become Godlike or God. 

But how is the poor character to be made better and 
better or the reflecting image clearer and dearer ? It is, by 
cleansing the mirror (soul) freer and freer from dirt and 
bringing it more and more in line with the effulgent light, 
that this can be effected ; and when the mirror is absolutely 
perfect and nearest the light shines the brightest, and so 
overpowers the mirror that the iwirror is lost to view, and 
the glory and the light of the Lord are felt. For, observes 
the learned ‘Professor truly, “ What you are conscious of, 
if the result be a true one, is also the glory of the Lord. In 
looking at a mirror one does not see the mirror or think of it, 
but only of what it reflects. For a mirror never calls atten- 
tion to itself— except when there are flaws in it”. These flaws 
are the colours of the Siddhantin who compares them to the 
mays. or the body. In union with the body, it is the body alone 
that is cognised, and not the mirror-like soul. In union with 
God, the glory and light alone are perceived and not the mirror- 
like soul either ! And the Professor declares, “ All men are 
mirrors — that is the first law on which this formula of sancti- 
fication or corruption is based. One of the aptest descriptions 
of a human being is that he is a mirror,” and we must beg our 
readers to go through the whole pamphlet to note how beauti- 
fully he draws out this parallel. 

He notes the second principle which governs this process, 
namely, the law of assimilation or identification. “ The law 
of assimilation is the second and by far the most impressive 
truth which underlies the formula of sanctification — the truth 
that men are not only mirrors, but that these mirrors, so far 
from being mere reflectors of the reflecting thing they see, 
transfer into their own inmost substance and hold in perma- 
nent preservation the thing that they reflect. No one can 



THE NATURE OF THE jiVA. 


337 


know how the soul can hold these things. No one knows 
how the miracle is done. No phenomenon in nature, no 
'process in chemistry, no chapter in Necromancy can even 
help us to begin to understand this amazing operation. For 
think of it, the past is not only focussed there in a man’s 
soul, it is there. How could it be reflected from there if it 
were not there ? All things he has ever seen, known, felt, 
believed of the sorrounding world, are now within him, have 
become part of him, in part are him — he has been changed into 
their image.” 

Following the languSge of Professor Henry Drummond, the 
formula of sanctification would read as follows. # 

“ I see God, I reflect God, I become God-like, Godly, I am 
God.” I close with only one quotation from St. Arunapdi 
Sivachariyar which sums up the whole teaching. 

aewTL-ffl? eoojujdi Geo^Qesrdrp ssarpsir^tyd 
s /rjtc 'F/raireu GsvQesreard sq^^d s&ip 

Q pnesartpQqs)^ Qpjr^ psv&rpesBsisrpSEVuuiTQso > 

G&ns QwasruurraSd « pG ptresrpueueir Qeufieisrfl 

eSsssru.^gn ldsow sQan eoeun ih S0i—^!ujrrearp^lar 
eSi—QLDtTLfilii] LCgiQuirev efi LCeV&np iLf ixisai—iLjiii 
ussareaji—UD'SBp s^m^inrr^iGesrGearelirpii 
‘ uir^sSdsd Qfireoeoi eu^aiutmiS/i eapdeirGessr, 

“ Say, ‘ I am not the world and am separate from it.’ Say 
also, ‘ I am not the unknowable Supreme One.’ Then as He 
is ananya with you, melt in love in all humility, and practise 
soham (1 am He) ; and He will appear as yourself, and your 
mala will all cease and you will become pure, just as the 
poison is removed by Garudadhyana. So it is the old Vedas 
teach us to practise this mantra * Aham Brahmasmi 
Praise be to Meykanda Deva. 


43 



SRI PARVATAM. 


“‘Oh Yes! when I reach the Alps’, he hath said , to me 
! I always pray.’ He would betake himself to some quiet comer, 
among that grand scenery, and fall on his knees. He was praising 
God in the work of His creation, the Alps, and bowed in simple 
praise of it.” 

This is what is reported of the saintly Ruskin, and the noble 
feeling given expression to above, clearly explains the wide-spread 
system of worship obtaining among the Hindus, We refer, of 
course, to the system of setting up places of worship to the Most 
High on the highest mountain-peaks and most magnificent hills. 
And the more inaccessible and difficult of reach these hills are, the 
more sacred do they become in the eyes of the people. And there 
can be £io possible doubt that some of these pilgrimages call forth 
no small amount of endurance, toil, patience and expense, 
which the people will never show, unless they are animated by 
an equal amount of fervid piety. There can be no doubt whatever 
also about the elevating influence of Nature in her grandest 
and magnificent aspects. The sense of elevation and freedom, 
purity and beauty, awe and reverence, one feels when one reaches 
one of these mountain-tops must be felt and not told, yet 
writers have holden forth about the marvels of a sunrise or sunset 
on Mount Blanc or on the Himalayas, and one cannot but cry 
out at such sights from his heart of hearts. 

“ Q&irtglQiu att—Qg @Q^srfla9s7-i(?,s * 

un-slQiu, ugGsirunsoQ&irirr G/euememsF p^npiLi utwaiug jgggpiLcnev/SiL-tT 

£6sK?ijj — 

* A friend of ours mentioned to us how the picture at Tiruvannamalai, 
with the setting sun, the flaming hill top and myriad lights, called to 
him at once these lines. Yogis have a different explanation of the triple 
light. 












aRl PARVaTAM. 


339 


In fact, the Siva Linga is nothing but the hill-top in its origin, 
and the custom of worshipping God on mountain-lops was current 
» among the Jews and the Romans. And to Moses, God appeared 
as fire and light on mountain-tops, accompanied with thunder, 
clouds and lightning, the true picture of Siva, as GirlS a and 
Kapardin. And the highest peaks in India had, from the begin- 
ning, been dedicated to the worship of Siva and Parvati, on 
Himavat, on the Vindhya, on the Western Ghats, on the Central 
Ranges, on the Eastern Ghats and on Mainaka, etc. Of these, the 
most sacred, of course, is Kailasa, and when we find that even 
St. Appar did not succeed in finding this Mountain Abode on earth, 
we will be correct in stating that this Mount KailaSa does not 
represent any material plane, but certainly means the Highest 
Summit of Man’s spiritual, moral and intellectual elevation, reaching 
which, after leaving his sense of his own greatness (Ahankara), he 
will surely unite in that Abode of Eternal Peace, Beauty and 
Bliss. But mortals identify this Supreme Abode with this and that 
mountain-peak, in particular, with Mainaka in Ceylon, with the 
Rock at Trichy, with the Hill of Kalahasti, with Sri Parvatam, 
with Himavat, See., and there is a purpose in view. Man cannot 
reach up to the Highest Ideal all at once. He must climb, must be 
made to understand by slow degrees, mark each as the highest, 
and then ascend higher and higher, not condemning what he has 
already reached, but always looking up higher and higher, until he 
shall have reached the highest of these hills. 

Of these hill-shrines, none is more sacred than the hill called 
Sri Saila, Sri Parvata, Sri Mallikarjuna and Mahanandi. Its 
importance may be guessed from its appellation itself “ Parvata’’, 
“ The Mountain.” It is so called by its pre-eminence, whereas all 
other hills are distinguished by peculiar names. And for one 
thing, this hill is much more difficult of approach, and presents 
a much grander scenery than those below in the south. The 
people and printes of ages gone by have expended their wealth 
and labour in building and beautifying this Holy Shrine, though 
their degenerate descendants simply sit with folded hands and see 
the disintegration of this noble edifice. 



340 


SRI PARVATAM. 


To southerners generally, a temple is sacred, if it had been 
visited by the Saiva Saints or Alvars ; and Sri Sailam has been 
visited by all the three Saints Appar, Sambhandar and Sundarar, , 
and their separate Hymns appear in the Devdra Collections ; and 
the place is called Sri Paruppatam, Tamil reading of Sri Parvatam, 
and the hill is locally known by this name more than by the name 
of Sri Sailam or Mallikarjunam. • c 

Now to describe briefly our journey to the place. From 
Madras, we reach Nandyal, by the M. and S. M. R. lines, and 
from Nandyal, we go by cart to Atmakur, a distance of 28 miles. 
The road is wretchedly bad for the greater part, and does not 
reflect much credit on the Board in charge of it. In fact, cart-men 
avoided the Higfc Road for nearly 10 miles and preferred to go 
by the country roads. Atmakur is a small town and is the 
seat of the Deputy Tahsildar, Police Inspector and a Local 
Fund Hospital. From here to the foot of the Hill (Nagaluti) is a 
distance of 12 miles. This road, too, except for a few miles, is of 
the worst description. The situation of Nagaldti is very pleasant, 
surrounded by shady groves, in which there is a nice and cool 
spring, the water flowing into a small tub from the mouth of a 
bull. There is here a small Temple dedicated to Siva and 
Virabhadrasvami. From Nagaluti we commence the ascent, and 
it is a steep one for over 2 or 3 miles. The chief difficulty of the 
ascent is due to the flight of steps that have been constructed 
over this distance. After we go up two or three hills, the road 
is not bad and it is slightly up and down, and as we reach Pedda- 
cheruvu, we get into a big plateau, a valley surrounded on all 
sides by the hills. Peddacheruvu is our halt for the day, and its 
distance is reported to be about 1 5 miles. There is a fine tank 
here and it is edged with tail growing bamboos, which give it a 
most picturesque appearance. In the tank itself, beautiful white 
lotuses, water lilies and tall cuscus, grasses grow and the water 
actually tastes sweet with the smell of the cuscus, grass. Early 
next morning we resumed our journey, and after some distance 
the way was rough but not difficult, having to go over several 
small hills ; and nearing Bhimani Kollum, we descend into a deep 



SRI PAR VAT AM. 


341 


ravine which cuts off Sri Parvata proper from the surrounding hills. 
And both the descent into this ravine and the ascent from it are 
both difficult, but not so bad as it was reported to be. The view 
from above into the ravine, and far below is very grand. The 
ravine cuts through these rocks to a considerable depth, and the 
cut sides look more like fort walls, so steep and straight and 
broWn the> r are. The bed of the Ravine is one slaty bed, there are 
no loose stones or sand. From the bottom of the Ravine at this 
spot, called Bhimani Kollum, commences the ascent of Sri ParvatT, 
or Mount Kailas ; and as we go up, vista after vista of hills and 
ranges of hills present themselves before us, the distant peaks and 
the line of trees on them become silhouetted like our Temple 
Vimanas and the row of Kalasams on them. One View specially 
seemed a remarkable likeness of the Siva-Linga.with the pedestal. It 
stood between two ravines, the highest Peak and another small one 
forming Siva and Parvati, and the Pedestal was a table-like rock 
in front. Our artist has taken a view of this beautiful picture and 
has named it Siva-Parvati, and it is not unlikely that sinlilar views 
had given rise to the symbol of the Siva-Linga itself. We ascend 
higher and higher, our toil and trouble seem to burden us, 
untill, at last, we reach the Top, where is situated what is 
aptly called the Kailasa Vakkili, the “ gate to Heaven ”. As the 
wearied traveller feels the refreshing breeze under the cool shade 
of this tower, the feeling of rest and pleasure one feels is simply 
thrilling. Indeed, in this world, at least half the pleasure we feel 
will be lost to us if it is not that, in seeking and securing this, it 
entails any amount of pain and trouble. From the gate of Kailas, 
we travel over more or less level ground slightly falling, and rising 
till we reach the Temple, of which we catch a glimpse from some 
distance and which is situated in a dip of Mount Kailas. Mount 
Kailas is surrounded on all sides by deep ravines and by the 
Kistna, so that on any side it is Steep and inaccessible, the ravine 
at Bhimani Kollum joining the Kistna below. Its situation is also 
central, and any way, you have to go 30 or 40 miles to reach the 
low country. 



§RI PARVATAM. 


?4? 

The temple proper is surrounded by castellated walls, longest 
sides being 1500 feet each, and the shortest being nearly tooo feet 
each and the height is 21 feet and thickness 4 feet. Nearly Ijie 
whole outer face of these walls (fancy such a dimension of 5000 x 
21 feet) is fully sculptured with the figures of animals, men 
and Gods. There are hunting pictures of all kinds, there are 
horses and elephants in every pose, Puranic representations of 
episodes, Rishis doing tapas in all kinds of postures ; and there are 
animals and reptiles in every grotesque form, athletes wrestling 
with each other, &c.* These pictures show that the race of men 
who cut them were a warlike and manly race. There are three 
towers, one of which is the highest,* and will compare favourably 
with the highest in Southern India. 

Passing within, the whole space is intersected into 3 squares, 
one below the other and the sides are filled with innumerable 
mantapams and shrines, the shrines mostly without any images and 
in the worst of repairs. There are large number of wells with small 
towers 0£ domes above, the only source of supply to all the 
pilgrims who resort to the place. Some one or two of the tanks 
altogether dry and filled up more or less. 

The centra] shrine is that of Mallikesvara and is the most 
costly structure. The principal Vimanam is covered from top to 
bottom with plated gold, unlike any other Temple in Southern 
India, and all the images of Nandis and Dakshanamurti placed ovfer 
the terrace in the mantapam fronting the Vimana are also similarly 
covered with gold. It is reported that of old these images 
contained inside untold wealth, and the Rohillas who once plun- 
dered the whole Temple have left their marks in the mutilated 
condition of most of these images. The style of the principal 
structures is quite dissimilar to those in Southern India, the Cho’a 
and Pandiyan styles, but there is a remarkable resemblance between 
these and the shore temple at Mahamalaipuram (corrupted into 

* There is one picture in which two men hold each other by their 
legs, stretched at full length, and withal making a regular ball. We 
have witnessed many an Indian and European circus performance, but 
never 3a w any such pose before. 



SRI PARVATAM. 


343 


Mahabalipuraml and the traditions in connection with the latter 
Temple show that priests from Sri Sailam were brought to the 
Mahamalaipuram Pagoda, which in itself proves the great antiquity 
of Sri Sailam Temple. The structure is clearly Chalukyan, and 
the Conjivaram Pagodas and .the seven Pagodas were also 
constructed by the Rulers of the Chalukyan Dynasty, when they 
held sway over those parts. The rock-cut Temple at Ellora, also 
called Mount Kailasa, was also their work, and it speaks volumes 
for the great religious zeal and piety of these noble sovereigns who 
adorned this ancient line of Kings, and yet to-day, the student of 
South Indian History knows hhrdly anything about them. 

The Temple of Sri Parvati is a very small one a{ present, but 
it is reported that the original image was stolen or mutilated and 
its place has also been changed. The Principal Amman Shrine is 
occupied by a Goddess called Brahmaramba, in whose name a • 
big feast is held in the month of Chitrai when bloody sacrifices are 
also offered. This is clearly an image of Kali, and iji i s shrine 
stands apart and is shut up after sometime in the night, even vjhen 
other shrines are open. Evidently, the image was set up sometime 
after the Temple had come into the hands of the Pushpagiri Mutt. 
Perhaps the image which had remained outside the Temple was set 
up in the place of Sri Parvati when the image of the latter had been 
was lost. Anyhow the worship of this Brahmaramba is not to be 
confounded with the principal worship of the shrine itself. 

The Temple-tree is a fig tree, and it must be a very ancient 
one. It towers far above the tallest tower and at its base, it 
measures more than 5 5 feet. Under its shade are seated Sanyasins 
and Yogis, and a good picture of this was photographed by our 
artist. The tree on the right-hand side of the principal picture is 
the fig tree we have mentioned above. Such an old tree we have 

not seen anywhere else. 

* 

There is one liberty allowed in this Temple and other Temples 
in this District, namely the right of free worship allowed to every 
caste Hindu, a right which, we dare say, as obtaining at one time 
everywhere in the South, as it is still to-day in the north. 



344 


SRI PARVATAM. 


And we had then the satisfaction of worshipping God with our own 
hands at our own leisure and our abhisheka and arehana were 
performed with the accompaniment of Devdra and Tiruvdgaga 
Hymns. One has necessarily to attain to that calm, resigned 
and reverent attitude of mind and body, forgetting all self, which 
is necessary in a worship of this kind, before one can expect to 
feel any soul-elevation. 

A visit to the Kistna which cuts through the Nalla Malais at 
this point and a bath in it are held very sacred ; and this is a pretty 
stiff job. It is one steep journey, down and down you go, till at 
the very bottom lies the perfectly blue and placid waters of Patala 
Gahga or Nl^-Ganga. The scene hereabouts can only be matched 
by the Nerbudda at the marble rocks. Our artist has taken 2 or 
3 views of the bathing-ghat and the winding river. The distance 
between Peddaeheruvu and mount Kailas is about 15 miles and 
from Mount KailaS to Patala Gahga (Kistna) is about 5 miles. 

For the greater part, the hills are covered with bamboos and 
various valuable forest trees, but at the time we went, owing to 
the drought and other causes the trees were more or less bare 
and the bamboos presented a withered appearance. The forest 
produce are all enjoyed by the Chenchus, the native inhabit- 
ants of these jungles and hills. On the route to Sri Sailam, these 
Chenchus occupy three settlements, called Gudems, one near 
N again ti, one near Peddaeheruvu, one near Sri Sailam. They levy 
from the pilgrims a kind of poll-tax at these different points, at one 
anna per head ; and this is said to be in consideration of their pro- 
tecting the property and person of the pilgrims in these wild 
regions, and the Police Inspector himself told us that they are, so far, 
remarkable for their honesty. These hill-men do not differ much 
from other natives of the low country, but they are almost naked 
except in the piece-cloth (lahgoti) which they wear. One big cloth 
"besides they wear with which they cover tHeir upper part of the 
body or lay it losely over their shoulders. They have a peculiar 
way of tying their hair, in the style known as Kondai Mudkhu , 
which kind of dressing may also be perceived in some of the 



SRI PARVATAM. 


345 


.* 

ancient Sculptures in Madura and elsewhere. By no means, are 
these savages or aborigines, but they must certainly have belonged 
to a very ancient and civilized race, but from the circumstance of 
having been confined to a residence in these hills, had gradually 
degenerated more or less. The females are better dressed and they 
could not be very much distinguished from the people of the plains. 
As'residents of Kurinji, the marriage which usually obtains amongst 
them is what may be called the Gandharva form. As a Chenchu put 
it, boys and girls roam about and get acquainted with each other, and 
choose for themselves, and after a time, the marriage is published by 
the inviting and feeding of a jew guests ; just in the same way as we 
read of in Kurin jippatyu. Of course the environments favour them so 
much, and the people are so few, and the liberty of 'movement is so 
great, that you cannot but expect such kind of marriages in such a 
community. Of course our poets and lawyers put it as though 
such and such a kind of marriage is required for such a kind of 
land ( Tinai, and our friend Mr. T. Vlrabadra Mudaliyar 

wonders why our poets should of necessity people ‘ ’ with 

prostitutes and dancing girls. Of course there is no necessity, but 
as in their view ‘ ’ ( Marudam ) the land covered with paddy 

fields represented the seat of wealth and luxury, and civilized 
activity and prostitution clearly follow in their wake, the poets 
always lay down as a law that whenever ‘ civilized towns ’ are 
spoken of, prostitution should also be maintained. In a sense this 
rule appears rigid, but ample scope is given when they usually 
speak of ‘ SHVj&svr ldujssu:.’ 

An account of the trip cannot be complete without a special 
description of the famous spring and Temple at Mahanandi ; and 
usually all pilgrims to Sri Sailam pass through Mahanandi on the>r 
return. It is about 9 miles from Nandyal and the Temple is 
situated at the foot of the same range. Our artist has also photo- 
graphed the beautiful Temple with the whole Tank. The chief 
interest lies in the Tank which is a perennial spring, and there are 
two big outlets which carry off with great force the ever-bubbling 
water. The water is slightly tepid, and it is of remarkable puriiy 
and clearness. .Light is refracted as m a perfect crystal, and you 



346 


§RI PARVATAM. 


*« 

could see all the colours of the rainbow on the bottom of the tank. 
The depth is about 5 feet all round, and once you get into it, you 
are reluctant to get out of it. You can see a pin at the bottorrf 
clearly, and however you may dirty the water, it becomes clear in 
no time. There is not a speck of dirt in the water or at the 
bottom, and any leaves or other matter that may fall into it are all 
lifted up and carried out. Visitors marvel, generally failing *to 
account for the clearness and pellucid character of the water, but 
if one places his eye in level with the surface of the water, he would 
easily perceive that all over the tank, there are streaks rising above 
the water, as in a tumbler of soda water, and this cannot be any- 
thing else than compressed air rising out with the water. Bigger 
bubbles can alsb be perceived here and there. The force of the 
spring and this compressed air both combine together to lift up all 
dirt and rubbish, and they are carried outside by means of the 
flowing outlets. The waters running from this spring serve to keep 
hundreds of acres under permanent cultivation, and here in fact 
may be seenfen instance of what our poets are fond of delineating, 
the commingling of forest and hill and country scenery, of what 
is called SdHem Twtu&aib, of Kurinji, and Mullai, and Marudam all in 
one place, and the scenery about this place is accordingly very 
enchanting. 







•• 

SAIVAISM IN ITS RELATION 
TO OTHER SYSTEMS.* 


. It was the Statesman of Calcutta who in reviewing the 
work of the last convention suggested that, in an assembly like 
this, it is the point of contact between the different religions 
that should be brought out rather than the points which distin- 
guish one from the other. As I think the suggestion is good, 
and as I have dwelt on the distinguishing marks of Saiva 
religion and philosophy in my former paper,}: I .address myself 
to the question of the elements common to the Saiva religion 
and other systems of faith. 

This aspect of the question is familiar to our religious 
writers and I quoted a dictum of one of our Acharyas who is 
at least 8 centuries old, in my last address, apd it could 
y bear repetition and should in my opinion form the. plank 

on which we should all meet. It is to this effect. “ Religions, 
postulates and text-books conflict one with another. It is asked: 
which is the true religion, which the true postulate and which 
the true book? That is the true religion, that the true postulate 
and that the true book which, not possessing the fault of calling 
this false and that true, and not conflicting with them, comprises 
reasonably everything within its fold.” But how is this possible? 
Where can the meeting ground be, between a religion which 
acknowledges no soul and no God, and a religion which bases its 
faith on the immortality of the soul and a Redeemer? They seem 
to be poles apart. There are such differences innumerable 
between one religion and another and no amount of argument 
and explanation could minimise the differences. Argument 
would lead to icrimonious debate and heated controversy. 

* The first paper that was read before the Convention of Religions, 
Allahabad 1911. 

X V ids page. 273 ante . 



34 s SA1VAISM IN ITS RELATION TO other systems. 

«. 

It will not do for one to try to convert the other. We are 
yet to see persons who have been converted by argument. 
There must be a predisposing state of the mind in all conversions. 
For argument also to be useful, there must be a pure heart 
and an unprejudiced mind. It one enters into a controversy with 
propossessions of all kinds, and each is convinced of his own 
truth, no agreement will be ever possible. Even in my. private 
talks, I avoid discussing with any person whose mind, I know 
is prejudiced. With this one element absent, I have talked to 
persons of all persuasions, free-thinkers included, and by the 
time we parted, we had become dearer to each other. 

However, our scheme is this. ‘'It takes stock of the fact 
that there are essential differences between man and man. 
Owing to differences of heridity and environment, facilities for 
acquiring knowledge and their absence, and a hundred other 
similar causes, people differ in their intellectual, moral and 
spiritual equipments. If in a single family of half a dozen 
children, fostered under the loving care of the same parents, 
one should v turn out to be an idiot and another an intellectual 
giant, one a vagabond and another a saint, it is not merely 
heridity alone that seems to count. There seems to be some- 
thing behind all these to account for the disparity. Our Hindu 
writers try to account for it by the law of Karma and past 
experience or Purva Puny a. Be this as it may, the differences 
in the moral and intellectual calibre of people are a fact and no' 
amount of education or correction seems to be of any use in 
such cases. Apart from cases of physical and mental deformi- 
ties, one cannot minimise the difficulties of the mind itself. 
Man must think. You cannot shut out his mind. As we 
imbibe knowledge and acquire learning, our ininds begin to 
think and ponder over the same problems which have agitated 
men’s minds from the very beginning of time. And with all 
the guides and mentors and correctives we possess, we take to 
particular lines of thought which, in the end, are all limited. 
But it is never too late to mend. We can outgrow' our 
thoughts and can change ; and we do change, both consciously 
and, in most cases, unconsciously. Even in the case of a single 
individual, with, a little introspection, it might be perceived, 



saivaism in its relation to other systems. 349 

.* 

how he had been changing from time to time, though he never 
changed his outward observances, his attendance at Church on 
Sundays so to speak. Thoughts about the reality of the 
world, his own individuality and the existence of a Supreme 
Being, have assailed him from time to time, yet he has 
emerged from ail these triumphantly in the end, and he had 
bqpome. a Godly man. 

Hence we arrived at the truth that all religions are 
necessary so as to serve the cause of progress of man in 
all stages of moral, intellectual and spiritual development. 
What will serve one will not serve another equally well. One 
could not be easily hustftd from one stage to another with 
profit. One of our Acharyas instances the case of a tree and 
its produce. One cares for the leaves alone an*d does not care 
for the flowers or the fruit, however tempting the latter may be. 
Another cares for the flowers alone ; another, the raw-fruit ; 
and another the mature fruit ; and yet another rejects such 
parts of the ripe fruit as the skin and stone &c., and drinks 
the rare sweet juice alone. Yet the tree had its vses for all, 
and each derived benefit from it according to his need. One 
writer puts it in another way also. To reach a .city or a hill 
top, there may be any number of ways, some shortcuts and 
some circuitous, some dangerous and rough, and some smooth ; 
yet each is filled with a desire to reach the goal, to climb the 
hill-top. Yet there is a third mode in which they present it 
by the simile of the ladder. It is called the Sopanatnarga — 
Sdpanam meaning ladder. As there are so many rungs to the 
ladder and each has to be climbed in order, before one can get 
to the top, each different religion forms one rung or other of the 
ladder. Each rung is necessary, and one cannot reject each as 
false or untrue. And our Sastras proclaim that all religions are 
from God and all are acceptable to God, whether these religions 
may be said to have a divine origin or a human origin. 

“ It people without broadness of mind promulgate new 
religions, even out of jealousy, even such are acceptable to our 
Lord This explains, by the way, how even man-made move- 
ments are doomed to disintegration and division by two potent 
factors, narrowness of mind and jealousy. 



350 SAIVAISM In its relation to other systems. 

•• 

God is the father of all, in every age and in every clime. 
He has not been partial to any one people nor to any one 
age nor to any one country. He has revealed Himself at all 
times in all countries and to all races. Nay, in every thinking 
and loving heart, He is revealing Himself. If there is truth 
anywhere, it is God’s truth, and as the Rev. G. M. Cobban 
puts it, all truth is authoritative and inspired and all truth 
is from God. 

“ Wherever you find God, there it is our own Lord the 
God that is present." So it is the accepted canon of the Saiva 
religion that its God is the God and Father of all religions, and 
every religion is acceptable to Him,&nd that no religion should 
be derided or rejected as false. 

Of course, it is an essential requisite and condition of all 
religions that they reveal a desire to reach the goal, or to climb 
to the top, a desire after truth and righteousness, a desire for 
a higher life. If this condition is fulfilled, it does not matter 
whether they are theistic or atheistic systems, God-made or man- 
made. Thfc searcher after truth is sure to proceed onward and 
onward, till he one-day reaches the goal. It is in this sense, 
one of our Tamil Saints, St. Appar, who before his conversion 
was a Jain, says that he never ceased worshipping Siva any 
time with water and flowers, water representing purity and 
sincerity, and flowers love. 

Having made thfo preliminary statement, I may now be ' 
allowed to compare Saivaism with some only of the world 
religions of to day. Among them, the first that claims our 
attention is Buddhism. It has two forms, northern and south- 
ern. Northern Buddhism, if not in origin, had assumed a 
Saivite form in its final shape. The famous Lipika symbol trac- 
ed in the pages of the Secret Doctrine, by Madame Blavatsky 
is nothing but the Siva Linga. There are stories scattered 
about in the pages of the Bhuddhist Scriptures that it was 
Siva himself who taught the Buddhist Religion, just as Tulasi 
Das makes Siva communicate the narrative' of Rama’s life to 
Goddess-Uma, and just as it is believed that it is Lord Visva- 
nath that communicates Ramataraka-maotra to every one dying 
in Benares. I, however, believe that the southernJorm, deprived 


SAIVAISM IN ITS RELATION TO OTHER SYSTEMS. 35 I 

** 

of its more dogmatic teaching of anatma &c., is the true 
form, which is of greater value to us. Of course, even Oriental 
Scholars have pointed it to us that Buddha was a Hindu, a 
Hindu of Hindus and the best of Hindus. His positive teach- 
ing emphasising the importance of moral greatness was already 
in Hinduism and formed part of it. And yet Buddhism was of 
gre^t value then and is of value for all time to come. In our 
search after man and God, and in putting on cloaks of holiness 
and piety, and in indulging in all sorts of ceremonials, we are 
apt to neglect and ignore one part of our duty, which is, after 
all, the foundation of all religions. In our desire for religious 
purity, we are apt to neglest moral purity as though that were 
a minor matter. But as our religion teaches us, it is an absolute 
sine qua non. The gulf between man and God cannot be cross- 
ed unless moral purity is attained. Of the importance of this 
Sakya Gautama reminded us, by his great personality and his 
teaching. We require such reminders every day. He is said to 
have incarnated several times, but even to-day is ripe for a 
fresh incarnation of him, in the troublous time we passing 
through. For what is this new spirit that is said to be leaven- 
ing us and creating all this unrest and all the misery in its 
train? This spirit is the spirit of Mammon, the materialism of 
the West, which is dazzling our eyes and captivating our minds. 
The West stands to us for untold wealth, untold power and 
• untold enjoyment. This new spirit is the desire to share in the 
wealth, power and enjoyment. But what does the story of 
Sakya Gautama teach us? He was not a pauper who was 
turned into a sannyasi as most of the modern-day holy-men are 
manufactured. He was the heir to the throne of a great Empire. 
He was in the prime of life and manhood, and in the enjoyment 
of all that wealth and luxury could bring. Yet he turned from 
them all, by seeing a few instances of death. He feared death 
and yet he was not a moral coward. He would have been glad 
to die if that had ended all. He feared death simply because 
to him, it simply s*pelled another birth. As his Tamil Prototype 
puts it, " Death is like sleep and birth is but the awakening.” 
Our holy men have always desired to die but prayed to be saved 
from re-bir.th. . It was the great cycle of births and deaths that 



352 SAIVAISM IN ITS RELATION TO OTHER SYSTEMS. 

-J 

was feared. This birth is spoken of as the great ocean of birth. 
He believed in the law of Karma which is at the same time the 
foundation of all Hindu theistic Systems. This cycle of the law 
is the wheel or circle, which is the chief symbol of Buddhism. 
Proceeding a step further, he enquired as to the cause of this 
birth and death. It was the desire for enjoyment, the thirst after 
power and pelf, Tanka', as the author of the Sacred KuraJ.puts.it, 
“It is the desire that is the seed of birth at all times and for all 
mankind.’’ It was this desire in its two forms — desire of good 
things (Kama) and avoidance of bad things (Krodha) in the 
train of ignorance — that is the cause of all Karma, all our sin 
and sorrow, our birth and death. 15 we can cutoff this desire 
we can cut off the seed of birth and become deathless and 
attain Nirvancf. 

“ Desire and aversion and ignorance, their name destroyed, 
disease is gone.” {Rural. 360.) 

We are quoting these texts from the sacred Rural of 
Tiruvajluvar, the sage of Mylapilr who is claimed as an orthodox 
Joaiva and yn worshipped as such, just to show how far the two 
systems proceed together. Kashi is claimed by all Saivites as 
the true burning ground as distinguished from all other burning 
grounds, and the meaning is this. Where we ordinarily die and 
are burnt, we simply sow the seeds of a fresh birth. It becomes 
a new planting ground merely. The true shniashana will be 
where we will be burnt up truly and really without a chance- 
of rebirth. There is real annihilation as is intended by the 
word Nirvana, but there is deathlessness also. What is it that 
dies and that which does not die ? It is man’s individuality, 
the “ I-ness ”, the egoism that is formed of Karma, the shadow 
that always dogs his foot-steps, the bundle of his desires, 
passions and numerous enjoyments, the tree of knowledge of 
good and evil ; it is this that is annihilated. What is not 
destroyed and, by the annihilation of the former, becomes freed 
of its fetters and becomes immortal, is the real spirit, the soul 
or atma (the tree of life). Buddha would *not postulate the 
other side of death, the real annihilation. Because he thought it 
only complicated matters. The thing was clear, desire was the 
ultimate cause of the disease of birth and sorrow, and. it by any 



SAIVAISM IN ITS RELATION TO OTHER SYSTEMS. 353 

herculean effort, we could remove the cause, the object would 
attained. As such he laid great stress on Desirelessness, 
ftr becoming balanced in pleasure and pain, in sinlessness 
and self-sacrifice; and this teaching is priceless to all and 
every one ; and as I said, I wish even now a fresh avatar of 
Buddha would incarnate to carry home to every one this 
teaching, not only on the Holy land of his birth, but to the 
West also, which also sorely needs an avatar of his type, 
to turn them away from the thought of mere material 
aggrandizement. 

In the scheme of salvation as framed in Saivite theology, 
this forms the first of the Tour rungs, namely Karma Samyam, 
(becoming balanced in pleasure and pain), the other three be- 
ing Malaparipakam and Sadgurudarsanam and Sattinipadam. 
Before I leave this part of the subject, I wish to draw the 
special attention of the Convention to the existence in the 
Tamil language of the Sacred Kural by Saivite Sage Tiru- 
valluvar, who lived about 2000 years ago. It is an ethical 
treatise which has profoundly influenced the Tamft people for 
the last 2000 years, and in the words of its English trartslator 
the late Rev. Dr. G. U. Pope, “it is not surpassed by any 
thing of the kind in any literature.” The same learned doctor 
further remarks that “it is evident from what has been said 
above, we have in Southern India an ethical treatise which in 
’a Christian point of view is nearly unexceptionable.” I will 
quote another observation of his also before 1 address myself 
to the next subject, namely, Christianity. 

“ To meet thoughtful Hindus in a spirit of dogmatic 
antagonism or to treat them with contempt or to speak of them 
as the perishing heathen, is absolutely unfitting. We have 
even to learn something from Hinduism.” 

The Rev. G. M. Cobban was a missionary gentleman who 
was a prominent and popular figure in Madras in my College 
days. He was a gjood student of Tamil ar.d of Saiva Siddhanta. 
Writing to the Contemporary Review he wrote, “First, I think, 
we should insist on the cordial recognition of these truths and 
cheerfully acknowledge their kinship to Christianity, for all 
truth is akin. .The Hindu poet knows what to say of it. He 



I 




354 SAIVAISM IT ITS RELATION TO OTHER SYSTEMS. 

says ‘ the heart is made pure by the truth.’ If I am asked 
whence these truths came, I would say from heaven, from 
Him who is the Truth. But whether they are the direct gifts 
of God to the Hindus, or whether like boulders, they have 
drifted and travelled to India, I cannot tell ; the evidence on this 
point is incomplete. If any urge that, although Hindus 
recognize their authority, they are un-inspired and not really 
authoritative, I would say truth is authoritative, because it 
is truth, not because it came in a particular way. And all 
truth is from God.” He also remarks “we find much truth 
both in books and men, so much as to surprise the student 
and delight the wise Christian teachfr.” 

These observations were all made in reference to the 
truths contained in Saiva and Vaishnava works in Tamil. And 
I have given other estimates of Saiva Siddhapta from Christian 
writers in my last address. The resemblance which struck 
them most between Christianity and Saivaism, and which 
I wish to emphasize here, relates to the ideal of Godhead, 
God's relation to man, the doctrine of Love and Grace, and 
the necessity for a divine teacher. I have defined the terms 
‘Personal and Impersonal’, ‘ Saguna and Nirguna’ in my 
last address and I have shown that, according to Saiva 
religion, God is personal in the true acceptation of the word, 
according to Christian writers. God is Sat, Chit, and Ananda, 
Nirgupa, absolute and personal at the same time. He is 
our Lord and Master, our heavenly Father, our intimate 
Friend and Beloved One. He loves us and we can love him. 
He understands our helplessness and is ever intent on our good, 
and if we only could respond to His Love which, in the words 
of one of our Saints, is “limitless and is ever rising and flowing 
over”, and which, in the words of another, is “ a flood brooking 
not its banks rushest into the cavity of my heart,” our salvation 
would be assured. ‘ God is love ’ and every Christian mission- 
ary who knows anything of Tamil knows by heart the famous 
verse in St. Tirumular’s Tirumantiram " Sivam and Love are 
different, say the fools. No one knows that Sivam and Love 
are the same. When one knows that Sivam and Love are the 
same, then he re^Ls in Sivam as Love.” 



SAIVAISM IN ITS RELATION TO OTHER SYSTEMS. 355 

I have urged Christians to drop the word “ Saguna ” 
(meaning clothed in the three gunas, Satva, Rajas and Tamas), 
find to drop their prejudice against the word Nirguna, which 
means non-material or Pure Intelligence and spirit. Our Idea 
of God is Sat-chit-ananda, symbolised in the form of Soma- 
skanda (Sa-uma-skapda) and this is the same as God the father, 
Ged the mother or Holy ghost, and God the son, and I have 
quoted in some other place the definition of these terms from 
Bishop Westcott, God as pure being or spirit, God as light that 
links to him all humanity, and God as Love. 

I have referred to the Doctrine of Grace as a special feature 
of Saiva Siddhanta in my last address ; and in this respect 
also, it differs in no respect from that of the Christian Doctrine. 
Christian Theologians have fought over the question of desert 
and grace, and there is a similar divergence in Saiva Siddhapta 
schools also. The doctrine of N irhetukariina is well set forth 
by Saiva sages also, and all schools recognize that even where 
you deserve the grace, it is God that helps you to deserve it. 
Our Skapda is Kumara Skapda, son of God, the first teacher 
and Parama Guru, and I have shown that unless God«comes 
down to us as the son of man, our redemption is not possible. 
Christianity speaks of only one revelation for all time to come. 
But in the Saiva Siddhanta, God reveals Himself as the son 
and Guru to each in his own fulness of time. 

What repels most Christians in Hinduism is its idealism 
and Pantheism. But in the manner in which 1 advaita' is 
defined by the Saivite school and hence called Suddha Advaita 
Siddhapta, the doctrine is without any reproach. “Thou art 
not aught in the universe; Naught is there save Thou ; (God) 
Who can know Thee ? ’ is our postulate. We distinguish 
clearly between the plane of God, the plane of man and the 
plane of the universe, just in the same way as Professor Henry 
Drummond does, and we postulate a unity at the same time. 
‘ God is all and not all' is one of our axioms. Even in regard 
to the doctrine of atonement, there is considerable agreement. 
We equally say with Christians, that where we can do His 
will, atoning ourselves with God, then He takes upon Himself 
all our burdens, and all our burdens fall off. (Vide § ivjfiana - 



356 saivaism in its relation to other systems. 

bodham, Sutra. 10.) As man falls away from God, by not doing 
His Will, so the final act of Sanctification consists in doing 
His will, and the moment we do this, we will be re-united to our* 
Father in Heaven. I onl} r hope that the day, the Christian world 
realizes the beauty of Saiva Siddhanta in all its aspects, much of 
the prejudice against Hinduism will fall off, and we will be 
united to each other in bonds of fraternal love as, we should fye, 
children of the same Father. One learned Jesuit Father blessed 
us after hearing of our idea of Sivam as Love, saying, ‘Yes, this 
is the truth and 1 wish God would give 3 7 ou grace to preach it.” 

In the scheme of practical religion, consisting of Charya , 
Kriyd , Yoga, and JTiana, otherwise cafled Dasamarga, Satputra- 
marga, Sahamarga, and Sanmarga, Christianity brings to the 
foreground Satputramarga or the Doctrine of Father-hood of 
God, though as 1 have shown elsewhere, it comprises other 
margas also. 

In regard to our relation to Mahomedanism, I am only sorry 
to say that mutual ignorance of each other’s truths has kept 
them from Recognition of their closest kinship, much closer in 
fact, than any other Hindu school even. We are like passen- 
gers entering a Railway carriage, and one who gets in first tries 
to prevent the other getting in. But once both get in and fall 
to talk, their kinship for generations is discovered, and they fall 
on each other’s necks, kiss and embrace. 1 will give you a 
story to illustrate. There was once a quarrel between the 
Saivites and their other Hindu brethren in a certain place. They 
went before the Nabob with their complaints. He promised to 
decide if each would show his God on the morrow. The Saivites 
went home dejected; for, how could they hope to show the Nabob 
their God? They fell to fasting and prayer, and at night, God 
appeared in a vision and told them to rise in the morning and 
alter proper ablutions, to divide their cadjan Holy Hymn Book 
with a thread at random, and the Hymn which was found should 
be taken and shown to the Nabob. The other party was jubi- 
lant, for in their wealth and power to decorate their God, they 
had no equals. They brought out their God gaily adorned 
with costly crowns and sparkling gems to the presence of the 
Nabob. The Saivites took their old browned ,paiui-leaf and 



SAIVAISM IN ITS RELATION TO OTHER SYSTEMS. 357 

* 

• 

read out the verse which was to this effect. “ The Lord with 
braided hair and His spouse with pencilled brows, live in the 
burning ground of Kanchi. He knows no sin. He is not one of 
the mortals. He has no one as His equal. No town claims Him 
as its citizen. He is beyond compare ; unless we with the eye 
of His Grace perceive His true nature, we can’t paint Him, and 
shyw Hjm as of such form and figure.” 

The Nabob nodded his head and said to the other party, 
“ Sabash ! This is a great Raja”; but told the Saivites, “Yours 
is God.” My Mahomedan friend to whom I related the story 
said, “True, if the Nabob did not know the nature of God, would 
he have recognized yours a^ God.” And that is the moral I am 
trjfing to bring out bjr means of the story. The God of the Sai- 
vites who form the bulk of the Hindu people and*whose doctrine 
is the most ancient form of Hinduism, is not an anthropomorphic 
conception. That they hold strictly with Mahomedans that God 
cannot be born, as a man, through the womb of the woman, 
attests this truth. Siva, (Sivam, Santam, Advaitam, Chaturtam) 
who by the way is not one of the trinity, in all His Relations to 
man, never was born and could never be born. He is thwefore 
called birthless (Aja) and deathless (Amrita) ‘ immortal,’ even in 
the Rig Veda. In the higher regions of philosophy and mystic- 
ism, there is very close approximation. We believe also that 
the famous Kaaba of Mecca is nothing but a Siva Linga. I 
quote very frequently from Shaik Sadi and other writers to 
illustrate the higher truths of Saiva philosophy. Here is a rose 
picked from the Gulistan. “ A certain person took his basket 
and told his friends that he would go into his garden and bring 
them fine flowers. He went in and the moment he came amidst 
the flowers, he was so overpowered by the strong scent, he fell 
down unconscious. He forgot himself, he forgot the promise 
given to his friends, and the basket slipped from his hands un- 
noticed.’’ This is the condition of the Jivan Mukta according to 
Saiva philosophy. There is joy in heaven and endless bliss but 
one will not be conscious he is so enjoying. This is pure 
advaita bliss. There is no return from there, ‘ no return ’ is the 
refrain of the Upanishats. One of our sages sings : “ we have 
not heard,, nor, learnt from those who had cast their eyes on 



358 SAIVAISM IN ITS RELATION TO OTHER SYSTEMS. 

% 

• 

Thee.” All our religious practices, ceremonies, forms and 
Shibboleths fall off from us, as the basket from the sleeper’s 
hand, and they are of no consequence when we reach His seat* 
I will appeal to my own religionists to try and study Mahomed- 
anism as it deserves to be studied, and 1 w r ould appeal to my 
Mahomedan brethren to come out of their seclusion and know 
something of us ; for as I may say with truth with m/ valued 
Christian friend, “ you have even something to learn from 
Hinduism.” In the scheme of practical religion, the popular 
form of Mahomadanism is Dasa Marga, though, as I have 
shown, the Mahomedan mystics jjave reached the highest 
experience of religion. Amongst the Tamil people, Christians 
address God usually as Pita, “ Father” and the Mahomedans as 
“ Andavan, Lord and Master.” 

Coming now to the Hindu Schools, Saivaism includes the 
school of Gapapatyas, Saktas and Vedaptins of Sankara’s 
School. So far as the practical religion is concerned, Vfedaptins 
and Saivit^s are indistinguishable in form, and they follow 
the Ckarya, Kriya and Yoga paths together. It is only in re- 
gard to the doctrinal part they differ. Vedaptins interpret 
“Advaitam” as ‘Ekam,’ ‘Abheda,’ ‘Abhinna.’ But if as Mapilal 
Dvivedi in his Monism , shows, ‘Advaita’ does not mean all 
this, but ‘ Ananya ’ or Anyonasti, as our Acharyas, Sri Nila- 
kantha Sivacharya and St. Meykandan take it to be, even the 
slight difference vanishes. There may be a purpose in empha- 
sizing the one-ness of all things, by reason of God’s immanence, 
as against gross dualism, but still an one-sided picture is always 
not safe. As regards its relation to Vaishnavism, there is much 
greater doctrinal harmony between Saivaism and Vaishnavism 
of Sri Ramanuja’s school than between these and Vgdaptism, 
of Sankara’s School, though in the forms of religion they differ. 
I presented a copy of my SivajnUnabddham to the late 
P. Srinivasa Rao, Judge, City Civil Court, Mhdras, a prominent 
Madhva ; and when I next met him, he said he thought I was an 
advaiti, but the reading of my book show r ed that there was no 
difference between his philosophy and mine. I am proud to call 



saivaism in its relation to other systems. 359 

r 

• 

mysef an advaiti still. But there was a meeting-ground 
possible between my Advaitam and his Dvaitam whereas, 
there was no union possible between his Dvaitam and what he 
fancied to be advaitam. A Srivaishnava friend of mine had 
written a key to my Sivajnanabodham. However I am glad 
to say the leaders on both sides are giving up their narrow 
prejudices and in the last Saiva Siddhanta conference* held at 
Ramnad, we had several Vaishnava friends lecturing on the 
platform, and on Sri Panchaksharam itself. However the value 
of Vaishnavism is in emphasizing the importance of Dasa 
Marga or Bhakti Marga, though Vaishnava saints have belonged 
to all the four Margas. C3ne of my Calcutta friends told me 
that Saivaism is not so popular a Bhakti Marga as Vaishnavism. 
And I spent a whole night in speaking to one who is considered 
as a great teacher now in Calcutta, in the presence of my friend, 
and the great man was kind enough to acknowledge his entire 
agreement with my views. In fact, the foundation of Saivaism 
is built solely on love. Usually the more exuberant form of 
Dasa Marga is alone mistaken for Bhakti Marga. The Deeper 
the river, the more silently does it flow. As love grows more 
and more, it grows silent. Outward manifestation is only in 
the lower stages. There is the deep-seated love of heart to 
heart, the secret of which no one outside could know. With 

. Hindus, it is only to strangers that, open words of welcome 
and salutation are extended. To close and intimate friends, if 
they are offered, they are regarded as insult. So it is, one of 
our saints says : “ how he could even raise his hands in praise 
when his heart was full and as in whatever act he did, he recog- 
nized God’s fulness.” The two and only two means of Sanctifi- 
cation according to Saivaism are Karma Samya or self-sacrifice, 
Dedication or Sivarpariam and undying love to God {vide 
Sutras io, 1 1 of Sivajnanabodham). As I have shown in the 
scheme of the fourmargas, it is not in Dasa-Marga alone that 
there is Bhakti, but Karma, Bhakti. and Jnana grow deeper and 
higher, as we ascend from Dasa-Marga through Satputra- 
Marga and Saha-Marga to San-Marga. 

* The fifth conference held on 26th, 27th & 28th December 1910. 



360 SAIVAISM IN ITS RELATION TO OTHER SYSTEMS. j 

% \ 
• , 

We love a child. We deck it with precious jewels and 
costly clothes. The child does not want them. It can hardly 
distinguish between a piece of glass and a diamond. But yet 
our acts mark our love. The same love induces a Christian to 
build the most costly Churches with the richest ornamentation. 
The London correspondent of ‘the Hindu’ of Madras once 
gave us an idea as to what amount of money is spent in*Europe 
in decorating the Churches with flowers during Easter and 
Christmas. Even the most iconoclastic Mahomedans have spent 
millions in marble, gems and richest brocades in ornamenting 
their places of worship. If this be ^ne mark of Bhakti or love, 
the thousands of Saivite temples from Mount Himavat to Cape 
Comorin and iseyond, a hundred times more than that of any 
other faith, attest the Bhakti side of Saivaism. 

The number of canonised saints as given in the Agastya 
Bhakta Vilasa and Upamanya Bhakta Vilasa in Sanskrit, 
corresponding to the Periya Purana in Tamil, is more than sixty 
three, wheaeas the list of canonised Vaishnava Saints (Alvars) 
contaftis only eighteen. The out-pourings of love of the Saivite 
Saints comprise twelve collections, the chief of which are called 
“ Devaram ” or garland of God, and Tiruvafagam or ‘the holy 
utterence’, the latter of which has been translated into excellent 
English by Rev. Dr. G. U. Pope. Says he: “These remarkable, 
poems are full of a simple fervour, which Tamil people find 
absolutely irresistible ; and hence with Saivas, they quite take 
the place occupied among Christians by the book of Psalms.” 
These collections are several times larger than the similar 
collections among Tamil Vaishnavas. 

However, I hope I have succeeded in showing that Saivaism 
is in harmony with each and every one of the living faiths of 
the world, and I pray to Lord Siva, the Source of all Power, 
all Light and all Love, to speed the work of this Convention. 

Praise be to Meykanda Deva. 









