===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.217334.The-Taittiriya_djvu.txt =====

Vedic 

comprising  English  Transitions  of  some  of  th^  ' | 
most  important  Sanskrit  Scriptural  Wori»  > ’ 
and  their  authoritative  commentaries  by 

A.  Mahadeva  Sastri,  B.  A.', 

Chmioft  Oovt  'OHentat  Library,  l£y$btB^ 

The  Bhagavad  Oita 

WIT*  lid  iAHUBffiiOKAHYA’s  Y’ 

Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Improved 
Crown  8vo.,  pp.  500.  Price : Boards,  Rs.  3.  Clotb  Rs.  4. 
Rt.  Hon.  Pro*.  Max  MuIlen-'  Vou  have  done  yoor  work  very, 

oonseleiitioutly..J  hopa  you  arill  coatinue  your  labours."  ^ 

Mr.  Bertram  Keightley.  M.  A.— -ihaveteidomnena 

or  more  English  translation  of  a difficult  Sanskrit  work." 

Sir  S.  Subrahmanya  Aiyar,  K.  C.  I.  B. — '•The  good  woA 

you  have  so  cheerfully  undertaken  for  the  good  of  your  countrymen  has  exc^ 

lently  done."  * " ' 

Sri  Swaiiii  Vivekananda : — •*  i am  glad  to  find  thai  yon  imts  un- 

dertaken  a most  difficult  task  and  performed  it  so  well." 

The  Hon.  Dr.  Justice  Qurudas  Banerji  "n>etM»i«tion 

Is  elegant  and  folthfiil. 

The  Theosophical  Review,  London: — «*The  work  is  admirably 

done,  the  English  fluent  and  pleasant  to  read,  the  translation  exact  and  scholarly.^ 
The  TheOSOphist  :—• <«  a trustworthy  guide  to  students  ofVecUc  Religion 
and  philosophy.  The  Sanskrit  has  been  rendered  into  very  good  English." 

Minor  Upanishads  Vol.  I 

comprising  Amritabindu  and  Kaivalya  Upn** 

’ I nishads  with  commentaries  and  Sanskrit  Text. 
Pep.  Svo.  pp.  xxlv.  16,  94.  Price : Boards  As.  10. 

Mrs.  Annie  Besant:*— **Itl8  exceedingly  useful  to  Issue  the  Kinor 
Upanishads,  the  two  that  make  up  the  present  volume  will  do  much  godd." 


CMLJuAu itOMd^t to uyi^jit WaWe (han tiubditoaiUil4p^tio^  lA^ tliit 

atfle  aiiTtetokJ^^  Inittaotlirt^  mnif  aaS  lets 

^bodj.  ^Theaeldlnory  mifbadithrpwmnehliffht  on  the  practical  upeot  of  the 
Vedmdo  ayMi^  rf^thiftpMliAdlJfttfiy 

valnnal  and  liid|i[^)a^  aoA^  ^]|u^  be  ieiUleed.^,Both  these  Upanisheds  deserve 
Mrefol  stndj,  and  Mr.  blaha^vasastriar  has  done  valuable  service  in  having  made 
thorn  aeoewibie  to  the  public.'* 

liliil  i)l: i -/iil 

Minor  Upanishads  Vol.  II 

TJie  VEDiN'^A  j^OCTRINE  OF  SaNKARIchIrYA, 
c*oinpnsing  i.  5anicarfl,chi^ya,’s  pakshiniti^fi,rti 
Stotra  with  Surds var&ch&rya’s  M&nasolldsa  ; ii. 
Surdsvardcharya’s  Pramva-^Vdrtika  ; Hi.  Dakshi- 
n&ndrti  Upanishad. 

Pep.  Svo.  pp.  Ixxvi.,  170.  Cloth  Re.  i-8>o.  Paper  1-4-0. 

The  Brahnuivadin:-<  Mr.  sutrtar  baa,  as  usual,  prt&ced  the  1>ook 
with  a lengthy  and  elaborate  introduction  which  is  eabaustive,  yet  clear  and  concise, 
and  it^indaya  a grasp  of  the  subject  and  a good  insight  and  skillto  present  things  in 
an  impressive  sequence 

" Mr.  Sastriar’s  translation  of  fdl  these  is  fluent  and  pleasant  and  at  the  same  time 
accurate  and  precise.  He  has  spared  no  pains  to  make  the  book  most  agreeable  and 
Inatructive  to  all.  On  the  whole  we  are  inclined  to  think  that  the  book  is  a thorough 
auteess  and  an  indispensable  guide  to  all  students  of  the  Aiiv$iia  Viddnta**' 

The  Liaht  of  the  East  • — ** We  have  read  the  intro* 

doctlinwitlpiiei^leMUtt^d  interest,  an  introduction  at  once  clear,  lucid  and 
elaboiate.*  "Wh  d^  not  nemtbf  Jssy  that  the  present  eaposklbn  Af^Saikfii^hArya’s 
4hat  of  many  others  we  have  come  across." 

• The  iH&4u,:—  "The  translation  is  easy,  readable  and  accurate:- merits 
which  very  few  translations  of  philosophical  treatises  till  now  published  can  boaak  Of^ 
^h(^arty(gettj^dfld  the  language  employed  are  , well  , adapted  to  the  under- 
• atandiogof  even  the  least  advanced  student  of  philosophy.  The  two  volumes  afford 

good  and.  pleasant  reading,  and  any  student  oT  philosophy  caff  fellow  the  author 
Without  any  feeling  of  intellectual  oppression." 


Th^  Taittlriya  U|MUii$hMd 

wi^  tB^  commentaries  b£.$anl^|ch|it^^  . 

Sttte5vaiik:bdirya,  and  Sftyana  (Vkiyinaffya). 

JPart  I,  Sdyana's  Introduction  to  the  study 

ofVpmishadi 

Crown  8to.  pp.  7a.  Prtee  As.  S. 

PttTt  II.  Contemplation 

Crown  8vo.  pp.  xii.  19a.  Price  Re.  1-8. 

Po/rt  III.  Brakmcmdya  Expounded 

Crown  8vo.  pp.  31a.  Price  Rs.  a. 

Part  IV.  (t)  Brahmavidya  Explained  and 
(ii)  Investigation  of  Brahman 
Crown  8vo.  pp.  ape.  Price  Rs.  a. 

Parts  II.  III.  IF,  in  one  vol, 

{comprising  the  whole  UpanishaJ  with  cotnmentaries). 

Boards  Rs.  4.  Cloth  Rs.  5. 

(Aug.  1900).— "...The  translation  of  philosophical 
works  generally  involves  obscurities  which  are  too  trying  for  an  ordinary  reader ; but 
Mr.  Siatri*8  work  is  admirably  free  from  these  intellectual  stumbling-blocks.  His 
simplicity  of  style  has  not,  as  is  unfortunately  the  case  with  many  such  works,  been 
achieved  at  the  cost  of  accuracy,  for  we  have  gladly  noted  Mr.  SAstri*s  close  and 
careful  fidelity  to  the  original  as  one  of  the  most  prominent  features  of  his  work. 
Besides  these  literary  merits,  his  Taittirtya  Upanishad  possesses  the  immense  value 
of  comprising  the  commentaries  of  the  greatest  Upanishad  authorities,  vis*;  Sankari- 
chirya,  Surdsvarhchgrya  and  S&yanfcchirya,  all  of  whom,  trying  to  interpret  this 
classical  Upanishad  from  the  same  point  of  view,  beautifully  supplement  each  other's 
work....The  author’s  own  notes,  in  many  places,  bring  out  clearly  many  questions 
involved  in  the  principal  points  at  issue  and  enables  the  reader  to  have  a thorough 
grasp  of  theuL  Students  of  Indian  philosophy  will  find  a go6d  deal  to  leaih  lit  this 
valuable  work. 

-—(April  x9oz).~The  volume  under  notice  forms  the  third  part  of  Mr.  Sftstrt's  trans- 
lation of  the  Taittiriya  Upanishad.  Its  particular  title  is  "Brahmavldyi  ezpeuiuM.”  It 
contains  the  greater  portion  of  the  Brahma-or  Ananda-valll,  one  of  the  most  ho^- 
tant  contributions  in  the  whole  Upanishadic  literature.  There  is  hardly  any  {mu- 
tant question  of  the  Vedknta  philosophy  which  is  not  discussed  in  this  work 
(beautifully  arranged  under  appropriate  headings  by  the  translator ) and  explained  in 


4 


It  a ^fiaaed  admirer  ofthaae  iiit^doluil  idanta  te  btkiX’wlth 

what  clearness  and  thoroughness  they  perceived  and  solved  many  of  the  problems 
centeringround  the  system  of  the  rigorous  monistic  thou^t— problems  which  modern 
thinkers  are  only  just  beginning  to  see,  while  only  a few  of  them  dare  so  muph  as 
l^dlethem. 

Mr.  Mahadeva  Sastri  has  already  earned  the  distinction  of  being  one  of  the  most 
painstaking,  veracious,  capable  add  lucid  translators  of  our  difficult  sacred  books 
among  contemporary  Indian  Schote..  In  the  present  work  he  has  surpassed  him- 
self. We  have  been  delighted  with  his  performance. 

The  D&Wfly  (Sept.  1901).— The  present  is  the  third  of  the  volumes  on  the 
subject  of  Taittir»ya  Upanishad,  which  Mr.  Sastri  has  brought  out,  the  first  being  an 
Introduction,  and  the  second  a translation,  with  standard  commentaries,  of  Sikshi- 
vall^  both  of  which  we  have  had  occasion  to  review  in  the  highest  terms  of  praise. 

No  student  educated  in  English  and  anxious  to  learn  the  highest  teachings  of  the 
Upanishads  could  rest  satisfied  until  he  had  mastered  the  Talttir^ya  Upanishad  ; and 
to  that  end,  no  one  could  be  a better,  a safer  guide  than  Mr.  Sastri.  For  it  is  no 
disparagement  to  the  learned  translators  of  Vol.  XV  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East 
series  ( which  gives  a translation  of  the  same  Upanishad)  to  say  that  they  are  less  in 
touch  with  the  subject  than  Mr.  Sastri. 

The  Brahmavadin,  (Sept.  z9oo).—Mr.  Sastriar  has,  as  usual,  spared  no 
pains  to  make  the  translation  readable  and  at  the  same  time  accurate. 

The  Indian  Review,  (Nov.  1900).— For  the  first  time,  perhaps,  this 

precious  mass  of  Advaita  commentaries  is  made  available  to  the  English  knowing 
public.  Mr.  Sastriar  has  as  usual  spared  no  pains  to  make  the  translations  pleasant 
and  flowing  and  at  the  same  time  accurate  and  precise. 

(April  1901;  —Tlie  volume  before  us  maintains  the  high  standard  of  its  predecessors 
and  has  the  additional  value  of  dealing  with  some  of  the  highest  problems  of  the 
Vedantic  metaphysics.  As  the  translator  points  out,  the  doctrine  of  the  kosai  is  the 
pivotal  doctrine  of  the  Vedanta  on  its  theoretical  as  well  as  its  practical  side,  and 
nowhere  in  the  Upanishads  is  this  doctrine  so  thoroughly  and  exhaustively  worked 
out  as  in  the  Upanishad  translated  in  the  volume  under  review.  We  therefore 
heartily  recommend  it  to  the  lovers  of  the  Vedanta. 

The  Theosophist-The  translation  is  faultlessly  accurate  and  very 
happy  in  expression.  The  general  get-up  of  the  books  is  very  neat  and  attractive 
ani4  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired. 

Sir  S.  Subrahraanya  Iyer.  K.  C.  I.  E. : —I  have  often  longed 

to  read  such  a translation. 


VEDIC  RELIGION 

THE  TAITTIrIyA  UPANISHAD 


AT 

Tlae  G.  T.  A.  FhriritinR  "Works, 
MYSOK.E. 


DEDICATED 

TO 

1. 1.  firi  Xiishnaraja  Vodagar  laliadur 

MAHARAJA  OF  MYSORE 

by  his  most  obedient  servant 

THE  AUTHOR 


IN  GRATEFUL  HOMAGE 
FOR  THE 

MANY  FACILITIES  AFFORDED 
BY  HIS  highness’  GOVERNMENT 
IN  ^RINGING  OUT  THIS  VEPIC  RELIGION  SpRIEg, 


THE 


TAITTIRIYA  UPANISHAD 

with  the  commentaries  of 

sankarAchArya,  sure5varAchArya 

AND 

SAYAATA  (VIDYARA2VYA.) 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH 
BY 

A.  Mahadeva  Sastri,  B.  A. 

OwKbtor,  Qovl.  Oriental  Library,  Mysore. 


MYSORE; 

PRINTED  AT  THE  G.  T.  A.  PRINTING  WORKS. 

1903. 


{All  rights  reserved]. 


PREFACE. 


The  Taittirtya-Upanishad  is  so  called  because  of  the 
recension  (s&khi)  of  the  Rrishna-Yajurveda  to  which  it 
is  appended.  It  is  the  most  popular  and  the  best-known 
of  all  the  Upanishads  in  this  part  of  the  country,  where 
the  majority  of  the  brahmins  study  the  Taittirlya  recen- 
sion of  the  Yajurveda,  and  it  is  also  one  of  the  very  few 
Upanishads  which  are  still  recited  with  the  regulated 
accent  an3  intonation  which  the  solemnity  of  the  subject 
therein  treated  naturally  engenders.  The  Upanishad 
itself  has  been  translated  by  severstl  scholars  including 
Prof.  Max  Muller ; and  the  latest  translation  by  Messrs. 
Mead  and  J.C.  Chattopidhyliya,  of  the  Blavatsky  Lodge 
of  the  Theosophical  Society,  London,  is  the  most 
‘ soulful  ’ of  all,  and  at  the  same  time  the  cheapest.  A 
few  words,  therefore,  are  needed  to  explain  the  object 
of  the  present  undertaking. 

5ankarach&rya  and  Suresvaricharya  are  writers  of. 
highest  authority  belonging  to  what  has  been  now-a- 
days  marked  off  as  the  Advaita  school  of  the  Vedanta. 
Every  student  of  the  Vedinta  knows  that  the  former 
has  written  commentaries  on  the  classical  Upanishads, 
on  the  Bhagavadgit&,  and  on  the  Brahmasiitras,  be- 
sides a number  of  manuals  and  tracts  treating  of  the 
Veddnta  Philosophy,  while  among  the  works  of  the 
latter,  which  have  but  recently  seen  the  light,  may  be 


*9  PREFACE. 

mentioned  (i)  the  Brihad&ra»yaka-Upanishad-bh&shya- 
V^rtika,  (a)  the  Taittiriya-Upanishad-bhdshya-Vdrtika, 
(3)  the  Minasollisa,*  {41  the  PraMava-Virtika,  * and 
(5)  the  Naishkarm}ra-siddhi.  The  first  four  of  these  are 
professedly  commentaries  on  Sankarich&rya’s  works, 
while  the  last  is  an  independent  manual  dealing  with 
some  fundamental  questions  of  the  Veddnta. 

As  the  subject  i|  treated  of  in  the  Brihaddra«yaka* 
Upanishad  from  different  stand-points  of  view  and  in 
great  detaQ,  it  is  the  one  Upanishad,  in  commenting 
on  which  Sankarichdrya  evidently  seeks  to  present 
an  exhaustive  rational  exposition  of  the  Vedic  Religion 
by  fully  explaining  every  position  as  it  turns  up  and 
examining  it  from  several  points  of  view,  whereas  in 
his  commentaries  on  other  Upanishads  he  contents 
himself  with  merely  explaining  the  meaning  of  the  texts 
and  shewing,  only  where  necessary,  how  they  support 
his  advaita  doctrine  as  against  the  other  doctrines 
which  seek  the  support  of  the  Upanishads.  It  is  cer- 
tainly for  this  reason  that  Suresvardch&rya,  who  un- 
dertook to  explain,  improve,  amplify  and  supplement 
the  teachings  of  SankarAch&rya,  thought  fit  to  further 
expound  the  latter’s  commentary  on.  the  Brihadiran- 
yaka-Upanishad.  This  exposition  forms  the  colossal 
work  known  as  theBnhaddra»yaka-Upani.shad-bhdsh3ra- 
V&rtika,  which  is  held  to  be  of  no  less  authority  than 

* The'M&nasoll&Ba  and  the  Prana va-Y&rtika,  the  two  smallest 
works  of  Sarcsrar&charya,  have  been  made  accessible  to  the 
English-reading  public  in  the  “ Minor  Upanishads  ” Vol,  II. 
issued  in  this  (the  Vedic  Seligion)  Series. 


PmMCB. 


iV 

the  bh^sh3ra  itself  and  is  idoi%  frequently  ^ cited  by  later 
writers  on  all  knotty  points  of  Advaita,  as  expounding 
its  phiioso{^  vritk  greater  precision.  Much  need  not 
be  said  here  as  to  Suresvarich&rya's  marvellous  power 
of  exposition,  since  the  readers  of  this  series  have  been 
made  &miliar  with  it  through  the  Mknasoll&sa,  which 
is  only  a condensed  statement  of  the  first  principles 
of  the  system  as  developed  in  the  commentary  on  the 
Upanishad  and  of  the  main  lines  of  argument  on  which 
he  proceeds  to  establish  them.  ^ 

Not  quite  so  exhaustive,  however,  is  either  5ankar&- 
ch&rya’s  or  Suresvarkch&rya’s  commentary  on  .the 
Taittirlya-Upanishad.  'The  only  reason  for  the  latter’s 
writing  a virtika  on  the  bhishya  of  the  Upanishad 
seems  to  me  to  have  been  the  high  importance  of  this 
classical  Upanishad  as  exclusively  treating,  among 
other  things,  of  the  five  Kosas  (sheaths  of  the  Self). 
As  the  doctrine  of  the  Kosas  is  the  pivotal  doctrine  of 
the  Ved&nta  on  its  theoretical  as  well  as  its  practical 
side,  students  of  the  VedAnta  should  be  thoroughly 
familiar  with  it  before  proceeding  further  in  their 
studies.  Accordingly,  in  an  attempt  to  present  to  the 
English-reading  public  the  Vedknta  Doctrine  as  ex- 
pounded by  the  two  great  teachers,  it  is  but  proper 
first  to  take  up  the  Taittiriya-Upanishad. 

As  though  to  make  up  for  the  want  of  that  thorough- 
ness in  SankarAchdrya’s  and  SuresvarAchArya’s  com^ 
mentaries  on  the  Taittirfya-Upanishad  which  is  so  char- 
acteristic of  their  commentaries  on  the  BrihadAiattyaka^ 


fl 


BMUTAGB. 


;6ll|rltiw  (or  VidyArawyat  as  some  would  have  it),  that 
{tfaltfic  GfdioUast  oo  the  Yedic  literature,  has  writtea 
.a;C0SniDentai3^  on  the  Taittiilya-Upanishad  which  is  at 
once  thorough  ;iad  lucid.  Though  in  interpreting  the 
original  text  of  the  Upanishad  Skyam  differs  slightly 
hei<e.  and  there  Iron)  Sankarich&rya,  he  follows  the 
gieftt  teacher  very  closely  on  all  points  of  doctrine, 
and  quotes  profusely  from  the  writings  of  the  two 
great  leaders  of  the  school.  In  . fact,  SAyana’s  Intro* 
ductidn  to  the  study  of  the  Upanishads  is,  as  its 
readers  are  aware,  made  up  of  long  extracts  from  the 
VArtikasAra,  a lucid  digest  of  SuresvardchArya’s  VArtika 
on  the  BrihadAraeyaka-Upanishad.  Into  his  exposi- 
tion of  the  Taittirlya-Upanishad,  SAyawa  introduces,  in 
appropriate  places  and  in  a concise  form,  the  various 
discussions  embodied  in  the  VedAnta-sAtras,  so  that  by 
studying  this  exposition  the  reader  is  sure  to  obtain  a 
comprehensive  view  of  the  contents  of  the  VedAnta- 
sAtras  and  a fair  insight  into  the  true  relation  between 
the  SAtras  and  the  Upanishads. 

The  woric  now  presented  to  the  public  contains  a 
liteid.1  translation  of  the  Taittirlya-Upanishad,  and  of 
SankarAchArya’s  and  SAyawa’s  commentaries  thereon. 
Of  SAyansTs  commentary,  only  such  portions — and  they 
are  very  rare— are  omitted  as  are  mere  repetitions 
of  SankarAchArya’s  commentary.  SuresvarAchArya’s 
vArtika  is  in  many  places— especially  in  the  SikshA- 
valll— a mere  repetition  of  the  bhAshya  ; and  therefore 
it  is  pnly  where  the  vArtika  explains  the  bhAshya  or 


PREFACE- 


▼a 

adds  to  it  something  new,  that  the  vdrtika  has  been 
translated.  A few  notes  have  been  extracted  from 
Anandagiri’s  (or,  more  properly,  Anandajn&na’s)  glosses 
on  the  bh&shya  and  on  the  v&rtika.  I have  also  added 
some  notes  of  my  own  where  they  seem  most  necessary. 

The  Sanskrit  Text  of  the  Upanisha^  is  given  in 
Devanftgart,  followed  by  the  English  rendering  of  the 
Upanishad  printed  in  large  type  {pica).  Then  follows 
the  English  rendering  of  S'ankar^chdrya’s  commentary 
printed  in  a smaller  type  {small  pica).  The  English 
translation  of  Siyana’s  Commentary  as  well  as  the 
notes  from  Suresvar&chirya’s  V&rtika  and  A'nandagi* 
ri’s  Tiki  are  given  in  a still  smaller  type  {long  primer), 
these  notes  being  marked  (S.)  or  (A.)  or  (S.  & A.)  as  the 
case  may  be.  Some  of  the  foot-notes  which  have  been 
taken  from  the  Vanamdli  (Achyuta  Krishn&nanda 
swdmin’s  gloss  on  the  bhishya)  are  marked  off  as  (V). 


August  190S, 
Mysore. 


A.  Mahadeva  Sastri. 


oolsrTisjsrTS 


5ANKARACHARYA*S  INTRODUC^TtON. 

Brahmavidyd.  the  specific  theme  of  the  Upanishad—  Doc- 
trine of  Salvation  by  works  alone — No  salvation  by  works 
alone-—  No  salvation  by  works  associated  with  contempla- 
tion— Etynjology  of  ‘ Upanishad.*  pp. 

BOOK  I. 

(Sikshdvalli  or  SdmhitUUpanishad) 

CONTEMPLATION. 

Introduction. 

The  three  divisions  itf  the  Taittiriya  Upanishad—  Why 
Sdwhitl- Upanishad  should  come  first.  pp,  14—  16. 

Lesson  I.  Invocation  to  Qod. 

Devas  place  obstacles  in  men’s  way  to  Brabmavidy&— 
A Mantra  for  the  removal  of  those  obstacles,  pp.  17—  28. 

Lesson  11.  Study  of  Phonetics.  pp.  29 — 32 

Lesson  111.  Contemplation  6f  Samhita. 

Invocation  for  fame  and  lustre — Contemplation  of  Sawi- 
hita  in  the  five  objects—  Contemplation  of  SawhitA  in  the 
Worlds—  Contemplation  of  Sawhit^  in  the  Lights—  Con- 
templation of  Sawhit^b  in  Knowledge — Contemplation  of 
Sa;«hit&  in  Progeny  — Contemplntion  of  Samhiti  in  the 
Self—  Contemplation  of  Samhiti  enjoined  for  a specific  end 
— The  Philosophy  of  Contemplation—  The  Up&saka 
should  be  seated  when  engaged  in  contemplation— No 

a 


IPfcific  time  and  place  de^essary  for  Upslsana—  The  scope 
of  Sai»hit4-Up4sana—  Identity  of  Up4sana  taught  in  differ- 
ent Upanishads—  When  different  attributes  should  be* 
gathered  together  in  Up4^na—  Two  distinct  Up4sanas  of 
SsuwhitA  —Self-contemplation  and  Symbolic  contemplation 
— No  SyrnfeM-'ShbuId  contemplated  as  the  Self—  One 
modealbne  of  Self-contemplation  should  be  practised—  Sym- 
bolic contemplations  may  be  practised  in  any  number  — The 
Syinbol  should  be  contemplated  as  Brahman,  not  vice  versa 

Upisana  defined.  pp.  33-57. 

Lesson  IV.  Prayers  for  Health  and  Wealth. 

Prayer  for  intellectual  vigour  — Prawava,  the  essence  of 
the  Vedas—  Prayer  for  physical  and  moral  health—  Prayer 
for  fame—  Prayer  for  union  with  the  Divine—  Prayer  for 
many  disciples—  Prayer  for  light  and  peace.  pp.  58-70. 

Lesson  V.  Contemplation  of  Vyahritis. 

The  three  Utterances— The  fourth  Utterance— Con- 
templation of  the  Utterances—  Contemplation  of  the  Utter- 
ances as  the  worlds— Contemplation  of  the  Utterances  as 
Gods—  Contemplation  of  the  Utterances  as  the  Vedas— 
Contemplation  of  the  Utterances  as  life-breaths — Vydhntis 
represent  Purusha  in  His  sixteen  phases—  Contemplation 
of  the  Utterances  enjoined.  pp.  71-79. 

Lesson  VI.  Contemplation  of  Brahman. 

Brahman  in  the  heart—  The  Path  of  Light  leading  to 
Brahman — The  state  of  Brahman  attained—  Contemplation 
of  Brahman  enjoined—  The  Fifth  and  Sixth  Lessons  treat 
of  ohe  and  the  same  upasana-  Many  are  the  Self-compre- 
hending upAsanks—  One  alone  of  the  Self-comprehending 


up&sanas  should  be  practised^  Contemplation  of  Brabmali 
as  the  Self—  How  Paramitman  is  ‘ manomaya/ formedTof 
thought— How  Brahman  is  full  of  light— Attributes  off 
Brahman  mentioned  elsewhere  should  be  borrowed—  Upi- 
sana  should  be  practised  till  death—  Where  the  Upisaka’s 
path  of  departure  diverges—  How  far  the  process  of  death 
is  the  same  for  all—  The  Path  of  Light—  The  departing  . 
soul  of  the  Up^saka  joins  the  sun’s  rays  even  at  night— 
Even  the  Upasaka  dying  in  the  Dakshm&yana  has  access 
to  the  Northern  Path—  The  Path  of  light  is  but  one—  The 
Vayu-loka  precedes  the  Aditya-loka—  The  region  of  Lightn- 
ing precedes  that  of  Varuwa—  The  Light,  etc.,  are  the 
guiding  Intelligences—  The  Path  of  Light  is  common  to  all 
Upisakas  of  Saguwa  Brahman— Worshippers  of  symbols 
cannot  attain  to  Brahma- loka—  The  glory  of  Brahma-Ioka— 
In  Brahma-loka  the  yogin  secures  objects  of  enjoyment  by 
mere  thought—  In  Brahma-loka  the  yogin  can  enjoy  with  or 
without  a body—  The  bodies  of  a yogin’s  creation  have  each 
a soul—  No  yogin  can  create  the  universe  as  a whole— 
Thence  the  yogin  attains  to  Videha-Kaivalya  in  due 
course.  pp.  80-115. 

Lesson  VIL  Contemplation  of  Brahman  in  the  visible. 

This  lesson  treats  of  the  contemplation  of  the  Hiraaya- 
garbha—  External  groups  of  the  visible—  Internal  groups 
of  the  visible—  The  Upasana  enjoined.  pp.  1 16-122. 

Lesson  VllL  Contemplation  of  Pranava. 

The  Praaava-Brahman—  The  Pranava  extolled—  Con- 
templation of  Pranava  enjoined—  The  relation  between  ‘ Om 
and  Brahman — The  meaning  of  “ Om,  the  UdgUha  **  —The 
meaning  of  “ Om  is  Brahman  Contemplation  of  the 
Unconditioned  Brahman,  pp.  123-135. 


m 


coNTxmmT* 


Lesson  IX.  Upasaka’s  Duties. 

Hie  works  incumbent  mi  an  . Uptisaka— The  most  im* 
fortant  of  theUp&saka's  duties.  pp.  136-144. 

Lesson  X.  The  lllitmination. 

A Mantra  to  be  repeated—  The  purpose  of  the  Mantra— 
The  Mantra  is  an  expression  of  Self-realisation—  Conditions 
of  saintly  vision—  Repetition  of  this  Mantra  serves  as  a sub- 
stitute for  Brahmayaj»a—  Saws&ra  cut  asunder  by  non- 
attachment—  No  obstacle  lies  on  the  path  of  the  unattached 
soul—  Purity  of  the  unattached  soul—  Purity  leads  to  wis- 
dom and  immortality.  pp.  145-15 1. 

Lesson  XI.  The  Exhortation. 

Works  are  necessary  for  wisdom—  Know  as  well  as  learn 
the  Veda—  Duties  briefly  stated—  Duties  never  to  be  neg- 
lected— Persons  worthy  of  worship—  How  far  to  observe 
Vedic  prescription  and  orthodox  custom—  Conduct  towards 
great  men—  How  to  make  gifts—  How  to  decide  matters 
of  doubt—  On  intercourse  with  the  accused—  The  pero- 
ration. 

Does  the  highest  good  accrue  from  works  or  from  know- 
ledge ?—  The  theory  that  the  highest  good  accrues  from 
works— Works  cannot  produce  liberation— Neither  does 
liberation  accrue  from  works  and  Vidya  combined—  Com- 
bination of  Vidyi  and  works  is  impossible—  Knowledge 
leads  to  salvation  without  the  aid  ot  works—  In  working 
for  knowledge,  the  duties  of  the  order  are  fulfilled—  Works 
of  all  orders  conduce  to  knowledge—  Knowledge  is  possible 
even  beyond  the  pale  of  isramas.  pp.  152-188. 

Lesson  XII.  Thanks-giving.  pp.  189-191. 


BOOK  II. 

{AmndavalU  or  Brahma-valli.) 

A - BRAHMA  ViOYA  EXPOUNDED. 

Chapter  I.  The  Peace-chant 

Thanks-giving.—  Prayer  for  mutual  good  feeling  faetweea 
master  and  disciple.—  Master  and  disciple.  pp.  195-199. 

Chapter  II.  Brahmavidya  in  a nutshell. 

Brahma-vidyi  is  the  specific  theme  of  this  section.—  The 
seeker  of  Brahmaj«dna  should  renounce  works.—  Cessation 
of  Avidy&  is  the  specific  end.—  To  speak  of  Brahman  as 
one  to  be  reached  is  only  a figure  of  speech — The  primary 
meaning  of  ‘ Brahman.’—  Brahman  is  knowable.—  An 
immediate  knowledge  of  Brahman  possible.—  Brahman 
realisable  through  manas.—  How  Revelation  helps  the  reali- 
sation of  Brahman.—  Absolute  identity  of  Brahman  and 
the  Self—  He  who  knows  Brahman  becomes  Brahman. 

pp.  200-219. 

Chapter  III.  Knowledge  and  Liberation. 

Knowledge  is  an  independent  means  to  the  end  of  man. 
— The  student  attains  knowledge  in  this  or  in  a future 
birth.—  Nothing  is  real  except  Brahman.—  A peculiar  fea- 
ture of  the  death  of  the  Brahmavid.—  To  reach  Brahman 
is  to  be  rid  of  separateness — Jiva  is  ever  liberated.-  The 
Liberated  Soul  is  identical  with  Brahman.—  How  Brahman 
is  both  conditioned  and  unconditioned.—  Liberation  is  the 
highest  state,  pp.  220^  ^33. 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter  iV.  Brahman  Defined. 

An  explanatory  Verse.*-*  Definition  of  Brahman.—  What 
Is  a definition.— B^hman  is  the  real.— Brahman  is  Con- 
sciousness..— Brahman  is  the  Infinite  — Brahman  is  not  a 
non-entity.— Brahman  is  not  a momentary  existence.— Brah- 
man defined  here  is  a positive  entity. — As  one  with  the  Self 
H^man  is  infinite.— Brahman  is  the  eternal,  infinite, 
i^ependent  Consciousness.—  Brahman  is  beyond  speech. 

— ‘ Real,'*  etc.,  construed  as  specifying  attributes.—  ‘ Real,’ 

etc.,  construed  as  defining  attributives.—  ‘Real,’  etc.,  define 
Brahman  by  mutual  government.  —Brahman  defined  as 
the  Real.—  Brahman  defined  as  Consciousness. — Brahman 
defined  as  the  Infinite. — Other  definitions  of  Brahman.—. 
Brahman  is  unconditioned.  pp.  234-274. 

Chapter  V.  Summum  Bonum. 

What  it  is  to  know  Brahman.—  The  Avy&krita  as  ‘ the 
highest  heaven.’ — The  akira  of  the  heart  as  the  ‘ highest 
heaven.’—  Brahman  ‘ hid  in  the  cave  ’ is  one’s  own  Self.— 
Attainment  of  the  Supreme  Bliss.  pp.  275-290. 

Chapter  VI.  The  Infinite  and  Evolution. 

The  relation  of  the  sequel  to  the  foregoing.—  Mantra  and 
Brilhmawa.—  Brahman  is  absolutely  infinite.—  Identity  of 
Brahman  and  the  Self.—  Brahman  is  the  material  cause  of 
the  universe.—  The  three  theories  of  creation.—  How  far 
the  Nyiya  theory  is  right.— How  far  the  Sinkhya  theory  is 
right.— All  accounts  of  Evolution  contribute  only  to  a 
knowledge  of  Brahman.—  Unreality  of  Evolution.  — AkiUa. 

— Evolution  by  Brahman’s  Will  and  Idea.—  Vdyu  (the  air.) 

— Fire,—  Water.—  Earth.—  Primary  elements  are  only 


CONtEliYS. 


kv 


Brahman  is  not  made  up  of  matter.—  Evolution  of 
material  objects.—  Evolution  of  the  Virdj  and  the  Sdtra. 

— Ak&sa  is  not  unborn.  —The  air  is  not  unborn.—  Brahman 
has  no  birth.—  How  fire  is  evolved  from  Brahman.***  Water 
is  evolved  from  Brahman.—  ‘ Food’  means  earth.—  Brah- 
man is  the  essential  cause  of  all  evolved  things. — Dissolu- 
tion occurs  in  the  reverse  order  of  Evolution..—  No  Self* 
contradiction  in  the  Srutias  to  Evolution.  pp.  29i-^l||^ 

Chapter  Vll.  Maya  and  lavara. 

Mayd  described.—  Md.y&  is  a fact  of  common  experience. 

— Miy^l  as  inexplicable.-^  May&  as  a non-entity.— 
M&y&  is  rooted  in  the  pure  Atman.—  Mliy&  tends  to  make 
Atman  the  more  luminous.—  M&y&  differentiates  Atman  into 
Jiva  and  Isvara.-  Miyd  and  the  Universe.—  Mfty4  as  a 
wonder-worker. — The  universe  is  a Miyi.—  Various  views 
as  to  the  origin  and  purpose  of  Creation.—  Orthodox  theory 
as  to  the  nature  of  Evolution.—  l$vara  is  the  Dispenser  of 
the  fruits  of  actions — Isvara  is  both  the  efficient  and  the 
material  Cause  of  the  Universe — No  self-contradiction  in 
the  Upanishads  as  to  the  Brahma-Vfbda.—  The  Upanishads 
do  not  support  other  doctrines  of  Cause.  pp.  322-340. 

Chapter  Vlll.  On  the  Defensive. 

Defence  of  the  Vedic  Doctrine.—  The  Veda  versus  the 
Sankhya  system—  The  Veda  versus  the  Yoga  system.—  The 
Veda  versus  the  Sftnkhya  reasoning — The  Veda  versus  em- 
pirical reasoning  generally — The  Veda  versus  sensuous 
perception.—  Non-duality  in  duality,  how  far  real.—  Isvara 
untainted  by  good  and  evil.—  Duality  evolved  from  non- 
duality.—The  theory  of  transformation  mamtained.— 


dOMtBNtS. 


xn 

Though  incorporeal,  Brahman  possesses  M&7&.—  Evolution 
as  an  act  of  sport.—  tsvara  acquitted  of  partiality  and 
eruelty.—  The  Attributeless  as  the  material  Cause. 

PP-  34i-355‘ 

Chapter  IX.  On  the  Offensive. 

The  Vedftnta  the  Sankhya.— The  Ved&nta  vems 
j||e  Vaueshika—  How  far  the  Vaiseshika  theory  supports 
mb  Brahma-vida.—  The  Vaiseshika  theory  of  creation  over- 
thrown.— The  Ved&nta  versus  Buddhist—  Realist. The 

Ved&nta  versus  Buddhistic  Idealism.—  The  Veddntin  versus 
the  Arhats.—  The  Ved4nta  versus  Theism. — The  VedAnta 
versus  the  P&hchar&tra.  pp.  356-368. 

Chapter.  X.  The  Evil  and  its  Cure. 

The  seed  of  human  organism.—  The  seed  developing  into 
man.—  The  action  of  ‘ five  fires’  in  the  birth  of  man.— 
Limitation  of  the  Self  as  man  by  Avidy^.—  Avidyi  and  its 
proof. — The  growth  of  the  subtle  body.—  Evolution  of 
manas,  etc.,  from  Consciousness.—  The  Self  is  unborn.— 

Review  of  the  past  lives  just  before  birth The  misery  of 

birth  and  infancy — The  misery  of  youth.—  The  misery  of 
old  age.—  The  misery  of  death  and  the  after-career.—  The 
study  of  kosas  and  its  purpose — SjunsAra  is  due  to  Avidy4, 
— Brahmavidyfl.  is  intended  for  man The  process  of  im- 

parting Brahmavidy4.—  The  one  Self  differentiated  into  the 
Ego  and  the  non-Ego — The  ko5as,  subjective  and  objec- 
tive.— The  relation  between  the  subjective  and  the  objec- 
tive kosas — The  Self  beyond — Contemplation  of  the 
sheaths  as  altars  of  sacred  fire The  purpose  of  the  con- 

templation of  kosas. 


pp.  369-386. 


CONTENTS. 


xvii 

Chapter  XL  Annamaya-kOEa. 

Introduction.—  Composition  of  the  Annamaya-koia«— • 
Contemplation  of  the  Annamaya-kosa—  A maotra  on  the 
unity  of  the  Vira.j  and  the  Annamaya.—  The  Virflj—  Con- 
templation of  the  Virij  and  its  fruits—  The  VirSj  as  the 
nourisher  and  the  destroyer — Knowledge  of  the  Annamaya- 
ko5a  is  a stepping-stone  to  knowledge  of  Brahman. 

pp.  387-404* 

Chapter  XII.  Pranamaya-kosa. 

The  purpose  of  the  sequel—  The  Pr4«amaya-kosa— 
The  effect  is  one  with  the  cause—  Composition  of  the 
Pri»amaya-ko5a — The  physical  body  is  not  the  Self.^ 
Pr4»a  has  a birth.—  Priwa  is  a distinct  principle.—  The 
limited  size  of  the  principle  of  Pra/za — Contemplation  of 
the  Prawamaya.—  Pr^wa,  the  Universal  Life.  pp.  405-425. 

Chapter  XIIL  Manomaya-kosa. 

From  Pr^wamaya  to  Manomaya.—  Manas.—  Senses  are 
born  of  the  Paramitman — The  senses  are  eleven  in  num- 
ber.— The  senses  are  not  all-pervading.—  The  senses  are 
dependent  on  Devas — The  senses  are  distinct  from  Pr&na 
proper. — Manas  is  the  chief  among  the  senses. — Contem- 
plation of  the  Manomaya—  What  the  Veda  in  reality  is— 
Brahman  beyond  speech  and  thought—  Fearlessness,  the 
fruit  of  the  Contemplation. — The  outcome  of  the  study  of 
the  Manomaya.  pp.  426-444. 

Chapter  XIV.  Vijnanamaya«kosa. 

Relation  between  the  Manomaya  and  the  Vijhinama- 
ya—  The  nature  of  the  Vijhanamaya^  Contemplation  of 

c 


xvni 


CONTENTS. 


the  Vijnanamaya*—  Contemplation  of  Vijn&naas  the  Hiran- 
yagarbha.^  The  fruit  of  the  contemplation  of  the  Hiraeya- 
garbha.**^  How  Brahmavidy&  is  acquired  by  persons  other 
than  the  twice-born.—  Devas  acquire  Brahmayidy&  through 
the  Veda.—  Is  Brahmavidyd  accessible  to  the  5i!idras  ?— 
The  Up&saka  liberated  before  death. The  outcome  of  the 
study  of  the  VijMnamaya.  pp.  445—  468. 

Chapter  XV.  Anandamaya-kosa. 

The  nature  of  the  Anandaraaya  self.—  The  Anandamaya 
is  hot  Brahman.—  The  bliss  of  the  Anandamaya-kosa.— 
Bliss  is  a positive  state.—  Theories  of  pleasure.—  The 

Vedintin’s  theory  of  pleasure Contemplation  of  the  Ahan- 

damaya.—  Concentration  in  Brahman  attained.—  Brahman, 
the  one  Being.— Brahman,  the  Innermost  Self.—  The  Anan- 
damaya construed  as  the  Param&tman — The  Anandamaya 
construed  as  the  Jiva,— Brahman,  the  sole  theme  of  the 
Upanishads.  - Conclusion.  pp.  469-502. 


CONTENTS. 


XIX 


BOOK  11. 

{Anandavalli  or  Brahmavalli) 
{Continued). 

B,-  BRAHMAVIDYA  EXPLAINED. 

Chapter  I.  Questions. 

The  purpose  of  the  sequel.— Sravawa  and  Manana.— The 
Questions  of  the  Disciple.  Pp,  507 — 51 1. 

Chapter  II.  Brahman’s  existence  as  Creator. 

The  purpose  of  the  sequel. — Brahman  exists.— Brahman’s 
Creative  Will. — Brahman  is  independent  of  desires. — 
Duality  is  an  illusion.— Brahman’s  Creative  Thought. — A 
summary  of  the  foregoing  argument.  Pp.  512—523. 

Chapter  III.  Brahman’s  existence  as  Jiva. 

Brahman  entering  the  Universe. — No  literal  interpreta- 
tion of  entering  is  possible. — The  true  import  of  the  pas- 
sage.— A clear  summary  of  the  discussion. — Another 
passage  of  the  same  import.— The  one  Life  and  Its  aspects. 
— Brahman  does  not  literally  enter  the  Universe. — Enter- 
ing means  manifestation. — Brahman  in  manifestation  is  un- 
affected by  multiplicity. — Brahman  as  the  Ego  is  unaffected 
by  pleasure  and  pain.— Linga-deha.is  the  up&dhi  of  jiva. 

Chapter  IV.  The  Jiva. 

Jiva  is  not  the  Creator. — Jiva  is  not  subject  to  birth  and 
death. — Jiva  is  not  of  the  Creation.-  Jiva  is  the  self-consci- 
ous principle.  Jiva  is  all-pervading. — Jiva  is  the  agent. — 
Jiva’s  agency  is  illusory. — Jiva  is  impelled  to  action  by 
tsvara. — Jiva  as  distinguished  from  tsvara.  Pp.  550 — 559. 


XX 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter  V.  Jlva'a  career  after  death. 

Jlva  carries  to  the  other  worlds  the  seeds  of  the  future 
body. — ^Jiva  descends  it  earth  with  residual  karma. — The 
sinful  do  not  reach  svarga.— Jiva’s  return  from  svarga. — 
The  relative  speed  of  jiva  when  returning.— Jtva  is  not  born 
as  a plant.  Pp.  560—566. 

Chapter  VI.  States  of  Consciousness. 

The  objects  seen  in  svapna  are  unreal.— Where  jiva  lies 
in  Sushupti. — Identity  of  Jiva  who  sleeps  and  wakes. — 
Swoon  is  a distinct  state  of  consciousness.— Elimination  of 
foreign  elements  from  jiva.  Pp.  567 — 573. 

Chapter  Vll.  Brahman  as  external  objects. 

Form  and  the  formless.— The  conscious  and  the  uncon- 
scious.— The  real  and  the  false. — The  One  Reality. — 
Brahman  experienced  by  the  wise. — The  bearing  of  the 
present  section. — Brahman  the  self-cause. — Brahman,  the 
Good  Deed.  Pp.  574—583. 

Chapter  VIII.  Brahman  the  source  of  joy. 

Brahman  the  source  of  the  supersensiious  pleasure. — 
Brahman  is  the  source  of  activity  and  sensual  pleasure. 

Pp.  584—589. 

Chapter  IX.  Who  attains  Brahman  ? 

The  purpose  of  the  sequel. — True  knowledge  leads  to 
fearlessness. — Brahman’s  real  nature. — Brahman  is  the 
Self. — Knowledge  of  duality  causes  fear. — Duality  is  a 
creature  of  avidy&. — Brahman’s  existence  as  the  source  of 
fear  .—The  non-dual  Self. — Brahman  as  the  Ruler  of  the 
Dniverse.  Pp.  590—605, 


CONTENTS. 


xxi 


Chapter  X.  Brahman  the  Infinite  Bliss* 

The  purpose  of  the  sequel.— Is  Brahman's  Bliss  inherent 
or  generated  ? — Brahman's  Bliss^  to  be  comprehended 
through  sensual  pleasure. — The  unit  of  human  bliss. — ^The 
bliss  of  the  Manushya-Gandharvas. — The  conditions  of 
higher  bliss. — Peace  is  the  essential  condition  of  bliss. — 
The  bliss  of  the  Deva-Gandharvas. — The  bliss  of  the  Pitiis. 
—The  bliss  of  the  Devas  born  in  the  Ajina. — The  bliss  of 
the  Karma-Devas.— The  bliss  of  Devas  proper.— .The  bliss  of 
Indra.— The  bliss  of  Brihaspati. — The  bliss  of  the  Praji- 
pati. — The  bliss  of  the  Hirawyagarbha.— Freedom  from 
desire  is  the  pre-eminent  condition  of  bliss.— The  Supreme 
Bliss  and  its  manifestations. — The  Supreme  Bliss  is  one 
and  non-dual.  Pp.  606—628. 

Chapter  XI.  Brahman  the  Self. 

The  purpose  of  the  sequel. — To  know  Brahman  is  to  at- 
tam  Him. — What  is  truth,  Duality  or  Non-Duality  ? — 
Non-duality  is  truth,  because  duality  is  a creature  of  igno- 
rance.— Fearlessness  in  moksha  is  compatible  only  with 
non-duality. — Duality  is  not  perceived  by  Atman  in  His 
natural  state. — Fearlessness  is  incompatible  with  duality. — 
Ignorance  and  knowledge  are  not  the  attributes  of  the  Self. 
—Attainment  is  knowledge. — A summary  of  the  foregoing 
discussion.  Pp.  629—650. 

Chapter  XII.  The  Unconditioned  Brahman. 

Brahman  is  beyond  speech  and  thought. — The  Word 
removes  our  ignorance  of  Brahman  without  denoting  Him. 
— The  doctrine  of  the  injunction  of  Brahma-jnAna  refuted. 
—The  One  Self  is  self-luminous,  unconditioned,  immutable, 


C0NTBNT6. 


ncU 


non-dual.— Knowledge  of  the  one  Self  imparted  by  Revela- 
tion.— No  external  evidence  is  necessary  to  prove  the  Self. 
— Knowledge  of  Brahman  cannot  be  enjoined. — The  autho- 
rity.of  the  ‘anuv&das’. — The  authority  of  assertive  sentences. 
— The  scope  of  injunction  in  the  Vedanta. — Wisdom  eradi- 
cates fear. — S&yaaa’s  explanation  of  the  verse Positive 

and  native  definitions  of  Brahman — Brahman  is  not 
denied.  Pp.  651— 683. 

Chapter  XIII.  Beyond  Works. 

The  enlightened  one  is  not  afflicted  by  anxiety  about 
good  and  evil — The  enlightened  one  derives  strength  from 
■good  and  evil.—  Conclusion  of  the  Anandavalli.—  The  en- 
lightened one  is  above  sin. — The  enlightened  one  is  above 
good  deeds. — The  indestructibility  of  the  pr&rabdha-karma. 

— The  indestructibility  and  use  of  obligatory  acts All 

obl^atory  acts  are  aids  to  Wisdom Liberation  neces- 

sarily accrues  from  right  knowledge — Persistence  of 
-wisdom  through  subsequent  incarnations.  Pp.  684—  697. 


CONTENTS. 


zdH 


BOOK  III. 

(Bhrigu-Valli.) 

Investigation  of  Brahman. 

Peace-chant,  p.  701. 

Chapter  I.  How  to  inveatigrate  Brahman. 

The  purpose  of  the  sequel — The  bearing  of  the  legends  in 
the  Upanishads—  Gateways  to  the  knowledge  of  Brah- 
man.— Brahman  defined  indirectly Investigation  ofBrah- 

man  is  necessary.—  Brahman  can  be  defined.—  Brahman 
is  the  source  of  the  Veda.—  The  Veda  is  the  sole  authority 
regarding  Brahman—  The  Upanishad  is  the  authority 
regarding  Brahman — Injunction  is  not  the  main  theme  of 
the  Upanishads.—  The  threefold  process  of  investigation. 
— Necessity  of  mental  purity.—  Necessity  of  Meditation.— 
Investigation  to  be  continued  till  intuition  is  attained.— 
Brahman  as  the  cause  of  the  universe.—  Brahman  as  omni- 
scient and  omnipotent.—  To  define  Brahman  as  the  cause 
is  to  define  Him  indirectly—  This  definition  is  not  incom- 
patible with  Brahman’s  non-duality—  Mky&  as  Brahman’s 
co-efficient.—  Devotion  is  the  essential  condition  of  Brahma- 
vidyi—  The  5ruti  recognises  the  order  of  celibates.—  No 
descent  from  a higher  to  a lower  stage  is  permitted.— 
Penance  for  deviation  from  the  path  of  celibacy—  Penance 
ensures  purity  only  in  future  life.—  Devotion  to  Brahman 
is  incompatible  with  works.  Pp,  702—  739. 

Chapter  il.  Realisation  of  Brahman. 

Food  realised  as  Brahman.—  The  first  finding  is  not 
satisfactory.—  Devotion  is  necessary  at  ail  stages—  Life- 


CONTENTS. 


ntr 

principles  as  Brahm^*.^  Manas  as  Brahman.—  Intelli- 
gence as  Brahman.—  Bliss  as  Brahman.—  Devotion  is  the 
sole  means  to  Brahma vidy&.—  Bliss  is  the  Self.—  The 
fruits  of  wisdom^—  Never  condemn  food.  Pp.  740—  760. 

Chapter  IIL  Some  minor  contemplations. 

Contemplation  of  food  as  Brahman.—  Contemplation  of 
life  and  body.— Contemplation  of  water  and  fire.— Con- 
templation of  Earth  and  Ether.—  Contemplation  of  Brah- 
man in  man.—  Contemplation  of  Brahman  in  the  Cosmic 
Being—  Contemplation  of  Brahman  in  some  special  as- 
pects. Pp.  761—  775. 

Chapter  IV.  Final  Attainment. 

The  Atman  is  ever  beyond  Sawsdra — Unity  of  the  Self 
and  Brahman—  The  enlightened  one  becomes  a Jlvan- 

mukta. — The  Jivanmukta’s  song  of  unity  with  all 

Knowledge  ensures  Bliss.  Pp.  776—  791, 


TAITTIRIYA-UPANISHAD 

WITH  COMMENTARIES- 


SANKARA'CHA'RYA’S  INTRODUCTION. 


From  whom  is  born  the  whole  universe,  in  whom 
alone  it  is  dissolved,  and  by  whom  alone  is  this  upheld, — 
to  that  Self  who  is  Consciousness  be  this  bow ! • 

I bow  ever  to  those  Gurus  by  whom  all  these  Upa- 
nishads  have  been  explained  heretofore,  who  have 
explained  all  words  and  sentences  as  well  as  all  kinds 
of  proof. 

For  the  benefit  of  those  who  wish  to  have  a clear 
view  of  the  essence  of  the  Taittiriyaka,  has  the  follow- 
ing commentary  been  got  up  by  me  by  the  grace  of  the 
Teacher.* 


* This  verso  occurs  also  in  the  published  edition  of  Snretva- 
rocharya's  Yartika ; and  ^nandagiri  gives  different  glosses  under 
the  Bhashya  and  the  Yartika. 


INTRODUCTIOK. 


a 


Brahmavidya  the  specific  theme  of  the 
Upanishad. 

In  the  former  section*  were  made  known  the  obliga- 
tory acts,  nityani  karm^iwi,  intended  for  the  eradication 
of  sins  already  incurred,  as  well  as  k^^my^^ni  karmani, 
those  acts  by  which  to  secure  some  specific  objects,  and 
which  are  intended  for.  the  benefit  of  those  who  seek 
those  objects. 

Now  the  Sruti  commences  Brahma- vidyrt  with  a 
view  to  remove  the  cause  which  leads  one  to  have  re- 


*ipu,  in  the  section  termed  Brahmana,  and  which  enjoins  works. 
The  works  here  enjoined  are  not  intended  to  secure  moksha  ; for, 
the  Sruti  “By  Dharma  one  wards  off  sin/’  declares  that  they 
are  intended  to  destroy  sins  already  incurred.  Even  Jaimini, 
who  copamences  his  Karma-mimamsa  with  the  aphorism  “ Now 
then  commences  an  enquiiy  into  Dharma”  excludes  all  inquiry 
into  the  Thing  in  Itself  ; so  that  this  specific  theme  of  tho  TJpa- 
nishad  has  not  been  dealt  with  in  the  section  which  treats  of 
works,  1.  e.,  of  things  that  are  to  be  brought  into  existence  by 
effort. 

The  ritiiallstifc  section  of  theVeda  treats  not  only  of  the  works 
above  referred  to,  which  one  is  bound  to  do  so  long  as  one  lives, 
but  also  of  those  which  arc  intended  to  secure  objects  of  desire 
pertaining  to  this  world  or  the  3jext.  Neither  among  these  acts 
are  there  any  intended  to  l^ecure  moksha,  inasmuch  as  the 
/S'ruti  does  not  enjoin  any  of  them  as  a means  thereto  ; whereas  it 
expressly  enjoins  them  as  a means  of  securing  worldly  ends. 
The  works  enjoined  in  the  ritualistic  section  of  the  Veda  thus 
serve  to  secure  such  things  as  fall  within  the  limits  of  samsara 
or  mundane  existence. 


INTRODUCTION. 


I 


course  to  works  (karma.)  Desire  (kama)  must  be  the 
cause  of  works,  because  it  is  desire  that  urges  one  to 
work.  In  fact,  activity  is  there  where  desire.is.  Indeed, 
no  activity  arises  in  those  who  have  attained  all  desires, 
inasmuch  as  they  rest  in  their  own  Self  when  there  is  no 
desire.  When  one  seeks  for  >3tman,  the  Self,  then  OB$ 
has  attained  all  desires.  And  the  Self  is  Brahman.  The 
Sruti,  indeed,  speaks  of  the  knower  of  Brahman  attain- 
ing the  Supreme  End.  Wherefore,  one  is  said  to  attain 
the  supreme  end  when  one  abides  in  one’s  own  Self,  on 
the  removal  of  avidya  or  ignorance  of  the  nature  of 
Brahman,  as  the  Sruti  declar<?s  in  such  passages  as  the 
following: 

“ He  attains  the  Fearless,  the  firm  abode”  * 

“He  unites  with  this  blissful  Self.”  t 

The  Upanishad  imparts  knowledge  concerning  the  Thing 
in  Itself ; for,  that  knowledge  alone  can  put  an  end  to  the 
desires  which  lead  one  to  have  recourse  to  works.  Bondage 
is  caused  by  desire,  and  liberation  by  absence  of  desire,  as 
taught  by  the  Sruti  with  particular  care  in  the  following 
passages : 

“ As  his  desire,  so  is  his  resolve ; as  his  resolve,  so  his 

work  ; as  his  work,  so  his  reward But  he  who 

does  not  desire,  who  has  no  desires,  who  is  beyond 
desire,  whose  desires  have  been  attained,  whose  object 


* Taittiriya-Upanishad  2-7-1. 

t Ibid.  2-8-1.  The  two  passages  hero  quoted  occur  in  a 
section  which  treats  of  the  Self  in  the  4nandamaya-koia. 


4 


IKTSOOUCTIOK. 


of  de^  is  iftman,  his  sense>organs  do  not  depart. 
Being  the  very  Brahman,  he  attains  to  Brahman.” 

False  conception  regardmg  the  Thing  in  Itself, — ^which  is 
in  fact  devoid  of  all  duality,  which  is  ever  none  other  than 
iftman,  our  own  Self, — is  due  to  ignorance  of  Its  real  nature. 
False  conception  gives  rise  to  desires,  and  these  lead  to 
action.  How  can  action,  which  thus  arises  from  ignorance 
of  iftman,  ever  co-exist  with  the  knowledge  of  ^tman. 
Therefore,  knowledge  of  A tman  is  quite  an  effective  antidote 
to  all  activities. 

Doctrine  of  Salvation  by  works  alone. 

. (Mtmamsaka’s  objection :)— Interested  (kamya)  and  for- 
bidden (pratishiddha)  acts  being  avoided,  the  fruits  of 
arabdha— the  karma  whose  fruits  are  being  reaped  in 
the  present  birth — being  exhausted  by  enjoyment,  all 
sins  of  omission  being  warded  off  by  the  performance 
of  obligatory  duties,  without  any  effort  t at  all  one  can 
attain  moksha,  which  consists  in  dwelling  in  one’s  own 
Self.  : 

Or,  it  may  be  that,  karma  (vedic  ritual)  being  the  means 


• Brihadaranjaka-Upanishad,  4-4-5,  6. 
t There  existing  no  cause  which  can  give  rise  to  another  birth. 
{ This  theory  assumes  that  all  past  karma  combines  together 
and  gives  rise  to  one  birth,  and  that  the  fruits  of  the  whole  of 
that  past  karma  can  be  exhausted  in  that  one  birth  alone  without 
any  residual  karma  being  left  which  may  give  rise  to  more  births 
in  the  {utore, 


INTRODUCTION. 


5 


to  the  unsurpas^d  pleasure  spoken  of  as  svarga,* 
moksha  is  secured  by  means  of  karma  alone. 

Thus,  the  soi-disant  Mt nuimsakas  hold  that  he  who  seeks 
moksha  should  resort  to  karma,  and  that  for  him  no  such 
thing  as  knowledge  of  .dtman  is  necessary. 

No  Salvation  by  works  alone. 

(Brahmav«din’s  awswer :) — Not  so.  It  is  indeed  quite 
possible  that  innumerable  karmas  generated  in  the 
innumerable  past  births  and  productive  of  opposite 
effects  exist,  those  which  have  already  begun  their 
effects  as  well  as  those  which  have  not.  Wherefore, 
since  such  of  the  karmas  as  have  not  yet  begun  their 
effects  cannot  be  exhausted  in  this  one  birth  by  way  of 
enjoying  their  fruits,  there  cannot  but  be  another  birth 
brought  about  by  the  residual  karma.  The  existence 
of  such  residual  karma  is  declared  in  hundreds  of  pass- 
ages in  the  sruti  and  the  smriti,  such  as  the  following : 
“ Among  them,  those  of  good  conduct  here 
soon  attain  to  a good  womb.”  I 

“ Then,  on  returning  to  this  world,  he  obtains,  by 

* According  to  the  Mimamsaka,  ‘svarga’  means  unsurpassed 
pleasure';  and  this  unsurpassed  pleasure  can  accrue  in  no  other 
state  than  that  of  moksha  or  disembodied  state.  Therefore 
according  to  the  Mimamsaka,  the  Sruti  teaches  that  the  vedic 
ritual  such  as  jyotishtoma,  which  is  said  to  be  the  means  of  at- 
taining svarga,  is  the  only  means  to  moksha,  the  state  of  dis- 
embodied spirit. 

+ Chhondogya-Upanishad  5-10-7. 


INTROUUCilON. 


virtue  of  the  remainder  of  merit,  birth  in  a distinguished 
family 

Moreover,  the  fruits  of  brahmanicide  and  of  the 
Asvamedha  or  horse-sacrifice  are  so  opposed  to  each 
other  that  the  fruits  of  both  cannot  be  reaped  in  one 
and  the  same  birth.  On  the  other  hand,  they  have  to  be 
reaped  in  two  different  bodies,  one  quite  T«raasic  and 
other  quite  Sattvic.  Further,  in  the  Dharmasastras, — 
in  the  treatises  on  civil  and  religious  law, — it  is  said  that 
the  effect  of  even  one  karma  done  here  runs  through  at 
least  seven  births.  It  needs  no  saying  that  innumera- 
ble karmas  must  give  rise  to  innumerable  births. 

(Mimamsaka.) — Nitya  or  obligatory  rites  are  intended 
to  destroy  good  and  evil  karmas  which  have  not  yet  be- 
gun their  effects.t 

(Brahmavadin  :)— No,  because  sin  (pratyavaya)  is  said 
to  accrue  from  their  omission.  Sin  (pratyavaya)  indeed 
means  something  evil  ;l  and  it  being  admitted  that  the 
obligatory  rites  are  intended  to  avoid  the  coming  evil, — 
i.  e,,  the  sin  of  omitting  the  obligatory  duties, — they  are 
not  intended  for  the  destruction  of  the  anarabdha-karma, 
that  portion  of  the  past  karma  which  has  not  yet  begun 
its  effect.  Even  granting  that  the  nitya  or  obligatory 
rites  are  intended  for  the  destruction  of  anarabdha-kar- 
ma, even  then  they  can  destroy  the  impure  deed  alone, 

• .4pastamba-Dharma8«tra,  2-2-3. 

f Now  the  Mtmamsaka  argues,  admitting  the  existence  of  san- 
chita-karma,  that  portion  of  the  past  karma  which  has  not  yet 
begun  its  fruits. 

\ i.  e.,  the  effect  of  sinful  acts,— -(Sur) ; the  coming  evil.— (A.) 


INTRODUCTION. 


1 


but  not  the  pure  one,  which  is  unopposed  to  it.  In- 
deed, since  the  karma  which  is  productive  of  good  is 
a pure  one,  it  cannot  be  opposed  to  the  nitya  or  obli- 
gatory acts.  Properly  speaking,  it  is  a pure  act  and  an 
impure  one  which  are  opposed  to  each  other. 

Moreover,  in  the  absence  of  knowledge,  karma  in  its 
entirety  can  never  be  exhausted,  since  then,  in  the 
absence  of  knowledge,  those  desires  which  give  rise  to 
karma  cannot  cease.  In  fact  desires  spring  up  in  him 
who  knows  not  y4tman,  the  Self,  inasmuch  as  they  aim 
at  results  which  are  external  to  the  Self.  Desire  can 
never  arise  with  reference  to  one’s  own  Self,  as  He  is 
ever  present ; and  it  has  been  said  that  ^tman  Himself 
is  the  Supreme  Brahman. 

Further,  omission  of  nitya-karma  is  purely  negative  ; 
and  no  sin,  which  is  a positive  eifect,  can  ever  arise  from 
a mere  negative  circumstance.  Wherefore,  omission  of 
obligatory  duties  is  a mere  sign  indicative  of  the  exist- 
ence of  an  evil  tendency  resulting  from  sins  accumulat- 
ed in  the  past.  Thus  we  arc  not  at  a loss  to  explain 
the  force  of  the  present  participle  in  the  following 
passage : 

“ Omitting  the  prescribed  act,  or  performing  the 
forbidden  act,  or  being  addicted  to  sensual  en- 
joyments, man  will  have  a falL”^ 


* Manu  XL  44.  The  last  line  has  been  rendered  according  to 
.dnandagiri’s  reading.  According  to  some  of  the  published 
editions  it  must  be  rendered  as  follows ; “ Man  must  perform 
a penance,” 


8 


tNtRODUCflOK. 


Otherwise  we  would  be  led  to  conclude  that  a positive 
effect  springs  out  of  a mere  negative  fact, — a conclusion 
which  is  opposed  to  all  evidence.  Wherefore  it  does 
not  stand  to  reason  that,  without  any  special  effort,  one 
will  abide  in  one’s  own  Self, 

As  to  the  contention  that, — the  unsurpassed  pleasure 
termed  svarga  being  caused  by  karma, — moksha  is  pro- 
duced by  karma,  (we  reply)  it  cannot  be  ; for,  moksha  is 
eternal.  Indeed,  what  is  eternal  cannot  be  produced. 
In  our  ordinary  experience  we  find  that  what  is  pro- 
duced is  impermanent.  Therefore  moksha  is  not  a 
thing  produced  by  karma. 

No  Salvation  by  works  associated  with 
Contemplation. 

{Objection:) — Karma  associated  with  Vidya  (contem- 
plation) has  the  power  of  producing  what  is  eternal. 

(Answer:) — No,  because  of  a contradiction.  It  is  a 
contradiction  in  terms  to  say  that  what  is  eternal  is 
produced. 

By  induction  we  infer  the  general  law  that  what  is  pro- 
duced is  impermanent.  It  having  been  thus  ascertained 
that  impermanency  is  in  the  nature  of  all  born  things,  Vidy& 
can  never  alter  it. 

(Objection :) — What  has  been  destroyed  is  not  itself 
again  born.  Thus,  like  the  pradhvamsabhava — non- 
existence of  a thing,  known  as  destruction, — moksha  is 
eternal  and  is  yet  produced. 

(Answer :) — No  ; because  moksha  is  positive. 


INTRODUCTION. 


To  explain : we  mean  that  no  positive  result  of  an  act, 
such  as  a pot, — unlike  the  mere  negative  result,  such  as  the 
d^truction  of  a thing, — is  ever  found  eternal  in  our  experi- 
ence. If  moksha  be  a positive  result  of  an  act,  it  must  also 
be  impermanent. 

We  have  so  far  assumed  that  the  result  of  an  act  can  be 
purely  negative,  such  as  the  destruction  of  a thing.  Proper- 
ly speaking,  the  result  of  an  act  cannot  be  merely  negative. 
When  a pot  is  said  to  have  been  destroyed,  we  have  potshreds 
produced, — which  is  a positive  result ; and  these  potshreds 
are  no  doubt  as  impermanent  as  the  pot  itself.  No  mere 
abhava  or  absence  of  a thing  being  ever  the  result  of  an  act, 
it  is  a mere  play  upon  words  to  say  that  it  is  produced  by  an 
act.  All  effects,  such  as  the  pot,  ever  inhere  in  clay  etc., 
either  manifested  or  latent,  as  attributes  of  the  substances,  but 
never  in  the  mere  non-existence  (abhava).  Mere  non-exist- 
ence (abhava)  cannot  be  related  to  an  act  or  a quality.  Im- 
aginary in  itself,  it  can  never  be  related  to  any  other  thing. 
It  is  therefore  a mere  verbal  quibble  to  speak  of  abhava  as 
if  it  were  a thing  in  itself,  just  as  it  is  a verbal  quibble  to 
speak  of  the  body  of  a stone-image.  So  the  Bhashyakara 
says : 

To  say  that  pradhvamsfl^bhava, — non-existence  of  a 
thing  known  as  destruction, — is  produced  is  only  a verbal 
quibble,  inasmuch  as  nothing  specific  can  be  predicated 
of  non-existence.  Non-existence  is  indeed  only  the 
negative  of  existence.^  Just  as  existence,  though 


* Abhava  is  nothing  distinct  from  the  particular  thing  which 
is  said  to  be  absent.  It  being  opposed  to  bhava  or  being,  uo-* 
thing  positive  can  be  predicated  of  it.- 


xo 


INTRODUCTION. 


one  and  the  same  throughout,  is  yet  distinguished  by 
cloth,  pot,  and  so  on, — ^.g.,  we  speak  of  the  existence  of 
a cloth,  the  existence  of  a pot,  and  so  on, — so  also, 
though  abhava  or  non-existence  is  in  itself  devoid  of  all 
distinctions,  yet  it  is  spoken  of  as  different  and  in 
association  with  different  acts  or  qualities  as  though  it 
were  a substance  etc.*  Non-existence  cannot,  indeed,  t 
co-exist  with  attributes  as  the  blue  lotus  co-exists  with 
its  attributes.  If  it  were  possessed  of  attributes,  then 
it  would  come  under  the  category  of  bhava  or  being. 

(Objection:) — The  agent  concerned  in  Vidy^  and 
Karma,  wisdom  and  works,  being  eternal,  moksha  which 
is  the  result  of  a continuous  current  of  Vidya  and 
Karma  is  also  eternal  like  the  Gangetic  current. 

(Answer:) — No  ; for,  agency  is  painful.  On  the  ces- 
sation of  agency,  moksha  ceases.  \ 

* As  to  the  contentioa  that  there  are  many  kinds  of  abhava 
all  of  which — except  pragabhava,  non-existence  of  a thing  prior 
to  its  birth — are  said  to  be  eternal,  we  reply  that,  though  of  one 
sort  in  itself,  it  is  yet  spoken  of  as  many  owing  to  the  multi- 
plicity of  acts  or  qualities  attributed  to  it.  In  point  of  fact, 
there  arc  not  many  distinct  abhavas. — (A) 
f It  cannot  be  disputed  that  attributes  co-exist  with  substances. 
So,  if  ghaia-pradhvamsabhaya — non-existence  of  a pot  known 
as  destruction — be  eternal  in  its  specific  character  as  such,  the 
concept  of  pot  which  enters  into  that  specific  concept  must 
also  be  eternal.  If  the  concept  of  pot  be  thus  eternal,  how 
is  a conception  of  its  non-existence  possible?  Existence  and 
non-existence  of  a pot  cannot  indeed  co-exist. 

X So  long  as  agency  which  is  painful  does  not  cease,  there  can 
be  no  moksha.  Neither  can  there  be  moksha  when  agency  ceases 
or  then  no  action  is  possible  which  is  .said  to  produce  moksha. 


iKtTRODUCTION. 


lx 


Wherefore  ^ moksha  consists  in  dwelling  in  one’s  own 
Self  on  the  cessation  of  avidy^r  and  kama,  on  account 
of  which  one  resorts  to  karma.  -4tman,  the  Self,  is 
Brahman ; and  since  a knowledge  of  Him  leads  to  the 
cessation  of  avidy^i,  the  Upanishad  which  treats  of 
Brahma-vidya  forms  a subject  of  special  study. 

No  cessation  of  avidy^i  can  ever  be  brought  about  except 
by  Brahma- vidy^j,  knowledge  of  Brahman.  Accordingly 
we  should  understand  that,  for  the  attainment  of  this 
knowledge,  the  Upanishad  should  be  studied.  This  vidya 
alone  serves  to  destroy  avidya  or  ignorance,  and  it  concerns 
none  other  than  i4tman,  our  own  Self. 

Etymology  of  Upanishad. 

Vidy^j  (knowledge  of  Brahman)  is  called  Upanishad 
because,  in  the  case  of  those  who  devote  themselves  to 
it,  the  (bonds  of)  conception,  birth,  decay,  etc.,  become 
unloosed,  or  because  it  destroys  (those  bonds)  altogether, 
or  because  it  leads  (the  devotee)  very  near  to  Brahman, 
or  because  therein  the  Highest  Good  is  seated.  As 
intended  to  produce  this  knowledge,  the  treatise  is  also 
called  Upanishad. 


* i.  e,  bcksauso  the  highest  good  cannot  be  attained  except  by 
knowledge  of  Brahman. 


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiii 


SI'KSHA'VALLI  OR  5A'MHITI'-UPANISHAD.) 


CONTEMPLATION. 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  three  divisions  of  the  Taittiriya  Upanishad. 

The  Taittinya- Upanishad  is  threefold — Sawhit*,  Varum, 
and  Yajnikf.  The  Upanishad  as  made  up  of  the  first 
prapa^haka  or  lecture  is  called  Samhitf,  because  the  study 
of  Samhita  forms  a part  of  it.  Varuwa  being  the  propagator 
of  the  tra4itional  lore  of  Brahmavidya  embodied  in  the 
second  and  third  lectures,  the  Upanishad  which  is  made  up 
of  the  two  lectures  is  called  after  him.  In  the  fourth  lecture 
Mantras  which  are  used  in  Yajnas  or  sacrificial  rites  are 
also  mentioned,  and  therefore  the  U panishad  as  made  up  of 
this  lecture  is  called  Yajnik*.  Of  these  three,  the  chief  is  the 
Varuni,  inasmuch  as  therein  is  expounded  the  Brahmavidya 
which  is  the  direct  means  to  man’s  simmum  bonum^  viz,,  the 
attaining  of  Brahman. 

Why  5a'nihiti'- Upanishad  should  come  first. 

It  should  not  be  objected  that,  as  the  chief  of  the  three, 
the  Varum-upanishad  should  be  first  read.  For,  to  acquire 
the  necessary  qualification  to  study  the  chief  one,  theSawhitf- 
Upanishad  should  be  read  first.  By  karma  or  Vedic  ritual, 
no  doubt,  the  seeker  of  knowledge  has  attained  the  necessary 
qualification  for  wisdom  as  well  as  a craving  for  wisdom ; 
still,  concentration  or  one-pointedness  of  mind  cannot  be 
brought  about  by  works.  On  the  other  hand,  owing  to  the 
multiplicity  of  activities,  there  will  be  a greater  tendency  to 
wander  away  from  the  one  point  of  study.  The  Kashas 
declare  that  concentration  or  one-pointedness  of  mind  is  es- 


x6 


CONTEMPLATION. 


sential  for  an  intuitive  realisation,  in  the  following  words: 
subtle  seers  alone,  with  a sharp  and  subtle 
mind,  is  He  beheld. 

This  one-pointedness  of  mind  is  produced  by  a practice 
of  dhyma,  meditation.  Hence  the  aphorisms  of  Patanjali 
describing  the  nature  of  Yoga  and  the  means  thereto  : 

‘‘Yoga  is  the  suppression  of  the  transformations 
of  the  thinking  principle.**  t 
“Their  suppression  is  secured  by  abhy/isa 
(practice)  and  vairagya  (non-attachment).**  J 

Wherefore  it  is  but  right  that,  for  a practice  of  dhy^ma  or 
meditation,  the  Sawhit^-Upanishad  should  come  first. 


* 'Kafha-TJpu..  3-12. 


tOp.  citl-2.  JOp.  cit  1-12 


LESSON  I. 

(First  Anuvdka) 

INVOCATION  TO  QOD. 


Devas  place  obstacles  in  men’s  way 
to  Brahmavidya. 

There  is  a popular  saying  that  many  are  the  obstacles 
which  beset  the  way  to  a good  end.  On  our  way  to  Brahma- 
vidy^i,  especially,  there  are  possibly  many  obstacles  placed 
by  Devas.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  endeavour  to 
remove  those  obstacles.  We  learn  from  the  following 
passage  of  the  Bnhad^irawyaka-upanishad  that  Devas  throw 
obstacles  in  the  way  to  Brahmavidya  : 

“ Now  whoever  worships  the  Devata  as  separate,  regard- 
ing ‘ He  is  separate,  I am  separate,’  he  knoweth  not.  As  a 
a cow  (is  to  us),  so  is  he  to  Devas.  Just  as  many  cows 
feed  one  man,  so  every  one  man  feeds  all  Devas.  When  one 
cow  alone  is  taken  away,  it  is  unpleasant;  how  much  more 
so  if  many  are  taken  away  ! Therefore  Devas  do  not  like 
that  men  should  know.” 

The  passage  may  be  explained  as  follows : — Men  are  of 
two  classes, — those  who  know  Brahman,  and  those  who 
resort  to  works.  That  he  who  knows  Brahman  becomes  all 
has  been  declared  in  the  preceding  passage  in  the  words 
“He  who  knows  thus  etc.”  1 Not  even  Devas  can  throw  ob- 
stacles in  the  way  of  a man  becoming  all  when  he  knows  the 

* Bri.  up  14-10,  t 

3 


i8  CONTEMPLATION.  [S'iksM--Vallu 

real  nature  of  Brahman.  For  the  man  that  knows  Brahman 
becomes  the  ^tman — the  very  Self — of  those  Devas,  as 
declared  in  the  same  Upanishad  in  the  following  words : 
“ And  Devas  cannot,  verily,  make  him  power- 
less ; he  becomes  their  very  self  indeed.” 

Having  thus  spoken  of  the  knower  of  Brahman  attaining 
the  summum  bontm,  the  Upanishad  proceeds  to  shew  the  con- 
trary result  in  the  case  of  him  who  has  no  such  knowledge, 
in  the  words  “ now  whoever  worships  Devata  as  separate” 
etc.  Now,  t.  e,,  after  describing  the  glory  of  Brahmavidya, 
the  power  of  avidya  or  ignorance  is  going  to  be  described. 
He  who  worships  the  Divine  Being  as  distinct  from  himself, 
thinking  that  the  Divine  Being,  the  object  of  worship,  is  dis- 
tinct from  himself  and  that  the  worshipper  himself  is  distinct 
from  the  Divine  Being, — the  worshipper,  thus  seeing  a dif- 
ference, knows  not  his  own  glory  of  being  himself  Brahman. 
Just  as  an  animal, — an  elephant  or  a horse, — not  aware  of 
its  own  superior  strength,  comes  under  the  control  of  men 
who  are  inferior  in  strength,  so  does  the  ignorant  worshipper 
come  under  the  control  of  Devas.  As  many  cattle — cows, 
sheep,  horses,  bulls,  buffaloes  etc. — subserve  the  happi- 
ness of  a single  man,  each  by  an  appropriate  service 
such  as  yielding  milk,  carrying  loads  etc.,  so  every  individu- 
al who  is  ignorant  subserves  the  happiness  of  Agni,  Swrya, 
Indra  and  other  Devas  by  way  of  offering  to  them  sacrificial 
oblations,  and  so  on.  Accordingly,  with  reference  to  Devas, 
every  individual  man  stands  in  the  place  of  all  animals.  A 
person,  for  instance,  who  owns  many  cattle  will  be  put  to 
much  pain  when  even  a single  animal  is  carried  away  by  a 
thief  or  a tiger ; how  much  more  so  when  many  are  carried 


* lUd, 


Afl^UVidka  L]  invocation  TO  GOD,  19 

away ! Therefore  Devas  are  put  to  much  pain  when  men 
realise  the  identity  of  the  Self  and  Brahman.  Since  the 
Veda  itself  thus  declares  that  it  is  quite  contrary  to  the 
wishes  of  the  Devas  that  men  should  acquire  Brahmavidya, 
it  is  quite  possible  that  Devas  may  place  obstacles  in  the 
way  of  men  who  wish  to  acquire  Brahmavidy^?.  This  has 
been  clearly  stated  in  the  Vartikas^ra  as  follows : 

“ Without  knowing  the  true  nature  of  his  own  Self,  a man 
works  to  nourish  external  Devas  by  sacrifices,  gifts  and 
other  rites,  as  a bull  works  for  a merchant.  A man,  though 
owning  many  cattle,  yet  suffers  much  pain  when  a single 
animal  is  stolen  away.  When  the  human  animal, — constitut- 
ing almost  the  whole  property  of  Devas, — is  carried  away  by 
the  thief  of  Brahmavidy^,  all  Devas  are  put  to  much 
pain.  Thus  it  will  be  painful  to  Devas  if  men  should  know 
the  identity  of  the  Self  and  Brahman,  and  therefore  they  ob- 
struct the  growth  of  wisdom.  Accordingly  we  find  even 
sannyasins  taking  to  a vicious  course  of  life,  being  thrown 
off  their  guard,  with  the  mind  turned  towards  external  ob- 
jects, bent  upon  quarrelling, — all  this  because  their  hearts 
are  poisoned  by  Devas.” 

Like  Devas,  even  i?ishis  and  others  are  obstructors.  This 
also  has  been  declared  in  a passage  in  the  Brihadarawyaka- 
upanishad,  which  is  briefly  explained  in  the  Vartikasara  as 
follows : 

“Identifying  himself  with  a caste  and  a religious  order,  he 
who  knows  not  the  Truth,  with  his  mind  turned  outward, 
forms  the  support  of  all  creatures  from  Devas  down  to  ants. 
The  householder  nourishes  all, — ^nourishes  Devas  by  wor- 
shipping and  offering  oblations  to  them,  nourishes  i^ishis  by 
studying  Vedas,  Pitns  by  Sraddha  rites,  men  by  gifts  of 
food  and  clothing  and  houses,  cattle  by  grass  and  \i^ater, 


20 


CONTEMPLATION. 


[S'tkshh-ValU. 

dogs  and  birds  by  the  leavings  and  seeds  of  grain.  Since 
no  one  does  an  act  of  good  who  has  not  been  won  by 
karma,  the  householder  must  have  been  acquired  by  Devas, 
etc.,  by  their  own  karma.  Devas  and  others  always  wish 
safety  as  much  to  the  householder,  who  does  good  to  them, 
as  to  their  own  bodies,  acquired  as  they  both  alike  are  by 
their  own  karma.  Neglect  of  works  is  the  result  of  acquiring 
a knowledge  of  truth ; and  it  is  a great  peril  to  which  the 
householder  is  subject.  This  peril,  indeed,  cannot  be  avert- 
ed by  Devas  and  all.  Neglect  of  works  from  sickness  or 
languor  is*  not  a permanent  loss,  since  man  may  do  them 
afterwards.  Accordingly,  Devas  and  others  thwart  man’s 
attempts  to  attain  wisdom  lest  his  knowledge  of  the  real 
nature  of  Brahman  may  deprive  them  of  their  whole  pro- 
perty.” 

The  same  truth  is  expressed  by  the  Kashas  in  the 
following  words : 

“ Of  whom  the  many  have  no  chance  to  even 
hear,  whom  many  cannot  know  though  they 
have  heard.’*  * 

And  our  Lord  has  stated  the  same  truth  in  the  following 
verse  : 

‘‘  Among  thousands  of  men  one  perchance 
strives  for  perfection.  Even  among  those  who 
strive  and  are  perfect,  only  one  perchance 
knows  Me  in  truth.”  t 

Mantra  for  the  removal  of  those  obstacles. 

Since  many  obstacles  lie  in  the  way  of  man’s  highest 
aspiration,  a mantra  to  be  recited  for  their  overthrow  is 


* Katlia  TJpa  2-7. 


t Bhagavadgita  YII.  3. 


Anuvhka  /.] 


INVOCATIOK  TO  GOO. 


31 


given  in  the  opening  section  of  the  Sai«hitfli-upanishad, 
But  this  mantra  is  not  given  at  the  commencement  of  the 
karma-laiwia  or  ritualistic  section,  because  performance  of 
rites  is  desired  even  by  the  Devas  and  others  and  therefore 
no  obstacles  will  lie  in  the  way.  It  may  perhaps  be  urged 
that  all  obstacles  to  wisdom  have  been  removed  by  the  per- 
formance of  sacrificial  works  and  gifts  enjoined  in  the 
former  section.  We  admit  that  it  is  true.  But  there  may  still 
exist  some  other  obstacles  which  are  removable  by  a recita- 
tion of  this  mantra.  Want  of  relish  for  knowledge  is  the 
first  obstacle,  and  this  is  the  result  of  the  great  sins  accu- 
mulated in  the  past  as  has  been  declared  in  the  Purawa  in 
the  following  words : 

“ Wisdom- worship  is  not  relishing  to  men 
of  great  sins ; on  the  other  hand,  wisdom- 
worship  even  looks  very  repulsive  in  itself.** 

And  those  great  sins  are  removed  by  sacrificial  rites  and 
g’fts  calculated  to  create  a taste  for  knowledge  of  Brahman. 
It  is  this  relish  which  is  spoken  of  as  vividisha,  desire  to 
know.  That  it  is  produced  by  sacrificial  rites,  etc.,  is  de- 
clared in  the  following  words : 

‘‘  Him  do  the  Brahmaw^s  seek  to  know  by 
sacrifice,  by  gifts,  by  the  austerity  of  restricted 
food.”  * 

Though  the  sacrificial  rites,  etc.,  when  performed  with  a 
view  to  their  immediate  specific  results  lead  to  enjoyments, 
to  sams^ra  or  mundane  life,  still  it  stands  to  reason  that 
when  dedicated  to  the  Lord  they  remove  the  great  sins 
which  obstruct  the  growth  of  wisdom.  Hence  the  words  of 
the  Lord : 


♦ Bri.  Up.  4-4-22. 


CONTEMPLATION.  [S'ikskh-V oB. 

**  He  who  does  actions,  placing  them  in 
Brahman,  abandoning  attachment,  is  not 
t^int^d  by  sin  as  a lotus-leaf  by  water.” 

And  a sign  of  this  extinction  of  sin  is  freedom  from  all 
attachment.  Accordingly  it  has  been  said  in  the  Naish- 
karmya-Siddhi, 

**  The  mind  getting  purer  by  works  dedicated 
to  the  /svara  manifests  non -attachment  for  the 
region  of  Brahma  and  the  like,  and  then  it  is 
perfect  in  purity.”  + 

In  the  Sreyomarga,  too,  it  is  said  : 

**  Man’s  conviction  of  the  worthlessness  of 
all  this  mundane  existence  from  Brahma 
down  to  plant  marks  the  ripening  of  his  acts 
dedicated  to  the  Divine  Being,  the  Antarya- 
min,  the  Indwelling  Regulator.” 

Though  the  obstacle  which  has  caused  a dislike  for 
knowledge  has  been  removed  on  attaining  vairagya  (non- 
attachment), still  many  obstacles  may  lie  in  the  way  of  upa- 
sana  (contemplation) — otherwise  spoken  of  as  yoga — by 
which  the  mind  becomes  one-pointed.  They  are  enume- 
rated by  Patanjali  as  follows : 

Disease,  dullness,  doubt,  carelessness,  sloth, 
worldly-mindedness,  misconception,  missing 
the  point,  and  unsteadiness  are  the  causes 
of  the  mind’s  distraction  and  they  are  the 
obstacles.”  I 

What  disfjosis  are  is  well-known.  Dullness  consists  in  the 
mind  being  unfit  for  work.  Owing  to  a preponderance  of 
tam^s  the  mind  does  sometimes  become  unfit  for  work. 


• Bhag.  Gita  V.  10.  f Op.  cit.  1-47.  J Yogasi^tras,  i.  30. 


Amvhkal.]  mvOCATIOM  TO  GOD. 

Doubt  is  the  absence  of  a determinate  knowledge  as  to  the 
object  of  contemplation.  Carelessness  is  the  occasional  neg- 
lect of  contemplation.  Sloth  is  indifference,  a tendency  to 
procrastinate.  Wovldly^mindedness  is  the  absence  of  vairtfgya 
or  non -attachment.  Misconception  is  the  false  notion  as  to 
the  nature  of  the  object  of  contemplation.  Missing  the  point 
is  marked  by  the  absence  of  a continuous  progress  through 
higher  and  higher  stages  in  the  concentration  of  mind. 
Unsteadiness  consists  in  engaging  in  contemplation  at  one 
time,  in  sacrificial  rites  and  gifts  at  another,  in  trade  Or 
agriculture  yet  again,  and  so  on. 

Here  follows  the  mantra  which  has  to  be  recited  for  the 
removal  of  obstacles  on  the  path  of  yoga’: 

^ ^ W>T:  I ^ I ^ 5T  ^ 

I ll^ll 

I.  Om.  May  Mitra  be  propitious  to  us,  and 
Varuna  propitious  be ; may  Aryaman  propitious 
be  to  us;  propitious  be  Indra  and  Bnhaspati  to 
us  ; to  us  propitious  may  Vishnu  of  vast  extent  be. 

Mitra  is  the  Devatatman,* — the  Shining  One,  the  In- 
telligence, the  Self  identifying  Himself  with,  and  mani- 
festing Himself  as,  day  and  prana  or  upward  current  of 
life-breath.  Varuna  is  the  Intelligence  concerned  with 
night  and  apana  or  downward  current  of  life-breath, 
Aryaman  with  the  eye  and  the  sun,  Indra  with  strength, 
Bnhaspati  with  speech  and  buddhi  or  intellect,  Vishnu 

* Here  it  is  Brahman,  the  Stitratman,  that  is  invoked  as 
Mitra,  eto.  (Su.  & A.; 


44  CONTEMPUTIOK.  [S,'ikshct-V (M. 

with  the  feet.  These  and  others  are  the  Devatas 
working  in  the  individual  organism. 

May  all  these  Devatas  be  propitious  to  us.  It  is 
only  when  these  are  propitious  to  us  that  wisdom  can 
be  studiedt,  retained  in  memory  and  imparted  to 
others  without  any  obstacle.  Hence  the  prayer  to 
them  to  be  propitious. 

Vishwu  is  said  to  be  of  vast  extent  because  in  His  n- 
carnation  as  Trivikrama  his  feet  were  very  extensive.  Or 
it  may  be  explained  thus  : Mitra  and  other  Devatas  or  In- 
telligences who  identify  themselves  with,  and  function 
through,  pr^ina  and  other  detached  members  of  the  bodily 
organism  have  been  mentioned.  The  Viraj-Purusha  who 
identifies  Himself  with,  and  functions  in,  the  whole  orga- 
nism has  yet  to  be  mentioned.  He  is  said  to  be  of  vagt 
extent  because  He  pervades  all,  having  the  whole  Brahmew- 
rfa  for  his  body.  Thus  the  Devas  working  severally  in 
the  whole  body  and  its  members  have  been  invoked  to  bless 
the  student  by  way  of  removing  all  obstacles. 

^ mm  I ^ STM  I I fqr^ 

Sm  m I m f I I 

I rRjFRnqg  I 3Tq^  HUT  I ^ qW^H  ^ II 

2.  Bow  to  Brahman ! Bow  to  Thee,  *Vayn ! 
Thou  art  indeed  Brahman  perceptible.  Thee 


Through  prana  or  life  and  sense-organs. — A. 
t This  study  consists  in  determining  the  import  of  the 
Vedantic  texts  by  sitting  at  the  feet  of  a teacher. — (A.) 


A mv^ka  /.  ] iNvocAtxoK  to  god.  25 

indeed  will  I declare  Brahman  perceptible. 
The  right  will  I declare ; and  I will  declare  the 
true.  May  That  protect  me;  may  That  protect 
the  teacher.  Me  may  That  protect ; may  It 
protect  the  teacher. 

The  seeker  of  Divine  Wisdom  bows  to  V^iyu  and  de- 
clares Him  as  Brahman  for  the  mitigation  of  all  troubles 
in  the  way  of  acquiring  Brahmavidya,  since  on  Him 
depend  the  fruits  of  all  actions.  To  Brahman,  t.  to 
V<^yu,  I make  this  bow. — Here  Vayu  himself  is  addresed 
Brahman. — Moreover,  since  Thou  art  Brahman  imme- 
diate, when  compared  with  the  external  organs  of 
sensation  such  as  the  eye,  I shall  declare  Thee  Brahman 
perceptible. 

As  Swtra, — or  Cosmic  Life,  Energy  and  Intelligence, — Pra- 
na. is  no  doubt  remote.  But  the  individualised  Prana  or  Vita- 
lity in  the  heart  is  present  to  everybody’s  consciousness  and 
is  therefore  immediate  when  compared  with  the  eye  etc., 
whose  existence  can  only  be  inferred  from  the  fact  of  colour 
etc.,  being  perceived  and  which  are  therefore  remote.  Prana 
is  spoken  of  as  Brahman  perceptible,  since  in  breathing  the 
body  expands  (the  root  ‘ brill  ’ means  to  expand).  Though 
not  the  very  Brahman,  Prana  is  addressed  as  such  just  in 
the  same  way  that  the  gate-keeper  of  a king’s  palace  is 
addressed  as  king  to  get  a ready  admission.  Pra»a  is  the 
gate-keeper  as  it  were  of  Brahman  in  the  heart.  The  seek- 
er of  liberation  who  wishes  to  see  Brahman  addresses  Prana 
as  Brahman  with  a view  to  praise  the  Intelligence  func- 
tioning in  the  vitality, — (A). 


4 


Jsk  d0NTEMPLAt!0!{f.  lS'ikshd--Vall\. 

the 'right — ue.^  that  which,  by  buddhi  or  intel- 
lect, is  determined  as  right,  as  having  been  taught  in 
the  scriptures,  and  so  constituting  our  duty — depends 
upon  liiee,  I will  declare  Thee  to  be  the  right.  The 
right  thing  when  executed  in  speech  and  by  the  body 
constitutes  the  true.  Since  this  execution,  too,  depends 
upon  Thee,  I shall  declare  Thyself  to  be  the  true.  May 
That,  that  Brahman  who  is  called  V^yu,  by  me  thus 
praised,  protect  me,  the  seeker  of  wisdom ; and  may  the 
same  Brahman  protect  the  teacher  by  way  of  granting 
him  power  to  teach. — The  repetition  of  “ May  That 
protect,”  etc.,  shows  earnestness. 

Now,  he  bows  to  the  Supreme  Brahman  who  impels  all 
these  Devas,— as  their  Antary^min,  as  the  Ruler  indwelling 
them  all, — in  the  words  “ Bow  to  Brahman.”  Brahman 
as  the  Swtra,  endued  with  jMna-sakti  and  kriya-sakti,  with 
the  powers  of  intelligence  and  force,  holds  in  their  places  all 
beings  of  life  that  put  on  the  body  of  Vayu,  as  declared 
in  the  following  passage  : — 

“V^iyu  verily,  0 Gautama,  is  that'Swtra;  by 
the  Swtra,  verily,  0 Gautama,  by  Vayu  is  this 
world  and  all  beings  are  woven,” 

Accordingly  the  student  bows  to  V^?yu  also.  Now%  the 
Antaryamin  is  not  addressed  in  the  second  person,  in- 
asmuch as  He  is  out  of  sight,  being  known  only  through 
the  scriptures  and  inference.  As  the  S«tratman,  however, 
i,  e,  as  Vayu,  Brahman  is  known  through  the  sense  of  touch. 
Xhip  very  idea  is  clearly  set  forth  in  the  words : ‘‘  Thou  art 
indeed  Brahman  perceptible.”  Because  Brahman,  mani- 


INVOCATlbN'  T6  GOD. 


Tested  through  the  upadhi  or  medium  of  Vayu,  is  perceptible 
to  the  senses,  the  student  says : I shall — in  the  sequel,  in 
the  passages  treating  of  up^sana  or  contemplative  wor- 
ship—-declare  Thee,  indeed,  as  Brahman  fit  for  S^kshatkara 
or  direct  perception.  It  is,  indeed,  the  Conditioned  Brahman 
who  after  a long  practice  of  contemplation  can  be  directly 
perceived  in  the  form  in  which  He  has  been  contemplated. 
Accordingly  the  Chhandogas  read  in  the  Sawrfilya-Vidya  as 
follows : 

(He  attains  to  the  /svara’s  state)  who  feels 
certain  that  ‘ departing  hence,  I shall  attain 
to  Him,’  and  to  whom  there  is  no  doubt.”  ''' 

The  Vajasaneyins  also  declare  ‘‘Becoming  the  Deva,'  he 
is  absorbed  in  the  Devas.”  i ‘ Becoming  the  Deva  ’ means, 
the  S^ksh^itk^ra  or  immediate  realisation  of  the  Deva*  in  this 
very  birth.  ‘ To  be  absorbed  in  the  Devas’  means  to  be- 
come the  Deva  himself  after  death.  Wherefore,  there  is 
nothing  untrue  in  what  I am  going  to  declare  in  the  sequel. 
On  the  other  hand,  I am  declaring  a real  fact  when  I 
say  that  ‘ Thou  art  Brahman  perceptible.’  ‘ To  declare  the 
right  ’ is  to  contemplate  in  the  mind  of  a real  fact  indeed  to 
be  expressed.  To  ‘ declare  the  true  ’ is  to  give  expression  to 
it  in  speech.  May  the  perceptible  Brahman  who  will  be 
spoken  of  in  the  sequel  protect  both  myself,  the  student 
and  the  teacher,  by  granting  to  us  respectively  the  power  to 
grasp  wisdom  and  the  power  to  impart  wisdom.  The  same 
idea  is  again  repeated  in  the  text, 

ii^ii 

3.  Om  ! Peace  ! Peace ! Peace  ! 


* Ohha.  Up.  3-44.  t 4-1-3. 


CONTEMPLATION. 


a8 


[S'ikshhMl 


The  uttering  of  the  word  ‘ peace  ’ three  times  is  in- 
tended to  ward  off  the  troubles  that  occur  on  the  path 
to  wisdom  owing  to  causes  operating  in  the  individual 
organism,  in  the  external  beings,  and  in  the  region  of 
Devas  or  Cosmic  Intelligences. 

Having  thus  prayed  to  the  perceptible  Brahman  as  Vayu, 
the  student  contemplates  by  means  of  Prawava  which  de- 
signates Him — the  imperceptible  Antaryamin,  the  Ruler 
within,  and  prays  for  the  removal  of  obstacles  : There  are 
three  kinds  of  troubles:  (i)  the ^ dhy^^tmika,  those  which 
arise  from  causes  operating  in  the  student’s  own  body, 
namely,  fever,  pain  in  the  head,  and  so  on;  (2)  the 
-<4  dhidaivika  the  troubles  from  the  Devas  etc. ; (3)  the 
dhibhautika,  troubles  arising  from  Yakshas,  Rakshasas, 
etc.  For  the  cessation  of  these  three,  the  word  ‘ peace  ’ is 
uttered  thrice.  That  the  contemplation  of  Jsvara  by  Prawava 
is  meant  for  the  removal  of  obstacles  is  formulated  by 
Patanjali  in  four  S«tras  as  follows  : 

“ /svara  is  a particular  soul  untouched  by 
affliction,  works,  fruition  and  impressions. 

His  designation  is  Prawava.  A constant 

repetition  of  it  and  an  intense  meditation  on 
its  meaning  should  be  practised.  Thence 
arises  a cognition  of  the  Inner  Consciousness 
and  absence  of  obstacles,” 


* Ypgftsiitras  i.-24-29. 


LESSON  II. 

{Second  Anuvdka) 

STUDY  OF  PHONETICS. 

The  Upanishad  being  mainly  intended  for  a know- 
ledge of  its  meaning,  there  should  be  no  want  of  care 
in  the  study  of  the  text.  * Therefore  here  follows  a 
lesson  on  Siksha,  the  doctrine  of  pronunciation. 

I ^ SWTIFTR:  I I 51T*I 

I || 

Om  ! We  shall  treat  of  the  phonetics  : sound, 
rhythm,  quantity,  strength,  modulation,  union. 
Thus  has  been  declared  the  lesson  on  phonetics. 

Phonetics  (Siksh^)  is  the  science  which  treats  of 
sounds  and  their  pronunciation.  Or,  the  word  ‘ siksha  * 
may  here  signify  the  sounds  etc.,  which  are  treated  of 
in  that  science,  i Sound  : such  as  *a\  Rhythm  : such  as 
ud^tta  or  high-pitched  tone.  Length  : short,  long,  etc. 
Strength  : intensity  of  effort.  Modulation  : pronunciation 
of  sounds  in  the  middle  tone.  Union  : conjunction  of 
several  sounds. — These  are  the  things  to  be  learnt. 
Thus  far  is  the  lesson  on  phonetics.  In  these  words 
the  Upanishad  concludes  the  present  subject  with  a 
view  to  proceed  to  the  next. 

* Otherwise,  the  intended  meaning  cannot  be  conveyed. 

t The  science  of  phonetics  being  expounded  elsewhere,  the 
second  interpretation  is  preferable. — (A.) 


30 


CONTEMPLATION. 


[SHksh^^Valll 

For  him  who,  by  the  recitation  of  the  mantra  given  in  the 
first  anuv^ka,  has  removed  obstacles,  it  is  proper  to  proceed 
with  the  text  treating  of  the  ways  of  contemplation  and  of 
the  nature  of  Brahman.  As  the  text  of  the  Upanishad  is 
mainly  intended  for  a knowledge  of  the  things  therein  treated 
of,  one  should  spare  no  pains  in  learning  the  text ; and  ac- 
cordingly the  Upanishad  proceeds  with  a lesson  on  phonetics. 
Here  one  may  ask,  what  if  one  be  careless  ? We  reply  : 
cary'essness  will  lead  to  evil.  It  has  been  said,  “ The  Man- 
tra, wh6n  wanting  in  rhythm  or  sound,  or  when  wrongly 
used,  conveys  not  the  intended  idea.  That  thunderbolt  of 
speech  will  ruin  the  worshipper  as  the  word  ‘ indra-satru  * 

did  owing  to  a fault  in  rhythm  ” " 

1 ■"  ■ 

* Pa^iini-Siksha.  52.  The  story  concerning  “ indra-satru  ” is 

told  in  the  Taittiriya-Samhita  2-4-12  as  follows : Tvash^a,  “ tho 
Yulcan  of  the  Hindus/’  whose  son  had  been  slain  by  Indra,  pre- 
pared to  get  up  the  Soma  sacrifice  without  Indra.  The  latter 
T^iahed  for  an  invitation  for  it,  but  Tvashfa  would  not  invito 
him,  who  had  slain  his  son.  Thou  Indra  interrupted  the  sacri- 
fice and  forcibly  drank  away  the  Soma  juice.  Thereupon Tvashta 
poured  into  the  fire  an  oblation  of  the  Soma  juice  that  then  re- 
mained, praying  “ 0 Agni,  grow  up  into  an  Iiidra-satru.”  Thence 
rose  a person,  named  Yritra,  who  began  to  extend  liis  form 
rapidly  over  the  three  regions  of  the  earfc)>,  the  interspace  and 
heaven:  Tvashia  was  afraid  of  his  growing  power  and  gave  Indra 
a^ consecrated  weapon  to  kill  him  with.  With  this  weapon  and 
with  the  whole  strength  of  Vishau  at  liis  back,  Indra  was  able  to 
draw  away  the  whole  strength  of  Yritra  into  himself  and  Yishnu, 
when  Yritra  became  absorbed  in  Indra’s  body.  Tvashia  of  course 
prayed  that  the  person  should  prove  Indra’s  destroyer ; but,  as 
he  had  mispronounced  “ Indra-satru,  ” with  udatta  (acute 
accent  or  high  tone)  on  the  first  instead  of  on  the  last  syllable, 
the  result^was  quite  the  contrary. 


Amvdka  s*rut)Y  phonjmpics.  ^ 

{Objection :) — If  so,  this  lesson  should  hpive  been  given 
the  karma-lw^w^a  or  ritualistic  section. 

(Answer:) — True.  For  that  very  reason, — as  the  lesson 
subserves  both  the  sections, — it  is  given  between  the  two 
sections. 

(Objection:) — Then,  as  subservient  to  both,  let  it  be  given 
at  the  beginning  of  the  Veda. 

(Answer:) — Though  subservient  to  both,  -it  has  to  be 
given  in  the  theosophical  section  in  order  to  shew  its  greater 
use  as  regards  knowledge.  As  to  the  ritualistic  section, 
despite  the  chance  of  misunderstanding  the  scriptures  owing 
to  error  in  the  rhythm  and  sound,  it  is  possible  to  do  away 
with  any  imperfection  in  the  performance  by  prayaschitta  qr 
an  expiatory  act.  Accordingly,  in  such  cases,  the  Veda 
gives  the  following  mantra  for  an  expiatory  offering  of 
clarified  butter  : 

Whatever  in  the  sacrifice  is  wrongly  done, 
unknown  or  known,  do,  O.Agni,  rectify  that 
(part)  of  this  (sacrifice) ; thou  indeed  knowest 
what  is  right.” 

On  the  contrary,  when  the  scriptures  in  the  theosophical 
section  are  wrongly  understood,  the  imperfection  cannot  be 
made  up  for.  Indeed,  it  is  not  possible  to  do  away  with 
wrong  knowledge  by  an  expiatory  act.  We  have  never  seen 
an  illusory  perception  of  serpent  in  a rope  removed  by  the 
reciting  of  the  G^yatrf  hymn.  Wherefore  no  expiatory  act 
whatever  is  enjoined  in  connection  with  knowledge,  in  the 
same  way  that  it  is  enjoined  in  connection  with  the  rituals^ 
On  the  contrary,  in  the  case  of  him  who,  striving  in  the  path 


* Taittirtya-Brahmana  3-7-11. 


32 


C0NT£MpLAT1oM. 


[S'ikshcL-Vallu 


of  wisdom  commits  any  sin,  the  scriptures  deny  all  ex- 
piation other  than  theosophy,  in  the  following  words  : 

“ If  the  yogin  should  unguardedly  commit  a 
sin,  he  should  resort  to  yoga  alone,  never  to 
any  other  thing  such  as  mantra.” 

Wherefore  the  lesson  on  the  phonetics  is  given  here  es- 
pecially to  enjoin  great  care  in  the  study  of  the  upanishads, 
so  that  there  may  be  no  defect  in  the  knowledge  acquired 
and  that  the  scripture  may  be  understood  aright. 

Modulation  (s^ma)  consists  in  reciting  the  text 

neither  too  fast  nor  too  slow,  in  pronouncing  ev^ery  sound 

according  to  its  proper  time As  to  the  six  things 

mentioned  here  the  Veda  should  be  recited  according  to  the 
directions  given  in  the  several  sciences  ; and  these  are  the 
only  six  things  in  the  science  of  phonetics  to  be  attended 
to. — Since  in  the  upanishad  “ siksha  ” and  other  words 
are  recited  in  one  neutral  accentless  “tone,  this  lesson  can- 
not indeed  insist  on  the  accentuation  of  radical  words  and 
terminations  as  taught  in  the  science  of  grammar  ; still  the 
accentuation  as  current  in  the  traditional  mode  of  recit- 
ing the  texts  should  be  learnt.  Though  it  does  not  enable 
us  to  acquire  any  special  knowledge  in  particular,  still, 
being  enjoined  in  this  lesson  on  phonetics,  it  may  be  of 
some — to  us  unknown — service.  That  unknown  service  may 
consist  in  the  removing  of  obstacles  placed  in  the  way  of  him 
who  engages  in  contemplation  and  seeks  to  acquire  wisdom. 


LESSON  III 

{Third  Amvaka^) 

CONTEMPLATION  OF  SAMHITA. 


In  the  second  lesson  has  been  shewn  in  what  particular 
way  the  text  should  be  recited,  to  secure  some  visible  and 
invisible  good.  In  the  third  lesson  is  taught  a certain  con- 
templation which  is  calculated  to  secure  fruits  of  this  and 
the  future  world. 

Invocation  for  fame  and  lustre. 

There  occurs  first  the  following  mantra  which  serves  the 
purpose  of  an  auspicious  act.  In  the  peace-chant  given 
above,  removal  of  obstacles  was  prayed  for,  while  in  this 
mantra  the  student  prays  for  perfection  in  the  contemplation 
and  its  fruits.  The  mantra  reads  as  follows  : 


I.  Fame  to  us  both  : Brahma-varchasa  to  us 
both. 

Now  the  sruti  proceeds  with  the  Upanishad  or  sacred 
teaching  concerning  conjunction  (sa7;ihita).  ^ Whatever 
fame  t accrues  from  a knowledge  of  the  sacred  teaching 

* The  contcMiiplatioii  of  gross  jihyskal  objects  through  Samhita 
or  conjunction  of  physical  sounds  is  first  taught  so  that  persons 
whose  minds  are  habitually  h.-iit  towards  external  objects  may 
find  an  entrance  into  tlie  subtle  truths  conveyed  by  the  upa- 
nishads — (S.) 

t On  account  of  the  observance  oE  all  duties  enjoined  in  the 
scriptures  and  by  the  study  of  the  Veda  undei*  ])rescribed  condi- 
tions—(S.) 

s 


34  • contemplatioM  [^'ikshk-Vallu 

regarding  Sawhita,  may  it  accrue  to  both  of  us,  master 
and  pupil.  Whatever  lustre  * accrues  from  that  cause, 
may  it  accrue  to  us  both. — This  invocation  is  uttered 
by  the  pupil.  Such  prayer,  indeed,  becomes  him  alone, 
as  he  has  not  yet  achieved  his  aspirations.  It  does  not 
become  the  master  who  has  already  achieved  his  aspi- 
rations. A master  is  one  who  has  already  achieved  his 
aspirations. 

The  pupil’s  fame  consists  in  his  being  known  to  have 
rightly  practised  the  contemplation,  and  the  master’s  fame 
in  being  known  to  have  taught  it  aright.  This  implies 
that  the  contemplation  has  attained  perfection,  not  wanting 
in  any  of  its  parts.  Brahma-varchasa  is  the  lustre  which  a 
br^hmawa  ought  to  possess,  and  which  accrues  from  a study 
of  the  Veda.  It  stands  for  all  the  fruits  spoken  of  in  the 

sequel  of  this  lesson No  doubt  the  blessing  prayed 

for  accrues  only  to  the  pupil,  the  worshipper ; still,  by 
courtesy,  it  is  spoken  of  as  a good  accruing  also  to  the 
master,  inasmuch  as  the  master  will  feel  happy  when  the 
pupil  attains  the  fruits  prayed  for. 

Contemplation  of  Samnita  in  the  five  objects. 

The  5ruti  now  enunciates  the  Vidya  or  contemplation  for 
which  the  auspicious  act  of  invocation  has  been  performed. 

W IRII 

2.  Now,  then,  the  Upanishad  of  SaWihltiJ  (the 


♦ of  the  fcikiu. — (A.) 


35 


Amvhka  IIL]  of  conjunction. 

sacred  teaching  about  conjunction)  shall  we  de- 
clare in  the  five  objects : in  the  worlds,  in  the 
lights,  in  knowledge,  in  progeny,  in  the  self. 
These  are  great  conjunctions,  they  say. 

Now : after  what  has  been  taught  in  the  preceding 
lesson  as  to  how  the  Upanishads  should  be  recited. 
Then  : because  the  buddhi  or  intellect,  always  accustom- 
ed as  it  has  been  to  think  of  the  text,  cannot  suddenly  be 
directed  to  a knowledge  of  the  truths  taught  in  it  The 
sruti  says  : We  shall  now  teach  the  comtemplation  of 
Sawhita — how  Sawhita  should  be  regarded  and  medi- 
tated upon,  a thing  which  is  quite  near  to  the  mere 
text — with  reference  to  the  five  objects  of  knowledge : 
namely,  the  contemplation  of  the  worlds,  of  the  lights, 
of  knowledge,  of  progeny,  of  the  self.  As  concerned 
with  conjunction  and  with  great  things,  these  sacred 
teachings  regarding  the  five  objects  of  thought  are 
spoken  of  as  Maha-samhitas,  as  great  conjunctions,  by 
those  who  know  the  Veda. 

The  student  having  practised  recitation  of  the  sounds, 
rhythm,  etc.,  of  the  text  in  the  manner  laid  down  in  the 
preceding  anuv^ka,  we  shall  first  explain  the  contemplation  of 
Sawhit^i,  which  concerns  itself  with  the  recitation  of  the  Vedic 
text ; for,  the  student  who  is  going  to  engage  in  contempla- 
tion, fullyjimbued  as  he  is  with  the  idea  of  Vedic  recitation 
by  long  practice,  will  find  it  very  hard  to  direct  his  mind  at 
once  to  contemplations  not  connected  with  the  recitation  of 
the  Vedic  text.  ‘Sawhit^i’  means  an  extremely  close  approxi- 
mation of  sounds  to  one  another,  < Up^ishad  ’ hert  means 


36  CONTEMPLATION.  [S'iksU»VaB, 

cotttemplatioii,  because  by  contemplation  a man  finds,  lying  . 
very  near  him,  all  the  good  such  as  progeny,  cattle,  and  the 
brahma- varchaSa.  The  conjunction  which  has  to  be  con- 
templated upon  will  be  described  in  relation  to  five  groups 
of  things.  To  shew  that  there  are  not  as  many  distinct 
c6hte'mplations  as  there  are  groups  of  things  to  be  con- 
templated, the  sruti  proposes  here  to  treat  of  one  single, 
act  of  contemplation  comprehending  all  the  five  groups  of 

objects The  conjunctions  are  said  to  be  great 

because  in  the  contemplation  they  are  to  be  regarded  as 
great  things  such  as  the  worlds. 

Contemplation  of  Samhita  in  the  Worlds. 

Now  the  sruti  proceeds  to  deal  with  the  first  of  the  five 
groups  of  things  to  be  thought  of  in  the  contemplation  of 
Samhita  : 

I ll^ll 

3.  Now  as  to  the  worlds : earth  is  the  first  form, 
heaven  the  next  form,  the  interspace  the  junc- 
tion, air  the  medium  ; thus  far  as  to  the  worlds. 

Of  the  conjunctions  mentioned  above,  contemplation 
of  conjunction  in  the  worlds  will  now  be  described. 
The  word  ‘ now  ’ in  all  these  passages  denotes  the  order 
in  whifch  the  objects  are  to  be  regarded  in  the  course  of 
contemplation. — Earth  is  the  first  form,  the  first 'sound  ; 
that  is  to  say,  the  first  of  the  two  sounds  joined  logether 


Anuv&ka  IIL]  o?  conjunction. 


should  be  regarded  as  the  earth.  * Similarly  heav^  :^, 
the  next  sound.  The  interspace  (antariksha)  is  the 
junction,  the  mid-space  between  the  first  and  the  second 
sounds,  the  place  where  the  two  sounds  are  joined  to- 
gether. Air  is  the  medium  t,  that  by  which  they  ,are 
joined  together.  Thus  has  been  taught  the  contempla- 
tion of  Sawjhita  in  the  worlds. 


In  the  scriptural  text  * ishe-(t)-tv^i,’  ‘ e ’ and  ‘ t ’ — the  final 
and  the  initial  sounds,  respectively,  of  the  words  ‘ ishe  ’ and 
‘ tvfl  ’ which  are  to  be  joined  together — are  the  two  sounds 
joined  together.  The  middle  space  between  them  should  be 
regarded  as  the  antariksha.  The  ‘ t ’ within  the  brackets  is 
the  sound  which  comes  in  by  doubling  the  ‘ t,’  pne  of  the 
two  sounds  joined  together,  and  it  is  this  additional  sound 
‘ t ’ which  has  to  be  regarded  as  the  air. 


Contemplation  of  Samhita  in  the  Lights. 

Then  follows  the  second  group : 

3#;  I 3TTf^  3TT- 

I I II VII 

vs 

4.  Now  as  to  the  lights  ; fire  is  the  first  form, 
sun  the  second  form,  water  the  junction,  lightning 
the  medium.  Thus  far  as  to  the  lights. 


* The  earth,  heaven,  etc.,  here  stand  for  the  Devatas,  the  In- 
tolli2:eiice.««  fnnetioning  in  the  earth,  heaven  etc.  The  material 
f jrms  are  not  worthy  of  worship. — (A.) 

t The  special  effort. — (A .) 


38  CONTEMPLATION  [SiksM-Valll. 

This  and  the  following  groups  should  be  interpreted 
like  the  preceding  one. 

Contemplation  of  Samhita  in  Knowledge. 

3TP^: 

I I Il^ll 

5.  Now  as  to  knowledge  : master  is  the  first 
form,  pupil  the  second  form,  knowledge  the  junc- 
tion, instruction  the  medium.  Thus  far  as  to 
knowledge. 

Knowledge  stands  for  the  text  which  has  to  be  taught  by 
the  master  and  learnt  by  the  pupil. 

Contemplation  of  Samhita  in  Progeny. 

Then  follows  the  fourth  group  : 

I m\  I I JRT  ^l^t  I 

STSPR  I ll^ll 

6.  Now  as  to  progeny  : mother  is  the  first  form, 
father  the  second  form,  progeny  the  junction, 
procreation  the  medium.  Thus  far  as  to  progeny. 

Progeny  : sons,  grandsons  etc. 

Contemplation  of  5amhita  in  the  Self. 

^ I I ||vs|| 


39 


Amv&ka  Hi.]  of  coNjuHcfioNi 

7.  Now  as  to  the  self : lower  jaw  is  the  first 
form,  upper  jaw  the  second  form,  speech  the  junc- 
tion, tongue  the  medium.  Thus  far  as  to  the  self. 

‘ Self  ’ here  denotes  the  whole  aggregate  made  up  of  the 
physical  body,  sense-organs,  etc.,  as  well  as  the  Conscious- 
ness witnessing  them  all,  inasmuch  as  the  notion  of  self 
refers  to  this  aggregate.  It  is  this  self  with  which  the  fifth 
group  is  concerned.  Speech  : the  organ  of  speech  located  in 
the  throat,  palate,  etc. 

The  Sruti  concludes  the  members  of  conjunction  described 
above  in  the  following  words  : 

\\<:\\ 

8.  Thus  these  are  the  great  conjunctions. 


Contemplation  of  Samhita  enjoined 
for  a specific  end. 

This  contemplation  is  prescribed  as  a means  to  a specific 
end  in  the  following  words : 

^ sirrifSMT  ^ 1 1 

11  ^ 11 

Whoso  should  contemplate  these  great  con- 
junctions thus  declared  is  endued  with  progeny 
and  cattle,  with  brahma-varchasa,  with  food  to 
eat,  with  the  region  of  svarga. 


46  CONtEtJPLAfiON.  [SHksU-Vatl^. 

The  Sanskrit  verb  ^vid,’  to  know,  should  be  here  under- 
stbod  fn  the  Sense  of  upasana  or  contemplation  because 
'this  section  treats  of  upasana.  Upasana  consists  in  a con- 
tinuous flow  of  one  and  the  same  idea  as  recommended 
by  the  scripture,  unmixed  with  other  ideas,  and  made 
to  hang  on  some  perceptible  object  recommended  by 
the  scripture.  He  who  renders  constant  service  to  the 
Guru  or  to  the  King  is  said  to  render  upasana  to  him, 
and  he  attains  the  fruit  thereof.  Here,  too,  he  who 
contemplates  in  the  manner  described  above  attains 
progeny  and  other  fruits. 

The  Sanskrit  root  ‘vid,’  no  doubt,  denotes  knowledge  pro- 
duced by  the  operation  of  sense-organs,  not  up^fsana  or  the 
act  of  contemplation,  a mental  act  depending  on  the  will  and 
effort  of  the  individual.  Still,  the  verb  ‘ vid  ’ which  means 
to  know  should  here  be  understood  in  its  secondary  sense  of 
upasana  or  contemplation  which  is  allied  to  knowledge, 
both  knowledge  and  contemplation  being  alike  functions  of 
the  mind.  The  word  cannot  be  understood  here  in  its 
primary  sense  inasmuch  as  mere  knowledge  which  is  not 
dependent  on  the  individual’s  will  and  effort  cannot  form 
the  subject  of  an  injunction.  If  mere  knowledge  were 
meant  here,  then,  as  it  has  been  already  imparted  in  the 
words  “ earth  is  the  first  form  ” and  so  on,  there  would  be 
no  nded  for  an  injunction.  It  cannot  be  urged  that  the 
form  ‘ veda  ’ occurring  in  the  Upanishad  is  in  the  indi- 
cative mood  and  does  not  therefore  mean  an  injunction. 
For,  we  regard  the  form  ‘ veda  ’ imperative,  as  often  used 
in  the  Vedic  texts.  It  may  perhaps  be  also  urged  that  this 
form  ‘ veda  ’ is  indicative,  not  imperative,  and  that  there- 
fore the  sentence  merely  repeats  the  truth  already  presented 


Amvdka  111.]  OF  coiijuNCTioii.  4i 

to  the  mind.  In  reply,  we  say  that  mere  knowledge  of  the 
truth  does  not  enable  one  to  attain  progeny,  cattle,  and  other 
fruits  mentioned.  Wherefore,  we  are  to  understand  that  the 
word  ‘veda’  is  used  in  its  secondary  sense  of  contemplation, 
and  is  in  the  imperative  mood,  signifying  an  injunction. 
This  interpretation  is,  moreover,  in  accordance  with  the 
context,  the  present  section  being  concerned  with  upasana 
as  may  be  seen  from  the  last  words  of  the  sixth  lesson, 
“thus  do  thou,  O Prachma-Yogj^a,  contemplate  (up^ssva).** 
Here,  svarga  is  indeed  the  fruit  to  be  reapi^d  in  the  future. 
As  to  the  cattle  and  other  fruits,  they  may  be  attained  either 
here  or  hereafter,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Chitr^i  sacrifice  whose 
fruits — namely,  cattle — are  said  to  be  attainable  here  in  the 
absence  of  all  obstacles,  or  hereafter  if  there  should  be  any 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  its  attainment  in  the  present  birth. 
It  is  for  the  attainment  of  fruits  like  these  that  the  act  of 
contemplation  which  depends  on  the  individual’s  will  and 
effort  is  enjoined  here  by  the  word  ‘ veda.* 

The  Philosophy  of  Contemplation. 

[In  the  Ved^inta-si^tras,  various  points  concerning  up^^sana 
have  been  discussed  and  settled.  The  Vedanta-sutras, — bet- 
ter known  as  the  5rtr^raka-Mmirtmsa,  an  enquiry  into  the 
embodied  soul, — comprise  four  books  (adhyayas)  divided 
each  into  four  parts  (piidas),  each  of  these  four  parts  contain- 
ing several  sections  (adhikarawas.)  An  adhikarawa  is  made 
up  of  one  or  more  aphorisms  (s//tras)  and  forms  a complete 
discussion  of  a single  question.  The  commentator  on 
this  Upanishad  gives  here  and  there  at  the  close  of  a lesson 
a digest  of  such  discussions  as  bear  upon  the  subject-matter 
of  the  lesson. 


6 


CONt'&MPLATlbM. 


['S'ikshh-Valk 


Every  such  discussion  will  be  presented  here  in  its  three 
following  parts : 

1.  QMstion: — A statement  of  the  two  or  more  different, 
antagonistic,  alternative  points  of  view  presenting  them- 
selves on  a subject. 

2.  PiXrvapaksha  or  the  Prima  Facie  View : — The  one  or 
more  points  of  view  which  will  be  ultimately  set  aside,  with 
all  the  arguments  in  its  or  their  support. 

3.  Siddhdnta  or  Conclusion: — That  point  of  view  which  has 
the  strongest  support  of  evidence  and  which  should  there- 
fore be  accepted  as  the  final  demonstrated  truth,  as  well 
as  all  the  arguments  which  can  be  adduced  in  its  behalf.] 


The  Upasaka  should  be  seated  when  engaged 
in  Contemplation. 

The  question  of  the  up^saka’s  posture  is  discussed  as 
follows  in  the  Vedanta- Swtras  IV.  i,  7-10  : 

{Question) : — Is  it  necessary  or  not  necessary  for  a man  to 
be  seated  while  engaged  in  contemplation  ? 

(The  Prima  Facie  View  : ) — It  is  unnecessary,  inasmuch  as 
no  particular  posture  of  the  body  has  any  bearing  on  the 
activity  of  manas. 

{Conclusion :) — It  is  necessary  that  he  should  be  seated 
when  engaged  in  contemplation.  Otherwise,  contemplation 
is  impossible.  In  the  first  place  it  is  impossible  for  a man 
to  contemplate  while  lying  down,  since  all  on  a sudden  he 
may  be  overpowered  by  sleep.  Neither  is  it  possible  for 
him  to  contemplate  when  standing  or  walking  ; for,  the  mind 
would  then  wander  away  from  the  point  by  having  to  attend 
to  the  balancing  of  the  body  and  to  ascertain  the  right  road, 


AnuvdJia  III.]  op  conjunction.  43 

No  specific  time  and  piace  necessaiy  for  Upasana. 

(Vedsnta-Swtras,  IV.  i,  ii.) 

{Question :) — Is  there  any  specific  time  or  place  wherein 
alone  one  should  practise  contemplation  ? 

{The  prima  facie  view) : — The  Veda  has  prescribed  the  east 
as  the  proper  direction  for  Brahmayajna,  the  place  inclined 
towards  the  east  for  Vaisvadeva,  the  afternoon  for  Pin<^a- 
pitriyajna,  and  so  on.  Thus,  time  and  place  of  a specific 
character  are  prescribed  in  the  case  of  Vedic  rites.  In  the  case 
of  contemplation,  too,  which  is  alike  an  act  enjoined  by  the 
Veda,  there  should  be  a specific  time  and  place  prescribed. 

{Conclusion  :) — Concentration  is  the  primary  condition  of 
meditation  (dhyana),  and  this  concentration  is  not  improved 
by  resorting  to  any  particular  place  or  time.  There  can 
therefore  be  no  specific  time  or  place  prescribed.  Hence  it 
is  that  the  5ruti,  prescribing  a proper  place  for  the  practice 
of  yoga,  recommends  that  the  place  selected  should  be 
agreeable  to  the  mind.  One  should  practise  yoga  only  at  a 
place  which  is  pleasing  to  the  mind.  No  specific  place  is 
prescribed  in  the  scriptures.  It  is  true  that  the  sruti  declares 
that  the  place  selected  for  the  practice  of  yoga  should  be 
even,  clean,  free  from  gravel,  fire  and  sand.”  " But,  as 
the  5ruti  concludes  by  saying  that  the  place  should  be  pleas- 
ing to  the  mind,  we  understand  that  there  the  sruti  only 
refers  to  some  of  the  general  conditions  which  facilitate  con- 
templation, the  end  in  view.  These  general  conditions  being 
satisfied,  there  is  no  restriction  that  any  particular  place  or 
time  should  be  resorted  to  for  yoga.  The  sruti  only  means 
that  contemplation  should  be  practised  where  concentration 
is  possible. 


♦ iS'vetaavatara-Upani?hftdi 


44 


CONTEMPLATION. 


The  Scope  of  Samhita-Upasana. 

We  have  now  to  discuss  as  to  how  much  of  the  attributes 
of  the  Being  described  in  the  scriptures  should  be  brought 
within  the  sphere  of  contemplation.  In  the  Aitareya-Upa- 
nishad  also,  contemplation  of  Samhit^  is  given  as  follows  : 

‘‘  Now,  then,  the  sacred  teaching  regarding 
Conjunction”  ; 

and  so  on.  Now  we  have  to  enquire  : (i)  Are  the  Up^isana 
given  in  the  Aitareya  recension  and  that  given  in  the  Tait- 
tin’ya  recension  one  and  the  same  or  different  ? (2)  Even  if 

they  are  one  and  the  same,  is  it  necessary  or  not  necessary 
that  all  that  is  taught  in  one  place  should  be  taken  as  taught 
in  the  other  ? 

As  to  the  first  question  : on  the  principle  established  in 
the  case  of  Panchagni-Vidya  and  Pr^rwa-Vidya,  it  may  at 
first  thought  appear  that  the  Up^zsanas  of  Saw/hita  taught  in 
the  Aitareya  and  the  Taittinya  recensions  are  one  and  the 
same. 

Identity  of  Upasanas  taught  in 
different  Upanishads. 

The  identity  of  Upasana  in  the  case  of  Panchagni-Vidy^i 
and  Prawa-Vidyrt  has  been  established  in  the  Vedanta- S^/tras 
III.  iii.  I.  as  follows  : 

{Question :) — The  Chhandogya  and  Bnhadarawyaka  Upa- 
nishads treat  of  the  Upasana  of  “ the  five  fires.”  Are  the 
Upasanas  different  or  identical  ? 

{The  Prima  Facie  View  ;) — The  two  Upanishads  teach  two 
different  sorts  of  contemplation,  these  last  being  known  by 
different  names,  Kauthuma  and  Vajasaneyaka  respectively  ; 


^ Op.  cit.  3-1-1-1. 


AmV&ka  in.]  OF  CONJUNCTION.  45 

SO,  too,  in  the  case  of  other  Upjisanas.  There  is  yet 
another  mark  pointing  to  a distinction  between  the  Upa- 
sanas  taught  in  different  recensions.  ThI  ceremony  called 
Siro-vrata  is  spoken  of  in  the  Mm^iaka-Upanishad  in  the 
words : “ This  Brahma- Vidy^  should  be  taught  to  those 
only  by  whom  the  vow  of  siro-vrata  has  been  duly  observ- 
ed.” * Siro-vrata  is  a kind  of  vow  enjoined  only  on  the 
students  of  the  Atharva- Veda,  but  not  on  others.  It  would, 
therefore,  seem  that  difference  in  recension  makes  the  Up«- 
sanas  quite  distinct. 

[Conclusion) : — Despite  the  difference  of  recension  the 
UptJsana  remains  one  and  the  same,  because  of  the  identity 
of  the  teaching.  The  contemplation  of  Pr^/;a,  for  instance, 
is  taught  in  the  Chh^ndogya-Upanishad  in  the  words, 

Whoso,  verily,  contemplates  (Pr^wa)  the  Best  and  the 
Highest.”  t And  the  Bi^ihad^ra-vyaka  treats  of  the  contem- 
plation of  Franvi  in  the  same  words.  Similarly,  the  five  fires 
of  Heaven,  Rain,  Earth,  Moon,  and  Woman,  recommended 
for  contemplation  in  what  is  called  the  Panchagni-Vidya 
are  spoken  of  in  exactly  the  same  terms  in  the  two  recensions. 
And  the  fruits  also  of  the  Up^isana  of  Pr^iwa, — namely,  that 
the  Upasaka  “ verily  becomes  the  l:)est  and  the  highest  ” 
are  described  in  the  two  recensions  in  exactly  the  same 
terms.  As  to  the  Up^sana  being  known  by  different  names 
such  as  Kauthuma,  Vnfjasaneyaka,  and  so  on,  they  are  not  so 
named  by  the  sruti  itself.  It  is,  on  the  other  hand,  only  the 
students  who  name  the  different  recensions  of  the  Veda  after 
the  sages  who  have  taught  them.  As  to  the  contention  that 
the  siro-vrata  goes  to  indicate  a difference  in  the  Upasana, 
we  answer  that  this  ceremony  is  necessary  for  the  learning 


* Op.  cit,  3-2-10.  t Op*  eft,  5-1-1. 


46  CONTEMPLATION  [SVy^sA^- Ko/ZJ. 

of  the  Vedic  text,  not  for  a practice  of  the  contemplation 
therein  taught.  The  words  ‘ he  that  has  not  observed  the 
vow  should  not  learn  it  * show  that  it  is  a vow  connected 
with  the  learning  of  the  text.  Wherefore,  there  being  so 
many  marks  of  identity  while  there  is  none  pointing  to  a dis- 
tinction, it  is  but  proper  to  maintain  that  the  mere  fact  of 
an  upasana  being  taught  in  two  different  recensions  makes 
no  difference  in  the  upasana  itself. 

Following  the  same  principle  in  the  present  case,  one 
may  argue  that  even  the  upasanas  of  conjunction  as  taught 
in  the  two  recensions  are  identical,  because,  in  the  first 
place,  the  object  to  be  contemplated  upon  is  one  and  the 
same  as  indicated  by  the  words  ‘‘  whoso  thus  contemplates 
this  conjunction,”  and  the  words  “Earth  is  the  first  form,” 
and  so  on  ; and  also  because  the  fruits  of  the  upasana  as 
described  in  the  two  places  are  of  the  same  kind,  namely 
“ He  is  endued  with  progeny  and  cattle.” 

When  different  attributes  should  be  gathered 
together  in  Upasana. 

Now,  as  to  the  second  question  raised  above,  the  prin- 
ciple of  gathering  together  ail  the  attributes  spoken  of  in 
different  places  in  connection  with  one  and  the  same  upasana 
has  also  been  established  in  the  Vedanta- Szztras  III.  iii.  5.  as 
follows : 

(Question  :) — Are  the  various  attributes,  spoken  of  in  con- 
nection with  an  upasana  taught  in  different  places,  to  be 
gathered  together  or  not  ? 

(Prima  Facie  View :) — The  Vajasaneyaka-Upanishad,  when 
teaching  of  the  contemplation  of  Prawa,  assigns  to  it  an  ad- 


♦ Mundaka  Tip.  3-2-U. 


Aunvctka  III.]  of  toNjuNcnoii.  47 

ditional  attribute— that  it  is  the  ‘ semen,’ — in  the  words 
“ The  semen,  verily,  soared  up.”  * As  this  attribute  is 
not  mentioned  in  the  Chhandogya,  one  may  think  that  that 
attribute  should  not  be  thought  of  when  contemplating 
Prawa  according  to  the  teaching  of  the  latter,  the  purpose  of 
contemplation  being  served  by  regarding  the  attributes  of 
Prawa  as  the  vital  breath,  as  speech,  and  .so  on. 

[Conclusion  :) — Though  untaught  in  the  Chhandogya  re- 
cension, the  attribute  should  be  added  to  the  object  of  con- 
templation, because  it  is  taught  in  the  other  recension.  We 
do  find  Agnihotra  and  other  sacrificial  rites  being  performed 
in  all  their  parts  as  taught  in  the  different  recensions. 
Against  this  it  may  be  urged  that,  the  purposes  of  contem- 
plation being  served  by  those  attributes  only  which  are 
given  in  one’s  own  recension,  it  is  unnecessary  to  add  to 
them  those  attributes  also  which  are  given  elsewhere.  This 
contention  has  no  force ; for,  on  the  principle  that  more 
work  produces  more  result,  the  attributes  spoken  of  in  other 
recensions  are  as  serviceable  as  those  given  in  one’s  own. 
Wherefore  it  is  necessary  to  collect  together  all  the  attri- 
butes mentioned  in  different  recensions. 

In  pursuance  of  the  principle  thus  established,  one  may 
think  that  to  the  details  of  the  Sawhita-Upasana  given  in  the 
Taittiri:ya‘Upanishad  should  be  added  those  given  in  the 
Aitareya-Upanishad,  such  as  “ Speech  is  the  first  form, 
manas  the  second  form,”  t and  so  on ; and  that  to  those 
given  in  the  Aitareya-Upanishad  should  be  added  the  de- 
tails given  in  the  Taittiriya-Upanishad,  such  as  “ Fire  is 
the  first  form,”  and  so  on. 


♦ Bri.  Up.  6-1-12.  f Up.  cit.  3-1-1-6. 


48  COl4TEMJ>LAtl6N  [S'iksh^-VM. 

Thus  at  first  sight  it  would  appear  that  the  Up^sanas 
of  Sawhita  taught  in  the  two  recensions  are  one  and  the 
same,  and  that  the  several  attributes  mentioned  in  the  two 
places  should  be  gathered  together  in  thought  by  him  who 
wishes  to  contenyplate  Sawhit^  or  conjunction. 

Two  distinct  Upasanas  of  Samhita. 

This  pyima  facie  view  should  be  set  aside  in  pursuance  of 
the  principle  established  in  the  Ved^inta-Swtras  III.  iii.  6,  in 
the  case  of  the  Udgftha-Vid}'^.  This  principle  is  discussed 
as  follows  : 

(Question) : — Are  the  Udg/tha-Vidy^s  taught  in  the  Chhan- 
dogya  and  the  Bnhadarawyaka  identical  or  different  ? 

(The  prima  fade  view) : — As  they  are  both  alike  designated 
as  the  Udgftha-Vidyfl,  they  are  properly  one  and  the  same. 
No  doubt  the  designation  is  not  authorised  by  the  Veda; 
but  such  incidents  as  a war  among  the  vital  activities  are 
related  in  both  texts  alike.  Having  represented  the  s^ittvic 
and  tamasic  activities  of  the  senses  as  Devas  and  Asuras 
respectively,  the  Chhrindogya  describes  a war  among  them  ; 
and  then,  after  shewing  that  speech  and  other  Devas  are  as- 
sailed by  Asuras,  it  declares  that  the  Pr^/?a-Deva  alone  is 
unassailed  by  them.  All  this  is  related  in  the  same  way  in 
the  Bnhadara;/yaka.  The  teachings  of  the  two  Upanishads 
refer  apparently  to  one  and  the  same  vidya  (iip^sana). 

(Conclusion) : — They  are  really  two  different  vidyas,  the 
thing  to  be  contemplated  upon  being  different  in  each.  In 
the  Chh^zndogya,  the  syllable  ‘Om,’  occurring  in  the  Udgftha, 
a particular  song,  has  to  be  regarded  as  Prawa,  Life  ; where- 
as in  the  Bnhad^rawyaka  Pr«?/a,  represented  as  the  chanter 
of  the  whole  Udgitha  song,  as  the  stimulator  of  the  organ  of 


///•]  OP  CONJUNCTION,  4^ 

speech^  has  to  be  regarded  as  Udgatn, — that  one  of  the  four 
principal  priests  at  a sacrifice  whose  function  it  is  to  chant  the 
hymns  of  the  Sama-Veda.  Thus  owing  to  a difference  in 
the  thing  to  be  contemplated,  the  two  vidy^s  are  quite 
different.  As  to  the  war  among  sense-organs  being  related 
alike  in  both,  this  point  of  similarity,  found  as  it  is  only  in 
minor  details,  cannot  by  itself  point  to  an  identity  in  the 
main  vidyas.  In  both  alike,  no  doubt,  Prawa  is  represented 
to  be  thQ  highest,  as  unassailable  by  the  Asuras,  and  this 
ought  to  enter  into  the  contemplation ; but  as  the  difference 
already  pointed  out  in  the  thing  to  be  contemplated  has  not 
been  gainsaid,  the  Udgttha-Vidyas  taught  in  the  two  Vedas 
are  quite  different. 

In  accordance  with  the  principle  thus  established,  in  the 
present  case  we  should  look  upon  the  contemplation  of  con- 
junction taught  in  the  Taittirtya  and  Aitareya  Upanishads 
as  different  on  account  of  a radical  difference  in  the  things 
to  be  contemplated  upon.  In  the  former,  the  things  to  be 
contemplated  upon  in  the  contemplation  of  conjunction  have 
been  declared  in  the  five  groups  of  objects  ; and  in  the  latter, 
the  things  to  be  contemplated  upon  are  divided  into  adhidaiva 
and  adhyatma,  cosmic  and  personal.  It  is  there  declared  as 
follows : 

“ V^iyu  and  i4ka5a,  these  are  the  adhidaivata. 

Then  as  to  the  adhyatma  : Speech  is  the  first 
form,  and  manas  the  second  form,”'"  and  so  on. 

The  extent  of  similarity  in  the  thing  to  be  contemplated — 
in  so  far  as  the  Earth  is  mentioned  as  the  first  form  in  both 
alike— is  not  sufficient  to  make  the  two  vidyas  identical. 


^ Op«  cit.  3-1-1-5, 6. 


S6  fcoNtBrfpufioN.  [$^tkshh-VaiU, 

The  points  of  diflFerence  preponderate,  and  it  is  but  reason- 
able that  the  preponderant  should  prevail. 

The  two  vidyas  being  thus  different,  it  is  not  right  that 
the  several  things  mentioned  in  the  Aitareya-Upanishad  as 
worth  contemplating  should  be  added  to  those  declared 
here  in  the  Taittiriya-Upanishad.  No  part  of  the  New 
Moon  and  Full  Moon  sacrifices,  for  instance,  is  added  to  the 
Agnihotra,  because  the  last  is  quite  different  from  the  two. 

It  has  been  thus  proved  that  the  two  vidyas  taught  in 
reference  to  Sawhifc^  are  different,  and  that  therefore  no 
part  of  the  details  given  in  the  Aitareya  should  be  added  to 
what  is  given  in  the  Taittirtya-Upanishad. 

Sef- Contemplation  and  Symbolic  Contemplation. 

There  is  yet  another  point  for  discussion.  Upasanas 
are  of  two  kinds,  those  which  involve  the  contemplation  of 
the  Self,  and  those  which  are  concerned  with  external  sym- 
bols (Prat/ka).  In  the  former,  the  Paramatman,  the  High- 
est Self,  is  contemplated  in  His  saguwa  or  conditioned  form, 
as  taught  in  the  sixth  anuv^ika.  There  it  is  taught 
that  the  Purusha,  known  as  Param^Jtman,  the  Highest 
Self,  abiding  in  the  heart-space,  has  to  be  contemplated 
upon  as  made  up  of  manas,  as  immortal,  as  golden,  and 
so  on,  in  the  thought  “ I ain  that  Param^ttman.’*  This 
contemplation  of  the  Self  is  well  discussed  in  the  Ve- 
danta-Swtras  IV.  i.  3.  When  the  devotee  contemplates  a 
visible  thing  outside  the  Highest  Self,  and  exalts  that  thing 
by  way  of  regarding  it  as  a great  Devata  or  as  Brahman 
Himself,  the  contemplation  is  said  to  be  symbolic,  concern- 
ed with  a symbol.  In  the  present  case  it  is  taught  that 


5* 


Amvdha  UL]  conjuhctwn. 

Earth  is  first  form.”  Here  the  first  sound  in  a conjunc- 
tion has  to  be  contemplated,  being  regarded  , as  the  Bhtf- 
Devata,  the  Intelligence  functioning  in  the  Earth.  Where 
it  is  taught  that  “ Manas  should  be  contemplated  as 
Brahman  ” and  so  on,  it  is  manas,  &c., — exalted  by  being 
regarded  as  Brahman, — which  should  be  contemplated. 

No  5ynibol  should  be  contemplated  as  the  Self. 

And  this  symbol  should  not  be  regarded  by  the  devotee 
as  his  own  Self.  A symbol  is  an  effect  of  or  an  emanation 
from  Brahman,  and  as  such  it  forms  a fit  object  on  which  the 
contemplation  of  the  Supreme  may  be  made  to  hiang.  That 
such  symbols  should  not  be  regarded  as  the  Self  has  been 
established  in  the  Ved^mta-Swtras,  IV.  i.  4.  as  follows : 

(Question:) — When  it  is  taught  that  manas  should  be 
regarded  as  Brahman,  that  the  Sun  should  be  regarded  as 
Brahman,  and  so  on,  it  means  that  the  symbols, — manas, 
the  sun,  etc., — exalted  by  being  regarded  as  Brahman,  form 
the  objects  of  contemplation.  Are  those  symbols  to  be 
regarded  in  contemplation  as  one’s  own  Self  ? 

(Prinui  facie  view :) — These  symbols  should  also  be  con- 
templated as  one’s  own  Self,  for  the  symbols  are  effefts  of  or 
emanations  from  Brahman,  and  as  such  are  one  with 
Brahman ; and  jtva,  too,  is  one  with  Brahman.  Thus  all 
distinction  being  absent  by  both  of  them  being  alike  one 
with  Brahman,  the  symbol  which  is  the  object  of  contempla- 
tion and  jiva  who  is  the  contemplator  are  one  and  the  same. 

(Conclusion  :) — When  the  symbol  which  is  an  effect  of  or 
emanation  from  Brahman  is  regarded  as  one  with  Brahman, 
then  what  has  made  it  a symbol  has  quite  vswished  away. 


tONtBimAtlON 


When  the  pot  becomes  one  with  clay,  the  pot  as  such  htts 
vanished  away.  When,  again,  the  jfva,  the  separate  indivi- 
^al  Ego,  is  regarded  as  one  with  Brahman,  then  he  ceases 
to  be  a separate  individual  Ego,  and  in  consequence  he 
xeases  to  be  a contemplator.  If,  with  a view  to  pre^rve 
intadt  the  distinction  between  the  object  of  contemplation 
and  the  contemplator,  the  oneness  of  cause  and  effect  and 
the  unity  of  jiva  and  Brahman  be  disregarded,  then  the 
symbol  and  the  contemplator  cannot  be  one,  and  they  will 
be  quite  different  from  each  other  like  the  cow  and  the 
buffalo.  Wherefore  it  is  not  right  to  contemplate  the  symbol 
as  the  Self. 


One  mode  alone  of  Self- Contemplation 
should  be  practised. 

Now,  all  upasanas  in  which  Brahman,  the  object  of  con- 
templation, is  regarded  as  one  with  the  Self,  culminate  in 
the  sflkshatkara  or  actual  perception  of  Brahman  ; so  that 
when  Brahman  is  intuited  by  one  Up^sana,  other  contem- 
plations are  of  no  use.  By  engaging  in  another  contempla- 
tion, the  mind  may  even  wander  away  from  the  sakshatka- 
ra  already  attained.  Accordingly,  when  several  upasanas 
are  tai^^ht  for  the  benefit  of  one  who  seeks  to  attain  Brahma- 
sskshstksra,  to  intuitively  realise  Brahman,  it  has  been  de- 
cided that  only  one  of  them — ^it  may  be  any  one — should  be 
resorted  to. 


Symbolic  Contemplations  may  be  practised 
in  any  number. 

But,  in  the  present  case,  the  contemplation  of  conjunction 
•may  be  practised  in  one,  two,  or  more  forms  at  will.  This 


A'unvilM  ///.]  of  cou/tmcnoK.  1j3 

point  has  been  settled  in  the  Vedanta-St^tras  III.  iii.  6o.  as 
follows : 

[Quistion  :) — Is  there  any  restriction  as  to  the  number  of 
symbolic  contemplations  to  be  practised  ? Or  oan  they  be 
practised  in  any  number  at  will  ? 

{Prima  facie  view  :) — The  principle  established  in  the  case 
of  those  upasanas  in  which  the  Self  is  contemplated  as  one 
with  the  object  of  contemplation  may  be  applied  to  the 
contemplation  of  symbols,  the  object  in  view  here  alike  be- 
ing the  s^rkshatkara. 

[Concltision :) — There  is  a vast  difference  between  the  two. 
As  to  the  former,  the  5ruti  gives  us  to  understand — in  the 
words,  “Becoming  the  Deva,  he  is  absorbed  in  the  Devas’* — 
that  as  the  culminating  point  of  contemplation,  the  con- 
templator  realises  while  still  alive  his  unity  with  the  Deva, 
and  that  after  death  he  becomes  the  Deva  Himself,  There 
is  no  evidence  whatever  to  shew  that  contemplation  of 
symbols  produces  sakshatkara.  And  as  sakshatkara  is  not 
the  aim  of  the  contemplation  of  symbols,  we  should  un- 
derstand that  the  several  objects  of  enjoyment,  declared — 
in  the  respective  contexts — to  be  attainable,  constitute  the 
fruits  of  the  contemplation  of  symbols.  .Accordingly,  as 
producing  fruits  of  a distinct  kind,  one  up^sana  does  not 
become  useless  when  another  has  been  practised.  And  the 
objection  that  the  mind  would  wander  away  from  the  point 
, does  not  at  all  apply  to  the  present  case ; for,  by  contem- 
plating one  symbol  at  certain  moments  and  again  at  another 
moment  contemplating  another  symbol,  the  apurva  or  in- 
visible effect  of  the  first  contemplation  does  not  become 
extinct.  Therefore  the  symbolic  contemplations  may  be 


54  COKTIMPLATIOM.  [S'ikshd-VoUi. 

practised  at  will|  either  one  alone  or  more  than  one ; and  in 
the  latter  case  the  many  contemplations  may  be  practised 
cither  severally  or  conjointly. 

The  Symbol  should  be  contemplated  as  Brahman, 
not  vice  versa. 

From  the  expression  Earth  is  the  first  form  ” it  may  at 
first  sight  appear  that,  being  the  first  mentioned,  earth  is  the 
subject  of  the  proposition  and  is  therefore  the  thing  to  be 
contemplated,  ue.,  the  symbol,  and  that  the  first  sound  in 
the  conjunction,  which  is  subsequently  mentioned,  is  the 
predicate,  showing  how  that  symbol  is  to  be  regarded.  On 
the  other  hand,  earth  being  the  superior  of  the  two,  the  first 
sound  in  the  conjunction  should  be  looked  upon  as  a symbol 
and  contemplated  as  earth.  For  instance,  the  small  salagra- 
ma  stone  is  regarded  as  the  Supreme— as  Vishnu,  as  Siva, 
and  so  on  ; but  not  vice  versa.  The  principle  that  an  in- 
ferior thing  which  is  a symbol  should  be  viewed  in  contem- 
plation as  a superior  one  is  established  in  the  Vedanta-sntras 
IV.  i.  5.  as  follows  : 

{Question :) — The  sruti  teaches  us  to  contemplate  that 
“Manas  is  Brahman,”  and  so  on.  There  arises  the  question, 
are  we  to  regard  manas  etc.  as  Brahman,  or  are  we  to  re- 
gard Brahman  as  manas  etc.  ? 

{Prima  facie  view :) — Brahman  being  the  Dispenser  of  the 
fruits  of  all  actions,  it  is  Brahman  whom  we  should  con- 
template as  manas,  as  something  not  Brahman.  * 

{Conclusion :) — Brahman  is  the  superior  of  the  two,  and  it 
is  therefore  proper  that  manas,  the  inferior  one,  should  be 
contemplated  as  Brahman,  the  superior.  To  take  an  ex- 


Anuvkka  tit.]  OF  coNjuudTibM.  55 

ample  from  our  wordly  concerns : when  a king’s  servant  is 
addressed  as  king  himself^  he  feels  honored,  but  not  vice 
versa.  The  word  ‘ as  ’ (Sanskrit  ‘ iti.’)  going  with  Brahman 
in  the  passages  “ let  him  contemplate  manas  as  Brahman  ** 
shews  that  manas  should  be  regarded  as  Brahman.  It  may 
be  asked,  how  can  Brahman  award  fruits  of  action,  when 
something  other  than  Brahman,  such  as  manas,  is  worship- 
ped ? We  answer  thus  : as  the  presiding  Lord  witnessing 
all  actions,  He  can  award  fruits  of  our  contemplation  in  the 
same  way  that  He  awards  fruits  when  we  worship  a guest 
who  is  entitled  to  our  hospitality.  Wherefore,  we  should 
contemplate  the  symbol, — which  in  itself  is  a thing  different 
from  Brahman, — viewing  it  as  Brahman. 

No  doubt  the  words  in  the  text,  “ the  sacred  teaching 
about  conjunction  shall  we  declare  in  the  five  worlds,” 
seem  to  imply  that  earth  etc.,  denoted  as  they  are  by  words 
in  the  locative  case,  are  the  objects  to  which  contemplation 
should  be  directed — that  is  to  say,  that  they  are  the  symbols ; 
still,  it  is  but  proper  to  understand  that  the  first  sound, 
etc,  are  the  symbols  which  have  to  be  viewed  as  earth  etc. 
When,  for  instance,  it  is  taught  “ Let  him  contemplate  the 
fivefold  Saman  in  the  worlds,”  it  has  been  made  out  that 
the  Saman  forming  an  integral  part  of  a sacrificial  rite  is 
the  symbol  which  should  be  viewed  as  worlds,  these  last 
being  denoted  by  a word  in  the  locative  case. 

Indeed,  this  point  has  been  established  in  the  Vedanta- 
Swtra  IV.  i,  6,  on  the  ground  that  Saman  used  as  the  object 
of  the  act  of  contemplation  is  the  main  thing  to  be  con- 
templated, and  is  therefore  the  symbol  which  should  be 
viewed  as  worlds.  Similarly,  here  in  the  passage  “ whoso 
should  contemplate  these  conjunctions,”  conjunctions  form 


object  of  the  act  of  contemplation,  and  we  are  therefor^ 
to  raderstand  that  they  are  symbols  to  be  viewed  as  e^th 
c|tc.  Thpugh  earth,  etc.,  are  symbols,  yet  as  constitut- 
ing the  forms  in  which  the  first  sound,  etc.,  are  to  be  viewed, 
th^sy.maybe  properly  referred  to  in  the  words  “in  the 
worlds’*  etc. 

Upasana  defined. 

To  discuss  yet  another  point : 

{Question’:) — What  is  up^isana  ? Is  it  a single  act  of 
thought  or  a frequent  repetition  of  one  and  the  same  thought  ? 

{Prima  facie  view  ) — Just  as  the  scriptural  injunction  “He 
shall  initiate  a Br<ihma?m  of  eight  years  into  the  study  of 
Vedas”  is  duly  observed  when  the  act  is  once  done,  so  too, 
by  a single  act  of  thought,  the  scriptural  injunction  is  duly 
fulfilled,  and  no  repetition  of  the  thought  is  necessary. 

{Conclusion  :) — Not  so,  we  say  ; for,  as  in  the  learning  of  the 
vedic  texts,  the  thought  should  be  repeated.  Just  as,  in 
pursuance  of  the  scriptural  command  that  every  one  shoxild 
learn  his  own  scriptures,  one  recites  the  vedic  text  frequently 
till  he  can  fix  it  in  memory,  so,  the  thought  should  be  often 
repeated.  If  the  very  word  ‘ adhyayana’  means  repeated 
utterance,  the  word  ‘ upasana*  also  means  a frequent  repeti- 
tion of  thought.  Accordingly  the  blessed  bhashyakara,  in 
his  commentary  on  the  Vedanta- S^^tras  IV.  i.  i.  says  as 
follows : 

“ Moreover,  the  words  ‘ upasana’  (devotion  or  contempla- 
tion) and  ‘ nididhyasana*  (meditation)  denote  acts  involving 
frequent  repetition.  Accordingly,  indeed,  when  we  say  ‘ he 
is  devoted  to  (upaste)  the  prince’,  or  ‘ he  is  devoted  to 


. t 

AmvUa  ///.]  0'  coKjuucTioM.  S9 

guru’,  we  refer  to  a p^son  .who  attends  on  the  prince  or 
guru  intently,  never  swervmg  from  the  act.  So,  when  we. 
say  * parted  from  her  husband  she  meditates  on 
refer  to  a woman  who  thinks  constantly  of  the  husband  and 
is  quite  anxious  to  meet  him. 

It  is  true  that  no  definite  measure  of  the  frequence  of 
thought  is  anywhere  prescribed  in  the  sruti,  as  is  done  iti 
the  case  of  mantras  meant  for  repetition ; but  the  thought* 
should  be  revolved  until  the  idea  that  the  symbol  is  the - 
Deity  contemplated  upon  has  struck  its  roots  deep^down  in 
the  mind  of  the  contemplator.  Therefore  the  Vartikakera 
says : 

‘‘To  approach  a thing,  viewing  it  as  something 
else  as  taught  in  the  scriptures,  and  there  to 
dwell  long  till  they  come  to  be  regarded  as 
one,  constitutes  what  is  called  upasana.”* 

It  is  like  wise  ministers'  having  installed  a boy  prince  on 
the  throne  and  constantly  waiting  on  him  till  all  people  come 
to  recognise  his  sovereignty  and  obey  him  as  their  king. 
When  once  the  symbol  has  come  to  be  regarded  as  the  Deity, 
the  idea  does  not  again  depart  from  it.  To  illustrate : the 
^ idea  of  God  comes  up  to  the  mind  on  seeing  the  idol  in,a 
ruined  temple  though  no  longer  worshipped.  The  results 
spoken  of  in  the  scriptures  will  accrue  to  him  who-has  wn- 
templated  the  symbol  till  the  idea  that  it  is  the  Deity  Him- 
self has  taken  a firm  root  in  the  mind. 


* Taittiriya-TJpanishad-Vartika* 


LESSON  IV. 

{Fourth  Amvdka.) 

PRAYERS  FOR  HEALTH  AND  WEALTH. 


In  the  third  lesson  contemplation  of  conjunction  has  been 
taught  for  the  attainment  of  progeny  and  other  fruits.  From 
that  indirectly  accrues  also  the  power  of  concentrating 
thought,  a necessary  condition  for  the  attainment  of  a 
knowledge  of  Brahman.  Now,  no  man  who  is  wanting  in 
retentive  power  of  intellect,  who  forgets  the  teaching  of 
scriptures  once  learned,  can  acquire  a knowledge  of  Brah- 
man. And  no  man  who,  owing  to  sickness  and  such  other 
causes,  lacks  physical  vigor,  etc.,  or  who  suffers  from  want 
of  food  and  clothing  and  the  like,  can  apply  himself  to  the 
study  of  the  scriptures  and  such  other  means  of  acquiring 
a knowledge  of  Brahman.  Therefore  mantras  conducive 
to  the  attainment  of  retentive  power  of  intellect  and  the 
like  are  taught  in  the  fourth  lesson. 

Prayer  for  intellectual  vigour. 

First,  the  sruti  teaches  the  mantra  to  be  recited  by  him 
w^ho  wishes  to  acquire  retentive  power  : 

I.  Who,  of  all  forms,  the  bull  of  chants,  sprung 
up  frotn  chants  immortal, — May  He,  the  Lord, 


59 


Anu,  IV,'\  prayers  for  health  and  wealth. 

me  with  intelligence  cheer.  Of  the  immortal, 
0 God,  the  possessor  may  I be ! 

Here  are  taught  japa  and  homa— the  recitation  of 
mantras  and  the  offering  of  oblations — as  means  of 
obtaining  medha  and  sri,  intelligence  and  fortune.  (That 
such  is  the  purpose  of  this  lesson  is)  shewn  by  the 
expressions,  “ May  He,  the  Lord,  me  with  intelligence 
cheer and  “ then  to  me  fortune  bring.” 

Pranava,  the  essence  of  the  Vedas. 

The  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ is  said  to  be  the  bull  of  Vedas 
because  of  the  ascendency  thereof  as  of  the  bull  in  a 
herd  of  cattle.  It  is  ‘ of  all  forms,’  because  it  pervades 
all  speech,  as  declared  elsewhere  in  the  sruti : 

“ As  all  leaves  are  fast  bound  in  the 
stalk,  so  is  all  speech  fast  bound  in  the 
syllable  ‘ Om,’  The  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ is 
all  this.”* 

It  is  for  this  reason  that  it  is  spoken  'of  as  the  “ bull 
of  chants.”  The  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ is  indeed  the  Object  of 
contemplation  here,  and  it  is  therefore  but  proper  to 
extol  it  as  the  bull  of  chants  and  so  on.  The  Vedas  are 
verily  immortal,  and  it  is  from  such  immortal  Vedas 
that  the  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ was  born  : that  is  to  say,  as  the 
most  essential  element  of  the  Vedas  did  it  sA*«c  forth  to 
Prajapati,  the  Lord  of  creatures,  when  he  began  to 
meditate  with  the  object  of  knowing  what  was  the  most 
essential  element  in  all  vedic  and  vulgar  speech.  The 


* Chba-Up.  2-23-4. 


LESSON  IV. 

{Fourth  Kmvdka.) 

PRAYERS  FOR  HEALTH  AND  WEALTH. 


In  the  third  lesson  contemplation  of  conjunction  has  been 
taught  for  the  attainment  of  progeny  and  other  fruits.  From 
that  indirectly  accrues  also  the  power  of  concentrating 
thought,  a necessary  condition  for  the  attainment  of  a 
knowledge  of  Brahman.  Now,  no  man  who  is  wanting  in 
retentive  power  of  intellect,  who  forgets  the  teaching  of 
scriptures  once  learned,  can  acquire  a knowledge  of  Brah- 
man. And  no  man  who,  owing  to  sickness  and  such  other 
causes,  lacks  physical  vigor,  etc.,  or  who  suffers  from  want 
of  food  and  clothing  and  the  like,  can  apply  himself  to  the 
study  of  the  scriptures  and  such  other  means  of  acquiring 
a knowledge  of  Brahman.  Therefore  mantras  conducive 
to  the  attainment  of  retentive  power  of  intellect  and  the 
like  are  taught  in  the  fourth  lesson. 

Prayer  for  intellectual  vigour. 

First,  the  5ruti  teaches  the  mantra  to  be  recited  by  him 
who  wishes  to  acquire  retentive  power  : 

I I 

I.  Who,  of  all  forms,  the  bull  of  chants,  sprung 
up  fropi  chants  immortal,— May  He,  the  Lord, 


59 


Anu.  /f^.]  prayers  for  health  and  wealth. 

me  with  intelligence  cheer.  Of  the  immortal, 
0 God,  the  possessor  may  I be ! 

Here  are  taught  japa  and  homa — ^the  recitation  of 
mantras  and  the  offering  of  oblations — as  means  of 
obtaining  medha  and  sri,  intelligence  and  fortune.  (Thit 
such  is  the  purpose  of  this  lesson  is)  shewn  by  the 
expressions,  “ May  He,  the  Lord,  me  with  intelligence 
cheer and  “ then  to  me  fortune  bring.” 

Pranava,  the  essence  of  the  Vedas. 

The  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ is  said  to  be  the  bull  of  Vedas 
because  of  the  ascendency  thereof  as  of  the  bull  in  a 
herd  of  cattle.  It  is  ‘ of  all  forms,’  because  it  pervades 
all  speech,  as  declared  elsewhere  in  the  sruti : 

“ As  all  leaves  are  fast  bound  in  the 
stalk,  so  is  all  speech  fast  bound  in  the 
syllable  ‘ Om,’  The  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ is 
all  this.”  * 

It  is  for  this  reason  that  it  is  spoken  ]of  as  the  “ bull 
of  chants.”  The  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ is  indeed  the  Object  of 
contemplation  here,  and  it  is  therefore  but  proper  to 
extol  it  as  the  bull  of  chants  and  so  on.  The  Vedas  are 
verily  immortal,  and  it  is  from  such  immortal  Vedas 
that  the  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ was  born  : that  is  to  say,  as  the 
most  essential  element  of  the  Vedas  did  it  shine  forth  to 
Praj«pati,  the  Lord  of  creatures,  when  he  began  to 
meditate  with  the  object  of  knowing  what  was  the  most 
essential  element  in  all  vedic  and  vulgar  speech.  The 


• CUha-Up.  2-23-4. 


60  COKTEIIPLATIOM  [SiksM-VolR. 

syllable  *Om*  is  eternal  aud  cannot  therefore  be  literally 
have-  a birth.  Mky  that  syllable  ‘ Om/  the 
Supreme  Lord,  tlfe  Dispenser  of  all  aspirations,  chfeer 
me  with  wisdom  ! Or  (to  interpret  the  sniti  better  still): 
May  He  strengthen  me  with  intelligence. — It  is  the 
strengthening  of  intelligence  that  is  here  prayed  for. — 
Of  the  immortal,  i.e.,  (by  the  context),  of  that  knowledge 
of  Brahman  which  is  the  means  to  immortality,  the 
possessor  may  I be. 

Pranava  is  the  highest  among  the  Vedas — which  are 
chanted  in  Gayatri*  arid  other  metres, — as  declared  in  the 
Ka^ha-Upanishad : 

“ That  place  which  all  the  Vedas  declare, 
for  which  they  declare  all  penances,  which 
seeking  they  live  the  life  of  celibacy,  that 
place  I tell  thee  briefly : it  is  ‘Om.*’* 

The  whole  universe  is  only  Its  embodiment,  inasmuch  as 
all  things  are  comprehended  in  speech  composed  of  words, 
and  the  whole  speech  is  comprehended  in  that  syllable  ‘a,’ 
-tWf^-first  member  of  Pra#»ava.  That  all  things  ar6  compre- 
hended in  sp^ich  is  declared  in  the  Aitareyaka  as  follows : 

Speech  is  his  (the  breath’s)  rope,  the 
names  its  knots.  Thus  by  his  speech  as 
by  a rope,  and  by  his  names  as  by  knots, 
aUthis  is  bound.  For,  all  these  are  names 
indeed.”  t 

Just  as  a dealer  in  cattle  ties  together  many  animals  by 


t Aitareya-ilranyakO) 


IV prayers  for  health  and  wealth,  bx 

bands  attached  to  one  long  extended  rope,  so,  in  the  hands 
of  Paramesvara,  the  Supreme  Lord,  speech  is  the  long  rope, 
and  names  such  as  ^ Devadatta  * are  bands,  and  by  these  b1 
things  in  the  universe  are  tied  up.  Everything  therefore 
rests  in  speech.  That  is  to  say,  every  man,  on  hearing  his 
own  [^name  pronounced  by  another,  comes  up  to  him  as 
though  he  were  bound  and  dragged  by  bands  of  rope.  That 
the  whole  of  speech,  with  all  the  things  in  the  universe 
comprehended  within  it,  is  itself  comprehended  in  Prawava 
is  declared  by  the  Chhandogas  in  the  following  words : 
‘*As  all  leaves  are  fast  bound  in  the  stalk, 
so,  is  all  speech  fast  bound  in  the  syllable 
‘ Om.*  The  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ is  all  this.” 

Just  as  the  va^a,  asvattha  and  other  fig  leaves  are  pervaded 
by  fibres  running  through  them,  so  is  the  whole  speech 
pervaded  by  the  syllable  ‘ Om.*  We  should  bear  in  mind 
that  it  is  through  the  syllable  ‘ a * that  the  whole  speech 
is  comprehended  in  the  Prawava,  as  declared  in  the 
Aitareyaka : 

‘“A  * is  the  whole  of  speech  ; and  mani- 
fested through  different  kinds  of  contact 
(mutes)  and  of  winds  (sibilants),  it  becomes 
many  and  different.**  i 

Those  sounds  which  are  termed  sparsas  and  those  which 
are  termed  «shmans  are  uttered  in  the  Matnka-mantn 
with  ‘a*  attached  to  them.  The  sound  ‘a’  is  therefore  saic 
to  be  embodied  in  the  whole  speech.  Thus  has  been  shewr 
how  Prawava  is  * of  all  forms,*  embodied  in  the  whole  uni 
verse.  Prawava  manifested  itself  to  Prajapati  as  the  highes 


^ Chha.  Up.  2-23-4.  Aita.  Aranyaka  2-3-6-14, 


CONTEMPLATION 


62 


[S'iksU-Valll 


or  most  essential  element  of  the  Vedas.  Accordingly  the 
Chhandogas  read  as  follows : 

Prajapati  brooded  on  the  world.  From 
them  thus  brooded  on  threefold  know- 
ledge issued  forth.  He  brooded  on  it,  and 
from  it  thus  brooded  on  issued  the  three 
utterances  ( vyrthritis ),  Bh«/^,  Bhuva/r, 

Sva/j.  He  brooded  on  them,  and  from 
them  thus  brooded  on  issued  the  syllable 
‘ Om  ’ ” - 

To  brood  upon  the  worlds  is  to  meditate  deeply  upon  them 
with  a view  to  find  out  their  essence.  To  issue  forth  is  to 
clearly  shine  forth  as  the  essence.  Immortality  or  freedom 
from  death  constitutes  what  is  known  as  liberation,  and  that 
is  the  end  for  which  the  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ manifested  itself. 
Hence  it  is  that  the  Chhandogas,  in  the  opening  section 
treating  of  the  syllable  ‘ Om,’  read  at  the  commencement, 
“ He  that  is  well  established  in  Brahman  attains  immortali- 
ty.” Prawava  being  the  designation  of  Brahman,  he  alone 
who  devoutly  contemplates  Prawava  can  be  said  to  be  well 
established  in  Brahman. 

May  He,  the  Supreme  Lord,  who  is  designated  by  Pra- 
nava,  cheer  me,  the  seeker  of  wisdom,  (by  endowing  me) 
with  the  power  of  retaining  in  memory  the  scriptural  texts 
and  their  teaching.  May  I,  O God,  by  Thy  Grace  grasp 
the  immortal,  1.^.,  the  scriptural  texts  and  their  teachings 
whereby  to  attain  immortality. 

Prayer  tor  physical  and  moral  health. 

Having  given  the  mantra  for  acquiring  retentiveness,  the 


* Chha.  Up.  2-23-3,  4. 


/iflU.IV.\  prayers  FOR  HEALTH  AND  WEALTH.  63 

sruti  now  proceeds  to  teach  a mantra  for  securing  immunity 
from  sickness  : 

I JRTOT:  #3?frs%  ^sf^;  1 ^cT  ^ rfnM  IRII 

2.  Able  may  my  body  be,  sweetest  be  my 
tongue  ! With  ears  much  may  I hear ! The 
sheath  of  Brahman  art  thou,  veiled  by  intelligence. 
What  I have  learned  do  Thou  keep. 

Moreover,  may  my  body  be  able  ! May  my  tongue  be 
sweetest,  uttering  only  what  is  most  agreeable ! With 
ears  much  may  I hear  ! May  my  karya-k^rrana-sanghata 
the  aggregate  of  the  causes  and  the  effects,  i.  e.,  the 
gross  physical  body  and  the  subtle  senses  making 
up  my  whole  bodily  organism — be  competent  for  i4tma- 
jnana,  competent  to  acquire  a knowledge  of  the  Self. 
And  it  is  for  the  same  end  that  I pray  for  medha, 
intellectual  retentiveness.  Of  Brahman,  of  the  Para- 
matman  or  Highest  Self,  Thou  art  the  sheath,  as  of  a 
sword,  being  the  seat  of  His  manifestation. 

I speak  of  Thee  as  the  sheath  of  Brahman  because  those 
who  have  cast  aside  all  worldly  desires  perceive  the  Suprem  e 
in  Thee,  and  because,  as  both  the  designation  and  the  sym- 
bol of  Brahman,  Thou  art  alone  the  means  of  perceiving 
Hiin.~-(S.) 

Thou  art  indeed  the  Prattka,  the  symbol  of  Brahman : 
in  Thee  Brahman  is  perceived.  By  worldly  intelligence 
Thou  art  concealed  ; that  is  to  say,  the  truth  concern- 


64  CONTBltPLATlON.  t5Vw-r<iE 

ing  Thee  is  unknown  to  men  of  common  intelligence. 

Concealed  as  Thou  art  by  their  worldly  intelligence, 
thf^.i^hose  thoughts  are  engrossed  in  the  external  objects 
do  not  contemplate  Thee,  the  Divine  Being,  who  givest 
immortality. — (S.) 

Do  Thou  guard  what  I have  heard,  do  thou  guard  my 
wisdom,  the  knowledge  of  the  Self  and  the  like  which  I 
have  acquired  by  hearing  the  scriptural  texts  ; that,  is  to 
say,  do  Thou  enable  me  to  acquire  wisdom  and  retain  it. 

Do  Thou  guard  my  wisdom  from  the  attacks  of  attach- 
ment, aversion  and  other  such  evils : do  Thou  so  watch 
that  when  I am  engaged  in  the  study  of  scriptures  and  in 
other  means  of  acquiring  knowledge,  I may  not  meet  with 
any  obstacles  to  wisdom,  such  as  worldly  attachment  and  the 
like.— (S.) 

These  mantras  are  to  be  repeated  by  him  who  wishes 
to  improve  the  retentive  power  of  memory. 

As  I seek  wisdom,  may  my  body  be  healthy  and  thus 
efficient  for  a practice  of  contemplation  ! May  my  tongue 
be  endued  with  extreme  sweetness  ; may  it  be  an  apt  organ 
wherewith  to  recite  the  scriptural  texts  ! May  I hear  many  a 
scriptural  text  conducive  to  the  growth  of  wisdom  : may  I 
not  be  afflicted  with  the  evil  of  deafness.  O Prawava,  Thou 
art  the  place  where  I may  meditate  upon  the  Supreme  Being, 
the  Cause  of  the  universe.  Just  as  a leather-sheath  is  the  place 
for  preserving  a sword,  so  is  Pranava  the  place  for  a safe 
meditation  of  Brahman.  Accordingly,  concerning  the 
syllable  ‘ Om,’  the  Ka/ha-Upanishad  says  : 

♦ As  a salagrama  stone  is  concealed  by  the  idea  of  (Jod.— (A.) 


Aklk' ' prayers  ^or  health  aHd  Wealth.  65 

V ,,,“,  Tliisis  thebeit  means,  this  the  highest  means.’’-*  . ,< 
Thus  PrasRva  is  associated  with  the  retentive  power  of. 
intellect.  Do  Thou,  O Supreme  Lord,  designated  as  Thou 
art  by  that  grand  Prawava,  protect  my  laming — all  the 
secret  truths  of  the  Veda  that  I have  learned  with  my  ears— 
by  way  of  removing  the  obstacles  of  forgetfulness  and  the- 
like. 

Prayer  for  fortune. 

Here  follow  the  mantras  with  which  the  seeker  of 
fortune  should  offer  oblations  : 

I 3T5rTr^  ^ I ^ tt  I 

m.  [\\\\ 

3.  Bringing  to  me  and  increasing  ever  and. 
anon  clothes  and  kine,  food  and  drink,  doing  this 
long,  do  Thou  then  bring  to  me  fortune  woolly, 
along  with  cattle.  Svdia  ! 

Then,  t after  endowing  me  with  mcdha  or  iritelli- 
Ance,  do  Thou  endow  me  with  fortune  which  in  an 
jpstant — rather,  ever — will  bring  to  me.  and-  increase 
clothes  and  kine,  food  and  drink.  For  to  one  who  is 
devoid  of  wisdom  fortune  is  indeed  only  a source  of  evil. 

Works  conducing. to  man’s  good  ill  this  or  the  future 
world  can  be  accomplished  only  by  n^ean^  of  wealth,  human 
and  divine, — i.  material  wealth  such  as  money,  and 


* Op.  cit.  2—17. 

t On  my  acquiring  a knowledge  of  the  Vedic  teaching.— ^S.) 


66 


tbWiii^uwoM.  [:$iksU-ValU. 


qf^toal  WMklth  such  as  contemplation  of  the  Divine  Being 
and  wisdom.  Hoice  the  pnyer  for  the  two. — (S.) 

Fortune  is  said  to  be  woolly  because  the  fortune 
sought  for  includes  goats  and  sheep  as  well  as  other 
kinds  of  cattle.  From  the  context  we  are  to  understand 
that  here  the  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ is  addressed.  The  word* 
*svaha’  shews  that  the  mantra  is  intended  for  an  oblation. 

The  word  also  marks  the  end  of  a mantra  here  as  well  as 
in  the  succeeding  cases. — (S.) 

Do  Thou,  Supreme  Lord,  designated  by  Praeava,  secure 
to  me  fortune  from  all  sources,  providing  me  with  clothes, 
etc.,  for  my  enjoyment,  increasing  them  when  acquired, 
preserving  them,  when  thus  increased,  long  and  safe  for 

me  who  is  the  seeker  of  wisdom To  that  God,  who  will 

endow  me  with  fortune,  may  this  thing — clarified  butter  or 
the  like — be  an  oblation ! 

Prayer  for  obtaining  disciples. 

Now  the  iruti  gives  five  mantras  wherewith  the  person 
who  has  been  endowed  with  fortune  abounding  in  clothes, 
food,  drink,  etc.,  offers  oblations  with  a view  to  obtain 
disciples  for  the  propagation  of  the  traditional  wisdom. 


I ^ II 

*irss*F5  9nir  m II 


* The  word  is  explained  to  mean  ‘ May  it  be  a fit  oblation ; ’ of 
the  iruti  has  itself  said.* 


Ami.  IV.]  prayers  por  health  and  wealth.  S', 

WF5  ^ win  II  < II 

4.  May  devotees  of  Brahman  come  to  me  from 
every  side ! Svaha ! 

5.  Variously  may  devotees  of  Brahman  come 
to  me ! Svflhu  ! 

6.  Well-equipped  may  devotees  of  Brahman 
come  to  me  ! Svuha ! 

7.  Self-controlled  may  devotees  of  Brahmar 
come  to  me  ! Svuha ! 

8.  Peaceful  may  devotees  of  Brahman  come 
to  me  ! Svuha  ! 

May  disciples,  intent  on  the  acquisition  of  knowledge 
come  to  me,  a teacher  of  the  traditional  wisdom  ! Whateve 
be  their  respective  ends, — be  it  cattle,  or  the  r^on  o 
svarga,  or  the  region  of  Brahma,  or  liberation, — to  me  ma; 
they  come,  endued  with  intellectual  aptitude  for  wisdom 
abstaining  from  all  puerile,  sportive  outgoing  activities  c 
the  sense-organs,  free  from  anger  and  other  evil  tendencies 
of  the  mind  ! 

The  mantras  from  the  5 to  8 are  not  read  in  this  contex 
in  some  countries,  in  the  belief  that  they  belong  to  som 
other  recension.  * 

Prayer  for  fame. 

Here  follow  the  mantras  productive  of  fame  as  a teacbe 
of  traditional  wisdom : 

* Kor  does  Sri  Sankarocborya  recognise  (hem  aa  lornda 
vpart  of  this  Upanishad. 


M coktshplatiok  . [SHkkh»-yi^. 

^ \l%  il  

./  • TO  in  0 II 

9.  Famous  among  people  may  I become! 

^vaha ! 

10.  Superior  to  the  wealthiest  may  i become  ! 
Syuha  ! , 

...Superior  to  the  wealthiest  among  the  same  class  of 
people  as  myself,  may  I become  ; that  is  to  say,  may 
I bi  superior  in  virtues  to  the  class  of  men  who  possess 
wealth  1 

By  Thy  Grace,  0 Supreme  Lord,  may  I be  famous 
among  all  people  as  a teacher 

Prayer  for  union  with  the  Divine. 

How  the  worshipper  may  become  famous  and  superior  is 
described  in  the  following  mantras  : 

• cqi  IFI  TO  11  H II 
■ ^rqr  wTsif^TO  lin  II 

I #TO  nun 

11.  That  Self  of  Thine,  O God,  may  I enter ! 
Svaha ! 

12.  Do  Thou,  0 God,  enter  me.  Svahd! 

13.  In  that  Self  of  Thine,  of  a thousand 
branches,  0 God,  do  I wash  myself.  Sv<iha ! 

May  I enter  into  Thee,  the  sheath  of  Brahman. 
ilfaVing' entkM 'into  Thee,  may  I npt  be  Other  than 


fRAYERS  FOR  HEAl/TH  AND  WEALTH.  69 

Thyself  1 Do’ Thou  also;  O Lord,  enter  irtto  me.  Let 
IS /be  one  alone  in  Self.  In  Thee  alone  ( as  in  a river ) 
if‘at  thousand  branches,  I wash  all  acts  of  sin. 

'Gt>d  (Bhagavat) : ‘ Bhaga  * is  the  name  given  to  the  six 
Derfections  collectively, — perfection  in  power,  in  virtue,  in 
:ame,  in  fortuiiie,  Ih  ‘ wisdom,  in  non -attachment.  May  I,  O 
Supreme  Lord,  enter  into  Thee,  may  I ever  lovingly -serve 
Thee  as  though  I have  become  one  with  Thyself ! Do  Thou 
also'  enter  into  me,  i.ei,  do  Thou  graciously  hold  me  in 
great  love  as  though  Thou  hast  entered  into  me.  ' In  Thee, 
n Thy  thousand. forms,  I wash  myself.  That  is  to  say, 
jevotion  to  Thee  is  the  sole  path  to  Bliss. 

Prayer  for  many  disciples. 

The  sruti  then  proceeds  to*  give  a mantra  intentled  to 
sectire  many  disciples,  illustrating  the  thing  by  analogies. 

qmssq:  I wi  3/?;^  I irf  si?/- 

I ^ 

14.  As  waters  run  to  a low  level,  as  months 
into  the  year,  so  unto  me  ma}^  devotees  of 
Brahman,.  O Disposer  of  all,  come  from  eveiy^ 
side  ! Svaha ! 

The  yeatr  (aharjara,  consumer  by  days,  or  consumer  of 
days)  is  so  called  because,  revolving  round  and  round 
in  the  form  of  days,  it  wastes  away  the  worlds,  or 
because  days  are  consumed  in  the  year  in  which  they 
are  comprehended. 


^ i,  p.,  do  Thou  destroy  all  C0,use  of  distinction, — (S.) 


COllTEMPtATION.  iksM-  V MU 


As  water  flows  quickly  down  an  inclined  level,  as  months 
run  into  the  year,  not  one  of  them  transgressing  it,  so  may 
the  devotees  of  Brahman  come  unto  me  from  all  parts  of  the 
country  with  extreme  quickness,  and  may  they  never  trana* 
gressme! 

Prayer  for  light  and  peace. 

JT  JT  HT  \\\%\\ 

15.  Refuge  * Thou  art,  to  me  do  Thou  shine 
forth  ; forth  unto  me  must  Thou  come ! 

Thou  art  like  a refuge,  like  a rest-house  close  by, 
wherein  to  shake  off  all  weariness.  Thou  art  the  abode 
wherein  resting,  thy  devotees  can  shake  off  all  sin  and 
pain.  Do  Thou,  therefore,  shine  forth  to  me.  Do  Thou 
come  unto  me  : do  thou  make  me  one  with  Thyself,  as 
the  metallic  head  of  an  arrow  (becomes  one  with  the 
body  it  pierces  into). 

The  seeker  of  fortune,  as  spoken  of  in  this  section, — 
i,e.,  in  the  chapter  on  wisdom, — must  be  one  who  seeks 
wealth  wherewith  to  perform  the  sacriflcial  rites  which 
serve  to  destroy  all  accumulated  sins  of  the  past.  It  is 
only  on  the  extinction  of  these  sins  that  wisdom  shines 
forth,  as  the  smriti  says  : 

“ Wisdom  arises  in  men  on  the  extinction 
of  sinful  karma.  As  in  a clear  mirror,  they 
see  the  Self  in  the  self.” 

Do  Thou  make  me  illustrious  as  the  teacher  of  Brahma 
vidy«.  Do  thou  come  to  me,  i.e,  be  gracious  to  me. 

« >■  ■<  - 


* Or  the  haunt  of  all  living  creatures,— ^8.) 


lesson  V. 

(Fifth  Anuvdka,) 

CONTEMPLATION  OF  THE  VYAHRITIS. 


Conttmplation  of  Satnhita  (conjunction)  was  first 
taught.  Then  followed  the  mantras  intended  for  him 
who  seeks  wisdom  and  those  intended  for  him  who 
seeks  fortune.  These  mantras  subserve  wisdom  in- 
directly. Here  follows  the  contemplation  of  Brahman 
within,  in  the  form  of  Vyahritis,  the  utterances  where- 
by to  secure  the  fruits'of  self-lordship  (svarojya). 

Accordingly  this  section  proceeds  to  extol  His  glory. — (S.) 

The  three  Vyahiitis  being  held  in  high  regard,  Brahman 
declared  independently  of  them  may  not  be  readily  accepted 
by  the  intellect ; wherefore  the  5ruti  teaches  the  disciple  to 
contemplate,  within  the  heart,  Brahman,  otherwise  termed 
the  Hiraayagarbha,  as  embodied  in  the  Vyahritis. — (A.) 

rhe  fifth  and  the  sixth  anuvakas  treat  of  the  contempla- 
tion of  Brahman ; the  fifth  treating  of  the  contemplation  of 
the  subordinate  Devatos,  while  the  sixth  treats  of  Brahman, 
the  Supreme  Devata.  First,  the  5ruti  speaks  of  the  three 
Vyahfitis  as  the  symbols  of  the  three  subordinate  Devatus. 

The  three  Utterances. 

^ KlUrW*.  II  ^11 

1.  ' BhitA,'  ‘ BhuvaA,’  'SuvaA  ’ : there  are  thus, 
verily,  these  three  utterances. 


^ Contemplation.  [S^iksh^valli. 

The  utterances  mentioned  here  are  known  as  the 
most  celebrated  ones. 

Vy<jhntis  are  so  called  because  they  are  uttered  in  various 
rituals,  such  as  agnihotra,  as  is  w^l  knowpito  . 

The  Fourth  Utterance. 

Having  thus  spoken  of  the  three  Vyahntis  well.kppwp  hi 
connection  with  the  ritualistic  section,  the  sruti  proceeds  to 
declare  another  Vyahriti  as  a symbol : 

2.  Of  them,  verily,  that  one,  the  fourth, 
‘MahaA’,  did  the  son  of  Mahachamasa  - discover. 

This  Vyahriti,  namely  ‘MahaA’,*is  the  fourth  of  thepi,.. 
It  was  the  son  of  Mahachamasa  that  discovered  this 
fourth  Vyahriti.  As  a past  event’  is  described  here, 
the  present  tense  should  be  understood  in  the  sense,  of, 
past  time.  Mention  of  Mahachamasya  is  intended  to 
show  that  the  Vyahriti  w'as  discovered  by  a i?ishi. 
Since  the  name  of  the  7?ishi  is  mentioned  here,  w^e'^ 
understand  that  contemplation  of  the  Rishi  forms  an 
integral  part  of  the  upasana  tabght  here. 

Mahachamasa’ is  so  named  after  the  great  vessel  (chamasa) 
of  Soma.  The  vesssel  of  Soma  is  spoken  of  as  ‘ great  be- 
cause it  is  used  in  most  of  the  Soma  sacrifices.  His  son  is 
the  7?ishi  here  referred  to  as  MahacliamaSya*.  *'  That  .RMhi 
teaches  the  Vyahriti  ‘Maha/^’, — the  fourth  of  the  Vyahritis 
of  .which  three  have  been  mentioned  as  BfiaA  etc!,— as  the 
main  object  of  contemplation.  • 


Atm.  V.] 


OF  tHE  vyx'HR'lTlS.  73 

Contemplation  of  the  Utterances. 

Now  the  smti  proceeds  to  enjoin  how  the  four  Vyahntis 
should  be  regarded  in  contemplation. 

I ^ ^ 1 3i5fFPir  \\\\\ 

3.  That  is  Brahman  ; that  is  ^^tman  ; its  limbs 
the  other  Gods, 

The  Vyflhriti  uttered  as  MahaA,  and  discovered  by  the 
son  ot  Mahachamasa, — that  is  Brahman.  * Indeed, 
Brahman  is  Mahat  (the  Great) ; and  the  fourth  Vyahriti, 
too,  is  MahaA. — What  else  is  that  Vyahriti  ? — It  is 
that.4tman,  t because  it  is  all-reaching.  The  other 
Vy^^hfitis, — the  v^orlds,  the  Gods,  the  Vedas,  the 
prtinas, — are  all,  indeed,  reached  by  the  Vyahriti, 
‘MahaA,’  ix.,  by  the  sun,  the  moon,  Brahman  (Pranava) 
and  food  respectively.  The  other  Gods  are  therefore 
its  limbs.  Here  ‘ Gods  ’ stand  for  others  also,  namely, 
worlds,  Vedas  and  pranas. 

‘MahaA’,  the  fourth  Vynhnti,  should  be  regarded  as 
Brahman,  the  Reality,  Because  it  is  Brahman,  this  fourth 
Vyahriti  is  .^tman  abiding  in  the  middle  of  the  body.  The 
other  Gods  of  the  Vyahritis  should  be  regarded  as  its  limbs, 
namely,  hands,  feet,  and  the  like. — Or,  this  may  be  a mere 

♦ That  is  to  say,  let  this  fourth  vyahriti  be  contemplated  upon 
as  Brahman.  It  should  bo  regarded  as  Brahman,  because  of  its 
greatness,  and  as  .dtman  because  it  pervades  all. — (S.) 

t iltman  is  derived  from  a root  which  means  ‘ to  reach,’  ‘ to 
pervade,* 


XO 


CONTElMPLAtlON.  \^\kSh(i^V(Uii^ 


praise  of  the  fourth  Vyahnti,  no  contemplation  of  them  as 
such  being  enjoined  here.  The  word  ‘ Maha/j  * being  derivec 
from  a root  meaning  ‘ to  worship,’  it  is  but  proper  to  praise 
the  Vy^ihriti  as  Brahman,  the  Adorable  One.  Just  as  the  con- 
scious Self  is  superior  to  the  limbs  of  the  body,  [so  ‘ Maha/t  * 
the  fourth  Vyahnti  is  superior  to  the  other  Vyahritis. 

Contemplation  of  the  Utterances  as  the  Worlds. 

The  Upanishad  proceeds  to  enjoin  the  contemplation  of 
the  Vyahritis  as  the  worlds  : 

I m #fjT  n « n 

4.  As  EHmA,  verily,  is  this  world  ; as  Bhuva/f, 
the  mid-region  ; as  Suva//,  the  other  world  ; as 
MahaA,  the  sun;  by  the  sun,  indeed,  do  all  worlds 
excel. 

Because  Gods,  the  worlds,  etc.,  are  all  the  limbs  of 
the  Vyahnti  ‘Maha/i,’  which  is  the  trunk  as  it  were, 
therefore  it  is  said  that  by  the  sun  the  worlds  attain 
growth  and  so  forth.  It  is  indeed  by  the  trunk  of  the 
body  that  the  limbs  attain  growth.  Thus  the  first 
Vyflhriti  ‘BhaA’  should  be  regarded  as  the  world,  as 
Agni,  as  the  2?igveda,  as  prana ; and  so  should  the 
other  Vyahritis  be  regarded  each  in  four  forms. 

The  Vyahnti  ‘MahaA’  is  the  trunk  as  it  were  of  Brahman 
or  the  Hira«yagarbha  who  ensouls  the  worlds  etc.  As  the 
^runk  of  the  body  contributes  to  the  growth  of  the  limbs,  so 


75 


Anu.  vya'hr'itis. 

in  the  form  of  the  sun  etc.,  the  Vyahriti  ‘MahaA*  contributes 
to  the  growth  of  the  worlds  and  so  on. — This  is  another 
reason  why  Maha/^  is  spoken  of  as  ^tman,  the  first  reason 
being  that  MahaA  reaches  all. — (A.  & S.) 

Because  all  worlds  fall  within  the  ken  of  our  regard 
(mahrrrrto  Togard  with  reverence)  only  when  illumined  by 
the  sun,  it  is  very  proper  that  Maha/j  should  be  regarded 
as  the  sun. 

Contemplation  of  the  Utterances  as  Gods. 

Now  the  Upanishad  enjoins  the  contemplation  of  the 
Vyahritis  as  Gods  : 

^ ^ 3#;  I ^ I I 

^ I m I]  ^ II 

5.  As  BJihA,  verily,  is  Agni,  Fire  ; as  BhuvaA 
is  Vrtyu,  the  Air  ; as  Suva/i  is  /4ditya,  the  Sun  ; 
as  Maha/f  is  Chandramas,  the  Moon  ; by  Chan- 
dramas,  indeed,  do  all  luminaries  excel. 

It  is  only  when  the  moon  shines  that  all  the  stars  arounc 
shine  in  excellent  forms. 

Contemplation  of  the  Utterances  as  the  Vedas. 

Then  the  Upanishad  enjoins  the  contemplation  of  th 
Vydhritis  as  the  A'^edas  : 

^ I ^ ^ ?rrqTI%  | | q; 

# m I sfirqr  ^ ^ ^ \\%\\ 


76 


CONTBUPLATIOK. 


[^iksM-ValR. 

6.  As  Bh«A,  verily,  asthei?iks;  as  BhuvaA, 
the  Samans ; as  SuvaA,  the  Yajuses  ; as  MahaA, 
Brahman  ; by  Brahman,  indeed,  do  all  the  Vedas 
excel. 

“Brahman”  here  means  the  syllable  ‘Om’ ; none  else 
can  be  meant  here  where  we  are  concerned  with  words, 
namely,  the  Vedas. 

The  fiiks,  the  Samans,  and  the  Yajuses  refer  to  the 
mantras  occurring  in  the  three  Vedas  respectively. 
‘Brahman’  here  denotes  the  syllable  ‘ Om.’  By  ‘Om’  indeed 
are  all  the  Vedas  made  excellent,  inasmuch  as  the  recitation 
of  the  Vedas  is  preceded  by  that  of  the  Pranava. 

Contemplation  of  the  Utterances  as  life-breaths. 

Now  the  Upanishad  enjoins  the  contemplation  of  the 
Vyahritis  as  prana.,  life-breath : 

I JTFT:  I ^ 1 I ^ 

1 31^  ^ snqr  ll^sll 

7.  As  Bhuh,  verily,  is  the  upward  life ; as 
BhuvaA,  the  downward  life  ; as  SuvaA,  the  per- 
vading life  ; as  MahaA,  the  food  ; by  food,  indeed, 
do  all  lives  excel. 

It  is  only  when  food  is  eaten  that  the  cravings  of  vitality 
are  satisfied. 

Vyuhritis  represent  Purusha  in  His  sixteen  phases. 

Now  the  Upanishad  concludes  its  teaching  concerning  the 
Vyshntis  regarded  as  the  worlds  and  so  on  : 


77 


Anu.  F,]  OF  THE  VYA'hr'iTIS. 

m ^ I sqijaq:  ll^ll 

They,  verily,  these  four  (Vyahritis)  become 
fourfold  ; four,  four  are  the  Vy^^hntis. 

They,  namely,  these  four  (Vyahritis),  BhwA,  BhuvaA, 
SuvaA  and  Maha/i,  are  each  fourfold,  each  being  in  four 
forms.  Four  in  all,  they  become  each  four. — Reitera- 
tion of  them  as  presented  above  is  meant  to  impress 
that  they  should  necessarily  be  contemplated  in  the 
aforesaid  manner. 

It  is  not  merely  to  magnify  the  Vy^rhntis  that  this  is  re- 
peated. It  is  intended  to  impress  that  each  Vy^hnti  should 
be  contemplated  in  its  four  aspects,  so  that  the  contempla- 
tion may  comprehend  the  Supreme  Spirit  (Purusha)  in  His 
sixteen  phases  — CA.) 

Each  Vyahfiti  becoming  four,  the  Vy^hritis  in  all  become 
sixteen.  To  show  that  all  of  them  should  enter  into  the 
contemplation,  ‘four’  is  twice  repeated  in  the  last  sentence. 

Contemplation  of  the  Utterances  enjoined. 

Now  the  Upanishad  enjoins  the  contemplation  of  the 
Vyahntis  : 

^ I si?T  I IK  u 

9.  Whoso  contemplates  them,  he  knows 
Brahman  ; to  him  do  all  Devas  offer  tribute. 

He  who  contemplates  the  Vyahritis  mentioned  abov^ 
knows  Brahman. 


78 


CONTEMPLATION 


[S'ikshh--Vall\. 

{Objection) : — ‘Brahman  being  already  known, — as  has 
been  declared  above  ‘‘  That  is  Brahman ; That  the 
iltman,” — there  is  no  necessity  to  declare  here  that  he 
knows  Brahman,  as  if  Brahman  were  unknown  before. 

{Answer:) — No.  There  is  no  room  here  for  such 
objection,  because  the  sruti  intends  to  teach  something 
in  special  about  Brahman. — True ; that  the  fourth 
Vyahriti  is  Brahman  has  been  known  ; but  neither  the 
distinctive  feature  of  His  being  knowable  within  the 
heart  nor  the  whole  description  (to  be  given  in  the  next 
lesson)  of  Himself  and  of  His  attributes, — that  He  is 
formed  of  thought,  that  He  is  full  of  peace,  and  so  on, — 
is  yet  known.  It  is  indeed  with  a view  to  teach  all  this 
that  the  sastra  looks  upon  Brahman  as  if  unknown  and 
says  he  knows  Brahman.”  Hence  no  room  for  the 
objection.  The  meaning  is  this  : he  knows  Brahman, 
who  contemplates  Him  as  possessed  of  all  the  attributes 
to  be  described  in  the  sequel.  So  that  this  lesson 
relates  to  the  same  thing  that  is  treated  of  in  the  next : 
both  the  lessons  treat,  indeed,  of  one  and  the  same 
upasana.  And  there  is  also  something  in  the  sequel 
which  points  to  this  conclusion.  The  words  “ He  is 
established  in  Fire  as  IShiih  ” constitute  a mark  point- 
ing to  the  unity  of  upasana.  Nothing  here  goes  to 
signify  that  two  distinct  contemplations  are  here  en- 
joined. There  are  no  words,  indeed,  such  as  ‘ veda,’ 
‘upasfta,’ — i,e,  ‘let  him  regard’,  ‘let  him  contemplate,’ — 
marking  off  one  injunction  from  the  other.  The  words 
be  who  knows  (veda)  them,”  occurring  in  the  fifth 


Am.  OF  THE  VYa‘hR  ITIS.  W 

lesson  refer  to  what  is  to  come  next  and  does  Hot  there- 
fore point  to  any  distinction  in  the  contemplation 
(upasana).  It  has  been  shewn  how  these  words  refer 
to  what  is  to  be  said  in  the  next  lesson  which  teaches 
the  distinctive  features  of  Brahman  (to  be  contemplated 
here). 

To  him  who  contemplates  thus,  all  Devas,  becoming 
his  subordinates,  bring  tribute  on  his  attaining  to  self- 
lordship (svarajya).  All  the  worlds  as  well  as  all  Devas 
contribute  to  his  enjoyment  according  to  their  respective 
powers.  This  is  the  fruit  accruing  to  the  contemplator. 

To  him  who  contemplates  the  Vyahritis  regarded  as  the 
Earth  and  so  on,  Indra  and  all  other  Gods  pay  reverential 
homage. 

[Objection) : — He  who  contemplates  symbols  such  as  the 
Vy^diyitis  here  spoken  of  cannot  attain  to  the  BrahmadokOi 
inasmuch  as  in  the  Vedanta-swtras,  IVh  iii.  15,  it  has  been 
determined  that  those  alone  attain  to  that  region  who 
contemplate  Brahman  independent  of  a symbol.  Thus  as 
they  do  not  attain  to  Brahman,  it  is  not  right  to  say  that 
he  is  worshipped  by  all  Gods. 

[Answer) : — No  such  objection  can  be  urged  here.  For, 
when  a person  contemplates  the  Vyahritis,  he  contemplates 
Brahman  also  as  taught  in  the  next  lesson.  The  contempla- 
tion of  Brahman  is,  indeed,  the  primary  factor,  while  the 
contemplation  of  the  Vyiihntis  is  supplemental  to  it.  The 
contemplator,  therefore,  does  attain  to  Brahman,  and  it  is 
but  right  to  say  that  he  will  1^  worshipped  by  all  Gods. 


LESSON  VI. 

{Sixth  Anuvdka,) 

CONTEMPLATION  OF  BRAHMAN. 


It  has  been  said  that  the  other  Gods  represented  by 
'Bhuh^  BhuvaA,  and  SuvaA  are  the  limbs  of  Brahman, 
the  Hirawyagarbha  represented  by  MahaA,  the  fourth 
Vyahriti.  Now  the  sruti  declares  that  the  hridaya- 
akosa,  the  bright  space  in  the  heart,  is  the  proper  place 
for  the  contemplation  and  immediate  perception  of  that 
Brahman  whose  limbs  the  other  Gods  are,  just  as  the 
salagrama  stone  is  the  proper  place  for  the  contempla- 
tion of  Vishnu.  Indeed,  when  contemplated  there,  that 
Brahman  is  immediately  perceived  in  all  His  attri- 
butes,— as  formed  of  thought  and  so  on, — as  theamalaka 
fruit  is  seen  in  full  when  held  in  the  palm.  It  is  necessary 
also  to  declare  the  path  by  which  to  attain  to  the  state 
of  the  universal  Self.  With  this  end  in  view  the  sruti 
proceeds  with  the  sixth  anuvaka. 

Brahman  in  the  Heart. 

^ 3Tnf»Rr:  I I 

II  Ul 

I.  Here,  in  this  bright  space  within  the  heart, 
is  He,  that  Soul  who  is  formed  of  thought,  un- 
dying, full  of  light. 


OF  BRAHIiiAN. 


Anu.  Vl.’] 


gx 


The  heart  is  the  lotus-like  fleshy  organ,  the  seat  of 
life,  with  the  apertures  of  many  a nodi  opening  into  it, 
with  its  head  downward  ; and  it  is  seen  and  well  recog- 
nised by  all  when  a sacrificial  animal  is  dissected. 
There  is  akasa  or  bright  space  within  it  as  there  is  in  a 
vessel.  Therein  is  the  Purusha,  the  Soul,  so  called 
because  He  lies  in  the  body,  or  because  by  Him  the 
Earth  and  all  other  worlds  are  filled.  He  is  mano- 
maya,  formed  of  manas,  thought  or  consciousness, — 
so  described  because  He  is  known  through  thought  or 
* consciousness.  Or,  ‘manas’  may  mean  anta/x-karana,  the 
organ  of  thinking,  and  the  Manomaya  is  He  who  identi- 
fies Himself  with  thought,  or  whose  characteristic  mark 
it  is.  He  is  immortal.  He  is  effulgent,  full  of  light. 

Brahman,  who  has  been  declared  as  if  He  were  remote,  is 
now  said  to  be  the  immediate  one. — Do  thou  see  the  Self 
by  thyself  in  the  space  within  the  heart.  This  space  within 
the  heart  is  the  abode  of  buddhi,  the  intellect.  There  dwells 
the  Soul  (Purusha)  to  be  cognised  immediately  as  one  formed 
of  thought  (Manomaya).  The  Soul  is  spoken  of  as  Mano- 
maya because,  just  as  Rrthu,  the  eclipsing  shadow,  is  seen 
along  with  the  moon,  so  is  the  Soul  directly  seen  only  along 
with  the  manas.  Or,  because*  the  manas  is  the  organ 
by  which  the  Soul  (Purusha)  can  think  of  objects.  He  is 
spoken  of  as  Manomaya.  Or,  the  Soul  is  spoken  of  as 
Manomaya  because  He  identifies  Himself  with  manas ; or 
because  the  Soul  is  manifested  through  manas,  v.'hich 
therefore  forms  the  mark  pointing  to  His  existence. — (S). 

In  the  fifth  lesson  the  contemplation  of  the  subordinate 
Gods  has  been  taught.  The  sixth  treats  of  the  contempla- 
tion of  the  paramount  God. 


contemplation. 


d2 


Valli, 


In  the  middle  of  the  heartdotus  there  is  akassL^  the  bright 
space,  of  the  same  capacity  as  the  thumb  of  the  individual 
to  whom  the  heart  belongs,  and  so  often  talked  of  in  the 
Srutis  and  in  the  Yoga-Sastras.  In  this  bright  space  is 
Purusha,  the  Param^tman,  the  Highest  Self,  the  All-pervad- 
ing. He  is  no  doubt  everywhere  ; but  here  the  5ruti  teaches 
that  the  heart  is  the  place  where  we  may  contemplate  and 
realise  Him.  Indeed,  manas  can  intuitively  realise 
Him  only  when,  having  been  restrained  by  sam^idhi  in  the 
middle  of  the  heart,  it  becomes  one-pointed,  as  the  5ruti 
elsewhere  says  “ He  is  seen  by  the  sharp  intellect.”  The 
word  ‘ this  * (Sanskrit  ‘ ayam  ’=  this  here ) preceding  the 
word  ‘ soul,’  signifies  immediateness  and  therefore  shews 
that  the  Soul  is  capable  of  being  immediately  realised  in 
intuition.  That  Soul  shines  forth  in  all  His  grace  and 
beauty  when  contemplated  in  the  middle  of  the  heart.  Ac- 
cordingly the  heart  is  spoken  of  in  connection  with  the 
Dahara-vidya  and  5amfilya-Vidya.  Manas  is  the  main 
feature  of  the  Soul  who  is  thus  to  be  contemplated  in  the 
heart : those  who  seek  knowledge  realise  Him  by  manas, 
and  those  who  resort  to  contemplation  have  to  meditate  with 
manas.  He  transcends  death  and  shines  by  His  own  light. 

The  Path  of  Light  leading  to  Brahman. 

Now  the  Sruti  proceeds  to  show  the  path  by  which 
the  sage  attains  to  Brahman  described  above,  as  realis- 
ed in  the  bright  space  of  the  heart,  forming  the  very 
Self  of  the  sage,  and  here  referred  to  as  Indra,  the  Lord  : 

*15(1^  I lIHll 


♦ yide  Chhandogya-Upanishad  VIIL  1*6;  HI.  14. 


OF  BRAHMAN. 


83 


Am.  VL] 

2,  In  the  mid-region  of  the  throat’s  two  pillars, 
that  which  hangs  down  like  a nipple, — that  is  the 
birth-place  of  Indra,  where  the  hair-end  splits, 
up  dividing  the  two  regions  of  the  skull. 

There  is  a nadi  (tube)  called  sushumna,  passing  up- 
ward from  the  heart,  and  often  referred  to  in  the  yoga- 
s^stras.  It  passes  through  the  mid-region  of  the  throat’s 
two  pillars,  as  also  of  that  bit  of  flesh  which  hangs 
down  like  a nipple  between  the  throat’s  two  pillars, 
and  through  the  region  of  the  skull  where  the  roots  of 
hair  lie  apart.  When  it  reaches  this  last  place,  the 
nadi  passes  up  breaking  open  the  two  regions  of  the 
head.  That  is  the  birth-place  of  Indra,  that  the  path 
by  which  to  attain  to  one's  own  true  nature. 

The  sushumnrr-nizi/  which  starts  up  from  the  heart  forms 
the  path  by  which  to  reach  Indra,  the  Lower  Brahman 
presented  here  for  contemplation.  This  path  will  be  found 
described  at  length  in  the  works  on  Yoga.  The  sage  has  to 
force  his  way  up  through  the  nipple-like  piece  of  flesh  hang- 
ing down  in  the  throat  with  its  face  turned  downward,  and 
to  pass  by  the  path  of  sushumna  filled  with  udana-vayu,  the 
up-going  current  of  the  vital  air.  This,  it  should  be  known, 
is  the  path  of  Indra,  and  the  sage  can  effect  his  passage 
through  it  by  means  of  the  Rechaka-Prawayama,  that  process 
of  restraining  breath  which  consists  in  driving  the  life-current 
upwards  and  outwards.  Passing  by  that  path,  he  breaks 
open  the  two  regions  of  the  skull  and  reaches  the  surface 
of  the  head  where  we  find  the  hair-roots  parted  frQm  one 
another — (S.  & A.) 


9^^  CONTBMPLATION  [S'lksht^^VaHi. 

The  right  and  left  sides  of  the  mouth’s  interior  situated 
above  the  root  of  the  tongue  are  called  the  talukas,  “the 
throat's  two  pillars.”  Between  them  lies  a small  piece  of 
down  like  the  nipple  of  a heifer,  and  often  refer- 
red to  in  the  Yogasatras,  quite  visible  to  others,  and  even 
touched  by  an  expert  in  the  Lambika-yoga  + with  the  tip 
of  his  own  tongue.  That  is  the  seat  of  Indra,  of  Parame- 
5vara,  the  Supreme  Lord.  This  piece  of  flesh  stands  for  the 
Sushumna  nodi ; and  the  sruti  here  speaks  of  it  as  if  it  were 
Sushumna  itself  which  lies  quite  close  to  it,  in  the  same  way 
that,  when  pointing  out  the  moon,  we  point  to  the  end  of  a 
tree’s  branch  as  the  place  where  the  moon  is.  And  penetrat- 
ing into  this  nadi,  the  mind  becomes  one-pointed,  and  is  then 
able  to  immediately  realise  the  Paramatman,  the  Supreme 
Self.  To  this  end  the  Kshurika-Upanishad  reads  as  follows  : 

“There  are  one-hundred  and  one  nadis.  Of  them 
sushumna  is  regarded  the  best,  which  rests  in  the  Supreme, 
untainted,  of  the  same  form  as  Brahman.  Ida  lies  to  the 
left  and  Pingala  to  the  right.  Between  them  is  the  Supreme 
Abode,  and  he  that  knows  It  knows  the  Veda.” 

Thus,  the  Sushumna-nadi  is  the  abode  of  the  Supreme 
Lord.  And  it  is  His  abode  because  it  is  also  the  path  by 
which  to  attain  immortality.  That  it  is  the  path  to  im- 
mortality is  declared  by  the  Chhandogas  and  the  Kafhas  as 
follows : 

“ Of  the  heart  there  are  a hundred  uadis  and  one  more  ; 
of  them  that  one  pierces  right  through  the  head.  Rising  up 
by  this,  one  reaches  deathlessness  ; the  others,  leading 
in  divers  ways,  are  used  for  going  out.”  I 

* Vide  Minor  Upanishads  Vol.  II.  p]).  62-66.  f J^id  p.  12t^. 
f Katha-Upa.  6-16.  Chhandogya-Upa.  8-6-6, 


OP  BRAHMAN. 


Anu.  VL] 

Thp  Sushumna-narfi  forces  its  way  up  between  the  right . 
and  left  portions  ot  the  head  especially  there  where  tte 
roots  of  the  hair  lie.  Just  as  the  tip  of  the  hair  beyond' 
which  there  is  no  hair  is  spoken  of  as  the  hair-end,  so  here 
the  root  of  the  hair  below  which  there  is  no  hair  is  spok^ 
of  as  the  hair-end. 

State  of  Brahman  attained. 

Having  thus  taught  the  path  of  the  upasaka’s  exit  for 
attaining  the  fruit  of  the  contemplation,  the  sruti  proceeds 
to  declare  what  that  fruit  is : 

I ^ ^ ^ I I 

I ?lt5rqi%%Frcri%t  1 ^ l 

3TT^iRRlfR  I JIFIRW  1 

% 

3.  In  Agni  as  he  rests,  in  Vayu  as  BhuvaA, 
in  ^ditya  as  Suva/;,  in  Brahman  as  Maha/i.  He 
attains  self-lordship ; he  attains  to  the  lord  of 
manas,  the  lord  of  speech,  the  lord  of  sight,  the 
lord  of  hearing,  the  lord  of  intelligence.  Then  he 
becomes  this, — the  Brahman  whose  body  is  the 
bright  space,  whose  nature  is  true,  whose  delight 
is  life,  whose  manas  is  bliss,  who  is  replete  with 
peace,  who  is  immortal. 

By  that  path,  he  who  thus  contemplates  and  realises 


86  CONTEMPLATION.  [SVifes/kl-  ValH. 

that  Self  who  is  formed  of  thought  makes  his  exit  from 
the  head  and  becomes  established  in  Agni  (Fire), — 
represented  by  the  Vyahriti  ‘ Bhuh/ — who  is  the  lord 
of  this  world,  a limb  as  it  were  of  the  Great  Brahman; 
t\e.,  in  the  form  of  Agni  he  pervades  this  world.  Similar- 
ly in  Vayu,  Air,  represented  by  the  second  Vyahriti, 
‘BhuvaA,’  he  is  established.  So,  too,  he  is  established 
in  i4ditya,  the  Sun,  represented  by  the  third  Vyahriti, 

‘ SuvaA.’  He  is  also  established  in  Brahman,  the  main 
body  represented  by  the  fourth  Vy^zhnti,  ‘ MahaA.’ 
Resting  in  them  all  as  their  very  Self,  becoming 
Brahman  Himself,  he  attains  to  svarajya,  self- 
lordship ; t,  e.  he  becomes  himself  the  lord  of  the 
subordinate  Gods,  in  the  same  way  that  Brahman  is 
their  lord. 

In  this  world,  he  who  has  none  else  for  his  king,  who  is 
himself  the  king,  is  said  to  be  a svaraj,  an  independent  lord. 
The  contemplator  becomes  such  a king  here  and  attains  to 
such  kingship  over  manas,  speech,  sight,  ear,  intellect ; 
there  is  no  doubt  of  it.  Such  excellent  results  accrue  from 
the  contemplation  of  the  Divine  Being  described  above — (S.) 

And  to  him  all  Gods  will  offer  tribute  in  subordina- 
tion to  him,  just  as  they  offer  tribute  to  Brahman.  He 
attains  to  the  lord  of  manas  : he  attains  indeed  to  the 
Lord  of  all  minds,  to  Brahman  who  is  the  Soul  of  all 
things.  It  is  indeed  Brahman  who  thinks  with  all 
minds.  To  Brahman  he  attains  who  contemplates  Him 
in  the  aforesaid  manner.  Moreover,  he  becomes  the 
lord  of  all  organs  of  speech,  the  lord  of  all  organs  of 


brahMan. 


Am.  VI,] 


d7 


sight,  of  all  organs  of  hearing,  and  of  all  organs  of 
understanding.  As  the  Soul  of  all  things  he  becomes 
the  owner  of  the  sense-organs  of  all  beings  of  life. 

Moreover,  he  becomes  something  even  greater  than 
that ; he  becomes,  to  wit,  the  very  Brahman  of  whom  we 
are  speaking,  whose  body  is  akasa,  the  bright  space, — 
rather,  whose  body  is  as  subtle  as  akasa  ; whose  nature 
is  true  whether  expressed  through  matter  with  form  or 
through  formless  matter ; who  sports  in  the  pranas 
or  life-functions,  who  is  the  pleasure-ground  of  all 
life-functions;  to  whom  the  mind  causes  nothing 
but  happiness;  who  is  peace  and  perfection,  who  is 
found  full  of  peace  and  endued  with  the  attribute  of 
immortality. — It  should  be  here  understood  that  these 
additional  attributes  pertain  to  the  same  Being  who  has 
been  already  described  as  Manomaya  and  so  on. 

The  5ruti  here  describes  the  form  of  Brahman  represent- 
ed by  the  Vyahnti,  with  a view  to  enjoin  the  contempla- 
tion thereof.  As  the  life-giving  Soul  of  the  three  worlds, 
this  Brahman  expresses  Himself  in  as  ‘sat-tya,’  as  ‘sat’  and 
*tyad,’  as  ‘mwrta’  and  ‘amwrta,’  as  matter  with  form  and  as 
matter  with  no  form."  He  has  His  pleasure-ground  in 
the  senses  (pr«;/as) ; or,  in  Him  the  senses  have  their 
pleasure-ground . — ( S . ) 

By  the  contemplation  of  the  three  Vyah/'itis  the  contem- 
plator  becomes  established  in  Agni  and  so  on  : he  attains 
the  powers  which  Agni,  Vayu  and  .4ditya  possess.  By  the 


* Seo  Brill.  Up.  The  air  and  ether  (aka«a)  are  formless, 
while  light,  water  and  earth  present  themselves  in  forms, 


CONTEMPLATION. 


n 


[•s 


tofltemplation  of  the  fourth  Vyahnti  he  becomes  established 
tti  Sraliman  abiding  in  the  Satyaloka : he  attains  the  power 
of  that  Brahman.  It  is  this  power  which  is  described 
at  togth  in  the  words  “he  attains  self-lordship”  etc.  He 
becomes  himself  the  Lord  of  Agni  and  other  subordinate 
Gods.  Because  he  is  their  king,  it  is  said  that  all  the  Devas 
offer  tribute  to  him.  Not  only  does  he  become  himself  the 
lord  of  all^  he  attains  to  lordship  over  the  minds  of  all  beings 
of  Ufe.  As  the  very  Soul  of  all  living  beings,  he  is  the  lord 
cff  all  sense-organs. — The  antha/i-karawa  or  inner  sense 
which  is  one  in  itself,  is  spoken  of  as  manas  and  vijwana,  in 
virtue  of  its  two  distinct  functions:  when  acting  as  an  organ, 
it  is  called  manas,  the  mind,  while  acting  as  an  agent  it  is 
spoken  of  as  vijnana,  the  intellect. — Formerly,  he  was  the 
lord  of  the  mind,  speech  and  other  organs  pertaining  to 
an  individual  organism,  whereas,  now  that  he  has  by 
contemplation  attained  to  the  upadhi  of  the  Viraj,  to  the 
stkte  of  the  Universal  Soul,  he  becomes  the  lord  of  the  mind, 
speech,  etc.,  pertaining  to  all  organisms. 

After  attaining  to  the  state  of  the  X'ir^j,  the  Macrocosmic 
Soul,  he  will  be  endowed  with  a knowledge  of  the  real 
nature  of  Brahman  ; and  when  nescience  (avidyfl)  is  thus 
destroyed,  he  attains  to  a state  which  the  sruti  proceeds  to 
describe  as  follows  : Like  akasa  Brahman  is,  in  His  nature, 
devoid  of  form.  Or, — to  interpret  the  5ruti  in  another  way, — 
as  the  basic  Reality  on  which  the  imagination  of  the  whole 
universe  rests.  Brahman  is  the  essence  of  all ; and,  as  such, 
may  be  said  to  be  one  with  akasa  in  nature.  In  akasa  there 
are  two  elements  found,  one  being  the  Real  Basic  Substance 
that  may  be  described  as  Sat,  Chit,  -^nanda, — or  Existence, 
Consciousness  and  Bliss, — and  the  other  being  an  imaginary 


0I>  BRAHMAN. 


89 


Am.  VL] 

element  made  up  of  n^ima  and  rtipa,  name  and  form.  The 
latter  of  the  two  elements,  composed  ot  name  and  form,  is 
false  and  cannot  therefore  constitute  the  nature  of  Brahman  ; 
but  the  Basic  Substance  is  real  and  constitutes  the  nature 
of  Brahman.  The  same  thing  is  meant  when  Brahman  is 
described  as  one  ‘‘  whose  nature  is  true.**  As  the  Reality 
whereon  rests  the  whole  imaginary  universe,  Brahman’s 
being  is  real,  can  never  be  reduced  to  a non-entity.  So 
also,  all  life’s  play,  all  its  activity  such  as  birth  and  the  like, 
takes  place  in  Brahman.  That  prawa  or  life  is  bom  of 
Brahman  is  declared  as  follows : “ From  Him  is  prawa 
born,  manas  and  all  senses.”  The  same  thing  is  taught 
in  the  form  of  question  and  answer : 

Question: — “ Blessed  Lord,  whence  is  this'prawa  born  ? ’*  t 
Answer : — “ From  ^tman  is  this  prawa  born.”  J 
The  sruti  thus  speaking  of  pr<i«a’s  birth  also  serves  to 
account  for  the  popular  notions  as  to  the  AimdM  being 
present  in  the  body  or  departing  from  it.  This,  too,  has 
been  declared  by  the  sruti  as  follows  : 

“ On  what  staying  shall  I say  ? — Thus  think- 
ing, He  evolved  pra/ia.”  J 

Brahman  is  the  seat  of  all  this  play  of  life.  And  Brahman 
is  the  Being  in  whom  lies  the  bliss  of  manas.  When  manas 
ceases  to  face  sense-objects  and  turns  towards  Brahman, 
then  it  is  that  great  happiness  accrues  to  manas.  And  this 
is  declared  in  the  Maitreya-Upaiiishad  as  follows : 

“That  happiness  which  belongs  to  a mind 
which  by  deep  meditation  has  been  washed 


* Mundaka-Up  2-1-3.  t ^ra«na-Up  3-1. 
% Ibid.  3-3.  § Ibid.  6*3,  4. 


eoUTEklPLAtiON. 


{SHkskh-Vallu 


clean  from  all  impurity  and  has  entered  within 
the  Self  cannot  be  described  here  by  words  ; 
it  can  be  felt  by  the  inward  power  only.” 

In  this  Upanishad,  too,  it  is  declared  as  follows : 

“ Nectar,  in  good  sooth,  this  (soul)  possessing 
a thing  of  bliss  becomes.”  f 

And  Brahman  is  replete  with  peace,  the  mind  having 
ceased  altogether  to  wander  away.  Indeed,  Brahman  being 
known,  the  mind,  immersed  as  if  is  in  the  pure  nectar  of 
bliss,  will  never  wander  away.  This  kind  of  peace  is  describ- 
ed by  the  5vetovataras  in  the  words  “knowing  Siv^a  he 
attains  unlimited  peace.”  ^ 

The  Lord  also  has  taught  as  follows : 

“Thus  always  keeping  the  mind  steadfast, 
the  yogin,  with  the  mind  controlled,  attains 
to  the  peace  to  be  found  in  Me,  culminating  in 
Nirvana.”  ^ 

Wherefore,  Brahman  is  full  of  peace  obtaining  in  the 
mind. — Or,  the  peace  now  spoken  of  may  be  said  to  inhere 
in  Brahman  Himself.  Unlike  Maya,  which  is  subject  to 
change,  transforming  itself  into  the  universe,  Brahman 
never  changes ; He  is  quite  immutable  (k’//astha),  as  the 
sruti  says, 

’’Unborn  is  ^tman,  great  and  firm.”  * 

Accordingly,  Brahman  is  replete  with  peace  inherent  in 
Himself.  And  Brahman  is  devoid  of  death.  Death  means 
departure  of  the  vital  breath  from  the  body,  and  this  is 
possible  only  in  the  case  of  the  Jfva  who  is  associated  with 

♦ 0|).  fit.  6-34.  t Tait.  TJji.  2-7.  J Op.  cit.  -1-14 
§ Bha«  Gita  6-15,  *1:  Bri,  Up.  4-4-2U. 


Am.  VL]  OF  BRAHMAN.  gi 

the  vital  air,  not  in  the  case  of  the  Param^tman,  unassocia- 
ed  with  the  vital  air.  The  absence  of  the  vital  air  in 
Brahman  is  declared  elsewhere  in  the  sruti  as  follows : “He 
is  without  life,  without  manas,  pure.”* 

Contemplation  of  Brahman  enjoined. 

Having  thus  described  the  Entity  to  be  contemplated,  the 
path  by  which  to  reach  to  Him,  as  also  the  fruits  of  the 
contemplation,  the  5ruti  proceeds  to  enjoin  the  contempla- 
tion as  follows ; 

^ ll»ll 

4.  Thus,  do  thou,  0 Pmchma-yogya,  contem- 
plate. 

Thus  do  thou,  O Prachina-yogya,  contemplate  Brah- 
man described  above,  endued  with  the  attribute  of 
thought  and  so  on. — This  exhortation  of  the  teacher 
implies  the  high  regard  he  has  for  the  truth  here  taught. 

Thus  does  the  Teacher  named  Mah^chamasya  instruct 
the  disciple  who  is  pr^chma-yogya,  i,  c,y  who  has  prepared 
himself  for  the  course  of  contemplation,  having  washed 
away  all  his  sins  by  the  observance  of  all  obligatory  rites 
prescribed  in  the  former  (or  ritualistic)  section,  both  nitya 
and  naimittika,  those  wliich  have  to  be  practised  every  day 
of  one’s  life  as  well  as  those  which  have  to  be  performed  on 
particular  occasions.  The  word  “thus”  shows  that  the 
disciple  has  to  contemplate  the  Entity  described  as  dwelling 
within  the  heart  and  so  on,  with  the  attributes  described  in 
the  words  “whose  body  is  akrt^a,”  and  so  on.  No  doubt, 
in  the  words  “ This  then  he  becomes,”  the  5ruti  seems  to 


* Mund,  Up,  2-1-2, 


9*  CONTKMPUTION 

imply  that  the  state  of  Brahman  is  the  result  to  which  the 
contemplator  will  attain  after  having  attained  to  the  condi- 
tion of  theVir<ij ; and  we  should  accordingly  understand  that 
the  sequel — ^the  portion  commencing  with  “ whose  body  is 
akosa  ” — ^treats  of  mukti,  the  state  of  liberation.  But,  since 
the  sruti — “ In  whatever  form  he  worships  Him,  that  he  be- 
comes,**— declares  that  the  object  of  contemplation  and  the 
resultant  state  should  be  identical,  the  attributes  described 
in  the  words  “ whose  body  is  akasa  **  should  also  enter  into 
the  contemplation  of  Brahman  here  taught.  Hence  it  is  that 
the  Teacher  (Sankaracharya)  has  construed  the  passage  as 
describing  the  attributes  of  Brahman  here  presented  for 
contemplation. 


The  Fifth  and  Sixth  Lessons  treat  of  one  and 
the  same  Upasana. 

Now  we  have  to  discuss  the  following  question:  Do  the 
Fifth  and  Sixth  Lessons  treat  of  one  upasana  or  two  differ- 
ent upasanas  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — They  treat  of  two  different  upasanas, 
inasmuch  as  the  things  to  be  contemplated  as  well  as  the 
fruits  of  contemplation  spoken  of  in  the  two  lessons  are 
different.  In  the  fifth,  the  thing  to  be  contemplated  is  a 
symbol,  the  Vyahriti,  regarded  as  the  worlds  etc.,  whereas, 
in  the  sixth,  the  object  of  contemplation  is  Brahman  formed 
of  thought  and  endued  with  other  attributes.  In  the  former 
the  fruit  of  the  contemplation  is  described  in  the  words  “To 
him  all  Devas  offer  tribute ; whereas  the  latter  speaks  of 
quite  a different  result,  namely,  the  attainment  of  mdepend* 


Anu.  VL]  OF  BRAHMAN.  93 

ent  sovereignty.  Therefore  the  upasanas  treated  of  in  the 
two  lessons  are  quite  different. 

{Conclusion): — Both  being  addressed  to  one  and  the  same 
person,  one  upasana  alone  is  taught  in  the  two  places. 
In  the  words  ‘‘whoso  contemplates  them,  he  knows 
Brahman  **  {V,  9)  the  sruti  declares  that  the  contemplation 
of  Brahman  is  intended  for  the  same  person  for  whom  the 
contemplation  of  the  Vyahntis  is  intended.  Further,  the 
sixth  lesson  declares  the  fruits  of  the  contemplation  of 
the  Vyahriti  as  well,  in  the  words  “ In  Agni  as  BhsA  he 
becomes  established.”  (VI. 3).  Wherefore,  one  upasana 
alone  is  taught  in  both  the  lessons.  As  to  the  difference  in  the 
things  to  be  contemplated,  it  may  be  easily  explained  by  con- 
sidering their  mutual  relation  to  be  one  of  angangi-bhava, 
that  of  chief  and  subordinate  factors.  Then,  the  offering  of 
tribute  by  all  the  Devas  may  be  regarded  as  the  fruit  accru- 
ing from  the  awga  or  subordinate  factor.  In  the  case  of  the 
fruit  of  a subordinate  factor  spoken  of  in  the  passage  “ He 
who  pours  oblation  with  the  leaMadle  (parnamayi  juhaA), 
he  never  hears  of  evil  repute,”*  it  is  but  proper  to  maintain 
that  the  passage  is  intended  merely  to  recommend  the  main 
act  of  sacrifice,  but  not  to  reveal  any  particular  fruit  accruing 
from  the  subordinate  factor  referred  to,  inasmuch  as  nobody 
ever  seeks  to  know  the  fruit  of  the  act  of  pouring  oblations 
with  a leaf-ladle,  that  act  forming  but  an  integral  part  of 
the  main  sacrifice  and  being  therefore  incapable  of  producing 
any  fruit  of  its  own,  distinct  from  the  fruits  of  the  main 
act.  But,  here,  contemplation  ot  Brahman,  independent  of 
the  Vyahritis,  is  possible,  and  it  may  therefore  be  concluded 
that  the  latter  is  taught  with  a view  to  a particular  fruit  of 


^ Taittirija-samhita  HI.  5.  7. 


94 


CONTEMPLATION. 


[SHkU^VallL 

its  own ; and  its  fruits  are  spoken  of  not  merely  with  a view 
to  recommend  the  main  factor  in  the  contemplation.  The 
two,  therefore,  together  constitute  one  upasana,  of  which  they 
are  respectively  the  chief  and  subordinate  factors. 

Many  are  the  Sell- Comprehending  Upasanas. 

We  cannot,  however,  by  extending  the  principle  thus 
e^blished  to  the  contemplation  of  Brahman  as  earth  &c. 
to  be  taught  in  the  Seventh  Lesson,  hold  that  it  constitutes 
one  upasana  with  what  is  taught  in  the  Sixth  Lesson  ; for, 
on  the  principle  discussed  in  connection  with  the  SandWyo.- 
Vidya,  the  Dahara-Vidy^i,  and  the  like,  it  must  be  quite 
distmct  from  the  other.  This  latter  principle  is  determined 
in  the  Vedanta-Swtras  III.  iii.  58.  as  follows  : 

(Question): — The  Dahara-Vidya, " the  Sawiilya- Vidya,t  the 
Madhu-Vidya  ^ and  the  like,  are  described  in  the  Chhando- 
gya  and  other  Upanishads.  Now  a question  arises  as  to 
whether  all  these  vidyas  (contemplations)  together  constitute 
one  upasana  or  each  constitutes  a distinct  upasana  by  itself. 

(Prima  facie  view)  : — On  the  principle  determined  in  the 
preceding  section,  all  of  them  constitute  together  but  one 
upasana,  inasmuch  as  a contemplation  of  all  of  them  put 
together  is  the  best  course  and  there  is  but  one  Brahman. 

(Conclusion) : — Because  it  is  impossible  to  practise  all 
contemplations  combined  into  one  whole,  the  Vid^vrs  must 
be  different.  And  Brahman,  the  object  of  contemplation  in 
these  Vidyas,  cannot  be  regarded  as  one  and  the  same  ; for, 
He  differs  with  the  different  attributes  assigned  to  Him. 
Nor  is  it  impossible  to  determine  the  scope  of  each  Vidya, 
inasmuch  as  in  each  case  the  upakrama  and  the  upasa;wh^ira, 


♦ Chha-Up.  VIII.  1-t).  t Ibid  III.  14.  J Ibid  III,  1-11. 


OP  BRAMlitAK. 


$5 


Anu.  V/.] 

the  opening  and  the  concluding  sentences,  serve  to  clearly 
define  the  limits  of  the  Vidy^.  Therefore  the  several  Vidyas 
are  distinct  from  one  another. 

One  alone  of  the  5elf- Comprehending  Upasanas 
should  be  practised. 

The  two  Vidy^zs  described  in  the  Sixth  and  Seventh 
Lessons  being  thus  distinct  from  each  other,  one  alone  of 
them  should  be  practised,  but  not  both.  This  point  has 
been  determined  in  the  same  work  III.  iii.  59. 

[Question)  : — Now,  Up^san^s  are  either  Self-comprehending 
or  symbolic.  The  former  comprise  all  the  contemplations  of 
the  Conditioned  ^tman,  in  each  of  which  the  Being  contem- 
plated upon  is,  as  pointed  out  in  the  Vedanta-swtras  IV.  1.3, 
regarded  as  one’s  own  Self ; and  the  latter  are  concerned 
with  the  contemplation  of  the  symbols  (pratikas), — 
of  things  external  to  the  Self  and  elevated  in  thought  by 
being  studiedly  regarded  as  some  Devatd:  or  God.  Is  there, 
or  is  there  not,  a restriction  as  to  the  number  of  the  Self- 
comprehending  Upasanas  which  one  should  practise  ? 

[Prima  facie  view)  \ — Of  the  Self-comprehending  Vidyas 
such  as  S^«rfilya-\"idy^7,  either  one  alone  may  be  practised, 
or  two,  or  three,  as  a person  chooses,  since  no  authority 
constrains  us  to  practise  any  one  or  more  particular  upasa- 
nas ; and  there  is  indeed  no  reason  whatever  why  a person 
should  practise  the  Sa;/iilya-\'idya  alone  or  the  Dahara- 
Vidya  alone,  or  any  other  \^idya  exclusively.  The  matter  is 
therefore  left  to  one’s  own  choice. 

[Conclusion)  : — There  is  in  the  first  place  one  determining 
factor,  namely,  the  fact  that  no  purpose  is  served  by  others. 
To  explain ; The  object  of  the  Upasana  is  an  immediate 


^ COMtEMPLATION. 

intiutive  riAlisation  of  Jsvara.  If  it  can  be  accomplished  by 
« wiglt  upasana,  other  upasunas  serve  no  purpose.  More- 
over; the  realisation  obtained  by  an  upssana  is  not  one 
brought  about  by  an  organ  of  right  knowledge ; it  is,  on  the 
other  hand,  generated  by  incessant  meditation  and  consists 
in  thinkmg  of  oneself  as  one  with  the  Entity  contemplated 
upon.  How  can  this  idea  of  identity  remain  firm,  when, 
after  practising  one  kind  of  upasana,  the  person  abandons 
it  and  resorts  to  another,  and  thus  his  mind  passes  from  one 
idea  to  another  ? Thus,  by  reason  of  the  practice  of  more  than 
one  upasana  having  no  purpose  to  serve  and  even  causing 
unsteadiness  of  mind,  it  is  necessary  that  one  alone  of  the  Self- 
comprehending  upasanas  should  be  practised,  and  no  more. 

Contemplation  of  Brahman  as  the  Self. 

As  in  the  case  of  the  right  knowledge  of  Brahman,  so, 
even  when  contemplating  Brahman,  He  should  be  regarded 
as  one  with  the  Self.  That  the  right  knowledge  of  Brahman 
consists  in  knowing  that  He  is  one  with  one’s  own  Seif  has 
been  shewn  in  the  Vedanta-Swtras  IV.  i.  3 : 

{Question) : — Should  the  knower  apprehend  Brahman  as 
distinct  from  himself  or  as  one  vrith  his  own  Self  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) ; — Brahman  treated  of  in  the  scriptures 
should  be  known  by  Jzva,  the  knower,  to  be  quite  distinct 
from  himself,  inasmuch  as  Jiva  and  Brahman  cannot  be 
identical,  the  one  being  subject  to  misery,  and  the  other 
being  above  all  misery. 

{Conclusion) : — The  difference  lies  only  in  the  upadhi.  It 
has  been  clearly  shewn  in  the  Vedanta-SMtras  II.  iii.  40  that 
Jfva,  though  Brahman  in  reality,  is  subject  to  the  miseries 
of  worldly  existence  as  caused  by  his  connection  with  the 


OP  BMHUAii. 


r;;  m.,'  U ,vy/tMyu)U  .-niV.}  n&f!  on  '^nr/fjd 

: AS  ;llwe,>' 

^)^tw,eqfttl»em,  it  should  be  that,  M iWwtit! 

ca^.Tiifithfq^q^s.  qwn  Self.  ; Ha^ce  it  is  that  thw  yf\^  4»ipm> 
tl^q  rqat  truth  .mi4frsta9<J  Rrahwa  to  be  ideii^^/afithlti^ 
§^l^as4fi^e4  in^the  gi(a|i4  proposiitions^' J[,ann  9rahQia^{7/ 
‘‘This  Self  is  Brahman;*'  and  they  even  teiach  tbe::^aia 
thipg  to  their  disciples  ii^  the  words  ‘‘That>  Tbouvatt*^’ 
Tbprefo^e  it  should  be  known  that  Brahman  is  identi^^ 
yrith  the  Selff  , , . 


Accordingly^  in  the  present  case,  the  cdntemplatiott  should 
be  practised  thus;  “I  am  the  Paraniatnian,  the  Supreme 
Self,  formed  of  thought,  immortal,  full  of  ligiit/*  j ^ t . 

'How  Paramatman  is  Manomaya,  formed  of  thoughi. 

In  the  Vedsnte-swtras  L ii.  i.. it  has  l>eep  disqussetl,:  vicith^ 
reference  to  the  Sn>rdilya-Vldys,  hpw  the  Fatima ta(l;E^l,l9ap> 
be  spoken  of  as  Manomaya,  formed  of  thought. , > 

{Question): — In  the  Chhandogya-Upanisbad,  the  Bntity. 
to  be  contemplated  is  described  as  “ formed  of : .thought,; 
luminous  in  form,  embodied  in  prawa.” Is  Jt  Jiya,;,or^ 
/svara  who  is  thus  spoken  of  ? r 

{Pfim  facie  view) It  is  Jtva;  for,  in  the  case  of  Jtiva  st 
is  ;easy  to.  explain  his  connection  with  manas  and  the  like^' 
The  word*  “manomaya”  meaning  “ formed  of  manas”:  refem: 
to  a connection  with  manas  or  thought,  and  the  word  ‘^prSsa)- 
sarIraV  meaning  “ having  prasa  for  his  body  ” refers  to  a 
connection  with  prsiita  or  life.  Neither  of  these  can  ^be  ex*, 
plained  in  the  case  of  /svara,  owing  to  the  denial  of  manas  and 
prasa  (in  the  description  of  /svara)  in  the  words  “ Having'no 


♦ Op*  eit;  ^14^2, 


98 


COKTBMPLATION 


[S'ikshh^VallL 

prana,  having  no  manas,  who  is  pure.’*  Moreover,  it  can  in 
noway  be  explained  how  He  who  has  no  place  to  rest  in  can 
have  His  abode  in  the  heart,  or  how  He  who  pervades  all 
can  be  very  small  in  size  as  declared  by  the  sruti  in  the 
5andilya-Vidya : “ This  ^tman  who  is  within  the  heart,  and 
who  is  very  small.”  t Hence  it  is  Jtva  that  is  spoken  of  in 
the  passage  referred  to. 

(Conclusion): — The  very  Brahman  who  is  spoken  of  in  the 
preceding  passage — where  peace  (5ama)  is  enjoined  in  the 
words  “All  this  is  Brahman,  born  from  Him,  dissolving  into 
and  breathing  in  Him ; so  let  every  one  contemplate  Him 
in  peace”,  I — is  the  Thiig  to  which  the  epithets  ‘ mano- 
maya’  and  ‘ pra»asar/ra  ’ refer.  The  meaning  of  the  passage 
which  enjoins  peace  may  be  explained  as  follows  : — All  that 
we  see  is  Brahman,  because  from  Him  it  is  born,  unto 
Him  it  dissolves,  and  in  Him  it  bre  ithes.  Therefore,  since 
Brahman  who  is  Himself  the  All  can  have  no  likes  or 
dislikes,  one  should  be  peaceful  at  the  time  of  contem- 
plation. Brahman  being  thus  construed  to  be  the  sub- 
ject of  discussion  in  this  passage,  the  next  passage  in 
which  the  epithet  ‘ manomaya  ’ occurs  must  also  refer  to 
Brahman.  And  there  is  no  inconsistency  in  speaking  of 
Brahman  as  associated  with  manas  and  prri;/i  ; for,  though 
not  applicable  to  the  Unconditioned,  the  epithets  can  be  ex- 
plained as  shewing  how  Brahman  should  be  contemplated 
in  His  conditioned  form.  Therefore,  here  as  in  all  other 
Upanishads,  Brahman  is  declared  to  be  the  object  of  wor- 
ship. Nowhere,  indeed,  in  the  Upanishads,  is  Jtva  declared 
to  be  the  object  of  worship.  The  conclusion,  therefore,  is 
that  it  is  Brahman  who  should  be  contemplated. 

Up.  2-1-2.  t Ohhi  Up.  3-14-3.  3-14-1. 


OP  BRAHMAK. 


99 


Am.  VL] 

Just  as,  in  the  Chhandogya-upanishad,  it  is  to  Brahman 
spoken  of  in  the  passage  enjoining  peace  during  contempla- 
tion  that  the  epithet  ‘ manomaya*  refers,  so  also,  here  in  this 
lesson,  it  is  the  Paramatman, — designated  by  the  word 
‘ purusha’  which  means  * all-pervading*, — who  is  spoken  of 
as  ‘formed  of  thought*.  That  the  word  ‘ purusha*  means 
‘ all-pervading’  is  taught  in  the  Sreyo-m^rga  as  follows: 

“ Purusha  is  so  called  because  of  His  lying  in 
the  bodyy  or  because  He  is  full  in  Himself,  or 
because  all  that  we  see  is  pervaded  by  Him.** 

[Objection)  : — The  first  etymology  “lying  in  the  body  ** 
applies  to  jiva  also. 

(Answer): — No,  because  Brahman  is  here  the  subject  of 
treatment,  as  shown  by  the  opening  words  “ whoso  knoweth 
these,  he  knowetli  Brahman,**  as  also  by  the  concluding 
words  “ Brahman  whose  body  is  the  bright  space.** 

How  Brahman  is  full  of  light. 

That  the  words  “ full  of  light”  may  be  applied  to  Brahman 
has  been  determined  in  the  Ved«nta-S?/tras  I.  i.  20  as 
follows: 

(Question): — In  the  first  adhyaya  of  the  Chh<indogya-upa- 
nishad,  the  5ruti  first  taught  all  the  subsidiary  objects  of 
contemplation  connected  with  the  Udgttha-Upasana  and 
then  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  main  object  of  contemplation 
in  the  following  words  : 

“ Now  that  golden  (i.  e.,  full  of  light)  Soul 
(Purusha)  who  is  seen  within  the  sun,” 
and  so  on. 


Op  cit.  I 


COKTEMKATIOK* 


there  drolls  a certain  pm  pr 
of  his  works  (karma)  and 
b>ftF}0dgf%(vHy»)4Of  naupe^  kind,  has  attained  to  the 
lfp»tion;0{  a God’  (J3leva)!and.  is  engaged  in  the  government 
O^tbe'jwjrld^  t tAnd,.i^-  everywhere,  /svara  dwells 

illiiheraolannrh  also^  Hence  the  questicm,  which  of  the  two* 
is  spoken  ef  in  the  passage  quoted  above  ? 

(Prima/ofiie:  may  be  that  the  Devata  or  the 

Individual  . Intelligence  functioning  in  the  solar  orb  is  re- 
ferred to.  here;  for  the  soul  (purusha)  here  spoken  of  is 
said|tq.h^ye  a limited  sovereignty,  a seat  and  a colour.  His 
limited  sovereignty  is  referred  to  in  the  following  words: 

, <|i^nd  He  is  the  lord  of  these  worlds  which 
,are,  t)eyond  it  (the  spa),  as  also  of  the  de- 
of  the  Peyas.”/*' 

And  His  .seat  is  referred  to  in  the  words  ^‘who  is  seen 
(lying)  within  the  sun”.  The  epithet  “golden  ’ refers  to  His 
colour.  Now,  of  all,  who  is 

tlw.aixxletof:dl^  who  has  m colour  or  form,  cannot,  indeed, 
bersakl  to  hdve  a limited  sovereignty,  or  to  dwell  in  another 
as  His  abode,  or  to  possess  a colour  or  form.  Wherefore 
it  .1)0  ,^me  Deyata  or  Individual  Intelligence  who 
is  l^e;^ken  pt 

!)((»i?i«;Ifisaia):-^Tlie  ^golden  Purusha*  here  spoken  of  muiSf 
be^tibei&varai  lor  He  is  said  to  be  the  Sarvatman,  Himself 
the  all,  to  be  one  with  all,  to  be  immanent  in  all  things 
as  their  yery  e^^cew  In  , the  passage,  “ That  is  the  Rik, 
that  the  Saq^,  that  the  Ukt^,  that  the  that  the 

Brahman  (Vedas),**  f the  sruti  refers  by  the  word  ‘that*  to 


- ♦JBuf.  1-6-8. 


. . \ 


t JWd.  1.7.6. 


xof 


tli^  gqld^  P^fr^sba,  the  subject  of  discussioat  and  teacfa^ 
that  He  is  one  with  the  whole  imiverse  including  the  Rik> 
Seman  etc,.  And  this  can  literally  apply  to  the  One  Second- 
less  Parami^v^ra,  not  to  a Devata  or  Individual  Intelligence 
of  the  dual  universe.  And  the  attribute  of  being  free  from 
all  sins,  as  described  in  the  words  He  has  risen  above  all 
sins/*  is  a characteristic  mark  of  Brahman.  No  doubt,  the 
Devata  of  the  solar  orb  has  risen  above  works  (karma)  and 
therefore  generates  no  acts  of  virtue  and  sin  in  the  present 
or  in  the  future  ; but,  as  He  is  still  subject  to  pain  caused 
by  the  asuras  (demons)  and  the  like,  we  may  presume 
that  the  accumulated  sins  of  past  births  still  cling  to  Him, 
giving  rise  to  the  pain.  The  limited  sovereignty,  seat, 
and  colour  pertaining  to  an  up/idhi  can  also  Apply  to  the 
Paramatman,  the  object  of  worship,  when  associated  with 
the  upadhi.  Wherefore  it  is  /svara  who  is  spoken  of  as  the 
golden  Soul  (Purusha). 

Attributes  of  Brahman  mentioned  elsewhere 
should  be  borrowed. 

Just  as,  in  the  passages  of  the  Chh^indogya  Upanishad 
under  reference,  oneness  with  all  and  the  like  attributes  are 
regarded  as  characteristic  features  of  Brahman,  so,  here  in 
the  Sixth  Lesson,  immortality  and  true-naturedness  and 
the  like  may  be  regarded  as  characteristic  features  of 
Brahman.  Therefore,  it  is  the  Paramatman  who  should  be 
contemplated  upon  as  endued  with  intelligence  and  other 
qualities.  In  the  Sa;/^ilya-Vidya  the  Chhandogas  read  as 
follows: 

“Full  of  intelligence,  embodied  in  life,  lumi- 
nous in  form,  of  unfailing  will.”"*' 


♦Ohha.  Up.  3-14-2. 


CONTEMPLATION. 


[SHkshd^Vain. 


The  Viijasaneyins,  again,  read  in  the  Brihadarawyaka  as 
follows : ^ 

“ That  person,  full  of  intelligence,  unfailing 
light  indeed,  is  within  the  heart,  small  like  a 
grain  of  rice  or  barley.  He  is  the  Ruler  of  all, 
the  Lord  of  all ; He  rules  all  this,  whatsoever 
exists.  ” 

So  that,  on  the  principle  ] of  the  Panchagni-Vidya — 
contemplation  of  the  five  fires, — we  should  understand 
that,  though  the  three  upanishads  belong  to  different  recen- 
sions, one  and  the  same  Vidy^  (contemplation)  is  taught  in 
all  of  them,  inasmuch  as  the  Being  who  is  presented  in 
them  for  contemplation  is  of  the  same  nature — viz..  He  who 
is  full  of  intelligence,  and  so  on.  The  principle  of  the  Panch- 
agni-Vidya  has  been  discussed  in  the  Third  Lesson,  t The 
Vidya  being  identical,  each  of  the  three  recensions  should 
borrow  whatever  new  features  are  spoken  of  in  the  two 
others  and  contemplate  the  Being  in  all  His  features  thus 
brought  together.  And  this  principle,  too,  of  borrowing 
new  features  from  other  recension  or  recensions  has  been 
discussed  in  the  same  Lesson. 


Upasana  should  be  practised  till  death. 

The  contemplation  should  be  practised  till  the  attainment 
of  sakshfltk^xra  or  immediate  perception,  i.e,y  till  the  devotee 
comes  to  regard  liimself  as  one  with  Brahman  endued  with 
all  the  attributes  gathered  together  as  shown  above.  The 
word  ‘up^rsana’  means  “repetition  of  an  idea,*  as  has  been 
shewn  in  the  Third  Lesson,  j And  the  svxiti  also-~i;j>.. 


* Bri,  Up.  5-G-l.  f Vide  ante  pp,  44-4G,  J Ante  pp.  56“-67. 


Am.  VL]  OF  BRAHMAN.  lOJ 

‘‘Becoming  the  Deva,  he  is  absorbed  in  the  Devas,'^'*’ — speaks 
of  the  Siikshatk^ira,  or  intuitive  realisation  of  Divinity  in  this 
very  birth.  Even  after  attaining  the  s:iksbatkara,  the  upa- 
sana  of  Brahman  should  be  continued  till  death.  This  point 
is  discussed  in  the  Vedanta- s.vtras  IV.  i.  12,  as  follows: 

(Question) : — Are  up.isanas  to  be  practised  as  long  as  one 
chooses  or  till  death  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — The  word  ‘upasana’  means  a continu- 
ed current  of  one  and  the  same  idea  uninterrupted  by  any 
foreign  idea.  Tliis  can  he  accomplished  in  a limited  period 
of  time.  Wherefore,  it  may  be  practised  as  long  as  one 
chooses,  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  practise  it  till  death. 

(Conclusion)  : — The  idea  prevailing  at  the  last  moment  of 
life  is  the  one  which  determines  the  future  birth  ; and  that 
idea  cannot  arise  easily  except  by  practising  upasana  till 
death.  Hence  the  smnti : 

“ Whatever  object  a man  thinks  of  at  death 
when  he  lei^'es  the  body,  that,  O son  of  KunU' 
reaches  he  by  uhoni  iha:  object  has  been  constantly 
meditated  upon"'  f 

(Objection)'. — How,  then,  can  the  idea  of  svarga  possibly 
arise  at  the  last  moment  of  life  in  him  who  has  to  go  to 
svarga  in  virtue  of  the  Jyotish/oma  and  other  acts  of 
sacrifice  ? 

(Answer)  : — We  say  that  the  Jip/rrva,  the  unseen  effect 
generated  by  the  sacrificial  act,  will  produce  the  idea. 

( Object  ion  J: — Even  in  the  case  of  an  upasana  there  may 
exist  some  ap//rva  or  unseen  eflect. 


* Bri-Up.4-1‘2. 


t Bha,  Gita  VHl,  6, 


^ co«immi6k. 

V ''<hiiif''W6'  'shbliltf ' 

dlls  kiSfy^W  consist  rep^titibn  bf  thb 

i^6h  & a ffieani'  6f  bbtamin^  tlie 

^oiySt/  Other  wife;  bvery  kind  of  pleiasure  or  pain  or  ’ ike 
like  bcShg  ihe  resiult  bf  sin  ap^rva  or  mvisibie  cause,  there 
b'ito  ilbeihkklng  aa^lfiR^  which  is^the 

known  means  of  securing  the  pleasure.  Wherefore,  prhfctibe 
of  contemplation  till*  death  Is  necessary,  as  it  is  the  known 
means  of  iobtaining  the  intended  result. 

. Wiioc^  jthe  |ip43Aka*s  path  of  departure  divergo|S< 

A special  feature  in  the  departure  of  the  up^saka,  who 
has  b^n  thus  repeating  the  contemplation  till  death,  is 
dtictissed  in  the  Vedsnta-swtras  IV.  ii.  17  as  follows: 

(QtUHiofi): — ^Is  there  any  or  no  special  featt^^^  in  the 
departure  of  one^^  who  has  been  practising  contemplation,  as 
compared  with  other  men’s  departure  ? 

(Pfima  fdcU  view):  It  has  been  said  that  an  up^isaka’s 
departure  is  the  same  as  that  of  others  till  they  come  to 
the  starting-point  on  their  paths.  Now,  it  is  but  proper  to 
bold  that,  even  after  they  start  on  their  paths,  their  depar- 
ture is  the  same,  inasmuch  as,  in  the  case  of  both  alike,  the 
Jhiti  speaks  of  the  flashing  of  the  heart  etc.  Accordingly 
the  sruti  says : 

The  tip  of  his  heart  flashes  ; with  that  flash 
this  soul  ( A tman ) makes  his  exit  through  the 
lieSd  or  through  other  parts  of  the  body.*’-’* 


• Bri*  Up*  4-4-2 


OP  BRAHMAK. 


Am.  VI.} 


105 


This  passage  may  be  explained  as  follows 

The  present  birth  closes  when  * the  sense  of  speech  attains  * 
unity  with  manas’  and  so  on,’®*  when  the  whole  linga- 
5ar»ra  combined  with  J*va  becomes  absorbed  in  Paramat- 
man,  remaining  in  Him  as  a mere  potentiality.  Then,  for 
the  next  birth,  the  linga-sanra  again  manifests  itself  in 
the  heart.  At  that  moment,  in  the  linga-sar*ra  which  then 
rests  in  the  tip  of  the  heart,  there  occurs  an  illumination 
in  the  form  of  an  idea  of  the  future  birth  which  is  to  come 
next,  commonly  spoken  of  as  * antya-pratyaya,'  the  idea  of 
the  last  moment.  With  this  idea  in  mind,  the  soul  de- 
parts through  the  nadh.  And  this  is  the  same  for  all. 
Wherefore  the  upasaka’s  departure  differs  in  no  way  from 
that  of  others. 

(Conclusion)*. — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as 
follows : An  upasaka  makes  his  exit  exclusively  by  the 
nodi  in  the  head, — others  making  their  exit  by  other  nadis 
only, — because  of  the  upasaka  having  constantly  thought 
of  the  nodi  in  the  head,  and  in  virtue  of  the  peculiar  power 
of  the  contemplation  of  the  Conditioned  (Saguxa)  Brahman. 
This  point  is  clearly  set  forth  elsewhere  in  the  sruti  in  the 
following  w'ords : 

Of  the  heart  there  are”  etc.  t 

That  is  to  say,  the  other  nadis  serve  only  for  exit,  but  not  for 
the  attainment  of  immortality.  Wherefore  there  is  some 
speciality  in  the  departure  of  an  upasaka. 

How  far  the  process  of  death  is  the  same  for  alL 

As  to  that  part  of  the  process  of  departure  which  precedes 


♦ For  the  whole  jiiwess  read  the  sequel, 
t Kath.  Up.  6-l(}.  Quoted  iu  full  on  p.  84, 


CONTStii^tA^lOM 


to6 


[$,Hk$U-V(dk 


of  divergence  where  the  up«?aka  makes  his 
through  the  nodi  of  the  head,  five  points  are  discussed  in 
the  Vedtfnta-S«tras  referring  to  a passage  in  another  upa- 
ni^todi  'The  passage  referred  to  occurs  in  the  Chh^ndogya- 
Upiuiiahad  smd  reads  as  follows : 

•*The  speech,  my  dear,  of  that  departing 
per^n  is  absorbed  in  manas,  manas  in  life, 
life  in  fire,  and  fire  in  the  Supreme  God.” 

With  reference  to  this  passage,  the  five  following  points 
have  been  discussed  and  established : — 

(1) .  The  upanishad  does  not  mean  that  the  ten  senses 
of  the  dying  man, — * speech*  standing  here  for  all  the  ten 
senses, — ^are  not  totally  and  substantially  absorbed  in  manas. 
It  only  means  that  the  action  of  speech,  etc.,  ceases  while 
manas  is  still  active,  their  activity  being  thus  absorbed  as 
it  were  in  the  activity  of  manas.  (Vedanta-s»tras  IV.  n.  1-2). 

(2)  Similarly,  when  manas  is  said  to  be  absorbed  in  life, 
the  upanishad  only  means  that  the  activity  of  manas  ceases 
when  pnma  or  life-breath  is  still  active.  (IV.  ii.  3). 

(3) .  Life  becomes  absorl>ed,  not  in  fire  (the  element  of 
matter  called  tejas),  but  in  Jfva,  the  man’s  own  conscious 
Ego,  as  declared  in  the  Brihad^ira/tyaka- Upanishad  : 

To  this  Self,  at  the  last  moment,  do  all  pr^i- 
was  go.”t  (Vedanta- S«/tras.  IV.  ii.  4-6.) 

(4).  The  process  of  departure — consisting  in  the  ces- 
sation of  one  activity  after  another— up  to  the  starting- 
point  on  the  path  of  exit  through  a nodi  is  the  same  for  all 


♦ Op.  cit.  t Op.  cit.  4-1-1 


OF  BRAHMAN. 


Anu.  VI.] 


i©7 


the  throe,— for  him  who  is  led  by  Dharma  and 

for  an  upasaka,  and  for  him  who  has  attained  to  an  intuitive 

knowledge  of  the  truth.  (IV.  ii.  7). 

(5).  The  activity  of  the  external  organs  of  sensation, 
manas,  and  prana,  having  been  absorbed  in  that  of  Jiyatman, 
the  conscious  individual  Ego,  the  activity  of  this  jfvatman 
is  in  its  turn  absorbed  in  that  of  the  five  subtle  elements  of 
matter, — tejas  or  fire  (in  the  passage  quoted  from  the 
Chhandogya-Upanishad ) standing  here  for  all  the  five  subtle 
elements,  among  which  the  element  of  fire  predominates. 
These  subtle  elements  of  matter  are  then  absorbed  in  the 
Paramatman.  In  the  case  of  him  who  has  not  yet  realised 
the  true  nature  of  Brahman,  the  elements  of  matter  do  not 
in  their  substance  become  absorbed  in  the  Paramatman ; it 
is  only  their  activity  that  ceases,  while  in  their  substance 
they  exist  potentially  in  the  Paramatman  who  alone  is 
awake  at  the  time  (IV.  ii.  8-1 1). 

Thus  in  five  sections  has  been  discussed  that  part  of  the 
process  of  departure  which  is  common  to  all. 

The  Path  of  Light. 

The  present  birth  closes  with  the  absorption,  in  the 
Paramatman,  of  all  activity  of  the  linga-sanra  made  up  of 
the  five  subtle  elements.  Subsequently  (IV.  ii.  17)  is  dis- 
cussed a special  feature  in  the  departure  of  an  upasaka  who, 
wending  his  way  to  Brahma-loka,  makes  his  exit  through 
the  nodi  of  the  head.  And  the  path  of  exit  has  been  des- 
cribed here  (in  part)  in  the  second  passage  of  this  lesson.  VV*e 
should  understand  that  this  portion  of  the  path  stands  for  the 
whole  Path  of  Light  which  leads  to  the  region  of  Brahnutn. 

Concerning  the  path  to  the  region  of  Brabnutn,  dx  poinU 


COKTBMPUTlONi 


I08 


[S^iksid-Valii. 


am  discussed  in  the  Vedimta^sstras  with  reference  tea 
passage  in  the  Chhandogya-upanishad  which  reads  as 
^ows : 

Now,  when  he  so  starts  up  from  this  body, 
then,  by  these  rays  alone  does  he  start  up- 
ward.’* 

The  departing  soul  of  the  upasaka  Joins  the 
sun’s  rays  even  at  night. 

(i)  In  this  passage  the  Chhandogas  declare  that,  on 
making  his  exit  through  the  nodi  of  the  head,  the  soul  joins 
the  rays  of  the  sun.  One  may  perhaps  think  that,  though  it 
is  possible  for  the  upasaka,  dying  during  the  day-time,  to 
join  the  sun*s  rays,  it  is  not  possible  for  him  to  do  so  if  he 
should  die  at  night.  As  against  this  it  has  been  argued 
that, . though  at  night  the  sun’s  rays  arc  not  manifested, 
yet  the  soul  does  join  them,  since  there  exists  a connection 
between  the  nadis  and  the  sun’s  rays  as  long  as  the  body 
exists  (IV.  ii.  18-19). 

Even  the  upasaka  dying  in  Dakshinayana  has  access 
to  the  Northern  Path. 

(ii)  In  the  Uttara-marga  or  Northern  Path  which  begins 
with  the  sun’s  rays,  the  Uttarayana  ( i.e.,  the  progress  of 
the  sun  north  of  the  equator)  is  mentioned  as  a stage. 
This  may  at  first  lead  one  to  think  that  the  upasaka  dying 
in  the  Dakshinayana  does  not  attain  the  fruits  of  the  upa- 
sana.  Against  this  it  has  been  argued  that  the  fruit  does 
accrue  to  the  upasaka  masmuch  as  the  term  * uttarayana  ’ 
means  here  the  Devata  or  Intelligence  who  identifies  him- 
self with  the  period  of  time  so  called.  (IV.  ii.  20-21). 


♦ Op.  cit.  8-6-5. 


Am.VL]  OP  BRAHMAN.  10$ 

Tlie  Path  of  Light  la  but  one. 

(iii)  In  the  Chhandogya  and  Brihadaranyaka  Upanishad8» 
the  Path  is  spoken  of  in  connection  with  the  Pancbagni- 
Vidya,  as  commencing  with  light  (archis),  in  the  words 
“ they  arrive  at  light,*’  and  so  on.  In  connection  with 
another  Vidys,  the  Vajasaneyins  speak  of  the  Path  as  com- 
mencing  with  the  Vayu-loka,  the  region  of  Vuyu  fAir),  in  the 
words  **  He  comes  to  Vayu.”  t In  the  Paryanka-Vidya, 
the  Kaushitakins  speak  of  it  as  commencing  with  the  Agni- 
loka,  the  region  of  fire,  in  the  words  “ Betaking  himself  to 
this  path  gone  by  the  Devas,  he  comes  to  the  Agni-loka/’  { 
These  passages  may  lead  to  the  view  that  the  Northern 
Path  is  of  several  kinds.  Against  this  it  has  been  argued 
that  it  is  possible  to  construe  the  passages  cited  above  by 
regarding  the  regions  of  Vayu  and  Agni,  etc.,  as  definite 
stages  on  one  path.  (IV.  iii.  i.) 

[ The  stages  on  the  Path  of  Light  leading  to  Brahman 
are  mentioned  differently  in  different  Upanishads  as  follows : 

1.  The  Chha'ndogya-Upanishad:— The  Light  (Archis), 
the  Day  (Ahan),  the  Bright  Half  of  the  Moon  (^pi/ryanwea- 
paksha),  the  Six  Months  during  which  the  Sun  goes  to  the 
North,  the  Year  (Samvatsara),  the  Sun  (i4ditya),  the  Moon 
(Chandramas),  the  Lightning  fVidyuth),  Brahman. 

2.  The  Brihada'ranyaka-Upanishad  : — The  Light,  the 
Day,  the  Bright  Half  of  the  Moon,  the  Six  Months  during 
which  the  Sun  goes  to  the  North,  the  Region  of  Devas 
(Devaloka),  the  Sun,  the  Lightning,  Brahman. 

3.  The  Kaushi'taki-Upanishad:— The  Region  of  Fire 


♦ Chh.  Up,  4-15-5;  Bri,  Up.  6-2-15.  f Ihxd,  5-10-1, 
} Kau.  Up,  1-3, 


tto  CONTEMPLATION  [SHkshd-Valli. 

the  R^ion  of  the  Air  (Vayu),  the  Region  of 
V^«a,  the  Region  of  Praj^pati,  the  Region  of  Brahman. 

The  ascending  order  of  the  stages  as  determined  by  the 
Vedanta-s^ftras  is  as  follows : 

(i)  The  Light  or  the  Region  of  Agni,  (2)  the  Day, 
(3)  the  Bright  Half  of  the  Moon,  (4)  the  Six  Months  during 
which  the  Sun  goes  to  the  North,  (5)  the  Year,  f'Sj  the 
Region  of  Devas,  (7)  the  Region  of  the  Air,  (8)  the  Sun, 
(9)  the  Moon,  (10)  the  Lightning,  (ii)  the  Region  of  Varu#ia, 
(12)  the  Region  of  Indra,  (13)  the  Region  of  Praj^pati, 
(14)  the  Region  of  Brahman. — Tr.] 

The  Vayu-loka  precedes  the  Aditya-loka. 

(iv) . . The  question  arising  as  to  the  situation,  on  the 
path,  of  the  Vsyu-loka  spoken  of  by  the  Kaushitakins, 
it  has  been  shewn  that  it  is  situated  just  below  the  /Iditya- 
loka,  the  reigon  of  the  Sun,  because  it  is  said  in  the  Brihada- 
ranyaka  that  the  soul  reaches  i^ditya  by  the  path  afforded 
by  Vayu.  (IV.  hi,  2). 

The  region  of  Lightning  precedes  that  of  Vanina. 

(v) .  The  Kaushftakins  place  on  the  Path  of  Light  the 
regions  of  Vanina,  Indra  and  Prajapati.  There  arising  a 
question  as  to  their  relative  situation  on  the  path,  it  has 
been  argued  that  inasmuch  as  the  Lightning  and  Varima  (the 
Lord  of  w ater)  are  related  to  each  other  through  rain,  the 
region  of  Varuna  should  be  placed  next  above  that  of  the 
Lightning,  and  that  the  regions  of  Indra  and  Prajspati  should 
be  placed  above  the  region  of  Varuwa,  on  the  principle  that 
new-comers  should  be  placed  last.  (IV.  iii.  3.) 


* Op-cit.  6— 10— .1 


OP  BRAlilttAl}. 


Am.  VL] 


tn 


the  Llgrht,  etc.,  are  the  sfuiditifi:  IntelUfirencea. 

(vi).  The  Light,  etc.,  placed  by  the  sruti  on  the  path, 
constitute  neither  sign-posts  on  the  way  (nwrga-chihna), 
nor  regions  of  enjoyment  (bhoga-bh«mi) ; but  they  are 
DevaUs  or  intelligences  who  lead  the  soul  from  one  region 
to  another  on  the  way.  (IV.  iii.  4-6). 


The  Path  of  Light  is  common  to  all  upasakas 
of  Saguna  Brahman. 

The  path  whose  course  has  been  thus  determined  is 
meant  only  for  those  who  contemplate  Saguwa  Brahman. 
He  who  has  realised  the  true  nature  of  Brahman  by  the 
right  sources  of  knowledge  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  path. 
This  departure  by  the  Path  of  Light  applies  to  all  upssanas 
of  Saguwa  Brahman,  not  to  those  up^zsanas  only  in  connec- 
tion with  which  the  path  is  mentioned  in  the  sruti.  By  this 
Path,  the  upssaka  attains  to  Brahman;  for,  it  has  been 
declared  that  ‘‘a  non-human  Spirit  dw’elling  in  the  region  of 
the  Lightning  conducts  the  souls  to  Brahman,  It  has  also 
been  determined  that  the  upasaka’s  (immediate)  goal  is  not 
Parabrahman  Himself,  Who  cannot  be  said  to  be  reached 
by  a path,  but  that  particular  region  of  Brahman  which 
falls  within  the  sphere  of  evolution.  (IV.  iii.  7-14.) 


The  worshippers  of  symbols  cannot  attain  to 
Brahma-loka. 

This  region  of  Brahman  in  the  evolved  universe  cannot 
be  reached  by  those  who  contemplate  symbols  (prat/kas). 
It  can  be  reached  only  by  those  who  contemplate  Brahman, 
not  by  others*  (IV.  iii.  15-16.) 


»M  coMftUptAfioN  [S^ik$kl^^yatti. 

The  i^oiy  of  the  Brahma-toka.  » 

It  is  this  region  of  Brahman  (constitutii^  the  Goal  reached 
by  the  Path  of  Light)  which  is  described  by  the^niti  in 
para  3 of  this  lesson.  On  reaching  the  Brahma-loka,  the 
upasaka  identifies  himself  with  both  the  Individual  Intelli- 
gences and  the  Universal  Intelligence.  As  identifying  him- 
self with  the  Individual  Intelligences,  he  becomes  one  with 
Agni,  Vayu,  i4ditya  and  other  Intelligences  and  partakes  of 
thdir  powers.  As  identifying  himself  with  the  Universal 
Intelligence,  he  becomes  Brahman,  the  Lord  of  the  Earth 
(BhaA)  and  all  other  worlds,  and  attains  to  Sv/7rajya ; i.e., 
he  becomes  an  independent  lord. 

In  saying  that  the  Yogin  attains  to  the  state  of 
Brahman  now  described  the  Kaushftakins  speak  of  him  in 
the  Paryanka- Vidytf  as  follows : 

Then  five  hundred  Apsarases  ( celestial 
damsels)  go  towards  him,  one  hundred  with 
chowries  in  their  hands,  one  hundred  with  gar- 
lands in  their  hands,  one  hundred  with  oint- 
ments in  their  hands,  one  hundred  with  gar- 
ments in  their  hands,  one  hundred  with  fruits 
in  their  hands.  They  adorn  him  with  an 
adornment  worthy  of  Brahman,  and  when 
thus  adorned  with  the  adornment  of  Brahman 
the  knower  of  Brahman  moves  towards 
Brahman.”  "• 

Concerning  this  very  attainment  of  Brahman,  this  indepen- 
dent dominion  (sviir^fjya),  the  following  four  points  have 
been  discussed  and  settled  in  the  Vedanta-s^tras  : 


♦ Kaush,  Up.  1-4. 


OF  BItAHMAKi 


Ank  VL] 


In  Brahma«loka,  the  Yogin  secures  okjeeti  M 
enjoyment  by  mere  thoughts. 

(i).  The' Yogin  who  dwells  in  the  Brahma-loka  attains  ob- 
jects of  enjoyment  by  merely  thinking  of  them.  He  does  not 
stand  in  need  of  any  external  means  to  bring  them  aboutt- 
iv.  8.9) 

In  Brahma-loka,  the  Yogin  can  enjoy  with 
or  without  a body. 

(ii) .  Concerning  the  Yogin  who  has  himself  thus  created 
objects  of  enjoyment  by  thought,  one  sruti  declares  that  he 
assumes  a body'*'  wherewith  to  enjoy  the  objects,  while 
another  declares  that  the  Yogin  does  not  assume  a body  for 
the  purpose.  To  explain  this  difference,  it  is  not  necessary 
to  suppose  that  there  are  two  different  classes  of  Yogins,  to* 
whom  respectively  they  apply.  The  fact,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  tliat  one  and  the  same  person  may,  as  he  chooses, 
assume  a body  or  not  for  the  purpose.  (IV.  iv.  10-14). 

The  bodies  cf  a Yoj^In’s  creation  have  each  a soul. 

(iii) .  When  the  Yogin  above  referred  to  chooses  to  create 
simultaneously  more  bodies  than  one,  it  may  be  supposed 
that  J^va,  the  individual  soul,  is  present  only  in  one  of 
them  while  tiie  others  are  soulless.  But,  as  a matter  of 
fact,  all  bodies  have  their  respective  souls  (J/vatmans),  all 
of  these  latter  acting  according  to  the  will  of  one  individual* 
(IV.  iv.  15-16) 

No  Yogin  can  create  the  universe  as  a whole. 

(iv) .  Though  the  Yogin  can  thus  create,  by  mere  thought, 
the  objects  of  his  enjoyment,  his  bodies,  and  his  souls  (Jtvat- 
mans),  he  cannot,  in  the  same  way,  create  the  great 

* The  physical  body  and  the  organs  of  external  sensattl^ 


CONTfiMPtATlOK. 


[SHkshh^VaUi. 


elem^E^t  td  matter  «uch  as  akassi  (ether)  or  the  Bxohmanda 
(the  Mundane  Bgg)  or  the  worlds  made  of  matter.  It  is 
the  beginningiess,  eternal  Paramesvara,  the  Supreme  Lord 
alone,  but  not  a Yogin,  who  ie  the  creator  of  the  universe, 
(ly,  iv^  i7?3a). 

Thence  the  Yogin  attains  to  VIdeha-kalvalya 
in  due  course. 

The  Yogin  who  has  become  an  independent  Lord  as 
sbe^  above  attains,  while  still  in  the  Brahma-loka,  to  the 
sikshsilorra,  immediate  intuitive  realisation  of  the  true 
nature  of  the  unconditioned  Brahman;  and  then,  on  the 
Brahma-loka  coming  to  an  end,  he  attains  Videha-kaivalya, 
the  disembodied  state  of  muksha.  This  state  has  been  des- 
cribed in  this  lesson  in  the  words  ‘‘  Then  he  becomes  this,” 
etc.  The  same  has  been  expressed  by  the  Blessed  Vyasa 
in  the  following  aphorism  : 

**  At  the  close  of  creation,  along  with  its  Lord, 

(they  go)  then  to  the  Supreme,  as  said  (in  the 
sruti).”  (IV.  iii.  lo). 

That  is  to  say,  on  the  dissolution  of  the  Brahma-loka,  they 
attain  to  the  Supreme  Brahman,  along  with  Brahman,  the 
Four-faced,  the  Lord  of  the  world,  as  declared  in  the  5ruti 
and  the  smriti : 

“ Those  aspirants  who  by  Vedantic  wisdom 
have  well  ascertained  the  Thing,  and  whose 
minds  have  been  purified  by  the  yoga  of 
renunciation,  they  all,  at  the  last  moment  of 
the  Great  Cycle,  become  released  from  the 
Great,  the  Immortal.”*^ 


t Kaivalya-Up,  2— tJ, 


61^ 


1*5 


Anii.  Vt.\ 

*'  When  the  dissolution  comes  at  the  end  of 
the  Great  Cycle,  they  all,  perfected  in  soul, 
enter  the  Supreme  Abode.” 

Thus,  he  who  contemplates  Brahman  first  attains  to  Brah-' 
ma-loka  and  then  attains  absolute  salvation. 


LESSON  Vit. 

(Seventh  Lesson.) 


CONTEMPLATION  OF  BRAHMAN  IN  THE  VISIBLE. 

This  lesson  treats  of  the  contemplation 
of  the  Hiranyag^arbha. 

The  sruti  has  thus  taught  us  to  contemplate  Brahman 
in  the  form  of  the  Vyahriti ; and  now  it  proceeds  to 
teach  that  the  self-same  Brahman  should  be  contem- 
plated in  the  panktas  or  five-membered  groups  of  objects 
composed  of  the  earth  and  so  on.*  As  related  to  the 
number  five,  the  universe  made  up  of  these  groups  may 
be  regarded  in  the  light  of  the  pankti  metre  t and  the 
whole  is  therefore  a pankta,  made  up  of  the  pankti.  And 
a yajita  or  sacrificial  rite  is  also  a p.-znkta*  as  declared  in 
the  sruti  “ Five-footed  i.s  the  pa«kti  (metre)  and  yajaa 
is  a pankta.”  Therefore  to  regard  this  whole  unirerse 
as  the  pankta,  as  made  up  of  (the  five-fold  groups  of 
objects  such  as  the  earth  and  other)  worlds  and  so  on, 
is  tantamount  to  regarding  it  as  a yajna  or  sacrificial  rite 
itself.  By  the  yajna  thus  effected,  one  becomes  the  Pra- 
japati  manifested  as  the  pankta, — as  the  universe  made 
up  of  the  five-membered  groups  of  objects. 

• With  a view  to  attain  great  results. — (S). 

f Pankti  is  a vedic  metre  consisting  of  li  ve  feet  (padiis)  of  eight 

syllables  each. 

J That  is  to  say,  the  universe  muy  be  regarded  not  only  in 
the  light  of  the  pankti  metre  as  has  been  shewn  above,  hut 
fifO  »«  the  light  of  a yajua  or  tucrifciul  litc.-  (A.) 


OT  fiRAMMAN  IK  THE  VISIBLE. 


Anu.  Vli.] 


tif 


The  Hirawyagarbha  or  Praj^tpati,  i.e.,  Brahman  manifett- 
ed  as  the  universe,  is  a p^nkta,  because  the  universe  has  been 
built  out  of  the  Jlv^  elements  of  matter.  To  regard  the  Hira- 
wyagarbha  as  a p^wkta  is  to  regard  Him  as  a yajaa,  which 
is  also  a p^jwkta,  as  brought  about  by  the  interaction  of  five 
factors, — namely,  (i)  the  sacrificer,  (2)  his  wife,  (3)  his  soOi 
divine  wealth  such  as  Vidya  or  contemplation,  and  fs) 
human  wealth  such  as  man’s  action  and  the  materials  used 
in  performing  the  sacrificial  rite.  By  the  yajnathus  effcted  in 
contemplation,  the  up/isaka  attains  to  the  state  of  the  Praje- 
pati,  the  governing  Soul  of  the  universe,  manifesting  Himself 
in  the  form  of  the  three  worlds.— (S.  & A.). 

In  the  Sixth  Lesson  has  been  taught  the  contemplation  of 
Brahman  regarded  as  manomaya  (formed  of  thought)  and 
so  on.  Inasmuch  as  this  Brahman,  who  has  none  of  the 
attributes  perceivable  by  the  eye,  can  be  grasped  only  by 
the  aspirants  of  the  highest  class,  the  sruti  proceeds  to 
teach  in  the  Seventh  Lesson  the  contemplation  of  Brahman 
endued  with  attributes  perceptible  to  the  eye, — a contempla* 
tion  which  is  suited  to  the  aspirants  of  a lower  class. 


External  groups  of  the  visible. 

Now  the  sruti  first  gives  three  groups  of  five  members 
each,  external  to  the  human  organism,  as  the  attributes 
(forms  or  embodiments)  of  the  Brahman  w’ho  has  to  be 
contemplated. 

I 3TPT  | 

^ II 


COMfEMPLAflON 


iti 


[S'lkshd-Valh. 


I.  Earth,  the  mid-region,  heaven,  (the  main) 
quarters  and  the  intermediate  quarters ; Agni 
fFire),  Vayu  (Air),  ^ditya  (Sun),  Chandramas 
*^Moon)  and  Nakshatras  (the  Stars) ; waters, 
plants,  trees,  the  bright  space  (akasa) , and  A tman 
(the  Self) : thus  far  among  the  external  beings. 

Now  the  sruti  proceeds  to  show  how  the  whole 
universe  is  a pankta.  Earth,  etc.,  constitute  the  pankta 
of  worlds  (lokas) ; Agni,  etc.,  of  Devatas  ; waters,  etc., 
of  bhtttas  or  external  beings.  Mentioned  as  one  among 
thebhutas,  ‘ A tman’ here  means  the  Vinij  (the  Universal 
Soul  manifesting  Himself  in  the  form  of  the  visible  or 
physical  worlds).  Before  the  words  ‘among  the  external 
beings  ’ we  should  understand  the  words  “ among  the 
worlds,  among  the  Devatas,”  inasmuch  as  the  p.iwktas 
of  the  worlds  and  Derates  also  have  been  mentioned. 

...Waters,  etc.,  are  the  five  substances  (dravya) These 

throe  groups  of  five  objects  pertain  to  external  being, 
bocauso  they  are  made  up  of  the  earth  and  other  [objects  of 
creation  which  are  regarded  as  external,  comprehended  in 
the  notion  of  ‘ this,’  as  distinguished  from  pra;ta  (upward 
vital  breath)  and  others  to  be  mentioned  below,  which  are 
comprehended  in  the  notion  of  ‘I.’  So  far  has  been 
taught  how  to  contemplate  Brahman  in  the  external  world. 

Internal  groups  of  the  visible. 

To  prevent  the  confounding  of  the  preceding  groups  with 
those  which  follow,  the  iruti  marks  off  the  latter  from  the 
former  and  proposes  to  describe  three  more  groups  of  fivt; 

tllipgs  each  i 


OP  BRAHMAN  IN  THB  VIBIBLfi. 


Am.  VII.] 


3T«TT®71^  I SH'^t  s^SqH  ^WH*.  I 

I \W\\ 

2.  Now,  as  to  the  self.  Pm;ta,  vyana,  apotl^.i 
udana,  samana  ; the  eye,  the  ear,  manas,  speecb^^ 
touch  ; skin,  flesh,  muscle  (snava);  borie»  rtidAro^V 

Now  will  be  mentioned  three  internal  groups  of  five 
things  each.  Pr^na,  etc.,  form  the  group  of  the  five 
airs  ; the  eye,  etc.,  form  the  group  of  the  five  senses  ; 
skin,  etc.,  form  the  group  of  the  five  ingredients  of  the 
physical  body. 

After  the  enumeration  of  the  three  groups  of  external 
objects,  three  groups  of  five  things  each  comprising  the  sejf 
are  enumerated. — The  self  here  spoken  of  refers  to  the* 
self  familiarly  so  called,  namely,  the  aggregate  of  the 
physical  body  and  the  senses,  which  those  people  who  barv'e 
no  philosophic  culture  look  upon  as  ‘ P.  Now  the  ^ruti 
proceeds  to  treat  of  the  contemplation  of  Brahman  in  this 
self.  Fraim,  etc.,  are  none  other  than  the  five  different 
functions  of  that  one  vital  air  which  abides  in  the  middle  of 
the  body.  Hence  the  aphorism  of  the  Holy  Sage  Yya^ 
concerning  Pr^na,  “ of  fivefold  functions  like  manas  is  if 
said  to  he”  (Vedanta-s;/tras  H.  iv.  12).  And  the  several 
seats  of  these  functions  are  enumerated  by  the  ancients  as 
follows : 

‘‘In  the  heart  is  the  pra;/a  ; in  the  anus,  the  ‘ 
apana ; samrma  is  in  the  navel  situated ; udana 
lies  in  the  region  of  the  throat ; vyana 
traverses  the  whole  body.” 


CONTBMPUTION 


[S'iksh&^VdlL 


no 


The  upasetia  enjoined. 

The  three  fivefold  groups  of  external  things  as  well  as 
the  three  fivefold  groups  of  internal  things  thus  far 
enumerated  represent  together  the  whole  universe  consti- 
tuting Brahman's  upadhi  or  seat  of  function.  It  is  Brah- 
man of  this  nature,  associated  with  the  up^xdhi,  that  has 
to  be  contemplated.  The  contemplation  is  enjoined  in  the 
following  passage  by  way  of  speaking  about  it  in  apprecia- 
tive terms : 

11X11 

3.  This  having  ordained,  the  Rishi  spake  thus : 
Pa;^kta,  verily,  is  this  all ; by  prr/zkta,  indeed, 
does  one  the  pawkta  strengthen. 

Having  ordained  that  this  whole  universe,  external 
as  well  as  internal,  is  fivefold  (p^z;dcta),  the  jRishi,  i.c,, 
the  Veda,  or  a certain  sage  w^ho  attained  to  a realisa- 
tion of  the  same,  said  as  follows : all  this  is  pa/zkta, 
built  on  the  principle  of  five.  The  number  (five)  being 
present  in  both  alike,  by  the  internal  p^J7?kta  does  (the 
up^isaka)  strengthen  the  external ; ix.,  the  former  fills 
the  latter ; ix,,  again  the  former  is  perceived  as  one 
with  the  latter.  That  is  to  say,  he  who  contemplates 
thus,  regarding  all  this  as  pawkta,  as  built  on  the 
principle  of  five,  becomes  one  with  the  Praj^^pati,  indeed. 

Having  realised  that  the  whole  universe  is  p^iwkta,  is  built 
on  the  principle  of  five,  the  irishi  said  that  all  this  universe 


OF  BtiAliMAK  iKTtid  VlSliLfi. 


tit 


Am.  Vll[.\ 


from  Brahma  down  to  plant  is  p^^kta  and  no  other.  Because 
of  this  identity  in  number,  by  the  internal  (<idhyatimka) 
paakta  does  one  strengthen  the  whole  external  group,  the 
former  becoming  one  with  the  latter. — (S.) 

That  is  to  say,  on  the  principle  that  the  lower  object 
should  be  regarded  as  the  higher,  one  should  regard  the 
internal  group  as  one  with  the  external.--(A). 

A certain  jRishi,  a seer  of  super-sensuous  truths  revealed 
in  the  scriptures,  perfected  in  contemplation,  having 
intensely  meditated  upon  the  earth,  mid-region  and  other 
objects  of  holy  regard  to  the  point  of  realisation,  having 
attained  in  his  own  consciousness  to  the  state  of  the  Viraj, 
the  Universal  Soul, — the  -Rishi  taught  to  his  disciples  the 
truth  which  he  has  realised  in  his  own  consciousness,  in  the 
following  words  : All  the  world  we  perceive, — the  body  of 
the  Viraj, — is  p^iwkta,  is  related  to  the  pankti  metre,  as  is 
well  known  to  all.  To  explain : According  to  the  sruti  “ five- 
syllabled  is  pankti,”  the  number  five  enters  into  the  metre 
of  pankti.  So  also  is  the  universe  associated  with  the 
number  five,  because  of  the  declaration  of  the  adepts, 
—namely,  that  the  great  quintupled  elements  of  matter 
and  all  their  evolutions  constitute  what  is  called  the  Viraj. 
Accordingly,  in  virtue  of  the  relation  of  similarity  which 
the  universe  bears  to  this  pankti  metre,  the  universe  is  said 
to  be  p^iwkta.  So,  too,  even  the  contemplation  of  the  earth, 
etc.,  as  concerned  with  groups  of  five  things,  may  be  re- 
garded as  p^iwkta.  Therefore,  the  up^saka  attains  to  the 
State  of  the  Vir^jj, — who,  as  has  been  shewn,  is  ptfwkta, — by 
the  contemplation  of  the  earth,  etc.,  which  is  also  pawkta. 
By  this  appreciative  reference  to  the  upasana,  the  sruti  implies 
the  injunction  that  he  who  wishes  to  attain  to  the  state  qf 


tw  fcoliTiiMi'UTioM. 

the  Wdj  should  contemplate  in  the  manner  described  atove. . 
On  the  principle  already  enunciated,  it  is  to  be  undet^teiod' 
that,  on  attuning  to  the  Viraj,  moksha  will  be  attuned  in 
due  course,  through  knowledge  of  the  truth. 


LESSON  VIII. 

(Eighth  AmvAka,) 

CONTEMPLATION  OF  PRANAVA. 

The  sruti  has  taught  the  contemplation  of  Brahman, 
first  in  the  form  of  the  Vy^hnti  (Utterance),  and  subse- 
quently in  the  form  of  pawktas  or  fivefold  groups. 
Now  will  be  taught  the  contemplation  of  the  syllable 
‘ Om’,  which  is  an  accessory  to  all  kinds  of  worship. 
When  contemplated  as  the  Higher  or  Lower  Brahman, 
the  syllable  ‘ Om’,  though  a mere  sound,  forms  indeed 
a means  of  attaining  the  Higher  or  Lower  Brahman, 
It  is,  verily,  the  abode  of  the  Higher  as  well  as  the 
Lower  Brahman,  just  as  an  idol  is  the  abode  of  Vishwu. 
So  the  sruti  says,  “ By  this  means  alone,  he  goes  to  one 
of  Them.”* 

Pra»ava  being  held  by  all  in  high  regard,  any  teaching 
regarding  the  contemplation  of  Brahman  will  not  be  so 
readily  accepted  by  the  intellect  if  the  teaching  were  altogether 
dissociated  from  Pranava.  The  contemplation  of  Brahman 
is  therefore  taught  here  through  Prawava.  The  Prawava 
which  is  a mere  sound  is,  no  doubt,  insentient  in  itself  and 
cannot  therefore  be  conscious  of  the  worship  offered  to 
it ; still,  as  in  the  case  of  worship  offered  to  an  idol,  it  is 
the  /svara  who  in  all  cases  takes  note  of  the  act  and  dis- 
penses the  fruits  thereof.— (A.) 

In  the  Seventh  Lesson  has  been  taught  the  contem- 
plation of  Brahman  as  manifested  in  the  form  of  earth  and 


* Pra«na-Up.  5—2, 


CONTEMPUTION 


W4 


[SHhh&’VaUi, 


othor  viable  gross  forms,  for  the  benefit  of  the  aspirants  of 
low  mental  culture.  In  ithe  Sixth  Lesson  was  taught 
the  ^ntemplation  of  Brahman  manifested  in  the  subtler 
forms  of  manas  and  the  like,  for  the  benefit  of  the  aspirants 
of  a middling  class  who  can  grasp  subtle  truths  to  a certain 
exteht.  In  the  Eighth  Lesson  will  be  taught,  for  the  bene* 
6t  of  the  highest  class  of  aspirants,  the  contemplation  of 
pure  Brahman  as  declared  in  the  Vedanta  and  designated 
by  Praffava. 


The  Pranava'Brabman. 

The  sruti  first  speaks  of  Pranava,  the  object  of  contem- 
plation ; 

I in  II 

I.  ‘ Om’  is  Brahman.  ‘ Om’  is  this  all. 

One  should  hold  in  mind — i.  e.,  contemplate — that 
the  sound  *Om’  is  Brahman.  For,  every  form  of 
sound  is  pervaded  by  the  syllable  ‘ Om’,  as  declared 
elsewhere  in  the  sruti,  “ As  all  leaves  are  fast  bound 
in  stalk”*  etc.  Inasmuch  as  the  thing  designated  is 
dependent  on  its  designation,  all  that  we  see  is  said  to 
be  the  syllable  ‘ Om’. 

One  of  the  points  of  similarity,  on  account  of  which  the 
pliable  ‘ Om’  may  be  regarded  as  one  with  Brahman,  is 
that,  like  Brahman,  it  is  the  basis  of  all. — (A.) 

The  syllable  ‘ Om,’  and  nothing  else,  is  the  designation 
of  the  Paramntman,  as  Patanjali  says  in  his  Yoga-s»tra 
already  quoted:  “His  designation  is  Prawava.”  The 


# The  passage  is  fully  quoted  on  page  61. 


Am.  VIII.]  pran'ava.  ptiS 

being  that  has  to  be  contemplated  here  is  none  oi  her 
than  that  Brahman  who  is  denoted  only  by  the  syUf  .ble 
* Om\  No  such  upadhi  as  the  earth  or  manas  sh(  mid 
be  thought  of.  That  is  to  say,  one  should  merely  pro- 
nounce the  syllable  ‘ Om*,  the  designation,  and  (v/hile 
doing  so)  contemplate  Brahman  denoted  by  it.  Thei  ^ruti 
proceeds  to  explain  how  the  syllable  ‘ Om*  can  be  the 
designation  of  Brahman,  by  stating  that  in  this  very 
syllable  ‘ Om’  all  this  universe,  made  up  of  nam  es  and 
forms,  is  comprehended.  That  all  words  are  therein 
comprehended  is  declared  by  the  sruti  in  the  words  “As 
all  leaves  are  fast  bound  in  the  stalk,”  etc.,  and  “ speech 
is  his  (breath’s)  rope,”^'  etc.  The  sruti  shows  that  all 
things  are  included  in  the  syllable  ‘Om*  throrigh  the 
words  denoting  them.  All  this  has  already  been  shown 
in  the  Fourth  Lesson  when  commenting  upon  the  phrase 
“ of  all  forms.”  Thus  the  Prawava  being  present  in  every 
thing,  it  can  be  the  designation  of  Brahman  who  h also 
present  in  every  thing. 

The  Prana^^a  extolled. 


In  the  sequel,  the  syllable  ‘ Om’  is  extolled,  since  it 
is  the  thing  to  be  contemplated : 

I ^ | 

I m siM  I 

3rrfrn%  I 3^1^  snsM:  | 

IRII 


t The  passages  are  fully  quoted  on  pp.  60—61. 


COHTBMmTION 


^6 


2.  Om ! — this  verily  is  compliance ; and  on  ut- 
tering ‘ 0 recite,’  they  begin  to  recite.  With  Om 
they  sing  somans.  ‘ Om  ! Som !’ — ^with  this  do 
they  tell  the  prayers.  ‘ Om !’ — thus  does  the 
Adhvaiyu  convey  acceptance.  ‘ Om !’ — thus 
assents  the  Brahma  (priest).  ‘ Om  !’ — thus  one 
permits  the  offering  of  an  oblation  to  Fire. 
* Om !’ — thus  says  the  brahma?za  who  is  about 
to  recite.  “ May  I obtain  Brahman — thus 
wishing,  Brahman  verily  does  he  obtain. 


‘ Om’  is  the  word  of  compliance.  When  one’s  duty 
is  declared  by  another,  the  former  complies  with  it, 
by  uttering  ‘ Om,’  thereby  conveying  the  idea  ‘ I shall 
do  so,  ’ or  ‘ I shall  go  there,’  and  so  on.  Indeed,  every 
one  knows  that  ‘ Om’  is  the  word  of  compliance. 
Moreover,  when  the  direction  “ O recite”  is  given,  they 
recite  accordingly.  Similarly,  with  ‘ Om’  the  Saman- 
chanters  sing  the  Samans.  ‘ Om  Som’ — this  being 
uttered,  those  who  pray  tell  their  prayers.  So,  with 
‘ Om,’  the  Adhvaryu  conveys  acceptance.  By  ‘ Om’ 
-the  Brahma  (one  of  the  priests)  expresses  his  assent. 
When  a sacrificer  says  that  he  is  going  to  offer  an 
oblation,  by  ‘ Om’  verily  does  another  give  his  per- 
mission. ‘ Om’  indeed  does  a brahmawa  utter  when 
about  to  recite  the  sacred  texts  : that  is  to  say,  with 
‘ Om’  does  he  start  the  recitation.  Wishing  to  learn 
Brahman,  the  Veda,  he  does  master  the  Veda.  Or, — ^to 
interpret  it  in  another  way,-wishingto  attain  Brahman, 


Am.  bi?  l>feAN*AVAk  ttf 

the  Paramatman,  i.  e.^  wishing  to  lead  his  self  to  the 
Paramatman,  a brahmawa  utters  ^Om’  and  ‘Om’  alone, 
aud  by  that  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ he  does  attain  Brahman. 

The  meaning  of  the  whole  passage  is  this  : because 
all  undertakings  which  start  with  the  syllable  ‘ Om* 
become  fruitful,  therefore  one  should  contemplate  the 
syllable  ‘ OnC  as  Brahman. 

- The  5ruti  proceeds  to  show  that  the  syllable  ‘ Om’  is 
related  to  all  things,  by  citing  a few  instances  connected 
with  Vedic  ritual.  In  the  Darsa  fNew  Moon),  and  the 
Vuimxaasdk  (Full  Moon)  and  other  sacrificial  rites, — when 
the  Adhvaryus,  i.  the  priests  who  perform  the  acts 
enjoined  in  the  Yajur-Veda,  have  to  address  a 'direction 
to  the  Agn/dhra,  they  utter  the  mantra  ‘^ravaya/ 
^pastamba  says  that  this  direction  may  begin  with  or 
with  ‘0,’  or  with  ‘ Om’.  The  second  alternative  has  been 
adopted  by  the  sruti  here.  The  ‘ o ’ in  the  mantra  is  in- 
tended to  address  the  Agmdhra.  So  the  mantra  means, 
“ O Agnfdhra,  give  the  Devas  to  know  that  an  oblation  is 
about  to  be  offered.”  The  syllable  ‘ o ’ in  the  mantra  is 
similar  to  ‘Om.’  The  word  of  direction  “ o 5ravaya  ” re- 
sembles ‘ Om  ’ in  so  far  as  ‘ o ’ occurs  in  both,  and  every- 
body knows  also  that  ‘ o * resembles  a part  of  the  Prawava. 
Thus  the  Adhvaryus  issue  their  direction  by  means  of  ‘o* 
which  is  only  a part  of  ‘ Om.’  So  the  Saman-chanter^ 
the  Udgatris,  chant  their  Samans  after  uttering  the  Pranava. 
Similarly,  even  the  Hotns,  the  Rig-Vedic  priests,  recite  the 
hymns  with  Prawava,  by  uttering  “ Om  Som.*  The  Hotfis 
seeking  the  permission  of  the  Adhvaryu  for  reciting  the 


♦ It  may  bo  noted  that  Sayawa’s  interpretation  of  thU 
tvm  iS'aukarach^^rya’ii  iu  mm 


CoMtfiiipu^ioii  [S'iksha-Vdli. 

hymnsi  the  Adhvaryu  and  say  **  Somsavomt  shall 

we  pray  ? *’  Here  ^5om*  is  the  first  syllable  and  * om  ’ the 
last.  Potting  together  the  first  and  last  syllables,  the 
5ruti  says  that  the  Hotns  pray  with  “ Om  Som.**  When 
the  Hotii  has  recited  the  hymns,  the  Adhvaryu  addresses 
them  a word  of  encouragement,  known  as  ‘ pratigara.*  When 
uttering  the  word  of  encouragement,- the  Adhvaryu  utters 
<Om.*  In  the  middle  of  a hymn,  on  the  completion  of  the  first 
half  of  averse,  the  Adhvaryu  utters  the  words  of  encourage- 
ment : “ O Hotri,  your  chanting  the  first  half  of  the  verse 
has  delighted  us.”  On  the  completion  of  the  verse,  the 
pratigara,  or  the  word  of  encouragement,  should  be  uttered 
with  the  Pra»ava  at  its  beginning;  and  the  Pra^ava  so 
uttered  denotes  assent  to  the  chanting  of  the  hymn.  When 
the  whole  hymn  is  completed,  the  Prawava  alone  should  be 
uttered  to  convey  assent.  Thus  even  in  the  pratigara  the 
Pranava  is  present.  The  Brahm^i  (priest)  is  one  who  knows 
4he  conduct  of  the  rituals  as  taught  in  the  three  Vedas. 
When  he  urges  other  priests  to  acts, — such  as  the  sprinkling 
of  consecrated  waters, — then  he  begins  his  direction  with  the 
Pra»ava.  In  the  Agnihotra-homa,  when  the  Adhvaryu  is 
about  to  take  out  milk  by  a ladle  from  the  milk-vessel  and 
to  pour  it  into  the  vessel  named  Agnihotra-hava«/,  then  he 
asks  the  sacrificer’s  permission  in  the  words  “ Om ! shall  I 
ttake  out  the  oblation  for  the  Devas?”  The  sacrificer 
grants  permission  by  uttering  the  syllable  * Om.’  In  the 
«wne  way,  when  about  to  engage  in  the  Brahma-yaj«a  or 
sacred  study  of  the  Vedas,  a brtfhmawa  commences  the  study 
by  uttering  the  Prawava.  Thus  by  citing  instances  from 
the  Vedic  ritual,  it  has  been  shewn  that  the  syllable  ‘ Om  * 


Jm.VIIf.]  ofpran’ava.  taa 

The  Contemplatien  of  Pranavii  enJoiii^efL 

Then  the  sruti  proceeds  to  enjoin  the  upasana  of  Pranava 
by  way  of  declaring  the  fruits  of  the  upasana*  He  who 
wishes  to  attain  Brahman  should  contemplate  Brahman  as 
designated  by  the  syllable  * Om.*  By  this  contemplationj 
he  will  certainly  attain  Brahman. 

The  relation  between  Om  and  Brahman* 

Now  we  have  to  enquire,  what  does  the  passage.  “ Om  is 
Brahman  ’*  mean  ? Does  it  mean  that  the  syllable  Om  is  a 
symbol  and  should  be  deliberately  looked  upon  as  Brahman? 
Or  does  it  mean  that  we  should  contemplate  Brahman  with 
the  adjunct  of  Om,  Brahman  as  designated  by  Om  ? 

It  may  at  first  appear  to  mean  that  one  shold  contem- 
plate the  word  ‘ Om  * itself  as  Brahman,  thus  regarding  it 
as  a symbol  on  which  the  idea  of  Brahman  should  be  super- 
imposed. So  interpreted,  the  words  ‘ Om  ’ and  ‘ Brahman  * 
are  in  their  proper  order  as  the  subject  and  the  predicate  of 
the  proposition. 

As  against  the  foregoing,  we  hold  as  follows ; on  the 
principle  discussed  in  connection  with  the  Udgitha-Vidya, 
the  syllable  Om  should  be  regarded  as  a mere  adjunct  of 
Brahman,  not  as  the  main  object  of  contemplation.  The 
principle  referred  to  is  discussed  as  follows  in  the  Vedanta- 
s^tras  III.  iii.  9 : 

The  meaning  of  ^*Om,  the  UdgithaA*’ 

(Question) : — It  is  said  “ Let  him  contemplate  the  syllable 
Om  the  Udg/tha.”'*'  Here  the  words  * syllable’  and  ‘Udgttha’ 
are  put  in  apposition  to  each  other ; and  this  appositional 
use  may  be  explained  in  four  different  ways:  (1)  It  may 


» Chha.  Up.  1—1—1, 


COK^TEiiipLATIO^ 


■ii6 


[S^tkskh-vMi 


mean  mere  adhyasa  or  superimposttion  of  the  idea  of  Udgitha 
upon  < Om,'  like  the  passage  let  him  contemplate  name  as 
Brahman.'^  (2)  Or  it  may  be  intended  to  remove  a mistaken 
idea ; we  say,  for  example,  “ the  thief  is  a pillar  ” when  we 
wish  to  undeceive  a man  who  has  mistaken  a pillar  for  a 
thief.  (3)  Or,  it  may  imply  unity  as  in  the  sentence  “ Jiva 
is  Brahman.**  (4)  Or,  it  may  imply  a relation  of  substance 
and  attribute  as  in  the  sentence  “The  blue  thing  is  a lotus.** 
In  which  one  of  these  four  ways  should  the  passage  under 
discussion  be  explained  ? 


{The  prima  facie  view) : — In  the  absence  of  a determining 
cause  we  cannot  construe  the  passage  in  any  one  particular 
way  exclusively. 


{Conclusion) It  is  possible  to  make  out  that  ‘ Udg/tha’ 
should  be  construed  as  a specifying  adjunct  of  the  syllable 
* Om.’ — The  syllable  * Om  ’ occurs  in  the  three  Vedas,  the 
i?ig-veda,  the  Yajur-veda,  and  the  Sama-veda.  The  ques- 
tion may  therefore  arise, — which  one  of  them  is  to  be 
contemplated  ? This  question  is  answered  by  the  passage 
thus:  that  particular  ‘ Om,’ — ^and  not  any  other  one — should 
be  contemplated,  which  forms  part  of  the  Udgjtha  Saman. 
Thus  the  ‘ Om  ’ which  is  to  be  contemplated  here  is  specifi- 
ed as  the  one  occurring  in  the  Sama-veda.  If  we  construe 
the  passage  otherwise,  as  implying  a removal  of  illusion,  or 
as  implying  unity,  we  will  have  to  make  a conjecture  as  to 
the  fruit  of  the  contemplation  of  ‘ Om  ’ so  conceived,  for  it 
is  a contemplation  which  is  quite  independent  of  that  which 
has  been  treated  of  in  the  remaining  part  of  the  section,  and 
as  such  it  must  produce  quite  a distinct  result.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  we  construe  the  passage  to  mean  the  relation 
Qf  substance  and  attribute,  the  contemplation  enjoined  here 


131 


Anu,  VIII.]  OF  fran'ava. 

will  be  that  of  the  Symbol  ‘Om’  viewed  as  *rasatama, 
the  itiost  essential  element*  as  taught  in  the  sequel; 
so  that,  no  injunction  of  a contemplation  distinct  from  the 
one  which  is  to  follow  is  intended  in  this  connection,  and 
therefore  no  conjecture  need  be  made  as  to  the  fruit 
produced  separately  by  that  contemplation. 

{Objection)*. — The  word  ‘Udg/tha*  denotes  the  whole 
song,  of  which  the  syllable  ‘ Om  ’ is  only  a part ; the  term 
^Udgitha’  cannot  therefore  be  literally  applied  to  ‘ Om.’ 
Thus,  if  you  interpret  the  passage  so  as  to  make  ‘ Udg/tha  * 
a specifying  adjunct  of  * Om,*  the  word  ‘ Udg/tha*  will  have 
to  be  understood  in  a secondary  sense. 

{Answer) : — True.  But  to  construe  ‘ Udgjtha*  as  a specify- 
ing adjunct  of  ‘ Om  * is  preferable  to  construing  it  in  any 
other  way.  To  interpret  the  appositional  use  as  implying 
superimposition,  i.e.,  to  make  the  sruti  speak  of  ‘ Om  ’ as 
*Udg/tha*  which  ‘Oin*  is  really  not,  is  to  ignore  the 
literal  meaning  of  ‘ Udgitha  * altogether,  just  as  to  speak  of 
an  idol  as  Vish/m  is  to  ignore  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word 
‘ Vishwu  * altogether  as  applied  to  something  which  is  not 
Vishnu.  To  do  so  is  to  violate  the  literal  construction 
altogether.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  construe  the  sruti  so 
as  to  mean  that  the  syllable  ‘ Om  * is  a part  of  the  Udg/tha, 
I.  if  we  interpret  the  word  ‘ Udg/tha  * to  mean  ‘ a part  of 
the  Udg/tha,*  we  do  not  ignore  the  literal  meaning  of 
‘ Udgitha’  altogether.  This  interpretation  is  at  least  in  partial 
accordance  with  the  literal  sense  and  is  therefore  nearer  to 
it  than  the  rest.  In  applying  in  this  sense  the  epithet 
‘Udgitha’  to  ‘ Om,*  we  surrender  only  a portion  of  the 
denotation  of  the  word, — namely,  all  the  syllables  in  the 
Udg/tha  other  than  ‘ Om,*  Therefore,  in  the  passage/*  Let 


ta  CONTEMPLATION  [S'ikskH-VidHi 

him  contemplate  the  syllable  the  Udgftha,”  the 

WG^rd  ^Udgftha'  is  an  epithet  applied  to  <Oin*  in  order 
to  distinguish  it  from  the  same  syllable  ocomring  in  the 
other  Vedas, 

The  meaning  of  * Om  is  Brahman.' 

. To  return  to  the  present  subject.  In  the  passage  **  Om  is 
Brahman,”  the  word  ^ Brahman  ’ may  denote  any  one  of 
the  three  kinds  of  Brahman:  Brahman  as  manifested 
in  the  form  of  thought  (Manomayaj,  or  Brahman  as  mani- 
fested in  the  form  of  earth  &c.,  or  the  pure  Unconditioned 
Brahman.  In  accordance  with  the  principle  of  interpreta-' 
tion  discussed  in  connection  with  the  Udgitha,  the  epithet 
<Om’  applied  to  Brahman  shews  that  the  Unconditioned 
Brahman  is  here  spoken  of  as  opposed  to  the  Conditioned 
Brahman.  The  passage  means  that  the  Supreme  Brahman 
denoted  only  by  the  designation  ‘ Om  ’ should  be  contem- 
plated. If  ‘ Om  ’ be  a mere  symbol,  then  it  is  the  word 
which  has  to  be  deliberately  viewed  as  Brahman ; and  then 
it  will  be  a contemplation  of  the  word  ‘ Om,*  not  of  Brah- 
man. In  that  case,  the  upasaka  of  the  symbol  cannot 
hope  to  attain  even  the  Brahma-loka,  much  less  the  Real 
Brahman.  If  Brahman  cannot  be  attained,  then  the  words 
of  the  sruti  Brahman  verily  does  he  obtain,’*  speaking  of 
the  fruits  ot  the  contemplation,  are  falsified.  When  Brahman 
Himself  designated  by  the  sylladle  ‘ Qm’  is  contemplated, 
the  upflsaka  attians  to  the  Brahma-loka;  and  there  realising 
Brahman  in  His  essential  nature,  he  goes  to  Brahman 
Himself  and  thus  attains  Videha-mukti,  Liberation  from 
embodied  existence  altogether.  Therefore  the  passage 
*<Omis  Brahman”  speaks  of  Brahman  in  His  essential 
nature  as  designated  by  the  syllable  * Om.* 


*33 


Am,  VIJI,]  op  pran'ava. 

Contemplation  of  the  Unconditioned  Brahman. 

(Objection): — Brahman  in  His  essential  nature  can  be 
reached  only  by  knowledge  (vedana)  coming  from  a right 
source  (pram^twa),  not  by  upasana  or  contemplation."^' 
Hence  it  is  that,  in  the  Sandilya.-Yidya,  Dahara-Vidy<»  and 
the  like,  the  contemplation  enjoined  is  that  of  the  Saguwa 
or  Conditioned  Brahman.  In  none  of  them  is  enjoined  the 
contemplation  of  Brahman  in  His  essential  nature.  More- 
over, on  ascertaining  from  the  Vedantic  texts  the  Uncondi- 
tioned Brahman  in  His  essential  nature,  one  has  achieved 
all  one’s  aspirations,  and  can  have  nothing  more  to  achieve 
by  means  of  the  up^sana.  Further,  those  who  know 
Brahman  are  rid  of  all  sense  of  agency ; how  can  they 
engage  in  an  upasana  ? 

(Answer) : — These  considerations  do  not  detract  from  the 
soundness  of  our  conclusion.  For,  the  Ved^ntic  proposii- 
tions  are  of  tv/o  sorts,  av^mtara-v^rkyas  and  maha-vakyas, 
subordinate  propositions  and  main  propositions.  A 
subordinate  proposition  is  that  which  treats  of  the 
essential  nature  of  Brahman  as  the  cause  of  the  universe, 
while  the  main  proposition  teaches  that  the  Ego  is  essenti- 
ally one  with  Brahman.  Now,  for  him  who  has  realised 
the  unity  as  taught  in  the  main  proposition,  there  is, 
we  admit,  no  purpose  to  be  served  by  the  contemplation, 
as  the  opponent  has  shown ; nor  can  he  regard  himself  as 
an  agent  concerned  in  the  act  of  contemplation.  On  the 
other  hand,  he  who  has  learned  from  the  subordinate 
propositions  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman  as  the  mere 

* Which  partakes  of  the  peculiar  colour  of  the  mind  of  the 
individual  concerned  and  does  not  therefore  necessarily  re- 
present the  Thing  as  it  is. 


CONTEMPlATION 


^34 


[SHkshd^Vaili 


cause  of  the  universe  does  not  lose  the  sense  of  his  own 
agency ; and  he  can  be  an  uposaka.  We  can  even  imagine 
the  contemplation  serving  a purpose:  the  upasaka  goes 
first  to  the  Brahma-loka,  and  realising  there  the  true  nature 
of  Brahman,  he  attains  Videha-mukti,  Such  a man  should, 
therefore,  contemplate  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman, 
Accordingly  the  Nnsimha-Uttara-.T^ipamya-  Upanishad 
teaches  many  ways  of  contemplating  the  Unconditioned 
Brahman.  The  smriti  also  enjoins  the  contemplation  of 
Brahman  in  His  essential  nature  : 

“ When  a man  has  entered  the  assembly  of 
those  who  have  committed  minor  sins  or  of 
those  who  have  committed  major  sins,  he 
should  contemplate  Brahman  during  a quarter 
of  the  night.” 

And  the  contemplation  of  Brahman  in  His  essential  nature 
has  been  discussed  in  the  Vedanta- sf/tras  I.  iii.  13.  as  follows ; 

( Question)  : — The  Prasnopanishad  reads, 

“ He,  again,  who  contemplates  that  Supreme 
Spirit  (Purusha)  by  this  triple  syllable  ‘Om’ 
and  so  on. 

What  Brahman  should  be  contemplated  ? Is  it  the 
Lower  Brahman  known  as  the  Hirawyagarbha,  or  is  it  the 
Supreme  Brahman? 

(The prima  facie  view): — It  is  the  Lower  Brahman  that 
should  be  contemplated.  For,  the  sruti  declares  the  fruit 
of  the  contemplation  in  the  words  “he  by  the  samans  is 
carried  up  to  Brahma-loka.”  t The  upasaka  is  said  to  go 
to  the  region  of  Brahman,  the  “ Lotus-seated,”  whereas  the 
fruit  of  the  contemplation  of  the  Supreme  Brahman,  by 


* Op.  cit.  5-5. 


•flhid. 


Jim.  VliL]  OF  pran'ava.  i3S 

which  man  should  be  able  to  realise  his  highest  end,  cannot 
be  said  to  end  there.  The  phrase  “Supreme  Spirit 
(Pursha),”  an  epithet  of  the  Supreme  Brahman,  can  be 
applied  to  the  Lower  Brahman  also,  inasmuch  as  the  latter 
is  supreme  with  reference  to  others  below. 

[Conclusion) : — It  is  the  Supreme  Brahman  that  should  be 
contemplated  here.  For,  the  Upanishad  speaks,  in  the 
sequel,  of  the  Brahman  contemplated  here  as  identical  with 
the  Supreme  Being  that  has  to  be  finally  realised.  The 
passage  of  the  Sruti  referred  to  reads  as  follows : 

“ He  sees  the  Purusha  lying  in  the  body,  the 
Higher  than  that  highest,  than  that  Jiva- 
ghana,  the  aggregate  Soul.” 

That  is  to  say,  he  who,  by  up^sana,  has  attained  to  the 
Brahma-loka  sees  the  Param^^tman  lying  in  the  heart  of  all 
living  beings,  who  is  higher  even  than  the  Hirawyagarbha, 
than  that  Highest  Being  who  is  all  J/vas  in  the  aggregate. 
The  Param.^tman  who,  in  this  passage,  is  spoken  of  as 
being  realised  at  the  end,  is  the  very  Being  who  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  section  is  referred  to  as  the  Being  who 
has  to  be  contemplated.  The  words  * Supreme  ’ and 
‘ Purusha  ’ occurring  in  both  the  places  show  that  one 
and  the  same  Brahman  is  spoken  of  in  the  two  places* 
Neither  is  the  Brahma-loka  the  only  fruit  attainable ; 
for,  from  there  liberation  will  be  attained  in  due  course* 
Therefore  the  passage  means  that  the  Supreme  Brahman 
Himself  should  be  contemplated. 

Thus  the  contemplation  of  Brahman  even  in  His  pure 
essential  nature  being  possible,  he  who  wishes  to  attain  to 
Brahman  should  utter  the  Prawava  and  contemplate  Him 
in  His  pure  essential  nature  as  designated  by  the  Pra»ava. 


LESSON  IX. 

{Ninth  Anuvaka) 

UPA5AKA*S  DUTIES. 


As  it  has  been  taught  that  one  becomes  an  independ- 
ent Lord  by  mere  knowledge  (vijwana),  one  may  think 
that  works  enjoined  in  the  sruti  and  in  the  smriti  are 
of  no  use.  As  a safeguard  against  this  possible  error, 
the  Upanishad  here  proceeds  to  treat  of  works  with  a 
view  to  shew  that  they  * are  means  of  attaining  the 
end  of  man. 

In  the  Eighth  Lesson  it  has  been  taught  that  Brahman 
should  be  contemplated  by  means  of  Prawava,  which  desig- 
nates the  Unconditioned  Brahman.  This  may  lead  one  to 
think  that,  because  by  mere  up^^sana  the  end  of  man, — 
namely,  liberation  attainable  in  due  course, — can  be  accom- 
plished, no  purpose  of  an  upasaka  is  served  by  the  obligatory 
duties  enjoined  in  the  5ruti  and  the  smnti.  To  prevent  this 
supposition,  the  Upanishad  teaches  in  the  Ninth  Lesson  that 
performance  of  the  obligatory  duties  should  be  conjoined 
with  the  upasana. 

The  works  incumbent  on  an  Upasaka. 

^ ^ l ^ i 

* They  co-operate  with  the  apara-vidya  or  lower  wisdom,  aud 
their  purpose  is  therefore  the  same  as  that  of  the  apara-vidya- (A), 


Upaasaka's  duties. 


^ I ? l <ng^  ^ 

^ I irt  ^ ¥H«ff<w<T<r>  ^ \ irsRiff  «T- 

3^rKn:f'«f<i  ^ 1 1131#^  IKII 

I.  The  right,  as  well  as  study  and  teaching; 
the  true,  as  well  as  study  and  teaching ; penance, 
as  well  as  study  and  teaching ; restraint,  as  well 
as  study  and  teaching ; peace,  as  well  as  study 
and  teaching ; the  fires,  as  well  as  study  and 
teaching ; offering  to  fires,  as  well  as  study  and 
teaching  ; guests,  as  well  as  study  and  teaching; 
the  human,  as  well  as  study  and  teaching ; the 
offspring,  as  well  as  study  and  teaching;  be- 
getting, as  well  as  study  and  teaching ; propaga- 
tion of  the  race,  as  well  as  study  and  teaching. 

What  ‘the  right'  is  has  been  already  explained.* 
The  right  and  the  other  duties  to  be  mentioned  below 
should  be  practised,  as  well  as  Svtidhyaya,  the  learning 
of  one’s  own  Veda,  and  Pravachana,  which  means 
either  Adhyapana,  the  teaching  of  it,  or  Brahma- 
Yajwa,  a daily  solemn  recitation  of  it.  The  meaning 
of  ‘the  true'  has  been  already  explained  along  with 
‘ the  right.’  Or  ‘ the  true’  may  mean  truth-speaking. 
Penance  (tapas) : bodily  mortification.  Restraint  (dama)  : 
calmness  of  the  organs  of  external  sensation.  Tran- 
quillity (Sama) : calmness  of  manas,  the  internal  organ. 

r 


* Vide  ante  page  2^. 


138  coAfEiipuTftoN  [SHkshh-ValU' 

While  practising  these,  fires  should  be  consecrated, 
and  oblations  offered  to  them ; guests  should  be  honor- 
ed ; the  human, — that  is  to  say,  social  duties  " — should 
be  discharged  as  occasions  arise;  offspring  should  be 
begotten  by  having  intercourse  with  wife  in  season, — 
at  periods  favourable  for  conception ; the  race  should 
be  propagated  through  children’s  children,  by  getting 
the  sons  married.  While  engaged  in  all  these  acts, 
one  should  pay  special  attention  to  the  studying  and 
the  teaching  of  the  Veda.  It  is  to  impress  this  truth 
that  study  and  teaching  are  repeated  along  with 
every  one  of  the  other  duties.  Indeed,  a knowledge 
of  the  Vedic  teaching  can  only  be  acquired  by  learning 
the  Vedic  text,  and  on  that  knowledge  the  highest 
good  depends ; while  the  teaching  or  recitation  of  the 
Veda  is  intended  for  retention  of  the  text  in  memory 
as  well  as  for  increase  of  merit  (I)harma).  Special 
regard  should  therefore  be  paid  to  the  study  and 
teaching  of  the  Veda. 

The  right  (rita) : when  a man  wishes  to  say  something, 
he  first  ponders  over  the  thing  as  it  is  and  then  thinks  of 
the  word  denoting  it.  7dta  is  this  manasic  act  of  thinking 
as  to  the  right  word  which  will  accurately  describe  the 
thing.  Svadhyayii : the  necessary  study.  ...  It  will  not 
do  for  the  seeker  of  moksha  to  practise  contemplation 
only ; he  should  practise  right  speech,  as  also  the  study  and 
teaching  of  the  Veda.  Penance  (tapas) : Fasting  and 
other  kinds  of  bodily  mortification.  The  5ruti  says  “ there 


Such  m purriage— 


Am,tXt]  UPASAKA’S  DUTIES. 

is  no  higher  penance  than  fasting.’**^*  In  the  Sruti  else- 
where— “by  yaj»a,  by  gift,  by  tapas,  by  fasting, ’’f-^Jasting 
is  mentioned  separately  from  tapas,  and  this  shews  that 
gifts  of  money  and  the  like  are  penances  intended  for  those 
' who  cannot  practise  fasting.  The  Sruti  says  ‘ It  is  verily 
a penance,  they  say,  when  one  gives  away  his  property.”  J 
Restraint:,  the  withdrawing  of  sight  and  other  organs  of 
external  sensation  away  from  forbidden  objects.  Tran- 
quillity : the  restraining  of  the  manas  from  all  forbidden 
thoughts.  Fires  (Agnis) : consecrated  fires  known  as  the 
^havan/ya,  etc.  Agnihotra:  the  offering  of  oblation  in 
the  consecrated  fires  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening. 
Guests : such  as  those  who  go  to  other’s  houses  to  beg 
food  on  odd  occasions,  not  on  the  new-moon  day  or  any 
other  specially  sacred  days.  The  human : the  honouring 
of  women  and  other  such  acts  as  are  incumbent  on  people 
at  marriage  and  on  other  like  occasions.  As  sanctioned 
by  the  custom  prevailing  among  the  leaders  of  society, 
even  these  acts  should  be  observed  like  those  which  are 
enjoined  in  the  5ruti  and  the  Smriti.  Offspring,  etc  : He 
should  also  observe  the  necessary  siicramental  rites  ante- 
cedent to  the  child-bearing.  He  should  have  intercourse 
with  wife  in  proper  season  with  a view  to  produce  children. 

Even  the  up^isaka  should  perform  all  acts  and  ceremonies 
enjoined  in  the  Sruti  and  the  Smriti  according  to  the  caste 
and  the  religious  order  to  which  he  belongs ; otherwise, 
obstructed  by  the  sin  accruing  from  the  neglect  of  enjoined 
works,  the  upnsana  cannot  produce  the  desired  effect.  We 
cannot,  however,  extend  this  principle  and  say  that  even 
a knowledge  of  the  real  nature  of  Brahman  requires  the  aid 


♦ YajMkMJp.  7B.  t Bri.  Up.  4-4-22.  if  Taitt.  {Sawluta  VL  i.  (> 


f4«  CONTEMPUTIOM 

of  works  to  produce  its  intended  effect ; for,  he  who  knows 
truth  has  nothing  to  do  with  works,  inasmuch  as  all  illusion 
r^arding  bis  own  Self— i.  the  false  idea  that  be  is  an 
agent,  that  he  belongs  to  a particular  caste  or  to  aparti* 
cular  religious  order — has  ceased.  But  since,  in  the  case 
of  an  upnsaka,  the  illusion  still  exists,  he  has  yet  some 
concern  with  works  and  it  is  therefore  but  proper  that  bis 
upesana  should  be  conjoined  with  works.  It  may  perhaps 
be  urged  that,  for  him  who  contemplates  incessantly,  it 
is  not  possible  to  engage  in  Agnihotra  and  similar  rites 
which  tend  to  mental  distraction  and  involve  a vast 
amount  of  labour.  Then  let  him  eng^e  in  that  course  of 
action  which  will  help  upasana:  let  him  practise  self- 
control,  controlling  the  body,  the  senses  and  the  mind. 
This  is  the  end  the  Yoga-Sastra  has  in  view  when  treating 
of  yama  and  niyama, — ^the  several  forms  of  self-control, 
,both  of  a positive  and  a negative  character.  Though 
performance  of  Agnihotra  and  practice  of  self-control  are 
meant  as  alternative  courses  of  action  according  as  the 
person  has  a wavering  or  unwavering  mind,  yet  the  study 
and  the  teaching  (or  recitation)  of  scriptures  are  quite 
necessary.  The  Sruti  repeats  these  two  duties  along  with 
every  other  duty,  with  a view  to  impress  the  truth  that 
they  should  be  constantly  practised  in  whatever  other 
duties  he  may  be  engaged.  The  study  of  scriptures  should 
under  no  circumstances  be  neglected,  since  in  case  of 
neglect,  one  becomes  a S^dra  as  the  Smnti  says : — 

That  twice-bom  man  who,  without  studying 
the  Vedas,  turns  his  attention  to  other  things, 
soon  becomes  a si^ra  while  still  alive,  as 
wdl  as  bis  whol^  &miily,  *’ 


UI>A6AKA*8  DUYIES. 


4* 


As  to  the.  prohibition  of  the  ^ abaildoning  of"  the  daily 
recitation,  the  Sruti  declares  in  the  section  of"  Brahma- 
yajsa  (is  follows 

*'  Untouched  by  evil  is  the  study  of  the  Veda. 

It  is,  verily,  the  purifier  even  of  the  Devas. 

He  that  casteth  it  aside,  is  not  lucky  (even)  in 
speech ; no  share  hath  he  in  heaven.  So  it 
is  said;  'He  who  hath  abandoned  (the 
Veda,  which  is)  the  friend,  aye  which  knoweth 
the  friend,  for  him  there  is  no  lot  even  in 
speech.  Much  may  he  hear,  but  he  heareth 
false.'  Not  indeed  doth  he  know  the'  path 
of  good  deeds.'  "* 

As  to  the  sannyasin ' who  renounces  all  former  works, 
even  he  should  not  abandon  the  study  of  the  Veda.  To 
the  same  effect  the  Smriti  says : — 

" Let  a man  renounce  all  works^  let!  him  not 
renounce  that  one  thing,  the  'Veda.” 

{Objection) : — The  yfrum-Upanishad  enjoins  the  abandon- 
ment even  of ' the  Vedic  study  (svndhyaya).  There  the 
-things  to  be  abandoned  are  enumerated  as  follows : scms, 
brothers,  relations,  etc.,  hair-tuft,  the  sacred  cord,  the 
sacrificial  rite,  the  canon,  the  Vedic  study  (svadhyaya)” 
and  so  on. 

(i4>Mw«»')f— This  objection  does  not  apply  here;  For 
the  5ruti  enjoins  that  the  ritualistic  section  of  the  Veda, 
which  is  of  no  use  to  the  parivrejakas  or  Saanyasins,. should 
alone  be  abandoned.  A repeated  study,'  however,  of  the;  use- 
ful portibn  is  necessary,  as  the  same  Upanishad  moitions.  it 
as  one'of  the  sanny«sin'».duties,  m the  following  wcards : — 


CONTEMPLATION  Volll 

He  shall  first  take  a bath  at  the  three 
saodhis  (connecting  periods),  he  , shall  hold 
communion  with  ^tman  in  sam^dhi ; he  shall 
often  repeat  the  -^rawykas  of  all  the  Vedas ; 
he  sliall  repeat  the  Upanishad,  aye  shall  he  re- 
peat the  Upanishad.” 

That  none  should  give  up  the  study  of  one’s  own  scriptures 
or  th^  teaching  and  reciting  of  them, — that  is,  that  special 
regard  should  be  paid  to  these  duties, — is  indicated  by  the 
repetition,  in  the  sruti,  of  the  words  “study  and  teaching.” 

The  iiMMt  important  of  the  upasaka’s  duties 

Now  the  5ruti  refers  to  the  different  views  as  to  which 
one  of  the  duties  mentioned  above  is  the  most  important: 

wW:  I cTT  ^ I 

^ I ^ cPT:  IR  II 

2.  Th,Q  true,  as  Satya-vachas,  the  son  of  Rathj- 
tara  holds;  penance,  as  Tapo-nitya,  the  son  of 
Puruiish/a  holds;  study  and  teaching  alone,  as 
Nflka,  the  son  of  Mudgala,  holds;  that,  verly,  is 
j)enance,  aye  that  is  penance. 

. :The  teacher- named  Satyavachas,  of  the  family  of 
Rathttara, — so  called  bwause  he  speaks  nothing  but 
truth,— maintains  that  trujh-speaking  alone  should  1^ 
practised.  The  teacher  named  Tapo-nitya, — so  called 
because  of  his  constant  penance, — the  son  of  Purusish/a, 
holds  that  penance  alone  should  be  practised.  The 
teacher  named  the  wn  of  M\jdgala,  thinks  that 


‘ upWkAVwTiis.  Hi' 

the  study  and  teaching  of  the  Vedas  should  alone  be 
practised.  Because  the  study  and  teaching  of  the 
Vedas  constitute  in  themselves  a penance,  they  alone 
should  be  practised.  Though  already  mentioned,  truth- 
speaking, the  study  of  the  Vedas,  and  their  recitation 
are  again  mentioned  here  with  a view  to  inspire  special 
regard  for  them. 

Nflka  is  so  called  because,  always  contented  with  the 
study  and  recitation  of  the  Vedas,  he  never  felt  any  sort  of 
anguish.  No  doubt  in  the  words,  “By  penance  Devas  vrere 
first  to  go  to  God  ; by  penance  did  i?ishis  attain  svarga,”  *•* 
the  sruti  declares  that  penance  is  the  most  important.  This 
does  not,  however,  detract  from  the  validity  of  Maudgalya’s 
contention  that  the  study  and  the  recitation  of  the  Vedas 
are  the  most  important.  They  alone  constitute  the  high- 
est penance,  as  the  repetition  of  the  words  shews,  and  are 
therefore  the  most  important.  It  is  because  they  consti- 
tute the  highest  penance,  that  the  Vedic  recitation  termed 
Brahma-Yaj«a  should  be  practised  even  on  those  days  on 
which  the  first  learners  should  not  study  the  Vedas* 
Accordingly  the  sruti  says : 

“ He  who,  thus  knowing,  studies  the  Vedas 
even  when  it  rains  and  lightens,  when  it  roars 
and  thunders,  when  the  wind  is  blowing,  even 
on  the  new  moon  day,  he  only  practises 
penance ; study,  indeed,  is  penance/’  | 

Another  passage  points  to  the  same  idea : 

“ Standing  or  walking,  sitting  or  lying  down, 
he  shall  not  fail  to  recite  the  V’eda  ; then  he  is 


^ yii.iuiki«*Up»  fU.  t Taiti  *^—14.. 


« pMuuice,  he  ia  pure,  .wl|o,  thufrknow* 
tpg^  redtes  Ihe  Vedati”  * 

Whetwfan^'  aa^ {Modwctive  (rf  rgraat  £ruUs,  it  isa  .peoaa^. 
h^ecevea-thaa  tbe.ipcoai^  of  juting  and  giying  away, 
wealth,  madedared  by  .the  ^ruti  in.  the  following  words ; 
“What  measure  of  svarga  be  wins  who  giyes  ■ 
away  this  earth  full  of  wealth,  that  measure 
of  the  world  he  ( who  studies  the  Veda ) wins, 

(a  world)  which  is  even  greater  and  inexhaust- 
ible. He,  moreover,  conquers  death,  he  attains 
unity  with  Brahmrui,'*  t 


LESSON  X. 

{Tenth  Anm&ka) 

THB  ILLUMINATION. 


A Mantra  to  be  repeated. 

^ ^ I 28  I wnS>8fif 

TOH#?  I I 3I2^?T:  I ^ ^- 

I.  The  Mover  of  the  Tree  I am;  my  fame 
like  the  mountain’s  peak.  The  High  One  making 
(me)  pure,  I am  the  very  Immortal  One  as  He  is 
in  the  sun;  I am  the  Lustrous  Wealth.  Of  high 
wisdom  (I  am) , immortal,  undecaying.  So  runs 
Trisanku’s  teaching  of  wisdom. 

The  purpose  of  the  mantra. 

The  mantra  that  comes  next  is  meant  for  recitation; 
and  its  recitation  leads  to  wisdom,  as  the  context  gives  us 
to  understand.  Indeed,  the  present  section  is  devoted 
to  wisdom,  and  we  are  not  given  to  understand  that 
it  is  meant  for  any  other  purpose.  And  it  stands  to 
reason  that  wisdom  arises  in  him  whose  mind  has  been 
purified  by  svadhyaya  or  recitation  of  the  sacred  text. 

The  mantra  is  an  expression  of  Self-reaiisation. 

As  the  Antaryamin,  I am  the  Mover,  the  Impeller* 


* The  (Jenerator.— (S.) 


19 


eOMTEMPUflON. 


14^ 


of  the  perishable  tree  of  samsara  or  mundane  existence. 
My  feme  is  on  high,,  like  the  mountain’s  peak.  The 
High  One  is  the  Primal  Source,  acting  as  the  purifier. 
Shining  forth  through  wisdom,  the  Supreme  Brahman 
restores  me  to  purity, — me  who  am  the  Sarvatman,  the 
Self  of  all. 

Brahman,  the  Primal  Source,  is  the  Supreme  Purifier, 
because  by  shining  forth  through  buddhi  in  consciousness. 
He  frees  me  from  samsara  or  region  of  births. — (SJ,  When 
thus  purified,  I become  Brahman,  the  Pure  One,  the 
Primal  Source. — ( A ) 

I am  the  Immortal,  the  Pure  Principle  of  .4tman 
(the  Self),  the  self-same  Pure  Immotal  Principle  of 
/Itman  who,  in  hundreds  of  passages  in  the  sruti  and  the 
smriti,  is  said  to  abide  in  the  Sun,  the  source  of  all  our 
nourishment.  Verily,  I am  the  Lustrous  Wealth, 
the  self-luminous  Principle  of  .4tman.  Or,  (to  interpret 
the  sruti  in  another  way:) — I have  obtained  the  Lust- 
rous Wealth,  the  Brahma-jwana  or  knowledge  of  Brah- 
man, the  wealth  which  conduces  to  the  happiness  of 
moksha,  that  which  illumines  the  Principle  of  vltman. 
I am  highly  wise,  as  endued  with  wisdom,  with  omni- 
science. I am  omniscient  because  I am  endued  with 
the  power  of  sustaining,  producing  and  destroying  the 
samsara,  or  mundane  existence.  As  such  I am  im- 
mortal, endued  with  the  attribute  of  immortality;  and 
I am  undecaying.  Or,  (to  interpret  the  sruti  in  another 
way:) — I am  soaked  with  amrita,  with  the  waters  of 
immortality. 


THE  ILLUMINATIOK. 


m 


Am,  X.] 

Thus  the  Rishi,  named  Trisanku,  who  became  Biah* 
man  and  realised  Brahman,  said  after  attaining  to  a 
knowledge  of  /Itman’s  oneness,  with  a view  to  proclaim, 
like  the  sage  Vnmadeva,  the  fact  that  he  had  achieved 
all  aspirations.  This  mantra  which  the  i2ishi  had  seen  in 
his  divine  vision  (arsha  darsana)  is  an  expression  of 
.dtmavidya,  showing  what  constitutes  Self-realisation. 

The  recitation  (jupa)  of  the  mantra  given  above  conduces 
to  purity  and  progress.  He  who  seeks  liberation  should 
devoutly  repeat  the  mantra,  well-balanced  in  mind,  with  a 
view  to  attain  Brahmaj»ana,  the  realisation  of  Brahman. — (S) 

Conditions  of  saintly  vision. 

From  the  fact  of  this  sacred  text,  which  sets  forth 
wisdom,  being  read  next  in  order  to  the  section  (ninth 
lesson)  which  treats  of  right-thinking  and  other  acts  of 
virtue  (Dharma),  we  may  conclude  that  divine  visions 
(«rsha»i  darsanani),  relating  to  the  Self  (/Itman)  and 
other  things,  occur  to  him  who,  free  from  desire  (kama) 
and  aspiring  to  know  Brahman,  is  devoutly  engaged  in 
the  obligatory  works  enjoined  in  the  sruti  and  the 
smnti. 

Not  the  recitation  of  the  sacred  text  alone  leads  to 
Brahma-jwflna.  On  the  other  hand,  all  works  conduce  to 
the  same  end. — (A)  The  seeker  of  moksha,  who  devoutly 
performs  the  works  enjoined  in  the  sruti  and  the  smriti, 
attains  saintly  (arsha)  vision,  an  intuitive  knowledge  of  truth 
to  which  leads  to  moksha. — (S)  When  the  devotee  performs 
the  works  enjoined  in  the  sruti  and  the  smriti,  in  the  service 
of  the  Lord  (Isvara), -.-doing  them  devoutly  for  the  sake  of  the 


148  CONTEMPUTION  [SHkshti-VdlL 

Lord,  not  for  the  sake  of  their  immediate  fruits, — and 
when  he  has  thereby  been  purified  in  buddhi  and  aspires 
for  liberation  alone,  then  he  attains  the  intuitive  knowledge 
which  leads  to  liberation,  that  knowledge  which  arises  in 
him  untaught,  revealing  nothing  but  truth. — (A) 

Repetition  of  this  mantra  serves  as  a substitute 
for  Brahmayajna. 

In  the  Ninth  Lesson  it  has  been  taught  that  the  works 
enjoined  in  the  Sruti  and  the  Smriti  should  be  performed 
in  addition  to  the  contemplation  of  Brahman.  It  has  also 
been  incidentally  taught  that  Brahmayajna  is  the  best 
tapas(or  austerity).  But  there  may  be  persons  who,  though 
earnest,  are  yet  not  competent  for  Brahmayajna,  as  having 
not  learned  the  Vedas  owing  to  dullness  of  intellect  or  other 
causes.  Now,  in  the  Tenth  Lesson  the  rruti  gives  a 
mantra,  by  repeating  which  even  those  persons  can  reap 
the  fruits  of  Brahmayajna. 

5amsara  cut  asunder  by  non  •attachment. 

The  tree  here  spoken  of  is  the  tree  of  samsara,  because 
(like  a tree)  samsara  can  be  cut  asunder  by  a knowledge 
of  the  Reality.  This  tree  of  samsnra  is  graphically  described 
in  the  Taittinya-^ranyaka  in  these  words : 

“Now,  He  that  knoweth  the  tree  whose  root  is 
on  high,  whose  branches  are  down  below....  ” 

The  Root,  the  Source  of  the  tree  of  samsara,  is  the  Supreme 
Brahman,  who  rises  high  above  all  universe.  Its  branches 


• Sayana's  interpretation  of  this  lesson  differs  a little  from 


THB  ILLUMINATION 


149 


A»u.  A".] 

are  the  bodies  of  Devas,  men,  and  beasts,  and  they  are  down 
below.  The  Ka/ha-Upanishad  reads : 

“This old,  old  tree  that  sees  no  morrow’s 
dawn  (stands)  with  its  roots  up  and  branches 
down,”  ^ 

The  tree  of  sams^ra  is  impermanent  and  does  not  stay 
the  same  to-morrow.  It  has  no  beginning.  The  Lord, 
too,  has  described  it  in  the  following  words : 

“ They  speak  of  an  eternal  Asvattha  rooted 
above  and  branching  below,  whose  leaves  are 
the  Vedas ; he  who  knows  it  is  a Veda- 
knower.”  t 

May  I,  the  seeker  of  liberation,  be  able  to  cut  asunder  the 
tree  of  samsara  by  the  sword  of  indifference  ( vairagya ) to 
sense-objects ! That  it  is  cut  asunder  by  indifference  has 
been  taught  by  the  Lord  in  the  following  verse : 

“Having  cat  asunder  this  firm-rooted  Asvattha 
by  the  strong  sword  of  non-attachment,  then 
that  Goal  should  be  sought,  whither  having 
gone  none  return  again.”  I 

No  obstacle  lies  on  the  path  of  the  unattached  5ouI. 

The  tree  of  samssra  being  cut  asunder,  my  fame  becomes 
like  unto  a mountain's  peak  ; it  rises  high  as  the  mountain’s 
peak  is  high.  The  fame  concerning  my  liberation  rises 
very  high  and  spreads  in  the  regions  of  Devas  : so  that  even 
Devas  cannot  thwart  my  wishes.  Accordingly  the  rruti 
says : 


* Op.  cit.  6-1.  t Bbag,  Gita,  XV.  1.  J Ibid,  XV.  3, 4, 


tsi 


CONTEMPLATiON 


ISHkskd-Valhi 

Indeed,  not  even  Devas  have  power  to  pre- 
vent his  becoming  (Brahman).'* 

PttHtiK  of  the  unattached  Soul. 

My  purity  transcends  all.  I am  as  pure  as  the  Immortal 
abiding  in  the  fast-coursing  Sun.  The  Sun  indeed  courses 
always  with  extreme  swiftness.  So  He  is  addressed : 

‘‘ I bow  to  Thee,  who  in  one-half  eye-wink 
traversest  two  thousand  and  two  hundred  and 
and  two  yojanas.”  t 

In  the  sun  there  abides  the  Shining  One,  the  Immprta} 
Being.  Accordingly,  in  the  Madhuvidy®  J,  the  Chhandogas 
declare  that  the  solar  sphere  is  sweet  honey,  and  that  in 
its  several  compartments — eastern,  western,  etc. — there  are 
stored  up  immortal  essences  of  red,  white,  and  other  cqlours, 
constituting  the  fruits  of  works  enjoined  in  the  i?ig-Veda 
and  other  scriptures.  And  it  has  also  been  declared  that 
the  Vasus  and  other  gods  live  upon  these  iiiimortal 
essences. 

Purity  leads  to  wisdom  and  immortality. 

Extremely  pure  as  I am,  may  I come  by  the  lustrous 
wealth ! -Wealth  is  of  two  kinds,  human  and  divine.  Human 
wealth  consists  of  gold,  silver  etc.,  which  are  perceived  by 
the  eye.  That  which  is  heard  by  the  ear,  i.  the  Brahma- 
jnana  and  the  like  which  are  known  only  through  the  Veda, 
constitutes  Swvne  wea\t\v,  Accor d\ng\y,  when  treating  ol  a 
certain  course  of  contemplation,  the  V/fjasaneyins  enjoin  the 
contemplation  of  the  eye  and  the  ear  regarded  respectively 
as  symbols  of  human  and  divine  wealth.  “The  eye  is 

* Bri.  Up.  1-^— 10.  t Yojana  = about  8 or  9 miles. 

X Ohha.  III.  et.  seq. 


THE  ILLUM1KAT16K* 


Am.  IX.] 


»st 


human  wealth ; by  the  eye  indeed  does  one  petceive  it*  The 
ear  is  divine  wealth  ; by  the  ear  indeed  does  one  hear 
it,”  The  epithet  ‘lustrous’  shews  that  the  divine  wi^th  is 
here  prayed  for.  Here  lustre  is  vigour ; and  Brahma-jiwna, 
the  divine  wealth,  is  vigorous  because  of  its  power  to 
remove  all  samsara. 

Endowed  with  these  riches,  with  this  divine  wealth  of 
Brahma-j«ana,  may  I be  possessed  of  vigorous  intelligence, 
of  the  intellectual  power  of  clearly  grasping  the  teachings  of 
the  scriptures  which  expound  Brahma-j^na;  and  may  I 
then  be  soaked  with  the  ambrosia  of  Brahmic  bliss ! 

According  to  the  sage  Trisanku,  the  recitation  of  this 
mantra  constitutes  the  austerity  of  Vedic  recitation  known  as 
Brahmayajwa,  which  one  should  practise  after  learning 
the  Veda  from  a teacher. 


Lesson  X! 

{Eleven^  Amv&ka) 

THB  EXHORTATION. 

In  the  Tenth  Lesson  a mantra  has  been  taught  which  may 
beredted  in  lieu  of  Brahma-yajea;  so  that,  even  to  a man  of 
dull  intellect,  Brahma-yaj»a  is  easy  of  performance.  Thus 
it  is  possible  for  one  to  combine  performance  of  the  works 
taught  in  the  srutiandthesmriti  with  practice  of  the  conte- 
mplation taught  before,  thereby  to  attain  liberation  through 
an  mtermediate  stage.  In  the  Eleventh  Lesson  the  sruti 
teaches  that  performance  of  works  is  by  itself  a step  towards 
moksha,  inasmuch  as  it  creates  a taste  for  wisdom. 

Works  are  necessary  for  wisdom. 

In  proceeding  in  this  lesson  to  enjoin  the  observance 
of  certain  necessary  duties,  the  sruti  evidently  means 
that,  prior  to  the  attaining  of  the  knowldge  that  the 
Self  (<4tnian)  is  one  with  Brahman,  it  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  perform  the  works  enjoined  in  the  sruti 
and  the  smHti.  The  aim  of  this  exhortation  is  evident- 
ly the  regeneration  of  the  aspirant.  Indeed,  Self- 
knowledge  does  readily  spring  up  in  him  who  has  been 
regenerated,  ue.,  whose  manas  (sattva)  has  been  purihed. 
Hence  the  smriti, 

“ By  tapas  (austerity)  man  kllleth  sin ; by 
Vldytt  (wisdom)  he  reacheth  the  Immortah'* 

In  the  sequel  here  the  sruti  saysi 

"By  tapas  do  thou  seek  to  know  Brahman."* 


■2. 


Atm,  Xl.]  THB  EXHORTATION.  153  - 

So,  to  bring  about  the  dawn  of  wisdom,  works  must 
be  performed,  because  of  the  sruti’s  exhortation ; and 
transgression  of  the  exhortation  cannot  but  lead  to  evil, 
First,  too,  in  order  comes  the  exposition  of  works. 
(In  this  Upanishad*,  prior  to  the  exposition  of  pure 
Brahma-vidya,  works  are  treated  of;  and  once  the 
Brahma-vidyfl  has  arisen,  works  serve  no  purpose,  as 
this  Upanishad  teaches  in  the  sequel : 

“ He  finds  the  Fearless  as  the  mainstay.”  * 

“Him  verily  in  truth  burns  not  the  thought 
* why  have  I not  done  righteousness  ?’  ” t 
“ He  has  no  fear  of  anything  whatever.”  I 

From  this  it  may  be  concluded  that  works  conduce  to 
the  rise  of  knowledge  by  way  of  extinguishing  the 
past  accumulated  sins.  And  there  is  a mantra  to  the 
same  effect : 

“ By  avidyfl  (works!  crossing  over  death, 
by  vidya  does  one  reach  the  Immortal.”  § 

The  mention  of  right  speech  and  other  duties  in  the 
Ninth  Lesson  is  meant  to  remove  the  impression  that 
they  are  of  no  use  whatever,  while  here  the  sruti  means 
to  teach  that  their  observance  is  necessary  as  conduc- 
ing to  the  dawn  of  knowledge. 

Two  sides  of  the  injunction  should  be  distinguished  here: 
(i)  that  prior  to  the  attainment  of  knowledge  it  is  necessary 
to  perform  works,  and  (2)  that  it  is  only  prior  to  knowledge 
that  their  performance  is  necessary. — (A)  He  who  aspires 

•T.IT.II.-.  t TI,i,hU.9.  I [hi, I § fw-np.  11. 


^54 


CONTEMPLATION. 


iS'ikshd^VallL 

to  moksha  should  observe  the  duties  mentioned  here  with  a 
view  to  obtain  wisdom.  They  should  be  observed  till  the 
Self-knowledge  is  attained.  Once  the  Self-knowledge  has 
been  attained,  all  human  aspiration  has  been  achieved ; and 
as  the  Self  is  ever  free  in  Himself,  there  is  no  more  purpose 
to  be  served  by  works.  It  is,  therefore,  only  prior  to 
Brahma-j;wna  that  performance  of  works,  as  tending  to  the 
purification  of  manas,  is  absolutely  necessary. — (S) 

Know  as  well  as  learn  the  Veda. 


Having  taught  the  Veda,  the  teacher  then 
exhorts  the  pupil. 

After  teaching  the  Veda  * to  the  pupil  (ante-vrtsin, 
lit.,  he  that  dwells  near),  then  the  teacher  begins  to 
exhort  him : that  is  to  say,  when  the  pupil  has  learnt 
the  texts,  the  teacher  then  instructs  him  in  the  meaninjr 
of  the  texts.  This  gives  us  to  understand  that  after 
learning  the  Veda  the  pupil  should  not  turn  back  from 
the  abode  of  the  teacher  without  making  an  enquiry 
into  Dharma,  into  the  nature  of  the  works  enjoined 
in  the  Veda.  And  the  smriti  says; 

‘‘  And  one  should  know  and  then  engage 
in  works.”  t 

Who  the  teacher  is,  Manu  says  as  follows : 

“ The  twice-born  who  draws  the  pupil  near 
and  teaches  him  the  Veda  with  the  (ritualistic) 

♦The  whole  Yeda — (S) 
t Vide  pasta mbi^-DharmasutrQ.  2— 2!  — 5. 


THE  EXHORTAflON. 


*55 


Jm.  XI.] 

formulas  as  well  as  the  secrets,  him  they  call 
a teacher.” 

The  pupil  is  he  who  always  dwells  in  close  proximity  with  a 
teacher,  such  as  the  one  described  above.  The  smnti  says ; 
“ Never  leaving  him,  his  shadow  as  it  were, 

(the  pupil)  should  reside  with  the  teacher.” 

To  such  a pupil,  the  master  teaches  the  Veda  after  drawing 
him  near,  i.  e.,  after  due  initiation  (Sl\  up-n/  = to  lead 
near).  Then,  when  the  pupil  has  learned  the  text,  the 
teacher  instructs  him  in  the  duties  to  be  performed.  From 
this  we  understand  that  after  learning  the  Veda  the  pupil 
should  not  return  home  from  the  teacher’s  family  without 
enquiring  into  Dharma. 

Duties  briefly  stated. 

^ I IRII 

2.  Speak  the  true.  Follow  Dhaniiai 

Speak  the  true:  give  utterance  to  what  thou  Corniest 
to  know  by  proper  evidence  an  1 what  is  worthy  of 
utterance.  And  thou  shalt  follow  Dharma,  too.  ‘Dharma’ 
here  stands  for  duty  in  general,  inasmuch  as  the  several 
duties,  such  as  truth-speaking,  are  particularised  below. 

The  wise  who  know  all  Dharma  lay  down  that  truth- 
speaking consists  in  giving  utterance  to  a thing  as  it  is 
perceived,  without  hypocrisy  or  a motive  to  do  injury. 
The  wise  say  that  Dharma  consists  in  the  observance  of 
Agnihotra  and  other  works. — (S). 

Truth-speaking  stands  also  for  other  virtues  mentioned 
along  with  it,  such  as  “ harmlessness,  truth,  the  abstaining 


* Op,  cit.  2— 14}0. 


156 


CONtlsUl'LATlON 


[SHkshh-Vcdk 

from  theft/'  *Dharma’  means  Agnihotra  and  other  sacri- 

ficial rites  enjoined  in  the  extant  srutis.  Jaimini  has  defined 
it  thus;  “ Dharma  is  the  thing  taught  in  (the  word  of)  com- 
mand (Veda)’'t  Thus  the  two  comprehensive  sentences  teach 
that  all  duties  enjoined  in  the  sruti  and  the  smriti  should  be 
observed. 


Duties  never  to  be  neglected. 

On  the  principle  that  “ Once  done,  the  command  of  the 
scriptures  has  been  observed,’  one  may  suppose  that  after 
a single  performance  of  the  works  enjoined  in  the  sruti  and 
the  smriti  they  may  be  abandoned.  To  prevent  this  supposi- 
tion the  5ruti  commands  as  follows  : 


3.  From  study  swerve  thou  not.  Havin"  offer- 
ed dear  wealth  to  the  teacher,  cut  thou  not  the 
progeny’s  line.  From  the  true  it  will  not  do  to 
swerve,  nor  from  Dharpia,  nor  from  welfare. 
Neither  will  it  do  to  swerve  from  well-being,  nor 
from  study  and  teaching,  nor  from  duties  to 
Davas  and  Pitris. 

Be  th^u  never  negligent  of  study. 


^ Ydj/taviilkyu-.irariti  L 122. 


t ruryamiuiamaa  I,  i.  2. 


THE  E.^HOftTATION 


*57 


Anu.Xl.] 

Never  forget  the  scriptures  thou  hast  learnt  from  the 
Guru.  The  smriti  says : 

“ Know  that  to  forget  w^hat  has  been  learnt  is 
equal  to  brahmanicide.” 

As  a return  for  the  knowledge,  do  thou  obtain  for  the 
teacher  a most  acceptable  wealth*  and  give  it  to  him. 
Then,  with  the  permission  of  the  teacher,  secure  a 
suitable  wife  and  prevent  break  in  the  line  of  descent. 
It  will  not  do  to  bring  about  a break  in  the  line  of  des- 
cent. That  is  to  say,  if  a son  is  not  born,  attempts 
should  de  made  to  get  a son  by  means  of  sacrificial 
rites  such  as  the  Putrak^mya-ish/i,  a rite  performed 
with  a view  to  get  sons.  This  appears  to  be  the  mean- 
ing of  the  sruti  because  of  the  mention  of  three  duties, 
**  offspring,  begetting,  and  propagation.”t  Otherwise, 
the  sruti  would  have  mentioned  only  one, — that  of  be- 
getting. To  swerve  from  the  true  is  to  have  an  occa- 
sion to  utter  a falsehood.  In  virtue  of  the  word  ‘swerve’ 
we  understand  that  it  will  not  do  to  utter  falsehood 
even  in  forgetfulness : otherwise  the  sruti  would  have 
simply  forbidden  the  uttering  of  falsehood. 

The  sruti  again  speaks  of  the  duty  of  truth-speaking 
v'lth  a vie  v to  teach  that  one  should  never  tell  a lie,  how- 
ever small,  even  in  forgetfulness.—  (S). 

It  will  not  do  to  swerve  from  Dharma.  Dharma 
refers  to  some  particular  works  to  be  done;  to  swerve 
from  Dharma,  therefore,  means  to  neglect  those 

* Cows,  Rold,  cloth  &c.  (SffjTrtim)  such  as  the  teacher  df'sires 
iu  accordaiico  Avith  the  Law— (S).  f Tait.  Up.  I.  9, 


CONTEMPtATION, 


i6o 


[Sih%H*VallU 


we,  the  teachers,  practise  and  which  are  not  contrary 
to  the  teaching  ot  the  Vedas,  but  not  in  the  contrary 
ones  though  practised  by  the  teachers. 

As  to  acts  other  than  thass  mentioned  abjve,  thou  shalt 
strive  to  perform  thoie  which  are  practised  by  the  wise,  and 
which  do  not  seem  to  involve  any  evil.  It  will  never  do  to 
resort  to  evil  acts  or  to  those  which  are  open  to  the  least 
suspicion  of  evil,  though  practis  id  by  the  wise.  Thou  shalt 
follow  our  example  only  with  regard  to  those  acts  which 
are  not  contrary  to  the  sruti  and  smriti  and  which  are  in 
accordanco  with  the  practice  of  the  wise. — (S), 

As  to  the  works  tending  to  promote  welfare  and  prosperi- 
ty, the  ^ruti  lays  down  some  restrictions. — These  works  are 
of  two  classes : those  which  are  open  to  blame  and  those 
which  are  not.  Tliose  which  have  been  already  referred 
to,' — namely,  the  sacrificial  rites  cenducive  to  longevity, 
acceptance  of  gifts,  the  conducting  of  a sacrificial  rite  for 
another, — are  works  not  open  to  blame  and  are  there- 
fore worthy  of  performance  ; the  others,  such  as  the  magical 
rites  performed  for  malevolent  purposes,  though  conducive 
to  welfare  by  way  of  destroying  the  enemy,  should  not  be 
resorted  to,  since  they  are  open  to  blame  as  leading  to  hell. 

Wise  men’s  practice  being  authoritative  like  the  sruti  and 
the  smriti,  one  may  suppose  that  the  teacher’s  example 
should  be  followed  in  all  acts.  But  here  too,  the  sruti 
makes  a certain  reservation. 

Sri  Krishna  has  descril^d  two  kinds  of  sampad  or  nature — 
Daiviand  Asuri,  divine  and  demoniac— in  thefollowing  words; 

“ Fearlessness,  purity  of  heart,  steadfastness 
in  knowledge  and  Yoga,  alms-giving,  self- 


THE  EXHORTATION, 


Am.  XL] 


t6x 


restraint  and  sacrifice,  sacred  reading,  aust< 
erity,  uprightness ; 

Harmlessness,  truth,  absence  of  anger,  re* 
nunciation,  tranquillity,  absence  of  calumny, 
compassion  to  creatures,  uncovetousness, 
gentleness,  modesty,  absence  of  fickleness; 

“ Boldness,  forgiveness,  fortitude,  purity,  ab- 
sence of  hatred,  absence  of  pride;  these  belong 
to  one  born  for  a divine  lot,  O Bh^rrata. 

“ Ostentation,  arrogance  and  self-conceit^ 
anger  as  also  insolence,  and  ignorance  belong 
to  one  who  is  born,  O Partha,  for  an  /fsuric 
lot.”  - 

Now  thou  shalt  follow  us  in  cultivating  the  good  qualities 
such  as  fearlessness,  but  not  ostentation  etc.  This  principle 
should  be  extended  to  the  whole  range  of  5ish/aclwfra  or  ortho- 
dox custom.  To  illustrate;  Parasurama,  the  son  of  Jama- 
dagni,  killed  his  mother  by  the  father’s  command.  Here  we. 
should  follow  the  example  of  Parasurama  in  the  good  act  of 
obeying  the  father’s  command,  but  not  in  the  sinful  act  of 
killing  the  mother.  And  so  in  other  cases. 

Conduct  towards  great  men* 

^ wrr:  i 

\ \M 

7.  Whatever  brahmawas  are  better  than,  our- 
selves, in  their  sitting  it  will  not  do  for  thee  to 
breathe. 


* Bhag.  Gjta  XYI.  1—4, 


V. 


CONTEMPLATION  SHksh^-ViUH. 


tfia 

Whoso  among  the  brnhmawas — not  kshatriyas  and 
others — are  eminent  as  teachers  *.  versed  in  the  sastras 
or  scriptures  etc.,  and  are  superior  to  ourselves,  thou 
shalt  entertain  them  by  offering  them  seats  and  so  on, 
i,  e.,  remove  their  fatigue.  Or(  to  interpret  in  another 
way) : when  such  brahmanas  are  seated  in  an  assembly 
for  discussion,  thou  shalt  not  even  so  much  as  breathe  ; 
thou  shalt  merely  grasp  the  essence  of  what  they  say. 

In  their  discourses,  thou  shalt  not  hasten  to  say  anything. 
Thou  shalt  grasp  the  essence  of  their  discourse  and  never 
thwart  them,  if  ever  you  have  power  to  do  so. — (S) 

If  ever  you  meet  righteous  persons,  superior  by  age, 
knowledge  and  qualities  to  us  who  are  thy  teachers,  thou 
shalt  remove  their  fatigue  by  offering  them  seats,  by  wash- 
ing their  feet  and  by  such  other  kinds  of  service.  Or — to 
interpret  in  another  way, — thou  shalt  not  breathe  in  their 
assembly.  Much'  less  shalt  thou  engage  in  a discussion 
with  them  in  a tone  of  familiarity,  thinking  that  thou  art 
very  learned.  All  thy  concern  should  be  to  learn  what 
they  teach. 

How  to  make  gifts. 

^IKil 

8.  W^ith  reverence  should  gifts  be  made,  never 
with  irreverence  should  a gift  be  made.  With 
liberality  should  gifts  be  made,  with  modesty 

* It  is  a common  thing  that  for  fear  of  ' the  king  etc.,  people 
make  gifts  during  marriage  and  other  occasions. — (8). 


THE  EXHORTAtlON 


163 


Am. 

should  gifts  be  made.  With  fear  * should  a gift 
be  given,  in  friendliness  should  a gift  be  given. 

Whatever  thou  hast  to  give,  do  thou  give  it  only 
with  reverence.  Never  with  irreverence  should  a thing 
be  given. 

When  thou  givest  wealth  to  a br^hma«a,  thou  sbalt  give 
it  reverently.  Nothing  should  be  given  with  irreverence. 
What  is  irreverently  given  is  of  no  use  in  either  world. 
Accordingly  the  Lord  says : 

Whatever  is  sacrificed,  given,  or  done,  and 
whatever  austerity  is  practised  without  faith, 
it  is  called  Asaty  O P^rtha;  it  is  naught  here 
or  hereafter.”"' 

To  interpret  the  sruti  in  another  way  ; Just  as  a reverential 
man  makes  a gift,  so,  even  in  the  absence  of  reverence,  a 
man  should  make  a gift.  The  verse  quoted  above  teaches, 
only  that  thereby  he  does  not  reap  the  frqit  of  a gift  made 
sattvically  . But  he  does  reap  the  fruits  of  a rajasic  or  a 
tnmasic  gift.  Accordingly  the  Lord  distinguishes  three  kinds 
of  gifts : 

“That  alms  which  is  given — knowing  it  fo  be 
a duty  to  give — to  one  who  does  no  service,  in  , , 
place  and  in  lime,  and  to  a worthy  person, 
that  alms  is  held  Sattvic. 

“ And  what  is  given  with  a view  to  receiving 
in  return,  or  lookingfor  the  fruit,  or.  reluctant-, 
ly,  that  alms  is  held  to  be  Rajasic. 

“The  gift  that  is  given  at  a wrong  place' or  ' 


♦Bhag.  GitaXYIL28 


CONTBttPUTlON 


164 


^ time  to  unworthy  persons,  without  respect  or 
^h  ^sdain,  that  is  declared  to  be  T/ima8ic.”f 
With  dstentatibn,  with  modesty,  or  from  fear  of  sastras, 
^With  the  discrimination  of  the  nature  of  the  time,  place, 
the  donee  ehould  gifts  be  made.  These  sentences 
treat  of  the  three  kinds  of  giving  mentioned  above.  “ I am 
rich  in  wealth;  as  my  wealth  goes  to  slaves,  men  and 
women,  so  let  it  go  to  the  brahmawas.”  When  a gift  is 
made  thus  insultingly  by  a man  because  of  his  vast  wealth, 
that  gift  is  Umasic.  When  a man  makes  gifts  in  the  same 
spirit  because  of  the  shame  felt  by  him  when  abstaining 
from  making  gifts  while  his  equals  do  so,  his  giving  is 
r^jasic.  Those  gifts  are  s^ttvic  which,  for  fear  of  sin,  a 
man  makes  to  the  sacrificial  priests  and  the  like  as  laid 
down  by  law.  A man  with  sattvic  nature  should  give 
-with  discrimination.  For  example,  he  should  know  that 
full  fees  are  due  to  the  four  important  priests  such  as  the 
Adhvaryu,  half  fees  to  the  next  four  such  as  Pratiprasth^Jtri, 
one-third  to  the  next  four  such  as  Neshfri,  one-fourth 
to  the  next  four  such  as  Unnetri. 

Or,  the  whole  passage  speaks  of  sattvic  gift  only.  “ There 
should  be  no  guile  in  the  matter  of  wealth”/,  thus  the  law 
lays  down  that  gifts  should  be  made  according  to  one’s 
means.  A wealthy  man  should  make  large  gifts  lest 
making  small  gifts  may  bring  great  shame  on  him. 

How  to  decide  matters  of  doubt. 

Having  thus  taught  of  the  duties  which  cannot  otherwise 
be  known,  the  sruti  now  proceeds  to  shew  how  to  decide 
in  matters  of  doubt : 


t Ibid.  XVlh  20-22, 


thE  EXiiofeTATlON. 


Jau.  XL] 


i6s 


*fW'*ln  I Jrffr  ^n^tW:  I M4«hRl:  Q5 1 *Wr 

^ ?f5r  ^ I m m\ 


9 Now  if  to  thee  a doubt  as  to  a deed,  or  a 
doubt  as  to  conduct,  should  occur,  as  the 
brahmawas  there — who  are  thoughtful,  zealous, 
well-versed,  not  hard  (at  heart),  desirous  of 
Dharma — ^would  act  in  such  matters,  so  there 
shalt  thou  act. 


If,  to  thee,  thus  acting,  there  should  ever  occur*  a 
doubt  as  to  a deed  enjoined  in  the  sruti  or  in  the  smriti, 
or  a doubt  as  to  a custom  (achara),  then,  in  those 
matters,  thou  shalt  act  just  in  the  way  in  which  the 
brahmawas  of  the  country  and  the  age — who  are  compe- 
tent to  judge  t,  well  versed  in  the  matter,  not  urged  on 
by  others  to  the  deed  or  custom,  seeking  Dharma, 
seeking  what  is  beyond  the  senses,  unassailed  by  kama 
(worldly  desire) — would  act  in  such  matters. 

Deeds  are  of  two  classes,  those  which  are  enjoined  in  the 
^ruti,  such  as  the  Agnihotra,  and  those  which  are  enjoined 
in  the  smnti  such  as  the  sandhy^-vandana  or  worship  of  the 
Divine  Being  at  the  main  points  of  time  in  the  day.  To  take 
an  example  from  the  works  enjoined  in  the  sruti ; In  one  place 
the  sruti  says  “ The  offering  of  oblation  should  be  made 
when  the  sun  has  risen  ; ” and  elsewhere  It  says  “ The  offer- 


* Owing  to  confusion  of  mind — (S) 
f AVho  are  able  to  discern  the  subtle  points— (S), 


i6b  doNTEMPLATioN.  [ii'tHsh^V  CUtl. 

• ' i • 

ing  of  oblatioil  should  be  made  when  the  sun  has  not  yet 
risen/*  This  may  give  room  to  a doubt.  Again,  to  take  an 
example  of  the  works  enjoined  in  the  smriti : A doubt  may 
arise  as  to  whether  the  Sandhya  Devato — the  form  in  which 
the  Divine  Being  should  be  worshipped  at  the  main  points 
of  time  in  the  day — is  of  the  male  or  female  sex,  the  scrip- 
tures speaking  of  the  DevaU  in  either  way.  To  take  an 
^ example  of  a custom  in  worldly  affairs  handed  down  in  the 
fa  tnily : A doubt  arises  as  to  the  propriety  of  marrying 
^ maternal  uncle’s  daughter  or  of  eating  animal  food,  inas- 
much’ ^ contradictory  views  obtain  in  these  matters.  In 
^uch  1 'latters  of  doubt  as  these  thou  shalt  act  in  the  way  in 
which  those  brahmawas  would  act  who  live  in  the  same 
•country,  which  thou  livest  at  the  time ; 

who,  as  attachment,  aversion,  anxiety  and  other 

evil  tenden  of  mind,  are  competent  to  decide  as  to  the 
real  meaning'' of  the  scriptures;  who  are  themselves  engaged 
in  the  obser\*'ance  of  the  constant  and  incidental  duties, 
intent  on  their  due  performance  ; who  are  free  from  anger, 
free  from  bigotr;^ ; ai»d  who  wwk  only  for  virtue  (Dharma), 
not  for  gain  and  honor. 

On  intercourse  with  the  accused. 

Having  thus  taught  bow  to  act  in  matters  of  doubt,  the 
STUti  now  goes  on  to  teach  the  procedure  whereby  to  decide 
as  to  , whether  one  should  abstain  or  not  from  social  inter- 
course with  persons  accused  of  a sinful  act : 

fr!T*.  II  : | q«n  ^ | m 

II VH 


THE  EXHORTATION. 


167 


Am.  XI.] 

10.  Now  as  to  the  accused : as  the  brahmawas 
there — ^who  are  thoughtful,  zealous,  well-versed, 
not  hard  (at  heart),  desirous  of  Dharma — ^would 
act  in  such  matters,  so  there  shalt  thou  act. 

Now  as  to  those  who  are  suspected  to  be  guilty  of  a 
blameworthy  act,  do  thou  proceed  as  recommended 
above. 

The  Peroration. 

The  exhortation  is  concluded  as  follows: 

^ 3TI^:  I ^ I I 

imil 

11.  This  is  the  direction;  this  the  advice;  this 
the  secret  of  Vedas;  this  the  command;  thus 
shall  devotion  be,  and  thus  verily  (all)  this  shalt 
thou  observe. 

This  is  the  direction,  this  is  the  advice  that  fathers 
or  others  should  give  to  their  sons,  etc.  This  is  the 
secret, — the  meaning, — of  the  Vedas,  This  is  the  word 
of  God*;  this  is  the  exhortation  as  to  all  things  that  are 
authoritative.  Therefore  all  that  has  been  taught  shall 
be  duly  done.  The  repetition  shews  high  regard  for 
the  instruction  here  set  forth,  implying  that  all  this 
should  be  observed,  that  none  should  fail  to  observe  it. 

The  righteous  should  strive  to  obey  every  command  that 
has  been  thus  laid  down. — (S). 

The  instruction  thus  given  from  para  2 to  10  is  adesa, 

r — 

♦ Jsvara,  the  Par^ipatman,  the  Highest  Self,— (S) 


t68 


CONTEMPLATION. 


[SHhB^Vallu 

the  Vodic  injunction.  Just  as  a king  commands  his  servants 
80  does  the  Vedic  injunction  command  the  devotee.  Upa- 
desa  is  the  command  laid  down  in  the  smriti,  so  called 
because  the  smntis  are  very  near  to  the  sruti,  upon  which 
they  are  based.  Even  in  the  smritis  that  cannot  • be  traced 
to  the  original  srutis,  directions  such  as  ‘‘ speak  the  true  ** 
are  given  in  the  same  form.  What  has  been  taught  in 
the  words  “ speak  the  true”  etc.,  constitutes  the  essence  of 
the  Vedas.  Of  the  three  parts  of  the  Vedas, — the  mantras 
(prayers  to  Gods  &c.),  the  arthavadas  or  subsidiary  passages, 
and  the  vidhis  or  injunctions, — the  last,  namely,  the  injunc- 
tions, constitute  the.  very  essence  of  the  Vedas.  These  com- 
mands are  the  commands  of  God,  as  the  Lord  says  **  Sruti 
and  smriti  are  my  own  command” 

Because  these  duties, — such  as  “speak  the  true” — taught 
in  the  sruti  and  the  smnti  are  enjoined  by  God  Himself  and 
constitute  the  essence  of  the  Vedas,  therefore  it  is  a bounden 
duty  to  observe  them. 

Seeing  that  here  the  sruti  lays  so  much  stress  on  works, 
some  hold  that  works  alone  can  lead  to  moksha:  while  some 
others  hold  that  moksha  results  from  works  and  knowledge 
combined.  Both  these  theories  were  refuted  by  us  (in  the 
introduction  to  the  study  of  the  Upanishads)  when  discuss- 
ing the  relation  between  the  ritualistic  section  and  the 
wisdom  section  of  the  Vedas.  Though  works  are  not  the 
direct  cause  of  moksha,  they  conduce  to  it  by  way  of  creating 
a desire  for  knowledge.  Hence  the  injunction  of  works  in 
the  wisdom  section  of  the  Veda. 

Does  the  highest  good  accrue  from  works 
or  from  knowledge? 

In  the  opening  section  (the  introductory  part  of  the 


THE  EXHORTATION.  169 

bhashya ) it  was  shewn  that  Vidya  or  knowl^e  of  Atman 
by  itself  to  the  tiigii6'st  Blib';'  "Ifb 'the 
piroposifiOh  ^till  more  ilirmly, 'the  comhientdtd^ 
ulto  a ^scussion  of  the  point  bn  this  bccdslob  '^henf  ''tiie 
sruti  is  found  to  enjoin  works,  his  mmh  object’  beihg‘tlb'shhW 
that  works  and  knowledge  serve  each  a distmct'purpote^(A) 

Now,  to  discriminate  between  Vidya  and  {Cuma, 
knowledge  and  works,  we  shall  discuss  the  following 
question : Does  the  highest  good  accrue  from  worka 
pure  and  simple,  or  from  works  aided  by  knowledge,  pr 
from  knowledge  and  works  operating  together  conjoiptly 
as  co-ordinate  factors,  or  from  knowledge  aided  by 
works,  or  frohi  knowledge  pure  and  simple? 

The  theory  that  the  highest  good  accrues  from  works. 

One  may  say  that  the  highest  good  accrues  from 
works  (karma)  pure  and  simple,  because  he,  alone  is 
qualified  for  works  who  possesses^  knowledge  of  the 
whole  Vedic  teaching.  And  this  knowledge  includes  a 
knowledge  of  ritman  as  taught  in  the  Upanishads,  as 
the  smriti  says  “ The  whole  Veda  with  the  secret 
(rahasya)  should  be  learnt  by  the  twice-born.”  In  the 
words  “ knowing  thus,  one  sacrifices,”  “ knowing  thiis, 
one  officiates  at  a sacrifice,”  the  sruti  shews  that'  only 
a man  of  knowledge  is  qualified  for  works  of  any  kind. 
It  is  also  said  “ knowledge  first,  then  action.”  There 
are  indeed  some  exegetists  who  maintafn  that  the 
whole  of  Veda  is  intended  to  teach  works;  So  that  if 
the  highest  good  cannot  be  attained  fey  works;  the  Veda 
is  of  no  use*  '>  • ■ ■ 


j'lt  is  «|pbM^noQgaised1^  «Mgetbts  that  tbe  V^a 
SlisifctaftiuiiglB  isd^at«only  withaviewtotsadi  soi^e< 
tiubif  dse  wkich  has  to  be  done,  whidi  has  to  be  newly 
fanWKht  into  existence.  On  this  principle,  we  shonld  un* 
4KStaiid  that,  where  the  Veda  treats  of  ^tman  as  He  is, 
h subserves  an  injunction  of  an  act  by  way  of  creating  an 
existed  notion  of  the  nature  of  the  agent  concerned  in  the 
act;  so  that,  the  <ruti  spsaking  of  the  fruits  accruing  from 
the  knowledge  of  A tman  pcnnts  iii  the  msun  to  the  injunction 
of  an  act.  The  highest  good,  therefore,  accrues  from  worics 
Blone.->(A) 

Works  cannot  produce  liberation. 

Mot  so,  bacause  of  thd  eternality  of  moksha.  It  is 
indeed  admitted  that  moksha  is  eternal,  and  it  is  also 
known  to  all  that  the  effect  of  an  act  is  temporary. 
If  the  highest  good  accrue  from  works,  then  it  would 
be  temporary,  a conclusion  which  nobody  is  prepared 
to  accept. 

iObjedioH: ) — ^The  interested  and  prohibited  acts  be- 
ing avoided,  the  arabdha-karma  being  exhausted  by  its 
firaits  being  enjoyed,  no  sin  of  omission  being  incurred 
when  all  obligatory  duties  are  performed,  moksha  is 
attained  even  without  knowledge. 

(Answer) This  cannot  be,  because,  as  was  already 
shewn,*  there  possibly  exists  some  residual  karma 
Whidi  gives  rise  to  another  body ; and  the  performsuice 
of  oblatory  works  cannot  neutralise  that  part  of  the 
reudoal  karma  which  is  not  opposed  to  them. 


* Tide  mte  page  5, 


Am*,  BOTORtAWM.  17* 

A$  to  tlie  contention  that  he  alone  is  <p^tiied  Sat 
works  who  possess^  a knowledge  of  the  Vedic 
tKiching,  we  answer : This  too  cannot  be,  becanse, 
from  the  knowledge  acquired  by  a mere  stqdy  of  what 
is  heard  ( i,  e.  of  Vedic  texts ),  there  is  qfMSam. 
Possessing  the  knowledge  acquired  by  a mereirtn^ 
of  Vedic  texts,  a man  is  indeed  quaiifiedfor  works ; 
no  such  knowledge  as  has  to  be  acquired  by  means  of 
uposana  is  necessary  for  works.  And  upasana  is  laid 
down  as  another  means  to  moksha,  as  a means  which  is 
quite  distinct  from  the  knowledge  acquired  by  a study 
of  Vedic  texts.  And  so  it  must  be,  because  the  sruti 
declares  that  it  is  a distinct  thing.  That  reflection 
(manana)  and  meditation  (nididhyasana  or  upasana) 
are  distinct  from  the  knowledge  acquired  by  a mere 
study  of  Vedic  texts  is  clear  from  the  fact  of  separate 
efforts  being  enjoined  in  the  sruti,  which,  after  direct- 
ing “ thou  shalt  hear  of  the  Self,”  teaches  again  that 
“thou  shalt  reflect  and  meditate  upon  the  Self.  ” 

Neither  does  liberation  accrue  from  works  and 
Upasana  combined. 

{Objection):— So,  then,  let  moksha  accrue  from  works 
aided  by  Vidya  or  Upasana.  It  is  possible  that,  when 
aided  by  Vidya,  works  acquire  a power  to  produce  a 
new  effect.  Just  as  a poison,  dadhi  or  thick  sour  milk, 
etc.,  though  in  themselves  liable  to  produce  death,  fever 
and  such  other  effects,  acquire,  when  co-operating  with 
9.  mantra,  sugar,  etc. , power  to  pipduce  ^uite 


i-'i 


■ CONTEMPuVlbN. 

e^ts.-  * ^oj^Woli^iha  niay  W 'pirpduc^d  by  wor'fe  aidbd 
by^Vidya//  ’ . _ 


r 


. h ' f w 


:— J!!lQ*TI^eobj)^tion  already  stated,  that  what 
is^ptpd^i^d  Qaimot  be  eternal,  applies  to  this  view  also. 

lijOi^otimy.-Oa  the  authority  of  the  Vachana*  (saying, 
i.  fii  -smti)  moksha,  though  produced,  is  eternal. 


t-dHsteef)  ^ — ^No,  because  the  sruti  is  a revelation. 
St^i,  as  we  all  understand,  reveals  a thing  as  it  is;  it 
does  hot  niake  what  has  not  been  in  existence.  Indeed, 
npt  eVen  on  the  authority  of  a hundred  srutis,  can  it  be 
that  the  eternal  is  produced,  or  that  what  is  produced 
is  imperishable. 


This  argument  will  do  also  to  refute  the  view  that 
Vidya  and  Karma,  conjoined  ^as  co-ordinate  factors, 
produce  moksha. 

{Objection)  Vidya  and  works  serve  to  remove  the 
obstacles  on  the  way  to  moksha. 


Avidy«  and  adharma  are  the  obstacles.  They  are  destroyed 
by  Tldya  and  works  respectively;  ■ Thus,  these  do  not  pro- 
duce moksha  itself.  Moksha,  which  consists  in  remaining 
as  the  Self,  is  eternal.  And  all  philosophers  admit  that 
nontoxisiteoce.  known  as -destruction  Cpradhvamsabhava) , 
though  an  effect  produced,  is  eternal. — {A) 

{Answer): — No;  we  find  that  works  produce  quite  a 
different  effect.  Works  are  found  to  bring  about  one 
of  the  following  effects; — utpatti  or  production  of  a new 


* This  refers  to  such  passages  as  " And  again  he  returns  not,” 
(Chha-TTp.  8— (A) 


THE  EXHORTATION 


Atm.  XL] 


thing,  vikara  or  change  of  state,  satn^ara  or  conse* 
cration^  apti  or  acquisition;  but  moksha  is  diffetent  from 
production  or  any  other  of  these  effects. 

The  cessation  of  avidy^  can  be  brought  about  only  by 
Vidya  (^Brahma-jw^^na)  as  taught  in  the  5ruti : 


“ The  heart’s  knot  is  dissolved;  all  doubts  are 
cut  apart;  deeds  perish  when  higher  and  lower 
That  have  once  been  seen.  ” * 


To  effect  it,  Vidy^r  does  not  require  help;  and  the  effect 
of  work,  it  is  well  known,  is  something  different.  To  llu.- 
trate  these  effects  with  reference  to  Vedic  sacrificial  acts  : 
a sacrificial  cake  (purorf^jsa)  is  a thing  produced  by  an  act ; 
grain  is  consecrated  by  the  act  of  sprinkling  water  thereon 
while  uttering  some  mantras;  the  soma  plant  changes  its 
original  state  by  the  act  of  pressing  out  the  juice  of  the  plant; 
and  the  Veda  is  acquired  by  the  act  of  studying.  On  the 
contrary,  moksha,  the  state  of  remaining  as  the  One  Self, 
cannot  have  a beginning,  is  not  capable  of  improvement,  is 
not  subject  to  change,  is  not  a thing  to  be  acquired;  and  it 
cannot  therefore  be  an  effect  of  Karma. — (A) 

(Objection)  : — Because  of  a path  being  spoken  of  in 
the  sruti,  moksha  is  attainable.  The  sruti  speaks  of  a 
passage  in  the  following  words:  ‘They,  free  from  stain, 
go  forth  by  the  sun’s  gate.  ” t “ Rising  by  this,  one 
reaches  deathlessness,  ” I Moksha  is  therefore  a thing 
to  be  reached. 


♦ Mund.  Up.  2-2— 8.1  t Murid.  Up.-2-ll. 

X Ka^ha.  Up,  6-16 


ij|;  Gos^uiriMi  S'Utsh^YaM^ 

^ the  aruti  speidia  the  Path  of  leadl^  to  took* 
we  imdarstand  that  mok^  consists  in  reaching  Bri&- 
man  who  dwells  beyond  the  Bndinunida,  the  Mvindane  Eggl* 
Therefore  it  cannot  be  contended  that  moksha  is  ever  pre< 
sot,  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  Self.— (A) 

(.dftsievr) : — ’No,  because  (the  goal)  is  everywhere  and 
is  not  a thing  different  from  the  pilgrim.  As  the  cause 
of  nkasa  and  all  else,  Brahman  is  omnipresent ; and 
all  conscious  souls  (Vijnanatmans)  are  identical  with 
Brahman.  So  that,  moksha  is  not  a thing  to  be  attain* 
ed.  What  is  to  be  gone  to  must  be  distinct  from  the 
goer,  must  be  a thing  removed  in  space  from  the  goer. 
What  is  not  distinct  from  another  cannot  be  gone  to 
by  that  other.  That  the  goer  here  is  not  distinct  from 
the  Goal  is  taught  in  hundreds  of  passages  in  the  srut 
and  the  smriti,  such  as  the  following ; 

“ Having  created  it,  He  penetrated  into  it.”  * 

“ And  do  thou  also  know  Me  as  kshetrajwa 
in  all  kshetras  (bodies).”  t 

{Objection) : — ^This  contention  is  opposed  to  the  sruti 
which  speaks  of  the  Path  and  the  Divine  glory  (of  the 
liberated  Soul).  To  explain : — There  is  yet  another  ob- 
jection. To  hold  that  moksha  is  not  a state  to  be  attain- 
ed is  to  contradict  the  passages  speaking  of  the  Path, 
and  those  passages  which  declare  as  follows : 

“ He  becomes  one,  he  becomes  three ” t 

“ When  he  desires  the  world  of  the  fathers 


• 'foitt.  Up.  2— 6.t  Bba.  Gitfl  XIII.  8.  J Chha.  7-16-2. 


JtitU,  tHS  BXHORTAt^N. 

(pitris)  ,by  his  mere  will  the  &tfaerscoine 

to  receive  him ” * 

**  He  moves  about  there  eating,  playii^,  and 
rejoidng,  be  it  with  women,  carriages,  or  re* 
latives,  never  minding  the  body  into  which  he 
was  bom.”  + 

{Answer}: — No;  because  these  passages  refer  to 
Keiya-Brs^hman,  to  Brahman  manifested  in  the  evolv- 
ed universe.  It  is  only  in  the  evolved  Brahman  that 
women,  etc.,  can  be  found,  but  not  in  Brahman  who 
is  the  cause,  as  witness  the  following  passages  : 

“ Existence  alone,  my  dear,  this  at  first 
was,  one  alone  without  a second."  J 
" Where  one  sees  nothing  else,  hears 
nothing  else,  understands  nothing  else, 
that  is  the  Infinite.”  § 

" When  the  Self  only  is  all  this,  how 
should  he  see  another  ? ” f 

Combination  of  Vidya  and  works  is  impossible. 

In  arguing  that  works  can  have  no  effect  on  moksha, 
it  has  been  hitherto  assumed  that  a conjunction  of  works 
and  knowledge  is  possible.  Now  the  bbsshyaksra  pro- 
ceeds to  argue  that  the  conjunction  is  impossible. — (A). 

And  because  of  their  mutual  opposition,  combination 
of  (right!  knowledge  and  works  is  an  impossibility. 
Of  course,  Vidya  or  Right  Knowledge  which  is  con- 
cerned with  the  Reality  wherein  agency  and  other 
factors  of  action  are  altogether  absent,  must  be  op- 

* Ibid.  8-2-1  t 8-12-3. 

X Chha.  6-2-1.  § Ibid.  7-24-1.  $ Brl-Up.  4-5-15, 


<i0^a?|»t?LAT^0N, 

posed  to  tekrttla**  6r  wotks  '^idh  csto  'only  be  ;;brought 
about  by  various  Victors  operating  t<^6ther.  It  .is, 
indeed,  impossible  to  regard  ohe  aiid  the  same  thing 
both  aS  being  really  marked  by  agency  ahd  so  on  and 
as  devoid  of  all  such  distinctions.  One  of  the  two 
states  must,  of  necessity,  be  an  illusion.  If  one  of 
them  is  an  illusion,  it  is  the  duality  that  should  be 
regarded  as  an  illusion,  set  up  as  it  is  by  the  innate 
ajfiana  or  ignorance  of  truth  as  said  in  hundreds  of 
passages  such  as  the  following : 

“ For,  when  there  is,  as  it  were,  duality, 
then  one  sees  the  other.”  * • 

“ He  who  sees  any  difference  here  goes 
from  death  to  death.”  t 
“ Where  one  sees  something  else,  that 
is  the  finite.”  1 

“ Now,  if  a man  worships  another  deity, 
thinking  the  deity  is  one  and  he  another, 
he  does  not  know.  ” § 

“ If  he  makes  but  the  smallest  distinction 
in  It,  there  is  fear  for  him.  ” IT 

That  oneness  is  the  truth  is  declared  in  the  following 
passages: 

“ This  Eternal  Being  that  can  never  be 
proved  is  to  be  perceived  as  one  only.”  $ 


• Ibid,  t Kaih.  Up.  2-10.  J Cliha.  Up-7-24-1.  § Bri.  Up-M-10 

t Taitt.  Up-2-7-1  $ Bri.Up-4-4-20 


TrtE  EiHORTAlIOK. 


177 


Am.  XI.] 

One  alone  without  a second/’* 

Brahman  alone  is  all  this.  ” t 
''  The  Self  alone  is  all  this.  ” t. 

And  no  work  is  possible  in  the  absence  of  a conscious- 
ness of  all  such  factors  of  action  as  samprad^^na,  i, 
a being  to  whom  something  may  be  given.  Moreover, 
there  are  thousands  of  passages  in  the  sruti,  teaching 
that,  in  right  knowledge,  there  is  no  consciousness  of 
distinction.  Hence  the  mutual  opposition  between 
Vidya and  Karma,  between  right  knowledge  and  works; 
and  hence  the  impossibility  of  their  combination. 
Wherefore,  the  contention  that  moksha  accrues  from 
Vidy^i^  and  Karma  combined  does  not  stand  to  reason. 

{Objection): — This  contention  is  opposed  to  the  sruti 
inasmuch  as  works  arc  enjoined  (in  the  sruti).  (To  ex- 
plain): If  it  be  argued  that  the  sruti  imparts  a knowledge 
of  the  oneness  of  the  Self  by  denying  the  agent  and  the 
other  several  factors  of  action,  like  unto  that  knowledge 
of  the  rope  which  removes  the  illusion  that  it  is  a ser- 
pent, this  argument  is  opposed  to  all  Vedic  texts  which 
treat  of  works,  as  there  would  be  nothing  left  for  them 
to  teach.  But  the  works  are  enjoined;  and  such  an 
opposition  will  not  do,  since  the  Vedic  texts  are  all 
authoritative. 

{Answer): — No,  because  the  sruti  aims  to  teach  the 
best  interests  of  man.  (To  explain) : The  passages  of  the 
sruti  which  are  devoted  to  knowledge  (Vidya)  aim  at 


Chhet.  Up-G-2-1  t Nfi.  Ut.Tap-7.  J Chha»7-25-2 


coNtBMpUTWN  iS'iksU-Valll. 


lit 

delivering  man  from  samsara  and  therefore  proceed  to 
impart  wisdom  with  a view  to  bring  about,  by  means 
of  wisdom,  the  cessation  of  avidy^j  or  nescience  which 
is  the  cause  of  samsara. 

{Objectim)\ — Even  this  contention  is  opposed  to  the 
sastra  which  aims  to  teach  the  reality  of  the  agent  and 
other  factors  of  action. 

{Answer]: — No.  The  ssLstra  which,  assuming  the 
existence  of  the  several  factors  of  action  as  popularly 
understood,  enjoins  works  with  a view  to  the  extinction 
of  sins  already  incurred  is  conducive  to  the  interests  of 
those  who  seek  liberation  as  well  of  those  who  seek  the 
(immediate)  fruits  of  action,  and  as  such  it  cannot 
operate  so  far  as  to  teach  further  that  the  several  factors 
of  action  are  real. 

That  is  to  say,  the  various  texts  of  sruti  which  have  been 
learned  in  pursuance  of  the  Vedic  command  should  be  held 
as  authoritative  (i.  imparting  true  wisdom)  not  because 
the  distinctions,  mentioned  therein  are  real,  but  because  they 
teach  what  is  to  the  best  interests  of  man. — (A). 

No  rise  of  wisdom  is  possible  so  long  as  the  obstacle 
of  accumulated  sin  lies  in  the  w^ay  to  it.  And  on  the  ex- 
tinction of  this  sin*  wisdom  arises ; then  comes  the 
cessation  of  avidya,  and  then  the  final  cessation  of 
samsoraL 

Till  now,  the  impossibility  of  a conjunction  of  Vidyti  and 
Karma,  of  knowledge  and  works,  has  been  argued  on  the 


♦By  due  performance  of  works  enjoined.— (Tr.) 


THE  EXHORTATION 


179 


Am,  XL] 

ground  that  they  are  respectively  based  oo  ^ illu^n. 

Now  the  bhashyakara  proceeds  to  argue  the  'pdnt  on  the 
ground  that  Vidye  and  Karma  are  intended  respectively  for 
akemins  and  kemins,  for  those  who  are  free  from  kema  or 
desire  and  those  who  are  not  yet  free  from  it. — (A) 

Moreover,  desire  for  the  not-self  (external  objects) 
arisek  in  him  who  sees  the  not-self ; and  thus  desiring, 
he  does  works ; and,  to  reap  the  fruits  of  those  works,  he 
will  have  to  take  a body  etc.,  to  undergo  samsiira, 
to  pass  through  birth  and  death.  To  one  who,  on  the 
contrary,  sees  the  oneness  of  the  Self  (.(4tman),  there 
can  be  no  desire.  .4tman  (the  Self)  being  not  different 
from  one’s  own  self,  ^tman  cannot  be  an  object  of 
desire ; so  that  to  be  established  in  one’s  own  true 
Self  is  moksha.  Hence,  too,  the  opposition  between 
knowledge  and  works.  And  because  of  their  mutual 
opposition,  knowledge  does  not  stand  in  need  of  works 
to  bring  about  moksha. 

And  we  have  shown  that  as  to  the  (right)  knowledge 
itself  coming  into  existence,  the  obligatory  works  are 
the  cause  of  knowledge  as  removing  the  accumulated 
sins  of  the  past  which  lie  as  obstacles  in  the  way,  and 
that  therefore  the  works  are  treated  of  in  this  section.* 
Hence  no  contradiction  of  the  srutis  enjoining  works. 

We  therefore  conclude  that  the  Highest  Good  ac- 
crues from  Vidya  alone,  from  knowledge  pure  and 
simple. 


• Which  is].devoted  to  Vidya.— (Tr.) 


CONTEMPLATION. 


z8o 


[Sikshi^Valll 


Knowledge  leads  to  salvation  without 
the  aid  of  works. 

That  in  leading  to  moksha,  knowledge  does  not  require 
the  help  of  works,  has  been  determined  in  the  Vedsnta- 
Sstras  III,  iv.  25,  as  follows : 

(Question) : — Does  or  does  not  the  Self-knowledge  require 
the  help  of  works  in  producing  its  fruits  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — It  does  require  the  help  of  works, 
because  these  latter  form  its  anga,  its  limb  as  it  were.  The 
Dar5a-P«rwam^isa  rite,  for  instance,  does  require  the  help 
of  the  Prayaja,  its  anga.  It  has  been  no  doubt  shewn  in 
the  opening  section  (III.  iv.  i.)  that  knowledge,  as  an 
independent  means  to  the  end  of  man,  cannot  form  an  anga 
or  appendage  of  works.  It  has  not,  however,  been  shewn 
that  works  do  not  form  an  anga  or  appendage  of  knowledge ; 
so  that,  as  our  premise  that  works  are  an  appendage  of 
knowledge  still  holds  good,  knowledge  cannot  do  without 
works. 

(Conclusion) : — Bramaj/w^na,  does  not  require  any  ex- 
ternal help  in  removing  what  it  has  to  remove  (namely, 
avidya  or  ignorance  of  the  true  nature  of  the  Self),  because 
it  is  an  illuminator,  like  a light,  or  like  the  consciousness 
of  a pot.  As  to  the  contention  that  works  form  its  anga  or 
appendage,  we  ask,  in  what  way  do  works  form  its  append- 
age ? Is  it  by  way  of  helping  knowledge  in  bringing  about 
its  fruits  like  the  pray^ja,  or  because  they  are  necessary  to 
bring  knowledge  itself  into  existence,  just  as  the  pounding 
of  grain  is  necessary  to  bring  a cake  into  existence  ? The 
former  cannot  be  the  case ; for,  then,  moksha  as  produced 
by  works  would  be  only  a temporary  effect.  If  the  latter 
were  the  case,  the  prayaja  and  the  like  could  not  be  called. 


THE  EXMORTATIOM. 


Am.  JSf/.] 


til 


angas,  inasmuch  as  they  do  not  bring  the  principal  act  into 
existence.  Therefore,  once  the  knowledge  has  arisen,  it 
does  not  stand  in  need  of  works  to  produce  its  effect. 

Works  are  necessary  for  the  rise  of  knowledge. 

That  works  are  necessary  for  knowledge  to  arise  has  been 
determined  in  the  Ved/mta-s«tras  III.  iv.  26-27  as  follows: 

[Question) : — Are  works  necessary  or  not  necessary  for 
Brahma-Vidya  to  arise  ? 

[Prima  facie  view) ; — Just  as  the  Brahma-Vidya  does  not 
require  the  help  of  works  to  produce  its  fruit,  so  also  no 
works  are  necessary  for  its  birth.  Otherwise,  it  will  be 
playing  fast  and  loose,  once  saying  that  Brahma- Vidya 
requires  the  aid  of  works  and  again  that  it  does  not 
require  it. 

[Conclusion) ; — There  is  no  playing  fast  and  loose  here. 
For,  one  and  the  same  thing  does  or  does  not  require  ah 
external  aid  according  to  the  end  in  view  and  according  to 
its  capacity  for  the  achieving  of  that  end.  A horse,  for 
example,  is  not  necessary  for  dragging  a plough,  but  he  is 
necessary  for  driving  in  a coach.  And  it  cannot  be  urged 
that  there  is  no  authority  to  prove  that  works  are  necessary 
for  knowledge  to  arise.  “ Him,  by  the  recitation  of  the 
Vedas,  do  the  brahmawas  seek  to  know,  by  sacrifice,  by 
gifts,  by  the  austerity  of  fasting ; in  these  words  the 
sruti  gives  us  to  understand  that  recitation  of  the  Veda  an4 
such  other  works  form  the  remote  means  to  the  knowledge 
of  Brahman,  by  way  of  creating  a desire  for  knowledge. 
“ Having  become  tranquil,  self-controlled,  quiet,  patient, 
well-balanced,  one  sees  the  Self  in  the  self  :”t  in  these  word^ 


* Bri.  Up,  4-4-22. 


'I*  Xbid.  4-4-23. 


CONTBMFUTION. 


[S'iksU-ValU. 

,ihemiti  enjoins  tranquillity,  self-conti'ol  and  other  forms 
of  nivritti  or  quietistic  life  as  a means  of  bringing  about 
knowledge;  so  that  these  form  the  proximate  means  to 
knowledge.  Therefore,  works  like  sacrificial  rites,  and 
virtues  like  tranquillity  and  self-control,  are  necessary  for 
the  rise  of  knowledge. 

In  working  fot  knowledge,  the  duties  of  the 
order  are  fulfilled. 

In  the  Vedanta-sirtras  III.  iv.  32 — 35  it  has  been  deter- 
mined that,  in  doing  works  for  the  sake  of  knowledge,  the 
duties  of  the  order  are  also  fulfilled. 

(Question) ; — Is  it  necessary  to  perform  the  prescribed 
duties  twice  separately, — once  for  the  sake  of  knowledge, 
and  again  by  way  of  observing  the  duties  of  the  order  ? 
Or  will  it  do  to  perform  them  only  once  ? 

(Prim facie  view): — ^The  very  works  such  as  sacrifices 
etc.,  which  are  enjoined  in  the  Upanishad  as  a means  of 
acquiring  knowledge,  are  also  the  works  which  are  enjoined 
in  the  ritualistic  section  as  the  duties  of  the  several  orders. 
As  the  ends  in  view  in  the  two  cases  are  different,  the  works 
should  be  done  twice. 

(Answer) : — Not  necessary.  When  a person  eats  food  in 
fulfilment  of  a sraddha  (a  ceremonial  rite  performed  in  honor 
oi  the  manes)  the  call  of  hunger  is  also  answered  by  that 
very  act.  So,  too,  by  doing  works  for  the  sake  of  know- 
ledge, the  demands  of  the  holy  order  to  which  the  individual 
belongs  are  also  answered.  One  may  perhaps  urge  that 
works  for  knowledge  are  optional  as  prompted  by  desire, 


THE  XSJ 

while  the  dutied  of  the  order  are  obligatory  and  therefore 
constant ; and  that,  such  being  the  case,  when  we  the 
works  only  once  to  achieve  both  the  ends,  we  only  confound 
together  two  such  contradictory  things  as  constant  and 
temporary  duties.  But  this  objection  cannot  stand ; for  on 
the  authority  of  scriptures,  one  and  the  same  act  may  put  on 
two  different  aspects.  For  example,  thesruti  says  “the 
sacrificial  post  should  be  of  khadira  wood,**  and  again  says 
“ for  the  seeker  of  manliness,  the  sacrificial  post  should  be 
of  khadira  wood.’*  Here  on  the  authority  of  the  scriptural 
injunction,  one  and  the  same  thing  serves  the  purposes  of 
both  the  obligatory  and  the  interested  sacrificial  acts.  So, 
too,  here.  Therefore,  it  will  do  to  perform  the  sacrificial 
acts,  etc.,  only  once  for  the  attainment  of  both  the  ends  in 
view. 

Works  of  all  orders  conduce  to  knowledge. 

{Objection) : — If  so,  there  is  no  room  for  other 
or  orders  of  religious  life,  because  of  Vidya  being  caused 
by  works.  And  since  works  are  enjoined  exclusively 
with  reference  to  the  order  of  householders,  it  is 
the  only  order  of  life  (in  which  man  may  work  for 
knowledge) ; and  the  texts,  too,  which  enjoin  life-long 
observance  of  works  will  favour  this  view  above  all 
others. 

{Answer) No ; for,  works  are  of  many  kinds.  Agni- 
hotra,  etc.,  are  not  the  only  works.  There  are  works 
unmixed  (with  cruelty  and  the  like),— namely,  chastity 
(brahmacharya),  penance  (tapas),  truth-speaking,  sama 
or  control  of  the  mind  (or  inner  sense] ^ dama  or  control 


x84  ^ntemplation  [S'iksM-Valll 

of  the  external  senses,  ahims^i  or  abstention  from 
cruelty,  and  others,  enjoined  on  other  orders  as  every- 
body knows,  and  which  conduce  even  more  effectively 
to  knowledge;  and  there  are  also  works  such  as 
Dhyana,  Dh^rra;*^^  and  the  like.  And  the  sruti  itself  is 
going  to  declare  By  tapas  (meditation)  do  thou  seek 
to  know  Brahman.’'  * It  is  possible,  in  virtue  of  the 
works  done  in  the  former  births,  to  attain  knowledge 
even  prior  to  entering  on  the  life  of  a householder ; and 
since  the  order  of  a householder  is  entered  on  only  for 
the  sake  of  works,  it  is  quite  useless  for  a man  to  be- 
come a householder  when  he  possesses  the  knowledge  for 
which  works  are  intended.  Moreover,  sons  etc.,  are 
intended  for  attaining  to  the  several  lokas  or  regions 
of  enjoyment.  How  can  a man  actively  engage  in 
works,  when  from  him  have  fled  all  desires  for  the 
enjoyments  of  this  world,  or  of  the  Pitri-loka,  or  of  the 
Devaloka,  which  are  to  be  secured  by  means  of  sons 
(works  and  upasana),  and  when,  realising  the  eternal 
Self,  he  finds  works  of  no  use  ? Even  a man  who  has 
already  entered  the  order  of  householders  should  ab- 
stain from  all  works  .when,  on  the  rise  of  right  know- 
ledge, he  loses  all  attachment  as  the  knowledge  be- 
comes ripe,  and  he  finds  all  works  quite  useless  to  him. 
And  this  is  indicated  by  the  sruti  in  the  words  ‘‘  Verily, 
my  dear,  I am  about  to  go  forth  from  this  place.”! 

{Objection) : — It  is  not  proper  to  say  so,  because  it  is 
found  that  the  greater  part  ot  the  sruti  is  devoted  to 


♦ Tait-Up-3-2.  f Bri  Up-4-5-2. 


THE  EXHORTATION. 


Am. 


IS5 


works.  The  sruti  puts  forth  more  effort  to  teach 
Agnihotra  and  other  works;  and  there  is  much  trouble 
involved  in  the  works  themselves,  inasmuch  as  Agnihotra 
and  the  like  can  be  accomplished  only  with  the  aid  of 
many  things.  Such  duties  as  austerity  and  chastity 
enjoined  on  other  orders  pertain  to  the  order  of  the 
householders  alike,  and  all  other  works  can  be  ac- 
complished with  very  limited  means.  It  is,  therefore, 
improper  to  hold  that  other  orders  of  life  are  alter- 
natives quite  equal  to  the  order  of  householders. 


(Answer) : — No,  because  of  the  aid  rendered  by  the 
works  done  in  former  births.  (To  explain:) — The 
argument  that  a greater  part  of  the  sruti  is  devoted  to 
works  does  not  detract  from  the  validity  of  our  conten* 
tion.  For,  even  the  works  done  in  former  births, — be 
they  works  like  Agnihotra  or  works  like  the  practice  of 
brahmacharya  ( chastity  ), — are  helpful  to  the  rise 
of  wisdom;  and  this  is  why  wc  find  some  persons 
free  from  all  attachment  from  their  very  birth,  while 
some  others,  who  are  engaged  in  works,  are  not  al- 
together free  from  attachment  and  hate  knowledge. 
Wherefore  it  is  desirable  that  those  who,  in  virtue  of 
the  purificatory  acts  done  in  former  births,  are  free  from 
attachment,  should  enter  other  orders  of  life  (than  that 
pf  householders). 


And  because  of  the  multiplicity  of  works.  (To 
t!)cptain)  : — Because  innumerable  results  accrue  from 
works,  and  because  people  long  more  for  those  results— 

24 


“ May  I coipe.j^y  this,”  “ n!Jay  I^cpn^  by  tl^;  ” 
do  people  desire  innum^able  thiegs, — it  is  b,u,t  .rigbj^ 
that  a grater  part  of  the  sruti  should  be  dpvQted  tp 
works- 

And:  bei^nse  works  are  means-^We  have  already 
said  that  works  are  the  means  of  attaining  knowledge. 
Greater  effort  should  be  put  forth  as  to  the  m^ns,  not 
as  tO:  the  epd. 

(Objection) : — As  knowledge  is  caused  by  works,  there 
is  no  use  making  further  effort.  Knowledge  arises  from 
works  on  the  extinction  of  the  accumulated  sins  of  the 
past  which  have  obstructed  its  rise.  AH  exertioni — such 
as  the  study  of  Upamshads — other  than  the  pedSorm* 
ance  of  karma  or  vedic  rituals  is  useless. 

(Answer) : — No,  because  there  is  no  such  rule.  There 
is  no  law  laid  down  to  the  effect  that  knowledge  comes 
from  the  extinction  of  obstacles  alone,  but  not  from 
the  Divine  Grace  (/svara-Prasfwia),  or  from  the  practice 
of  austerity  (tapas)  and  dhyana  and  the  like.  Ahifesa 
(abstention  from  injury),  brahmacharya  (chastity),  and 
the  like  are  all  conducive  to  wisdom,  while  srava«a 
(study  of  upanishads),  manana  (reflection  upon  their 
teaching' , and  nididhyasana  ( meditation ) are  the  im- 
mediate cause  of  wisdom.  We  , therefore,  conclude  tbsit 
there  are  other  asramas  or  orders  of  life.  And  we  also 
conclude  that  all  orders  are  qualified  to  work  for  yidya, 
and  that  the  highest  good  accrues  from  knowledge 
alone, 


THB  EXHORTATIOK.  xS? 

Kiiowla4ge  Is  poasibie  eypn  bsyoiid  Ilia  pAif 
oi  asramas. 

ISnrt  jsvm  the  works  of  those  who  do  not  to  toy 

one  of  the  four  recognised  orders  conduce  to  knowledge  hto 
been  determined  in  the  Vedanta-Sjl^tras  III.  iv.  36 — 39  as 
follows : 

(Question) : — Does  that  man  attain  knowledge  or  not,  who 
does  not  pertain  to  one  of  the  four  recognised  orders  ? 

(Printa  facie  view) : — Knowledge  of  the  Reality  cannot 
be  attained  by  a widower,  by  a snstaka  (one  who  has  finish- 
ed his  studies  with  the  teacher  and  has  been  just  initiated 
into  the  order  of  householders,  but  who  has  not  yet  taken  a 
wife),  and  in  short,  by  any  person  who,  having  completed 
the  duties  of  one  order,  has  not  for  some  reason  entered  on 
the  duties  of  the  next  succeeding  order  ; for,  such  a person 
. does  not  belong  to  any  recognised  order  of  religious  life, 
which  is  the  means  of  purifying  the  mind  (buddhi). 

(Conclusion) : — Knowledge  is  possible  even  for  those  who 
do  not  belong  to  any  one  of  the  four  recognised  orders  of 
religious  life,  inasmuch  as  there  are  works,  such  as  japa 
(recitation  of  the  set  formulas),  which  are  quite  independent 
of  the  four  holy  orders  and  are  yet  conducive  to  the  purifica- 
tion of  the  mind.  The  smriti  says  “ By  sacred  recitation 
alone,  verily,  can  a brahma«a  be  perfected ; there  is  no  doubt 
of  this.”  * In  the  sruti,  we  are  told  that  Raikva,  who  does 
not  belong  to  any  particular  order  and  is  yet  to  marry,  is 
qualified  for  samvarga-vidy^».  t Thus  Gargi  and  other  inst- 
ances of  persons  who  do  not  belong  to  any  one  of  the 

♦ Hanu,  2 — 87.  f Tide  Cbhandogya-Up.  4 — 1.  ei  seg. 


i88  CONTEMPLATION,  f S'ikskd-  Vall% 

recognised  orders  may  be  cited.  This  does  not  mean  that  the 
recognised  orders  serve  no  purpose ; for  they  tend  to  accele- 
rate purification.  Knowledge  is,  therefore,  possible  even 
for  him  who  does  not  belong  to  any  one  of  the  recognised 
holy  orders. 


LESSON  XII. 

{Twelfth  Anuvaka). 

THANKS-aiVINQ.- 


In  the  Eleventh  Lesson  the  master’s  exhortation  to  the 
pupil  has  been  given.  So  far  it  has  been  taught  that  there 
exist  up^sanas  and  works  which  are  remote  aids  to  the 
right  knowledge  of  Brahman.  In  the  Twelfth  Lesson  the 
sruti  gives  the  peace-chant  which  should  be  recited  on 
reading  the  texts  treating  of  these  .external  aids,  on  study- 
ing their  meaning,  and  on  observing  the  acts  thus  enjoined. 

^ ^ I ^ I ^ ^ ^ 

I ^ JTT  I ^ | ^ I ^ 

STO  5t§rn%  I ^ I I 

1 I I I ^T- 

^nf^:  \\\\\ 

I.  Om!  May  Mitra  be  propitious  to  us,  and 
VaruMa  propitious  be  ; may  Aryaman  propitious 

♦ According  to  5'aiikaracharya,  this  Lesson  should  go  along 
with  the  Brahmayalli.— (Tr; 


190  coHTEMfUtioH.  [^iksh^VaUI, 

be  to  us ; propitious  be  India  and  Bnhaspati  to 
us ; to  us  propitious  may  Vishnu  of  vast  extent 
be.  Bow  to  Brabflfian^  Bow  to  Thee,  Vayu ! 
Thou  art  indeed  Brahman  perceptible.  Thee 
indeed  have  I declared  Brahman  perceptible. 
The  right  have  I decihted  ; aftd  1 have  declared 
the  true.  That  has  protected  me,  That  has 
protected  the  teacher;  aye.  That  has  pro- 
tected That  has  protected  the  teacher*  Om ! 
P#iee ! Peace  1 Peace  ! 

This  lesson  shbnld  be  cotietrUBd  In  the  Satse  way  as  the 
‘Lesson.  la  the  First  LesSoh,  the  words  ‘ 1 ^ dedare 
Brihtnsan  ’ are  used  because  Brahinan  has  not  been  taught 
already.  Similarly,  since  the  removal  of  obstacles  has  to 
be  songht  for,  the  words  **  May  That  protect  me”  are  used; 
whertes  at  the  en^  the  words  “ I have  declared  Brahman,” 
That  hip  'protected  me,”  are  used  inasmach  as  brahnian, 
has  already  been  spoken  of,  and  all  obstacles  have  been 
rbiiibveii.  irtfe  disd^e  te^s  to  the  removal  of  obstacles 
which  has  been  already  effected,  with  a view  to  shew  that 
be  ts  not  uhj^ateful.  Otherwise,  if  the  seeker  of  moksha 
does  not  remember  the  good  d<nie  by  Indra  , Variwa  and 
other  Gods,  it  would  seem  that  he  is  ungrateful ; but  it  is 
not  proper  to  be  ungrateful,  inasmuch  as  the  smriti  says, 

the  eene  of  brohmanicide,  an  expiation  is 
sew,  but  there  is  no  expiation  for  ingratitude,” 

Even  when  the  prescribed  acts  have  been  perlbrtti^)  their 


Jnu.  kll.]  THAKKS-Oivwio.  tgl 

fruifion  may  be  obstructed  by  the  sin  of  ingratitude.  It  is 
to  avoid  this  sin  that  the  pupil  brings  back  to  mind  the  good 
done  by  the  Devas  by  way  of  having  removed  all  obstacles 
arising  from  within  and  without  the  body. 


BOOK  II 

(A*NANDA-VALLI'  or  BRAHMA- VALLI'.  ] 


A.—BRAHMA-VIDY^  EXPOUNDED. 


CHAPTER  I. 
THE  PEACE-CHANT. 


A peace-chant  was  recited  (in  Sikshavallt,  Anuvaka  I) 
with  a view  to  remove  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the 
(lower)  wisdom  therein  taught.  And  here  again  the 
peace-chant  is  recited  for  removal  of  obstacles  in  the 
way  of  the  Brabma-Vidy<i  which  is  going  to  be  taught, 

Thanka-giving. 

^ % ftsr:  ^ I sir  pw- 

I sir  ^ I Jit  I Jirt  I 

vm  I ^ wm 

I I ^rr^Jinj^  i ^rr- 

?ni^:  \\\\\ 

* Om.  May  Mitra  be  propitious  to  us,  and 
Varuwa  propitious  be ; may  Aryaman  propitious 
be  to  us;  propitious  be  Indra  and  Brihaspati  to 
us ; to  us  propitious  may  Vishwu  of  vast  extent 
be.  Bow  to  Brahman ! Bow  to  Thee,  Voyu  ! 
Thou  jirt  indeed  Brahman  perceptible.  Thee 

* Sajana  has  construed  this  anuraka  as'a  supplement  to  the 
teaching  imparted  in  the  fi^iksharalli.  But  according  to 
iSfankarocharja,  it  fprws  a prelude  to  what  follows  here  in 
the : 


196  BRAHMA'VIDYA  EXPOUNDED  [AlMndA-V Olll 

indeed  have  I declared  Brahman  perceptible. 
The  right  have  I declared ; and  I have  declared 
the  true.  That  has  protected  -me,  That  has 
protected  the  teacher ; aye,  That  has  protected 
me,  That  has  protected  the  teacher.  Om ! 
Peace ! Peace ! Peace ! 

Prayer  for  mutual  srood-feeUna:  betwjeen  Master  . 
and  disciple. 

^ I ^ I m ^ I 

% I m I V iEn^:  II 

May  Brahman  protect  us  both ! 

May  He  give  us  both  to  enjoy  ! 
Efficiency  may  we  both  attain  ! 
Effective  may  out  study  prove  ! 

Hate  may  we  not  (each  other)  at  all ! 
Om  ! Peace ! Peace  ! Peace  ! 

May  Brahman  protect  us  both  together,  both  the 
teacher  and  the  pupil ! May  Brahman  give  us  both  to 
enjoy ! May  we  achieve  efficiency  for  wisdom  ; and  may 
we,  thus  efficient,  pursue  our  study  effectively,  i.  e. 
may  the  study  enable  us  to  understand  what  is  taught ! 
May  we  not  hate  each  other  at  all ! On  the  occasion  of 
instruction,  enmity  may  arise  from  some  unworthy  act 
which  the  pupil  or  the  teacher  may  have  done  unawares. 
It  is  to  prevent  this  that  the  benediction  is  uttered ; 


THE  peace-chant 


4m.  l.\ 

May  we  never  have  occasion  to  cherish  mutual  hatred  I 

The  peace-chant  is  read  here  'with  a view  to  remoire  all 
ill-feeling  which,  in  the  intercourse  between  the  master  and 
the  pupil,  may  have  arisen  from  an  unworthy  act.  The 
knowledge  imparted  by  the  master  cannot  bear  fruit  unless 
the  mind  (anta/^-karaaa)  of  the  master  is  pacified ; for,  the 
master  is  not  different  from  /sv^ra. — (S) 

The , meaning  of  the  word  peace  ” utter^  thrice 
here  has  been  already  explained.* 

This  peace-chant  serves  also  to  remove  obstacles  in 
the  way  of  the  knowledge  which  is  going  to  be  impart- 
ed. It  is  indeed  to  be  wished  that  knowledge  of  the 
Self  may  be  attained  without  let  or  hindrance ; there 
lies  the  source  of  the  highest  good. 

This  peace-chant  is  intended  to  remove  all  obstacles  in 
the  way  of  Brahma- vidya  which  is  going  to  be  taught. — As 
to  what  has  been  already  taught,  no  peace-chant  is  here  ne-. 
cessary,  as  the  Sruti  says  That  has  protected  me,  thus 
shewing  that  the  knowledge  already  imparted  has  produced 
its  effect  without  any  obstacle. — Indeed  in  the  sequel,  the 
Upanishad  will  teach  the  inherent  identity  of  the  Self  and. 
Brahman,  a knowledge  of  which  will  devour  all  ignorance. 
Freedom  from  k^ma  (desire)  accrues  only  from  the  know-, 
ledge  of  That  which  being  unknown,  kama  (desire),  with  all 
its  train,  comes  into  being. — (S) 

In  the  Samhitf- Upanishad  was  clearly  expounded  the 
means  to  Brahma-vidya.  In  the  Varum- Upanishad  the 
real  nature  of  Brahman  will  clearly  be  explained. 


•Vide  page 


tsS  BRAHMA'VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [AmniO^Vtllti. 

First  the  iruti  gives  a mantra  intended  for  recitationi 
and  which  will  prevent  the  rise  of  all  mutual  enmity  between 
the  master  and  the  pupUf  so  that  there  may  reign  perfect 
mutual  amity  between  them* 

Master  and  disciple. 

The  disciple  for  whom  the  teaching  herein  embodied  is 
intended  is  one  who  has  conceived  a taste  for  knowledge  as  a 
result  of  the  performance,  in  this  birth  or  in  the  past  births, 
dl  the  nitya  and  naimittika  (obligatory  and  occasional) 
works,  enjoined  in  the  ritualistic  section  ; whose  mind  has 
been  turned  inward  and  has  attained  one-pointedness  by  the 
practice  of  contemplation  taught  in  various  forms  in  the 
Ssiehitf-Upanishad;  who  has  clearly  seen  the  impermanency 
of  all  the  worlds  that  can  be  earned  by  kamya  (desire* 
prompted)  works,  and  who  has,  therefore,  grown  disgusted 
with  them;  who,  having  concluded  that  moksha  cannot  be 
attained  by  works,  approaches  the  Guru  for  the  sake  of  the 
khowledge  of  Brahman’s  real  nature,  which  alone  can  lead 
to  moksha.  And  the  Guru  is  one  who  has  studied  the 
Vedas,  who  has  mastered  the  whole  of  the  Vedic  teaching 
and  is  therefore  competent  to  instruct;  whose  mind,  being 
ever  devoted  to  Brahman,  is  never  engrossed  in  external 
things.  Accordmgly  the  i^tharvamkas  say: 

‘‘Having  surveyed  the  worlds  that  deeds 
(done  for  reward)  build  up,  he  who  loves  God 
unto  renunciation  should  betake  himself. 

The  uncreate  is  not  by  the  create  (to  be  . 
obtained).  To  find  out  that,  he  verily  should 
tP  tpachpr  go—versfd  in  the  law,  who  takes 


THE  PEACB'CHANfi 


Am  /.j 


t9d 


his  final  stand  on  God— fuel  in  hand* " * 

And  the  Kathas,  too,  read  as  follows: 

“ Of  Him  the  speaker  is  a wonder,  and  able  is 
he  who  attains  (HimJ ; a wonder  is  he  who 
knows  (Him)  taught  by  an  adept.  t 

Here,  though  the  Guru  has  achieved  all  aspirations  and 
has  nothing  more  to  achieve,  yet  the  disciple  prays,  in 
this  mantra,  for  the  welfare  of  both. 

May  Brahman  whom  I can  know  after  securing  the  grace 
of  the  master  (acharya)  protect  both  me  and  the  Guru ! 
May  Brahman  so  guard  us  both  at  the  time  of  instruction 
that  the  Guru  may  teach  me  with  full  energy  and  at  the 
same  time  I may  grasp  the  teaching  with  full  comprehension 
and  without  doubts! — Thus  the  disciple  first  prays  for  Brah-, 
man’s  providential  care  in  the  matter  of  ultimate  result, 
namely,  that  his  grasp  of  the  teaching  may  be  such  as  to 
dispel  all  his  avidyft  and  that  the  master  may  be  pleased  on 
seeing  this  cessation  of  avidya.  To  attain  this  end, — ^thc 
disciple  prays, — may  we  both  so  co-operate  as  to  infuse  into 
the  knowledge  a power  to  produce  the  desired  effect! 
Then  the  disciple  prays  for  the  means  by  which  this  can  be 
effected : May  all  the  texts  which  we,  the  Guru  and  the 
disciple,  have  been  studying  together,  prove  effective  by 
way  of  illumining  the  teaching  therein  embodied ! May  We 
not  cherish  mutual  hatred  ! The  disciple  may  be  displeasjed 
that  the  Guru  has  not  properly  explained,  and  the  Guru 
may  grow  displeased  with  the  disciple  for  want  of  ardent 
devotion;  may  there  be  no  occasion  for  this  kind  of  dis-* 
pleasure ! 


* Itutui.  Up.  1-2-12. 


t Kath.  Up*  2-?, 


tT 

ik’A  Niifsii^LL. 


Homage  to*  the  eternal  Consciousness,  That  which  is 
present  in  all  divers  things,  never  a thing  of  the  past, 
the  Innermost  one,  the  Immutable,  neither  to  be  secured 
riot  to  l)e  avoided ! — (S) 

Brahma; Vidya  ia  the  specific  theme  of  this'sectioii. 

In  Book  I.  were  first  taught  those  contemplations — 
the  contemplations  of  Samhita  and  the  like — which  are 
not  incompatible  with  works;  then  was  taught  the 
contemplation  of  the  Conditioned  Self  through  the 
Vyahritis,  whereof  fruit  is  independent  sovereignty 
(svarajya).  But  these  alone  cannot  bring  about  a 
complete  annihilation  of  the  seed  of  samsara.  * With 
a view,  therefore,  to  the  extinction  of  ajnana  or  igno- 
ranee  which  is  the  seed  of  all  trouble, — with  a view  to 
impart  a knowledge  of  the  Self  divested  of  all  condi- 
tions, t the  sruti  proceeds  with  this  section  { Book  II ) 
as  follows : 

♦ For,  these  upasanas  have  their  origin  in^kama  and  karina> 
in  desire  and  works. 

f i.  c.,  to  impart  a knowledge  of  the  Thing  in  itself,  of  the  Self 

as  .He 


BRAHjiWiDVA  tl4  A NUtSHELL. 


20t 


Am.  /.] 


I.  The  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the' 
Supreme. 

The  Seeker  of  Brahitiajnatia  should 
renounce  works. 

Brahmavidy<i  is  intended  for  that  person  who  has  become 
pure  in  mind  (antaA-karawa)  by  the  observance  of  obliga- 
tory duties,  with  no  more  attachment  for  the  immediate 
fruits  of  actions  than  for  the  sons,  etc.,  seen  in  a dream. 
From  sense-perception,  from  the  Scriptures,  and  from  in- 
ference, he  learns  that  all  fruits  accruing  from  wprks  are 
perishable  ; and  thus  knowing,  he  loses  all  attachment  for 
them  as  for  a hell.  That  (state  of  liberation)  which  is  free 
from  all  faults,  which  is  marked  by  the  extinction  of  all 
desire,  is  unattained  merely  because  of  our  Tamas(aj/^ana 
or  nescience) ; for,  this  non -attainment  of  liberation  rests  in 
popular  belief,  unsupported  by  reason.  No  factor  of  action 
can  destroy  the  nescience  which  has  placed  moksha  beyond 
reach  ; and  therefore  he  alone  who  has  renounced  all  works 
and  is  equipped  with  the  qualifications  stated  above  is  qua- 
lified for  a knowledge  of  the  Inner  One.  Renunciation  is 
verily  the  best  of  all  means  to  moksha.  He  alone  who  has 
renounced  all  can  know  It,  his  own  Inner  Self,  the  Supreme 
Abode.  “ Give  up  dharma  and  adharma,  and  likewise  the 
true  and  the  false.’*  And  so  the  Taittin'ya-sruti  also  says  : 
“ Renunciation  is  Brahman.”  * The  disciple  should,  there- 
fore, see  that  whatever  is  brought  about  by  works  is  perish- 
able; and  then,  equipped  solely  with  the  renunciation  of 
works,  he  should  strive  for  knowledge  of  the  Inner  Self.  If 


^ Mahanarayana-Up.  21-2. 


a6 


* 2oi  brahma- viDVA  EXf»oiJNDBD,  [Anandu^  Vallt. 

a thing  comes  of  itself  into  existence,  of  what  use  is  action 
there  ? If  it  be  in  the  nature  of  a thing  never  to  come  into 
existence,  what  have  works  to  do  there  either  ? But  when 
a thing  is  capable  of  being  produced  and  needs  only  a cause 
for  its  birth,  then  alone  action  is  necessary  to  cause  the 
birth  as  in  the  case  of  a pot  which  has  to  be  produced  from 
clay.  On  the  other  hand,  that  which,  like  a flower  in 
empty  space,  never  comes  into  existence,  or  that  which, 
like  akasa,  always  exists,  can  never  be  brought  into  exist- 
ence by  an  act.  And  the  sruti  does  not  purpose  to  enjoin 
that  anything  should  be  done. — It  does  not  enjoin  that  the 
end  in  view  should  be  achieved,  because  everybody  knows  it 
without  an  injunction.  Nor  does  the  sruti  purpose  to 
command  the  performance  of  the  mere  sacrificial  act, 
because  the  mere  act  is  painful.  The  sruti  i purposes  to 
instruct  merely  as  to  the  means  of  attaining  the  desirable. 
“Do  thou  by  tapas  seek  to  know  Brahman  well ; ” J in  these 
words  the  sruti  stimulates  us  to  work  for  Brahmajmina, 
and  in  the  words  “ Whence  (all)  these  beings  are  born  ” § 
the  sruti  speaks  of  the  characteristic  nature  of  Brahman 
whom  we  seek  to  know.  And  the  means  of  realising  Brah- 
man consists  in  abandoning  the  sheaths  (kosas)  one  after 


• And  it  cannot  be  that  the  «ruti  which  has  man’s  happiness 
in  view  teaches  what  primarily  is  painful  to  him. 

I The  source  of  all  stimulus  to  action  lies  in  our  own  ruga  or 
passion. 

J Tait.  Up.  3 — 2;  i.e,,  if  you  want  to  know  Brahman,  you 
should  resort  to  tapas. 

§ Ibid 


Am,  /.]  BRAHMA-VIoyA  IN  A NUTSHELL.  203 

another,  in  rejecting  everything  that  has  any  cracetn  with 
action,  and  thus  entering  the  Innermost  Being,  That  which 
is  at  the  back  of  all  Kosas.— (S). 

Cessation  of  Avidya  is  the  specific  end. 

And  the  aim  of  this  Brahmavidya  is  the  extinction 
of  avidya,  and,  through  it,  the  final  cessation  of  samsara. 
The  sruti  will  accordingly  declare  “ Brahman’s  bliss 
knowing,  he  fears  not  from  anything  whatever.”*  So 
long  as  the  cause  of  sawsara  exists,  it  cannot  be  said 
that  “ the  Fearless  he  attains  as  the  mainstay ; ” t nor 
that  “ sins  committed  or  virtues  neglected  burn  him 
not.”  I We  are  thus  given  to  understand  that  from 
this  knowledge  of  Brahman  as  the  All-Self,  comes  the 
cessation  of  sawsara. 

In  the  words  “ the  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the 
Supreme”  the  sruti  itself  speaks  of  the  purpose  with 
a view  to  shew,  at  the  very  outset,  the  bearing  and  the 
purpose  of  the  Brahmavidya.  The  bearing  and  the 
purpose  of  Vidya  being  known,  one  will  try  and  listen 
to  the  teaching,  grasp  it,  and  hold  it  in  the  mind  ; for 
Vidya  is  attainable  only  through  these  processes,  such 
as  srava«a  (listening  to  the  teaching),  as  elsewhere  the 
sruti  says : 

“ ^tman  should  be  heard,  should  be 
thought  of’  etc.'J 

In  speaking  of  the  end  as  conceived  by  a person  who, 
owing  to  avidya,  longs  for  it  (as  though  it  were  something 


* Tait,  Up.  2-9.  t 3-7.  ? Ihii  8-9,  § Brh.Up.  2.4.5- 


204  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Amnda-VolU. 

external,  as  something  he  has  yet  to  attain  to),  the  sruti 
means  to  stimulate  the  effort  whereby  to  attain  the  end 
which — being  one  with  the  true  Self  of  the  seeker — is 
really  infinite.  Since  all  the  works  which  have  been 
spoken*  of  in  the  ritualistic  section  are  intended  to  bring 
, about  some  effects,  to  yield  fruits  external  to  the  Self, 

the  disciple  will  act  in  no  other  way.  On  learning  that 
results  of  all  actions  are  perishable,  the  man  loses  all 
longing  for  them ; but,  as  avidy^?,  the  root  of  kama,  is  yet 
not  destroyed,  he  still  cherishes  a desire  to  rise  up  from  this 
lower  region  (of  causes  and  effects)  to  the  Supreme.  Thus, 
in  the  words  the  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the  Sup- 
reme,” the  5ruti  speaks  of  an  end  and  a means,  only  with 
a view  to  the  attainment  of  what  is  quite  the  contrary, 
by  way  of  leading  the  disciple  to  the  Innermost  One.  Like 
a mother  inducing  her  child  to  drink  a medicinal  mixture, 

, by  saying  that  thereby  his  hair  will  grow  in  profusion,  the 
sruti  induces  one  who  is  yet  a child  in  knowledge  to  strive 
. for  that  which  cannot  be  attained  except  by  knowledge. 
As  to  the  notion  that  it  detracts  from  the  nature  of  moksha 
to  thus  think  of  it  as  an  effect  produced  by  a means,  that 
notion  is  burnt  away  into  nothing  in  the  fire  of  the  knowledge 
that  Brahman  is  one.  That  inborn  desire  of  every  man 
which  expresses  itself  in  the  form  “ May  I not  be  put  to  the 
slightest  misery,  may  I always  be  happy,”  is  possible  only 
w^hen  the  object  of  that  desire — namely,  moksha — exists. 
Though  he  has  not  realised  the  true  nature  of  moksha, 
still  man  works  for  liberation  all  the  same,  his  mind 
. burning  with  the  desire  described  above,  and  filled  with 
the  fear  of  sawsara.  Since  everywhere  activity  can  be 
indqced  only  by  (stating)  the  end  to  be  attained,  the  ^ruti 


JLHU  /.]  BRAHMA-VIDYA  IN  A NUTSHELL.  205 

starts  with  the  words  “ the  knower  of  Brahman  reaches 
the  Supreme,’*  with  a view  to  allure  man  (to  the  proper 
course  of  action).  Attracted  by  the  fruits  declared  in  the 
5ruti,  he  betakes  himself  to  srava;ia  and  other  processes  of 
acquiring  knowledge ; for,  these  are  the  only  processes  by 
which  knowledge  can  be  acquired,  as  the  sruti  itself  has 
declared.  No  activity,  here,  of  whatever  kind, — be  it  the 
one  enjoined  in  the  Vedas  or  that  which  is  concerned 
with  a worldly  pursuit, — is  without  an  end  in  view.  It 
is  therefore  the  end  in  view  that  can  induce  activity. — (5). 

Brahman  will  be  defined  in  the  sequel.  Brahman  is 
so  called  because  He  is  the  greatest.  The  knower  of 
Brahman  reaches  the  Supreme,  the  Unsurpassed. 
The  Supreme  here  spoken  of  must  be  Brahman  himself, 
inasmuch  as  by  knowing  one  thing  something  else 
cannot  be  attained.  Elsewhere  the  sruti  clearly  says 
that  the  knower  of  Brahman  attains  Brahman  : 

‘‘  He  who  doth  truly  know  that  Brahman  Sup- 
reme, he  Brahman  Himself  becomes.”'** 

Here  the  end  is  stated  in  the  words  “ reaches  the  Sup- 
reme.” The  attainer  of  the  end  is  spoken  of  as  “the 
knower  of  Brahman.”  By  this  sentence  the  sruti  necessari- 
ly implies  that  Brahmavidya  is  the  means  of  attaining  the 
Supreme.  Just  as  a sacrificer  achieves  svarga  by  means 
of  Agnihotra,  so  the  knower  of  Brahman  can  attain  to  the 
Supreme  by  means  of  Brahmavidya. — (5). 

To  speak  of  Brahman  as  one  to  be  reached 
is  only  a figure  of  speech. 

(Objection)  : — The  sruti  declares  in  the  sequel  that 


* Up.  3-2-9, 


ao6  BRAHMA'ViDVA  EXPOUNDED  [Anattda-'^alli. 

Brahman . is  present  in  all  and  forms  the  Self  of  all ; 
so  that  He  is  not  one  to  be  reached.  We  generally 
speak  of  one  thing  being  reached  by  another,  of  one 
limited  object  by  another  limited  object.  Brahman 
being  unlimited  and  the  Self  of  all,  it  is  not  proper  to 
speak  of  His  attainment  as  though  He  were  limited 
and  distindt  from  one’s  own  Self. 

Attainment  being  always  associated  with  duality,  with 
the  limitations  of  space,  time  &c.,  how  can  it  be  predicated 
of  Brahman  who  is  not  limited  by  them. — (S). 

(Answer)  : — There  is  no  incongruity  here. — How? — 
Because  of  the  attainment  or  non-attainment  of  Brah- 
man being  dependent  on  perception  or  non-perception. 
(To  explain):  The  Jlva  who,  though  in  reality  one 
with  Brahman,  yet  identifies  himself  with  the  physi- 
cal (annamaya)  and  other  bodies  which  are  limited 
and  external  to  the  Self  and  formed  of  material  ele- 
ments, and  he  becomes  engrossed  in  them.  Then, 
just  as  a man,  whose  mind  is  engrossed  in  the  enumera- 
tion of  those  that  are  external  to  himself,  is  oblivious 
of  his  own  existence,  though  in  reality  he  is  immediately 
present  there  to  make  up  the  required  number,  * so 
the  jiva  is  quite  oblivious  of  his  being  in  reality  one 
with  Brahman;  and  regarding,  in  virtue  of  this  avidya 

• A story  is  told  of  ten  way-farers  who,  after  crossing  a 
stream,  wanted  to  see  whether  all  ihe  passengers  were  alive.  But 
eachoftiiem,  counting  all  the  nine'others  except  himself,  found 
that  one  was  missing  and  all  began  to  weep  bitterly  for  the  loss 
of  one  of  them,  till  at  last  they  were  disillusioned  by  someone 
telling  each  of  them  that  the  reckoner  himself  was  the  tenth. 


6RAHMA-VIDYA  IN  A ^iufSIlELi 


Am,  /.] 


207 


(nescience),  the  physical  and  other  external  bodies, — 
the  non-self — as  his  own  Self,  he  thinks  himself  to  be 
none  other  than  the  physical  and  other  bodies,  the 
non-self;  so  that  by  avidya,  Brahman,  though  one’s 
own  Self,  becomes  unattained.  Thus,  we  can  quite 
understand  how  jiva,  owing  to  avidya,  has  not  attain- 
ed his  true  nature  as  Brahman,  and  how  he  attains  it 
by  vidy^i,  on  seeing  that  Brahman,  who  is  the  Self  of 
all,  as  taught  in  the  sruti,  is  his  own  Self, — like  a man 
who,  owing  to  ignorance,  misses  himself  making  up 
the  required  number,  and  who,  when  reminded  by  some 
one  else,  finds  himself  again  by  knowledge. 

The  non-attainment  of  the  One  Self,  who  is  the  All, 
is  due  to  avidya,  like  the  missing  of  the  tenth  man,  the 
avidya  consisting  in  regarding  the  five  bodies  severally 
annamaya  etc, — as  his  own  seifs.  By  the  knowledge  that 

I am  the  tenth”,  the  tenth  man  is  attained  only  through 
the  destruction  of  aj^kina  ; and  similarly  Brahman  is  attained 
by  the  removal  of  aj;wna.  So  long  as  we  admit  that  the 
knower,  the  knowable  and  the  like  are  distinct  from  Brah- 
man, we  understand  the  word  Brahman  in  its  secondary 
sense.  To  understand  the  word  in  its  primary  sense,  we 
should  know  that  the  knower,  the  objects  of  knowledge,  etc., 
are  all  one  with  Brahman.1  There  is  then  no  occasion 
for  an  injunction^ niyoga)  of  an  act,  as  there  is  during 
our  recognition  of  duality,  inasmuch  as  here  the  evil  is 
removed  by  the  mere  destruction  of  ignorance,  as  a sick 
man  becomes  himself  on  the  eradication  of  his  malady. 


♦ Such  as  the  act  of  meditation  by  which  Brahman  may 
actually  be  reached, — (-4), 


ilO  BRAHrfA-VlfeYA  EJ^POUNDED.  [Amuda-VatU 

Vedic  Revelation,  Brahman  being  knowable  Only  through 
Sastra  (Revelation). 

(Ansmr):-^  Yes;  hence  the  word  ‘‘realised.**  That  is, 
Brahman  as  taught  in  the  Vedas  can  be  brought  home  to 
one*s  mind  by  means  of  manas  acting  independently  of  the 
senses.  By  the  word  ‘ alone,*  all  organs  of  external  sensa- 
tion, such  as  the  eye,  are  excluded ; and  by  the  word 
‘ realised  ’ — Sk.  anu-drash^avya  =^=  can  be  seen  after — 
Revelation  is  admitted. 

An  immediate  knowledge  of  Brahman  possible. 

It  should  not,  however,  be  supposed  that.  Brahman  being 
revealed  by  the  Ved7.s,  an  indirect  ( paroksha ) knowledge 
of  Brahman  is  alone  possible,  as  in  the  case  of  Dharma 
and  Adharma.  The  analogy  between  the  two  is  not  so 
complete ; for,  Brahman  is,  by  His  v^ery  nature,  the  Im- 
mediate (aparoksha), — as  the  sruti  has  declared,  “ That 
Brahman  which  is  the  very  Immediate”'*' — whereas  Dharma 
and  Adharma  are,  in  their  nature,  remote.  We  admit  that 
though  Brahman  is  in  Himself  the  Immediate,  there  is  the 
illusion  that  He  is  remote.  Hence  it  is  that  in  the  subordi- 
nate propositions — such  as  “ Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite  is 
Brahman  ’* — the  5ruti  spsaks  of  Brahman  in  His  aspect  as 
the  Cause  of  the  universe,  and  then,  with  a view  to  remove 
the  false  notion  of  remoteness,  teaches  in  the  main  proposi- 
tions that  Brahman  is  one  with  the  Pratyag^Jtman,  the 
Inner  Self.  Accordingly,  the  Vajasaneyins  declare,  “ He 
that  knows  ‘ I am  Brahman  * becomes  this  all.”  Here, 
too,  in  the  Taittinya  Upanishad,  Brahman’s  identity  with 
the  Inner  Self  is  taught  in  the  words  “ Whoso  knoweth 

♦ Bri.  Up.  3^-1. 


t 


BRAHMA-VIDYA  IN  A MUTSHEU, 


RXt 


the  One  hid  in  the  cave,*’  etc.  It  is  not  possible  even 
to  imagine  that  anybody  will  ever  fall  into  the  error  of 
supposing  the  Pratyag^tman  to  be  remote ; for,  by  all  men 
including  children  and  cowherds,  the  Inner  Self,  the 
Pratyagatman,  is  regarded  as  immediately  perceived  in 
manas.  If  things  like  a pot, — which  are  apprehended  by 
the  Pratyag/itman  of  Inner  Self  through  sight  and  other 
senses,  and  which  are  even  insentient  in  themselves,  * — 
can  be  regarded  as  immediate  because  they  are  not  appre- 
hended through  a medium — such  as  linga  (a  mark,  forming 
the  middle  term  of  a syllogism), — how  is  it  possible  for  one 
to  suppose,  even  by  a mistake,  that  the  Pratyag^itman  is 
remote  (paroksha), — that  Pratyagatman  whose  remoteness 
we  cannot  so  much  as  imagine,  the  very  Chit  or  Conscious 
Principle  which  is  self-luminous  and  illumines  all  ? That 
the  Pratyag^jtman  is  self-luminous  and  illumines  all  is  taught 
in  the  sruti  in  the  following  words ; 

‘‘  After  Him  alone  shining,  all  things  shine  ; 

by  His  light  does  all  this  clearly  shine.”  t 

Such  being  the  case,  it  is  not  possible  to  suppose  that  any 
one  will,  even  by  a mistake,  regard  as  remote  the  Pratya- 
grttrnan  who  is  really  the  illuminator  of  all,  the  very  Chit 
or  Consciousness  shining  forth  in  the  notion  of  ‘ I * even  in 
our  consciousness  of  practical  life. 

( Objection ) : — The  Witness  ( srtkshin ),  as  distinguished 
from  the  physical  body  and  other  sheaths  (kosas),  live  in 
all,  is  remote  (paroksha). 

[Answev) No,  because  of  His  being  absolutely  immedi- 


♦ and  which  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  remote  from  the  Self, 
f Katha-Up.  5—15, 


im  BstmiA-Vim  BXPotmoBn ^Jinand^-  VaUt 

«le«  Becrase  He  is  regarded  as  immediate;ey6n  when  associ- 
ated with  the  physical  body  and  other  sheaths  which 
iiisentient  (jaia)  and  therefore  capable  of  obscuring  Him^ 
much  more  therefore  is  He  immediate  when  unassociated 
with  them*  Thus,  because  of  His  being  one  with  the  Inner 
Self  who  is  immediate,  Brahman,  though  knowable  through 
Revelation,  is  apprehended  in  manas  a&  the  Immediate. 

Brahman  realisable  through  manas. 

(Objection) What  is  apprehended  by  manas  can  never 
be  Brahman,  as  the  Talavakaras  say  : 

**  What  by  manas  one  thinks  not,  by  what, 
they  say,  manas  is  thought,  That  alone,  do 
thou  know,  is  Brahman,  not  that  which  they 
worship  thus. 

This  passj^e  may  be  explained  as  follows  That  Witness- 
Consciousness  (S^kshi-Chaitanya)  which  no  born  creature 
can  apprehend  by  manas  as  an  object  of  thought,  and  by 
which,  as  those  who  know  the  mysteries  of  the  Vedas 
declare,  that  manas  is  illumined,— do  thou,  O disciple, 
understand  that  the  Witness-Consciousness  is  Brahman.  As 
to  the  Brahman  whom  the  Upasakas  worship  as  the  Cause 
of  the  Universe  revealed  in  the  scriptures,  as  something 
external  to  their  own  Self,  like  a pot  presenting  itself  as 
an  object  of  perception,— the  Being  thus  worshipped  cannot 
be  the  Brahman  properly  so  called,  because  no  being  that 
IS  external  to  one’s  own  Self,  that  is  an  object  of  perception, 
that  is  conditioned  by  an  upadhi,  can  be  the  Brahman 
proper.  Because  of  such  denial,  what  is  perceived  immedi- 
ately by  manas  as  an  object  of  thought  cannot  be  Brahman. 


* Kena-TJp. 


Mm,  /.}  BRAKHA^ViptA  !K  A iraT4mUS|.* 

(i4iisfe^^r}:-4No  such  objection  can  be  raited  tee.  We 
6o  not  indeed  admit  that  the  miti  means  that  Bridiman 
cannot  be  apprehended  by  manas.  If,  on  the  contracyi 
that  be  the  meaning  of  the  passage,  how  is  it  that  the 
$ruti  teaches  “ That  alone,  do  thou  ktww,  is  Brahman"  ? 

(OSyictwe) As  the  Witness  is  self-luminous,  it  does 
not  stand  to  reason  to  say  that  He  is  illumined,  like  a pot, 
by  the  consciousness  proceeding  from  manas. 

{Ansiver) Well,  we  explain  thus.  Certainly,  Brahman 
is  not  illumined  by  the  phala,  by  the  resulting  or  generated 
comciousmss  of  manas.  He  is,  however,  illumined  by  the 
vntti,  by  the  mental  modification,  i.e.,  by  the  manas 
thrown  into  a particular  mode.  When  Brahman  is  grasp- 
ed by  the  mano-vritti,  by  manas  in  that  particular  state 
into  which  it  is  thrown  by  the  teaching  of  the  mahavakya 
or  main  proposition  which  teaches  that  Brahman  is 
identical  with  the  Witness-Consciousness,— when  manas  is 
thrown  into  this  state,  f.f.,  when  the  right  knowledge  of 
the  Reality  has  been  attained  avidya  which  is  the  cause  of 
all  distindlion  between  Erahman  and  the  Inner  Self  vanishes 
altogether.  It  cannot  be  urged  that  this  state  of  manas  is  only 
a remote  knowledge  ; for,  contaift  with  the  objedl  can  alone 
bring  about  a change  in  the  mode  ( vritti ) of  manas. 
When  a change  in  the  mode  of  manas  is  brought  about 
through  the  eye,  it  then  assumes  the  form  of  a pot  in  virtue 
of  its  contact  with  the  pot,  and  people  call  it  immediate 
perception.  Why  should  we  not  in  the  same  way  regard 
as  immediate  perception  that  mode  also  of  manas  in  which 
it  assumes  the  form  of  the  Witness- Consciousness  by 
coming  in  conta(5l  with  it  ? 


iUHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED  [Jimndo-l oUk, 

How  Rovelation  helps  the  realUation 
of  Brahman. 

It  should  not  be  objected  that,  if  only  by  conta(5l  with  the 
object  the  manas  can  be  made  to  assume  the  form  of  the 
Witness-Consciousness,  Revelation  (V^kya)  has  no  purpose 
to  serve.  For,  Revelation  alone  can  remove  the  illusion 
that  Brahman,  defined  as  the  Cause  of  the  Universe,  is 
distindt  from  the  Pratyag^tman,  the  Inner  Self.  Thus, 
that  mode  of  manas  which  apprehends  the  unity  of  the 
Inner  Self  and  Brahman  is  brought  about  only  by  contacft 
with  the  vishaya  or  object  of  knowledge  in  consequence 
of  the  sruti  having  denied  all  distindtion ; so  that,  this 
knowledge,  though  produced  by  Revelation,  is  immediate. 
But  in  the  case  of  a person  whose  mind  is  turned  outward 
and  does  not  therefore  come  in  contact  with  the  Wit- 
ness-Consciousness dwelling  within,  the  knowledge  he  has 
of  the  unity  of  the  Inner  Self  and  Brahman  has  been 
brought  about  by  Revelation  alone.  Such  knowledge  is 
mediate,  remote  (paroksha),  like  the  knowledge  we  have 
of  Dharma,  Adharma,  Svarga,  Naraka,  and  soon.  And 
here  the  absence  of  s^ikshatk^ra  or  immediate  perception 
is  not  due  to  any  fault  in  Revelation.  It  is  due  to  the 
fault  of  the  person  himself  in  that  his  mind  is  turned  out- 
ward. We  do  not,  for  instance,  think  it  a fault  of  the  eye 
that  a person  who  faces  the  east  does  not  see  the  color 
and  form  of  the  things  in  the  west.  When  the  person 
whose  mind  has  been  turned  outward  resorts  to  Brahma- 
dhyana — ^to  nididhyasana  as  it  is  called, — and  thereby 
brings  about  that  state  of  the  mind  (buddhi)  wherein, 
being  turned  inward  and  becoming  one-pointed,  it  is 
competent  to  investigate  and  apprehend  the  subtle,  then, 


AttU.  /.]  BftAHMA-ViDVA  tN  A KUtSHELt* 

the  mind  ( buddhi ) comes  in  contacfl  with  the  Inner 
Self,  puts  on  His  form,  and,  aided  by  Revelation,  casts 
away  the  illusion  of  duality.  And  this  state  of  buddhi  is 
called  Sakshatlwra.  In  the  case  of  a mukhyodhikjrin  or  duly 
qualified  disciple  whose  mind  has  been  turned  inward 
even  prior  to  listening  to  the  Revelation  (of  unity)  by  the 
contemplation  of  Sagu«a  Brahman,  or  by  nididhy^rsana 
after  listening  to  the  teaching  of  the  unity,  and  who,  by  a 
course  of  logical  reasoning  based  upon  agreement  and 
difference,  has  been  able  to  distinguish  the  Witness- Consci- 
ousness from  the  physical  body,  etc.,  and  to  realise  It, 
and  who  has  determined  the  nature  of  Brahman  as  taught 
in  the  subsidiary  passages  (av^ntara-vakya), — the  maha- 
vakya  gives  rise  to  the  very  sakshatkara  or  dire(5t  percep- 
tion of  the  Self  as  one  with  Brahman,  not  a mere  indiretfl 
knowledge.  This  very  idea  is  explained  in  the  Vakya- 
vHtti  as  follows : 

**  The  Inner  Consciousness  that  shines  forth  is 
the  very  non-dual  Bliss,  and  the  non-dual 
Bliss  is  the  very  Inner  Consciousness.  When 
the  knowledge  of  their  mutual  identity 
thus  arises,  then,  indeed,  the  non-Brahman- 
ness  of  the  ‘ Thou  ’ ceases,  as  also  the  remote- 
ness of  the  ‘ That.’  If  so,  what  then  ? Listen  : 

The  Inner  Consciousness  is  established  as  the 
very  Perfect  Bliss.”  t 

Absolute  Identity  of  Brahman  and  the  Self. 

{Objection)  :—Tho\jLgh  mutual  unity  (anyonya-tadatmya) 
may  be  predicated  of  Brahman  and  the  Self,  yet  they  can- 


♦ i.  e.  Brahman.— (Tr.) 


t Op.  cit.  39—41 


mA  he  One  Impartible  £sseD^(akha«i^Mska«rasa);  Iqr^^ 
the  unity  of  • blue  ’ and  ‘ lotus,’  they  are  yet  distinct 
as  attriimte  and  substance.  Accordingly,  here,  too,  there 
may  still  rernmn  the  distinction  as  Brahman  and  thS  Self. 

No ; there  is  a difference  between  the  two 
cases,  because  of  the  failure  of  unity  in  the  case  of  a subst* 
ance  and  its  attribute.  The  attribute  of  * blue  ’ is  found 
in  the  clouds  and  the  like,  and  thus  its  unity  with  the  lotus 
fails.  Even  the  substance,  namely  the  lotus,  fails  to  coexist 
with  blue  colour  inasmuch  as  there  are  white  and  red 
lotuses.  Being  thus  distinct  from  each  other,  an  impartible 
unity  (akha»ia-artha)  between  a substance  and  its  attribute 
is  impossible ; whereas  the  unity  of  Brahman  and  the  Self 
never  fails,  and  they  are  therefore  one  and  the  same  thing, 
the  One  Impartible  Essence.  And  this  truth  has  been 
taught  by  Visvarwpacharya  * in  the  following  words : 

“No  Self-ness  {Atma.-ia)  can  be  outside 
Brahman;  nor  Brahman-ness  (Brahma-ta) 
outside  the  Self.  Therefore  the  unity  of  these 
two  is  different  from  that  of  ‘blue’  and  ‘lotus’.” 

[Objection) : — If  so,  the  words  ‘ y4tman  ’ and  * Brahman  * 
being  synonymous,  there  would  be  no  use  having  two 
separate  words. 

[Amwer) Not  so.  Despite  the  absence  of  all  distinc- 
tion in  the  thing  denoted,  a distinction  yet  exists  in  the 
ideas  to  be  removed  which  are  creatures  of  delusion,  name- 
ly, the  non^Brahman-ness  (of  the  Self)  and  the  remoteness 
(of  Brahman).  This,  too,  has  been  taught  by  the  Acharys, 

♦ alias  Sureavaracharya. 


AnuA.^  bilAlikA-VIbVA  lx  A NUtSttElt.  itir 

as  follows ; 

Though  the  very  Self,  Brahman  is, 
owing  to  delusion,  tainted  with  remoteness.  So 
also,  though  the  very  Brahman,  the  Self 
thinks  as  if  there  is  some  other  being.” 

The  Thing  is  one  alone.  In  Its  aspect  as  revealed  only  in 
the  sruti,  It  is  called  Brahman.  In  Its  aspect  as  the  one 
immediately  perceived  in  manas,  It  is  called  ^tman,  the 
Self.  Its  nature,  as  the  Cause  of  the  universe,  as  the 
Omniscient  Being,  and  so  on,  is  revealed  only  by  the  sruti; 
and  the  mediateness  of  our  ktwwledge  thereof  leads  to  the 
illusory  idea  that  Brahman  Himself  is  remote.  And  since 
the  physical  body  and  the  like  called  up  in  the  immediate 
manasic  perception  of  ‘ I ’ are  non-Brahman,  we  fall  into 
the  error  of  thinking  that  even  the  Witness,  the  Conscious 
Self,  is  non-Brahman.  Because  the  distinction  between 
Brahman  and -^tman  thus  conceived  accounts  for  the  two 
separate  words  in  use  while  the  real  thing  spoken  of  is  the 
One  Impartible  Essence,  an  immediate  knowledge  of  Brah- 
man as  identical  with  the  immediate  Self  within,  arises 
from  the  mahavakya.  A person  who  is  endued  with  this 
kind  of  knowledge  is  here  spoken  of  as  Brahmavid,  the 
knower  of  Brahman. 

He  who  knows  Brahman  becomes  Brahman. 

Such  a one  is  fit  to  attain  the  Supreme;  and  so  indeed  the 
^ruti  says : ‘ He  reaches  the  Supreme  *.  The  (Sanskrit)  word 
‘para ’(here  translated  as  ‘ Supreme ’)  means  also  ‘other’. 
But  the  word  cannot  mean  ‘ other  ’ here,  inasmuch  as  the 


s8 


* Bri.  Up,  Sambandha-Vartika  909* 


feftAHMA-viDVA  EXPOUNDED.  [Anafida-ValU^ 

Thing  is  non-dual,  the  sruti  having  denied  all  duality  in  the 
words  “ Here  is  no  duality  whatever.*’*  If  the  word  signifies 
‘ highest  *,  Brahman  must  be  the  thing  denoted  by  the  word 
* para  *,  all  the  rest  being  low  as  made  up  of  maya.  Thus 
it  is  tantamount  to  saying  that  he  who  knows  Brahman 
reaches  Brahman  Himself.  The  ^tharvamkas  expressly 
say:  “he  who  verily  knows  that  Supreme  Brahman 
becomes  Brahman  Himself.”  t 

{Ohjection.)  :-"The  act  of  reaching  spoken  of  in  such 
sentences  as  “ he  reaches  the  village  ” consists  in  a contact 
with  the  village  preceded  by  a passage.  Therefore,  just  as 
an  upasaka  of  the  Saguwa  Brahman  rises  up  through  the 
naAi  of  the  head,  and  after  passing  on  the  Path  of  Light, 
reaches  the  Brahmadoka,  by  a similar  process,— we  should 
explain,— the  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  Brahman. 

No,  because  of  the  denial  of  ascent  and  passage. 
Ascent  is  denied  by  the  sruti  in  the  words  “His  pranas  (the 
vital  air  and  the  senses)  do  not  ascend.”  The  denial  of 
passage  is  conveyed  by  the  sruti  in  the  following  words : 

“ As  to  the  path  of  the  person  who  has  become 
the  Self  of  all  beings  and  who  rightly  sees  all 
beings,  Devas  are  confounded,  looking  out 
(as  they  do)  for  the  path  of  the  pathless.” 

To  explain  : The  Brahmavid,  who  is  the  Self  of  all  beings 
of  life,  sees  all  those  beings  rightly  as  one  with  himself. 
What  his  path  is,  even  Devas  are  at  a loss  to  know.  These 
Devas  are  the  Guiding  Intelligences  (the  /4tivahikas, 
Transporters)  on  the  ‘ northern,’  ‘ southern  ’ and  downward 


♦Bri.  Tip.  44-19. 


t Mujid.  Up.  3-2-9* 


knU  /•]  BRAHMA-VIDYA  IN  A NUTSHELL.  219 

paths ; and  they  get  confounded  when  looking  out  for  the 
path  of  the  pathless,  of  the  Brahmavid  who  has  no  path ; they 
are  at  a loss  to  find  his  path,  whereas  they  can  trace  the 
course  of  those  who  have  to  pass  through  the  three  paths, 
namely,  the  up^isakas  (those  who  have  practised  contempla- 
tion), the  performers  of  sacrificial  rites  and  acts  of  charity 
and  non-performers  of  these  acts.  Wherefore,  it  is  only  a 
figure  of  speech  to  say  that  Brahman  is  reached.  And  the 
dissolution  (of  the  Brahmavid’s  life-principles  in  the  uni- 
versal life)  is  spoken  of  by  the  sruti  in  the  following  words  : 

“ His  pr^was  ascend  not ; **  “ here  alone  they 
are  dissolved.”  “Being  Brahman  himself,  he 
is  merged  in  Brahman.”'*' 

Though  he  is  the  very  Brahman  even  prior  to  knowledge,  by 
aj«^ma  he  imagines  himself,  to  be  a jzva,  and  on  the  attain- 
ment of  knowledge  he  himself,  the  upadhi  in  whose  asso- 
ciation he  has  become  a j/va,  disappears  altogether  so  that 
he  becomes  Brahman  even  in  consciousness.  A man,  not 
being  aware  of  the  jewel  on  the  neck,  searches  for  it  else- 
where; and  when  reminded  by  some  one,  he  feels  the  jewel 
and  then  says,  as  if  by  a figure,  that  it  has  been  attained. 
Similarly,  to  say  that  Brahman  is  attained  is  only  a figure 
of  speech. 


•Bri.  Up.  4-4-7;  3-2.11. 


CHAPTER  III. 

KNOWLEDGE  AND  LIBERATION. 

The  question  as  to  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman  will  be 
discussed  later  on  (in  Chap  IV.)  We  shall  now  proceed  to 
discuss  some  points  in  connection  with  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman  and  the  attainment  of  the  Supreme. 

Knowleds^e  is  an  independent  means  to  the 
end  of  man. 

That  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  referred  to  in  the  expres- 
sion “the  knower  of  Brahman  ” is  an  independent  means  to 
the  summum  bonum  has  been  determined  in  the  Vedanta- 
swtras  III.  iv.  I.  as  follows  : 

{Question) Is  the  Self-knowledge  an  independent  means 
to  the  end  of  man,  or  is  it  a mere  accessory  to  sacrificial 
rites  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) In  the  absence  of  the  knowledge  that 
the  Self  [A  tman)  is  distinct  from  the  body,  a person  is  not  sure 
that  there  is  a soul  going  to  the  other  world,  and  he  will  not 
"therefore  engage  in  the  Jyotish^oma  and  other  sacrificial 
rites.  Thus,  as  impelling  one  to  sacrificial  rites,  the  Self- 
knowledge  imparted  by  the  Upanishads  is  an  accessory 
factor  (anga)  of  sacrificial  rites. 

{Conclusion) -As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  follows: 
Knowledge  of  the  Self  (i4tman)  as  distinct  from  the  body  is 
of  two  kinds : one  is  the  knowledge  that  the  Self  (iftman^  is 


vlw*  /.]  KNOWLEDGE  AND  IIBmTIQN. 

an  agent  and  passes  from  this  to  the  other  worldi  while  the 
other  is  the  right  knowledge  that  the  Self  is  one  with  Brah- 
man. Of  the  two,  the  knowledge  of  the  Self  as  the  agent 
rouses  activity ; but  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  that  the 
Self  is  the  non-dual  Brahman  does  not  induce  action  ; nay, 
it  even  brings  about  cessation  of  activity  by  its  denial  of  the 
reality  of  action  and  its  various  operative  factors  as  well  as 
of  its  fruits. 

{Objection) We  are  told  that  even  men  of  right  know- 
ledge such  as  Janaka  were  engaged  in  action. 

(Answer)  :~-Yes ; they  took  to  that  course  of  life  for  loka- 
sangraha,  u e.^  with  a view  to  set  an  example  to  the  world. 
If  performance  of  works  be  necessary  even  for  men  of  right 
knowledge  to  secure  liberation,  then  how  to  explain  the 
5ruti  which  speaks  (in  their  case)  of  the  worthlessness  of 
offspring  etc.,  in  the  words  what  have  we  with  offspring  to 
do,  we  to  whom  this  here,  this  Self,  is  the  world.**  * Thus 
the  sruti  says  that  when  the  world  of  the  True  Self  has 
been  immediately  realised,  the  offspring  etc.,  which 
are  the  means  of  securing  happiness  in  the  world  of  non- 
self, turn  out  to  be  of  no  use.  Of  the  same  tenor  are  the 
statements  “ For  what  end  are  we  to  study  Vedas?  **  “For 
what  end  are  we  to  worship  ? *’  and  so  on.  Wherefore, 
knowledge  of  the  True  Self  is  an  independent  means  to  the 
sumntum  bonum,  not  a mere  accessory  factor  of  sacrificial 
rites. 

The  student  attains  knowledge  in  this  or  in 
a future  birth. 

As  to  when  that  knowledge  arises,  the  Vedanta-sstra 


* Bri.  Up.  4-4-22 


'sia  BRAHMA.vioyA  EXPOUNDED,  [Anando-VolH. 

(III.  iv«  5.)  discusses  as  follows : 

{Qmtion)  :*^Does  the  student  of  Brahmavidya  attain  the 
knowledge  invariably  in  this  birth,  or  does  he  attain  it 
either  in  this  birth  or  in  a future  birth  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) When  the  processes  of  sravawa  (study), 
nxanana  (reflection)  and  nididhyasana  (meditation)have  been 
gone  through,  the  knowledge  does,  of  necessity,  arise  in 
this  very  birth.  There  is  certainly  no  necessity  for  the 
alternative  in  point  of  time  that  it  is  attained  either  in 
this  very  birth  or  in  a future  birth ; for,  the  man  who  en- 
gages in  sravawa  and  other  processes  desires  to  attain  know- 
ledge in  this  very  birth.  A person  engages  in  the  study  with 
the  desire  “ may  I come  by  wisdom  in  this  very  birth.”  It 
should  not  be  supposed  that  since  sacrificial  rites,  etc,, 
produce  their  effects  in  the  unseen  (i.e.  in  future  births),  and 
since  the  sacrificial  rites,  etc.,  are  said  to  be  the  means  of 
attaining  the  knowledge  of  Brahman,  this  knowledge  of 
Brahman  can,  like  svarga  and  other  fruits  of  sacrificial  rites, 
etc.,  be  reaped  only  in  a future  birth.  For,  the  sacrificial 
rites,  etc.,  have  served  their  purpose — by  way  of  creating  a 
desire  for  knowledge, — even  before  the  student  engages  in 
sravawa  and  other  processes.  Wherefore,  the  knowledge 
does,  ©f  necessity,  arise  in  this  very  birth. 

{Conclusion): — We  maintain  that,  in  the  absence  of  obsta- 
cles, the  knowledge  arises  in  this  very  birth.  But  when 
there  is  an  obstacle  in  the  way,  it  arises  in  a future  birth,  in 
virtue  of  the  sravawa  and  other  processes  gone  through  in 
this  brith.  That  many  an  obstacle  may  exist  is  declared  as 
follows* 


* Kafha-TJp.  2-7, 


Am.-  /.]  KNOWLEDGE  AND  LIBERATION.  22^ 

‘*Of  whom  the  many  have  no  chance  even  to 
hear,  whom  many  cannot  know  though  they 
have  heard.”^' 

Against  this  it  should  not  be  argued  that  there  exists  no 
evidence  for  the  assertion  that  the  knowledge  arises  in  a 
future  birth  as  a result  of  the  sravawa  and  other  processes  of 
study  gone  through  in  former  births  ; for,  the  sruti  speaks 
of  Vflmadeva  having  attained  knowledge  while  yet  in  the 
womb : 

**  Lying  still  in  the  womb,  V^imadeva  thus 
uttered  it.’*  t 

Therefore  knowledge  arises  in  this  very  birth  or  in  a future 
birth. 


Nothing  is  real  except  Brahman. 

It  has  been  said  above  t that  because  there  exists  nothing 
real  except  Brahman,  the  word  ‘ para  ’ here  in  the  Upani- 
shad  cannot  mean  ‘other’.  The  unreality  of  all  else  has 
been  determined  as  follows  in  the  Vedanta-swtras  III. 

ii-  31-37  • 

(Question) Does  anything  exist  or  not  beyond  Brahman? 

(Prima  facie  view):— It  must  be  admitted  that,  beyond 
Brahman  who  is  said,  in  the  words  “not  thus,  not  thus,”J 
to  be  devoid  of  all  perceptible  attributes,  there  exists  some- 
thing. The  reasons  are : 

(i)  Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  a bridge  in  the  following 
passage:  “Then,  as  to  the  ^tman,  He  is  the  bridge,  the 


♦ Aitarcya-Up.  2-4-1.  f Vide,  ante  p.  217. 


J Bri.-Up.2.3.G, 


9i9  BRAHMA-VIDVA  EXPOUMDED,  [Amndo-VolH. 

(III.  iv.  5.)  discusses  as  follows: 

{Qmtion) Does  the  student  of  Brahmavidya  attain  the 
knowledge  invariably  in  this  birth,  or  does  he  attain  it 
either  in  this  birth  or  in  a future  birth  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) When  the  processes  of  sravawa  (study), 
manana  (reflection)  and  nididhyasana  (meditation)have  been 
gone  through,  the  knowledge  does,  of  necessity,  arise  in 
this  very  birth.  There  is  certainly  no  necessity  for  the 
alternative  in  point  of  time  that  it  is  attained  either  in 
this  very  birth  or  in  a future  birth ; for,  the  man  who  en- 
gages in  sravawa  and  other  processes  desires  to  attain  know- 
ledge in  this  very  birth.  A person  engages  in  the  study  with 
the  desire  “ may  I come  by  wisdom  in  this  very  birth.”  It 
should  not  be  supposed  that  since  sacrificial  rites,  etc,, 
produce  their  effects  in  the  unseen  (i.e.  in  future  births),  and 
since  the  sacrificial  rites,  etc.,  are  said  to  be  the  means  of 
attaining  the  knowledge  of  Brahman,  this  knowledge  of 
Brahman  can,  like  svarga  and  other  fruits  of  sacrificial  rites, 
etc.,  be  reaped  only  in  a future  birth.  For,  the  sacrificial 
rites,  etc.,  have  served  their  purpose — by  way  of  creating  a 
desire  for  knowledge, — even  before  the  student  engages  in 
sravawa  and  other  processes.  Wherefore,  the  knowledge 
does,  of  necessity,  arise  in  this  very  birth. 

{Conclusion): — We  maintain  that,  in  the  absence  of  obsta- 
cles, the  knowledge  arises  in  this  very  birth.  But  when 
there  is  an  obstacle  in  the  way,  it  arises  in  a future  birth,  in 
virtue  of  the  sravawa  and  other  processes  gone  through  in 
this  brith.  That  many  an  obstacle  may  exist  is  declared  as 
follows: 


* Kafta-Up.  2-7, 


Am.  /•]  KNOWLEDGE  AND  LIBERATION.  22^ 

“Of  whom  the  many  have  no  chance  even  to 
hear,  whom  many  cannot  know  though  they 
have  heard.”"' 

Against  this  it  should  not  be  argued  that  there  exists  no 
evidence  for  the  assertion  that  the  knowledge  arises  in  a 
future  birth  as  a result  of  the  srava«a  and  other  processes  of 
study  gone  through  in  former  births ; for,  the  sruti  speaks 
of  V^madeva  having  attained  knowledge  while  yet  in  the 
womb: 

“ Lying  still  in  the  womb,  Vamadeva  thus 
uttered  it.”  + 

Therefore  knowledge  arises  in  this  very  birth  or  in  a future 
birth. 


Nothing  is  real  except  Brahnran. 

It  has  been  said  above  | that  because  there  exists  nothing 
real  except  Brahman,  the  word  ‘ para  ’ here  in  the  Upani- 
shad  cannot  mean  ‘other’.  The  unreality  of  all  else  has 
been  determined  as  follows  in  the  Vedflfnta-swtras  III. 

ii-  31-37: 

[Question) Does  anything  exist  or  not  beyond  Brahman? 

[Prima  facie  view):--lt  must  be  admitted  that,  beyond 
Brahman  who  is  said,  in  the  words  “ not  thus,  not  thus,”I 
to  be  devoid  of  all  perceptible  attributes,  there  exists  some- 
thing. The  reasons  are : 

(1)  Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  a bridge  in  the  following 
passage:  “Then,  as  to  the  ^tman.  He  is  the  bridge,  the 


* Aitarcya-tJp.  2-4-1.  f Vide,  ante  p,  217. 


J Bri.-Up,  2-3-(i, 


iii  BRAHMA.viDVA ExporNDED,  [Amndo-VolH, 

(III.  iv.  5.)  discusses  as  follows : 

(Question) Does  the  student  of  Brahmavidya  attain  the 
knowledge  invariably  in  this  birth,  or  does  he  attain  it 
either  in  this  birth  or  in  a future  birth  ? 

(Prima  facie  view) .When  the  processes  of  sravawa  (study), 
manana  (reflection)  and  nididhy^isana  (meditation)have  been 
gone  through,  the  knowledge  does,  of  necessity,  arise  in 
this  very  birth.  There  is  certainly  no  necessity  for  the 
alternative  in  point  of  time  that  it  is  attained  either  in 
this  very  birth  or  in  a future  birth ; for,  the  man  who  en- 
gages in  sravawa  and  other  processes  desires  to  attain  know- 
ledge in  this  very  birth.  A person  engages  in  the  study  with 
the  desire  “ may  I come  by  wisdom  in  this  very  birth.”  It 
should  not  be  supposed  that  since  sacrificial  rites,  etc,, 
produce  their  effects  in  the  unseen  (i.e.  in  future  births),  and 
since  the  sacrificial  rites,  etc.,  are  said  to  be  the  means  of 
attaining  the  knowledge  of  Brahman,  this  knowledge  of 
Brahman  can,  like  svarga  and  other  fruits  of  sacrificial  rites, 
etc.,  be  reaped  only  in  a future  birth.  For,  the  sacrificial 
rites,  etc.,  have  served  their  purpose — by  way  of  creating  a 
desire  for  knowledge,— -even  before  the  student  engages  in 
srava«a  and  other  processes.  Wherefore,  the  knowledge 
does,  of  necessity,  arise  in  this  very  birth. 

(Conclusion):— We  maintain  that,  in  the  absence  of  obsta- 
cles, the  knowledge  arises  in  this  very  birth.  But  when 
there  is  an  obstacle  in  the  way,  it  arises  in  a future  birth,  in 
virtue  of  the  sravawa  and  other  processes  gone  through  in 
this  brith.  That  many  an  obstacle  may  exist  is  declared  as 
follows : 


* Ka<ha-Up.  2-7* 


KNOWLEDGE  AND  LIBERATION, 


223 


Am.  1.] 

“Of  whom  the  many  have  no  chance  even  to 
hear,  whom  many  cannot  know  though  they 
have  heard.”"' 

Against  this  it  should  not  be  argued  that  there  exists  no 
evidence  for  the  assertion  that  the  knowledge  arises  in  a 
future  birth  as  a result  of  the  sravawa  and  other  processes  of 
study  gone  through  in  former  births  ; for,  the  sruti  speaks 
of  V^^madeva  having  attained  knowledge  while  yet  in  the 
womb: 

“ Lying  still  in  the  womb,  Vamadeva  thus 
uttered  it.”  f 

Therefore  knowledge  arises  in  this  very  birth  or  in  a future 
birth. 


Nothing  is  real  except  Brahnran. 

It  has  been  said  above  t that  because  there  exists  nothing 
real  except  Brahman,  the  word  ‘ para  ’ here  in  the  Upani- 
shad  cannot  mean  ‘ other  ’ . The  unreality  of  all  else  has 
been  determined  as  follows  in  the  Ved^znta-swtras  III. 

ii.  31-^37: 

[Question) Does  anything  exist  or  not  beyond  Brahman? 
[Prima  facie  view)\—li  must  be  admitted  that,  beyond 
Brahman  who  is  said,  in  the  words  “not  thus,  not  thus,”]; 
to  be  devoid  of  all  perceptible  attributes,  there  exists  some- 
thing. The  reasons  are : 

(i)  Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  a bridge  in  the  following 
passage:  “Then,  as  to  the  ^tman.  He  is  the  bridge,  the 

' Aitarcya-Up.  f Vide,  ante  p,  217.  { Bri.-Up,  2-3-6, 


6feAaMA-ViDYA  EXPOUNDED.  ^Amnda-Vollu 

support/’^  Now,  in  common  parlance,  a bridge  is  bounded 
by  the  shore  on  either  side  and  keeps  the  water  in  its  place ; 
and  crossing  over  the  bridge  one  reaches  the  dry  land. 
Similarly,  Brahman  is  a bridge  maintaining  the  universe 
in  its  place ; and  there  must  be  something  else  beyond, 
which  one  reaches  after  crossing  over  Brahman. 

(2)  The  sruti  applies  a measure  to  Brahman  in  the 
words  ‘‘  Four-footed  is  Brahman,  ” t “ The  Purusha  has 
sixteen  phases.”  J We  find  such  measures  applied  in  common 
parlance  to  a quadruped  or  the  like  beyond  which  there  is 
something  else,  but  never  to  a thing  beyond  which  there  is 
none  else. 

(3)  The  sruti  speaks  of  Brahman’s  contact  with  another  in 
the  words  “ With  the  Existence,  my  dear,  he  then  becomes 
united.”!  And  that  contact  is  possible  only  when  something 

exists  beyond  Brahman,  the  Existence. 

(4)  In  the  words  ‘Mtman,  verily,  my  dear,  should  be 
seen,”  the  5ruti  refers  to  a distinction  as  the  seer  and  the  seen. 

For  these  reasons,  it  cannot  be  held  that  there  is  nothing 
beyond  Brahman. 

{Conclusion)'. — In  the  first  place  Brahman  cannot  be  a 
bridge  in  the  primary  sense  of  the  word  ; for,  otherwise,  it 
would  even  follow  that  Brahman  is  formed  of  earth  and 
wood.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  a 
bridge  on  account  of  some  point  of  agreement  with  it,  then 
let  the  point  of  agreement  consist  merely  in  holding 
something  in  its  place,  not  in  regard  to  something  else 
existing  beyond ; and  the  sruti,  too,  reads  “ the  bridge, 
the  support.”  As  to  the  sruti  applying  a measure,  it 

* Ohha.  8-4-1.  f 8-18-2,  J Ibid.  6-7-1.  ! Ibid  6-8-1, 


KNOWLEDGE  A!lD  LIBERATION, 


Am.  /.] 


’*25 


is  only  for  the  purposes  of  contemplation  ; for  such  mea- 
sures are  applied  in  the  sruti  when  treating  of  a contempla- 
tion, not  when  teaching  as  to  what  the  Reality  is.  Such 
distinctions  as  the  sruti  refers  to  are  due  to  the  upadhis,  like 
the  distinction  between  the  infinite  akasa  and  the  akasB, 
limited  by  a pot.  Thus,  because  the  passages  which  seem 
to  imply  that  there  is  something  else  beyond  Brahman 
admits  of  a different  explanation,  and  because  the  sruti 
denies  all  else  in  the  words  “ One  alone  without  a second,” 
there  exists  nothing  beyond  Brahman, 

A peculiar  feature  of  the  death  of  the  Brahmavid. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  attainment  of  Brahman  here 
spoken  of  is  unlike  that  of  the  Brahma-loka,  in  that  the 
life-principles  of  a Brahmavid  does  not,  at  death,  depart 
from  his  body.  This  point  has  been  established  in  the 
Ved^jnta-swtras  (IV.  ii.  12-14)  follows  : 

(Question): — ‘‘His  pr^iwas  do  not  depart  in  these 
words  the  sruti  denies  the  departure  of  prawas  {i,  c.,  the 
life-principles  which  make  up  the  Linga-sar/ra,  comprising 
the  prawamaya,  manomaya,  and  vij;;anamaya  kosas)  in  the 
case  of  the  person  who  has  known  the  Reality.  Is  it  the 
departure  from  the  physical  body  or  the  departure  from  the 
j/va  that  is  denied  here  ? 

{Pyima  facie  view) : — It  is  the  departure  from  the  j^Va  that 
is  denied  here ; for  otherwise,  if  life  does  not  depart  from 
the  body,  then  there  would  be  no  death  of  the  body. 

( Conclusion) : — Water  sprinkled  on  a heated  stone  goes 
nowhere  else,  nor  even  is  it  seen  there ; on  the  other  hand, 
it  disappears  altogether.  Similarly,  the  life-principles  of 


Up.  4-4-6, 


29 


BRAHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Amndor  VoUL 

the  person  who  has  known  the  Reality,  though  not  depart- 
ing from  the  body,  do  not  yet  remain  in  the  body ; on  the 
other  hand,  they  become  altogether  dissolved.  Thus,  owing, 
to  absence  of  vitality,  the  body  is  said  to  be  dead.  It  need 
not  be  urged  here  that,  in  the  absence  of  life’s  departure,  the 
body  cannot  be  said  to  die.  For,  from  the  distension  (and 
inertness)  of  the  body  we  have  to  infer  that  the  life-princi- 
ples which  are  said  to  have  not  departed  from  the  body  do 
not  remain  in  the  body  either. 

(Objection) : — In  preference  to  all  this  trouble,  let  us  admit 
life’s  departure  from  the  body  and  deny  its  departure 
from  the  j/va. 

(Answer) We  cannot  say  so ; for,  the  wearing  of  another 
body  being  inevitable  so  long  as  the  pranas  or  life-principles 
departing  from  the  body  cling  to  the  jtva,  there  can  be 
no  moksha  at  all.  Therefore  it  is  life’s  departure  from  the 
body,  not  from  jtva,  that  is  denied  here. 

To  reach  Brahman  is  to  be  rid  of  separateness. 

It  has  been  said  above**'  that  the  reaching  of  the  Supreme 
consists  in  the  extinction  of  the  upadhi  or  limitation  which 
makes  A tman  a jiva.  This  extinction  of  the  up^dhi  has  been 
discussed  in  the  Vedanta-swtras  IV.  ii.  15.  as  follows  : 

(Question) Do  the  wise  man’s  pr^was  or  vital  powers, 
/.  e,y  speech  and  other  senses,  become  dissolved  in  the  Su- 
preme Brahman  or  in  their  respective  causes  ? 

(Prima  facie  view) When  speech  and  other  pranas  (life- 
principles)  of  the  wise  man  undergo  dissolution  at  death 
they  are  dissolved  in  their  respective  causes,  but’not  in  the 


♦Vide  ante  p.  219, 


AHu  L]  knowledge  and  liberation.  227 

Paramatman,  the  Supreme  Self ; for,  in  the  words  When, 
this  person  dying,  speech  goes  to  the  Fire,  life-breath  to  the 
Air,  sight  to  the  Sun’*"^*  etc.,  thesruti  teaches  that  life- 
breath  etc., — designated  as  kolas  (constituents  of  the 
organism)  in  the  passage  To  their  bases  go  the  fifteen 
kalas,”t— are  absorbed  in  their  respective  causes  referred  to 
(in  this  latter  passage)  as  the  basic  principles  (pratish^h^s). 

(Conclusion)*, — From  the  stand-point  of  the  person  who 
has  realised  Truth,  they  are  absorbed  in  the  Paramatman 
Himself,  as  ascertained  from  the  sruti  which  elsewhere 
says: 

“ Just  as  the  rivers  onward  rolling  unto  their 
setting  in  the  ocean  go,  quitting  both  name 
and  form ; just  so  the  sage,  from  name  and 
form  set  free,  goes  to  the  shining  Man  beyond 
Beyond.”  I 

This  passage  speaks,  in  the  illustration,  of  the  absorption  of 
rivers  into  the  ocean.  It  may  be  urged  that  the  absorption 
(of  pr^was)  in  the  Paramatman, — ^which  is  the  point  to  be 
established, — is  not  quite  so  explicit  here.  If  so,  there  is 
the  following  passage  which  makes  it  quite  clear  : 

**  Just  as  these  rivers  rolling  onward,  towards 
ocean  tending,  on  reaching  ocean  sink,  their 
name  and  form  (distinctive)  perish — ‘ ocean  ’ 
they’re  simply  called;  in  just  the  self-same 
way,  of  that  all-watchful  one,  these  sixteen 
phases.  Man-wards  tending,  on  reaching  Him 
sink  in  the  Man,  their  name  and  form  do 
perish — the  Man  they’re  simply  called.”  § 


* Bri.  Up.  3-2-13.  f Mmwi.  Up.  3-2-7.  J Ihid^  3-2-8, 
§ Praspa.  Up.  6-5. 


238  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Amnda^VoUu 

This  last  passage  represents  the  stand-point  of  the  Tattva- 
vid  himself,  of  the  person  who  has  realised  Truth. 
That  passage  of  the  sruti,  on  the  other  hand,  which  has  been 
quoted  in  support  of  the  prima  fade  view  represents  the 
stand-point  of  the  by-standers.  On  the  death  of  the 
Tattva-vid,  the  persons  standing  near  think,  from  their 
own  stand-point,  that  even  his  speech  and  other  pranas 
are  absorbed  in  the  Fire,  etc.  Hence  no  discordance 
between  the  two  passages.  Therefore  the  pranas  of  the 
Tattva-vid  are  dissolved  in  the  Paramatman,  the  Supreme 
Self. 


Jiva  is  ever  liberated. 

The  nature  of  liberation  which  is  attained  on  the  extinc- 
tion of  the  upadhi  has  been  determined  in  the  Vedanta- 
Swtras  IV.  iv.  1-3.  as  follows: 

{Question) -The  sruti  says : “ Serene,  rising  out  from 
this  body  and  becoming  that  Supreme  Light,  he  attains 
to  his  true  Self.”''*'*  This  passage  may  be  explained  thus  : 
On  the  extineflion  of  the  upadhi,  j/va  attains  perfect  sere- 
nity. Thus  serene,  j^’va  gives  up  all  attachment  for  the 
three  bodies,  reaches  the  Supreme  Brahman  and  dwells 
in  the  state  of  liberation.  Now  the  question  is : Is  this 
state  of  liberation  a new  acquisition  ? or  has  it  been  inherent 
in  jiva  all  along  ? 

{Prima  fade  vieiv)  \ — The  state  of  liberation  here  referred 
to  has  not  already  existed  in  jiva ; it  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
an  acquired  state,  since  the  sruti  declares  in  the  words 
“ he  attains  to  his  true  Self  ” that  the  state  has  been  newly 
brought  into  existence.  If  it  existed  before,  it  must  have 


* Chha.  Up. 


KKOWLEPOB  ANP  LIBERATION, 


Am.  /.] 


existed  even  in  the  state  of  sams^ra  and  cannot  therefore 
be  a result  achieved.  Therefore  the  state  of  liberation  is 
like  svarga  a newly  acquired  condition. 

[Conclusion) The  state  of  liberation  has  already  existed 
in  jiva  since  it  is  spoken  of  as  ‘ the  true  Self*  in  the  passage 
“he  attains  to  his  true  Self.**  The  5ruti  “svena  r«pe;^a 
abhinishpadyate’*  cannot  simply  mean  that  he  attains  to 
a state  or  form  belonging  to  him,  (the  word  ‘ sva’  being 
interpreted  to  mean  <his  own*);  for,  then,  the  statement 
would  be  of  no  purpose.  The  state  of  liberation,  whate  ver 
that  might  be,  belongs  to  jfva  as  a matter  of  course ; and 
the  statement,  therefore,  would  convey  no  specific  meaning. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  expression  “svena  r«pe«a 
abhinishpadyate”  is  interpreted  to  mean  ‘ he  attains  to  his 
true  Self,’  then  the  statement  will  serve  to  show  that 
it  is  not  a mere  possession  or  belonging  (/.  f.,  something 
external  which  has  been  newly  acquired).  Nor  does  the 
word  “attain”  imply  that  the  state  of  liberation  has  been 
produced,  inasmuch  as  what  has  already  existed  does  not 
admit  of  production.  On  the  other  hand,  the  attainment 
here  consists  in  the  manifestation  of  the  Brahman-w^55  in 
virtue  of  the  knowledge  of  Truth.  It  may  perhaps  be 
urged  here  that  in  that  case  the  expressions  “ becoming 
the  Supreme  Light,”  and  “attains  to  his  true  Self” 
are  tautological.  We  answer : the  expression  “ becom- 
ing the  Supreme  Light  ” merely  points  to  the  fact  of 
having  eliminated  from  ‘ That  * ( i.  ^.,  from  Brahman, 
the  Cause)  all  that  is  foreign  to  His  essential  nature,  while 
the  expression  “attains  to  his  true  Self  ” points  to  the  fact 
of  having  realised  the  import  of  the  whole  proposition 
(“That  Thou  art”).  And  the  fact  that  liberation  has 


jsivArtMA^ViUJfA  JsX^  uuwi^JStr*  V MU 

existed  does  not  detra(5l  from  its  being  an  end  to  be  aimed 
at ; for,  the  liberation  that  has  hitherto  existed  has  not  been 
free  from  ajwma.  Therefore  the  state  of  liberation  is  none 
other  than  the  Ancient  Thing  Itself,  (the  One  Reality  ‘that 
has  always  been  in  existence). 

The  Liberated  Soul  is  identical  with  Brahman* 

Yet  another  feature  of  the  state  of  liberation  has  been 
discussed  in  the  Vedanta- Swtras  IV.  iv.  4.  is  as  follows ; 

{Question) : — Is  the  liberated  soul  distincfl  or  not  distin(5l 
from  the  Supreme  Brahman  ? 

{Prim  facie  view) : — The  liberated  soul  must  be  distindt 
from  the  Supreme  Brahman,  inasmuch  as  they  are  respecti- 
vely spoken  of  as  the  agent  and  the  object  of  an  action.  In 
the  words  “ The  serene  one  approaches  (or  becomes)  the 
Supreme  Light”  the  * serene  one,’  i,  j/va,  is  spoken  of 
as  the  agent  of  the  act  of  approaching,  and  Brahman,  ‘ the 
Supreme  Light,’  is  spoken  of  as  the  object.  Wherefore, 
,.he  liberated  jeva  is  distindl  from  Brahman, 

(Conclusion) : — It  has  been  said  that  to  approach  or  become 
the  Supreme  Light  is  merely  to  know  the  essential  nature  of 
* That’  (t.  e»y  Brahman  the  Cause)  eliminating  therefrom  all 
that  is  foreign  to  it.f  So,  at  that  stage  there  may  yet  be 
a sense  of  duality.  Subsequently  in  the  words  “ he  attains 
to  his  true  Self,”  the  sruti  refers  to  that  state  of  the  liber- 
ated soul  which  corresponds  to  the  import  \ of  the 
proposition  “ That  Thou  art  ” taken  as  a whole.  At  this 
stage  there  can  be  no  distinction  between  jzva  and  Brahman, 
since  later  on  in  the  words  “ He  is  the  Highest  Purusha 

* Ibid. 

t Brahman  being  still  regarded  as  separate  from  jiva.— (Tr,) 

J Viz,,  the  absolute  identity  of  Brahman  and  jiva.— (Tr.i 


KNOWLEDGE  AND  LIBERATION. 


Am,  /.] 


231 


(spirit)”*  the  sruti  refers  to  the  liberated  Soul  and  declares 
that  ‘ He  * — i.e,y  the  jtva  who  has  attained  to  his  true  Self — 
is  the  same  as  the  Highest  Spirit,  Brahman.  Therefore, 
the  liberated  Soul  is  not  distinct  from  Brahman. 


How  Brahman  is  both  conditioned  and 
unconditioned. 

Yet  another  point  in  this  connection  is  discussed  in  the 
Vedanta-swtras  IV.  iv.  5 — 7. 

ft 

(Question) : — Brahman  who  is  identical  with  the  liberated 
Soul  is  spoken  of  in  the  sruti  in  two  ways,  as  conditioned 
(sa-visesha)  in  some  places  and  as  unconditioned  (nir-visesha) 
in  some  other  places,  as  witness  the  following  passages : 

It  is  the  Self,  free  from  sin,  free  from  old 
age,  from  death  and  grief,  from  hunger  and 
thirst,  whose  desires  are  unfailing,  whose 
purposes  are  unfailing.”  t 

‘‘As  a mass  of  salt  has  neither  inside  nor 
outside,  but  is  altogether  a mass  of  taste,  thus 
indeed  has  the  Self  neither  inside  nor  outside, 
but  is  altogether  a mass  of  knowledge,”  I 

The  question  is,  is  Brahman  both  conditioned  and  uncon- 
ditioned at  the  same  moment  ? or,  is  Brahman  conditioned 
at  one  time  and  unconditioned  at  another  ? 

(Prima  facie  view) ; — Brahman,  when  in  the  state  of  libera- 
tion, cannot  be  both  conditioned  and  unconditioned  at  the 
same  moment,  the  two  states  being  quite  opposed  to  each 
other.  It  must,  therefore,  be  that  He  is  in  the  two  states 


8.12-3. 


^Ihid  8.1-5. 


t Brh  Up.  4-5-13, 


BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED 


a‘32 


[Ananda-Yatti. 


alternately  at  different  moments. 

{Conclusion): — As  against  the  foregoing,  we  hold  as 
follows : From  two  different  stand-points  of  view,  Brahman 
may  be  conditioned  and  unconditioned  at  the  same  time. 
He  is  unconditioned  from  the  stand-point  of  the  liberated 
one,  whereas  from  the  stand-point  of  one  who  is  still  held  in 
bondage.  Brahman,  who  is  one  with  the  liberated,  appears 
to  be  the  Cause  of  the  universe  endued  with  omniscience 
and  other  attributes.  Certainly, the  liberated  ones  are  never 
conscious  that  they  are  possessed  of  omniscience,  unfailing 
will  and  other  such  attributes,  inasmuch  as  the  avidya  which 
lies  at  the  root  of  the  idea  has  been  destroyed.  But  those 
who  are  held  in  bondage  are  under  the  sway  of  avidy^  and 
therefore  imagine  that  Brahman  who  is  ever  uncondition- 
ed is  endued  with  omniscience  and  other  such  attributes. 
It  being  thus  possible  to  explain  that  Brahman  is  at  the 
same  moment  conditioned  or  unconditioned  according  as 
the  stand-point  is  the  one  or  the  other,  it  is  idle  to  suggest 
that  Brahman  exists  in  these  two  difierent  states  alternately 
at  different  periods  of  time.  Wherefore  Brahman  is  both 
conditioned  and  unconditioned  at  the  same  time. 


Liberation  is  the  highest  state. 

One  more  point  has  been  discussed  in  the  Vedanta- 
Swtras  III.  iv.  52  as  follows: 

{Qmtion) : — Is  there  any  state  higher  than  the  state  of 
liberation  here  referred  to  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) The  Brahma-loka,  the  region  of 
Brahman  to  which  the  upssakas  of  Sagu«a  Brahman  attain 
as  the  fruit  of  their  contemplation,  is  of  four  states : Stilokya 
(being  in  the  same  world  as  Brahman,  the  Four-faced), 


Atm.  /•]  Knowledge  and  Libera^ioi^.  ^33 

Sarwpya  (being  of  the  same  form  as  Brahman),  S^ntfpya 
(being  very  close  to  Brahman),  and  S^irshri  (being  equal  in 
rank  to  Brahman).  Or  thus : By  the  rule  “ more  work, 
better  results’*  svarga  is  of  various  sorts.  Similarly, 
liberation  here  referred  to,  which  is  alike  the  fruit  of  an  act 
may  be  surpassed  by  some  other  state. 

{Conclusion) : — What  we  call  liberation  is  none  other  than 
one’s  own  inherent  nature  as  Brahman,  but  not  an  acquired 
state  like  svarga.  It  has  been  taught  in  the  sruti  and  even 
stands  to  reason  that  Brahman  is  of  one  nature.  Therefore, 
liberation  is  of  one  sort,  whether  attained  by  Brahman,  the 
Four-faced,  or  by  man.  The  Salokya  and  other  specific  kinds 
of  liberation  mentioned  above  are  acquired  results  and 
therefore  admit  of  degrees  of  excellence  according  to  the 
quality  of  the  up^tsana  ; but  the  mukti  or  liberation  (spoken 
of  here),  we  may  conclude,  is  not  of  that  nature. 


3C» 


CHAPTER  IV. 

BRAHMAN  DEFINED. 


An  Explanatory  Verse. 

In  the  words  the  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the 
Supreme  **  the  sruti  has  aphoristically  set  forth  knowledge 
and  moksha,  the  means  and  the  end ; and  their  nature  has 
been  determined  in  the  Vedanta-Swtras  as  shewn  in  the 
foregoing  chapter.  Now  the  sruti  cites  a certain  verse 
which  forms  a short  commentary  on  the  aphorism. 

‘‘The  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the  Supreme : ” 
this  is  to  express  in  an  aphoristic  form  the  whole 
teaching  of  the  Second  Book  (idnanda-Vallf).  Now 
the  following  verse  (fdch)  is  quoted  (i)  with  a view 
to  determine  the  nature  of  Brahman — who,  as  has  been 
indicated  in  the  words  “ the  knower  of  Brahman  reaches 
the  Supreme,  ” is  the  Thing  to  be  known,  but  whose 
characteristic  nature  has  not  been  stated  definitely — by 
way  of  giving  a definition  which  will  set  forth  His 
characteristic  nature  as  distinguished  from  all  else  ; (2) 
with  a view  that^  Brahman,  of  whom  it  has  been  but 
vaguely  said  that  He  should  be  known,  may  be  more 
definitely  known,  i.  c,,  in  order  that  we  may  know  that 
Brahman,  as  defined  below,  is  the  same  as  our  own  Inner 
Self  (Pratyag^tman)  and  no  other ; and  (3)  with  a view 
to  shew  that  the  fruit  of  Brahmavidya  declared  above 
ia  thQ  words  “the  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the 


BRAHMAN  DEFINED. 


235 


Am  L] 

Supreme”  consists  in  attaining  to  the  state  of  the 
Universal  Being  (Sarvatma-bhava,  lit,^  all-Self-ness), 
in  being  Brahman  Himself  who  is  beyond  all  attributes 
of  samsara, 

I “ccq m i ...”  IRII 

2.  On  that,  this  has  been  chanted : ‘‘  Real, 
Consciousness,  Infinite  is  Brahman; 

As  referring  to  what  is  taught  in  the  foregoing  Brah- 
mawa  text,  the  following  verse  (rich)  is  chanted  : “ Real, 
Consciousness,  Infinite  is  Brahman ; ” 

For  a clear  understanding  of  what  has  been  taught  in 
the  foregoing  aphoristic  statement,  this  sacred  verse  is 
cited.  That  is  to  say,  the  whole  meaning  of  the  aphorism 
is  clearly  explained  in  the  verse.  In  the  foregoing  aphoristic 
expression,  the  sruti  speaks  of  the  knower  of  Brahman.’* 
Now,  one  will  be  inclined  to  ask  what  Brahman  is. 
Accordingly,  the  sruti  describes  the  nature  of  Brahman  in 
the  four  words  Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite  (is) 
Brahman.” 


Definition  of  Brahman. 

The  sentence  ‘‘  Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite  is 
Brahman  ” forms  a definition  of  Brahman.  The  three 
words,  “ Real,  ” “ Consciousness,  ” and  “ Infinite  ” 
are  the  attributive  adjuncts*  (viseshawartha)  of 
Brahman,  the  substantive  (viseshya).  Brahman  is  the 

♦ i,  e.,  epithets  stating  the  specific  s^ttributes  of  Brah- 
man.—(A) 


^6  B»AHMA.vinYA„BXPoiiMii|D  [Amnda^YoB. 

substantive,  because,  as  the  Thing  to  be  known, 
Brahman  forms  the  subject  of  discourse.  Because  of 
their  relation  as  substantive  and  attributive,  the 
words — “ Real  ” and  so  on — are  in  the  same  case,  all 
of  them  referring  to  one  and  the  same  thing — (samana- 
dhikaranaU  When  qualified  by  the  three  epithets, 
“Real,”  etc.,  Brahman  is  distinguished  from  all  other 
substances.  Indeed,  a thing  is  known  only  when  it  is 
distinguished  from  all  else,  as,  for  instance,  when  we 
speak  of  “ a blue  big  sweet-smelling  lily.” 

That  is  to  say,— just  as  the  epithets  ‘blue,*  ‘big,*  and 

* sweet-smelling  * serve  to  define  a lily,  so  the  epithets 

• Real*  etc.,  serve  to  define  Brahman,  the  Supreme  Being. 
When  so  defined  by  the  epithets  “ Real”  and  so  on.  Brah- 
man is  distinguished  from  all  other  subtances,  none  of  which 
possess  the  said  attributes  of  Brahman,  (/.^.,  which  are  all 
unreal,  insentient  and  finite).  A thing  is  said  to  be  known 
when  known  as  distinguished  from  all  else.  A blue  lily, 
for  instance,  is  said  to  be  known  only  when  known  as 
distinguished  from  the  red  lily  and  the  lilies  of  other  colours. 
Similarly,  Brahman  can  be  said  to  be  known  only  when 
known  as  distinguished  from  all  else,  (from  the  unreal  etc.), 
since,  otherwise,  there  can  be  no  definite  conception  of 
Brahman. — (5). 

Since  the  words  ‘ Real,  ’ etc.,  are  of  the  same  case, 
all  referring  to  one  and  the  same  thing,  they  must  be  related 
as  attributive  and  substantive  (viseshawa-viseshya),  just 
as  in  the  phrase  “a  blue  big  sweet-smelling  lily**  the 
words  are  related  as  attributive  and  substantive.  In  the 
passage  of  the  5ruti  under  consideration,  Brahman  must 


9RAHUAN  DBVINBO* 


'Ahu,  /,] 


^7 


bs  regarded  as  the  substantive^  because,  as  having  been 
declared  to  be  the  knowable,  Brahman  forms  the  main 
subject  of  discourse  ; and  the  words  ‘ Real  ’ etc.,  mark 
off  Brahman  from  all  that  are  unreal  etc. 


What  is  a definition  ? 

(Objection)  : — A substantive  is  specified  by  an  attribu- 
tive, only  when  it  also  admits  of  qualification  by  quite 
a different  attributive,  like,  for  instance,  the  lily,  which 
is  either  red  or  blue  or  of  some  other  colour.  When 
there  are  many  substances  coming  under  one  genus, 
each  being  distinguished  by  a distinctive  attribute,  then 
only  do  the  attributes  have  a meaning,  but  not  when 
there  is  one  thing  alone  of  the  kind;  for  then  it 
admits  of  no  qualification  by  any  other  attributive. 
Just  as  there  is  only  one  sun  which  we  see,  so  there 
is  only  one  Brahman  ; there  are  no  other  Brahmans 
from  whom  He  may  be  distinguished,  unlike  the  blue 
lily  (which  can  be  distinguished  from  the  red  lily  and 
other  varieties,) 

A substantive  is  a thing  which  admits  of  being  qualified 
by  various  attributives  in  turn.  As  there  is  no  Brahman 
of  another  kind,  how  can  Brahman  be  a substantive  ?— (S). 
That  is  to  say When  a substantive  denotes  a thing  which 
exists  in  various  forms  of  manifestation,  each  form  being 
distinct  from  others,  then  that  substantive  needs  qualifica- 
tion by  an  attributive  if  any  particular  form  of  the  thing 
should  be  denoted.  The  lily,  for  instance,  being  of  various 
kinds,  each  distinct  from  others,  it  has  to  be  qualified 
by  ‘ red  ’ or  ‘ blue  * or  the  like,  in  order  that  a particular 


«38  BRAHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Afianda-V allu 

variety  may  be  denoted.  Brahman  being  secondless,  there 
are  not  many  Brahmans,  and  therefore  Brahman  cannot  be 
qualified  by  an  attributive. — (A), 

Besides  the  blue  big  sweet-smelling  lily  spoken  of  at 
present,  there  are  other  kinds  of  lily,  namely,  a red  lily, 
a small  lily,  a slightly  fragrant  lily,  which  are  all  met 
with  in  common  experience.  Therefore,  in  this  case,  the 
words  ‘ blue,’  etc.,  serve  to  distinguish  the  lily  meant  here 
from  other  lilies.  But  there  are  no  other  kinds  of  Brah- 
man ; there  is  no  Brahman  who  is  not  real,  there  is  no 
Brahman  who  is  insentient,  there  is  no  Brahman  who  is 
finite.  Just  as  the  sun  we  see  is  only  one,  so  Brahman  also 
is  one  alone.  Since  there  are  no  other  Brahmans  from 
whom  the  one  meant  here  has  to  be  distinguished,  the 
adjuncts  ‘ Real,’  etc.,  are  of  no  use. 

(Answer)  : — No,  because  of  the  adjuncts  being  in-' 
tended  as  a definition. — To  explain  : The  objection 
does  not  apply  here. — Why  ? — For,  the  main  purpose 
of  the  attributives  here  is  to  define  Brahman,  not 
merely  to  state  His  specific  attributes. — What  is 
the  difference  between  a definition  and  the  defined  on 
the  one  hand,  and  the  attributive  and  the  substantive 
on  the  other  ? — We  shall  tell  you.  The  attributives 
serve  to  distinguish  the  substantive  from  others  of  the 
same  genus  only,  while  a definition  aims  to  dis- 
tinguish the  thing  defined  from  all  else,  as  when  wc 
say  aiasa  is  the  space-giving  substance.”  And  we 
have  said  that  the  sentence  ‘ Real  is  intended  as 

a definition. 

If  ‘ Brahman’  and  ‘ real’  etc.,  be  respectively  regarded 
as  the  substantive  (vheshya)  and  the  attributive  (visesha«a), 


BSAtllf  AN  bEFINED. 


Am.  /.] 


aid 


then  the  objection  may  apply.  But,  since  we  regard  them 
as  the  defined  (lakshya)  and  definition  (lakshawa)  respective- 
ly, the  foregoing  objedtion  cannot  in  the  least  apply  to  our 
interpretation.  Now,  that  is  termed  attributive  (vise- 
sha«a)  which  abides  in  a heterogeneous  thing  it  qualifies,, 
and  which  is  a coinhering  attribute  distinguishing  it  from 
others  of  the  same  class. — (S).  That  is  to  say,  an  attribu- 
tive is  that  which  always  coexists  with  the  substantive  in 
consciousness,  distinguishing  it  from  others  (of  the  same 
genus) — (^).  The  substantive  (viseshya)  is  that  which  ex- 
ists both  as  a genus  and  as  particulars, and  which  is  possess- 
ed of  various  attributes,  each  of  these  attributes  being 
sometimes  found  and  sometimes  not  found  in  association 
with  it.— (S).  That  is  to  say,  the  substantive  (viseshya)  is 
that  which  denotes  a thing  as  distinguished  only  from 
others  of  the  same  genus — {A),  A definition  or  charact^er- 
istic  mark  (lakshaua)  is  that  attribute  which  isolates  all 
things  from  the  thing  defined,  i.c.y  which  enables  one  to 
distinguish  in  consciousness  the  thing  defined  from  all 
others,  and  which  always  inheres  in  the  thing  defined — (S). 
That  is  to  say,  a definition  distinguishes  the  thing  defined 
from  all  else,  of  the  same  and  other  genera.— (^),  A thing 
is  said  to  be  defined  by  a definition,  when  the  definition 
marks  it  off  from  others  of  the  same  genus  as  also  of  other 
and  therefore  opposed  genera.— (S).  That  is  to  say,  a thing 
is  defined  when  it  is  marked  off  from  all  else.— (^). 


The  words  real,”  etc.,  form  defining  adjuncts  of  Brah- 
man, and  there  do  exist  things  which  have  to  be  excluded 
from  the  conception  of  Brahman.  A simple  attributive 
serves  merely  to  distinguish  the  thing  described  from 
others  of  the  same  class ; whereas  the  defining  adjunct 


^4*  BRAriMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Amndd-Vdltl.  ' 

sehres  to  distinguish  the  thing  defined  from  all  else.  Ac- 
cordingly the  words  ‘real,*  etc.,  serve  to  distinguish 
Brahman  from  all  things  that  are  not  Brahman, — from  all 
unreal,  insentient  and  finite  things.  When  we  define 
akflsa  as  space,  the  definition  serves  to  distinguish  akasa 
from  all  corporeal  substances,  and  yet  there  is  nothing  else 
belonging  to  the  same  class,  i.e,,  no  other  dkasa,,  from 
which  it  has  to  be  distinguished.  Similarly,  here,  all 
unreal,  insentient  and  finite  things  are  excluded  from 
the  conception  of  Brahman. 

The  words  * real,*  ‘ consciousness’  and  ‘ infinite’  do 
not  qualify  one  another,  because  they  are  all  intended 
to  qualify  something  else.  Here,  they  qualify  the 
substantive  ‘ Brahman.’  Therefore,  every  one  of  these 
adjihidts  is  independent  of  the  other  adjuncts  and  Is 
directly  related  to  Brahman.  Thus  : Brahman  is  the 
Real,  Brahman  is  Consciousness,  Brahman  is  the 
Infinite. 


Brahman  is  the  Real. 

Whatever  does  not  deviate  from  the  form  in  which 
it  has  been  once  ascertained  to  be  is  real ; and  what- 
ever deviates  from  the  form  in  which  it  has  been  once 
ascertained  to  be  is  unreal. 

When  a thing  never  puts  on  a form  different  from  that 
form  in  which  it  has  been  once  proved  to  be,  that  thing 
is  real,  and  as  such  it  must  be  quite  distineft  from  ksrya 
or  what  is  produced. — (5). 

All  changing  form  (vikara)  is,  therefore,  unreal,  as 
the  sruti  definitely  says ; 


BRAHMAN  DEFINED. 


241 


Anu.  /.] 

“ (All)  changing  form  (vik^ira)  is  a name, 
a creation  of  speech  ; what  is  called  clay  is 
alone  real : thus,  Existence  (Sat)  alone  is 
real.’’* 

Thus,  in  the  words  ‘‘  Brahman  is  real,”  the  sruti  dis- 
tinguishes Brahman  from  all  changing  forms  (vikara). 

When  a thing  which  has  been  ascertained  to  be  of  a 
certain  form  never  deviates  from  that  form,  then  that  thing 
is  real,  we  say, — as,  for  example,  the  rope  which  has  been 
mistaken  for  a serpent.  That  thing  is  unreal  which  de- 
viates from  its  (once  ascertained)  form,  as,  for  example,  the 
serpent  wdiich  comes  up  in  idea  when  in  reality  there  is 
only  a rope.  Similarly  Brahman,  who  forms  the  basis  of 
the  whole  universe,  is  real  because  of  the  absence  of  devi- 
ation even  in  mukti.  As  proving  false  when  right  know- 
ledge arises,  the  universe  is  subject  to  deviation  in  mukti 
and  is  therefore  unreal.  Accordingly  the  Mawi/^kya-Upani- 
shad  teaches  the  unreality  of  the  universe  in  the  words 
“ a mere  myth  (maya)  is  this  duality.”  j The  Chhandogas, 
too,  declare,  by  way  of  illustration,  the  unreality  of  pots 
and  other  changing  forms  (vikara)  and  the  reality  of  clay, 
the  material  cause  (prakriti),  as  follows : 

(All)  changing  form  is  a name,  a creation  of 
speech  ; what  is  called  clay  is  alone  real : thus, 
Existence  (Sat)  alone  is  real.” 

Brahman  is  Consciousness* 

From  this,t  it  may  follow  that  Brahman  is  the  cause. 

* Chhft.  Up.  6-1-4.  t Gauc7apada-Karikas  i— 17, 

X i,e„  from  the  analogy  of  clay, 


31 


BiiAMMA-vii>YAfiXpouNDED.  [Amnda-VotHr. 

And  it  may  also  follow  that,  being  the  cause,  Brahman, 
like  any  other  substance  is  a factor  of  an  action,  and  is 
like  clay  insentient  (achit).  The  sruti,  therefore,  says 
that  Brahman  is  Consciousness. 

The  meaning  is : consciousness  alone  is  absolutely  real, 
while  the  insentient  matter  is  real  only  from  the  stand- 
|)oint  of  our  ordinary  worldly  experience  ( i^yavahara). 

The  word  ‘ jnana*  means  knowledge,  consciousness, 
ttere  the  word  ‘ jwana’  should  be  derived  so  as  to  mean 
^ knowledge’  itself,  but  not  “ that  which  knows,”  since 
the  word  is  used  as  an  adjundl  of  Brahman  along  with 
‘ real  ’ and  * infinite.* 

The  word  ‘j;i^na*  may  be  derived  in  four  ways:  it  may 
denote,  with  reference  to  the  act  of  knowing,  either  the 
agent  of  the  act,  or  the  object  of  the  act,  or  the  instrument 
of  the  act,  or  the  act  itself ; it  may  mean  the  knower, 
or  the  object  known,  or  the  instrument  of  knowledge,  or 
the  act  of  knowing.  The  question  is,  which  one  of  these 
is  here  meant  ? Because  the  word  is  used  to  distinguish 
Brahman  from  all  else,  and  because  it  goes  along  with  the 
adjunct  ‘ infinite,’  the  word  should,  in  all  propriety,  mean 
‘ knowledge’ ; since,  otherwise,  it  is  open  to  many  objections. 
By  ‘jwana’  we  should  understand  that  knowledge  which 
is  real  (f.  e,^  unfailing,)  and  infinite.  Thus,  as  standing 
best  to  reason,  the  word  *jnana’  should  be  derived  so  as 
to  mean  knowledge  itself.— ("SJ  Elsewhere  this  etymology 
would  make  ‘jnnna’  mean  the  ad  of  knowing ; but,  here, 
from  its  association  with  the  adjuncts  ‘ real  ’ and  ‘ infinite,  * 
the  word  * jwana  ’ denotes  Consciousness  pure  and  simple, 
the  undifferentiated  unconditioned  Consciousness.--(^} 


BSAHMAH  BBFIIIBBu 


4n».  L ] 


Brahman,  indeed,  cannot  be  real  and  infinite  if  He 
were  the  agent  of  the  act  of  knowing: . hqijv  can 
Brahman  be  real  and  infinite  while  undergoing  change 
as  the  agent  in  the  act  of  knowing?  That,  again,  is 
infinite  which  is  not  limited  by  anything  else.  If 
Brahman  were  the  knower,  He  would  be  marked  off 
from  what  is  known  and  from  (the  act  of;  knowing  and 
cannot  therefore  he  infinite,  as  the  sruti  elsewhere  says : 

“Where  one  sees  nothing  else, understands 

nothing  else,  that  is  the  Infinite.  But  where  one 

understands  something  else,  that  is  the  finite.”  * 

(Objection) : — Since  in  the  passage  “ where  one  un- 
derstands nothing  else”  it  is  only  the  knowing  of 
non-self  that  is  denied,  the  sruti  may  mean  that  one 
knows  one’s  own  Self. 

(Answer): — No;  for,  the  passage  is  intended  to 
convey  a definition  of  the  Infinite. — The  sruti  quoted 

above,  “ where  one  sees  nothing  else ” is  intended 

to  define  the  nature  of  the  Infinite  (Bh«man’.  Taking 
for  granted  the  prevalent  notion  that  “ what  one  sees 
is  something  else,  (something  other  than  one’s  own  self), 
the  sruti  here  gives  us  to  know  the  nature  of  the 
Infinite  in  the  words  “ where  there  is  no  seeing  of 
something  else,  that  is  the  Infinite.”  Since  the  words 
“ something  else  ” are  used  in  the  sruti  where  it  seeks 
to  deny  what  v/eprima  facie  understand  by  seeing  etc.,  t 

* Ohha  Up.  7-24-1. 

1 1.  e.,  to  deny  the  seeing,  hearing,  etc.,  of  things  beyond  the 
Self.— (Tr) 


244  BRAHMA'VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [AuanAa-V^tU 

the  passage  cannot  convey  the  idea  that  one  can  act 
\ipon  (u  e.,  know)  one’s  own  Self.  Owing  to  the  absence 
of  duality  in  one’s  own  Self,  there  can  be  no  knowing 
of  one’s  own  Self.  If  the  Self  were  the  thing  known, 
there  would  be  no  knower,  inasmuch  as  the  Self  is 
concerned  in  the  act  only  as  the  thing  known.  It 
cannot  be  contended  that  the  one  Self  alone  is  concerned 
in  both  ways,  both  as  the  knower  and  as  the  known  ; 
for,  as  devoid  of  parts,  the  one  Self  cannot  be  both  the 
knower  and  the  known  simultaneously.  Being  indivisible, 
the  Self  cannot,  indeed,  be  the  known  and  the  know- 
er, at  the  same  time.  Moreover,  if  the  Self  be  know- 
able  like  a pot,  etc.,  all  instruction  through  the  scriptures 
as  to  the  knowledge  thereof  would  be  useless.  Indeed, 
instruction  as  to  the  knowledge  of  what  can  be  known 
in  the  ordinary  way  like  a pot,  etc.,  would,  indeed,  be 
of  no  use.  Therefore,  if  Brahman  be  the  knower.  He 
cannot  be  infinite.  If  Brahman  be  subject  to  special 
conditions  of  existence  as  the  knower  and  so  on.  He 
cannot  be  the  Existence  pure  and  simple,  and  the  pure 
and  simple  Existence  alone  is  real,  as  elsewhere  the 
sruti  says  “That  is  real.”*  Therefore  the  word 
‘jw^na’  being  used  as  an  adjunct  of  Brahman  along 
with  the  words  ‘ real  ’ and  ‘ infinite,  ’ the  word  should 
be  so  derived  as  to  mean  knowledge  or  Consciousness, 
and  the  expression  * Brahman  is  Consciousness  ’ serves 
to  dispel  the  notion  that  Brahman  is  an  agent  or  any 
other  tactor  of  an  action,  as  also  the  notion  that  He  is, 
like  clay,  etc.,  an  insentient  (achit)  thing. 


♦Chha.Up.  G-S-  7. 


Am.  I.  ] 


BRAHMAN  DEFINED. 


^45 


Brahman  is  the  Infinite, 

Brahman  being  defined  as  Consciousness,  it  will 
perhaps  be  thought  that  He  is  finite,  since  we  find  that 
all  worldly  consciousness  is  finite.  To  prevent  this 
supposition  the  sruti  says  ‘‘  Brahman  is  Infinite.” 

Brahman  is  infinite  or  endless,  i.  e.,  having  no  limit  or 
measure. — (S) 

To  prevent  the  supposition  that  Brahman  spoken  of  as 
Consciousness  is  finite  like  the  consciousness  of  a pot,  the 
sruti  says  that  ^ Brahman  is  infinite.  In  common  parl- 
ance, the  word  * j^rina  ’ (knowledge  or  consciousness),  which 
etymologically  means  ‘ that  through  which  something  is 
known  or  shines  forth,’  is  applied  to  that  particular  mode 
(v;'ltti)  of  mind  (anta/z-karawa),  which  connects  a pot  or  the 
like  with  Consciousness  ; and  this  state  of  mind  is  material 
(bhautika)  inasmuch  as  the  sruti  says  “ formed  of  food 
(annamaya),  verily,  my  dear,  is  manas.” It  stands  to 
reason  that  such  jw^ma  (consciousness)  is  limited.  But  here 
(in  the  definition  of  Brahman)  the  word  is  derived  so  as  to 
mean  knowledge  itself  and  denotes  the  very  consciousness 
(sphura/^a).  As  this  consciousness  is  immaterial,  it  is  in- 
finite, limitless.  There  are  three  kinds  of  limit,  due  respect- 
ively to  space,  to  time,  and  to  other  things.  Now,  there 
is  no  limitation  (in  Brahman)  due  to  space  or  time,  inas- 
much as  in  the  words  “ like  akasa..  He  is  all-pervading  and 
eternal,”  the  sruti  gives  us  to  understand  that  He  is 
present  at  all  times  and  in  all  places.  Like  His  presence 
at  all  times  and  in  all  places.  His  essential  oneness  with  all 
things  is  declared  in  the  sruti  as  follows  : 


* Chlia.  Up.  G-5-4. 


94/^  SRAHMA-vim  EXPOUNDED.  [Ancmda^Viflll. 

Aye,  this  immortal  Brahman  is  before ; Brah- 
man is  behind,  on  right  and  left,  stretched 
out  above,  below.  This  Brahman  is  surely 
this  all.  He  is  the  best.** 

So,  since  there  exists  nothing  distinct  from  Brahman,  there 
is  no  limitation  caused  by  other  existing  things  either. 
Thus,  the  passage  means:  Brahman  is  that  which  is 
distinguished  from  all  that  is  unreal,  from  all  that  is 
insentient,  from  all  that  is  finite. 

Brahman  is  not  a non>entity. 

( Objection  ) : — Since  the  attributives,  ‘ Real,’  etc., 
serve  to  merely  exclude  unreality  and  the  like,  and 
since  Brahman,  the  substantive,  unlike  such  (substant- 
ives) as  ‘ lily,’  is  not  known  t,  it  would  appear  that  the 
passage  ‘‘  Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite  is  Brahman,” 
•'.onveys  the  idea  of  a non-entity  (szmya)  like  the 
following : 

Bathed  in  the  waters  of  the  mirage, 
crested  with  sky-flowers,  here  goes  the 
son  of  a barren  woman,  carrying  a bow  of 
the  hare’s  horn.” 

This  objection  has  been  started  against  the  statement  al- 
ready made  that  the  attributives  ‘ Real  * etc.,  are  meant  to 
exclude  the  unreal  etc.,  {vide  p.  238).  The  meaning  of  the 
objection  is  this : As  a matter  of  fact,  all  substantives  such 
as  lily  denote  things  which  fall  within  the  range  of  other 


* Mund,  Up.  2—2—11. 

t there  being  no  source  of  knowledge,  other  than  sruti, 
concerning  Brahmani 


Anu:  I,  J 6kAltMAN-6EFI!4E£>.  m 

sources  of  knowledge  than  sabda  or  word,  whereas  Brah- 
man, the  substantive  here,  is  not  a thing  knowable  from 
any  other  source  of  knowledge  than  the  scriptures ; and  the 
mere  word  ‘Brahman*  cannot  be  a proof  as  to  His  existence 
and  nature.  And  since  the  words  ‘ real,*  etc.,  are  merely 
meant  to  exclude  the  unreal,  etc.,  the  passage  ‘ Real,  Con- 
sciousness, Infinite  is  Brahman  * cannot  give  us  an  idea 
of  a positive  entity. 

[Answev) This  passage  does  not  refer  to  anon-entity  for 
the  following  reasons : 

(1)  We  have  nowhere  experienced  an  illusion  which  does 
not  embrace  (i.  e.,  rest  on)  some  reality.  Accordingly  all 
illusion  rests  only  on  some  reality. — (S). 

That  is  to  say,  when  the  passage  “ Real,  Consciousness, 
Infinite  is  Brahman,  ” excludes  the  unreal  etc.,  it  means  to 
teach  that  Brahman  is  the  reality  lying  at  the  basis  of  the 
illusory  manifestation  of  the  whole  universe.— (Tr). 

(2)  A word  such  as  * lily  * conveys  to  us  an  idea  of  the 
thing  denoted  by  the  word  ; it  cannot  convey  an  idea  of  the 
absence  of  the  thing, — an  idea  which  forms  the  import  of 
a wdkya.  or  assemblage  of  words.— (S). 

That  is  to  say,  ‘not  unreal,*  ‘not  insentient,*  ‘not  unlimit- 
ed,’—each  of  these  is  an  idea  that  can  be  imported  only  by 
an  assemblage  of  words,  and  therefore  the  single  words 
‘ real  ’ etc.,  cannot  convey  the  negations  referred  to. 
These  words,  on  the  other  hand,  convey  respectively  the 
ideas  of  supreme  reality,  self-luminosity,  and  fullness 
(infinity). —(A). 

{3)  One  grasps  from  a word  first  the  thing  denoted  by 
the  word,  and  then  comes  to  know  of  the  absence  of  the 


248  BRAHMA- VIDYA  EXPOUNDED  [AflUnda-  Vullu 

opposite,  because  of  their  mutual  opposition,  as  in  the  case 
of  inimical  animals,  the  slayer  and  its  victim.— (S). 

When  we  see  a place  infested  with  rats,  we  infer  the 
absence  there  of  -their  euemy,  the  cat.  Similarly,  from  the 
word  ‘‘real,’*  etc.,  we  first  obtain  the  idea  of  supreme  reality, 
and  so  on ; and  then  we  infer  (by  arthapatti.  Presump- 
tion) the  absence  of  the  opposite, — of  unreality  and  the 
like, — since  such  contraries  as  reality  and  unreality  cannot 
abide  in  one  and  the  same  thing.  Accordingly,  as  knowable 
primarily  from  a different  source  of  knowledge  (nirznantara), 
the  absence  of  what  is  opposed  to  the  thing  directly  de- 
noted by  a word  cannot  be  the  primary  sense  of  that 
word.— (A). 

(4)  From  a proposition  (sabda)  we  understand,  in  the 
first  instance,  the  relation  (sangati),  of  the  substance  and 
the  attribute  (dharmin  and  dharma),  whereas  the  absence  of 
^he  contrary  is  known  from  quite  a different  source  of 
knowledge  (manantara)  and  is  not  therefore  looked  upon 
as  the  import  of  the  proposition. — (S). 

The  proposition  ‘ Brahman  is  real  ’ imports,  in  the  first 
instance,  the  idea  of  the  co-existence  ( t^idatmya ) of  Brah- 
man and  reality  as  the  substance  and  the  attribute ; and 
then  on  a second  consideration,— namely,  If  Brahman  is  real, 
how  can  He  be  unreal  ? — i,c,,  by  arthripatti  or  presumption 
which  is  a quite  different  source  of  knowledge,  the  absence 
of  unreality  in  Brahman  is  known.  Accordingly,  not  being 
unknowable  from  other  sources  of  knowledge,  the  latter 
does  not  form  the  main  import  of  the  proposition.  The 
meaning  deriv^ed  secondarily  from  the  import  of  a proposi- 
tion, cannot  be  itself  the  import  of  the  proposition.— (A). 


♦Vide  Minor  Upanialiods  Voh  II.  p.  2(5, 


BRAltMAK  DEFINED. 


249 


Anu.  /.] 

(5)  The  idea  of  blue  does  not  arise  without  involving  the 
idea  of  the  thing  that  is  blue ; so,  too,  the  idea  of  a subst- 
ance does  not  arise  without  involving  that  of  the  attri- 
bute.—(S). 

The  ideas  of  substantive  and  attributive  are  always 
correlated,  so  that  the  5ruti  speaking  of  Brahman  as  Real, 
Consciousness  and  Infinite,  cannot  refer  to  a mere  noth- 
ing.-(A). 

(6)  Every  word  such  as  ‘ blue  ’ primarily  conveys  to  us 
the  idea  of  a thing  as  related  to  something  else.  This  is 
why  there  always  arises  the  question,  what  is  it  that  is 
blue  ?-(S). 

Since  no  non-entity  can  be  related  to  anything,  no  word 
in  a sentence  can  ever  denote  a non-entity. — (A ). 

Brahman  is  not  a momentary  existence. 

The  passage  cannot  refer  to  a momentary  existence 
(ksha;nka)  either.  The  Vnrtikakara  says : 

Similarly,  as  may  be  determined  by  pratyaksha  or 
immediate  perception,  it  is  not  possible  to  establish  the 
momentariness  of  anything  whatever.— -(S). 

It  is  acknowledged  by  all  that  every  pram^wa  or  instru- 
ment of  knowledge  is  such  only  as  revealing  what  has 
hitherto  remained  unknown.  And  as  a thing  cannot  be 
both  known  and  unknown  at  the  same  moment,  this 
difference  must  be  due  to  its  different  conditions  at  different 
moments  of  its  existence.  Accordingly,  there  is  no  evidence 
for  the  momentary  existence  of  anything  whatever.  The 
sruti,  moreover,  declares  that  .<4tman’s  vision  is  never 
obscured.— (A). 

3^ 


3^0  BRAHMA-viDVA  E3ipouNDED.  [Amnda^V alU . 

(2)  Moreover,  the  idea  of  the  destruction  of  a thing  is 
inconceivable.— (A) . 

Destruction  of  a pot  cannot  take  place  when  the  pot  exists; 
nor  even  can  (the  attribute  of)  destruction  inhere  in  the  pot. 
If  it  should  inhere  in  the  substance  (pot)  as  its  attribute, 
then  the  pot  has  not  been  destroyed  at  the  moment  any 
more  than  before — (S). 

A pot  cannot  be  said  to  have  undergone  destruction  so  long 
as  it  exists.  Since  existence  and  destruction  are  opposed 
to  each  other,  they  cannot  pertain  to  a thing  at  the  same 
moment.  Destruction  cannot  take  place  when  the  pot  does 
not  exist ; for,  what  is  there  to  be  destroyed  ? Perhaps  the 
opponent  may  say : though  destruction  lias  taken  place 
when  the  pot  exists,  the  destruction  itself  has  been  destroy- 
ed in  its  turn  on  facing  its  opposite,  the  existence  of  the  pot. 
As  against  this,  the  V^rtikakara  says (A). 

Do  you  maintain  that  destruction  itself  has  been  destroy- 
ed ? Then,  we  agree.  May  you  live  a hundred  years ! My 
contention  is  that  the  pot  is  not  subject  to  destruction,  and 
. so  far  you  do  not  argue  against  it.  The  act  of  destruction 
cannot  do  away  with  the  thing,  such  as  a pot,  which  under- 
goes destruction,— r.,  in  which  the  action  takes  place,— 
any  more  than  the  act  of  going  can  do  away  with  the  goer. 
How  can  anything,  which  depends  for  its  existence  upon 
something  else  existing,  do  away  with  that  other  thing— (S). 

Brahman  defined  here  is  a positive  entity. 

Admitting  that  here  the  words  ‘ real,  ’ etc.,  are  meant  as 
mere  attributives  pointing  to  the  denial  of  what  the  subst- 
antive is  not,  we  have  tried  to  shew  that  the  passage  refers 
neither  to  a non-entity  nor  to  a momentary  existence,  Now 


BRAHMAN  DEPiNED. 


251 


/4  m.  /.] 

in  point  of  fact,  as  said  before,  the  passage  is  meant  to 
define  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman  in  Himself  and  can- 
not, therefore,  point  to  a non-entity  or  to  a momentary  exist- 
ence. So,  the  Bhrtshyakrira  proceeds  to  answer  the  objection 
as  follows (A). 

The  objection  cannot  apply  here,  because  the  pass- 
age is  intended  as  a definition. 

For  Brahman  to  be  a substantive,  it  is  enou  ^h  if  we  ha\  e 
an  idea  that  He  exists  ; and  it  is  not  necessary  that  He 
should  fall  v/ithin  the  range  of  some  other  prama/^a  or  source 
of  right  knowledge. And  we  form  an  idea  of  the  possibility 
of  Brahman’s  existence  on  the  following  consideration  : 
Where  a rope  is  mistaken  for  a serpent,  we  know  that  the 
false  serpent  rests  on  a reality,  namely,  the  rope.  Similarly, 
there  should  exist  some  reality  at  the  basis  of  the  whole 
manifested  universe,  which  is  false  because,  like  the  illu- 
sory serpent,  it  is  a phenomenon  (dmya),  an  appearance. 
The  5ruti,  therefore,  defines  here  not  a mere  non-entity,  but 
the  essential  nature  of  Brahman  who  is  thus  presumed  to 
exist.  Moreover,  we  should  understand  that  no  specifying 
attributes  of  Brahman  are  sought  here,  inasmuch  as  Brah- 
man’s essential  nature  is  not  itself  known  already. — (A). 

We  have  said  above  t that,  though  they  are  mere 
attributives,  ‘ real  ’ and  other  adjuncts  are  intended, 
in  the  main,  to  define  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman. 
If  the  thing  defined  were  a non-entity  ( swnya ),  the 


’••‘As  the  opponent  suggests.  Vide  ante  p.  2t0. 

f Vide  ante  p.  23§. 


BRAHMA-vpvA  BifPouNpED  [Auanda-Vi^^. 

definition  would  serve  no  purpose.*  Thus,  because 
the  passage  is  intended  as  a definition,  we  think  that 
it  does  not  refer  to  a mere  non-entity.  Though  serv- 
ing to  exclude  the  opposite,  the  adjuncts  ‘ real,  ’ etc.,  do 
not,  of  course,  abandon  their  own  connotation. 

The  word  * real  * connotes  unfailing  existence,  the  word 
‘consciousness’  connotes  self-luminous  knowledge  of  objects, 
and  the  word  ‘ infinite’  connotes  all-pervading-ness.  Thus, 
each  of  the  adjuncts  conveys  a positive  idea  while  exclud- 
ing the  opposite,  and  therefore  does  not  signify  a mere 
negation. — (A). 

Certainly,  if  the  adjuncts  ‘real,  ’ etc.,  were  to  connote 
mere  negation  (s«nya),  they  cannot  be  the  determinants 
of  a substantive.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  adjuncts 
convey  positive  ideas  of  their  own  such  as  reality, 
then  w^e  can  understand  how  they  serve  to  determine 
the  nature  of  Brahman,  the  substantive,  as  distinguish- 
ed from  other  substantives  which  are  possessed  of  the 
opposite  attributes.  Moreover,  even  the  word 
‘ Brahman  ’ conveys  a positive  idea  of  its  own. 

In  conjunction  with  other  words^ — ‘ real  ’ etc., — the  word 
‘ Brahman  ’ connotes  a positive  idea  of  its  own,  namely, 
greatness.  Absolute  greatness  consists  in  being  unlimited  in 
space  and  time  and  being  secondless ; and  nothing  here 
warrants  a limitation  of  the  greatness  connoted  by  the 
word.  The  word  ‘ Brahman  * connotes  a being  who  is  of 


♦ A non-entity  need  not  be  defined  simply  because  it  is  a non- 
entity.— (A), 


A HU,  L ] BRAHMAN  DEFINED.  253 

unsurpassed  or  absolute  greatness.  This  is  another  reason 
why  the  passage  cannot  refer  to  a non-entity. — (A). 

The  word  * Brahman  ’ has  a known  meaning  of  its  own 
as  conveyed  by  the  root  ‘ bnh  * to  grow.  His  Holiness 
(5ri  5ankarachflrya)  has  shewn  (elsewhere),  in  another  way, 
how  the  word  ‘ Brahman  * has  a definite  sense  of  its  own  : 

As  Brahman  is  the  Self  of  all,  everybody 
knows  of  His  existence.  Every  one,  indeed, 
feels  the  existence  of  the  Self.'*'  ” 

Thus,  as  the  Self  of  all.  Brahman’s  existence  is  familiar 
to  every  one.  And  that  Brahman  is  the  Self  is  declared 
by  the  sruti  in  the  words  “This  here,  the  Self,  is 
Brahman.”!  Thus,  since  the  passage  does  not  refer  to  a 
mere  non-entity,  we  can  understand  how  the  words  ‘ real,  * 
etc.,  serve  to  specify  Brahman  and  define  Brahman’s 
essential  nature.  Otherwise,  what  is  there  to  be  specified  ? 
or  whose  essential  nature  has  to  be  defined  ? 

Of  these  (attributive  words),  the  word  ‘infinite’ 
^constitutes  a qualifying  adjunct  by  way  of  denying  all 
limitation,  while  the  words  ‘ real  ’ and  ‘ consciousness’ 
are  qualifying  adjuncts  by  themselves  conveying  some 
(positive)  ideas  of  their  own. 

The  exclusion  of  the  opposite  is,  as  was  already  shewn,! 
only  an  implication,  not  the  primary  import  of  the 
words. — (.S) 


* Viih  the  Bhashja  on  the  Vcdanta-s^itras,  Vol.  I,  p.  14 
(S.  B.  E). 

f Maud,  Up.  2. 

JVidc  ante  pp,247'248, 


«S4  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [AflUnda-  Vallt] 

As  one  with  the  Self,  Brahman  is  infinite. 

Since  in  the  passage  “ From  Him,  verily,  from  this 
Self  (24tman),  was  akasa  born,  etc.,  the  word  ‘ Self 
(^tman)  is  used  with  reference  to  Brahman,  Brahman 
is  the  very  Self  of  the  knower.  And  in  the  words  “ He 
unites  with  this  blissful  Self  ”t  the  sruti  declares  that 
Brahman  is  the  Self.  And  also  because  of  His 
entrance:  in  the  words  “having  created  it,  He  entered 
into  that  very  thing,  t ” the  sruti  shews  that  Brahman 
Himself  has  penetrated  into  the  body  in  the  form  of 
jiva.  Brahman  is,  therefore,  the  knower’s  own  Self. 

Brahman  will  be  spoken  of  as  one  hid  in  the  cave,  ”§ 
and  again  as  the  Self  (^tman)  in  the  words  “ From  Him, 
verily,  from  this  ^tman  here,  was  akasa.  born  From  these 
two  passages  we  may  conclude  that  the  words  ‘ Brahman  ’ 
and  Mtman’  denote  one  and  the  same  tiling.^  Do  you  main- 
tain that  the  Supreme  Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  distinct 
from  the  conscious  Self  ?|1  Then  how  could  the  distinction, 
alleged  to  be  taught  by  the  Scripture  as  an  absolute  truth, 
be  ever  set  aside  If  the  Self  be  notin  Himself  the 


♦Taitt.  Up.  2-1.  flhid.  2-8.  I Ibid.  2-0, 

§J6id.  2-1.  i.  c,  as  the  witness  of  tlie  hnddhi,  again 
as  the  Self  (.dtman) — (A)  $ Ibid. 

Therefore  Brahman  cannot  be  limited  by  the  Self.— (A) 

II  In  sneh  passages  as  “ who  abides  in  the  Self  (hitman)  ” 
etc.,  Bri.  Up.  3-7  (Madhyand;na-/S^tkha;— (A) 

That  is  to  say,  inasmuch  as  it  could  not  be  set  aside,  we 
should  understand  that  the  «ruti  merely  reiterates  the  distinction, 
as  set  up  by  illusion,  with  a view  to  teach  unity, — (A) 


BtlAkiilAN  b&t'lMBt). 


/.] 


«5S 


Supereme  Brahman,  how  can  His  nature  be  altered  by  the 
mere  command  of  the  sruti, — how  can  it  be  altered  by 
something  else  (i.  e,,  by  constant  meditation  of  the  unity  ?) 
From  him  who  directs  his  mind  to  the  Inner  Self,  who  has 
rid  himself  of  all  attributes  alien  to  the  Self,  and  who  has 
then  attained,  in  accordance  with  the  teaching  of  the 
scriptures,  the  knowledge  that  ‘ I am  Brahman’,— how  can 
the  Supreme  be  different  from  him  ? If  all  such  attributes 
as  “ not  gross,”  | be  held  to  be  the  attributes  of  Brahman 
who  is  distinct  from  the  Self,  of  v/hat  avail  are  they,  all  of 
them  being  alien  to  the  Self  ? If,  on  the  other  hand,  they 
are  the  attributes  of  the  Self,  they  serve  to  obliterate  the 
idea  of  all  distinction  between  the  Self  and  Brahman.  The 
sruti  I opens  with  the  word  ‘ Brahman  ’ and  ends  with  the 
word  ‘/Itman’.  Each  of  the  words  ‘ Brahman’  and  Mtman* 
will  find  its  complete  signification  only  when  it  includes  the 
connotation  of  the  other,  and  this  is  not  possible  if  Brahman 
and  -dtman  were  two  distinct  entities. — (S). 


Brahman  is  the  eternal,  infinite,  independent 
Consciousness. 


(Objcclion) If  so,  Brahman  being  the  Self,  He  is 
the  knower,  the  agent  of  the  act  of  knowing.  It  is  a 


=*'TIlc  alleged  Vcdic  command  being  Let.  the  mind  dwell  in 
the  tliougiit  that  ‘ thou  art  That  ’ ” — (A) 
t Bri  Up.  11-8-8. 

J The  pasE-age  here  referred  to  is  “Tell  ms  Bralimau  who  is 
visible,  not  invisible,  the  Self  f^^tmaii)  who  is  wdthin  all’* 

Bri,  Up,  3-4-l.-(A). 


256  BRAHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Ananda-Vctlll. 

well-known  fact  that  the  Self  is  the  knower.  “ He  de- 
sired in  these  words  the  sruti  gives  us  to  understand 
that  he  who  has  desire  is  the  knower.  t Thus,  as 
Brahman  is  the  knower,  it  would  not  be  proper  to  speak 
of  Brahman  as  knowledge  or  consciousness.!  It  would 
also  make  Brahman  non-eternal.  If  Brahman  were 
knowledge, — i.  e,,  the  dhatvartha,  the  root-sense,  the 
very  act  of  knowing, — then  Brahman  would  be  non- 
eternal. And  then  Brahman  would  also  be  relative  or 
dependent ; for,  the  act  signified  by  the  root  ‘ jna  ’ to 
know  depends  upon  the  operation  of  karakas  or  acces- 
sories of  action  ; and  knowledge  or  consciousness  being 
here  the  meaning  of  the  root,  it  is  non-eternal  and  de- 
pendent. 

(Answer): — No;  for,  as  it  is  not  distinct  from  the 
essential  nature  (of  the  Self),  knowledge  or  consciousness 
is  spoken  of  as  an  effect,  only  by  courtesy.  Conscious- 
ness is  the  essential  nature  of  the  Self  (/Itman);  it  is 
not  distinct  from  the  Self,  and  it  is  therefore  eternal. 
Now  to  explain  : The  manifestations — in  the  form  of 
sound,  etc., — of  the  buddhi,  which  is  an  upadhi  of  (the 
Self),  and  which,  passing  through  the  eye  and  other 
sense-organs,  puts  on  the  forms  of  sense-objects,  are 


• Bri.  Up.  1*2 ; 1‘4. 

t And  as  shewn  in  the  Tarka-sftstras  or  the  Sciences  of  Logic, 
it  is  but  proper  that  the  Self  f Atman)  is  un  agent — (8) 

J As  was  done  before.  Vide  ante  p.  242. 


fikAtl&tAK  bE^i^Bb. 


And.  ] 

objects  of  iltman’s  consciousness;  and  whenever  diey 
arise,  they  become  permeated  by  i4tman*s  consciousiMsss; 
and  it  is  these  manifestations  of  budihi, — illumined  by 
the  hitman’s  consciousness  and  spoken  of  as 
consciousness  itself, — which  constitute  the  meaning  of 
the  root  * jna  ’ = to  know  and  are  imagined  by  the 
undiscriminating  men  to  be  the  inherent  attributes 
(dharmas)  of.  i4tman  Himself,  changing  every  now 
and  then. 

The  changes  which  take  place  in  the  buddhi  are  ascribed  • 
to  the  Self  owing  to  non-discrimination.  The  Self  is  not 
the  agent  in  the  act  of  knowing,  because  knowledge  or 
consciousness  which  is  the  essential  nature  of  the  Self  is  not 
distinct  from  Him.  It  is  the  buddhi  which  gives  rise  to  the 
cognitions,  and  its  agency  is  ascribed  by  courtesy  to  the 
Witness  thereof.  F or,  the  buddhi  gives  rise  to  vrittis  or  cogni- 
tions permeated  by  A tman’s  consciousness — all  embraced  by 
the  consciousness — as  sparks  of  incandescent  iron  (are  per- 
meated by  fire).  On  seeing  that  these  cognitions  to  which 
the  buddhi  has  given  rise  are  all  set  with  Consciousness, 
the  ignorant  think  that  Consciousness  itself  is  produced, 
though  It  is  eternal,  immutable  (Kw^astha).  What  other 
witness  can  be  cited  to  prove  the  ageney  of  that  Witness 
whose  evidence  is  the  only  one  men  have  as  to  the  manifesta- 
tion and  obscuration  of  the  buddhi  ? As  Consciousness  is 
unaffected  prior  to  the  rise  of  any  particular  state  of  buddhi, 
so,  too,  even  on  the  rise  of  that  state,  Consciousness  remains 
unaffected,  as  our  own  experience  proves. — (S)  That  is  to 
say,  there  exists  no  evidence  to  prove  that  any  change  has 
taken  place  in  Consciousness  which  witnesses  the  absence 

33 


*55  BRAHMA-VIDYA  E3{t>0U«DED.  ^Amnda-VHU, 

as  well  as  the  presence  of  a state  of  buddhi.  The  Witness- 
Consciousness  remains  Unaffected  by  the  state  of  buddhi 
while  merely  witnessing  the  absence  or  presence  of  buddhi’s 
naodes. — (A) 

As  to  Brahman’s  Consciousness,  however,  it  is,  like 
' the  sun’s  light  or  like  the  heat  of  the  fire,  not  distinct 
from  Brahman’s  essential  nature  (svar«pa) ; nay,  it  is 
the  very  essential  nature  of  Brahman,  not  dependent 
on  any  external  cause,  inasmuch  as  it  is  His  own 
eternal  nature.  As  all  beings  are  undivided  from 
Him  in  time  and  space,  as  He  is  the  cause  of  time  and 
akflsa  and  all  else,  as  He  is  extremely  subtle, — to  Him 
there  is  nothing  unknowable,  however  subtle,  conceal- 
ed and  remote  it  may  be,  whether  past  or  present  or 
future.  Wherefore,  Brahman  is  all-knowing.  And 
there  is  also  the  following  mantra : 

“ Without  hands,  without  feet.  He 
moveth.  He  graspeth ; eyeless  He  seeth, 
earless  He  heareth.  He  knoweth  what 
is  to  be  known,  yet  is  there  no  knower 
of  Him.  Him  call  they  first,  mighty, 
the  Man.”* 

The  Sruti  further  says : 

“ Knowing  is  inseparable  from  the  knower, 
because  it  cannot  perish.  But  there  is 
then  no  second,  nothing  else  different 
from  Him  that  He  could  know.”t 


•iSveta.  Up.  3-19.  fBri.  Up.  4-3-30. 


BRAHMAN  DEFINSa 


259 


Because  Brahman  is  not  different  from  the  Conscious 
one  (Self)  and  has  not  to  rely  (for  His  Consciousness) 
on  the  sense-organs  and  other  instruments  of  knowledge, 
we  must  understand  that,  though  essentially  of  the 
nature  of  Consciousness,  Brahman  is  yet  eternal.  His 
Consciousness  is  not  what  is  connoted  by  the  root 
(namely,  the  temporary  act  of  knowing),  inasmuch  as 
It  is  immutable.  And  for  the  same  reason,  Brahman 
is  not  the  agent  of  the  act  of  knowing. 

Brahman  is  beyond  speech. 

For  the  same  reason.  Brahman  cannot  be  designated 
by  the  word  ‘ jwana’.  On  the  other  hand,  by  the  word 
‘j«ana’  which  refers  only  to  a semblance  of  His 
(Consciousness)  and  denotes  a state  (dharma)  of 
buddhi.  Brahman  is  indicated,  but  not  designated, 
inasmuch  as  Brahman  is  devoid  of  attributes  such  as 
genus  (quality,  act,  etc.),  through  denoting  which 
words  can  be  applied  to  things,  and  inasmuch  as  the 
word  refers  to  the  same  thing  to  which  ‘ real  ’ and 
‘ infinite  ’ refer. 

As  Brahman  illumines  agents  and  acts,  words  which 
designate  agents  and  acts  can  but  remotely  indicate  the 
Supreme  Brahman ; they  do  not  directly  designate  Him. 
Brahman’s  Consciousness,  which  is  inseparate  from  all, 
which  is  immutable  and  is  not  different  from  Brahman,  is 
immanent  in  all  as  their  Innermost  Self.— (S) 

Neither  can  Brahman  be  designated  by  the  word 
‘ Real,  ’ Being  in  His  essential  nature  devoid  of  all 


BRAHUA>^yjl  BXrOmireKJ. 


y6o 


fuitidih  ViilHt 


alien  elements,  Brahman,  when  defined  as  real,  is  only, 
indicated  by  the  word  which  denotes  the  genus  or 
universal  of  being  (satta-snmanya)  in  the  external 
world.  Brahman  cannot  indeed  be  primarily  denoted 
by  the  word  ‘ satya 

Accordingly,  in  their  close  mutual  proximity,  the 
words  ‘ real,  ’ etc.,  determine  the  sense  of  one  another ; 
and  while  thus  shewing  that  Brahman  cannot  be 
directly  designated  by  the  words  ‘ real  ’ etc.,  they 
serve  also  to  indicate  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman. 

These  words,  without  giving  up  their  own  meaning, 
indicate  the  nature  of  the  Supreme  by  eliminating  every 
thing  alien  to  His  nature  and  removing  the  ignoraince  which 
is  the  root  of  all  illusion.  ‘ Real  ’ and  other  words  used  here 
^ave  different  meanings  only  in  so  far  as  they  serve  to 
eliminate  different  ideas  such  as  unreality.  When  the 
elimination  has  taken  place,  all  these  words  point  to  the  one 
essential  nature  of  Brahman,  which  is  not  therefore  a 
complex  idea  conveyed  by  an  assemblage  of  words 
(vokya). — (S) 

Hence  the  unspeakableness  of  Brahman  by  a word, 
as  the  sruti  declares  in  the  following  words : 

“ Whence  (all)  words  return  without 
attaining,  as  also  manas.”* 

“ He  finds  his  fearless  mainstay  in  the 
Unuttered,  in  the  Homeless.”! 


•Tftitt.  XJp.  2-4.  fjhid.  2-7, 


BlttSKAM  QEFIKBD. 


diiu.  /.] 


s6x 


Hence,  too,  is  He,  unlike  the  blue  lotus,  not  denoted 
by  an  assemblage  of  words. 

All  such  passages  as  these  can  have  a meaning  only  when 
Brahman  is  of  the  nature  described  above. 

Thus  (the  meaning  of  the  words  in  the  definition  is  as 
follows) : The  word  ‘ real  (satya)  ’ signifies  immutability 
(k«tastha-ta),  and  the  word  ‘ jwana  (knowledge)  ’ conscious- 
ness. Consciousness  being  in  itself  immutable  (and  forming 
the  nature  of  Brahman),  the  knower,  (»'.  e.,  the  Witness, 
Brahman)  is  infinite  (ananta),  i.  e.,  One. — (S). 

' Real,  ’ etc.,  construed  as  specifying  attributives. 

Though  in  reality  there  is  only  one  Brahman  and  no 
more,  still,  as  associated  with  upadhis  which  are  unreal, 
insentient,  and  limited,  three  other  Brahmans— belonging  to 
the  same  genus  of  Brahman  as  the  Real  Brahman,  but  who 
are  respectively  unreal,  insentient,  and  limited, — may  appear 
to  exist,  from  the  stand-point  of  an  ignorant  person. 
Accordingly,  the  words  ‘ real  ’,  etc.,  serve  to  distmguish  the 

Brahman  meant  here  from  the  other  Brahmans. 

» 

‘ Real  ’ etc.,  construed  as  defining  attributives. 

But  when  the  passage  is  regarded  as  a definition,  it 
serves  to  distinguish  the  one  Brahman  from  the  upsdhis 
which  belong  to  a different  genus  altogether.  Elsewhere, 
for  example,  the  iruti  has  defined  the  Infinite  (Bhi/man)  by 
distinguishing  It  from  all  ordinary  consciousness  which  is 
triple  (tripuff),  i.  e.,  which  always  comprises  the  three  ele- 
ments of  perceiver,  perception  and  percept.  The  Chhando- 
gas  read  as  follows ; 


36a  BRAHMA^viDYA EXPOUNDED.  [Anandd^V/Ulk 

“ Where  one  sees  nothing  else,  hears  nothing 
else,  and  understands  nothing  else,  that  is  the 
Infinite.” 

Here  the  sruti  teaches  that  the  Infinite  is  that  thing  in 
Vhich  the  threefold  consciousness  of  one  seeing  another  is 
absent  and  thus  points  to  the  Reality  which  is  beyond  all 
ordinary  experience  by  distinguishing  It  from  everything 
else.  Similarly,  here,  too,  we  may  understand  that  in  the 
words  ‘ real,  * etc.,  the  5ruti  defines  Brahman  to  be  untinged 
with  unreality  and  so  on  by  way  of  distinguishing  Him 
from  all  that  is  unreal, 

< Real,  ’ etc.,  define  Brahman  by  mutual 
government. 

Now,  when  construed  as  mere  (specifying)  attributives, 
the  three  words — * real,*  ‘ consciousness,*  and  ‘ infinite  ’ — 
combine  together  by  way  of  governing  the  meaning  of  one 
another  and  point  to  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman. 

To  explain : The  word  ‘ real,’  which  means  absence 
of  b^dha  or  liability  to  prove  false,  denotes  three  kinds  of 
reality,  namely — (i)  Pratibhasika  or  pertaining  to  illusion, 

(2)  Vyavah^irika  or  pertaining  to  practical  or  ordinary  life, 

(3)  Paramarthika  or  absolutely  true.  In  the  case  in  which 
the  mother-of-pearl  is  mistaken  for  silver,  the  silver  does 
not  prove  false  so  long  as  the  illusion  (pratibhasa)  lasts,  and 
this  sort  of  reality  is  therefore  spoken  of  as  Pratibhasika. 
Earth  and  other  elements  of  matter,  as  also  the  body  (san'ra) 
and  other  material  compounds,  do  not  prove  false  in  our  con- 


* Chhand.  Up.  7-24-1, 


bttAtlMAK  DEFINED. 


Am.  /.] 


sciousness  of  practical  life,  and  their  reality  is  therefore 
spoken  of  as  Vyavaharika  or  pertaining  to  ordinary  or 
practical  life.  Not  proving  false  even  after  the  attainment 
of  the  knowledge  produced  by  the  Vedanta  (Upanishad),  the 
reality  of  Brahman  is  Paramarthika  or  absolutely  true.  The*^ 
word  * real  * applied  to  the  three  kinds  of  reality  alike, 
points  here  to  Brahman,  as  it  is  governed — as  its  applica- 
tion is  restricted — by  the  words  ‘ consciousness  (jnana)  * 
and  ‘ infinite  (ananta).’  The  real  of  the  illusory  and  the 
ordinary  consciousness  are  neither  conscious  nor  infinite. 
Even  the  word  * j;wna  (knowledge  or  consciousness),*  applied 
alike  to  Consciousness  (Chit)  and  to  the  vnttis  or  modes  of 
buddhi,  points  heie  to  Brahman  whose  essential  nature  is 
Chit  or  Consciousness,  since  the  use  of  the  word  is  restricted 
by  the  words  ‘ real  ’ and  ‘ infinite.*  Certainly,  unlike  Brah- 
man, the  buddhi-vnttis  or  states  of  mind  are  neither 
absolutely  real  (abadhya), — e,y  beyond  all  liability  to  prove 
false, — nor  devoid  of  the  three  kinds  of  limitation.  The 
word  ‘infinite’,  too,  applied  alike  to  the  akasa  which  is 
unlimited  in  space  and  to  Brahman  who  is  devoid  of  all 
kinds  of  limitation,  applies  to  Brahman  alone  when  its  use 
is  restricted  by  the  words  ‘ real  * and  ‘ consciousness,’  for 
the  reason  that  akasa  is  neither  consciousness  nor  absolutely 
real.  Thus  governing  one  another,  the  three  words  ‘ real,* 

‘ consciousness  ’ and  ‘ infinite  ’ point  to  Brahman  who  is 
immutable,  conscious,  and  secondless.  So  the  teachers  of 
old  say : 


* Vide  ante  pp.  245,  246. 


96a  BRAHMA-viDYA EXPOUNDED,  {Amndfa^V^xllU 

Where  one  sees  nothing  else,  hears  nothing 
else,  and  understands  nothing  else,  that  is  the 
Infinite.’* 

Here  the  sruti  teaches  that  the  Infinite  is  that  thing  in 
which  the  threefold  consciousness  of  one  seeing  another  is 
absent  and  thus  points  to  the  Reality  which  is  beyond  all 
ordinary  experience  by  distinguishing  It  from  everything 
else.  Similarly,  here,  too,  we  may  understand  that  in  the 
words  * real,  ’ etc.,  the  sruti  defines  Brahman  to  be  untinged 
with  unreality  and  so  on  by  way  of  distinguishing  Him 
from  all  that  is  unreal. 

* Real,  ’ etc.,  define  Brahman  by  mutual 
government. 

Now,  when  construed  as  mere  (specifying)  attributives, 
the  three  words — ‘ real,’  ‘ consciousness,’  and  * infinite  ’ — 
combine  together  by  way  of  governing  the  meaning  of  one 
another  and  point  to  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman. 

To  explain ; The  word  ‘ real,’  which  means  absence 
of  badha  or  liability  to  prove  false,  denotes  three  kinds  of 
reality,  namely — (i)  Pratibhasika  or  pertaining  to  illusion, 

(2)  Vyavah^rika  or  pertaining  to  practical  or  ordinary  life, 

(3)  P^iram^rthika  or  absolutely  true.  In  the  case  in  which 
the  mother-of-pearl  is  mistaken  for  silver,  the  silver  does 
not  prove  false  so  long  as  the  illusion  (pratibhasa)  lasts,  and 
this  sort  of  reality  is  therefore  spoken  of  as  Pratibhasika. 
Earth  and  other  elements  of  matter,  as  also  the  body  (sarira) 
and  other  material  compounds,  do  not  prove  false  in  our  con- 


* Cbhand.  Up.  7-24-1, 


fiftAtlMAtf  DSFlKEb. 


A}m.  /.] 


aiSg 


sciousness  of  practical  life,  and  their  reality  is  therefore 
spoken  of  as  Vyavah^rika  or  pertaining  to  ordinary  or 
practical  life.  Not  proving  false  even  after  the  attainment 
of  the  knowledge  produced  by  the  Vedanta  (Upanishad),  the 
reality  of  Brahman  is  Paraniarthika  or  absolutely  true.  The* 
word  ‘ real  ’ applied  to  the  three  kinds  of  reality  alike, 
points  here  to  Brahman,  as  it  is  governed — i.e.y  as  its  applica- 
tion is  restricted — by  the  words  ‘ consciousness  (jwana)  ’ 
and  ‘ infinite  (ananta).*  The  real  of  the  illusory  and  the 
ordinary  consciousness  are  neither  conscious  nor  infinite. 
Even  the  word  * jnana  (knowledge  or  consciousness),’  applied 
alike  to  Consciousness  (Chit)  and  to  the  vrittis  or  modes  of 
buddhi,  points  heie  to  Brahman  whose  essential  nature  is 
Chit  or  Consciousness,  since  the  use  of  the  word  is  restricted 
by  the  words  * real  ’ and  ‘ infinite.’  Certainly,  unlike  Brah- 
man, the  buddhi-v/ittis  or  states  of  mind  are  neither 
absolutely  real  (abadhya), — i,  beyond  all  liability  to  prove 
false, — nor  devoid  of  the  three  kinds  of  limitation.  The 
word  ‘infinite’,  too,  applied  alike  to  the  akasa,  which  is 
unlimited  in  space  and  to  Brahman  who  is  devoid  of  all 
kinds  of  limitation,  applies  to  Brahman  alone  when  its  use 
is  restricted  by  the  words  ‘ real  ’ and  ‘ consciousness,’  for 
the  reason  that  akasa  is  neither  consciousness  nor  absolutely 
real.  Thus  governing  one  another,  the  three  words  ‘ real,* 

‘ consciousness  ’ and  ‘ infinite  ’ point  to  Brahman  who  is 
immutable,  conscious,  and  secondless.  So  the  teachers  of 
old  say ; 


• Vide  ante  pp*  245,  246. 


&ltAl!llA«Vlt>yA  BXPOUMDBD  [AfUmdO-Y^dti^^ 

<<  ^Rieal  * means  immutable,  *jffana(knowledge)* 
means  consciousness,  and  < infinite*  means 
one.  Thus  by  the  three  words  is  Brahman 
denoted.  ’* 

the  three  words,  the  word ‘‘infinite**  denotes  Brahman 
by  merely  excluding  all  else,  whereas  the  words  “real  ’*  and 
“consciousness**  refer  to  Brahman  by  primarily  signifying  in 
themselves  immutability  and  consciousness  and  incidentally 
excluding  falsity  and  insentiency  (jarfya)  as  the  V^xrtikaktfra 
has  said."^  There  the  Vartikakara  has  said  that  the 
idea  of  exclusion  is  not  the  primary  import  of  the 
sentence  and  that  it  is  derived  from  another  source  of 
knowledge.  This  other  source  of  knowledge  is  the  inex- 
plicability of  a coexistence  of  the  pairs  of  opposites— reality 
and  imreality,  consciousness  and  unconsciousness. 

It  is  true  that  the  relation  (here  imported)  of  substance 
ar.d  Attribute  is  not  real ; still,  it  does  form  a gateway  to 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman  in  His  true  nature  in  the 
same  way  as  a reflection,  which  is  false  in  itself,  leads  to  a 
knowledge  of  the  real  object,  or  in  the  same  way  as  the 
seeing  of  a woman  in  a dream  indicates  the  good  that  is  to 
come.  In  so  far  as  from  the  three  adjuncts  we  thus  get  a 
knowledge  of  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman,  they 
constitute  a definition  of  Brahman. 

Brahman  defined  as  the  Real. 

Or,  each  of  these  adjuncts  is  in  itself  an  independent 
definition  of  Brahman.  The  unreal,— namely,  aj^na  and 


* Vide  ante  p.  248, 


BRAHMAN  DEFINED. 


26s 


Anu.  1.  ] 

its  effects, — being  excluded  by  the  word  * real,  ’ • there 
remains  one  thing  alone,  the  indivisible  (akha»ia)  Conscious- 
ness, L e,,  Brahman.  The  attribute  of  reality,  which  has 
thus  hinted  at  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman,  is  itself 
an  effect  of  ajmna  and  therefore  false ; and  as  such  it  is 
excluded  by  the  very  word  * real.  ’ The  kataka"'  dust,  for 
example,  when  dropped  into  the  muddy  water,  removes 
the  muddiness,  and  itself  disappears.  Or,  to  take  another 
example : a drug  swallowed  for  the  digestion  of  the  food 
already  eaten  causes  the  digestion  of  itself  and  of  the  food. 
It  should  not  be  supposed  that,  as  the  attribute  of  reality 
is  thus  excluded,  it  will  follow  that  Brahman  is  false.  For, 
unreality  has  been  already  excluded.  On  the  disappearance 
of  the  kataka  dust,  for  example,  the  former  muddiness  does 
not  again  appear ; nor,  when  the  drug  has  been  digested, 
does  the  food  again  become  undigested.  Both  reality  and 
unreality  having  been  thus  excluded,  the  result  is  to  define 
that  Brahman  is  attributeless.  Does  any  one  imagine  that 
such  a thing  is  non-existent  ? He  should  not ; for  then  the 
Thing  cannot  be  Existence  (Sat)  and  the  Self  (/4tman). 
The  Chhandogas  declare  ‘ Brahman  is  Existence  and  the 
Self.’  Having  begun  with  the  Reality  under  the  designation 
‘ Existence  (Sat)  ’ — in  the  words  “ Existence  alone,  my  dear, 
this  at  first  was  ” — they  read  “ That  is  real  (satya).  That  the 
Self  (^tman).”t  Thus  the  very  thing  that  is  here  (in  the 

’*'The  clcariiig-nnt,  a seed  of  the  plant  Stryclinos  Potatorum, 
which  being  rubbed  upon  tlie  inside  of  the  water-jars  occasions 
a precipitation  of  the  earthy  particles  diffused  through  the 
water  and  removes  them. 

tOhhct.  Up.  6-9-4. 


34 


^ ftRAHMA-vibvA  Exp6u^^DED  [Ananda^Yotk. 

T^ttinya-upanishiid)  spoken  of  as  ‘ real  * is  in  the  Chhan- 
dogya-Upanishad  declared  to  be  Existence  and  the  Self. 
Certainly,  Existence  cannot  be  non-existent,  any  more  than 
light  can  be  darkness.  We  have  already  refuted  the  idea 
of  the  non-existence  of  the  Self  by  citing  the  bhashyakara’s 
(Sankarocharya’s)  words.*  Moreover,  Brahman  cannot  be 
non-existent,  because  He  is  the  basic  reality  whereon  rests 
the  illusory  notions  of  reality,  falsity,  and  so  on.  There  can, 
indeed,  be  no  illusion  without  an  underlying  basic  reality. 
To  this  end,  the  Chhandogya-Upanishad  first  expounds, 
as  the  opponent’s  view,  the  theory  of  Non-existence  in  the 
words,  “ On  that,  v^erily,  some  say  that  Non-existence  alone 
this  at  first  was,  one  alone  without  a second ; from  that 
Non-existence  the  existence  was  born  ; ” then  it  condemns 
that  theory  in  the  words  “ How,  indeed,  my  dear,  can  it  be 
thus?,  he  said,  how  can  existence  be  born  of  Non-exist- 
^nce  ? and  then  finally  it  concludes  with  the  theory  of 
Existence,  as  its  own,  in  the  words  “ Existence  alone,  verily, 
my  dear,  this  at  first  was,  one  alone  without  a second.”!  And 
this  theory  alone  is  consistent  with  experience.  If,  on  the 
other  -hand.  Non-existence  were  the  upad^^na  or  material 
cause  of  the  universe,  {i,  e,,  if  the  universe  is  made  up  of 
Non-existence),  then  the  whole  universe  would  present  itself 
to  consciousness  in  association  with  non-existence, — thus : 
earth  does  not  exist,  water  does  not  exist,  and  so  on.  But 
the  universe  is  not  so  regarded.  Wherefore,  Brahman,  the 
Cause  of  the  Universe,  is  Existence  itself.  Just  as  in  the 
Chh/mdogya  are  expounded  the  merits  and  faults  of  the 


♦ Vide  ante  p,  253«  f 2, 


BRAHMAN  DEFINED. 


theories  of  Existence  and  Non-existence  in  regard  to 
Brahman,  the  Cause,  so  also  here  in  the  Taittinya  Upani- 
shad  will  be  expounded  the  merits  and  faults  of  the  theories 
of  Existence  and  Non-existence  with  reference  to  Brahman 
in  His  aspect  as  the  Inner  Self  (Pratyag^tman) ; 

Non-being,  verily,  doth  one  become  if  he 
doth  Brahman  as  non-being  know.  Brahman 
is ! — if  thus  one  knows,  they  then  as  being 
Him  do  know.”"' 

The  Kashas  also  read,  “ ‘ He  exists*— thus  alone  is  He  to  be 
known.  ”t  Therefore,  though  actually  devoid  of  the  attri- 
bute of  reality  or  being,  still,  as  the  basic  reality  whereon 
rests  that  illusory  notion,  Brahman  is  Being, — Existence 
itself. 

{Objection) : — If  a thing  cannot  exist  in  either  of  the  only 
two  possible  alternative  modes  of  existence,  no  other  mode 
of  existence  is  indeed  possible.  On  this  principle,  we  think 
that  it  does  not  stand  to  reason  that  Brahman  is  devoid 
of  both  the  attributes,  reality  and  unreality. 

Not  so.  It  is  possible,  as  in  the  case  of  a 
eunuch  (napuwsaka).  A eunuch  is  neither  of  the  male  sex 
nor  of  the  female  sex.  So  here. 

{Objection) The  existence  of  this  third  class  of  persons 
is  proved  by  immediate  or  sensuous  perception. 

{A  nswer) If  so.  Brahman  also  is  known  from  the  sruti 
(to  be  neither  real  nor  unreal.) 


^ Taitt.  Up.  2-G.  fKa/ha.  Up.  6-13. 


*68”  BRAHMA'VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  vm. 

{Ohjection)  :—But,  in  the  words  Brahman  is  real,  ” the 
sruti  says  that  Brahman  is  denoted  by  the  word  ‘ real  * and 
thus  admits  of  the  attribute  of  reality. 

{Answer) No,  because  of  the  sruti  declaring  that  Brah- 
man is  beyond  speech  in  the  words,  “ whence  all  words 
turn  back.”*  But  the  word  * real  * which  in  common  par- 
lance is  applied  to  the  real  of  our  ordinary  consciousness, 
and  which,  on  the  strength  of  the  attribute  of  such  reality 
falsely  ascribed  to  Brahman,  excludes  the  opposite  attribute 
of  unreality,  points  to  the  real  Brahman,  the  mere  Existence 
devoid  of  both  the  attributes,  just  as  a person  extracts  by 
one  thorn  another  that  has  pierced  into  his  sole,  and  then, 
casting  aside  both,  leaves  the  sole  alone.  Thus,  the  defini- 
tion that  ‘ Brahman  is  real  ’ is  faultless. 

Brahman  defined  as  Consciousness. 

{Objection)  As  panvi  (knowledge,  consciousness),  Brah- 
man may  be  concerned  in  an  act.  ]?iana  may  mean  either 
that  by  which  something  is  known,  or  the  very  act  of 
knowing.  In  the  former  case.  Brahman  becomes  an 
instrument  in  the  act  of  knowing,  and  in  the  latter  He 
becomes  an  act.  But,  properly  speaking,  Brahman  cannot 
be  either.  “ Partless,  actionless,  tranquil in  these  words 
action  is  altogether  excluded.  Therefore  the  definition  of 
Brahman  as  pana,  is  fallacious. 

{Answer)  so.  Like  the  word  ‘real  (satya),  ’ the 

word  ‘ consciousness  (jftana)  ’ also  is  a lakshana,  an  indicator. 
The  root,  in  itself,  denotes  only  a mode  of  mind  (buddhi- 


♦fiiyeta.  Up.  649,  tTait.  Up.  ?-4. 


BRAHMAN  DEFINED. 


Am.  L] 


^69 


vritti).  Accordingly  in  the  Upade^a-sahasr/  it  is  said : 
“The  Atman’s  semblance  (abhasa)  is  the 
agent,  and  the  act  of  buddhi  is  the  meaning 
of  the  root.  Both  these,  combined  together 
without  discrimination,  form  the  meaning  of 
the  word  * knows.  ’ Buddhi  has  no  conscious- 
ness, and  the  A toan  has  no  action  ; so  that, 
properly  speaking,  neither  of  these  can  alone 
be  said  to 

The  word  ‘ jnana.  ’ which  denotes  primarily  the  buddhi 
or  mind  having  consciousness  reflected  in  it,  and  manifest- 
ing some  sense-object  as  sound,  touch,  and  so  on,  ascribes 
to  Brahman  the  attribute  of  cognition,  with  a view 
first  to  exclude  inertness  and  insentiency  (ja^/atva)  from 
Brahman  and  then  to  indicate  the  true  nature  of  Brahman 
as  devoid  of  even  that  attribute,  e,,  as  the  Pratyagatman 
(Inner  Self),  as  the  Eternal  Consciousness,  All  this  has 
been  clearly  explained  by  the  Vartikakara.f  The  sruti  says : 

“Sight  is  indeed  inseparable  from  the  seer.”]: 

“ As  a mass  of  salt  has  neither  inside  nor 
outside,  but  is  altogether  a mass  of  taste, 
thus,  indeed,  has  the  Self  neither  inside 
nor  outside,  but  is  altogether  a mass  of 
knowledge.”  § 

In  these  passages  the  sruti  declares  that  the  Self  is  one 
Eternal  Pure  Consciousness,  and  it  is  the  actionless  Self  of 


# Op.  cit.  (Verse)  xviii.  53-54.  f Vide  ante  p.  257- 
I Bri.  Up.  4-3-23,  § Ibid.  4-5-1?, 


BkJiHUAr^mh  BXPOUKDBD. 


9p 

this  Batura  that  is  here  hmted  at  by  the  word  ^jmina 
(consciousness) Therefore  the  definition  that  Brahman  is 
Consciousness  is  free  from  all  faults. 

Brahman  defined  as  the  Infinite. 

{Objection) : — The  definition  that  Brahman  is  the  Infinite 
excludes  the  three  kinds  of  limitation,  so  that,  it  follows 
that  Brahman  has  the  absence  of  limitation  for  its  attribute. 
To  say,  for  instance,  that  there  is  no  pot  here  on  this  piece 
of  land  is  to  signify  that  the  piece  of  land  has  the  absence 
of  a pot  for  its  attribute.  Accordingly,  the  passage  cannot 
point  to  one  Indivisible  Essence  (akha;^a-elca-rasa). 

(Answer): — When  limitation  of  Brahman  by  a second 
thing  is  excluded,  even  abhava  or  non-existence  as 
something  distinct  from  Brahman  has  been  excluded : so 
that  the  word  ‘infinite*  first  predicates  of  Brahman  an 
association  with  abhava  or  non-existence, — which  is  itself  a 
product  of  maya, — with  a view  to  exclude  limitation,  and 
then  excluding,  on  the  principle  of  the  kataka  dust,*  even 
that  abhava,  it  points  only  to  the  One  Essence,  the  One 
Existence.  Thus  alone  can  we  explain  the  sruti  which  says 
elsewhere,  “ Existence  alone,  my  dear,  this  at  first  was.’* 
Therefore  the  definition  of  Brahman  as  the  Infinite  is 
faultless.  Accordingly  the  V^rtikak^ra  says : 

“ As  the  6elf  is  the  womb  of  time  and  space, 
as  the  Self  is  the  All,  as  nothing  else  exists,  the 
Supreme  Self  is  absolutely  infinite. 


• "plde  ante  p.  265, 


BkAMMAN  &BFtNkt>. 


i7i 


“ There  can  be  indeed  no  limitation  of  the 
Uncreated  Reality  by  the  fictitious.  Time  and 
other  things  (we  experience)  here  are  all  ficti- 
tious, because  of  the  sruti  ‘ mere  creation  of 
speech  is  all  changing  form.*  **  ^ 


Other  definitions  of  Brahman. 

On  the  same  principle  of  construction  that  has  been  adopt- 
ed in  interpreting  the  expression  ‘ Brahman  is  real,  * we 
should  construe,  as  forming  each  an  independent  definition, 
such  words  as  ‘bliss  (^nanda),*  ‘self-luminous  (svayaw- 
jyotis),  * ‘ full  (pwrwa),  * occurring  in  the  passages  like  the 
following: 

“ Consciousness  and  Bliss  is  Brahman.  **  + 

“ There  he  becomes  the  self 4ummus  Purusha.  J’* 

“ Full  is  That,  Full  is  This.  ’*  § 

Accordingly,  bliss  and  other  attributes  should  be  gathered 
together  in  this  connecflion.  Such  plurality  of  definitions 
is  due  to  the  plurality  of  the  popular  illusions— concerning 
the  nature  of  Brahman— which  have  to  be  removed ; and 
Brahman  is  not,  on  that  account,  of  many  kinds.  It  is  the 
Unconditioned  (Nir-visesha)  alone  that  all  the  definitions 
ultimately  refer  to. 

The  principle  of  the  gathering  together  (upasa»«htfra) 
of  bliss  and  other  defining  adjunds  in  this  connedtion  has 
been  discussed  in  the  Vedanta- s«tr as  III.  iii.  11-13 
follows: 


* Tait.  Up.  Vartika,  Brahmavalli,  134—135. 

t Bri.  Up.  3-9-28.  J Ibid,  4-3-9.  § Ibid.  5-1-1. 


fiRAHKiA-viDVA  Rj^pouNDED.  [kmuda-  VoUu 

{Qmtion) The  Taittiriya-Upanishad  describes  the  Sup- 
reme Brahman  as  * Bliss,*  ‘ Real,’  and  so  on  in  the  follow- 
ing passages : “ Bliss  is  Brahman ; *’  “ Real,  Consciousness, 
Infinite  is  Brahman.  **  The  question  is : Is  it  necessary  or 
not  necessary  to  take  into  account  these  attributes  of  Brah- 
man when  studying  the  teaching  of  the  Aitareyaka  and 
other  Upanishads  concerning  the  Supreme  Brahman, 
as  contained  in  such  passages  as  “ Consciousness  (prajw^rna) 
is  Brahman  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) Not  necessary,  because  such  attribu- 
tes are  peculiar  to  the  Vidy^j  (up^isana)  inculcated  in  that 
particular  upanishad,  as  in  the  case  of  the  attributes  like 
**  the  Dispenser  of  blessings.  To  explain : In  the 
Upakosala-Vidy^,  Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  “ the  Dispenser 
of  blessings,  ” “ the  Dispenser  of  Light,  and  so  on,  while 
in  the  Dahara-Vidy^i,  He  is  spoken  of  as  one  of  unfailing 
desires  and  unfailing  purposes.”  j But  the  attributes 
mentioned  in  the  one  Vidya  are  not  to  be  taken  into  account 
in  the  other.  A similar  assortment  should  be  made  here 
in  the  case  of  ‘ bliss  * and  other  attributes. 

(Conclusion) -The  two  cases  are  not  quite  analogous. 
Since  the  attributes  such  as  “ the  Dispenser  of  blessings  ” 
are  mentioned  where  specific  courses  of  contemplation  are 
enjoined  (for  specific  purposes),  each  group  of  attributes 
should  be  held  quite  apart  from  other  groups  in  strict 
accordance  with  the  injunctions.  But  the  attributes  such 
as  ‘ bliss  * are  calculated  to  give  rise  to  a knowledge  of  Brah- 
man, and,  as  such,  they  do  not  form  subjects  of  injunction. 


♦Ait.  Up.  5-3.  fChha,  Up.  4-15-3,  4-  llhid.  8-1-5. 


BRAHMAN  DEFtN^D. 


an 


Accordingly,  since  there  is  no  room  at  all  here  for  injunction 
pointing  to  a particular  assortment  of  attributes,  and  since 
all  of  them  alike  are  calculated  to  lead  to  a knowledge  of 
Brahman,  they  should  all  be  taken  into  account  in 
determining  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman. 

Brahman  is  unconditioned. 

That  Brahman  is  unconditioned  has  been  discussed  in 
the  Vedanta-swtras,  III.  ii.  11-21  as  follows: 

{Question) : — Is  Brahman  conditioned  or  unconditioned  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) “ This  Brahman  is  four-footed  in 
such  words  as  these  the  sruti  declares  Brahman  to  be 
conditioned.  “ Not  gross,  not  subtle:”!  in  these  words  the 
sruti  declares  Brahman  to  be  unconditioned.  Therefore, 
Brahman  actually  exists  in  both  ways. 

{Conclusion) :— It  is  the  Unconditioned  that  is  taught  in 
the  scriptures,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  Unconditioned  that 
other  sources  of  knowledge  cannot  tell  us  anything  about. 
On  the  contrary,  Brahman,  conditioned  as  the  author  of 
the  universe,  can  be  known  by  a process  of  inference  such 
as  the  following : the  earth  and  all  other  things  must  have 
a cause  because  they  are  effects.  Therefore,  when  in  the 
upasana  section  the  conditioned  Brahman  is  presented  for 
contemplation,  the  sruti  only  reiterates  the  nature  of 
Brahman  as  ascertainable  from  other  sources  of  knowledge. 
But  that  is  not  the  idea  concerning  the  nature  of  Brahman 
which  the  sruti  aims,  in  the  main,  to  inculcate.  We  should 
not,  however,  suppose  that  Brahman  really  exists  in  both 
ways,  as  made  out  respectively  by  inference  and  from  the 

’ ♦ Chhet.  Up.  a-18-2.  t Bn-  Up.  3-8-8. 


33 


BRAHiiA-yiBVAft^outJp^b,  [AmndorJ^i^L 


smtu  To  sa^  t^t  one  i^id  the  same  thing  is  both  con4i- 
tibned^and  nni^nditioned  is  a contradiction  in  terms.  Thus, 
ini^much  as  the  notion  that  Brahman  is  conditioned  does 
not  cbhstitute  the  chief  aim  of  this  teaching,  it  must  be  a 
mere  illusion  ; and  therefore  Brahman  is  in  reality 
unconditioned.  It  is  this  Brahman,  the  One  Indivisible 
Sssence,  that  is  referred  to  in  the  passage  * Real, 
Consciousness,  Infinite  is  Brahman.’ 


CHAPTER  V. 

SUMMUM  BONUM. 


Having  thus  explained  the  nature  of  Brahman  in  the 
first  foot  (quarter)  of  the  verse  which  is  calculated  to 
unfold  the  meaning  of  the  aphorism  “ the  knower  of  Brah- 
man reaches  the  Supreme,***  the  sruti  proceeds  to  explain, 
in  the  remaining  portion  of  the  verse,  the  nature  of  the 
knowledge  and  of  the  attainment  of  the  Supreme  referred  to 
in  the  aphorism. 

“ .... 

1 5r5i<iTf  n”  ^ \\\\\ 

2.  “ ....Whoso  knoweth  the  one  hid  in  the  cave 
in  the  highest  heaven  attains  all  desires  together, 
as  Brahman,  as  the  Wise.” 

He  that  knows  Brahman — of  the  nature  described 
above — abiding  in  the  cave  in  the  highest  Heaven 
attains  all  desires  without  any  exception : he  enjoys  all 
the  pleasures  that  one  may  desire,  he  enjoys  them  all 
simultaneously,  as  one  with  the  Omniscient  Brahman. 

What  it  is  to  know  Brahman. 

{Objection) As  one  with  the  knower,  the  Supreme 
Brahman  cannot  be  a thing  that  the  knower  may  seek  to 
attain,  And  since  there  is  no  (knower  j other  than  Brahman, 


276  BftAHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Ananda^Volli. 

how  can  it  be  said  whoso  knoweth  the  one  hid  in  the 
cave/’  and  so  on  ?^(S). 

If  Brahman  and  the  Self  be  identical,  there  can  be  no 
knower,  nothing  knowable,  no  knowledge.  How  can  there 
be  a knowing  of  Brahman  at  all  ? 

{Answer)  :—All  statements  as  to  the  knowing  of  Brahman, 
as  to  the  attainment  of  all  desires,  and  as  to  mukti,  are 
figurative.  The  V^rtikakara  says  : 

The  knower  attains  the  one  who  is  (ever)  attained,  by 
the  mere  cessation  of  nescience  on  attaining  to  the  consci- 
ousness of  the  absence  (in  Brahman)  of  unreality  and  other 
such  attributes  as  have  been  set  up  by  his  ignorance 
of  (the  true  nature  of)  Brahman  as  real  etc.  'Thus  alone 
does  a parson  come  to  know  (Brahman)  though  already 
known;  thus  alone  does  the  Self  come  to  be  liberated 
though  already  liberated ; thus  alone  does  nescience  cease 
to  exist  though  really  it  never  existed.  I can  swear  thrice 
to  it.*"  So,  with  the  vision  obscured  by  agency  and  other 
attributes  ascribed  (to  the  Self)  by  avidy^,  one  fails  to  see 
Brahman  in  His  true  nature  as  real,  etc. , though  He 
is  one's  own  Inner  Self.  Wherefore,  when  on  the  cessation 
of  avidy^  the  vision  is  fully  open  at  all  times,  one  devours 
away  all  notions  of  duality  such  as  the  knower,  and  sees  the 
Inner  Self  (Pratyag^tman).— (S) 

Just  as  a person  comes  to  know  that  he  is  the  tenth 
man  on  hearing  the  statement  “ thou  art  the  tenth,  ” t 


♦ i.  e.,  I assert  tliis  on  the  authority  of  the  scriptures  which 
say  “ One  alone  without  a second  ” and  so  on — (A), 
t Fide  mie  the  note  on  page  206, 


jiWUi  /.  ] SUMMUM  BDNUM. 

though  evidently  the  knower,  the  thing  known,  aUd  know- 
ledge are  not  really  different  from  one  another,  so  also,  in 
pursuance  of  the  teaching  of  the  sruti,  a person  may  come 
to  know  also  that  he  is  himself  Brahman.  So  long,  how- 
ever, as  he  does  not  know  that  he  himself  is  Brahman,  the 
illusion  that  he  is  a j^va  does  not  cease  by  the  mere 
knowledge  of  Brahman  (the  Cause).  He  should,  therefore, 
know  that  one’s  own  Inner  Self  ‘ hid  in  the  cave  ’ is  id- 
entical with  Brahman. 

The  Avyakrita  as  *the  highest  heaven.* 

The  cave  (guh^,  from  the  root  ‘guh  ’—to  hide) — the 
buddhi  (the  intellect), — is  so  called  because  therein  are 
hidden  all  things,  such  as  the  knower,  knowledge,  and 
the  knowable ; or  because  the  human  ends,  enjoyment 
and  liberation,  are  therein  hidden.  In  the  buddhi  is  the 
highest  heaven,  i.  r.,  the  highest  ak^sa  (lit.,  the  bright 
one)  known  as  the  Avyakrita,  the  Undifferentiated. 
That  (the  Avyakrita),^  indeed,  is  the  highest  t akasa, 
because  of  its  nearness  to  ‘ Akshara’  (the  Supreme  Brah- 
man) as  shown  in  the  following  passage  : 

‘‘  Here,  0 Gargi,  in  this  Indestructible 
One  (Akshara)  the  akasa  (Avyakrita)  is 
woven  like  warp  and  woof.” I 


* Here  follows  the  reason  why  akasa  fvyoman)  is  interpreted 
to  mean  the  Avyakrita,  not  the  clement  of  matter  known  as 
akasa— (A). 

t The  material  akasa  is  low  in  comparison  with  the  Avyakrita ; 
the  latter  may,  therefore,  be  spoken  of  as  the  highest  akasa,— (A) 
JBri.  Up.  3-8-11, 


BRAHKX.tltsw  [Anandit^VM. 

til  ab  ip^B&iiig  of  Brahmtm  b^hg  hid  in  fh6  caVe 
fh  the  highest  hiwven,*’^^  the  iruti  refers  to  the  state  of 
thihj^s  hs  they  hb.  For,  there  is  no  evidence  that  any  cme, 
hther  than  Brahman  defined  as  real,  etc.,  dwells  within  the 
boddhi.  The  devotee,  having  then  (on  hearing  the  teaching 
bf  the  sniti)  completely  withdrawn  his  mind  from  all  things 
that  are  not  real,  etc.,  enters  into  what  dwells' te/iVAtn  the 
mind  and  realises  the  Self  (^tman),  the  Real.~(S). 

That  is  to  say,  on  hearing  the  teaching  of  the  sruti  that 
Brahmhn,  who  is  devoid  of  all  conditions  of  cause  and  effect, 
lies  hidden  in  the  Avyakrita,  the  cause  of  Buddhi,  the 
devotee  who  belongs  to  the  highest  class  of  the  students  of 
Brahma- Vidya, — i,  e.,  whose  mind  is  turned  away  from  all 
unreal,  insentient  and  limited  objects  (which  are  painful  in 
ihemselves)  completely  (/.  without  cherishing  the  least 
doubt  or  misconception  regarding  their  real  nature) — first 
conceives  Brahman  as  the  Cause ; and  then,  seeing  that  all 
effects  as  well  as  their  absence  (abhava)  are  mere  illusions 
having  no  real  existence  apart  from  Brahman,  the  Cause, 
^d  seeing  also  that  Brahman,  the  Cause,  is  not  distincff  from 
Brahman  who  is  neither  the  cause  nor  the  effect,  he  comes 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  Witness  of  the  buddhi  is  really 
none  other  than  Brahman  who  is  the  Real,  Consciousness, 
the  Infinite,  and  Bliss. — (A). 

Thus,  with  a view  to  point  out  the  means  of  realising  the 
unity  of  Brahman  and  the  Self,  the  sruti  has  taught  to  us— 
in  the  words  “ hid  in  the  cave,  in  the  highest  heaven,** — 

• i.  e.,  Li  Avyakrita.  Tho  Avyakrita  is  Brahman  unknown 
(aj»iata).  When  removed  by  ignorance  from  the  Self,  i.  e.,  when 
unrecognised  as  one  with  the  Self,  Brahman  is  called  the 
Avyakrita  and  forms  the  Cause  of.the  whole  universe.— (A) 


suMiiuji  BOKpU. 

ttot  Brahman  who  is  beyond  all  causes  and  ^bo 
lies  in  the  Avy^krita, — in  the  Brahmmi  that;  a|;)i(^  in 
buddhi— as  the  cause  lies  in  the  effect.— (S.  4 A). 

The  'cave'  is  the  five  kosas  (sheaths  of  the  SeliQi  it|: 
their  aggregate.  So  we  have  elsewhere  said : 

“ Behind  the  physical  body  there  is  prana ; be- 
hind prana,  there  is  manas ; behind  that  again 
is  the  agent  (kartri) ; behind  this  again  is  the 
enjoy er  (bhoktri).  This  series  is  the  cave.”  * 

The  Avyakrita,  the  cause  of  these  five  kosas,  is  here 
spoken  of  as  the  'highest  heaven,*  The  nature  of  the 
Avyaknta  has  been  described  by  those  who  are  acquainted 
with  the  tradition  as  follows : 

"The  nescience  concerning  -^tman,  with  a 
semblance  of  consciousness  in  it,  is  the  Avya- 
knta, the  cause  of  the  two  bodies  (the  gross 
and  subtle  bodies,  the  sthnla  and  snkshma 
sariras).” 

And  the  sruti  also  shews — in  the  words  " That,  verily, 
the  Avyaknta  then  this  was.”t — that,  before  evolution, 
this  whole  universe  was  the  Avyaknta.  To  be  the  Avya- 
krita  is  to  be  in  an  unmanifested  condition.  On  account  of 
Its  similarity  to  akasa  in  so  far  as  both  are  alike  incorporeal 
(amarta),  the  Vajasaneyins  speak  of  the  Avyaknta  as  akasa 
in  the  Akshara-Brahmawa,  where  Gargt  puts  a questiqn 
and  Yajwavalkya  answers  : 

{Question)  In  what  is  the  akasa  (Avyaknta)  woven, 
like  warp  and  woof  ?”  I 


* Vedania*Paiichada8{,  3-2.  t Dri,  Up.  1*4-7.  J J6ui.  3-8*7, 


«8o  BRAHMA-viDYA  EJtpouKDSD  [Ananda~V(^, 

(Answer) :— *«  Here,  indeed,  in  the  Akshara,  0 Gargi,  is 
the  ak<wa  woven  like  warp  and  woof.  ’* 

As  the  cause  of  the  five  elements  of  matter  (including 
akosa  commonly  so  called,  the  air,  and  so  on)  this  (Avya- 
knta)  dkassL  is  the  highest.  The  Supreme  Brahman  abides 
in  this  highest  akasa.  It  is  no  doubt  true  that  the  universe 
including  the  Avyaknta  and  the  five  elements  abides  in 
the  imperishable  Supreme  Brahman  called  Akshara,  since 
the  universe  is  superimposed  upon  Him  who  is  the  basic 
reality  underlying  all.  Still,  the  buddhi  (intellect)  of  the 
seeker  of  knowledge  (realisation)  dismisses  from  its  view 
all  external  objects  of  sense  (sound,  etc.,)  and  entering  within 
through  the  annamaya  and  other  kosas  up  to  the  Avyakrita, 
it  realises  the  true  nature  of  Brahman  as  transcending  the 
universe.  It  is,  therefore,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  one 
who  seeks  realisation,  that  Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  though 
He  were  abiding  in  the  Avyakrita,  here  spoken  of  as  “ the 
highest  heaven.’* 

Or,  t the  words  ‘ cave  ’ and  ‘ heaven  ’ may  be  con- 
strued as  put  in  apposition  to  each  other.  Then  the 
* cave  ’ is  the  Avyakrita-akasa  itself ; and  being  the 
Cause  and  the  subtlest,  the  Avyak7'ita,  too,  has  all 
things  contained  within  It  in  the  three  times  (past, 
present,  and  future).  Within  this  cave  of  the  Avya- 
krita.  Brahman  lies  hidden. 

Such  is  the  construction  put  upon  this  part  of  the  passage 
by  some  commentators. — (A). 

♦ Bri,  Up.  3-8-11. 

fi.  e.,  instead  of  construing  ‘ cave  * and  ‘heart’ as  Vyadlii- 
karana,  as  referring  to  two  distinct  things,  one  being  located  in 
the  other.— (A.) 


dutttiuM  BoKu&t. 


, They  construe  ‘cave  \and  ‘ heaven,’  as  we  have  seen,  in 
two  ways:  (ij  as  vyadhikarawa,  referring  to  two  distinct 
things,  to  buddhi  and  (Avyakrita)  Brahman  respectively, 
whereof  the  latter  is  located  as  it  were  in  the  former,  as  the 
cause  (such  as  clay)  is  located  (t.  is  constantly  present) 
in  all  its  effecfls  (such  as  pot) ; (2)  as  samanadhikarawa,  as 
referring  to  one  and  the  same  thing,  the  Avyakrita  Brahman 
being  the  cave  wherein  all  things  are  contained,  as  the 
effcets  are  all  contained  in  the  cause.--(Tr). 

The  akasa  of  the  heart  as  the  ‘ highest  heaven.* 

Now  Sankaracharya  proceeds  to  give  what  he  considers 
to  be  a better  interpretation : — (A). 

But  it  is  proper  to  understand  by  “ the  highest 
heaven  ” the  heaven  or  akasa*  of  the  heart,  inasmuch 
as  ‘ the  heaven ' is  intended  as  vijwana-anga,  as  an 
aid  to  the  realisation  or  immediate  knowledge  (of  Brah- 
man). That  the  ‘ heaven  ’ or  akasa  of  the  heart  is  the 
highest  is  clear  from  another  passage  of  the  sruti  which 
says: 

“ And  the  akasa  which  is  around  us  is 
the  same  as  the  akasa  which  is  within  us ; 
and  the  akasa  which  is  within  us,  that  is 
the  same  as  the  akasa  which  is  within  the 
heart.”t 

The  (material)  akasa  in  the  heart  is  supreme  when 
compared  with  the  akasa  outside  the  heart.  It  is  the 
akasa  wherein  the  buddhi  rests. — (S) 

e.,  the  material  (bhwta)  akasa  enclosed  in  the  heart. — (Ai, 
fChha.  XJp.  3-12-7, 9. 


36 


^^2 


BkAtt&iA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED. 


The  thumb*sized  akas2  which,  as  all  know,  exists  within 
the  hpart-k>tus  is  itself  spoken  of  as  ^ the  highest  heaven.* 
It  is  but  proper  to  speak  of  the  akasa  in  the  heart  as  the 
highest  one  when  compared  with  the  akasd,  outside  the 
body  and  the  ahisa  within  the  body,  inasmuch  as  the  ak^a 
within  the  heart  is  the  seat  of  the  sam^dhi  and  the  sushupti 
states  of  consciousness  which  are  free  from  all  pain, 
whereas  the  other  two  are  seats  of  the  jagrat  (waking) 
and  svapna  (dream)  states  of  consciousness.  In  that  akasa 
lies  the  ‘ cave,  * the  buddhi,  so  called  because  the  triple 
consciousness — comprising  the  knower,  knowledge  and  the 
known, — as  well  as  the  Java’s  enjoyment  and  liberation 
caused  respectively  by  illusion  and  discrimination,  are 
located  in  the  buddhi. 

In  the  material  akasdi  of  the  heart  lies  the  buddhi  (the 
understanding) ; and  in  the  buddhi  dwells  Brahman  ; i»  e,. 
Brahman  is  manifested  in  the  buddhi.— This  interpretation 
of  the  passage  stands  best  to  reason.  For,  then,  it  amounts 
to  saying  that  as  one  with  the  Seer, — with  the  Witness, 
with  the  Self, — Brahman  is  the  Immediate  (aparoksha) . 
Otherwise,  i.  e,,  if  the  passage  be  interpreted  to  mean  that 
Brahman  dwells  in  the  Universal  Being  (Samash^i),  /.  e., 
in  the  Avyaknta  or  Maya,  it  would  follow  that  Brahman  is 
remote  (paroksha).  Then,  owing  to  its  remoteness,  the 
knowledge  thus  imparted  cannot  remove  the  illusion  of 
samsara  which  is  a fact  of  immediate  perception.  Because 
the  5ruti  intends  to  teach  that,  as  one  with  the  Seer  or  the 
Immediate  Consciousness  within.  Brahman  is  immediate, 
dwelling  in  every  one’s  own  heart,  therefore  we  should 
understand  that  the  akasa  of  the  heart  is  the  ‘ heaven  * here 
spoken  of.  Then  alone  can  the  sruti  impart  to  us  an 


3UMMUM  DONUM. 

immediate  knowledge  of  Brahman.— (A) 

Brahman  * hid  in  the  cave  ’ is  one’s  own  Self. 

In  this  * heaven  * of  the  heart  there  is  the  cave,  the 
buddhi  or  understanding ; and  there  (in  the  cave)  is 
Brahman  hidden ; which  means  that  Brahman  is 
clearly  perceived  through  the  vritti  or  state  of  the 
buddhi.  In  no  other  manner,*  indeed,  can  Brahman 
be  related  to  any  particular  time  or  place,  inasmuch  as 
He  is  present  everywhere  and  devoid  of  all  conditions. 

The  Self  (i4tman)  is  spoken  of  as  lying  in  the  buddhi 
because  the  idea  that  the  Self  is  the  doer  and  the  enjoyer 
has  arisen  from  His  contact  with  matter  (/.  with  the 
antaA-karawa,  the  inner  sense,  the  buddhi),  or  because 
Brahman  is  perceived  through  the  state  (vritti)  of  the 
buddhi  free  from  Tamas  and  Rajas,  as  the  sruti  elsewhere 
says  “ By  manas  alone  can  Brahman  be  seen.**  t The 
buddhi  is  spoken  of  as  a cave  because  those  who  have 
turned  their  mind  inward  see  Brahman  quite  hidden  in  the 
buddhi,  beset  with  kama  and  avidya. — (S), 

Brahman  is  said  to  be  hidden  in  the  buddhi  because  it 
is  in  the  buddhi  that  Brahman  is  perceived.  It  is,  indeed, 
there  that  Brahman  dwells  as  the  Inner  Self.  Though 
Brahman  is  one’s  own  Self,  He  is  not  perceived  by  those 
whose  minds  are  directed  outward,  veiled  as  He  is 
by  kama,  avidya  and  so  on.  But  He  is  perceived  by 
those  whose  minds  are  turned  inward,  since  in  their  case 
the  veil  of  kama  and  avidy^  is  torn  away. 


♦ than  as  being  clearly  perceived  through  the  buddhi.— (A) 


384 


BSARUA'VIDVA  EXI*OUKDBD 


• [AntmdJi- 


With  a view  to  remove  the  duality  involved  in  the  idea 
that  the  Supreme  Brahman  is  knowable  by  the  knower, 
the  sruti  here  teaches  that  the  Knowable  is  “ in  the  cave  in 
the  highest  heaven,**  in  the  knower.  — (S). 

(Objection) : — If  jiva  and  Brahman,  the  knower  and  the 
Knowable,  were  identical,  then,  since  j/va  is  a saws^rin,  it 
would  follow  that  Brahman  also  is  a sawsarin,  and  then 
nobody  would  seek  to  attain  Brahman. — (A). 

(Ansioer) : — He  who  has  been  all  along  treading  the  path 
of  ends  and  means,  enters  at  last,  in  his  own  Self, 
the  Supreme,  who  is  altogether  unrelated  to  ends  and 
means.— (S). 

That  is  to  say,  the  jiva,  the  sawsarin,  who  has  all  along 
been  acting  with  the  hope  of  attaining  svarga  and  other 
objects  of  desire  by  means  of  sacrificial  rites,  realises  at 
last  as  one  wnth  his  own  Self  the  Supreme  Brahman, 
Arho  is  neither  an  end  nor  a means.  When  even  the 
samsarin  thus  ceases  to  be  a saws^rin,  where  is  room  for.  the 
objection  that  our  interpretation  makes  Brahman  a saw- 
s<irin  by  speaking  of  His  identity  with  jiva  who  is  a saw- 
sarin.— (A). 

Attainment  of  the  Supreme  Bliss. 

What  of  him  who  thus  realises  Brahman? — He  en- 
joys all  desires,  i.e.,  all  desirable  pleasures,  without  any 
exception.  Does  he  enjoy  them  alternately  one  after 
another  as  we  enjoy  sons,  svarga,  and  the  like  ? The 
sruti  answers : No;  simultaneously  he  enjoys  them  all 

* i.  6.,  again,  that  Brahman  is  the  same  as  the  Witness  and  no 
more,  and  that  the  Witness  is  the  same  as  Brahman  and  no 
more.— (Aj. 


8UMMUM  BONUU. 


M.  i,  ] 


8S5 


amassed  together  at  one  and  the  same  moment  in  one 
single  consciousness,  which,  like  the  sun’s  light,  is 
eternal  and  inseparate  from  the  true  nature  of  Brahman, 
and  which  we  have  described  as  Real,  Consciousness 
and  Infinite.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  words  /' to- 
gether, as  Brahman.”  The  enlightened  sage  becomes 
Brahman;  and,  as  Brahman  Himself,  he  enjoys  all 
pleasures  simultaneously,  not  like  the  ~man  of  the 
world  who  enjoys  pleasures  one  after  another, — his 
true  Self  being  limited  by  an  upadhi  and  so  forming 
a mere  reflection  as  it  were  like  the  sun’s  image  in 
water,  and  partaking  of  the  nature  of  samsara,  while 
his  pleasures  are  dependent  on  dharma  and  other 
causes,  on  the  eye  and  other  sense-organs. — How  then 
(does  he  enjoy  the  pleasures)  ? — In  the  manner  men- 
tioned above  : he  enjoys  all  pleasures  simultaneously, 
as  he  is  identical,  in  his  true  essential  nature,  with 
Brahman  the  Omniscient,  the  Omnipresent,  the 
Universal  Being ; while  his  pleasures  are  not  de- 
pendent on  dharma  and  other  causes,  or  upon  the 
eye  and  other  sense-organs. — ‘ The  wise’  means  ‘ the 
omniscient.’  Indeed,  nothing  short  of  omniscience 
can  be  properly  called  wisdom.  Himself  being  omni- 
scient and  Brahman,  he  enjoys  all  pleasures.  The 
word  ‘ iti’  (in  the  original  = thus),  added  to  the 
mantra  at  the  end,  is  intended  to  mark  the  close  of  the 
mantra  quoted. 

So  long  as  the  consciousness  of  agency  remains,  there  can 
be  no  enjoying  of  all  pleasures  at  one  moment.  According- 
ly the  nuti  says  that  be  enjoys  them  all  as  Brahman, 


9|5.  brahma-vidya  expounded.  [AmndOrVaUi. 

If  the  5ruti  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  he  enjoys  all  the 
pleasures  along  with  Brahman, — thus  implying  duality, — 
then  Bri^man  would  not  be  one  with  the  Inner  Self.  It 
is  not  even  possible  to  think  that  the  Supreme  Brahman, 
defined  as  Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite’*  is  external  to  the 
Self.  • Since  the  word  ‘ saha*  is  a mere  particle,  it  cannot 
be  contended  that  the  word  means  ‘ along  with*  and  nothing 
else.  So,  the  passage  means  that  the  sage  who  has  known 
Brahman  enjoys  all  pleasures  simultamously.  When  all 
that  is  unreal,  etc.,  has  been  removed  by  the  right  know- 
ledge of  Brahman,  there  exists  nothing  else  except  the 
Self  (^tman).  Accordingly,  as  Brahman,  the  wise,  the 
sage  attains  all  pleasures  at  one  and  the  same  moment. 
Nothing  else  besides  the  Inner  Self  is  found  abiding  within 
the  cave  of  the  heart.  Wherefore,  to  him  who  has  real- 
ised Brahman  (defined  as  Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite), 
Brahman  is  the  same  as  the  Inner  Self  and  none  other. 
To  shew  that  there  exists  none  to  be  known  and  attained 
other  than  the  wise  man  himself,  ‘ Brahman’  and  ‘ the  wise* 
are  grammatically  put  in  apposition  to  each  other,  thus 
denoting  that  the  two  words  refer  to  one  and  the  same 
thing.  By  the  one  consciousness  which  admits  of  no 
sequence,  he  comprehends  all  pleasures  occurring  in  a 
sequential  order,  as  the  sruti  elsewhere  says  : 

“ But  as  to  the  man  who  does  not  desire,  who, 
not  desiring  (and)  freed  from  desires,  is  satis- 
fied in  his  desires,  or  desires  the  Self  only,” 
etc.  + 

At  the  beginning,  at  the  end,  and  in  the  middle,  the  minds 

• A particle  (nipatn ) can  have  more  meanings  than  one, — (A) 

■j"  Bri,  Up,  4—4—6, 


SUMMUM  BONUM. 


287 


'Anu.  /•] 

working  in  all  the  innumerable  bodies  are  indeed  permeated 
by  the  one  undifferentiated  Consciousness  experiencing  none 
separate  from  the  Self.  Since  the  knower  of  Brahman  has 
attained  all  desires,  which  are  the  stimuli  of  all  kinds  of  ac- 
tivity, he  no  longer  enters  on  any  pursuit  whatever,  for  want 
of  a motive.  A vidy«  is  the  source  of  all  desires,  and  all  acti- 
vities grow  out  of  desires.  Activity  gives  rise  to  Dharma 
and  Adharma,  and  these  give  rise  to  the  body  which  is  the 
seat  of  evil.  Therefore,  in  the  case  of  the  wise  sage, 
immediately  on  the  destruction  of  avidya  follows  a complete 
cessation  of  all  the  phenomena  (of  mind)  which  are  the 
main-springs  of  all  activity. — (S). 

In  the  words  ‘‘ he  attains  all  pleasures,’*  etc.,  the  sruti 
explains  what  the  attainment  of  the  Supreme  is  which  was 
spoken  of  in  the  aphorism.  The  knower  of  Brahman 
attains  simultaneously  all  pleasures  experienced  by  all  be- 
ings of  life.  The  man  without  the  knowledge  puts  on,  one 
after  another,  bodies  of  different  kinds  as  the  result  of  his 
own  actions  (karma) ; and  then,  in  the  form  of  jtva, — a 
reflection  of  his  own  true  Self  caused  by  his  connection 
with  the  upadhi,  like  the  sun  reflected  in  water, — he  enjoys 
pleasures  through  the  eye  and  other  sense-organs  as 
the  Vartikakara  has  explained  above. 

{Objection) : — A mantra  in  the  Muwiaka-Upanishad  de- 
clares the  existence  of  two  sentient  entities  in  the  body,  in 
the  following  words : 

‘‘Two  beauteous-winged  companions,  ever 
mates,  perch  on  the  self-same  tree ; one  of  the 
twain  devours  the  luscious  fruit ; fasting,  the 
other  looks  on.” 


Op«  cit.  3— 4» 


BRAHlifA-VlDYA  EXPOUNDED 


Of  tbe  two,  it  is  the  jiva,  the  enjoyer,— •limited  by  the  upfdhi 
and  forming  as  it  were  a reflection  of  the  true  Self,  and 
having  only  one  body — who  comes  by  enjoyment ; whereas 
it  is  by  the  Witness,  the  non-enjoyer,  the  Absolute  Conscious- 
ness called  Brahman,  who,  as  free  from  all  upadhis,  is  pre* 
sent  everywhere, — it  is  by  Him  that  the  whole  world  of 
objects  of  enjoyment  is  illumined.  This  is  common  to  the 
wise  and  the  ignorant  alike.  Under  such  circumstances, 
we  ask,  on  what  special  ground  is  it  spoken  of  as  the  result 
attained  by  the  wise  man  ? 

{Answer): — We  answer;  the  wise  man,  realising  that 
Brahman  who  illumines  all  objects  of  enjoyment  is  one 
with  himself  in  his  true  nature,  feels  quite  happy.  But  the 
ignorant  man  does  not  feel  in  that  way. 

{Objection) : — Just  as  the  pleasures  of  all  beings  are  illumin- 
ed by  the  consciousness  of  Brahman,  so,  too,  all  the  miseries 
of  all  beings  may  be  illumined  by  that  consciousness.  By 
this'  consciousness  of  the  miseries,  the  wise  sage  may  also 
feel  pain. 

{Answer) No,  because  of  the  absence  of  all  taint  of 
misery  in  Brahman,  the  Witness.  Accordingly,  the  Kashas 
read: 

“Just  as  the  sun,  the  eye  of  all  the  world,  is 
not  besmirched  with  outer  stains  seen  by  the 
eyes ; so,  that  one  inner  Self  of  all  creation  is 
never  smeared  with  any  pain  the  world  can 
give,  for  it  standeth  apart.” 

{ObjerHon)  .-—Neither  is  Brahman  affected  by  happiness 
any  more  than  by  misery. 


Kaeha-Up.  5-1 1. 


SUMMUM  DONUM. 


289 


Am.  I.  ] 

{Answer) True.  Brahman  is  not  affected  by  happiness. 
But  bliss  is  the  very  nature  of  Brahman,  as  the  sruti  declares: 
“ Bliss  is  Brahman,  he  knew.” 

“ Consciousness  and  Bliss  is  Brahman.” + 

Though  Bliss  is  the  very  nature  of  Brithman,  it  puts  on 
the  form  of  a sensual  pleasure  (vishayananda)  when  limited 
by  a state  of  mind  (chitta-vntti).  In  his  longing  pursuit 
after  an  objedt  of  desire,  a man  feels  miserable  on 
failing  to  obtain  it ; but  when  at  any  time  that  object  is 
obtained  in  virtue  of  a past  merit  (piu/ya),  his  longing  for  it 
ceases,  and  then  his  mind  is  turned  inward  and  thrown  into 
a peculiar  s^ttvic  state  (vritti).  The  mind  in  that  state  com- 
prehends a portion  of  Brahman’s  Bliss  within,  and  this 
limited  Bliss  is  called  vishay^nanda,  the  sensual  pleasure. 
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  Bnhadnra;/yaka  when  it  says: 

‘‘This  is  His  highest  bliss.  All  other  creatures 
live  on  a small  portion  of  that  bliss.”  | 

It  is  these  sensual  pleasures  (vishayananda)— those  small 
bits  of  Brahman’s  Bliss  snatched  by  the  s^ttvic  vnttis  and 
experienced  by  all  living  beings  from  Brahma  (the  Four- 
faced) down  to  the  plant— which  are  here  referred  to  by  the 
5ruti  in  the  words  “he  attains  all  desires".  “Desire”  here 
means  that  which  is  desired.  It  is  pleasures,  not  miseries, 
that  are  desired  by  all  beings  of  life.  The  Brahmavid,  the 
person  who  has  realised  Brahman,  disregards,  in  virtue  of 
his  right  knowledge,  all  limitations  in  these  pleasures  which 
are  due  to  the  vnttis  or  states  of  mind ; and  then  he  realises 
as  Brahman  that  residual  essence  which  has  been  thus  liber- 
ated from  all  limitation  and  \vhose  essential  nature  is  Bliss 

* Taitt-Up.  3—6.  t Bri-Up.  3-9-28. 

J Op,  cit.  4r— 3'--32. 


37 


290  nuAHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED.  \ Anandu-V dlL 

and  Bliss  alone.  Then,  he  feels  happy  in  the  perennial 
thought  that  all  that  is  worth  achieving  has  been  achieved 
and  t^at  all  that  is  worth  attaining  has  been  attained.  It  is 
this  happiness  which  distinguishes  the  wise  sage  from  the 
ignorant.  • 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  INFINITE  AND  EVOLUTION. 

The  relation  of  the  sequel  to  the  foregoing. 

The  subject-matter  of  the  whole  valU  (Book  II), 
expressed  in  an  aphoristic  form  in  the  Brahmawa  pass- 
age (Chapter  II)  “The  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the 
Supreme,’’  has  been  briefly  explained  in  the  mantra 
(Chaps.  Ill  and  IV).  Again  with  a view  to  determine 
at  greater  length  the  meaning  of  the  same  passage,  the 
sruti  proceeds  with  the  sequel  which  forms  a sort  of 
commentary  thereon. 

Mantra  and  Brahmana. 

The  Veda  consists  of  two  portions,  Mantra  and  Brah- 

mawa.  The  BrahmavalU'  1 falls  under  the  category  of 

Brflhmatta.  Brahma»a  again  is  eiglit-fold.  .\nd  the  eight 

varieties  of  Brahmana  are  enumerated  by  the  Vajasaneyins) 

as  follows : 

* 

I.  Itihdsa  or  story — “ lihngu,  the  son  of  \'iiru/Zci,  once 
approached  his  father  Varu//a/’  $ and  so  on. 

* Mantra  aiid  Biv/IiinaRii  arc  thus  distinguished  : Mantra  is 
that  portion  of  the  Veda  which  consi.‘<ts  of  jirayers  or  iiymns  or 
words  of  adoration  addressed  to  a deity  or  di'itios  and  intended 
for  recitation.  Brtthmaua  is  that  jiortion  of  the  Veda  which 
contains  rules  for  the  em])loyin(ait  of  the  mantras  at  various 
sacrifices,  detailed  explanutio  is  of  these  sacrifices,  their  origin 
and  meaning,  with  illustrations  in  tin*  way  of  stories  and 
legends, 

t Or  -dnaiidavalU  as  ASankaraeliurya  calls  it.  ( IV). 

J Bri.  Up.  d-4— 19.  § Tuitti,  Up,  11— 1. 


29^  BRAHHA^VIDYA  EXPOUNDED  yAftafKla^  V CUM 

2.  Purdna  ( cosmogony ) :~the  portion  treating  of  sargs 
and  pratisarga,  primary  and  secondary  creations  : such  as 
“ That  from  which  all  these  creatures  are  born,”  etc.  * 

3.  Vidyd  or  Up^sana : — the  contemplations,  such  as  are 
enjoined  in  the  words  “ Whoso  should  contemplate  these 
great  conjunctions  thus  declared,”  etc.  f 

4.  Upanishad  or  instruQtion  in  the  secret  wisdom : — In 
the  Lesson  XI  (Exhortation)  in  the  5ikshavalh‘,  it  has  been 
said  “ This  is  the  secret  of  the  Vedas.”  J 

5.  Slokas  or  verses : — such  as  those  to  be  quoted  in  the 
sequel  of  this  Book,  ^ nanda- valh‘. 

6.  Siltra  or  aphorism — such  as  “ the  knower  of  Brahman 
reaches  the  Supreme.”  § 

7.  Anuvydkhydna  or  a short  succinct  gloss,  such  as  “Real 
Consciousness,  Infinite  is  Brahman,”  etc.,  % where  the 
words  of  the  s?/tra  are  succinctly  explained  one  after 
another. 

8.  Vydkhydna  or  a clear  exhaustive  exposition  of  that 
point  in  the  anuv3"^khy^ma  which  needs  further  explanation. 
The  passage  forming  the  text  of  the  present  chapter  is  a 
Vyakhyana,  because  of  the  evolution  {syhhti)  being  described 
there  with  a view  to  explain  how  Brahman  is  infinite  as  de- 
clared in  the  Anuvy^ikhyflna.  So  the  \'^?kyavnttikflra  says: 

“ Do  thou  know  That  which  the  sruti  (first) 
declares  to  be  infinite,  and  to  prove  whose 
infinitude  the  5ruti  then  says  that  the  universe 
is  evolved  fiom  it.” 

The  evolution  which  will  serve  to  shew  that  Brahman 
is  infinite,  the  sruti  describes  as  follows: 

♦ Ibid,  t d^bid,  1-3,  J Ibid,  1-11.  § Ibid,  2-1.  Jhid, 


THE  IKFINITE  AHD  EVOLUTION. 


mm  '3:cIW^R*H  3?TO:  | 3?|+1^|I5I5;  J ^- 

qk^:  I snkPT:  I 3T^:  | #qvrq:  | 

*^55n3^|3Rnr|;5^:  \\\\\ 

3*  From  That,  verily, — from  This  Self— is 
ak^5a  (ether)  born;  from  akasa,  the  air;  from  the 
air,  fire;  from  fire,  water;  from  water,  earth; 
from  earth,  plants;  from  plants,  food:  from 
food,  man. 

Brahman  is  absolutely  infinite. 

Now,  in  the  beginning  of  the  mantra  it  has  been 
said  ‘‘Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite,  is  Brahman”. 
How  can  Brahman  be  real  and  infinite? 

It  has  been  taught  in  the  mantra  that  one’s  own  Self  is 
Brahman  who  is  the  Real,  Consciousness,  and  the  Infinite; 
who  is  beyond  the  five  kosas;  who  is  the  Fearless;  who  is 
described  in  the  s^stras  as  invisible”  and  so  on.  Then  the 
question  arises,  how  can  Brahman  be  such  ? — (S)  That  is 
to  say,  like  all  tilings  which  are  marked  by  the  threefold 
limitation,  Brahman  is  also  a thing  divided  from  other 
things,  and  like  them  He  must  be  finite,  unconscious  and 
unreal.  How  can  Brahman  be  the  Real,  Consciousness, 
and  the  Infinite  ? — (A) 

We  answer : " Brahman  is  infinite  in  three  respects — 

* Brahman  being  the  cause  of  time,  space,  and  all.  He  is  in- 
finite in  all  three  respects,  and  as  such  He  is  the  Real  and 
ConscioiLsness  ; so  that  it  is  now  necessary  to  show  first  that  He 
is  the  cause  of  all ; and  when  it  is  shewn  that  Brahman  is 
infinite  in  all  three  respects,  it  will  necessarily  follow  that  He  is 
the  Real  and  Consciousness. — (S). 


a94  aiuHMA-vim  expounded.  [Amndct^^jdlL 

in  respect  of  time,  in  respect  of  place,  and  in  respect 
of  things  respectively.  A kosa  for  example,  is  infinite  * 
in  spfice ; for,  there  is  no  limit  to  it  in  space.  But 
Akassi  is  not  infinite  either  in  respect  of  time  or  in 
respect  of  things. — Why  ? — Because  it  is  an  effect 
(karya).t  Unlike  akasa.  Brahman  is  unlimited  even 
in  respect  of  time,  because  He  is  not  an  effect.  What 
forms  an  effect  is  alone  limited  by  time.  And  Brahman 
is  not  an  effect  and  is  therefore  unlimited  even  in 
respect  of  time.  So,  too,  in  respect  of  things. — How 
is  He  infinite  in  respect  of  things  ? — Because  He  is  in- 
separate from  all.  That  thing,  indeed;  which  is  seperate 
from  another  forms  the  limit  of  that  other;  for,  when 
the  mind  is  engaged  in  the  former,  it  withdraws  frorr 
the  latter.  The  thing  which  causes  the  termination 
of  the  idea  of  another  thing  forms  the  limit  of  that  other 
thing.  The  idea  of  the  cow,  for  instance,  terminates  at 
thfe  horse;  and  because  the  (idea  ofj  cow^  thus  termi- 
nates at  the  horse,  the  cow  is  limited,  finite.  And 
this  limit  is  found  among  things  which  are  separate 
from  one  another.  There  is  no  such  separation  in  the 
case  of  Brahman.  He  is  therefore  unlimited  even  ir 
respect  of  things. 

Here  one  may  ask:  How  is  Brahman  inseparate 
from  all  ? — Listen.  Because  He  is  the  cause  of  all 
things.  Brahman,  indeed,  is  the  cause  of  all  things, — 

♦ Because  akasa,  is  the  prakriti  or  material  cause  of  all  thai 
exists  in  spa**e.  An  effect  is,  indeed,  a part  of  the  cause,  anc 
does  not  exist  elsewhere  outside  the  cause. — (S). 

+ L e.,  it  is  born  in  time.  And  akasa  is  not  infinite  as  a thing  • 
for,  there  are  other  things  besides  aka^a. 


295 


Anu^  L } INFINITE  AND  EVOLUTION# 

— time,  akasa,  and  so  on. 

( Objection ) : — Then  Brahman  is  limited  by  other 
things,  in  so  far  as  there  are  other  things  called  effects. 

{Answer) : — No,  because  the  things  spoken  of  as 
effects  are  unreal.  Apart  from  the  cause,  there  is  indeed 
no  such  thing  as  an  effect  really  existing,  at  which  the 
idea  of  the  cause  may  terminate ; and  the  sruti  says : * 
‘‘  (All)  changing  form  (vikara)  is  a name,  a creation  of 
speech,”  etc.  {vide  ante p,  2^1).  So,  in  the  first  place, 
as  the  cause  of  ak^isa,  etc.,  t Brahman  is  infinite  in 
space  ; for,  it  is  admitted  by  all  that  akasa  is  unlimited 
in  space.  And  Brahman  is  the  cause  of  akasa.  From 
this  it  may  be  concluded  that  (Itman)  is  infinite  in 
respect  of  space.  Indeed  an  all-pervading  thing  is 
never  found  to  arise  from  that  which  is  not  all-pervad- 
ing. Hence  the  y4tman's  absolute  infinitude  in  point 
of  space.  Similarly,  not  being  an  effect,  hitman  is  in- 
finite in  point  of  time ; and  owing  to  the  absence  of 
anything  separate  from  Him,  He  is  infinite  in  respect 
of  things.  Hence  His  absolute  reality. 

Since  thus  the  threefold  infinitude  of  Brahman  and  the 
unreality  of  all  causes  and  effedls  have  to  be  clearly  shewn 
in  the  sequel,  we  should  understand  that  it  is  the  true  nature 
of  Brahman  as  real,  etc. , which  the  sruti  expounds  in  the 
sequel  by  way  of  describing  the  evolution  of  the  universe, 

* What  is  real  or  not  imaginary  cannot  be  limited  by  what  is 
imaginary ; and  that  time,  etc. , are  imaginary  is  shewn  in  the 
«ruti  quoted  here.— (S) 

t and  therefore  one  with  all  things. 


296  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED,  ^Amflda-  VolB. 

and  that  the  evolution  does  not  form  the  main  subjedt- 
matter. — (S.  & A.). 

Identity  of  Brahman  and  the  Self. 

From  That  ” : ^ That  ’ here  refers  to  Brahman  as 
described  in  the  original  aphoristic  expression.  “ From 
This  Self” : ‘ This  ’ here  refers  to  Brahman  as  subse- 
quently^  defined  in  the  words  of  the  mantra.  From 
Brahman  who  has  been  first  referred  to  in  the  aphoris- 
tic passage  of  the  Brahmana  section  and  next  defined 
in  the  words  ‘‘  Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite  is  Brah- 
man,”— from  Him,  from  Brahman ' here,  from  Him 
who  is  spoken  of  as  the  Self  (^tman),  is  ak^sa  born. — 
Brahman  is  indeed  the  Self  of  all,  as  the  sruti  else- 
where says  ‘‘  That  is  real.  That  is  the  Self.*  And  thus 
Brahman  is  .4tman. — From  Him,  from  Brahman  who 
is  here  in  us  as  our  own  Self,  is  akasa  born. 

Since  in  the  words  * the  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the 
Supreme,’  the  sruti  tells  us  that  by  mere  knowledge  of 
Brahman  one  attains  Brahman  ; and  since  the  word  ‘ wise  ’ 
in  the  expression  “ as  Brahman,  the  wise,”is  put  in  apposi- 
tion to  ‘ Brahman,’  thus  showing  that  Brahman  and  the  wise 
man  are  one  and  the  same,  we  understand  that  the  Self  and 
Brahman  are  identical.  And  in  the  passage  we  are  now 
construing,  ‘ That  * and  ‘ This  ’ are  put  in  apposition  to 
each  other  ; so  that,  here  also,  the  5ruti  evidently  implies  the 
identity  of  Brahman  and  the  Self.  Indeed  the  word  ‘ Self’ 
does  not  primarily  denote  anything  other  than  our  own 
Inner  Self.  “ From  me  all  this  is  born  ; in  me  it  is  dissolv- 
ed in  the  end ; alone  I support  all  this : ” these  words  of 


♦ Chha.  Up,  6-8—7. 


^1^4  L 3 IKPlmtE  AND  fivotutioK.  ^5^ 

the  scripture  also,  speaking  of  the  Self  as  the  cause  of  the 
universe,  point  to  the  identity  of  the  Self  and  Brabmani 
since  there  cannot  be  two  causes  of  the  universe. — (S). 

The  Thing  spoken  of  as  ‘ Brahman  ’ and  ‘ Supreme  ’ in 
the  aphorism  is  here  referred  to  by  the  word  ‘That*  signify 
ing  remoteness.  And  the  Thing  spoken  of— -as  ‘ Real  ’ etc.^ 
and  as  ‘ hid  ’ — in  the  verse  just  preceding  the  passage  we 
now  interpret  and  forming  a sort  of  commentary  on  the 
aphorism  is  here  referred  to  by  the  word  ‘ This  ’ signifying 
proximity  or  immediateness.  ‘Verily’  shews  certainty.  These 
three  words  imply  that  the  Thing  spoken  of  in  the  aphorism 
and  the  Thing  spoken  of  in  the  verse  are  one  and  the  same. 

Or, — the  word  ‘ That  * denoting  remoteness  (paroksha) 
points  to  the  Thing  in  Its  aspect  as  Brahman  which  is 
revealed  by  ^Sruti.  The  word  ‘ verily  ’ signifies  that  such 
Brahman  is  declared  in  all  Upanishads.  The  word  ‘ this  * 
implying  immediateness  (pratyaksha ) denotes  the  aspect  of 
the  Thing  as  one’s  own  immediate  consciousness.  To  make 
this  clear,  the  word  ‘ Self  ’ is  used.  The  words  ‘ That  * 
and  ‘ This,’  put  in  apposition  to  each  other  and  referring 
to  one  and  the  same  thing,  imply  oneness  ( t^idatmya ) of 
the  Self  and  Brahman.  It  is  this  oneness  that  is  signified 
in  the  preceding  verse  by  the  words  ‘ Brahman’  and  ‘ wise’ 
being  put  in  apposition  to  each  other  and  thus  referring  to 
one  and  the  same  thing. 

Brahman  is  the  material  cause  of  the  universe. 

That  the  Supreme  Brahman  who  is  the  Inner  Self  of  all 
living  beings  is  the  prakriti  or  material  out  of  which  the 
ether  ( akasdi ),  air,  and  all  other  born  things  are  made  is 
denoted  by  the  ablative-case-termination  ‘ from.*  Vaninx 

38 


BRAHMA*VIDYA  BXPOCNDBD.  \Amfldc^V (^lU 

says  that  the  ablative  denotes  the  praknti,  the  material,  o 
which  the  thing  that  is  born  or  comes  into  being  is  mad 
up.  *^A\sasB,  is  bom:"  this  means  that  aka$a>  passe, 
through  birth,  is  the  agent  in  the  act  of  being  born  c 
coming  into  being.  So,  the  ablative  termination  signifiei 
that  Brahman  is  the  upadana-kara»a,  the  material  cause,  o 
ak^a*  * Pralcnti  ’ literally  means  that  of  which  the  effec 
is  essentially  made,  and  it  therefore  denotes  the  material  cause 
such  as  clay.  It  is  true  that  even  the  potter,  the  efficien 
cause,  has  a share  in  producing  the  pot ; still,  in  th 
production  thereof,  the  potter’s  share  is  not  so  important 
The  potter,  indeed,  is  not  constantly  present  in  the  pot  prc 
duced,  in  the  same  way  as  clay  is  present.  Thus,  becausi 
of  the  importance  of  its  share  in  the  production  of  the  effect 
the  upflckna  or  material  cause  alone  is  meant  by  the  wore 
* Prakfiti.’ 

{Objection)’, — It  is  Maya,  not  Brahman,  that  is  the 
material  cause  of  the  universe.  So  the  Svetasvataras  read 

“Maya,  indeed,  as  prakriti  man  should  know, 
and  as  the  owner  of  Maya  the  Mighty  Lord.’’ 

(Answer) : — The  objection  has  no  force,  because  Maya  is 
only  a sakti  or  power  of  Brahman  and  as  such  has  nc 
independent  existence.  That  Maya  is  only  a 5akti  or  powe. 
of  Brahman  is  declared  in  the  same  Upanishad  as  follows 

“ Of  Him  is  no  result,  no  means  of  action  ; 
none  like  to  Him  is  seen,  none  surely  greater. 

In  divers  ways  His  power  (^akti)  supreme  is 
hymned.  His  wisdom  ( and ) His  might  dwell 
in  Himself  alone.’’  t 


• Op  cit.  4—10. 


t Op.  cit,  6—8. 


THE  INFINITE  AND  EVOLUTION.  299 

Such  men,  by  art  of  meditation,  saw,  in  its 
own  modes  concealed,  the  power  of  the 
Divine.” 

No  sakti  or  power  can  ever  indeed  detach  itself  from  its 
seat  (flsraya)  and  remain  independent.  Therefore,  to  say 
that  May^j,  which  is  a power,  is  the  prakritl  is  tantamount  to 
saying  that  Brahman  who  possesses  that  power  is  the  pra- 
knti.  The  word  ‘ i4tman’  in  the  ablative  case  here  refers 
to  the  Paramatman  (Supreme  Self),  the  Mahesa  (Mighty 
LordJ,  the  Mflyin  ("possessor  of  the  Maya)j  the  prakriti  of 
the  Universe.  From  Him,  from  the  Param^itman  who  is 
the  Mflyin,  akasa  was  born.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  the  Para- 
mfltman  Himself  that  is  manifested  in  the  form  of  the  aka- 
sa, air,  etc. 

The  three  Theories  of  Creation. 

The  upadana  or  material  cause  such  as  clay  gives  rise  to 
a pot  which  is  quite  distinct  from  clay.  The  material  cause 
such  as  milk  is  itself  transformed  into  curd.  The  material 
cause  such  as  a rope,  combined  with  ignorance,  turns  out  to 
be  a serpent.  The  philosophers  of  the  Nyaya  school 
declare,  on  the  analogy  of  clay  and  pot,  that  the  universe 
comprising  earth  and  so  on  is  newly  created  out  of  atoms, 
(paramawus) ; whereas  the  Sankhyas  declare,  on  the 
analogy  of  milk  and  curd,  that  the  Pradhana  composed  of 
the  gu»as, — Sattva,  Rajas,  and  Tamas, — transforms  Itself 
into  the  universe  composed  of  Mahat,  Ahankara,  etc.  But 
the  Vedantins  declare,  on  the  analogy  of  rope  and  serpent, 
that  Brahman  Himself,  the  One  Partless  Essence,  the  Basic 


* Op,  cit.  1—3. 


300  BiuHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Xfiania-VM. 

Reality  underlying  the  whole  imaginary  universe,  puts  on, 
in  virtue  of  His  own  Maya,  the  form  of  the  universe.  Of 
these  three  theories,  the  theory  of  creation  and  the  theory 
of  transformation,  the  Arambha-vada  and  the  PariMma- 
v/ida,  have  been  refuted  in  the  Sarfraka-M/m/imsft  (the 
Ved(mta-sf/tras). 

How  far  the  Nyaya  theory  is  right. 

How  then,  it  may  be  asked,  to  explain  the  theories  pro- 
pounded by  the  two  great  i?ishis,  Gautama  and  Kapila  I 
We  answer  thus : The  two  theories  have  been  propoundec 
to  help  the  dull  intelleds  and  refer  to  secondary  or  mino 
evolutions  (av^ntara-snshfis).  The  Great  J?ishi,  Gautama 
taught  the  creation  of  earth,  etc. , out  of  the  atoms,  with  z 
view  to  impart  instrudlion  concerning  jiva  and  /svara  to  hin 
who,  following  the  views  of  the  Lokayatas  or  materialists 
identifies  himself  with  the  body;  who,  not  knowing  tha 
there  is  a self  distindt  from  the  body  and  going  to  svarga  o 
naraka,  does  not  observe  the  Jyotish^oma  and  other  sacri 
ficial  rites;  and  who,  not  knowing  that  there  exists  /svar 
whom  he  should  worship,  does  not  practise  the  contempla 
tion  of /5vara  which  leads  him  to  Brahma-loka.  Akasa, 
time,  space,  and  atoms  having  been  once  evolved  from  th 
Supreme  Brahman,  the  First  Cause,  the  process  of  furthe 
evolution  from  that  point  may  correspond  to  the  accoun 
given  by  Gautama  and  others  of  his  school.  Ho\ 
is  the  Vedantin’s  theory  violated  by  it  ? So  far,  the  May 
theory  is  not  vitiated  by  it,  inasmuch  as  Gautama’ 
false  theory — false  because  it  is  drisya,  an  objedl  of  consc 
ousness  external  to  the  Self— has  been  generated  by  the  ver 
Maya  which  gives  rise  to  the  illusion  of  samsara  of  wonder 
ful  variety  in  all  beings  of  life  from  Brahma  down  to  plant. 


THE  INFINITE  AND  EVOLUTION. 


Am.  I.  ] 


301 


How  far  the  Sankhya  theory  is  risrht. 

On  the  same  principle, — ^it  may  perhaps  be  urged, — the 
Evolution  described  in  the  Vedfinta  fUpanishad)  is  also  an 
illusion.  We  admit  that  it  is  an  illusion,  and  it  is  the  very 
object:  of  the  Vedanta  to  teach  that  the  whale  creatkm  is 
an  illusion.  Just  as  Gautama’s  endeavour  is  to  teach  to  the 
duller  intelledls  (mandadhik^irins)  that  there  is  a soul  dis- 
tindl  from  the  body  who  is  the  doer  oiadlions  and  who  is 
capable  of  going  to  svarga,  so  the  great  sage,  Kapila, 
taught  the  Sankhya-sflstra  with  a view  to  impart  to  men  of 
average  intellecft  (madhyamadhikarins)  a knowledge  of  the 
Conscious  ^tman, — the  mere  Witness,  free  from  agency 
and  attachment  of  every  kind, — ^and  thus  to  prepare  them 
for  Brahma-j^na.  In  the  Sankhya-sastra,  Evolution  in 
some  of  its  later  stages  prior  to  the  Evolution  of 
atoms  is  described  in  order  to  enable  the  student  to  disting- 
uish between  Chit  and  Achit,  Spirit  and  Matter.  Where 
there  is  Brahman  alone  who  is  the  One  Partless  Essence, 
Maya  sets  up  two  distinct  things  such  as  chit  (sentient)  and 
jaia  (insentient),  sets  up  many  individual  souls  distinct 
from  one  another,  and  sets  up  Gu«as  such  as  Sattva,  Rajas, 
and  Tamas.  The  subsequent  process  of  evolution  may 
correspond  to  the  account  given  in  the  Sninkhya  system. 

Similarly,  the  ^aivngamas  treat  of  the  evolution  of  eleven 
tattvas  or  principles  prior  to  the  evolution  of  the  twenty- 
five  described  in  the  Sflnkhya,  with  a view  to  clear  the 
conception  of  Jsvara,  the  object  of  all  worship. 

All  accounts  of  Evolution  contribute  only 
to  a knowledge  of  Brahman. 

The  5ruti,  however,  has  here  described  just  a little  of  the 
Evolution  beginning  with  akfi,sa,  only  by  way  of  illustra- 


joi  BRAHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED.  ^Amnda^Vdti. 

tion.  An  exhaustive  description  of  the  evolution  is  indeed 
impossible  and  is  of  no  avail.  This  description  of  evolu- 
tion is  intended  as  a means  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahman, 
and  this  purpose  is  served  by  a description  of  even  a part  of 
the  evolution.  That  the  evolution  serves  as  a means  to  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman  is  declared  by  Gauiapd<d^chd.rya  in 
his  memorial  verses  on  the  Ma.«it!ikya-upanishad  as  follows: 

“ Evolution  as  described  by  illustrations  of 
earth,  iron,  sparks  of  fire,  has  another  impli- 
cation; for,  they  are  only  means  to  the  reali- 
sation of  the  Absolute ; there  being  nothing 
like  distinction.” 

No  contemplation  or  knowledge  of  evolution  in  itself  is 
declared  anywhere  as  a means  to  a distinct  end.  Nowhere 
does  the  sruti  say  **  Let  a man  contemplate  evolution 
or  ^ the  knower  of  evolution  attains  to  well-being.”  Hence 
it  ii  that  all  accounts  of  evolution  given  in  the  sruti,  the 
smriti,  the  agama,  and  the  pura.«a  have  been  accepted  by 
the  VRrtikakAra : 

By  whatever  account  (of  evolution)  a know- 
ledge of  the  Inner  Self  (Pratyag^tman)  can  be 
imparted  to  men,  that  here  (in  the  Vedic 
Religion)  is  the  right  one ; and  there  is  no  one 
(process)fixed  for  all.”  + 

There  can  be  no  rule  that,  of  the  various  dreams  seen  by 
many,  a certain  one  alone  should  be  accepted  and  not  the 
rest.  Let  us  not  discuss  more,  lest  we  may  say  too  much. 


* Op.  cit  3—15, 


t Bri,  Up.  Vartika,  1-4-402. 


iliw  /•]  INFINITE  AND  EVOLUTION,  30| 

Unreality  of  Evolution, 

Seeing  that  Brahman  is  inseparate  from  all,  changeless, 
one,  neither  the  cause  nor  the  effect,  it  is  not  possible  to 
maintain  that  evolution  takes  place  in  the  Supreme  Brah- 
man Himself.  All  things  other  than  Brahman  should — 
because  of  that  very  fact  of  their  being  other  than  Brah- 
man— be  regarded  as  effects.  And  since  Bahman  is  not  the 
cause,!  there  can  be  no  cause  of  evolution.  If  the  cause  of 
evolution  lies  in  the  very  essential  nature  of  Brahman, 
then  since  Brahman’s  presence  is  constant,  the  universe 
must  be  constant, — which  cannot  be ; for  (every  thing 
that  is  born  has  its  birth  in  time  and  space,  and)  there 
cannot  be  another  time  and  another  space  in  which  that 
time  and  that  space  can  have  their  birth. — (S). 

Evolution  (of  the  universe  from  Brahman)  was  not  (in 
the  past),  because  Brahman  is  not  of  the  past ; and  Brah- 
man was  not  of  the  past  because  He  is  the  cause  of 
time. — (S)  That  is  to  say.  Brahman,  the  alleged  creator,  is 
unrelated  (asanga)  to  anything  else  and  is  therefore  unrela- 
ted to  the  time  past.  And  unlike  pots,  etc..  Brahman  is  not 
conditioned  or  limited  by  time.  Such  association  with  time 
as  is  implied  in  the  statement  that  He  is  the  cause  of  time 
is  a mere  maya, — (A).  And  the  evolution  (of  the  universe 
from  Brahman)  will  not  take  place  in  the  future,  since 
(Brahman)  is  not  of  the  future ; and  He  is  not  of  the  future 
because  no  change  can  ever  arise  in  Brahman.  Evolution 
does  not  take  place  in  the  present  because  A tman  is  ever 
secondless  and  immutable.  Therefore,  from  the  standpoint 

•f  i,e.,  since  Brahman  is  eternal  and  immutaTble  (Kw<astha)-(A; 


m BIUHMA-VIDVA  EXPOUNDED  [Amnda^Vo^ 

of  the  real  state  of  things,  the  evolution  of  the  universe  from 
Brahman  never  was,  nor  is,  nor  is  yet  to  be.  It  is  quite  as 
meaningless  to  speak  of  the  evolution  as  having  taken 
place  in  the  past  or  as  taking  place  now  or  as  yet  to  take 
place  in  the  future,  as  it  is  meaningless  to  speak  of  an 
atom  as  a camel.  Therefore  avidya  alone  is  the  cause  of  the 
evolution. — (S.) 

The  universe,  again,  must  have  been  existent  or  non- 
existent as  such  before  its  birth.  It  could  not  have  been 
non-existent,  since  then  it  could  have  no  cause.  If  the 
universe  were  non-existent,  how  could  there  have  been  that 
relation  between  it  and  the  cause,  in  virtue  of  which  the 
universe  should  come  into  being  ? Neither  could  the 
universe  have  existed  as  such  prior  to  its  birth  ; for  there 
would  be  nothing  new  in  the  effect.  Moreover,  birth,  des- 
truction and  other  changes  to  which  all  things  in  the 
universe  are  subject  cannot  themselves  be  subject  to  birth, 
cestruction  and  so  on,  and  must  therefore  be  eternal  and 
immutable;  for,  to  speak  of  the  birth  of  birth  involves  the 
fallacy  of  infinite  regress  fanavasthA):  which  isabsurd.-(S&A) 

As  the  triple  time  (past,  present  and  future)  has  its 
origin  in  avidya,  it  cannot  be  the  cause  of  the  universe. 
For  the  same  reason,  neither  Karma  nor  Devas,  nor  /svara, 
nor  anything  else  can  be  the  cause.  The  birth  of  the  uni- 
verse, its  continuance  (sthiti)  and  its  dissolution,  all  these 
occur  every  moment.  The  sruti  indeed  declares  that  the 
creatm:  (kartrU  generates  the  universe  by  his  mind  and  acts. 
As  a moon  is  generated  by  the  eye-desease  called  timira,  so 
is  aka^a  born  of  Brahman  tainted  with  avidyd,  which  has 
neither  a beginning  nor  a middle  nor  an  end.  What  is 
thus  evolved  cannot  stand  even  for  a single  moment; 


THE  tKFlNltE  ANC  EVbitJffON. 


f.J 


30s 


whence  its  permanence  ? To  the  deluded  vision  it  appears 
permanent  like  the  serpent  generated  by  avidy<f  out  of  the 
rope.  He  who  is  attacked  by  the  eye-desease  (timira^  thinks 
of  the  moon-light  born  of  it  as  something  external  to  himself ; 
similarly  one  looks  upon  the  (universe)  evolved  (out  of  the 
Self)  as  distinct  from  the  Self — (S). 

Akasa. 

A\ias2i  is  that  thing  which  has  sound  for  its  property 
and  which  affords  space  to  all  corporeal  substances. 

The  akflsa  thus  evolved  out  of  the  material  cause  (upa- 
d^ina) — namely,  Brahman  combined  with  Maya, — partakes 
of  the  nature  of  both  Brahman  and  Maya,  Brahman  has 
been  described  as  Real,  and  this  means  that  Brahman  is 
Existence ; for,  having  started  with  the  words  “ Existence 
alone,  my  dear,  this  at  first  was,”  the  sruti  concludes 
“ That,  the  Existence,  is  Real.”  Akaso.  partakes  of  (the 
nature  of  Brahman  as)  Existence,  inasmuch  as  it  presents 
itself  to  our  consciousness  as  something  existing,  Maya 
means  wonder ; for,  when  houses,  mountains,  etc.,  are 
swallowed  by  a juggler,  people  say  “this  is  maya.”  Just  as 
the  appearance  of  a reflected  image  of  the  vast  expanse  of 
heaven  in  an  imporous  mirror  of  solid  bell-metal  is  a 
wonder,  so  the  appearance  of  akasa  in  Brahman  is  a wonder, 
it  being  inconceivable  how  akasa  can  make  its  appearance 
in  Brahman  who  is  impenetrable,  who  is  the  pure  essence 
of  Bliss  and  Bliss  alone,  who  is  Real,  Consciousness,  and 
Infinite.  Since  none  but  a juggler  can  swallow  houses  and 
mountains,  others  call  it  a wonder ; similarly,  since  none 
of  the  j/vas  can  create  akasa  and  other  things  which  have 
been  created  by  /svara,  th«se  things  are  a wonder  to  us. 

* Chha.  t). 


39 


3o6  b&ahha-vidya  expounded  [Inan^a^^Vdili 

In  80  &r  as  akosa  is  thus  something  wonderful,  ^t  partaki^s 
of  the  nature  of  Maya.  But  the  power  of  aka^a  to  afford 
space  to  all  (corporeal)  things  constitutes  its  own  peculiar 
nature.  **  Akasa  is  a wonderful  thing  affording  space  in 
this  form  aknsa  presents  itself  to  our  consciousness  as 
partaking  of  the  nature  of  Brahman  and  Maya.  And  it  has 
sound  for  its  property.  The  echo  heard  in  mountain-caves 
etc.,  is  supposed  to  be  inherent  in  akasa  and  is  therefore 
said  to  be  the  property  of  akasa. 

Evolution  by  Brahman’s  Will  and  Idea. 

The  will  (kama)  and  idea  (^sankalpa"' J alone  concerning 
the  evolution  of  akasa — which,  as  has  been  shewn  above, 
has  mere  sound  for  its  property  and  affords  space  to  all 
corporeal  substances  — pertain  to  the  Brahman  endued 
with  Maya.  His  will  (kama)  takes  the  following  form,  I 
will  create  akasa.”  His  idea  (sankalpa)  is  the  thought  “ let 
akasa  (of  the  said  description)  come  into  being.”  Brahman 
being  devoid  of  mind,  it  is  true  that  no  idea  in  the  form  of  a 
mano-vritti  or  mode  of  mind  is  possible.  Still  His  Maya, 
the  unthinkable  ‘power  (achintya-sakti),  transforms  itself 
nto  the  two  vrittis  or  modes  called  kama  and  sankalpa,  will 
and  idea.  That  in  virtue  of  His  unthinkable  power  (sakti) 
all  experience  is  possible  for  Brahman  though  He  is  devoid 
of  sense-organs  is  declared  by  the  sruti  in  the  following 
words : 

Without  hands,  without  feet,  He  moveth. 

He  graspeth  ; eyeless  He  seeth ; ( and ) 

earless  He  heareth.”  j 

All  acts  (karmas),  which  were  done  by  sentient  creatures 
in  a former  evolution  and  were  ttien  unripe,  remain  during 


♦ = the  imagining  f Svetcc-Up.  3—19. 


/♦]  the  infinite  and  evolution.  307 

the  time  of  pralaya  (dissolution  of  the  universe)  in  the 
Brahman  endued  with  M.aya  and  slowly  ripen.  When  the 
acts  become  ripe,  He  creates  the  world  in  order  that  the 
creatures  may  enjoy  the  fruits  of  those  acts.  This  has  been 
declared  in  the  Tattvaprakasika,  a digest  of  the  teaching  of 
the  Saiva--^gamas: 

‘‘  Out  of  mercy  to  all  living  beings  who  have 
been  wearied  in  saws^ra,  the  Lord  brings 
about  the  Great  Dissolution  of  all  things 
for  the  repose  of  those  very  beings.  Again,  .in 
virtue  of  their  acts  having  become  ripe, 
the  Supreme  Lord,  out  of  mercy  to  the  souls 
(pasus),  brings  about  creation  and  fructifies  the 
acts  of  the  emboided  beings.” 

Therefore,  owing  to  the  ripeness  of  the  acts  of  living 
beings,  there  arises  in  the  Supreme  Lord  a desire  to  create 
and  an  idea  (sankalpa=the  imagining)  of  the  things  that 
are  to  be  evolved  in  the  creation.  The  things  that  are  to  be 
evolved  come  into  being  just  in  accordance  with  the  will 
and  the  idea  of  the  Lord.  Accordingly,  the  Paramatman, 
the  Supreme  Self,  is  described  in  the  sruti  as  “One  whose 
desires  are  true,  whose  ideas  are  true.”  Such  being  the 
case,  all  the  things  come  into  being  one  after  another  ex- 
actly as  He  thinks  of  them. 

Vayu  (the  air.) 

Thence,  from  akasa,  comes  into  being  Vayu, 
the  air,  with  two  properties,  the  property  of  touch 
which  is  its  own,  and  the  property  of  soun4  belonging 
to  akasdi  already  evolved.* 

Of  these  elements  such  as  akosa,  each  is  said  to  be 


3o8  brahma-vidva  expoukded.  [Ananda-VaUi. 

possessed  of  one,  two  or  more  properties  according  as  it  is 
the  first,  second,  and  so  on,  in  the  order  of  evolution  ; for, 
on  the  principle  that  every  effect  is  pervaded  by  cause,  each 
of  the  succeeding  elements  is  pervaded  by  the  element  or 
elements  preceding  it  in  the  order  of  evolution.  The  air 
(Vayu)  is  not  born  of  the  akasa,  because  the  latter  is  a mere 
effect  (loirya).  The  air  (Vayu)  is  born  from  -^tman  assum- 
ing the  form  of  akasB.,  Therefore  it  is  from  Atman  that 
the  air  takes  its  birth.  The  same  is  true  in  regard  to 
the  birth  of  other  elements. — {S) 

From  Brahman  associated  with  }Aaya  and  having  put  on 
the  form  (up^idhi)  of  akasa  which  was  first  evolved,  the  air 
was  bom.  and  Brahman  are  the  cause  of  all 

things  and,  as  such,  are  common  to  all,  and  therefore 
it  is  on  account  of  the  special  relation  of  the  air  to 
Brahman’s  Upadhi  of  rtkasa  as  its  proximate  invariable 
i ntecedent,  that  the  air  is  declared  to  be  born  *of  akasa. 
The  property  of  the  air  is  touch  vrhich  is  neither  hot  nor 
cold.  To  carry  away  is  the  function  of  the  air  just  as  it  is 
the  function  of  akasa  to  afford  space.  In  the  air,  also,  the 
attributes  of  its  cause  are  all  present.  The  attribute  of 
existence  expressed  in  the  words  ‘‘  the  air  exists  ” pertains 
to  Brahman.  That  peculiilr  nature  of  the  air  which  is  not 
found  in  other  things  and  is  therefore  strange  is  an  attribute 
of  the  Maya,  The  noise  made  by  the  air  blowing  on  the 
sea-shore  and  other  places  is  the  attribute  of  sound  pertain- 
ing to  akasa. 

The  sound  which  inheres  in  akasa.  as  its  property  is 
present  in  the  air,  etc.,  and  the  undiscriminating  person 
ascribes  it  to  the  air  itself,  and  so  on,  just  as  a person 
ftscribes  all  the  attributes  of  a garland  to  the  serpent  when 


AfiU*'  INFINITE  AND  EVQLUTIOl^.  309 

he  has  mistaken  the  garland  for  the  serpent  (S.  115). 

Fire. 

In  the  same  way  we  should  interpret  the  [other  passages, 
such  as  “from  the  air,  the  fire  is  born,”  and  so  on. 

From  the  air  was  born  fire  having  three  attributes, 
composed  of  the  two  preceding  attributes  and  (the 
attribute  of)  colour  which  is  its  own. 

Luminosity  is  the  special  property  of  fire,  and  its  function 
is  to  illumine.  In  this  case  also,  the  existence  of  fire  is  the 
attribute  of  Brahman  ; its  strangeness  as  something  distinct 
from  all  other  things  is  the  attribute  of  Maya.  The  “ bhug 
hhug''  sound  of  the  blazing  fire  is  the  attribute  of  akas3..  It 
is  hot  to  the  touch  ; this  is  the  attribute  of  the  air.  Now 
the  touch  and  the  sound  of  the  fire  are  peculiar,  distinct 
from  the  touch  of  the  air  and  the  sound  of  ak.isa  ; and  this 
peculiarity  causes  wonder  and  is  therefore  due  to  Maya. 

Water. 

From  fire  was  born  water  with  four  attributes,  com- 
prising its  own  attribute  of  taste  and  the  three  preced- 
ing ones. 

The  special  property  of  water  is  sweet  taste.  The 
attributes  of  the  cause  are  also  present  in  it.  Thus,  water 
exists.  Owing  to  liquidity  which  distinguishes  it  from  all 
the  rest,  it  is  something  strange.  In  a current  of  water 
flowing  through  rocky  river-beds  the  ! bill ! ” sound  is 
heard.  It  is  cold  to  the  touch  and  white  in  colour. 

Earth. 

From  water  earth  came  into  being,  with  five  attri- 
butes, comprising  smell  which  is  its  own  and  the  four 
preceding  attributes. 


3tO  BIUHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED*  ^Amndo^  VfdVi* 

From  water^  of  the  nature  described  above,  was  bom 
earth.  Smell  is  its  special  property.  Earth  exisU,  It  is 
something  strange  on  account  of  its  solidity  which  dis- 
tinguishes it  from  all  the  rest.  By  contact  with  a corporeal 
substance  the  **  haia ! liata ! **  sound  is  produced.  It  is 
hard  to  the  touch.  It  is  of  Various  colours,  black,  green 
and  so  on.  Its  taste  is  sweet  and  so  on. 

Thus  has  been  described  the  evolution  of  the  five  ele- 
ments of  matter  from  ak^sa  to  earth. 

Primary  elements  are  only  five. 

{Question): — The  Kaushttak/-Up.  (3-8)  speaks  of  ten 
bhwta-matras  or  elements  of  matter.  How  is  it  that  here  the 
sruti  speaks  of  only  five?— (A) 

(Answer): — There  are  only  five  primary  elements  of 
matter  such  as  akasa  mentioned  above.  Nothing  else,  we 
deem,  exists  besides  the  five  elements,  of  which  all  causes 
and  effects  are  made  up.— (S) 

Brahman  is  not  made  up  of  matter. 

Though  earth  is  possessed  of  the  four  attributes  pertain- 
ing respectively  to  akasa  and  so  on,  yet  it  is  not  itself  pre- 
sent in  those  four  elements.  Similarly  though  the  whole 
uni  verse  is  made  up  of  Brahman,  still  Brahman  is  not  made 
up  of  the  universe. — (S) 

Thus  has  been  established  the  proposition  declared  above, 
that  Brahman  is  Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite  and  Second- 
less,  and  that  in  Him  nothing  else  is  experienced. — (S J 

Evolution  of  material  objects. 

From  earth  plants  were  born  ; from  plants,  food ; 
and  from  food,  transformed  into  semen,  was  born  man 


an 


Am.  I.  ] the  infinite  and  evolution, 

( purusha ) with  a form  composed  of  the  head,  hands 
and  so  on. 

Plants,  food  and  man  are  formed  of  matter.  Their 
evolution  here  stands  for  the  evolution  of  the  whole  universe 
of  material  objects  comprising  mountains,  rivers,  oceans 
and  so  on.  Though  the  bodies  of  cattle  and  the  like  which 
are  born  of  sexual  union  are  all  ‘ formed  of  food  * (anna- 
maya),  still  owing  to  the  importance  of  the  human  being  as 
one  qualified  for  the  path  of  knowledge  and  works,  the 
5ruti  has  here  spoken  of  man  among  others.  The  import- 
ance of  man  is  thus  declared  in  the  Aitareyaka : 

“ But  in  man  the  Self  is  more  manifested,  for 
he  is  most  endowed  with  knowledge.  He  says 
what  he  has  known,  he  sees  what  he  has 
known,  he  knows  what  is  to  happen  to- 
morrow, he  knows  heaven  and  hell.  By 
means  of  the  mortal,  he  desires  the  immortal ; 
thus  is  he  endowed.  With  regard  to  the 
other  animals,  hunger  and  thirst  only  are  a * 
kind  of  understanding.  But  they  do  not  say 
what  they  have  known,  nor  do  they  see  what 
they  have  known.  They  do  not  know  what 
is  to  happen  tomorrow,  nor  heaven  and  hell.” 

Evolution  of  the  Viraj  and  the  Sutra. 

In  declaring  the  evolution  of  matter  and  material  objects 
the  sruti  tacitly  implies  the  evolution  of  the  Viraj  whose 
body  is  made  up  of  material  objects  in  the  aggregate.  So, 
the  Vartikakara  says : 

Then  came  into  being  the  Vir^j,  the  manifested  God, 


3t2 


BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Amflda-  VolU. 


whose  senses  axe  Dis  and  other  (DevatAs  or  Intelligences), 
who  wears  a body  formed  of  the  five  elements  (quintupled 
= panchlknta),  and  who  glows  with  the  consciousness 
‘‘  I am  all.’*  And  prior  to  the  evolution  of  the  Vir^ij  must 
have  occurred  the  evolution  of  the  Stitra  ; for,  the  Wixa] 
could  come  into  being  after  the  Siitra  had  come  into  being. 
The  sruti  elsewhere  speaks  of  the  Stitra  as  the  basis  of  the 
Viraj ; and  therefore,  since  the  evolution  of  the  Viroj  is  here 
mentioned,  the  evolution  of  the  SAtra  also  must  have  been 
meant  here.  Moreover,  the  sruti  will  speak  of  the  Intelli- 
gence (i.  e.,  the  SMra)  in  the  words  “ Intelligence  increases 
sacrifice;  ” and  this  shows  that  the  evolution  of  the  Sfitra 
also  is  implied  here.  Further  the  sruti  will  refer  to  the 
Sj^tra  as  **  Life,  sight,  hearing,  mind,  speech,”  distinguishing 
Him  from  “food  (anna)”  t etc.,  and  will  also  enjoin  the  con- 
templation (upflsana)  I of  the  Si^fra  in  the  words  “ Intelli- 
gence, as  Brahman  the  eldest,  do  all  the  Gods  adore.” 
Here  “ Intelligence”  cannot  refer  to  the  mere  act  (of 
knowing)  since  a mere  act  cannot  be  an  object  of  contem- 
plation and  cannot  be  qualified  as  ‘ Brahman  the  eldest  ’. 
Neither  can  it  refer  to  the  individual  soul,  because  one 
cannot  contemplate  oneself.  Nor  does  the  word  denote 
Brahman,  the  first  cause,  because  the  first  cause  cannot 
be  spoken  of  as  Intelligence  (Vijwana).  Therefore,  the 
word  ‘ Intelligence  * denotes  the  S«tra  and  it  is  the  contem- 
plation of  the  s«tra  that  is  there  enjoined.  As  the  swtra  will 


♦ The  Swtratmau  fthe  Thread- SouU,’ the  Cosmic  Intelligence, 
the  Hiran-yagrabha,  having  for  His  upadhi  or  vehicle  the 
totality  of  the  subtle  bodies, 

t t 2~5 


THE  IKFIKITE  AND  EVOLUTION. 


Am.  /.  ] 


in 


bs  thus  spoken  Sf  as  an  object  of  contemplation,  the  evolu- 
tion  of  the  Swtra  is  also  implied  in  this  Connection.  Piror  to 
the  evolution  of  the  Viraj  (the  effect)  the  Swtra  remains 
undifferentiated  from  the  one  Existence,  the  Param^itman, 
the  Cause  of  the  Swtra  ; and,  therefore,  though  an  effect, 
the  Swtra  does  not  manifest  Himself  as  an  effect.  After 
evolving  the  effect  (the  Vir^ij)  as  clay  evolves  the  pot,  the 
Swtra  becomes  as  it  were  the  effect.  That  is  to  say,  in  the 
form  of  the  Vir^j  the  Sutra,  becomes  visible.  But  as  long 
as  the  effect  is  not  evolved,  the  S/^tra  is  prajwfxna-ghana, 
pure  and  simple  consciousness;  i.  e.,  He  abides  as  a mere 
potentiality  of  intelligence  and  motion  (vijwana  and  kriyA,) 
in  Brahman,  the  first  cause,  because  of  the  absence  of  a 
vehicle  through  which  to  manifest  Himself  as  the  Universal 
Intelligence  or  as  individual  Intelligences,  as  Samash^i  or 
Vyashri.  When  conditioned  by  the  effect  (Viraj),  the  S«tra 
manifests  Himself  as  the  Universal  Intelligence  and  the 
individual  Intelligences — (S.  & A.). 

Akasa  is  not  unborn. 


The  evolution  of  akrisa  from  Brahman  has  been  discussed 
as  follows,  in  the  Vedanta-s//tras  (II.  iii.  i — 7). 

{Question)  : — The  question  at  issue  is,  whether  akasa  is 
eternal  or  has  a birth. 

{Prima  facie  view) : — The  sruti  says  “From  Him,  from 
This  here,  from  the  Self,  is  akasa.  born.”  The  akasa.  here 
spoken  of  is  eternal  and  has  no  birth.  For,  it  is  hard  to 
mak«  out  the  three  necessary  causes  of  its  birth, — namely, 
the  samavdyin  or  material  cause,  the  nimitta  or  efficient 
cause,  and  the  asamavdyin  or  other  accessory  causes.  But 
the  sruti  speaks  of  it  as  having  been  born  from  .4tman 

40 


314  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  \Amnda-VallL 

simply  because  it  possesses  the  attribute  kf  existence  like 
those  things  which  are  admitted  to  have  been  born  of  .^tman. 
Therefore  the  ak^isa,  which  has  neither  a beginning  nor  an 
end,  is  not  born. 

(Conclusion): — All  Upanishads  proclaim  aloud,  as  if  by 
beat  of  drum,  that,  the  one  Thing  being  known,  all  else  i^ 
known.  This  dictum  can  be  explained  only  if  akasa,  also  is 
born  of  Brahman  and,  as  such,  is  one  with  Brahman  in  the 
same  way  that  the  pot  is  one  with  clay  ; but  not  otherwise. 
Moreover,  akasa.  must  have  a birth  because  it  is  separate 
from  other  things,  like  a pot  etc.  The  proof  of  its  separate- 
ness from  other  things  lies  in  the  well-marked  distinction 
between  it  and  the  other  things  such  as  the  air.  Against 
this  it  may  psrhaps  be  urged  that  Brahman  is  distinct  from 
other  things  and  yet  has  no  birth.  We  answer  that  Brah- 
man is  one  with  all  and  that  it  is  not  possible  to  shew  that 
He  is  distinct  from  anything  whatsoever.  And,  moreover, 
the  5ruti  speaking  of  the  birth  of  akasa.  will  be  respected  if 
we  maintain  that  it  has  a birth.  As  to  the  contention  that 
it  is  impossible  to  make  out  the  three  necessary  causes  of 
its  production,  it  is  wrong  to  say  so,  because,  though 
according  to  the  Ny^ya  theory  of  new  creation  (arambha- 
v^da)  the  three  causes  are  necessary,  they  are  not  necessary 
according  to  the  theory  of  illusion  (vivarta-vada).  On 
these  grounds  we  maintain  that  akasa.  is  born  from  Brahman, 
the  Cause. 

The  air  is  not  unborn. 

In  the  Vedfinta-swtra  (II.  iii.  8)  the  question  of  the  birth 
of  the  air  is  discussed  as  follows: 

(Question):-— la  the  air  (v^yu)  eternal,  or  is  it  born  of  any- 
thing else  ? 


THE  INFINITE  AND  EVOLUTION. 


315 


Anu.  /.] 

{Primn  facie  view): — It  is  only  in  the  Taittiriyaka  that  the 
air  is  spoken  of  as  born  from  akasa.  AnH  this  birth  is  only 
figurative,  inasmuch  as,  when  treating  of  creation,  the 
Chh^mdogya  speaks  of  the  birth  of  fire,  water,  and  earth, 
but  not  of  the  air.  It  may  be  asked,  how  can  the  Taittiriya 
J)assage  be  regarded  as  figurative  in  direct  contravention  to 
the  well-recognized  principle  that  omission  in  one  place 
cannot  render  nugatory  what  is  expressly  declared  in  another 
place  ? In  reply  we  say  that  the  passage  should  be  under- 
stood in  a figurative  sense  because  it  contradicts  another 
statement  of  the  sruti.  In  the  Bnhadr/ra;/yaka,  for  instance, 
it  is  said  *‘This  Intelligence  (Dev^atrt)  whom  we  speak  of  as 
Vayu  never  vanishes”.  Because  the  destruction  of  V^^yu  is 
thus  denied  in  the  5ruti,  and  because  the  denial  of  destruc- 
tion is  incompatible  with  birth,  we  maintain  that  the  air  is 
unborn. 

(Conclasiou):^It  is  true  that  the  Chhandogya  does  not 
speak  of  its  birth  ; still,  on  the  same  principle  t on  which 
we  understand  in  one  place  the  attributes  mentioned  in 
another  place  though  they  are  not  expressly  declared  in  the 
former,  we  may  regard  the  birth  of  the  air  as  declared  in  the 
Chhandogya,  seeing  that  all  that  is  said  in  the  Taittir/yaka 
have  to  be  understood  in  the  Chh^mdogya.  As  to  the 
statement  of  the  sruti  that  Vayn  never  vanishes,  it  should 
not  bj  construed  quite  so  literally.  Occurring  in  a sec- 
tion devoted  to  up.'isana  or  contemplation,  it  only  serves 
to  extol  the  Intelligence  (Devat^z).  All  the  arguments,  too, 
by  which  the  birth  of  akasa,  has  been  established  apply  to 
the  present  case  alike.  It  should  not  be  supposed  that,  as 
having  been  evolved  from  akasa,  the  air  is  not  comj^rehended 

* Op.  Cit.  1^5 — 22  t PP*  46-47. 


3i6  brahma-vidya  expounded.  [Amnda-Vallt. 

in  Brahman  and  that  threfore  by  knowing  Brahman  we 
cannot  know  the  air;  for,  it  will  be  shewn  in  the  sequel 
that  Brahman  Himself  takes  the  form  of  every  antecedent 
effect  and  so  forms  the  cause  of  the  succeeding  effect : so 
that,  here  too,  as  having  assumed  the  form  of  akasdi^  Brah- 
man Himself  is  the  cause  of  the  air.  We  therefore  concludet 
that  the  air  has  a birth. 

Brahman  has  no  birth. 

( Ved^nta-swtra  II.  iii.  9). 

{Question) : — Now  the  question  arises,  has  Brahman  a 
birth  or  no  birth. 

{Prima  facie  view) : — Existence  alone  this  at  first  was.”  * 
The  Existence  here  spoken  of,  i.  e.,  Brahman,  must  have 
a birth,  because  all  causes  must  have  a birth,  as  for 
instance  akasa. 

{Conclusion) Brahman,  the  Existence,  has  no  birth  ; 
i jr,  it  is  hard  to  conceive  a cause  that  can  produce  Brah- 
man. In  the  first  place  non-existence  cannot  be  the  cause, 
because  of  the  denial  “ how  can  existence  be  born  of  non- 
existence ? ” Neither  is  existence  itself  the  cause  of 
Existence;  how  can  a thing  be  the  cause  of  itself?  Nor 
can  or  the  like  be  the  cause  of  Existence ; for,  akasa, 
etc.,  are  themselves  born  of  Existence.  And  as  to  the 
induction  that  every  cause  must  have  a birth,  it  is  invali- 
dated by  the  sruti  “ That  One,  the  Self  here,  is  great  and  un- 
born.” t Therefore  Brahman,  the  Existence,  has  no  birth* 
How  fire  is  evolved  from  Brahman. 

The  Vedanta-sutra  (II.  iii.  10)  discusses  the  birth  of  fire 
as  follows : 

{Question): — “ It  created  fire:  in  these  words  the  Chh^n- 


^ Chha.  6-2.  f Bri  Up.  4-4-22. 


Am.  /.]  THE  INFINITE  AND  EVOLUTION.  317 

dogya  speaks  of  fire  as  born  of  Brahman,  while  the  Tai- 
ttir/ya  declares  fire  to  have  been  born  of  the  air.  There 
arises  the  question,  Is  fire  born  of  Brahman  or  of  the  air  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — The  Taittir/yaka  passage  admits 
of  the  interpretation  that  fire  comes  after  the  air,  and 
it  may  therefore  be  concluded  that  fire  is  born  of  Brah- 
man. 

{Conclusion) : — The  word  ‘ born’  occurring  in  a previous 
sentence  has  to  be  understood  in  the  sentence  “ from  the 
air,  fire;”  so  that  the  sentence  cannot  but  mean  primarily 
that  fire  is  evolved  from  the  air  as  its  material  cause.  By 
harmonising  the  Chh^ndogya  and  the  Taittir^yaka  state- 
ments, we  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  it  is  out  of  Brah- 
man assuming  the  form  of  the  air  that  fire  is  evolved. 

Water  is  evolved  from  Brahman. 

With  reference  to  the  evolution  of  water,  the  Vedanta- 
s/^tra  (II.  hi.  ii)  discusses  the  question  as  follows: 

Is  water  born  of  Brahman,  or  of  fire? 

[Prima  facie  view) : — It  is  true  that  both  the  Chhandogya 
and  the  Taittir/yaka  upanishads  declare  that  water  is  born 
of  fire.  But  we  cannot  accept  this  statement,  since  two 
things  so  opposed  to  each  other  as  fire  and  water,  which 
can  never  coexist  with  each  other,  can  be  related  as  cause 
and  effect. 

[Conclusion)', — Though  the  quintupled  (pancluknta) fire 
and  water  of  our  sensuous  perception  are  opposed  to 
each  other,  still  we  should  not  suppose  that  the  unquin- 
tupled (a-panch^'knta)  fire  and  water,  which  are  beyond  our 
sensuous  perception  and  which  are  therefore  knowable 


3i8  brahma-vidya  expounded.  [Amnda-ValU. 

through  the  sruti  alone,  are  opposed  to  each  other.  Fur- 
ther, we  see  that  increase  of  heat  produces  perspiration. 
Therefore,  as  taught  in  the  two  upanishads,  water  is  born 
out  of  Brahman  assuming  the  form  of  fire. 

*Pood*  means  earth. 

The  Chhandogya  says,  they  (waters)  created  food.”'*' 
This  statement  has  been  discussed  as  follows  in  the  Ved^^n- 
ta-s«tra  (II.  iii.  12): 

What  does  ^ food*  mean  ? Does  it  mean  the 
element  of  matter  known  as  earth,  or  does  it  mean  the 
eatable  things  such  as  barley  ? 

(Prima  facie  view) In  common  parlance  the  word  ‘food’ 
is  used  in  the  latter  sense. 

{Conclusion) The  word  ‘food*  means  here  the  element  of 
matter  called  earth,  inasmuch  as  it  occurs  in  a section 
treating  of  the  evolution  of  the  mahabhwtas  or  primary 
elements  of  matter.  Further,  the  sruti  says:  “The  red 
colour  of  burning  fire  is  the  colour  of  fire,  the  white  colour 
of  fire  is  the  colour  of  water,  the  black  colour  of  fire  is  the 
colour  of  food.”t  It  is  mostly  in  earth,  not  in  barley  or  rice, 
that  we  meet  with  black  colour.  And  the  parallel  teaching 
is  expressed  in  the  Taittir/yaka  in  the  words  “from  water, 
earth.”  On  the  strength  of  this  parallelism,  we  may  inter- 
pret ‘food’  to  mean  earth.  It  should  not  be  urged  that  this 
interpretation  is  not  warranted  by  the  etymology  of  the 
word  ‘ anna’  (what  is  eaten) ; for,  the  element  of  earth  and 
food  being  related  to  each  other  as  cause  and  effect,  they 
are  looked  upon  as  one.  Therefore  the  word  ‘food*  here 
signifies  earth. 


• Op.  cit.  6-2-4.  t Ibid.  6—4—1. 


Ann  /,]  ‘THE  INFINITE  AND  EVOLUTION.  3I9 

Brahman  is  the  essential  cause  of  all  evolved  things. 

(Vedsnta-swtra,  II.  iii.  13) 

(Question) In  settling  the  various  points  discussed  above, 
it  has  been  assumed  that  every  effect  is  evolved  from  Brah- 
man Himself  who  assumes  the  form  of  the  effect  preceding. 
The  question  we  now  propose  to  discuss  is:  Is  it  the  sks5a, 
the  air,  etc,  that  produce  their  effects  ? or,  is  it  Brahman 
assuming  the  form  of  the  akasa,  the  air,  etc.,  that  produces 
the  effects  ? 

(P/ima  facie  view  )\— ‘Ike  first  of  the  two  alternatives 
appears  to  be  reasonable.  In  the  words  from  flkasa,  the 
air  is  born  ; from  the  air,  fire,*’  and  so  on,  the  sruti  de- 
clares that  from  the  flkn5a,  etc.,  unassociated  with  Brah- 
man, the  succeeding  things  are  evolved. 

(Conclusion)',— -In  the  words  **  He  who  is  within  controll- 
ing the  “ He  who  is  within  controlling  the  air,*** 

the  sruti  denies  the  independence  of  the  akasa,  etc.  Similarly 
in  the  words  “the  light  saw’*  ! “ the  waters  saw,**  t etc.,  the 
sruti  teaches  that  light,  etc.,  are  creators  endued  with 
thought;  and  this  power  of  thinking  is  not  possible  in  the 
insentient  things  which  are  quite  independent  of  the  intelli- 
gent Brahman.  Wherefore  the  cause  of  every  thing  is 
Brahman  Himself  assuming  the  form  of  ak«sa  etc. 

Dissolution  occurs  in  the  reverse  order  of  Evolution. 

(Ved^nta-s«tra  II.  iii.  14.) 

(Question) Does  the  dissolution  of  things  take  place  in 
the  same  order  in  which  they  are  evolved,  or  in  a different 
order  ? 


* Bri.  Up.  3-7  f Ohha,  6-2. 


320  BRAHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Ananda^ValU. 

(Prima  facie  view) -The  order  in  which  the  evolution  of 
things  takes  place  being  once  defined,  the  same  order  must 
apply  to  the  process  of  dissolution. 

{Conclusion) If  it  be  held  that  the  cause  is  dissolved 
before  the  effect,  it  would  follow  that  the  effect  will  remain 
for  a time  without  its  material  cause : which  is  absurd.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  Purawa  says : 

“ O God-sage,  the  world-basis,  namely,  earth, 
is  dissolved  in  water,  water  is  dissolved  in  fire, 
fire  is  dissolved  in  the  air.” 

Thus  the  reverse  order  of  evolution  is  equally  well  defined 
in  the  Purawa  as  the  order  in  which  dissolution  takes  place. 
We  conclude  therefore  that  dissolution  takes  place  from 
earth  upward,  the  order  of  evolution  being  reversed  here. 

No  Self-contradiction  in  the  Sruti  as  to  Evolution. 

(Vedanta- S?ftr a,  II.  hi.  15.) 

Is  the  foregoing  order  of  evolution  contra- 
dicted or  not  by  the  following  passage  of  the  sruti : 

From  Him  rise  life,  mind,  and  all  the  senses, 
aether,  air,  fire,  water,  and  earth  supporting 
all.”  - 

(Prima  facie  view)  The  order  oi  evolution  from  akasa 
downwards  is  violated  by  the  order  given  in  this  passage 
wherein  praaa,  etc.,  are  said  to  have  been  evolved  prior  to 
akasa,  etc. 

{Conclusion) For,  truly,  my  child,  mind  comes  of 
earth,  life  comes  of  water,  speech  comes  of  fire.  ” f In  these 


* Mundaka-up*  2-1-3. 


t Ohha.  6-5-4. 


AnU.  L ] 'THB  IKFIKITE  AND  EVoLuTION.  3^1 

words,  the  sruti  declares  that  pra«a,  etc.  are  things  com- 
posed of  the  elements  of  matter.  They  should  accordingly  be 
classed  with  the  elements  of  matter,  and  therefore  there  can 
be  no  reference  here  to  any  special  order  of  their  evolution. 
Moreover,  the  passage  quoted  above  from  the  Muwdaka  does 
not  mean  any  particular  order  at  all.  There  is  no  word  or 
particle  in  the  passage  signifying  order,  as  there  is  in  the 
Taittmy a passage,  from  dkasa.  is  horn  the  air**  and  so 
on ; whereas  the  Muwiaka  passage  is  a mere  enumeration  of 
things  evolved.  Hence  no  contradiction  between  the  two 
passages. 


41 


CHAPTER  VII. 

MAYA  AND  ISVARA. 

Maya  described. 

Maya  is  the  upadsna  or  material  cause  of  the  whole  uni- 
verse which  is  made  up  of  elements  of  matter  and  material 
objects,  from  akasa.  down  to  man.  Being  itself  the  material 
cause,  Maya  makes  Brahman  also,  in  whom  it  inheres,  the 
prakriti  or  material  cause.  The  peculiar  nature  of  Maya  is 
clearly  described  in  the  Nrisi>«ha-Uttara-Tflpan»ya-Upa- 
nishad  in  the  following  words : 

“And  May  a is  of  the  nature  of  daik- 
ness  (T amas ),  as  our  experience  shows. 

It  is  insentient ; it  is  ignorance  itself; 
it  is  infinite,  void,  formed  of  ‘ this,' 
pertaining  to  This  here,  and  reveal- 
• ing  It  eternal.  Though  evcr\non-exist- 
ent,  Maya  appears  to  the  deluded  as 
if  it  were  one  with  the  Self.  It  shows 
th4  being  and  non-being  of  This  herc> 
as  manifested  and  unmanifested,  as 
independent  and  dependent.  * 

To  explain ; t 

* Op.  cit.  9. 

t A clear  explanation  of  this  passage  is  given  by  Vidyaranya 
in  his  commentary  on  the  Upanishad,  ns  also  in  the  Chitradipa, 
the  sixth  section  in  the  Vedanta-Panehadasi.  The  accompanying 
explanation  is  derived  from  both.— (Tr.j 


MAYA  AND  ISVARA. 


333 


Jm  /,] 

Maya  as  a fact  of  common  experience. 

Maya  is  of  the  nature  of  Tamas, — darkness,  nescience 
(sijnansi).  The  proof  of  its  existence  lies  in  our  own  experi- 
ence, as  the  sruti  itself  declares.  So  the  common  question— 
how  can  ajnana  inhere  in  Brahman  who  is  pure  conscious- 
ness ? — is  answered  by  an  appeal  to  our  own  experience. 
The  association  of  Brahman  (Consciousness)  with  Maya  or 
Avidya  (nescience)  is  a fact  of  experience,  and  there  is  no 
use  putting  the  question.  “It  is  insentient  (jada),  it  is  ignor- 
ance in  these  words  the  sruti  appeals  to  the  facts  of  our 
experience  to  prove  the  existence  of  May^.  All  objects 
other  than  the  Chit  or  Consciousness,  such  as  pots,  are 
insentient ; and  this  insentiency  of  the  external  objects  is 
none  other  than  the  insentiency  experienced  in  sushupti. 
When  intellect  fails  to  perceive  a thing,  people  call  it 
ignorance  (moha).  ‘ I am  ignorant ; * ‘ This  is  ignorant ; * 
the  ignorance  which  manifests  itself  in  this  form  is  none 
other  than  the  ignorance  which  supervenes  the  Self  in  the 
state  of  sushupti  (deep  dreamless  sleep)  ; and  the  ignorance 
of  the  sushupti  state,  too,  is  a fact  of  every  one's  experience. 
Thus,  the  insentient  and  delusive  Maya  is  experienced  by 
all  people  in  their  ordinary  life.  As  all  persons,  from  the 
most  intelligent  down  to  children  and  cowherds,  experience 
the  Maya,  it  is  said  to  be  infinite,  i.  e.,  universal.  Like- 
wise, the  ignorance  of  the  sushupti  state  is  all-comprehend- 
ing ; and  there  is  nothing  which  does  not  come  within  the 
sweep  of  ignorance  even  in  the  waking  state.  Ignorance 
(moha)  is  therefore  infinite  (ananta).  The  infinite  insentient 
Maya,  of  the  nature  of  ignorance,  is  thus  a fact  of  every 
man's  experience,  and  therefore  the  teaching  of  thq  $rqti 
that  Maya  is  the  cause  of  the  universe  is  not  oppose*  tb 


334  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXI>OUNDED.  [Aftaflda^Vdli. 

experience.  And  it  is  with  a view  to  give  us  to  understand 
the  non-duality  of  Brahman  that  the  sruti  teaches  that  the 
whole  universe  is  nothing  but  Maya  (a  strange  inexplicable 
phenomenon),  of  the  nature  of  Tamas  (darkness)  or  avidya 
(nescience) 

Maya  as  inexplicable. 

Though  Maya  is  a fact  of  every  one’s  experience,  it  is 
not  real,  because,  from  a rational  point  of  view,  it  is  inexpli- 
cable (anirvachamya),  as  the  sruti  has  described  it  in  the 
words  “ Then  it  was  not  ‘asat,’  it  was  not  ‘sat.’  We  cannot 
say  that  it  is  ‘ a-sat*,  that  it  does  not  exist : because  it  is 
present  before  consciousness.  Neither  can  we  say  that  it  is 
‘sat,*  that  it  exists  : because  it  is  denied  in  the  sruti  in  the 
words  “ there  is  no  duality  whatever  here”. t—M^y^i  is  in- 
explicable from  another  point  of  view.  In  the  state  of 
dreamless  sleep  there  is  in  us  no  other  light  than  the  self- 
luminous  Chit  or  Consciousness,  and  M^ya  is  experienced 
as  inhering  in  that  pure  Consciousness,  as  we  have  already 
seen.  We  are  at  a loss  to  explain  how  the  insentient  Maya 
can  thus  inhere  in  pure  Consciousness  (Chit). 

Maya  as  a non-entity. 

It  is  from  the  stand-point  of  wisdom  (vidyfl)  or  right 
knowledge  that  Maya  is  declared  in  the  sruti  to  be  a non- 
entity (tuchchha) ; for,  in  the  vision  of  the  enlightened, 
Maya  is  ever  absent. 

It  is  in  this  Maya  or  Avidy^^  experienced  in  the  sushupti 
that  the  whole  universe,  everything  comprised  in  the  vast 
Evolution,  is  contained  in  the  form  of  vasanas  or  latent 
tendencies  and  impressions.  Thus  Maya  is  of  three  kinds 
differing  with  the  three  stand-points  of  view.  It  is  at  all 
tiilies  non-existent,  a mere  void  (tuchchha),  from  the  stand- 
^ Bra.  2-8-9  f Ka^ha-XJp.  4-11. 


MAYA  AND  ISVARA. 


3^5 


Am.  /.] 

point  of  the  sruti,  which  represents  the  right  knowledge  of 
the  enlightened.  It  is  inexplicable  from  the  stand-point  of 
reason.  It  is  a fact  from  the  stand-point  of  ordinary 
experience. 

Maya  is  rooted  in  the  pure  Atman. 

[Objection) Where  does  the  root  of  this  Maya  or  Avidya 
lie  ? It  cannot  be  in  jiva,  because  jiva  is  subservient  to 
Avidya,  he  being  a creature  thereof.  The  question  is,  where- 
in,— prior  to  the  evolution  of  jiva  and  other  things  in  the 
universe — does  Maya  rest  ? and  what  is  that  thing  which 
being  an  object  (vishaya)  of  Avidya,— i.  e. , which  being  un- 
known,— ]i\2L  and  other  things  in  the  universe  come  into 
being  ? Neither  in  /svara  is  Maya  rooted  ; for,  He  is  omni- 
scient in  Himself  and  a product  of  Avidya. 

[Answer): — Yes;  for  the  reasons  adduced  above,  Maya  is 
rooted  neither  in  /svara  nor  in  jtva.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
pertains  to  This  here ; it  is  rooted  in  the  pure  Chit,  in  the 
Absolute  Conciousness,  which  shines  forth  self-luminous 
to  the  whole  world  in  the  sushupti,  constituting  the  basis 
as  well  as  the  object  of  Avidya  whereon  rests  all  differen- 
tiation of  jiva  and  /svara. 

Maya  tends  to  make  Atman  the  more  luminous. 

It  is  no  doubt  evident  from  the  fact  of  every  one’s  experi- 
ence expressed  in  the  words  “ I do  not  know  myself”,  that 
ajwana  or  nescience  is  primarily  rooted  in  the  ^tman  alone, 
in  the  Absolute  Consciousness,  and  that  it  is  this  Absolute 
Consciousness  which  being  primarily  unknown,  the  universe 
presents  itself  to  Consciousness.  This  relation,  however,  of 

• That  is  to  say,  lavara  as  distinct  from  jiva  is  a being 
evolved  from  Chit  by  Avidya. 


3^  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  \^Amn^Valli. 

^tmac  to  Avidya  never  really  detracts  in  the  least  from  His 
purity : on  the  other  hand,  like  clarified  butter  poured  into 
the  fire,  it  only  tends  to  increase  His  luminosity  as  its  Wit- 
ness. 

(Objection): — Then,  as  the  blazing  fire  burns  up  the 
clarified  butter,  ^tman  may  burn  up  Avidyj;  so  that  there 
can  be  no  Avidya  at^all  ? 

(Answer) : — Yes : Avidya  is  ever  non-existent. 

(Objection) : — Then,  how  is  it  that  Avidyo  is  spoken  of  as 
the  cause  of  the  universe  ? 

(.4 Though  Avidy«  is  really  non-existent,  the 
ignorant,  who  cannot  discriminate,  imagine  that  it  exists  and 
that  it  is  one  as  it  were  with  the  ^tman.  The  non-existent 
appears  to  the  ignorant  as  if  it  were  existent.  From  the 
stand-point  of  the  ignorant,  therefore,  Avidya  may  be 
spoken  of  as 'the  cause  of  the  universe. 

Maya  differentiates  Atman  into  Jiva  and  Isvara. 

M(jy»  or  Avidytf  reveals  the  ‘being’  or  existence  of 
Consciousness, — the  locus  as  well  as  the  object  of  Avidya, 
—by  way  of  constituting  the  object  witnes-sed  by  Conscious- 
ness and  thus  enabling  Consciousness  to  shine  forth,  not- 
withstanding that  the  pure  Consciousness  cannot  in  Itself 
be  spoken  of  either  as  being  or  non-being  in  the  ordinary 
sense  of  these  terms;  while,  in  the  case  of  the  ignorant, 
M»y»  renders  Consciousness  non-existent  by  veiling  It. 
When  Consciousness  is  manifested,  it  is  a being ; when  It 
is  unmanifested  it  is  a non-being.  The  Absolute  undifferen- 
tiated Consciousness,  existing  by  virtue  of  Its  own  inherent 
^tirer,  becomes  manifested  by  contact  with  Avidya,  by  way 
of  bringing  that  Avidya  iuto  light,  just  as  light  diffused  in 


Maya  AKD  iSvara< 


32f 


Afm.L\ 

space  becomes  manifested  by  bringing  corporeal  objects  into 
light.  Though  Consciousness  is  self-luminous,  still  It 
becomes  unmanifested  when  the  insentient  preponderates,— 
such  being  the  very  nature  of  Avidy/7.  According  as  ^tman 
is  manifested  or  unmanifested,  He  is  independent  or  depen- 
dent, He  is  the  /svara  or  a jiva.  -^tman  is  independent  with 
reference  to  Isiaya  in  so  far  as,  while  able  to  manifest 
Himself,  He  makes  it  appear  to  exist  and  contributes 
to  its  creative  power,  (arthakriyakarin) . And  Aimaxi  be- 
comes dependent  on  M.aya  when  Consciousness  appears  to 
be  subordinate  to  the  M^y^  which  abides  in  Him,  and  as 
a result  the  Self  is  identified  with  the  '^laya  itself.  Thus  the 
One  Consciousness  appears  in  the  differentiated  form  of 
jiva  and  /5vara,  according  as  It  is  or  is  not  associated  with 
ahankara  (egoism) . 

Maya  and  the  Universe. 

"^laya  exhibits  the  being  and  non-being  of  the  universe  by 
evolution  and  involution,  by  unrolling  and  rolling  in,  like  a 
cloth  with  painted  pictures,  yiaya  is  dependent,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  not  perceived  apart  from  Consciousness,  It  is  also 
independent  because  it  brings  about  a change  in  the  Self 
who  is  unattached.  It  converts  -^4tman,  who  is  immutable 
and  free  from  attachment,  into  the  universe,  and  has  also 
created  /svara  and  jiva,  out  of  a semblance  of  Consciousness. 

Maya  as  a wonder-worker. 

Without  affecting  at  all  the  Immutable  Self  ( Kw^astha) 
Viaya  creates  the  universe  and  all.  There  is  here  naught 
that  is  surprising  to  us,  since  it  is  in  the  very  nature  of 
Maya  to  bring  about  the  impossible.  Just  as  liquidity 
is  an  inherent  property  of  water,  heat  of  fire,  hardness  of 
stone,  so  also  the  achievement  of  the  impossible  is  an 


3^  BRAHMA-VIDYABKPOUNDBD.  [Amndd^VoUL 

inherent  property  of  Maya,  It  is  not  due  to  external  causes. 
One’s  mind  is  filled  with  astonishment  at  a juggler’s  pheno- 
menon so  long  only  as.  one  does  not  know  that  it  is  caused 
by  the  juggler ; once  it  is  known,  one  rests  satisfied  that  it 
is  a mere  maya. 

All  questions  arise  against  those  only  who  maintain  the 
reality  of  the  universe.  No  question  can  arise  against 
Maya  because  it  is  itself  a question,  a wonder.  If  you  raise 
a question  against  this  ^question  itself,  I raise  another 
question  against  your  question.  Wherefore  the  question 
should  be  solved,  but  it  should  not  be  attacked  by  a counter 
question.  Maya,  which  is  a wonder  by  its  very  nature, 
is  a question  by  itself ; and  all  intelligent  persons  should, 
if  they  can,  try  and  find  a solution  for  it. 

The  Universe  is  a Maya. 

{Objection) ; — That  the  universe  is  a M^^ya  has  itself  yet 
to  be  made  out. 

(AnsivcY) : — If  so,  we  shall  proceed  to  determine  it.  Let 
us  first  see  what  sort  of  a thing  that  is  which  we  call  maya 
in  common  parlance.  That  which  presents  itself  clearly  to 
our  mind,  but  which  it  is  not  possible  to  explain, — people 
apply  to  that  the  term  maya,  as  for  instance,  the  indraj^ila, 
the  phenomenon  produced  by  a juggler.  Now,  the  universe 
clearly  presents  itself  to  our  consciousness ; but  its  expla- 
nation is  impossible.  Therefore  the  universe  is  a mere 
Maya,  as  you  may  see  if  you  view  the  matter  impartially. 

Even  if  all  learned  men  were  to  join  together  and  proceed 
to  explain  the  universe,  ignorance  stares  them  in  the  face 
in  some  one  quarter  or  anotner.  What  answers,  for  instance, 
can  you  give  to  the  following  questions  ?— How  are  the 
body,  its  sense-organs  and  the  rest  produced  from  semen  ? 


MaVA  AMD  ISVARA. 


34$ 


J»U.  /.] 

How  has  consciousness  come  to  be  there  ?— Do  you  say 
that  such  is  the  very  nature  of  semen  ? — Then  pray  tell  me 
how  you  have  come  to  know  it.  The  inductive  method  of 
agreement  and  difference  fails  you  here ; for  there  is  suOh  a 
thing  as  sterile  semen.  “ I know  nothing  whatever;**  this 
is  your  last  resort.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Great  Ones 
regard  the  universe  to  be  a magic.  On  this  the  ancients 
say : “ what  else  can  be  a greater  magic  than  that  the  semen 
abiding  in  the  womb  should  become  a conscious  being  endued 
with  various  off-shoots  springing  from  it  such  as  hands, 
head  and  feet,  and  that  the  same  should  become  invested 
with  the  marks  of  infancy,  youth,  and  old  age  following 
one  another  and  should  see,  eat,  hear,  smell,  go  and  come?  ’* 
As  in  the  case  of  the  body,  so  in  the  case  of  the  fig  seed  and 
tree  and  the  like.  Ponder  well.  Where  is  the  tiny  seed,  and  * 
where  is  the  big  tree  ? Therefore  rest  assured  that  the 
universe  is  a maya.  As  to  the  T^irkikas  (logicians)  and 
others  who  profess  to  give  a rational  explanation  of  the 
universe,  they  have  all  been  taught  a severe  lesson  by 
Harshamisra  and  others.  Manu  says  that  those  things 
which  are  beyond  thought  should  not  be  subjected  to  argu- 
ment, and  it  is  indeed  impossible  to  imagine  even  in  mind 
how  the  universe  has  been  produced.  Be  assured  that  Maya 
is  the  seed  endued  with  the  potentiality  of  producing  what  is 
unthinkable.  This  seed,  M^y^,  is  alone  present  to  consci- 
ousness in  sushupti  or  deep  dreamless  sleep. 

Various  views  as  to  the  origin  and  purpose 
of  Creation. 

The  Svet(t5vataras  speak  of  the  Mahesvara,  the  Great 
Lord,  as  one  who  owns  this  Maya  and  excercises  control 
over  it.  That  He  is  the  creator  is  also  declared  by  the 


33^  BRAHMA-viDYA  fijtpoUNDED.  [Aftafida^V allu 

Svet^vataras  in  the  following  words : 

**  From  that,  the  magic  Master  (M^yin) 
brings  this  all ; in  this  another  by  His  magic 
power  (Maya)  is  held  in  bonds.” 

As  to  the  origin  and  purpose  of  Creation,  Gau^iapadacharya 
states  in  his  memorial  verses  on  the  Mawiakya-Upanishad 
the  various  views  on  the  subject  in  the  following  words  : 

“ Others  who  contemplate  on  Creation  deem 
it  an  expansion  (vibhwti).  By  others  Crea- 
tion is  supposed  to  be  of  the  nature  of  a dream 
(svapna)  or  maya.  ‘ Creation  is  a mere  will  of 
the  Lord  ;*  thus  has  been  Creation  determined 
(by  some).  Those  who  contemplate  on  Time 
' think  that  all  beings  proceed  from  Time. 

Some  say  that  Creation  is  for. the  sake  of 
pleasure  ; others  hold  that  it  is  for  sport.  It 
is  the  inherent  nature  of  the  Shining  One 
(Deva) : what  desire  can  He  have  who  has 
attained  all  pleasures  ? ” 

To  explain : Several  views  are  held  as  regards  the  nature 
and  purpose  of  Creation.  One  view  is  that  the  /svara 
creates  the  world  with  the  view  of  manifesting  His  own 
glory  as  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  i,  with  a view  to  shew 
how  great  and  mighty  He  is.  This  and  other  views  to  be 
explained  below  as  to  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Creation 
are  advanced  only  by  those  who  study  evolution,  whereas 
those  who  study  the  Absolute  Truth  lay  no  stress  on  evolu- 
tion. The  5ruti  says  that  “ It  is  the  Lord  who  by  His  Maya 

""  ♦ Op  cit.  4—9,  * Op.  Cit.  i.  7-9. 

* The  explanation  is  taken  from  the  commentaries  of  &nkarc6- 
Charya,  .iuandagh-i,  and  Vidyaraaja. 


MAYA  AND  ISVARA. 


33* 


Am.  I.  ] 

shines  in  all  the  various  forms.”  t A juggler,  for  instance, 
projects  the  magical  thread  in  space  {akasd)  ; and  thereby 
ascending  into  the  air,  weapons  in  hand,  he  goes  far  be- 
yond our  ken,  is  there  hacked  by  the  sword  into  pieces  in 
battle,  falls  down  in  pieces  on  earth,  and  again  rises  up  alive 
in  the  presence  of  the  spectators ; but  these  spectators  do 
not  care  to  find  out  the  truth  or  otherwise  of  the  maya  and 
the  phenomenon  produced  by  the  maya.  Similarly,  here,  the 
three  states  of  consciousness,  namely,  sushupti,  fdeep  sleep), 
svapna  ^dream)  and  j^grat  fwaking  state),  are  like  the 
magic  thread  projected  in  space  by  the  juggler.  The  reflec- 
tions of  Aimsm  in  these  states,  called  respectively  the 
Prdjwa(wise),  the  Taijasa(luminous),  the  Vi5va(penetrating), 
and  so  on,  may  be  compared  to  the  juggler  who  appears  to 
ascend  into  the  air  by  the  magic  thread.  Entirely  distinct 
from  the  thread  and  from  the  man  who  ascends  by  it  is  the 
juggler  (raay^vin),  the  real  personage  who  has  all  the  while 
been  standing  invisible  on  the  earth,  veiled  byhism^yya; 
and  like  him  is  the  Supreme  Reality,  the  Fourth  One  lying 
beyond  the  three  states  of  consciousness.  Consequently, 
those  i4ry as  (noble  persons)  who  seek  liberation  take  to 
the  study  of  the  Supreme  Reality  alone,  not  to  the  fruitless 
study  of  Creation.  Therefore  the  various  views  here  referred 
to  are  the  theories  held  by  students  of  evolution. 

Accordingly,  there  are  also  persons  who  hold  that  Creation 
is,  like  a dream,  a casual  manifestation,  occurring  in  the 
absence  of  enquiry ; and  there  are  others  still  who  hold  that 
evolution  is  a mayd,  the  sole  purpose  being  the  exhibition 
of  a wonder-working  power.  These  two  theories  are  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  siddhanta  or  othodox  Vedai^tic  view. 


t Bri.  Up,  2-6-19, 


352  BRAHMA^iDYA  EXPOUNDED,  [Jmnda^  ValU 

The  things  seen  in  a dream  have  a counterpart  in  the 
waking  consciousness ; and  as  such  they  may  be  real  in  one 
sense*  Similarly  the  maya^  inhering  in  the  magical  stone 
or  the  like  which  is  a real  substance,  may  be  so  far  real  in 
one  sense.  According  to  the  orthodox  view,,  the  universe 
has  not  even  this  much  of  reality  in  it. 

A fourth  view  as  to  the  nature  of  Creation  is  that  it  is 
controlled  entirely  by  the 'mere  will  (ichchha)  of  the  7s  vara. 
When  many  dishes  of  sweet  viands  are  placed  before  a 
man,  it  depends  entirely  on  his  own  choice  as  to  which  one 
or  more  dishes  he  will  partake  of.  So  also  here,  /svara’s  will 
is  unfailing,  unobstructed.  A pot,  for  instance,  is  a mere 
act  of  the  potter’s  will  and  nothing  more ; for,  he  first 
forms  within  in  his  mind  an  idea  of  what  its  image  and  form 
and  name  ought  to  be  and  then  produces  the  thing  in  the 
external  world.  So  the  /svara’s  creation  is  His  mere 
thought  and  nothing  more.  Such  is  the  view  of  Creation 
held  by  some  Theists. 

Others,  again,— namely,  the  jyotir-vids,  the  students  of 
astronomy,— maintain  that  Time,  not  the  /svara,  is  the 
cause  of  the  universe,  the  /svara  remaining  quite  an  in- 
different impartial  spectator.  Trees  put  forth  flowers  and 
fruits  at  particular  seasons  of  the  year,  so  that  this  bud- 
ding forth  and  ripening  of  fruits  depends  upon  time.  Simi- 
larly the  manifestation  of  the  universe  depends  on  Time. 

Thus  various  views  are  held  as  to  the  origin  of  the  uni- 
verse. Divergent  views  prevail  even  as  regards  the  purpose 
of  Creation.  According  to  some,  God  creates  the  universe 
for  His  own  enjoyment,  in  the  same  way  that  a man  engages 
in  agricufture  or  commerce  for  his  own  enjoyment;  while 
accordix^  to  some  others,  God  engages  in  the  creation  of 


MAYA  AND  ISVARA. 


333 


Am.  /.] 

universe  for  mere  sport,  just  as  a man  plays  at  dice  or 
engages  in  other  games  as  a matter  of  diversion. 

Orthodox  theory  as  to  the  nature  of  Evolution. 

Last  comes  the  orthodox  theory  of  the  Vedanta.  Evolution 
is  the  very  nature  (svabhava)  of  the  Divine  Being,  and 
is  a creation  of  Maya  which  is  inherent  in  Him,  and  which, 
as  has  been  already  shewn,  is  a fact  of  universal  experi- 
ence. Just  as  Brahman  is,  in  His  essential  nature.  Real, 
Consciousness,  and  Bliss  and  nothing  else,  so  birth,  exist- 
ence, and  destruction  of  the  universe  are  natural  to  Brahman 
endued  with  Maya ; so  that  no  specific  purpose  need  be 
sought  for,  as  He  is  devoid  of  all  desire.  This  is  the 
orthodox  theory. 

The  two  theories  as  to  the  purpose  of  Creation  just 
discussed  are  false.  ‘‘What  desire  can  He  cherish  who 
has  attained  all  pleasures?”  Thus  does  the  Teacher 
(Gaurfapadacharya)  set  aside  the  two  views  regarding  the 
purpose  of  Creation. 

Or  it  may  be  that  here  the  Teacher  sets  aside  all  the 
foregoing  theories  in  the  words,  “ what  desire  can  He  have 
who  has  attained  all  pleasures  ? ” But  for  Maya,  the 
Supreme  Self  who  is  in  possession  of  all  pleasures  can 
never  be  supposed  to  think  of  evolving  the  universe  with 
the  object  of  manifesting  His  own  glory  and  lordly  power. 
The  universe  created  out  of  maya  and  dream  cannot  but  be 
of  the  nature  of  maya  and  dream;  and  the  words ‘maya’ 
and  ‘ dream  (svapna)  ’ denote  what  is  unreal.  Neither  is 
it  ever  possible  for  the  Supreme  One,  who  is  essentially 
Bliss  and  Bliss  alone,  to  cherish  a desire  (ichchha)  or  to 
engage  in  a voluntary  act.  Being  never  subject  to  any 
change  in  Himself,  He  can  never  cherish  a desire  or 
engage  in  a voluntary  act.  To  Brahman  unaffected  by 


334  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  ^Amnda-^VulU. 

'iHaya^  no  pleasure  or  sport  can  be  ascribed.  Therefore  all 
creation  by  the  Lord  is  a mere  illusion  {may a). 

Now  as  to  the  theory  that  all  beings  proceed  from  Time 
(kala).  The  rope  appears  to  be  a serpent  in  virtue  of  its 
own  nature,  owing  to  our  ajwana,  i.  e.,  when  we  are 
ignorant  of  its  real  nature ; similarly  the  Supreme  mani- 
fests Himself  as  akasdi  and  so  on  by  virtue  of  His  own  in- 
herent power,  owing  to  M.aya  or  our  ignorance  of  His  true 
nature.  The  sruti  nowhere  declares  that  Time  is  the  cause 
of  all  beings,  whereas  it  expressly  declares  that  akasdi, 
is  born  from  the  Self. 

Isvara  is  the  Dispenser  of  the  fruits  of  actions. 

{Ohjeciion) ; — It  is  the  former  acts  (karmas)  of  sentient 
creatures  which  generate  the  bodies  in  which  those  crea- 
tures reap  the  fruits  of  their  acts.  Of  what  avail  is  the 
/5vara  spoken  of  ? 

(Answer): — Not  so  ; /jvara  alone  is  the  Dispenser  of  all 
fruits  of  actions  as  has  been  established  in  the  Vedanta- 
sutras  III.  ii.  38 — 41.  There  the  point  is  discussed  as 
follows : 

{Question) : — Is  it  the  act  (karma)  itself  that  dispenses  its 
fruit,  or  is  it  the  /svara  worshipped  by  means  of  the  act  ? 

(Prima  facie  view) An  act  is  no  doubt  of  only  a tempo- 
rary duration.  It  does  not,  however,  according  to  the 
ritualistic  school  of  Jaimini,  disappear  altogether  without 
generating  something  new  called  apilrva,  which  may  be 
supposed  to  be  either  a form  put  on  by  the  act  after  it  has 
disappeared  from  view,  or  a form  put  on  by  the  effect  prior 
to  its  manifestation  at  a subsequent  period.  And  through 
this  api^rva  the  act  done,  which  to  all  appearance  is  tempo- 


Anu  /,]  NiAYA  ISVAltA.  33  5 

rary,  may  itself  produce  the  effect.  To  maintain  therefore 
that  /svara  is  the  Dispenser  of  fruits  involves  a needless 
assumption. 

{Conclusion): — The  apt^rva  of  karma  is  insentient  in  itself 
and  has  therefore  no  power  to  dispense  the  fruit  of  the 
act  just  in  accordance  with  its  specific  nature  and 
magnitude.  In  our  own  experience  we  see  no  such  power 
possessed  by  an  act  of  service,  which  is  insentient.  Therefore 
it  should  be  admitted  that,  as  it  is  the  king  to  whom  service 
is  rendered  that  dispenses  the  fruits  of  the  service,  so  it  is 
/svara  worshipped  by  works  that  dispenses  the  fruits  of  the 
works.  Certainly,  this  view  involves  no  needless  assumption ; 
for,  /svara  is  revealed  in  the  Vedas  and  is  therefore  not  an 
assumption.  That  /svara  alone  is  the  dispenser  of  the 
fruits,  of  good  and  bad  deeds,  of  dharma  and  adharma,  and 
that  He  alone  impels  men  to  those  acts  is  taught  by  the 
sruti  in  the  following  words : 

“For,  He  makes  him,  whom  He  wishes  to  lead 
up  from  these  worlds,  do  a good  deed  ; and 
the  same  makes  him,  whom  He  wishes  to 
lead  down  from  these  worlds,  do  a bad  deed.”" 

On  the  contrary,  as  /svara  is  thus  proved  by  proper  evid- 
ence, it  is  the  objector’s  position  that  involves  a gratuitous 
assumption,  the  alleged  ap//rva  being  nowhere  spoken  of  in 
the  sruti.  Hence  the  conclusion  that  /svara  who  is  wor- 
shipped by  works  is  the  dispenser  of  the  fruits  of  those 
works. 

Isvara  is  both  the  efficient  and  the  material 
cause  of  the  universe. 

That  /svara  is  both  the  efficient  and  the  material  cause  of 


Kaus.  Up.  3-8, 


33$  fiRAHMA-VIDYA  BXI>OUNDBD.  [Amndo^VolU. 

the  universe  has  been  established  in  theVedanta-SBtras 
I.  iv.  33-27,  as  follows : 

{Question) The  Upanishads  teach  that  Brahman  is  the 
cause  of  the  universe.  The  question  is : Do  they  teach  that 
He  is  the  mere  efficient  cause  of  the  universe  ? or  that  He 
is  the  material  cause  as  well  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) He  is  only  the  efficient  cause  of  the 
imiverse.  For,  in  the  words  “ He  thought  ” the  sruti  refers 
to  His  having  thought  of  the  universe  to  be  evolved. 
Certainly  the  thinking  of  the  effect  to  be  produced  makes 
Him  the  mere  efficient  (nimitta)  cause. 

[Cc^^usion) : — “ He  thought,  * may  I be  born  manifold:’  ” 
in  these  words  the  sruti  declares  that  the  Thinker  Himself 
becomes  manifold  by  being  born  in  various  forms.  There- 
fore, /svara  is  the  upad^^na  or  material  cause  as  well. 
Further,  the  sruti  declares  that  the  One  Brahman  being 
known,  the  whole  universe,  though  not  taught,  becomes 
known.  That  is  to  say,  to  know  the  One  is  to  know  all. 
This  dictum  can  be  explained  only  if  Brahman  is  the 
material  cause  of  all;  for,  then,  it  is  easy  to  justify  the 
dictum  on  the  ground  that  the  universe  is  evolved  from 
Brahman.  If,  on  the  contrary,  Brahman  were  the  mere 
efficient  cause  of  the  universe,  all  things  comprised  in  the 
evolved  universe  would  be  distinct  from  Brahman ; how,  then, 
could  one  be  said  to  kaow  all  by  knowing  Brahman  ? There- 
fore the  sruti  means  that  Brahman  is  the  material  as  well 
as  the  efficient  cause  of  the  universe. 

No  self-contradiction  in  the  Upanishads  as  to  the 
Brahma-vada. 

In  the  Vecknta-s«tras  (from  I.  i.  5 to  I.  iv  13)  it  has 


Anu.  7.] 


MAYA  AND  ISVARA. 


337 


been  shewn  that  all  the  Upanishads  teach,  in  one  voice,  that 
Brahman  is  the  material  as  well  as  the  efficient  cau^e  of 
the  universe.  This  interpretation  has  been  justified  in  the 
Ved^mta-szitras  I.  i.  14-15,  by  way  of  explaining  all  apparent 
self-contradictions  on  the  subject. 

Are  we  right  or  not  in  construing  thus  the 
Vedanta  teaching  as  to  the  Cause  of  the  universe  ? 

[Prima  facie  view) It  would  seem  that  this  interpreta- 
tion is  not  right ; for,  the  Upanishads  are  full  of  self- 
contradictions  and  cannot  be  regarded  as  a prama»a  or 
right  source  of  knowledge  at  all.  The  Taittmya-Upanishad, 
for  instance,  teaches  that  Brahman  creates  akoit,  etc., 
whereas  the  Chhandogya-Upanishad  teaches  that  He 
creates  light, etc.  In  the  Aitareyaka  it  is  said  that  He  begins 
His  creation  with  ‘‘these  worlds,”  while  the  Mu;?rfaka- 
Upanishad  teaches  that  He  starts  with  the  creation  of 
pra«a  and  so  on.  Thus  there  are  self-contradictions  in  the 
teachings  of  the  Upanishads  as  to  the  things  created  by 
Brahman.  Even  their  teaching  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
Cause  involves  a self-contradiction.  The  Chhandogya  speaks 
of  the  Cause  as  Existence  in  the  words  “ Existence  alone 
this  at  first  was,  ” whereas  the  Taittir/yaka  speaks  of  it  as 
Non-existence  in  the  words  “Non-existence  verily  this  at 
first  was,  ” and  the  Aitareyaka  says  that  the  Self  is  the 
Cause,  in  the  words  “ The  Self,  verily,  this  at  first  was, 
one  alone.”  Owing  to  such  self-contradictions  as  these,  it 
is  not  right  to  maintain  that  an  harmonious  self-consistent 
doctrine  as  to  the  Cause  of  the  universe  can  be  made  out 
from  the  teaching  of  the  Upanishads. 

( Conclusion ) :--Granted  that  a difference  ej^ists  in  the 
teaching  of  the  Upanishads  as  to  the  things  creafeS  such  as 


SjS  fiRAHMA.VIDYA  EXPOUNDED . [Anando^  V^IU 

akasa,  and  also  as  to  the  order  in  which  they  are  created, 
^kosa  and  other  created  tilings  are  mentioned  in  the  Upa- 
nishads  not  for  their  own  sake,  but  solely  with  a view  to 
impart  a knowledge  of  Brahman.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  is  no  difference  whatever  in  the  teaching  of  the  Upani- 
shads  as  to  the  nature  of  Brahman,  the  Creator  of  the 
universe,  who  forms  the  main  subject  of  discourse.  Brah- 
man spoken  of  in  one  place  as  Existence  is  designated  in 
another  place  as  the  Self  (-^tman)  with  a view  to  teach 
that  Brahman  Himself  is  in  the  form  of  the  jtva  or  Ego  in 
all.  When  the  sruti  speaks  of  the  Cause  as  Non-existence, 
it  refers  to  the  Avyakrita,  the  Undifferentiated,  but  not  to  an 
absolute  Non-existence;  for,  elsewhere,  in  the  words  ‘‘How 
can  existence  come  out  of  non-existence  ? the  sruti 
expressly  teaches  that  Non-existence  cannot  be  the  Cause. 
All  the  apparent  self-contradictions  thus  admitting  of  an 
easy  explanation,  we  are  right  in  maintaining  that  the 
>Tuti  teaches  in  one  accord  that  Brahman  is  the  Cause  of 
the  universe. 

The  Upanishads  do  not  support  other  doctrines 
of  Cause. 

In  the  Vedrtnta-swtra  I.  iv.  28,  the  same  interpretation 
that  we  have  put  upon  the  teaching  of  the  Upanishads  as 
to  the  Cause  of  the  universe  has  been  upheld  by  way  of 
shewing  that  the  sruti  does  not  lend  any  support  to  the 
doctrine  that  the  atoms,  etc.,  are  the  cause  of  the  uni- 
verse. 

{Qii^stiony^Does  the  Upanishad  anywhere  tegcb  that, 
like  the  atoms,  the  void  (swnya),  and  the  like  are 


Maya  AMd  iSVArA. 


Jhu  /,] 


the  Cause  of  the  universe  ? Or  does  it  teach  everywhere  that 
Brahman  alone,  and  nothing  else,  is  the  Cause  ? 

(Prima  facie  view) : — The  sruti  teaches  also  that  atoms, 
etc. , are  the  Cause  of  the  universe,  for,  it  illustrates 
the  Cause  by  the  example  of  a fig  seed.  To  explain : In 
the  sixth  adhyaya  of  the  Chhandogya-Upanishad,  where 
one  Uddiilaka  instructs  his  pupil  Svetaketu,  the  former 
refers  by  way  of  illustration  to  fig  seeds  which  hold  mighty 
trees  in  their  womb,  with  a view  to  shew  how  the  vast 
external  universe  of  gross  physical  objects  is  comprehended 
within  the  one  subtle  principle.  From  this  we  may  under- 
stand that  the  sruti  means  that  atoms  (paramrx;ms),  corres- 
ponding to  the  fig  seeds  in  the  illustration,  are  the  Cause  of 
the  universe.  And  the  void  (s«nya)  also  is  directly  declared 
to  be  the  Cause  of  the  universe  in  the  words  “ Non-existence 
this  in  the  beginning  was.”  The  theories  of  Nature 
(svabhava)  and  Time  are  also  referred  to  in  the  words 
**Svabhava,  the  inherent  nature,  is  the  cause,  as  some  sages 
say;  Time  as  some  others  hold.”  f Therefore  the  sruti 
supports  those  theories  also  which  respectively  maintain  that 
atoms,  etc.,  are  the  Cause  of  the  universe. 

{Conclusion)  —The  dictum  that,  the  One  being  known,  all 
is  known,  cannot  be  explained  in  the  light  of  nihilism 
(s?/nya-vada)  or  other  theories.  The  swnya  and  the  like 
being  incapable  of  producing  Brahman,  Brahman  cannot 
be  known  by  knowing  the  void  (s/mya)  and  the  like.  The 
illustration  of  fig  seeds  and  so  on  can  be  explained  on  the 
ground  that  Brahman,  who  is  beyond  the  ken  of  the  senses, 
is  very  subtle.  It  has  been  said  I that  the  word  “ non- 


♦ TaUt.  Up.  2-7-1  t X ^*wte  p,  *666 


340 


BRAHMA«VXDYA  E^OUNDEDa  [Aftatlda^V ollL 

existence”  denotes  the  Avyaknta  or  the  Undifferentiated, 
devoid  of  name  and  form.  Nature  (svabhava)  and  Time 
theories  are  referred  to  in  the  sruti  only  as  theories  which 
should  be  rejected.  Hence  the  conclusion  that  Brahman 
alone,  as  taught  in  the  sruti,  is  the  Cause  of  the  universe,— 
not  the  atoms,  or  the  like. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

ON  THE  DEFENSIVE. 


Defence  of  the  Vedic  Doctrine. 

In  the  Vedanta-swtras  ( in  the  Pada  i of  the  Adhyaya  II ) 
all  objections  raised  against  the  doctrine  of  Brahman, — 
which  has  been  made  out  in  the  First  Adhy^iya  as  the  one 
taught  by  all  Upanishads  in  one  voice, — on  the  ground  that 
it  is  opposed  to  the  smntis  or  teachings  of  some  individual 
sages  and  to  the  logic  of  experience,  have  been  answered  in 
thirteen  disijuisitions  (adhikarawas),  all  of  which  together 
form  a defence  of  the  foregoing  exposition  of  the  Vedic 
doctrine.  The  first  disquisition  has  been  digested  as 
follows : 


The  Veda  versus  the  Sankhya  system. 

(Vedanta-swtras  II.  i.  1-2). 

( llie  oppoiunt ) The  Vedic  doctrine  of  Brahman  should 
make  room  for  the  Sankhya  teaching  ; for,  as  the  Sankhya 
teaching  would  otherwise  have  no  scope  at  all,  it  must 
prevail  as  against  the  other.  Of  course  the  Sankhya  doctrine 
has  been  promulgated  for  the  express  purpose  of  teaching 
the  nature  of  things  as  they  are  ; it  has  nothing  whatever 
to  do  with  Dharma,  /.  e.y  with  the  teaching  of  what  one  has  to 
do  ; and  therefore,  if  the  teaching  of  the  Sankhya  system  be 
set  aside  even  in  that  matter,  then  it  would  have  no  scope 
at  all.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  teaching  of  the  Veda, 
which  treats  of  Dharma  as  well  as  Brahman,  be  set  aside  so 
far  as  it  concerns  one  of  them,  namely,  Brahman,  even 


Ui  SRAHtfA^viovA  e}(poukdbo.  [^nando-VoUi, 

then  it  will  have  ample  scope,  so  far  as  it  treats  of  Dharmo. 
Accordingly,  it  is  but  proper  that  the  Vedic  doctrine  of  Brah- 
man  should  give  in  to  the  Ssnkhya  teaching,  inasmuch  as 
otherwise  the  latter  would  have  no  scope  at  all ; whereas  (as 
shewn  above)  the  Vedic  teaching  can  afford  to  make  room 
for  the  other. 

{J'he  Veddntin) : — As  against  the  foregoing,  we  hold  as 
follows : It  is  not  right  that  the  Vedic  teaching  should  be 
made  to  give  in  to  the  'S^inkhya  doctrine ; for,  the  latter 
has  been  falsified  by  the  institutes  of  Manu  and  the  like 
which  speak  of  Brahman  as  the  Cause  of  the  universe.  The 
institutes  of  Manu  and  the  like  are  indeed  more  authorita- 
tive, inasmuch  as  they  are  based  on  the  Vedic  texts  now 
extant,  while  Kapila's  doctrine  has  no  such  basis.  Cer- 
tainly, we  know  of  no  Vedic  text  whatever  supporting  the 
doctrine  that  Pradhana  is  the  Cause;  and  it  has  been 
already  shewn  that  all  extant  Vedic  texts  point  to  Brahman 
as  the  Cause  of  the  universe.  Hence  the  impropriety  of 
making  the  Vedic  doctrine  give  in  to  the  Sankhya  teaching. 

The  Veda  versus  the  Yoga  system. 

(Vedanta-swtras  II  i.  3) 

{The  opponent) The  Yoga  doctrine  is  the  science  taught 
by  Patanjali.  The  eight-stepped  yoga  therein  taught  is 
taught  in  the  extant  Vedic  texts  also.  In  the  Svetssvata- 
ra-Upanishad,  for  instance,  yoga  is  taught  at  great  length. 
Further,  yoga  is  a means  to  knowledge ; for,  in  the  words 
“with  the  sharp  and  subtle  mind  He  is  beheld”*'*  the 
5ruti  declares  that  the  one-pointedness  of  mind  which  can  be 


* Kafha,  Up.  342 


OK  THE  DEPEKSIVE. 


343 


Jnu.  /.} 

accomplished  by  yoga  is  a means  to  the  immediate  realisa- 
tion of  Brahman.  Hence  the  authority  of  the  science  of 
Yoga.  And  this  science  teaches  that  Pradhana  alone  is  the 
Cause  of  the  universe.  Therefore  the  Veda  should  make 
room  for  the  Yoga  doctrine. 

(The  VedAntin) Indeed  the  Yoga  doctrine  is  an  authority 
so  far  as  it  is  concerned  with  its  main  aim,  which  is  to  teach 
the  eight-stepped  yoga ; but  it  is  no  authority  as  regards  the 
non-Vedic  theory  of  Pradh^na,  which  lies  away  from  the 
main  aim  of  its  teaching. — To  explain : Having  started 
with  the  words  “ Now  commences  the  teaching  of  yoga,** 
the  science  then  defines  yoga  in  the  words  “ yoga  is  the 
restraint  of  the  modifications  of  the  thinking  principle  ’*,  and 
expounds  yoga  at  great  length  in  the  sequel;  so  that 
the  main  aim  of  tlie  science  is  yoga.  The  science  does  not, 
on  the  other  hand,  start  with  Pradhana  and  the  rest  as  the 
main  subject  of  its  teaching.  When  in  the  second  section 
which  is  devoted  to  an  exposition  of  yama,  niyama,  and 
other  steps  on  the  path  of  yoga,  the  author  explains  the 
evil,  the  cause  of  evil,  its  abandoning,  and  the  means  of 
abandoning  it,  he  makes  a casual  mention  of  Pradhana,  etc., 
as  taught  in  the  Sankhya.  Pradh^na  does  not  therefore 
form  the  main  subject  of  its  teaching.  Plence  no  neces- 
sity for  the  Veda  giving  in  to  the  Yoga  doctrine. 

The  Veda  versus  the  Sankhya  reasoning. 

(Vedflnta-swtras  II.  i.  4— n) . 

(The  opponent) : — It  should  give  in  to  the  empirical  reason- 
ing such  as  the  following : The  insentient  universe  cannot 
have  been  born  of  Brahman  who  is  intelligent;  for  the  one 


344  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED,  ^Amflda^V OllL 

is  of  quite  a different  nature  from  the  other.  What  is  quite 
opposed  to  another  cannot  be  bom  of  that  other  ; as  for 
example,  the  buffalo  is  not  born  of  the  cow. 

(The  Veddntin): — The  dictum  that  the  cause  and  the  effect 
are  of  the  same  nature  fails  in  the  case  of  scorpions  and 
hair.  We  know  that  the  scorpion,  a sentient  organism, 
is  born  of  cow-dung  which  is  insentient,  and  that  an  insen- 
tient thing  such  as  hair  is  born  of  the  human  organism 
which  is  sentient.  Therefore  no  dry  reasoning  independ- 
ent of  the  Veda  can  take  a final  stand  in  any  matter.  Accor- 
dingly one  of  the  teachers  has  said : 

“ A thing  inferred  with  ever  so  great  a care 
by  logicians  however  expert  is  quite  otherwise 
explained  by  other  and  greater  experts.” 

Therefore,  the  Vedic  doctrine  cannot  be  set  aside  on  the 
strength  of  the  specious  argument  based  upon  the  distinc- 
tion between  Brahman  and  the  universe. 

The  Veda  versus  empirical  reasoning  generally. 

(Ved^nta-swtra  II.  i.  12). 

{The  opponent) : — Granted  that  the  Vedic  doctrine  cannot 
be  set  aside  on  the  strength  of  the  S^mkhya  and  Yoga 
systems  and  their  logic.  There  are,  however,  other 
systems,  those  of  Kaw^da,  Buddha  and  so  on ; and  the 
Vedic  doctrine  will  have  to  give  way  to  their  teachings  and 
their  logic.  Kaw^ida,  a Maharshi,  a great  sage,  has  taught 
that  the  atoms  (paramfl^wus)  are  the  cause  of  the  universe, 
and  supports  this  theory  by  the  following  argument : All 
things  produced  are  produced  out  of  smaller  parts;  a cloth. 


♦ iSloka^Vartika. 


Anu.  L ] the  defensive.  345 

for  instance,  is  produced  out  of  threads ; and  all  molecules 
are  things  produced;  therefore  they  must  have  been  pro- 
duced out  of  things  which  are  smaller  in  magnitude.  And 
Buddha,  again,  who  is  an  incarnation  of  Vishim,  teaches 
that  the  universe  has  come  out  of  abh^iva  or  non-existence 
and  supports  that  vijw  by  logic : Every  existing  thing  is  pre- 
ceded by  its  non-existence ; the  dream-world,  for  instance,  is 
preceded  by  sushupti  or  dreamless  sleep.  Wherefore,  the 
Vedic  doctrine  should  give  in  to  the  mighty  systems  of 
Ka^^da  and  the  like. 

{The  Veddntin) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  argue  as 
follows : When  even  the  S^inkhya  and  Yoga  doctrines,  treat- 
ing of  Praknti,  Purusha  and  other  things,  and  which  are 
incidentally  here  and  there  cited  by  the  authors  of  the  Pur^i- 
was,— by  the  crest-jewels  of  Vedic  teachers,— have  been  set 
aside  as  weak  and  unwarranted  so  far  as  their  teaching  as 
to  the  Cause  of  the  universe  is  concerned,  much  more 
readily  should  we  set  aside  as  weak  and  unwarranted  the 
theories  of  Ka/wda  and  the  like  which  are  ignored  by  all 
wise  teachers.  Certainly,  nowhere  in  the  Pur^was,— the 
Pjdma,  the  Brahma  and  the  like,— is  the  theory  of  atoms 
and  molecules  cited  even  incidentally.  On  the  contrary, 
in  the  words  “ One  should  not  honor,  even  by  a word  of 
mouth,  the  sceptical  rationalists  and  hypocritical  devo- 
tees,” such  systems  are  altogether  condemned.  As  to 
the  generalisation  that  all  produced  things  are  produced 
out  of  smaller  parts,  it  does  not  apply  to  illusion  (vivarta) ; 
for,  we  see  mighty  trees  on  a distant  mountain -top  giving 
rise  to  the  illusory  idea  of  the  very  minute  tip  of  the  grass- 
blade.  Even  as  to  the  inference  that  the  univwse  Jias  come 


* Vishnupurawa,  3—18—101. 

44 


346  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUKDED,  [AfUinda-  Vdllv 

out  of  non-being,  the  example  of  the  dream-world  cited 
above  does  not  warrant  the  general  proposition  that  every 
produced  thing  is  preceded  by  its  non-existence ; for  su- 
shupti  is  only  an  avastha  or  condition  of  the  Self  (^tman), 
and  since  the  existence  of  the  Self  during  sushupti  has 
thus  to  be  admitted,  it  follows  that  the  dream-world  is 
preceded  by  something  existing.  Wherefore  the  Vedic 
doctrine  should  not  give  way  to  the  systems  of  KemdsL, 
Buddha  and  the  like. 

The  Vedanta  versus  sensuous  perception. 

(Vediinta-s«tra  II.  i.  13) 

{The  opponent)  :--The  non-duality  which  has  been  made 
out  by  a connected  interpretation  of  Vedic  texts  is  proved 
false  by  pratyaksha  etc. , — by  sensuous  perception,  empiri- 
cal inference,  etc. , — which  reveal  a distinction  between  the 
perceiver  and  the  things  perceived. 

{Jhe  Veddntin) No.  For,  in  the  case  of  the  ocean  we  per- 
ceive both  duality  and  non-duality : in  the  form  of  waves 
it  is  dual ; and  as  a body  of  water  it  is  non-dual.  Only, 
these  opposites,  duality  and  non-duality,  cannot  coexist 
in  that  thing  which  does  not  altogether  admit  of  even  a 
distinction  of  aspects  and  is  absolutely  one.  Wherefore, 
when  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  two  aspects — non -dual 
as  Brahman,  and  dual  as  differentiated  into  the  perceiver 
and  the  objects  of  perception,— the  Vedic  doctrine  cannot  be 
set  aside  on  the  ground  of  opposition  to  our  perception 
of  duality. 

Non -duality  in  duality— how  far  reat 

^ (Veckmta-swtras,  II.  i.  14-20) 

(Question) -Is  this  non-duality  in  duality  absolutely  real 


61)  TIttf  DliFSNStVE. 


347 


Jm.  /.] 

or  only  apparently  so  ? 

(Prima  facie  view) -It  is  absolutely  real ; for  it  never 
proves  false  in  the  case  of  Brahman  any  more  than  in  the 
case  of  the  ocean. 

[Conclusion) “ Here  there  is  no  duality  whatever in 
these  words  the  sruti  denies  all  duality.  By  reasoning,  too, 
we  come  to  the  same  conclusion.  For,  duality  and  non- 
duality, which  are  mutually  destructive,  cannot  coexist  in 
one  and  the  same  thing,  just  as  the  one  moon  cannot  be 
two.  As  to  the  conclusion  arrived  at  in  the  preceding  article 
that  duality  and  non-duality  in  the  One  Thing  are  due  to 
difference  in  Its  aspects,  even  this  is  not  right ; for,  the 
non-dual  Reality  does  not  admit  of  different  aspects.  In  the 
ocean  or  the  like,  however,  both  duality  and  non -duality 
are  admitted  because  of  a difference  in  its  aspects,  which  is 
a fact  of  experience ; and  it  is  a well-established  principle 
that  no  fact  of  experience  can  be  dismissed  as  unreason- 
able. It  cannot  be  said  that,  in  the  present  case  also,  two 
different  aspects,  as  Brahman  and  as  the  universe,  are  facts 
of  experience ; for,  Brahman  is  knowable  only  through  5fls- 
tras  (scriptures).  Wherefore  non-duality  in  duality  in  the 
case  of  Brahman  is  opposed  to  both  sruti  and  reasoning  and 
has  only  a relative  (vy^vaharika)  reality,  ue,^  it  is  real  only 
from  the  stand-point  of  the  unenlightened.-— It  may  be  asked, 
then,  what  is  the  Absolute  reality  ? We  reply:  Non-duality 
is  alone  real : apart  from  the  cause,  there  is  no  effect ; and 
therefore  the  cause  alone  is  real.  And  accordingly  the  sruti 
teaches  that  the  cause  alone  is  real,  and  illustrates  the 
truth  by  clay  and  the  like. 


* Kaiha.  Up.  4-11 


SKAttDA'IrtbVA  fi»>dONDBb. 


3^-. 


“ By  one  clod  of  clay,  for  instance,  my  d«ir, 
all  that  is  made  of  clay  is  known*  A product 
Of  speech  is  the  changing  form,  a name ; what 
we  call  clay  is  alone  real : so,  my  dear,  is  the 
one  spoken  of,*’* 

This  passage  may  bs  explained  as  follows:  A big  clod  of 
clay  is  the  cause,  and  pots  and  dishes,  etc.,  are  its  changing 
forms.  The  Tflrkikas{logicians)  maintain  that  pots  and  di- 
shes, etc. , are  things  quite  distinct  from  clay.  To  shew 
that  pots,  etc. , are  not  independent  realities,  the  sruti  speaks 
of  them  as  vik^ras  or  changing  forms ; which  means  that 
pots,  etc. , are  only  different  forms  of  the  one  thing,  clay, 
and  that  they  are  not  independent  realities  any  more ' than 
childhood,  youth,  and  dotage  are  independent  of  Deva- 
datta.  So  that  even  while  it  manifests  itself  in  the  form  of 
pots,  etc. , clay  alone  is  the  independent  reality.  There- 
fore, when  clay  is  known,  the  whole  real  essence  of  pots, 
etc, , is  known.  Unreal  as  these  are,  they  are  not  worth 
knowing.  Though  these  changing  forms  manifest  them- 
selves through  the  eye,  yet,  when  properly  scrutinised, 
they  are  found  to  have  no  being  whatever  of  their  own 
apart  from  clay.  They  exist  only  in  names,— dish,  pots, 
etc.,— which  are  but  a creation  of  speech.  Thus  these  chang- 
ing forms  have  no  real  being  of  their  own  and  yet  present 
themselves  to  consciousness:  that  is  to  say,  they  are  false 
appearance3(mithya)  and  are  therefore  unreal ; whereas  clay 
has  a being  of  its  own  even  apart  from  its  changing  forms 
and  is  therefore  real.  It  is  in  accordance  with  this  illustra- 
tion that  we  should  understand  the  Vedic  teaching  regard- 
ing Brahman,  and  it  is  quite  clear  that  in  that  teaching 


*Chha.  6—1—4, 


A^ui  {.]  ' ^ ^ bEl^ENSlVk.  34^' 

Brahxhan  corresponds  to  clay,  and  the  universe  td  pots,  etc. 
Wherefore,  the  universe  being  one  with  Bndiman,  the  truth 
is  that  Brahman  is  non-dual.  Those  persons^  however, 
who  have  not  thus  investigated  the  matter  learn  on  the  one 
hand  from  the  teaching  of  the  Veda  that  Brahman  is  nmi- 
dual,  while  again  they  are  convinced  of  duality  by  sensuous 
perception  and  empirical  inference.  As  thus  the  twofold 
knowledge  arises  only  at  first  sight,  i.  e. , in  the  ab- 
sence of  a thorough  investigation,  we  may  conclude  that  the 
non-duality  in  duality  presented  to  the  mind  in  the  case  of 
Brahman  and  the  universe,  as  in  the  case  of  the  ocean  and 
its  waves,  is  but  relatively  true  (vyavaharika),  and  that 
it  is  considered  real  only  in  the  absence  of  investigation. 

Isvara  untainted  by  good  and  evil. 

(Ved^mta-sirtras  II.  i.  21-23) 

{The  opponent) In  the  case  of  j^’vas  merged  in  the  sawsa- 
ra,  the  Paramesvara  or  Supreme  Lord  does  good  to  them 
by  way  of  endowing  them  with  non-attachment  (vairagya). 
He  has  also  created  evil  in  the  form  of  sin(adharma)leading 
to  hell  (naraka) ; and  while  doing  so,  He,  as  the  Omnisci- 
ent, knows  His  identity  with  the  j^vas.  This  is  to  say  that 
He  does  both  good  and  evil  to  Himself,  which  is  incon- 
gruous ; for,  no  sensible  person  in  the  world  neglects  his 
own  good  or  does  evil  to  himself.  The  Vedic  doctrine, 
therefore,  is  open  to  the  objection  that  it  makes  the  Lord 
neglect  His  own  good. 

{The  Veddntin) As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as 
follows /svara  is  omniscient,  and  therefore  knows  that 
the  jtva’s  samsara  is  unreal  and  that  He  is  untainted  in 
Himself.  Hence  no  room  for  the  objection  that  the  Lord 
is  affected  by  good  and  evil. 


BRAHMA-VIDYA  BJtPOUNDBD,  [Amnda^^iMt 

Duality  evolved  from  non^duality. 

(Vedanta-sutras,  II.  i. 

iJT he  opponent)  X — alone  without  a second”  frotn 
these  words  we  learn  that  Brahman  is  devoid  of  all  duality; 
i.  e. , we  learn  that  He  is  not  in  Himself  made  up  of  dis- 
tinct parts  and  that  there  exists  nothing  else  belonging  to  the 
same  class  as  Brahman  or  to  a different  class.  On  the 
contrary,  the  things  to  be  created,  such  as  akasa,  the  air, 
etc.,  are  various.  When  there  is  no  variety  in  the  cause, 
there  cannot  certainly  be  any  variety  in  the  effect ; other- 
wise, from  one  thing,  such  as  milk,  might  be  evolved  things 
of  different  kinds,  such  as  curd,  oil  and  so  on.  Moreover, 
the  5ruti  describes  the  evolution  of  ^ikasa  and  other  things 
in  a certain  order ; and  we  are  at  a loss  to  know  what  there 
is  to  determine  the  particular  order  of  evolution.  There- 
fore, the  evolution  of  the  universe  in  all  its  variety  and  in  a 
particular  order  cannot  take  place  from  Brahman  who  is 
one  and  secondless. 

(The  Veidntin) : — In  point  of  fact,  Brahman  is,  no  doubt, 
non-dual;  but  the  5ruti,  reason,  and  experience  tell  us 
that  Brahman  is  associated  Avith  avidya.  The  sruti  says : 
“Maya  verily  is  PrakMti(cause),  man  should  know ; and  /sva- 
ra  the  possessor  of  Maya.”  Maya  is  the  same  as  avidya,  since 
both  alike  are  characterised  by  indefinability.  It  should  not 
be  supposed  that  this  admission  of  Maya  lands  us  in  duality  ; 
for,  nothing  is  real  except  Brahman.  Thus,  though  one, 
Brahman  can  produce  the  universe  in  all  its  variety 
with  the  help  of  avidya.  Neither  should  it  be  supposed 
that  there  exists  nothing  to  determine  the  particular  order 


* Chha.  6^2-1. 


ON  THE  defensive. 


35* 


4m  /.] 

in  the  evolution  of  things ; for,  avidyiJ  may  possess  poten- 
tialities which  bring  about  the  evolution  of  things  in  a 
particular  order.  Therefore,  the  evolution  of  things  in  the 
universe  in  all  their  variety  and  in  a particular  order  can 
take  place  from  Brahman,  the  secondless. 

The  theory  of  transformation  maintained. 

(Vedsnta-swtras  II,  i.  26-29.) 

{The  opponent) : — In  the  sixth  article  (adhikarawa)  * it  has 
been  shewn  that  cause  and  effect  are  one ; so  that,  the  Vaise- 
shika’s  theory  of  the  production  of  an  effect  distinct  from 
the  cause  is  not  acceptable  to  the  Brahmavadin.  He  is 
therefore  obliged  to  accept  the  theory  of  transformation 
(pariwiima),  as  in  the  case  of  milk  and  curd.  Then  he  may 
bs  asked  this  question  : Is  it  wholly  or  in  part  that  Brah- 
man transforms  Himself  into  the  universe  ? In  the  former 
case,  Brahman  would  bs  non-eternal  ; in  the  latter, 
Brahman  would  be  made  up  of  parts.  Wherefore  the 
theory  of  transformation  cannot  be  maintained. 

[The  Veddntin): — Brahman’s  transformation  of  Himself  in- 
to the  universe  is  effected  by  the  potentialities  of  Maya,  as 
thesruti  says,  ‘‘The  Lord  appears  multiform  through  mayas 
(false  ideas)  ” t It  is  not  a reality.  Therefore  the  Brahma- 
vada  cannot  be  caught  between  the  two  horns  of  the 
dilemma,— transformation  as  a whole  or  transformation  in 
part.  Thus,  the  theory  of  transformation  is  not  difticult  for 
the  Brahniav^din  to  maintain. 

Though  incorporeal,  Brahman  possesses  Maya. 

(Vedanta-swtras.  II.  i.  30 — 31) 

(The  opponent) : — In  the  world  we  find  all  jugglers,  who 


♦ Vide  ante  pp,  346—349,  f Bri.  Up.  2—5—19, 


35^  BRAHMA*vi»yA  EXPOUNDED.  ^XnandurVoM. 

magical  powers,  possessed  of  a body*  Brahman  be- 
ing without  a body,  how  can  He  have  the  power  of  Maya  ? 

(The  Ve4Mi»)  Though  the  house-builders  and  other 
architects  stand  in  need  of  earth,  timber,  grass  and  other 
extmtiai  objects  quite  distinct  from  themselves,  yet,  a 
juggler  can  construct  houses  ^d  the  like  wi|thout  resorting 
to  any  external  things.  Similarly,  though  the  worldly 
juggler  stands  in  need  of  a body,  still,  without  a body,  Brah> 
pan  may  possess  Maya.  Perhaps  it  may  be  urged  that 
we  have  the  authority  of  sensuous  perception  for  maintain- 
ing that  a juggler  can  produce  houses,  etc. , without  any 
external  aids.  If  so,  then,  even  as  regards  Brahman,  we 
may  rely  on  the  authority  of  the  sruti  which  says  that  **  the 
Mahesvara  is  the  possessor  of  Maya,**  * and  maintain  that 
He  is  without  a body  and  yet  possesses  Maya. 

Evolution  as  an  act  of  aport. 

(Vedanta-satras  II.  i.  32 — 33) 

(Jke  opponent) “ Bliss  is  Brahman  ; **  t in  these  words 
the  iruti  declares  that  the  Parame5vara,  the  Supreme  Lord, 
is  ever-contented.  If  we  admit  that  such  a being  cherishes 
a desire  for  creation,  it  will  detract  from  His  ever-content- 
edness.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  deny  any  such  desire, 
then  it  is  tantamount  to  saying  that,  as  creating  the  uni- 
verse without  an  intelligent  purpose  in  view,  the  /^vara 
behaves  like  a lunatic. 

{The  Veddntin) Princes  and  others,  who  are  quite 
intelligent,  engage  in  hunting  and  other  kinds  of  activity 
only  as  a matter  of  sport,  with  no  specific  end  in  view. 
And  inspiv^ation  and  expiration  are  facts  of  everybody*s 


* Sve+a,  4—10.  f Tai.  Up.  3^0—1 


353 


^nU*,  /.]  ON  DEFENSIVE. 

experience.  There  are  innumerable  instances  of  purpose^ 
less  activities  displayed  by  children.  Like  these,  /svara, 
though  ever-contented,  may  create  the  whole  universe 
without  any  specific  end  in  view  and  yet  be  not  a lunatic. 

Isvara  acquitted  of  partiality  and  cruelty. 

(Vedanta-s«tras.  11.  i.  34—36) 

(The  opponent) : — /svara  creates  most  happy  beings  such 
as  Devas,  as  also  most  unhappy  beings  such  as  cattle  and 
other  lower  animals,  and  also  men  who  are  midway 
between  the  two.  Thus  bestowing  happiness  and  misery 
of  different  degrees  upon  different  classes  of  souls,  how 
can  /svara  be  other  than  partial  ? Or,  bringing  about  the 
destruction  of  Devas,  lower  animals,  men  and  other  . crea- 
tures in  the  whole  universe, — an  act  which  is  extremely 
reprehensible  even  to  the  meanest  being,— how  can  He  be 
other  than  merciless  ? Thus,  the  /svara  of  the  Vedanta  is 
open  to  the  charge  of  partiality  and  mercilessness. 

(The  Veddntin) In  the  first  place  /svara  cannot  be 
charged  with  partiality,  inasmuch  as  the  different  creatures 
are  bom  in  the  highest  class  or  in  the  middle  class  or  in 
the  lowest  class  of  beings  just  according  to  their  respective 
karmas.  It  cannot,  however,  be  urged  that  this  detracts 
from  the  independence  of /svara ; for,  as  the  Antaryamin, 
the  Inner  Regulator  and  Controller  dwelling  in  all  beings, 
He  rules  all  karma. 

Here  one  may  say  : If,  to  avoid  the  charge  of  partiality 
against  /svara,  you  say  that  karma  is  the  cause  of  difference, 
and  again  if,  to  secure  /svara’s  independence,  you  make 
Him  the  Regulator  of  karma’s  operations,  in  the  end  you 
make  /svara  Himself  the  cause  of  difference  in  the  lots 

45 


354  BRAHMA-VIDVA  EXPo\jNDKD.  [AmnithVt^. 

of  different  creatures. 

In  reply  we  say  that  this  is  not  a fault  at  all.  The 
act  of  regulating  consists  in  the  mere  preventing  of  the 
potentialities  of  the  different  things  in  nature  from  getting 
into  confusion.  These  potentialities  form  the  very  body  or 
essence  of  Maya ; and  /svara  is  not  their  creator.  Since  the 
respective  karmas  of  the  different  beings  are,  by  virtue  of 
their  inherent  potentialities,  the  cause  of  the  differences, 
/5vara  who  is  the  mere  regulator  of  their  operations  cannot 
be  charged  with  partiality. 

Like  sushupti  or  dreamless  sleep,  the  destruction  of  the 
universe,  is  not  a source  of  pain ; on  the  contrary,  it 
removes  all  pain  ; so  that  /svara  only  shews  His  mercy  by 
this  act. 

{Objection) : — Though  /5vara  is  not  open  to  the  charge  of 
partiality  when,  in  the  minor  evolutions.  He  creates  the 
universe  in  accordance  with  the  preceding  karma,  still  He 
is  open  to  the  charge  as  regards  His  first  creation,  since 
there  existed  no  karma  preceding  that  creation. 

(Ans7oer) : — No.  The  series  of  creations  is  beginningless, 
as  the  scriptures  say,  “ no  end,  no  beginning.’* 

The  Attributeless  as  the  material  cause. 

(Vedanta- satra  II.  i.  37) 

(The  opponent) That  is  said  to  be  the  praknti  or  material 
cause  which  changes  itself  into  the  effect.  In  our  expe- 
rience we  find  that  all  material  causes  such  as  clay  are  pos- 
sessed of  attributes.  Then,  how  can  the  attributeless 
Brahman  be  the  material  cause  of  the  universe  ? 


♦ Bhg.  Gita.  15-^ 


ON  iHE  DEFENSIVE. 


355 


Jim.  /.] 

(Tie  Ved&ntin) It  is  true  that  etymologically  the  term 
^ praknti*  means  that  which  undergoes  change.  But  this 
change  may  take  place  in  two  ways : either  by  way  of 
actual  transformation  as  in  the  case  of  milk,  etc.,  or  by 
being  mistaken  for  something  else,  as  a rope  is  mistaken 
for  a serpent.  Now,  though  the  attributeless  Brahman  can- 
not undergo  actual  transformation.  He  may  be  mistaken  for 
something  else.  We  do  And  that  one  j^ti  or  species,  which 
is  attributeless,  is  mistaken  for  another : on  seeing,  for 
instance,  a dirty  br^hma^a,  people  mistake  him  for  a SMdra. 
Therefore,  though  attributeless,  Brahman  can  be  the 
praknti  or  material  cause  of  the  universe. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

ON  THE  0PFEN5IVE. 


The  second  pada  (quarter)  of  the  second  Adhyaya  of  the 
Vedanta-SMtras  establishes  in  eight  articles  (adhikaranas) 
the  theory  that  Brahman  is  the  cause  of  the  universe,  by 
way  of  condemning  all  other  theories. 

The  Vedanta  versus  the  Sankhya. 

(Vedsnta-stdras  II.  ii.  i — lo) 

(Sankhya) : — Pradhsna  which  is  composed  of  pleasure, 
apd  pain  and  ignorance  is  the  prakriti  or  material  cause  of 
the  universe,  inasmuch  as  we  find  the  universe  made  up  of 
objects  of  pleasure,  pain  and  ignorance.  To  explain: — A 
pot,  a cloth,  and  the  like  produce  pleasure  when  they  are 
obtained,  since  they  serve  the  purpose  of  fetching  water, 
covering  the  body,  and  so  on.  For  this  very  reason,  when 
a person  is  robbed  of  them  by  others,  they  form  a source  of 
pain.  When,  again,  no  water  has  to  be  fetched,  then  the  pot 
is  not  a source  of  pleasure  or  pain  ; it  remains  an  object  of 
indifference.  Ignorance  (moha)  concerning  the  pot  consists 
in  its  being  thus  an  object  of  indifference.  Moha  ("igno- 
rance) is  derived  from  the  root  ‘ mu^  ’~to  be  unconscious ; 
and  with  reference  to  objects  of  indifference  no  chitta-vritti 
or  state  of  consciousness  is  seen  to  arise.  Since  pleasure, 
pain  and  ignorance  thus  run  through  the  whole  universe, 
Pradhana  is  the  cause  of  the  universe. 


Ott  tHE  OFFENSIVE. 


357 


J»u  /.] 

< (Veddniin)  :-^Pradhana  is  not  the  cause  of  the  universei 
because,  insentient  as  it  is,  it  cannot  have  the  power  of 
designing  and  building  the  universe  composed  of  such  a 
variety  of  things  as  the  bodies,  the  senses,  mountams,  and 
so  on,  each  with  a peculiar  form  and  structure  of  its  own. 
In  the  world  we  see  that  complex  structures  such  as 
palaces,  of  which  each  part  serves  a distinct  purpose  of  its 
own,  are  all  the  work  of  very  highly  intelligent  authors. 
This  incapacity  for  designing  the  structure  of  the  universe 
apart,  we  cannot  conceive  how  the  insentient  Pradhana 
can  ever  so  act  as  to  bring  the  universe  into  existence ; for, 
we  see  no  carriages  or  other  insentient  things  acting  when 
not  acted  on  by  intelligent  beings.  If,  then,  to  avoid  this 
difficulty,  the  Sankhya  should  admit  that  the  sentient 
spirit  (Purusha)  acts  upon  Pradhana,  the  admission  runs 
counter  to  his  postulate  that  Purusha  is  unattached.  As 
to  the  assertion  that  pleasure,  pain  and  ignorance  run 
through  pots  and  other  things  in  the  universe,  we  say  that 
the  proposition  cannot  de  maintained,  because  pleasure, 
pain  and  ignorance  are  internal  (subjective  states)  whereas 
pots  and  other  things  are  external  objects.  Therefore, 
Pradhana  cannot  be  the  cause  of  the  universe. 

The  Vedanta  versus  the  Vaiseshika.  . 

In  the  last  chapter,  when  ansv/ering  the  Sankhya’s 
objection  against  the  theory  that  from  the  sentient  Brah- 
man is  evolved  the  universe  which  is  insentient  and  is 
therefore  of  quite  a different  nature  from  its  cause,  the 
Vedantin  illustrated  his  theory  by  the  observed  fact  of  the 
birth  of  a scorpion  from  the  cow-dung.  Thereby  the  Sank- 
hya’s objection  was  answered,  and  the  Vedanta  theory  was 
so  far  maintained. 


BitAHitA>vn»A  BXFouROBDt  [AnanM-Vn^. 

Ill  tile  ^Meiit  ^iqiter  tbs  Vadmtfat  bas  attam|l«d  a 
rdiitation  of  rival  tbeories  and  has  overihrowB,  in  tbs  ifirst 
article  the  SankfaTa  doctrine  of  cause.  He  has  now  to 
refute  the  Vaiseshilca  theory. 

How  ter  the  Valaesb^  theory  sepporta  the 
Brahmavada. 

(Vedanta-sutra  II.  ii.  ii.) 

The  Vaireshika  theory  having  been  worked  out  in  great 
detail,  a person  who  has  been  thoroughly  impressed  with 
that  theory,  would  pay  no  regard  to  the  theory  that  Brah- 
man is  the  cause,  unless  he  is  furnished  with  an  illustra- 
tion— of  a cause  producing  an  effect  differing  in  its  nature 
from  that  cause, — taken  from  his  own  system.  Now,  we 
shall  proceed  to  enquire  whether  the  Vaireshika  system 
furnishes  an  instance  of  a cause  producing  a dissiinilnr 
‘.ffect.  It  may  at  first  sight  appear  that  the  system  furni- 
shes no  instance ; for,  according  to  that  system,  a white 
cloth  is  produced  out  of  white  threads  only,  not  out  of 
threads  of  red  colour.  The  Vedtfntin  maintains  that  the 
system  does  furnish  instances  of  causes  producing  dissimi- 
lar effects.  To  explain : a param<i»u  (ultimate  infinitesi- 
mal particle)  is,  according  to  the  Vaweshika,  of  the  size 
spoken  of  as  all-round-ness,  (panmanda\y&) . A combina- 
tion of  two  paramoMus — as  opposed  to  atoms — which  cannot 
be  measured  in  terms  of  atoms  produces  a dvi-a«uka 
(a  molecule  of  two  atoms)  which  can  be  measured  in 
terms  of  an  atom.  This  is  one  instance.  Similarly, 
a dvi-a»uka  is  short  (hrasva)  in  measure,  and  has  therefore 
no  length ; and  a combination  of  three  such  molecules  pro* 


ON  THS  OFFENSIVE. 


3^ 


Jm,  h ] 

a tri^aimka  ( three-atomed ) molecule  haviiag  the 
measure  of  length,  and  so  far  immeasurable  in  terms  pf 
atoms*  This  is  another  instance.  So  also  other  instances 
can  be  cited  from  the  Vabeshika  system. 

The  Vaiseehika  theory  of  creation  overthrown. 

(Vedrtnta-s«tras  II,  ii.  12 — 17) 

{Jhe  VaUeshika) : — The  universe  of  the  last  cycle  is  dis- 
solved at  the  time  of  Pralaya  ; and  again,  when  a desire  to 
create  arises  in  the  Great  Lord,  then,  in  virtue  of  the 
karma  of  sentient  beings,  activity  springs  up  for  the  first 
time  in  the  unmoving  parama»us  (ultimate  particles).  As  a 
result  of  this  activity,  one  param^r/m  combines  with  another, 
and  out  of  this  combination  a dvi-anuka  is  formed,  and  out 
of  a combination  of  three  dvi-a;mkas,  a tri-awuka  is  formed. 
In  this  way  the  whole  universe  is  produced.  In  the  ab- 
sence of  all  contradiction  to  this  theory,  we  maintain  that 
parama;ms  combine  together  and  produce  the  universe. 

{Jhc  Veddntin) It  has  been  said  that  activity  first 
springs  up  in  the  paranKj;ms.  We  ask : Has  this  activity 
a cause  or  not  ? If  it  has  no  cause,  it  may  spring  up  at  all 
times,  since  there  is  nothing  to  restrict  it  to  a particular 
occasion  ; and  then  there  can  be  no  dissolution  (pralaya). 
If  it  has  a cause,  then,  again,  we  ask : Is  that  cause  seen 
or  unseen  ? Is  it  something  suggested  by  our  ordinary  ex- 
perience or  something  transcendental  ? In  the  first  place 
the  cause  cannot  be  something  seen  or  what  our  ordinary 
experience  can  suggest ; for,  no  action  or  reaction  (pra- 
yatna  or  pratighata)  is  possible  prior  to  the  creation  of 
the  bodily  organism.  As  to  /^yarn’s  action  (prayatna) , it 


3fi0  BilAMMA«VIDYA  EX1>0UNDED;  [Amnda-VoUL 

is  sternal  and  cannot  therefore  be  an  inmiable  antecedent 
of  the  first  activity  which  is  occasional.  In  the  next  place, 
the  cause  of  the  first  activity  cannot  be  something  unseen 
or  transcendental ; for,  the  transcendental  or  supersensu-^ 
ous  cause  (adnshfa  or  the  latent  force  of  the  past  karma)  is 
said  to  inhere  in  the  ^tman  and  cannot,  therefore,  be  rela- 
ted to  paraimifius.  Being  placed  in  such  dilemmas  as 
these,  the  Vaiseshik'a’s  explanation  of  the  first  activity  m 
the  paramasus  cannot  be  accepted,  and  no  combination  of 
paramasus  as  a result  of  that  activity  is  therefore  possible. 
Thus  the  theory  that  the  universe  arose  out  of  the  param^r- 
nus  combined  together  is  for  ever  cast  away. 

The  Vedanta  versus  Buddhist  Realist. 

(Veddnta-s«/ms  II.  ii.  18—27.) 

{The  Buddhists) : — There  are  some  Buddhists  who  main- 
tain that  external  objects  exist  as  such,  and  they  hold  as 
follows : There  are  two  aggregates,  the  external  and  the 
internal.  The  external  aggregate  comprises  the  objects 
such  as  earth,  rivers,  oceans,  and  so  on  ; and  the  internal 
group  is  made  up  of  the  mind  and  its  modes.  The  whole 
universe  consists  of  these  two  aggregates  and  no  more. 
The  parama»us  are  the  cause  of  the  external  aggregate. 
They  are  of  four  classes ; some  of  them  are  hard  and  are 
spoken  of  as  the  atoms  of  earth.  Some  are  viscid  and  are 
spoken  of  as  the  atoms  of  water.  The  atoms  of  a third  class 
are  hot  and  are  spoken  of  as  the  atoms  of  fire.  The  atoms 
of  the  fourth  class  are  mobile  and  are  spoken  of  as  the 
atoms  of  the  air.  Out  of  the  ultimate  atoms  (paramanus) 
of  these  four  classes  combining  together  simultaneously  is 
formed  the  external  aggregate.  - The  cause  of  the  internal 


6fJ  THE  dPPEHSlVi. 


Auk.  I.j 


361 


aggregate  is  made  up  of  five  skatidhaa  (grbupal.  1f%eae 
groups  are  (i)  R«pa-skandha,  the  group  of  forms,  com- 
posed of  sounds,  touch,  etc. , which  are  pcrcdved  through 
the  mind ; (2)  Vij^wna-skandha,  the  group  of  knowledge, 
which  consists  of  cognitions  of  these  forms;  (3)  Vedana- 
skandha,  the  group  of  feeling,  which  consists  of  pleasure 
and  pain  caused  by  the  cognitions ; (4)  Sawjmi-skandha,  the 
group  of  designations,  which  is  made  up  of  names  such  as 
Devadatta;  (5)  Samskara-skandha,  the  group  of  tenden- 
cies, made  up  of  the  latent  impressions  left  by  the  four 
groups  mentioned  above.  Out  of  these  five  groups  (skandhas) 
combined  together  is  evolved  the  internal  aggregate.  Thus 
the  two  aggregates  admit  of  an  explanation,*'^ 

We  ask:  Is  there  an  Intelligence  external 
to  these  two  aggregates  and  bringing  about  aggregations . of 
atoms  and  skandhas  ? Or  do  they  themselves  aggregate 
together  ? Suppose  the  answer  to  the  former  question  is  in 
the  affirmative;  then  we  ask  again,  is  that  Intelligence  an 
abiding  entity  or  a momentary  existence  ? To  say  that  the 
Intelligence  is  an  abiding  entity  is  to  contradict  the  funda- 
mental doctrine  of  the  Buddhists  that  everything  is  momen- 
tary. Suppose  the  Intelligence  is  momentary ; then  it  is 
impossible  to  explain  how,  having  not  itself  existed  at  one 
moment,  it  can  bring  about  the  aggregation  at  the  next  in- 
stant. If  the  Buddhist  should  say  that  there  exists  no  Intel- 
ligence external  to  the  aggregates  and  bringing  about  their 
aggregation,  we  then  ask,  how  can  the  insentient  skandhas 
and  atoms  aggregate  together  into  their  respective  forms,  of 
their  own  accord  without  a governing  Intelligence.  Thus  the 


*Vide  Mimr  Vol  II.  pp.  89—90. 


46 


362  BRAHMA>vioYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Ananda-VoUi- 

Buddhistic  doctrine  of  the  two  aggregates  does  not  accord 
with  reason. 

The  Vedanta  versus  Buddhistic  Ideaiism 

(Vedsnta-SMtras,  11.  ii.  28 — 32). 

{The  Buddhist)  : — Some  Buddhists  maintain  that  external 
objects  do  not  really  exist  as  such.  They  say  that  Vij/wna- 
skandha  (group  of 'cognitionsjis  alone  real.  It  cannot  be 
urged,  they  say,  that  this  proposition  is  opposed  to  our 
ordinary  experience  (vyavahara).  For,  in  svapna  (dream) 
experience  of  external  objects  is  possible  although  at  the  time 
the  mind  alone  really  exists  while  the  external  objects  do 
not  really  exist.  So  our  experience  of  external  objects  is 
possible  in  the  waking  state,  though  they  do  not  really  exist 
at  the  time.  Thus  it  stands  to  reason  that  VijMtma-skandha 
alone  is  real. 

{The  Veddntiii)  :—As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as 
'oUows : The  illustration  of  svapna  or  dream  state  does  not 
apply  to  the  case ; for,  our  dream  experience  proves  false  in 
the  waking  state;  whereas  our  experience  of  the  waking  state 
never  proves  false.  Neither  can  it  be  said  that  there  is  no 
evidence  for  the  existence  of  external  objects;  for  it  is 
witnessed  by  our  consciousness.  Pots,  etc,  are  indeed  ex- 
perienced in  consciousness  as  things  existing  in  the  external 
world.  Perhaps  it  may  be  urged  on  the  other  side  that  it  is 
our  own  mind  (buddhi)  that  manifests  itself  as  pots  and 
other  external  objects,  and  that  this  idea  is  expressed  in  the 
words,  “ the  reality  that  is  knowable  within  manifests  itself 
as  if  it  were  something  external.  ” If  so,  we  reply  that  these 
very  words  constitute  the  evidenceTor  the  existence]  of  the 
external  world.  If  external  objects  nowhere  exist  at  all,  no 


Anu  /t]  ON  THE  OFFENSIVE.  363 

idea  of  external  objects  is  possible,  and  the  words  ^'as  if  it 
were  something  external  ” would  have  no  meaning  at  all. 
Therefore,  as  external  objects  do  exist,  it  cannot  be  main- 
tained that  Vijwana  alone  is  real. 

The  Vedantin  versus  the  Arhats. 

(Vedsnta-stttras,  II.  ii.  33 — 36) 

(TheArhat): — There  are  in  the  main  two  padsrthas 
(categories),  J^va  and  a-J»va.  Jiva,  the  soul,  is  intelligent, 
is  of  the  size  of  the  body  in  which  it  dwells,  and  is  made 
up  of  parts.  A-J/va,  the  non-soul,  is  of  six  classes : one 
class  comprises  mountains  and  the  like,  and  the  other  five 
are : (i)  ssrava,  the  aggregate  of  the  senses,  so  called  be- 
cause it  is  through  these  senses  that  the  soul  moves  among 
the  sense-objects ; (2)  sawvara,  (non-discrimination,  etc.,) 
which  enshrouds  the  discriminating  faculty;  (3)  nirjara 
(austerity) — such  as  plucking  of  the  hair,  sitting  upon 
a heated  stone— the  means  of  causing  the  decay  of  desire, 
anger,  and  other  passions ; (4)  bandha  ( bondage ),  the 
series  of  births  and  deaths  brought  about  by  the  eight 
kinds  of  karma,  four  of  them  being  injurious  acts  and 
constituting  the  four  kinds  of  sins,  and  the  four  others 
being  non-injurious  acts  and  constituting  the  four  kinds  of 
meritorious  action  ; (5)  moksha  (release)  which  consists  in 
the  soul  constantly  rising  upward  when,  by  the  means 
pointed  out  in  the  scriptures,  it  has  risen  above  the  eight 
kinds  of  karma. 

[In  the  Sarvadarsana-sangraha,  &iya^#a  explains  this  point 
further  as  follows : 

If  a thing  absolutely  exits,  it  exists  altogether,  always 


BRAHMA-viDYA  EXPouNDEp.  [Aitanda^VaHl 


3^ 

eyorywherc,  aijd  with  every-bpdyi  and  no  one  at  any  time 
or  place  would  ever  make  an  effort  to  obtain  or  avoid  it,  as 
it  would  be  absurd  to  treat  what  is  already  present  as  an 
object  to  be  obtained  or  avoided.  But  if  it  be  relative  ( or 
indefinite),  the  wise  will  concede  that  at  certain  times  and 
in  certain  places  any  one  may  seek  or  avoid  it.  Moreover, 
suppose  that  the  question  to  be  asked  is  this  : “Is  being  or 
9w»~bemg  the  real  nature  of  the  thing.?’*  The  real  nature  of 
the  thing  cannot  be  beings  for  then  you  could  not  properly 
use  the  pharse,  “ It  is  a pot  ” (gha^o’sti),  as  the  two  words 
“ is  **  and  “ pot  ” would  be  tautological ; nor  ought  you  to 
say,  “ It  is  not  a pot,”  as  the  words  thus  used  would  imply 
a direct  contradiction ; and  the  same  argument  is  to  be 
used  in  other  questions.  As  it  has  been  declared, 

“ It  must  not  be  said  ‘ It  is  a pot,’  since  the 
word  ‘ pot  * implies  * is  * ; nor  may  you  say 
‘ it  is  not  a pot,’  for  existence  and  non-exist- 
" ence  are  mutually  exclusive,”  &c. 

Thus  said  the  teacher  in  the  Syadvada-tnanjari — 

“ A thing  of  an  entirely  indeterminate  nature 
is  the  object  only  of  the  Omniscient ; a thing 
partly  determined  is  held  to  be  the  true  object 
of  scientific  investigation.  When  our  reason- 
ings based  on  one  point  proceed  in  the  reveal- 
ed way,  it  is  called  the  revealed  Sydd-vdda^ 
which  ascertains  the  entire  meaning  of  all 
things.” 

“ All  other  systems  are  full  of  jealousy  from 
their  mutual  propositions  and  counter-propo- 
gitions ; it  is  only  the  doctrine  of  the  Arhat 


ON  TH5  OFFENSIVE. 


365 


4m>  /.  ] 

which  with  no  partiality  equally  favours  ^ 

sects.”  * ] 

The  nature  of  these  seven  categories  is  determined  (m  the 
principle  known  as  the  saptabhang*-ny^ya,  * the  system  of 
seven  paralogisms.*  This  principle  is  stated  as  follows  : 
(i)  “ May  be,  it  is,**  (2)  <<  May  be,  it  is  not,’*  (3)  May 
be,  it  is  and  it  is  not,”  (4)  May  be,  it  is  indefinable,” 
(5)  “ May  be,  it  is  and  yet  indefinable,  (6)  “ May  be,  it  is 
not  and  indefinable,”  (7)  “ May  be,  it  is  and  it  is  not  and 
indefinable.”  ‘ Syat  * (may  be)  is  here  an  indeclinable 
particle  meaning  ‘ a little.*  Now  there  are  four  classes  of 
opponents  (to  the  Jain  doctrine)  who  severally  hold  the 
doctrine  of  existence,  the  doctrine  of  non-existence,  the 
doctrine  of  existence  and  non-existence  successively,  and 
the  doctrine  that  everything  is  indefinable  (anirvachamya). 
And  again  there  are  three  other  classes  holding  one  or  another 
of  the  three  first  theories  in  conjunction  with  the  fourth. 
As  against  these  seven  classes  of  opponents,  the  seven  kinds 
of  reasoning  should  be  employed.  When,  for  example,  the 
holder  of  the  doctrine  of  existence  comes  up  and  scornfully 
asks  the  i4rhata,  Does  moksha  exist  in  your  system?” 
then  the  .<4rhata  answers  “ It  exists  a little.”  Similarly,  as 
against  other  schools,  he  answers  “ It  does  not  exist  a little,*, 
and  so  on.  Thereby  all  opponents  are  abashed  to  silence^ 
Thus,  by  the  all-sufficient  principle  of  saptabhangtnyaya, 
the  nature  of  jfva  and  other  categories  is  made  out,  and  so 
far  there  is  nothing  anomalous  in  the  system. 

{The  Veddntitt): — This  reasoning  on  the  so-called  principle 
of  saptabhangf  is  illogical,  inasmuch  as  it  predicates  existence 


* Translated  by  Prof.  Cowell. 


$66  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED,  [AfUluda^  ValU. 

of  soul  when  answering  the  question  of  the  holder  of  the 
doctrine  of  existence,  and  it  predicates  non-existence  of  the 
same'soul  when  answering  the  question  of  the  holder  of  the 
doctrine  of  non-existence.  The  i4rhat  predicates  two  quite 
opposite  attributes  of  one  and  the  same  subject.  And  it  is 
not  right  to  maintain  that  the  soul  is  made  up  of  parts ; 
for,  then  it  would  be  non-eternal.  If  the  soul  be  non-eternal 
who  is  there  to  seek  for  moksha  as  an  end  ? Wherefore,  the 
nature  of  the  soul  and  other  categories  cannot  be  determin- 
ed by  the  illogical  reasoning  called  the  sapta-bhang/. 

The  Vedanta  versus  Theism. 

(Vedanta-s«tras,  II,  ii.  37 — 41) 

It  has  already  been  shewn,  on  the  mere  strength  of 
scriptures,  that  /svara  is  both  the  efficient  and  the  material 
cause  of  the  universe.  The  Tarkikas,  Saivas  and  other 
theists  do  not  assent  to  this  doctrine  and  maintain  on  the 
contrary  that  /svara  is  the  mere  efficient  cause  of  the 
universe.  In  support  thereof,  they  resort  to  the  following 
course  of  empirical  reasoning  : The  potter  is  not  the  material 
cause  of  the  pot  which  he  makes  ; he  is  only  the  efficient 
cause,  as  the  controlling  agent  operating  upon  the  rod, 
wheel  and  other  things.  Like  the  potter,  /svara  only  stands 
beside  the  universe  of  which  he  is  the  efficient  cause. 

{Jhc  Veddntin) : — It  is  not  right  to  maintain  that  /svara  is 
the  mere  efficient  cause ; for,  then,  it  will  be  difficult  to 
acquit  Him  of  partiality,  cruelty  and  other  faults.  It  may  be 
asked,  how  does  the  Vedantin  acquit  Him  of  those  faults  ? 
We  reply  that  /svara  creates  the  universe  in  accordance 


* Vide  ante  pp,  335-336 


ON  THE  OPFENSIVE. 


367 


Jm.  I.] 

with  the  karma  of  living  beings ; and  we  say  so  on  the 
authority  of  Revelation  (i4gama).  If  the  thiest  should  seek 
refuge  with  i^gama  as  the  last  resort^  then  he  should 
abandon  the  doctrine  of  extra-cosmic  God,  inasmuch  as  in 
the  words  “ Manifold  may  I become  ” the  sruti  declares 
that  /svara  is  the  material  cause.  Hence  the  unsoundness 
of  the  theory  of  extra-cosmic  God.” 

The  Vedanta  versus  the  Pancharatra. 

(Vedanta-s/dras,  II.  ii.  42 — ^45) 

( The  Pancharatra ) : — The  Bh^tgavatas  of  the  Psncharatra 
school  hold  as  follows : The  One  Lord,  V^isudeva,  is  the 
material  as  well  as  the  efficient  cause  of  the  universe.  The 
breaking  of  the  bondage  of  mundane  existence  is  effected 
by  worshipping  Him,  by  knowing  Him  and  by  meditating  on 
Him.  From  Vasudeva,  jiva  who  is  spoken  of  as  Sankarshai^a 
is  born  ; from  j/va  is  born  manas  spoken  of  as  Pradyumna; 
from  manas  is  born  egoism  (ahawkara)  spoken  of  as  Aniru- 
ddha.  The  whole  universe  is  arrayed  in  the  four  forms  of 
Vasudeva,  Sawkarshawa,  Pradyumna  and  Aniruddha. 

{JChe  Veddntin): — As  not  opposed  to  the  teaching  of  the 
sruti,  the  teaching  of  the  Pancharatra  regarding  Vasudeva 
and  His  worship,  etc.,  may  be  accepted.  But  the  asser- 
tion that  j/va  is  born  is  wrong  and  cannot  be  maintained  . 
for,  if  j/va  were  born  it  would  lead  us  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  a man  will  not  reap  what  he  has  sown  and 
that  he  reaps  what  he  has  not  sown.  To  explain  : since 
the  jiva  of  a former  creation  had  a birth  at  the  beginning  of 


» TtthUp. 


BRAHttA>7roTA  s:b>ouNOHD. 

creaidoD,  be  tbost  have  been  de^royed  at  the  end  dt 
it,  Bo  tiuit  the  acts  of  dharma  and  adharma  done  by  hhn 
contd  not  bear  fruit,  and  it  would  therefore  follow  that  they 
were  destroyed.  And  the  hew  j»va  that  is  bom  at  the 
beginning  of  this  creation  cotnes  by  pleasure  and  pain  here, 
though  he  has  not  already  done  acts  of  dharma  and  adhrma, 
and  thus  reaps  what  he  has  hot  sown.  Thus  the  birth  of 
the  soul  as  taught  in  the  Pancharatra  is  unsound. 


CHAPTER  X. 

- THE  EVIL  AND  ITS  CURE. 

The  seed  of  human  ors^anism. 

From  earth  co-operated  by  rain,  etc.,  all  plants,  such  as 
rice,  composed  of  the  five  guwas  or  component  parts,  come 
into  being  in  orderly  succession.  To  say  that  the  earth  is 
co-operated  by  rain,  etc. , is  to  say  that  the  earth  becomes 
quintupled;  , it  combines  with  the  other  four  elements 
and  thus  forms  a compound  of  all  the  five  elements.  And 
all  food,  all  that  is  edible,  is  derived  from  plants.  From 
the  food,  when  digested,  comes  chyle  (rasa) ; chyle  genera- 
tes blood,  blood  generates  flesh,  and  flesh  gives  birth  to 
fat  (medas) ; from  fat  bones  are  produced,  and  bones  give 
rise  to  marrow  (majj^) ; from  marrow  comes  the  semen, 
which,  combined  with  the  mother’s  blood  (asnj),  constitutes 
the  seed  (b/ja). 

The  seed  developing  into  man. 

With  his  intellect  enveloped  by  the  mighty  snares  of 
avidya  or  ignorance  of  his  real  Self,  with  his  heart  carried 
away  by  the  fish-hook  of  insatiable  k^ina(desire)  that  is  born 
of  non-discrimination  (moha),  man,  the  father  of  the  one  yet 
to  be  born,  is  assailed  by  darkness  (tamas),  struck  down  by 
the  arrows  of  sense-objects  that  are  poisoned  with  attachment 
and  discharged  from  the  bow  of  desire  with  all  the  force  of 
purposeful  thoughts.  Then  he  is  powerless  as  if  possessed 

* The  whole  of  this  Chapter  is  a translatioiiof  the  Vartika  and 
of  portions  of  Jnaiidagiri’s  gloss  thereon. 


47 


370  BRAKMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  ^AnandOrVMi. 

with  a demon ; and  urged  on  by  the  karma  of  the  person 
that  to  be  bom,  he  falls  amain  into  the  woman-fire,  as 
the  moth  rushes  into  a blazing  fire,  covetous  of  its  flame. 
When  the  man  has  embraced  the  woman,  the  semen  describ- 
ed above  is  extracted  from  every  part  of  the  body ; and 
through  the  semen-carrying  tube  {nodi) , it  is  soon  let  into 
the  womb,  in  the  manner  determined  by  their  karma  and 
knowledge."^'  The  semen  thus  poured  into  the  womb  and 
acted  on  by  the  controlling  force  of  the  two  causes — 
namely,  the  former  karma  and  knowledge — passes  succes- 
sively through  the  embryonic  states  of  *kalala’  and  ^budbuda* 
in  a few  days.  Then  it  passes  on  into  the  state  of  the  foetus 
(pesf)  and  then  becomes  a compact  mass  (ghana) . This 
compact  mass  gradually  assumes  the  form  of  a body  en- 
dued with  various  limbs,  and  from  these  limbs  grow  the 
hairs.  With  whatever  elements  of  matter  (bh«tas)  and 
with  whatever  senses  (karanas)  the  soul  was  associated  in 
the  former  birth,  the  same  elements  and  the  same  sense- 
organs  go  to  make  up  the  organism  in  which  the  soul  is  to 
be  bom  here  in  the  present  life ; f and  this  we  maintain 
on  the  strength  of  the  sruti  which  declares  as  follows : 

“ As  a goldsmith,  taking  a piece  of  gold,  turns 
it  into  another  newer  and  more  lieautiful 
shape,  so  does  this  self,  after  having  thrown 


• i.  e.  by  the  karma  and  knowledge  of  the  parent  and  the  otf- 
Bpring,  or  of  the  two  parents  of  the  forthcoming  child. — (A) 

t That  is  to  say,  the  same  five  elements  of  matter  that  entered 
into  the  composition  of  the  former  body  form  the  material  cause 
of  the  present  body,  and  the  same  senses  that  functioned  in  the 
former  body  become  manifested  in  the  present  one. — (A) 


Amu.  /.]  the  evil  and  its  cuke.  3p 

off  this  body  and  dispelled  all  ignorance  make 
unto  himself  another  newer  and  more  beauti* 
ful  shape/* 

The  action  of  five  fires  in  the  birth  of  man. 

The  sruti  elsewhere  says  : 

**  Into  the  five  fires  of  heaven,  rain-cloud,  earth, 
man  and  woman,  the  Devas  pout  the  oblations 
of  faith,  soma  (moon),  rain,  food,  and  semen ; 
and  when  the  fifth  oblation  has  been  made, 
the  soul  is  born  as  man.”  t 

Here  the  sruti  mentions  the  stages  through  which  the 
constituents  of  human  organism  have  passed.  The  Devas, 
i.  ^.,  the  pranas  or  life-forces  of  the  ;nan  pour  his  faith 
(sraddha)  into  the  fire  of  heaven.  The  matter  of  heaven, 
thus  acted  on  by  the  faith  of  the  individual  and  by  the  life- 
forces,  becomes  the  luminous  matter  of  heaven,  the  soma- 
rajan.  The  same  life-forces  of  man  then  pour  that  matter 
of  heaven  (soma)  into  the  fire  of  rain-cloud  ; and  thence  it 
comes  as  rain.  Then  the  Devas  pour  this  rain  into  the 
third  fire  called  earth,  and  there  comes  the  food.  This 
food  enters  into  man  and  is  converted  into  semen,  and  this 
semen,  when  cast  into  the  woman’s  womb,  becomes  man. 

Limitation  of  the  Self  as  man  by  avidya. 

The  Viraj,  the  Universal  Self  manifested  in  His  vesture 
of  the  gross  physical  matter  of  the  universe,  has  been 

* Bri.  Up. 

t This  is  an  abstract  of  the  Chha.  Up.  5 — 4,  et  seq, 

J The  yajamana,  who  in  his  former  birth  was  engaged  in  the 
sacrificial  ritual. 


372  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Afiauda-  VollL 

evolved  from  the  S/^tra,  the  same  Universal  Self  manifest- 
ed in  the  subtle  matter  of  the  universe ; and  though  in- 
finite' and  coextensive  with  the  whole  universe,  He  yet 
becomes  a limited  being  through  ignorance  (sammoha), 
and  thinks  “ this  much  I am  ** — with  reference  to  the 
physical  body  of  man,  in  virtue  of  k^ima  and  karma. 
In  the  same  fashion  the  Swtra,  manifested  both  as  the 
Universal  Being  and  as  limited  beings  in  the  subtle  matter 
of  the  universe,  becomes  limited  as  the  linga-sartra  or 
subtle  body  of  man  which  is  made  up  of  the  seven- 
teen constituents.  *•'  The  source  of  this  twofold  limita- 
tion is  in  the  Avyakta,  the  Unmanifested  Cause  ; and  this 
Avyakta,  as  limited  in  the  human  organism,  is  identical 
with  man’s  Ego  in  the  sushupti  state.  The  Supreme  Self 
who  is  beyond  the  cause  and  the  effects  above  referred  to, 
and  who  is  infinite  in  Himself,  becomes  by  avidya  what 
is  called  the  Kshetrajwa,  the  knower  of  the  body,  the 
self-conscious  Ego,  as  manifested  in  man,  who  is  a mere 
semblance  of  the  Supreme  Conscious  Self.  Hence  the 
words  of  our  Lord,  Sri  Krishwa:  “Do  thou  know  Me 
as  the  Kshetrajwa.”  t 

Avidya  and  its  proof. 

• It  is  avidya, — the  consciousness  ‘ I do  not  know,’  bring- 
ing about  the  limitation  of  the  Supreme  Self  as  the  self 
of  man, — which  is  the  sole  cause  of  the  threefold  limitation 
above  referred  to.  Our  consciousness  is  the  sole  evidence 
of  its  existence,  just  as  the  consciousness  of  the  owl  is  the 

* These  are  manas,  biiddhi,  five  Jiianendriyas  or  organs  of 
knowledge,  five  Kannendriyas  or  organs  of  action,  and  five 
pranas  or  vital  airs. 


t Bh,  Gita  XIII  2. 


THE  EVIL  AND  ITS  CURE. 


373 


Am.  /.] 

sole  evidence  of  the  night’s  darkness  that  it  sees  during  our 
daytime.  That  is  to  say : nothing  but  Consciousness  exists 
as  an  objective  reality  ; and  for  the  existence  of  avidy^  in  It, 
there  is  no  proof  other  than  our  own  experience  (sv^inu- 
bhava).  He  who  seeks  to  prove  avidya  by  proper  tests 
of  truth  is,  indeed,  like  one  who  tries  to  see  the  darkness 
of  a mountain-cave  by  means  of  a lamp.  What  the  human 
consciousness  knows  as  the  non-self  is  all  evolved  from 
avidy^r,  and  is  looked  upon  as  avidya  itself,  as  false  know- 
ledge. Vidyrt  or  real  knowledge  is  identical  with  the 
Self ; it  is  Consciousness  itself.  Avidya  is  the  non-percep- 
lion  of  the  Self,  the  veil  of  the  Self.  It  is  not  a mere 
negative  of  vidy^i,  since  the  mere  absence  of  vidya  cannot 
act  as  the  veil  of  the  Self.  The  negative  prefix  ‘a*  in 
‘avidya’  implies  only  that  the  thing  denoted  by  the  word  is 
something  opposed  to  or  other  than  vidy^i,  ^as  in  ‘ a-mitra 
(non-friend)’  and  ^ a-dharma  (demerit)  ’ ; — not  that  it  is  the 
mere  absence  of  vidya.  And,  when  properly  examined,  all 
differentiation  perceived  by  the  deluded  minds  in  the  non- 
self,— in  the  external  universe, — as  being  and  non-being, 
resolves  itself  into  this  non-perception,  is  finally  trace- 
able to  the  idea  ‘ I do  not  know’;  and  it  is  therefore  proper 
to  hold  that  it  is  all  a manifestation  of  avidy^r. 

The  growth  of  the  subtle  body 

With  his  discrimination  obscured  by  this  avidy^,  the 
human  Ego  (jn^a)  abandons  his  former  body,  and  with  the 
up^^dhi  of  the  linga-sarira  enters  the  womb  of  the  mother, 
wafted  thither  by  the  strong  winds  of  karma. 

The  solid,  watery,  and  fiery  substances  eaten  by  the 
mother  are  each  resolved  into  three  parts;  and  each  of  these 
three  parts  undergoes  a definite  transformation.  Thus  the 


374  BRAHMA^viDYA EXPOUNDED.  [Anando-VollL 

subtlest  porti<m  of  the  solid  food  builds  up  mauas,  buddhi, 
and  iudriyas  (senses) ; the  subtlest  part  of  the  watery 
food  builds  up  prana  or  life-breath  in  all  its  various  mani- 
festations ; the  subtlest  part  of  the  fiery  food  builds  up 
speech  and  other  organs  of  action.  Their  less  subtle  parts 
are  transformed  respectively  into  flesh,  blood,  and  marrow ; 
and  the  grossest  parts  are  transformed  into  dung,  urine, 
and  bone. 

Evolution  of  manas,  etc.,  from  Consciousness. 

The  several  senses  are  evolved  from  the  Ahawksra 
( Egoism ) under  the  impulse  of  former  . impressions 
(bhsvanss)  which  are  now  brought  up  by  karma ; and  the 
nature  and  efficiency  of  the  senses  so  evolved  depend  there- 
fore upon  the  former  karma  and  knowledge  of  the  individual 
concerned.  To  illustrate  : The  organ  of  hearing  is  evolved 
from  the  consciousness  “I  am  the  hearer ; ” and  this 
principle  should  be  extended  to  the  evolution  of  the  other 
indriyas  or  senses:  from  Egoism  conjoined  with  the 
consciousness  “ I am  the  toucher  ” the  sense  of  touch  is 
evolved ; and  from  the  Egoism  conjoined  with  the  consci- 
ousness “ I am  the  seer,”  the  sense  of  sight  is  evolved.  Thus 
it  is  from  the  Ahamkara  acted  on  by  Consciousness  that  the 
senses  are  evolved,  not  from  the  Ahawkara  pure  and  simple 
as  some  Sawkhyas  hold. 

The  Self  is  unborn. 

i4tman  is  said  to  be  born  when  the  body  is  born  just  as 
when  the  pot  is  produced  the  akasa  of  the  pot  is  said  to  be 
produced.  y4tman  being  thus  really  not  subject  to  birth. 
He  is  not  subject  to  other  changes,  inasmuch  as  all  these 
changes  presuppose  the  change  called  birth. 


JHU  I9]  and  its  cure.  3.75 

Rtvlw/  of  the  past  Uvea  Just  before  bteth. 

As  this  visible  physical  body  of  the  man  lying  in  the 
womb  develops,  his  linga-sanra  also  develops  itself  more 
and  more.  In  the  ninth  or  tenth  month  after  conception, 
when  all  his  senses  (karanas)  have  been  developed,  and 
prior  to  his  birth  into  the  world,  all  the  vasanas  or  latent 
impressions  gathered  up  in  the  past  innumerable  births 
present  themselves  one  after  another  to  the  view  of  the 
embodied  soul  who,  in  his  linga-sanra,  has  already  entered 
into  the  womb  under  the  impulse  of  his  past  dharma  and 
adharma  and  is  lying  there  awake  in  all  his  senses.  Man, 
thus  awakened  as  to  his  past  experience  stored  up  in  him 
as  vrtsan^s  or  latent  impressions,  becomes  alive  to  the 
misery  of  existence  in  the  womb  and  the  like.  “ Ah,  what 
a great  misery  has  befallen  me ! Thus  feeling  dejected, 
he  then  grieves  about  himself  in  the  following  wise : “ Ere 
entering  this  womb,  I often  suffered  intolerable  excruciating 
pain ; I often  fell  into  the  burning  sands  of  the  hell  that 
burn  the  wicked  souls ; but  these  drops  of  the  pitta  fluid 
heated  by  the  digestive  fire  of  the  stomach  cause  more 
excruciating  pain  to  me  who  am  held  down  in  the  womb  ; 
and  the  worms  in  the  stomach,  with  their  mouths  as  sharp 
as  the  thorns  of  the  k//fasrrlmalf  plant,  torture  me,  who 
am  already  tormented  by  the  saw-like  bones  on  each  side. 
The  misery  of  the  kumbhfpaka  hell  looks  very  small  by 
the  side  of  the  torture  in  the  womb  which  is  full  of  all  mal- 
odors  and  is  burning  with  the  digestive  fire  of  the  stomach. 
Lying  in  the  womb,  I suffer  all  the  misery  of  the  hells 
where  the  wicked  souls  have  to  drink  of  pus,  blood  and 


* with  which  the  wicked  are  tortured  in  the  world  of  Yama. 


376  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Afimda-^Vollu 

rheum,  and  to  eat  of  things  vomitted ; and  I suffer  all  the 
misery  of  the  worms  that  live  in  the  dung.  The  greatest 
misery  of  all  hells  put  together  cannot  exceed  the  pain 
now  suflFered  by  me  lying  in  the  womb.**  '*'• 

The  misery  of  birth  and  infancy 

Then  squeezed  by  the  net-work  of  bones,  overwhelmed  by 
the  fire  of  the  stomach,  with  all  the  limbs  smeared  with 
blood  and  liquid  discharges,  and  enveloped  in  a membrane, 
tormented  by  excruciating  pain,  crying  aloud,  with  the  face 
downwards,  he  emerges  out  of  the  womb  as  if  delivered 
from  a snare  and  drops  down  lying  on  the  back.  Then  the 
baby  knows  nothing,  and  remains  like  a mass  of  flesh  and 
foetus.  He  has  to  be  guarded  from  the  grip  of  dogs,  cats 
and  other  carnivores,  by  others  with  sticks  in  hand.  He 
cannot  distinguish  the  demon  from  the  father  and  Dakin/  f 
from  the  mother ; he  cannot  distinguish  pus  from  milk.  Fie 
upon  this  miserable  state  of  infancy  ! 

The  misery  of  youth. 

Then,  on  attaining  youth,  he  grows  haughty  and  is 
assailed  with  the  fever  of  sexual  passion.  All  on  a sudden 
he  sings  aloud,  and  as  suddenly  he  leaps  or  jumps  and 
ascends  a tree.  He  frightens  the  mild ; and,  blinded  by 
the  intoxicating  love  and  anger,  he  pays  no  heed  to  any- 
thing whatsoever. 

The  misery  of  old  age. 

Then  attaining  to  the  age  of  decrepitude  which  is  the 

* The  samsara  in  its  hideous  aspect  as  experienced  in  the 
womb  is  here  described  with  a view  to  create  a disgust  for 
sawtsara  and  to  spur  on  the  disciple  to  a strong  endeavour  to 
get  out  of  it  and  to  avoid  future  return  to  the  womb. — (A ) 

t A kind  of  female  imp. 


THE  EVIL  AND  ITS  CURB. 


377 


Jm.  L ] 

object  of  ^ insult,  he  becomes  miserable.  With  the  chest 
choked  up  by  phlegm,  he  cannot  digest  the  food ; with 
fallen  teeth,  with  weak  sight,  having  to  eat  of  sharp  and 
bitter  and  astringent  things,  with  the  loins,  neck  and 
hands,  thighs  and  legs,  bent  down  by  the  morbid  humours 
of  wind,  he  becomes  quite  helpless,  assailed  by  myriads  of 
diseases,  insulted  by  his  own  kinsmen,  precluded  from  all 
ablutions,  smeared  with  dirt  all  over  the  body,  lying  on 
the  floor,  embracing  the  earth  as  it  were.  Having  swallow* 
ed  all  the  intelligence,  memory,  courage,  bravery,  and  the 
strength  of  the  youth,  this  damsel  of  a Jara  feels  as  if 
she  has  achieved  all  and  dances  with  joy  to  the  drum  of 
asthmatic  cough,  to  the  kettle-drum  of  the  roaring  stomach, 
to  the  flute  of  the  sonorous  breath,  with  the  garment-hem 
of  white  mustachios,  with  the  petty-coat  of  the  wrinkled 
and  grey-haired  skin,  having  a third  leg  as  it  were  in  the 
staff,  again  and  again  reeling  and  tumbling;  brilliant  in 
the  gold- jewels  of  projecting  knots  of  flesh,  veiled  hi  the 
thin  skin,  with  the  tinklings  of  moving  anklets  caused  by 
the  rubbing  of  the  heel  and  knee-bones. 

The  misery  of  death  and  the  after  career. 

To  the  death-pangs  that  succeed,  there  is  no  parallel. 
Creatures  suffering  from  the  direst  maladies  of  the  body 
are  afraid  of  death.  In  the  very  embraces  of  kinsmen, 
the  mortal  creature  is  dragged  away  by  death,  as  the  ser- 
pent lying  hidden  in  the  depths  of  the  ocean  is  dragged 
away  by  the  kite.  “ Ah ! my  dear ! my  wealth ! O my 
son  ! ’*  While  thus  bitterly  weeping,  man  is  swallowed  by 
death  as  a frog  by  a serpent.  It  is  meet  that  the  seeker  of 


* Old  age  personified 


378  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Auanda-V (Uli^ 

moksha  should  remember  the  pangs  of  the  dying  man  whose 
vitals  are  cut  to  pieces,  and  whose  joints  are  unloosed. 
“ When  thy  consciousness  fails  thee  and  with  it  thy  per- 
ceptive faculty,  when  tied  by  the  band  of  death,  how  canst 
thou  find  a saviour  ? Encountering  darkness  everywhere, 
as  when  entering  a deep  pit,  thou  wilt  see  with  distressed 
eyes,  thy  kinsmen  beating  their  breasts.  Thou  wilt  then 
find  thyself  dragged  by  kinsmen  all  around  with  their  iron- 
bands  of  affection.”  Tormented  by  hiccough,  withering 
away  by  hard  breathing,  dragged  by  bands  of  death,  man 
finds  no  refuge. 

Mounted  on  the  wheel  of  sams^ira,  and  led  on  by  the 
couriers  of  death,  and  bound  fast  by  the  death-band,  man 
grieves,  ‘ where  am  I to  go  ?’  As  man  goes  alone  after 
death,  his  karma  alone  leading  him  on, — is  he  a wise  man 
who  in  this  world  of  maya  thinks  that  the  mother,  father, 
elders,  sons  and  kinsmen  are  all  his  and  will  come  to  his 
help  ? This  world  of  mortals  is  verily  like  a resting-tree. 
One  evening  birds  meet  together  on  a tree  for  the  night’s 
rest,  and  the  next  morning  they  leave  the  tree  and  part 
from  one  another  and  go  their  way  ; just  so  do  men  meet 
for  a time  as  relatives  and  strangers  in  this  world  and  then 
disperse.  Birth  leads  to  death,  and  death  to  birth  ; thus 
without  rest  man  wanders  for  ever  like  gha/t-yantra  (a 
machine  for  raising  water). 

The  study  of  kosas  and  its  purpose. 

Having  described  the  evolution — from  Brahman — of  the 
universe  including  man,  the  sruti  proceeds  to  shew  how  to 
bring  about  the  destruction  of  the  great  evil  of  saws^ra. 
It  is  with  this  end  in  view  that  the  five  kosas  of  man  will 


THE  EVIL  AND  ITS  CURE. 


379 


Anu  /,] 

be  described ; and  by  resolving  each  kosa  into  that  which 
precedes  it  in  evolution,  each  effect  into  its  immediate  cause 
till  the  Ultimate  Cause  is  reached,  man  will  be  led  on  to  a 
knowledge  of  Brahman  who  is  neither  the  cause  nor  the 
effect,  and  of  the  unity  of  his  Self  and  Brahman. 

Samsara  is  due  to  avidya. 

The  dwelling  in  the  womb  and  all  other  vicissitudes  of 
existence  described  above  as  making  up  the  evil  of  saws^ra 
pertain  to  the  linga-deha,  or  subtle  body.  Though  the  real 
Self  of  man  has  nothing  to  do  with  those  vicissitudes,  still, 
by  delusion  (sam-moha),  by  confounding  together  the  two 
bodies  and  the  real  Self,  he  thinks  that  he  himself  is  subject 
to  the  changes.  Identifying  himself  with  buddhi  (under- 
standing, intellect),  man  regards  himself  as  the  cogniser,  and 
engages  in  the  act  of  congnising.  Identifying  himself  with 
manas,  he  regards  himself  as  the  thinker,  and  as  a result  of 
this  confusion  he  performs  mental  acts.  Identifying  himself 
with  pram,  (up-breathing)  and  other  forms  of  vitality  he 
feels  concerned  in  all  outgoing  activities.  And  identifying 
himself  with  sight  and  other  senses,  he  is  engrossed  in  think- 
ing of  color  and  so  on.  Similarly,  when  the  physical  body 
is  burnt,  he  thinks  himself  burnt ; the  deluded  man  regards 
himself  black  and  thus  puts  on  the  blackness  of  the  body. 
By  avidyri  man  becomes  attached  to  cattle,  wealth  and 
the  like  and  thinks  himself  the  ovmer  of  them;  and  by 
attachment  he  ascribes  to  himself  the  affections  of  the 
physical  body  and  the  linga-sarfra,  and  thinks  that  he  is  a 
student,  a householder,  an  ascetic,  a sage,  and  so  on.  The 
body  is  in  fact  a product  of  the  various  elements  of  matter, 
quite  foreign  to  the  real  Self  of  man,  and  man  subjects 


3fiO  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED,  [Aftanda^VallU 

himself  to  evil  by  mere  delusion,  by  regarding  the  human 
organism  as  *1'  and  'mine*. 

Brahmavidya  is  intended  for  man. 

Though  all  beings  alike—the  lower  kingdoms  as  well  as 
man, — are  products  of  food  and  are  evolved  from  Brahman 
primarily,  still,  the  human  being  is  here  made  the  subject 
of  investigation,  simply  because  it  is  man  who  is  qualified 
for  li^ma  and  jfkina,  who  is  capable  of  acting  and  know- 
ing aright.  Man  is  plunged  deep  down  in  this  ocean  of 
samsara,  in  this  repository  of  all  evil ; and  it  is  man  whom 
the  sruti  seeks,  by  means  of  Brahmavidya?,  to  unite  to 
Brahman,  to  his  own  Innermost  Self. 

The  process  of  imparting  Brahmavidya. 

The  sruti  tries  to  impart  this  Brahmavidya?  or  knowledge 
of  Brahman  by  an  exposition  of  the  five  kosas.  By  afford- 
ing to  man  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  kosas  (the 
sheaths  of  the  Self),  it  will  be  shewn  that  Brahman  beyond 
the  kosas  is  one  with  man’s  real  Self  within.  It  is  indeed  by 
first  pointing  to  the  end  of  the  tree’s  branch  that  one  points 
out  the  moon  beyond.  The  human  mind  which  is  fully 
tainted  with  the  \asaxias — with  the  tendencies  and  impres- 
sions of  past  mundane  experiences — that  have  accumula- 
ted in  this  beginningless  sawsara  can  realise  the  real  Self 
within  only  by  some  peculiarly  appropriate  process,  and  it 
is  this  appropriate  process  which  the  sruti  describes  in  the 
sequel. 

The  one  Self  differentiated  into  the  Ego 
and  the  non-Ego. 

The  Pratyagatman,  the  real  Self  within,  is  one  in  Him- 
self^ untouched  with  any  duality ; neither  does  there  exis  t 


THE  EVIL  AND  ITS  CURB. 


381 


Am.  /.] 

anything  whatever  even  outside  the  Self.  The  one  Self  is, 
owing  to  avidya,  differentiated  into  the  two  false  categories 
of  the  Ego  and  the  non-Ego.  That  is  to  say,  when  the  one 
true  Self  is  not  realised  in  His  true  nature  as  one,  that  very 
Self  appears  differentiated  as  the  Ego  and  the  non-Ego ; so 
that  all  the  differentiation  we  are  conscious  of  is  due  to  avidyn 
and  therefore  false ; and  the  Self  remains  all  the  while  one 
in  fact,  untouched  by  duality. 

The  kosas,  subjective  and  objective. 

There  are  five  kosas  or  sheaths  in  which  the  Self  manifests 
Himself  as  the  Ego, — namely,  the  Annamaya  or  the  one 
composed  of  food,  the  Prawamaya  or  the  one  composed  of 
vitality,  the  Manomaya  or  the  one  composed  of  thought,  the 
Vijf^^namaya  or  the  one  composed  of  intelligence,  and  the 
^nandamaya  or  the  one  composed  of  bliss ; and  correspond- 
ing to  these  there  are  five  kosas  or  sheaths  in  w^hich  the 
same  Self  manifests  Himself  as  the  objective,  as  the 
non-Ego, — namely,  Anna  or  food,  Prana,  or  \dtality, 
Manas  or  thought,  Vijwana  or  intelligence,  and  .Luanda 
or  bliss.  So  that,  ultimately,  there  are  five  principles, — 
Anna,  Pra«a,  Manas,  Vij«ana  and  .^nanda.  Anna  is 
the  Viraj  ( the  radiant ),  that  which  is  manifested  to 
our  senses,  the  physical.  This  has  grown  or  evolved  out 
of  Prana  or  vitality.  Prana^  Manas,  and  Vijwana  constitute 
what  is  called  the  S//tr^jtman.  This  S^tr^itman  is  made  up 
primarily  of  two  kinds  of  matter : one  of  them  is  the  vehicle 
of  all  outgoing  activity  (kriya-sakti)  and  is  called  Prana  or 
life-principle ; the  other  kind  of  matter  is  the  vehicle  of  all 
intellection  or  knowledge  (vijfwna-sakti)  and  is  of  two  kinds, 
Manas  and  Vijw^na.  Manas  is  the  anta^-karana,  that  kind 


38a  BRAHMA-VIDVA  EXPOUNDED.  [J^naitda^VotH. 

of  matter  in  which  all  concrete  (savikalpaka ) thought  ex- 
presses itself.  It  is  in  the  manasic  form  of  matter  that  all 
concrete  thoughts,  such  as  those  embodied  in  the  i?ig- Veda, 
the  Yajur- Veda,  andtheSama-Veda,  express  themselves.  And 
Manas  is  behind  Fram, : that  is  to  say,  it  is  from  Manas  that 
Frana,  has  been  evolved.  Vij«<7na  or  intelligence,  too,  is  the 
antaA-kara»a,  the  matter  in  which  all  abstract  (nirvikalpaka) 
thought  expresses  itself.  All  determinate  ascertained  know- 
ledge, such  as  that  concerning  the  truths  taught  in  the  Veda, 
constitute  the  Buddhi,  the  understanding.  These  three  ko5as 
of  Frans.,  Manas,  and  Vij/mna  constitute  the  Swtratman. 
i4nanda  is  the  bliss  which  results  from  knowledge  and  action, 
and  is  the  ultimate  cause  of  all.  Thus,  Anna  or  physical 
matter  constitutes  the  Viraj-kosa;  Frans,  Manas,  and  Vij«^na 
constitute  the  S//tratman ; and  .^4nanda  constitutes  the  Kara- 
«ako5a  (the  Cause  sheath).  The  same  five  kosas  (sheaths 
or  principles)  are  mentioned  in  the  Bnhad^irawyaka  under 
the  names  of  Anna,  Frans,  Manas,  Vach  (sheech,  correspond- 
ing to  Vijwana  here)  and  Avy^knta  (the  undifferentiated 
Root  of  matter).  Pr^wa  Manas  and  Vach,  spoken  of  as  the 
three  foods  of  Prajapati,  constitute  the  S^tratman  ; Anna  is 
the  Viraj ; and  the  Avyrtkrila  is  the  K^rawa,  the  ultimate 
Cause  of  all. 

The  relation  between  the  subjective  and  the 
objective  kosas. 

The  five  sheaths  of  the  non-Ego  or  objective  group  cons- 
titute respectively  the  material  essences  of  which  the  five 
sheaths  of  the  Ego  or  subjective  group  are  built  up.  On 
realising  the  nature  of  the  ten  kosss  of  the  Ego  and  the 


♦ 1-2. 


THE  EVIL  AND  ITS  CURE. 


3$3 


Am.  /.] 

non-Ego  groups,  the  student  should  first  resolve  in  thought 
the  five  sheaths  of  the  Ego  group  into  their  respective 
material  essences  in  the  objective  group ; i*  e. , he  should 
understand  that  the  Annamaya-kosa  is  made  up  of  the 
matter  on  the  plane  of  physical  matter,  that  the  Prawamaya- 
kosa  is  made  up  of  matter  on  the  plane  of  Prana,  or  vital 
essence,  and  so  on.  He  should  then  realise  that,  as  the 
effect  is  not  distinct  from  the  cause,  the  Annamaya  is  not 
distinct  from  Anna,  its  material  cause.  So,  too,  with  regard 
to  the  other  kosas.  The  student  should  now  take  the  next 
step : he  should  see  that  as  Anna  has  been  evolved  from 
Prawa,  the  one  is  not  distinct  from  the  other,  its  material  cause , 
and  is  therefore  one  with  it.  In  the  same  way  he  should  see 
that  Prana  is  not  distinct  from  Manas,  that  Manas  is  not 
distinct  from  Vij^mna,  and  that  Vij;mna  is  not  distinct  from 
.^nanda,  the  first  Cause. 

The  Self  beyond. 

When  the  student  has  by  this  process  risen  above  the 
level  of  effects  and  attained  to  the  level  of  the  Cause,  he  is 
taught  the  grand  truth  that  the  Self  and  Brahman  are 
identical.  In  the  light  of  this  teaching  he  ceases  to  identify 
himself  with  the  Cause  and  rises  to  the  level  of  Brahman 
beyond  the  Cause,  and  thus  realises  the  unity  of  Brahman 
and  the  Self. 

Contemplation  of  the  sheaths  as  altars  of 
sacred  fire. 

As  Luanda  is  the  innermost  essence  of  the  remaining  four 
principles  of  the  non-Ego  group,  so,  the  .^4 nandamaya-kosa 
is  the  pratyag(7tman  or  the  innermost  essence  of  the  remain- 
ing four  sheaths  of  the  Ego  group,  inasmuch  as  these 


3^  dKAftUk^viDirA 

sheaths  are  all  manifestations  of  the  one  jiVa  who  is  con- 
sdoq^sness  pare  and  simple  (praje^a-ghaha).  The  con- 
templation, however,  enjoined  in  the  sequel,  of  the 
^nandama}ra-ko5a  which  is  consciousness  pure  and  simple 
— as  made  up  of  a head,  two  wings,  a trunk  and  a tail— may 
be  explained  as  referring  to  the  variety  in  the  manifested 
forms  of  bliss  resulting  from  the  acts  of  the  individual. 
Each  sheath  is  represented  as  made  up  of  a head  and  so  on 
for  the  purposes  of  contemplation.  Accordingly,  the  teachers 
of  old  have  explained  that  these  are  but  imaginary  repre- 
sentations of  the  kosas  in  the  form  of  altars  of  the  sacred 
fire.  The  Annamaya-kosa,  for  instance,  should  be  contem- 
plated as  the  altar  of  the  sacred  fire  arranged  in  the  form  of  a 
bird:**'  the  head  of  the  human  physical  body  corresponding  to 
the  head  of  the  bird,  the  arms  to  the  wings,  the  middle 
portion  to  the  trunk,  and  the  remaining  part  to  the  tail 
of  the  bird. 

The  purpose  of  the  contemplation  of  kosas. 

By  a constant  contemplation  of  these  kosas  represented 
as  altars  of  the  sacred  fire,  the  student  attains  wisdom.  His 
buddhi  or  understanding  becomes  purer  and  acquires  the 
faculty  of  true  discrimination.  With  the  growth  of  the 
faculty  of  true  discrimination,  he  abandons  the  first  kosa 
and  recedes  to  the  one  next  behind.  Thus  step  by  step  he 
abandons  one  kosa  after  another,  and  receding  behind  all 
kosas  and  dissolving  away  all  of  them,  he  attains  to  a 
knowledge  of  his  unity  with  Brahman  and  becomes  liberat- 
ed* The  sruti  further  declares  that  he  who  contemplates 

♦ In  sacrificial  rites,  the  altars  of  the  sacred  fire  are  usually 
arranged  in  the  form  of  a bird,  such  as  a hawk. 


Aixm  ^ Hie  Virilj  obts^  all  food.  Thk  idxvak  be  tlk 


for,  so  the  teaches,  and  no  teaching  of  the  Veda  cati 
ever  be  doubted.  Doubt  may  arise  only  as  to  the  matters 
known  through  sensuous  perception  or  through  iufereifoe 
therefrom,  the  vision  in  this  case  being  distorted  by  the 
idiosyncrasies  of  the  human  mind.  ^The  Vedic  revelation, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  not  subject  to  any  such  distortion. 

Or,  the  purpose  of  the  teaching  of  these  upasanas  may  be 
explained  in  another  way : — Man  naturally  identifies  himself 
with  the  kosas.  The  5ruti,  taking  hold  of  this  natural  bent 
of  the  human  mind,  enables  man  to  resolve,  by  Dhy^na  or 
meditation,  each  kosa  into  what  is  behind  it,  till  he  reaches 
the  Self  behind  all  kosas,  and  then  enjoins  him  to  hold  on 
to  that  Self  alone.  The  fruits  of  the  contemplation  men- 
tioned in  connection  with  the  several  kosas  should  not  be 
supposed  to  accrue  as  declared  here.  The  unity  of  Brah- 
man and  the  Self  is  the  main  point  of  teaching,  and  that 
alone  therefore  is  the  truth  which  the  sruti  seeks  to  impress 
in  this  connection.  A parallel  case  is  found  in  the  Chhan- 
dogya-Upanishad.  There  the  sruti  teaches  the  contem- 
plation of  mm,  etc., — to  which  man  resorts  of  his  own 
accord,  without  the  sruti  enjoining  it, — only  with  a view  to 
enjoin  the  contemplation  of  the  Infinite  (Bhwman),  declar- 
ing it  as  the  highest  of  the  upasanas  therein  taught. 

Or,  it  may  be  that  in  speaking  of  the  contemplation  of 
food,  etc.,  and  the  fruits  thereof,  the  Taittiriya  merely 
reiterates  the  teaching  of  the  Brihadara/iyaka  concerning 


• Op.  cit.  7. 


3^6  BRABH&'VtOTA  VolH. 

the  oentemidttiens  of  the  Virej  and  the  SetMtmtai,— which- 
are  there  enjmned  as  the  means  of  attaining  fruits  ranging 
below  mokdia, — ^while  the  miun  object  of  the  Taittirtya  is  to. 
impart  a knowledge  of  the  Absolute  Reality,  as  the  means  of 
attaining  the  highest  good. 


CHAPTER  XL 
ANNAMAYA-KOSA. 

Introduction. 

In  chapters  VI  to  IX,  it  has  been  well  established  that 
the  whole  universe  from  akaso,  down  to  man  has  been 
evolved  from  Brahman  endued  with  Maya.  This  being 
established,  it  becomes  quite  evident  that  Brahman  is 
infinite ; for,  as  the  effect  has  no  existence  apart  from  the 
cause,  Brahman  Himself  is  in  the  form  of  space,  time  and. 
all  things.  Having  thus  established  the  infinitude  of  Brah-r 
man  declared  in  the  words  ‘‘  Real,  Consciousness  and 
Infinite  is  Brahman,”  the  sruti  proceeds  to  establish  the 
statement  that  He  is  * hid  in  the  cave,*  by  way  of  dis- 
criminating the  real  Brahman  from  the  five  kosas  ban- 
ning with  the  Annamaya  and  ending  with  the  ^nandamaya. 

Composition  of  the  Annamaya-kosa. 

To  treat  first  of  the  Annamaya-kosa : 

^ ||»l| 

4.  He,  verily,  is  this  man,  formed  of  food- 
essence. 

This  human  being  whom  we  perceive  is  a vikara  or 
product  of  food-essence.  It  is,  indeed,  the  semen, — the 
essence  of  all  parts  of  the  body,  bearing  the  (generator’s) 
thought-impress  of  human  form, — ^that  here  constitutes 
the  seed ; and  he  who  is  born  from  that  seed  (which 
bears  the  thought-impress  of  human  form)  must  be 


38S 


biuhii*-vh»?a  SXWWMDBO.  [Aiuind9-V^. 

likewise  of  human  form ; for,  as  a rule  we  find  that  all 
creatures  that  are  barn, .of  whateuar  class  of  beings,  are 
of  the  same  form  as  the  pareirfs. 

{Question) : — ^All  creatures  alike  being  formed  of  food- 
essence  and  descended  from  Brahman,  why  is  man 
Bione  taken  (for  examination)  ? 

{Answer) ; — Because  of  his  importance. 

[Question) : — Wherein  does  his  importance  lie  ? 

[Ansyiier) : — In  so  far  as  he  is  qualified  for  karma  and 
jnana,  for  acting  and  knowing  aright.  Man  alone, 
indeed,  is  qualified  for  karma  and  jnana,  because  he 
alone  is  competent  to  follow  the  teaching,  and  because 
he  alone  seeks  the  ends  which  they  are  intended  to 
secure.  Accordingly  the  sruti  says  elsewhere  : “ But  in 
man  the  Self  is  more  manifested  ’’  &c.*  It  is  man 
#hom  the  sruti  seeks  to  unite  to  Brahman,  the  Inner* 
most  Being,  through  Vidy«  or  wisdom. 

f With  a view  to  transport  man  by  the  ship  of  Brahma- 
vidya  to  the  farthest  shore  of  the  great  ocean  of  evil-produc- 
ing kosas  (sheaths),  the  sruti  says  “ He,  verily,  is  this  man  ” 
etc.  Here  ‘ He  * refers  to  the  /ftman,  the  Self,  the  Primal 
Being ; and  ‘ verily,’  shows  that  He  is  the  ^tman  taught 
in  all  upanishads.  In  the  words  ‘this  man’  the  sruti 
teaches  that  the  A tman  Himself  has  become  the  man  of 
kosas  by  avidyn,  by  not  knowing  himself.  Just  as  a 'rope 

* Aitr,.  Artk.  2-3-2- 3.  The  passage  is  quoted  in  full  on  page  811. 

t Here  the  Yartikakara's  explanation  differs  from  the 
Bhashyakura’s, 


liecewBs  a serpent  oaty  by  avtdys, — ior,  a rope  ccp'aaww 
actually  become  a serpenti'-^i  by  avidys  Attsam  becewetiite 
nua  ot  tiva  kosas  and  appears  to  suiler  alonj;  with  the  Jcanis. 
* Amwrasaniaya  ’ means  a thipg  formed  of  kod-e^Mnoe. 
Reason’^'  as  well  as  revelation  f teach  that  the  Supreme  Self 
is  not  farmed  of  any  material,  unlike  a pot  which  is  formed 
of  clay.  But  we  know  that  the  body  is  made  of  food-essence. 
The  rruti  says  that  “ He  ( the  Self ),  verily,  is  this  man 
formed  of  food,”  simply  because  the  physical  body  is  an 
upsdhi  of  the  Self. — (S  & A). 

By  this  man  formed  of  food-essence  we  should  under- 
stand the  piaia  or  individual  human  organism  only ; but 
that  organism  is  one  with  the  Virrrj,  with  the  whole  visible 
universe  constituting  the  physical  body  of  the  Cosmic  Soul. 
Elsewhere,  in  the  words  The  Self  alone  was  all  this  in 
the  beginning,  in  the  form  of  man,”  + the  sruti  teaches  the 
unity  of  the  body  and  the  Viraj ; and  here,  too,  in  the  words 
“ Those  who  contemplate  upon  Anna  (food)  as  Brahman,” 
the  sruti  directs  us  to  regard  Brahman  and  Anna  as  one. 
When  by  upasana  the  organism  which  is  limited  to  the 
individual  is  unified  with  the  Viraj  or  Cosmic  Organism^ 
Prana  (life)  becomes  also  unified  with  Vayu,  the  Hiranya- 
garbha ; and  then  the  Self  in  the  upadhi  of  the  Hiranya- 
garbha  passes  beyond  the  limits  of  individuality,  in  the 
isame  way  that  a lamp-light  confined  within  a pot  becomes 

* The  reason  is : that  He  has  no  parts,  that  He  is  unattached, 
and  so  on. 

f “He  is  not  horn.  He  does  not  die,”  etc.  (Kath|a-up.  2-18^ 

J^Bri,  Up.  1 


bkahma-vxdva  bxi>oundsd.  Ufmaa-y«si. 

idi&Md  m space  when  the  confining  pot  is  broken  to 
|ne(»s— (S.  & A;), 

The  human  organism,  composed  of  a head,  hands,  feet, 
etc.,  and  which  at  the  beginning  of  creation  was  evolved 
after  the  evolution  of  aloisa  and  other  things  mentioned 
already, — ^that  very  human  organism  is  the  one  which  every 
man  regards  as  * my  body.’  Certainly,  what  a person  now 
regards  as  his  own  body  is  not  itself  the  one  evolved  at  the 
banning  of  creation  ; still,  as  both  alike  are  formed  of  food- 
element  evolved  in  the  course  of  the  evolution  beginning 
with  dkassL,  man’s  body  is  of  the  same  kind  as  the  one 
evolved  at  the  beginning  of  creation.  Hence  the  words 
He,  verily,  is  this  man.  ” The  words  “ formed  of 
food-essence  (anna-rasa)  ” clearly  point  to  this  idea.  There 
are  six  kinds  of  food-essence : sweet,  acid,  saline,  bitter, 
acrid  and  astringent  The  physical  body  is  formed  of  these 
six  essences  of  food.  The  essence  of  the  food  eaten  by  the 
parents  is  in  due  course  converted  into  the  seven  principles 
of  this  body, — namely,  skin,  blood,  flesh,  fat,  bone,  marrow 
and  semen  ; and  on  entering  the  womb  it  is  again  changed 
into  a human  body.  The  Garbha-upanishad  says : 

‘‘  The  food-essence  is  of  six  kinds.  From  this 
essence  blood  is  formed ; from  blood,  flesh ; 
from  flesh,  fat  ; from  fat,  bone ; from  bone, 
marrow ; from  marrow,  semen.  From  a com- 
bination of  semen  and  blood  the  foetus  is 
formed.” 

The  gross  physical  body  mentioned  here  as  formed  of  food- 
essence  includes  also  the  subtle  body  lying  within  it,  inas- 
much as  this  latter  body  is  formed  of  simple  (a-paachAcrita, 


A^ltAMilVA-KOSA' 


Am. 


0* 


unquintupled,  uncompounded)  elements  of  matter  (btuita) 
and  is  nourisihed  and  maintained  by  food,  etc.,  eaten  by  man* 
That  the  subtle  body  is  formed  of  elements  of  matter  is 
declared  by  the  Teacher  in  the  following  words ; 

The  five  unquintupled  primary  elements  of 
matter,  and  the  senses  which  are  evolved  from 
them,  constitute  together  the  Linga-Sarira 
composed  of  the  seventeen  constituents;  the 
Linga-San'ra  thus  being  material.” 

That  the  subtle  body  is  nourished  and  maintained  by  food, 
etc.,  is  taught  in  the  Chhandogya: 

** Formed  of  food,  verily,  ismanas;  formed  of 
water  is  prawa;  formed  of  fire  is  speech.”* 

From  our  ordrinary  experience  it  can  be  shewn  that  in  the 
case  of  all  beings,  when  manas  is  weakened  by  fasting,  it  is 
invigorated  by  breaking  the  fast.  Similarly,  we  find  in  our 
experience  that,  when  pr^wa  or  vitality  is  weakened  by  the 
fatigue  of  a journey,  it  is  refreshed  by  drinking  water.  So 
also  we  see  songsters  purify  their  throats  by  drinking  ghee, 
oil,  and  other  tejasic  (fiery)  substances  and  thus  improve 
their  voice.  The  physical  body  which  we  perceive — formed  of 
food,  and  associated  with  the  Linga-deha  (subtle  body)wbich 
is  composed  of  manas,  pr^iwa,  speech,  etc.,  and  whose  nature 
has  just  been  described, — is  the  adhyatmika,  i.e.,  belongs 
to  the  individual  soul.  From  this  we  may  also  understand 
the  nature  of  the  ^dhidaivika,  the  body  of  the  Cosmic  Soul, 


* These  seventeen  constituents  are  ; the  five  primary  elements, 
the  five  jwana-indriyas  (senses  of  knowledge),  the  five  karma- 
^ndriy as  (senses  of  action),  manas,  and  buddhi. 

t clt  6-^5^. 


iteA^rinilc  li^  «alltd  fintboMwiai  tiie-  MipMfMfr  Egg» 
yfl^ttikahim  has  described  Hnfsliovs: 

**Then  came  into  bemg  the  Vinq,  tiisiiiaiii* 
fested  God,  sHiose  senses  are  Du  (space)  and 
ether  (Devatss  or  inteUigences),  who  wears  a 
body  formed  of  the  five  gross  elements  of 
' matter,  and  who  glows  with  the  consciousness 

‘1  am  air.” 

The  Annamaya-kosa  has  been  described  by  the  rruti  only 
with  a riew  to  ultimately  enable  the  disciple  to  understand 
the  real  nature  of  Brahman,  just  as  the  end  of  a tree's 
branch  is  first  shown  with  a view  to  point  out  the  moon 
over  against  it. 

Contemplation  of  the  Annamaya-kosa. 

The  rruti  now  proceeds  to  represent  for  the  purposes  of 
contemplation  the  five  parts  of  the  Annamaya-kora  in  the 
form  of  a bird  as  in  the  case  of  a sacrificial  fire.  The 
sacrificial  fire  arranged  in  the  form  of  a hawk,  a heron,  or 
some  other  bird,  has  a head,  two  wings,  a trunk  and  a tail. 
So  also,  here,  every  kosa  is  represented  to  be  made  up  of 
five  parts : 

I m w i w.  I 
I ii^ii 

5.  This  itselfis  his  head ; this  is  the  right  wing, 
diis  is  the  left  wing,  this  is  the  self,  this  is  the  tail, 
the  support. 

The  disciple’s  mind  having  been  accustomed-to  regsiid 
the  non-self  as  the  Self-r^o  regard  as  the  Self  the 


//j 


AIfNAllAVA*iwObA« 


several  forms,  bodies,  or  kosas  which  are  extctHal  to 
the  Self— it  is  impossible  for  it  all  at  once  to  coini«ie- 
hend  the  Innermost  Self  without  the  support  ( of  its 
former  experience),  * and  to  dwell  in  Him  detached 
altogether  from  that  support.  Accordingly,  the  sruti 
tries  to  lead  man  within  (to  one  self  within  another  till 
the  real  Self  is  reached)  by  representing  ( the  inner 
embodied  selves,  the  Pr^wamaya  and  so  on  ) after  the 
fashion  of  the  physical  body,  of  that  embodied  self  with 
which  all  are  familiar, — i.e.,  by  representing  them  as 
having  a head,  etc.,  like  the  Annamaya  self, — in  the 
same  way  that  a man  shows  the  moon  shining  over 
against  a tree  by  first  pointing  to  a branch  of  the  tree,  t 

The  Annamaya-kosa  is  here  represented  by  the  sruti  as  a 
bird,  as  having  wings  and  a tail,  in  order  that  the  Prawa- 
maya  and  other  kosas  may  also  be  represented  in  the  form 
of  a bird.  The  intellect  will  thereby  be  divested  of  its 
engrossment  in  external  objects  and  can  then  be  directed 
steadily  to  the  self.  No  contemplation  of  a kosa  is  intended 
for  the  specific  fruit  spoken  of  here.  The  present  section 
starts  and  concludes  with  a discussion  of  the  unity  of  the 
Self  and  Brahman  ; therefore  this  unity  must  be  the  aim  of 


* i.e.,  indopendeiitly  of  all  reforcnco  to  the  kosas  formerly, 
regarded  as  selves. 

t He  who  \vaiit.s  to  show  the  moon  to  another  first  teaches 
that  the  end  of  the  branch  of  the  tree  is  the  moon.  When  the 
eye  has  thus  been  directed  towards  the  end  of  the  branch,  and 
has  been  withdrawn  from  all  other  directions,  then  the  moon 
over  against  the  end  of  the  branch  is  shown. 


50 


394  BRAMMA.VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [AmndO-VdlL 

its  teaching.  To  suppose  that  the  contemplation  for  a 
specific  purpose  is  also  intended  here  is  to  admit  that  the 
present  section  deals  with  two  different  topics,  which  is 
opposed  to  all  principles  of  interpretation.  As  to  the  sruti 
speaking  of  the  specific  fruits,  it  should  be  construed 
into  a mere  praise  of  the  intermediate  steps  in  the  process  of 
Brahmavidya,  calculated  to  induce  the  student  to  push  on 
the  investigation  with  zest.  By  meditating  upon  the  kosas 
one  after  another,  the  student  realises  their  true  nature. 
When  the  mind  dwells  steadily  in  one  kosa  and  realises  its 
true  nature,  it  loses  sight  of  all  objects  of  its  former  regard ; 
and  when  thus  divested,  gradually,  of  the  idea  of  one  kosa 
after  another,  the  student’s  mind  is  competent  to  dwell 
steadily  in  the  Self. — (A). 

Of  the  man  formed  of  food-essence,  what  we  call 
head  is  itself  the  head.  In  the  case  of  the  Prawamaya 
lind  the  like,  what  is  not  actually  the  head  is  represent- 
ed as  the  head  ; and  to  guard  against  the  idea  that  the 
same  may  be  the  case  here  with  the  Annamaya),  ^ 
the  sruti  emphasises,  “this  itself  the  head”.  The  same 
is  true  with  regard  to  wings,  etc. — This,  the  right  arm 
of  the  man  facing  the  east,  is  the  right  wing;  this,  the 
left  arm,  is  the  left  wing  ; this,  the  central  part  of  the 
body,  is  the  self,  the  trunk,  as  the  sruti  says,  “ The 
central  one,  verily,  is  the  self  of  these  limbs.”  This, 
the  part  of  the  body  below  the  navel, — the  tail  as  it  were, 
because,  like  the  tail  of  a bull,  it  hangs  down, — is  the 
suppoit,  f.^.,  that  by  which  man  stands.  • 

As  to  the  Annamaya  which  is  to  be  meditated  upon, 
we  bead,  the  part  of  the  body  situated  above  th^ 


A?^>tA\lAYA-kO^A. 


Am.  /.] 


neck,  is  itself  the’  head.  There  is  no  figure  here.  The  two 
hands  themselves  we  see  are  to  be  meditated  upon  as  the 
two  wings.  The  part  of  the  body  situated  below  the  neck 
and  above  the  navel  is  the  self,  the  middle  part  of  the  body, 

the  suitable  abode  of  jiva, It  is  plain  that  the  part  of 

the  human  body  below  the  navel  is  the  support  of  the 
upper  part.  In  the  body  of  the  bull  and  other  animals,  the 
tail  forms  a support  in  so  far  as  it  serves  to  drive  away  flies 
and  musquitoes  and  the  like.  This  idea  of  the  tail  being 
the  support  of  the  bodies  is  presented  here  for  purposes  of 
contemplation."'* 


As  fashioned  after  the  mould  of  the  physical  body, 
the  Pr^tnamaya  and  others  to  be  mentioned  below  are 
also  represented  to  be  of  the  same  form,  having  a head 
and  so  on  ; the  molten  mass  of  copper,  for  example, 
poured  into  the  mould  of  an  idol  takes  the  form  of 
that  idol. 


- Though  the  Pr/i»amaya  and  the  other  three  kosas  are  not 
actually  made  up  of  ,a  head  and  so  on,  still,  as  the  molten 
metal  poured  into  a mould  takes  the  form  of  that  mould,  so 
the  Prawamaya  and  other  kosas  which  lie  within  the  Anna- 
maya-kosa  may  be  imagined  to  be  moulded  after  the  latter. 
Such  a representation  is  only  intended  to  facilitate  the  medi- 
tation and  discrimination  of  the  four  kosas — (S&A) 


* That  is  to  say,  the  value  of  the  idea  consists  in  the  fact  that 
a contemplation  thereof  leads  to  a comprehension  of  the  true 
nature  of  Brahman  in  ihan, — which  is  here  the  main  subject  of 
discourse.  Brahman  will  be  spoken  of  as  the  support  of  the 
4nandamaya  self. — (Tr.) 


39$  ditAHMA-viDYA  £muKDED«  [Anondo^VdUii 

A Mantra  on  tlie*unity  of  the  VIraJ 
and  the  Annamaya. 

Thus  has  been  taught  the  form  in  which  the  Annamaya- 
kosa  should  be  contemplated.  Now,  the  sruti  quotes  a 
mantra  with  a view  to  confirm  what  has  been  taught  in  the 
Brahmana  here  regarding  the  kosa  and  its  uptisana: 

ii^ii 

6.  On  that,  too,  there  is  this  verse:* 

[ ] 

sRnl  srsrr:  srmw  i w.  te  1 3?%  ^r- 

^ I I ^ f|  «RTRi 

?wf<T  I m I %s5Rm^  I st^rrra^l 

^ % ^JcTRT  I ^RVf^rf  I 

* According  to  the  division  cniToiit  among  the  students  of 
these  days,  the  first  anuvtika  ends  here.  Some  students  give  to 
these  divisions  the  name  ‘ Khaiidas’  or  sections,  Sayam  does  not 
recognise  this  division  and  even  condemns  it  as  not  founded  on 
any  logical  division  of  subject-matter.  He  looks  upon  the  whole 
Anandavall/,  beginning  with  “ The  knowor  of  Brahman 
reaches  the  Supreme”,  as  the  second  aniivttka,  the  Peace-Chant 
being  the  first  anuvaka.  These  two  anu^akas  with  the  Bhrigu- 
valli,  the  third  anuvaka, constitute  what  Sayana  calls  the  Varum- 
Upanishad. 


Am.n.]  ANI)AMAYA*KOSA.’  397 

I 1 3T?jcrsf%  ^ i owK'H 

[Anuvaka  II] 

I “From  food  indeed  are  (all)  creatures  born, 

whatever(creatures)  dwell  on  earth;  by  food,  again, 

surely  they  live ; then  again  to  the  food  they  go 

at  the  end.  Food,  surely,  is  of  beings  the  eldest; 

thence  it  is  called  the  medicament  of  all.  All 

« 

food,  verily,  they  obtain,  who  food  as  Brahman 
regard  ; for,  food  is  the  eldest  of  beings^  and 
thence  it  is  called  the  medicament  of  all.  From 
food  are  beings  born  ; when  born,  by  food  they 
grow.  It  is  fed  upon,  and  it  feeds  on  beings  ; 
thence  food  it  is  called.’’ 

Bearing  on  this  teaching  of  the  Bnzhma/^a,  there 
is  the  following  mantra  which  refers  to  the  nature  of 
the  Annamaya-i3^tman,  the  self  of  the  physical  body. 

The  sloka  is  quoted  here  in  corroboration  of  the  teaching 
of  the  Br^hmaz/a,  with  the  benevolent  idea  of  impressing 
the  truth  the  more  firmly. — (S). 

Just  as  a mantra  was  quoted  before  with  reference  to 
what  was  taught  in  the  aphorism  “ the  knower  of  Brahman 
reaches  the  Supreme,”  so  also  a verse  is  quoted  here  in 
corroboration  of  what  has  been  just  taught.  This  verse 
consists  of  fourteen  p^zdas  or  lines.  Though  no  such  metre 
is  met  with  in  ordinary  language,  this  extraordinary  metre 
must  have  been  current  in  the  Vedic  literature. 


3g8  SRAHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED.  \^Ananda^VatA^ 

The  VIraj. 

From  food,  * indeed,  converted  into  rasa  ( chyle ) 
and  other  forms,  are  born  all  creatures,  moving  and 
unmoving  ( sthtivara  and  jangama).  Whatever  crea- 
tures dwell  on  earth,  all  of  them  are  born  of  food  and 
food  alone.  After  they  are  born,  by  food  alone  they  live 
and  grow.  Then  again,  at  the  end  when  their  growth, 
their  life,  has  come  to  an  end,  to  food  they  go;  i.  c , in 
food  they  are  dissolved. — Why  ? — For,  food  is  of  all 
living  beings  the  eldest,  the  first-born.  Of  the  others, — 
of  all  creatures,  of  the  Annamaya  and  other  kosas,t — 
food  is  the  source.  All  creatures  are  therefore  born  of 
food,  live  by  food,  and  return  into  food  at  the  end. 
Because  such  is  the  nature  of  food,  it  is  therefore 
called  the  medicament  of  all  living  creatures,  that 
\-'hich  allays  the  scorching  (hunger)  in  the  body. 

Food,  the  Viraj,  was  evolved  before  all  creatures  on 
earth,  and  is  therefore  the  First-born.  Hence  the  assertion 
of  the  Purawa  “He  verily  was  the  first  embodied  one”. 
Those  who  know  the  real  nature  of  food  call  it  the  medica- 
ment (aushadha)  of  all,  because  it  affords  a drink  that  can 
assuage  the  fire  of  hunger  which  would  otherwise  have  to 
feed  upon  the  very  dh^rtus  or  constituents  of  the  body.  This 
cow  of  food  suckles  her  calf  of  the  digestive  fire  in  all  beings, 
through  the  four  udders  of  the  four  food-dishes.  | — (S) 

* i.e.,  from  the  Yiraj, 

t The  Pra^Mimaya  and  other  ko«as  are  certainly  not  constituted 
of  Anna,  the  physical  food ; but  they  attain  growth  by  the  food 
eaten  by  man. 

J The  four  kinds  of  food  are  those  which  have  to  be  eaten 
respectively  by  mastication,  by  sucking,  by  swallowing,  and 
by  licking. 


ANNAMAVA'KOSA. 


399 


Am.  II.] 

All  creatures, — the  womb-born,  the  egg-bom,  and  so 
on, — all  creatures  that  dwell  on  earth,  are  born  of  food 

(anna),  as  has  been  already  shewn The  bodies  of  animals, 

etc.,  form  the  food  of  the  tigers  and  the  like ; hence  the 
assertion  that  they  dissolve  in  food  at  the  end.  Because 
food  is  the  source  of  the  bodies  of  all  living  beings,  it  is  the 
medicine  of  all,  as  removing  the  disease  of  hunger.  By 
removing  the  disease  of  hunger,  food  forms  the  cause  of  a 
creature’s  life,  of  its  very  existence. — The  sruti  speaks  of  food 
as  the  remover  of  hunger  simply  to  shew  that  it  is  the  cause 
of  the  existence  of  all  creatures.  The  sruti  has  described  the 
Annamaya-kosa  at  length  by  speaking  of  food  as  the  cause 
of  the  birth,  existence  and  dissolution  of  all  living  creatures. 

Contemplation  of  the  Viraj  and  its  fruits. 

The  sruti  then  proceeds  to  declare  the  fruit  that 
accrues  to  him  who  has  realised  the  Food-Brahman, 
the  unity  of  food  and  Brahman. — They  who  contemplate 
the  Food-Brahman  as  directed  above  obtain  all  kinds  of 
food.  Because  “lam  born  of  food,  I have  my  being 
in  food,  and  I attain  dissolution  in  food,’^  therefore,  food 
is  Brahman.*  How,  it  may  be  asked,  can  the  contem- 
plation of  the  Self  as  food  lead  to  the  attainment  of  all 
food  ? The  sruti  answers : For,  food  is  the  eldest  of 
all  beings,  because  it  was  evolved  before  all  creatures ; 

* Food  is  Brahman,  hccanse  it  is  the  cause  of  the  birth,  exist- 
ence, and  dissolution  of  all  Annamaya-kosas.  The  disciple  should 
contemplate  on  the  idea  **  I am  the  Food-Brahman,”  because  it  is 
not  possible  to  attain  all  food  without  being  embodied  in  the  body 
of  the  Viraj,  the  Food-Brahman,  and  because  the.disciple  cannot 
attain  to  that  state  without  contemplating  his  unity  with  the  Viraj, 


400  BtUHMA-VlDYA  EXPOUNDED,  VolU. 

and  it  is  therefore  said  to  be  the  medicine  * of  all.  It 
therefore  stands  to  reason  that  the  worshipper  of  i4tman 
as  food  in  the  aggregate  attains  all  food. 

The  srati  speaks  of  food  as  Brahman  because  food  is  the 
cause  of  the  birth,  existence,  and  destruction  of  the  universe. 
He  who  contemplates  this  Brahman,  the  Vmj,  fora  long 
time  with  great  reverence  and  uninterrupted  devotion  and 
contemplates  the  Vir^j  as  one  with  the  devotee  himself, — he 
becomes  one  with  the  Vir^j  and  attains  all  food  that  all 
individual  creatures  severally  attain.  That  is  to  say,  the 
devotee  of  the  Vir^ij  partakes  of  all  food,  like  the  Vimj 
Himself.  In  the  words  “This  here  is  the  Viro^j*’  the  Tandins 
declare  that  the  Viraj  is  the  eater  of  all  food.  How  this  is 
possible  the  sruti  explains  by  declaring  that  the  whole 
visible  universe  is  pervaded  by  the  Vir^ij  as  the  eater  there- 
ofi  as  every  effect  must  be  pervaded  by  its  cause. — (S) 

Those  men  who  contemplate  Brahman  in  food,  taking 
food  as  a symbol  of  Brahman, — i.  e.,  those  who  elevate  food 
in  thought  to  the  height  of  Brahman  and  contemplate  it  as 
having  assumed  the  form  of  the  physical  body  made  up  of 
a head,  a*  tail  and  other  members, — these  devotees  attain  all 
food. — Or,  the  food  which  was  at  first  evolved  from  Brah- 
man through  the  evolution  of  akas2i  and  so  on  is  now 
manifested  as  the  physical]  bodies  of  individual  souls,  such 
as  human  and  other  bodies,  as  also  in  the  form  of  the  Vir^j, 
t.e.,  as  the  body  of  the  Universal  Soul.  Those  who  contem- 
plate Brahman  as  manifested  in  the  upadhi  of  food  thus 
transformed  attain  unity  with  the  Universal  Being,  the  Vir^rj, 
and  partake  of  all  kinds  of  food  which  all  the  different  classes 


♦ See  the  Vartikakara’s  explanation  on  page  398. 


vilWrr//.]  Annamaya-ko^a. 

of  living  beings,  from  Brahman  down  to  plants,  severally 
attain,  each  class  attaining  the  food  appropriate  to  it. 

Addressing  at  first  the  disciple  who  seeks  to  know  the 
Truth,  the  5ruti  has  declared  “ food,  surely,  is  the  eldest  of 
beings,”  etc.,  with  a view  to  describe  the  nature  of  the 
Annamaya-kosa,  the  physical  body,  since  knowledge  of 
the  body  is  a step  on  the  path  to  knowledge  of 
Brahman.  And  the  sruti  repeats  the  same  statement  again 
with  a view  to  extol  the  Being  to  be  contemplated  upon. 
The  passage  means : Because  food  (Anna)  is  the  eldest- 
born,  the  cause  of  all  living  beings  from  man  to  the  Vir<»j, 
therefore  it  is  the  medicament  of  all,  as  removing  all  diseases 
of  sawsflra.  For,  by  practising  contemplation  on  the  line 
indicated  above,  one  attains  the  Viraj,  and  in  due  course 
attains  salvation  as  well. 

From  food  are  beings  born  ; when  born,  by  food 
they  grow.’’  This  repetition  of  what  has  been  already 
said  is  intended  to  mark  the  conclusion  of  the  present 
subject. 

The  Viraj,  here  presented  for  contemplation,  is  a lofty 
Being,  for  the  further  reason  that  He  is  the  cause  of  the 
origin  and  growth  of  the  bodies  of  all  living  beings. 

The  Viraj  as  the  nourisher  and  the  destroyer. 

The  etymology,  too,  of  the  word  ‘anna*  points  to  the 
loftiness  of  Food  as  the  cause  of  all  bodies. 

Now  the  sruti  gives  the  etymology  of  the  word  *anna\ 
It  is  so  called  because  it  is  eaten  by  all  beings  and  is 
itself  the  eater  of  all  beings.  As  eaten  by  all  beings  and 

5* 


BkAHKfA-ViDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [AfianChl^V^ii^* 

as  the  eater  of  all  beings,  Food  is  called  Anna.*  The 
word  (in  the  text)  meaning  ‘thus’  marks  the  close 
of  the  exposition  of  the  first  kosa. 

‘Anna’  (Food)  is  so  called  because  it  is  eaten  by  all.  beings 
for  their  living  existence ; or  because  it  destroys  all  beings. 
It  is  a well-known  fact  that  all  bodies  die  of  diseases 
generated  by  disorderly  combinations  of  food-essences  in 
them.  Here,  the  sruti  marks  the  close  of  the  verse  quoted,  as 
well  as  the  end  of  the  exposition  of  the  Annamaya-kosa. 

Knowledge  of  the  Annamaya-kosa  is  a stepping  - 
stone  to  knowledge  of  Brahman. 

To  the  man  who  seeks  to  know  the  nature  of  Brahman 
*hid  in  the  cave’,  the  5ruti  has  expounded  the  Annamaya-kosa 
as  a step  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahman.  The  exposition 
forms  a step  to  the  knowledge  by  way  of  removing  all 
attachment  to  external  objects — such  as  sons,  friends,  wife, 
home,  land,  property, — and  confining  the  idea  of  self  to  one’s 
own  body.  Every  living  being  naturally  identifies  himself 
with  his  sons,  etc.,  as  if  they  form  his  very  self ; and  this  fact 
is  admitted  by  the  sruti  in  the  words  “ Thou  art  the  very  self, 
under  the  name  ‘ son  ’.”f  In  the  Aitareyaka  also  it  is  said 
“ This  self  of  his  takes  his  place  as  to  the  good  acts ; while 
the  other  self,  reaching  the  (old)  age  and  having  achieved 
all  he  had  to  do,  departs.”  I The  meaning  of  the  passage 

* This  etymology  is  intended  to  shew  that  the  Prajftpati,  who  is 
manifested  in  the  form  of  Food,  exists  in  two  forms,  as  both 
the  eaten  and  the  cater. 

t The  Taittiriya  Ekagnikawda.  2—11—33. 

• J Aita—Up,  4—4 


Am,  IL] 


ANKAMAVA'KOSA. 


V>3 

» this : A householder,  gifted  with  a son,  has  two  adveis, 
one  in  the  form  of  the  son  and  the  other  in  the  form  of  the 
father.  His  self  in  the  form  of  the  son  is  installed  in  the 
house  for  the  performance  of  the  purificatory  rites  (pu«ya- 
karma)  enjoined  in  the  sruti  and  the  smnti ; whereas  his 
self  in  the  form  of  the  father,  having  achieved  all  that  he 
has  had  to  do,  dies,  his  life-period  having  been  over.  The 
Blessed  Bhfjshyakfira  {Sri  Sankarach^rya)  has  also  referred 
to  this  fact  of  experience  in  the  following  words : **  when 
children,  wife,  etc.,  are  defective  or  perfect,  man  thinks 
that  he  himself  is  defective  or  perfect,  and  thus  ascribes  to 
the  Self  the  attributes  of  external  things.”  Since  every 
man  is  aware  that  the  son  is  distinct  from  himself,  the 
notion  that  the  son  is  himself  is  like  the  notion  that  “Deva- 
datta  is  a lion.”  Therefore  the  Annamaya-kosa  has  been 
expounded  here  with  a view  to  shew  this  kind  of  its  superi- 
ority as  self, — i.  e.,  with  a view  to  confine  the  disciple’s 
idea  of  self  within  the  limits  of  one’s  own  body  by 
withdrawing  the  idea  from  the  whole  external  world  com- 
posed of  sons,  friends,  etc.  The  sruti  will  explain  this 
clearly  in  the  sequel,  in  the  following  words  : 

“ He  who  thus  knows,  departing  from  this 

world,  into  this  self  formed  of  food  doth  pass.”'*' 

There  may  be  a person  who,  owing  to  the  preponderance 
of  the  deeply  ingrained  seeds  of  attachment  for  external 
objects,  does  not,  when  once  taught,  take  his  stand  in  the 
Annamaya  self.  It  is  to  enable  such  a man  to  do  it  that 
the  contemplation  of  the  Annamaya  self  has  been  taught. 
He  who  practises  this  contemplation,  constantly  fixing  his 


♦ Tai.  Up,  i 


^ BRAHMA-VIOVA  EXWDNDSD. 

thought  on  the  Annamaya  self,  withdraws  altogether  hrom 
the  lixternal  objects  and  takes  his  stand  in  the  Annamaya 
self*  If  a devotee  of  this  class  be  short-lived  and  die  while 
still  engaged  in  this  contemplation  without  passing  through 
the  subsequent  stages  of  investigating  the  real  nature  of  the 
Praaamaya  and  other  selves  and  thus  perfecting  the  know- 
ledge of  the  true  nature  of  Brahman,  then,  he  will  attain  all 
food  as  declared  above.  It  is  this  truth  that  the  Lord  has 
expressed  in  the  following  words  : 

‘‘  Having  attained  to  the  worlds  of  the  righte- 
ous and  having  dwelt  there  for  eternal  years, 
he  who  failed  in  yoga  is  reborn  in  a house  of 
the  pure  and  wealthy.”'*' 

Thus  with  a view  primarily  to  remove  all  attachment  for 
External  objects,  the  sruti  has  treated  of  the  nature  of  the 
Annamaya-ko5a,  and  has  incidentally  spoken  of  its  upa- 
Sana  and  the  fruit  thereof. 


CHAPTER  XII 

PRANAMAYA-KOSA. 


The  purpose  of  the  sequel. 

Now  the  sastra  proceeds  to  shew, — by  means  of 
wisdom,  i.e.,  by  way  of  removing  the  five  sheaths  of  the 
Self  which  avidy^  has  set  up, — that  Brahman,  who 
is  behind  all  the  illusory  selves  from  the  Annamaya 
down  to  the  ^nandamaya,  is  one’s  own  true  Inner  self, 
in  the  same  way  that,  by  threshing  the  m any-sheathed 
seed  of  kodrava  (Paspalum  scrobiculatum),  one  brings 
to  view  the  grain  within. 

First,  with  a view  to  lead  the  mind — which  has  lost  its 
Longing  for  external  objects — to  the  inner  being  which  is 
behind  food  and  the  food-sheath,  the  sruti  proceeds  to  ex- 
pound the  nature  of  Pra/^a  or  vital  air  and  the  Prawamaya- 
ko5a  or  the  vital  body — (S) 

The  Pranamaya-kosa. 

^rni  qrwi:  i 

^ 'jfr;  IRII 

2.  Than  that,  verily, — than  this  one  formed 
of  food-essence, — there  is  another  self  within, 
formed  of  Pr<i/ja ; by  him  this  one  is  filled. 

Distinct  from  that,— from  the  gross  physical  body 


4o6  brahma-vidya  expounded.  [Ananda-Valli. 

(piiM^a)  formed  of  food-essence,  which  has  been  describ- 
ed above,* — there  is  a self  within  formed  of  Prawa  or 
vital  air,  and  quite  as  falsely  imagined  to  be  the  self  as 
the  gross  body.  The  self  formed  of  Pra»a,  the  vital 
air  (v^j^yu),  fills  the  self  which  is  formed  of  food- 
essence,  as  the  air  fills  the  bellows. 

The  effect  is  one  with  the  cause. 

^^TkanihaV': — here  ‘ refers  to  the  Vir^tj,  being  the 
one  at  a distance,  i,  t. , manifested  as  food  or  gross  physical 
matter  which  is  external  to  the  individual  being  formed  of 
that  food.  ‘‘KmYy”:  This  particle  serves  to  call  back  to 
memory  the  Viraj  described.  Than  this  one  ** : The  word 
*this'  here  denotes  the  immediate,  individual  being.  By 
this  appositional  use  of  Hhan  that  * and  ‘ than  this  one  ’ the  sruti 
teaches  that  the  individual  being  (the  effect,  the  product,) 
i'.  one  with  the  Viraj,  the  Cosmic  Being,  is  in  truth  identi- 
cal with  the  cause.  So,  too,  in  similar  contexts  in  the 
sequel,  the  appositional  use  of  ‘ than  that  ’ and  ^than  this  one* 
shews  the  oneness  of  the  effect  (such  as  the  Prawamaya) 
with  the  cause  (such  as  Prawa).  \ Otherwise, — i,  e, , if  the 
effect  be  not  one  with  the  cause, — Brahman  and  the  uni- 
verse would  be  two  distinct  things : and  this  is  nothing 
but  the  duality  of  the  Sankhya  system. — (S).  Moreover, 

* and  represented  as  a bird. 

t For,  on  the  principle  of  the  oneness  of  effect  with  the  cause, 
the  whole  external  universe  can  be  resolved  into  Brahman, 
the  Cause.  And  on  realising  the  identity  of  Brahman  with  the 
Self  as  taught  by  Bevelation,  Brahman  the  Cause  becomes  the 
Infimte  Being  who  is  neither  the  cause  nor  the]  effect.— (S) 


mKAMAVA^HOSA. 


Am-  U-l 


4071 


the  cause,  such  as  the  Prawamaya,  is  said  to  exist  indepea- 
dently  of  the  efiect,  such  as  the  Annamaya,  i^diile  the  effect 
caanot  exist  indep^dcntly  of  the  cause.  This  also  pofarts 
to  the  same  conclusion,  namely,  that  the  effect  is  one  with 
the  cause,  is  not  distinct  from  the  cause,  is  the  cause 
itself— .(S) 


Tha  composltlen  of  the  Pranamaya-kosa. 

And  the  Praz/amaya-kosa  is  of  a distinct  nature  from  the 
Annamaya,  and  is  within  it  as  its  basic  substance.  It  is  a 
self,  because  like  the  Annamaya  it  is  also  falsely  identified 
with  the  Self. — (S) 

Now  the  first  mentioned  sheath,  the  Annamaya-kosa,  is 
permeated  by  four  kosas,  by  the  Pranamaya  and  the  rest. 
Similarly  the  Pr^j/zamaya  is  permeated  by  three  kosas,  the 
Manomaya  by  two  kosas,  and  the  Vij/wnamaya  by  one 
kosa.— (S) 

The  Annamaya  is  filled  by  the  Pra/zamaya  as  the  serpen*- 
is  filled  by  the  rope,  (where  the  latter  is  mistaken  for  the 
former).  The  Annamaya  is  an  effect  of  the  Prawamaya; 
it  is  a mere  imagination,  as  the  sruti  says  “ all  effect  is  a 
mere  name,  a creation  by  speech.”"' — (S). 

In  the  words  of  the  Br^ihma/za  it  was  declared  that  the 
Paramatman  (the  Supreme  Self)  Himself  attained  the  state 
of  the  Annamaya-kosa  in  the  course  of  evolution  beginning 
with  akasdi ; and  the  same  truth  was  then  confirmed  by 
quoting  a verse.  Distinct  from  the  self  first  spoken  of  in 
the  words  of  the  Brahma«a,  and  then  in  the  verse,  as  the  one 
experienced  in  the  consciousness  “ I am  a man”,— distinct 


* Ohha,  614. 


BRAHMAV10VA  l£kf>dUN]>BD. 

inm  this  self  is  the  Prsnamaya  self,  dwelling  within  it.  By 
the  Prseamaya  self  the  Annamaya  is  filled.  Within  the 
physical  body  dwells  the  body  of  vital  airs,  pervading  it  from 
head  to  foot. 

In  the  Linga-sar^ra,  there  are  two  saktis  or  potentialities, 
Jifana*5akti  and  Kriy^-5akti,  the  potentiality  of  conscious- 
ness, and  the  potentiality  of  action.  What  we  call  Prana,  is 
a substance  evolved  from  the  kriya-sakti  of  the  Linga-5arfra. 
A form  built  of  Prana  is  the  Pra«amaya-kosa,  the  aggregate 
of  the  live  vrittis  or  functions  of  Pr^i;ia.  These  vnttis  are  pecu- 
liar functions  of  the  principle  of  Prawa,  known  as  prana  (out- 
breathing),  apana  (in-breathing),  vyana  (diffused  breath- 
ing), udana  (up-breathing),  and  samana (essential or  complete 
breathing).  And  the  functions  are  manifested  each  in  its 
appropriate  region,  such  as  the  heart.  Accordingly,  it  is 
said : In  the  heart  lies  prana ; in  the  anus  lies  apana ; 

satnana  is  established  in  the  navel;  udma  lies  in  the  throat; 
vyana  per^'ades  the  whole  body.”  This  aggregate  of  vital 
functions, — this  Pranamaya-kosa— is  falsely  ascribed  to  the 
Self,  and  we  see  it  identified  with  the  Self  by  him  who  thinks 
* I breathe  ’ ; it  is  therefore  here  spoken  of  as  atman, 
the  self.  Now,  just  as  sons  and  other  external  objects  are 
regarded  as  non- self  when  the  idea  of  self  has  been  confined 
to  one’s  own  physical  body, — which,  when  compared 
with  sons,  etc.,  is  the  immediate  self  of  man,— so  also, 
the  physical  body  ceases  to  be  regarded  as  the  self 
when  the  Pranamaya  self  within  the  Annamaya  has  been 
clearly  presented  to  view.  Though  neither  the  son  nor  the 
physical  body  is  the  real  Self,  still,  in  common  parlance, 
they  are  distinguished  from  each  other.  The  son  is  gau»a- 


PftAMA»tAVA<lCdSA. 


IjiiiM.  iiif 


4«d 


tftman ; that  is  to  say,  a man  speaks  of  his  son  as  the  self 
only  in  a figurative  sense ; whereas  when  a man  speaks  of 
his  body  as  the  self,  he  actually  mistakes  the  body  for  the 
real  Self ; that  is  to  say,  the  body  is  a mithya-atman,  is  a 
false  self,  is  actually  mistaken  for  the  real  self.  In  the  one 
case,  man  is  conscious  that  the  son  is  distinct  from  himself# 
while,  in  the  other,  he  is  not  conscious  that  the  body  is 
distinct  from  himself.  This  difference  is  referred  to  by  the 
Bhashyakara  {Sri  5ankaracharya)  in  the  following  words : 

When  the  son  and  the  body  are  regarded  as 
the  non-self,  the  figurative  self  and  the  false  self 
cease  to  be.  On  the  rise  of  the  knowledge  that 
‘ I am  Brahman,  the  Existence,*  where  is 
room  for  action 


The  physical  body  is  not  the  Self. 

The  philosophers  of  the  Lokayata  or  materialistic  school,  as 
well  as  those  among  the  laity  who  are  not  aware  of  the  distinc- 
tion between  the  body  and  the  Self,  regard  the  body  itself  as 
the  Self.  That  this  view  is  false  is  here  indirectly  taught  by 
the  sruti  teaching  of  the  Prawamaya  self.  This  point  has 
been  discussed  in  the  Vedanta -s^tra  III.  iii.  53. 

{Question) : — In  the  article  preceding  the  one  under  refer- 
ence, it  has  been  determined  that  the  contemplation  of  the 
sacred  fires  constituted  of  manas,  etc.,  does  not  form  part 
of  any  sacrificial  rite,  and  that  a man  may  practise  it 
independently  of  any  sacrificial  rite.  Then  the  question 
arises.  What  is  man  ? This  question  has  to  be  answered  in 
connection  with  the  Ritualistic  section  as  well  as  in  connec- 
tion with  the  section  of  Brahmavidya ; for,  it  deals  with  the 
• Yi^  commentary  on  the  Yedanta-sutra  I.  i.  4. 

^2 


Existence  of  ffae  Self  independent  of  the  body  and-^ttlBkdBg 
svaii;a  and  -moksha. 

ijke  Materialist)', — The  body  itself  is  the  Self;  for  con- 
sciousness is  invariably  found  in  connection  with  the  body 
.gnd  the  body  alone.  Consciousness  is  manifested  only  where 
there  is  a body,  but  not  in  the  absence  of  a body.  It  should 
not  be  urged  that  consciousness  is  a thing  quite  distinct  from 
the  body  and  that  therefore  the  Self  is  quite  independent 
of  the  body.  For,  like  the  power  of  intoxication  arising  from 
a combination  of  arecanut  and  betel  leaf  and  lime,  con- 
sciousness, too,  is  born  of  the  elements  of  matter  combin- 
ing together  so  as  to  form  the  physical  body ; how  can 
consciousness  be  quite  a different  kind  of  thing  ? Where- 
fore, the  Self  is  no  other  than  the  physical  body  which  is 
found  to  have  the  power  of  sensation. 

{Jhe  Vcddntin) : — The  consciousness  we  have  of  earth 
and  other  elements  of  matter  must  be  distinct  from  those 
elements  of  matter,  because  it  is  their  perceiver.  In  every 
case  of  perception,  the  perceiver  must  be  distinct  from  the 
thing  perceived  ; the  sense  of  sight,  for  instance,  is  distinct 
from  colour.  Such  being  the  case,  when  a person  says  that 
the  perceiving  consciousness  is  the  Self,  how  can  the  Self 
ever  be  identified  with  the  body  which  is  made  up  of  matter  ? 
As  to  the  argument  that  consciousness  is  found  where  there 
is  a body,  and  that  it  is  not  found  where  there  is  no  body^ 
we  say  that  the  negative  part  of  the  argument  cannot 
be  maintained,  inasmuch  as  the  scriptures  speak  of  the 
intelligent  Self  passing  into  the  other  world  without  the 
physical  body.  And  the  authority  of  the  scriptures  must 
be  upheld  by  all. 


prajiamaya-rosa/  """  4x1 

Prana  ha^  a Urth. 

That  the  vital  principle  {Prana)  dwelling  within  the 
physical  body — which  has  been  proved  to  be  the  non-self 
— has  a birth  has  been  determined  as  follows  in  the 
Vedanta-swtra  II.  iv.  8 : 

{Question) : — In  man  there  is  the  vital  air  traversing  the 
aperture  of  the  mouth  and  causing  him  to  breathe  in  and 
out.  Has  it  a beginning  or  no  beginning  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — It  has  no  beginning  ; for,  in  speak- 
ing of  the  state  of  things  prior  to  creation,  the  sruti  refers 
to  the  activity  of  Prana  in  the  words  “ It  breathed  airless.” 

[Conclusion) : — The  word  ‘ breathed  ’ does  not  here  denote 
the  action  of  the  vital  air,  inasmuch  as  the  existence  of  the 
air  has  been  denied  by  the  suti  in  the  words  “ it  breathed 
airless.”  There  the  sruti  speaks  only  of  the  existence  of 
Brahman  ; for,  that  passage  is  of  the  same  tenor  as  many 
other  passages  of  the  sruti  speaking  of  the  state  of  things 
prior  to  creation,  such  as  “ Existence  alone  this  at  first 
was.”'''  And  the  passage  “ Hence  come  into  being  Pra«a,”+ 
etc. , speaks  very  clearly  of  the  birth  of  Prana,  Therefore, 
like  the  senses,  Prana  has  a birth. 

Prana  is  a distinct  principle. 

(Ved^nta-s^^tras  II.  iv.  9 — 12) . 

[Question) : — Is  Prana,  the  vital  air,  identical  with  V^iyu, 
the  air  outside  ? Or  is  it  a mere  function  of  the  five  senses  ? 
Or  is  it  something  else  ? 

[Pritna  facie  view) : — The  external  air  itself,  entering 
through  the  aperture  of  the  mouth  into  the  body  just  as  it 


♦ Chha-6.3-1, 


t Muwd,  Up,  8-1^3. 


BRAflMA-ViUYA  EXPOUNDED.  lAmiUta-ymi. 

alters  into  the  aperture  of  a.  bamboo  stick,  is  termed 
Praea*  There  exists  no  distinct  principle  (tattva)  called 
Preea  ,*  for,  the  sruti  says  “ What  we  call  Pfa«a  is  the  air 

itselt” 

Or,  just  as  the  several  birds  that  are  confined  in  one 
cage  cause  that  cage  to  move  while  they  themselves  are 
moving,  so  also  the  eleven  senses — the  five  organs  of  sen- 
sation, the  five  organs  of  action,  and  manas — cause  the  body 
to  move  while  they  are  engaged  in  their  respective  activi- 
ties. This  common  function  of  all  the  senses,  which 
results  in  the  bodily  motion,  is  what  is  called  Pra»a  or 
vitality.  And  accordingly,  the  Sankhyas  teach  that  “ the 
common  function  of  the  senses  constitutes  the  five  airs  such 
as  pr4»a  or  out-breathing.**  f Therefore,  Prana,  is  not  a dis- 
tinct principle. 

(Conclusion) : — “ Pr^wa,  verily,  is  Brahman’s  fourth  foot ; 
It  shines  by  the  light  of  Vayu.'*  J In  these  words,  the 
sruti,  speaking  elsewhere  of  the  contemplation  of  the  four- 
footed  Brahman,  clearly  points  out  a distinction  between 
the  adhyatmika  Pra«a  (the  vital  principle  in  the  individual 
organism)  and  the  adhidaivika  Vayu  (the  cosmic  principle 
of  air),  the  one  being  helped  by  the  other.  • Therefore  the . 
unity  declared  in  the  words  **  what  we  call  Prana,  is  the  air 
itself*  should  be  explained  as  referring  to  their  unity  as 
cause  and  effect.  As  to  the  contention  of  the  S^mkhyas, 
we  say  that  it  is  quite  untenable,  since  there  can  be  no 
function  which  is  common  to  all  the  senses.  In  the  case 
of  the  birds,  however,  the  motion  generated  by  them  all 
is  of  one  kind  and  contributes  to  the  motion  of  the  cage. 


• Bri.  Up.  8-1-5.  t Stmkhya-Karika,  29.  | Cbha-Up.  3-184, 


!>RANAMAYA-KOSA. 


4*3 


//.} 

Not  SO,  indeed,  are  the  functions  of  seeing,  hearing,  thinking, 
etc.,  all  of  one  kind.  Neither  are  they  all  such  as  can 
contribute  to  the  movement  of  the  body.  Therefore,  we 
conclude— as  the  only  alternative  left — that  Prana,  is  a distinct 
principle. 

The  limited  size  of  the  principle  of  Prana. 

(Vedanta-swtra  I.  iv.  13.) 

(Qmtion) : — Is  this  principle  of  Prana,  (in  the  individual 
organism)  all-pervading,  or  small  in  size  ? 

[Prima  facie  view) : — Prana,  pervades  all  bodies,  from  that 
of  the  lowest  animalcule  up  to  that  of  the  Hirawyagarbha, 
as  the  5ruti  says : 

‘‘  He  is  equal  to  a grub,  equal  to  a gnat,  equal 
to  an  elephant,  equal  to  these  three  worlds, 
equal  to  this  universe.”'^ 

Therefore  Prana  is  all-pervading. 

(Conclusion): — The  cosmic  principle,  the  Prana,  of  the 
Hiranyagarbha,  exists — as  the  sruti  says  “ Vayu  (the  air) 
itself  is  the  Cosmic  Being  ” — both  as  a principle  in  the 
Cosmic  Being  and  as  a principle  in  the  separate  individual 
beings,  and  it  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  all-pervading. 
It  is  this  all-pervadingness  that  the  sruti  quoted  above 
refers  to,  for  the  purpose  of  contemplation.  The  principle 
of  Prana  in  the  individual  being  is,  like  the  senses,  invisible 
and  limited  in  size. 

Contemplation  of  the  Pranamaya. 

Now  with  a view  to  enjoin  another  contemplation  on  him 
who,  in  virtue  of  the  strong  sub-conscious  idea  (vasana) — 


♦ Bri-Up. 


414  BRAHMA-vfDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [AfmdilrV^. 

that  the  body  itself  is  his  own  self — which  has  been 
cherished  through  many  births,  feels  unable  to  shake  off 
that  notion,  the  sruti  proceeds  to  present  the  form  in  which 
the  Pra»amaya-kosa  should  be  contemplated. 

JITJI  1 5^1%  q^:  1 3TqR  w I 

3TR!Rr  antJIT  I 3M  3^  ito  \\\\\ 

3,  He,  verily, — this  one, — is  quite  of  man’s 
shape.  After  his  human  shape,  this  one  is  of 
man’s  shape.  Of  him  pr^wa  itself  is  the  head, 
vyana  is  the  right  wing,  apana  is  the  left  wing, 
akas^  is  the  self,  the  earth  is  the  tail,  the  support. 

He,  verily, — namely,  this  Pranamaya  self—is  certain- 
Iv  of  man's  shape,  having  a head,  wings,  etc. — Is  it  in 
itself  (possessed  of  a head,  etc)  ? — No,  says  the  sruti. 
The  self  made  of  food-essence  (anna-rasa)  is  human  in 
form,  as  every  one  knows.  This  Prawamaya  self  is 
fashioned  in  human  form  not  by  himself,*  but  only  after 
the  human  shape  of  the  Annarasamaya  self ; just  as  an 
idol  is  fashioned  after  the  mould  into  which  the  melted 
metal  is  poured.  Similarly,  every  succeeding  self 
becomes  fashioned  in  human  form  after  the  human 
form  of  the  preceding  one  ; and  the  latter  is  filled  by 
*the  former. 

That  one,  who  has  been  said  to  dwell  within  the  physical 
body,  is  verily  this  one,  namely,  the  Prawamaya  self,  who 


• because  the  Pranamaya  is  incorporeal— (S), 


. PftAi;AMAYA>KOSA«  ^ 


piiaseits  himself  to  ccmsdousness  in  the  idea  ‘‘  I toeatfae.” 
TWe  0069  no  doubt,  devoid  of  a head  aud  other  m^ixbers; 
still,  one  should  imagine  these  members  and  contemplate 
him  as  human  in  form.  It  should  not  be  supposed  that 
even  this  imagining  is  impossible.  For,  it  is  quite  possible 
to  imagine  that  the  Pra»amaya  self,  abiding  within  the  Anna- 
maya  in  full,  is  moulded  into  human  form  after  the  human 
form  of  the  Annamaya,  just  as  the  melted  copper  poured 
into  a mould  assumes  the  form  of  an  idol. 

How,  then,  is  he  of  human  form? — The  sruti  answers: 
The  head  of  the  Pr^rnamaya  is  pram,  itself.  The  ¥ram.- 
maya  self  is  formed  of  V^iyu  (the  vital  air),  and  pr^iwa 
(the  outward  breath),  that  particular  aspect  (vritti) 
of  the  vital  air  in  which  it  traverses  through  the 
mouth  and  nostrils,  is  to  be  imagined  as  the  head,  on 
the  authority  of  the  scriptural  teaching.  The  imagining 
of  wings,  etc.,  is  in  all  cases  here  based  entirely  on  the 
scriptural  teaching.  The  vyana  aspect  (of  the  vital  air) 
is  the  right  wing,  and  the  apana  aspect  is  the  left  wing. 
The  akasa  is  the  self : that  is  to  say,  that  particular 
aspect  of  vitality  which  is  known  as  samana  is  the  self 
as  it  were.  ‘ A kasa’  here  denotes  samana, — which  abides 
in  akasa  or  the  middle  of  the  body, — as  the  word  occurs 
in  a section  treating  of  Prawa-vrittis  or  aspects  of  vitality. 
As  occupying  a central  position  with  reference  to  the 
other  aspects  of  the  vital  air,  samana  is  the  self;  and 
that  the  trunk  or  the  central  part  is  the  self  is  declared 
by  the  sruti  in  the  words,  “Indeed  the  middle  one  of 
these  members  is  the  self.”  The  earth  is  the  tail,  the 
support.  The  earth,  i»  the  DevaU  or  Intelligence 


4^  , vuHUk-vw^A  vxgomoip,  [Amnd^ViaUk 

^ called,  IS  the  support  of  the  principle  of  Prana  in  the 
individual  organism,  as  the  cause  of  its  stay.  The  miti 
elsevdiere  says  She  props  up  man’s  apana,”^  etc.  But 
for  this  support,  the  body  may  be  carried  aloft  by  the 
udana  aspect  of  vitality,  or  it  may  have  a fall  owing  to 
its  weight.  Therefore  the  Pnthivt-Devata,  the  Intelli- 
gence called  Earth,  is  the  prop  of  Prawamaya  self. 

The  pra»a  ( out-breathing)  aspect  of  the  Pr^wamaya-kosa 
is  represented  as  its  head  because  of  its  eminence  as  abiding 
in  the  mouth.  The  vy^na  aspect  is  represented  as  the  right 
wing  because  of  its  superior  strength  ( as  pervading  the 
whole  body),  while  the  apana  aspect  is  represented  as  the 
left  wing  because  it  is  not  quite  so  strong.  The  samana 
aspect  is  termed  akasa  because  of  its  similarity  to  akasa  (as 
all-pervading),  and  it  is  said  to  be  the  self  of  the  pra^^as  or 
lifp-functions,  because  therein,  according  to  the  5ruti,  abide 
all  pra»as, — (S) 

The  vitality  in  its  pra^^a  (out-breathing)  aspect  passes 
upward  from  the  heart  and  traverses  through  the  mouth 
and  the  nostrils.  This  should  be  contemplated  as  the  head 
of  the  Prrtwamaya.  In  its  vy^rna  aspect  the  vital  principle 
traverses  through  all  the  nadis  ; and  in  its  apana  aspect  it 
passes  from  the  heart  downwards.  These  two  aspects 
should  be  regarded  as  the  right  and  left  wings.  *Akasa* 
bere  denotes  the  space  in  the  middle  of  the  belly  about  the 
navel,  and  it  stands  for  the  vital  principle  in  its  samana 
aspect  abiding  in  that  region.  The  samana-v^iyu  is  the 
centre  of  the  Pr««amaya-kosa.  The  word  ‘ earth  ’ stands 
for  the  remaining  aspect  of  Prana,  namely,  the  udana- vayu.t 


♦ apana  here  stands  for  the  Pranamaya-kosa— (V) 
f Here  Sayana  differs  from  iSankarocharya. 


PRANAMAYA-KOSA. 


4^7 


.Am.  //.] 

To  understand  here  the  word  ‘ <ik«sa  ’ in  its  primary  mean- 
ing would  be  to  depart  from  the  main  subject  of  discourse, 
namely,  the  Pr«»amaya-kosa.  The  earth  is  the  preserver 
of  all  living  beings  and  is  therefore  said  to  be  their  support. 
Similarly,  the  ud^^na  air  preserves  prawa  and  other  vital  airs 
in  the  body,  these  last  remaining  in  the  body  only  so  long 
as  the  udana-vayu  does  not  depart.  It  is  therefore  said  to 
be  their  support.  The  independence  of  the  vital  principle 
in  its  udana  aspect,  as  causing  the  stay  or  departure  of  the 
principle  in  all  its  aspects,  is  declared  by  the  ^4  tharvamkas 
in  the  following  words : 

“ He  thought : on  what  now  going  out,  shall 
I go  out;  or,  on  what  staying,  shall  I stay  ? 

Thus  thinking.  He  evolved  life.’"' 

Therefore  the  udana.  aspect  of  the  Pr^wa  principle  forms  the 
tail  of  the  Pr^wamaya-kosa  represented  for  the  purposes  of 
contemplation  in  the  form  of  a bird.  The  principle  of  Prawa 
as  well  as  its  five  aspects, — represented  as  the  head,  wings 
and  so  on, — are  clearly  described  in  the  Maitreya-upanishad 
as  follows : 

“In  the  beginning,  Prajapati  (the  lord  of  crea- 
tures) stood  alone.  He  had  no  happiness 
when  alone.  Meditating  on  himself,  he  created 
many  creatures.  He  looked  on  them  and  saw 
they  were,  like  a stone,  without  understand- 
ing, and  standing  like  a lifeless  post.  He  had 
no  happiness.  He  thought,  I shall  enter 
within,  that  they  may  awake.  Making  him- 
self like  air  ( vayu ),  he  entered  within.  Being 


* Pras,  Up.  6--3. 


53 


BRAHMAVIDYA  EXPOUNDED. 


/41S 


one,  he  could  not  do  it.  Then  dividing  him- 
^ self  five-fold,  he  is  called  Pm»a,  Apana, 
Sam^na,  Ud^na,  Vy^na.  Now,  that  air  which 
‘ rises  upwards  is  Pr^wa.  That  which  moves 
’ downwards  is  Ap^na.  That  by  which  these 
two  are  supposed  to  be  held  is  Vy^ina.  That 
which  carries  the  grosser  material  of  food  to 
the  Ap^na  and  brings  the  subtler  material 
to  each  limb  has  the  name  Samana.  That 
which  brings  up  or  carries  down  what  has 
been  drunk  and  eaten  is  the  Ud^ina.”'*' 

That  is  to  say,  having  found  no  amusement  in  Himself 
when  He  was  alone,  the  Prajapati  created  bodies  for  the 
purpose,  and  with  a view  to  attain  conscious  experience  in 
those  bodies.  He  has  entered  into  them  as  their  Jfvatman  in 
the  up^dhi  of  the  vital  air,  and  he  leads  a conscious  life 
in  the  upadhi  in  its  five  aspects. 

Prana,  the  Universal  Life. 

ii»ii 

4.  On  that,  too,  there  is  this  verse  : 

As  to  the  teaching  concerning  the  Prawamaya  self, 
there  is  the  following  verse : 

JIM  ^ I I 

* Oip.  cit.2— 


m 


AhU.' Ill.l  '■  * PRANAMAYA-koSA. 

*113: 1 I Cl  I % Jim- 

I SPTt  % ^cTnnJi^:  I ?%|JUI 

(Anuvaka  III.) 

I.  After  Pm;2a  do  Devas  live,  as  also  meii 
and  beasts.  Pra?ia,  verily,  is  the  life-duration  of 
beings ; thence  it  is  called  the  life-duration  of 
all.  The  whole  life-duration  do  they  reach,  who 
Pra/za  as  Brahman  regard.  Pr^;/a,  verily,  is  of 
beings  the  life-duration  ; thence  it  is  called  the 
life-duration  of  all.  Thus  (ends  the  verse). 

After  Pra;ia, — after  Vayu  in  whom  inheres  the  life- 
potentiality,  i.  e,,  ensouled  and  informed  by  Pra;^a, — do 
Agni  and  other  Gods  (Devas)  breathe,  i.  c^.,  they  do  the 
act  of  breathing,  i e,y  again,  they  become,  active  by 
way  of  breathing.^ — Or,  since  the  present  section  deals 
with  microcosmic  or  individual  (adhyatmika)  orga- 
nisms, t ‘ Devas  ’ here  denotes  senses  (indriyas).  Only 
when  the  life  proper  functions,  the  senses  also  can 
function.  So  also  do  men  and  beasts  t function  only 
when  the  life-principle  functions.  So  that  the  living 
creatures  have  their  being,  not  in  the  Annamaya 


* I.  e.,  the  other  Gods  are  only  dilfereiil  aspects  of  the  Sictrat- 
mail,  as  the  ^\tkalya-Brahmaaa  says.  Or,  these  -Gods  have 
attained  to  the  state  of  the  Satratraaii  in  virtue  of  their  past 
contemplation  of  th(‘  Sifi.rntman.  Or,  like  ourselves,  these 
Gods  have,  for  their  u])ctdhi,  Prtoia,  the  seat  of  Kriya-sakti. 
t i.  e.,  the  Pranamaya-ko«a.  ' J L e.,  their  physical  bodie 


430  BSAHMA-VtDVA  BXPOUNDEDt 

seif  alone,  which  is  heterogeneous  (parichchhinna)  or 
made-up  of  distinct  and  well-defined  parts;  on  the 
other  hand,  men,  etc.,  have  tbeir  being  in  the  Pr«»a- 
ma3ra  self  also,  which  lies  within  the  Annamaya  self, 
and  which  (unlike  the  other)  is  a homogeneous  un- 
divided whole  (s<idhara«a),  permeating  the  whole 
physical  body  (sarva-pinda-vyapin).*  Similarly,  all 
living  creatures  are  informed  by  the  Manomaya  and 
other  subtler  and  subtler  selves, — one  abiding  within 
another, — inclusive  of  the  A nandamaya ; the  internal 
permeating  the  external  selves  which  lie  outside,  and 
all  of  them  alike  being  set  up  by  avidya  and  formed  of 
akosa  and  other  elements  of  matter.  And  they  are 
ensouled  also  by  the  true  Self  lying  within  them  all 
like  the  Kodrava  grain  in  its  many  coats, — that  Self 
who  is  All,  the  cause  of  akasa  and  all  the  rest,  who  is 
eternal,  unchanging,  all-pervading,  who  has  been 
defined  as  “ Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite,”  who  tran- 
scends the  five  kosas.  He,  indeed, — that  is  to  say,— is 
really  the  Self  of  all.  t 


* That  ia  to  say,  the  Prciaamayakosa  is  not  cut  off  into 
distinct  regions  as  the  pinda  or  microcosmic  physical  body  is. 
Unlike  the  latter,  it  has  no  .s|)ccialised  or^rans,  each  discharging 
a specific  function.  It  is  a unity  present  in  every  part  of  the 
body.  Or,  the  idea  here  intended  may  be  tliat  the  Pranamaya,  in 
the  cosmic  aspect  as  the  Stttratman,  pervades  all  the  piadas  or 
individual  physical  bodies. 

f One  koia  has  been  spoken  of  as  the  self  of  another  only 
relatively,  i.  e.,  without  reference  to  the  absolute  truth.  In 
reality  all  kosas  are  illusory  aspects  of  the  cue  real  Self.— (.d) 


PRANAMAYA-KOSA. 


431- 


And.  IlL] 

It  has  been  said  that  “ after  Pr<i»a  do  Devas  live.”— 
How  so  ? — The  Sruti  says:  because  Prfl«a  is  the  life- 
duration  of  all  beings.  The  Sruti  elsewhere  says, 
“Life  is  possible  only  so  long  as  Pra«a  dwells 
within  this  body ; ” * and  therefore  Pr««a  is  the  life- 
duration  of  all.  On  the  departure  of  Prawa  death  takes 
place,  as  everybody  knows;  and  everybody  under- 
stands that  Pra»a  is  the  life-duration  of  all.  Wherefore, 
those  who,  departing  away  t from  this  external  Annamaya 
self, — which  is  asadhara»a  t or  made  up  of  various 
distinguishable  parts, — retire  to  the  Prawamaya  self 
within,  which  is  sadhflra«a  § or  made  up  of  homogeneous 
parts,  and  contemplate  him  as  Brahman, — i.  e those  who 
contemplate"  I am  Prana  who,  as  the  source  of  life,  asthe 
life-span  of  all,  is  the  Self$  of  all  beings,” — they  attain 
the  full  life-period  in  this  world,  they  do  not  die  an  un- 
natural death  before  the  allotted  period.H  By  the  full 
life-period,  we  should,  of  course,  understand  one- 
hundred  years,  as  the  sruti  ^ declares. — How  so  f — The 
sruti  says  “ Prana,  verily,  is  of  beings  the  life-duration ; 


♦ Kaushitaki-Up,  3-2. 

t i.  0 , abandoning  the  idea  that  the  Annamaya  is  the  self. 

J yyf^vritta-svariApa,  not  of  one  and  the  same  nature  in  all 
its  parts. 

§ 0.,  common  to  all  senses  (indriyas),  because  the  food  eaten 

by  Pivtna  serves  to  nourish  all  the  senses. 

$ in  the  form  of  the  Swtratman — ( A). 

% At  birth,  the  present  body  is  allotted  a certain  length  of 
life-duration. 

^ **  Man  lives  one  hundred  je&rB**^lTaittinya  Samkitd] 


422  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Anirndd-V aUU 

■thence  it  is  called  the  life-duration  of  all.”  This 
repetition  is  intended  to  explain  how  this  Vidya 
(upasana)  can  yield  the  fruit  mentioned  here.  The 
explanation  lies  in  the  principle  that  with  whatever 
attributes  a man  contemplates  Brahman,  he  is,  as  the 
result,  endued  with  the  same  attributes. 

As  in  the  case  of  the  Annamaya  self,  there  is  a verse 
treating  of  the  Prawamaya  self  also.  Devas  live  only  when 
ProHSL  breathes ; they  do  not  live  by  themselves.  “ When 
thou  rainest  here,  then  alone  do  these  live.*’*  Others,  too, 

* such  as  men  and  beasts,  depend  for  their  life  on  Pr^wa. 
The  sruti  says  that  all  senses,  both  in  the  microcosm  and 
in  the  macrocosm,  have  cast  off  death  by  attaining  to  the 
being  of  Prana,  or  Cosmic  Life  (Adhidaivata).t  All  this 
does,  in  truth,  apply  to  Pra/^a,  because  a creature  lives  only 
so  long  as  there  is  Prana  informing  it.  Thence  Prana  is 
often  called  by  sages  the  life-duration  of  all.  Those  who 
devoutly  contemplate  the  Pra;/amaya  self  as  endued  with 
the  attribute  of  being  the  life  of  all  attain  to  that  very 
Prana  who  is  the  life  of  all. — (S) 

The  Sattvic  beings  such  as  Agni,  Indra  and  other  Gods, 
the  Rrtjasic  beings  such  as  the  brfjhma^^as,  kshatriyas  and 
other  men,  the  Tamasic  beings  such  as  beasts,  all  these 
discharge  their  functions  only  so  long  as  the  prana^vayu 
or  the  vital  air,  abiding  within  their  respective  bodies, 
functions.  It  is  indeed  the  vital  air  that  puts  the  body  in 
motion.  Accordingly,  the  Kaush/takins  declare  : 

“ But  Prana  alone  is  the  conscious  self 
(prajMtman)  and  has  laid  hold  of  this  body  ; 
it  makes  it  rise  up.”  I 

* prasiia-Up.  2-10.  f Bri,  Up.  { Kau.  Up.  o— o. 


AnU.  IIL]  PRANAMAYA-KOSA.  423 

In  the  course  of  His  speech  concerning  His  part  in  the 
support  of  the  body  which  the  God  of  Frana.  addressed  to 
the  Gods  of  the  elements  of  matter  such  as  akasa.,  and  to  the 
Gods  of  the ‘senses  such  as  speech,  the  -^tharva^kas 
declare : 

Life— and  life  is  best — said  unto  them : 

‘ Straight  into  error  do  not  step.  It  is  I who 
by  this  quintuple  division  of  myself  together 
keep  and  hold  this  arrow  up.’  ” 

Just  as  an  arrow  is  propelled  by  a bowman,  so  this 
body  is  propelled  by  Frana  and  is  therefore  denoted 
by  the  word  ‘ arrow.’  Because  Frana  produces  activity 
in  the  bodies  of  Devas,  men  and  beasts,  and  because 
thereon  depends  the  life-duration  of  all  creatures,  therefore 
it  is  called  the  life-duration  of  all.  Those  who,  by  this 
mere  knowledge  of  the  Pr^«amaya-kosa,  are  unable  to 
give  up  altogether  their  tendency  to  regard  the  Annamaya- 
ko5a  as  the  Self,  and  who,  with  a view  to  get  rid  of  that 
tendency,  resort  to  the  contemplation  of  Brahman  in  the 
upadhi  of  Fxana, — they  attain  full  life-duration  in  this  birth 
without  meeting  an  unnatural  death,  as  the  result  of  their 
contemplation  of  Brahman  in  the  up^dhi  of  the  microcosmic 
(^dhyatmika)  Fmna ; and  by  their  contemplation  of  Brahman 
in  the  up^dbi  of  the  Hirawyagarbha, — the  ^4  dhidaivika  or 
macrocosmic  Fxana — they  become  themselves  the  Hirawya- 
garbha  in  the  future  birth  and  attain  full  life-period  reach- 
ing up  to  Mahnpralaya,  the  Great  Cosmic  Dissolution, 
Pra«a,  verily,  is  of  beings  ” etc : in  these  words,  at  first, 
the  Prawamaya-kosa  has  been  extolled  ; here  again  they  are 


Pra«jia-TJp.  2—3. 


4*4  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Aimda~VtMl 

r6{>eated  with  a view  to  extol  the  up^sana  or  contemplation 
taught  here. 

The  outcome  of  the  study  of  the  Pranamaya-kosa. 

Now,  the  sruti  shews  the  aim  of  all  this  teaching  regard- 
ing the  Pr«wamaya-ko5a : 

^ ^ wir  i m ii  ^ ii 

2.  Thereof, — of  the  former,— this  one,  verily, 
is  the  self  embodied. 

Thereof, — of  the  former,  i.e.  of  the  Annamaya, — this 
one — namely,  the  Prawamaya — is  the  self,  having  the 
Annamaya  for  his  body. 

The  Prfl«amaya  which  has  been  just  described  is  the  self 
dwelling  in  the  Annamaya-kosa.  When  the  idea  that  the 
Prawamaya  is  the  self  is  deeply  ingrained,  the  illusion  that 
tiie  Annamaya  is  one’s  own  self  disappears.  Then  there 
arises  the  conviction  that  the  Annamaya  is  the  body,  and 
that  the  Pr^«amaya  is  one’s  own  self  dwelling  in  that  body, 
there  being  no  room  for  two  selves. 

The  Pr^wamaya  just  described  is  the  self  of  the  Anna- 
maya,— is  the  self  embodied  therein, — because  the  latter  is 
ensouled  by  the  former.--(S) 

Or,'*'  the  ‘self*  refers  here  to  the  one  described  above  as 
“ Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite.**  Any  self  other  than  the 

* Sri  /Sankaracharya  has  interpreted  this  passage  in  accord- 
ance with  the  view  of  the  Vrittikara,  who  holds  that  the 
J[nandamaya  is  Brahman.  Here,  as  in  the  Vedanta-swtras 
(L  i.  12-19).  the  Bhashyakara  first  gives  the  Vrittikara’s  inter- 
pretation, only  to  set  it  aside  later  on. 


PRANAMAYA-KOSA. 


435 


Am.  ///.] 

one  thus  defined  in  the  sruti  is  such  only  in  a seomdary 
sense  of  the  word.  That  Self  alone  lies  within  all. — ^Tbis 
interpretation  gives  a rational  meaning  to  the  words  ** 
ptfrvasya  (the  Self  of  the  former)**  in  the  original.’** 
hold  that  the  real  Self  underlying  all  false  selves  is  the 
described  above  as  **  Real  **  etc.,  who  is  devoid  of  all  saia- 
snra.  Certainly,  the  real  basis  of  the  illusory  serpent  is  in 
the  rope ; it  cannot  be  in  any  other  false  appearance  such 
as  a rod  which  illusion  may  set  Up  in  the  place  of  the  real  ' 
rope — (S). 


* Then  the  whole  passage  should  be  rendered  as  follows  : The 
same  Chit-dhatu  or  Principle  of  Oonscioasness  that  is  the 
real  Self  of  the  former  (A.nnamaya)  is  the  Self  of  the  Prana- 
maya— 


54 


IIS 


CHAPTER  XIII 

MANOMAYA-KOSA. 

Prom  Pranamaya  to  Manomaya. 

The  fruti  now  proceeds  to  unite  to  the  Manomaya  self 
him  who,  on  the  ground  that  all  creatures  have  their  birth 
and  being  and  dissolution  in  Prana,  as  declared  in  the 
sequel,  has  abandoned  the  false  Annamaya  self  and  has 
taken  his  stand  in  the  Pranamaya,  in  the  consciousness 
“ I am  prana.” — (S) 

tWlSJ  ipmiH  I I 

^ ll^ll 

3.  Than  that,  verily, — than  this  one  formed 
of  Prawa, — there  is  another  self  within  formed  of 
Manas  (thought-stuff).  By  him  this  one  is  filled. 

Manas. 

Manas  is  the  anta/^•karana,  the  internal  organ 
or  instrument,  consisting  of  sankalpa  (fancies,  purposes, 
impulses)  and  vikalpa  (thoughts  of  distinct  objects, 
doubts).  Formed  of  this  stuff  is  the  Manomaya,  as  the 
Annamaya  is  formed  of  food-stuff.  And  this  is  the 
inner  self  of  the  Pranamaya.  The  rest  may  be  inter- 
preted as  before,  t 


• Tai.  Up.  3—3,  f Vide  p.  406 


MANOMAYA-KOSA. 


Am.  HL] 

Maya,  which  resides  in  Brahman  and  is  the  material 
cause  of  the  universe,  is  made  up  of  three  gueas  or 
principles.  The  gu«a  of  Tamas  being  the  cause  of  the 
Annamaya,  inertness  is  found  to  predominate  in  that  kosa; 
there  exists  in  it  neither  the  kriya-sakti  nor  the  jnana-5akti| 
neither  the  power  of  action  nor  the  power  of  cognition. 
The  gu«a  of  Rajas  being  the  cause  of  the  Prai^amaya, 
the  power  of  action  inheres  in  the  Prawamaya,  The  guna 
of  Sattva  being  the  cause  of  the  three  kosas  from  the  Mano* 
maya  upward,  the  power  of  cognition  inheres  in  those  three 
ko5as.  The  cause  of  the  Manomaya  is  Sattva  mixed  with 
Tamas  ; and  therefore  we  find  in  it  the  Tamasic  qualities, 
such  as  attachment  and  hatred.  The  cause  of  the  Vijwana- 
maya  is  Sattva  mixed  with  Rajas,  and  therefore  we  find  in 
it  the  agency  with  reference  to  all  Vedic  sacrificial  rites 
and  all  secular  acts  such  as  agriculture.  The  pure  gu/^a  of 
Sattva  is  the  cause  of  the  .^nandamaya,  and  therefore  we 
find  therein  only  joys  of  various  kinds,  termed  love  and  so 
on.  No  doubt,  the  j/wna-sakti,  the  essence  of  cognition,  is 
in  itself  only  one ; still  it  appears  threefold  owing  to  a 
difference  in  its  aspects  or  functions, — as  the  instrument 
(kara«a-5akti),  as  the  agent  (kartn-sakti),  and  as  enjoyment 
(bhoga-sakti).  Manas  is  a product  of  jwana-sakti,  or  essence 
of  cognition  in  its  aspect  as  an  instrument ; and  formed 
of  this  Manas  is  the  Manomaya,  the  aggregate  of  the  vfittis 
or  states  of  mind  such  as  desires,  fancies,  and  the  like. 
These  states  of  mind  are  enumerated  by  the  Vajasaneyins 
as  follows : 

“ Desire,  representation,  doubt,  faith,  want  of 

faith,  firmness,  want  of  firmness,  shame, 


BXKNIilOSOt  [ItumiikVM 

refleotio»)  £eari*— all  is  mind."’^ 
la  this  enaction  oiay  be  cited  other  passages  such  as  tbe 
Mloaifing: 

•‘Thirst  foadaess passion,  covetousness** etc.^' 

The  Manomaya  lies  within  the  Praeamaya,  so  that,  on 
account  of  proximity,  the  -dtman’s  Consciousness,  which 
permeates  all,  is  manifested  in  Manas ; and  because  of  this 
manifestation  of  ^ftman  in  it,  the  Manomaya  is  the  self  of 
the  Pranamaya.  The  Pranamaya  is  permeated  by  the 
Manomaya, — the  external  by  the  internal.  Just  as  the 
kriya-sakti  or  the  power  of  action  pervades  the  whole  body 
from  head  to  foot,  so  also  is  the  jnana-safcti  found  to 
pervade  the  whole  body.  Manas,  the  internal  sense,  stands 
here  for  the  ten  external  senses  also,  such  as  those  of  sight, 
speech,  etc.  It  should  therefore  be  observed  that  all  senses, 
both  of  cognition  and  of  action,  are  included  in  the  Mano- 
mhya-kosa. 

Senses  are  born  of  the  Paramatman. 

The  origin  of  these  senses  has  been  thus  discussed  in  the 
Vodanta-sstras  II.  iv.  1—4  : 

(Question) Are  the  senses  beginningless,  or  have  they 
been  created  by  the  Supreme  Self  ? 

(Prima  facie  The  senses  are  beginningless,  because 

their  existence  prior  to  creation  has  been  declared  by  the 
sruti  in  the  following  words : 

“ Those  iJishis  alone  at  the  beginning  were 
existent.— Who  are  those  i?ishis  ?— Pra»as 
(the  vital  powers,  senses)verily  are  the  i?ishis.*’ 


• Bri.  Up. 


t Maitri-Up.  3-6 


tii4  UAXOUUtA^iBiUL.  4# 

(Conclusion)  :-rlQ  tbe  fitist  pteca  the  propesitkm  that,  the 
One  being  known^  all  is  known,  cannot  be  true  unless  tbe 
senses  (indriyas)  are  included  among  created  things.  And 
the  statement  that  mind  comes  of  food,  breath  of  water, 
and  speech  of  fire  ’*  shows  that  the  senses  are  products  of 
the  elements  of  matter.  Tbe  birth  of  the  senses  is  clearly 
declared  m the  words  hence  is  born  pransLf  manas  and  aU 
senses.”  f As  to  the  passage  which  speaks  of  their  exist* 
ence  prior  to  creation,  it  should  be  interpreted  as  referring 
to  a minor  creation.  We  therefore  conclude  that  senses 
are  born  from  the  Paramatman. 

The  senses  are  eleven  in  number. 

(Vedsnta-sstras.  II.  iv.  5—6). 

(Question) : — How  many  are  the  senses,  seven  or  eleven  ? 

(Prima  facie  view) : — The  senses  are  seven  in  number ; for 
the  sruti  says  in  general  “ seven  senses  are  born  thence. 
The  sruti  speaks  also  specifically  of  them  as  dwelling  m the 
seven  apertures  of  the  head,  in  the  words  “ Seven,  indeed, 
mre  the  prsnas  located  in  tbe  head.”$ 

(Conclusion): — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  follows: 
Senses  other  than  those  located  in  the  head,  such  as  hands 
and  tbe  like,  are  mentioned  in  the  Veda ; “ Both  hands  and 
what  one  must  handle,  both  organ  of  joy  and  what  must 
be  enjoyed.”  So,  in  determining  the  number  on  the  sole 
authority  of  the  Vedas,  we  find  there  are  eleven  separate 
functions— namely,  seeing,  hearing,  smelling,  tasting,  touch- 
ing, speaking,  taking,  going,  enjoying,  excreting,  and 
•thinking ; and  there  must  be  eleven  separate  sense-organs 
concerned  severally  with  these  eleven  functions. 

^ Chha,  Up.  6 5-4.  f Mmid.  Up.  2-1-3.  J Ibid.  2-1-8 
§ Tait.  Smi.  5—1 — 7 % rrasna.  Up.  4—8. 


4^6 


BKAHMA-Vt&yX  EXMOKBBD.  [Ifumia-Vm, 


The  ietises  are  not  all*pervadiiig. 

(Vedanta-swtras.  II.  iv.  8—13.) 

(Question) — Are  the  senses  all-pervading  or  limited  in 
extent  ? 

(rfe  Sanhhya): — The  senses  are  all-pervading ; but  their 
functions  are  confined  to  particular  regions  of  the  several 
organisms  in  order  that  therein  the  several  jivas  may  enjoy 
the  fruits  of  their  respective  actions. 

ijhe  V eddntin)\—T\i\^  involves  a needless  assumption. 
When  all  our  experience  can  be  explained  by  supposing  that 
the  senses  are  of  the  same  extent  as  the  'bodily  regions 
where  they  function,  of  what  avail  is  the  needless  assum- 
ption that  the  senses  are  all-pervading  without  functioning 
throughout.  Moreover,  the  sruti  speaks  of  the  ascent, 
departure,  and  return  of  j/va ; and  since  these  are  not 
possible  in  the  jfva  who  in  himself  is  all-pervading,  it  has 
been  assumed  that  the  senses  form  the  upadhi  of  the  jtva 
and  that  it  is  by  this  up/idhi  or  vehicle  of  the  senses  that  he 
really  ascends,  departs,  and  returns.  If  even  this  uptidhi 
were  all-pervading,  what  then  is  it  which  really  ascends, 
departs,  and  returns  ? Wherefore,  the  senses  are  not  all- 
pervading.  When  the  S«trak«ra  (the  author  of  the  Ved^nta- 
swtras)  speaks  of  these  middle-sized  senses  as  a»us( —atoms, 
subtle  ones),  he  only  means  that  they  are  invisible,  so  subtle 
that  they  transcend  the  ken  of  ordinary  men. 

The  aenses  are  dependent  on  Devas. 

( Vedanta-sf^tras:  II.  iv.  14 — 16) 

( Are  the  senses  quite  independent  in  their 
working  or  dependent  on  Devas  ? 


MANOMAYA'KOSA. 


43* 


Am.  ///.] 

(Prima  facie  view): — Speech  and  other  senses  perform 
their  respective  functions  quite  independently ; they  are  not 
dependent  on  Devas.  Otherwise,  the  Devas  would  be  the 
enjoyers  or  sufferers  by  the  experience  acquired  through  the 
senses,  and  the  jtvatman  (individual  embodied  soul)  would 
derive  no  experience  at  all. 

(Conclusion) : — In  the  words  “ Agni  became  speech  and 
entered  the  mouth  and  so  on,  the  sruti  declares  that 
speech  and  other  senses  are  under  the  influence  respectively 
of  Agni  and  other  gods ; and  their  operation  therefore 
depends  entirely  upon  the  Davas.  From  this  it  by  no 
means  follows  that  the  Devas  are  the  enjoyers  of  the  fruits 
of  the  experience.  Certainly,  it  is  not  right  that  the  Devas, 
who  have  attained  to  the  state  of  Devas  as  the  fruit  of  their 
highly  meritorious  karma,  should  be  affected  by  the  ex- 
perience so  low  in  its  kind  ; on  the  contrary,  a very  high 
enjoyment  accrues  to  them  in  their  Devatr^  bodies.  It  is 
the  human  soul  that  enjoys  the  fruits  of  his  karma  in  the 
form  of  the  experience  gained  through  the  senses  working 
under  the  influence  of  the  Devas.  We  therefore  conclude 
that  the  senses  are  dependent  on  the  Devas  for  their  action. 

The  senses  are  distinct  from  Prana  proper. 

(Vedanta-swtras  II.  iv.  17 — 19). 

(Question) : — Are  these  senses  mere  functions  of  Prswa,  or 
are  they  principles  quite  distinct  from  Prrtwa  ? 

(Prima  facie  view) : — Speech  and  other  senses  must  be 
mere  functions  of  Prana,  proper ; for,  the  sruti  declares  that 
they  are  only  forms  of  Prawa,  in  the  words  **  They  were  all 
of  this  one  alone.”  t Moreover,  in  common  parlance,  they 


* Ait.  Up.  2-4.  fBri.  Up.  1—5—21. 


4Si  hkAHMA-muMitP6V}itiimD. 

dedgtiiAiti  by  the  very  ti»rm  Pre/ie : as  for  mstaace,  it 
is  sometimes  said,  the  preims  of  this  dying  one  have  not 
^ gone/*  The  5ruti  also  speaks  of  spoech  and  other 
senses  under  one  and  the  same  designation  < praea  ’ : 

**  And  the  people  do  not  call  them  the  tongues, 
the  eyes,  the  ears,  the  minds,  but  the  breaths 
(pr/isas).**  ^ 

Therefore  the  senses  are  not  distinct  from  Pra»a. 

( Conclusion ) : — One  distinction  between  them  is  this  : 
while  speech  and  other  senses  are  overcome  with  weariness 
in  their  respective  spheres  of  work,  Pr^wa  is  unwearied  in 
its  operation.  The  sruti  says ; 

Death  having  become  weariness,  took  them 

and  seized  them Having  seized  them, 

death  held  them  back  from  their  work.  There- 
fore speech  grows  weary.’*  t 

Again,  in  the  dialogue  between  Prawa  and  the  senses,  the  sruti 
declares  first  that  the  body  did  not  perish  or  rise  as  speech 
and  other  senses  departed  from  or  entered  into  it ; and  then, 
that  the  body  perished  or  rose  as  Pra»a  departed  from  or 
entered  into  it.  Because  of  these  distinguishing  features 
declared  in  the  sruti,  it  is  only  in  a figurative  sense  that 
speech  and  other  senses  are  said  to  be  mere  forms  of  Pra;ta 
and  are  spoken  of  under  the  designation  * pran^'  And  the 
senses  are  spoken  of  as  pranas  because  of  their  following 
Prana  so  closely  as  servants  follow  tl^ir  master.  There 
is  a vast  difference  in  their  functions.  The  senses  are  limit- 
ed in  their  respective  spheres  of  action  and  are  instruments 
of  thought  ; whereas  Prana  is  the  leader  of  the  senses  and 


♦Ohha,  5-1-15, 


t Bri.  Up.  1-5-21. 


makomava-kosa. 


433 


Am.  ///.] 

the  body.  Accordingly,  because  of  their  weariness  and  other 
distinguishing  features,  the  senses  are  principles  quite 
distinct  from  Prawa, 

Manas  is  the  chief  among  the  senses. 

Of  these  eleven  senses  Manas  is  the  chief,  and  therefore 
the  Manomaya-kosa  is  named  after  it.  And  Manas  is  the 
chief  of  the  senses  because  speech  and  other  senses  depend 
on  it  for  their  respective  functions.  Indeed  in  all  their 
respective  functions  they  invariably  presuppose  a state  of 
mind  called  praj/w  (consciousness)  such  as  a desire  to  speak^ 
to  see,  to  hear,  or  the  like.  This  truth  has  been  stated  at 
length  by  the  Kaush^’takins,  viewing  the  matter  both  in  its 
positive  and  negative  aspects.  Viewing  the  matter  in  its 
positive  aspect,  they  declare  : 

‘‘  Having  by  praj;w  ( consciousness ) taken 
possession  of  speech,  he  reaches  by  speech  all 

words Having  by  pvRpia  taken  possession 

of  the  eye  he  reaches  all  forms ’* 

The  negative  side  of  the  proposition  is  declared  as  follows 
“ For,  without  prajw^r,  speech  does  not  make 
known  any  word.  ‘ My  mind  was  absent,’  he 
says,  ‘ I did  not  perceive  that  word  ’...Without 
prajwa  the  eye  does  not  make  known  any 
form.  ‘ My  mind  was  absent,’  he  says,  ‘ I 
did  not  perceive  that  form.’  ” t 

Contemplation  of  the  Manomaya. 

Having  taught  that  the  Manomaya,  the  aggregate  of 
all  senses,  is  one’s  own  self,  the  sruti  now  proceeds  to 

Kail.  Up.  .*j— 1>.  t ^—7. 


55 


434  BRAHMA-viBYA EXPOUNDED,  ^^AftanAa-V idlL 

enjoin  the  contemplation  thereof,  in  order  to  strongly  im- 
press the  idea  in  the  heart ; and  with  a view  to  this  end  the 
iruti  first  teaches  the  form  in  which  it  should  be  contem- 
plated : 

^ 3^^  35r  I ^ I 3^- 

I r[FT  1 W I W I 

3TIciq  I 3^  J#5T  ll«ll 

4.  He,  verily,  this  one,  is  quite  of  man’s  shape. 
After  his  human  shape,  this  one  is  of  man’s  shape. 
Of  him,  the  Yajus  itself  is  the  head,  the  i?ik  is 
the  right  wing,  the  Saman  is  the  left  wing,  the 
ordinance  is  the  self,  the  Atharva-Angirases  are 
the  tail,  the  support. 

The  Manomaya  which  has  been  declared  to  abide 
within  the  Pr^j«aniaya  as  the  self,  and  which  we  feel  in  the 
consciousness  “ I think,  I imagine,”  is  represented,  for 
contemplation’s  sake,  to  be  of  human  form  made  up  of  five 
. members.  As  explained  above,  I the  human  form  of  this 
kosa  follows  from  that  of  the  Pra;/amaya,  after  the  fashion 
of  the  melted  metal  assuming  the  form  of  the  mould  into 
which  it  is  poured. 

What  the  Veda  in  reality  is. 

Of  him,  the  Yajus  is  the  head. — Yajus  is  that  class  of 
mantras  which  are  not  subject  to  any  definite  rule  as 

* The  first  two  sentences  should  be  explained  as  before. 
Vide  ante  pp.  414-415.  t JhuL 


MANOMAYA-'KOSA. 


435 


Anu^  IIL] 

to  the  syllables,  lines  and  endings.  All  speech  of  this 
kind  is  here  referred  to  by  the  word  ‘ Yajus.’  It  is 
here  represented  as  the  head  because  of  its  importance; 
and  the  importance  lies  in  its  being  of  immediate  use 
in  sacrificial  rites,  etc.  For,  it  is  with  the  Yajus — with 
the  words  svaha,  etc.,^‘ — that  an  oblation  is  offered.  Or, 
the  representation  of  the  Yajus  as  the  head  and  other  like 
representations  should  always  be  based  entirely  on  the 
authority  of  the  sruti.  t What  we  call  Yajus  is  only  a 
mano-vritti, — a state,  a mode,  a function,  an  act,  of 
mind, — and  consists  in  thinking  of  the  particular  syl- 
lables,  words  and  sentences — as  uttered  by  particular 
organs,  with  particular  effort,  pitch  and  accent, — as 
constituting  the  Yajurveda  ; and  it  is  this  thought  that 
manifests  itself  through  hearing  and  other  organs  and 
is  given  the  appellation  of  Yajus.  The  same  thing 
applies  to  the  /^ik,  and  to  the  Saman. 

The  word  ‘ yajus,’  is  generally  used  to  denote  an  aggre- 
gate of  external  sounds  known  by  that  name.  But,  lest  the 
criticism  of  the  sruti  might  be  carried  too  far,  we  should 
absolutely  accept  its  authority  and  understand  that  ‘ yajus  ’ 
here  denotes  a particular  state  of  mind — which  may  be 
expressed  in  the  words  “ we  now  study  the  Yajurveda ; 
these  syllables  occurring  in  this  particular  order  constitute 
the  Yajurveda  which  we  should  study.” — (A).  So  that  what 
we  call  Yajus  is  a particular  state  of  Manas  woven  into  the 

* 'J'he  other  words  are  ‘svadha,’  ‘vashar — fS). 

f Inasmuch  as  the  sruti  is  of  a higher  authority  ; whereas  all 
attempt  to  seek  for  an  analogy  as  the  basis  of  the  representation 
is  human. — (S.) 


436  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Aftatlda-Vdli. 

consciousness  of  /svara,  and  which,  in  the  form  of  words 
and  sentences,  becomes  manifested  through  hearing  and 
other  organs. — (S).  That  is  to  say,  the  Yajus,  the  /?ik,  etc., 
are  only  particular  states  of  mind  impregnated  with  con- 
sciousness ; or  they  are  all  mere  consciousness  in  the  form 
of  particular  states  of  mind. — (A). 

Mantras  being  thus  only  vrittis  or  functions  of  mind, 
and  since  a function  can  be  repeated,  we  can  under- 
stand how  a mental  repetition  of  mantras  is  possible 
Otherwise,  as  incapable  of  repetition,  a mantra  could 
not  be  repeated  (in  mind)  any  more  than  a pot;  so  that 
it  would  be  absurd  to  talk  of  a mental  repetition  of 
mantras. 

If  mantras  were  not  functions  or  acts  of  mind, — ^were 
something  other  than  acts,  like  pots,  etc., — no  such  thing  as  a 
repetition  of  the  mantra  would  be  possible  ; for,  it  is  only  an 
act  or  function, — which  every  state  of  consciousness  is, — 
that  can  be  repeated,  but  not  an  external  thing  such  as  a 
pot.  The  mind  cannot  directly  act  upon  objects  which  are 
external  to  it  and  therefore  beyond  its  scope  ; so  that,  if  the 
mantras  were  something  external  to  the  mind,  to  speak  of 
a mental  repetition  of  them  would  be  absurd. — (S  & A). 

But  a repetition  of  mantras  is  often  enjoined  in 
connection  with  sacrificial  rites. 

And  such  injunctions  shew  that  mantras  are  acts  or 
functions  which  alone,  unlike  external  objects  such  as  pots, 
are  capable  of  repetition. — (A). 

(Objection)  : — The  mental  repetition  of  a mantra  may 
be  effected  by  way  of  repeating  the  thought  (smriti)  of 
its  syllables. 


MANOMAYA-KOSA. 


437 


Am.  ///.] 

• 

That  is  to'say,  though  the  mantra  cannot  itself  be  repeated 
(in  mind),  as  beyond  its  direct  reach,  the  repetition  may 
be  effected  by  revovling  in  thought  the  meaning  of  the 
mantra— (S). 

{Answer) : — No,  because  it  would  involve  a departure 
from  the  primary  sense  of  words.  To  explain : the 
formula  ‘‘  let  him  thrice  repeat  the  first  ( verse ) and 
thrice  the  last  ” enjoins  a repetition  of  certain  verses. 
If  the  verse  cannot  itself  be  the  subject  of  repetition, — 
if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  mere  thought  of  it  were 
repeated, — it  would  be  tantamount  to  a neglect  of  what 
is  primarily  enjoined  in  the  words  ‘‘  Let  him  thrice 
repeat  the  first  verse,"' 

To  repeat  the  mere  idea  of  what  is  taught  in  the  verse  is 
to  resort  to  a secondary  sense  of  the  injunction ; for,  the 
idea  of  what  is  taught  in  the  verse  is  different  from  the 
verse  itself,  of  which  a repetition  is  here  enjoined.  More- 
over, in  the  words  “mental  repetition  is  deemed  a thousand 
times  more  effective,”  it  is  said  that  a mental  repetition  of 
mantras  is  more  fruitful,  and  that  the  external  repetition, — 
i,  e,,  the  repetition  of  mantras  through  word  of  mouth, — is 
less  .fruitful.  Wherefore  the  mental  repetition  is  what  is 
primarily  enjoined  ; while  the  other — i.e.  repetition  by  word 
of  mouth — can  be  made  out  by  understanding  the  text  in  its 
secondary  sense.  When  a passage  is  capable  of  a literal 
interpretation,  it  is  not  right  to  understand  it  in  a secondary 
sense. — (S  & A) 

Therefore,  the  mantras  are  nothing  other  than  the 
Atman’s*  Consciousness  limited  by  the  upadhi  of 


438  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Amnda-VoM. 

• 

the  states  of  mind  and  manifested  in  these  states  of 
mind; — that  Consciousness  of  -4tman  which  has  neither 
a beginning  nor  an  end,  and  which  is  here  spoken  of 
as  Yajus.  And  so,  we  can  explain  how  the  Vedas  are 
eternal.  Otherwise, — i.  c.^  if  they  are  objects  external 
to  consciousness,  like  colour,  etc., — the  Vedas  would  be 
non*eternal ; and  this  conclusion  is  quite  unsound. 
And  the  sruti  which  speaks  of  the  unity  of  the 
Veda  with  the  Eternal  Self,  in  the  words  “ He  is  the 
.4tman  abiding  in  Manas,*  in  whom  all  Vedas  become 
one,”t  will  have  a meaning  only  if  the  Rik  and  other 
portions  of  the  Veda  are  eternal.  There  is  also  a 
mantra  which  reads  as  follows  : 

“ The  Riks  are  seated  in  Akshara  (the 
Indestructible),  in  the  Supreme  Heaven, 
wherein  all  Devas  sit  on  high.’’  J 

Since  it  has  been  established  that  mantras  are  mental 
states,  and  since  all  mental  states  are  found  invariably 
permeated  by  the  Conscious  Self,  the  mantras  are  one  with 
the  Conscious  Self.  Thus  the  view  that  mantras  are 
mental  states  or  acts  explains  not  only  the  possibility  of 
their  repetition,  but  also  the  eternality  of  the  Vedas  which 
are  ultimately  one  with  /Itman.  Further,  as  the  Veda  is  one 
with  Consciousness,  as  it  is  not  a mere  insentient  word,  it 
is  capable  of  throwing  light  upon  Dharma  and  other  things 
worth  knowing.  This  view  obviates  the  necessity  for  the 
unwarranted  postulate  of  ‘ Spho/a’  or  eternal  sound — that 


• as  the  wiiness  thereof — (A),  f Taitt.  Ara.  3 — 11. 
J Taitt,  Ara. 


MANOMAYA-KOSA. 


439 


Anu.  III.] 

form  of  the  Veda  in  which  it  it  said  to  be  distinct  from  the 
insentient  syllables  of  which  it  is  composed,  and  in  which 
it  is  supposed  to  be  able  to  throw  light  upon  truth. — (S&A) 

The ‘ordinance’  here  refers  to  the  Br^ihmawa,  (that 
section  of  the  Veda)  which  ordains  things  requiring 
specific  directions.  The  Atharva-Angirases,  i e.,  the 
mantras  seen  by  Atharvan  and  Awgiras,  including  their 
Brahmawa,  is  the  support,  because  they  treat  mostly 
of  rites  which  promote  man’s  well-being  by  conducing 
to  his  peace  and  strength. 

The  Brrthmawa  section  of  the  Veda  consists  of  ordinances 
and  is  therefore  here  referred  to  by  the  word  “ ordinance.” 
Or,  the  Br^ihma/ea  is  so  called  because  it  is  the  command 
of  the  Supreme  Brahman. — (S). 

The  three  Vedas  here  designated  as  the  Yajus,  etc,,  refer 
to  the  mantras  comprised  in  them,  while  the  Brahmawa 

portion  is  referred  to  by  the  word  “ ordinance  ” The 

mantras  of  the  Atharva- Veda  are  represented  as  the  support, 
because,  as  contributing  to  the  attainment  of  what  is  desir- 
able and  to  the  avoidance  of  what  is  undesirable  here  in 
this  lif3,  they  promote  man’s  well-being.  It  is  true  that  the 
Yajus  and  other  Vedas  are  formed  of  words,  not  of  mind  ; but 
here  the  words  ‘yajus,’  etc.,  stand  for  the  states  of  mind 
concerned  with  the  thought  of  those  words.^ 

ii^ii 


* Sayaua’s  interpretation  is  somewhat  at  variance  with  the 
Bhrtshyakara’s. 


440  brasma-vidya  EXPOUNDED.  \Ai\and(i~V oUi. 

5.  On  that  as  well  there  is  this  verse  : 

As  in  former  cases,  this  verse  throws  light  upon  the 
Manomaya  self. 

Brahman  beyond  speech  and  thought. 

^ IK II 

Anuvaka  IV. 

I.  Whence  all  words  turn  back  as  well  as 
Manas,  without  reaching ; he  who  knows  Brah- 
man’s bliss  fears  not  at  any  time. 

This  verse  is  cited  as  evidence  concerning  the  nature  of 
the  Manomaya-kosa  described  above.  That  is  to  say,  this 
verse  is  quoted  here  to  shew  that  the  Vedas  are  of  the 
nature  described  above.  It  is  Brahman  that  is  inaccessible 
to  words ; nothing  else  is  inaccessible  to  words.  As 
Brahman  is  the  Eternal  Consciousness,  even  Manas  has  no 
access  to  Him.  The  sruti  declares  that  Brahman  is  beyond 
the  reach  of  mind,  by  describing  Him  as  “ that  which  one 
thinks  not  by  Manas.”* — (S) 

Or,  the  5ruti  has  quoted  this  verse  with  a view  to  teach 
that  the  wise  man  should  understand  that  the  Manomaya  is 
composed  of  speech  and  thought  ( Manas ),  beyond  whose 
reach  nothing  lies  except  Brahman,  the  Untainted.  Brahman 
is  not  the  main  thing  referred  to  in  this  verse,  inasmuch  as 
there  is  no  occasion  to  treat  of  Him  in  this  chapter. — (S.) 


Keua-Up.  1-5 


Am.  77.]  MANOMAYA-KOSA.  44^ 

As  this  chapter  relates  ta  the  Manomaya-kosa,  it  cannot 
be  the  Supreme  Brahman  that  is  described  here.  Now  to 
explain  the  verse  as  descriptive  of  the  Manomaya-kosa : 
Manas  may  be  said  to  lie  beyond  the  scope  of  speech, 
because  it  is  immediately  witnessed  by  consciousness  and 
does  not  therefore  stand  in  need  of  speech  or  other  senses 
to  manifest  itself  in  consciousness.  It  is  also  beyond  the 
reach  of  Manas  ; for,  it  is  impossible  to  think  that  Manas 
is  reached  by  its  own  vntti  or  state.  As  the  Swtratman  is 
Great  or  Unlimited,  and  as  Manas  is  one  in  essence  with 
the  Swtotman,  even  the  word  ‘Brahman*  may  be  applied 
to  Manas.  That  man  has  nothing  to  fear  at  any  time  who 
knows  that  bliss  is  the  fruit  of  the  contemplation  of  this 
Manomaya  Brahman,  and  who,  by  contemplation,  has 
attained  Brahman’s  bliss  and  dwells  in  the  state  of  the 
Hirawyagarbha — (A) . 

He  has  never  anything  to  fear,  who  contemplates  Brah- 
man’s bliss  in  the  upadhi  of  the  Manomaya, — that  bliss 
which  is  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman,  whom  no  words 
nor  thought  can  reach,  though  speech  and  mind  can  speak 
and  think  of  all  else.  In  the  first  place,  no  words  can  denote 
Brahman  as  He  belongs  to  no  particular  genus  and  is  devoid 
of  qualities,  etc.  On  this  the  Naishkarmyasiddhi saysj 
“Relation,  qualities,  action,  genus,  and  usage, — 
these  make  a word  applicable  to  a thing. 

None  of  these  exists  in  yltman:  thence  .hitman 
is  never  denoted  by  a word.” 

When  Manas  thinks  of  things,  it  thinks  of  them  as  of  this 
or  that  form.  In  neither  way  can  Brahman  be  thought  of. 
Therefore  Manas  recedes  from  Brahman.  This  idea  has 


* ft  work  of  Siiresvaracharya ; III.  103. 

56 


BRAHMA-OTBYA  EXPOUNDED.  [AnandOrVui^. 

been  expressed  in  the  Pawchakosa-viveka  (in  the  Vedenta- 
Paedudasi)  as  follows: 

Under  what  form  then  does  Self  exist  ? — if 
one  were  to  ask  this,  we  would  reply  that  the 
notion  of  this  or  that  mode  does  not  apply  to 
Self.  That  which  is  not  like  this  nor  like 
thati  you  must  regard  with  certainty  as  Self  in 
its  essence.  An  object  known  through  the 
' senses  is  commonly  spoken  of  as  “ like  this,** 
and  that  which  is  not  presented  to  conscious- 
ness as  “ like  that.**  The  cogniser  (vishayin) 
is  not  known  through  the  sense-organs ; nor 
is  there  a non-presentation  of  Self ; for,  the 
nature  of  Self  implies  presentation.”'*' 

Fearlessness,  the  fruit  of  the  contemplation. 

Just  as  the  sruti  has  taught  in  the  preceding  chapters  the 
contemplation  of  Brahman  in  the  up^dhis  of  the  Annamaya 
and  the  Prawamaya,  so  here  it  means  to  teach  the  con- 
templation of  Brahman  in  the  upadhi  of  the  Manomaya. 
Otherwise,  it  would  be  of  no  use  to  represent  the  Yajus,  etc., 
as  the  head  and  so  on.  Here  the  root  ‘ vid  * of  the  word 
“ vidv<^n  **  (knower)  denotes  contemplation  (upasana),  in- 
asmuch as  the  two  verbs  “ vid  **  and  upa-as  **  are  used 
synonymously  in  the  sections  treating  of  up^^sana.  This 
has  been  clearly  shewn  by  Sii  Sankaracharya  in  his  com- 
mentary on  the  Vedanta-swtras  (IV.  i.  i) : 

In  some  passages  the  verb  * vid  * ‘ to  know  * 
is  used  at  the  beginning  and  the  verb  * upa-<is  ’ 

‘ to  contemplate  * at  the  end.  For  example. 


♦ Op.  Cit  26—27, 


MANOMAYA-KOSA. 


Am.  IV.] 


m 


we  have  at  the  beginning  ‘He  who  Jmm 
what  he  knows  is  thus  spoken  of  by  me’* 
and  then  ‘ Teach  me,  sir,  the  deity  which 
you  contemplate'  f In  some  passages  the  verb 
‘upa-rts*  occurs  at  the  beginning  and  the 
verb  * vid  ’ at  the  end ; as  for  example,  we 
have  at  the  beginning  ‘ let  a man  contemplate 
on  mind  as  Brahman,*  I and  at  the  end  ‘ He 
who  knows  this  shines  and  warms  through 
his  celebrity,  fame  and  glory  of  countenance.”! 

Accordingly  the  verb  ‘vid,*  to  hmw^  here  denotes  cem- 
templation.  As  a result  of  this  contemplation,  there  will  be 
no  fear  either  here  or  hereafter.  In  him  who  is  incessantly 
engaged  in  the  contemplation,  there  is  no  room  for  the 
feelings  of  attachment  and  hatred,  and  the  devotee  is 
therefore  free  from  all  fear  of  the  world.  As  he  has  there- 
by secured  mukti  which  will  accrue  to  him  in  due  course, 
(i.  e.,  after  passing  through  the  state  of  the  Hirawyagarbha, 
the  Lower  Brahman),  he  is  devoid  of  all  fear  of  the  future. 
The  absence  of  both  kinds  of  fear  is  indicated  by  the 
words  “ at  any  time.” 

The  outcome  of  the  study  of  the  Manomaya. 

Now  the  5ruti  proceeds  to  point  out  the  main  purpose  of 
this  teaching  concerning  the  nature  of  the  Manomaya : 

^ ^ 3TICW  I W.  ^ IRIl 

2.  Thereof, — of  the  former, — this  bne,  verily, 
ia  the  self  embodied. 

• Chha.  4—1—4.  t Ibid,  4 — 2 — 2. 

} dUI.  3—18—1.  § Ibid.  3—18—6. 


444 


BRAHMA-VXDYA  EXPOUNDBD. 


Thereof,  of  the  former,  i.  e.,  of  the  Pr^Jitamaya, 
this  one,  namely  the  Manomaya,  is  the  self,  having 
the  Pranamaya  for  his  body.* 

Then  arises  the  strong  conviction  that  the  Pranamaya  is 
the  body  and  that  the  Manomaya  is  its  lord.  The  Bnhada- 
ranyaka  records  a dialogue  between  Balaki  and  Ajatasatru. 
Balaki  regards  Prana  as  the  Self ; and  in  order  to  prove  that 
Prana  is  not  the  Self,  Ajatasatru  takes  him  to  a man  who 
is  asleep.  He  calls  the  man  out  by  the  four  scriptural 
names  of  Prana.  The  man  not  awaking  at  the  call,  it  is 
concluded  that  the  insentient  Prana  is  not  the  Self.  And 
then,  to  shew  that  the  self  is  self-conscious, — something 
other  than  Prana, — Ajatasatru  rubs  the  man  in  hand  and 
wakes  him  up.  Then  the  conscious  /4tman  rises.  And 
accordingly  the  sruti  says : 

And  the  two  together  came  to  a person  who 
was  asleep.  He  called  him  by  these  names, 

‘Thou,  great  one,  clad  in  white  raiment. 

Soma,  king.’  He  did  not  rise.  Then  rubbing 
him  with  his  hand,  he  woke  him,  and  he 
arose.”  t 


• For  a full  explanation  of  this,  Vide  ante  pp.  424 — 425. 
t Bri.  Up,  2—1—15. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

VIJNANAMAYA-KOSA. 


To  him  who  has  completely  withdrawn  from  the  Pra«a- 
maya,  the  sruti  teaches  the  Vijwanamaya  with  a view  to  lead 
him  still  farther  within,  beyond  even  the  Manomayakosa. 

The  relation  between  the  Manomaya  and  the 
Vijnanamaya. 

mm  sim  ^ifiwr:  i 

^ \\\\\ 

3.  Than  that,  verily, — than  this  one  formed 
of  Manas, — there  is  another  self  within,  formed 
of  Vijnana.  By  him  this  one  is  filled. 

This  should  be  interpreted  as  before.  The  inner 
self  of  the  Manomaya  is  the  Vijwflnamaya.  It  has  been 
shewn  that  the  Manomaya  is  made  up  of  the  Vedas. 
Vij^^^ina  or  Intelligence  is  the  knowledge  of  what  is 
taught  -in  the  Vedas,— the  certain  or  determinative 
knowledge  (nischaya).  And  this  determinative  know- 
ledge * (adhyavasaya)  is  an  attribute  (dharma)  of  the 
anta/t-kara;ia,  the  inner  sense.  Made  up  of  this, — i,e,^ 
formed  of  these  determinative  cognitions,  which  are 
regarded  as  pramanas  or  right  cognitions— is  the  Vijwa- 


* including  the  determinative  knowledge  gained  in  ordinary 
experience.— f A) . 


446  BRAHMA'VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  {lnmda-V(M. 

namayaself.  Indeed,  t the  sacrificial  rites,  etc.,  are 
performed  by  one  only  after  ascertaining  their  nature 
from  right  sources  of  knowledge  ; and  the  sruti  says  in 
the  verse  (to  be  quoted  below)  that  VijVwma  is  the  source 
of  all  sacrificial  rites. 

The  Manomaya,  which  has  been  described  to  be  made  up 
of  the  Vedas,  is  mainly  composed  of  vrittis  or  states  of  mind, 
while  the  next  one  is  the  owner  of  those  states.  Buddhi, 
which  is  made  up  of  determinative  cognitions  (vyavasaya),  is 
regarded  as  the  owner  of  the  states  of  mind.  The  sruti 
says,  “ Intelligence  performs  the  sacrifice  : ” this  will  have 
no  meaning  unless  Intelligence  (Vijw^na)  is  regarded  as  an 
agent,  as  the  owner  of  the  mental  states,  as  one  who  passes 
through  those  states.  Buddhi  or  Intelligence  itself,— not 
the-4tman,  because  He  is  immutable, — containing  within 
it  a semblance  of  i4tman’s  Consciousness,  is  the  agent. 
Since  the^^tman  cannot  be  the  agent,  Vijmina  must  be  the 
performer  of  the  sacrificial  rites.  If  Vij^na  were  not  the 
agent,  no  sacrificial  rite  would  be  possible. — (Sj. 

The  nature  of  the  Vijnanamaya. 

The  Manomaya  is  made  up  of  mental  states  such  as  kama 
andsawkalpa, — desires,  impulses  and  formative  thoughts. 
Being  the  up^idhi  of  the  Pratyagatman, — i.  e.,  being  a 
medium  or  vehicle  in  which  the  Inner  Self  manifests  Him- 
self,— the  Manomaya  has  been  spoken  of  as  the  self.  Behind 
this  s^lf, — which  manifests  itself  in  consciousness  as  I 
desire,  I imagine  ’*  and  so  on, — there  is  another  self  called 

f This  is  to  shew  tliat  “ Vijnana  ” here  means  knowledge  of 
the  truths  taught  in  the  Veda  concerning  the  sacrifices  to  be 


VUN4NAMAYA-K0SA. 


m 


^m.  IV.] 

yijwanamaya,  the  Intelligence-majde.  By  the  Vijikwmmaya 
lying  within,  the  Manomaya— the  external  one, — ^is  filled. 
When  the  j»ana-5akti  or  the  knowing  principle  which  is 
evolved  out  of  the  Sattva-guwa  is  influenced  by  the  Tamas, 
Manas  or  thought-principle  is  formed,  with  its  Tamasic 
attributes  of  attachment,  hatred,  etc.  So  Vijw^raa  or  the 
cognising  principle,  with  its  Rajasic  attribute  of  agency,  is 
formed  out  of  a combination  of  the  knowing  principle  and 
the  Guna  of  Rajas.  Among  the  states  of  consciousness, 
there  is  a particular  one  in  the  form  “ I am  the  agent,”  and 
the  principle  apprehended  in  this  particular  state  of  con- 
sciousness with  the  attribute  of  agency  pertaining  to  it  is 
the  thing  denoted  by  the  word  ‘VijMna’;  and  ‘Vijwxnamaya* 
means  formed  of  Vij«ana.”  Vijw^na,  which  is  evolved 
from  Sattva  associated  with  Rajas,  assumes  the  form  of 
the  Ego,  apprehended  as  M ’ in  consciousness.  It  is  this 
principle  of  Ego  that  all  people  think  of  as  ‘I.*  There  are 
two  sets  of  ideas,  the  idea  of  ‘ this  * and  the  idea  of  * I.’ 
The  idea  of  ‘ this  * refers  to  what  is  known,  to  something 
distinct  from  the  knower,  to  something  that  is  outward ; 
whereas  the  idea  of  ‘I  * refers  to  the  inward,  to  the 
knower  himself.  This  analysis  should  not  be  objected 
to  because  of  the  fact  that  the  knower  (pramatri)  and  the 
known  (prameya)  are  always  found  mixed  up ; for,  this 
mixture  is  a fact  of  experience,  and  it  cannot  therefore 
vitiate  our  analysis.  It  is  a well-recognised  principle  that 
no  ascertained  fact  of  experience  should  be  dismissed  on 
the  ground  of  its  inexplicability.  The  Ego  apprehended  in 
consciousness  as  ‘ I who  is  the  cogniser  of  all  knowledge 
through  whatsoever  organ  obtained,  is  the  one  here  spoken 
of  as  the  Vijwanamaya.  Having  in  view  this  princi- 
ple, the  i4tharva»rikas  first  enumerate  all  instruments  of 


448  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [AnUndO^V (Uli, 

knowledge  and  all  things  knowable  through  them,  and  then 
mention  quite  separately — as  distinct  from  them  all — him 
who  experiences  them : 

“ Both  • sight  and  what  must  be  seen,  both 

hearing  and  what  must  be  heard, 

He  is  the  seer,  toucher,  hearer,  smeller,  taster, 
the  mind  of  impulse  and  of  reason,  the  agent, 
the  knowing  self,  the  man.”  " 

And  the  Kaushitakins  also  first  declare,  from  both  the 
positive  and  negative  points  of  view,  that  all  experience  of 
objects  through  senses  depends  upon  Manas,  and  then 
mention,  as  distinct  from  them  all,  the  subject  of  all  those 
experiences : 

Having  by  prajw^i  (self-conscious  know- 
ledge) taken  possession  of  speech,  he  obtains 

by  speech  all  words Let  no  man  try  to  find 

out  what  speech  is,  let  him  know  the  speaker.”! 

{Objection) : — The  subject  of  all  experiences  is  Aimm 
Himself,  not  the  fourth  sheath  called  Vijwanamaya.  Hence, 
it  is  that  in  discussing  the  nature  of  the  jiv^itman,  the 
Blessed  B^rdar^yawa  has  said  “ (^tman)  is  the  agent  (kartn) 
because  then  the  scriptures  will  have  a meaning  ”(II.  iii.33). 

(Answer) : — There  is  no  room  for  such  objection  ; for,  the 
agency  of  the  ^tman  is  due  to  an  up^dhi,  as  has  been 
shewn  in  the  Ved^rnta-swtra  11.  iii.  40.  This  swtra  says : 
Just  as  a carpenter  can  build  a house  with  external  imple- 
ments. such  as  a hatchet,  and  cannot  at  all  build  without 
them,  so  also,  i4tman  is  in  Himself  quite  unattached  and 
becomes  an  agent  when  associated  with  the  senses,  such 

♦ Pnwna.  Up.  4—8,  9.  f Kaush.  Up,  3-6,  8. 


VIJNANAMAYA-KOSA. 


m 


Am.  III.] 

as  the  sense  of  speech. 

{Objection): — Then  the  ^tman  becomes  ap  ageist  in 
association  with  the  Manomaya  composed  of  the.  iaUfflP 
sense  (anta^-karawa)  and  the  external  senses.  What  pUfpowa 
does  the  Vij«anamaya  serve  ? 

Not  so;  for  on  this  principle,  one  might 
urge  that  even  the  carpenter  is  useless.  Since  the  brahmawas 
and  others  may  build  a house  with  hatchets  and  other 
implements,  the  carpenter  would  be  quite  useless.  If  the 
carpenter  is  necessary  because  of  the  absence, — in  others 
such  as  brahma«as, — of  the  requisite  knowledge  and  skill 
concerning  the  structure,  then,  here,  too,  there  is  a necessity 
for  the  Vijw^namaya  which  has  the  power  of  knowing  and 
acting  in  all  matters  of  experience.  And  this  two-fold  power 
cannot  pertain  to  ^tman,  the  real  Self,  except  by  false  im- 
putation ; and  we  say  that  an  attribute  is  falsely  imputed 
to  a thing  only  when  that  attribute  really  pertains  to  some 
other  thing.  A serpent,  for  instance,  really  exists  in  a hole, 
and  it  is  for  a serpent,  actually  existsing  in  a hole,  that  a 
rope  is  mistaken.  Accordingly,  here  too,  the  two-fold  power 
of  knowing  and  acting,  which  really  inheres  in  the  Vij/mna- 
maya,  is  falsely  imputed  to  the  pure  Conscious  Aimm, 
This  is  what  the  V^jasaneyins  mean  when  they  read  : 

“ Me  is  within  the  heart,  surrounded  by  the 
prrtwas  (senses), — the  self-luminous  Spirit 
(Purusha)  consisting  of  knowledge.  P>ecom- 
ing  equal  with  it.  He  wanders  along  the  two 
worlds,  as  if  thinking,  as  if  moving.”  ’• 

To  explain  : Purusha  (Spirit)  is  in  Himself  the  pure  self- 


^ Pri,  Up. 


4SP  BRAHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Ananda-  VallL 

luminous  Consciousness;  but,  when  in  association  with 
the  upadhi  of  the  Vijminamaya,  He  becomes  coextensive 
with ' it,  i.  e.,  limited  by  that  upadhi ; and  with  the 
wandering  upadhi,  He  Himself  wanders  through  the  two 
worlds.  Though  Purusha  does  not  Himself  wander  at 
all,  He  appears  to  wander  because  of  the  upadhi  wandering. 
Indeed  when  a pot  is  carried  from  one  place  to  another, 
the  flkasa  within  the  pot  is  carried  as  it  were  to  that 
other  place,  whereas  in  fact  the  akasa  is  not  carried  from 
the  one  place  to  the  other.  This  idea  is  clearly  conveyed 
by  the  words  “as  if.”  When  the  iip^dhi  thinks,  one 
imagines  that  the  salf-conscious  /Itman  Himself  thinks. 
Similarly,  when  the  up^idhi  moves,  one  imagines  that  the 
y4tmaa  Himself  moves.  This  wandering  of  Atman  in 
samsirra, — this  departing  (from  the  body),  going  and  return- 
ing,—as  caused  by  His  connection  with  the  upadhi,  has 
been  explained  by  the  Blessed  Badarayawa  in  the  Vedanta - 
s/^tra  (II.  iii.  29).  So  that  we  must  admit  that  even  agency 
(kar/ritva)  really  abides  in  the  upadhi  of  the  Vijwanamaya 
and  is  falsely  imputed  to  the  >4  tman.  Tlie  Vijwanamaya 
endued  with  agency  is  the  inner  self  of  the  Manomaya 
which  acts  only  as  an  instrument. 

( Objection ) The  Mfmamsa-sastra  (the  Vedanta- swtra) 
treats  of  the  Linga-sar/ra  as  made  up  only  of  the  eleven 
senses  ( including  Manas ) and  of  prawa  in  its  five  aspects  : 
No  such  principle  as  Vijwana  has  been  spoken  of  in  the 
work. 

{Ansivsr) : — Though  not  described  in  connection  with  the 
pra«as  or  senses  (II.  iv.),  still  it  has  been  discussed  in  the 
previous  section  (II.  iii.  29,  et  seq,)  as  the  principle  which 
is  the  source  of  the  imputation  of  the  attributes  of  sawsara 


.AnU.IV.]  VIJNANAMAYA-KOSA.  *451 

to  the  jjv^jtman.  Moreover,  it  is  only  by  admitting  the 
principle  of  Buddhi  or  Vij^/^ina  that  the  number  seventeen 
of  the  Lingasan’ra  can  be  made  up.  The  number  enters 
into  the  Blessed  Teacher’s  description  of  the  Linga5arira : 
“ the  primary  unquintupled  elements  of  matter  and  their 
products  make  up  the  *linga-san'ra  composed  of  seventeen 
principles,”  And  these  seventeen  principles  have  been 
enumerated  by  Visvar«pflch^irya'"  as  follows:  “ Five  organs 
of  perception  and  as  many  organs  of  action,  five  airs,  with 
Buddhi  and  Manas,  are  the  seventeen  principles,  as  they 
say.” 

{Objection) ; — Manas,  Buddhi,  Ahaw/kara,  and  Chitta, — 
these  four  are  four  different  vnttis  or  modifications  of  the 
one  antaA-karawa  or  inner  sense,  Manas  is  the  state  of 
mind  called  doubt  (sa/«saya) ; Buddhi,  is  that  known  as 
nischaya  or  determinate  knowledge ; Ahaw/kara  is  that 
known  as  Egoism ; and  Chitta  is  that  known  as  imagina- 
tion. These  vnttis  or  states  of  mind,  as  well  as  the  objects 
they  relate  to,  are  enumerated  by  the  tharvawikas  in  the 
following  words : 

“ Both  impulse  (Manas)  and  what  impulse 
must  seek,  both  reason  (buddhi)  and  what  one 
must  reason,  both  that  which  makes  things 
‘ mine  ’ and  things  that  must  be  referable  to 
‘ me,’  imagination  (chitta)  too  and  what  must 
1)8  imagined ” I 

All  these  different  states  of  mind  are  momentary,  and  arise 
only  at  different  times.  Indeed,  everybody  knows  that  one 
characteristic  feature  of  Manas  is  the  non -simultaneity  of 


* alim  Suret<var(tcliarya, 


t Prii8na*IJp,  4—8. 


BRAHMA-viDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [ Aftanda-^Valli. 

its  cognitions.  Thus,  the  Manomaya  and  the  Vijwanamaya 
are  mere  vrittis  or  states  of  mind  and  cannot  therefore  be 
regarded  as  distinct  principles  (tattvas)  like  the  Annamaya 
and  the  Praaamaya;  and  since  those  states  of  mind 
arise  at  different  moments,  it  is  not  right  to  regard  the  one 
as  informing  the  other. 

(Answer) : — You  cannot  say  so ; because,  we  hold  that, 
as  the  agent  (kartri)  and  the  instrument  (karawa)  respective- 
ly, they  are  distinct  principles.  The  four  states  of  mind 
above  referred  to — namely,  doubt,  determinate  knowledge, 
egoism,  and  imagination — are  different  functions  of  the 
instrument  (kara«a).  But  the  agent  is  quite  a different 
principle  from  the  instrument ; and  it  has  been  here  and 
there  designated  as  Vij^na  ( intelligence),  or  as  Buddhi 
(understanding),  or  as  Ahawkara  (Egoism).  The  Ka/has, 
for  instance,  designate  the  agent  as  Buddhi  in  the  following 
passage  : 

“ Know  the  Self  as  the  lord  of  the  chariot,  the 
body  as  only  the  car,  know  also  the  reason 
(buddhi)  as  the  driver,  and  the  impulse  (Manas) 
as  the  reins.  The  senses,  they  say,  are  the 
horses,  the  objects  for  them  are  the  roads.”" 

To  explain : The  Chid^ztman,  the  Conscious  Self,  is  the 
lord  of  the  chariot.  The  charioteer  is  Buddhi,  which 
is  insentient  in  itself,  the  seat  of  agency,  or  the  medium  in 
which  Consciousness  (chaitanya)  is  reflected.  Buddhi  be- 
comes sentient  when  impregnated  with  a semblance  of  the 
Chit  or  Consciousness;  and  thus  becoming  an  agent,  it  is 
independent,  and,  like  a charioteer,  controls  the  senses  by 
means  of  manas,  as  the  charioteer  controls  horses  by  means 


* Kaflia*TJ]),  1 — 3— |j,4. 


AnU.IV.]  VIJNANAMAYA-KOSA.  453 

of  reins  and  thus  drives  the  chariot  of  the  body.  Thus  Buddhi 
and  Manas  are  two  distinct  principles  (tattvas).  We  are 
further  given  to  understand  that  Buddhi  is  permanent  and 
coeval  with  Manas.  The  word  ‘ vij«ana  ’ is  also  applied 
to  the  same  thing  in  the  same  context : 

“ Aye,  the  man  who  hath  reason  (vijMna)  for 
driver,  holding  tight  unto  impulse’s  reins,  he 
reacheth  the  end  of  the  journey,  that  supre- 
me home  of  Vishnu.*’* 

In  the  same  context,  with  a view  to  shew  that  Buddhi  lies 
within  Manas,  it  is  declared  that  the  one  is  superior  to  the 
other : 

“ Beyond  the  senses  are  the  rudiments  ; be- 
yond the  rudiments,  impulsive  mind  (Manas) ; 
beyond  this  mind,  the  reason  (Buddhi)  ” t 

So  also,  when  the  teaching  of  the  Nirodha-samadhi, — the 
samadhi  which  consists  in  the  entire  suppression  of  Manas, 
as  a means  of  intuiting  the  Pratyagatman,  — the  sruti 
declares  that  Buddhi  lies  inside  Manas  : 

“ The  wise  should  sink  speech  into  mind;  this 
he  should  sink  in  tlie  j/wnatman  (reason.)”  |' 

That  is  to  say,  speech  and  other  external  senses  should  first 
be  sunk  in  the  internal  Manas.  Then  Manas  should  be 
sunk  in  the  conscious  self,  ( jnanatman ) which  lies  farther 
inward  than  even  Manas.  Here  the  term  ‘j/wnatman’  denotes 
the  Vij;^fmamaya,— not  the  Chid^itman,  the  Supreme  Con- 
scious Self ; for  the  latter  is  in  the  sequel  mentioned  as  the 
5flnta-^tman,  the  Tranquil  Self.  The  first  upadhi  in  which 


jl,Ui  1-3-9.  t : Ihiil  1-3-13. 


454  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXtK)UNDED.  [AnOnda^VolU. 

the  Supreme  Brahman,  the  True  Self  (Pratyagatman), 
eaters  into  saws^ra  or  transmigratory  existence,  is  Vijwana, 
the  next  is  Manas,  and  outside  even  this  Manas  is  Prawa. 
This  order  has  been  adopted  by  the  Vajasaneyins  in  their 
description  of  sawsara : 

“ The  self  is  indeed  Brahman  consisting  of 
reason  (vijw^na),  impulsive  mind  (inanas),life 
(pr^wa),  etc.” 

It  is  the  principle  designated  as  Vij/i^ma  or  Buddhi  that,  in 
common  parlance,  is  spoken  of  as  ‘ L’  While  explaining, 
in  His  commentary  on  the  Vedanta-swtras,  the  adhyasa  or 
false  imputation,  the  Bhashyakara  (the  Commentator,  5r^’ 
Sankartrcharya)  first  'illustrates  the  imputation  in  the  case 
of  son,  wife,  the  physical  l)ody,  the  senses  and  manas ; 
and  then,  as  a further  illustration,  he  refers  to  the  imputa- 
tion of  the  Vijwanamaya  in  the  following  words  : 

Thus  falsely  identifying  Ahampratyayin — 
the  subject  that  feels  as  ‘ I ’ — with  the  Pratya- 
gatman,  the  True  Self,  the  Witness  of  all  its 
conduct,”  etc. 

And  so  also,  when  commenting  on  the  Vedanta-s«tra  I.  i.  4, 
he  says : 

“ By  the  same  Ahawkartri  or  principle  of  Ego, 
by  the  Ahampratyayin — the  subject  that  feels 
as  ‘ I,’ — all  acts  are  accomplished,  and  he 
alone  is  the  enjoyer  of  their  fruits.” 

It  is  this  agent  and  enjoyer  or  experiencer  (kar/ri  and 
bhoktri)  that  the  [followers  of  the  Ny^iya  school  regard  as 
thejmtman.  And  theS^mkhyas  say  that  the  anta/ikara;/a 


* Bri.  Up.  4-4r~5. 


VIJNANAMAVA-KOSA. 


455 


Am.  IV.] 

is  threefold : Manas,  the  eleventh  of  the  senses,  being 
one,  Ahamkara  the  second,  and  the  principle  of  Mahat 
the  third.  They  define  Ahawkara  as  “Egoism  (abhimana).’* 
It  is  the  Ahawk^ira,  impregnated  with  a semblance  of  Chit 
or  Consciousness  (Chit-chh^iya),  which  is  here  spoken  of  as 
Vij/wnamaya.  The  Manomaya  is  penetrated  by  the  Vijwana- 
maya;  and  the  Annamaya  is  penetrated  by  the  Pra»a- 
maya  which  is  itself  penetrated  by  the  Manomaya ; so  that 
there  arises,  throughout  the  Annamaya  from  head  to  foot, 
the  notion  of  egoism,  that  “ I am  a man.” 

Contemplation  of  the  Vijnanamaya. 

With  a view  to  enjoin  the  contemplation  of  the  Vijw^na- 
maya  as  a means  of  confirming  the  notion  that  the  Vijwiina* 
maya  is  the  self,  the  5ruti  proceeds  to  describe  the  form  in 
which  it  should  be  contemplated : 

^ ^ ^ I ^ 1 wm  5^- 

I cTFT  I ^ 'T^:  I q^:  | 

%T  ^ci?r  I ||»|| 

4.  He,  verily,  this  one,  is  quite  of  man’s  shape. 
After  his  human  shape,  this  one  is  of  man’s 
shape.  Of  him  faith  surely  is  the  head,  right- 
eousness is  the  right  wing,  truth  is  the  left  wing. 
Yoga  is  the  self,  and  Maha/?  is  the  tail,  the 
support. 

He  who  has  acquired  (througfh  Vedas)  a determinate 
knowledge,  first  cherishes  faith(sraddha)as  to  the  things 
he  has  to  do.  As  faith  is  a primary  element  in  all 


456  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Auauda-V alU . 

things  to  be  done,  it  is  the  head  as  it  were  of  the 
Vijnanamaya. 

Faith  is  the  head  because  of  the  smriti  “ Whatever  is 
sacrificed,  given,  or  done,  and  whatever  austerity  is  practis- 
ed,  without  faith,  it  is  called  unrighteous,  O P^irtha ; it  is 
naught  here  or  hereafter.’*'*' 

‘ 5rat  * means  truth,  and  ‘ dha  * means  to  hold.  5raddhfl^ 
is  according  to  the  Mah^itmans,  the  conviction  that  the 
Pratyagflitman  (the  Inner  Self)  alone  is  true. — (S) 

* Righteousness  * and  ‘ truth  ’ have  been  already 
explained,  t Yoga — composure,  meditation — is  the  self, 
the  trunk  as  it  were.  As  limbs  serve  their  purposes  when 
resting  in  the  trunk,  so  it  is  only  when  a man  is  self- 
composed  by  the  practice  of  meditation  that  faith,  etc  , 
enable  him  to  acquire  a knowledge  of  the  Reality. 
Therefore,  meditation  (yoga)  is  the  self  (the  trunk)  of 
the  Vijwanamaya.  Maha//  is  the  principle  of  Mahat,  { 
the  First-born, — the  Great  Adorable  One,  the  First- 
born ” §as  the  sruti  elsewhere  says.  As  the  support  of 
the  Vij«anamaya,  Mahat  is  the  tail.  Certainly,  the 
cause  is  the  support  of  the  effects,  as  the  earth  is  the 
support  of  the  trees,  shrubs  &c.  And  the  principle  of 
Mahat  is  the  source  of  all  knowledge  possessed  by 
Buddhi.  Therefore  Mahat  is  the  support  of  the 
Vijw^mamaya  self. 


♦ Flia.  Gita  XVII.  28. 

f Vide  (ante  p.  2(5)  the  Commentary  on  ‘the  right’  and  ‘ the  true,* 
J The  Hiranyagarbha,  the  Swtra.— (Ai. 

§ Bri.  Up.  5-4-1, 


VIJNANAMAYA'KOSA. 


457 


Am.  IV. I 

The  agent  who,  as  has  been  shewn  above,  is  so  univer- 
sally recognised  by  the  Sruti,  by  the  Ny^ya  and  other 
systems  of  philosophy,  as  well  as  by  the  ordinary 
experience  of  people,  is  the  same  principle  that  we  all 
experience  in  consciousness  as  “ 1 am  the  agent”  ; and  that 
agent  is  here  spoken  of  as  the  Vijiwnamaya.  After  the 
pattern  of  the  Manomaya — represented  in  contemplation 
with  a head,  wings  and  so  on, — the  Vijw^namaya  is  of 
human  form,  represented  alike  with  a head,  wings,  etc. 
Though  faith,  etc. , are  only  vnttis  or  states  of  mind,  and 
are,  as  such,  functions  of  the  Manomaya,  vStill,  inasmuch 
as  the  Vijwanamaya  is  the  agent  and  is  therefore  the  owner 
of  the  instrument  (manas)  and  its  functions,  these  states  of 
mind  may  also  form  part  of  the  Vijw^namaya  and  may  be 
represented  as  the  head  and  so  on.  Sraddh^  is  the  highest 
faith  that  what  is  taught  by  the  teacher  and  the  scrip- 
tures is  true  and  that  the  knowledge  of  the  teaching  and 
the  means  to  that  knowledge  as  prescribed  in  the  5ruti 
are  fruitful.  ‘ Righteousness’  and  ‘ truth’  here  stand  for 
the  agency  concerned  with  those  two  states  of  mind. 
Yoga  is  the  sam^dhi  of  both  kinds,  (i)  the  samprajmita- 
sam^dhi  and  (2)  the  asampray/wta-sam^idhi — i.  e.  ,(i)the 
samrtdhi  in  which  there  still  remains  a consciousness  of  the 
distinction  as  cogniser,  the  cognised  and  cognition,  and 
(2)  the  samrzdhi  in  which  there  is  no  such  consciousness, 
the  mind  being  entirely  en  vappovi  with  the  object  of 
meditation  and  putting  on  the  form  of  that  one  object  exclu- 
sively. Yoga  is,  indeed,  defined  “as  the  restraint  of  all 
modifications  of  the  thinking  principle.”  ‘ Mahat*  here 
means  the  principle  of  Mahat,  the  Hitawyagathha,  the 


♦ Yogastitras  i,  2. 


58 


BftAHMA-vxDYA  ExtBouNBiiD.  [AnoHda-Vo^. 

first  thing  evolved  out  of  thjj  Avyakrita, — out  of  that 
UndifTarentiated  Root  of  matter  which  is  described  in  the 
sruti  ks  lying  beyond  the  Mahat.  This  principle  is  the 
aggregate  of  all  agents  presenting  themselves  in  the  cons- 
ciousness of  individual  beings  as  ‘ 1/  and  is  therefore  the 
support  of  the  Vijwanamaya.  It  is  this  principle  of 
Mahat  that  is  described  in  the  Nnsiwha-Uttara-Tapan^’ya 
as  “ The  Universal  Ego,  the  Hirawyagarbha.” 

11^  II 

[ ] 

5 On  that  as  well  there  is  this  verse  : 

Contertipiation  of  Vijnana  as  the  Hiranyagarbha. 

11  ^ II 

T%?r  m ^ I ^ I ^ I 

m I ^§1  ^ I nflRn'h  I ?r- 

flc^rr  I ^ ii’ii 

(Anuvaka  V.) 

I.  Intelligence  accomplishes  sacrifice,  and 
deeds  as  well  does  it  accomplish.  Intelligence 
do  all  Gods  worship  as  Brahman,  the  Eldest. 
If  Intelligence-as  Brahman  one  knows,  if  from 
That  he  swerves  not,  in  body  sins  forsaking,  he 
all  desires  achieves. 


• Op.  cit.  9 


4Sd 


'Anu^lV!\  vii^kAKAKiK-iL6^k. 

Just  as  there  are  verses  throwing  light  on  the 
teachings  of  the  Brahmana  concerning  the  Annamaya, 
etc. , so  there  is  a verse  concerning  the  Vij»^namaya, 

Intelligence  accomplishes  sacrifice.”  It  is  indeed  a 
man  of  intelligence  who  in  due  faith  performs  a 
sacrifice.  Hence  the  agency  of  Vijwana  or  Intelligence. 
And  it  performs  deeds  * as  well.  Because  all  is  done  by 
intelligence  (Vijwana),  therefore  the  Vij;irmamaya  selft 
is  Brahman.  All  Gods  such  as  Indra  t contemplate 
the  Intelligence-Brahman.,  who  is  the  eldest  because 
He  is  the  First-born  or  because  He  § is  the  source  of 
all  activities.  When  thus  contemplating,  they  identify 
themselves  with  the  Vij^^anamaya  Brahman.  It  is  in 
virtue  of  the  contemplation  of  this  Brahman, — the 
Mahat, — that  they  are  endued  with  higher  knowledge 
and  power  (jw^ma  and  aisvarya) , $ 

It  is  the  very  Supreme  Brahman,  wearing  of  His  own 
accord  the  coat  of  Buddhi  or  Intelligence,  that  is  here 

* i,  e, , worldly  a^ts. 

t Yijnaim  has  boon  dG-?cribGl  as  the  agont  of  all  acts,  with  a 
view  to  establissh  a point  of  similarity  between  the  Yijnfnia- 
maya  and  Brahnuiii— i.e.,  Sabrtttman,  the  Cause  of  the  universe, 
—so  that  the  for.ner  may  be  contcmpbte  1 as  0:1  o with  the  latter. 

J The  Vanamedft,  a gloss  on  tho  bhosliyn,  explains  this  to  mean 
that  the  Devas  practised  this  cjntemplatio]i  in  a former  birth 
and  have  become  DeVas  in  virtue  of  the  contemplation. 

§ as  the  Swbr:tb:nan. 

J That  is  to  say,  this  highci*  knowledge  and  power  which  they 
possess  indicates  that  Brahman  has  been  worshipped  in  their 
former  birth. 


460  BhAHiiA-viDVA  ti«*‘pui4oiD.  [Andnda-VMti* 

( 

Sp3ken  of  as  the  Intelligence-Brahman.  Buddhi  illumina- 
tes pots  and  other  objects  by  putting  itself  en  rapport  with 
them«  Accordingly  Buddhi  should  place  itself  en  rapport 
with  Brahman,  the  Absolute  Consciousness,  so  that  it  may 
illumine  Brahman. — (S).  By  speaking  of  Brahman  as 
associated  with  Buddhi,  the  sruti  shews  that  the  seeker  of 
moksha  may  easily  attain  a knowledge  of  Brahman. — (A) . 
Agni  and  other  Devas  always  worship  this  Being,  the  First- 
born, the  Intelligence-Brahman,  with  a view  to  attain 
Him.  And  the  sruti  says: 

“ He  behind  whom  the  year  (sawzvatsara-Pra- 
j^pati)  revolves  with  the  days,  Him  the  Gods 
worship  as  the  Light  of  lights,  as  immortal 
Time.  ” (S) . 

It  is  this  Intelligence  (Vij^na),  acting  as  the  agent  of  all 
works,  that  performs  the  Jyotish^oma  and  other  sacrificial 
rites.  What  intelligence  performs  is  falsely  imputed  to 
the  witness  thereof,  the  pure  Conscious  /Itman.  Similarly, 
all  worldly  acts,  such  as  those  concerned  with  industry, 
trade,  ect.,  are  achieved  only  by  Vij/wna.  This  intelli- 
gence in  the  individual,  the  agent  in  all  worldly  and 
spiritual  activities,  is  worshipped  by  Indra  and  other  Gods 
as  one  with  Brahman,  the  First-born,  the  principle  of 
Mahat  designated  as  the  Hira7^yagarbha,  whose  body  is 
the  first-born  and  therefore  the  eldest. 

“This  one,  the  Mahat,  the  First-born,  the 
Adorable”  t 

“ The  Hira/tyagarbha  came  into  existence 
first.”  1 


* Bri.  XTp.  4-1*16. 


t Ihki:  5-4-1 


t Tait-Samh»  4-1*8. 


VIJNANAMAYA-KOSA. 


461 


Am.  tv.'] 

“ He,  verily,  is  the  first  embodied  one ; He 
verily  is  called  Purusha;  Brahm^j  the  first 
creator  is  He  of  all  beings ; He  came  first 
into  being.’* 

The  fruits  of  the  contemplation  of  the 
Hiranyagarbha. 

If  a person  realises  this  Intelligence-Brahman,  and 
further,  if  after  realisation  he  never  swerves  from  that 
Brahman, — for,  it  is  possible  that,  in  virtue  of  the 
external  non-egos  having  been  long  regarded  severally 
as  the  Self,  he  may  fail,  on  occasions,  to  regard  the 
Vijw^jnamaya  Brahman  as  the  Self, — that  is  to  say,  if 
he  ceases  to  regard  as  Self  the  Annamaya  and  the  like, 
and  dwells  constantly  in  the  thought  that  the  Vijw^^na- 
maya  Brahman  is  the  Self,  then  the  following  will  be 
the  result ; In  this  body  he  abandons  sins.  Indeed, 
all  sins  arise  only  from  self-identification  with  the 
body  ; and  it  stands  to  reason  that  their  cessation 
should  be  brought  about  by  self-identification  with  the 
Vij/^anamaya  Brahman,  just  as  the  shade  is  removed 
by  the  removal  of  the  umbrella.  Accordingly  he  leaves 
in  the  body  itself  all  sins  born  of  the  body,  all  sins 
arising  from  self-identification  with  the  body,  and, 
becoming  one  in  essence  with  the  Vijwanamaya 
Brahman,  he  attains  completely  all  desires,  remaining 
all  the  while  as  the  Vij;^^inamaya  self. 

Since  the  seat  of  all  sins  is  the  body,  which  is  made  up  of 
ntima,  r«pa,  kriy^i, — names  (or  thoughts),  forms,  and  deeds, — 
the  removal  of  the  body  puts  an  end  to  all  sins*  Firm  in 


^ 4^a  &iUHiiA*vt0YA  A^rouiirDEix.  [Amnda^Valti. 

the  idea  that  am  Intelligence  and  Intelligence  alone/’  he 
deposits  all  sins  in  the  body  itself  and  attains  all  wishes. 
The  devotee,  becomes  one  with  the  Intelligence,  the  Hiran- 
yagarbha,  endued  with  all  the  wonderful  powers  of  Anima 
and  the  like ; and,  as  such,  he  attains  all  objects  of 
desire  in  the  world  of  effects,  inasmuch  as  the  world  of 
eflFects  is  pervaded  by  the  Cause,  the  Hirawyagarbha,  the 
source  of  all  fruits  of  action. — (S)  He  who,  like  Indra  and 
other  Gods,  is  devoted  to  a contemplation  of  Brahman  in 
the  upadhi  of  Vij#wna,  and  he  who,  thus  contemplating  till 
death,  never  turns  away  from  that  Brahman,  he,  that  is 
to  say,  who  never  breaks  the  continuity  of  the  thought 
that  “ I am  the  Intelligence-Brahman,”  and  who  never  feels 
like  ordinary  men  that  I am  a man,  I am  the  doer  and 
the  enjoyer,  I am  happy,  I am  miserable” — he,  while 
remaining  in  the  body,  is  rid  of  all  sins  leading  to  the 
misery  of  future  birth;  and  then,  after  enjoying  in  the 
Brahma-loka  all  pleasures,  which  he  will  compass  by 
merely  willing  them,  he  will  attain  true  knowledge  and  be 
finally  released. 

How  Brahmavldya  Is  acquired  by  persons  other 
than  the  twice  born. 

Though  Indra  and  other  Gods  have  no  occasion  to  study 
the  Veda,  any  more  than  women  and  the  5//dras,  still  they 
have  access  to  the  Brahmavidya  as  taught  in  the  Veda.  The 
5tfdras  and  women,  on  the  other  hand,  are  not  entitled  to 
receive  Brahmavidy^  through  the  Vedas,  though  it  may  be 
taught  to  them  through  the  smritis,  purawas,  and  so  on. 


♦ Vide  Minor  Upanishads  Vol,  II.  p.  135—136. 


Am.  tV!]  VIJNANAMAYA-K09A.  ' 463 

OeVas  acquire  Brahmavldya  through  the  Veda* 

(Vedrinta-s«tras  I.  iii.  26 — 33) 

{Question)', — “ Whoever  among  Devas  awoke,  he  indeed 
became  That ; and  so  with  Aishis  and  men,”  Whoever 
among  Devas  knows  Brahman,  he  becomes  Brahman. 
Now  the  question  arises,  Are  Devas  qualified  for  Brahma- 
vidya  or  not  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — It  would  seem  that  Devas,  i?ishis, 
and  the  like  are  not  qualified  for  Vidya.  It  is  said  that  a 
Vedic  command  is  meant  for  him  alone  who  seeks  the 
fruit  of  the  act  enjoined,  who  is  competent  to  observe  the 
command,  who  has  the  requisite  knowledge  to  do  the  act 
enjoined,  and  who  do2s  not  belong  to  the  class  of  persons 
specifically  excluded  by  the  scripture.  These  qualifications 
are  not  all  found  in  disembodied  beings  such  as  Devas.  It 
cannot  be  urged  that  the  Vedic  hymns  (mantras)  and  ex- 
planatory passages  (arthavadas)  speak  of  Devas  as  embodied 
beings  ; for,  these  texts  are  intended  to  point  to  what  is 
taught  in  the  main  injunction,  but  not  to  what  their  words 
literally  mean. 

{Conclusion ) : — The  arthavridas  or  explanatory  passages 
which  are  subsidiary  to  injunctions  (vidhis)  are  of  three 
kinds:  (i)  Guwa-vadas,  figurative  speech;  (2)  Anuvadas 
repetition;  {3)  Bhwtflrthavada,  narration  of  real  facts  or 
past  events.  To  explain  : The  sruti  says : “ The  sun  is 
the  sacrificial  post ;”  ‘‘  The  Sacrificer  is  the  prastara  (the 
handful  of  ku5a  grass ).”  These  texts  being  opposed  to 
observed  facts  when  literally  understood,  they  should  be 
interpreted  in  g ^gqiratiy^  sense.  The  sacrificial  post  is 

♦ Bri.  Up.  l-MO. 


BRAHMA- viDVA EXPouNDEX).  [Amndo-VaUL 


spoken  of  as  the  sun  because  of  its  lustre,  and  the  sacrifi- 
cer  is  spoken  of  as  the  ku5a  grass  because  of  his  important 
share  in  the  achievement  of  a sacrifice.  Such  passages  are 
Gu»a-v(fdas.  Again,  “ Fire  is  the  antidote  for  frost ; ” 
“ The  air  is  the  swiftest  God  : ” such  passages  as  these  re- 
peat merely  what  we  have  ascertained  from  other  sources  of 
knowledge  and  are  therefore  classed  as  Anuv^das.  “ Indra 
raised  the  vajra  (thunder-bolt)  against  Vntra;  ” since 
passages  like  this  describe  things  as  they  are  or  as  they 
happened  and  are  unopposed  to  what  we  have  learnt  from 
other  sources,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  impression 
that  what  they  teach  is  true,  so  long  as  we  admit  that  the 
Veda  is  an  independent  source  of  knowledge.  Such  passages 
as  these,  which  are  spoken  of  as  bh?/t«rthav^idas,  incident- 
ally teach  as  truths  the  ideas  which  they  convey  when  their 
words  are  construed  by  themselves,  while  their  main  pur- 
pose is  to  contribute,  to  the  meaning  of  the  main  injunctions, 
that  part  which  can  be  made  out  by  construing  together 
the  whole  sentences.  The  same  principle  applies  to  the 
mantras  or  original  chants.  Accordingly,  on  the  authority 
of  the  mantras  ( hymns ) and  the  arthavadas  ( explanatory 
and  illustrative  passages),  we  understand  that  the  Devas 
and  the  like  are  embodied  beings,  and  that,  as  such,  they 
are  competent  to  receive  instruction.  We  can  also  easily 
conceive  how,  on  seeing  that  their  own  glory  is  perishable 
and  that  there  is  a still  higher  one  beyond,  the  Devas  may 
seek  for  Brahmavidya.  Even  the  requisite  knowledge  is 
within  their  reach ; for,  though  they  neither  undergo  the 

* The  arthavrtdas  come  under  the  Brahma??*  portion  of  the 
Veda,  which  is  intended  to  explain  ihewieaaing  and  purpose  of 
the  mantras.  Vide  ante  pp.291-292. 


VtjKAKAiitAYA'kOSA. 


465 


Am*  V] 

ceremony  of  upanayana  nor  study  the  Vedas,,  still,  the  Vedas 
present  themselves  to  their  vision^  It  is  not,  therefore, 
possible  to  exclude  Devas  from  Brahmavidyt*.  It  may  be 
granted  that  the  Sagu/ta-Brahmavidy^i  (contemplation  of 
the  conditioned  Brahman ),  involving  as  it  does  the  con^ 
templation  of  a particular  Deva— as,  for  instance,  ^ditya, 
the  sun — is  not  meant  for.  that  particular  Deva,  because 
there  exists  no  other  God  of  the  same  description,  and 
because  the  state  of  ^ditya  to  be  attained  as  the  fruit  of  the 
contemplation  has  been  already  attained  by  him ; but  the 
title  of  the  Devas  to  Nirgu«a-Vidya,  to  the  contemplation 
of  the  Unconditioned,  is  beyond  all  question.  So,  Devas 
are  qualified  for  Brahmavidya. 

Is  Brahmavidya  accessible  to  the  Sudras? 

The  title  of  the  Sz/dras  (the  caste  of  labourers)  to  the 
Brahmavidys  is  discussed  in  the  Vedzrnta-szztras  (1.  iii.  34-38) 

, as  follows : 

[Question) ; — Is  the  swdra  entitled  or  not  to  instruction  in 
the  Vedic  wisdom  ? 

[Prima  facie  view): — In  the  Samvargavidyrt  occurs  a 
passage  which  reads  as  follows  : — 

“ Thou  hast  brought  these,  0 5/zdra,  that  by 
that  means  alone  thou  mayst  make  me 
speak.’ 

The  meaning  of  the  passage  may  be  explained  as  follows ! 
A certain  disciple,  named  Jzrnasruti,  approached  the  teacher 
named  Raikva  and  offered  to  him,  as  presents,  one  thous- 
and cows,  a daughter,  a necklace  of  pearls,  a car,  and  d 


♦ Chha.  Up.  4r-2— 5, 


^ BRAHiiA-viDvA  BitpotittotiD.  [Andftda-  VoUi. 

tcertain  number  of  villages.  Then  Raikva  addressed  him 
hus : ‘ ‘ O Janasruti,  O sudra,  thou  hast  brought  these 
things, — one  thousand  cows,  etc., — thinking  that,  by  thus 
presenting  the  daughter,  etc.,  to  me,  thou  wilt  please 
my  mind  and  make  me  impart  instruction.”  From  this 
passage  it  would  seem  that  even  the  s?^dra  who  is  beyond 
the  pale  of  the  three  tv;ice-born  classes  is  qualified  for 
Vedic  Wisdom ; for,  like  the  Devas  who  are  beyond  the 
pale  of  the  three  higher  castes,  the  swdra  also  may  be 
qualified  for  Brahma- Vidya,  though  he  is  beyond  the  pale 
of  the  three  higher  castes. 

ICoticlusion) : — There  is  a difference  between  Devas  and 
the  5«dras.  Though  Devas  do  not  undergo  the  process 
of  upanayana  and  adhyayana, — of  formal  initiation  and 
study, — still  the  Vedas  present  themselves  immediately  to 
their  minds  as  a result  of  good  acts  they  had  done  in  the 
past.  The  5»dra,  on  the  contrary,  has  done  no  such  deeds 
in  the  past,  and  the  Vedas,  therefore,  do  not  present  them- 
selves immediately  to  his  vision.  Neither  has  he  any  occa- 
sion to  study  the  Vedas,  inasmuch  as  he  is  not  entitled  to 
initiation  (upanayana).  In  the  absence  of  one  of  the 
qualifications  for  treading  the  path  of  Vedic  Wisdom, — 
namely,  the  rec^uisite  knowledge, — the  5i^dra  cannot  tread 
the  path. 

{Objection): — Then,  how  is  it  that  Jana^ruti,  who  is 
addressed  as  a swdra,  has  been  taught  Vedic  Wisdom  ? 

{Answer): — The  word  ‘5//dra’  as  applied  to  Jana^ruti 
should  not  be  understood  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is 
commonly  used*  The  word  should  be  understood  in  its 
etymological  sense.  It  then  means  he  who,  owing  to  the 
grief  (Sk.  ‘ juch  ’)  that  he  was  wanting  in  wisdom,  has  run 


VIJNANAMAYA-KOSA. 


467 


A'm.  V.  ] 

(6k.  ‘dru’)  to  the  teacher  to  obtain  it.  It  should  not  be  urged 
that  common  usage  should  prevail  as  against  etymology. 
For,  the  common  usage  can  convey  here  no  sense  at  all. 
In  the  whole  story  there  are  many  indications, — such  as 
the  ordering  of  the  charioteer  and  other  signs  of  wealth  and 
power, — shewing  that  J^nasruti  is  a Kshatriya. 

{Objection)', — If  the  swdra  be  not  qualified  for  Vedic 
Wisdom,  then  he  cannot  attain  inoksha  despite  his  intense 
aspiration  for  it. 

(Answer): — Not  so;  he  may  acquire  Brahmavidy^ 
through  the  smntis  and  the  pur^was  and  thereby  attain 
moksha.  Therefore  we  conclude  that  the  5//dra  is  not 
qualified  for  the  Vedic  teaching. 

The  Upasaka  liberated  before  death. 

That  the  devotee  who  has  realised  by  contemplation  the 
Sagu7ja  (conditioned)  Brahman  is  rid  of  merit  and  demerit 
even  before  death,  has  been  established  in  the  Ved^mta- 
s/dras  (III.  iii.  27-28) : 

(Question) : — Does  the  release  from  good  and  bad  karma 
take  place  after  death  or  before  it,  in  the  case  of  one  who 
has  by  contemplation  realised  Saguwa  Brahman  ? 

(Prima  facie  view) : — It  takes  place  after  death  on  the  way 
to  Brahma-loka.  The  sruti  teaches  that  it  takes  place  after 
the  crossing  of  the  river  that  lies  close  to  that  loka  : He 
comes  to  the  river  Viraja  and  crosses  it  by  the  mind  alone, 
and  there  shakes  off  his  good  and  evil  deed.”  - 

(Conclusion) : — It  is  useless  to  carry  the  '^karma  till  the 
crossing  of  the  river,  since  on  the  way  to  the  loka  there 
remains  no  fruit  to  accrue  from  the  good  and  bad  deeds, 


^ Kaushi.  Up.  1-4. 


^ brahma^vidya  bxboundbd.  [Amfula-ValH, 

the  attainment  of  Brahman  being  the  only  fruit  yet  to  be 
realised.  Moreover,  in  the  case  of  the  disembodied,  there 
could  be  no  means  whereby  to  shake  off  the  good  and 
bad  deeds— which  are  alleged  to  have  not  been  shaken 
off  before  death,— inasmuch  as  it  is  impossible  for  the 
disembodied  to  do  an  act  whereby  to  shake  them  off. 
It  cannot  be  urged  that  the  assertion  that  they  are 
shaken  off  before  death  is  unfounded ; for  the  Tawrfins 
declare  that  the  soul  shakes  them  off  as  “ the  horse  shakes 
off  the  hair.’*  On  these  considerations,  we  should  set  aside 
the  Kaush/takin’s  teaching  that  the  good  and  bad  karma  is 
shaken  off  after  the  crossing  of  the  river.  Accordingly 
we  conclude  that  it  is  before  death  that  the  upasaka  is 
released  from  his  good  and  bad  deeds. 

The  outcome  of  the  study  of  the  Vijnanamaya. 

Now  the  sruti  proceeds  to  shew  that  the  realisation  of 
the  Vijrt^inamaya  by  the  up/isaka  leads  to  the  conviction 
that  the  Manomaya  is  but  a body : 

^ ^ I ?T:  IRIl 

2.  Thereof, — of  the  former, — this  one  is  the 
self  embodied. 

Of  the  former, — i.e.,  of  the  Manomaya, — this  one, 
namely,  the  Vij7ianamaya,  is  the  self,  having  the 
Manomaya  for  his  body. 

In  ordinary  experience  we  know  that  a hatchet  or  other 
instruments  cannot  be  the  self.  So  also,  as  a mere  instru- 
ment, the  Manomaya  cannot  be  the  self  and  must  there- 
fpre  be  counted  as  a body. 


CHAPTER  XV. 
ANANDAMAYA-KOSA. 


The  nature  of  the  Anandamaya  self 

With  a view  to  teach  that  even  this  Vijnanamayakosa  is 
not  the  Self,  the  iruti  proceeds  to  teach  the  Anandamaya : 

^ ll^ll 

3.  Than  that,  verily, — than  this  one  formed 
ofVijwana, — there  is  another  self  within  formed  of 
bliss:  by  him  this  one  is  filled. 

To  bring  about  the  removal  of  the  idea  of  agency  from 
the  Self,  the  5ruti  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  i^nandamaya, — 
the  consciousness  of  the  Pratyagfitman  or  the  True  Self, 
conditioned  by  the  up^idhi  of  the  anta/?-kara;ja  manifested 
as  joy,  the  fruit  of  knowledge  and  action.  In  the  last 
chapter  the  Self  has  been  described  in  His  aspect  as  the 
agent,  under  the  designation  of  the  ^"ij//f7namaya ; and  now 
the  sruti  teaches  of  the  Self  in  His  aspect  as  the  enjoy er, 
as  the  inner  self  of  the  Vijw^namaya.  Though  pure  in 
Himself,  the  Self  becomes  the  enjoyer  by  avidya  as  He 
identifies  Himself  with  the  upadhi  of  the  Buddhi  (anta^- 
karawa) , this  latter  taking  the  form  of  love  and  so  on. — (S) 

The  Anandamaya  is  not  Brahman. 

( Objection  ) : — There  are  some  soi-disant  scholars, 


♦ The  Trittikara.— (A) 


470  BRAHMA-VIDYAEXPOUKDED.  [AmndOr-Vdli. 

who  contend  as  follows:  This  one,  the  -^^nandamaya,  is 
the  Supreme  Being  Himself ; for  (in  the  sequel)  Bhrigu 
and  Varuna  close  their  investigation  at  this  stage,  i,  e, , 
with  the  i4nandamaya.  Further,  the  sruti  often  declares 
that  Jnanda  or  bliss  is  Brahman ; and  hence,  loo,  the 
appropriateness  of  the  designation  ‘ /I  nanda-valh*’  given  to 
this  portion  of  the  Upanishad.-— (S) 

{Answer): — We  understand  that  the  j4nandamaya 
self  here  treated  of  is  one  of  the  evolved  principles, 
as  shewn  by  the  context  and  by  the  termination  “ maya.'' 
The-present  section  has,  indeed,  hitherto  spoken  of 
evolved  principles, — those  formed  of  food  and  other 
material  elements ; and  in  the  same  series  occurs  this 
one,  the  i4nandamaya.  And  here  the  termination ‘maya’ 
is  used  in  the  sense  of  product  (vikara),  as  it  undoubtedly 
is  in  ‘ Annamaya,’  that  which  is  produced  out  of  food. 
We  should  therefore  understand  that  the  i4nandamaya 
is  a product. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  we  understand  the  termination 
maya’  to  mean  ‘ abounding  in,’  the  termination  would  be 
understood  in  two  different  senses  in  the  same  context. — (S) 
And  without  resorting  to  any  such  deviation,  it  is  possible 
to  make  out  a consistent  meaning  of  the  passsge. — (A) 

And  also  because  of  (the  liberated  one)  passing  into 
it. — To  explain:  The  sruti  will  teach  (in  the  sequel) 
that  he  (who  has  realised  Brahman  as  his  own  true 
Self)  “ passes  into  the  Anandamaya  self.’^t  We  see  (in 
the  section  whence  the  passage  is  quoted)  that  it  is  only 


♦ not  the  Supreme  Brahman— fSJ,  f Tail.  Up.  2-8. 


47t 


m.  ANAKbA^tAYA-kOSA. 

into  things  outside  the  Real  Self,— only  into  the  things 
of  the  evolved  universe, — that  he  is  said  to  pass:  and 
he  passes  into  the  A nandamaya  self  in  the  same  way 
that  he  passes  into  the  Annamaya.  And  it  cannot  be 
that  he  passes  into  the  Real  Self;  because  it  would  he 
opposed  to  the  context.  * And  such  a thing  is  also  im- 
possible : it  is  not  possible  for  one  to  pass  into  one’s 
Self,  simply  because  there  is  no  duality  in  one’s  own 
Self ; and  Brahman  is  the  very  Self  of  him  that  passes. 

The  act  of  passing,  too,  spoken  of  in  the  sruti,  points  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  ^nandamaya  is  a product.  That 
all  products  pass  into  or  become  merged  in  the  Cause  is  a 
thing  which  we  all  can  understand. — To  pass  into  the 
Paramatman  must  be  either  to  pass  beyond  Him  or  to 
attain  him.  None,  indeed,  can  pass  beyond  Brahman,  the 
Supreme  Self,  as  the  sruti  itself  has  clearly  taught.  + And 
Brahman,  the  Supreme  Self,  is  already  attained,  because 
He  is  the  very  Self : /svara  never  passes  into  His  own 
Self  by  Himself ; no  athlete,  however  clever,  can  mount 
upon  his  own  shoulder. — (S) 

And  also  because  of  the  incongruity  of  representing 
the  A nandamaya  \ as  possessed  of  a head  and  so  on. — 
It  is  not  of  course  proper  to  imagine  a head  and  other 
members  in  the  One  described  above,  § who  is  the 

♦ In  that  section,  the  other  things  that  the  knower  of  Brah- 
man is  said  to  pass  into  arc  all  outside  the  Real  Self. 

t Ka/lia,  Up.  I — n. 

J alleged  to  be  identical  with  Brahman. 

§ As  the  Real,  Consciousness,  the  Infinite,  i.  e, , as  having 
no  specific  attributes  and  therefore  not  forming  an  object  of 
con  tern  phitiuu. 


4flf  BRAHUA-VtOVA  BXPOUNDBD.  [Inmda-VaUi. 

cause  of  akasa,  etc.,  who  does  not  fall  under  the 
category  of  products. — And  the  sruti  expressly  excludes 
from  Him  all  specific  attributes  in  such  passages  as  the 
followmg : 

“ Transcending  sight  and  self,  beyond 
defining,  void  of  base.”* 

Not  great,  not  small.”  t 
“ Not  thus,  not  thus.^’l 

Since  the  Supreme  Reality  is  neither  corporeal  nor  incor- 
poreal, we  cannot  imagine  Him  as  possessed  of  a head,  etc. 
Moreover,  Brahman  will  be  described  as  “ transcending 
sight  and  self”,  which  is  opposed  to  what  is  said  here  of 
the  i4nandamaya. — (S) 

And  also  because  of  the  incongruity  of  the  mantra 
quoted  here. — Since  no  doubt  can  ever  arise  as  to  the 
existence  of  Brahman  if  He  were  identical  with  the 
-dnandamaya  self  that  is  immediately  experienced  as 
composed  of  love  and  other  parts,  w'e  cannot  explain 
why  the  sruti  quotes  the  mantra  “Non-being  verily 
does  one  become  if  he  doth  Brahman  as  non-being 
know.”  § 

Since  the  ^nandamaya  has  a definite  form,  there  is  no 
room  for  doubt  as  to  its  existence.  The  sruti  speaks  of  a 
doubt  as  to  the  existence  of  Brahman,  and  therefore  Brah- 
man is  not  identical  with  the  /4nandamaya. — (S  & A). 

Further,  it  would  be  incongruous  to  speak  of  Brah- 
man as  the  support,  i.  c.,  as  something  distinct  (from 


♦ Tai.  Up.  2-7. 

J Bri.  Up.  2-3-6. 


t Bri.  Up.  3-8-8. 
§ Tai.  Up.  2-6. 


AKAMDAMAYA'ROSA. 


m 


the  ^nandamaya)— in  the  words  ‘‘Brahman  is  the  tail, 
the  support.”  • 

Therefore,  the  ^nandamaya  falls  under  the  category 
of  products ; it  is  not  the  very  Supreme  Self. 

Bhngu’s  closing  of  the  investigation  with  the 
maya  can  be  explained  even  on  the  theory  that  the  . 
maya  is  a product. — Brahman  is  first  described  in  the 
i4nandavalU’.  And  then  with  a view  to  teach  the  means  of 
realising  Him,  the  sruti  makes  Bhngu  ask  Varuwa  “ Teach, 
Brahman,  O Lord.”  Brahman,  the  end,  having  been  already 
explained,  the  means  of  attaining  the  end  remains  to  be 
taught.  And  these  means  are  the  five  kosas  (sheaths), 
because  it  is  by  an  (investigation  of)  these  ko^as  that  one 
attains  Brahman.  By  anvaya  and  vyatireka, — by  the 
method  of  conjoint  presence  and  absence, — applied  to  the 
five  kosas,  thei4tmanis  realised;  and  they  are  therefore 
regarded  as  the  means  of  attaining  Brahman.  Thus,  the 
-^nandavalU' having  explained  the  end, -^namely,  the  unity 
of  the  Self  and  Brahman, — and  the  Bhnguvalh  having  to 
concern  itself  only  with  the  teaching  of  the  means  of  attain- 
ing that  end,  it  is  but  right  that  Bhngu  should  close  the 
investigation  with /I  nanda,  which  is  the  last  step  on  the 
path  of  investigation. — (S) 

{Objection) : — The  Bhrigu-valh  does  not  enjoin  the  inves- 
tigation of  Brahman.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  concerned 
with  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  Himself.  Hence  the  refer- 
ence at  the  outset  (upakrama)  to  the  knowledge,  in  the  pass- 
age “The  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the  Supreme.” — (S) 

(Answer):^ A person  can  be  commanded  to  do  only  that 

6o 


474  B^tpoUNDi^D.  [Ananda^  Valli . 

thing  which  altogether  depetids  on  his  will.  But  the  right 
knowledge  of  Brahman  does  not  altogether  depend  on  any 
one’s  will.  .The.  connection  of  the  Bhngu-valk‘  with  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman — spoken  of  at  the  outset  in  the 
words  “ The  knower  of  Brahman  reaches Jhe  Supreme” — 
may  be  explained  as  merely  pointing  to  the  relation  between 
knowledge  and  investigation  as  the  end  and  the  means. — (S) 

Accordingly  Varuwa  has  taught  to  Bhngu  only  the  five 
kosas  as  the  means  by  which  to  realise  the  nature  of  Brah- 
man described  in  the  ^nanda-vali/;  and  as  the  remainder, — 
namely,  the  real  nature  of  Brahman  to  be  realised — can  be 
known  from  the  passages  where  it  is  described,  Bhrigu 
stopped  his  investigation  with  ^nanda,  the  fifth  kosa;  but 
not  because  he  ever  meant  that  the /I  nandamaya  is  Brah- 
man.— (S) 

We  even  grant  that  the  ^nancfa,  last  spoken  of  in  the 
Bhrigu-valli,  is  identical  with  the  Supreme  Brahman.  Who 
has  ever  denied  that  the  Bliss  (^nanda)  which  in  its  nature 
admits  of  no  difference  wrhatever  is  the^same  as  Brahman? 
Bliss  is  verily  the  essential  nature  of  the  Supreme  Self 
(Paramatman).  But  that  bliss  which  manifests  itself  as  love 
and  so  on  cannot  be  identical  with  the  Supreme  Brahman. 
We  call  that  Bliss  Brahman,  in  which  such  distinctions 
as  love  and  so  on  have  no  place,  and  which  is  quite  beyond 
the  reach  of  manas.  As  the  five  kosas  have  been  excluded 
from  Brahman  as  having  their  origin  in  ajwana,  it  does 
not  stand  to  reason  to  identify  the  ^ nandamaya-kosa  with 
that  Bliss  which  is  beyond  the  reach  of  thought  and 
word. — (S)  Just  as  the  other  kosas,  such  as  the  Annamaya 
which  are  products  evolved  from  Brahman,  are  permeated 
by  Brahman,  the  Supreme  Bliss,  so  also  is  the 


ANANDAMAYA-KDSA. 


475- 


Am.  F.] 

maya  permeated  by  the  Supreme  Bliss  and  hence  spoken 
of  as  ^nandamaya  evolved  from  ^nanda. — (S) 

Therefore  the  ^nandamaya  self  here  spoken  of  is  the 
self  associated  with  an  up^idhi,  with  the  upadhi  of  Buddhi 
manifesting  itself  in  the  form  of  love  and  so  on  as  the 
result  of  thought  and  action. — (S) 

The  bliss  (^nanda)  here  spoken  of  is  the  happiness 
which  results  from  thought  and  action.  Formed  of  this 
bliss-stuff  is  the  A nandamaya.  And  this  lies  within 
the  Vijwanamaya,  because  the  sruti  declares  that  it  lies 
within  the  Vijnanamaya,  the  source  of  all  sacrificial 
rites  and  the  like.  The  result  of  all  thought  and  action 
being  indeed  meant  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  enjoyer, 
it  must  lie  within  the  Vij/^anamaya,  the  source  of  all 
sacrificial  rites  And  so  the  A nandamaya  self  must  lie 
in  the  innermost  recesses  of  the  former  kosas.  Further, 
Vidya  (upasana,  contemplation)  and  karma  are  intend- 
ed to  secure  love  and  other  forms  of  bliss.  It  is  a fact, 
indeed,  that  the  object  of  all  contemplation  and  action 
is  to  secure  love]  and  other  (forms  of  happiness). 
Therefore,  since  love  and  other  ( forms  of  happiness  ) 
resulting  ( from  thought  and  action  ) are  very  .near  to 
the  Self,  it  is  but  proper  to  say  that  this  ^nandamaya 
is  within  the  Vij;mnamaya.  And,  indeed,  the^lnanda- 
maya,  made  up  of  the  v^zsanas  ( latent  impressions  ) of 
love  and  other  forms  of  happiness,  presents  itself  to 
consciousness  in  svapna  (dream)  in  association  with  the 
Vijwanamaya. 

is  to  S3»y,  t!i3  enjoy 3r  go  nes  after  the  agent,'— (A) 


476  BRAHUAvjm  BXFovKBBD.  [Amndo^V^L 

Being  thus  an  object  witnessed  in  svapna  by  the 
Pratyagatman,  this  ^nandamaya  cannot  be  Brahman 
Himself— (S  & A). 

The  bliss  of  the  Anandamaya-kosa« 

Bliss  is  the  essential  nature  of  the  Supreme  Brahman  as 
declared  by  the  sruti  in  the  words  “ Bliss  as  Brahman  he 
knew ; ” * “ Consciousness  and  Bliss  is  Brabman.”t  A 
form  (vikara)  of  this  Bliss  is  the  -^nandamaya,— the  aggre- 
gate of  love,  joy,  etc.,— to  be  mentioned  below.  It  is  true 
that  the  Bliss  which  is  identical  with  Brahman  undergoes 
no  change ; still,  as  akasB.  is  imagined  to  undergo  limitation 
through  the  upadhi  or  medium  of  pots,  etc.,  so  in  the  case 
of  Bliss  we  may  imagine  a limitation  through  the  sattvic 
vnttis  of  antaA-karafia,  through  the  states  of  the  mind  in  its 
purity ; and  in  virtue  of  this  limitation  Bliss  puts  on  the 
form  of  love,  joy  and  so  on.  This  i4nandamaya  self  is 
interior  to,  and  is  quite  distinct  from,  the  Vij/wnamaya 
looked  upon  as  the  agent  in  all  actions.  By  this  -^nanda- 
maya  is  filled  the  Vijminamaya  described  before.  Just  as 
motion  which  is  a function  of  Pr^wa  is  experienced  through- 
out the  body  permeated  by  the  IVawamaya,  just  as  senti- 
ency  or  sensation  (jmma-sakti)  which  is  a function  of  manas 
is  experienced  throughout  the  body  which  is  endued  with 
Prana  and  permeated  by  the  Manomaya,  and  just  as  the 
consciousness  of  agency—**  I am  the  doer  is  experienced 
throughout  the  body  which  is  endued  with  both  Prana  and 
Manas  and  permeated  by  the  VijMnamaya,  so  also  special 
forms  of  pleasure  are  experienced  throughout  the  whole 
body,— in  the  hands,  feet,  etc.,— which  are  endued  with 


t Tait.  Up.  3-6. 


t Bri.  Up.  3-9-28, 


Am.  V.]  ANANDAMAYA-KOSA,  477 

Vijttunar  Manas  and  Praaa,  and  permeated  by  the  Luanda- 
maya.  This  is  the  idea  conveyed  by  saying  that  the 
Vijwanamaya  is  permeated  by  the  ^nandamaya. 

{Objection) : — Like  pleasure,  pain  also  is  experienced  in 
the  hands  and  other  parts  of  the  body, 

{Answer) : — What  if  it  be  experienced  ? It  is  experienced 
by  reason  of  the  body  being  permeated  by  the  Manomaya, 
which  gives  rise  to  the  state  of  pain.  Pain  is  a property  of 
the  Manomaya,  and  pleasure  is  a property  of  the  -Inanda- 
maya  as  will  be  clearly  explained  in  the  sequel. 

Bliss  is  a positive  state. 

Now  we  have  to  discuss  the  question,  what  is  inanda  or 
pleasure  ? Is  it  a mere  cessation  of  pain,  or  is  it  a positive 
state  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — At  first  it  may  be  supposed  that 
pleasure  is  a mere  cessation  of  pain,  inasmuch  as  sensation 
of  pleasure  is  felt  on  the  cessation  of  the  pain  caused  by 
hunger,  thirst  and  sickness, 

{Objection) : — Pleasure  is  a positive  state  in  itself ; only 
it  is  lost  sight  of  during  the  existence  of  pain,  the  opposite 
state ; so  that,  if  pleasure  should  manifest  itself,  it  is 
necessary  that  pain  should  cease.  Thus  since  the  manifest- 
ation of  pleasure  and  the  disappearance  of  pain  are  simul- 
taneous, the  one  is  mistaken  for  the  other. 

( Answer ) : — No.  On  being  rid  of  fever,  we  have  no 
experience  of  any  positive  state  of  pleasure  apart  from  the 
cessation  of  pain.  Therefore,  pleasure  is  nothing  but  the 
cessation  of  pain. 


478  BRAHMAVIDW  EXPOUNDED.  [AnandO^VtlUi, 

{Conclusion) As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  follows: 
we  conclude  that  pleasure  is  a positive  state  because  of  the 
consciousness  of  pleasure,  experienced  on  hearing  all  on  a 
sudden  the  musical  strain  of  a lute  when  there  is  no  conscious* 
ness  of  pain  preceding.  But  if  pleasure  were  a mere  nega* 
tive  state,  it  should  be  felt  as  the  absence  of  some  pain,  and 
the  consciousness  should  therefore  include  a memory  of 
that  pain,  since  every  consciousness  of  a negative  state, — 
such  as  the  absence  of  a pot,  the  absence  of  a cloth, — 
includes  the  consciousness  of  the  thing  that  is  absent.  This 
point  has  been  well  established  by  the  teachers  of  old. 
Thus,  because  pleasure  is  presented  to  mind  without  any 
reference  to  pain,  it  is  not  the  mere  cessation  of  pain.  That 
which  is  presented  to  mind  without  reference  to  pain,-— as 
for  example,  a pot— cannot  be  the  absence  of  pain. 

Or,  pleasure  is  a positive  state  because,  like  pain,  it 
admits  of  higher  degrees  of  intensity  and  these  higher 
degrees  of  intensity  of  pleasure  will  be  enumerated  later  on 
at  length  when  dealing  with  the  pleasure  of  an  emperor,  etc. 

Theories  of  pleasure. 

Having  thus  determined  that  bliss  is  a positive  state,  we 
have  now  to  discuss  the  following  point : what  is  bliss  ? Is 
it  an  act  ? Or  a quality  ? Or  a reflection  of  something  else  ? 
Is  it  a conditioned  form  of  something?  Or  is  it  uncondi- 
tioned and  independent? 

{Prima  facie  vietv)  \ — At  first  sight  it  may  seem  that  it 
is  of  the  nature  of  an  act ; because  the  word  ‘ ananda  * is 
derived  from  the  verb  ‘ nad,*  to  be  pleased.  And  when  the 
Kaushitakins,  enumerating  the  organs  of  action,  speak  of 
the  organ  of  generation,  they  include,  in  the  scope  of  its 


AnandaMaya-kosa. 


Am.  V.] 


47$ 


activity,  the  act  of  enjoying : “ Having  by  consciousness 
taken  possession  of  the  organ  of  generation,  he  obtains 
enjoyment,  amusement  and  offspring.”  Here  the  word 
* enjoyment  ’ denotes  the  union  of  the  several  parts  of  the 
bodies  in  contact,  pervaded  throughout  by  the  activity 
called  enjoyment  (ananda-kriya)  produced  by  the  organs 
of  generation.  ‘Amusement*  is  the  pastime  that  is  the 
natural  concomittant  of  the  union ; the  offspring  is  the 
generation  of  children  which  is  the  result  of  the  union. 
Just  as  speaking  and  other  kinds  of  activity  are  generated 
by  the  sense-organ  of  speech  and  the  like,  so  also  enjoying 
is  a kind  of  activity  generated  by  the  sexual  organ. 
Accordingly  the  S^mkhyas  say : “ Speaking,  taking,  walking, 
excreting  and  enjoying  are  the  functions  of  the  five 
organs.”  f And  the  Jtharvawikas  have  also  declared  the 
objects  reached  by  these  organs  of  action  along  with  their 
activities  mentioned  above : 


“ Both  voice  and  what  must  be  voiced,  both 
hands  and  what  one  must  handle,  both  organ 
of  joy  and  what  must  be  enjoyed,  both  organ 
of  voiding  and  what  must  be  voided,  both 
feet  and  what  must  be  footed.”  + 

This  act  of  enjoying  generated  by  the  sexual  organ  should 
properly  be  included  in  the  Manomaya,  and  it  is  not  there- 
fore right  to  speak  of  the  ^nandamaya  as  something 
interior  to  Vij/mnamaya. 

{Conclmion) No,  because  by  ‘anaiida*  we  mean  here 


♦ Kaiishi.  Up.  8—6.  t Sahkliya-Karikas.  28, 

{ Pra«ha-Up.  4—8. 


4Sq  bsarmayidya  sxpovhdbd.  [Anandif-VaUl 

something  difierent  from  the  act  of  enjoying  you  have 
referred  to.  As  to  the  nature  of  this  ^nanda  different  views 
are  held  by  difierent  schools  of  philosophers. 

According  to  the  Vaiseshikas,  ananda  or  pleasure  is  a 
momentary  aflection  produced  in  the  ^tman  by  contact 
with  Manas, — the  ^tman  or  Soul  being  himself  the  doer 
and  the  enjoyer.  They  hold  that  the  nine  affections — such 
as  understanding,  pleasure,  pain,  desire,  etc., — are  charac- 
teristic attributes  of  the  ^tman. 

The  S^inkhyas  hold  as  follows : The  ^^tman  being  free 
from  all  ties,  desire  and  other  affections  are  only  modifica- 
tions (parhwma)  of  the  three  Gu»as  of  Praknti.  Pleasure  is 
a modification  of  the  Sattva-guwa,  activity  is  a modification 
of  the  Rajo-gufta,  and  error  is  a modification  of  the  Tamo- 
gu«a.  And  accordingly  the  Lord  has  said : 

“ Sattva  attaches  one  to  pleasure,  Rajas  to 
action,  O descendant  of  Bharata;  while, 
veiling  knowledge,  Tamas  attaches  one  to 
error.” 

Some  followers  of  the  Ny^iya  system  hold  as  follows : 
The  sensual  pleasure  is  a mere  pain  because  of  its  associa- 
tion with  pain.  What  with  the  trouble  of  securing  the 
objects  of  pleasure,  what  with  the  different  degrees  there 
are  of  pleasure,  and  what  with  its  liability  to  destruction, 
one  can  easily  see  that  sensual  pleasure  is  necessarily 
associated  with  pain.  But  in  the  state  of  liberation  (moksha) 
;he  eternal  bliss  which  is  an  inherent  attribute  of  ^tman 
is  perceived  in  consciousness,  which  is  likewise  an  inherent 
attribute  of  w4tman.  Moksha  is  therefore  an  object  of 
aspiration. 


* Bhag.  Gita  XIV,  9. 


Am.V.] 


ai^andauava-kosa. 


481 


The  Vedantin’s  theoiy  of  pleasure. 

The  Vaweshika  and  other  theories  of  pleasure  which 
have  been  just  described  are  founded  on  human  speculation. 
But  the  sruti  has  declared  that  the  sensual  pleasure  is  but 
a chip  of  that  eternal  Bliss  which  forms  the  very  being  of 
the  Self  and  which  is  an  entity  by  itself.  The  sruti  says : 

“ This  is  His  highest  Bliss ; all  other  creatures 
live  on  a small  portion  of  that  Bliss.” 

While  giving  expression  to  his  wisdom,  a certain  Yogin 
has  stated  this  truth  in  the  following  words : 

Abiding  all  the  while  in  the  midst  of  the  milk- 
ocean  of  bliss,  I have  foolishly  spent  all  this 
time,  tasting  only  such  drops  of  the  ocean  as 
come  forth  from  the  fire  of  the  sense-objects.” 

This  chip  of  Bliss  may  be  either  a reflection  of  the  original 
Bliss,  or  a bit  of  it  chopped  off.  The  theory  of  Reflection 
has  been  stated  by  the  teachers  of  old  as  follows  : 

‘‘Now  we  shall  discuss  the  sensual  pleasure 
which  contains  within  it  a portion  of  Brahman’s 
Bliss,  and  which  forms  the  gateway  to  it.  The 
sruti  has  declared  that  the  sensual  pleasure  is 
a bit  of  Brahman’s  Bliss; — that  the  Supreme 
Bliss,  which  is  one  indivisible  homogeneous 
essence,  is  of  this  Self,  that  all  other  crea- 
tures enjoy  but  a portion  of  this  Bliss. 

“ Manas  is  subject  to  three  kinds  of  states  : 
namely,  tranquil  (santa),  violent  (ghora),  erring 


^ BW.  Up.  4— 3— <32* 


fit 


4la  BRAHUA-vim  BXPouMDiD.  [Afumdo-VaiU. 

(mMihk.)  The  tranquil  states  are  dispassion 
(vairag)ra),  endurance,  generosity,  and  so  on. 

The  violent  states  are  thirst,  fondness,  attach- 
ment, covetousness,  and  so  on.  The  erring 
states  are  delusion,  fear,  etc.  In  all  these 
states  of  mind  Brahman's  Consciousness  is 
reflected,  while  in  the  tranquil  states  of  mind 
His  Bliss  as  well  is  reflected.  The  sruti  says 
that  ‘ He  becomes  in  form  like  to  the  various 
forms.’ 

“ The  Ved^nta-stttra  (III.  ii.  i8)  compares 
Brahman’s  manifestations  in  the  various  forms 
to  the  reflected  images  of  the  sun.  ‘ The  Self 
of  all  creatures  is  one  alone,  and  He  appears  in 
one  and  many  ways  like  the  moon  in  water.’! 

The  image  of  the  moon  is  imperfect  when 
reflected  in  dirty  water,  whereas  it  is  quite 
perfect  when  reflected  in  clear  water.  Similar- 
ly, Brahman  reflected  in  mental  states  is  of 
two  sorts.  Owing  to  the  impurity  of  the 
violent  and  erring  states  of  mind,  Brahman’s 
bliss  is  unmanifested  in  them,  while,  owing  to 
their  partial  purity,  His  consciousness  is  re- 
flected in  them.  Or,  to  illustrate  more  aptly  ; 

It  is  only  the  heat,  not  the  light,  of  fire  that 
passes  into  water,  however  pure  it  may  be ; 
similarly,  consciousness  alone  is  manifested  in 
the  violent  and  erring  states  of  mind.  On  the 
other  hand,  both  the  heat  and  the  light  of  fire 


* Jiatha-Up. 


t Brahraabindu'ITp, 


ANANDAMAYA-KOSA. 


Am.  V.] 


489 


pass  bto  a piece  of  wood ; and,  just  so,  both 
Consciousness  and  Bliss  are  manifested  in  the 
tranquil  states  of  mind.” 

Thus  the  theory  of  Reflection  has  been  described.  Now  as 
to  the  theory  of  Separation.  That  bliss  which  constitutes 
the  essential  being  of  the  jeVatman,  and  which  is  self- 
manifested  in  the  upadhis  or  vehicles  of  Consciousness — 
the  body,  the  senses,  etc., — is  the  bliss  that  has  been 
chopped  oflF,  as  it  were,  from  Brahman.  As  the  object  of 
highest  love,  j/v^tman  is  bliss  itself.  That  the  bliss  is  the 
essential  being  of  the  j/v^tman  and  that  he  is  the  object  of 
highest  love  is  declared  by  the  Vrijasaneyins  as  follows  : 

“This  Self,  who  is  nearer  to  us  than  anything, 
is  dearer  than  a son,  dearer  than  wealth,  dearer 
than  all  else.”  -f 

This  Self, — who  is  immediately  experienced  in  the  notion 
‘ here  I am,”  who  is  the  witness  of  the  body,  senses, 
etc., — this  self  is  the  innermost  principle  of  our  being  ; and 
surely  it  is  dearer  than  wealth,  sons  and  all  else, — these 
being  of  varying  degrees  of  nearness.  These  varying  degrees 
of  nearness  are  explained  by  the  V^zrtikak^ra  as  follows  : 

“ Sons  are  dearer  than  wealth  ; dearer  than  sons 
is  one’s  own  body  ; the  senses  are  dearer  than 
the  body;  and  pra«a  is  dearer  than  the  senses; 
dearer  even  than  prawa  is  the  Self  beyond.” 

Wealth  and  other  things  which  are  outside  the  Self  are 
objects  of  love  because  of  their  being  subservient  to  the 
Self.  But  love  for  the  Self  is  the  highest  because  it  is 


* Vedaiita-Panchadasi,  XV.  1 — 11. 
f Bri.  Up.  1— 


4.84  BRAHMA.V1DYAB»00ND8D.  [Amnda-Valll 

absolute.  All  this  has  been  illustrated  in  the  Maitreyi- 
Br^rhmafia  by  many  examples  such  as  the  following : 

“Verily,  a husband  is  dear  to  one,  not 
because  of  love  for  the  husband;  but,  because 
of  the  love  for  the  Self,  the  husband  is  dear.** 

And  ail  the  examples  mentioned  in  this  connection  have 
been  compiled  by  a writer  as  follows  : 

“ A husband,  a wife,  a son,  wealth,  cattle, 
Brahmawas,  Kshatriyas,  worlds,  Devas, 

Vedas,  creatures — all  these  are  beloved  for 
the  sake  of  the  Self.” 

As  the  object  of  genuine  love,  the  Self  is  in  his  essential 
nature  the  true  Bliss  itself  ; and  as  dwelling  in  each  body 
:eparately,  the  Bliss-i4  tman  becomes  divided  as  it  were. 
As  the  genuine  Bliss,  the  Bliss-^tman  is  the  original, 
whose  reflections  enter  into  tranquil  states  of  the  mind 
-when  thinking  of  agreeable  objects  such  as  wealth,  sons, 
etc.  These  reflections  are  as  false  as  the  images  reflected 
in  water  or  in  a mirror  ; and  though  the  bliss  which  has 
become  separated  by  the  upadhis  is  real,  still,  it  has  the 
fault  of  limitation.  Consequently,  neither  the  reflected 
image  of  Bliss  nor  its  detached  bits  can  constitute  the 
genuine  Bliss.  On  the  contrary,  that  Bliss  is  real  which 
constitutes  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman,  and  which  is 
not  subject  to  any  kind  of  limitation.  Accordingly  in  the 
dialogue  between  N^rada  and  Sanatkumara,  the  Chhan- 
dogas  declare  as  follows : 

“ « This  bliss,  however,  we  must  seek 

to  know.* 


♦ Bri,  Up.  2-4-5. 


AnU»  V.]  ANANDAMAYA-KOSA.  485 

‘ Sir,  I desire  to  know  the  bliss.* 

* The  Infinite  is  bliss.  There  is  no  bliss  in  the 
finite.  The  Infinite  alone  is  bliss,  and  the 
Infinite  alone,  verily,  we  must  seek  to  know’ 

* Sir,  I desire  to  know  the  Infinite.’ 

‘ Where  one  sees  nothing  else,  hears  nothing 
else,  cognises  nothing  else,  that  isthe  Infinite. 

Where  one  sees  something  else,  hears  some- 
thing else,  cognises  something  else,  that  is 
the  finite.  The  Infinite  is  immortal,  and 
the  finite  is  mortal.’” 

Narada  asked  Sanat-Kurniira  how  he  might  reach  the 
end  of  grief ; and  the  latter  said  that,  to  reach  the  end  of 
grief,  the  real  nature  of  bliss  should  be  investigated. 
Narada  undertook  to  investigate  it,  and  the  master 
taught  him  that  the  Bhwman,  the  Infinite,  was  Bliss. 
“ Bh.vman”  means  infinity.  It  has  been  said  above  that 
since  neither  the  context  nor  any  accompanying  word  sug- 
gests a limitation  in  its  literal  sense,  the  word  ‘ Brahman’ 
denotes  absolute  or  unlimited  greatness.  So  here,  too,  the 
word  ‘ Bhwman’  means  absolute  infinity.  We  see  that, 
people  find  pleasure,  not  in  limited  wealth,  but  only  in  the 
vastness  of  wealth.^  So,  the  Infinite  is  Bliss,  and  certain- 
ly the  Infinite  alone  should  be  investigated.  Seeing  that 
Nflrada  was  prepared  for  the  investigation,  Sanat-kumara 
defined  the  Infinite  in  the  words  “ Where  one  sees  nothing 
else,”  etc.  In  our  ordinary  experience,  one  sees  colour  by 
the  eye,  one  sees  something  distinct  from  oneself.  This 


* Cbha.  Up.  7—23—1. 


4^^  BRAHMA-vioYA  BXPouNPEP.  [Amnda-VoUl. 

is  one  aspect  of  the  tripu/i  or  triple  consciousness,  made  up 
of  the  seer,  what  is  seen,  and  the  act  of  seeing.  There  are 
other  aspects : such  as  the  one  made  up  of  the  hearer, 
what  is  heard,  and  the  act  of  hearing;  the  one  made  up  of 
the  cogniser,  what  is  cognised,  and  the  act  of  cognising ; 
and  so  on.  That  which  does  not  admit  of  triple  con- 
sciousness in  any  one  of  its  aspects  is  the  Infinite.  The 
triple  consciousness  in  its  several  aspects  obtains  only  in 
forms  set  up  by  Maya  ; and  all  such  forms  are  finite.  Of 
the  two,  the  Infinite  is  imperishable  and  the  finite  is 
perishable.  The  finite  things  in  this  universe  of  duality 
contain  seeds  of  pain  and  are  therefore  painful  in  their 
nature  ; whereas  the  Infinite,  the  Non-dual,  is  devoid  of  all 
seeds  of  pain  and  is  therefore  Bliss  itself.  This  Infinite, 
in  Its  genuine  nature  as  Bliss,  is  felt  in  the  sushupti  and 
samadhi  states  in  which  the  triple  consciousness  is  al- 
together absent.  But  on  awaking  from  sushupti  and 
samadhi,  e,,  in  the  j^grat  and  vyutth^ma  states  which 
are  associated  with  triple  consciousness,  the  universe  of 
finite  objects,  embraced  in  the  consciousness  of  the  ordi- 
nary world,  is  experienced  in  its  painful  nature  by  the 
enlightened  sage  as  well  as  by  the  unenlightened  man  of  the 
world.  Thus  as  they  are  mixed  with  pain,  both  the 
limited  bliss,  which  constitutes  the  essential  nature  of  the 
j/va,  and  the  reflections  thereof  in  the*  mental  states  are 
not  genuine.  The  Infinite  alone  is  the  genuine  Bliss, 

Contemplation  of  the  Anandamaya. 

Now  the  sruti  proceeds  to  teach  of  the  form  in  which  the 
.Inandamaya,— which  is  a vik^ira  or  modified  form  of  the 
genuine  Bliss  just  described,  composed  of  love,  joy  and 


AKANDAMAYA'KOSA. 


Am.  V.] 


4«y 


other  forms  of  Bliss — should  be  contemplated,  so  that 
the  conviction  that  the  ^nandamaya  is  the  self  may  be 
strengthened. 


I m I ^ W.  I 

W>  I 3TI?K  3TRflI  I m 5%  ste  1)811 

4.  He,  verily,  this  one,  is  quite  of  man’s 
shape.  After  his  human  shape,  this  one  is  of 
man’s  shape.  Of  him,  love  itself  is  the  head, 
joy  is  the  right  wing,  delight  is  the  left  wing, 
bliss  is  the  self.  Brahman  is  the  tail,  the  support. 

Love,  which  springs  up  at  the  sight  of  a beloved  son 
and  the  like,  is  the  head,  as  it  were,  of  the  A nandamaya 
self,  because  of  its  prominence.  Joy  is  the  exultation 
caused  by  the  acquisition  of  a beloved  object.  The 
same  exultation  raised  to  a high  pitch  is  called  delight. 

The  ^4  nandamaya,  lying  within  the  Vij^namaya,  is  none 
other  than  he  who  feels  “ 1 am  happy,  I am  the  enjoyer.’* 
After  the  pattern  of  the  Vij;wnamaya,  made  up  of  a head, 
&c.,  the  J nandamaya,  too,  is  of  human  form.  Love,  joy 
and  delight  are  reflections  of  Bliss  manifested  in  the 
S<ittvic  states  of  mind.  Delight  is  caused  by  the  benefit 
derived  from  a beloved  object. 


Bliss  is  happiness  in  general;  and  it  is  the  self,  * as 


• i 6.,  the  centre. 


4^  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPOUNDED.  [Amtlda-^V (Uli^ 

it  were,  of  love  and  other  forms  of  bliss,  because  it 
runs  through  them  all.  Bliss  (Jlnanda)  * is  the 
Supreme  Brahman.  And  this  Bliss  is  manifested  is 
that  state  of  mind  (antaA-kara;^a)  which  is  brought 
about  when  sons,  friends,  or  such  other  objects  of 
regard,  are  presented  to  consciousness  in  virtue  of 
good  karma,  when  the  veil  of  Tamas  ^darkness)  has 
been  lifted  and  the  mind  is  tranquil. 

Under  the  action  of  Dharma,  darkness  vanishes  from 
Buddhi.  The  more  does  it  vanish,  the  more  is  the  Buddhi 
self-collected,  and  the  greater  is  the  happiness. — (S) 

This  is  what  is  known  among  people  as  the  sensual 
pleasure  (vishaya-sukha).  And  this  pleasure  is  imper- 
manent because  the  karma  which  brings  about  such  a 
state  of  mind  is  impermanent 

As  the  anta/j-kara?m  is  more  purified  by  austeri- 
ty (tapas)  which  is  calculated  to  dispel  darkness,  by 
contemplation  ividya),  by  chastity  and  pious  devotion 
(brahma-charya\  and  by  reverential  faith  (sraddh^),  it 
becomes'  more  and  more  free  (from  Tamas)  and  be- 
comes more  and  more  tranquil ; and  then  the  Bliss 
manifests  itself  in  a higher  and  higher  degree  and 
expands  more  and  more.  The  sruti  says  in  the  sequel : 

“ Nectar,  indeed,  is  he.  Nectar,  indeed, 
possessing,  he  becomes  a thing  of  Bliss.^t 


* which  is  devoid  of  all  duality. — (S; 
t Tait.  Up.  2^(5. 


AI^AKDAMAYA-KOSA. 


489 


Am. 

. “He,  verily,  it  is  who  bestows  bliss.”  * 

“All  other  creatures  live  on  a small  por- 
tion of  that  bliss.”  t 

Thus  bliss  is  of  different  degrees  of  intensity,  owing  to  the 
variety  of  karma  producing  it.— (S) 

The  bliss  here  referred  to  is  that  which  is  reflected  in 
ajwana,  the  upadansL  or  material  cause  of  the  vrittis  or 
vehicles  of  consciousness  described  above.  Or,  it  may  be 
that  the  limited  bliss,  forming  the  essential  nature  of  the 
jivtJtman,  the  original  counterpart,  is  reflected  in  the  vehicles 
described  above,  (namely,  love,  joy,  delight,  etc.). 

Accordingly  the  sruti  will  describe  in  the  sequel 
different  degrees  of  bliss,  rising  in  scale  a hundredfold 
higher  and  higher  as  the  subjugation  of  desire  (kama) 
is  more  and  more  complete.  Of  the  ^4nandamaya  self, 
thus  admitting  of  different  degrees  of  intensity,  the 
Supreme  Brahman  Himself— the  object  of  the  sruti 
being  to  give  us  to  understand  what  Brahman,  the 
Supreme  Reality,  is  I — is  the  tail,  the  support. 

That  one  perfect  Brahman  wherein  this  increasing  bliss 
attains  its  highest  degree,  is  the  tail,  because  it  is  the 
basis  of  all. — (S). 

It  is  the  Supreme  Brahman,  forming  the  main 
subject  of  discourse,  that  has  been  described  as 
“ Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite;”  and  it  is  to  impart  a 

* Ibid,  t 4'-— S'— •32* 

I That  is  to  say,  the  sruti  teaches  thereby  that  Brahman 
is  the  Innermost  one  in  all. 


62 


BRAHUlA-VlDYA  EXPOU^JDED. 


[Amn^a-Vdli 


knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Brahman  that  the  iive 
ko«as,  beginning  with  the  Annamaya,  have  beer 
described.  The  Supreme  Brahman,  the  Innermos 
One  lying  within  them  all,^is  also  the  Self  of  then 
all.  It  is  this  non-dual  Brahman  that  constitutes  the 
support,  i.  c , the  ultimate  basic  reality  underlying  all 
duality  which  avid}’^^  has  set  up.  Since  the  ilnanda- 
maya  leads  ultimately  to  unity,  there  does  exist  the 
One,  the  non-dual  Brahman,  who  is  the  ultimate 
basis  of  duality  imagined  by  avidyu,  who  is  the  tail 
the  support,  of  the  /Inandamaya. 

. The  infinite  and  genuine  Bliss  is  Brahman,  and  is  the 
basis  of  all  the  rest ; thence  come  the  finite  bliss  of  ]ivai 
man  and  the  reflections  thereof.  Love,  joy  and  deligh 
are  no  doubt  states  of  the  mind  which  is  an  instrument,  anc 
are  therefore  external  to  the  Vij;/anamaya  who  is  the  agent 
Still,  inasmuch  as  they  contain  the  reflections  of  the  inne 
finite  bliss  of  j/va  or  of  the  inner  infinite  bliss  of  Brahman 
the  inandamaya  Self  is  regarded  as  interior  to  tjie  VijMna 
maya. 

Concentration  in  Brahman  attained. 

On  realising  intuitively  by  contemplation  the  inanda 
maya  Self,  the  mind  attains  concentration  in  Brahma. 
Himself  who  has  been  figuratively  spoken  of  as  the  tail  c 
the  A nandamaya  ; and  then,  as  conveying  no  reflection  o 
any  kind,  the  mind  surely  realises  the  true  nature  of  Brah 
man,  as  the  sruti  says,  “ \Vitli  sharp  and  subtle  mind  is  H 
beheld.'’  It  is  like  one  who  mistakes  the  radiant  rays  of 
gem  for  the  gem  itself,  and  who,  on  approaching,  find. 


• Kafim-Bp. 


ANANDAMAYA-KOSA. 


491 


Am.  V:] 

out  what  the  real  gem  is.  This  circumstantial  realisation 
of  the  true  nature  of  Brahman  is  the  fruit  of  the  contem- 
plation (of  the  ^nandaniaya ),  and  therefore,  without 
mentioning  any  other  fruit,  the  sruti  concludes  by  merely 
teaching  the  true  nature  ol  Drahniau, — who  is  the  basis  of 
the  whole  universe, —in  tlie  v*ords  “ Jlrahman  is  the  tail, 
the  support.”  Accordingly,  the  sruti  proceeds  to  cite  a 
verse  which  describes  Brahman,  the  chief  element  in  the 
.^nandamaya-kosa : 

II  ^ II 

5.  On  that,  too,  there  is  this  verse  : 

As  bearing  on  this  teaching,  too,  the  following  verse 
may  be  cited : 

The  sruti  cites  the  following  verse,  in  order  that,  through 
that  verse,  the  student  may  understand  what  has  been 
already  taught.— (S) 

Brahman,  the  one  Being. 

II  qSIS^siT^Fi:  II 
II  Ul 

( Anuvaka  VI. ) 

I.  Non-being,  verily,  does  one  t^ecome  if  he 
as  non-being  knows  Brahman.  If  one  knows  that 
Brahman  is,  then  they  regard  him  as  being. 
Thus  (reads  the  verse). 


492  BRAHMAViDiA  EXPOUNDED.  [Anonda-VoUi. 

He  who  knows  Brahman  to  be  non-being  becomes 
equal  to  a non-being  himself.  That  is  to  say,  he 
attains  no  human  aspirations,  any  more  than  one  who 
is  non-existent. 

If  a person  knows  that  Brahman  is  non-being,  though  He 
exists  in  the  form  of  the  Self,  he,  as  identifying  himself 
with  the  kosas,  surely  becomes  non-existent.  The  Self  does 
not  indeed  exist  as  a kosa  without  existing  as  Brahman. 
How  can  the  (illusory)  serpent  have  a being  except  as  the 
rope  which  alone  is  real  ? — (S). 

If,  on  the  contrary,  a man  knows  that  there  exists 
Brahman,  who  is  the  basis  of  all  differentiation,  who  is 
the  seed  of  all'evolution,  and  who  in  Himself  is  charac- 
terised by  no  distinguishing  features  (we  know  of',...  — 

Now,  it  may  be  asked,  whence  at  all  arises  the 
suppo.sition  that  Brahman  docs  not  exist  ? We  reply  : 
it  arises  from  the  fact  that  Brahman  is  beyond  sensuous 
e.xperience.  The  mind  (buddhi),  trained  as  it  has  in- 
deed been  to  regard  that  as  existing  which  falls  within 
the  range  of  sensuous  experience  and  which  is  but  a 
creature  of  speech,  has  also  come  to  believe  that  what  is 
contrary  thereto,  i,e.,  what  is  beyond  sensuous  experi- 
ence, is  non-existent.  People,  for  instance,  understand 
that  a pot  exists,  when  it  is  brought  within  the  range 
of  experience,  and  that  it  does  not  exist,  when  it  does 
not  come  within  the  range  of  experience.  Similarly, 
here  too,  one  may  suppose  that  Brahman  does  not  exist. 
Hence  the  supposition  “if  one  kndws  that  Brahman  is." 

What  of  him  who  knows  that  Brahman  exists? 


ANANDAMAYA-KOSA. 


493 


Am.  VI] 

The  sruti  says  : Because  of  his  knowledge  that  Brah- 
man exists,  those  who  know  Brahman  regard  him  as 
being  ; they  regard  that,  being  one  with  Brahman,  he 
is  the  Supreme  Being  and  Reality.  That  is  to  say, 
others  regard  that  he  is  Brahman  Himself, 

Suppose  a person  knows  Brahman,  the  One,  the  Existent, 
as  distinguished  from  the  kosas  which  are  non-existent ; 
then,  the  Self  ( the  witness ) being  none  other  than  Brah- 
man, the  Br^rhma;/as  (i.  e.,  devotees  of  Brahman ) regard 
him  as  Being.  Such  being  the  case,  one  should  abandon 
all  thought  of  the  kosas  which  have  been  created  by  ajw^na, 
and  should  resort  solely  to  the  Param«tman,  the  Supreme 
Self,  who  is  free  from  all  change,  who  has  neither  a beginning 
nor  an  end.  Being  Param^itman,  the  Self  can  never  be  a non- 
being,  because  there  is  no  non-being  except  as  kosas;  hence 
the  sruti  “ Death,  verily,  is  the  non-being  ‘ He  exists  * : 
thus  alone  should  one  regard  ; ” I “ Existent,  verily,  this  at 
first  was.”  I Nothing  can  really  have  a being  anywhere 
except  in  Brahman,  the  vSelf. — (S) 

So  far  as  sensuous  experience  goes,  all  living  beings 
think  that  a pot  exists,  only  with  reference  to  that  pot 
which  can  be  used  for  bringing  water,  which  can  be  seen 
by  the  eye,  and  so  on.  If  the  contrary  were  the  case, 
they  think  that  no  pot  exists.  So,  with  this  kind  of  expe- 
rience firmly  ingrained  in  his  nature,  man  thinks  that 
Brahman,  who  is  beyond  sensuous  experience,  does  not 
exist.  As  opposed  to  him,  he  who  has  the  power  of  dis- 
crimination thinks  that  all  matter  and  all  material  things 
which  fall  within  the  range  of  sensuous  experience  are 


* Bri.  Up,  1-3-28,  f Ka^ha-Up.  6-13.  J Chha.  Up.  6-2-1 


BRAHMAVIOYA  EXPOUNDED. 


m 


ncm-cxistedt,  b6cause  of  his  conviction  of  their  illusory 
nature,  founded  on  the  5ruti,  reason  and  experience.  He 
believes  in  the  existence  of  Brahman  beyond  sensuous 
experience,  as  proved  by  the  5ruti  and  other  authorities. 
The  man  who  regards  Brahman  as  non-being  will  be  him- 
self non-existent ; for,  it  has  been  shewn  that  the  Anna- 
maya  and  other  kosas  are  non-self,  and  he  does  not  admit 
the  existence  of  Brahman  beyond  the  kosas.  Suppose  a 
man  knows  Brahman  who  is  beyond  the  five  kosas ; then, 
that  very  Brahman  is  his  essential  being,  and  therefore,  in 
virtue  of  his  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  Brahman,  those 
who  have  exhaustively  studied  the  scriptures  say  that  he, 
this  discriminating  man,  has  a being,  has  a Self. 

Or,  (to  interpret  the  verse  in  a better  way) : He 
who  understands  that  Brahman  does  not  exist  has  no 
faith  in  the  righteous  path  of  any  kind  based  upon 
distinctions  of  caste  and  religious  order  (vanm  and 
^israma),  and  he  therefore  comes  to  believe  that  there 
is  no  such  path, — the  path  being  in  fact  intended 
solely  for  the  realisation  of  Brahman.  So  that,  being 
an  unbeliever  (nastika),  he  is  regarded  by  people  as 
unrighteous.  As  opposed  to  him*,  he  who  understands 
that  Brahman  exists  believes  in  the  righteous  path 
based  upon  the  distinction  of  caste  and  religious  order, 
and  therefore  resorts  to  it  in  accordance  with  the 
ordinance;  and  consequently  the  wise  call  him  a 
righteous  man,  a follower  of  the  right  path.  This  is, 
in  effect,  to  say  that  we  should  know  that  Brahman 
exists. 

He  who  bdieves  that  Brahmiin  is  non-existent  is  certain- 


Am.  V.] 


ANANDAMAYA-KOI^A. 


ly  unrighteous.  Since  the  whole  path  of  righteousness 
based  upon  distinctions  of  caste,  religious  order,  and  the 
like — is  intended  to  lead  to  a knowledge  of  Brahman,  he 
who  condemns  tlje  whole  path  of  righteousness  by  way  of 
denying  the  existence  of  Brahman  is  a thorough  unbeliever. 
On  the  contrary,  him  who  believes  in  the  existence  of 
Brahman,  they  regard  as  righteous,  as  the  pillar  of  the 
righteous  path.  This  is  the  idea  which  the  Kashas  express 
in  the  words  ; “ ‘ He  exists’ : thus  should  one  regard,” 

Brahman,  the  Innermost  Self. 

Now  the  sruti  proceeds  to  direct  the  upflsaka  to  firmly 
dwell  in  the  idea  that  the  i4nandamaya  is  his  Self,  while 
teaching  the  aspirant  of  right  knowledge  that  the  Self  is 
identical  with  the  Real  Brahman  : 

3TFiir  I jt:  IRII 

2.  Thereof, — of  the  former, — this  one,  verily, 
is  the  Self  embodied. 

Thereof, — of  the  former, — /.  r.,  of  the  Vij;j^inamaya, 
this  one,  surely, — namely,  the  Hnandamaya, — is  the 
embodied  Self,  Lc.,  the  Self  dwelling  in  the  Vijwana- 
maya  body. 

That  one  who  has  no  body,  who  is  the  one  Existence, 
the  Non-dual,  the  Partless,  is  the  Self  of  all  other  selves 
mentioned  above, — ending  with  the  ^nandamaya.  There 
is  no  other  Self  beyond— (S). 

There  can  never  arise  a doubt  that  this  one  (the 
Jlnandaniaya)  docs  not  exist.  But,  as  to  Brahman, 


49^  BRAHMAVIDYA  EXPOUNDED-  [AnaniU-V OllL 

there  is  room  for  the  doubt  that  He  does  not  exist, 
since  He  is  devoid  of  special  conditions  of  existence 
and  is  common  to  all  alike.  * 

This  very  ^nandamaya  is  the  master  of  the  Vijwana- 
maya, — the  latter  being  the  body  of  the  former.  So  far  as 
the  upasaka  is  concerned,  the  passage  should  be  construed 
to  mean  that  the  Jnandamaya  is  the  Self.  As  to  the 
aspirant  after  true  knowledge  it  should  be  construed  as 
follows ; The  Brahman  just  spoken  of  as  the  tail  is  the 
Self  of  the  former,  i,  of  the  quaternary  made  up  of  love, 
joy,  delight  and  bliss;  the  quaternary  constituting  the 
body,  and  Brahman  who  has  the  quaternary  for  His 
body  being  the  Self.  The  self-same  idea  has  been  express- 
ed by  the  Vartikakara.  Vide  ante  p.  425  11.  4-10. 

The  Anandamaya  construed  as  the  Paramatman. 

The  meaning  of  this  section  has  been  discussed  in  the 
Brahmas«tras  (I.  i.  12 — 19).  One  school  of  commenta- 
tors has  interpreted  the  swtras  as  follows  : 

{Question) : — In  the  Taittin'ya-Upanishad,  five  principles — 
the  physical  body,  Pra//a,  Manas,  Buddhi,  and  ./^nanda, — 
have  been  mentioned  under  the  designations  of  Annamaya, 
Prawamaya,  Manomaya,  V^ij/^anamaya  and  Anandamaya, — 
every  succeeding  one  being  interior  to  the  one  preceding  it. 
Now  a doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the  Anandamaya,  the 
innermost  of  them  all,  is  an  entity  of  the  w^orld  (samsarin) 
or  the  Supreme  Self  (Param^itman), 


* Here  the  commentator  tries  once  more  to  impress  the 
notion  that  the  mantra  quoted  above  refers  to  Brahman,  but 
not  to  the  Anandamaya  as  the  Vrittikara  contends. 


Am.Vl.]  ANANDmYA'KOSA.  497 

^ ‘ 'i  ?r.f* 

\Prma  facie  view) : — It  would  seem  that  the  jinandamaya 
is  an  entity  of  the  world;  for,  the  word  “tfriandamaya” 
rnean^  a modified  form  (vik<(ra)'of  ^nanda  sind  is  therefore 
ap^icable  only  to  an  entity  of  the  world.  This  word  pan- 
not  be  applied  to  the  Supreme  Self,  the  Immutable  one. 
Moreover,  the  ^nandamaya  has  been  spoken  of  as  made  up 
of  ^ve  members : “ Love  is  the  head,  joy  is  the  right 
wing,;  delight  is  the  left  wing,  Bliss  is  the  self.  Brahman 
is  the  tail,  the  support.”  Love  is  the  pleasure  which 
arises  at  the  sight  of  an  object  of  desire.  The  pleasure 
caused  by  the  acquisition  of  that  object  is  joy,  and  that 
which  arises  from  its  enjoyment  is  delight.  Bliss  is  plea- 
sure in  the  abstract,  which  manifests  itself  in  the  upadhi 
of  ajnana  during  sushupti  and  the  like.  That  bliss  which 
is  unconnected  with  any  upadhi  or  condition  whatsoever  is 
Brahman.  The  five  members  of  the  ..^nandamaya,  spoken 
of  as  love  and  so  on,  are  represented  in  imagination  as  the 
head,  etc.,  only  to  facilitate  our  contemplation  and  com- 
prehension. Of  the  i4nandamaya  thus  represented  in 
imagination,  the  head  and  the  two  v/ings  form  three 
members;  the  central  portion  is  spoken  of  as  the  self 
and  constitutes  the  fourth  member;  while  the  tail,  the 
lower  part,  the  support,  the  basis,  constitutes  the  fifth 
member.  Certainly  the  partless  Paramatman  can  have  no 
parts.  Therefore,  the  /4nandamaya  is  surely  a samsarin, 
an  entity  of  the  world. 

(Cffactewn)  As  against  the  foregoing,  it  is  argued  as 
follows:  The .dnandamaya  is  the  Paramdtman,  because 
of  the  repetition.  Again  and  again  the  ^nandamaya  is 
referred  to  in  this  section  of  the  Upanishad,  in  the  passages 
like  the  following : 


63 


j|  ; *_  ’'i  [\V*.  ^ . 

49t  BEAHMA^VIDVA  SXBOUHDBD*  [Jimn^VoUi. 

This  b the  raquky  coticeming  bHss.'*  ^ 

Into  this  self  fiHstned  of  bliss  he  passes  on.^*  f 
FrequAnt  reference  is  a mark  of  the  main  subject  of  dis- 
course; and  we  have  shewn  that  the  one  main  theme  of 
all*  Upani^iads.  (Vedsnta)  is  Brahman,  and  Brahman 
alone.  Moreover,  the  section  opens  with  Brahman  in  the 
words  **  Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite  is  Brahman,”  I and 
again  He  is  spoken  of  as  the  creator  of  the  universe  in  the 
words  “ He  created  all  this;”  § and  therefore  the  -dnanda- 
maya  is  Brahman.  It  should  not  be  urged  that  the  word 
ending  in  the  termination  maya,”  and  meaning  formed 
of  bliss”  cannot  be  applied  to  Brahman;  for,  the  word 
may  also  mean  abounding  in  bliss.”  And  as  to  love,  etc. 
being  spoken  of  as  members  of  the  ^nandamaya,  it  is 
due  to  the  upadhis,  such  as  perception  of  the  sense- 
objects.  Wherefore  the  ^nandamaya  is  Brahman. 

Such  is  the  construction  put  upon  the  Vedanta-swtras 
(1.  i.  12 — 19)  by  one  school  of  the  Ved<mtins. 

The  Anandamaya  construed  as  the  jiva. 

Now  the  same  swtras  will  be  interpreted  according  to  the 
orthodox  (5ankaracharya’s)  school  of  the  Vecknta : 

( Question ) : — It  has  been  said  that  “ Brahman  is  the 
tail,  the  support.”  Here,  a doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the 
5ruti  means  that  Brahman  is  a member  of  the  ^nanda- 
maya,  or  that  Brahman  is  to  be  known  as  an  independent 
entity  in  Himself. 

(Pnma  facie  view) : — It  would  appear  that  Brahman 
should  be  comprehended  as  a member  of  the  Anandamaya, 

X Ibid.  ilhid. 


♦ Tait.  Up.  2-8. 


t Ibid. 


JlftU*  VL  ] anandamava-kosa,  499 

inasmuch  as  in  common  parlance  the  term  ^ tail  ’ is  a ppli- 
eable  only  to  a member  of  the  bodfu  • ' ' . ^ 

{Conclusion) The  word  ‘ tail*  does  not  mean  a member 
of  the  body.  It  is  that  long  appendage  \irhich  is  attached 
to  the  bodies  of  some  animals.  And  the  i^nahdamaya  can- 
not be  said  to  be  possessed  of  a tail,  which  is  only  a part 
of  the  Annamaya  or  physical  body  of  animals  such  as  the 
cow.  Since  the  word  * tail*  does  not  thus  admit  of  a literal 
interpretation  here,  we  should  understand  it  in  a figurative 
sense  as  meaning  < basis’.  Brahman  is  the  basic  reality 
underlying  the  ^nandamaya  or  jiva,  since  Brahman  is 
mistaken  for  j/va.  And  the  ^nandamaya  cannot  be  the 
Supreme  Self  (Paramtrtman) ; for,  even  if  we  understand 
the  word  anandamaya”  as  signifying  “ abounding  in 
bliss”  it  would  imply  some  admixture  of  pain.  Wherefore, 
as  the  basic  reality  underlying  jfva.  Brahman  is  presented 
here  as  the  main  thing  to  be  comprehended.  Hence  the 
frequent  reference  to  Brahman  in  such  passages  as  “ Non- 
being  verily  does  one  become  if  he  as  non-being  knows 
Brahman as  also  the  opening  words  of  the  section,  the 
knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the  Supreme.”  So  that,  on 
the  principle  of  interpretation  discussed  in  the  case  of  the 
Purusha  spoken  of  in  the  Ka/ha-Upanishad,  it  is  Brahman 
alone  that  is  here  presented  for  comprehension,  but  not  the 
evolution  of  «ka5a,  etc.,  nor  the  Annamaya  and  other 
kosas. 

Brahman,  the  5ole  theme  of  the  Upanishada. 

The  principle  of  interpretation  above  referred  to  is  dis- 
CUsWcl  as  follows  in  the  Ved^mta-swtras  (III.  iii.  14—15). 


S^,  BRAHMA-^wiiBmuNDED*  [Amnda^VoUL 

(Qmtwn) : — In  the  Ka^ha^Upanishad,  occurs  the  follow^ 
ingmissage:  , . 

“ Beyond  the  senses,  verily,  are  objects ; and 
beyond  objects  is  Manas ; even  beyond 
Manas  is  Buddhi ; beyond  Biiddhi  is  ^tiHan, 
the  Mahat;  beyond  the  Mahat  is  Avyakta; 
beyond  Avyakta  is  Purasha ; beyond  Purusha  . 
there  is  nothing  whatsoever;  That  is  the 
farthest,  That  the  Supreme  Goal.” 

The  meaning  of  the  passage  may  be  explained  as  follows : 
A person  first  craves  in  manas  for  sense-objects  and 
then  reaches  them  through  the  senses.  Now,  the  senses 
being  internal  with  reference  to  external  objects,  every- 
body can  understand  that  the  former  transcend  the 
latter.  But  as  objects  of  desire,  these  sense-objects  are 
internal,  or  subjective,  in  relation  to  the  senses.  And 
beyond  thesie  objects  of  desire  is  the  desire  itself,  a state  of 
mind,  which  is  quite  internal  or  subjective.  Buddhi,  the 
subject  experiencing  these  changes  of  manas,  transcends 
the  changes  of  manas,  and  beyond  even  Buddhi  is  the 
Self,  the  Hirawyagarbha,  designated  as  Mahat,  the  upada- 
na  or  material  cause  of  Buddhi.  Transcending  even  Mahat 
is  the  material  cause  thereof,  called  Avyakta,  the  Ajnana 
lying  at  the  root  of  all;  and  even  beyond  Avyakta  is 
Purusha,  tbe  Supreme  principle  of  Consciousness,  the 
basic  Reality  underlying  Avyakta.  And  there  exists 
naught  beyond  Purusha.  Purusha  is  the  last  rung  in  the 
ladder  of  ascendmg  transcendentality  and  is  the  Supreme 
Goal  to  be  reached  by  all  aspirants  of  the  Highest  Good. 


• Op,  cit.  8-10, 11. 


Am,  Vi,\  ANANDAMAYA-KOSA.  30I 

' ' f \ ' „ ' , ' I 

' Now  a doubt  atfises  as  to  whethei!  the  whole  series  of  ^ 
things  enumerated  here,  or  Purusha  alone,  is  presented  by  ^ 
the  sruti  for  comprehension. 

{Prima  fdcie  view) : — The  whole  series  of  things  beginning  ‘ 
with  the  senses  is  presented  by  the  sruti  for  comprehen- 
sion, equally  with  Purusha,  the  main  subject  of  discourse^ 
Otherwise,  the  exposition  of  the  series  would  be  in  vain. 
It  may  perhaps  be  urged  that  to  hold  that  the  section 
efxpounds  so  many  things  would  tantamount  to  the  admis- 
sion that  it  treats  of  different  propositions.  We  answer 
that  the  section  certainly  treats  of  different  propositions,  it 
being  impossible  to  make  out  that  only  one  single  proposi- 
tion is  here  treated  of. 

[Conclusion) : — Since  knowledge  of  Purusha,'brings  about 
the  cessatiori  of  aj»<ma  which  is  the  source  of  all  sawsara,  ’ 
it  is  Purusha  alone  that  forms  the  subject  of  discourse. 
Accordingly,  as  a means  of  attaining  this  knowledge  of 
Purusha  alone,  Yoga  has  been  specially  taught  in  the 
sequel  in  the  following  words  : 

“ This  one,  the  Self,  hid  in  all  beings,  shines 
not ; but  He  is  seen  with  sharp  subtle  buddhi 
by  them  that  see  the  subtle.”  " 

This  passage  may  be  explained  as  follows:  As  the 
innermost  being  in  all,  the  Self  lies  hidden  and  does  not 
manifest  Himself  to  him  whose  mind  is  turned  outward. 
On  the  contrary  He  manifests  Himself  to  Him  whose  mind 
is  turned  inward.  For  him  whose  mind  is  thus  turned 
inward  and  who  always  seeks  to  see  the  subtle  Reality,  it 
is  possible  to  see  the  Self  by  means  of  Buddhi  which  by 


* Ihid  8-12. 


trnMkmm 

of  Yoga  has  attuned  to  one-puntedoo^  and  is  a^ 
t^giiiii^s«6<iu  It  eababt  fae  ob^oeted  Puindl^ 
ak^ltS  tbs  subject  ofoxpositbn,  the  description  of  t|a 
whole  series  (tf  things  would  be  usriess ; for^  this  seridS 
is  the  iiieans  whereby  the  mind  which  is  turned  outward 
is  oiabled  gradually  to  approach  Purusha.  Therefore^ 
Purorita  alone  is  the  thing  to  be  known. 

Conclusion. 

In  accordance  with  this  principle  of  interpretation,  we 
understand  that  the  evolution  of  skua,  etc.,  has  been 
ei^ounded  with  a view  to  shew  that  Brahman  is  the 
Jnhnite,  and  that  the  five  koras — the  Annamaya,  etc., — 
have  been  described  with  a view  to  shew  that  Brahman 
lies  in  the  cave.  It  is  Brahman,  and  Brahman  alone,  that 
is  presented  everywhere  for  comprehension.  We  therefore 
conclude  that  Brahman  is  Real,  Consciousness,  and  In- 
dite, und  that,  as  lying  in  the  cave.  He  is  also  the  inner- 
mwt  Self  of  all. 


BOOK  II. 

Illlllllllillllllllllllllllllll 

(A'NANDAVALLI'  OR  BRAHMA VALLI) 

{CONTINUED) 

B.— BRAHMAVIPYA  EXPLAINED. 


64 


CHAPTER  I. 

QUESTIONS. 

The  purpose  of  the  sequel. 

It  has  been  said  that  “ the  knower  of  Brahman 
reaches  the  Supreme,”  not  the  ignorant  man  who  holds  to 
the  unreal  (asat).  With  a view  to  demonstrate  this  truth, 
the  sruti  proceeds  with  the  sequel. — (S). 

Now  the  following  question  arises : If  Brahman  is  com- 
mon to— is  the  essential  being  of— both  the  enlightened  and 
the  unenlightened  alike,  the  attainment  or  non-attainment 
of  Brahman  may  apply  to  both  alike,  there  being  apparently 
no  ground  whatever  for  a distinction  between  the  two. 
Now,  the  purpose  of  the  sequel  is  to  shew  wherein  the  dis- 
tinction between  the  two  lies.— (S  & A). 

Or,  since  the  mind  (antaA-kara«a)  of  the  one  in  the  dark- 
ness (of  ignorance)  is  wedded  to  mere  forms  of  Evolution 
(kiryamSitra),  t.  <.,  since  the  unenlightened  man  identifies 
himself  with  the  sheaths  (kosas),  he  cannot  recognise  the 
existence  of  the  Supreme  Self,  though  He  is  a self-evident 
Being.  So  the  sequel  is  intended  to  prove  the  existence  of 
the  Self  who  is  beyond  all  creation,  as  also  to  answer  the 
two  questions  that  follow  here. — (S  & A). 

'v 

Sravana  and  Manana. 

Having  finished  the  exposition  of  Brahman, ». the  sec- 
tion of  srapKm  (hearing),  the  jruti  next  proceeds  with  the 


So8  BiuHiiii-vtjOYA  BXFtAiiim  [A,nmda-V^l{, 

section  of  mamm  freflection)  dealing  vnth  the  rati(»idle 
of  the  Brahma- vidy&i  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  en- 
grossed in  outward  forms.  Now,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
section,  the  sruti  formulates  the  questions  that  arise  in  the 
mind  of  the  disciple. 

Owing  to  perversity  of  the  disciple’s  intellect  (buddhi), 
many  doubts  arise  in  his  mind  with  reference  to  the  teach- 
ings of  the  master  ; and  the  rruti  therefore  raises  here  such 
questions  as  are  naturally  suggested  by  what  has  been 
taught  already.  That  the  process  of  mamm  (reflection) 
follows  that  of  sravana  (hearing  master’s  exposition),  as 
suggested  here  by  the  word  ‘ then,’  is  quite  clearly  express- 
ed elsewhere  by  the  sruti : 

The  Self,  verily,  my  dear,  should  be  heard, 
reflected  and  meditated  upon.”  * 

These  two  processes  are  further  explained  by  the  sinriti  in 
the  following  words : 

( The  Self } should  be  heard  ( studied ) 
through  the  words  of  the  sruti,  and  reflected 
upon  in  reason.” 

Their  purposes  are  distinguished  by  the  sruti  in  the  following 
words : 

“ The  heart’s  knot  is  dissolved,  all  doubts  are 
cut  apart.”  t 

When  the  true  nature  of  Brahman  has  been  learnt  from 
instructions  (upadesa),  the  heart’s  knot,  i.  e.  the  illusion  of 
oneness  of  the  Inner  Self  with  the  anta^-karaaa,  is  dis- 


♦ Bri.  Up.  2-4^5. 


t Mund.-IJp.  2-2-8, 


"'Am.  VI.]  OUESTIONS.  5«a 

solved.  Doubts  are  cut  asunder  by,  reflection  in 

tbe  process  of  finding  the  rationale  of  what  has  been  taught 
in  the  instruction.  Therefore  questions  are  raised  beta 
embodying  the  doubts  to  be  cut  asunder. 

- The  Questions  of  the  Disciple. 

iscTiteig^  I \ I 

3#  ^ JR  I X ^ II  ^ II 

3.  Hence,  then^  the  questions  that  follow: 
whether  does  any  one  who  knows  not,  departing, 
goes  to  that  region  ? Or,  does  any  one  who 
knows,'  departing,  attain  that  region  ? 

Because  such  is  the  case  *,  these  then  are  the  dis- 
ciple’s questions  following  upon  the  teacher’s  exposi- 
tion. t 

Because  Brahman  is  the  Self  of  both  the  enlightened  and 
the  unenlightened  and  is  unknowable,  the  disciple  addressed 
the  following  questions  to  the  teacher  after  hearing  his  ex- 
position.—(S). 

Brahman,  indeed,  is  the  same  in  the  enlightened  and 
the  unenlightened,  as  He  is  the  cause  of  akdsa,I  etc. 
Therefore,  it  may  be  supposed  that  the  attainment  of 

* i.  e.,  because  Brahman  is  the  same  in  all. 

t From  the  foregoing  exposition,  the  disciple  has  come  to  un- 
derstand that  the  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the  Supreme  and 
that  He  who  is  thus  attainable  through  knowledge  is  the  source 
of  all  being,  is  the  essence  of  all,  is  the  all. 

I i.  e.,  as  He  is  the  source  of  all  jivas  associated  with  matter 
(bhtitas) — (A). 


510  BRAHMA-viDVA  EXPLAINED.  [Ananda-Vollu 

Brahman  is  possible  even  in  the  case  of  the  unenlightf 
OTed*-«^Hence  the  question  : Does  even  he  who  knows 
not, hence  departing  attain  that  region,  the  Supreme 
Self  (Param&tman)  ? Or  does  he  not  attain  ? — This 
second  question  should  be  here  understood,  because  of 
the  (Sanskrit)  plural  t “ questions”  ; two  other  ques- 
tions referring  to  “ him  who  knows.” 

If,  though  Brahman  is  the  cause  of  both  alike  fof  him 
who  knows  and  of  him  who  knows  not),  he  who  knows 
not  does  not  attain  Brahman,  one  may  suppose  that 
even  he  who  knows  does  not  attain  Brahman.  Hence 
arise  two  questions: — Does  he  who  knows  Brahman, 
hence  departing,  attain  that  region  ? Or  does  he,  like 
him  who  knows  not,  not  attain  ? — This  latter  question 
is  the  second  one  (concerning  him  who  knows). 

Brahman  who  is  the  cause  of  the  whole  universe  and 

who,  as  jiva,  has  entered  all  bodies,  is  present  in  the  unen- 
lightened as  well  as  in  the  enlightened.  If,  therefore,  the 
latter  attains  Brahman,  the  former  too  may  attain  Him. 
If  the  unenlightened  cannot  attain  Brahman,  even  the  en- 
lightened may  not  attain  Him. 

Or,  + only  two  questions  are  here  meant,  concerning 
(respectively)  him  who  knows  not  and  him  who  knows. 
The  plural,  however,  holds  good,  as  embracing  a third 

♦ i.  e.  after  death. 

t shewing  that  three  or  more  questions  arc  meant  here. 

J The  answer  begins  with  the  words  “ Ho  desired,”  which 
cannot  be  construed  as  an  answer  to  any  of  the  four  questions. 
Hence  the  altemativc  interpretation. 


<}UESTlOti$. 


5M 


Jnu  VI.] 

, question  suggested  by  implication.— To  explain  : The 
words  “ if  he  as  non-beiog  knows  Brahman  , and  if 
one  knows  that  Brahman  is,”  (vide  ante  p.491),  give  rise 
to  the  doubt  whether  Brahman  exists  or  not.  Hence 
the  first  question  which  naturally  arises  close  upon  the 
master’s  Instruction  is  : Does  Brahman  exist  or  not  ? 
Brahman  being  the  same  in  all,  a second  question 
arises.  Does  he  who  knows  not  attain  Brahman  or 
not?  If  he  who  knows  not  does  not  attain  Brahman 
who  is  the  same  everywhere,  then,  even  he  who  knows, 
it  may  be  supposed,  does  not  attain  Brahman.  Hence 
the  third  of  the  questions  which  follows  : Does  he  who 
knows  attain  Brahman  or  not  ? 

That  is  k)  say,  if  the  unenlightened  does  not  attain  Brah- 
man, what  evidence  is  there  to  shew  that  the  enlightened 
attains  Brahman  ?— (S). 


CHAPTER  II. 

BRAHMAN'S  EXISTENCE  AS  CREATOR. 

TIu  purpose  of  the  sequel. 

In  the  sequel,  the  Upanishad  proceeds  to  answer  the 
foregoing  questions. 

And  now,  first  of  all,  it  proceeds  to  establish  the 
very  existence  (of  Brahman). 

As  the  two  other  questions  presuppose  the  existence  of 
Brahman,  the  sruti  proceeds  to  establish,  first  of  all,  the  ex- 
istence of  Brahman. — (S). 

It  has  been  said,  “Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite  is 
^rahman.”  Now,  as  it  is  necessary  to  explain  how 
Brahman  is  Real,  the  sruti  proceeds  with  this,  the  pre- 
sent section.  Brahman’s  existence  being  once  esta- 
blished, His  reality  is  also  established.  It  is,  indeed, 
taught  that  “ The  Existent  is  the  Real  * so  that,  ex- 
istence being  proved,  reality  also  is  proved. 

{Question)  : — How  do  you  know  that  the  sequel  is 
intended  for  this  purpose  (of  proving  the  reality  of 
Brahman  by  proving  the  existence  of  Brahman)  ? 

{Answer)  : — By  closely  following  the  tenor  of  the 
texts.  It  is,  indeed,  this  idea  t (of  existence)  which 

, • ».  6.  existence  and  reality  are  synonymous.— (V). 
t But  not  the  idea  of  the  wise  or  the  unwise  attaining  or  not 
attaining  Brahman.— (Y). 


A»U  VL]  .B&AHMAN  ASCRBATOlU  - 513  - 

runs  through  the  succeeding  passages  such  at  the  fol* 
lowing ; 

“ They  declare  That  as  Real.”  " If  this 
ik4$a,  (this)  Bliss,  existed  not.” 

As  an  answer  to  the  disciple’s  first  question,  i.  e.,  the 
question  concerning  the  existence  of  Brahman,  the  Guru 
proceeds  to  describe  creation  (snshti)  with  a view  to  prove 
the  existence  of  Brahman. 

Brahman  exists. 

{Objection)  : — Now,  it  may  be  supposed  that  Brah- 
man is  altogether  non-existent. — Why  ? — Because,  that 
which  exists,  such  as  a pot,  is  perceived  in  actual  ex- 
perience that  which  does  not  exist,  such  as  the 
rabbit’s  horn,  is  not  perceived.  Brahman,  likewise,  is 
not  perceived  ; and  so,  not  being  perceived  in  actual 
experience,  He  does  not  exist. 

{Answer) : — Not  so ; for,  Brahman  is  the  Cause  of 
fbkdsa  &c. 

(To  explain  : — It  cannot  be  that  Brahman  does  not 
exist. — Why  ? — For,  it  is  taught  (in  the  sruti,  * that 
akasa  and  all  else^in  the  creation  have  been  born  of 
Brahman.  It  is  a fact  of  common  experience  that  that 
thing  exists  from  which  something  else  is  born,  as,  for 
example,  clay  and  the  seed,  which  are  the  sources  of  a 
pot  and  a tree.  So,  being  the  cause  of  dk&sa  &c., 
Brahman  exists.  Nothing  that  is  born  is  ever  found 
to  have  been  born  of  non-existence.  If  the  whole 


• In  the  words,  “ All  this  He  created.”  > 


'8M&i4-viB>v4>B»ui«iDr ' ^Andfido-VUil^ 

; ttnfttion,  coinprisiag  names  and  forms  and  so  on,  were 
born  of  non-existence,  it  would  likewise  be  non-existent 
apj^  could  not  therefore  have  been  perceived  (as  exist- 
ing). But  it  is  perceived  (as  such).  Therefore  Brah- 
man exists.  If  the  creation  were  bom  of  non-existence, 
it  would,  even  when  perceived,  have  been  perceived 
only,  in  association  with  non-existence  (».«.,  only  as 
non-existent).  And  such  is  not  the  case.  Therefore 
Brahman  exists.  Elsewhere  in  the  words  “ How  can 
existence  be  born  of  non-existence  ?”  * the  sruti  has 
declared  from  the  point  of  reason  t the  impossibility 
of  the  birth  of  existence  from  non-existence.  It  there- 
fore stands  to  reason  to  say  that  Brahman  is  existent 
and  existent  only. 

Moreover,  the  non-existent  cannot  be  the  Cause,  because 
^it  has  no  existence.  The  Cau^e  is  that  which  exists  befote 
‘the  effect.  Non-existence  (the  void,  5unya)  cannot  there- 
fore be  a cause. 

{Objection) : — Brahman,  too,  cannot  be  the  Cause,  because 
He.  is  immutable  (kutastha). 

(Amwer) : — Just  as  the  magnet,  while  immutable  in  itself, 
can  produce  an  effect,  so  also.  Brahman  may  be  the  Cause. 
If  the  cause  be  a thing  that  is  ever  active,  then,  where  is 
room  for  anything  new  ? {To  explain)  : — If  it  be  held  that 
’ the  cause  is  a thing  which  is  ever  active,  then,  it  is  tanta- 

• Chhil.  Up.  6-2-2. 

t Bj  adding  the  fact  that  non-existence  does  not  run  through 
' the  objects  of  experience. — (Y.). 


; SKAHMAN  AS  OlSftioB.  51^ 

mount  to  sayiog  that  the  cause  is  immutably,  not 
ing  c^ge.  If,  on  the  contrary,  again,  it  be  held  that;  fbS' 
cause  is  a thing  which  is  active  only  on  a.  particular  occ^ 
sioh,  the  cause  must  have  been  previously  inactive,  /<, 
immutable.— (S  & A). 

Brahman’s  Creative  Will. 

{Objection) 'If  Brahman  be  the  cause  like  clay  and 
the  seed,  then  He  would  be  insentient. 

{Answer] : — No  j for,  Brahman  is  one  who  has  desires. 
Indeed,  in  our  experience,  there  exists  no  insentient 
being  having  desires.  And  we  have  stated*  that 
Brahman  is  Omniscient  ; and  it  is  therefore  but  right 
to  speak  of  Brahman  as  one  who  has  desires. 

Brahman  Is  independent  of  desires. 

{Objection)  : — Then,  as  one  having  desires,  Brahman, 
like  ourselves,  has  unattained  objects  of  desire,  t 

{Answer) : — No,  because  of  His  independence.  Brah^ 
man’s  desires  do  not  rouse  Him  to  action  in  the  same 
way  that  impure  desires  influence  others  and  guide 
their  action. — How  then  (are  they)  ? — They  are  true 
(satya)  and  wise  (jMna)  1 in  themselves,  one  with 

* While  commenting  on  the  passage ‘‘ Real,  Consciousness, 
and  Infinite  is  Brahman.” 

f If  Jsvara  had  desires  caused  by  MAy&,  then,  like  the  jivav 
He  would  not  be  ever-satisfied  as  He  is  said  to  be. 

I Like  Brahmftn,— -(V), 


BRAHMA^irlDYA  BkPLAiNBD.  [Amnda-VolU. 

*,  and  therefore  pure.  By  them  Brahman  is 
• not  guided.  It  is,  on  the  other  hand,  Brahman  who 
guides  them  in  accordance  with  the  Karma  of  sentient 
beinp.  Brahman  is  thus  independent  as  regards  desires. 
Therefore,  Brahman  has  no  desires  unattained. 

And  also  because  Brahman  is  independent  of  external 
factors.  (That  is  to  say),  unlike  the  desires  of  other 
beinp,— ^the  desires)  which  lie  beyond  them  t , 
which  are  dependent  on  the  operation  of  Dharma  and 
other  causes,  and  which  stand  (for  their  realisation)  in 
need  of  additional  aids  such  as  the  body  (kiirya,  the 
effect,  the  physical  body)  and  the  sense-organs  (kara«a, 
the  Linga-sarlra)  distinct  from  the  beings  themselves, — 
Brahman’s  desires  are  not  dependent  on  external  causes 
and  the  like.  -What  then  ? — They  are  one  with 
IHiniself  t. 

The  Mlm&msa  § answers  the  foregoing  objection  by 
comparing  His  desires  to  sportive  acts  and  the  respi- 
ratory process.  He  is  also  distinguished  from  jivas  by 
the  fact  that  His  desires  are  never  frustrated.  So  says 

♦ Brahman  as  reflected  in  Maya  is  the  cause  of  the  Universe. 
His  desires  are  forms  (pariaainas  ) of  Miiyii  and  are  ensouled  by 
Consciousness  which  is  not  overpowered  by  ignorance,  avidy&, 
&c.  They  are  therefore  true  and  wise,  like  Brahman.  As  one 
with  Brahman,  as  the  upadhi  of  Brahman,  they  are  unaffected 
by  sin  (adharma)  and  are  therefore  pure, — (A), 
t Beyond  the  control  of  those  beings.— (V). 

J i.  e..  Their  fulfilment  is  dependent  on  Himself  alone, — (V.) . 

§ Vid$  VecWinta-SAtras,  II,  i.  33, 


VI.]  BftAHMAN  AS  CREATOR. ' 517 

the  sruti : “ Of  unfailing  desires  and  of  unfailing 
purposes  He  is.”  * 

It  is  this  truth  that  the  Upanishad  teaches  in  the 
following  words : 

I ^ ^ II  » II 

4.  He  desired  : many  may  I be,  may  I be  born  ! 

He,  the  Atman,  the  Self, — from  whom  ak4sa  was 
born, — desired,  many  may  I be  ! 

It  is  the  Pratyagitman,  associated  with  Avidya  i,  e,,  the 
Pratyagatman  not  fully  realising  Himself,  and  w^ho  was 
spoken  of  before  as  the  source  of  ak^a, — it  is  this  Pratya- 
galman  that  is  here  said  to  have  desired  ; for,  without 
avidyd.,  kfi,ma  (desire)  cannot  arise  in  any  being  whatever. 
— (S  & A). 

He : That  Brahman  who  was  spoken  of  as  “ the  tail, 
the  support  ” of  the  Anandamaya-kosa,  and  who  was  de- 
scribed as  **  the  Self  embodied  * of  the  five  sheaths  from  the 
Annamaya  to  the  Anandamaya.  He,  this  Atman,  who, 
prior  to  snshd,  was  one  alone  without  a second,  desired,  in 
virtue  of  association  with  His  own  potentiality  (sakti). 
That  is  to  say,  the  Milya-sakti,  that  wonder-producing 
potentiality  which  is  ever  present  in  Atman,  modified  itself 
into  the  form  of  desire.  Certainly,  without  M^yA.,  there  can 
arise  no  desire  in  the  One  Immutable  Principle  of  Consci- 
ousness. 

Duality  is  an  illusion. 

The  sruti  describes  the  form  of  His  desire  in  the  words 
“ many  may  I be.” 


♦ Chha  8-1-5. 


/ BKAHMA-yiDYA  ixpuiNEB*  [Ankfida^Valli- 

{Question) : — It  may  be  asked,  how  can  one  thing 
become  many,  except  by  association  with  other  things  ? 

We  see  that  the  multiplicity  of  &k&5a  arises  from  associ- 
ation with  upddhis,  with  other  things  such  as  a pot.  But, 
how  can  Brahman,  who  was  without  a second,  become 
many  ? 

{Answer) Thesruti  answers  in  the  words,  ‘‘  may  I 
be  bom.” 

That  is  to  say,  may  I reproduce  Myself  increasingly, 
may  I assume  more  forms  than  the  one  which  has  been 
hitherto  in  existence. 

Brahman  does  not  indeed  multiply  Himself  by  giving 
birth  to  things  quite  distinct,  (as  the  father  multiplies 
himselO  by  giving  birth  to  a son. — How  then  ? — It  is 
by  the  manifestation  of  the  name  and  form  which  have 
remained  unmanifested  in  Himself. 

The  father  who  gives  birth  to  a son  remains  a separate 
being.  He  himself  is  not  born  as  the  son.  Similarly,  in 
the  present  case,  one  may  suppose  that  Brahman,  the 
Creator  of  the  universe,  is  not  Himself  born  as  the  universe, 
and  ask,  how  is  it  that  the  sruti  represents  Brahman  as 
having  desired  to  be  so  born  ? The  answer  is  that  name 
and  form  which  come  into  being  are  not  quite  distinct  from 
Brahman.  Just  as  the  wa\res  manifesting  themselves  in 
the  ocean  are  not  quite  distinct  from  the  ocean,  so  also, 
name  and  form,  which  first  reside  unmanifested  in  Mily&, 
Brahman’s  inherent  potentiality  (sakti),  come  into  mani- 
festation afterwards,  and  remaining  one  with  Brahman  in 
His  essential  nature  as  existence,  become  themselves 


AHU.VIJ]  brahman  as  CREAtOR. 

manifested  as  existent.  This  very  idea  is  expressed  by  the 
Vfijasaneyins  in  the  words  “All  this  was  then  undeveloped. 
It  became  developed  by  name  and  form."  * * * § Hence  the 
propriety  of  the  words  “ may  I be  born,"  the  M&yi  of 
Brahman  manifesting  itself  in  the  form  of  the  universe. 

When  name  and  form  which  have  remained  unmani- 
fested in  the  Atman  become  differentiated  in  all  their 
variety, t in  no  way  abandoning  their  essential  nature  as 
Atman  I , not  existing  in  space  and  time  apart  from 
Brahman,  then.by  this  differentiation  of  name  and  form. 
Brahman  becomes  manifold.  In  no  other  way  can  the 
partleps  Brahman  become  manifold,  or  become  small. 
It  is,  for  instance,  through  other  things  that 
appears  small  or  manifold.  So  it  is  through  them§  alone 
that  Atman  becomes  many.  Indeed  there  exists  nothing 
other  than  Atman,  no  not-self— however  subtle,  re- 
moved and  remote,  whether  of  the  past  or  the  present 
or  the  future, — as  distinguished  from  Brahman  in  space 
and  time.  Therefore  name  and  form  in  all  their 
variety  have  their  being  only  in  Brahman.  Brahman’s 
being  is  not  in  them.  They  have  no  being  when 
Brahman  is  ignored  and  are  therefore  said  to  have 
their  being  in  Him.  It  is  through  these  upddhis  (of 


• 13ri.  Up.  1-4-7. 

^ _A.s  Tanin^tras,  as  gross  elements  of  matter,  as  the  Hundane 
Egg,  and  as  various  forms  of  being  within  It.— (V). 

J i,  e.,  remaining  all  the  while  as  one  with  the  Self,  their 
source,— not  existing  as  distinct  from  the  Self, 

§ Through  name  and  form. 


jl20  BHAHMA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED.  [Amnda^Valli. 

name  and  form)  that  Brahman  is  manifested  to  us  as 
all  categories  of  being,— as  the  knower,  as  the  objects 
known,  as  knowledge,  as  words,  as  objects. 

Just  as  a burning  faggot,  while  remaining  of  one  shape, 
puts  on  various  shapes  owing  to  some  external  causes,*  so 
also  the  multiplicity  of  the  Supreme  Atman  is  due  to  the  illu- 
sion of  names  and  forms.  So,  it  is  only  by  way  of  manifesting 
Himself  in  these  illusory  names  and  forms  that  the  Lord 
must  have  desired  to  be  born.  These  names  and  forms 
residing  in  the  Atman  spring  forth  into  manifestation  in  all 
variety  from  the  Atman,  the  Lord,  in  their  due  time  and 
place,  subject  to  the  Karma  of  the  (sentient  beings  in  the) 
universe.  It  is  this  daily  differentiation  of  names  and 
forms  from  but  of  Vishnu  which  the  sruti  represents  as 
Brahman  becoming  manifold,  and  which  is  like  a juggler 
(mliyin,  magician)  putting  on  manifold  forms.  Indeed, 
Brahman  being  without  parts,  it  cannot  be  that  He  actually 
becomes  manifold.  Wherefore,  it  is  only  in  a figurative 
sense  that  Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  becoming  manifold,  in 
the  same  way  that  ^bk^sa  becomes  manifold  through  jars 
and  other  objects  extending  in  space. — (S). 

Brahman's  Creative  Thoaght. 

\m 

5.  He  made  tapas. 

With  this  desire,  He,  the  Atman,  made  tapas.  ‘Tapas' 
here  means  ‘ thought  ’,  as  sruti  elsewhere  says  “ whose 
■ tapas  consists  of  thought  itself  t As  he  has  attained  all 


* When  it  is  shaken  or  whirled  round, 
f Mund.  Up.  1-1-9. 


Vh]  SRAHfiiAN  AS  CRBATOR.  \ 5^** 

desires;  the  other  kind  of  tapas  * cannot  be  meant  here* 

The  tapas  (penance)  of  the  common  parlance,  belonging 
as  it  does  to  the  world  of  effects,  cannot  be  meant  here* 
The  penance  the  sruti  here  speaks  of  is  the  tsvara’s  thought 
concerning  creation. — (S). 

To  the  Supreme  Lord  (Paramesvara)  the  various  forms 
of  the  penance  of  self-mortification  can  be  of  no  avail. 

Such  tapas  He  made ; that  is  to  say,  He  thought 
about  the  design  of  the  universe  to  be  created. 

^ I I ^ m II 

6.  Having  made  tapas^  He  sent  forth  all 
this,  and  what  of  this  more. 

Having  thus  thought,  He  emanated  all  this  universe, — 
as  the  karma,  or  the  past  acts  of  sentient  beings,  and  other 
operative  circumstances  determined, — in  time  and  space, 
with  names  and  forms  as  we  experience  them,  as  they  are 
experienced  by  all  sentient  beings  in  all  states  of  being.  He 
emanated  all  this  and  whatever  else  is  of  the  same  nature. 

The  Isvara,  having  pondered  according  to  the  sruti, 
emanated  the  universe,  according  to  the  desires  and  acts  of 
the  sentient  beings  to  be  born,  in  their  proper  forms  and 
shapes. — (S). 

A summary  of  the  foregoing  argument. 

Here  the  existence  of  Paramdtman  is  established  on  the 
following  grounds : 


• Self-mortification  through  body  and  mind. 


66 


52a  . BRAHMA-VIDYA  BXPLAII^BD*  [Aftaitda^V oltL 

(i)  that  He  is  the  Being  who  willed. 

^2)  ^hat  He  is  the  Being  who  thought. 

(3)  that  He  is  the  Being  who  created. 

The  Nihilist  (asad-vidin)  holds  as  follows : It  may  be 
inferred  from  experience  that  all  that  exists  is  composed  of 
names  and  forms,  as,  for  instance,  ikisa,  and  other  elements 
of  matter,  and  the  bodies  composed  of  those  elements  of 
matter  such  as  those  of  Devas  and  animals.  But  the 
Paramatman  is  distinct  from  name  and  form,  as  the  sruti 
elsewhere  says: 

“ He,  who  is  called  Akasa,  is  the  revealer  of 
name  and  form.  He,  in  whom  these  are,  is 
Brahman.”  * 

As  to  the  assertions  such  as  **  Paramfi.tman  is  Brahman,” 
they  cannot  go  to  establish  His  existence, — inasmuch  as 
they  are  mere  fancies  (vikalpas) — any  more  than  the  words 
“the  rabbit’s  horn”  can  establish  the  existence  of  the 
rabbit’s  horn.  Patanjali  says  ; 

“ Fancy  is  a notion  founded  on  a knowledge 
conveyed  by  words,  but  corresponding  to  which 
there  is  no  object  in  reality,”  t 

So,  Brahman,  being  devoid  of  name  and  form,  is  also 
devoid  of  existence  which  is  always  associated  with  a name 
and  a form.  This  view  is  quite  on  all  fours  with  the 
statements  of  the  sruti  such  as  the  following : 

“ Non-existent,  verily,  this  at  first  was.”  I 

“ Whence  words  recede.”  § 


♦ Ohhan,  Up.  8-14-1.  f Yoga-sutras  l-9^  J Tai.-Up,  2-7-1. 
§ Ibid.  2-9-1, 


BRAHMAN  AS  CREATOR. 


Am  VL] 


33J 


Then  follows  the  teaching  ‘ not  thus,  not  thus  * 

“ Neither  coarse  nor  fine,  neither  short  nor  long.”  t 
So,  we  conclude  that  Brahman  does  not  exist. 

As  against  the  Nihilist  who  argues  thus,  the  sruti  esta- 
blishes the  existence  of  Brahman  by  an  argument  in  the  fol- 
lowing form  : The  Paramitnian,  as  the  Being  who  desired, 
must  be  existent,  just  as  a man  who  desires  svarga  and 
the  like  exists.  He  is  also  the  Being  who  thought,  and 
therefore,  like  other  thinkers  such  as  a king’s  minister.  He 
must  be  existent.  ’ He  is  also  the  creator,  and  therefore, 
like  all  other  creators  such  as  a potter  who  makes  pots, 
He  must  be  existent.  The  very  existence  you  have  asserted 
of  names  and  forms  is  itself  Brahman  as  we  understand 
Him,  the  names  and  forms  being  mere  illusions  set  up  by 
Mayd  in  the  substratum  of  Brahman  who  alone  is  existent. 
As  to  the  texts  of  the  sruti  referred  to  as  supporting  the 
Nihilist’s  position,  their  meaning  will  be  explainel  in  the 
sequel. 


t Bri.-Up.  2-3-6.  t Bri.-Up.3-8.8, 


CH APTE  R I I I . 


BRAHMAN’S  EXISTENCE  AS  JIVA, 


Brahman  entering:  the  Universe. 

The  sruti  now  presents  another  argument  to  prove 
Brahman’s  Existence.  Brahman,  as  the  Being  who  enter- 
ed the  creation,  is  existent,  like  a person  who  enters  the 
house  or  the  like. 

I livsti 

7.  This  having  sent  foith,  into  that  very  thing 
He  then  entered- 

Having  emanated  the  universe,  what  did  He  do  ? In 
answer  the  sruti  says  : Into  that  very  universe  which 
was  created,  He  then  entered. 

He,  the  Lord  of  Lords,  the  MAyivin,  the  Wonder-worker, 
having  created  the  universe,  then  entered  that  very 
universe  by  the  same  miyi  or  mysterious  power,  in  the 
same  way  that  a garland  is  said  to  enter  the  serpent,  &c.,  for 
which  it  is  mistaken. — (S). 

Having  emanated  all  forms  (sarlras)  in  existence,  from 
the  Hirawyagarbha  down  to  unmoving  objects,  the  Para- 
m&tman  entered  those  very  forms  which  He  brought  into 
bdng. 


Anu  Vi.]  brahman's  EXISTENCE  ils  jivA.  5«5 

No  literal  interpretation  of  entering:  is  possible. 

Now  we  have  to  enquire  '*  how  He  entered  into  the 
creation.  Did  He  who  emanated  the  universe  enter 
into  it  in  the  self-same  form  (as  the  Emanator)  or  in  a 
different  form  ? 

{Question)  : — Which  of  the  two  appears  to  be  reason- 
able ? 

{Answer)  : — The  participial  form,  ‘having  sent  forth’, 
indicates  that  the  Emanator  Himself  entered  into  the 
'universe. 

{The  opponent)  : — This  does  not  stand  to  reason  if 
Brahman  is  the  Cause  (of  the  universe)  as  clay  (is  of 
pots  &c.),  inasmuch  as  the  effect  is  one  with  the  cause. 
(To  explain) : Since  the  cause  itself  is  transformed  into 
the  effect,  it  does  not  stand  to  reason  to  say  that 
the  cause  enters  once  more,  separately,  (into  the 
effect),  subsequent  to  the  production  of  the  effect,  like 
one  that  had  not  already  entered  it.  Indeed,  over 
and  above  the  transformation  of  clay  in  the  form 
of  a jar,  there  is  no  entering  of  clay  into  the  jar.  So 
we  explain  as  follows  : Just  as  clay  may  enter  into  the 
jar  in  the  form  of  dust,  so  also,  the  Atman  may  enter 
in  a different  form  into  the  universe  composed  of 
names  and  forms.  And  the  sruti  also  says  elsewhere 
“ Having  entered  in  this  form,  in  the  form  of  jiva.”  t 

* This  enquiry  is  put  in  a simpler  and  clearer  form  by 
Sayam  in  the  sequel.  Vide.  p.  532,  ff. 

t Cliha.  Up.  C.-3-2, 


5*$  ' brahma-vidya  explained.  [AmndA-Valli. 

{Anmer) This  does  not  stand  to  reason,  for 
Brahman  is  one.  No  doubt  a cause  like  clay  may,  in  the 
form  of  dust,  enter  the  jar,  because  clay  is  multiple  in 
its  constitution  and  is  made  up  of  parts,  and  there  is  a 
place  not  already  filled  in  by  dust.  On  the  contrary, 
Atman  is  one,  and  is,  moreover,  partless  ; and  there  is 
no  place  not  already  filled  in  by  Him.  Wherefore  the 
entering  of  Brahman  cannot  be  explained  (in  the  way 
suggested  above'. 

{The  opponent) : — Then,  how  is  the  entering  to  be 
explained  ? And  the  entering  must  be  a thing  not 
opposed  to  reason,  as  it  is  taught  in  the  sruti,  in  the 
words  “ into  that  very  thing  He  then  entered.”  So,  let 
us  explain  it  by  supposing  that  Brahman  is  made  up  of 
-parts.  As  having  parts,  it  is  quite  possible  that  He 
entered  into  the  names  and  forms  in  the  creation  in 
the  form  of  jtva,  like  the  hand  entering  the  mouth. 

As  to  the  sruti  speaking  of  Brahman’s  entrance,  let  us 
suppose  that  Brahman  is  finite.  Then,  like  the  hand  enter- 
ing the  mouth,  the  entering  of  Brahman  is  possible. — (S). 

(Answer): — This  explanation  will  not  do ; for  there  is 
no  void.  (To  explain)  : When  the  Atman  transformed 
Himself  into  the  effect  (universe),  there  can  exist  no 
place  for  Him  to  enter  in  the  form  of  jiva, — no  place 
which  is  devoid  of  Atman,  over  and  above  the  place  of 
the  effect  (universe)  consisting  of  names  and  forms. 

Whether  finite  or  infinite  in  space,  the  cause  does  per- 
vade the  effect  and  so  there  is  no  place — devoid  of  Atman — 
which  the  Supreme  may  enter  in  the  form  of  jlva. — (S). 


Anu  VI.]  B^HMAn's  EXISTENCE  AS  jtyA.  5*7 

{The  opponent) : — He  enters  the  cause  itself; 

That  is  to  say,  the  Lord  (as  jiva)  so  enters  the  universe 
which  He  created  that  it  finally  assumes  the  form  the 
cause. — (S). 

{Answer): — Then  he  would  no  longer  be  the  jivitman, 
just  as  a jar  ceases  to  be  a jar  when  it  enters  into  clay 
{t.  e.  when  it  becomes  clay). 

The  opponent’s  suggestion  is  tantamount  to  saying  that 
this  passage  teaches  that  the  effect  is  not  an  effect,  that  it 
is  one  with  the  cause,  just  as  the  passage  “ I am  Brahman  ” 
teaches  that  the  Ego  is  one  with  Brahman.  Then  where  is 
the  effect,  the  universe,  for  tsvara  to  enter  ? — (S.  & A.) 

Besides,  as  the  sruti  itself  says  “ Into  that  very  thing 
(the  universe,  the  effect)  He  then  entered  ”,  it  will  not 
do  to  hold  that  He  (as  jlva)  entered  into  the  cause. 

{The  opponent) : — It  may  be  that  Brahman  becomes 
another  kind  of  effect.  (To  explain) : By  the  words 
“ Into  that  very  thing  He  then  entered  ”,  the  sruti 
means  that  Brahman  first  becomes  an  effect  in  the 
form  of  jiva  and  then  becomes  transformed  into  another 
kind  of  effect  consisting  of  names  and  forms. 

The  Brahman’s  entering  may  be  explained  to  mean  that 
jiva,  an  effect  of  Paramatraan,  becomes  transformed  into 
ahankara  and  other  effects. — (S.  & A.). 

{Answer) : — No,  because  it  is  opposed  to  reason.  A 
pot,  for  instance,  cannot  become  another  pot.  Moreover, 
it  is  opposed  to  the  sruti  which  speaks  of  distinction : 
it  is  opposed  to  the  texts  wnich  presuppose  a distinc- 


5ad  BRAHMA-T^mYA'EXpiAiNBD^  \Anancla‘Va,llii. 

tion  between  jlva  and  the  universe  consisting  of  names 
an<^  forms.  And  also  because  of  the  impossibility  of 
moksha  if  jlva  becomes  (the  universe  of  names  and 
forms).  Certainly  no  one  becomes  that  very  thing  from 
which  he  is  to  be  released  ; no  person,  such  as  a robber, 
who  is  bound  (with  a chain),  becomes  that  chain  itself. 

{An  opponent)  : — Let  us  explain  the  passage  to  mean 
that  Brahman  transformed  Himself  as  the  external  and 
the  internal ; that  is  to  say,  that  Brahman  Himself,  the 
Cause,  became  at  once  transformed  in  the  form  of  the 
receptacles  such  as  the  bodies  (sarira)  and  also  in  the 
form  of  the  jivas  who  are  to  be  contained  within  those 
bodies. 

{Answer)  : — This  will  not  do  ; for  entrance  is  possible 
only  in  the  case  of  one  who  stands  outside.  We  cannot 
indeed  conceive  that,  when  one  thing  lies  within 
another,  the  same  thing  enters  into  that  other.  One 
can  enter  a thing  only  when  he  is  outside  that  thing  ; 
for,  in  that  sense  alone  is  the  word  ‘ enter  ’ understood 
in  common  parlance,  as  when  we  say,  ‘ he  built  the 
house  and  entered  it.’ 

{An  opponent)  : — The  entering  may  be  likened  to  re- 
flection, as  in  the  case  of  water  and  sun’s  reflection 
in  it. 

{Answer) : — No ; for  Brahman  is  infinite  and  incor- 
poreal. We  can  only  conceive  a finite  and  corporeal 
object  being  reflected  in  another  object  which  is  trans- 
parent, as  the  sun  is  reflected  in  water.  On  the 


Am,  . VI,]  BZISTltKai  «S ]iv&.  539 

contrary,  we  cannot  understand  how  the  entrance  of 
Atman  may  be  likened  to  reflection,  seeing  that  He 
is  incorporeal,  that  He  is  the  Cause  of  &k&sa  &c.,  that 
He  is  infinite,  afid  that  there  can  exist  no  object  re- 
moved from  Him  in  space,  which  may  serve  as  the 
reflecting  medium. 

The  true  import  of  the  passage. 

{The  opponent) : — If  so,  then  there  is  no  entering  at 
all.  Neither  do  we  find  any  other  way  (of  explaining  the 
passage).  But  the  sruti  says,  “into  that  very  thing  He 
then  entered;”  and  for  us  the  sruti  is  the  source  of  know- 
ledge as  regards  supersensuous  matters.  However  much 
we  try,  we  cannot  make  anything  out  of  this  passage. 

{Another  opponent) : — Ah!  then,  as  conveying  no  mean- 
ing, we  have  to  ignore  * altogether  the  passage,  “This 
having  sent  forth,  into  that  very  thing  He  then  entered.” 

{Answer)  : — No  ; for  the  passage  is  intended  to  treat 
of  quite  a different  thing  altogether. — Why  all  this 
discussion  beside  the  point  ? For,  this  passage  is  intend- 
ed to  treat  of  quite  a different  thing  with  which  the  sruti 
is  at  present  concerned.  We  should  call  that  to  our  mind. 
The  sruti  (Anandavalli)  started  with  the  following 
words : 

“ The  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the  Supreme.” 
“ Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite  is  Brahman.  Whoso 
knoweth  the  one  hid  in  the  cave ” 


• like  a chUd’B  babble.— (S). 


67 


' 53Q  . BRAHiiA^vroyA  bxpuinbd,  [Amnda-VdU. 

This  last  passage  is  intended  to  teach  that  Brahman  is 
no  other  than  the  Atman,  the  Self.  And  to  show  that 
Atnian  is  no  other  than  Brahman,  Atman  is  qualified 
“This  Self  is  Brahman.”  * Thus,  when  these  two 
negative  aspects  of  their  identity  have  been  re- 
cognised, then  liberation  is  attained.  Because  the  know- 
ledge productive  of  this  result  is  intended  to  be  taught  here, 
therefore  the  non-dual  Brahman  is  said  to  be  hidden  in  the 
‘ cave,  ’ is  said  (in  the  mantra  and  brAhmawa)  to  have 
entered  the  mind  (antaA-kara»a). — (S). 

It  is  knowledge  concerning  Brahman  that  is  to  be 
imparted  here ; and  it  is  the  subject  with  which  the 
sruti  is  concerned.  And  with  a view  to  impart  know- 
ledge of  Brahman,  the  sruti  treated  of  the  emanation 
from  Him  of  the  effects,  from  the  akiisa  down  to  the 
physical  body  ; then  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  was 
begun  (in  the  section  which  treats  of  the  five  kosas 
or  sheaths).  There  the  sruti  taught  that  within 
the  Annamaya  self  there  is  another  self  formed 
of  Pr&»a,  that  within  the  latter  there  is  the  Manomaya 
self,  and  that  within  this  latter  there  is  the  Vijwinamaya 
self,  and  thus  the  sruti  taught  that  Brahman  dwells  in 
the  cave  of  intelligence  (Vij»l.na).  Again  the  sruti 
taught  that  therein  lies  the  Anandamaya  self,  the  Self 
in  a specific  form.  Further  on,  seeing  that  it  is  only 
through  cognising  His  manifestation  as  the  Inanda- 
maya  that  the  Atman — the  finality  of  ever-increasing 
bliss,  “ Brahman,  the  tail,  the  support  ”,  the  basis  of 
all  differentiated  manifestation,  (in  Himself)  devoid  of 


^i.1  . BRAHMAN  ’S  EXISTENCE  AS  jiVA.  . 53I 

•*  * 

all  differentiation — can  be  recognised  in  that  very  cave, 
He  is  represented*  to  have  entered  into  it.t 

It  is  the  Undifferentiated  One  who  is  to  be  cognised  in  this 
cave  of  intelligence  (buddhi)  which  is  the  source  of  all 
differentiation ; the  entrance  is  therefore  an  imaginary 
representation,  not  an  actual  fact.— (S). 

Not  elsewhere,  indeed,  is  Brahman  cognised,  because 
He  is  in  Himself  devoid  of  all  special  manifestation. 
Our  experience  shews  that  it  is  only  association  with 
a specific  condition  that  enables  us  to  cognise  Him. 
Just  as  Rlihu  (the  eclipsing  shadow)  is  cognised  only 
when  in  association  with  a specific  object  such  as  the 
sun  or  the  moon,  so  also  it  is  association  of  the  Atman 
with  the  cave  of  intelligence  (antaA-kara«a)  that  causes 
the  cognition  of  Brahman,  because  of  the  proximity 
and  luminous  nature  of  the  intelligence  (anta^-karawa). 
And  just  as  the  cognition  of  jars  and  other  objects 
is  associated  with  light,  so  also  the  cognition  of  Atman 
is  associated  with  the  light  of  a buddhi-pratyaya  or 
intellectual  state. 

Because  in  the  luminous  intelligence  (antaA-kara>)a),  we 
perceive  Brahman  by  illusion  as  the  seer,  hearer  &c.,  there- 
fore the  Upanishad  represents  Him  as  having  entered  the 
intelligence,  with  a view  to  teach  the  indentity  of  the  Self 
and  Brahman. — ( S & A ). 

So  the  theme  with  which  the  Upanishad  started  in 


• in  the  passage  under  consideration— (V ), 
f Tho  cave  of  Vijnanamaya. — (V). 


53*  5RAHMA-V1DYA  EXPLAINED,  [Ananda-Volli. 

the  passage  “ the  one  hid  in  the  cave  ”,  in  the  cave 
which  causes  cognition  of  Brahman,  is  again  treated  of 
in  the  words  “this  having  emanated,  into  that  very  thing 
He  then  entered,” — this  latter  passage  forming  a sort  of 
commentary  on  the  former.  He  who  emanated  &k&sa 
etc.,  emanated  this  universe  around  us  and  then  entered 
into  it.  He  is  cognised  within,  in  the  cave  of  intellect 
(buddhi),  in  such  specific  forms  of  manifestation  as  seer, 
hearer,  thinker,  knower,  and  so  on.  It  is  this  which 
constitutes  His  entrance. 

Moreover,  in  the  words  “Thereof,  this  one  is  the  Self 
embodied,”  the  sruti  teaches  that  He  who  has  entered  the 
heart  and  He  who  has  not  entered  the  heart  are  identical, 
for  the  Supreme  Brahman  Himself  has  assumed  the  form  of 
jiva  by  entering  into  the  five  kosas.  This  explains  why  the 
sruti,  in  the  sequel  of  this  Anuv&ka,  teaches  the  absence  in 
the  Supreme  Self  of  all  conditions  ascribed  to  Him  such  as 
agency  connected  with  the  act  of  entering.  Therefore,  with 
a view  to  teach  the  oneness  of  Kshetraj»a  and  Is  vara  by  dis- 
carding all  distinction  between  the  two.  He  who  has  not 
actually  entered  the  universe  is  represented  to  have  entered 
it.-(S). 

Therefore,  Brahman,  the  Cause,  exists.  So  we  should 
know  Him  as  existing  only. 

A clear  summary  of  the  discussion. 

[The  foregoing  discussion  is  put  in  a simpler  and  clearer 
form  by  SAyana  as  follows  : ] 

Let  us  now  enquire  : Did  the  Paramatman,  who  was  the 
Creator,  enter  the  universe  in  the  same  form  as  Creator  or 
in  a different  form  ? 


AnU  VL]  BRAHMAN^S  EXISTENCE  AS  jlVA,  ; 533 

iOne  answer)  ; — The  participial  form  “having  emanated*' 
shews  that  creation  and  entrance  are  the  acts  of  one  .and  the 
same  agent  and  that  therefore  Brahman  entered  as  Creator 
Himself. 

{Objection)  : — This  view  cannot  be  maintained  ; for,  in  the 
case  of  a material  cause  (upid^na),  like  a clod  of  clay,  the 
entering  is  impossible.  The  same  clod  of  clay  which  has 
been  transformed  into  a pot  cannot  itself  enter  the  pot. 
Similarly,  how  is  it  possible  for  the  Creator,  who  trans- 
formed Himself  as  bodies,  to  enter  into  those  very  bodies  ? 

{Another  answer) : — Then,  let  us  suppose  that  Brahman 
entered  in  a different  form.  Just  as  clay,  in  the  form  of 
dust,  may  enter  a pot  produced  out  of  a clod  of  clay,  so 
also,  if  Brahman’s  entrance  as  Isvara  is  not  possible,  let 
Him  enter  in  the  form  of  the  jiva. 

{Objection)  \ — Not  so.  The  non-dual  cannot  have  two 
forms.  Even  granting  this  possible,  there  can  be  no  place 
for  Brahman  to  enter.  As  the  material  cause,  He  is  already 
present  in  all  the  bodies  ; and  therefore,  as  there  is  no  place 
devoid  of  the  ParamMman,  where  can  He  enter  ? 

{Another  answer)  \ — It  may  be  that  He  as  jiva  enters  the 
Paramatman  (the  cause)  Himself  who  is  present  in  those 
bodies  (as  their  material  cause). 

{Objection)  : — No ; for,  in  the  words  “ into  that  very  thing 
He  then  entered,”  the  sruti  teaches  that  He  entered  the 
bodies  that  were  created. 


{Another  answer)  :--The  effect,  namely,  the  body  that  was 


5H  brahma-vioya  explained.  [Anatidd-VallL 

created,  is  again  transformed  into  another  effect  in  the  form 
of  jiva,  and  this  transformation  is  spoken  of  as  entrance. 

[OhjecHon) No  ; for,  we  do  not  find  one  transformation 
such  as  pot  being  itself  transformed  into  another  transform- 
ation such  SB  a dish, 

{Answer) : — Brahnian’s  entering  may  be  likened  to  reflec- 
tion, like  the  sun’s  reflection  in  water, 

{Objection) ; — No ; for  Brahman  is  infinite  and  incorporeal, 
and  there  is  no  medium  of  reflection  removed  from  Him  in 
space.  The  orb  of  the  sun,  which  is  limited  in  space  and 
corporeal,  becomes  reflected  in  a medium  such  as  water 
removed  from  it  in  space.  On  the  contrary,  Brahman 
is  not  limited  in  space,  nor  corporeal ; neither  is  there  any 
medium  (upftdhi)  whatever  which  is  removed  from  Brahman 
in  space.  Therefore  in  no  way  can  Brahman’s  entering  be 
explained. 

{Conclusion) : — This  entering  should  be  explained  like  the 
creation  of  the  universe.  Just  as  the  Supreme  Lord  (Para- 
mervara)  created  by  the  power  of  His  miya  this  universe 
of  inconceivable  design,  so  also  by  the  same  power  of  m&yft 
He  may  have  entered  it. 

Here  one  may  say : The  sruti  does  not  mean  that  this 
mysterious  (m^yimaya)  creation  of  hikisOL,  etc.,  should  be 
regarded  as  real.  The  sruti  only  means  that  the  effect  does 
not  exist  apart  from  the  cause  any  more  than  a jar  exists 
apart  from  clay,  and  merely  refers  to  the  universe  as  set  up 
by  illusion  (bhrftnti),  with  a view  to  establish  the  infinite- 
ness of  Brahman  already  stated.— Similarly,  then,  we  argue 
that  the  sruti,  having  first  explained  the  proposition  that 


AfW,  VI.]  brahman’s  EXISTENCE  AS  jlVA.  535 

Brahman  is  ‘ hid  in  the  cave  ’ by  teaching  at  the  aid,  in 
the  exposition  of  the  five  sheaths,  that  ‘ Brahman  is  the 
tail,’  refers  to  the  entering  of  Brahman,  which  is  a mere 
illusion,  only  with  a view  to  explain  more  clearly  the  same 
thing  over  again.  Just  as  a person  who  builds  a house  and 
enters  it  is  found  to  remmn  within  it,  so  also,  Brahman  i$ 
perceived,  in  the  intellect  (buddhi)  situated  in  the  heart- 
lotus,  in  specific  aspects  as  seer,  bearer,  knower,  and  so  on, 
as  though  He  created  iik&sa  and  other  things  in  the  universe 
and  then  entered  within  it.  This  truth  is  figuratively  re- 
presented as  Brahman  entering  the  universe. 

Another  passage  of  the  same  import. 

This  entering  is  taught  by  the  Vd.jasaneyins  in  the 
following  words : — 

“ He,  this  one,  here  entered,  up  to  the  very 
tips  of  the  finger-nails,  as  a razor  in  a 
razor-case,  or  as  fire  in  a fire-place 
(fire-wood)  ” * 

The  meaning  of  this  passage  is  explained  very  clearly  in 
the  Vartika-sira  as  follows : 

The  One  Life  and  Its  aspects. 

* He  ’ refers  to  the  Witness  (Sdkshin),  the  illuminator 
(Witness)  of  the  Unmanifested  ; ‘ this  one  ’ refers  to  him 
who  dwells  in  (or  limited  by  the  up&dhi  of ) the  body  immed- 
iately perceived  by  all. 

[Objection) ; — The  Adhishfhftna,  the  Supreme  or  Basic 
Consciousness,  being  non-'dual,  whereas  the  dweller  in  the 


* Bri.  Up.  1-4-7. 


536  BHAHMA-VIDYA-BXPLAINED.  [Aftandu-  VotlL 

body  is  associated  with  duality  (body),  it  is  impossible  to 
speak  of  them  as  one,  in  the  words  “ He,  this  one.** 

(Answer) No ; for,  in  the  case  of  one  who  (by  illusion) 
does  not  know  the  true  nature  of  the  Real,  nothing  is  im- 
possible,* as  witness  the  ether  (ak^a)  perceived  by  the  eye 
as  blue  like  a cloth  of  blue  colour.  The  question  of 
possibility  or  impossibility  arises  in  the  case  of  things 
known  through  proper  evidence,  not  as  regards  things  set 
up  by  illusion. 

By  the  word  ‘ here  * are  denoted  the  bodies,  from  the 
SCltra  (Hirawyagarbha)  down  to  unmoving  objects.  In 
these  bodies,  this  one,  the  jiva,  is  very  clearly  perceived  ; 
and  this  perception  of  Chit  (Life,  Spirit,  Consciousness)  as 
jIva, — made  up  of  a semblance  of  Consciousness  (chidibh^sa) 
and  nescience  (tamas) — is  denoted  by  the  word  ‘ entered.* 
Life  (chit)  in  its  semblance  enters  into — becomes  directly 
associated  with— the  Pratyak-moha,  the  ignorance  of  the  True 
Self ; and  this  semblance  is  present  in  all  transformations  or 
eflFects  of  that  ignorance  and  constitutes  the  upidhi  or 
condition  in  which  Life  (Chit)  enters  the  universe.  Just  as 
the  scarlet  colour  of  the  japa  flower  is  falsely  ascribed  to 
the  white  crystal  (sphatika)  stone,  so  also  this  entering  of 
the  semblance  of  Life  is  falsely  ascribed  to  Life.  Thus,  the 
Supreme  One,  having  created  by  His  own  the  universe 
from  the  Sutra  down  to  unmoving  objects,  entered  it  in  a 
form  which  is  a mere  semblance  of  Himself.  How  far  He 
entered  is  taught  in  the  words  “ to  the  very  tips  of  the 


♦ i.  e,,  it  is  not  impossible  that  he  should  regard  his  Self  as 
limited  by  the  upadhi. 


Anu,  VIA  brahman’s  BXlStltNCfi  AS  jtvA.  53^ 

finger-nails,**  the  presence  of  Life  in  the  body  up  to  the 
very  tips  of  the  finger-nails  being  indicated  iDy  the  body 
being  felt  warm  up  to  that  limit. 

Life  exists  in  the  body,  pervading  it  both  in  a general 
aspect  and  in  particular  aspects:  and  this  twofold  existence 
is  referred  to  in  this  passage  by  the  two  illustrations. 
Just  as  fire  exists  in  the  firewood,  pervading  the  whole  of 
it,  so  also  the  Atman  exists  in  the  body  pervading  the  whole 
of  it ; and  just  as  a razor  lies  in  a razor-case  without  per- 
vading the  whole  of  it,  so  also,  dwelling  within  the  auditory 
and  other  specific  n^ils  (nervous  tubes),  the  Atman  lies 
without  pervading  the  body  in  those  specific  aspects.  Just 
as  different  razors  occupy  different  places  in  the  razor-case, 
so  also  Consciousness  in  different  aspects  occupy  different 
naiis.  In  the  jagrat  (waking)  and  svapna  (dream)  states, 
jiva  presents  both  forms  ; and  in  sushupti  (dreamless  sleep) 
jiva  exhibits  Life  in  its  general  aspect  alone.  Life  in  its 
general  aspect  serves  the  purpose  of  keeping  the  body  alive 
here,  and  Life  in  its  particular  aspects  functioning  in  the 
body  is  concerned  in  thinking  of  objects  such  as  sound. 

Thus  the  passage  speaking  of  Brahman’s  entrance  has 
been  clearly  explained  word  by  word  and  in  its  main 
purport. 

Brahman  does  not  literally  enter  the  Universe. 

Now,  let  us  enquire  into  the  rationale  of  the  teaching. 

Does  Brahman  enter  (the  universe)  (i)  as  Devadatta 
enters  a house,  or  (2)  as  a serpent  enters  a stone,  or  (3)  as 
the  sun’s  orb  enters  water,  or  (4)  as  qualities  enter  a sub- 
stance, or  (5)  as  seeds  enter  the  fruit. 


68 


53®  BRAHMA-VIDYA  B)a»LAINED,  [Afianda^Vatli. 

The  first  illastration  does  not  apply,  for  Devadatta  is 
limited  in  space  and  has  parts,  whereas  the  Atman  is  not 
so.  As  the  Atman,  m His  very  nature,  is  absent  nowhere 
and  pervades  all,  any  limitation  of  Atman  is  inconceivable, 
the  sruti  denying  it  in  the  words  “not  thus,  not  thus.**  * Ac- 
cordingly in  the  case  of  the  Atman  who  is  infinite  and  devoid 
of  parts,  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  entering  a new  and 
different  place  by  leaving  the  former  one. 

. Neither  is  the  second  illustration  applicable,  because  of 
the  Atman’s  not  being  subject  to  transformation.  The 
bhdtas  or  elements  of  matter  are  transformed  into  the  ser- 
pent lying  within  the  stone.  But  the  Atman  is  not  subject 
to  transformation  (pariwAma). 

Nor  is  the  third  illustration  appropriate.  Unlike  the 
water  and  the  sun,  the  body  and  the  Conscious  Atman 
cannot  unite  and  disunite,  and  cannot  therefore  enter  (the 
body  in  the  way  suggested). 

The  fourth  illustration,  too,  does  not  apply,  because  of 
the  Atman’s  being  not  dependent  on  another.  Attributes 
(gu«as)  and  the  like  are  dependent  on  substances  ; but  the 
Atman  is  not  dependent  on  the  body,  the  sruti  speaking  of 
Him  as  “the  Lord  of  all.” 

The  fifth  illustration  is  not  more  apt,  because  of  the 
Atman’s  immutability.  The  seed  is  associated  with  change ; 
but  the  Atman  is  declared  conclusively  in  the  scriptures  to 
be  devmd  of  the  six  changes  to  which  all  things  in  the  uni- 
verse arc  subject. 


♦ Bri.  Up.  2-3-6, 


539 


Anu.  VL]  BRAHItfAK^S  BXISTBNCE  jtVA. 

No  tautology  is  involved  in  the  second  and' fifth  illustra- 
tions being  separately  given  ; for,  there  is  a difference  be- 
tween the  two.  The  serpent  and  the  stone  are  related  as 
container  and  contained,  whereas  the  fruit  and  the  seed 
within  are  related  as  whole  and  part. 

Then,  one  may  say,  it  is  the  limited  jlva  or  individual 
self  who  enters  the  bodies.  So  there  can  be  no  objection. 

You  cannot  say  so,  because  it  is  the  Creator  that  entered. 
As  the  5ruti  says  “this  having  sent  forth,  into  that  very 
thing  He  then  entered,**  the  Creator  and  the  enterer  must  be 
one,  as  when  one  says  “Having  eaten  he  goes.** 

Thus  it  would  at  first  sight  appear  that  Brahman’s  entr- 
ance is  in  no  way  explicable. 

Entering  means  manifestation. 

As  against  the  foregoing,  we  will  now  shew  how 
Brahman’s  entrance  is  explicable.  Devoid  as  He  is  of 
space,  direction  and  the  like,  it  is  not  in  His  essential 
nature  to  actually  enter  into  another.  In  His  case,  the  en- 
tering is  a mere  imaginary  representation,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  solar  orb  reflected  in  a vessel  of  water.  Though  the 
two  cases  differ  in  so  far  as  the  latter,  unlike  the  former, 
admits  of  separation  &c.,  yet  they  are  analogous  in  those 
points  wherein  analogy  is  intended.  Who  can  deny  the 
analogy  between  the  two  in  so  far  as  both  alike  are  capable 
of  perception  only  when  associated  with  an  upAdhi  ? The 
two— the  illustration  and  the  illustrated — agree  in  the 
following  respects : they  are  both  capable  of  perception  only 
in  association  with  an  up&dhi,  i,  only  when  they  are 
limited  or  conditioned  ; they  then  appear  otherwise  than 


54»  ,mKii4*YiDV4  BXjPLAXNBD*  [Anmuio^ValK 

what  they  really  are ; and  they  are  then  manifested  as  many* 
Firsify : the  solar  orb  is  too  bright  in  itself  for  us  to  see,  but 
the  same  orb  is  clearly  seen  when  reflected  in  water  ; simi- 
larly, the  self-luminous  Atman  cannot  be  perceived  when 
unassociated  with  an  upadhi ; but  when  conditioned  by  the 
insentient  physical  body,  &c.,  He  is  clearly  perceived. 
Stcondly : when  a man’s  vision,  obstructed  in  its  course  by 
a mirror  and  turning  its  way  back  towards  his  own  face, 
comprehends  the  face,  an  inverted  image  of  the  face  is  pre- 
sented to  view.  Similarly,  when  the  intellect  influenced  by 
the  body  comprehends  the  Self,  it  makes  out  the  Immutable 
One  as  subject  to  change.  Thirdly  : the  sun,  though  one, 
appears  as  many,  because  of  the  multiplicity  of  the  vessels 
of  water ; so,  too,  owing  to  the  multiplicity  of  the  bodies, 
the  Self,  though  one,  appears  as  many.  Though  He  is 
devoid  of  all  multiplicity  and  its  cause  though  He  is  not 
divisible,  though  there  is  no  witness  other  than  Himself, 
yet,  in  virtue  of  the  illusion  of  entering,  He  seems  to  be  en- 
dued with  such  attributes.  Prior  to  it,  the  true  Inner  Self 
(Pratyagfttman)  was  devoid  of  all  form,— was  not  a seer, 
or  a hearer,  or  the  like.  On  the  birth  of  Name  andd  Form  t, 
He  was  endued  with  form,  became  a seer,  ahearer,’and  so 
on.  He  who  is  endued  with  form — he  who  is  the  seer, 
hearer,  and  so  on, — and  He  who  has  no  form,  conditioned 
respectively  by  mind  (buddhi)  and  its  cause  (maya)  are  re- 
spectively designated  as  Kshetrajwa  andtsvara,  the  individual 
soul  and  the  Supreme  Lord.  Through  these  indirectly  is  to 
be  comprehended  the  One  who,  immutable,  knows  “I  smell 

• Objective  perception, 
f the  subjective  and  the  objective  universe. 


Anu.  VL]  brahman’s  existence  as  jlVA* 

this  odor,”  the  One  who  is  the  mere  Witness  of  all.  Just  ai 
the  sun  in  the  heavens  is  comprehended  through  the  suh 
reflected  in  the  vessel  of  water,  so  is  the  All-Witness  to  be 
comprehended  through  him  who  dwells  in  the  intellect  a$ 
the  doer  and  the  enjoyer.  And  just  as  the  luminary,  the 
moon,  is  comprehended  through  the  extremity  of  a tree’s* 
branch  which  is  not  luminous,  so  is  the  Atman,  the  Consci- 
ous One,  to  be  comprehended  through  the  upadhi  of  the 
Cause,  which  is  not  conscious. 

It  is  this  very  illusion  of  separate  individuality  (jlvitman) 
which,  because  of  its  use  in  the  comprehension  of  the  True 
Inner  Self,  is  here  represented  as  the  entering  (of  Brah- 
man), analogously  with  the  sun’s  image  reflected  in  the 
water  in  a vessel.  Certainly,  the  Supreme  One,  devoid  as 
He  is  of  time,  space,  or  direction,  cannot  be  said  to  enter,  in 
theliteralsenseof  the  word,  like  a serpent  entering  a hole ; 
this  entering  must  therefore  be  a mere  imaginary  represent- 
ation from  the  standpoint  of  avidy^  or  ignorance.  Though 
a mere  witness,  uncontaminated  by  any.  He  is,  owing  to 
avidy&«,  for  want  of  discrimination,  perceived  with  the  attri- 
butes of  mind  (buddhi)  and  other  creatures  oi  ignorance 
(avidyi),  as  though  He  were  reflected  in  them.  In  illustration 
of  this,  the  scripture  has  cited  the  analogy  of  fire,  the  sun 
and  air,  thereby  showing  that  the  Atman  is  said  to  have 
entered  the  universe,  though  by  nature  He  cannot  have  en- 
tered it.  As  fire,  (the  sruti  says),  though  one,  entering  the 
world — composed  of  firewood,  stomach  and  the  like — became 
in  form  like  them,  (so  does  the  Inner  Self  of  all  creation , 
though  one,  became  in  form  like  the  various  forms  He 


♦ Kafha^Up,  5-9,  10, JH. 


feRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED.  [Afianda-VoltL 


S4« 

catered) ; but  as  a matter  of  fact  fire  does  not  enter  them. 
As  the  air,  (thesruti  says  again),  though  one,  entering  the 
world  composed  of  different  sorts  of  fans,  assumed  various 
forms,  (so  did  the  Self) ; but  in  point  of  fact  the  air  has  not 
entered  them.  Again  the  sruti  speaks  of  the  sun  as  enter- 
ing water  in  different  vessels  though  it  remains  quite  outside 
them  all.  Similarly,  the  Atman,  too,  though  He  has  not 
entered  the  universe,  looks  as  though  He  has  entered  it. 
As  creation  and  the  like  are  imaginary  representations,  so 
should  the  entering  be  regarded  as  a mere  fiction.  Creation 
does  not  admit  of  a reasonable  explanation  and  is  therefore 
a fiction.  What  is  non-existent  cannot  take  birth  ; and 
what  is  existent  cannot  take  birth  either,  because  it  already 
exists.  In  the  Immutable  One  there  can  be  no  change. 
Therefore  birth  is  due  to  ignorance.  As  for  the  verse  of  the 
jTuti  just  quoted  it  decidedly  speaks  of  creation  &c.,  with 
tfie  mere  view  of  giving  an  insight  into  the  true  nature  of 
the  Pratyagdtman,  the  Inner  Self.  The  entering  of  the 
Self  in  the  particular  parts  of  the  body,  as  illustrated  in 
the  sruti  by  razors  and  the  razor-case,  points  to  His  clear 
perceptibility  even  in  the  senses,  while  the  entering  into 
the  body  as  a whole,  as  illustrated  by  fire  and  firewood, 
points  to  His  pervading  of  the  whole  creation  as  the  sub- 
stratum thereof.  Nowhere  do  we  find  one  thing  altogether 
co-extensive  with  another  except  when  one  of  them  is  the 
substratum  of  which  the  other  is  a false  appearance.  Two 
things  which  are  quite  distinct,  such  as  the  cow  and  the 
horse,  cannot  be  altogether  co-extensive  with  each  other. 
Neither  can  two  things  which  are  altogether  identical  be 
said  to  be  co-extensive  with  each  other,  inasmuch  as  we 
cannot  conceive  one  of  the  two  as  co-extensive  with  the 


AnU*  VI,]  brahman’s  EXISTENCE  AS  jiVA.  ^3 

other.  And  it  is  impossible  to  find  two  things  which  are 
distinct  as  well  as  identical.  We  are  therefore  driven  to  the 
conclusion  that  a thorough-going  co-extensiveness  can  exist 
only  between  a substratum  and  its  false  appearances.  Just 
as  a garland  enters— is  mistaken  for — a serpent  only  on 
account  of  darkness,  but  not  in  reality,  so  also,  it  is  by  the 
power  of  miyA  that  our  Self  has  entered  the  things  set  up 
by  the  ignorance  of  the  Inner  Self.  Thus  the  Self  has  en- 
tered the  universe  in  two  ways,  (i)  by  way  of  pervading 
the  whole  universe  and  (2)  by  way  of  revealing  Himself  (as 
jiva  or  the  individual  soul). 

Brahman  in  manifestation  is  unaffected 
by  multiplicity. 

Now  we  shall  answer  the  objections  that  are  levelled 
against  this  doctrine  of  entering. 

Firstly^  it  has  been  said  : If  the  Supreme  One  Himself 
entered  the  universe,  then,  because  of  the  multiplicity  of 
the  things  wherein  He  has  entered,  and  with  which  He 
has  become  identical,  it  would  follow  that  the  Supreme 
Lord  becomes  manifold. 

Our  doctrine  is  not  open  to  this  objection  ; for,  we  may 
turn  the  table  by  asking  : As  the  many  things  in  the 
universe  have  become  identical  with  the  One,  why  do  you 
not  say  that  there  must  be  a unity  ? In  this  case,  where 
both  the  alternatives  are  possible,  the  scripture  is  the  de- 
termining authority,  and  it  denies  all  multiplicity.  A rope 
does  not  become  manifold  in  virtue  of  the  multiplicity  of  the 
objects  for  which  it  is  mistaken,  such  as  a serpent,  etc.  and 
the  5ruti says  that  the  One  Deva  has  entered  the  universe  in 


=*  Sve.  Up,  6-11. 


5H  B«^MA.VIDYA  EXPLAINED.  [Amnda-Volli. 

the  various  forms.  We  have  therefore  to  regard  the  t$vara, 
the  Supreme  Lotd,  as  One  alone,  like  the  d>kd>5a. 

Brahman  as  the  Es:o  is  unaffected  by 
pleasure  and  pain- 

Secondly^  it  has  been  also  said  : Since  those  into  whom 
He  has  entered  are  worldly  beings  (sawsirins),  and  since  the 
Supreme  has  become  one  with  them,  it  would  follow  that 
He  also  is  a being  of  the  world  (saws^rin)  and  is  subject  to 
its  sorrows. 

We  answer  : The  sruti  says  that  He  has  risen  above 
hunger,  etc. 

{Objection) : — It  cannot  be  so  ; for  we  see  in  Him  pleasure 
pain,  extreme  delusion,  and  the  like. 

{Answer) : — No  ; the  sruti  + says.  He  is  not  tainted  by 
the  world’s  sorrows,  He  is  quite  outside  the  world.  The 
experience  of  sorrbws  and  the  like  can  find  room  in  that  one 
who  is  created  by  the  upfiidhi,  it  pertains  to  that  semblance 
of  Consciousness  (chidabh5,sa)  which  manifests  itself  in  the 
upAdhi.  If  Atman  were  to  experience  pain,  who  is  the  wit- 
ness of  that  sufferer  ? The  sufferer  cannot  be  a witness  ; 
and  so  also  the  witness  cannot  be  a sufferer.  Without  un- 
dergoing change,  one  cannot  suffer  pain  ; and  how  can  one  be 
a witness  when  one  undergoes  change  ? Wherefore  I,  who  am 
the  witness  of  the  thousands  of  changing  mental  states,  am 
subject  to  no  change.  Pleasure  and  pain  affect  the  mind 
which  has  the  semblance  of  Consciousness  (chid^LbhA.sa) 
in  it  and  regards  the  aggregate  of  the  body  and  the  senses  as 
the  self.  Like  a spectator  regarding  the  man  who  is  ready  to 
fight  with  a club  in  hand,  so  does  the  witness  regard  the 

♦ Bri.  Up.  3-6-1.  f Kaiha-Up,  6-11. 


Am.VL'l  brahman's  BXISTEK«  AS  jiVJH.  345 

mind,  which  is  subject  to  pleasure  and  pain,  standing  i^)art 
away  from  the  aggregate.  Accordingly,  the  pain  that  is 
felt  through  the  senses  pertains  only  to  the  not-Self.  The 
Veda  declares  that  senses  do  not  comprehend  the  Inner  Self  i 
the  sruti  says,  whereby  can  one  know  the  Knower  ?” 
Further,  it  says,  “It  is  quite  distinct'  from  the  knowH 
and  quite  distinct  from  the  unknown.’*  f The  knowledge 
“ I feel  pain,”  which  affects  only  the  semblance  of  the  Self, 
is  ascribed  to  the  Self  by  the  deluded  ; and  with  the  wise  it 
has  only  a secondary  sense.  Moreover,  how  can  pain  per- 
tain to  the  Self,  since  it  is  felt  in  particular  parts  of  the 
body,  thus : * I feel  great  pain  in  the  tip  of  the  nose,  in  the 
tip  of  the  foot-thumb  ’ and  so  on  ? If  pain  pertained  to  the 
Inner  Self,  it  would  pervade  the  whole  body  like  conscious- 
ness, and  would  not— as  pertaining,  like  consciousness,  to 
the  very  nature  of  the  Seer — be  repulsive  to  us. 

Against  this  it  may  be  said  as  follows  : Since  the  sruti 
says  that  all  things  are  dear  only  as  causing  pleasure  to  the 
Self,  pleasure  pertains  to  the  Self. 

We  answer  ; this  is  not  right ; for,  in  the  words  “ when 
there  is  a creation  of  other  things,  then  one  sees  another,”  J 
the  sruti  teaches  that  all  duality  including  pleasure  pertains 
to  the  illusory  self  ; and  in  the  words  “ when  to  him  all  has 
become  the  Self,  then,  whereby  has  one  to  see  and  what  ?”§ 
all  duality  including  pleasure  and  pain  is  denied  when  the 
Self  has  been  known.  If  this  is  not  convincing  to  you,  it  is 
on  account  of  your  sin  ; but  to  me,  it  is  a matter  of  direct 
experience.  To  the  vision  turned  solely  towards  the  Inner 
One,  there  is  no  evil  of  any  kind  in  the  Self. 


• Bfi.  24-14.  t Kena.  Up.  1-3.  I Bri.  4-3-31.  § Ibid.  2-4^14. 


546  . siUHiu-vtDYA  mLAiNED^  [Ananda^^VolU^ 

It  is  true  that  the  Tirkikas  lay  down  the  dogma  that, 
qualities  such  as  desire  and  hatred  pertain  to  the  Self ; 
but  it  cannot  stand  the  test  of  reason.  If  the  Self  be  always 
a matter  of  mere  inference,  then  his  suffering  cannot  be 
perceived  through  mind.  If  the  Self  be  perceived,  then 
there  can  be  no  perceiver.  Being  devoid  of  parts,  He  can- 
not be  both  the  perceiver  and  the  perceived.  If  made  of 
parts.  He  would  be  impermanent.  Wherefore,  the  Atman 
is. not  the  sufferer  of  pain. 

(Objection) : — If  the  Supreme  Self  be  not  subject  to  pain, 
a.nd  as  no  other  being  really  exists,  where  is  the  sufferer  of 
pain  ? It  is  for  the  cessation  of  pain  that  you  study  the  Upa- 
nishads. 

(Answer) : — We  study  the  Upanishad  for  the  mere  anni- 
hilation of  the  illusion  that  I am  the  sufferer  of  pain,  an 
illusion  caused  by  ignorance  of  the  True  Self.  Just  as  that 
one  among  ten  persons  who,  seeing  only  the  nine  others, 
does  not,  on  account  of  illusion,  see  himself  as  the  tenth, 
though  all  the  while  he  is  the  tenth  man  seeing  the  nine 
others,  so  also,  while  seeing  all  that  is  not-self,  he  who  does 
not  know  the  real  nature  of  the  Self  does  not  know 
of  the  oneness  of  the  Self,  though  as  the  one  Self  he  sees  all 
that  is  outside  the  Self.  When  the  ignorance  of  the  fact 
that  he  is  the  tenth  man  is  burnt  up  in  the  fire  of  the  true 
knowledge  which  arises  when  another  man  tells  him  ‘ you 
are  the  tenth,’  then  the  tenth  man  sees  that  he  is  the  tenth. 
Similarly,  having  burnt  up  the  Self-ignorance  in  the  fire  of 
the  knowledge  which  arises  from  the  teaching  of  the  sruti 
“ That  thou  art,”  * one  attains  the  oneness  of  the  Self,  as 


* Chha.  6-9*4. 


^ AUU^  VL]'  BRAH^fAN’s  EXISTENCE  its  jlVA.  >^7 

the  result  of  that  knowledge.  By  means  of  the  scripture 
and  the  teacher,  set  up  by  the  ignorance  of  the  Inner  Self, 
one  attains  to  the  unity  of  the  Self,  a unity  which  is  of^osed 
to  the  very  means  by  which  it  is  attained ; and  all  this  is  due 
to  MiyL 

Thus,  it  is  not  possible  for  schoolmen  to  level  against 
our  system  any  objection  whatsoever  based  on  the  doctrine 
of  entrance.  Hence  the  soundness  of  our  doctrine  of 
entrance. 

Other  passages,  too,  speaking  of  the  entrance  of  Brahman 
should  be  explained  in  the  same  way.  The  Nnsiwha- 
Uttara-Tapaniya,  for  instance,  says : 

‘‘  Having  created  and  entered  the  Vir^ij,  the 
Devatis,  and  the  sheaths,  the  Undeluded  acts 
as  if  He  were  deluded,  only  by  Mayd,.”  * 

Linga^deha  is  the  upadhi  of  Jiva. 

The  upidhi  of  the  vital  breath  (pr&wa-v&yu)  is  the  means 
whereby  the  All-pervading  enters  the  physical  body.  And 
accordingly  the  Maitreya-Upanishad  says ; 

‘‘  He,  having  made  Himself  like  the  air, 
entered  within.”  t 

The  entrance  and  the  departure  of  that  vital  air  are  as- 
cribed to  the  Atman.  The  Atharvawikas  say  : 

‘‘ He  thought,  on  what  going  out,  shall  I go 
out,  or  on  what  staying,  shall  I stay  ? Thus 
thinking,  He  life  evolved.”  J 

No  doubt,  the  whole  of  the  Linga-deha  constitutes  the 
upidhi  by  which  the  Atman  effects  His  entrance  into  the 

Op.  cit.  9.  t cit.  2-6.  J Pra«narUp.  6-3. 


:348.  iiMiHiA<^yA  sxpUiWBP. 

grods  phydcal  body  (sthtUa^^mrira) ; still,  vre  must  bear  iq 
miad  that  pr&iia  or  the  vital  principle  is  the  most  prominent 
£sc0r  in  it.  This  upMhi  o!  the  Linga*deha  enters  the  body 
at  the  tips  of  the  feet ; and,  ascending  upwards,  it  establishes 
itself  in  the  two  thighs  lying  above,  in  the  abdomen,  in  the 
chest,  and  in  the  head.  This  has  been  declared  by  the 
Aitareyins  as  follows  : 

Brahman  entered  into  that  man  by  the  tips 
of  his  feet.**  * 

(Objection) : — Elsewhere  in  the  words  He  had  the 
thought : By  which  (end)  should  I enter  it,**  the  same 
Aitareyins  start  with  an  enquiry  into  the  gate  by  which  the 
Supreme  Self  entered  the  body,  and  then  read  as  follows : 

“ Having  cleft  apart  this  end.  He  entered  by 
this  door.**  t 

Here  they  teach  that  He  forced  open  the  gate  in  the 
liead,  i.  e,  the  tip  of  the  sushumn^,  and  entered  within  the 
body  by  that  door.  There  is  thus  a contradiction  between 
these  two  passages. 

{Answer) : — They  are  not  mutually  contradictory  ; for  the 
two  passages  are  intended  to  convey  two  distinct  ideas, 
according  to  two  distinct  standpoints.  The  Linga-deha 
subserving  us  in  perceiving  the  ordinary  world  is  said  to  have 
entered  the  body  through  the  tips  of  the  feet ; whereas,  the 
one*pointed  mental  state  termed  *sam&dhi,’  which  reveals  the 
True  Being,  being  attainable  in  the  sushumnd.,  the  Linga- 
deha  in  that  condition  is  said  to  have  entered  * the  body  at 
that  end.  Bearmg  this  in  view,  the  sruti  says : 


• Aita-Aranya.  2-1-4-1, 


t Ait.  Up.  3-12. 


Am*VlJ\  BRAHMAN^'sBXISTBNCB  AS  jlVA. 

**  Sushumn&,  forsooth,  merged  in  the  Supreme, 
taintless,  and  one  in  form  with  Brahman.”  * 

Now  there  is  a passage  in  the  Aitareya  Upanishad  which 
reads : 


‘‘  Fire,  becoming  speech,  entered  in  the  mouth. 

Air,  becoming  life,  entered  into  the  nostrils,”  t 

This  means  simply  that  speech  and  other  constituent 
parts  of  the  Linga-deha,  which  entered  the  body  through 
the  tips  of  the  feet,  sustained  by  their  respective  Devat&s  or 
presiding  deities,  are  situated  in  the  respective  regions  of  the 
body  such  as  the  cavity  of  the  mouth.  And  the  Chhandogas 
also  read : 

“ Let  Me  now  enter  those  three  beings  in  the 
form  of  this  jiva,  in  the  form  of  this  self,  and 
let  me  then  reveal  names  and  forms.”  J 

‘ Jiva  * means  the  sustainer  of  life  ; and  the  passage 
means  that  Brahman  enters  the  body  in  the  form  of  jlva. 

Thus,  then,  after  a consideration  of  the  meaning  of  this 
and  such  other  . passages,  we  conclude  that  the  Supreme 
Self  enters  the  body  as  jlva. 


Kshura-Up.  15,  + Op,  cit.  2-4.  X Op,  oit.  6-3-2, 


chapter  IV. 


THE  aiVA. 

Now,  to  discuss  some  points  concerning  the  nature  of 
jlva. 

Jiva  is  not  the  Creator. 

(Vedanta-sutras,  II.  iv.  20-23.) 

In  the  Ved^inta-stitras,  it  has  been  shown  that  jlva  is  not 
the  creator  of  Names  and  Forms.  The  disquisition  is  di- 
gested in  the  following  form  : 

[Prima  facie  view) : — The  five  elements  having  been  created 
by  isvara,  it  must  be  jlva  and  none  else  who  creates 
Names  and  Forms,  the  material  objects  we  perceive,  such 
as  the  mountains  and  the  like.  For,  in  the  words,  “ Let  me 
now  enter  these  three  beings  in  the  form  of  this  jiva,  who 
is  myself,  and  let  me  then  reveal  Names  and  Forms,**  * 
the  sruti  declares  that  it  is  in  the  form  of  jlva  that  Is  vara  is 
engaged  in  the  creation. 

(Conclmion) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  follows: 
In  the  sruti  we  see  that  it  is  only  in  the  act  of  entering  that 
Isvara  assumes  the  form  of  jiva  ; for,  the  expression  ‘fin  the 
form  of  jiva*’  should  be  construed  with  “ enter**  owing  to 
their  mutual  proximity.  To  construe  the  expression  with 
‘‘  reveal**  would  be  to  connect  it  with  a more  remote  verb. 
Indeed,  jlva  has  not  the  power  of  creating  mountains  and 


* ObharUp.  6.3-2. 


Am.VI.]  ftRAHMAN^S  BXISTBN^II  AS  jtVil* 

rivers ; whereas  tsvara  has  all  powers,  as  the  sniti  says 
**  Supreme  is  His  power,  and  of  all  sorts,”  * Besides,  tho 
verb  “ I shall  reveal’*  in  the  first  person  admits  of  a better 
interpretation  when  construed  with  tsvara.  Wherefore 
Is  vara  is  the  creator  of  Names  and  Forms.  As  to  the  potter 
and  the  like  being  the  makers  of  jars,  cloths  and  the  like, 
they  become  such  only  when  impelled  to  the  acts  by  the 
Lord.  Therefore  we  conclude  that  tsvara  Himself  is  the 
creator  of  all. 

In  the  same  work,  the  Veddnta-s{itras,  the  nature  of  jlva 
has  been  discussed  in  eight  disquisitions.  Their  digests 
are  given  hereunder. 

Jiva  is  not  subject  to  birth  and  death. 

(VedAnta-sAtras,  II.  hi.  i6.) 

{Question) Is  it  jiva  or  the  body  that  undergoes  birth 
and  death  ? 

{Pfima  facie  view) ; — In  common  parlance  we  say  “ a son 
is  born  to  me  and  the  sAstra  prescribes  sacraments  such 
as  the  birth-ceremony.  So  birth  and  death  pertain  to  jiva. 

{Conclusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  follows: 
Birth  and  death  which  really  pertain  to  the  body  are,  by 
courtesy,  spoken  of  as  pertaining  to  jiva  ; for,  if  it  be  ad- 
mitted that  birth  and  death  pertain  to  jiva,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  avoid  the  two  fallacious  conclusions  that 
jiva’s  acts  in  this  birth  vanish  without  producing  their 
effects,  and  that  he  reaps  in  this  birth  the  fruits  of  acts 
which  he  never  did.  The  common  parlance  and  the  scrip- 


J Sve.-Up.  6-8. 


{Siandfh  V^: 

tani  otdiiumce  tfae  bit^h-caremony  are  bued  upon 
' bUh  aiid  death  ascribed  by  mere  courtesy  to  j!va>  la  the 
trords  “idrhai  de^reid  of  jfva,  forsooth,  this  body  dies,  jiva 
never  dies,"  the  Upanishad  teaches  that  it  is  the  body 
davmd  of  jfva  that  really  dies,  and  denies  jlva’s 
lialnlity  to  death.  Therefore  birth  and  death  pertain  to  the 
body. 

Jiva  is  not  of  the  Creation. 

(Ved&nta-sdtras,  II.  ii.  17.) 

{Question) Is  jiva  born,  as  aka$a,  &c.,  are  bom,  at  the 
b^inning  of  the  Kalpa  ? or  is  he  not  born  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — The  non-duality  of  Brahman  prior 
to  creation,  taught  by  the  sruti  in  the  words  “ One  alone 
without  a second"  f cannot  be  explained  if  jiva,  as  distin- 
guished from  Brahman,  had  no  birth.  And  the  sruti, 
hioreover,  refers  to  the  birth  of  jiva  by  comparing  it  to  the 
feparks  of  fire : 

“ As  from  fire  small  sparks  start  up  around, 
just  so,  from  this  one,the  Self,  all  vital  energies, 

. all  worlds,  all  gods,  all  beings,  all  these  seifs, 
start  up  around.” 

Tborefore,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Kalpa,  jiva  is  born 
from  Brahman,  like  the  Hk&ra,  &c. 

{Conclusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  fol- 
lows : Brahman,  who  is  non-dual,  Himself  enters  as  jiva 
into  the  mind  (buddhi)  that  is  born,  as  the  sruti  says,  “ This 
having  sent  forth,  into  that  very  thing  He  then  entered.”  § 

...  • Chhi-Up.-6-ll-3.  t P»d. 6-2-1 

t Bri  Up.  2-2-20.  § Tatt.  Up.  2-6-7. 


.'  '1^i;c<!drlingly  the 

ia^g  tliat  then  He  nbt|  (wb  ’ ' '^"'! 
'say  tfiatj  while  seeing,  verily,  He  theti  seeS  bbt. ' , 

. no  failure  there  is  of  the  Seer’s  si^hl:,' 

” as  it  is  undying;  but  no  second  one  exists,  ’ 
distinct  and  .separate  from  Him,  which  he 
might  see.” ' 

This  passage  means - What  the  people  aver,— that  then, 
in  sushupti,  jlva  sees  nothing, — is  not  true.  While  jiva  then 
actually  .sees,  it  is  merely  through  illusion  that  people  say 
that  jiva  does  not  see.  Whence  his  vision  ? Thesruti  ex- 
plains thus : There  is  indeed  no  failure  of  the  Selfs  inherent 
visibo,  because  in  itself  it  is  never-failing.  Othetwise,  even 
for  him  who  maintains  that  consciousness  fails  in  those 
^tates,  it  is  not  possible  to  speak  of  a failure  not  witnessed 
Ay  consciousness.  How  is.  it  then,  it  may  be  asked,  that 
P^ple  think,  though  erroneously,  that  jiva  is  not  conscious? 
^he  sruti  explains  thus : The  duality  of  the  universe, — as 
4j^tinguished  from  the  conscious  principle  of  Brahman,— 
made-up  of  action,  of  various  factors  in  action,  and  of  tlm 
fruits  of  action,  does  not  then  exist,  because  it  has  become 
hter^ed  ih  the  cause ; so  that  there  is  no  consciousness  of  the 
peircMver,  perception  and  objects  of  perception,  as  in  the  wak’. 
ing  statb.  Hence  the  erroneous  belief  of  the  people  that 
jiva  does  not  see.  Therefore,  jiva  is  a conscious  principle. 

Jiva  is  all -pervading. 

. . (Ved4iita-siitras,IL  iii.  19-33).  . ' 


• • -Bri.'iUp.  4-3-23. 


' (Prim  fide  vm) :— “This  One,  the  Self,  is  yefy^jp^j^ 
(anu);  He  is  to  be  known  by  mind ; ” * thus  the  shiti  says 
that  jiva  is  very  small.  His  departure  is  also  spoken  of  in  ihe 
words  “ from  this  body  he  departs  ” ; t his  goal  in  the 
Words  “to  the  moon  verily  do  they  all  go" ; J and  his  return 
in  the  words  “from  that  world  he  again  comes  back. " 

Of  course,  the  departure,  &c.,  are  not  possible  in  case  jiva 
is  all-pervading.  They  can,  no  doubt,  be  explained  on 
the  supposition  that  he  is  of  a middling  size ; but  then 
it  would  be  opposed  to  the  sruti  which  teaches  that  he 
is  very  small  (a»u),  and  his  impermanency  would  then  be 
inevitable.  Therefore  jiva  is  very  small. 

' (Conclusion) The  mind  (buddhi)  containing  reflected 
consciousness  is  not  all-pervading.  Jiva  being  conditioned 
by  the  mind  as  his  upAdhi  or  vehicle,  it  is  easy  to  explain 
the  rrutji  .speaking  of  his  smallness,  departure,  &c.  In  him- 
self, however,  jiva  is  one  with  Brahman  and  is  therefore 
all-pervading.  The  rruti  declares  that  he  is  all-pervading 
in*tKe  words  “He,  verily,  this  One,  theSelf  is  a great  being{‘’f 
“he  is  all-pervading,  the  inner  Self  of  all  beings.”  ||  There- 
fore jiva  is  all-pervading. 

Jiva  is  the  agent. 

(VedAnta-sutras,  II.  iii.  33-39). 

(Question) Is  jiva  the  agent  or  not  ? 

§ Bri.  4-4-6. 

T Bri.  4-4-22. 

11  5ve.  6-U. 


* Mum?.  3-1-9. 
t Chhi  8-6-5. 

I^aush.  1-2. 


Th«  Sfid^fayas  hold  that  agencyi 
which  means  engagement  in  action,  pertains  to  tha.mand 
j^teddhf)  because  it  is  subject  to  transformation  (parin&ma), 
liht  hot  to  the  j!va  or  self  who  is  unattached. 

(Coiuitum) : — This  view  is  unsound.  It  being  evident 
tlmt  the  mmd  serves  as  an  organ  or  instrument,  it  cann(^ 
be  regarded  as  the  agent.  Instruments  such  as  an  axe 
never  act  as  agents.  If  the  mind  were  the  agent,  we  would 
have  to  look  out  for  something  else  which  might  serve  as  its 
organ.  You  cannot  say,  let  there  be  no  agent  at  all ; for, 
the  sacrificial  acts  enjoined  in  the  first  section  of  the  Veda, 
the  study  of  theosophy  and  the  like  enjoined  in  the  second, 
and  all  worldly  occupations  such  as  cultivation,  presuppose 
an  agent.  Therefore  jiva  is  the  agent. 

Jiva’s  agency  is  Illusory. 

(VedAnta-shtras,  II.  iii.  40). 

(Question) ; — Is  jiva’s  agency  which  has  been  established 
in  the  previous  article,  rea’  or  illusory  ? 

(Prim  facie  view) : — Being  uncontradicted,  it  must  be 
real. 

(Conclusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  say  : Agency 
which  is  an  attachment  is  denied  by  the  sruti  in  the  words, 
“Devoid  of  attachment,  verily,  is  this  one,  the  Purusha."* 
Just  as,  owing  to  the  proximity  of  the  white  crystal  stone 
to  the  china-rose  (japA)  flower,  the  red  colour  of  the  latter 
is  ascribed  to  the  former,  so  also,  agency  is  ascribed  to  the 
Self  owing  to  His  proximity  to  the  mind  (antaA-kara»a). 


• Bn.  4-3-15. 


Am.  VI.]  THBjtvA.  # 

Jivft  Is  impelled  to  action  by  isvara. 

(Ved&nta-siitras,  11.  iii.  4X-42). 

(Question)  Is  it  the  Supreme  Lord  or  passion  that  im- 
pels jiva  to  action  ? 

(Pfima  facie  view) In  the  ordinary  affairs  of  the  world 
we  see  likes  and  dislikes  alone  impelling  cultivators  and 
other  agents  to  action.  In  accordance  with  this,  we  should 
regard  that  likes  and  dislikes  alone  impel  jiva  to  action 
when  he  engages  in  righteous  and  unrighteous  acts,  dharma 
and  adharma.  If  Isvara  were  the  impeller,  the  conclusion 
would  be  inevitable  that  He  is  partial,  as  impeU'ng  some 
jivas  to  righteous  acts,  and  some  others  to  unrighteous  acts. 
Therefore  it  is  not  tsvara  that  impels  jlva  to  action. 

(Conclusion) : — In  the  first  place,  f5vara  does  not  become 
guilty  of  partiality,  inasmuch  as  He  is  a general  cause  like 
rain.  Though  rain  is  the  cause  of  the  growth  of  corn,  still 
it  is  the  seeds  that  make  them  different,  as  rice,  barley,  and 
so  on  Similarly,  though  the  Lord  is  the  general  impeller 
of  jivas  to  action  by  way  of  willing  “let  the  jivas  act  each 
in  his  own  way,”  still  He  is  not  partial,  inasmuch  as 
differences  in  their  lots  are  due  to  their  respective  acts  in 
former  births  and  their  respective  v^san^s  or  tendencies, 

(Objection) : — Acts  bring  forth  only  their  fruits  ; they  do 
not  cause  other  acts. 

(Answer)  ‘True.  As  impelling  jlva  to  action  with  a 
view  to  yield  their  own  fruits  in  the  form  of  pleasure 
and  pain,  they  indirectly  bring  about  other  acts,  and  thus 
we  are  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  one  act  causes  another 
act, 


CHAPTER  V. 


JIVA’S  CAREER  AFTER  DEATH. 

la  the  Ved&nta-shtras  six  articles  (adhikaranas)  are  devot- 
ed to  a discussion  of  jiva*s  passage  from  this  to  other 
worlds  and  back.  They  are  summarised  in  this  chapter. 

Jiva  carries  to  the  other  worlds  the  seeds  of  the 
future  body. 

(Ved&nta-silitras,  III.  i.  i — 7). 

(Question) : — Does  jlva,  when  departing  from  this  world, 
carry  with  him  elements  of  subtle  matter  (bhhta-stlkshma), 
or  not  ? 

(Prima  facie  view)  : — When  the  jlva  conditioned  by  the 
up&dhi  of  pr&;?a  or  vital  principle  departs  from  this  world  to 
pass  into  another  body,  he  does  not  carry  with  him  elements 
of  subtle  matter  constituting  the  root-principles  of  his  future 
body  ; for,  the  five  elements  of  matter  being  easily  available 
everywhere,  it  is  unnecessary  to  carry  them  from  here. 

(Conclusion): — Asagainst  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  follows: 
Though  mere  elements  of  matter  are  easily  available  every- 
where, those  that  constitute  the  root-elements  ot  the  body 
are  not  easily  available  in  all  places  and  are  therefore  to  be 
carried  from  here.  Moreover,  the  senses  (indriyas)  which 
constitute  the  upddhi  of  jlva  cannot  pass  into  other  worlds 
witb(nit  material  elements,  as  they  are  never  found  dis- 


Ami^^  VL^  )lWs CAREER  AFTttR  death.  ^ 

joined  in  life.  Further  the  sruti  says,  *‘In  thfe  fifth  dfalfttion^ 
the  waters  are  termed  man.”  ♦ The  meaning  of 
hge  may  be  explained  as  follows : Heaven,  rain^dol^d, 
earth,  man,  and  woman, — these  five  objects  are  represent^ 
ed  as  fires  for  the  purposes  of  contemplation.  The  jlva, 
going  to  svarga  and  returning  again,  is  represented  as  ah 
oblation  in  those  fires.  The  jiva  who  has  performed  sa- 
crificial and  charitable  acts  ascends  to  svarga.  On  the 
exhaustion  of  the  fruits  of  the  acts,  he  descends  into  the 
rain-cloud  and  is  precipitated  to  the  earth  as  rain.  In  the 
form  of  food  he  enters  man  ; and  then  through  man’s  semen 
he  enters  the  woman  and  there  puts  on  the  body.  Therefore 
the  five  elements  of  matter  which  are  the  root-elements  of 
the  body — and  which,  by  metonymy,  are  here,  in  the 
passage  just  quoted,  spoken  of  as  water,— pass  with  jiva 
into  the  five  regions  beginning  with  heaven  and  are  trans- 
formed in  the  fifth  region  into  the  body  called  man. 
Therefore,  when  passing  into  the  other  world,  jiva  does 
carry  with  him  the  root-elements  of  the  body. 

Jiva  descends  to  earth  with  residual  karma. 

(Ved^inta-sutras,  III.  i.  8— ii). 

[Question) : — When  descending  from  svarga,  does  or  does 
not  jiva  bring  with  him  any  residual  karma  (anusaya)  ? 

[Prinia  facie  view) : — The  man  who  descends  from  svarga, 
after  enjoying  its  bliss,  comes  to  earth  without  anusaya. 
‘ Anusaya,* — literally,  that  which  clings  to  jiv^, — means 
residual  karma.  No  one  has  any  residual  karma  to  carry 
with  him  when  descending  from  svarga,  all  the  fruits  of 

• Chha.  Up  6-9^1,  ^ 

^71 


BJuutMA^viDYA  EXPLAINED.  [Aftaiidd-  Volli. 

fankia  haviDg  been  enjoyed  in  svarga.  AceoriUngly^  spe^« 
hxg^pi  man's  descent  to  earth/the  sruti  says  Having  lived 
aatog  as  their  works  (samp&ta)  last,  then,  by  this  very 
way  they  again  come  back.**  * Sampdia, — literally,  that  by 
which  one  . ascends  to  svarga, — is  the  aggregate  of  one’s 
karma.  So  the  passage  means  that  jlva  lives  in  svarga 
until  the  fruit  of  all  his  karma  is  enjoyed.  Wherefore,  when 
descending  &om  heaven,  he  brings  with  him  no  residual 
karma. 

{Conclusion)  :~-Though  the  karma  which  has  to  yield  its 
fruits  in  svarga  has  been  exhausted  by  enjoyment  of  the 
fruits  thereof,  there  is  still  left  with  jiva  an  accumulation  of 
righteous  and  unrighteous  acts,  whose  fruits  have  not  yet 
been  reaped.  Otherwise,  in  the  absence  of  righteous  and 
unrighteous  deeds  done  in  this  birth,  it  would  be  hard  to 
explain  why  the  body  that  is  just  born  is  subject  to  plea- 
sure and  pain. 

As  to  the  view,  maintained  by  some,  that  the 
whole  aggregate  of  the  acts  done  in  one  birth  is  exhausted 
by  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  thereof  in  the  next  succeeding 
birth  alone,  we  say  it  is  wrong,  because  this  view,  that  the 
whole  karma  is  exhausted  in  one  birth,  is  untenable,  inas- 
much as  the  asvamedha  (the  horse-sacrifice)  and  the  like 
which  take  the  doer  to  the  position  of  Indra,  and  the  sinful 
acts  such  as  those  which  make  one  born  in  the  body  of  a 
hog  and  so  on,  cannot  both  of  them  yield  their  fruits  in  one 
and  the  same  birth.  So  that,  though,  out  of  the  acts  done 
in  one  birth,  the  fruits  of  the  acts  such  as  jyotish/oma  have 
been  enjoyed,  there  should  remain  other  acts  whose  fruits 


* Chha.  Up,  540-6, 


VL\  JivVs  CARBBR  AFTER  DBATH^ 

have  not  been  reaped.  The  word  < samp&ta*  (in  the  passive 
quoted  above)  refers  only  to  the  svarga-yielding  act»  npt  to 
other  acts.  The  sruti  speaks  of  the  souls  w*ho,  descendio^ 
from  svarga,  put  on  the  human  body  in  the  fifth  oblatiott,. 
as  also  of  the  existence  of  the  acts  of  merit  and  sid  which 
bring  about  the  body : 

“ Whoso  have  been  of  good  conduct  here, 
they  soon  attain  good  birth,  the  birth  of  a 
brfiihmawa  or  the  birth  of  a kshatriya  or  the' 
birth  of  a vaisya.  But  whoso  are  of  bad  con? 
duct  here,  they  soon  attain  evil  birth,  the  birth 
of  a dog,  or  of  a hog,  or  of  an  outcaste 
(chawiMa).*' 

Thus  we  are  to  conclude  that  souls  descend  to  earth 
carrying  with  them  the  residual  of  their  past  karma. 

The  sinful  do  not  reach  svarga. 

(Vedanta-siitras,  III,  i.  12 — 21). 

{Qmtion)  :-~Does  the  sinful  man  reach  svarga  or  not  ? 

(Pfima  facie  view) : — “ Whoso  from  this  world  depart,  to 
the  Chandramas  (moon),  verily,  they  all  go:  *’  in  these  words 
the  5ruti  teaches  that  even  the  sinful  go  to  svarga  which  is 
here  termed  Chandramas  {lit.,  a lovely  region).  It  is  true 
that  the  sinful  are  not  destined  to  enjoy  the  bliss  of  sVarga  ; 
but  we  must  suppose  that  they  pass  into  heaven,  so  that, 
the  fire  of  woman  wherein  the  souls,  on  their  return  to 
earth,  put  on  the  body,  may  count  as  the  fifth  fire. 


• Chhh  Up.  5-10-7; 


j0%  BftAimiVIDTAMPLAlMED.  [Amfidd^VoUi. 

:— Saals  pass  into  svarga^  only  for  tha  enjoy- 
ment of  bliss,  not  because  it  is  necessary  to  pass  through 
tbelBve  fires  named.  For,  the  number  of  fires  vary  in  cer- 
tain oases,  In  the  case  of  Droaa,  for  instance,  the  fire  of 
wommi  is  absent,  while  in  the  case  of  Sltd.  even  the  fire  of 
man  is  absent.  The  words  “ they  all”,  in  the  sruti  quoted 
above,  refer  to  men  of  good  deeds.  As  to  the  sinful,  the 
sruti  says  that  they  go  to  the  world  of  Yama  : 

«i  Worship  with  oblations  Yama,  son  of  Vivas- 
vat,  the  goal  of  men.”  * 

Thispas^ge  means:  **  Do  ye  propitiate  Yama  to  whom  the 
sinful  men  will  have  to  go.”  Therefore,  the  sinful  do  not 
go  to  svarga. 

Jiva’s  return  from  svarga. 

(VedAnta-sutras,  III.  i.  22). 

{Question) : — The  descent  from  svarga  is  described  in  the 
sruti  as  follows : 

“ They  return  again  that  way,  as  they  went,  to 
' the  ether  (&kdsa),  from  the  ether  to  the  air. 

Then  the  sacrificer,  having  become  air,  be- 
comes smoke ; having  become  smoke,  he 
becomes  mist  ; having  become  mist,  he  be- 
comes a cloud  ; having  become  a cloud,  he 
rains  down.”  t 

Here  the  question  arises  : Does  jiva,  in  his  descent  from 
svarga,  b^me  of  the  same  nature  as  ak&sa  &c.?  or  does  he 
become  merely  similar  to  them  ? 


♦ Rig-Yeda,  x.  14. 1, 


f Ohhft.  Up.  5-10-5-6. 


Anu.  VI. \ Java’s  career  AFtER  DEATIt.  ids 

{Prima facie  view): — He  becomes  one  in  natUfE-with 
them,  inasmuch  as  the  sruti,  in  the  words  becoming  aif** 
and  so  on,  teaches  that  the  jiva  becomes  one  with  them.  > 

{Conclusion) ; — It  being  impossible  for  one  thing  to  be- 
come another,  we  hold  that  to  attain  to  means  to  attaiin 
the  subtlety  of  kk&s2L ; to  become  air  means  to  come  under 
its  control ; to  become  smoke,  etc.,  is  to  come  in  contact 
with  them. 

The  relative  speed  of  Jiva  when  returning. 

(Vedanta-stitras,  III.  i.  23). 

{Question)  After  coming  down  as  rain,  jiva  unites  with 
rice,  etc.,  as  the  sruti  says : 

Then  he  is  born  as  lice  and  corn,  herbs  and 
trees,  sesamum  and  beans.**  * 

The  question  is : Is  jiva*s  return  from  &kasa,  prior  to  his 
union  with  rice,  &c.,  slow  or  rapid  ? 

{Prima  facie  vieiv) ; — Nothing  in  the  sruti  points  to  either 
way.  Hence  no  definite  rule. 

{Conclusion) : — In  the  words  “ from  this,  verily,  it  is  hard 
to  escape,’*  t the  sruti  speaks  of  the  difficulty  of  passage  on 
uniting  with  rice,  &c.,  and  so  teaches  definitely  that  on  un- 
iting with  rice,  &c.,  jiva*s  passage  is  tardy.  By  implication, 
therefore,  this  leads  us  to  the  conclusion  that,  prior  to  this 
stage,  his  passage  is  rapid. 

Jiva  is  not  born  as  a plant. 

(Ved^nta-siitras,  III,  i.  24—27). 

{Question) Are  jivas  born  as  rice,  &c.,  on  their  descent 
from  heaven  ? or  do  they  merely  unite  with  them  ? 


♦ ChhL  Up.  5-10-6. 


flhid 


566;  BSAHMA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED.  [AmndO-VilUi. 

(Prima  view) : — The  sruti  means  that  jivas  do  not 
m^eiy  unite  with  rice,  sesamum,  etc.,  as  they  do  with 
iLkfisd,  etc.,  but  that  they  are  actually  born  as  such  ; for, 
the  rruti  says  that  they  are  < born*  as  such.  It  cannot  be 
contended  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  soul  descending  from 
svarga  after  enjoying  there  the  fruit  of  the  meritorious  acts 
to  be  born  as  a plant  (sthAvara),  which  birth  is  the  effect  of 
very  sinful  acts  ; for,  there  exists  the  cause  of  such  a birth, 
namely,  the  killing  of  animals  for  sacrificial  purposes. 
Therefore  we  conclude  that  jivas  are  actually  born  as 
plants. 

[Conclusion)  : — Being  enjoined  by  the  sruti,  the  killing  of 
animals  for  sacrificial  purposes  is  no  sin.  Therefore  the 
word  “ born**  in  the  sruti  means  simply  that  they  unite 
with  the  plants  mentioned.  On  the  contrary,  no  actual 
birth  is  meant,  inasmuch  as  the  sruti  does  not  speak  of  it 
as  due  to  the  operation  of  any  acts.  And  where  actual 
birth  is  meant,  the  sruti  refers  to  it  as  the  result  of  acts,  as 
when  speaking  of  “ men  of  good  deeds’*  and  “ men  of  evil 
deeds.*’  Therefore  we  conclude  that,  when  descending 
from  svarga,  jivas  merely  unite  with  rice,  etc. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

STATES  OP  CONSCIOUSNESS. 


The  objects  seen  in  svapna  are  unreal. 

(Vedanta-sutras,  III.  ii.  i — 6) 

(Question) Is  the  creation  of  objects  in  dream  real  or 
unreal  ? 

(Pnma  facie  view) : — The  sruti  speaks  of  the  creation  in 
dream  (svapna)  of  carriages  and  other  things,  in  the  words 
“he  himself  creates  chariots,  horses,  and  roads.**  * This 
creation  must  therefore  be  real  so  far  as  our  ordinary  expe- 
rience goes,  like  the  creation  of  Sik^a,  &c.  We  do  not  find 
any  distinction  between  the  waking  state  and  the  dream 
state,  since  the  act  of  eating  and  the  like  occurring  in  the 
latter  serve  alike  the  actual  purposes  of  appeasing  hunger, 
&c.  So  we  hold  that  the  creation  in  question  is  as  real  as 
the  creation  of  6.k^sa,  both  being  alike  the  acts  of  Isvara. 

(Conclusion) : — The  dream-creation  must  be  false,  as  there 
are  no  appropriate  time  and  place.  Certainly,  within  the 
ndiifis  which  are  very  narrow  like  the  thousandth  part  of  the 
hair,  there  is  no  sufficient  room  for  mountains,  rivers,  oceans 
and  the  like  ; and  in  the  case  of  one  who  goes  to  sleep 
midnight,  there  is  no  appropriate  time  for  the  occurrence  of 


» Bn.  Up.  4-3-10. 


56d,  BRAHBIA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED.  [Afiauda-V ollt . 

a S(^ar  eclipse.  Neither  are  there,  in  the  case  of  a boy  who 
has  not  undergone  the  ceremony  of  upamyana^  occasions 
for  exultation  at  the  birth  of  a son.  Moreover,  the  objects 
seen  in  dream  prove  false  in  dream  itself.  The  object  per- 
ceived to  be  a tree  at  one  moment  comes  at  the  next  mo- 
ment to  be  regarded  as  a mountain.  As  to  the  allegation 
that  dream-creation  is  taught  in  the  sruti,  it  may  be  seen 
that  the  sruti  ^eaks  of  the  creation  as  fictitious  : 

‘‘There  are  no  (real)  chariots  in  this  state,  no 
horses,  no  roads,  but  he  himself  creates 
chariots,  horses  and  roads.”  * 

Therefore  the  sruti  means  that  the  cars,  &c.,  which  in 
reality  are  non-existent,  are  mere  illusory  appearances  like 
silver  in  the  mother-of-pearl.  As  to  its  similarity  with  the 
jdgrat  state  adduced  above,  even  that  is  not  of  much  avail 
here,  inasmuch  as  we  hav^e  pointed  out  points  of  disparity — 
auch  as  want  of  appropriate  time  and  place — which  prepon- 
i derate  over  those  of  similarity.  It  has  been  also  alleged  that 
dream-objects  are  created  by  Isvara ; but  this  is  untenable, 
for,  in  the  words  “The  man  that  wakes  when  others  sleep, 
dispensing  all  desires,”  I the  sruti  also  teaches  that  it  is 
jiva  who  is  the  creator  of  the  objects  of  dream-consciousness. 
Therefore  the  dream-creation  is  illusory. 

Where  jiva  lies  in  sushupti. 

(Ved^nta-siitras,  III.  ii.  7—8.) 

{Question) ; — Regarding  the  sushupti  state,  the  sruti  says: 


► Bfi,  Up.  4-5-10. 


t Ka^ha,  Up.  6-8. 


Am.  VL]  STATES  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS.  569 

“Then  he  has  entered  into  these  nArfis.”  * 

“Through  them  he  moves  forth  and  rests  in 
the  puritat.”  t 

“He  lies  in  the  AkAsa  which  is  in  the  heart.’*  J 

In  these  passages  the  sruti  declares  that  in  sushupti  jlva 
lies  in  the  ndiiis,  in  the  purltat,  and  also  in  Brahman,  here 
designated  as  Akasa.  The  question  is,  Is  it  separately  or 
conjointly  that  these  places— the  nftdis,  &c.,— constitute  the 
seat  of  jiva  in  sushupti  ? 

(Pfima  facie  view) : — They  constitute  the  seatofjlva  se- 
parately, each  by  itself,  ins^smuch  as  all  of  them  severally 
serve  the  one  purpose  in  view.  When  the  sruti  says  “let  a 
man  sacrifice  either  with  rice  or  with  barley,”  we  under- 
stand that  two  alternatives  are  meant  by  the  sruti,  inasmuch 
as  either  one  ot  them  serves  the  one  purpose  of  furnishing 
the  sacrificial  oblation.  So  also,  the  purpose  to  be  served 
here  being  one  and  the  same,  namely,  sushupti,  we  should 
understand  that  three  alternatives  are  meant  here  by  the 
sruti ; that  jiva  attains  sushupti  in  the  nWis  at  one  time,  in 
the  puritat  at  another  time,  and  in  Brahman  at  yet  another 
time. 

[Conclusion) : — We  do  not  admit  that  they  all  severally 
serve  one  and  the  same  purpose ; for  it  is  easy  to  shew  that 
they  serve  distinct  purposes.  Now  the  nadis  serve  as  the 
paths  by  which  the  jiva  who  has  been  wandering  in  the 
sense-organs  of  sight,  &c.,  may  pass  to  Brahman  dwelling 
in  the  heart.  Hence  the  words  of  the  sruti,  “through 
them  he  moves  forth,”  shewing  that  n^rfis  are  the  means  by 


• OhhL  Up.  8-6-3.  t Bri.  Up.  2-1-19.  t Up.  2-1-17. 


570 


BRAHMA-VIDVA  EkPLAlMED* 


which  jiva  passes.  Thepurltat,  the  envelope  of  the' heart, 
serves  as  an  enclosure,  like  a bed'-room,  and  Brahman  forms 
the  seat,  like  a bed-stead.  Accordingly,  just  as  one  enters 
by  the  gateway  and  lies  on  a bed  in  a room,  so  jiva  passes 
through  the  n&dts  and  lies  in  Brahman  within  the  purltat. 
l!)istinct  purposes  being  thus  served  by  them  severally,  they 
conjointly  constitute  the  abode  of  jiva  in  sushupti. 

(Objection) : — If  jiva  lies  in  Brahman  during  sushupti,  then 
how  is  it  that  we  are  not  then  conscious  of  their  relation 
as  such  ? 

(Answer) : — Because  they  havfe  become  one,  we  say. 
When  a pot  of  water  is  immersed  in  a reservoir  of  water, 
we  do  not  see  its  existence  as  distinct  from  the  reservoir  ; 
so  also,  we  are  not  conscious  of  jiva,  conditioned  by  the 
upadhi  of  antaA-kara«a,  as  distinct  from  Brahman,  inas- 
much as  he  as  wed  as  his  enshrouding  darkness  is  then 
merged  in  Brahman.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  sruti 
elsewhere  speaks  of  jiva  becoming  one  with  Brahman  du- 
ring sushupti : ‘‘With  the  Existent,  my  dear,  he  then  be- 
comes one.” 

Identity  of  jiva  who  sleeps  and  wakes. 

(Vedinta-siitras,  III.  ii.  9) 

(Question) : — Is  the  jiva  who  wakes  from  sleep  necessarily 
the  same  as  he  who  went  to  sleep  ? or,  may  he  be  a 
different  one  ? 

(Pfima  facie  view) When  a drop  of  water  has  been  cast 
into  the  ocean,  the  identical  drop  cannot  again  be  unfailingly , 
aken  out  from  the  ocean ; similarly  when  one  jiva  has  been 


.im.  VI]  STATES  OF  corf SCIOUSNESS.  SJl 

merged  in  Brahman  during  sushupti,  it  is  not  possible  that 
necessarily  the  identical  jiva  wakes  from  sleep.  Therefore 
it  may  be  that  any  one  of  the  many  jlvas  wakes  from  sleep. 

\ ^{Conclusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing,  we  hold  as  follows: 
The  two  cases  are  not  quite  analogous.--  Tlie  jiva  is  a con- 
scious entity,  and  when  he  becomes  merged  in  Brahman, 
he  is  still  enveloped  in  his  karma  and  avidyi  ; whereas 
when  the  drop  of  water  is  cast  into  the  ocean,  it  is  unen- 
closed by  anything.  When  a glass,  filled  with  the  water  of 
the  Ganges  and  with  its  mouth  covered,  is  thrown  into  the 
sea,  the  glass  can  be  taken  again  out  of  the  sea,  and  we 
can  clearly  identify  the  water  of  the  Ganges  therein  con- 
tained. Similarly,  the  identical  jiva  may  wake  from  sleep. 
Therefore  the  sruti  says  : 

‘‘Whatever  these  creatures  are  here,  whether 
a tiger,  or  a lion,  or  a wolf,  or  a boar,  or  a 
worm,  or  a midge,  or  a gnat,  or  a musquito, 
that  they  become  again  and  again.” 

Thatistosay,  whatever  bodies  the  tiger  and  other  jivas 
have  severally  occupied  prior  to  sleep,  the  same  bodies  are 
occupied  by  those  jivas  on  waking  after  sleep.  Neither  can 
it  be  contended  that  the  jiva  who  attains  Brahman  during 
sleep  cannot  again  come  into  being,  in  the  same  way  that 
the  liberated  one  does  not  come  into  being  ; for,  in  the  case 
of  the  former,  the  limiting  upadhi  still  exists,  so  that  when 
the  upddhi  starts  up  into  being,  the  jiva  must  start  up  into 
existence.  Therefore,  when  a jiva  goes  to  sleep,  it  is  the 
same  jiva  that  wakes  from  sleep. 


* Chha.  Up.  6-9-3. 


572 


B«AM»tA*vmYA  BxpLAiNfiiD.  [Afiandd^VitUt 

Swoon  is  a distinct  state  of  consciousness. 

(Ved^ta-siitrasi  III.  ii.  lo) 

{Question) Is  swoon  (mtirchhi,)  comprehended  in  any 
one  of  the  three  states  above  referred  to,  or  is  it  distinct 
from  them  all  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — We  are  not  aware  of  a state  of  con- 
sciousness distinct  from  jigrat,  svapna  and  sushupti. 
Therefore,  swoon  is  comprehended  in  one  of  those  states. 

{Conclusion) : — As  it  stands  quite  alone,  we  must  admit 
that  it  is  a distinct  state.  It  cannot  be  included  either  in 
jdigrat  or  svapna,  for,  unlike  these  states,  there  is  no  con- 
sciousness of  duality  in  it.  Nor  can  it  be  included  in 
sushupti;  because  the  two  states  appear  to  be  quite  different. 
When  a man  is  asleep,  his  face  is  calm,  his  breath  balanced, 
and  his  body  motionless  ; whereas,  in  the  case  of  one  who 
is  in  a fit  of  swoon,  the  face  becomes  agitated,  his  breath 
is  uneven,  and  his  body  shakes.  It  is  true  that  swoon  is 
not  a state  quite  familiar  to  children  and  the  like  because  it 
is  not  of  daily  occurrence  like  jagrat  and  other  states  ; still 
experts  do  know  the  state  of  swoon  occurring  on  rare  occa- 
sions and  apply  proper  remedies.  Therefore,  it  is  a distinct 
state  of  consciousness. 

Elimination  of  foreign  elements  from  jiva. 

Thus,  in  these  four  articles,  the  nature  of  the  jiva—the 
‘thou*  in  “That  Thou  art”— has  been  divested  of  all  foreign 
elements.  In  the  first  place,  by  shewing  that  the  world  of 
dream  is  an  illusion,  it  has  been  shewn  that  though  we  are 
then  conscious  of  pleasure,  pain  and  agency,  jiva  remains 


Ann.  VL]  states  of  consciousness.  573 

free  from  attachment ; and  so  far,  the  foreign  elements  have 
been  eliminated  from  jiva’s  nature.  It  has  been  further 
taught  that  this  absence  of  all  attachment  in  jiva’s  nature 
is  to  be  found  in  our  own  experience  during  sleep,  because, 
it  has  been  shewn  that  jiva  becomes  then  one  with 
Brahman.  By  shewing  that  the  same  jlva  that  goes  to 
sleep  wakes  also  from  sleep,  it  has  been  impressed  upon  us 
that  he  is  not  impermanent.  Lastly,  by  way  of  discussing 
the  state  of  swoon,  it  has  been  taught  that,  though  breath- 
ing and  all  other  signs  of  life  fail  at  death,  it  should  not  be 
supposed  that  jlva  is  then  dead. 


CHAPTER  VI  I. 
BRAHMAN  A5  EXTERNAL  OBJECTS. 


Having  thus  proved  the  existence  of  the  Param^tman  by 
referring  to  His  presence  in  the  body  as  jiva,  the  perceiver, 
the  sruti,  with  a view  to  afford  a further  proof  of  His  exist- 
ence in  the  form  of  the  objects  of  perception,  now  proceeds 
to  teach  that  He  has  transformed  Himself  as  the  objects  of 
perception. 

I I ||  ^ || 

8.  That  having  entered,  both  the  being  and 
the  beyond  He  became,  the  definite  and  the 
indefinite,  the  abode  and  the  non-abode,  the 
conscious  and  the  unconscious  ; both  the  real 
and  the  false  did  the  Real  become,  and  what- 
ever else  is  here.  That,  they  say,  is  the  Real. 

Form  and  the  formless. 

Having  entered  the  creation,  He  became  the  being 
and  the  beyond,  the  corporeal  and  the  incorporeal,  forrr. 
and  the  formless,  milrta  and  amUrta, 


575. 


Ann.  VL]  brahman  as  EXtERNAt objects. 

All  things  from  the  AvyAkrita  or  Unmanifested  Beiog 
down  to  the  bodies  are  included  in  these  two  classes  of 
objects,  form  and  formless. — (S). 

Having  entered  in  the  form  of  the  perceiver  (bhok^ri)  the 
bodies  that  were  created,  He  then  transformed  Himself 
into  the  objects  of  perception,  the  being  and  the  beyond,  8cc. 

* The  being'  refers  to  the  visible  objects,  the  three  states  of 
matter,  namely,  earth  (prithvi),  water  (ap)  and  fire  (tejas) ; 
and  * the  beyond  ' refers  to  the  two  invisible  states  of  matter, 
air  (vAyu)  and  ether  (Akasa).  The  Bnhadira«yaka-upa- 
nishad  teaches,  in  the  words ‘‘ Form  comprises  this,  what 
is  distinct  from  air  and  from  ether,”that  the  three  states  of 
matter  other  than  air  and  ether,  namely,  earth,  water  and 
fire,  are  corporeal,  and  describes  them  as  sat  or  the  being, 
“ this  is  the  being  air  and  ether  being  described  as  tyad 
or  the  beyond.  Under  these  two  categories  are  brought  to- 
gether all  objects  which  are  distinguished  as  the  visible  and 
the  invisible.  To  these  two  categories  should  be  added 
two  other  categories  composed  of  their  abhAvas  or  negations. 
Thus,  Brahman  transformed  Himself  into  the  four  cate- 
gories of  things. 

These, — forms  and  the  formless, — which,  prior  to 
creation,  resided  in  the  Atman,  undifferentiated  in 
name  and  form,  are  (now,  at  the  beginning  of  creation) 
differentiated  by  the  Atman  dwelling  within  them. 
Though  thus  differentiated  and  spoken  of  as  form  and 
formless,  they  still  remain  one  with  the  Atman  in  time 
and  place,  and  therefore  He  is  said  to  have  become  the 
being  and  the  beyond. 


bKAw|||^1^l4;vA  t^Lkishu  [Ananaa^  ^ out. 

The  defimie  is  that  object  which  is  distinguished 
from  other  classes  of  objects  and  from  other  objects  of 
the  same  class,  and  known  as  existing  at  a particular 
time  and  a particular  place  ; that  which  can  be  speci- 
fically pointed  out  ‘‘this  it  is.**  What  is  opposed  to  the 
definite  is  the  indefinite. 

The  definite:  What  can  be  fully  defined,  as,  this  pot 
which  is  here  before  me  with  its  body  widely  bulging  out, 
which  is  made  of  clay,  a tangible  object  capable  of  holding 
water.  What  is  opposed  to  this  is  the  indefinite^  that  which 
can  be  spoken  of  only  in  vague  terms,  as  for  example,  the 
minute  distinctions  of  a particular  taste  such  as  sweetness 
or  of  a particular  odour,  and  so  on  ; these  cannot  be  fully 
described. 

These  two,  the  definite  and  the  indefinite^  are  only 
descriptive  attributes  of  form  and  the  formless  respec- 
tively. Thus,  form  and  the  formless  are  respectively 
the  definite  and  the  indefinite,  the  visible  and  the  in- 
visible. So  also  they  are  the  abode  and  the  non-abode. 
A bode  constitutes  an  attribute  of  form  and  the  non-abode 
of  the  formless. 

The  abode : the  seat,  such  as  the  flower,  sugar.  That 
which  is  opposed  to  this  is  non-abode^  that  which  dwells  in 
another,  such  as  odour  and  taste. 

Though  “ the  beyond,**  etc.,  are  spoken  of  as  the 
attributes  of  the  formless,  still  they  pertain  to  objects 
iti  the  differentiated  world,  inasmuch  as  they  are  said 
to  have  come  into  being  after  creation.  ‘ The  beyond* 


AnU.  K/.]  AS  BXtBRNAKjilBCTS.  577 

denotes  Pr4»a  (v4yu  or  air),  etc. ; and  these— namely, 
sir  and  ether — are  indefinite  and  also  constitute  the 
non-abode.  Wherefore,  these  attributes  of  the  formless 
pertain  only  to  the  category  of  the  differentiated 
being.  * 


The  conscious  and  the  unconscious. 

‘ The  conscious  ’ means  the  sentient  beings,  and  ‘ the 
unconscious',  the  insentient  objects  such  as  stone. 

The  reai  and  the  faise. 

The  real  and  the  Jalse  : ‘The  real’  here  means  the 
realities  commonly  so-called, — on  account  of  the  con- 
text : it  does  not  mean  the  Absolute  Reality,  for 
Brahman,  the  Absolute  Reality,  is  one  alone.  As  to 
the  real  here  refered  to,  it  is  only  relatively  so,  what 
we  commonly  speak  of  as  real.  Water,  for  instance,  is 
said  to  be  real  as  compared  with  the  mirage,  which  is 
illusory.  ‘ The  false’  means  the  so-called  unreal. 

That  which  never  fails  in  our  ordinary  experience  is  real, 
and  what  in  our  ordinary  experience  is  erroneously  ascribed 
is  fake.  For  example,  the  mother-of-pearl,  a rope,  a pillar, 
etc.,  are  real ; and  when  they  are  mistaken  for  silver,  a 
serpent,  a thief,  &c.,  these  latter  are  said  to  be  false. 

The  categories  of  things  here  mentioned  stand  for  the 
whole  universe,  including  these  and  other  categories  of 

* but  not  to  the  Unmanifested  Brahman,  the  Cause,  who  is 
also  formless.— (V) 


73 


$96  BSASmrVIoyA  EXPLAINED.  [AtUindA-V^Mi. 

being  such  as  heat  and  coM,  pleasure  wd  pain,  hondif  uid 
dishonor,  &c. 

* ^ \ 

The  One  Reality. 

(Question) : — What  is  it  that  has  become  all  this  ? 

(Answer)  : — The  Real,  the  Absolute  Reality. 

(Question) : — What,  again,  is  that  Reality  ? 

(Answer) : — Brahman,  the  subject  of  treatment  here, 
wherewith  this  Book  began  in  the  words  Real,  Con- 
sciousness, Infinite  is  Brahman.” 

The  Creator  became  by  avidyd.  all  this  which  has  sprung 
from  avidy^.  It  is  by  denying  all  that  is  composed  of  “the 
being  and  the  beyond”  that  the  truth  is  presented  to  us  in 
the  sequel, — the  truth  that  ‘I  am  Brahman,*  the  truth  that 
all  duality  is  absent  in  the  true  Self.  Because  all  that  we 
^peak  of  as  existing  and  as  not  existing  have  their  origin  in 
ignorance  (moha),  the  Lord  of  the  World  says  also,  “It  is 
not  said  to  be  being  or  non-being.**  Be  it  known  that  it 
is  the  One  Inner  Self  who,  witnessing  the  mind’s  mani- 
festation and  disappearance,  is  unfailing.  Therefore  there 
must  exist  that  Supreme  Brahman,  by  whose  existence  all 
creatures  of  avidyi,  manifesting  themselves  as  causes  and 
effects,  appear  to  exist.  Whatever  involves  intelligent  de- 
sign presupposes  an  intelligent  being,  as  for  instance,  a 
pot ; so  also,  the  subject  of  contention  here — namely,  the 
universe— involving  as  it  does  a complicate  design,  presup- 
poses an  intelligent  being.— (S). 

• Bbagavadgita  XIII.  12.  The  meaning  of  this  as  well  as  the 
sruti  is,  not  that  nothig  exists,  but  that  cause  and  effect,  which 
are  not  constant,  are  not  Brahman.— (A). 


Anu,  VL^  PRAhman  as  external  objects.  " 579 

Brahman  transformed  Himself  as  the  univer^  made  up 
of  thbgs  classed  as  **tht  being  and  the  beyond/’  and  so  on* 
By  this  the  sruti  means  to  teach  that  Brahman  must  exist, 
as  having  transformed  Himself  in  the  form  of  the  objects  of 
perception,  just  as  milk  exists  prior  to  its  transformation  as 
curd,  &c. 

Brahman  experienced  by  the  wise. 

Because  the  one  Brahman  alone,  who  is  called  the 
Existence,  became  “the  being  and  the  beyond”  and 
whatever  else  is  included  in  the  two  categories  of 
form  and  the  formless, — in  short,  all  that  is  comprised 
in  the  category  of.  phenomena  (vikara),  without  any 
exception,  there  existing  no  phenomena  of  name  and 
form  outside  Brahman, — therefore  the  know^ers  of 
Brahman  say  that  all  this  is  Brahman,  the  Real. 

Having  established  Brahman’s  existence  by  inference, 
the  sruti  proceeds  here  to  establish  the  same  by  an  appeal 
to  the  experience  ot  the  wise. 

Whatever  we  see  in  this  universe,  whether  it  be  the  per- 
ceiver  or  the  object  perceived,  it  is  not  really  the  universe 
as  such;  but  it  is  the  never-failing  Brahman.  So  say  the  wise. 
Wherefore  it  is  wrong  to  say  that  Brahman  does  not  exist, 
since  His  existence  is  a fact  of  wise  men’s  experience. 

The  bearing  of  the  present  section. 

Now  to  shew  the  bearing  of  this  section  : The  sec- 
tion started  with  the  question,  does  Brahman  exist  or 
pot  ? In  answer  to  this  question,  it  has  been  said 


SSp  " BRAHUA-VIDYA  BXPUUNBD.  [AflOnda-VidU. 

that'  the  Atman  “ desired,  many  may  I be  !”  And  in 
accordance  with  this  desire  He  emanated  &k&sa  and 
other  things  in  the  universe,  comprising  ‘ the  being 
and  the  beyond’  and  so  on  ; and  entering  the  universe 
so  created  He  became  many,  as  the  seer,  as  the  hearer, 
as  the  thinker,  as  the  knower.  So  that,  we  should 
understand  that  this  Brahman — the  very  Brahman 
who  is  the  cause  of  &k&sa,  etc..  He  who  dwells  in  all 
creatures,  who  lies  hid  in  the  highest  heaven  of  the 
heart-cave,  revealing  Himself  in  all  the  cognitions  of 
the  mind,  in  all  His  specific  manifestations  (as  hearer, 
seer,  and  so  on), — does  exist. 

Brahman,  the  self-cause. 

^ II  ^ II 

g.  On  that,  too,  there  is  this  verse. 

Just  as,  in  the  case  of  the  five  sheaths  described 
above,  verses  were  quoted  descriptive  of  the  Self  in  the 
Annamaya-kosa,  etc.,  so  also,  a verse  is  quoted  here 
which  speaks  of  the  existence  of  the  Innermost  Atman 
in  all,  by  speaking  of  the  universe. 

II  m n 

iifw  I II  t II 

[Anuvaka  Vi  I.] 


AnU.  F//.]®RAHMAN  AS  EXTERKAL  OBJECTS.  5^1 

I.  Non-being,  verily,  this  in  the  beginning 
was.  Thence,  indeed,  was  the  being  born.  That 
created  itself  by  itself ; thence  is  That  the  self- 
cause called. 

‘ Non-being  ’ means  the  unmanifested  Brahman,  as 
distinguished  from  the  universe  with  specific  names 
and  forms  manifested  ; * it  does  not  mean  absolute 
non-existence.  ‘ This  ’ refers  to  the  universe  com- 
posed of  specific  names  and  forms.  Prior  to  creation, 
this  universe  was  Brahman  Himself,  here  spoken  of  as 
‘non-being’.  Thence,  from  that  Non-being,  t was 
born  the  being,  with  specific  names  and  forms  distinct- 
ly marked. 

The  universe  composed  of  names  and  forms  are  in  them- 
selves non-existent,  because  they  are  not-Self.  What  is 
existent  came,  verily,  from  that  One  Existence,  namely 
Brahman. — (S). 

Was  the  creation  quite  distinct  from  Him,  as  the 
son  is  distinct  from  the  father  ? 

The  sruti  answers  : That  created  itself  by  itself. 
Brahman  spoken  of  as  non-being,  created  Himself  by 
Himself.  I 

That  one  who  is  “ Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite,"  creates 
Himself  by  Himself  into  “ the  being  and  the  beyond,”  when 
associated  with  avidyi. 

• The  manifested  universe  being  called  sat  or  being. 

t From  the  Cause. 

J i.  e„  without  being  impelled  b7  any  one  else,  5e  made  Him- 
self as  the  universe— (V). 


5%  BKAHMA^VIDYA  BmAINBD«  [Amnd(J^VtM. 

TJife’ all-powerful  Lord  created  all  this  by  Himself ; and 
therefore,  th§  Mahfttmans  call  Him  as  the  well-doer 
(su-kfita)— (S). 

Indeed  there  exists  nothing — neither  a material  cause  of 
the  universe  similar  to  clay,  nor  an  efficient  cause  like  the 
potter — over  and  above  Brahman.  On  the  contrary,  Brah- 
man takes  the  place  of  both. 

Such  being  the  case,  Brahman  is  called  ‘ su-krita,’ 
the  Cause  par  excellence,  * the  self-cause.  It  is  well 
known  to  the  world  t that  Brahman  is  the  independent 
cause,  for.  He  is  the  cause  of  all. 

Those  who  are  versed  in  the  s&stras  say  that  Brahman 
is  an  agent  by  Himself.  On  the  other  hand,  the  jivas  are 
not  agents  by  themselves  ; they  are  impelled  to  act  by  the 
Antary&min,  the  Inner  Ruler,  as  the  following  passages  of 
5ruti  and  smiiti  show.” 

Who  from  within  rules  the  self.”  J 

He  is  thy  Self,  the  Inner  Ruler,  the  Immortal.”  || 

‘‘  It  is  He  who  makes  one  do  a good  deed.”  ^ 

“ In  what  way  I am  impelled  by  that  unknown  God 
residing  in  the  heart,  in  that  way  I do.” 

Brahman,  the  Oood  Deed. 

Or,  to  interpret  the  passage  in  another  way: — Because 
Brahman  created  all  out  of  Himself,  remaining  one  with 
the  whole  universe,  therefore,  .as  an  embodiment  of 

* The  independent  cause. — (V). 

t The  world  here  refers  to  sastra  or  scriptures. 

I Bri.  Up.  3.7.22.  II  Bri.  Up,  3.7-3.  f Kau.  Up.  3.8. 


Anu.  VIL]  brahman  as  bxtbrnal  objects.  583 

such  a meritorious  act  (puf^ya),  BrahmaUi  the  Cause, 
is  called  ‘ su-krita’  the  good  or  meritorious  act. 

^ Su-knta’  literally  means  that  which  is  well  done,  a good 
act ; it  refers  to  the  act  of  the  Lord,  not  to  the  Lord  Him- 
/feelf  who  is  the  agent.  Even  in’  common  parlance,  what- 
ever is  done  by  the  master  himself  with  effort,  that  alone 
ii  said  to  be  well  done,  but  not  that  which  is  done  by  the 
servants — (S). 

In  either  case,  however,  there  exists,  as  is  well-known 
in  the  world,  what  is  here  termed  su-krita,  that  which 
brings  about  the  effects  (of  former  acts)  etc.,  be  it  the 
Good  Deed  itself  (punya) , or  the  other  one  ; * and  this 
well-known  truth  can  be  explained  only  on  the  suppo- 
sition that  an  Intelligent  Eternal  Cause  exists.  Ac- 
cordingly, it  being  well-known  that  there  exists  an 
Independent  Agent,  or  that  there  exists  the  Good  Deed, 
we  conclude  that  Brahman  exists. 


♦ namely,  Brahman,  the  independent  cause. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 
BRAHMAN  THE  SOURCE  OE  JOY. 


To  prove  Brahman's  existence  in  yet  other  ways,  Ihe 
nuti  teaches  that  Brahman  is  Bliss  (Anauda). 

BrMimaa,  the  source  of  the  supersensuous  pleasure. 

I w.  I m ^ 

^ m II 

2.  That  one,  verily,  called  the  self-cause.  He 
is  the  Flavour.  Flavour,  indeed,  this  one  having 
got,  blest  becomes  he. 

On  the  following  ground  also,  Brahman  exists. — On 
what  ground  ?— Because  He  is  the  Flavour.  Whence  is 
Brahman  known  to  be  a Flavour  ? The  sruti  says  : He 
who  is  known  as  the  self-cause, — He  is,  verily,  the 
Flavour.  ‘Flavour’  in  common  parlance,  means 
that  which  causes  satisfaction,  that  which  causes  plea- 
sure, i.  e.,  an  object  which  is  sweet,  acid,  etc.  Having 
got  the  Flavour,  man  here  becomes  blest  or  happy. 

Brahman  who  manifests  Himself  as  ‘the  being  and  the 
beyond’  is  said  to  be  the  Supreme  ‘Rasa’  or  Flavour  in 
this  creation  which  in  itself  is  destitute  of  flavour.  Flavour 


585 


Anu.  VlL]  BRAHKA*}  Titg  SOlJRCB  0#  JOV. 

means  essence,  the  Immortal  Brahman,  the  Bliss,  the  Joy. 
By  this  Flavour  it  is  that  the  universe,  which  in  itself  is 
flavourless,  appears  to  be  flavoury.  How,  it  may  be  asked, 
ean  this  supersensuous  Flavour  be  the  Bliss  ? The  sruti 
answers  in  the  words  “Flavour,  indeed,’*  etc. — (S). 

In  Qur  experience  no  non-existent  object  is  found  to 
ckuse  pleasure.  Though  possessing  no  external  sources 
of  happiness,  the  wise  brahmanas  (devotees  of  Brahman) 
who  do  not  work  for  happiness  and  who  cherish  no  desire 
are  found  full  of  happiness  as  though  they  have  obtained 
external  objects  of  pleasure.  To  them,  certainly, 
Brahman  and  Brahman  alone  is  Flavour,  the  source  of 
pleasure. 

These  pure  ones,  the  samny&sins,  those  who  have  re- 
nounced all,  attain  .supreme  Bliss,  which  is  supersensuous. 
In  them,  certainly,  there  must  reign  that  Supreme  Peace 
which  thoroughly  delights  their  minds  ; in  them,  cer- 
tainly, we  find  all  marks  of  delightful  minds.  In  those  who 
have  realised  the  Self  we  find  such  outward  symptoms  of 
peace  as  we  find  in  a man  who,  diseased  with  itch,  sits 
near  the  fire  scratching  his  body  with  his  mind  immersed  in 
joy.  This  inference  of  Bliss  is  meant  for  those  only  who  have 
not  realised  the  true  nature  of  the  Bliss-Self ; but,  for  those 
who  have  realised  the  true  nature  of  the  Self,  it  is  a fact  of 
immediate  experience— (S). 

Therefore  that  One,  the  source  of  their  bliss, — namely 
Brahman, — does  exist,  as  flavour  exists. 

Brahman  is  Flavour,  because  He  isJ  the  source  of  the 
sage’s  happiness,  of  his  feeling  that  he  has  achieved  all, 

74 


s66  BftAitMA-viDVA  BXBtAiNBD.  [Amnda-Vallu 

and  so  on.  Brahman  is  so  called  because  He  is  to  be  tasted 
with  love,  relished  in  the  knowledge — the  state  of  mind- 
produced  by  the  Savoury  Vedintic  teaching.  . Brahman 
is  indeed  approached  with  love  by  all  who  seek  the  know- 
ledge. Love  for  Brahman  cannot  arise  if  He  were  not  of 
the  nature  of  bliss.  Hence  the  word  ‘flavour*  points  to 
Brahman  being  the  Bliss  itself.  Against  this  it  may  be 
urged  that  those  who  seek  to  know  Dharma  approach  it  with 
love,  though  Dharma  is  not  the  Bliss  itself.  We  answer 
thus:  men  do  not  indeed  love  Dharma  for  its  own  sake ; 
they  love  it  as  the  means  by  which  to  attain  the  bliss  of 
svarga.  On  the  contrary,  Brahman  is  not  a means  to  any 
bliss  superior  to  Himself ; so  that,  as  the  primary  object  of 
love.  Brahman  is  the  Bliss  itself.  Hence  it  is  that  we  find 
the  sage  who,  having  realised  the  Flavour,  is  filled  with 
joy  and  regards  himself  as  blest.  The  sage  does  not  possess 
the  worldly  objects  of  pleasure,  such  as  flowers,  woman, 
See*  He  possesses  only  the  Self,  and  does  not  regard  other 
things,  such  as  flowers,  as  a possession  at  all.  The  scrip- 
ture says  “Beyond  the  gain  of  the  Self,  there  is  nothing 
higher.’*’^'  Wherefore  we  should  admit  that  Brahman  exists 
as  the  Bliss  which  is  the  source  of  the  happiness  of  the  sage. 

Brahman  is  the  source  of  activity  and  sensual  pleasure. 

Further,  with  a view  to  shew  that  Brahman  exists  even  as 
the  source  of  our  physical  activity  ahd  sensual  pleasure,  the 
sruti  proceeds  to  shew  that  Brahman  is  the  cause  of  both  : 

CTcJ^I II  ^ II 


* ^pastamba-Dharmasiitra,  1 — 22 — 2, 


587 


Anu.  VII.]  brahman  the  source  of  joy. 

3.  Who  indeed  could  live,  who  breathe,  should 
not  this  Bliss  be  in  kk&sa  ? This  verily  it  is  that 
bestows  bliss. 

For  the  following  reason  also  Brahman  exists. — For 
what  reason  ? — Because  of  the  breathing  and  other 
kinds  of  activity  we  see.  Our  body,  for  instance,*  when 
alive,  breathes  up  and  down  by  the  aid  of  prd»a  and 
apana,  the  vital  airs  ; and  thus  we  see  that  vital  func- 
tions and  sensational  activities  are  carried  on  by  the 
body  and  the  senses  combined.  This  conjunction  in 
mutual  dependence  for  the  benefit  of  one  single  entity 
is  not  possible  in  the  absense  of  an  Intelligence  outside 
the  combination  ; for,  it  is  not  found  possible 
elsewhere,  t 

So  the  sruti  says  : If  in  Akasa — in  the  Supreme 
Ether,  in  the  cave  (of  the  heart), — this  One,  the  Bliss, 
do  not  exist,  who  indeed  in  the  world  could  breathe 
in  and  who  could  breathe  up  ? Therefore  there 
exists  that  One,  namely.  Brahman,  whose  enjoy- 
ment, indeed  all  the  activities  of  the  body  and  the 
senses  as  well  as  all  the  vital  functions  subserve  ; and 
it  is  He  who  causes  the  pleasure  of  (all  beings  in  the) 
world. — Why  so  ? — For,  it  is  this  One,  the  Supreme 
Self,  who  makes  (all  beings  in)  the  world  happy  accord- 

* a»  well  as  the  bodies  of  the  Devas  or  Cosmic  Intelligences, 
t For  instance,  earth,  timber  and  other  materials  out  of  which 
a house  is  built,  do  not  combine  together  without  an  intelligent 
being,  quite  outside  theiq  all,  who  is  to  occupy  the  house  as  its 
lord. 


5^8  BRAHMA^vkWA  ttXPtAiiNfiD;  ^Amndu^V (Mi. 

ingtotheif  merit  (Dharma),  The  Supreme  Self  is 
the  Bliss,  whiph  is  revealed  only  in  its  limited  forms 
to  sentient  beings  on  account  of  their  avidy^  or 
ignorance. 

This  bliss,  which  the  sentient  beings  in  the  world  attain 
in  different  degrees  according  to  their  meritorious  acts, 
reaches  its  culmination  in  the  Infinite  Bliss  ; and  therefore 
there  must  be  in  existence  that  Supreme  Bliss,  that  Flavour, 
which  is  the  object  of  our  absolute  love. — (S). 

kkdsa : the  text  may  be  construed  also  to  mean  “should 
this  one,  the  Ak^tsa,  the  Bliss,  exist  not.”  For  the  word 
“Akisa”  literally  means  that  which  shines  everywhere  by 
itself,  the  self-luminous  One.  If  this  Bliss,  the  Self,  pre- 
viously spoken  of  as  the  Flavour,  do  not  exist,  whence 
then  is  the  agent  who  within  this  body  acts  through  the 
settees  and  breathes  ? The  Atharvawikas  teach  that  Atman 
is  the  agent  who  acts  through  the  eye  and  other  sense- 
organs  : 

“He  is  the  seer,  toucher,  the  hearer,  smeller, 
taster,  thinker,  knower,  the  agent,  the  con- 
scious self,  the  Purusha.”  " 

In  common  parlance,  birth  and  death  being  found  concomi- 
tant with  the  presence  and  the  absence  of  the  vital  air  in  the 
body,  the  ignorant  believe  that  pr&wa  itself,  the  vital  air,  is 
the  Self.  Relying  on  this  belief,  Bal&ki  t regarded  prawa  as 
the  Self  and  argued  with  Aj^tasatru  who  held  that  Brahman 
was  the  Self.  Accordingly,  with  a view  to  remove  the 
illusion  that  it  is  pr&na  that  sees  and  does  other  acts,  the 

Pwna,  Up.  4-9.  t Fwie*  Bri.  Up.  2-1, 


589 


Ann.  VIL]  brahman  the  source  of  joy. 

sruti  here  separates  prd>»a  from  the  real  Self,  in  the  words 
“ who  could  breathe  ? ” In  the  absence  of  the  Bliss-Atman, 
who  is  to  do  the  act  of  breathing  by  means  of  prfii»a  ? That 
prdi»a  is  a mere  instrument  while  the  Self  is  the  agent  is 
also  clearly  taught  in  the  Ushasti-Br&hmawa  : 

“He  who  breathes  by  prawa,  He  is  thy  Self 

and  within  all.”  * 

It  is  true  that  the  Bliss-Atman  who  is  devoid  of  all  attach- 
ment, cannot  in  Himself  be  the  agent  of  the  acts  done 
through  the  senses  &c. ; still,  He  can  be  the  agent  when 
associated  with  the  upd<dhi  of  the  Vij»a,namaya-ko5a.  There- 
fore, as  the  cause  of  all  activity.  Brahman  does  exist.  It 
is  this  Bliss-Atman,  the  cause  of  all  activity,  who  bestows 
pleasure  on  all  beings.  On  obtaining  an  object  of  desire,  the 
mind  withdraws  its  attention  from  the  object,  and,  turning 
inwards  before  the  rise  of  a desire  for  another  object,  it  enjoys 
the  Bliss  of  the  Inner  Self  (Pratyag&tman).  This  is  what 
is  usually  called  sensual  pleasure.  This  truth  is  known 
only  to  the  people  who  are  endued  with  discrimination. 
Thus  we  should  admit  that  Brahman  exists,  as  the  source 
of  this  sensual  pleasure. 


♦ Bn,Up,  3.4-J. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

WHO  ATTAINS  BRAHMAN  P 

The  purpose  of  the  sequel. 

Arguments  for  the  existence  of  Brahman  have  been 
clearly  stated.  The  5ruti  now  proceeds  to  answer  the 
questions  “ Whether  does  any  one  who  knows  not,  depart- 
ing, go  to  that  region  ? Or  does  any  one  who  knows, 
departing,  attain  that  region  ? ” It  is  indeed  the  man  of 
wisdom  that  reaches  Brahman,  in  whom  there  is  no  fear, 
but  who  is  the  source  of  fear  ; for,  the  tamas,  the  darkness 
of  ignorance,  is  the  only  obstacle  to  the  attainment  of  Brah- 
man ; and  certainly  there  exists  no  other  obstacle.  What- 
ever  obstacle  there  may  exist,  it  is  caused  solely  by  avidyi, 
and  therefore  avidya  alone  prevents  the  attainment  of 
liberation  (moksha).  Though  the  True  Self  within  is  the 
witness  of  avidya,  though  Avidya  itself  exists  to  us 
only  as  witnessed  by  the  True  Self  within,  whose  light  ever 
shines  and  never  sets,  still  He  is  screened  by  avidy&  ; and 
this  is  due  to  the  power  of  avidya.  The  question  as  to 
why  the  ignorant  one  does  not  attain  Brahman  who  is  pre- 
sent in  both  the  wise  and  the  ignorant  alike  would  arise 
only  if  it  be  held  that  Brahman  could  be  attained  without 
knowledge : but  no  such  question  could  arise  when  we  hold 
that  knowledge  alone  leads  to  the  attainment  of  Brahman, 
by  removing  avidyA,  the  cause  of  sawsfiira.  We  do  not  in- 


* in  chapters  II — VIII. 


AttU.  VII  WHO  ATTAINS  BRAHMAN  ? 591 

• 

deed  deny  that  Brahman,  who  is  the  Self  of  all  and  is 
therefore  present  in  the  ignorant  as  well^  as  the  wise,  is  in 
fact  attained  as  such  by  both  alike.  We  have  already 
said  * that,  inasmuch  as  Brahman  is  the  very  Self  of  all, 
knowledge  leads  to  the  attainment  of  Brahman — who  in 
Himself  is  ever  present  in  us— by  way  of  removing  igno- 
rance (avidya).  Accordingly  the  sruti  now  tries,  in  the 
following  passage,  to  prove  with  great  assiduity  this  truth, 
that  it  is  the  wise  man,  not  the  ignorant  one,  who  attains 
Brahman. — (S). 

The  question  as  regards  the  ignorant  man  attaining  or 
not  attaining  Brahman,  though  first  in  order,  is  for  the 
moment  set  aside  inasmuch  as  there  is  much  to  be  said 
about  it.  The  sruti  first  removes  the  doubt  as  to  the  wise 
man’s  attainment  of  Brahman. 

Even  as  the  cause  of  the  ignorant  man’s  fear  and 
the  wise  man’s  fearlessness,  Brahman  exists.  It  is  only 
by  resorting  to  an  existing  being  that  one  can  attain  fear- 
lessness. Cessation  of  fear  cannot  accrue  from  resort 
to  a non-existent  being. — How  is  Brahman  the  cause 
of  fearlessness  ? — The  sruti  proceeds  to  answer  : 

True  knowledge  leads  to  fearlessness. 

w i#bt 

^5^  I m II  » II 

4.  When  in  truth  this  (soul)  gains  fearless 
support  in  Him  who  is  invisible,  selfless,  un- 


* Vide  ante  pp.  207—208. 


59#  BRAHl4A-Vlb¥A  EXPtAINBD  ' [Imitdci-ValU. 

defined,  non-abode,  then  has  he  the  Fearless 
reached. 

When  the  aspirant  finds  his  support  in  Brahman 
without  fearing,  i.  e.,  when  he  finds  that  Brahman  is 
his  own  Self,  then,  he  attains  fearlessness,  inasmuch  as 
he  perceives  in  Him  no  duality  * generated  by  avidyi, 
the  cause  of  all  fear. 

Brahman’s  real  nature. 

{Question) : — Of  what  nature  is  Brahman  ? 

(Anmer) : — He  is  invisible,  &c.... 

Invisible : Visible  means  what  is  capable  of  percep- 
tion, i.  e.,  a phenomenon  (vik&ra)  ; every  phenomenon 
subserves  perception.  Brahman  is  not  visible,  i.  e., 
He  is  not  a phenomenon,  no  object  of  perception. 
Self-less : formless,  having  no  body.*  Because  Brahman 
is  invisible,  He  is  formless.  Because  He  is  selfless.  He 
is  undefined.  It  is  only  a visesha,  a specific  or  particu- 
lar thing,  that  can  be  defined  ; and  every  particular  is  a 
phenomenon  (vikara).  But  Brahman  is  not  a pheno- 
menon, because  He  is  the  source  of  all  phenomena. 
Whence  He  is  undefined.  Because  such  is  Brahman, 
He  is  the  non-abode.  He  is  no  abode  or  substratum  of 
attributes.  This  is  tantamount  to  saying  that  Brah- 
man is  devoid  of  all  attributes  of  the  objects  of  crea- 
tion. 

* i.  e.,  He  does  not  perceive  doalitf  as  real ; for,  it  is  admitted 
that  even  the  wise  man  does  perceive  duality  which,  however, 
he  isegards  as  unreal. — fV). 


S9S 


Anu.  yil.]  Wko  AttAlSS  brahmam  ? 

According  to  the  common  usage,  perception  means  the 
consciousness  of  objects  obtained  through  any  of  the  senses  ; 
and  in  interpreting  the  scripture  we  are  to  understand 
its  words  in  accordance  with  their  common  usage.  The 
visible  or  perceptible  is  a thing  which  possesses  individu- 
ality ; for,  an  individual  or  particular  object  alone  can  be 
an  object  of  perception.  Neither  the  Eternal  Conscious- 
ness nor  mere  negation  (abh^va)  can  be  an  object  of  per- 
ception. Brahman  has  nothing  that  is  perceptible  in  Him 
and  is  therefore  invisible.  Self  (in  ‘selfless’)  means  what  can  be 
imagined  to  have  s^//-existence,  i,e,^  the  universal  (sAmdnya) 
running  through  the  particulars  which  are  perceptible. 
Having  no  existence  in  itself,  it  exists  to  us  only  through 
the  particulars.  Selfless  therefore  means  devoid  of  univer- 
sals.— (S). 

Or, — the  visible  or  perceptible  means  the  universe  we 
perceive  in  the  waking  state — which  is  usually  regarded  as 
the  perceptible, — the  physical  body,  the  Annamaya-kosa, 
the  Vir^bj,  the  universe  composed  of  the  physical  compound- 
ed or  quintupled  matter.  The  self  in  [self -less)  refers  to  the 
Priwamaya,  Manomaya,  and  Vijndnamaya  kosas,  which  are 
all  subservient  to  the  Self  ; that  is,  it  refers  to  the  subtle 
body,  the  Sutratman,  the  universe  composed  of  subtle,  un- 
compounded,  or  unquintupled  matter.  Then  remains  the 
fifth  one,  the  Anandamaya-kosa,  the  repository  of  the  ex- 
periences resulting  from  the  other  kosas,  the  jiva,  the 
semblance  of  the  One  Consciousness,  and  this  is  here  spoken 
of  as  defined.  Brahman  the  Supreme  is  undeHned^  tran- 
scending the  Anandamaya,  beyond  the  cause  and  the  effect, 
the  Pure  Consciousness,  referred  to  by  the  word  * Thou*  in 
‘That,  Thou  art.*— (S). 


75 


^ BRAHMA-VIDYA  EkPUiNED.  [Inando-VoUi* 

The  ahode  means  the  unknown,  the  cause  of  the  five 
sheatbSi  wherein  the  universe  is  merged  (at  pralaya)  and 
whence  the  submerged  universe  come  into  being  (at  the 
time  of  creation).  The  non-ahode  means  Brahman  beyond 
the  Cause,  referred  to  by  the  word  * That,*  the  One  who  is 
Eternal,  Pure,  Intelligent  and  Free,  and  identical  with  the 
one  referred  to  by  ‘ Thou.’ — (S). 

Or,  these  negative  epithets  such  as  ‘ invisible*  are  meant 
to  deny  what  has  been  above  spoken  of  as  * the  being  and  the 
beyond,*  and  so  on.  It  was  said  that  Brahman  became  ‘the 
being  and  the  beyond* ; and  from  this  one  may  suppose  that 
the  universe  actually  exists  in  Brahman.  The  removal  here 
of  this  idea  which  is  uppermost  in  the  mind  of  the  student 
is  quite  in  its  proper  place.  The  two  categories,  namely, 
forms  and  the  formless^  have  been  spoken  of  as  ‘ the  being 
and  the  beyond,*  and  so  on  ; and  it  is  the  denial  of  these 
that  is  here  meant,  inasmuch  as  the  sruti  elsewhere  makes 
the  same  denials.  In  this  case  we  should  understand 
* abode*  as  meaning — not  the  Primary  Cause,  but — the 
antaA-kara»a,  the  abode  of  all  tendencies  (v&san^s),  inas- 
much as  the  denial  of  the  Primary  Cause  is  included  in  the 
denial  of  * the  formless.*  Thus,  these  being  denied,  one 
can  directly  see  what  is  Brahman’s  real  nature. — (S). 

For  a firm  knowledge  of  the  Self  it  will  not  do  merely  to 
get  an  idea  of  what  the  Self  is  in  Himself.  The  mind 
(buddhi)  being  drawn  away  from  the  Self  when  it  is  en- 
grossed in  the  being  and  the  non-being— in  the  not-self,  in 
the  objects  of  the  external  world,  in  causes  and  effects — 
the  sruti  denies  the  being  and  the  non-being  and  thereby 
diverts  the  mind  from  them  and  causes  it  to  dwell  firmly  in 
the  Inner  Self. — (S). 


595 


Anu,  VIL]  ATTAINS  BRAHMAN  ? 

Brahman  is  the  5elf. 

By  denying  the  visible,  the  sruti  means  to  teach  that  the 
Inner  Self  is  one  with  Brahman,  that  Brahman  is  no  oth^ 
than  the  Self.  How  can  anything  other  than  the  Self  be  ab- 
solutely real  ? Neither  negation  nor  an  illusory  phenomenon 
is  conceivable  except  through  association  with  the  Absolute 
Reality,  the  Immutable  Eternal  Consciousness — (S). 

Brahman  here  described  as  invisible  is  in  reality  identical 
with  the  Self.  It  is  because  of  this  identity,  that  the  5ruti 
which  starts  with  the  words  “The  Knowev  of  Brahman  rea- 
ches the  Supreme,”  concludes  * with  the  words  “when  this 
soul  gains  his  support  in  Brahman,”  etc.  When  a man  intuiti- 
vely perceives  Brahman  who  is  beyond  perception,  etc.,  u f., 
when  one  realises  the  identity  of  the  Self  and  Brahman  by 
direct  intuition  “I  am  Brahman,”  then,  at  that  very 
moment,  he  is  free  from  avidy&  and  attains  the  Supreme, 
the  Fearless.  The  words  “gains  his  support”  shew  that 
this  passage  refers  to  Brahman,  who  has  been  described  as 
“Brahman,  the  tail,  the  supporf'—[S). 

The  four  epithets  beginning  with  * invisible  ’ qualify 
Brahman.  He  is  invisible,  cannot  be  reached  by  the  senses. 
As  having  no  specific  marks  He  is  unknowable  through 
inference.  Though  the  three  bodies  are  the  specific  mark 
of  jiva,  as  creatorship  is  of  the  Isvara,  there  are  no  specific 
mark  or  marks  through  which  the  real  nature  of  Brahman 
transcending  the  universe  can  be  inferred.  Brahman  cannot 


* Thus  shewing  that  to  know  Brahman  is  to  gain  Him,  which 
will  not  hold  good  unless  Self  and  Brahman  are  identical. 
None  but  the  Self  can  be  gained  by  mere  knowledge.— (A). 


596  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED.  [An^mdO^ValU. 

be  fully  described.  There  is  no  word  that  can  denote  the 
real  nature  of  Brahman.  Thus,  Brahman  cannot  be  reached 
through  perception,  inference  and  revelation.  Brahman  is 
therefore  of  a different  nature  from  the  whole  universe  of 
effects.  Further,  He  is  abodeless,  inasmuch  as  the  sruti 
speaks  elsewhere  of  Him  as  being  ‘‘established  in  His  own 
greatness/*  Though  the  Primary  Avidy^  cannot  likewise 
be  known  through  perception,  inference  or  revelation,  still, 
as  it  abides  in  Brahman,  it  is  distinguishable  from  Him 
who  has  no  abode.  When  the  aspirant  of  BrahmavidyA. 
attains  the  firm  conviction  that  this  Brahman — the  Brahman 
whose  existence  has  been  established  and  whom  one  can 
realise  in  one’s  own  experience— is  identical  with  his  own 
Self,  then  he  attains  Liberation,  a state  in  which  there  is  no 
fear  of  birth  and  death.  His  Liberation  is  coeval  with 
knowledge  : he  attains  Brahman  at  the  very  moment  he 
knows  Him, — a truth  to  which  all  sages  bear  testimony. 

When  the  aspirant  finds  that  Brahman  is  his  own 
Self,  he  attains  fearless  state.  For,  then  he  is  establish- 
ed in  his  True  Self ; then  he  sees  nothing  else,  hears 
nothing  else,  knows  nothing  else.  Indeed  one’s  fear 
arises  from  some  one  else  ; it  is  not  right  to  say  that 
one’s  fear  arises  from  one’s  own  Self.  Therefore  it  is 
something  outside  the  Self  that  causes  fear  to  the  Self. 
Despite  the  sources  t of  fear  existing  all  around,  the 
brfi-hmanas, — those  who  have  known  Brahman, — are 
found  to  be  afraid  of  none  anywhere.  This  cannot  be 
explained  in  the  absence  of  Brahman  affording  to 


# Chha.  7-24-1, 


f Such  ap  serpents,  tigers,  &c. 


WHO  ATTAINS  BBAHHAN  ? 


597 


Am.  Vll,'] 

them  shelter  from  fear.  Because  we  find  them  fearless, 
we  conclude  that  Brahman  does  exist  as  the  cause  of 
their  fearlessness. 

(Question)  : — When  does  the  aspirant  attain  the 
Fearless  ? 

(Answer) : — When  he  sees  nothing  else.  When  he 
sees  no  duality  in  the  Self,  then  he  attains  the 
Fearle.ss. 

Knowledge  of  duality  causes  fear. 

Now  the  sruti  proceeds  to  explain  clearly  how  the  ignorant 
man,  departing  hence,  does  not  reach  the  Supreme 
Goal.— (S). 

The  doubt  regarding  the  wise  man  having  been  removed 
by  the  jruti  asserting  that  he  attains  Brahman,  the  sruti 
proceeds  now  to  remove  the  doubt  regarding  the  ignorant 
man,  by  asserting  that  he  does  not  attain  Brahman. 

^ \ ^ m 

II  ^ II 

5.  When  indeed  this  (soul)  makes  in  this  One 
even  the  smallest  break,  then  for  him  there  is 
fear. 

When,  on  the  contrary,  in  the  state  of  ignorance,  the 
ignorant  man  sees  ‘in  this  One,’  in  the  Atman,  in 
Brahman,  things  set  up  by  avidyd,  as  the  timira- 
affected  eye  sees  a second  moon,  when  he  sees  even 
the  smallest  difference, — to  make  difference  means  to 


59®  BRAHMA-VIDVA  «XPLAINB1>.  [Amflda-VulU. 

it— then,  because  of  that  perception  of  differ- 
ence, there  is  fear  for  the  perceiver  of  the  difference. 
Thus  the  Self  is  the  cause  of  the  Selfs  fear. 

Duality  U a creature  of  avidya. 

Because  ignorance  makes  what  is  ever  attained  appear  as 
unattained,  therefore,  the  sniti  has  emphatically  asserted  that 
the  wise  njan  alone  attains  Brahman.  Such  being  the  case, 
the  ignorant  cannot  attain  Him,  the  tsvara  ; for,  when 
screened  by  avidyi,  what  is  actually  attained  becomes  un- 
attained. Though  the  One  Self  who  transcends  the  visible 
ever  remains  one  with  Brahman,  He  is  deceived  by  avidy^i. 
Just  as  by  ignorance  one  thinks  an  object  in  hand  as  un- 
dttained,  so  also,  by  ignorance  one  does  not  attain  Brahman, 
one’s  very  Self.  By  ignorance,  man  separates  himself  from 
the  One  Consciousness,  and  regards  himself  as  doer  and 
enjoyer,  in  the  same  way  that,  by  illusion,  a rope  itself  be- 
comes a serpent.  On  account  of  ignorance  he  makes  a 
distinction  between  himself  and  Brahman,  as  the  knower 
and  the  known,  and  regards  that  the  Isvara,  the  Lord,  is  one 
being  and  that  he  himself  is  another  being,  quite  powerless. 
Thus  making  a distinction  where  there  is  no  distinction,  he 
comes  by  the  evil  of  fear  which  arises  from  that  distinction. 
Though  in  fact  he  has  no  cause  of  fear,  still  he  imagines, 
through  ignorance,  the  One  Self  as  many,  and  is  afraid  of 
Him.  Fear  arises  when  there  is  a second  object,  as  the  sruti 
itself  has  loudly  declared  elsewhere  “From  the  second, 
verily,  fear  arises.”  (S). 

There  is  no  real  distinction  of  any  kind  between  jiva  and 
Brahman ; and  therefore  when  the  man  of  the  world  sees  the 


♦ Bri.  1-4-2, 


Vli.\  Wlio  AtTAINS  BRAHMAN  ^ S® 

smallest  difference  between  them,  when  he  sees  that 
Brahman  is  in  any  way  distinct  from  himself  then  he  is 
subject  to  the  fear  of  birth  and  death,  as  the  sruti  elsewhere^^, 
says : 

**From  death  to  death  he  goes  who  here  below 
sees  seeming  difference.”  * 

“Whosoever  looks  for  Brahman  elsewhere 
than  in  the  Self  shall  be  abandoned  by 
Brahman.”  f 

Now  one  may  suppose  that  a person  who  has  mastered 
the  ritualistic  section  of  the  Veda,  or  a person  who  has  re- 
alised the  Sa-gum  or  Conditioned  Brahman  by  contemplation, 
attains  liberation  in  virtue  of  the  knowledge  he  possesses,  in 
the  same  way  that  the  knower  of  the  Nir^guna  or  Uncondi- 
tioned Brahman  attains  liberation  by  his  knowledge.  This 
supposition  is  removed  by  the  sruti  in  the  following  words : 

^ ^ II  ^ II 

6.  That,  verily,  is  fear  to  the  knower  who  does 
not  reflect. 

Because  the  Lord  is  the  source  of  fear  to  him  who  imagines 
himself  to  be  subject  to  His  control  and  distinct  from  Him, 
therefore  the  very  Brahman  in  whom  there  is  nothing  to 
cause  fear  becomes  the  source  of  fear.  Ah  ! None  lies 
beyond  the  power  of  avidya  which  causes  fear  even  to 
Brahman  whom  Agni  and  other  Devas  fear.  The  Divine 
Lord  is  fearless  and  causes  fear  even  to  the  Lords  ; even  in 


* Katha,  Up.  4-10  f Bri.  Up.  2-4-6. 


($00 


BRAHUA-VIDVA  EXPLAINED.  [Amnda-Vollin 

Him  avidy&  generates  fear.  Nothing  is  beyond  its 
sc5ope.-^(S).  * 

^ Brahman,  whom  having  known,  the  wise  man  attains  fear- 
lessness,— the  very  Brahman  who  thus  causes  fearlessness 
forms  the  source  of  fear  to  the  Self  owing  to  ignorance. 
That  One  who  is  invisible,  etc.,  and  in  whom  there 
is  nothing  to  fear,  proves,  when  screened  by  ignorance, 
when  He  becomes  subject  to  the  control  of  avidy&,  a source 
of  fear  to  Himself.  If  the  knower  of  Brahman  should,  by 
ignorance,  separate  the  Inner  Self  from  Brahman  to  so 
small  an  extent  as  the  tip  of  the  hair,  then  his  very  Self 
proves  a source  of  fear  to  himself— (S). 

Brahman’s  Existence  as  the  source  of  fear. 
Brahman  Himself  is  the  cause  of  fear  to  him  who 
sees  distinction,  who  thinks  ‘The  Lord  is  distinct  from 
me;  Tara  distinct  from  Him,  a being  of  the  world 
(sawsara).”  When  thus  regarded  as  distinct,  Brahman 
causes  fear  to  him  who  makes  the  smallest  distinction, 
not  seeing  the  identity.  Therefore,  though  knowing, 
yet  ignorant  is  that  man  who  sees  not  the  one  True 
Self  that  is  identical  with  himself.  It  is  by  perception 
of  the  cause  of  distinction  that  one  cherishes  fear, 
regarding  oneself  as  liable  to  destruction.  * It  is 
he  alone  who  is  not  himself  destructible  that  can 
be  the  cause  of  destruction,  t In  the  absence  of  the 

* It  is  indeed  he  who  believes  that  Parameavara  will  destroy 
him  or  cast  him  into  the  hell  that  has  any  reason  to  fear. — (A), 
t To  say  that  the  Cause  of  destruction  is  destructible  involves 
the  fallacy  of  infinite  regress  (anavasthd.),and  therefore  the  cause 
of  all  destruction  is  eternal  and  cannot  be  other  than 
Brahman.— (A). 


Anu\  VIL]  WHO  AtTAlNS  BtlAHWAK  ? 

Cause  of  all  destruction  who  is  not  HimSell  iilible  to 
destruction,  it  would  be  hard  to  account  for  fear,  Which 
can  arise  only  wh^,  the  cause  of  danger  is  seen,  Ih^ 
point  of  fact  there  is  fear  in  the  whole  world.  Where- 
fore, as  there  is  fear  in  the  world,  we  understand  that 
there  must  certainly  exist  He  who  is  the  Cause  of  fear, 
who,  being  Himself  indestructible,  is  the  cause  of  all 
destruction,  and  of  whom  the  whole  world  is  afraid. 

The  non-dual  Self. 

The  passage  admits  of  another  interpretation  : — Brah- 
man is  the  source  of  fear  to  the  unreflecting  knower  of 
Brahman,  to  him  who  thinks  that  he  has  known  Brahman, 
who  regards  Brahman  as  knowable  by  him  and  therefore 
distinct  from  himself.  The  True  Self  who  is  one  with 
Brahman  is  neither  the  knower  nor  the  knowable  ; and 
therefore,  to  regard  oneself  as  the  knower  is  an  illusion,  in 
the  same  way  as  it  is  an  illusion  to  regard  the  mother-of- 
pearl  as  silver  ; and  a person  who  so  regards  himself  is 
therefore  said  to  be  unreflecting.  The  sruti  says  : 

“ He  thinks  of  It,  for  whom  It  passes 
thought.”  * 

“ Other  than  known  is  That,  beyond  the  un- 
known too.”  + 

These  passages  mean  : — It  is  quite  distinct  from  the  know- 
able,  It  is  quite  distinct  from  the  unknowable  ; It  is  distinct 
from  the  knowable  and  the  knower.  It  is  words  and 
nameable  things  that  become  either  known  or  unknown. 


• Itena.  Up.  2~3. 


t Ibid.  1—3. 

76 


6at  BHAHMA-viDVA  EXPLAINED,  [A^panda'^VolU. 

They^  ue  inseatiemt  and  subject  to  transformation.  So^  too, 
is  the  knower  of  the  known,  the  knower  being  a particular 
, transformation  of  the  mind  (antaA-karana  with  semblance- 
consciousness  in  it).  But  Atman  who  is  pure  Consciousness 
cannot  be  the  known  or  the  unknown  or  the  knower ; other- 
wise He  could  not  be  one  with  the  Immutable,  Non-dual 
.Brahman.  Having  separated  the  Self  from  the  known  and 
knowledge  as  also  from  the  knower,  which  are  all  set  up  by 
ignorance,  and  having  also  separated  Him  from  the  un- 
known, from  ignorance  and  the  ignorant,  one  should 
know  “ I am  Brahman**  as  taught  in  the  sruti. — (S). 

He  who  does  not  know  the  real  nature  of  Brahman  sees 
distinction  between  himself  and  Brahman,  and  therefore 
.Brahman  is  the  source  of  fear, — the  fear  of  sa;i^s&ra,  of 
.birth  and  death — as  well  to  him  (who  knows  the  Condi- 
tioned Brahman)  as  to  him  who  is  quite  ignorant.  He  does 
not  attain  liberation. 

Brahman  as  the  Ruler  of  the  Universe. 

To  confirm  the  assertion  that  there  is  fear  for  him  who 
has  no  knowledge  of  the  real  nature  of  Brahman,  though 
he  may  possess  other  knowledge,  the  sruti  quotes  a verse  : 

^ II  \S  II 

II  ^ II 

y.  There,  too,  there  is  this  verse. 

II n 


AtW.  VIII.]  WHO  ATTAINS  BRAHMAN  ? 6O3 

953^1^  in  II 

[Anuvaka  VIII.] 

I.  From  fear  of  Him  does  Wind  blow,  from 
fear  of  Him  does  Sun  rise,  from  fear  of  Him 
Agni  and  Indra  (act)  and  Dsath  the  fifth  does 
run. 

Wind  and  others  here  mentioned,  who  are  very 
noble  beings  and  lords  in  themselves,  discharge  their 
respective  functions  of  blowing  and  the  like,  which  in- 
volve much  trouble,  according  to  a certain  law.  This, 
their  regular  discharge  of  their  respective  functions,  is 
possible  only  when  there  is  a Ruler  outside  them. 
Therefore,  we  conclude  that  there  is  Brahman,  their 
Ruler,  of  whom  they  are  afraid,  and  from  fear  of  whom 
they  perform  their  functions  like  the  servants  of  a 
king. 

For  want  of  the  knowledge  of  unity  described  above, 
even  the  lords  of  lords  do  their  respective  acts,  afraid  of 
Brahman,  the  true  Inner  Self.  Wind  and  others  here 
mentioned  are  very  powerful  beings,  self-reliant,  full  of 
physical  strength  and  very  mighty.  They  are  still  afraid 
of  Brahman  and  discharge  their  respective  functions  from 
fear. — (S). 

He  who  has  in  a former  birth  done  very  noble  acts  and 
practised  a lofty  contemplation  is  born  in  this  birth  as  the 
Wind-God.  Though  endued  with  such  greatness,  and 


^ BRAHMA^VIPYA  EXPLAINED.  [AnWnda’^Vc^^ 

t^^QUgh  ^is  A God^  be  is  ever  un  wearily  engaged  in  ike 
act  of  blowing,  from  fear  of  Brahman,  the  Antaryimin,— of 
Him  who  rules  all  from  within.  So,  too,  do  the  Sun,  Agni 
and  Indra,  perform  their  respective  functions.  Death  is 
the  fifth  God,  in  reference  to  the  four  gods  already  men- 
tioned. He  runs  always  here  and  there  towards  those  living 
beings  whose  life- period  has  been  over,  with  a view  to  kill 
them.  Though  the  Unconditioned  Brahman,  who  in  Him- 
self is  without  attachment,  cannot  l^e  the  cause  of  fear, 
still,  when  associated  with  the  upidhi  of  miyA,  He  may,  as 
the  AntaryAmin,  be  the  cause  of  fear,  as  the  VArtikakara 
says : **He,  conditioned  by  Tamas  or  Avidya,  is  the  Ruler 
of  the  universe,  which  is  subject  to  rule.”  Elsewhere  the 
sruti  says : 

^‘Who  rules  the  air  within,  He  is  thy  Self, 
the  Ruler  within,  the  Immortal.” 

“By  the  command  of  that  Imperishable,  O 
GArgi,  sun  and  moon  stand  apart.”  i 

That  Brahman  is  the  Cause  of  fear,  the  Regulator,  the 
Ruler  from  within,  is  settled  in  the  following  disquisition: 

( Vedanta-sutras.  I.  ii.  5.  ) 

{Question) ; — In  the  BrihadArawyaka-Upanishad,  YAjwa- 
valkya  said  to  UddAlaka  as  follows : 

“He  who  dwells  in  the  earth  and  within  the 
earth,  whom  the  earth  does  not  know,  whose 
body  the  earth  is,  and  who  rules  the  earth 
within.  He  is  thy  Self,  the  Ruler  within,  the 
Immortal.”  J 


♦ Up.  3-7-7. 


t Ibid.  3-8-9.  J Op.  cit.  3*7-3, 


Am.  VIII.]  WHO  ATTAINS  BRAHMAN  ? 605 

Now  the  question  arises,  who  is  the  Ruler  of  the  universe, 
comprising  the  earth,  etc.  ? Is  it  the  Pradhina,  or  Jiva,  or 
the  Isvara  ? 

{Prima  facie  vuw)\ — Being  the  material  cause  of  the  ^ 
whole  universe,  the  Pradhdna  may  be  supposed  to  be  the 
Ruler  of  its  emanations.  Or,  jiva  may  be  the  ruler,  for, 
it  is  he  who  has  done  acts  of  merit  and  sin  (dharma  and 
adharma);  and  these  acts  bring  the  universe  into  existence  so 
that  their  fruits  may  be  reaped  through  that  universe.  Being 
thus  the  creator  of  the  universe  through  his  acts,  jiva  may 
be  its  ruler. 

(Conclusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing,  we  hold  as 
follows  : In  the  words  “He  is  thy  Self,  the  Ruler  within, 

the  Immortal ” the  sruti  teaches  that  the  Ruler 

is  one  with  jiva  and  immortal.  So,  as  the  5ruti  teaches 
that  He  is  the  Inner  Ruler  of  the  earth,  the  mid-air  and  all 
things,  we  learn  that  He  is  all-pervading.  For  these  rea- 
sons, the  Paramesvara,  the  Supreme  Lord,  is  the  Ruler. 
The  Pradh&.na  cannot  be  the  Ruler,  inasmuch  as  the  sruti 
speaks  of  the  Ruler  as  the  seer  and  hearer,  “Unseen,  He 
is  the  seer  ; unheard.  He  is  the  hearer.”  The  insentient 
Pradhana  cannot  be  a seer  or  a hearer.  Neither  can  jiva  be 
the  ruler,  as  he  is  classed  among  the  ruled:  “who,  being 
within,  rules  the  self.”  \ Wherefore  the  Supreme  Lord 
is  the  Antarytoin,  the  Inner  Ruler.  From  this  it  will  be 
seen  that  it  is  the  ignorant  alone  who  has  to  fear,  not  he 
who  knows  the  Real. 


• Bri.  Up.  3-7-2.T 


t Jbid.  3.7.88. 


CHAPTER  X. 

BRAHMAN  THE  INFINITE  BLISS. 


The  purpose  of  the  sequel. 

In  Chapters  II — IX,  all  the  questions  have  been  answer- 
ed. In  the  words  he  attains  all  desires  together,”  * it 
has  been  said  very  concisely  that  the  knower  of  Brahman 
attains  allobjects  of  desire  at  once  ; and  it  has  been  also 
said— in  the  words  “ That  One,  verily,  is  the  Flavour,”  t 
— that  Brahman  is  Bliss.  With  a view  to  establish  these  two 
propositions  the  sruti  starts  an  enquiry. 

l5  Brahman’s  Bliss  inherent  or  generated  ? 

IR  II 

2.  This  is  the  enquiry  concerning  bliss- 

Brahman,  the  Source  of  fear,  is  Bliss.  J Here  follows 
the  enquiry  concerning  Brahman  the  Bliss. 

{Question) What  is  there  concerning  Bliss  which 
has  to  be  inquired  into  ? 

(Answer) ; — The  question  concerning  bliss  which  has 
to  be  settled  by  enquiry  is  this  : Is  (Brahman’s)  Bliss 

* Vide  ante  p.  276.  f Vide  ante  p.  584. 

J Brahman  has  been  spoken  of  before  as  snob  in  the  passage 
^‘That  One,  verily,  is  the  Flavour.” 


AnU.  VIIL]  brahman  tHE  INFINITE  BLISS.  6©7 

generated  by  the  contact  of  the  subject  and  the  object 
like  the  worldly  pleasure,  or  is  it  inherent  in  Him  ? 

In  other  words : Is  it  generated  by  the  contact  of  the 
senses  and  sense-objects  like  the  worldly  pleasure  ? Or, 
is  it  quite  independent  of  all  external  means  ?— (S). 

Brahman’s  Bliss  to  be  comprehended  through  sensual 
pleasure. 

The  enquiry  that  follows  here  is  treated  of  by  the  ^ruti 
elsewhere.  The  BrihadArawyaka-Upanishad  has  discussed 
at  great  length  and  determined  the  nature  of  Bliss  in  the 
section  which  begins  as  follows  : 

“If  a man  is  healthy,  well  accomplished,  and 
lord  of  others,  surrounded  by  all  human  enjoy- 
ments, that  is  the  highest  blessing  of  man/’  * 

‘Healthy*  means  sound  in  body  and  the  senses  ; ‘well-ac- 
complished’ means  possessed  of  knowledge  and  other  such 
attainments. 

Now  the  highest  worldly  pleasure  is  occasioned  by 
the  combination  of  the  necessary  external  means  and 
personal  accomplishments,  and  this  is  here  pointed  out 
for  a comprehension  of  Brahman’s  Bliss.  It  is,  of  course, 
through  this  bliss  which  is  familiar  to  us,  that  it  will  be 
possible  for  us.  to  conceive  Brahman’s  Bliss  attainable 
through  the  mind  (buddhi)  from  which  all  sense-objects 
have  turned  away. 

The  word  ‘bliss*  in  the  text  means  the  worldly  pleasure 
generated  by  the  combination  of  external  objects  and  personal 


* Bfi.  4-3-33, 


6o& 


* BRAMMArVibYA  BXPLAiNfiC.  [Afumda^Vdlli. 

accomplishments.  By  means  of  this  bliss  within  our  ken, 
raised  to  the  highest  point,  we  shall  indicate  that  Bliss  which 
is  ungenerated  and  does  not  depend  on  any  external  means. 
We  see  that  whatever  admits  of  higher  and  lower  degrees 
culminates  in  what  is  infiinite  in  itself ; so,  too,  in  the 
case  of  bliss.  Whatever  admits  of  a higher  measure  cul- 
minates in  what  is  immeasurable  in  itself ; so  our  bliss 
culminates  in  the  Supreme  Bliss.  The  sruti  itself  teaches 
this  here  to  those  whose  vision  is  directed  outwards  and 
who  are  therefore  unable  to  comprehend  the  Inner 
Self.— (S). 

Even  the  worldly  pleasure  is  a part  (or  semblance)  of 
Brahman-Bliss.  When  wisdom  is  screened  by  unwisdom 
(avidy&)  and  ignorance  is  in  the  ascendant,  the  Brah- 
man-Bliss becomes  the  worldly  pleasure  admitting  of 
various  degrees  as  experienced  by  Brahma  and  other 
1:  eings  of  the  world  in  accordance  with  their  deeds 
(karma),  their  wisdom,  and  the  external  means  at  their 
command.  The  same  Brahman-Bliss,  the  Bliss  which  is 
present  to  the  mind  of  the  man  who  has  realised 
Brahman  and  who  is  unassailed  by  desire,  is  the  bliss 
which  is  experienced  a hundredfold  more  and  more  in  the 
ascending  orders  of  beings,  rising  from  man,  gandharvas 
and  upwards,  according  as  avidya  or  ignorance,  desire 
and  karma  decrease,  till  the  culminating  point  is 
reached  in  the  bliss  of  Brahma,  the  Hiranyagarbha. 
When  the  distinction  of  the  subject  and  the  object 
caused  by  avidyft  has  been  set  aside  by  vidyA  or  wis- 
dom, then  there  will  remain  the  one  inherent,  perfect 
non-dual  Bliss. 


AHU.  bKAtiMAN  tHa;  iNifiNiiJf  uu^ 

The  Brahman-Bliss  which  has  to  be  determined  by  en- 
quiry does  not  admit  of  higher  and  lower  degrees.*  It  is 
the  bliss  generated  by  karma  which  we  find  in  the  world 
admitting  of  higher  and  lower  degrees,  from  the  bliss  of 
Brahmib  down  to  that  of  man.  Where  this  bliss,  rising 
higher  and  higher  from  man  upwards,  reaches  its  culmina- 
ting point, — we  should  understand  that  to  be  Brahman, 
having  no  beginning,  middle,  or  end.  It  is  a drop  of  this 
Brahman-Bliss  which  the  whole  world  from  Brahmi  down 
to  man  enjoy  according  to  their  purity  and  meritorious 
deeds.  So,  rising  higher  and  higher  from  man  upwards, 
we  can  see  face  to  face  the  inherent  infinite  Bliss  of  our 
Self. 

The  unit  of  human  bliss. 

With  a view  to  make  us  understand  this  truth,  the 
sruti  proceeds  as  follows  : 

II  ^ II 

3.  Suppose  a youth,  a good  youth,  learned  in 
the  sacred  lore,  promptest  in  action,  steadiest 
in  heart,  strongest  in  body, — suppose  his  is  all 
this  earth  full  of  wealth.  This  is  one  human 
bliss. 

Yovth  : one  in  prime  of  life.  Though  a youth,  one 
may  . not  be  good  ; and  though  good,  one  may  not 
be  young.  Hence  the  qualification  “good  youth.” 

77 


BBAHiiii<fV!DyA  BxpumsD.  [An0ndfhV(Uli^ 

In  childhood  man  cannot  appreciate  the  objects  of  plea- 
sure and  is  therefore  incapable  of  experiencing  the  sensual 
pleasures  derived  from  flowers,  good  scents,  women^  and 
so  on.  In  old  age,  though  man  can  appreciate  things,  still, 
he  lacks  capacity  for  enjoyment ; and  therefore  there  is  no 
pleasure  for  him  either.  So  that  youth  alone  is  the  period 
pf  enjoyment.  A youth  who  is  ugly  and  cherishes  feelings 
of  enmity  and  the  like  suffers  much  pain  : hence  the  quali- 
fication *good.’  Though  a good  youth,  a man  will  have  to 
suffer  pain  if  he  lacks  the  knowledge  of  any  one  of  the 
fourteen  sciences  and  the  sixty-four  arts  : hence  the  epithet 
^^earned  in  sacred  lore.*'  Though  learned  in  all  lore,  he 
who  is  slow  in  action,  or  he  who,  owing  to  slowness  of 
digestion,  does  not  relish  food,  cannot  enjoy  : hence  the  qua- 
lification ‘promptest,’  or  ‘best-eater*  (as  the  word  ‘fi>sish^ha* 
is  otherwise  rendered),  i,  one  who  can  eat  all  articles  of 
food  with  great  relish.  Even  such  a man,  if  wanting  in 
fortitude,  cannot  exhibit  courage  in  war  and  the  like  affairs : 
hence  the  epithet  “ steadiest  in  heart.”  Though  endued 
with  courage,  he  who  lacks  physical  strength  cannot  be 
equal  to  such  tasks  as  horse-riding : hence  the  epithet 
“ strongest.” 

Thus  all  personal  accomplishments  have  been  spoken 
of.  If  to  such  a man  belongs  the  whole  earth  endued 
with  all  wealth — with  material  objects  necessary  for 
enjoyment  in  this  visible  world  and  with  all  materials 
necessary  for  those  rituals  by  which  to  secure  the  plea- 
sures of  the  unseen  world — i.  e.,  if  such  a man  be  the 
king,  the  ruler  of  the  whole  earth,  then  his  bliss  is  the 
highest  pleasure  of  man,  the  unit  of  human  bliss. 


iskAhMaN  iHb  iNfiiUiis 


uii 


Tile  posses^n  of  external  objects  of  pleasure  is  referred  to 
by  the  sruti  in  the  second  supposition.  To  this  should  be 
added  such  qualifications  as  *Hhe  lord  of  others”  spoken,  of 
in  the  Bnbaddira»yaka-Upanishad.  If  a ruler  of  the  whole 
earth  should  ever  possess  all  the  qualifications,  then  his  UisS 
would  represent  the  unit  of  human  bliss. 

The  pleasures  which  are  lower  than  these  are  no  bliss  at 
all,  as  they  are  mixed  with  pain.  Certainly,  no  man  other 
than  a ruler  of  the  earth  described  above,  is  found  any- 
where to  enjoy  satisfaction  in  all  respects.  Bliss  means 
satisfaction  ; satisfaction  is  incompatible  with  desire  for 
external  objects ; and  desire  for  an  object  of  pleasure  neces- 
sarily springs  up  if  the  object  is  not  already  possessed. 
But,  in  the  case  of  a ruler  of  the  earth,  nothing  mars  his 
satisfaction,  inasmuch  as  all  objects  in  this  world  of  man 
are  in  bis  possession. 

Such  being  the  case,  as  desire  grows  less  and  less,  bliss 
also  rises  higher  and  higher.  Having  this  in  view,  the 
sruti  proceeds  to  treat  of  the  bliss  which  is  higher  than  the 
one  described  above  : 

The  bliss  of  the  Manushya-Qandharvas. 

II  » II 

4.  What  is  a hundred  times  the  human  bliss, 
that  is  one  bliss  of  human  fairies,  as  also  of  the 
man  versed  in  the  Vedas,  not  smitten  by 
passion, 


0!a  B&AHMA^vfDirA  sxpLAiNSD.  [AfiaUita^y 

c The  bliss  of  the  Imman  dairies  (manushya-ffaxidhar- 
vis)  isa  hundred  times  superior  to  the  human  bliss.  The 
human  fairies  are  those  who,  while  they  are  men,  havej 
in  vii:tue  of  works  and  knowledge  of  a superior  sort, 
have  becoihe  Gandharvas.  They  indeed  have  the 
power  of  making  themselves  invisible  and  the  like, 
and  they  have  very  subtle  bodies  and  senses. 

These  Gandharvas  of  the  human  world  emit  sweet 
odours ; they  can  assume  whatever  form  they  like  ; they 
possess  the  power  of  making  themselves  invisible  and  other 
powers  of  the  kind,  and  they  are  experts  in  dancing  and 
music.— (S). 

The  conditions  of  higher  bliss. 

They  have  accordingly  fewer  obstacles  ; they  possess 
power  to  resist  the  pairs  of  opposites  (such  as,  pleasure 
and  pain,  heat  and  cold),  and  they  command  all 
materials  of  pleasure.  Therefore,  being  unobstructed 
and  able  to  counteract  obstruction,  the  human  fairy 
has  peace  of  mind.  Owing  to  greater  peace  of  mind, 
there  is  a better  manifestation  of  pleasure.  Thus,  we  see 
that,  owing  to  the  superior  tranquillity,  the  bliss  attain- 
able at  a higher  stage  is  a hundred  times  superior  to 
the  bliss  attainable  in  the  next  lower  stage. 

Of  the  stages  mentioned  here  up  to  BrahmA,  each  suc- 
ceeding stage  is  a hundred  times  superior  to  the  one  preced- 
ing it.~(S.) 

By  omitting  the  epithet  not  smitten  by  passion^  in 
the  first  instance,  ^ the  sruti  shews  that  a man  of 

• i.  a.,  when  speaking  of  the  human  hWm 


Am.  VIIL]  BRAHMAN  THE  INFINITE  BUSS«  615^ 

sacred  lore  who  cherishes  no  longing  for  hnman  plea- 
sures can  attain  a pleasure  which  is  a hundred  times 
superior  to  the  human  pleasure,  i.  e,,  a plea^5ure  which 
is  equal  to  the  pleasure  of  a human  fairy. 

A man  of  sacred  lore  who  is  averse  to  all  human  plea-  ‘ 
sures,  but  who  cherishes  a desire  for  the  pleasures  of  the 
next  higher  stage,  can  realise  the  pleasure  which  is  a hund- 
red times  superior  to  the  unit  of  human  pleasure.— (S). 

The  qualification  a good  youth,  learned  in  the  sacred 
lore”  implies  sacred  knowledge  and  sinlessness,  and 
they  are  common  to  all  stages,  whereas  the  absence  of 
desire  differs  (at  different  stages)  tending  to  a high  or 
low  bliss  according  as  the  object  (of  desire)  is  high  or 
low.  Accordingly,  inasmuch  as  from  a superior  deve- 
lopment of  this  last  attribute  accrues  a hundred 
times  superior  pleasure,  the  sruti  teaches — by  the  epi- 
thet * not  smitten  by  passion’ — that  the  attribute  of 
being  unsmitten  by  passion  is  the  means  for  the  attain- 
ment of  Supreme  Bliss. 

The  5ruti  teaches  that  the  means  of  attaining  the  Sup- 
reme Bliss  are  three,  namely,  sacred  lore,  righteousness, 
and  absence  of  desire.  The  first  two  are  common  to  all 
stages  from  the  human  stage  up  to  Brahm^i,  while  the  third 
rises  higher  and  higher  with  the  ascending  orders  of  beings 
and  is  therefore  superior  to  the  other  two.— (S). 

The  king  being  a human  being,  his  pleasure  can  become 
an  object  of  our  aspiration,  and  therefore  the  qualification 
of  * sacred  lore*  has  not  been  mentioned  in  connection  with 
human  pleasure.  The  human  fairies  dwell  in  the  antarik- 
sba  or  mid-region,  as  the  sruti  says  elsewhere  “By  the  Yak- 


$14  filUHMA-VlDYA  EXPLAMJBD.  [Amndu-^VoUi. 

shasy  thdGandharvas  and  hosts  of  the  Apsarases  is  the  anta« 
riksha  inhabited  so  that,  the  pleasure  of  human  fairies,  is 
not  familiar  to  man,  and  the  qualification  ^ man  versed  in 
the  Vedas’  is  therefore  intended  to  shew  how  that  pleasure 
comes  to  be  known  in  the  world  of  man.  Indeed  by  a 
study  of  the  scriptures  and  by  his  own  experience,  such  a 
man  sees  many  defects  in  the  enjoyment  of  pleasure-giving 
objects  in  all  regions, — namely,  that  it  has  to  be  secured 
with  much  trouble,that  it  is  impermanent,  and  that  there  are 
yet  higher  pleasures, — and  cherishes  no  longing  for  that 
kind  of  enjoyment.  So  that  a man  versed  in  the  sacred 
lore  and  unassailed  by  passion  enjoys  all  the  pleasure  that 
accrues  to  one  from  possession  of  the  objects  peculiar  to  the 
region  of  human  fairies.  Though  an  ignorant  man  who  is 
unaware  of  the  region  of  human  fairies  may  at  present  re- 
main unassailed  by  a desire  for  the  pleasures  of  that  region, 
still,  at  a subsequent  period  when  he  will  know  more  of 
the  region  through  the  scriptures,  a desire  for  its  pleasures 
may  spring  up  in  him,  and  then  he  will  cease  to  be  indiffer- 
ent. But  since  the  man  of  the  sacred  lore  who  sees  evil  in 
those  pleasures  never  cherishes  a longing  for  them,  he 
always  remains  unassailed  by  desire. 

Peace  is  the  essential  condition  of  bliss. 

(Objection) : — In  the  case  of  a Gandharva,  dancing,  music 
and  the  like,  cause  now  and  then  a welling  up  of  mind  and 
gives  rise  to  delight  ; but  this  is  not  possible  in  the  case  of 
the  man  of  sacred  lore  who  is  free  from  passion. 

{Ansmr)  : — Let  there  be  no  such  delight  for  him.  Being 
but  a momentary  passing  state  of  mind,  it  is  not  a genuine 
blisst  The  genuine  bliss  consists  in  the  peculiar  sntisfacr 


6i5 


Anu.  VIIL]  BKAHMAN  THE  INFINITE  BUSS* 

tion  which  prevails  in  the  mind  when,  on  the  attainment  of 
the  object  desired,  the  desire  for  it  ceases,  and  the  deUgbt 
dnd  other  passing  states  of  mind  subside.  It  has  been  said  : 

“ Neither  the  sensual  pleasure  in  this  World 
nor  the  great  pleasure  of  heaven  is  equal  to  a 
sixteenth  part  of  the  pleasure  of  the  extinction 
of  desire.” 

Bliss  in  the  form  of  satisfaction,  equal  to  that  of  the  fairy, 
exists  for  him  who  is  versed  in  the  sacred  lore  unassailed 
by  desire. . 

What  has  been  said  in  these  two  instances — namely,  that 
the  bliss  of  satisfaction  manifests  itself  more  and  more  as 
greater  tranquillity  prevails  in  the  mind, — should  be  under- 
stood in  the  other  cases  that  follow  here. 

The  bliss  of  the  Deva-Qandharvas. 

I II  ^ II 

5.  What  is  a hundred  times  the  bliss  of  hu- 
man fairies,  that  is  one  bliss  of  celestial  fairies, 
as  also  of  the  man  versed  in  the  Vedas,  not 
smitten  by  passion. 

These  are  fairies  (Gandharvas)  by  birth. 

They  are  singers  of  the  celestial  regions  (Deva-loka) 
born  as  such  at  the  very  beginning  of  creation. 


id  BRAHMA-VIOYA  BXPLAINBD  [AtlMdalVSH. 

The  bliss  ol  the  Pitris. 

3j«hwiHM-  -:  I II  ^ II 

6.  What  is  a hundred  times  the  bliss  of  the 
celestial  fairies,  that  is  one  bliss  of  the  Pitns 
who  dwell  in  the  long-enduring  world,  as  also  of 
the  man  versed  in  the  Vedas,  not  smitten  by 
passion. 

Those  who  dwell  long  in  the  Pitn-lokas  are  here  referred 
to,  and  such  are  the  departed  souls  of  those  who,  while 
here,  perform  the  ceremonies  such  as  the  Pitri-sriddha 
(oflering  to  the  Pitris). — (S). 

The  bliss  of  the  Devas  born  in  the  Ajana. 

, % ^ I ^ <^311311- 

SRRt  I II  vs  || 

7.  What  is  a hundred  times  the  bliss  of  the 
Pitris  who  dwell  in  the  long-enduring  world,  that 
is  one  bliss  of  the  Devas  born  in  the  Ajfi,na,  as 
also  of  the  man  versed  in  the  Vedas,  not  smitten 
by  passion. 

The  Aj&na  [lit,,  birth)  is  the  region  of  the  Gods 
(Devabka).  As  a reward  for  the  performance  of  the 
acts  (of  public  charity)  enjoined  in  the  smriti,  souls  are 
born  in  the  region  of  the  Gods  (Devas). 


K///.]  brahman  the  infinite  bMBS. 

The  Aj&na  is  a Devaldca  so  called,  lying  just  above  the 
r^ion  of  Pitns. 

The  bliss  of  the  Karma-Devas. 

% ^ ^IcIURr^niRt  I 

I ^ I ^nm- 

mi\\<  W 

8.  What  is  a hundred  times  the  bliss  of  the 
Devas  born  in  the  Ajfbna,  that  is  one  bliss  of  the 
Devas  (known  as)  Karma-Devas,  those  who  have 
reached  Devas  by  work,  as  also  of  the  man  versed 
in  the  Vedas,  not  smitten  by  passion. 

They  have  reached  Devas  by  mere  work,  by  mere 
Vedic  ritual  such  as  fire-worship,  Agnihotra. 

They  are  unenlightened  ; i.  e.,  they  possess  no  knowledge 
of  Brahman. 

The  bliss  of  Oevas  proper. 

^ % 5m  I^RRR^:  I ^^RRR?^:  | 

II  ^ II 

9.  What  is  a hundred  times  the  bliss  of  the 
Devas  (known  as)  Karma-Devas,  that  is  one 
bliss  of  Devas,  as  also  of  the  man  versed  in  the 
Vedas,  not  smitten  by  passion. 

The  Devas  here  referred  to  are  the  thirty-three  * 

* Namelji  the  eight  Vasus,  the  eleven  Rudras,  the  twelve 
ildityas,  Indra,  and  PrajApati. 


78 


6x6 


BHAHUA-VlDVA  EXPLAINED. 


Devas  who  paHake  of  the  oblations  offered  in  the 
sacrificial  rites. 

These  reside  on  the  Northern  or  Higher  Path,  the  Deva- 
y&ha,  the  Path  bf  the  Gods ; they  are  those  who' have 
practised  both  sacrificial  rituals  and  contepiplation  of  brah- 
man. 

The  bliss  of  Indra. 

5TtT^^RmR^I:  I ?!  I 

‘^i«hw§riw  in  0 H 

10.  What  is  a hundred  times  the  bliss  of 
Devas,  that  is  one  bjiss  of  Indra,  as  also  of  the 
man  versed  in  the  Vedas,  not  smitten  by  passion. 

Indra  is  the  Lord  of  the  Devas  described  just  above. 

The  bliss  of  Brihaspati. 

Ri«hR5tiR  WWW 

11.  What  is  a hundred  times  the  -bliss  of 
Indra,  that  is  one  bliss  of  Brihaspati,  as  also  of 
the  man  versed  in  the  Vedas,  not  smitten  by 
passion. 

brihaspati  is  Indra’s  teacher. 


/iffU.  brahman  THE  INFINITE  BUSS.  619 

The  bliss  of  the  Prajapatl. 

^ ^ 5RT  I ?T  I 

m II  U II 

12.  What  is  a hundred  times  the  bliss  of  Bn- 
haspati,  that  is  one  bliss  of  the  Praj&pati,  as  also 
of  the  man  versed  in  the  Vedas,  not  smitten  by 
passsion. 

Prajlipati,  the  Lord  of  creatures,  is  the  Vir4j,  who 
has  the  three  worlds  for  his  body. 

The  bliss  of  the  Hiranyag^arbha. 

^ ^ 5nT  sRiq)ruJF?r:  | ^ sfsror  stfk:  i «I^- 
11  U II 

13.  What  is  a hundred  times  the  bliss  of  Pra- 
j&ipati,  that  is  one  bliss  of  Brahma,  as  also  of  the 
man  versed  in  the  Vedas,  not  smitten  by  passion. 

Brahma,  the  Hirawyagarbha,  who  is  manifested  as 
the  Universal  Being  as  well  as  the  individual  beings, 
who  pervades  all  the  universe  of  sawsara,  in  whom  all 
the  different  degrees  of  bliss  described  above  unite  into 
one,  who  possesses  the  Dharma  which  causes  that 
bliss,  the  knowledge  concerning  that  (Dharma  and  its 
results),  as  also  the  utmost  freedom  from  desire. 

He  is  the  Siitratman,  the  first  of  the  embodied  beings, 
asthesruti  says, The  Hirsu^yagarbhawas  in  the  begin- 
ning.” The  smyiti  also  says  “ He,  verily,  is  the  first 


♦ Tait.  SamhitA.  4-1-8. 


BRAHMA-VIDYA  BXPLAINE&, 


6aci 


» [Ami>tda-V<dli, 


embodied  being,  He  is  called  Purusha^  the  soul ; He,  the 
origiiiilcres^r  of  all  beings,  thU  Brabm&  catae  into  .b<^ng 
in  the  beginning.”  Therefore  the  ever-increasing  bliss  in 
this  universe  of  sams&ra  culminates  in  Him, 

Freedom  from  desire  is  the  pre-eminent 
conditon  of  Biiss. 

His  bliss  in  its  entirety  is  experienced  directly  by 
him  who  is  versed  in  the  Vedas,  who  is  free  from  all  sin 
and  unassailed  by  desire.  Therefore  we  learn  that  these 
three  attributes  form  the  means  (to  the  Supreme  Bliss). 
Knowledge  of  the  Vedic  teaching  and  freedom  from  sin 
are  necessary  (at  all  stages),  while  freedom  from  desire 
rises  higher  and  higher  at  different  stages  ; wherefore, 
we  understand  that  this  last — freedom  from  desire — is 
the  pre-eminent  condition  (of  the  Supreme  Bliss). 

By  teaching,  as  shewn  above,  that  all  degrees  of  bliss  lie 
within  the  scope  of  the  man  versed  in  the  Vedas,  the  srfiti 
has  explained  how  it  is  that  “ whoso  knoweth  the  One  hid 
in  the  caVe  in  the  highest  heaven  attains  all  desires  to- 
gether.” 

The  Supreme  Bliss  and  its  manifestations. 

Even  this  bliss  of  the  Hira»yagarbha,  which  comes 
within  the  scope  of  the  man  learned  in  the  Veda  on 
developing  the  utmost  freedom  from  desire,  is  only  a 
part  of  the  Supreme  Bliss,  as  the  «ruti  says,  “ Of  this 
Bliss,  verily,  other  beings  enjoy  a part.”*  This  Bliss, 
from  which  its  parts  are  separated  t as  drops  of  water 
from  ocean,  and  wherein  those  parts  attain  unity,  1 
• Bri.  4-8-32.  f through  their  np&dbis. 

J on  the  extinction  of  the  upadhiB. 


621 


VlIL]  brahman  the  infinite  ELISS. 

— this  Supreme  Bliss  is  inhereut  in  Brahman  tecjause 
it  is  non-dual. 

In  that  Supreme  Bliss  beyond  the  Hirawyagarbha  all  our 
separated  blisses  attain  unity  ; there  all  desire  for  higher 
and  higher  degrees  of  bliss  and  all  knowledge  of  duality  are 
absent,  in  virtue  of  true  Knowledge;  and  there  freedom  from 
desire  in  all  its  ascending  degrees  reaches  its  culminating 
point.— -Having  thus  arrived  at  a knowledge  of  the  Supreme 
Bliss,  we  should  then  understand  through  the  scriptures  that 
“ I am  this  Supreme  Bliss.** — (S). 

Here  there  is  no  such  distinction  as  bliss  and  the 
enjoyer  of  bliss. 

For,  the  sruti  itself  has  taught  that  not  the  smallest  dist- 
inction should  be  made  in  Brahman.  No  accessories  are 
necessary  for  the  attainment  of  one’s  own  Self,  because  it 
is  naturally  attained.  The  removal  of  ignorance  is  alone 
necessary.  Just  as  a man  v^ho  is  sunk  down  under  a heavy 
burden  attains  greater  and  greater  ease  by  the  gradual 
removal  of  the  burden,  so  also  by  the  gradual  removal  of 
avidydi,  one  attains  gradually  greater  and  greater  peace  in 
one*s  own  Self.—  (S). 

Thus  the  highest  bliss  in  the  world  of  saws^ra  which 
forms  the  door  leading  to  the  Supreme  Bliss,  has  been 
made  known  through  both  Revelation  and  the  direct  experi- 
ence of  the  man  versed  in  the  Vedas.  Now,  the  sruti  proceeds 
to  speak  of  the  Supreme  Brahman-Bliss. 

The  Supreme  Bliss  is  one  and  non-dual. 

The  result  of  the  foregoing  enquiry  is  concluded  as 
follows  ; 


632 


BRAttMA-VipVA  BXPLAtNM*.  \ Amnda'V fflk, 

^ «wip|  3^  I I ^ nun 

14.  And  this  one  who  is  in  the  man,  and  that 
one  who  is  in  the  sun,  He  is  one. 

He  who  is  hid  in  the  cave  in  the  highest  heaven, 
who,  having  emanated  ^ik&sa  and  the  rest  in  the  uni- 
verse down  to  the  physical  body  (annamaya),  has 
entered  into  that  very  universe,  is  here  spoken  of  as 
“ this  one  who.” — Who  is  here  referred  to  ? The  one 
in  this  body  (purusha).  “ That  one  who  is  in  the  sun” 
refers  to  that  Supreme  Bliss  which  is  said  to  be  within 
the  scope  of  the  man  learned  in  the  Vedas  and  whereof 
a part  alone  contributes  to  the  bliss  of  all  beings,  from 
Brahm^  downwards,  who  are  entitled  to  happiness. 
He  is  one,  as  the  ak&sa  in  different  jars  occupying 
different  places  is  one. 

{Objection) : — In  referrring  to  His  existence  in  man, 
it  is  not'  right  to  refer  to  it  in  such  terms  merely  as 
“ this  one  who  is  in  the  man,”  without  any  specifica- 
tion ; it  would,  on  the  other  hand,  be  right  to  refer  to 
it  in  the  words  “ this  one  who  is  in  the  right  eye  ;”for 
so  does  the  sruti  refer  to  it  elsewhere.  * 

{Answer) : — No  : for,  this  section  treats  of  the  Su- 
preme Brahman,  t It  is  the  Supreme  Atman  that  the 
sruti  treats  of  in  this  section,  as  witness  the  passages  : 

• Bri,  Up.  2—3—5. 

■ f Whereas  the  passage  quoted  above  occurs  in  a section 
treating  of  the  conditioned  Brahuian.  -{Y). 


AnUi  VHL]  brahman  the  infinite  bliss.  6^3 

**  When  in  truth  this  soul  gains  fearless 
' support  in  Him  who  is  invisible,  selfless, 
undefined,  non-abode,  then  has  he  the 
Fearless  reached. 

‘‘From  fear  of  Him  does  Wind  blow.”  t 
“This  is  the  enquiry  concerning  Bliss.”  % 

It  is  not  of  course  right  to  introduce  a foreign  subject 
all  on  a sudden,  while  the  sruti  intends  to  impart  here 
a knowledge  of  the  Paramatman.  It  is,  therefore,  th(i 
Supreme  Brahman  that  is  here  referred  to  in  the  words 
“ He  is  one.”  Is  it  not  indeed  an  enquiry  into  Bliss 
with  which  the  sruti  is  here  concerned  ? The  result  of 
that  enquiry  has  to  be  stated  here,  in  the  conclusion, 
namely,  that  the  Bliss  of  Brahman  is  inherent  and  non- 
dual, the  Paramfi-tman  Himself,  that  it  is  not  produced 
by  the  contact  of  the  subject  and  the  object.  Consonant 
with  this,  indeed,  is  the  indication  of  Brahman  in  the 
words  “ This  one  who  is  in  the  man,  and  that  one  whp 
is  in  the  sun,  He  is  one,”  by  doing  away  with  the 
special  features  existing  in  the  different  beings. 

The  direct  result  of  the  foregoing  enquiry  into  Bliss,  as 
stated  here,  is  that  Brhaman  is  the  non-dual  bliss,  quite 
independent  of  external  means;*,  e.,  that  the  Brahman 
whose  nature  as  Supreme  Bliss  has  been  shewn  to  us  through 
inference— the  limited  bliss  of  the  beings  in  the  universe 
pointing  to  the  existence  of  the  infinite  Bliss — is  identical 
with  the  inner  Self.  Brahman,  who  is  devoid  of  all  sawsftra 
and  described  as  “Real,  Consciousness  and  Infinite,”  has 

* p.  591.  t P*  t P’ 


G24  brahma-vidya  explained  [Amnda-Vidiu 

been  raised  above  the  unreal  and  the  unconscious  and  shown 
to  be  one  with  the  Self  abiding  in  the  mind  of  man.  By 
the  exbicatioii  from  the  not-self— the  egoism,  etc.,  that  lies 
in  the  lap  of  avidyi, — of  the  Witness  thereof,  we  are  made 
to  perceive  directly  that  the  Witness  is  the  same  as  Brahman; 
for,  the  Witness  being  self-luminous  and  immediately 
known,  He  is  here  referred  to  as  ‘‘this  one.**  The  Inner 
Self  of  the  man  free  from  avidya  as  described  in  the  words, 
“the  man  learned  in  the  Vedas,  not  smitten  by  passion,** 
occurring  in  the  last  instance,  is,  owing  to  proximity,  referred 
to  in  “this  one  in  the  man  ; ’*  and  so  the  sruti  here  teaches 
that  this  Inner  Self  of  man,  the  Pratyagatman,  is  one  with 
Brahman.— (S). 

When  there  is  no  avidya,  Brahman  comes,  of  Himself, 
within  the  range  of  experience.  Where  an  unknown  object 
is  to  be  known,  there  it  is  that  an  external  source  of  know- 
ledge is  needed,  the  ego  continuing  to  be  the  perceiver  ; but 
as  to  Brahman  who  is  Himself  Consciousness,  no  such  ex- 
ternal source  of  knowledge  is  necessary.  Here  knowledge 
of  the  Self  is  identical  with  the  Self  and  involves  no  con- 
sciousness of  a foreign  object ; and  therefore  no  external 
knowledge  is  needed.  This  consciousness  of  the  Self  has, 
unlike  others,  neither  a rising  nor  a setting. — (S). 

The  location  denoted  by  the  words  ‘in  the  man’  in  the 
passage  “this  one  who  is  in  the  man”  is  secondary  and 
should  therefore  be  ignored  as  unintended,  the  sruti  referring 
mainly  to  the  Self  as  it  does  elsewhere  in  such  passages  as 
“This  intelligent  one  who  is  in  the  prd,«as.”  * So,  in  the 
words  “this  one  who  is  in  the  man,”  the  sruti  teaches  that 
jlva  is  identical  with  that  one  who  is  the  constant  Witness 


♦ Bri.  Up,  4-4-22. 


VriL]  bj^ahman  the  infinite  bussv  6ajj 

6f  the  mind,  and  who  can  be  reached  by  the  mind  which 
IS  not  smitten  by  passion.  ‘‘That  one  who  is  in  the  Sun**, 
fefers  to  the  Paramditman  who  shines  brightest  in  the  sun 
and  is  devoid  of  all  separation  from  us.  That  the  Para- 
mdtman  is  present  in  the  sun  is  taught  in  the  5ruti : 

“The  Sun  is  the  Atman  of  the  moving  and 
the  unmoving.” 

Because  by  avidyfi,  the  One  Reality  puts  on  different  fornis 
as  Kshetrajwa  and  Isvara,  therefore,  by  discarding  this 
distinction,  we  should  regard  them  as  one  in  reality,  just  as. 
the  dikasa  of  a jar  and  akasa  outside  the  jar  are  one. — (S). 

(Objection) :^Even  then,  the  reference  to  the  particular 
entity  of  the  sun  is  of  no  use. 

(Answer)  : — The  reference  is  not  useless.  It  serves 
to  shew  that  the  inferiority  of  man  and  the  superiority 
of  the  sun  should  be  ignored.  Of  course,  the  highest 
excellence  in  this  world  of  duality,  made  up  of  form 
and  formless  matter,  is  reached  in  the  sun.  When  we 
ignore  the  special  features  of  man,  we  will  find  that  the 
Supreme  Bliss  exists  the  same  (in  man  and  in  the  sun)  ; 
and  therefore  neither  superiority  nor  inferiority  exists 
for  one  who  has  reached  this  state  (of  unity).  It  there- 
fore stands  to  reason  to  assert  ‘This  soul  gains  fearless 
support  in  Him,”  etc. 

The  sun  is  the  highest  object  in  the  universe  made  up 
of  the  matter  having  form  and  of  the  formless  matter. 
Identity  of  the  Consciousness  in  us  with  the  Consciousness 

• Tait.  Sam.  2-4-14. 


79 


M BRAHMA-VlDyA  BXPLAlNBD^  ^AnOfUla-V^^U. 

I 

in  the  sun,  as  taught  in  thesruti,  is  possible  only  wheh  the 
elements  which  make  the  man  and  the  sun  the  lower  and 
the  higher  beings  are  eliminated.  In  the  words  ^Hhis  one 
who  is  in  the  man**  the  sruti  refers  to  jiva,  the  lower  entity, 
manifested  in  the  mind  of  man  and  predicates  his  unity  with 
tsvara,  the  higher  entity,  as  when  we  say  the  “serpent  is 
rope.’*In  virtue  of  this  predication  of  unity  with  isvara,  jiva’s 
inferiority  which  is  correlated  to  Isvara’s  superiority  should 
be  lost  sight  of,  being  incompatible  with  his  unity  with 
trvara  ; and  then  tsvara*s  superiority  should  also  be  lost 
sight  of,  inasmuch  as  it  can  exist  only  in  relation  to  the  infe- 
riority of  jlva.  So,  the  result  of  this  predication  is  that  the 
superiority  in  the  sun  and  the  inferiority  in  the  jiva  are  both 
lost  sight  of.  Thus  discarding  both,  we  get  at  that  which 
is  not  what  the  words  of  the  sentence  directly  denote,  that 
which  is  taught  only  in  the  words  “not  thus,  not  thus,*’ 
namely,  the  truth  that  Brahman  is  the  Self  and  that 
the  Self  is  Brahman.  Neither  superiority  nor  inferiority 
exists  in  the  Atman.  It  is  they,  whose  vision  is  over- 
powered by  ignorance,  that  see  superiority  and  inferiority. 
Ignorance  alone  leads  to  the  perception  of  superiority, 
etc. ; they  do  not  exist  in  reality  : therefore  when  ignorance 
is  devoured  by  knowledge,  all  distinctions  vanish.  Moreover, 
since  the  Bliss  of  the  Supreme  Brahman  excels  all  blisses 
hanging  from  man  up  to  that  of  the  Hirawyagarbha,  we 
should  hold  to  the  unity  of  the  Self  in  man  and  of  Brahman 
in  the  sun  ; and  then,  ignorance  which  is  the  source  of  all 
differentiation  will  disappear.  By  describing  Brahman  as 
“Real,  Consciousness,”  the  sruti  denies  the  unreal  and  ig- 
norance in  the  very  nature  of  Brahman.  Ignorance  which 
is  the  cause  of  all  distinction,  being  thus  removed,  the 


AtWi  Vm,]  brahmaw  thr  infinite  bliss#  627 

unity  of  jivain  man  with  Brahman  in  the  sun  is  not  incom- 
patible with  reason.— (S). 

<Man’  here  means  the  aspirant  of  wisdom.  In  him  there 
exists  some  bliss,  as  both  reason  and  experience  shew.  The 
sruti  elsewhere  has  started  at  length  the  argument  for  its 
existence.  Having  started  with  the  words  ‘‘  for  the  Selfs 
pleasure,  indeed,  does  everything  become  dear,**  the  sruti 
shews  that  all  objects  of  pleasure  such  as  sons,  wealth,  etc., 
are  dear  as  subservient  to  the  Self,  and  thereby  proves  that 
the  Self,  as  the  object  of  supreme  love,  is  the  Bliss  itself. 
Every  one  feels,  “May  I ever  live  ! May  I never  die  !**  It  is 
thus  a fact  of  every  one’s  experience  that  the  Self  is  Bliss. 
Man  here  stands  for  all  sentient  beings  of  the  same  class  ; 
and  in  speaking  of  bliss  in  man  the  sruti  has  in  view  the 
bliss  in  all  the  external  beings  that  we  see  around  us.  The 
bliss  in  the  sun  is  typical  of  the  bliss  which  is  beyond  our 
perception  and  stands  for  the  bliss  of  all  the  Devat§.s  or 
Cosmic  Intelligences  of  the  same  class  as  the  sun.  In 
whatever  being  there  is  bliss,  whether  it  be  in  man,  or  in 
the  other  sentient  creatures  around  him,  or  in  the  DevatAs 
or  Cosmic  beings, — in  whatever  up&dhis  or  vehicles  it  is  con- 
tained, all  bliss  is  one  and  the  same  in  its  essential  form. 
All  the  distinctions  that  we  make  in  bliss, — such  as  human 
bliss,  the  bliss  of  gods,  and  so  on, — have  reference  only  to  the 
upidhi.  This  One  Partless  Bliss  of  Brahman,  with  all  the 
distinctions  thereof  due  to  the  up&.dhis  from  the  Hirawya- 
garbha  down  to  the  unmoving  objects,  has  been  referred 
to  by  the  sruti  elsewhere  in  the  words  : 

“This  is  His  highest  bliss.  All  other  creatures 
live  on  a small  portion  of  this  bliss.**  t 

t Bri.  4^.32, 


* Bri.  2-4-5. 


m fiRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED.  [Aftandd-ValH. 

Thus  the  foregoing  enquiry  points  to  this  conclusion  : 
that  the  seekers  of  knowledge  should  understand  that 
Brahman’s  Bliss  is  one  and  one  alonci  that  it  is  one  and 
indivisible,  that  it  is  as  it  were  the  ocean  of  bliss  whereof 
the  blisses  of  the  Hirawyagarbha  and  others  are  so  many 
drops. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

BRAHMAN  THE  SELF. 


The  purpose  of  the  sequel. 

The  question  as  to  whether  Brahman  exists  or  does 
not  exist  has  been  answered.  The  creation,  the  en- 
joyment of  bliss,  the  vital  functions,  the  fearless 
state,  and  existence  of  fear, — all  these  point  to  the 
existence  of  Brahman  (their  Cause),  the  Source  of 
ftkaisa  &c.  Thus  one  question  has  been  answered.  The 
two  other  questions  relate  to  the  wise  and  the  ignorant, 
as  to  whether  they  door  do  not  attain  Brahman. 
The  last  of  the  three  questions  is,  Does  the  wise  man 
attain  or  not  attain  Brahman  ? It  is  this  question 
which  the  sruti  proceeds  to  answer  in  the  sequel.  The 
middle  one  of  the  three  questions  being  answered  when 
the  last  question  is  answered,  no  (separate)  attempt 
will  be  made  to  answer  that  question. 

The  foregoing  is  the  Bhishyakira’s  (Sankarachirya’s) 
view.  As  against  this,  the  Vartikakara  (Suresvarfi,chdrya) 
says  as  follows  ; 

I,  whose  dense  ignorance  has  been  consumed  in  the  fire 
of  His  Holiness’s  (5ankarach&rya’s)  speech,  think  that 
these  questions  relating  to  the  wise  and  the  ignorant  have 
' been  answered  in  the  words,  « When  in  truth  this  soul 


630  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED.  [Anonda-Volli. 

gains  fearless  support  in  Him  who  is  invisible.. aiUe 
p.  590  et  seq).  By  construing  the  passage  just  referred  to 
as  meant  to  answer  the  two  questions,  not  only  is  the 
question  as  to  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  Brahman 
answered,  but  also  direct  answers  to  both  the  other  ques- 
tions are  obtained. — (S). 


To  know  Brahman  is  to  attain  Him. 

The  sruti  now  proceeds  to  describe  the  result  of  knowing 
the  Bliss  as  explained  above  : . 

eSRP#!  «|wrRqflrcflRSqfl5f5wR|  1 '^qq|»iqtlIctlH^4- 
I ^ %RWTIciTR^q#f?l*l%  I 
II  II 


15.  He  who  thus  knows,  departing  from  this 
world,  attains  this  Annamaya  self,  this  Pr^twa- 
maya  self  does  he  attain,  this  Manomaya  self  he 
attains,  this  Vijna,namaya  self  he  attains,  he  at- 
tains this  Anandamaya  self. 

Whoever  knows  thus,  i.  e., — ‘thus’  referring  to  what 
has  been  just  said — whoever  knows  “ I am  Brahman,” 
Brahman  described  above,  whoever  casts  aside  all  in- 
feriority and  superiority,  and  realises  his  identity  with 
the  non-dual  Brahman,  the  Real,  Consciousness,  the 
Infinite,  he  departs  from  this  world,  he  withdraws  from 
this  world,  i.  e.,  he  becomes  indiff-rent  to  this  world, 


BRAHMAN  THE  SELF. 


53t 


Am.  Vlli^ 

to  this  congeries  of  visible  and  invisible  olqects  of  de- 
sire, and  attains  the  Annamaya  self  described  before 
at  length.  He  does  not  see  the  aggregate  of  the 
external  objects  as  distinct  from  his  physical  body  ; 
that  is  to  say,  he  regards  the  whole  universe  of  gross 
matter  * as  his  own  physical  body  (annamaya-fttman).t 
Then  he  identifies  himself  with  the  whole  Prdnamaya 
being  I described  above,  which  dwells  within  the  whole 
Annamaya  ; then  with  the  Manomaya,  then  with  the 
Vijndnamaya,  then  with  the  Anandamaya,  described 
above.  And  then,  he  attains  his  fearless  stand  in  the 
Invisible,  the  Selfless,  the  Undefined,  the  Abodeless. 

Whenever  a person  in  this  world,  as  it  rarely  happens, 
has  perfected  himself  in  the  course  of  many  past  births, 
and  intuitively  perceives  his  identity  with  Brahman  des- 
cribed above,  then  he  loses  attachment  for  this  personal 
self  which  is  full  of  evil  as  also  for  all  external  beings,  and 
attains  to  that  Being  in  whom  this  physical  universe  takes 
its  rise,  has  its  being,  and  attains  dissolution  at  the  end.  ‘He 
who  thus  knows’  means  the  person  who,  thus,  in  virtue  of 
his  knowledge  of  the  truth,  has  given  up  all  attachment  for 
the  separate  body  or  bodies  with  which  he  identified  him- 
self through  attachment  ; and  it  is  such  a person  who 

* 1.  e.,  the  Viraj. — (Y). 

t i.  e,,  he  sees  that  he  is  identical  with  Brahman  in  the  form 
of  the  physical  matter  comprising  both  the  individual  (vyashfi) 
physical  body  as  well  as  the  universal  (samashfi)  physical 
body,-fV). 

t t,  e.,  the  SdtrAtman.— (V). 


63d  BRAHMA-VIDYA  RXPUINBD.  ViM* 

attains  the  Aanamaya  eelfi  and  so  on.  In  the  course  of 
his  investigation  into  the  nature  of  things,  he  sees  his 
identity  with  the  Annamaya-ditman,  the  Vir&j  ; and  seeing 
all  the  individual  beings — such  as  sons,  grandsons  &c., 
— in  the  physical  world  as  none  other  than  the  VirAj  from 
whom  they  have  been  evolved,  he  rises  above  them  all. 
Similarly,  he  sees  the  Annamaya  self  as  none  other  than 
the  Prdnamaya  self  and  rises  above  the  former  by  identi- 
fjring  himself  with  the  latter.  Then  again,  by  identifying 
himself  with  the  Manomaya  which  lies  within  the  Prdwa- 
maya,  he,  as  a matter  of  course,  gives  up  his  identity  with 
the  external,  the  Prawamaya,  just  as  the  serpent  for  which 
a rope  is  mistaken  loses  its  identity  as  such  when  seen  in 
its  true  form  as  rope.  Thus,  by  passing  into  the  higher 
and  higher  self,  he  gives  up  the  lower  ones  until  he  attains 
finally  the  Fearless,  the  Brahman  beyond  the  visible  and 
the  invisible. -~(S). 

When  a man  knows  the  Inherent  Bliss  of  the  Self  in  the 
way  delscribed  above,  he  attains  that  bliss  in  the  same 
order.  Brahman  defined  above  as  “ Real,  Consciousness,” 
and  so  on,  has  evolved,  by  the  power  of  His  m^y^,  the 
whole  universe  from  ^k^a  down  to  our  bodies,  and  is  pre- 
sent in  the  cave  of  the  five  sheaths  as  though  He  has  en- 
tered into  it;  that  is  to  say.  He  can  be  directly  perce- 
ived in  us  in  His  unconditioned  form.  And  this  Brahman 
is  one  partless  Essence,  the  one  Supreme  Bliss.  Now  the 
sruti  proceeds  to  teach  by  what  steps  one  who  has  realised 
Brahman  in  this  form  attains  the  Bliss. 

The  universe  created  by  Brahman  is  twofold,  made  up 
of  the  perceiver  and  the  object  of  perception,  the  bhoktxi 


Anu.  FJ/iHfc  ^ fiRAHKiiAN  TiiR  $33 

and  the  bhogya.  The  former  includes  the  ^os  ranging 
from  the  Inner  Conscious  Self  (Pratyak-chaitanya)  down 
to  the  self  of  the  physical  body.  That  part  of  the  universe 
which  lies  outside  our  body  presenting  itself  to  our  consci- 
ousness as  ‘ this,*  and  comprising  the  son,  the  wife,  etc., 
comes  under  the  category  of  the  objects  of  percep- 

tion. No  doubt  the  son,  the  wife,  &c.,  are  found  identified 
with  the  self,  as  witness  people  who  feel  happy  or 
miserable  when  the  sons,  &c.,  are  happy  or  miserable  ; 
still,  their  separateness  from  oneself  being  clearly  reco- 
gnised by  all,  they  are  selves  only  in  a secondary  sense,  but 
not  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  word  ; and  accordingly  the 
sruti,  with  a view  to  prevent  their  identification  with  the 
Self,  first  treated  of  the  Annamaya  self.  The  aspirant  fpr 
knowledge,  too,  understanding  this  truth,  departs  from  this 
world,  i.  e.,  gives  up  his  attachment  for  the  son  and  the  like 
perceived  as  external  to  the  self,  and  identifies  himself  with 
the  Annamaya  self  as  taught  in  the  sruti.  That  is  to  say, 
no  longer  identifying  himself  with  the  pleasures  and  pains 
of  the  sons,  &c.,  he  rests  in  the  mere  Annamaya  self.  In 
the  same  manner  he  passes  from  the  iVnnamaya  into  the 
Pr^wamaya  and  other  seifs.  On  passing  into  the  Ananda- 
maya,  he  gradually  gives  up  the  four  aspects  of  the 
Anandamaya  sheath  and  finally  rests  in  Brahman,  the  One 
Partless  Bliss,  spoken  of  as  “ Brahman,  the  tail.” 

What  is  truth,  Duality  or  Non -Duality  ? 

Now  we  have  to  discuss  this  point  : Who  is  he  that 
thus  knows  ? and  how  does  he  attain  (Brahman)  ? — Is 
he  who  attains  (Brahman)  distinct  and  quite  separate 
from  the  Supreme  Atman  ? or  is  he  identical  with  the 
Supreme  Atman  ? 


8o 


BHAHMA'Vim  EXBLAlNEDt 


VdU. 


; Or,  is  he  both  distinct  from  and  identical  with  the  Sup- 
feme  Atman  ? — (S). 


{Question) : — What  would  follow  from  this  ? 

That  is  to  say,  where  is  the  necessity  for  this  discussion? 
A discussion  must  be  calculated  to  remove  a doubt  and  to 
serve  a definite  purpose. — (A). 

{Atmeer) : — If  he  be  distinct  from  the  Supreme 
Atman,  it  would  go  against  the  sruti  which  says : 

" This  having  sent  forth,  into  that  very 
thing  He  then  entered.”  * 

“ Now  if  a man  worships  another  Deity, 
thinking  ‘the  Deity  is  one,  I am  another,’ 
he  does  not  know.”  t 


“ Existence one  alone,  without  a 

second.”  J 

“ That,  Thou  art.”  |1 

If  he  be  identical  with  the  Supreme  Atman,  then  he 
would  be  both  the  agent  and  the  object  of  the  action 
spoken  of  in  the  words  “ he  attains  the  Anandamaya 
self;”  which  is  opposed  to  reason.  Moreover,  then, 
either  the  Supreme  would  be  subject  to  the  misery  of 
sams&ra,  or  there  would  be  no  Supreme  Being  at  all.  IF 


• Ante  p.  524.  t Bri.  Up.  1-4-10.  t Chh4  6-2-1 . ||  Ibid  6-8-7. 

^ If  jiTawnd  the  Supreme  be  identical,  either  jiva  should 
be  merged  in  the  Supreme,  or  the  Supreme  should  be  merged 
in  jiva.  In  the  former  ease,  the  existing  samsara  should  per- 
tain to  the  Supreme ; in  the  latter  case  there  would  be  no  place 
for  the  Supreme,  the  Ruler  of  jivas.— (V). 


BRAHMAK  THB  SBLV. 


6j5 


Am. 

,v 

The  third  case  is  evidently  open  to  objection.  The  three 
sides  of  the  question  being  all  alike  apparently  open  to 
objection,  it  is  necessary  to  discuss  the  matter  thoroughly, 
with  a view  to  determine  which  of  them  is  quite  free  from 
objection  ; and  everybody  knows  that  it  is  a determinate 
and  certain  knowledge  which  can  be  of  any  benefit. — (A). 

{The  opponent) : — If  it  be  not  possible  to  refute  the 
objections  to  which  both  the  sides  are  severally  cqjen, 
then  there  is  no  use  discussing  the  point.  If,  on  the 
contrary,  it  is  settled  that  one  of  the  two  sides  is  not 
open  to  objection,  or  if  there  be  a third  side  which  is 
quite  unobjectionable,  then  that  must  be  the  meaning 
of  the  sruti,  and  a discussion  of  the  point  would  be 
quite  uncalled  for. 

{Answer)  : — No  ; because  that  settlement  is  the  very 
object  in  view. — Certainly,  if  the  objections  urged 
against  the  two  sides  could  not  be  answered,  or  if  there 
be  a third  side  which  is  recognised  as  unobjectionable, 
then  the  discussion  would  be  useless.  But  that  point 
has  not  been  settled  as  yet ; so  that  this  discussion, 
intended  as  it  is  for  a settlement  of  the  point,  does 
serve  a purpose. 

{The  opponent) : — Yes,  the  discussion  has  a purpose 
to  serve,  inasmuch  as  it  is  intended  to  determine  the 
meaning  of  the  s&stra  or  scriptures.  So,  you  are  welcome 
to  discuss  the  matter,  but  you  cannot  establish  the 
point. 

{The  Veddntin)  : — What ! is  there  a Vedic  command* 
ment  that  the  point  shall  pot  be  established  ? 


636  BRAHHA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED. 

{The  opponent) : — Nd. 

{The  Veihntin) : — Why  then  ( do  you  say  that  I can- 
not establish  the  point)  ? 

{The  opponent) : — Because  many  are  arrayed  against 
you.  Relying  as  you  do  solely  on  the  teaching  of  the 
Vedas,  you  maintain  oneness.  But  many,  indeed,  are 
those  who  are  arrayed  against  you,  arguing  for  duality 
and  hot  caring  for  the  Vedas.  I have  therefore  a 
doubt  as  to  whether  you  can  establish  your  point. 

{The  Vedantin)  : — A benediction,  indeed,  to  me  is 
this  very  thing, — ^your  saying  that  I,  a monist,  have 
many  dualists  arrayed  against  me.  I will  conquer 
them  all  ; and  I shall  now  commence  the  discussion. 

Non-duality  is  truth,  because  duality  is  a creature 
of  ignorance. 

I maintain  that  ‘he  who  thus  knows’  * is  the  Su- 
preme Atman  Himself ; for,  it  is  here  intended  to  teach 
that  he  is  identical  with  the  Supreme.  Here,  t in  the 
words  “the  knower  of  Brahman  reaches  the  Supreme,’’ 
the  sruti  has  indeed  proposed  to  teach  that  jiva  attains 
identity  with  the  Supreme  through  knowledge  of  that 
Supreme  One.  Certainly,  it  is  not  possible  that  one 
can  ever  attain  identity  with  another  altogether  distinct. 

Whether  destroyed  or  not,  one  cannot  become  another  ; 
a pot,  whether  destroyed  or  not,  does  not  become  a 
cloth. — (A). 

• i,  e,,  the  f At  the  commencement  of  this  VailH. 


VIH^\  BRAHMAN  THE  SELF.  6$7 

(The  opponent) : — Neither  is  it  possible  that  one  can 
ever  attain  identity  with  oneself. 

If  ji  va  be  identical  with  Brahman,  he  is  already  Brahman. 
What  then  is  the  meaning  of  the  sruti  which  says,  “He  who 
knows  Brahman  reaches  the  Supreme;**  “He  who  knows 
Brahman  becomes  Brahman  Himself.*’  * — (S) 

{Answer)  : — It  is  true  that  jiva  is  already  Brahman,  for, 
he  who  is  not  Brahman  cannot  become  Brahman.  As  to  the 
sruti  teaching  that  the  knowerof  Brahman  attains  Brahman, 
it  only  means  to  say  that  what  is  unattained  by  avidyi 
becomes  attained  by  vidya  or  knowledge,  just  as  the  tenth 
man  who,  by  ignorance,  did  not  know  that  he  was  the  tenth, 
became  the  tenth  by  knowledge. — (S). 

We  answer  the  opponent  thus : — The  object  of  the 
sruti  is  to  remove  the  idea  of  separateness  caused  by 
avidyfi.  The  attainment  of  one*s  own  Self  through 
Brahma-vid}4,  as  taught  (by  the  sruti  in  the  words 
quoted  above),  consists  in  the  giving  up  of  the  non-self, 
of  the  personal  self  connected  with  the  physical  body, 
etc.,  which  are  erroneously  regarded  each  in  turn 
as  the  self. 

(Question) : — How  are  we  to  understand  that  such  is 
the  purpose  of  the  teaching  ? 

{Answer) : — Because  the  sruti  teaches  knowledge  and 
no  more.  And  we  all  see  that  the  result  of  knowledge 
is  the  removal  of  ignorance.  And  mere  knowledge  is 
here  taught  as  the  means  of  attaining  the  Self. 


* Mund,  Up.  3-2-9, 


ejS  BRAHIfA^VIDVA  EXPLAIMBS  [AntMehVoUi, 

Apart  from  the  removal  of  avidyft,  .no  teaching  of  - Brah- 
man like  the  reaching  of  a village  is  meant  here. — (S). 

[The  opponent)  i — It  is  like  imparting  knowledge  of 
the  road.  The  teaching  of  mere  knowledge  (of  Brah- 
man) as  the  means  does  not  point  to  identity  with 
Him. — Why  ? — For,  we  see-  that  knowledge  of  the 
road  is  imparted  for  reaching  a strange  village  ; and 
certainly  the  man  who  has  to  go  to  the  village  is  not 
identical  with  the  village. 

Just  as  the  knowledge  of  the  road  to  the  village  is  the 
means  of  reaching  the  village  through  walking,  so  also, 
knowledge  of  Brahman  is  the  means  of  reaching  Brahman 
through  a repeated  practice  of  contemplation  of  that 
knowledge. — (S). 

[Answer) : — No,  because  that  is  a different  case. 
Certainly,  no  knowledge  of  the  village  itself  is  there 
imparted it  is  only  knowledge  of  the  road  leading  to 
the  village  that  is  imparted.  On  the  contrary,  here 
( in  the  upanishad  ) no  knowledge  of  means  other 
than  knowledge  of  Brahman  is  imparted. 

One  literally  reaches  the  village  by  travelling  on  the  road; 
whereas  here  the  reaching  is  figurative  and  consists  in  the 
giving  up  of  avidyA  by  knowledge. — (S). 

[The  opponent) : — It  means  that  knowledge  of  Brah- 
man aided  by  the  ritual  and  other  acts  treated  of  in 
the  sruti  constitutes  the  means  to  the  attainment  of  the. 
Supreme. 


VtIL]  brahman  THE  SELF.  6j|9 

(jinswer) No  ; for,  we  h^ive  already  answered  this 
objection  by  saying  that  moksha  is  eternal,  and 
so  on. 

So  far  as  liberation  is  concerned,  there  is  not  the  least 
thing  to  be  eftected  by  ritual.  The  Real  is  in  His  inherent 
nature  ever  wise  and  therefore  ever  pure.  Brahman  is 
therefore  ‘ ever  free.  What  is  there  for  works  to  do 
here.  ?-(S). 

And  the  sruti,  in  the  words  ‘'this  having  sent  forth, 
into  that  very  thing  He  entered,”  teaches  that  the  one 
embodied  in  the  created  objects  is  identical  with 
Brahman. 

Fearlessness  in  moksha  is  compatible  only  with 
non-duality. 

It  is  only  on  this  theory  that  we  can  explain  how 
the  knower  of  Brahman  attains  fearless  stay  in  Brah* 
man.  Of  course,  it  is  only  when  the  knower  sees  none 
other  than  himself  that  he  may  be  said  to  have  attained 
the  fearless  state  by  knowledge,  there  being  then  none 
other  * than  himself  that  might  cause  fear.  And  all 
beings  other  than  the  Self  must  be  creatures  of  avidyd; 
for  then  alone  can  mere  knowledge  lead  us  to  regard 
the  external  being  as  unreal. 

It  is  only  when  duality  is  a creature  of  avidya  and  the 
real  existence  is  one  alone  that  the  following  passages  will 
have  a meaning : 


* such  as  iBvara. 


tl40  BRAHMA-VIDYA  BXPUIKED.  [Anind(h  V(dh* 

who  tfamks  ^Deity  is  one,  I am  another, 
he  does  not  know.*’  * 

“He  is  to  be  known  as  one  alone.**  t^(S). 

Duality  is  not  perceived  by  Atman  in  His  natural 
state. 

The  existence  of  a second  moon,  indeed,  is  one  which 
is  not  perceived  by  him  who  has  eyes  unaffected  by  the 
disease  of  iimira. 

The  knowledge  that  the  moon  is  one  will  be  true  only  if 
a second  moon  is  not  seen  by  those  other  than  the  tmira-dis- 
eased  man. — (S). 

[The  opponent) : — It  cannot  be  granted  that  no  exter- 
nal being  is  perceived. 

[Answer) : — You  should  not  say  so  ; for  it  is  not 
perceived  in  the  states  of  sushupti  and  samidhi. 

Speaking  of  sushupti,  the  sruti  says,  “Then  there  is 
no  duality.**  So  that,  though  perceived  at  times,  duality 
is  not  perceived  at  other  times  and  is  therefore  unreal. — (S). 

[The  opponent)  : — Non-perception  (of  duality)  in  su- 
shupti is  like  the  non-perception  of  a thing  by  one  who 
is  quite  preoccupied  with  another  thing. 

(Answer) : — No  ; for  there  is  then  (in  sushupti)  no 
perception  of  anything  at  all. 


♦ Bri.  Up.  1-4-10.  t Bfi.  Up,  4-4-20, 


AinUJ:  VtU.]  bjwsman  th5  64$ 

{The  opponent)  :t-Since  there  is  a perceptioa  io| exter- 
aal  objects  in  the  j&grat  and  svapna  stat^,  the 
external  objects  must  really  exist.  ; , 

(Answer): — No,  because  thej&gratand  svapna  are 
creatures  of  avidya.  * — The  perception  of  external 
objects  in  the  j&grat  and  svapna  states  is  caused  by 
avidyA,  because  it  does  not  exist  in  the  absence  of 
avidyi. 

(The  opponent) : — Then  even  the  non-perception  in 
sushupti  is  due  to  avidya. 

(Answer) : — No,  because  this  non-perception  is  the 
natural  state  (of Atman). — (To  explain)  : It  is 
the  immutable  state  of  Atman  that  constitutes  His 
real  nature,  because  it  is  not  dependent  on  other 
things.  No  changing  state  can  ever  constitute  His 
real  nature,  because  it  is  dependent  on  other  things. 
Certainly  the  real  nature  of  Atman  has  no  need  of  an 
external  operative  cause.  It  is  only  a specific  aspect 
of  Atman  that  stands  in  need  of  an  external  cause  to 
bring  it  about.  This  specific  aspect  is  a change,  and 
perception  (of  external  objects)  in  the  jagrat  and 
svapna  states  is  a specific  aspect  (of  the  Atman).  In- 
deed, that  state  of  a thing  which  does  not  depend  on 
an  external  cause  is  the  real  nature  of  that  thing ; what 
is  dependent  on  an  external  cause  does  not  constitute 
the  inherent  nature  of  the  thing,  inasmuch  as  it  dis- 
appears on  the  disappearance  of  the  external  cause. 

* Avidya  is  the  erroneous  identification  of  the  Self  with  the 
body,  etc.— (A), 

81 


64i  3RAHMA-VIDVA  brrlained.  [Amtida^VtUli* 

Therefore^  sushupti  being  the  inherent  state  of  the 
Atman,  the  specific  aspect  (of  perception)  is  then  un- 
manifestcd,  whereas  it  is  manifested  in  the  jagrat  and 
svapna  states. 

Fearlessness  is  incompatible  with  duality. 

In  the  case,  however,  of  those  who  hold  that  there 
exists  an  tsvara  and  a universe  distinct  from  the  Self, 
there  can  be  no  cessation  of  fear  ; for,  fear  arises  from 
an  external  being  ; and  an  external  being,  if  existent, 
can  never  undergo  annihilation  ; and  * what  is  non- 
existent cannot  make  its  existence  felt. 

{The  opponent): — The  external  being  becomes  the  source 
of  fear  only  when  conjoined  with  another  cause,  t 

(Answer): — No,  for  it  is  the  same  with  this  other 
cause.  Even  supposing  that  the  external  being  be- 
cpmes  the  source  of  fear  only  when  there  exists 
another  auxiliary  co-operative  cause,  permanent  or 
transitory,  such  as  good  and  bad  acts  (dharma  and 
adharma),  we  cannot  suppose  that  such  a cause  will 
ever  cease  to  exist,  and  therefore  there  would  be 
no  cessation  of  fear.  If,  on  the  contrary,  we  should 
suppose  that  such  a cause  would  cease  to  exist,  then 
existence  and  non-existence  would  be  mutually 
interchangeable,  and  no  faith  could  be  placed  in 
anything  whatsoever. 

* This  is  said  against  a possible  supposition  of  the  opponent, 
that  fear  is  non-existent  and  is  therefore  absent  in  moksha. 

t This  other  cause  being  jjiva’s  dharma  and  adharoia. 


BRAHMAN  THE  SELF. 


64J 


Anu.VUL] 

Supposing  fear  can  arise  without  a cause  and  is  there- 
fore not  caused  by  Isvara,  even  then  there  would  be  no 
cessation  of  fear.  If  fear  be  inherent  in  Atman,  then  it 
would  cease  only  with  the  cessation  of  Atman.  But  no 
follower  of  the  Vedas  would  ever  admit  that  Atman  will 
ever  cease  to  exist. — (S). 

On  the  other  hand,  this  objection  does  not  apply  to 
the  theory  of  oneness,  inasmuch  as  (the  fear  of)  sawsira 
as  well  as  its  cause  are  creations  of  ignorance.  Cer- 
tainly, the  second  moon  seen  by  the  ^m/m-diseased  eye 
neither  comes  into  being  nor  undergoes  annihilation. 

Fear  being  caused  by  ignorance,  it  disappears  on  the  dis- 
appearance of  ignorance.  If  it  be  caused  by  an  external 
object,  then  there  will  be  fear  always.  If  it  be  caused 
by  the  Self,  then  the  Self  having  no  control  over  it,  it  would 
not  cease  unless  the  Self  ceases  to  exist,  which  nobody  is 
prepared  to  grant.  And  if  the  Self  should  cease  to  exist, 
there  would  be  none  to  reap  the  fruit  of  the  cessation  of 
fear.  If  we  hold  that  fear  is  caused  by  mere  avidy^,  all 
this  can  be  easily  explained.  When  avidyfi,  will  be  absent, 
fear  will  be  absent  too  ; for,  fear  arises  only  when  there  is 
avidyd.  Fear  arises  when  Brahman  is  not  realised. 
Whence  can  fear  arise  when  Brahman  is  realised  ? Where  is 
the  serpent  when  the  rope  is  seen  ? Therefore  avidyS.  alone 
must  be  the  cause  of  fear. — (S). 

Ignorance  and  knowledge  are  not  the  attributes 
of  the  Self. 

{The  opponent) ; — Then  knowledge  and  ignorance, 
vidyi  and  avidy&,  are  the  a.ttributes  of  Atmaq. 


6(4  BRAHMA-VlDYA  EXPLAINED.  . 

(^«stii«y)  ^--No,  because  they  are  cognised  in  imme- 
diate perception  (pratyaksha).  Discrimination  and 
non-discrimination,  knowledge  and  ignorance,  are,  like 
colour,  perceived  by  immediate  perception,  as  pertain- 
ing to  the  mind  (antaA-kara»a).  Certainly,  as  an  object 
of  immediate  perception,  colour  can  never  be  an  attri- 
bute of  the  percipient.  And  avidyi  or  ignorance  is 
cognised  by  one’s  own  experience,  “ I am  ignorant, 
and  my  understanding  cannot  discriminate.”  So  also, 
knowledge  or  discrimination  is  cognised  in  one’s  own 
experience  ; and  the  wise  impart  their  knowledge  to 
others,  and  accordingly  those  others  understand  also. 
Therefore  knowledge  and  ignorance,  vidyA  and  avidyd, 
should  be  brought  under  the  category  of  name  and 
form.  Name  and  form  are  certainly  not  the  attributes 
of  the  Atman,  since  the  sruti  says : 

“ He  who  is  called  Akdsa  is  the  revealer 
of  name  and  form.  That  which  is  distinct 
from  them  is  Brahman.”  * 

These  again,  name  and  form,  are  mere  fictions,  just  as, 
with  reference  to  the  sun,  day  and  night  are  mere  fic- 
tions ; they  do  not  exist  in  reality. 

Attainment  is  knowledge. 

{The  opponent)'. — In  the  theory  of  non-duality,  an  iden- 
tical being  would  be  both  the  agent  and  the  object  of 


* Ohhi.  Up.  8-14-1. 


Viif.]  BRAHMAN  TH«  SELI».  6^5 

the  action  spoken  of  in  the  sruti  this  Anahdamaya^ 
Self  he  attains.** 

(Answer] : — No,  for  this  attainment  consists  in  mere 
knowledge.  No  reaching,  as  in  the  case  of  a leech 
(jaliika),  is  meant  here. — What  then  ? — The  reaching 
spoken  of  in  the  sruti  means  mere  knowledge. 

L e,,  the  knowledge  **  I am  Brahman,”  which  removes 
avidya  as  well  as  its  effects  erroneously  ascribed  to  Brah- 
man, the  True  Self.  So  that,  on  the  attainment  of  know- 
ledge, there  would  be  no  occasion  for  this  objection. — (A). 

It  may  be  urged  that  the  Atman  never  sees  himself  as 
subject  to  pleasure  and  pain  ; i,  e.  it  may  be  objected  that, 
since  Brahman  who  is  ever  free  is  never  subject  to  sawsdra. 
He  cannot  regard  the  cessation  of  saw/sara,  resulting  from 
knowledge,  as  of  any  benefit.  In  reply,  we  ask,  then  tell 
me  who  the  seeker  of  moksha  is.  There  being  no  sawsdrin 
other  than  Brahman,  there  would  be  no  seeker  of  moksha 
if  Brahman  be  not  subject  to  sawsara,  and  the  scriptures 
treating  of  moksha  would  all  go  in  vain.  Moreover,  in  the 
states  of  jdgrat,  svapna  and  sushupti,  the  Self  experiences 
Himself  as  subject  to  saw^sdra,  by  His  inherent  Conscious- 
ness, as  ‘*I  am  black,  I am  happy,  I do  not  know.”  Being 
devoid  of  causes  and  effects,  of  the  senses  and  the  body,  the 
Supreme  Atman  is  not  subject  to  such  division  as  the  agent 
and  the  object,  and  so  on.  Because  of  the  absence  of  these, 
the  Atman  is  nothing  but  pure  Consciousness.  Knowledge 
removes  from  the  Atman  all  connection  with  action,  which 
arises  from  avidya.  In  Himself  the  Atman  is  unrelated  to 
action.  No  works  are  necessary  for  on^  to  ?itt?un  one’s  own 


646*  BRAHMA-VIDV4  EXPLAINED,  [Afiiifd(t-VaUt 

inherent  nature;  for  works  are  necessary  only  to  brmg  about 
a change  or  what  is  not  inherent  in  the  nature  of  a thing. 
The  rituals  enjoined  in  the  Veda  are  useful  only  in  cleans- 
ing the  mind  and  preparing  the  way  for  the  removal  of 
ignorance.— (S). 

(The  opponent) Attainment  should  be  understood  in 
its  literal  sense,  it  being  declared  in  the  sruti  that  the 
knower  attains  Atman. 

(Answer)  : — No  ; for  actual  union  is  not  seen  in  the 
case  of  the  Annamaya  self. 

When  the  knower  is  said  to  pass  from  the  external 
world  into  the  Annamaya  self,  we  find  that  no  actual 
reaching  takes  place  as  in  the  case  of  a leech  or  in 
any  other  fashion. 

[The  opponent): — The  Manomaya,  or  the  Vijfiinamaya, 
having  gone  out  towards  external  objects,  turns  back 
again  and  attains  itself,  i,  e.,  abides  in  itself. 

Like  the  manas  or  buddhi,  which,  after  going  out  to- 
wards external  objects  through  its  vnttis  or  functions, 
turns  back  and  reaches  itself,  so  also  the  Atman  goes  out 
towards  the  physical  body,  etc.,  through  manas,  and  then 
turning  back,  comes  to  Himself.— (S). 

(Answer) Seeing  that  one  cannot  act  upon  oneself, 
you  have  asserted  that  some  one  outside  the  Annamaya 
self  passea  into  the  latter  ; but  you  here  speak  of  the 
Manomaya  or  the  Vijn&namaya  returning  tO  itself : 
this  is  a self-contradiction, 


bKAhIaAN  iHn;  Sal^* 


Am. 


Ufy 


Even  a leech,  however  active,  cannot  reach  itaelf  by 
itself.  Even  supposing  that  a leech,  being  made  of  several 
parts,  reaches  one  of  its  parts  by  another,  the  Atman  can- 
not do  so,  inasmuch  as  He  has  no  parts. — (S). 

So,  too,  it  is  impossible  to  explain  the  actual  attain- 
ment of  the  Self  by  the  Anandamaya. 

Therefore  the  attainment  is  not  reaching.  Neither 
is  it  one  of  the  Annamaya,  &c.,  that  attains  Brahman. 
As  the  only  remaining  alternative  unobjectionable  view, 
the  union  (spoken  of  here)  must  be  mere  knowledge, 
attained  by  one  who  is  outside  the  sheaths  ranging 
from  the  Annamaya  to  the  Anandamaya. 

It  is  only  from  ignorance  that  the  Supreme  Self,  the 
Innermost  Self  in  all,  who  lies  beyond  all  sheaths  and  who  is 
immutable,  is  said  to  attain  or  know  the  Self,  just  as  it  is 
on  account  of  ignorance  that  ^kAsa  is  said  to  be  a space- 
giving substance. — (S). 

When  union  is  thus  viewed  as  mere  knowledge,  (vre 
can  understand  how),  on  the  rise  of  the  knowledge  of 
one’s  true  Self,  vanishes  away  the  Atman’s  illusory 
knowledge,  that  identification  of  the  Self  with  the  not- 
self— such  as  the  Annamaya— which  arises  from  the 
Atman’s  connection  with  the  heart-caye, — that  Atman 
who  is  within  all,  who  abides  in  the  not-self  including 
the  Anandamaya,  and  who,  having  created  the  uni- 
verse from  the  AkA-m  down  to  the  physical  body,  then 
entered  into  that  very  universe.  The  word  “ attain” 
is  used  in  this  figurative  sense,  namely,  the  cessation 
of  illusion  of  avidya  or  ignorance  ; the  attaining  of  the 


^8  BumhUL^vmk  EXPLuiNSD.  [AfidihlUi-^VidtL 

til-pemding  Atman  cannot  indeed  l^e  explained  in 
any  other  vfhy.  Moreover,  there  is  rib  being  other 
than  Atman  ; and  one  cannot  attain  oneself.  Certainly 
a leech  does  not  attain  itself.  Therefore,  it  is  only 
with  a view  to  impart  the  knowledge  of  the  oneness  of 
the  Self  with  Brahman  defined  above  in  the  words 
“Real, Consciousness,  Infinite  is  Brahman,'’  that  Brah- 
man who  is  the  object  of  all  experience  is  represented  as 
multiplying  Himself,  as  creating  the  universe,  as  enter- 
ing it ; as  the  Flavour  attained  by  the  wise,  as  the 
Fearless,  as  the  Goal  attained,  and  so  on  ; whereas, 
in  point  of  fact,  no  such  conditions  can  exist  in  the 
unconditioned  Brahman. 

That  is  to  say,  all  this  representation  is  intended  to.  lead 
to  the  knowledge  am  Brahman”  who  is  the  Real,  the 
infinite,  the  never-failing  Consciousness.  On  the  rise  of 
the  sun  of  knowledge,  the  Self  who  lies  beyond  the  five 
sheaths  devours  one  by  one  all  the  five  sheaths,  and,  like  a 
lamp,  becomes  extinguished  in  Himself. — (S). 

A summary  of  the  foregoing  discussion. 

S&ya«a  gives  a clear  summary  of  the  results  of  the  fore- 
going discussion  as  follows  : 

{Question) : — Who  is  meant  by  the  words  “he  who  thus 
knows  Is  it  Paramfttman  or  some  one  else  ? It  cannot 
be  Paramitman,  for.  He  is  the  one  to  be  known  and  can- 
not therefore  be  the  knower.  It  cannot  be  some  one  else 
either,  for,  it  would  be  opposed  to  the  teaching  such  as 
vThat,  Thou  art.” 


BkAHkAI^  THE 


Am.  VllL] 

{Answer) : — This  objection  does  not  apply  to  our  theory  ; 
for,  the  Paramittnan  can  be  both  the  knower  and  the 
known.  When  conditioned  by  the  physical  body,  the 
senses,  and  other  up&dhis,  He  is  the  knower  ; as  the  one 
partless  Bliss,  He  is  the  one  to  be  known. 

{Objection) : — The  sruti  says  that  ‘he  who  thus  knows’ 
attains  Brahman.  Attainment  (sam-kramana)  means  firm 
conjunction,  as  we  find  in  the  case  of  a leech  firmly  holding 
on  to  a blade  of  grass  ; and  certainly,  the  knower,  the 
Paramditman,  conditioned  by  the  upddhis  such  as  the  body 
and  the  senses,  cannot  be  said  to  attain  the  Annamaya  self 
in  the  manner  of  a leech. 

(Answer) Not  so,  for,  attainment  here  means  the 
disappearance  of  illusion  as  a result  of  knowledge.  And 
accordingly  the  Bh^shyakka  (5ankarlich^rya)  has  said, 
“the  word  ‘ attain  * is  used  in  a figurative  ^ense, — the 
cessation  of  illusion,  of  avidya.'*  Mere  knowledge  cannot 
indeed  be  the  means  of  attaining,  in  the  literal  sense  ; we 
do  not,  for  example,  find  that  the  mere  knowledge  “this  is 
composed  of  collyrium”  ever  attaches  collyrium  to  the  eye. 

(Objection) : — Already,  in  the  words  “departing  from  this 
world”  occurring  in  the  first  instance,  the  sruti  has  spoken 
of  the  disappearance  of  illusory  knowledge  concerning 
external  objects  such  as  children. 

(Answer)  : — If  so,  then,  by  the  attainment  of  the  Anna- 
maya self  the  sruti  may  mean  that  the  illusion  regarding 
children  and  the  like  will  spring  up  no  more.  We  have 
accordingly  explaine4  the  attainment  of  the  Annamaya  to 
mean  resting  in  the  Annm'iya  self.  On  the  same  principle, 

8^ 


bHAiiMA*viuxA  bAfiJUMHii;.  \AfUlfUi^ 

by  the  attainment  of  the  Pr&eamaya  we  mean  that,  as  a 
result  of  the  realisation  of  the  Prilbamaya  self,  the  illusion 
of  the  identification,  of  the  Self  with  the  Annamaya, 
which  has  once  disappeared,  does  not  spring  up  again. 
And  so  in  the  subsequent  cases.  Though  the  Annamaya, 
etc.,  are  not  the  True  Self,  still,  they  are  spoken  of  as  the 
Self,  because  from  illusion  they  are  commonly  regarded  as 
the  Self,  as  the  thing  corresponding  to  the  notion  of  * I. " 
Seeing  that  Brahman,  the  Real  Bliss,  is  beyond  speech  and 
thought,  the  sruti  does  not  speak  of  the  attainment  of  Brah- 
man, the  real  Bliss,  by  the  four-aspected  bliss  of  the 
Anandamaya-kosa,  though  as  a mattk  of  fact  there  exists 
such  attainment. 


CHAPTER  XI  I . 

THE  UNCONDITIONED  BRAHMAN. 


Brahman  is  beyond  speech  and  thought. 

^ II  U II 
II  II 

1 6.  On  that,  too,  there  is  this  verse. 

Here  is  a verse  which  also  teaches  that  on  realising — 
by  knowledge,  in  the  manner  described  above — 
that  One,  the  Unconditioned  Self,  one  is  not  afraid  of 
any  thing  whatever,  i.  c.,  attains  a fearless  permanent 
stay.  This  verse  serves  also  as  a brief  summary  of  the 
whole  teaching  of  the  present  section,  the  Ananda-Valli. 

. This  verse  is  quoted  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  the  view 
that  Brahman  is  beyond  the  scope  of  speech  and  thought. 

II  JTfqlSfTRf:  II 
I q ^ II  \ II 

[Anuvaka  IX] 

I.  He  who  knows  the  bliss  of  Brahman, 
whence  (all)  words  recede,  as  well  as  mind, 
without  reaching,  he  is  not  afraid  of  any  one 
whatsoever. 


BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED 


652  . 


[Ananda-Valli. 


From  the  Unconditioned  Non-dual  Bliss-Self  defined 
above,  all  words — all  designations  which  can  denote 
only  conditioned  things  such  as  substances  (dravya), 
but  which  are  employed  by  authors  to  denote  the  Un- 
conditioned Non-dual  Brahman  alike,  because  of  the 
fact  that  He  is  also  an  existent  thing — recede  without 
reaching  Him  ; i,  failing  to  denote  Brahman,  they 
show  themselves  powerless.  Mind  (manas)  means 
thought,  cognition.  And  whatever  thing  speech  is 
employed  to  denote, — and  it  is  employed  to  denote 
even  the  supersensuous, — thought  also  proceeds  to 
comprehend  that  thing.  And  wherever  cognition  acts, 
there  speech  also  acts.  Thus  everywhere  speech  and 
thought,  word  and  cognition,  act  together. 

* Be  it  known  that  Brahman  lies  beyond  the  reach 
of  speech.  Because  of  the  absence  in  the  Paramatman  of 
the  features— such  as  relation  with  another  thing,  attri- 
butes, action,  genus,  popular  usage,  etc., — which  may 
occasion  the  application  of  words,  the  sruti  studiedly  asserts, 
in  the  words  ‘^without  reaching,”  that  Brahman  cannot  be 
denoted  by  words.  We  have  therefore  said  before  {Vide 
p.  237  et  seq,)  that  the  words  “ Real,  ” etc.,  merely  define 
the  nature  of  Brahman  by  denying  the  applicability  to  Him 
of  substantives  and  attributives  which  are  applicable  only 
to  the  five  sheaths.  We  hold  that  the  Self  is  Brahman 
devoid  of  the  ideas  of  T,  Ego’  and  ‘mine.*  Therefore,  words 
which  are  applicable  to  substantives  &c.  recede  from 

* The  comments  running  from  this  paragraph  onwards  up  to 
where  ^Sankaracharya’s  Commentary  is  resumed  are  taken  from 
Suresvarfiksh&rya's  ' V&rtika  and  ^nandajn4na*s  gloss  there^ 
on.— (Tr), 


Aim.  IXJ\  the  UNCONDITIONED  BRAHMAN.  $53^ 

Brahman  because  of  the  absence  of  the  necessary  features 
mentioned  above.  A$  well  as  mind  : All  cognitions  which 
are  transformations  of  mind  (buddhi)  are  Incapable  of  reach- 
ing Him  who  is  the  Witness  of  the  mind  and  its  functions. 
Therefore,  as  cognitions  fail  to  reach  Him,  words  which 
generate  cognitions  ‘recede,  as  well  as  mind,’  i.  e.,  as  well 
as  the  cognitions  produced  by  the  words. 

(Question) : — Then  how  is  it  that  Brahman  is  said  to  be 
known  through  the  sastras  or  scriptures  ? 

(Ans7£/er): — All  the  words  which  are  used  to  impart  a true 
knowledge  of  Brahman  only  give  us  to  understand  Him  in- 
directly, by  implication  ; they  fail  to  denote  Him  directly. 

The  mental  cognition  which  is  generated  by  a word  has 
a form,  and  so  fails  to  reach  the  self-conscious  Brahman  ; 
thus  cognitions  recede  from  Him  along  with  the  words. 

The  Word  removes  our  ignorance  of  Brahman  without 
denoting  Him. 

(Question);— If  Brahman  be  beyond  speech,  and  beyond  the 
thought  generated  by  speech,  how  can  speech  (Revelation) 
remove  the  ignorance  concerning  Him  ? 

(Answer): — Speech,  such  as  “That,  Thou  art,”  has  that 
peculiar  power  in  it  in  virtue  of  which  it  removes  the  ignor- 
ance concerning  Atman  without  directly  designating  Him, 
just  as,  in  the  case  of  a man  who  is  asleep,  his  sleep  is 
removed  by  such  words  as  “ O Devadatta,  arise  ” which 
are  used  to  awake  him,  but  which  do  not  designate  him 
who  awakes.  And  ignorance  disappears  because  it  has  a 
weak  bs^sis  a^s  compared  with  knowledge.  Knowledge  is 


6^  BRAHMA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED. 

tile  very  essential  form  of  the  Self,  and  therefore  ignorance 
can  hardly  exist  in  the  Self.  Moreover,  speech  has  an  in- 
conceivable power,  as  seen  in  the  case^of  spell-chants  used 
for  curing  bites  of  poisonous  animals  ; and  accordingly  we 
know  Brahman  through  words,  which,  without  directly 
denoting  Him,  can  produce  a knowledge  of  Him  and  there- 
by dispel  our  ignorance.  When  men  who  are  asleep  are 
awakened  by  means  of  words,  they  give  up  sleep  and 
awake  without  having  grasped  the  relation  between  the 
words  and  what  is  denoted  by  them  ; for,  in  sleep  no 
one  grasps  words  as  he  grasps  them  in  the  waking 
state.  Thus  in  the  case  of  a man  who  is  asleep  the 
knowledge  caused  by  speech  is  effective  though  there  is  no 
grasp  of  the  relation  between  the  words  and  their  respective 
meanings.  So  when  ignorance  is  despelled  by  speech,  there 
can  arise  the  knowledge  T am  Brahman.’  Though  the 
words  ‘that’  and‘  thou’  in  the  sentence  “That,  Thou  art,*’ 
can  in  themselves  denote  only  the  conditioned  consciousness, 
the  sentence  as  a whole  generates  by  implication  the  idea 
of  the  One  Invisible  Essence, — of  Brahman  as  identical  with 
the  Inner  Self,  though  this  last  is  not  directly  denoted  by 
the  words  ; and  this  knowledge  of  the  oneness  destroying 
the  ignorance  of  it,  we  realise  in  experience  our  identity 
with  Brahman. 

The  two  occurrences,  namely,  the  rise  of  knowledge  and 
the  disappearance  of  ignorance,  are  not  identical  and  simul- 
taneous ; they  are  related  as  cause  and  effect,  the  one 
preceding  the  other.  There  is  therefore  no  room  for  any 
such  question  as  “which  of  them  precedes  the  other  ?”  The 
word  which  dispels  ignorance  (avidyA)  gives  rise  to  the 
knowledge  Igrs^hman’ ; and  this  knowledge  disappe^s 


, AmUp  iA*j  UNC^ONmtlONSb  £D311AHMAN.  b55 

aloz^g  with  ignorance  after  destroying  it,  just  As  the  medi- 
cinal drug  itself  disappears  after  removing  the  disease. 
Then  there  remains  that  One  who  is  ever  self-conscious, 
pure,  and  free. 

% 

The  doctrine  of  the  injunction  of  Brahma-jnana 
refuted. 

Thus  Brahman  being  eternal  and  ever  free,  no  necessity 
exists  either  for  operation  (bhAvana)  of  any  kind  or  for 
evidence  (mfi,na)  of  any  other  sort. 

Brahman  being  Himself  Consciousness,  He  is  above  the 
ordinary  run  of  knowable  things  ; and  it  is  only  in  the  case 
of  the  knowable  things  of  our  ordinary  experience  which 
are  known  through  external  means— that  is  to  say,  in  the 
case  of  things  which  are  not  self-known  like  Brahman — 
that  a necessity  for  external  evidence  exists.  Unlike  the 
fact  that  “there  are  fruits  on  the  bank  of  the  river”  asserted 
by  a trustworthy  person,  the  fact  of  Brahman’s  non-duality 
is  not  amenable  to  such  evidence  as  sensuous  perception 
(pratyaksha)  ; how,  then,  can  one  say  that  the  sruti  speak- 
ing of  Brahman’s  non-duality  stands  in  need  of  further 
evidence  ? What  evidence  does  one  need  to  become  con- 
scious of  That  One,  by  whose  presence  alone  one  becomes 
conscious  of  the  knower,  of  the  instrument  of  knowledge, 
of  the  object  known,  and  of  the  resulting  knowledge. 
Unlike  the  consciousness  of  a pot,  which  suffers  interruption 
for  want  of  appropriate  conditions— an  appropriate  time,  an 
appropriate  place,  an  appropriate  state  of  mind, — the  con- 
sciousness of  Brahman  never  suffers  interruption  in  any 
state  whatever,  in  jAgrat  or  svapna  or  sushupti ; for.  He 


^56  BkAHitA-Vtm  b^Lainbd.  [Anand^V^aHi. 

is  the  witness  of  the  presence  or  absence  of  the  interrupting 
causes.  The  mind  which  apprehends  *this  should  be  done 
thus/  and  Hhis  should  not  be  done  thus/  does  not  exist 
by  itself ; it  has  its  being  in  this  One,  the  Self ; what  oper- 
ation or  external  evidence,  therefore  does  Hts  existence 
need  ? What  evidence  does  the  One  Consciousness  need, 
that  One  who  is  wide  awake  even  prior  to  the  operation  of 
the  agent,  etc.,— that  is  to  say,  in  sushupti,  etc.,— unasso- 
ciated with  conditions  (upddhis)  and  unconcerned  with  the 
not-self  ? 

Though  commanded  by  a Vedic  injunction,  how  can  one 
see  that  Thing  which  is  not  denoted  by  words  and  which 
thought,  too,  cannot  reach  ? Being  eternally  existent, 
Atman  does  not  stand  in  need  of  human  effort  to  bring  Him 
into  being ; and  being  beyond  the  reach  of  speech  and 
thought,  neither  can  the  knowledge  of  Him  form  a subject 
of  injunction.  If  the  statements  of  fact  such  as  “That, 
Thou  art,**  should  be  construed  as  subsidiary  to  the  injun- 
ction of  knowledge,  “the  Atman  should  be  seen,’*  then,  the 
identity  of  the  Self  and  Brahman  asserted  in  such  subsidi- 
«ary  propositions  will  have  to  be  set  aside,  as  lying  outside 
our  ordinary  experience;  for  nothing  that  is  said  in 
a subsidiary  proposition  can  be  accepted  as  meant 
by  the  Veda  to  be  true  if  it  should  run  counter  to  the  evi- 
dence furnished  by  sensuous  perception  and  the  like.  It  is 
true  that  the  Veda  sometimes  enjoins  things  which  do  not 
exist  as  facts  of  our  ordinary  experience,  as,  for  instance, 
when  it  enjoins  us  to  regard  the  heavens  as  fire  ; but  it 
does  so  only  when  the  several  things  spoken  of,  such  as 
the  heavens  and  fire,  are,  when  taken  by  themselves,  facts  of 
our  experience.  On  the  contrary.  Brahman  who  is  said  to  be 


AmllX.]  tHE  UHCONt)ltIONfi&  BtlAHMANi 

eHemally  pure  and  free  is  never  a fact  of  our  ordinary  experi- 
^e  and  cannot  therefore  form  a subject  of  an  injunction. 
A Vedic  commandment,  though  lying  outside  our  ordinary 
experience,  can  be  made  out,  as  formed  of  a peculiar  corre^ 
lation  of  several  known  things  brought  together  ; but 
Brahman  is  one  and  indivisible  and  is  not  a composite  thing 
which  can  be  spoken  of  in  a sentence  as  made  up  of 
several  detached  parts  correlated  together : Brahman 
cannot  therefore  form  a subject  of  injunction. 

It  cannot  be  urged  that  such  a thing  as  the  Brahman 
described  above  cannot  possibly  exist ; for,  how  can  one 
say  that  such  a Brahman  cannot  possibly  exist,  seeing  that 
evidence  as  well  as  non-evidence,  as  also  spurious  evidence, 
all  do  bear  testimony  to  His  existence— all  of  them  existing 
to  us  only  as  witnessed  by  Him  who  is  the  Eternal  Consci- 
ousness ? 

{Objection)  If  the  Vedanta  does  not  enjoin  knowledge, 
how  can  its  teaching  be  authoritative  ? 

{Answer): — Why  should  not  the  assertive  * sentences,  such 
as  “That  Thou  art,”  be  regarded  as  authoritative  ? They 
do  impart  knowledge,  which  removes  the  ignorance  of 
the  Immutable  Consciousness  as  also  the  pain  that  results 
from  that  ignorance.  Even  the  injunction  (niyoga)  of  know- 
ledge can  have  no  meaning  unless  this  knowledge  of  the 
Immutable  Consciousness  be  held  as  true  ; and  the  injun- 
ction itself,  which  is  insentient,  cannot  make  itself  known 
in  the  absence  of  this  Consciousness. 

If  the  Vedinta  enjoins  the  knowledge  of  Brahman,  in  the 
words  “ He  shall  see  Atman,”  we  ask,  whence  is  the  exist- 
ence of  the  Unconditioned  Brahman  known  ? Is  it  from  the 
* as  opposed  to  sentences  implying  command  or  injunction. 

83 


658  B«AiiiiA-viDYA  EXPLAiKBi>^  [AnanAa^VM. 

sentence  of  command  or  from  any  other  sentence  ? It 
cannot  l^e  from  the  sentence  of  command  ; for  the  whole 
meaning  of  the  sentence  consists  in  enjoining  on  man  the 
duty  of  acquiring  knowledge  of  Brahman.  A sentence  of 
command  enjoins  a duty  on  man  without  reference  to  the 
reality  or  unreality  of  the  things  referred  to  in  it,  and  can- 
not therefore  be  an  authority  as  to  the  real  nature  of  the 
thmgs  it  speaks  of. 

In  point  of  fact,  knowledge  cannot  form  a subject  of  in- 
junction, inasmuch  as  it  cannot  be  done  or  undone  or  other- 
wise done  by  a person  at  will ; he  cannot  therefore  under- 
take the  act  though  he  may  be  enjoined  by  hundreds  of 
sentences.  He  can  engage  only  in  an  act  which  it  is 
possible  for  him  to  do.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the  nature  of 
Brahman  can  be  known  from  such  assertive  sentences  as 
That  Thou  art;  ’*  for,  these  sentences  being  held  as  sub- 
s diary  to  the  sentence  of  command,  cannot  describe 
Brahman  unconditioned  by  the  subject-matter  of  the  main 
proposition ; and  therefore  Brahman  described  in  such 
subsidiary  assertive  sentences  must  be  one  who  is  concern- 
ed with  action.  Those  who  are  given  never  to  transgress 
Vedic  commands  may  even  eat  their  own  flesh  and  give  up 
their  dear  lives,  these  acts  being  in  their  power  to  do.  But 
one  does  not  undertake  the  boiling  of  gold  pieces  though 
enjoined.  He  who,  believing  that  he  is  enjoined  by  sruti 
to  know  Brahman,  blindly  undertakes  the  act  without  any 
regard  to  its  possibility,  would  fail  to  achieve  his  purpose 
and  so  put  himself  to  unnecessary  pain,  like  the  thief  among 
boiler-makers.  * 


• A thief,  with  a view  to  prevent  the  discovery  of  his  theft, 
took  shelter  in  the  house  of  a boiler-maker  close  by.  Tho  master 


AmdX.]  THE  UNCONDITIONED  BRAHMAN.  659 

Neither  can  it  be  said  that  contemplation  (updsani)  of 
the  Conditioned  Brahman,  which  can  form  the  subject  of  an 
injunction,  gives  rise  to  the  Brahma-jh^na  or  knowledge  of 
the  Unconditioned  ; for,  it  is  a principle  laid  down  in  the 
5ruti  and  the  smriti  that  the  result  of  contemplation  is  the 
attainment  of  the  Conditioned  Brahman  in  accordance  with 
the  contemplation,  but  not  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Unconditioned. 

/ 

If  the  contemplation  enjoined  does  not  comprehend  the 
real  nature  of  Brahman,  then  such  a contemplation  cannot 
give  rise  to  Brahma-JMna  ; the  idea  of  silver,  repeated  ever 
so  often,  cannot  give  rise  to  the  idea  of  the  mother-of-pearl 
mistaken  for  silver. 

If  the  Atman  could  be  known,  then  injunction  of  the 
knowledge  (jii&na)  or  contemplation  (upfi^sana)  of  the  Atman 
would  be  possible.  As  the  sruti  says  that  the  Atman  can- 
not be  known,  there  can  be  no  injunction  of  the  knowledge 
or  contemplation  of  Atman  who  is  beyond  the  reach  of 
knowledge. 

The  Niyoga-v^dins  hold  that  the  Upanishads  give  us  to 
know  the  Reality  only  in  connection  with  an  injunction, 
believing  that  a mere  assertive  sentence  of  the  Veda  uncon- 
nected with  an  injunction  has  no  value  as  evidence  of 

3f  the  house  ordered  him  to  make  a boiler.  He  could  not  help 
indertaking  it ; but,  not  having  been  trained  to  it,  he  was  doing 
jhe  task  very  awkwardly.  Meanwhile,  the  city  police,  who  were 
*n  search  of  the  thief,  soon  appeared  there,  and,  seeing  how 
-wkwardly  he  was  doing  the  work,  they  thought  he  was  the 
.hief  and  arrested  him. 


€60  BRAHMA^VIDYA  SXPXAINXD* 

truth.  This  cazmot  be  ; for,  it  is  works  that  are  enjt^ed 
in  the  Vedic  injunctions,  and  a person  may  be  directed  by 
these  injunctions  to  do  acts,  which  he  can  accomplish  with 
effort.  How  can  he  ever  be  made  to  undertake  what  has 
not  to  be  accomplished  by  effort  and  action,  namely,  the 
real  nature  of  the  Self  ? 

Neither  is  it  the  knowledge  of  the  Self  that  is  enjoined 
here  in  the  Upanishad  by  the  sentences  of  command  ; for 
such  an  injunction  is  included  in  the  general  injunction 
“ Every  one  shall  study  his  own  section  of  the  scriptures.” 
Just  as  the  knowledge  of  the  injunction  of  a sacrificial  act 
does  not  itself  require  an  injunction  other  than  this  general 
injunction,  so  also  the  knowledge  of  Atman  does  not  require 
a separate  injunction. 

Suppose  the  Niyoga-vadin  says  as  follows:— It  may  be 
so,  if,  even  in  the  absence  of  an  injunction,  we  find  people 
regarding  Self-knowledge  as  a means  to  the  end  of  man. 
On  the  contrary,  we  do  not  find  that  such  is  the  case.  It 
being  only  from  a Vedic  injunction  of  Self-knowledge  that 
we  come  to  know  that  Self-knowledge  leads  to  the  good  of 
man,  neither  mere  assertive  statements  nor  other  sources  of 
knowledge  can  impart  the  knowledge  of  that  fact. 

[We  Answer) : — It  is  not  so  ; for  we  cannot  conceive  of 
any  result  of  knowledge  other  than  a comprehension  of  the 
object  to  be  known.  Since  the  knowledge  of  the  Self  can 
arise  even  in  the  absence  of  an  injunction  other  than  the 
general  one  “ Every  one  shall  study  his  own  section  of  the 
scriptures,”  what  purpose  is  there  to  be  served  by  an  in- 
junction of  Self-knowledge  ? 


Aim.  IX.]  UKCONOmONSD  BRAHMAN^  66l 

Suppose  the  Niyoga-vWin  rejoins  thus It  is  not  the 
sibbda-jndina,  or  such  knowledge  of  the  Self  as  can  be  im- 
parted by  the  words  of  the  sruti,  that  is  enjoined  in  the 
Upanishad.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Upanishad  enjoins 
quite  a different  knowledge  of  the  Self.  It  enjoins  the 
achievement  of  that  transcendental  intuitive  knowledge  of 
the  Supreme  Self  through  the  cultivation  of  perfect  self- 
control,  perfect  tranquillity,  perfect  endurance,  perfect 
balance  of  mind.  Indeed  it  is  not  possible  to  comprehend 
Brahman,  like  a jar,  by  such  knowledge  as  can  be  imparted 
by  words,  inasmuch  as  Brahman  is  not  a thing  which  can 
be  denoted  by  a sentence.  The  import  of  a sentence,  as 
held  by  experts  in  the  subject,  consists  in  the  correlation  of 
things  denoted  by  the  several  words  in  the  sentence.  We  do 
hold  that  Vdikya  or  speech  is  the  right  source  of  knowledge 
regarding  Brahman  ; but,  as  lying  beyond  the  scope  of 
speech,  Brahman’s  real  nature  cannot  form  the  import  of  a 
sentence  ; so  that  we  are  forced  to  admit  that  Brahman  has 
to  be  comprehended  by  some  other  kind  of  knowledge  than 
that  produced  by  words. 

Against  this  it  may  be  urged  as  follows  : — If  you  do  not 
grant  that  Brahman  can  be  comprehended  by  such  know- 
ledge as  can  be  imparted  by  a sentence,  then  Brahman 
cannot  be  taught  by  the  Vedas. 

The  Niyoga-v^din  answers  : — You  cannot  say  so  ; for. 
Brahman  does  form  the  subject  of  Vedic  teaching,  inas- 
much as  He  is  comprehended  by  that  intuitive  knowledge 
(sAkshitk^ra)  which  is  achieved  by  a constant  con- 
templation of  such  knowledge  of  Brahman  as  is  pro. 
duced  by  the  Vedic  texts,  We  cg^nnot  admit,  on  the 


66a  BKAHMA-VIDYA  SXPLAIKBD.  [AnafUkl*  VcML 

Bnere  authorit;^  of  your  dictum,  that  Brahman  constitutes 
the  subject  of  Vedic  teaching,  and  forms  the  import  of  a 
sentence ; for,  then,  knowledge  of  Brahman  would  not 
depend  on  the  effort  of  man.  Unlike  Dharma,  the  Atman^s 
nature  cannot  form  the  import  of  a sentence,  as  He  cannot 
be  connoted  by  any  word.  Even  supposing  that  He  is 
connoted  by  a word.  He  cannot  form  the  import  of  a sent- 
ence ; for,  single  detached  words  can  only  connote 
universals/s&m^Lnya)  or  generic  attributes,  whereas  a sent- 
ence as  a whole  points  to  a particular  object.  Though 
Brahman  may  be  conceived  as  a universal  (s&mdinya),  He 
cannot  be  regarded  as  a particular.  In  point  of  fact,  how- 
ever, the  Ved&ntin  holds  that  Brahman  does  not  admit  of 
such  distinctions  as  a universal  and  a particular ; so,  how 
can  He  be  comprehended  by  speech  ? Being  not  denoted 
by  a word.  Brahman  cannot  form  the  import  of  a sent- 
c ncS  ; so  that  no  knowledge  of  Brahman  can  be  imparted 
by  speech.  Therefore  the  intuitive  knowledge  that  “ I am 
Brahman”  is  beyond  the  reach  of  a sentence  ; and  as  this 
intuitive  knowledge  is  generated  by  a constant  contempla- 
tion of  that  knowledge  of  Brahman  which  can  be  imparted 
by  the  Vedas,  Brahman  may  be  regarded  as  forming,  in  a 
way,  the  subject  of  the  Vedic  teaching. 

The  One  Self  is  self-luminous,  unconditioned, 
immutable,  non -dual. 

(Siddhanta) A refutation  of  the  theory  that  the  nature 
of  Brahman  is  taught  in  the  Upanishads  in  association  with 
an  injunction  is  contained  in  the  verse  quoted  by  the  Upa- 
nidiad  here  and  explained  by  us  , < This  is  the  object 


IX.]  "THE  UNCONDITIONED  BRAHMAN.  $63 

known,*  ‘ this  is  knowledge,’  * I am  the  knower,^ — being* 
thus  always  clearly  perceived  as  distinguished  from  one  an- 
other, it  is  not  these  three  categories  of  things,  of  which  the 
Atman  is  ignorant.  Neither  can  the  Atman,  who  is  the  Wit- 
ness of  all  cognitions,  be  of  a nature  other  than  that  of  pure 
consciousness  ; that  is  to  say,  the  Pratyagatman,  being  the 
basis  of  all  illusory  manifestations,  cannot  himself  be  an 
illusory  manifestation.  Though  of  the  nature  of  pure  con- 
sciousness, the  Atman  is  not  perceived  as  such  owing  to 
ajndm,  illusion,  ignorance.  He  has  nothing  in  Him  to  cast 
off  and  has  nothing  to  acquire.  Being  the  Witness  of  all 
that  is  cast  away,  and  of  all  that  is  acquired,  He  must 
in  Himself  be  immutable,  subject  to  no  change ; and 
He  becomes  the  Witness  of  the  perceiver,  etc.,  only  in 
virtue  of  His  association  with  ajnjina  which  is  the 
cause  of  the  perceiver,  etc.  It  is  the  ego — the  buddhi, 
the  understanding — that  takes  these  forms,  “ I know,” 
“I  do  not  know;  ” and  this  ego  is  only  an  aspect  or  function 
of  the  mind  (antaA-karawa-vntti)  and  is  the  seat  of  pratya- 
bhijhi,  the  faculty  of  the  cognition  of  identity,  i,  e,,  the 
faculty  which  holds  together  in  association  the  different 
cognitions  in  their  sequence.  It  is  the  perceiver — i,  e.,  the 
mind,  the  antaA-karawa  with  a semblance  of  consciousness 
— that  lacks  or  comes  by  knowledge.  As  the  Atman  beyond 
all  the  sheaths  is  indivisible,  He  cannot  put  on  the  different 
forms  referred  to,  as  the  mind  can.  It  is  the  knower — i.  ^., 
the  ego,  the  agent,  who  puts  on  different  forms,  and  who 
has  a semblance-consciousness, — who  is  said  to  recognise, 
in  the  form  this  is  the  thing  I saw”  or  “ I am  the  same 
person  that  was”  : at  the  present  moment,  when  the 

mind  is  impressed  with  an  object  presented  to  the  senses, 


6^4  Bn^M^viDYA  sxPLAiMBD*.  [Amnda^VolHt 

lie  recalls  his  former  exp^ience  as  the  perceiver  ofah  <^jdct, 
havmg^all  along  carried  with  himself  the  impression  of  the 
object  caused  by  the  experience  thereof  in  a former  state 
df  mind.  Like  this  recognition  of  identity,  even  ignorance 
{ajMna},  etc.,  pertain  only  to  the  mind,  not  to  the  Immu- 
table Consciousness  ; and  it  is  by  illusion  that  one  thinks 
that  ignormice,  etc.,  pertain  to  the  Self.  This  is  a fault  of 
the  mind  (buddhi) : it  is  buddhi,  the  ego,  the  mind  with  re- 
flected consciousness,  that  puts  on  the  forms  of  external 
objects,  the  form  of  the  self  or  knower,  and  the  appearance 
of  consciousness.  Such  variety  and  change  of  forms  can- 
not pertain  to  the  Self  who  is  Immutable. 

Knowledge  of  the  one  Self  imparted  by  Revelation. 

By  the  process  of  manana,  i.e,^  by  following  what  is  called 
the  method  of  ‘conjoint  presence  and  absence*  (anvaya- 
vyatireka)  as  indicated  by  the  sruti,  the  aspirant  of  moksha 
sets  aside  as  foreign  to  the  True  Self,  all  that  is  the  not- 
self,— which  is  perceived  by  the  mind,  and  whose  form  is 
reproduced  in  the  mind  at  the  time  of  perception, — seeing 
that  the  not-self  is  not  always  present  in  the  jft»grat,  svapna, 
and  sushupti  states  ; and,  seeing  that  pure  consciousness  is 
always  present  in  all  states,  he  holds  on  in  the  mind  to  that 
pure  Consciousness,  the  Self,  the  ‘Thou’,  the  mind  being 
then  thrown  into  the  form  of  the  pure  consciousness,  which 
is  not  a thing  that  can  be  described  in  a sentence;  that  is  to 
say,  which  does  not  admit  of  that  correlation  of  things 
which  is  necessarily  comprehended  in  the  import  of  a sen- 
tence. Then  the  sentence  “That,  Thou  art”  or  the  like, 
shewing  th^  unreality  of  what  is  inconstant  produces  the 
knowledge  “I  am  Brahman,”  a state  of  the  mind  (buddhi- 
vfitti)  which,  at  the  very  next  moment  after  its  rise,  burns 


.Anu*  IX*]  UNCONDltlOIlED  BRAHMAN.  66$ 

away  the  ignorance  of  the  Self  and  all  its  eflfectsand  givies  the 
student  to  know  that  the  Self  is  Brahman  and  that  Brahman 
is  the  Self, — to  know  the  Unconditioned  One.  Just  as  in 
virtue  of  the  agreement  in  case  (s&mdn&dhikarafiya)  of  the 
two  terms  in  the  sentence  <*The  ak^a  in  the  jar  is  the  mighty 
expanse  of  ak&sa/’  we  set  aside  the  limitations  of  the  two 
&k&5as  as  incompatible  with  their  unity  and  comprehend 
the  one  dkasa  underlying  the  two  limited  ones  spoken  of  as 
identical,  so  also,  in  virtue  of  the  agreement  in  case  of  the 
two  words  ‘That’  and  ‘Thou'  in  “That,  Thou  art,”  which 
shows  the  things  directly  denoted  by  the  two  words  are  re- 
lated as  substantive  and  attributive,  we  set  aside  all  the 
limitations  denoted  by  the  two  words  as  incompatible 
with  the  unity  here  implied  and  intuitively  comprehend  the 
One,  not  forming  the  direct  import  of  the  sentence  ; and 
inasmuch  as  the  words*of  the  sentence  have  thus  served  to 
indicate  the  One  Reality,  the  knowledge  of  the  One  may  be 
considered  to  have  been  directly  imparted  by  the  sentence, — 
the  sentence  being  by  itself  capable  of  imparting  the  know- 
ledge of  the  One  who  does  not  form  the  import  of  a sentence. 

No  external  evidence  is  necessary  to  prove  the  Self. 

The  assertion  that  another  kind  of  knowledge  has  yet  to 
be  achieved  is  like  threshing  the  husk  of  the  grain.  Non- 
conception, misconception  and  doubt  are  found  to  arise 
only  with  reference  to  a jar  and  the  like,  but  not  with  refer- 
ence to  the  cogniser’s  cognition  and  the  Witness-conscious- 
ness. As  to  cognition  there  can  be  no  non-cognition, 
misconception  or  doubt ; for,  being  immediately  present 
before  consciousness  it  does  not  need  an  external  evidence. 
(To  explain) ; — A cognition,  whether  it  is  in  the  form  of 


?9S5  ARARMA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED,  [Afldndll^^VMu 

tertainty  or  of  doubt,  presents  it^lf  to  the  cogniser  without 
tmy  modtum  ; wherefore  it  does  not  need  an  external  proof. 
Not  does  even  the  cogniser  admit  of  non-cognition,  mis- 
conception or  doubt,  inasmuch  as  he  is  immediatly  present 
before  the  Witness-consciousness.  Such  being  the  case,  it 
needs  no  saying  that  the  Unconditioned  Self  whose 
neVer-failing  consciousness  bears  a constant  testimony  to  the 
existence  of  the  cogniser,  cognition,  etc.,  require  no  external 
evidence  at  all. 

Therefore  no  knowledge  other  than  that  imparted  by  the 
words  of  the  Upanishad  has  to  be  achieved  for  further 
enlightenment.  Moreover,  this  Unconditioned  non-dual  Self, 
admitting  of  no  such  relations  as  are  implied  in  the  direct 
import  of  any  sentence,  is  experienced  in  sushupti ; and 
this  experience  cannot  be  an  illusion,  as  it  is  supported  by 
the  authority  of  the  sruti  which  says  “As  to  the  view  that 
there  (in  the  sushupti)  he  does  not  see,  (we  say),  though 
seeing,  he  does  not  see.’*  The  very  inherent  conscious- 
ness of  the  Brahman-Self  manifesting  itself  in  that  state  of 
mind  which  results  from  a proper  understanding  of  the 
final  teaching  of  the  Upanishads,  constitutes  the  knowledge 
which  can  remove  the  nescience,  that  knowledge  being  as 
constant  as  the  Self  whereas  the  not-self  is  but  a temporary 
manifestation.  This  Self  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  known 
or  the  unknown,  as  knowledge  or  ignorance,  as  one  who 
knows  or  one  who  knows  not ; for  such  things  exist  to  us  as 
witnessed  by  the  Self ; and  even  His  witnessship  is  not 
absolutely  real.  Wherefore  no  further  knowledge  is 
called  for  with  a view  to  an  elimination  of  these  elements 
from  the  Self. 

Bri.  Up.  4*3-23, 


iX]  . TJpE.UNCONDITIONED  BRAHJiCAN.  6frp 

Knowledge  of  Brahman  cannot  be  enjoinod. 

An  injunction  (niyoga),  moreover,  can  command  a person 
.0  do  what  lies  in  his  power ; but  knowledge  of  things  as  they 
ire,  depends,  not  on  the  will  of  a person,  but  upon  things 
;hemselves.  If  the  knowledge  * it  is  to  be  done  thus  * and 
it  is  to  be  done  not  thus’  can  be  derived  from  the  ritualistic 
section  of  the  Veda,  without  that  knowledge  being  separa- 
ely  enjoined,  why  can  a person  not  derive  a knowledge  of 
:ruth  from  an  assertive  sentence  such  as  “That,  Thou  art’* 
yvithout  a separate  injunction.  An  injunction  can  command 
in  action  to  be  done  ; the  agent,  &c.,  do  not  form  the 
subject  of  an  injunction,  because  they  already  exist  ; and 
t is  further  held  that  an  identical  sentence  cannot  point  to 
wo  things,  t,  e,f  (in  the  present  instance)  cannot  both 
-omraand  an  act  and  impart  a knowledge  of  the  true  nature 
rf  things  referred  to  in  the  sentence. 

It  cannot  be  maintained  that  ail  speech  implies  injunction; 
or,  there  is  a difference  perceived  by  the  ear  in  the  very 
wording  of  the  two  kinds  of  sentences,  those  which  express 
in  injunction  and  those  which  assert.  If  it  be  held  that 
sensuous  perception  cannot  always  be  relied  upon,  then  the 
definition  of  sensuous  perception — that  it  is  the  knowledge 
arising  in  the  ego  from  contact  of  the  senses  with  what  then 
exists — as  given  by  the  omniscient  sage,  Jaimini,  would 
go  in  vain. 

An  agent  can  exercise  his  independent  will  with  regard  to 
an  act.  His  will  has  no  sway  over  the  nature  of  things  as 
they  are.  Mukti,  in  our  view,  is  the  state  of  Atman  as  He 
is  ; if  it  could  be  secured  by  action,  then  it  would  be 
impermanent. 


^ BRAHMA-VIOVA  EXPXJklNBD.  [Amnda^^VM. 

hM.  that  knowledge  alone  astrue  which  oomprdiends 
a thi|ig  as  it  is.  The  knowledge  which  has  its  origin 
solely  in  man's  e£fort  can  be  no  true  knowledge  any  more 
than  that  of  silver  (arising  when  the  mother-of-pearl  is 
mistaken  for  silver).  As  right  knowledge  comprehends 
things  as  they  are,  it  is  impossible  for  the  Vedanta  to 
teach  the  real  nature  of  the  Thing  as  it  is  in  connection 
with  an  injunction. 

What  is  the  reason  for  saying  that  the  Upanishad  teaches 
Brahman  as  related  to  an  injunction  ? Does  every  sentence 
or  every  pramiwa  (source  of  knowledge)  convey  knowledge 
of  things  as  subsidiary  to  an  injunction  ? Unless  some  such 
invariable  association  is  adduced  as  a reason,  we  cannot  ad- 
mit that  the  Ved&ntic  texts  impart  knowledge  of  Brahman 
only  as  related  to  an  injunction.  We  hold  quite  a differ- 
ent view  : we  hold  that  the  texts  of  the  Upanishad  which 
are  not  connected  with  any  injunction  constitute  the  autho- 
rity as  to  the  true  nature  of  the  Inner  Self  as  He  is,  though 
we  admit  that  such  texts  of  the  Upanishad  as  are  connected 
with  injunctions  enjoin  acts  such  as  sravawa,  the  study  of 
the  scriptures,  and  so  on.  Moreover,  all  effort  on  the  part  of 
man  enjoined  by  the  srutiin  connection  with  the  knowledge 
of  Brahman,  be  it  the  knowledge  imparted  by  the  very  texts 
or  the  knowledge  which  is  alleged  to  result  from  a repeat- 
ed practice  thereof,  presupposes  that  Brahman  forms  the 
subject  of  treatment  in  the  Upanishads.  If  this  be  not  ad- 
mitted, then  the  injunction  of  the  knowledge  of  Brahman 
would  be  impossible.  The  theory  that  the  Reality  is  taught 
only  as  associated  with  an  injunction  runs  counter  to  the 
fact  that  such  passages  as  “ Brahman  is  not  gross,"  *** 


• Bn.  Up,  3-8,8. 


669 


A IX,]  the  ONCONDITIONED  BRAHMAN. 

‘‘Brahman  is  beyond  words***,  &c.,  treat  of  Brahman  as  He 
is.  These  passages  should  not  be  rendered  unauthoritative 
concerning  the  nature  of  Brahman  by  being  made  subsidi- 
ary to  an  injunction.  It  cannot  be  urged  that,  if  unassociated 
with  an  injunction,  these  passages,  like  the  speech  of  an 
untrustworthy  person,  would  have  no  authority.  For,  if 
such  passages  be  not  authoritative  as  treating  of  Brahman, 
then  the  injunction  would  have  no  scope  at.  all.  Even, 
though  enjoined  to  know  Brahman,  who  is  in  fact  unknow- 
able, one  cannot  do  it  ; none  has  power  to  make  a. thing 
what  it  is  not.  If  it  be  said  that  the  Vedic  injunction 
would  impel  him  to  the  act,  then  he  would  do  it  like  the 
thief  among  the  boiler-makers,  t 

Moreover,  the  injunction  of  knowledge  runs  counter  to 
the  texts  which,  in  a commanding  tone,  assert  that  Brah- 
man is  other  than  what  is  known  and  other  than  what  is 
unknown.  The  sruti  denies  Brahman’s  knowability,  in 
sentences  of  command  such  as  “whereby  shall  one  know  the 
knower?  ” “Thou  shalt  not  see  the  seer  of  sight.”  § Brah- 
man being  the  Eternal  self-luminous  Consciousness  illumin- 
ing all  luminaries,  to  know  Him  is  impossible. 

[Ohjection)  : — It  is  Atman  that  sees  the  visible  universe. 
So,  how  can  it  be  said  that  Atman  is  not  the  object  directly 
perceived  ? 

(Answer): — If  so,  in  the  act  of  knowing  the  Atman,  the 
agent  and  the  object  of  the  action  would  be  identical, 
namely,  the  Atman.  In  fact,  being  unseen,  He 


♦ Katha-Up.  3-15, 
X Bri.  2-414. 


t Vide  note  on  p.  658. 
§ Jhid,  3.4-2. 


can- 


6p>  BRAHMA^VIDYA  BXPi-AlNBD,  [AnaHd^-^VoUL 

not  be  the  d>ject ; and  being  ingimutable  (kdl^astha)  he 
cannot  be  the  agent  in  the  act  of  seeing.  Thus  alone,  eihi 
we  explain  the  denial — with  reference  to  Atman— of  the  six 
changes  of  state  such  as  birth.  It  is  such  distinguishable : 
forms  as  the  cogniser,  cognition  and  the  cognised,  that  are 
said  to  be  the  objects  of  perception,  being  themselves  not 
luminous.  If,  as  the  Witness-Consciousness,  the  cogniser 
be  also  the  object  cognised,  then  the  cognition  and  the 
instrument  of  cognition  would  also  be  nothing  more  than . 
the  Witness-Consciousness,  and  the  terms  ‘the  cogniser,* 
‘the  cognised’  &c.,  would  not  denote  what  are  ordinarily 
meant  by  such  terms.  So  the  Witness-Consciousness 
cannot  be  the  object  of  cognition. 

The  authority  of  the  ^anuvadas.* 

If  the  anuvftda — repetition  of  a single  notion  or  of  a pro- 
I osftion,  in  a word  or  a sentence,  in  connection  with  an  in- 
junction— convey  no  evidence  as  to  what  it  signifies  in 
itself,  it  would  not  be  possible  to  connect  the  substance  of 
milk  with  the  act  of  offering.  * It  is  no  reply  to  say  that 
milk  may  be  connected  with  svarga  ; for  the  substance  of 
milk  by  itself  cannot  be  connected  with  svarga  except 
through  an  act.  Moreover,  when  the  sruti  enjoins  (in  con- 
nection with  Darsa  and  Purwamlisa)  “ He  shall  obtain  cattle 
by  milk-pail”  t instead  of  by  a pan  (chamasa),  it  is  held 

♦The  reference  here  is  to  the  injunction  “He  shall  offer 
milk,”  where  the  act  denoted  by  the  word  “offer*'  is  a repetition 
of  what  was  already  enjoined  in  a separate  sentence. 

t In  this  injunction  the  sruti  seems  at  first  sight  to  connect 
the  snbslanee  of  the  milk-pail  with  the  result  directly,  without 
the  intervention  of  an  act. 


AHhI  t)L,\  the  UNCOHDIttONiD  Sft 

that  parUy  the  sruti  intends  a repetition  of  what  is  already 
ta||[ht,— namely  that  water  should  be  poured  into  a vessel, 
and  that  the  pouring  of  water  into  a vessel  is  a means  to  the 
svarga— and  that  it  teaches  a new  truth  in  so  far  as  it  enjoins 
that  instead  of  a pan  (chamasa)  a milk-pail  should  be  used 
by  him  who  seeks  to  secure  cattle.  Thus  even  here  it  is 
through  its  relation  with  the  pouring  of  water — during  the 
performance  of  the  sacrificial  rites  of  Darsa  and  PhrsamAsa 
which  are  said  to  be  the  means  to  svarga — that  the  sub- 
stance of  the  milk-pail  can  bring  about  the  intended  fruit, 
namely,  cattle.  This  would  be  impossible  if  the  repetitions 
(anuvAdas)  should  convey  no  authority  as  to  what  they 
signify.  Perhaps  it  may  be  urged  that,  on  account  of  the 
use  of  the  milk-pail,  which  is  different  from  pan  (chamasa), 
the  two  acts  of  pouring  are  altogether  different  and  that 
therefore  there  is  no  repetition  of  what  is  already  taught. 
If  this  be  true,  then,  it  would  also  follow  that  the  two  acts 
are  different  as  being  enjoined  in  connection  with  different 
fruits,  namely,  svarga  and  cattle  respectively;  in  which  case 
all  injunctions  prescribing  the  use  of  particular  substances 
for  particular  fruits  in  connection  with  acts  already 
prescribed  would  have  no  scope  at  all. 

The  authority  of  assertive  sentences. 

(Objection) : — The  assertive  sentences  which  do  not  teach 
either  that  something  should  be  given  up  or  that  something 
should  be  acquired  can  convey  no  authority  as  to  what  they 
signify  ; so  that,  the  sentence  imparting  the  knowledge 
“I  am  Brahman”  conveys  no  authority  with  it. 

{Answer) Brahman  is  our  very  Self,  we  need  not 
put  forth  a fresh  effort  to  secure  Brahman.  Being  none 


$J2  B&AHMA-VlDYA  BXPtAINBD.  [Amnda^VoiH. 

Other  thap  one’s  Self,  Brahman  cannot  be  given  up  either. 
Since  the  assertive  passage  such  as  ^That,  Thou  art*' jpn- 
partsthe  knowledge  of  Brahman  which  leads  to  the  highest 
bUss;,  what  more  is  left  here  for  an  injunction  to  do?  Without 
an  injunction,  the  passage  is  a self-sufficient  authority. 
Similarly,  it  cannot  but  be  admitted  by  the  crows  ( of 
mimftmsakas)  that  anuvidas  are  authorities  as  regards 
what  they  signify.  It  is  when  we  seek  to  know  purpose 
of  anuv&das  that  we  have  to  connect  them  with  an  injunc- 
tion. Thus  in  no  case  can  it  be  shewn  that  a sentence  can 
convey  authority  as  to  what  it  signifies  only  when  viewed 
in  relation  to  an  injunction.  Whence  then  the  necessity 
that  from  an  injunction  alone  is  authoritative  knowledge 
derived  ? 

If  the  original  teaching  and  its  repetition  (vada  and 
anuv&da)  convey  different  meanings,  then  the  repetition 
should  convey  authority  with  it,  as  imparting  the  knowledge 
of  what  has  been  not  known.  And  it  is  a fact  of  our  ex- 
perience that  the  two  do  convey  two  different  meanings  ; 
the  former  is  looked  upon  as  teaching  what  is  not  already 
known  and  the  latter  as  repeating  what  is  already  known. 

If  it  be  held  that  the  repetitions  convey  ideas  of 
things  which  are  as  illusory  as  the  mirage-water,  then  in- 
junction can  have  no  scope  anywhere.  Every  single  term 
in  a sentence  (which  is  of  the  nature  of  an  anuvAda)  can 
give  us  to  know  what  it  designates,  without  presupposing 
anything  else  : If  it  should  lack  power  to  give  us  to  know 
even  that  much  independently,  then  its  utterance  would  be 
altogether  futile. 

We  ask,  whence  have  you  come  to  know  that  a term  is 
an  amvdda  or  repeats  what  has  been  otherwise  known, 


Anu.  the  UNCONblTIONfet)  biuhMai^.  673 

and  that  it  is  sdJcanksha  or  presupposes  its  connection  with 
sotKething  else  ? It  cannot  be  from  the  term  itself  having 
those  attributes  ; for,  terms  are  looked  upon  as  conveying 
no  authority  with  them.  And  as  to  the  injunction  itself, 
its  signification  has  been  exhausted  by  giving  us  to  knc^w 
the  thing  enjoined.  When  a term  presupposes  anything, 
what  is  presupposed  must  be  something  else  which  is  nbt 
designated  by  the  term  itself ; if  it  should  convey  no  au- 
thority with  it  as  to  what  it  signifies,  how  can  the  meaning 
of  a sentence  be  construed  ? 

We  may  further  ask,  whence  do  you  know  that  a term 
has  no  authority  ? Certainly  pratyaksha  (immediate  per- 
ception) and  other  pram^was  (instruments  of  knowledge) 
give  us  to  know  what  exists,  but  not  what  does  not  exist, 
a mere  abhiva  or  non-existence. 

And  the  sruti  will,  in  the  sequel  (Bhrigu-Valli),  give  us 
to  know  the  real  nature  of  the  Self  by  shewing  that  the 
Self  is  not  of  the  nature  of  the  physical  body,  or  of  the 
vital  air,  or  of  the  mind  ; and  it  is  therefore  hard  to  shew 
that  an  injunction  teaches  it.  The  miti  does  not  teach 
that  the  Self  is  distinct  {bhinna)  from  the  physical  body, 
etc.,  as  though  these  latter  really  exist.  Such  a thing  as 
distinction  cannot  be  apprehended  by  any  of  the  pramawas; 
for,  distinction  between  one  thing  and  another  should  mean 
absence  (abhiSbva)  of  the  one  in  the  other,  and  this  absence 
being  a mere  negation  cannot  come  in  contact  with  the 
senses.  As  other  prama«as  are  based  upon  sensuous 
perception  (pratyaksha),  they,  too,  cannot  apprehend  dis- 
tinction. The  opponents  may  urge  that  distinction  is  an 
abhdiva  and  can  be  apprehended  through  the  absence  of  the 

85 


^74  BRAHJIA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED.  [Anand^-Vf^t. 

otlier  parm^Mas,  which  is  also  an  abhava.  Then,  an 
aldi&va  of  pram&na  is  considered  to  be  a pram&fia,  which  is 
alp^d.  In  the  absence  of  consciousness  manifested  in 
the  mind  as  the  result  of  the  operation  of  a pram^na,  nothing 
manifest  itself  to  us.  Even  the  opponents,  however,  hold 
that  the  absence  of  prarndnas  is  not  altogether  an  abhava  ; 
which  is  quite  inconsistent  with  the  contention  that  an 
abh&va  of  pramanas  gives  us  to  know  distinction  which  is  an 
abh&va.  Wherefore  the  sruti  does  not  teach  that  the  Self 
is  distinct  from  the  physical  body,  etc..  The  assertive  sen- 
tences in  the  sruti  give  us  to  know  the  nature  of  the  Self  as 
He  is,  by  denying  the  nature  of  the  physical  body,  etc,, 
falsely  ascribed  to  Him. 

It  cannot  be  urged  that  the  knowledge  generated  by  an 
. assertive  sentence  derives  its  authority  from  an  injunction. 
How  can  a knowledge  which  has  no  authority  in  itself 
derive  authority  from  an  injunction  ? Akasa,  for  instance, 
cannot  be  converted  into  trays,  however  skilfully  a potter 
may  operate  upon  it. 

If  knowledge  of  the  Atman  be  already  made  out,  why 
should  it  need  an  injunction,  any  more  than  one  injunction 
needs  another  injunction  ? If  it  be  not  already  made  out, 
how  can  it  be  enjoined  ? 

If  it  be  urged  that  from  an  injunction  alone  can  one  learn 
that  knowledge  leads  to  liberation,  then  one  would  have  to 
look  out  for  another  injunction  teaching  that  a Vedic  injunc- 
tion subserves  human  good ; so  that  we  understand  that  the 
knowledge  imparted  by  the  texts  such  as  “That,  Thou  art” 
yields  its  fruit  by  itself,  just  as  eating  produces  satisfaction 
by  itself. 


A Hte.  IX.  ] the  uncokditioned  brahman.  67s- 

Just  as  we  understand  the  meaning  of  the  injunction, 
“Every  one  shall  study  his  own  portion  of  the  scriptiires;** 
without  another  injunction,  so  also  we  understand  the 
meaning  of  the  assertive  sentence  without  any  injunction.  ^ 
If,  in  the  absence  of  an  injunction,  the  knowledge  imparted 
by  the  assertive  sentence- is  false,  then  the  meaning  of  the 
injunction  “Every  one  shall  study  his  own  portion  of  the 
scriptures’*  must  also  be  false. 

Either  the  injunction  should  be  held  subservient  to*  the 
assertion,  or  the  assertion  should  be  held  subservient  to  the 
injunction.  The  result  would  be  this  : — If  the  assertion  be 
subservient  to  the  injunction,  then,  the  knowledge  imparted 
would  be  like  the  knowledge  that  “the  heavens  is  fire,” 
calculated  to  produce  some  invisible  results  in  future  ; it 
would  not  impart  right  knowledge,  knowledge  of  the  Thing 
as  it  is.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  injunction  be  held 
subservient  to  the  assertion,  then,  no  injunction  of 
knowledge  can  be  made  out. 

The  scope  of  injunction  in  the  Vedanta. 

Prior,  however,  to  the  attainment  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth  as  a whole,  taught  in  the  assertive  sentences  such 
as  “That,  Thou  art,”  injunction  is  possible,  enjoining  that 
it  is  incumbent  on  a student  to  discriminate  the  nature  of 
the  things  spoken  of  in  the  main  assertive  texts,  by  the 
application  of  the  method  of  anvaya-vyatireka,  of  “conjoint 
presence  and  absence.”  This  investigation  is  necessary, 
because  ignorance  of  the  true  nature  of  the  things  spoken 
of  in  the  passages  referred  to  is  an  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the 
understanding  of  the  truth  a whole  taught  in  those  pro- 
positions. 


676  BIUHMA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED.  [Amfldd^V 

. If  what  is  taught  by  a Vedic  text  is  a thing  which  has  yet 
to  be  done  and  stands  in  need  of  operative  factors,  that,  then, 
is  a thing  which  can  be  enjoined.  When  one  of  quite  a 
difierent  nature,  the  Eternal  One  who  is  not  concerned 
with  action,  is  known  from  a Vedic  text,  He  cannot  be 
made  the  subject  of  an  injunction.  Since  the  knowledge 
‘That,  Thou  art,*’  on  its  very  rise  can  bring  about  the 
removal  of  ignorance  without  any  extraneous  aid,  the 
knowledge  is  not  meant  for  nididhyasana  or  deep  contem- 
plation. If  the  knowledge  that  has  been  attained  cannot 
bring  about  its  own  result,  namely,  the  removal  of  ignorance, 
it  cannot  do  so  when  it  is  made  subservient  to  the 
injunction  of  nididhydsana. 

Wisdom  eradicates  fear. 

* He  who  knows  the  inherent,  eternal,  partless, 
supreme  Bliss  of  Brahman, — that  incomprehensible, 
unutterable,  invisible  Bliss  of  Brahman,  which  words, 
employed  to  denote  Brahman  by  authors  in  ever  so 
many  ways,  as  well  as  the  understanding  that  is  cap- 
able of  comprehending  all,  fail  to  reveal;  which  is  very 
Self  of  the  man  of  spiritual  enlightenment  who  is  free 
from  sin  and  unassailed  by  desires  of  all  kinds  ; which 
is  above  all  contact  of  the  subject  and  the  object he 
who  has  realised  the  Brahman-Bliss  as  described 
above,  has  no  fear  from  any  quarter,  as  there  is  no 
cause  of  fear.  Certainly,  there  exists  nothing  apart 


'*  Here  we  resume  Sankar^h4rya’s  Comment  once  more* 
(Vid$  ante  p.  652,  note.). 


677 


-4^-  /X.J  UNCONDITIONED  BRAHMAN. 

from  the  wise  one,  nothing  distinct  from  him,  of  which 
he  has  to  fear.  For,  it  has  been  said  that,  when  one 
makes  even  the  smallest  difference,  there  is  fear  for 
him.  And  since,  in  the  case  of  the  wise  man,  all  cause 
of  fear  which  is  the  creature  of  avidya  has  disappeared 
like  the  second  moon  seen  by  the  ^twwVa-diseased  eye, 
it  is  but  proper  to  say  he  has  no  fear  from  any  quarter. 

He  who  knows  Brahman’s  Bliss — the  Immutable  Con- 
sciousness, wherein  there  is  no  duality  of  any  kind, — has 
no  fear  from  anything  whatsoever. — (S). 

The  duality  signified  by  the  expression  “Brahman’s 
Bliss,”  as  also  by  the  expression  “the  bliss  of  the  brahmawa 
(srotriya)” — of  him  who  has  known  Brahman  and  thereby 
become  Brahman, — is  figurative,  like  “the  duality  signified 
by  “R^hu’s  head”  ; there  being  actually  no  such  duality,  in- 
asmuch as  Brahman  is  unconditioned  (nirguwa).  This 
grandeur  of  the  brdhmawa,  of  him  who  has  known  Brahman, 
admits  of  no  increase  or  decrease,  as  it  is  his  inherent 
nature.  On  knowing  this,  he  has  no  fear  from  any 
(fuarter.  In  the  words  “He  who  knows  Brahman-Bliss  is 
not  afraid  of  any  one  whatsoever,”  the  5ruti  teaches  that 
the  fruit  of  the  knowledge  is  coeval  with  the  knowledge,  as 
the  satisfaction  resulting  from  eating  food  is  coeval  with  the 
eating : it  is  unlike  svarga,  which  has  to  be  attained  at 
some  future  time.  Since  there  is  no  other  obstacle  in  the 
way  of  moksha  except  avidy^,  the  sruti  says  that  moksha 
is  coeval  with  knowledge,  it  is  duality  which  is  the 
source  of  fear  ; and  duality  has  its  origin  in  avidy^i, ; so  that 
when  avidy&  has  been  consumed  by  the  fire,  of  vidyS.,  fear 
can  arise  from  no  quarter  whatsoever.  That  is  to  say, 


©7^  BRAHIIA-VIDVA  EXPLAlNBD.  V aUL 

wlien  avidy^has  been  removed  by  tbe  knowledge  that  our 
pure  Inner  Self  is  the  very  Paramktman,  the  Supreme- 
Self,  there  is  no  fear  from  anything  whatsoever.— (S). 

In  the  words  “Whence  all  words  recede,"  the  sruti  gives . 
us  to  understand  that  Brahman  cannot  be  signified  by  a 
word  or  a sentence  ; and  the  sruti  which  teaches  absolute 
truth  uses  the  words  “as  well  as  manas"  with  a view  to 
deny  in  the  Supreme  Atman  all  the  differentiations  that 
rf^n  be  imagined  by  mind.  Accordingly  the  sruti  denies  all 
extraneous  knowledge  of  the  Self  and  speaks  of  Brahman 
as  unconscious  of  anything  other  than  Himself : 

“This  Self  is  not  obtainable  by  explanation, 
nor  yet  by  mental  grasp,  nor  hearing  many 
times  ; by  him  whomso  He  chooses,  by  him 
is  He  obtained.  For  him  the  Self  His  proper 
form  reveals.’'  * — (S). 

This  verse  (mantra)  was  quoted  in  the  section  treat- 
ing of  the  Manomaya-kosa,  inasmuch  as  manas  is  the 
organ  of  Brahma-jndna.  There  the  Manomaya  is  by 
courtesy  regarded  as  Brahman  ; and  with  a view  to 
extol  it,  mere  fear  was  denied  in  the  words  “fears 
not  at  any  time."  But  here,  in  the  verse  treating  of 
the  non-dual  Brahman,  the  very  cause  of  fear  is  denied 
in  the  words  “is  not  afraid  of  any  one  whatsoever." 

because  all  duality  terminates  in  Brahman,  the  Inner 
ggjf^ because  the  five  sheaths  do  not  exist  apart 


* Kft(ha.  Up.  2-23. 


A^U.IX*]  'THE  UNCOKDmOKBDBKAHMAN.  ^79 

from  the  Self— as  the  serpent  terminates  finally  in  the  xope, 
this  v^se  was  quoted  by  the  sruti  in  the  section  treating  of 
the  Manomaya-kosa. 

The  wise  man  is  himself  the  Supreme  Brahman.  He 
sees  in  Himself  the  non-dual  Self.  One  alone,  without  a 
second,  he  has  no  fear,  as  there  exists  no  cause  of  fear. 

Sayana’5  explanation  of  the  verse. 

The  explanation  of  this  verse  in  the  chapter  on  the 
Manomaya  kosa  should  be  here  referred  to.  We  explain 
the  verse  further  as  follows  : — Words  can  denote  only  con- 
ditioned things  ; they  are  nevertheless  used  by  authors  to 
denote  even  the  Unconditioned  Brahman  simply  because 
He  is  an  existent  being  ; but  then  they  recede  without 
denoting  Him : their  power  of  denoting  fails  altogether. 
And  the  mind  grasps  all  supersensuous  truths  only  in  the 
wake  of  the  words,  but  not  independently  by  themselves  ; 
so  that  when  words  recede,  the  mind  also  recedes  along 
with  words.  Accordingly,  Brahman’s  Bliss  being  superior 
to  that  of  the  Hirawyagarbha,  it  is  impossible  to  speak 
or  think  of  its  extent.  Whoever  understands  the  Bliss 
which  constitutes  the  very  inherent  nature  of  Brahman, 
which  the  words  can  merely  hint  at  by  suggestion  (lakshawdi- 
vyitti),  and  which  the  mind  can  grasp  at  in  the  same 
way,  that  person  is  not  afraid  of  anything  whatsoever. 

As  quoted  in  the  chapter  on  the  Manomaya-kosa,  the 
verse  reads  “ fears  not  at  any  time''  Considering  the  context 
of  the  verse  as  quoted  there,  we  explain  it  as  follows  : He 
who  contemplates  Brahman  as  conditioned  by  the  Mano- 
maya is  not  afraid  at  any  time  either  in  this  birth  or  in  a 


680  BRAHHA-VIDYA  EXPLAINED.  [AfUmda-'  V(tUi. 

future  birth,  since  he  can  ward  off  any  fear  that  may  ever 
arise.  . But  here  in  the  case  of  the  one  who  knows,  through 
proper  instruments  of  knowledge,  the  non-dual  bliss  of 
Brahman,  the  very  cause  of  fear  does  not  exist : hence  the 
words  **  is  not  afraid  of  any  one  whatsoever.”  As  the  sruti 
says  “ from  a second  thing,  verily,  does  fear  arise,**  * the 
cause  of  fear  is  the  thing  which  lies  outside  the  Self  ; and 
such  a thing  has  no  place  in  the  non-dual  Brahman. 

Positive  and  negative  definitions  of  Brahman. 

The  author  of  the  VAkyavritti  has  said,  Having  thus 
determined  the  meaning  of  ‘Thou,’  the  student  should 
reflect  upon  the  meaning  of  ‘ That’  as  defined  by  the  sruti 
in  both  the  negative  and  positive  aspects.”  The  sruti 
has  defined  Brahman  in  His  positive  aspect  as  “ Real, 
Consciousness,  Infinite  is  Brahman.”  It  has  been  said 
above  t that,  in  thinking  of  this  positive  aspect  of  Brahman, 
one  should  assemble  in  one  array  all  such  definitions  as 
‘ Brahman  is  Bliss,’  ‘ Brahman  is  self-luminous,’  and  so  on. 
In  the  words  “ whence  all  words  recede,”  Brahman  is  de- 
fined in  his  negative  aspect.  In  reflecting  upon  this  aspect, 
the  student  should  bear  in  mind  all  such  negative  defini- 
tions as  “not  gross,  not  small,  not  short,”  as  has  been 
determined  in  the  Ved^nta-sfltras. 

(Vedanta-sutras,  III.  iii.  33). 

(Question) In  the  G&rgi-Br^hma«a,  Brahman  is  defined 
by  certain  negations  such  as  “ not  gross,  not  small,  not 
short.”  + So  also  in  the  Ka^ha-Upanishad  : “without 


* Bri.  Up,  1-4-2.  f Utde  ante  pp.  271—273.  J Bri.  Up,  3-8-8. 


AnU.llL,']  TBit  UBCbl^BltlOKltD  BlUHItAN.  6Si' 

sound, without  touch,  without  colour,  without  perishing/’* 
Similar  definitions  are  found  in  other  Upanishads.  The 
question  is : Is  it  necessary  or  not  that  the  student  of  one 
Upanishad  should  note  all  negative  definitions  given  in 
other  Upanishads  ? 

(Prma  facie  view) It  is  not  necessary  : for,  unlike  the 
attributes  such  as  reality  and  bliss,  these  negations  do  not 
constitute  the  inherent  nature  of  Atman,  and  therefore  no 
purpose  is  served  by  noting  all  the  negative  definitions. 

(Conclusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  fol- 
lows : Just  as  the  negations  contained  in  one  Upanishad 
serve  to  indicate  the  nature  of  Atman  though  they  do  not 
constitute  the  very  nature  of  Atman,  so  also,  those  nega- 
tions collected  from  other  Upanishads  serve  the  same  pur- 
pose. It  should  not  be  urged  that,  since  those  negations 
alone  which  are  contained  in  one’s  own  Upanishad  serve  to 
indicate  the  nature  of  Atman,  it  is  useless  to  note  the  nega- 
tions contained  in  other  Upanishads  ; for,  these  latter  serve 
to  strengthen  the  knowledge.  Otherwise,  even  in  the  case 
of  one’s  own  Upanishad,  it  would  be  useless  to  note  all  the 
negations  contained  therein  when  two  or  three  alone  might 
serve  the  purpose.  Therefore  all  negations  should  be  col- 
lected together. 

Brahman  is  not  denied. 

(Ved&nta-siitras,  III.  ii.  22 — 30). 

As  regards  the  negations  thus  collected  together,  there 
remains  a particular  point  to  be  discussed. 


• Op,  cit  3-15 


86 


taAa  A^viDYA  BXPuuKBD.  [Amndn^V olli, 

{Qmstion) : — ^In  the  section  of  the  Brihad4rai»yaka*Upa- 
aishad  treating  of  the  two  kinds  of  matter, — the  matter 
having  form  and  the  formless  matter,— the  sruti,  after  de- 
scribing at  great  length  the  matter  with  form  compri^g 
earth,  water  and  fire,  as  well  as  the  formless  matter  com- 
prising air  and  ether,  proceeds  to  describe  Brahman  in  the 
words  “ Now  then  is  the  instruction  * not  thus,  not  thus.’  ” 
The  question  is.  Does  Brahman  also  come  or  not  come 
within  the  sweep  of  this  negation  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — After  treating  of  the  two  kinds  of 
matter,  which  are  manifestations  of  Brahman,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  treat  of  Brahman  who  manifests  Himself  in  those 
forms  ; and  with  this  view  the  sruti  says,  * not  thus,  not 
thus.’  The  universe  being  denied  by  one  of  the  two  nega- 
tions, the  other  would  be  meaningless  if  Brahman  be  not 
denied  by  the  second  negation.  So  that,  Brahman  also 
comes  within  the  sweep  of  the  negation. 

{Coticlusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  fol- 
lows : The  second  negation  is  not  useless,  since  it  serves 
to  strengthen  the  same  idea  by  repetition.  By  this  repe- 
tition, the  sruti  teaches  that  nothing  which  can  be  perceived, 
i.  e,,  nothing  which  can  be  indicated  by  the  word  ‘thus,’ 
can  be  Brahman.  Suppose  we  do  not  understand  such  a 
repetition  here  ; then,  since  by  one  negation  alone  are 
denied  the  two  kinds  of  matter — matter  having  form  and 
matter  having  no  form — which  are  the  subject  of  treat- 
ment here  and  which  can  be  indicated  by  ‘thus,’  we  would 
have  to  legard  as  Brahman  what  remains  undenied,  namely, 
the  abh^va  or  absence  of  the  two  kinds  of  matter  as  well  as 
the  primary  avidyd.. 


Am,  /X,]  the  unconditioned  brahman.  683 

{Objection) ; — Though  we  understand  repetition  here,  the 
diflSculty  will  still  remain  unexplained  : for,  repetition  has 
unrestricted  scope  and  may  include  Brahman  within  its 
sweep. 

(Answer) : — No  ; for,  Brahman  is  not  an  object  of  per- 
ception and  cannot  therefore  be  indicated  by  the  word 
‘thus,*  which  represents  the  things  to  be  denied.  Moreover, 
if  the  sruti  which  has  proposed  to  teach  Brahman  with 
much  effort, in  the  words  “Now  then  follows  the  instruction,** 
were  to  deny  the  self-same  Brahman,  it  would  be  a mere 
self-contradiction.  The  sequel,  too,  goes  against  the  denial 
of  Brahman.  In  the  sequel  the  sruti  speaks  of  Brahman  as 
“the  Real  of  the  real,”  meaning  thereby  that  Brahman  is 
pre-eminently  and  absolutely  real  as  compared  with  what 
are  commonly  regarded  as  real,  namely,  mountains,  rivers, 
oceans,  etc.  All  this  would  go  in  vain  if  all  is  denied  including 
Brahman.  Wherefore  Brahman  does  not  come  within  the 
sweep  of  the  negation. 


CHAPTER  XI  I I . 
BEYOND  WORKS. 


The  enlisrhtened  one  is  not  afflicted  by  anxiety  about 
Sfood  and  evil. 

{The  opponent): — There  do  exist  causes  of  fear,  namely 
omission  of  righteous  acts,  and  commission  of  sinful 
ones. 

It  is  wrong  to  say  that  he  who  knows  Brahman  has  no 
fear  from  anything  whatsoever  ; for,  there  exists  a cause  of 
fear  in  the  form  of  anxiety  relating  to  dharma  and  adharma. 

(Answer) : — Not  so. 

Why? 

The  sruti  says  : — 

II  ^ II 

2.  Him,  verily,  burns  not  the  thought,  “Why 
have  I not  done  the  right  ? Why  have  I 
done  sin  ?” 

He  who  knows  (Brahman)  as  described  above  does 
not  feel  afflicted  at  heart. — Now,  it  may  be  asked,  in 
what  way  do  the  omission  of  righteousness  and  com- 


• BEYOND  works: 


685 


mission  of  sin  not  afflict  him  ?— We  answer:  At 
approach  of  death  a man  feels  an  after-compunction  at 
heart,  thinking  ‘ why  have  I not  done  the  right  act  ? ' 
Similarly,  he  may  feel  afflicted,  fearing  that  he  may  fall 
into  the  hell  and  the  like,  and  thinking  ‘ Why  have  I 
done  the  forbidden  act?’  These  two,  the  omission  of  the 
right  and  the  commission  of  sin,  do  not  afflict  him 
(who  knows  Brahman)  as  they  afflict  him  who  knows 
not  Brahman. 

Him  who  knows  the  Self  as  the  non-agent,  omission  of 
the  right  act  and  the  commission  of  sin  do  not  afflict,  inas- 
much as  all  fruit  of  action  goes  to  the  agent.  “ An  ac- 
cursed being  I am  who  while  alive  have  never  done  a good 
act ; I have  always  done  sin  so  that  fear  has  overtaken 
me  !”  It  is  such  thoughts  as  these  that  cause  fear,  at  the 
approach  of  death,  in  those  whose  mind  is  invested  with 
avidyd,  when  fatal  hiccoughs  have  overpowered  them.  It 
is  in  the  very  nature  of  the  fruit  of  an  action  that  it 
accrues  to  the  doer  of  the  act.  Good  and  evil,  which  have 
their  origin  in  him  who  knows  not,  do  not  therefore  afflict 
him  who  knows  himself  as  the  non-agent. — (S). 

At  the  approach  of  death  all  sentient  beings  feel  anxious 
in  mind  on  the  rush  of  such  reflections  as  the  following : 
Formerly  in  youth,  when  the  body  and  the  senses  were 
strong,  when  there  was  plenty  of  wealth  and  other  resour- 
ces, why  did  I not  do  sacrificial  acts,  acts  of  gift,  and  such 
other  meritorious  acts  which  are  the  means  of  attaining 
svarga  and  other  regions  of  the  kind;  and  why  did  I do  acts  of 
sin,  such  as  the  robbing  of  other  men’s  wealth,  which  will  take 
me  to  the  hell  ? Such  thoughts,  though  causing  anxiety  to 


Mi  BRAHHA'VIDYA  SXPUINBD.  [Am^O-YdK 

Ml  9t^er$,  do  aot  assail  that  man  who  has  kpowa 
B^Mioian. 

The  enllirbtenedone  derives  strength  from 
good  and  evil. 

(Question) : — For  what  reason  do  they  not  afflict  the 
wise  man  ? 

(Answer) : — Being  one  with  the  immutable  and  non-dual 
Self,  he  consumes  dharma  and  adharma,  good  and  evil,  as 
well  as  avidyli,  by  the  fire  of  knowledge,  and  dwells  in  his 
own  Self.— (S). 

The  «ruti  says : 

^ ^ ancUR  II  ^ II 

3.  Whoso  knows  thus,  these  two  as  the  Self 
does  he  cherish. 

He  who  knows  Brahman  as  described  above 
cherishes  these,— good  and  evil, — as  the  Self ; he  regards 
them  both  as  the  Supreme  Self. 

Good  and  evil  exist  and  tnanifest  themselves  to  conscious- 
ness. These  two  factors  in  their  being,  existence  and 
manifestation,  are  derived  from  the  Self ; and  whatever  else 
is  associated  with  them  as  causes  of  good  and  evil, — their 
specific  names  and  forms, — are  not  real,  as  they  are  dissociat- 
ed bom  existence  and  manifestation.  The  Self  was  origin- 
ally regarded  as  virtue  and  sin  owing  to  avidy&  ; but  now, 
the  wise  man  thinks  that  the  things  which  were  regarded 
aa  {^purcea  Off  good  and  evil  identical  with  the  Self, 


BEYOND  WORKS 


97 


and  by  this  knowledge  he  cherishes  the  Self  the  more,  and 
rejoices  at  the  sight  of  what  to  the  worldly  peofde 
appears  as  good  and  evil,  without  ever  cherishing  the  least 
fear.— (A). 


He  who  knows  Brahman  as  his  own  Inner  Setf  at  once 
burns  away  good  and  evil  generated  by  avidyft  in  the  fire  of 
the  knowledge  that  he  is  the  non-agent.  Having  thus  anni- 
hilated good  and  evil  without  any  remnant,  he  strengthens 
the  Self  the  more.  Though  strong  in  Himself,  the  Atman 
is  weakened  by  the  disease  of  avidyd.  When  the  terrible 
disease  of  avidyd  is  reduced  by  Vidyd,  the  latter  is  said  to 
make  the  Atman  strong.  W’hen  a man  is  wakened  from 
sleep,  the  objects  seen  in  his  dream-perception  are  found  to 
have  no  existence  outside  the  wakened  soul.  So  here  good 
and  evil  remain  only  as  the  One  Self  and  no  more, — (S). 

The  sruti  gives  the  reason  why  the  knower  of  Brahman 
feels  no  anxiety.  The  person  who  has  learnt  from  the  scrip- 
tures and  reason  that  good  and  evil  acts  are  the  source  of 
anxiety  cherishes  the  Self  with  a view  to  avoid  the  anxiety 
caused  by  the  acts.  He  feels  happy  in  the  conviction  that 
this  Self  is  merely  the  Witness,  but  not  the  doer  of  good 
and  evil  acts.  As  the  conviction  that  am  Brahman”  has 
altogether  destroyed  even  the  avidyd  which  is  the  cause  of 
the  whole  sawsdra  comprising  dharma  and  adharma  and 
their  fruits,  he  grows  very  strong  ; that  is  to  say,  he  is 
never  overtaken  by  dharma  and  adharma. 

(Objection)  Though  it  has  been  known  that  the  Self  is 
Brahman  and  non-agent,  good  and  evil  acts  are  necessarily 
brought  about  by  the  activities  of  the  sense-organs  and  the 


688  BRAHUA-VtDVA  EXPLAINED.  [J.ftdnd^V4l^, 

body  which  stQl  coatinae  to  be  active  : and  there  remain 
also  some  good  and  evil  acts  done  in  former  births. 

(Anstver) : — The  sruti  explains  as  follows  : 

II  9 II 

4.  Both  these,  verily,  as  the  Self  does  he 
cherish  who  thus  knows. 

The  wise  man  regards  virtue  and  sin  as  identical 
with  the  Self,  divesting  them  of  their  specific  forms, 
and  thus  cherishes  the  Self. — Who  is  it  that  cherishes 
the  Self  thus? — He  who  knows  thus,  i.  e.,  who  knows 
the  non-dual  Bliss-Brahman.  Virtue  and  sin,  looked 
upon  by  him  as  the  Self,  become  weak  and  harmless, 
and  do  not  lead  him  to  any  more  births. 

Because  the  wise  man  who  has  become  the  Real  Invisible 
Brahman  makes  out,  by  bis  right  knowledge,  that  good  and 
evil  are  both  one  with  Brahman,  therefore  he  only  cherishes 
the  Self  the  more  through  good  and  evil  ; so  that  these  can 
no  longer  disturb  his  peace.  It  is  to  the  subtle  body  that 
weakness  pertains,  and  this  is  due  to  karma.  Karma  again 
has  its  origin  in  the  agent,  etc.,  and  these  are  set  up  by  the 
ignorance  of  the  Self.  And  when  the  ignorance  which  is  the 
cause  of  weakness  is  destroyed  by  the  knowledge  that 
the  True  Inner  Self,  am  Brahman,”  he  remains  as  one  alone 
and  grows  all  the  stronger.  Such,  it  is  said,  is  the  fruit 
accruing  to  him  who  knows  his  own  Inner  Self  as  described 
above, — as  inherently  wise,  as  inherently  pure  and  inherently 
free. — (S). 


toVoNp  woftics. 


Aimf 


He  who  has  known  that  good  and  evil  actf  .^fise  anxiety 
and  that  knowledge  of  the  Self  removes  the  anxiety,  looks 
upon  good  and  evil  acts  as  the  very  Self.  That  is  to  say, 
following  the  teaching  of  the  scriptures,  he  regards  good 
and  evil  acts  in  their  aspects  as  the  Supreme  Self.  Ho 
never  regards  them  in  their  aspects  as  good  and  evil  which 
are  mere  creatures  of  Mayi.  It  is  a fact  known  to  all 
sages  who  see  the  reality.  To  the  knower  of  Brahman, 
good  and  evil  acts — whether  it  be  those  which  were  done  in 
the  past  births  or  those  which  are  done  in  the  present 
birth — do  not  exist  as  such,  as  distinct  from  his  own  Self.. 
When  such  is  the  case,  it  needs  no  saying  that  he  suffers 
no  pain  arising  from  anxiety  about  them. 


Conclusion  of  the  Anandavalli. 


II 

5.  Such  is  the  Sacred  Wisdom. 

Thus  has  been  revealed,  in  this  valli,  this  Brahma- 
vidya,  this  sacred  wisdom,  this  supremely  secret  science 
among  all  sciences,  the  science  wherein  lies  imbedded 
the  HighestGood. 


This  valli  is  spoken  of  as  the  Upanishad  because  it  direct- 
ly leads  to  the  knowledge  of  the  non-dual  Brahman.  But 
‘upanishad*  means  wisdom  itself ; and  wisdom  is  so  called 
because  it  is  by  wisdom  that  a person  approaches  {upa^  etya) 
the  non-dual  Brahman  and  attains  {ni^sad)  his  fearless  Self; 
whereas  this  sacred  Valli,  as  meant  to  impart  that  wisdom, 
is  called  Upanishad,  only  for  courtesy’s  sake,  by  those  who 
know  Brahman  and  have  abandoned  all  desires.— (3). 

87 


brah&c^-vidVa  EXPLAINED.  [Aftaiida^VMU. 

Tile  ehlisliten^  one  is  above  sin. 

^ (Vedinta-s^itras  IV.  i.  13). 

{Question) Is  the  enlightened  man  affected  or  not  by 
the  taint  of  sin  ? 

{Pfima  facie  view) : — ‘‘No  karma  is  exhausted  even  in 
hundreds  of  crores  of  eons  (kalpas)  without  its  fruit  being 
reaped  by  the  doer  : ” in  these  terms  the  scriptures  declare 
that  no  sin  is  exhausted  without  its  fruit  being  reaped  ; so 
that  even  he  who  has  acquired  knowledge  of  Brahman  is 
affected  by  the  taint  of  sin. 

[Conclusion): — As  against  the  foregoing  we  bold  as  follows: 
In  the  case  of  him  who  has  realised  the  Unconditioned 
(nirguna)  Brahman,  one  cannot  so  much  as  suspect  that  he 
will  be  affected  by  sin  ; for  he  is  firmly  convinced  that  he 
is  Brahman,  the  non-agent,  in  all  the  three  periods  of  time, 
past,  present  and  future  ; he  feels  “I  never  acted,  I do  not 
act;  I shall  never  act.’*  Certainly,  not  even  the  dull-witted 
would  ever  think  that  he  who  is  not  the  doer  of  an  act  is 
affected  by  the  results  of  the  act.  Neither  is  theknower 
of  the  Conditioned  Brahman  affected  by  sin,  inasmuch 
as  the  sruti  teaches  that  he  is  not  tainted  by  sins  and  that 
all  his  sins  perish.  That  he  is  not,  after  attaining  an  intuitive 
realisation  (s&kshdtkdra)  of  Brahman,  affected  by  the 
sins  which  may  be  supposed  to  arise  from  his  continued  out- 
ward activities  through  the  body  and  the  senses,  the  5ruti 
teaches  in  the  following  words  : 

‘'And  as  water  does  not  cling  to  a lotus  leaf, 
so  no  evil  deed  clings  to  one  who  knows  it.” 

* Chlitt.  Up. 


AnU^  IX.]  BEYOND  WORKS. 

And  the  iruti  speaks  also  of  the  destruction  of  all  the  sins 
which  accumulated,  prior  to  the  realisation  of  (Conditioned) 
Brahman,  both  here  in  this  birth  and  in  the  past  births : 

“As  the  soft  fibres  of  the  ishlka  reed,  when 
thrown  into  the  fire,  are  burnt,  thus  all  his 
sins  are  burnt.”  * 

As  to  the  assertion  that  no  karma  perishes  without  yielding 
its  fruit,  it  applies  only  to  those  persons  who  possess  neither 
the  knowledge  of  the  Unconditioned  Brahman  nor  that  of 
the  Conditioned  Brahman.  Wherefore  we  conclude  that 
he  who  possesses  a knowledge  of  Brahman  is  untainted 
by  sin. 

The  enlightened  one  is  above  good  deeds. 

(Vedibnta-sutras.  IV.  i.  14) 

{Question) Is  the  enlightened  one  affected  or  not  by 
good  deeds  (pmya)  ? 

(Prima  facie  vieiv)  \ — Though  unaffected  by  sins,  he  may 
be  affected  by  good  deeds.  As  the  good  deeds  are  enjoined 
by  the  Vedas,  they  cannot  be  opposed  to  the  Brahma- 
jn^na  which  is  derived  from  the  same  source. 

{Conclusion) As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  follows: 
The  Self  is  not  an  agent,  and,  as  such,  He  cannot  be  tainted 
by  good  deeds  any  more  than  by  evil  deeds.  As  to  him 
who  knows  only  the  Conditioned  Brahman,  the  5ruti  says  in 
the  Dahara-Vidya  that  “all  sins  recede  from  him.”  \ 


• Ibid.  5-24-3. 


t Chhd.  Up.  84-X. 


brahma-vidya  EXPLAINED.  [Anandd^Volll. 

The  sruti  here  regards  as  sins  all  the^good  deeds  other  than 
t'he  Contemplation  of  Brahman,  inasmuch  as  the  good 
deeds  belonging  to  the  category  of  interested  acts  give  rise, 
like  evil  deeds,  to  inferior  births  and  bodies  ; and  it  teaches 
that  all  good  and  evil  deeds  as  well  as  their  results 
(referred  to  in  the  passage  preceding  the  one  here  quoted) 
are  all  evil  and  recede  from  the  devotee  of  Brahman.  “Both 
these,  verily,  does  he  cross  beyond*’  : * in  these  words  the 
sruti  declares  that  the  enlightened  one  crosses  beyond 
good  and  evil  deeds  alike.  Wherefore,  we  conclude  that  he 
is  untainted  by  good  deeds  in  the  same  way  as  he  is 
untainted  by  evil  ones. 

The  indestructibility  of  the  prarabdha- karma. 

(Ved^inta-siltras,  IV.  i.  15) 

{Question)  Of  the  acts  done  prior  to  enlightenment, 
some  have  not  begun  to  yield  their  fruits  while  others  have 
given  rise  to  the  present  birth.  The  question  is.  Is  this 
latter  portion  of  the  acts  liable  to  destruction  on  the  rise  of 
knowledge  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — With  reference  to  both  the  classes  of 
acts  alike,  the  Self  is  not  the  agent,  and  therefore  they  prove 
false,  both  alike.  From  this  it  would  follow  that,  like  the 
good  and  evil  acts  which  have  not  begun  to  yield  their 
fruits,  those  which  have  begun  to  yield  their  fruits  are 
liable  to  destruction  on  the  very  dawn  of  knowledge. 

(Conclusion) The  sruti,  experience  ( anubhava  ),  and 
analogy  (yukti),  all  point  to  the  indestructibility  of  the  good 
and  evil  acts  which  have  already  begun  to  yield  their 


t Bri.  Up.  44.22, 


BEYOND  ■works; 


■Am:IX.] 


fruits.  The  sruti  says : ‘‘  For  him,  there  is  only  ’ delay  s6 
long  as  he  is  not  delivered  (from  the  body)  ; then  he  will  be 
perfect.*’  * This  passage  may  be  explained  as  fdflows : 
The  Liberation  of  him  who  has  known  the  Real,  though 
delayed,  is  not  delayed  very  long.  It  is  delayed  ciily  so 
long  as  the  vitalities  (pranas)  do  not  depart  from  the  body  ; 
and  this  is  because  the  span  of  life  which  has  been  fixed  at 
the  time  of  impregnation  (garbhadhana)  cannot  be  shorten- 
ed. And  when  the  body  and  the  vitality  part  with  each 
other,  then  he  becomes  one  with  Brahman.  Thus  the 
sruti  teaches  in  this  passage  that  the  enlightened  one  is 
subject  to  sai«5ara  till  the  close  of  the  present  body. 
The  experience  of  the  enlightefied  ones  clearly  confirms  the 
truth  of  this  teaching.  Now,  as  to  analogy  from  ordinary 
experience : Though  an  archer  is  free  to  discharge  or 
withhold  an  arrow  so  long  as  it  remains  in  the  quiver, , still, 
once  the  arrow  is  discharged,  he  becomes  helpless  ; and  the 
discharged  arrow  drops  down  of  itself  on  the  exhaustion  of 
the  force  imparted  to  it.  We  may  also  adduce  the  analogy 
of  the  revolving  motion  of  the  potter’s  wheel.  So,  in  the 
present  case,  too,  the  Brahma-jndna  may  have  power  to 
destroy  anftrabdha-karma,  i,  e,,  the  acts  which  have  not 
yet  begun  to  yield  their  fruits ; but  it  has  no  power  to 
destroy  the  ftrabdha-karma,  the  acts  which  have  already 
begun  to  yield  their  fruits.  If  the  sruti,  etc.,  do  not  admit 
the  indestructibility  of  the  &rabdha-karma,  then,  for  want 
of  a teacher,  the  wisdom-tradition  (vidyfii-sampradiya) 
would  cease  altogether.  Certainly,  it  cannot  be  held  that 
the  unenlightened  one  would  teach  wisdom  ; and  if  the  en- 
lightened one  were  liberated  at  the  very  moment  that,  he 


♦ QhhL  Up.  6—14—2. 


BRAHMA-VIDYA  B?CPlAIN|tO.  [Amn^VoM, 

came  by  knowledge,  who  would  be  the  teacher  then  ? 
Hence  the  indestructibility  of  the  good  and  evil  deeds  which 
have  already  begun  their  effects. 

The  indestructibility  and  use  of  obligatory  acts. 

(Vediinta-sutras,  IV.  i.  i6«i7). 

(Question)  Are  the  Agnihotra  (fire-worship)  and  the  like 
acts,  which  are  enjoined  as  obligatory  duties  (nitya-karma), 
liable  to  destruction  on  the  dawn  of  knowledge  ? 

{PWwfs/saV  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  Agni- 

hotra and  other  obligatory  acts  done  in  this  birth  prior  to 
the  attainment  of  knowledge,  or  in  previous  births,  are 
liable  to  destruction,  equally  with  the  interested  (kdmya) 
acts,  in  virtue  of  the  knowledge  that  Atman  is  not  the 
agent. 

(Conclusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  fol- 
lows : An  obligatory  act  is  made  up  of  two  factors,  the 
primary  factor  conducing  to  the  purification  of  chitta^  the 
organ  of  thought,  and  the  other,  a secondary  factor,  yield- 
ing svargaand  other  fruits  of  the  kind.  We  grant  that  the 
latter  is  liable  to  destruction.  But  since  the  other  factor 
which  conduces  to  the  purification  of  cliitta  has  served  its 
purpose  by  helping  the  rise  of  knowledge,  it  is  not  possible 
to  conceive  it  as  having  been  destroyed.  Indeed,  no  one 
looks  upon  rice  and  the  like  as  lost  when  consumed  as  food. 
As  to  the  obligatory  acts  done  after  the  rise  of  knowledge, 
they,  like  the  acts  done  with  a view  to  reward,  do  not  taint 
him  who  possesses  knowledge. 


dBtOND  WORKS? 


Am.  IX.] 


All  oblisfatory  acts  are  aids  to  Wisdom* 


(Vedfijnta-stitras.  IV.  i.  i8). 

{Question) : — The  obligatory  acts  which  conduce  to  the 
rise  of  knowledge  may  be  classed  under  two  heads,  those 
which  combine  contemplation  (up&.san&)  in  connection 
with  some  of  their  constituent  parts,  and  those  which  do 
not  combine  it.  The  question  is : Do  both  classes  of  obli- 
gatory acts  alike  conduce  to  the  rise  of  knowledge  ? Or  do. 
those  of  the  former  class  alone  conduce  to  it  ? 


{Prima  facie  view) : — Those  acts  which  combine  contem- 
plation in  them  are  superior,  and  therefore  they  alone 
conduce  to  the  rise  of  knowledge,  not  those  which  are 
devoid  of  contemplation. 

{Conclusion)\ — “Whatever  one  does  with  Vidya  (knowledge, 
contemplation),  that  alone  is  more  powerful,”  * The  sruti 
which,  in  these  words,  teaches  that  an  act  associated  with 
contemplation  has  an  increased  power,  implies  that  even  an 
act  which  is  unassociated  with  contemplation  has  power  ; 
otherwise,  there  would  be  no  occasion  for  the  use  of  the 
adjective  in  the  comparative  degree.  Wherefore  the  acts 
which  do  not  combine  contemplation  in  them  conduce  to 
knowledge,  as  well  as  those  which  do  combine  it,  but  only 
to  a smaller  extent  than  the  latter. 


Liberation  necessarily  accrues  from  right  knowledge. 

(Ved^inta-sutras.  III.  iii.  32) 

{Question) Does  the  knowledge  of  the  real  nature  of 
Brahman  necessarily  lead  to  moksha  or  not  ? 


# Cbbl  1-1-10. 


6915  BRAHUA'VIDYA  BXPlJltNBD.  [Anof^yalli. 

{Pfima  jack  view)  ;-rThos^,who  have  attained  knowledge 
of  Brahman  do  not  necessarily  attain  moksha.  It  is  said 
in  the  Puriinas  that,  under  the  command  of  Vishnu,  a 
Vedic  teacher,  Ap&ntaratamas  by  name,  incarnated  himself 
as  Krishna-Dvaip&yana  at  the  end  of  the  Dvdpara-yuga. 
Similarly,  Sanatkumdira  was  born  of  P&rvati  and  Para- 
mesvara  as  Skanda.  In  the  same  way,  several  others,  too, 
such  as  Vasisb^ha,  who  were  all  possessed  of  true  know- 
ledge, were  born  here  and  there  in  other  bodies,  under  the 
influence  of  a curse,  or  in  fulfllment  of  a promise,  or  of 
their  own  accord. 

[Conclusion)  these  persons  to  whom  you  have  re- 

ferred are  rulers  of  the  world  ; and  having  in  a former 
cycle  (kalpa)  worshipped  the  Supreme  Lord  by  mighty 
austerities,  they  have  attained  to  positions  of  administra- 
tive power  which  they  should  hold  through  several  births  ; 
atid  on  the  exhaustion  of  the  karma  whereof  the  fruits  are 
being  thus  reaped,  they  will  be  liberated.  And  there  being 
nothing  which  can  prevent  the  true  wisdom  from  consuming 
the  acts  which  have  not  yet  begun  their  effects,  liberation 
accrues  as  a matter  of  necessity  to  him  who  has  attained 
true  wisdom. 

Persistence  of  wisdom  through  subsequent 
incarnations. 

(Ved&nta-sutras,  IV,  i.  19). 

(Question) : — Does  or  does  not  liberation  accrue  to  those 
enlightened  souls  who  will  have  to  pass  through  several 
births  in  virtue  of  their  pr&rabdha-karma  ? 


BEYOND  WORKS. 


697 


Am.  IX.] 

{Pnma  facie  view)  .‘—There  is  no  liberation  to  the  persons ' 
who  hold  positions  of  administrative  power  ; for,  when 
many  incarnations  have  to  be  undertaken  with  a view  to 
work  out  the  effects  of  the  pritrabdha-karma,  the  true  wis- 
dom which  was  formerly  acquired  disappears  ; and,  as  a 
result  of  the  acts  done  subsequently,  a series  of  incarnations 
becomes  inevitable. 

{Conclusion) : — The  karma  which  has  commenced  its  effect 
can  only  yield  its  own  fruits  in  the  form  of  happiness  or 
misery,  inasmuch  as  it  operates  only  to  that  end.  Indeed, 
none  of  the  acts  which  were  formerly  done  conduce  to  the 
loss  of  the  true  wisdom  once  acquired  ; so  that  it  cannot  be 
supposed  that  wisdom  would  be  lost  as  a result  of  the  past 
kirma.  Neither  can  it  be  supposed  that  loss  of  wisdom 
occurs  during  the  interval  caused  by  death  ; for,  we  see 
that  wisdom  is  not  lost  during  the  interval  caused  by  sleep. 
So  that,  wisdom  persists  through  several  births  ; and  as 
the  acts  done  in  ever  so  many  births  after  the  attainment 
of  wisdom  do  not  taint  the  person,  liberation  does  accrue 
‘ to  the  rulers  of  the  world. 

Though  this  point  was  determined  in  the  third  adhy&ya 
of  the  Vedanta-sitras,  it  is  again  discussed  in  the  fourth 
adhy&.ya  by  way  of  answering  an  objection. 


88 


BOOK  III. 


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiin 


( BHRIQU-VALLI' ) 


INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN 


THE  PEACE-CHANT. 


I I 3A  frn%:  5ni%:  5rn%:  ii 

May  Brahman  protect  us  both ! 

May  He  give  us  both  to  enjoy  ! 
Efficiency  may  we  both  attain  ! 
Effective  may  our  study  prove  ! 

Hate  may  we  not  (each  other)  at  all  ! 
Om  ! Peace  ! Peace  ! Peace  ! * 


•Fur  connnciitH  on  the  Peaco-Chaiit,  Vide  antcpj),  196-199. 


chapter  1. 

HOW  TO  INVESTIQATE  BRAHMAN. 


The  purpose  of  the  sequel. 

Having  created  the  universe  from  akfca  down  to  the 
{^ysiqal  bodies  <annamaya)  and  then  entered  into 
that  very  universe,  Brahman,  ‘‘the  Real,  Conscious- 
ness, and  the  Infinite,”  manifests  Himself  in  the  form 
of  so  many  individual  beings  as  it  were  ; so  that  one 
should  know  “I  am  that  very  Brahman,  that  Bliss, 
who  is  quite  distinct  from  all  created  objects,  who  is 
’nvisible”  and  so  on  ; and  it  is  with  a view  to  produce 
this  (knowledge)  that  He  is  spoken  of  as  having  en- 
tered into  the  very  objects  which  He  created.  When 
a person  knows  thus,  good  and  evil  deeds  do  not  lead 
him  to  any  more  births.  This  is  the  main  drift  of  the 
teaching  of  the  Ananda-vallt. 

The  Ananda-valli  has  treated  of  that  knowledge  which  is 
identical  with  the  inherent  Consciousness  of  Brahman,  the 
Real,  Consciousness,  the  Infinite,  the  True  Inner  Self— that 
inherent  knowledge  of  Brahman  which  alone,  penetrating 
the  mind  that  has  been  prepared  to  receive  it  by  the  teach- 
ing of  the  5ruti,  can  eradicate  the  root  of  ignorance. — (S). 

And  there  ends  the  Brahma- vidyi.  Now,  then, 
with  a view  to  teach  what  the  means  to  Brahma-vidyi 


/.]  TO  INVESTIGATE  BRAHMAN.  7O3 

is,  the  sruti  proceeds  in  the  sequel  to  treat  of  devotion 
[tapas),  as  also  of  the  upAsanas  of  the  Annamaya  and 
the  lik'j. 

It  Is  true  that  in  the  S&mhit!-upanishad  (5iksh&-valil) 
works  and  contemplation  were  spoken  of  as  means  to  Brah- 
ma*vidy&  ; but  they  are  comparatively  remote  and  indirect 
means  (bahiranga-sadhana)  to  Brahma-vidya.  As  the  vichara 
or  investigation  of  Brahman,  which  is  the  proximate  means 
to  Brahma- vidya,  was  not  treated  of  in  the  5iksha-valU,  the 
present  section  proceeds  to  treat  of  the  subject.  The  pro- 
cess of  investigation  of  Brahman  being  treated  of,  the 
subsidiary  processes  of  manana  (reflection),  etc,  will  also 
have  been  treated  of. 

The  bearing  of  legends  in  the  Upanishads. 

With  a view  to  extol  Brahma- vidy&,  the  sruti  starts  with 
a story  as  follows  : 

^ I ^ I sNtfl  ^ 

in  II 

I.  Bhrigu,  that  son  of  Varuwa,  approached 
Varuwa,  his  father,  saying  “Sir,  teach  me 
Brahman” 

‘That’  shewsthat  Bhngu  was  a celebrated  personage. 

There  was  a Maharshi  (great  sage),  Bhrigu  by  name,  the 
founder  of  a family  (Gotra-pravartaka).  He  was  a celebrated 
personage  often  referred  to  in  the  mantra  and  the  brihma»a 
portions  bfthe  Veda.  “The  descendants  pfBhnguand 


XNVBSTIQATION  OF  BRAHMAN. 

A&giras  shall  coasecrate  Fire  addressing  Hixn  consecrate 
yhee,  0 Lord  of  sacrifices,  for  the  sacrifices  of  the  Bhrigus 
and  the  Angiras.*’*  * 

Seeking  to  know  Brahman,  He  approached  Varuf^a, 
uttering  the  mantra  **adhthi  bhagavo  brahma,''  which 
' means,  ^‘Sir,  teach  me  Brahman.”  i , 

He  who  seeks  for  the  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Brah- 
man should  approach  the  Master,  the  Guru,  with  • faith 
and  devotion,  pure  in  mind,  and  uttering  the  appropriate 
mantra.  With  a feeling  of  revulsion  from  all  pleasures 
ranging  below  the  bliss  of  moksha,  Bhrigu  asked  Varu/xa, 
“Teach  me  the  Supreme  Brahman.” — (S). 

The  story  speaking  of  the  master  and  his  pupil  points  to 
the  truth  that  Brahma- vidya  can  be  acquired  only 
through  a master  (guru).  The  sruti  says  elsewhere  ,“That 
knowledge  alone  which  is  learnt  from  a teacher  leads  to 
real  good.”  + — (S). 

That  one  should  go  to  a teacher  for  Brahma- vidyd.  is 
taught  in  the  5ruti  as  follows  : . . 

“For  a knowledge  of  That  One,  he  should  go 
to  a Guru  alone.” 

The  mantra  means:  Ponder  well  over  Brahman, 
Ponder  over  Brahman  in  mind  and  teach  me. 

The  story  given  here  serves  to  extol  Brhhma-vidyd, 
Msaying  that  it  was  imparted  by,  the  Tat  her  his 

dear'  feon.  / ' .u.r,..  1 

. f TM.  Brdh.  1-1-4  t Chhi  Up. -49-3,  .! 


AnU.  /.]  HOW  TO  INVESTIGATE  BRAHMAN.  70S 

That  such  stories  are  intended  to  extol  Vidy&  ha^  been 
established  by  discussion  in  the  Ved^ta-siitras 

(Ved4nta-stitras,  HI.  iv.  23 — 24.) 

During  the  Asvamedha  or  horse-sacrifice,  the 
Adhvaryu,  the  chief  priest,  should  assemble  at  nights  the 
king  (the  sacrificer)  and  his  family  and  tell  them  some 
Vedic  legends  and  other  chaste  stories.  This  narration  is 
called  the  pariplava.  Now  a question  arises  as  to  whether 
the  legend  of  Y^jwavalkya  and  his  two  wives,  the  legend 
of  Janaka  and  his  assembly  of  sages,  and  other  such 
legends  occurring  in  the  Upanishads,  are  meant  for  the 
pdriplava  enjoined  in  the  sruti. 

{Prima  facie  view)  They  must  have  been  meant  for  the 
pdriplava.  If  meant  for  that  purpose,  the  legends  in  the 
Upanishads  would  subserve  the  purposes  of  ritual ; and 
this  is  to  serve  a better  purpose  than  the  mere  extolling  of 
Vidy^  or  knowledge. 

{Conclusion)  : — The  legends  of  the  Upanishads  cannot 
have  been  meant  for  the  pdriplava,  inasmuch  as  the  legends 
to  be  so  narrated  are  specified  : the  legend  to  be  recited  on 
the  first  day  shall  be  about  Manu,  the  king,  son  of  Vivasvat; 
on  the  second  day,  about  Yama,  the  king,  son  of 
Vivasvat ; and  so  on.  If  the  legends  in  the  Upanishads 
are  explained  as  meant  to  extol  the  Vidy&s  with  which  they 
are  connected,  then  there  will  be  a unity  of  purpose  running 
through  the  legends  and  the  Vidy^is,  which  are  treated  of 
together  in  the  same  sections.  Therefore  we  conclude 
that  the  upanishadic  legends  serve  the  purpose  of  extolling 
the  Vidy^s. 


7o6  investigation  of  brahman.  [Bhrigu-VaUi, 

OatewEsn  to  tbe  knowledge  of  Brahman. 

The  Sruti  proceeds  to  show  how  Vanuia  taught  his  son 
the  way  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahman. 

?iN 

2.  To  him  he  said  this ; Food,  life,  sight, 
hearing,  mind,  speech. 

When  the  son  approached  the  father  in  due  fashion, 
the  father  taught  the  son  in  the  following  words  : food, 
life,  sight,  hearing,  mind,  speech.  • That  is  to  say,  he 
referred  to  the  food  or  the  body,  to  the  life  within  the 
body,  i e.,  the  eater,  as  also  to  the  organs  of  perception 
such  as  sight,  hearing,  mind  and  speech, — he  referred 
to  these  as  the  gates  to  the  perception  of  Brahman. 

Food : the  upidAna  or  material  cause  of  the  physical 
body.  Life : Pri»a,  the  vital  air  functioning  in  five  different 
ways.  Sight y etc.,  are  the  organs  of  perception. — (S). 

Food,  life,  etc.,  are  mentioned  here  with  a view  to  point 
out  an  easy  way  to  knowledge,  namely,  the  method  of 
anvaya-vyatireka,  i,  e.,  of  “ conjoint  presence  and  absence.” 
It  leads  us  to  this  conclusion:  the  body,  etc.,  are  inconstant 
and  cannot  therefore  be  the  Self,  whereas  the  Self  is 
constant  and  must  therefore  be  Brahman. — (S). 

Or,  it  may  be  that  the  words  “food,  life,  sight,” 
etc.,  serve  to  define  Brahman, — the  Infinite,  the  Unutter- 
able,-ras  one  with  our  Inner  Self,  the  Pratyagitman.  This 
explanation  is  also  consonant  with  the  sruti  which  describes 
Brahman  as  “ the  Life  of  life.”  The  accusative  case,  too, 
in  which  the  words  ‘food  {anm)\  etc.,  are  used,  here,  can  be 


HOW  TO  INVESTIGATE  BRAHMAN. 


Am.  /.] 


J67 


better  explained  when  they  are  regarded  as  definitions  of 
Brahman.~(S). 


To  Bhngu  who  approached  him  uttering  the  mantra» 
father  taught  the  gateway  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahman. 
Food,  life  and  mind  are  the  material  cause  of  the  Anna- 
maya,  the  Pr&wamaya,  and  the  Manomaya  sheaths.  Sight, 
hearing  and  speech,  too,  are,  like  the  mind,  gateways  to 
the  knowledge.  The  sruti  means  to  include  among  these 
the  organs  not  mentioned  here,  such  as  touch  and  other 
organs  of  sensation,  as  also  the  hand  and  other  organs  of 
action.  When  we  say  “the  moon  is  at  the  tip  of  the  branch’* 
the  tip  of  the  branch  pointing  to  the  moon  forms  an  index 
to  the  moon,  and  so  serves  as  a means  to  the  perception 
of  the  moon.  Similarly,  food,  life,  etc.,  are  means  to  the 
perception  of  Brahman  hid  in  the  cave,  by  way  of  hinting 
at  Him.  That  they  are  means  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahman 
is  clearly  taught  in  the  Bnhad§,ra;^yaka  as  follows  : 

“ They  who  know  the  life  of  life,  the  sight  of 
the  sight,  the  bearing  of  hearing,  the  mind  of 
the  mind,  they  have  comprehended  the 
ancient,  primeval  Brahman.” 


It  is  easy  to  know  Brahman  through  food,  vital  air, 
etc., — to  know  Him  as  the  Food,  the  Life,  etc., — because 
Brahman  is  the  basic  Reality  underlying  all  illusory  mani- 
festations such  as  food,  life,  etc.  That  is  to  say.  Brahman 
should  be  sought  through  food,  the  vital  air,  etc.,  which 
are  identified  with  the  Ego. 


♦ Bn."  Up,  44.18, 


7o8  investigation  of  brahman,  ^hfigu-  Valli' 

Brahman  defined  indirectly. 

I m ^ I ^ 5rR!Tj% 

I 5iq^qf^Rr(%  i I gfg^  ii  \ \\ 

3.  To  him,  verily,  he  said : Whence  indeed 
these  beings  are  born  ; whereby,  when  born, 
they  live ; wherein,  when  departing,  they  enter  ; 
That  seek  thou  to  know  ; That  is  Brahman. 

Having  taught  that  these — food,  etc., — are  the  gate- 
ways, Varuwa  taught  Bhrigu  the  definition  of  Brah- 
man.— What  is  that  definition  ? — The  definition  of 
Brahman  is  this : Brahman  is  that  wherefrom  these 
beings,  from  Brahm^i  down  to  plants,  are  born  ; where- 
by, when  born,  they  live — i.  they  maintain  vital 
functions, — and  grow  ; and  wherein,  when  departing, 
they  enter  u e,,  wherewith  they  attain  unity  at  dissolu- 
tion. That  is  to  say,  Brahman  is  that  wherewith  no 
object;in  the  creation  can  ever  cease  to  remain  in  unity, 
(t.  e.,  wherewith  they  remain  one  always),  at  birth, 
during  their  stay  and  also  at  dissolution. 

Be  it  known  that  Brahman  is  that,  wherefrom  none  of  the 
beings,  from  Brahmd,  down  to  unmoving  objects,  can  ever 
exist  apart,  at  birth,  during  stay  or  at  dissolution. — (S). 

Now  the  sruti  proceeds  to  give  the  definition  of  Brahman 
and  to  shew  that  investigation  is  the  means  to  the  know- 
ledge of  Brahman.  Seeing  that  Bhfigu,  on  hearing  of  the 
gateways  to  the  knowledge  of  Brabmail,  was  very  anxious 


dffUi  /•]  HOW  TO  INVESTIGATE  BRAHMAN.  7O9 

• 

to  know  Brahman,  Varuwa,  the  most  friendly  and  credible 
teacher  as  he  was,  taught  Bhrigu  further,  without  any  ques- 
tion on  his  part.  Brahman  is  that  wherefrom  are  born  all 
these  creatures,  comprising  the  five  primary  elements  of 
matter  such  as  ^kisa,  as  also  all  sentient  beings  possessed  of 
material  bodies  from  the  Hirawyagarbha  down  to  plants, — 
the  word  ‘indeed’  pointing  to  the  well-known  teaching  of  the 
sruti  which  elsewhere  says  “He  these  worlds  did  create;” — 
that  One  whereby  the  creatures,  when  born,  are  sustained  ; 
that  One  wherein  all  these  beings  enter  when  under- 
going destruction  ; just  as  foam,  waves,  bubbles,  etc., 
have  their  birth,  being,  and  dissolution  in  the  one  ocean. 

Investigfation  of  Brahman  is  necessary. 

Do  thou  seek  to  know  particularly  that  One,  viz., 
Brahman.  That  is  to  say,  do  thou  reach  Brahman 
thus  defined,  through  the  gateways  of  food,  etc.  The 
sruti  elsewhere  says  that  these  form  the  gateways  to 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman  : 

‘They  who  know  the  life  of  life,  the  sight 
of  sight,  the  hearing  of  hearing,  the  mind 
of  the  mind,  they  have  comprehended  the 
ancient,  primeval  Brahman.”  ^ 

Do  thou  seek  to  know  Brahman  thus  defined,  that  One 
who  is  not  born  or  destroyed  when  the  universe  is  born  or 
destroyed. — (S). 

Do  thou  investigate  that  Thing  which  is  the  cause  of 
the  world’s  birth,  being  and  destruction  ; and  this  Thing 
is  Brahman,  of  which  thou  hast  asked. 


• Bri.  4-4-18. 


710  iNVBSTroATioN  oiP  BRAHHAN.  [Bhrigu^V^U, 

The  necssstty  for  an  investigation  of  Brahman  has  been 

discussed  as  follows  in  the  Ved&nta-sutras  ; 

* 

(Ved&nta-siitras  L i.  i). 

{Qmtion) : — 'The  Atman,  verily,  my  dear,  should  be 
seen;  Pe  should  be  heard,  reflected  and  meditated 
upon”  : * in  these  words  the  sruti,  referring  to  the  percep- 
tion of  Atman  as  an  end,  prescribes  'hearing’  as  the  means 
to  that  end.  'Hearing  (sravawa)*  means  that  process  of 
investigation  which  leads  to  the  conviction  that  VeddiUtic 
texts  treat  solely  of  Brahman.  Now  a doubt  arises  as  to 
whether  there  exists  a necessity  for  a science  which  Ireats  of 
the  principles  of  investigation  into  the  nature  of  Brahman. 

{Pritna  facie  view) There  exists  no  necessity  for  such  a 
science;  for,  there  is  nothing  to  be  discussed,  and  no  pur- 
pose to  be  gained.  Discussion  is  necessary  where  there  is 
room  for  doubt ; but  no  doubt  arises  as  to  the  nature  of 
Brahman.  If  a doubt  arises  at  all,  is  it,  we  ask,  about  His 
aspect  as  Brahman  or  about  His  aspect  as  the  Self  ? It 
cannot  be  about  His  aspect  as  Brahman,  for  the  sruti 
has  determined  it  as  "Real,  Consciousness,  Infinite.”  t 
Neither  can  it  be  about  the  aspect  as  the  Self,  for,  this  too 
is  determined  in  the  consciousness  of  "I.”  Do  you  say  that 
this  consciousness  of  'I’  is  an  illusion,  inasmuch  as  it 
refers  to  the  illusory  self  ? It  cannot  be  so,  for,  the 
illusoriness  of  this  self  cannot  be  made  out.  It  is  not 
possible  to  explain  how  illusion  can  cause,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  mother-of-pearl  and  silver,  the  notion  of 


•Bri.  Up.  2-4-5* 


t Tftit.  Up.  2-1, 


AnU.  /•].  TO  INYKSTIGAT®  9RAK^M.  7*^ 

mutual  identity  of  the  Self  and  the  body,  seeing  that 
they  are  so  entirely  opposed  to  each  other  like  light 
and  darkness,  the  one  being  sentient  and  the  other  insenti- 
ent. Thus,  since  no  doubt  can  arise  as  to  what  has  been 
determined  by  the  sruti  and  our  self-consciousness,  there  is 
no  occasion  for  any  discussion.  Neither  do  we  see  that 
any  purpose  is  served  by  the  discussion  ; for,  no  liber- 
ation is  seen  to  follow  even  when  the  nature  of  Brahman, 
the  Self,  is  determined  as  revealed  in  the  sruti  and  in  our 
Consciousness.  Wherefore,  Brahman  being  not  worth 
investigation,  there  exists  no  necessity  for  the  science. 

(Coitcj^sion): — There  does  exist  a necessity  for  the  science, 
because  there  is  a subject  worth  discussion  and  a purpose 
served  by  it.  Brahman,  the  Self,  is  a thing  which  admits  of 
doubt,  owing  to  the  mutual  contradiction  between  therruti 
and  the  consciousness  of  ‘ 1.  * In  the  words  “This  one,  the 
Self,  is  Brahman,”  the  sruti  teaches  that  Brahman  who 
is  without  any  attachment  whatever  is  identical  with  the 
Self,  whereas  the  consciousness  of  ego  in  such  forms  as 
“I  am  a man,”  comprehends  the  Self  as  one  with  the  body. 
And  the  inexplicability  of  the  illusion  only  proves  the  ex- 
istence of  the  illusion.  Therefore  there  is  a subject  of  doubt 
here,  and  it  forms  the  subject  of  discussion.  That  liberation 
results  from  a determinate  knowledge  of  the  subject  can  be 
clearly  made  out  both  from  the  sruti  and  from  the 
experience  of  the  wise.  Therefore,  inasmuch  as  we  have 
to  investigate  Brahman  by  way  of  investigating  the 
meaning  of  Vedantic  texts,  there  exists  a necessity  for  the 
science. 


♦ Mand^kya-Up. 


714  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  \BhngU^VidH. 

Here  a doubt  arises  as  to  whether  Brahman  is  the  author 
of  the  Veda  or  not. 

{Prima facie  view): — Brahman  is  not  the  author  of  the 
Veda,  for,  the  Veda  is  eternal.  In  one  of  the  Vedic  verses, 
a sage  prays  to  his  God  for  inspiration  to  praise  Him  with 
the  Eternal  Speech  ; and  the  Eternal  Speech  is  none  other 
than  the  Veda.  The  smriti  says  : 

**In  the  beginning  •was  projected  by  the  Self- 
born  (Brahma)  the  Veda,  the  Eternal  Divine 
'Word,  whence  all  this  evolution  proceeds.” 

Therefore  Brahman  is  not  the  author  of  the  Veda. 

• 

[Conclusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as 
follows  : It  is  meet  that  Brahman  is  the  author  of  the 
Veda ; for,  we  are  given  to  understand  that  the  Veda 
came  forth  without  any  effort,  like  breath.  ‘‘From  that 
Adorable  One  (Yajua),  who  is  worshipped  by  all,  the  /?ik 
and  S&man  were  born  : ” * thus  the  sruti  clearly  teaches 
that  the  Veda  was  born  of  Brahman,— here  called  Yajna 
or  the  Adorable  One,  who  is  worshipped  in  all  sacrifices. 
Having  come  forth  from  Brahman  without  any  effort  on 
His  part,  it  is  distinguished  from  the  productions  of  such 
authors  as  Kftlid^sa  who  first  conceived  of  the  things  to  be 
treated  of  in  their  works  and  then  composed  those  works ; 
and  so  far,  it  is  unlike  any  work  produced  by  a person. 
Being  reproduced  at  each  creation  exactly  as  it  was  in  the 
preceding  creation,  it  is  eternal,  as  running  in  one  conti- 
nuous stream.  When  it  is  made  out  that  Brahman  is  the 
author  of  the  Veda  which  treats  of  the  whole  scheme  of  the 
universe,  it  is  also  made  out  that  He  is  Omniscient. 


• PuruBha-Siikta. 


Am,  i.]  HOW  TO  INVESTIGATE  BRAHMAN.  ?I5 

The  Veda  is  the  sole  authority  rei^ardins:  Brahman. 

Having  thus  justified  the  definition,  the  discussion  in 
the  same  section  of  the  Vedinta-sfitras  proceeds  to  deter- 
mine that  Revelation  (Agama)  is  the  sole  authority  regard- 
ing Brahman. 

(Question) : — “Of  that  \upanishadic  Being,  verily,  I 
ask : ” * these  words  addressed  by  YAjnavalkya  to  Sdkalya 
give  us  to  understand  that  the  Supreme  Brahman  is  a 
being  knowable  through  the  Upanishads.  Now  a doubt 
arises  as  to  whether  Brahman  can  be  known  through  sen- 
suous perception,  &c. 

(Pfima  facie  view)  \ — As  an  objective  reality,  Brahman 
must,  like  all  objects  such  as  a pot,  come  within  the  ken 
of  sensuous  perception,  etc. 

(Conclusion) : — Being  devoid  of  colour,  taste,  etc..  Brah- 
man does  not  come  within  the  scope  of  sensuous  perception  ; 
and  being  devoid  of  invariably  associated  attributes,  He 
cannot  be  known  through  inference  (anumana)  ; being  not 
similar  to  any  thing  known.  He  cannot  be  known  through 
comparison  (upamftna).  He  can  be  known  only  through 
the  Vedas  ; for  ‘Aupanishada  ’ means  * knowable  only 
through  the  Upanishads’  ; and  the  sruti  expressly  denies 
other  sources  of  knowledge  in  the  words  “ He  who 
knows  not  the  Veda,  knows  not  Him,  the  Great  One.” 

(Objection)  :-~According  to  the  Bhashyaka.ra  (SankarR- 
chirya),  who,  in  his  commentary  on  the  Vtdanta-sfitras, 
I.  i.  2.,  says  “5ruti,  etc.,  and  also  experience,  etc.,  are 
authorities  here,  each  in  its  way,”  Brahman  is  also  known 
through  other  sources  of  knowledge. 


♦ Bn.  Up.  3-9-26. 


7x8  iNvasTiGAtioN  OF  BRAHMAN.  [Bhrigu^Vctlli. 

:-jlt  is  trao  : Brahoian  is  primarily  ^istertained 
solely4brough  the  Vedas,  and  then  experience  and  inference 
are  let  in  as  corroborative  evidence,  in  explaining  the 
teaching  of  the  sruti.  Wherefore  Brahman  is  known  solely 
through  the  Veda. 

The  Upanishad  is  the  authority  rej^arditig  Brahman* 

(Ved&nta«sdtras.  I.  i.  4.) 

(Question) : — Do  the  Ved^otic  texts  (upanishads)  treat 
mainly  of  Brahman,  or  do  they  treat  only  of  the  agent,  the 
Devatd,  &c.,  connected  with  the  ritual  ? 

{ Prima  facie  view)  The  texts  that  treat  of  jiva  mainly 
refer  to  the  nature  of  the  agent  concerned  with  the  rituals ; 
those  that  treat  of  Brahman  mainly  refer  to  the  DevatA  to 
be  worshipped  through  the  rituals  ; and  those  that  treat  of 
creation  mainly  refer  to  the  things  employed  in  the  rituals. 
Thus,  the  Vedintic  texts  will  subserve  the  performance  of 
the  ritual.  If  they  treat  of  Brahman  in  the  main,  then 
they  would  not  subserve  the  ritual  and  would  therefore  be 
of  no  use.  Wherefore  the  main  aim  of  the  Veddntic  texts 
is  to  throw  light  on  the  nature  of  the  agent,  the  Devat&, 
an<^  other  accessories  connected  with  the  ritual. 

(Conclusion) The  Vedantic  texts  treat  mainly  of  Brah- 
man ; for,  as  occurring  in  an  entirely  different  section,  it 
cannot  be  helJ  that  they  are  subsidiary  to  the  ritual  by  way 
of  describing  the  agent  and  other  factors  connected  with  the 
ritual,  while  the  six  marks  which  go  to  determine  what  the 
main  theme  of  a section  is  show  that  the  VedAntic  texts 
treat  mainly  of  Brahman. 


Anu.  /.]  HOW  TO  tNVESTIGATB  BBAHBfAN.  JIJ 

The  six  marks  (liffgas)  by  which  the  main  theme  of  a 
section  can  be  determined,,  are  enumerated  by  teachers  of 
old  as  follows  : 

j f Upakrama,  commencement. 

1 ifpasamhdra^  conclusion. 

2.  Ahhyhsa^  reiteration. 

3.  ApUrvatdf  unprecedentedness. 

4.  Phala^  fruit. 

5.  Afthavdda^  explanatory  statement. 

6.  Upapatti,  illustration. 

1.  The  sruti  begins,  ‘*In  the  beginning  there  was  Exis- 
tence alone,  one  only  without  a second’*,  * and  concludes 
as  follows : “All  this  has  its  being  in  It ; It  is  the  True ; It 
is  the  Self ; and  That  Thou  art.”  + The  agreement  between 
the  commencement  and  conclusion  of  a section,  both  of 
which  alike  refer  to  Brahman,  constitutes  one  mark. 

2.  Reiteration  is  the  frequent  repetition  of  “ That, 
Thoii  art.” 

3.  Unprecedentedness  consists  in  Brahman  being  inacces- 
sible to  any  other  pramte  or  instrument  of  knowledge. 

4.  The  specific  jrnii  is  ol  ?\\, 

from  the  knowledge  of  the  One. 

5.  The  explamtory  statements  are  those  which  speak  of 
Brahman  as  creating,  sustaining,  destroying,  entering  into, 
and  governing  the  universe. 

6.  Illustration  consists  in  adducing  such  analogical  instan- 
ces as  clay. 


♦ Ohhd.  Up.  6-2-1.  t Ohha.  Up.  6-8-7. 


7X3  INVJtSTlGATIO;^  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BhngU^  VoUi  • 

^y  tl^i^ks  we  have  to  coacludethat  Brahman  is 
the  theme  pf  the  Upanishads.  It  cannot  be  contended 
that  this  knowledge  is  of  no  use,  as  not  subserving  the  ritual ; 
for,  it  is  possible  that  cessation  of  evil  may  follow  know- 
ledge, as  in  the  case  of  the  knowledge  “this  is  not  a serpent, 
it  is  only  a rope.” 

Injunction  is  not  the  main  theme  of  the  Upanishads. 

(Ved&nta-shtras  L i.  4). 

{Question) Do  the  Upanishads  mainly  enjoin  knowledge? 
or  do  they  treat  mainly  of  Brahman  ? 

[Prima  facie  view) Some  VedS^ntins  maintain  as  follows : 
Though  the  Ved&ntic  texts  treat  of  Brahman,  they  do  not 
end  there  alone.  On  the  other  hand,  they  first  treat  of  the 
true  nature  of  Brahman  without  producing  immediate 
consciousness  of  Brahman,  and  then  enjoin  the  achievement 
of  immediate  cognition  of  Brahman.  Thus  alone,  as 
ordaining  action,  the  Vedantic  texts  may  well  be  spoken  of 
as  Sdstra,  commandment.  Moreover,  after  enjoining 
sravasa  or  knowledge  acquired  by  a study  of  the  texts,  the 
Upanishads  clearly  enjoin  the  realisation  of  Brahman  in 
one’s  own  experience  by  means  of  reflection  and  meditation. 
Wherefore  the  main  purpose  of  the  Vedanta  is  to  enjoin 
knowledge. 

(Conclusion)  : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as 
follows  : Knowledge  cannot  form  the  subject  of  an  injun- 
ction ; for,  knowledge  cannot  be  done  or  undone  or  other- 
wise done,  and  does  not  therefore  depend  on  man’s  will. 
And  the  Sistra  is  so  called  not  necessarily  because  it  com- 


iin«.  /.]  HOW  TO  INVESTIGATE  BEAHMAH. 

mands  (sds  = to  command)  duties  ; but  it  may  be  so  called 
also  because  it  expounds  (sams  = to  relate)  the  nature  of 
what  exists  in  nature.  It  cannot,  moreover,  be  maintained 
that,  an  indirect  knowledge  of  Brahman  having  been  first 
acquired  through  the  Vedintic  texts,  the  Vedanta  then 
enjoins  the  realisation  of  Brahman  in  experience  by  means 
of  reflection  and  meditation.  Like  the  words  ^‘Thou  art 
the  tenth  man,”  the  texts  can,  by  themselves,  give  rise  to 
an  immediate  knowledge  ; and  it  is  only  prior  to  the  acquir- 
ing of  the  immediate  knowledge  of  Brahman  through  the 
Ved&ntic  texts  that  reflection  and  meditation,  which  are 
forms  of  activity  dependent  on  man’s  will,  are  enjoined, 
with  a view  to  check  the  rise  of  false  notions  and  to  remove 
the  idea  that  absolute  unity  is  an  impossibility.  Where- 
fore the  Ved&ntic  texts,  such  as  “That,  Thou  art,”  end  by 
treating  of  Brahman. 

The  threefold  process  of  investisration. 

This  investigation  into  the  meaning  of  the  Ved^intic  texts 
with  a view  to  determine  the  real  nature  of  Brahman  is 
enjoined  here  in  this  Upanishad  in  the  words  “ That,  seek 
thou  to  know.”  The  same  injunction  occurs  in  another 
Upanishad  which  reads,  “ The  Self  should  be  heard, 
reflected  and  meditated  upon.”*  The  meaning  of  this 
passage  is  given  in  a passage  of  the  smnti: 

“ He  should  be  heard  through  the  words  of 
thesruti,  and  reflected  upon  by  reasoning ; and 
when  reflected  upon.  He  should  be  meditated 
constantly.  These  are  the  means  to  the  per- 
ception of  the  Self.” 


* Bri.  Up.  2-4^5, 


7^0  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BhrigU^YMt. 

' The  PudUni  also  says  : 

^‘Now,  O eminent  sages,  Sravana  is  the 
mere  determination  of  the  main  drift  of  all 
the  Vedantic  texts  as  shewn  by  such  marks 
as  upakrama,  * &c.,  under  the  guidance  of  a 
beloved  teacher.  Manana  means  the  act  of 
reflecting  upon  that  teaching  by  applying  to 
it  such  course  of  reasoning  as  will  go  to  sup- 
port the  teaching.  Nididhydsana  means  one- 
pointedness  of  mind  in  Sravana  and  Manana, 
Sravana,  O sages,  is  the  direct  cause  of  the 
rise  of  knowledge,  whereas  reflection  and 
meditation,  which  are  calculated  to  eliminate 
foreign  elements,  are  indirect  causes,  while  the 
control  of  the  mind  and  the  senses,  and  the 
like,  constitute  the  necessary  conditions  of 
investigation. 

These  three  processes  of  study,  reflection  and  meditation 
are  enjoined  under  the  designations  of  learning  (p&w^fitya), 
childhood  (b&Iya)  and  saintliness  (mauna),  in  the  Kahola- 
Brihmawa  which  reads  : 

“ Let  a Brdhmawa,  after  having  fully  attained 
learning,  seek  to  abide  in  childhood  ; and 
having  fully  attained  learning  and  childhood, 
he  then  becomes  a saint ; and  after  having 
fully  understood  saintliness  and  unsaintliness, 
he  becomes  a Brdhmafia.*’  f 


• Vido  anie  p.  717, 


t Bri,  Up.  3-5-1. 


Anu.  /.]  How  TO  Investigate  beahman^ 

That  is  to  say,  on  completing  the  three  processes,  his  true 
nature  as  one  with  Brahman  manifests  kself  in  him,  and  he 
becomes  a Brdhmam  in  the  literal  and  primary  sense  of  the 
word.  Here  the  word  ‘ childhood,*  as  implying  purity  of 
mind  which  is  one  of  the  essential  conditions  of  the  process 
of  reflection,  stands  for  manana. 

Necessity  of  mental  purity. 

(Ved^nta-sutras,  III.  iv.  50). 

{Question)  :-~The  Upanishad  says  ‘ Let  a Br4hma;ia 

seek  to  abide  in  childhood.’  Does  ‘ childhood’  here  mean 
the  period  of  life  so-called,  or  an  unregulated  course  of 
life,  or  purity  of  mind  ? 

{Prima  facie  view) : — The  word  ordinarily  means  a parti- 
cular period  of  life  ; but  then  it  cannot  form  the  subject  of 
an  injunction.  Then  let  us  understand  it  in  the  sense  of 
unregulated  course  of  action  and  speech.  But,  ‘childhood’ 
can  never  mean  purity  of  mind. 

{Conclusion) As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  fol- 
lows : ‘ Learning  ’ and  ‘ saintliness’  stand  for  sravawa  or 

study  of  the  scriptures  and  nididhyasana  or  deep  medita- 
tion on  the  Ved^ntic  teaching.  As  occurring  between  these 
two,  ‘ childhood’  must  stand  for  manana  or  reflection.  And 
purity  of  mind  is  an  essential  condition  of  this  process, 
since,  when  influenced  by  feelings  of  attachment  and  hatred 
or  by  sense  of  honor  and  disgrace,  or  by  such  other  pas- 
sions, a person  is  unable  to  reflect  and  check  the  outward 
course  of  the  mind.  If  ‘childhood’  is  understood  in 
the  sense  of  ‘ behaviour  of  a child,’  it  may  as  well  mean 
purity  of  mind  as  unrestricted  course  of  action  and  speech, 

91 


722  INVESTIGATION  OP  BRAHMAN.  [BhftgU-  Valli. 

—both  alike  being  associated  with  a child.  But  the 
child-age  and  unrestricted  life  are  of  no  use  in  the  process  of 
reflection ; on  the  other  hand,  they  are  quite  inimical  to  it, 
inasmuch  as  the  mind  which  is  quite  uncultured  or  en-, 
grossed  in  external  activities  makes  reflection  altogether 
impossible.  Wherefore  ‘childhood’  is  here  used  in  the 
sense  of  purity  of  mind,  not  in  the  other  two  senses. 

Necessity  of  Meditation. 

(Veddnta-Siitras,  III.  iv.  47 — 49). 

In  the  Kabola-Brdihmawa  it  is  said  : 

“ Let  a Brihmawa,  after  having  fully  attained 
learning,  seek  to  abide  in  childhood;  and 
having  fully  attained  learning  and  childhood, 
he  then  becomes  a saint ; and  after  having 
fully  understood  saintliness  and  unsaintliness, 
he  becomes  a Br&hman.”  * 

The  meaning  of  this  passage  may  be  explained  as  follows  : 
Since  the  highest  end  of  man  is  to  be  Brahman,  a person 
seeks  to  attain  to  that  state.  To  this  end,  he  should  first 
attain  full  learning  by  way  of  determining  the  main  drift  of 
the  teaching  of  the  upanishads  ; and  then,  remaining  like  a 
child,  without  such  feelings  as  attachment  and  hatred,  he 
should  strive  to  remain  constantly  brooding  over  the  argu- 
ments with  a view  to  dispel  all  idea  of  impossibility  as  to 
the  teaching  of  the  Upanishads.  Then  having  completed 
learning  and  reflection  he  becomes  a saint  {muni)» — Now,  the 


# Tlri  Tin  ^ 


Anu.  /.]  HOW  TO  INVESTIGATE  BRAHMAN.  723 

question  arises  as  to  whether  saintliness  (maum)  is  en- 
joined here  as  an  essential  step. 

(Prima  facie  view)', — It  is  not  an  essential  step,  inasmuch  as 
the  words  of  the  sruti  do  not  convey  an  injunction.  Neither 
can  we  make  out  that  the  sruti  means  an  injunction  here  ; 
for,  being  comprehended  in  panditya^  mama  is  not  a thing 
to  be  freshly  enjoined.  The  word  ^pdnditya'  means  know- 
ledge as  also  ‘ mauna‘  (from  man— io  know).  So  mauna  is 
not  enjoined  in  this  connection. 

{Conclusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  fol- 
lows : As  a repetition  through  the  word  * mauna,*  of  learn- 
ing or  knowledge  (pawiitya)  already  mentioned  serves  no 
purpose,  the  word  means  here  constant  devotion  to  knowledge^ 
which  has  not  been  already  taught ; and  by  understanding 
in  this  connection  the  words  seek  to  abide”  occurring  in 
the  previous  clause,  we  can  make  out  an  injunction  ; and 
constant  devotion  to  knowledge  serves  a definite  purpose, 
as  it  conduces  to  the  removal  of  strong  dualistic  tendencies 
(visan^s)  which  are  ingrained  in  the  mind.  Wherefore 
saintliness  (mauna)  which  means  the  same  as  deep  medi- 
tation (nididhyasana)  is  enjoined  in  this  connection. 

Investigation  to  be  continued 
till  intuition  is  attained. 

(Vedanta-sutras,  IV.  i.  1-2) 

[Question)  -Are  the  several  steps— such  as  sravawa— in 
the  process  of  investigation  to  be  carried  on  once  only, 
or  are  they  to  be  repeated  as  often  as  necessary  ? 

[Prima  facie  “Once  observed  the  command  of 

the  scriptures  has  been  obeyed,”  This  is  the  principle  laid 


NVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BkrigU^  VulU, 


7H 

down  in  regard  to  the  sacrificial  rites,  such  as  Pray&ja,  en- 
joined in  the  Vedas.  On  the  same  principle,  it  will  be  enough 
if  the  several  steps  in  the  process  of  investigation  have  been 
once  gone  through. 

{Conclusion): — As  against  the  foregoing  contention  we  argue 
as  follows.  The  principle  enunciated  above  applies  to  those 
acts  whose  ultimate  fruits  lie  beyond  our  ken  ; whereas  here 
we  can  make  out  the  result  of  the  investigation  to  be  the 
attainment  of  the  s&kshdtkara  or  an  intuitive  knowledge  of 
Brahman,  which  is  a visible  result.  On  the  principle  that 
it  is  unreasonable  to  imagine  an  invisible  result,  when  a 
visible  result  can  be  made  out,  we  hold  that  Srava?;a,  etc., 
should  be  repeated  till  the  result  is  attained,  just  as  it  is 
held  that  rice  should  be  threshed  till  the  husk  is  removed. 

Brahman  as  the  cause  of  the  universe. 

Frequent  repetition  of  the  process  of  investigation  com- 
prising the  study  of  texts,  etc.,  leads  to  an  intuitive  know- 
ledge of  Brahman  defined  above  in  the  w^ords  “Whence  all 
these  beings  are  born,”etc.  The  word  “whence”  here 
refers  to, the  cause  of  the  birth,  etc.,  of  all  beings,  namely 
Brahman,  and  shews  that  Brahman  is  both  the  material 
(upSd^na)  and  the  efficient  (nimitta)  cause.  Brahman  is  here 
defined  as  the  cause,  not  only  of  the  birth  of  the  universe, 
but  also  of  the  sustenance  and  dissolution  of  the  universe. 
He  is  described  as  the  cause  of  the  sustenance  of  beings 
with  a view  to  shew  that  He  is  not  a mere  efficient  cause 
like  the  weaver  of  a cloth.  To  shew  that  He  is  not  a mere 
accidental  cause  ( asamavayi-k4ra»a ) like  the  union  of 
threads.  He  is  described  as  the  cause  of  dissolution.  To 
describe  that  He  is  the  cause  of  the  birth,  sustenance  and 


HOW  TO  INVESTIGATE  BRAHMAN. 


Am.  I.] 


dissolution  of  the  universe,  is  tantamount  to  saying  that  He 
is  the  efficient,  the  accidental,  as  well  as  the  material  cause 
of  the  universe,~-all  in  one. 


{Objection) : — It  is  nowhere  taught  that  the  bhdtas  or 
root-elements  of  matter  have  a birth  ; and  as  all  material 
beings  are  born  of  the  elements  of  matter,  Brahman  cannot 
be  the  material  cause  of  the  universe. 

(Answer) : — Not  so;  for,  the  sruti  teaches  that  the  root- 
elements  of  matter  have  had  birth.  We  are  conscious  that 
earth  exists,  that  water  exists,  and  so  on,  and  thus  we  see 
that  the  idea  of  existence  runs  through  all  elements  of  matter 
as  we  perceive  them;  so  that,  existence  is  the  material  cause 
of  the  elements  of  matter.  And  this  existence  is  Brahman. 
The  elements  of  matter  are  only  the  forms  through  which 
Brahman  constitutes  the  cause  of  material  objects,  just  as,  in 
the  form  of  a clod,  clay  becomes  the  cause  of  a pot.  But  it 
is  existence  which  is  the  material  cause  of  the  universe  as 
clay  is  of  the  pot,  inasmuch  as  we  find  existence  running 
through  all  material  things  as  experienced  by  us. — The  un- 
enlightened, for  instance,  regard  that  the  material  cause  of  a 
cloth  consists  of  several  threads,''even  though  it  is  one  long 
thread  of  which  the  cloth  is  woven. 

As  against  the  theory  that  §.kdsa,  time,  etc.,  are  eternal, 
we  hold  that,  like  pots  and  trays,  they  must  have  had  a birth 
since  they  are  conceived  as  distinct  from  other  objects  of 
our  experience  (and  belong  as  such  to  the  world  of  duality 
and  phenomena). 

Brahman  as  omniscient  and  omnipotent. 

The  universe  that  has  been  created  is  of  utmost  va- 
riety, and,  we  cannot  explain  this  except  by  supposing  that 


736  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [ BkrigU-  Vulll 

Brahman,  its  Creator,  is  omniscient  and  omnipotent. 
Certainly  no  person  other  than  one  who  possesses  requisite 
knowledge  and  power  can  build  mansions  of  wonderful  de- 
signs.— Though  Brahman,  who  is  without  sense-organs, 
does  not  possess  such  instruments  of  knowledge  as  sensuous 
perception  through  which  all  things  are  cognised,  still, 
having  regard  to  the  sruti  and  reasoning,  we  should  admit 
that  Brahman  is  all-knowing.  The  sruti  speaks  of  Brah- 
man as  one  *‘who  is  all-knowing  and  all-wise.*'  The  same 
thing  may  be  made  out  by  reasoning  as  follows  : The  con- 
sciousness (chaitanya) which  is  reflected  in  all  transfor- 
mations of  MAyA  as  objects  of  cognition  constitutes  what  we 
call  the  experience  of  those  objects.  As  Brahman’s  consci- 
ousness is  the  basic  reality  underlying  all  those  phenomenal 
manifestations  which  are  called  objects  of  cognition,  it  may 
be  readily  seen  that  Brahman  possesses  knowledge  of  all  the 
things  of  the  present  moment.  Though  the  objects  of  the 
past  as  well  as  the  modifications  of  MAya  corresponding  to 
them  disappeared,  impressions  of  these  latter  are  retained,  as 
in  our  own  case,  as  memories  of  the  objects  of  past  experi- 
rience,  which  are  also  transformations  of  MAyA;  and 
through  His  consciousness  being  reflected  in  them,  He 
possesses  knowledge  of  all  the  things  in  the  past.  Similarly, 
as  a potter  has  a clear  conception  of  the  pot  even  prior  to 
making  it,  so  Brahman  possesses  a knowledge  of  all  that  is 
to  happen  in  future,  as  the  transformations  of  His  mAya. 
Wherefore  from  the  stand-point  of  reasoning,  we  can  make 
out  that  Brahman  is  omniscient. 

That  He  possesses  all  powers  is  taught  both  in  the  sruti 
and  in  the  smnti.  The  sruti  says : “ His  Supreme  Power 


1— 9, 


Anu.  /.]  HOW  TO  INVESTIGATE  BRAHMAN. 

is  many-sided ; ” * and  the  smnti  also  says ; 

“ There  are  in  all  things  potentialities  which 
are  unthinkable,  but  of  whose  existence  there 
is  ample  proof.  So,  there  are  potentialities, 
such  as  those  of  creation,  inherent  in  Brah- 
man, as  heat  is  in  fire.**  + 

To  define  Brahman  as  the  cause  is  to 
define  Him  indirectly. 

This  omnipotent  Brahman  is  defined  as  the  cause  of  the 
birth,  etc.,  of  the  universe.  Though  birth,  etc.,  pertain 
to  the  universe,  the  causality  connected  therewith  per- 
tains to  Brahman,  and  therefore  the  definition  given 
above  holds  good.  It  should  not  be  urged  that  if  caus- 
ality, which  means  association  with  an  act,  should,  as 
the  defining  mark,  constitute  an  inherent  attribute  of 
Brahman  like  the  luminosity  of  the  moon,  it  would  detract 
from  the  immutability  of  Brahman.  Causality — we  say — 
pertains  to  Brahman  through  His  up^dhi,  and,  as  such, 
constitutes  an  indirect  definition  of  Brahman.  When,  for 
instance,  Devadatta’s  house,  is  defined  as  the  one  on  which 
a crow  is  perched,  this  feature  of  being  perched  upon  by  a 
crow  does  not  constitute  an  inherent  attribute  of  the  house, 
inasmuch  as,  on  the  departure  of  the  crow,  there  is  no  idea 
that  the  house  is  wanting  in  any  of  its  parts  ; so  that  the 
feature  of  being  perched  upon  by  the  crow  is  a purely 
accidental  attribute  of  the  house  and  constitutes  but  an 
indirect  definition  of  Devadatta’s  house.  So  also  here; 
causality  is  a feature  of  Brahman  due  to  His  accidental 
connection  with  the  birth,  etc.,  of  the  universe,  and  consti- 
tutes but  an  indirect  definition  of  Brahman. 


* iSve.  Up.  6— S.  t Vislmuparawa  1~3 — 2, 


738 


INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BhrigU-VcUH. 


This  definition  is  not  incompatible  with 
Brahman’s  non-duality. 

This  feature  of  Brahman  is  illusory  and  does  not  detract 
from  Brahman’s  non-duality.  In  such  cases  as  ‘ the  serpent 
is  a rope,  * ‘ the  silver  is  the  mother-of-pearl  the  illusory 
features,  such  as  serpent  and  silver,  are  used  as  the  defining 
marks  of  the  rope  and  the  mother-of-pearl,  because  of  an 
illusory  association  between  the  two ; so  can  causality  be  a 
defining  mark  of  Brahman. 

Maya  as  Brahman’s  coefficient. 

Brahman  is  regarded  as  the  cause,  only  in  so  far  as  He 
is  the  basis  of  illusion,  while  it  is  MAy^i  which  is  directly 
concerned  with  the  change  (vikara) ; and  this  sort  of 
Brahman’s  causality  does  not  detract  from  His  uncon- 
cernedness. As  Existence  and  Consciousness,  Brahman  is 
present  throughout  the  whole  universe  ; and  as  the  basic 
changing  principle,  Mkyk  is  also  present  throughout  the 
universe;  so  that  both  together  constitute  the  material 
cause  of  the  universe.  If  we  are  to  determine  which  of  the 
two  is  the  prominent  factor  in  the  causality,  it  would 
depend  upon  the  stand-point  of  view  from  which  the  matter 
is  considered.  We  may  view  them  as  two  cords  entwined 
together  into  one  string,  or  as  a being  and  his  potentiality, 
or  as  illusion  and  the  basic  reality  underlying  it.  In  a rope 
made  up  of  two  strings,  the  two  strings  are  the  material 
cause  of  the  rope,  and  are  equally  prominent ; on  this 
analogy  some  regard  Brahman  and  May^  as  of  equal  pro- 
minence as  the  material  cause  of  the  universe.  There  are 
others  who,  on  the  analogy  of  fire  and  its  burning  power, 
regard  Brahman  as  the  more  prominent  factor.  When  we 
say  that  fire  burns,  it  is  the  burning  power  of  the  fire  that 


MOW  TO  IMVBSTIGATB  BRAHUAM. 


Am.  /.] 


739 


achieves  the  act  of  burning  ; still,  inasmuch  as  the  powet 
depends  for  its  being  on  its  possessor,  prominence  is  given 
to  fire  ; so  also,  as  a mere  potentiality,  is  regarded  as 
secondary  in  reference  to  Brahman  who,  as  the  possessor 
of  MayA,  is  regarded  as  the  primary  cause.  Some  others, 
again,  assign  prominence  to  Mliyfi.  on  the  analogy  of  a rope 
mistaken  for  a serpent.  Though  the  serpent  has  no  form 
apart  from  that  of  the  rope,  still,  at  the  time  of  illusion, 
the  rope  is  altogether  ignored  and  the  serpent  is  promi- 
nently present  in  consciousness.  On  all  hands,  the  decla- 
ration of  the  sruti  that  Brahman  is  the  cause  of  the  uni- 
verse applies  to  Brahman  conditioned  by  M^iya. 


Devotion  is  the  essential  condition  of  Brahmavidya* 

?r  cRtOTrr  II  » II 

4,  He  resorted  to  devotion. 

Having  learned  from  his  father  the  gateways  to  the 
perception  of  Brahman  as  welf  as  the  definition  of 
Brahman,  Bhrigu  betook  himself  to  devotion,  tapas, 
as  the  means  to  the  perception  of  Brahman. 

{Question) ; — Whence,  then,  this  belief  of  Bhrigu, 
that  devotion  is  the  means  to  the  perception  of  Brah- 
man ? 

{Answer) : — Because  of  the  incomplete  teaching. 
Varuwa  taught  the  gateways  to  the  perception  of  Brah- 
man, such  as  food,  as  also  the  definition  of  Brahman, 
“ whence  these  beings...”.  This  teaching  indeed  is 
incontplete  ; for.  Brahman  has  not  been  described  ^is 


739 


INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [ BhHgU-  VoUt. 


He  is  in  Himself.  Differently  indeed  should  Vayruna 
have.taught  Brahman  to  his  son  who  was  so  anxious 
to  know : he  should  have  taught  what  Brahman  was 
in  Himself,  ‘ Brahman  is  this,  He  is  so  and  so.^  But 
he  did  not  describe  Brahman  in  that  way  ; on  the 
contrary  the  teaching  was  incomplete.  So,  Bhngu 
understood  that  his  father  had  certainly  in  view  yet 
another  means  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahman.  And 
he  hit  upon  devotion  as  the  particular  one  in  view 
because  it  is  the  most  effective  means  of  all.  It  is  in- 
deed a well-known  truth  that  of  all  specific  means  to 
the  respective  specific  ends,  devotion  (tapas)  is  the 
most  effective  means. 

Even  after  teaching  what  Brahman  was  in  Himself— that 
food,  life  &c.,  is  Brahman, — the  father  gave  an  indirect 
definition  of  Brahman  in  the  words  ‘‘  whence  all  these 
beings  are  born,”  etc.  If  the  father  had  regarded  that  his 
teaching  of  Brahman  was  complete  when  he  had  taught 
that  Brahman  was  one  with  one’s  own  Inner  Self,  he  would 
not  have  given  subsequently  the  indirect  definition  of 
Brahman.  Accordingly,  seeing  that  Brahman  was  not 
completely  taught,  and  believing  therefore  that  his  father 
had  certainly  in  view  some  appropriate  means  to  the  end, 
Bhrigu  betook  himself  to  devotion,  though  not  taught  by 
the  father  to  do  so.  And,  of  all  means,  he  resorted  to 
tapas^  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  most  effective  means,  as  the 
smriti  says, 

“ \\^hatever  is  hard  to  be  traversed,  whatever 
is  hard  to  be  attained,  whatever  is  hard  to  be 
reached,  whatever  is  hard  to  be  performed, 


Anil*  /.]  HOW  TO  INVESTIGATE  BRAHMAN.  731 

all  this  may  be  achieved  by  devotion  (tapas) ; 
for  devotion  possesses  a power  which  it  is 
difl&cult  to  surpass.”*— (S). 

Therefore  Bhngu  hit  upon  tapas  as  the  means  to  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman,  though  not  taught  by  his 
father. 

And  the  particular  mode  of  here  meant  is  the 
composure  or  concentration  (samddh^na)  of  the  ex- 
ternal and  internal  organs  of  knowledge,  inasmuch  as 
that  forms  the  doorway  to  the  realisation  of  Brahman. 

“ And  one-pointedness  of  the  mind  and 
the  sense-organs  is  indeed  the  highest  de- 
votion. It  is  superior  to  all  dharmas  and 
it  is  the  Supreme  Dharma,  they  say.’' 

This  is  the  subjective  or  internal  (fi.dhy&tmika)  tapas^  one 
which  is  appropriate  to  the  end  here  in  view.  But  even 
such  kinds  of  tapas  as  are  generally  known  to  people,  com- 
prising acts  of  self- mortification  in  body  and  mind,  are 
helpful  though  as  a remote  means  to  the  end  in  view.— (S). 

Or,  the  tapas  here  meant  is  the  meditating  upon  the 
subject  by  the  method  of  anvaya-vyatireka,  of  agreement 
and  difference,  since  this  can  lead  to  the  knowledge  “ I am 
Brahman.”  Vy^isa  has  said  : 

“ Who  am  I ? Whose  or  whence  ? What 
will  one  become  and  how  ? Thus  should  the 
aspirant  of  liberation  ever  enquire,  seeking  to 
achieve  the  purpose  of  life.” 

Accordingly,  for  a seeker  of  moksha,  this  is  the  appropriate 


* Manu.  XI.  ^39. 


INVESTIGATJON  OF  BRAHMAK^  [BhrigU-V^Uli. 

iapaSf  as  it  is  conduciva  to  salvation.  Even  the  definition 
of  Brahman  given  here  in  the  words  “ whence  verily,  these 
beings  are  born**  etc.,  shews  that  this  kind  of  tapas  is  the 
one  meant  here  : for,  in  these  words,  the  sruti  directs  at- 
tentioc^  to  the  application  of  the  method  of  anvaya-vyati- 
rekathus;  the  creatures  have  birth,  &c.,  and  are  there- 
fore not  the  Atman,  whereas  Brahman  is  devoid  of  birth, 
&c.,  and  is  therefore  the  Atman. — (S). 

Devotion  {tapas)  means  the  duty  of  the  fourfold  fiLsrama  or 
religious  life,  which  is  the  means  to  Brahma-jndna.  It 
has  no  doubt  been  shewn  in  the  Veddnta-sutras  III.  iv. 
36—38  that  even  those  acts — such  as  japa  or  mere  recita- 
tion of  sacred  formulas,  fasting  (upav^sa),  divine  worship, 
and  such  other  acts  of  piety  to  which  any  man  may  resort 
— which  lie  outside  the  duties  of  the  four  recognised 
disramas,  lead  to  Brahmajuana ; but  in  III.  iv.  39,  it  has 
been  settled  that  devotion  in  one  of  the  four  recognised 
orders  of  religious  life  is  superior  to  devotion  outside  the 
four  recognised  orders.  The  word  tapas  (devotion)  is  applied, 
in  the  sruti  and  the  smnti,  to  the  observance  of  the  duties 
prescribed  for  the  four  recognised  orders.  Of  the  duty  of  a 
brahmachArin  it  is  said,  “ study  of  one’s  scriptures  is 
tapas  indeed** ; of  the  duty  of  a gnhastha  or  householder, 
“ It  is,  verily,  tapas,  they  say,  that  one  gives  away  one*s 
property  ” ; of  the  duty  of  a Vdnaprastha  or  forest-dweller, 
“ there  is  no  higher  tapas  than  fasting  ” ; and  the  duty  of  a 
sa;;}nylLsin  is  thus  spoken  of : 

* “ And  one-pointedness  of  mind  and  the  senses 

is  indeed  the  highest  tapas*' 


HOW  TO  tNVBSTIGATB  BBAHMAM. 


Am.L] 

The  study  of  scriptures  supplies  the  autbwtative  source 
of  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  ; by  acts  of  charity  and  gift^ 
one  attains  vividish^  or  a desire  for  knowledge,  as  the  sruti 
says,  “ they  attain  a desire  for  knowledge,  by  sacrifice  and 
gift ; ” fasting,  as  is  well  known,  acts  as  a check  tipon  the 
imperiousness  of  the  senses,  and  the  sruti  declares  that 
concentration  is  the  direct  means  to  knowledge : “ But  He 
is  seen  through  sharp  intelligence.’*  * Accordingly  Bhtigu 
betook  himself  to  devotion  in  the  fourth  order  of  life,  as  a 
sawnyasin,  having  renounced  all  concern  with  ritual,  and 
engaged  in  the  concentration  of  the  mind  and  the  senses. 

The  sruti  recognises  the  order  of  celibates. 

In  the  Ved^nta-siitras  III.  iv.  1-17,  it  is  settled  that 
Self-knowledge  is  the  independent  means  to  moksha.  And 
this  Self-knowledge  is  easy  of  acquisition  in  the  case  of  him 
who  belongs  to  the  order  of  celibates.  The  next  section  of 
the  Ved&nta-sAtras  establishes  that  celebates  form  a recog- 
nised §,5rama  or  order  of  religious  life. 

(Vedanta-siitras,  III.  iv.  18—20). 

[Question) Is  there  a recognised  order  of  celibates  or 
no  ? 

[Prima  facie  view) There  is  no  recognised  order  of  reli. 
gious  life  ; for,  no  such  order  is  enjoined  in  the  sruti.  The 
Chhandogya-npanishad  says,  “There  are  three  branches  of 
Law : sacrifice,  study  and  charity  are  the  first,  austerity 
the  second,  and  to  dwell  as  a religious  student  in  the  house 
of  a tutor  is  the  third.”t  Here  the  Upanishad  merely 


* 3-12. 


t Op.  cit,  2-23-1. 


734  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BhUgU-  Valli. 

m&ntions  three  orders  of  life,  namely,  the  order  of  house- 
holders, (by  referring  to  their  duties  such  as  sacrifice),  the 
order  of  forest-hermits  (by  referring  to  their  duty  of  aus- 
terity), and  the  order  of  life-long  religious  students  ; no  in- 
junction is  expressly  conveyed  by  the  words  of  the  sruti. 
Neither  can  we  argue  that,  as  being  otherwise  unknown, 
these  three  orders  of  life  are  here  enjoined  ; for,  the  sruti 
censures  the  abandonment  of  the  householder’s  duty  of 
fire-worship,  in  the  words  “ The  murderer  of  a son  indeed 
is  he  who  allows  the  sacred  fire  to  become  extinct.”*  When 
the  smnti  speaks  of  four  stages  of  religious  life,  it  has  in 
view  the  blind  and  the  lame  who  are  not  qualified  for  the 
householder’s  duty.  Certainly,  a blind  man  is  not  quali- 
fied for  a rite  which  involves  the  act  of  seeing  the  clarified 
butter  and  other  such  acts  ; nor  is  a lame  man  qualified  for 
a rite  involving  jumping  and  other  such  motions.  There- 
fore it  will  not  do  for  one  whose  sight  and  other  organs  are 
sound,  to  resort  to  a life  of  celibacy,  as  a means  to  Self- 
knowledge. 

(Conclusion) : — The  life  of  celibacy  is  a recognised  order 
of  religious  life.  Though  it  is  not  expressly  enjoined,  it  is 
possible  to  make  out  that  it  is  enjoined,  inasmuch  as  it  is 
mentioned  there  as  a thing  not  already  known.  It  cannot 
be  urged  that  it  involves  the  sin  of  a child-murder ; for,  it  is 
only  a householder  who  incurs  the  sin  when  he  abandons 
the  sacred  fire.  Further,  it  is  wrong  to  say  that  the  life  of 
celibacy  is  intended  for  the  lame  and  the  blind  ; for,  those 
who  are  not  meant  to  lead  the  householder’s  life  are  men- 
tioned separately  elsewhere,  and  the  life  of  celibacy  is  en- 


♦ Tait.  Saw,  2-2-5. 


Am.  HOW  TO  IN VBSTiGATB  BRAHMAN.  73^ 

joined  on  them : “ Then,  again,  whether  a man  is  engaged 
in  vows  or  is  not  engaged  in  vows,  whether  a man  has  ab- 
andoned sacred  fire  or  has  kept  no  fires  at  all,  on  whatever 
day  he  becomes  disgusted  with  the  world,  that  self-same 
day  should  he  wander  out  Neither  is  it  by  mere  im- 
plication that  we  learn  that  the  life  of  celibacy  also  is  meant 
for  those  whose  organs  of  sight,  etc.,  are  sound  ; for  the 
J4b§ila  sruti  expressly  says : Having  completed  the  stu- 

dent-life, he  should  become  a householder  ; from  the  house- 
hold, he  should  become  a forest-dweller,  and  then  wander 
out.”  Wherefore  the  order  of  celibates  is  a recognised  one. 

No  descent  from  a higher  to  a lower  stage 
is  permitted. 

(Vedanta-shtras,  III.  iv.  40). 

(Question) Is  descent  from  a higher  to  a lower  stage  of 
religious  life  allowed  ? 

(Prima  facie  view) : — Just  as  one  may  ascend  from  a lower 
to  a higher  stage  at  will,  so  also  a man  may  descend  from  a 
higher  to  a lower  stage, — from  the  fourth  to  the  third,  and 
so  on,— either  on  account  of  attachment  or  on  account  of  his 
greater  faith  in  a former  stage  of  life. 

(fonclusion ) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as 
follows : In  the  first  place,  attachment  should  not  be  allow- 
ed any  sway,  since  it  has  its  root  in  illusion.  Neither 
should  one  be  led  by  faith  in  the  duties  of  a former  stage  of 
life ; for  such  duties  are  not  enjoined  with  reference  to  a 
man  belonging  to  a higher  order,  and  do  not  therefore  con- 
stitute ‘ duties  ’ at  all  with  reference  to  him.  Certainly  a 


* Jabalft  Up.  4. 


0F  E^AUfttAN.  VMtt* 

mili's  duty  iiot  determined  merely  by  his  capacity  and 
faith ; on  the  other  hand,  his  duty  consists  in  what  is 
enjoined  on  him.  Moreover,  in  the  words  ‘‘thence  he 
should  not  return  the  sruti  insists  on  ascent  to  a higher 
stage  by  way  of  forbidding  descent  to  a lower  one.  And 
the  custom  of  the  wise  does  not  sanction  descent,  as  it 
sanctions  ascent.  Wherefore  no  descent  is  allowable. 

Penance  for  deviation  from  the  path  of  celibacy. 

(Vedinta-stitras,  III.  iv.  41-42). 

(Question) Is  there  a penance  for  the  purification  of  one 
who  deviates  from  the  path  of  celibacy  ? 

(Prima  facie  view)  No  penance  can  purify  a man,  who, 
having  taken  a vow  of  life-long  studentship  and  celibacy 
deviates  from  the  path  of  celibacy  by  intercourse  with  a 
woman  ; for  the  scriptures  say : 

“ As  to  the  man  who,  having  ascended  to  the 
path  of  life-long  chastity,  again  strays  from  it, 

I do  not  see  by  what  penance  he  can  be  puri- 
fied.” 

It  cannot  be  urged  that  the  sruti  prescribes  a penance  in 
the  words,  “ when  a student  of  Veda  has  had  intercourse 
with  a woman  let  him  sacrifice  an  ass  for,  this  penance 
is  prescribed  in  the  case  of  an  upakurvaxia-hfahmachdrin,  one 
who  takes  a temporary  vow  of  chastity  as  a condition  of  the 
Vedic  study.  Wherefore  in  the  case  of  the  Naish^hika- 
brahmachArin,  ue,,  in  the  case  of  him  who  strays  from  the 
vow  of  perpetual  celibacy,  there  can  be  no  penance. 


Anu,  /.]  HOW  TO  INVESTIGATE  BRAHMAN.  737 

{Conclusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing,  we  hold  as  fol- 
lows : — Just  as,  in  the  case  of  one  who  takes  a temporary 
vow  of  chastity,  the  tasting  of  flesh  and  intoxicating  liquor 
constitutes  a minor  sin  (upa-pitaka),  so  also  in  the  case  of 
one  who  treads  the  path  of  life-long  celibacy,  intercourse 
with  a woman  other  than  his  tutor’s  wife  constitutes  only  a 
minor  sin,  not  a major  sin  (mah5,-pd,taka)  ; so  that,  through 
penance  and  reformatory  sacraments,  purification  is  attain- 
able. If  penance  be  allowed  for  deviation  from  celibacy, 
on  the  ground  that  it  is  a minor  sin,  as  not  enumerated 
among  the  major  ones,  it  may  be  asked,  how  are  we  to  ex- 
plain the  text  quoted  above,  which  says  I do  not  see  by 
what  penance  he  can  be  purified  ” ? We  answer  that  it 
merely  inculcates  the  necessity  of  great  care  in  the  observ- 
ance of  the  vow  ; hence  the  words  “ I do  not  see,”  but 
not  that  there  exists  no  penance.  And  the  penance  for  the 
sin  is  none  other  than  the  sacrifice  of  an  ass,  it  being  the 
violation  of  chastity  which  has  to  be  atoned  for,  in  this  case 
as  in  the  other.  Similarly,  a penance  is  prescribed  when 
a forest-dweller  (vdnaprastha)  or  a wanderer  (parivr^tjaka) 
deviates  from  his  path  ; 

‘‘  The  forest-dweller,  when  he  has  violated  his 
vow,  shall  undergo  the  Krichchhra  penance  of 
twelve  days,  and  grow  a large  grove  of  plants ; 
the  mendicant  shall  proceed  like  the  forest- 
dweller,  except  that  he  shall  not  grow  the 
soma  plant.” 

Penance  ensures  purity  only  in  future  life. 

(Ved^nta-sutras,  III.  iv.  43). 

{Question) Is  the  one  so  purified  by  penance  to  be 

93 


73(8  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BhrtgU-VGlli^ 

admtt^  into  the  society  of  the  orthodox  ? Or  is  he  to  be 
excomijQunicated  7 

{Prim  facie  view) : — Since  his  sin  has  been  washed  away 
by  penance,  he  may  be  admitted  into  the  society  of  the 
orthodox  ; otherwise,  the  purification  is  of  no  avail. 

{Conclusion) It  may  be  that  he  is  purified  for  the  future 
life  ; but,  as  the  scriptures  say  “ I do  not  see  by  what  pen- 
ance he  can  be  purified,”  he  is  not  purified  for  the  present 
life  : and  consequently  the  orthodox  shall  avoid  all  inter- 
course with  him. 

Devotion  to  Brahman  is  incompatible  with  works. 

Since  devotion  to  works  in  the  several  stages  of  religion  s 
life  leads  the  devotee  to  superior  worlds  and  does  not  con- 
stitute the  means  to  knowledge,  it  follows  that  devotion 
through  concentration  and  the  like,  accompan’ed  by  cessa- 
tion of  all  works,  is  alone  the  means  to  knowledge,  as 
established  in  the  Vedanta-sutras. 

(Veddiuta-sutras,  III.  iv.  18-20). 

[Question)  : — The  sruti,  having  spoken  of  “ three  branches 
of  the  Law,”  says  that  all  those  who  duly  observe  the 
duties  of  the  several  stages  of  life  attain  to  purer  and 
happier  worlds,  and  then  teaches  that  devotion  to  Brahman 
is  the  means  to  moksha,  in  the  words  “ whoso  dwells 
firmly  in  Brahman  attain  immortality.”*  Now  the  ques- 
tion arises  as  to  whether  this  Brahma-nish^hi  or  devotion 
to  Brahman  is  possible  for  him  who  treads  the  path  of 
works  leading  to  happier  worlds. 


* Chha  9, .9, 3.9,. 


739 


Jm.  /.]  ■ HOW  TO  INVESTIGATB  BRAHMAN. 

(Prima  facie  view) : — Devotion  to  Brahman  is  possible 
even  for  him  who  treads  the  path  of  works  with  a view  to 
attain  to  happier  worlds  ; for,  it  is  possible  for  one  to 
devote  himself  to  Brahman  at  spare  moments  after  per- 
forming the  acts  pertaining  to  the  order  to  which  he 
belongs.  Certainly,  there  is  no  injunction  to  the  effect 
that  he  who  desires  to  attain  worlds  shall  not  know  Brah- 
man. 'Wherefore  devotion  to  Brahman  is  possible  for  all 
disramas,  orders  of  religious  life. 

[Conclusion) : — As  against  the  foregoing  we  hold  as  fol- 
lows : — Brahma-nish^hi  or  devotion  to  Brahman  consists 
in  steadily  devoting  oneself  to  Brahman,  abandoning  all 
external  activities  and  directing  the  whole  thought  to 
Brahman,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  else.  This  is  not  possible 
for  him  who  is  ardently  devoted  to  works.  Abandonment 
of  works  and  performance  of  works  are  opposed  to  each 
other.  Thus  devotion  to  Brahman  is  possible  for  him 
alone  who  has  abandoned  works. 


CH  AFTER  I I. 

REALISATION  OP  BRAHMAN. 


Food  realised  as  Brahman. 

Bhrigu  was  given  to  understand  that  investigation 
was  the  means  of  attaining  knowledge  of  Brahman  defined 
above  indirectly  as  the  cause  of  the  universe  ; and  the  sruti 
now  proceeds  to  shew  what  conclusion  he  came  to  at  the 
first  stage  of  investigation. 

II  ^ II 

II  ^ xi«T4lSH5iiih';  II 
11^  II 

^ A 

TO  I 3RT  II  \ II 

5.  He,  having  practised  devotion, — 

[Anuvaka  II.] 

I.  That  food  was  Brahman  he  concluded. 
From  food  indeed  are  these  beings  verily  born  ; 
by  food,  when  born,  do  they  live  ; into  food,  do 
they,  when  departing,  enter. 


Am.  //.] 


REALISATION  OF  BRAHMAN. 


741 


He  concluded  that  food  * was  Brahman.  Food,  in- 
deed, possesses  the  attributes  of  Brahman  mentioned 
above. — How  ? — From  food  indeed  are  these  beings 
verily  born  ; by  food,  when  born,  do  they  live  ; into 
food  do  they,  when  departing,  enter.  Therefore,  that 
is  to  say,  it  is  proper  to  hold  that  food  is  Brahman. 

Food  {anm)^  here  referred  to  is  the  material  cause  of  the 
Annamaya  sheath  spoken  of  in  the  Anandavalli.  So  also 
with  regard  to  priwa,  manas,  vijMna,  and  ananda.  For, 
the  definition  of  Brahman  can  in  no  way  apply  to  the  forms, 
such  as  the  Annamaya,  evolved  out  of  the  upfi»dfi,na  or 
material  (jause,  such  as  food.  Certainly,  the  Annamaya, 
etc.,  are  evolved  out  of  anna,  food,  etc.;  and  since  every 
effect  is  said  to  dissolve  into  and  be  one  with  the  cause, 
the  investigator  is  gradually  led  on  to  the  final  cause, 
Ananda,  by  first  seeing  the  \nnamaya,  etc.,  as  one  with 
anna  etc.,  and  then  by  seeing  anna,  food,  as  one  with  life, 
life  as  one  with  mind,  mind  as  one  with  intelligence,  and 
finally  intelligence  as  one  with  Bliss.— (S). 

Having  zealously  practised  devotion  of  the  kind  described 
in  the  last  chapter,  Bhngu  concluded  that  food  was  Brah- 
man,— seeing  that  food  possessed  the  marks  of  Brahman, 
i,  e,,  seeing  that  all  beings  had  their  birth,  etc.,  in  food. 
-(S). 

Bhngu  investigated  the  subject  with  devotion  in  full 
concentration  of  mind,  and  concluded  that  food  was  Brah- 
man,— seeing  that  food  possessed  the  marks  of  Brahman 

* The  Viraj,  the  material  cause  of  the  physical  body  consist- 
ing of  the  five  gross  elements  of  physical  matter  perceived  by 
all.  The  Viraj  is  the  source  of  all  physical  objects.— (A). 


745? 


INVESTIGATION  OF  SRAHMAN.  ^Bhfi^U^  Volll* 


in  6.  seeing  that  food  was  the  cause  of  the  birth,  stay,  and 
dissolution  of  the  universe.  The  word  * beings*  means  the 
gross  bodies.  These,  as  everybody  knows,  have  their 
birth  in  food  ; ior,  it  is  the  sperm  of  man  and  the  blood  or 
ovum  of  woman  that  constitute  the  source  of  the  gross 
body,  which  is  made  up  of  the  essence  of  food  lying  in  the 
womb.  The  sruti,  too,  has  declared,  “ From  food  man 
(is  born).”  It  is  true  that  dkasa,  etc.,  as  such,  are  not 
born  of  food  ; still,  their  birth  in  the  form  of  the  gross 
bodies  must  be  traced  to  food  ; and  it  is  in  this  sense  that 
food  is  spoken  of  as  the  cause  of  the  universe. 

The  first  finding  is  not  satisfactory. 

crflSPT  I 5^  I ^3^1% 

^\\\\\ 

2.  That  having  known,  again,  verily,  did  he 
approach  Varuwa  the  father,  saying  Sir,  teach 
me  Brahman.'' 

Having  thus  thought  over  the  subject  in  full  concen- 
tration and  concluded  that  food  was  Brahman,  as  ac- 
cording both  with  the  definition  of  Brahman  and  with 
reason,  Bhrigu  felt  a doubt  and  again  approached  his 
father,  Varuna,  saying  “ Sir,  teach  me  Brahman.” 

Not  pleased  with  the  result,  he  felt  a doubt  and  wished 
to  know  more.  . He  did  again  approach  the  Guru  ; he  did 
not  give  way  to  sloth. 

What,  then,  was  the  cause  of  his  doubt  ? We  answer : 
Because  he  saw  that  food  (the  Virij)  had  birth. 


REALISATION  OF  BRAHMAN. 


743 


Am.  //.] 

Seeing  that  food  was  an  effect,  he  again  went  to  the 
Guru  and  asked,  with  a view  to  cut  asunder  his  doubt* 

-(S). 

Similarly,  finding  that  prkna,  manas,  and  vijn&na,  when 
regarded  as  Brahman,  were  open  to  the  same  objection,  he 
again  and  again  asked  about  the  Supreme  Brahman  till 
there  was  no  occasion  for  any  more  enquiry. — ^S). 

The  aspirant  to  knowledge  does  not  give  up  enquiry  till 
the  Supreme  Brahman  is  known  by  direct  experience  like 
a hilva  fruit  held  in  the  hand.— (S).  * 

The  reason  why  Bhngu  was  not  satisfied  with  his  finding 
may  be  explained  thus  The  V^jasaneyins  read  as  fol- 
lows : 

Some  say  that  food  is  Brahman  ; but  this  is 
not  so,  for,  in  the  absence  of  life,  food  de- 
cays.”* 

The  malodour  of  food  is  clearly  perceived  in  the  physical 
body,  which  is  made  up  of  food.  The  Vishwupurana,  too, 
teaches  the  same  thing  as  follows  .* 

“ To  the  person  who  does  not  get  disgusted 
with  the  foul  smell  of  his  own  body,  what 
else  can  be  taught  to  him  to  cause  disgust  in 
him  ?” 

Therefore,  though  the  physical  body  has  its  birth,  being, 
and  death  in  food,  still  food  cannot  be  Brahman. 

Devotion  is  necessary  at  all  stages. 

1 m 1 II  \ \\ 


* Bn.Up.  5-12-1. 


744  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BhrigU^Vullh 

3.  To  him  said  (Varuwa) : By  devotion,  Brah- 
mafa  seek  thou  to  know.  Devotion  is  Brahman. 

This  reiteration  of  devotion  is  intended  to  impress 
that  it  is  the  best  means.  Varu«a  means  to  say  : so 
long  as  thou  dost  not  find  the  thing  to  which  the  defi- 
nition of  Brahman  is  fully  applicable,  and  so  long  as 
thy  desire  for  further  light  does  not  cease,  so  long,  do 
thou  betake  thyself  to  devotion  through  concentration 
which  is  thy  sole  means  to  the  end.  That  is  to  say, 
seek  thou  to  know  Brahman  by  devotion  alone. 

By  repeatedly  saying  ‘‘  by  devotion  seek  thou  to  know 
Brahman,**  we  are  given  to  understand  that  through  devo- 
tion alone  is  perception  of  the  Self  possible.— (S). 

To  Bhfigu  who  thus  approached  his  father,  the  latter 
taught  that  only  devotion  by  concentration  (described 
above)  was  the  means  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahman. 
With  a view  to  impress  the  truth  that  devotion  was  the 
proximate  means  to  attain  an  intimate  knowledge  of  Brah- 
man, Varuwa  spoke  of  it,  by  courtesy,  as  identical  with 
Brahman,  in  the  words  ‘‘  Devotion  is  Brahman.*’  If 
Brahman  were  taught  in  the  v/ords  “ Real,  Cousciousness, 
Infinite  is  Brahman,’*  which  define  Brahman  as  He  is, 
then  one  would  think  that  Brahman,  as  knowable  through 
scriptures,  cannot  be  immediately  perceived,  any  more 
than  Dharma  and  Adharma.  Accordingly,  Varu;?a,  seeing 
that  Brahman  was  perceptible  through  one-pointed  under- 
standing, did  not  teach  Bhrigu  what  Brahman  was  in 
Himself,  but  taught  him  only  Devotion, 


m 


AnU.III,]  KBALlSAtlON  Ol^  BkAItMAH. 

^ ?I^S5!>aRI  il  8 II 

4.  He  resorted  to  devotion. 

Life-principle  as  Brahman. 

II  II 

II  II 

II  II 

jprr  ^ sjRRici^  I ^5^ 

5rf?n%  I JTT^  ^11%  ^MPd  I JIPI 

^ II  ni 

5.  He,  having  practised  devotion, — 

[Anuvaka  111.] 

I.  That  life  * was  Brahman,  he  concluded. 
From  life  indeed  are  these  beings  verily  born  ; 
by  life,  when  born,  do  they  live  ; into  life  do 
they,  when  departing,  enter. 

The  sruti  now  proceeds  to  shew  to  what  conclusion 
Bhngu  came  by  pondering  over  the  matter  a second  time. 
Bhyigu  again  thought  over  the  definition  given  above, 
with  mind  in  full  concentration,  and  concluded  that  life 

* the  cause  of  the  Viraj,  namely  what  is  called  Pr&wa,  the 
Hirawyagarbha,  in  his  aspect  of  activity  or  kriya-sakti. — (A). 

94 


iNVEsxiGATJioN  OP  [BhrigUrValli. 

was  Brahman.  The  Aitareyins  declare  negatively  that 
life  is  the  cause  of  the  birth  of  the  physical  body  : 

“Without  life,  indeed,  semen  is  not  emit- 
ted ; if  it  be  emitted  at  all,  without  life  it 
would  decay,  it  would  not  be  born.”  * 

When  a jlva  embodied  in  the  subtle  body  (Knga-deha), 
returning  from  heaven  (svarga)  or  hell  (naraka)  through 
rain,  enters  into  man  through  food,  and  through  his  sperm 
into  the  woman’s  womb,  then  that  sperm,  heated  by  the 
vital  air,  which  penetrates  into  it,  passes  through  the 
stages  of  embryo,  etc.,  and  gives  birth  to  the  body.  But 
in  the  absence  of  vitality,  the  sperm  cannot  give  rise  to  the 
physic^  body.  As  life  is  the  cause  of  the  birth  of  the 
physical  body,  so,  it  is  the  cause  of  its  sustenance,  as  the 
Kaushltakins  declare : “So  long  as  in  this  body  the 
vitality  remains,  so  long  does  the  bcxiy  live,”  It  is  a well- 
known  rfact  that  on  the  departure  of  vitality  takes  place  the 
death  of  the  body  : therefore,  since  vitality,  though  not  the 
updddna  or  material  cause  of  the  physical  body,  is  the 
nimitta  or  efficient  cause  of  its  birth,  sustenance  and  death, 
Bhrigu  concluded  that  life  was  Brahman. 

I 35^^  wn  I 

51^  in  II 

2.  That  having  known,  again,  verily,  did  he 
approach  Varu«a,  the  father,  saying  “ Sir,  teach 
me  Brahman.” 


* Ait.  Ar.  3.1-2-2. 


REALISATION  OF  BRAH&IAN.  747 

?r  I ^ m I 11  ^ II 

3.  To  him  said  (Varuwa)  : By  devotion, 
Brahman  seek  thou  to  know.  Devotion  is 
Brahman. 

?r  ii  8 II 

4.  He  resorted  to  devotion. 

Manas  as  Brahman. 

II  ^ II 

II  II 

II  ^ =^5^55^:  II 

j#  5?MJn?T  I i?JTd  m ^rl^r 

•\  ©s, 

I *FRn  I JR:  sppRf^ra^- 

II  \ II 

5.  Having  practised  devotion, — 

[Anuvaka I VJ . 

I.  That  manas  * was  Brahman,  he  concluded. 
From  manas,  indeed,  are  these  beings  verily 
born  ; by  manas,  when  born,  do  they  live  / into 
manas  do  they,  when  departing,  enter. 


* The  Hiranyagarbha  in  his  aspecfc  of  will,  sankalpa,— 
iobchhaj?akti.— (A). 


748 


INVESTK&ATION  OF  BRAHMAN. 


[Bhrigu-VtUli. 


The  sruti  proceeds  to  shew  at  what  conclusion  Bhngu 
arrived  after  pondering  over  the  matter  a third  time. 

The  vital  principle  is  unintelligent  and  cannot  therefore 
be  Brahman.  In  the  words  **  Consciousness  is  Brahman,*’* 
Intelligence  and  Bliss  is  Brahman,”  t the  sruti  gives  us 
to  understand  that  Brahman  is  intelligent.  And  manas  is 
intelligent,  because  it  is  the  principle  of  knowledge  (jnlLna- 
sakti).  The  definition,  too,  as  the  cause  of  the  birth,  &c., 
of  the  universe  applies  to  the  manas.  It  has  been 
declared  above  that  the  entering  of  the  vital  air  into  the 
womb  leads  to  the  birth  of  the  physical  body ; and  similarly 
the  entrance  of  vitality  is  itself  dependent  on  manas, 
as  declared  by  the  Atharvamkas  in  the  form  of  a question 
and  an  answer : 

Girgya  asked : **  How  comes  he  into  this 
body  ?”  Pippal&da  answered : By  an  act  of 
manas  does  he  come  into  this  body.”  j‘ 

The  act  of  manas  here  referred  to  is  the  sankalpa  or  forma- 
tive thought  which  at  the  time  of  death  arises  in  the  manas 
impelled  by  the  karma  of  the  closing  life,  the  thought  of 
the  ego  that  he  will  be  born  in  such  and  such  a body.  By 
this  thought  produced  at  the  close  of  the  former  incarna- 
tions the  vital  principle  which  had  formed  part  of  the 
former  body  comes  into  the  body  of  the  present  incarna- 
tion. This  truth  is  clearly  taught  in  the  same  Upanishad : 

“ His  senses  still  inhering  in  his  mind,  what- 
ever his  thought,  with  that  he  goes  into  the 
pr6i»a  ; pr&.«a  joined  with  the  fire,  united  with 

Up.  5-3. 


fBri,  3-9*28.  J Prasna.  Up.  3-3. 


REALISATION  OF  BRAHMAN. 


Am.  IV.] 


the  Atman,  leads  him  into  his  world  as  he 
has  built  it  up.*’  * 

The  ego  (jiva)  carrying  along  with  him  speech  and  other 
senses— whose  functions  at  the  time  of  death  become 
absorbed  as  it  were  in  those  of  manas— thinks  of  the  body 
which  he  will  have  to  put  on  next  ; and  with  these  thoughts 
concerning  the  next  body  the  ego  enters  into  pikna.  or  vital 
principle,  which  becomes  at  this  stage  the  leading  principle 
of  his  constitution.  And  this  prawa,  impregnated  with  the 
fire  of  this  intense  thought  concerning  the  future  body, 
leads  the  whole  subtle  body  (linga-deha)  along  with  the 
ego  (jiv&tman)  to  the  region  #hich  he  has  built  up  in 
thought.  The  Bnhadarawyaka  gives  the  following  illus- 
tration : — 


^‘And  as  a leech,  after  having  reached  the  end 
of  a blade  of  grass,  and  having  approached 
another  blade,  draws  itself  together  towards 
it,  thus  does  this  Self,  after  having  thrown 
off  his  body  and  leaving  it  unconscious,  and 
after  having  approached  another  body,  draws 
himself  together  towards  it.”  t 
To  explain A leech  moving  among  blades  of  grass, 
after  having  reached  the  end  of  one  blade,  first  catches  hold 
of  another  with  the  fore  part  of  its  body,  and  then  draws 
its  hind  part  to  it  ; so  also  the  jivitman,  abandoning  at  the 
time  of  death  the  present  body  by  way  of  ceasing  to  identify 
himself  with  it,  leaves  it  insentient,  and  then,  after  first 
fashioning  the  future  body  by  thought,  then  carries  his 


♦ Praana  Up.  3-P, 


t Bri.  Up.  4-4-3. 


750  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BhftgU-VidlL 

whole  body— f.  carries  himself  embodied  in  the  linga- 
deha— to  that  other  body.  Therefore  all  embodied  beings 
are  born  of  manas.  As  one  has  to  exercise  thought  in  secur- 
ing means  of  livelihood  such  as  agriculture  and  trade,  manas 
is  the  cause  of  the  sustenance.  Since,  as  shewn  above, 
death  occurs  whe^n  one  abandons  by  thought  all  attach- 
ment to  the  body,  manas  is  also  the  cause  of  the  dissolu- 
tion. Thus,  as  manas  possesses  the  characteristic  marks  of 

Brahman,  Bhrigu  concluded  that  manas  was  Brahman. 

« 

^ II  \ II 

2.  That  having  known,  again,  verily,  did  he 
approach  Varuna,  the  father,  saying  “ Sir,  teach 
me  Brahman  ” 

^ I m i II  \ || 

3.  To  him  said  (Varuwa) ; By  devotion,  Brah- 
man seek  thou  to  know.  Devotion  is  Brahman. 

9 II  « II 

4.  He  resorted  to  devotion. 

Intelligence  as  Brahman. 

II  II 


Atm>  V.]  RBALISATION  OP  BRAHUAM.  75^ 

II  m || 

^ifFT  ^ I 

I 5IRnl%  I SPRqfipjf^- 

II  ni 

5.  He  having  practised  devotion, — 

[ Anuyaka  V.  ] 

I.  That  intelligence  * was  Brahman  he  con- 
cluded. From  intelligence,  indeed,  are  these 
beings  verily  born  ; by  intelligence,  when  born, 
do  they  live  ; into  intelligence  do  they,  when 
departing,  enter. 

The  sruti  proceeds  to  shew  at  what  conclusion  Bhrigu 
arrived  after  pondering  over  the  matter  for  a fourth  time. 

Manas  being  but  an  organ  or  instrument  like  sight,  etc., 
it  is  dependent  on  the  agent  and  cannot  therefore  be  Brah- 
man. That  intelligeuce  is  the  agent  has  been  clearly 
taught  by  the  sruti  in  the  words  “ Intelligence  accom- 
plishes sacrifice,”!  The  definition  of  Brahman  can  be 
easily  applied  to  the  agent ; for  the  agent  is  the  cause  of 
the  birth  of  the  body  through  his  acts  (karma).  The  sruti 
says  “ Whatever  act  he  does,  such  does  he  become.  Pure, 
indeed,  becomes  he  by  a pure  act,  and  he  becomes  impure 
by  an  impure  act.”  J As  the  agent  of  such  worldly  acts  as 
agriculture,  intelligence  is  the  cause  of  the  sustenance  of 

* 'Uhe  Hira)iyagarbha  in  his  aspect  of  intelligence,  jfiina- 
«akti.— (A).  t Tait.  Up.  2-5.  J Bri.  Up.  4-4-5. 


751 


INVEStlOATION  OP  BRAHMAN.  [BkrigU^  VolB. 

ths  body ; and  by  engaging  in  battle  and  other  such  acts 
which  bring  about  death,  intelligence  causes  dissolution. 
Therefore,  intelligence,  which  answers  to  the  definition  of 
Brahman^  must  be  Brahman. 

I ^ f^q«t(K  I 
IRII 

2.  I'hat  having  known,  again,  verily,  did  he 
approach  Varuwa,  the  father,  saying  “ Sir,  teach 
me  Brahman,” 

rf  trqT=q  i to  m i # ii  \ \\ 

3.  To  him  said  ( Varuwa ) : By  devotion. 
Brahman  seek  thou  to  know.  Devotion  is 
Brahman. 

rl^STOT  II  8 II 

4.  He  resorted  to  devotion. 

Bliss  as  Brahman. 

^ TOc"^!  II  ^ II 

II  ^ II 

II  ^ qstspqi:  II 

I I iPFqf^I^T^- 

^ in  II 

5.  He,  having  practised  devotion, — 


Am.  VL] 


• RBAUSATION  OP  BRAHMAN. 


753 


[Anuvaka  VL] 

I.  That  Bliss*  was  Brahman,  he  concluded. 
From  Bliss,  indeed,  are  these  beings  verily 
born ; by  Bliss,  when  born,  do  they  live ; into 
Bliss  do  they,  when  departing,  enter. 

Now  the  sruti  proceeds  to  show  at  what  conclusion 
Bhngu  arrived  after  pondering  over  the  matter  for  a fifth 
time. 

As  agency  is  associated  with  pain,  intelligence  cannot 
be  Brahman.  Moreover,  these  four  principles, — food,  life, 
mind  and  intelligence, — cannot  be  the  cause  of  the  birth  of 
all  being ; it  being  impossible  that  S.kAsa  and  other  primary 
elements  of  matter  should  be  born  of  food,  etc.,  which  are 
formed  of  those  elements  of  matter.  On  the  contrary. 
Bliss  is  devoid  of  pain ; being  in  itself  agreeable  to  all,  it 
constitutes  the  highest  end  of  man ; and  it  is  also  the  cause 
of  all  being  including  the  primary  elements  of  matter  such 
as  ak^a ; and  for  these  reasons  Bliss  may  be  regarded  as 
genuine  Brahman.  The  nature  of  Bliss  is  described  by  the 
Chhandogas  as  follows  : “ What  indeed  is  the  Great,  that 
is  bliss  ; in  the  small,  bliss  exists  not ; the  Great  One  alone 
is  bliss.”  t Objects  are  of  two  kinds,  great  and  small.  The 
Great  One,  the  all-inclusive  one,  is  alone  bliss  ; but  in  what 
lies  beyond  the  Great  One,  i.  e.y  in  the  small  one,  there  is  no 

* Brahman  associated  with  Maya.  Since  the  Conditioned 
cannot  be  the  basic  Reality  of  the  Conditioned,  Bhrigu  conclud- 
ed it  was  the  Unconditioned  One  that  Varu?ia  hinted  at  by 
speaking  of  Brahman  as  the  cause  of  the  universe,— (A), 
t ChhA.  Up.  7-23-1. 


95 


7S4  INVESTIGATION  OE  EllArtlitAN.  \hhY%gU-V(dU. 

bliss.  The  Great  One  must  be  bliss.  What  constitutes 
the  difference  between  the  Great  one  and  the  small  is 
taught  in  the  same  Upanishad  as  follows : “Where  one  sees 
not  anything  else,  that  is  the  Great ; and  where  one  sees 
another,  that  is  the  small.”  * The  non-dual,  admitting  of 
no  triads, — each  of  these  invplving  three  different  elements 
such  as  perceiver,  perception  and  the  object  perceived, — is 
the  Great  One  ; and  the  universe  of  duality  involving  triads 
is  the  small.  The  same  Upanishad  speaks  of  the  Great 
One  and  the  small  as  the  permanent  and  the  impermanent ; 

“ What  indeed  is  the  Great  One,  That  is  im- 
mortal ; and  what  is  small,  that  is  mortal.” 

In  the  waking  and  dream  states  involving  duality,  we  ex- 
perience only  pain,  for  the  most  part.  If  there  be  pleasure 
at  all  now  and  then,  even  that  is  a mere  pain,  as  involving 
raahy  imperfections,  namely,  the  trouble  of  procuring  it,  its 
inferiority  as  compared  with  higher  pleasures,  and  its  perish- 
ability. Accordingly,  the  author  of  the  Sreyom§.rga  says  : 
“ Alas  ! because  the  small  pleasures  of  the  embodied  beings 
are  hard  to  procure  and  subject  to  decay,  and  conduce  only 
to  misery,  therefore,  there  are  only  miseries  upon  miseries 
here  in  this  world.”  With  this  view,  it  has  been  said 
that  there  is  no  bliss  in  the  small.  But,  in  sushupti  and 
samAdhi,  the  two  states  of  non-duality,  bliss  reigns  supreme 
and  self-luminous.  It  should  not  be  supposed  that  it  is 
mere  absence  of  pain ; for,  mere  abhAva  or  absence 
cannot  be  self-luminous.  Bliss  is  self-luminous  because  it 
manifests  itself  without  a prama«a  or  medium  of  knowledge. 


Ibid  7-24  I. 


Am.  VI.]  REALISATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  755 

Certainly  in  that  state  non-duality  is  not  perceived  through 
a pramft»a ; if  it  were  so  perceived,  then  there  would  be 
duality  and  sushupti  would  come  to  an  end.  We  must, 
however,  conclude  that  it  manifests  itself  then,  because 
there  is  no  disagreement  on  the  point.  If  people  understand 
thejdgrat  and  svapna  states  without  any  disagreement, 
they  do  understand  also  the  states  of  sushupti  and  samadhi 
without  any  disagreement.  Thus,  as  manifesting  itself 
without  an  external  medium  of  knowledge,  the  non-dual  is 
self-luminous  and  is  therefore  not  mere  absence  of  pain. 
The  non-dual  is  bliss  because  sushupti  and  samadhi  are 
objects  of  pleasure,  like  the  attainment  of  sense-objects  of 
pleasure.  All  men,  when  they  have  to  do  nothing  else,  lie 
down  to  rest,  seeking  the  bliss  of  sushupti.  And  those 
who  possess  right  knowledge  resort  to  the  nirvikalpa- 
samadhi,  only  to  enjoy  the  bliss  of  it.  Both  these  classes 
of  people  subsequently  call  back  the  bliss  of  these  states  to 
their  mind  thus : ‘ I slept  happily  ’ ; ‘ I felt  quite  happy  in 
the  state  of  perfect  self-composure.’  From  these  instances 
of  sushupti  and  samadhi  we  may  understand  that  even  the 
non-dual,  which  existed  prior  to  the  emanation  of  the  dual, 
was  Bliss.  It  is  from  this  non-dual  Bliss,  that  all  dual 
existence  including  4kasa  and  other  elements  of  matter,  as 
also  all  beings  from  the  Hira/^yagarbha  downwards,  is  born. 

{Question)  -.—Duality  and  non-duality,  creation  and  dis- 
solution, alternate  with  each  other,  again  and  again,  like 
day  and  night.  Now,  since  one  thing  cannot  have  two 
such  mutually  opposite  forms,  we  must  hold  that  one  of 
these  forms  must  be  inherent,  while  the  other  is  extraneous. 
Which,  then,  of  these  is  the  inherent  form  and  which  the 
extraneous  form  of  the  One  ? 


756  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BkngU-V all\* 

(Answer): — We  answer  thus : It  is  agreed  that  th^  non- 
dual Bliss  of  sushupti  is  independent  of  all  extraneous 
means ; whereas  the  dual  waking  state  is  based  on  many 
external  means  such  as  sense-objects,  etc.  Therefore  the 
non-dual  self-existent  Bliss  is  the  upd.d^Lna  or  material 
cause  of  the  temporary  universe  of  duality  ; the  many 
things  such  as  foam,  waves,  bubbles  have  their  birth,  being 
and  dissolution  in  the  one  ocean. 

Devotion  is  the  sole  means  to  Brahmavidya. 

Thus  when  Bhrigu,  with  his  mind  purified  by  de- 
votion, found  that  life,  mind  and  intelligence  did  not 
fully  answer  to  the  definition  of  Brahman,  he  slowly, 
step  by  step,  dived  within  till  he  came  to  know,  by 
means  of  devotion  alone,  that  Bliss,  the  innermost  One, 
was  Brahman.  Thus  the  main  drift  of  the  teaching  of 
this  section  is  this : the  aspirant  to  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman  should  resort  to  that  supreme  kind  of  devo- 
tion, namely,  to  the  perfect  composure  of  the  external 
and  internal  senses,  as  the  means  to  that  knowledge. 

By  devotion  alone,  by  applying  the  process  of  elimination 
through  anvaya-vyatireka,  Bhngu  was,  step  by  step,  led  to 
find  Brahman  in  the  Pratyagatman,  the  Inner  Self.  Ac- 
cordingly those  who  strive  to  escape  from  sawsara  should 
always  resort  to  the  faultless  devotion  with  a view  to 
finding  Brahman  in  the  Inner  Self. — (S), 

By  devotion  of  concentration,  Bh?'igu  realised  that  the 
non-dual  Bliss  was  Brahman  defined  as  the  cause  of  the 
universe.  Therefore  devotion  alone  is  the  primary  means. 


757 


AnU,  F/.]  REALISATION  OF  BRAHMAN. 

And  ip  the  sciences  of  Yoga  Patanjali  and  others  have 
treated  at  length  of  several  means  of  attaining  this  one- 
pointedness  of  the  mind  which  is  the  highest  form  of 
devotion. 

In  the  legend  narrated  above  concerning  the  investiga- 
tion of  Brahman  as  the  cause  of  the  universe,  it  has  been 
shewn  that  devotion  in  one* pointedness  of  mind  is  the 
proximate  means  to  the  intuitive  realisation  of  Brahman  as 
bliss.  And,  now,  with  a view  to  remove  a doubt  as  to 
whether  there  exists  another  principle  superior  even  to 
Bliss,  as  Bliss  is  superior  to  the  four  principles,  food,  life, 
mind  and  intelligence,  the  sruti  concludes  the  subject  thus  : 

Bliss  is  the  Self. 

^ ^ I qdi  II 

2.  This  wisdom  of  Bhrigu  and  Varuna  is  es- 
tablished in  the  Supreme  Heaven. 

Now,  the  sruti,  departing  from  the  legend,  formulates 
in  its  own  words  the  propositions  established  through 
the  legend.— This  wisdom  learned  by  Bhrigu  and 
taught  by  Varuwa,  and  which  first  started  with  the 
Annamaya  Self,  culminates  in  the  Highest  heaven, 
i.  e.y  in  the  Supreme  non-dual  Bliss  hid  in  the  cave  of 
dkasa  of  the  heart. 

This  Brahmavidya  is  well-known,  because  it  is  spoken  of 
in  other  Upanishads,*  and  is  realised  by  one's  own  • experi- 
ence acquired  through  one-pointedness  of  mind.  This 


* Mund.  Up.  1-1-1 ; Kaivalya-Up. 


758  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BkngU-VaUl. 

culihinates  in  the  Highest  Ak&sa,  i,  e,^  in  the  principle  of 
Brahman,  There  are  three  Ak^sas : 

(i)  That  spoken  of  * as  born  of  the  Self,  the  lowest  &kft.sa ; 

{2)  That  spken  of  f as  the  Avyaknta,  the  Undifferenti- 
ated Root  wherein  all  universe  is  woven  as  warp  and  woof ; 
the  middle  ^.kdsa. 

(3)  The  Highest  AkAsa,  the  Principle  of  Brahman,  the 
Indestructible,  the  basic  Reality  underlying  all  phenomenal 
universe  including  the  Vedas,  the  One  which  in  the  main 
is  treated  of  in  the  i?igveda  and  other  scriptures.  Than 
this  there  is  nothing  higher  to  be  known.  Hence  it  is  that 
wisdom  reaches  its  culminating  point  in  this  principle. 

The  Supreme  Heaven  is  the  Self  wherein  all  distinction 
of  ‘ I ’ and  ‘ thou  *,  of  the  ego  and  the  non-ego,  disappears  ; 
and  wisdom  reaches  its  culminating  point  there,  where  one 
s^es  Brahman  as  the  Self  and  the  Self  as  Brahman.  Thus, 
from  a sentence  one  acquires  the  knowledge  “ I am  Brah- 
man," which  cannot  be  the  import  of  a sentence, — (S). 

The  fruits  of  wisdom. 

M II X II 

3.  Whoso  thus  knows  is  firmly  established. 

And  whoever  else  in  this  fashion  dives  within,  step 
by  step,  by  the  same  means  of  devotion  and  realises 
Bliss  as  Brahman,  He  also,  in  virtue  of  this  culmina- 
tion of  wisdom,  becomes  established  in  Bliss,  in  the 
Supreme  Brahman,  that  is  to  say,  he  becomes  the  very 
Brahman. 


* Tait.  Up.  2-1. 


t Pri.  Up.  3.8-11. 


Afm.Vt.\  RteALISATlON  OP  bIiamman.  759 

He  casts  away  the  five  sheaths  and  attains  the  supreme 
support.  The  wise  man  attains  a firm  abode  in  that  sup- 
port, spoken  of  in  the  Anandavalli  as  “ Brahman,  the  tail, 
the  support which  is  beyond  cause  and  effect.— (S). 

The  sruti  states  the  immediate  visible  result  of 
wisdom  : 

^ I ^ vm  I 

R5R  ^ 11 » 11 

11  ^ 11 

4.  Possessor  of  food  and  eater  of  food  he  be- 
comes. Great  he  becomes  by  progeny,  by  cattle, 
by  spiritual  lustre,  great  by  fame. 

He  becomes  possessed  of  plenty  of  food ; we  say 
plenty  because,  if  the  mere  existence  of  food  were  meant, 
all  people  possess  food,  and  then  nothing  peculiar  would 
have  been  mentioned  as  the  result  of  wisdom.  Similar- 
ly, he  becomes  the  eater  of  food  ; that  is  to  say, 
digestive  fire  is  set  aflame.  He  becomes  great  as  pos- 
sessed of  sons,  etc.,  of  cows,  horses,  etc.,  and  of  spiritual 
lustre  accruing  from  the  tranquillity  of  the  mind  and 
senses,  from  wisdom  and  the  like.  He  becomes  great 
by  fame,  as  a man  of  righteous  conduct. 

It  is  not  quite  unreasonable  to  say  that  this  visible  result 
accrues  to  him  who  has  known  Brahman ; for,  though  a 
jlvanmukta,  he  perceives  duality  owing  to  a slight  tinge  of 
avidyd.  still  lurking  in  him.  By  the  grace  of  the  t5vara, 
even  the  unenlightened  ones  come  to  possess  plenty  of  food ; 


760 


INVESTIGATION  OP  BRAHMAN. 


[Bhrigu-Vcdli. 


much  more  so  then  should  they  enjoy  plenty  of  food  who 
have  realised  their  identity  with  Isvara. — (A). 

Never  condemn  food. 

11  II 

?tTiRP3^||  \ II 

[Anuvaka  Vll.] 

I.  He  shall  not  condemn  food ; that  shall  be 
his  vow. 

Moreover,  because  Brahman  has  been  known  through 
food,  let  the  aspirant  regard  it  as  Guru,  and  so  let  him 
never  condemn  it.  * This  vow  is  enjoined  on  him  who 
has  thus  known  Brahman.  This  injunction  of  the  vow 
is  meant  to  praise  food  ; and  food  deserves  praise  be- 
cause it  is  the  means  of  perceiving  Brahman. 

Or,  t it  may  be  that  here,  in  these  last  three  passages,  the 
Upanishad  speaks  of  the  fruit  accruing  to  those  who  con- 
template conditioned  Brahman,  i,e.y  who  contemplate  food 
as  Brahman.  It  does  not  certainly  stand  to  reason  to  say 
that  such  results  accrue  to  those  who  have  attained  all 
desires  and  have  nothing  else  to  attain. — (S). 


* A samnya«in  knowinpj  Brahman  should  partake  of  that 
food  only  which  comes  by  chance.  When  the  food  so  obtained 
happens  to  be  poor  or  unclean,  let  him  not  condemn  it. 

f Here  Sure«varacharya  differs  from  /Sankaracharya  ; and 
Sayana  follows  the  former.  Sayana’s  interpretation,  as  accord- 
ing with  the  subject-matter  of  the  next  chapter,  will  be  given 
at  the  beginning  of  the  next  chapter, — (Tr.) 


CHAPTER  III. 

SOME  MINOR  CONTEMPLATIONS. 


Contemplation  of  food  as  Brahman. 

Brahma- vidy^L  is  easy  of  acquisition  for  the  aspirant  of 
the  highest  grade,  i,  e.y  for  him  who  i$  endued  with  one- 
pointed  mind.  But,  with  reference  to  him  whose  mind 
wavers,  cherishing  a desire  for  worldly  ends,  the  sruti,  by 
way  of  prescribing  the  means  of  obtaining  those  ends, 
enjoins  certain  contemplations  which  conduce  to  the  acqui- 
sition of  one-pointedness  of  mind. 

Food  being  the  first  gateway  to  the  knowledge  of  Brah- 
man, the  sruti  enjoins  the  contemplation  of  Brahman 
through  the  symbol  of  food. 

He  who  contemplates  food  as  Brahman  becomes  steady 
without  the  wavering  of  the  mind.  He  will,  moreover, 
possess  plenty  of  food  and  will  be  able  to  eat  it,  free  from  all 
sickness.  He  will  be  blest  with  off-spring,  sons,  grandsons, 
etc.;  he  will  acquire  cattle,  horses  etc.;  he  will  acquire  spiri- 
tual lustre  through  constant  study  of  the  Vedas  and  other 
scriptures  ; he  will  be  famous  in  all  these  respects.  Be- 
cause one  attains  to  Brahma-vidya  through  the  gateway  of 
food  by  making  it  an  object  of  constant  contemplation, 
therefore  the  devotee  should  never  condemn  food  as  though 
it  were  his  Guru.  This  refraining  from  condemning  food 
should  be  made  a vow  by  this  devotee ; it  should  be  accom- 
plished as  a matter  of  necessity.  If  this  vow  be  trans- 
gressed, the  contemplation  will  be  so  far  defective. 


q6 


762  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [ BhrigU-  ValH. 

Contemplation  of  life  and  body. 

With  a view  to  enjoin  another  contemplation,  the  sruti 
proceeds  to  shew  the  object  which  should  be  contemplated: 

qFfr  m I i Ji?5r  ^ I 

^ wi'.  \ II  \ 11 

' 2.  Life,  verily,  is  food,  the  body  the  eater  of 
food.  In  life  the  body  is  set ; life  is  set  in  the 
body.  Thus  food  is  set  in  food. 

Haying  taught  that  the  direct  means  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  One  is  the  constant  meditation  of  the  Reality  under- 
lying the  entities  denoted  by  ‘‘  That”  and  “ thou,”  and 
having  also  treated  of  the  result  of  the  knowledge  in  the 
-concluding  words  of  the  section,  the  sruti  now  proceeds  to 
prescribe  the  contemplation  of  Frkna,  etc.,  as  an  indirect 
means  to  Brahmaju^na,  for  the  benefit  of  those  who,  not 
being  fully  developed,  are  unable  to  carry  on  the  process 
of  investigation  described  above.— (A), 

Life  (prana)  is  food  because  it  exists  within  the 
body  ; and  whatev'jr  is  set  within  another  forms  the 
food  of  that  other.  And  life,  too,  is  also  set  within 
the  body.  Therefore  life  is  food,  and  the  body  the 
food-enter.  And,  vice  versa,  the  body  is  food,  and  life  the 
food-eater. — Why  ? Because  the  body  is  set  in  life  ; 
the  existence  of  the  body  being  dependent  on  life. 
Wherefore,  both  these,  the  body  and  life,  are  food  as 
well  as  the  food-eater.  Because  each  is  set  in  the  other, 
therefore  each  of  them  is  food  ; and  because  each  of 


AnU.  VII, SOME  MINOR  CONTEMPLATIONS.  763 

them  is  the  support  of  the  other,  therefore  each  of  them 
is  the  food-eater,  ' o-  

Just  as  the  food  that  has  been  eaten  lies  within  the  body, 
so  prdiwa  dwells  within  the  body  and  is  therefore  regarded 
as  food.  By  reason  of  containing  the  life-food-'  which-  lies 
within  it,  the  body  is  regarded  as  the  eater.  Just  as  a pillar 
within  the  house  supports  the  house,  so  life,  dwelling  within 
the  body,  supports  the  body,  and  therefore  the.  body  is  said 
to  be  set  in  pr^«a.  That  life  is  the  support  of  the  body  is 
declared  in  the  dialogue  of  the  vital  principles : 

“ It  is  I who  by  this  very  quintuple  division  of 
myself  together  keep  and  hold  this  bundle  up.” 

And  it  is  quite  evident  that  the  body  is  the  supporter  of 
life.  The  devotee  should  constantly  contemplate  that  life 
and  the  body  are  each  other’s  support.  Moreover,  it  has 
been  said  before  that,  as  dwelling  within  the  body,  pr/i»a  is 
food.  And  the  body  is  food  because  it  is  evolved  front 
food  ; so  that,  both  of  them  being  food,  and  both  of  them 
being  the  support  of  each  other,  it  should  also  be  contem- 
plated that  food  itself  is  set  in  food. 

Having  thus  treated  of  the  thing  to  be  contemplated,  the 
sruti  proceeds  to  enjoin  the  contemplation  thereof.' 

I II-  \ ||. - 

II  ^T^TJitsg^:  II 

3.  Whoso  knows  that  thus  food  is  set  in  food, 
he  is  settled  ; possessor  of  food  and  food-.eater 


* Pras.  Up.  2-0. 


7^  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  \BhngU-  VcUU. 

he  becomes.  Great  he  becomes  by  progeny,  by 
cattle,  by  spiritual  lustre  ; great  by  fame. 

II  II 

3^  *1  I ?T^g?ni;^ll  \ li 

[Anuvaka  VIII.] 

1.  He  shall  not  abandon  food  ; that  his  vow. 

This  vow  is  enjoined  on  him  who  contemplates  life  and 
the  body  as  taught  above. — (S  & A). 

That  his  vow  : This,  as  before,  is  intended  to  extol 
food  : when  thus  one  does  not  abandon  food,  without 
making  any  such  distinction  as  good  food  and  bad  food, 
food  becomes  exalted.  The  same  interpretation  should 
be  put  on  the  succeeding  passages  also,  beginning  with 

Water  verily  is  food.” 

Contemplation  of  water  and  fire. 

Now  the  sruti  proceeds  to  treat  of  yet  another  thing  to  be 
contemplated : 

S#fecIT:  | ||  ^ || 

2.  Water  verily  is  food,  fire  the  food-eater. 
In  water  is  fire  set ; water  is  set  in  fire.  Thus 
food  is  set  in  food. 


A nu.  /X.] 


SOME  MINOR  CONTEMPLATIONS. 


7^5 


As  the  water  that  is  drunk  is  digested  by  the  degestive 
fire  in  the  stomach,  water  is  regarded  as  food,  and  fire  as 
the  food-eater.  As  the  lightning  is  present  in  the  rain- 
water and  as  perspiration  occurs  when  the  body  is  heated, 
water  and  fire  are  regarded  as  each  other’s  support.  For 
the  same  reason  they  are  each  other’s  food  : 

The  sruti  proceeds  to  enjoin  contemplation. 

^ ^ I ^ I 

usnn  I ||  i ii 

II  |cqg$rS3^:  II 

3.  Whoso  knows  that  thus  food  is  set  in  food, 
he  is  settled  ; possessor  of  food  and  food-eater 
he  becomes.  Great  he  becomes  by  progeny,  by 
cattle,  by  spiritual  lustre  ; great  by  fame. 

II  ^ II 

3?^ ^ I \ \\ 

[Anuvaka  IX.] 

I.  He  sliall  make  food  plentiful ; that  his  vow. 

He  who  contemplates  water  and  fire  as  food  and  food- 
eater  shall  make  it  his  vow  to  earn  plenty  of  food. 

It  has  been  formerly  enjoined  that  the  food  which  comes 
to  hand  at  the  dinner-time  should  not  be  abandoned  on  the 
ground  that  it  is  not  good,  while  here  the  sruti  enjoins  that 
one  should  earn  plenty  of  food  to  give  it  to  travellers, 


INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BkngU-ValH. 


Contemplation  of  Earth  and  Ether. 

The  sruti  proceeds  to  treat  of  yet  another  thing  to  be 
contemplated : 

m I 3Tr^5frS5f|^:  I s#- 

fe?r:  I aTRiitr  l^ferlT  | ^ II 

2.  Earth  verily  is  food,  ether  the  food-eater. 
In  earth  is  ether  set  ; earth  is  set  in  ethei*.  Thus 
food  is  set  in  food. 

As  the  earth  abides  in  the  ether  which  lies  both  above 
and  below  it,  the  earth  is  food  and  the  ether  is  the  food- 
eater.  Since,  in  the  view  of  the  uneducated,  the  ether  lies 
upon  the  earth,  they  are  related  as  container  and  contained. 
I'ut  from  the  stand-point  of  the  educated,  the  ether  is  the 
basis  or  container.  The  devotee  should  thus  contemplate 
them  as  each  other’s  food. 

The  sruti  proceeds  to  enjoin  contemplation  : 

E ^ ^ iricrf^  I 

I iT3Rr  I 

II  ^ 11 

II  ^ II 

3.  Whoso  knows  that  thus  food  is  set  in  food, 
he  is  settled  ; possessor  of  food  and  food-eater 
he  becomes.  Great  he  becomes  by  progeny,  by 
cattle,  by  spiritual  Iqstre  ; great  by  fame. 


AnU.X.]  SOME  MINOR  CONTEMPLATIOHS.  , 7^7 

II  m II 

[Anuvaka  X.] 

1.  None,  as  to  lo4ging,  he  shall  turn  away: 
that  his  vow. 

He  who  contemplates  earth  and  ether  shall  not  turn 
away  any  one  who  comes  to  him  for  lodging. 

^ ^ II  H II 

2.  Therefore,  by  whatever  means,  he  should 
earn  much  food. 

When  lodging  is  given,  food  should  necessarily  be 
given  ; therefore  he  shall  earn  plenty  of  food,  by  every 
means. 

When  lodging  is  given  to  a traveller,  food  also  must  be 
given  to  him  ; otherwise  sin  will  accrue,  as  is  taught  in  the 
xruti.  The  sruti  says  that  an  inhospitable  person  is  de- 
barred from  all  good  both  here  and  hereafter  : 

“Hopes,  expectations,  communion  with  saints, 
pleasant  words,  sacrifice  and  public  charity, 
sons,  cattle,  all  are  taken  from  the  fool  in 
whose  abode  a brihman  fasting  rests.”  * 

Therefore,  with  a view  to  give  food,  he  should  earn 
plenty  by  any  of  the  following  means : officiating  as  a 


• Katha  Up.  1—8. 


768  INVESTIOATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [BhrigU-Vallh 

priest  at  another’s  sacrifice,  teaching  scriptures  to  others, 
receiving  gifts. 

The  sruti  quotes  the  custom  of  the  wise : 

II  \ 

3.  Food  is  prepared  for  him, — they  say. 

’ When  a man  comes  seeking  for  food,  the  wise, 
possessing  plenty  of  food,  say  that  food  is  prepared  for 
him  : they  do  not  turn  him  away  telling  him  that  there 
is  no  food.  For  this  reason  also  he  shall  earn  plenty 
of  food. 

The  sruti,  moreover,  spcttks  of  the  meritoriousness 
of  the  act  of  giving  food. 

^ I pmsFn  m I ^ 

I m 50^  II  » II 

4.  This  food,  verily,  being  prepared  at  the 
highest,  at  the  highest  is  food  ready  for  him. 
This  food,  verily,  being  prepared  at  the  middle, 
at  the  middle  is  food  ready  for  him.  This  food, 
verily,  being  prepared  at  the  lowest,  at  the  low- 
est is  food  ready  for  him, — (for  him)  who  thus 
knows. 


SOME  MINOR  CONTEMPLATIONS. 


769 


dm.  X.] 


In  whatever  manner  and  at  whatever  period  of  time 
a person  gives  food,  in  the  self-same  manner  and  at 
the  self-same  period  of  time  does  it  accrue  back  to  him. 
The  sruti  shows  how  this  is  the  case.  If  food  is  pre- 
pared and  given  to  the  needy  guest  at  the  prime  of 
life,  or  in  the  best  fashion,  i,  e.,  with  greatest  respect, 
the  giver  will  reap  this  fruit : at  the  prime  of  life,  and 
in  the  best  fashion,  does  the  food  accrue  to  him,  just 
as  he  has  given  food.  Similarly,  if  he  giv^  food  at 
the  middle  age  and  with  moderate  respect,  or  if  he 
gives  food  late  in  life  and  in  the  lowest  fashion,  i.  e,, 
with  least  respect,  nay  with  disrespect,  at  the  self- 
same age  and  in  the  self-same  way  does  food  accrue  to 
him.  Whoever  knows  t^  merit  of  food  as  de- 
scribed above,  and  knows  afeo'the  fruit  accruing  from 
the  gift  of  food,  to  him  accrues  fruit  from  gift  of  food 
as  described  above. 

To  shew  that  the  earning  of  much  food  leads  to  great 
results,  the  sruti  teaches  that  superior  gifts  produce  superior 
results.  The  food  that  has  been  earned  is  best  given  when 
given  at  the  best  of  places  (f.  s.,  at  a sacred  piece  of  land  or 
body  of  water),  at  the  best  of  times  {i,  s.,  at  the  time  of  solar 
solstices,  on  new-moon  days,  etc.),  to  the  best  person  (».s.,a 
chance  guest  who  is  engaged  in  the  study  of  the  Vedas  and 
other  scriptur#^  and  in  the  observance  of  their  precepts), 
in  the  best  falhion  (t.  with  due  devotion,  homage  and 
respect),  and  by  the  best  giver  (1.  e,,  by  him  in  whom  sattva 
or  the  principle  of  goodness  predominates).  This  sAttvic 
gift  has  been  thus  described  by  the  I^ord  ; 


97 


fyo  IHVBSTIG»T10tl  QV.  niUaMKHi.^Bkl^gk-V\aUi 

wbiphis  given— knowing  it  to  be  . 

. dirty  ^give — to  one  whp  dpes  no  service, 

. . ..  . ;io.p4ce  and  in  time,  and. to  a worthy  person, 
j th^t  gi|t  is  held  Sittyic.”  * 

If  a person  knows  what  s4ttvip.  gift  is  and  acts  accord- 
.ingly,  to  him  in  a future  birth  fo&d  accrues  in  the  best  way. 
The  two  succeeding  sentences  should  be  interpreted  as 
referring  to  the  r&jasic  and  t^masic  gifts.  These  have  also 
been  desdHbed  by  the  Lord  follows : 

“ And  that  gift  which  is  given  with  a view  to 
a return  of  the  good,  or  looking  for  the  fruit, 
or  reluctantly,  that  gift  is  held  to  be  Rlljasic.” 

“ The  gift  that  is  given  at  a wrong  place  or 
time,  to  unworthy  ^sons,  without  respect  or 
with  insult,  that  is  declared  to  be  T^imasic.”  + 

. The  passages  speaking  of  the  fruits  of  the  three  kinds  of 
gift  should  also  be  interpreted  accordingly.  As  incidentally 
connected  with  the  vow  which  forms  part  of  the  contempla- 
,tion  taught  above,  the  truth  that  the  fruit  of  a gift  will  be  in 
accordance  with  the  nature  of  the  gift  has  been  here  taught. 

Contemplation  of  Brahman  in  man. 

Now  the  sruti  proceeds  to  teach  how  Brahman  should 
be  contemplated : 

^ ^ ^ I ^ SlFimsRl:  I I 

qi#:  I qitr  i ^ ii^ii 

5.  As  safety  in  speech,  as  gain  and  safety  in 
pr&»a  and  apd<na,  as  action  in  the  hands,  as 


* Bhag.  GitaXVm.20. 


t Ibid,  XVIII.  21-22. 


A^. " X.]  SOME  * 77K 

motion  in  the  feet,  as  discharge  in  the  anus:* 
such  are  contemplations  in  man.  ^ 

Safety  means  preservation  of  what  has  been  acquir- 
ed. The  devotee  should  contemplate  that  Brahman 
dwells  in  speech  as  safety;  As  speech  is  conducive  to 
safety,  safety  lies  in  speech. — (S). 

Gain  means  acquisition  of  what  has  been  not  already 
acquired.  Though  gain  and  safety  occur  when  pr&wa 
and  apina  are  strong,  still  they  are  not  altogether  due, 
to  them,  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  due  to  Brah- 
man. Therefore  it  should  be  contemplated  that  Brah- 
man dwells  in  priwa  and  apana  as  gain  and  safety. 
So,  too,  in  the  other  cases  ths^  follow.  Brahman  Him- 
self should  be  contemplated  in  such  and  such  a form. 
Action  being  brought  about  by  Brahman,  it  should  be 
contemplated  that  Brahman  dwells  in  the  hands  in  the 
form  of  action.  Similarly,  Brahman  should  be  con- 
templated as  motion  in  the  feet,  as  discharge  in  the 
anus.  Such  are  the  contemplations  of  Brahman  in 
reference  to  human  personality. 

Because  these  are  the  contemplations  of  Vish»u  in  man, 
therefore  the  wise  always  call  them  sam&jMs  or  perfect 
knowledge,  highest  contemplations  relating  to  man.<~(S). 

Speech, pram,  &c.,  are  symbols  through  which  Brahman 
should  be  contemplated.  Action:  activities  such  as  sacri- 
ficial rituals,  fighting,  &c.  Brahman  should  be  contemplated 
as  sacrificial  ritual  in  the  br&.hma»a’s  hands,  as  fighting  in 
the  warrior’s  hands.  These  are  the  contemplations  that  can 
be  practised  through  parts  of  human  body.  These  up^sanas 


772  INVESTIGATION  Ot  BRAttttAN.  [BkfigU-VaUi. 

lire  teroted  samljMs,  because  these  activities  are  constcmtly 
carried  on  and  M around, — The  plural  “ contemplations  ” 
shows  that  these  Contemplations  are  independent  of  each 
other. 

Contemplation  of  Brahman^  the  Cosmic  Beinj:. 

I fir  I ^1#  I I 

p?i5 1 I ^Ei'Lisitntr  ii 

iK  il 

6.  Next  as  to  those  referring  to  Devas:  as 
satisfaction  in  the  rain,  as  strength  in  the  light- 
ning, as  fame  in  cattle,  as  light  in  the  stars,  as 
procreation,  the  immortal,  and  joy  in  the  genera- 
t;ve  organ,  as  all  in  the  akasa. 

Next  follow  contemplations  (of  Brahman)  in  Devas. 
As  rain  conduces  to  satisfaction  through  food,  etc., 
it  should  be  contemplated  that  Brahman  Himself 
dwells  in  the  rain  in  the  form  of  satisfaction.  Similarly 
in  other  cases,  too,  Brahman  should  be  contemplated 
in  such  and  such  a form.  He  should  be  contemplated 
as  strength  in  the  lightning,  as  fame  in  cattle,  as 
procreation,  the  immortal,  and  joy  in  the  generative 
organ.*  As  the  generative  organ  conduces  to  all  these — 
to  the  attainment  of  immortality  by  way  of  leading  to  a 


• This  member  should  rather  go  along  with  the  contempla- 
tions of  Brahman  in  man  in  the  preceding  article.— (A). 


SOMB  MINOR  CONTEMPLATIONS. 


773 


Am.  X.] 

discharge  from  debts  through  a son,— Brahman  should 
be  regarded  as  dwelling  in  it  in  those  forms.  All 
things  are  set  in  the  &kjisa : and  therefore,  all  things 
that  exist  in  aka^a  should  be  conteniplated  as  Brahman. 

He  who  contemplates  jBrahman  as  the  all  in  &k&5a,  be- 
comes one  with  all. — (S). 

Having  treated  of  contemplations  of  Brahman  in  parts 
of  human  body,  the  sruti  proceeds  to  treat  of  those  relating 
to  parts  of  the  body  of  the  Deva  or  Cosmic  Being.  Rain, 
lightning,  etc.,  here  refer  to  the  Devatds  or  Intelligences 
who  identify  themselves  with  them.  Procreation,  sexual 
enjoyment,  and  sexual  intercourse  are  effected  through  the 

organ  of  generation  as  the  Kaushitakins  have  taught In 

the  whole  universe  comprising  matter  and  material  objects, 
Brahman  abides  as  the  DevatA  or  Intelligence  who  identi- 
fies himself  with  Akasa. 

Contemplation  of  Brahman 
in  some  special  aspects. 

'We  should  understand  that  the  fruits  of  the  contempla- 
tions here  taught,  commencing  with  the  contemplation  of 
speech,  are  in  accordance  with  the  upAsana.  The  sruti 
teaches  that  in  whatever  form  a man  worships  Him, 
he  becomes  that  very  thing.  With  this  view  the  sruti 
proceeds  to  treat  of  some  contemplations  along  with  their 
fruits : 


7f4'’  iNviSTldAtibW  OP  SMi^UAN. 

^ i I I i 

^5;^:  ^ I .q^  feq^qgjjr:  I 

q^sft«frSlf5qi;|isi|| 

' ‘j.  Let  him  contemplate  iThat  as  support,  he 
becomes  well -supported.  Let  him  contemplate 
That  as  great,  he  becomes  great.  Let  him 
contemplate  That  as  thought,  he  becomes 
thoughtful,  Let  him  contemplate  That  as 
homage,  to  him  desires  pay  homage.  Let  him 
contemplate  That  as  the  Supreme*,  possessed  of 
supremacy  t he  becomes.  Let  him  contemplate 
That  as  Brahman’s  destructive  agent,  around 
him  die  his  hateful  rivals,  and  those  rivals  whom 
he  does  not  like. 

The  &k&sa  too  is  Brahman. — Let  a man  contemplate 
Brahman  as  the  support  of  all ; and  by  contemplating 
Brahman  as  the  support  of  all,  the  devotee  will  have 
full  support.  Similarly,  in  the  preceding  contempla- 
tions, whatever  fruit  J is  dependent  on  a thing,§  that 
fruit  is  Brahman ; and  by  the  contemplation  of  Brah- 
man as  such,  the  devotee  attains  that  fruit.  The  sruti 

• Saj&na  interprets  Brahman  as  Veda. 

t He  becomes  the  Virftj,  who  commands  all  gross  objects  of 
pleasnrs. — (A).  According  to  Sitjana,  he  will  bare  a perfect 
comimand  over  Veda. 

5 S^h  Safety.— *(A).  • ' § 8udi  As  speech —(Aj. 


AnU.  ^.]  SOME  MINOR  CONTEMPLATIONS.  ^73 

too  says  elsewhere : “ In  whatever  form  one  worships 
Him,  he  becomes  that  very  thing.”  If  a man  con- 
templates Brahman  with  the  attribute  of  greatness, 
he  becomes  great.  If  a man  contemplates  Brahman 
as  manas  or  thought,  he  becomes  capable  of  thinking. 
If  one  should  contemplate  Brahman  with  the  attribute 
of  homage,  all  objects  of  desire  bend  low  before  the 
.devotee.  Brahman’s  destructive  power  is  that  in  which 
the  five  Devat&s — Rain,  Lightning,  Moon,  Sun  and 
J^ire — meet  their  end.  Brahman’s  destructive  agent  is 
VsLyu,  as  the  sruti  has  elsewhere  taught.*  V&yu  is  one 
with  ftkiisa,  and  akasa  is  therefore  Brahman’s  destruc- 
tive agent.  If  a man  should  contemplate  ftkftsa  in  its 
embodiment  of  V&yu,  as  Brahman’s  destructive  agent, 
such  of  his  rivals  as  hate  him — the  rivals  are  thus 
qualified  because  among  rivals  some  hate,  while  others 
do  not — die  all  around  him,  as  also  those  rivals  whom 
he  hates  though  they  do  not  hate  him. 

He  becomes  well  supported : He  will  possess  all  means  of 
living,  such  as  food  and  clothing.  Great:  by  wealth. 
Homage  : on  subduing  others. 


* “•  Vayn  is  the  end  of  all.”  (OhhA.  Up.  4-3-1.) 


7t4  iNVfisTidAttoiJ  oi*  BftisftkAH* 

^ j 5j^%si^  ^KWr;  I ?nt;ii^pjiRfi?T  I | 

q^sft«lrwif*n:  jNi 

" Let  him  contemplate  That  as  support,  he 
becomes  well-supported.  Let  him  contemplate 
That  as  great,  he  becomes  great.  Let  him 
contemplate  That  as  thought,  he  becomes 
thoughtful.  Let  him  contemplate  That  as 
homage,  to  him  desires  pay  homage.  Let  him 
contemplate  That  as  the  Supreme*,  possessed  of 
supremacy  t he  becomes.  Let  him  contemplate 
That  as  Brahman’s  destructive  agent,  around 
'lim  die  his  hateful  rivals,  and  those  rivals  whom 
he  does  not  like. 

The  &k&sa  too  is  Brahman. — Let  a man  contemplate 
Brahman  as  the  support  of  all ; and  by  contemplating 
Brahman  as  the  support  of  all,  the  devotee  will  have 
full  support.  Similarly,  in  the  preceding  contempla- 
tions, whatever  fruit  J is  dependent  on  a thing,§  that 
fruit  is  Brahman ; and  by  the  contemplation  of  Brah- 
man as  such,  the  devotee  attains  that  fruit.  The  sriiti 

* Sayina  interprets  Brahman  as  Yeda. 
t He  becomes  the  Vir&j,  who  commands  all  gross  objects  of 
pleasure.— (A).  According  to  Sftjana,  he  will  have  a perfect 
command  over  Yeda. 

SiacH  ai  6afety.-J(A). ' § Buch  as  speech— (A), 


SOME  MINOR  CONTEMPLATIONS. 


Am, 


n3 


too  says  elsewhere : “ In  whatever  form  one  worships 
Him,  he  becomes  that  very  thing.”  If  a man  con- 
templates Brahman  with  the  attribute  of  greatness, 
he  becomes  great.  If  a man  con^templates  Brahman 
as  manas  or  thought,  he  becomes  capable  of  thinking. 
If  one  should  contemplate  Brahman  with  the  attribute 
of  homage,  all  objects  of  desire  bend  low  before,  the 
■ devotee.  Brahman’s  destructive  power  is  that  in  which 
the  five  Devat^s — Rain,  Lightning,  Moon,  Sun  and 
i^ire — meet  their  end.  Brahman’s  destructive  agent  is 
Vdyu,  as  the  srnti  has  elsewhere  taught.*  Vftyu  is  one 
with  &k4sa,  and  dkasa  is  therefore  Brahman’s  destruc- 
tive agent.  If  a man  should  contemplate  fi,kAsa  in  its 
embodiment  of  V&yu,  as  Brahman’s  destructive  agent, 
such  of  his  rivals  as  hate  him— the  rivals  are  thus 
qualified  because  among  rivals  some  hate,  while  others 
do  not — die  all  around  him,  as  also  those  rivals  whom 
he  hates  though  they  do  not  hate  him. 

He  becomes  well  supported : He  will  possess  all  means  of 
living,  such  as  food  and  clothing.  Great:  by  wealth. 
Homage : on  subduing  others. 


t Vayu  is  the  end  of  all.”  (Chh6.  Up.  4-3-1.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

pINAL  ATTAINMENT. 

The  Atman  is  ever  beyond  Samsara. 

Having  thus,  from  the  stand-point  of  illusory  knowledge, 
taught  the  several  contemplations,  such  as  those  which  fall 
within  the  scope  of  the  average  aspirants,  the  commentator 
(SankarAcharya)  now  proceeds  to  expound  the  underlying 
truth,  apart  from  all  illusion. — (A). 

In  the  section  beginning  with  the  words  ‘‘  Life,  veri- 
ly, is  food,  the  body  the  food-eater,”  the  sruti  has 
taught  us  that  it  is  the  evolved  universe,  including  the 
dk£sa,  which  appears  as  food  and  food-eater. 

{Qu^estion) : — True,  it  has  been  taught.  What  of  that  ? 

{Answer]  : — From  this  it  follows  that  the  saws&ra 
which  is  due  (to  the  things  in  the  universe)  being 
mutually  related  as  enjoyers  and  objects  of  enjoyment, 
pertains  to  the  evolved  universe,  but  not  to  the  Atman. 
It  is  only  ascribed  to  Atman  through  illusion. 

This  relation  of  food  and  food-eater  belongs  to  the  world 
of  effects  and  therefore  pertains  to  the  aggregate  of  the 
principles  comprising  human  upAdhi.  The  sruti  has  taught 
this  at  length,  with  a view  to  show  that  that  relation 
pertains  only  to  the  world  of  effects  and  that  it  should  not 
be  extended  to  Brahn^an  who  is  beyond  thought  and 
words.— (S), 


PINAL  ATTAINMENT. 


Am.  X] 


777 


(The  opponent) ; — The  Atman,  too,  is  a thing  evolved 
from  the  Param4tman,  and  it  is  therefore  but  right  to 
say  that  sams4ra  pertains  to  the  Self. 

(Answer) : — No  ; for,  the  sruti  speaks  of  the  entrance 
of  that  one  who  is  not  a sams4rin.  “ This  having 
emanated,  into  that  very  thing  He  entered”  : in  these 
words  the  sruti  declares  the  entrance  in  the  universe, 
of  the  Paramitman  Himself  who  has  created  &k4sa  and 
other  things  and  who  is  not  a samsftrin.  Therefore 
the  living  self,  the  jtv&tman,  who  has  entered  the  uni- 
verse, is  none  other  than  the  Supreme,  who  is  not  a 
sawsArin.  And  the  identity  of  the  agent  in  the  acts  of 
creating  and  entering  leads  to  the  same  view.  When 
the  creation  and  the  entrance  are  looked  upon  as  the 
acts  of  one  and  the  same  agent,  then  alone  does  the 
participle,  “ having  created,”  become  explicable. 

(The  opponent) : — On  entering,  the  Supreme  under- 
goes change  of  nature. 


(Answer) : — No  ; for,  we  have  refuted  * this  inter- 
pretation by  shewing  that  entrance  has  quite  a differ- 
ent meaning. 


(The  opponent] As  the  sruti  says  specifically  that  the 
One  has  entered  the  universe  ‘‘in  this  form  of  the  jiva,”t 
the  Supreme  must  have  entered  the  universe  with  a 
different  nature  (as  sawsArin). 


• Vide  mte  pp.  525-632. 


t OhM.  Up.  6.3.2. 

98 


77&  iNVEsti6Atioi4  BkAiiMAi}.  [BHngu-VaWi. 

{Af^er) : — No,  becatise  the  sruti  again  speaks  of 
the  jtva  as  identical  with  the  t)ne,  in  the  words  “That, 
Thou  art.” 

(The  opponent) : — There  the  sruti  merely  presents  an 
exalted  picture  for  contemplation,  whereby  the  jfva 
who  has  come  to  be  a distinct  being  (as  samskrin) 
may  rid  himself  of  that  distinct  feature  (sawskra). 

(Answer) : — No,  because  of  the  identity  taught  by 
the  sruti  in  the  words  “ That  is  real,  That  the  Self, 
and  That  Thou  art.” 

That  is  to  say,  the  opponent’s  view  is  incompatible  with 
the  identity  which  the  sruti,  when  literally  interpreted, 
conveys,  and  which  we  find  no  reason  to  set  aside. — (A). 

(The  opponent) : — Why,  our  experience  does  shew 
that  the  jiva  is  a samsarin. 

(Answer) : — It  cannot  be  ; for  the  perceiver  cannot 
be  an  object  of  perception. 

(The  opponent) : — Why,  the  Self  with  his  attribute 
ofsawtsdra  is  perceived. 

(Answer)'. — No ; for,  since  an  attribute  is  not  distinct 
from  its  substratum,  the  Self  would  then  be  an  object 
of  perception  as  well  as  the  perceiver  ; i.  e.,  the  Self 
would  be  both  the  agent  and  the  object  of  the  act  of 
perceiving  ; which  is  impossible,  just  as  it  is  impos- 
sible for  heat  to  become  heated  and  for  light  to  be- 
come illumined. 


FINAL  ATTAINMENT. 


779 


Am.  X.] 

{The  opponent) : — As  the  Sell  is  found  to  be  subject 
to  fear,  &c.,  we  infer  thatjhe  Self  is  subject  to  pain,  &c 

{Answer) : — For  the  very  reason  that  fear  and  pain 
are  perceived,  they  are  not  the  attributes  of  the  per- 
ceiver. 

{The  opponent) : — This  is  opposed  to  the  reasoning 
adopted  by  the  followers  of  Kapila  and  Ka»Wa. 

{Answer) ; — That  does  not  vitiate  our  theory ; for,  as 
their  systems  lack  proper  foundation  and  contradict 
the  Veda,  we  must  look  upon  them  as  based  on  illu- 
sion. 

Thus  A-tman’s  freedom  from  sawsdra  has  been  esta- 
blished both  through  sruti  and  reasoning. 

Therefore  the  common  view  that  the  Self  is  the  enjoyer 
of  external  objects  should  be  relegated  to  the  region  of 
avidy4  ; such  a relation  cannot  apply  to  the  Atman  who 
is  one  with  the  Real  Infinite  Brahman.  That  the  duality 
comprising  the  enjoyer  and  the  objects  of  enjoyment  arises 
from  avidya  is  taught  by  the  sruti  in  the  words  “ when 
there  is,  as  it  were,  duality,  then  one  sees  the  other,  one 

hears  the  other, ”.  * And  again  in  the  words  “ But 

when  the  Self  only  is  all  this,  how  could  he  smell  an- 
other, how  could  he  see  another ’’  the  sruti  teaches 

that  the  Self  who  is  free  from  avidytL'  and  all  such  things 
is  always  free  from  duality  ascribed  to  him  by  avidytb— (S). 


* Pri.  Up.  2-4- 


780 


INVESTieXTIbN  Oir  BKAHHAN.  [BhngH-V^lH- 


. « ^ Unity  of^the  5elf  and  Brahman. 

And  (the  jiva  is  not  a sams4^)  because  he  is  one  (with 
liwara). 

How  is  the  jiva  one  (with  fsvara)  ? 

The  sruti  says : 

WT  3??^  I I H II  ^ II 

8.  And  this  one  who  is  in  the  man,  and  that 
one  who  is  in  the  Sun,  He  is  one. 

This  passage  has  been  explained  already  [vide  ante 
pp.  622 — 628). 


The  enlightened  one  attains  unity  with  the  All. 


I 


I ^ I ';(?RiT?R(wir- 

f?rR  m\ 


He  who  thus  knows,  departing  from  this  world 
and  attaining  this  Annamaya  self,  then  attain- 
ing this  Pr4»amaya  self,  then  attaining  this 
Manomaya  self,  then  attaining  this  Vijn^namaya 
self,  then  attaining  this  Anandamaya  self,  tra- 
versing these  worlds,  having  the  food  he  likes, 
taking  the  form  He  likes,  this  song  singing  he  sits. 


FINAL  attainment. 


Am.X.] 


The  meaning  of  the  verse  beginning  with  tbfc  words 
" Real,  Consciousness,  lohnite  is  Brahman,”  has  been 
explained  at  length  by  the  whole  Anandavallt  which 
forms  a sort  of  commentary  on  the  verse.  But  that 
part  of  it  which  speaks  of  the  fruit  of  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman  in  the  words  “ attains  all  desires  together,  as 
Brahman,  as  the  wise,”  has  not  been  explained  at 
length.  In  the  sequel,  the  sruti  proceeds  to  show  what 
all  those  desires  are,  what  objects  they  refer  to,  and 
how  he  attains  them  all  together  as  Brahman.  Now, 
in  the  legend  of  the  father  and  his  son,  which  forms  a 
supplement  to  the  Vidyd  taught  in  the  previous  section, 
it  has  been  taught  that  Devotion  (tapas)  is  the  means 
to  Brahma-vidyi.  The  sruti  then  treated  of  the  mutual 
relation,  as  food  and  food-eater,  of  all  created  things 
from  pr^iwa  up  to  ^.kflsa,  and  treated  of  the  modes  of 
contemplating  Brahman.  The  sruti  has  then  treated 
of  desires  relating  to  the  different  objects  in  the  crea- 
tion (such  as  dkasa)  and  of  the  appropriate  means  by 
which  they  can  be  realised.  But,  if  Atman  be  one 
alone,  there  cannot  be  objects  of  desire  as  well  as  one 
who  desires  them,  inasmuch  as  the  whole  variety  is 
resolved  into  the  One  Self,  Such  being  the  case,  how, 
it  may  be  asked,  can  we  understand  that  the  knower  of 
Brahman  attains  all  desires  together  as  Brahman  ? 

We  answer : because  the  knower  of  Brahman  be- 
comes the  all. 

The  knower  of  Brahman  enjoys  all  objects  of  pleasure  at 
once  because  he  has  become  ope  with  Brahman  | and  pop® 


7^  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  \BhngUhy cM . 

bat  Bmbman  caa  enjoy  all  objects  of  desire  at  once. 
Nothing  in  the  universe  exists  ,|i(y  itself  and  all  things  exist 
;in  the  Supreme  Brahman  who  is  the  Real,  Consciousness, 
idle  Infinite,  and  Bliss. — (S). 

Or  the  Upanishad  comprised  in  this  chapter  is  intended 
to  teach  that  Brahma-Vidyil  devours  all  things  in  the 
universe  which  are  mutually  related  as  food  and  food-eater, 
and  that  therefore  truth  points  to  non-duality — (S). 

How  has  he  (the  know'er  of  Brahman)  become  the  all  f 

The  sruti  answers  thus : By  knowledge  of  the  unity 
of  the  Atman  in  man  and  in  the  sun,  he  eliminates  all 
inferiority  and  superiority  from  the  Atman,  and  gra- 
dually passing  beyond  the  selves  generated  by  avidyd, 
such  as  those  ranging  from  the  Annamaya  to  the 
Anandamaya,  he  becomes  one  with  the  Real,  Con- 
scious, Infinite  Brahman,  the  Invisible,  the  inherent 
Bliss,  the  Unborn,  the  Immortal,  the  Fearless,  the 
Non-dual, — the  Goal.  Having  the  food  he  likes  and 
assuming  the  forms  he  likes,  he  traverses  these 
worlds, — the  earth  and  other  worlds : i.  e.,  as  one  with 
the  all,  he  sees  all  these  worlds  as  the  Self,  and  sits 
singing  Saman.  Sdman  is  Brahman  who  is  ‘ sama’  or 
one  with  all.  To  sing  S&man  is  to  proclaim,  for  the 
benefit  of  the  people,  the  unity  of  the  Self  as  well  as 
the  perfection  in  life  resulting  from  the  knowledge. 

The  knower  of  Brahman  realises,  by  his  knowledge,  the 
unreality  of  the  whole  not-self  set  up  by  avidyd,  and  sees 
himself  to  be  the  Self,  the  Brahman  who  is  the  Real,  the  In- 
visible, etc.  Having  thus  become  one  with  Brahman,  and 


FINAL  ATTAINMENT. 


Am.X.] 


devoid  of  inferior  Jtud  superior  forms,  he  traverses  through 
these  worlds,  he  continues  to  perceive  the  upSdhis  creat- 
ed by  acts,  though  he  knows  them  to  be  unreal. — No  traver- 
sing through  them  in  li^liUral  sense  is  possible  in  the  case  of 
Brahman  who  is  immutable ; the  sruti  says  “ He  thinks  as 
it  were,  he  moves  as  it  were.*”*'  The  wiseome,  being  himself 
the  all,  sees  all  these  worlds  as  the  Self ; and  feeling  that  he 
has  achieved  all,  he  sings  the  song  that  follows : — (S). 


The  enlightened  one  becomes  a Jivan-mukta. 

• Here  (in  the  passages  8 and  9)  the  sruti  teaches  what  the 
aspirant — on  attaining  one-pointedness  of  mind  either  in 
this  birth  or  in  the  next  as  the  result  of  the  contemplations 
described  in  the  last  chapter — will  know  and  what  he  will 
attain  as  the  result  of  that  knowledge.  Though  this  has 
been  taught  in  the  Anandavalll,  still  it  is  repeated  here  with 
a view  to  shew  that  devotion  concentration  or  one- 

pointedness  of  mind  which  can  be  attained  through  various 
kinds  of  up^sana  (contemplation)— finally  leads  to  the 
Supreme  end  of  man.  Since  the  aspirant  has  realised  that  the 
one  partless  Bliss,  described  in  connection  with  the  Ananda- 
mayakosa  as  “ Brahman  the  tail,  the  support,”  is  his  own 
Self,  and  since  he  has  rid  himself  of  the  illusion  that 
identifies  with  the  Self  delight  and  other  members  ot  Anan- 
damyakosa  as  well  as  the  sheaths  lying  outside  the  Ananda- 
maya  sheath  through  which  the  Self  becomes  bound,  he  is 
liberated  in  fact.  But,  people  speak  of  him  as  living  inas- 
much as  they  still  see  his  body  and  sense-organs  as  before. 
Thus  in  the  view  of  the  world  he  still  lives,  while  in  his 
own  view  he  is  liberated,  and  he  is  therefore  called  a Jlvan- 


* Bri.  Up.  4-3  7. 


^8*  INVESTIGATION  OF  BKAHMAN.  \BhrigU-V oUL 

* 

mukta,  liberated  while  still  alive.  Having  realised  identity 
with  Atman  as  shewn  above^  he  lives  like  other  people  here 
till  death, — How  does  he  live  ? — Eating  what  food  he  likes, 
putting  on  what  form  be  likes,  he  traverses  these  worlds. 
As  he  has  risen  above  the  laws  which  enjoin  certain  kinds 
of  food  and  forbid  certain  kinds  of  food,  he  eats  in  any 
man*s  house  he  likes.  So  the  sruti  says : Begging  food, 
from  all  castes,  the  stomach  his  dish  and  the  sages  also 
say,  “ As  to  those  who  tread  the  path  beyond  the  three 
guwas,  what  can  be  enjoined  or  what  can  be  fprbidden  ? 
He  also  puts  on  any  dress  he  likes ; the  sruti  speaks  of 
them  as  those  whose  dress  is  undetermined,  whose  conduct 
is  undetermined.”  * Eating  as  he  likes  and  dressing  him- 
self as  he  likes,  he  wanders  through  K^i,  Dv^ravati,  and 
other  places,  one  after  another,  never  settling  in  a house  in 
one  place ; the  sruti  speaks  of  such  a man  as  “ not  dwelling 
in  a house,  and  making  no  efFort.”t  Or  we  may  explain 
thus : Convinced  that  he  is  one  with  all,  that  “ all  sentient 
beings,  from  Brahman  down  to  unmoving  objects,  are  my 
body,”  I he  finds  satisfaction  in  the  thought  that,  whatever 
persons  move  about  and  in  whatever  worlds,  all  such  move- 
ments are  his  own.  What  more  does  he  do  ? He  sits  sing- 
ing the  siman  that  follows  here,  a mantra  in  the  form  of  a 
song.  It  is  a mantra  which  teaches  oneness  (samatva). 
The  5ruti  says : “ One  with  all,  hence  S&  man  ” ; § and  also 
“ Same  always ; hence  siman.”  II  Singing  the  mantra  in 
the  manner  prescribed  in  the  Slimaveda,  he  thereby  pro- 
claims to  his  disciples  that  he  has  become  one  with  all. 

* J&bala-Up.  6.  t Ibid.  t Upadesanahasri. 

§ Ohhk  Up,  2-9-1.  f Ibid. 


FINAL  ATTAINMENT. 


Am.  X.] 


765 


The  Jivanmukta’s  song  of  unity  with  all. 

I I 315- 

\ gJlTfr^S  \ 5^5115:  i 3lt  5^<Ff3:5  55^5115- 

5 I 3I5#l  IW^RT  W ^ 3li- 

cIFT  JH  I ^ »iT  ^ »IT  ^ SS^rr:  I 315^-, 

I 3it  fPrfi«R5rr\?i^l  §51^ 

3^:  in  o II 

10.  Oh  ! Oh  ! Oh ! I am  food,  I food,  I food  I 
I food-eater,  I food-eater,  I food-eater ! I am 
the  combining  agent,  I the  combining  agent,  I 
the  combining  agent.  I am  the  First-born  of 
the  existence  ! Prior  to  gods,  the  centre  of  the 
immortal.  Whoso  giveth  me,  he  surely  doth 
thus  save.  I,  the  food,  eat  him  who  eats  food. 
I the  whole  being  destroy.  Light,  like  the  sun ! 

Oh  ! : This  expresses  extreme  wonder. — Where  is  the 
occasion  for  this  wonder?-— Though  I am  the  non-dual 
taintless  Atman,  I am  myself  food  and  food-eater.  The 
threefold  repetition  is  intended  to  denote  the  wonder- 
fulness of  the  thing. 

All  this  is  divided  twofold,  food  and  food-eater.  The 
enlightened  one  says  “ I who  am  the  Atman,  the  Real  and 
the  Infinite,  am  myself  this  twofold  world. — (S). 

The  wonder  is  this,  that  by  the  mere  knowledge  obtained 
through  the  grace  of  the  Guru  and  the  scriptures,  I who 


99 


INVESTIGATION  OP  BRAHMAN.  [BhrigU-V&Uii. 

was  one  with  the  body  have  become  Brahman  who  is  the 
all.  In  the  words  “ I am  food**  etc.,  the  enlightened  one 
proclaims  his  experience  of  oneness.  Whatever  food  is 
prepared,— rice,  wheat,  barley, — all  that  is  myself  ; for 
while  the  name  and  form  of  the  food  are  false  appearances, 
the  basic  Reality  underlying  them  which  is  Existence, 
Consciousness  and  Bliss,  is  none  other  than  myself.  So 
too  in  the  case  of  “ food-eater’*  and  “ combiner,”  Food- 
cxtsr:  brJihTii»/is,  kshatriyas,  cattle,  horses,  etc. 

I am  myself  also  the  combining  agent,  the  Intelli- 
gence that  brings  about  the  combination  of  food  and 
the  food-eater. — Or,  (to  interpret  it  better),  f am  the 
Intelligence  who  brings  about  the  combination  of 
various  objects,  which,  having  no  purpose  of  their  own, 
are  intended  solely  for  the  purpose  of  another  being, 
so  that  it  might  serve  as  the  food  of  that  other  being, 
the  food-eater. 

I myself,  the  Atman,  of  the  nature  described  above,  am 
the  connection  between  food  and  food-eater,  the  connection 
as  perceiver  and  objects  of  perception.  There  exists  no- 
thing else  except  myself. — (S). 

The  enlightened  one  sees  in  himself  the  Self  who  is 
devoid  of  action  and  of  the  several  factors  concerned  in 
action.— (S). 

The  threefold  repetition  of  “ I am  food”  etc.,  implies 
extreme  regard  for  the  knowledge,  which  is  thus  expressed 
with  a view  to  create  confidence  in  the  minds  of  those 
people  who  betray  want  of  faith.— (S). 


PINAL  ATTAINMENT. 


Auu.  X,] 


7^7 


1 am  myself  the  one  who  brings  various  elements  to- 
gether, as  for  instance,  a king  who  collects  an  army,  and 
the  like. — Or  (to  interpret  it  in  another  way),  I am  the 
maker  of  verses,  *. the  poet. 

The  threefold  repetition  in  these  cases  shews  that  all 
food,  all  enjoyers,  and  all  poets  are  here  referred  to.  To 
be  all  these,  one  must  necessarily  be  one  with  all.  The 
threefold  repetition  is  also  meant  to  inspire  confidence,  as 
in  the  case  of  swearing.  Such  threefold  repetition  is  often 
resorted  to  both  in  the  Veda  and  in  common  parlance. 
People  say  I swear  thrice  before  you.**  The  Veda 
says : “ Thrice  real  are  Devas.**  * 

I am  the  First-born  of  the  existence,  i,  of  this 
universe  comprising  the  corporeal  and  the  incorporeal 
objects.  Prior  to  all  gods,  I am  the  centre  of  immor- 
tality ; that  is  to  say,  the  immortality  of  all  sentient 
beings  is  rooted  in  me. 

I existed  even  prior  to  the  whole  universe  made  up  of 
forms  and  formless  objects,  of  food  and  the  food-eater  ; 
that  is  to  say,  1 am  devoid  of  this  universe ; I am  of  quite 
a distinct  nature.  The  sruti  says,  “ That  eats  nothing 
whatever.”  t Even  prior  to  Devas  I was  ; i,  e,,  I existed 
ever  before  the  manifestation  of  jivas  or  separated  intelli- 
gences ; I was  pure,  without  separation  of  any  sort.  I 
am  the  centre  of  the  immortality  of  the  Devas,  because  I, 
the  Self,  the  Pratyagitman,  am  the  cause,  the  basis,  of 
their  immortality  ; or  because  the  liberation  of  the  indivi- 
dual intelligences  consists  in  their  realisation  of  identity 
with  me,  with  Brahman. — (S). 


* Tai?  Sam,  6?3-10, 


t Bri,  U|).  3-8-8. 


788  INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHMAN.  [ BkngU- 

I am  Brahman’s  First-born,  the  Hiranyagarbha,  the 
first  evolved  entity,  because,  Atman  is  the  Reality  under- 
lying the  phenomenon  called  the  Hiranyagarbha.  1 ex- 
isted even  prior  to  Indra  and  other  gods,  these  latter  having 
been  created  by  Atman,  as  the  sruti  says  : 

**  It  created  still  further  the  most  excellent 
kshatra  (power),  namely  those  kshatras 
among  Devas— Indra,  Varuwa,  Soma,  Rudra, 
Parjanya,  Yama,  Mrityu,  ts&na.”  * 

I am  the  prop  of  moksha,  like  the  knave  of  a wheel,  which 
is  the  support  of  the  wheel  and  its  spokes,  inasmuch  as  in 
the  words  the  knower  of  the  Self  crosses  beyond  sorrow”! 
the  sruti  teaches  that  knowledge  of  the  Self  leads  to 
moksha. 

Whoso  giveth  &c. : Whoever  gives  food  to  the  seekers 
of  food,  i.  e,,  whoever  teaches  that  I myself  am  in  the 
form  of  food,  he  preserves  it  as  it  is,  without  losing  ; 
but  if  one  does  not  give  food  in  proper  time  to  those 
who  seek  it  and  eats  it  himself,  such  a person  who  so 

eats, — him  I myself,  who  am  food,  will  eat  up  at  once 
as  one  eats  food. 

The  teacher  who  teaches  me,  the  Param6.tman,  to 
his  disciples,  he  alone  saves  his  disciples  by  imparting  to 
theni  the  knowledge  of  the  Param^itman. — Or,  if  a person 
generously  gives  me  to  Br&hma»as,  etc.,  for  eating,  such  a 
person  alone  saves  the  Brithmanas.  The  Yajniki-Upa- 
nishad,  after  speaking  of  the  evolution  of  things,  such  as 
food,  in  order,  says ; ‘‘Therefore  he  who  gives  food  gives  all 


t Bri.  Up.  1441, 


t Chha,  Up.  7.1.3, 


PINAL  ATTAINMENT. 


789 


Am.  X.] 

these/*  That  is  to  say,  the  Param&tman  who  is  to  be 
taught,  and  the  food  which  one  gives  to  another,  are  both 
myself.  I,  in  the  form  of  the  Devati  presiding  over  food, 
eat  up  the  greedy  miser  who  eats  all  food  by  himseJf  with- 
out giving  it  to  others ; that  is  to  say,  I ruin  him  by 
hurling  him  into  hells  such  as  the  MahAraurava.  The  rruti 
says:  “A  perfect  sinner  is  he  who  eats  alone.**  t The 
sniriti  also  says  “ Sin  do  those  sinners  eat  who  cook  food 
for  their  own  sakes.**  J 

{The  opponent) If  so,  then  I am  afraid  of  moksha, 
of  this  oneness  with  all.  Let  me  have  samsara  only, 
since,  even  when  I am  liberated  from  saws&ra,  I,  be- 
coming food,  shall  be  eaten  up  by  food. 

(Amwer) : — Do  not  be  so  afraid  ; for,  the  enjoy- 
ment of  all  desires  has  been  spoken  of  from  the  stand- 
point of  ordinary  experience.  The  enlightened  one, 
having  become  one  with  Brahman  by  knowledge,  rises 
beyond  the  world  of  our  ordinary  experience  compris- 
ing things  related  as  food  and  food-eater  set  up  by 
avidyd.  To  him  there  exists  besides  himself  nothing 
else,  of  which  he  may  be  afraid.  Therefore  one  need 
not  be  afraid  of  moksha. 

(The  opponent)  : — If  so,  why  does  the  sruti  say,  “ I 
am  food,*’  I am  food-eater,”  etc.  ? 

{Answer): — The  food  and  the  food-eater  we  commonly 
speak  of  are  mere  phenomena  and  exist  only  in  name 
they  do  not  exist  in  reality.  Though  they  are  such. 


f Op,  cit.  50,  t Tai.  Brk.  2-8-8.  | Bhag.  GitA,  3-|3. 


INVESTIGATION  OF  BRAHlkCAN. 


090 


[Bhngu-Vdti. 


stiil,  with  a view  to  teach  that  the  phenomenal  world 
emanates  from  Brahman  and  has  no  existence  outside 
'Brahman,  and  with  a view  to  extol  the  unity  of  the  Self 
with  Brahman  attained  as  the  result  of  Brahmavidyi, 
it  is  said  I am  food,  I am  food-eater,’"  etc.  To  him 
who  has  become  Brahman  by  the  destruction  of  avidya, 
there  is  ho  trace  of  fear  and  other  evils  which  are  all 
caused  by  avidyi. 

I the  whole  being  destroy : As  the  Paramesvara,  I destroy 
the  whole  being,  this  whole  universe  which  is  the  resort 
of  all  creatures  from  Brahma  downwards,  and  in  which 
all  creatures  take  their  birth. 

On  becoming  Brahman,  the  Real  Infinite  Conscious- 
ness, I dispel  the  whole  being  set  up  by  avidyj,  as  the  Sun 
dispels  the  night’s  darkness,  and  remain  all  alone.— (S). 

It  was  I who,  as  Isvara,  destroyed  the  whole  universe  at 
the  time  of  Pra/aya  or  Dissolution. 

Light  like  ihe  sun  : lik6  the  sun  my  light  is  ever  lumi- 
nous. 

Just  as  the  sun  is  self-luminous  and  shines  without  the 
•aid  of  other  lights,  so  I am  the  self-luminous  consciousness, 
shining  without  the  aid  of  the  eye  or  any  other  medium. 

Knowledge  ensures  Bliss. 

U II 

II  ^ II 

II.  Whoso  thus  knows.  Such  is  the  Upa- 

nisha4t 


AnU.X.^  FINAL  ATTAINMENT.  79t 

To  him  whO|  controlling  the  senses  and  the  mind, 
abstaining  from  all  outward  concerns,  endued  with 
perfect  endurance  and  with  perfect  balance  of  mind— • 
who,  by  mighty  devotion,  like  Bhrigu,  attains  the 
knowledge  of  the  Paramfttman  as  imparted  in  these 
two  vallts, — to  him  accrues  all  the  fruit  described 
above.  Amen  ! 

The  fruit  mentioned  above  accrues  to  that  person  who 
realises,  through  Annamaya  and  other  seifs,  the  Atman,  the 
One  Partless  Bliss,  spoken  of  as  “ Brahman,  the  tail.” 
Though  it  has  been  already  said  that  the  enlightened  one 
attains  this  fruit,  still  it  is  repeated  here  with  a view  to 
shew  that  the  enlightened  one  alone  attains  the  fruit  and 
that  the  enlightened  one  does  necessarily  attain  the  fruit. 


THUS  ENDS  THIS  UPANISHAD. 


