===== Internet Archive OCR: rkas.2429.threegreatachary0000unse_djvu.txt =====

x 


Poe 


4 


CRITICAL SKETCHES OF THE? LIFE AND TIMES: 
AN EXPOSITION OF JHEIR PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEMS.’ - 


- 
» 


" 


FIRST EDITION 


PRICE RS, TWO. 
a, NATESAN & CO., PUBLISHERS, 
MADRAS. 


r) = 
HINDU RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


The Bhagavad-Gita. With the Text in Devanagari 
and an English Translation by Annie Besant. Fourth 
Edition. Price percopy. Amnas Four. 


The Three Great Acharyas; Sankara, Ramanuja 
and Madhwa: A study of their Lives and Times and a 


critical exposition of their philosophy In one volume. 


Rs Two. To Subscribers of “I. R.” Re. 1-8. 


Light on Life. A Selection of Six Spiritual Dis-. 


courses by Baba Premanand Bharati. Price Re, One. 
To Subscribers of the ‘“‘ Indian Review,” 12 as. 


The Life and Teachings of Buddha. By A. Dharmapala. 


. Price As. 12. 2nd Edn. To Subscribers of “I. R.” As. 8. 


. Sri Sankaracharya’s Select Works. The Text in Sanskrit 
Devanagiri type and an English Translation. By 3. Ven- 
kataramanan, B.A. 2nd Edn. Rs. 2. To Subs. LR. Re. 1-8. 


The Vaishnavaite Reformers of India.—Critical Sketches 
of their Lives and Writings. By T.Rajagopalachariar, 
M.A.,B.L. Price Re. 1. To Subscribers of “I.R.” As, 12. 


Swami Vivekananda : Speeches and Writings. With four 
Portraits. 5th Edn. Rs. 3. To Subs. of “I.R.” Rs. 2-8. 


The Mission of Our Master. Essays and Discourses by 
the Eastern and Western Disciples of Ramakrishna- 
Vivekananda. Rs. 3. To Subs. of ‘‘ LR.” Rs. 2-8. 


Aspects of the Vedanta. By various writers. Third 
Edition. Re, 1.. To Subscribers of the “ 1.R.” As. 12, 


Ten Tamil Saints. By M. 8. Purnalingam Pillai. 
B.A., L.T. Price As. 12. To Subscribers of “I.R." As. 8. 


_ India’s Untouchable Saints, By K, V. Ramaswami. 
B.4., B.L. Price As. 6. To Subscribers of “I.R.” As. 4. 


Essentials of Hinduism. Ag. 12. To Subs. of “I.R.” As. 10. 
Hindu Psalms & Hymns. By K. V.Ramaswami. As. 4, 


Maitreyl: A Vedic Story. By Pandit Sitanath Tattva- 
bhushan. Price As. 4. 


Vemana. The Telugu Poet and Saint. By C.R : 
krishna Rau. As. 4, . er 


Aggressive Hinduism. By Sister Nivedita. As, 2. 


Nation-Building: A Stirring appeal to Indi 
Annie Besant. As. 2, eae eer. < 


G.A.Natesan & Co., Publishers, George Town, Madras. 


_ SANKARA, RAMANUJA, MADHWA 
| SWAMI HARSHANARDA 


CRITICAL SKETCHES OF THEIR LIFE AND TIMES: 
AN EXPOSITION OF THEIR PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEMS. 


FIRST EDITION 


PRICE RS, TWO. 
G. A. NATESAN & CO., PUBLISHERS, 
MADRAS. 


% 


Jib hey 
a By cold 


%  e 
- 


ba . 


° SWAM! HARSHANANDA 


CONTENTS. 


SRI SANKARACHARYA 
LIFE AND TIMES 


By Mr. C. N. Krishnaswami Alyar, M.A. ... r 
PHILOSOPHY : 

By Pandit Sitanath Tattvabushan me FR 

By Mr. S. Venkataramanan see EEG 


SKI RAMANUJACHARYA 


LIFE AND TIMES 

By Dr. S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar, M.A.%.. 13 
PHILOSOPHY 

By Prof. T. Rajagopalacharyar, M.A., ... 152 
RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 

Prof. M. Rangacharya, M.A. a. AGS 


SRI MADHWACHARYA 


LIFE AND TIMES 

By Mr. C. N. Krishnaswami Aiyar, M.A, ... 225 
PHILOSOPHY 

By Mr. S. Subba Rau, M.A. oe ©6286 


PREFACE 


ANKARA, Ramanuja and Madhwa are the three . 
Great Acharyas whose teachings hold sway 

over the bulk of the Hindus all over India. They are 
equally appreciated by the best thinkers of the day 
even among the Oriental Scholars of Europe and 
America. An attempt is made in the following pages 
to bring under one cever critical sketches of their life 
and times together with an exposition of their res- 
pective systems of philosophy. It is hoped that this 
comprehensive edition will be welcomed by the public, 


EDITED 
BY 
G, A. NATESAN 


HIGH CLASS 
MONTHLY | 
PERIODICAL, 


vw ® Ba ‘aS : r fi 7 
‘< 3 eae ns Oa 1 ee 


LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA. 


BY 
Mr. C. N. KRISHNASWAMI AIYER, m.a. 


CHAPTER }i. 


—— i —o_s 


INTRODUCTION. 


——-_ ~»- ——— 


I. SOURCES OF INFORMATION AND THEIR VALUE. 


af S far as it is known,” says a recent American 
AY writer in speaking of the great Athenian 
Sage, “the life of Socrates, in its merely 
outward bodily incident, may be told in a paragraph.”* 
Such, it is to be feared,is also the case with Sankara, 
whose life it is here purposed to sketch. Few of the 
facts of his life can be narrated with certainty, not 
even the time and the place of his birth, 


Yet the need fora reliable and historic account 
of Sankara is being felt more and more: for the 
Adwaita Philosophy, of which he was the foremost 
expounder and which has since his time enjoyed a 
wide and more or less steady popularity throughout 
India, has latterly had additional importance given to 
it by the Vedantic studies of Western scholars, Euro- 
pean and American, and by the spread of Theosophic 
thought. The comparative method is being applied 


vo 


2 "LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 

to it and its merit is being thus tested. Christian and 
other hostile sects seek to expose what they believe to 
be its shortcomings. This intelligent study of 
Sankara’s works has naturally aroused a desire to 
ascertain the facts of the ‘external’ life of the Teacher. 
As yet, however, but few really historic memoirs 
exist of the life and times of Sankara, written ina 
true historic spirit and with the object of showing 
him just as he was. The aim of the present sketch 
is accordingly to gather together for the benefit of 
the general reader what is to be found in the Sankara- 
vijayas or ‘ Triumphs of Sankara’ which have come 
down to us, and in the monographs and stray items 
of information available in the recent writings of 
modern enquirers. 

These ‘ original authorities’ are—(1) the Sankara- 
vtjayas of Madhavacharya, Anandagiri, Chidvilasa 
and Swami Sadananda, arranged perhaps in chrono- 
logical order here; (2) a chapter which is to be found 
in the ninth Amsa of Skanda Purana; and (3) 
Mahdvavijaya and Manimanjart, both, by Pandit 
Narayanacharya, a hostile Madhva writer. And of 
recent writers, Wilson, Max Muller, and Telang may 
be mentioned as the most important. A few words 
regarding the relative merits of these several sources 
are needed to prevent misconceptions and explain the 
attitude of the present writer towards them. 

Madhavacharya, whose work is placed first in the 
list, is the well-known Vidyaranya, who was minister 
of Hukka and Bukka, Kings of Vijayanagar, and 


SOURCES OF INFORMATION AND THEIR VALUE 3 


became later on the chief of the Sringeri Mutt. This 
fact settles the time when this Sankaravijaya was 
written, Whether Vidyaranya wrote it himself or caused 
itito be written by some one else: for, considered as a 
literary effort, it is to be feared that, matter and 
manner taken together, the work does not reflect much 
credit on the critical capacity and historic judgment 
of the author. It is quite clear from internal evidence 
that it was meant to be a counterblast to the Madhva 
writings above mentioned. Of the other Sankara- 
vijayas, it need only be said that they all show traces 
of relatively later origin, though Wilson claims for 
Anandagiri age as wellas trustworthiness. This, 
however, Telang has shown to be groundless and 
untenable. The chapter of Skandapurana has been 
mentioned only to show that it isa very recent and 
poor interpolation and has even less historic value. 
Madhvavijaya and Manimanjart are, on the other 
hand, owing to their nature, very interesting for 
historic purposes. In his sketch of the life of Madhva, 
the writer of this account has endeavoured to show 
that these works were the fruit of the persecution 
which that teacher of dualistic Vedanta had received 
from the then incumbents of the Sringeri Mutt, and that 
he had on that account been forced to call himself 
Bhima,.and make Sankara, one of whose successors at 
the Sringeri Mutt, accidentally bearing the same name, 
(as has been shown elsewhere), had been troubling 
him, an avatar of a Rakshasa, Maniman by name, men. 
tioned in the Mahabharata. Pandit Narayana, one of 


4 LIFE AND TIMES ,OF SANKARA 


the followers of Madhva, in the next generation, put 
these hints together along with some traditions current 
in Malabar about Sankara, and thus composed these 
two works of his, with intent to discredit Sankara’s 
origin and his doctrines. 
2. HINDUISM BEFORE Jincane BUDDHISM 
The life of Sankara, like that of every other great 
man, has to begin with the description of the state of 
things in the midst of which he was born and brought 
up, for ‘‘each man, poet or philosopher, inhales much 
before he exhales.” Accordingly'we have to consider 
the state of Hinduism at the time of the advent of 
this great Guru, and pass in rapid review the stages. 
it had gone through before reaching that particular 
state. 
It is enough, however, to start with the period, 
whenever it was, When Vedic sacrifices constituted 
mainly the creed of Hinduism. In the,vords of the 
poet, “ kings (in those days) had milked the earth for 
sacrifices, and Indra, in return, the heavens, to help 
harvests on.” There was the sacrifice ,of the horse, 
there was the sacrifice of the goat, and of all things 
imaginable. And sacrifices had increased not merely 
in number but also in elaboration of ritual. Extra- 
vagant rewards had been promised by the promoters, 
which, however, could not be realised in practice and 
the unconvincing explanations invented to explain 
these failures away, merely served to hasten the fall 
of the system. Under such circumstances, therefore, 
the desire for inner religious improvement was slowly 


HINDUISM BEFORE SANKARA: BUDDHISM 5 


growing and making itself manifest. The opponents 
of animal sacrifices were to be found not merely among 
the Kshatriyas, but the more thoughtful among the 
Brahmins had also begun to sing the praises of divine 
contemplation and practical moral virtues, as against 
_ the extravagances ‘of sacrifices. The Upanishads or 
«« the top-knots of the Vedas,” as they are sometimes 
termed, are almost everywhere of this line of thought, 
and one glorious hymn, chanted to this day by the 
orthodox Smarta Brahmin before breaking his fast, 
discovers im beautiful terms the meaning of the whole 
movement. It is known as BRAIA(Sacrifice of the Self) 
and is well worthy of translation; but it being rather 
long, this sample will suffice for our present purpose : 
—<* And of the sacrifice performed by the master who 
has understood these truths, the soul is the performer ; 
the heart, the seat of the sacrificial fire ; sensual desires, 
the ghee; anger, the sacrificial lamb ; contemplation, 
fire; the period of sacrifice as long as life lasts ; 
whatever is eaten, is sacrificial rice; whatever is drunk, 
is the soma drink; and death is the sacred bath con- 
eluding the ceremony !”’ 

“This spirit, fostered by men of thought and en- 
couraged by men of action over a long period, at last 
practically manifested itself in the teaching of Gautama 
the Buddha. Most Hindus have learned to regard this 
teacher as an avatar of Vishnu, though, strangely 
enough, he is said to have come down not to establish 
religion and law by protecting the good and punish- 
ing the wicked, which is the mission of all the other 


6 LIFE AND TIMES QF SANKARA _ 


avatars of Vishnu, but to delude some pious devotees 
of Siva as well as of Vishnu. Many others, who have 
learned to look upon him with better and more ra- 

tional feelings, yet seem to regard him as an alien, 

and his faith as absolutely alien to India. This, it 

need hardly be pointed out, is a gross misreading of 
history. The teaching of Gautama, a member of a 

Rajput clan, was but a developed form of the thoughts 
and theories found in the Upanishads, with the 

freshness and vigour of his own personality and zeal 

added to them. The rapid spread of Buddhism among 

all classes is proof that he had ‘set to music’ just ‘ the 

tune which had been haunting millions of ears.” Long 

after his departure and after hjs inclusion in the 

Hindu Pantheon, Buddha’s real service to mankind 

is described by Jayadeva, in one of his popular 

songs, to have been the propagation of the spirit of 

mercy and the abolition of animal sacrifices. For 

sings he, ‘‘O Thou of merciful heart! Thou didst 

condemn the slaughter of lambs at sacrifices, though 

enjoined by Srutis, when Thou didst take the shape of 
Buddha.” His crusade against the killing of angnals, 
and his battles so earnestly fought in favour of ehte- 
ousness and renunciation, his use of the vernaculars in: 
religious teaching instead of Sanskrit, and his organi- 
sation of bands of monks and nuns of allcastes to 
spread his faith—all these points explain the electric: 
speed with which Buddhism spread in his days as well 
as in the succeeding times, not merely over all parts of 
India but over vaster regions East and West. 


REVIVED HINDUISM: ITS DEFECTS 7 


Starting under such favourable conditions, how- 
ever, this religion, like every other institution ever 
started by human agency, silently went on changing 
from century to century, and during its later life 
became corrupt in many ways. Gross idolatry in 
practice (cf. Hiouen Tsang), formal atheism in doc- . 
trine, a regular army of monks and nuns everywhere 
eating up the substance of the industrious and charged 
with the worst evils of decayed monasticism, Were 
only afew of its bad features. Its enemies, the 


Brahmins, at length felt that the time had come for ) 


them to use the logic and rhetoric of Buddhists © 
against themselves,—and they began to do it 
effectively. 

3. REVIVED HINDUISM: Its DEFECTS. 

Among these neo-Hindu missionaries, Kumarila 
Bhatta_is evidently the most renowned. Tradition 
connects him with a fierce and relentless conflict 
against the Buddhist, of which more will be said later 
on. Here it is enough to note that his peculiar faith 
was in what is known as Karma-marga, that is, salva- 
tion by the sole means of the faithful performance of 
Karmas or the daily and other periodical ceremonial 
rites enjoyed by the Vedas and the Smritis. His suc- 
cess, whatever it was, was due, not certainly to the 
advocacy of animal sacrifice, whose day had most 
assuredly fled, and to which mere lip-service was all 
that anybody would render, but to the revival of the 
harmless rites, made more impressive and more 
authoritative through his successfully meeting the 


8 " LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 
¢ 


arguments of the Buddhists against the Vedic religion 
and in favour of their own faith. 

Bhatta’s was only one of the many sects that had 
been formed at various times in the latter progress of 
Hinduism. There was Bhairavas, Saktas, Ganapat- 
yas, With many sub-divisions among each; and the 
name of these sects was really legion.* They had all 
based their faiths, however, on the Vedas; particular 
texts or passages, torn from the context and specially 
interpreted, formed their scripture; and several of 
them had begun to claim greater authority for the 
Puranas or the Smritis on which they had based 
their belief, than even that which belonged to the 
Vedas. And what was of infinitely greater import- 
ance, the practices of some of these religious sects 
were abominable or terrible. And every sect was in- 
tolerant of every other. The long and ceaseless 
wranglings of these sects and their occasional mutual 
. persecutions and other hardships thereby caused had, 
lat length, resulted ina general sense of weariness 
| which seemed to have come Over men, and an earnest 

hankering after some kind of harmonising principles, 
and general religious peace. Union and friendliness 
were possible only when a common basis could 
be so fashioned as to be comprehensive and 
able to allow for large differences of secondary im- 


+ TFT: TTA TUR: HroMsMAcqay dwar ae: 
agiad qaieiaaies qo oftcieg faraae ore: atat]ed 
Sankara- Vi jaya. 


REVIVED HINDYISM: ITS DEFECTS 9 


portance, philosophically as well as practically. This 
then was assuredly the kind of unifying influence that 
Was urgently needed. It was given to Sankara to sup- 
ply this need, in the most wonderful manner possible 
and with the most solid success, and make Vedanta 
the basis of every religious sect that India has known, 
so as to satisfy the needs of men of all shades of 
antelligence and bias. 


CHAPTER 11. 
——»- — 


BIRTH AND EARLY YEARS. 


—  - +-——- —— 


THE TIME AND PLACE OF HIS BIRTH. 


An obscure village named Kaladi, six miles to the 
east of Alvoi, now a station on the Cochin-Shoranur 
Railway line, is traditionally mentioned as the birth- 
place of Sankara. It is not undisputed ; for, Ananda- 
girl mentions that place as Chidambaram. He is, 
however, alonein this statement. Further, the writer 
of Manimanjari gives it as Kaladi, and his testimony 
in such matters must be held peculiarly valuable for 
very obvious reasons. Again, Pazurpanai Illam, one of 
the Nambudri families in the neighbourhood of Trichur, 
has been in all Malabar understood to be the family to. 
which the mother of Sankara belonged, and her 
cremation ground thereabout is still shown to the 
enquirer asa place of interest. There is likewise a 
curious practice connected with the temple of Narayana 
at Badarikasrama on the Himalayas. The officiating 
priest there has been a Nambudri from Malabar for a 
long period, and the memory of no man goes back toa 
period when he was otherwise. And, as tradition 
assigns the founding of this temple to Sankara, the 
presence of the Nambudri there can easily be explained’ 


wa 
= 


THE TIME AND PLACE OF HIS BIRTH IF 


by his kinship to the founder, We have, therefore, 
every reason to believe that Sankara belonged to: 
Malabar and to the Nambudri class of Brahmins. 

The Agrahara of Kaladi is said to have been 
founded by a neighbouring chief, who was called 
Rajasekhara, if that be, indeed, a proper name. This. 
chief dreamed, as thousands of other men have done, 
that Siva had become manifest in the neighbourhood 
of his capital in a spontaneously risen Linga. And he 
accordingly caused a temple to be built for the God 
and founded an Agrahara or settlement of Brahmins 
for the service of the temple. Among these was one 
of the name of Vidyadhiraja, which is evidently a 
title indicating his learning. He had an only son of 
the name of Sivaguru. They went through the usual 
course of instruction open in those days to. Brahmin 
boys; and, having completed his studies, he married’ 
at the proper age and settled down 'as a householder. 
For a long time he was childless, and both husband: 
and wife prayed to Siva to bless them with a son. At 
length, in consequence, as the Sankaravi,aya puts it, 
of a plan agreed upon at Kailas between Siva and the > 
Gods who had called there to learn how He was . 
going to revive Hinduism, the God was pleased to 
bless the wife of Sivaguru and she became the mother 
of Sankara. 

It would be a marvel if, in the case of such a 
great Guru like Sankara, as in so many other cases, 
later generations had found nothing extraordinary 
about his birth. Accordingly, in addition to the divine 


12 LIFE AND TIMES | OF SANKARA 


blessing noted just now, we have several other 
versions to consider in regard to the circumstances of 
the Guru’s birth and parentage. Madhava adds that, 
before blessing Sivaguru’s wife, the God asked her in a 
vision while she was asleep, whether she would have a 
number of dunces and ruffians for children, or an only 
‘wise son who was destined to be short-lived. She 
‘wisely chose the latter alternative, and had Sankara 
for her son. 

Anandagiri, however, relates the story in an 
entirely different manner. We have seen that he 
mentions the place of Sankara’s nativity as Chidama- 
baram. We are told that there was a pious Brahmin 
living with his wife at this place, and that at one time 
the husband retired to a neighbouring forest after 
renouncing the world, that the wife continued for a 
long time to serve the Lord of Chidambaram, and 
that, asa reward of her devotion, the Lord was 
pleased to make her conceive in some mysterious and 
miraculous manner. And the child thus born to her 
‘was Sankara. 

There is again another version of the story of 
Sankara’s birth which we have to examine before we 
pass on. The writer of Manimanjari states that a 
Brahmin widow of Kaladi went astray from the 
ascetic life imposed upon her and begot a male child, 
and that this child was Sankara. This plain state- 
ment, however, is based on a tradition still current in 
some parts of Malabar, that a young widow of Kaladi 
once went to the temple of Siva along with other girls 


THE TIME AND PLACE OF HIS BIRTH 13 
° 


of her own age, and that, as some among them prayed 
for children, she also did so, that the Lord granted her 
request, and that she bore Sankara in consequence. 
The difficulties which Sankara is said to have ex- 
perienced later on, in conducting the funeral rites 
of his mother, would also seem to confirm the suspl- 
cions about the illegitimacy of his birth, though the 
objections ‘of his relatives were merely against a 
Sanyasin attempting to violate the rules of his order, 
by undertaking to perform the funeral rites of his dead 
mother. 

We have no materials to enable us, at this dis- 
tance of time, to estimate authoritatively the meaning 
of these stories regarding Sankara’s birth. We see, 
however, that Madhava’s book makes absolutely no: 
mention whatever of these damaging traditions. If: 
he hadxhad any knowledge of or belief in them, he 
would surely not have left them unexplained ; for, he 
has sought to explain away the other calumnies 
against Sankara ; as, for instance, the incidents relating 
to Bharati which will be mentioned later on. Fur- 
ther, there is a fairly strong argument to prove that 
all this talk about his birth being suspicious is unfound- 
ed. Both at thetime of his renunciation and in connec- 
tion with the funeral rites of his mother, we shall 
see that Sankara showed an extraordinary affection 
for her ; in the latter case, he even went the length of 
offending the whole circle of his orthodox relations 
for the purpose of satisfying his mother’s wishes. 
Now, as it has been a maxim with the Aryan Hindus 


14 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 
¢ 


to regard the unchaste mother, the indebted father 
and the idiotic son, as among the worst enemies of 
man, Sankara would hardly {have cared to suffer 
all the troubles and annoyances that he did on his 
mother’s account, if she had not deserved that 
amount of sacrifice and filial love on his part, even 
when such sacrifice was unnecessary according to the 
strict letter of the law. Accordingly, we may 
ascribe the whole of this tradition partially to calumny 
and partially to misguided admiration. It is also 
‘considered by some, we may add, that he was perhaps 
a posthumous son, and it is just possible that this 
simple fact was afterwards developed by friends no 
less than enemies on the lines of the mysterious with 
the most varied and grotesque results in every case. 
If these are the difficulties in regard to the ascer- 
tainment of the place and the circumstances of San- 
kara’s birth, infinitely greater are those that we have 
to face in trying to ascertain the time of his birth. 
The exact year of his birth is perhaps lost to us for 
ever, for, the horoscope given in Madhava’s book is a 
mere imitation of Rama’s and is, therefore, worthless.* 
The Sringeri Mutt, undoubtedly of the Guru’s found- 
ing, has a list of his successors; but, unhappily, it is 
an imperfect list, for, besides other errors, it assigns to 
Suresvaracharya, the immediate successor of the Guru, 


“ Two views are generally held as the probable time of the 
Guru's advent; namely, 788 A. D., which is accepted by one 
school of thinkers, and the close of the 6th century, which is 
held by the other. It need hardly be observed that nothing 
conclusive has been arrived at by either party, nor is it likely 
to be until better data become available. 


THE TIME AND PLACE OF HIS BIRTH 15 
° 

a period of 700 years or more! Still as the time of 
this monk’s birth is placed at the close of the eighth 
century of the Vikrama era, if we make some allow- 
ance for somebody’s carelessness herein, it is easy 
perhaps to reconcile small discrepancies and take /) 
788 A. D.as the year of the Guru’s birth, as Max / 
Muller does. 

Two additional reasons would also seem to support 
this. Madhava’s book locates the Buddhists mainly in 
Kashmir or more generally in the Himalyan regions; 
and Magadha does not seem to have figured in San- 
kara’s days as the stronghold of Buddhism, or even as 
a province where the Buddhists were numerous, though 
in the minority. Now as Hiouen Tsang had found in 
the middle of the seventh century that Magadha was 
still dominantly Buddhistic under Siladitya II., a 
period of about 150 years is not toolong for the 
decline of Buddhism in this province. Again, if the 
date assigned by the late Professor Sundaram Pillay 
to Sambandha could be accepted as the right and 
proper date, and if theallusion said tobe found in 
one of Sankara’s devotional songs isa real reference 
to that Tamilian saint, then the year that we have 
accepted has every probability of being the right 
date. As it is, however, it can only be regarded as 
provisional. 

Telang, it must be noted, very ably pleads that 
Sankara must have been born somewhere towards the 
close of the sixth century, from a remarkable allusion 
in his Sutra-Bhashya to a Purna Varman, who was a 


16 "LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 
€ 


Buddhistic King of Magadha at about that time. To 
the present writer, however, it seems to need additional 
and more direct evidence before that date may well be 
said to have been established. For the present, then, 
We proceed on the supposition that 788 A. D. indicates 
the year of Sankara’s birth. 
2. EARLY YEARS AND EDUCATION. 

The boy’s early years were spent in the usual way. 
He was initiated into the mysteries of the alphabet at 
the proper time, and soon manifested uncommon 
intelligence. In his seventh year he was about to be 
invested with the sacred string, when his father died. 
His mother had the ceremony conducted later, and sent 
him to learn the Vedas and the Vedangas—from whom 
Wwe are not told. As has been said of several others, 
it is also said of Sankara that he learned all the Vedas 
and Shastras in twoor three years—by the eighth 
year of his age he had finished his course of studies! 
And the same writer who tells us this also informs us, 
almost in the same breath, that after his return from 
his Guru’s home, where he had been staying for some 
years, fathers who had daughters to marry Were anxi- 
ous to offer them in marriage to him, Now, it is 
absolutely unheard of among Nambudiris, at any time 
in their history, that a boy was married about his eighth 
year. .One or the other of these statements, therefore, 
has to be iejected; and we may regard the tender age 
when he finished his course of studies as having been 
given in a careless manner or with intent to add to the 
Guru’s greatness. We shall, therefore, reject it and 


EARLY YEARS AND EDUCATION 17 


e 

hold that, in all probability, Sankara had become a 
young man by the time he returned to his own house, 
having, in the usual course, completed his study of the 
Shastras in the house and under the guidance of his 
teacher. This, however, is not meant to urge that 
there was nothing extraordinary about him. It only 
rejects tenth-rate and meaningless miracles. How 
capacious his mind was and how solid and how well 
the seeds of learning now sown in him blossomed 
forth when the time came for it, appears in every 
‘line of the commentaries, as will be shown later on. 

Sankara’s student-life being over, proposals of 
marriage began to be seriously entertained; and his 
mother must have been, as usual, busy consulting 
astrologers about the horoscopes of suitable girls. One 
day, about this time, we are told that the sage Agastya 
and other sages called at Sankara’s house; and the 
talk turning on the length of his life, Agastya reminded 
the mother of her choice of a wise but short-lived 
son, and told her that her son wasaccordingly destined 
to die at an early age. All the story about the short- 
ness of Sankara’s life naturally looks very much like 
a prediction after the event. Accidents have often 
helped to guide innate tendencies and some accident, 
at this time, might have contributed to the sudden 
turn in Sankara’s life. Whatever the reason, he 
seems immediately afterwards to have formed within 
himself a resolution to renounce the world and 
become a Sanyasin. Thus the talk of marriage was 
soon thrown into the background by his serious 


2 


18 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


€ 

proposal to become at once a Sanyasin. The mother, 
as is usual in all similar cases, bewailed her sad fate, 
her loneliness during the remainder of her life, and 
felt sorry that there was to be no one to perform her 
funeral rites after her death. The Shastras declare 
that a Sanyastn is above all rites and ceremonies, so 
that even the performance of the funeral rites of his 
parents ceases to be obligatory on him. Sankara 
assured his mother, however, that, Sanyasin or no 
Sanyasin, he would always be ready to attend to her 
spiritual requirements. Even then his mother was 
not satisfied, and Sankara was obviously waiting for 
his opportunity in patience. 

One day, mother and son went to have their bath 
in the river. It was then in floods: and as he was 
having his plunge, he felt that a crocodile was pulling 
him by the foot. At once he shouted out to his 
mother in a loud voice,—‘*‘ I am gone, dear mother ! 
The crocodile is dragging me down. Let me have 
the satisfaction of dying a Sanyasin. Give me the 
permission needed. I shall then die in peace!” The 
mother in this crisis could not, of course, hesitate and 
at once told him that he was a Sanyasin. 

Perhaps there was a real peril, and Sankara 
secured what is known as BTqa-qaa or the adoption of 
the vow of asceticism and mendicancy when death is 
near. However it was, he emerged from the water a 
declared Sanyasin. He repeated his promise to his 
mother, placed her under the care of his relatives, to 
whom he likewise left all his property, and left Kaladi 


RENUNCIATION 19 
e 


in search of a Guru with a view to get himself form- 
ally initiated into the holy order of Hindu Sanyasa, 
3. RENUNCIATION. 

In almost every part of India there have been 
recognised seats of Hindu learning sanctified through 
their association with the names of some great 
teachers. All the various branches of Ancient Indian 
learning have had their recognised founders and 
‘traditional’ leaders. The Vedanta-Sutras of Bada- 
rayana, the Karma-Sutras of Jaimini and all other 
works of that kind have been taken up by particular 
‘schools’ in various partsof the country, and their tradi- 
tional interpretations of religious doctrine and philo- 
sophy have been treasured up and handed down by 
oral teaching to generations of earnest and faithful stu- 
dents. Of such seats of learning, Sankara was led to 
choose one: ‘on the bank of the Narmada’—evidently, 
hermitage—presided over at this time by a great Sany- 
asin of the name of Govinda. His teacher and per- 
haps also predecessor in office there was the famous 
Gaudapada. Hardly anything more has come down 
to us of Govinda than that he taught Sankara the 
germs of his philosophy. But as we find that, in 
every work that Sankara has left behind, he sub- 
scribes himself reverentially as the disciple of Sri 
Govinda Bhagavatpada, we may well take it to prove 
the great esteem that Sankara had for this teacher, 
as also the desire to publish his obligations tothe 
teacher. Sankara also pays his respects to his Parama- 
Guru—i.e., the teacher’s :teacher—Gaudapada—thus 


20 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 
€ 


making it almost certain that the latter had just 
preceded Govinda. 

The description of the first meeting of Govinda 
and his pupil is given both by Madhava and Chid- 
vilasa. The former is perhaps at his worst here; for 
he makes Sankara go to the hermitage, cast himself at 
the teacher’s feet, and, on being asked who he was, 
answer—‘ Master, I am neither fire, nor air, nor 
earth, nor water—none of these, but the Supreme 
Spirit shining underneath all phenomena.” In other 
words, he talks Advaita long before learning it ! Chid- 
vilasa locates the hermitage on the Himalayas; San- 
kara goes to Govinda there and pays his respects; and, 
on being asked who he was, says—‘“‘I am the son of 
Sivaguru, a Brahmin of Kerala. My father died in 
my childhood, and I was brought up by my mother. 
Ihave hada fair course of training in the Shastras.” 
Then he goes on to give the crocodile incident already 
referred toand requests the teacher to formally initiate 
him and invest him with the robe of the Sanyasin. 
Perhaps the temple at Badari was built in memory 
of these days. 

Satisfied with this account, Govinda received 
this pupil with pleasure, and having made him go 
through the formalities needed, made him a full 
Sanyasin and began to teach him the philosophy that 
he had himself learnt from Gaudapada. How long 
the course of discipline and instruction lasted we can- 
not tell, but it must have been a fairly long one. 
For, soon after its completion, Sankara leaves the 


RENUNCIATION aI 


hermitage and goes to Benares, where he receives 
pupils himself and begins to write his works and 
propagate his philosophy. It is said that Govinda 
desired Sankara to go to Benares first, and after- 
wards become one of those peripatetic teachers of 
religion who abounded so largely in pre-Buddhistic as 
Well as post-Buddhistic India. To this day his name 
is invoked by his affectionate disciples as ‘ the best 
of peripatetic teachers.’ 


CHAPTER III. 
2 gee 
PREPARATION FOR THE GREAT MISSION. 
peat ee 
I. Lire AT BENARES. THE COMMENTARIES 
AND OTHER WORKS. 
Si 

Accordingly Sankara went to Benares, and in that 
centre of learning soon distinguished himself in dia- 
lectics and philosophy, and began to attract pupils 
from various quarters. Among these was a young 
Brahmin from the land of the Cholas, 7.e., from 
Chidambaram or some part of what is now the dis- 
trict of Tanjore. He was admitted asa novice with 
the name of Padmapada, and his devotion to the Guru 
was unbounded. He, therefore, became specially en- 
deared to him; and this having roused some 
impatience in the minds of the other disciples, Sankara, 
on one occasion, put his favourite’s faith to the test in 
their presence by making him Walk across the Ganges 
as if on solid ground, which he is said-to have done 
because he had possessed the mustard seed of faith 
which moves. mountains. We shall learn more, later 
on, of his unbounded faith in his master. 

The order in which he wrote his works is not 
known to us; but judging from analogy, it is clear he 
must have attempted small things before beginning 


LIFE AT BENARES. THE COMMENTARIES, ETC. 23 


great ones. ‘There is a tradition that he began with 
commenting on the Thousand Names of Vishnu 
(Vishnu-Sahasranama), and thereis nothing improbable 
in it. The reader will easily find in his terse and beauti- 
ful explanations of these Names an earnest of what 
was tofollow. Many small works of various kinds 
must have been written by him before he proceeded to 
comment on the chief Upanishads, or on the Gita, or, 
finally, on the Vedanta-Sutras. The commentary on 
the Gita is said to betray some amount of impatience 
in regard to those who object to an unmarried young 
man turning out a Sanyasin. If it does, it must be 
evidently the expression of his personal feelings. 
There were likewise many original monographs com- 
posed at intervals as occasion called them forth. One 
such might be noted asa sample. One day Sankara 
was going along the street with his pupils to have his 
midday bath in the Ganges. A Chandala with his 
dogs was passing by him, when the pupils shouted to 
ask him to clear the road, as Brahmins do in Malabar 
to this day. This man, however, turned about and 
asked the Guru how he might consistently 
teach Advaitism and practice such differentiat- 
ing observances. The Guru was struck by the 
answer, and its pertinency to the occasion called 
forth the five beautiful slokas forming the Manisha 
Panchaka, every one of which ends thus:—" He 
who has learned to look on phenomena in this 
(monistic) light is my true Guru, be he a Chandala 
or a twice-born man. This is my conviction.” 


24 LIFE AND TIMES ,OF SANKARA 


How the Chandala was able to address Sankara thus 
We are not told, butall difficulties in the situation 
are avoided by making him Siva in disguise. Another 
and one of the most popular of the Gurw’s minor songs 
is said to have had a similar origin. It is a poem of 
about twelve slokas whose refrain is—‘* Worship 
Govinda, Worship Govinda, worship Govinda, O fool! 
When thou art face toface with Death at the appoint- 
ed time, it is not the repetition of a grammatical 
formula that will save thee.” The story is that he 
observed at Benares a student enthusiastically engaged 
in learning Sanskrit Grammar, and that, with the 
object of teaching him the futility of such studies in 
the matter of the salvation of the soul, the great Guru 
spontaneously burst out in song and gave vent to one 
of the most popular and musical of his smaller poems, 
which is even to-day very largely used asa devotional 
song almost all over India. 

In this manner Sankara lived for several years at 
Benares, and sometimes at Badari to be free from bustle 
and disturbance, composing his works, submitting 
them to the wise men of his acquaintance in those parts 
and developing and revising them in the light of criti- 
cisms and controversies. Vyasa himself, the reputed 
author of the Vedanta-Sutras, is said to have on one 
occasion come to Sankara’s abode asan old man; and 
learning there from his pupils that he had commented on 
the Vedanta-Sutras, Vyasaentered intoa disputation 
with him on some knotty point; and this went on for 
a Whole week, till Padmapada finding neither side dis- 


° 


COMMENCEMENT OF THE TRIUMPHAL TOUR 25 


posed to give way, interposed and prayed that the 
Avatars of Vishnu and Siva might desist from further 
controversy and give the world peace! This, being 
interpreted, probably means that there was a good deal 
of wrangling over portions of Sankara’s commentary on 
- the Vedanta-Sutras, and that he was perhaps occasion- 


ally forced to give up some of his earlier positions and 


meet opponents half-way. The old man here might 
Well represent an opponent of that kind, whom San- 
kara could not find it quite easy to satisfy and whose 
acquaintance with the literature of the Vedanta philo- 
sophy must have been so good as to entitle him to be 
looked upon as a re-incarnated Vyasa. The cardinal 
points, however, had now become settled and fortified 
and Sankara stood forth as the most uncompromising 
Monistic Teacher of India expounding in inimitable 
language the great truth of the familiar formula 
-acaata, ‘ That thou art.’ 
2. COMMENCEMENT OF THE TRIUMPHAL TOUR. 
The most important works of the Guru having 
thus been finished and tested and taught to his pupils, 
Sankara left Benares accompanied by a large number 
of his pupils and with a large collection of books. Chid- 
vilasa mentions the name of a certain Ratan . Singh as 
the then chief of Benares, who, on this occasion, pressed 
Sankara to stay on with him. The Guru excused 
himself by saying that he had been asked by his master 
to be a peripatetic teacher, and that, therefore, his 
mission was to teach and preach over the whole of 
India. Perhaps this name of the then King of Benares 


26 LIFE AND TIMES,OF SANKARA 


is not of much value for historical purposes. But, 
aware as we are of the part played by royal patrons in 
those days in promulgating religion and in encourag- 
ing literature and philosophy, we need not doubt that 
Sankara’s fame and influence began to spread by reason 
of the help rendered by royal chiefs and princes every- 
where, no less than by his own worth ; for Anandagiri 
and Chidvilasa both agree in saying that the teacher 
had while on tour all the usual paraphernalia which 
the religious chiefs of Mutts display in our own days, 
and these could only have been gifts made by kings to 
Sankara in recognition of his religious learning and 
authority. 

So, helped by the local chiefs of Benares, Sankara 
began his triumphal progress as a teacher. He must 
have been then over twenty-five years of age, if our 
supposition is correct regarding his age at the time 
when he became a Sanyasin. He first stopped at 
Prayag (Allahabad) and bathed at the confluence of 
the Jumna and the Ganges, and in his prayers remem- 
bered his parents. Afterwards, while he was resting in 
the shade of trees along the river bank with his disci- 
ples, news was brought to him that the great Bhatta, 
the champion of the Purva-Mimamsa school and the 
extirpator of North Indian Buddhism, was about to 
commit himself to the flames! 

3. THE EPIsODE OF KUMARILA BHATTA. 

This is the place to speak at some length of the 
life and doings of this historic personage. We have 
already had occasion to get a glance of his life-work 


THE EPISODE OF KUMARILA BHATTA ay 
. J f 


but we shall now pause to take a fuller view of him. 
He is believed to have been an Assamese Brahmin by 
some, while others profess to see in his Vartika conclu- 
sive proof of his connection with the land of Tamil, and 
the following account is mainly taken from what 
Madhava says of him. He went through the course of 
studies open to every Brahmin boy. But either his own 
inclinations, or motives such as are known to have in- 
fluenced Christian missionaries like Father Beschi, led 
him soon to put on the disguise of a Buddhist and 
learn Buddhistic theology from a great teacher of 
Buddhism. For a time all went on well; but on one 
occasion this teacher in his discourse happened to be 
more severe than usual in ridiculing the divinity and 
the sanctity of the Vedas, so much so that Bhatta shed 
tears in consequence of it. His brother-students who 
® were all Buddhists, observed it and inferred that he 
must bea heretic. Accordingly, ‘ these pious people, 
who had taken on themselves the vow never to harm 
animal life,’ resolved that rather than suffer him to go 
abroad in possession of their secret doctrines and the 
weak points of their philosophy and turn their logic 
against themselves, they would do away with him 
altogether. So one night, as they were all chatting on 
the terrace of the Buddhist teacher's house, they con- 
trived to trip him up, and down fell Kumarila exclaim- 
ing ina loud voice—* If it be true that the Vedas 
form the true Revelation, may they save me from 
harm!” He reached the ground safe enough, having 
lost but one of his eyes, which loss, we are told, was 


> 


28 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 
€ 


due to the doubt implied in the expression, ‘If it be 
true!’ Hesomehow escaped with his life, and from 
that moment became the most uncompromising oppo- 
nent of the Buddhistic faith and made it his mission to 
carry on aruthless war of controversy against its fol- 
lowers. We have, however, only the account of what 
he did at the court of King Sudhanvan, though 
incidentally we are told that he had visited many 
Other courts before arriving there. Here ensued a 
mighty controversy between the Buddhistic teachers 
at the king’s court (the iking was a Buddhist himself) 
and Bhatta, the uproar and din caused by which is 
said to have agitated the very heavens! Bhatta 
exposed their follies and their weak points with 
pitiless logic, and battered all their strongholds and 
defeated the enemy everywhere. Then he explained 
to the king his chief doctrines—that the Vedas were 
true and revealed verbally even as they are, and that 
they, therefore, formed the best proof of their 
own authority as well as the touchstone of the 
authority of the Smritis, Puranasand other scriptural 
works. @qq: FAI Gta: ATMA | He held that the earlier 
part of the Vedas relating to the sacrifice was alone 
capable of saving men, so that the really religious 
part of life according to him was to go through the 
rites enjoined in the sacrificial Kanda or section ‘of 
the Vedas. But the king’s turn for abstract reasoning 
Was apparently only of indifferent excellence, and so 
he bluntly said:—‘ In matters of dialectics, success 
depends on the amount of one’s knowledge and the 


ee EEE 


THE EPISODE OF KUMARILA BHATTA 2 
° 


length of one’s tongue; and I, therefore, declare that I 
shall hold the faith of that man among you to be true 
and enduring, who, casting himself from the top of 
the adjacent hill, remains whole!” Hereupon the 
Buddhists merely kept looking at each other, but the 
Brahmin readily undertook to risk his person. The 
ordeal was accordingly gone through in the presence 
of a large crowd, and Bhatta threw himself down 
with the exclamation already given and reached the 
ground ‘like a pillow stuffed with down.’ The 
Buddhists, however, argued that it wasnot the proper 
test in settling the truth of faiths, for the body in such 
"eases could be protected from harm by means of drugs 
or charms or yogic practices. The king was wroth 
and proposed a second test as a kind of ultimatum. 
He caused a jar to be brought into the assembly with 
its mouth carefully covered and sealed, and said that 
he would espouse the faith of that party which could 
say truly what was inside theclosed jar. The parties 
met next morning and the Buddhists declared that 
the jar contained a serpent, while Bhatta said it was 
the God Vishnu who has the great serpent, Sesha, as 
his bed. ‘At these words of the Brahmin, the face 
of the king wore the look of the lotus that has faded” 
in consequence of the pond wherein it grows 
becoming dry.’ From this awkward predicament, 
however, the king was soon relieved, for a voice from 
heaven declared that the Brahmin was right and 
that the other party was wrong! The king thus 
got rid of all his doubts at once and issued this 


30 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 
t 


memorable edict—‘‘ Let all those of my subjects 
be slain who fail to slay the Buddhists, old and 
young, from the Himalaya mountains to the bridge of 
Rama! ” 

It has been thought desirable to give this account 
of Kumarila at some length, because, among other 
reasons, it gives, in however distorted a form, some of 
the methods adopted by religious controversialists and 
revivalists in those days. If Bhatta really had achiev- 
ed a dialectical victory at this court, as at other 
courts of kings and royal personages, tradition would 
surely have recorded it after the beaten manner. 
From what we have reproduced from the account 
given by Madhava, it seems clear that Bhatta’s dialec- 
tic skill did not prove quite so successful here as it 
might have done elsewhere ; while the test of falling 
down ‘ from the hill’ or from some other height was 
one that Kumarila had already undergone; andas to 
how his apparent failure to successfully guess the 
contents of the jar was retrieved by the support of a 
voice from heaven, we really cannot explain it. 

With regard to the king’s edit to massacre the 
Buddhists from the Himalaya mountains to Rama’s 
Bridge, however, it is safe to say at once that it is 
mere poetic bombast, for the simple reason that pre- 
vious to the days of the Mahomedan Emperors, India 
knew no sovereign whose sway was quite so extensive. 
Moreover, this same Sudhanvan who could issue such 
asummary edict for the destruction of Buddhists 
over the whole of India, is represented in another con- 


——— Oe a 


eo 


. = 


THE EPISODE OF KUMARILA BHATTA 31 


° 
nection as hardly able to overcome a mob of Kapa- 
lika fanatics! In the declining days of Buddhism in 
India, the followers of that religion must, in many 
places, have been subjected to much inconvenience 
and even ignominy. The patronage of sovereigns and 
ruling chiefs, which, in the earlier days, had helped 
on the propagation of Buddhism in the country of its 
birth, gradually transferred its support to Hinduism so 
as to effect a complete reconversion of the people toa 
more or less new adaptation of their ancient faith. 
This much may be freely admitted. But to prove 
that there was any general persecution or massacre of 
the Buddhists in India, there is next to nothing in the 
way of adequate evidence. 

For, if we content ourselves with the more or less 
legendary accounts of the persecution either of Bud- 
dhists in Hindustan and the Dakhan, or of Jains in 
Southern India, we shall have to admit that millions 
upon millions of men were tortured or burnt or des- 
troyed in the various diabolical ways known only to 
religious persecutors. But taking a more sober view 
of India and its people, and interpreting these legends 
in the light of comparison with past and present facts 
and of calm criticism, we have ample reason to 
believe that religious and political fires of persecution 
hardly ever discoloured the serene skies of the Indian 
village communities or any of those parts of the 
country which lay far removed from towns and cities. 
And even in cities the Buddhists, Jains and Hindus 
had, asa rule, got on well together for centuries ; 


32 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


€ 
for the account we have from Hiouen Tsang of the 
relations between the various hostile religious sects does 
not forebode any such coming storm, as we are asked 
to believe, raged over Hindustan so fiercely, under the 
guiding hand of Bhatta, in the very next century- 
Testimony from unexpected quarters continues to 
come in our own days to prove that a wide, fierce and 
relentless persecution for the sake of religion could 
never have been a fact in the history of India; and that 
relatively few cases of persecution, which undoubtedly 
must have occurred at times, were confined, as a rule, 
to particular localities, the great capital cities usually, 
and probably to the ‘ tallest blades of the field,’ 2. ¢., 
to the most obstinate of sectaries. 
4. BHATTA AND SANKARA. 

On the whole, however, Bhatta seems to have 
succeeded in converting many large provinces from 
Buddhism to Vedic Hinduism; and tradition confirms 
the fact of his having had a large following. And 
when he was satisfied that this work was fairly over, 
he is said to have resolved on the extraordinary course 
of committing himself to the flames, of which, as has 
been already mentioned, news reached Sankara at 
Prayag, or, as Chidvilasa has it, at Ruddha or 
Rudrapur, of which’Bhadra Sena was the ruler 
at the time. Sankara hastened® to the spot, and 
found Bhatta with piles of straw and dried 
sticks thrown» about his person, all of which 
were already aflame. He even then caused him- 
self to be announced to Bhatta and asked for an 


BHATTA AND SANKARA _ 33 
° 


explanation of his course of conduct. The latter ans- 

wered that, on reviewing his life, he had found two 

unpardonable sins which he had been driven to commit 

to further his mission. The first was the destruction 

of his Gurw, Buddhist though he was, in the flame of 
persecution which he (Bhatta) had kindled ; the second, 
the practical denial of God in his endeavour to prove 

the absolute revelational character of the Vedas and the 

the sole efficacy of the Vedic rites to save men. The 
Smritis having ordained self-immolation in such cases 
as the only proper means of purifying oneself, he had 

resolved on setting the example of obedience, so that 
the world might not have cause to say that he was a 

person that recked not his own rede, Sankara, it is 
said, expressed a desire to have the pleasure of a dis- 
cussion with him, but, as Bhatta had already become 

half-burnt, he could not collect his thoughts. He, 

therefore, asked Sankara to go to Mandana Misra, a 
champion of the Karma Marga almost as good as’ 
Bhatta himself. Mandana had married Bhatta’s sister 
and at this time was living at Mahishmati, the capital 

at one time of Magadha. Bhatta, after taking leave 

of all, passed away, leaving in the minds of many 

people the memory of the work for which he had 
lived and died. 

Tragic and full of instruction his narrative un- 
doubtedly sounds; but for purposes of history, it is to 
be feared that the part of the story relating to the 
meeting of Sankara and Bhatta is valueless ; for chrono- 
logy does not favour it, if we have it upon the right 

3 


34 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


time for Sankara. This touching story then must be 
regarded, like many other touching stories, as having 
other uses than the historical. ‘This remark, however, 
applies only to the meeting of the Gurus. It is, in all 
likelihood, a fact that Bhatta ended himself in that 
extraordinary way, for his nature, so faras tradition 
unfolds it, seems to have been highly emotional; and 
being terribly in earnest, if he had been conscious of 
having sinned, and conscious also that nothing short of 
that final step would meet the needs of the case, he 
obviously was not the person to shrink from that 
ordeal. Besides it was perfectly in keeping with the 
Levitical and casuistic nature of the central doctrine 
he had been preaching all his life. 


CHAPTER IV. 


——-30—— 
THE MISSION ACCOMPLISHED. 
70: 
I. MANDANA MISRA. 
20: 
E now come to what apparently was the great- 

est achievement of Sankara—the controversy 

he had with Mandana Misra and its results. The 
elaboration of this event in almost all our authorities 
is evidence of its great importance, but strangely 
enough we have not many facts given about it ina 
plain and acceptable manner. Leaving Prayag, says 
Madhava, Sankara went to Mahishmati, where 
Mandana was living as chief Pandit of the court and 
‘in great affluence. A fine palatial house, a number of 
men-servants and women-servants, rows of parrots 
and other birds repeating the dogmatic formula of 
their master,— 4a: ATU Wa: Wawa’ —these are 
enough to show how he was living. Madhava’s 
account places the incident of this controversy rela- 
tively at the beginning of Sankara’s tour. Ananda- 
girl, on the other hand, makes Sankara go from 
Rudrapur, after Bhatta’s self-immolation, ‘ north- 
wards and reach Vidyalaya, lying to the south-east 
of Hastinapura, and called at that time by the people 
there as Vijil Bindu,” for there lived Mandana then. 
Accordingly Sankara went to Mandana’s residence 

and met him in controversy there. What occurred at 


36 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


the meeting is described by Madhava, but here his 
authority seems to be decidedly untrustworthy. The 
only inference from this description seems to be that 
Mandana, brought up in the Karma-Mimamsa faith, 
had come to entertain a constitutional hatred for 
» Sanyasins (who have to give up their daily and other 
. prescribed rites) as a class of people who were unclean 

and unfit for association. And we are told that he 
was performing a Shraddha ceremony, when Sankara 
is said to have somehow ‘ dropped down’ in their 
midst. This ‘dropping down’ of Sankara we shall 
examine presently. At once Mandana was wroth and 
a delectable talk ensued between the two, of which 
the following is a sample:—‘*‘ Whence art thou 
shaven (one)?”” ‘ From neck upwards.” ‘I asked 
the way by which thou hast managed to come.” 
“And what did the way answer thee?” ‘It 
answered thy mother isa widow.” ‘“ Just so; thy 
mother is, therefore, a widow, eh?” Andso on it 
went, growing from bad to worse, till the Brahmins 
who were present there for dinner interposed and 
pacified both ! 

After this fine introduction, however, Sankara 
desired Mandana to let him have the honour of a con- 
troversy ; with him. And he agreeing most readily, 
they sought for an umpire. 

2. BHARATI. 

Now it so happened that Mandana hada wife of 
the name of Bharati, whose learning and accomplish- 
ments Were very vast and many-sided, and whom 


BHARATI 37 
@e 


accordingly they agreed to honour by appointing as 
an umpire. Each began with the stipulation that, in 
case he was defeated, he would take on himself the | 
role of life adopted by his opponent. In other words, 
Sankara, if defeated, agreed to marry and become a 
house-holder—the worst sin which a Sanyasin could 
commit, And Mandana, in a similar manner, agreed: 
to become a Sanyasin and receive the red-robe from 
the hands of his own wife. And then the controversy 
continued long, day after day, without any inter- 
ruption. 

Bharati, according to Madhava, did not sit and © 
listen, but was minding her household duties. At the 
outset she had thrown two garlands, one over the: 
shoulders of each of the disputants, with a declaration 
that he, whose garland should begin to fade first, 
should consider himself defeated. After several days, 
Mandana’s garland began to fade first. Accordingly 
he owned deféat, though in a sullen mood; while his 
wife, now that her husband was dead to her, prepared 
to leave home, though we are not told whither to go. 
In all our authorities this lady is treated as an avatar 
of the Goddess of Learning who had come down into 
the world by way of undergoing punishment for a 
piece of silliness in her heavenly abode. She laughed, 
it is said, at the mistake which the sage Durvasa 
had committed while chanting the Vedas before 
Brahma and his wife in a large assembly. The 
sage became enraged at the woman who had so 
dared to expose him to ridicule; and he pronounced 


38 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


this curse of earthly degradation upon her and subse- 
quently, after her prayers had softened his heart, he 
limited the period of her exile! Accordingly her period 
of banishment being now over, she desired to go back 
to her heavenly abode. It was her mission to proclaim 
the omniscience of Sankara to the world and having 
done it by means of her umpireship, she was free to 
depart. But Sankara stopped her from going and 
begged the honour of having a dialectic controversy 
with her also; he further solicited the favour of her 
departing only when he should agree to it.. Both 
these requests were granted to him. He now turned 


to Mandana still brooding over his defeat, and begged . 


him to reconcile himself to the inevitable, seeing that 
Jamini himself, the reputed author of the Karma- 
Sutra, would have agreed to his victorious interpreta- 
tion of the Sutras. Mandana, thereupon, cheerfully 
acquiesced in his defeat, and offered to become a 
Sanyasin and follow him. But, it isstrangely added, 
Bharati now interposed and begged the favour of a 
controversy with herself; for Sankara had as yet 
defeated but one-half of Mandana, herself being the 
other half! He objected to arguing with women, but 
she quoted precedent. So, as before, the disputation 
went on for seventeen days. Bharati, trying to dis- 
comfit Sankara, passed from one Sastra to another ; 
and finding at last that she could not inflict a 


defeat on him in any other science, she resolved to 


humble him by means of the Science of Love or 
Kamasastra. 


—s- me 


SANKARA’S YOGIC ADVENTURES 39 
e 


3. SANKARA’S YOGIC ADVENTURES. 

-Now Sankara had not had the experience needed 

to answer questions on this science, and so found that 
his reputation as well as the consequent victory of his 
cause was at stake. So he begged of her an interval 
of one month for preparation to meet her in argument, 
which being allowed, he went to the bank of the 
Narmada; and in the hole of a tree in some forest 
there, he left his body in hiding, and asked some of 
his disciples to keep watch over it while the living 
soul was away from it. Then by means of his yogic 
powers he separated his soul from that body and 
luckily came upon the dead body of a King, Amaruka, 
which was about to be committed to flames, and 
entered it. The king rose and all the town rejoiced. 
However, in a short while, the ministers as_ well 

as the queens of the late king found something extraor- 
dinary about their restored sovereign, and suspected 
that the soul of some Mahatman had come to live in 
the body of their master. So messengers were secretly 
sent to search for a human body hidden in lonely 
forests or caves, and to burn it when found, so that 
the Mahatman might remain with them and the king 
continue to live for a long time. Meanwhile, Sankara 
in the body of the king was acquiring the experiences 
of love with his queens and was recording those experi- 
ences in a treatise which has come down to us under 
the name of Amarukasataka. And in the midst of 
these lovely women and their blandishments, he forgot 
his promise to his disciples about his going back to 


40 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


them ; and the month agreed upon soon passed away. 
The disciples then began to search for him; and 
hearing the miraculous resurrection of Amaruka, they 
Went to his city, sought audience with the king, and 
sang a few philosophic songs which at once roused the 
memory of Sankara. Then they hastened to the place 
where the body had been secreted. But by this time 
the messengers of the king had found it out and had 
just begun to set fire to it! The unattached soul of 
Sankara now hastened back and entered his own body 
in this perilous condition. He then prayed to Vishnu, 
conceived as Nrisimha, to help him, which He did by 
sending down atimely shower of rain that put out 
the flames. Sankara was now in his own body again. 

After these adventures he returned to Mandana’s 
abode, and resuming the old controversy, satisfied 
Bharati on all the points raised by her, and established 
that he was, indeed, omniscient. Thereafter, accord- 
ing to Madhava, she departed back to her heavenly 
home. But according to Chidvilasa and others, she 
was still held spell-bound in the air and was taken 
along with Sankara to Sringeri, where he caused a 
temple to be built, which he dedicated to her. Here 
she was persuaded to take up her residence, and 
Bharati is even to-day: worshipped by many devotees 
at Sringeri. And Mandana offered all his possessions 
asa. gift to Sankara who, however, asked him to 
distribute them to the poor and the deserving and 
then follow him, which he did. He then became 
a disciple of Sankara; and when he shewed himself 


. 


THE CONVERSION OF MANDANA RESTATED 4I 
° 


worthy of the new philosophy of life, he was made 

into a Sanyasin with the name of Sureswara 

Acharya, the name by which he is known in these 

parts even to this day. 

4. THE CONVERSION OF MANDANA RESTATED— 
THE REAL BHARATI. 

This rather long and tedious account of Manda- 
na’s conversion has been given in order that we may 
now examine it so as to find out what exactly it was’ 
that occurred ; for there certainly must be some truth 
at the bottom of this strange story which has been 
here summarised. At first sight it seems so full of 
incredible details and distortions that one is tempted 
to reject the whole of it asa tissue of fictitious 
fancifulness. But ona careful analysis, however, we 
find that two main points deserve to be noted and 
examined. These are:—(1) the incidents relating to 
the great lady known as Bharati, and (2) the yogic 
adventures of Sankara. 

With regard to Bharati, tradition is unanimous 
that she was really a gifted lady, well versed in the 
Sastras and a fitting companion to the famous Pandit, 
Mandana Misra. The theory of her being an avatar 
of the Goddess of Learning is evidently an invention 
of a later generation intended to honour her memory 
and scholarship. 

Let us try to realise to ourselves the circumstances 
of the case. Bharati belonged to an age when learning 
among Women was more common, and they enjoyed 
greater freedom, than during the centuries following 


42 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


the establishment of Mahomedan rule in India. For, it 
was one of the greatest revolutions of Buddhism to 
educate women for the profession of religion and make 
them go forth as nuns and peripatetic preachers even 
to distant lands. The reader will easily recollect the 
case of Sangamitta who thus went to Ceylon. And 
this spirit of Buddhism, living as it did for centuries 
in close contact with Hinduism, must have communi- 
cated much learning and enlightenment to Indian 
women of all ranks and stations in life. So that by 
the ninth century learning among Hindu women, 
especially those of high social standing, must have 
been a fairly common phenomenon. Bharati was, 
therefore, a learned lady of exceptional abilities. This 
fact seems to have escaped the notice of the inventors 
of the legend we are examining, probably because 
they were living in days when the dark purdah had 
already shut in the liberty and learning of women it 
India. 

Accordingly, after a careful examination of the 
story as given by Madhava and Chidvilasa, the simple 
facts of the controversy and conversion may be given 
thus :—The disputation between the two great men 
was perhaps held in the presence of the king of the 
place. Mandana apparently set out with the rash 
vow of becoming a Sanyasin in case of defeat—not 
a very improbable supposition in the case of one who 
had come to regard himself well-nigh invincible, and 
who had also had an irascible temper. According to 
his accepted doctrines, turning out a Sanyasin and 


— ee a 


THE CONVERSION OF MANDANA RESTATED 43, 
e 


giving up the ritualistic religion of the Vedas is about 
the worst sin that one can commit in the world. 
Bharati naturally came to know of her husband’s 
defeat and its results to her and then adopted the 
only sensible course that was open to a woman of 
her learning and character. She also renounced the 
world and became, as it were, anun, and was content 
to accompany her converted husband wherever he 
went. Buddhistic nuns had been well enough known 
for long then. And when later on the Sringeri Mutt 
was established and Mandana was placed at its head 
as the successor of Sankara, she must have settled 
down there and passed her days in prayerful devotion 
and religious realisation, as it befitted a woman of 
her history and character. She was perfectly. justified 
in the course she adopted, for though, with the don- 
ning of the red robe, Mandana had become dead to her 
as husband, she was, indeed, very wise in following 
him and Sankara in the capacity of a devoted disciple. 
Lastly her noble and resigned life in her later days 
and her peaceful end at Sringeri added lustre to her 
reputation for uncommon learning and wise accom- 
plishments, and formed the ground-work of the ad- 
miration, which may even now be observed in a con- 
crete form in the temple that has been so worthily 
dedicated to her at Sringeri. Indeed, there cannot 
be much doubt that Sankara’s revival of Vedantic 
Hinduism in India is largely indebted to this famous 
and venerable lady, although we cannot now measure 
accurately the value of her contribution to the cause 


44 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 
€ 


of progressive Hinduism in her days. To place her 
on the pedestal of immortal glory, it is enough for us 
to know that Sankara considered her to be worthy of 
worship and reverential commemoration. 

5. THE YOGIC MIRACLE EXAMINED. 

{f we are prepared to admit that this view is the 
most probable one in regard to Bharati, then the yogie 
adventures of Sankara have to be similarly examined, 
The possibility of one man’s soul entering at his own 
pleasure the body of another man is not granted by 
modern science. The question of the reality of the 
soul itself is one on which modern psychology has not 
as yet said the last word, though the experimental 
psychology of the Indian Yoga seems, nevertheless, to 
be rational enough :in leading us to the proof of the 
reality of the soul. But all those wonder-working 
Yogic powers, which are amply described in Hindu, 
Jain, and Buddhistic writings, are things about which 
the best attitude now is one of suspended judgment. 
Accordingly the whole story of the transference of 
Sankara’s soul into Amaruka’s body has to be rejected 
as being undemonstrable, the more because the motive 
assigned for this adventure is after all very silly and 
inconsistent with the learning and subsequent conduct 
of Bharati. In so treating this question of soul-trans- 
ference, however, it is not meant to condemn the 
philosophy or the psychology or the practice of Yoga 
as being in itself impossible—that will be going out 
of the way and highly presumptuous. But with all 
the deference due to those who believe in yoga, how- 


TOUR THROUGH THE DEKHAN DISTRICTS 45, 
s 


ever, we may say that the works of the Teacher, 
which luckily we still possess, are miraculous enough 
to satisfy the most exacting expectations of the most 
ardent admirer. Weshall accordingly venture to 
conclude that the whole of this episode is due to the 
misguided enthusiasm of later admirers, from whom 
every great person has reason to pray to be saved. 
The result of Sankara’s advent to Mahishmati 
was not merely that Mandana was converted, but 
that the king and his court were likewise converted 
so as to follow his doctrines. For Sankara, while 
emphasising jnana or knowledge of the Supreme 
Spirit as the chief object of man’s endeavours here 
on earth, did not go the length of rejecting all the 
other means of attaining the swmmum bonum, as. 
Bhatta and other controversialists had egotically done 
before. This spirit of compromise, in all likelihood, 
made his work easier ; for there was but little revolu- 
tionary in his contentions. The lovers of ceremonial- 
ism were allowed to go on with their Karmas—only | 
the spirit which underlay the doing of them had to! 
become different. : 
6. TOUR THROUGH THE DEKHAN DISTRICTS. 
Having ‘done his work at Mahishmati, Sankara 
left with his disciples for the South of India and pass- 
ed through Maharashtra preaching his doctrines 
wherever he went. He denounced all wicked prac- 
tices, and sent forth disciples, where he could not go 
himself, to spread the light of the Vedanta. A class 
of Brahmins here worshipped Siva under the name of 


46 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 
Cc 


Mallari, and religiously honoured and exalted the posi- 
tion of the dog, which was the animal that this God loved 
to ride on. Vedic text such as 9¥q: agfaxaqa alaaaa:l 
Were quoted to support it. But Sankara could easily 
prove that they were hopelessly in the wrong, and 
show them that the dog, being an unclean animal, 
did not deserve any worship. Mallari is even 
now known to be the tutelary deity of many 
Mahratta families, and at the festival of Dasara that 
deity receives special worship at their hands. But 
his dog or dogs are not heard of in our days as objects 
of worship. 

There was likewise the sect of Kapalikas of 
atrocious memory whom Sankara encountered here- 
about. From one of them he seems to have hada 
narrow escape. The favourite deity of the Kapalikas 
is Bhairava, the Destroyer, who has a peculiar fondness 
for the heads of learned Brahmins; the more learned 
and pious, the better! Such a head presented to him 
streaming with warm blood had been conceived to be 
the most acceptable offering. A section of Mahratta 
Brahmins of the name of Karadis have had a bad 
reputation among the people of South India for 
catching stray pilgrims from the South to Benares and, 
after fattening them for a whole year, offering them 
to Durga in sacrifice at the close of the Dasara 
as an acceptable and a highly valuable offering. This 
charge against them is nothing new, and it was in all 
likelihood a Karadi Brahmin of these parts that 
approached Sankara at this time with the object of 


| 


THE SRINGERI MUTT 47 
2” 


sacrificing him to Kali, There ‘is nothing unique 
about this belief in human sacrifice, for history has 
known it all the world over in very many repulsive 
and piteous forms. 

Madhava says that the Kapalika approached 
Sankara and begged for his head as a gift, employing 
certain sophistries of Advaitism to prove that Sankara 
could not lose anything by the loss of the head, while 
he himself gained thereby the highest object of his 
attainment. Sankara agreed and asked him to come 
and take it, while he was alone and was absorbed in 
contemplation. Accordingly the Kapalika went and 
was just aiming the fatal blow, when Padmapada, 
who had just then returned, caught hold of his 
uplifted arm, knocked him down and killed him with 
his own weapon. Madhava, in relating this killing 
of the Kapalika, says that the spirit of the fierce 
God Narasimha was then on Padmapada, and that 
Sankara finding out what had taken place managed 
to pacify the infuriated disciple. 

7. THE SRINGERI MUTT 

Then he travelled to the south till he reached the 
source of the Tungabhadra, where he stopped and 
built a temple which he dedicated to the Goddess of 
Learning. Under the name of Sarada, that Goddess 
is to this day the presiding deity of the temple there. 
Childvilasa says that he was helped in this work by a 
local chief of the name of Vira-Sena. To the temple 
he attached a Mutt and placed the most learned of his 
disciples, Mandana, at its head, with the name 


48 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


of Sureswara Acharya, by which name he is still 
known in the records of that Mutt. The institution 
is ‘‘the Sringeri Mutt” of to-day, the most richly 
endowed and the most widely honoured of South 
Indian religious institutions. 

Madhava here gives an account of the daily 
monastic life of Sankara, which is just what one finds 
in Mutts even in our own days—with the exception 
that there was then much original teaching and com- 
position going on therein, because of the presence of 
the Founder of a new School.of Philosophy. 

8. THE GLOSS OF PADMAPADA. 

In connection with the work of religious and 
philosophic teaching here at Sringeri, we come upon 
an exhibition of jealousy among the disciples. Even 
in matters which the Guru might view as_ peculiarly 
his own, he did not always find it possible to have his 
own way. At this time Sankara was desirous that his 
commentary on the Vedanta-Sutras should have a 
gloss added to it to prevent misconception and to supply 
ellipses. Heseems to have felt convinced that Manda- 
na’s learning bothin the Karmic and in his own 
philosophy, had fitted him best for his task, and he, 
therefore, asked himto carry it out. At once Sankara’s 
other disciples set up Padmapada, the earliest and 
undoubtedly the most devoted of his followers, to do 
the same work, They argued plausibly enough that 
Mandana’s conversion Was on account of his defeat in 
controversy, and was not, therefore, the result of hearty 
conviction. They feared that his gloss might prove 


THE GLOSS OF PADMAPADA 49 


@ 
dangerous to Sankara’s system, for he might un- 
consciously or even deliberately show leanings towards 
the faith in. which he had been brought up before. 
They, therefore, thought that Padmapada should be 
asked to do it, for his devotion to the Guru had been 
well tested and he had all the teachings of the Guru 
imparted to him thrice over by the Gurw himself. 
Although he was born a Prabhakara, he had been well 
enough weaned from his earlier faith even in his 
youth; and had, therefore, as they contended, become 
worthy of the honour and trust implied in the per- 
mission granted to annotate the Guru’s works. 
Padmapada, however, suggested Anandagiri or 
Hastamalaka, who had joined Sankara in his tour 
through Maharashtra, in order that he himself 
might appear less selfish in the eyes of his teacher. 
Sankara felt perplexed and vexed. He felt sure that 
Mandana was, by his intimate knowledge of the 
strong and weak points of the Karmamimamsa 
Philosophy, the best fitted among his disciples ; yet, in 
his great undertaking, he did not want to go against 
the wishes of the majority among them. So he 
suffered Padmapada to do the work in spite of his 
own misgivings, and was really sorry that his 
great commentary had to lose the benefit of the gloss 
of so valuable a scholar as Mandana. To console 
the latter, however, Sankara allowed him to annotate 
his commentaries on the chief Upanishads and also to 
compose one or two original works. This unseemly 
quarrel shows the spirit of the age and the suspicion 
A 


50 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


which ever haunts the faithful in full proportion to 
the intensity of their faith. It seems to be the curse 
from which the followers of no great religious teacher 
can be said to have been free. The reader of the 
Bible will easily recollect the quarrel among the . 
disciples of Christ for precedence. 

Padmapada then annotated his master’s commen- 
tary on the Vedanta-Sutras, and in doing it, he ex- 
posed the flaws of the Prabhakara school of the Purva- 
mimamsa to ridicule over and over again. He seems 
to have been ‘a vain man’; for, having done this work, 
he asked the Gurwu’s permission to go to Rameswar— 
perhaps to parade his learning in the land of his birth. 
Permission having been given, he went to Chidam- 
baram (his ‘ native place’ according to Chidvilasa), 
which was at that time the stronghold of the Prabha- 
kara faith. Here Padmapada stayed with his uncle, 
who was still a follower of the Prabhakara faith. 
This person happening to read portions of his 
nephew’s gloss on Sankara’s great commentary, 
resolved to wreak his vengeance on the manuscript ! 
And Padmapada, having in a moment of weakness 
agreed to leave his books behind him,’ and set out for 
Rameswar, in his absence the uncle contrived to 
consign the books to the flames. On the nephew’s 
return, he, of course, expressed great sorrow for the 
mishap. Padmapada was at a loss to know how 
then to proceed and was not sure if he could do the 
work again so Well. It is added that his uncle had 
also had the villainy to drug him with a view to spoil 


SANKARA’S MOTHER—HER FUNERAL RITES 51 
e 


his intelligence. He at last returned with a drooping 
heart and joined his master once again. 


CHAPTER V. 


LAST DAYS. 


i. SANKARA’S MOTHER—HER FUNERAL RITES 

And now we come tothe most pathetic part of 
Sankara’s life. Tradition is unanimous herein, and 
there is nothing in the narrative to make it in itself 
improbable. Some time after Padmapada left for 
Rameswar, Sankar, either longing to see his mother 
or having had news conveyed to him of the declining 
state of her health, left his disciples behind at Sringeri, 
and went apparently all alone to Kaladi. His mother 
was then bed-ridden, and was, of course, exceedingly 
glad to see him, He touched her feet in reverence— 
setting the rules of Sanyasa at defiance. Being very 
ill and her thoughts all turned to the other world, she 
desired her son, whose fame had doubtless reached 
her ears, to discourse to her on things that would 
bestow peace and salvation on her soul, He began 
to preach to her his high philosophy, evidently under- 
rating the difficulties in comprehending it. So the 
mother desired him to tell her of things which she 
could easily understand. Accordingly he glorified 
Siva ina hymn of praise composed by himself. The 
messengers of Siva soon made their appearance, 
but their terrific shapes were too much for her 


r 


52 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


and she refused to go along with them to the 
world of Siva. Then Sankara praised Vishnu; and 
his messengers coming down in bright and agreeable 
forms, she blessed her son, gave up her body and 
went along with them to the abode of Vishnu. 

The mother being dead, Sankara sought to fulfil 
the promise he had made to her at the time of his re- 
nunciation, and desired to perform her funeral rites 
himself. This, however, was not easy, for the whole 
Agrahara opposed it as being against the: Smritis and 
established practice ; and Nambudris, of all the ortho- 
dox people in the world, are the last to suffer any 
deviation from the clerical law to occur in their midst 
unopposed. If Sankara was a Sanyasin, as he said he 
was, he had nothing to do with funeral rites ; and if 
he persisted in performing them, he was clearly an 
impostor in the garb of a Sanyasin, and must be 
hunted like a heretic and sinner. Arguing the affair 
in this manner, the relatives of Sankara held aloof 
and in spite of his entreaties, they would neither help 
him to remove the dead body, nor, as tradition path- 
etically adds, let him have fire to burn it with. Un- 
able to soften their hearts, he resolved to do the rites 
without anybody’s help; and girding himself up for 
it, he bore the body of his mother to the back-yard of 
the house, and making there a pyre with dried sticks 
he laid the body onit, made fire for the cremation and 
performed all the rites pertaining to the funeral 
ceremony. “Tradition further adds that, unable to 
remove the body entire, he cut it and removed the 


» 


REMARKS THEREON 53 
@ 


pieces one by one—and, having found only stems of 
the plantain tree for fuel, he exercised his divine 
power and set them on fire! 

2, REMARKS THEREON. 

The funeral rites being over, he sought to find 
some means of revenging himself on his heartless 
relatives. Madhava adds an apology for this fit of 
anger, and says—‘Although some of the deeds of the 
great do not seem to conform to Shastraic rules 
ordinarily observed, such persons are not to be censur- 
ed on that account.’ Sankara is said to have persuad- 
ed the local chief to issue an edict prohibiting those 
relatives from chanting the Vedas and thus making 
them unfit to entertain Sanjasin as guests. They 
were further compelled to set apart in each [lam a 
corner of its own compound to burn the dead of the 
family, and tosee that every dead body should be 
cut into parts and then burnt! 

Now it cannot be denied that Hindu princes 
have often issued edicts, changing religious and social 
practices or the status of particular classes among their 
subjects. There are many historic instances to illus- 
trate this. Indeed, there would have been nothing 
strange in what this local chief is alleged to have done 
at the instigation of Sankara, if we can be sure that 
he, in fact, had sufficient influence for it at the 
court of this local chieftain. But beyond the bare 
mention of a ‘Rajasekhara’ referred to just before the 
Gurw’s renunciation, who, on one occasion at that 
period, is said to have gone to the young Brahmin to 


54 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


‘ 


have a view of one whose great learning had already 
begun to be noised abroad, Madhava tells us little 
from which Sankara’s influence at his court may well 
be estimated. Accordingly the whole question of this 
supposed edict looks suspicious for want of conclusive 
evidence. It isa fact, however, which may interest 
many readers, that the Nambudris continue to this 
day the formality of mangling the dead bodies of their 
relations before they are removed tothe place of crem- 
ation. A knife is made just to touch the various 
joints of the body. It is also a fact in most, if not all, 
the IZlams of the Nambudris that a corner of their 
spacious compound serves as the cremation ground of 
the family. And, lastly, it isa fact also that some 
among the Nambudris do not learn how to chant the 
Vedas. If called on to explain the origin of any of 
these practices, they repeat the story of the edict and 
say that the observances have continued so long as to 
become included in their Smrttis. 

The tale relating to the funeral rites makes just 
one thing clear, that Sankara failed to become a pro- 
phet in his own land. There is but one difficulty, 
however, in the way of our admitting the whole of 
this story as true. For, if Sankara’s name and fame 
had spread so far and so wide, as we may naturally 
inferefrom the story of his tour and his controversies as 
recorded, it certainly looks very odd that during the 
whole of his troublous period of his mother’s funeral 
ceremonies, there was not a single disciple by him to 
help him. This difficulty Madhava avoids by repre- 


TOUR THROUGH THE EAST COAST DISTRICTS 55 
4 


senting that Sankara had left every oneof his disciples 
behind, and hastened to his mother’s home on _learn- 
ing that she was seriously ill. Perhaps Anandagirt 
is right in placing the incident of the death of Sanka- 
ra’s mother at an earlier period in his life. 

Viewed as a whole, the narrative relating to the 
funeral rites of Sankara’s mother is exceedingly ins- 
tructive as an act of rare filial affection, furnishing to 
common men one of the best illustrations of the moral 
beauty and sublimity which are to be found in_the 
noble duty of a man having to honour the sacred me- 
mory of his mother. — 
3. TOUR THROUGH THE EAST Coast DISTRICTS. 

Returning to Sringeri, he set out sometime after- 
wards with a large number of followers on a tour 
through the Eastern coast, stopping in important cen- 
tres of learning, at the capitals of kings and places of 
pilgrimage, to preach his doctrines and to condemn 
whatever wicked practices were therein prevalent. 
At Puri he established a Mutt which still goes by the 
name.of Govardhan Mutt. Conjeeveram seems at 
that time to have been a stronghold of Saktas, whom 
Sankara is said to have argued out of their abomina- 
tions. He purified their temples; and the pre-emi- 
nence, which the Goddess Kamakshi of Kanchi and 
Minakshi of Madura have to this day preserved, would 
seem to bear out the prevalence at one time of Sakti- 
worship in all these regions and its purification under 
Brahminal influence. But it is perhaps dangerous to 
theorise too much. We are briefly told that in the 


c 


56 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


course of this tour the kings of the Chola and Pandya 
kingdoms were won over. The net result of the tour 
was that the abominations of the Aaktas, Gana- 
pathyas, Kapalikas and the rest of their tribe received 
a severe check; and permanent arrangements were 
made at Sringeri to periodically attack the centres of 
immoral and unholy religious rites so as to chase them 
away altogether in due course. This tour of reform- 
ation and religious purification must have lasted 
fairly long. 

4. FINAL TOUR THROUGH HINDUSTAN 

At length, after making arrangements to carry 
on his missionary Work in the South and after firmly 
establishing the Sringeri Mutt with a proper staff, 
Sankara left once again for the North. Passing 
through the Berars, he stopped for some time at 
Ujjain. From the Meghaduta of Kalidasa, as well as 
from other sources, we learn that some kind of Satva 
worship was prevalent here, which apparently need- 
ed the shedding of a good deal of the blood of sacrifi- 
cial victims. Madhava calls the devotees of this deity 
by the name of Bhairavas and with this sect Sankara 
began to argue and denounce their iniquities, which 
roused the mob there, whose leader was significantly 
called Krakacha, which means a saw. Madhava 
brings in here once again King Sudhanvan who has 
already been mentioned, The fact seems to be that 
Sankara first won over the local chief to his faith, 
and with his help put down the atrocities of the 
Bhairavas by force, when perhaps argument had 


ABHINAVA GUPTA—SANKARA’S END © 57: 
e 


proved to be of no avail with them. Thence he 
passed on to Gujarat and there at Dwaraka established 
a Mutt which is in existence even now and has some 
following. He then travelled along the course of the 
Ganges, in which journey he is said to have won 
victories in controversy over many great personages 
such as Bhaskara, Bana, Dandin, Mayura and others. 
But if the date we have accepted is the correct one 
for Sankara, many of these controversial victories 
have to be treated as inventions. He is also said to 
have gone to. Kashmir to win the famous Seat of 
Learning there, which was meant as a prize to the 
wisest of men; and this information is useful perhaps 
as showing that Buddhists could be found in large 
numbers chiefly in the Himalayan regions even in 
Sankara’s days. 

5. ABHINAVA GUPTA—SANKARA’S END. 

The last controversial victory, which seems to 
have much to support its reality, was at Kamrup, or 
Gauhati, as it is now called, in Assam, where San- 
kara triumphed over the Sakta commentator Abhinava 
Gupta. This man felt his defeat so keenly that he 
resdlved to be somehow revenged on his opponent: 
Accordingly he utilised knowledge of Black Magic, 
and by means of it caused Sankara to be afflicted with 
a very serious form of. hemorrhoids ; and though he 
did not mind it for a while, the disciples who were 
doing him personal service soon saw that the disease 
was growing upon him; and they are said to have 
consulted many doctors and tried many prescriptions 


58 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


in vain, At length a messenger from Siva came and 
revealed the secret, At once Padmapada was wroth, 
and being a clever hand himself in the Black Art, he 
undid Gupta’s evil work very easily and Sankara 
became whole as before. 

Although we are told that Sankara thus got well, 
what followed soon after shows that the disease must 
have severely told on him, and that there was only 
some temporary relief, during which he managed to. 
go to Badari and establish a Mutt there as well as. 
build a temple to Narayana. After this he retired to 
Kedarnath. And here, in his thirty-second year, as 
it is stated by Madhava and several others, or in his 
thirty-eighth year, as another tradition has it (which 
latter is accepted by the present writer), the great 
Teacher passed away in the year A.D. 828, 


CHAPTER VI. 


——. —<+ 


THE WORK OF SANKARA. 
SE aed i: 
I, THE MotTrtTs. 

a es 
It is not proposed in this sketch to trace the 
fortunes of Sankara’s system in times later than his. 
own, or those of his successors at the various Mutts 
established by him. In the first place, the materials 
are not available for it ; and in the next such a descrip- 
tion is outside our limits. It is enough for our purpose: 


THE CARDINAL DOCTRINE OF SANKARA 59 
® 


to say that the four Mutts we have incidentally 
mentioned continue to exist in greater or less affluence 
even now, after having had their usual ups and downs 
in the course of about twelve historic centuries. The 
Sringeri Mutt, in our own parts, knew very bright 
days during the beginning and early development of 
the Vijayanagar Kingdom, but it is to be feared that 
even this Mutt has got but few valuable records to 
enable one to write its history. | 

These Mutts, though founded by the same teacher 
and for the same purpose, have had but little connec- 
tion with each other, administrative, social or religious. 
But, at the same time, there has been no rivalry 
known between any two of them, India having appa- 
rently proved wide enough for all of them to work 
smoothly on. There has been, however, one small 
succession in the south caused by the establishment. of 
a Mutt now at Kumbakonam, which has a limited 
following in Tanjore and the adjoining districts. That 
this Kumbakonam Mutt is comparatively modern, 
appears to be probable, thought its exact age *cannot 
be well ascertained. 

2, THE CARDINAL DOCTRINE OF SANKARA 
AND ITS GENESIS, 

It is now our business to examine the net result 
_ of Sankara’s life and labours. We have already taken 
note of what the tune was that was haunting millions 
of ears about his time. We saw how Buddhism rose 
from the Upanishads, grew, and after a long life, 
decayed in the land of its birth. It is often said that 


6o LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


Buddhism disappeared from India by persecution. We 
have ample testimony, however, to prove that this 
persecution is a myth. Buddhism simply lost itself in 
the revived Hinduism.- A long course of peaceful life 
side by side had certainly led to many silent assimi- 
lations and natural borrowings—the practical abolition 
of animal sacrifices, the gorgeous and elaborate festivals 
and processions, and the owning of Buddha as an 
avatar of Vishnu, being some of those that lie on the 
surface. On the side of thought this process culminated 
in the practical acceptance and wide adoption of the 
Bhagavad-Gita and its most comprehensive philosophy, 
which, unlike the old ‘ exclusive’ religions of the Vedas, 
may be followed and practised by all classes of people. 
Furthermore, the most prominent failings of Buddhism 
came to be noted and guarded against to save Hinduism 
from a like fate. For instance, the Bhakti-Marga or 
the path of love and devotion to God, as explained 
in some of the most eloquent passages of a Bhagavata 
or Vishnu-Purana, is an open protest against the 
atheisnf of Buddhists. Again, while orders of monks 
were being slowly organised in imitation of Buddhists, 
Care was taken to rigorously exclude women from 
them. 

Having been born and brought up amidst such 
circumstances, Sankara soon carved out for himself, at 
a very early stage of his life, a clear and definite course 
It was to give a common basis to the most prevalent 
forms of the Vedic faith and to reconcile all these to a 
cardinal co-ordinating idea. Hence arose his Panthe- 


THE END AND THE MEANS 6r 
a 


ism, which sees the Great First Cause, the Essence of 
Intelligence, everywhere about us and in us. With 
the help of this doctrine, supported as it is by many 
Vedic texts, it was easy for his master-mind to show, 
wherever he went, that the current religious sects Were 
all narrow and illogical, and, that if properly under- 
stood, there was no real antagonism at all between the 
rival sects and no good ground for the rise of bad 
blood in the practice of religion or the contemplation 
of philosophy. 
3. THE END AND THE MEANS. 

For our immediate purpose, we must be satisfied 
with a bare statement of his chief doctrines. He started 
with the hypothesis of a Maya or Avidya, an ignorance 
which is objective.* Nothing really exists but the 
_ Supreme Spirit, so that what is commonly called 
Nature (animate and inanimate) is but an illusion and 
a dream, caused by this Ignorance which surrounds 
the Supreme Spirit, and hides It, ‘*even as the 
smoke that rises fromthe fire hides the blaze for a 
time.” Phenomena appear real, for the same reason 
that things seenin a dream are real so long as the 
dream lasts, or for the reason that mother-of-pearl is 
mistaken for silver, or a piece of rope for a snake, 
until the illusion goes away. The business of life is, 
therefore, to cast off the gross sheaths that surround 
the spirit within us, and to realise its identity with 


~ > 


pOARAAATATAPAT AAMRISEA PAEATAM TST: Aaa AAA: 


Sutra-Bhashya.- 


62 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


the Supreme Spirit. The chief means of attaining 
this end is the cultivation of true knowledge, that is 
the study of the Vedanta and the incessant con- 
templation of its teachings. Special emphasis had to 
be laid on this means, as Sankara had found that 
Bhatta had ‘ bent the bow too much on the other side ’ 
and held that the purely physical Karma or going 
through a round of ritualistic formalities was alone 
sufficient to secure salvation. In all doctrinal 
passages, therefore, he gives prominence to the 
acquisition of Vedantic knowledge. But that does 
not mean, however, that he rejected the other 
means, for he accepted the Karmic road also as one of 
the roads to take the soul finally to the goal. Again, 
nowhere in his writings is he more eloquent than in 
his songs in exemplification and praise of the Bhakii- 
Marga. 

The Supreme Spirit of Sankara is free from all 
real attributes, and the only positive statement that 
can be made about it is that It is and is the Essence 
of Intelligence and Bliss. : This has led the author of 
Manimanjart to say that Sankara has called Nothing- 
ness by the name of Brahman, and a recent writer to 
declare that ‘ he retained the name of God to save his 


religion from becoming Buddhistic atheism.’ Now it. 


cannot be denied that Buddhistic philosophy had 
considerable effect on him, though it is hard te mea- 
sure the extent of that influence. But in every sens- 
ible statement of Sankara’s teachings, one sees Pan- 
theism and not Atheism governing them. And Pans 


a yt 


THE END AND THE MEANS | 63 


theism and Atheism asia always be poles apart, 
State it how we will. 

The end of a man being the realisation of the 
identity of his own spirit with the Supreme Spirit, and 
the study of Vedanta and the contemplation of its 
teachings being the best means of attaining it, Sankara 
also recommended less difficult paths of salvation for 
such people as are not fitted for. that kind of self-reali- 
sations, The practic of self- denial and of other moral 
virtues, dey d and the careful discharge of 
each —.. as ordained by the scriptures, are 
declared by him to be preliminaries to acquiring, in due 

course, the needed moral competency for the study of 
the Vedanta and the realisation of its ideals. Man is to 
do his secular as well as religious duties, not because 
it will give him good things here or in the other 
world, as Bhatta had said, but because they have to 
be done; and at every step the Vedantin is called upon 
+o bear in mind these ‘sublime words of the Gita :— 
<‘ The master of the sacrifice, who is Brahman, has 
thrown into the sacrificial fire which is Brahman, the 
sacrificial rice which is Brahman, for the satisfaction 
of Brahman; and that which that master wants to 
attain is like-wise Brahman!” 

This comprehensive and pantheistic basis, while 
it enabled the hitherto hostile sects to worship each its 
own deity as before, showed at the same time giaies 
sive reasons for mutual toleration and friendli 
Sankara’s mission, looked at thus, was chore not 
to destroy but to fulfil, ‘‘for it was by no means 


64 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


suppression of acts of outward devotion nor of the 
preferential worship of any acknowledged pre-eminent 
Deity. So when the admission was made that 
Brahman was the Supreme Spirit, the First Cause 
as distinct from Siva or Vishnu, the Teacher left” 
undisturbed, having regard to human frailties, the 
observance of such rites and worship of such deities 
as are either prescribed by the Vedas or of works not 
incompatible with their authority.” Of these deities 
five had already become recognised as deserving 
worship at the hands of every Vedic sect—the 
Bhagavata, for instance, mentions it—and the wor- 
shippers of these five comprised the bulk of the 
people, though each sect was sub-divided into a large 
number of mutually repellant groups. They were 
the Sun, Ambika (Sakti), Vishnu, Ganapati and Siva. 
Everywhere, at the conclusion of the controversy, the 
precept given was the same—offer worship to the five 
Gods. This was how Sankara sought to unite these 
enemies and to counteract their ‘particularist’ tenden- 
cies. It never occurred to him to talk as the advocates 
of some militant faiths had done before him, or have 
done since, to claim all wisdom for himself and 
locate all folly in his opponents, crediting them 
with nothing but folly. It is for the candid 
reader tojudge whether the result has justified the 
founder’s expectations, and his history has since 
proved how far his measures have softened sect- 
arian bigotry and the consequent rise of bad 
blood. 


HIS METHOD 65 
° 


4. His METHOD. 

As his plans were moderate and conciliatory, so 
was his method agreeable and perhaps about the best 
_ to be employed in such matters. Anandagiri is speci- 
ally valuable in giving us a fair idea of what this me- 
thod was. Wherever he went, he asked the leaders of 
thought who opposed him to state their case and ex- 
plain their doctrines and practices. After they did it, 
he began to point out how far he could go with them 
—and in the case of most of them he could go with 
them some way, as they had all based their faith on 
the authority of the Vedas. Next came the points of 
difference—philosophical as well as practical. Those | 
who quoted stray sentences (as the Mallari-worshippers. 
did) from the Vedas in support of their objectionable ~ 
- doctrines or practices, he could answer by quite a 
host of passages quoted against them; and those who 
had based their evil doings on Smritis were told that it 
was a Well-understood axiom that, as against Srutts, 
Smritis could not stand, and that as against Smritts 
Puranas could not stand. One or two small instances 
must suffice to illustrate this method. The champions of ‘ 
Sun-worship argued that that Luminary was Supreme 
Spirit, because a well-known text says—" This Sun 
is Brahman.” But Sankara could quote a number of 
texts to the contrary, for instance, one which runs— 
‘‘ The Sun shines from fear of this (Brahman);” or 
again—“ The Sun, the Moon...all shine with the 
light borrowed from the Supreme Light,”’ and so on. 
The worshippers of Siva or Vishnu or Ganapati could 

5 


66 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


likewise receive no support from the Vedas, and the 
authority of the Vedas herein was supreme; ‘and 
passage after passage followed in defence of this post- 
tion. No wonder that, with this kind of tact as well 
as argument, he was able to influence thoughtful 
people everywhere. How different this from the 
method which has been pursued by many another 
teacher in India, and from the one which is being 
commonly pursued by our Padri friends and people 
of their likeness! These latter begin wherever they 
go by arrogating to themselves the whole truth and 
nothing but the truth, leaving with a unique impar- 
tiality to their opponents, the whole of the error and 
nothing but error. 

If any person’s style is an index of his mind, the 
style of Sankara’s is one. It has been said that the 
sublimest philosophy expresses itself in the simplest 
language, and, if we want the best illustration to 
prove it, we have to go to Sankara for it. Bewitching 
and marvellous and simple, it is at once the language 
of the child and the philosopher in one. No wonder 
then that enemies should bear testimony to it, even 
while they malign his doctrines. Viewed from any 
standpoint, it is truly a privilege to read a bit of him 
or hear some of his slokas sung to you. He is, there- 
fore, undoubtedly the great 4&7, ‘ factor for good’ to 
whoever care’ to approach him. 

5. HIS\CHIEF PRACTICAL REFORMS 

We might now take a rapid survey of the chief 

practical reforms which the Guru was able to effect 


HIS CHIEF PRACTICAL REFORMS 67 
° 


either himself directly or through the agency of his 
successors working on the lines sketched out by him. 
They are, from one point of view, of greater interest 
_ to us than his doctrines which can, at all times, be 
understood and utilised only by a few. It might be 
that Sankara did not accomplish all the reforms 
ascribed to him during the short period of his mission, 
but that he sketched the lines on which his successors 
worked. But it might also be that those days were 
more plastic than our own, because Hinduism was then 
living in closer contact with an aggressive offspring 
of its own, which had even in its early days achieved 
astounding success. Then again both Buddhistic and 
Hindu kings were freely issuing edicts introducing’ 
changes in faith and in social practice. People, 
therefore, in those days, and even long after Sankara’s 
time, could have had no idea of the chill process of 
crystallisation that has come upon our life since, and 
has frozen the genial current of our soul with that 
withering curse of each being wise in his own conceit 
and each deluding himself with the belief that he 
lives in the best of all worlds; and being accustomed 
to changes, gentle as well as violent, they easily 
suffered their practices to change, wherever there was 
any need for it. At all events the thinking people 
had not in those days been brought up, as they too 
often are now, in the belief that the world had never 
changed and that every local practice had remained 
just what it was in the days of Manu! 

_ According to our authorities, the chief reforms 


68 LIFE AND TIMES, OF SANKARA 


with which Sankara concerned himself were the fol- 
lowing :— 


(t) Prohibition of marking the body with hot 
metallic designs. Readers can easily understand what 
this means. The Sri-Vaishnavas and Madhvas con- 
tinue to this day to mark every one among them on 
the shoulders and elsewhere with the designs of the 
' conch and disc of Vishnu. Anandagiri makes a great 
deal too much of this reform, and Madhava likewise 
lays much stress on it. This circumstance throws some 
doubt on the value of these books as original authorities, 
and leads one to ask oneself whether, after all, some 
‘of these might not have been counterblasts to hostile 
books finding favour with the public—for instance, 
aey fas. 


(2) No sects that Sankara had to contend against 
were found to have fallen so low in morality as the 
Saktas and the Bhairavas. The former in these days 
are happily found but in few localities, Assam being the 
most prominent of them, and the Coromandel Coast 
showing stray cases here and there. The sect is, as 
is Well-known, ‘ divided against itself,’ and the Sama- 
chara or left-handed variety of it, is the most loath- 
some form that religion has ever assumed. The — 
Dakshinachara or right-handed variety has been influ- 
enced by the superior moral atmosphere surrounding 
it, so as to make its once detestable practices 
comparatively innocent ‘to suit the irom age 


HIS CHIEF PRACTICAL REFORMS _ 64 
e 


Kali.’*If in our own days the abominations of theSaktas 


have learned to hide their heads in shame, and are 
found only in some dark corners, no small part of 
the credit is due to the chastening influence of San- 
kara’s teaching and his earnest endeavour to put evil 
down. He also fought against the hideous worship- 
pers of Ganapati whose ritual decency forbids us to 
describe. In both these cases, however, be it noted, 
actual worship of Sakti and of Ganapati was retained, 
but the abominations connected therewith were con- 
demned and abolished. 

(3) If he used arguments against the Saktas, he 
did not hesitate to use force, wherever he could, 
against the Bhairavas or Kapalikas, who in any age 
and under any circumstances would deserve that and 
@ven worse treatment. Although we may make large 
allowances in their favour, the account we have of 
their ways is so horrid and detestable that no one can 
have anything but praise to offer to Sankara for his 
labours against this pestilential religious sect. 

6. SANKARITE MONKS. 

Lastly, he organised Mutts and organised ten 
definite orders of Sanyasins under the name Dasna- 
mis, probably in unconscious imitation of similar 
Buddhistic organisations. The continuation of the 


Mutts was provided for by the institution of a suc- 


| tha ee. a ea eee 

* These statements have drawn from the Thessophist some 
remarks about all of us moving in the direction of Dakhinachara 
Saktas in some occult way. But as this sketch has followed the 
logic of common sense throughout, itis hoped that the kind re- 
viewer will not take it amiss that the writer still remains 
obdurate. 


7a? LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


cession of Sanyasin chiefs, while their safety was 
entrusted to neighbouring rulers who had usually 
become converts to the new faith. The Dasnamis 
add at the end of their names any one of the following 
suffixes, Saraswati, Bharatt, Puri, Giri, Tirtha, 
Asrama, Vana, Aranya, Parvata and Sagara. This 
list is seen occasionally in slightly altered forms. Some 
of the Sanyasins at the head of the Sringeri Mutt have 
been Bharatis (the late incumbent was also one), and 
there was at least one Aranya in Vidyaranya. These 
Sanyasins are recruited from all castes, and some rise 
to become Ativarnasramis (superior to caste obser- 
vances) and dine with all classes of people without 
suffering for it in the estimation of the ‘high born.” 
Perhaps this is due to the silent influence of the Bud- 
dhistic rules which from their very beginning had 
forbidden caste scruples within the monasteries. The 
Paramahamsas represent the highest of these grades, 
and one can attain this grade only by a long course of 
holy life and the gathering of Vedantic knowledge. In. 
other words, men rise to be Paramahamsas by merit 
and Sankara’s writings invariably have the following 
colophon :—* Thus is this finished which has been 
composed by Sankara Bhagavatpada, the best of peri- 
patetic teachers of the grade of Paramahamsas, and 
the disciple of SriGovinda Bhagavatpada.” 

Profiting by the lessons which the Buddhistic 
inclusion of women as Parivrajikas in the body of 
ordained ascetics had taught, and true to the old ideal 
of the Smritis under which women were never allowed 


THE RESULT$—THE FUTURE 71, 


independence, Sankara rigorously excluded women 
from his monasteries, which were meant to serve only 
as schools of learning, as peripatetic teaching institu- 
tions, and as asylums for those men who courted. 
poverty and purity and freedom from the thraldom of 
the world. 

7. THE RESULTS—THE FUTURE. 

The effect of these doctrinal and practical 
reforms has had a widespread and far-reaching 
importance. We have often heard it said that 
Hinduism has been unique in that it has been able 
to assimilate alien faiths and include them within 
itself. Accordingly it has also been said that it is 
the most tolerant of the religions of the world. In 
so far as these statements are true, one of the best 
expounders in comparatively later times of this 
comprehensive and tolerant Hinduism was, by general 
consent, Sankara. His followers are of course hetero- 
genous in composition, but taken on the whole, they 
form, according to Mr. L. Rice in the Mysore 
Gazetteer, and according to a host of other observant 
authorities, the most tolerant of the Hindu sects. This 
then is one of Sankara’s chief claims on our admiration. 
There have, indeed, been reformers since his time, 
some of them working in a wider sphere like Kabir 
and Nanak, who sought to unite in harmony even the 
Hindus and the Muhammadans; but so far as toler- . 
ation and breadth of view are concerned, within the 
pale of Hinduism itself, most subsequent movements 
must be called retrograde. 


72 LIFE AND TIMES, OF SANKARA 


The one weak point in Sankara’s system may 
now be noted as having formed the underlying cause 
of subsequent secessions, We saw that he was for- 
ced to lay unusual stress in jnana or the true reali- 
sation of God and, like Socrates of old, sought “ to 
rationalise the whole Universe” to counteract the 
extravagances of Bhatta. Now this kind of wisdom 
is clearly not within the reach of common men, to 
whom Sankara’s teaching is accordingly a sealed 
book. Then again, a little knowledge which is dange- 
rous in all cases, is most dangerous here, and is apt to 
give rise to many pious humbugs and deluded weak- 
lings who will cite Scripture for their own purposes. 
Further, even among the most learned in Sankara’s 
school of Vedanta a tendency has often been seen to 
make religion more an affair of the head than of the 
heart. And notwithstanding his great eloquence in 
praise of Bhakti or religious devotion, the injunction 
given to the less gifted and therefore the great majority 
of his followers to keep mechanically repeating the 
formula ‘Iam Brahman’ is but a sorry substitute for 
--genuine and intelligible Bhakti. This, is cannot be 
, denied, began to be felt in succeeding times and led 
to the subsequent ‘ Bhagavata’ movements in the 
eleventh, twelfth, and the following centuries. 

Another charge against him has been brought by 
those who have been most opposed to his philosophy— 
that he has by force read his own doctrines into the 
Sutras of Badarayana. But we have already seen that 
not merely Sankara, but every other philosopher or 


THE RESULTS—THE FUTURE 73 
e 


poet known to history has had to inhale much before 
the could exhale, so that his commentary on the 
Vedanta Sutras includes not only the meaning of the | 
original, but also all the explanations that had been 
given by subsequent students before his time; and 
naturally his own peculiar views and doctrines are 
also embodied therein, for otherwise he would have 
founded nothing. There is nothing to marvel here for 
the student of history, for all commentators have at 
all times done the same thing more or less. Great 
men as well as little men “‘can mever escape from the 
influence of the process in which they form part. ” 
And as for the Sutras, it is in their nature to be 
easily elastic! and when unsupported by tradition, 
nothing, indeed, can be made out of them. Accord- 
ingly this objection is no objection, for if it is admitted 
every teacher suffers, while if we disregard qtqqT, we 
cut ourselves adrift. 

During the last fifty years, if not for a longer 
time, Sankara and his philosophy have received addi- 
tional importance through the zeal of Western scholars 
and Theosophists, and he now has admirers in lands of 
which he could never have even dreamt. His philoso- 
phy is being subjected to the usual processes of 
comparison and criticism, wherever its study has been 
earnestly taken up. Itit can continue to stand the 
tests of thought and time in future, as it has done in 
the past, there is certainly a bright prospect before it. 
If, however, at any future date, the human mind out- 
grows the limits of Sankara’s philosophy,mankind will 


oo 


74 LIFE AND TIMES OF SANKARA 


f 


surely value it even then as a substantial contribution 
leading to the infinite growth of knowledge of which’ 
the Sruti sings, agama | warataaat: | All true and 
noble work in the building up of progress and civili- 
sation is of this nature, and as the tower rises higher 
and higher, the lower levels thereof become the inevi- 
table supports of the higher elevation; and the lower 
they are, the greater is the weight of the superincum- 
bent edifice that rests on them. 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA. 


BY 
PANDIT SITANATH TATTVABUSHAN 


I, SANKARA APPEALS TO REASON, NOT TO MERE 
AUTHORITY. 

Leaving aside more exact definitions of philoso- 
phy, definitions which are not likely to be intelligible 
to the ordinary, unphilosophical reader, we may define 
Philosophy, for our present purpose, asa reasoned 
theory of the Universe, a theory that endeavours to 
explain the mutual relations of Nature, Man and God. 
Philosophy must, at the least, be such a theory, what- 
ever else it may be. Now, do the writings of Sankara- 
charya really containa philosophy in this sense of the 
terms? We ask this question at the very outset, be- 
cause such a question is often asked by the superficial 
reader of Sankara’s writings, and answered in the 
negative. Such a reader sees that Sankara ever and 
anon speaks of himself asa mere expounder of the 
utterances of the ancient sages of India—the rishis of 
the Upanishads, the composer of the Vedanta apho- 
risms, and the author of the Bhagavad-Gita. At 
almost every step he appeals to the Vedas as the ulti- 
mate authority on matters spiritual, and seems to deny 
that man can know God by unaided Reason. In his 
commentary on thesixth anwvak of the ‘ Brahmananda 
Valli’ of the Tatttiriya Upanishad, he distinctly says: 
“The Sruti is our source of knowledge in matters 
transcending the senses.” A reader of the class 


76 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


f 


mentioned above may, therefore, naturally conclude 
that Sankara’s system is not a philosophy in 
any proper sense of the term. But a careful 
reader of his writings will observe, that, not- 
withstanding Sankara’s great regard for scriptural 
authority, and his anxiety to show that his system is 
based on such authority, unlike the systems of the 
Sankhyas and the Nayayikas, which he characterises 
as unscriptural, he reasons a good deal, and defends all 
his leading doctrines by arguments addressed to the 
understanding of his readers. It is also seen that 
what he calls Sruti or Revelation is nothing but spiri- 
tual insight and experience and that by setting 
up the Vedas as our authority on spiritual matters, he 
means nothing more than this, that the recorded 
experiences of the rishis turn our eyes inward and 
thus help us to see with the eyes of the spirit, the 
Supreme Self in which all souls and all things 
rest. His appeal to Scripture is not as to an external 
authority to be blindly received, but as to a valuable 
help to the attainment of true wisdom—wisdom 
which is attainable by every qualified seeker after 
truth. As he says in his commentary on the Prasno- 
panishad, VI. 2—‘‘The use of a scriptural text is not 
to alter existing things, but to make them appear as 
they are.” Again, at the end of his commentary on 
the tenth anxuweak of the'Siksha Valli’ of the Taittiriya 
Upanishad, he says: “ Thus is it shown that the 
visions of, the rishis concerning the soul’‘and such 
other matters, manifest themselves to one who is 


——- 


THE BASIS OF ALL KNOWLEDGE a7 


devoted to the constant duties prescribed by the 
Srutis and the Smritis, who is unselfish and who 
seeks to know the Supreme Brahman.” By what 
actual arguments Sankara establishes the different 
tenets of his philosophy, we shall see as we pro- 
ceed. 

2. SELF-INTUITION, PRIMARY AND BASIS OF 

ALL OTHER KNOWLEDGE. 

Sankaras’s commentary on the Upanishads, the 
Vedanta Sutras and Bhagavad-Gita are the most 
important of his works and are the only ones that can, 
without doubt, be ascribed to him. These writings, as 
a matter of course, follow no system, or, if any, only 
that which the original works commented upon follow. 
This is one reason why the ordinary reader cannot 
understand Sankara. To make him intelligible, the 
main doctrines of his philosophy must be set down 
in something like a logical order and the arguments 
adduced by him in defence of each also set forth. We: 
shall try something like this in the present account 
of his philosophy. We invite the reader, therefore, 
first of all, to grasp the very fundamental 
principle of Sankara’s system—the primary nature 
of self-intuition (asmatpratyaya or ahampratyaya)- 
In his commentary on the seventh aphorism of 
of the third pada, second chapter, of the Sariraka 
Mimamsa, he says: “The self is not contingent in 
the case of any person; for it is self-evident. The 
self is not established by proofs of the existence of 
the self.” Later on hesays: “ Nor is it possible to 


48 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


deny such a reality, for it is the very essence to him 
who would deny it.’? He then proceeds to show that 
this primary and self-evident intuition of self is the 
basis of all other kinds of knowledge, whether 
perceptive or inferential, direct or indirect, present, 
past or future. That is to say, we cannot know any 
-object without knowing ourself as the knower. As to 
the necessity or self-evident character of the proposi-— 
tion, ‘I know myself in knowing anything else,” 
anyone may convince himself of this by trying to 
think its opposite, which will be found to be not only 
unthinkable, but actually self-contradictory. Thus, if 
it seems to the reader that, while reading this book 
with deep attention, he really forgets himself, he will 
find on actual examination, that the proposition is 
really unthinkable and even absurd. He will see that, 
if such a thing were possible, if he could really forget 
himself in reading this book, if he could, in other 
words, know it out of conscious relation to himself, it 
would not be possible afterwards to bring the object 
in relation to his consciousness, as he will actually do. 
Perhaps he will say that at one moment he actually 
knows the book that is, sees or reads it, without know- 
ing himself as the seer or reader, that is, without 
knowing that it is he who sees or reads it, but that at 
another moment he remembers that it was really he 
who read the book. But how is it possible for anyone 
to remember anything without actually knowing it? 
Remembering is recognition—knowing again—and 
there can be no recognition without. cognition. To 


THE WORLD RELATIVE TO KNOWLEDGE 79 
e 


say, therefore, that one remembers anything without 
knowing it, is to say that one knows it without know- 
ing it, which is absurd. If, inthe present case, the 
reader says that he reads this book or any part ofit 
without knowing his self as its reader, and then, at 
_ another time he remembers himself as its reader, he is 
really guilty of self-contradiction. Sankara’s conten- 
tion, therefore, that the knowledge of self is the con- 
stant basis of all other knowledge, is quite evident. 
3. THE WORLD RELATIVE TO KNOWLEDGE. 

We now proceed to explain another cardinal doc- 
_ trine of Sankara’s philosophy,—the relativity of the 
world to knowledge. The ordinary unreflective reader 
has no suspicion of this relativity. To him the world 
exists whether anyone knows it or not. He constantly 
thinks and speaks of visible objects as existing unseen, 
audible objects as unheard, tangible things as untouch- 
ed, and intelligible facts as unrelated to any under- 
standing. He never suspects that such conceptions are 
self-contradictory and that the existence of an object 
necessarily implies the existence of a subject or know- 
ing self in relation to whose knowledge it exists. If, 
as we have seen, we cannot know objects without 
knowing the self as its knower, it follows that we can- 
not think of any object without thinking of the same 
self as its knower; and if we must belzeve objects to 
exist exactly as they are known and thought of—and we 
cannot do otherwise—we must believe them existing as 
known—as the object of a knowing self. In other 
words since we know objects as seen, heard, smelt, 


80 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


tasted,touched or understood,—as in some Way or other 
related to the knowing self,—and can think of them 
only as so related,—therefore, to believe them as exist- 
ing out of this relation is really to believe that things 
seen exist unseen, things heard exist unheard and so 
on, which is believing in contradictions as palpable as 
any can be. So Sankara says in his commentary on 
the Prasnopanishad, VI. 2: ‘‘It cannot be said that 
there exists an object, but it cannot be known. It is 
like saying that a visible object is seen, but there is no 
eye...... Where there is no knowledge there is no 
knowable.” The fact is that in thinking of objects, all, 
whether they are reflective or unreflective, do think of 
a knowing self, but that unreflective people, because of 
their inability to analyse their thoughts, are not dis- 
tinctly aware of this fundamental condition of all 
thought. 
4. SELF, THE ONLY REALITY KNOWN. 

Now, from what has been said above, it may seem 
that in knowing the world we know two distinct enti- 
ties, namely, the self as the subject of knowledge, and 
Nature as the object of knowledge,—that, though the 
existence of Nature implies its relation to a knowing 
self, it is nevertheless a distinct reality, and not iden- 
tical with the self. But it will be seen on close exa- 
mination that this distinction of Nature from the self 
is only apparent, not real. Sankara shows this clearly 
in his commentary on the first anuwvak of the ‘Brah- 
mananda Valli’ of the Taittiriya Upanishad. As he 
says there, “Appearances such as sound, though they 


SPACE DOES NOT EFFECT DUALITY St 
e 


present themselves as objects of self-knowledge, (and, 
therefore, as distinct from it) are yet found to be per- 
vaded by self-knowledge” ‘The essence of the self,’’ 
says he in the same commentary, “is knowledge, which 
can never be parted from it.” If, then, every object is 
found to be pervaded by knowledge, the very essence 
of the self, no object can be distinct from the self, but 
is really comprehended in it. As a pleasure or a pain, 
though verbally distinguishable from the self which 
feels it, is really one with it, so are colours, tastes, 
smells, sounds and touches one with the self that per- 
ceives them, though they are verbally distinguishable 
from it. In knowing the world, therefore, we know 
nothing but the self, The distinction of subject and 
object is only conventional—vyavahartka, as Sankara 
calls it—and the result of ignorance—avidya—ignor- 
rance which is removed by true knowledge. In every 
act of knowledge we know one, undivided entity— 
the self which is both subject, and object, because it 
knows only itself and nothing else, or,—as the distinc- 
tion of subject and object is only conventional—which 
is neither subject nor object, but transcends the 
-distinction. 
5. SPACE DOES NOT EFFECT DUALITY 

BETWEEN THE SELF AND THE WORLD. 

But our notion of the quality of subject and 
object, of the self and the world, is not likely to be 
given up unless the source of this notion is traced and 
shown to be unreliable. Its source, then, is time and 
space, the idea of which regulates all our sensuous per- 

6 


82 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


ception. We shall consider space first and see how it 
breaks up, or rather seems to break up, the fundamen- 
tal unity of consciousness. Space not only brings in 
the distinction of one object from another, but also 
that of the self from the world. The self seems to be 
here, in the body or in some particular part of the 
body, and the world, or any particular object in the 
world, there, out of the self. But this distinction of 
in and out, here and there, as between the self and 
the world, is the result of identifying the self with the 
body or some part of the body, and of forgetting that 
its essence is knowledge. As knowledge, the self is 
not only here, in a particular object, but everywhere, 
in all objects, for, as has already been seen, it pervades 
or illumines everything it knows. As the Kathopani- 
shad, If. 1, to. says, and Sankara fully endorses, 
‘‘What is here, is also there; what is there is also 
here. He who sees duality in this, goes from death 
to death.” Again, as the Chhandogya Upanishad, 
VII. 15. 1. says and Sankara concurs, ‘ The self 
alone is below, the self above, the self behind, the self 
before, the self to the right, the self to the left ; the 
self is all this.” The fact is that space, as an object 
of knowledge, is comprehended in the knowing self 
and cannot be out of it. The distinction of here and 
there, in and out, therefore, cannot subsist as between 
the self and its objects. For the self, there cannot be 
in the proper sense of the term, any external object or, 
world, The notion of an external or material world, 
therefore, is purely conventional,—vyavaharika—and 


KNOWLEDGE NON-SENSUOUS AND ETERNAL 83 


is rejected by true knowledge. Space, which seems 
to make the Universe dual or plural, does not really 
do so. On the contrary, as a type of unity, it 
supplies Sankara with an illustration of the perfect 
oneness and indivisibility of the self. The distinction 
of here and there, of this and that, as between objects, 
does not, it will be seen, split up space itself into 
parts. The space inside a pot may seem to be different 
from that outside of it, but really there is no partition 
betweem the two. The walls or sides of the pot, 
which seem to part the inside space from the outside, 
are themselves in space, and, therefore, cannot part 
space from space. Similarly, the body, which seems 
to separate the self from the world, or the self in the 
body from the self in the world, does not really do so, 
for both the body andthe world outside of it are 
illumined by the same self,—are objects of the same 
knowing self—and are thus comprehended in its 
essence. The notion of duality, therefore, as furnished 
by space, may be rejected as groundless. Objects, 
which seem to come to us as aliens, and as froma 
foreign source, are really one with what we call our 
self. 

6. KNOWLEDGE REALLY NON-SENSUOUS, 

UNCHANGEABLE, AND ETERNAL, 

But if it be so, how is it, it may be urged, that 
objects do not always remain before or in the self, but 
seem to appear to it and disappear from it. If they 
were one with the self, would not they be ever present 
with it and the continual flux experienced in our per- 


84 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


ceptions be impossible? Sankara discusses the subject 
very fully in his introduction to the second chapter of 
the Aitareya Upanishad and, as the result of a long 
discussion, comes to the conclusion that the constant 
change apparent in our perceptions does not really 
imply any change in the knowledge of the self, in 
which ald things exist eternally,—not, indeed, as ob- 
jects distinguished from a subject, for the self trans- 
cends this distinction,—but in perfect unity with it. 
Our perceptions seem to result from the contact of our 
organs of knowledge with objects external to thems 
But real knowledge, as it is in the s@lf, is not such a 
resultant. It is an eternal attribute of the self. In 
reality it neither arises from the action of external ob- 
jects upon the senses nor is destroyed in the absence 
of such action. If it were so, says Sankara, there 
would not be such things as visions and sounds in the 
dreaming state, when the organs of perception are 
inactive. ‘ Thus,” he says, ‘* there are two kinds of 
vision that of the eye which is transient, and that of 
the self, which is eternal: Similarly also two kinds of 
hearing, that of the ear, which is transient and that of 
the self which is eternal. Similarly two kinds of 
thought and knowledge, external and_ internal.” 
That knowledge, though seeming to be in a flux, is 
really not so, but is a permanent property of the self, 
receives a Striking illustration from the familiar but 


none the less wonderful fact of remembrance. The 


fact that things disappearing from the stream of 
changes that constitutes our sensuous life do yet re- 


—" 


KNOWLEDGE NON-SENSUOUS AND ETERNAL 85 
e 
appear and are recognised as identical with things 
known before, proves that knowledge is non-sensuous 
and does not depend for its existence on the changing 
and flowing form which it assumes in our perceptive 
life, Thus, if the knowledge of the book before me” 
were a mere event, a change, a perceptive act, as it is 
called, it would vanish for ever on the cessation of the 
other actions, internal and external, on which it seems 
to depend,—my attention, the action of light on the 
eye, and the like. Weshould know nothing about it, 
at any rate, after a period of sound sleep, when all per- 
ceptive action ceases. But we know, as a fact, that it 
will re-appear to-morrow,—re-appear in relation with 
the self that now forms its ground and cause, and 
thereby prove itself as a permanent property of the 
self—as belonging to its very essence. It will prove 
that it was never absent fromthe knowledge of the 
self, —knowledge, which, though different from sensu- 
ous knowledge, is none the less real than it, but rather 
infinitely more so. Sankara Says all this in effect in 
his refutation of the Buddhist Sensationalism (Kshant- 
kavijnanavada in the second pada of the second 
chapter of the Vedanta Sutras. One short quotation 
from that long discussion must suffice after all that we 
have said on the subject. ‘ Unless there exists,’ says 
Sankara, “‘ one relating principle in the past, present 
and future—one which Is unchangeable and sees all 
things—the facts of remembrance, recognition, &c., 
which depend upon mental impressions requiring 
space, time and occasional cause, cannot be explained.” 


86 THL PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA - 


( 


7, UNREALITY OF TIME, SPACE AND 
THE FINITE SE£LF. 

It is clear, then, from what has been said above, 
that in every act of knowledge we know only one 
‘Reality—that which we call our self—and that the 
objective world, the world of time and space, has no 
independent existence, but is comprehended in the self. 
The self alone has paramarthika or real existence, 
whereas the existence of the world is only vyavaharika, 
practical or phenomenal. The belief in its independ- 
ent or real existence is the result of avidya, ignorance, 
—ignorance which is removed or destroyed by a true 
knowledge of reality. From the paramarthika stand- 
point there is no object as distinguished from the 
subject, no world, no space, no time, no action—there- 
fore and no agent, for action and agency depend on 
time. The argument for the unreality of space and 
time, which we have already given at some length, 
may be briefly summarised as follows: space is the 
distinction of here and there. The distinction obtains 
only as long as the principle that relates or unifies 
here and there is not seen, or, in other words, as long 
as @bjects in space are believed to be_ realities. 
independent of the self. When, however, here and 
there are both seen to be comprehended in the self 
—in that indivisible unity of consciousness, in which 
there is no distinction of here and there,—the distinction 
itself ceases to be real and with that ceases the reality 
of space. Similarly, time which is the distinction of 
mow and then, ceases to be real when it is seen in 


UNREALITY OF TIME, SPACE & THE FINITE SELF 87 
e 


relation to the self, for which the distinction has no 
existence ; for, while present, past and future events go: 
and come, the self persists and knows all. Even this 
going and coming of objects, is, as we have already 
seen, only apparent, and seems to be real only so long 
as objects are believed to be independent of the self. 
When they are seen to be identical with the self, it is 
found that they can neither go nor come, and we find, 
by actual experience, that facts disappearing from our — 
perceptive life and apparently destroyed, re-appear in 
that life and prove their permanent, timeless existence 
in the self in its non-perceptive aspect. Now, as to 
the unreality of action and agency, they follow from 
what has been said as regards the unreality of space 
and time. Sankara indeed speaks, now and again, of 
knowledge as an action, as we too have done in ex- 
pounding his doctrine. But according to him its charac- 
ter as an action, as a change or event, is only vyava- 
harika. As we have already said it is only if you look 
upon objects or facts as different from the self that 
they seem to come and go, and the self seems to be 
an agent in the act of knowing. When this distinc- 
tion is seen to be unreal, knowledge appears in its true 
character, namely as the permanent essence of the self, 
and not a passing act or quality. Then, again, as to 
the perfect unity of the self, notwithstanding the 
fact that it appears different in different persons, the 
fact is evident from what we have already said. 
It is time and space and their various modifications 
that seem to break up the Universe into various 


$8 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


parts, various spheres of knowledge and activity, 
and thus into different selves to which they are 
related. With the merging of time and space in 
the self, the idea of a plurality of selves is seen to 
be groundless. When the agencies that introduce 
finitude into reality are seen to be unreal, finitude 
itself disappears and the Infinite alone remains, Thus 
is Our own self, the self in each of us, which we ignor- 
antly imagine to be finite, seem to be really nothing 
but Brahman, satyamjnanamanantam,—truth, know- 
ledge and infinitude, or the True, the Knowing and 
the Infinite, if by these adjectives we understand a 
Reality of which truth, knowledge and infinitude are 
not separable attributes, but form its very essence. In 
his commentary on the first anwvak of the ‘‘ Brahman- 
anda Valli” of the Tatttiriya Upanishad, Sankara 
discusses these attributes of Brahman at great length 
and shows that the terms expressing them are applied 
to Brahman in a sense somewhat different from what 
they bear in their application to phenomenal objects. 
They are used,in the case of Brahman, not to describe 
him,—for he cannot be described, as description im- 
plies distinction, and Brahman cannot be distinguished 
from anything other than he—but simply to indicate 
his nature as the one only Reality, self-illumined, self- 
dependent, indivisible and excluding even the possi- 
bility of any other reality. To the attributes already 
enumerated, is added anandam, bliss, not in the sense 
of the happiness experienced in obtaining a pleasurable 
object external to one’s own self, but such happiness as 


BRAHMAN AS ISVARA 89 
e 


a non-dual, secondless Reality can feel in the plenitude 
of its own nature. 
8. BRAHMAN AS ISVARA. 

Having explained as fully as our limits 
allowed, Sankara’s idea of paramarthika existence, we 
proceed to give a fuller statement than we have hither- 
to done of the vyavaharika world as conceived by 
him. We sce already that he does not pronounce, the 
world of sensuous objects and finite selves as absolute- 
ly non-existent. Far from doing so, he rather admits 
that in one sense that world is as real as Brahman, 
for, its real essence is one with Brahman—compre- 
hended in Brahman’s indivisible essence. Sankara 
is never tired of repeating the Chhandoyya text, Sar- 
vam khalu idam Brahma—Verily all this is Brabman. 
It is only the world’s existence as conceived to be 
distinct from Brahman that is unreal according to him. 
Such a conception, he says, in based on ignorance and 
disappears on theattainment of true knowledge. Now, 
the question is whence is this ignorance—this fruitful 
source of the infinite variety that constitutes the world? 
In reply, Sankara has no hesitation in saying that this 
potent agency belongs to Brahman himself, though in 
saying so he seems to contradict himself, palpably. Is 
not Brahman, as conceived by Sankara, the very 
essence of knowledge? How, then, could there be 
ignorance in him even for a single moment? Is not 
Sankara’s Brahman a non-agent (nishkriya)? How, 
then, could any power or agency belong to him? We 
confess we find no clear answers to such question m 


go THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


Sankara. His oft-repeated answer is that avidya is 
anirvachaniya, not clearly describable, for it 
cannot be said to be either one with Brahman 
or different from him. In its effect, as manifes- 
ted in the life of a being conceived as finite, 
avidya, indeed, is not indescribable. It can very well 
be described as the finite self'’s ignorance of its own 
true nature, removable by true knowledge, as Sankara 
does describe it now and again, for instance, in his 
commentary on the third aphorism of the fourth 
pada, first chapter, of the Vedanta Sutras. The 
indescribability comes in when it is asked, how could 
there be any room for a finite being, or—what is. 
practically the same thing—for the conception of 
such a being in a Reality infinite and without the 
least shade of distinction ? Fully recognising this in- 
describableness, however, Sankara finds himself com- 
mitted to the postulation of a power, dependent on 
Brahman and called indifferently Avidya or Maya, 
which gives rise to subjects and objects phenomenally 
but not absolutely real. This power does not, indeed, 
make Brahman either ignorant or limited, for he is 
independent of, and therefore untouched by, it. But 
as related to it, he assumes a character which does 
not belong to him as conceived apart from it. This. 
‘assumption’ is not indeed an affair of time, not any- 
thing that begins to be at one time, and ceases to be 
at another, for, though the effects of Maya comes 
and go, Maya itself, as a power, is eternal. But 
nevertheless, as it is a power producing unreal! 


BONDAGE AND LIBERATION gt 
° 


appearances. Sankara refuses to ascribe to it para- 
marthika or absolute existence. However, in relation 
to this power, Brahman is Isvara, the Ruler,—the 
Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the world,—all- 
knowing, all-powerful, merciful, just, holy, the 
friend and saviour of finite souls. As Isvara, then, 
Brahman has all the characteristics of what is called! 
a personal God. Sankara’s views on Maya and 
Isvara will be found explained at some length in 
his commentary on the fourteenth aphorism of the 
first pada, second chapter, of the Vedanta Sutras, 
besides other passages. We make no quotations, as 
detached passages on the matter are not likely to: 
convey any clear idea. The eternality and indes- 
tructibleness of Maya will be found admitted in the 
commentary on the Vedanta Sutras, 1. 1. 5 and 
Es: B25; 
g. THE CosMIC SOUL AND THE COSMOS. 
BONDAGE AND LIBERATION. 

With the personality of Brahman at the top of 
the vyavaharika world, Sankara gives back all that 
he seems to have taken away by his process of merg- 
ing everything finite in the Infinite. With the Crea- 
tor he gives back the world created and sustained by 
him, with all the finite objects and finite souls con- 
tained in it, and he sharply criticises the Buddhist 
Sensationalists for denying their existence, in the 
same manner in which he takes the Sankhya_philoso- 
phers to task for their rejecting the most rational 
doctrine of an intelligent Creator of ‘the world im 


92 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 
é 


favour of their unintelligent Prakriti. At the head 
of all created beings he places the Karya or Apara 
Brahman, the Effect-God or Lower Brahman as 
distinguished from God as Cause or the Higher, 
Supreme Brahman. He is otherwise called Brahma 
or Hiranyagarbha. As objects can exist only in rela- 
tion to and in distinction from, a subject, as changes 
imply a mind of which they are modifications, the 
objective world as a totality implies the existence ofa 
Subject to which it is related,—a Mind of which all 
cosmic changes are modifications. This Mind 
considers the world as its body, just as individual 
minds consider smaller aggregates of objects as their 
bodies. This Lower Brahman is saguna, 1%. @., 
immanent in sattavam, rajas and tamas, the primary 
gunas or qualities of Nature, and their innumerable 
modifications; whereas the Supreme Brahmam is 
nirgunam, Without the gunas, i. e., transcending the 
qualities of Nature. Under Brahma, and compre- 
hended in his all-pervading life, are the various classes 
of individual beings such as gods, demons, men and 
the lower animals, All are, indeed, -one with 
Brahman in essence, but they appear finite and distinct 
from him in consequence of their indentifying them- 
selves with certain aggregates of objects which they 
consider as their bodies or limiting adjuncts (upadhis). 
These aggregates, in the ascending order of their 
subtlety, are the following five:—(1) the nutritive or 
material sheath (annamaya kosha), (2) the vital sheath 


(pranamaya kosha), (3) the sensorial sheath (manomaya, 


—— 


INCARNATION, UNIVERSAL AND SPECIAL 93 
e 


kosha), (4) the intellectual sheath vijnanamaya kosha)y 
and (5) the beatific sheath (anandamaya kosha). These 
ageregates are called sheaths (koshas), for they keep 
the real nature of the self hidden, just as the sheath 
enclosing a sword keeps it hidden. The soul, in the 
lowest stage of its spiritual development, identifies — 
itself with the body composed of gross matter ; in the 
next stage with the vital powers; then with the 
sensorium manas, the seat of sensations; then with 
the intellect or understanding, the faculty that forms 
general conceptions and leads us to imagine ourselves 
as agents and subjects of knowledge; and then 
ultimately with delightful feelings of all classes, 
specially the higher. But when enlightenment dawns 
upon us, we discover the truth that these aggregates | 
as limited objects, are not our real self, and are not 
limiting adjuncts to it. Our real self, we find, is 
infinite and absolute—the Supreme Brahman himself. 
Our self-identification with a limited object, with all 
its sin and misery is our bondage, while the conscious- 
ness of unity with Brahman, with all the holiness and 
blessedness pertaining to such consciousness, is our 
liberation. The subject of the five sheaths and our 
identification with and liberation from them, the 
reader will find treated of in Sankara’s commentary 
on the ‘ Brahmananda Valli’ and the ‘ Bhrigu Valli » 
of the Taittiriya Upanishad. 
10. INCARNATION, UNIVERSAL AND SPECIAL. 

Wenow come toa consideration of the means 

proposed by Sankara for obtaining liberation and the. 


‘Q4 THE PHILOSO.’HY OF SANKARACHARYA 


processes through which, according to him, the soul 
obtainsit. But before entering intoa proper discussion 
-of these subjects, we shall briefly notice Sankara’s view 
-of incarnation, both because it isan important doctrine 
of speculative philosophy and because it is closely 
connected with Sankara’s view of ethical and spiritual 
life. It must be clear from what we have already said 
the Sankara holds a doctrine which may be called 
that of universal incarnation. Every so-called finite 
is, according to him, an incarnation of the Deity, 
‘inasmuch as the self we call our own is really the 
Supreme Self. It is only our ignorance that hides 
-our identity with Brahman, and this ignorance is 
quite removable by knowledge. When this ignorance 
is removed we realise the truth of the mahavakyas, 
great utterances, of the Vedanta—‘ So’ham’ ([sopani- 
shad, 17)—I am He, ‘ Aham Brahmasmi’ (Brihada- 
ranyaka, 1, 4, 10..—Iam Brahman, and ‘ Tattvam- 
ast’? (Chhandoga, vi. 8..—Thou art That,—utterances 
which Sankara is never tired of repeating. Neverthe- 
less, this identity of God and man, however real and 
-essential, has to be discovered through a process in 
the case of the ordinary individual. The question 
now is, is there, or has there ever been, any individual 
in whom the consciousness of identity with the Deity 
is eternal and not discoverable through a process ? In 
other words, has God ever incarnated himself—mani- 
fested himself as an individual like ourselves, with 
body, sensorium and understanding like ours? It is 
curious that Sankara has nowhere, in his writings, dis- 


INCARNATION, UNIVERSAL AND SPECIAL 95 
e 


cussed this question philosophically—setting forth the 
arguments in favour of and against this doctrine of 
special incarnation. But it is evident from several 
passages in his work, specially from the introduction 
to his commentary on the Bhagavad-Gita, that he 
accepts the popular doctrine of Sri Krishna, son of 
Devaki, being the incarnation of the Deity ina special 
sense, But in the particular passage referred to, he 
uses a Word which seems considerable to differentiate 
his view of the Divine incarnation from the popular 
view. He says that in Devaki as mother and from 
Vasudeva as father, the Creator ‘Amsena Krishna 
kila sambabhuva’—was born in part as Krishna. One 
can see very Well why Sankara uses the word amsena, 
in part, in speaking of the Lord’s incarnation. Incar- 
nation is manifestation in flesh and other mediums 
like the sensorium and the understanding, which are 
all finitethings. Now, the manifestation of the Self 
through finite things cannot but be partial, and so 
Sri Krishna, however superior he may have been to 
ordinary mortals, would yet seem to have been a finite 
being so far as his manifested or perceptive life was 
concerned. But if it be so, it is not easy to see what 
difference in kind exists between him and other indi- 
viduals. Sankara, however, never distinctly makes 
the admission to which he seems to be committed and, 
excepting the reservation implied in the word amsena, 
everywhere speaks of Sri Krishna as the incarnation of 
the Lord ina special sense. It may be mentioned by 
the way that the doctrine of special incarnation is 


96 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


absent from the Upanishads—the twelve that forma 

the basis of the Vedanta Philosophy—and from the 

Vedanta Sutras. 

11. ADMISSIONS INCONSISTENT WITH ABSOLUTE 
MONISM. 

However, Sankara’s acceptance of the doctrine of 
special incarnation commits him to two very important 
admissions,—admissions Which seem to conflict. with 
the general drift of his philosophy. The first is that 
the state of absolute liberation does not imply an 
utter annihilation of difference; in that state also, 
as in the state of bondage, there is a recognition of the 
plurality that constitutes the world,—only that 
recognition is coupled with the consciousness that 
plurality is maytk, the result of the Lord’s mysterious 
power of creation. To Sri Krishna himself, the incar- 
nation of the eternally free Lord, moving among the 
Kurus and the Pandavas driving the chariot of his 
friend and pupil in the battle-field, and instructing 
him in the supreme science of liberation, there is evi- 
dently a distinct recognition of all the differences that 
constitute the phenomenal world, including his own: 
distinction, as the Universal Self, from other. persons 
as finite individuals. We shall see hereafter how far 
Sankara keeps this admission in view in his distinc- 
tion of karma or apekshika mukis (gradual or relative 
liberation) and para or absolute liberation. The 
second admission referred to above is that even 
liberated—absolutely liberated—souls may re-in- 
carnate themselves, not indeed under the influence of 


THE OPPOSITION OF JNANA AND KARMA Q7 


desires or the result of past actions, for all desires. 
and fruits of actions are dead in their case, but for the 
object of doing good to the world,—liberating those 
who are still in bondage. This admission also 
Sankara seems now and again to nullify by his doct- 
rine of the final merging of individual souls in 
Brahman and that of the essential opposition of karma 
(action) and liberation. 
12. THE FOUR GATIS OR DESTINIES, THE 
OPPOSITION OF JNANA AND KARMA. 

We come, therefore, to a consideration of San- 
kara’s view of karma. According to him there are four 
stages of spiritual progress, and accordingly, as one 
occupies one or another of these stages at the time 
of one’s death, he obtains one or another of four cor- 
responding gatis, fates or conditions, in the period 
following his departure from the world. In his com- 
mentary on the Chhandogya Upanishad V. to, 
Brihadaranyaka, VI. 2, and elsewhere, he speaks of 
these four stages and the fates to which they lead. 
The lowest is that in which man—and what is said 
of man applies to other orders of being also—does 
not subject himself to any Vedic discipline, but 
lives a life of pure impulse unchecked by any 
higher law. Such men, when they die, are reborn in 
the form of some lower animal such as a fly or an 
insect. The next higher stage is that in which man 
performs the duties prescribed in the Srutis and the 
Smritis, but acquires no knowledge regarding the gods 
he worships. The highest reward allotted to this 

7 


98 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


stage is the attainment of the lunar regions through 
the way called the pitriana—the path of the manes 
__and the enjoyment, for a time, of the joys provided 
there. When these are over, with exhaustion of the 
enjoyer’s punya Or merit,—Which, however great, is 
nevertheless a perishable thing,—he comes down and 
is reborn. The third higher stage is that in which the 
performer of karma prescribed in the Scriptures adds 
to his virtuous deeds a knowledge of the deities 
worshipped by him. The deities spoken of in this 
connection do not include the Supreme Deity, the 
Highest Brahman. The highest god known in this 
stage is the Apara-Brahman, or Hiranyagarbha. He 
is known and worshipped as distinct from the wor- 
shipper, at least in some respects, and it is the 
consciousness of his distinction from the object of his 
worship that makes it possible ;for him to worship it 
and to seek his own good in various finite shapes by 
sacrifices to the gods and the performances of other 
duties prescribed in the Scriptures. The highest 
reward assigned to this stage is the attainment of the 
Divine regions— Brahmaloka—through the devayana 
or the path of the gods: When this world has once 
been attained, there is no return from it to lower 
worlds, The soul lives there for ages in the company 
of the gods and in close proximity to the Lower 
Brahman, and when this Brahman himself is merged 
in the Highest Brahman at the end of the cycle 
(kalpa), his worshippers also share in his happy fate.* 


a 
* See Sankara’s commentary on the Prasnopanishad VJ. 6, 
and that on the Vedanta Sutras,1V. 3. 


——— 


THE OPPOSITION OF JNANA AND KARMA gg 
= 


This process of obtaining liberation is called by 
Sankara karma-mukti—gradual liberation. As the 
attainment of the Brahmaloka is itself called mukte 
in the Srutts and the Sutras, Sankara calls this state 
apekshiki muktt—relative liberation. We see, then, 
how far, according to Sankara, karma alone—the mere 
performance of prescribed duties—on the one 
hand and karma coupled with apara vidya, the lower 
knowledge of the gods.—on the other, can take us. 
Beyond all such finite forms of personal good 
(purushartha) lies paramukti, absolute liberation, 
which consists in perfect union with the Supreme 
Being without a single shade of difference. This can 
be secured only by the para vidya jnana—the 
knowledge of one’s perfect indentity with Para-Brah- 
man. When this knowledge is acquired, the soul is in 
no need of making a journey through the devayana to 
the Brahmaloka. It becomes jivan mukta, liberated 
though living in the world, and isat death, completely 
merged in Brahman. The jnana which secures juan 
mukté is, according to Sankara, incompatible with 
karma of allsorts. Such jnana shows the identity of 
the self with the Supreme Brahman, who is, as we 
have already seen, a non-agent, akarta, and is above 
all needs and, therefore, all desires)5 How can one 
who knows oneself to be the externally complete Brah- 
man have any motive for action ? Hence Sankara fights 
a long and interminable battle against Samuchehaya- 
vada, the doctrine of the union of jnana and karma. 
According to the upholders of this doctrine, both know- 


100 THE PWILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


ledge and action are necessary for liberation, and even 
those who have attained the highest knowledge should 
perform the duties prescribed in the Scriptures, though 
without any selfish desires. The life of a householder 
therefore, is not, according to these theorists, imcom- 
patible with the highest knowledge. Sankara admits 
that the performance of the duties prescribed in the 
Scriptures is necessary for purifying the heart, and 
that, unless the heart is purified, the highest know- 
ledge cannot be attained. But he. thinks that wher 
the necessary purification of the heart has taken 
place, and the highest knowledge has arisen, cere- 
monial and domestic duties; that is karma in the 
proper sense, become unnecessary, and the only 
duties that remain then are those that ripen and 
strengthen the knowledge of Brahman. Of this 
latter class of duties we shall give Sankara’s views 
further on. Against the former, and against the life 
of a house-holder, which is based on them, Sankara 
speaks everywhere throughout his writings. But we 
may refer to two particular passages as containing a 
summary of his views on the subject. His refutation 
of Samuchchayavada will be found specially in his 
commentary on the eleventh verse of the second 
chapter of the Bhagavad-Gita, which is really the 
opening note of the commentary, coming immediately 
after the introduction. His advocacy of sannyasa, 
the ascetic’s life, as the only one compatible with the 
highest knowledge, and his tirade against the house- 
holder’s life as inconsistent with the knowledge of 


oe ies 


RE-INC#RNATION lol 


Brahman, will be found specially in his introduction 
to the commentary on the Attareya Upanishad. In 
the first-mentioned commentary, however, he makes 
an admission which seems to be a virtual surrender of 
his position. Herein he says that the performance of 
a kshatriya’s duties by Sri Krishna, the incarnation of 
the Lord, for the good of the world, and of ceremo- 
nial and domestic duties by Janaka and other house- 
holders who had gained the highest knowledge, with 
the same object, was not such karma as he (Sankara) 
teaches to be incompatible with the highest know- 
ledge. The absence of desire (kama) and egotism 
(ahankara) in such actions takes them away from the 
category of karma properly so called. After this con- 
cession, very little, if any, difference remains between 
Sankara’s position and that of the Samuchchayavadin, 
specially if the latter accepts, in their entirety, the 
teachings of the Gita on disinterested action (ntsh- 
kama karma). : | 
13. RE-INCARNATION. RELATIVE AND 
ABSOLUTE LIBERATION. 

We must return, however, to the four different 
gatis or destinies to which, in the opinion of Sankara, 
the soul becomes subject according to its behav:our 
on earth. All of them, it will be seen, imply a belief 
an re-incarnation. Sankara offers no regular philoso- 
phical defence of the tenet of re-incarnation, though 
it is easy to see, from his writings, what arguments 
he would have adduced in favour of the doctrine if 
he had been called upon to argue it out. We, there- 


102 THE PHILOSOPHY C# SANKARACHARYA 


fore, attempt neither any defence nor any criticism of 
the theory. The reader, if he feels any curiosity 
about it, may consult the section on ‘ Re-incarnation.” 
in the present writer’s treatise on Hindu Thetsm, 
where he will find the doctrine defended at some 
length with arguments both old and new. For our 
present purpose, it will be sufficient to say that there 
is nothing, prima facte, irrational and, therefore, un- 
philosophical in the ideal of re-incarnation. The 
immortality of the soul being admitted, the next ques- 
tion is whether an embodied or a disembodied exis- 
tence is the more probable form of the soul’s continu- 
ance in after-life, a question the settlement of which 
will depend upon the weight of arguments on either 
side. But the same rationality can scarcely be urged. 
in favour of Sankara’s doctrine that souls not subject 
to any discipline in this life will be re-born in the 
shape of some lower animal. The conception of such 
a destiny for a human being seems to ignore the vast 
difference between the human consciousness and that 
of the lower animals. Even the most degraded 
of human beings seem to be incomparably superior 
to the lower animals, and though a process 
of progression, by which higher orders of being 
are developed out of the lower, is a rational idea, 
defensible both scientifically and philosophically, a 
reverse process of retrogression seems opposed to both 
science and philosophy. The first of the four gatis 
spoken of by Sankara, thus seems to be philosophically 
indefensible. Coming, now, to the second and the 


RE-INCARNATION : 103. 


third, the soul’s passage to the Pitriloka and the 
Brahmaloka, we must say that these doctrines scarcely 
come under the category of philosophical, since they 
are not defended by arguments, but are put forward 
as interpretations of Scriptural texts. There 1s, 
indeed, nothing intrinsically irrational in the idea of 
an abode of the virtuouslike the Pétraloka, though 
there seems to be something mechanical in that of 
one’s merit being exhausted there in time and 
necessitating a fall and re-birth. There is-also, noth- 
ing unreasonable, in itself, in the idea of a world 
occupied by the higher gods, that is of the most wise 
and holy of finite beings, where the Divine presence, 
_ though pervading the whole universe is felt most 
vividly, and imparts a blessedness which cannot be 
enjoyed anywhere else. But nevertheless Sankara’s 
teachings about such a world and the way by which 
the soul reaches it rest on no better or higher autho- 
rity than the utterances of the Scriptures and must be 
accepted or rejected according to the light in which 
we regard these authorities. It may also be doubted 
whether Scriptural teaching on this subject is at all to 
be taken in a literal sense,—as treating of an actual 
world and an actual way—or is altogether figura- 
tive—representing a spiritual condition as a world, 
and a process of spiritual progress as a Way. A 
careful study of the Kaushitaki Upanishad, Chapter 
I, Chhandogya, IV. 15 and Brihadaranyaka, VI. 2. 
15, which contain accounts of the Brahmaloka, its 
contents, and the way to it, does really suggest such a 


104 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


doubt. Sankara, however, and the other interpreters 
of the Srutis, including the author of the Vedanta 
Sutras, interpret these descriptions as realistic. But 
there is a curious difference among these interpreters as 
to one important point, a consideration of which will 
lead us to the discussion of the fourth gaté spoken of by 
Sankara, namely, the union of the soul with the Sup- 
reme Brahman, which is the only one that admits of 
philosophical discussion in the proper sense of the term, 
The difference referred to is whether the Brahman 
approached by the devayana is the higher or the lower 
Brahman. Two ancient interpreters of the Scriptures, 
Jaimini and Badari, take opposite sides. According to 
the former, it is the higher Brahman that is reached 
by the way: according to the latter it is the lower. 
The difference is into a mere difference of textual inter- 
pretation : it leads to important philosophical differ- 
ences, and hence our taking it up in this book. The 
author of the Swtras simply mentions the views of the 
ancient interpreters, with their arguments, side by 
side, but does not clearly take any side. Sankara, 
however, thinks that he takes Badari’s side, whereas 
Ramanuja, the great Vaishnava philosopher, and a 
great opponent of Sankara’s philosophy, interprets 
the author of the Sutras as in favour of Jaimini’s 
view. It would perhaps be preposterous for us to 
take any side when such great authorities find reason 
to differ; nor is it necessary for us to do so. The fact, 

however, is that the soul’s union with Brahman in 
the Brahmaloka, which is described in the scriptural 


RE- INCARNATION 105 


passages already referred to, and in the last three padas 
of the fourth Chapter of the Vedanta-Sutras, isa 
union with several points of difference. The soul 
sees its essential unity with Brahman, but neither 
obtains all the powers of the Deity nor is completely 
merged init. The author of the Sutras distinctly 
calls this condition liberation, and the Vaishnava 
philosophers hold it to be the highest condition 
attainable by a finite being. Hence also they inter- 
pret it as union with the highest Brahman, 
between whom anda finite being there must always 
exist, as they teach, some points of difference. But 
Sankara thinks that as Para-Brahman is above all 
difference, the soul’s union with him must bea condi- 
tion without a shadow of difference (bheda) in it, and he 
finds scriptural authority for such a condition in such 
passages as the seventh verse, fourth section, fourth 
chapter of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. It is not 
easy to conceive what Sankara precisely means by such 
a condition. His oft-repeated characterisation of it as 
one without the least vestige of difference would seem 
to make it incompatible even with the consciousness 
that all differences are mayik, or phenomenal. But if 
we were to interpret it in the light of admissions as to 
the eternality and indestructibility of Maya or the 
principle of difference, and as to Sri Krishna, the 
Lord’s incarnation, and liberated souls working for 
good of the world, and thus being conscious of pheno- 
menal differences, then we should have to conceive 
even absolute liberation as admitting of a sort of 


% 


106 THE PHILOSOPHY OF SANKARACHARYA 


differentiation—though it were a differentiation very 
dissimilar to that which the soul conceives under the 
influence of avidya. Notwithstanding the difficulty 
of an exact interpretation of Sankara on the point, we 
lean towards the view that it is the latter kind of 
differentiation, and not the former, that he is careful 
of excluding from his conception of absolute liberation. 
However, the absolutely liberated soul does not, 
according to Sankara, need to go anywhere in parti- 
cular, and through any way, to obtain its highest 
condition. It becomes the Supreme Brahman him- 
self, who is in space and time, or,—what is really the 
same thing,—beyond all space and time. It becomes 
so even while living in the body. But Sankara makes 
a difference, as will be seen from his interpretation of 
the texts referred to above, between having a body 
and being freed from it, and seems to think that liber- 
ation is not quite complete till the body is dissolved, 
This distinction, again, seems to conflict with his 
definition of liberation as the attainment of the high- 
est knowledge,—which can have nothing to do with 
the dissolution of a physical organism—and with the 
admission that the incarnation of the eternally free 
Lord and other liberated souls lived and moved in 
bodies without the least prejudice to their freedom. 
14. BHAKTI OR REVERENTIAL LOVE TO GOD. 

We have seen now what place Sankara gives to 
jnana and karma in spiritual culture. It remains to 
be seen what he conceives to be the function of bhakti, - 
the reverential love of God, in the attainment of 


BHAKTI OR REVERENTIAL LOVE TO GOD 107 


liberation. His commentary on the Bhagavad Gita, 
where bhakti is extolled now and again, leaves no 
doubt as to thehigh place it occupies in his system. 
In the Vivekachudamani, a beautiful treatise ascribed 
to him, he says: “Of the things which help the 
attainment of liberation, bhakti is the greatest ’’— 
_ © Mokshakarana samagryam  bhaktireva gartyast.” 
But it must be clear, both from the verse quoted and. 
from the foregoing exposition of Sankara’s view, that 
bhakti in the popular sense, as a feeling of reverence 
for a being conceived as higher than the soul of the 
devotee, can be regarded only as a help, a stepping- 
stone, to liberation in a system of Absolute Monism 
like Sankara’s. And this is exactly the light in which 
Sankara regards it: it is a means, not the end,—a 
lower and not the final stage in the soul’s progress. 
But there are passages in the Bhagavad Gita, for 
instance, verses 54 and 55 of the eighteenth chapter, 
where the final stage of spiritual progress is described 
and yet bhakté finds a place there. How does Sankara 
interpret such passages ? In such passages he simply 
takes bhakti as identical with jnana and he finds 
scriptural authority for so regarding it. In chapter 
VII, verse 16 of the Gita, Sri Krishna speaks of four 
classes of worshippers, and by implication, of four 
species of bhakti, and gives superiority to that whith 
is identical with or based on jnana, Jnana, to 
Sankara, is the knowledge of the soul’s identity with 
Brahman ; the highest form of bhakts, therefore, is 
the most constant and vivid consciousness of such 


108 THE PHILOSOPHY OF,,SANKARACHARYA 


identity. The other kinds of bhakti enumerated in 
the above text are reverential feelings that inspire (1) 
those in distress, (2) those who desire knowledge, and 
(3) those whose object is to attain some particular 
end. Evidently Sankara would class even highest 
dualistic bhakti under the second or third head. 

15. SCHEME OF SPIRITUAL EXERCISES. 

Now, this leads us naturally to the subject of 
wpasanas or devotional exercises, with a notice of 
which we shall close our account of Sankara’s philoso- 
phy. In Sankara’s scheme of spiritual exercises, a 
scheme which we have simply mentioned above, but 
have not given in detail, wpasana comes under 
samadhana. Thescheme is called sadhanachatush- 
taya, the fourfold discipline. It comprises (1) 
Nityanitya-vastu-viveka, the discrimination of things 
permanent and transitory; (2) [hamutra-phalabhoga- 
viraga, non-attachment to rewards of actions, earthly 
or heavenly; (3) Samadamadi-sadhanasampat, 
disciplines beginning with sama and dama; and (4) 
Mumukshutvam, desires for liberation. The discipline 
classed under the thigd head are sama, the drawing 
away of the mind from things earthly; aama, the 
restraining of the external senses; wparatt, giving up, 
for the sake of obtaining the higher knowledge, the 
duties prescribed in the lower code; tttiksha, patiently 
bearing the sufferings caused by heat, cold, &c, 
samadhana, the concentration of the mind in higher 
things by giving up sleepiness and laziness; and 
sraddha, faith in all (higher) things. The reader will 


CONCLUSION 109 
° 


find these disciplines enumerated in Sankara’s 
commentary on the first aphorism of the Vedanta. 
Sutras and their meanings explained in the annota- 
tions of Govindananda, whom we have followed in the 
explanation we have given. The subject of wpasanas 
he will find dealt with in the introduction to the 
commentary on the Chhandogya Upanishad, the 
greater portion of which is taken up with various kinds 
of devotional exercises. These Sankara divides into 
two broad classes: (1) those which are closely related 
to Vedic ceremonies and gradually lead the mind to 
higher exercises; and (2) those which, through the 
contemplation of Brahman in relation to the objects of 
Nature, both gross and subtle, leads us to a knowledge 
of him as transcendant,—to that highest form of 
knowledge in which all distinctions of subject and 
object, of action, agent and the result of action are 
merged in one, infinite, indivisible Entity. 
16, CONCLUSION. 

We take leave here of our great philosopher. Our 
object has been to expound rather than criticise his 
system. But we have suggested certain difficulties in 
it—such as no systems, ancient or modern, are entirely 
free from. Probably no ancient system will quite suit 
the modern mind. But we may perhaps be allowed to 
hazard the opinion that, of all ancient systems, that of 
Sankaracharya will be found to be the most congenial 
and the most easy of acceptance to the modern Indian 
mind. 


SSANKARA’S PHILOSOPHY OF SAMSARA* 
BY 


Mr. S. VENKATARAMANAN 
— os — 


Man, says Shankara, is likea plant. He grows, flourishes and 
atthe end he dies but not totally. For as the plant, when 
dying, leaves behind it the seed, of which, according to its 
quality,a new plant grows;—so man, when dying, leaves his 
Karma, the good and bad works of his life, which must be 
rewarded and punished in another life after this. No life can 
be the first, for it is the fruit of previous actions, nor the last, 
for its actions must be expiated in a next following life. So the 
‘Samsara is without beginning and without end, and the new 
-creation of the world after every absorption into Brahman isa 
moral necessity.— Dr. Paul Deussen on “the Philosophy of the 
Vedanta.” 


(C\AMSARA or phenomenal existence, whose main 
factor is the bondage of births and deaths in 
succession, is unreal and is the result of illusion,—the 
ignorance by which the only and absolute reality, the 
Supreme Self, is mistaken for the unreal world, in the 
same Way as a rope may be mistaken for a serpent in 
the dusk of the evening. Both bondage and liberation 
are thus illusory, for, since there is no real bondage 
at all, how can there bea liberation from it ? Yet, 
liberation or moksha is relatively spoken of and can 
only result from a thorough knowledge of the reality 
behind and beyond and underneath and within the 
unreal. Sankara emphasises the fact that such 
* From the Introduction to ‘Select Works of Sankaracharya’ 


Sanskrit Text and English Translation, Translated by S° 
‘Venkataramanan, Price Rs,2. G. A. Natesan & Co., Madras’ 


SANKARA’S PHILOSOPHY OF SAMSARA III 
e 


knowledge is not a mere theoretical one which can be 
gathered from books or lectures, but is of the nature 
of direct realisation or actual experience. The sole 
source of this knowledge is a clear and accurate 
understanding of the Vedic text ‘‘ That thou art, ” 
but, however much one may analyse its meaning by 
means of his own reason or with the aid of commen- 
taries, the direct realisation of the self cannot take 
place unless the Vedic text in question reaches the 
student through the mouth ofa spiritual teacher (the 
guru). It is then, and only then, that the disciple 
realises in a flash, as it were, ‘I am Brahman,” the 
individual soul is seen, at all times and in all 
conditions, to be identical with the Supreme Self, and 
the knowledge springs up that all this is indeed the 
Self and there is naught but the Self. This is the 
highest goal of spiritual endeavour, the moksha or 
liberation of the Vedanta philcsophy. Further detail 
would be out of place in a short preface of this kind, 
but the translator feels bound to call attention to one 
very prominent teaching of Sankara which will be 
evident from a perusal of the present publication,— 
namely, that devotion to a personal God (Saguna- 
Brahman) is not inconsistent with the true Vedanta 
philosophy, but, on the other hand, spiritual perfection 
or liberation is impossible without the grace of God 
attainable by devotion and the grace of the Master 
(gurw) who alone can reveal the true nature of the 
Self to the ardent aspirant for the Absolute that is 


beyond all word and thought. 


0 ——— te hee Se eee 


Sankara’s Select Works 


Sanshrit Text and English Translation 
By Mr, 8. VENKATARAMANAN, B. A. 


Contents.— Hymn to Hari; The Ten-Versod Hymn; 
Hymn to Dakshisamurti; Direct Realisation; The Century 
of Versés ; Kuowledge of Sif ; Commentary on the Text ; 
Definition of one’s own Se,f, 

Proface.—The main object of this publication is to 
present, in simpla English, some of the works of Sri 
Sankaracharya in which he tried to expound, in a popular 
styte, the philosophy of the non-dualistic Vedanta of which 
he was the well-known founder. With this view the 
present translation has been rendered free of technical 
words and phrases. It is hoped that the juxtaposition 
of the Sanskrit text and the English translation will 
serve the double object of enabling the student of Sans- 
bris to understand the text better aad to eorrect, by a 
reference to the text, any defeci of expression in the 
translation as an inevitahiec result of the attempt to garb 
jt * a popular style. To those that have had no training 
>: .netaphysics or dialectics and have neither the loisure 
‘or the capacity to read the original standard works of 
Sankara, a publication of this kind should bea specially 
nelpful for a proper understauding of the {b-ord outline 
of Sankara’s philosophy of non-dualism. Se 


Second Edition. Price Rs. Two. 
To Subscribers of the Indian Review, Rs. 1-8. 


Se 


G. A. Natesan & Co., Publishers, George Town, Madras. 


—S_ SD Shoe Se 


Sri Ramanujacharya 
HIS LIFE AND TIMES 


BY 

Dr. S. KRISHNASWAMI AIYANGAR, M.A., M.R.A.S. 
GENERAL CHARACTER OF SOUTH INDIAN HISTORY. 
TNO the religious history of India,the contributions 
a that the Southern half has had to make have 
been many. The South generally enjoyed more peace- 
ful development and was long free from the convulsions 
“hat threw the North into confusion, and all the inter- 
nal revolutions and external attacks sent out the pulse 
of the impact almost spent out to the South. This has 
been of great advantage and it is precisely in the dark 
ages of the North, that often intervened between 
brighter epochs, that the South sent out its light to 
redeem the darkness. 


SOUTH INDIAN CONTRIBUTION TO RELIGIONS IN 
INDIA. 

This general character of the history of the North 
of India from the first centuries of the Christian era 
onwards makes a continuous history impossible on 
certain lines; while in the South during this period, 
there has been a continuity of development amidst all 
the din and clang of war and dynastic revolutions. 
Our concern here is about the Vaishnava movement 

® 


114 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


and this has had a continuous history almost from the 
beginning of the Christian era. 

MIS-IMPRESSIONS REGARDING RAMANUJA. 

There has been considerable mis-impression that 
the Vaishnava movement originated in Ramanuja and 
all those that claim to be Vaishnavas (not including 
the disciples of Madhwa who are Vaishnava in a 
narrower sense) both in the North and the South can 
trace their particular form of Vedanta no earlier than 
Ramanuja. On the basis of this mis-impression, the- 
cories have been built up time and again that the char-. 
acteristic features of the special teachings of Ramanuja 
have been borrowed from Christianity. The latest 
exponent of this theory is Dr. Grierson, though he 
would make a considerable distinction between the 
Vaishnavas of modern times and those of the older, 
and perhaps set those of the North against the South. 
This no doubt is an error which arises from not giving 
due weight to the indebtedness of Ramanuja to those 
Tamil saints that had gone before him long ere he 
came into the world. The hypothesis would be 
untenable unless it could be proved that all these 
Tamil saints could be shown also to have visited the 
Christian shrine at Mylapore or elsewhere. Besides, 
even from the point of view of Sanskrit Vaishnavaism, 
it cannot be said to have been proven that the 
peculiar features of Ramanuja-Vaishnavaism are not 
traceable to earlier works and teachers. Hence a 
life of Ramanuja based on historical material alone 
and free from the legends that have gathered round 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES I15 
° 


it, as time wore off, would be of great advantage to 
clear away the wrong impressions that prevail regard- 
ing his life and teaching. 

THE SPECIAL PERIOD OF RAMANUJA’S ADVENT. 

That Ramanuja should have appeared in the 
eleventh century is quite as much of the mission 
getting the man as the advent of the Buddha in the 
sixth century before Christ, This century in the South 
of India was characterised by considerable religious 
ferment. It was then that each religious sect among 
the people felt the need for formulating a creed of its 
own and placing itself in a regularly organised _reli- 
gious body so as to be able to hold its own in the midst 
of the disintegrating influences that gained dominance 
in society. That Ramanuja appeared and did what is 
ascribed to him is just in the fitness of things, ae 
regard to the circumstances of the times. 

PREDECESSORS OF RAMANUJA. 
(a) THE ALVARS. 

There have been a succession of devotees called 
jn Vaishnava parlance Alvars in contra-distinction to 
4 similar Saiva group called Adiyars. These two 
classes had considerable similarity with characteristic 
distinctions. They both laid stresson the doctrine of 
Bhakti as a means to the attainment of salvation, the 
one through Vishnu and the other through Siva. The 
Vaishnava tradition names twelve of the Alvars while 
the Saiva saints number sixty-three, The Tamil works 
of the former including a centum upon Ramanuja 
himself, constitute the Prabhandum 4,000, while those 


116 SRIF RAMANUJACHARYA 


of the {Saivas constitute a vaster collection of 
Tevarams, etc, 
The twelve Alvars are in the traditional order : 


1. Poygai Alvar. 
I i 2. Bhutathu Alvar. 
: 3. Pey Alvar. 
II 4. Tirumalisai Alvar. 
It f 5. Nammalvar. 
6. Madhurakavi Alvar. 
IV fo, Kulaseknaraivar. 
V 8. Periyalvar. 


g. Andal. 


10. Tindaradippodi Alvar. 
} 11. Tiruppanalvar. 
12. Tirumangai Alvar. 


VI 


The actual dates ascribed by the hagiologists to 
these Alvars would not bear scrutiny, but the order in 
which they are mentioned is substantially correct. In 
order of importance, Nammalvar stands first, and it 
is his work that has the distinctive appellation 
Tiruvoymoli—“the word of the mouth.” They were 
all regarded by the generations ‘that succeeded them 
as manifestations of diviné wisdom to redeem the 
world from the perilous plights to which it had 
brought itself. 

(b) THE ACHARYAS. 

The next group that followed, as the hagiologists 
would have us believe, in unbroken succession, is 
known as Acharyas (or preceptors) not so near to the 
divine, but still raised above the ordinary man of the 


ee 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 117 


oy 

world by much. This orthodox succession of apostles 
include six names before Ramanuja, of which the two 
most important are Nathamuni and his grand-son 
Alavandar. The great-grand-son of this latter through 
one of his grand-daughters was Ramanuja. 

PARENTAGE AND BIRTH OF RAMANUJA. 

While Alavandar was still in occupation of the 
apostolic seat of the Vaishnavas at Srirangam, one of 
his grand-sons requested permission of him to go and 
devote himself to the service of God on the Tirupathi 
Hill. The permission was graciously accorded and 
the young man went and settled there with his venera- 
ble father and two younger sisters. While there, two 
young men wishing to enter life as householders hap- 
pened to go to the holy place and sought each the 
hand of one of the sisters, Of these two Asuri Kesava 
Bhattar of Sri Perumbuthur wedded the elder, 
while Kamalnayana Bhattar of Mallaimangalam 
accepted the younger of the girls. Of the first pair 
jn course of time was born a boy (in 1017 A. D.) 
whom the maternal uncle named Lakshmana (other- 
wise Ramanuja or in Tamil, Haya Perumal). 

EARLY LIFE: OF RAMANUJA, | 

Of the childhood of Ramanuja, as of others in 
similar positions of life, very little is known. There 
appears to have been nothing extraordinary in his 
career except that he appears to have lost his father 
while young. He received the kind of education ordi- 
narily given to boys of his class and age along with 
his cousin (mother’s sister’s son) Govinda Bhattar, as 


118 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


he was called. The two young men had advanced 
sufficiently to seek a teacher in the Vedanta to instruct 
them. They went to a teacher of reputation holding 
his classes in Conjeeveram and this change marks the 
turning point in the career of the young men. 
RAMANUJA AND YADAVAPRAKASA. 
Under Yadavaprakasa then the two cousins 
Ramanuja and Govinda Bhattar were both studying 
the Vedanta assiduously. The former made such pro- 
gress and his great-grandfather at Srirangam had 
heard such good reports of his remarkable advance, 
that he travelled all the way incognito to see the 
young man, This he did in the Deva Raja shrine at 
Conjeeveram. Gratified with the look of the young 
man, he went back hoping that he might soon trans- 
fer the mantle of office to the youth of great promise 
that he just saw. He did not wish to speak to Rama- 
nuja lest it should attract attention and disturb Rama- 
naja’s studies in any way. Ramanuja went on with 
his studies yet awhile. when he began to feel that at 
times Yadavaprakasa’s interpretations of Vedic pas- 
sages were not quite up to his satisfaction. On one 
occasion, he even went the length of offering an ex- 
planation of his own which struck those about as more 
satisfactory than that of his master. This led to 
grave differences between master and disciple. Matters 
advanced a step further when, at the invitation 
of the ruler of the place, Yadavaprakasa failed in 
an attempt at exorcising. The princess was possessed 
and the spirit declined to move at Yadava’s bidding. 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 1Ig 


It would, however, go away if it were Ramanuja’s 
pleasure that it should. Ramanuja was pleased to 
give the order and the ghost was raised, This made: 
Yadava more jealous of his pupil and the crisis Was 
reached when interpreting another Upanishad ; 
Yadava again rendered the passage in a somewhat: 
absurdly disrespectful manner. Ramanuja showed! 
positive disapproval of what he considered a purpose- 
ful distortion of the texts. Yadavaprakasa asked 
Ramanuja to leave his academy, but was advised to 
get rid of Ramanuja altogether. 
ATTEMPT AT ASSASSINATION OF RAMANUJA. 

At the instigation of some of his disciples Yadava 
organised a pilgrimage to Benares, and Ramanuja 
and his cousin, were among the party. The latter 
having been more docile stood in high favour with 
the master and was in the secrets of the plot to assas- 
sinate Ramanuja. It was arranged to kill him in the 
depths the forests, perhaps not very far from 
Kanchi. formation of this was given to Ramanuja 
in time and he escaped at dead of night, and journey- 
ed back to Kanchi under the guidance ofa kind 
hunter and huntress. At daybreak the latter asked 
for alittle water and when Ramanuja got down a 
well to fetch her some, the pair disappeared. Rama- 
nuja had not to travel much farther before he came 
in sight of the spires of the great temple at Kanchi. 

RAMAN UJA’S RETURN AFTER ESCAPE, 

Having reached Kanchi and intimated to his 

mother of what had happened and how he escaped 


i 
* ,] 


120 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


death by divine intervention, he settled down as a 
householder at the instance of his mother, and devoted 
himself to the service of God Devaraja at Kanchi. 
Alavandar was drawing near his end in the mean- 
while, and those about him despatched the eldest 
among his disciples to go and bring Ramanuja to Sri- 
rangam. Periyanambi, as this emissary was called, 
arrived at Kanchi and stood reciting one of the beauti- 
ful verses in praise of God (the Stotraratna) composed 
by his master Alavandar. Ramanuja’s attention was 
drawn to the slokas (verses) in spite of his single- 
minded devotion to his preparation for the morning 
service. Turning round he asked the stranger who 
the composer of the piece was. Periyanambi answer- 
ed it was his great master Alavandar. The next 
guestion was necessarily, whether he could see him. 
“If you would go with me now,” said Periyanambi, 
“«] will take you to him.” Ramanuja hurried through 
his morning service and started with Periyanambi, 
having obtained permission of Devaraja for the journey. 
RAMANUJA’S FIRST JOURNEY TO SRIRANGAM 
TO VISIT aALAVANDAR. 

They journeyed along till they reached the north- 
ern side of Srirangam when at a distance Ramanuja 
descried a group of men on the south bank of the 
Koleroon River. Approaching closer Periyanambi and 
his younger companion discovered that Alavandar was 
no more and the group consisted of his disciples who 
came there with the remains of the departed great one 
for its final disposal. Ramanuja was taken close to the 


rig Al te ita ial Oa Ne 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 121 


7 
body to take a first and final look at the great master, 
when lo! he saw three out of the five fingers of the 
right hand folded. Struck with this, he enquired 
whether the effect was noticed in life and the answer 
‘came that the defect was not physical and was not 
noticed in life. On further enquiry Ramanuja was 
told that the master had three of his cherished objects 
unfulfilled, namely, an easily-read and understood com- 
mentary upon the Brahmasutra: the giving of the 
names of Parasara and Shadagopa to suitable persons 
that would make these names live among the people. 
Ramanuja promised to see these fulfilled and the 
fingers straightened. Ramanuja waited for the 
funeral ceremonies to be completed and returned to 
Kanchi to resume his duties of devotion to God. 
RETURN OF RAMANUJA TO KANCHI AND THE 
MISSION OF HIS FUTURE. p 

Days having passed, in his usual round of service, — 
Ramanuja felt that time was passing without any 
attempt on his part to perform what he had promised 
to do. Not knowing what exactly to do, he appealed 
to the elderly priest of God Devaraja and wished that 
he might ascertain the divine will regarding his own 
future. Tirukkachchinambi, as the priest was called, 
gave out the will of God, in the matter, in the follow- 
ing sloka: 

“ Sreman param tatvam aham, matam, me 
bhedaha, prapattirnirapaya hetuhu, 

“ Navasyakicha smriti, hiantyakale mokshaha, 


mahapurnaha iha aryavaryaha.” 


122 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


‘I am the supreme, my conviction is distinction, 
devotion is the unfailing cause of salvation, conscious 
volition not essential, release in the end; at present 
Periyanambi is the highest preceptor.” 

In these six phrases was Ramanuja given the 
direction for his future work, whether the actual 
direction came from within himself or from without 
or those about. He was to pin his faith to God and 
work out the qualified monistic system of Indian 
philosophy accepting Periyanambi for his initiation, 
and teaching the doctrines of devotion to God whose 
self-imposed duty it is to give salvation even with- 
out the conscious volition of the person wishing it. 
Ramanuja felt the call and with the permission of 
Devaraja, accorded through his priest, he started 
towards Srirangam. 

RAMANUJA’S INITIATION UNDER PERIYANAMBI, 

He halted at Madhurantakam to pay his homage 
of worship to the God Rama in the temple there on 
the tank bund; and while in the act, he saw Periya- 
nambi who was on his way to Kanchi. They both 
enquired of each other the purpose of his journey and: 
found that each had in a way come to the end of it. 
Ramanuja found the Guru (preceptor) he sought, 
while Periyanambi's object was to take Ramanuja to 
Srirangam. In fact, he had been sent on that special 
mission by the disciples of first degree of the late 
master Alavandar. At Ramanuja’s importunate en-- 
treaty Nambi initiated him into the mysteries of the 
hidden lore of the Vedanta of those times, in the pre-- 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 123 


° 
sence of God Rama in the temple. Both Nambi and 
Ramanuja returned to Kanchi; master and disciple 
together lived there for some time. But their separa- 
tion came soon and gave a turn to the whole career of 
Ramanuja. 
CIRCUMSTANCES LEADING TO RAMANUJA’S a 
RENUNCIATION. 

Nambi and Ramanuja took up lodgings together 
and the two families were living amicably together 
for some time. Ramanuja, however, does not appear 
to have been very happy in the choice of his wife. 
He did not find in her that ready sympathy and com- 
pliance to his own wishes he expected of her. On 
one occasion he had invited Tirukachchinambi to his 
house and the two were seated and conversed together 
for a while. When the former went away Ramanuja’s 
wife quickly washed the seat occupied by him, the 
temple priest having been of a slightly inferior status 
in point of caste. Ramanuja felt aggrieved and over- 
looked this offence with an admonition. Again one 
morning while he was still by the accustomed well 
preparing for the morning service at the temple, 
a poor man asked him for food. He directed him 
home with instructions to demand food of Ramanuja’s 
wife with the husband’s permission. She said there 
was none available. The man returned intimating 
Ramanuja of how he fared. Ramanuja’s enquiry on 
returning home proved that there was some food 
which might have been given to the person. Again 
he excused her. But the third offence proved the last 


\yO 


124 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


straw, and was the most serious of all in Ramanuja’s 
estimation. Ramanuja’s wife and Periyanambi’s both 
of them went to the same well to fetch water. It 


‘would appear that through the latter’s carelessness 


some water from her vessel dropped into that of the 
other. This naturally led to some altercation in 
which the relative claims of the two families were 


aather too freely discussed by Ramanuja’s wife. The 


other lady reported the matter to her husband, who 


‘rather than offend the good man quietly broke up 
his establishment and returned to Srirangam, 


RAMANUJA’S. RENUNCIATION, 
Ramanuja soon found out the cause of Nambi’s 


<anceremonious departure and resolved that the time 


had come for separating from his wife. He took ad- 
vantage of an invitation from his father-in-law to send 
his wife away and without further delay assumed the 
yellow robes of a sannyasi (he that has renounced the 


world). This step at once added to the rising reputa- 
‘tion of Ramanuja, and disciples began to gather 


round him. It was now that disciples first appear 
round Yathiraja (king of hermits), as he came to be 
called. It was probably now also that the question 
assumed importance whether a sannyasi should be of 
the Ekadandi or Tridandi (single rod or triple rod, as 
the symbol of office). The Vaishnava version has it 
that Yadavaprakasa, his late master, became a convert 
to Ramanuja under the name Govindayogi and wrote 
the work Yatidharma Samuchchayam. (The enguiry 
into the rules of conduct of a hermit.) 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 125 
° 


RAMANUJA SETTLES DOWN AT SRIRANGAM AND 
PREPARES HIMSELF TO FULFIL HIS MISSION. 

While Ramanuja was making progress in this 
manner, the disciples of Alavandar at Srirangam wished. 
to get him to live in their midst, and occupy the seat 
of their late master which had remained unoccupied 
for lack of a suitable successor. This time they sent 
another of Alavandar’s immediate disciples, his own 
son, by name Tiruvarangapperumal Aiyar. Ramanuja. 
followed the Aiyar and settled down at Srirangam. 
It was now that he set about seriously to acquire the 
qualifications which alone would justify his accession. 
to the high position to which he was looked upon by 
the public as the most worthy candidate. He had, 
therefore, to get himself initiated in every department 
ef learning and_ philosophy which then con- 
stituted the Vaishnava lore. Periyanambi having 
become his guru (preceptor) in one part, he had to 
seek initiation of Tirukottiyurnambi for another 
(manthrartham). He went six times in succession and. 
on all these occasions the master was not satisfied 
with the earnestness of the disciple and declined to 
open his mind. Ramanuja in despondency thought 
of giving up the business when he was asked to try 
another time. He succeeded in inducing the great 
one to unlock his secrets, after the customary promise 
not to publish except toa worthy disciple previously 
tried. Ramanuja agreed and found the secrets of 
such efficacy for salvation that he taught all about 
him what he learnt. The guru summoned the disciple 


126 SRL RAMANUJACHARYA 
f 


to his presence and asked him how it was that he so 
flagrantly transgressed the injunctions of his master. 
Ramanuja begged to be prescribed the punishment 
and the guru replied that the punishment would be 
‘eternal hell ’ hereafter, but nothing here. Ramanuja 
replied, with characteristic beneficence, that he would 
gladly suffer ‘hell ’ himself, if by so doing he was 
instrumental in ministering to the attainment of salva- 
tion to the suffering millions of humanity. The 
\master appreciated the spirit of the disciple’s trans- 
- gression and said that the particular darsana (section 
of Vedanta) might hereafter be known as ‘Ramanuja 
Darsana.’ 
CONVERSION OF RAMANUJA’S COUSIN. 

At this period Ramanuja had to intervene in the 
affairs of his cousin and companion at school—Govinda 
Bhattar. This young man had continued his journey 
along with Yadavaprakasa to the Ganges. It would 
appear that while he bathed in the holy waters of the 
river, a ‘phallic emblem’ stuck to the palm of his 
hand. Hence the name Ullangai Gonarndanayanar. 
Ever since, he had become a staunch Saivite and had 
taken residence at Kalahasti not far from his maternal 
uncle at Tirupathi. At Ramanuja’s request the 
uncle met the nephew and brought him back to 
allegiance to the Vaishnava persuasion under the new 
sacerdotal designation of Embar. Ramanuja’s name 
had kegun to attract attention and he felt that he 
should still acquire other qualifications before becom- 
ing every Way the head of a * darsana.’ 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 127 
° 


RAMANUJA COMPLETES HIS QUALIFICATIONS. 

He began his studies in Tiruvoymoli first under 
‘Tiruvarangapperumal Aiyar and then under Tiru- 
malaiyandan. While with the latter, he had occasion 
to show his special acuteness of intellect in suggesting 
special interpretations of important texts, which on 
further discussions were found to have been in full 
agreement with the views of Alavandar. This new 
acquisition completed his round of qualifications and 
he had become in fact a successor of Alavandar in 
every sense of the term. 

A SECOND ATTEMPT ON RAMANUJA’S LIFE. 

Ramanuja’s fame had spread so wide and he 
came to be known so well that his little cousin at 
Tirupathi (son of his maternal uncle) evinced a_pre- 
cocious desire to attach himself to Ramanuja. The 
father sent the boy in charge of a nephew of his own 
and the two arrived at Srirangam when Ramanuja’s 
life had been saved by the unlooked-for intervention 
of a good woman. Ramanuja as a sannyast had to 
go round at mid-day from house to house for food. 
One of the householders had instructed his wife to 
poison the food and serve it tohim. The woman felt 
compelled to obey the husband, but on giving the 
handful to Ramanuja, could not bear the feeling that 
the good man would die of the food. She, therefore, 
prostrated before him while getting back into the 
house. It is recognised as a rule of practice that 
when a sannyast goes out for alms (biksha), no one 
should make the usual salutation. This strange con- 


' : 


128 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


duct on the part of the lady struck Ramanuja and he 
suspected foul play. On examination the poisoning 
was discovered and ever after it was arranged that 
the elder of the two new arrivals should undertake 
the food-supply of Ramanuja. In spite of this attempt 
at assassination, all had so far gone smoothly ; and 
the life of Ramanuja becomes stormy hereafter. His. 
fame had spread far and the few prominent conver- 
. sions attracted attention. Whether he wished it or 
no, he had to make his position good against all comers 
and had to assume the role of a controversialist. 
CONTROVERSY WITH YEGNAMURTI. 

At this time there arrived at Srirangam an ad- 
vaitic sannyasi by name Yegnamurti, in the course cf 
a controversial tour through India, There began bet- 
ween the two agreat disputation regarding the relative 
superiority of their respective creeds. For sixteen days 
they went on with no decisive result either way and 
Ramanuja was somewhat anxious about his own posi- 
tion, when it struck him that he might derive some. 
help from Alavandar’s works. He referred to the 
latter’s Mayavadakandanam (a refutation of the ideal- 
istic theory). Thus armed he overcame his adversary 
on the seventeenth day and, as a result, enlisted his 
rival among his followers under the Vaishnava desig- 
nation of Arulalapperumal Emberumanar. 
RAMANUJA’S FULFILMENT OF HIS FIRST PROMISE.. 

Some time after Ramanuja felt that he might con- 
veniently pay the long-wished-for visit to his uncle, 
who sent word through his nephew that he very much 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 129 


wished to see him, Ramanuja then set forward to 
Tirupathi, one of the three ‘ holy of holies’ of the Sri 
Vaishnavas. He stayed there a year receiving instruc- _ 
tion in the Ramayana from his maternal uncle there, 
who at the end of the period made over to him his 
two sons. His preparations Were now complete and as 
he was growing old, he set about fulfilling his under- 
“taking to Alavandar. The first of his three pro- 
mises was the writing out of such a commentary for 
the Brahmasutra as would embody the views of the 
qualified monistic school of thought. It was abso- 
lutely essential fora due performance of this work 
that he should acquaint himself with the previous 
commentators, particularly of the Bodhayanavritti. 
This naturally was not easy of acquisition for one of 
his intentions, explicit and implied. He had to go 
about much before he found access to a library in the 
north, containing the work, where he was allowed. 
just to read it through. He felt that it was not 
enough when a quick disciple among his followers 
came to his rescue by saying that he had completely 
mastered the work and could give reference when- 
ever wanted. This was one among his first disciples, 
who lived to render yet greater services to his master. 
With the help of Kurathalvar—for such was the 
name of this stout-hearted and quick-minded disciple— 
Ramanuja wrote out the three works—the essence of 
the Vedanta (Vedantasaram), a resume of the 
Vedanta (Vedanta Sangraham), the light of the 
Vedanta (Vedantadipam). He also wrote, or rather 
b] 


130 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


ft 
gave out, the commentaries on the Brahmasutra and 
Bhagavat Gita, This list of works redeemed Rama- 
nuja from his first promise. 
RAMANUJA SECURES THE APPROVAL OF THE 


LEARNED FOR HIS BHASHYA. 

But these must be accepted before Ramanuja 
could feel he had done his duty to his master. He 
had, therefore, to start on a tour to different places to” 
secure the approval of the learned. This tour natur- 
ally took him to the great seat of learning—Kashmir. 
There at Sarasvatipita (the seat of learning) he read 
through the work in an assembly of philosophers and 
obtained from them the approval of no less an author- 
ity than “ Sarasvati’’ herself. Asa token of her 
approval she presented Ramanuja with the image of 
Hayagriva (horse-necked, an aspect of Vishnu) and 
said that his commentary might thereafter be known 
as Sri Bhashya (the commentary). It is because of this 
distinction that among his disciples Ramanuja is 
known as Bhashyakarar (maker of the Bhashya). The 
image of Hayagriva has come down to the present 
generation and _ is believed to be that which is the ob- 
ject of worship at the Parakala Mutt at Mysore. 

RAMANUJA SETTLES A SAIVA-VAISHNAVA DISPUTE 
AT TIRUPATHI, 

Returning from the North he had to pass by Way 
of Tirupathi where matters had assumed a serious 
aspect on a dispute as to the nature of the deity there. 
‘The Saivas claimed the shrine to be that of God 
Subrahmaniya, while the Vaishnavas claimed it as 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES I3C 


e 

that of Vishnu. The matter had, therefore, to be 
settled one way or the other and they agreed to leave 
the decision to the God himself, It was arranged that 
one evening both parties should assemble and look up 
the sanctum sanctorum having placed the weapons 
peculiar to each deity. The shrine was to be that of 
Vishnu or Siva according as the one set or the other 
Rips assumed by God, It was found the next morn- 
ing that the image had assumed the disc and conch 
characteristic of Vishnu, and ever after the shrine 
appears to have been taken to be that of Vishnu. 
Having settled this dispute Ramanuja returned to 
Srirangam and set about arranging matters for get- 
ting through the remaining items of work he had 
undertaken. 

RAMANUJA FULFILS THE SECOND DESIDERATUM— 

SAHASRANAMA BHASHYA. 

Ramanuja’s foremost disciple Kurathalvar was for 
long childless. One night it would appear he had to 
go to bed without food having had to fast the whole 
day for lack of provisions. The bell in the great tem- 
ple pealed indicating that the night-worship was going 
on. The devoted wife thought to herself that it was 
hardly fair that God Ranganatha should accept regu- 
lar worship when the staunchest of his devotees lay 
starving. Soon after the temple priests brought a 
supply of food from the temple and knocked at the 
door of Kurathalvar. The wife opened the door and 
delighted with the arrival of food, woke up the 
restless husband and fed him. As the direct outcome 


132 SR] RAMANUJACHARYA 


€ 

of this divine favour, she soon became mother of two 
sons, to one of whom, at the instance of Ramanuja, 
the name Parasara was given. This boy had grown 
up to man’s estate when Ramanuja was looking out 
for some one through whom he might fulfil the second 
object. This young man Parasara Bhatta was com- 
missioned to write a commentary on the Sahasranama 
(the thousand names of Vishnu). This work of 
Parasara Bhatta fulfilled the second of the desi- 
derata of Alavandar. 


PILLAN’S 6000 COMMENTARY ON THE TIRUVOYMOUI 
FULFILMENT OF THE THIRD DESIDERATUM. 


There then remained the means of perpetuating 
the name of Nammalvar, the author of the Tiruvoy- 
moli. Ramanuja was perhaps thinking of a com- 
mentary himself. It would appear he was contem- 
plating within a closed room a particular verse of the 
work attempting to realize its full significance when 
his cousin looked through a chink in the door. 
The young man, Pillan by name, forthwith put the 
question whether the master was pondering the verse 
referring to the God at Tirumalirunjola. Ramanuja 
was struck with the acuteness of the young man, and 
commissioned him to write out the 6000 commentary 
on the Tiruvoymoli, giving him the name Tirukkuru- 
haippiran Pillan, the first part of which being one of 
the many surnames of Nammalvar. This brought 
the third of Alavandar’s desiderata to fulfilment. 
Ramanuja could now feel his mission at an end and 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 133 


: 
‘settle down toa life of quiet teaching. This way 
perhaps years rolled by. 
THE CHOLA PERSECUTION AND ESCAPE OF 
RAMANUJA, 

He was not, however, altogether unmolested. 

Perhaps achange of ruler or a change in his surround- 
ings brought about a change in the spirit of complete 
“tolerance that as a rule characterised the administ- 
ration. Be the cause what it may, the Chola ruler for 
the time being, often given the name Kulottunga, took 
it into his head to demand assent to the doctrine, 
«‘ Sivat parataram nasti.”’ ‘‘ There is no being (God) 
superior to Siva.” This seems to have been aimed 
particularly against the Ramanuja propagandists, 
perhaps because of a few prominent conversions. This 
challenge was openly thrown out, and naturally 
enough everybody pointed to Ramanuja as the person 
whose assent ought to be obtained. Ramanuja was 
summoned to appear in the royal presence. 

Ramanuja’s friends feared danger, and to avoid 
it Kurathalvar undertook to personate Ramanuja. 
Assuming the robes of the sannyast, Kurathalvar 
went along with the venerable Periyanambi to the 
Chola Court, while Ramanuja assuming the dress 
of a householder and at the head of a small body of 
adherents betook himself to the kingdom of the Hoy- 
sala Bitti Deva. Travelling along the banks of the 
Kaveri Ramanuja settled down at Saligram where he 
lived for a period of 12 years. While here Bitti 
Deva was just carving out for himself a kingdom 


134 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


along the southern marches of the Chalukya kingdom 
of Vikramaditya and the Chola frontier in the north- 
west. 
CONVERSION OF BITTI DEVA. 
A daughter of the king was possessed and after 
failing in all other attempts at exorcism Ramanuja’s 


aid was called in. Sure enough the ghost was raised 


and Bitti Deva agreed to become the disciple of Rama- 
nuja. This could not, however, be without overcom- 
ing the Jains in controversy, as the king is reputed to 
have been a Jain. Ramanuja had the best of it in the 
disputation and the bulk of the Jains either embraced 
the Ramanuja darsana or were ordered to be ground 
down in oil mills. This latter threat, however, Was 
mot carried into effect through the intervention of 
Ramanuja. Ramanuja returned to Saligram. 
DISCOVERY AND CONSECRATION OF THE 
MELUKOTE TEMPLE. 

It was while here that Ramanuja’s stock of 
namam (the white earth which serves for the Vaish- 
nava caste-mark on the forehead) ran out of stock and 
Ramanuja was much concerned. He dreamt over- 
night that there was a hill of that material, not far 
from Tondanur, where he made the acquaintance of 
Bitti Deva. Following the clue he obtained in his 
dream, and through the good offices of Vitala Deva 
(Bitti Deva) Ramanuja got the spot marked out in his 
dream dug up; when lo! there appeared beneath a 
small shrine. He then got it consecrated as Tiruna- 
rainapuram (Melukote of the maps). Thinking of a 


— —_—e 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 135 
° 


suitable image for this shrine, he dreamt of the image 
of Ramapriya which was at Delhi in possession of the 
daughter of the ruler at the time. He had to under- 
take a journey to Northern India again. Having got 
possession of the image somewhat miraculously, he 
returned with it. As the princess proved inconsolable. 
without her pet image, the king (whoever he was), 
sent a party of men to bring back Ramanuja, who 
found shelter in a Panchama village. It is out of 
gratitude for this protection that he ordained the 
admission of the latter into the temple on the car 
festival. The consecration of the image and the 
completion of the temple are placed in 1021 Saka 
or 1099 A. D., which appears to antedate the event 
much. He had to make good his position here again 
as agaiust everybody else, and held a successful dispu- 
tation against the Bauddhas of Padmagiri (Sravana 
Belgola). He then resided at Tirunarainapuram ex- 
pecting news from the South. 
RAMANUJA RETURNS TO SRIRANGAM. 

While Ramanuja was busy doing the important 
things detailed above, Kurathalvar and Periyanambi 
went to the Chola court in obedience to the royal 
summons, There the question was put to them 
whether they subscribed to the statement Sivat 
Parataram Nasti! Kurathalvar subscribed with a 
reservation Dronamasti Tatahaparam. ‘There 1s. 
Drona above Siva’’! taking Siva in the sense of a 
measure, Drona being a bigger measure. For this 
impertinence the angry king ordered the putting out 


136 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 
f 


of the eyes of the two Vaishnavas. Periyanambi, a 
venerable old man, died on the way ; but the sturdier 
Kurathalvar, nothing daunted, returned and lived at 
Srirangam. After a time the Chola ruler died of a 
carbuncle, which the Vaishnavas put down to be the 
result of the ruler’s cruelty to the devoted adherents 
of Ramanuja. News of the death of the Chola ruler 
‘was taken to Ramanuja by the messenger whom he had 
sent to condole with Kurathalvar in his misfortune. 
On receipt of this somewhat assuring news, Ramanuja 
made up his mind to return. 

ORGANISATION OF THE ADHYAYANOTSAVA AND 
THE COLLECTION OF THE PRABANDHA. 
Consoling his beneficent disciple as best he could, 

Ramanuja had to set about arranging matters for the 
Adhyayanotsava (an annual festival for the recitation 
of the works of the Tamil Saints) for which it was 
the practice to fetch the image of Nammalvar from 
Alvar Tirunagari in the Tinnevelly District. This 
having been a year of heavy rainfall it was found 
impossible to bring the image of the Alvar all the 
‘way. Ramanuja in consequence consecrated a shrine 
and restored the image of the Alvar in Srirangam 
itself, so that no similar difficulty might be experienced 
for the future. It was on the occasion of this festive 
celebration that one of the disciples of Kurathalvar 
dedicated the centum in honour of Ramanuja on the 
model of the decade of Madhurakavi on Nammalvar. 
Amudan of Arangam, the author of the centum, it 
would appear, was the Smartha manager of the 


BISQUIFE AND TIMES 137 


temple at Srirangam, and had been not over-accom- 
modating to the Vaishnava apostle or his disciples. 
When his old mother was drawing near her end, the 
son dutifully enquired if she desired anything he 
might do for her. She wished that either Ramanuja 
himself or one of his nominees might be invited to 
accept food of him on the occasion of her funeral 
‘ceremonies. Amudan had no alternative but to make 
tthe request of Ramanuja, who advised that his 
indomitable disciple Kurathalvar might be asked. 
The latter accepted the invitation and demanded for 
satisfaction the keys of the temple which Amudan 
surrendered and became henceforward the disciple 
of Kurathalvar. This Amudan in his new-born zeal . 
composed the centum and begged hard that it might 
be accepted. Ramanuja accepted the dedication and 
permitted its inclusion in the prabandha 4000 at the 
earnest pleadings of his first disciples. Having made 
provision for the regular annual recital of this 4000, 
Ramanuja got images of the Alvars and Andal set up 
in Srirangam and other important places, where also 
‘similar annual celebrations were ordained. 

CONSECRATION OF THE GOVINDARAJA SHRINE AT 

TIRUPATHI. 

He then paid a visit to Alvar Tirunagari and on 
his return heard that his maternal uncle at Tirupathi 
was no more. He then repaired thither and got the 
funeral ceremonies duly performed by the elder of the 
two cousins of his, the younger of whom he had long 
regarded as his son in apostolic succession, It was 


138 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 
€ 


while he was yet here that he heard that the Govinda- 
raja temple at Tirupathi had been overthrown and 
the image cast into the sea, He caused the image to 
be brought over, and housed it in the temple at 
the foot of the sacred hill where again he caused 
to be set up the images of the Alvar and Andal as 
elsewhere. 
PILGRIMAGE TO HOLY PLACES. 

He then returned to Srirangam by way of Kanchi 
and Madhurantakam. He then went to Tirumalirun- 
jolai and Srivilliputtur to complete his round of pilgri- 
mage to the sacred shrines of Vishnu in the South= 
Having thus established his influence throughout 
. South India and having organised and popularised the 
teachings of Visishtadvaita-Vedanta he could now 
think his mission was at an end. 

ARRANGEMENT OF THE SUCCESSION. 

He arranged for the continuance of his teaching 
by nominating seventy-four among the worthiest of 
his followers. Of this number four had special cus- 
tody of the Bhashya, one among whom had the Pra- 
bhanda teaching also. This one was no other than 
his cousin-son Pillan, who became the actual successor 
of Ramanuyja. 


While he was preparing to depart this world he 


found the most indomitable among his companions. 


anticipate him in this aS well. Having got his funeral 
rites duly performed, Ramanuja felt himself quite at 
the end of his mission when again at the importunate: 


entreaty of his disciples, he had to permit three of his: 


; 
| 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 139 


own representations consecrated and set up in Sri- 
rangam, Sriperumbuthur and Tirunarainapuram. This 
example had been followed later on and every Vishnu 
temple in the South has, as a necessary adjunct, a 
little shrine for Ramanuja. Consoling his sorrowing 
disciples and companions, Ramanuja felt the call and 
passed away quietly having completed his 120th year 
in this world. 

The above, in brief, is an outline of the life of 
Ramanuja, as the most authoritative tradition has it. 
This tradition hasan inevitable tendency to gather 
volume, as time passes, and there have been as many 
varieties of this biography as are found interested 
hagiologists. But this account relies particularly on 
two contemporary works which have special claims for 
our acceptance. Neither of them is a professed biogra- 
phy and both of them were written for the acceptance 
of contemporaries and one of them had been read 
before Ramanuja and obtained his imprimatur. This 
‘s the work of Amudan of Arangam and consists of 
one hundred stanzas in Tamil included in the 
Prabandha of the Tamil part of the Vaishnava lore. 
The other is the work of a disciple also, by name 
Vaduhanambi, (or in Sanskrit Andhrapurana) perhaps 
because he was a Telugu man. This is called 
Yathiraja Vaibhavam and consists of 114 slokas. 
This work describes all that Ramanuja did in a way 
so free from exaggeration that it would strike one as 
being particularly reliable, The name of the author 
occurs among the 74 successors of first degree of 


340 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 
€ 


Ramanuja and his obligation to the master is indicated 
in the sloka quoted hereunder. 

‘‘Kamschid Kasminschid arthe prathiniyatha- 
thaya sanniyojyantharangair, thathra_ kshirartha 
kritye pratiniyathamaho dasamapyathyanarham Kur- 
van sriman yathisassvapathavinatha thathdasanu- 
dasam mamapyathyanthabaktam svahithamiva sadha 
‘gopayan sopi payat.’” Having ordered his most 
trusted disciples to accept particular offices, Ramanuja 
“‘who protected his worthy servant, servant of his 
servants, entrusted with the service of providing milk, 
may he prosper.” It now remains to examine 
historically what truth there isin the above account 
from available historical material and how far certain 
impressions that prevail regarding Ramanuja and 
his teachings find justification from his life and 
times. 

Having recounted the incidents in the life of 
Ramanuja in the previous sections of the paper, we 
shall now proceed to examine critically whether the 
main incidents of his life are what his disciples claim 
them to have been and whether recent research, so far 
as it bears upon these, lends any support to these as a 
‘whole. The following incidents will be examined 
seriatim, as they @ppear to be arranged in chrono- 
logical order :— 

1. Ramanuja’s conversion of Yadavaprakasa, 
bis preceptor. 

2. His conversion of Yegnamurti, an Advaita 
Sannyasin. 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES I4!I 


3. Settlement of ‘the Smartha Vaishnava 
dispute about the God at Tirupathi. 

4. The Chola persecution of Ramanuja. 

5- The Hoysala Vishnuvardhana’s conversion, 

6. Foundation of the temple at Tirunarayana- 
puram (Melukote). 

7. The conversion of Amudan of Arangam, the 
author of Ramanuja Nurrandhadhi. 

8. The consecration of the Govinda temple at 
the foot of the Tirupathi Hill. 

For the purposes of this again we shall, as far as 
possible, have recourse to such works of reliable. 
authority, as those of Ramanuja’s contemporaries and 
immediate successors only. 

i. Yadavaprakasa was an advaitic teacher of 
reputation at Conjeeveram. He was also a writer of 
authority in his philosophy; and in his days and 
after he was a leader of a school of thought, that as. 
the best representative of advaitic exposition, Ved- 
anta Desika quotes him and disputes his position. He 
is the reputed author of Yatidharma Samuchchayam 
and of the Yadava Nikandu; according to others the 
two works are from separate persons. At any rate, 
the Yadava of the former work is, in all probability, 
the philosophical expounder of the advaitic system, In 
the face of these facts, it would appear impossible that 
he should have been the first convert to the teachings 
of his ex-disciple Ramanuja, whom he did not love 
overmuch as a disciple. So it does, and I had long 
thought that the story was a pious fabrication. There 


142 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


is no reference in the Yatidharma Samuchchayam to 
his conversion at all. This is a work which under- 
takes to examine what the duties of a sannyasi are 
according to the best authority ; and he seems to hold 
that there is good authority for both classes of sannya- 
sins—those with the sacred thread and tuft of hair on 
the head (the Vaishnava) and those without these 
adjuncts (the Saiva). Except a reference to the ‘ Pra- 
bhandas’ in the invocatory verse and the invocation 
itself being addressed to Vishnu as Dattatrya, the work 
is non-committing in this particular. But the work, 
Ramanuja Nurrandhadhi of Amudan of Arangam, one 
of his own converts, refers often to success in disput- 
ation against great controversialists, but does not 
mention names though the references are such as 
would warrant the inference that they were in parti- 
cular Yadavaprakasa and the sannyasin Yegnamurti 
(stanzas 58, 64 and 88). But in two works of 
Vedanta Desika coming just three generations after, 
or say about a century, we have direct references to 
the purpose. The first half of verse 13 of Ethiraja 
Saptati refers to ‘‘ Svabhalat Uddhrita Yadava- 
prakasa ”’ (he that had uprooted with his own strength 
Yadavaprakasa). This need not necessarily mean 
conversion, but that such was actually the case is 
clearly stated in one of his other works, Satadhu- 
shani.* Vedanta Desika followed Ramanuja at an 
interval of three generations only and we might take 


* J am obliged for this reference to Tarkathirtha Pundita- 
ratnam Kasturirangachar of Mysore. 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 143 


him as a sufficient authority for the fact, as he takes 
Yadava’s opinions and seriously controverts them in 
other parts of his works. 

ii. As to Yegnamurti’s conversion we are not in 
a position to say anything as nothing more is known 
of him than the fact, perhaps, of his having beena 
sannyasin (Ekadhand)i). 

iii. The question about Tirupathi is of far greater 
importance, the more so as there has recently been 
going on a lively controversy about the same subject 
in the columns of the journals and papers consequent 
on Mr. Venkayya’s reference to the temple having 
been Saivite in his official report. It will be seen 
that the Vaishnava account has it that the God on 
the hill had just lent his characteristic weapons, the 
disc and the conch, to the Tondaman Chakravarti. 
Let it be noted here, in passing, that this evidently 
refers to the conquest of Kalingam by Karunakara 
Tondaman about 1111 A.D. Messrs. M. Narayana- 
swami Iyer, B.A., B.L., and T. A. Gopinatha Rao, M.A., 
have both written concerning this in the Sen 
Tamil. The former inclines to the Vaishnava view 
and the latter to the Saiva. The question, therefore, 
needs to be examined with care. The following facts 
concerning the point appear to be agreed upon. The 
Tevaram hymners have not at all celebrated the 
shrine; the Vaishnava Alvars have. The Tamil epic 
Silappadhikaram has explicitly given the temple a 
Vaishnava character and there is no possibility of 
mistake here, On this account, therefore, Mr, Gopi- 


144 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


natha Rao would bring the Silappadhikaram after 
Poygai Alvar (whether he brings it also after Rama- 
nuja is not quite clear, though he shows a leaning to 
bring it to the middle of the 12th century). This 
gentleman holds that the original God was Subrah- 
maniya as the place is called ‘ Ilangoil ’ and the God 
is referred to once or twice as ‘Kumara’ though not 
without other adjuncts. The latter is quite decisive 
according to him. So it would be, if the premises 
have been quite as they are represented to be. One 
fundamental defect here is the taking out of words 
without reference to their context. Mr. Gopinatha Rao 
refers to the God being known as Balajee among the. 
Northerners. This may be, but Balajee is not ex- 
clusively applied to Subrahmaniya, if applied to Him 
at all. I have here numbers of persons known as. 
Balajee, but the word stands for Balakrishna. This. 
is equally sound; there is something more. The early 
Alvars, Poygai Alvar, Bhutattar, Pey Alvar, delight in 
referring to God in one of his aspects as a child either 
as Rama or Krishna, preferably the latter. One has. 
only to look through the writings of these to be con- 
vinced of this. Why they do so is beside the point. 
It is this Balakrishna—he is not so named in the 
work—that has given rise to the name Balajee.* 
Since Krishna, as Vitoba is very popular yin the 
Mahratta country. Anyhow, this interpretation of 


* When last at Tirupathi I heard another version. When 
the Northerners first appeared at the shrine they were struck 
with the softly beautiful look of the image and exclaimed Bala 
(damsel). Hence the name Balajee as they say. 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 145 


Balajee is in keeping with the writings of the Alvars 
who had bestowed their best thoughts upon God’s 
manifestation at Tirupathi. Pey Alvar lends the 
greatest support to this contention as to the nature of 
the deity. He refers to the God as QaragGuser por 
Sere si (61); Normsohses sorGpHsCsror Qa py 
(68); Qari@ust Canorsfit (72); srr GssCsror 
saGnaGa, arwesGpdwrw (77> kt will thus be 
seen that he refers to the same deity in the four differ- 
ent ways as above. They are, of course, to be taken 
synonymously. References 1 and 3 may be doubt- 
ful, but the other two must be sought to help us 
in the interpretation. Reference 2 clearly indicates 
one of the actsof young Krishna, and reference 4, 
though not equally clear, to an achievement of 
Vishnu, when Brahma was about to grant the boons 
sought of him by Ravana. If amore direct indica- 
tion be needed, the stanza 62 makes it clear to any 
unprejudiced mind. There are a number of places 
sacred to Vishnu and the names given are Vaishnavite 
names, ¢.g., Tiruvarangam and Thirukudandhai 
(Kumbakonam). There is thus nothing to bear out 
the contehtion that the God there was ever meant to 
be Subrahmaniya. Stanza 63 of the same 3rd Tiru- 
vandadi states clearly that the manifestation of God 
there is in the united form of Siva and Vishnu, This 
is borne out by the stanzas 3 and 98 of the Ist Tiru- 
yandadi. This would, therefore, make it clear that 
the God was of the Harihara type. Then the question 
arises why is it that Ilango speaks of it asa Vishnu 
10 


146 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


temple in such clear terms ? The explanation perhaps 
would be that the temple had been known only as a 
Vishnu temple. though there was the duplex char- 
acter in the idol. This could be noticed only by a 
devotee who was in close touch with the temple 
which Hango could not pretend to have been. There 
would be nothing very strange about this if most 
people nowadays do not know it. Its established 
reputation as a Vishnu temple accounts for the omis- 
sion of Tirupathi by the Nayanmars of the Saivites. 
How then was it that the Saivites laid claim to it in 
the days of Ramanuja? Ramanuja’s time was re- 
markable for the revival of the Prabandam which 
was being taught much more widely than before. 
Besides this, Ramanuja’s cousin’s conversion must 
have made the Saivites alive to the danger of this 
Vaishnava neighbourhood. So on the old grounds of 
the dual form of the God they revived their claims, 
particularly as the ruling sovereign was likely to lean 
to the Saiva side. Naturally enough Ramanuja 
appealed toa trial by ordeal of some sort. Ever 
after, there appears to have been no dispute as_ to the 
character of the deity. This must have taken place 
some time after 1111 A.D., the probable date of the 
conquest ofKalingam. 

iv. The next item of importance in the life of 
Ramanuja is the\Chola persecution. The Chola ruler 
at the time was Kulottunga, the Chalukya Chola 
(1070—1118 A.D.). The Cholas were Saivas most of 
them, but they were tolerant enough of other religions 


oo oe a 


oer 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 147 


as well, while some of them even went the length of 
endowing Vishnu temples. This Kulottunga does 
not appear to have been particularly narrow-minded, 
as he made a grant even to the Bauddha settlement 
at Negapatam. But as the Vaishnava account itself 
has it, he was persuaded by others into compelling all 
to assent to the doctrine of the supremacy of Siva. 
This is not at all improbable considering that this 
was the period of great Saiva activity and the ruler 
was the special patron of Sekkilar. The general body 
of Vaishnavas do not appear to have been ill-treated, 
but Ramanuja’s active work at Srirangam attracted 
attention and ended in the blinding of Kurathalvar 
and the old preceptor of Ramanuja himself. This 
must have taken place about the nineties of the 11th 
century. And Ramanuja was compelled to leave 
the country. His immigration into the Mysore 
country brings us to the next important incident in 
his life. 

v & vi. He moved up the Kavery and settled 
at Saligram, wherefrom he had been invited to the 
headquarters of Vitala Deva Raya or Bitti Deva, 
This latter could not have been the ruling sovereign 
at the time as his brother was alive to the end of the 
century and a few years later. During the last years 
of the century he was still active in the Gangavadi 
frontier, and it was while here that he must have met 
Ramanuja. His elder brother “ had for his God Isa ” 
and this meant perhaps he was a Saiva. Bitti Deva was 
converted and he helped Ramanuja in the restoration 


148 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


of the temple of Narayana at Melukote. I have else- 
where* shown that the persecution of the Jains as- 
cribed to Vishnuvardhana is hardly approved by facts. 
The consecration of the temple at Melukote is placed 
in the year 1099 A.D. twelve years after Ramanuja’s 
arrival as Saligram. This might have been the case as 
Ramanuja would have taken care not to provoke the 
hostility of the ruler of his new domicile. Vishnuvar- 
dhana thenceforward supported the cause of Rama- 
nuja andencouraged Vaishnavism. He went on 
buiding templesand endowing them, not without 
supporting the other temples and creeds as well, 
though not perhaps to the same extent. This acti- 
vity culminated in the building and consecration of 
the temple at Belur in (or about) 1117 A.D.t There 
is nothing improbable in the date, as it was in this 
year: that he could claim to have become master of 
the Gangavadi. So Ramanuja must have lived in 
Mysore for nearly a quarter of a century. It was the 
death of the Chola Kulottunga in 1118 A. D., that 
enabled him to return. But then there is perhaps an 
inconsistency with respect to dates. As the Guru- 
paramparai has it, it would appear that the Chola 
died soon after the blinding of the two friends of 
Ramanuja ; but in actual fact, if the date 1ogg A. D. 
be taken as correct for the Melukote incident, which 
appears tao early to be true, the death of the persecuting 
Chola came many years after. This kind of accuracy, 


* Mysore Review for March, 1905. (Vide Appendix.) 
+ Hassan vol. of the Epigraphia Carnataka Ins. Belur 58 & 71. 


a eae a . 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 149 


it Would be too much to expect in an account such as 
we have and of its professed character. 

vii. The next incident of importance is the con- 
version of Amudan of Arangam, the manager of the 
temple at Srirangam, a non-Vaishnava. For this we 
have evidence of the convert himself. He is the 
author of the Ramanuja Nurrandhadhi and in verses 
3, 4 and 7 of the work he makes it clear that 
he was a convert by favour’ of Ramanuja and 
Kurathalwar. In verses 8, 21, he clearly describes 
Ramanuja’s relation to the Alwars and Nadhamuni 
and Alavandar (Yamunaithuraivar), in spite of 
Opinions to the country by scholars who implicitly 
believe in the opinion of Dr. Caldwell. Not 
only this. The centum (in fact 108) of his verses 
gives in a small span, mostly allusively but clearly 
enough, the main achievements of Ramanuja and 
becomes the contemporary authority for most of the 
facts of Ramanuja’s life as detailed above. The 
moderation of tone and sobriety of language com- 
mend its authority the more, as else Ramanuja would 
not have been persuaded into including it among the 
Prabandam 4000. 

viii. Lastly comes the construction and conse- 
cration of the Govinda shrine at the foot of the Tiru- 
pathi Hill. This affords the best clue to the date of 
Ramanuja. The Guruparamparai gives this as the 
last act of a busy life under circumstances which, 
thanks to the researches of Brahma Sri R. Raghava 
Iyengar, Court Pandit of Ramnad and Editor of the 


150 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


Sen Tamil, the organ of the Madura Tamil Sangam, 
prove to be quite historical. The story, it will be 
remembered, is that the Govinda Raja temple at 
Chidambaram having been removed from the premises 
of the great Siva temple, Ramanuja and his disciples 
got the idol enshrined in a new temple at Tirupathi. 
In a number of historical works relating to the period, 
particularly in the Kulottunga Cholan Ula of 
Ottakuthan,* this achievement is ascribed to Kulot- 
tunga II, the son and successor of Vikrama Chola 
and one of the patrons of Kuthan himself. There it 
is described that he renovated the Saiva temple and 
plated the roofing with gold—incidentally mention- 
ing that the “ God Vishau had been sent back to his 
original shrine—the sea.”t This would mean not 
only the removal but the throwing of the image into the 
sea. In another, there is a reference to Kulottunga’s 
having rooted out the minor Gods from the great 
shrine, This must have taken place in the reign of 
Kulottunga iI (cir. 1123-1146). That the Vaishna- 
vas were enabled to enshrine the God at Tirupathi 
perhaps shews the limitation of the Chola authority 
at the time or their indifference to the fact, provided 
the obnoxious God had been removed from the 
hallowed presence of their “Holy of Holies,” a 
place full of the most narrow-minded of the Saivites. 
That the Vishnu shrine was previously in the temple 
at Chidambaram is borne out by a reference in the 


* Sen Tamil Vol. III, pt, 5 pp. (166—167). 
+ Sen Tamil Vol. III, pt. 8 pp, (801—302). 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES I5t 


works of the Manikka Vasagar (Tiruchchirrambalak- 
kovai, 86). There is absolutely no reason to doubt 
the authority of these works about this parti- 
cular and this would give us the ultimate limits. 
of Ramanuja’s active life. According to the. 
traditional account Ramanuja lived for 120 years 
from 1017 A.D.—1137 A.D. Some object to this 
length and regard it as a fabrication just to give the 
reformer the ‘ Mahadasa’ as it is called. It is a 
matter of very small consequence to us whether he 
lived the 120 years or no. What is more important 
for our purposes is that his was a long and active life: 
and covered three reigns of the Cholas :—Kulottunga 
I (1070 A.D. to 1118 A.D., Vikramachola (1118 A.D. 
—1135 A.D.), Kulottunga II. (1123—1146 A.D.) 
Ramanuja’s active life might, therefore, be safely 
referred to the last quarter of the 11th and the first- 
half of the 12th century A.D. 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF RAMANUJA 
BY 


Pror. T. RAJAGOPALACHARYAR, M.A., B.L. 


THE TERM ‘ VISISHTADWAITA’ EXPLAINED. 

/INHE Visishtadwaita is so-called because it incul- 

cates the adwaita or oneness of God, with 

visesha or attributes. It is, therefore, ‘ qualified 
non-dualism.’ God alone exists; all else that is seen 
is His manifestation, attribute, or Sakti. Such 
attributes are chit or the individual souls and achat 
or matter. The Adwaitic position is also that God 
alone exists and all else is manifestation. Herein is 
the common element between the .two views; but 
the Adwaitin regards the manifestation as unreal and 
temporary, and asa result of Avidya or Nescience. 
In consequence, the one Brahman is without any 
attribute, in his view. Ramanuja and his school 
regard the attributes as real, and permanent, but 
subject to the control of the one Brahman in all their 
modifications and evolutions. The oneness of God is 
compatible.with the existence of attributes, as the 
latter are incapabie of existing alone, and so do not 
constitute indep-ndent things. They are called the 
prakaras or the modes, sesha or the accessories, and 
miyamya or the controlled, of the one Brahman. The 
word Brahman is thus used either to denote the 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 153 


central unity, when it becomes possible to speak of 
the soulg and matter, as its attributes, or to denote 
the combined trinity when the whole universe may 
properly be described as consisting of Brahman and 
Brahman alone. The Visishtadwaitin does not make 
the unphilosophical statement that the souls are 
absolutely independent entities, endowed with the 
capacity of separate existence and activity, apart 
from Brahman. 
THE FUNDAMENTAL ATTRIBUTES. 

The Brahman (we use the word in the first of , 
the above senses) is Intelligence. It is something 
more—it is the Knower. Where attributes are 
denied, and all that exists is homogenous intelligence, 
as in the Adwaita, there can be no knower; for there 
is nothing to know. But for the Visishtadwaitin, 
Brahman is a knower, and the variety, philosophi- 
cally essential for knowledge, is furnished by the 
attributes. Brahman is Bliss, i.e., he is blissful ; for 
a mixture of the opposite, pain, is unimaginable in 
his case. It will thus be seen that besides the attri- 
butes of souls and matter, which may be called ‘ the 
concrete attributes’ if such a phrase may be used, 
Brahman has various abstract attributes qualities 
strictly so called, denoting his perfection from various 
points of view. The Visishtadwaitin considers 
‘Intelligence’ as partaking of the dual character 
of an abstract and a concrete attribute; and 
he instances ‘light’ as an example of the 
possibility of such an attribute. Intelligence 


\ 


154 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


is the essence of Brahman; it is an attribute 
as well, in its nature of universal pervasion. 
Again Brahman is real, satya. By this is under- 
Stood that he is without vikara or modification 
of any kind. The souls and matter are asatya or 
unreal, which again means that they are subject to 
modification, which is necessarily an element of 
impurity. In the case of souls, this modification takes. 
the form of expansion or contraction of Intelligence. 
In mineral, plant or animal life, the soul, under 
karmic control, is dull or of suppressed Intelligence. 
The modifications of matter are of a more serious 
kind, In the creation and expansion of the universe,. 
matter undergoes a real modification of its nature. 
Such change is called parinama or evolution, as con- 
trasted with vivarta or apparent variation, which is 
the view of the Adwaitin. The Visishtadwaitin holds- 
that, in spite of the souls and matter being pervaded 
by Brahman, and modifications of them though under 
Brahman’s control, do not touch His essence ; just as 
the Adwaitin maintains that the operation of Avidya 
does not affect the one Reality. The ‘ unreality’ of the 
Cosmos is thus another point of agreement between 
the Adwaitin and the Visishtadwaitin; but this, it 
must be admitted, is merely a nominal agreement, 
considering the important diversity in their concep- 
tions of the unreality. The Visishtadwaitin would 
thus call Brahman, ‘ Sat,’ and the rest ‘ Asat’; in 
a narrower sense; he reserves the epithet ‘ Asat’ to- 
Matter, which undergoes change in its essence, unlike 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 155 


o 


the souls whose essence is like to the Brahman’s and 
never changes. 
TWO STATES OF BRAHMAN. 

There are two states of existence for the Brah- 
man, One is absolute quiescence or pralaya, when 
all the souls and matter exist in Him in deep sleep as 
it were. No differentiation is possible in that stage 
between the souls and matter; these are then, as it 
were, non-existent. ‘Sat alone exists, one without a 
second.’ Existence is the only phrase that can be 
applied to the Brahman then, as volition, not to 
speak of creation, is potential or has not commenced. 
to work. Then begins the second stage, creation. To 
the Adwaitin, creation is a negative, an unreal, act. 
It is the clouding of the pure Intelligence of Brahman 
by the inexplicable Avidya, which produces the 
manifestation of apparent diversity. The Visishtad- 
waitin considers creation as a positive volitional effort 
of the Brahman to display real diversity, by actua- 
lising the energy for change which is innate in both 
the souls and matter. Sa Aikshata bahw syam praja- 
yeya iti, * He thought, may I become many, may I 
grow forth.’ The antah pravesa ‘entry within’ 
which Upanishads speak of as taking place ‘at 
creation is not strictly true. To the Visishadwaitin, 
it means only the Brahman’s willing to develop 
His inseparable attributes, souls and matter; for 
Brahman was ‘within’ even before creation. To 
the Adwaitin, the antah pravesa is entirely 
metaphorical. The language of the Parinama Vada 


156 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


is used in his view, merely for facility of com- 
prehension. 
THE PURPOSE OF CREATION. 

The ethical justification for creation is Justice. 
The fruits of actions (karma) have to’ be bestowed, 
equally and impartially, and Brahman does this by 
endowing souls with appropriate bodies of various 
kinds and giving room for further functioning and 
display of free-will within limits; the further evolu- 
tion depends on the manner in which the individual 
uses his opportunities. As karma is, in the Hindu 
view, beginningless, it becomes unnecessary to account 
for its origin. To the objection that Brahman could 
have no purpose, being without wants, in engaging 
itself in creation, the reply is, in the words of the 
author of the Sutras, lokavat tu lila kaivalyam 
(II. 1°33), it is mere recreation, as in ordinary life. 
In other words, as no compulsion can be predicated 
of the Brahman to evolve the universe, the Visistitad- 
Waitin accounts for it by the only other possible 
alternative, that it is mere recreation for the Brahman, 
but the strictest justice for the souls concerned. 
Sankara adds the explanation that His innate nature 
(svabhava) is to create, which does not carry us much 
further, and then reminds us that the whole discus- 
sion is unreai, as Brahman is never the agent of 
creation. 

THE AUTHORITY OF REVELATION. 

To the Visishtadwaitin, as to the Adwaitin, the 

Vedas and Smritis are the sole and independent autho- 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 157 


rity for the knowledge of Brahman. Reason has no 
operation except in matters perceptible by the senses. 
Transcendental notions as those with respect to the 
nature and attributes of Brahman and the souls, can 
only be got from Revelation. This position appears 
illogical, dethroning, as it does, Reason, the accepted 
instrument of correct conclusion in all processes of 
thought. To explain this anomaly, we have to dwell 
a little on the exact place assigned to reason by 
Sankara as well as Ramanuja. Reason is an indefinite 
word. It depends for its correctness, on the intel- 
lectual capacity of the person arguing, the extent of 
his information and other circumstances. Until a 
fallacy is exposed, an argument is apparently sound. 
Then it is upset and the conclusion has to be reached 
by other reasonings. This want of finality in mere 
reason is referred to in the Sutras (II.1-11) and is the 
cause of the Vedantic systems rejecting it as a 
sufficient authority in the knowledge of Brahman as 
the Nyayikas did. The argument from design may at 
best establish a highly endowed intelligent first cause 
or causes, but could not lead to the conception of a 
perfect Brahman as first cause. And so, the help of 
mere reason as a sufficiently competent determining 
factor in the establishment of Brahman, as first 
cause, is rejected, This must not be taken to mean 
that the Hindu Vedantins reject argumentation in 
their philosophy. Every page of their writings is a 
standing monument of their skill in the subtlest 
seasonings. According to them the purpose of reason- 


158 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


ing is two-fold. It has, in the first place, full scope 
in matters which do not transcend the senses. In 
the second place, it is a valuable adjunct in ontology, 
where the texts of the Vedas are to be construed. As 
it so happens that most important texts are liable to 
be disputed as to their meanings, it goes without say- 
ing that there is full room for logical interpretation 
with respect tothem. To say that explicit Vedic 
texts are unquestionable authorities means one of two 
things, either that we take them as the conclusions of 
great minds reached after acute reasoning, on matters 
which our feeble intellects could not sufficiently 
comprehend, or we consider them to be the records 
of unigue direct experiences of men who had trained 
their powers of mental perception by methods to 
which we have no access. Neither position is 
inconceivable or necessarily absurd. So many 
scientific positions are accepted by the general body 
of educated men all over the world on the faith of 
representations that those positions have been verified 
by some one by actual experiments. There may be 
danger of mistakes and mis-statements in either case; 
but those like Sankara and Ramanuja, who do not 
feel the position of an agnostic satisfactory or com- 
fortable, have preferred to base their ontological 
position on s~evelation, while fully trusting to their 
capacity for ratiocination to meet objections on the 
part of those who do not subscribe to the authority 
of the Vedas. Bctween these two, there is, however, 
a difference, Sani‘ara includes the Srutis and Smritis 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 159 


among ephemeral things whose purpose is served 
when once oneness is realised. Ramanuja considers 
them as always authoritative and as expressive of the 
eternal commands of the Deity whose breath they are 
said to be. An important difference arises between 
these two thinkers, based on this distinction. In 
Sankara’s view the compulsory nature of ordained 
duties last only till an individual has realised by 
thinking his unity with God, Ramanuja considers the 
performance of such duties obligatory as long as life 
and physical power endure. (See:Sutras III. 4.32-35.) 

There are also certain assertions in Ramanuyja’s 
religious tenets which must be unacceptable to those 
who do not believe in revelation or adopt his 
interpretation, Such are his eternally free souls 
(nityas), heaven conceived as a distinct place apart 
from and outside the changeable universe (though 
not outside Brahman), the existence of the Deity in 
physical forms of various kinds, the peculiar paths of 
souls on their release from the body, and so on. Belief 
in these is based on express texts and no reasoning can 
be called to prove them. It is Ramanuja’s contention 
that reasoning is equally powerless to disapprove them. 
And a disapproval of these in no way affects Rama- 
nuja’s conclusions, as regards the nature of Brahman 
and its relation to souls and matter, as philosophical 
positions consonant to abstract reasoning. 

MODE OF RECONCILIATION. 

We now come to Ramanuja’s mode of reconcil- 

ing Vedic texts. Western scholars have tried to 


160 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


arrange chronologically the principal Upanishads 
and to discern, in some of them, partial truths; 
in others, crude statements; in others again the 
completest insight into things transcendental that 
may be given to man. How far this discus- 
sion is convincing we _ shall not’ stop to 
examine. Where passages in the same Upanishads 
appear to conflict, as in the Chandogya, the Brihad- 
Aranyaka, or the Isa-Vasya, it is evident that the 
ordinary rules of interpretation must be resorted to, to 
arrive at a consistent meaning. The respect which 
Hindus have entertained for the Upanishads on 
account of their antiquity has prevented them from 
considering any of them as of inferior authority to 
the rest. It follows that a consistent doctorine has to 
be attempted out of at least the principal Upanishads. 
This is what Sankara and Ramanuja have attempted 
to do, each in hisown way. And this is indeed what 
Badarayana, the first interpreter of the Upanishads 
known to us, has ‘himself done in the Sutras, 
Professor Deussen and others have conjectured 
that Badarayana had a partiality for the Chandogya 
and hence the frequent reference to it in the topics 
discussed. Indian scholars thoroughly equipped with 
an intimate acquaintance with ‘the immense and 
highly technical philosophical literature, which is only 
just beginning to be studied and comprehended, in 
part, by European scholars,’’ to use the words of 
Dr. Thibaut, have ascertained that, in the two 
Mimamsas, the passage discussed in each adhikarana 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 165 


are only typical and not exhaustive and that the 
order of exposition is mainly based on logical sequence. 
It follows that there is no justification for the view 
that one or two Upanishads are specially intended 
as the repository of philosophical truths to the 
exclusion of other Upanishads. 

The texts of the Upanishads referring to the 
Supreme Self are of two kinds. Some speak of Him 
as nirguna, attributeless. Others describe him as 
having attributes or qualities like wisdom, power, etc, 
As truth can be only one, the natural question arises 
whether these texts can be reconciled in any manner, 
Sankara’s view is that predominance must be given to 
the nirguna texts, as the others have the effect of 
limiting the Infinite, which should not be done. 
Hence texts like ‘Hkam eva Adwaitiyam,’ one only, 
without a second,’ neha nana Asti,’ there is here no 
diversity, etc., are interpreted by him, without much 
staining, as establishing the absolute oneness of the 
Brahman. And the other texts are relegated to an 
inferior position and made to refer to an imaginary 
and inferior Brahman called apara or karya Brahman, 
i.e., the Brahman in conjunction with its creative 
power called maya. Ramanuja’s difficulty seems to 
be that this sharp division of the passages into those 
referring to the higher and those referring to the lower 
Brahman is not easily and directly inferable from the 
texts themselves. On the other hand, the passages 
are so mixed up that it is impossible to say that this 
distinction, if true, was ever prominently kept up. 

11 


162 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


His reconciliation is, therefore, as follows: the texts 
of the Upanishads do not inculcate an attributeless 
Brahman; the attributes are real and not the result 
of Avidya; the texts referring to those attributes 
expound the Brahman, as He is, with the souls and 
matter as His inseparable modes. Brahman is one, 
only in His compound nature, as described already. 
The texts denying any attributes for Him are to be 
taken as meaning that He has no low or inauspicious 
attributes, such as liability to changes, death, sorrow, 
etc. The texts as to creation, as mentioned already, 
mean a real modification of the attributes, souls and 
matter of the Brahman and do not mean that Brah- 
man becomes suffused with Nescience and imagines 
a variety. The souls are many and God is immanent, 
both in them and in matter. The texts which speak 
of unity and deny variety do so of the totality of the 
Brahman with his attributes, Texts, which deny a 
second to Brahman, mean that there is no other 
controlling power in the universe apart from Him. 
Texts which deny the possibility of knowing Brah- 
man, do not mean that he cannot be the object of 
thought, as there is no thinker; they mean only that 
His wonderful and priceless excellences or qualities 
could not be adequately described. Else, according 
to Ramanuja, they would conflict with hosts of 
passages which prescribe knowledge of Brahman and 
ascribe qualities to Him. The text of the Brihad 
Aranyaka II. 3. 6. which contains the famous words 
“meti nett” “notso, not so” and is taken by 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 163 


Sankara to teach the negation of all attributes is 
interpreted by Ramanuja (Sutras. ITI. 2.21) as merely 
denying the possibility of adequate knowledge of the 
Brahman. “This interpretation” says he, “is 
confirmed by the fact that after the negative phrase 
comes an epithet of Brahman as ‘the True of the 
True, for the Pranas are the True’.” Ramanuja 
interprets this text to mean that the Pranas or the 
individual souls are satya or ‘true,’ t.e., not subject 
to change in their essence, while the Supreme Self is 
altogether real or unchangeable. “ He is, therefore, 
more eminently trwe than they (the souls) are.” 
THE THEORY OF CAUSATION. 


The theory of causation has profoundly exercised 
the minds of all Hindu philosophers; the Vedantins, 
like the Sankhyas, maintain the oneness of cause and 
effect in essence, as opposed to the logicians who 
maintain that they are different. In what sense, then, 
is the world which is an effect, one with its cause? 
Badarayana has a topic discussing this point. (Sutras, 
e TV. 23, ete) Here he maintains that the Brah- 
man is not merely the instrumental cause, but also the 
material cause of the universe. He is in the position, 
not merely of the potter but also of the mud, 
to give an illustration familiar to Indian philosophers, 
A succeeding Sutra, (I. 4. 27,) refers to the way in 
which Brahman as the cause becomes the effect. It 
is by ‘ parinama’ or owing to modification. In 
Ramanuja’s view the oneness of cause and effect 
arises from the fact that the cause is the Brahman 


164 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


in the suwkshma or subtle state, when the souls and 
matter are ‘undeveloped and the effect is Brahman 
also, now comprised of the Supreme Self and the 
souls and matter, the latter in a fully developed 
state.* Sankara, practically admitting the inter- 
pretation of the Sutras given above, would how- 
ever, explain the modification as ‘ Vivarta’ really 
7.6., phenomenal creation by Brahman as influenced 
by Avidya or Maya. That the two philosophers 
are entirely at variance in their view of 
this oneness is also clear from their respective 
commentaries on the important Sutra II-1-15, (14, in 
Sankara’s numbering) a discussion of which would be 
out of place in this brief exposition. We would only 
draw attention to an important and suggestive state- 
ment of Sankaracharya, at the close of his commen- 
tary of the above Sutra, that Badarayana, in his view, 
omits to contradict the reality of the manifested 
world and adopts the language of the Parinama 
Vada, for the purpose of facilitating the exposition of 
the saguna meditations later on in the work. 
THE DOCTRINE OF NESCIENCE. 

Ramanuja’s Sribhashya is remarkable for the 
lengthy disquisition on various topics by which his 
actual commentary on the Sutras is preceded. In this 
disquisition, he treats of various controversial point 
and expounds fully his differences of views from those 
of Sankara. One of the most important of these is his 


* The pharse ‘ Visishtadwaitam ’ is sometimes explained ag 


the oneness or identity and the two Visishta entities mentioned . 


in the text, as cause and effect. 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 165 


statement of objections to the theory of Maya or 
Avidya, which is a fundamental one in Sankara’s 
philosophy and is, at the same time, the most vulner- 
able point in it. Is this Avidya different from or 
identical with Brahman? The former view would 
seem to undermine Sankara’s doctrine of oneness and 
the latter is equally untenable. Sankara cuts the 
Gordian knot by boldly declaring that it (the Avidya) 
is Sadasadanirvachaniya, i. ¢., it is indescribable as 
either‘existing or non-existing. Ramanuja expounds 
at great length his difficulties as to the tenability of 
the Maya theory, under seven heads, a clear account 
of which is to be found in Professor Rangacharya’s 
‘Analytical outline’ prefixed to his valuable trans- 
lation of the Sri Bhashya, Vol. I. Ramanuja’s objec- 
tions are of this wise: The Avidya cannot operate 
on the Brahman, directly, for His nature is Intelli- 
gence and this would repel Nescience by its intrinsic 
merit. Nor can it operate on the individual souls, 
for these are the outcome of the action of Avidya and 
cannot, therefore, be acted upon in anticipation. 
Again, to state that Nescience clouds the Brahman is 
impossible, for that would mean that Brahman’s 
luminous nature is thereby destroyed, a. position 
which is not admissible. Avidya, again, as defined 
by Sankara, is in Ramanvuja’s view, inconceivable, as 
the simultaneous possession of two opposite charac- 
ters, as existence and non-existence, cannot be predi- 
cated of anything in human conception, Ramanuja, 
further, does not think that to describe Avidya as 


166 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


‘indescribable’ really strengthens the position of 
Sankara; for if a thing is absolutely indescribable, it 
must be non-existent as an entity. Then Ramanuja 
points out that such an Avidya cannot be proved to 
exist by any known means of proof including Vedic 
or Smriti texts; if such an Avidya should exist, it is 
irremovable, says Ramanuja, for the knowledge of 
attributeless Brahman required to remove it, is accord- 
ing to him an impossible thing, such a Brahman not 
being provable. Lastly, such an Avidya is irremovable 
for another reason. In Ramanuja’s view the ignorance, 
being the result of Karma, can be removed only by 
enjoined action and meditation. Mere knowledge of 
Brahman cannot remove it. For all these reasons, 
Ramanuja concludes that the theory of Maya is 
untenable and opposed to the tenor of the Vedic 
texts. 
CONCLUSION, 

It is not the purpose of this sketch to explain all 
Ramanuja’s objections to Sankaracharya’s views. 
What has been attempted is only the setting forth of 
Ramanuja’s views on important points with just so 
much reference to the doctrines of Sankara, as is 
necessary to understand Ramanuja. To really grasp 
the vital differences between these two eminent 
philosophers, and to arrive ata proper estimate of 
their relative merits, would mean a thorough discus- 
sion of three important questions, namely, (1) who is 
the better interpreter of the Upanishads, (2) who has 
more accurately represented the views of the Vedanta 


ee Se a 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 167 


Sutras, and (3) who is entitled to greater respect aS a 
philosophical thinker. These are questions of so 
difficult a nature that they are entirely beyond our 
scope and capacity. Enough has, however, been said 
to show that Ramanuja when he becomes better 
known, would most certainly be deemed entitled to a 
high place among the world’s philosophers, and his 
system, though not possessing the simplicity or 
universality of Sankaracharya’s, is yet an eminently 
sound one, compatible with the admission of the 
reality of the cosmosand a high conception of the 
nature and attributes of the Deity. 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 
BY 
PROF. M. RANGACHARYA, M.A. 


AISHNAVISM is a very old form of religion 
known to the History of Civilisation in India. 

How old it is, itis not now possible to deter- 

mine ; but it is certain that its sources may be traced 
to the Vedas. Vishnu in Vedic literature is seen to 
be a solar deity, and is conceived as an all-pervading 
god. It is in accordance with a very widely accepted 
Indian derivation of the word to interpret Vishnu as 
a pervader; and the conception of this same god as 
Trivikrama—as the god who was able to cover the 
whole universe in three strides—is also distinctly 
Vedic in origin. Moreover, as a god he is said to 
have his place in the supreme heaven, in Vishnoh 
paramam padam, as it is called in the Vedas. 
Modern European scholars consider that this parama 
pada of Vishnu is, in all probability, the position of 
the sun in the zenith. This is obviously the highest 
position conceivable that may be occupied by any 
object during the day. Thus Vishnu was of old a 
solar deity who occupied the highest heaven, and was 
at the same time capable of pervading with his light 
and life all the three worlds making up the visible 
universe, the earth-world, the mind-world and the sky- 
world. The all-pervading god and the god who occu - 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 169 


pies the highest heaven—such evidently is the concep- 
tion underlying Vishnu in Vedic literature. From this 
conception as its source has arisen Vaishnavism, 
which, in its various forms, is now recognised to be 
the most predominant and the most popular religion 
among the Hindus. To ascertain and describe the 
position occupied by Ramanuja in relation to the 
progress and development of this great religion is the 
main aim which I intend to keep in view in my 
lecture. 

The primary conception underlying the original 
deity is a matter of great importance in determining 
the course of development of the religion associated 
with that deity. This can be amply illustrated by 
means of instances that may be gathered from the 
history of religions, There is, for instance, another 
solar deity in Vedic literature, who goes by the name 
of MITRA; and this god Mitra, understood as the 
Sanskrit language requires, is the sun-god conceived 
asafriend. This Mitra is not merely a god of our 
Vedas, but is a god known to the Zend-Avesta of the 
Parsees as well. He seems therefore to have been a 
god held in honor by the Iranian as well as by the 
Indian Aryas even before they separated from each 
other. That separation must of course have taken 
place very very long ago. It may well be that this 
Mitra was a deity worshipped in Persia before 
Zoroaster taught his religion—the modern religion of 
the Parsees, A great French savant, Ernest Renan, 
has solemnly remarked that, if Christianity had not 


170 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


gone to Europe, in all probability Mitraism would 
have become the religion of Europeans. In saying 
this he evidently pays a very high compliment to this. 
religion of MITRA and draws our attention to the 
tendency of that religion to be helpful to man in the 
way of encouraging in him purity love, piety and 
righteousness. He even seems to grant that the 
moral influence of that religion could indeed have 
been in no way inferior to that which Christianity 
has had among Europeans and Americans. Now, can 
it be said that the original conception of this god as a 
friend has had no power or part in determining the 
really superior moral merit of Mitraism? Surely its 
friendly god must have done a great deal in deter- 
mining the line of development of that religion. 

So it must have been in connection with the 
religion of Vishnu also. Moreover, we find here that, 
in very early times, another idea more prominently 
brought to light in connection with another Vedic 
deity, Bhaga, came to be associated with the religion 
of Vishnu, That other idea is in fact the concep- 
tion of god Bhaga asa bestower of auspicious bless- 
ings. This god Bhaga is perhaps an older god than 
even Mitra. God Bhaga appears to have had an 
Indo-European history. He was known to the 
ancient religion of the Slavonians, to the ancient reli- 
gion of the Parsees, and also to the ancient religion 
of the Aryas of this country. As the bestower of 
auspicious blessings, Bhaga seems to have been very 
highly honoured and held in great reverence asa 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 171 


typical god. This word bhaga in later Sanskrit litera- 
ture came to assume many meanings. It may now 
mean the sun, but very frequently means good bless- 
ings and auspicious qualities and great powers. 
Thus the name of the sun-god, looked upon as a 
bestower of blessings and of auspicious powers, may 
easily be seen to have undergone a deterioration in 
meaning, so as to import not the god but the physical 
object symbolising the god, or those blessings and 
those powers whereof the god was originally conceiv- 
ed to be the bestower. When in this manner the 
earlier meanings of this word as the name ofa god 
became almost forgotten among the people, the other 
later meaning naturally gained ground. It must 
be in consequence of an indentification of _ the 
god himself with the power of goodness that he 
possessed, that the word bhaga ceased to be the 
name of the god and came to denote chiefly his. 
power of goodness and grace. After this took place, 
we observe a change in the structure of the name of 
the god: that name is no longer Bhaga but Bhagavat. 
This changed word means the possessor of those 
beneficent qualities and auspicious powers which 
have come to be represented by the word bhaga. In 
that way there arose a religion in which the worship: 
of the Bhagavat was the chief element ; and in it the 
Bhagavat came to be looked upon as the Supreme 
God. The religion which has been based on this 
worship of the Bhagavat is called the Bhagavata 
religion. It appears to be distinctly described in the 


172 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


Mahabarata. And even European and American 
critics seem to be fairly in agreement in holding that 
the Mahabarata, in its present form, must have been 
well known in India not later than the 4th century 
before the Christian era. The Mahabharata is rightly 
conceived to be a work that could not have been 
produced at any one time by any one man. Although 
in the epic itself its authorship is ascribed to Vyasa, 
there is ample indication in it of frequent additions 
having been made to it in later times: and this sort 
of growth in size must have gone on with it for some 
centuries. If itis true that this growth reached its 
culmination about the 4th century before Christ, and 
if we have distinct references to the Bhagavata 
religion in the Mahabharata, then the worship of the 
Bhagavat must have been current fora fairly long 
time before that in India. That the Bhagavat may 
‘well be traced to the Vedic Bhaga is a point which 
does not seem to me to be in any manner improbable. 
There is some reason to believe that Sri-Krishna was 
probably the originator of the Bhagavata religion ; 
and Megasthenes is considered to have been well 
aware of the prevalence of Krishna-worship in his 
days in North India. Now, if Vishnu and _ the 
Bhagavat are to be identified, as they seem to have 
been identified from very early times in this country, 
thereby Vaishnavism is naturally bound to become 
more comprehensive and to acquire a more expanded 
and more lovable moral meaning. Accordingly 
Vaishnavism came to mean in due time the ‘worship 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 173 


of an all-pervading God, who is in the highest heaven, 
and is at the same time the bestower of all auspicious 
powers and benevolent blessings. Here, in this com- 
bined conception of God, we have the very heart, so 
to say, of Vaishnavism. From this central idea 
arose all the later developments of this religion, as 
also all its later adaptations to the needs of progressive 
Hindu life. 

In the same manner as Vaishnavism, Saivism 
also may be traced to the Vedas—to the Deity Rudra 
so well-known in Vedic literature. Vishnu is a 
solar deity in the Vedas, as I mentioned to you 
already. Rudra is therein conceived to be Agni—the 
firegod. From the Vedic conception of Rudra as 
thé god of fire arose Saivism, even as from the con- 
ception of the sun-god arose the later worship of 
Vishnu as the one Supreme God. Why did these 
later developments and modifications in religion come 
into existence in this country, one may very well ask, 
Why was there the gradual overthrow of the old. 
Vedic religion of sacrifices, and why the introduction 
of the later religions based on the Upanishads, the 
Itihasas, Puranas and Agamas? That is indeed an 
interesting question to ask. The development of 
thought in Indian civilisation made it necessary that. 
the old Vedic religion of ritualism should be superseded 
by another religion, which had more of real life in it, 
and was more capable of satisfying the religious needs. 
and aspirations of the human heart, irrespective of 
all considerations of race, caste and social status, 


174 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


Nevertheless, this new religion could not be altogether 
new. In fact the progress of religion is so effected in 
the history of all civilizations that no new religion 
can be absolutely or unmixedly new. When a new 
institution or a new idea has to be introduced among 
a people for their immediate benefit, it invariably 
happens that this new institution or new idea becomes 
implanted upon something that is really old. And 
the new idea or the new institution, growing in the 
midst of old surroundings, absorbs and assimilates a 
great deal of what is old-from its environment: and 
in the result, the old and the new together sprout 
up ina new form so as to make the new product, 
viewed asa whole, more comprehensive, more beautiful 
and more helpful to the advancement of culture and 
character and civilization among the people. That is 
the way of progress everywhere. Whether we trace 
the origin, for instance, of Buddhism or Christianity, 
or trace the course of civilization in China or Japan or 
France or England or India, we invariably find that 
new ideas and institutions grow in the midst of old 
environments and under the impulse of old forces 
which are still alive and actively in operation. We 
thus learn to see that every new growth is largely the 
result of the assimilation of much that is old with 
something that is new. 

In the course of the development of the sacrificial 
religion of the Vedas, the influence of the priests at one 
time became so markedly preponderant, that the gods 
themselves almost began to disappear from the vision 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 178 


of the sacrificers. And what loomed largely before 
their eyes was the performance of the sacrifice in ac- 
cordance with the strict letter of the law. Another 
thing which also must have loomed largely was the 
rewarding of the sacrificial priests by the payment of 
valuable dakshina or honorarium to them. To what 
extent such a decline of the true religious spirit took 
place may be made out from the fact that some of | 
the later Mimamsakas, when dealing with the ques- 
tion of who the Devatas are, to whom sacrifices are 
offered, hastily dismissed the question itself by giving 
out that we need not at all trouble ourselves about 
who the Devatas are. They went quite so far as to 
say that the Devata is simply that thing the name 
whereof is seen inflected in the dative case in sacri- 
ficial formulas like Indraya svaha for instance. ‘* Who 
is Indra ?”’ is the question asked, let us suppose. The 
reply is—‘‘ Don’t ask who he is. He may be anything 
or nothing. He is simply that thing the name of 
which is here in this formula inflected in the dative 
case.””’ When such an answer is given tosucha 
question, we may at once make out what relative 
importance must have been attached to the question. 
of who or what the gods are, as compared with the 
numerous and complex details of the sacrificial cere- 
monial. When mere sacrificial details become too 
much all-absorbing, all considerations regarding who 
or what the deity is, what its powers are, why we 
should worship it, were thrown into the back-ground. 
In fact these and other more interesting details 


176 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


bearing upon the question of godhood rapidly went 
behind the curtain. As all thought bearing upon the 
vital question of godhood in religion disappeared in 
that manner, what happened to be left behind was 
nothing more than mere form overloaded with nume- 
rous complicated and unattractive details involving 
much useless expenditure of time, wealth and labour. 
Naturally the common human heart would be 
prone to rebel against such a religion. There can 
indeed be no real life of any kind in an over-encrusted 
and fossilised shell of religion. There is nothing in 
it to touch the heart, and makesit burn with the 
magic fire of spiritual fervour and moral emotion and 
sympathetic exaltation. It is too dry and too mecha- 
nical, too much of a sham to satisfy the deep religious 
longings of the aspiring and uplifted heart. In the 
early stages of its development Vedic religion was 
not like this either in its aim or in its practical use. 
From the very beginning it was indeed an earnest 
endeavour to rise from nature to Nature’s God. In 
the hymns and prayers and chants addressed to the 
numerous nature-gods of the Vedas, a careful student 
may easily observe a growing tendency towards the 
realisation of what is sometimes called personal 
monotheism. The many gods of an earlier age become 
merged in the one God and are identified with Him: 
and this one God does not*lose His divinity of His 
personality. Many consider that such a really divine 
and personal God has to be an _ essential element 
in all truly satisfying religions. Anyhow there 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM i277 


must be for the common man in his religion some- 
thing to grasp and to worship as a Supreme Power 
and Personality, who would lovingly come to help 
him in times of difficulties, and to whom he might 
with complete confidence surrender himself in all con- 
ditions of trial and sorrow and suffering. Religion has 
even been defined as a kind of self-surrender, as the 
surrender of themselves which men make to a Higher 
Power, feeling unable to look after themselves in this 
world eof troubles and turmoils—in this world, 
wherein even the most thoughtful man feels that he 
is blind-folded and tossed about without any aid from 
any really capable and truly knowing guide. Such 
a puzzling thing is indeed this world of ours! It is 
in fact so full of mystery and so full of pitfalls to the 
earnest and thoughtful man that he naturally feels 
that it would be good for him to seek and obtain the 
#ppport of a Supreme Power, so that he may throw 
himself entirely on the mercy of that Power and 
derive unerring guidance from It, and take safe 
refuge with It, whenever necessary. It is very proper 
that this kind of feeling should come to the human 
mind most commonly and most readily, particularly 
in times of great danger and difficulty. When such 
a trying hour comes, how will the over-formal 
sacrifice, with all its elaborate details of ritual, help 
the aching heart of the man in trouble? How will 
the idea that the deity may be nothing other than 
what happens to be represented by the word, which 
is inflected in the dative case in a sacrificial formula, 
12 


178 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


help him? You can all easily see that a conception 
of the diety, such as this, will give him no help, no 
support, no comfort, It is therefore very natural for 
the common man not to take into account the 
definition of the deity as given by these sacrifice- 
loving latter day Mimamsakas. He wants his God 
to be real, to be supernatural and transcendental, and 
to be possessed at the same time of the requisite love 
and power to be ever near him and help him 
effectively. 

In this way more than one of the prominent 
gods of the Veda began to be personally worshipped, 
otherwise than through the old over-formal sacrifices, 
gods such as Indra, Rudra, Brahma and Vishnu. 
We have enough evidence to indicate that many 
Vedic gods came to be so worshipped independently. 
In the course of this process some people chose one 
deity for their worship, while others chose other 
deities. Besides this, we have to take note of the 
fact that the Aryas who brought their Vedic religion 
and Aryan civilization into this land were new-comers 
from outside: and they were comparatively few in 
number. Before they came to this land, other people 
were dwelling therein whose language and civiliza- 
tion were different, and whose ideas and _ institutions 
were different, from those of the Aryas. These 
original inhabitants were, as far as we can make out 
with the help of available evidence—which is, how- 
ever, hostile—a rather wild people who, nevertheless 
had a real civilization of their own, and had also an 


oo 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 179 


ordered social organization of their own. They were 
often found to be very powerful and clever in their 
conduct of affairs. Above all they had also a 
religion of their own, although this religion of 
theirs is declared to have been comparatively of a 
much lower kind than that of the Aryas. The 
religion that was then current among them 
is understood to have been characterised 
by the worship of the phallus, of serpents and 
trees and other things of that kind; and by rea- 
son of the magic and witch-craft associated there- 
with, it appears to have been a primitive magical 
religion as well, These and other primitive elements 
of religion must have been. found to exist among the 
original inhabitants of India, when the Aryas came in 
_ with their comparatively higher and more potent 
civilization. At that time these comparatively less 
cultured and less civilized original inhabitants could 
not of course grasp the meaning and aim of the Vedic 
chants and of the sacrificial religion of the victorious 
Aryas. And the Aryan priests, who were responsible 
for the proper conduct of the Aryan sacrifices, consi- 
dered, as it was very natural in those days, that only 
the Aryan people were entitled to perform those 
Aryan sacrifices. So the sacrificial religion of the 
Aryas could not easily be made to spread among the 
non-Aryan inhabitants of the land. In addition to 
this the common human tendency of these non-Aryans 
in favour of a personally responsive deity must have 
to a noticeable extent told against the fatal comple- 


180 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


tion of the sacerdotal process of ceremonial fossilisa- 
tion in religion. 

This sort of exclusiveness in religion is nothing 
very strange or very peculiar in the history of human 
civilization. Those of you that know anything 
about the religion of the Jews may remember that, 
till a very late period in the history of Judaism, it 
Was an exclusive religion. It was a religion to adopt 
which the Jews alone were, by birth, entitled, but 
the Gentiles were not. Later on, however, the Jews 
also began to take in converts to their religion: 
they did not, however, allow these converts to enter 
freely the Holy-of Holies in theirtemple at Jerusalem. 
These converts were allowed to go only as far as the 
gate; and for this reason they went by the name of 
the Proselytes of the Gate. And even this became . 
permissible, as I told you, very late in the history of 
Judaism. In the earlier stages of its history, Judaism 
was a rigorously exclusive religion. So also, if you 
got to the earlier history of Rome and of Greece, you 
will find there the same religious exclusiveness. The 
religion of the Latin tribes was distinctively exclusive. 
Nobody, who did not belong to any one of those Latin 
tribes, had any right to take part in the public Worship 
which they conducted from time to time, Among 
the Hellenic people of Greece also, those, who did 
not by birth belong to the Hellenic fraternity, were 
not allowed to take part in their public worship. In 
fact, in connection with the development of every 
historically evolved religion, we find that at one time 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 18 


in the early stages of its evolution, it must have been 
exclusive. And yet the exclusiveness of the sacrificial 
religion of the Vedas has been, in modern days, made 
the theme of much harsh criticism directed against 
the ancient Brahmanical priests of India, The 
chief complaint against these priests is that they 
managed to keep all higher religion and higher social 
privileges to themselves, and that the sense of human 
equality was smothered by them and kept away 
in the region of the improper and the impossible. 
This is an accusation based on ignorance in relation 
to the exact conditions of historic evolution in 
religion, We have to bear in mind that, in the pro- 
gress of human civilization, most early religions are 
characterised by exclusiveness at first. We generally 
start with the exclusive religion of the tribe ; and this 
sometimes develops into the religion of a group of 
federation of tribes, which again may, under favour- 
able circumstances, grow into the religion of a nation. 
In all these stages religion has to be largely exclusive ; 
and it is only at last that we arrive at the universal 
religion, If we bear this great fact in the history of 
religion in mind, we may see at once how the bottom 
of this accusation against the ancient Aryan priests of 
India can be knocked off with the greatest case. 
Much of what I have said regarding early reli- 
gious exclusiveness may look like a digression ; but 
you will see that it is not without its bearing on the 
important question of the forces that gave rise to that 
universal religion, which has come to be known by 


182 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


the name of Vaishnavism. In the course of its 
natural development, religion in our country also 
became more and more universal; and with the 
growth of universalism in religion all distinctions of 
race, caste and creed had to disappear in the matter 
of men’s religious eligibility for the attainment of the 
highest good of soul-salvation. I say advisedly that 
even differences of creed disappeared in this matter 
under the benign influence of the larger religious 
universalism in the country, because universal Hin- 
duism has proved to beso comprehensively tolerant 
as toadmit readily the title of all mankind for 
salvation, and to take away from life much of the 
unwholesome bitterness of feeling generally arising 
from differences in religious creed and opinion. This 
is a point in relation to Hinduism which can indeed 
be very fully demonstrated to be true. 

Here, I may, in passing, point .out that even so 
early as the time of Vasishta and Visvamitra the 
Sympathetic and expansive tendencies of liberalism 
seem to have struggled to come up in the sphere of 
religion in India. Visvamitra was a liberal seer, even 
as Vasishta wasa conservative sage, who wanted the 
Vedic religion to be confined solely to the Aryas. That 
Visvamitra desired even this religion to be made uni- 
versal, seems to be borne out by the well-known 
Story of Trisanku. Whether you approve of this 
view regarding our ancient Aryan liberalism in reli- 
gion or not, this much is clear, that in later times the 
sacrificial religion had, in spite of its having been 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 183 


more or less expanded and allowed to spread largely 
to disappear, partly on account of its own over- 
luxurious and redundant growth, and partly on 
account of its notable unsuitability to satisfy the 
earnest cravings in the heart of man after a real, 
hearty and living religion. And when it thus natu- 
rally faded away, we find that three deities known 
to the Vedas came to hold a prominent position in. 
the popular religion of the Hindus—Rudra, Vishnu 
and Beahma. 

With this natural decadence of the overburdened 
Vedic ritualism and its many and multiform sacrifices, 
we observe two religious forces making themselves more- 
and more markedly effective and acting in consonance 
with each other in the evolution of further religious 
progress. The germs of philosophic speculation found 
in the Vedas grew rapidly and culminated in the pro- 
duction of our justly famous Upanishads: and the 
popular force in favour of the personal deity also 
asserted itself as against the weakened sacerdotalism 
of decadent Vedic ritualism. It is in fact as the result 
of the operation of these two forces that the idea of 
the Hindu Trinity of gods came into existence, so as to 
serve well the demands of religious philosophy on the 
one hand, and the felt religious needs of the advancing 
popular mind on the other. When these gods of the 
Trinity came to hold a prominent position in Hindu 
religion, even then the old spirit of the religion of the 
Vedas, that among the gods there isxnone higher and 
none lower, that each god as he is worshipped may well 


184 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


be looked upon as supreme—that spirit of henotheism 
as Max Muller called it—persisted among the thought- 
ful people: and with its persistence it was impossible 
for them to declare that any one Was higher or lower 
among these three gods. In the meanwhile philosophy 
had, as I have already hinted, begun to produce more 
notable results than in the earlier days of the religion 
of the Vedas. I don’t mean to say that in the Vedas 
We do not see the real beginnings of Hindu philoso- 
phy. It would be very wrong if I saidso. On the 
other hand, there is ample evidence to show that 
potent germs of early philosophic thought are found 
in great abundance in the Vedas—particularly in the 
Rig-Veda and the Atharvana Veda. That these 
germs should have grown well and produced large and 
highly valuable results is very natural indeed amonga 
people so notably prone to be speculative and religious 
as the Hindus have been for centuries, The Upani- 
shads are sometimes called the Vedanta, which means 
literally the end of the Vedas. If it is not thus literally 
interpreted to mean the last portion of the Vedas, it 
may be made to denote the aim or purpose of the 
Vedas, that for the attainment of which the Vedas 
seem to have steadily striven, Whatever the 
interpretation of the word Vedanta may be, we are 
able to trace in the treatises. going by the name of 
the Upanishads, the sources of the later systems of 
Hindu philosophy known as the Sankhya, the Yoga 
and the Vedanta systems, Even Buddhistic and 
Jaina philosophy are held by some to be 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 185 


traceable to them. Those treatises themselves 
do not give any definite expression to 
any particular system of philosophy, They are not 
the work of one mind like the systems of modern 
philosophers, such as Kant, Hegel, Mill, or Spencer. 
Although not systematised as in modern philosophic 
works, the thoughts in them are strikingly luminous, 
often very piercingly and gloriously luminous. These 
thoughts take us to the farthest limit of all philosophy 
and irapel us to go even beyond, and are expressed in 
language which is most enthralling and highly sub- 
lime. I believe my philosophic friends will support 
me, if I say that, after all, there is much deadening in- 
fluence in system-making. As soon as we put together 
our philosophic thoughts into a system, there is a 
natural tendency for that system to lose spontaniety 
and originality and to become lifeless and hidebound. 
They lose their power to expand, and the germs of 
originality in them become crushed under the great 
pressure of the mechanical forces of systematisation. 
Luckily, therefore, for us, the authors of the Upani- 
shades were not like modern philosophers: they did 
not endeavour to build up systems. They must have 
felt that their function as teachers was simply to give 
free expression to what they from time-to-time saw 
like seers. They left system making to their later and 
weaker followers. That is why we have had in this 
country a profuse growth of pure and highly aspiring 
philosophy out of our Upanishads—of philosophy 
which has flourished in various forms and under 


186 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


various names, and has been systematised in various. 
ways by various scholars and sages and saints, 

Among the systems of philosophy that arose out 
of the luminous thoughts of the Upanishads, the very 
first was in all probability the Sankhya system of 
Kapila, which is considered by Brahminical tradition 
also to be one of the oldest systems of orthodox Hindu 
philosophy, Then came the Yoga system; and later 
on still, by combining, as I believe, the Sankhya and 
the Yoga together, came the Vedanta system.« And 
when these systematised philosophies began to. 
flourish, they too had of course their part to play in 
shaping the growth of religion and in modifying the 
general conception of God among the people. I told 
you that, in response to the inevitable cravings of the 
human heart, the sacrificial religion of the Vedas had 
to be set aside in favour of a religion wherein there 
was a God who was a real support to the worshipper, 
a God with.whom the worshipper could take refuge, 
and from whom the worshipper could obtain love and’ 
help in times of trial and hardship. I also said that, 
among the Vedic gods, three came to occupy promi- 
nently the personal position which the human heart 
required that its gods, should occupy: and these are- 
Brahma, Vishnu and Siva. In the early days of the 
origin of this Hindu Trinity, the old henotheistic 
idea was evidently operating powerfully enough to- 
prevent any such differentiation in rank among these 
gods, as later controversy brought into existence in 
later times so as to embitter the religious feelings of 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 187 


the Hindus very much. Such a differentiation in 
rank between Vishnu and Siva, for instance, we don’t 
see much of, even about the time when our famous 
poet Kalidasa flourished. In dealing with these three 
gods, Kalidasa looks upon them as though they were 
very nearly equal, and shows no kind of partiality to 
any one deity at the expense of another, although 
there is very good reason to believe that he was him- 
self a worshipper of Siva. When he happens to 
offer his prayers to Siva, he offers them as to the 
Supreme Deity; and when again he has to oifer 
prayers to Vishnu, he offers them similarly as if to 
the Supreme Deity; and the language of philosophic 
description and praise he applies to Vishnu in one 
place is almost identieal with the language of 
adoration he applies to Siva in another place. 
And he honours Brahma almost equally with these 
two gods. But how longs it possible for this religion 
of the equal Trinity to go on unchanged ? How can you 
have three gods, and consider each of them to be Su- 
preme ? It is inevitable for a question like this to arise 
after the mind begins to philosophise a little. If you 
do not philosophise—the god whom you for the time 
being consider to be Supreme—your heart naturally 
goes forth in adoration to that god ; and in his wor- 
ship, you forget everything else. But if you philoso- 
phise, you are led to become more and more circum- 
spect, In such circumspection there 1s both safety 
and danger: and philosophical circumspection made 
the later attitude of India one of inquisitive doubt 


188 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


regarding this equal position of the Trimurtis. What 
I have called philosophical circumspection made it in 
fact necessary that the assumed position of equality 
among the gods of the Hindu Trinity must be 
accounted for in some reasonable manner. Thus 
there was naturally an apportionment of functions 
to these gods ; and all the three gods making up the 
Trimurtts were held to be different and partial 
manifestations of the one great God of advancing 
Hindu philosophy. Thus Brahma _ becaiae the 
creator, and Vishnu the sustainer, and Siva the 
destroyer. 

Why is that one of these gods came to be looked 
upon as creator, another as sustainer, and the third as 
destroyer ? We have to note here firstly the effect of 
the germinal force underlying the ancient conception 
of these gods. The word Brahman is often used to 
denote the Vedic prayer that is offered to Vedic deities, 
Such Vedic prayer has been personified asa deity, and 
declared to be powerful enough even to create. This 
conception of Brahman in the Veda resembles in 
many respects the Greek idea of the Logos. The rela- 
tion between language and the meaning underlying 
language has played a great part in the development 
of Hindu philosophic thought, particularly in the 
matter of explaining the relation between the visible 
universe and the invisible reality that is behind it. 
Often enough we find Indian philosophers saying that 
the visible universe is something like the audible 
world of language; and that the invisible foundation 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 189: 


of the universe is like the power of meaning possessed 
by language—the power of meaning which we cannot 
perceive with any of the senses. The relation between 
the word and its meaning has indeed been long held 
by our thinkers to be representative of the relation 
between the phenomenal universe and the reality 
which is behind it, forming its enduring basis and 
everlasting support. That is indeed one of the 
_ noticeable ways in which we find higher Indian 
thoughtegrowing, developing and expanding. More- 
over, in Vedic literature, in the Upanishads in parti- 
cular, we have it stated that the Creator willed, and 
thereby created the world. If you will, how do you 
give expression to your will? You do so either by 
means of the language you speak, or by means of the 
deed you do. Hence the language, which gives ex- 
pression to the will of the speaker, may well become 
identified with the will itself. And when the creating 
will is seen to be really responsible for the creation of 
the universe, we may very well maintain that it is the 
word, which gives expression to the will, that is res- 
ponsible for such creation. Hence the expression Bahu 
Syam being representative of the will of the Creator,. 
naturally came to.be recognised asthe immediate cause 
of the production of creation. If we understand that 
the idea underlying Brahman is distinctly that of the 
‘word’, and if we also bear in mind the relation bet- 
ween the word and its meaning, as well as the relation 
between the will and the word which gives expression 
to it, we may very easily realise how natural it is for 


190 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


the idea of creation to become associated with the 
Vedic Brahman. ‘Thus arose Brahma the creator in 
the Trinity ; and philosophy also differentiated and 
assigned to him the function of creation, 

Now how about Siva ? He is, as you have been in- 
formed, the Vedic god Rudra, and as such the god of 
fire—Agni. This Agni as Rudra is declared in Vedic 
literature to have a santta tanuh and also a 
ghoratanuh—a form which is lovely and peaceful and 
a form which is terrific and fierce. In the fience form 
which he has, we have to look upon him asa destroyer; 
and a destroying god becomes naturally the punisher 
of faithlessness and evil-doing. Such a godcan be 
considered neither strange nor unwanted among the 
_essential elements of a complete religion. In this 
universe of ours, We may sce the processes of creation, 
-sustentation and destruction always going on side by 
side. We surely cannot think of the world as being 
at any time free from decay: if we could do that, 
the world would certainly cease to be what it is. I 
don’t know if there is any poet who can command a 
sufficiently strong and clear imagination to portray 
the condition of the world as altogether unassociated 
with destruction and dissolution. If destruction 
disappear from the midst of the world, there would 
be no room in it at all for renovation. And will not 
most young men protest against such a situation ? 
The stage of the world would then be quite fully 
occupied by very superfluous veterans: and when the 
world’s stage becomes so overburdened with exhausted 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM IgI 


veterans, the young men can surely have no scope 
there for life and for growth. Naturally the condi- 
tion of the world would then be very different—so 
different indeed as to be quite incapable of being 
consistently conceived. Destruction is thus an essen- 
tial element in the universe as We know it. Whether 
it is possible to have a universe without destruction 
and decay therein, is a question which we need not 
at present discuss; for we know only one universe, 
and there can be no good at all in troubling ourselves 
about the possibility or otherwise of another way of 
organising another universe. Let us take into con- 
sideration the one only universe which we know— 
that, wherein we have to live from day to day, even 
as we have to die when the hour for it comes: and 
this universe is characterised by decay and destruc- 
tion. Destruction is as essential a part therein as 
creation and sustentation are. Hence—to whom 
this essential function of destruction is to be assigned 
—is a question which philosophy has every right to 
ask. And the fierce Rudra as Siva came to be 
recognised as the most competent got to take upon 
himself the responsibility for performing this function 
of destruction in the universe. 

Then there is the work of sustentation to be per- 
formed and looked after in the universe. Some god 
must take care of that work. With the idea underly- 
ing the conception of god Vishnu, there came to be 
the association, as you know, of the idea of the 
Bhagavat. There had thus come into existence the 


192 SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 


conception of a god as an all-pervading source of 
light and life, of a god who, occupying the supremest 
position in the universe, is ever helpful to mankind 
as the bestower of beneficial powers and gifts and 
blessings on them. As Vishnu became such a god, 
it Was quite natural that he was made responsible 
for looking after the work of sustentation in the 
universe. In the midst of the birth, decay and death, 
which are everywhere evident in the universe, we also 
see that things endure in a more or less marked 
condition of steady well-being for shorter or longer 
Intervals of time. It is this endurance of things in 
the condition of comparative well-being that has been 
designated as sustentation, And the god, who has 
to look after such a function of sustentation, must 
obviously be a god of love, The creating god 
Brahma has merely to deal out the barest justice to 
all beings in accordance with the law of karma. The 
importance of this function of Brahma in the universe 
cannot at all be gainsaid; but his function is not de- 
signed to make him a suitable object of either religious 
fear or religious love. In the manner in which the 
fierce Rudra became quite appropriately the destroying 
god and an object of religious fear to his worshippers, 
Vishnu became equally appropriately the protecting 
god and an object of religious love to his Worshippers, 
Siva, as the austere god of fear and unrelenting 
rigour could easily become Mahadeva or the ‘great 
god’ among the people. But Vishnu alone could be 
always Santakara, full of peace and benignity so as 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 193 


to love his worshippers and be really loved by them 
in return. 

In this way the functions of the three gods of 
the Hindu Trinity became distributed among them. 
At any rate I can offer no better explanation of why 
Brahma became the creator, Rudra the destroyer, 
and Vishnu the protector. Old Vedic tradition and 
compartively later philosophic thought thus gave rise 
to the religion of the Trimurtis. This religion was, 
however, from the very beginning lacking in the 
element of finality even for the time being, as its 
three gods were looked upon as mere functional 
aspects of the one only God of the universe, the God 
of allgods. It isthe tendency of the aspiration of 
religion to look up always, and to endeavour to rise 
to higher and higher levels of worship and realisation. 
Therefore, after conceiving the one only God the 
universe, in whom there has to be the natural and 
final synthesis of all the other gods, the heart of the 
worshipper cannot be at ease, if he is ever called 
upon to worship any being who is in any manner less 
than the sublime and almighty fulness of his one only 
God, the God of all gods. Siva and Vishnu, who 
had already become popular gods, rose under this 
impulse to represent the one only God of true 
philosophy, inasmuch as popular imagination and its 
predilections and prejudices would not very naturally 
be in favour of the adoption of an entirely new deity 
to represent this one only God of philosophy. Indeed 
Saivism and Vaishnavism appear in this light in the 

13 


194 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


Mahabharata, although we cannot fail to notice 
therein a very marked tendency in favour of looking 
upon Vishnu as the one only God of true philosophy. 
It is true that our great poet Kalidasa was not a 
narrowly sectarian bigot in his worship of Siva as 
the Supreme God; but we cannot therefore say that 
he was unaware of Vaishnavism as an independent 
religion in which Vishnu happened to be the Supreme 
God. By the time the gradual growth of the 
Mahabharata came to itsend Saivismand Vaishnavism 
had already assumed their distinctive shapes, and had 
come to be accepted among the people as different 
forms of one and the same religion derived from the 
same scriptural and philosophic sources. 

In the meanwhile, that is, in the interval 
between the grand climacteric of Upanishadic 
thought and the culmination of the age-long growth 
ofthe Mahabharata, a new force of great significance 
came into existence in the religious and social at- 
mosphere of Indian civilization ; and that is none other 
than the momentous force of Buddhism. Buddhism 
was really a revolt against the overdone sacerdotalism 
of the Vedic sacrificial religion of the Brahmins. 
Probably it was also a revolt against the aristocratic 
isolation of the Brahminical priests and their monopoly 
toserve as the clergy, that is, as authorised teachers of 
religion and philosophy. When a revolt against any 
established order of institutions is started, itis found, 
in the history of all countries and civilizations, that 
the revolt as revolt invariable goes too far. Indeed 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 195 


the process is comparable to the oscillation of the 
pendulum in this respect : men first go to one extreme 
in one direction, and then they go to the other 
extreme in the opposite direction. Since Buddhism 
operated as a revolt againt the excesses of Brahminical 
sacerdotalism and clerical monopoly, Gautama the 
Buddha tried to establish beyond doubt that he was 
as much entitled to be a teacher of religion as any 
Brahmin born, and .taught that the mechanical 
religiom of over-formal ceremonialism and life-taking 
sacrifices does nothing more than merely cause 
unjustifiable injury to innocent animal life. He felt 
sincerely that sucha religion cannot purify a man’s 
life, cannot satisfy the deep spiritual longings of his 
heart, and cannot make his life’s burden of sorrows 
and sufferings lighter or his hope of final freedom and 
salvation surer and more cheerful. In accordance 
with the tendency of the age, the Buddhistic revolt 
itself had to be based upon and guided by philosophic 
speculation; and the philosophy on which it was 
accordingly based is now recognized by most scholars 
to have been derived from the luminous and inspiring 
thoughts contained in the Upanishads, and probably 
also from some of the later systems of philosophy built 
up with their aid. We have both Sankhya and 
Yoga elements in Buddhistic philosophy, and also a 
large number of ideas and doctrines directly traceable 
to the Upanishads. The most notable feature in 
Buddhistic philosophy is that it does not cause men 
to trouble themselves about the question of the final 


196 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


philosophic reality. It does not ask—‘‘ Is there a 
God, and if there is, what is His relation to the 
universe?” This aspect of philosophy, Buddhism 
purposely ignored, It started with the proposition 
that life in this world is ever full of sorrow and 
pain and misery, and that to get out of such a life of 
grief and pain and misery once for all, so as to go 
back to it no more, has to be the chief purpose of 
life—its very swmmum bonum. . 

How is this purpose to be accomplished 2 The 
problem is one of practical ethics, and its solution was 
found out to be in the annihilation of trishna—of the 
thirsting after the pleasing objects of the senses and 
the agreeable delights of life. It is this trishna or 
thirsting after the pleasing things of life which is 
declared to be really responsible for the bondage of 
life—I won’t say, for the bondage of the soul, because 
the question of the soul appears to have been left 
undecided in Buddhism. If we get rid of this trishna, 
we get rid of bondage; and then we become free. 
And what becomes of us when we so become free. 
We attain nirvana as the Buddhists say. But 
Buddhistic nirvana is not in all respects the same as 
the Hindu salvation of moksha. On the attainment 
of nirvana, man’s continuously recurring mundane 
life of pain, sorrow and misery—of birth, growth and 
decay and death—is declared to disappear altogether. 
What there will be after all this misery disappears, 
Buddha does not want people to enquire into and 
examine. His ideal lay altogether in practical ethical 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 197 


life. ‘Look to the ethical life, don’t waste your time 
in vain metaphysical wranglings regarding the nature 
of the Brahman or the destiny of the soul”—he is 
known to have declared more than once, Whether 
the soul is real, whether it is something separate and 
apart from or the same as God, he did not care to 
consider. These discussions are, after all, such as 
cannot lead to anything like really final and irrebut- 
table conclusions. Indeed we cannot satisfactorily | 
solve these metaphysical problems and give to their 
solutions the character of finality. Philosophy would 
cease to be philosophy if there were to be real finality 
about all its conclusions: and Buddha obviously 
thought that this absence of finality made metaphy- 
sical discussions useless for the practical guidance of 
life. There may or may not be a Brahman, and this 
Brahman may or may not be related to the universe. 
We may or may not have a soul that remains and 
endures even after the attainment of nirvana. These 
problems were to him practically insignificant. His 
concern evidently was to free human life from the 
net of over-wrought metaphysics as much as from 
the redundant overgrowth of ritualism, and to 
make it practically pure, blissful and serene. Such 
is a brief statement of the more important aims of 
Buddhism. You may see here how, in_ his 
revolt, Buddha went to the other extreme. It is 
true he has not denied God. He has not denied the 
soul either. But he has distinctly told all those that 
seek guidance from him that there is no good in try- 


198 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


ing to solve problems about God and the soul, and 
that ceremonial worship and sacrifice as elements of 
religion and aids to conduct are very much Worse 
than meaningless mockery. 

That is how Buddha’s work came to figure in 
the field of Indian religion, and he naturally interfer- 
ed with the even progress of old Hindu thought. He 
had therefore to be met. After Buddha, his followers 
laboured with exemplary zeal to make his religion 
spread. Although they took much sincere and earnest 
trouble, their work, like that of all propagandistic 
workers, made them indulge rather freely in that kind 
of low activity, in which their chief aim turned out to 
be not so much to spread the good teachings of 
Buddha in regard to the necessity of making human 
life here on earth pure, unselfish, holy and helpful, as 
to see that other religions were subjected to harsh 
criticism and were made to lose their influence in the 
world. They, therefore, freely found fault with the 
ancient Vedic religion of the Hindus. Some of the 
old criticisms of the Buddhists are even now repeated 
by other modern critics of Hindu religion and Hindu 
scriptures. The attempt to meet these criticisms in 
earnest gave rise to a_ religious revival among the 
Hindus. In the case of this revival of Hinduism also, 
the process was indeed like the oscillation of the 
pendulum. When Buddhism went to one extreme, 
the Brahminical revival went to the other. When 
Hinduism started afresh to assert itself against 
Buddhistic opposition, it was the Mimamsaka who at 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 199 


first came forward to vindicate the Hindu religion. 
He relied upon and worked for establishing the infal- 
lible authority of the Vedas. According to him the 
Vedas are self- produced and eternal, they are not the 
result of any inspired vision of any seer, they are not 
even revelation which is limited in time ; but they are: 
eternal and self-existent, they have always been and 
will ever be. With the aid of such an eternal, self-- 
existent and infallible Veda, it was his aim not so 
much, to establish any form of theistic ethics and 
rational religious worship, as to resuscitate the nearly 
dead ritualism of the old Vedic religion with its many 
and multiform sacrifices. That was the position 
which the Mimamsaka held. It was on this ground 
that he took his stand against the Buddhist. But we 
know that sucha position, resting solely upon the 
eternality and infallible authority of the Vedas, 
cannot be made to tell effectively against the purely 
ethical practical position taken up by the great 
humanitarian teacher Buddha. When the argu- 
ment of the Mimamsaka against the Buddhistic 
critics could not thus have the desired effect in. 
rehabilitating Hinduism, then there arose the neces- 
sity of meeting philosophy by philosophy and ethics by 
ethics. This could be done quite easily, because the 
human heart cannot go on for ever in pleased. 
satisfaction with a religion that does not take God 
into consideration, and does not take the soul and its 
final destiny into consideration. The religion that 
entirely relies upon a more or less empirically deter- 


200 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


mined discipline of ethical conduct in life, must be, 
from the very nature of the case, an unsatisfying 
religion. My learned and esteemed friend in the 
chair will, Iam sure, corroborate me whenI give 
expression to the view that the true foundation of all 
enduring ethics has to be found in metaphysics. That 
ethics which is not founded upon metaphysics is 
certain to be shaky ethics. That is what I unders 
stand all true philosophy to teach. Thatis also what 
the human heart evidently feels from its very battom. 
It is all very well to say that our lives must be pure, 
and unselfish and sinless. But why should they be 
so? Weare all proneto know the better and do 
the worse. As St. Paul has put it, there is a double 
nature in every one of us. There isa certain some- 
thing in us which always prompts us to do that which 
is right and good; and there is also a certain some- 
thing else in us which prompts us to do what is not 
right and good. Between these two prompting forces 
in the heart of man—there is a struggle going on 
incessantly. If, in the course of this constant 
struggle, the force prompting us to do the right is not 
supported strongly by religion and by philosophy, then 
naturally the force which prompts us to do the 
wrong will overpower us and make our lives alto- 
gether faulty and unworthy. Even with the aid of 
the support derived from the helping hand of 
philosophy and religion, do not so many of us give 
way before the force which always tempts us to dg 
evil? Therefore this purely ethical, and agnostic and 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 2ol- 


empirical religion could not satisfy all the religious 
cravings of the human heart. It could not uphold 
religion and morality so sufficiently or so completely 
rationally as to make them stand on their own legs 
and enable us to declare with the unfailing authority 
of reality that the life of righteousness is alone for 
ever the proper life for man. 

Accordingly, it became necessary that the religion 
which strove from a theistic standpoint to counteract 
the agaostic influence of Buddhism, should address 
itself to the work of making the authoritative com- 
mandment and justification of morality and un- 
selfishness more satisfactory than Buddhism could 
ever prove them to be. The work of the 
Mimamsakas in establishing the divine authority of 
the Vedas and their everlasting character could not, 
as we have seen, give rise to this result. And so 
something else had to be done to bring about such a 
result, and thereby establish the high value and 
worthiness of Hindu scriptures and Hindu tradition 
in vindicating morality and in satisfying all the high 
spiritual requirements of religion. This work had 
necessarily to be done; and it was taken up by 
Sankaracharya in right earnest. That such was 
the need of the hour had been made out by 
the famous Gaudapadacharya even before the 
time of Sankara. Indeed Gaudapada had already 
succeeded in formulating a scheme of thought whereby 
the humanitarian ethics of Buddhism might very well 
be evolved out of the Upanishadic metaphysics of 


202 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


Hinduism, Many of us are not conscious of ‘the 
manner in which we are hour after hour moulded by 
our environments ; and often enough we feel that we 
are absolutely free agents in all that we think and do. 
But if we carefully examine the processes of history 
with a view to find out why it is that in one and the 
same country the leading men of one age think in one 
manner, while those of another age think in a differ- 
ent manner, we are sure to find out that there are 
natural forces which tend to produce such varjations. 
in thought andaim. It is in consequence of these 
forces that they think and act as they doin history. 
If we bear this Well in mind, we may quite easily 
discern how very unconsciously Gaudapada and 
Sankara must have adopted the line of reasoning 
they did, for the purpose of over-coming the unwhole-. 
some sceptic effects of the agnosticism of the 
Buddhists. One of the chief ends to be gained in 
this conflict was the establishment of the authority 
of the Vedas, which meant the same thing as the 
establishment of the authoritativeness of the old long- 
cherishéd religious thoughts and traditions of the 
country. Another such object was to derive that 
same purity and sinlessness and selflessness of life,. 
as was advocated by Buddha, from the teachings 
of our old Vedic and Vedantic religion. These are 
indeed among the practical historical results, of the 
philosophical doctrines taught by Sankaracharya.. 
During his all too short period of life, his thoughts 
as a philosopher and his workasa religious reformer: 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM | 203 


produced very marked and momentous results. 
While accepting the Mimamsaka’s views regard- 
ing the eternality and infallibility of the sacred 
scriptures of the Hindus, Sankara had to con- 
tend against his exaggerated faith in the sacerdotal 
ceremonialism of the Vedas. There is very good 
evidence to show that he fought this fight with very 
remarkable success. On the strength of the eternality 
and infallibility of the Vedas, he had further to 
establish that the agnostic ethics and humanitarianism 
of Buddhism, though very high in their then moral 
value, were really inferior to Vedantic — ethics and. 
Vedantic humanitarianism. How well he accomplish- 
ed this, the later history of Buddhism in India 
abundantly demonstrates. In the course of his 
endeavour to re-establish Hinduism unshakably on its 
ancient foundations, he of course worked most nobly 
and heroically for purity as well as unity in human 
life and human society. 

If he had lived longer he might have given us 
much more of the treasure of his thoughts; and 
might have enlightened many more dark corners in 
the great field of Indian philosophy and Hindu 
religious aspiration. And yet, what he did in the 
short span of his. life is more than enough to 
immortalize him a thousand times. His great suc- 
cess in carrying out the object, which he obviously 
had in view, is evident from the fact that his 
teachings put an end to the effective oOppo- 
sition of Buddhism against Hinduism, and pro- 


204 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


moted in a notable manner the forward progress of 
Hinduism along the lines of a highly improved ethical 
universalism. His object was evidently to win back 
those pious and earnest and thoughtful peopie, who 
had strayed away from the old fold of Hindu religious 
tradition and Hindu philosophic thought. Consequent- 
ly Sankaracharya’s religion had to be based on the 
philosophical foundation of the higher pantheistic 
monism; and it thus became pre-eminently the 
religion of jnanin. His teaching is, as you know, 
that the Supreme Brahman is identical with the soul, 
and that everything in the phenomenal universe is an 
illusory manifestation of that Brahman who is in fact 
the one only reality. Such being the position o 

Sankaracharya, he had naturally to propound highly 
metaphysical problems and theories, and had to prove 
that the soul is in fact a part of this one great reality 
in the universe, and that becoming absorbed into it 
in the end is indeed the great salvation of moksha. 
When that aim of becoming absorbed into Brahman 
is accomplished, souls get out of the bondage of 
samsara at once and as a matter of course; and in this 
state of moksha, every soul comes to its own enjoy- 
ment of unlimited light and eternal bliss and peace. 
{t is not difficult to make out how these teachings of 
his tend to give a firmer and more rational metaphy 

sical foundation even for Buddhistic ethics. In this 
We have the greatest historical achievement to be 
placed to the credit of Sankaracharya. He saw, and 
made others also see distinctly, that the moral fruits 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 205 


of pure Buddhistic life were more fully capable of 
being derived from Vedantic Hinduism. When this 
became evident, how could Buddhistic critics decry 
any longer the old religion of the Hindus with justice? 
When before Sankaracharya the Mimamsaka had 
worked effectively to establish the eternal and 
infallible character of the Vedas, and when Sankara- 
charya later on demonstrated the high ethical value 
and humanitarian purpose of the teachings contained 
in thasesame Vedas, the position of the religion of 
the Hindus, as found upon their ancient scriptures, 
became altogether impregnable. It certainly cannot 
be amiss to point out here that there is very good 
evidence in the writings of Sankaracharya to indicate 
that he was himself an ardent Vaishnava: he may 
well be made out to have beena great Bhagavata. 
Although his achievements in relation tothe great 
work of strengthening the philosophical fortifications 
of Vedantic Hinduism have been comprehensively 
general and non-sectarian in character, it is abundantly 
clear that he must have felt that his higher pantheistic 
monism was in no Way seriously incompatible with 
Vaishnavism even in its form as the accepted religion 
of the ancient Bhagavatas. | 

It has, however, to be observed that the large 
body of the Hindus in the country could not easily 
comprehend Sankaracharya’s Vedantic religion, since 
it was too philosophical for the common human mind. 
The common man could not indeed derive sufficient 
religious satisfaction from it. His need even then was. 


206 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


to have a God who would love him, who would come 
to help him and render protection unto him whenever 
he got into difficulties—a God at whose feet he might 
throw himself unreservedly sothat He in His divine 
wisdom might do with him whatever He chose. The 
sense of man’s dependence upon God, his instinct 0 

love to God, and his felt need for an always unfailing 
divine support could not be easily satisfied by the sub- 
limely impersonal God of Sankara’s pantheistic mo- 
nism. What wonder, if soon afterwards there arose 
among the people the desire to see where else they 
could obtain their religious satisfaction? The old 
religion of the Hindus was distinctly marked by the 
‘supreme dominance of a loving and saving divine per- 
sonality in it, Even before Buddhism there was, as 
it appears, the religion of the Hindu Trinity. And 
after Buddhism lost its great influence in India, the 
popular position of Vedantic Hinduism became very 
highly improved. This religion had by that time been 
proved to be in no way inferior to Buddhism or any 
other religion, in the matter of establishing the obli- 
gatoriness of pure ethical conduct as based on sin- 
lessness and selflessness in life. And yet the need was 
felt for a personal God, and for a more emotional and 
less intellectual religion than that of Sankara. This 
more emotional and less intellectual religion had in 
fact been known well to the people of India before. 
Such a religion is clearly traceable in the pages of the 
Mahabharata and in the Puranas. And after Bud- 
dhism and Sankaracharya, this old emotional religion 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 207 


was felt to be more and more wanted. Accordingly 
religious reformers arose and came forward to supply 
the felt need of the hour. Among those who so arose 
in India to give this needed emotional turn to the re- 
established and freshly progressive Hindu religion, 
Ramanujacharya certainly played a very important 
part, and produced very notable results as a fearless 
and faithful worker in the field of Hindu religious and 
social reform. There have been others who also 
endeayoured in their days to do this kind of work; 
but among all such, Ramanujacharya may be made 
out to have been undeniably the most famous and 
fruitful worker. Ramanujacharya had, of course, his 
predecessors, who had prepared the way for him, as 
the history of the Sri-Vaishnava religion distinctly 
shows. And in carrying out this requisite reform in 
Hindu religion, that is,in making it a religion of 
loving devotion to an all-powerful and all-merciful 
God, what Ramanuja mainly did was that he com- 
bined the old religious views of the Bhagavatas with 
the Vedantic ideas of Sankara’s higher pantheism, so 
as to make his advaita or absolute non-dualism _ be- 
come visishtadvaita or qualified non-dualism. Rama- 
nuja’s aim was evidently to emphasise the religious 
value of devotion and service and self-surrender to 
God, but not to make the realization of the oneness 
of God with the soul of man and with the uni- 
verse the basis for moral conduct, and the means 
for the attainment of the sublime salvation of 
moksha. The need for moral conduct, for purity, 


208 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


for sinlessness, and for selflessness in life has been 
believed in and proclaimed by all great religious 
teachers in India as in every other part of the 
world. But they have differed as to the question 
of how this sinless life is to be realised in practice. 
Is it to be made dependent upon spiritual and 
philosophical realisation, or is it to be made dependent 
upon the culture of the tender and benevolent 
emotions, has in fact been the practical problem at 
issue. There can be no doubt that both the processes 
are capable of yielding the fine fruit of pure and noble 
conduct. However to most men and women the 
culture of the emotions happens to be easier than the 
achievement of spiritual and philosophic realisation, 


Ramanujacharya accordingly declared bhakti to 
be the most suitable means to achieve purity, 
sinlessness, and selflessness, in life; and hence this 


same bhakti was according to him the truest and the 
most unfailing means for the attainment of the 


salvation of moksha. The emotion of bhakti is said 
to be a feeling akin to love; it is indeed deep devotion 
and love. Even in our common daily life, we may 
very Well realize what a potent factor love is in 
encouraging morality, and in establishing purity and 
selflessness and sinlessness in life. Imagine a young 
man who is entirely absorbed in himself, who does 
not care to think of anybody or anything other than 
himself,—imagine further that, either as in India or 
in the fashion of Europeans, he marries a_ beautiful 
and worthy damsel, and becomes day after day more 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 209 


and more attached to her in love. Suppose _ this 
young man of the above description goes to the 
Bangalore fruit-market and sees rows of fine luscious. 
fruits exposed for sale there. His mouth of course 
Waters, and he buys some choice fruits among them. 
Does he eat them himself ? He would probably have 
done so in those old-self.centred days of his uniquely 
single blessedness. He does not and cannot do so 
» now; for his love to his wife is so true and so deep 
that although at the very sight of the fruits his own 
mouth profusely watered, he carries them home to 
his wife and gives them to her in preference to him- 
self. And if in course of time he becomes the father 
of a number of children, and then goes again to the 
Same market and sees similar fruits, his mouth 
probably will not then water at all. He will have 
by that time become too much of an altruist, that is . 
too much ofa true lover of others, and his mouth 
will surely have learnt not to water on seeing even 
the best of fruits. Nevertheless, he is certain to buy 
the fruits, in the belief that those fruits will be even 
more delicious and agreeable to his children than 
they were to him in those old days when his mouth 
freely and fearlessly watered in his own interest at 
the sight of the sweet fruits. He buys them and 
takes them home. To whom does he give them now? 
Evidently not to his wife, who is now to him no 
more than the worthy and respectable mother of his 
dear children. But he gives them to the children, 
This clearly shows how potent love is in expanding 
14 


210 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


our sympathies and in killing our selfishness. 
And by killing selfishness, Wwe in fact kill all 
that is calculated to encourage sinfulness and 
impurity in us. With the disappearance of selfish- 
ness, every temptation that tends to make our lives 
unrighteous and faulty disappears at once. In this 
way love may be made out to be a very potent factor 
in giving rise to purity and unselfishness in life. If 
this feeling of love is steadily and carefully cultivated | 
in the human heart, if it is made to find its object not 
merely in the wife and the children, but in that great 
Being, who is the very life and foundation of the uni- 
verse, and from whom comes all that is good and true 
and beautiful in the universe, if that Being is made 
the object of our love, then there will arise, as they 
put it in Sanskrit, anuragadviragah—that is, through 
intense attainment to that Divine Being, there will 
‘arise in us absolute non-attachment to ourselves. 

This idea is sometimes illustrated in Hindu litera- 
ture by taking the example of an uncontrollable illegi- 
timate attachment which a man may have to @ 
mistress, although he is morally bound to bestow on 
his own wedded wife all his love and attachment. 
As his illegitimate love grows in intensity, that is, as 
the object of his illegitimate love becomes more and 
more dear to him, his lawfully wedded wife may be 
seen to be discarded by him more and more. Thus 
his viraga or want of attachment to the wedded wife 
‘bears an inverse ratio to his anuraga or loving attach- 
ment to the illegitimate mistress. This example is not 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 2tr 


a very happy one morally: neverethe-less as an 
illustration it is very telling. And what I want you 
to understand from it is, that, if he make God the 
object of all our attachment, then everything else 
ceases in time to have the power of attracting our 
love. With the growth of such a full God-love in us, 
our love of pleasure, of wealth, of beauty and of 
power disappears like mist before the rising sun. The 
only love that then endures is our love of God. And 
the full gmport of this God-love depends upon our con- 
ception of God. If it be realised that everything that 
is in the universe has come from Him, and in due time 
goes back to Him—if such is the conception which 
we have of God, then, when He becomes the object 
of our love, all His creatures also become the objects 
of our love asa matter of course. How will it be 
possible for us to live a life of selfishness, when God 
and all his creatures have thus become the objects of 
our true and devoted love ? Such a thing is indeed 
impossible. We cannot love God and His creatures 
sincerely, and love also at the same time our own 
sweet little selves. The love of man’s sweet little 
self fades away in the larger presence of the love of 
God and His creatures. Here, therefore, is an efficient 
and worthy means placed at the disposal of man, by 
which he may overcome his tendencies in favour of 
selfishness and sinfulness—and that means is man’s 
loving devotion to God, which isin Hinduism known 
by the name of bhaktt. Here also anuraga or loving 
attachment to God and all His creatures gives rise to 


212 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


viraga OF the feeling of non-attachment to relation to 
one’s self. It isnot merely that love expands our 
syampathies and kills our selfishness : love indeed does 
more—it stimulates in us self-sacrifice and impels us 
to wear ourselves away cheerfully in serving those 
whom we love. Our love of God—when it is indeed 
real and hearty—is fully capable of turning us into 
earnest and sincere servants of all His creatures. In 
fact it is in serving His creatures that our love of 
God finds its satisfaction and makes itself alive and 
visible. And it is actually maintained in the Sri- 
Vaishnavism of Ramanuja that to love and houour 
and serve the Bhagavatas is even more meritorious 
than to worship the Bhagavat. Loving devotion to 
God has been and is undoubtedly a great moral force 
in human history. 

Thus with theaid of bhaktv we may annihilate 
selfishness, and thereby realise moksha. The obliga- 
toriness of bhakti is, therefore, an unfailing authority 
‘n favour of pure ethical conduct and high nobility 
of purpose: it is ‘ndeed an unfailing means to help 
us always to attain real success in living the righteous 
life. Moreover it is easier for us to command bhakts 
than to obtain that transcendental spiritual wisdom 
and the realisation of the unity of reality which 
Sankaracharya’s philosophy demands of all its 
followers. The tendency to love is altogether natural 
and is implanted in the heart of all persons, There 
is in fact no person of any kind who has not a natural 
aptitude to love and to be moved by love. The only 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 213 


point to be attended to in respect of this. natural 
emotion of love is to make it expand so widely and 
so comprehensively that it may have the great God 
Himself and all His creatures for its object. And 
the tendency of love to have itself lavished upon the 
beloved is very frequently seen to be against the 
conception of absolute oneness between the lover 
and his beloved. The function of philosophy consists 
largely in realising the unity of reality, while that of 
bhakti or the emotion of God-love and divine devotion - 
is in the realisation of union through service and self- 
sacrifice. When it is found that the path of bhakte 
leads the devotees of God more easily and more natu- 
rally to the attainment of moksha through the realised 
relation of God-union, than the path of wisdom or 
jnana does through the realisation of oneness with 
God, then as a matter of course the easier path of 
bhaktt will be followed by many so as to make it 
become the really popular road of religious aspiration 
and attainment, Ramanujacharya, whose aim 
obviously was to make as many as possible come 
under the saving influence of God-love as compre- 
hended in Vaishnavism, made bhaktt the basis of 
all religious life; and to him jnana itself came to 
‘mean the same thing as bhakti.’ In fact it is in this 
light that he has interpreted Vedanta-Sutras of 
Badarayana. Accordingly, making bhakti as before 
the pivot of popular religion was one of the most 
important points in the life-work of Ramanujacharya. 
It is fully worthwhile noting here that the Sanskrit 


214 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


words bhaga, bhagavat, and bhakti are all of the 
same origin etymologically ; and it cannot therefore 
be an altogether unfounded assumption to hold that 
the word bhakti must have, almost from the very 
commencement of its religious history in the Sanskrit 
language, meant the means of worshipping Bhagavat 
in the spirit of true love and devotion as the one 
Supreme Lord, the God of all gods. There is other 
evidence also to prove that the doctrine of bhakti is 
undoubtedly an ancient element in the religion of the 
Bhagavatas. Anyhow there can be no doubt that the 
all-pervading and all-enlivening Vishnu, who, as Bha- 
gavat, is the loving bestower of all auspicious boons 
and blessings, and is, as Narayana, the abode of all 
life and the internal controller—antaryamin—of all 
beings, is most appropriately approached through 
bhaktt. The most glorious delight of love is ever in 
experiencing the response of love to love. Therefore 
to a loving God, what can be more delightful that the 
confident and trustful love with which His devotees 
respond to His love? And is not Vishnu, the bestower 
of light and life and of all auspicious boons and bles- 
sings, a loving God? When we think of our own un- 
worthiness to be the objects of His love, and contrast 
it with His infinite benevolence and the immense 
value of all His divine gifts, how can we conceive 
Him to be other than a really loving God? On the 
certainty of His all-merciful and omnipotent love is 
based another doctrine of the Sri-Vaishnavas, which 
is closely allied to the doctrine of bhakti and may 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 215 


even be said to be a natural development of it. I refer 
to the doctrine of prapatti or absolute self-surrender 
to God, which is also spoken sometimes as saranagats. 
This doctrine of self-surrender is based mainly on the 
last teaching given by Sri Krishna to Arjuna in the 
Bhagavadgita, and it is hence held to be as authorita- 
tive as the Gita itself. I told you a little while ago 
that there are some modern philosophers also who 
maintain that man’s sense of dependence on a higher 
power has to be an essential element in all religions. 
Whether it really has to be soor not, we need not 
discuss now. But it is evident tliat the doctrine on 
prapatti is based on such a sense of dependence on 
God—a dependence which is complete and unques- 
tioningly trustful. Ramanuja’s views regarding this 
doctrine come out most beautifully from his 
Saranagatigadya, which is a highly pathetic prayer 
in Sanscrit prose embodying his great faith in God 
as his sole refuge and only Saviour. 

There is another point in the work of Ramanuja 
in connection with Vaishnavism, which is brought 
_ prominently to view by the name Sri- Vaishnavism, 

which has been given to the religion he taught and 
upheld. It is sometimes called Vaishnavism of the 
Sri-sampradaya. Ramanuja’s religion has been 
called Sri-Vaishnavism, because Sri, that is, the 
goddess Lakshmi, is made to have an important func- 
tion to perform in it. When man, by means of his 
bhakti, endeavours to attain moksha, itis found that. 
he often feels helpless and hopelessly forlorn of 


216 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM. 


account of his knowledge of his own culpable 
unworthiness to be blessed with the salvation of soul- 
emancipation and God-attainment as also on account 
of his very natural conception of God as a just and 
impartial apportioner of the fruits of karma to all 
His creatures. When we deal with a great question 
of religion and morality like the fitness of God’s 
creatures to be saved and lifted out of the thraldom 
of samsara, and base its solution on our metaphysical 
conceptions of God and of the will of God, we caanot 
help thinking of Him as a hard taskmaster, who is 
systematically bent upon seeing that all His command- 
ments are duly obeyed by all His creatures, and that 
His will is always honoured by them as law. With 
such an absolutely just God, who is very rightly and 
very naturally apt to become deeply disappointed 
with us whenever we violate His commandments, 
our chances of attaining salvation are indeed infinitely 
small. When we calmly measure our own capacity 
to conduct our lives in complete consonance with the 
will of God, the result is certain to fill us all with 
great despondency. Since the moral law is based 

upon the will of God, we are all bound to live our — 
livcs in accordance with the moral law. But when 
the wcakncss that is in us unnerves us and we become 
a prey to temptations how can we then manage to 
live the life that is morally faultless ? And if we break 
down undcr the heavy pressure of trying temptations, 
are we thereafter to have no hope of any kind regard- 
ing the attainment of the bliss of soul-salvation? In 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 217 


this manner we are led to face the old problem of how 
the mercy of the loving God may be reconciled with 
the strict impartiality of the absolutely just God. It 
is in a situation like thisthat we naturally feel the 
need for the kindly interposition of a suitable 
intermediary between us and our great God,—an 
intermediary, who on the one hand is willing and 
able to excuse our faults and can on the other hand 
effectively approach our almightly God with the 
petition? for mercy in behalf of His weak and erring 
creatures. Itis not here in India alone that the 
help of such an intermediary has been sought by 
pious and God-fearing people. Other religions also 
than this Sri-Vaishnavism seek and’ postulate an 
interceder between God and man, between the 
ever-just and almightly God and the weak and erring 
human being, so that this weak and _ erring 
being may be made to have the full benefit of divine 
mercy. Some make their religious Guru such an 
interceder ; others, like the Christians, make a divine 
incarnation serve as such an interceder; and Sri- 
Vaishnavism looks upon Lakshmi, the Divine Mother 
of the Universe, as such an interceder. To bear well 
and without harm the burden of moral and religious 
responsibility belonging to weak and erring mankind, 
some such interceder between the judging God ‘and 
the human beings to be judged is very rightly 
recognised to be necessary by more than one well- 
known religion. Now in the religion taught by 
Ramanujacharya, this interceder is, as you have been 


218 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


already told, the goddess Lakshmi. The conception 
of Lakshmi as the divine consort of Vishnu is also 
an old one in Hindu religion. It is known to later 
Vedic literature, and has a philosophical meaning 
underlying it—this meaning being nothing other than 
the true representation of the relation between 
prakritt and Paramapurusha. Prakriti is conceived 
to be the wife of God, who is the Supreme Being. 
According to what is called some Pauranika 
Sankhya—which is the same as the Sankhya of 
Kapila, with the exception that, in the Pauranika 
Sankhya, a Supreme Soul is postulated and made 
to have the same relation to the universe 
as a whole as the various individual souls have 
to their respective embodiments—according, to 
this Pawranika Sankhya, it is maintained that 
prakriti, which is in fact the source of the created 
universe, is obedient to the will of the Supreme Soul 
and gives brith to the universe in consequence of His 
close association with it. Hence prakriti is looked 
upon as the wife of God and the Mother of the 
Universe. Both Vaishnavism and Saivism have 
recognised the appropriateness of this conception of 
the relation between God and Nature ; and in Saivism 
we have prakriti and Parama-purusha even blended 
together in conception of the Ardhanarisvara—the 
God who is represented as half man and half woman. 
If we understand that Lakshmi represents in 
Vaishnavism the power of prakriti, we may easily 
make out the meaning and. fitness of the function 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 21g 


assigned to her in Sri-Vaishnavism. Even according 
to the Sankhya of Kapila, prakriti is conceived to 
undergo.all her modifications with a view to liberate 
all bound souls from their imprisonment in matter, 
and is for this reason compared to a kind and _ loving 
mother. In Pauranika Sankhya, Mother Nature 
happens thus to be the obedient and loving consort of 
Father God. Please note here that the feminine gender 
of the word prakriti in Sanskrit has not been without 
its inffuence in making Nature the kindly Mother of 
All, even as God is the great Father of All. Looked 
at in this light, what does the propitiation of 
Lakshmi really signify ?It means this—that before 
we succeed in propitiating our God who is above-and 
beyond Nature, it Is necessary for us to propitiate 
Nature, if we are indeed anxious to get on well in life 
as Well as after life. Those who want to live their 
lives happily and harmoniously for themselves and for 
others have tosee that they do not foolishly violate 
the laws or oppose the irresistible forces of Nature. 
Hence the propitiation of the powers of Nature is 
always required in our own interest. Our ancestors 
of thousands of years ago achieved marked progress 
in religion by passing from Nature to Nature’s God. 
In Ramanuja’s Visishtadvaita philosophy, the oneness 
of the ultimate reality is not the result of any form of 
essential identity, but is based upon an organic union 
of the component entities making up the reality. 
Hence according to him the path of philosophic ascent 
is inevitably from Nature to Nature's God. And the 


220 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


function of mercy-seeking intercession in behalf of 
Weak man, which is assigned in Sri-Vaishnavism to 
Lakshmi, the merciful Mother of All, enables us to see 
further that, in Ramanuja’s view, the path of ‘religious 
realisations also is in proceeding from Nature to 
Nature’s God. 

When philosophy taught our ancient sages how 
to analyse the universe, and their constructive 
imagination ied them to conceive the relation between 
God and Nature to be like that between a hnsband 
and his wife, it became perfectly natural for 
Vaishnavism to make Lakshmi the wife of Vishnu and 
the-merciful Mother of the Universe. You know that 
the progress of religions takes place not unoften by 
the infusion of new ideas into old institutions. A 
‘great Arabic scholar writing about the religion of 
the Semites pointed out some years ago, with many 
examples, the tendency that there is in human 
societies to conceive their divinities almost uncon- 
‘sciously in the light of their own social organizations. 
If we have a community of people whose society is 
matriarchal in organisation, and among whom the 
mother is, therefore, the most prominent person in 
the family, their most natural conception of the deity 
happens to be as a goddess. They look upon the 
high supernatural being or beings at whose hands 
they seek sympathy and support as a mother. In 
other communities wherein the social organisation is 
patriarchal, where the father is the most authori- 
tative figure in the family, the divine being is looked 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 225 


upon as a father. This state of affairs in human 
civilisation is indeed very well-known to students of 
anthropology. And we are able to make .out with 
various kinds of evidence that the Dravidian people of 
South India possessed in the early days a matriarchal 
organisation of society, that among them the mother 
was accordingly the most important figure in the 
family, and that consequently the worship of the 
village goddess as amman—that is, as mother—came 
to beevery prevalent among them. If we have a 
people among whom goddess-worship is prevalent, 
and if we want to introduce in their midst a newer 
and a higher religion, it turns out to be necessary to 
find a real place for a great goddess in that newer 
and higher religion. This was probably one of the 
reasons which led to the enthronement of Lakshmi in 
the religion of Ramanujacharya as the word’s Mer- 
ciful Mother, who is the ever-loving and ever-success- 
ful mediatrix between Her Lord God and the indi- 
vidual souls seeking the salvation of a perfected re- 
union with Him. Ramanuja’s predecessors in the 
line of Sri-Vaishnava teachers had already given a 
prominent place to Lakshmi in their religion, probably 
because it happen to be a characteristic feature of 
Sri-Vaishnavism that it arose the Tamil land and 
obtained its fresh nourishment largely from the 
inspired thoughts and sentiments of certain well- 
known Tamil poets and saints. The thought-influences 
proceeding from these poets and saints were taken 
up by Brahminical teachers, and were woven into 


222 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


the philosophy of Vaishnava Vedanta in a very 
remarkable manner. Suh a mutual in-weaving of 
of pious poetry and sublime philosophy is probably 
not Seen in the literature of any other religion. The 
Sri-Vaisnavas often speak of their sacred literature 
as Ubhaya-Vedanta, that is, as a double Vedanta 
consisting of the Sanskrit philosophic Vedanta and 
the Tamil poetic Vedanta. And the association of 
Lakshmi or Sri with Vishnu as the intermediary 
between weak man and almighty God must also 
have been postulated in this manner in response to 
popular needs and influences; and it led to various 
consequences, Thus it is in all probability that 
Vaishnavism became here a religion in which 
Mother Lakshmi has to intercede for mercy between 
God and His children. And who are His 
children? All mankind—nay, all living beings. 
If all mankind happen to be His children, and if 
Mother Lakshmi intercedes between weak and 
suffering mankind on the one hand and almighty God 
on the other, we can easily understand how in this 
religion none can be kept out of the Holy of Holies, 
and none can be looked upon as unworthy to receive 
the grace of God. If out of a family of a number of 
children, a mother keeps aWay anyone child from 
sharing the ,kindly and merciful favour of the father, 
she certainly deserves to characterised \as an unnatural 
mother. Therefore in this religion there is an all- 
comprehensive divine graciousness which knows no 
exclusion. The reciprocity and the universality of 


RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 223 


divine and human love, as known to this religion, 
has in no small measure been the result of the Mother 
of All being made init to intercede between God 
and all His children so as to temper His serene justice 
with tender mercy. 

I have thus tried to indicate to you in a very 
brief outline the position occupied by Ramanujacharya 
in the development of Sri-Vaishnavism in our country: 
Vaishnavism, when adopted by Ramanuja, had 
already became Sri-Vaishnavism. In it the old 
Bhaga¥ata doctrine of salvation through bhakti had 
been reasserted and developed beyond into the 
doctrine of prapatti. The decision to utilise the 
Ubhaya- Vedanta to Sanskrit philosophy and Tamil 
Vaishnava poetry as the basis of Sri-Vaishnavism had 
also been arrived at and practically carried out to a 
large extent by the predecessors of Ramanuja. 
Accordingly he was in no sense the pioneer of the 
popular religious movement out of which Sri-Vaishna. 
vism arose in South India. He may be said to have 
come on the crest of the wave of this movement ; and 
it received its final seal of authority and rational 
sanction at his hands. That he secured for it the full 
support of the Sanskrit Vedanta, and proved it to be 
a worthy means for the exaltation of the social 
virtues and the uplifting of the masses, is abundantly 
demonstrated by the events that filled his long life of 
courageous convinction and enduring sincerity and 
comprehensive humanity. Let me refer in illust- 


ration of this to the single instance of his having ad- 


224 RAMANUJA AND VAISHNAVISM 


mitted the paraiyas—the holeyas as youcall them 
here—as worshippers into the famous Vishnu temple 
at Melkote, which is, as you all know, situated within 
the Mysore State. The humanity and courage 
involved in this noble act are both highly remarkable, 
and worthy of the enfranchising religious movement 
which attained its consummation through his work. 
After him others carried the stream of Vaishnava 
thought in various ways into various parts of this 
holy land of ours; and new forms of Vaishnava faith 
came into existence under new conditions. But these 
are matters which cannot be included within the 
scope of the persent lecture. The popularisation of 
the ideas of the Fatherhood of God, the Motherhood 
of Lakshmi, and the Brotherhood of Man in India is 
indeed in a notable degree due to Ramanuja and _his 
work in life; and it is now a fact of history that to 
him may be traced more or less largely the beneficent 
religious influences that have proceeded from Rama- 
nanda, Kabir and Nanak. So far, Ramanuja’s work 
in connection with the immemorial and ever progres- 
Sive religious life of India has shown itself to be like 
the work of the prescient sower who sows good 
seeds in good soil: and we may therefore feel well 
assured that, under the quickening stimulation of 
the heavenly light of God-love, the harvest of the love 
of man to man as manwill in due time be quite 
abundant and full of further hope and further promise 
in this our ancient and historic country. 


Sri Madhwacharya 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 


BY 
Mr. C. N. KRISHNASWAMI AIYAR, M.A. 


CHAPTER Il. 


1.—INTRODUCTORY. 


NHE present state of Indian History being what it 
q is, no apology seems needed for historic sketch- 
es, however humble their scope, so long as the: 
subject treated of is comparatively unfamiliar. That 
it is so in the case of the Teacher, whose life it is here 
proposed to sketch, it is not hard to show. 

For in South India, from the seventh century 
onwards, if not earlier, there have been hundreds of 
saints and religious reformers labouring for the 
progress of ‘Protestant Hinduism, ’ and leaving more 
or less of tangible results behind. Of these, however, 
Sankara, Ramanuja and Madhwa, have had the 
special distinction of each associating his name 
permanently with a more or less well-known system 
of philosophy, in addition to the religious and semi- 
religious reforms their systems or the times severally 
called forth. Each has had accordingly a more or less" 
influential following, though Sankara, according to a 

15 


226 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


recent estimate, has nearly seventy-five per cent. of 
the Hindus still owning him as their gurw. 

But the comparative and historic method of 
study, which for over fifty years has shown itself 
prominent in the West, and has still more recently 
‘been making its influence felt in our own country, 
‘does not estimate the importance of a system by the 
mere number of people who accept it or profess to 
follow it. It has got other tests and other standards 
to go by, and, from one point of view, all systems are 
alike useful for its mission. This being granted, it is 
rather strange that Sri Madhwa and his philosophy 
should thus far have received but scant attention at 
the hands of scholars, Western as well as Indian. 
Sankara and his system have, thanks to German and 
other European savants, as well as the Theosophic 
Agency, been widely studied and estimated and 
admired, while Ramanuja may also be assumed to 
have become fairly well-known, though not so widely 
known. The South Indian Vaishnavites, at any rate, 
who form his chief followers, have shown themselves 
active in so many directions and some at least of the 
well-known scholars of that community have, by means 
of translations and otherwise, tried to familiarise 
the general public with their beliefs and practices, 

It is doubtful, however, so far as one is aware, if 
the name of Madhwa, as the Founder of an important 
system of philosophy, is as yet a tenth as familiar to 
‘the reader of things in general in other parts of India 
or even to those who claim special acquaintance with 

‘ 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 227 


Indian thought in the West. Apparently it is not, 
for Max Muller once mentions it, only to brush it 
lightly aside, while Hunter, for instance, in his other- 
wise excellent account of Neo-Hinduism, does not sO 
much as make a bare mention of Madhwa or his 
system among the Vaishnavite Reformers. It may be 
freely granted that, if the amount of following is the 
chief or sole index of the importance of a religious or 
philosophical system, Madhwaism must take its 
place much below the Chaithanytte, Yallabhite or 
Kabirpanthi or other forms of North-Indian Vaish- 
navism. But it may well be doubted whether that is 
always the right kind of test in determining the 
intrinsic or relative worth of a system of philosophy. 
Any endeavour, therefore, which is meant to draw the 
attention of the ‘comparative ’ student to the chief 
features of the Dwaita system of philosophy as 
fashioned by its best exponent, as well as to the life 
and times of the Founder, may be assumed to need 
no special excuse for its making. 
2—SCOPE AND METHOD 

For these reasons the present is a small attempt 
at showing in outline the life and times of Sri 
Madhwacharya and the main features of his philoso- 
phy. It is not proposed to discuss the latter at any- 
thing like adequate length or contrast it with other 
systems preceding or following it, so as to assign to it 
its place in the history of philosophy. These must 
necessarily be left to much better equipped hands and 
to future specialists and research students. All that 


228 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


is meant here isto present in a general way the 
Teacher and his work on strictly historical lines and 
for the general reader's benefit. It is not directly 
addressed to the guru's followers—at any rate in the 
first instance—and not certainly to such of them as 
are strictly ‘orthodox.’ They need not and are not 
called upon to subscribe to the rational line, which is 
here deliberately adopted, and which will be strictly 
and scrupulously followed in the series of studies 
meant to describe the Lives and Times of the chief 
gurus of India. 

It may be added, however, in passing, and by 
way of explanation, that the chief offence to the 
orthodox of every sect, committed by the adoption 
of Rationalism in religious matters, is the rejection 
among Others of miracles popularly socalled—those 
supernatural incidents which gather round the 
memory of every great person by the efforts of ene- 
mies as Well as friends, and which are addressed 
primarily to the vulgar and the credulous and are 
meant to ‘ magnify’ the founder in their eyes. The 
intelligent reader will easily analyse some of these 
and find that they all run in certain common grooves, 
the most marvellous and astounding among them 
concerning themselves as a rule with the sternest 
facts in every man’s life—his birth and exit, Now 
the historic presentation consistently and deliberately 
rejects miracles, for the simple reason that ‘ what is 
history cannot be supernatural, and what is Super- 
natural cannot be history,’ 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 229 


At the same time, the rationalistic and historic 
spirit does not run-a-muck and absolutely exclude 
the ‘heroic’ nature of great men of thought or 
action. It will therefore be found that, in narrating 
the ‘story ’ of Madhwa’s life, his claim to originality 
is fully conceded, while at the same time some 
account is also taken of the Somewhat vague 
notions—discomforting doubts of hitherto accepted 
doctrines—which were prevalent at or before the 
time of his advent, and which assuredly prepared 
the way for the acceptance of his message. 

3.—SOURCES 

In the absence of any contemporary historical 
accounts, the lives of most of the gurus, and so of 
Madhwa among others, have necessarily to be 
extracted from other sources more or less indirect 
and necessarily imperfect—from their own works, 
if they have left any; from the semi-mythical accounts 
which have come down to us in fragments, or in 
compilations from their own disciples or their imme- 
diate followers ; from songs or indirect references in 
other quarters; and from Sasans (inscriptions and 
the like) where these are available. 

Now, in Sri Madhwa’s case, we have undoubt- 
edly a large collection of his own works at 
our disposal, The present writer, however, does 
not pretend to have studied any of them—at any 
rate in the original—in the historic or any 
other spirit. He, therefore, ventures to hope that 
the enlightened among his followers will undertake 


230 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


itasa labour of love, and add to the historic 
interpretation of the guru’s teachings, though for 
purposes of his life, it is to be feared that no 
material addition can be made from this source, 
this kind of literature being necessarily philosophic 
and impersonal.* 

Next there are two compilations professing to 
tell the story of the guru’s life and work, These 
are Madhwa Vijaya and Manimanjari—two compila- 
tions in verse—proceeding from Pundit Narayana 
Acharya, son of Pundit Trivikrama Acharya, 
one of the greatest of Madhwa’s converts. It need 
hardly be said that these are, more pwranic than 
historic, and, being composed in a thoroughly 
orthodox spirit, require very careful handling for 
historic purposes. But such as they are, they form 
the main basis of this sketch because it is a case of 
that or none. | 

The learned Appayya Dikshit is known to have 
subjected Sri Madhwa’s philosophy to some criti- 
cal examination, but it is not within the reach of 
the persent writer, and after all it is not likely to 
help historic aims very much, for the Dikshit 
lived long after the Teacher himself and his object 
was to criticise the .philosophy,not to writeof the 
philosopher, and his methods were anything but 
historic. 


* Mr. Subba Rao of Satem has published translations of 
Sutra Bhashya andthe commentaries of the Bhagavad Gita. 
The latter has a sketch of the guru's life but necessarily of the 
orthodox kind. 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 231 


Sasans and inscriptions have yet to come to 
light, with perhaps the sole exception of one single 
epigraphic contribution of an inscription at Srz 
Kurmam relating to Swami Narahari Thirtha, from 
which one is able to limit the field of conjecture 
relating to the time of Sri Madhwa’s existence and 
labours in our midst. Some day we may expect the 
mutts to discover documents of high historic value, 
but the day is not yet. | 

In these circumstances the reader hardly need 
to be cautioned against the imperfections attending 
an attempt of this kind and the provisional nature 
of most of the ‘conclusions’ arrived at. He only 
needs reminding that, in presenting what facts and 
conclusions have become available to the writer, he 
has been studiously keeping the historic view of them 
throughout and has not deliberately chosen to go 
out of it. 


CHAPTER ll. 


I1—THE LAND OF THE GURU’S BIRTH. 


The land of the Guru’s birth combines all the 
rare physical beauties of Western Coast Districts 
and its people have long been remarkable for their 
fine build and high intelligence. In our own day the 
- Mangaloreans have distinguished themselves iii many 
“Walks of life and their women form the best edu- 
_Cated on our side. 

It was about the middle of the eighth century 
after Christ that this land of Tuluva, now compris- 
‘Ing the Canaras more or less, is believed to have 
received a fresh wave of Brahmin immigrants with 
“whom this narrative is immediately concerned. They 
are known to have been invited by the Vanavasi 
Kadamba King, Mayura Varman. They were fol- 
lowers of Kumarila Bhatta in the main, that is, up- 
holders of the Karma Marga as established by the 
Purva Mimamsa School of Jaimint. Bhatta, it need 
hardly be stated, is now familiar to the schoolboy as 
the most successful and relentless of the persecutors 
of Buddhism in Northern India, though the day may 
come when, through the kind offices of research, he 
will cease to occupy that bad eminence to which his 
friends and his enemies have both conspired to raise 
him! 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 233 


These Bhatta immigrants, however, soon em- 
braced in the next generation the system of Sri 
Sankara, who had established a mutt at Sringeri, on 
the Tungabadhra, from which energetic apostolic 
successors Were Spreading his faith in all directions, 

For upwards of five hundred years Adwattism 
and the practices associated therewith had been 
spreading and driving their roots apparently with- 
out violence or tumult in every province of India, 
till at length the faith could claim more than ninety 
per cent. of the people of India. Even now, as has 
been noted already, according to a recent calculation, 
it includes about seventy-five per cent. of the Hindus; 
at the time of which we are writing, therefore, it 
must have included more, for there have since been 
schisms from it in the shape of Vaishnavite and other 
sects, which have drawn away large numbers of 
people from its ranks. 

2.—THE STATE OF SANKARA’S SYSTEM. 

But Sankara’s system, like every other sys- 
tem that the world has seen, had undoubtedly 
had weak points about it, which, though hid from 
men’s gaze in its morning splendour, had silently 
grown with its growth and had begun to discover 
many ugly features, the worst of which bore indirect- 
ly or otherwise on character. Pundit Narayana 
notes some of them, though he is more vehement on 
the doctrinal side of the evil—perhaps because he 
regarded them, as Paul III. did, parents of the other. 
‘‘ The doctors of the dominant theology had grown 


234 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


turbulent,” we are told, ‘and were proclaiming 
from the house-tops that phenomena were unreal,. 
that the Lord is no Person and has no (righteous). 
attributes, that souls were undifferentiated and so 
forth. Several pious people had begun to feel dis- 
satisfied with the prevalent philosophy and its in- 
fluence on character. The shades of False Theology 
had obscured the Sun of Truth,” and a vague and 
new tune was haunting the ears of some thousands of 
the Canara people and of the adjoining districts. 
This tune it was given to Sri Madhwa ‘to set to- 
music.’ 

We learn incidentally that Sankara’s. was only 
one of the twenty-one chief heretical systems then in 
existence. The names of these are given by more 
than one Madhwa writer, but in no recognised order—_ 
neither logical nor chronological. But twenty out of 
twenty-one, apparently needed but little trouble to- 
brush them aside, so that the one system which 
Madhwa had to oppose with all his might was 
Sankara’s, in doing which accordingly he has employ- 
ed special methods and special care, as will be 
detailed later on, and has set himself to condemn not 
only his philosophy in incidental and formal ways, . 
but his personality as well, after the manner familiar 
enough to the student of religious history—after the 
manner, for instance, of the Catholics in the case of 
Luther. 

One of these special methods was a new doctrine - 
which was formed by the gurw and definitely” 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 235 


mentioned in his Bharata Thathparya Nirnaya, and 
reproduced. with additions and embellishments by 
Pandit Narayana in his Madhwa Vijaya, and, in a 
special manner, in Manimanjari. Stated in the 
beaten way, then, the cause of the avatar of Madhwa 
was this:— : ri: 

The Dyttas, being eternal enemies of Vishnu, 
had received repeated beatings at the hands of 
the Lord, whenever they presumed to trouble 
His pgople—as, for instance, in connection with His. 
avatars of Narasimha, Rama and Krishna Vayu, the 
son of Vishnu, had on every one of these occasions, 
appeared in the flesh along with his Father—as 
Hanuman helping Rama, and as Bhima carrying out 
the wishes of Krishna and so forth. On this latter 
occasion, he had slain a dytia, Maniman by name, (a 
story which may be read in the Aranya Parva), who, 
having thus been baffled in physical fighting, had for 
long been plotting to create a secession among the 
people of Vishnu. At length, having been armed 
with the necessary weapons by Siva, whom he had 
pleased with his penances and prayers, he entered the 
world as Sankara and had, by reason of his rare 
dialectical skill, succeeded in spreading his false faith. 
The chosen of Vishnu had too long been kept steeped 
in ignorance and, at the request of the Devas and 
Brahma, Vishnu was pleased to desire His son and 
servant Vayu to go down once more and gather the 
good and the pious in the fold and condemn the 
wicked. The resolution having once been made in 


236 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


heaven, it was made known to the people (of South 
Canara) in various well-known ways. On one occa- 
sion, for instance, at a festive gathering at the temple 
of Udipi, the spirit of Ananteswar was upon a 
Brahmin and made him messenger of good news and 
proclaim the kingdom of heaven at hand. And it was 
also found, later on and after the guru had made his 
mark fairly well, that the Rig-Veda itself had fore- 
told the advent of the great reformer and his 
triumphs! 

There is nothing absolutely original under the sun 
—no, not even in the white heat of religious rancour. 
The stories bear such a monotonous feature about 
them. For the reader has but to change the names, 
and he will find the story fitting a hundred other 
contexts equally well. 

The real situation, however, was that Sankara’s 
system had shown itself more intellectual than moral, 
as has been already said, and over the whole of India 
the wave of Bhakthi Marga was passing for some 
centuries—due, perhaps, among other things to 
Islamic activities of those days. 

3-—BIRTH AND EARLY YEARS OF THE GURU 

In those days there lived in Pajaka, in the 
village of Belle, six miles to the south-east of Udipi, a 
Brahmin of the name of Madhya Geha* owning 
some small plot of garden land and living on 
what could be got from cultivating it. He was well 


* Literally. middle-house—an evident rendering into Sans- 
krit of the vernacular clan name or distinctive family name. 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 237 


versed in the Vedas and the Vedangas and was hono- 
rably surnamed the Bhatta. He had married a 
beautiful and virtuous wife Vedavati by name, by 
whom he had had, in the course of several years, 
two sons and a daughter, of whom the sons had died 
in infancy, while the daughter was still living. The 
Brahmin, however, being strictly orthodox in his 
views, had been longing for a son ‘to continue the 
thread of his line’ and he and his wife had been 
moving with prayers and penances the Lord of Udipi,. 
who was their tutelary Deity. At length, after a trial 
of over twelve years, the Lord was pleased to hear 
their prayers and bless them, and inthe year 4300 
of Kali Yuga, which roughly corresponds to 1199 of 
the Chirstain era, on the last day of Dasra, the wife 
of Madhya Geha presented him with a son. And 
this son became Sri Madhwa, the Founder of the 
Dwaita System of philosophy. 

The year of his birth is indicated ie the guru 
himself,in his Bharata Thatparya Nirnaya and has 
nearly been established by a recent epigraphic find. 
at Sri Kurmam, of which mention has already been 
made, Mr. H. Krishna Sastri, the finder, argues the 
question of the exact year in a thoroughly scientific 
way and reaches the conclusion that the year of the. 
guru’s birth must have been 1238 A. D. The present 
writer however is not prepared to regard it as con- 
clusive, and until the chain of his argument is made 
more complete, is not willing to summarily reject 
the sloka referred to as an interpolation, which is. 


238 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


what the Sastri does. For the present, then, the 
year of the guru’s birth is 1199. But though the 
year is thus a matters of doubt, the month and day 
are quite accurately known, for Madhwa Navami is 
the first red-letter day of the Madhwa Calendar. 
Mr. C. M. P. Achar discusses the question at some 
length and believes 1238 A. D. to be the year in 
in which the guru was bornor became a Sanyasin! 
But in this discussion Vidyasankar is left out of 
account, which is not desirable, for next after the 
Guru himself, he is the chief actor in this ‘play,’ as 
will be shown below. 

The event naturally caused the greatest rejoicing 
in the family. More than that, it caused rejoicing in 
Heaven and the Devas proclaimed success to the 
righteous and confusion to the wicked. The spirit 
_of Vayu was also seen to descend from Heaven and 
enter the child’s body ! 

The father blessed the name of the Lord and 
called the child Vasudeva, and the childgrew up 
nd was the joy of his parents and friends. Orientals 
are, as a rule, precocious and Vasudeva gave indica- 
tions from childhood onwards of a glorious future. 
Miracles necessarily formed part of them, of which 
a sample or two must suffice for our present purpose. 
The parents had taken the child to be presented to 
the Lord of Udipi and, as they were returning 
through a dense and fearful forest, an evil spirit 
dwelling thereabout opposed their way, but presently 
felt rebuked by the divine Child and went about 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 239 


his business, bearing testimony to the godly presence 
of Vayu. On another occasion, in his fifth year, the 
child was one day found missing and after an anxious 
search made everywhere for three whole days, his 
parents saw him again at the temple of Ananteswar 
at Udipi, teaching gods and men how to worship 
Vishnu according to the Shastras. 

In due course Vasudeva was initated into the 
mysteries of the alphabet and invested with the 
sacred string and sent to the village school to learn the 
chanting of the Vedas along with other boys of his 
age. Among these he soon distinguished himself very 
highly in various forms of physical exercise and field 
games. He could wrestle, run, jump andswim most 
wonderfully—so much so that people loved to call 
him Bhima for his strength and agility. Perhaps it 
was this fact, which need not be doubted, that was 
after all the chief foundation of the doctrine already 
referred to, and what was at first mere rhetoric, 
was afterwards changed either silently or delibe- 
rately into logic, and sanctified later into an un- 
doubted article of faith. Hundreds of other 
examples may be cited to prove that the grandest 
of doctrines often rest upon very simple foundations. 
The reader will easily call to mind the celebrated 
Christian doctrine of transubstantiation and in our 
own land, it isin some quarters believed that the 
celebrity of Dasagriva, ten-headed (Ravana,) rests 
upon nothing more than a bit of rhetoric indicativa 
of that chieftain’s ‘bull-neck’! 


240 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


In his studies, properly so called, however, 
Vasudeva is said to have failed to give his teacher 
satisfaction or promise of any kind, being habi- 
tually irregular in attendance and inattentive to 
lessons. This statement does not agree with what 
has been already said about the boy’s precocity, 
bét we must suppose this to be an attempt, clumsy 
perhaps, but well-meant, to show the divine side 
of the Guru and magnify it in the eyes of the disci- 
ples. The village schoolmaster, therefore, apparently 
gave him up in despair and Vasudeva left school soon 
after, though it is not easy to say when. 

The next event in his life was his renunciation, 
which, as we shall presently see, occurred about his 
twenty-fifth year, and, on this occasion, we find him 
styled Purna-Pragna in recognition of his uncommon 
learning in the Vedas and Vedangas. It is hard to 
reconcile both these statements without some con- 
necting link. We have, therefore, to assume that, 
humanly speaking, Vasudeva left the village school 
after the usual vedic course was completed, and, for 
several years afterwards, had been learning the 
Shastras, 1.e., logic, grammar, dialectics and the like ; 
to what excellent purpose, the world has since known 
so well. 

4.—THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 

But all these several years there were forces 
working within, which are now hid from us, but 
which were slowly drifting Vasudeva towards 
renunciation, The Pundit himself does not help us 


HIS LIFE.AND TIMES 248 


here, for he merely talks of the gods hastening him 
on and other vague things, which in effect amounts to 
Saying he does not know. Whatever the reason, how- 
ever, When Vasudeva at length made up his mind to 
renounce, he proved himself terribly in earnest about 
it, sought for a gurw to formally initiate him and 
soon found him in a certain Achuthapreksha, if 
that is a reliable proper name. This monk, we 
are told, had become dissatisfied with the Vedanta 
Hie had, been taught and was awaiting the advent 
of some man of God toreformit. How far this 
could have been true, we shall find later on, when his 
own pupil was trying to wean him from the old 
faith. 

The act of renunciation was not easy, for the 
boy was the darling of his parents and, what more, 
their only son. It, therefore, meant that the old 
parents were once again to go without funeral rites— 
the worst lot that could befall them in the circum- 
stances. They begged, they chid and remonstrated. 
But Vasudeva prophesied a younger brother for him- 
self and having remained a ‘secular’ novice till it 
was realised in due course and his brother (Vishnu- 
thirtha, as he came to be known long after), was 
born, he got at length initiated according to the 
Shastras and was acclaimed by the assembled people 
with the title of Purna Pragna. Immediately after 
the ceremony was over, as the young monk was 
‘adoring Ananteswar’ the spirit of the Lord was 
on one of the crowd, who turning to Achutapreksha 


16 


242 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


cried out, ‘My son, behold my beloved for whom 
thou hast been longing all the while! He is thy 
guide and the means of thy salvation!’ 

The act of renunciation is usually placed in 
Vasudeva’s ninth year by the orthodox—for very 
obvious reasons. But two or three good reasons 
may be adduced to prove this was much later, though 
thereby it is not meant to lessen the gurw’s greatness 
any way. It may be said once for all that the great- 
ness of Sri Madhwa, like the greatness ef other 
persons of his class, does not depend on these frail 
crutches, but rests on the solid foundation of the 
work he has done. 

Now, in the first place, the Pundit mentions the 
occurrence of a festival immediately after this renun- 
ciation, which looks most like the Mahamakham 
celebrated once every twelve years at Kumbakonam. 
The period of twelve years is calculated on the mo- 
tions of the planet Jupiter, and its latest celebration 
was in 1897. Tradition among Madhwas connects 
the institution of this festival at Kumbakonam with 
the name of Madhwa, and thereis nothing to point 
against it. If then he had established a festival of 
this kind, he must have modelled it on what was 
obtaining at Udipi in that connection. This conclusion 
may be asserted without fear of contradiction, if 
the festival had been kept up still at Udipi, but 
unfortunately it is not—worse than that, no one 
remembers its ever having been done there in the 
past, so that all tracing it to its right {source has 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 243 


now became impossible. It is some small consola- 
tion that there is still a festival of the kind observed 
at a shrine in South Canara called Vujtasthala. 

If, therefore, we agree to take this occurrence for 
a fact, and calculate backwards, it reduces the guru’s 
age at the time of the renunciation to either thirteen 
or twenty-five. The writer prefers taking the latter, 
for,-as has been already said, Vasudeva had by the 
time he renounced, not only mastered his training 
in the Vedas and Vedangas, but had also been wait- 
ing for some years to please his parents, who describ- 
ed themselves as old and past all hopes of child- 
bearing. There is, therefore, every likelihood of its 
proving the right time, if we agree that Vasudeva 
renounced in his twenty-fifth year and became a 
monk to be known from that time by the name of 
Purna-Pragna. 

The dedication of his life hereby to the study 
and realisation of Vedanta soon brought his vigorous 
dialectical and logical powers to th front and the 
old Sankarite Vedantism of Achutapreksha failed to 
satisfy him. He saw weak points in it at every step 
and, unconsciously perhaps at first, but slowly and 
surely, he was drifting towards opposition. While it 
was yet in itsearlier stages, he had had on several 
occasions to argue with his own guru, who had been 
nourished in the old faith, and often to carry discus- 
sion to unpleasant lengths. But the fame of his dis- 
courses soon spread and the young monk’s strong con- 
victions and great originality began to be noised 


244 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


abroad in the neighbourhood and his presence felt in 
many different ways. 

Some time after his learning had made him a 
worthy recipient thereof, Achutapreksha was glad to 
promote him to the first rank of monkhood and instal 
him, as, the Pundit says, Ruler of the Kingdom of 
Vedanta, which in all likelihood means, make him 
Head of the mutt he was ruling till then. On this 
occasion he received the name of Ananda Thirtha, 
the name by which he styles himself in all his 
writings. This position gave him the first place 
among the monks atthe mutt attached to Anan- 
teswar, and for some years they all lived exercising 
themselves in prayers and penances, study, disputa- 
tions and the other duties enjoined on the order. 


CHAPTER Ill. 


1.—THE GUKkU’S SOUTHERN TOUR. 


The Deccan in those days was, as we know, 
split up into a number of kingdoms of varying sizes 
and im ortance, mostly independent, too often hostile 
and intriguing. Several names of such kingdoms and 
rulers have been unearthed and gathered together by 
the laboursof Archzologists. But, whatever their 
other defects, the chiefs were, as a rule, all professing 
patronage to learning, such as it then was. Occasion- 
ally there were specialists gracing particular courts, 
such, for instance, as Vignaneswara. But the bulk of 
the Pundits were, asa rule, ‘generalists’ and were 
able to discourse, loudly, if not always profitably, on 
‘the sciences’ in genera], ‘and the Vedanta in 
particular, And in an age of _ incessant wars, 
troubles and insecurity, the most pleasing feature of 
the Indian land undoubtedly was, that it was easy 
and possible for men of learning to travel from court 
to court with the express purpose of beating opponents 
at the dialectical tournaments and meléés, with 
which kings and chiefs loved to amuse themselves, 
and of winning sonorous titles and tangible rewards, 
The reader may, if he likes, feast his ears with a few 
specimen titles like ‘ Tharkapanchanana,’ ‘ Vade 
Simha,’‘ Prativadi Bhayankara,’ and the like still 


246 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


surviving in odd corners. The discourses Were usu- 
ally dry as dust and academic, except when on occa- 
sions it was a case of Buddhist or Jain persecution, 
when a ghastly interest attached to it, where men 
were driven to argue with the noose of Zaleukos 
thrown about their necks, and an angry and clamou- 
rous multitude were eager to decide questions on 
other grounds than their merits. Readers of the lives 
of saints in all lands will easily recollect cases where 
miracles ofa sort are too often decided for or against a 
party. Madhwa, as we may hereafter agree to call 
Ananda Thirtha, though for reasons not well-known, 
had, during these quiet years, come across many such 
peripatetic knights of learning and had learned to 
recognise his superiority and to habitually oppose the 
essentials of the old faith. 7 
At length, sure of holding his own in controver- 
sies Madhwa set out for a tour through the south- 
ern districts of South India. We learn that just 
before doing it, he managed to make his peace with 
his father. This evidently means that the wrath, 
which had inflamed poor Madhya Geha on the 
occasion of his son’s proposed renunciation, because 
all his entreaties had failed to shake Madhwa’s 
resolve, had not cooled down until several years after, 
and not until the rising fame of the young monk 
had justified his choice, and he was tempted to 
exclaim, as the father of another seemingly unpromis- 
ing son did in profane history, ‘after all the booby 
has some sense !’ | 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 247 


Accompanied by Achutapreksha and others, 
Madhwa went south and stopped at Vishnuman- 
galam. This town which lies twenty-seven miles. 
South of Mangalore, we shall meet in this sketch 
once more in a later context. Here occurred one of 
those miracles which delight his devout followers. 
most, and which connect him with Bhima in one 
of his ‘tremendous’ aspects. The reader will remember. 
the highly delightful story of the Pandu _hero’s. 
encounter with the Asura Baka and his eating with 
ease the ‘monster’ dinner which had been prepared 
for him, and which had been entrusted into his 
hands to be taken to the monster. What we have 
in Madhwa Vijia -is but a tame version of this story, 
and Madhwa is said to have satisfied his hosts 
by this exhibition of his Bhima nature. A dozen 
times or so he eats fairly ‘monstrous’ dinners, but 
the more miraculous part of the story is Where we 
find him doing the very opposite of it, namely, 
‘ multiplying loaves’ to meet the needs of his party 
in the midst of wildernesses. The reader will again 
think of the story of Krishna eating the only grain of 
rice which Draupadi could find for him on a rather 
serious occasion in the period of the exile of the 
Pandus, of which this is perhaps a distorted and 
tame version. 

2—THE INCIDENT AT TRIVANDRUM. 

The next important halt was made at Trivan- 
drum and here it was, in all likelihood, that an cvent 
occurred which has served since as a turning point 


248 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


in the history of Madhwaism. We saw that Madhwa 
was till now only engaged in controverting individual 
articles of the monistic faith and baffling the average 
champions of that faith whom he happened to meet, 
by his pitiless logic and cross questioning. From this 
desirable attitude of healthy enquiry and research, 
Madhwa felt bound to turn, after what occurred here, 
and discover, now and ever afterwards, an attitude 
of uncompromising hostility and loathing towards 
the person of Sankara, his system and his followers. 
, What is reality it was that occurred, we cannot tell, 
for we have Only the evidence of a partisan, who was 
not himself an eye-witness to it, and who is evidently 
desirous to show his own side to the best advantage. 
But even he finds it hard to dismiss it in the easy 
and beaten way in which other controversies are 
brushed aside and, reading between the lines, there- 
fore, we are not perhaps wrong in concluding that 
there was a disputation held here before the King, 
according to the custom obtaining in such cases; that 
it was between Madhwa and the then incumbent of 
the Sringeri mutt who had chanced to be there tour- 
ing on his own account; that Madhwa was not able 
to silence his opponent as speedily or effectively here, 
as he is said to have done elsewhere; and that the 
disputants parted in anger and ill-will and smarting 
under the injury thus caused to his reputation, 
Madhwa bore ever afterwards deadly enmity to the 
tr:umphant rival and treated him and his triumph in 
the way familiar to us in religious controversies ; 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 249 


pretty much, that is, as the early Christians treated 
the Romans andthe Pagans generally, when they 
became the objects of relentless persecution at their 
hands ; or as the Protestants looked upon Philip and 
his agents, 

The Pundit calls this monk of Sringeri Sankara 
(with a slight modification of the first letter, made in 
the worst of tastes), and, though that great gurw had 
lived and _ laboured six or seven centuries earlier, 
coolly asks us to believe he had come down again to 
secure a dialectical victory over Madhwa. At the 
same time, he gives us a rare glimpse of this person, 
for he calls him ‘the dwarf. We are naturally 
curious to learn more about this dwarfish monk, 
who was in the main instrumental in making Madh- 
wa’s attitude towards the faith and person of San- 
kara into one of eternal hostility. But unluckily 
neither Madhwa Viiya nor Maniman art throws 
further light on him. 

There is, however, a list of Sankara’s successors 
furnished by the Sringeri mutt, though it is manifest- 
ly incomplete and imperfect. We have neverthe- 
less the rare luck to find in it the name of Vidya 
Sankar, who is said to have occupied the seat 
between 1228 A.D. and 1333 A.D. The latter 
date is worthless for it would give Vidya Sankar 
a pontificate of a hundred and five years! We, 
therefore, reject it. But the year 1228 is very impor- 
tant, for, among other things, it settles the time of 
Madhwa’s southern tour, if not his age at the time 


250 SRI MADIWACHARYA 


of renunciation. Vidya Sankar having been installed 
in 1228, ‘the tour of Madhwa must only have occurr- 
ed sometime after that event, when probably that 
monk was also making his first tour about his. 
‘diocese’ which, to this day, includes Trivandrum. 

The rise of bad blood here, under circumstances. 
mentioned, and the accidental coincidence of the 
names of his adversary and of the Founder of 
Adwaitism, therefore showed itself in the formation 
of the Bhima-Maniman theory, shaped and fortified 
during the guru’s own life-time and embellished and 
added to by the zeal of his successors. This conclu- 
sion becomes all the more probable when it is 
remembered that, in addition to this occurrence at 
Trivandrum, Madhwa and his followers were for 
many years afterwards, being persecuted and annoyed: 
in various ways by the followers of the dominant 
faith, a few of which will be found in their proper 
contexts later on. 

The addition of Vidya to the name of Sankar 
gives point to this argument, for it indicates the 
Swami’s great learning in Adwaitism and accounts. 
for the tough fighting and the unpleasant ending: 
of the contoversy at Trivandrum. So that it may 
now be taken as good as proved that the parties to- 
this dispute were in very truth Vidya Sankar and. 
Madhwa and that the result of the dispute was a. 
turning point in the genesis of Madhwaism. 

The ill-will originating at Trivandrum was. 
further intensified by a second collision at Rameswar,, 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 251 


where for four months or more * the wicked dogs. 
kept howling at his gates, while the lion within very 
properly refused to be drawn out or disturbed by 
them.’ 

Then the guru travelled to Srirangam and along 
the banks of the Palar back to Udipi. 

3.—THE NET RESULT OF THE TOUR. 

The account we have of some of the contro- 
versies of Madhwa in this tour tallies wonderfully 
with what we learn from other sources regarding the 
general characteristics of disputations in those 
days. There are mere‘ academics’ and touch on 
abstruse philosophic questions, on which the last 
word could never be said. One sample will suffice. 
The Pandits ‘somewhere on the bank of the 
Palar,’ probably Conjeeveram, desired to try 
Madhwa’s powers of exposition and taking advant- 
age of a casual remark of his, that it Was possible to 
interpret the Srutis ‘< three ways, the Mahabharata 
in ten ways and each of the Thousand Names of 
Vishnu in a hundred different ways, they challenged 
him to interpret the first of the Names Visva, in a 
hundred ways, tempting him and meaning to trap 
him. But he knew their hearts and took up the 
challenge with alacrity and with the help of rules 
relating to the use of prefixes and suffixes, began to 
expound the meanings connoted by the term Visva in 
such a terrific manner that, before he had done with 
half a dozen, the Pundits felt dazed and stunned, 
and earnestly besought him to desist, owning hig, 


252 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


divinity without question as well as their own little- 
mess ! 

The net result of the tour was Madhwa’s per- 
ception of his own greatness and the widening of the 
breach between him and the head priest of the 
Sringeri mutt. Accordingly soon after his return, he 
wrote his commentary on the Bhagavad Gita, which 
Set forth incidently the essentials of his faith and 
formed the prelude to the composition of the guru's 
‘commentaries of the Vedanta Sutras, and the formal 
proclamation of his faith later on. 


CHAPTER IV 


1. THE GURU’S NORTHERN TOUR. 


The next event in his life was the tour through 
Hindustan, but it must have occurred several years 
after his return to Udipi from the south. For, in the 
first place, the greatest of his works, namely the 
commerftaries of Vedanta Sutras, is found finished by 
the time Madhwa reached Benares. But as we have 
found that Madhwa’s progress till now had been but 
gradual and slow, starting from objections to stray 
points and ending in the commentaries of the Gita, 
we shall not be wrong in allotting some tew years to. 
the composition of this sheet-anchor of every faith— 
the commentaries of the Sutras. We may, therefore, 
take it that the actual composition of the work was 
done at Udipi during a fairly long interval, and that 
it was revised and received its touches later in the 
light of the critisms it had had at Benares, the centre 
of learning at all times. 

Again, among the incidents connected with this 
tour, mention is made of a certain King Iswara 
Deva in Maharashtra, who tried to impress 
Madhwa and party into his service—apparently in 
connection with the building of some dam or fashion- 
ing acanal, The King, of course, smarted for it, 
for the spirit was upon him and, having bidden the 


254 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


Guru to work, he found at the close of the day that 
the had been unconsciously working for him the whole 
day ! 

Putting miracle on one side, however, we may 
try to examine this proper name and we find among 
the Yadava chiefs of Devagiri there was a king of 
the name of Mahadeva, who reigned from 1260 A. D. 
to 1271 A.D. The names are identical and the 
use of the one for the other is a well-known poetical 
shift; We have seen that the Guru’s ‘tour through 
the Southern Districts could not have occurred earlier 
than 1228 A. D., and we may, therefore, now agree 
that the northern tour could not have occurred earlier 
than 1260 A. D., and for a similar reason. The 
interval though long, was surely not too long for 
the preparation of the commentaries of the Vedenta 
Sutras, which is, as has been said, the sheet anchor 
of every system of Vedanta Philosophy. And there 
were doubtless other works composed about this time, 
as occasion demanded. 

2, DIFFICULTY OF TOURING IN THOSE TIMES. 

The events connected with this tour seem to 
have been recorded by an eye-witness, from whom 
Pundit Narayana professes to have borrowed his 
version. Read carefully, we discover many interest- 
ing facts about the state of the country in those days. 
Wild beasts infested the roads, and gangs of dacoits, 
wilder than beasts. Many of the miracles were 
accordingly the shifts of the Guru to extricate himself 
and party from these dangers. Rivers were unford- 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 255 


able or impassable, and it required much skill on the 
part of the Guru to effect his purpose. On one such 
occasion we have the well-known miracle of walking 
across a sheet of water ‘without wetting the cloth.” 
Cheifs were sometimes neutral, sometimes hostile. 
They had to be coaxed or evaded. All the originality 
of the guru was needed on such occasions. One 
instance given by the Pundit is of rare value. It 
shows the difference between the apostolic suc- 
cessors of Madhwa and his own self in a striking 
manner. In the course of his travels, it happened 
that on some occasions’ Madhwa met hostile Maho- 
medan cheifs, whom, however, he found it possible 
and desirable to’ pacify by means of conciliatory 
speeches made, as the Pundit adds, in their own lan- 
quage—that is in Urdu or Persian, Just so. For 
Madhwa, as the founder of a new system, had neces- 
sarily had to learn other systems, and, in practical 
matters, to deal with people in sensible ways, and 
understand the secret that ‘the nearest road to a 
man’s heart lies through the tongue.’ So, whatever 
use he might make of the term * Mlechcha ’ for dialec- 
tical purposes, he had had no scruple to deal with 
them in person and hold concourse with them to 
effect his purposes. The present day Gurus, on the 
other hand, the Swamis, that is, those that occupy 
mutts everywhere in India, are much diviner beings 
than their founders, for, so far from learning Mlechcha 
languages, or ‘ndeed learning anything at all that 
may do them or others good, they shut themselves up 


256 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


as a rule, and when they find they must stir out, do 
it with all manner of absurd precautions; and if, as 
ill-luck would have it, they chance to meet the gaze 
of a Mlechcha walking the road, they must needs fast 
the whole day and make gifts of milch cows to purify 
themselves ! ! 

At Goa, it appears, the Guru had actually to 
save himself and party by flight. 

Of all the troubles which attended the tour, how- 
ever, one of the most annoying seems to have been 
the angularities of his own ‘immediate’ disciples— 
those who were doing him personal service and were, 
therefore, most intimate with him. They were appa- 
rently a wild sect of Canara Brahmins, with thick 
heads and stalwart limbs. The other miracles which 
they had witnessed having apparently failed to touch 
their hearts, the Guru had to prove his Bhima nature 
to them by actual wrestling with them jointly and 
severally and ‘ flooring’ them all with ease ! 

3. THE GURU AT HARDWAR: THE SUTRA 
_ BHASHYA. 

In thismanner Madhwa reached Hardwar, where 
he stayed and passed a number of days in fasting, 
silence and contemplation, and then left all alone for 
‘the abode of Vyasa’—the Himalayan Badari or 
some wilderness adjoining. Here he remained some 
time, nobody knowing anything of his movements. 
The Pundit, of course, talks of the Guru’s unwilling- 
ness to go back to the mortal world, for it had all 
become rotten at that time and of his hesitation ‘ to 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 257 


throw sacrificial rice before dogs’; as well as Vyasa’s 
encouragement asking him to go, because there were 
still people left in the world who deserved and desired 
salvation. This in all probability means that the 
Guru began proclaiming his faith only after much 
hesitation and prolonged mental struggle. 

Having made up his mind, however, he return- 
ed to Hardwar and began fearlessly proclaiming the 
supreme Godhead of Vishnu and published his most 
endurigg work, the Commentaries of the Vedanta 
Sutras; and preaching his faith wherever he went, 
he returned slowly, stopping at Kalyan, the metropolis 
of the Chalukya Empire and the natural resort of 
Pundits in those days. Here he made his first great 
conversion, that, namely, of aneminent rival Sobhana- 
bhatta by name, who, as has been noted, succeeded 
the Guru after his departure and became head of the 
mutt, whose branches* at the present day claim the 
allegiance of the bulk of the Madhwas. 


* The succession list usually given is as follows :— 
- §ri Madhwacharya. , 


Padmanabha Thirtha ree Sobhanabhatta. 
Narahari Thirtha. 
Madhava Thirtha. 
ain tees Thirtha. 
Jaya Thirtha (Scholiast of Madhwa’s Commentaries), 


Vidyathi Raja. 
i Di intact fninecipceipin lt maha an 


' 
Vyasa Raya mutt, Uttaradi mutt, Sumatindra mutt, 
17 


258 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


4. BACK TO UDIPI—MINOR REFORMS. 

On his return to Udipi Madhwa’s first business 

-was to convert hisown Guru Achutapreksha, Though 
we were told on a former occasion that he was one of 
those who had become dissatisfied with the faith 
in which he had been brought up, the account of 
his conversion given here seems to point to a differ- 
ent state of things altogether. For, Madhwa had to 
repeat his arguments refuting the faith of Sankara 
over and over to him, and when that course failed to 
convince Achuthapreksha, he had to add _ the terror of 
his‘voice, and anathemas in case of further persistence, 
before the Guru’s mind could be purged of all heresy ! 
As conversions multiplied and new questions 
presented themselves for solution, the Guru made a 
number of changes, though perhaps not all of them 
reforms. The branding onthe shoulders with the 
arms of Vishnu, already adopted by Ramanuja was 
declared necessary according to Shastras, though the 
Way in which it ismow done—under which the 
Madhwa men and women are branded every time 
that the head of their muté makes his ‘ visitation,’—is 
perhaps a novelty introduced after Madhwa’s time. 
The founding of the temple at Udipi in honour of 
Krishna was meant to unify and concentrate the 
interests of his followers and, to this day, most of the 
orthodox Madhwas manage to goto Udipi once at 
least in their lives. The prohibition of bloodshed in 
connection with sacrifices (of which more hereafter) 
‘was, however, a reform of no small consequence for 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 259 


which the societies for the prevention of cruelty (and 
torture) to animals and those that feel with it, might 
truly feel grateful to the Guru. 


CHAPTER V. 


—_— 


1. BEGINNINGS OF: PERSECUTION. 


But these changes and conversions naturally 
earned for the teacher a rich crop of « enemies among 
the followers of the dominant faith and its high 
priests at Sringeri. The Sringeri mutt having long 
enjoyed great political influence in addition to its 
superiority in point of numbers on its side, we can 
easily imagine its attitude towards a rival so near its 
headquarters (Udipi is not very far from Sringeri,) 
proclaiming himself a prophet and denouncing the 
accepted doctrines. Ceaseless insults and injuries 
were bound to be the order of the day, especially as 
the new sect, besides being inferior in numbers, had 
as yet had no royal support under which to thrive 
peaceably or ‘forcibly.’ Maltreatment with impunity : 
must necessarily have made the anxious eyes of the 
followers turn towards the Guru for remedy, and as 
the prospect of immediate redress of wrongs could not 
under the circumstances be held out, the Guru must 
have formulated the famous Bhima-Maniman Theory, 
under which the dominant sect and its founder be- 
came, as has been already related, the eternal enemies. 
of the people of God, seeming to prosper for a time, but 
bound ultimately to be beaten by the Lord’s servant. 

This is the only rational conclusion which one 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 261 


has to draw from the narrative we have concerning’ 
the composition of a work which Madhwa was busy 
with at this time. It was the Mahabharata Thath- 
parya Nirnaya, i.e., Exposition of the right meaning 
__ of the Mahabharata. 

This revision of the great epic of Vyasa was. 
rendered necessary, we are told, inasmuch as the 
sage’s meaning had become misunderstood and 
foreign matter had got mixed with the original ; 
Madhwa is stated to have gone to the abode of Vyasa 
to obtain his special sanction for rewriting his work, 
and, fortified with it, to have written the Mahabharata, 
aright, 7. e., so as to strengthen his system and confirm 
and sanctify the Bhima-Maniman incident, as yet 
without a local habitation. The general reader notes 
that Vyasa's special sanction was needed only in twa 
cases—the commentaries and this Reversion. The 
former needed it, as a matter of course, for it was 
the basis of the system. Why the latter should need it, 
while some other works of the Guru, more important 
from a doctrinal point of view, do not seem to have 
felt the need for it, is a question naturally suggesting 
itself to the curious mind and demanding an answer, 
It may not perhaps be altogether wrong for us to 
suppose that the doctrine in question, which was for 
the first time formulated, was the chief cause of the 
special fortification felt needed in this case. 

2, THE APPROPRIATION OF THE LIBRARY 

We now come to the greatest injury the Guru 
sustained at the hands of the rival priests during his 


462 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


lifetime. More than a chapter and-a-half out of the 
sixteen chapters of Madhwa Vijaya is devoted to the 
narration of this incident, thereby showing its great 
importance. It was the forcible appropriation of the 
Guru’s library by the head of the Sringeri mutt. It 
happened in this way. 

After the encounter at Trivandrum, Vidya 
Sankar of Sringeri did not apparently trouble 
further about Madhwa, for the simple reason that the 
latter had not become formidable until several years 
after. The date of Vidya Sankar’s exit givenin the 
published list is 1333, which, we already saw, means 
some irregularity in the Register, for it allots to this 
Swami more than a hundred years of pontificate. 
One or two names have clearly escaped the attention 
of the Sringeri muét, and this is made clearer from 
what we have in Madhwa Vijaya. From the latter 
we learn that the monk who was ruling at Sringeri 
at this time was a Padma Thritha who is said te 
have succeeded Gnani Sreshta i.¢6., Vidya Sankar. 
This Padma Thirtha, therefore, is the missing link 
or one of the missing links between Vidya Sankar 
and Bharati Krishna, who, according to the list, 
succeeded the former in 1333. Vidya Sankar made 
his exitin peace and was succeeded by Padma 
Thirtha, a monk from the country of the Cholas, ¢. e., 
from the Coromandel Coast. A strong suspicion, 
however, attaches to this part of the story and to the 
name given, by reason of the startling coincidence of 
the name Padma Thirtha with Padmapada, the chief 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 263 


disciple of the great Sankra, who was also a man 
from the Chola land. 

Padma Thirtha, or whoever else he was, saw 
the danger threatening the faith. The fame of 
Madhwa consequent on the publication of the com-? 
mentaries and the conversion of Sobhana Bhatta had 
begun to tell. The converts armed with the zeal! 
natural to them, were seen in many places: 


actively engaged in fishing for men. Tt was 


time,, therefore, that something were done to: 
check the spread of the new faith. A Pande- 
montium was held at Sringeri and a plan 
of operation was agreed on. Smartha mission- 
aries were to goin all directions and counteract the! 
mischief. They were not to be very scrupulous as to 
the means employed in silencing heretical teaching. 
If calumny and other legitimate means should fail, 
there was His Holiness prepared to end his rival by 
the use of the Black Art, which he had not learned for: 
nothing. And if even this should miscarry, they might 
rest assured that poison would not. The Guru, there- 
fore, was bound to be caught somehow and despatched. 

Before resorting to these extreme measures, how- 
ever, Padma Thirtha sought to try the effect of 
taking the Guru’s library away from him. We cam 
easily understand the valu2 of the palm leaf manus- 
cripts in the days previous to printing and the intro- 
duction of cheap and easy writing materials, Padma 
Thirtha evidently believed that, if the works of the 
rival teacher were appropriated, the system would 


264 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


receive a severe blow, from which it might not easily 
recover. Orders to seize hold of the manuscripts from 
Madhwa missionaries had already been issued to those 
who had been sent to counteract their work. The 
chief priest, therefore, merely sought to crown the 
work of spoliation by laying hold of the central 
library and carrying the manuscripts away and bury- 
ing them somewhere from which they should never 
more see the light. The plan once decided on was 
successfully carried out on the borders of the ter-itory 
of King Jaya Simha. 

This king or chief must have been connected 
with the Jaya Simhas of the Chalukya dynasty, but of 
his religious bias it is not easy to say anything. He was 
a ruler of Kembla, called after an old town eight 
miles north of Kasaragod. But his capital was at 
Vishnumangalam, which we have already known The 
name of the capital is significant enough, but it does 
not enable us to say anything more than that the 
king was well disposed towards the new teacher. 
_ To him Madhwa applied for help and the library was 
through his intercession, recovered in due course, 
The Guru stayed at his court for some time, but 
the prince does not seem to have been converted, for 
during the rest of the teacher’s life, he does not 
appear to have had any royal convert, the usua 
additions of the present day heads of mutts, elephants, 
horses palanquins and the like, which are gifts of 
kings and rich men, being apparently conspicuous by 
their absence to the last day of Madhwa. 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 265 


3. LAST YEARS OF THE GURU. 

_ It was just after the restoration of the library 
that the last great conversion of the Guru was made 
—that, namely, of Pundit Trivikrama. His son, 
Pundit Narayana, from whom we have received the. 
only original account available of the life and doings 
of the guru, gives us a full description of the circum- 
stances under which his father becamea convert. It 
is just what we have already seen in regard to 
Achutkapreksha, namely, that Trivikrama had 
been brought upin the old faith, but had become 
dissatisfied with it, though he did not choose to be- 
come the follower of the new Guru until after eight 
days of hot discussion he had felt himself vanquished. 

The fame of Trivikrama’s conversion brought 
in other adherents. The descendants of this Pundit 
are said to be still seen in South Canara or in the 
Cochin State territory, showing to the pious pilgrim 
the image of Krishna presented by Madhwa to his 
great disciple after his conversion. Social needs, how- 
ever seem to have subsequently forced them to go 
back, for they are now said to profess the old faith or 
call themselves at all events Smarthas. 

If our surmise regarding the date of the Guru’s 
tour to the North is correct, that is, if he had under- 
taken it after 1260, he must now have been preach- 
ing his faith for about fifteen years. It was at this 
time that, while the guru was still somewhere in King 
Jaya Simha’s territories, that his parents died at 
Udipi, within a few months of each other. Madhwa’s 


& 


266 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


brother attended to their funeral rites, but presently 
after felt miserable because he had become ruined in 
business. Vexed with the world, and now that his 
duty to his parentshad been done, he went to his 
brother and persuaded him to let him have the 
monk’s robe, which being granted he remained at- 
tached to his brother, under the name of Vishnu Thir- 
tha till the day of his departure. 

Madhwa seems to have spent his last years. 
mostly in Saridantara, the doab formed by the 
Kumara Dhara and Netravati, writing monographs. 
on doctrinal or practical points and sending mis- 
Sionaries to silence opponents.. And here, on one 
occasion, he went to bathe in the sea in connection 
with aneclipse of the sun. The sea behaved very 
rudely to him, but casting an angry look on it he 
stilled it! 

The records of the Madhwa mutts assign to the 
founder seventy-nine years, six months and twenty 
days of active rule. This is clearly impossible, for it 
makes him live even after Alauddin’s invasion of the 
Dakhan in 1294. From what we have said regarding 
Madhwa Vijaya, it is clear that even when Pundit 
Narayana lived, he had only heard of the Mahomedan 
terror in Hindustan. We have therefore, to suppose 
that the period indicated is the period of Madhwa’s. 
life. The last miracles recorded of him are those 
connected with his activities in Saridantara, as the 
names of places go to show. No tradition tells us as. 
to what exactly became of him in the end, except that. 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 267 


he disappeared one day even as he sat teaching, but 
his followers now believe that he rejoined Vyasa, after _ 
having desired Padmanabha Thirtha to carry on the 
apostolic work, and put the guardianship of the 
shrine of Krishna at Udipi under the care of a Board 
of eight others of his disciples. In the abode of 
Vyasa, Madhwa is still believed to remain against the 
beginning of a new Kalpa, when he will be rewarded. 
with the office of Brahma (the Creator). 


CHAPTER VI. 


— 


OUTLINE OF THE GURU’S FAITH. 


The limits of the sketch do not allow our following 
the fortunes of the faith under Madwa’s successors. 
Like many another faith, the one mutt which he had 
left behind for propagandism, has become split up 
into three chief branches, with but little useful links 
among them. In succeeding centuries rich and royal 
disciples endowed each of the mutts liberally as they 
happened to belong to the one or the other. And 
certain well-known factors, internal and external, 
have brought about inthem, as in every other muété 
that one could name, a state of things, most deplor- 
able in the interests of society and religion, and loudly 
calling for remedy and state intervention. 

But the sketch will scarcely answer its purpose 
if it fails to take a bird’s-eye-view of the chief features 
of the faith and of the chief points of difference bet- 
ween it and the faith standing most opposed to it 
i. €., Sankara’s. 

The faith is Vaishnavism or Sad Vatshnavism, 
as the Madhwas love to call it, so as to distin- 
guish it from the Sri Vaishnavism of Ramanuja. It 
might be viewed, like most of the Indian faiths of 
any importance, in its philosophical as well as practi- 
cal aspects. Being founded, as all post-Buddhistic 


i 5 a Pe 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 269. 


faiths are, on logic and grammar, the Dwaita Philo- 
sophy starts with a five-fold hypothesis. A belief in 
the Panch1bheda, five prime, real and eternal distinc- 
tions, is what one has to begin with. That is to say, 
he hasto take for granted, the distinction between: 
the Supreme Spirit and lesser spirits, between spirit 
and matter and so forth, even as the student of the 
Adwaita Philosophy has to take the existence of Maya 
or Avidya for granted. The Dwaita hypothesis, 
therefore, repudiates in unmistakable terms, the 
Monism of Sankara and the modified Dualism of 
Ramanuja. Phenomenal world, it follows, is real and 
eternal and true perception is only gained when, to- 
use a favourite Vedantic simile, silver is seen to be 
silver, and not when mother of pearl is mistaken for 
it, in which case We see but do not perceive. The 
hypothesis, like so many others of its kind, may some 
day clash with proved scientific facts and conclusions, 
but human ingenuity is infinite and inconsistencies 
will no doubt be explained away, if people are ear- 
nest about saving the system. 

The Supreme Spirit is Vishnu or Narayana and 
is the Personal First Cause, the Moral and Intelligent 
Governor of the Universe. He and his Consort 
Lakshmi are real, though mysterious persons, 
Brahma (the Creator) and Vayu are two of his sons. 
It is Vishnu that is talked ot as Brahma in the Upan- 
ishads and His attributes are endless. 

Souls or spirits have forms corresponding to 
those of animated nature in this universe and are of 


270 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


three classes. Those of the first class are alone des- 
tined for eternal residence in the abode of Narayana, 
which they enter sooner or later according to the 
fruit of their karma here below. The lesser gods, the 
Pitris (roughly corresponding to the names of the 
Romans), sages, kings and a few other select classes 
of persons come under this head. The third class 
consists of those spirits that are doomed to eternal 
hell, towards which their sins drift them helplessly 
on. The enemies of Vishnu and of His people and 
those that doubt the revealed nature of the Vedas and 
sin against God and man, are among members of this 
group. The spirits of the middle class are destined 
to attain neither, but, like Sisyphus, are ever doing 
and never done,’ being eternally subject to the ups 
and downs of Samsara, 7%. e, evils of birth and 
death, 

2, TENETS SPECIALLY CHARACTERISTIC 

OF THE FAITH, 

Few among the Indian faiths have cared to be 
so rigorously logical. The thirst for eternal peace of 
the troubled human soul, has indeed from very early 
times been solved in India, by a belief in a debtor- 
creditor system of Karma. The exposition of this 
system had in previous times been based on an 
assumption that it is possible for all souls to attain 
eternal bliss sooner or later, When the debtor-side 
of each soul’s account should show zero. Madhwa 
now completed the symmetry of it by another equally 
rational and possible, though cruel and inhuman 


-HIS LIFE AND TIMES 271 


assumption that the creditor-side might show zero— 
the more easily because there were candidates enough 
for eternal hell at that time in the persecutors of the 
new faith. This position has recently been sought 
to be defended on the ground of some inexorable ‘Law 
of Nature,’ which takes no account of men’s nerves. 
But it comes with the worst grace from those who 
extol Bhakthi Marga so much. 

One more doctrinal point deserves to be noticed 
‘because, so far as the writeris aware, no other Indian 
faith shows its like, at all events in the form in which 
it is presented, that, namely, which declares that 
there is no salvation possible for man except through 
Vayu, the son of Vishnu. The genesis of this doctrine 
is hard to come at. From the earliest known times the 
Guru or the spiritual guide has always claimed and 
been allowed exceptional sanctity, because the idea 
of each one guiding his own Spiritual progress, with- 
out any help from/ g-tearned preceptor, was never 
started here, andfhe assertion\of M/lton that every 
man has an eqyal right to intérpret the Revealed 
Book according % the light_that iS in him, was never 
once so much as" eat of in“India, Guru Nanak, 
Founder of the Si “seems to have been the 
chief of the latté? . mers, Who laid much 
greater stress thanhad§peen done of old on the 
sanctity and necessity Of the spiritual guide. But 
no one except Madhwa seems to have given it this 
remarkable shape or presented it in this highly sugges- 
tive form. What its genesis might be due to we 


272 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


cannot undertake to say at present. We might, 
therefore, just note it and pass on. 

In the rules on individual and social life, so far 
as religion influences them, the sect, like many 
another of those or succeeding times, has, consci- 
ously or otherwise, drifted towards the Puranas, 
though, sure enough, professing the highest regard for 
the Srutis and Smritis. ‘‘ The fact is that, during 
the long course of our medizval history, we neglected 
the higher and eternal teachings of the Srugt and 
swore foolishly by the lower and temporary ritualistic 
and caste ideals of the Smritis and Puranas,’ ‘‘ and 
this fully accounts for our downfall.” If this is a fact, 
then Madhwaism shares it as fully as any other sect. 
The Guru himself in the Thathparya Nirnaya says 
that he is in an especial manner following the path 
indicated by the Mahabharata in all his injunctions, 

The uncompromising hatred discovered by Sri 
Vaishnavas in regard to the God Siva, whom many 
among them would not so much as hear named, was 
happily avoided by Madhwa, though by proclaiming 
the supreme Deity of Vishnu, he was forced to assign 
an inferior place to this God in his system. 

3. ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE sSANKARITE SYSTEM, 

We have already had to notice the attitude of 
Madhwa and his followers towards the system of 
Sankara—-an attitude which, intensified by the 
persecution they had suffered, drove the oppressed 
to doom the heresiarch and his followers to eternal 
hell. How he would have behaved if he had had 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 273 


royal patrons to help him, or how his successors 
would have behaved if the persecution had begun 
after his departure, we cannot tell. But, coming as 
it did in his own time, and before the faith had defi- 
nitely shaped itself and received its finishing touches, 
we have strong reasons to believe 2/ contributed in 
no small measure to the tnclusion of the Maniman 
doctrine. And though we shall in many cases do 
Well to remember that ‘ the sources of religion lie hid 
from us’, We are not perhaps far wrong, in this in- 
stance, if we suppose the singular hatred discovered 
by the sect to the departed guru of Adwaitism and to 
his doctrines, far more than to the living followers of 
the faith, is due to this unfortunate occurrence, It 
would doubtless have been exceedingly magnanimous 
of Madhwa to have spared the personality of the 
Founder of Adwaitism, who had had no hand what- 
ever in the persecution, But he did not, and the 
hints thrown out in the Thatparya Nirnaya were 
taken up by his more zealous followers like Pundit 
Narayana, and have been worked up into a most 
disgraceful libel ever written of the dead, which, 
mellowed by time, has become sacred and is regarded 
as the first step to every student of Madhwa 
Theology. This libel is the companion volume to 
Madhwa Vijaya and is known as Manimanjart. Such 
are the bitter fruits of religious intolerance and 
persecution and, as the persecutors could not be 
dealt with on the principle of like for like, the weaker 
party necessarily had to resort to abuse, 
18 


274 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


It need hardly be said that inthis, as in so many 
other instances, practice has shown but little corres- 
pondence to the troublesome theory of Dytias, for as 
a matter of fact, a few miserable fanatics apart, who 
might be ignored, the bulk of thesect have always 
moved on excellent terms with their Smartha brethren, 
and amorg the Marathi followers of the Guru, 
matrimonial alliances between members of the 
different sects have been by no means uncommon. 
Even the most orthodox of the sect have no objection 
to dine in campany with Smarthas, herein happily 
avoiding the absurd extremes to which Sri Vaishna- 
vas have carried matters, and now find it so hard to 
retrace these wrong steps. And, if people believe in 
what they are talking about, and if intermarriages 
between the different sects of Brahmins is a right 
step in Social Reform, then it is certainly much easier 
to bring about union between Madhwas and 
Smarthas, than between Sri Vaishnavas and any other 
sect. It is to be hoped that the leaven of the West 
will serve as it has done in so many other ways, to 
smoothen the already smooth relations of the sects, 
and doctrinal differences will be made to occupy their 
proper place without disturbing social relations. 

4. POPULAR FEATURES OF MADHWAISM. 

Madhwaism is an excellent exposition of Neo- 
Hinduism in that itcan be grasped by the meanest 
believer, there being but little of Occultism or Esoteri- 
‘cism about it. Vishnu, whom the worshipper is 
asked to regard as supreme, is the Purante Vishnu 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 275 


and is familiar to the common reader in those bright 
manifestations of His, like Rama, Krishna and the 
rest. The writer of this sketch has been severely 
handled by the orthodox among the Madhwas for 
daring to make this statement, but he has already 
answered objections of thiskind by his determination 
to write on historical lines. The worship of Vishnu 
consists in (1) Ankana, marking the body with His 
symbols, the five arms; (2) Namakarana, giving His 
names to children or other objects of love; and 
(3) Bha‘ana, singing his glories. The special 
stress laid by some of the disciples on the last item 
has given rise to two divisions among them, called 
respectively Dasakutas and Vyasakutas, but this is for 
all practical purposes a division without distinction. 
The system therefore is, on the dogmatic as well 
as practical side, positive, terribly positive; in this 
respect also it is diametrically opposed to Sankara’s, 
where, (according to Pundit Narayana), Absolute 
Nothingness is made, on the side of dogma, to go by 
the name of Brahman, and where also the Adwaitee 
has but too often discovered a tendency to make 
religion an affair of the head, of knowledge more than 
one of the heart and righteous character, the latter of 
which religion ought always to strive to be.* The 
Madhwa’s idea of God is, in theory as well as practice, 
anthropomorphic even in the last resort. But if we 
believe with Goethe that ‘man really never knows 
“* Religion is being and becoming, not talking.—Swami 


Vivekananda. Sankara has of course nothing tc do with this 
evil feature. 


276 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


how anthropomorphic he is’, and that ‘in every 
country the masses of the people are fetish-worship- 
pers,’ we shall be tempted to say perhaps that the faith 
of Madhwa is strong just where the other is weak. 

We have already touched on the reform in con- 
nection with sacrifices. Sacrifice of animals in expec- 
tation of: rewards in this world as well as in. the 
other, is an old and world-wide institution, and no 
wonder that in India, singularly remarkable for its 
conservatism, it has lived on to our own day, though 
showing but few signs of vigorous life now. The 
monstrous hopes that had once been held out to the 
masters of sacrifices, in case they were properly gone 
through, according, to the strict letter of the law, 
were bound to defeat themselves. The story of King 
Nahusha, his aspiration for the office of Indra and his 
fall on account of his incivility to the sage Agastya— 
all seem to Wear on their face proof of the desperate 
straits to which those who had held out impossible 
promises, were driven to reduce themselves. Accord- 
ingly reaction against the sacrifice of animals set in 
even as early as the times of the Upanishads, The 
last passage of the Narayana Upanishad which goes 
by the name of (Sacrifice of self) might have 
been the composition of the great Buddha himself. 
Heralded by such early protests came the mighty- 
mouthed Buddha and the spread of his faith meant 
the practical abolition of sacrifices. 

With the renewed activity of Neo- Hinduism, 
sacrifices seem to have somewhat revived, though 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 277 


their day was assuredly gone. And the last vestiges 
of bloodshed connected therewith for ever were practi- 
cally done away with by Vaishnavite reformers 
everywhere—who with one accord have all laid the 
most absolute emphasis on the sufficiency of the 
Bhakthi marga—by Ramanuja before the time of 
Madhwa, by Madhwa himself and Chaitanya, 
Vallabha and other in later times. The thanks of the 
truly righteous are due to all of them on this account. 
Various were the reasons assigned or the devices 
adopted in the place of bloody sacrifices, and Madhwa 
enjoined, not indeed their complete abolition, which 
is imposible for any one who bases his teachings on 
the authority of the Srutis, but the substitution of a 
lamb made of rice meal instead of the lamb of flesh 
and blood. Those who have any knowledge of the work 
of the Samayita in a Yagna, that is, of how the 
lamb is ‘done to death’ on occasions of sacrifices, still 
occasionally seen performed by Smarthas, chiefly in 
some of the coast districts of the Madras Presidency 
—where the poor animal is gagged and despatched 
‘without the shedding of blood,’ in a manner too 
horrid for plain description—have really very good 
reason to feel thankful to Madhwa for having stopped 
it, so far at least as his own followers are concerned. 
We might also notice with pleasure that the chief 
temples and shrines managed in Madhwa interestes 
are, asarule, free from the objectionable services 
of Deva Dasis (prostitutes) and the pujaris or priests 
are in many instances of much better social, stand- 


278 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


ing than the kurukkals or other tribes akin to 
them. 

The Puranic leanings of the faith have naturally 
enlarged the sphere of the professional Pawranica or 
the Rhetor. And as saints multiplied in course of 
time, red-letter days also increased in number, which, 
together with the memorable days common to all 
sects, have made the Madhwa year one round of 
festivals and saints’ days. Puranas in praise »f Gods 
and of saints, have also naturally multiplied ia fear- 
ful numbers, some passable, many puerile, if not 
positively harmful, by reason of the low taste and 
lower accomplishments prevailing among the latter 
day Pundits who composed them. The Madhwa men 
and women have acquired the habit of attending 
Puranic recitals in large numbers, and if the right 
kind Pauranicas could be found or made to carry on 
this work, the institution may be made to serve excel- 
lent educational purposes. Such as it is, it has result- 
ed in a better organisation among them than among 
other sects, and the average Madhwa knows more 
about his Gurw and his faith than the average 
Smartha, te whom Sankaracharya often means no 
more than the ruling Priest at Sringeri or elsewhere. 

5. GENESIS OF THE CARDINAL DOCTRINES OF 
THE FAITH 

If it is once admitted that Religion has had a 
history like everything else, and that each Reformer 
merely ‘set to music the tunes haunting a large 
number of ears,’ it becomes easy for us to understand. 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 279 


that Madhwaism has assimilated many things from 
preceding faiths and rejected others. We saw some- 
thing of what it rejected in the Sankarite system and! 
what it took in from Ramanuja’s. There were 
several other faiths flourishing in this part of India, 
at the time of Madhwa’s advent, and in particular 
Jainism, whose stronghold the Canaras had become, 
after its downfall in the Chola and Pandya king- 
doms. It would bea marvel if Madhwa’s inquiring, 
mindehad not been influenced at all by these faiths: 
and their practices. It is, of course, impossible to 
anatomise Madhwa doctrines and practices and group 
them and assign, this to Jainism, that to Saivaism, 
that to another and so on and so forth. But some of 
them bear clear impress of their origin and it is the 
legitimate duty of history to take note of them, It 
may well be that the founder of a sect might ‘not 
himself have been able totrace the steps through 
which his mind had passed before he was able to 
give a definite shape toa doctrine. But though he 
could not discover it himself, men who do not live in 
the midst of the bustle connected witha reform 
movement or live long after it, and have no vested 
interests to guard, can compare things in ‘ the cool 
shade of retirement,’ and make inferences, provided 
always that they hold themselves ready to change 
every one of them when solid reasons are given 
therefor. 

There is, moreover, ample direct evidence in this: 
case to prove that Madhwa had learned the systems. 


280 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


of the twenty-one rival faiths, if only to refute their 
arguments, which he has done in his commentaries on 
the Vedanta Sutras. That he had had no scruple to 
learn even the Mlechcha language is proved by the 
statement in Madhwa Vijaya that he had picked up 
Persian enough to parley with hostile Mahomedans 
in North India. Under such circumstances, it would 
have been exceedingly strange if he had not acquain- 
ted himself with the faith of the Jains by whom he 
was surrounded or even that of the Christians having 
a settlement at Kalyan or thereabout, very near 
Udipi. In judging the attitude of the Founder of a 
faith, we must make up our mind to exclude the 
attitude of the modern heads of mutts in regard to 
these matters. These latter repose on the glory of 
the Founder, secure from fear of violence or spolia- 
tion under the most impartial government they have 
ever had, and have the luck to be placed in situations 
where ignoranee ts bliss. They, therefore, very 
properly refuse to commit the folly of being wise, ¢.e., 
learning anything. 

The greatest difficulty in connection with an 
Investigation of this kind is the sensitiveness of the 
followers of the faith under examination. In all 
cases of living faiths, of which Madhwaism is one, 
the orthodox, from the way in which they are brought 
up, feel shocked when their cherished beliefs are 
touched with ‘intent to be ‘cut up,’ and professed 
theologians have always raised a cry of horror when 
religion is treated like any other institution. They 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 281 


are afraid that if, for instance, a particular doctrine 
of a Guru is shown to have been adapted from 
a previously known source, the Gurw loses his 
divinity, and his system its revealed nature. They 
call him ungodly who rejects absurd miracles, They 
never bring themselves to agree that in the case of 
Madhwa, it is glory enough for him to have composed 
the works that he has left behind, and that his ‘divine’ 7 
nature and his greatness will not be one whit the less, 
for the total rejection of all the miracles associated 
with his name. He has been able to pour old win 
into new bottle without breaking it, and that is divinity 
enough for any teacher. For “ religions which stake 
‘their existence on the belief of men in certain occur- 
rence true or alleged, instead of basing themselves 
on truths independent of time and place, and satis- 
fying man’s spiritual needs and aspirations,—always 
run the risk of losing their hold on the thinking 
portion of the followers thereof.” 

Bearing in mind these difficulties as well as 
the fact that our examination has for its aim not 
certainly decrying the merits of any person, 
but search after historic truth, we might now look at 
two or three features of Madhwaism, whose genesis 
seems plain and easily traceable. To begin with, 
there is the doctrine of the Divine Person with 
attributes, repeated and upheld ever so oft, and the 
substitution of ‘mealy’ lamb for the lamb of flesh, 
The doctrine and this healthy reform appear due to , 
the strong Jain influence found in Canara at that 


282 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


time. The curious may compare the invocation of 
the guru before commencing the Sutra Bhashya, with 
the invocation of Amarasimha. The Jain tenderness 
for animal life has had a long, noble, and even 
ludicrous history, but the guru, as one might expect, 
based his reform on an episode in the Mahabharata. 

Again, we have seen that the doctrine of salva- 
tion solely through Vayu, son of Vishnu, is to be found 
in this form in Madhwatism alone of all the faiths of 
India. It is tempting, though it is undesirable, to 
connect this at once with the doctrine of the only 
other great faith which proclaims it—Christianity. 
But unless we are sure of the steps through which 
the one was metamorphosed into the other, asserting 
the Christian origin of this doctrine serves only to 
wound the feelings of the orthodox. At this stage, 
therefore, we have merely to rest content with noting 
its singularity, as well as the singular nature of 
another doctrine—that concerning eternal Hell— 
though in this latter case its origin can well be 
connected with the troubles under which the faith 
happened to spread. 

Add, to points of doctrine, certain remarkable- 
incidents and even expressions used by the Pundit in 
his life of the Guru, for instance, the flight to the 
temple of Udipi in the boyhood of the teacher, the 
fasting and prayer before the proclamation of the- 
faith, multiplying ‘loaves’ and even such phrases as 
giving out the good news and fixhing for men. These- 

re too numerous to be put down as the results of mere: 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 283 


coincidence, though not of that kind which can force 
conviction on neutral minds. It is difficult to measure 
the work of forces which act through unconscious 
cerebration which is the only way of accounting for 
their presence in Madhwa Vijaya, in the absence of 
more solid evidence, 
6. SOCIAL ASPECT OF THE FAITH 

It has often been given out by more than one 
writer that the mission of Ramanuja was one of 
Sociat Reform under a religious guise. The fact 
is pointed out in proof that Tamil has been placed 
by Vaishnative saints on a footing of equally with 
Sanskrit, which always was, as it is now, a sealed 
book to the multitude. If it ever was intended by 
Ramanuja or his successors as a Social Reform 
movement, it has had a singular result at the present 
day, for having asked for bread, his disciples seem to 
have been verily favoured with stone! No such claim 
can possibly be advanced in regard to Madwa. His 
teachings were mainly addressed to Brahmins. So 
that, except the Malavas of South Canara, who own 
special allegiance to the Shivilli Brahmins there, and 
a few hundreds of the gold-smith caste in Coimbatore 
(who streak their foreheads after the manner of 
Madhwas, though it is difficult to say that they do 
anything more), there are no other non-Brahmin 
adherents of the faith to be met with—at least so far 
as the writer is aware. 

The Guru, it is to be feared, has enjoined on his 
followers a system of fasting too rigorous to have 


284 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


healthy influence. . Herein likewise one is tempted to 
see Jain influences, whose overdoing of fasts has long 
passed the bounds of reason and common sense. The 
orthodox have to fast from year’s end to year’s end, 
on one account or another. It is not that kind of 
fasting which is content with the mid-day meal, but 
absolute abstention. from eating and drinking. The 
average Madwa physique has, therefore, had good 
reason to suffer, in so far as any one has chosen to be 
really orthodox. Let it be understood that it 4s not 
fasting but the overdoing of it that is here had in 
view. The writer has reason to believe it is being 
overdone, though under the high pressure of modern 
life, the rigour of it is necessarily giving way. On 
widows’ heads, the rigour falls with all its violence, 
though this cannot move the sympathy ofa people, 
among whom widows are praised in proportion to 
their efforts to hasten their end. 

It would be a marvel if, after the experience of 
Europe and India in previous times, Madhwa 
Theology had exercised any useful or healthy influence 
on culture, Examples of beautiful originals ruthlessly 
tampered with, because of their connection with 
heathen, pagan, or heretic authors, will readily occur 
to the reader of Papal history and Madhwaism has, 
sure enough, had its own share in that kind of work, 
though on a very small scale. In the Bhagavata, for 
instance, an entire chapter, confessedly no interpolation, 
is omitted in Madhwa recitals, because it attributes ig- 
norance to the Creator. And it has placed on a foot- 


HIS LIFE AND TIMES 285, 


ing of equality masterpieces of art like the Ramayana 
of Valmiki or the Mahabharata of Vyasa, with the 
Yamaka Bharata of Madhwa. with an evident 
partiality for this ecclesiastical common-place of a 
pedantic age. Theology and sweet reasonableness 
seem always to have been constitutionally opposed to, 
and been poles apart, from each other*. 

But when all is said, the fact remains that Ma- 
dhwaism is one of the most living of Indian faiths. 


nen ne Bi Ta tlh kal 
* Mr. Achar’s appreciation of the literary merits of 
Madhwa Vijiaand Manimanjari isthe latest illustration hereof.. 


PHILOSOPHY OF MADHWACHARYA 
BY MR. S. SUBBA RAU, M.A. 
ie gS 
INTRODUCTORY 

BOUT the middle of the twelfth century, India 
A south of the Vindhyas was being governed by 
native potentates. The Aryan community was 
habitually giving serious and due attention eto its 
religious, philosophical, and literary pursuits, though 
there might have been considerable disturbance by 
war or political changes. It was already some 
centuries since the Buddhistic influence had been 
completely subverted, or had declined for want of 
political support. By this time, the Vedanta system 
had come to be studied as expounded by Sri Sankara- 
charya while the older orthodox expositions were 
consigned to oblivion. It should not be forgotten 
that, besides the Vedas, Vedangas, Puranas, Itihasas, 
etc., there was an earlier literature in every other 
branch of knowledge. Generally, people had still 
intense faith in that the Vedas etc., are the reposi- 
tories of truth and wisdom, though the common reader 
or thinker did not hope to derive therefrom a syste- 
matic idea of their contents. The philosophy of 
Maya was a most fascinating study, and its influence 
was widespread, But thoughts of opposite schools 
could not be blotted out of existence; they were only 
smouldering till they should be blown into a flame by 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 287 


a strong breath, as of Sri Ramanuja, or of Sri 
Madhwa. The former bases his exposition on an 
earlier treatise called Bodhayana Vritti; and the 
latter institutes a comparative study of the common 
and oldest authorities, and interprets them in the 
light of sound logic, giving full value to the internal 
evidence before he arrives at his conclusions. This 
feature gives the study of Sri Madhwa’s works a 
historical importance as throwing light either ona 
very early stage, or on different stages, of philosophical 
thinking. 
THE INFLUENCES IN THE COUNTRY 

Sri Madhwacharya is generally known over 
South India as a great religious reformer, and an 
orthodox commentator on the Brahma Sutras, and 
theefamous ten Upanishads. He was born ofa Tulu 
Brahmin, in a village near the small town of Udipi 
in the District of South Canara. Of late, there has 
been a slight question about the date of his birth, some 
holding it to be about 1118 A.D., others about I1g9 
A.D. At this time, the narrow strip on the Western 
Coast beyond the Ghats was comparatively secure from 
molestation. It had long ago become the asylum of many 
Brahmin families as well as of Brahminical learning, 
Here, the native princes extended to them their liberal 
patronage, while the people cherished a veneration 
for them. The archives of the old literature which 
the immigrants had brought with them were not 
exposed to the destructive influence of foreign inva- 


sions. Here, too, the traces of some ancient cults and 


288 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


several aspects of the Aryan religious life may, to this 
day, point to an interesting phase of the past history. 
The worship of Vishnu, especially in the form of Sri 
Krishna, so general on that coast, is a sure indica- 
tion that the influence of the Bhagavatas was great 
there, if not all-sweeping. Even when the country 
was convulsed with the study of the Advaitic Philo- 
sophy there did not cease to be staunch adherents of 
older systems. The prevailing study, however, had 
not much interfered with the crystallised religious 
beliefs and practices. The religious and_philoso- 
phical literature largely consisted of dialectics and 
polemics full of sophistry, mostly written in the old 
style.* Great erudition was often displayed to con- 
found the ordinary thinker, which filled the masses 
with wonder and blind admiration. Such was the 
character of the learning that commanded approba- 
tion generally of scholars, too. Hence, great was the 
difficulty in the way of one holding. opposite views. 
The only hopeful course was to ransack the authoritae 
tive literature, Vedic and later, and to replace sophis- 
try by sound reasoning that may not prove self-des- 
tructive. In these circumstances was Sri Madhwa 
placed when he came forward as a teacher. As him- 
self a pupil, he had begun by respectfully pointing out 
the faults and fallacies in the works taught to him. 
When he was himself challenged to expound the 
established system, he won admiration by his. 
perfect familiarity with the traditional interpretation 


* Many of them are now lost. 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 289 


and exposition, After giving proofs of the  intui- 
tive yet masterly insight into the philosophical lore, he 
discovered to the view of the unbiassed, of course, 
very emphatically, how the established system was 
not satisfactory either in the light of sacred 
authorities or in respect of accurate reasoning. 
Naturally, he was next challenged to expound the 
true Vedic Philosophy, and he chose to present his 
views by means of quotations from works which 
were, gt the time, admitted to be great aurhorities, 
and by means of the Logic recognised by those 
authorities, viz., the Vedas, Pancharatra, Itihasa, and 
Brahmatarka, to which last constant reference is given: 
in his works, 
THE SCOPE OF THE PAPER 

* Thus, we see that he does not claim any origi- 
nality on his part for the system. He comes forward 
only as an orthodox interpreter of the system which 
the Brahma Sutras are intended to teach. A foreign 
critic justly observes that the system of Philosophy 
taught by Sri Madhwacharya does not seem to 
commend itself to many, simply because they are 
prejudiced by the name ° Dualistic Philosophy’, which, 
he thinks, isa misnomer; and that, if properly 
presented, it will find more readers in the world than 
any other. Accordingly, it is purposed to sketch 
here, a general view of the cardinal principles and of 
the general course of reasoning employed to maintain 
them. Indeed, the task is beset with peculiar 
difficulties; for the positions and aspects of the system, 

19 


290 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


cannot be effectively described and presented unless a 
searching contrast is instituted between this and all 
the other schools of thought both ancient and 
modern; and to make its’ distinctive character 
sufficiently clear, a huge volume may have to be 
written. But the task here undertaken is a very 
humble one. Thisis intended only as a preparation 
of the mind for more elaborate study and research 
into this philosophical literature. 
PHILOSOPHY DEFINED 

At the present day, the term ‘ Philosophy ’ is used 
in connection with many branches of study and the 
reader would be glad to be told what notion he should 
form here by the word. Etymologically, it means 
* Love of wisdom’, and this sense may not seem to 
suit its present function to convey the most generalised 
course of thought. An enquiry, however, intended 
to arrive at the most generalised knowledge of things 
and the spirit in which that knowledge is to be sought 
may be taken to be the full meaning of the word. 
For the ‘Love of wisdom’ is and must be the motive 
power to speed the journey on that long and tedious 
road of enquiry. Now, wisdom cannot be what it is 
if it did not imply invariable reference to‘ TR OTH", 
or reality or facts, that is, to things as such and as 
they are in the given place and time. For the 
purposes of the present paper, philosophy may be 
taken to mean: (I) A system of knowledge always 
having reference to Truth, that is, things as they are 
both in their gross forms and in their subtle and 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 2ot 


ultimate state; and (II) A system of teaching or 
writing which is devoted to investigation into the 
nature of things asa means of attaining to sucha 
knowledge of Truth. 
TRUTH 

“Truth ’—It is a most charming word. Under 
this name, anything might acquire an importance and 
attractiveness which need not be real. To many, 
‘Truth’ seems to stand apart from things that are 
true. eFor they are prone to think that ‘Truth’ as 
forming part and parcel of things has nothing of that 
grandeur which they would or could see in theab- 
stract ‘Truth.’ Therefore, the Acharya first interrupts 
this pleasant notion and tells them that ‘ Truth’ is 
inseparable from the things that are true. Accord- 
ingly, his system deals with the ultimate and most 
general question, what things are fundamentally true, 
why they should be accepted as such, what relations 
do subsist and can be logically conceived to subsist 
or maintained, on authority, between the funda- 
mentals, or between them and their products, or 
between the several products. 

MADHWA A PHILOSOPHER 

Since very few of the modern scholars know him 
to: be a philosopher in the highest sense of the word, 
an examination of the ground work of Philosophy 
is worth making at the outset. A reasoned and 
general system of religion of any stability must stand 
on a worthy philosophical view of all the related 
things in the range of knowledge, His works clearly 


292 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


show that he worked at his system with such a 
persuasion and he has written more on points of 
philosophy than on those of religion. Accordingly, 
he has written a set of works called Prakaranas, that 
is, small accessory treatises dealing severally with 
points connected with the main system. These 
inculcate those principles of logic which «should safely 
guide the thinker through the intricate maze of 
enquiry. Itis therefore, of great advantage at the 
very threshold to give or receive the warning that, at 
every step, we should be careful not to jump out of 
the only ground on which we can possibly stand. 
KNOWLEDGE: ITS RELATIVITY 

Now then, the enquiry starts naturally with a 
survey of _ that fundamental ground, namely 
Thought or Knowledge. The nature of that 
ground must be certainly examined, for, only on 
this available ground, Sri Madhwa rests his 
philosophy as well as his religion. Thought or 
Knowledge, whether it is the experience of common 
parlance or some essential property of some sub- 
stratum, or that substance itself, it cannot be what 
it is or must be, when the Knower and the Known 
correlated to Thought are denied, or are not admit- 
ted; for such denial cannot:cease to be self-destruc- 
tive. Thus, in the Acharya’s system,'consistency rules. 
and exercises a sovereign power over all Thought and 
its correlatives, and must therefore commend itself to 
all those that respect the Laws of Thinking. In his 
view, nothing may deserve to be called philosophy 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 293 


which does not stand the test of this sovereign rule, 
for this alone can warrant the fundamentals that may 
be arrived at. Inthis view, all the theories that 
have been, or will ever be propounded do belong to 
all times, and they are only subject to the force of a 
current that may at a time, submerge some and allow 
some others to float and prevail on the surface. 
Hence the position he takes up as the mere expounder 
of Sri Badarayana’s system is neither inconsistent nor 
without proof. | 
THE VEDAS AND LOGIC 

In his view, too, the Vedasare the representa- 
tives (in sound) of the ideas of all times, and he can 
recugnise the authoritativeness of the Vedas in a sense 
or in a degree in which even’ other teachers of Ortho- 
doxy have not done or cannot do; for to these, they 
are no better than phenomenal things of the limited 
world. Whereas, Sri Madhwa considers the Vedas 
as both Truth and means of knowing the Truth, 
permanent and absolute. This position might seem 
inconsistent with the logical character specially claim- 
ed for the system. It is however, a mistake due:to 
misconception of the function or province of Logic, 
which, by itself, cannot become an independ- 
ent means of knowledge, %. e-, of knowing the 
Truth. 

THE PROVINCE OF LOGIC 

The familiar ‘1’ or the individual self is evi- 
dently the primary factor or basis involved or implied 
in knowledge either as a means, or as the resultant, 


294 SRI -MADHWACHARYA 


or as something without which no knowledge could 
be. The nature of its working exhibits a purpose to: 
which means is adapted, and generally implies means 
and causes beyond itself. Now, the means of 
knowledge has been generally recognised as three- 
fold; viz., the Sense-Perception, the Word, and 
Reasoning or Logic. The sphere of the senses is, 
after all, admitted as very limited; and logic or 
reasoning does not tndependantly furnish facts. On 
the other hand, it has only to examine the facts 
furnished by any independant means of knowledge, 
Perception or the Word, as the case may be. Though 
the modern thinker may find it difficult to understand 
how the Word may be such a means, the subject has 
been sifted by Aryan seholars with a marvellous 
power of intuition and consistent Logic. And so.he 
would do well to consider the subject with due 
deference. The Aryan thinker concedes that the 
sphere of the Word is far wider than that of the 
senses: first, this is true even in the case of human 
testimony. Admitting for the present that the Word 
can furnish facts which are beyond the range of the 
senses, We may See that all reasoning must proceed 
on the facts furnished by sense perception or testi- 
mony. In the process of reasoning we deduce new 
facts; but all the same, the reasoning is by nature so 
dependent upon the facts furnished by other means, 
that it can never rise to the rank of an independent 
means of knowledge. Logic is in the first place 
useful for testing the consistency of successive obser- 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 295. 


vations and notions and correcting the errors that 
may creep into the various sources of knowledge, and 
secondly, by virtue of consistency in the course of 
nature, for assuming certain other facts or relations: 
not directly known by Pratyaksha or Word. Thus, 
the real function or scope of Logic is that it must 
subserve the authority of the sense-perception or of 
the Word; and that Logic and Testimony (of the 
Word) may both unitedly elucidate certain truths. 
without and shadow of inconsistency about them. 
Perhaps, there is no great thinker who does not re- 
cognise this very essential and primary principle ; but 
this recognition is after all a mere promise, and it is no 
assurance of its observance. No thought is worthy 
of any regard, no item of knowledge is of any value, 
unless and until it is thoroughly examined with 
reference to its contents and is found to be free from: 
the self-destructive inconsistency. Accordingly, the 
Acharya has, in proving sure every step he 
takes, to pass in review the positions taken by 
all the other writers. Very often, statements. 
conveying really distinct ideas are misunderstood. 
as conveying one and the same idea, or vice-versa; 
and against such mistakes he has to Warn us, 
Again, the first principles often happen to be so 
general and subtle, that they cannot be easily grasped 
unless the contrary is seen side by side to be absurd. 
Since thought or idea is the motive power that 
urges us onward in the path of enquiry, every detail 
of the enquiry must be cast in the mould of thought 


296 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


or idea, when that may be said to be within our 
grasp. The Acharya’s system, therefore, opens with 
an examination of evidence. 
EVIDENCE OR PRAMANA 
General 

The term Pramana or evidence is by most philo- 
sophers understood only as the means by which things 
are apprehended, but the Acharya goes a step further 
and recognises the apprehension (knowledge) to be the 
primary and direct evidence of the thing that is 
apprehended ; for when the idea is up it does not 
imply any medium for its relation to the thing repre- 
sented; while the means, having led to the result, 
namely, the apprehension, withdraws itself as it were 
from the field of idea, not intervening in any manner 
or degree between the knowledge and the known. 
That is to say, the organs for instance only help on 
the faculty of understanding, but do not form any 
part of the understanding when it has risen, and do 
not require the idea again to pass through them to the 
object. Hence the Acharya lays down that apprehen- 
sion or knowledge is the primary and direct evidence 
of what is perceived. The secondary evidence or the 
means of evidence is of three kinds, though some other 
Systems recognise four or more. The three sources of 
knowledge recognised by the Acharya are (1) sense- 
perception or the senses, known as Pratyaksha, (2) 
Reasoning or Ratiocination, (3) Word or Testimony, 
while Upamana or Analogy admitted by others is 
shown to be a variety of Ratiocination or Reasoning. 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 297 


This classification of Pramanas (the means of evi 
dence) makes it clear that according to this system, 
experiential thought or idea as any other fact, claims 
for the law of Causation a fundamental character 
which some thinkers may hesitate to allow. Whether 
thought or idea is essentially a new product at every 
step or only a disclosure, the antecedent circumstances, 
not being the material cause, cannot be said in any 
manner to form part and parcel of the resulting, 
or thg disclosed, idea. For instance, light, the 
object, place, time and vision, all may be required 
and contribute to the rise of a particular idea, but 
do not constitute the idea. In every act of know- 
ing, the relation of the Knower and the Known, 
or rather the relation of Knowledge to the Known 
is direct 4. ¢.,implies no mediacy. How to jump out 
of this relation, it is not possible to understand. So 
long as the faculty remains what it is, this relation 
must be. Bereft of this relation, anything can be 
called knowledge. If we deny, the very denial 
implies an idea, or it is the expression of an idea. 
Therefore the means or circumstances that are 
invariably the antecedents of a particular idea be- 
comes the evidence or the medium of knowledge of a 
thing, not directly, but through the idea or knowledge 
which they are instrumental in producing. Hence 
these are called Secondary or Mediate Evidence, as 
only serving to produce that which is the immediate 
eyidence of the known. To define it succinctly, 
Ewidence is either that (the tdea) which. by virtue of 


298 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


tts own nature has direct reference to what is cognised, 
or that which 1s the means of or help to such cognition, 
Both the immediate and the mediate must stand the 
tests that may be applied when necessary to prove 
their validity. Every idea or apprehension, as it 
arises, implies its own validity by virtue of its nature. 
It does not involve or imply, (for it cannot), a doubt 
of itself. On the other hand, the validity of any idea 
or thought may be questioned or impeached at the 
instance of some other idea or thought which claims. 
greater or absolute validity and effectually contradicts 
that prior notion. Now, two points are to be kept 
distinct in view:—(1) The Genesis of an idea or 
notion, and (2) its validity. 

(1) The rising of a Notion or Thought depends 
upon the means, circumstances or causes which are 
the antecedents. 

(2) As already pointed out, a notion rises. 
implying its own validity 7..e., it does not rise impli- 
cating a suspicion of its own validity; for it often 
induces action in expectation of the realisation of the 
purpose—and in the natural course, the notion, the 
action and the realisation do in very many cases. 
correspond together and the notion of its validity often. 
stands tested. When any notion is rejected as false, 
the explanation of its invalidity is to be found in the 
means and antecedent circumstances, For, when a 
perception is produced by virtue of the ‘ the means of 
knowledge,’ an expectation of realising the thing 
induces the necessary action ; but, if the action is not 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 299: 


fruitful, the perception or notion is rejected as illusive. 
Here, only the means, etc., are considered to be. 
at fault, defective or erroneous or misleading. So it 
is clear that naturally and primarily, no notion or 
idea implies a suspicion of itself.. Such a suspicion 
is always caused by a subsequent corrective notion: 
or thought. 

All that has been said of evidence and know- 
ledge plainly supposes the relation of knowledge, on 
the one hand, to the Knower of whom it is am 
attribute, and, on the other, to the Known, to which 
it refers generally as something different and distinct 
from itself. The Acharya holds this as the most 
of all the first principles of his philosophy—namely,. 
there is no perception, notion, or idea which might 
staed unrelated to the Knower and the Known, for, 
all inquiry must start with, and all acceptable 
conclusions must be in terms of, such knowledge ;. 
otherwise, any system of thought reluctant to recog- 
nise this fundamental position must, he thinks, stand 
self-condemned. Besides the three Pramanas accepted 
in this system, there are several others named by 
other schools of thought, which are, however, 
shown to be varieties of any one of the three, 
Pratyaksha or sense-perception and Anumana or 
Reasoning are readily admitted as the two sources of 
knowledge derived by experience. 

THE NATURE OR THE WORD AS EVIDENCE 

The authoritativeness of the Word or Testimony 
has a peculiar significance and requires a speciak 


300 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


effort of the modern mind to perceive the force of 
admitting it as such. 

Sabda or Testimony may for all practical pur- 
poses be supposed a record, rather a permanent 
-exponent, of ideas (eternal or other, as the case may 
be), which, not being within the range of our sense 
experience, are still conveyed to us by the power of 
‘the Word. 

It has been questioned whether Logic is first or 
the authority (Testimony). A careful review of the 
works of Sri Madhwacharya discloses the fact that 
there can be no sort of inconsistency or contradiction 
‘between them. Logic or logical principles, we know, 
are founded upon the relation of things in actual 
-observation. If we hold that logical principles are valid 
and useful in questions dealing with such matter’ of 
-observation, we can with equal truth and profit admit 
their validity and usefulness in the province of the 
authority or testimory. The Acharya does not draw 
any great distinction of kind between the authority 
-of the Senses and that of Testimony. If the scientist 
-of to-day would say that he can detect things 
‘beyond the range of the naked eye with the aid of a 
telescope or microscope, or with some light rays 
‘similar to the well-known X-rays the Acharya tells us 
that even the gross physical senses when refined by 
the processes of Yoga or other means in the laboratory 
of one’s own physical frame—they are capable 
of performing. functions which we now deny of them. 
Now the testimony would be nothing but the record 


HIS PHILOSOPHY » 308 


of observations by the refined senses and organs. 
Then the principles of Logic which we restrict to the 
- province of the meagre sense-experience are only and. 
naturally extended to the whole field of knowledge 
and means thereof. And it is hereby clear that our 
restriction after all evinces a sort of narrow-minded- 
ness. | 
Again we should clearly bear in mind that logi- 
cal principles must follow actual facts and the facts: 
canno$ primarily arise in accordance with any 
assumption, baseless assumption, that we may be apt 
- to make. If the Acharya emphasises the absolute 
authority of Testimony and tells us that all Logic is. 
nothing but a consistent construing of the Testimony 
as it is of sense-experiences, it Is this truth that he 
ha? successfully brought home to the mind of think- 
ers. Likewise he very often warns us against the 
very great and frequent danger of being led away by 
false generalisations and analogies, which are but 
attempts to connect the unconnected things by a 
stretch of imagination, He constantly therefore 
draws our attention to the individual character and 
nature of facts and things—a position most funda- 
mental in the genesis as well as the history of know- 
ledge. The differance between the individual things- 
is as essential a part of each as agreement or similar- 
ity. So we are told and we also observe the points. 
of community are not identical but are only similar 
standing forth or running side by side like parallel 


lines. 


302 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


To start with, another important and common 
mistake has to be warned against. The logical prin- 
ciples are not the means of knowledge, but they are 
only certain laws that obtain between the ideas in so 
far as these are tested to be true with reference to the 
things implied by them. So when we say that these 
principles follow actual facts, it should always be kept 
vivid in the mind that the facts are proved ideas but 
not fancies. 

_ The above explanation of the Authority of 
Testimony (Word) might appear to conflict with 
-our favourite view that the Vedas are eternal like 
God. They are not even admitted as the composi- 
tion of the Deity, through whose grace they become 
revealed to holy men. A little consideration will 
show that the seeming conflict is of no real conse- 
quence, while the theory itself turns our attention to 
two important conceptions. Are we to suppose that 
we live in a world which is by time and space un- 
connected with all the past and all the future? Or 
are we to suppose that we live in it connected with 
the whole stream of time and space? Granting that 
our present world is a creation of some thousand 
years, could we deny the existence of similar worlds 
both in the past and in the future? If we deny it, the 
inductive hazard should become altogether unreliable. 
If we grant it in the past, of what benefit should it 
be.to us except by way of making us wiser with a 
record of the past history ? Through the eternity of 
time, how many should be admitted in the past? We 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 303 


cannot possibly stop without alighting upon an infinite 
series of things, facts and ideas, worlds and records 
representing them. The recognition of an infinite 
series is a Clear explanation of the term eternity. So, 
in the first place, every great thinker, perceives that 
the testimony of words must essentially embody such 
eternal ideas. Next, when the distinction is drawn 
between the eternal and the human (the natural and 
artificial, so to say), Testimony, there is a compul- 
sion toesee the difference between their import. The 
modern scholar might, however, hope to easily dispose 
of the question on the ground of ignorance as to 
authorship. But this cannot be a satisfactory solution 
to one who perceives and distinguishes the character 
of the various ideas and their basis, Whatever the solu- 
tio’ of the question-may ultimately be, no difficulty 
can however be conceived ‘in \the way of admitting 
‘the authoritativeness of true ideas. Hence, the 
Acharya divides the authoritative Testimony into 
Apaurusheya (that which is not the composition of 
any person), and Paurusheya (composition of some 
person). This distinction implies the assumption that 
the former wholly consists of true ideas, which 
become the standard for others, but do not require 
to be proved by some other standard; whereas 
the latter Testimony admits of test or demons- 
tration as against the ideas of the former and of 
sense-experience. We know that the ultimates 
should only be self-evident truths, and even those 
are to be perceived as such by every individual 


304 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


who has to acquire kuowledge. Then we cannot say 
that the process of cognition or perception, can make 
the eternal things, and ideas non-eternal or change- 
able. If the eternal testimony should have been seen 
from time to time to represent such ideas, etc., its 
authoritativeness arises from itself. The general 
principle in determining whence arises the validity of 
a perception is that the means of knowledge, not being 
defective or interfered with, leads to a correct ue 
hension by its own virtue. 

Further, it may be sufficient that the simplest 
elements of language are eternal to be only discover- 
ed and used by us at different stages of advancement, 
for which we are endowed with faculties. Hence 
the fifty-elements alone of Speech might be, the 
Acharya would allow, sufficient to be admitted as 
Eternal. They are said to be all-pervading, ¢. e., 
they must be admited to be everywhere. All occur-. 
ring every where, a particular combination, when 
revealed toa particular Saint and recognised by his 
superior vision to be the Eternal Record or Represent- 
ative of certain ideas, the Combination is a piece of 
the Vedas. A fuller discussion of this point must 
form the subject of a separate work. 

If a certain item of sense-perception is indisput- 
ably correct and valid, it would then be impossible to 
accept as valid a statement contradicting that. More- 
over, our understanding of the language is generally 
based on our sense experience and only through this, 
can language help us to conceive things and facts, 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 305. 


when these are beyond the range of direct observation 
or of Inference. Thus the Acharya recognises the 
importance of the Sense-Perception as the first open- 
ing of the gates of Knowledge to be acquired through 
other means than self-intuition. In human nature, 
intuition, though the very basis, is yet limited in many 
aspects in the case of the souls. 

The next point to be constantly bornein mind 
is that, if Sense-Perception furnishes facts on which 
_ the process of reasoning primarily depends, the Word 
does it on a larger scale in relation to what may lie 
beyond the range of our senses. Neither Pratyakshe 
nor Sabda (Word) can be treated as a variety of 
Inference, since the processes involved in this are not 
required“in the other two. 

+ OBJECTIVE REALITY : 

From what has been said it is clear that the 
theory of knowledge as maintained here implies 
objective existence and reality of things, facts, or 
aspects in relation to the Self asthe Knower, 
Then the reality of such objective existence or 
aspect is the first of the philosophical points to be 
considered. From the logical conception of a fact or 
Reality, there is no necessity for supposing that what- 
ever is not eternal or unchanging cannot be Truth 
or reality or fact. Even a phenomenon that may 
last for a single moment is a fact, and the perception 
thereof as a phenomenon is a true and correct percep- 
tign. In the first place, Knowledge generally implies 
an object as existing out of itself. With reference to. 

20 


300 SRI ._MADHWACHARYA 


such an object the primary notion takes the form “ it 
is a thing,’’ more correctly, “dt is”. (the positive). 
The notion ‘it is not’ (the negative), surely depends 
upon the primary positive notion ‘it ¢s’; for without 
this reference, the second notion does not arise. Hence 
we have a practical definition :—That with reference 
to which the notion ‘it is not’ cannot primarily 
‘arise at all times or at all places, constitutes the 
existence (being) ofa thing. When perception arises 
of the knowing Self or of anything else, its existence 
is implied in the very first apprehension, as also the 
reality or validity of the apprehension. If in certain 
‘cases, the perception happens to be at variance with 
the facts implied in it, andit is to be given up as 
false, some other perception, at least, that which pro- 
ves the preceding to be a mistake, must certainly 
claim this reality and validity ; otherwise, every notion 
would have to be given‘up as a mistake without proof— 
a position that cannot save one from self-contradiction. 
Infact, no proof or argument has yet been advanced 
free from this serious objection, to prove the unreality 
of the objective world, or even of the different aspects 
of the very knowing Self. Numerous are the 
attempts made to show that knowledge cannot com- 
_prehend anything except itself ; that is to say, ideas 
themselves stand as the Knower and the Known and 
such relation must be false—this view is agreeable to 
some thinkers; for, these philosophers think that 
since nothing can be proved or stated except in terms 
of ideas, the objective relation implied by:them is all 


a 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 307 


due to some unaccountable nature ever tending to 
mistake—perhaps this opinion alone excepted, Against 
all such positions, the Acharya proves how they are 
untenable and shows that they invariably fling them- 
selves into self-contradiction and ignore the operation 
of the Law of Causation; for the unreal cannot have 
an appearance even, cannot become the object of 
misapprehension, and cannot therefore be causally 
connected with any effect. ae 
‘As already pointed out, it is not possible to 
declare all ideas to be altogether illusions ; otherwise, 
even in the sphere of common experience, the distinc- 
tion of true and false ideas should cease to be of any 
value or meaning. Supposing that all ideas are illu- 
sions, we should analyse the mental phenomenon of 
illusion or mis-apprehension so as to find an explana- 
tion. The analysis shows that there is an object 
positively presented, and it does not essentially vanish, 
but that aspect alone yanishes which is superimposed 
or super-added by the mind which is misled by tts 
similarity etc., to think of other things, when the 
thing presented is perceived through defective serises 
or faulty means, Thus the analysis forces the 
acceptance of two real things (viz., the thing present- 
ed and that another which is suggested by the point 
of similarity) without which no misapprehension can 
‘ever arise. The being of what is presented, but’ not 
perceived as it is, becomes predicated of what is sug- 
‘gested by force of association. Then, if the notion 
which might imply the unreality of the world of 


308 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


difference, be a notion having reference to some 
aspect or attribute of something else, this at least 
must be admitted to be true or real. If, on the other 
hand, the subsequent notion, too, should arise with- 
out any reference at all, it cannot correct any preced- 
ing notion. 
BHEDA OR DIFFERENCE 

Further, the ideas of distinction cannot be 
accounted for, so long as no intrinsic essential pecu- 
liarities are admitted in the things themselves which 
are connected as causes with the several notions, 
Therefore, the Acharya holds that in the proper 
exercise of the senses and faculties all the apprehen- 
sions or notions are representatives of Truth. Hence, 
the un-impeached notions implying relations prove 
difference to be a truth whether it isin things or 
aspects. This is the next most fundamental principle. 

DIFFERENCE—WHETHER CONVENTIONAL 

Could we not dispose of the notion of difference 
as conventional ? We cannot; for if a certain dis- 
‘tinction be called conventional, it does not mean it is 
false: Wehave the ordinary distinction as positive 
‘and negative. In the ordinary acceptation, it cannot 
be proved absolutely unreal. It does not cease to be, 
‘even if we use the terms in a_ different order. 
Wherein has convention its own origin? It is 
not possible to conceive that mere convention could 
make the distinction which is not. On the other 
hand, when distinction already exists, convention 
Steps in in the use of the term or of any such mark to 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 309. 


denote the distinctness and thereby to help memory 
and further thought, and facilitate communication, 
So the term is conventional and it may not matter, 
whether this term or that is appropriated to denote 
this or that aspect or thing those under consideration. 
Such terms either need not be unreal. Nothing could 
be found to prove that things causing the notion of. 
difference come into existence or vanish merely by 
virtue of convention. It cannot be supposed that the 
notion is baseless 7. e., arises without sufficient cause. 
When we are thus compelled to find the cause of itin 
the very nature of things by what virtue could con- 
vention make the objective difference an unreality ? 
We may perhaps, by an effort of will, differently 
use, the terms positive and negative, and palpably 
there might be no inconvenience in a few cases; 
when, however, the genesis of the terms positive and 
negative as embodying the antecedent thoughts 1s. 
investigated into, it is not possible to hold that they 
have to represent something arbitrary or unconnected. 
with all true ideas. A simple yet apt illustration we 
find in the commonest terms up and down, Might 
we not freely change the denotation of these two 
words and say ‘ We are going up hill’ when we des- 
cend, and ‘We go down hill’ when we ascend? We 
might; but the distinction between ascent and descent 
was not produced, and could not be annihilated, by - 
the use of the terms. 

* Many other explanations are sought to deny the 
validity of the notion of difference as well as the 


310 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


objective difference involved in the notion. Some of 

them may be examined before Sri Madhwa’s con-. 

clusion is stated. The notion duality is supposed: 
to be induced and regulated by time and space,: 

evidently on the assumption that they are ‘unreal: 
in themselves, It may be just asked whether they” 
are unreal on the strength of any evidence, as bei 
ing so given in understanding or as not being: 
given at all. First, the arguments or considerations: 
employed in proving the ideas of time and ‘space: 
as inferential are no longer considered valid. We 

see that the ideas ‘of time and space are not; 
the result of sense perception, nor do they seem-to: 
be in the sphere of consciousness before other. 

objects are apprehended. The muscular sense, 
which ‘is said to contribute to the inferential na- 
ture of this idea, is to be questioned, as not direct: 
ly giving rise to any consciousness. To take: 
one by one—Is space itself to be considered as existing: 
or aS non-existing, real or unreal? Is the idea of. 
space necessary for the perception of duality, 7.¢.,.is it: 
present before the notion of the duality can arise, 
either in respect of the subject or things external > 
Or does it create duality which is nowhere? If space 
be‘no other than the Knowing self, could or does it» 
become the object of any such notion as implies or: 
might imply its identical character with the subject > 
In the first place, it would not do to say that the non-i 
existent space induces any idea or notion. If, compel 
Jed by fear of inconsistency, we would not abandon: 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 312 


the only ground under our feet viz., Thought, we 
must conceive space as something existing. 

Now, what distinctions are suggested or are 
denoted by the terms here and there—how could 
they, or why should they, be unteal? It is often sup- 
posed that space is indivisible, 7.e., something that 
has no ‘parts, and therefore the divisions as here and 
there must be unreal. This view might be taken 
with reference to many other objects of knowledge ; 
however, the answer to the question of space would 
enable the thinker to find the solution in other cases 
as well. Is the distinction of here and there to be 
admitted as unreal, because, it would otherwise make 
space other than what it is? Is space to be conceived 
as something having parts or no parts. The latter 
alternative cannot be adopted since it is inconceivable 
how such a thing could ever give occasion for the 
distinction as here and there. ‘If a geometrical point 
could be conceived at any time to become expanded 
into the unlimited space, we could see that the ex- 
pansion must be false and that the fancied distinctions 
are necessarily false. too. On the other hand, the 
conception of the point precludes all such imagi- 
nation, nor do we find anything to support any poOssi- 
ble theory that space so evidently unlimited, might 
become contracted into a point or resolve itself into: 
the Knower or Knowledge or into nothing. 

Must space like the notion of space be absolutely 

sidentical with the thinking Self ? Supposing that to 
be, we cannot see how the distinctions as here and 


312 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


there implied by the nature of such a self could be 
given up as unreal, for, the self at least must be real. 
Nothing could be admitted to be real if the properties 
that constitute it are not real, too. But, whatever may 
be the reality. of the properties, it might be said 
that that cannot warrant theiassumption of separate 
entities real and absolute, which are indispensable 
only for the notion of duality or plurality. This ob- 
jection is futile. The distinction in properties or 
aspects, however inseparable they may be, is sufficient 
to prove the main characteristic of knowledge always 
implying the relation of the Knower and the Known. 
Similarly, if the same characteristic of knowledge 
should invariably imply the distinction in properties or 
things which cannot be part and parcel of the think- 
ing Self, these alone could not be rejected as unreal. 

If the Self, being essentially Knowledge, pervade 
absolutely everything, whence is the necessity for it 
to indulge the notions of here and there. Perhaps, 
Ignorance or Nescience, might be brought into 
account for the notion; but when the Self or the self 
knowledge is supposed to.be all-pervading, or all- 
comprehensive, the nature, position and relation of 
that Ignorance cannot be consistently conceived or 
explained, and any explanation would necessitate the 
presupposition of time and space, which should there- 
by become doubly reassured as to their ‘Separate 
existence, 

If any statement should be found in the Vedas : 
conveying the absolute identity of time and Space 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 313 


with the thinking self, it must submit to the same 
examination, and is liable to the same objections. On 
the other hand such texts only forbid the supposition > 
that the all-pervading Paramatman could become 
divided up or affected differently by anything or by any 
conditions, for instance, as some would have, really or 
falsely, by the Ignorance which infects the self—the 
Ignorance, Maya, or Avidya (positive or negative), 
which is supposed to explain away all notions of 
differehce. Let us just see what the Chandyoga text: 
VII-15 means. Substituting the word space for 
Brahman or Atman in the text, we shall have 
** Space alone is above, is below, is behind, before, to» 
the right, to the left, Space is alf this.” What should 
we consider to have been gained or lost by this pro-. 
cess? Should we directly conclude that Brahman or 
self is space? Howcould that help us out of the 
difficulty of accounting for the distinction? If the 
Self is so pervading and is no other than Space, even ° 
the supposed Ignorance cannot help us in accounting 
for the notions of the Self as being above, below, etc. 
For the Ignorance itself has to be conceived in terms 
of Time or Space. 
TIME AND SPACE 

Whatever be the nature of the Self, limited or 
unlimited, the notion of distinction as here and there 
in space cannot be explained, if space is not conceived 
as areal whole having parts. The idea of a whole is 
nof inconsistent with the idea that it has parts. The 
idea of the parts of a whole does not require parti- 


314 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


tions of a foreign substance between the several parts 
or even their separation from the whole and from 
each other. When the whole is so broken up and 
the pieces are separately presented, the idea of the 
whole and of the relation of the parts into that whole 
cannot always arise as when the whole is presented 
with all the parts intact. A wall between two rooms. 
being itself in space, should it be on that account 
supposed incapable of forming the partition between 
the parts of space constituting the rooms? [f it “could, 
not, we might say what cannot make a partition can- 
not enter into space i.e., cannot be in space. So we 
should arrive at the absurd conclusion that a wall’ 
cannot be in space. Whatever is observed to be in: 
space is not observed to be also one with space un-’ 
limited and impartible. Further, if space could not 
be conceived to have parts, it might be asked whether 
things come to be in space, each encompassing all at 
the same time. If it were so, we should not be able: 
to. think what resistance might be. On the other” 
hand, limited bodies admitted as existing in space, 
and ‘resisting each other cannot but prove that space 
has parts, which do not require to be cut asunder for. 
the sake of that conception. The wall is considered as 
a partition but indicates that the space it takes up is 
a part of space in general as distinguished from its 
parts to be conceived as rooms, or occupied by other 
limited bodies, or unoccupied side by side. | 
Thus, it is not possible to conceive that there ‘is 
any item of correct understanding which identifies, . 


HIS PHILOSOPHY - 315 


by virtue of its own character, the Knowing Self with : 
space. Similarly, a more elaborate investigation» 
would show the fallacious character of every position: 
taken to prove Time to be identical with the Knowing. 
Self; and that only the assumption of the one abso-» 
lute existence without a second, but nat the force of. 
evidence available, would compel us to endeavour: 
after this identifying. Hence parts or aspects of an: 
identical whole can be perceived as such, only when» 
they aré related in the whole. In the Spiritual Being’ 
the parts (aspects) are ideally separable, while in the. 
Material, physically also. 134 
Such considerations, due regard to knowledge,. 
to evidence, to the principle of consistency and to the: 
law of causation, have determined the view taken: 
by Sri Madhwa in respect of Time and Space., 
He therefore tells us that Time and Space are two: 
entities which are always and directly in the cogni-: 
tion of the Knowing Self, and wheneverother objects: 
are perceived, the Self at once casts them into the 
mould of time and space over present to it; and has: 
shown all attempts to prove these notions as inferen- 
tial to involve the process of begging the question or 
some other fallacy. 
PERVASION AND DIFFERENCE 
Does the character of the Knowing Self require: 
the eschewing of all notion of difference? It is sup-: 
posed that the Knowing Self is all-pervading and: 
possibly nothing can be out of itself ; should then the. 
perception that things exist as distinct. objects of: 


316 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


knowledge, i. ¢., distinct from the Knower and the 

knowledge, be unreal or incorrect? But as already 

shown with reference to space, the Self of all-. 
pervasion could not in itself in any manner become — 
affected by the existence of objects. Further the 

‘conception of pervasion itself would become more — 
significant when there are things to be pervaded by 

the Self. If the nature of Self is once granted to be 

capable of cognising itself or another, it would do so, 

‘whether what is cognized be an aspect of itself or 

-anything distinct from itself, for that does not require 

what is perceived always to stand aloof from it or to 

ibe contained in itself. Even as space, the Knowing 

Self if all-pervading need not. become divided into 

‘unconnected pieces by the presence of different limited 

‘objects comprehended in itself. Now, in granting a 

Supreme Being or Paramatman, personal or imper- 

sonal, such omnipresence has to be granted for 

‘various.reasons which we need not discuss here. In 
His case all that has been just now said of pervasion 

would be require to be admitted. But every Knowing 

‘Self engaged in working out its own destiny cannot 

be proved as omnipresent, or aS comprehending in > 
itself all things given in its understanding. 

Let us ‘next suppose that knowledge pervades 
all objects; even then, why should they become 
part and parcel of knowledge. Certainly, the idea 
of pervasion does not necessitate the admission of 
indentity between that which pervades and that 
which is pervaded, nor does the term comprehension 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 317 


help us in conceiving that what comprehends is 
necessarily identical with what is comprehended. 
Therefore, there is no sallying out of this relativity 
and we should face the worst contradiction that could 
be conceived, if we should:say that there is no rela- 
tion in the relations perceived. Without adopting 
such an inconsistent position, we cannot make the 
statement or indulge in the notion that the related 
Knower and the Known are always one. Or if self- 
consciousness be granted, and if, in every act of 
knowing, the Known is_ no other than Self, ‘ sleep’ 
also must be a conscious state, as truly as multi, or 
as the state of Dhyana. 
THE INDIVIDUALITY OF THE SOUL 

Perceptions of pain and pleasure and of the 
identity of the suffering Self (the sufferer) under 
them—do they require the erasure of all distinctions ? 
That cannot be; for if pain, pleasure etc., should be 
merely verbal distinctions, there ought not to be dis- 
tinct ideas; for when strictly synonymous words or 
terms are used, ideas are not different. Further, the 
avoidance of some and the seeking after of some 
others cannot but imply intrinsic difference between: 
the two sets of things. Suppose each term describes 
the Self and nothing but Self in a particular aspect, 
even then, the distinctions cannot become merely 
verbal. 

The several senses are differently affected by 
different objects and the notions of pleasure and pain 
gre realised as different and as being caused by differ-. 


318 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


ent objects or circumstances, at different times, in 
different. individuals, in different degrees of intensity. 
An easy explanation of these seems to be found in 
calling them appearances. But if it were possible to 
find indisputable evidence that all appearances are 
absolutely baseless, the absolute oneness of all might 
‘somehow be postulated. On the other hand, the 
‘appearances, changing as they may be, primarily 
claim the recognition of their being connected, inti- 
‘mately too, with some basis, The changes or appear- 
‘ances are at the same time different in ‘different 
things, pertinently suggesting a difference in their 
bases or causes. But the oneness of basis could be 
thought .of, only when the differences are fancifully 
or dogmatically set aside. Or, if they should all be 
supposed to be the essence of one Self, the distinctions 
‘must always be as true asthe very self and these 
‘cannot be accounted for except by admitting self- 
consciousness and different aspects in the Self—which 
is, of course, incompatible with the theory of oneness, 
since that consciousness might become the evidence 
of other existences. Perhaps, this insuperable diffi- 
‘culty has led to the assumption of a Knowledge 
‘which is to be unconnected with the Knower and the 
Known. Anyhow, the notion that implies a know- 
‘ing of the world outside the Self should be left with- 
out a consistent explanation. 

‘Further the self has no necessity of knowing 
‘itself either, for it cannot when pure, since it has no 
aspects of its own and it should not become the agent 


‘HIS PHILOSOPHY 319 


‘of perceiving; or when conditioned, the conditions 
cannot be supposed in any manner to interfere with 
the self and confer on it the virtue of perceiving, 
since the nature of the self is unassailable (Asanga), 
and only these conditions might be said to perceive, 
or act in any manner towards, not the self, but 
something else which is not. It is, therefore, unintel- 
ligible to say that the self knows nothing but itself in 
knowing the world. Moreover, no perception is seen 
naturally to arise as “I know the world which is not.” 
Therefore, to start with the assumption that the 
‘distinctions do not exist, and, for the purpose of 
proving it, to assume another entity of which existence 
cannot be consistently predicated in any admissible 
sense, are not agreeable to Sri Badarayana and to 
Srie Madhwa, who are therefore found to adhere to 
the older philosophical view as conveyed in the heart 
of the Rigveda. Now that the varied experiences 
emphatically show in the light of admissible know- 
ledge that the spiritual beings in the several bodies 
are finite, and each has to work separately for its own 
development and towards the final goal, the authorities 
may be received with satisfaction, especially when, as 
shown above, the truth of difference between soul 
and soul is perceived to be more than a probability. 
All the foregoing discussions are but preliminary just 
to indicate how Sri Madhwa was forced to differ 
from the views of his predecessors. Since a more 
elaborate presentation of his reasons'for the difference 
ig beyond ‘the scope of this sketch, we may directly 


320 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


pass on to his philosophical analysis both of the moral 
and physical world. | 
THE AIM OF PHILOSOPHY 

The philosophical enquiries always set abou 
investigating the highest purpose to be attained by 
man, by all those in whom such a wish is implanted. 
The presumption has been that man is in a state of 
misery or change, and all endeavours must tend to his 
rising out of it. The posibility of realising that end de- 
pends upon a thorough understanding of the causes and 
the laws governing this undesirable state. Perhaps, in 
despair of an escape from it in any other manner, we 
seem to be hopeful of it by supposing the very condi- 
tion to be unreal. To Sri Madhwa this appears no 
solution at all and the investigation pointing to such 
a conclusion appears bootless trouble, On the other 
hand, the experiences of the world are as irrefutable 
facts as their causes must be. The different conditions 
of man must therefore be looked upon as different 
combinations either of causes or effects. If particular 
combinations have tended tothis miserable state, an 
analysis or untravelling of this complex condition, re- 
storing the several elements to their original condition, 
or instituting a different set of combinations must tend 
to a different state. Taking this position we can see 
that the Being that thirsts after realisation of a better 
state can possibly have it and that that attainment 
alone can be the sensible end of man. Accordingly 
Sri Madhwa see the fitness of, and finds reasons for, 
starting with the proposition that the world is real, 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 321 


and its wise and good Ruler is a Reality of all excel- 
lenceand powers. Therefore a true understanding 
of the world and its Author, and of their true rela- 
tions, he says, gradually leads to the direct cognition. 
of the Lord and His Grace towards the desired 
Salvation. | 
CATEGORIES OF THE SYSTEM 

Philosophers endeavour to analyse the whole 
world of things or phenomena into convenient groups 
for the purposes of understanding and explanation, 
Kanada divides it into six or seven groups of things in. 
the most comprehensive sense, and Gotama divides 
the phenomena in their subjective aspect into sixteen 
groups for the purpose of testing truths so far as they 
may be embodied in language, the exponent of thought. 
Other philosophers also have their own divisions. But 
Sri Madhwa has, with reference to the genuine autho- 
rities and accurate observation, grouped them under 
these ten heads or categories:—1I. substance, 2. 
quality, 3. action, 4. community, 5. speciality or 
particularity, 6. the specified (Visishta) 7, the whole 
(Amsi), 8. latent power (Sakti) g. similarity, Io. non- 
existence or (abhava). (Vide author’s treatise on the 
categories of Madhwa’s system.) | 

Such a classification is apparently necessary for 
the understanding of the relations, how they were 
brought about, how and how far they can be 
changed or brought to an end. Primarily the 
saientific process of study is analysis, and it starts 
with our understanding. An idea of what is not, was 

21 


322 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


not, and will not be at any time, is yet possible to 
have, and it is necessary in contradistinction to the 
idea, what 1s, was or will be. That idea, we must 
admit, is called forth by some force of imagination, 
however formless, vague and indefinite the represent- 
ation may be. Sometime, it may be called forth by 
the use of language which has no reference to any 
fact or object that hasa being. Without such a 
vague conception at least of absolute non-being, there 
could be no denying it either. The Acharya’s fasight 
into this feature of understanding must clearly show 
that the most fundamental principle involved in it is 
always kept in view. At the same time he requires 
the thinker to- remember that facts alone have 
attraction for him, and facts and fancies should never 
be-confounded. Secondly the Acharya’s thoughts on 
the knotty problem of external perception or theory of 
vision and his deference to the law of causation 
promise and admit a basis to the human understanding 
which must stand firm as long as a true conception of 
knowledge may guide man safely out of the meshes 
woven by the same faculty when corrupt. 
MATTER OR PHYSICAL SUBSTANCE 

Starting with this principle he tells us that the 
different properties and characteristics or tendencies 
of mutually exclusive nature, abstractions as they 
may in themselves be, do point to difference in 
substances, gross or subtle, wherein, they must rest. 
For instance, let us take all unintelligent matter to Ke 
one kind of substance. If that were absolutely 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 323 


homogeneous and every portion of it absolutely like 
any other portion in all respects it would be difficult 
consistently to explain the very many and different 
phenomena. The explanation sought to be given by 
the combination in different proportions or by. the 
differently acting force working upon it, cannot 
succeed so long as the principle is assumed to be the 
one absolute substance, absolutely homogeneous. On 
the other hand, different principles or even particulars 
may jhave such prevailing kindred natureas may be 
fit to be considered under one class, forming a practir 
cally homogeneous heap or mass. That is to say, the 
classification or assortment into one group or class 
does not necessitate the recognition of a substance in 
general to be absolutely identical either in quantity or 
qfality, except perhaps by a forced thought or 
forced expression or by regarding things to be 
such under peculiar conditions or light; under 
such conditions imagined or instituted by ws they 
might exhibit a similar form of virtue, but this cannot 
prove that their differentiating virtues are not at all. 
Hence prakrite or unintelligent matter, (which is the 
physical matter of the modern or the materialistio 
science, fit to be weighed or analysed, or treated in 
ever so many ways), Which in conjunction with a force 
or forces may variously fall into combinations of itsown 
constituent principles and according to proportions 
yeild different and useful products, is philosophically 
and logically conceived to be one, 1.¢., one kind of 
substance, from the ruling common characteristic of 


324 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


being subject to modification. When this is thus 
found to be one distinct nature, another by virtue of 
what the same understanding implies must be admitted 
as exhibiting a different set of characteristics. The 
mental and moral phenomena refuse to be resolved 
into that modifiable ponderous physical substance ; 
for supposing for a moment that they could beso 
resolved, it would then be the absolute annihilation 
or denial of the mental and moral nature as having 
really no causal or germinal existence. The difficulty 
of taking up such a position being so evident, some 
have found it easier and more agreeable to hold that 
all physical matter or phenomena if at all, exist only 
in idea and might be resolved into idea, which, must 
however, ultimately stand unrelated. Thus the two 
views are mutually exclusive, though both the sides 
appear to be in actual combination, and hence, in 
observation too. 
THE THREE ENTITIES 

Now the view propounded by Sri Madhwa, par- 
tially recognised by some others also, comes in ap- 
parently as a conciliation of both, but diametrically 
opposed to either. The physical matter cannot be 
essentially resolved into the mind or fully accounted 
for by the mental and moral phenomena, while these 
essentially refuse to be the physical matter, or merely 
its modes of its properties. The relation of related 
things does not require such unification while it is the 
full evidence of itself, vtz., the relation between things 
of different natures each acting and re-acting on the 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 325 


other and still capable of being liberated in some 
cases from such operation wholly or to the desirable 
extent, The light brought into a dark room becomes 
the evidence not only of the presence of of any dull 
substance, but of its own presence as well. Such 
cogent considerations lie at the foundation of the 
system taught by Sri Madhwa. Accordingly the 
whole universe presented to his thought divides itself 
into two main groups viz., the intelligent and the un- 
intelligent. The former furnishes the motive force 
necessary for the changes or the modifications in the 
latter, and as such it is capable of acting with absolute 
or limited force with regard to that physical matter. 

Now the Supreme Intelligence of absolutely 
independent activity is the Supreme Being that, 
untonditioned, rules all the rest that is conditioned. 
Though it is placed logically in the first group it 
should not be considered as equal to, or one with, any 
other particular of that group* for the very reason 
that we have to grant thut to be the one absolute, 
and the others to be limited or finite. In spite of the 
similarity in respect of being intelligent, the recogni- 
tion of this broad gulf of difference between that one 
and other particulars of the class cannot affect the 
dignity of philosophical conceptions. From the impor- 
tance of the Supreme Intelligence, the absolute source 
of force, it is separately considered as the independent 
existence, not in itself conditioned but wisely condi- 
tioning or limiting other existences. The entities thus 


* Vide introduction to the translations of Purna Pragna to 
Darsana, and Tattva Sankhyana. 


326 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


recognised in this system are three viz., 1. the Inde- 
pendent Intelligence, 2. the dependent intelligences, 3. 
the unintelligent. The ten categories already enumer- 
ated comprehend these three and their relations.* 
The Bhagavad Gita directly supports this threefold 
classification of eternal truths or entities. 

THE NATURE OF THE ENTITIES. 

_ I. The Supreme Intelligence or Brahman is un- 
limited by time, space qualities and powers, and hence 
independent. II. The limited intelligences, are unlimit- 
ed in time, but limited in all other respects and 
hence they are wholly dependent upon Brahman who, 
in His infinite wisdom, best knows how to guide them 
and help them in working out their destiny. Now the 
difference recognised between individuals must lead to 
its logical consequences. The impulses of moval 
nature are not essentially the same in all. Other- 
Wise the activities different in various individuals 
at the same time cannot be satisfactorily explain- 
ed, the body or vesture cannot be said to account 
for them; for the body is guided and used by the 
in-dweller, and, for his use in a particular manner it 
is made suitable. These impulses or tendencies are, 
being the very essence, not to be eradicated and super- 
seded by others; on the other hand, they severally 
develop to an absolute perfection in the several indi- 
viduals—a development which determines the final 
goal of each (vide-Gita). These impulses or tenden- 
cies are of three kinds as Satvika, Ra asa and 


ries Th EY ee. ee ss 
* Vide Chapter XV and Introduction to the Author's 
Translation. 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 327 


Tamasa. The Saiva, Rajas and Tamas are three 
principles constituting Prakriti, corresponding to 
those tendencies and becoming the instrument or 
basis for working out the Soul’s nature. They 
appear to actuate different individuals and may be 
popularly described as good, evil, and good and evil 
mixed. These cannot be thought of as depending 
upon any causes Or circumstances that have no real 
or permanent connection with the eternal beings. 
They cannot be said to arise out of the material 
bod%es with which beings are endowed; on the other 
hand, the bodies are given to each suitably to the 
tendencies init. Therefore the question cannot but 
lead us to recognizing that the source of the tenden- 
cies is in the essantial nature of the intelligent being 
itself. 

III Also, the wnintelligent Matter is essentially 
unlimited in time. But it is capable of being modi- 
fied and cut into pieces, and the Acharya states that 
the ordinary notion of an atom is only crude, and 
even that atom may, if provided with such subtle 
means, be divided intostill finer parts, perhaps till we 
come to something like a geometrical point; even 
such a point has, in his view, aspects when consider- 
ed relatively to the various lines that may pass 
through. for drawn to, or from it. He would, there- 
fore, tell us that in the space of an atom there may be 
infinities of living existences. This entity, regarded 
as one homogeneous mass of substance, is described, 

with due regard to the law of causation, as constitut- 


328 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


ed of a number of subtle principles all agreeing in this 
respect that they are modifiable. When these princi- 
ples are taken in different proportions, the gross forms 
of matter in different stages are produced with differ- 
ent virtues or properties according as this or that 
principle predominates. The combinations are 
brought about by the will and command of the 
Supreme Intelligence, of course, not blind of any pur- 
pose. They are produced evidently to serve, not any 
purpose of that Matter or the principles constituting 
it—(hence it is called unintelligent, for the 
intelligentialone can be said to have a purpose), 
but the purposes to be achieved by the limited 
intelligence. Various questions affecting the law, pro- 
gress and the ultimate goal of the life in observation 
may be consistently answered when a clear and 
sufficiently deep insight ishad into the nature of these 
three entities, even as assumptions for speculation. 

One great feature of the aforesaid analysis is the 
endeavour to emphasise the distinction between the 
changeable and the unchangeable. It is the former 
that is the basis of all the phenomena, appearing and 
disappearing, and also reappearing, having a transi- 
tory life against the fond wishes of the intelligent 
being who apparently is the sport of them all and 
would have all agreeable phenomena alone perpetuat- 
ed without a change or interruption. This circum- 
Stance has been used in the Brahma Sutra to prove 
the dependent character of the limited intelligence. 
Thus a grand purpose is read through the changes | 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 329 


that are produced to, and withdrawn from, the view 
of the jiva. When thus the principle of essential 
distinction is recognised between the entities, the 
Evolution cannot be considered to have any particu- 
lar value with reference to that Matter alone. Though 
this matter and the spiritual essence cannot become 
mixed up into a substance of one nature or of a third 
nature, still Matter does exist only for the uses of the 
Other, and hence the states of its gross evolution are 
intended to contribute to the subtle evolution of the 
light of understanding in the spiritual being whose 
essence does not thereby become modified. If then 
the course of evolution in Matter should depend upon 
the course that has to be passed through by the spiri- 
tual being, and if the latter course should be regulated 
by tlee peculiarities resting in the jiva and consequent- 
ly the line appointed by the guiding Omniscience, the 
course of Evolution cannot, and need not, be as _ per- 
fectly straight and advancing only onwards as we 
would have it. The principle being to give the spirit- 
ual entity all those experiences that may give the 
development necessary for the attainment and the 
intelligent and intelligible realisation of the final goal, 
and as it is to be reached severally by those beings, 
the law of Evolution should be taken to work as 
modified by Karma, which necessarily works ina 
Zigzag course, 

KNOWLEDGE SENSUOUS AND NON-SENSUOUS 

, Phe intelligent being must, by virtue of its own 
essence, know certain things directly either its own 


330 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


aspects or other objects ever present to it, That is. 
to say, it has non-sensuous knowledge. When we 
have called it limited intelligence, the non-sensuous- 
knowledge it has, though very necessary, cannot be 
very considerable; nor should the mistake be made 
that it possesses all the required knowledge either ;. 
on the other hand it has essentially the faculty to: 
extend within certain limits the sphere of its under- 
standing by the experiences which the conditions are 
intended to bring about. The non-sensuous know- 
ledge is called sakshi gnana and the Self constitutes. 
by itself the faculty of perceiving directly, and hence: 
it is sakshin, The words sakshi is so explained by 
Panini. It is not to.be taken to mean one that looks. 
on with indifference or unaffected by what is perceived. 
By this virtue the individual Self realises all that is 
conveyed to it by the senses and other organs. Having 
regard to this source the knowledge so gained is. 
called Vrittignana or experiential knowledge. In the 
case of embodied souls both kinds of knowledge are 
observed to be. But the former is always true andi 
the latter may or may not be. So when two percep- 
tions arise successively with reference to the same 
thing the sakshi or the soul sits in judgment upon 
them. The details of non-sensuous knowledge lie 
dormant in the case of many souls, and in fact their’ 
attention is more strongly drawn to sensuous present- 
ations. Thisstate of the soul is described as samsara-- 
bandha ; for while in that condition the soul happens 
to be engrossed with the passing circumstances made 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 330 


sufficiently attractive, why, in an over-powering 
degree, though not, after all, without a purpose even 
therein. That is, the jiva is, in the long run, expected 
to discover how forgetful he has been of his own 
nature and of the Lord and other things of permanent 
and absolute interest, which he could realise only by 
contrast, and by the disgust and dissatisfaction he 
must feel and develop towards them. 
SAMSARA OR BONDAGE 


The bondage or the evident limitation by a body 
or bodies which appear to be the impediment to 
such realisation is by some regarded as only seem- 
ing or unreal; it is said that the unreal seems to 
be real through Ignorance, against which difficul- 
ties have been already raised; for they hold that, 
beifig unreal, the bondage can possibly vanish when 
the veil of Ignorance is raised. But this purposeless 
unreality at any point or in any manner investing a 
boundless unknowable Reality does not commend it- 
self to Sri Madhwa. With the data already described, 
he thinks that the limited intelligences are in real 
bondage, since they are eternal and ever capable of 
some essential perception, desire, and activity which 
differ in each both in kind and degree, and they are, 
therefore, naturally invested like unto a seed with an 
appropriate husk of a lingasareera, that is a subtle 
body of prakriti, which is a reality distinct from the 
essence of the Intelligent being. When it is said that 
the bondage is real, it does not mean it is the essen- 
tial nature of the being. That is a view rather 


332 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


mecessitated by the starting assumption that there is 
but one Reality without a second. As already shown 
the very limited character of the soul's essential nature 
is sufficient to explain how it becomes subjected to 
-other real conditions useful in working towards a goal 
of its own. Then the Lord in His perfect wisdom, 
not according to our wisdom agreable to our desire 
and wishes, institutes those real conditions of bondage; 
He also raises us from their midst when the evolution 
of our nature is complete. Thus the responsibility 
which the moral being must bear is not merely pheno- 
menal, but has a firm basis and significance, though 
not generally perceived by us—(vide author’s summary 
of the 18th chapter of the Gita). 
KARMA AND KNOWLEDGE 

_ When the essential nature of workers and their 
conditions are thus conceived tobe real, it is easy to 
see that they have to do Karma, that -is, to work so 
as to gain that knowledge which should engender 
devotion to and secure the grace of Brahman. Directly 
from this position it is clearly seen that the prescribed 
Karma is the means of the required knowledge which 
in its turn purified and exalted by devotion is the im- 
mediate and most important step towards the goal, 
Hence knowledge is superior to Karma but they are 
not antagonistic, with might appear to be the case 
under some confusion of ideas. 

The Karma spoken of in the foregoing paras 
graph is a means to knowledge enjoined upon tke 
worker and as such is consists of duties that one 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 333. 


should necessarily perform. Again Karma is often 
spoken of as the cause of the mundane bondage. 
This Karma literally means what one does, 1. ¢., 
activity in general. All activities not prompted by 
the wish of delighting the Lord and obtaining His. 
grace, do produce some consequence or other, and 
the jivas are bound to abide by it (vide Gita). The 
Intelligent being is essentially characterised by know- 
ledge or the faculty of knowing, will, and self direct- 
ed activity, and assuch he cannot at any moment 
cease to be active. Then it is clear that the direc- 
tion given to the activity makes it either a source of 
strengthening the mundane bondage, or of knowledge: 
leading to liberation. 
GODHEAD 

* It has been already described as being unlimited: 
in all respects, 7.e., it is absolute. By some it is held: 
that the “ Absolute” is wnknowable indescribable, 
destitute of attributes, of all peculiarities, is purely 
impersonal, manifests itself into many by means of 
conditions, But the Acharya points out that the very 
idea of “ Absolute” is as relativeas any other idea,. 
relative to the idea of ‘the conditioned,” and how- 
ever vague this idea may be, it is still knowing the 
‘¢ Absolute ; ” that is to say, the Absolute is not abso- 
lutely unknowable; certainly it is unknowable in the 
sense it is not wholly and exhaustively known, and as 
for that matter, this sort of unknowableness is to be 
admitted with reference to the commonest things 
claimed to be wholly within the range of our know- 


334 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


ledge. Similarly it is indescribable inasmuch as it is 
not exhaustively described in language ; it is desti- 
tute of qualities viz., Satwa, Rajas, Tamas, but not 
of the infinite attributes of infinite excellence nor of 
peculiarities, since every idea distinguishing Brah- 
man from other things implies a characteristic of the 
Absolute. 

‘The statement that Brahman is indescribable 
etc., however, proceeds from the absence of thorough 
comprehension of Brahman. “ The wise see the form 
of (the Mount) Meru and still do not see it (for they 
cannot see all over, in and out). (Similarly) it (Brah- 
man) cannot be described, reasoned out, and known 
(entirely as such and such). So the Garuda Purana 
says, ‘‘ For want of thorough comprehension, Brah- 
man though declared by the whole body of Scriptures 
and capable of being known and inferred by reason- 
ing, is said to be beyond the reach of words, reason- 
ing and knowledge ” (Purna Pragna Darsa page 14). 

ABSOLUTE IS NOT UNKNOWABLE 

When the eye sees a huge object having colour, 
neither that eye nor the mind acting with it is obser- 
ved to limit or reduce the dimensions of the object. 
Similarly, to think of Godhead as possessing attributes 
cannot in any manner limitor reduce it. A small 
mirror which may bear the image of a much larger 
object yet representing an unmistakable likeness of 
the whole does not thereby make the object be of 
lesser dimensions; nor does it require the object to 
enter into it that it might bear the image. So when 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 335 


our senses are brought in relation to objects there is no 
necessity for these to enter into either the senses or the 
mind, though indisputably the perception of objects 
arises in the mind which has no dimensions. Whether . 
it is the mind, a faculty of the material vesture, or it 
is the intelligent self, that perceives, the object is not 
required toenter into them; hence it is properly the 
vbject. Onthe same line of reasoning, we can see 
that all the means of knowledge at our command may 
give us the necessary perception of the Absolute 
without in any manner affecting its absoluteness, since 
we are related to it without in any manner interrupting 
its character. By the way, it may also be noted that 
the Acharya holds that if the Absolute could not be 
directly pescribed by any word, no word could possibly 
indicate it even by way of suggestion ; for when it is 
again questioned ‘ what is the thing that is suggested 
by any word?’, the answer must finally be given in 
words which at least must directly describe Him. 
What is describable is certainly knowable, no matter 
to what extent it may be, while the sufficiency of the 
possible extent is attested by the practical end accoms 
plished. 

If all the Vedas do not exhaustively describe 
Brahman or the Absolute, it is described by them all 
so far as they go. Sri Madhwacharya has shown in 
his commentary of the first Adhyaya of the Vedanta 
Sutras and in Karmanirnaya how all the sentences, 
words, syllables and sounds declare the excellence and 
perfectness of the Absolute, Such Brahman cannot 


336 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


be sensibly supposed to become, really or otherwise, 
conditioned by ahything else or in any manner. 
INCARNATION 

The idea of incarnation is one of much abuse 
and in fact it is incompatible with the nature of the 
Supreme Being. Whenever He appears as one 
among His creatures for the purpose of guiding 
them, He seems to them as one in flesh and_ bloode 
But under no circumstances He assumes or has the 
necessity to assume, such a body as conditiops the 
little jiva. It is not a matter of serious difficulty for 
realisation that the Lord of unbounded powers can 
show Himself in such forms as are familiar to men. 
Sri Madhwa repeatedly points out that no prakrita 
deha t. e., a material body is put on by the Lord. To 
be conditioned by the material body and to be preSent 
in all bodies as the omnipresent Lord are two differ- — 
ent things. On the other hand the j2va who is impri- 
soned as it were in the material body might be said 
to have incarnations though involuntarily. When the 
essential and eternal difference is made out between 
the Lord and the souls, the question of incarnation 
has altogether a different bearing in the teachings of 
Sri Madhwa. Accordingly all the statements in the 
Gita are explained in this light and supported by a 
proper interpretation of the Rik Purnamidam (Br. vii, 
1) “That is whole, thisis whole, from the whole 
issues the whole, the whole being taken away from 
the whole, (still) the whole remains.” Thus the un- 
conditioned nature of Brahman is declared, whether 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 337 


He is the Whole pervading all space and time or 
appears to us ina human form or actuates us en- 
throned in our hearts. 
PERSONALITY OF GOD 
If the term ‘ Impersonal’ means “of unlimited 
nature in all respects,” Brahman is Impersonal. He 
is also personal, for He is not a mere lifeless abstrac- 
tion, nor a formless mass of some substance, True, His 
infinite Personality we cannot even conceive. But by 
virtue of His unbounded powers and out of His pure 
grace towards us, He may show Himself as a finite 
Personality, but He does not on that account become 
finite in any respect or degree. (vide Purusha Sukta 
and Vedanta Sutras III. 11. 23 to 27). Even when 
He so appears, He does not assume material bodies, 
though we are dull enough to mistake His Personality 
as finite, or as consisting of flesh and blood, to which 
alone our eyes are habituated. He is essentially all 
knowledge, all bliss. So the Highest Brahman is 
directly the Iswara, unsubdued or unveiled by Maya, 
the Ruler of the world and all. It is He who agitates 
the unintelligent matter, causes the subtle consti- 
tuent principles thereof to combine in various pro- 
portions and to produce various gross effects, which 
become the conditions with which the souls. have to 
work towards their destiny. Since jivas must work 
and the products of matter must furnish them’ with 
conditions under the guidance of the Lord, this gross 
perceptible universe is seen to develop from the subtle 
principles of the unintelligent matter when worked up 
22 


338 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


by the guiding activity of the Lord and the necessary 
activity of jivas. 4 
THE MEANS OF SALVATION 

When thus the nature of Brahman, and of the 
limited Intelligent being is truly perceived and when 
there isa necessity felt on the part of the latter for 
working towards a high purpose viz., that of realising | 
as fully as possible, their own nature and that of the 
Lord, and thereby attaining to a state of blessedness 
emerging from a life of sleepy dullness and darkness, 
the j¢vas naturally look for the means of attainment, 
which is called sadhana. The subject is clearly treat- 
ed of in the third Adhyaya of the Purna Pragna 
Darsana and its introduction. To state briefly, 
renunciation, devotion, direct cognition of the Lord: 
by contemplation are the only means leading to mukéi. 
A correct knowledge of all things grossand_ subtle by 
enquiry and the qualification of intrinsic devotion tend 
to that course of contemplation. 

An inborn devotion to the Lord, a just study of 
the Vedas, control of the senses, the eschewing of 
pleasures, indifference to hopes and fears, the 
perception of the futility and the perishable character 
of all things below, a thorough resignation to the feet 
of the Lord are the first qualifications of those that 
are eligible to work towards direct cognition. The 
knowledge tobe gained by enquiry must have pre- 
eminently reference to these points :—(I) The five 
relations of ineffaceable difference: (a) The Lord is 
‘distinct from the limited intelligence, (b) The Lord is. 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 339 


distinct from the unintelligent matter, (c) One jtva is 
distinct from another. (d) Jivas are distinct from 
Matter. (e) When Matter is divided, the pieces are 
distinct from one another. (2) The graduated rank 
of all the finite beings. (3) The conclusive perception, 
by ascending up the ladder of gradation, of the 
Supreme Being as one far, far above, and as the 
Independent and Gracious Ruler of these all. 
INELIGIBLE JIVAS 

Besides the recognition of entities more than 
one and the aforesaid gradation, there is a 
third article of faith which fills thinkers with 
unqualified horror; it is the question of eternal 
damnation, or of some jivas being ineligible for 
the blissful state in salvation, This point really 
requires a separate treatise for elucidation, since it is 
a view opposed to the sentimental world or to systems 
dignified as only gratifying that sentiment, and the 
Acharya’s view has been represented as having origi- 
nated in his own sentiment. However the general 
reader may, for a moment, see the justification of the 
view by thinking that all the evil tendencies and the 
mixed tendencies of good and evil are respectively 
condemned to suffer eternal damnation or to be ever 
tossed only in the mundane life. If these tendencies 
should ever be perceived and happen to be as some 
concrete individuals of immutable character, no better 
destiny could then await them. Taking such a view 
Szi Madhwa classifies into three groups the jivas who 
are such concrete intelligent and yet immutable ten- 


340 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


dencies; for in the Acharya’s system, there is no 
abstract attribute standing apart from some substance 
or substratum implied by the notion, no substance 
destitute of some attribute, and there is nothing more 
perceived of the substance than the group of attri- 
butes presented to the understanding (vide Sudha 
under Vedanta Sutras III-ii-28). But the Jiva of 
each class works with his own appropriate conditions 
and becomes developed to ripeness in his own tend- 
ency and thus reaches the destiny to be realiged by 
virtue of his essential nature. 
THE FINAL STATE 

When the jivas attain mukti they do not and 
need not become one with the Lord nor equal to Him, 
or to one another among themselves,—which was not 
before, for the perfection attained by each jtré is 
duly his own, which does not savour of any sense of 
dissatisfaction or jealousy—a point elucidated by Sri 
Badarayana in the Sutra (III-iii-34). 

SATIA 

But the gradation (inequality) among the re- 
leased does not become the cause of variance (jealousy, 
etc.,) between them, because they have their mind set 
on (Brahman) the Imperishable, and are all equal (in 
being free from defects) ; and (the inferiors) are 
indebted tothe swperiors,as the pupil (ts to the 
master). 

BHASHYA 

‘From the absence of equality betwixt the 

released (in heaven) variance (jealousy etc.,) does not 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 34r 


arise between them; for all have attained to 
the direct knowledge of Brahman, and are free from. 
defects or shortcomings, in which respect they are 
equal ; and there is the grace of the superiors to which 
the souls of lower grades are indebted. This may 
be illustrated by the case of the pupil who has betaken 
himself to the precepter (that leads him to Brahman). 
All this is said in the Tura Sruti, “ The classes of souls 
in the world of bliss are various and of various grades. 
But thgy are not at variance (with each other); for 
they all know Brahman, and are free from faults; 
even in the world (mere) inequality of rank does not 
become the cause of variance (discontent, etc.) as 
(observed) in the relation of the master and the pupil, 
etc.; then whence could there be any cause of differ- 
ené@e among those that have after release attained 
to real wisdom ?”’ 

The jivas having within their appropriate limits 
endeavoured and attained a direct perception of the 
Lord and His Grace enter into the state of heavenly 
bliss generally along with Chaturmukha who is the 
final Preceptor of all. The heavenly state is not a 
mere absence or forgetfulness of miseries, but it is a 
state of positive intelligible, blissfulness ; for, their 
own pure spiritual nature and the presence of the 
blissful Lord ever enjoyed in unfading freshness can 
really make them blessed through eternity. 

THE CHIEF IDEAS RECAPITULATED 

From the foregoing meagre sketch it may be 

seen that (i) in this systema special significance is 


342 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


attached Pwurushartha the chief good, which the 
Intelligent being thrists after to attain; (2) the means. 
with which we are endowed and are working are not 
naturally descredited; (3) that everything concrete - 
or abstract proved to be truth or proved inherent in 
the truth has a real value and purpose, (4) that Know- 
ledge essential and experiential are both useful 
attributes of the limited Intelligent being (5) that the 
senses in their normal and sound condition and the 
Eternal Testimony consistently interpreted are the 
sources of all reliable knowledge; (6) that 
the limitations of knowledge in the finite jive 
1S no impediment to obtaining a true perception: 
of the absolute to the necessary extent (7) that 
the attributes of the Absolute are as absolute 
as itself and are essentially the same so as not ‘to 
become its limitations in any manner; (8) that 
difference or distinctness is a characteristic of 
everything, since anything that is perceived is per-: 
ceived to be distinct from everything, either generally 
or specially ; (g) that the property of Particularity 
enables us to abstract the various aspects of one and 
the same thing and to speak of them as_ separate 
things while the identity of the thing is not interfered 
with ; (10) that on the strength of the only reliable 
evidence vouchsafed to us absolute identity of all that 
appear different ceases to be acceptable; (11) that: 
the three kinds of entities are the least to which all 
the phenomena can possibly be reduced, and they 
cannot be fewer to afforda consistent explanation ; 


HIS PHILOSOPHY 343. 


and (12) that the philosophical dignity of oneness of 
all is questioned on the strength of evidence as tested 
by logic, and, inspite of various analogies and grand 
scientific enquires, that oneness hoped for in the end 
would only stand in inexplicable destitution of purpose, 
either in the beginning or at the conclusion. Only 
such of the points have been touched upon as are 
necessary for the general reader to have a clear idea 
of the distinctive character of Sri Madhwa’s philoso- 
phical eviews. 

More than any other, the one feature that has 
been brought out is Sri Madhwa’s contention that the 
validity of sense experience cannot be totally impeach-. 
ed and the Srutis cannot be interpreted as _ contradic. 
ting either that experience or any psychological law, 
that no transcendental positions contradicting them 
can be admissible. The realistic view of the pheno- 
menal world as well as of its positive causes expressed 
in the Rigveda (vide Mandalas II to VII) and the 
condemnation of the opposite view inthe Bhagavad 
Gita (chap. xvi-8 &c.) afford an enormous strength to 
his psychological data. He tells us that in the par- 
ticulars of a class the points of community in one 
are not identical with those in another, but they are 
only two sets like each other. The points of difference 
equally from the essence of each individual and 
thus the full contents of a particular comprise both 
the points of community and those of difference, If 
those are real, no reason can be seen why these alone 
should be thought unreal. Both being equally reak 


344 SRI MADHWACHARYA 


as the essence of the thing, he cannot see that mere 
difference in the essential nature between one and 
another could become the source of misery or defect. 

The cause of misery must be found in- the pecu- 
liarities of each java, or in some circumstances such 
as passions, all culminating in some ignorance or mis- 
apprehension, which cannot with any propriety be 
supposed to limit the Unlimited Intelligence, from 
which on the other hand, the limited intelligence 
cannot without hélp rise to the realisation of a better 
and ever blessed state. Accordingly the Sutrakara 
has shown how the gradation or difference does not in 
any manner mar the sense of perfect blessedness of 
the jiva in the-heavenly kingdom. Similarly the gunas 
known as Satva, Rajas, and Tamas are those to be 
eschewed, but not the qualities ,i.e., the propertics) of 
wisdom, nobility, power and such excellent and 
essential attributes which make the individual; for 
these cannot go at all. This is absolutely true of the 
Lord whom the gwnas of prakritt could never assail. 
In fine the theory of Sri Madhwa comes forward to 
exhibit the truth on the basis that the causes of our 
moral aspirations are absolutely real; those conscious 
aspirations are equally real; and the realisation of 
those aspirations must be and is a gloriously absolute 
and conscious reality—a position which alone he 
thinks confers true dignity on a philosophical view. 


. *,f | 
First Edition, 2,000 Copies, Feb. 1923, Natesan & Co., Madras. 


BOOKS GN INDIA. 


Rt. Hon. V.S Srinivasa Sastri’s Speeches & Writ- 
jogs. The first comprehensive collection. Rs. 3. 
To Subscribers of the “ Indian Review” Rs. 2-8. 


Sarojini Naidu’s Speeches and Writings. With a 
biographical sketch. Enlarged and up-to-date edition. 
Cloth bound Rs. 3. To Subs. of “I.R.” Re. 2-8. 


The Indian Problem. By C. F. Andrews. Essays 
and Papers on Indian Independence, India and the 
Empire, Non-Co-operation, Swadeshi Movement, 
National Education, Untouchability, The Colour Bar. 
The Drink Evil and The Opium Trade of India. Price 
Re. 1. To Subscribers of the “ Indian Review, ” As. 12. 


Prince Edward’s Speeches in India, A collection 
of H. R. H. the Prince of Wales’ Speeches in India 
with numerous portraits and illustrations. Re. One. 
To Subscribers of the “ Indian Review.” 12 as. 


Visvabharati. (The World University) By Dr. 
Rabindranath and Mr. C. F. Andrews, with 6 Portraits 
and illustrations. Price 8 As. To Subscribers of the 
“Indian Review’ 6 as, 

Eminent Orientalists. Indian, English, German, 
French and American. Cloth bound Rs. 2. To 
Subscribers of the “Indian Review.” Re. 1-8 as. 


Delhi the Capital of Indie. Revised and enlarged 
edition of ‘All About Delhi.” With 54 illustrations. 
Price Rs. 2. To Subscribers of “I. R.”, Re. 1-8. 


Bureaucratic Government. A Study in Indian 
Polity. By Mr. Bernard Houghton, I.C.S. (Retd.) 
Price Re. 1-8. To Subscribers of the “I. R.’’ Re. 1-4. 


Morley’s Indian Speeches. Re. 1-8. To Subscribers 
of the “I.R.” Re. 1-4. 


Montagu’s Indian Speeches. Price Re. 1-8. To 
Subscribers of the “I.R.” Re. 1-4, 


Rash Behari Ghose’s Speeches & Writings. Second 
Edition. Re. 1-4. To Subscribers of the “I. R..” Re. 1. 


The Mission of Our Master, Fssays and Dis- 
courses. By the Eastern and Western Disciples of 
Ramakriehna—Vivekananda. Price Rs.3. To Subs- 
cribers of the “Indian Review ” Rs. 2-8. 

(® Books are given at coneession ratcs only to subs- 
cribers of “ The Indian Review ” Any one who wishes 
to buy books at concession rates must remit Rs, 6. 
one years subscription to the Review in advanee. 


ble, <6 PE RENE SE EL LS 
G.A. Natesan & Co., Publishers, George Town, Madras, 


JNDIAN ARTS, INDUSTRIES & AGRICULTURE 
indian Industrial and Economic Problems. By The Hon. 
Prof. V. G. Kale, Rs. 2. To Subs. of “I. R.” Re. 1-8. 


Essays on Indian Economics. (3rd Edition). By Mahadev 
Govind Ranade. Rs. 2. To Subs. of “I. R.”’ Re. 1 8. 


Industrial India. By Glyn Barlow, M.A. Second Edl- 
tion. Re. 1. To Subscribers of the “I. R.” As. 12. 


The Swadeshi Movement.—A Symposium. Second 
Edition. Re. 1-4. To Subs. of the “I. R.”’ Re. 1 


Agricultural Industries in India. By Seedick R. Sayani. 
Second Edition. Revised and enlarged. Re. 1. To 
Subscribers of the “Indian Review” As. 12. 


Lift-Irrigation. By A.Chatterton. Second Edition. 
Rs. 2. To Subscribers of “I. R.” Re. 1-8. 


The Improvement of Indian Agriculture —Some Lessons 
from America. By Catheryne Singh. Second Editica. 
Price Re. 1. To Subscribers of “I. R.” As. 12. 


184 INDIAN TALES 
FUN, FOLLY AND FOLK-LORE. 


A COLLECTION OF THE 


TALES OF TENNALI RAMAN 
TALES OF MARIADA RAMAN 
TALES OF RAJA. BIRBAL 
KOMATI WIT AND WISDOM 
THE SON-IN-LAW ABROAD 
NEW INDIAN TALES 
TALES OF RAYA AND APPAJI 
FOLKLORE OF THE TELUGUS 
t# Hight booklets in one volume. 3 
Price Re. 1-4 as. 
T'o Subscribers of the Indian Review, Re. 1, 


#87 Books are given at concession rates only to subs- 
cribers of ‘“* The Indian Review,” Any one who wishes 
to buy books at concession rates must remit Rs. 4, 
one year's subscription to the Review in advance. 


G.A.Natesan & Co., Publishers, George Town, Madras. 


18 UNIFQRM CLOTH-BOUND VOLUMES. 


PDL LD aS, 


SPEECHES AND WRITINGS 


THE RT. HON. SRINIVASA SASTRI. 
SAROJINI NAIDU. (up-to-date collection). 
SIR Jj. C. BOSE. 
Or. SIR P.C. RAY. . 
ANNIE BESANT. 
THE RT. HON. LORD SINHA, 
SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 6th Hdition, 
DADABHAI NAOROJ}. 2nd Edition. 
SIR WILLIAM WEDDERBURN, 
MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA. 
M. K. GANDHI. Third Edition. 
SURENDRANATH BANERJEA. 
SIR DINSHA WACHA. 
Price of each Vol. Rs, 3. (Three’) 
To Subscribers of the “ Indian Review,” Rs. 2-8 as,. 
GUPAL KRISHNA GOKHALE. 
3rd Edition. Price Rs. 4. To Subs. of “I. R.” Rs. 3-8. 


UNIFORM WITH THE ABOVE, 


Hinduism. A Handbook of Hindu religion des- 
cribing the rit-s and practices of the Hindus together 
with a critical exposition of the tenets of the Hindu 
Dharma. By Babu Govinda Das. Price Rs, 3. To 
Subscribers of the “I. R.” Rs. 2-8. 


Indian National Evolution. A Survey of the origin 
and progress ofthe Indian National C:ngress and the 
Growth of Indian Nationalism. By Amvica Charan 
Mazumdar. Second Edition, Price Rs. 3. To Sub- 
scribers of the “ Indian Review ”, Ks. 2-8. 

The Governance of India. A hand-book of progres- 
sive politics by Babu Govinda Das. Price Rs.3. To 
Subscribers of the “I,R.” Rs, 2-8. 

The Mission of Our Master. Essays & Discourses by 
the Eastern and Western Disciples of Ramakrishna- 
Vivekananda. Rs. 3. To Subs. of “1.R.” Rs, 2-8. 


a. A. Natesan & Co., Publishers, George Town, Madras ° 


HINDU KELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Hinduism. A Handbook of Hindu religion des- 
eribing the rites and practices of the Hindus together 
with a critical exposition of the tenets of the Hindu 
Dharma. By Babu Govinda Das. Price Rs. a 
Subscribers of the “ Indian Review ” Rs. 2-8. 

The Bhagavad-Gita. With the Text in Devanagari 
and an English Translation by Annie Besant. Fourth 
Edition. Price per copy Annas Four. 

The Three Great Acharyas: Sankara, Ramanuja and 
Madhwa: A study of their Lives and Times and a 
critical exposition of their philosophy. In one volume. 
Rs. Two. To Subscribers of '‘ Indian Review,” Re. 1-8, 

Light on Life. A Selection of Six Spiritual Dis- 
courses by Baba Premanand Bharati. Price Re, One. 
To Subscribers of the “I. R.” 12 as. ss 

The Life and Teachings of Buddha. By A. Dharmapala 
Price As. 12. 2nd Edn. To Subscribers of “I. R.” As. 8. 

Sri Sankaracharya’s Select Works. The Text in Sanskrit 
Devanagiri type and an English Translation. By 3. Ven- 
&ataramanan, B.A. 2nd Edn. Rs. 2. To Subs. I.R. Re. 1-8. 

The Vaishnavaite Reformers of India.—Critical Sketches 
of their Lives and Writings. By T. Rajagopalachariar, 
M.A., 8.L. Price Re. 1. To Subscribers of “I.R.” As. 12. 


Swami Vivekananda : Speeches and Writings. With four 
Portraits. 6th Edn. Rs. 3. To Sabs. of “IR.” Rs. 2-8. 


The Mission of Our Master. Essays and Discourses by 
the Eastern and Western Disciples of Ramakrishna— 
Vivekananda. Rs. 3. To Subs. of “ I, R.” Rs. 2-8. 


Aspects of the Vedanta. By various writers. Third 
Edition. Re. 1. To Subscribers of the “I. R.” As. 12. 


Ten Tamil Saints. By M. S. Purnalingam Pillai, 
BA, L.T. As. 12. To Subscribers of “I. R.” As. 8. 


Essentials of Hinduism. As. 12. To Subs. of “I.R.” As. 10. 
Hindu Psalms & Hymns. By K. V. Ramaswami. As. 4, 


Maitreyi: A Vedic Story. By Pandit Sitanath Tattva- 
Dhushan. Price As. 4. 


India’s Untouchable Saints, By K V. Ramaswami 
Price As. 5. 


Aggressive Hinduism. By Sister Nivedita. As. 2. 
Nanda: The Pariah Saint. As. 4. 
Nation~Building: By Dr. Besant. As. 2. 


eS ne ee ee ENT TS Da oe 
G. A. Natesan & Co. Publishers, George Town, Madrar. 


Indian Statesmen. 


HIS is a new series of uniform booklets containing 
sketches of the lives of eminent Indian 
Statesmen, notably those who have been Dewans 
and Prime Ministers of well-known States. With 
frontispiece and extracts from Speeches & Writings. 


Sir Salar Jung Sir M. Visvesvaraya 
Dewan C. Rangacharlu _—_ Sir Seshiah Sastri 

R. Raghunatha Rau Raja Sir T. Madhava Rao 
-Sir Seshadri Aiyar Sir Dinkar Rao 

V. P. Madhava Rao R. C. Dutt 


Price Annas Four each: 


‘““Saints of India” Series 


HESE lives are all based on the original accounts 
and biographies in the several Indian languages. 
Each book also contains a special account of the 
peculiar religious doctrines which each saint taught, 


Dayaneshwar Nammalwar Vallabhacharya 
Namdev Appar : Nanak 
Ekanath Nanda. .«.«« Guru Govind 
Ramdas Kabir Dayananda 
Tukaram Chaitanya Ramakrishna 
Tulsidas Vivekananda Ram Tirath 


Sankara Deva, the Vaishnavite Saint of Assam. 
Price Four Annas each. 


“Friends of India’ Series 


“THESE biographies are so written as to form a 

gallery of portraits of permanent interest to the 
student, as well as tothe politician. With copious 
extracts from Speeches & Writings and a frontispiece. 


Lord Ripon Rey. Dr. Miller Lord Macaulay 
Annie Besant Henry Fawcett John Bright 
Lord Minto A. O. Hume Nivedita 
Bradlaugh Sir Henry Cotton Wedderburn 


Foolscap 8vo. Price Annas Four each. 


The Leader :—Willbe a welcome addition to the 
political and historical literature of the country. 

The Harvest Field :—The little books are written in 
a pleasant style, and contain extracts from the impor- 
tant speeches of these men. 


oe 


G. A. Natesan & Co., Publishers, George Town, Madras. 


HINDUIS ® 


By BABU GOVINDA DAS 


N tbis remarkable treatise Babu Govinda Das, the 
well-known writer and Sanskrit schelar depicts 
the character and genius of Hinduism through the 
centuries. He traces the origin and development of 
the religion of the Aryas since the Vedic times and 
shows how new rites and practices, some wholesome 
and some unwholesome have crept into the fabric of 
the Hindu faith. He brings the light of rational criti- 
cism to the Interpretation of the Hindu religion. The 
book deals with the sources of Hinduism, its funda- 
mental teachings, its rites and customs, and is invalua- 
ble to students of comparative religion, social re- 
formers avd legislators. Cloth bound 450 peges, © 


Rs, 3. To Subs. of the “J. R.”’ Rs. 2-8. 


THE INDIAN PROBLEM 


BY C. FX. ANDREWS 


INDIAN INDEPENDENCE 
INDIA AND THE EMPIRE 
NON-CO-OPHRATION 
SWADESHI MOVEMENT 
NATIONAL EDUCATION 
DRINK AND OPIUM EVIL 


Modern Review.—It has a handsome frontispiece, 
and gives,in a handy form, and at a cheap price, the 
writer’s viewson the many questions now engaging 
the attention of the country. Of all Mr. Andrews” 
views, those on independence deserve the first place, 
as they are the most outspoken end sincere expression. 
of amagnanimous soul saturated with sympathy for 
the down-trodden and.oppressed, and conscious of the- 
blessings of the liberty which he himself enjoys. 


Price Re. One only. 
To Subscribers of the “ Indian Review," 12 as. 


G.A. Natesan & Co,, Publishers, George Town, Madras. 


GANDHI: HIS LIFE & SPEECHES 


Gandhi’s Speeches and Writings. Including Cos- 
‘tributions to Young india & Navajivan. Third Edition, 
up-to-date and enlarged. Contains his speeches and 
writings on the South African [Indian Question, his 
views on indeatured Labour and [ndians in the Colo- 
nies, his jail experiences in South Africa, his pro- 
nouncements on the Champaran and Khaira affairs, 
Rowlatt Billsand Satyagraha, the Punjab outrages, 
‘the Khilafat Question, Swaraj, and other arti- 
cles reprinted from Young India and Navajivan. 
Contains also a vivid account of his life, his arrest 
and tria! and messages fromthe gaol. With numerous 
appreciations, portraits and illustrations, and a 
valuable index at the end. 


= Cloth bouad, Price Rupees Three. 


“To Subscribers of the ‘‘Indian Review,’ Rs. 2-8 as. 


The Rt. Hon. Srinivasa Sastri P. C. 


e HIS SPEECHES AND WRITINGS. 


uM. Sastri is a writer and speaker of rare distinction 

and an attempt is made in this volume to 
present, under one cover, a comprehensive collection 
of his more important pronouncements on subjects of 
public interest. It includes, among others, his 
masterly essay on Self-Government, his speeches in 
the Congress, in the old Imperial Legislative Council 
and inthe Council of State, his Presidential Address to 
the National Liberal Federation, his famous speech at 
the Second Assembly of the League of Nations, a few 
of his orations in Australia, Fiji and Canada in his 
Dominions tour, and his recent pronouncements in 
England and India, on the Kenya question. The 
collection also includes Mr. Sastri’s appreciative» 
studies of Gokhale and Gandhi. . 


Book your order at once 
“#2 Only a limited number of copies are issued, 
Cloth Bound, Price Rupees Three. 
To Subscribers of the “ Indian Review.”’ Rs 2-8 ag. 


G. A. Natesan & Co., Publishers, George Town, Madras, 


eB ey 


BIOGRAPHIES OF 


EMINENT INDIANS. 


Series of uniform Booklets each witha Portrait 
anda biographical sketch with copious extracts.. 


Dadabhai Naoroji 
Sir P. M. Mehta 
G. K. Gokhale 
Lala Lajpat Rai 
Ravi Varma 

K, T. Telang 


Ananda Mohan Bose 


W. C. Bonnerjee 


Lal Mohun Ghose — 


Sir J. C. Bose 

Dr. P. C. Ray 
Lord Sinha 

Prof. D K. Karve 
Budruddin Tyabji 
Sir Syed Ahmed 
Sir Syed Amir Ali 
M. K. Gandhi 

R. N. Mudholkar 
J.N. Tata. 
Sasipada Banerji 
V. K. Chiplankar 
Kesavchandra Sen 
Syed Hasan Imam 
Aurobindo Ghose. 


Hakim Ajmal Khan 
Foolscap 8vo. 


Raja Ram Mohan Roy 
Devendranath Tagore 
Dinshaw Edulji Wacha 
Mahadev Govind Ranade 
Sir Rash Behari Ghose 

Sir Surendranath Banerjea 
Sir T. Muthusami lyer 

H. H. the Aga Khan 

Sir S. Subramania lyer 

Bal Gangadhar Tilak 

Madan Mohan Malaviya 
Babu Kristo Das Pal 

V. Krishnaswami Aiyar 
Rahimtulla Mohamed Sayani 
Iswara Chandra Vidyasagar 
Sir C. Sankaran Nair 

H. H.the Gaekwar of Baroda- 
Sir N. G. Chandavarkar 
Pratapchandra Mazumdar 
Sir V. Bhashyam Iyengar, 
Dr. Asutosh Mukherjee. 

C. R. Das. 

Motilal Nehru. 

The Ali Brothers. 

Rt. Hon. V. S. Sastri. 


Price Annas Four each. 


 neenenemmenenl 


INDIAN POETS. 


= ACH sketch contains a brief account ef the life 
and career of the poet described and copieus 
extracts from their writings and also a frontispiece. 


Ghalib 


Romesh Chander Dutt. 
Rabindranath Tagore. 


Teru Dutt 

Michael Madhusudan Dutt. 
Mrs. Sarojini Naidu.; 

B. M. Malabari: 


Bankim C. Chatterjee. 


Price 4 As, each. 


G.A. Natesan & Co., Publishers, George Town, Madras; 


(Omens one eeee 


THE MISSION OF OUR MASTER 


ESSAYS AND DISCOURSES — 
BY THE EASTERN & WESTERN DISCIPLES 


OF RAMAKRISHNA—VIVEKANANDA - | 
> ee 


= 


| 
: 
VIVEKANANDA « BRAHMANANDA 
_ ABHEDANANDA 2 SARADANANDA 
: TRIGUNATITA Z& TURYANANDA 
BODHANANDA = KRIPANANDA 
VIRAJANANDA = SHARVANANDA 
NIVEDITA = DEVAMATA | 
MISS WALDO Z PARAMANANDA * 
PRINCIPAL CONTENTS = 


HMorical Evolution of India; The Common Basis 
of All Religions; Poetry of the Vedas; Missionaries 
in India; Indian Epics; The Ethical Ideas of the 
Hindus; Sankaracharyar ; Zoroaster ; Confucius ete. 

2 Cloth Bound Price Rs. 3. 
| To Subscribers of the “Indian Review” Rs. 2-8 as. 
7 


Eminent Orientalists. 


INDIAN, ENGLISH, FRENCH, GERMAN AND AMERICAN 
Among the Orientalists Studied are : Sir William Jones, 
Sir Charles Wilkins. Colebrooke, Horace Wilson, 
George. Tournour, Fergusson, Rajendralal Mitra, 
Telang, Bhau Daji and Indraji, Dr. Buhler, Monier 
Williams, Max Muller, Sir John Fleet, Edwin Arnold, 
> Nivedita, Griffith, Whitney, Vincent Smith, Tilak, 
- Anundoram Borooah, Bhandarkar, Macdonnel, Keith, 
Paul Deussen and Sylvain Levi. ‘se 
4 Among the contributors to the volume are: Prof. P. 
~ Seshadri, Prof. Radhakrishnan, Dr. S. Krishnaswami # 
Ayengar, Prof. P. P.S. Sastri, Mr. Shumbu Chunder 
Dey, Prof. Suryanarayana, Mr. Vasant Naik, Mr. [ 
K. S. Ramaswami Sastri, Prof. M. 8. Ramaswami 
Ayengar, Prof. Surya Kumar Bhuyan, Prof. Srinivasa- 
chari, and Mr. D. W. Wickramarachi. 
O 


Price Rs. 2 (Two.) To Subs. of the “I, R.” Re. 1-8. 
| °G.. A. Natesan &Co, Publishers, George Town, Madras. 
) 


ee 1 1 ene 


a 


VIEWS OF LEADING HINDUS 
A symposium by Sir Gura Dass Bannerjee, Kt. ; 
The Hon. Mr. Justice T. Sadasiva Aiyer; Mr. 
Satyendranath Tagore, i.¢c.s.; Mr. P. T. Srinivasa 


Ivengar, B.A., F-M.U.; Dewan Bahadur R. Ragoonath ff 
Rao, ¢.S.1.3 Mr. P. Narayana Iyer, B.A. B.L.} Rai ff 


Bahadur Lala Baijnath; Dr. Sir S. Subramania Aiyat, 
R.C.1.E+ LL.D. 3 Rao Bahadur Y. K. Rama:ujachari 5 


- Babu Bhagavan Das; The Hon. Mr. V. Krishnaswami 


Tyer, €.S.1; The Hon. Mr. Gokuldas K. Parekh; Rao 


Bahadur C. V. Vaidya: Pandit Durga Datta Joshi; § e: 
Babu Govinda Das; The Hon. Mr. justice P, Rf 
Sundaraz Aiyar; Dewan Bahadur K. Krisinas ami @f 


Rao, ¢.1.£.3;. Mr. K,  Ramanajachari; Mr, _ 
VY. M. Mabajani; Rao Bahadur Wamean ‘Madhav 


Kolhatkar:The Hon. Dewan Bahadur M.Adiuarayana 7 


Ayah : Rao Bahadur Beorao Vinavak ; The Hon. Mr 
N. Subbarau Pantuiu ; Babu Sarada Charan Mitra: 
Sir Pratul Chandra Chatterji, Kt., C.1.E., LL.D. Psice 

As.i2. To Subscribers of “PR.” As. 16. 


IF YOU HAV# NOT ALREADY SEEN 


THE INDIAN REVIEW jf 
Edited by Mr. G A. NATESAN > nh 
THE BEST, 'FHE CHEAPEST AND 
** The Most Up-to-date ladian Periodical * . 
SEND YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS = 
WITH A\FPOUR-ANNA POSTAGE STAMP 
FOR A SPECIMEN COPY. 
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, Rs. 5 (FIVE) ONLY, 
FOREIGN: OnE POUND, 


Subscription can commence from any month. 


ee ct ne Ee As eS em et en Nn ee eR pnt ae peat sen 


NE 
G.A. Natesan &Co., Publishers, George Town, Madras. : 


