===== Internet Archive OCR: tiruvacagamorsac00maniuoft_djvu.txt =====

JT/f 


THE    TIRUVA^AGAM 


*    OR 


SACRED    UTTERANCES' 


a.  u.  POPE 


THE  TIRUVACAGAM 

OR 

'SACRED    UTTERANCES' 
OF    THE   TAMIL   POET,   SAINT,   AND   SAGE 

MANIKKA-VAgAGAR 

THE    TAMIL    TEXT    OF    THE    FIFTY-ONE    POEMS 

WITH 

ENGLISH  TRANSLATION,  INTRODUCTIONS,   AND  NOTES 

TO   WHICH   IS   PREFIXED 

A  SUMMARY  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  LEGENDS  OF  THE  SAGE,  WITH 

APPENDICES   ILLUSTRATING  THE   GREAT  SOUTH-INDIAN 

SYSTEM    OF    PHILOSOPHY    AND    RELIGION 

CALLED 

THE    QAIVA   SIDDHANTAM 

WITH    TAMIL    LEXICON  AND    CONCORDANCE 


BY  THE 

REV.    G.    U.    POPE,    M.A.,   D.  D. 

BALLIOL  COLLEGE  AND  INDIAN   INSTITUTE,  OXFORD 


OXFORD 

AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 
1900 

•>/y. 

T.  H.  TsjwWt 

Antiqur!"  Boo**11** 
4&.  VenUtftch*t*  Mn*«ly  Si 


Pi 


/?£>£> 


HENRY  FROWDE,   M.A. 

PUBLISHER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD 


LONDON,    EDINBURGH,   AND   NEW  YORK 


(a.) 
(ffc.)    up; 


nC^  if  iij  ir  JIT  Suj 


dj,  4  6YlD  U  f£  L. 

fffrsurrias 


* 

A.  D.    1900 


PRINTED   AT  THE   CLARENDON    PRESS 

BY  HORACE  HART,  M.A. 
FKINTBR   TO   THE   UNIVERSITY 


CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

PREFACE ix 

INTRODUCTION  — 

LIFE  AND  LEGENDS  OF  MANIKKA-VACAGAR         .        .         .  xvii 

NOTES 

I .  (Divan's  Operations ;  Sacred  Sports ;  The '  Lowly  Devotee ; ' 

Bhairava xxxvii 

II.  The  Five  Syllables:  £i-va-ya-na-ma ;  The  £aiva  Rosary  xxxix 
Tiru-aruJ-payan,  Chapter  IX. 

III.  The  Soul's  Emancipation  :  Mutti ;  Moksha     .         .         .  xlii 

IV.  The  Guru         .........  xliv 

Tiru-arul-payan,  Chapter  V. 

V,  Cessation  of  Energy  :  ^atti-nibatham      ....  xlvi 

VI.  Grace .         .         .  xlviii 

Tiru-arul-payan,  Chapters  IV,  VI,  VII,  VIII,  X. 
VII.  Cithambaran  :     its    Legends,    Tiger-foot   and    Serpent- 

devote'e Ix 

VIII.  Bhakti                               ^ Ixvii 

IX.  Manikka-Vacagar  and  the  Buddhists  in  £ithambaram     .  Ixvii 

X.  (^ivan  Enthroned  on  the  Silver  Mountain        .         .         .  Ixxiii 
XI.  The  £aiva  Siddhanta  System  of  Philosophy  and  Religion 

in  South  India Ixxiv 

XII.  The  Three  Caiva  Categories Ixxvi 

Tiru-arul-payan,  Chapters  I,  II. 

XIII.  The  Bride;  £atti Ixxxii 

XIV.  Evolution,  Preservation,  and  Involution          .         .         .  Ixxxiii 
XV.  Anavam  :  the  Bond  of  Finite  Ignorance  ....  Ixxxiv 

Tiru-arul-payan,  Chapter  III. 

METRICAL  SYSTEMS Ixxxviii 

REFERENCES  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTES        ....  xciii 

TRANSLITERATION  OF  TAMIL  WORDS;  AND  THEIR  PRONUNCIATION  xcvi 

AopiTioNs  AND  CORRECTIONS .  xcviii 


VI  CONTENTS. 

( 
HYMNS  IN  TAMIL  AND  ENGLISH — 

1.  Divan's  Ways  of  Old,  pp.  1-7 Lines  95 

2.  (Divan's  Fame,  pp.  8-16 ,,  ,146 

3.  The  Universe,  pp.  17-29 „  182 

4.  Praise  (the  ' Agaval'),  pp.  30-43          .                          .  „  225 

5.  The  Sacred  Cento,  pp.  44-84 „  400 

6.  '  Forsake  me  not/  pp.  85-102      ....  „  200 

7.  The  Maidens' Song  of  the  Dawning,  pp.  103-116       .  ,,  80 

8.  The  'Ammanai,'  pp.  117-127 „  120 

9.  The  Gold  Dust,  pp.  128-138 „  80 

10.  The  Humming-Bee,  pp.  139-151         ....,,       80 

11.  The  Tambour-Song,  pp.  152-158        ....,,       80 

12.  The  £aral,  pp.  159-167 ,80 

13.  The  Lilies,  pp.  168-174 •         »       76 

14.  The  Unthiyar,  pp.  175-182         ...  ,,       57 

15.  The  Tonokkam,  pp.  183-189       ...  „       56 

16.  The  Golden  Swing,  pp.  190-193         ....,,       54 

17.  The  Mother-Decad,  pp.  194-197        ...  ,,40 

18.  The  Kuyil-Decad,  pp.  198-202 ,,40 

19.  The  Ten  Insignia,  pp.  203-206 ,,40 

20.  The  Morning  Hymn,  pp.  207-212  „       40 

21.  The  Ancient  Temple-Song,  pp.  213-218  „       40 

22.  The  Temple-Lyric,  pp.  219-224  „       40 

23.  Weariness  of  Life,  pp.  225-230  ....  ,,40 

24.  The  Refuge-Decad,  pp.  231-234         ....,,       40 

25.  The  Desire-Decad,  pp.  235-238          .         .  „       40- 

26.  The  Wonder- Decad,  pp.  239-242       .         .         .  •       .         ,,40 

27.  Mystic  Union,  pp.  243-247          ...  ,,       40 

28.  '  No  joy  in  life,'  pp.  248-253        ...  .        „       40 

29.  Grace,  pp.  254-259     .  „       40 

30.  The  'Eagle-Mount,'  pp.  260-263         ....,,       28 

31.  'Mine  eyes  have  seen,'  pp.  264-267   ....         M       40 

32.  The  Supplication,  pp.  268-272 ,,44 

33.  The  Bruised  Heart,  pp.  273-277  „       40 

34.  '  My  soul  is  consumed,'  pp.  278-281  „       40 

35.  The  Decad  of  Dread,  pp.  282-286       .         .         .         .         „       40 

36.  The  Sacred  Pandi,  pp.  287-290 .         .         .        .  ,,40 

37.  The  Decad  of  the  'Tenacious  Grasp,'  pp.  291-297    .        ,,      40 

38.  Sacred  Sadness,  pp.  298-301 ,,40 

39.'  The  Sacred  Lament,  pp.  302-303       .        .        .        .         ,,12 

40.  The  Decad  of 'Glorious  Tillai,'  pp.  304-307       .         .         ,,40 

41.  The  Miracle- Decad,  pp.  308-313         .         .  .         ,,    °  40 

42.  The  Head-Decad,  pp.  314-318 ,,    t  40 


CONTENTS.  vii 

» 

43.  The  Sacred  Word,  pp.  319-323          ....  Lines  40 

44.  Devout  Musings,  pp.  324-326     .         .         .        .  ,,24 
^5.  The  Pilgrim-Song,  pp.  327-332  .                 .        .        .  „       40 

46.  The  Sacred  March,  p.  333 ,,8 

47.  The  Sacred  Venba,  pp.  334-337  „       44 

48.  The  Ancient  Mystic  Word,  pp.  338-340    .  „       28 

49.  The  Marshalling  of  the  Sacred  Host,  pp.  341-346     .  „       64 
5Q.  The  Garland  of  Rapture,  pp.  347-350         .         .  „     -28 
51.  The  Wonder  of  Salvation,  pp.  351-354       .        .        .  „      36 

Total  lines  3327 


PAGE 

LEXICON  AND  CONCORDANCE i 

GENERAL  INDEX      .  81 


PREFACE. 

IT  has  been  repeatedly  asked,  '  Of  what  possible  use  can 
the  republication,  translation,  and  editing  of  books  like  the  Tiru- 
va9agam  be?' — and,  'Who  can  be  expected,  to  desire  to  make 
themselves  acquainted  with  such  works?'  This  consideration 
has  delayed  the  publication  for  some  time ;  and  it  is  not  at  all  to 
be  anticipated  that  the  circulation  of  the  book,  at  least  in  Europe, 
will,  for  some  time  to  come,  be  encouraging.  Still,  this  is  a  work 
that  ought  to  be  done!  If  the  Tamil  people  and  the  English  are 
ever  in  any  degree  to  understand  one  another,  and  to  appreciate 
each  other's  thoughts  and  feelings  regarding  the  highest  matters ; 
if  any  progress  is  to  be  made  in  the  developement  of  a  real 
science  of  Hinduism,  as  it  now  is,  our  English  people  must  have 
the  means  of  obtaining  some  insight  into  the  living  system  which 
exercises  at  the  present  day  such  a  marvellous  power  over  the 
minds  of  the  great  majority  of  the  best  Tamil  people. 

For,  under  some  form  or  other,  £aivism  is  the  real  religion 
of  the  South  of  India,  and  of  North  Ceylon ;  and  the  £aiva 
Siddhanta  philosophy  has,  and  deserves  to  have,  far  more  influence 
than  any  other.  The  fifty-one  poems  which  are  here  edited, 
translated,  and  annotated,  are  recited  daily  in  all  the  great  £aiva 
temples  of  South  India,  are  on  every  one's  lips,  and  are  as  dear 
to  the  hearts  of  vast  multitudes  of  excellent  •  people  there,  as 
the  Psalms  of  David  are  to  Jews  and  Christians.  The  sacred 
mystic  poetry  of  a  people  reveals  their  character  and  aspirations 
more  truly  than  even  their  secular  legends  and  ballads ;  for 
sacred  hymns  are  continually  sung  by  the  devout  of  all  ages, 
and  both  sexes ;  and  all  classes  of  the  community  are  saturated 
with  their  influence.  The  attentive  consideration  of  the  system 
here  developed  must  lead  to  a  sympathetic  appreciation  of  what  the 
hopes,  fears,  aspirations,  and  yearnings  of  the  devoutest  Hindu 
minds  in  the  South  are,  and  have  been  from  time  immemorial. 
I  have  occasionally  ventured  in  notes  to  go  beyond  the  province 
of  editor  and  translator,  and  have  criticized  many  things  here  and 
thrfre ;  yet  I  feel  quite  sure  that  my  kind  and  candid  friends  in 


X  PREFACE. 

South  India  will  be  in  no  danger  of  misunderstanding  me  spirit 
in  which  I  have  written.  These  are  times  when  in  regard  to  all 
religious  systems  thorough  rational  investigation,  searching  his- 
torical criticism,  and  a  careful  candid  consideration  of  the  meaning 
of  the  symbols  by  which  doctrines  are  supposed  to  be  expressed, 
are  quite  necessary  everywhere.  The  result  of  this  searching,  yet 
reverent,  analysis  has  been  and  is, — ever  more  and  more,— of  the 
utmost  value  in  the  West.  Whatever  is  TRUE  will  bear  the  test  of 
the  severest  scrutiny,  though  men  may  feel  obliged  from  time 
to  time  to  modify  the  expressions  of  their  belief,  and  to  readjust 
their  most  cherished  formulas.  There  is  an  evolution  of  religion. 
Meanwhile,  TRUE  DIVINE  FAITH  lives  on,  and  grows  more  vigor- 
ously for  the  conflicts  in  which  it  is  ever,  of  necessity,  engaged. 

It  is  much  to  be  desired  that  our  friends  in  South  India  should 
recognize  this,  and  consent  to  enter  upon  a  thorough  scientific 
investigation  of  the  historical  foundations  of  their  popular  beliefs, 
the  precise  import  of  symbolical  expressions,  and  the  practical 
bearing  of  every  portion  of  their  wonderful  '  Siddhantam.' 

In  matters  of  religion  the  greatest  hindrance, — and  the  most 
truly  irreligious  thing, — is  the  spirit  of  ignorant,  unreasoning, 
unsympathetic  antagonism.  Every  system  has  its  truths  and 
profounder  thoughts;  and  these  lie  deeper  than  'full  fathoms 
five '  in  man's  nature  ;  and  must  be  fundamentally  and  essentially 
in  large  measure  the  same  for  all  men,  and  for  all  time.  It  is 
only  by  recognizing  these  common  truths,  and  making  them  the 
basis  of  inquiry,  as  to  further  alleged  Divine  communication/I, 
that  it  is  possible  to  gain  a  true  religious  developement. 

Very  many  things  celebrated  in  these  remarkable  poems  are 
doubtless  without  even  the  shadow  of  historic  foundation,  but  it 
is  yet  possible  to  feel  a  lively  interest  in  some,  at  least,  of  them 
as  poetic  fancies.  What  seems  graceful  and  touching  to  one 
people  often  excites  laughter,  or  scorn,  or  even  detestation,  among 
others.  So,  in  regard  to  symbols,  it  is  quite  certain  that  many 
"  expressions,  figures  of  speech,  and  allegories,  very  dear  to 
peoples  in  the  West,  have  no  significance  whatever  to  those  of 
the  East.  And  very,  very  much  that  seems  to  Oriental  minds 
edifying,  is  repellent  to  those  of  the  West.  Still,  I  think  the 
time  has  really  come  when  thoughtful  and  candid  people  may 
do  much  to  remove  the  hindrances,  that  undoubtedly  exist,  to 
the  closer  union  of  the  convictions  and  sentiments  of  devout  men 
in  East  and  West.  I  may  add  that  nothing  can  be  further  from 


PREFACE.  xi 

my  purpose  in  this  work,  and  more  utterly  distasteful  to  me,  than 
theological  controversy;  and  if  in  this  work  any  one  word  of 
mine  should  give  pain  to  any  of  my  valued  Tamil  friends,  I  ask 
forgiveness  in  advance. 

It  seems  also  most  desirable  that  all  Europeans  whose  lot 
it  is  to  dwell  in  the  Tamil  lands,  or  who  anywhere  set  themselves 
to  benefit  their  Tamil  fellow-subjects, — and  especially  missionaries 
and  teachers, —  should  take  pains  to  know  accurately  the  feelings 
and  convictions  of  those  for  whom,  and  in  the  midst  of  whom, 
they  work.  For  many  years  I  have  not  ceased  to  say, — there  in 
India,  and  here  in  Oxford, — to  successive  classes  of  students, 'You 
must  learn  not  only  to  think  in  Tamil,  but  also  to  feel  in  Tamil,  if 
you  are  to  be  intelligible  and  useful  among  the  Tamil  people.' 

This  publication  (the  fruit  of  much  weary  toil)  may  help,  it 
is  trusted,  all  who  desire  to  be  helped,  along  this  certainly 
difficult  road. 

It  must  be  confessed,  moreover,  that  I  very  earnestly  wish 
also  that  my  valued  Tamil  friends  may  be  led  to  make  the 
closer  acquaintance  of  some  of  the  magnificent  collections  of 
'sacred  poetry'  existing  in  English.  And  this  not  only  for  the 
benefit  (which  must  be  great)  of  the  individual  student,  but  of 
Tamil  literature.  For  no  literature  can  stand  alone. 

I  may  safely  take  it  for  granted  that  my  indulgent  Tamil 
friends  will  not  shrink  from  these  Christian  compositions,  because 
they  are  full  of  the  unstinted  praises  of  Him  Whom  all  acknow- 
ledge as  the  noblest,  purest,  best,  and  most  self-sacrificing  of 
those  who  have  worn  the  garment  of  our  mortality, — any  more 
than  I  have  shrunk  from  long  and  appreciative  study  of  poems 
containing  very  much  with  which  I  can  have  but  scanty  sym- 
pathy1. '  Scrutinize  all  things:  hold  fast  that  which  is  good!' 

I  may  add  that  my  experience  as  a  translator  has  taught  me  that 
to  get  even  a  glimpse  of  the  thought  of  a  real  poet,  the  student 
must  often  go  down  into  the  depths,  must  use  every  means  to  put 
himself  in  sympathy  with  his  author,  must  learn  to  think  and  feel 
with  him,  and  so — it  may  be — at  last  come  to  understand  him. 

Some  German  and  Latin  hymns  were  translated  150  years 
ago  by  that  wonderful  Tamil  scholar  and  poetic  genius,  the 
missionary  Fabricius ;  and  '  Fabricius'  hymn-book '  has  been,  and 
deserved  to  be,  the  basis  of  nearly  all  the  Christian  Tamil 


1  See  my  Nalatfiyar,  p.  92,  and  Introduction,  p.  xiii. 


xii  PREFACE. 

< 

hymnology.  Though  it  is  hardly  classical,  it  is  so  vigorous  and 
real  in  its  tone,  that  it  does  not  seem  likely  ever  to  lose  its 
hold  upon  the  affections  of  the  Tamil  Christian  community. 
Nevertheless  it  is  to  be  earnestly  desired  that  the  transfusion 
of  much  great  European  and  sacred  poetry  into  popular,  easy, 
rhythmic  Tamil  verse  resembling  that  of  Manikka-Va^agar, 
should  be  attempted.  If  a  foreigner  has  bestowed  infinite  pains 
(would  that  it  had  been  with  greater  results!)  on  the  study  of 
the  Tiruvasagam,  perhaps  some  of  the  native  scholars  of  South 
India,  versed  in  English  and  Tamil,  may  be  induced  to  inquire 
whether  they  cannot  find  fitting  material  for  study,  imitation,  and 
translation  in  that  inexhaustible  mine  of  beauty  and  profound 
thought  which  is  opened  up  in  English  sacred  verse,  from  the 
Hebrew  psalms  down  to  the  Christian  poetry  of  the  present  day. 
Nothing  of  this  sort  can  be  expected  to  live  and  be  effective 
among  a  people  if  not  expressed  in  their  own  vernacular  language, 
the  '  vulgar  tongue,' '  in  which  they  were  born.' 

The  speech  of  a  dying  people  may,  perhaps,  be  allowed  to 
die;  but  this  cannot  be  said  of  the  Tamil  race.  Heaven  forbid! 

Dead  languages  have  great  uses.  '  Even  in  their  ashes  live  their 
wonted  fires.'  De  mortnis  nil  nisi  bonum  ! — yet,  in  many  ways,  the 
living  tongues  are  better!  One  cannot  tell  what  flowers  may  yet 
bloom,  what  fruits  may  yet  ripen,  on  the  hardy  old  trees.  Let 
Tamilians  cease  to  be  ashamed  of  their  vernacular! 

There  exists  now  much  of  what  is  called  Christian  Tamil, 
a  dialect  created  by  the  Danish  missionaries  of  Tranquehar«; 
enriched  by  generations  of  Tanjore,  German,  and  other  mission- 
aries ;  modified,  purified,  and  refrigerated  by  the  Swiss  Rhenius 
and  the  very  composite  Tinnevelly  school ;  expanded  and  har- 
monized by  Englishmen,  amongst  whom  Bower  (a  Eurasian)  was 
foremost  in  his  day;  and,  finally,  waiting  now  for  the  touch  of 
some  heaven-born  genius  among  the  Tamil  community  to  make  it 
as  sweet  and  effective  as  any  language  on  earth,  living  or  dead. 

Of  that  unique  genius  Beschi  (see  Preface  to  my  Kurral, 
for  a  history  of  this  great  man),  and  of  De  Nobilibus,  and  (in 
after  days)  of  Ellis  and  Stokes, — with  a  multitude  of  others,  such 
as  Drew,  Caldwell,  and  Percival,  who  advanced  Tamil  culture,— 
space  forbids  me  here  to  speak. 

Beschi — with  his  unnamed  collaborators  —  has  left  what  is 
a  literature  in  itself,  but — except  certain  prose  books— tending 
more  and  more  to  become  obsolete.  <• 


PREFACE.  Xlll 

There  has  been  at  least  one  real  native  Christian  poet,  Vetha- 
nayaga  Sastriyar  of  Tanjore,  whose  writings  should  be  collected 
and  edited.  Christian  lyrics,  of  unequal  value,  abound.  Mr.  Webb, 
an  able'  America'n  missionary  of  Madura,  did  much  to  develope 
these.  The  '  Pilgrim's  Progress '  has  been  versified ;  and  the 
first  book  of  '  Paradise  Lost/  by  V.  P.  Subramanya  Mudaliar, 
is  a  courageous  attempt.  Many  more  works  might  be  cited,  but 
this  must  suffice  for  Christian  Tamil. 

Amongst  many  others,  Tirumular's  Tirumantra,Tayumanavar's 
poems,  Pattanattu  Pillai's  poems,  the  Devaram,  the  Tiruvi9aipa,  with 
various  articles  in  '  The  Light  of  Truth/  by  N.  B.  and  by  P.  A., 
exhibit  at  once  the  capabilities  and  needs  of  popular  Tamil  poetry. 

Of  old  classical  Tamil  and  its  stores  I  have  spoken  elsewhere. 

I  am  afraid  I  cannot  recall  more  than  two  recent  works 
which  seem  to  me  to  give  promise  of  a  veritable  re-descent  in 
more  modern  attire  of  the  Tamil  Sarasvatl. 

The  distinguished  author  of  Manomaniyam,  P.  Suntharam  Pillai, 
has — too  early  for  us— passed  into  the  unseen.  The  copy  he  sent 
me  (inscribed  with  characteristic  modesty),  'Submitted  to  — —  with 
the  author's  best  respects/  is  to  me  a  valued  companion. 

The  little  anonymous1  volume — a  first  instalment — entitled 
'  Tani-pa^ura-togai '  seems  to  herald  the  advent  of  a  new  school 
to  be  heartily  welcomed. 

But  Tamil — like  Latin  in  the  early  Christian  ages — must  learn 
to  adapt  herself  to  the  new  order  of  things!  Horace  and  Virgil 
would  hardly  have  consented  to  part  with  their  metrical  system 
for  the  rhythms  and  rhymes  of  a  later  time;  yet '  Dies  Irae'  and 
'Veni  Spiritus/  the  poems  of  Richard  and  Adam  of  St.  Victor, 
St.  Bernard,  and  a  multitude  of  others,  came  to  dwell  in  the  world's 
heart  for  ever ;  while  Dante  and  all  the  great  Italians  are  Latins ! 

The  work  of  translation  was  here  arid  there  difficult,  and  I  had 
to  compare  a  great  number  of  similar  verses  to  get  at  the  meaning. 
An  anonymous  scholar2,  who  has  written  the  only  commentary 
I  know  on  the  Tiruv^agam,  confesses  himself  at  a  loss  to  explain, 
among  others,  Poems  I- IV.  I  have  altered  a  few  things  in  accord- 
ance with  his  interpretations,  but  have  often  seen  reasons  for 
differing.  The  work  is  very  able  and  learned. 


1  The  author's  name  is  now  given.   The  verses  are  by  V.  G.  Suryanarayana  Sastriar,  B.  A., 
Head  Tamil  Pandit  of  the  Madras  Christian  College.     An  enlarged  edition  with  English 
renderings  will  soon  be  issued. 

2  This  was  not  published  till  my  translation  was  in  the  press.     Indeed  the  editor  gives 
in  I*is  preface  as  one  reason  for  the  publication  the  fact  that  an  Angajeyar  (Englishman)  was 
putting  forth  an  English  translation. 


XIV  .  1'KKFACF. 

Generally  my  translation  runs  line  for  line  with  the  original, 
and  preserves  something  of  its  rhythm,  where  this  did  not  interfere 
with  fidelity  to  the  sense. 

Of  the  Tiruva9agam  itself  nothing  need  be  added  to  'what  is 
elsewhere  said. 

My  thanks  are  due  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India  for 
a  liberal  subsidy ;  to  the  Delegates  of  the  Clarendon  Press ;  and  to 
many  Tamil  friends  (who  do  not  desire  their  names  to  be  mentioned). 

A  full  list  of  subscribers  and  donors  will  be  duly  published. 

To  Mr.  Pembrey  (as  in  my  former  writings)  I  owe  very  much 
for  his  indefatigable  co-operation. 


I  date  this  on  my  eightieth  birthday.  I  find,  by  reference, 
that  my  first  Tamil  lesson  was  in  1837.  This  ends,  as  I  suppose, 
a  long  life  of  devotion  to  Tamil  studies.  It  is  not  without  deep 
emotion  that  I  thus  bring  to  a  close  my  life's  literary  work. 

Some  years  ago,  when  this  publication  was  hardly  projected, 
one  evening,  after  prayers,  the  writer  was  walking  with  the 
late  Master  of  Balliol  College  in  the  quadrangle.  The  conver- 
sation turned  upon  Tamil  legends,  poetry  and  philosophy.  At 
length,  during  a  pause  in  the  conversation,  the  Master  said 
in  a  quick  way  peculiar  to  him,  '  You  must  print  it.'  To  this 
the  natural  answer  was,  'Master!  I  have  no  patent  of  immor- 
tality, and  the  work  would  take  very  long.'  I  can  see  him  now, 
as  he  turned  round, — while  the  moonlight  fell  upon  his  white 
hair  and  kindly  face, — and  laid  his  hand  upon  my  shoulder, 
saying,  'To  have  a  great  work  in  progress  is  the  way  to  live 
long.  You  will  live  till  you  finish  it.'  I  certainly  did  not  think 
so  then,  though  the  words  have  often  come  to  my  mind  as  a  pro- 
phecy, encouraging  me  when  weary ;  and  they  have  been  fulfilled, 
while  he  has  passed  out  of  sight. 

To  the  memory  of  Benjamin  Jowett,  one  of  the  kindest,  and 
best,  and  most  forbearing  of  friends, — to  whom  I  owe,  among 
much  else,  the  opportunity  of  accomplishing  this  and  other 
undertakings, — I  venture  to  inscribe  this  volume  with  all  gratitude 
and  reverence. 

May  the  blessing  of  his  Master  and   mine  crown  the  very 

imperfect  work! 

G.  U.  POPE 
BALLIOL  COLLEGE, 

April  24,  1900. 


PART   I. 

THE    LEGENDARY    HISTORY 

OF 

THE  TAMIL  POET,  SAINT,  AND  SAGE 
MANIKKA-VAgAGAR, 

WITH   NOTES  ON    THE   £AIVA   SIDDHANTA   SYSTEM   OF   RELIGION 
AND   PHILOSOPHY. 


THIS  life  of  the  Sage,  with  the  notes  appended,  was  presented  in  substance 
to  the  members  of  the  Victoria  Philosophical  Society,  read  before  them,  and 
printed  by  them.  With  their  consent  these  are  now  reprinted  in  a  considerably 
enlarged  form.  The  writer  has  to  offer  his  warmest  acknowledgments  to  the 
Council  of  that  excellent  Society,  and  especially  to  their  Honorary  Secretary, 
Captain  Petrie.  To  them  the  publication  of  this  work  is  in  great  measure  due. 


-THE   HISTORY  OF    MANIKKA'-VA^AGAR. 

§  i.  To  his  Conversion.    T.  V.  0.  P.  I. 

THE  history  of  this  remarkable  man  is  involved  in  considerable 
obscurity;  but,  although  we  can  only  discern  the  dimmest 
outline  of  his  figure  amid  the  mists  of  South-Indian  poetical 
tradition,  it  is  quite  certain  that  he  actually  existed ;  that  these 
legends,  interesting  in  themselves,  have  a  considerable  foundation 
in  fact;  and  that  this  sage  was  the  first  in  the  long  and  every 
way  remarkable  series  of  devotees  of  £ivan  who  engaged  in 
the  arduous  work  of  recovering  the  south  of  India  from  the 
Buddhists  and  Jains.  He  is  not  however  regarded  in  the  Tamil 
lands  as  the  greatest  of  the  £aiva  saints,  that  honour  being 
reserved  for  Tiru2  Nana  Sambandhar,  some  of  whose  legends 
I  have  elsewhere  given  (Ind.  Mag.  and  Review,  1897).  Nor  is  it 
possible  with  even  an  approximation  to  certainty  to  fix  his  date. 
As  he  evidently  flourished  at  the  time  when  the  influence  of 
Buddhism  in  South  India  was  decaying,  if  not  dying  out,  there 
is  good  reason  to  suppose  that  he  lived  somewhere  about  the 
seventh  or  eighth  century  of  our  era.  Some  further  confirmation 
of  this  supposition  will  be  forthcoming.  The  authorities  for  his 
history,  if  we  may  call  them  such,  really  .  resolve  themselves 
into  two:  his  own  writings,  which  are  but  sparingly  autobio- 
graphical; and  the  very  modern  legendary  poem  called  the 
Vdthavurar*  Purdnam  (T.  V.  U.  P.).  This  latter  again  is  an 
amplification  of  the  sections  fifty-eight  to  sixty-one  of  the 
Madura  Sthala  Purdnam,  or,  as  it  is  commonly  called,  Tiru 
Vilaiyddal*  Purdnam;  and  is  utterly  unhistorical.  This  latter 


1  '  Manikya '  is  more  correct  Sanskrit ;  but  in  Tamil  the  name  has  always  been  written  as 
I  have  given  it.    It  means,  '  He  whose  utterances  are  rubies.'    A  respected  Tamil  scholar  has 
gravely  (in  the  sS<Sais8is0riaesiifi,  Jan.  1900,  p.  278)  announced  its  derivation  to  be  from  lorexr 
(  =  'excellent')  +  jD*®  (  =  'sweetness').   This  is  ingenious,  and  bravely  patriotic;  but  obviously 
untenable ! 

2  Tiru  is  the  Tamil  equivalent  of  the  Sanskrit  fri,  'blessed,'  'sacred,'  and  when  prefixed  to 
the  names  of  persons  corresponds  to  SAINT.  The  Tamil  form  of  Sanskrity«<z««  is  Ndna,  ©TOT. 

3  Vat  ham  =  'disputation '  [Sanskrit  Vadd\.    The  town  where  the  saint  was  born  was  called 
'  disputation-town.'     The  country  was  full  of  polemics  in  those  days.     See  Ndladi,  p.  202. 

4  See  NOTE  I.  'Sacred  sports'  of  the  god,  of  which  sixty-four  are  given.    This  work  has 
been 'printed  in  Tamil.     A  summary  is  given  in  Taylor's  Oriental  Historical  Manuscripts, 


XX  THE   HISTORY  OF 

t 

creatures  go  from  flower  to  flower  through  every  grove/  he 
sought  out  and  held  converse  with  the  professors  of  different 
£aiva  schools,  saying  within  his  soul,  'Where  shall  I  find, the 
spotless  Guru1,  who  can  expound  to  me  the  mysteries  of  the 
Agamas?'  In  fact,  the  state  of  mind  of  the  youthful  prime 
minister  was  much  like  that  in  former  generations  of  Sakya-muni 
or  Gautama,  and  of  all  the  great  saints  and  sages  whose  names 
live  in  Indian  tradition :  the  world's  infinite  woe  oppressed  him, 
and  there  was  neither  remedy  nor  teacher  to  be  found.  (NOTE  V.) 
It  is  evident  that  at  that  period  the  faithful  followers  of  the  Caiva 
system  were  few,  and  rival  systems  were  in  the  ascendant.  The 
king  himself  and  his  courtiers  were  probably  but  lukewarm  in 
their  religious  profession.  Jainism  was  everywhere. 

The  recital  of  these  mental  troubles,  and  the  touching  confession 
of  his  ignorance  and  youthful  folly  are  to  be  found  in  many  of  his 
poems.  (See  especially  No.V,  The  Sacred  Cento,  pp.  44-84.)  They 
remind  one  most  forcibly  of  the  Confessions  of  St.  Augustine, 
and  we  cannot  help  saying  that,  in  our  Tamil  sage,  we  find  a  spirit 
congenial  to  that  of  the  great  doctor  of  the  West. 

The  crisis  was  at  hand.  One  day  when  the  king  was  sitting 
in  state  in  the  midst  of  his  nobles  and  dependant  kings, 
messengers  came  announcing  that,  in  a  harbour  in  the  territory 
of  the  tyra  king,  ships  had  arrived  with  multitudes  of  horses 
of  rare  value,  from  the  'Aryan2'  land.  We  may  suppose  that 
this  means  Arabia,  and  the  whole  legend  points  to  the  traffic 
ever  carried  on  by  coasting  vessels  between  India  and  tjie 
western  countries,  from  whence  not  goods  only,  but  influential 
ideas  also  came.  The  king  at  once  commissioned  his  confidential 
minister  to  proceed  to  Tiru-perun-turrai  (sacred-great-harbour')* 
to  b\iy  these  horses ;  and  gave  him  an  enormous  treasure  for 
their  purchase.  Manikka-V^agar,  seated  in  a  magnificent  litter, 
set  out  accordingly  in  more  than  royal  pomp,  escorted  by 
troops  composed  of  mercenaries  from  every  known  eastern  land. 
Never  was  progress  more  magnificent  than  that  which  the  poet 
imagines.  It  is  the  last  gleam  of  the  predestined  saint's  secular 
glories.  And  thus  through  cities,  over  vast  wildernesses  and 
interposing  hills  (!),  he  made  his  way  to  the  great  western  harbour, 
where  he  was  to  make  his  purchases.  The  curtain  here  falls 


1  See  NOTE  IV.  'The  Gnru.'  2  Arya  seems  here  to  be  equivalent  to  'foreign.' 

3  This  is  now  called  Avudaiyar  Koyil.    It  is  twenty-seven  miles  from  Pnthukotta,  antf  the 
sage  is  worshipped  there. 


MANIKKA-VA^AGAR.  XXI 

I 

at  the  end  of  the  first  act  in  the  drama  of  the  sage's  history. 
His  secular  life  is  really  ended.  Like  St.  Paul  journeying  to 
Damascus,  he  is  on  the  eve  of  an  unexpected  and  decisive 
experience. 

§  ii.  fyvan  Appears.    The  Sage's  Conversion.   T.V.  U.P.  II.  1-82. 

And  here  the  poet  for  a  time  leaves  him  journeying  on,  and 
introduces  us,  in  the  second  canto,  to  a  more  splendid  court 
than  that  of  the  Pandiyan  king;  to  the  court  of  Civan  Himself, 
where  He  sits  enthroned  with  Uma  by  his  side  on  the  silver 
hill.  (NOTE  X.)  There  the  God  announces  to  the  assembled 
deities  his  intention  to  visit  earth,  in  the  form  of  a  guru  or 
human  teacher,  that  he  may  initiate  and  consummate  the 
conversion  and  salvation  of  a  disciple,  who  shall  restore  to  all 
the  Southern  lands  the  teaching  of  the  truth,  and  make  the 
Tamil  language  for  ever  glorious  with  the  'nectar  of  sacred  and 
devout  poesy.'  His  adoring  hosts  are  to  accompany  Him  in  the 
guise  of  disciples,  for  one  of  the  titles  of  £ivan  is  'Lord  of  Hosts.' 
(NOTE  XII.)  The  poet  has  a  great  many  beautiful  verses,  and 
some  very  fanciful  ones,  about  this  gracious  advent  of  Civan. 

The  trees  put  forth  their  verdure,  the  flowers  exhale  new 
fragrance,  the  birds  sing  on  every  branch,  the  beautiful  grove 
around  Tiru-perun-turrai  is  hushed  in  expectancy,  when  under 
a  thick  and  spreading  Kuruntham l  tree,  in  human  form,  the 
mighty  Guru  takes  his  seat,  attended  by  his  hosts,  all  like  Him- 
self, in  appearance  Caiva  saints.  Meanwhile  the  youthful  prime 
minister,  unconscious  of  the  coming  crisis,  draws  near  the  town 
with  his  gorgeous  company,  and  hears  from  amid  the  grove 
solemn  mysterious  strains,  the  voices  of  the  999  saintly  atten- 
dants of  the  God,  who  are  chaunting  the  venerable  Caiva-Agamas. 
He  at  once  stops  his  royal  cavalcade,  and  sends  a  messenger 
to  inquire  the  source  and  reason  of  this  sweet  mystic  music. 

The  answer  is,  that  surrounded  by  a  vast  multitude  of 
devotees,  beneath  a  Kuruntham  tree,  there  sits  a  venerable 
saintly  Guru  with  braided  lock,  crowned  with  a  garland  of 
Kondraij  in  majestic  grace  most  like  unto  Civan  Himself. 

Our  traveller  forthwith  reverently  alights,  draws  near,  and 
at  once  is  transported  with  rapture.  He  beholds  a  mystic  Guru 
who  has  a  rosary  of  scarlet  Eleocarpus  beads  around  his  head 
and  throat  and  breast;  who  is  smeared  with  sacred  ashes  of 


1  The  tree  is  the  '  thorny  trichilia.'     Its  flowers  are  very  fragrant.    See  p.  255. 


XX11  THE   HISTORY  OF 

c 

dazzling  white,  has  a  third  eye  of  fire  in  the  centre  of  his 
resplendent  forehead,  and  holds  in  his  hand  a  book.  '  What 
book  is  this  ? '  he  ventures  to  inquire.  The  answer  is,  '  It  is 
the  £iva-nana-bodham.'  We  must  pause  to  remark  the  daring 
anachronism  of  this  reply.  This  celebrated  work  of  the  Tamil 
Aquinas,  the  great  Meykanda-Devar,  did  not  exist  for  at  least 
two  centuries  after  Manikka-Va^agar's  time.  '  And  what,'  inquires 
the  neophyte,  '  is  fyvain  ^  ?  What  is  NSnam  ?  and  what  is 
Bodham  ? '  '  tyvani?  was  the  God's  reply,  '  is  the  incomparable 
true  and  divine  Essence.  Nanam  is  the  science  of  that  Essence. 
Bodham  is  its  right  apprehension.'  No  sooner  does  this  answer 
fall  upon  his  ears  than  the  inquirer,  who  has  reached  the  exact 
stage  of  religious  experience 2  that  according  to  the  Caiva  system 
renders  him  meet  to  hear  and  receive  the  Guru's  words,  exclaims, 
'  Henceforth  I  renounce  all  desires  of  worldly  wealth  and  splen- 
dour. To  me,  Thy  servant,  viler  than  a  dog,  who  worship  at 
Thy  feet,  grant  emancipation  from  corporeal  bonds !  Take  me 
as  Thy  slave,  O  king  of  my  soul!'  Saying  this,  he  stands  weeping 
and  worshipping  at  the  Guru's  feet.  One  of  the  chief  of  the 
surrounding  host  now  intercedes  for  him  as  worthy  to  be  taught 
the  mystery  of  emancipating  grace,  and  the  God  accordingly 
receives  him,  and  bids  the  attendants  prepare  at  once  for  his 
solemn  initiation. 

In  the  grove  a  stately  tabernacle  is  prepared,  surrounded  with 
rich  silken  hangings,  and  adorned  with  myriads  of  fragrant 
blooming  flowers  and  innumerable  sparkling  gems.  In  the 
midst  a  lofty  seat  is  prepared  for  the  Guru,  and  the  neophyte 
is  bathed  with  water  from  the  Ganges,  besprinkled  with  perfumes, 
and  prepared  for  reception  by  a  variety  of  minute  ceremonies. 
He  then  presents  food  with  many  kinds  of  luscious  fruits  to  the 
great  Master,  after  which  the  initiation  begins.  The  Mantras 
and  holy  texts  are  taught  him.  He  hears  these,  while  his 
faculties  are  absorbed  in  loving  devotion.  He  then  worships 
the  sacred  feet  of  the  Guru,  and  places  them  reverently  on  his 
head3.  With  the  impartation  to  him  of  all  the  mysteries  of  the 
£aiva  Siddhanta  philosophy  (NOTE  XI),  the  initiation  is  complete. 

And  now,  how  changed  is  the  youthful  minister  of  state ! 
He  has  become  a  Jivan-muttar,  who  lives  in  'a  body  still  for 
a  little  while,  but  is  one  in  feeling,  soul,  power  and  faculty 


The  neuter  form.  2  ^atti-nibatham  (NOTE  V).  3  Lyric  XXXII. 


MANIlvKA-VACAGAR.  xxiii 

with  the  Infinite  Eternal.  He  has  put  off  his  rich  garments 
and  adornments,  is  besmeared  with  white  ashes,  and  wears  the 
peculiar  habiliment  of  the  ascetic.  From  his  head  depends  the 
braided  lock  of  the  £aiva  devotee,  one  hand  grasps  the  staff,  and 
the  other  the  mendicant's  bowl :  he  has  for  ever  renounced  the 
world — all  the  worlds — save  Civan's  self. 

And  he  is  faithful  henceforward  even  to  the  end.  In  the 
whole  legendary  history  of  this  sage,  whatever  we  may  think 
of  the  accuracy  of  many  of  its  details,  and  whatever  deduc- 
tions we  are  compelled  to  make  for  the  exaggerations  that 
have  grown  up  around  the  obscurity  of  the  original  facts, 
there  stands  out  a  real  historical  character,  which  seems  to  be 
a  mixture  of  that  of  St.  Paul  and  of  St.  Francis  of  Assisi.  Under 
other  circumstances  what  an  apostle  of  the  East  might  he  have 
become!  This  is  his  conversion,  as  South  India  believes  it;  and 
in  almost  every  poem  he  alludes  to  it,  pouring  forth  his  gratitude 
in  ecstasies  of  thanksgiving,  and  again  and  again  repeating  the 
words '  I  am  Thine,  save  me ! '  His  poetry  lives  in  all  Tamil  hearts, 
and  in  the  main  and  true  essence  of  it  deserves  so  to  live ! 

The  next  step  was, — and  here  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  see  how 
the  conduct  of  the  new  devotee  can  be  justified, — to  make  over  to 
the  Guru  and  his  attendants  the  whole  of  the  treasure  entrusted 
to  him  by  his  king  for  the  purchase  of  horses.  By  initiation  he 
has  become  the  Guru's  very  own.  All  that  he  is  and  has  belongs 
to  his  new  Master.  So,  together  with  his  own  garments,  jewels, 
and  personal  property,  the  whole  of  his  late  master's  prodigious 
treasure  is  at  once  handed  over  to  be  distributed  to  the  devotees 
of  the  God  and  to  the  poor ! 

§  iii.   Events  in  Madura.     T.  V.  U.  P.  11.83-135. 

Meanwhile  the  nobles  who  composed  his  escort  beheld  with 
astonishment  the  sudden  transformation  of  the  youthful  minister, 
and  were  still  more  astounded  at  this  misappropriation — as  it 
certainly  seemed  to  them — of  the  king's,  their  master's,  property. 
So  they  ventured  to  draw  near  to  the  sacred  assembly,  and  to 
expostulate  respectfully;  but  Manikka-Va^agar  sternly  bade  them 
depart, — for  '  why,'  said  he,  '  would  you  bring  me  back  to  earth's 
false  employments?'  Finding  all  their  expostulations  useless, 
they  at  length  returned  to  Madura,  and  announced  to  the  king 
that  his  favourite  minister  had  become  a  Caivite  Sanniyasi  ('  one 
Who  has  renounced  the  world'),  and  had  made  away  with  all 


xxiv  THE   HISTORY   OF 

the  money  entrusted  to  him.  As  in  the  case  of  Daniel,  there 
was  jealousy  at  work  no  doubt,  but  Manikka-Va^agar  was 
evidently  not  blameless,  as  seen  at  least  from  a  mundane 
point  of  view.  The  king  was  exceedingly  'enraged,'  as  was 
natural,  and  sent  a  peremptory  order  for  his  minister's  instant 
return.  When  the  royal  order  arrived  and  was  presented  to 
the  new  ascetic,  his  reply  was,  '  I  know  no  king  but  £ivan,  and 
even  were  Yaman's  (the  god  of  death)  messengers  to  come  to 
bear  me  away,  my  Master  has  conquered  YamanV  He  then 
took  the  king's  missive  and  spread  it  before  the  God  asking 
for  direction.  £ivan  smiled  sweetly  upon  him,  and  bade  him 
return  fearlessly,  and  tell  the  king,  that  on  the  igth  of  the  month 
of  Avani 2  the  horses  which  he  had  been  sent  to  purchase  would 
arrive  in  Madura.  The  God  also  arrayed  him  in  resplendent 
garments,  and  gave  him  a  fitting  chariot,  together  with  a  ruby 
(hence  his  name)  of  inestimable  value  which  he  was  to  present 
to  the  king.  Accordingly,  Manikka-Va^agar  returned  with  the 
messengers,  and  stood  before  his  former  master,  who  sternly 
required  him  to  account  for  his  conduct.  To  this  he  submis- 
sively replied, — as  the  God  had  bidden  him, — (though  it  seems  to 
us  to  be  false !)  that  the  horses  had  been  procured,  and  were  wait- 
ing in  Perun-turrai ;  but  that  he  had  not  brought  them  with  him 
now  because  the  Brahmans  had  assured  him  that  the  igth  of 
the  month  Avani  was  the  propitious  day  for  the  transmission  of 
these  precious  animals  to  Madura.  He  also  presented  the  ruby, 
which  filled  the  king  with  astonishment  and  delight,  made  him 
satisfied  with  the  explanation,  and  caused  him  to  regard  the 
report  of  the  others  as  a  piece  of  mere  envious  detraction.  So 
the  time  passed,  till  there  were  only  two  days  wanting  to  the 
date  fixed  for  the  arrival  of  the  horses.  And  now,  one  of 
the  courtiers  who  had  gained  the  ear  of  the  king,  represented 
the  whole  matter  in  its  true  light ; — or  rather,  as  it  had  appeared 
to  all  who  had  accompanied  Manikka-V^agar :  'Your  majesty,' 
said  he,  '  is  deceived ;  your  prime-  minister  on  the  outskirts  of  the 
city  of  Perun-turrai  saw  a  Caiva  Guru  of  imposing  appearance 
and  apparent  sanctity,  whose  disciple  he  at  once  became,  and 


1  See  Nala4i  Lex.  *.j» :  (Jivan  with  His  left  foot  kicked  Yaman,  and  'death  was  dead !' 
This  is  referred  to  in  A'ttrra/,  269  : 

'  Ev'n  over  death  the  victory  they  rnay  gain, 

If  power  by  penance  won  their  souls  obtain.' 
See  also  NIti-Nerri-Vilakkam  51,  and  Stokes'  note.    Comp.  p.  63. 

8  The  1 9th  of  Avani  (Sept.  4)  is  a  great  annual  festival-day  in  commemoration  of  this. 


MANIKKA-VA(;AGAR.  XXV 


j 


to  whom  he  made  over  the  whole  of  the  treasure  for  the 
purposes  of  that  sect!'  It  would  seem  that  they  themselves^ 
though  they  had  seen  everything,  had  no  belief  in  the  divinity 
of  the  Guru  ;  and  it  is  possible  that  they  themselves  were  Jains, 
or  Buddhists,  who  were  rejoiced  to  have  the  opportunity  of 
bringing  this  accusation  against  the  £aiva  saint.  It  must  be 
remembered  too,  that  it  is  a  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  Caiva 
system  that  every  Guru  is  in  Caiva  eyes  an  absolute  incarnation 
of  the  God  ;  but  to  these  non-Qaiva  courtiers  he  was  simply  a 
sectarian  mendicant.  The  king  in  consequence  ordered  Manikka- 
Va^agar  to  be  thrown  into  prison  till  he  should  restore  the 
treasures  he  had  misappropriated ;  and  this,  doubtless,  seems  to 
us  to  have  been  but  just ;  yet  the  poet  tells  us,  that  all  nature 
sympathised  with  the  suffering  saint;  sun,  moon  and  stars 
withdrew  their  light,  trees  drooped,  and  the  whole  creation 
languished.  The  sufferer  in  his  prison  meanwhile  utters  lamenta- 
tions, and  makes  very  touching  appeals  to  the  God  in  Whom  he 
trusted.  This  part  of  the  history  is  in  truth  very  pathetic,  and 
enjoys  great  popularity  among  Tamilians. 

The  second  canto  leaves  him  thus  in  prison,  but  the  date 
of  the  promised  arrival  of  the  horses  is  at  hand ! 

§  iv.   The  'Horses?    T.V.  U.P.  III. 

'It  is  the  duty  of  the  father  to  relieve  the  woes  of  his 
children,'  and  so  £ivan  appears  at  the  appointed  time  with  the 
promised  horses.  But  here  is  seen  a  characteristic  of  the  God 
upon  which  all  the  £aiva  writers  delight  to  expatiate  —  His 
sportive  character:  He  delights  to  astonish,  to  bewilder,  even  to 
delude  the  sons  of  men !  So  everything  in  the  universe  is  the 
sport  of  £ivan.  '  He  disports  himself  in  the  universe  arid  in 
the  souls  of  individual  men  V  His  dance  at  £ithambaram 2  is 
the  symbolic  expression  of  this.  So  in  this  case  the  God  gathers 
together  a  vast  multitude  of  jackals  from  the  forest  around, 
converts  them  into  magnificent  chargers,  gives  them  into  the 
charge  of  all  the  inferior  gods,  who  come  disguised  as  grooms, 
while  He  Himself  rides  at  the  head  of  the  troops,  disguised  as  the 
merchant,  who  has  brought  the  horses  for  sale  from  a  distant 
land.  The  tidings  reach  the  king  :  '  The  purchased  horses  have 
actually  arrived !  An  innumerable  host,  they  cover  the  plains. 

1  '  Kelati  ande,  Kelati  pindeV     Comp.  Tiruva^agam  III.  124-141,  and  NOTE  I. 
3  See  NOTE  VII.  '  Qithambaram.' 


XXVI  THE    HISTORY   OF 

The  heavens  are  dark  with  the  dust  of  their  feet.'  Of  course 
the  king  sees  how  wrongly  he  has  treated  his  prime  minister, 
who  is  at  once  released  from  prison,  restored  to  favour,  and  goes 
forth  with  the  king  to  inspect  and  receive  the  purchased  horses. 
Wonderful  indeed  (and  very  prolix!)  is  the  Tamil  poet's  descrip- 
tion of  the  cavalcade,  and  of  the  good  points  of  the  horses. 
But  the  interest  of  the  story  centres  in  the  advent  of  £ivan, 
whom  Manikka-Va^agar  at  once  instinctively  recognizes  as  his 
Master,  but  dares  not  openly  worship,  since  the  Deity  willed 
to  preserve  His  incognito.  The  mighty  Divinity  Himself  stands 
before  the  Pandiyan  king,  horsewhip  in  hand,  and  concludes  the 
bargain  ;  when  it  appears  that  the  horses  delivered  are  worth 
four  times  the  treasure  that  had  been  entrusted  to  the  prime 
minister  for  the  purchase !  The  delighted  king  gives  dresses 
of  honour  to  £ivan  and  the  other  disguised  gods,  but  these  they 
receive  with  manifest  contempt,  which  greatly  astonishes  and 
irritates  him.  This  is  explained  away,  however,  as  the  result 
of  their  foreign  customs.  The  horses  are  delivered  up  to  the 
king's  grooms,  the  gods  depart,  the  king  and  his  minister  go  to 
their  respective  palaces,  and  darkness  comes  down  over  the  land. 
But  the  tranquillity  is  short-lived  ;  for  before  the  dawn  the  whole 
city  is  roused  by  frightful  howlings,  which  proceed  from  the 
royal  mews.  The  newly-arrived  jackal-horses  have  resumed  their 
old  forms,  and  are  making  night  hideous  with  their  howlings. 
They  even  fall  upon  the  real  horses  and  devour  them ;  and 
after  a  tremendous  fight  and  unspeakable  confusion  make  thpir 
escape  to  their  native  jungles.  The  king  now  perceiving  that 
he  has  been  deceived,  sends  for  the  prime  minister,  and  furiously 
upbraids  him  with  the  trick,  and  demands  restitution  of  the 
treasure.  Till  this  has  been  restored  Manikka-Va^agar  is  handed 
over  to  the  tormentors,  who  take  him  down  to  the  river  now  dry, 
and  there  expose  him  under  the  fierce  noon-tide  sun  on  the 
burning  sand  of  the  Vaigai  with  a  huge  stone  on  his  back. 
Again  he  utters  pathetic  prayers,  and  appeals  to  his  Master 
Who  has  deluded  both  him  and  the  king.  This  brings  us  to 
the  fourth  canto,  wherein  the  sage  is  finally  vindicated.  Of 
course  it  is  known  that  the  mighty  Civan  carries  in  the  midst 
of  His  bushy  locks  the  river  Ganges ;  so  to  that  river-goddess 
He  gives  command  that  she  shall  rush  down,  filling  the  empty 
channel  of  the  Vaigai,  and  inundating  the  city  of  Madura,'  the 
scene  of  the  saint's  sufferings.  '  Like  a  herd  of  fierce  elephants 


MANIKKA-VA^AGAR.  Xxvii 

) 

rushing  from  the  mountains,'  the  waters  of  the  Ganges  come 
down  and  cause  the  river  to  overflow  its  banks,  threatening 
to  drown  the  city.  The  astonished  and  bewildered  king  and  his 
courtiers  are  now  sensible  of  their  mistake,  and  the  sage  is  once 
more  restored  to  the  royal  favour,  and  entrusted  with  the  task 
of  directing  the  measures  whereby  the  city  is  to  be  saved  from 
destruction.  Under  his  direction  orders  are  given  to  the  inhabi- 
tants to  build  a  dam  for  their  protection  ;  and  to  each  one  is 
assigned  the  extent  of  wall  for  which  he  is  responsible. 

§  v.    fyvan,  a  Carrier  of  Earth.     T.  V.  U.  P.  III. 

Now  in  the  city  was  a  poor  woman,  whose  name  was  Cem- 
mana-Celvi  (the  true-hearted  happy  one'},  a  widow,  who  earned 
a  scanty  livelihood  by  selling  rice-cakes.  The  order  is  given 
her  to  construct  her  share  of  the  dam,  but  she  cannot  herself 
dig  and  carry  earth,  and  she  has  no  one  to  work  for  her,  and 
no  money  wherewith  to  hire  a  substitute.  In  her  despair  she 
rushes  to  the  temple  of  Cokka-Nayagar1  (under  which  name 
£ivan  is  still  worshipped  in  the  renowned  temple  at  Madura). 
Her  prayer  in  the  temple  is  very  touching.  It  comes  to  this 
at  last,  '  Helper  of  the  helpless,  I  flee  to  Thee  for  suc- 
cour!' Qivan  is  never  appealed  to  in  vain,  and  so  He  Him- 
self comes  in  His  own  quaint  way  to  her  rescue.  Just  outside 
the  shrine,  as  she  is  drying  her  tears,  she  sees  a  youthful  rustic, 
a  day  labourer,  clad  in  ragged  garments,  with  a  basket  for  carry- 
ing earth  put  on  His  head  as  a  covering,  and  bearing  a  spade 
on  His  shoulder,  who  addresses  her  with  the  words,  '  Will  you 
hire  me  to  do  your  work  ?  I  am  hungry ;  feed  me,  and  I  will  do 
whatever  you  bid  me '  (p.  173).  The  old  woman  was  in  raptures, 
for  had  not  her  prayer  been  answered  ?  But  O  the  wonder  of  it ! 
She  knew  not  the  whole  mystery.  The  cooly  was  none  other  than 
£ivan  in  servant's  form2,  thus  humbling  Himself  to  bear  the 
burdens  of  His  living  ones.  So  the  God  undertakes  the  task, 
eating  the  rice-cakes  with  undisguised  delight,  but  doing  His  work 
in  very  eccentric  fashion.  It  was  another  of  His  'sports!'  He 
ran  backward  and  forward,  threw  a  little  earth  here  and  a  little 
earth  there,  danced  wildly,  and  sang  strange  snatches  of  songs, 
till  the  inspectors  of  the  work  pronounced  Him  mad.  Still,  on 
the  whole,  His  work  seemed  marvellously  to  prosper  ;  for,  in  fact, 


1  This  is  equivalent  to  sundara, '  the  beautiful.' 

2  In  all  this  there  is  much  to  remind  us  of  Herakles. 


XXVlil  THE   HISTORY   OF 

( 

the  river  knew  Him,  and  shrank  away  back  into  its  former  narrow 
limits.  At  length  the  young  cooly  having  eaten  all  the  cakes, 
crowned  all  His  eccentricities  by  quietly  lying  down  on  the  river- 
bank,  and  falling  asleep  with  the  basket  as  a  pillow."  This  is 
reported  to  the  king.  The  impudent  cooly  is  sent  for,  and 
having  been  with  difficulty  aroused  from  His  slumber,  stands 
before  the  king  as  a  culprit,  making  however  no  defence.  The 
angry  king  commands  Him  to  be  beaten.  But  when  the  first 
blow  is  struck,  all  the  universe  shudders.  Every  god  in  heaven 
and  every  sentient  being  on  earth  feels  the  blow.  There  goes 
up  a  shuddering  cry  from  all  creation.  And  when  they  look 
again,  the  God  has  disappeared J. 

§  vi.   His  Ministry.    T.  V.  U.  P.  IV.  55— V.  44. 

When  intelligence  of  this  is  brought  to  Manikka-Va^agar,  he 
is  plunged  into  the  deepest  grief,  both  at  the  humiliation  of 
the  God,  and  because  he  himself  had  not  been  permitted  to  see 
and  converse  with  Him.  His  lamentations  and  complaints  in 
the  poem  are,  as  usual,  in  their  way  very  beautiful,  if  somewhat 
hyperbolical.  The  king  now  pays  the  saint  a  visit,  acknowledges 
all  his  mistakes,  declares  his  unworthiness  to  have  such  a  minister, 
and  offers  to  resign  to  him  the  kingdom.  The  sage  however 
has  but  one  wish,  and  that  is,  to  return  to  Perun-turrai,  there 
to  dwell  at  the  feet  of  the  God.  His  request  is  granted,  and 
the  king  returns  to  his  palace ;  while  the  sage,  now  released 
for  ever  from  the  entanglement  of  worldly  affairs,  finally  puts 
off  his  courtier's  dress,  and  assumes  the  garb  of  an  ascetic.  His 
conversion  and  consequent  trials  are  over,  and  he  enters  upon 
the  new  life.  From  that  day  it  was  his  one  work  to  glorify 
his  Master.  He  loses  no  time  in  returning  to  fall  at  his  Guru's 
feet,  and' pour  out  all  his  soul  in  the  Sacred  Presence. 

After  some  time  the  God  announces  to  His  disciples  that  as 
His  design  in  coming  to  earth,  namely  the  conversion  and  con- 
firmation of  the  sage,  is  accomplished,  He  will  now  return  to 
Kailasa.  To  the  999  devotees  who  are  His  attendant  hosts  He 
gives  the  charge  to  remain  in  the  grove  with  Manikka-Va^agar, 
worshipping  and  meditating  until  in  the  sacred  tank  fire  appears, 
into  which  they  are  to  cast  themselves,  and  so  pass  home  to 
their  Master.  They  must  patiently  wait.  And  for  the  neopbyte 


Comp.  Tiruva9agam  II.  47  ;  VIII.  47  ;  XIII.  62. 


MANIKKA-VAgAGAR.  xxix 

himself,  a  further  trial  is  enjoined.  He  is  to  remain  behind,  even 
after  all  his  companions  have  gone  home,  that  he  may  establish 
throughout  the  whole  Tamil  country  the  faith  of  Civan,  and 
compose"  Tamil  hymns  which  shall  be  the  Vedas  of  the  South. 
The  day  of  the  ascension  comes,  and  the  Master  departs,  but 
halts  under  a  Kondrai1  tree,  whither  the  sage  follows  Him,  still 
begging  that  he  may  at  once  accompany  Him,  and  be  for  ever 
at  His  side  on  the  silver  mount.  '  Nay/  replies  the  God,  '  learn 
rather  to  know  that  I  am  everywhere.  While  thou  art  doing 
My  will,  I  am  with  thee.  Wait  patiently.  In  Uttara-ko9a- 
mangai  thou  shalt  be  taught  the  mystery  of  the  eight  mystic 
powers2.  From  thence  thou  shalt  go  from  shrine  to  shrine,  till 
in  (^ithambaram  thou  shalt  discomfit  the  Buddhists,  and  then 
obtain  thy  consummation.'  At  length  the  God  disappears,  and 
Manikka-V§9agar  returns  alone  to  the  other  devotees.  Under 
the  tree  they  set  up  a  lihgam,  and  worship  night  and  day.  It 
was  then  and  there  that  the  saint  began  his  poetical  composi- 
tions. Twenty-one  of  the  fifty-one  lyrical  compositions  he  has 
left  are  marked  as  composed  in  Perun-turrai.  They  are  all  full 
of  the  glories  of  £ivan,  the  grace  that  found  out  and  converted 
the  singer,  and  the  grief  he  feels  at  his  enforced  absence  from 
his  Master3.  This  last  grief  is  intensified  by  the  speedy  depar- 
ture of  his  companions4.  One  day  as  they  were  worshipping, 
a  mystic  flame  blazed  up  in  the  centre  of  the  tank,  as  Qivan 
had  announced  beforehand,  and  they,  casting  themselves  into  it, 
disappeared  5. 

And  now  the  sage  alone  sits  under  the  Kondrai  tree  from 
whence  Civan  had  ascended,  and  utters  his  lamentations.  The 
marvellous  poem,  '  The  Sacred  Cento '  (numbered  five  in  the 
collection,  p.  44),  was  then  composed.  It  contains  some  of 
his  finest  verses.  Thence  begins  a  new  phase  of  his  life.  He 
passes  from  town  to  town,  worshipping  at  each  shrine,  and  com- 
posing verses  which  are  headed  according  to  the  place  of  their 
composition.  The  shrines  he  visited  were  however  very  few  in 
comparison  of  those  said  to  have  been  hallowed  by  the  presence 
of  Sambandhar  and  the  other  saints  of  the  following  cycle. 


1  A  large  and  beautiful  tree  of  the  Cassia  fistula  genus.     It  has  very  magnificent  golden 
flowers.     (See  Ainslie  I.  60.) 

2  The  Siddhi  or  supernal  powers.     (See  the  sixth  song.) 

^See  especially  Lyric  VI.  '  Forsaken  ;'  Lyric  XXXII.  i  ;  and  NOTE  VI. '  Grace.' 
'"Lyric  XXXII.  5,  &c.  5  Lyric  XXXII.  7. 


XXX  THE    HISTORY   OF 

The  fifth  canto  brings  the  sage  to  the  scene  of  his  greatest 
achievements  and  of  his  consummation,  Cithambaram.  It  will 
be  remarked  that  he  goes  back  to  Madura  and  the  Pandiyan 
kingdom  no  more.  He  is  especially  the  saint  of  Cithambaram 
and  the  Cora  kingdom ;  and  the  remainder  of  his  history  is 
a  continued  glorification  of  the  great  northern  shrine.  Many  of 
the  hymns  that  he  composed  in  reference  to  the  God  as  mani- 
fested in  Tilla'i  are  exceedingly  beautiful l.  The  note  of  sadness 
is  almost  absent,  while  the  delight  of  constant  worship  in  the 
court  (Ambaram),  where  Civan's  dancing  form  is  seen,  fills  him 
with  rapture2. 

§  vii.   The  Sage  and  the  Ceylon  Buddhists.    T.V.  U.P.  VI. 

After  awhile  it  seems  that  some  ascetic  from  (Cithambaram, 
either  our  sage  himself,  or  one  of  his  disciples,  passed  over  to 
Ceylon,  between  which  and  the  South  of  India  there  was  much 
intercourse.  The  story  represents  the  visitor  as  able  to  converse 
with  the  people.  It  would  seem  therefore  that  it  was  the  north 
of  Ceylon  to  which  he  went.  He  is  in  the  garb  of  an  ascetic  of 
the  severest  order.  Almost  naked,  with  a  rosary  of  Eleocarpns 
beads,  his  body  smeared  with  white  ashes,  a  staff  with  little  bells 
in  one  hand  and  a  skull  in  the  other,  he  wanders  about,  living 
upon  alms ;  and,  whether  he  stands  or  sits  or  lies  down,  is  always 
praising  the  Golden  Porch  (Cithambaram). 

The  Buddhists  carry  the  tidings  to  the  king,  who  sends  for 
him.  At  first  he  refuses  to  go,  saying,  '  What  have  I,  a  mendicant, 
to  do  with  kings?'  At  length,  however,  he  stands  before  the 
king,  and  is  confronted  with  the  Buddhist  gum,  who  is  armed 
with  the  three  Pitakas  of  his  law,  and  is  as  accomplished  an 
ascetic  as  the  Caivite  himself.  'What  is  this  Golden  Porch?' 
they  ask.  '  The  sacred  shrine  where  £ivan  dances,  and  where 
the  Cora  king  ever  worships.'  It  may  be  mentioned  here 
that  the  curious  legends  of  (Cithambaram  are  summed  up  in 
the  '  Koyil  Puranam,'  of  Umapathi.  (NOTE  VII.)  The  result  is 
that  the  Buddhist  guru  in  insulting  language  announces  his 
intention  to  visit  the  vaunted  shrine,  and  tear  the  God  from 
his  throne. 

The  scene  changes  somewhat  abruptly  to  Tillai  or  Citham- 
baram. The  Buddhist  guru  with  his  company  of  devotees  has 


1  See  NOTE  VII.  '  githambaram.'  2  See  NOTE  VIII.  '  Bhakti.' 


MANIKKA-VACAGAK.  xxxi 

come  to  Cithambaram  and  encamped  within  the  temple  enclosure. 
The  king  of  Iram  (Ceylon)  with  his  court  has  also  arrived,  and 
with  him  a  daughter  who  is  dumb.  The  kings  exchange  cour- 
tesies, the  king  of  Ceylon  bringing  tribute  to  the  £ora  king  as 
his  feudal  lord.  It  would  almost  seem  as  if  there  were  in  this 
legend  a  vague  reminiscence  of  some  great  expedition  of  the 
king  of  Ceylon  with  the  double  intention  of  conquering  the  country 
and  establishing  Buddhism  on  the  continent1.  The  arrival  of 
these  strangers  threw  all  Cithambaram  into  confusion.  The  3,000 
devotees  of  the  temple  wish  to  expel  the  intruders  by  violence, 
but  the  God  Himself  appears  to  them  in  a  dream,  and  orders 
them  to  send  for  Manikka-Va^agar,  who  in  his  hermitage  near 
at  hand  was  plunged  in  mystic  meditation.  Thus  bidden  by  the 
God  he  comes  forth,  and  a  vast  assemblage  is  convened.  The 
£ora  king,  his  courtiers,  and  the  £aiva  saint  are  on  the  one  side, 
while  the  king  of  Ceylon,  his  attendants,  and  the  Buddhist  saint 
are  on  the  other.  The  sage  on  a  lofty  seat  is  enthroned  as  the 
champion  of  the  £aiva  faith.  Brahma  and  all  the  gods  and 
immortals  of  every  rank  form  the  audience.  The  Cora  king, 
bowing  with  lowly  reverence,  addresses  the  sage  in  the  following 
ominous  words :  '  O  holy  one,  to  establish  the  £aiva  wisdom  over 
all  the  world  is  your  province  :  to  exterminate  these  Buddhists 
is  mine.'  We  shall  not  go  into  the  details  of  the  disputation, 
reserving  its  fuller  translation  for  another  place.  (Noxz  IX.) 
The  whole  turns  at  length  upon  the  argument  which  the  Caivite 
urges  with  great  force,  that  according  to  the  Buddhist  system 
there  can  be  'neither  God,  nor  soul,  nor  salvation.'  At  the  close 
of  the  discussion,  the  saint  makes  his  appeal  to  Sarasvati,  the 
goddess  of  speech :  '  How  canst  thou,  who  dwellest  on  the  tongue 
of  Brahma,  allow  these  men  by  use  of  speech  to  revile  the 
Eternal?' 

She  acknowledges  the  appeal  by  striking  the  heretics  dumb. 
The  Ceylon  king,  convinced  by  the  arguments,  and  overwhelmed 
by  the  miracle,  confesses  himself  a  convert,  and  prays  that  his 
dumb  daughter  may  have  the  gift  of  speech  restored  to  her.  The 
prayer  is  heard,  and  she, — her  tongue  being  loosened, — begins 
at  once  to  refute  the  absurdities  of  the  Buddhist  gurus.  The 
substance  of  her  words  is  supposed  to  be  given  in  the  twelfth  (or 
£aral)  song  (p.  159).  Finally  all  the  discomfited  Buddhists  put  off 


1  I  doubt  altogether  this  king's  being  either  of  the  Gayavayu's  spoken  of  in  the  Mahavamso. 
Nothing  as  to  dates  can  be  concluded  from  this  merely  poetical  legend. 


xxxii  THE    HISTORY  OF 

the  insignia  of  their  religion,  besmear  themselves  with  tne  sacred 
ashes,  and  take  up  their  abode  in  the  precincts  of  sacred  Tillai ; 
thus  the  Caivite  victory  is  complete. 

No  mention  is  made  of  the  use  of  any  violent  measures1. 

§  viii.   His  Beatification.    T.  V.  0.  P.  VII. 

The  last  canto  relates  the  final  beatification  of  the  saint. 
After  his  triumph  over  the  heretics  he  is  supposed  to  have  sung 
four  of  his  most  beautiful  songs,  in  which  the  note  of  jubilation  is 
very  perceptible  [XLVI,  XLIX,  L,  LI].  At  length  one  day  a  vener- 
able devotee,  ostensibly  a  mendicant  stranger  from  the  Pandiyan 
land,  presented  himself  before  the  saint  with  the  request  to  be 
permitted  to  take  down  his  songs  from  his  own  mouth.  The 
saint  accordingly  sang  them  all,  while  the  stranger  carefully 
noted  down  every  word,  and  having  done  so  disappeared.  It  was 
Civan  Himself, — £okka-Nayagar,— who  had  quitted  His  shrine 
in  Madura  for  the  purpose.  Straightway  the  God  goes  up  to  His 
silver  mountain  Kailasam,  and,  assembling  all  the  gods  around 
him,  makes  all  heaven  glad  with  Manikka-Va^agar's  verse!  Next 
morning,  on  the  pedestal  of  the  image  in  Tillai,  is  found  the  copy 
made  by  the  God's  own  hand,  and  attested  by  His  signature,— 
a  thousand  verses  without  a  flaw.  The  devotees  of  the  temple 
take  up  the  book  with  astonishment  and  reverence,  and  sing  over 
the  songs  to  the  enraptured  multitudes.  They  then  in  a  body 
go  to  the  sage,  and  ask  him  to  give  them  an  authoritative 
exposition  of  the  meaning  of  the  whole.  In  answer  he  bids  them 
follow  him,  and  proceeding  to  the  Golden  Court  points  to  the 
image  of  the  God,  adding  'the  Lord  of  the  assembly  Himself 
(Sabhapati)  is  the  meaning;'  and  then  disappears,  melting  into 
the  image  of  his  Master.  The  devotees  return  to  their  resting- 
places  with  joy  and  thanksgiving2. 


These  poems,  of  which   the  translation  is  here  printed,  are 
daily  sung  throughout  the  whole  Tamil  country  with  tears  of 


1  A  fuller  account  of  this  disputation  is  given  in  NOTE  IX. 

2  Comp.  Lyric  I.  91,  &c. : 

'      .     .     .     Adoring  ever,  THEE  they  name, 
Whom  words  declare  not;  then,  BENEATH  THY  SACRED  FEET 
THEY  LEARN  THE  MEANING  OF  THEIR  SONG.    .    .     .' 
So  Dante,  Par.  xx.  40 : 

'  Ora  conosce  '1  merto  del  suo  canto.' 
'Now  knoweth  he  the  merit  of  his  song.' 


MANIKKA-VA^AGAR.  XXxiii 

rapture,  and  committed  to  memory  in  every  £aiva  temple  by  the 
people,  amongst  whom  it  is  a  traditional  saying,  that  '  he  whose 
heart  is  not  melted  by  the  Tiruvagagam  must  have  a  stone  for 
a  heart.'  It  is  probable  that  a  portion  of  the  lyrics  is  of  later 
date.  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  determine  what  sands  of  truth 
have  been  brought  down  in  these  traditions,  and  it  is  very  hard 
indeed  to  say  how  much  of  their  undoubted  beauty  and  symbolic 
truth  is  due  to  influences  (historically  quite  probable)  from 
foreign  sources ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  read  the  poems  without 
feeling  that  the  sage  of  Tiru -Vathavur  was  a  sincere  seeker  after 
God,  whom,  in  ways  that  he  then  knew  not  of,  he  has  since  been 
permitted  to  know  and  worship. 

The  success  of  Mdnikka-Vdt;agar  in  reviving  ^aivism,  which 
seems  to  have  been  then  almost  extinct,  was  immediate,  and  we 
may  say  permanent ;  for,  although  there  was  a  period  of 
declension,  when  the  Jain  and  Buddhist  systems  again  became 
very  prevalent,  there  arose  another  set  of  devotees1  who  must 
be  looked  upon  as  his  disciples,  though,  curiously  enough, 
scarcely  any  reference  to  him  is  found  in  their  writings.  From 
his  time  dates  the  foundation  of  that  vast  multitude  of  £aiva 
shrines  that  constitute  a  peculiar  feature  of  the  Tamil  country. 

In  considering  the  causes  of  his  success,  I  feel  inclined  to 
set  aside  all  stories  of  persecution  carried  on  at  his  instigation. 
These  belong,  it  appears  to  me,  to  a  later  period.  His  own 
personal  devotion  and  fervour  of  spirit  made  him  an  altogether 
irresistible  apostle  of  his  faith.  I  see  no  evidence  of  anything  like 
it  in  the  after-times.  He  went  about  testifying  that  he  had  seen 
Civan  in  Perun-turrai,  and  had  then  and  there  passed  from 
darkness  to  light.  He  thus  declared  to  all  what  he  fully  believed 
himself  to  have  seen  and  handled.  He  was  an  enthusiast,  but 
absolutely  sincere.  The  doctrines  that  he  taught  will  abundantly 
appear  from  an  attentive  consideration  of  his  disputes  with  the 
Buddhist  gurus.  (NOTE  IX.)  He  taught  the  people  that  there  was 
one  supreme  personal  God, — no  mere  metaphysical  abstraction, 
but  the  Lord  of  gods  and  men.  He  also  taught  that  it  was 
the  gracious  will  of  £ivan  to  assume  humanity,  to  come  to  earth 
as  a  Guru,  and  to  make  disciples  of  those  who  sought  Him  with 
adequate  preparation.  He  announced  that  this  way  of  salvation 
was  open  to  all  classes  of  the  community.  He  also  taught  very 


1  The  Santana  gurus  (NOTE  XI). 
C 


XXXIV  THE    HISTORY    OF 

emphatically  the  immortality  of  the  released  soul — its  conscious 
immortality — as  he  said  that  the  virtual  death  of  the  soul  which 
Buddhism  teaches  is  not  its  release.  (NOTE  III.)  It  will  be  seen 
how  very  near  in  some  not  unimportant  respects  the  £aiva  system 
approximates  to  Christianity;  and  yet  some  of  the  corruptions, 
to  which  it  has  led,  by  what  almost  seems  a  necessity,  are 
amongst  the  most  deplorable  superstitions  anywhere  to  be 
found.  Here  the  truth  of  the  old  maxim  is  abundantly  verified, 
'  Corruptio  optimi  pessima.' 

Again,  the  Qaivites  led  the  way  in  the  propagation  of  their 
system  by  means  of  popular  songs.  Any  one  who  compares  the 
fervid  piety  of  our  sage's  very  beautiful,  and  generally  very  simple, 
lyrics  will  feel  with  what  force  they  must  have  struck  the  chord 
that  vibrated  then  as  it  vibrates  still  in  millions  of  hearts.  '  One 
touch  of  nature  makes  the  whole  world  kin,'  and  no  one  can  read 
the  sage's  verses  without  profound  emotion.  Scarcely  ever  has 
the  longing  of  the  human  soul  for  purity  and  peace  and  divine 
fellowship  found  worthier  expression. 

In  considering  the  poetry  of  Tiru  Manikka-Va^agar  the  Tamil 
student  must  feel  its  superiority  to  all  the  vast  collections  of  the 
Devaram,  although  the  authors  of  some  of  these  enjoy  perhaps 
a  wider  popularity  among  the  Tamil  people1.  Versions  can  of 
course  give  nothing  but  the  very  faintest  idea  of  the  earnestness 
and  grace  of  the  sage's  hymns.  They  cannot  be  rendered  into 
simple  prose  without  entirely  misrepresenting  them,  and  to  put 
them  rigidly  into  metre  would  involve  a  sacrifice  of  exactness  in 
the  rendering.  In  this  translation  they  are  given  line  for  line, 
and  almost  word  for  word,  in  language  answering,  as  nearly 
as  I  know  how  to  shape  it,  to  the  tone  and  manner  of  the 
Tamil  originals.  I  find  this  the  way  in  which  I  can  produce 
the  most  literal  version.  It  is  quite  certain  that  the  influence  of 
these  poems  in  South  India  is  like  that  of  the  Psalms  among 
Christians,  and  that  they  have  touched  for  generations  the  hearts 
of  the  vast  majority  of  the  Tamil-speaking  people.  There  is  in 
them  a  strange  combination  of  lofty  feeling  and  spirituality  with 
what  we  must  pronounce  to  be  the  grossest  idolatry.  And  this 
leads  to  the  thought  that  in  the  £aiva  system  of  to-day  two 
things  that  would  appear  to  be  mutually  destructive  are  found 


1  It  is  curious  that  the* sage  is  not  mentioned  by  these  later  hymnists,  although  there  are 
traces  of  his  influence,  especially  in  Appar's  fervent  verses,  which  will  well  repay  the 
student.  See  especially  his  Qu/Au  £)(y^s*«ir!_«ii  ^Qfurmii,  p.  n). 


MANIKKA-VA^AGAR.  XXXV 

to  flourish  together,  and  even  to  strengthen  one  another.  The 
more  philosophical  and  refined  the  £aivite  becomes,  the  more 
enthusiastic  does  he  often  appear  to  be  in  the  performance  of 
the  incongruous  rites  of  the  popular  worship.  In  general,  (^aivites 
pay  peculiar  adoration  to  two  distinct  idols,  leaving  out  of 
question  Gane"9a  and  Suppiramanya,  the  so-called  sons  of  £ivan. 
These  two  symbols  are  first  the  '  liiigam '  with  the  '  lingi,'  and 
secondly  the  image  of  Civan  accompanied  with  Uma,  whose 
form  is  generally  combined  into  one  with  his.  These  really 
represent  one  idea,  Civan  and  £atti,  the  god  and  the  energy 
that  is  inseparable  from  him,  which  combine  to  create,  sustain, 
and  destroy  the  phenomenal  universe.  (NOTE  XIII.) 

It  is  sometimes  thought  and  said  that  the  idols  in  these 
temples  are  mere  signs,  representing  as  symbols  the  Divine 
Being  and  some  of  His  works  and  attributes.  This  is  not 
altogether  an  adequate  statement  of  the  case.  Each  image  by 
a  peculiar  service  which  is  called  Avdganatn  (Sans.  Avdhanam 
=  '  bringing  unto ')  becomes  the  permanent  abode  of  an  indwelling 
deity,  and  is  itself  divine.  The  worshippers,  as  will  be  seen  in 
our  legends,  seem  to  believe  that  the  images  of  the  god  consume 
the  food  presented  to  them,  and  are  strengthened  and  refreshed 
by  it.  These  images  are  treated  and  spoken  of  as  living  and 
sentient  beings.  They  are  seen  to  smile,  to  lift  up  hands  to 
bless,  to  move  from  place  to  place,  and  to  issue  audible  com- 
mands1. Devout  and  enthusiastic  worshippers  amid  the  glare 
of  the  lamps  and  the  smoke  of  the  incense  seem  to  be  carried 
away  so  as  to  entirely  identify  the  invisible  object  of  their 
thoughts  with  that  which  is  presented  before  their  eyes.  It  was 
certainly  so  with  our  poet.  If  it  be  remembered,  that  some  of 
these  images  have  been  actually  "worshipped,  tended,  garlanded, 
and  treated  as  human  beings,  for  a  thousand  years ;  that  each 
generation  has  done  them  service  and  lavished  gifts  upon  them ; 
that  they  are  connected  by  association  with  long  lines  of  saints 
and  sages ;  and  that  it  is  earnestly  believed  that  Civan's  method  of 
gracious  manifestation  is  by,  and  through,  and  in  these,— as  what 
we  should  call  sacraments  of  his  perpetual  presence, — we  shall 
understand  with  what  profound  awe  and  enthusiastic  affection 
even  images,  to  us  most  unsightly,  can  be  beheld  by  multitudes 
of  good  and  excellent  people. 


1  In  the  Purra-Ndnnurnt,  52. 12,  regarding  a  desecrated  shrine,  it  is  said  :  '  The  divinities, 
erewhife  adored  with  festive  music,  abandon  their  pillar-homes.' 


C  2 


XXXVI  THE    HISTORY   OF    MANIKKA-VA^AGAR. 

And  somehow  the  error  and  folly  and  idolatry  often  seem  to  be 
but  the  poetic  accompaniments  of  what  is  mainly  most  worthy. 

Once  for  all,  it  is  necessary  to  state  that  the  influence  of  the 
Bhagavad-Glta  is  to  be  traced  in  every  part  of  Manikka-Vagagar's 
poems.  £ivan  takes  the  place  of  Krishna,  and  a  great  deal, 
which  I  cannot  help  regarding  as  of  exceeding  value,  is  added ; 
while  much  unbefitting  and  obsolete  (I  must  be  pardoned  for 
a  candid  expression  of  feeling!)  Pauranic  mythology  and  legend 
is  dragged  in,  as  simple  poetic  embellishment  designed  to  please 
the  multitude.  I  should  advise  every  student  of  this  Tamil 
work  to  compare  it  even  verbally  with  that  greatest  of  Sanskrit 
productions. 

The  Jain  compositions  were  clever,  pointed,  elegant,  full  of 
satire  and  worldly  wisdom,  epigrammatic,  but  not  religious;  for  in 
the  Ndladiyar's  four  hundred  quatrains  there  is  no  mention  of 
God.  Even  in  the  sublime  Kurrats  thirteen  hundred  and  thirty 
couplets  there  are  but  ten  which  speak  of  a  Divine  Being.  The 
effect  therefore  of  these  songs — full  of  a  living  faith  and  devotion 
— was  great  and  instantaneous.  South  India  needed  a  personal 
God,  an  assurance  of  immortality,  and  a  call  to  prayer.  These  it 
found  in  Manikka-Vagagar's  compositions1. 


1  NOTE  VIII.  '  Bhakti.' 


APPENDIX. 

NOTE  I. 

CIVAN'S  ACTS  OR  OPERATIONS  ;  THE  '  SACRED  SPORTS  '  OF  THE  GOD. 

IN  the  Qaiva  legends  and  poems  three  kinds  of  actions  are  very  commonly 
referred  to  as  having  been  performed  by  Civan,  and  each  of  these  requires 
consideration.  Sometimes  these  are  five.  (Hymn  I.  41-43  ;  111.13.) 

1.  We  find  Qivan  perpetually  spoken  of  as  disporting  Himself  amidst  His 
subjects,  and  His  actions  are  often  represented  in  a  more  or  less  grotesque 
aspect.     This  idea  of  the  God  as  engaged  in  sport  quite  permeates  the  Qaiva 
system.     You  hear  the  minstrel  in  the  street  singing  Kelati  ande,  Kelati  pinde 

— %^rf?l  "*HQ ,  %*rf7f  f^"^  ('He  sports  in  the  world;  He  sports  in  the 
soul '),  and  the  notion  is  explained  by  reference  to  His  omnipotence.  All 
His  operations  are  easy  to  Him,  involving  no  effort,  so  that  He  is  said  to  'act 
without  acting ' ;  and  thus  everything  is  the  sport  of  Qivan :  the  whole  universe 
is  bright  with  His  smile,  and  alive  with  His  joyous  movements.  This  is  so 
thoroughly  inwrought  into  the  system  that  such  names  as  '  Deceiver '  (Kalvar, 
seffenn)  and  'Maniac'  are  perpetually  given  to  the  God.  The  Puranam 
of  Madura,  containing  the  history  of  the  sixty-four  amusements  of  Qivan 
($(rrj<3Sl$e(nLj[rt-.p  L/ff/reaw/i),  illustrates  this.  Some  of  these  quasi-divine  sports 
seem  to  us  very  ridiculous,  but  we  are  required  by  our  Qaiva  friends  to  receive 
the  mystic  interpretation  of  each !  In  the  romantic  history  of  Manikka- 
Vdfagar,  which  is  really  taken  from  hints  in  the  same  Puranam,  the  change  of 
the  jackals  into  horses,  and  vice  versd,  and  the  God's  behaviour  as  a  labourer, 
are  somewhat  extreme  cases  of  this ;  but  are  not  quite  incapable,  I  suppose, 
of  a  serious  application. 

2.  Closely   connected   with  this   are  the  very  frequent  manifestations  of 
the  God   for  the  purpose   of  trying    His  votaries ;    and  in  several  of  these 
(not  translated)  the  God  is  represented  in  an  exceedingly  unfavourable  light. 
Throughout    the    whole    of  these    legends    there    runs    the    idea    that,    as 
there   were   innumerable   mendicants   assuming   the    conventional   garb  and 
appearance   of    the   God,    He    might    at    any  time   appear   to  any   of  His 
worshippers  in  such  a  form  ;   and  thus  all  pious  souls  were  rendered  eager 
to  exercise  due  hospitality  to  Qaiva  mendicants,  as  they  knew  not  whether 
their  love  might  not  any  day  be  rewarded  by  receiving  the  visit  of  the  Master 
Himself.     One  of  these  stories  is  that  of  the  '  lowly  devotee '  given  below.     Of 
course,  the  old  classical  stories,  such  as  that  of  Baucis  and  Philemon,  are  of 
a  similar  kind. 


xxxviii  NOTE  I. 

3.  The  dancing  of  Qivan,  especially  in  the  Golden  Hall  at  Qithambaram,  is 
connected  with  an  especial  legend  (which  we  give),  and  is  always  interpreted 
in  the  same  way  as  the  sports  referred  to  above.  (NOTE  VII.)  His  dancing 
is  symbolical  of  His  perpetual  and  gracious  action  throughout  the  universe 
and  in  loving  hearts.  In  fact,  it  takes  us  back  to  the  manifestations 
of  the  pre-Aryan  demon,  or  Bhairava,  that  dances  in  the  burning-grounds, 
smearing  himself  with  the  ashes  of  the  dead,  adorning  himself  with  necklaces 
of  their  bones,  and  bearing  away  with  him  a  skull  as  a  trophy.  (NOTE  XI.) 
There  are  many  composite  elements  in  these  very  ancient  histories ;  and  it  is 
but  fair  to  allow  those  who  yet  regard  them  with  reverence  to  give  them  any 
reasonable  interpretation  of  which  they  may  be  considered  susceptible. 

The  following  is  the  legend  of  the  '  lowly  devotee,'  Qirru-tonda 
Nayanar : — 

In  the  town  of  Tiru-9enkattan-kudi,  in  the  (^ota.  land  [the  Tamil  country  round  about 
Tanjore],  there  lived  a  man  called  Parafijotiyar,  who  was  a  skilled  physician,  an  adept  in  the 
management  of  horses  and  elephants,  and  also  a  mighty  warrior.  But  he  was  a  saint  too. 
Day  and  night  this  noble  and  highly  gifted  man  meditated  on  the  perfections  of  Qivan  the 
Supreme,  and  so  humbly  devoted  himself  and  his  wealth  to  the  service  of  the  poor  mendicant 
devotees  of  Civan,  that  he  always  bore  the  name  of  the  '  lowly  devotee.' 

On  a  certain  occasion  he  had  gained  a  great  victory  for  his  Raja,  and  as  he  returned 
laden  with  rich  spoil  the  courtiers  snceringly  told  the  king  that  it  was  the  singular  devotion 
of  the  brave  hero  to  his  God  that  had  gained  for  him  the  victory,  which  was  therefore  clue 
solely  to  the  favour  of  Qivan.  '  What,'  cried  the  Raja,  who  before  this  knew  nothing  of  the 
saintliness  of  his  Commander-in-Chief,  '  have  I  exposed  so  great  a  saint  to  peril  of  death  in 
battle  for  my  petty  affairs?  He  shall  fight  no  more  ! ' 

The  'lowly  devotee '  replied  :  '  Nay,  I  have  merely  performed  the  ancestral  duties  of  my 
caste.  No  evil  there,  though  I  slew  your  foes ! ' 

But  the  king,  giving  up  to  him  the  spoils  of  the  campaign,  released  him  at  once  from  all 
further  service,  and  bade  him  occupy  himself  henceforth  wholly  in  the  service  of  the  tJod, 
and  of  His  devotees.  So  the  Nayanar  [devotee]  went  home,  and  thenceforth  devoted  himself 
exclusively  to  the  worship  and  service  of  Civan  in  the  temple  of  his  native  town.  And,  as 
domestic  virtue  is  the  highest  of  all  virtue  (Kurral,  41-50),  he  married  a  lady  called 
Nangaivar  of  Tiru-venkadu,  by  whom  he  had  one  son,  Qlrala-devar.  At  five  years  of  age 
the  boy  was  sent  to  school  to  learn  Civan's  sacred  books. 

Now  '  Civan  the  Supreme '  was  graciously  pleased  to  make  proof  of  the  love  of  His 
devotee,  and  to  test  especially  his  obedience :  and,  therefore,  from  among  the  various  forms 
the  God  assumes,  and  under  which  He  is  worshipped  bv_  the  six  Caiva  sects,  he  chose  that  of 
Bhairava — '  the  terrible,  the  destroyer ' — and  descended  from  Kailasa,  his  own  peculiar 
.  heaven,  in  that  dread  shape,  loaded  with  matted  hair,  his  body  smeared  with  ashes — 
weird  and  terrible.  Yet  he  seemed  a  holy  man,  though  of  the  most  repellent  type  of 
fanatical  mendicants.  The  'lowly  devotee'  found  him  thus  seated  under  a  banyan  tree, 
and  immediately  discerning  the  sign  of  the  sacred  ashes,  went  to  offer  him  hospitality. 

The  disguised  one  inquires  :  '  Art  thou  the  renowned  lowly  devotee  ? ' 

The  Nayanar  meekly  replies :  '  The  servants  of  my  God  deign  in  love  to  style  me  so. 
I  have  sought  in  vain  to-day  for  guests  among  the  pilgrim-servants  of  our  God.  I  have  now 
found  thee.  Graciously  take  thy  holy  meal  in  my  house.' 

'  Thou  canst  not  find  me  the  food  I  need.' 

'  If  Civan's  servants  need  aught,  the  difficult  becomes  easy,  because  of  Him  whom  they 
serve  ;  I  can  and  will  provide  whatever  thou  canst  require.' 

'  Once  in  six  months  I  eat  the  flesh  of  a  slain  victim  :  this  is  the  day.' 

'  I  have  flocks  and  herds  ;  I  can  supply  and  offer  the  victim,  and  my  wife  shall  prepare 
the  food.' 

[To  an  orthodox  Caivite  the  slaying  of  any  living  thing  is  a  great  crime ;  yet  this  deV  otee 


THE    MYSTIC    FORMULA   OF   THE    FIVE   LETTERS.  XXXIX 

is  represented  as  overcoming  his  natural  repugnance  to  it  and  to  the  use  of  animal  food, 
because  he  believed  that  what  the  servant  of  Civan  wished  must  somehow  or  other,  there  and 
then,  be  right.  The  whole  story — one  of  the  very  oldest  of  the  religious  legends  of  South 
India — takes  us  back  to  the  time  of  Abraham,  and  seems  to  illustrate  a  faith  resembling  his.] 

The  Bhairava  replies"  'What  I  eat  must  be  a  HUMAN  victim.  It  must  be  five  years  of 
age,  its  limbs  without  a  blemish  ;  the  only  child  in  the  household ;  a  sacrifice  willingly 
offered.  Such  a  little  one  the  mother  must  herself  hold  with  joyous  mind  while  the  father 
slays.  Such  food  alone  I  eat  this  day.' 

'  Such  food,  if  THOU  require,  is  not  difficult  to  supply,'  replies  the  lowly  devotee,  and 
hastens  homeward  with  cheery  countenance.  His  wife  meets  him  with  wifely  obeisance  at 
the  door,  and  asks  :  '  What  does  the  holy  one  command  ?  ' 

He  repeats  to  her  the  awful  words. 

She  asks :  '  \Vhere  shall  such  an  offering  be  obtained  ? ' 

'  My  life,  my  wife,'  says  he, '  for  much  wealth  might  even  such  a  one  be  bought,  but  where 
are  the  mother  and  father  able  with  glad  and  pious  mind  so  to  sacrifice  ?  It  must  be  our 
own  little  son,  and  it  is  we  who  must  so  offer  him  to  the  servant  of  the  God.' 

She,  with  a  like  unflinching  devotion,  consents,  and  adds:  'Go;  bring  from  the  school 
our  little  one,  born  to  be  the  guardian  of  our  lives.' 

The  devotee,  with  pious  mind,  eagerly  hastens  to  the  school.  .  .  .  [But  we  must  draw 
a  veil  here.  The  food  is  ready,  the  fearful  guest  brought  in,  and  the  father  with  courteous 
deference  begs  him  to  eat  of  the  sacrifice.] 

'  I  cannot  eat  alone.     None  so  worthy  to  share  with  me  as  thyself.' 

Another  plate  is  set  in  all  lowly  loving  obedience.  But  the  Bhairava  interposes  yet 
another  objection. 

'  Thou  hast  a  son,  let  him  eat  too.' 

'  My  son  cannot  help  us  in  this  ! ' 

'  Till  he  come  I  eat  not  ;  go  seek,  call,  and  bring  him  here.' 

The  father  rises,  calls  the  mother,  and  they,  simply  obedient,  but  bewildered,  stand 
without  the  door  and  cry,  '  Come,  O  son.'  Then,  lo,  even  as  he  was  wont,  his  bright  eyes 
beaming  with  joy,  his  long  black  silken  curls  glistening  in  the  sunlight,  his  silver  anklets 
tinkling  as  he  runs,  their  son  is  seen  hastening  on,  and  rushes  into  his  mother's  arms.  .  .  . 
When  they  would  bring  him  in  to  the  presence  of  the  disguised  God  the  dread  guest  had 
vanished,  and  the  dish  was  empty,  bright,  and  clean.  It  had  all  been  delusion,  the  sport  of 
the  Deify  ! 

No  death,  no  offering, — but  in  pious  will. 

Then,  because,  what  the  God  caused  them  to  seem  to  do  in  a  loving  ecstasy  was  right 
in  its  motive,  though  forbidden  in  itself,  all  the  gods  appeared  to  them  in  the  sky  and 
applauded  them;  and  while  they  worshipped  in  speechless  rapture,  the  father,  mother,  son, 
and  nurse  were  carried  away  to  Kailasa,  there  to  adore  the  God,  and  Parvathi,  his  wife,  and 
Suppiramanya,  his  son,  in  bliss  unending1. 

NOTE   II. 

THE  MYSTIC  FORMULA  OF  THE  FIVE  LETTERS  (OR  SYLLABLES);  THE 

£AIVA  ROSARY. 

An  amazing  amount  of  ingenuity  has  been  displayed  in  devising  a  quasi- 
magical  system  founded  on  these  five  Sanskrit  syllables.  The  following,  which  is 
Chapter  IX  of  Umapathi's  great  work  entitled  'The  Fruit  of  Divine  Grace/  gives 
authoritatively  the  whole  mystery  of '  The  Grace  of  the  Five  Letters,'  that  is, 
the  grace  gained  by  the  use  of  the  invocation  consisting  of  Qi-va-ya-na-ma 

1  In  the  Indian  Institute,  Oxford,  are  to  be  seen  printed  copies  of  various  editions  of  this 
work,  with  illustrations,  curiously  suggestive.  In  the  Bodleian  Library  are  two  palm-leaf 
MSS.  of  this  particular  legend,  one  of  which  is  a  very  spirited  dramatic  version.  I  have 
never 'seen  or  heard  of  another  copy  of  this  latter. 


xl  NOTE   II. 

(= Adoration  to  (Jtvati).  '  A  help  to  those  votaries  who  cannot  otherwise  attain 
to  the  bliss  of  mystic  quietude  (Samadhi).'  These  syllables,  with  their  various 
times  and  methods  of  recitation,  give  rise  to  many  subtle  disputations.  Much 
is  arbitrary,  the  method  is  cryptic,  and  very  much  seems  puerile ;  but  some 
REAL  TRUTH  is  hidden  in  the  symbols. 


Each  of  these  sections  consists  of  a  question,  an  answer  by  the  Guru  with 
its  commentary,  and  a  summary.  The  answer  is  the  Master's  teaching,  and 
is  a  couplet  of  exquisite  Tamil,  in  imitation .  of  Tiruvalluvar.  (See  Pope's 
Kurral,  Introd.,  p.  vii.)  Under  different  heads  we  have  given  the  whole  100 
couplets  of  this  work.  (See  p.  xciii.) 

The  Disciple  asks: 

If  the  unutterable  rapture  has  not  been  gained  by  the  means  already  explained,  is  there 
any  other  method  ? 

LXXXI. 

7'hf  Guru  answers  : 

The  systems  of  grace,  the  Vedas,  and  other  sacred  scriptures, 
have  as  object  the  mystic  meaning  of  the  '  Five  Syllables.' 
Commentary.  The  substance  of  the  teaching  of  the  sacred  '  Five  Letters'  is  the  LORD, 
the  FLOCK,  and  the  BOND.     Such  is  the  conclusion  of  those  mighty  in  the  Agamas  (the 
twenty-eight  £aiva  Agamas\  the  Vedas,  and  other  sacred  books.    (NOTE  XII.) 
gg-  Summary.  The  substance  of  all  TRUTH  is  included  in  the  '  Five  Letters.' 


What  does  this  pentad  of  letters  (syllables)  declare  ? 

LXXXII. 
The  King,  the  Energy,  the  Bond,  fair  Maya,  Soul — 

all  these  are  contained  in  the  Om-gdram. 

Com.  The  Piranavam  (see  Lex.  Jj«*r««A)  contains  within  it,  (i)  the  grace  of  Qivan,  and 
(a)  of  Qatti  (the  Divine  Energy,  NOTE  XIII),  with  the  (3)  knowledge  otAnavam  (NOTE  XV), 
and  (4)  of  fair  Maya,  and  (5)  of  the  Soul.  These  are  symbolized  by  the  'Five  Syllables,'  and 
in  OM  the  whole  are  concentrated. 

Sum.  Here  is  expounded  the  doctrine  of  the  mystic  OM,  which  is  the  subtile  form  of  the 
'  Five  Letters.' 

What  is  the  order  in  which  the  '  Five  Letters  '  stand  ? 

LXXXIII. 

On  one  side  mystic  dance  of '  Weakness/  on  the  other 
dance  of  mystic  '  Wisdom,' — SOUL  between  the  two. 

Com.  The  syllables  MA  and  NA  represent  the  energetic  whirl  of  Impurity  in  itself,  and 
as  operating  in  the  Soul ;  the  syllables  Ql  and  VA  represent  the  mystic  action  of  £ivan  and 
of  Grace.  Between  these  stands  YA,  which  represents  the  Soul1. 

[The  ' dance '  is  the  divine  impulse  and  guidance  given  to  the  Soul  in  this  state  of  bondage, 
and  in  the  state  of  emancipation.  NOTE  I.] 

Sum.  In  this  the  significance  of  the  '  Five  Letters '  is  explained. 

How  is  it  that  by  means  of  the  '  Five  Letters '  the  Soul  does  not  (at  once)  obtain  the 
'KNOWN'? 

LXXXIV. 

MA  and  NA  prevail  over  the  mind;  thus  it  returns  not  to  Him; 
whenever  it  obtains  Qi  its  deeds  are  cancelled. 


1  See  Hymn  V.  196  note. 


THE    MYSTIC   FORMULA   OF   THE    FIVE   LETTERS.  xli 

Com.  {This  couplet  admits  of  two  distinct  interpretations.  7'he  more  authoritative 
is  given.} 

When  MA  and  NA,  which  are  'Impurity'  and  'Tirotham'  ($3  at  fib,  NOTE  V),  bind  the 
Soul  tight  (or  the  mind  is  dissipated),  it  (the  YA)  cannot  return  ;  when  their  great  Bond 
is  loosed,  it  obtains  Ci,  which  is  supreme  blessedness. 

Sum.  The  Bond  and  the  method  of  release  are  shown  in  the  '  Five  Letters.' 

[Compare  C.i.  Pira.  II.  41  (p.  372).] 


How  is  it  that,  though  there  are  these '  Five  Letters,'  Anavam  (Impurity)  does  not  depart  ? 

LXXXV. 

While  bewildering  powers  of  theveiler  and  Impurity  stand  first,  ho  wean  it  depart? 
Not  unless  the  dominant  Anavam  change  its  place. 

Com.  While  NA  and  MA,  representatives  of  Tirotham  and  Impurity,  are  pronounced  first, 
can  these  be  removed  ?  Put  these  after,  and  C.  I  first :  then  Anavam  will  cease  to  obscure. 

Sum.  They  who  would  be  set  free  must  utter  the  formula  thus  :  QIVAYA-NAMA,  and  not 
NAMA-C.  IVAYA  l.  [God  must  be  first !] 

[Compare  Un.Vil.,  44.] 

Will  Impurity  depart  from  those  who  repeat  the  '  Five  Letters '  ? 

LXXXVI. 
Ah,  worship ;  but  if  the  foundation  be  not  known, 

since  Qi  precedes  not,  Impurity  will  still  assert  itself. 

Com.  When  men  repeat  the  sacred  formula  unmindful  of  the  foundation,  which  is  Qivan, 
desire  will  reassert  itself,  still  clinging  to  Na  and  Ma. 

Sum.  Here  he  commiserates  those  who  thus  recite  them,  and  still  suffer,  having  no 
Divine  assistance. 

Why  is  this  pentad  of  letters  recited  thus  ? 

LXXXVII. 
If  £ivan  come  first,  and  thou  so  recite  it, 

embodiment  will  cease.     This  is  your  method. 

Com.  If  the  devotee  recite  the  pentad  so  that  Cl  and  VA  precede,  by  this  position  the 
embodiment  will  be  removed.     Thou,  O  disciple,  who  desirest  release,  recite  it  thus! 
Sum.  This  teaches  that  the  released  say,  Ci-vd-ya-na-ma,  and  never  Na-ma-c-i-va-ya. 


What  benefit  accrues  from  this  order  of  recitation  ? 

LXXXVIII. 
VA  will  in  grace  give  £i,  and  bring  prosperity.     To  such  souls 

this  is  the  spotless  Form  which  will  appear. 

Com.  When  thus  recited,  VA,  which  is  grace,  points  out  Ci,  which  is  Civan,  and  estab- 
lishes YA,  which  is  the  Soul,  in  the  abode  of  delight.  And  that  is  the  faultless,  sacred  form 
of  C.ivan. 

Sum.  Here  the  significance  in  the  sacred  formula  of  VA  (=the  Energy  of  Grace)  is  taught. 


How  will  that  soul  exist  in  the  heaven  of  liberation  ? 

LXXXIX. 

No  longer  placed  between  the  spotless  NA  and  VA, 
the  Soul  will  stand  in  grace  between  VA  and  £ 


1  Idiom  permits  either  ;  but  the  orthodox  use  only  the  former.     Such  apparent  trifles 
divide  even  devout  people  ! 


xlii  NOTE  III. 

Com.  The  Soul  (ya}  standing  no  longer  between  the  spotless  (it  may  be  read  '  Acin  Na  ' 
or  '  A9il  Na,'  i.e.  spotted  or  spotless ;  and  each  of  these  presents  an  orthodox  view  of  Tirotham) 
Na  and  Va  (Qatti),  now  stands  between  VA  and  £i.  (Comp.  NOTE  V.) 

(It  is  said  that  this  arrangement  must  be  learned  from  a  gttru.} 

Sum.  This  defines  the  position  attained  by  those  who  rightly  use  the  formula. 

[See  Un.  Vil.,  46.]  

Is  there  any  manifest  evidence  of  our  being  in  this  state  of  deliverance  ? 

XC. 

The  sacred  writings  teach  in  every  possible  way  to  fix  the  mind 
on  the  path  that  leads  not  away  from  Him. 

Com.  The  sacred  writings  teach  us  all  methods,  so  that  we  should  ponder  them,  and 
never  forsake  the  sacred  influence  of  Qivan  and  of  His  Qatti. 

Sum.  This  couplet  sums  up  the  teaching  of  the  last  four  chapters  (VI-IXX 

[On  the  subject  of  the  'Five  Syllables'  the  remarks  of  Oldenberg  (Buddha),  p.  27,  may  be 
consulted  with  advantage.  There  has  always  been  among  men  a  strong  conviction  of  the 
mystic  power  of  quasi-sacred  syllables,  uttered  in  a  certain  way,  of  the  inherent  power  of 
spells  and  charms,  '  deadly  to  hear  and  deadly  to  tell,'  —some  such  a  feeling  as  Sir  Walter 
Scott  illustrates  in  the  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel.  In  the  ChhandSgya  Upanishad  II.  2  it  is 
said,  '  Let  a  man  meditate  on  the  fivefold  Saman  as  the  five  worlds.  The  hihkara  is  the  earth, 
the  prastava  the  fire,  the  udgitha  the  sky,  the  pratihdra  the  sun,  the  nidhana  heaven.  Let 
a  man  meditate  on  the  fivefold  Saman  as  rain.  The  hihkara  is  "  wind  (that  brings  the  rain) ;" 
the  prastava  is  "the  cloud  is  come;"  the  udgitha  is  "it  rains;"  the  pratihara,  "it  flashes, 
it  thunders  ; "  the  nidhana,  "  it  stops."  There  is  rain  for  him,  and  he  brings  rain  for  others, 
who,  thus  knowing,  meditates  on  the  fivefold  Saman  as  rain.'  This  may  have  given  rise  to  the 
use  of  this  invocation  to  £ivan, — Namacivaya, — as  a  kind  of  magical  formula.  The  intention, 
at  any  rate,  is  the  same,  to  emphasize  doctrines  and  to  bring  them  into  practical  working.] 

NOT*:  in. 

THE  SOUL'S  EMANCIPATION  (df®.    Mutti,  <y>j$$,  *jf^0« 
In  Sanskrit,  Mukti  or  Moksha. 

The  best  explanation  of  the  £aiva  Siddhanta  doctrine  of  Mutti,  or  the 
Soul's  final  emancipation  from  embodiment  (erlosung  von  den  weltlichen  banden, 
— Seligkeil\  is  found  in  the  treatise  called  Qiva-Piragacam  (QsnuiSlffsirfw)  by 
the  same  great  sage  Umapathi  (I.  38,  &c.),  and  has  been  translated  (though 
from  a  very  imperfect  MS.)  by  Mr.  Hoisington  (American  Oriental  Soc.  Journal, 
1854).  This  is  a  commentary  on  the  Qiva-fiana-bodham.  Mr.  J.  M.  Nalla-sami, 
a  learned  £aivite  of  Madras,  has  recently  published  a  translation  of  Civa-fiana- 
bodham,  with  valuable  notes,  which  is  a  most  useful  compendium. 

Ten  faulty  (or  imperfect)  theories  of  this  consummation,  so  devoutly  wished 
for  by  all  Hindus,  are  enumerated  in  these  works,  or  in  the  commentaries  on 
them: — 

(1)  There  is  the  bliss  aspired  to  by  the  Lokayattar  ('  Worldlings ').     This 
is  simply  gross  sensual  enjoyment  in  this  world.     These  heretics  are  con- 
tinually attacked    in   the    Siddhanta    books.       [See    Sarva-darfana-sahgraha 
(Triibner's  Series).]     They  were  atheistic  Epicureans,  followers  of  Charvaka 

(NOTE  XIV). 

(2)  There  is  the  cessation  of  the  five  Kandhas.      This   is  the  Buddhist 
Nirvana,  and  is  always  considered  by  Tamil  authors  to  be  mere  annihilation. 


THE   SOUL'S    EMANCIPATION.  xliii 

The    South-Indian  view  of  Buddhism    is    illustrated   in  NOTE  IX.      (Sarva- 
da^ana-sangraha,  p.  3 1 .) 

(3)  The  destruction  of  the  three  (or  eight)  qualities  is  pronounced  to  be 
the  final  emancipation  by  some  Jains,  and  by  the  teachers  of  the  atheistic 
Sankhya  system.     This  would .  reduce  the  human  Soul  to  the  condition  of  an 
unqualified  mass,  a  mere  chaos  of  thought  and  feeling. 

(4)  There  is  the  cessation  of  deeds  by  mystic  wisdom.     This  is  the  system 
of  Prabhdkara  (Sarva-darcana-sarigraha,  p.  184).     The  deeds  mentioned  are 
'  all  rites  and  services  whatsoever.'    The  devotee  becomes  in  this  case,  so  the 
C.  aivite  urges,  like  a  mere  image  of  clay  or  stone. 

(5)  '  Mutti '  is  represented  by  some  Caiva  sectaries  as  consisting  in  the 
removal  from  the  Soul  of  all  impurity,  as  a  copper  vessel  is  supposed  to  be 
cleansed  from  verdigris  by  the  action  of  mercury.     There  is  a  good  deal  of 
abstruse  reasoning  about  the  pollution  aforesaid.     '  Copper  is  not  really  in  this 
sense  purified  by  the  removal  of  the  green  stain  on  its  surface ;    the  innate 
weakness  of  the  metal  is  in  Us  constant  liability  to  this  defilement.     Gold  is 
never  coated  by  such  impure  matter.     Copper  will  always  be  so ;  it  is,  as  it 
were,  congenital.     Now  these  sectarians  preach  that,  by  the  grace  of  Qivan, 
the  innate  corruption  of  the  Soul  may  be  removed,  from  which  will  necessarily 
follow  permanent  release  from  all  bonds.'    This  seems  to  resemble  very  closely 
the  Christian  idea  of  the  sanctification  of  the  souls  of  men  by  divine  grace 
infused.     The  Siddhanta,  however,  insists  upon  it  that  for  ever,  even  in  the 
emancipated  state,  the  power  of  defilement,   the   potentiality  of  corruption, 
remains  (i.e.  'pdfam  is  eternal').     This  corruption  cannot,  it  is  true,  operate 
any  longer  in  the  emancipated  condition ;  but  it  is  still  there, — dead,  unillu- 
minated,  the  dark  part  of  the  Soul,  turned  away  from  the  central  light,  like  the 
unilluminated  part  of  the  moon's  orb.     Personal  identity,  and  the  imperfec- 
tions necessarily  clinging  to  a  nature  eternally  finite,  are  not  destroyed  even 
in  Mutti. 

(6)  Another  class  of  C/aiva  sectaries  taught  that  in  emancipation  the  body 
itself  is  transformed,  irradiated  with  C/ivan's  light,  and  rendered  immortal.    This 
system  supposed  that  intimate  union  with  Qivan  transmuted  rather  than  sancti- 
fied the  Soul. 

(7)  There  is  then  the  system  of  the  Veddn/is,  who  taught  that  the  absolute 
union  of  the  Soul  with  the  Infinite  Wisdom,  its  commingling  with  the  Divine 
Spirit,  as  the  air  in  a  jar  becomes  one  with  the  circumambient  air  when  the 
jar  is  broken,  was  Mutti.     But  here  personality  is  lost. 

(8)  The   doctrine    of    Palkariyam    (followers   of  Bhaskard)    is,    that    in 
emancipation  there  is  an  absolute  destruction  of  the  human   Soul,  which  is 
entirely  absorbed  in  the  supreme  essence. 

(9)  There  were  some  C/aivites  who  taught  that  in  emancipation  the  Soul 
acquires   mystic  miraculous   powers ;    that,  in   fact,  the  emancipated  one   is 
so  made  partaker  of  the  divine  nature  and  attributes,  that  he  is  able  to  gain 
possession  of  and  exercise   miraculous   powers,  which   are   called  the  eight 
'  Siddhis.'     Persons  professing  to  wield  such  magical  powers  are  not  unfre- 
quently  found   in   India,   and   there   is   in    them   very   often    a    bewildering 
mixtare  of  enthusiasm  and  fraud. 


xliv  NOTE   IV. 

(10)  There  were  also  some  who  taught  that  in  emancipation  the  Soul 
becomes,  like  a  stone,  insensible.  This  stationary,  apathetic  existence,  if 
existence  it  can  be  called,  is  the  refuge  of  the  Soul  from  the  sufferings  and 
struggles  of  embodiment. 

In  opposition  to  all  these  faulty  theories,  the  true  doctrine  of  emancipation 
is  thus  defined  :  When  the  Soul,  finally  set  free  from  the  influence  of  threefold 
defilement  through  the  grace  of  Qivan,  obtains  divine  wisdom^  and  so  rises  to  live 
eternally  in  the  conscious,  full  enjoyment  of  (Divans  presence,  in  conclusive  bliss, 
this  is  EMANCIPATION,  according  to  the  Siddhanta  philosophy.  (See  T.  A.  P.  75, 
in  NOTE  VI.) 

NOTE    IV. 

THE  '  GURU.'     (Sans,  are  =  venerable?) 

The  Guru  plays  a  most  important  part  in  all  Hindu  religion.  He  is  the 
'venerable'  preceptor,  master,  and  embodied  god.  In  the  Cuiva  system  His 
dignity  culminates.  He  is  one  who  in  successive  embodiments  has  drawn 
nearer  and  nearer  to  final  deliverance  (Mutti),  and  is  now  in  His  last  stage  of 
embodiment  (NOTE  V).  Civan  lives  in  Him,  looks  lovingly  on  the  meet 
disciple  through  His  eyes,  blesses  with  His  hands,  with  His  mouth  whispers 
into  the  disciple's  ear  the  mystic  words  of  initiation,  and  crowns  with  the  lotus 
flowers  of  His  feet  the  bowed  head  of  the  postulant,  who  thus  is  to  become  as 
his  Master.  (See  Hymn  IV.  95.) 

The  exact  doctrine  is  set  forth  in  the  following  ten  couplets,  being 
Chapter  V  in  Umapathi's  authoritative  work,  '  The  Fruit  of  Divine  Grace  ' 


THE  FORM  OF  GRACE. 

This  chapter  speaks  of  grace  in  the  form  of  the  Guru  (divine  Teacher), 
Who  is  mystic  knowledge  made  manifest.  This  manifestation  is  the  '  fruit  of 
the  GRACE  '  spoken  of  in  the  last  chapter.  (See  NOTE  VI  for  Chapter  IV.) 

CHAPTER  V. 
The  Disciple  asks: 
Who  comes  when  twofold  deeds  are  balanced  ?     [Catti-nibatham,  NOTE  V.] 

XLI. 

The  Guru  answers: 
GRACE  that  in  the  times  of  ignorance  abode  within  ; 

now  made  manifest  by  visible  signs,  —  the  King  who  departs  not. 

Com,  While  man  was  in  this  state  of  ignorant  bondage  He  by  latent  grace  abode  within  ; 
now  the  Divine  Lord,  the  very  centre  of  knowledge,  appears  in  bodily  shape  as  a  Guru. 
Neither  from  before  the  eyes,  nor  from  within  the  Soul,  does  this  KING  henceforth  depart. 

Sum.  Divine  grace  assumes  the  form  of  a  GURU. 


Is  it  essentially  necessary  that  He  Himself  should  come  as  Guru  ?     Will  not  learned 

men  suffice? 

XLII. 

None  can  know  the  disease  within  but  those  of  the  household. 

Can  the  outer  world  discern  it  too  ? 
Com.  In  any  house  if  one  be  diseased,  those  in  the  house  will  be  aware  of  it,  but  the 


THE   GURU.  xlv 

distant  world  knows  it  not ;  so,  if  Civan,  who  dwells  within  the  Soul,  come  as  a  Guru,  our 
disease  shall  be  healed. 

Sum.  This  removes  the  doubt  as  to  the  necessity  of  Divan's  advent  as  a  Guru. 


Can  all  recognize  the  Guru  thus  appearing  ? 

XLIII. 

Who  born  on  this  earth  is  able  to  discern  such  a  Divine 
Dispenser  of  grace  not  ever  given  before  ? 

Com.  He  performed  the  works  of  creation,  preservation,  destruction,  and  '  veiling ' 
(NOTE  XIII,  Catti)  without  any  manifest  appearance  ;  but  now  His  work  of  grace  is 
performed  in  a  way  not  known  before,  while  He  wears  a  human  form  as  a  robe,  and  thus 
conceals  Himself.  This  men  know  not. 

Sum.  Men  think  of  the  Guru,  who  is  Civan  Himself  made  manifest,  as  though  He  were 
a  mere  man  like  themselves. 

How  is  it  that  inferior  souls  know  not  the  Guru  ? 

XLIV. 

Souls  immersed  in  the  false  darkness  ef  sense-perception  cannot  see  the  two: 
teachings  of  GRACE  divine  and  the  Teacher. 

Com.  Those  who  live  in  the  enjoyment  of  fleeting,  worldly  enjoyments,  and  whose  under- 
standings are  veiled  by  the  darkness  of  Anavam  (NOTE  XV),  cannot  know  the  two  great 
truths  of  the  blessedness  of  mystic  Wisdom,  and  of  the  grace  embodied  in  the  Guru,  by  which 
it  may  be  reached.  [Comp.  Bhagavad-Gita  IX.  n.] 

Sum.  The  reason  for  men's  ignorance  of  the  Guru. 


Is  it  necessary  that  His  sacred  form  should  be  visible  like  ours  ? 

XLV. 
The  world  does  not  discern  the  bodily  form 

as  the  cloak  assumed  to  take  and  hold  men  fast. 

Com.  It  is  common  in  the  world  to  ensnare  beasts  and  birds  by  exhibiting  their  own 
shape  as  a  lure.  Here  men  would  dread  any  appearance  manifestly  Divine ;  and  so  Grace 
clothes  itself  in  a  human  dress,  beneath  which  men,  alas !  fail  to  discern  the  Divine. 

Sum.  In  this  and  the  two  preceding  verses,  the  ignorance  of  men  in  not  recognizing  the 
Guru  is  reproved. 

May  not  any  teacher  be  thus  a  cloaked  jmage  of  Civan? 

XLVI. 
What  would  thus  accrue  ?    Who  knows  anything  ? 

Seek  Him,  and  be  freed.    The  true  meaning  is  known  only  from  Him. 

Com.  Whether  you  ordinarily  rely  upon  a  particular  Guru,  or  not,  signifies  nothing;  seek 
Him  who  alone  can  interpret  the  truth.  So  only  can  you  escape  from  impurity  and  emerge 
into  pure  light. 

Sum.  The  real  meaning  of  any  scientific  treatise  cannot  be  understood  without  the 
assistance  of  the  true  Teacher. 

Is  it  not  enough  that  divine  Grace  is  the  core  of  your  knowledge  ?  Must  He  come  as 
a  Guru  too? 

XLVII. 

When  snake-poison"  has  entered  the  system, — not  the  mere  presence  of 

the  '  Mahgus,'— 
A  skilful  physician  is  necessary  to  remove  the  poison. 


xlvi  NOTE   V. 

Com.  The  mystic  art  of  the  snake-charmer  is  necessary  to  cure  one  bitten  by  a  poisonous 
serpent.  Thus  a  Guru  bearing  (Divan's  very  image  must  look  upon  us  with  the  eye  of  mystic 
Wisdom,  and  darkness  will  disappear,  not  otherwise. 

Sum.  The  Bond  is  only  loosed  by  the  divine  Teacher. 


Is  this  His  gracious  manifestation  as  a  Teacher  for  all,  or  for  one  class  only  ? 

XLVIII. 
To  those  become  a-kalar  He  gives  precious  gifts  of  grace,  and  cancels  deeds. 

To  those  still  (a-kalar,  as  a  Guru,  He  gives  His  grace. 

Com.  To  the  ViilMna-kalar  and  to  the  Pralaiyd-kalar1,  who  are  freed  from  Kalai 
(sense-deception),  He  reveals  Himself  in  their  inner  consciousness,  and  removes  AijO»am\ 
To  others,  in  the  form  of  a  Guru,  He  comes  and  bestows  grace.  [Comp.  p.  Ixxx.] 

Sum.  This  shows  why,  and  for  the  sake  of  whom,  He  puts  on  the  vestment  of  humanity. 


Cannot  salvation  be  effected  without  the  coming  of  the  Guru  ? 

XLIX. 

Who  can  know  unless  the  gracious  Revealer  of  the  wide 
extended  way,  the  great  Knower,  shall  appear  ? 

Com.  Unless  the  Lord,  possessed  of  the  wisdom  surpassing  the  six  ATTUVA3,  and  the 
Revealer  of  the  way  of  release,  shall  come  in  the  form  of  a  Guru,  who  can  know  these  things  ? 

Sum.  The  knowledge  of  the  really  existent  can  only  be  given  by  the  manifested  Lord, 
possessed  of  perfect  knowledge. 

Is  it  necessary  that  He  should  come  in  the  form  of  another  devotee  ?  Is  it  not  enough 
that  He  is  within  my  sentient  mind? 

Ml 

Mystic  knowledge  may  visit  us  without  His  intervention  — 
when  the  fair  crystal  kindles  fire  without  the  sun  ! 

Com.  The  crystal  may  be  faultless,  but  will  not  act  as  a  burning  glass  in  the  absence  of 
the  sun  ;  even  so  divine  and  mystic  Wisdom  enters  not  the  mind,  whatever  knowledge  it  may 
possess,  without  the  Guru,  who  is  Civan's  grace  made  manifest. 

Sum.  In  this  it  is  taught  that  religious  knowledge  has  no  excellence  without  the  teaching 
of  the  Guru. 

NOTE    V. 

(^ATTI-NIBATHAM  :  ffp$-i8u(rpu>,  IjfH  f%tJT<T  =  '  Cessation  of  Energy' 

The  souls  of  men  are  found  here  in  a  state  of  bondage  called  the  '  com- 
bined state  '  (ui5<$t£>).  The  Qaiva  Siddhanta  system  traces  their  passage  thence 
into  the  '  free,  eternally  emancipated  state  '  (Q/>j$£d).  The  eternal  Soul  was,  by 
a  gracious  interposition  of  the  Supreme,  made  subject  to  vanity,  combined  wilh 
material  forms,  and  launched  forth  into  a  world  of  action,  in  order  that,  the 
effect  of  deeds  (eternal,  a  parle  ante)  being  removed  or  cancelled,  the  Soul 
might  at  length  be  enlightened  by  special  grace,  and  so  become  gradually 
disentangled  and  purified  ;  the  consummation  of  which  is  Mutti  (NOTE  III), 
or  final  emancipation,  and  mystic,  ineffable,  eternal  union  with  Civan4. 


1  T.  A.  P.,  Chapter  II,  in  NOTE  XII.  a  NOTE  XV. 

3  This  word  is  an  adaptation  of  Sans.  ADHvS,  and  expresses  the  physiological  elements 
of  all  being.     The  idea  is  obsolete. 

4  See  Pope's  NalSdiyar,  ch.  xi.  pp.  66-69. 


yATTI-NIBATHAM.  xlvii 

In  this  second  stage  of  embodiment,  the  passage  into  which  is  the  great 
crisis  in  the  Soul's  secular  pilgrimage,  it  is  prepared  for  the  third  and  final 
stage.  The  man  is  now  no  longer  of  the  world,  but  a  devotee  (Jivan-muttan, 
@eu<sor(i/>jg:5G!r*),  emancipate,  yet  in  the  flesh :  one  in  whom  a  great  work  of 
grace  is  being  wrought,  and  is  near  to  its  consummation.  Comp.  Theologia 
Germanica1,  ch.  xxviii.  This  work,  dated  about  1350,  by  an  unknown 
Christian  saint,  who  was  thus  a  contemporary  of  Umd-pathi  (NOTE  VII,  and 
p.  xciii),  should  be  studied  by  all  earnest  '  seekers  after  truth ' ! 

In  Bhagavad-Gita,  ch.  ii,  this  state  of  Jivan-mutti  is  described.  It  is 
called  Qanthi  (firsts!,  SO'f'rf);  '  repose.'  The  next  and  final  stage  is  Nirvanam 
(f^mf,  /StT&jrTeasTLD  ='  blowing  out '),  which  is  used  for  Mtitti. 

In  the  Sahkhya  Karika  (LXVII)  this  doctrine  of  Jivan-mutti  (or  Qanthi)  is 
enunciated :  '  By  attainment  of  perfect  knowledge  the  causes  of  deeds,  virtuous 
and  otherwise,  cease  (<sS^sr  ^^L/L/).  Yet  for  awhile  the  body  lasts  on,  as 
a  potter's  wheel  continues  for  a  time  to  revolve  after  the  impulse  has  ceased: 
sanskdra  vacdt  chakrabhramavat  dhrita  farirah.' 

In  the  Sankhya  aphorisms  of  Kapila,  Book  III.  78-83,  the  subject  is 
discussed :  '  The  emancipated  sage  goes  on  living,  as  the  potter's  wheel 
revolves  for  some  time,  in  consequence  of  the  motive  inertia  resulting  from 
previous  action.  This  is  necessary ;  for  such  a  living,  yet  liberated,  sage  is  the 
only  competent  teacher — the  only  Guru.' 

The  steps  by  which  the  devotee  has  reached  this  threshold  of  a  new 
existence  are5 — 

(1)  His  being  awakened  by  the  energy  (Qatti)  of  C/ivan,  which  is,  in  inten- 
tion and  in  fact,  entirely  gracious  ;    but  as  it  arouses  the   Soul  to  painful 
conflicts  in  varied  experiences  of  successive  embodiments,  it  is  spoken  of  as 
an  energy  of  (divine)  anger  (Tirotham). 

(2)  The  second  step  was  his  coming  under  the  power  of  Maya,  both  pure 
and  impure  (matter  or  its  underlying  essence,  and  sense  organization),  whereby 
he  has  obtained  successive  bodies,  spheres  of  being,  organs,  and  experiences. 
In  these  embodiments  he  has  consumed  the  fruit  of  his  works, — those  which 
are  actually  his,  and  those  which  have  been  imputed  to  him  and  laid  upon 
him  by  the  Supreme  Power  (by  an  eternal  fate). 

(3)  The  third  step  is,  that  the  impurities  in  which  from  all  eternity  the 
Soul  has   been   involved   have  thus  '  ripened,'  or  their   fruits   have   become 
mature  (m&i-uiflurrsw).    This  is  an  idea  profound  and  far-reaching,  but  which 
it  is  difficult  for  us  to  comprehend.     It  rests  upon  a  figure.     The  Soul  has  to 
partake  of  the  results  of  these  deeds  which  are  its  eternally  destined  inheritance. 
This  is  compared  to  the  eating  of  fruit ;  but  these  fruits  can  only  be  eaten  when 
they  are  ripe,  when  the  Soul  has  been  placed  in  circumstances  where  their 
whole  effect  and  deserts  have  been  brought  out  and  experienced.     The  whole 
effect  of  any  deed  is  slowly  evolved  and  matured,  and  the  Soul  must  encounter, 


1  Theologia  Germanica.  Translated  from  the  German  by  Susanna  Winkworth.  With 
a  preface  by  Charles  Kingsley.  Macmillan's  Golden  Treasury  Series. 

3  The  corresponding  Buddhistic  formula  is  hetu-prabhava-dharmam,  or  in  Tamil  ag>iSa$*8. 
Comp.'Mam'-Megalai  T.  4. 


xlviii  NOTE  VI. 

from  aeon  to  aeon,  these  mysterious  powers  which  constitute  its  destiny,  in  all 
their  developements  and  in  their  fullest  maturity. 

(4)  In  the  fulness  of  the  time,  as  the  fourth  step,  there  comes  a  '  balancing 
of  deeds.'  (T.A.P.  51.)  The  notion  of  this  seems  to  be,, that  there  is  a  point  in 
time  when  the  sins  and  merits  that  cling  to  the  Soul  and  are  its  fate,  become 
equal,  and  balance  one  another,  or  are  made  equal  by  the  grace  of  the  Supreme. 
There  are  now  gathered  into  one  the  three  kinds  of  deeds,  the  eternal  accumu- 
lations of  fate,  the  assignment  for  expiation  during  the  present  birth,  and  those 
which  will  yet  accrue  before  the  consummation  is  gained.     These  threefold 
deeds  are  at  once  cancelled  ;  and,  freed  from  them,  the  Soul  enters  upon  its 
last  stage  of  embodied  existence.     (See  Pope's  Naladiyar,  ch.  xi.  pp.  66-69, 
KARMMA.) 

(5)  The  energy  of  Qatti,  which  is  commonly  called  '  the  veiling '  energy 
(Tirotham),  is   now  changed    into  a  gracious  energy  of  enlightenment   and 
repose  from   physical   perturbations;    this   is   called   Qiva-9atti-nibatham,   or 
cessation  of  Civan's  '  veiling '  energy.     (Noxz  XIII  on  Qatti.) 

(6)  And  thus  the  Soul  passes  into  another  human  form,  of  the  purest  and 
most  orthodox  Qaiva  lineage,  and  is  in  the  third  and  pure  state.     Its  course 
and  discipline  therein  must  be  considered  in  another  place. 

NOTE    VI. 
GRACE. 

The  prominence  given  in  the  Qaiva  Siddhanta  to  the  operations  of  Divine 
Grace  is  remarkable.  The  Tamil  word  (&j(nj<s<r}  Arul  is  used  in  every  sense 
given  to  Xapts  in  the  New  Testament,  and  to  "IDH  in  the  Hebrew.  As 
Manikka-Vafagar  uses  the  word  constantly,  I  have  translated  Umapathi's 
Chapter  IV,  and  append  it. 

fc&  The  remedy  for  Anavam  is  Arul:  @(5(25«©  u>ng»  ^(BjCW !  (NOTE  XV.) 


The  Fruit  of  Divine  Grace. 

CHAPTER   IV. 
THE  NATURE  OF  GRACE. 

This  treats  of  divine  and  mystic  WISDOM  imparted  in  the  shape  of  GRACE. 
In  order  to  dissipate  the  darkness  of  Anavam,  and  to  show  the  way  of  deliverance, 
the  doctrine  of  grace,  the  remedy  for  Anavam,  is  here  expounded. 

The  Disciple  asks : 
What  is  meant  by  the  '  dawning  of  the  day  * '  ? 

XXXI. 

The  Guru  answers  : 
Than  GRACE  is  nothing  greater ;  as  in  this  world 

nothing  is  greater  than  that  one's  soul  requires. 

Com.  There  is  nothing  greater  than  Divine  GRACE.    This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  fact 
that  in  the  world  the  things  each  one  needs  and  desires  are  to  him  the  greatest. 
Sum.  Here  the  dignity  of  GRACE  is  shown. 


1  Song  of  Solomon  ii.  17, '  Until  the  clay  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away.' 


GRACE.  xlix 

Kxplain  liow  Grace  operates. 

XXXII. 

Grace  as  the  sun  appears,  and  sheds  everywhere 
great  light  for  deeds  and  their  effects. 

Com.  There  are  'deeds  (KARMMA)  of  accumulation'  (£WRp&M*)i  there  are  also  'deeds 
ripe  for  fruition  in  the  present  birth'  (Pirdrattam);  there  are  also  'deeds  now  accumulating 
within  man's  consciousness '  (Agamiyarn).  Grace  sheds  everywhere  light  for  the  performance 
of  new  deeds,  and  for  the  consumption  of  the  fruits  of  former  deeds ;  even  as  the  sun  by 
shedding  light  enables  men  to  accumulate  and  to  enjoy. 

Sum.  Here  it  is  stated  that  GRACE  is  the  source  of  all  action. 

There  is  an  ambiguity  in  the  couplet.  It  seems  to  read :  '  increase  and  consumption  of 
deeds ' ;  i.  e.  '  Civan's  Grace,  through  the  operation  of  His  Catti,  affords  light  of  under- 
standing by  which  men  (otherwise  utterly  unintelligent)  perform  the  actions  of  life,  thus  at 
once  accumulating  new  stores  of  deeds  (meritorious  or  sinful),  and  experiencing  (eating, 
consuming)  the  fruit  of  deeds  done  in  former  organizations.' 

The  whole  doctrine  is  epitomised  in  Pope's  Nalajiyar,  pp.  66-69. 


If  one  should  say,  lNo  need  for  Grace  to  effect  these  results;  the  soul  of  man  can  do  its  own 
ivork,1  what  is  your  reply  ? 

XXXIII. 

The  flesh  knows  nothing,  and  the  soul  knows  nothing  of  itself : 
since  these  know  nothing ;  who,  of  himself,  can  know  ? 

Com.  The  material  elements  of  the  phenomenal  universe  are  unintelligent ' ;  souls 
have  no  knowledge  of  their  own  ;  therefore,  if  Grace  do  not  take  cognizance  of  their 
state,  and  impart  to  them  mystic  knowledge,  whence  can  they  in  this  world  obtain  saving 
knowledge? 

Sum.  In  this  is  given  the  answer  to  those  who  say  that  Grace  needs  not  to  know,  or 
take  cognizance  of,  the  Soul :  It  needs  to  know  that  it  may  make  known  ! 


How  is  it  that  souls  are  in  ignorance  of  the  Grace  which  thus  guides  them? 

XXXIV. 
As  fish  in  the  sea  of  milk  conduct  themselves,  though  with  Grace  endowed, 

souls  sink  back  in  the  sea  of  bewilderment. 

Com.  As  fish  in  the  '  sea  of  milk '  not  drinking  of  it,  seek  lesser  fish  for  food,  so  souls, 
even  in  the  sea  of  Grace,  through  bewilderment  know  not  Civan's  Grace !     They  seek  the 
mean  enjoyments  of  earth,  while  spiritual  delights  and  divine  communion  are  disregarded. 
Sum.  Here  the  degradation  and  suffering  of  souls  even  amid  C.  ivan's  Grace  is  shown. 


How  is  it  that  souls  know  not  His  gift  of  knowledge  ? 

XXXV. 

A  traveller  oft  knows  not  the  helper  drawing  nigh. 

The  five  senses  know  not  the  soul  to  which  they  are  instruments  of  perception. 
So  the  soul  knows  not  its  Lord. 

Com.  Like  one  who  walking  by  the  way  is  not  aware  of  a  helper  that  has  drawn  nigh  ; 
the  soul  is  not  known  by  the  five  senses  it  employs.  Even  so  s.ouls  know  not  the  Grace 
Which  is  their  life  and  illuminator. 

Sum.  Here  also  the  ignorance  of  souls  in  regard  to  the  help  and  direction  of  Grace 
is  shown. 

1  NOTE  XII,  T.  A.  P.  [17],  p.  Ixxxl. 
d 


1  NOTE   VI. 

What  illustrates  the  soul's  ignorance  of  the  way  it  is  guided  ? 

XXXVI. 

Men  know  not  that  earth  upholds  them  as  they  tread ; 
so  embodied  souls  know  not  Grace  that  inspires. 

Com.  Men  who  walk  on  the  earth  say  of  themselves,  '  we  walk,'  and  think  not  that  it  is 
the  earth  which  upholds  them  ;    so,  in   this  world,  though  embodied  souls  are  under  the 
influence  of  Divine  Grace,  they  reflect  not  that  it  is  Grace  that  works  all  in  them. 
Sum.  The  insensibility  of  souls. 


Can  they  by  seeking  discover  Grace  ? 

XXXVII. 
Those  who  have  lost  the  mountain,  lost  the  earth,  lost  the  sky, 

and  lost  themselves  are  alike  I 

Com.  Such  is  the  state  of  men, — who  on  the  mountain,  behold  it  not ;  on  the  earth,  see 
it  not ;  in  the  sky,  know  it  not ;  possessed  of  Divine  guiding  wisdom,  discern  it  not ;  and, 
finally,  are  ignorant  of  their  own  being  ! 

Sum.  The  bewilderment  attendant  upon  embodiment. 


•How  is  it  that  men  wander  ignorant  of  Grace  ? 

XXXVIII. 
The  way  of  men  under  the  tyranny  of  falsehood  is  like  that  of  him  who 

stands  in  the  flood  with  parched  tongue  ; 
or  like  his  who  after  the  dawning  is  in  darkness  still. 

Com.  It  is  possible  to  stand  in  the  midst  of  a  stream  of  sweetest  water  without  tasting  it, 
and  so  to  remain  parched  with  thirst.    It  is  also  sometimes  the  case  that  fools  are  bewildered 
as  in  the  dark,  even  when  day  has  dawned.    So,  those  that  are  under  the  power  of  deceit  taste 
not  the  Grace,  and  see  not  the  light  of  the  Lord. 
Sum.  The  fault  is  in  thfc  soul,  and  not  in  Him  ! 


How  can  this  ignorance  be  removed  ? 

XXXIX. 

Hear  with  undistracted  mind !     This  folly  is  that  of  the  cat 

standing  on  the  milk-pan,  and  springing  at  the  insect  on  the  wall. 

Com.  We  should  calmly  and  collectedly  listen  to  the  teachings  of  Grace.  The  folly  that 
listens  with  divided  mind  is  like  that  of  the  cat,  which  having  reached  the  milk  vessel,  and 
standing  on  its  edge,  drinks  not  the  sweet  milk,  but  darts  at  the  wall  in  pursuit  of  a  worthless 
spider  at  the  risk  of  its  life,  breaking  the  vessel  in  the  spring1. 

Sum.  This  and  the  four  preceding  couplets  illustrate  the  assistance,  governance,  and 
support  of  GRACE  which  souls  are  ignorant  of,  and  so  incur  loss.  The  common  title  of  these 
five  couplets  is  '  Soul's  Fault.' 

Is  this  not  known  to  the  unthinking  also  ? 

XL. 
How  can   '  deliverance '  be  attained   by  empty  souls   that  have  no  real 

sympathy  with  Grace,  though  theirs  from  eternity? 
Com.  From  everlasting  ages  until  this  day  have  they  been  recipients  of  Grace,  but  not  in 


1  The  cat  makes  a  spring  at  an  insect.  If  it  catch  the  prey,  it  is  but  poor  food  ;  and  if  it 
miss,  its  labour  is  lost,  and  the  milk  vessel  thrown  down  and  broken  ;  so  SOULS  do  not  hide 
themselves  within  the  GRACE  which  from  eternity  is  conjoined  with  their  being,  and  thus 
fail  to  obtain  the  supreme  delight. 


GRACE.  11 

the  least  have  they  come  under  its  influence,  and  are  thus  souls  devoid  of  good ;  how  can  such 
obtain  DELIVERANCE  ? 

Sum.  This  couplet  reproves  those  who,  though  recipients  of  CJvan's  Grace,  yield  not  to 
its  influence,  and  seek  not  final  'deliverance.'     [Comp.  Gita  II.  52-64.] 


In  continuation  of  NOTE  VI  we  add  Tiru-arul-payan,  Chapters  VI,  VII, 
VIII,  and  X,  completing  the  system  as  sung  in  the  Tiruva9agam.  This  was 
the  saint's  supposed  experience.  The  whole  will  repay  much  study *. 

CHAPTER   VI. 

THE  FIRST  STEP — THE  WAY  OF  KNOWLEDGE  :   ANMA-TARI£ANAM,  '  SOUL'S 

ENLIGHTENMENT.' 

This  teaches  the  way  in  which  we  come  to  understand  the  REALITY  of 
things,  that  is  PATHI.  Since  this  is  by  grace,  it  naturally  follows  the  chapter 
that  treats  of  that  subject.  (NOTES  IV  and  XII.)  Nalla-sami  Pillai's  note  on 
this  chapter  is  exhaustive. 

The  Disciple  asks: 

When  will  He  come  as  a  Guru  ? 

LI. 

The  Guru  answers  : 

When  the  vast  mass  of  twofold  deeds  is  balanced, 
the  '  Energy '  of  the  King  shall  exert  its  power. 

Com.  When  the  time  arrives  in  which  opposing  sins  and  merits  exactly  counterbalance 
one  another,  Civan's  gracious  emancipating  Energy  shall  begin  Her  work.  (NOTE  V,  p.  xlviii.) 

Sum.  Here  we  are  taught  that  for  the  understanding  of  the  Reality  the  Divine  Energy  is 
imparted  as  needed. 

When  the  Lord  appears  as  a  Guru  what  will  He  teach  ? 

LII. 
The  One,  the  manifold,  darkness,  deeds,  twofold  Mayai: 

these  He  will  show  us  as  entities  from  everlasting. 

Com.  There  are  six  entities  which  have  no  beginning.  The  first  of  these  is  the  LORD 
(Pathi),  Who  is  One.  The  second  is  the  aggregate  of  SOULS  (Pa9u)  :  an  infinite  host.  The 
third  is  the  Impurity  of  ANAVAM,  wearing  the  form  of  darkness.  The  fourth  is  twofold  DEEDS 
(Vinai).  The  fifth  and  sixth  are  the  two  kinds  of  MAYAI,  the  pure  and  the  impure  (the  unreal, 
changeable  substratum  of  the  phenomenal  universe).  [Gita  XIII.  19.] 

Sum.  This  teaches  us  of  the  realities  which  have  no  beginning.     (These  are  six.) 
[Here  is  a  grand  divergence  from  much  Western  theology  and  philosophy:  (i)  The  aggregate 
of  all  '  souls '  with  their  undeveloped  potentialities  of  thought  and  act,  interpenetrated  by 


1  St.  Augustine  (deeply  imbued  with  Alexandrian  thought)  in  his  treatise  '  De  Doctrina 
Christiana,'  lib.  ii.  cap.  7,  gives  seven  steps  by  which  the  soul  comes  to  God.  The  first  of 
these  is  '  the  fear  of  God'  (G0fuuaj  uffft).  The  second  is  'the  reverent  study  of  the  Divine 
revelation.'  The  third  is  '  love  of  God  and  of  our  fellow-men.'  The  fourth  is  '  steadfast 
self-discipline.'  The  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  correspond  to  Chapters  VI,  VII,  VIII  of  the 
T.  A.  P.  The  fifth  is  '  purgatio  animae : '  '  purgat  animam  tumultuantem  quodammodo 
atque  obstrepentem  sibi  de  adpetitu  inferiorum  conceptis  sordibus : '  ^oSrto*^.  The  sixth  is 
'  purgatio  oculi  cordis  : '  ^ehiafiftfasrib.  The  seventh  is  that  in  which  '  talis  films  adscendit  ad 
sapientfam  ....  qua  pacattis  tranquiUus  perfruitnr : '  ^<*io  avoid. 

d    2 


Hi  NOTE   VI. 

a  divine  but  hidden  influence,  is  without  beginning,  and  thus  Qivan  is  not  their  Creator, — is 
not  '  the  Father  of  all  Spirits.'  (2)  A  corruption  called  Anavam  vas  essential  to  the  Ann,  or 
Soul)  is  also  uncreate, — from  everlasting.  (3)  A  shadowy,  inconceivable  host  of  unoriginated 
deeds,  merits,  and  demerits  from  all  eternity  waits  to  require  consumption  by  these  souls. 
(4)  The  Maya,  the  substratum  and  material  (?)  of  the  phenomenal  universe,  is  also  from 
everlasting.] 

Of  these  six  entities  which  have  no  beginning,  which  must  you  know  ? 

LIII. 

DOER  ;  DEEDS  done ;  FRUITS  ;  LORD,  who  brings  deeds  home  to  soul : 
these  belong  to  thee  to  know,  O  disciple  ! 

Com.  In  order  to  be  saved  it  is  necessary  to  consider  (i)  the  spiritual  essence  to  which 
deeds  are  attributed  ;  (2)  the  twofold  deeds  which  are  supposed  to  have  been  done  ;  (3)  the 
joys  and  sorrows  of  embodiment  which  are  their  fruit ;  and  (4)  the  Lord,  who  at  the  appointed 
time  brings  these  deeds  home  to  the  soul,  that  it  may  experience  their  effects. 

Sum.  This  and  the  two  following  show  how  the  world  is  guided. 

N.B.  It  is  ignorance  of  these  four  things  that  leads  to  the  self-assertion  which  says, 
'  I '  and  '  mine.' 


Can  the  living  one  Himself  know  these  ? 

LIV. 

Flesh  lives  through  its  connection  with  the  living  soul.    Understanding  souls 
live  through  union  of  the  embodied  soul  with  Divine  Grace. 

Com.  The  bodjr  is  in  life  inseparably  conjoined  with  the  spirit,  and  living  and  moving  as 
one  with  it.  So  this  embodied  soul  is  united  inseparably  with  the  Divine  Wisdom,  and  thus 
lives  and  moves. 

Sum.  This  also  teaches  C.  ivan's  method  of  guiding  men. 


How  does  Grace  operate  upon  souls  ? 

LV. 

Crystal  retains  its  own  clear  brightness.     The  sun  shining  on  it  shows  also 

many  varied  hues. 
Thus  earth  bears  the  colours  of  its  King ! 

Com.  The  crystal  under  the  sun's  light  reflects  many  colours  while  retaining  its  own 
transparent  brilliancy  (which  also  it  owes  to  the  same  sun);  so  the  Energy  of  Wisdom,  the 
light  of  the  Supreme,  irradiates  the  soul,  and  permeates  the  world.  [Comp.  LXVII,  p.  lv.] 

Sum.  This  and  the  two  preceding  couplets  show  how  the  Lord  acts  upon  the  woild. 
[In  '  bondage,'  and  in  '  release '  alike,  the  Lord  is  the  cause  of  all.] 


May  I  not  say, '  I  need  not  Grace  to  see  by ;  I  myself  will  see  ? ' 

LVI. 
Easy  the  way  of  vision  ;  but  twixt  eye  and  object  light  must  be. 

Without  the  light  of  Grace  twixt  soul  and  KNOWN,  soul  sees  not ! 

Com.  In  the  midst  of  the  soul's  thought  the  light  of  mystic  wisdom  must  be  set  up  and 
shine ;  without  this,  if  you  regard  the  senses  merely,  you  will  obtain  no  real  knowledge. 
The  soul  is  unintelligent  without  Civan. 

Sum.  This  teaches  us  that  words  heard  impart  no  understanding  without  the  GUR^J. 


GRACE.  liii 

How  is  it  we  see  by  the  Grace  of  C.  ivan  ? 

LVII. 
In  your  feeble  perception  by  the  senses,  the  soul's  instruments, 

learn  how  the  soul  itself  is  the  instrument  of  Grace. 

Com.  Know  thou  that  all  thine  actions  are  performed  under  the  guidance  of  the  active 
Energy  of  the  Supreme,  even  as  the  soul  perceives  through  the  senses  as  its  instruments. 
Sum.  We  live  and  act  under  the  guidance  of  the  Lord. 


How  are  we  to  know  under  the  influence  of  Grace  ? 

LVIII. 
Ponder  not !     Think  of  nothing  !     See  not  thyself  in  the  foreground  ! 

What  thou  beholdest,  let  it  be  THAT. 

Com.  Inquire  not  of  things  in  their  abstractness,  of  what  nature  mystic  wisdom  may  be. 
Think  not  of  anything  in  its  concreteness,  nor  seek  to  interpret  the  symbols  as  thou  dost  of 
material  objects.  Put  not  thyself  forward  as  one  who  sees.  Regard  steadily  the  Loving 
Wisdom  that  regards  thee. 

Sum.  Remaining  thus  moveless,  the  vast  expanse  of  mystic  knowledge  shall  be^  thine. 


Shall  I  obtain  joy  by  thus  contemplating  the  Divine  Grace  ? 

LIX. 

Regard  that  joy  itself  as  the  one  object  of  contemplation  ; 
and  hide  thou  thyself  in  the  mystic  light  of  wisdom. 

Com.  Regard  the  gladness  of  mystic  knowledge  as  though  it  were  an  object  of  sense  (an 
objective  reality) ;  but,  that  there  may  be  for  thee  no  other  light  than  that  of  mystic  know- 
ledge, enter  thou  within  It,  and  lie  hidden  there  ! 

Sum.  This  teaches  the  absolute  mingling  of  the  soul  with  Grace. 


And  when  shall  we  part  with  these  intuitions  of  sense  ? 

LX. 

See,  as  thou  hast  seen  !     The  unseen  seek  not  to  see ! 
As  thou  hast  been  taken,  rest ! 

Com.  In  whatever  way  Grace  hath  appeared  to  thee,  even  so  regard  thou  It.  What  thou 
canst  not  see,  strive  not  to  see.  In  whatever  way  Grace  absorbs  thee,  wholly  yield  thyself. 

Sum.  In  this  and  the  two  preceding  verses  we  are  taught  how  to  behold,  how  to  become 
commingled  with,  and  how  absolutely  to  yield  oneself  up  to  Divine  Grace.  [Gita  XVIII.] 

CHAPTER   VII. 

THE  SECOND  STEP — THE  '  SOUL'S  CLEANSING  : '  ANMA-CUDDHI. 
The  last  chapter  spoke  of  the  SOUL'S  KNOWLEDGE,  and  in  this  we  are  taught 
how  to  apply  knowledge  for  the  SOUL'S  CLEANSING  from  SELF.     . 
[After  illumination  comes  purification.] 

The  Disciple  asks : 
When  comes  perfect  resignation  of  the  soul  ? 

LXI. 

The  Guru  answers: 
Those  in  pure  shade  need  not  bid  one  in  noontide  glare  come  hide  himself: 

the  fainting  soul  will  resort  to  the  shadow  of  Grace  of  its  own  accord. 
Com.  No  one  need  say  to  him  who  is  fainting  in  the  oppressive  glare,  '  Haste  hither  to 
hide  thee  in  the  refreshing  shade  ; '  of  his  own  accord  he  hastens  towards  it.     Even  thus,  those 


liv  NOTE  VI. 

suffering  from  the  heat  of  earth's  delusions  will  seek  the  relief  of  Grace.    [Hymn  V.  (iv), 
pp.  58-61.] 

Sum.  The  reason  for  resorting  to  Grace. 

[This  is  in  substance  Ci.  Pira.  II.  26-29  5  and  C'-  Na.  B.  Qutram  IX  : 
'Let  me  hide  myself  in  THEE  !'] 


How  is  it  this  sacred  Grace  is  not  enjoyed  by  all  alike  ? 

LXII. 
To  jaundiced  taste  even  sweet  milk  is  bitter ; 

when  tongue  is  cleansed  the  bitterness  is  gone. 

Com.  When  the  sense  of  taste  is  vitiated  by  disease,  even  sweet  milk  seems  bitter.  Cure 
the  disease,  and  the  bitterness  disappears.  Thus  under  the  influence  of  ANAVAM  all  religious 
observances  are  distasteful;  when  ANAVAM  departs,  the  Guru,  the  Lingam1,  and  the  Sahga- 
mam  will  be  desired. 

Sum.  This  shows  that  when  Grace  reveals  itself,  the  healed  soul  at  once  recognizes  it. 


When  ignorance  departs,  is  it  I  that  knows  ? 

LXIII. 
Though  light  amid  the  darkness  is  to  the  see-er  shown, 

he  still  regards  a  vain  phantasm.     When  will  this  cease  ? 
Com.  Though  Grace  in  form  of  light,  reveals  Itself  to  souls  lying  bewildered  in  the  dark- 
ness of  Anavam,  to  the  intent  that  they  may  see  the  LORD,  they  see  Him  not,  but  contemplate 
THEMSELVES  !     When  shall  such  vain  imaginings  cease? 
Sum.  The  fault  of  not  steadily  beholding  Grace  alone. 


What  are  the  respective  actions  of  the  enlightened  and  the  unenlightened  ? 

LXIV. 
Both  light  and  darkness  make  all  things  seem  alike  : 

to  distinguish  between  unity  and  multiplicity  is  the  work  of  the  enlightened. 

Com.  In  perfect  light  and  in  dense  darkness  the  distinctions  of  things  are  equally  lost. 
The  distinguishing  them  and  the  confounding  them  are  the  signs  of  the  intelligent  and 
unintelligent  respectively. 

Sum.  Those  under  the  influence  of  Grace,  and  those  who  are  not,  are  alike  in  this ; 
nothing  else  appears  to  them  :  all  light,  or  all  darkness. 


Do  all  understand  the  way  of  clear  knowledge  and  mystic  union  ? 

LXV. 

Save  in  the  case  of  the  good  and  loving  ones  doth  it  ever  happen  that  one  is 
found  to  bear  the  whole  burden  you  would  impose  ? 

Com.  None  but  good  friends  bear  the  burden  wholly  which  is  imposed  upon  them  in 
aiding  others.     Can  such  friendship  be  easily  attained  ? 

Sum.  Wre  are  told  that  the  deeds  of  those  loving  souls  that  approach  Him  are  His. 
Such  a  loving  one  is  the  KNOWER,  and  His  Grace  is  easy  of  attainment. 

[A  quotation  is  given  which  seems  to  give  an  Antinomian  turn  to  this  couplet.     Does 
the  mystic  renouncer  of  selfhood  cease  to  be  morally  responsible  ? 


;     ufiair   LJirffsfaof^    Qftu£lif.&io   UassfliurtG) 


1  See  Life,  §  vi,  and  easiaia  in  Lex.  and  Index. 


GRACE.  lv 

'  Qivan  abides  with  me,  destroys  "  birth,"  saying,  "  This  man's  deeds  are  wholly  Mine  ;  what 
is  done  to  him  is  done  to  Me !     If  the  faithful  commit  sin  He  makes  it  service."  '] 


Is  He  who  imposes  the  burden  diverse  from  him  who  bears  the  burden  ?  Is  not  all 
Piramam  ?  • 

LXVI. 

One  placed  a  treasure  in  your  charge ;   deceitfully  some  one  with  guile 

appropriated  it. 
Say,  were  you  asleep,  or  had  you  gone  elsewhere  ? 

Com.  Civan  gave  thee  body,  organs,  a  world  to  energize  in,  and  faculties  for  enjoyment — 
in  trust.  He  comes  to  claim  them.  You  say,  '  Some  one  came  with  guile  and  filched  them 
from  me.'  Were  you  asleep  or  absent  when  the  robbery  was  effected?  You  have  lost 
yourself  and  the  KNOWN. 

Sum.  The  denial  of  the  reality  of  Pa9u  and  Pa9am  is  treachery  to  Catti. 


To  the  wise,  who  have  thus  become  '  Servants,'  do  not  '  impurities  '  arise  ? 

LXVII. 

As  the  crystal  pillar  receives  the  sun's  light,  with  no  shadow  at  all ; 
so  no  darkness  remains  to  lay  hold  on  him. 

Com.  At  noon,  when  the  sun  is  in  the  zenith,  its  perpendicular  rays  fall  on  and  are 
absorbed  in  the  crystal  column,  without  shadow  or  refracted  rays  of  many  hues ;  so  under  the 
full  influence  of  Grace  the  darkness  of  impurity  abides  not.  [Comp.  T.  A.  P.  50,  55, 
pp.  xlvi,  Hi.] 

Sum.  Here  we  are  taught  how  Grace  brings  the  soul  under  its  absolute  influence. 

[This  beautiful  couplet  requires  much  study  in  connection  with  the  whole  system.  The 
soul,  the  crystal  column,  has  potentialities  of  splendour ;  but  only  '  in  the  Divine  Light  does  it 
see  light.'  It  must  stand  upright  under  the  direct  rays  of  the  Divine  Sun,  with  no  intervening 
mist  or  cloud,  and  no  reflected,  coloured,  refracted  cross-lights  from  the  sense-world.  Then 
only  is  it  filled  with  pure  essential  radiance,  in  which  its  own  crystalline  lustre  shines  in  its 
perfection,  yet  is  undistinguished,  being  merged  in  the  glory  that  excelleth,  the  Infinite 
All-in-All.]  

How  may  one  abide  so  that '  Impurity '  shall  not  appear,  but  Grace  remain  ? 

LXVIII. 

Those  under  the  influence  of  Grace  stand  BEHIND  the  light  of  reality, 
like  jewelled  hand  that  bears  a  gleaming  torch. 

Com.  Those  that  bear  aloft  before  them  a  blazing  torch  can  see  whatever  they  desire  : 
torch  BEFORE,  themselves  BEHIND  it.  Thus  till  the  Known  shall  appear,  men  must  put  the 
torch  of  Grace  before  them,  and  tread  carefully  behind  it. 

Sum.  The  method  of  remaining  in  union  with  Grace. 


It  is  Grace  that  knows.     I  need  not  know  ? 

LXIX. 

If  it  be  not  anything  one  can  perceive  by  the  Five  Senses,  deprived  of  THIS 
what  can  the  Five  Senses  perceive  ?  what  can  self  perceive  ? 

Com.  If  it  be  not  an  object  which  can  be  discerned  by  the  body,  as  is  the  case  with  the 
Bliss  supreme,  which  is  the  KNOWN,  how  can  the  Senses  assist  us  in  gaining  it?  or  how  can 
souls  attain  it  ? 

Sum.  Since  it  is  out  of  the  sphere  of  sensation,  how  can  it  be  within  the  power  of  the 
Senses  to  gain  it?  [Things  spiritual  can  only  be  spiritually  discerned.] 


Ivi  NOTE   VI. 

Is  it  necessary  for  Grace  to  show  itself?     Can  I  not  myself  see  it  ? 

LXX. 

Those  that  freely  give  must  not  be  thought  of  as  those  forced  by  us  to  give. 
Think  rather :  '  Who  are  we  to  obtain  this  boon  ? ' 

Com.  One  does  not  think  of  those  who  spontaneously  and  with  desire  bestow  anything 
upon  us  as  though  they  had  yielded  to  our  violence.  And  thus  it  is  through  Grace  only 
that  the  KNOWN  is  revealed  to  the  apprehension  of  the  soul. 

Sum.  This  and  the  preceding  couplet  teach  that  supreme  felicity  is  the  gift  of  Grace ; 
and  that  souls,  whether  with  organs  or  without  them,  cannot  of  themselves  obtain  it. 

CHAPTER    VIII. 
THE  THIRD  STEP — THE  STATE  OF  BLISS  :    ANMA-LABHAM.     [Comp.  NOTE  V.] 

This  signifies  the  way  in  which  the  soul's  '  gain '  is  obtained.  '  Soul- 
purity'  has  for  its  fruit  'Soul-gain,'  which  is  union  with  God.  Thus  the 
chapters  are  connected.  [Man  dies  to  live.] 

The  Disciple  asks  : 
In  what  way  can  the  soul  obtain  bliss  ? 

LXXI. 

The  Guru  answers : 

Those  that  put  BEFORE  them  the  light  that  arises  in  the  darkness  enjoy  bliss; 
those  that  put  it  BEHIND  them  endure  suffering. 

Com.  Those  that  once  (in  a  lower  stage)  put  divine  and  mystic  knowledge  BEHIND  them, 
and  went  before  it,  have  suffered  affliction.  Afterwards,  if  they  place  the  lamp,  of  mystic 
wisdom,  which  has  arisen  amidst  the  darkness  of  natural  impurity,  BEFORE  them,  and  walk 
in  its  light,  these  shall  obtain  supreme  felicity. 

Sum.  Here  we  are  taught  who  they  are  that  shall  obtain  supreme  felicity. 

[This  is  §  7  of  Book  II  in  Ci.  Pira.,  verses  30-39.] 


For  this,  is  not  Grace  sufficient  ?    Over  and  above  this,  what  need  of  the  '  KNOWN  '  ? 

LXXII. 

Nothing  results  when  souls  and  Grace  are  without  the  KNOWN, 
when  the  soul  and  the  KNOWN  combine  is  bliss. 

Com.  The  KNOWN  is  supreme,  and  it  is  through  HIM  that  the  soul  derives  blessing. 
(This  seems  to  need  no  further  explanation  ;  but  the  idea  of  a  mystic  marriage  is  introduced 
in  a  fantastic  and  untranslateable  fashion.  See  p.  Ixxxi.  The  soul  is  feminine,  so  is  Catti,  or 
Grace.  The  soul  must  be  introduced  by  Grace  to  C.  ivan,  the  KNOWN,  the  mystic  Bridegroom.) 

Sum.  We  learn  here  the  limits  within  which  supreme  felicity  can  be  attained. 

[This  is  Qi.  Pira.  II.  24.] 

When  the  soul  is  united  to  the  KNOWN,  does  the  KNOWN  through  the  soul  obtain  bliss  ? 

LXXIII. 

He  gives  bliss  to  those  that  draw  nigh  to  Him. 

His  Form  is  perfect  blessedness ;  nor  can  this  be  enhanced. 

Com.  The  Lord  imparts  supreme  felicity  to  those  who  draw  near  to  Him  ;  but  since  His 
Form  is  the  fulness  of  infinite  felicity,  He  partakes  not  of  the  blessedness  He  imparts. 
Sum.  The  King  IMPARTS,  and  does  not  RECEIVE. 


GRACE.  Ivii 

Does  the  soul,  then,  obtain  that  bliss  as  one  alien  from  the  Supreme  ? 

LXXIV. 
As  in  the  compound  Tadalai,  by  combination  of  letters  L-f  T=  D,  and  these 

do  not  remain  but  coalesce ; 
so,  know  thou,  that  in  the  supreme  felicity  thou  shalt  be  one  with  the  Lord. 

Com.  When  the  words  Tal  ('  foot ')  and  Talai  ('  head ')  are  written  as  one  compound 
('  head  and  foot'),  the  letters  /  and  t  combine,  and  are  not  separated,  but  coalesce  in  4  (G.  37)  ; 
so  the  soul  shall  enjoy  blessedness  in  mystic  union  with  the  King. 

[Foot  is  soul,  and  Head  is  Civan.] 

Sum.  The  soul  sinks  down  into  the  KNOWN  in  mystic  eternal  union. 

[See  gi.  Pira.  II.  37.]  

Do  they  not  yet  obtain  absolute  unity  ? 

LXXV. 
If  they  become  one,  both  disappear ;  if  they  remain  two,  there  is  no  fruition ; 

therefore  there  is  union  and  non-union. 

Com.  If  you  say  that  the  Lord  and  the  soul  are  one,  there  is  neither  an  obtainer  nor  boon 
obtained.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  two,  there  is  no  blissful  consummation  for  the  soul ; 
therefore  the  condition  of  such  souls  must  be  a  compound  of  duality  and  non-duality : 
mingled,  not  merged. 

Sum.  In  release  the  soul  is  not  merged  in  the  Supreme.     (NOTE  III.)  * 


What  then  is  the  mode  of  the  soul's  approach  to  the  Supreme  and  unity  with  Him  ? 

LXXVI. 
None  say  we  have  drawn  nigh;  and  none  say  we  have  obtained;  in  speechless 

rapture 
when  bonds  are  loosed,  embodiment  returns  no  more. 

Com.  Those  who  obtain  the  Supreme  felicity  of  release,  and  those  who  have  attained  the 
state  of  Samathi  which  directly  leads  to  it,  never  for  a  moment  leave  their  Lord,  by  self- 
contemplation.  Those  who,  beyond  the  power  of  speech,  have  laid  hold  of  Him  are  born 
no  more. 

Sum.  Here  the  state  of  those  who  have  obtained  release  is  explained. 

[Comp.  C.i.  Pira.  II.  34,  43  ;  £i.  Na.  B.  Yen.  62.] 


What  is  meant  by  the  speechlessness  above  ? 

LXXVII. 

Till  you  are  in  a  state  like  that  of  one  possessed, 
remain  destitute  of  all  action. 

Com.  One  possessed  by  a  spirit  is  under  that  spirit's  absolute  control,  and  is  incapable  of 
any  independent  action;  so  remain  thou  inactive,  till  all  thine  acts  are  under  the  control 
of  the  King. 

Sum.  Here  we  are  told  what  mature  Samathi  is. 


What  is  the  cessation  of  action  on  the  part  of  the  absorbed  mystic  like  ? 

LXXVIII. 

To  those  who  obtain  that  resplendent  possession  that  gain  alone  suffices ; 
all  else  is  as  something  in  the  hands  of  those  that  sleep. 


1  Comp.  Kingsley's  preface  to  Theologia  Germanica,  referred  to  in  NOTE  V.    See  Inge's 
Bampton  Lectures,  1899,  pp.  189-191. 


Iviii  NOTE  VI. 

Com.  When  the  devotees  have  gained  the  glorious  and  true  possession  of  the  Lord, 
therein  is  supreme  delight ;  and  any  works,  such  as  the  observances  of  Yogam  and  the  like, 
are  as  things  handled  by  one  in  sleep. 

Sum.  Specific  sectarial  observances  cease,  or  are  performed  mechanically. 

[Cornp.  gi.  Pira.,  p.  385  ;  II.  45,  46.] 


Can  the  rapture  of  this  union  be  described  ? 

LXXIX. 

Absorbed  in  the  delight  of  the  state  when  the  three  appear  not, 
what  words  can  tell  the  bliss  ? 

Com.  When  the  knower,  the  mystic  knowledge,  and  the  KNOWN  appear  no  more  as 
distinct,  being  mingled  in  one  happy  fruition,  that  absorption  is  a  rapture  inexpressible 
by  words. 

Sum.  The  overwhelming  nature  of  the  Supreme  felicity.     [Glta  X.  9.] 


In  what  way  can  that  possession  be  obtained  ? 

LXXX. 

The  bliss  that  is  named  as  above  all  bliss 

is  the  bliss  which  the  abiding  in  divine  love  bestows. 

Com.  This  supreme  felicity  is  praised  as  surpassing  all  delights.     The  enjoyment  of  it 
even  now  is  the  result  of  abiding  in  the  state  of  reverent  loving  service. 
Sum.  LOVE  makes  the  attainment  of  supreme  felicity  easy. 

CHAPTER   X. 

THE  FOURTH  STEP — THE  STATE  OF  THOSE  WHO  HAVE  '  DRAWN  NIGH.' 

Here  the  condition  of  those  who  have  attained  to  Samathi  (Mystic  Slumber) 

is  spoken  of.     What  this  slumber  is  has  been  shown  in  the  preceding  chapter, 

and  how  men  may  gain  it :  here  the  condition  of  the  already  liberated  mystic 

is  explained.     These  are  the  devotees  whose  condition  is  described  ip  NOTE  V. 

The  Disciple  asks: 
WThat  is  the  thought  of  the  KNOWERSI  who  never  forsake  the  KNOWN  ? 

XCI. 

The  Guru  answers: 

Sinking  in  the  Supreme  Understanding,  while  delight  sinks  into  their  souls, 
they  slumber  in  sacred  peace.     What  other  words  are  there  ? 

Com.  W'hile  they  themselves  sink  down  into  the  full  tide  of  Mystic  Wisdom  (which  is 
the  Supreme) ;  and  while  infinite  rapture  flows  down  into  their  souls,  they  abide  in  a  state  of 
blissful  slumber. 

Sum.  It  is  taught  here  that  the  Knower  sinks  down  into  and  abides  in  the  Known. 


Will  those  who  have  attained  this  state  desire  higher  stations  of  felicity? 

XCII. 

Assuredly  they  perform  not  the  'five  great  works';  nor  the  'causal  works'; 
nor  the  employments  of  any  abodes  of  pleasure. 


The  KNOWLEDGE,  the  KNOWERS,  and  the  KNOWN  : '  SANAM,  N^TRU,  and  NEYAM. 


GRACE.  lix 

Coin.  The  works  of  C.ivan  (NOTE  I),  the  Supreme,  are  creation  (i),  conservation  (2), 
destruction  (3),  'veiling'  (4),  and  bestowal  of  grace  (5).  They  perform  not  these.  The 
ministerial  works  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Ruttiran,  Mage"9an,  Satha^ivan  (Ci.  Pira.  I.  9)  they  do 
not ;  nor  do  they  engage  in  any  of  those  dreaded  acts  which  lead  to  future  embodiment. 

Sum    This  teaches  that  they  rest  from  all  work. 


Do  these  attain  to  omniscience  and  the  other  attributes  ? 

XCIII. 

Though  they  have  attained  to  the  knowledge  of  everything  ; 
these  '  Knowers  '  here  know  nothing  but  the  '  Known.' 

Com.  Though  these  perfected  devotees  by  mystic  union  with  C.  ivan  gain  omniscience  and 
other  qualities ;  yet,  while  on  this  earth,  they  know  nothing  whatsoever  except  the  Supreme, 
the  one  object  of  mystic  knowledge. 

Sum.  In  every  place  they  see  C.  ivan,  and  contemplate  Him  alone. 


When  objects  of  sense  present  themselves  to  the  Knowers  of  this  kind,  how  do  they  act  ? 

XCIV. 

They  restrain  the  organs  of  sense ;  and  entering,  sink  into  their  Source. 
They  follow  not  the  senses,  but  act  as  the  tortoise  does  on  land. 

Com.  When  the  world  of  sense  obtrudes  itself,  the  devout  man  fears,  goes  not  out  after 
it,  checks  the  perceptions  of  his  mind,  draws  near  and  enters  into  the  KNOWN,  and  from 
THAT  turns  not  away.  An  illustration  of  this  is  the  tortoise,  which,  walking  on  the  earth, 
if  any  one  approach  it,  fears,  draws  in  its  head,  and  lies  motionless. 

Sum.  This  shows  the  way  in  which  the  devout  dread  the  power  of  sense,  and  withdraw 
themselves  from  its  influence. 

[Comp.  C.i.  Pira.,  p.  382.] 

But  are  there  any  who  have  left  the  '  Known  '  and  departed  from  him  ? 

XCV. 
There  is  no  place  or  world  where  the  Lord  is  not. 

There  is  no  place  to  which  men  can  withdraw  from  Him. 
Com.  There  is  no  place  in  which  the  soul  can  dwell  apart  from  C,ivan.     C.  ivan  Himself 
throughout  all  rational  and  irrational  beings  abides,  so  that  nothing  and  no  one  is  apart  from 
Him. 

Sum.  This  teaches  that  the  devout  have  ceased  to  dwell  in  the  sphere  of  limited  know- 
ledge, and  have  entered  the  unlimited. 


Have  these  persons  then  seen  that  Existence  within  (themselves)  or  without  ? 

XCVI. 

Within  and  without  the  same  Divine  Grace  stands  revealed. 
Those  who  possess  this  mystic  vision  despise  nothing. 

[Commentators  differ,  and  the  text  is  ambiguous.     We  give  the  later.] 

Com.  Both  within  and  without,  That  which  Mystic  Wisdom  reveals  exists  unvarying  ;  to 
those  who  have  obtained  it  no  means  <?f  communion  with  Him,  even  through  the  senses,  must 
be  despised. 

Sum.  This  shows  us  that  to  the  mystically  enlightened  the  phenomenal  universe  is  only 
seen  in  God. 

[Comp.  C.  i.  Pira.,  p.  369.  '  To  those  who  have  attained  to  Nanam  (Mystic  Wisdom) 
C.ivan  is  revealed  within,  and  is  seen  equally  in  forms,  such  as  the  Lifigam,  &c.,  in  which  He 
reveals  Himself.  The  perfected  mystic  despises  not  any  means  of  realizing  the  presence  of 
the  Immanent  Infinite.'  This  is  Carithai  (traditional  observance)  in  Nanam.] 


Ix  NOTE  VII. 

But,  tell  me,  do  these  '  mystic  knowers  '  engage  in  no  employment  ? 

XCVII. 
To  those  who  engage  in  the  world's  work  comes  worldly  requital. 

To  the  absence  of  such  work  the  result  is  the  True. 

Com,  To  those  who  follow  as  they  are  led,  and  under  the  egotistic  influences  which  say  T 
and  '  mine,'  perform  acts,  there  accrues  the  reward  of  worldly  enjoyment.  To  those  who 
perform  penances  and  give  gifts  (with  no  egotistic  desires)  the  result  is  the  imperishable 
pleasures  of  the Vorld  of  deliverance. 

Sum.  To  those  who  abide  in  This,  the  Truth,  no  work  (apart  from  Him)  is  possible. 


As  old  deeds1  are  consumed  (eaten),  does  not  the  effect  of  new  deeds  accumulate  ? 

XCVIII. 

Old  deeds  disappear  with  the  body ;  if  in  the  interval  deeds  accumulate, 
Divine  Grace  burns  them  up. 

Corn.  Here  the  division  of  deeds  into  the  three  classes  of  Pirarattam,  fanfitam,  and 
Agamiyam  must  be  remembered.  The  two  former  of  these  disappear  with  the  death  of  the 
body  (of  the  saint).  As  for  those  deeds  of  merit  or  demerit  which  have  accumulated  in  this 
present  state,  the  Divine  Grace  dissipates  them  (p.  xlix). 

Sum.  From  this  it  appears  that  the  consummate  devotee  is  freed  from  the  influence  of 
every  species  of  deed.  

Is  the  infinite  liberation  obtained  when  the  body  dies  ? 

XCIX. 

To  men  of  matured  knowledge  the  works  that  yield  the  three  return  not ; 
to  them  this  world  is  absolutely  as  that  world. 

Com.  The  threefold  deeds  which  compel  a  man  to  live  in  the  present  embodiment,  or  in 
the  next  embodiment,  or  in  any  future  state,  are  removed  by  Grace ;  and  thus  he  enjoys,  even 
while  still  in  the  body,  the  infinite  deliverance. 

Sum.  This  teaches  that  in  the  condition  of  the  Jivan-muttan  he  enjoys  on  earth  the  bliss 
of  the  infinite  liberation. 

[Comp.  Kurral,  p.  353  ;  Ndla4iydrt  p.  157.] 


Have  these  no  desire  to  save  others  ? 

C. 

Reflecting  upon  the  sorrows  of  those  under  the  influence  of  deceit, 
they  are  agitated  by  a  flood  of  compassion. 

Com.  When  these  devout  and  blessed  persons  behold  the  multitude  of  souls  that,  under 
the  influence  of  the  deceits  of  the  sense-world,  are  suffering  affliction,  they  themselves  are 
agitated  by  a  feeling  of  irrepressible  compassion. 

Sum.  In  the  souls  that  desire  the  heavenly  emancipation  there  is  a  loving  Grace  like 
that  of  their  King. 

NOTE   VII. 

QlTHAMBARAM  :    ITS   LEGENDS,    AND   THE   MYSTIC    DANCE   OF   QlVAN. 

THE  '  TEMPLE  LEGEND.' — Among  all  the  sacred  places  held  in  reverence 
by  the  Qaivites,  there  is  none  that  can  vie  with  Qithambaram  (Chellumbram). 
Its  legends  are  published  in  what  is  entitled  The  Koyil  Purdnam,  where  '  Koyil ' 
(meaning  temple  in  general)  is  used  par  excellence  of  Qithambararri. 


See  Pope's  Ndla4iyar,  p.  66,  and  Qi.  Pira.,  p.  366. 


CITHAMBARAM.  Ixi 

UMAPATHI. — This  Puranam  is  attributed  to  '  Umapathi  Civacariyar,'  the  author 
of  many  great  treatises  (before  mentioned  in  these  NOTES,  II-IV),  and  whose 
date  is  one  of  the  few  of  which  we  seem  to  have  some  certain  knowledge.  In 
his  statement  and  refutation  of  heresies,  the  date  1313  is  given.  He  was  the 
last  of  the  Qaiva  schoolmen  (whose  period  is  the  thirteenth  century),  contem- 
poraries of  the  great  mediaeval  Christian  schoolmen,  and  their  not  unworthy 
rivals  in  learning,  acuteness,  and  piety.  If  then  this  work  is  his,  the  reputation 
of  the  shrine  must  have  been  great  from  a  very  early  period.  The  legends  in 
this  Puranam  relate  to  a  time  long  antecedent  to  that  of  any  of  the  devotees 
whose  stories  are  given  in  the  Periya  Puranam ;  and,  in  fact,  belong  to  the  very 
oldest  period  of  South-Indian  legend.  These  myths  relate  especially  to  the 
Vyaghrapada  ('Saint  Tiger-foot'},  Patafijali  ('  The  Serpent  Devotee'},  the 
mystic  dance  of  C/ivan,  and  the  story  of  Hiranyavanma  ('The  Golden1).  With 
these  is  combined  a  great  quantity  of  details  of  miscellaneous  mythology.  No 
'  higher  criticism,'  alas,  has  been  at  work  here  ! 

I.  The  history  of  Vyaghrapada,  whose  image  is  often  found  in  close  proximity 
to  that  of  Qivan,  is  a  very  peculiar  one,  and  seems  to  belong  to  the  very  earliest 
period  of  the  establishment  of  the  Brahmanical  system  in  the  South.  The  name  is 
found  in  the  Rig -Veda ;  so  that  these  legends  are  simple  inventions  to  account 
for  the  appellation,  and  to  link  on  the  Qaiva  system  to  the  Vedic  times. 

There  was  on  the  sacred  lands  in  the  North,  somewhere  near  the  banks 
of  the  Ganges,  a  hermit,  a  Brahman  of  the  purest  lineage  and  perfectly 
conversant  with  the  Vedic  rites,  to  whom  a  son  was  born  endued  with 
singular  gifts  and  powers.  The  boy  grew  up  in  the  wilderness  under  the 
tutelage  of  his  father,  and  when  he  had  learnt  all  that  the  father  could  teach 
him,  the  old  hermit  said  to  his  son  and  disciple,  '  What  else  can  I  do  for 
thee  ? '  The  son  replied,  prostrating  himself  at  his  father's  feet,  '  Teach  me 
what  is  the  highest  form  of  ascetic  virtue.'  The  father  replied  that  the 
worship  of  Qivan  was  the  highest.  '  And  where,'  inquired  the  son,  '  can'  I 
best  worship  Him  ? '  The  hermit  replied,  '  The  whole  universe  is  the  presence 
of  Para-brahma '  (the  Supreme  Spirit),  l  yet  there  are  places  on  earth  where 
He  especially  manifests  Himself,  even  as  the  pervading  Soul  dwells  and  energizes 
in  a  visible  and  circumscribed  body.  There  are  many  myriads  of  such  shrines, 
but  of  all  of  them  Tillai 1  is  the  central  sanctuary '  (Mula-sthdna\  '  where  Qivan 
will  receive  thy  homage ;  for  there  is  established  the  hhgam  which  is  light2.' 
So  the  youthful  ascetic  went  on  his  journey,  after  taking  an  affectionate  leave 
of  his  mother,  followed  by  his  father's  benediction.  After  a  long  journey 
southward  over  mountains,  rivers,  and  plains,  he  arrived  at  a  spot  where  he 
found  a  beautiful  lake,  covered  with  lotus  flowers  (Qiva-ganga-firtham),  and 
a  lihgam  established  under  the  shade  of  a  huge  banyan  tree.  Falling  on  his 


1  A  name  of  Cithambaram,  which  at  that  time  was  a  vast  wilderness,  covered  with 
(excoecaria  agallocha)  a  tree  called  Tillai  (perhaps  Sans.  TILAKA). 

2  At  Cithambaram  is  one  of  the  principal  lihgams,  generally  enumerated  as  twelve.    It 
is  called  the  '  Air-lingam/  and  is  now  invisible  !     This  worship  of  God  (generally  some  local 
deity)  in  connection  with  a  stone  or  pillar,  as  marking  a  sacred  spot,  is  found  everywhere  in 
ancient  records.     See  Genesis  xxviii,  and  Dr.  Charles'  Eschatology.     It  was  not  long  before 
the  idea  was  perverted  by  mysticism. 


Ixii  NOTE   VII. 

face,  he  worshipped ;  and  at  once  devoted  himself  to  its  service,  crowning  it 
with  flowers,  bathing  it  with  water  from  a  sacred  pool  hard  by,  and  fulfilling 
all  the  usual  observances.  He  then  went  onward  a  little  distance  towards  the 
east,  and  there,  under  a  fragrant  tree  on  the  borders  of  a  beautiful  tank, 
established  for  himself  a  second  li-hgam  as  his  own  especial  shrine,  and  built 
a  hermitage  of  leaves  and  grass  hard  by.  Thenceforward  he  divided  his 
services  between  the  two  sacred  spots,  which  are  still  revered  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  great  temple.  And  now,  being  alone,  he  found  it  difficult  to 
accomplish  his  daily  task  according  to  his  mind ;  for  he  wished  to  gather  not 
only  flowers  from  the  tanks,  and  from  the  fields,  and  from  shrubs,  but  also, 
and  chiefly,  those  that  grew  on  the  lofty  trees,  which  were  sweetest  of  odour 
and  richest  of  hue ;  yet,  however  early  he  went  forth  in  the  morning,  before  he 
had  gathered  the  last  of  his  flowers,  the  first  had  withered  under  the  fierce 
sun's  rays ;  nor  could  he,  while  laboriously  and  slowly  climbing  the  lofty  trees 
in  the  early  hours,  see  rightly  to  select  perfect  flowers.  His  flower-worship 
was  therefore  defective  and  unsatisfactory.  In  an  ecstasy  of  passionate  prayer, 
he  besought  the  assistance  of  the  god,  who  appeared  in  answer  to  his  loving 
invocation,  and  promised  him  whatever  boon  he  sought.  The  grace  he  asked 
was,  that  his  feet  and  hands  might  become  those  of  a  tiger,  armed  with  strong 
claws  and  furnished  with  eyes,  so  that  he  might  rapidly  climb  the  highest  trees, 
and  see  clearly  to  select  the  fittest  flowers  for  the  divine  worship.  This  boon 
was  granted  him,  and  so  he  takes  his  place  among  the  great  devotees  of 
Qivan  as  the  '  Tiger-footed '  and  '  Six-eyed,'  and  a  part  of  the  neighbourhood 
derives  its  name  from  this  circumstance,  and  is  called  Tiru-puli-ur  ('  Sacred 
Tiger-town '). 

II.  Some  time  afterwards  he  was  joined  by  another  devotee  (Patafijali ', 
whose  form  is  that  of  a  serpent.  The  history  of  this  mysterious  personage  is 
closely  connected  with  the  mystic  dance  of  Qivan.  This  great  leader  of  Qivan's 
hosts  is  a  form  of  the  Athi-9eshan,  or  thousand-headed  serpent,  on  which  Vishnu 
slept  on  the  ocean  of  milk  through  long  periods.  The  wild  story  relates  that 
Vishnu  one  day  .arose  from  his  slumber  and  repaired  to  Kailasam,  there  to  worship 
the  supreme  Qivan,  Who  told  him  that  in  the  neighbouring  forest  of  Taragam  there 
were  multitudes  of  heretical  Rishis  or  devotees,  dwelling  with  their  wives  in 
huts  of  leaves.  These  seem  in  some  way  to  have  been  rebels  against  His 
authority;  in  fact,  a  commentator  calls  them  the  followers  of  the  Mimansai, 
who,  puffed  up  with  pride  of  learning,  regarded  themselves  as  independent  of 
Qivan's  authority.  (The  whole  history  points  to  some  great  conflict  between 
Vedantists  and  Qaivites  in  early  days.)  It  was  the  intention  of  Qivan  to  visit 
this  wilderness,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  state  of  the  Rishis  there,  and  to  teach 
them  a  lesson.  He  bade  Vishnu  accompany  Him  in  the  form  of  a  female,  and 
the  two — Qivan  as  a  mendicant,  with  the  usual  insignia  and  the  bowl  for  the 
collection  of  alms,  attended  by  Vishnu  as  his  wife — entered  the  jungle.  It  is 
in  connection  with  this  story  especially  that  Qivan  is  called  a  'deceiver.'  (Comp. 
NOTE  I.)  The  history  that  follows  is  in  many  respects  far  from  edifying,  though 
the  author  defends  it,  and  gives  to  everything  an  allegorical  meaning.  At  first 


1  PataKjali  was  the  founder  of  the  Yoga  system.     This  is  an  attempt  to  make  him  out  to 
be  a  mythic  personality. 


V'lTHAMBAKAM.  Ixiii 

sight  all  the  Rishis'  wives  were  seized  with  an  unspeakable  frenzy  of  passion 
for  the  false  mendicant ;  while  all  the  Rishis  themselves  were  equally  infatuated 
by  the  false  dame  that  followed  Him, — Vishnu  in  disguise.  There  was  soon 
fierce  wrath  raging  throughout  the  whole  hermitage.  The  inhabitants  of  the 
wilderness  speedily  perceived  that  the  mendicant  and  his  wife,  who  possessed 
such  a  mysterious  and  irresistible  power  of  attraction,  were  other  than  they 
seemed.  They  became  ashamed  of  the  ecstasies  of  evil  desire  into  which  they 
had  been  thrown,  and  gathering  themselves  together,  the  10,000  Rishis  pro- 
nounced fierce  imprecations  upon  the  disguised  gods,  which  their  wives 
reiterated.  But  the  gods  were  unharmed.  They  then  dug  a  sacrificial  pit 
and  proceeded  to  offer  sacrifices,  whose  object  was  to  ensure  the  destruction 
of  the  strangers.  Every  Vedic  rite  was  observed,  for  were  they  not  the  most 
accomplished  of  ritualists  ?  The  result  was  that  a  fierce  tiger  was  created  in 
the  sacrificial  fire  which  rushed  forth  upon  Civan ;  Who,  smiling  gently,  seized 
it  with  His  sacred  hands,  and  with  the  nail  of  His  little  finger  ripped  off  its  skin, 
and  wrapped  it  round  Himself  as  a  soft  silken  garment.  This  accounts  for 
Qivan's  tiger-skin  mantle  so  often  mentioned  in  the  V§9agam.  (NoxE  I.) 
Undiscouraged  by  failure,  they  renewed  their  offerings,  from  out  of  which 
came  a  monstrous  serpent,  which  He  seized  and  wreathed  round  His  neck, 
where  it  ever  hangs ;  and  then  began  His  mystic  dance.  And  now  came  forth 
the  last  monster  in  the  shape  of  a  black  dwarf,  hideous  and  malignant, 
brandishing  a  club  with  eyes  of  fire.  His  name  was  Muyalagan  ('  the  Club- 
bearer^.  Upon  him  the  God  pressed  the  tip  of  His  sacred  foot,  and  broke  the 
creature's  back,  so  that  he  writhed  on  the  ground ;  and  thus,  with  His  last  foe 
prostrate,  Civan  resumed  the  dance  of  which  all  the  gods  were  witnesses,  while 
His  hosts  sang  wild  choruses.  The  figure  of  the  prostrate  foe,  writhing  under 
the  God's  foot,  is  reproduced  in  every  Caiva  shrine.  The  Rishis,  parched  with 
the  heat  of  their  own  sacrificial  fires,  faint  with  the  fury  of  their  anger,  and 
overwhelmed  with  the  ineffable,  mysterious  velocity  of  the  motion  and  the 
splendour  of  the  heavens  opening  around  them,  fell  to  the  ground  as  dead,  and 
then  rising,  worshipped  the  manifested  God,  acknowledging  themselves  His 
faithful  devotees. 

The  very  accomplished  editor  of  this  Puranam  (and  commentator  upon  it), 
a  zealous  reviver  in  modern  times  of  the  Caiva  system  (Arru-muganavalar,  of 
Jaffna),  gives  his  account  of  the  meaning  of  this  strange  scene.  It  seems  that 
the  10,000  Rishis  dwelling  in  the  wilderness  were  adherents  of  the  Purva 
Mimansa  school  (founded  by  Jaimini),  whom  Qivan  resolved  to  bring  into 
His  fold,  and  by  the  strange  polemic  detailed  in  the  legend  He  accomplished 
His  purpose.  According  to  our  editor,  these  Rishis  held  seven  erroneous 
doctrines:  (i)  they  taught  that  the  universe  as  it  is  is  eternal;  (2)  that  souls 
have  no  author  or  Lord ;  (3)  that  Qivan  and  all  the  gods  are  not  eternal ; 
(4)  that  the  Vedam  alone  is  eternal ;  (5)  that  the  words  of  the  Vedam  are  the 
only  divinities ;  (6)  that  those  words  reveal  no  other  divine  beings  than  them- 
selves ;  (7)  that  by  performance  of  the  sacrifices  prescribed  in  the  Vedam,  and 
by  close  adherence  to  the  Karma-kandam  (the  ceremonial  part),  all  blessings 
here  and  hereafter  can  be  obtained.  These  Rishis,  who  were  consummate 
masters  of  the  Vedic  ritual,  considered  themselves  independent  of  all  deities, 


Jxiv  NOTE  VII. 

showed  neither  love  nor  devotion  to  Qivan,  and  taught  the  same  absolute 
reliance  upon  rites  and  ceremonies  to  their  wives  also.  To  convince  them 
(both  the  Rishis  and  their  spouses)  of  their  moral  weakness  and  of  the  limited 
power  of  their  most  orthodox  sacrifices,  Qivan  now  appeared  as  the  Bhiksha- 
tana-Murlti  (Mendicant  Deity],  with  Vishnu  as  the  goddess(!)  of  Illusion,  in  order 
to  bring  them  to  His  feet.  They  were  thus  forced  to  recognize  their  dependence 
upon  Qivan,  and  to  acknowledge  that  by  His  Grace  ajone  they  could  obtain 
remission  of  sin  and  merit.  They  acknowledged  that  '  the  virtue  of  them 
who  love  not  Divan's  foot  is  sin.'  The  legend  teaches  that  He  subdues  and 
wraps  round  Him  as  a  girdle  the  tiger-like  fury  of  human  passion.  The  guile 
and  malice  of  mankind  He  wears  as  His  necklace,  and  beneath  His  feet  is  for 
ever  crushed  the  monster  of  human  depravity. 

Of  course,  recognizing  the  spirit  of  this  teaching,  it  may  be  allowed  us 
to  doubt  whether  such  explanations  would  ever  have  been  dreamt  of  but  for 
Western  teaching;  and  whether  myths  like  these  are  the  appropriate  means 
for  imparting  this  instruction1. 

The  fact  is  that  we  have  here  the  pre-Aryan  divinity,  half  god,  half  demon, 
coming  forth  from  the  burning-ground  where  he  holds  his  midnight  orgies, 
dancing  in  the  midst  of  his  rabble  rout.  The  commentator  adds  that  since 
Qivan  Himself  and  His  disguised  companion,  though  they  excited  evil  desires 
in  the  poor  Rishis  and  their  wives,  yet  felt  none  themselves,  and  since  no 
sin  was  actually  committed,  there  is  no  room  for  condemnation  of  the  story 
as  a  specimen  of  divine  action2. 


1  I  write  quite  unreservedly,  knowing  full  well  the  courtesy  and  candour  of  my  Caiva  friends, 
who  will  not  question  my  love  for  them,  and  unfeigned  respect  for  their  cherished  convictions. 

2  The  composite  character  of  what  may  be  called  the  Caiva  religion  is  very  marked  ;  it 
has  borrowed  much  from  diverse  sources,  and  is  accordingly  full  of  inconsistencies,  sometimes 
speaking  the  language  of  absolute  pantheism,  and  then  again  seeming  to  grasp  most  firmly 
the  idea  of  a  personal  divinity,  who  is  at  once  the  Creator,  the  Preserver,  and  the  Destroyer 
of  all  things.     The  original  idea  of  Qivan  is  found  in  the  Vedas,  but  the  name  is  simply 
a  euphemism  meaning  '  propitious '  or  '  gracious.'     Another  name  seldom  found  is  Carva, 
'  the  Destroyer.'     It  seems  most  probable  that  with  the  idea  of  Rudra,  the  god  of  the  Storm, 
and  Agni,  the  god  of  Fire,  is  mixed  up  the  notion  of  an  aboriginal  demon  such  as  are  still 
worshipped  in  the  South  of  India.    In  the  hymns  to  CJvan  the  most  incongruous  epithets  are 
applied  and  actions  ascribed  to  Him.     At  one  time  we  see  C.ivan  in  Kailasa,  the  Silver 
Mountain  (NOTE  X),  surrounded  by  all  the  gods  in  awful  state,  supreme  Ruler  of  all  the 
worlds ;  at  another  time  He  is  represented  as  wandering  in  the  jungle  or  from  village  to 
village,  smeared  with  ashes  from  the  burning-ground,  a  horrible  and  disgusting  object.     So 
He  was  reviled  by  Daksha.     He  is  at  once  an  awful  deity,  a  frolicsome  and  mischievous  man 
with  superhuman  powers,  and  a  ferocious  demon ;  and  so  His  £atti,  or  spouse,  who  is  wor- 
shipped under  a  vast  variety  of  names  throughout  all  India,  is  sometimes  the  gracious  and 
beautiful  mother,  and  sometimes  the  fearful  and  malignant  DURGA.     There  is  good  reason 
to  suppose  that  the  worship  of  this  malignant  demoness  may  have  been  an  original  cult  of 
the  pre-Aryan  races  of  India.     In  this  way  every  species  of  inconsistency  is  to  be  found  in 
the  hymns  which  are  sung  in  honour  of  Civan  and  His  spouse.     Wherever  two  views  have 
been  held  with  regard  to  God,  the  C.  aiva  system  asserts  them  both  without  the  least  attempt 
to  reconcile  them  or  qualify  them,  indicating  thereby  the  deep  feeling,  of  which  many  illus- 
trations will  be  found  in  the  translations  of  C.  aiva  poetry,  that  the  thought  of  God  so  tran- 
scends human  intellect  that  all  statements  regarding  Him  contain  some  truth,  while  none 
are  adequate,  so  that  all  may  be  alike  affirmed  or  denied.     There  is  no  doubt  that  the 
Caivites  of  the  South  learnt  the  necessity  of  a  visible  divine  Guru,  an  incarnate  Teacher, 


CITHAMBARAM.  Ixv 

The  goddess  Parvathi  now  descended  upon  the  white  bull;  and  Q'ivan 
joining  her,  they  departed  in  triumph  to  Kailasam. 

Vishnu  was  thus  left  alone  with  Athi-feshan.  Both  of  them  are  over- 
whelmed with  the  glory  of  Qivan's  mystic  dance ;  and  especially  Athi-9eshan 
is  possessed  by  the  one  desire  to  behold  it  again.  Seeing  this  pious  aspiration, 
Vishnu  tells  him  that  he  will  release  him  from  further  service,  his  place  as 
servitor  (couch  and  canopy)  being  occupied  by  his  son,  and  exhorts  him  to 
resort  to  the  northern  hill  of  Kailasam,  there  by  a  life  of  asceticism  to  obtain 
the  favour  from  Qivan  of  this  beatific  vision.  So  the  new  serpent-devotee 
wends  his  way  upward  and  northward,  while  his  mighty  head,  with  its  thousand 
crests,  each  bearing  a  jewel,  diffuses  a  radiance  around  him  that  makes  the  sun 
look  dim,  yet  he  is  prepared  to  lay  aside  these  splendours  and  seek  only  to 
become  the  least  of  Qivan's  devotees.  After  awhile  Qivan  Himself,  assuming 
the  form  of  Brahma  and  riding  upon  a  swan,  the  usual  vehicle  of  that  god, 
drew  near  to  test  the  sincerity  of  the  neophyte,  who  had  now  plunged  into  all 
the  austerities  of  the  Yoga  system.  The  disguised  god  represents  to  Athi- 
9eshan  that  he  has  already  done  enough  to  merit  for  himself  the  delights  of 
Paradise  and  all  the  divine  powers  of  the  most  exalted  of  the  heavenly  beings, 
and  offers  to  him  any  boon  that  he  may  desire.  But  the  reply  is, '  I  desire  not 
the  blessedness  of  any  separate  heaven,  nor  the  miraculous  powers  of  Siddhi ; 
all  that  I  desire  is  to  see  for  ever  the  mystic  dance  of  the  God  of  gods.' 
(Comp.  Song  XXXIV.  28.)  The  pretended  Brahma  argues  with  him,  ridicules 
him,  and  urges  him  to  relinquish  his  pursuit,  but  he  finally  replies:  'Here 
I  abide,  and  if  now  unsuccessful,  I  die  without  the  beatific  sight,  I  shall  pass 
into  other  forms,  and  finally  see  that  which  I  desire.'  Recognizing  his 
immovable  fidelity,  Civan  assumes  His  proper  form,  and,  riding  with  Parvathi 
on  the  milk-white  bull,  draws  nigh  and  lays  His  hand  in  benediction  upon  His 
servant's  head. 

He  then  proceeds  to  instruct  the  new  disciple,  for  such  Athi-9eshan  thus 
becomes.  The  teachings  of  the  God  who  here  assumes  the  character  of  a  guru 


first  of  all  from  Buddhism.  The  most  elaborate  arguments  are  to  be  found  directed  to  the 
establishment  of  the  proposition  that  man  can  only  receive  divine  teaching  from  one  who  is 
both  God  and  man.  This  is  perhaps  the  most  prominent  doctrine  of  Qaivism  :  The  true 
GURU  is  an  incarnation  of  fivan,  (NOTE  IV.)  Another  tenet,  which  the  Pure  Qaivites 
alone  among  Indian  sects  maintain,  is  the  conscious  immortality  of  the  souls  of  the  faithful. 
Ten  different  theories  of  the  heavenly  state  are  recounted  in  the  Civa-Piraga9am,  of  which  the 
last  is  the  authorized  teaching  of  the  Caiva  Siddhanta  philosophy.  3"he  soul  in  Mukti,  or 
the  state  of  release,  retains  its  individual  consciousness,  remains  for  evermore  a  separate 
existence,  sharing  the  blessedness  and  wisdom  of  the  Supreme,  but  unmingled  with  His 
essence.  In  fact,  the  doctrine  held  by  the  Caivites  on  this  head  is  hardly  to  be  distinguished 
from  Christian  teaching.  (NOTE  III.) 

The  prayers  and  hymns  addressed  to  Civan  contemplate  Him  in  every  aspect,  and  are  accord- 
ingly often  exceedingly  inconsistent,  mingling,  as  seem  to  us,  the  most  puerile  conceptions 
with  those  that  are  in  the  highest  degree  exalted.  Again,  the  controversies  of  the  Qaivites 
with  Jains  and  Buddhists  in  the  South  have  led  to  a  very  elaborate  system  of  mystic  interpre- 
tation. Whatever  C,  ivan  does  or  says  has  some  mystic  meaning  ;  such  meaning  being  some- 
times exceedingly  edifying  and  elevated,  but  appearing  very  often  to  be  forced  and  unnatural. 
(See  NOTE  XII.)  One  is  tempted  to  say  that  the  myths  often  obscure  and  even  neutralize 
the  truths  which  they  are  supposed  to  symbolize.  The  C,aivites  are  now  divided  into  several 
sects,  which  agree  in  scarcely  anything  but  the  assertion  of  the  supremacy  of  C.ivan. 

e 


1XV1  NOTE   VII. 

I 

go  back  to  the  origin  of  all  things.  (NOTE  IV.)  The  universe  has  sprung 
into  apparent  existence  from  primeval  Maya,  as  the  result  of  Karma  and  for 
the  sake  of '  souls,'  that  it  may  be  the  scene  of  embodiments  and  of  action  good 
and  evil.  As  an  earthen  vessel  has  the  potter  as  its  first  cause,  the  clay  as  its 
material  cause,  and  as  its  instrumental  cause  the  potter's  staff  and  wheel,  so  the 
universe  has  Maya  for  its  material  cause,  the  Qatti  of  Qivan  for  its  instrumental 
cause,  and  the  Lord  Qivan  Himself  as  its  first  cause.  We  must  note  here, 
however,  that  Maya,  according  to  the  Caiva  system,  is  really  '  matter,'  some- 
thing very  different  from  the  '  Illusion '  of  the  Vedanta  system.  And  now 
Qivan  has  two  forms  or  bodies,  the  one  which  has  parts  and  is  visible,  the 
other  which  is  without  parts,  invisible  and  transcendent.  (Sa-kala  and  Nis/i- 
ka}a.) 

Beyond  these  mystic  bodies  is  His  own  natural  form,  which  infinitely  tran- 
scends them.  It  is  His  essential  form  of  wisdom,  which  is  mere  light  and 
splendour.  He  is  thus  the  supremely  blessed  soul  of  all  things,  and  the  five 
acts  of  destruction,  preservation,  creation,  embodiment,  and  gracious  release 
(NOTE  I)  are  His  ceaseless  mystic  dance.  Of  this  dance  the  sacred  Vedas 
know  the  excellence,  but  are  not  cognizant  of  its  cause,  its  time,  its  place,  its 
full  intention.  In  the  forest  of  Taruvanam  [Taruka],  in  the  midst  of  the  Rishis, 
the  gods  beheld  it;  but,  because  that  is  not  the  world's  centre,  it  trembled 
beneath  His  foot.  In  sacred  Tillai,  which  is  the  exact  centre  of  the  universe, 
shall  this  dance  be  finally  revealed,  and  there  the  God  promises  to  Athi-9eshan 
that  he  shall  again  behold  it. 

'  Meanwhile,'  adds  the  manifested  Qivan, '  that  thou  mayest  make  thy  way 
to  Qithambaram,  it  is  necessary  to  put  off  thy  form  of  Athi-9eshan,  for  the 
inhabitants  of  earth  would  be  affrighted  by  thy  thousand  heads,  and  gleaming 
eyes,  and  expanded  crest.  Thou  shalt  be  born,  or  seem  to  be  born,  of  mortal 
parents,  retaining  in  part  thy  serpent  form.  Then,  descending  into  the  world 
of  dragons,  thou  shalt  make  thy  way  to  where  a  hill  is  seen,  and  a  cave, 
entering  by  the  southern  gate  of  which  thou  shalt  emerge  into  the  groves  of 
Tillai.  There  is  the  original  liiigam,  and  near  to  that  is  the  shrine  which  shall 
be  the  scene  of  my  manifestation.  There,  too,  thou  shalt  find  my  servant  the 
"  Tiger-foot,"  who  is  performing  penance.  Dwell  as  his  companion  in 
the  hermitage,  and  to  you  both  shall  in  due  time  be  accorded  the  vision  for 
which  you  are  longing.' 

Accordingly  Athi-9eshan,  who  has  now  become  a  devotee,  part  man  and 
part  serpent,  under  the  name  of  Patafijali1,  meets  with  the  Tiger-foot,  makes 
for  himself  a  hermitage,  and  plants  a  lingam,  where  he  performs  his  daily 
worship.  The  living  creatures  in  the  wilderness  at  first  were  sore  affrighted : 
'  We  first  saw  the  man  with  a  tiger's  feet,  and  now  we  see  another,  half  dragon 


1  This  claiming  of  PataSjali  as  a  devotee  of  £ivan  indicates  the  reception  on  the  part  of 
the  Qaivite  doctors  of  the  system  of  which  that  great  thinker  was  the  founder.  The  Yogam 
of  Patafijali,  and  the  entire  teaching  of  the  theistic  Sankhya  are  received  by  (Jaivites.  Indeed^ 
in  reading  the  GlTA  we  feel  that,  if  in  place  of  Krishna  we  insert  the  name  of  £ivan,  it  will 
almost  pass  for  a  £aivite  manual.  The  practical  Y5gam,  '  Karma-Yoga,'  is  the  law  of  the 
Siddhantam.  It  may  be  observed  in  passing  that  the  influence  of  the  GTTA  upon  South 
India  as  a  doctrinal  manual  and  as  a  great  and  inspiring  poem  has  been,  and  is,  incalculably 
great. 


MANIKKA-VACAGAR'S  DISPUTATION  WITH  THE  BUDDHISTS.    Ixvii 

and  half  man,'  said  they,  and  fled ;  but  by-and-by,  accustomed  to  the  sight, 
they  roamed  around  the  hermitages  in  perfect  amity. 

The  next  book  of  the  Puranam  expatiates  at  great  length  upon  the  first 
institution,  as  it  would  seem,  of  the  great  festival  still  observed  when  Qivan  is 
supposed  to  dance  in  the  Golden  Hall. 

NOTE    VIII. 
ON  THE  IDEA  OF  BHAKTI=PIETAS  (upts)}. 

Compare  Pope's  Kurral,  Introd.,  p.  vi. 

The  songs  of  the  Qaiva  saints  express  devotion,  humility,  and  love  of 
unspeakable  fervour.  We  are  reminded  of  the  Psalmist's  language  (Ps.  xviii.  i), 
'  I  will  love  Thee,  O  Lord,  my  strength1.' 

This  spirit  of  personal  devotion  is  not  found  (as  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson 
has  taught  us)  in  the  Vedas.  In  fact,  it  seems  to  be  something  pertaining  to 
the  Semitic  religions  especially,  and  possibly  came  into  India  from  the  extreme 
South,  where  Christian  and  other  foreign  teaching  existed  from  the  earliest 
centuries  of  the  Christian  era.  Chaitanya  (A.  D.  1434)  is  generally,  but  quite 
erroneously,  regarded  as  the  great  introducer  into  South  India  of  this  idea  of 
Bhakti ;  but  as  he  taught  in  the  fifteenth  century,  and  Manikka-Vafagar  cannot 
have  lived  at  a  later  period  than  the  ninth,  it  is  to  the  latter  that  perhaps  we  are 
to  attribute  its  general  introduction. 

Bhakli,  or  loving  piety,  is  the  main  idea  of  the  Qaiva  system,  and  the 
fervent  self-negating  love  and  worship  of  Qivan  is  represented  as  including  all 
religion,  and  transcending  every  kind  of  religious  observance ;  and,  since  all 
are  capable  of  this,  men  of  all  castes  can  be  received  as  devotees  and  saints 
in  the  Qaiva  system.  Love  is  the  fulfilment  of  all  laws.  Love  elevates  and 
perfects  all.  (See  Hymn  XXXIV.) 

NOTE    IX. 

MANIKKA-VACAGAR'S   DISPUTATION    WITH    THE    BUDDHISTS   IN    QlTHAMBARAM. 

It  seems  desirable  to  give  a  somewhat  fuller  translation  of  the  sixth  canto 
of  the  Vatha-urar-Puranam,  entitled  '  The  Victory  over  the  Buddhists  in  Dispu- 
tation.' The  story  tells  how  Manikka-Vasagar  was  summoned  from  his 
retreat  to  confront  the  Buddhist  teachers  who  had  come  over  to  Qithambaram 
with  the  king  of  Ceylon.  The  day  of  disputation  arrived.  The  conference 
was  held  in  the  hall  where  the  Buddhists  were  lodged.  We  are  told  that  the 
saint  with  the  3,000  resident  devotees  repaired  to  the  temple,  performed  their 
devout  worship,  implored  the  grace  of  Qivan,  and  then  gathered  in  the  hall  of 
conference.  A  veil  was  put  over  the  saint's  face  that  he  might  not  even 
behold  the  ill-omened  countenances  of  the  heretics  !  He  was  then  seated  on 
a  royal  throne,  while  around  and  behind  him  were  the  faithful  Brahmans  and 


1  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  idea  of  special  devotion  is  expressly  taught  in  the 
G!TA  (whose  date  must  be  sought  somewhere  in  the  first  three  centuries  of  the  Christian  era), 
but  the  devotion  of  the  Qaivite  to  the  Guru — who  is  a  man,  a  holy,  human,  divinely-endowed 
teacher— differs  very  widely  from  this,  or  any  previous  Hindu  conception  of  loving  service; 
still  I  imagine  that  the  GrrX  was  the  source  of  our  sage's  teaching  on  this  subject. 

e  2 


Ixviii  NOTE  IX. 

devotees  of  every  class,  who  had  thronged  in  from  all  the  country  round. 
Amongst  them  the  C;6ra  king  took  his  seat  upon  a  gorgeous  throne,  after  he 
had  duly  paid  homage  at  the  sacred  feet  of  the  saint.  On  the  other  side 
entered  the  Ceylon  king,  who  was  received  by  the  Coran  with  the  utmost 
condescension.  His  tributary  presents  were  accepted  with  many  complimen- 
tary speeches,  and  he  was  invited  to  occupy  a  seat  near  that  of  the  Qoran 
himself. 

The  Buddhist  guru  with  his  disciples  sat  opposite,  and  towering  around 
(presumably  invisible  as  yet)  were  all  the  gods  and  blessed  ones  from  all  the 
worlds.  Even  the  divinities  of  the  Sun  .  and  Moon  were  in  presence  there. 
The  salutation  of  the  Cora  king  to  the  saint  at  the  opening  of  the  conference 
was  ominous:  'It  is  thine,  O  saint  of  sacred  Perun-turrai,  to  establish  the  truth 
of  the  Caiva  wisdom.  Afterwards  it  shall  be  my  care  to  extirpate  these 
Buddhists  ! '  It  is  said  that  these  words  of  the  king  were  heard  by  the  Ceylon 
champions  with  dismay  and  by  the  orthodox  champions  with  delight.  Thus 
encouraged,  the  saint  opened  the  conference  with  no  very  saintly  words  : 
'  O  Buddhan,  who  dost  utter  words  of  guile,  wherefore  art  thou  come?'  The 
foreign  guru  replied  in  no  conciliatory  strain :  '  I  am  come  to  tell  this  town  that 
there  is  no  god  but  Him  whose  enduring  worship  we  perform,  and  to  place  in 
sight  of  all  men,  in  the  very  Golden  Hall  itself,  the  image  of  our  god  Buddha. 
This  is  all  I  seek.'  The  saint,  with  withering  smile,  replied :  '  O  thou  who  hast 
performed  no  austerities  in  any  former  birth,  can  a  hare  become  an  elephant  ? 
But  tell  me,  who  is  this  good  and  mighty  god  of  yours  ?  And  how  shall  souls 
approach  his  feet  ? '  The  topics  then  were  '  God  and  the  way  of  salvation.' 
The  foreign  guru  replied  in  wrath, '  Can  one  show  the  sun's  rays  to  the  blind  ? 
Were  I  to  tell  of  Buddha's  greatness,  I  should  require  many  thousand  tongues. 
But  our  god  has  revealed  to  us  the  good  law  of  the  Pidagam\  in  which  virtue 
is  proclaimed.  In  love  He  has  been  born  in  many  shapes.  He  has  given 
assurance  to  millions  of  souls,  and,  free  from  the  fourfold  evils  of  murder,  theft, 
falsehood,  and  intemperance2,  He  sits  in  majesty  under  an  Arafu3  tree.  The 
"  trouble  of  birth  "  is  coming  into  existence,  and  the  ceasing  of  the  multiform 
cognizance  of  many  things  arising  from  assembling  and  combination  in  the 
womb  of  the  Five  Kandhas  (SKANDHA),  which  urtform  (rupa),  sentience  (vedana), 
sign  (kurrippu;  sanfia),  representation  (bhavanai;  sanskara),  and  consciousness  or 
clear  apprehension  (vinfianam).  And  the  utter  perishing  of  these  is  deliverance 
(moksham)'.  This  exposition  of  the  Buddhist  creed  in  regard  to  God,  the 
universe,  and  salvation,  requires  no  doubt  much  elucidation,  and  many  volumes 
have  been  written  about  it  in  East  and  West.  A  summary  of  it  is  given  in  the 
Sarva-dar9ana-sahgraha4,  though  I  am  not  sure  that  much  light  is  thrown 


1  The  Tri-pitaka  (Tipitaka,  in  Tamil  Pidagam),  '  three  baskets,'  are  three  collections 
regarded  as  canonical  scriptures  by  the  southern  Buddhists.     The  second  of  these  treats  of 
ethics,  and  seems  to  be  especially  indicated  here. 

2  The  prohibitions  of  Buddhism  are  five.     Here  adultery  is  omitted. 

3  This  is  the  Ficus  religiosa,  or  poplar-leaved  fig-tree.     In  Sanskrit  it  is  called  Bodhi,  or 
'  perfect  wisdom,'  because  under  it  Buddha  was  perfected.     Other  names  are  A9vattha  and 
Pippala  (Peepul). 

*  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 


MANIKKA-VA£AGAK'S  DISPUTATION  WITH  THE  BUDDHISTS.     Ixix 

upon  it  in  that  work.  In  Dr.  Earth's  work  on  '  The  Religious  Systems  of 
India1'  fuller  information  is  given,  and  the  authorities  there  referred  to  afford 
the  student  an  opportunity  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  almost  all  that  has  been 
said  and  thought  on  the  subject.  Here  our  one  object  is  to  show  how  the 
native  mind  in  South  India  apprehended  the  system.  Many  of  the  details 
of  this  disputation  are  doubtless  not  to  be  relied  on,  but  they  show  us  what 
the  traditional  belief  is,  and  explain  why  Buddhism  lost  its  hold.  For  indeed, 
though  Buddhists  existed  for  some  centuries  afterwards  in  the  South,  they 
never  recovered  the  blow  inflicted  upon  them  by  the  events  of  which  we  are 
trying  to  gather  up  the  current  traditions.  To  return  to  our  disputants.  The 
saint  smiled  in  derision,  and  looking  into  the  blameless  face  of  the  Qora  king, 
said, '  What  can  I  reply  to  this  Buddhist,  who  in  unconscious  frenzy  utters  such 
words  as  these  ?'  He  then  replied  to  the  foreign  heretic  :  'Thou  hast  told  us 
that  knowledge  appears  and  in  an  instant  of  time  disappears ;  all  is  in  a  cease- 
less flux.  If  so,  before  thou  didst  finish  uttering  forth  thy  words  and  meanings, 
since  thine  understanding  must  have  passed  away,  what  revelation  of  truth  and 
virtue  can  there  be  ?  (Since  all  apprehension  is  transient  and  momentary,  there 
can  be  no  real  knower,  or  knowledge,  or  thing  Known.}  Thus  there  can  be  in  thy 
system  neither  code  of  laws  nor  revelation  of  truth  and  virtue.  Again,  thou 
tellest  us  that  thy  Buddha,  thy  God,  was  born  in  many  successive  shapes. 
How  then  can  one  who  himself  is  subject  to  delusion  and  evil  deliver  others 
from  these?  You  say,  your  Lord  was  guiltless  of  murder  ;  but  if  he  assumed 
all  possible  forms  on  this  earth,  as  you  say,  then  as  a  ravening  tiger  or  as 
a  jackal,  when  he  was  hungry  was  it  grass  that  he  ate,  and  tender  shoots  of 
trees  ?  In  thy  false  creed  thou  tellest  us  of  Five  Kandhas ;  and  that  when  these 
pass  away  the  soul-body  perishes ;  and  that  when  form,  &c.,  cease,  the  soul- 
body  is  no  more.  If  so,  where  is  thy  king,  and  how  could  he  survive  and 
appear  as  saviour  of  many  men  ?  (This  idealism  destroys  lawgiver  and 
deliverer  alike.") 

'  Again,  since  the  embodied  form,  together  with  its  cause  (the  soul  and  its 
deeds),  perishes,  your  king,  who  sits  under  the  Arafu  tree,  is  formless,  is  non- 
existent. So  annihilation  is  your  salvation.  The  destruction  of  the  Five 
Kandhas  is  deliverance ! 

'Yet  again,  you  speak  of  twenty-one  Buddhas,  who  existed  before '  (twenty- 
four  are  generally  given);  'and  you  say  that  each  of  these  in  being  born 
occasioned  the  death  of  his  mother.  Are  such  beings  gods,  and  not  rather 
worthy  of  hell  ?'  (The  reference  here  is  not  clear.) 

The  next  objection  to  the  Buddhistic  system  is  that  it  makes  no  distinction 
between  organized  living  creatures,  their  life  or  soul  being  merely  the  tem- 
porary and  delusive  product  of  the  same  organization.  '  You  also  say  that  the 
only  difference  between  living  creatures  (souls,  lives,  breaths]  is  that  they  are 
formed  of  different  mixtures  of  the  same  four  elements;  yet  in  the  night 
season,  when  thou  wert  asleep,  if  a  serpent  climbed  over  thy  face,  thou 
wouldst  discern  a  difference,  O  silly  reasoner.  Thou  hast  denied  the  exis- 
tence of  any  knowledge  of  spirit  (soul,  life)  beyond  the  form.  When  the  form 


Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 


1XX  NOTE    IX. 

then  has  perished,  how  can  the  life  reappear  under  other  forms  ?  What  and 
where  is  the  Atman,  the  self  ?  What  is  it  that  exists  (the  V7roora<ri?)  when  the 
form  identical  with  the  soul  has  perished  J  ?  You  deny  also  the  existence  of 
the  Fifth  Element,  the  ether,  through  which  sounds  are  transmitted ;  and  you 
say  there  are  no  spaces  not  filled  with  air,  water,  fire,  and  earth.  In  what 
medium  then  do  your  four  elements  combine  to  form  living  beings  ?  Where 
then  is  your  Buddha  (who,  having  gained  Nirvana,  must  be  freed  from  all 
elemental  combinations),  in  his  northern  dwelling  under  the  shade  of  theArafu 
tree  ?  You  deny  also  that  trees  have  souls  ;  and  yet  they  grow2,  and  put  forth 
leaves  by  imbibing  water,  and  become  finally  dry  wood  and  leaves  !  In  them 
souls  of  men  can  obtain  suitable  organisms  for  expiation  of  their  deeds.  You 
say  that  to  kill  anything  is  a  great  crime,  and  yet  you  allow  the  eating  of  the 
flesh  of  animals  which  others  have  slain.  Surely  if  they  kill  for  your  sake,  you 
are  guilty  of  the  murder  which  you  cause.'  (See  Manu  V.  51.)  It  seems  strange 
that  this  accusation  should  apparently  be  true.  The  same  thing  is  referred  to 
in  the  Kurral  (256),  and  it  was  the  source  of  a  good  deal  of  controversy 
between  the  Jains  and  the  Buddhists ;  the  Buddhists  refusing  to  kill,  but  not 
refusing  to  eat  the  flesh  of  the  slain,  while  the  more  consistent  Jains  would 
neither  slay  nor  eat3.  '  Again,  while  the  cause  continues  to  exist,  the  effect  perishes. 
This  is  the  doctrine  of  our  Agamas.  But  with  you  it  seems  that  the  soul's 
perishing  with  the  body  is  its  salvation.  Your  creed  is  that  when  the  Five 
Kandhas  perish  the  soul  is  released.  Tell  me  where  and  what  is  the  released 
soul,  whose  only  existence  was  in  the  momentary  and  fluctional  existence  of 
the  Five  Kandhas.  Surely  form  and  existence  and  deliverance  perish  toge- 
ther ! '  Here  the  Buddhist  guru,  beside  himself  with  rage,  interposed  :  "  Thou 
sayest  that  we  possess  neither  god  nor  salvation.  What  then  is  your  god, 
and  what  is  your  salvation  ? '  To  this  Manikka-Va^agar  replied,  '  Our  God, 
seated  in  the  shade  of  the  beautiful  banyan  tree,  taught  the  laws  of  right; 
and  many  have  beheld  His  beauty  as  He  performed  the  mystic  dance.  His 
adornment  is  the  sacred  ashes.  Umai  is  the  half  of  His  form.  He  is  full  of 
grace ;  who  can  worthily  proclaim  our  God  ?  In  Tillai's  beauteous  Golden 
Hall,  He  dwells,  wearing  as  a  jewel  the  crescent  moon.  Is  there  any  end  to 
the  story  of  His  greatness  ? '  Here  the  Buddhist  interposed,  as  indeed  seems 
quite  natural,  with  the  inquiry  :  '  Whither  tends  all  this  verbiage  ?  Answer  me 
plainly  these  questions  :  Your  God,  as  He  sits  beneath  the  shade  of  the  banyan, 
has  a  rosary  and  repeats  His  prayers.  Is  it  because  He  strives  to  think  of 
some  other  gracious  deity  beyond  Himself  to  whom  He  prays  ?  You  tell  me 
He  dances  in  Tillai.  Does  one  dance  for  the  edification  of  a  select  company 
of  the  wise,  or  to  gratify  one's  own  phantasy  ?  Again,  "  our  God  wears  ashes 
on  His  sacred  body,"  you  say,  with  proud  complacency.  Is  it  because  even 
white  ashes  look  pure  upon  His  dark  red  skin  ?  Then  you  tell  me  that  half 


1  See  Oldenberg,  'Buddha,'  Hoey's  translation,  p.  29,  &c.  (Williams  and  Norgate,  1882), 
and  p.  243.     What  appears  to  man  to  be  his  body  is  in  truth  '  the  action  of  his  past  state, 
which  then,  assuming  a  form  realized  through  his  endeavour,  has  become  endowed  with 
a  tangible  existence.' 

2  Sir  M.  Monier- Williams,  'Buddhism,'  p.  no.     Professor  Rhys  Davids  on  Buddhism, 
and  the  Bishop  of  Colombo's  work  on  the  same  subject  are  indispensable. 

3  Comp.  Ji.  Chin.  I.  iv.  179,  p.  59,  where  this  objection  is  urged  from  &Jain  point  of  view. 


MANIKKA-VA^AGAR'S  DISPUTATION  WITH  THE  BUDDHISTS.    Ixxi 

His  form  is  woman!  Who  in  the  world  has  ever  heard  of  half  a  woman? 
And  if  Umai  thus  shares  His  being,  it  is  indeed  to  be  wondered  at  that  your 
hermits  leave  wife  and  home  to  dwell  quite  alone  in  the  wilderness!'  But  the 
mocking,  cynical  laugh  of  the  Buddhist  company  was  too  much  for  the  Qaiva 
champion,  who  scornfully  interposed,  '  Thou  art  unworthy  to  listen  to  high 
mysteries,  the  knowledge  of  which  constitutes  the  blessedness  of  these  assem- 
bled devotees.  None  can  know  these  things  who  have  not  first  performed 
penitential  acts  to  which  thou  art  a  stranger.  Yet  know  thou  that  our  God 
carries  the  prayer-rosary  in  order  that  all  His  saints  may  from  His  example 
learn  to  pray  and  mortify  themselves.  The  rosary  is  like  the  weapon  in  the 
Master's  hand,  with  which,  Himself  unassailable,  He  is  teaching  His  neophytes 
to  make  war.  Thou  sayest  that  our  God  dances  as  dance  the  wanton  ones  of 
earth,  that  eyes  of  flesh  may  see  Him.  Nay,  but  as  the  fire  runs  through  the 
fuel  uncontaminated,  so  doth  our  God  pervade  all  souls  and  all  bodies  with  His 
mystic  energies  :  He  dances  in  the  universe  and  in  the  soul.  You  ask  about 
the  sacred  ashes.  He  wears  them  to  assuage  the  sorrows  of  all  souls.  This 
act  of  His  is  like  the  nursing  mother's  taking  medicines  herself  to  heal  the 
maladies  of  her  tender  infant.  And  thou  askest  why  Civan  shares  Umai's  form. 
The  answer  is  that  to  give  mystic  wisdom  to  His  worshippers  He  assumes  this 
mystic  twofold  form.  Qivan  the  Supreme,  who  rides  upon  the  mighty  bull, 
commingles  with  the  souls  of  men  like  the  fragrance1  in  the  flowers;  but  this 
thou  knowest  not.  He  is  the  First ;  He  is  the  Yogi ;  He  is  the  Enjoyer ;  He 
is  the  Formless  ;  He  is  the  Splendour ;  He  is  the  Being  of  many  forms  ; 
He  is  the  Sea  of  delight.  Who  knows  His  crown,  who  knows  the  sole  of  His 
foot,  save  that  He  fills  the  Golden  Hall  where  virtue  rules,  and  sorrow  is 
not?'  This  closes  the  controversy,  but  the  sequel  as  given  in  the  legend  is 
stranger  still. 

When  we  sum  up  this  controversy  it  seems  as  though  strict  logic  had  no 
place  in  it,  and  the  result  is  made  to  depend  upon  the  double  miracle,  the 
infliction  of  dumbness  upon  the  Buddhist  disputants  and  the  restoration  of 
speech  to  the  daughter  of  the  Ceylon  king2.  Each  party  has  expounded  his 
tenets  and  reviled  those  of  his  opponent;  but  the  only  thing  that  looks  like 
real  reasoning  is  Manikka-Vafagar's  treatment  of  the  Buddhist  idea  of  the 
Kandhas.  It  has  been  too  much  the  custom  in  India  to  hide  poverty  of  thought 
under  a  multitude  of  high-sounding  words,  and  to  regard  any  explanation  that 
is  not  absolutely  absurd  as  a  proof.  The  Kandhas^  or  aggregates,  represent  no 
facts  or  realities,  but  imaginary  states  or  conditions  of  finite  existence,  and, 
according  to  the  popular  view  of  the  case,  the  whole  theory  means  this  :  there 
is  an  unreal  something,  not  embodied,  not  permanent,  indeed  not  really  exis- 
tent, to  which  clings  the  responsibility  of  certain  deeds,  how  done,  or  by  whom, 


1  Kandam  in  Tamil  (Sans.  GANDHA)  means  also  fragrance.    Sweet  odours  are  reckoned  to 
be  five,  the  pafScha-Kandham.     It  seems  that  there  is  an  allusion  to  this  here.     The  five 
Kandhas  (Pali  for  Sans.  SKANDHA)  would  be  unintelligible  to  Tamil  people,  and  the  general 
idea  among  the  vulgar  was  that  the  Buddhists  taught  that  the  universe  was  formed  from  com- 
binations of  odours !     Compare  Sarva-dar9ana-sangraha,  ch.  ii.  p.  22,  Kechana  Bauddha,  &c. 
The  Tamil  student  should  read  laexfKSusxfoj  (XXX). 

2  She  is  introduced  in  Song  XII,  as  the  respondent.     See  note  there. 


Ixxii  NOTE  IX. 

or  when,  is  entirely  uncertain ;  and  this  shadow  of  being  must  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  expiating  or  working  out  the  results  of  these  deeds,  and  therefore  this 
EGO,  without  fixed  principle,  or  substratum  of  existence,  or  soul,  or  body, 
obtains  in  this  world  an  embodiment.  Of  this  the  first  element  is  (inform  ; 
the  second  is  (2)  sensation ;  the  third  is  (name  or)  (3)  sign  (or  characteristic 
qualities);  the  next  is  the  (4)  deeds  which  determine  the  faculties  and  disposi- 
tions of  the  mind ;  the  last  is  (5)  individual  consciousness.  These  elements 
combine,  arrange,  and  rearrange  themselves,  suffering  infinite  modifications,  till 
death  dissolves  the  bond.  If  Nirvana  has  not  been  obtained,  and  so  another 
metempsychosis  is  necessary,  what  survives. — the  deeds  without  the  doer, — 
instantaneously  receives  another  embodiment,  and  so  on  until  at  length  the 
deeds  have  been  atoned  for ;  and,  as  it  necessarily  follows,  the  shadow  of  being 
is  annihilated ;  and,  as  the  whole  universe  is  compounded  of  the  same  Kandhas, 
it  follows  that  there  is  in  reality  no 'god,  no  soul,  and  of  course  no  immortality, 
nothing  in  fact  but  appearance  and  sensation.  As  presented  in  Tamil  writings, 
the  whole  system  seems  fragmentary. 

Manikka-Va9agar  presses  this  upon  his  opponent,  who  has  nothing  to  say 
in  defence  or  explanation,  but  reviles  the  Qaiva  mythology,  the  origin  of  which 
he  finds  in  the  Vedas  themselves.  Here  the  Buddhist  seems  to  have  had  surer 
ground  to  tread  upon,  and  the  only  reply  that  was  possible  to  Mauikka-V^agar 
was  to  explain  away  everything  as  allegorical  and  mystical.  These  explana- 
tions are  poetical,  but  very  far-fetched,  and  historically  find  no  sanction  in  the 
original  myths.  They  are  ingenious,  but  adapted  only  to  the  comprehension  of 
a  refined  and  select  body  of  the  initiated :  to  the  world  the  system  is  one 
of  puerile  idolatries  and  superstitions.  Such  at  least  was  the  Buddhist's  idea.  It 
will  be  noted  that  each  party  claimed  for  its  master  the  attribute  of  '  Revealer 
of  Virtue.'  Buddha  under  the  Bodhi  tree,  and  Qivan  under  the  Ala  tree,  both 
taught  the  ancient  law  of  right,  and  on  this  matter  no  controversy  arose.  The 
Tamilians  are  right  in  declaring  that  the  morality  of  Buddhism  is  essentially 
that  of  the  Upanishads  except  in  the  matter  of  forbidding  sacrifice;  and  in 
regard  to  the  last  point  the  fact  that  the  Buddhist  sanctioned  the  eating  of  the 
flesh  of  animals,  though  he  himself  would  not  slay  them,  overbalanced  in 
the  mind  of  the  Qaivites  all  the  ethic  excellence  of  their  system  (Kurra[, 
ch.  xxxiii).  It  will  be  apparent  that  the  victory  of  the  sage  was  one  of 
sentiment  and  of  authority,  but  not  in  any  way  of  logic  or  learning *. 


1  Comp.  Lyric  XII  in  the  Tiruva^agam  :  '  The  Sacred  C.aral,'  and  notes. 

There  are  three  Tamil  works  of  Jain  or  Buddhist  origin  which  throw  great  light  upon  these 
poems.  These  are  (i)  the  Jivaga  Chintamani ;  (2)  the  C.  ilapp-athigaram ;  and  (3)  the 
Mani-Megalai.  These  have  only  very  recently  been  made  thoroughly  accessible  to  Tamil 
students  by  the  labours  of  Ve.C.ami-nathaiyar,the  very  learned  head  pandit  of  the  Kombakonam 
Government  College.  From  these  works  many  sentences  may  be  extracted  which  have  been 
the  germ  of  longer  passages  in  these  poems,  and  in  other  better  known  Tamil  classics ;  but  it 
is  especially  in  the  epithets  applied  to  the  Supreme  that  a  very  interesting  correspondence  can 
be  traced. 

The  condition  of  the  Tamil  lands  at  the  time  when  our  sage  flourished  can  best  be  realized 
by  a  study  of  the  latter  two  of  the  works  we  have  mentioned.  There  seems  to  have  been 
a  most  remarkable  mixture  in  the  south  of  C.aivism,  Jainism,  Buddhism,  and  the  ancient 
demonolatry.  The  charity  and  piety  of  the  Buddhist  teachers  seems  to  have  been  acknowledged 


CIVAN    ENTHRONED   ON    THE    SILVER    MOUNTAIN.          Ixxiii 

NOTE   X. 
QIVAN  ENTHRONED  ON  THE  SILVER  MOUNTAIN. 

'Qivan  sat  upon  His  throne,  and  on  His  left  side  was  with  Him  His  gracious 
energy,  the  world's  mother,  the  goddess  Parvathi.  He  is  from  eternity  free 
from  all  impurity,  the  Everlasting,  the  All-Pervader,  possessed  of  all  wisdom, 
all  pre-eminence,  and  all  spontaneous  grace.  Through  His  infinite  compassion 
towards  souls,  for  which  they  can  render  Him  no  return,  He  ever  performs, 
without  performance,  the  acts  of  creation,  protection,  destruction,  veiling  and 
dispensing  grace.  He  is  the  first  and  only  God,  having  one  sacred  face 
and  three  eyes,  which  are  the  glowing  splendours  of  the  sun,  the  moon,  and 
the  god  of  fire.  His  crest  of  matted  hair  (east—,  Sans.  JATA)  is  crowned  with 
the  Ganges,  the  crescent  moon,  and  the  Kondrai  (cassia)  garland.  His  sacred 
ears  are  adorned  with  earrings  of  conch-shell  and  flower-petals  (Q@n&).  His 
throat  is  black  with  the  poison  churned  out  from  the  milky  sea.  (See  notes  to 
Lyric  XII.)  His  sacred  hands  grasp,  one  the  antelope,  and  one  the  axe ;  one 
gives  the  sign  of  safety,  and  the  fourth  assurance  of  gifts  of  grace.  His  body, 
ruddy  like  coral,  is  besmeared  with  sacred  ashes.  His  breast  is  adorned  with 
the  white  investing  thread  and  necklaces  consisting  of  the  bones  of  innumer- 
able Brahmas  and  Vishnus  and  the  skulls  of  Brahmas  of  innumerable  aeons. 
He  has  girt  Himself  with  the  tiger's  skin  (NOTE  VII).  His  waist  is  resplendent 
with  dagger  and  girdle.  His  feet,  like  red  lotus  flowers,  tinkle  with  the  heroic 
anklets  and  sounding  bells.  Such  is  the  body  that  He  wears  as  Qri-Kanthar 
(He  of  the  auspicious  throat}.  He  sits  on  the  silver  hill  of  Kaildsam,  whose 
innumerable  white  peaks  are  adorned  with  divers  jewels.  There  in  a  shrine  of 
ruddy  gold  He  gleams,  while  His  crowding  hosts  make  music  with  innumerable 
instruments.  Many  on  either  side  wave  the  white  Qamaram  (the  white  tail  of 
the  Yak,  or  Bos  grunniens\  and  many  others  wave  flower-twined  fans.  The 
heavenly  musicians  and  choristers  of  every  degree  sing  in  sweet  harmony. 
The  leaders  of  His  hosts, — their  frames  dissolved  in  ecstasy  like  wax  in  fire, 


on  all  sides,  and  in  many  respects  left  nothing  untaught  that  the  Tamil  mind  considered 
necessary.  And  the  doctrine  of  the  metempsychosis  taught  by  all  of  these  was  really  and 
essentially  one  and  the  same.  At  the  same  time  the  fancy  of  these  Jain  and  Buddhistic 
authors  lead  them  to  depict  many  scenes  which  are  altogether  inconsistent  with  C.aivite 
opinions.  The  way  in  which  the  heroes  and  heroines  in  these  romantic  epics  are  permitted 
to  see,  as  in  a  mirror,  the  whole  history  of  their  former  embodiments,  and  thus  to  trace 
out  the  causes  of  their  present  sufferings  and  struggles  is  very  beautiful ;  but  of  this  idea 
our  bard  seems  to  have  had  no  cognizance.  It  is  a  very  remarkable  circumstance  that  over 
both  Jainism  and  Buddhism  the  C.aiva  Siddhantam  gained  so  complete  a  victory.  These 
three  authors  have  been  for  ages  almost  obsolete  throughout  the  Tamil  country,  and  this 
is  not  owing  simply  to  their  obscurity  and  artificial  character,  but  to  the  victory  gained  over 
those  systems  by  the  energetic  propagators  of  C.  aivism.  It  is  much  to  be  wished  that  these 
Tamil  writings  should  be  carefully  compared  with  the  Buddhist  Jatakas,  and  the  tales  current 
among  the  Jains.  The  machinery  of  these  poems  is  quite  different  from  anything  we 
find  elsewhere  in  Tamil  literature.  Fairies,  persons  possessed  of  magic  powers, — ;wonderful 
and  mysterious  manifestations, — are  recorded  in  every  canto,  and  we  are  reminded  rather 
of  the  Arabian  Nights  than  of  any  of  the  Pauranic  legends.  It  must,  however,  be  admitted 
that  the  morality  is  generally  of  a  high  order,  although  perhaps  differing  essentially  from  that 
of  the  Kurral,  and  still  more  from  that  of  the  Christian  system. 


Ixxiv  NOTE    XI. 

their  quivering  bodies  thrilled  in  every  part  with  joy,  while  rapture  fills  them 
as  the  torrent  from  the  open  sluice,  plunging  into  the  very  gulf  of  delight, — were 
dancing  and  singing  before  His  face.  The  ascetics,  hands  clasped  above  their 
heads,  were  reciting  the  Upanishads  which  are  the  heads  of  the  Vedas. 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Indra  with  the  other  gods  stood  afar  off,  kept  back  by 
the  wand  of  the  sacred  Nandi,  and,  with  hands  upon  their  mouths,  humbly 
made  known  their  wants  to  Him  who  sat  upon  the  throne.' 

I  have  translated  this  literally  from  the  introduction  to  the  Periya  Puranam 
in  order  to  show  the  mythological  conception  entertained  by  the  Qaivas  of  the 
object  of  their  worship.  Nothing  can  be  nobler  and  more  spiritual  than 
the  accounts  found  in  many  of  their  writings  of  PATHI  (the  Lord);  but  mingled 
with  everything  are  the  incongruous  conceptions,  a  few  of  which  are  here 
shadowed  forth.  In  such  descriptions  every  legend  is  introduced,  every  form 
in  which  the  God  is  anywhere  worshipped  is  brought  in,  and  the  result  often  to 
our  minds  is  inexpressibly  grotesque.  Yet  for  every  particular  an  explanation 
is  offered,  mystic  meanings  are  given,  and  the  whole  is  resolved  into  a  series 
of  allegories  which  are  supposed  to  teach  the  gracious  operations  of  Qivan, 
the  Lord  of  all.  In  reading  these  legends  it  is  necessary  to  keep  always  in 
memory  this  twofold  character  of  the  religious  system  of  South  India.  Gross 
and  ridiculous  representations  (so  they  strike  the  foreigner)  are  found  in 
juxtaposition  with  refined,  pathetic,  devout,  and  even  sublime  expressions. 
This  is  peculiarly  the  case  in  the  lyrics  of  the  profound  enthusiast  Manikka- 
Vajagar.  The  Qivan  here  pictured  was  seemingly  always  before  the  sage's  eye. 

NOTE   XI. 

THE  QAIVA  SIDDHANTA  SYSTEM  OF  PHILOSOPHY  AND  RELIGION  IN 
SOUTH  INDIA. 

The  (jaiva  Siddhanta  system  is  the  most  elaborate,  influential,  and  un- 
doubtedly the  most  intrinsically  valuable  of  all  the  religions  of  India.  It  is 
peculiarly  the  South-Indian,  and  Tamil,  religion ;  and  must  be  studied  by  every 
one  who  hopes  to  understand  and  influence  the  great  South-Indian  peoples. 
The  Vaishnava  sect  has  also  many  influential  followers  in  the  Tamil  lands, 
but  these  are  chiefly  immigrants  from  the  North.  Qaivism  is  the  old  prehistoric 
religion  of  South  India,  essentially  existing  from  pre-Aryan  times,  and  holds 
sway  over  the  hearts  of  the  Tamil  people.  But  this  great  attempt  to  solve  the 
problems  of  God,  the  soul,  humanity,  nature,  evil,  suffering,  and  the  unseen 
world,  has  never  been  fully  expounded  in  English.  Its  text-books  (probably 
its  sources)  exist  in  Tamil  only,  and  in  high  Tamil  verse,  which  is  often  made 
of  set  purpose  obscure  and  difficult.  (Classical  Tamil  is  very  little  studied, 
yet  this  key  alone  can  unlock  the  hearts  of  probably  ten  millions  of  the  most 
intelligent  and  progressive  of  the  Hindu  races.) 

In  a  period  quite  antecedent  to  all  historic  data,  the  native  Dravidian 
religion  was  a  kind  of  Caivism.  It  had  peculiar  forms  of  sacrifice,  ecstatic 
religious  dances,  rites  of  demon  worship,  and  other  ceremonies  which  still 
exist  among  the  villagers  of  the  extreme  South1,  and  more  or  less  among  the 


1  See  Pope's  Ndladi,  16. 


Till:    TAIVA    SIDDHANTA    SYSTKM    OK    IMIIL(JSO1'1IY.  IxXV 

rural  population  everywhere.  Much  of  this  may  be  traceable  to  'ancestor 
worship.'  (Comp. Dr. Charles/ A  Critical  History  of  a  Future  Life/  pp.  19-40.)  In 
process  of  time  northern — Aryan,  Vedic,  Brahmanical — influences  were  brought 
to  bear  upon  these  original  forms  of  worship,  and  those  who  introduced  the 
Vedic  religion  into  the  South  found  a  place  for  the  superstitions  of  the  aborigines 
in  their  own  system.  The  inhabitants  of  South  India  adopted  to  a  great  extent 
the  social  institutions,  the  myths,  and  forms  of  worship  of  the  Aryan  settlers. 
In  the  Vedas  Qivan  is  not  named,  but  the  god  Rudra,  the  god  of  storms  and 
tempests,  seems  to  have  been  the  type  of  a  divinity  most  in  unison  with  the  ideas 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  South,  who  probably  came  originally  from  Central 
Asia,  and  brought  with  them  their  Scythian  divinity,  who  was  cruel,  and  was 
worshipped  with  rude  and  cruel  ceremonies.  Rudra-Civan  became  therefore 
the  type  of  the  divinity,  as  the  destroyer.  In  process  of  time  Buddhism  and 
the  Jain  system  found  their  way  into  the  South,  propagated  by  zealous  and  able 
men,  and  thus  undoubtedly  a  sofier  and  more  genial  character  was  imparted  to 
the  whole  of  South  India.  Meanwhile  on  the  eastern  coast  Christianity  was 
introduced  by  the  Nestorians,  and  spread  abroad  very  rapidly,  becoming  widely 
known  and  exerting  great  influence  even  where  it  did  not  make  converts.  It 
is  undoubtedly  the  fact  that  these  Christian  influences  pervaded  the  whole  South. 
Muhammadanism  also  in  various  directions  at  a  later  period  entered  the  Tamil 
land,  and  exerted  great  influence  over  the  thinkers  in  those  regions.  Thus  the 
elements  out  of  which  the  present  and  finished  Qaivism  of  the  South  has  been 
evolved  are  numerous  and  diverse.  It  must  also  be  noticed  that  since  the 
twelfth  century  the  Vaishnava  system  has  been  a  formidable  rival  of  Caivism, 
and  the  rivalry  has  tended  to  develope  and  systematize  the  dogmatic  parts  of 
the  system  most  decidedly.  We  have  now  to  do  with  the  historic  beginnings 
of  South-Indian  Qaivism.  A  sage  from  the  North,  whose  name  was  Kumarila 
Bhatta,  in  the  eighth  century  came  from  Behar  and  taught  the  existence  of 
a  personal  deity  in  opposition  to  the  Buddhists.  His  disciple  was  the  very 
celebrated  sage  Qankara  Acharya,  who  is  the  father  of  religious  philosophy  in 
the  South.  Various  sects  claim  him  as  their  founder,  but  he  certainly  was 
a  Caivite,  and  is  regarded  as  an  incarnation  of  Civan  Himself. 

The  great  revival  and  spread  however  of  Qaivism  is  due  to  certain  saints 
or  devotees  who  were  men  of  great  devotion,  unwearied  activity,  and  remark- 
able power.  The  first  of  these  was  Manikka-Vagagar,  whose  date  is  uncertain, 
but  may  reasonably  be  assigned  to  the  tenth  century  A.  D.,  or  earlier.  Probably 
about  a  century  later  arose  ftana  Sambandhar  and  the  various  lesser  devotees 
whose  legends  are  collected,  amplified,  and  idealized  in  the  Periya  Puranam. 
Some  notice  of  these  is  essential  to  a  clear  view  of  our  subject.  The  next  stage 
in  the  history  is  the  rise  of  the  great  philosophical  school  called  the  C/AIVA  SID- 
DHANTA system.  These  sages  were  fourteen  in  number,  and  are  called  the 
Santana  gurus  ('  succession  of  teachers ').  The  only  date  which  appears  to  be 
reliable  is  that  given  by  one  of  these,  LJmapathi,  in  a  polemical  treatise.  He 
wrote  in  1313.  Thus  the  early  fourteenth  century  was  remarkable  for  the 
existence  of  a  most  able  and  zealous  band  of  philosophical  C/aivites,  whose 
influence  still  pervades  the  land.  Their  system  is  called  the  Pathi-pafu-pafam. 
Here  Pathi  is  the  Lord  or  Supreme  Being,  Pagu  is  the  soul,  and  Pagam  is  the 


Ixxvi  NOTE   XII. 

bond;  and  on  the  interpretation  of  these  three  words  everything  depends. 
The  Lord  of  course  is  C/ivan,  and  the  attributes  with  which  He  is  invested  are 
very  remarkable.  In  the  C/aivite  catechism  the  question  occurs, '  What  is  Pathi  ? ' 
and  the  answer  is,  '  He  is  the  eternal,  all-pervading,  all-wise,  eternally  blessed, 
absolutely  independent  Creator  of  all,  who  is  from  all  eternity  free  from  taint  of 
evil.'  One  of  the  most  valuable  of  the  text-books  of  this  system  is  the  Tiru- 
arul-payan,  '  Fruit  of  Divine  Grace.'  (NOTES  II,  IV,  VII.) 

NOTE   XII. 
THE  THREE  CAIVA  CATEGORIES  (PADARTHA). 

In  the  first  quatrain  of  his  greatest  work  (the  Civa-Piraga9am),  Umapathi, 
the  ablest  of  the  Qaiva  schoolmen,  throws  down  the  gauntlet  and  challenges 
the  teachers  of  all  the  Hindu  schools,  declaring  that  the  real  and  only  intention 
of  all  the  Vedas  and  other  sacred  writings  is  summed  .up  in  the  three  mystic 
words  PATHI  (the  Lord),  PA9U  (the  flock),  and  PA9AM  (the  bond).  These  are 
the  three  categories  of  the  £atva  Siddhanta  system.  Though  this  system 
received  its  final  developement  some  centuries  after  our  sage,  implicitly  he  held 
its  principles,  and  it  is  necessary  for  the  illustration  of  these  poems  and  legends 
to  bring  together,  connect,  and  illustrate  the  main  dogmas  of  that  elaborate, 
thoughtful,  and  influential  religious  philosophy  which  has  been  evolved  in 
connection  with  these  words. 

The  three  eternal  entities  of  the  system  are  (i)  the  LORD,  who  is  C;ivan 
Himself;  (2)  the  aggregate  of  all  souls  or  lives  that  constitutes  C/ivan's  FLOCK, 
which,  by  His  grace,  He  wills  to  conduct  to  the  blessedness  of  final  disentangle- 
ment from  all  embodiments ;  and  (3)  the  BOND,  or  the  sum  total  of  all  those 
elements  which  bind  souls  and  hinder  them  from  finding  release  in  union  with 
the  '  Lord.'  These  three — Pathi,  Pafu,  Pa^am — are  equally  eternal,  existing 
unchanged  and  undiminished  through  successive  aeons.  The  idea  of  the 
'  Lord '  is  a  philosophical  refinement  of  that  of  the  Qivan  of  the  older  myth- 
ology. Among  other  titles  given  to  Rudra  we  find  that  of  Pafunam-pati 
('  Lord  of  the  flocks '),  and  from  that  has  been  evolved  the  ingenious  allegory 
on  which  this  system  is  founded.  Umapathi's  doctrine  in  regard  to  the  '  Lord ' 
is  set  forth  in  many  quatrains  of  his  text-book,  the  admirable  C/iva-Piragagam 
(I.  i,  pp.  59-63).  This  is  the  sum  of  his  theology  as  to  this  topic  :— 

i.  Pathi  is  the  Supreme  Being; 

ii.  He  is  neither  permanently  manifested,  nor  unmanifested ; 
iii.  He  is  without  qualities  or  distinguishing  marks1; 
iv.  He  is  free  from  all  impurity ; 

v.  He  is  absolutely  one ; 
vi.  He  is  eternal ; 

vii.  He  is  the  source  of  wisdom  to  innumerable  souls ; 
viii.  He  is  not  subject  to  fluctuations ; 
ix.  He  is  immaterial  (indiscerptible) ; 

x.  He  is  the  essence  of  bliss ; 


1  This  is  the  diroios  of  Philo.     See  Inge's  Bampton  Lectures,  1899. 


THE   THREE   CAIVA   CATEGORIES.  Ixxvii 

xi.  He  is  difficult  of  access  to  the  perverse,  but  the  final  goal  of  those  that 
truly  worship  Him  ; 

xii.  He  is  infinitely  small  and  infinitely  great ; 

xiii.  He  is  the  true  Qivan,  or  '  blessedness.' 

The  second  of  these  statements  is  thus  explained  :  Whatever  has  a  visible 
form  must  be  subject  to  the  laws  of  production,  maintenance,  and  decay  ; 
therefore  the  Supreme  is  without  visible  form.  On  the  other  hand,  that  which 
has  no  form  by  which  it  can  become  manifest  is  a  mere  fancy,  like  the  '  horn 
of  a  hare '  or  '  flowers  of  the  atmosphere.'  But  Pathi  is  real  and  makes  Himself 
known  to  souls.  This  will  be  further  explained  in  connection  with  another 
part  of  the  subject. 

Civan  as  thus  described  is  said  to  be  Nish-kala,  i.e.  without  parts  or 
adjuncts,  perfect  in  Himself,  the  absolute  Lord.  But  He  is  capable  of  manifes- 
tation, and  in  order  to  energize  in  souls,  and  in  the  various  constituents  of  that 
eternal  aggregate  of  impurity  which  constitutes  the  bond,  He  assumes  a  Qa-kata 
nature,  i.  e.  one  composed  of  a  species  of  spiritual  body. 


We   here   append  Chapters  I,   II  of  Tiru-arul-payan,  which   are  full  of 

interest : — 

CHAPTER  I. 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  SUPREME  LORD  :    PATHI. 

The  Disciple  asks  : 
What  is  Divan's  (Pathi,  the  LORD'S)  essential  nature1  ? 

I. 

The  Guru  answers : 

Like  the  vowel  A2,  wisdom's  self,  the  matchless  KING, 
everywhere3  abides,  and  all  things  fills. 

Commentary.  The  vowel  letter  A  is  understood  in  all  letters,  and  is  their  life ;  so  the 
matchless  LORD  fills  all  souls,  Himself  unchanged,  and  is  their  life. 

Summary.  Here  is  a  statement  of  (l )  the  existence  of  the  King ;  and  of  (2)  His  insepar- 
able union  with  all  souls  (all  that  lives). 


If  the  LORD  be  thus  beyond  the  reach  of  mind,  speech,  and  touch,  how  can  souls  ^be 
freed  from  pollution  *  and  obtain  deliverance  ? 

II. 
That  souls6  may  reach  His  state,  His  Energy*  gathers  them  in. 

Our  LORD  is  (nevertheless)  One  and  Indivisible. 
Com.  All  souls  are  destined  by  Grace  to  dwell  at  length  within  the  abode  of  pure  and 


1  Tan-iyalbu  [=  Sans.  TATTVA-SUBHAVA]  £<*«B/?<usi)L/. 

4  '  Vowel '  and  '  life '  are  in  Tamil  the  same  word  :  ojiSf.     This  imitates  Tiruvalluvar's 
Kurral,  I.    See  Pope's  Kurral,  p.  184. 

3  Alike  in  sentient  and  non-sentient  being :  ft-g^ga*®  80$\Qinl>.     See  Unmai-Vilakkam,  30. 

*   Sans.  MALA-PARIPAKAM,  PAKVAM  :    uxsaufiaib. 

5  iDOTgjinJf,  lit.  'ABIDING-SOULS.'     These  change  not  forms  as  bodies  do, — are  indiscerp- 
tible.    See  T.  A.  P.,  p.  Hi. 

6  Sans.  C.  AKTI  :  #^.   Her  gracious  operation  is  explained  by  Umapathi  in  his  Chapter  IV; 
see  p.  xlviii,  and  NOTE  XIII,  p.  Ixxxii. 


Ixxviii  NOTE  XII. 

infinite  wisdom ;   and  this  is  effected  by  the  ENERGY  of  Qivan,  called  Para-^atti l,  which 
abides  in  Him,  inseparable  from  Himself,  and  is  the  instrument  of  His  gracious  operation. 

Sum.  In  this  couplet  it  is  taught  (i)  that  the  LORD  exists  in  oneness  with  an  Energy 
(Catti) ;  and  (2)  that  this  Energy  bears  the  form  of  Grace. 


'Is  your  LORD  then  great  and  glorious? 

III. 
In  greatness,  subtile  nature,  exceeding  grace,  and  precious  boon  He  grants 

He  is  the  INCOMPARABLE. 

Com.  There  is  nothing  to  which  He  can  be  likened  in  regard  to  (i)  His  infinite  great- 
ness, which  is  beyond  human  thought,  (2)  His  minutely  penetrating,  all-pervasive  subtilty", 
which  unseen  carries  on  the  five  mysterious  operations,  His  boundless  grace,  and  the  wondrous 
gifts  thereby  bestowed  on  devout  souls. 

Sum.  Here  the  incomparable  greatness  of  the  LORD  is  asserted. 
\Kurral,  7.]  

Why  call  Him  the  Incomparable  ?    Is  He  not  one  of  three  ?  • 

IV. 

He  creates,  preserves,  and  to  the  power  of  Maya  all  consigns : 
He  is  the  Refuge  that  ne'er  departs. 

Com.  The  Supreme  Lord  '  CREATES  '  (or  evolves)  the  world  and  its  phenomena  by  the 
instrumentality  of  Brahma,  His  first  creation.  He  sustains  them  through  Vishnu,  His  next 
creation.  In  the  end  He  will  '  DESTROY '  (or  involve)  the  phenomenal  universe  by  causing 
it  to  be  merged  in  Maya  (  —  chaos).  He  Himself,  Refuge  of  all  souls,  nevermore  departs. 

Sum.  Here  it  is  shown  that  it  is  He  who  performs  the  three  works  of  creation,  preserva- 
tion, and  '  DESTRUCTION.' 

[£iva-fiana-bodham,  Aph.  I.     NOTE  XIV.] 


Is  He  Formless,  or  has  He  Form,  or  is  He  at  once  the  Formless  and  manifested  in  Form  ? 

V. 

He  is  Formless  and  has  Form.     To  those  who  know  Him 
He  has  the  Form  of  Wisdom. 

Com.  His  formless  Essence  is  fourfold  :  £ivan,  Qatti,  Natham,  and  Vinthu.  His  mani- 
festations in  form  are  four  :  Mahe9uran,  Uruttiran,  Mai,  and  Ayan.  In  hearts  that  know  Him 
the  Lord  wears  the  Form  of  Wisdom. 

Sum.  The  Invisible  Essence  and  Visible  Forms  of  the  Supreme  Lord  are  here  explained. 

[There  is  a  ninth  state,  or  manifestation,  of  the  Lord  :  as  Sada-^ivan.  The  two  states 
are  the  Nish-kala  and  (^a-kala,  p.  Ixvi.  See  £i.  Pira.  I.  i,  p.  63.  This  Gnostic  series 
symbolizes  the  evolutional  character  of  the  unfolding  of  the  universe  in  each  aeon.] 


If  He  have  aught,  some  one  must  have  endowed  Him  with  it.     Is  it  not  so? 

VI. 
Innumerable  souls  through  His  indwelling  fulness  attain  to  know; 

there  is  none  above  our  King  who  to  Him  can  thus  impart. 
Com.  To  all  souls  He  gives  suitable  embodiments,  and  thus  they  gain  self-conscious 
knowledge ;  but  there  is  no  Being  who  in  like  manner  could  assign  to  Him  form,  or  impart  to 
Him  knowledge.     Our  King  assumes  all  forms  He  pleases. 


1  Sans.  PARA-CAKTI.    Comp.  £i.  Pira.,  p.  93,  &c.     NOTE  XIII. 
3  Hymn  III.  1-5.   Ay^sari-iiugP,  pp.  17-29. 


THE   THREE  CAIVA   CATEGORIES.  Ixxix 

Sum.  Here  it  is  taught  that  Cjvan's  divine  nature  is  UNDERIVED. 

[Comp.  Ci.  Pira.  I.  3,  p.  65,  &c.     This  is  in  opposition  to  Vaishnavas  and  others  (Pafija- 
riittiri,  see  Sarva-dar^ana-sangraha),  who  hold  that  the  Creator  (Brahma)  gave  Him  His  form.] 


Can  all  men  attain  the  knowledge  of  this  Lord? 

VII. 

As  unfailing  wisdom  He  never  withdraws  Himself  from  His  servants; 
though  He  is  the  King,  WHOM  THE  HEAVENLY  ONES  SEE  NOT. 

Com.  In  the  lotus  of  devout  souls  He  ever  inseparably  dwells  as  unfailing  Wisdom  ;  yet 
is  He  not  to  be  beheld  even  by  the  gods.  . 

Sum.  This  declares  the  method  in  which  the  Lord  dispenses  grace. 
[Comp.  Kttrral,  I.  2,  pp.  3,  184 : 

'  His  feet,  Who  o^er  the  full-blown  flower  hath  past,  who  gain 

In  bliss  long  time  shall  dwell  above  this  earthly  plain.' 

The  Tiruva9agam  is  full  of  this  idea.    Comp.  Lyric  II  (pp.  8-16);  with  note  on  the  Arnna- 
calam  myth,  to  which  this  is  the  key  (p.- 198).] 


Is  the  Lord  confined  to  one  spot,  or  is  He  all-pervading? 

VIII. 

Everywhere  through  all  He  dwells  pervasive,  like  fire  in  heated  water ; 
yet  with  none  identified,  abides  alone. 

Com.  All  worlds,  and  all  souls,  infinite  in  number,  He  pervades,  as  fire  heats  water, 
entering  it  and  uniting  with  it.  He  is  not  confined  by  the  limits  of  the  natures  He  pervades, 
but  exists  alcne,  uncontaminated. 

Slim.  Here  it  is  said  that  £ivan  fills  all  things,  but  is  affected  by  none. 


Does  the  Lord  always  manifest  Himself  to  all  in  one  manner  ? 

IX. 

To  those  who  draw  not  nigh,  He  gives  no  boon ;  to  those  who  draw  nigh, 
all  good :  the  great  Qahkaran  knows  no  dislike. 

Com.  If  men  draw  not  nigh  to  worship  and  serve  Him,  He  imparts  not  to  them  the 
sweetness  of  His  grace,  nor  delivers  them  from  embodiments,  deaths,  and  sorrow.  To 
those  who  draw  nigh  to  Him  He  gives  all  these  good  things.  He  is  ever  the  impartial 
Benefactor  of  all ! 

Sum.  C.  ivan  is  without  desires  or  aversions  ;  dispensing  to  every  one  according  to  his  deeds. 

[See  Kurral,  4.] 

Can  those  who  worship  and  serve  Him  obtain  that  gift  ? 

X. 

Ponder  well !  doubtless  there  is  a  Wisdom,  all-pervading, — balm, — 
that  clinging  malady  of  '  birth '  unfailing  heals. 

Com.  Our  Lord  in  the  form  of  Wisdom,  uniting  inseparably  with  and  joined  to  souls,  is 
the  sure  remedy  for  the  eternally  clinging  disease  of  human  embodiment.  This  is  undoubted. 
Ponder  it  well  with  ceaseless  love  ! 

Sum.  The  necessity  and  reward  of  devoutly  serving  the  Lord. 

[Comp.  Glta.] 

CHAPTER   II. 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  '  FLOCK/  PAC;U  ;  OR,  THE  STATE  OF  SOULS. 
This  chapter  expounds  the  nature  and  condition  of  the  aggregate  of  all 
souls.     The  Lord  (Pathi)  is  One ;  the  Flock  (Pafu)  is  manifold  and  made  up 
of  innumerable  souls. 


Ixxx  NOTE   XII. 

The  Disciple  asks : 
Are  there  any  who  may  bear  this  name  ? 

XL 

The  Guru  answers : 

Days  past,  and  days  to  come,  are  numberless ;  so  is  the  company 
that  have  renounced,  and  hereafter  will  renounce. 

Com.  The  aeons  in  which  evolution  and  involution  have  taken  place,  and  shall  yet  go  on, 
are  infinite.  The  number  of  souls  that  have  gained  the  feet  of  the  Supreme,  and  of  those  who 
in  the  unending  future  shall  obtain  Grace,  is  infinite.  So  this  Flock  cannot  be  counted. 

Sum.  Here*  the  existence  and  multiplicity  of  souls  is  taught. 

The  exquisitely  figurative  word  '  flock'  suggests  the  idea  of  the  Great  and  Good  Shepherd, 
and  of  the  time  'When  there  shall  be  one  Flock  [fold]  and  one  Shepherd.' 


Are  all  these  souls  of  the  same  grade? 

XII. 

There  are  those  with  three  impurities ;  those  set  free  from  one  of  these  ; 
and  those  who  have  but  one. 

Com.  Darkness,  deeds,  and  delusion, — these  three  impurities  exist  in  some.  There  are 
some  who,  delusion  having  been  removed,  are  still  under  the  influence  of  darkness  and  deeds, 
— subject  to  a  twofold  impurity.  There  are  others  in  whom  the  impurity  of  darkness  alone 
remains.  Souls  may  thus  be  arranged  in  three  classes  *. 

Sum.  Souls  are  distributed  into  three  categories,  according  to  their  different  conditions 
from  of  old. 

Are  any  of  these  above  the  others  ? 

XIII. 

All  the  three  classes  are  subject  to  the  original  c  impurity ' : 
to  those  who  cling  to  Him  the  unseen  Lord  is  Help. 

Com.  The  members  of  all  these  three  classes  are  alike  subject  to  the  original,  ^ternal 
impurity  of  Anavam.  They  must  all  therefore  look  to  the  invisible  Lord  for  ultimate 
deliverance. 

Sum.  Here  it  is  taught  that  the  original  impurity  of  darkness  clings  to  all,  though  one 
class  has  been  set  free  from  Maya,  and  a  second  class  from  Kanmam  also. 

[The  second  line  of  this  couplet  is  obscure  ;  my  rendering  is  literal.] 


Is  there  no  knowledge  in  souls  not  devoted  to  Him  ? 

XIV. 
Things  seen  daily  are  mingled  confusedly  in  dreams ! 

What  can  men  do  whose  might  of  intellect  is  such  ? 

Com.  Things  which  men  see  in  their  waking  hours  are  ofttimes  reproduced  with  strange 
perversions  in  their  sleep.  The  author  therefore  asks,  in  contemptuous  irony,  what  reliance 
can  be  placed  on  knowledge  subject  to  such  vicissitudes? 

Sum.  It  is  shown  us  in  this  and  in  the  next  couplet  that  the  soul  has  neither  knowledge 
(self-consciotisness}  nor  active  faculty  without  a  primal  Source  from  which  these  flow. 


1  The  three  classes  are :  i.  C,a-kalar  [Sans.  SA-KALA  =  'with  Kalai'].  These  are  under 
the  influence  of  all  the  three  Radical  impurities:  Anavam,  Kanmam,  and  Mayai,  which  consti- 
tute the  threefold  BOND.  (NOTE  XV.)  2.  Pralaiyd-kalar  [Sans.  PRALAYA-KALA].  These 
are  under  the  influence  of  two  Radical  impurities :  Anavam  and  Kanmam.  3.  Vinnana- 
kalar,  who  are  freed  from  all  but  Anavam.  A-kalar  (opposed  to  Sa-kalar)  =  '  those  without 
Kalai.' 


THE   THREE  C.AIVA   CATEGORIES.  Ixxxi 

In  slumber,  it  is  true,  comes  forgetfulness  ;  but  in  waking  honrs  have  souls  no  innate 

knowledge  ? 

XV. 

Without  organs  of  sense  reason  comes  not  into  contact  with  the  objective : 
how  then  can  soul  be  said  to  know  ? 

Com.  The  ear  and  other  sense-organs  are  required  by  the  soul  as  necessary  instruments  of 
perception;  this  being  the  case,  how  can  the  soul  itself  be  said  to  possess  knowledge?  Its 
knowledge  comes  to  it  from  perception  of  the  world  of  sense. 

Sum.  This  is  to  be  taken  in  combination  with  the  former. 


But  has  the  soul  no  knowledge  whatever  save  through  the  senses  ? 

XVI. 

Light  and  darkness,  and  the  phenomenal  universe, 

are  not  perceptible  to  the  eye  obscured  by  cataract. 

Com.  Light  from  sun,  moon,  or  fire;  darkness  which  brings  confusion;  and  the  varied 
world  of  phenomena,  appear  not  to  the  blinded  eye.  So,  if  the  soul  have  no  faculty  of 
vision  or  perception,  what  can  sense-organs  do  for  it  ? 

Sum.  The  souls  of  men  have  merely  an  imparted  faculty  of  perceiving  what  is  presented 
as  an  object  of  perception. 

[An  innate  faculty,  like  power  of  vision,  *nl8  (comp.  Kurrat),  is  necessary  to  sense- 
perception.  The  soul,  with  material  sense-organs,  placed  over  against  the  object-world,  must 
have  a  divinely-given  faculty  of  using  those  organs  ;  alone  with  senses  and  objects  it  could 
know  nothing.]  _ 


i2i    iv.] 
C,at,  A9at,  and  Sat-a9at:  What  is  there  then  that  can  perceive  these  three  ? 

XVII. 
The  '  REAL  '  draws  not  nigh  the  '  UNREAL.'     The  '  unreal  '  knows  nothing. 

Soul  that  takes  cognizance  of  both  these,  must  itself  be  both. 
Com.  C.IVAN,  who  is  abiding  knowledge,  has  no  need  to  contemplate  and  know 
the  'Bond,'  —  inert  matter,  —  the  threefold  impurities  which  imprison  the  soul.  The  BOND 
itself,  with  all  the  elemental  categories,  is  material  and  unintelligent.  The  SOUL  (Pactt), 
which  puts  forth  energies  and  contemplates  both  Pathi  and  Pafam,  must  partake  of  both 
natures,  (that  is,  has  affinities  with  both  matter  and  spirit.} 

Sum.  Here  we  are  taught  that  souls  are  not  pure  knowledge  (like  Pathi),  nor  mere 
matter  (like  Pdcam).  _ 

Can  you  illustrate  by  a  figure  this  twofold  nature  of  souls  ? 

XVIII. 

In  this  world  are  there  not  things  which  are 

dark  in  the  darkness,  and  light  in  the  light  ? 

Com.  There  are  things,  like  the  eye,  crystal  and  ether,  which  are  dark  when  no  light  is 
shed  upon  them,  but  kindle  into  brightness  when  irradiated  from  without.  So  the  soul  is 
intelligent  or  unintelligent,  according  as  divine  irradiation  is  given  or  withheld. 

Sum.  There  exists  something  intermediate  between  pure  intellect  and  insensible  matter, 
which  something  has  potentialities  of  knowledge. 

[C.ivan  is  thus  («-(%A<gaW)  'life  of  life,'  'soul  of  soul.'  It  is  'the  inspiration  of  the 
Almighty  that  gives  man  understanding.'] 


Since  light  too  is  with  the  soul  from  eternity,  why  should  the  soul  have  any  connection 
with  darkness  ?     Can  light  and  darkness  co-exist  ? 

XIX. 

To  the  eye  of  an  owl  light  itself  is  dense  darkness, 
so  are  they  whose  eyes  behold  not  Vaman. 

f 


Ixxxii  NOTE   XIII. 

Com.  When  the  sun  rises  the  eye  of  the  owl  receives  not  its  beams  ;  so  the  soul  we  have 
spoken  of  sees  not  the  light  of  Qivan's  wisdom,  being  veiled  by  Anavam. 

Sum.  This  illustrates  the  way  in  which  souls  fail  to  recognize  Him  who  is  their  Light 
and  Life. 

[See  Qi.  Nana-pira.  II.  20,  p.  313 :  Vaman,  furuxfr,  see  Lex.] 


When  shall  the  ignorance  of  these  souls  disperse  and  grace  be  given  ? 

XX. 
From  eternity  until  now  souls  bear  the  load.     Alas  ! 

when  shall  they  know  the  grace  divine  ?     Ah  !  abiding  woe  ! 
Com.  The  couplet  echoes  the  commiserating  exclamation,  'When  dawns  the  day  of  grace?' 
Sum.  A  piteous  declaration  of  the  sorrow  that  the  Flock  of  all  souls  endures. 

NOTE    XIII. 
THE  BRIDE,  PARA-CATTI  =  QIVAN'S  '  PRIMAL  ENERGY.' 

In  order  that  the  supreme  Pathi  may  energize  in  soul  and  in  the  Pa9am 
(Malam)  from  which  the  universe  is  evolved,  there  proceeds  forth  from  him  an 
energy  (Qatti,  fff^,  Sans.  QAKTI)  which  in  its  various  manifestations  will  require 
attentive  consideration.  The  doctrine  is  thus  summed  up  :  The  supreme 
Qatti,  or  essential  energy  that  subsists  in  and  one  with  Qivan,  sends  forth  in 
successive  developements  (r)  the  energy  of  desire,  (2)  the  energy  of  wisdom, 
and  (3)  the  energy  of  action.  These  powers  in  operation  constitute  the  sacred 
body  of  Qivan.  This  '  the  uncontaminated  one  approaches,  manifesting  him- 
self as  inscrutable  grace,  and  thus  joins  himself  to  the  pure  Maya.'  He  then 
approaches  '  impure  Maya,  the  causal  one,  and  establishes  bodies,  organs, 
worlds,  and  fruition  in  all  their  plenitude,  in  order  that  deeds  eternal  and 
inexorable  may  be  consumed,' — as  it  is  curiously  phrased.  Thus  souls  are 
embodied,  and  involved  in  the  bond  from  which,  when  deeds  are  consumed,  they 
will  be  evolved.  This  is  the  mystery  of  the  developed  and  undeveloped  forms 
of  the  Supreme.  What  is  specially  important  here  is  that  the  supreme  divinity 
(Pathi)  manifests  Himself  and  operates  in  the  universe  only  through  his  QATTI, 
or  energy.  '  Qivan  and  Qatti  are  as  the  sun  and  its  radiance.'  This  noun  is 
in  Sanskrit  feminine,  and  thus  the  effective  energy  of  Qivan  is  represented  as 
a  female, — a  goddess ;  and  it  is  very  wonderful  what  an  amount  of  mythology 
and  ritual  has  been  accumulated  around  this  one  word1.  The  question  is 
repeated  again  and  again,  How  is  Pathi,  Who  is  pure  spirit,  to  mingle  with  and 
energize  in  souls  and  amid  impurities  ?  and  the  answer  is,  that  He  does  so  by 
sending  forth  an  energy  that  is  like  a  ray  of  light,  a  mighty  influence  that 
quickens,  illuminates,  and  purifies  all  things;  and  this  energy,  personified  as 
a  goddess,  has  led  to  all  the  developements  of  Qatti  worship.  This  is  in  fact 
the  way  in  which  the  Qaiva  philosophy  bridges  over  the  gulf  between  the  finite 
and  the  infinite.  (Comp.  Qiva-fiana-bodham,  p.  54,  Madras,  1825.) 

There  is  hardly  a  glimpse  of  this  idea  in  the  BHAGAVAD-GITA,  and  its 


J  It  is  curious  to  compare  the  mysticism  of  Novalis  (Les  disciples  a  Sais,  in  Materlinck, 
p.  47)  :  'II  est  heureux  ce  fils,  ce  favori  de  la  nature,  a  qui  elle  permet  de  la  contempler  en  cette 
dualite,  sous  la  forme  d'une  force  male  et  femelle,  et  en  son  unite,  sous  la  forme  d'un  hymen 
eternel  et  sans  fin  ....  sa  religion  sera  le  veritable  et  essentiel  naturalisme.' 


EVOLUTION,   PRESERVATION,   AND   INVOLUTION.          Ixxxiii 

developement  in  the  Sidclhanta  seems  to  mark  a  decided  advance  in  theological 
science.  The  very  precious  germ-thought  would  seem  to  be  that — so  much 
emphasized  in  the  Christian  Revelation — of  the  Spirit  of  God  moving  over, 
through,  and  in  the  entire  creation,  and  especially  energizing  in  human  souls. 
It  is  curious  to  recall  the  Greek  Caktis,  the  Eumenides,  the  Muses,  and  other 
feminine  personifications.  In  Latin  the  names  of  Venus  and  Diana  corres- 
pond to  the  Tamil  Ammai.  And  in  Dante,  Beatrice  seems  almost  to  take 
the  place  of  Umaz,  since  from  her  all  light,  knowledge,  and  help  proceed. 
Mary,  Beatrice,  Lucia,  Rachel,  and  Matilda  all  resemble  the  Caivite  Caktis. 
Indeed,  if  the  magnificent  hymn  'Veni,  Creator  Spiritus!'  were  translated 
literally  into  Tamil  verse,  it  would  seem  to  express  in  a  much  more  appro- 
priate, dignified,  and  forcible  manner  the  whole  idea  which  lies  at  the  root  of 
this  part  of  the  Caiva  system, — that  all  light,  knowledge,  power,  freedom,  and 
sanctification  are  from  the  Blessed  Spirit  sent  forth  by  the  Father  for  the 
salvation  of  His  children.  Of  course  Christians  do  not  regard  the  Divine 
Spirit  as  really  a  dove, — and  the  representation  of  the  divine  energy  as 
a  woman  is  surely  not  regarded  as  essential  to  the  fullest  developement  of  the 
great  truth  it  is  supposed  to  symbolize. 

.  We  must  not  omit  reference  to  the  personification  of  WISDOM  in  the 
Christian  sacred  scriptures  as  well  as  in  the  apocryphal  books.  Many  of 
these  passages  could  be  used,  almost  precisely  as  they  stand,  by  a  Caivite 
in  expounding  his  views  of  Qakti.  The  Alexandrian  school  of  philosophy 
and  theology  has  followed  out  this  course  of  personification  to  a  great  extent, 
and  it  does  not  seem  to  be  improbable  that  those  thinkers  were  influenced 
partly  by  South-Indian  ideas.  Gnosticism  in  all  its  developements  seems  to 
have  come  from  the  East. 

NOTE    XIV. 
'  EVOLUTION,'  '  PRESERVATION,'  AND  '  INVOLUTION  '  IN  OPPOSITION  TO  ATHEISM. 

The  doctors  of  the  Caiva  Siddhanta  are  strenuous  opponents  of  the  atheistic 
school,  or  Ldkayatikas,  as  is  seen  in  the  Sarva-dar9ana-sangraha,  chapter  i, 
where  they  are  called  Charvakas.  These  deny  the  existence  of  a  Creator,  and 
the  argument  against  them  for  the  existence  of  a  supreme  Being,  who  evolves, 
sustains,  and  involves  the  phenomenal  universe,  is  as  follows  :  '  The  whole 
universe,  with  its  entire  complement  of  beings,  male,  female,  and  without  life, 
comes  into  phenomenal  existence,  subsists  awhile,  and  then  subsides ;  this  is 
our  experience.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  assert  the  existence  of  a  Lord,  or 
Palhi,  who  creates,  maintains,  and  destroys.  The  reappearance,  after  dissolu- 
tion, of  the  phenomenal  universe  in  a  new  aeon  is  the  result  of  the  bond, — 
impurity.  For  souls  must  again  and  again  have  embodiments ;  there  must 
be  a  long  chain  of  metempsychoses  in  order  that  these  impurities  may  be 
matured,  work  out  their  legitimate  tendencies,  and  produce  their  various 
results  in  the  experience  of  each  being.  Only  when  these  are  exhausted,  may 
souls  be  released  from  their  power.  Since  then  these  embodied  living  ones 
(souls)  come  upon  the  stage  of  being,  act  awhile,  and  then  pass  away,  there 
must  be  a  Lord  (Pathi),  who  directs  their  course ;  especially  as  every  element 
of  the  bond  is  unintelligent,  and  cannot  seek  out  for  itself  the  souls  to  which  it 

f2 


IXXXIV  NOTE    XV. 

clings;  nor  can  the  souls  themselves  select  their  own  appropriate  forms  and 
successive  embodiments,  and  cannot  of  themselves  select  the  deeds  which 
pertain  to  them.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that  the  Supreme,  the  Uncon- 
taminated  One,  should  preside  over  and  direct  each  embodiment.  We  thus 
see  in  this  universe  a  succession  of  living  beings  with  material  environments. 
Now,  what  is  thus  manifestly  subject  to  decay,  and  is  ever  being  renewed  and 
changed,  must  have  an  intelligent  Author,  Sustainer,  and  Restorer  of  its 
manifold  frame.  Therefore  the  Lord  exists,  and  is  first,  and  midst,  and  last.' 

This  teaching  is  a  strong  and  necessary  protest  against  the  atheistic 
Sahkhya  school  of  Kapila,  who  gives  to  his  primordial  matter  ((tp<s\*-i$ij£l(t5$) 
the  power  of  self-developement,  while  the  Siddhanta  most  emphatically  and 
with  powerful  reasonings  teaches  that  the  whole  universe  must  be  for  ever 
inert,  unintelligent,  and  lifeless  without  the  operation  of  Pathi  and  his  mani- 
fested energy. 

NOTE    XV. 

ANAVAM,  OR  THE  '  BOND  OF  FINITE  IGNORANCE  '  (unffuz,  UJSOUD). 

This  is  in  later  Qaiva  books  called  ANAVAM  (= minuteness],  an  abstract  noun 
from  ANU  (glggy,  ^T5l),  'anything  minute,  subtile.'  It  is  a  word  in  its  meta- 
physical sense"  coined  by  the  Tamil  Caivites,  and  corresponds  in  some  ways 
to  '  original  sin ' :  Sahaja-Mala. 

Presented  in  this  formal  way  it  is  the  latest  developement  of  Qaivism. 
(Thirteenth  century.) 

The  following  from  the  Tiru-arul-payan,  Chapter  III,  throws  as  much  light 
upon  this  conception  as  it  is  perhaps  capable  of  receiving. 


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  JBoND  (PA^AM)  ;  OR,  THE  IMPURITY  OF  DARKNESS1. 

The  author  has  spoken  of  the  LORD  and  of  the  FLOCK  (NOTE  XII),  and 
here  he  speaks  of  the  BOND,  which  is  threefold :  darkness,  deeds,  and  delusion. 
But  especially  he  speaks  of  ANAVAM,  the  first  of  these :  ignorance  assuming 

a  concrete  form. 

The  Disciple  asks: 
What  is  the  sorrow  that  clings  to  the  soul  ? 

XXI. 

The  Guru  answers : 
That  which  denies  the  grievous  round  of  unceasing  embodiment 

and  bliss,  and  means  of  help,  is  ever  existent,  though  ever  hidden. 

Commentary.  There  is  an  eternally  clinging  impurity  of  darkness  (ANAVA-MALAM)  that 
conceals  all  that  the  soul  should  know  in  regard  to  afflictions  from  birth,  the  joys  of  release, 
and  the  help  the  Lord  imparts. 

Summary.  In  this  and  the  following  couplet  (I)  the  reality  of  ANAVAM  and  (2)  its 
bewildering  power  are  shown. 

Unto  what  may  this  ANAVAM-impurity  be  likened  ? 

XXII. 

Nothing  except  DARKNESS  while  showing  itself,  hides  all  else, 
so  as  to  make  them  one  with  itself. 


1  The  Tamil  name  Aviffai  (Sans.  A  +  VIDYA)  is  used  as  a  synonym  of  ANAVAM.    It  is  also 
called  '  darkness,'  irtil,  for  which  ami  (  =  grace)  is  the  remedy.     Comp.  Bhagavad-Glta. 


ANAVAM,  OR  THE   BOND  OF   FINITE   IGNORANCE.         Ixxxv 

Com.  Darkness,  and  it  alone,  has  the  power  to  manifest  itself,  hiding  things  so  that  their 
distinctive  differences  shall  not  appear.  ANAVAM  hides  birth  and  death,  the  way  of  release, 
and  the  means  of  deliverance. 

Sum.  The  bewildering  effect  of  ANAVAM. 


Is  it  in  all  things  the  analogue  of  darkness  ? 

XXIII. 
Darkness  hides  objects  of  vision,  but  shows  itself; 

ANAVAM  hiding  all  else,  itself  also  remains  concealed. 

Com.  Darkness  in  the  phenomenal  world,  though  it  wraps  all  things  in  concealment,  is 
itself  clearly  perceived.  This  mental  darkness  conceals  both  divine  knowledge  and  its  own 
presence  in  the  soul.  [See  KtiCuSiatvii  (p.  100),  I.  8.] 

Sum.  The  spiritual  darkness  of  ANAVAM  is  more  cruel  in  its  effect  than  ordinary  darkness. 


Does  this  power  which  conceals,  and  itself  lies  concealed,  affect  the  Lord  ? 

XXIV. 

This  darkness  exists  from  eternal  ages,  permeating  the  soul, 
together  with  the  inner  light,  and  abides  till  now. 

Com.  From  eternity  the  darkness  of  ANAVAM  co-exists  in  the  soul,  with  the  inner  light 
of  divine  mystic  wisdom.  It  spreads  not  indeed  over  the  divine  Essence,  but  dwells  persistent 
in  the  soul,  and  obscures  it  even  until  now. 

Sum.  ANAVAM  is  from  infinite  ages,  and  does  not  pass  out  of  the  soul  like  'deeds '  and 
'  delusion.'  (NOTE  III,  and  p.  li.) 


Is  this  ANAVAM  really  unknown  to  the  souls  it  enshrouds? 

XXV. 

'  My  Lady  Darkness '  has  an  infinity  of  lovers,  but  hides  herself 
from  even  her  spouse  with  strictest  chaste  reserve  I 

Com.  Though  this  'darkness'  pervades  and  interpenetrates  all  souls,  yet  to  the  soul  in 
which  it  dwells  the  '  energy  of  ignorance*  reveals  not  herself. 
Sum.  This  teaches  the  mysterious  power  of  ANAVAM. 

[ANAVAM  is  one,  though  pervading  an  infinity  of  souls.     (8.  tS.}  pp.  99,  159.)    There  is 
a  personification  here,  as  in  the  next.    In  Tiruv§9agam  IV.  43-45  : 

'  Soon  as  I  thought  of  that  Being,  free  from  hate,  unique, 
Delusive  powers  in  ever-changing  millions  swarmed, 
And  straight  began  their  ever-varying,  delusive  play.' 
In  Manikka-Va;agar's  days  the  theory  of  ANAVAM  had  not  been  fully  worked  out.] 


How  can  one  know  this  ANAVAM  ? 

XXVI. 

No  need  of  many  words !     This  ignorance  of  all  that  souls 
should  know  is  the  gift  of  the  '  sons  of  darkness.' 

Com.  What  good  can  come  from  using  many  words  ?  The  condition  that  is  ignorant  of 
the  difference  between  temporal  and  eternal  things  must  be  caused  by  the  powers  of  black 
darkness.  ANAVAM  is  the  parent  of  innumerable  active  energies  of  unwisdom. 

Sum.  This  root-impurity  is  the  cause  of  a  mighty  power  of  darkness,  and  so  is  known  by 
its  effects. 


NOTE    XV. 

It  any  one  deny  the  existence  of  ANAVAM  1,  what  is  your  reply? 

XXVII. 

If  there  be  no  darkness,  why  sorrow  ?     If  it  be  nothing  but  soul's  essence 
it  departs  not ;  or,  when  it  departs  the  soul  must  perish  too. 

Com.  If  you  deny  the  concrete  existence  of  this  darkness  of  ignorance,  why  was  the  soul 
subjected  to  this  sorrow  of  embodiment,  which  is  the  source  of  the  life  of  sense?  If  you  say 
that  it  is  merely  the  natural  condition  of  the  soul,  then  if  divine  mystic  wisdom  be  given,  this 
ignorance  departing,  the  soul  will  itself  cease  to  be.  (Cleansing  would  mean  destruction  /) 

Sum.  A  refutation  of  those  who  deny  the  existence  of  a  specific  impurity  to  which  the 
name  of  ANAVAM  is  given. 

If  one  say,  '  ANAVAM  came  incidentally  in  the  course  of  developement,'  what  reply  is 

there  ? 

XXVIII. 

If  this  impurity  had  a  beginning,  how  explain  its  appearance  ? 

and  may  it  not  silently  reappear  even  in  the  realm  of  release  ? 

Com.  If  ANAVAM  has  sprung  up  incidentally,  there  must  be  some  cause  for  its  appear- 
ance, as  there  is  for  a  stain  on  a  white  garment,  or  for  a  tarnish  on  the  surface  of  a  mirror  ; 
nor  in  that  case  can  there  be  any  absolute  and  final  deliverance  for  the  soul,  for  ANAVAM 
may  again  spontaneously  appear.  [The  crucial  question  of  the  origin  of  evil.} 

Sum.  A  refutation  of  those  who  teach  that  ANAVAM  has  had  a  beginning. 


If  it  be  from  eternity,  surely  it  never  will  depart  ? 

XXIX. 

Though  darkness  grow  and  spread,  light  will  disperse  it. 
If  not,  it  never  can  leave  the  mind. 

Com.  Material  light  ever  dissipates  the  darkness  that  admits  it ;  if  it  were  not  so, 
perpetual  darkness  would  brood  over  all  things.  Even  thus,  if  ANAVAM  yield  not  to  the 
successive  operations  of  grace,  ignorance  can  never  be  dispersed.  If  ANAVAM  yield  not  to 
successive  impartations  of  grace  2,  the  office  of  the  guru  is  useless.  But  this  office  does  rid 
the  soul  of  it.  The  soul  must  have  a  faculty  of  receiving  effectual  grace. 

Sum.  The  means  of  deliverance  from  ANAVAM. 


How  would  you  answer  a  person  who  deemed  that  primal  delusion,  and  not  ANAVAM, 
concealed  things  ? 

XXX. 

Like  a  light  that  illuminates  till  the  dayspring  arise, 

'  delusion '  takes  form,  and  associates  itself  with  deeds. 

Com.  Till  divine  mystic  wisdom  is  imparted  by  Qivan,  and  so  the  darkness  of  ANAVAM 
is  dissipated,  '  delusion '  (Tirotham)  appears,  and,  for  the  sake  of  deeds  which  have  to  be 
consumed,  is  the  cause  of  the  phenomenal  universe.  Even  so  is  it  when  one  lights  a  lamp, 
and  awaits  the  dawning  of  the  day  !  [NOTE  V.  (5).], 

Sum.  Here  'delusion'  and  deeds  in  their  relation  to  ANAVAM  are  explained3. 


1  The  Aikkiya-vdthi  school.  See  Qiva-Piragj^am,  II.  22.  This  school  is  the  second  in 
the  '  refutation  of  heresies '  by  our  author. 

3  Lit.  '  Kalai  and  the  rest.' 

3  The  use  of  the  word  Arm  (g{&t,  Sans.  ANU)  by  the  Qaivites. — The  word  Anavam  (from 
Arm)  signifies  'the  state  or  character  of  the  Atom.'  As  far  as  can  be  ascertained  the  word 
Anu,  which  has  the  meaning  of  '  soul,'  is  not  used  in  any  such  connection  in  Sanskrit,  or 
in  earlier  Tamil.  In  searching  for  its  history  I  have  found  it  used  in  a  striking  manner  in  the 


ANAVAM,   OR   THE    BOND   OF   FINITE   IGNORANCE.       IxxxvK 

Jain  system.  It  may  be  remarked  that  probably  the  best  account  of  the  Jains  can  be  gathered 
from  four  Tamil  books,  and  these  are  the  'JIvaga  Chintamani,'  the  '  Cjlapp-athigaram,'  the 
'  Mani-Megalai,'and  the  'C.  iva-Piana-9iddhiyar.'  From  these  we  learn  that  the  Jains  (or,  at  least, 
the  division  of  them  called  Ajivagar,  or  (^uvethanar)  held  that  the  whole  universe  consists  of 
five  species  of  atoms  («jygw) :  Earth,  Fire,  Water,  Air,  and  Soul.  It  must  be  noted  that 
the  same  word  is  used  for  life,  breath,  soul,  and  spirit.  This  word  Uyir  («-«W)  is  also  used 
for  Anma,  a  corruption  of  Atman.  These  five  species  of  atoms  are  eternal,  uncreated, 
indestructible,  indiscerptible,  and  incapable  of  mixing  with  one  another,  though  combining 
in  every  variety  of  substance  in  the  phenomenal  universe.  They  are  invisible  save  to  the  eyes 
of  divine  beings  'dwelling  within  the  circle  bounded  by  the  golden  walls,' — the  home  of 
spirits  made  perfect.  As  these  atoms  combine  without  direction  or  control,  they  form  bodies, 
into  which  the  soul,  itself  an  atom,  passes.  Thus  every  soul  having  an  eternal  burthen  of 
deeds  which  have  to  be  consumed,  expiated,  and  so  annihilated,  enters  the  body  thus  provided 
for  it  by  a  blind,  resistless,  and  utterly  inexplicable  fate.  This  part  of  the  doctrine  seems 
somewhat  to  correspond  with  that  of  the  Qaiva  Siddhanta ;  but,  again,  the  Jains  speak  of 
the  colours  of  atoms,  which  are  pure  white,  red,  golden,  green,  blue,  and  ordinary  white. 
These  six  colours  -belong  to  the  four  elements  of  earth,  water,  fire,  and  air.  As  the  body 
is  compounded  of  these  in  various  proportions,  the  indwelling  soul  has  innate  qualities  or 
dispositions  symbolized  by  these  colours.  The  pure  and  absolute  white  when  gained  at  last, 
entitles  the  soul  to  liberation  and  conclusive  blessedness.  Thus  the  soul  is  dependent  for  its 
condition  and  character  upon  a  fate  which  started  it  with  a  burthen  of  'deeds'  good  or  bad, 
and  varying  in  every  case ;  and  also  upon  its  environment,  which  is  the  necessary  irresistible 
influence  of  its  constituent  atoms. 

There  is  a  further  doctrine,  as  in  the  other  systems,  of  virtue  and  vice,  and  in  this  it 
does  not  differ  essentially  from  the  Siddhantam. 


Ixxxviii  THE   METRES  EMPLOYED   IN 


THE   METRES   EMPLOYED   IN   THE  TIRUVAQAGAM. 

••* 

On  the  subject  of  Tamil  metres  the  student  may  consult  my  Second 
Catechism  of  Tamil  Grammar  (Oxford),  or  the  Third  Grammar  [G.,  Madras, 
1859]  with  the  references  there  to  the  Yapparurigalam. 

There  are  fourteen  varieties  of  metre  in  this  collection  of  sacred  verse,  falling 
under  four  heads  :  Venba,  Kali-pa,  A9iriyam,  and  Viruttam. 

I.  The  VENBA  pieces  [G.  185,  Pope's  Ndladtydr,  Introduction,  pp.  xxvi- 
xxxvi]  are  19,  47,  48,  including  twenty-eight  quatrains,  all  CW  ^<se>f 
[G.  189.] 


II.  KALI-PA,  of  which  we  have  seven  variations. 

These  are  poems  in  which  the  metrical  feet  have  (generally)  the  connection 
peculiar  to  the  Venba;  though  the  metre  is  Kali-pa,  which  is  said  to  have  a  quick, 
'leaping'  rhythm  (gi&r&r®)  6p<ss>f),  and  consists  of  any  feet;  but  chiefly,  of 
Qw<sssf@n  (  ---  ,  ^  ^  —  ,  wwww-,  _  v,  «^-)  [G.  175],  with  sf^eSetrm 
and  S(T^w<sfru^  (—  <w>  \j  }  \j  \j  \j  \jj. 

(i)  The  first  poem  is  in  this  KALI-VENBA  metre  (pp.  1-7).  It  has  ninety- 
four  lines  of  four  feet,  and  a  final  of  three  feet,  like  the  second  line  of  a  Kurral 
[Pope's  Jfurral,  Introduction,  p.  xxv]  ;  with  initial  rhyme  and  assonance. 
[G.  181-183.] 

(ii)  Of  those  really  belonging  to  Kali-pa,  5  (ii),  10-13,  15,  31,  and  38-40 
(in  all  thirteen)  are  called  KO$:CAGA-KALI-PA,  and  are  in  verses  of  four  lines  each. 
Beside  these,  7,  8,  and  16  are  really  the  same  ;  but  consist  of  stanzas  of  eight 
or  six  lines.     See  p.  48. 

These  are  called  Taravu  (£ne>\),  which  means  '  nape  of  the  neck':  they  are, 
in  fact,  'recitatives,'  and  are  very  sonorous. 

In  5  (ii)  we  find  almost  exclusively  'srriu  feet.'  This  might  be  called 
Epichoriambic.  The  connection  is  sometimes  seSpp'teir,  where  a  sntLi 
is  followed  by  a  rSenff  ;  or  QeuessiL-Xeir,  where  a  snub  is  followed  by  a 
Gist.  Comp.  51,  where  the  metre,  however,  is  Viruttam. 

(iii)    KALI-TARIfAI. 

Of  this,  14  is  the  only  example.    It  has  nineteen  stanzas  of  three  lines  each. 
The  first  line  has  four  feet,  and  the  others  three. 

This  is  not  quite  regular.  Tari9ai  (&trip  ^<ss)f)=.'  cadence';  and  indicates 
a  kind  of  choral  ode  following  the  Taravu. 

(iv)  Under  ssSuuir  must  come  5  (ix),  which  is  said  to  be  sefl  i§'2®)<g  gjztnp. 
It  has  four  lines  of  five  feet  each,  of  which  the  formula  is 


inir 


or  eSI 
or  LDIT 

But  some  lines  have  an  additional  foot. 


LDIT 


<SITiU 


LDIT 


THE   TIRUVA9AGAM.  Ixxxix 


This  is  a  kind  of  Viruttam.    When  compared  with  the  following, 
gjonp,  its  inferiority  is  striking. 

(v)  siLi—^eirs  sffSpgjaap.     [G.  192.] 

This  is  a  more  artificial  form  of  the  above,  and  is  very  popular. 
Its  rule  (#Lli_3srr)  is  fivefold  : 

(1)  Each  stanza  must  have  four  lines,  of  five  feet  each,  under  one  rhyme. 

(2)  The  sequence  is  Ven-dalai  :    u>n  Qp&r  iSsaff,  eSerrto  Qpear 

siriL  QP&ST  Qisff.     [K.,  Introduction,  p.  xxvii.] 

(3)  The  first  four  feet  of  each  line  are   ($iu/b@ir)   --  ,    w 

v  v  v  \j  ,  —  v^w,  with  an  occasional 


(4)  The  fifth  foot  must  be  —  \j  \j  —  ,  or  ^  w  ^  v^  —  . 

(5)  The  stanza  always  ends  with  <sj. 

5  (i),  6,  and  36  are  in  this  metre. 

(vi)  Here  comes  in  the  AMMANAI,  8. 

The  only  irregularity  is  that  the  sequence  is  not  always  maintained  between 
the  last  syllable  of  a  line  and  the  first  syllable  of  the  next  line.  Comp. 
stanza  18. 

(vii)  Poem  24  is  said  to  be  of  'mixed  metre':  s&xs^su.  It  is  mainly  of  the 
seS  rhythm,  the  fourth  line  in  each  stanza  being  very  musical. 


III.  AgiRiYAM,  or  '  aphoristic/  metre,  of  which  we  find  here  three  varieties. 

(i)  Poems  2,  3,  and  4  are  in  this  measure,  which  from  its  use  in  grammars 
and  didactic  works  gets  its  name  of  'the  master's  metre'  (^9//?ttj  =  -^H|'eJ). 

It  is  the  original  Tamil  representative  of  the  Sanskrit  Qloka. 

It  is  also  called  Agaval  (g}&®i&)  =  the  call,  or  the  peculiar  strut  of  the 
pea-fowl).  [G.  191,  and  references.] 

Its  sequence  (p'far)  is  antispastic,  i.e.  Ner  follows  Ner,  and  Nirai  follows 
Nirai:  thus — 


JetTLD 


This  jerky  rhythm  is  called  the  Agaval-O9ai. 

(ii)  /$!tetfu>63Bri$L6\)  ^{^flaju  U;T  (= aphoristic  verse  of  unvarying  recurrence). 

This  is  a  subdivision  of  the  A9'iriyam.     The  146  lines  of  poem  2,  and  the 
225  lines  of  4,  furnish  good  normal  specimens.     Observe — 

(1)  The  lines  are  all  of  four  feet  (^swa/if). 

(2)  The  feet  are  mostly  of  two  metrical   syllables   (^)uj/D^/f),  i.e. 


(3)  The  connection  (pZsir)  is  not  always  strictly  that  of  the  A9iriyam. 

(4)  They  are  rhymed  in  couplets. 

(iii)  @3sw,z  (B)fD®r  ^Qiflaju  uir  (=A9iriyam,  where  lines  of  two  feet  are 
interspersed). 


XC  THE    METRES   EMPLOYED   IN 

Poem  3  is  in  this  metre,  and  differs  from  2  and  4  in  only  two  respects  : 
(i)  some  lines  have  two  feet,  and  others  three  feet;  (2)  rhymes  are  irregular, 
or  wanting  altogether. 

IV.  VIRUTTAM  (  =  round);  thirty-one  hymns. 

The  three  metres  hitherto  considered  mainly  depend  on  sequence,  connection 
of  feet  {•s'fcrr},  and  rhythm  in  the  individual  lines;  but  Viruttam  arranges  them 
in  rhymed  stanzas,  mostly  quatrains,  in  which  each  line  must  harmonize  with 
the  rest,  and  fall  into  a  kind  of  tune,  often  kept  up  for  many  stanzas,  or  a  whole 
piece.  This  is  more  like  Alcaic  and  Horatian  metres. 

Its  •  law  is :  if  a  foot  in  one  line  end  in  u>n,  eSetrti,  SITUJ,  or  aesfl,  the 
corresponding  feet  in  the  other  lines  must  end  in  the  same. 

(1)  The  stanzas  may  be  of  four  feet,  and  then  the  metre  is  called 

Kali-mruttam.     See  5  (v),  17,  34,  46,  and  51. 

5  (v)  reads  very  harsh. 
Its  formula  is  ILIT,  eS,  <s3,  eS.     But  the  final  <sS  =.  —  ^  -,  or  \->  w  ^  -. 

(2)  If  of  five  feet,  it  is  treated  here  as  seSuuir,  iv. 

(3)  If  of  six  or  more  feet,  it  is  called  Afiriya-viruttam.     [G.   193, 

and  references.] 

To  this  must  be  referred  5  (iv,  vi,  vii),  9,  18,  20,  21,  25,  35,  41,  42,  43, 
45,  40,  50. 

(4)  Of  seven  feet  are  5  (viii),  22,  28,  29,  30,  34,  37,  44. 

(5)  Of  eight  feet  are  5  (iii,  x),  23. 
Each  variety  has  its  time-measure.     [G.  16.] 


NOTES  ON  INDIVIDUAL  VIRUTTAM  LYRICS. 

9  (pp.  128-138). 

This  is  Asiriya-viruttam  of  six  feet.     Formula  :  ©0,  eS,  sirvu  (twice). 
Great  license  is  used.     A  woman's  song. 


5  (iv),  41. 

These  are  Afiriya-viruttam  [G.  193]  of  six  feet. 
The  formula  is  u>/r,  eS,  e3,  <s3,  eS,  SITIU. 

They  have  thus  twenty-six  measures  [G.  16],  or  thirteen  metrical  £7r  ( 
Caesura  and  Monai  before  fifth  foot. 

We  might  read  as  Dactylic  pentameter  hyper  catalectic^  with  anacrusis 


There  are  frequent  resolutions  of  —  into 


5  (vi),  21,  32,  33,  45,  50. 

These  are  Afiriya-viruttam  of  six  feet,  divided  into  two  equal  parts,  of 
which  the  formula  is  wrr,  u>tr,  sirib  (twice),  having  twenty-eight  measures. 


TIIK  TIRU\A((A(-AM.  xci 

6  (vii),  35. 

A9iriya-viruttam.     Six  feet. 

Formula :  eS,  wrr,  WIT  (twice),  twenty-four  measures. 

But  observe  that  the  initial  o9  ends  really  in  a  long  syllable,  and  is  generally 
^  -,  ^  -  ^  -,  or  -  w  -.     This  affects  the  rhythm. 


25. 


A9iriya-viruttam  of  six  feet  :  five  with  u>tr,  and  the  sixth  with  snub  (occa- 
sionally u>rr).     A  caesura  after  the  fourth  foot. 


42. 

A9iriya-viruttam  of  six  feet. 

This  is  unique,  and  requires  much  care  to  read  rhythmically. 


Formula :  WIT,  WIT )  sesfl 


WIT,  eS  )  eSI. 


WIT 


43. 

This  has  six  feet,  each  line  divided  into  two  equal  parts  ;  but  the  law  of  the 
Viruttam  is  not  strictly  observed. 

Line  i  gives  a9,  WIT,  stub  •  eS,  e3,  siriu  ;  but  the  chorus  in  each  verse  : 


gves  stri,  o, 

Again  and  again  u>n  and  eSI  are  interchanged,  or  a  SITUJ  is  substituted. 
The  sequence  is  Ven-dalai  [Introduction  to  Kurral,  p.  xxvii]. 


22,  28,  29,  37,  44,  49. 

A9iriya-viruttam.     Seven  feet  and  twenty-eight  measures. 
Formula  :  eS,  wit  [but  eS  =  -  ^  -]  ; 

eSI,  WIT; 

eS}  eS!}  wrr  [or  &nuu~\. 
Many  irregularities. 

22  is  anaphordic  (jy^/r^).    [G.  199.] 
44.  has  often  six  feet  :  WIT,  WIT,  strii,  &c. 


5  (viii). 

A9iriya-viruttam.     Seven  feet. 
Formula:  e 


or  '  w/r 


WIT,  wrr,  <sS. 

Time-measure:  fourteen  wn^s^esur.     [G.  16.] 

Observe  that  the  last  foot,  though  a  eSetrw,  is  really  -  ^  -. 

<iT  To  us,  it  is  Trochaic  tetrameter  calaleciic,  with  an  optional  anacrusis 


XC11 


THE   METRES   EMPLOYED   IN   THE   TIRUVA^AGAM. 


20. 


Each  stanza  has  four  rhymed  lines  of  eight  feet  ;  but  these  really  make  eight 
equal  lines,  the  alternate  ones  having  only  '  alliteration  '  (CWSsar). 
The  formula  of  these  is  eS,  eS,  e$,  LDIJ.     It  is  singularly  pleasing. 
Note  that  the  third  and  fourth  foot  generally  form  an  antispast  : 


23,  5  (iii,  x). 

A9iriya-viruttam  of  eight  feet. 

In  23  we  have  u>trt  e8,  e3,  ILH  (twice),  in  both  half-lines  generally ;  but 
the  fourth  foot  is  sometimes  a  satis,  and  there  are  minor  irregularities. 

In  5  (iii)  the  measure  is  sniLi,  sniL,  LDIT,  WIT  (twice),  giving  twenty  iLir^ 
[G.  16.] 

In  6  (x)  we  find  WIT,  eS,  WIT,  eS  (twice),  or  sixteen  wrr<$j$<ss)ff . 
It  may  be  read  as  two  Trochaic  penthemimers : 


17. 

This  has  two  formulas, — for  one  and  three  of  each  stanza  it  is  wn,  e$,  eSl, 
-;  but  for  two  and  four  WIT,  eS,  IDIT,  u>rr.     It  is  very  much  like  doggerel. 


34. 

This  at  first  sight  seems  capable  of  varied  scansion,  but  (with  the  usual 
license)  reads — 

<S6ZJH  #6377  <56377  tO/T 


46   is 


S1TUJ 


Wit 


arni 


eS 


It  has  a  pleasant  mingling  of  the  Qffuuso  and  &TIE/S&).     [K.,  Introduction, 
p.  xxvii,  §  vii.]  ^ 


61  is  made  up  of  striii  feet  ( ,  «^  \j ,  \j 


REFERENCES   AND   BIBLIOGRAPHICAL   NOTES.  Xciii 


REFERENCES  AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL   NOTES. 

T.A..P,=  Ti'ru-arul-pqyan,  fslqij  ^/(gil.  uuuesr.    The  100  couplets  of  this 
great  text-book  are  all  given  in  these  NOTES,  as  follows : — 
CHAPTER  I,  II.  1-20  in  NOTE  XII. 
„         III.  21-30  in  NOTE  XV. 
„         IV.  31-40  in  NOTE  VI. 
„         V.  41-50  in  NOTE  IV. 

VI-VIII.  51-80  in  NOTE  VI. 
„         IX.  81-90  in  NOTE  II. 
,,         X.  91-100  in  NOTE  VI. 

The  Traditional  History  of  Umapathi  fyvdgariyar  (see  NOTE  VII). — '  Umapathi  (  =  Lord 
of  Umai,  C.  ivan)  C.iva9ariyar  was  of  the  Tillai-varnthanar  tribe  of  Brahmans,  and  was  from 
his  earliest  youth  carefully  instructed  in  the  Vedas,  Agamams,  and  other  C.  aiva  scriptures. 
He  lived  in  the  discharge  of  all  the  duties  of  his  caste  and  class,  universally  respected  by  his 
fellow-townsmen.  One  day  he  went  as  a  Guru  in  his  palanquin  with  the  ensigns  of  his  dignity 
to  Tiru-Kalaft-  Qeri. 

'  Now  at  that  time  there  lived  a  Guru  at  Tiru-KalaH-Ceri,  whose  name  was  Marrai 
Nana9ambandha  C/iv^ariyar,  a  disciple  of  Arunanthi  of  Tiru-pennagadam,  a  Brahman  who 
was  commonly  known  by  the  name  of  C.agalagama-pandithar  (  =  Learned  in  all  the  Agamas). 

'  This  Marrai  Nana$ambandha  C.iva9ariyar,  seeing  him  pass  by,  said,  "  There  goes  a  man 
blind  in  the  daylight."  Now,  being  mature  in  grace  and  ripe  for  emancipation  (NOTE  III),  the 
instant  he  heard  these  words,  Umapathi  descended  from  his  palanquin,  fell  at  the  sacred 
teacher's  feet,  and  adored  him  with  "eightfold"  and  "fivefold"  prostrations.  At  the  Guru's 
meal  Umapathi  was  present,  and  when  some  rice  fell  to  the  ground  as  he  was  eating,  took  it 
up  and  ate  it.  He  then  received  from  his  new  Guru  the  mystic  teaching  necessary  to 
his  final  emancipation.  When  he  returned  to  his  people  they  expelled  him  for  his  violation 
of  caste  propriety  in  eating  the  remnants  of  his  Guru's  food,  and  he  was  compelled  to  remove 
to  Kottavan  -kudi,  where  eventually  he  was  in  death  made  perfect.' 

It  is  said  that  he  composed  a  commentary  in  Sanskrit  on  the  Boudgara  Agamam,  and 
in  Tamil1  he  wrote  (i)  Qiva-Piraga9am,  (2)  Tiru-arudpayan,  (3)  Vina-venba,  (4)  P5Ui- 
paxrjodai,  (5)  Kodi-Kavi,  (6)  Nenju-vidu-tuthu,  (7)  Unmai-nerri-vilakkam,  and  (8)  C.ankarr- 
paniragaranam  (p.  33).  These  all  explain  and  defend  the  tenets  of  the  C,  aiva  Siddhanta,  and 
I  have  used  them  "all  in  these  notes.  Palm-leaf  copies  made  in  Ceylon  are  in  the  Bodleian, 
and  they  have  been  printed  in  Madras  by  Canmuga-C,  unthara-Muthaliyar  and  others. 

From  a  date  given  in  Umapathi 's  works  we  learn  that  he  was  in  the  height  of  his  activity 
in  A.  D.  1313.  We  also  find  that  Madhava  Acharya,  the  author  of  the  Sarva-dar9ana- 
sangraha,  was  elected  in  A.  D.  1331  as  head  of  the  Math  of  Sringeri  in  Mysore.  It  seems 
evident  then  that  Madhava's  account  of  the  C,aiva  system  was  not  the  result  of  a  study 
of  the  finished  writings  of  the  Siddhanta  School.  In  fact,  very  little  can  be  learnt  about 
our  especial  subject  from  Madhava's  writings.  The  more  we  examine  the  details  of  the 
system  the  more  thoroughly  convinced  do  we  become  that  the  Siddhanta  is  indeed  an  eclectic 
system  thought  out  by  Tamil  sages,  from  hints  contained  in  Sanskrit  works,  and  owes  its 
completeness  to  the  ingenuity  of  the  Tamil  mind.  It  is  the  Tamil  answer  to  Buddhist,  Jain, 
and  Pantheist.  Umapathi  has  not  so  wide  a  reputation  as  Sankara  Acharya,  or  Madhava, 
because  he  taught  in  the  vernacular. 


1  Vada-mori  = '  northern  word '  =  Sanskrit.     Ten-mori  = '  southern  word '  =  Tamir  or  Tamil. 
See  Poke's  Kurral,  Introduction. 


xciv  REFERENCES 


T.  K.  P.  =^0assifip£iuuLf.uj[Tn  ;   a  treatise  in  100  Venba  quatrains,  by 
Uyya-vantha-deva-nayanar.     This  is  very  useful.     [Madras,  1875.] 


£.  N.  B.  =  £iva-ndna-bodham,  &<su  (&jirear  Qurr&LD,  by  Mey-kanda-devar. 
NOTE  III.  

U.V.  =  Unmai-Vilakkam,  e.6Bjr<sz»tz>  eSerrssw, '  the  light  of  reality'  (p.  5). 
This  is  one  of  the  fourteen  authoritative  standards  of  the  Siddhantam.  Its 
author  was  Mana-vagagam-kadanthan  of  Athigai,  one  of  the  disciples  of*  Mey- 
kanda-devar.  In  fifty-four  quatrains  the  work  gives  an  epitome  of  the  system. 


f.  P.  =  £ iva-Piragd(am,  by  Umapathi  £iva9ariyar  [1872].  NOTE  III. 
Often  printed. 

The  following  is  the  author's  preface  : — 

The  origin  of  this  treatise,  called  Civa-Piragdfam,  is  as  follows  : — 

C^ri-kanda-Paramcfuran,  the  absolute  Lord,  graciously  imparted  the  true  doctrine  of 
PATHI,  PA^U,  and  PAfAM,  which  constitutes  the  $3tu-k&n<jam  of  the  Caiva  Agamams,  the 
'  original  scripture '  proceeding  from  Himself,  to  Nanthi  (Devar),  who  graciously  imparted 
to  ^anat-kumara  and  other  sages  (Rishis)  the  substance  of  that  teaching  in  twelve  standard 
books  called  the  Civa-ndna-bodham.  (^anat-kiimara  transmitted  it  to  the  (^attiya-Hana- 
tarisinis ;  these  to  Paranjothi  Maniuni ;  he  to  Mey-&amfa-(dfvar),  whose  sacred  dwelling 
was  in  (Tiru)  Venney-Nallur.  This  last  compressed  the  doctrine  of  the  twelve  volumes  into 
twelve  Cutrams,  making  a  '  secondary  scripture,'  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Qiva-nana- 
bodham,  and  committed  it  to  Arunanthi  (Devar).  He  examined  it,  and  since  the  work  was 
much  compressed  and  the  meaning  profound,  expanded  it  and  made  a  '  secondary  scripture,' 
to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  (^iva-nana-fiddhi.  Umapathi  (Devar)  of  Kottavan-kudi, 
seeing  that  these  works  were  intelligible  only  to  those  of  acute  minds,  took  them  both,  and 
adding  from  his  own  stores  of  divine  wisdom,  composed  this  '  dependant  scripture,'  to  which 
he  gave  the  name  of  CtV6-Pirag&fO9tt  and  which  consists  of  100  quatrains  of  the  Viruttam 
metre,  divided  into  two  parts,  consisting  of  fifty  quatrains  each,  and  called  respectively 
'general  doctrine'  and  'reality.' 

The  Civdgamam  is  the  '  original  work '  (cjp«Jrg>r&)  ;  Civa-ndna-bodham  and  Civa-iidna- 
f iddhi  are  the  'secondary  authorities'  (*>$stt&i)\  and  this  C^iva-Piragafaw  is  a ' supplementary 
tieatise  '  (^r/i^A,  ^ODL.^^.  See  Nannfd,  6-8. 


P.P.  =  Periya  Purdnam,  'the  great  legend.'  This  is  published  in  verse  with 
commentary  [1885].  There  is  a  prose  summary  by  Arrumuga-Navalar  [1881]. 

(^ekkirar  and  the  Periya  Purdnam,  or  'Great  Legendary  History.' — About  the  end  of 
the  eleventh  century,  it  would  seem,  arose  a  Tamil  poet  whose  influence  throughout  South 
India  has  been  very  great,  and  is  probably  increasing.  He  came  from  the  village  of 
Kundrattur  ('  hill-town'},  and  was  called  Arul-mon-devar, l  He  of  the  Gracious  Word.'1  His 
brother  was  called  Pal-arra-vayar,  '  He  from  whose  mouth  milk  ever  flows'  These  may  have 
been  epithets  afterwards  given,  but  the  name  of  £ekkirar,  which  was  originally  that  of  the 
tribe  (a  subdivision  of  the  Vellalar,  or  Yeomen),  was  given  to  the  poet  as  being  pre-eminently 
the  glory  of  his  race.  The  C.  ora  king  of  that  day  was  called  Anapayar  ('  the  Imperishable,' 
an  epithet  of  C.ivan),  whose  date  is  between  A. D.  1063  and  1112,  and  is  said  to  have  been 
greatly  addicted  to  the  study  of  Jain  literature,  and  especially  of  their  great  epic,  the  Jivaga 
Chintamani,  an  account  of  which  is  given  elsewhere.  There  were  many  good  reasons  against 
this  heretical  study,  but  the  chief  one  urged  was  that  its  teachings  were  opposed  to  the  C,  aiva 
faith.  The  C.  ekkirar,  who  for  his  learning  and  piety  had  been  made  prime  minister  of  the 
kingdom,  a  position  greatly  affected  in  old  times  by  C.  aiva  devotees,  reproved  his  master  for 
these  heretical  studies.  The  king  answered,  'But  where  are  the  lives  of  your  C.aiva  Saints? 
Give  them  to  me,  that  I  may  obtain  pleasure  and  edification  from  their  perusal.'  To  this  the 
minister  replied,  that  Sundara  Murtti  had  summed  up,  in  eleven  poems,  the  history  of  the 


AND   BIBLIOGRAPHICAL   NOTES.  XCV 

(,'aiva  devotees,  and  that  Nambi-andar-Nambi  had  amplified  this  work  in  verse  '.  These  works 
were  brought  to  the  king,  who  read  them  with  delight,  but  found  them  all  too  brief.  lie 
therefore  requested  his  minister,  the  C.  ekkirar,  to  compose  a  poem  that  should  be  a  great  epic 
like  the  JIvaga  Chintamani,  and  should  make  these  histories  popular  through  all  the  Tamil- 
speaking  lands.  C.ekkirar  undertook  the  task,  and  at  once  proceeded  to  Qithambaram,  the 
C.  ivan  metropolis,  where,  after  bathing  in  the  sacred  tank,  and  performing  all  holy  rites,  he 
presented  himself  before  the  God,  Who  there  ever  performs  the  mystic  dance  that  symbolizes 
His  five  divine  operations.  There  worshipping  he  made  his  prayer  for  inspiration  to  perform 
the  assigned  task.  In  response  a  voice  was  heard  from  the  shrine  which  uttered  the  line — 

'  He  who  is  hard  to  be  understood  and  expressed  in  words.' 

This  both  the  poet  and  the  three  thousand  devotees  of  the  temple  heard,  and  understood 
that  the  God  sanctioned  the  undertaking  and  commanded  that  the  poem  should  commence 
with  this  line. 

The  bard  now  set  himself  to  collect  from  every  quarter,  arrange,  and  versify  the  legends, 
while  the  impatient  king  continually  sent  messengers  to  inquire  as  to  the  progress  of  the  work 
and  to  urge  it  on.  At  length  the  poem  was  completed,  and  the  king  himself,  learning  that 
the  greal  poem,  whose  initial  line  the  God  Himself  had  vouchsafed  to  dictate,  was  completed, 
came  to  the  sacred  place,  and  bowed  in  reverence  before  his  poet-laureate  and  minister.  And 
now  epistles  were  dispatched  to  all  parts  of  the  Tamil  country,  to  the  devotees  of  the  God  of 
every  order,  who  came  thronging  in  until  the  city  was  crowded  with  sages  and  ascetics.  In 
t  he  Golden  Hall — the  Ponnambalam — a  seat  was  placed  for  the  bard,  and  with  royal  pomp 
the  finished  poem  was  placed  upon  a  pedestal,  while  flowers  were  scattered  around  and  incense 
offered.  So  the  first  reading  began  on  the  sixth  of  the  month  Qittirai  (April),  and  continued 
day  by  day  till  the  same  time  of  the  following  year,  while  in  the  interval,  all  the  auditors 
from  every  region  were  daily  feasted  by  the  bounty  of  the  king.  After  the  reading  was  com- 
pleted, the  book  was  wrapped  up  in  a  silken  covering  fringed  with  gold,  then  deposited  in 
a  golden  casket,  and  with  the  bard  placed  in  the  hoivdah  of  a  royal  elephant,  where  the  king 
stationed  himself  with  a  fan  to  cool  the  distinguished  compiler ;  and  thus  in  royal  pomp  they 
returned  to  the  royal  abode.  The  king  then  assigned  to  the  poet  the  7'ondai  land2  as  a  king- 
dom, which,  with  his  brother,  he  governed  for  some  time,  and  then  returning  to  the  presence 
of  the  God,  in  due  time  obtained  his  final  release. 

The  collection  of  legends  which  this  poet  has  thus  versified  consists  of  seventy-two  cantos, 
in  which  the  lives  of  sixty-three  devotees  of  C.  ivan  are  given,  with  every  species  of  embellish- 
ment. It  would  seem  that  the  Caiva  gurus  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they  could  not 
retain  their  hold  upon  the  people  without  something  that  should  be  equivalent  to  the  Jdtakas 
current  among  both  Buddhists  and  Jains,  and  probably  beginning  then  to  be  used  by  the 
Vaishnavites  also.  It  is  curious  that  the  same  species  of  legendary  history  was  commencing 
at  that  very  time  to  play  a  very  great  part  in  the  religion  of  the  Western  peoples.  About  this 
period,  the  Nestorian  Christians  on  the  Western  Coast  of  South  India  were  in  full  force,  and  though 
their  teaching  would  seem  to  have  been  very  corrupt,  and  a  great  deal  of  Hinduism,  Buddhism, 
and  Muhammadanism  was  mingled  with  their  Christianity,  they  still  possessed  and  valued  and 
vaunted  their  own  legends  together  with  and  above  the  sacred  authentic  Christian  history. 

Our  poet  and  the  devotees  at  C.ithambaram,  who  seem  to  have  formed  an  Editorial 
Committee,  had  abundant  sources  of  inspiration.  Every  village  throughout  the  Tamil  lands 
was  made  to  give  up  its  traditions,  and  additional  matter  was  sought  for  in  all  directions. 
The  result  is  a  very  remarkable  and  composite  Hagiography. 


Muir  =  Muir's  Sanskrit  Texts.     [Second  Edition.     Triibner,  1868.] 


S.  D.  S.  =  Sarva-darfana-sangraha ,  by  Madhava  Acharya.    [Calcutta,  1858.] 
Translation  of  above  by  Cowell  and  Gough.     [Triibner,  1882.] 


1  This  is  a  famous  work  composed  by  the  Saint.     See  his  life. 

2  The  Tondai-mandalam  was  a  subordinate  kingdom,  subject  to  the  C,6ras. 


XCV1  TRANSLITERATION   OF   TAMIL  WORDS, 


TRANSLITERATION    OF    TAMIL    WORDS,   AND 
THEIR    PRONUNCIATION. 

IN  attempting  to  write  Tamil  words  in  Roman  characters  many  difficulties 
arise.     The  following  hints  are  intended 

(1)  to  enable  the  student  to  write  Tamil  in  English  letters  on  a  uniform 
and  scientific  system ; 

(2)  to  show  how  to  reproduce  these  words  in  Tamil  characters ;  and 

(3)  to  guide  the  student  into  something  like  an  Oriental  enunciation  of 
words. 

1.  The  Tamil  vowels  are  twelve  in  number,  to  be  pronounced  as  in  Italian. 

£1  =  a  as  in  America; 

^  =  a  as  in  father ; 

Jg)  =  ;'  as  in  pm ; 
j£  (/F)  =  ?  as  in  pjque ; 

a.  =  u  as  in  bu\\ ; 

ass.  —  u  as  in  rule ; 

CT  =  ^  as  in  end ; 

67  =  <?  as  in  th(?y  ; 

<p  =  o  as  in  opinion  ; 

^  =  o  as  in  opium  ; 

gg        =  ai  as  in  aisle  or  maid  (two  sounds) ; 
gxsrr      =  au,  or  ow  in  fowl. 

II.  Tamil  consonants  are  eighteen  in  number. 

r.  s=k,g(kh,gh,h}.  [Guttural.]  The  following  rules  must  be  observed  :— 

(a)  &  initial,  mute  or  doubled,  =  k. 

(8)  s  single,  not  initial,  —g. 

(c)  In  Sanskrit  words  &  often  stands  for  kh,  gh  or  h  :  these  letters  having 
no  separate  sign  in  Tamil. 

2.  £=f  (s,  fy,  ch.     [Palatal-dental.] 

(a)  This  is  a  very  soft  palatal,  not  a  sibilant.     Tamil  people — the  pure, 

old,  unsophisticated,  unorganized  Dravidians — could  pronounce 
neither  a  sibilant  nor  an  aspirate.  They  simply  omitted  these, 
or  for  s  used  /  (p),  or  substituted  the  soft  palatal  f,  which  is 
c  with  a  soft  s  sound  in  it :  the  French  (. 

(b)  When  doubled,  or  following  ^>  and  tl,  \i  =  ch. 

(c)  After  (CTj  it  =/ 


AND   THEIR    PRONUNCIATION.  XCvii 

3.  iL—d.     [Cerebral.] 

(a)  This  is  a  d  stopped  as  far  back  on  the  palate  as  possible.     The  dot 

under  marks  its  very  hard  sound. 
(£)  When  doubled  (L~L^)  it  =  t(,  a  doublet  pronounced  in  the  same  way. 

4.  j=t,  th  (d,  dh).     [Dental.] 

(a)  This  is  a  soft  dental  /  when  initial. 

(b)  When  doubled,  or  in  the  body  of  a  word,  it  =  /A  as  in  /#is — FLAT;  never 

sharp  as  in  ///in  1 

5.  u  =  p,b(ph,bh,f}.     [Labial.] 

(a)  u  initial,  mute  or  doubled  is  hard,  =p. 

(b)  u  single,  not  initial,  =  b. 

(c)  In  Sanskrit  and  foreign  words  u  may  stand  for  ph,  bh,  v,f. 

6.  IEI^  <g£,  «»r,  cor,  i  =  n,  n,  n,  n.     [Nasal.]     As  these  belong  to  the  above 
five  classes  respectively  they  may  be  distinguished  thus : — 

IEI  or  n  guttural =n, 

(j?5  or  n  palatal =n, 

eaer  or  n  cerebral =n, 

esr  and  is  are  really  the  same  in  use  as  the  English  n. 

7.  u,  —  m,  I 

ih  =y,    L   as  in  English. 
&  =  v,    j 

8.  <f,  p}  £  =  r,  rr  (r\  r.     These  are  three  r  sounds,—  dental,  palatal,  and 
cerebral  respectively. 

9.  &)  and  &r  =  /,  /.     See  3.  (a). 

10.  pfa  is  used  for  //,  when  the  /  sound  is  strong.      It  may  be  distinguished, 
when  necessary,  by  a  line  under  (#). 


It  would  be  of  great  advantage  if  all  Tamil  scholars  could  agree  to  use, 
consistently  and  always,  one  uniform  distinctive  system  of  transliteration  for 
Tamil  words. 

In  printing  the  Tamil  text  I  have  ventured  to  use  occasionally  an  apostrophe 
to  indicate  the  disappearance  of  a  letter  according  to  Tamil  rules.  [G.  20.]  Thus, 
&86B)£iLj6asfl6srf[).     Here  &r  in  tL&r,  and  IB  in  tSebp,  have  disappeared,  «w 
taking  their  place,  and  '  gives  warning  to  the  reader  of  an  elision. 

eiemss  S)a;?6u  or  )  _ 

.  .,      .  [  Here  a.  is  cut  off. 

This  is  an  experiment. 


ADDITIONS   AND   CORRECTIONS. 


Page  52,  line  3,  for  fff  read  fr$ 

P.  54,  1.  12,  for  Gar*j(*  read  j,ff«          , 

n  f  -in  some  copies. 

P.  01,  1.  2,  for  m-pp  read  a-f>f 


P.  63,   1.  5,  yi>r  •/» 

P.  66,  1.  12,  ^7r  a  read  <gti 

P.  243,  1.  23,  for  man  r,W  men 

LEXICON. 

P.  3,  col.  2,  after  1.  11,  insert  (in  some  copies)  jf^<s««*[S.  ANUKUJ.AM],  in  harmony  with,  4.67. 
P.  13,  col.  i,  1.  30,  alter  thus:  ®fcr. 

I.  see  <jy&r,  «&r. 

II.  v.  tr.  [§  62],  afflict. 

III.  v.  intr.  [§  57],  grieve,  yearn,  29.  38  [or  *&r]. 
P.  32,  col.  I,  1.  33,  for  Qftr-ji  tead  0>*<*.jp 


PART   II. 

THE    FIFTY-ONE    POEMS 

OF   THE 

TIRUVAgAGAM 

OF 

MANIKKA-VAgAGAR. 

INTRODUCTIONS,   TAMIL   TEXT,   AND   ENGLISH    TRANSLATION. 


ff sir     djpfj ei9 & G s ifj $ 


<£.     ^frig} 

&  QJ      L-f  <J  fT  <S83T  LD. 
'  611  65T^[BIT^'lC65)J)6a)lDUJn[Sn"LJLpC!nLC. 

§ 


G  I.D  LD  ^Sl^GSTin'  JDj<5!Kfr<o$$flULJ[T<55r 


TIRUVAgAGAM 

OR 

THE    SACRED    UTTERANCE. 

HYMN   I. 
DIVAN'S  WAYS  OF  OLD ;  OR,  DIVAN'S  COURSE  FROM  EVERLASTING. 

This  has  always  been  considered  the  first  of  Manikka-Vafagar's  poems,  and  it  has  all  the  charac- 
teristics of  a  preface,  as  enumerated  in  the  Nannul;  but  its  very  technical  completeness  makes  its 
genuineness  doubtful ;  and  it  rather  appears  to  have  been  added  by  the  Tillai  assembly  when  the 
lyrics  of  the  Saint  were  first  collected.  In  the  Vdthavurar  Purdnam  (V.  n)  it  is  said  that  after  the 
divine  Master  had  returned  to  Kaila^am,  the  Sage  with  the  999  devotees  remained  under  the  Kurunthu 
tree  at  Perun-turrai,  where  the  God  had  first  appeared  to  him  ;  erected  a  shrine  there,  and  spent  his 
time  in  adoration  and  praise,  until  his  fellow-worshippers  passed  through  the  fire  to  £ivan,  leaving 
him  alone.  To  this,  the  first  period  of  his  religious  history,  the  following  three  poems  belong ;  and 
also,  according  to  tradition, lyrics  19,  20,  23-29,  32-34,  36,  38,  39,  41-48,  and  perhaps  a  few  others. 

Here  all  the  Tamil  lines  are  of  four  feet,  except  the  last,  which  has  three  only.  The  connection  is 
Ven-dalai  (Pope's  Kurral,  Introd.,  p.  xxvii ;  Ndladi,  p.  xxvi,  &c.).  The  metre  is  Ven-kali-pa. 

§  Salutations. 

Hail,  the  five  letters !   Hail,  foot  of  the  Lord  ! 

Hail,  foot  of  Him  Who  not  for  an  instant  quits  my  heart ! 

Hail,  foot  of  the  Guru-pearl  that  rules  in  Gogari ! 

Hail,  foot  of  Him  Who  becomes,  abides,  draws  near  as  the  Agamam  ! 

Hail,  foot  of  Him,  the  One,  the  Not-One,  and  the  King!  5 


i.  Na-ma-9i-va-ya.     This  is  the  mystic  formula  of  five  letters  (or  five  syllables,  as  we  should 
say)  =  ' Salutation  to  £ivan.'     V.  245-248.     NOTE  II.  3.  £i<5*it»®g*s>p  :  Tiru-vavadu-turrai. 

4.  These  are  said  to  be  twenty-eight  in  number,  and  to  contain  the  elements  of  Caivism. 

B 


^?  (1)  GU  IT  ff 


!  £l<su<5sr(o3: 


LDfTlULJ   l 

/f  Qu(rfjjrigi<55)fnjB/B  G^sussr  ^is^Qunpf^  ! 


&rnQ<s\) 


(LpJB<o!np  <S)Sll2G3T(Lf>(LgJJilLC> 


Victory  to  the  foot  of  the  King,  who  soothed  my  soul's  unrest,  and  made  me  I 

Victory  to  the  jewelled  feet  of  Pinnagan,  who  severs  continuity  of  birth  ! 

Victory  to  the  flower-foot  of  Him  Who  is  far  from  those  without  1 

Victory  to  the  anklets  of  the  King,  rejoicing  'mid  those  that  fold  adoring  hands  ! 

Victory  to  the  anklets  of  the  glorious  One,  who  uplifts  those  that  bow  the  head ! 

Praise  to  the  foot  of  ^an  !    Praise  to  my  Father's  foot !  1 1 

Praise  to  the  foot  of  the  Teacher !   Praise  to  Divan's  roseate  foot ! 

Praise  to  the  foot  of  the  Stainless,  who  in  love  stood  near ! 

Praise  to  the  foot  of  the  King,  who  cuts  off  delusive  birth  ! 

Praise  to  the  foot  of  glorious  Perun-turrai's  God  !  1 5 

Praise  to  the  Mount,  in  grace  affording  pleasures  that  cloy  not ! 

§  Introduction. 

Because  He,  £ivan,  within  my  thought  abides, 

By  His  grace  alone,  bowing  before  His  feet, 

With  joyous  thought,  Divan's  '  Ways  of  Old  '  I  '11  tell, 

That  thus  my  former  '  deeds '  may  wholly  pass.  20 


7.  Properly  Sanskrit  Pitmadha=t  he  with  braided  locks.'      8.  i.  e.  men  of  other  sects.       20.  For 
'deeds'  see  Pope's  Kurral,  p. xxxviii  and  notes;  with  especially  Ndlafi,  ch.  xi. 


LJ  J  IT  683T  li.        ffi. 


§ 
< 
LJ(D<55)6UUJJIL1LJ 


GTSVGVfTLJ  iSlfDULJLCi 


I  came,  attained  the  grace  the  '  Brow-eyed '  showed, 

Adored  the  beauteous  foot  by  thought  unreached. 

O  Thou,  Who  fill'st  the  heaven,  Who  fill'st  the  earth,  art  manifested  light, 

Transcending  thought,  Thou  boundless  One  !  Thy  glory  great 

I,  man  of  evil  'deeds/  know  not  the  way  to  praise  !  25 

§  His  various  e  ml)  o  clime  lit  s. 

Grass  was  I,  shrub  was  I,  worm,  tree, 

Full  many  a  kind  of  beast,  bird,  snake, 

Stone,  man,  and  demon.     'Midst  Thy  hosts  I  served. 

The  form  of  mighty  Asuras,  ascetics,  gods  I  bore. 

Within  these  immobile  and  mobile  forms  of  life,  3° 

In  every  species  born,  weary  I've  grown,  great  Lord  ! 

§  He  found  the  Master. 

Truly,  seeing  Thy  golden  feet  this  day,  I've  gained  release. 
O  Truth  !  as  the  Ongaram  dwelling  in  my  soul, 


26.  Comp.VIII.  79.          33.  Many  mysteries  are  hidden  in  this  Sanskrit  word.   Lex.    See  £i.  Pr. 
II.  41,  42. 

B  2 


$  IK  STJ  T  a1*  ii. 

-4-  ™      C' 

QLDJUJU/T! 


Quiriuiuiriflssr  srsvsv/rtL  G?Lj/n/J^gy«6t>  aj/ 


,  <srruumu, 

I,  <5T<5$r%o$TLJ 

(oSlfflfllUfTlLJ, 


L  Ql_<55T<£G!L($  ^SST 


That  I  may  'scape.     O  spotless  One  !     O  Master  of  the  bull ! 

Lord  of  the  Vedas  !     Rising,  sinking,  spreading,  subtile  One  !  35 

Thou  art  the  heat !  and  Thou  the  cold  !  the  Master  Thou,  O  spotless  One ! 

Thou  cam'st  in  grace,  that  all  things  false  might  flee, 

True  Wisdom,  gleaming  bright  in  splendour  true, 

To  me,  void  of  all  wisdom,  blissful  Lord  ! 

O  Wisdom  fair,  causing  unwisdom's  self  to  flee  far  off!  40 

§  Civan's  five  operations. 

Thou  know'st  no  increase,  measure,  end  !    All  worlds 

Thou  dost  create,  protect,  destroy,  enrich  with  grace, 

Release.     Thou  causest  me  to  enter  'mid  Thy  servant  band. 

More  subtile  Thou  than  fragrance.     Thou'rt  afar,  art  near. 

Thou  art  the  Mystic  word  transcending  word  and  thought.  45 

As  when  are  mingled  milk,  sweet  juice  of  cane  and  butter, 

Thou  dost  distil,  like  honey,  in  the  thought  of  glorious  devotees, 

And  cuttest  off  the  continuity  of  births— our  mighty  One  ! 


43.  Divan's  Jive  works.    The  best  exposition  of  these  is  found  in  the  £iva-piraga9arn,  I.  6.     See 
TE  I.  '  Civan's  operations.' 


<#  GU     l_|  J  T  633T  &.       &>. 


Q^i/j/u,  — 


iur 

&(TI     IQ  , 


fili)  &lfDIB(§  3b  ILJ  fTGU  IT65T  ^jSJjj]  SuQsST  \ 

§ 


§  Human  embodiment  and  enlightenment  by  grace. 

Thou  hast  the  colours  five  !     While  heavenly  ones  extolled 

Thou  didst  lie  hid,  our  mighty  Lord  !    In  the  strong  grasp  of  deeds,  50 

I  lay,  hidden  amid  illusion's  shrouding  gloom. 

Thou  binding  with  rare  cords  of  virtue  and  of  sin, 

Didst  clothe  with  outer  skin,  enveloping  with  worms  and  filth, — 

Within  my  nine-gated  dwelling  foul  bewildered, 

By  the  five  senses  sore  deceived, —  55 

To  me,  mean  as  I  was,  with  no  good  thing,  Thou  didst  grant  grace, 

That  I,  with  mind  erewhile  embruted, — pure  one  ! — should 

Become  commingling  love,  in  soul-subduing  rapture  melt ! 

Thou  cam'st  in  grace  on  this  same  earth,  didst  show  Thy  mighty  feet 

To  me  who  lay  mere  slave, — meaner  than  any  dog, —  60 

Essential  grace  more  precious  than  a  mother's  love  ! 

§  Epithets  of  praise. 

Spotless  splendour  !     Brightness  of  full-blown  flower  ! 


49.  In  Unmai-Vilakkam,  5  : 

'  EARTH  in  colour  is  golden  ; 
WATER  is  white ;  FIRE,  the  all-pervasive,  is  red; 
The  mighty  WIND  is  black; 
The  ETHER  is  smoke-coloured.' 

So  the  five  colours  are  mystically  the  five  elements, — all  His.        50.  'Deeds,' good  and  evil,  alike 
cause  embodiment.         53  &c.  Ndladi,  ch.  v.  [B.  GITA  V.  14].        61.  Comp.  VIII.  41. 


$  55  eu  IT  ff  a  il>. 

\  ^Is 
LJfbiD£}££ilLJ  urrrfl&gj 


\ 
srssr  ^(irjuSffiTtLijSesftyQGsr  • 


(O&\  jtfi^jxni  <&&  rfl  tu  jf?i  gg 


<jpj<£<£(T\  L&at&m 


pf  <9j-i—Qrr[rG(fliLiJiLj&9  Qfjsvsvj^  jp  smjastni  sswti  <su  mu 


O  Teacher  !     Honied  ambrosia  !     Lord  of  £iva-town  ! 

O  venerated  One,  Guardian,  Looser  of  Pagam's  tie, 

Working  in  grace  of  love,  that  in  my  mind  delusion  may  die  out  !  65 

Great  river  of  exceeding  tenderness,  with  ceaseless  flow  ! 

Ambrosia  that  satiates  not  !     Infinite,  almighty  Lord  ! 

Light  unseen  that  lurks  within  the  souls  that  sought  Thee  not  ! 

Thou  Who  abidest  in  my  soul,  till  melting  waters  flow  ! 

Thou  Who  art  without  pleasure  or  pain,  Who  yet  hast  both  !  70 

Loving  to  loving  ones  !     Effulgent  One,  Who  all  things  art, 

And  their  negation  too  !     Great  Master,  whom  no  darkness  gathers  round  ! 

First  One,  Thou'rt  End  and  Midst,  and  art  devoid  of  these  ! 

Father,  Lord,  Who  drew'st,  and  mad'st  me  Thine  ! 

Eye  of  the  minds  that  see  by  keenest  glance  of  wisdom  true,  75 

Hard  to  be  eyed-!     Subtle  understanding,  none  can  scrutinize  ! 

Holy  !  Who  comest  not,  nor  goest,  nor  mingling  liv'st  ! 

Guardian  who  guardest  us  !     Great  Light  whom  none  can  see  ! 

Flood  of  delight  !     Father  !     Light  of  all  passing  splendours 

That  appear!     Unutterably  subtle  Intellect  !  80 


77.  Comp.  XX.  17,  18. 


611      l_|  CT  (T  633T  li).       <SB. 


6763T 
!J(Lp(o<£  \ 


Q<ffT<SV<SVlb 


l<5ui-][r/Bl5) 

UGV(o6V[T(IJ)LC> 


Of  all  that  in  this  world  diverse  pronounced  as  truth 

Is  known,  Thou  art  the  knowledge  sure  !     Full  certitude  ! 

Precious  ambrosia,  fountain  welling  up  within  !     My  Owner  Thou  ! 

§  Passionate  invocation. 

I  can't  endure,  our  Guru,  in  this  changing  straitened  frame  to  'bide. 

Aran  !     All  Thy  saints  made  true  invoke  Thee,  85 

Worshipping  abide,  and  praising  Thee,  from  falsehood  freed, 

Hither  return  no  more  !     That  deeds  and  birth  cling  not, 

To  sever  bonds  of  this  deceitful  sensuous  frame  the  might  is  Thine  ! 

Lord  who  dost  dance,  trampling  dense  darkness  down  ! 

Dancer  in  Tillai !     Dweller  in  the  Southern  Pandi  land  !  90 

Thou  Who  dost  cut  off  evil  birth  !— Adoring  ever,  Thee  they  name, 

Whom  words  declare  not ;  then,  'NEATH  THY  SACRED  FEET 

THEY  LEARN  THE  MEANING  OF  THEIR  SONG.     The  blessed  ones 

In  Divan's  town  who  dwell, — full  many  a  one,— beneath 

The  feet  of  £ivan,  lowly  bending  utter  praise.  95 


d§  IIj  <SU  IT  ff  <95  &• 


T  6OTT  L  IT  6U 


(oSTT/T®  JBIULJI-JID  OTl 


giVAN'S    FAME. 

HYMN   II. 
THE  SACRED  SONG  OF  DIVAN'S   RENOWNED  ACTS. 

Composed  in  Tillai  (7m<  Vdthavurar  Puranam,  V.  62). 

The  sacred  foot  that  danced  in  Tillai's  city  old 

Is  His,  Who  in  all  varied  lives  has  energized  ; 

Revealed  in  beauty  of  innumerous,  varied  qualities  ; 

In  earth,  in  sky,  and  in  celestial  worlds. 

All  ordered  lore  hath  He  revealed,  and  He  made  void.  5 

My  darkness  hath  He  driven  for  aye  far  off. 

Within  His  servants'  inmost  soul  that  love  o'erflows 

He  dwells, — His  glory  and  His  choice. 

On  great  Mahendra's  biding  hill 

In  grace  He  caused  the  uttered  Agamas  appear.  10 

He  came  with  the  good  goddess, 

Pleasant  and  gracious,  mingling  with  men  at  Kalladam. 

i.  See  XL.  9.  Lines  18,  19. 


a.. 


QUITS  (?S17/L_Q/jD/r(5)  Sl^^^6UfTlU6U<SYT  a® 


bfbfD  65)  (SU^  LQ(o$)LC>LL  Q  £/B  jJBl  jj^jsl  QJj  tg 


jpj/B<£  u86Vrrrfluj<g8)  lu  LA  ijs^^oflu^  / 

(7rj6yLn  (oSlJ^QsU  /D* 
Q  ^)/L/3V/_9s5T  ^/T^, 


ID 


With  her  whose  words  are  milk  in  the  'fivefold  couch,' 

He  caused  sweet  grace,  that  unfailing  accumulates,  to  grow. 

In  guise  of  a  woodman,  of  her  whose  lips  are  crimson,  15 

He  sank  in  the  lovely  expanse  of  the  swelling  breast. 

Becoming  a  fisherman  He  caught  the  shark. 

And  he  received  the  Agamas,  a  rich  spoil. 

Moreover,  on  Mahendra  seated,  the  self-same  Agamas 

From  His  five  mouths  He  graciously  spake  forth.  20 

In  our  abode  a  Brahman  He  became, 

And  as  a  deathless  Guru  dwelt  in  grace. 

Assuming  diverse  forms,  and  diverse  habitudes, 

As  hundreds  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  natures, 

lean,  Lord  of  the  bull,  that  the  world  might  be  saved,—  35 

He  and  the  Lady,  His  partner,  —  came  in  grace. 

Bringing  horses,  in  the  Western  land, 

Right  royally  He  rode  in  state. 

In  fair  Puttur,  town  of  the  dart,  upon  the  bull  He  rode, 


13.  A  shrine  of  that  name:  Patlja-palli.  '  15.  (Divan's  appearance  as  a  Vefan  (Sans.  Kirata),  or 
'  woodman,'  is  told  in  the  Aranya  Parvam  (IV)  of  the  Mahabharata,  and  in  §  2  'Arjnna's  penance.' 
See  Villiputtiran's  Tamil  version,  III.  §  i,  ver.  81  &c.  17.  '  Sacred  sports,' 57.  18.  'Sacred 

sports,'  1 6.         21.  Tillai,  or  Nantham  Paft. 


IO  $  J5  61J  n  8-  S>  &  . 


<s£lrbQurT(rrj  (osui—ib^  FT-JB 


JB[fl<55)UJ&  (ZjJBlQnrj  ^sQlU  JB69T65)  LD  ILj  Lb  J 

^syr  ^\i 

S  (<3jLJLJrFl 


Qp  rrssrss)  LDILJLD, 


QcS/TSYT  <5S)&  ILf  LL  ; 
^SSTSsfisV  <JT)]iyJU<SULL  (S/TdSLJ 
LJffl&L£>  ; 


Made  manifest  His  state  and  glorious  pomp.  30 

In  a  mirror,  at  Puttur  of  the  santhal-wood, 

Gave  increase  to  the  woodman  armed  with  bow. 

His  form  all  flame,  that  held  the  'gram-bag,' 

In  magic  beauty  exquisite,  of  old  he  showed. 

He  whose  extent  to  Hari  and  to  Brahma  was  not  known, 

In  goodness  jackals  into  horses  made, 

To  make  him  His,  He  of  the  sacred  foot, 

The  chargers  to  the  Pandiyan  sold, 

Nor  deigned  to  take  the  heaped-up  gold. 

Our  King  made  me  His  slave,  and  in  the  path  of  grace  to  keep,  40 

Made  manifest  the  ancient  brightening  ray. 

Becoming  a  Brahman,  graciously  making  me  His  own, 

He  showed  the  magic  illusion. 

Coming  to  Madura,  the  city  great  and  fair, 

He  became  a  horse's  groom. 

And  therein  too,  for  the  female  devotee 

He  condescended  to  carry  earth. 


35-  See  Arundfalam.  42.  In  Perun-turrai.  43.  Thejacka/s. 


QsUL-IEJ 


LJ 

UIT6U 


LT> 


In  Uttara-Kofa-Mangai  abiding 

He  showed  His  special  form. 

In  Puvanam  he  vouchsafed  to  appear  in  beauty,  50 

And  showed  His  ancient  spotless  form. 

In  Vathavur  he  came  sweetly  gracious 

And  caused  the  sound  of  His  tinkling  anklets  to  be  heard. 

In  Perun-turrai's  blissful  home,  a  Blessed  One  He  dwelt, 

And  guileful,  in  undimmed  lustre  hid  Himself.  55 

In  Puvalam,  beauteous,  sweet  and  gracious, 

He  sin  destroyed. 

A  water-booth  he  placed,  to  gain  the  victory, 

And  graciously  became  an  attendant  who  serves  water. 

He  came  a  guest  to  Venkadu.  60 

Beneath  the  Kurunthu  tree  He  sat  that  day. 

In  royal  Mangai,  in  fair  beauty  throned, 

The  eight  great  mystic  powers  in  grace  He  gave. 

Becoming  a  hunter,  and  assuming  the  form  He  desired, 

In  the  forest  with  guile  He  lay  hid.  65 

48.  Song  VI. 


$  15  6U  IT  <J  (S  U)  . 


iT<£  Qsssru  /TVO  nfl  xijpjSQi)  $s£lfb 


(oK  fTSSTJS  SSSTGoST  J&SVt&lU  J56&T6S)  l£>  lULJb  J 


UITGU&LL  USVLJSV  XKL\S)JU 


Exhibiting  a  body,  assumed  at  pleasure, 

He  bore  the  fitting  form. 

In  Jackal-town  well  pleased  in  grace 

He  became  an  earthly  babe. 

In  Pandur  He  came  to  dwell.  70 

In  the  resplendent  island,  in  the  south  of  Devur, 

He  assumed  kingly  state. 

In  sacred  Arur,  famed  for  its  honey-dripping  groves, 

He  bestowed  the  gift  of  wisdom. 

In  Idai-maruthu,  by  hosts  attended,  75 

He  planted  His  pure  foot. 

Assuming  the  nature  of  Ekambam, 

He  became  partner  with  his  never-sundered  queen. 

In  glory  He  dwelt  in  sacred  Vanjiyam, 

And  delighted  in  the  society  of  her  of  perfumed  locks. 

He  became  an  attendant  bearing  a  mighty  bow, 

And  assumed  many  various  appearances. 

He  dwelt  in  a  spacious  home  in  Kadambur  ; 


$  jlj 


V  <5&(l1jUU<55r 


LjfDLDUiULL 
p 
GV  Q 


LLfTLD^SV  L^(o-S^^!J  Q  61J  if)  LJ  65T  , 


And  showed  Himself  in  beauty  in  the  hill  Ingoy. 

He  became  a  Caivan  in  Aiyarru.  85 

He  abode  with  desire  in  Turutti. 

In  the  '  town  of  the  sacred  palm  '  He  dwelt  desired. 

In  Karumalam  He  manifested  His  presence. 

In  the  'Vulture's  Hill'  He  dwelt  without  a  flaw. 

In  Purrambayam  He  taught  virtues  manifold.  9o 

In  Kuttalam  He  was  for  a  sign. 

Concealing  His  endless  greatness  in  form  of  fire, 

In  beauteous  disguise  the  only  primal  One  assumed  a  form, 

In  magic  splendour  came  in  grace, 

Took  each  one's  nature  into  Himself,  —  95 

Being  the  infinite  Lord  of  grace,  our  king,  — 

Became  a  Sage  as  moonlight  bright. 

Thro'  upper  air  descending  to  the  beauteous  LAND 

He  came  in  fairest  form  and  filled  with  grace,— 

Lord  of  the  HILL  Mahenthiram,  mountain  of  mystic  lore,  100 

The  King  of  grace,  immeasurably  great  ! 

89.  Song  XXX. 


Gil  T  ff  <$  UD. 


,  SflgjfjfT 
<55)  !—<£  ^  HfB 


UflJbfr  SGSTLGSiPU  UUSSTfD  <SU  <535TSS8T 


(Lp  LL  ; 


If  one  could  tell  the  way  He  made  me  His: 

He  showed  His  sacred  form  of  power  and  grace  ; 

He  exhibited  His  BANNER  of  sacred  ashes; 

The  RIVER  of  rapture  that  straightway  105 

All  human  vileness  sweeps  away,  in  grace  He  gave : 

The  Partner  of  the  DAME,  in  mercy  great ! 

While  the  great  NATHA-DRUM  spake  loud 

He  made  me  His,  so  that  impurity  touches  not. 

He  bears  the  mystic  SPEAR,  no 

The  splendour  He  whose  flame  pure  light  emits, 

Who  cuts  away  the  primal  threefold  bond  ; 

A  loving  one,  the  lotus  GARLAND  blue 

In  fragrant  loveliness  He  wore ; 

Hari  and  Brahma  knew  not  Him  to  mete;  115 

On  prancing  charger  forth  He  rode. 

He  shows  in  grace  the  way  knows  no  return ; 

The  old  dominion  of  the  Pandi  LAND  is  His ; 


104  &c.   Compare  Song  XIX  for  the  ten  royal  insignia  and  attributes.         113.  Umai,  His  spouse. 
115.  Song  VII.  69-72. 


jc 


He  bears  to  bliss  supern  His  pious  saints  ; 

Uttara-Kofa-Mangai  is  His  TOWN;  120 

To  the  primeval  Beings  He  gives  grace, 

The  GOD  OF  GODS  His  sacred  NAME; 

His  VEHICLE  is  gift  of  joy  dispels  the  dark ; 

His  the  MOUNT  of  grace  that  greatness  gives, 

Fitted  to  each  on«'s  lofty  nature,  each  one's  power  ;  125 

Meetly  in  love  He  makes  them  His; — 

Me,  cur,  in  Tillai  filled  with  good, 

He  bade  draw  nigh  th' all-glorious  company; 

Yet,  Ah  !  He  left  me  here. 

That  day  His  servants  who  gained  grace  to  go  with  Him,  130 

Mingled  in  perfect  union  with  Himself, 

While  those  that  gained  it  not  leaped  on  the  fire  ! 

Then  did  bewilderment  come  over  them. 

On  earth  they  rolled,  they  fell,  they  wailed, 

They  rushed  with  eager  foot  to  reach  the  sea;  135 

'  Our  Lord,  our  Lord,'  they  wept  and  called. 


5^Saf?  <5  (ft)  Gffl  GXTGST  , 


While  those  who  gained  His  foot  pressed  near, 

And  cried,  '  Celestial  Dancer,  who  to  Patanjali  gave  grace,' 

And  yearned  to  gain  satiety  of  bliss, 

He  dances  'mid  the  company  of  beauteous  'Tiger-town/  140 

That  golden  beauty  like  Himalaya  wears, 

There  to  Umai,  whose  roseate  mouth  is  filled  with  sweetness, 

And  to  Kali  grants  the  beauteous  smile  of  His  blest  countenance. 

Thus  the  King  with  His  assembled  saints 

Joyous  hath  entered  '  Tiger-town,'  with  garners  filled,  145 

High  Lord  of  Kailai  that  resounds  with  rapturous  song. 


138.  NOTE  VI.  'Cithambaram.'  He  is  the  supremely  blessed  soul  of  all  things,  and  the  five  acts 
of  destruction,  preservation,  creation,  embodiment,  and  gracious  release  are  his  ceaseless  mystic 
dance.  Of  this  dance  the  sacred  Vedas  know  the  excellence,  but  are  not  cognizant  of  its  cause,  its 
time,  its  place,  its  full  intention.  In  the  forest  of  Taruvanam,  in  the  midst  of  the  Rishis,  the  gods 
beheld  it ;  but,  because  that  is  not  the  world's  centre,  it  trembled  beneath  his  foot.  In  sacred  Tillai, 
which  is  the  exact  centre  of  the  universe,  this  dance  is  finally  revealed. 


LJ 


THE 
NATURE  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  UNIVERSE. 

HYMN    III. 

This  poem  has  an  introduction  of  twenty-eight  lines,  after  which  the  praises  of  Civan  are 
intermingled  with  somewhat  intricate  but  ingenious  allegories.  The  whole  partakes  of  the  nature 
of  a  rhapsody, — not  without  some  sublimity, — and  can  be  fully  appreciated  by  those  only  who  have 
studied  the  whole  Caiva  system  as  shdwn  in  NOTES  I-XVII.  It  is  an  imitation,  it  would  seem, 
of  the  Sanskrit  Catarudriya,  or  Hymn  to  Rudra1.  Yet  Civan — the  Auspicious — is  imagined  by  the 
Tamil  Caivites  quite  otherwise  than  by  the  northern  and  more  ancient  authorities.  Civan  in  the 
south  is  the  Guru,  the  friend,  almost  the  familiar  companion,  of  His  votaries,  and  is  addressed  with 
a  mixture  of  awe  and  of  simple  affection  that  has  a  peculiar  effect.  Through  all  Manikka-Va^agar's 
poems  this  personal  relation  of  the  God  as  manifested  Guru  to  His  devotees  or  disciples  is,  of  course, 
most  prominent.  I  am  not  aware  of  anything  quite  like,  this  in  the  mythology  of  the  north,  though 
among  the  worshippers  of  Vishnu  in  His  various  incarnations  something  analogous  may  exist. 

Here  lines  1-12  are  very  intricate,  and  emphasize  two  thoughts:  -(i)  that  the  Supreme  in  His 
greatness  embraces  all,  and  pervades  the  minutest  things  in  His  universe  ;  and  (2)  that  He  is  the 
unique  Being,  whose  wondrous  and  admirable  sublimity  is  not  to  be  fully  comprehended  by  any 
finite  beings,  gods  or  men.  The  two  epithets  are  the  Great  One  (line  6),  and  the  Beautiful  One 
(line  12). 

The  idea  of  lines  13-16  is  peculiar  to  the  Caiva  system,  which  teaches  that  there  are  three  great 
processes  carried  on  by  Civan,  the  Supreme,  in  the  universe.  In  the  beginning  of  each  aeon  He 
evolves  the  phenomenal  universe,  and  through  countless  ages  sustains  it  as  the  theatre  of  births  and 
deaths, — of  the  whole  drama  of  metempsychosis ;  and  at  the  end  of  each  aeon  He  destroys,  or 
involves  the  phenomenal  universe  in  its  primal  elements.  These  three  processes  of  evolution, 
conservation,  and  involution,  are  commonly  assigned  to  three  deities,  of  whom  Brahma  is  the 
Creator,  Vishnu  the  Preserver,  and  Civan  the  Destroyer.  This  however  was  seen  to  give  to  Civan 
an  office  apparently  inferior,  and  certainly  less  gracious,  than  that  which  belongs  to  the  other  gods. 

The  South-Indian  Caiva  system  boldly  faces  this  difficulty.  According  to  it  there  is  really  but 
one  God.  He  is  called,  among  many  other  names,  Civan  '  the  Blessed  One.'  Vishnu  and  Brahma 
and  the  other  so-called  gods  are  but  dependant  '  souls '  like  the  rest,  and  at  the  beginning  of  each 
aeon  their  place  and  office  for  that  aeon  are  assigned  them  by  the  Supreme  as  the  result  of  merits 
accumulated.  The  Brahma  of  the  present  aeon  is  the  Demiurge  or  fashioner  of  the  evolved 
universe :  he  puts  it  into  shape,  and  is  the  mere  agent  of  Civan. 

This  system  invites  us  to  contemplate  the  universe  at  the  beginning  of  each  aeon  awaiting  the 
action  of  the  Supreme.  Existence  is  eternal ;  it  is  subject  to  what  are  called  deluges,  or  overwhelming 
catastrophes,  in  which  all  the  heavens,  and  all  the  regions  of  the  abyss,  all  worlds,  and  all  beings, 
are  restored  to  their  rudimental  condition,  after  which,  by  the  will  and  operation  of  Civan,  they 
resume  their  normal  manifestations.  What  exists  at  the  beginning  of  an  aeon  ? 

First,  we  have  the  Lord,  PATHI,  Civan,  Peruman.  He  is  the  First  Cause  of  all  things  :  the 
only  GOD. 

Inseparable  from  Himself, — dwelling  in  Him, — is  His  personified  energy  or  fAKTl, — his  bride, — 
said  to  be  the  originator,  source,  fountain,  beginning  of  all  emotion,  action,  wisdom,  and  grace. 


1  Muir,  vol.  iv.  pp.  322-326. 
C 


Secondly,  we  have  Souls,  lives,  atomic  existences,  —  the  flocks,—  -pafu.  These  have  now  no 
embodiment,  no  powers,  energies,  or  faculties,  —  abiding  like  birds  sleeping  in  the  night  on  the  branches 
of  some  mighty  tree,  —  hardly  to  be  distinguished  from  the  tree  itself,  save  that  they  live.  These  are 
definite  in  number,  and  are  eternal  ;  no  addition  can  ever  be  made  to  the  number  of  souls  that 
are  alive  in  the  universe,  none  of  them  can  ever  die.  Since,  as  we  shall  see,  these  may  gain 
absolute  identification  with  Civan-Peruman  and  thus  be  embodied  no  more,  the  number  of  embodied 
souls  diminishes  ;  but  no  soul  ceases  to  exist  even  after  obtaining  release,  and  being  taken  into  God. 
It  may  be,  according  to  this  system,  that  the  time  shall  arrive  when  all  embodied  lives  have  obtained 
release,  and  then  the  worlds  will  for  ever  cease  and  Civan  be  all  in  all.  Each  of  these  souls  has 
its  load  of  deeds  which  are  stored  up,  and  are,  cl  parte  ante,  eternal  ;  the  result  of  which,  in 
pleasure  or  in  pain,  each  soul  in  some  embodied  form  must  experience.  As  the  Caiva  system  says, 
'  The  fruit  of  deeds  must  be  eaten.' 

These  souls,  at  the  beginning  of  each  aeon,  crouch  waiting  for  their  embodiments.  There  are 
now  no  evolved  worlds  —  no  heaven,  no  hell,  no  gods,  demons,  men.  All  these  have  been,  and 
shall  be,  —  but  now  are  not.  That  SOULS  may  be  furnished  with  embodiments,  and  with  worlds  in 
which  they  may  experience  their  fate,  we  have,  thirdly,  the  Bond,  —  pdfam,  the  eternal  material  cause 
of  the  creation.  This  is  threefold,  pure  mdya,  impure  mdya,  and  prakriti,  the  offspring  of  the  latter, 
which  is  undefined.  These  three  categories  PATHI,  PA£U,  and  FACAM  —  which  we  call  roughly 
'  GOD,  THE  SOUL,  AND  MATTER  '  —  are  the  subjects  expounded  in  the  Caiva  Sidclhanta  philosophy. 
See  NOTES  XI,  XII. 

[Metre  :   g)2sjtrig^sir  Q&ftuCiur.     Lines  of  four  9t}  a  few  with  two  or  three.] 


<ssr 

L]tS$)JlLJ  <f 


Q(yssy^QiurT(Sl  Lnfrsvsussr 

<5337Y/?«J 


§  Civan's  palpable  and  subtile  existences. 

The  developement  of  the  sphere  of  the  elemental  universe, 

Its  immeasurable  nature,  and  abundant  phenomena, — 

If  one  would  tell  their  beauty  in  all  its  particulars, — 

As  when,— more  than  a  hundred  millions  in  number  spread  abroad, — 

The  thronging  atoms  are  seen  in  the  ray  that  enters  the  house, 

So  is  He  the  GREAT  ONE,  Who  exists  in  the  minutest  elements. 

If  you  would  know  Him,  Brahma  and  the  rest  with  Mai,— 

His  greatness,  source,  glory,  and  end, 

Conjoined  with  His  eternity,  His  extent,  His  abiding  essence, 


(Sfj  £<s  Q  LC  i'(£l  ^IT  svp^ 


§ 

L/<S5)L_Lj(oL_//77D  LJ(5JO/_<S(^ti)  /_/<55)Lp(o/L//r<55T  ; 


*® 


Q  <SIJ  <Slfl  LJ  LJ  I—  a.® 


His  subtile  and  palpable  manifestations,—  10 

They  sought  to  understand.     As  the  rush  of  a  mighty  whirlwind 
The  Beauteous  One  drave  them  far  in  whirling  course ! 

§   The  operations  of  the  Supreme. 

He  is  the  Ancient  One,  Who  creates  the  Creator  of  all ; 

He  is  the  God,  Who  preserves  the  Preserver  of  things  created; 

He  is  the  God,  Who  destroys  the  Destroyer;  15 

But,  thinking  without  thought,  regards  the  things  destroyed. 

To  the  six  sacred  sects  with  their  six  diverse  kinds  of  men 

He  is  the  attainment  of  deliverance ;  and  Source  of  being  to  the  heavenly  ones. 

He  is  the  Possessor  of  all,  Who  resembles  an  insect. 

Day  by  day  He  to  the  sun  its  lustre  gave.  20 

In  the  sacred  moon  He  placed  its  coolness ; 

Kindled  in  the  mighty  fire  its  heat ; 

In  the  pure  ether  placed  pervasive  power; 

Endued  the  ambiant  wind  with  energy  ; 

To  the  streams  that  gleam  in  the  shade  their  savour  sweet,  25 


10.  NOTE   X.  'The   three   categories.'        19.  Hiding  Himself,  as  a   worm   lies  concealed   in 
the  core. 

C  2 


$  (5  QJ  IT  ff  *  IX). 


QfD%s$Tuu6V 


And  to  the  expanded  earth  its  strength  He  gave  ; 
For  ever  and  aye,  me  and  millions  other  than  me, 
All  in  their  several  cells  hath  He  enclosed. 

§  Forty  epithets. 

See  Him  the  First !  see  Him  the  Whole  ! 

See  Him  Himself,  Being  without  compare  !  30 

See  Him  adorned  with  the  wild  boar's  ancient  tusk  ! 

See  Him  Whose  girdle  is  the  forest-tiger's  skin  ! 

See  Him  with  ash  besmeared  !    Whene'er  I  think  and  think, 

See,  I  cannot  bear  the  thought !     I  perish  overwhelmed  ! 

See,  in  the  sweet- voiced  lute  He  is  the  melody  !  35 

See,  each  thing,  as  its  essence  is,  He  knows  ! 

See  Him,  the  Infinite !     See  Him,  the  Ancient  One  ! 

See  Him,  the  Great  One  Whom  Brahma  and  Mai  saw  not ! 

See  Him,  the  Wonderful !     See,  the  Manifold  ! 

See  Him,  the  Ancient  One,  transcending  words  !  40 

See,  He  dwells  afar  where  human  thought  goes  not ! 

31.  NOTE  X. 


21 


See,  He  is  taken  in  the  net  of  piety  ! 

See  Him,  that  One,  Whose  title  is  'the  only  One'  ! 

See,  He  extends  throughout  the  wide  extended  earth  ! 

See  Him,  more  subtile  than  an  atom  small  !  45 

See  Him,  the  King  incomparably  great  ! 

See  Him,  the  Precious  One,  rarest  of  all  that's  rare  ! 

See,  mingling  with  all  beings,  each  one  He  cherishes  ! 

See  Him,  the  Subtile  One,  Whom  science  fails  to  see  ! 

See  Him,  above,  below,  He  spreads!  5° 

See,  the  beginning  and  the  ending  He  transcends  ! 

See,  the  'bond  *  and  'loosing'  He  ordains  ! 

See,  He  is  That  that  stands,  and  That  that  goes  ! 

See,  He  discerns  the  aeon  and  its  end  ! 

See  Him,  the  Lord  Whom  all  may  gain  !  55 

See,  Qivan  Whom  the  gods  know  not  ! 

See  Him,  the  Male,  the  Female,  and  'neither  one'  ! 

See,  even  I  have  seen  Him  with  my  eyes  ! 

See,  the  ambrosial  Fount,  yielding  abounding  grace  ! 


57.  See  lines  134,  135  ;  and  £iva-fiana-b5dham,  Aphorism  I. 


Lo,  I  have  seen  His  mercy's  might ! 

See,  His  roseate  Foot  this  earth  hath  trod ! 

See  Him,  even  I  have  known,  the  Blessed  One ! 

See,  in  grace  He  made  me  His  ! 

See,  her  His  Spouse  whose  eyes  are  dark-blue  lotus  flowers  ! 

See,  Her  and  Him  together  stand  !  r>5 

§  The  Sea  and  the  Cloud. 

Lines  66-95  are  well  nigh  untranslateable,  for  they  contain  a  subtle  and  intricate  allegory,  by 
means  of  which  the  grace  of  the  manifested  Civan,  who  is  praised  tinder  the  title  of  the  '  Cloud,'  is  set 
forth.  The  idea  is  (1.  66),  that  the  Infinite  sea  of  rapturous  supreme  felicity  is  C.ivan,  but — (1.  67)  as 
the  Cloud  in  the  monsoon  season  sucks  up  water  from  the  sea,  and  rises  in  black  masses  that  cover 
the  sky,  while  all  the  phenomena  of  the  wonderful  outburst  of  the  beneficent,  but  also  fearful, 
monsoon  are  exhibited, — so  does  the  Supreme  manifest  Himself  as  the  Gum,  the  Object  of  love,  and 
Giver  of  grace  to  His  worshippers.  In  the  monsoon  season,  lightnings  flash  from  one  end  of  the  sky 
to  the  other,  crested  torrents  sweep  down  over  the  hills,  bearing  with  them  uprooted  plants  and  trees, 
and  not  unseldom  huge  snakes  that  have  been  disturbed  from  their  rocky  mountain  hiding-places. 
The  various  kinds  of 'Gloriosa'  spread  forth  their  beautiful  flowers  like  supplicating  hands,  while 
every  valley  and  hollow  is  filled  with  water.  Meanwhile,  as  the  heat  is  most  intense  just  before  the 
burst  of  the  monsoon,  the  poet  pictures  a  troop  of  thirsty  antelopes,  deluded  by  the  mirage  which 
seems  to  offer  them  refreshing  streams  and  shade  :  disappointed  they  are  left  to  die  of  thirst  in 
the  wilderness.  Meanwhile  the  pain  of  the  fierce  heat  has  ceased.  Down  the  gorges  of  the  hills  the 
torrent  rushes,  and  is  received  into  tanks  prepared  for  it  by  the  expectant  husbandmen.  These  lakes 
are  fragrant  with  beautiful  flowers,  and  on  their  banks  the  maidens  have  kindled  fires  with  aromatic 
woods,  at  which  they  dry  their  hair  and  garments  after  the  refreshing  bath.  The  cultivators  may 
now  sow  their  seed  and  expect  a  rich  harvest.  All  this  is  the  work  of  the  black  clouds  which  draw 
water  from  the  sea  to  fertilize  the  earth.  In  these  lines  every  particular  of  the  description  has  its 
mystical  meaning,  which  hardly  needs  illustration.  The  student  will  compare  VII.  61-64. 

The  ancient  sea  of  bliss  superne  is  THAT  indeed  ! 
Appearing  like  a  black  vast  CLOUD, 
Arising  in  the  hill  of  Perun-turrai  blest, 


62.  '  I  have  found  Him  to  be  what  His  Name  implies.' 


Gg  /i  L/SV  L/  LJJBfS'&oST  SU  /T<5W  J  Q&lfilU,  670 


pi'b  i5lfn<o£lu3fb  (o 

tfyfEiSil  LAfruQuQtjfEJ  &Qf)$omU§6 


<£  Q  p(T 

IEl&<535r 


<otn  i_ 


Whilst  sacred  lightnings  flash  from  every  point,— 

While  serpent  bright  of  sensual  bondage  dies, —  70 

While  the  sore  sorrow  of  the  fervent  heat  hides  itself, — 

While  the  all-beauteous  Hibiscus  shines  forth, — 

Swelling  in  its  wrath  like  our  mortal  pain, 

It  sounds  forth  in  mighty  grace  as  a  drum. 

While  the  kanthal  stretches  out  supplicating  hands,  75 

And  the  tender  drops  of  sweet  unfailing  grace  distil, 

While  the  gleaming  torrent  swells  on  every  side, 

And  rises  to  the  highest  banks  of  every  lake  ; — 

The  '  demon-car '  of  the  six  sects 

Excites  the  thirst  of  the  large-eyed  antelope  throng.  So 

And  they  with  eager  desire  crowd  to  drink ; 

And  faint  with  unquenched  thirst  haste  hither  and  thither. — 

Meanwhile,  the  heavenly  mighty  stream 

Rises  and  rushes,  crowned  with  bubbles  of  delight, 

Eddies  around,  dashes  against  the  bank  of  our  'embodiment/  85 


72.  TSndri  =  Gloriosa,  the  'November  flower.'  79.  Sects,  more  or  less  heretical,  leading  men 
astray  by  delusive  exhibitions  of  seeming  truth.  '  Demon-car,'  '  devil's  chariot '  is  the  Tamil  idea  of 
the  mirage.  80.  Silly  souls  of  men. 


ip 

UWLDfTLD 


«su//4^/syj 
, 
sr  QLDXGST, 


And  twofold  deeds  of  ours  growing  from  age  to  age,— 

Those  mighty  trees,— roots  up  and  bears  away. 

It  rushes  through  the  cleft  of  the  high  hills, 

Is  imprisoned  in  the  encircling  lake, 

Where  grow  the  expanded  fragrant  flowers, — •  90 

In  tank,  where  rises  smoke  of  the  agil,  where  beetles  hum ; 

And  as  it  swells  with  ever-rising  joy, 

The  ploughmen-devotees  in  the  field  of  worship 

Sow  in  rich  abundance  seed  of  love  ! 

Hail,  CLOUD-LIKE  god,  hard  in  this  universe  to  reach  !  95 

§  Ascriptions  of  praise. 

God  Who  wear'st  black  snake  for  girdle,  hail ! 

First  One,  giving  grace  to  the  devout  ascetics,  hail ! 

Warrior  Who  dost  remove  our  fear,  all  hail ! 

Thou  Who  dost  ever  draw  us  to  Thee,  make  us  Thine,  all  hail ! 

Thou  Who  dost  wipe  away  sorrows  that  gather  round,  all  hail !  100 

Thou  Who  giv'st  ambrosia  rare  to  those  that  gain  access  to  Thee,  all  hail ! 


15  eti  ewr  u  LJ  u  $  $.      ffn.  25 


)  GV  IT<£ 


JBLQUSST, 

QufKaiurrssr, 


m&o 
(osv/rsar, 


fl  ^)  6V  (a  SU  /TS3T, 


Si  SS^fD/B^I  (oLL6&UJ 


Thou  Who  in  thick  darkness  dancing  dost  bend  down,  all  hail  ! 

Lover  of  Her  with  shoulders  like  the  swelling  bamboo,  hail  ! 

Thou  Who  art  hostile  to  the  hostile  one,  our  King,  all  hail  ! 

Thou  Who  to  thy  lovers  art  treasure  in  distress,  all  hail  !  105 

§  Praises. 

Praise  to  Thee,  our  Own,  waving  the  envenomed  snake  ! 
Praise  to  Thee,  Great  One,  Who  fill'st  our  souls  with  pious  rage  ! 
Praise  to  Thee,  mighty  in  Thine  ash-smeared  form  ! 

In  every  part  what  moves,  Thou  mov'st  it;  what  lies  still,  Thou  lay'st  to  rest  ; 
What  stands,  Thou  dost  establish.  no 

Thou  Ancient  One,  transcending  speech, 
Not  grasped  by  apprehension  of  the  soul  ! 
Not  by  the  eye  perceived,  nor  by  sense-organs  all. 
Thou  didst  arrange  in  order,  manifest  the  ether  and  all  elements. 
Like  fragrance  of  the  flower  uprising  everywhere,  1  15 

Thy  greatness  without  cease  all  things  pervades. 
This  day  to  me  in  condescending  grace  Thou  cam'st, 
Making  this  body  of  destruction  fall  away,  O  Being  glorious  ! 


S5TLJ  LDSU/T/BSsV  Q<£F/U/L/LJ 


(3}6UlTJpJ6$r  LD  IT  LdSSs    LJ 


WD  SI/ 

l<55riT<£     &rrsijijjLD, 


J  Q  U  IU  trfygl  t 


To-day  to  me  in  condescending  grace  Thou  cam'st  ;  I  praise  Thee  ! 

Thou  Who  did'st  fashion  this  decaying  frame  ;  I  praise  Thee  !  120 

As  fountain  springing  in  my  soul  Thou  mak'st  me  glad  ;  I  praise  Thee  ! 

While  pleasure  beyond  bound  like  flower  expands, 

I  know  not  how  to  bear  this  body  vile  ! 

§  His  hidings  of  Himself. 

Bright  gems  flash'd  emerald  splendour  forth,— 

The  lightning's  play  mingling  with  gleam  of  gold,  —  125 

Brahma  went  up  to  seek  Thee  ;  Thou  didst  hide  Thyself  ! 

From  them  who  toiled  with  mystic  scrolls  didst  hide  Thyself! 

From  those  who  in  their  homes  practised  virtue,  Thou  didst  hide  Thyself! 

From  those  who,  in  union  with  Thee,  fixed  their  contemplative  soul 

With  painful  effort;  Thou  didst  hide  Thyself!  130 

From  those  who  boasted  to  see  Thee  by  some  rare  device, 

By  that  same  device,  there,—  didst  Thou  hide  Thyself! 

Benign,  regarding  all,  receiving  with  abundant  grace, 

As  male  appearing  Thou  dost  change  to  neutral  form, 


124.  G^r-TOT,  1.  141.     NOTE  I.  128.  Kurral,  Introd.,  p.  x.  130.  A'nrral,  ch.  xxvii. 

134.  See  Civa-nana-bodham,  Aph.  I.     'The  Lord  is  manifested  in  the  universe,  in  which  all  being  is 
found,  in  the  three  forms  of  male,  female,  and  neuter  (or  inanimate  things).' 


<$>  (fj  Gil  6OT  L  U  LI  (&  *  ,       ffn.  VH 

i       v^  C/  «  / 


And  in  a  bright-browed  female  form  dost  hide  Thyself!     Far  off  135 

Bidding  the  senses  five  depart, — passing  over  every  trackless  hill 

With  frames  scarce  living,  spurning  all  delights, 

Ascetic  saints  in  contemplation  dwell; — in  their  souls  Thou  fitly  hid'st  Thyself! 

Seeming  one  thing,  then  not,  eluding  knowledge,  Thou  dost  hide  Thyself! 

When  e'en  of  old  I  strove  to  find  Thee,  when  to-day  I  strive,  140 

Thou  hid'st  Thyself,  Deceiver  !     But  we've  found  Thee  now  ! 

§  Worship. 

Haste,  haste  ye,  garlands  of  fresh  flowers 

Around  His  feet  to  bind  ! 

Assemble,  go  around,  follow  hard  on,  leave  ye  no  gap. 

Lay  hold  of  Him,  although  He  hide  Himself,  avoid  your  grasp  !  145 

The  Incomparable  told  out  His  nature  as  it  is, 

That  those  like  me  might  hear. 

He  called,  in  grace  He  made  me  His, 

He  as  a  Brahman  showed  His  glory  forth, 

Then,  while  undying  love  dissolved  my  frame,  I  cried  ;  15° 


141.  Such  language  is  often  used  in  regard  to  Qivan  to  express  the  mystery  of  His  Essence,  and  the 
infinite  variety  of  His  manifestations.     NOTE  I. 


o 


SLirEl  (o^LLl—<SU!T  6$/L/  LJ  LJ  a/  /E/, 


(o&frib(otD<55T 


_ 

LptT(55)Lt> 


<-£](7fjGlfluj  -sflQtUSST,  LJQTjSllLILD  JjQp)  USST  , 


I  raised  enraptured  voice  above  the  billowy  sea's  loud  waves  ; 

In  utter  wilderment  I  fell,  I  rolled,  I  cried  aloud, 

Madman  distraught,  and  as  a  maniac  raved  ; 

While  those  who  saw  were  wildered,  who  heard  it  wonder'd  sore. 

More  than  the  frenzy  wild  of  raging  elephant  155 

Bore  me  away  beyond  endurance  far.     'Twas  then  through  all  my  limbs 

A  honied  sweetness  He  infused,  and  made  me  blest. 

The  ancient  city  of  His  foes  with  fire  lit  by  His  beauteous  smile 

He  caused  to  fall.     Ev'n  so  that  day 

With  mighty  fire  of  grace  our  humble  dwellings  160 

He  destroyed  that  none  were  left. 

To  me  as  the  ripe  Nelli  fruit  in  palm  He  was. 

§  Rapture. 

What  to  say  I  know  not,  Hail  !  —  to  Thee  complain. 

I  mere  cur  cannot  endure  !     What  He  hath  done  to  me 

I  understand  not  !    Ah  I'm  dead  !     To  me  Thy  slave  165 

What  Thou  in  grace  hast  given  I  know  not,  tasting  am  not  satiate, 


162.  Phyllanthus.     Its  fruit  is  transparent.    So  was  He  grasped  by  me,  and  revealed  to  me. 


.        [fi,. 


£l  <SV  (o  <SV  <5$T  t 


SSTSST  ' 


Though  I've  imbibed  I  comprehend  it  not  ! 

Like  flowing  billows  swell  from  out  the  sea  of  milk 

Within  my  soul  He  made  deep  waters  rise, 

Ambrosia  surpassing  speech  filled  every  pore.  170 

This  is  His  gracious  work  ! 

In  every  body  in  this  currish  state 

He  filled  me  full  with  honied  sweetness  ; 

Ambrosial  drops  most  marvellous 

He  caused  throughout  my  being  to  distil.  175 

With  tender  soul,  as  though  He'd  make  me  as  Himself, 

He  formed  for  me  a  frame  where  grace  might  flow. 

And  as  an  elephant  explores  fields  of  sweet  cane,  at  last 

He  sought,  and  found,  and  made  even  me  to  live.     In  me 

Mercy's  pure  honey  while  He  mixed,  180 

He  gave  in  grace  supernal  food  :  — 

Ev'n  He  Whose  nature  nor  Brahma  knows  nor  Mai  ! 


[5  IT  so  nr  GJJ 


[Metre  : 


&$iT(Lpi<i-p 


&(!JI(Lp[I<oSSl  GJSSTLb 


THE    SACRED   AGAVAL   OF    PRAISE. 

[This  seems  to  the  translator  to  read  more  like  a  work  of  Umapathi,  than  of  our  sage  !] 

HYMN    IV. 

THE  CREATION    OF  THE  WORLD. 
HE   CAUSED  THE   PHENOMENAL   UNIVERSE   TO   APPEAR. 

§  Lines  i-io.     The  Peet  of  (Jfrvan. 

While  the  Four-faced  and  other  heavenly  dwellers  rose, 

Adoring,  sacred  Mai,  whose  head  with  rays  is  crowned, 

With  His  two  feet  measured  the  threefold  world,  — 

While  saints  from  the  four  quarters  praised  with  all  their  sentient  powers, — 

Eager  that  day  Thy  foot  and  crown  to  know, 

He  then  became  a  fierce  strong  boar,  and  rushing  on 

Dug  down  through  sevenfold  regions,  wearied  cried  at  last : 

'  Eternal  Source  of  all,  to  Thee  be  triumphs  manifold  ! ' 


2,  3.  See  Muir,  vol.  iv.   p.  69  &c.     This  is  one  of  the   oldest  myths.          5.   The  story  of 
Arunachalam.     Song  VII.  69  &c. 


§    i9f)ULj. 

i)L?  (iyiu 


LC/T^/T 


(Lf> 


tf)  SW  ff 


t) 


Yet  though  He  worship  paid,  Thy  pair  of  Feet-flowers  saw  he  not ; 

Yet  Thou  to  me  Thy  worshipper  art  easy  of  access  !  10 

§  Lines  11-35.      Human  embodiment. 

On  earth  girt  by  the  watery  seas,  from  elephant  to  ant, 

Through  many  matrices  I  passed, 

Obtained  a  human  form  within  my  mother's  womb. 

Thus  was  I  born  into  the  sad  sea  of  th'  afflictive  life.  25 

Then  during  each  year  as  it  met  me 

I  gained  and  hoarded  gains.     How  varied  was  my  life  ! 

Morning's  routine,  hunger  in  noontide  hour,  and  night 


13.  To  the  25th  line  inclusive,  the  developement  of  embryonic  life  is  detailed. 


32 


IT  ff  a  ic. 


L£> 

<£<SV<S)SI  toTGST^JLCt  LJGV&L—fi)  iSl  <55>L<£]  LO 
GV<SlJLCi  <5T<5$TGS)1LL  Jgf  SV  <SV  6$  fi 


LfSVSUJLQ  UfTlU  LJSVja««/0  iSl  (S^  Lfif^^]  /i 

§    ILJSLD. 

Q<£ILJ<5ULT>  <oTS$ 


LLfTlLJIT 


For  sleep.     In  journeys  oft  I  lived. 

Jet  black  locks,  and  crimson  lips,  and  radiant  smiles  were  hers;—  30 

Into  love's  sea  I  plunged.  31-35 

In  the  wide  marts  where  foolish  worldlings  toil 

I  lived,  still  slave  to  fierce  desires. 

I  lived  by  sea  of  learning  multiform ; 

I  lived  in  sorrow  men  call  wealth  ; 

I  lived  'mid  ancient  stings  of  poverty  ;  4o 

And  thus  in  varied  forms  and  fortunes  spent  my  days. 

§  Lines  42-51.     The  idea  of  God  comes  into  his  life. 

Then  wondrous  thought  of  the  Divine,  so-called,  arose. 
Soon  as  I  knew  that  BEING,  free  from  hate,  unique, 
Delusive  powers  in  ever-changing  millions 
Began  beguiling  varied  play. 

31.  These  lines  are  full  of  pretty  conceits,  but  hardly  reproducible.  36.  Domestic  life.     See 

KurraL         42.  Sans,  siddham.        44.  See  NOTE  XI.     Tiru-arul-payan,  III.  5,  6. 


33 


J5  II  3>  35(L£>  LL 


G$rir 


LLfTlLJK  GUKJSLb  <oT<5$T65)l(51j 


Relations,  neighbours,  came  around, 

With  fluent  tongue  they  urged  their  '  atheism.' 

Friends  around — (such  herds  of  cattle  old  !)— 

Seiz'd  me,  call'd,  hurried  to  and  fro  ; 

The  Brahman  said,  'the  way  of  penance  is  supreme';  50 

And  others  showed  the  law  of  trusting  love  ! 

Sectarian  disputants  complacently 

Discordant  tenets  shouted  loud  and  fought. 

Then  haughty  Vedant  creed  unreal  came, — 

Whirled,  dashed,  and  roared  like  furious  hurricane.  55 

Lokayathan  a  glistening  mighty  snake 


47.  NOTE  XII.  51.  Of  Bhaktixn.&  Arull  This  struggle  is  illustrated  well  by  Umapathi's 
Koyil  Puranam,  II.  44,  &c.,  where  the  strife  between  ritual  (eSfffio)  and  devotion  (#^ii)  is  shown  in 
a  curious  and  (often)  unedifying  story.  See  NOTE  VI.  52.  In  the  very  valuable  Sahkalpa- 

nirakaranam  (eejxpuiSur&ieeaib,  'refutation  of  heresies')  by  the  great  Umapathi,  this  sectarian 
squabbling  is  illustrated.  [Madras,  1873,  1897.]  53.  Comp.  Ndladi,  ch.  xxviii.  56.  The 

Lokdyata  heretics  (>^t2fiT^TfT  =  'w'orl(i-extended').  [^TT^T«fi='the  system  of  Charvaka.'  SeeSarva- 
darcana-sangraha,  ch.  i,  translated  by  Cowell  and  Gough  (Triibner,  1882).  Text  edited  by  Pandita 
Ifvara  Vidyasagara,  1858.]  This  is  Brihaspati's  verse  : 


T  Tn^R    ^T     ^T(3IT 

'  There  is  no  svarga,  no  emancipation,  nor  any  soul  in  other  world.' 

And  this  is  Madhava's  summary  : 


'  There  earth,  &c.,  the  four  elements,  are  original  principles  (tatvaws)  ; 


From  these  alone,  when  transformed  into  the  body,  intelligence  is  produced  ; 


And  these  being  destroyed,  it  also  perishes.' 
D 


GU  IT 


§  ©05- 


D  LJ[T<SlSllL]IEI 
(oLJ<S5)<£lLJIEl 


<oTG$TJp] 


ujLnrr 


Brought  cruel  poisoned  heresies. 

Whilst  these  delusions,  endless,  girt  me  round, 

§  Lines  59-86.     His  Conversion. 

Lest  I  should  go  astray,  He  laid  His  hand  on  me  ! 

As  wax  before  the  unwearied  fire  (»o 

With  melting  soul  I  worshipt,  wept,  and  bent  myself, 

Danced,  cried  aloud,  and  sang,  and  prayed. 

They  say:  'The  tooth  of  elephant  and  woman's  grasp  relax  not/ 

So  I  with  love,  real,  intermitting  never, 

Was  pierced,  as  wedge  driven  into  soft  young  tree.  65 

All  tears,  I  like  the  refluent  sea  was  tossed  ; 

Soul  was  subdued,  and  body  quivered  with  delight. 

While  the  world  called  me  demon,  mocking  me, 

False  shame  I  threw  aside  ;  the  folk's  abusive  word 

I  took  as  ornament  ;  nor  did  I  swerve.  70 

My  mind  was  rapt;  —  a  fool,  but  in  my  folly  wise,— 

The  goal  I  sought  to  reach  infinity  !     All  wondering  desire, 

As  cow  yearns  for  its  calf,  I  moaning,  hurried  to  and  fro. 

70.  See  V.  9-12. 


.        ff>. 


35 


67® 


6T6&T  (DffmaSI, 


<ffrturr 


5*0 


Not  ev'n  in  dreams  thought  I  of  other  gods. 

The  One  most  precious  Infinite  to  earth  came  down ;  75 

Nor  did  I  greatness  of  the  Sage  superne  contemn, 

Who  came  in  grace.     Thus  from  the  pair  of  sacred  feet 

Like  shadow  from  its  substance  parting  not, 

Before,  behind,  at  every  point,  to  it  I  clung. 

My  inmost  self  in  strong  desire  dissolved,  I  yearned  ;  So 

Love's  river  overflowed  its  banks  ; 

My  senses  all  in  Him  were  centred ;  '  Lord  ! '  I  cried. 

With  stammering  speech,  and  quivering  frame 

I  clasped  adoring  hands ;  my  heart  expanding  like  a  flower. 

Eyes  gleamed  with  joy  and  tears  distilled.  85 

His  love  that  fails  not  day  by  day  still  burgeons  forth  ! 

§  To  the  end :    Praises. 

Like  mother,  Thou  hast  brought  me  up,  I  praise ! 
God,  strong  to  cancel  deeds  of  ours, 
Who  didst  become  in  truth  a  Sage,  I  praise ! 

King  of  golden  Madura  !  90 

D  -z 


G?LJ  /T/ytffl  ! 


LJ<S5)/_LLJfT<L7,  SJUUfTlU,  <^/S5)/_LLJ/7//,       unr 


\ 
Qeufsl,  (autribfi  !  siSl/josv/r,  Quirpf^  \ 


(oUiTjbfl  ! 


Guru  Pearl,  in  Kudal  shining  bright  ! 

Dancing  in  southern  Tillai's  court, 

This  day  to  me  precious  ambrosia  Thou  ! 

Source  of  the  fourfold  mystic  Scroll  that  ne'er  grows  old  ! 

£ivan,  whose  conquering  banner  is  the  Bull  !  95 

Thy  varied  form  gleams  as  the  lightning  ;  —  Thee  I  praise  ! 

In  me  the  stony  heart  Thou  softenest. 

Guard  me,  Thou  guarded  hill  of  gold  ! 

Ah,  give  Thy  grace  to  me  ! 

Thou  dost  create,  Thou  dost  preserve,  Thou  dost  destroy  !  100 

Father,  who  dost  remove  all  griefs,  I  praise  ! 

Ruler,  I  praise  !     My  King,  I  praise  ! 

Mount  of  shining  crystal,  —  praise  ! 

Monarch,  to  Thee  be  praise  !    Ambrosia,  —  praise  ! 

Unfailing  refuge  are  Thy  fragrant  feet  !  105 

Thee  Vedic  Sage,  I  praise  !     Spotless  One,  —  praise  ! 

Thee  First,  I  praise  !     Wisdom,  I  praise  ! 

Thou  Goal  I  seek,  —  praise  !     Sweet  fruition,  Thee  I  praise  ! 


95.  See  XIX,  verse  10. 


ffi. 


,  Qurrrbfr*!  I 
<55><f6uir,  (ourrtbrfil  I 
/,  Quirpfi  ! 


\ 
(?LJ/r/D/r51  ! 


v  <oT<sifliu      L(os  Quiri&  \ 


a  SO 


QLL 

v— '/ v^x         ' — ft~  ~  "  c"  ( — 

.         .  „_.  .  ni  ^^^ 


Our  Lord,  on  Whose  bright  crest  the  river  flows, 

Our  Master,  —  praise!    Understanding,  —  praise!  no 

Thou  hast  beheld  the  servitude  of  lowliest  me, 

O  Teacher,  —  praise  !    Minute  as  atom,  —  praise  ! 

O  £aivan,  —  praise  !    Our  Chief,  I  praise  ! 

Our  Sign,  I  praise  !    Virtue,  I  praise  ! 

Thou  Way,  I  praise!    O  Thought,  I  praise!  115 

Balm,  hardly  by  celestials  gained,  I  praise  ! 

King,  easy  of  access  to  others,  —  praise  ! 

Monarch  in  grace,  Who  savest  lest  we  sink 

In  hell's  hated  one-and-twenty  rounds,  I  praise  ! 

Companion,  —  praise!    My  Helper,  —  praise!  uo 

O  Bliss  of  life,  I  praise  !    My  Treasure,  —  praise  ! 

O  free  from  bonds,  —  praise  !    First  One,  —  praise  ! 

Father,  —  praise  !    Haran,  —  praise  ! 

Thou  One,  transcending  word  and  understanding,  —  praise  ! 

Yield  of  the  world  girt  by  the  extended  sea,—  praise  !  125 

Beauty  rare,  yet  easy  of  access,  I  praise  ! 


112.  Comp.  III.  5.          123.  Sans.  KARA,  a  title  of  £ivan  (lit.  the  seizer),  as  the  Vedic  Agni. 


(Ij  611  rr 


oSST 


(ocFSUS,  (oLJfTMitfl  I 


i  ^s^^iw  SL-jfjBiTiu,  Qurr/bfl  I 


6UT6$T<5<£<!SL£)!T 
UrT(fl<5$)l_ 
f!J)lFl<55)L-/Brr<5$r<£[TlLJ  ^SLfiJB 


Eye  like  an  azure  cloud,  I  praise  ! 

Abiding  Mount  of  sacred  grace,  I  praise! 

Me,  too,  Thou  mad'st  a  man,  —  Thy  twin  feet 

Thou  placed'st  on  my  head,  O  Warrior,  —  praise  !  13° 

Thou  dost  wipe  off  all  sorrow  from  adoring  hand,  —  praise  ! 

Sea  of  imperishable  rapture,  —  praise  ! 

Thou  dost  transcend  all  forms  that  pass  and  come  renewed,  —  praise  ! 

First  One  surpassing  all,  —  praise  ! 

Bridegroom  of  Her  with  fawnlike  eyes,  —  praise  !  135 

Mother  of  the  Immortals  in  the  heavenly  land,  —  praise  ! 

Fivefold  Thou  dost  in  earth  extend,  —  praise  ! 

Fourfold  Thou  dost  exist  in  the  water,  —  praise  ! 

Threefold  in  fire  Thou  shinest,  —  praise  ! 

Twofold  in  the  air  Thou  art  all  glorious,  —  praise  !  140 

One  in  the  ether  Thou  hast  sprung  forth,  —  praise  ! 

Ambrosia  of  the  troubled  mind,  —  praise  ! 

Hard  to  be  approached  by  gods  e'en  in  a  dream,  —  praise  ! 

In  waking  hour  to  me  a  cur  Thou  gavest  grace,  —  praise  ! 


135.  For  the  inner  sense  of  all  such  lines,  see  NOTE  XIII. 


GuirrupS1^    $5    djasuev;.     &. 
)<55>*_LC(75  ^(oS^fDILjLD  <oTJB<$mu9 


<5TJf><g[riLJ, 

6urr^y)iLit 


,  Qunrbfl  \ 


<£L£>&nr, 


GSTSfff/SST 


Father,  Who  dwell'st  in  Idai-ir\aruthu,  —  praise  !  u? 

Thou  bearest  Gangai  on  Thy  crest,  —  praise  ! 

King  in  Arur  abiding,  —  praise  ! 

Lord  of  glorious  Tiru-aiyarru,—  praise  ! 

Our  Prince  of  Annamalai,  —  praise! 

Sea  of  ambrosia,  filling  all  the  place,  —  praise  !  150 

Our  Father  dwelling  in  Ekambam,  —  praise  ! 

Thou  Who  in  form  art  half  a  woman,  —  praise  ! 

Who  dwell'st  supreme  in  Perun-turrai,  —  praise  ! 

£ivan  Who  dwell'st  in  Sira-palji,  —  praise  ! 

None  other  refuge  here  I  know,  —  praise  !  155 

Our  Dancer  in  Kuttalam,  —  praise  ! 

Our  King  dwelling  in  Gokari,  —  praise  ! 

Our  Father  of  Ihgoy's  Mount,  —  praise  ! 

Beauteous  One  of  seemly  Paranam,  —  praise  ! 

Idangan  Who  dwell'st  in  Kadambur,  —  praise  !  160 

Father,  gracious  to  those  that  come  to  Thee,  —  praise  ! 

Beneath  the  Itti  tree  to  six, 

162.  This  is  the  thirty-third  of  the  sixty-four  'sports'  of  the  god.     The  six  are  the  nurses  of 
(Divan's  son,  Karttikeya,  —  the  Pleiades. 


A  o  ^  if,  6ii  n  a-  ($  LD  . 


LLfTSST-S 

(?ei/saar(S)L£) 


OTSST^l/B  £(Tfj61(TtriLlt 


!  g9'L//r, 


Qurfliumu, 


King,  Thou  wert  gracious,  and  to  th'  elephant, — praise ! 

£ivan,  Lord  of  the  southern  land,  —praise  ! 

King  of  our  country  folk, — praise  !  if>o 

Thoa  wert  gracious  to  the  litter  of  the  boar, — praise  ! 

Lord  of  glorious  Kailai's  Mount, — praise  ! 

Father,  Who  grants  us  grace,  — praise  ! 

King,  Who  our  darkness  dissipates, — praise  ! 

I  Thy  slave  languish  all  alone, — praise  !  170 

In  grace  remove  my  guile, — praise  ! 

In  grace  say  to  me  '  Fear  not/ — praise  ! 

Poison  became  ambrosis  by  Thy  love, — praise ! 

Father, — praise  !    Guru, — praise  ! 

Eternal, — praise  !    Pure  One, — praise  !  1 75 

Brother, — praise  !    Existent  One, — praise  ! 

O  Great  One, — praise  !    O  Lord, — praise  ! 

0  Rare  One, — praise  !    O  Pure  One, — praise  ! 
Glorious  Path  of  Vedic  sages, — praise  ! 

1  make  my  plaint,  nor  can  endure,  O  First  One, — praise  !  180 

163.  See  twenty-first  'sport.'  164.  This  is  the  forty-fifth  'sport.'  173.  Song  XII. 


.     ffi. 


Kinsman,  —  praise  !    Life,  —  praise  ! 

Glory,  —  praise  !    Bliss,  —  praise  ! 

O  Cloud,  —  praise  !    O  Bridegroom,  —  praise  ! 

Spouse  of  Her  whose  feet  are  soft,  —  praise  ! 

I,  a  cur,  Thy  slave  am  perplexed,  —  praise  !  185 

Our  Master  Thou,  all  dazzling  bright,  —  praise  ! 

Eye  apprehending  forms  diverse,  —  praise  ! 

King,  dwelling  in  the  circling,  sacred  town,  I  praise  ! 

Lord  of  the  mountain  land,  —  praise  ! 

Thou  in  Whose  locks  is  the  crescent  moon,  —  praise  !  190 

Blessed  Lord  of  the  sacred  Eagle-mount,  —  praise  ! 

Aran  of  hilly  Puvanam,  —  praise  ! 

Formless,  in  form  revealed  Thou  art,  —  praise  ! 

Mountain  of  mercy  ever  nigh,—  praise  ! 

Light  transcending  utmost  bound,  —  praise  !  195 

Clearness,  hard  to  understand,  —  praise  ! 

Ray  of  the  flawless  Gem,  —  praise  ! 

Loving  to  those  Thou  mak'st  Thine  own,  —  praise  ! 

191.  Song  XXX. 


/j?u9<5<ncF  jBi—jBpniu, 


Ambrosial  grace  that  satiates  not,  —  praise  ! 

Our  Lord,  the  bearer  of  a  thousand  names,  —  praise  !  200 

Thou  Whose  garland  is  the  Tali-arrugu,  —  praise  ! 

Dancer  in  light  expanding  far,  —  praise  ! 

O  Beauteous  with  the  santhal  wood  perfume,  —  praise  ! 

Bliss,  hard  for  thought  to  reach,  —  praise  ! 

On  Mandira's  mighty  mount  Thou  dwell'st,  —  praise  !  205 

Thou  Who  dost  undertake  to  save  us,  —  praise  ! 

Thou  Who  in  grace  didst  give  the  tiger's  dug  to  th'  antelope,  —  praise  ! 

Thou  Who  didst  walk  upon  the  billowy  sea,  —  praise  ! 

Thou  didst  give  grace  that  day  to  the  black  bird,  —  praise  ! 

Thou  didst  appear  by  sense  discerned,  —  praise  !  210 

Fiery  One  on  earth  displayed,  —  praise  ! 

Thou  art  the  First,  the  Midst,  the  Last,  —  praise  ! 

Hell,  Paradise,  or  pendant  Earth  not  entering, 

The  heavenly  goal  Thou  gav'st  unto  the  Pandiyan,  —  praise  ! 

Thou  that  fillest  all,  to  Thee  be  praise  !  215 

King  of  £iva-puram  rich  with  clustering  flowers,  to  Thee  be  praise  ! 


199.  Song  XI.  3, 4.        201.  Song  XIX.  36.       205.  Mount  Mandara.        209.  The  forty-seventh 'sport.' 


Q  u  if 


SJDLD/ 
i-i  surriLiuQufrssT  pnfliurT 


<5T 

(a-3F!T^U 

I   (ourrrnnfl  ! 
f 


(oUfTtbrr)!,  -fiLi&iLi, 


God,  garlanded  with  purple  lotus  flower,  to  Thee  be  praise  ! 

Thou  dost  cut  off  bewilderment  of  those  that  worship  Thee,  —  praise  ! 

Praise  !    Take  in  grace  this  wreath  of  babbling  words 

From  me,  mere  cur,  that  know  not  to  distinguish  false  from  true  ! 

Ancient  of  days,  Burner  of  many  towns,  —  praise  ! 

Infinite  Lord  of  splendours  infinite,  —  praise! 

Praise  !    Praise  !    Bhuyanga-Peruman  ! 

Praise  !    Praise  !   Ancient-cause  of  all  ! 

Praise  !    Praise  !    Triumphant  praise  ! 


A  A  $  jj  GU  IT  ff  3>  li . 


Bl  Qfj>3F    P  <£  &  ££>. 
u  63)  OJ  J  IT  &  <£  UJ    off  <#    »  $  J  li. 


65)  &  3i  ft  <5$T 


HYMN    V. 

THE   SACRED   CENTO. 
RELIGIOUS    ENTHUSIASM. 

Introduction  to  the  Sacred  Cento. 

This  remarkable  poem  contains  a  hundred  especially  flowing  and  harmonious  verses  of  varying 
metres.  These  are  divided  into  ten  decads,  and  the  whole  are  connected  by  the  law  which  requires, 
that  the  last  word  of  each  verse  shall  begin  the  following  verse.  The  whole  ten  lyrics  with  their 
hundred  verses  are  thus  linked  together.  This  arrangement,  which  is  very  common  in  Tamil,  is 
called  Anthathi,  which  I  venture  to  translate  'Anaphoretic  verse.'  This  cento  is  intended  to 
exhibit  the  progress  of  the  soul  through  the  successive  stages  of  religious  experience  till  it  loses 
itself  in  the  rapture  of  complete  union  with  the  Supreme.  The  general  title  given  by  one  editor 
is  equivalent  to  'The  Varying  Phases  of  Religious  Enthusiasm;'  at  least  this  is  the  nearest  expression 
for  it  that  I  can  find  in  English.  The  poem  is  supposed  to  have  been  composed  in  Tiru-perun-turrai 
immediately  after  the  departure  of  the  Saints,  for  some  time  Manikka-Va^agar's  companions,  who 
passed  through  fire  and  went  home  to  £ivan.  From  the  border  of  the  tank,  where  the  divine  con- 
flagration had  arisen,  into  the  midst  of  which  his  companions  had  thrown  themselves,  he  returned  to 
the  Kondrai  tree,  where  he  spent  a  long  period  in  solitary  meditation,  of  which  these  poems  are  the 
sum.  He  surveys  his  past  experiences,  contemplates  the  work  assigned  him,  and  while  he  begins  the 
series  of  sacred  poems  by  which  he  was  to  establish  the  Qaiva  system  in  the  hearts  of  his  fellow- 
countrymen,  he  never  ceases  to  complain  in  most  touching  language,  that  he  is  not  permitted  at  once 
to  follow  his  Master  and  brethren  into  the  rest  and  glory  of.Paradise.  This  is  indeed  the  burthen 
of  much  of  his  poetry. 

The  titles  of  the  ten  decads,  into  which  the  poem  is  divided,  indicate  in  some  measure  the  course 
of  his  thoughts  and  the  character  of  his  mental  conflicts.  There  is  a  most  pathetic  alternation  of 
rapturous  and  realizing  devotion  with  coldness  and  apathy,  and  even,  it  seems,  of  temporary  abandon- 
ment to  gross  sensuality.  It  is  to  be  doubted  whether  the  whole  of  these  verses  are  of  one  period, 
and  I  should  prefer  to  think  that  they  really  embody  his  meditations  and  soliloquies  up  to  the  period 
of  his  final  settlement  in  (Jithambaram. 

DECAU  I. 

THE    COGNITION    OF    THE    TRUE, 
i. 

Humble  access  to  the  new  Master. 

My  frame  before  Thy  fragrant  foot  is  quivering  like  an  opening  bud ; — 
My  hands  above  my  head  I  raise ;— while  tears  pour  down,  my  melting  soul, 


ff^aii.     @. 

Qurrtbrfil,  mu&iu  Quirrbfl  GTSS 


<suniJp<sy  ; 


srr  SST 

19_  0fr  Co  QT  S5T 


LD6UIT. 


The  false  renouncing,  praises  Thee ; — with  songs  of  triumph  praises  Thee, — 
Nor  suffer  I  adoring  hand  to  rest ; — O  Master,  look  on  me  !  4 

n. 
Self-surrender.     He  accepts  the  ascetic  life. 

I  ask  not  bliss  of  Indra,  Mai,  or  Ayan  ; — though  my  house  and  home 

Be  ruin'd,  friendship  form  I  none  save  with  Thine  own ; — though  hell's  abyss 

I  enter,  I  unmurmuring  go,  if  grace  divine  appoint  my  lot ;  — 

O  King !  no  other  god  save  Thee  I  ponder,  our  Transcendent  Good  !  8 

in. 

He  is  despised  as  a  mad  enthusiast. 

Transcendent  Good  !  Owner  and  Sire  !   Thy  servant  melting  thinks  on  Thee  ; 
In  raptures  meet  I  utter  forth  my  fever'd  soul's  ecstatic  joys, 
Still  wandering  from  town  to  town  ;  while  men  cry  out,  'A  madman  this;' 
And  each  one  speaks,  with  mind  distraught,  discordant  words.    O,  when  comes 
death?  " 

IV. 
None  to  be  worshipped  but  9ivau. 

Erewhile  was  Dakshan's  offering  death.  They  ate  the  flesh,  and  poison  feared  ! 
'  Our  Father/  cried  our  friends  and  worshipt  Him  with  suppliant  voice. 

5.  In  original,  Puran-dura  =  '  town-render.'    An  epithet  of  Indra.     See  Muir,  vol.  v.  p.  i  i.v 
13.  See  the  account  of  Dakshan's  sacrifice.     Comp.  VIII.  85,  &c.;  XII.  16-20;  XIII.  13-16  ;  XIV. 
1 3,  &c.     This  is  a  very  ambiguous  verse. 


1  6  g  Olf*  •  A 

Lc/J)  j/rQ(63)(5)/i>  OTsaars 


Q<£61JJ6T<5$T 

®. 

<3F65T  ; 


8-0 

r 

Sk. 


<SVtTlLJLD6V[r 


CT. 


And  yet  'Three  are  the  gods  that  rule  in  heaven  and  earth,'  they  vainly  deem. 
What  sin  is  this  your  haughty  minds  breathe  out,  ye  erring  penitents?  i<> 

v. 

X  plead  no  merit,     am  no  real  devotee. 

No  penance  have  I  done,  nor  bowed,  with  hand  unstinting  scatt'ring  flowers ; 
Born  all  in  vain, — to  '  cruel  deeds'  a  thrall,  —the  bliss  of  Qivan's  heav'n, 
Amongst  Thy  loving  ones,  I've  fail'd  to  gain  ;  see,  and  in  grace  bestow 
On  me,  Thy  slave,  consummate  life  beneath  Thy  feet,  Supernal  Lord !  20 

VI. 
Grace  unfailing  to  the  faithful. 

They  roam'd  and  cull'd  choice  varied  flowers  to  lay  in  worship  at  Thy  feet, 
They  deemed  that  all  they  sought  they  should  obtain;  and  from  these  loving  hearts 
In  mystic  guile  Thou  hidest  still,  abiding  not !    In  grace  bestow, 
Love  to  Thy  glorious  foot,  that  I  may  ceaseless  praise  with  perfect  song !      24 

VII. 

Civan  was  an  ascetic,  as  I  am  now. 

Erewhile  the  Maker's-maker  bowed,  brought  blooming  flowers,  and  everywhere 
Sought  for  Th' All-seeing  One,  nor  found.  Our  mighty  One,  Who  dwells  beyond, 


17.  See  Pope's  Kurral,  ch.  xxvii.  18.  See  my  Nala4i,  ch.  xi.  21.  Lit.  '  many  flowers.' 

These  are  fourfold:  ' branch-flower '  (Cani®^),  'creeper-flower'  (Q«/ifiiu),  'water-flower'  (fiuy,), 
and  'ground-flower'  (nSsuu^).  Comp.  Koyil  Pur.  I.  15-21.  23.  Song  III.  125,  &c.  25.  I.e. 
Vishnu,  who  produced  Brahma,  the  Demiurge.  Muir,  vol.  iv.  pp.  266,  267  :  'Tato  Brahma  sama- 
bhavat,  SA  TASYAIVA  PRASADAJAH.' 


47 


LJQJ657",  (57  1£)  Lff/TSST,  LJ^      LLttLL>jl<£  <3S<538T<o55,  <S6ffiT    tfGySjuQTj  LD/7S5T, 


ao. 


Here  in  the  wilds  with  demons  danced,  a  homeless,  friendless  one ;  and  there 
In  tiger-skin  arrayed  Himself,  as  madman  wand'ring  to  and  fro  !  28 

VIII. 
Save  Thy  servants  in  the  day  of  doom  I 

The  wand'ring  wind,  the  fire,  the  flood,  the  earth,  the  heaven, — a  time  shall  be, 
When  these  adown  the  gulf  shall  go  !    After  that  hour  unknown  has  come 
The  deeds— mighty  the  soul  to  bind — Thy  slave  in  wand'ring  days  has  done, — 
Let  the  time  come  for  these  to  pass !  Guard  us  from  these,  our  Guardian  then !  32 

IX. 
Bhavan's  our  Lord. 

Bhavan's  our  Lord,  Whose  garland  is  the  cool  vast  moon,  of  heavenly  ones 
The  Prince.  (Divan's  our  Lord,  Who  made  me  His,  my  meanness  though  He  saw. 
Our  Lord  Supreme  is  He,  and  I,  His  lowly  servant,  thus  declare  : 
That  earth  may  know,  sound  out  that  Bhuvan  is  our  Lord  !  36 

x. 

'Tis  wondrous  grace  that  sought  me  out. 

Unmeet  was  I  to  enter  'mongst  Thy  loving  ones,  my  flawless  Gem  ! 
Ambrosia  rare  !  The  way  Thou  took'st  me  for  Thine  own  and  mad'st  me  meet ! 


27.  NOTE  I.  28.  Koyil  Pur.  II.  32.  29-32.  Comp.  the  '  Dies  irae.'  31.  Pope's 

Ndlodi,  ch.  xi.         33.  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  328.  Bhavan  = '  the  existent,'  '  the  eternal.'        36-  Bhuvan  : 
an  epithet  of  Civan,  'Lord  of  the  air,'  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  25. 


48 


GU  IT 


a.. 


LD 


The  very  meanest  lifting  high,  Thou  didst  the  heav'nly  ones  bring  low  ! 
What  Thou  our  Lord  to  me  hast  done  is  as  a  play  men  laugh  to  see !  40 

DECAD  II. 
THE   IMPARTATION   OF   DIVINE    KNOWLEDGE. 

XI. 
A  prayer  for  perfect  love. 

'Midmost  of  Thy  devoted  ones,  like  them  in  mystic  dance  to  move  ; 
Within  Thy  home  above  to  gain  wish'd  entrance,  lo,  I  eager  haste ! 

0  golden-glorious  Hill  of  gems!   Give  grace,  that  ceaseless  love  to  Thee, 
Our  Master,  in  my  heart  of  hearts,  melting  my  very  soul,  may  'bide.  44 

"  xn. 

Longing  for  grace  alone. 

1  dread  not  any  birth.     To  death  what  should  I  owe  !     Nor  do  I  crave 
Even  heaven  itself  to  gain.     No  power  to  rule  this  earth  do  I  esteem. 
O  £ivan,  crowned  with  cassia-flowers  that  sweets  distil ;  our  Peruman  ! 

Our  only  Lord  !    I  fainting  cry  :  'When  comes  the  day  I  find  Thy  grace?'  48 


41.  Comp.  T.  A.  P.,  ch.  vi.  [This  fine  metre  is  *,r&q-0  ^/ra;  Q«/r#*«*  aeSuur.  So  X-XIII,  XV, 
XXXI,  XXXVIII-XL ;  and  VIII,  XVI  have  the  same  rhythm,  but  six  lines.  It  has  four  feet 
(mostly  *«J)  and  Ven-dalai  (G.  1 79).  In  Greek  poetry  it  is  Epichoriambic.] 


XIII. 
Without  Thy  presence  I  pine. 

I  ever  pine  Thy  flow'ry  feet  to  see, — Thy  slave,  dog  though  I  am  ! 
I  sit,  no  fitting  flowers  present,  my  tongue  no  rising  raptures  speaks. 
Thou  Who  the  well-strung  golden  bow  didst  bend  !   Ambrosia' of  Thy  grace 
If  Thou  give  not,  I  PINE, — a  wretch  forlorn,— what  other  can  I  be?  52 

XIV. 

Deadness  of  soul. 

My  inmost  self  PINES  not,  as  were  befitting,  for  Thy  sacred  Foot ; 
Nor  melts  in  love ;  I  bring  no  wreath ;  speak  out  no  worthy  word  of  praise ; 
Within  the  shrine  of  Him,  the  King  of  gods,  perform  no  service  due;  55 

Nor  move  in  dance.  To  death  I  haste  !  Thou  Whom  true  wisdom  bringeth  nigh ! 

xv. 

God  all  in  all. 

Thou  art  the  Heaven ;  Thou  art  the  Earth ;  Thou  art  theWind ;  Thou  art  the  Light ; 
The  Body  Thou  ;  the  Soul  art  Thou  ;  Existence,  Non-existence  Thou  ; 
Thou  art  the  King ;  these  puppets  all  Thou  dost  make  move,  dwelling  within, 
That  each  one  says:  '  Myselfand  mine.'  What  shall  I  say?  How  render  PRAISE?  60 


51.  £ivan  is  a  great  master  of  the  bow.     With  a  single  arrow  he  destroyed  the  three  cities. 
Comp.  Muir,  vol.  iv.  pp.  223-228. 

60.  '  Who  slays  conceit  that  utters  "I"  and  "  mine," 

Shall  enter  realms  above  the  powers  divine."  Kurral,  346  (p.  245). 
E 


-  o  ^  5  GIJ  IT  <SF  a  li . 


sr  LLSST^GSTLJIJGV 


a*s> 


Quffliu[r(o<ssr  I 


era. 


XVI. 

My  praise  is  pure.     Free  me  from  embodiments. 

The  heavenly  ones  adore  Thee  still  heaven's  bliss  to  share  !  Their  minds  to  Thee 
They  lowly  humble  that,  on  high  exalted,  men  may  worship  them ; 
Thou  round  whose  flower-wreath  hum  the  honey-bees !  Thy  slave,  I  praise 
Thee,  even  I,  that  Thou  may'st  save  from  idle  round  of  earthly  birth  !  64 

XVII. 
The  bliss  of  Civan's  heaven  of  presence. 

The  heavenly  dwellers  chaunt  Thy  praise  ;  the  fourfold  Vedas  utter  song  ; 
She  of  the  shining  locks  that  shed  perfume  is  sharer  of  Thy  seat; 
There  in  true  love  Thy  servants  all  commingling  dwell ;  there,  more  and  more, 
Thy  feet  with  sounding  anklets  girt  do  they  behold,  Thou  hard  to  know !       68 

XVIII. 

This  abandonment  is  unendurable. 

Thou  Whom  'tis  hard  to  know, — in  sky  and  in  the  golden  court  revealed,— 
Our  mighty  One  !  beneath  the  jewelled  feet  where  I  was  made  Thine  own, 
No  more  I  scatter  fragrant  flowers,  nor  wondering  weep,  nor  melt  in  love. 
'Tis  past  my  power  to  bear  !    How  can  it  be  ?    I  die,  insooth,  I  die  ! 


StfllLJ, 


2.0. 


XIX. 

He  is  above :    we  earthly  still. 

With  flow'ry  arrows  in  the  spring-time  comes  the  god  of  soft  desire, 
And  witching  smile  of  maidens  fair,  with  rosy  mouths  and  flower-wreathed  locks ! 
Poor  soul, — that  pants  and  melts  through  these, — Who  made  thee  His,  and 

thrilled  thy  frame, 
To-day  hath  gone  and  dwells  in  heaven  ;  yet  see,  thou  still  art  lingering  here  !  76 

xx. 
O  soul  be  wise  I 

O  soul,  that  livest  here  in  joy  !   Of  life's  true  joys  bereft,  in  mire 

Thou  sink'st  of  'mighty  deeds '!  Him  Who  guards  men  from  sinking  praisest  not ! 

Thou  art  devising  ruin  to  thyself, — I  tell  thee  so  full  oft ; 

Thou'rt  sinking  even  now  beneath  the  FLOOD  of  the  distressful  sea !  80 


E    2 


SYJ  T  9  <%  lt. 


a.*. 


o52(S5f<s(od5/_Si5T,  STSSTUfTI/J  (oUfTSV 


DECAD  III. 
DYING   TO   SENSE   AND    SELF. 

This  decad  describes  the  mystic  experience  known  by  Caiva  Siddhantis  as  A'iina-(arilhai,  in 
which  the  devotee,  though  able  to  discern  God  in  and  above  and  beyond  all  things,  continues  to 
perform  outward  rites  (£arithai)  and  to  avail  himself  of  all  means  of  grace.  See  £iva-Piraga9am 
II.  48.  Since  Qivan  so  deigns  to  manifest,  and  yet  veil,  His  Presence,  the  devotee  is  assiduous  in 
performance  of  all  prescribed  acts  of  worship,  while  his  soul  transcends  the  visible,  and  by  Nanam 
(in  this  connection  =  divine  Faith}  sees  God. 

XXI. 

I  have  relapsed  into  apathy. 
'  Through  Thine  expanding  locks  the  FLOOD  pours  down  ; 

the  Bull  is  Thine,  Lord  of  the  heavenly  ones  !  '- 
They  sang,  and  stood,  with  panting,  melting  souls, 

like  torrent  plunging  in  th'  abyss  !  and  I, 
With  yearning  soul  I  heard  !  Thou  mad'st  me  Thine  !    Yet  now 

from  head  to  foot,  I  melt  not ; — from  my  eyes 
The  rushing  waters  pour  not  down  ; — my  heart 

is  stone ;— both  eyes  are  wood  to  SINFUL  me  !  84 

XXII. 
Deadness  has  come  over  me. 

Thou  ent'ring  stood'st  by  me  fast  bound  IN  SIN  ; 
as  one  who  says,  'I'm  sin's  destroyer,  come  !' 


co 


i  iSlurrssr  ^(ts^ius  Sl^uoiSlssr  urrstneu 


LL<55)plU<SU65) 

IE] 

(ojBfr^Sl<s  dssasr®, 


Thyself  announcing  thus,  Thou  mad'st  me  Thine,— 

becam'st  my  mighty  Lord.     Like  iron  statue,  I 
Now  sing  no  praise,  nor  dance,  nor  weep,  nor  wail, 

nor  faint  with  bliss.     Behold,  O  Primal  One, 
To  Thee  I  make  my  plaint ;  nor  know  how  this 

with  me  shall  end,  Thou  Who  art  First  and  Last !  88 

XXIII. 
Very  vile,  but  Thine:    save  me! 

Thou'rt  Ayan,  Thou  the  fourfold  Vedas'  Lord  ; 

I  know  Thee, — I,  lowest  of  men  that  live ; 
I  know, — and  see  myself  a  very  cur ; — 

yet  Lord,  I'll  say  I  am  Thy  loving  one  ! 
Though  such  I  was,  Thou  took'st  me  for  Thine  own. 

Thy  saints  are  here  no  longer,  only  I, 
Vile  wretch  !  and  is  it  thus  Thy  greatness  shines  ? 

Our  Peruman,  what  shall  I  say  to  Thee  ?  93 


87.  Song  XXVII.  ii,  &c.        89.  Vishnu  and  Brahma.     This  is  strictly  Krishna,  the  '  cow-herd'; 
not  Ayan,  but  Ayan. 


CA 


Gil  T  ff  <S>  li. 


Qu(l1jLbj(o<55T  I    6T65rQfD<5ST(orD  (oLJ&U  (oUtflLJ 

, 


6U69BT635TJB  ^fl 


<oTJB<&  JILJ  I    9_ 6STID  SST 
6U  <S39r<5SSrjU^!T6Sr  <jy,g)l£  fTL-  ^L,  <S1J  lyjol]  <5  /Til  £f., 


XXIV. 

Thy  votary,  though  full  of  sin. 
And  if  I  spake,  '  Thou'rt  L^an,  Father,  Sire 

great  Peruman  ;'  thus  have  I  ever  said  ; 
If  I  besmear'd,  'twas  sacred  ash  alone 

I  smear'd,  still  praising  Thee,  our  Peruman  ; 
Who  erst  made  those  Thine  own  who'd  passed  by  love 

o'er  birth  and  death.     In  torrent  plunged  of  lust 
And  guile,  behold  me,  spotless  Hill  of  gems  ! 

Father !  'Twas  such  an  one  Thou  mad'st  Thine  own  !  96 

XXV. 

The  mystery  of  His  being. 

Thy  colour  is  not  red, — nor  white  Thy  form  ; — 
Thou'rt  Many,  One ;  Atom,  than  Atom  far 
Subtler ;  the  heavenly  host  in  'wildered  thought 

know  not  the  way,  Father,  to  reach  Thy  feet. 
Thou  showd'st  Thy  form,  Thy  beauty  didst  display ; 
didst  show  Thy  flow'ry  feet !   Me  wandering,  Thine 


a-     a  ii. 


cc 


D  ,_£)/£/)  LD  6V  IT  <£  Co  d£  ^ 


LDITSti 


2.CT. 


57  <3rfT)  <o^l  SS 


Thou  mad'st,  safeguarding  me  from  future  '  birth ' ! 

Our  Peruman,  what  shall  I  say,  what  THINK  ?  100 

XXVI. 
Wonders  of  grace. 

Thou  mad'st  my  THOUGHT  Thy  THOUGHT  !   Of  me,  mere  cur, 

Thou  mad'st  the  eye  rest  on  Thy  foot's  blest  flower, 
Thou  mad'st  me  bow  before  that  flower  alone  !    My  mouth 

Thou  mad'st  to  speak  abroad  Thy  gem-like  word  ! 
My  senses  five  to  fill  Thou  cam'st,  and  mad'st  me  Thine. 

Ambrosial  Sea  of  magic  might !   O  Mount !   Thyself 
Thou  gav'st,  Thy  form  like  wild  of  roseate  lotus  flowers, 

to  LONELY  helpless  me,  Thou  Only-Light !  104 

XXVII. 
The  voyage. 

I,  LONELY,  tost  by  billows  broad  of  anguish  sore, 

on  the  great  '  sea  of  birth,'  with  none  to  aid ; 
Disturbed  by  winds  of  mouths  roseate  like  ripened  fruit, 

lay  caught  in  jaws  of  the  sea-monster  lust ! 


105.  See  Pope's  Kurral,  pp.  187,  188. 


(5  su  IT 


svrrssr, 


<£6$r<5T<5V6vrrrEi 


1  Henceforth  what  way  to  'scape  ? '  I  frequent  cried  !  then  thought, 

and  seiz'd  the  raft  of  Thy  Five  Letters  !   So  to  me, 
O  Primal  One,  Thou  showd'st  a  boundless  fertile  shore, 

and  mad'st  the  rash  insensate  one  Thine  own  !  108 

XXVIII. 
What  He  did  for  me ! 

Him  none  by  hearing  know;  He  knoweth  no  decay; 

He  hath  no  kin ;  naught  asking,  heareth  all ! 
While  people  of  the  land  beheld,  here  on  this  earth 

to  me,  a  cur,  He  gave  a  royal  seat ; 
To  me,  a  dog,  all  things  not  shown  before,  He  showed  ; 

all  things  not  heard  before,  He  caused  to  hear; 
And  guarding  me  from  future  'birth/  He  made  me  His. 

Such  is  the  wondrous  work  our  Lord  hath  wrought  for  me  !  113 

XXIX. 
His  appearing  I 

The  WONDER  this !   Say,  is  there  aught  like  this  ? 
He  made  me  servant  of  His  loving  saints; 

107.  NOTE II.       112.  Comp.XLI,andVIII.33,&c.       113.  KoyilPur.  IV.  59.  'Service  to  the  saints.' 


£  *    •       •  57 

;    ,_gy  (Xp  <£  ii) 


Q<SF<F<5$)<3:LDrT 


fTViO. 
(o  dfr  SiJ  fj  Co  cS  /7 


rds^/E/  (3)iy-j?)f<sv(0<svjLc>, 


Dispell'd  my  fear,  ambrosia  pouring  forth,  He  came, 

and  while  my  soul  dissolv'd,  in  love  made  me  His  own ; 

The  Sire, — Male,  Female,  Neither,  Ether  pure, — was  He  ; 
as  wondrous  Fire ;  as  End  of  all ;  beyond  all  far ; 

His  body  like  a  flower  of  golden  hue ; 

our  £iva-Peruman,  our  Lord,  OF  GODS  THE  KING  !  nfi 

xxx. 

Triumph. 

The  GOD  OF  GODS,  to  king  of  gods  unknown ; 

King  of  the  'Three';  what  teeming  worlds  create, 
Preserve,  destroy  ;  the  First ;  Essence  divine  ; 

the  Sire  of  sires  ;  Father,  whose  half  the  Mother  is  ; 
The  King  of  all !    He  came,  and  made  me,  too,  His  own. 

Henceforth  I'm  no  one's  vassal ;  none  I  fear  ! 
We've  reached  the  goal ;  with  servants  of  His  saints 

in  sea  of  bliss  we  evermore  shall  bathe  !  120 


115.  See  £iva-ffana-b5dham,  Aphorism  I.  These  three,  'Male,  Female,  Neither'  (i.e.  all  beings 
animate  and  inanimate),  include  all  the  phenomenal  universe.  The  END  is  (Divan's  name  in  the  same 
aphorism.  116.  Song  XIX.  4.  117.  Even  to  Indra.  Comp.  '  sport,'  i. 


cQ  ^  J5  QJ  IT  ff  «  IX. 

§    f.       ^j&gl 

[Metre:    six  feet— A9iriya-Viruttam,    G.  193.      Formula    mostly    is :  — ">r|«fi|aS|cSjrf|-*ri.     In 
classical  metre  it  is: — 


Tr. 


dact. 


—    w   w         —   \j 


choriamb.] 


Ifofi. 


urr(Sl  Stair  nflSsu  ;  u<5S>puuaji?5ij  Qfiu 
;  (^LK5)®sar  /r^ti/^S 
;  Qp(Tfj<SLj(o<5(r  jDSvnfti'Ssv  ;  QfiueuQ^frssr  fo^Co 


GTGWLQLJSVLD  ^dRJU  <57/<5!«<35<S5>HJL/ 


DECAD  IV. 
THE    SOUL'S    PURIFICATION. 

XXXI. 

The  slnggish  soul. 

Thou  dancest  not;  thou  hast  no  love  for  the  DANCER'S  foot;  with  melting  thrill 
Thou  singest  not ;  thou  throbbest  not ;  thou  bowest  not  down  ;  the  flower  of 

His  foot 
Thou  wearest  not ;  thou  crownest  it  not  with  flowers ;  there's  none  like  Thee, 

DEAD    HEART ! 

Thou  seekest  Him  not  through  every  street ;  thou  wailest  not ;  nothing  know 
I  thou  dost !  124 

XXXII. 
The  ungrateful,  treacherous  heart. 

My  Sire  came,  entered,  made  His  own  me  who  knew  naught ;  in  mercy  taught 

me  all; 

Caused  me  to  know  the  higher  path ;  He  loos'd  my  every  bond  !— 
Despite  the  gain  of  changeless,  sweetest  gifts  of  grace, — thou'rt  changed,  DEAD 

HEART ! 
RUINED  by  thee,  to  all  that's  false  subjected,  thus  I  RUINED  lie !  u8 


iai.  NOTE  VI. 


(OLD  !       *     SUT/U,  ^<s5)/_/u/rs5T 

syrsu^f^  (&j(fliu<su<55T  <s£l<5W 

svrr^srrfi  -soft  iriSlffljs  $Qt)py&ji  ^- 


SthOr 
IW®. 


XXXIII. 

Heart  unworthy  of  trust :   insensible  to  complaint. 
My  foolish  senseless  HEART,  that  changing,  RUIN  bring'st  to  me, 
Henceforth  I  trust  thee  nevermore ; — assuredly  on  (Divan's  mighty  arm 
The  ashes  thickly  smeared  thou  saw'st,  yet  melted'st  not ;  this  body's  bonds 
Thou  rendest  not, — nor  can  I  bid  restore  the  ruin  thou  hast  wrought.  133 

xxxiv. 

The  utter  folly  of  the  fickle  mind. 

Perish,  O  restless  mind  !  before  the  Master  Absolute, 
A  dog  I  lay; — Thou  didst  enjoy  His  fragrant  flowery  Foot;— 
But  now  thou'rt  severed  like  a  young  and  tender  shoot ;  all  former  bliss 
Hast  lost !  Truly  I  deem  Thy  wisdom  and  Thy  greatness  measureless !       136 

xxxv. 

Insensible  to  infinite  mercy. 

When  He  to  heavenly  ones  inscrutable,  of  access  easy  to  His  saints, 
Our  hidden  sin  destroyed,  and  made  me  His,  thou  knew'st  the  melting  joy ! 


J33)  134-  '  Who  has  right  of  sale.'  136.  Irony. 


Ql  IT   IF  ft  U>  , 


frron  • 


QiuQssrl 


Yet,  HEART,  thou  hast  not,  hating  all  thy  hidden  sin,  prepar'd  an  ample  field 

for  Him, 
Nor  bow'd  before  the  Master's  healing  Feet,  the  heavenly  goal  to  gain  !       140 

XXXVI. 
What  remedy? 

If 'tis  not  given  to  pass  the  golden  gate, — where  all  may  entrance  find, 
And  whence  none  e'er  departs ; — nor  yet  to  melt  in  love  before  the  foot 
Of  Him,  my  Sire,  my  Lord ; — if  there  to  me  abound  no  more 
Ambrosia,  every  honied  sweet ; — a  sinful  man,  what  can  I  do  for  this  ?          144 

XXXVII. 
A  sinner  — I  quit  Thee  not. 

What  other  sinners  are  there  like  to  me,  cur  at  the  Master's  Foot  ? 

Yet  not  a  whit  from  me  to  sever  is  Thy  sacred  will ;  and  thus, 

O  Primal  One,  Thy  Foot's  fair  flower  if  I  should  quit,  and  yet  live  on, 

My  soul  is  iron,  stone  my  mind  ;  my  ear  to  what  shall  it  compare  !  148 


147.  Comp.  Pope's  Kurral,  p.  185,  &c. 


&.    @.  6  1 


/L/frQ<S5T<35>/L/<3&  &  (7fj  Lb  l5l  Stiff  6$T   (otf)  tf)Sa>cfF, 


IfnSb. 


ff'O. 


XXXVIII. 
Life,  a  long1  exile. 

The  others  all  have  reached  the  goal,  yet  I,  who  know  not  anything, 
Haste  not  to  Thee  who  art  all  sweetness,  (^ivan,  King  of  £iva-  world  ; 
Thou  Spouse  of  her  whose  eye  is  like  the  tender  fawn  ;  long  time 
I  still  abide,  cherish  this  flesh,  and  so  my  death-in-life  drags  on  !  i5j 

xxxix. 

How  do  I  bear  life? 

O  bliss  that  ceases  not  !   O  bliss  beyond  compare  !    His  bright  flower-foot 
He  gave  ;  to  me  of  kind  more  base  than  dogs,  He  showed  the  perfect  way. 
My  Chief,  who  gave  me  grace  sweeter  than  mother's  love,  I  see  not  now  ! 
Yet  in  the  fire  I  fall  not,  wander  not  o'er  hills,  nor  plunge  me  in  the  sea  !    156 

XL. 
Still  the  senses'  slave  ! 

'When  Cupid's  dart  in  springtide  wounds,  moonlight  will  scorch;'  of  this  I  took 
No  heed;  like  milk  'neath  churning  stick  I'm  stirred  by  wiles  of  those  of  fawn- 

like  eyes. 

To  Civan's  city  go  I  not,  where  grace  as  honey  to  the  soul  is  given  ; 
To  cherish  soul  within  the  body,  still  I  eat,  and  garments  still  put  on  !  160 


62  ^IJ  OJ  IT  ff  «  li. 


99L, 


5T<35i533T/_  Q  {£  611  <SuQ  LL  \ 


LLlTllj(oLL  \ 


DECAD  V. 
THE    RENDERING    A    FIT    RETURN. 

XLI. 
X  did  not  clearly  apprehend  Thine  appearing-. 

Like  elephant  two-handed  I  saw  not 

My  mind's  true  germ ;  I  saw  but  sore  distress. 

Thou  bad'st  me,  'come' ;  yet,  'mid  the  heavenly  ones 

'Twas  I  alone  passed  not,  the  senses'  slave.  164 

XLII. 

Xt  must  have  been  illusion.     Is  HE  man  ? 

To  all  who  apprehend  that  one  bright  Essence  truly  is, 

As  female,  male,  or  lifeless  thing  Thou  art  not  known ; — 

To  me  Thy  servant,  coming  as  Thou  art,  Thou  didst  appear  ! 

I  saw  Thee,  yet  I  saw  Thee  not !     What  visual  juggle  this  !  168 

XLIII. 

When  shall  X  really  see  Thee  as  Thou  art? 

Thou  Form  unique,  to  even  heavenly  ones 

Unknown  !   Thou  Mystic  Dancer,  Who  didst  make  me  Thine  ! 

161.  An  elephant  with  two  trunks  would  be  utterly  lost ;  so  I,  serving  two  masters,  the  heavenly 
Master  and  the  sense-world.  162.  The  guru  in  the  soul.  166.  See  £iva-iiana-bodham, 

Aph.  I.  p.  ii.  'God  is  not  the  phenomenal  universe,  to  denote  all  the  contents  of  which  the  words 
he,  she,  it  may  be  used.'     Comp.  V.  115.  168.  It  must  have  been  a  visual  juggle,  a  mere  trick 

of  the  eye.     Unbelief follo'MS  unfaithfulness. 


63 


L/ 


Me  Thine  !   On  earth,  in  heaven,  or  when  all  these 
Have  passed  away,  —  WHEN  shall  I  see  Thy  face? 


12 


XLIV. 

I  am  of  earth,   earthy. 

Thou  Infinite,  by  men  yet  seen  !    Beyond  eye's  ken 

Thou  Essence  gleaming  bright  !    Here,  like  a  fledgling,  I 

Would  gladly  leave  this  faulty  frame  ;  yet  know  I  not  — 

Dweller  in  this  sense-world  —  how  I  may  Thee  put  on.  176 

XLV. 

Deaduess  of  soul. 

I  call  not  on  Thee  filled  with  mighty  love, 

Nor  render  praise,  nor  fall  in  ecstasy. 

'Tis  with  me  as  when  death  confronted  Thee, 

Bowing  before  those  lotus  flowers  Thy  feet.  180 


1 80.  Death  slain,  and  brought  to  life  again! — There  is  an  odd  little  story  in  the  Skanda  Puraiiam 
(sSydFjaairi-jfl,  <fljjAa«m_£}u<_«uio),  which  is  capable  of  conveying  very  impressive  teaching.  It  is  as 
follows: — There  was  an  ancient  sage  called  Mrikanda,  who, having  no  son,  offered  fervent  prayers  to 
£ivan,  and  performed  many  austerities,  always  praying  for  the  gift  of  a  worthy  son.  At  length  (^ivan 
appeared  to  him  in  his  hermit's  habitation,  and  promised  him  a  son,  who  was,  however,  to  be  taken 
from  him  by  death  in  his  sixteenth  year.  The  son  was  born,  and  grew  up  in  the  wild«rness,  a  pattern 
of  virtue,  and  an  enthusiastic  worshipper  of  £ivan.  But  at  the  appointed  time,  the  terrible  Yaman, 
lord  of  death,  came  and  threw  his  noose  over  the  doomed  youth.  Qivan,  who  loved  the  devout  boy, 
was  enraged  at  this,  and  with  a  kick  of  his  foot  laid  Yaman  (the  lord  of  death)  dead  on  the  ground. 
We  may  say,  by  the  way,  that  Yaman  seems  to  us  to  have  been  badly  treated,  since  he  was  after  all 
only  doing  (Divan's  will.  However  this  may  be,  all  the  gods  came  round  £ivan  imploring  mercy  for 
Yaman, — for,  however  terrible  death  may  be,  the  worlds  cannot  get  on  without  him.  Accordingly 
a  touch  of  Qivan's  foot  restored  the  god  of  death  to  life.  The  poet's  application  of  this  myth  is  very 
remarkable.  He  says  in  effect :  '  I  am  as  dead  in  soul  as  Yaman  was,  but  thy  touch  brings  even  death  to 
life.'  Comp.  IX.  70;  XV.  41  ;  XXIII.  34;  XXIX.  26;  A'urraf,  269;  Niti-Nerri-ViJakkam,  51. 


64 


IT  ff  * 


&  srr  (6Wj  z 

IS  <ofr  (SYTj/E/ 


&l  1565)35 


L/  su  su  jLc/oar     iumr<s(^Lo 

<5T  SV  SoV  uSsVdSLpSV  c95iS337© 

<5  SV  (517  (SOcKLDSST^  (D^  GSTLJiL  L_  <95/_ 


XLVI. 
Call  me,  take  me  once  more. 

Call,  take  me  'midst  Thy  loving  ones,  Thou  crowned 

With  cassias,  home  of  sweets  and  humming  bees  ! — 

In  'midst,  beneath,  above,  in  all  contained, 

Thou  art,  my  Sire,  'like  oil  within  the  seed  !'  184 

XLVII. 

The  Self-sufficing  sought  out  me. 

Father  and  Mother,  Lord  !    To  all  besides. 

Sire,  Mother,  Lord  : — to  Him  all  these  are  not ! 

Erewhile  within  my  inmost  soul  He  entered, 

Whom  none  by  thought  can  know,  the  Ever-blissful  One  !  188 

XLVIII. 

I  had  but  a  glimpse  of  His  glory. 

To  Thee,  nor  wealth,  nor  want !    From  heavenly  ones  to  worms, 

And  grass,— (no  limit),  all  Thou  fillest,— Being  rare  ! 

I  saw  Thy  Foot-gem  limitless,  yet  swerved  from  Thee. 

This  is  the  grief  I  stony-hearted  have  endured  !  192 


@.  6 


[Metre  :   «^.j»9/*«yS  Qw^w^.  uiQfiu  eSgfoib.    Formula  :  -  ior  ]  -  ur  [  -  *»£. 


<oT<3ST  l 

JBJGST  lurrffjjLQ  G^GST  n)<sv<s\)[rLJ 


XLIX. 
An  appeal. 

My  bonds  Thou  loosed'st,  mad'st  me  Thine  !   And  all 

The  loving  saints  —  who  ashes  gave  —  beheld. 

Thou  didst  exalt,  within  the  temple  court, 

Ev'n  me  Thou  didst  exalt,  who  knew  not  anything.  196 

L. 
I  was  not  chosen  for  my  wisdom  or  might. 

Thou  Only-  Wise  !  Ambrosia  !  me,  a  servile  cur, 

When  Thou  didst  take  and  make  Thine  own,  was  I  then  wise  ? 

Thou  saw'st  my  ignorance  that  day  Thou  mad'st  me  Thine  ! 

Ah,  Lord  of  grace,  was  I  then  wise  ?"  was  I  then  strong  ?  200 

DECAD  VI. 
OVERFLOWINGS   OF   JOY. 

LI. 

No  possible  return  for  such  mercies  I 

O  Master,  O  my  Mighty  One,  my  Father,  Peruman,  my  births' 
Destroyer,  Thou  Who  mad'st  me  Thine,—  an  evil  wholly  worthless  dog, 


196.  Lit.  'knew  not  eight  and  two,'  i.e.  ten,  of  which  the  sign  is  the  letter  Y  (u),  and  this  in  the 
mystery  of  the  five  syllables  represents  the  soul.     See  NOTE  II ;  Song  I.  i  ;  and  Unmai-vUnkkam  32. 


[5  <su  IT  *  <$  i  . 


©a.. 

Q&IUGU  pJ& 


b  (oLDGU  h 

Qumuiu 


USVLLfT    IXoSfl  6U  IT  B<oSfisUfTl—LJ    LJTSlS) 


And  throughly  base;—  I  cannot  think,  Thou  see'st,—  of  any  meet  return  to  Thee, 

0  Shining  One,  Lord  of  the  Porch,  —  nor  know  I  aught  that  I  can  do.  204 

LII. 

X  am  still  the  senses'  slave. 

Mean  cur,  that  knew  not  what  to  do,  I  gave  mysetf  to  gain  those  things 
That  false  ones  gain,  who  ne'er  have  seen  Thy  flowery  Feet  of  ruddy  gold. 

1  saw  and  heard  that  Thy  true  saints  set  free  from  lies,  had  gained  Thy 

fragrant  Foot; 
Yet  I,  —  false  one,—  O  Warrior  strong!  still  eat,  am  clothed,  and  here  abide.    208 

LIII. 

I  only  left  I 

Thou  Warrior  strong  from  out  Thy  golden  city  cam'st,  mad'st  darkness  flee  ; 
With  Her  the  beauteous  Queen  didst  deign  to  come.     The  glorious  devotees 
Who  grace  had  gained,  approached  Thy  Feet.    I  saw,  yet  like  a  sightless  hog 
That  roams  the  village  street,  shall  I  still  roam  a  wretch  doomed  to  live  on  ?    212 

LIV. 

My  love  is  weak. 

Full  many  a  saint  through  deathless  time  wrought  penance,  —  members  mortified,— 
With  frustratehope  to  see  Thee  here!  Yet  Thou  didstsinful  meThyservant  make. 


208.  Comp.  line  160. 


$  Jj  ^  *  £>  -95  ib .     @.  67 


QGSTGXT,  {J£)IEI 


O  Gem  !   This  frame  with  foulness  filled  wears  not  away.    To  see  Thy  face, 
The  strong  desire  and  love  'bide  not  in  me  ;  my  Prince,  how  may  I  rise?    216 

LV. 

Still  I  live  this  loathed  life. 

Thy  bride  is  Umai  with  the  fawn-like  eyes  !  Thou  cam'st  and  mad'st  me  Thine  ; 
'Ambrosia  Thou,  essential  sweetness  shed  !   O  Civan,  southern  Tillai's  King  ! 
Thy  saints  assembled  'neathThy  sacred  sign  have  gone  to  gather  round  Thy  Feet. 
This  loathsome  body  still  I  guard,—  still  here  I  dwell,  O  MASTER  MINE  !       220 

LVI. 

Thy  will  ordains  my  exile. 

0  MASTER  MINE  !    They  think  on  Thee,  Thy  loving  ones,  with  rapture  filled  ; 
They're  Thine,  Thy  Foot  I  saw  them  join.  Yet  here  more  mean  than  village  cur 

1  dwell  ;  my  heart  no  rapture  feels  ;  my  mind  is  stone,  nor  melts  within. 
This  body  vile  I  still  must  guard  and  here  abide,—  such  is  THY  WILL  !          224 

LVII. 
My  old  life  of  earthly  love. 

The  way  THY  WILL  ordains  befits  me  well  !  Faithless  I  strayed,  I  left 
Thy  saints.     A  reprobate  was  I  !    How  did  I  watch  the  one  belov'd, 

220.  Araladi,  ch.  iii.  226.  ?  G*trui*>. 

F   2 


58 


a.«»a. 


!  Quirsvsvrr  tBiri 

L]<5$T<o$)LD  f 


Qui<ssr(ossr  ^ 

)  ;  (?LJ  /r/ryy/i 


The  quiverings  of  the  lip,  the  folds  of  circling  robe,  the  timid  bashful  looks,— 
To  read  love's  symptoms  there  !  My  mind  thus  ruin  to  myself  wrought  out.  228 

LVIII. 

Was  my  vocation  a  mockery  then? 

Thou  honied  Sweetness,  purest  Joy,  Souls'  Light,  Master  Who  fill'st  with  bliss 
The  frame  of  those  that  trust  in  Thee,  Giver  of  endless  gifts  !    Of  worth 
I  void  am  yet  Thy  slave  ;  Thou  me  hast  made  Thine  own  ;  if  this  be  so, 
Thy  servant's  state  would  show,  I  plead,  Thy  gift  of  grace  was  but  Thy  sport.   232 

LIX. 

What  other  refuge  have  I  ? 

Thy  nature  others  know  not,  Lord  !    Me  evil  cur,  lowest  of  all, 
Hast  Thou  not  made  Thine  own?  And  wilt  Thou  let  me  go  cast  out  fromThee? 
Then  who  will  deign  to  look  on  me?    What  shall  I  do,  O  Peruman? 
Father,  whose  sacred  form  is  gleam  of  gold,  where  shall  I  refuge  find  ?        236 

LX. 

I  have  sure  hope  :    yet  how  unworthy  I 

I  shall  enter  beneath  Thy  Foot  which  is  mine  !  'mid  saints  that  adore  I  standing 
Shall  laugh,  glad  as  I  gaze  on  the  well-known  form  !  shameless  dog  tho'  I  am  ! 

232.  NOTE  I. 


B.  ro 


§    CT. 

[Metre  :  ^j»^/*««9  Q*jf«uqL  ur&fti  «%4,s(A.     Formula  :  -  «fl  |  -  tor  |  -  ior.] 

on  35. 

r  stria  sii/rLpdssMcS  ;  <fF(ra«zr/r,  Qunpfyl 


yQurrfb^ll  Qutrpfil 


ae.. 


<sutnu 


<sumu 


No  melting  love  is  here  !   To  see  Thee,  —  to  be  made  Thine  own,  —  can  I 

Be  meet?  This  abject  state,  Father  !   behold,  'tis  past  my  power  to  BEAR  !     240 

DECAD  VII. 

THE    OVERWHELMING    SENSE    OF    THE    DIVINE 
COMPASSION. 

LXI. 
Praises. 

I  BEAR  no  more  these  joys  of  sense  ;    Hail  !   Cankara  ! 

Hail  !  heaven's  ancient  Lord.     Hail  !  our  Vidalai  ! 

Hail  !  Matchless  One  !    Hail  !  King  of  heavenly  hosts  ! 

Hail  !  Tillai's  Dancer  !    All  hail  !  our  Spotless  One  !  ;-H 

LXII. 
Ecstasy. 

All  hail  !  Na-ma-gi-va-ya  !  Buyangan  !    My  senses  fail  ! 

All  hail  !  Na-ma^i-va-ya  !  Other  refuge  is  there  none  ! 

All  hail  !  Na-ma-9i-va-ya  !  Send  me  not  forth  from  Thee  ! 

All  hail!  Na-ma-9i-va-ya  !  Triumph,  triumph,  Hail  ! 


348 


241  &c.  This  is  very  incoherent  and  rhapsodical.    See  notes  on  Song  I.         242.  l'i</atai  =  a.  bull 
(  =  mighty  one),  which  is  on  his  banner.  Song  XIX.  37-40.        245.  NOTE  II.  ;  IJuyaiigan,'  XLV. 


$  [Ij  6U  IT 


Guirpfl  !  flea  UJ/BLD,  Gutrpfll  juirpGosr,  Guirpfl\ 

-  -      -   -  *          ^  - '•  Lysi/SST^ff^dJ 


flciff1. 


<£[fliu 


LXIII. 
AU  in  aUI 

Hail !    Loving  One,  Who  deign'st  to  make  false  ones  like  me  Thine  own  ! 

Hail !  to  Thy  Foot !    Hail !    O  Lord  !    Hail,  hail ! 

Hail !  Sweetness  new  of  mercy's  flood  !    Earth,  water,  fire, 

Wind,  ether,  the  two  lights  of  heaven,— are  Thee,  O  GOD  ! 

LXIV. 

Come  quickly  1 

Hail,  O  my  GOD  !   In  grace  behold  me ;  Hail ! 

Hail !    I  pray  Thee  melt  my  soul  within  me,  make  me  Thine  ! 

Hail !   This  body  strip  from  off  me  ;  quickly  give  the  heavenly  realms  ! 

Hail !    £ahkara,  Who  in  Thy  braided  lock  hast  Ganga  placed  ! 

LXV. 

Praise. 

Hail  1    O  £ahkara,  other  refuge  have  I  none  ! 

Hail !    Partner  of  the  Queen  of  glorious  form,  of  ruddy  lips, 


256.  How  Gahga  (the  Ganges}  got  info  the  tuft  of  hair  on  Divan's  head, — The  ancestors  of  a 
certain  king  of  the  solar  race  named  Bhagtrathan,  owing  to  the  curse  of  the  ancient  sage  Kabilar, 
were  consumed  to  ashes,  and  to  restore  them  to  life  he  obtained  by  severe  penances  the  favour  from 
the  gods  that  the  heavenly  Ganges  should  be  sent  down  to  this  world  ;  but  Qivan,  fearing  that  the 
rush  of  the  celestial  flood  would  destroy  the  earth,  caught  the  river  on  his  head,  and  kept  it  among 
the  twines  of  his  braided  lock, — so  saved  the  world.  The  legend  seems  to  have  no  possible  meaning, 
but  the  most  popular  epithets  of  £ivan  are  founded  upon  it.  One  may  fancy  that  the  god  is  a  per- 
sonification of  the  Himalayas,  whose  tangled  forests  are  his  hair,  from  the  midst  of  which,  as  from 
the  very  heavens,  flows  down  the  mighty  Ganges,  while  the  -crescent  moon  gleams  brightly  on  the 
mountain's  brow.  [LEX.  «Bao«,] 


UW& 

LL  (oL-(o<55T. 


LJfl^LD, 


onoT. 


LD/E/  (55)c3?    .Sf^.^,  Q<SUGSST  633^0), 


P 

And  gleaming  smile,  and  black  bright  eye  !    Hail  !    Rider  on  the  mighty  Bull  ! 
Here  these  earthly  joys  I  bear  not,  Embiran,  —  I  all  renounce  !  360 

LXVI. 

Prostration. 

I  have  myself  renounced,  even  I  ;  Hail,  hail,  Embiran  ! 

I  have  not  done  Thee  wrong  !    Hail  !    Foot  to  which  I  service  owe  ! 

Hail  !    Faults  to  forgive  is  duty  of  the  great  ! 

O  cause  this  earthly  life  to  cease  !    Hail,  Lord  of  heaven  !  264 

LXVII. 
Adoration. 

Hail,  Lord  !    Hail!    Thou  King  of  heavenly  saints  ! 

Partner  of  the  Queen's  graceful  form,—  Hail  !    Wearer  of  the  sacred  ash  ! 

Hail  1  Worthy  Prince  !  Hail  !  Thou  of  Tillai's  sacred  court  ! 

Hail  !  King  of  heaven  !    My  only  Ruler,  Hail  !  268 

Lxvm. 
Take  me  ! 

Hail,  only  Deity  !    Incomparable  Father,  Hail  ! 

Hail  !    Guru  of  the  heavenly  ones  !    Hail  !  Tender  Branch  ! 

Hail,  bid  me  come,  receive  me  !  grant  Thy  Foot  to  gain  ; 

And  thus  remove  my  lonely  friendless  woe  !  -T-1 


(5  ^  ^ 

<9ncfe>  • 


LJ/THJ 


CTO. 


[Metre  :   tryffHaif  0»^.«i>.  ^fi^u  eS^jtfit.      Formula  :  «or,  wr,  ior,  (or,  »j,  inr,  «fi.] 

L-I<535TITLJLJ 


LXIX. 

Hail,  to  those  who  love  with  perfect  love,  Giver  of  love  surpassing  theirs  ! 
Hail  !  Greatness  that  oft  my  falsehood  pardon'd,  granted  grace,  and  made  me 

Thine  ! 
Hail  !    Prince,  Who  drank   the  outpoured  poison,  —  to   the   heavenly  ones 

ambrosia  gave! 
Hail  !  Thy  perfect  Foot  on  me,  a  wretch,  in  grace  bestow  !  376 

LXX. 

The  Universal  Lord. 

Hail  !   Thou  Who  art  earth,  water,  fire,  wind,  ether  too  ! 

Hail  !    Thou,  all  life's  phenomena,  —  Thyself  invisible  ! 

Hail,  all  living  beings'  End,  —  Thyself  without  an  end  ! 

Thyself  reaching  through  all,  by  senses  five  unreached  !  a8o 

DECAD  VIII. 
MYSTIC    UNION. 

LXXI. 
Sinking  in  rapture. 

Sire,  as  IN  UNION  strict,  Thou  mad'st  me  Thine  ;  on  me  didst  look,  didst  draw 
me  near  ; 

And  when  it  seemed  I  ne'er  could  be  with  Thee  made  one,—  when  naught  of 
Thine  was  mine,  — 

275.  Song  XII.  277.  Comp.  CCLL  2, 


70 


CT9.. 

rrrrjs)  J^ 

,  GTSST 


;  5TS3T 
LJ/5/d? 

QLDILJ&  <sv!> 


And  naught  of  mine  was  Thine, — me  to  Thy  Feet  Thy  love        283 
In  mystic  union  joined,  Lord  of  the  heavenly  land ! — 'Tis  height  of  BLESSEDNESS  ! 

LXXII. 

All  bliss  in  God. 

For  BLESSEDNESS  I  seek; — not  Indra's  choice  delights,  nor  those  of  other  gods; — 
Thou  Only-One,  Hive  not  save  with  Thy  Feet  twain!  Our  Lord,  my  breast  is  riven, 

With  trembling  seized  ;  my  hands  in  adoration  join  ; 
And  from  my  eyes  a  ceaseless  stream  pours  down,  as  of  a  river,  O  MY  SAGE  I   288 

LXXIII. 

Prayer  for  consummation. 

MY  SAGE,  save  to  Thyself  there's  none  to  whom  I  cling ; — in  me,  deceitful  one, 
No  part  from  mingled  falseness  'scapes;  I'm  falsehood's  self! — Partner  of  Her 
whose  dark 

Eyes  gleam,  come  Thou  to  me  !  the  love  Thy  true  ones  feel,— 
Who  at  Thy  jewell'd  Feet  in  love  commingling  rest, — mine  be  it  too,  I  PRAY!  292 

LXXIV. 

Give  me  essential  oneness. 

I  PRAY  for  love  of  Thine  own  jewell'd  Feet ;  remove  the  false  ;  Thine  own 
Make  me  in  truth ;  dog  though  I  am,— O  bid  me  come,  in  grace  join  to  Thyself, 

385,  See  V.  5-8, 


i-it  IT  ff  a>  i  . 


d5  !     STSST  Qd5/T  CofiV/T, 

CTffr. 
C>  <oT<SV%SV  (olLJlU 


svssrdssr 


CTCT. 


For  evermore  Thine  own  !    So  let  me  ceaseless  praise,  295 

Thro'  every  world  returning  ever  come  ;  my  King,  that  I  may  WORSHIP  THEE  ! 

LXXV. 

Thou  art  sole  actuality. 
THEE  WORSHIP  both  the  earth  and  heaven,  with  shouts  of  joy,  and  fourfold 

mystic  scroll  : 

They  yearning  pine  for  Thee.     For  they  who  gain  Thee  know  naught  true 
exists  but  Thee. 

Ah  !  since  we  vow  to  quit  Thy  service  never,  come  299 

And  grantThy  grace,Thou  Partner  of  thelovely  Queen  !  Pausing  why  PONDERSO? 

LXXVI. 

He  transcends  thought  and  speech. 
WHEN  PONDERING  Thee  the  thought  goes  forth,  to  reach  the  bound  desired  by 

fitting  word 
Is  not  a  whit  attainable;  nor  are  these  things  one  hears  through  forms  of  speech. 

Thee,  Who  art  all  the  world,  the  senses  five  know  not. 
How  GAIN  the  Father's  Foot  that  rests  in  all  that  is  and  every  sphere  beyond?  304 

LXXVII. 
Pity  me! 

To  me,  a  guileful  soul,  who  thought  to  GAIN  Thee,  Lord,  salvation  save  by  Thee 
Is  none.     No  other  Being  truly  is,  save  Thee  !    Lest  pining  sorrow  come, 


297.  The  personified  Vedas,  often  represented  as  sages  worshipping  in  Divan's  court. 


61  9\ 


(oS5r!  ^  JPJSVSV  ^SV&SV,  ^fEJi^L 


Q(SST\  6>IT 


<5T6$T 


DTSaafT/i)  (<^)  ^SoV,  FT<f(o65T  \ 


<5T69TLJJjj]LC> 


SrO)!  Q&(T<o33TL-  ^GSTLO  SV/f!   ^/f  ^<53 


Q  &16 


GUfTUJLD 


In  mercy  to  my  sin,  my  soul  vouchsafe  to  guard. 
'Tis  pitying  grace  like  this  alone,  RULER  SUPERNE  !  Thy  glory  doth  beseem.  308 

LXXVIII. 

My  soul  ding's  to  Thee. 

'RULER  SUPERNE,  there's  none  butThee,  or  here  or  there/  and  thus  I  ever  spake, 
Fool  though  I  was,  there  was  no  difference  !  Our  Lord  :  Thou  Spotless  One, 
Who  didst 

Make  me,  an  outcast  wretch,  Thine  own,  my  Teacher  Thou. 
The  THOUGHT,  that  other  god  exists  than  Thee  the  One,  my  mind  shall  never 
THINK!  312 

LXXIX. 

Old  days  of  ignorance. 

By  THOUGHT,  by  deed,  by  hearing,  or  by  speech,  or  by  these  wretched  senses  five, 
I  failed  in  days  of  old  Thy  truth  to  reach  ;  —  I,  low  and  foolish  one. 

I  passed  not  through  the  fire,  my  heart  burst  not  with  shame. 
To  Thee,  O  Father,  even  yet  may  I  attain  !    May  I  yet  dwell  with  Thee  !     316 

LXXX. 

Strange  command  :  '  Tarry  yet  below.' 
Me  iron-hearted  and  deceitful  one,  Thine   own  Thou  mad'st  ;    Thy  Foot's 

sweet  bliss 

Filled  me  with  joy;   with   me  Thou  didst  commingling  join.     The  fire  was 
there,  and  I 


309.  Comp.  XXXV.  3,  7. 


315.  As  the  others  did.     See  legend. 


QJ  T  a-  as  t   . 


[Metre:  arfi&fa>j£ia>f>.    Lines  with  *  are  irregular,  having  six  or  seven  feet.] 


(oLJ&LJ 

LLPLJ 

(ofD&LJ  UlLQl—SST't 


Was  there  :  that  was  which  was!  Though  this  was  so  that  day,    319 
There  was  in  Thee  desire  for  me,  in  me  for  Thee; — what  ignorance  was  mine? 

DECAD  IX. 
ECSTASY. 

LXXXI. 
Falsehood  lingers  yet. 

'The  seed  of  lies  is  not  destroyed ;' — so  saying,  Thou  hast  placed  me  here  !— 
All  those  that  were  to  Thy  desire  have  come,  and  reached  Thy  sacred  Foot! — 
In  depths  of  fear  I  sink.  O  God,  Who  didst  in  Arur  ask  for  alms, 

What  shall  I  do  ?     SPEAK  Thou  to  me  !  324 

LXXXII. 

Resignation. 

Thou  SPAK'ST  to  me,  amid  Thy  saints  with  sacred  ash  I  was  besmeared ; 
By  men  on  earth  as  Thy  poor  slave  I've  been  abused;  henceforth,  if  what 
I  suffer  pleases  not,  'tis  what  my  soul  desires,  because  I  am 

Thy  SLAVE,  whom  Thou  didst  make  Thine  own  1  328 


319.  The  saints  passed  through  the  fire  to  Divan's  paradise  (315).  The  sage  was  there,  desiring, 
but  not  permitted,  so  to  pass.  Yet  £ivan  loved  him  1  Strange  command  :  '  Tarry  yet  below.'  See 
legend.  321.  Life  is  a  discipline ;  the  lesson  to  be  learnt  is  to  distinguish  the  true  and  real  from 
the  false  and  unreal.  323.  See  Sunthara  Murtti's  legend. 


77 


QL^ 


LXXXIII. 
Yet  I  know  not  why  I'm  left. 

And  am  I  not  Thy  SLAVE  ?  and  didst  Thou  not  make  me  Thine  own,  I  pray  ? 
All  those  Thy  servants  have  approached  Thy  Foot ;  this  body  full  of  sin 
I  may  not  quit,  and  see  Thy  face,— Thou  Lord  of  Civa-world ! — I  fear, 

And  SEE  NOT  HOW  TO  GAIN  THE  SIGHT  !  332 

LXXXIV. 
Tell  me  the  hindrance  to  my  instant  freedom. 

I  SEE  NOT  HOW  THY  SIGHT  TO  GAIN  ; — though  Thee  THAT  DAY  I  saw !  Speak  Thou, 
In  music  say  what  'tis  that  weighs  my  spirit  down, — O  Light  Superne  ! 
Male,  Female,  rare  Ambrosia,  Sire  !    I  die,  a  dog,  of  power  bereft,— 

By  what  may  I  rise  up,  my  Lord  ?  %  336 

LXXXV. 

Falseness  keeps  me  out ! 

Thou  Partner  of  the  fawn-eyed  Queen ; — Thou  Word,  whose  end  the  Word 

knows  not; — 

Ambrosia  sweet,  to  thought  unknown;  King,  faults  of  wretched  me  Thou  bear'st 
I  babbling  tell  my  woes.    Thy  saints  have  reached  the  city  blest.   OUTSIDE 

I  and  my  FALSENESS  wander  here !  340 


335.  See  III.  134,  135. 


78  ^jaiirff^ii. 

jfs»: 

QlLlU 


6U  S9ST633T 


*  (outran  S-.S 


\U6ST 


^tfGSTUJLD  LDSSTLLfTUJ 


LXXXVI. 
But  O,  the  pity  of  it. 

OUTSIDE  we  go,  FALSENESS  and  I ! — True  love  to  gain  I've  lost  the  power. 
This  is  my  gain  !    Thy  saints  to  Thee  who  utterly  are  joined  now, 
Know  nothing  else  but  Thee ;  in  acts  all  glorious  on  their  way  they  go  ! 

O  £ivan,  they  have  reached  Thy  FOOT  !  344 

LXXXV1I. 
Failure ! 

0  Master,  give  Thy  slave  to  love  Thy  FOOT  ;  Thy  servants  now  have  gained 
The  world  from  which  they  come  not  back  ;  outside  I  have  remained,  I've  tried 
'To  crown  the  village  cow,  and  so  have  crowned  the  blind  !'     From  love,  of 

Thy  twain  Feet 

Estranged,  a  slave  I  'wildered  WEEP  !  348 

LXXXV1II. 
I  am  unworthy  to  be  numbered  with  Thy  saints. 

1  WEEP  !    With  loving  mind  towards  Thee,  like  wax  before  the  fire  were  they. 
Thy  gleaming,  golden,  jewelled  Foot  have  they  beheld,  and  worshipping 
Have  followed  Thee;  not  following  on  with  them,  in  vain  have  I  been  born  ! 

Wherewith  shall  I  before  Thee  bow?  35-' 


347.  I  cannot  find  a  clue.     It  means  :  '  I  have  striven" in  vain.' 


-7Q 


LJ<S5)LplLI 


u/rfi  aj'Q/rsijSsu    /TWHJ  Qumuif  Qi£>iuiurr(ossr\  «.©«* 


Ss>O. 
(U!j(o<5$T  QLJll(LlQ(Ll<55T  GlGST^GrLL  QuiTlLI,  <oT<55T  ^JSSTI  \UjQufllU, 


§ 


<S5T\ 
LLfr(o<55T\ 


[Metre  :  «r«*r  ^J*  «y9  Q/*i?-&  «syi».  ^&fiaj  sS^fit.  Formula  :  -u>r  |  -«S  -i«r  |  -*S.  This  popular  and 
pleasing  Tamil  metre  is  essentially  trochaic  tetrameter  catalectic.  It  has  eight  lines,  of  which  one, 
three,  five,  seven  are  under  one  rhyme  (agioo*).  The  alternate  lines  have  the  assonance  (ffiof&or). 
See  Grammar.  Each  of  the  eight  lines  has  a  caesura  after  the  fifth  syllable.  The  first  half  of 
each  line  is  thus  a  true  trochaic  penthemimer.  But  resolutions  of  -  into  o  u  are  not  infrequent. 
Trochee  becomes  tribach.  The  scheme  is  thus  :  sbu-u-ldbu-^o  -.] 


^j  (Lpj5J£tj§6sr 


LXXXIX. 
At  least,  take  my  sin  away. 

In  grace  Thou  hast  put  far  all  ills  of  those  that  bowed ;  on  ancient  saints 
Thou  didst  bestow  Thy  Foot  adorned  !    If  that's  too  great  for  me,  my  guilt 
(Who'm  like  a  tough  bambu)  destroy ;  come  swiftly,  give  Thy  healing  Foot  ; 
Thou  only  True,  from  FALSEHOOD  free  !  356 

xc. 

Teach  me  Thy  way. 

All  FALSE  am  I ;  FALSE  is  my  heart ;  and  FALSE  my  love ;  yet,  if  he  weep, 
May  not  Thy  sinful  servant  Thee,  Thou  Soul's  Ambrosial  sweetness,  gain? 
Lord  of  all  honied  gladness  pure,  in  grace  unto  Thy  servant  teach 

The  way  that  he  may  come  to  Thee  !  360 

DECAD   X. 

THE  OVERFLOW  OF  RAPTURE, 
xci. 

The  true  ones  blest — but  1 1 

O  Flood  of  mighty  changeless  grace  !    They  came, 
who  gain'd  erewhile  the  gift  immutable 


80  $?  15  eu  IT 

GVfTLJUjSiU  Ulfi^r  Qufi 


Qsusaar  <s$3frbg]  (oLLGsfl 

sr  QLOJ/JLCKOMLD 


Of  station  'neath  Thy  twain  flow'r-  wreathed  Feet. 

They,  LOVING  THEE  IN  TRUTH,  HAVE  REACH'D  THE  TRUE  ! 
Thee,  Endless  One,  benignly  manifest,— 

diffusing  light,  —  as  Man,  I  saw  Thee  come  ! 
Yet  I,—  a  dog,  of  heart  by  fate  unblest,— 

lie  at  the  gate,  ah  me  !  in  low  estate.  364 

XCII. 

Deny  me  not  Thy  truth. 
O  Half  of  Her  with  eyes  of  glist'ning  jet, 

Thou  cam'st  and  mad'st  me  Thine,  with  tender  hand 
As  feeding  me  from  golden  cup,  —  since  when 

hard  of  access  I  deem  Thee  nevermore  ;  . 
Thou  on  Whose  Body  gleam  the  ashes  white  ! 

They,  LOVING  THEE  IN  TRUTH,  HAVE  REACH'D  THE  TRUE  ! 
But,  tell  me,  is  it  MEET  that  Thou  should'st  go 

and  leave  me  here,  in  falsehood  thus  to  fall  ?  368 

XCIII. 

Take  '  deeds  '  away. 
MEETNESS  I'd  none,—  the  false  I  took  for  true; 

but  when  with  loving  glance  Thou  bad'st  me  come, 


81 


;  (Lp<s$)nr)       iui    <5T<s$T 


Afflictions  ceased  !    Yet  now  deceit  seems  truth. 

I  have  not  died,  O  blooming  lotus  Foot  ! 
Thou  with  Thy  loving  ones,  —  to  whom  Thy  grace 

was  given,  O  roseate  Form,  —  on  high 
Hast  gone,  and  left  me  here.     Lord,  hear  my  plaint  : 

there  is  no  end  of  deeds  for  worthless  me  !  372 

xciv. 

Ko  limit  to  Thy  power. 

There  was  no  love  in  me  towards  Thy  Foot, 

O  Half  of  Her  with  beauteous  fragrant  locks  ! 
By  magic  power  that  stones  to  mellow  fruit 

converts,  Thou  mad'st  me  lover  of  Thy  Feet. 
Our  Lord,  Thy  tender  love  no  limit  knows. 

Whatever  sways  me  now,  whate'er  my  deed, 
Thou  can'st  even  yet  Thy  Foot  again  to  me 

display  and  save,  O  Spotless  Heavenly  One  !  376 

xcv. 

My  course  laid  out  by  Thee. 

Thou  Whom  the  lords  of  heaven  themselves  know  not  ! 
Thy  source  and  end  the  Vedas  cannot  trace  ! 

G 


82 

SsffT  n5Jl—(Tfj/B 


ay  Q<PlU(3j6UrTlLJ; 


/J;  Qurfliu  JDG 


LLfbOtDGSTS  cBfTSlJ 


Thou  Whom  in  every  land  men  fail  to  know  ! 

As  Thou  hast  sweetly  made  me  Thine,  hast  called 
This  flesh  to  dance  on  stage  of  earth,  — 

me  to  enjoy  Thyself  with  melting  soul,  — 
In  mystic  drama,  too,  hast  caused  to  move,  — 

pining  on  earth,  Thou  Lord  of  magic  power  !  380 

xcvi. 

'  I  am  Thine,  save  me  I  ' 
Without  a  seed,  the  fruit  Thou  causest  spring  ; 

th'  entire  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  all  therein 
Thou  didst  ordain,  and  wilt  destroy  !    Me  too, 

deceitful,  mean,  within  Thy  temple  gates 
Thou  fill'd'st  with  frenzy  ;  mad'st  to  join  the  band 

of  Thy  great  loving  ones  !  Ev'n  should  the  tree 
They  plant  yield  poison,  men  destroy  it  not  ;— 

and  thus  am  I,  MY  OWNER  AND  MY  LORD  !  384 

xcvi  i. 

Devotion. 

OWNER  AND  LORD,  all  hail  !   Besides  Thyself 
support  to  cling  to  hath  Thy  servant  aught  ? 


83 


jSLVLJ  rriTUffIT,  (oLJfTfbaSll  /L//77/J£82//i 


%o53TUJrT6fr(o6$Tt 

i/j,  (ourrtbnfill 

ibnSI  !  ^Uu(o<SST\ 


65T\   <oT<S5T&    &(Lp35  Q<5$T\ 
GIST  IB  p  Q<o5T\ 
(o<S5T\ 


(o<S$T\  ^ 

ujetrir 


<S5)/BIU 


I  serve  Thee,  hail  !   Transcendent  Being,  Lord 

of  those  in  heavenly  courts  who  dwell,  all  hail  ! 
Lowest  of  all  have  I  become,  all  hail  ! 

Giver  to  me  of  every  grace,  all  hail  ! 
Thou  Who  didst  make  me  Thine  own  servant,  hail  ! 

the  First  Thou  art,  and  Last,  my  FATHER,  hail  !  388 

XCVIII. 

Earnest  appeal. 
My  FATHER  !  unto  me  Ambrosia  Thou  ! 

O  Blest  Supreme  !    Thou  art  to  honey  like 
That  flows  abundant,  thrills  the  soul  with  bliss  ! 

Thy  loving  ones  enjoy  Thee  as  their  own  ! 
Helper  Thou  art  !  with  glist'ning  glory  crowned, 

in  weary  anguish  of  Thy  worshippers. 
O  Treasure  !  tell  me,  wilt  Thou  leave  me  here, 

in  this  poor  world  to  pine  away,  our  KING  ?  39a 

xcix. 
Comet 

O  KING,  our  Lord,  come  Thou  to  me,  to  me  ! 
Who  art  before  the  four-faced  One  and  Mai, 

G  a 


84 


QJ  IT  &$&. 


<suqf)& 
Quiu<s  Lssssr  .-J965T  umu 


•zoo. 

xlk  •     xr>«  •        /T»         ._  •_  -D I 

LJ1TI— 


l  jfilssr  QLDIUIUIT  OLDILHU(OSST\ 


And  all  the  gods.    Our  Lord,  come  Thou  to  me,  to  me ! 

After  the  day  when  all  things  have  their  end 
Thou  art !    Our  Lord,  come  Thou  to  me,  to  me ! 

I  at  Thy  jewell'd  Feet  would  utter  praise 
With  loving  tongue  !   Our  Lord,  come  Thou  to  me,  to  me  ! 

that  I,  Sin's-slayer,  may  Thy  glories  SING  !  396 


Longing-  desire. 

THY  PRAISE  TO  SING  I  long,  all  hail !   Thee  sing  ! 

while  all  my  being  sinks  and  melts  in  love. 
I  long  to  dance,  all  hail !  in  Thy  blest  courts, 

before  Thy  flow'ry  dancing  Foot !   A  dog, — 
I  long  to  join,  all  hail  !    Remove  me  from 

this  nest  of  worms,  all  hail !     The  false  I  long 
To  leave,  all  hail !    Grant  me  Thy  home,  all  hail ! 

Hail,  Thou  who  art  to  THY  TRUE  SERVANTS  TRUE  !  400 


399.  The  body.  400.  The  song  begins  with 


6V)    Cl     S»l   683T  U  U  IX)  .        Si. 


<S1    (S33T  6337  LJ  LJ 

[L?  j  u  g  ff  on  oj  or  IT  A  5  111  &  .] 


'FORSAKE    ME    NOT.' 

HYMN  \1. 

This  title,  which  forms  the  burthen  of  the  poem,  is  given  to  one  of  the  Sage's  most  interesting 
compositions.  It  consists  of  fifty  quatrains,  constructed  in  a  beautiful  metre  (see  my  Second  Grammar, 
§  192),  which  is  in  fact  epichoriambic  (as  is  explained  in  the  notes  to  the  Tamil  text). 

It  is  called  an  Anthathi  poem.  This  means  that  it  is  anaphoretic,  the  last  word  of  a  verse  being 
repeated  in  the  beginning  of  each  following  verse,  and  very  often  striking  its  key-note.  (Hymn  V 
is  the  same.)  This  has  a  beautiful  effect  in  Tamil,  but  the  difference  of  idiom  often  forbids  the 
translator  to  attempt  to  reproduce  it  in  English. 

The  poem  throughout  is  a  genuine  human  cry  for  Divine  help  in  the  midst  of  a  terrible  struggle, 
and  is  full  of  the  most  vivid  emotion.  It  was  composed,  according  to  tradition,  immediately  after 
the  wonderful  cento  that  forms  the  fifth  poem,  and  gives  expression  to  the  youthful  devotee's  feelings 
after  his  guru  had  finally  departed,  and  the  company  of  the  999  (?)  saints  who  attended  him  had 
thrown  themselves  into  the  fire.  He  is  said  to  have  gone  round  the  Qivan  shrines  in  the  Pandiyan 
kingdom,  and  first  of  all  to  have  spent  some  considerable  time  in  the  ancient  city  of  Tiru-Uttara-koca- 
mangai,  which  was  at  one  time  a  Paudiyan  capital,  situate  eight  miles  south-west  of  Ramnad,  where 
the  ruins  of  an  important  Qivan  shrine  are  yet  to  be  seen.  There  he  suffered  from  the  reaction 
naturally  consequent  upon  the  excitement  produced  by  the  wonderful  events  of  the  preceding  months. 
He  had  been  till  now  the  petted,  highly  gifted  favourite  and  prime  minister  of  the  Pandiyan  king, 
living  in  the  midst  of  pomp  and  luxury,  invested  with  almost  absolute  power ;  and  was  still  in  his 
early  manhood.  He  finds  himself  at  once  a  Qaiva  mendicant,  who  has  renounced  everything, 
subsists  on  alms,  and  must  spend  his  days  and  nights  in  solitary  meditation. 

Meanwhile  the  circumstances  in  which  he  finds  himself  placed,  the  lives  of  his  companions,  the 
whole  environment  of  the  temple,  are  not  favourable  to  pure  and  high  devotion.  The  lofty  ideal  is 
not  realized  here.  Then,  as  now,  the  influences  surrounding  and  emanating  from  the  shrine  itself 
were  in  many  ways  deteriorating.  From  the  evidence  of  these  verses,  we  conclude  that  there  were 
two  things  from  which  he  suffered.  One  of  these  was  the  allurements  of  the  female  attendants,  who 
in  bands  pertained  to  the  temple.  We  have  noticed  this  elsewhere.  Hindu  commentators  will  often 
find  mystic  meanings,  which  are  harmless, — if  unfounded.  Again  and  again  in  this  and  other  poems  he 
deplores  the  way  in  which  he  has  been  led  to  violate  his  vow.  The  other  difficulty,  often  referred  to, 
was  the  way  in  which  mere  ceremonial  acts  had  to  be  performed,  affording  no  relief  to  his  conscience. 
He  thus  fell  into  a  desponding  and  well-nigh  despairing  state  of  mind,  and  sent  forth  this  cry,  like 
that  heard  in  the  Psalter,  and  reiterated  by  the  greatest  Being  that  ever  trod  the  pathway  of  this 
human  life.  Few  things  in  literature  have  such  a  genuine  ring  as  some  of  the  verses  in  which  the 
young  noble  bewails  his  apparent  desertion  by  his  Master.  Yet  he  never  quite  lost  his  confidence 
and  love ;  and  afterwards,  as  many  of  the  lyrics  show,  exchanged  for  the  '  spirit  of  heaviness  the 
garment  of  praise.' 

I  do  not  think  that  any  one  can  be  found  who  will  withhold  his  sympathy  from  the  Sage.  It  may 
be  noticed,  though  it  is  in  connection  with  the  Tamil  text  that  the  matter  must  be  more  fully  dis- 
cussed, that  there  is  a  great  difference,  as  it  seems  to  me,  between  the  style  of  the  first  twenty  stanzas, 
(where  indeed  it  may  be  conjectured  that  the  poem  originally  ended,)  and  those  that  follow.  Notably 
in  verses  21-50  there  is  only  one  reference  to  Uttara-k59a-mangai,  which  city  in  verses  1-20  is  a  part 
of  the  perpetual  refrain.  These  later  verses,  too,  are  more  ingenious  and  subtle,  and  are  more  full  o/ 


86  $  5  &j  n  *  a  ii  . 


poetic  fancies.  Sometimes,  indeed,  they  may  seem  to  be  even  more  beautiful  than  those  that  am  the 
undoubted  composition  of  the  Sage.  Their  language,  rhythm,  and  manner  seem  to  me,  however,  to 
be  different.  But  I  readily  acknowledge  the  difficulty  that  lies  in  the  way  of  all  merely  subjective 
criticism,  especially  by  a  foreigner.  Yet  the  exceedingly  uncritical  way  in  which  these  texts  have 
been  hitherto  handled  necessitates  and  justifies  the  attempt. 

The  writer  did  a  great  part  of  these  translations  at  beautiful  Lugano,  not  unfrequently  relieving 
the  toil  by  the  enjoyment  of  an  hour  in  the  church  of  S.  Maria  degli  Angioli,  before  the 
marvellous  frescoes  of  Bernardino  Luini  ;  and  could  not  help  wishing  ofttimes  that  the  Tamil 
Sage  and  Seeker  after  God  could  have  stood  there,  or  haply  knelt  by  his  side.  Could  Manikka- 
Vacagar  have  traced  that  history  of  the  Great  Master,  of  His  passage  from  Gethsemane  to  the  glory 
of  His  heavenly  dwelling-place,  how  would  he  have  been  affected  ?  One  wonders  !  It  may  be  that 
he,  and  the  weaver  of  Mailapur,  and  the  wandering  sages  of  the  Naladiyar,  and  others  whose  legends 
we  recall,  have  since,  freed  from  the  flesh,  visited  that  spot.  Certainly  they  know  those  histories 
now  !  Shall  we  not  in  regard  to  our  poet-sage,  wherever  his  ashes  are  scattered,  say  hopefully  and 
tenderly,  Requiescat  in  pace  ? 

[Metre  : 


&,. 


2_(S5)L_/L/QJ  (oSST\  LCS5TJ32//.i>  &-4545J  (od&flT^LD/E/  <5S)&&&aQp\ 
<P<5$)L-ILJ6U  (o<55T\   £>6fTiri>(o3;6$Tt    QTLCt    /_9/7/T<55T,    OT<55T8s37^    £>[TIEJ 

f—1  rr*  rrs^rri    5*x^rfT*  I 


Q-s/rsfrC?  GYT  ! 


2_<sfrG?<srr<S5T, 


i. 

The  forsaken  one's  petition. 

Me,  meanest  one,  in  mercy  mingling  Thou  didst  make  Thine  own, — 
Lord  of  the  Bull !    Lo,  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    O  Thou  Who  wear'st 
Garb  of  fierce  tiger's  skin  !    ABIDING  UTTARA-KOSA-MANGAI'S  KING  ! 
Thou  of  the  braided  lock  !    I  fainting  sink.     Our  Lord,  uphold  Thou  me  !       4 

ii. 

The  crimson  lips  of  maidens  fair,  in  ripeness  of  their  charms, 
I  press  no  more ;  yet,  LO  !  THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME  ;  though  in, 
Not  out  Thy  worthy  service,  UTTARA-K69A-MANGAi's  KING, 
I  am !    Thou  mad'st  false  me  Thine  own,  why  dost  Thou  leave  me  NOW  ? 


i.  The  word  Kafaiyavan  (  =  meanest  one)  begins  and  ends  the  poem.        3.  Uttara-kofa-maiigai, 
see  Introduction.    Tiger's  skin,  see  KSyil  Pur.  II.  33.  NOTE  VI.         5.  This  had  to  be  toned  down. 


so  oS  dbr  6SOT  u  u  iS) .      a.  37 


(o  35  fT  <P  LD  (El 


^<5ff 


III, 

A  tree  on  river  bank  of  dark-eyed  maiden's  senses  five 

I  rooted  stand  !    Lo,  ME  THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  ;  Thou  who  dwell'st 

In  ArOr's  shrine  renowned  ;  O  UTTARA-KOSA-MANGAI'S  KING  ! 

Half  of  her  form,  the  beauteous  one  !   Thou  FOSTERER  of  my  life  !  u 

IV. 

Thou  took'st  me  in  Thy  gracious  FOSTERING  hand  ;  and  then,  withdrawn, 

Lo  !   THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  me  lost  here  ;  Thou  Whose  lofty  crown 

Bears  the  pale  crescent  moon,  O  UTTARA-KSfA-MANGAi's  KING  ! 

Thou  radiant  Beam  as  lightning  seen  'mid  sheen  of  GLISTENING  gold  !  16 

v. 

Like  moth  in  GLISTENING  flame,  to  those  of  gentle  speech,  long  time 
I  fall  a  prey  !    Lo,  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !     In  Thy  flower-crown 
Sweet  bees  sip  fragrant  honey  ;  UTT'RA-KO9A-MANGAi's  KING  ! 
Since  with  ambrosia  of  Thy  grace  to  feed  me  I  REFUSED  !  ao 

VI. 

Through  ignorance  I  have  Thy  grace  REFUSED  ;  and  Thou,  my  Gem, 
Hast  loathed  me  !    Lo,  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    My  throng  of  'deeds  ' 

9.  Comp.  Kurral,  1101.  n.  Arilr,  see  Periya  Puranam  I.  12.  Not  literal. 


S3 


BJP 


FT      &        S5TD  <ffTl—<f  fUb^sSI      lU5$T          fvuj 

Sm. 


<surr\ 

Csusvgusvssr  GJJBJBIU  Qurr<sQu<s^(o<5srl 


Suppress,  and  make  me  Thine, — O  UTTARA-K09A-MANGAi's  KING  ! 

Will  not  the  great-soul'd  bear,  though  little  curs  are  FALSE  ?  24 

VII. 

FALSE  me  Thou  mad'st  Thine  own,  as  though  some  worth  I  had  ;  didst  mend 
Me,  O  Thou  True  !  Lo,  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    Thy  throat  is  black 
With  swallow'd  poison  !    STATELY  UTTARA-KOfA-MANGAi's  KING! 

0  roseate  One,  £ivan,  who  PUTT'ST  AWAY  my  mortal  pains  !  28 

VIII. 

What  is  Thy  way  of  glorious  grace  that  PUTS  AWAY  my  sin  ? 

1  ask  with  awe;  THOU'ST  LEFT  ME, — UTTARA-KOCA-MANGAI'S  KING; 
Before  whose  jubilant  Bull  flower-crown'd  foes  fearing  fled  ! 

The  senses  'five '  and  fear  in  ways  DIVERSE  draw  guilty  me  !  32 

IX. 

Like  ant  on  firebrand  lit  at  DIVERSE  ends,  sever'd  from  Thee, 

Distraught,  Lo  !  ME  THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN,  Thou  the  only  Lord 

Of  the  vast  triple  world,  strong  UTTARA-KO^A-MANGAI'S  KING  ! 

Whose  BRIGHT  right  hand  uplifts  the  warrior's  triple-headed  spear !  36 

24.  See  V.  263.   This  seems  to  have  been  a  kind  of  proverbial  expression.       27.  See  note  to  XII, 
verse  8.        31.  See  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  190.    The  mere  roar  of  the  bull  destroyed  some  of  the  Asuras. 


so. 


S3T  p  ^ 

<SU  <oQ  djl  65T  V)  ^!(5!Kfr!pl<8sV  IUJ6V  <oT(fl<£<£[TlLJt  L/J* 


U  U 


/r/u  oSlSsar  Qiussr 


ff 

sa. 

L_/THJ; 


x. 

I  gained  access  to  Thy  BRIGHT  Feet,  freed  from  this  mortal  frame  ! 
Yet  me  who  pine,  THOU'ST  LEFT  ;  O  UTTARA-KOfA-MANGAi's  KING, 
Around  Whose  beauteous  flowery  groves  the  swarms  of  beetles  hum  ; 
Thou  Who  with  bow  of  might  didst  burn  the  city  of  Thy  FOES  !  40 

XI. 

My  FOES,  'the  five'  deceived  me;  from  Thy  jewelled  flower-like  Feet 

I  parted  ;  Lo  !  THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME  !   Thou  honey  of 

My  sinful  soul  !    O  UTTARA-KOSA-MANGAI'S  KING  ! 

O  WORTH,  Whose  golden  form  gleams  'neath  the  hallowed  ash  !  44 

XII. 

0  WORTHY  ONE,  Thou  mad'st  me  Thine  ;  by  senses  '  five  '  deceived, 

1  worthless  left  Thee  !    UTTARA-KX^A-MANGAI'S  KING  !  And  Thou 
Hast  left  me  !    Thou  Whose  mighty  javelin  slays  Thy  trembling  foes  ; 
Great  SEA  of  clear  Ambrosia  given  for  worthless  me  to  taste  ! 

XIII. 

As  dog  laps  water  from  the  lake,  my  soul  Thy  mercy's  SEA 

Quits  not;  me  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN,  UTTARA-KOCA-MANGAI'S  KING; 

40.  Song  XIV.  41.  The  senses.  44.  He  is  fiery  red,  but  the  white  ashes  smeared  make 

the  ylow  less  oppressively  dazzling. 


61J  IT 


53 


Who  dost  as  in  a  home  abide  in  those  who  leave  Thee  not  ; 
Wine  of  the  palm  I   Ambrosia  !   Gem  !    My  FLOOD  of  bliss  ! 

XIV. 

Like  one  whose  tongue  amid  the  FLOOD  is  parched  I  gain'd  Thy  grace, 
Yet  sorrow  springs  ;  ME  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ;  UTTARA-K09A-MANGAi's  KING; 
Who  ever  dwellest  in  Thy  servants'  hearts  that  Thee  desire  ! 
To  me  in  guile  immersed  grant  grace  !    My  joy  is  JOYLESS  all  ! 

xv. 

With  JOYOUS  thought  I  saw  Thy  Foot,  drew  near,  and  gained  Thy  grace  ; 
Yet  am  not  free  !   ME  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN,  UiTARA-KdfA-MANGAi's  KING, 
Whose  flowery  jewell'd  Foot  is  Light  of  all  true  lights  that  gleam  ! 
Father  accessible  !    Lord,  Who  didst  make  me  all  Thine  own  ! 

XVI. 

I  wandered  weary,  none  to  say  '  Fear  not  !'    Like  lightning's  flash 
Behold,  THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    Thou  Truth  beyond  compare  ; 
Great  UTTARA-KS^A-MANGAI'S  KING,  that  like  Thyself  abides  ; 
Like  Mother  Thou,  like  Father  Thou,  my  soul's  most  precious  WEALTH  ! 


56 


60 


64 


64.  See  LI.  36. 


(SO    <alT  683T  SS3T  LJ  U  li  .        Stt  .  QJ 


,  d5S33T  L—fTlLJ  J   Q  LCtlLJ  LD<S$)  Lfi  lUfTlf 


J£l  65T  GW2W  6)S(3l£s}9  <£<53STI—[TILJ  ; 
LO  <S5Tjp/Lb  ^.^ 

UlL  .©  LLl_!EtQ<55ltl&Q&  \  eta- 


STS3T 


67* 


XVII. 

O  WEALTH  !    Sole  Refuge  of  my  lonely  heart !    By  those  who  spurn 

Thy  glories  fear'd  !  Lo,  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  ; — O  Grace  by  eager  hearts 

And  true  enjoyed  ;  THOU  KING  OF  UTTARA-I^A-MANGAI'S  SHRINE, 

With  fair  groves  girt !    Darkness  and  light,  this  world  and  that,  Thou  art !    68 

XVIII. 

'  Be  with  me  !    Govern,  use,  sell,  pledge  me :'  thus  I  cried, 

Yet  me,  erewhile  Thy  guest,  THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN,  Who  didst  drink 

The  poison  as  ambrosia ;  UTTARA-KO9A-MANGAi's  KING  ! 

Thou  healing  Balm  for  those  bowed  down  by  'changeful  birth's  '  disease  !     72 

XIX. 

Fire  of  Thy  'biding  grace  my  sins'  thick  springing  wood  burns  up. 
Vidahgan  !    THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  ;  O  UTTARA-KO^A-MANGAI'S  KING  ; 
Who  dost  destroy  the  root  of  human  'birth/  and  make  me  Thine ; 
The  hill-like  elephant  didst  flay,  and  fright  the  Vanji-BOUGH  !  76 


71.  See  XII,  verse  8.  74.  Vi<Jangan.     Epithet  of  Qivan  as  worshipped  in  Aiur.     Periya 

Puranam  I.         76.  NOTE  VI.   Vanji,  a  delicate  creeping  flower  plant.    Epithet  of  Umai. 


Q2 


IT  ff  <$  il. 


a.o. 
(ouirsv  ^gsv  Lc/j^ssrsar,  Q&nLD<sn(oLc> 


9:  \ 

(o6$T, 


QJt. 


<Sp<583r<5$)LDlU  Q<SST\ 

S$T\  <sfilLL  i^JSi^ly  -ssissr  i—iTiu  ;  QLLILJ 

Q<5$T\   <oTGST^](5^  (o-flUfTlLI,  tS)lDir<£&n5l  <£rb 

Qsyrl  O^/rsarsjnLC)  j^GssTGtoLbiu  Q<ssr\  <j*y<sQu  Out) 


XX. 

Like  climbing  plant  with  no  supporting  BOUGH,  I  wavering  hung  ! 
Lo,  Tender  One,  me  trembling  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ;  Thou  Who  dwell'st 
Where  heavenly  ones  come  not  ;  strong  UTTARA-KO9A-MANGAi's  KING  ; 
Thou  Who  art  Ether,  Earth,  and  Fire,  and  Wind,  and  watery  FLOOD  !  80 

XXI. 

Like  little  shrubs  where  elephants  contend,  by  senses  five 

I've  been  sore  vexed  ;  lo,  THOU,  my  Father,  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME  ! 

To  sinful  me  commingled  honey,  milk,  sweet  cane,  ambrosia, 

LIGHT  of  my  soul,  —  thrilling  my  flesh  and  inmost  frame,  —  Thou  art  !  84 

XXII. 

The  LIGHT  Thou  art  :  the  White  One,  gleaming  bright,  with  sacred  ash 
Besmeared.     Lo  !   THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  ;  Thou  to  Thy  servants  true 
Art  near  ;  from  others  ever  distant  ;  hard  to  know  ;  — 
The  Feminine,  the  ancient  Male,  the  neutral  One  art  Thou  !  88 


80.  See  V.  277.          88.   Piirushas,   see  Muir,  vol.  iv.     Qiva-nana-b5dham,  Aph.  I.     Comp. 
V.  115. 


ji  £>  £6  e\J   o?  6$jr  ewr  u  U  ii  .     ffir  .  no 


Qurbpgil  Q&rrsysrQl,  /_9<S5)LpG?/u  OLJ  (75  <££)<£, 

QSU/D/DI^.  (otU%S5T  6$®$,  <S533T  £_/TUJ  J 
LD  ID  JD  L$- 

&.  /»  /D  tp. 


£.«». 


i—friu;  G&ILHSST  Lo/r^ff/_< 
l  Ljsvssfiesr&LL  (ourrpsv 

^l—fBpGffiy^ 


;  Qsuiuiu  &*-(bQ(   Quins; 


XXIII. 

The  form  Thou  gav'st  I  wore,  in  faults  abounding,  scant  of  love, 
Me,  worthless  slave,  THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN,  see!    But,  if  Thou  leave, 
I  perish  ;  none  but  Thee  upholds  Thy  slave  ;  Source  of  my  being's  bliss ; 
This  clear  perception  hath  Thy  servant  gained,  Indwelling  Lord  !  92 

XXIV. 

Things  true  abiding,  folly-stirred,  for  vanities  I  burn'd ; 

And  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  ;  Thou  Who  as  robe  dost  wear  the  hide 

Of  fiery  mighty-handed  elephant! — I  joys  of  sense 

Seeking  gain  not,  like  ANTS  that  noiseless  round  the  oil-jar  swarm.  96 

XXV. 

Like  worm  in  midst  of  ANTS,  by  senses  gnawed  and  troubled  sore, 

Me,  utterly  alone,  Lo !  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ;  Thou  Whom  fiery  death  obeyed; 

Whose  fragrant  flowery  Foot  the  heavenly  ones  attain,  and  they 

Who  know;  O  MIGHTY  One,  Who  from  Thy  servants  partest  not !  100 


89.  Comp.  Pope's  Nalafiydr,  34,  p.  25.  96.  Nalaifiyar,  337. 


QA  p  [5  GU  IT  &  St 

as*. 


(TK   [J)  IT 

Qf)  $  ft 


XXVI. 

1  When  the  GREAT  waters  fail,  the  little  fishes  faint ; '  so  reft  of  Thee 

I  quake.     Lo  !    THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    The  moon's  white  crescent  borne 

On  Ganga's  wave,  like  little  skiff  on  mountain  stream, 

Is  hidden  in  Thy  braided  locks, — O  CHOICEST  GEM  of  heaven  !  104 

XXVII. 

CHOICE  GEMS  they  wore,  those  softly  smiling  maids  ;  I  failed,  I  fell. 
Lo  !   THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  ! — Thou  gav'st  me  place  'mid  Saints  who  wept, 
Their  beings  fill'd  with  rapturous  joys ;  in  grace  didst  make  me  Thine  !— 
Show  me  Thy  Feet,  even  yet  to  SENSE  revealed,  O  spotless  Gem  !  108 

XXVIII. 

While  SENSES  made  me  quake,  I  trembling  swerved  to  falsehood's  way. 
Lo  !   THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    While  heaven  and  earth  the  poison  feared 
From  out  the  mighty  sea,  Thou  madest  it  ambrosia ;  Home  of  grace  ! 
Thy  servant  I,  O  Master,  stand  distraught ;  sole  Worship  of  my  heart !        na 

105.  The  play  on  words  is  here  inimitable.    Comp.  Nala4i,  176 ;  Kurral,  965.       1 10.  1 1 1.  See 
XII,  verse  8.  112.  Lit.  '  my  worshipful  Caste  '  or  '  my  Brahman,'  see  Lex. 


jt>  $>  60    6J?  0&T  68W  U  U  li .       ffit. 


95 


*u/ 


LJ/H 

i&Gtr  jr*/r>  <grr(j[)&Lp6V  GUGST  puSl  iflrbQ 

ffnO. 


ObB. 

(0637! 


LJL_ 

Q<ssr\ 


XXIX. 

Thyself  from  every  fetter  free,  Thou  freed'st  me  from  all  fault,  O  Sire, 
Whose  bow  victorious  is  the  mighty  mount !    Lo,  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  ! 
Thy  lotus-form  the  cassia's  gold  wreath  wears ;  O  matchless  One  ! 
By  fivefold-evil  am  I  stirred  like  milk  by  CHURNING  STAFF.  ir6 

xxx. 

The  senses'  fire  burns  fierce;  I'm  stirr'd  as  the  cool  curds  by  CHURNING  STAFF. 
Lo  !  ME  THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  !    Thou  Who  wear'st  chaplet  of  skulls 
And  clustering  wreaths  of  flowers,  and  the  long  entrails'  twine ;  and  dost  Thyself 
Adorn  with  ashes,  and  sweet  sandal-paste,  O  ESSENCE  PURE!  120 

XXXI. 
Thou  art  with  all — but  me  I 

PURE  ESSENCE  Multiform,  Who  art  cool  flood,  sky,  wind,  earth,  fire ; 
THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    White,  black,  and  azure  art  Thou  seen  ! 
Roseate  Thy  form  !    Thy  girdle  is  the  glistening  hooded  snake  ! 
O  WARRIOR  ELEPHANT,  with  dripping  brow  and  mighty  foot !  124 


114.  Mount  Meru  was  Divan's  bow,  XIV.  i.  116.  Malam.    This  is  threefold,  according  to 

the  Qaiva  system.   But  in  the  Catechism,  §§  48,  49,  two  are  added  :  «gB*r«i4,  *aruxi,  IOTBOK,  «>«i*^«?ui»I 
piGtrrprd.     C.  iva-Piraga^am,  I.  20  (p.  157;  Madras,  1872).  119.  This  refers  to  Civan's  form  as 

Bhairava.     Comp.  XII.     In  the  Ka9i  Khandam,  §§  31  and  89.  121.  His  wondrous  transforma- 

tions, V.  57-60,  277-280. 


611  IT  ff  3>  & . 


fWfn. 


I—  ml  ; 
Sysfl^^l 

Gits  <£rnu 


Ifnffi. 


$T  LD  SSTfEl  <£  S&flsfilfS 


XXXII. 

Sensuality  was  my  bane. 

Those  WARRING  ELEPHANTS,  the  senses  five,  I  feared, — was  lost. 
THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME, — Thou,  hard  to  leave, — hard  to  attain, 
Save  by  Thy  worthy  saints,  bright  Gem  !   While  fierce  fire  raged, 
Poison,  hard  won  from  out  the  sea,  Thou  mad'st  Thy  food,  O  Azure-throat !  u8 

XXXIII. 
Pardon  my  waywardness  1 

That  I  wished  to  do  I  did, — wine  of  Thy  grace  I  drank,— rejoiced  ;  — 
Then  swerved  !   THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    Thy  fragrant  flowery  Foot, 
As  in  the  days  of  old  Thou  gav'st,  command  and  bid  me  serve ! 
Take  me,  my  Father  !    O  remove  this  wayward  FOND  DESIRE!  132 

xxxiv. 

X  was  fickle  and  self-willed. 

Stirred  by  no  strong  DESIRE  I  did  my  will,  nor  clung  to  Thine  ! 
And,  lo  !    THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    When  wilt  Thou  yet  as  wine 
Of  joy  meet  me,  and  all  my  mind  with  fragrant  sweetness  fill, 
As  of  the  plantain  fruit,— TRANSCENDENT  LORD  of  Kailai's  hill  ?  136 


128.  See  XII,  verseS. 


jS  p>  £6  so   sS dbr  suar  u  u  li .      afr. 


uip^i^.  aj/rQj7F®tc  OTSST 

i_ 


97 


I  rlOCm  • 

IULJ 
&6SST  LJTIU;  'a 


LL>  <S5STJB  £B 


XXXV. 

I  am,  though  faulty,  Thine  ! 

TRANSCENDENT  LORD,  with  Thine  own  ancient  saints,  me  faulty  one 
Thou  didst  desire  !     O  Aran,  yet  Lo  !   THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !— 
Thou  didst  me  place  near  Thee, — like  the  hare-spots  thou  wear'st,— 

0  mighty  Warrior  'gainst  birth's  five-mouth'd  snake,  my  soul  would  shun  !    140 

xxxvi. 

Quench  sensual  fires. 

Like  flames  in  forest  glade  sense-fires  with  smoky  glare  burn  fierce ! 

1  burn  !    Lo,  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    O  conquering  King  of  heaven, 
The  garlands  on  Whose  braided  lock  drip  honey,  while  the  bees 

Hum  softly  'mid  Mandara  buds,  whence  fragrant  sweetness  breathes.  144 

XXXVII. 
Is  there  no  pity  ? 

O  King,  to  me  poor  ignorant,  '  Fear  not  for  faults,'  Thou  didst 
Not  say,  but  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME,  O  Thou  with  fragrance  crowned ! 
Spouse  of  the  sea-born  maid  with  sparkling  gems  and  jet-black  eyes  ! 
Bhuyangan  !  Golden  Foot !  My  'deeds'  PRESS  round  like  clustering  hills  !    148 


139.  See  Naladi,  151,  176.  144.  See  XX.  7.  147.  See  note  to  VIII.  n,  n.     £ivan 

a  fisherman. 


IT  ff  as  i   . 


SVJIT  ( 
,  *«»T  I_/TH; 


lUJlLjl 

fTV*Sn. 


,  &A  i—fnu-, 


ffio. 


XXXVIII. 

I  have  erred  throiig-h  weakness. 

By  senses  PRESSED,  fearing  I  left  Thee,  weak  to  quit  the  charms 
Of  sweet- voiced  maids.     Lo  !  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    Thou  radiant  Beam  ; 
King  of  the  burning-ground  ;  Ambrosia  to  Thy  worshippers  ; 
Hard  to  be  gained  ;  SOLE  HELP,  removing  loneliness  of  lonely  me  !  152 

xxxix. 

Help  me  in  this  conflict  with  the  flesh. 

SOLE  HELP,  whilst  Thou  wert  there  I  wandered  wanton, — 'deeds'  my  help  ! 

THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME,  Thou  Helper  of  my  guilty  soul ; 

Thou  Source  of  all  my  being's  bliss  ;  Treasure  that  never  fails  ! 

No  whit  bear  I  this  grievous  body's  mighty  NET  !  156 

XL. 
The  pain  of  sensuality. 

Caught  by  those  eyes  whose  timid  glance  is  like  fawn's  in  the  NET, 
'Wildered  I  grieved.     Lo  !  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    Thou  on  Whose  head 
The  pale  moon's  crescent  thin  is  seen  !    Ocean  of  grace  !    Thou  Lord 
Of  Kailai's  hill !  Spouse  of  the  mountain  Maid  !  Source  of  my  being's  joy !  160 


153.  Lit.  '  walked  on  my  head.' 


UU 


gg 


QPILJ  cS/r/L/LD  QunQpssr,  (rleu  Qtssr 


ffG.. 


usla,<s$)i_  su/rsyr 


Qssrl  Qfirp  & tflfipsu  Qssr \  &i£l  iuir^Q^j(LpLi  uir 

Q<s$r\ 


XLI. 
Woe  is  me,  in  this  vile  fleshly  prison  I 

In  the  hot  flood  of  lust  for  those  of  ruddy  lips,  like  crocodiles,— 

I  eager  plunged.     Lo  !  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    This  body  foul, 

Ant-eaten, — I  endure  not ;    £ivan,  list  to  my  complaint ! 

Thou  Bridegroom  of  the  beauteous  Bride;  my  joyous  Goal  of  bliss!  164 

XLII. 

Grace  once  given,  now  withdrawn. 

Thou  gav'st  indeed  to  me  in  grace  to  gain  my  goal,  Thy  Feet ; — 

Yet  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME,  not  fated  to  shake  off  this  flesh  ! 

The  moon  beheld  the  serpent  bright  in  skull-cave  hid,  and  feared  ;— 

Then  plunging  hid  his  swelling  crest  within  Thy  braided  lock,  O  KING  !       168 

XLIII. 
I  adore  Thee,  though  forlorn. 

O  KING,  to  wretched  me,  who  know  not  any  path,  the  Light 
Of  joy !  THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME  ! — Thou  the  true  Vedic  Lord 
To  me  didst  speak,  Who  passest  speech  !    To  steadfast  worshippers, 
Thou  art  the  First,  the  Last  too, — Thou  this  universal  Whole  !  17^ 

H  2 


ffi&r. 


XLIV. 
Tormented  by  last. 

Like  oil  was  I  poured  in  fierce  fire  of  glancing  dartlike  eyes,— 

Lo  !    THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !  Whose  word  erst  joined  me  to  Thy  saints, 

Who  ever  worship  at  Thy  fragrant  flowery  Feet  ;  my  Lord  ! 

My  Master,  faulty  though  I  am,  forsake  me  not  !    Thee  will  I  SING.  176 

XLV. 

Spiritual  desertion. 

I  SANG  Thee  not,  nor  worshipped  Thee,  O  hidden  Gem,  —  nor  left  this  flesh. 
Lo  !  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !    All  wonderment  I  wept,  yet  sought  Thee  not, 
Nor,  'Where  is  £ivan,'  '  Who^hath  seen  Him?'  did  I  haste  to  ask. 
I  lay  supine,  my  soul  no  raptures  knew  ;  —  I  suffered  sore  !  180 

XLVI. 

Still  will  I  adore  the  mysteries  of  Thy  nature. 

Like  fly  in  jack-fruit  caught,  I  fell  a  prey  to  fawn-eyed  maids  ! 
Lo  !  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !     But  if  Thou  leave,  I'll  utter  loud  reproach  ! 
I'll  call  Thee  'Black-throat,'  'Who  ate  poison  from  the  sea/  'The  Unqualified,' 
'The  man,"  Crowned  with  the  waning  moon/'The  mighty  God  gone  wrong.'  184 

183.  Gunamili  :  this  is  a  play  on  words:  gunam  ='  quality.'  The  sages  deny  qualities,  or 
attributes,  to  the  Supreme.  If  so,  He  is  destitute  of  all  power  or  fitness—  unqualified  for  anything. 
'  We  never  speak  of  the  qualities  or  modes  of  God;  and  the  reason  is  that  these  words  imply  change 
and  diversity,  like  the  phenomena  which  distinguish  one  species  from  another  of  the  same  genus  ; 


.     8n. 


*£{£{.  ftrffi") 


lurrssr  sTssr  ssflssr  &_gsprj 


'  XLVII. 
Various  wandering's. 

The  ancient  worship  of  Thy  blameless  Feet  I  gained ;  then  fell ; 

Reviled  Thee ;  woke  once  more ;  and,  LO  !  THOU  HAST  FORSAKEN  ME  ! 

Greatness,  that  heavenly  Ganga  stirs  to  shed  bright  gems  and  pearls  ! 

Thy  WREATH'S  the  crescent  in  the  water  seen,  caught  in  Thy  braided  lock !    188 

XLVIII. 

I  will  boast  Thy  name. 

Hero,  Who  wear'st  the  fiery  snake-WREATH  on  Thy  starlike  head  ! 

Lo  !  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  !     But  if  Thou  leave,  when  others  ask 

'Whose  servant  Thou  ?'     'Slave  of  the  glorious  slaves 

Of  Utt'ra-ko5a-mangai's  King,'  I'll  name  myself,  and  cause  them  SMILE  at  Thee.  193 

XLIX. 

Ever  praising. 

I'll  make  them  SMILE,  unfolding  faults  and  service  to  the  Lord  ! 
Lo  !  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME  ;  but  if  Thou  leave,  I  shall  ABUSE  Thee  sore ! 
'  Madman,  clad  in  wild  elephant's  skin;'  'Madman,  with  hide  for  his  garb;' 
'Madman,    that    ate    the    poison;'     'Madman   of  the    burning-ground-fire;' 
'Madman,  that  chose  even  me  for  His  own!'  196 


and  this  cannot  be  predicated  of  an  infinite  and  eternal  being.  All  that  is  in  Him  is  immutably 
there ;  and  this  relation  of  inherence  and  permanent  co-existence  in  one  nature  is  expressed  by  the 
word  attribute.'  Martineau's  Types  of  Ethical  Theory,  vol.  i.  p.  129. 


IO2  ^  15  GU  IT  ff  a  ix  . 

@o. 


lUITlLl 


L. 

ABUSING  Thee  or  praising, — crushed  by  sin,  and  grieved  am  I  ! 
Lo  !  THOU'ST  FORSAKEN  ME,  Thou  Brightness  on  red  coral  hill ! 
Thou  mad'st  me  Thine ;  didst  fiery  poison  eat,  pitying  poor  souls, 
That  I  might  Thine  ambrosia  taste,  —  I,  meanest  one  ! 


200.  The  construction  is  involved;  compare  line  i. 


Cflfe   U  IT  C8);ft|,      <TT. 


103 


?T  IJ>  IT  SU  §1 

ST  LD    U  IT  <S5)  S)J 


THE    MAIDENS'    SONG    OF    THE    DAWNING. 

HYMN    VII. 

The  mystic  '  Song  of  the  Maidens'  forms  a  pendant  to  the  '  Morning  Hymn'  (XX).  It  has  always 
been  attributed  to  Manikka-Va9agar  without  any  hesitation,  though  in  many  respects  it  is  certainly 
unlike  most  of  his  other  lyrics.  It  is  said  to  have  been  composed  for  the  use  of  the  women  at  Aruna- 
calam,  among  whom  it  is,  and  was,  the  custom  to  celebrate  with  great  demonstrations  of  joy  a  festival 
in  honour  of  the  god  Qivan  and  the  goddess  Catti  in  the  month  of  Margari,  which  corresponds  to  the 
second  half  of  December  and  the  first  half  of  January.  At  that  time  the  females  of  the  city  of  all 
ages  for  ten  successive  days  rise  before  dawn,  and  perambulate  the  precincts,,  arousing  their  com- 
panions from  house  to  house,  and  proceeding  to  bathe  (in  rigidly  decorous  manner)  in  the  sacred 
tank.  There  are  passages  in  this  poem  which  I  have  been  obliged  somewhat  to  veil,  and  modify, 
carefully  preserving,  however,  the  full  and  exact  meaning  of  the  original,  as  I  conceive  it.  There  is, 
however,  connected  with  the  Qaiva  worship,  it  must  be  said,  a  series  of  rites  which  is  sometimes 
called  the  tantric,  and  sometimes  the  faktt  system.  No  doubt,  in  connection  with  this,  many 
unspeakable  abominations  have  been,  and  are  at  times  perpetrated;  and  every  thoughtful  Hindu  is 
sincerely  anxious  that  all  trace  of  these  corruptions  should  be  swept  away.  In  all  nations  similar 
things  have  existed,  and  it  would  be  quite  superfluous  to  enumerate  the  ancient  rites  of  a  similar 
character  that  have  been  enthusiastically  celebrated.  [Comp.  GROTE,  I.  25,  219,  &c.]  From  such 
things  the  £aiva  system  must  sever  itself  absolutely,  which  it  can  the  more  decidedly  do,  because 
they  have  no  real  root  in  the  £aiva  Siddhanta  philosophy  itself. 

In  one  edition  of  these  poems  there  is  an  introduction  to  the  '  Maidens'  Reveille,'  which  gives 
a  mystic  interpretation  to  a  large  portion  of  the  lyric.  According  to  this  author,  from  the  month  of 
Adi  to  the  month  of  Margari  (i.e.  from  July  I5th  to  January  isth)  is  the  night  season  ;  the  other  half 
of  the  year  being  the  daytime  :  the  whole  year  forming  a  single  day  of  the  gods.  The  former  half  of 
the  year,  in  which  there  is  rain  with  black  clouds,  is  the  representative  of  the  secular  period  of  involu- 
tion or  destruction,  when  all  things  have  been  re-involved  in  the  triple  veils  of  darkness,  which 
period  precedes  that  of  the  re-creation,  or  evolution.  The  other  half  of  the  year  represents  the  period 
of  creation,  i.e.  the  time  during  which  the  phenomenal  universe  is  re-evolved  from  its  eternal  elements, 
as  the  sphere  of  the  activities  of  all  things  that  have  life.  The  month  of  Margari  is  then  the  symbol 
of  the  awaking  of  the  universe  from  its  slumber  of  involution.  It  is  the  dawn  of  the  new  creation,  — 
of  secular  evolution.  [NOTE  XIII.] 

Now  this  creation  is  the  work  of  (^atti,  the  manifested  energy  of  £ivan  :  —  his  wife,  who  is 
the  author,  not  of  life  indeed,  but  of  the  whole  phenomenal  system  in  which  and  by  which 
life  exerts  its  energies,  and  achieves  its  destinies.  £ivan  Himself  can  come  into  no  personal  relation 
with  matter  and  its  veiling  delusions  and  darkness.  It  is,  therefore,  £atti  that  accomplishes  the 
work;  she  is  an  energy  of  activity,  of  knowledge,  and  of  desire;  and  through  her  alone  the  Supreme 
evolves  all  things.  But  this  tantric  system,  like  the  gnostic  systems  of  old,  does  not  permit  $M\.\, 
as  the  Partner  of  the  Supreme,  to  accomplish  directly  the  work  of  evolution.  This  would  be  far  too 
simple  and  direct  for  Hindu  philosophy.  There  is  a  long  chain  of  feminine  manifestations  Bacons) 


104  dj?  jij  en  IT  *  <$  ti. 

evolved  in  succession,  each  coming  into  a  relation  to  the  Supreme  that  constitutes  a  distinct  stage  in 
the  process;  and  it  is  only  at  last  that  Brahma  and  Vishnu  are  evolved,  to  be  respectively  the 
fashioner  and  the  maintainer  of  the  cosmic  world.  The  writer  here  enumerates  nine  of  these  (Jattis, 
amongst  whom  are  numbered  the  chief  female  divinities  that,  under  various  names  and  epithets,  are 
worshipped  or  propitiated  in  various  parts  of  India.  Among  them  is  the  dreaded  Kali.  No  doubt 
there  are  hints  of  all  this  in  this  poem,  but  its  plain  and  obvious  interpretation  is  the  only  one  known 
to  the  majority  of  those  that  use  it,  and  I  imagine  the  composer  himself  was  innocent  of  anything 
like  the  gnosticism  and  mysticism  that  his  interpreters  have  given  him  credit  for.  As  the  hymn 
stands  it  is  a  beautiful  composition,  but  in  some  parts  it  will  seem  to  be  somewhat  obscure.  I  have 
tried  to  give  a  version  that  shall  be  as  literal  as  possible,  but  only  the  Tamil  reader  can  feel  how 
great  a  poet  its  author  was  ;  and  only  the  student  of  the  South-Indian  Qaiva  philosophy  can  expect 
to  enter  into  its  spirit. 


[Metre:    Q««t*rj_ir<ur«r«;»£  j&uppffsS&Jor*  Qar##**«ev9iiur.      See  VIII  and  XVI.] 


a. 


<su<srr(f^^l(oiurrl 

617  KlJBl  ILJ 


<oT65T 


The  temple -worship. 
\The  waits  sing  at  the  door.'] 

The  Splendour  rare  and  great,  that  knows  nor  first  nor  end, 

we  sing ;  Thou  hear'st  the  song,  yet  still  sleep'st  on  ; 
O  lady  of  the  large  bright  eye  !  is  thine  ear  dull 

that  it  perceives  not  sound  of  praise  that  hails 
The  great  God's  cinctured  feet  ? — She  hears  the  strain  resound 

through  all  the  street,  yet  in  forgetful  sleep 
On  her  flower-couch  she  muttering  turns  !  — 
See,  here  she  nothing  noting  lies  !    Why  thus,  why  thus  ? 

doth  this  our  friend  beseem  ? — OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  ! 


4.  The  refrain  is  elembavay!  which  may  mean  'Arise  (or  ponder),  O  our  Lady! '  but  seems  like 
Scott's  eleu  loro!  in  Marmion. 


ST  ID  LJ  IT  en  ai .     CT.  ios 

a.. 


3ft-3r  LJbSVlTLJUJ^JS 

<si>i'&<o$r9n 

GSSTUfTITUJITLD  ^         <5JS\)  6p     STLbUJGUITlLj  >] 


FT-P69T  ULp^q-tfiirl  U  ITI5I  @  (55)  i_  uS'/f  ! 


II. 

Trifle  not  I 

'  Hail  to  the  heavenly  Light/  thou  ever  say'st,  as  we, 

by  night  and  day.     Now  of  this  flowery  couch 
Art  thou  enamour'd,  maid  with  faultless  gems  adorned  ? 

Shame !  jewell'd  dames,  are  these  things  trifles  too  ? 
To  sport  and  jest  is  this  the  place,  when  He  in  grace 

Hath  come  to  give  the  foot-flower,  shame-fast  angels  praise  ? 
The  Teacher,  Lord  of  £iva-world,  in  Tillai's  porch  He  rules. 

Who  are  His  lovers  all?— OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  ! 

in. 
O  thou  whose  smile  as  pearl  is  bright,  arise,  present 

thyself  before  the  Sire,  the  blissful  One,  th'  Ambrosial, 
And  with  o'erflowing  sweetness  speak  !     Come,  ope  thy  doors  !- 

[She  joins  them.    They  enter  the  temple-porch.] 

'  Ye  men  devout,  the  Ruler's  ancient  saints,  ye  reverend  men, 
Will't  be  amiss  if  ye  our  weakness  aid,  us  novices  admit?' 

[In  the  temple.'] 

No  cheat  is  this,  know  we  not  all  Thy  wondrous  love  ? 


GIJ  IT 


LJ/TL-/IA 

f         v^*- 

«a_ 


&>. 


cS/E/cS  (o61tr(oLJ3iLn 


Who  sing  not  what  they  beauty  deem  ?     Our  Civan's  form 

ev'n  so  we  yearn  to  see. — OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  u 

IV. 

[7$<ry  all  henceforth  sing  their  morning  song  to  the  goddess,  imploring  HER  to  arise  in  grace^\ 
O  thou  of  radiant  pearl-like  smile,  is't  not  now  dawn  ? 

have  not  the  sweet-voiced  come,  like  parrots  many-hued  ? 
Thus  thinking,  as  is  meet,  we  speak ;  meanwhile  in  sleep 

close  not  Thine  eye ;  let  not  thy  time  in  vain  be  spent ! — 
Sole  Balm  of  heaven,  the  Veda's  precious  Sense,  the  Dear 

to  eyes  that  see,  we  sing,  our  melting  minds 
In  rapture  all  dissolved  ;  nor  deem  thou  should'st  remain 

for  ever  thus  asleep  !— OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  16 

v. 

Say  not,  '  9ivan  is  unknowable!' 
The  'Mount'  that  Mai  knew  not,  and  Ayan  saw  not,— we 

can  know ;  so  Thou  dost  utter  falsities, 
O  guileful  one,  whose  mouth  with  milk  and  honey  flows, 

ope  thy  door !     He  Whom  earth,  heaven,  and  other  realms  know  not, 

12.  From  this  point  it  is  the  goddess  that  is  mostly  invoked  in  some  verses. 


U  r  <•)•!<      6T. 


f  <oTLLLJ  J6U  TfL/  ! 


CT. 


<Sp  QFj  <5U  SST  , 


&  RU  LJJILJ 


In  glory  makes  us  His,  cleanses  our  souls  in  grace. 

His  goodness  sing  !     'O  £ivan,  £ivan/  hark  !  they  cry. 
Thou  understandest  not  ;  thou  understandest  not  !  — 

So's  she  with  perfumed  locks  !  —  OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  ! 

VI. 

O  fawn,  but  yesterday  thou  said'st,  'At  dawn  I  come 

to  rouse  you  up;'  but  now,  all  unabashed 
Tell  us,  what  quarter  didst  thou  seek  ?  —  is't  not  yet  dawn  ? 

He  Who  is  sky,  and  earth,  and  all  things  else,  to  men  unknown  ; 
Himself  will  come,  will  guard,  and  make  us  His;  to  us 

who  coming  sing  His  heavenly  cinctur'd  Foot,  speak  thou  ! 
In  rapture  melt  !   The  King  of  thee,  of  us  extol  ; 

of  all  the  worlds  !—  OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  ! 

VII. 

Mother,  are  these  too  trifles?     Many  heavenly  ones 

know  not,  the  One,  the  mighty  glorious  Lord. 
Hearing  His  signals,  ope  thy  mouth,  and  '  £ivan  '  cry, 

Cry  '  Southern-One.'     Like  wax  before  the  fire 


en  IT 


Gurrsrrrr 


Melting,  —  'My  own,  my  King,  Ambrosia,'  we  all 

have  sung  !     Hear  thou  !  apart  from  us  yet  dost  thou  sleep  ? 

Dost  thou  yet  speechless  lie,  like  the  hard-hearted  silly  ones  ? 
What  grace  is  in  this  sleep  ?  —  OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  ! 

VIII. 

While  cocks  are  crowing,  small  birds  chaunt  on  every  side  ; 

while  trumpet  sounds,  sound  out  the  conch-shells  everywhere  ; 
The  heav'nly  Light  without  compare,  the  Grace  without  compare,— 

the  Being  great  without  compare,  we've  sung  ;  hear'st  not  ? 
Bless  thee,  what  slumber's  this  ?    Thou  openest  not  thy  mouth  ? 

is  such  the  recompense  for  our  King's  love  we  bring  ? 
Th'  Eternal,  First  of  Beings  ;  Him  Who  'bides  the  Only-One  ; 

the  Lady's  Partner  sing  we  all  !  —  OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  32 

IX. 

Ancient  of  days,  existing  ere  the  ancient  world  ! 

Whose  nature  shares  the  newness  of  created  things  ! 
Thy  worshippers  devout,  who've  gained  Thee  for  their  Lord, 

adore  Thy  servants'  feet,  —  to  them  give  reverence  due.  — 


uironeu.     CT. 


log 


uiflQf  Q^[r(Lpu^ujiuu 


ao. 


<S£  65Tp  <5V  <SV  S3T  J 


/D,  l5l(G33)LJ  l5l<S)IT%51T£[T6iT  ! 
otJ/f?  c^T&.^ 
Ulj(SlLL 


sm, 
QLDJIUIUITIT  <£I_LQ  QufriLKofts  L*       tQ&i  <oT<o$r<s$r& 


Q&iuiurrl 


And  these  alone  shall  be  our  wedded  lords  ;  joyous 

ev'n  as  they  bid,  due  service  will  we  render  meek. 
Thus,  if  Thou  grant  to  us  this  boon,  our  King,  no  lack 

Thy  handmaids  e'er  shall  know  !  —  OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  36 

x. 
Beneath  the  sevenfold  gulf,  transcending  speech,  His  foot-flower  rests  ; 

with  flowers  adorned  His  crown  of  all  the  universe  is  crown  ! 
The  Lady's  at  His  side  !  —  His  sacred  form  dwells  not  alone  ! 

The  Vedam,  heavenly  ones,  and  earth,  praise  Him  ;  and  yet 
He's  our  one  Friend,  Whose  praise  ne'er  dies;  within  His  saints  He  dwells; 

pure  He  sustains  the  'clan';  ye  temple-ladies,  say 
What  is  His  Town?  His  Name?  His  kin?  and  who  His  foes? 

And  how  sing  we  His  praise?  —  OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  .(o 

XI. 

[/«  the  temple-tank.'] 
Entering  the  broad,  frequented  tank  with  joyful  cries, 

and  hands  outstretched,  we  plunge  and  plunge,  and  sing  Thy  Foot. 
O  Guru,  see,  Thy  faithful  worshippers  are  blest  !     As  fire 

Thy  hue  is  red  ;  Thou  wear'st  white  ashes  ;  Blessed  One  ! 


6VJ  IT  ff  35  li 


<SS)LL> 


sCL. 


,  &[TJ5igtlLD, 


Thou  Bridegroom  of  the  Lady  lithe,  with  broad,  black  eyes ! 

O  Guru,  make  us  Thine  in  grace.     In  this  our  sport, 
What  those  who  would  be  saved  perform,  we've  done,  as  they ; 

guard  that  we  weary  not ! — OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  44 

XII. 

Lord  of  the  sacred  stream,  where  we,  that  thronging  mortal  woes 

may  cease,  acclaiming  bathe  !    Dancer  in  Tillai's  sacred  court 
'Midst  waving  fire  !    This  heaven,  this  flowery  earth,  us  all, 

in  sport  Thou  guardest,  formest,  dost  enshroud ; — 
Thou  say'st  the  word  ! — Bracelets'  tinkling,  jewels  rattling 

with  a  merry  sound,  tuneful  beetles  humming  round  our  locks  adorned, 
Plunge  in  the  tank,  where  flowers  are  glistening ;  praise  the  M  aster's  golden  Foot, 

and  in  the  fountain  bathe  ! — OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  48 

XIII. 

There  burn  dark  crimson  flowers  of  Kuvalai,  here  the  red  lotus  blooms ; 

there  the  bright  race  of  small  birds  utters  songs ; 
Here  those  who  wash  away  their  sin  are  gathered  round  ! 

This  swelling  tank  is  like  our  Queen  and  King ! 


5  CT  &  uiraneu.     CT. 


cz^^  J5l(DLbUIH<)-, 


We  ent'ring  plunge  and  plunge  again,  our  shells  resound  ; 

our  anklets  tinkling  sound  ;  our  bosoms  throb  with  joy  ; 
The  wave  we  plunge  in  swells.     Plunge  in  the  lotus  crowned  flood 

and  joyful  bathe  !—  OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  5^ 

XIV. 

While  ear-drops  swing  ;  while  golden  jewels  wave  ; 

while  flow'ry  locks  are  dancing;  swarms  of  wing'd  things  flit  ; 
Bathe  in  the  cool  flood,  sing  the  sacred  court  ! 

sing  the  mystic  Vedas,  sing  their  inner  sense  ! 
Sing  glory  of  the  Light,  sing  Him  the  cassia-wreath  Who  wears  ! 

Sing  ye  the  power  of  Him,  the  First,  sing  Him  the  Last  ! 
Sing  ye  the  glory  of  Her  Foot,  Who  armlets  wears, 

Whose  guardian  care  we  own  !  —  OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  56 

xv. 

The  Lady  of  Karai-kal  '. 

Once  on  a  time,  '  our  Peruman/  full  oft  cried  she. 
His  glory  any  time  to  speak  she  ceased  not 


57.  The  word  'time  '  is  Kal,  so  there  is  a  play  on  the  word  Karaikal.     It  may  be  that  the  poet 
in  another  passage  alludes  to  her  beautiful  prayer  (XI,  verse  8) : — 

'  He  gave  me  grace,  tho'  I  all  else  forget,  ne'er  to  forget 
His  foot,  Whose  mighty  dance  we  sing  !....' 


1  Her   very  ancient  legend   follows.— The  'Mother'  of  Karaikal.— Some  of  the  legends  in 
the  Tamil  Periya  Puranam   relate  to  the  period  between  the  first  and  second  great  revivals  of 


(5  6U  IT 


With  gladsome  mind,  while  tears  in  ceaseless  stream  flowed  forth. 
Once  on  a  time,  this  woman  came  to  earth,  nor  bowed 


Qaivism,  and  a  few  are  anterior  to  both.  It  seems  pretty  certain  that,  while  the  Jains  and 
Buddhists  were  active  and  apparently  triumphant  everywhere,  there  were  a  great  multitude  of 
the  faithful  Caivites  who,  like  the  Covenanters  in  Scotland,  were  rendered  more  zealous  by  the 
persecutions  to  which  they  were  exposed.  Among  these  was  the  'Mother'  of  Karaikal,  who  was 
a  poetess,  many  of  whose  verses  are  still  preserved.  The  legend  gives  a  most  interesting  picture 
of  some  phases  of  South-Indian  life  a  thousand  years  ago.  The  '  Mother '  was  the  wife  of  a  rich 
merchant  of  Karaikal1,  whose  name  was  Paramadattan  ('  Endowed  with  heavenly  gifts1}.  Her 
own  name  was  Punithavathiyar  ('  The  pure ').  She  was  very  devout,  and  especially  careful  to 
entertain  all  C.aiva  devotees  that  came  to  her  door.  One  day  her  husband  received  from  some 
persons  who  had  come  to  him  on  business  a  present  of  two  mangoes,  of  a  very  superior  kind,  which 
he  sent  home  to  his  wife.  Soon  afterwards,  a  holy  devotee  arrived  at  the  house  as  a  mendicant  guest ; 
but  she  had  nothing  ready  to  offer  him  except  some  boiled  rice.  This  she  set  before  him,  and  having 
no  other  condiment  to  present,  gave  him  one  of  the  aforesaid  mangoes.  At  noon  her  husband 
returned,  and  after  his  meal  ate  the  remaining  mango,  which  pleased  him  so  much  that  he  said  to 
his  wife,  '  There  were  two  ;  bring  me  the  other.'  Sh'e  went  away  in  dismay ;  but  remembering  that 
the  god  to  whose  servant — because  he  was  His  servant — she  had  given  the  fruit,  never  deserts  those 
who  serve  Him,  she  offered  a  mental  prayer,  and  straightway  found  a  mango  in  her  hand,  which 
she  carried  to  her  husband.  Being  a  divine  gift,  it  was  Of  incomparable  sweetness,  and  he  said  to 
her,  'Where  did  you  obtain  this?'  She  hesitated  at  first  to  reveal  the  wonder  that  had  been  wrought 
on  her  behalf,  but  reflected  that  she  ought  to  have  no  concealments  from  her  husband,  and  so  told 
him  everything.  He  gave  no  credence  to  her  words,  but  roughly  replied, 'If  that  is  so,  get  me 
another  like  it.'  She  went  away,  and  said  in  her  heart  to  the  god,  'If  thou  givest  me  not  one  more 
fruit,  my  word  will  be  disbelieved ! '  Forthwith  she  found  another  fruit  still  more  lovely  in  her 
hand.  When  she  carried  this  to  her  husband  he  took  it  in  astonishment ;  but  behold  !  it  forthwith 
vanished.  Utterly  confounded  by  these  wonderful  things,  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  his  wife 
was  a  supernatural  being,  and  resolved  to  separate  at  once  from  her.  He  revealed  the  matter, 
however,  to  no  one,  but  quietly  equipped  a  ship  in  which  he  embarked  a  great  part  of  his  wealth, 
and  then  on  a  lucky  day,  worshipping  the  god  of  the  sea,  with  sailors  and  a  skilful  captain,  he  set 
sail  for  another  country,  where  he  made  merchandise,  accumulated  a  fortune,  and  after  some  time, 
re-embarking,  came  back  to  India  to  another  city  in  the  Pandiyan  land,  where  he  married  a  merchant's 
daughter,  and  lived  in  great  luxury.  A  daughter  was  born  to  him,  to  whom  he  gave  the  name  of  the 
wife  with  whom  he  had  feared  to  remain,  but  for  whom  he  retained  exceeding  reverence. 

After  awhile  his  return  and  prosperity  became  known  to  his  friends  in  Karaikal,  who  resolved 
to  compel  him  to  receive  again  his  first  wife,  their  kinswoman,  whom  he  had  deserted.  They 
accordingly  proceeded  to  his  new  residence,  carrying  with  them  in  a  litter  his  saintly  spouse,  the 
'  Mother '  of  Karaikal.  When  he  heard  that  she  had  arrived  and  was  halting  in  a  grove  outside  the 
town,  he  was  seized  with  a  great  dread,  and  proceeded  with  his  second  wife  and  daughter  to  where 
the  'Mother'  was  encamped  surrounded  by  her  kindred.  He  at  once  prostrated  himself  with 
profoundest  reverence  before  her,  saying,  'Your  slave  is  happy  here  and  prosperous  through  your 
benediction.  To  my  daughter  I  have  given  your  sacred  name,  and  I  constantly  adore  you  as  my 
tutelary  goddess ! '  Poor  Punithavathiyar,  utterly  confounded  by  this  salutation  and  worship,  took 
refuge  among  her  kinsfolk,  who  all  cried  out,  'Why  is  the  madman  worshipping  his  own  wife  ?'  To 


1  Karaikal  js  a  small  town  held  by  the  French.  It  is  forty-seven  miles  from  Tanjore.  Near  it 
is  the  famous  Alankadu  (Vataranyam),  a  forest  of  banyan  trees,  where  the  shrine  of  the  '  Mother  ' 
still  stands. 


$5    6T  11     LI!IOT>G»l 

ib  £)/E//E/G>W  iSlpQp JE 

61li ?  @6U6U6E»T(533rLb 
GUJIf&-QJj<SUU  Ll)<5S3T(y$3tilfi[T\    SU/T/U 


Before  the  heavenly  ones,— by  the  great  King  with  frenzy  filled. 

Who  like  to  her  ?    Of  this  mysterious  One, 
O  lovely  damsels,  sing  the  Foot,  and  bathing  plunge 

beneath  the  flow'ry  flood  ! — OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  60 


this  Paramadattan  replied,  '  I  myself  beheld  her  work  a  miracle,  and  I  know  that  she  is  no  daughter 
of  the  human  race,  but  a  supernatural  being,  and  so  I  have  separated  myself  from  her,  and  I  worship 
her  as  my  tutelary  divinity,  and  have  dedicated  this  my  daughter  to  her,  and  therefore  have 
I  worshipped  her  and  call  upon  you  to  do  the  same.'  But  Punithavathiyar  pondered  the  matter, 
and  prayed  within  herself  to  Civan  the  Supreme,  saying :  '  Lord,  this  is  my  husband's  persuasion  ! 
Take  from  me  then  the  beauty  that  I  have  hitherto  cherished  for  his  sake  alone.  Remove  from  me 
this  burthen  of  the  flesh,  and  give  to  me  the  form  and  features  of  one  of  the  demon  hosts  who 
evermore  attend  on  Thee,  and  praise  Thee.'  That  very  instant,  by  the  grace  of  the  god,  her  flesh 
dried  up,  and  she  became  a  demoness,  one  of  Civan's  hosts,  whom  the  earthly  world  and  the 
heavenly  world  hold  in  reverence.  Then  the  gods  poured  down  a  rain  of  flowers,  heavenly 
minstrelsy  resounded,  and  her  relatives,  fearing,  paid  her  adoration  and  departed.  So  she  had  now 
become  a  demoness,  and  her  abode  was  the  wild  jungle  of  Alankadu ;  but  through  the  inspiration  of 
the  god  she  sang  several  sacred  poems,  which  are  preserved.  Afterwards  there  came  upon  her  an 
irresistible  desire  to  behold  the  Sacred  Hill  of  Kaila^am,  and  with  inconceivable  speed  she  fled 
northwards  till  she  arrived  at  the  foot  of  the  Mountain,  and  reflecting  that  it  was  not  right  with  her 
feet  to  tread  the  heavenly  ascent,  she  threw  herself  down  and  measured  the  distance  with  her  head. 
The  goddess  Uma,  Civan's  bride,  beheld  her  thus  ascending,  and  said  to  her  spouse,  '  Who  is  this 
that  in  this  strange  fashion  draws  near,  a  gaunt  fleshless  skeleton,  sustained  only  by  the  energy 
of  love?'  To  which  Civan  replied,  'She  that  cometh  is  the  "Mother"  devoted  to  my  praises,  and 
this  mighty  demon-form  she  has  obtained  by  her  prayers.'  When  she  drew  near  he  addressed  her 
with  words  of  love,  calling  her  by  the  name  of  '  Mother,'  which  she  for  ever  bears.  As  soon  as  she 
heard  the  word  she  fell  at  his  feet  worshipping,  and  ejaculating  'Father!'  Qivan  then  said  to  her, 
'  What  boon  dost  thou  ask  of  me  ?'  She  worshipped  and  replied,  '  Lord,  to  me  your  slave  give  love, 
which  is  undying,  and  infinite  blessedness.  I  would  fain  be  born  on  earth  no  more  ;  but  if  I  must  be 
so  born,  grant  me  at  least  that  I  may  never,  in  any  form,  at  any  time,  forget  Thee,  my  God ;  and 
when  thou  dost  perform  thy  sacred  mystic  dance,  beneath  thy  feet  in  rapture  may  I  stand  and  sing 
thy  praise.'  To  which  the  God  replied,  'In  Alankadu  thou  shall  see  my  dance,  and  with  rapture 
thou  shalt  sing.'  Then  the  sacred  'Mother'  of  Kajaikal  returned,  measuring  the  distance  still  on  her 
head  to  holy  Alankadu,  where  she  beheld  the  God's  sacred  dance,  and  sang  her  renowned  lyrics  in 
his  praise. 

This  legend  illustrates  a  remarkable  feature  in  the  Qaiva  worship  of  the  south,  where  devotees 
are  not  infrequently  adored  as  having  become  demons.  Doubtless,  this  is  connected  with  pre-Aryan 
usages,  and  the  poems  attributed  to  the  '  Mother '  of  Karaikal  present  the  most  vivid  picture  of 
demon  worship  with  which  I  am  acquainted.  It  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  the  source  of  this 
tradition.  WTe  have  the  picture  of  a  devout  and  enthusiastic  worshipper  of  CJvan,  who  sacrifices 
everything  to  the  performance  of  her  supposed  duties  to  the  god.  She  is  misunderstood  by  her 
inappreciative  husband,  who  forsakes  her,  and  finally,  with  scorn,  repudiates  her.  She  has  built 
herself  a  chapel  in  the  jungle,  where  she  spends  her  days  and  nights  in  prayers  and  austerities,  and 
on  her  death  is  worshipped.  The  legends  would  soon  accumulate,  and  the  poems  represent  in 
dramatic  form  the  artistic  view  of  all  the  circumstances. 


1x4  nij 

SSr 
(Lp<SST  <j£l< 


Qurrssr 


<5T65T<55TLJ 


SrUJn),  nSI<o5><P(Lp£6$TUJrbt  Q(D6UlT&&rLJ(T<SVt 


XVI. 
The  Cloud  ' :    an  Allegory. 

Erewhile  thou  didst  the  sea  diminish,  rising  like  the  Queen ; 

didst  glisten  like  Her  slender  waist  Who  rules  my  soul ; 
Didst  like  the  golden  anklets  sound  that  on  Her  sacred  foot 

in  beauty  gleam  ;  didst  bend  like  to  Her  sacred  brow 
The  bow.     As  she,  mindful  of  those  who  love  our  King, 

who  like  herself,  our  Mistress,  never  quit  His  side; 
Mindful  of  us  too,  as  our  Queen,  pours  forth  sweet  grace, 

even  so  pour  down,  O  CLOUD  !  OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  64 

XVII. 

The  red-eyed  one2,  and  He  Whose  face  turns  to  each  point3, 

and  gods  in  every  heaven,  taste  no  delight  like  ours. 
Thou  of  the  fragrant  locks  didst^make  our  beings  pure ; 

and  here  in  grace  didst  rise  in  every  home  of  ours  ; 


1  Here  theie  is  a  subtle  comparison  between  Qivan,  Qatti,  and  a  cloud  that  in  the  monsoon  season 
rises  from  the  sea.     The  cloud  drinks  the  waters  of  the  sea,  gleams  in  the  sky  with  lightning  fires, 
sends  forth  the  voice  of  the  thunder,  is  sometimes  made  beautiful  with  a  rainbow,  and  then,  spreading 
itself  over  the  heavens,  pours  down  fertilising  showers  on  all  the  earth  below.     So  Qivan  drank  the 
poison  from  the  sea ;  dances  in  Qithambaram  while  His  golden  anklets  sound ;  wears  a  form  of 
dazzling  splendour;  is  renowned  for  the  victories  He  gained  with  His  bow;  and  pours  forth  blessings 
over  all  the  earth.    The  comparison  to  Uma  or  Qatti  is  obvious.     This  closely  resembles  III.  66-94. 

2  Vishnu.  3  Brahma,  the  'four-faced.' 


in- 


SITIT 


y,i£>L/<S5TSVLJ  iriLJp  p  (T  Ql—  <SV  jptT  OT/i  LJ  fTSU  (TUJ  ! 


The  Warrior  gave  in  grace  His  golden  lotus  feet; 

the  King  of  beauteous  eye;  Ambrosia  rare  to  us  His  slaves; 
Our  Peruman  !    Singing  His  gift,  plunge  we  and  bathe 

in  the  clear  lotus-flood  !—  OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !    -  68 

XVIII. 

Annamalai  His  form,  His  lotus  foot  heaven's  host 

adored,  while  lustre  of  their  jewell'd  crowns  grew  dim  ; 
So  when  the  bright-eyed  sun  the  darkness  drives  away, 

the  cool  moon's  rays  are  paled,  the  stars  themselves  depart. 
Thus  stood  He  forth  ;  was  Female,  Male,  was  Neither-one; 

was  Heaven  with  gleaming  lights,  was  Earth,  was  all  the  rest. 
Ambrosia  manifest  !    Praising  His  jewell'd  foot,  O  Maid 

plunge  in  this  flowery  stream  !  —  OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  73 

XIX. 
The  Maidens'  Vow. 

'  The  children  of  Thy  hand  are  we  ;  our  Refuge  Thou  ;'- 

thus  that  old  word  we  say  anew  ;  in  this  our  dread 
Our  Lord,  to  Thee  one  prayer  we  make  ;  vouchsafe  to  hear  ! 

'  let  none  but  Thine  own  lovers  true  our  forms  embrace  ;  — 


69.  See  VIII.  60. 
I   2 


eu  IT  JF  as  do  . 


lQu  UlfKof 

L£l6V  GT69T  <<ol  JuStO/DiD  <S  (?d£6V     p/f  GTLDLJ  J6U  If  (LI  \ 


S.O. 
Co  LJ  /Tffl  ^51  !    <J9l(Tfj  (Sffi  <3f  ,  ^55T  (S5J^//J  /Tii  LJ  /T^LD  SD  ff  . 


IUJLD  a.f/j/uc^L.Q<»TS35r/_(/5(or5ti) 

JUT*  LD  tTJ&Ll      [ffT  (oL_(oSV  J  !T  6TLO  LJ16U  ITIU  ! 


Our  hands  no  service  pay  save  to  Thyself  alone  ;— 

our  eyes, — by  night,  by  day, — let  them  see  nought  but  Thee  !'- 

Our  King,  if  here  this  boon  Thou  grant,  to  us  the  sun 

in  perfect  beauty  shines ! — OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  76 

xx. 

Be  gracious  Thou  !  to  Thy  foot's  flower  be  praise ! 

be  gracious  !    To  Thy  rosy  beauteous  feet  be  praise  ! 
The  golden  feet,  the  source  of  all  that  live,  be  praised ! 

The  flow'ry  feet,  the  bliss  of  every  life,  be  praised  ! 
The  twain  feet,  Goal  and  End  of  every  life,  be  praised  ! 

The  lotus-flower,  unseen  by  Mai  and  the  Four-faced,  be  praised  I 
The  golden  flowers,  that  saving  made  us  His,  be  praised ! 

In  Margari-month  we  bathing  praise  ! — OUR  LADY  FAIR,  ARISE  !  80 


THE    SACRED    AMMANAI. 

HYMN   VIII. 

RAPTUROUS   JOY. 

The  remarks  made  in  the  introduction  to  VII  will  apply  in  some  degree  to  this  poem  also,  which 
is  traditionally  said  to  have  been  composed  at  the  same  place  and  time  by  the  bard,  who  seeing  the 
women  in  great  numbers  enjoying  their  favourite  game  of  Ammanai  and  accompanying  it  with 
a  simple  song,  listened  to  their  words,  and  then  put  the  substance  into  these  verses.  In  some  of 
them  He  relates  his  own  experiences ;  in  others  he  puts  words  into  their  mouths.  In  the  play  the 
women,  generally  six  in  number,  sit  in  a  circle  and  toss  a  number  of  little  balls  from  one  to  another 
with  great  dexterity  and  very  swiftly.  It  is  a  pretty  sight.  They  accompany  their  game  with 
a  simple  song,  the  rhythm  of  which  is  suited  to  the  action  of  the  players.  In  this  case  there  are 
twenty  verses  of  six  lines,  each  verse  having  but  a  single  rhyme.  The  subject  of  such  verses  is 
generally  some  heroic  exploits,  such  as  are  popular  among  all  classes ;  or  the  great  acts  of  a  deity. 
Here  the  title  of  '  rapturous  joy '  has  been  prefixed,  as  the  editor  seems  to  have  conceived  that  as  the 
main  idea  of  the  verses. 

I. 
His  advent  as  Guru.     The  Foot. 

Great  Mai,  the  fiery-eyed,  delved  down,  but  failed  to  reach 

His  foot's  expanding  flower !    To  earth  that  foot  came  down, 

Our  'birth'  cut  off,  made  those  like  us  His  own. — Lord  of 

The  south-land's  clustering  cocoa-groves,  and  Perun-turrai's  shrine, 

And  Tillai's  sacred  court, — a  sage  He  came,  call'd  me  in  grace, 

And  gave  release.    SING  we  His  foot  whence  mercy  flows !   AMMANAY,  SEE  !     6 


1-6.  Here  there  are  four  leading  ideas :  (i)  Qivan  rising  as  the  mountain  Aruna^alam,  passed 
above  and  below  the  soaring  flight  of  Brahma  and  the  delvings  of  Vishnu  ;  (2)  this  same  Qivan  has 
graciously  manifested  Himself  as  a  GURU  to  the  humble,  loving  bard  in  order  to  release  him  from 
further  metempsychosis  ;  (3)  He  is  also  worshipped  in  the  temple  of  Perun-turrai,  His  great  southern 
shrine,  where  the  saint  first  knew  Him ;  and  (4)  in  the  sacred  court  of  Tillai  He  dwells,  a  Brahman, 
one  of  the  3000  saints,  the  mystic  Dancer  and  Dispenser  of  grace.  There  the  sage  is  to  obtain  his 
consummation.  These  four  ideas  perpetually  recur  in  these  poems.  I.  This  is  an  unfeiling  topic 
treated  with  inexhaustible  variety.  See  notes  to  XI.  Nalatfi,  373.  4.  Comp.  XLII.  9-12. 

5.  Lex.  Ahganan. 


su  IT  ff  a  iri  . 
BL, 


sr,  QjDSSTGsrssr,  Quq$p&i<ss>/DUJrrGsr,  tf&Qr 
su 
WM 


II. 

Manifestations. 

To  men  on  earth,  to  heavenly  ones,  to  those  beneath, 
To  those  beyond,  He's  scarce  made  known  ;  to  us  accessible  ! 
The  Name  revered,  the  South-king,  Perun-turrai's  Lord 
Entering  our  souls,  with  frenzy  filled  them,  showed  the  final  way. 
Unsating  Nectar,— in  the  billowy  sea  He  cast  His  net ; 
The  Sea  of  full  desire  SING  we !   AMMANAY,  SEE  ! 

in. 

The  initiation  in  Penin-turrai. 

Inthiran,  Mai,  Ayan,  all  the  other  heavenly  ones, 

Stood  round  in  upper  air ; — £ivan  in  grace  to  earth  came  down, 

Made  those  like  us  His  own.     His  arm  the  sacred  ashes  shows ; 


10.  Lit.  'the  way  by  which  souls  going  return  Hot  to  embodiment.'     XXV.  26  ;  L.  n. 

11,  12.  givan  casts  His  net,  is  a  fisherman.     (Comp.  II.  17;    XLVIII.  9;    XLIX,  8.)     This 
refers  to  a  story  in  the  fifty-seventh  of  the  '  sacred  Sports '  (Taylor's  Oriental  MSS.,  p.  103  ;  Nelson's 
Madura  Manual.)     Parvathi  was  one  day  inattentive  while  Qivan  was  expounding  to  her  the  Vedic 
mysteries,  for  which  she  was  condemned  by  her  angry  husband  and  preceptor  to  be  born  on  earth  as 
the  wife  of  a  fisherman.     Accordingly  one  day  she  was  discovered  lying. as  a  tender  infant  under 
a  Pinnai  tree  (or  Punnai,  Calophyllum  fnophyllum,  see  Nala4i  Lex.\  by  the  headman  of  the 
Paravar,  a  great  clan  of  fishermen  found  everywhere  along  the  coasts  of  the  Tamil  lands.     By  him 
she  was  adopted,  and  grew  up  a  maiden  of  surpassing  beauty.     At  this  time  Nandi  the  chamberlain 
of  Qivan,  in  order  to  bring  about  the  accomplishment  of  the  god's  purposes  with  regard  to  the 
banished  Parvathi,  assumed  the  form  of  a  monstrous  shark,  II.  17;  and  in  various  ways  annoyed 
the  poor  fishermen,  breaking  their  nets  and  wrecking  their  boats.     On  this  the  headman  of  the 
Paravars  issued  a  proclamation  that  whoever  should  catch  the  sea-monster  should  be  rewarded  with 
the  hand  of  his  beautiful  adopted  daughter.   Qivan  forthwith  made  his  appearance  as  a  youth  of  noble 
aspect  who  had  come  from  Madura,  and  at  the  first  throw  of  his  net  caught  the  shark  and  brought  it 
to  land.     He  accordingly,  having  himself  become  a  fisherman,  received  the  fisherman's  daughter  in 
marriage.     The  god  now  assumed  his  ancient  form,  and  restored  Parvathi  to  hers,  and  with  many 
gracious  words  took  the  foster-father  with  Him  to  Kail^am,  the  paradise  of  the  Silver  Hill. 

12.  '  Sea  that  satisfies  every  desire.' 


IT  ten.     s\. 
@(61j  &if  ^j  Q  LJ  (£/!(£]  6S)  p  IU  (1  6ST  , 


ffi. 


Ll^n)  C^  p  (Lf,  JB^J  !Ei  t 


d5(55)L_L/LJZ_A_ 


All-glorious  Perun-turrai's  Lord,  who  comes  our  hearts  to  thrill ; 

To  loose  our  bonds  He  on  a  charger  rode,  and  gave 

Unending  raptures ;  SING  the  bliss !   AMMANAY,  SEE  !  18 

IV. 
He  chose  not  the  ascetics,  but  me ! 

The  gods  who  filled  the  heavens, — Mai,  Ayan,  Indra  too, 
Sore  penance  did,  like  anthills  stood,  yet  knew  Him  not ! 
To  me  a  cur  He  came ;  with  mother-love  He  lent  His  aid ; 
In  flesh  He  came,  with  trembling  rapture  thrilled  me  through- 
Honied  ambrosia's  Essence  pure  ;  the  jewell'd  foot 
That  treads  the  skies  in  gleaming  light  SING  we  !   AMMANAY,  SEE  !  24 

v. 
His  grace  to  me  all  unworthy. 

The  Mighty  One,  the  South-king,  Perun-turrai's  Lord, 
Me  vilest  cur,  of  mind  untaught,  with  frenzy  filled ; 
Kneaded  the  stone,  made  it  sweet  fruit ;  plunged  in  the  flood 


17.  This  verse  refers  to  the  manner  of  the  saint's  initiation,  and  the  coining  of  the  jackal-horses 
to  Madura  under  the  leadership  of  the  disguised  god.  20.  In  Arur  he  is  worshipped  as  Yanmlga 
Nathar,  or  'Lord  of  the  anthill.'  This  is  variously  explained.  See  XXIII.  5,  6.  Gods  and  saints 
have  performed  arduous  penances  in  vain  :  to  me  He  spontaneously  revealed  Himself.  25.  '  With 
stony  heart,'  as  27. 


[2O  J>  IT)  GU  IT  <!F  <5>  IX)  . 


ft. 


JBS&&  Q&iutu, 

L-iressri—Gurr 


6T. 


Of  mercy ;  all  my  sin  destroyed.  To  Him,  the  Sage, 
Who  Tillai's  city  entering,  in  the  sacred  court  abides, 
The  ancient  Rider  of  the  Bull,  SING  we  !  AMMANAY,  SEE  I  30 

VI. 
<pivan  a  '  false  '  mendicant. 

And  hast  thou  heard,  my  friend,  how  one  with  falsehood  came  ? 

The  Lord  of  Perun-turrai's  southern  shrine  begirt 

With  storied  walls,  showed  things  ne'er  shown  before,  showed  bliss, 

Showed  us  His  lotus  foot,  and  honey  of  His  grace ; — 

While  rustics  laughed, — that  we  the  heavenly  home  might  gain, 

He  made  us  His  ;  SING  we  this  grace  !    AMMANAY,  SEE  !  36 

VII. 
9ivan's  ten  epithets. 

Indweller  in  the  heart  of  those  who  ceaseless  ponder  Him  ' ; 

The  FarofF-One 2 ;  the  Warrior 3 ;  ever-loving  habitant 

Of  Perun-turrai's  southern  shrine 4 ;  the  Sage 5 ;  half  of  Whose  form 


31.  This  seems  to  refer  to  the  story  in  Canto  II.  44,  &c.  of  the  Koyil  Puranam  (Madras,  1885), 
p.  75,  which  the  Tamil  student  should  read.  The  explanation  of  the  native  editor  is  ingenious,  but 
it  is  useless  to  follow  him  in  his  disquisition.  Compare  the  legend,  NOTE  VI.  39.  See  1 1 1. 

37-42'  Qivan  is  here  praised  under  ten  different  epithets,  which  sum  up  much  of  the  poet's  creed 
with  regard  to  his  Master. 


JBJB&Ln<55)LA 


£)  Uifl<£K- 

J£l<5$T  QuLQUbfTSST,  Qu(/5^g/(53W)  ILJ  /T65T, 
T<£Bl  <S$  ILJ  6ST  LLi  <558T 


Ub  Stiff  <3ribl$3}l 

I,  KIT  6851', 


sTi—U  iSlstfltDiurrGsr, 


The  Lady  shares fi ;  the  Lov'd-One  Who  made  me,  mere  cur,  His  own7 ; 

With  mother-love  Who  visits  men  8 ;  the  sevenfold  world 

Whose  essence  is 9 ;  Ruler  of  souls10;  SING  we  !    AMMANAY,  SEE  !  42 

VIII. 
Seven  aspects  of  9ivaii. 

Half  of  the  Queen,  whose  grace  accepts  our1  melodies, 

The  mighty  Lord 2,  the  king  of  Perun-turrai's  shrine 3 ; — 

He  rules  the  expanded  sphere  renowned  *  of  upper  heaven ; 

The  God  with  eye  in  midmost  of  His  brow5;  in  Madura 

Distrest,  He  carried  earth  for  hire6,— was  smitten  by  the  king7,— 

SING  we  His  golden  form  that  bore  the  wounds  !    AMMANAY,  SEE  !  4* 

IX. 
Ten  mythic  ideas  of  Civan. 

His  the  crescent ] ;  His  the  mystic  word  * ;  Perun-turrai's  king 3 ; 

He  wears  the  twisted  thread 4 ;  He  rides  the  glorious  bull 5 ; 

Black  is  His  throat 6 ;  His  body  red 7 ;  He  smears  the  ashes  white 8 ; 


41.  Comp.  I.  61.  43-48-  Here  Qivan  is  praised  under  seven  aspects,  of  which  the  last  has 

reference  to  the  legend  given  in  the  bard's  life.     It  seems  that,  to  all  hearts,  the  idea  of  fellowship  in 
toil  and  suffering  voluntarily  endured,  is  attractive.         50.  And  so  is  a  Brahman. 


J22 


d§*  (1)  61J  IT 


LJSJ0TS5)/_U  UffKof  LJLp 


i  i . 


First  in  all  worlds  is  He9;  the  rapture  without  end 

As  in  the  days  of  yore  to  ancient  saints  in  grace  He  10  gives  ! 

That  all  the  worlds  may  wonder,  SING  !    AMMANAY,  SEE  ! 

• 
x. 

Various  praises  :    six  topics. 

The  Sage  above  the  gods  that  rule  the  heavens  l  ;  Who  stands 

In  majesty  above  the  kings  that  rule  this  earth  ~  ; 

The  pleasant  Pandi-land,  whose  gift  is  Tamir's  pleasant  speech,  is  His"; 

The  Bridegroom  of  the  Queen  4  ;  in  Perun-turrai,  His  delight, 

He  showed  His  gracious  feet,  made  me,  a  dog,  His  own  8  ; 

Annamalai's  His  shrine6:  SING  we  !     AMMANAY,  SEE  ! 


60 


Praises. 


The  fair  Queen's  Half;  of  southern  Perun-turrai  Lord; 

Whose  Nature  thrills  the  souls  that  cling  around  His  feet  ; 

The  Sire  who  made  that  Pandi-land  the  £iva-world  ; 

Adown  Whose  braided  lock  the  waters  flow  ;  Whose  blissful  jewell'd  foot 


57.  This  refers  to  Tiru-vi}ai-adal,  4  and  5.     See  Puranam,  p.  227.  58.  This  queen  is 

Ta4<ithctgai,  or  Mlnakshi.  60.  Another  name  for  Arun^alam.     See  VII.  69, 


&|  ft  ID  It  26QI  .        £|.  123 


aft.. 


era. 


6lJ?(5Yr^<oV)i£)LJdG;  dS/T^/T/f 
Syr^T  (o35<SSTUf 

srstftf  fD<o53fl/B<5rr%ssT<F 


Abides  within  their  souls,  who  rightly  render  them  to  Him; 

Beyond  the  furthest  limits  praise  uplift !     AMMANAY,  SEE  !  66 

XII.       ' 
The  Supreme  and  Absolute. 

Listen,  O  damsel  with  the  jet-black  eyes !— Mai,  Ayan,  Indra  too, 

Through  every  'birth'  sought  Him  :  me,  with  sweet  grace,  in  this  one  'birth,' 

He  made  His  own  ;  guards  me  that  I  may  suffer  'births '  no  more ; 

In  all  that's  real,  manifest ;  the  true  His  'biding-place ; 

The  Self  in  all  that  is,  is  He ;  of  everything  the  Home ; 

Our  £ivan,  Who  that  essence  is,  SING  we  !    AMMANAY,  SEE  !  73 

XIII. 
Praises:   six  epithets. 

While  bracelets  tinkling  sound, — while  ear-rings  wave, — while  jetty  locks 
Dishevelled  fall, — while  honey  flows,  and  beetles  hum ; 
The  Ruddy-One  Who  wears  the  ashes  white 1,  Whose  home 
None  reach  or  know2,  who  dwells  in  every  place3, — to  loving  ones 
The  True 4,  the  Sage  Whom  hearts  untrue  still  deem  untrue ft, 
Who  in  Ai-arru  dwells6,  SING  we  and  praise  !    AMMANAY,  SEE  I 


67.  ^yuaSr,  Ayan  (S.  AjAN  =  «0/<for«),  Brahma.         77.  Comp.  Ps.  xviii.  25,  26.         78.  Tiruvai- 
ami  (Trivaiyar),  a  shrine  near  Tanjore  :  lit.  'the  sacred  five  rivers.'    Sec  Appa  Murtti's  legend. 


124 


D  LJ  J^SV  ILjKI  &  G$T65T 

^sr^^ssr 

STy  ^\  LD  LC  ff  (GtfjlLil 


L£> 


XIV. 
The  story  of  his  conversion. 

As  elephant,  as  worm,  in  human  shapes,  in  forms  divine, 

In  other  births  diverse, — I  lived  and  died, — was  wearied  sore  ; 

He  stood  in  flesh  revealed,  melted  my  soul ;  and  joyous  drove 

My  sin  away ;  with  every  sweetness  filled ;  and,  as  a  king 

In  grace  appearing,  in  His  service  me  received  : 

That  Heavenly-One's  foot-flower  SING  we  !    AMMANAY,  SEE  !  84 

xv. 

9ivan's  triumph  at  Dakshan's  sacrifice. 

He  made  the  moon  grow  dim  in  Dakshan's  sacrifice;' 

He  Indra's  shoulder  crushed  ;  cut  off  the  '  Ecchan's '  head  ; 

Teeth  of  the  bright-beamed  sun,  that  rides  the  sky,  He  broke ; 

Dispersed  the  gods,  and  drove  away  to  every  point ; 

Lord  of  South  Perun-turrai's  shrine  with  flow'ry  groves 

Begirt ;  the  Fragrant-garlanded,  SING  we  !    AMMANAY,  SEE  !  90 


79.  See  IV.  ii.     The  whole  of  the  'Psalm  of  life'  is  a  commentary  on  this.  86.  The 

'  sacrificer.'     Comp.  V.  13  ;  XII.  17  ;  XIV.  13-48. 


£\.  125 


XVI. 
The  sweetness  of  His  Presence. 

His  Presence  mingled  in  my  body,  soul,  and  thought ; 

As  honey,  rare  ambrosia,  every  choicest  sweet 

He  gave  His  grace,  in  ways  the  heavenly  ones  know  not : 

The  WARRIOR  crowned  with  cassia's  honied  flowers ;  as  glorious  light 

Of  wisdom  known,  with  souls  in  number  infinite, 

Their  KING  He  dwells ;  this  tell  we  out !   AMMANAY,  SEE  !  96 

XVII. 
Ecstasy  of  adoration. 

I'll  wear  the  flow'ry  'cassia'  wreath,  and  wearing  join  myself 

To  (Divan's  mighty  arm  ;  and  joining  cling  in  rapture  lost ; 

Then  shrinking  shall  I  melt  with  love  of  His  red  lip ; 

I'll  seek  Him,— seeking  I'll  ponder  Divan's jewell'd  foot; 

I'll  faint  and  droop,  and  yet  again  revive.     The  ruddy  foot 

Of  Him  who  dances  there  'mid  fire  SING  we  !    AMMANAY,  SEE  !  102 


97-iox.  This  is  a  mystic  use  of  ideas  illustrated  in  A'urra/,  chaps,  cix-cxxxiii.  ioa.  Qivan 

performs  His  mystic  dance  in  Tillai  with  fire  in  one  of  His  hands.     See  legends  of  Cithambaram. 

•XT TTT 


NOTE  VI. 


Bp  QLDSOTQLD/TL$«J/rsyr  Q&Lp^arQijLb  unjsliufasr, 
Qeustfleujsp 


6ll[T65T<SU<k$T,  LD fffsl lU^J LD 

,  Q^ S5TLJ fTSJRJT^L  JB  fT L-. I— fT^oST y 


XVIII. 
91  van  appeared  as  a  Brahman. 

In  light  He  gleams,  Her  Half  whose  words  as  Parrot's  note  are  soft, 

The  Sage  whom  Mai  and  Ayan  coming  forth  could  not  discern ; 

In  glorious  Perun-turrai's  grove  with  honied  fragrance  filled, 

In  mercy  affable,  and  sweetest  grace  transcending  thought, 

In  light  He  came,  caused  light  within  my  soul  to  shine; 

The  Brahman  full  of  tenderness  SING  we  !    AMMANAY,  SEE  !  108 

XIX. 
Praise,  with  eleven  epithets. 

The  Primal  One1,  End  of  the  Three2 ;  beyond  the  End 

The  After  One3,  with  braided  lock4 ;  of  Perun-turrai  which  He  guards 

The  King5,  the  Heavenly-One6,  the  Partner  of  the  Queen7; 

Who  dwells  in  southern  Anai-ka s ;  the  southern  Pandi-land 

~Who  owns";  Ambrosia  sweet  to  those  who  call  Him  theirs10; 

To  such  an  one,  the  Father11,  SING  we  praise  !     AMMANAY,  SEE  !  114 


103.  There  are  parrots  and  parrots  !     A  paroquet's  soft  murmuring  is  considered  the  type  of 
musical  female  speech.  112.  '  Elephant-park':  this  is  a  town  on  the  Kaveri,  near  Trichinopoly. 

It  was  visited  by  all  the  great  saints,  and  seven  hymns  in  the  Devaram  are  in  its  praise. 


4?  nj  A)&ifln269T.     a\ .  127 

ao. 
QULGLDJSST,  QuQrjrsgiiGinrDiLirTGsr, 


JBfTLQ 


XX. 

Clinging-  to  the  Guru. 

The  mighty  Lord  Whose  nature  others  know  not — Perun-turrai's  king 

In  grace  upon  victorious  charger  riding  came; 

His  servant's  faults  removed ;  gave  virtue  ;  cleansed  from  stain  ; 

Severed  the  clinging  cords  of  earthly  ties  !    His  praises  old 

We  cling  to, — so  may  earthly  bonds  be  loosed  ;  the  mighty  bliss 

Of  Him  to  whom  we  cling,  SING  we  !    AMMANAY,  SEE  ! 


119,  1 20.  Comp.  Kurral,  350: — 

'  Cling  thou  to  that  which  He,  to  Whom  nought  clings,  hath  bid  thee  cling, 
Cling  to  that  bond,  to  get  thee  free  from  every  clinging  thing.' 


«,. 


jJBl  (ffj  LJ      Q  LJ  (TID  <9r  65ZST  <at53T  /i. 

[dj,  car|is>ioGgJ)6OUJ  &.] 
[Metre  :  «*j»9<"».  ^GtfueSafifi*.     Form  :  -  •»  |  -  «S  |  -«£  |  irregular  !J 


)  nf>LJLC><SS)6ULC>L$65r\ 


SUffl 


THE    SACRED    GOLD    DUST. 

HYMN   IX. 

THE   MERGING   OF   THE   SOUL   IN    RAPTURE. 

In  the  Vatha-Urar-Puranam  V,  63,  we  are  told  that  the  Sage  when  inTillai  saw  women  pounding 
the  gold  dust  which,  mixed  with  perfumes,  is  strewn  on  the  heads  of  distinguished  visitors  to  the 
shrine,  and  on  great  occasions  is  lavishly  thrown  over  .all  things  and  persons  connected  with  the 
worship.  As  they  pounded,  they  sang  foolish  songs;  and  he  composed  these  twenty  verses,  in 
a  somewhat  loose  metre,  to  be  sung  in  time  with  the  pestles.  The  song  is  much  admired,  but  is 
a  little  obscure,  and  almost  colloquial.  I  have  tried  to  preserve  the  rhythm, — five  principal  accents 
in  each  half  line. 

I. 

Reverence  to  the  various  queens  of  heaven. 

The  pearl-twined  wreath  and  flowery  garland  raise ; 

the  flower-vase  place,  incense,  and  sacred  lamp  ! 
To  £atti,  £omi,  Goddess-earth,  and  Queen 

of  speech,  chaunt  ye  auspicious  songs  ! 
For  Qitti,  Gauri,  Parppathi,  and  Gahgai, — haste, 

and  coming  wave  your  cooling  fans  ! 
The  Sire,  Lord  of  Ayyar,  the  Father-King  extol, 

and  dancing,  POUND  THE  SACRED  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  4 


2.  Comp.  introduction  to  VII. 


a.. 


C  617^0^  /ixSZOLD 

SST,  Q&lU&GSSTtSSSTLK        1.3^/5  ft(oLC>\ 


(fe. 


II. 
Devoutly  do  this  service. 

For  our  Lord  of  the  flowing  flower-crowned  lock 

we  needs  must  POUND  THE  SACRED  DUST  OF  GOLD  ! 
Ye  of  the  beauteous  shapely  eyes,  come  ye, 

and  coming  all,  with  us  in  union  sing. 
Cry  out,  nor  stand  aloof  from  the  devoted  throng ; 

bow  down,  our  King,  our  Dancer  worshipping  ! 
The  Goddess  and  He  coming  shall  take  us 

for  theirs :  POUND  WE  THE  DUST  OF  RUDDY  GOLD  ! 

in. 

Adorn  the  place  as  a  sacred  pavilion. 

Adorn  with  beauteous  ashes,  cleanse  the  place ; 

sprinkle  pure  gold,  the  treasures  spread  ye  out, 
Plant  Indra's  sacked  tree  ;  lift  everywhere 

the  banner,  placing  round  soft  gleaming  lights  ! 


6.  Lit.  '  Ye  whose  eyes  are  like  (in  shape)  slices  of  young  mango  fruit  :   an  exquisite 
10.  The  Kalpa-trce  of  Indra  yields  every  fruit  desired  by  the  worshipper.     They  put  up  a  represen- 
tative of  it  '  for  luck.' 


(Ij  GU  IT 


(P. 


OTSV  SDfTi     Lf& 

/Lb  ussrOfLnQurrfb 

U  JfffSl  §35T(S5)  (L/  L/  LJ  /^^^y^SSTJW, 
^6337133377  f) 


For  the  King  of  the  heavenly  ones  ;  the  Lord  of  Ayan,  the  Monarch  ; 

the  Lord,  the  Sire  of  Velan  the  good ; 
For  the  spouse  of  the  Mistress  who  rules  such  as  we  : 

POUND  WE  BEFITTING  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  I  a 

IV. 

Adorn  each  pestle  with  glistening  gems ; 

the  handle  and  mortar  adorn  ye  ! 
The  loving,  lowly  devotees,  salute 

and  wish  them  lasting  bliss  ! 
The  golden  shrine  of  sacred  Ekamban  in  Kachi, 

whither  all  the  land  resorts, 
Sing  we.     And,  freed  from  deeds  that  bondage  bring, 

singing,  POUND  WE  THE  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  16 

v. 

Ayan  and  Ari  shall  their  garlands  bring  ! 

not  Indra,  nor  with  him  the  deathless  ones, 


ii.  Ayan  =  Brahma.  (Divan's  superiority  to  him  is  a  cardinal  doctrine.  Velan  is  (Divan's  younger 
son,  Kumaran.  His  favourite  weapon  is  the  javelin  (vel),  and  he  is  the  tutelary  god  of  foresters.  See 
legend  of  Karmappar.  15.  Conjeveram.  £ivan  is  there  worshipped  as  Ekamban  (Ekambaran)  = 
'  he  who  has  one  garment.'  See  XIV.  4. 


#5u  Gun  $  A  e&ragr  ub. 

ITS 


(TL-LJ  Qurrrb  a^o 


Sf.. 


CT. 

lurnruu 


Nor  all  the  perfumed  hosts  of  gods,  save  after  us, 

the  pestle  suffer  we  to  lift  ! 
Sing  we  the  golden  shrine  of  sacred  Ekamban, 

the  Bowman  Who  smote  three  forts  of  his  foes, 
Ye  of  smiling  roseate  lips  !  for  the  three-eyed  Sire's 

dance,  —  POUND  WE  THE  DUST  OF  GOLD  ! 

VI. 

Many  a  pestle  would  the  great  ones  upraise  ; 

that  the  world  would  not  serve  for  a  mortar. 
To  mix  the  fragrant  dust  the  saints  crowd  round, 

that  the  worlds  suffice  not  to  behold. 
In  favouring  love  He  made  us  slaves  His  own  ; 

and  gave  His  flowery  Feet  to  crown  our  brows. 
To  the  mountain's  Son-in-law,  joyous  ever, 

sing  we  and  POUND  THE  DUST  OF  GOLD  ! 

VII. 

While  the  golden  armlets  tinkling  sound  ; 
while  the  saintly  bands  uprising  chaunt  ; 


3.  Or  'worthy.'     P.N.N.  XXIX.  3.     Lex.  mo. 


18. 

K    2 


IT  <!F  a>  i3b  . 


LJ  /H      SSTGST  677EJ<S5<SYT  LJ  JtTLJ  &,&£]& 


QLJ/T/D 


fib, 


While  townsfolk  greet  us  with  loud  acclaim ; 

while  them  we  greet  with  answering  shout  ; 
The  Partner  of  the  Queen,  on  whose  soft  feet 

the  anklets  tinkling  sound, — our  God, 
The  King,  like  mighty  mount  of  purest  gold, 

To  serve,  POUND  WE  THE  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  a8 

VIII. 

Ye  simple  maidens  fair,  with  bright  wide  eyes, 

while  armlets  tinkle,  bosoms  heave  and  swell, 
While  shoulders  gleam  with  ashes  pure, 

proclaim  ye  ever  praises  of  our  Lord, 
Who  showed  His  bright  flower-Foot,  and  in  this  world 

made  us,  lower  than  very  dogs,  His  own  !       • 
His  ways  of  grace,  sing  o'er  and  o'er,  and  Him 

to  serve,  POUND  WE  THE  SACRED  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  32 

IX. 

Let  the  whole  earth  be  the  mortar ; 
as  pestle  plant  Meru  the  lofty ; 


G  LJ  It  |)  •*  sfer  68BT  li .       flw.  JOD 

QLDILJ  Grsgf  LD^cFsrafl 
(?l 

Q&ILJIU 


LC> 


QlJlTfb  &<5$3T<533rL£>  ^)  l^^^jB  /T  (o  /LC  ! 


ss. 

SV/7"  <oT 


<£LbU6lJ 


Saffron  of  truth  pour  forth  in  copious  stream. 

Him  Who  in  southern  Perun-turrai  dwells 
His  sacred  roseate  Foot  sing  evermore  ! 

With  right  hand  seize  the  pestle's  ruddy  gold, 
The  Sage,  the  glorious  One  of  beauteous  Tillai's  shrine 

to  serve,  POUND  WE  THE  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  36 

x. 

While  our  bosoms  pearl-adorn'd  beat  high ;  while  in  our 

clustering  locks  the  honey-bees  play  ; 
While  with  £ivan  our  minds  are  dancing;  while  bright 

eyes  with  dew  are  gleaming ; 
While  wild  rapture  from  our  Lord  is  thrilling ;  while, 

as  others  live,  their  changing  lives  we  live ; 
With  our  Father's  mercy  glad,  ever 

dancing,  POUND  WE  THE  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  4° 

XI. 

Rich  jewels  like  the  moonlight  gleaming  ; 

panting  mouths  and  lips  of  coral  quivering ; 


15  en  IT 


QumuiuiT 


<S5)LJ 


Sing  ye  the  way  He  made  us  His;  sing  ye  the  way 

our  service  He  accepts; 
Seek  ye  our  Peruman,  and  seeking,  joy  in  heart, 

then  let  your  trembling  minds  grow  bold  ; 
Dance  ye  to  Him  who  dances  in  the  Court; 

dance  and  POUND  WE  THE  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  44 

XII. 

Him  in  whose  throat  is  the  blackness,  Balm  of  the 

dwellers  in  heaven,  the  ruby  Dancer  Himself, 
The  Sage,  the  Lord  of  the  sages,  us  who  took, 

and  made  us  His,  and  all  His  rareness  showed  ; 
The  False  to  the  false,  the  Truth  of  the  true, — 

ye  beauteous  ones  with  eyes  like  opening  flowers, 
Who  wear  the  golden  armlets,  ye  of  lovely  form,— 

praising,  POUND  WE  THE  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  48 

XIII. 

Damsels  with  slender  waists  and  crimson  lips, 

black  eyes,  bright  smile,  and  words  like  music  sweet ! 

47.  Comp.VIII.  77. 


£(IJU    QUIT  il)  «9T<£r«OBrub.       gni 


c£<55T/D,3?LLJ<5dT, 

6Tzi<s5>LD/L/<S5r 


<SU[TlSl<£ 


(oLL  \ 


My  rare  Ambrosia  ;  our  ^'re  ;  our  Lord  of  might  ; 

to  the  daughter  of  Himavat 
Her  Husband,  Son  and  Sire,  and  Brother  too  ; 

our  Teacher's  feet  sing  ye,  whose  bosoms  gleam 
With  gold  and  gems,  ye  damsels  beautiful, 

sing  and  POUND  WE  THE  SACRED  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  52 

XIV. 

While  the  shells  sound,  while  the  anklets  tinkle, 

while  waving  chaplets  crown  your  flowing  locks, 
WThile  your  roseate  lips  like  ripe  fruit  quiver, 

bright  jewelled  ones,  sing  the  £iva-world  ! 
For  His  foot,  Whose  head  is  crowned  with  braided  lock 

where  Gahga's  streams  resound  with  serpent's  hiss  ; 
While  our  bosoms  with  swelling  tender.ness 

heave,  POUND  WE  THE  SACRED  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  56 

xv. 
Essence  of  wisdom's  sweetness  exquisite  ; 

honey  unfailing,  full  of  excellence  ; 

51.  Qivan  is  Parvathi's  brother  also.     Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  424. 


/ 


136 


Lf 


lSSSSr  LLL-J565>!£JB<SV<S$IT\ 


^^  (Si/S5)s  ^  rr(LpiJb<sujrt  p  GSTU  jp  LbQ 


Q&LGLA6VITU 


asr. 


Him  who  is  savour  rich  of  every  fruit;  the  King 

with  power  to  enter  sweetly  every  mind ; 
The  Dancer  Who  cut  off  embodiment 

and  made  us  His,  in  swelling  strains  praise  ye, 
Ye  maidens  sweet,  with  eyes  like  purple  lotus  flowers, 

singing,  POUND  WE  THE  SACRED  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  60 

XVI. 

Thus  we  too,  coming  with  the  loving  ones, 

shall  sing  the  ways  He  makes  us  His. 
He  shows  the  roseate  flowery  feet,  that  gods 

in  heaven  who  rule,  e'en  in  their  dreams,  know  not. 
He  bears  aloft  the  flag  of  victory 

in  prosperous  war.     Praise  (^iva-Peruman  !  — 
Singing  the  conquering  Hero's  names  who  took 

the  towns,  POUND  WE  THE  DUST  OF  RUDDY  GOLD  !  64 

XVII. 

Sing  we  the  cassia-flower  with  honey  rife  ; 
sing  £iva-town ;  sing  we  the  infant  moon 


u   G  u  ITTQ  <*  dbr  snr  ic. 


(9j  <SV  LL  U  tflJL, 


(55)  /L/     ^  GST  (LpUL-\!JLL 


urn 

i  I —  ^x     /    ~-^js  I 

%§j?lBnQlI> !  «ra_ 


LJ/T^LLD 


Upon  His  sacred  braided  lock  ;  sing  we 

the  mighty  Bull,  the  trident  and  the  axe, 
His  warring  right  hand  wields ;  that  dwellers 

in  this  world,  and  in  other  worlds  might  'scape ; 
Sing  how  the  poison  for  his  food  He  ate, 

that  day,  and  POUND  THE  SACRED  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  68 

XVIII. 

He  trundled  Ayan's  head  like  ball, — sing  Him  ! 

He  broke  the  teeth  of  Arukkan, — sing  Him  ! 
He  slew  the  elephant,  and  wore  its  skin, — praise  Him  ! 

The  Lord  of  death  He  spurned  with  sacred  Foot, — praise  Him  ! 
He  shot  His  arrows  'gainst  the  towns  combined,— praise  Him  ! 

Poor  wretched  slaves,  He  made  us  His, — praise  we 
That  love !    Here  stand,  and  ever  dance  and  sing, 

and  for  the  Lord,  POJJND  YE  THE  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  72 

XIX. 

Sing  ye  the  cassia-wreath  of  rounded  flowers  ! 
Sing  ye  His  folly  wild  !    His  wisdom  sing  ! 

69.  See  V.  13  and  Kaci  Kh.     This  was  Bhairava.       73.  This  composite  character  of  £ivan  is 

a  perpetual  delight  to  his  worshippers.     NOTE  I. 


138 


0.0. 


Sing  ye  southern  Tillai,  the  saints'  abode  ! 

Sing  we  the  blest  One  of  the  'sacred  hall ' ! 
Sing  we  the  serpent  girdle  that  He  binds ! 

Sing  we  the  armlets  1  On  His  hollow  palm 
Sing  how  the  serpent  rears  its  folds,  and  for 

the  Ruler,  POUND  THE  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  76 

xx. 

For  Him  Who  is  the  Vedam  and  the  Sacrifice ; 

for  Him  Who  is  the  Falsehood  and  the  Truth  ; 
For  Him  Who  is  the  Splendour  and  the  Gloom ; 

for  Him  Who  is  Affliction  and  Delight ; 
For  Him  Who  is  the  Half,  Who  is  the  Whole ; 

for  Him  Who  is  the  Bond  and  the  Release ; 
For  Him  Who  is  the  First,  Who  is  the  Last ; 

dancing,  POUND  WE  THE  SACRED  DUST  OF  GOLD  !  80 


Oft 


so. 
(o  <£  V  <£  ^1  LA  I  9 . 

[<#6U  Q 63)63) L.&&UJ  li.] 

[Metre  :    Breui^^j/a/  Qsrffst  aseSuur.     See  V.  §  ii.] 


THE    HUMMING-BEE. 

HYMN  X. 

Our  poet-sage,  like  S.  Anthony  of  Padna,  and  some  other  mediaeval  saints,  had  a  great  sympathy 
with  the  irrational  creation.  Comp.  the  Kuyil  decad  (XVIII%  and  the  Parrot  decad  ,XIX).  This 
poem  is  addressed  to  the  humming-bees,  or  winged  beetles,  which  abound  in  all  the  topes  and  glades 
of  South  India,  and  are  especially  numerous  in  the  shady  groves  that  surround  the  temples;  having 
a  great  preference  for  the  fragrant  and  beautiful  trees  which  are  sacred  to  the  Hindu  deities. 

The  insect,  here  called  Gottumbi,  is  probably  the  dragon-fly,  Eitpletea  splendens. 

Here  the  SOUL  is  really  addressed,  and  exhorted  to  seek  Qivan's  feet. 


Mysteriously  great. 

The  King  that  crowns  the  flower  ;  Purandaran  ; 

the  Lady  blest,  in  beauty  clothed, 
That  sits  on  learned  tongues  ;  and  Naranan  ;  ' 

the  fourfold  mystic  Vedic  Scroll, 
The  Splendours,  Riders  in  majesty ; — with  all 

the  heavenly  ones  too,  know  Him  not : — 
Go  to  His  roseate  foot  who  mounts  the  Bull ; 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  THOU  HUMMING-BEE  ! 


I.  Brahma  and  Indra.  SarasvatI,  the  goddess  of  eloquence  and  learning  vMuir,  vol.  iii.  p.  14); 
Mother  of  the  Vedas,  called  Na-magal,  'She  of  the  tongue.'  a.  (i)  Vishnu,  (a)  The  personified 
Vedas,  in  Tamil  called  •  mysteries.'  3.  Siirya,  the  sun-god,  the  moon  and  Agni.  The  first  is  said 
to  have  at  various  times  become  a  horse,  to  have  ridden  a  horse,  and  to  ride  in  a  chariot  drawn  by 
seven  horses.  Ma  may  here  mean  (O  '  horse,'  or  (a)  '  majesty.' 


IT  (f  a;  i3b. 


a.. 


(o<£(<SS)IT  &LC>6V(oLL>  OfSS 


On. 


II. 
X  am  nought,  yet  made  like  to  Him. 

Who  am  I  ? — Wisdom's  lessons  what  are  they 
that  fill  my  mind  ? — and  me  who'd  know, 

Had  not  the  Lord  of  heaven  made  me  His  own? 
He  of  the  temple  court,  Who  erst 

A  mendicant  with  mind  distraught  asked  food, 
in  broken  skull  with  flesh  impure ! 

Haste  to  His  lotus- foot,  as  honey  sweet; 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  THOU  HUMMING-BEE  ! 

III. 
All  sweetness  is  in  Him. 

Honey  from  any  flower  sip  not,  though  small 

as  tiniest  grain  of  millet  seed  ! 
Whene'er  we  think  on  Him,  whene'er  we  see, 

whene'er  of  Him  our  lips  converse, 
Then  sweetest  rapture's  honey  ever  flows, 

till  all  our  frame  in  bliss  dissolves ! 
To  Him  alone,  the  mystic  Dancer,  go ; 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  THOU  HUMMING-BEE  ! 


5.  This  is  corrupt  in  the  Tamil  text(?).         7.  ^ivan  himself  was   once   a   filthy  mendicant, 
like  me! 


IV. 
His  love  given  to  loveless  me. 


There  was  no  love  in  me  like  Kannappan's ; 

when  He,  my  Sire,  saw  this,  me  poor 
Beyond  compare,  in  grace  He  made  His  own  ; 

He  spake,  and  bade  me  come  to  Him. 


13.  See  XV.  9-12. 

The  Legend  of  Kannappa  Nayandr,  or  the  'Eye- Devotee.' — The  image  of  this  renowned  South- 
Indian  devotee  stands  in  the  temple  at  Kalahasti  (Calastri)  near  the  Pulicat  hills.  He  was  a  raja  of 
Uduppur,  and  of  the  Shepherd  caste  (a  Vedan,  or  Hill-man ;  perhaps  a  Kurumbari) 1.  The  story 
represents  his  ancient  clan  as  possessing  great  wealth  and  authority  in  a  wild  billy  district,  where 
their  whole  occupation  was  hunting.  There  is  a  Zamindar  who  lives  there  now  in  feudal  state. 
The  old  chieftain,  the  father  of  Kannappa,  whose  name  was  Nagan  (the  Dragon-man},  is  represented 
to  us  as  moving  about  attended  by  fierce  hunting  dogs,  armed  with  every  kind  of  rustic  weapon ; 
a  skilful  archer,  around  whose  mountain-dwelling  innumerable  forest  animals  of  every  kind  had  their 
home,  and  where  the  cries  '  shoot' !  '  hurl' !  '  strike' !  were  mingled  from  morning  to  night  with  the 
bowlings  of  wild  beasts,  the  barking  of  dogs,  and  the  sound  of  the  horns  and  drums  of  the  hunters. 
He  had  no  son,  and  therefore  he  and  his  wife  went  to  the  temple  of  Subrahmanyan  (a  son  of  Qivan), 
— the  favourite  deity  of  mountaineers,  and  probably  a  pre- Aryan  deity  of  the  South,  an  object  of 
worship,  under  many  names  and  forms,  in  every  Tamil  hamlet.  To  him  they  offered  cocks  and 
peafowl,  made  great  feasts  with  copious  libations  of  strong  drink,  performed  wild  dances ;  and,  in 
fact,  according  to  the  legend,  seem  to  have  worshipped  much  after  the  rude  fashion  of  the  demon 
worshippers  of  the  present  day.  The  result  was  that  by  the  favour  of  their  tutelary  deity  a  son  was 
born  to  them,  who  from  his  early  childhood  shared  in  his  father's  pursuits,  being  brought  up,  it  is 
expressly  said,  like  a '  tiger's  cub.'  The  proud,  happy  father  used  to  carry  him  about  on  his  shoulder, 
but  finding  him  one  day  too  heavy  to  be  thus  borne,  gave  him  the  name  of  Tinnan  ('  the  sturdy  one '), 
which  remained  his  pet  household  name.  He  was  erewhile  to  bear  a  more  honourable  and  enduring 
title !  Soon  after  this  the  old  chief,  finding  himself  unable  any  longer  to  conduct  the  hunting 
expeditions  of  the  tribe,  made  over  his  authority  to  his  son,  with  whom  alone  this  history  is 
concerned. 

Henceforth  our  young  hero  is  ever  in  the  dense  jungles  with  his  veteran  huntsmen.  One  day 
a  wild  boar,  of  gigantic  size,  that  had  been  caught  in  their  nets,  escaped,  and  made  off  with  prodigious 
speed  to  the  mountain  side.  Tinnan  pursued  it  with  two  faithful  attendants,  but  it  led  them  a  weary 
chase,  and  did  not  stop  till,  exhausted  with  fatigue,  it  fell  down  in  the  shade  of  a  tree  on  the  slope 
of  a  distant  hill.  There  Tinnan  with  his  sword  cut  it  in  two.  His  attendants  came  up,  and  were 
astonished  and  delighted  at  his  success,  and  said, '  We  will  roast  the  boar  here,  and  refresh  ourselves.' 
But  there  was  no  water  at  hand,  so  they  took  up  the  carcase  of  the  boar  and  carried  it  some  distance 
onward,  till  they  came  in  sight  of  the  sacred  hill  of  '  Kalahatti.'  At  the  view  of  the  mountain  one  of 
the  attendants  cried  out,  that  on  that  mountain  summit  there  was  an  image  of  the '  God  with  flowing 
hair '  (QiVAN).  <  If  we  go  thither  we  may  worship  him,'  added  he.  Hearing  this  the  young  giant 
Tinnan  again  shouldered  the  boar  and  strode  on,  exclaiming,  « with  every  step  that  I  advance 


1  These  tribes  occupied  what  was  called  the  Tondai  land,  the  district  lying  between  the 
the  northern  Pennar,  formerly  under  the  Pallavas,  and  annexed  to  the  gOra  kingdom  in  tl 

century. 


142 


IT  <ff  a»  IT  . 


With  heavenly  grace  adorned  He  shines,  and  wears 

white  ashes,  and  the  golden  dust ! 
To  Him, — of  mercy  infinite, — go  thou, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  O  HUMMING-BEE  !  16 


towards  the  mountain  the  burden  of  the  boar  diminishes.  There  is  some  miraculous  power  here ; 
I  must  find  out  what  it  is.'  So  saying  he  mshed  on  with  great  eagerness  till  he  came  to  the  bank  of 
a  river,  where  he  deposited  his  burden,  bade  his  companions  make  a  fire  and  prepare  the  feast,  while 
he  himself  hastened  onward  till  he  beheld  on  the  slope  of  the  hill,  on  the  further  bank  of  the  stream, 
a  stone  liiigam,  the  upper  part  of  which  was  fashioned  anto  a  rude  image  of  the  head  of  the  god. 
The  moment  he  beheld  it,  as  the  magnet  draws  the  iron,  it  drew  his  soul,  which  had  been  somehow 
prepared  by  the  merit  of  good  deeds  and  austerities  performed  in  some  former  birth ;  and  his  whole 
nature  was  changed,  every  feeling  being  swallowed  up  in  intense  love  for  the  god,  whom  for  the  first 
time  he  now  beheld  *.  As  a  mother,  seeing  her  long  lost  son  return,  tarries  not,  but  rushes  to  embrace 
him,  so  he  threw  himself  upon  the  image,  tenderly  embraced  it,  and  fervently  kissed  it.  With  tears 
of  rapture,  his  soul  dissolving  like  wax  in  the  sunshine,  he  cried  out, '  Ah,  wondrous  blessedness  !  to 
me  a  slave  this  divinity  has  been  given !  But  how  is  it  that  the  god  remains  here  alone  in  a  wilderness 
where  lions,  elephants,  tigers,  bears,  and  other  wild  beasts  dwell,  as  though  he  were  some  rude 
mountaineer  like  me?'  Then,  examining  the  image  more  closely,  he  saw  that  water  had  been 
recently  poured  upon  it  and  green  leaves  strewn  over  it.  '  Who  can  have  down  this  ? '  said  he.  His 
attendant,  who  had  in  the  meantime  come  up,  replied :  '  In  the  olden  time,  when  I  came  here  on 
a  hunting  expedition  with  your  father,  a  Brahman,  I  remember,  came,  poured  water  and  placed  leaves 
upon  this  image,  repeating  some  mysterious  words ; — perhaps  he  is  here  still.'  So  it  dawned  upon 
the  mind  of  Tinnan  that  these  and  other  services,  which  he  himself  could  render,  might  be  acceptable 
to  the  god.  '  But,'  said  he, '  there  is  no  one  here  to  supply  him  with  food.  He  is  alone,  and  I  cannot 
leave  him  for  an  instant ;  yet  I  must  perforce  go  and  bring  for  him  some  of  the  boar's  flesh  cooked 
for  our  feast.'  So,  after  much  hesitation  and  unwillingness  to  lose  sight  for  a  moment  of  his  new 
found  treasure,  he  went  back,  crossed  the  stream,  where  he  found  the  food  already  prepared  and  his 
servants  wondering  at  the  delay  in  his  return.  Tinnan  regarding  them  not,  took  some  of  the  boar's 
flesh,  and  cutting  off  the  tenderest  portions,  roasted  them  on  the  point  of  an  arrow ;  tasted  them,  to 
ascertain  that  they  were  savoury  ;  carefully  selected  the  best,  putting  them  into  a  cup  of  teak  leaves 
which  he  had  sewn  together ;  and  prepared  to  return  to  the  woodland  deity  with  his  offering.  The 
servants  seeing  all  this,  very  reasonably  concluded  that  their  master  had  suddenly  gone  mad,  and 
hastened  off  home  to  take  the  news,  and  to  ask  the  priestess  of  their  tribe  to  return  with  them  and 
exorcise  the  evil  spirit  that  they  supposed  had  taken  possession  of  their  lord.  Tinnan  unconscious  of 
their  departure,  hastened  back  with  the  food  in  one  hand,  and  his  bow  and  arrows  in  the  other.  As 
he  crossed  the  river,  he  filled  his  mouth  with  water,  with  which  coming  before  the  image  he 
besprinkled  it.  He  then  took  the  wild  jungle  flowers  from  his  own  hair,  and  put  them  over  it,  and 
presented  the  coarse  boar's  flesh  he  had  brought,  saying:  'My  Lord,  I  have  chosen  for  thee  the 
daintiest  portions,  have  carefully  prepared  them  with  fire,  have  tasted  them,  and  softened  them  with 
my  own  teeth.  I  have  sprinkled  thee  with  water  from  the  stream,  and  have  put  on  thee  flowers  thou 
mayest  love.  Accept  my  gifts ! '  [This  presentation  of  food  to  the  lihgam  and  other  images  is  often 
referred  to  in  these  stories,  and  the  impression  is  given  that  the  worshippers  believed  that  the  idol  itself 


1  This  sudden  illumination  and  influx  of  devout  feeling  towards  £ivan,  the  Supreme,  is  in  strict 
accordance  with  the  fundamental  dogma  of  Karma,  '  old  deeds,'  which  suddenly,  after  many  trans- 
migrations, at  the  appointed  time  yield  their  assured,  though  long-delayed  fruit.  [See  Pope's 
Naladiyar,  pp.  66-69.]  This  subject  demands  the  careful  study  of  all  who  would  gain  an  insight 
into  any  Hindu  system. 


s.o. 

©. 


V. 

The  only  God. 
'Those  gods  are  gods  indeed/— ' These  others  are 

the  Gods/  men  wrangling  say;  and  thus 
False  gods  they  talk  about,  and  rant  and  rave 
upon  this  earthly  stage.     And  I 


consumed  the  offering,  comp.  V.  13-16  ;  but  it  is  never  expressly  said  that  the  food  disappeared  from 
before  the  shrines,  though  this  is  sometimes  implied.]  Meanwhile  the  sun  went  down,  and  during  the 
whole  night  Tinnan  with  his  arrow  on  the  strung  bow  kept  watch  and  ward  around  the  god,  and  at 
dawn  went  forth  to  the  mountain  to  hunt,  that  he  might  provide  for  the  daily  wants  of  his  new  master. 
While  he  was  gone  on  this  errand  the  Brahman  in  charge  of  the  lihgam,  who  was  a  learned  ascetic 
of  renowned  virtue  and  holiness,  Qivagochariyar,  came  at  daybreak,  and  having  performed  his  own 
ablutions  in  the  river,  provided  himself  with  a  vessel  of  pure  water  for  the  purification  of  the  divine 
image,  and  a  basket  of  sacred  flowers  and  fresh  leaves  for  its  adornment,  and  uttering  the  mystic 
Five  Syllables,  devoutly  drew  near.  A  scene  of  unutterable  pollution  met  his  horrified  gaze.  Flesh 
and  bones  were  strewed  around,  and  the  image  itself  had  been  defiled  with  filthy  water  and  common 
wild  flowers !  With  trembling  horror  he  sprang  aside,  exclaiming,  '  Oh,  god  of  gods !  what  un- 
hallowed impious  hands  of  mountaineers  have  brought  these  pollutions  here.  How  didst  thou 
permit  them  thus  to  profane  thy  presence?'  So  saying,  he  wept,  fell  down,  and  rolled  in  anguish 
before  the  god.  But,  reflecting  that  at  any  rate  it  was  wrong  to  delay  any  longer  the  sacred  service, 
he  carefully  removed'the  unhallowed  things  from  the  precincts,  and  proceeded  to  perform  his  daily 
worship  according  to  the  Vedic  rites ;  and  having  sung  the  appointed  hymn,  and  many  times  gone 
round  the  right  of  the  image,  and  prostrated  himself  in  adoration,  departed  to  his  hermitage. 

Meanwhile  the  servants,  having  taken  the  news  of  Tinnan's  madness  to  old  Nagan,  his  father, 
returned  with  him  and  the  priestess  of  their  demon  temple.  They  both  attempted  to  reason  with  the 
young  enthusiast,  and  to  recall  him  to  the  worship  to  which  he  had  been  accustomed ;  but  its  wild 
orgies  delighted  him  no  more.  His  whole  affection  was  centred  upon  the  new  found  Qivan ;  so  they, 
regarding  him  as  hopelessly  mad,  returned  sorrowing  to  their  village. 

[One  object  of  this  legend  seems  to  be  the  reconciliation  of  the  orthodox  Qaiva  worship  with  the 
ruder  forms  of  demon  worship  then  in  use.  The  contrast  is  exceedingly  striking  when  the  refined 
and  thoroughly  instructed  Brahman,  with  his  scrupulous  attention  to  all  the  minutiae  of  Vedic 
worship,  who  regarded  the  slaying  of  animals  as  a  crime,  and  the  eating  of  their  flesh  as  an 
unspeakable  abomination,  and  considered  that  whatever  had  touched  a  man's  mouth  was 
polluted,  and  that  the  wild  human  inhabitants  of  the  jungle  were  a  lower  order  of  creation,  is  brought 
face  to  face  with  the  youthful  chieftain  of  an  almost  savage  tribe,  whose  chief  delight  is  to  hunt 
down,  slay  and  devour  the  birds  and  beasts  of  the  forest ;  who  brings  boar's  flesh  for  the  unpolluted 
(Jiva-n  to  eat,  and  carries  water  in  his  mouth  wherewith  to  besprinkle  the  image ;  who  actual  1; 
his  leathern  slippers  to  brush  away  the  refuse  leaves  from  the  head  of  the  god,  who  knows  no  sacred 
texts ;  and  who  worships  the  same  god,  indeed,  but  has  nothing  to  commend  him  save  a  rude  and 
uninstructed  though  zealous  devotion.] 

Meanwhile  the  mountaineer  guards  the  god  by  night,  returns  at  eventide  to  offer  his  gifts  and 
perform  his  rude  service,  and  spends  the  day  in  providing  flesh  of  beasts  for  the  god's  repast.  At 
dawn,  when  the  young  woodman  has  departed,  duly  comes  the  pure  and  exclusive  Brahman,  having 
scrupulously  made  his  own  ablutions,  cleanses  the  precincts,  and  performs  his  ceremonious  worship. 
These  men  so  different  serve  by  turns  before  the  same  lihgam,  which  they  both  regard  with  equal 
reverence ! 


No  piety  could  boast :  that  earthly  bonds 

might  cease  to  cling,  to  Him  I  clung  ! 
To  Him,  the  God  of  all  true  gods,  go  thou, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  O  HUMMING-BEE  ! 


19.  VIII.  1 20.     Kurral,  345-350.     Pope's  Naladiyar,  Lex. 


But  this  cannot  long  continue  so.  The  Brahman  makes  a  passionate  appeal  to  Qivan  to  guard 
himself  from  these  pollutions,  the  author  of  which  he  cannot  trace.  He  then  returns  to  his  hermitage, 
sad  and  sorely  perplexed.  But  in  the  night  the  god  appears  to  him,  and  thus  addresses  him ' :  '  That 
which  thou  dost  complain  of  is  to  me  most  dear  and  acceptable !  Thy  rival  ministrant  is  a  chieftain 
of  the  rude  foresters.  He  is  absolutely  ignorant  of  the  Vedas  and  the  Qaiva  texts.  He  knows  not 
the  ordinances  of  worship.  But  regard  not  HIM,  regard  the  spirit  and  motive  of  his  acts.  His  rough 
and  gigantic  frame  is  instinct  with  love  to  me,  his  whole  knowledge — ;n  thine  eyes  crass  ignorance — 
is  summed  up  in  the  knowledge  of  ME  !  His  every  action  is  dear  to  me ;  the  touch  of  his  leathern 
slipper  is  pleasant  to  me  as  that  of  the  tender  hand  of  my  son  Skanda.  The  water  with  which  he 
besprinkles  me  from  his  mouth  is  holy  to  me  as  the  water  of  the  Ganges.  The  food  he  offers  me — 
to  thee  so  abominable — is  pure  love.  I  regard  not  the  externals  of  the  worship.  He  utterly  loves 
me,  even  as  thon  dost ;  but  come  to-morrow  when  thou  shall  see  his  worship,  and  I  will  give  thee 
proof  of  his  devotion  to  me  *.'  The  Brahman  slept  no  more  that  night,  but  at  daybreak  was  put  in 
hiding  behind  the  lihgam  by  the  god  himself.  And  now  £ivan,  who  knows  the  hearts  of  his 
worshippers,  in  order  that  Tinnan's  truth  might  be  manifest,  caused  blood  to  trickle  down  from  the 
right  eye  of  the  image.  The  young  worshipper  drawing  near  beheld  this,  and  exclaimed, 'Oh,  my 
master,  who  hath  wounded  thee  ?  What  sacrilegious  hand,  evading  my  watchfulness,  has  wrought 
this  evil?'  Then  seizing  his  weapons  he  proceeded  to  scour  the  neighbourhood  to  see  if  any 
mountaineer  or  wild  animal  could  be  detected  as  author  of  the  mischief.  Finding  none,  he  threw 
himself  on  the  ground  in  despair;  but  at  length  reflected  that  he  had  heard  of  remedies  which  would 
staunch  the  flow  of  blood.  So  he  went  and  sought  out  in  the  jungle  some  herbs  of  virtue,  and  applied 
them ;  but  the  wound  bled  all  the  more  copiously.  Then  a  happy  idea  struck  him :  '  for 
a  wounded  eye  the  remedy  is  another  eye  applied,'  said  he;  and,  pausing  not  an  instant,  with  his 
arrow  he  scooped  out  his  own  right  eye,  and  applied  it  to  the  bleeding  eye  of  the  image,  from  which 
at  once  the  blood  ceased  to  flow  !  At  this  his  rapture  knew  no  bounds.  He  sang  and  danced,  and 
poured  forth  uncouth  expressions  of  ardent  thanksgiving ;  but  on  looking  at  the  image  once  more, 
alas !  blood  was  seen  issuing  from  the  other  eye.  After  a  moment  or  two  of  bewildered  sorrow,  his 
countenance  was  lit  up  with  a  radiant  light  of  gladness ;  for  he  has  still  one  eye  left,  and  the  efficacy 
of  the  remedy  has  been  tried  already ;  so  he  raises  himself  up,  puts  his  foot  close  up  to  the  image's 
suffering  eye,  that  he  may  be  able  to  feel,  when  he  can  no  longer  see,  where  to  apply  the  remedy ; 


1  Tiruvafagam  (Lyric  XV.  9-12)  refers  to  this  part  of  the  legend.     He  does  not  name  the 
devotee,  but  the  reference  is  obvious.     This  is  one  of  very  many  stanzas  that  would  be  unintelligible 
but  for  the  key  which  a  knowledge  of  the  legend  puts  into  our  hands. 

2  The  idea  is  one  expressed  with  marvellous  energy  and  beauty  by  Hebrew  prophets  (Micah  vi. 
6-8).     Horace's  lines  will  occur  to  the  student : — 

'  Immunis  aram  si  tetigit  manus, 
Non  sumptuosa  blandior  hostia 
Mollivit  aversos  Penates 

Farre  pio  et  saliente  mica.' 

'  If  the  votary's  hands  are  pure,  they  propitiate  the  gods  with  the  humblest  offering,  and  would  not 
be  more  persuasive  with  the  costliest.1 


Sri 

,  QutssynsLiT,  UDdSdssyr, 


CT. 


VI. 

He  elevates,  calms,  and  purifies  the  soul. 
In  this  mad  world,  'mid  stress  and  strife  confused, 
from  birth  and  death  that  ceaseless  spring ; — 
Where  hoarded  treasure,  women,  offspring,  tribe, 

and  learning's  store,  men  prize  and  seek  ; — 
He  calms  the  storm  of  mental  changing  states, 

and  clears  from  error's  mists  the  soul. 
To  mystic  wisdom's  mighty  God  go  thou, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  O  HUMMING-BEE  !  24 

VII. 
Nothing-  shall  draw  me  from  Him ! 

On  Qankaran  the  soul's  ambrosia,  who  thinks, 

shall  he  fare  ill  ?    The  sacred  Foot 
That  aye  endures  shall  I  a  prodigal  forget  ? 

But  those  who  cleave  not  to  that  Foot, — 
A  sinful  fellowship  in  worship  vain, — 

their  very  forms  we  will  not  know ! 
To  Him,  supremely  Excellent,  go  thou, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  O  HUMMING-BEE!  a8 


26,  27.  Comp.  XXXV. 


and  proceeds  to  scoop  out  the  other  eye.  But  this  last  sacrifice  is  too  much  for  Qivan  to  permit  to 
be  consummated  ;  from  out  the  lihgam  he  puts  forth  a  sacred  hand,  and  grasps  that  of  the  youthful 
enthusiast,  who  still  holds  the  arrow  ready  to  accomplish  his  pious  intention,  and  says  :  '  Stay,  Tinnan, 
stay  thine  hand,  my  loving  son  !  Henceforth  thy  place  for  ever  shall  be  at  my  right  hand,  on  my 
holy  mount.'  (^ivagochari  had  learnt  the  lesson,  that  LOVE  AND  SELF-DEVOTION  ARE  MORE  THAN 
CEREMONIAL  PURITY,  and  fell  prostrate;  while  the  choirs  of  heaven  chaunted  the  beatification  of 
the  Saint,  who  is  from  age  to  age  adored  under  his  title  of  Kann-appan — the  devotee  who  gave  his 
eyes  for  the  service  of  his  God. 

L 


6U  IT 


<S5)  SW 


VIII. 
His  grace  to  me  and  mine. 

Unique  it  sprang,  rose  up,  sent  forth  its  boughs 

that  none  can  count, — a  tree  of  grace  ! 
Right  well  He  cared  for  me, — a  cur, — and  called, 

and  caused  in  state  aloft  to  ride, 
He  is  my  Sire !    To  sire  and  house  and  race 

the  mighty  Peruman  is  He  ! 
To  Him,  the  Fount  of  bliss  unfailing,  go; 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  THOU  HUMMING-BEE  !  32 

IX. 

His  self-forgetting  compassion. 

His  throat  is  black ;  His  nature  passes  far 

all  powers  of  thought  that  men  possess  ! 
I  went,  drew  near,  took  refuge  at  His  Feet ; 

and  He,  straightway,  delusions  all 
From  changing  deaths  and  births  that  ceaseless  rise 

within  my  being  caused  to  cease. 
To  Him,  Who  is  compassion's  sea,  go  thou, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  O  HUMMING-BEE  !  36 


39.   He  is  'self-existent':   svayambhu.     Comp.   Pope's   Kurral,    pp.   183-189.  33.  See 

for  the  idea  of  this,  XXXIII.  17;  XLVIII.  21.     Qiva-Hana-bodham,  Cut.  IV.     Unmai-vilakkam, 
11-17. 


(5  <&  (5  ,5  IT 


^^j  «  ssr(y 


X. 
His  tender  love  has  followed  me. 

Pain  I  endured, — grew  old, — again  waxed  like 

a  weanling  calf, — in  ceaseless  change; 
And  here  I  dwelt,  desiring  evermore 

enjoyments  that  a  dog  might  share, — 
In  folly's  every  guise.     With  mother-love, 

He  came  in  grace,  and  made  me  His ! 
To  the  rich  Lord  of  mercy's  store  go  thou, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  O  HUMMING-BEE  !  40 

XI. 
He  gave  grace  without  upbraiding. 

Thou  didst  not  call  me  '  stony-heart,' 

'deceiver,'  'obstinate  of  mind;' 
But  Thou  didst  cause  my  stony  heart  to  melt, 

and  in  compassion  mad'st  me  Thine ; 
Thou  Lord  of  Tillai's  sacred  temple-court, 

in  beauty  rich,  where  swans  disport ! 
Go,  hasten  to  the  golden  beauteous  Foot ; 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  THOU  HUMMING-BEE  !  44 


37.  Either  '  a  calf  that  leaves  its  mother,'  or  '  a  calf  which  its  mother  forsakes.'  41.  Comp. 

lines  47,  73. 

L  2 


1  48  ^  g  «u  f  *  *  A, 

sa. 


f^Ub  Qu(TJj<S5)LDUj'&S5T<f 
tSGST  QdFiULJSfff 

ir-<P(b(0<& 


XII. 

The  loving  Lord,  Who  taught,  wretch  as  I  am, 

my  lips  to  sing.     His  jewell'd  Feet; 
The  Teacher  great,  Who  pardon'd  all  the  faults 

of  me",  a  very  fiend  in  sooth  ; 
He  still  in  grace  accepts  my  services, 

nor  spurns  my  worthlessness  ! 
To  I9an  go,  as  tender  mother  known, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  THOU  HUMMING-BEE  !  48 

XIII. 
His  love  demands  my  all. 

Devoid  of  love  for  Him  in  sooth  was  I. 

I  know  it,  and  He  knows  it  too  ! 
And  yet  He  made  me  His,  this  too  all  men 

on  earth  shall  surely  see  and  know. 
He  there  appeared,  in  all  His  grace  revealed. 

He  only  is  my  being's  King  ! 
Come  thou,  and  joyous  join  thyself  with  me 

TO  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  O  HUMMING-BEE  !  52 

XIV. 
He  came  to  me  as  my  Guru. 

Germ  of  all  being,  far  beyond  this  world,— 

yet  in  this  world  too,  seen  ; 
With  Her,  whose  flowery  locks  breathe  sweet  perfume, 

in  mercy  manifest,  He  came  ; 

47.  Comp.  lines  41,  73. 


G  &  IT 


iSlurrtssr  GTLC>  iSlrrmssr 


A  sacred  Sage,  versed  in  the  mystic  scroll, 
He  stood  revealed,  and  made  me  His. 
Go  to  the  God,  in  sacred  form  displayed, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  THOU  HUMMING-BEE  !  56 

XV. 
Only  His  mercy  brought  me  near. 

How  far  away  had  I  and  all  my  thought 

from  Him  the  loving  Lord  remained, 
Had  not  the  Wearer  of  the  flowing  lock,— 

He  with  the  Lady, — ma'de  me  His  ! 
The  Lord,  Who  is  the  heaven,  Who  is  each  realm 

of  earth  and  of  the  mighty  sea ! 
Go  to  the  roseate  Feet  that  sweets  distil, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  THOU  HUMMING-BEE  ! 

XVI. 
The  thought  of  Him  is  joy. 

Soon  as  I  thought  upon  His  sacred  form 

which  every  thought  of  man  transcends, 
The  Lord  of  mercy's  flood  of  purest  joys, 

that  ne'er  delude,  swept  o'er  my  soul. 
My  Lord  revealed  Himself  that  He  might  make 

me  ever  fully  His  alone. 
To  Him,  the  Lord  of  Lords  Supreme,  go  thou, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  O  HUMMING-BEE  !  64 


Qumuiumu  Q&6V6U;£(o<£ 


SD/L//T! 

QflLJlLHTIT 


<£&>. 


6UJ6UH61IJB 


XVII. 
He  saved  me  from  senses'  bondage. 

In  pleasures  false  I  plunged,  and  sank  deep  down,— 

each  day  of  earthly  prosperous  joy, 
I  thought  it  true,  and  thus  enslaved  I  lay  ; 

in  grace  revealed,  He  made  me  His  ! 
Call  Him  'my  Teacher,'  'precious  Life,'  'great  Lord, 

of  Tillai's  sacred  temple-court  ;  ' 
And  seek  those  selfsame  roseate  flowery  Feet, 

TO  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  THOU  HUMMING-BEE  !  68 

XVIII. 
£ivan  as  depicted  in  ancient  myths. 

The  tiger's  skin,  the  robe,  the  pendants  rare, 

the  ears'  round  golden  ornaments, 
The  ashes  white  as  milk,  the  sandal  paste 

so  cool  and  sweet,  the  parrot  green, 
The  trident,  and  the  armlets  linked  :  this  pomp, 

and  ancient  fair  array  He  owns, 
Regarding  well,  with  joyous  soul  go  thou, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  O  HUMMING-BEE  1  72 

XIX. 

Visited  me,  nor  despised  my  nn  worthiness. 
'Deceiver,'  'sinner  vile,'  'rebellious  one,' 

all  this  to  me  He  did  not  say; 
The  Generous  One  came  oft  to  visit  me, 
nor  took  His  Presence  from  my  mind  ! 

69-73.  See  NOTE  X.  73.  Comp.  line  41. 


151 


ao. 


Of  all  the  pains  that  fill'd  my  soul,  no  one 

in  any  wise  was  left  with  me  ! 
So  to  His  gleaming  jewelled  Foot  go  thou, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  O  HUMMING-BEE!  76 

XX. 

His  (Trace  to  the  lowly. 

• 

Ayan,  who  crowns  the  lotus  flower,  and  Mai 

were  grieved, — for  He  was  hard  to  reach  ! 
But  I,  His  lowly  slave,  all  jubilant 

fulfilled  of  exultation  stood  ! 
To  me,  mere  cur,  He  gave  a  lofty  seat, 

endued  right  well  with  worthiness ! 
To  Him,  Whose  form  is  fiery  flame,  go  thou, 

AND  BREATHE  HlS  PRAISE,  O  HUMMING-BEE  !  So 


srr  <o$sr  LD  . 


[Metre  :  wwi^Asira/  Q«*#«*  soSijur.    See  V.  §  ii.] 

B. 
i  USSTf&tU  [flUff  Q<J^SS7Vp/S33r/7VT_£  ^(TTjSlJlpJ 


SpQJjQtjGULCi  SpSSTJUi  V 


THE  TAMBOUR  SONG;   OR,  REFUGE  WITH   giVAN. 

HYMN  XI. 

Arttnafalam. — The  name  of  Rudra  is  scarcely  ever  applied  to  Qivan  in  the  south,  yet  it  would  seem 
as  if  the  idea  of  Civan  had  been  mainly  developed  from  the  Vedic  Rudra,  the  god  of  Storms,  the  father 
of  the  Maruts,  of  whom  so  many  stories  are  told  which  now  are  the  accepted  legends  of  C.  ivan.  It 
may  safely  be  said  indeed  that  all  the  Vedic  Rudra's  acts  and  attributes  are  given  in  the  modern  f  aiva 
system  to  £ivan.  One  of  these  is  connected  with  the  legend  of  Aruna^alam,  so  often  referred  to  in 
Tamil  Caiva  poetry.  According  to  the  legend  contained  in  the  Liiiga  Puranam  (Muir,  vol.  iv. 
pp.  385-393),  it  is  related  that  Brahma  and  Vishnu  disputed  regarding  their  respective  claims  to 
superiority,  and  thence  a  terrific  fight  arose.  At  this  time  to  quiet  their  contention,  £ivan,  or 
Mahadeva,  appeared  as  a  luminous  lingam,  a  pillar  of  fire, '  equal  to  a  hundred  final  mundane  con- 
flagrations, without  beginning,  middle  or  end,  incomparable,  indescribable,  undefinable.'  Hari 
determined  to  examine  the  source  of  this  fiery  appearance,  and  took  the  shape  of  a  boar  whose 
description  is  very  wonderful.  Speeding  downwards  for  a  thousand  years  he  beheld  no  base  at  all  of 
the  lihgam.  Meanwhile  Brahma  took  the  form  of  a  swan  purely  white  and  fiery  eyed,  with  wings  on 
every  side,  rapid  as  thought,  and  went  upwards  to  see  the  litigants  top ;  but  both  failed,  and  at  length 
united  in  a  hymn  of  praise  to  Qivan  as  supreme ;  which  so  pleased  the  god  that  he  offered  them 
a  boon.  They  asked  that  they  might  both  obtain  an  eternal  devotion  for  him,  which  was  granted. 
'  Thenceforward  the  worship  of  the  lihgam  has  been  inaugurated  in  the  worlds.  The  pedestal  is 
MahadevI,  and  the  lingam  itself  is  the  visible  Mahe^vara.'  (Comp.  Arun^ala  Puranam,  Canto  II.) 

I. 

9ivan  as  a  Guru. 

Mai's  self  went  forth  a  boar,  but  failed  His  sacred  Foot 

To  find ;  that  we  His  form  might  know,  a  Sage  He  came, 

And  made  me  His !    To  Him,  Who  hath  nor  name,  nor  form, 

A  thousand  sacred  names  SING  WE,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  4 

4.  See  IV.  199. 


4?  nfj  $>  G  fl>  eft  Co  GTT  sjar  it .     <g>a. 

a.. 


IU 


STSVSV/TLD 


Q<P(61j&L_i /BS 


<£* 


II. 

I  saw  Him;   thenceforward  my  soul  worships  Him  unseen. 

The  Lord  in  Perun-turrai's  ever-hallowed  shrine 

Who  dwelt,  my  birth  with  all  its  germs  destroyed ;  since  when 

I've  none  else;  formless  is  He, — a  form  He  wears, 

The  Lord  of  blest  Arur  SING  WE,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  ! 

in. 

To  Hari  and  to  Brahma  and  to  other  gods 

Not  manifested,  £ivan  came  in  presence  there, 

Melted  our  hearts,  received  our  service  due;  that  all 

The  world  may  hear,  and  smile,  SING  WE,  AND  BEAT  TE^LENAM  !  la 

IV. 

From  sinking  in  the  vain  abyss  of  worthless  gods, — 

From  birth's  illusions  all,— the  LIGHT  SUPERNAL  saved 

And  made  me  His.     Soon  as  the  new,  pure  Light,  was  given 

How  I  in  Bliss  was  lost :  SING  we,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  16 


15  su  IT 
©. 


Si. 


6T. 


v. 

To  'wildered  gods,  to  Ayan,  and  to  Mai  unknown, 

£ivan  assumed  a  form,  that  men  on  earth  should  joy. 

That  germs  of  birth  consumed  might  die,  with  gracious  glance, 

How  to  my  soul  He  came,  SING  WE,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  20 

VI. 

The  Lord,  Who  shakes  the  serpent  dancing  round  His  waist, 

With  His  Hill-partner,  came  to  earth,  made  us  His  own;— 

Say  thus,  soul-lighted,  eyes  like  full  bright  lotus  flowers, 

Pouring  forth  floods  of  tears,  and  SINGING,  BEAT  TELLENAM  1  24 

VII. 

£ivan  unknown  to  Hari,  Ayan,  Indra,  heavenly  ones, 

On  earth  drew  even  me;  'come,  come,'  said  He,  and  made  me  His ! 

When  imprint  of  His  flow'ry  Feet  was  on  my  head  impressed, 

How  grace  divine  was  mine,  SING  WE,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  28 


SIT  ajar  t . 


srr  luuiSltnuQurr 


ao. 


VIII. 


Like  rustling  palm-leaves  is  this  frame  !    Its  births  and  deaths, 

With  dread  of  good  and  ill,  He  swept  away,  and  made  me  His; 

He  gave  me  grace,  though  I,  all  else  forget,  ne'er  to  forget 

His  Foot ;  Whose  mighty  dance  SING  WE,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  32 


IX. 


As  though  some  stone  were  made  sweet  fruit,  the  Lord  in  grace 
Gave  ev'n  to  .me  His  golden  Foot,  and  made  me  His. 

0  ye  with  slender  waist,  red  lips,  and  winsome  smiles  1 

1  Lord  of  the  Southern-Land,'  call  Him ;  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  36 


X. 


Even  in  a  dream  His  jewelled  Feet  'tis  hard  for  gods  to  see,— 

With  Her  like  laurel  tree  with  jewelled  arms,— entering  in  grace, 

In  waking  hour  He  took,  and  made  me  His !    With  loving  souls 

Your  dart-like  eyes  be  filled  with  tears,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  4° 


30.  See  Pope's  Ndladiyaf,  p.  67. 


IT  &•  s>     . 


sc. 


Qfiu  SSTLL  nrsysri—  ^L  u  my-p  Q^6Yr(a<sfr<sssrfEa  Q&mL  i_  /T(?LD  T  ! 


SflL. 


&l—g£lLL 


@ITU!TL-.<SV 


XI. 

When  He,  Her  spouse  whose  eyes  shine  bright,  mixt  with  my  soul, 

And  made  me  His,  deeds  and  environments  died  out; 

Upon  this  earth  confusion  died ;  all  other  mem'ries  ceas'd ; 

How  all  my  'doings'  died,  SING  WE,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  44 

• 

XII. 

Ascetic  bands  sore  languish'd,  longing  for  release. 

Grace  to  the  elephant  he  gave,  made  me  His  own ; 

The  light  superne  deep  plunged  me  in  devotion's  sea ! 

How  sweet  His  mercy  is,  SING  YE,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  48 

XIII. 

Not  those  on  earth,  nor  in  th*  abyss,  nor  heavenly  ones,— 

To  none  beside,  so  near  He  drew ;  .He  made  me  His  ! 

To  sing  His  advent,  or  Him,  th'  only  Great,  conceive 

Is  hard,  His  glory-song  SING  WE,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  52 


46.  In  Tiruvilai-adal,  20,  21,  £ivan  comes  as  a  wonder-working  ascetic,  and  among  other  things 
causes  a  stone  elephant  to  eat  sugar-cane.  But  «jy/*^)  is  also  =  'fig-tree.'  Various  interpretations  are 
given. 


4?  rt)  $  C  ^  sfa  C  SIT 


s®. 


r  Ljrrjsprrrrj&liuiT 


<F  J<£  (gl  J  LC> 


XIV. 

Mai,  Ayan,  all  the  gods,  and  Sciences  divine, 

His  essence  cannot  pierce.    This  Being  rare  drew  near  to  me ; 

In  love  He  thrilled  my  soul !    With  this  remembrance  moved, 

Let  your  bright  eyes  with  tears  o'erflow,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  56 

xv. 

The  spreading  sea  of  grace  superne  that  melts  and  swells, 
From  which  'tis  sweet  to  draw  and  drink,  we  gather  round. 
The  Feet  of  the  bright  southern  Lord  call  we  to  mind, 
His  slaves,  praise  we  His  sacred  grace,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  60 

XVI. 

Buddhan,  Purandaran,  the  primal  Ayan,  Mai,  praise  Him, 
The  One-distraught,  Who  dwells  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine, — the  Sire 
Who  made  births  cease,— Lord  of  fair  Tillai's  porch,— His  gracious  Feet 
How  in  my  soul  they  entered,  SING,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  64 

xvn. 

I  lay  bewilder'd  in  the  barren  troublous  sea 
Of  sects  and  systems  wide  discordant  all ;— 


611  T  <BF 


LJ/raS),  ffffff  Qp®rr(o6ifr<533riEi 


670. 


9.0. 


My  care  He  banished,  gave  in  grace  His  jewelled  Feet; 

Praise  we  His  gracious  acts,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  68 

XVIII. 

Though  Ether,  Wind,  Fire,  Water,  Earth  should  fail, 

His  constant  Being  fails  not,  knows  no  weariness ! 

In  Him  my  body,  soul,  and  thought,  and  mind  were  merged. 

How  all  myself  was  lost,  SING  WE,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  72 

XIX. 

Prime  Source  of  heavenly  ones,  the  Germ  of  those  beneath, 

Earth's  Balm ;  Mai's,  Ayan's  Treasure,  open  eyed 

We  saw,  SING  YE,  His  gracious  Feet,  Who  dwelt  with  us ! 

Call  Him  'Lord  of  the  Southern-Land,'  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  76 

xx. 

Sing  His  race ;  sing  the  heron's  wing ;  Her  beauty  sing 

Who  wears  bright  gems ;  sing  how  He  poison  ate ;  each  day 

In  Tillai's  temple  court  He  dances,  where  the  waters  play; 

His  tinkling  anklets'  music  SING,  AND  BEAT  TELLENAM  !  80 


77.  See  Tiruvilai-adal,  28. 


sl  (nj  &  <&  nr  ip  ev . 

[#su  gji  so)  i_  uj  a  IT  (5  oraPuj  ii.] 


Gumufrssr  LD<5$)n)(3urrg£]wt 


a. 


^issrssTLCiQuiLj  (o<g5/r<su<S33rLDfr<£  Q^/JW^LD  ^Dj^gi  OTSST 


THE    SACRED 

HYMN   XII. 

THE   SPORT   OF   CIVAN'S   GRACIOUS   'ENERGY.' 

i. 

Objections  to  '  ashes,'  the  snake,  and  the  mystery  of  His  teaching. 
06;.  What  He  smears  is  'white  ash  '  ;  what  He  wears  is  an  angry  snake  ; 
What  He  speaks  with  His  lips  divine  is  the  mystic  word,  it  seems  ;  MY  DEAR  ! 
Ans.  What  He  smears,  what  He  says,  what  He  wears  are  the  means  by  which  He, 
As  my  Lord,  rules  me  ;  and  of  all  that  hath  life  the  Essence  is  He!  £ARALO  !  4 

ii. 
Objection  to  His  mendicant  guise. 

Obj.  '  My  Father,  Embiran,  to  all  indeed  is  Ruler  Supreme  ; 

Yet  He  wears  a  clouted  kovanam  ;  '  and  why  should  this  be  so,  MY  DEAR  ? 


I.  These  are  the  words  used  by  Dakshan  to  his  daughter  Umai  [Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  379]  in  the 
i  Khandam,  ch.  Ixxxviii.  16  :  — 

*"  fSff&ib  ycfcrugj 
u-io  D-earugs  aursuih  aegiv 
sr  eefif  eS«ni_  asarsu  0oretiratir 


fl,  v.  '  be  enraged.'] 
'  His  body  he  smears  with  ashes  ;  a  serpent  he  wears  as  adornment  ; 
Poison  from  the  sea  he  eats  ;  a  skull  he  carries  ; 
He  rides  a  white  bull  that  rages  with  anger.     Such  an  one, 
O  damsel,  is  he  fit  to  come  to  our  sacrifice'/' 
The  ashes,  the  serpent,  the  poison,  the  skull,  and  the  bull  are  matters  of  praise  in  all  f  aiva  poems. 


1  T.  V.  U.  Pur.  VI.  86.     NOTE  VIII.  to  the  'life.'     ^aral  (an  imitative  word)  is  the  name  of 
a  female  play,  of  which  the  verse  is  the  accompaniment.     In  each  stanza  the  former  couplet,  song  by 


x6o 


fB». 


9  <3J/r<533T. 


.  TheVedas  four,  the  meaning  with  which  all  lore  is  fraught,  as  the  great  thread 
Himself  alone  as  kovanam  He  spreads;  behold,  QARALO  ! 

in. 

The  objection  that  Civan  is  a  homeless  ascetic. 

OZ>/.  His  shrine's  the  burning  ground  ;  fierce  tiger  skin  His  goodly  garb  ; 
All  motherless  and  fatherless  is  He;  all  lonely  dwelleth;  see,  MY  DEAR! 
Ans.  Motherless  is  He  and  fatherless  ;  dwelleth  all  alone  ;  but  though  'tis  thus, 
If  He  be  wroth,  the  worlds  to  powder  crumble  all  ;  behold,  (^ARALO  !  12 

IV. 
The  punitive  inflictions  of  Bhairavan. 

Obj.  Ayan,  the  '  Bodiless/  with  Anthagan,  and  Qanthiran, 

In  divers  ways  He  wounded  sore,  yet  slew  not  ;  see,  MY  DEAR  ! 


8.  An  ascetic  mendicant  wears  a  very  scanty  cloth,  suspended  by  a  string  round  the  waist ;  but  why 
should  He,  who  often  appears  in  such  stately  majesty  (X.  69-72),  wear  this  unseemly  pretence  of  decent 
clothing?  The  answer  is  ambiguous  in  the  original,  but  seems  to  say:  'All  mysteries  are  contained 
and  hidden  in  Him,  and  the  Vedic  revelation  is  the  link  between  Him  and  the  souls  of  men.'  Strange 
symbolism!  9.  Comp.  NOTE  I.  13.  See  XIII.  57.  The  '  Bodiless '  is  Kaman. 

Kdman,  the  'Bodiless.' — The  story  of  the  destruction  of  Kaman  (or  the  god  of  Love)  by  Qivan 
is  very  curious,  and  should  be  read  by  the  Tamil  scholar  in  the  Kamba-Kamayanam,  I.  x.  i-io. 
It  seems  that  Qivan  resolved  to  enter  on  a  course  of  very  strict  devotion  (Yogam)  with  the  intention 
of  increasing  his  powers !  The  lesser  divinities  fearing  this,  instigated  Kaman  to  endeavour  to  distract 
the  mind  of  the  devotee.  Accordingly  the  archer  sallied  forth  with  his  arrows  composed  of  the  nine  most 
fragrant  flowers,  and  having  fitted  one  on  to  the  string,  took  aim  at  Qivan's  sacred  breast.  But  the 
god  suddenly  opened  his  third  eye  in  the  centre  of  his  brow,  from  which  he  darted  a  wrathful  flame 
that  instantly  reduced  Kaman  to  ashes.  At  the  intercession  of  all  orders  of  creation  Kaman  was 
restored  to  life,  but  not  to  a  visible  substantial  form,  and  he  still  pervades  the  world  riding  on  the 
chariot  of  the  soft  south-wind,  working  his  mischief  unseen.  Ancient  European  mythology  made  him 
blind :  he  is  here  '  bodiless.'  The  legend  may  remind  us  of  the  story  of  Echo.  The  allusions  to  this 
myth  in  these  lyrics  are  endless— and  wearisome. 

the  leader,  proposes  some  mystery  regarding  £ivan,  to  which  the  latter  couplet  is  a  reply  (very 
unsatisfying!)  sung  in  chorus  by  all  the  maidens,  with  much  clapping  of  hands.  As  originally 
written  the  objection  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Buddhist  Guru,  and  the  reply  is  by  the  Ceylon 
king's  hitherto  dumb  daughter.  See  the  disputation  with  the  Buddhists  at  Cithambaram  for  the 
supposed  occasion  and  scope  of  the  song. 


60. 


IB  iUGtnw&GssT  ^p  sngxssH—  /u  js  i  tu  <$  G? 


@. 

&g]<£  (o^eUlTS 

GTS3T, 


ST. 


,  STSiST,  ^Jffi. 


.  He  Whose  eyes  are  three,  the  Ruler  great,  if  He  shall  punish, 
Is't  not  a  triumph  to  the  heav'nly  ones,  O  thou  with  flowing  locks?  £ARALO  !  16 

v. 

Dakshau's  sacrifice. 

Obj.  Of  Dakshan  He  smote  off  the  head,  off  E£9an  too;  the  hosts  of  gods 
That  flocking  came  He  sent  to  nothingness ;  why  this,  MY  DEAR  ? 
Ans.  Them  who  thronging  came  to  nothingness  He  sent ;  'twas  grace ! 
In  grace  to  Ef9an  too  He  gave  one  head  the  more ;  see,  £ARALO  !  20 

VI. 
Arunacalam. 

Obj.  Him  the  flow'ry  god  and  Mai  knew  not;  in  fiery  form  He  came 
From  earth  that  stretch'd  to  lower  worlds ;  wherefore  was  this,  MY  DEAR  ? 
Ans.  From  earth  to  realms  beneath  had  He  not  reach'd,  they  twain 
The  insolence  of  self-esteem  had  not  cast  off;  behold,  £ARALO!  34 


16.  It  must  be  for  their  good.  17.  This  is  Sans.  yajan  =  l  he  who  sacrifices.'  The  wild  story 
is  variously  told,  but  Vishnu  seems  meant  here.  In  line  20  it  must  be  Dakshan.  See  XIV,  where 
the  theme  is  expanded;  and  XIII.  57,  &c.  In  Ka9i  Khandam,  ch.  Ixxxvii.  &c.,  a  full  account  is 
given  from  the  Skanda  Puranam,  Daksha  Khandam.  Muir,  vol.  iv.  (index).  Wilson's  VUhnu 
Puranam,  p.  61,  &c.  21.  See  Lyric  XI.  Brahma:  sprung  from  a  lotus. 

M 


6U  IT  cff  a  l     . 


VII. 
Parvathi  lives  in  His  side,  Gariga  on  His  crest. 

Obj.  Soon  as  the  mountain  maid  as  part  of  Him  He  placed,  another  dame 
In  watery  form  upon  His  braided  locks  poured  down  !    Why  this,  MY  DEAR  ? 
Ans.  Upon  His  braided  locks  in  watery  form  had  she  not  leaped,  the  world 
To  cavernous  destruction  rushing  ruined  must  have  lain  !    £ARALO  !  .•> 

VIII. 
The  poison1. 

Obj.  He  ate  halalam  from  the  sounding  sea,  that  day  arisen 

With  mighty  din  ;  what  means  this  wondrous  act,  MY  DEAR  ? 

Ans.  Had  He  not  eaten  on  that  day  the  poison  fierce,  Ayan  and  Mai 

And  all  the  other  gods  of  upper  heaven  had  died  ;  behold,  £ARALO  !  32 


25.  See  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  307.    Note  on  V.  256.     For  the  Tamil  student  the  classical  passage  is 
Kamba-Ramayanam  I.  x.  31,  &c.  29.  See  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  366.     JIalahiilam  -visham  ghSram 

sanjagrah  amritopamam.     The  Tamil  scholar  should  read  Kamba-Ramayanam  I.  x.  1 7,  &c. 


1  The  Hala-hala  Poison,  the  churning  of  the  Sea,  the  blackness  of  Qivarfs  Throat,  and  the  epithet 
'  Ambrosia? — Among  other  things  in  these  lyrics  that  require  explanation  to  the  English  reader, 
the  subjects  referred  to  in  the  above  title  are  of  the  most  frequent  recurrence,  and  are  apt  to  weary 
and  even  disgust. 

It  is  most  necessary  however  to  understand  once  for  all  how  essential  they  are  to  the  South-Indian 
concept  of  Qivan,  as  the  great  and  beneficent  Being  Who  is  to  be  approached  in  prayer  and  gratefully 
adored.  It  will  hardly  be  possible  for  the  reader  to  do  anything  like  justice  to  the  Poet  and  religions 
Teacher,  unless  he  deem  it  worth  while  to  make  the  attempt  to  view  these  things  candidly  and 
dispassionately  in  the  light  in  which  they  are  viewed  by  the  more  devout  and  intelligent  of  the  £aiva 
community. 

The  legend  is  simply  this  :  the  lesser  deities  were  in  sore  affliction  and  came  to  Qivan  for  help. 
He  accordingly  came  forth  from  Kaila^a,  and  using  Mount  Mandara  as  His  churning-stick,  with 
Vasu-deva  as  the  rope  which  caused  it  to  revolve,  proceeded  to  churn  the  sea  of  milk.  The  result 
was  the  appearance  of  the  Ambrosia  or  food  of  immortal  gladness.  But  before  this  a  stream  of  fiery 
poison  black  and  deadly,  the  Hala-hala  poison,  rushed  forth.  This  the  deity  himself  drank  up,  and 
hence  his  throat  is  for  ever  black,  a  glorious  memorial  of  his  voluntary  sufferings.  The  cup  of 
ambrosia  He  gave  to  the  grateful  gods.  Another  version  of  this  story  may  be  read  in  Wilson's 


Quss 


sssrurrsv 


IX. 


. The  LordofTillai's  court,  Who  in  thesouthern  land  delights,  and  dancesthere, 
A  mighty  maniac,  delighted  in  the  female  form,  behold,  MY  DEAR  ! 
Ans.  Had  He  not  delighted  in  the  female  form,  all  in  the  wide  world 
Would  have  obtained  heaven's  bliss  and  earth  had  failed ;  behold,  £ARALO  !   36 

33.  The  story  is  given  in  the  Koyil  Puranam,   §  ii,  where  it  is  explained !     But  the  verse  if 
variously  interpreted  and  is  not  of  any  importance. 


Vishnu  Puranam,  ch.  ix,  and  in  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  366.  It  is  also  to  be  found  in  various  forms  in  Tamil 
verse,  but  is  essentially  a  Sanskrit  and  northern  myth.  The  question  occurs,  was  this  regarded  as 
literal  fact,  or  was  it  put  forth  as  a  parable?  Our  readers  will  perhaps  remember  the  discussion 
about  Euhemerism  in  Crete's  History  of  Greece,  vol.  i,  see  index.  It  may  be  said  that  three 
classes  of  Hindus  are  to  be  met  with  in  the  South :  those  to  whom  this  and  similar  histories  are 
wonderful  stories  and  nothing  more.  They  take  no  more  interest  in  them  than  we  should  in  the 
Arabian  Nights'  Entertainments. 

A  second  class  believe  the  legends  devoutly,  and  regard  them  as  capable  of  a  mystic  interpretation 
to  which  however  they  do  not  attach  any  surpassing  importance,  nor  are  they  at  all  agreed  as  to  its 
details.  The  third  class  think  that  under  the  veil  of  such  legends  ancient  sages  concealed  mysterious 
teachings  which  they  were  unwilling  to  expose  to  the  vulgar  gaze.  And  they  say  that  they  alone 
possess  the  secret  of  the  esoteric  meaning  of  the  myths,  which  they  themselves  regard  as  more  or  less 
antiquated  and  uncouth. 

Whether  the  Upanishads  and  Sanskrit  literature  in  general  lend  any  countenance  to  this  last  idea  is 
exceedingly  doubtful.  I  incline  to  think  that  these  mystic  interpretations  are  only  to  be  found  in  later, 
and  chiefly  in  South-Indian,  authors.  It  is  very  certain  that  the  (^aiva  Siddhanta  philosophers  have 
made  it  their  especial  business  to  give  to  all  such  legends  a  more  elevating,  and  at  the  same  time 
distinctly  £aivite,  interpretation.  The  south  of  India  has  from  the  earliest  time  been  more  open 
than  the  rest  of  the  east  to  western  influences  and  teaching,  and  I  feel  convinced  that  this  is  one  of 
the  results.  Whether  in  any  way  the  chasm  between  western  and  eastern  ideas  can  be  bridged  over 
by  any  such  explanations  is  of  course  a  most  interesting  question. 

It  is  quite  permitted  us  to  say  that,  the  truth  supposed  to  be  concealed  (rather  too  carefully!) 
under  these  symbols  is  that,  the  Supreme  Being  has  condescended  to  come  to  earth  to  taste  the  bitter 
cup  of  suffering,  retaining  ever  the  glorious  signs  of  that  agony,  while  to  men  He  presents  the  draught 
of  immortal  blessedness.  However  this  may  be,  the  epithets  of '  Black -throated '  and  '  Ambrosia '  as 
applied  to  Civan  need  not  be,  must  not  be,  simply  grotesque,  but  associated  with  the  pathos  of 
suffering  and  the  tenderness  of  unselfish  love. 

The  idea  of  this  is  expressed  in  the  first  poem  of  the  Purra-Nannurru,  which  is  by  Perundevanar, 
the  translator  of  the  Bharatam  : — 

'  He  wears  th'  adornment  of  a  throat  with  poison  black ;  that  stain 
The  chaunters  of  the  mystic  scrolls  are  wont  to  praise.' 

Of  course  there  are  many  things  which  are  said  and  sung  by  the  devout  of  all  systems  in  all  lands 
that  require  to  be  explained,  and  it  will  generally  be  found  that  a  mystic  meaning  is  at  the  root  o 
the  uncouth  phrase.  This  has  been  more  or  less  lost  sight  of:  the  symbol  is  apt  to  supersede  the 
real  thought. 

M    -2 


su  IT  *  a  til. 


ao. 


3=0 


LX. 


X. 

Obj.  He  is  the  endless  One ;  and  me,  a  dog,  who  came  to  Him, 

He  plunged  in  tide  of  rapturous  bliss  unending;  behold,  MY  DEAR  ! 

Ans.  The  sacred  Feet  that  plunged  me  in  rapture's  flowing  tide 

Are  treasure  rich  to  gods  in  upper  heaven  that  dwell ;  behold,  £ARALO  !        40 

XI. 

Obj.  Lady !  what's  this  ascetic  rite  ?    Sinews  and  bone  He  wears, 

A  bony  circlet  on  His  arm  He  loves  to  bear;  behold,  MY  DEAR  ! 

Ans.  The  way  of  the  bony  circlet  hear  !    In  the  end  of  the  age, 

When  the  two  had  reached  their  fated  hour,  He  put  it  on ;  behold,  CARALO  !     44 

XII. 

Obj.  His  garb  is  the  skin  of  the  forest  tiger;  He  eats  from  a  skull ; 

The  wild  is  His  city;  to  Him  here  who  will  service  pay?  MY  DEAR  ! 

Ans.  Yet,  hear  thou !  Ayan  and  sacred  Mai,  and  the  King 

Of  them  of  the  heavenly  land,  are  His  humble  and  faithful  ones ;  CARALO  !    48 


38.  This  seems  odd  in  the  mouth  of  a  Buddhist  objector ;  but  we  may  understand,  a  '  (^aivite 
says,1  &c.  43,  44.  At  the  end  of  each  aeon.     See  Ka9i  Khandam.  45.   See  IX.     This 

is  a  euphemism  for  '  burning-ground.'     See  *r®  in  LEX.     Comp.  line  9  and  VI.  151. 


yr  QLJ  ®Brt£.(7K6s>aj 

STS5T, 


XIII. 
His  marriage. 

/.  The  mountain  monarch's  golden  Daughter  bright  of  brow,  the  Lady  blest, 
He  wedded  with  the  fire  as  all  the  world  doth  know;  what's  that?  say,  MY  DEAR! 
-<4«5.  Had  He  not  wedded  Her  for  all  the  world  to  know,  the  world  entire 
Had  in  confusion  lost  the  import  true  of  every  lore;  behold,  £ARALO  !  51 

XIV. 
The  dance. 

Obj.  The  Lord  of  Tillai's  court,  by  cool  palms  girt,  whence  honey  drips, 
There  entering  does  a  mystic  dance  perform  ;  what's  that,  MY  DEAR  ? 
Ans.  Had  He  not  enter'd  there,  all  the  wide  earth  had  quick  become 
Abode  of  demons  armed  with  flesh-transfixing  spears  ;  £ARALO  !  56 

xv. 

The  bull. 

Obj.  On  stately  elephant,  swift  stead,  or  car  it  pleased  Him  not  to  ride  ; 
A  bull  He  pleased  to  mount !    Explain  me  this  that  I  may  know,  MY  DEAR  ! 
Ans.  The  day  He  burnt  with  fire  the  triple  mighty  walls, 
Mai  divine  a  bull  became  to  bear  Him  up  ;  behold,  £ARALO  !  60 


50.  See  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  385,  note.  54.  See  Koyil  Puranam.  NOTE  VI.  60.  When  Rudra 
destroyed  the  three  cities  of  the  Asuras,  Vishnu,  in  the  form  of  a  bull,  supported  the  chariot.  See 
Mahabharata,  Karnaparvam,  and  notes  to  XIV. 


166  $  5  sij 

"J>tjTT 


<oT8STJ)J  JB 

<<Sy3)  <5$T  L£>  SffVDcS 
<5T/         u([fLDJG$r  f-Tf  trSTSST  Q(f)f£JJ%  6ST, 


<FGV(Lp<5S)L-UJ 

JB<SV(Lp<S5)l—lLJ  JSJJGtSSTfb&SST  pQTjSlfltLl  ^QfDGST,  GJUS.? 

JBGV(Lp<55)l—lU 


XVI. 
9ivan  a  guru  and  an  avenger  too. 

Obj.  Well  to  the  four,  the  fourfold  mystic  scrolls'  deep  sense, 

That  day,  beneath  the  banyan  tree,  and  virtue  He  reveal'd ;  behold,  MY  DEAR  ! 

Ans.  That  day,  beneath  the  banyan  tree,  though  virtue  He  revealed, 

He  utterly  destroyed  the  cities  three ;  behold,  QARALO  !  64 

XVII. 
A  mendicant. 

Obj.  In  the  sacred  hall  He  dances,  and  wanders  abroad  to  beg  for  alms ; 
This  homeless  mendicant  shall  we  approach  as  god  ?    How  so,  MY  DEAR  ? 
Ans.  Hear  thou  the  nature  of  this  sacred  mendicant !  Him  Vedas  four  know  not; 
But  they've  invok'd  Him  Lord  and  Ifan,  praising  loud;  behold,  £ARALO  !    68 

XVIII. 
The  disc. 

Obj.  When  He  smote  down  Jalandharan,  the  monster  of  the  sea,  that  disc 
To  Naranan,  the  good,  in  grace  He  gave ;  how's  that,  MY  DEAR  ? 
Ans.  Since  Naranan,  the  good,  dug  out  an  eye,  and  laid  at  Aran's  foot, 
As  flower,  to  him  in  grace  the  disc  He  gave  ;  behold,  (^ARALO  !  72 


62.  So  verse  20.  64.  Not  only  a  guru,  but  a  warrior  also.  He  taught  virtue,  and  He 
punished  sin.  65.  This  mendicancy  has  always  been  an  objection.  How  can  the  squalid  life  of 
a  wandering  mendicant  comport  with  the  unapproachable  majesty  of  the  Ever-blessed  Supreme  ? 
7i,  72.  See  XV.  37-40. 


•Ib. 


65ST 


(35/T63BT, 

S.O. 


XIX. 

His  garment  is  the  spotted  hide ;  His  food  the  fiery  poison  dark. 
Is  this  our  Peruman's  great  skill  ?    Expound  that  I  may  know,  MY  DEAR  ! 
Ans.  Our  Peruman, — whatever  He  wore  there, — whate'er  He  ate, — 
The  greatness  of  His  Nature  none  can  know;  behold,  £ARALO  !  76 

xx. 

Virtue  and  true  philosophy  must  be  divinely  taught. 

Obj.  To  saints  of  goodness  rare,  beneath  the  Al,  virtue  and  all  the  Four  He  taugh  t ; 

Explain  to  me  the  grace  He  showed,  seated  with  them,  MY  DEAR  ! 

Ans.  Had  He  not  taught  that  day  in  grace,  the  worthy  saints  virtue  and  all 

the  Four, 
To  noble  souls  this  world's  nature  had  ne'er  been  known !  Behold,  £ARALd  !   80 


73.  This  is  a  mere  repetition,  and  perhaps  spurious.     See  note  on  verse  8.  75.  See  verse  I. 

80.  Compare  Pope's  Ktirraf,  Introduction,  p.  vii.  This  verse  is  a  later  addition,  and  seems  to  refer 
to  a  different  period.  See  NOTE  IV. '  The  guru.'  See  also  lines  61-64.  It  is  partly  a  repetition  of 
verse  16.  Comp.  Tiruvijai.  16.  This  is  the  C.  aiva  version  of  Buddha  under  the  Bodhi. 


i68 


THE    SACRED    LILY-FLOWERS 

OR 

TAKING    THE   VICTORY    FROM    MAYA. 

HYMN  XIII. 

I. 
Renunciation  of  other  help. 

His  sacred  Feet, — the  twain, — soon  as  upon  my  head  He  placed, 

Help  of  encircling  friends, — the  whole, — I  utterly  renounced  ; 

In  Tillai's  court  begirt  with  guarded  streams,  in  mystic  dance 

He  moves.   That  Raftsman's  glory  SING,  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  ! 

ii. 

Further  experiences  in  Madyarjnnam. 

From  father,  mother,  kindred,  and  all  else  that  were  to  me 

As  bonds,  He  set  me  free  ;  made  me  His  own, — the  Pandi-Lord  ! 

In  Idai-maruthu,  His  dwelling,  rapture's  honey  flowed. 

That  sweet  recess  with  song  PRAISE  WE,  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  ! 


4.  The  Raftsman.     See  Kurral,  8,  10;  and  notes,  p.  187.  8.  Recess,  lit.  'hollow  of  a  tree,' 

where  honey  is  often  found. 


y, 

ffc. 


UG35TULL-. 


(o^ (557^(5)  QdS/TSSTSS)^ 


III. 

Converting  grace. 

Us  too,  than  dogs  more  vile,  of  worth  and  note  He  made  to  be; 

With  greater  than  a  mother's  tenderness,  our  Peruman 

Cut  off  'illusive  birth/  made  us  His  own  ;  our  'deeds '  so  strong 

Laid  prostrate  humbled  in  the  dust ;  PLUCK  WE  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !  13 

IV. 
The  Rebel-rout. 

They  praised  not  the  king  of  Tillai's  town,  'mid  well-tilled  fields, 

Dakshan  renown'd,  and  Arukkan,  and  E9?an,  Moon,  and  Fire ! 

By  Vira-bhadra  with  his  demon  host  that  fill'd  the  sky, 

Sing  how  that  day  they  suffer'd  wounds;  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !      16 

v. 

Ferun-turrai  and  Tillai. 

£ivan,  the  Lord,  who  on  His  'lock'  the  honied  cassia  wears, 

Took  fleshly  form,  sought  me,  and  entering  came  ;  before  the  world 

That  I  may  dance,  and  utter  triumph  songs,  in  dance 

He  moves !  For  H  im,  King  of  heaven's  sons,  PLUCK  V/E  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !     ao 


ii.'  Strong  deeds,'  for  their  hold  is  not  to  be  easily  loosed.  See  Pope's  Nalatfiyar,  pp.  66-69. 
12.  Lit.  'put  dust  (i.e.  sacred  ashes)  in  their  mouths.'  13.  Or,  'by  minstrels  sung.'  See  fan,  u*r. 
15.  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  378,  &c.  Comp.  V.  13-16 ;  XII.  17-20  ;  XIV.  13-54. 


1  70  $  raj  sij  IT  a1  a  li  . 


prDj5{565T 

LL> 


CT. 


p  euirurrt^u  y^eusveQ  QxjujiujQLLjl 


VI. 

The  Triads. 

THREE  fires  He  gave  in  gracious  pity  to  the  gods ; 

THREE  heads  to  sever  fire  He  sent  from  sacred  brow,  in  grace ; 

THREE  forms  He  wears,  the  Only;One,  Incomprehensible  ; 

THREE  rebel  towns  He  burnt;  so  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS!  24 

VII. 
His  gracious  work. 

He  made  my  head  to  bow;  my  mouth  to  laud  His  cinctured  Foot 

He  taught ;  gave  me  to  join  th'  assemblage  of  His  glorious  saints ; 

And  with  the  Queen,  in  Tillai's  court  adorned,  dances  our  Peruman. 

Sing  we  aloud  His  excellence,  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !  28 

VIII. 

He  taught  the  pathway  to  the  golden  Feet  of  His  great  saints, 

Praise  ye  the  Master's  grace  that  made  me  His  and  gave  the  sign  ! 

'  Old  deeds '  that  made  us  wholly  bond-slaves,  sorely  troubled  us, 

Sing  how  He  brought  to  naught ;  AND  so  PLUCK  WE  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !        32 


21.  Comp.  Manu  III.  85.  2?.  .See  XII.  13-20. 


&>. 
_L  L//rSl5)jLJ  LJ<o53f)Q<FlLJUJLJ  LJ[T<£  L£>6V1T 


U  lSl 


l-.lD^ftDLJ 


IX. 

That  I  might  praise  Him  many  a  day,  and  service  due  perform, 

The  Mighty-One  His  fragrant  foot-flower  on  my  frame  impress'd  ; 

A  beauteous  Light  He  shone,  softened  my  heart,  and  made  me  His ! 

Sing  how  those  jewell'd  Feet  are  gold,  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !          36 

x. 

That  this  my  frame,  mere  mass  of  fierce  desires,  might  pass  away, 

Great  Perun-turrai's  Lord  placed  on  my  head  His  glorious  Foot.   . 

KABALI, — Who,  well  pleased,  black  poison  ate  from  out  the  sea, — 

Sing  we,  amidst  His  warring  foes,  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !  40 

XI. 

The  BEING  INFINITE,  with  every  varied  sweetness  filled  ; 

The  LORD,  Who  took  my  soul  in  joyous  pomp ;  His  sounding  Feet 

All  dwellers  in  the  world  shall  praise !    That  is  the  way  of  good  ! 

That  way  sing  we  His  glory  now,  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !  44 

35.  Lyric  IX.  33. 


SVffQ 


ifjl<5$r(fyri 


XII. 


Heaven's  Lord,  and  Mai,  and  Ayan,  and  the  other  gods  He  rules 
As  King,  with  attributes  and  signs  that  none  may  e'er  attain ; 
The  fiery  poison  from  the  vasty  sea,  He  made  His  food 
Ambrosial ;  and  thus  sing  we,  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  ! 


XIII. 


That  day,  beneath  the  banyan's  shade,  in  grace  the  Vedas  rare 

He  gave ;  the  heavenly  ones  and  mighty  saints,  each  day,  stood  round, 

And  praised  Him  of  the  perfect  Foot  with  cassia-flower  adorn'd ; 

Its  golden  petal's  dust  sing  we,  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !  52 


XIV. 


Fair  pictured  in  my  soul  His  Feet's  twin  flowers  in  grace  He  gave ; 

The  Lord,  Who  in  Ekambam  dwells,  made  here  His  chosen  seat ; 

In  Tillai's  sacred  court,  girt  by  wide  walls,  is  now  His  home ; 

Sing  how  in  mystic  dance  He  moves,  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !  56 


45.  i.e.  Indra,  Vishnu,  and  Brahma.  49.  See  XIII.  6r,  77. 


y, 


170 


a®. 


L  Ulfl&tfllUU 


&6T. 


XV. 

Daksliaii's  sacrifice. 

Fire  and  the  Sun,  and  Ravanan,  and  Andhagan,  and  Death, 

With  red-ey'd  Hari,  Ayan,  Indra,  and  the  Moon-god  too, 

And  shameless  Dakshan  and  the  E9fan  :  these  their  honour  lost ! 

Singing  His  swelling  glory  now,  PLUCK  WE  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !  60 

XVI. 

The  strong  bull's  Rider ;  Champion  brave  of  those  of  £iva-town ; 

In  Madura,  earth-carrier;  in  grace  He  ate  the  cakes; 

Was  smitten  by  the  Pandiyan's  staff,  who  claimed  His  service  there. 

Sing  the  song  of  the  wound  He  bore,  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !  64 

XVII. 

The  ancient  Mai,  Ayan,  the  heavenly  ones,  the  Danavar, 

Knew  not  His  sacred  golden  Foot,  but  joined  in  praise ! 

Entering  within  my  breast,  He  made  me  His  !    His  ornament 

The  gleaming  serpent  SING  WE  thus,  AND  PLUCK  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !  68 


57.  Comp.  XII.  13-20.          61.  See  Life  of  Manikka-Va9agar,  p.  xxviii  above. 
Danu,  enemies  of  the  gods.     Muir,  vol.  v.  p.  95. 


65.  Sow  of 


J5  6U  IT  8-  (5  U3. 


Mb. 


y^eusveSI  Q&irujiun(oL£>iT\ 


XVIII. 

That  with  desire  insatiate  my  soul  might  ever  joy 

At  sound  of  tinkling  anklets  on  His  glorious  sacred  Foot, 

In  dance  He  moves, — the  Lord  of  Perun-turrai's  car-thronged  streets. 

This  mighty  rapture  chaunting  loud,  PLUCK  WE  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !  7^ 

XIX. 

The  Perun-turrai-Lord,  Who  wears  the  hide  of  elephant ; 

Who  took  a  madman's  form ; — Who  in  this  world  became  a  child  ; 

Source  of  all  heavenly  bliss;  great  Uttara-k69a-mahgai's  Prince  ; 

As  in  our  minds  He  entering  came,  PLUCK  WE  THE  LILY-FLOWERS  !  7r> 


74.  In  Tiruvijai.  23  the  story  may  be  found. 


ft  QTj 


p        ILJ  (T  IT  . 

[  «5  rr  ear  GGU  ponf?.] 

THE   UNTHIYAR;   OR,  SACRED  VICTORY. 

• 

HYMN   XIV. 

DIVAN'S    TRIUMPHS. 

Tamil  scholars  give  different  interpretations  of  the  word  Unthiyar.  It  seems  to  mean  '  the  players 
at  a  game  resembling  battledore  and  shuttlecock.'  The  word  Unthi  is,  I  imagine,  used  for  the 
shuttlecock  or  ball  which  the  players  cause  to  '  fly  aloft.' 

In  this  lyric  FIVE  GREAT  TRIUMPHS  OF  C.  IVAN  are  celebrated. 

I.  The  first  of  these  (1-4)  is  the  destruction  of  the  three  towns,  in  Tamil  and  Sanskrit  Tripura, 
which  is  curiously  enough  made  to  be  the  name  of  a  giant  overthrown  by  Qivan.     I  give  an  abstract 
of  this  story  from  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  203  :  — 

'  There  were  in  the  sky  three  cities  of  the  Asuras,  one  of  iron,  another  of  silver,  and  a  third  of 
gold,  which  Indra  could  not  demolish,  with  all  his  weapons.  Then  all  the  great  gods,  distressed, 
went  to  Rudra  as  their  refuge,  and  said  to  him,  after  they  were  assembled  :  "  Rudra,  there  shall  be 
victims  devoted  to  thee  in  all  the  sacrifices.  Bestower  of  honour,  destroy  the  Daityas  with  their 
cities,  and  deliver  the  worlds."  He,  being  thus  addressed,  said,  "So  be  it;"  and  making  Vishnu 
his  arrow,  Agni  its  barb,  Yama,  the  son  of  Vivasvat,  its  feather,  all  the  Vedas  his  bow,  and  the 
excellent  Savitri  (the  Gayatri)  his  bowstring,  and  having  appointed  Brahma  his  charioteer,  he  in  due 
time  pierced  through  these  cities  with  a  three-jointed  three-barbed  arrow,  of  the  colour  of  the  sun, 
and  in  fierceness  like  the  fire  which  burns  up  the  world.  These  Asuras  with  their  cities  were  there 
burnt  up  by  Rudra  !' 

II.  The  second  of  these  triumphs  (5-16)  is  the  destruction  of  Dakshan's  sacrifice.   The  story  of  this 
is  told  with  many  variations,  and  is  evidently,  as  Professor  Wilson  pointed  out  long  ago,  a  reminiscence 
of  some  great  struggle  between  the  followers  of  Vishnu  and  Civan  ;  but  it  is  neither  possible  to  give 
any  full  interpretation  of  it,  nor  to  reconcile  the  discrepancies  in  the  various  accounts  of  it.     The 
account  given  below  is  that  of  the  K^i  Khandam,  which  every  student  of  Tamil  should  read. 

In  the  Ka9i  Khandam,  the  account  of  Dakshan  —  his  sacrifice,  punishment,  forgiveness,  and 
penance  in  Benares  —  occupies  chapters  Ixxxvii-xc  inclusive,  and  fills  148  stanzas.  It  sums  up,  with 
some  inconsistencies,  the  whole  story  as  given  in  the  Sanskrit  books.  Dakshan  (  =  the  Intelligent)  is 
represented  sometimes  as  the  father,  and  sometimes  as  the  son  of  Aditi;  and  at  other  times  the  two 
are  curiously  said  to  have  been  reciprocally  producers  and  produced.  He  is  identified  with  Prajapati, 
the  Creator.  This  almost  seems  like  a  statement  that  the  whole  universe  is  developed  from 
intelligence,  and  might  appear  like  a  very  symbolical  setting  forth  of  Hegel's  system.  Dakshan  had 
many  daughters  married  to  the  great  saints,  and  especially  Ka9yapa  (K^iban)  is  said  to  have  been 
the  husband  of  twelve  of  them.  One  of  his  daughters  was  Durga,  or  Uma,  who  was  subsequently 
born  from  the  mountain  after  her  voluntary  death,  and  so  received  the  name  of  Parvathi.  So  Civan, 
the  Supreme,  was  a  son-in-law  of  Dakshan,  the  Intelligence  from  which  the  Universe  was  developed. 
It  is  rather  entangled. 

On  one  occasion  all  the  gods  and  saints  made  a  visit  to  the  silver  mountain  Kaila^a.  They 
were  there  received  with  great  condescension,  and  even  kindness,  by  the  mighty  one  upon  whose 


1 76  $  15  GU  IT  *  a  & . 

head  is.  the  Kondrai  wreath,  whose  throat  is  black  with  the  poison  he  swallowed  to  save  the  world, 
and  from  the  centre  of  whose  forehead  a  third  eye  shines  resplendent.  But  the  deity  did  not 
recognize  his  father-in-law,  nor  rise  to  receive  him.  This  fills  Dakshan  with  disgust,  and  he  proceeds 
to  indulge  in  the  most  extravagant  abuse  of  Qivan.  It  will  be  seen  that  everything  with  which  he 
reproaches  Qivan  is  used  by  Manikka-Va^agar  as  praise.  Of  course  a  mystical  meaning  is  given  to 
each  circumstance  !  The  following  is  a  summary  of  his  language  (Ixxxvii.  9,  &c.) : — 

'  He  has  no  mother,  no  father,  and  no  relatives  ! 
He  is  a  maniac  who  dances  with  demons  on  the  burning-ground. 
He  has  an  eye  in  his  brow  from  which  devouring  fire  blazes  forth. 
He  wears  the  skin  of  a  fierce  tiger,  foul  and  fetid. 
Race,  family,  caste,  quality  hath  he  none. 

He  wears  as  an  ornament  the  skin  of  a  serpent  that  causes  deadly  ill. 
He  has  discarded  the  anointing  of  himself  with  flowery  essences, 
And  besmears  himself  with  foul  ashes  of  corpses  in  the  burning-ground. 
His  food  is  poison  from  the  billowy  sea ; 
As  conveyance  he  has  an  ancient  bullock  ; 
He  wears  the  skin  of  a  black  elephant ; 
His  ruddy  hand  grasps  a  skull  bereft  of  flesh. 

If  you  say  he  is  a  Brahman  l,  he  has  changed  all  rules  of  ordered  life; 
If  yon  say  he  is  a  king,  he  bestows  no  grace ;  but  all  destroys ; 
If  you  say  he  is  a  merchant  full  of  wealth,  he  goes  about  begging  ; 
He  has  no  skill  in  any  mystic  lore. 

Nor  is  he  a  Brahmajari 2,  for  a  large-eyed  damsel  is  part  of  his  body  ; 
He  bears  an  implement  of  war,  and  so  is  not  a  worthy  ascetic ; 
He  wanders  amid  the  hot  desert  sands,  and  so  is  no  seemly  householder ; 
He  cut  off  the  head  of  the  flower  god, 
So  knows  not  the  laws  of  excellent  justice ; 
The  lady  with  gleaming  brows  is  half  of  his  frame, 
So  he  is  not  male,  or  female,  or  sexless  one. 
In  the  day  when  he  destroys  all  worlds, 
Having  worn  as  a  garland  the  skull  of  flowery  Ayan, 
And  whirling  the  three-headed  gleaming  lance 
Everywhere  he  kills.     Is  it  possible  to  call  him  a  saint? ' 

After  thus  relieving  his  mind  by  abuse  to  punish  Qivan's  discourtesy,  he  resolves  to  perform 
a  mighty  sacrifice  (tnagani),  and  so  gain  additional  powers.  £ivan  must  be  dethroned  or  slain.  All 
the  gods  are  invited,  and  there  is  a  very  magnificent  assembly  on  Dakshan's  mountain.  Then  comes 
forth  a  sage  Dadl9i,  who  protests  that  no  sacrifice  can  be  of  efficacy  to  which  Qivan  has  not  been 
invited ;  such  a  place  of  worship  must  become  '  a  burning-ground,  where  goblins,  demons,  and  dogs 
prowl  around."  His  protest  is  answered  by  additional  abuse,  and  so  the  devotees  depart,  leaving  the 
gods  and  goddesses  to  join  with  Dakshan  in  the  unhallowed  offering.  And  now  the  great  mischief- 
maker  in  all  Such  legends,  whose  name  was  Naradar,  the  sweet  lutist  of  the  holy  mount,  hurries  to 
Kaila9a  to  tell  the  goddess  Umai  of  her  father-in-law's  projected  offering.  She  longs  to  be  present, 
and  implores  her  spouse  to  permit  it,  but  he  rejects  her  request.  Somehow  or  other  she  does 
however  go,  and  with  every  token  of  filial  piety  meets  her  father  and  mother ;  and  after  the  first 
greetings  enquires  why  the  great  god,  the  lord  of  all,  is  not  invited  : 

'  It  seems  as  though  you  had  forgotten  the  greatest  of  guests.' 

To  this,  abuse  of  £ivan  is  the  only  answer. 

She  at  once  dies,  puts  off  the  body  which  owns  Dakshan  as  father,  and  is  reborn  as  the  daughter 
of  Himavat,  whence  Qivan  afterwards  takes  her  as  Parvathi,  '  the  mountain  maid.' 

For  the  sacrifice  and  its  results,  see  Ka9i  Khandam,  chap.  Ixxxix. 

III.  The  third  triumph  is  his  bestowal  of  the  milky  sea  on  the  son  of  Vasishtha  (stanza  xvii).  For 
this  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  to  the  Koyil  Puranam  I.  25.  It  is  a  rather  confused  and  somewhat 
meaningless  story  as  it  has  come  down  to  us. 


He  can  be  neither  Brahman,  Kshatriya,  nor  Vai$ya.  2  Nor  a  student.     See  Manu. 


IV.  The  fourth  triumph  is  given  at  great  length  in  the  Ka^  Khandam,  and  U  connected  with  the 
god's  manifestation  as  Vlra-bhadra.    For  this  it  is  only  necessary  to  refer  to  chapter  xc  of  the  above 
work. 

In  regard  to  the  Kafi  Khandam,  indeed,  which  is  mainly  a  translation  from  the  Sanskrit  SkaiuU 
Pnrana,  it  must  be  noted  that  there  is  in  it  much  didactic  poetry  of  a  more  elevated  character,  which 
has  furnished  the  motive  for  many  verses  by  the  lesser  bards.  But,  on  the  whole,  it  may  b« 
characterized  as  a  collection  of  legends  which  are  utterly  unprofitable,  and  have  been  worked  into 
the  devotional  poetry  of  the  Qaivites  to  its  very  great  detriment.  The  legends  of  Dakshan's  sacrifice, 
of  the  appearance  and  ferocity  of  Vira-bhadra  as  a  kind  of  incarnation  of  C.  ivan,  and  of  the  unseemly 
disputes  between  Vishnu  and  Brahma  as  to  the  pre-eminence,  occupy  large  portions  of  the  book  and 
are  utterly  useless  in  these  days.  We  may  give  a  summary  of  chapter  xxxi,  entitled  'The  Appearance 
of  Bhairava,' 

C.ivan,  the  Supreme,  envelopes  the  world  in  elusive  mystery,  so  that  none  know  him  while  He  it 
all  in  all.  Hence,  even  among  the  gods,  disputes  arose  as  to  who  was  the  greatest.  'I  am  the 
supreme  Essence,'  cried  Vishnu.  '  I  am  the  Self-existent,'  declared  Brahma  from  his  lotus-seat.  The 
sacred  Veda,  the  unwritten  record  of  mysterious  truth,  was  called  upon  to  decide.  The  divine  essence* 
whose  incarnation,  or  manifestation  rather,  is  the  fourfold  Veda  spoke  out :  The  first  Vedic  genius 
declared  that  since  Cjvan  alone  performed  the  three  operations  of  creation,  preservation,  and 
destruction,  he  was  the  Supreme  and  unoriginated  God.  The  second  declared  that  since  C.ivan 
had  performed  arduous  sacrifices  and  penances,  so  as  to  merit  praise  from  the  whole  universe,  he  was 
the  supreme.  The  third  announced  the  same  conclusion,  but  based  it  upon  the  fact  that  Cjvan  fills 
all  things  with  light,  and  is  adored  by  all  the  mystic  sages  as  the  giver  of  wisdom.  The  fourth 
Vedic  mystery  declared  that  since  Civan  revealed  himself  in  various  forms  exciting  emotions  of  joy 
and  ecstatic  devotion  in  the  hearts  of  his  worshippers,  who  beheld  him  crowned  with  cassia-wreaths, 
he  was  the  greatest  of  the  gods.  [It  is  easy  to  see  the  arguments  by  which  the  supremacy  of  Qivan 
is  here  upheld,  and  there  are  gleams  of  truth  which  Christianity  emphasises  and  illustrates,  but  the 
legends  connected  with  the  statements  are  very  wonderful,  and  certainly  obscure  and  confuse,  rather 
than  illustrate,  the  truth  concerning  the  supreme  and  absolute.]  Vishnu  and  Brahma  listen  only  to 
deride.  '  C,  ivan,'  they  cry,  '  rides  on  a  bull ;  he  has  a  matted  coil  of  hair ;  he  dances  in  the  burning- 
ground  ;  he  smears  ashes ;  his  throat  is  black  with  the  swallowed  poison ;  he  wears  as  a  girdle 
a  hissing  snake ;  he  is  the  leader  of  a  wild  demon-host,  and  Umai  is  a  part  of  his  form.  This  being 
so,  how  can  he  be  the  life  of  the  soul  of  all  ? '  [These  aie  the  arguments  that  were  urged  by  Jains 
and  Buddhists,  and  the  wonder  is  that  they  did  not  everywhere  and  finally  prevail.] 

Roused  by  these  insults,  C.ivan  suddenly  appears.  His  aspect  is  described  in  the  usual  terms, 
and  he  sends  forth  a  manifestation  or  incarnation  of  himself,  or  of  his  destroying  energy,  to  which 
the  name  of  Vairavan  (Vlra-bhadra)  is  given.  This  anomalous  being  is  of  terrific  appearance,  and 
endowed  with  all  the  Destroyer's  terrible  energy.  He  is  followed  by  a  host  of  malignant  demons. 
C.ivan  calls  him  his  son,  and  bids  him  destroy  all  his  enemies.  Vairavan  accordingly  seizes  the  fifth 
head  of  Brahma  between  his  thumb  and  forefinger,  twists  it  off  and  throws  it  on  the  ground, 
performing  a  terrific  dance  which  throws  the  whole  universe  and  every  order  of  sentient  existence 
into  a  paroxysm  of  terror.  This  subdues  the  opposing  deities,  and  Vishnu  worships  at  C.  Ivan's  feet, 
praising  him  in  the  most  extravagant  terms.  The  whole  ends  in  a  wild  orgy,  in  which  £ivan  and 
Brahma  join.  This  is  so  often  referred  to  in  C;aivite  poetry,  and  seems  so  incapable  of  any  edifying 
interpretation,  that  we  have  thought  it  necessary  to  give  the  authentic  summary  from  the  K&(fi 
Khaadam  once  for  all. 

V.  The  last  is  the  victory  over  the  Ceylon  king,  Ravana.     This  legend  is  perpetually  referred 
to  in  the  south,  and  seems  to  have  a  popularity  among  the  poets  somewhat  in  excess  of  its  apparent 
importance. 

After  his  victory  over  Kuvera,  Ravana  went  to  Saravana,  the  birthplace  of  Karttikeya.  Ascending 
the  mountain,  he  sees  another  delightful  wood,  where  his  car  Pushpaka  stops,  and  will  proceed  no 
further.  He  then  beholds  a  formidable  dark  tawny-coloured  dwarf,  called  Nandl9vara,  a  follower  of 
Mahadeva,  who  desires  him  to  halt,  as  that  deity  is  sporting  on  the  mountain,  and  has  made 
it  inaccessible  to  all  creatures,  the  gods  included.  Ravana  angrily  demands  who  C.ankara  (Mabadeva) 
is,  and  laughs  contemptuously  at  Nand^vara,  who  has  the  face  of  a  monkey.  Nand^vara,  who  was 
another  body  of  Civan,  being  incensed  at  this  contempt  of  his  monkey  form,  declares  that  I 
possessing  the  same  shape  as  himself,  and  of  similar  energy,- monkeys,— shall  be  produced  to  destroy 


IT'S  ^?  IT)  6U  IT  <ff  S  li. 

Havana's  race  (Tasmad  mad-vlrya-sanyuktah  madntpa-sama-tejasah  utpatsyanti  badhartha»i  hi 
kulasya  tava  vanarah}.  Nand^vara  adds  that  he  could  easily  kill  Ravana  now,  but  that  he  has  been 
already  slain  by  his  own  deeds.  Ravana  threatens  that  as  his  car  has  been  stopped,  he  will  pluck  up 
the  mountain  by  the  roots,  asking  in  virtue  of  what  power  Qivan  continually  sports  on  that  spot,  and 
boasting  that  he  must  now  be  made  to  know  his  danger.  Ravana  then  throws  his  arms  under  the 
mountain,  which,  being  lifted  by  him,  shakes,  and  makes  the  hosts  of  Rudra  tremble,  and 
even  Parvathi  herself  quake,  and  cling  to  her  husband  \^Chachala  Pdrvathi,  chapi  tada  flis/ita 
Mahefvaram).  £ivan,  however,  presses  down  the  mountain  with  his  great  toe,  and  along  with  it 
crushes  the  arms  of  Ravana,  who  utters  a  loud  cry,  which  shakes  all  creation.  Ravana's  counsellors 
then  exhort  him  to  propitiate  Mahadeva,  the  blue-throated  lord  of  Uma,  who,  on  being  lauded,  will 
become  gracious.  Ravana  accordingly  praises  Mahadeva  with  hymns,  and  weeps  for  a  thousand 
years.  Mahadeva  is  then  propitiated,  lets  go  Ravana's  arms,  says  his  name  shall  be  Ravana  from 
the  cry  (rava)  he  had  uttered,  and  sends  him  away,  with  the  gift  of  a  sword  bestowed  on  him  at  his 
request. 

[Metre  : 


a. 


d&<533ri£-<SVi£>  GT&LLUIT 


§  I.     The  three  cities.     ;    i -• 

Bent  was  the  bow;— upsprang  the  tumult ; 

Perished  three  cities !— Fly  aloft,  UnthI ! 

As  they  burnt  straightway  together,— Fly,  &c. 

Two  arrows  we  saw  not— in  Egambar's  hand  : 

One  arrow;  three  cities!— Fly  aloft,  UnthI ! 

And  one  was  too  many !—  Fly,  &c.  6 

There  was  shaking  of  framework  ;— and  as  He  moved  His  foot, 
The  axle  was  broken— say,  Fly  aloft,  Unthi ! 
Perished  three  cities !—  Fly,  &c. 


2.  Muir,  vol.  iv.  pp.  203  &c.,  225. 


.          . 
/T/f  -  <§>(!$  {Lp<SU<oS>!J&  <£  TSU  6V  Q<5  /T620T 

Qi—iuiu  fiijsv 


\ 
§  a_.     ^ssesr  jfiiLL.  u&S. 


•f  frsu  nr£jl(rrjv><5  irssr  QTGST  jryfi 

ST  ntBUjU     \ 


Those  who  won  their  escape — a  triad  of  persons — He  guarded. 

To  Him  whose  arrows  fail  not, — Fly  aloft,  Unthi ! 

Saying,  He's  the  Tender- One's  Spouse  ! — Fly,  &c.  u 

§  n.   Dakshan's  sacrifice.     13-48. 

The  frustrate  offering  thrown  to  the  ground — the  gods- 
Sing  how  they  fled  !— Fly  aloft,  Unthi ! 
To  Rudra  the  Lord,— Fly,  &c.  '5 

Aha  !  Mai  divine  got  a  portion  that  day  of  the  offering ; 

And  He  died  not !— Fly  aloft,  Unthi ! 

The  Four-faced's  father !— Fly,  &c.  '« 

The  fierce  one — Agni — to  consume  it  collected 

His  hands  of  flame.     He  cut  them  away !— Fly  aloft,  Unthi ! 

Spoiled  was  the  sacrifice ! — Fly,  &c. 

Dakshan,  who  raised  the  anger  of  Parvathi, 

He  saw  and  spared,  what  good  ?  my  dear !— Fly  aloft,  Unthi! 

To  the  Spouse  of  the  Beautiful,— Fly,  &c.  a4 

10.  See  Mnir,  vol.  iv.  p.  223. 

N   "2 


180  4?  5  su  IT  ff  a  LT  . 


esr 


Q<SU  (*hj  £}<S5r(o  SUSy 


QpiTi—triBpiSliD  u  up  <syib$up  \  V,  o 


.35  633T&J37L/ 

<oT6V!TLL  &-ButD 


(o<ftTLL>6$T(lf>&Q<S5Trf){B  ^IJS^UfD 


Purandharan  became  a  tender  '  kuyil,' 

And  flew  up  a  tree  !— Fly  away,  UnthI ! 

King  of  the  heavenly  ones  !— Fly,  &c.  27 

The  angry  sacrificer's  head — 

Sing  how  it  fell !— Fly  aloft,  UnthI ! 

That  birth's  chain  may  be  snapt ! — Fly,  &c.  30 

The  head  of  a  sheep — to  Vidhi — as  his — 
Sing  how  He  joined  ! — Fly  aloft,  UnthI ! 
While  you're  with  laughter  convulsed  ! — Fly,  &c.  33 

Sing  how  Bhagan,  who  came  to  eat,  'scaped  not, 

He  plucked  out  his  eye  ! — Fly  aloft,  UnthI ! 

That  germs  of  our  birth  may  die  ! — Fly,  &c.  36 

The  Lady  of  the  tongue  lost  a  nose ;  Brahma  a  head  ;— 

The  Moon-god's  face  He  smashed  ! — Fly  aloft,  UnthI ! 

That  ancient  troublous  deed  might  die  ! — Fly,  &c.  39 


31.   Vidhi  (Sans.  Vidht)  is  a  name  of  Brahma.     Comp.  under  Daksha,  in  Muir,  vol.  v. 


iSljb  gp  Q<su6rr<s£l  STOTT 


^  6V)  efcv  cgy  /fl  JBpQ^GST  jrpJBJBUn)  ! 


The  god  of  the  Vedas  four,  the  Lord  of  the  sacrifice, 

Fell ;  sing  how  he  sought  the  way  they  went ! — Fly  aloft,  UnthI  ! 

And  Purandharan,  too,  in  the  offering  ! — Fly,  &c.  42 

The  teeth  in  the  mouth  of  the  Sun-god 

How  He  swept  them  broken  away ! — Fly  aloft,  UnthI ! 

The  sacrifice  came  to  confusion  !— Fly,  &c.  45 

Dakshan  that  day  lost  his  head  ; 

Tho'  Dakshan's  children  stood  round  ! — Fly  aloft,  UnthI  ! 

Perished  the  sacrifice  ! — Fly,  &c.  48 

§  III.    Ubanianya. 

Who  that  day  to  the  son  gave  the  sea  of  milk ; 

To  the  glorious  Lord  of  the  braided  lock, — Fly  aloft,  UnthI  ! 

To  Kumaran's  Father, — Fly,  &c.  5' 

§  IV.   Brahma. 

The  Four-faced's  head,  who  sits  on  the  beauteous  flower, 

Was  quickly  nipt  off !— Fly  aloft,  UnthI ! 

By  His  nail  was  nipt  off! — Fly,  &c.  54 

49.  Qivan  gave  milk  from  '  the  full  sea  divine '  to  Ubamanyan,  son  of  the  Muni  Vasishjha.    Koyil 
Pur.  I.  25  ;  IV.  78. 


782  ^  15  su  IT  *  a  li . 


§  V.    Havana. 

His  heads  who  stayed  the  car,  and  raised  the  hill,— 

Sing  how  twice  five  of  them  perished  ! — Fly  aloft,  UnthI ! 

And  twenty  perished ! — Fly,  &c.  57 


57.   See  history  of  Nandi9a,  in  Muir,  vol.  iv.   p.  460,  &c. ;   and  Kamba-Ramayanam,   Uttara 
Khandam,  §  3,  verses  137-144. 


THE    SACRED    TONOKKAM. 

HYMN  XV. 

There  is  an  amusing  illustration,  drawn  by  a  native  artist,  of  this  game  as  played  in  South  India. 
Its  name  literally  means  '  aiming  at  the  shoulder,'  for  it  ends  up  with  placing  the  hands  of  each 
opposing  pair  on  the  shoulders  of  the  other.  In  some  lines  this  is  used  as  a  symbol  of  the  approach 
of  the  soul  to  (Divan's  feet. 

I. 
The  cleansing"  from  delusion. 

The  demon-car  allures :  'a  stream  flowing  from  flowery  lake/ 
Men  think,  and  rush  to  draw,  in  ignorance  and  folly  lost !  . 
Thou  hast  such  fond  delusions  far  removed,  O  Dancer  blest 
In  shining  Tillai's  court !    As  we  Thy  roseate  Foot  would  reach, 

PLAY  WE  T5NOKKAM  !  4 

II. 

The  Lord  of  Tillai's  court,  whose  glory  never  wanes  ; 
Whom  'he  who  hurled  the  calf  at  fruit/  and  Brahma  could  not  see ; 
Lest  I  in  endless  births  and  deaths  should  sink,  made  me  His  own  1 
Praising  His  excellence,  ye  maids  with  thickly  clustering  locks, 

PLAY  WE  TONOKKAM  ! 


i.  This  is  the  name  for  the  mirage  in  the  desert  seen  on  the  sand-plains  of  South  India,  which 
thus  goes  by  the  name  of  <  Teri,'  or  '  what  pertains  to  the  chariot.'    (Ter  =  chariot.)    See  III. 
6.  A  curious  epithet  of  Vishnu,  who,  as  Krishna,  threw  a  calf  to  bring  down  a  wood-apple. 


184  $  5  ED  IT  a-  a  li  . 

Ha, 


G?a/L_(<S3)T  (o<fL-  /»51.L/ 


ffi. 


5T  Q<S5T<51j  &££!  sfrCo  STT 


0-0 


III. 

Kanuappar  '. 

As  in  the  worship  paid  true  ministrations  HE  discerned  :  — 
The  glorious  slippered-foot,  the  chalice-mouth,  the  flesh  for  food  ;— 
Such  gifts  acceptance  gained  !     He  knew  the  woodman's  pure  desire ; 
And  as  the  saint  stood  there,  with  joyous  mind,  fulfilled  of  grace, 

PLAY  WE  TONOKKAM  !  U 

IV. 

So  that  my  stony  heart  was  melted,  He  all  tenderly 
Compassionate  stood  by,  and  came  within  my  soul  in  grace, 
Led  me  in  way  of  good  ;  and  then,  as  all  the  country  knows, 
He  here  drew  nigh,  spake  with  me  face  to  face ;  and  thus 

PLAY  WE  T5NOKKAM  !  16 

V. 

God  manifold,  yet  One. 

Earth,  water,  fire,  air,  ether  vast,  the  wandering  moon,  the  sun, 
And  man, — to  sense  revealed  :  EIGHT  WAYS  He  joined  Himself  to  me; 
Throughout  seven  worlds,  in  regions  ten,  He  moves  :  yet  One  alone 
Is  He  !     As  manifold  He  comes  and  'bides  with  us  ;  and  so 

PLAY  WE  TONOKKAM  !  20 


1  See  the  legend  in  note  to  X.  13. 


Or. 


CT. 

LD[T<o5$fl  !Fl<SU&(J]jLL(Glj  Ofl  6$)  <£,£<£! 
rJ£llLflJb  QsUJBllUSST  (ITj'S&iBtB'fysSTjS  tSKGIT 


VI. 
Various  sectaries. 

Buddhists,  and  others, — in  their  wisdom  fools, — the  men  of  many  sects, 
All  with  their  systems  worthless  and  outworn,  bewildered  stand ; — 
My  every  power  He  fills- with  bliss  superne,  makes  all  life's  works 
Devotion  true, — through  His  compassion,  FATHER  seen  !   And  thus 

PLAY  WE  TONOKKAM  !  24 

VII. 
Caudecuvara  Nayanar  '. 

The  Neophyte  from  evil  free,  cut  off  the  feet  of  him 
Who  rashly  overturned  the  work  in  Civan's  honour  done  : 
A  Brahman  he  in  caste,  His  father  too  !     Through  Lean's  grace, 
While  gods  adored,  his  crime  was  utterly  consumed  ;  and  thus 

PLAY  WE  TONOKKAM  !  28 


23.  As  in  stanzas  iii  and  vii,  where  ignorant  and  erring  devotion  is  accepted. 


1  See  the  legend  (in  the  Periya  Puranam,  vol.  i.  pp.  512-538),  of  which  the  following  is  an 
abstract : — 

The  Legend  of  fctndefuvara  Nayanar :  The  Young  Brahman  Cowherd. — In  a  town  in  the  Qora 
country,  called  £eynalur,  a  Brahman  boy  was  born,  whose  name  was  Vi9ara-9arumar,  who  from  his 
earliest  days  instinctively  understood  the  whole  Qaiva  creed ;  so  that  when  the  sages  came  to  instruct 
him  he  met  them  with  the  recitation  of  the  essential  doctrines  of  the  system,  which  he  had  grasped 
by  a  divine  intuition.  It  may  be  permitted  to  repeat  the  articles  of  his  creed,  as  these  are  summed 
up  in  the  legend  :  '  All  souls  are  from  everlasting  fast  bound  in  the  chains  of  impurity.  To  destroy 
that  impurity,  and  to  give  to  these  souls  infinite  felicity  and  eternal  release,  He  who  is  eternal  is 
revealed.  He  performs  the  five  Acts  of  creation,  preservation,  destruction,  "  envelopement,"  and 
gracious  deliverance.  He  is  the  one  Lord  (Pathi},  Who  possesses  the  eight  attributes  of  absolute 
independence,  purity  of  form,  spontaneous  understanding,  absolute  knowledge,  natural  freedom  from 
all  bonds,  infinite  grace,  endless  might,  and  boundless  blessedness.  His  name  is  Qivan,  the  Great  Lord. 
He  performs  his  gracious  acts  by  putting  forth  the  energy  (fa//*;,  Who,  as  a  person,  is  one  with 
Him,  and  is  therefore  the  divine  Mother  of  all,  as  He  is  the  divine  Father,  and  must  with  Him  be 


l86  $  5  6U  IT  9  S>  W. 


VIII. 

Our  pride  is  gone,  forgotten  reason's  laws  ;  ye  maidens  fair  !— 
We  think  but  of  the  cinctured  foot  of  Him,  Lord  of  the  south, 
Whom  heaven  adores  !     The  rapturous  Dancer's  grace  if  we  obtain, 
His  slaves, — even  so  in  rapture  lost,  we  then  shall  dance  ;  and  thus 

PLAY  WE  TONOKKAM  !  32 


loved  and  worshipped.  Nor  can  we  say  "  we  will  do  this  in  some  future  birth,"  for  we  arc  born  here 
as  human  beings  for  this  and  no  other  purpose ;  and  the  human  form  in  the  infinite  series  of  trans- 
migrations is  hard  to  attain  unto.  Nor  should  we  defer  till  to-morrow  our  dedication  of  ourselves, 
since  we  know  not  the  day  of  our  death.  Therefore  must  we  avail  ourselves  of  Qivan's  gift  of  grace, 
studying  the  sacred  Agamas  and  other  works,  without  doubting,  or  commingling  of  perverse 
interpretation.  This  is  the  WAY  of  life!' 

One  day,  together  with  his  school  companions,  he  went  down  to  the  bank  of  the  river  where  the 
village  cows  were  grazing  in  charge  of  a  man  of  the  herdsman  caste.  This  rustic,  having  no  sense  of 
right  and  wrong,  beat  one  of  the  cows  with  a  stick  ;  but  Vi9ara-9arumar  was  vehemently  stirred  by 
this  outrage,  and  rushing  up  to  him  in  great  wrath,  restrained  him  from  striking  the  sacred  animal  : 
'Know  you  not,'  said  he,  'that  cows  have  come  down  from  the  world  of  Civan  to  this  earth  ?  In 
their  members  the  gods,  the  sages,  and  the  sacred  purifying  stream  dwell.  The  five  products  of  these 
sacred  creatures  are  the  sacred  unguents  of  Civan.  And  the  ashes  which  are  the  adornment  of  the  God 
and  his  devotees  are  made  from  their  refuse  !'  Dwelling  upon  this  idea  he  conceived  a  desire  to  devote 
himself  entirely  to  the  task  of  herding  and  caring  for  the  troop  of  sacred  cows ;  and  accordingly  sent 
away  the  rustic,  who  reverentially  departed.  And  thus  our  hero  became  a  self-dedicated  Brahman 
herdsman.  As  such  he  easily  obtains  permission  of  all  the  Brahmans  of  the  town  to  take  charge  of 
their  kine ;  and  daily  along  the  bank  of  the  beautiful  river  Manni,  he  leads  forth  his  troop  in  the 
grassy  glades  and  green  pastures,  allowing  them  peacefully  to  graze  their  fill,  and  supplying  them 
with  refreshing  water.  When  the  fierce  heat  of  the  sun  oppresses,  he  leads  them  into  the  shady 
groves,  and  guards  them  well,  meanwhile  gathering  the  firewood  necessary  for  his  household  worship ; 
and  then  at  eventide,  leaving  each  cow  at  its  owner's  door,  he  goes  to  his  home. 

While  things  went  on  in  this  manner,  the  cows  increased  daily  in  beauty,  waxed  fat,  were  joyous, 
and  by  day  and  night  poured  forth  abundant  streams  of  milk  for  their  owners.  The  Brahmans  found 
that  they  had  more  milk  than  formerly  for  their  offerings,  and  were  glad.  The  cows,  tended  with 
such  unvarying  solicitude,  were  brisk  and  cheerful,  and  though  separated  for  awhile  from  their 
calves  that  remained  tied  up  in  the  houses,  grieved  not  a  whit,  but  with  joy  awaited  the  coming  of 
their  young  herdsman,  following  him  gladly,  crowding  around  him  like  tender  mothers,  and  lowing 
joyfully  at  the  sound  of  his  voice.  The  youthful  Brahman,  seeing  the  exuberance  of  their  milk, 
reflected  that  this  was  a  fitting  unction  for  the  head  of  the  God  ;  and  conceiving  a  great  desire  so  to 
employ  it,  constructed  a  lihgam  of  earth  on  a  little  mound  beneath  the  sacred  Atti  tree  on  the  bank 
of  the  river,  and  built  around  it  a  miniature  temple  with  tower  and  walls.  He  then  plucked  suitable 
flowers,  and  with  them  adorning  the  image,  procured  some  new  vessels  of  clay,  and  took  from  each 
of  the  cows  a  little  milk,  with  which  he  performed  the  unction  prescribed  for  the  divine  emblem  (the 
Liiigam) ;  and  Qivan,  the  Supreme,  looked  down  and  received  with  pleasure  the  boy-shepherd's 
guileless  worship.  All  essentials  of  the  sacred  service  he  supplied  by  the  force  of  his  imagination. 
Though  this  was  done  daily,  the  supply  of  milk  in  the  Brahmans'  dairy  was  no  whit  diminished. 


.    *.  187 

OS)  • 


Y)  tSl  65T 


IX. 

The  Three  in  story  famed,  of  giant  race,  escaped  the  fire, 
And  guardians  stand  before  my  '  Brow-eyed  '  Father's  door ;  since  when, 
Indras  beyond  compute,  and  Brahmas  (who  can  count  the  sum?) 
Behold  !     And  many  Mais,  too,  on  this  earth  have  died ;  and  thus 

PLAY  WE  TONOKKAM  !  36 

33.  But  see  CTSRT  en,  and  XIV.  10.          34.  The  three  guardians  of  the  gates  of  Divan's  city  : 
Taragakshan  ('  Star-eye  '),  Kamalakshan  ('  Lotus-eye '),  and  Vidyun-mdli  ('  Lightning-garland  *). 

For  a  long  time  this  continued,  until  some  malicious  person  saw  what  was  going  on,  and  told  it 
to  the  Brahmans  in  the  village,  who  convened  an  assembly  before  which  they  summoned  the  boy's 
father,  and  told  him  that  his  son  Vi9ara-9arumar  was  wasting  the  milk  of  the  Brahmans'  sacred  cows 
by  pouring  it  idly  on  the  earth  in  sport.  The  father  feared  greatly  when  he  heard  the  accusation,  but 
protested  his  entire  ignorance  of  the  waste  and  desecration,  and  asking  pardon,  engaged  to  put  a  stop 
to  his  son's  eccentric  practices.  Accordingly  the  next  day  he  went  forth  to  watch  the  boy's  proceed- 
ings, and  hid  himself  in  a  thicket  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  He  soon  saw  his  little  son  ceremoniously 
bathe  in  the  river,  and  then  proceed  to  his  miniature  temple,  gathering  sacred  flowers  and  leaves, 
arranging  everything  in  order  for  the  minutiae  of  £iva-worship,  and  then  pouring  a  stream  of 
anointing  milk  over  the  earthen  lingam.  Thus  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  accusation,  he  was 
greatly  incensed,  and  rushing  forth  from  his  concealment  inflicted  severe  blows  upon  the  boy,  and 
used  many  reproachful  words.  But  the  young  devotee's  mind  was  so  absorbed  in  the  worship, — so 
full  of  the  rapture  of  mystic  devotion,* — that  he  neither  perceived  his  father's  presence,  nor  heard  his 
words,  nor  felt  his  blows.  Still  more  incensed  by  the  boy's  insensibility,  the  infatuated  father  raised 
his  foot,  broke  the  vessels  of  consecrated  milk,  and  destroyed  the  whole  apparatus  of  worship  !  This 
was  too  much  for  the  young  enthusiast  to  bear ;  the  god  of  his  adoration  was  insulted,  and  the  sacred 
worship  denied.  He  regarded  not  the  fact  that  it  was  his  father,  a  Brahman  and  a  guru,  who  was 
the  offender;  but  only  saw  the  heinous  sin  and  insult  to  Civan.  So  with  the  staff  in  his  hands  he 
aimed  a  blow  at  the  offender's  feet,  as  if  to  cut  them  off ;  and,  behold,  the  shepherd's  staff  became  in  his 
hands  the  Sacred  Axe  oi  Civan,  and  the  father  fell  maimed  and  dying  to  the  ground.  The  enthusiastic 
boy  then  went  on  with  his  worship  as  if  nothing  had  occurred,  but  the  Lord  C.  ivan,  with  Uma  the 
goddess,  riding  on  the  sacred  White  Bull,  immediately  appeared  hovering  in  the  air.  The  young 
devotee  prostrated  himself  before  the  holy  vision  in  an  ecstasy  of  joy ;  when  the  Supreme  One  took 
him  up  in  his  divine  arms,  saying, '  For  my  sake  thou  hast  smitten  down  the  father  that  begat  thee. 
Henceforth  I  alone  am  thy  father]  and  embracing  him  stroked  his  body  with  His  sacred  hand,  and 
kissed  him  on  the  brow.  The  form  of  the  child  thus  touched  by  the  divine  hand  shone  forth  with 
ineffable  lustre,  and  the  God  further  addressed  him  thus  :  '  Thou  shall  become  the  chief  among  my 
servants,  and  to  thee  shall  be  given  all  the  offerings  of  food  and  flowers  that  my  worshippers  on 
Kail^a's  mountain  present.'  His  name  thereupon  became  Cande9uvarar  ('  the  impetuous  Lord  *). 
The  manifested  God  finally  took  the  mystic  cassia-wreath  from  His  Own  head,  and  with  it  crowned 
the  youthful  saint.  And  so  he  ascended  to  heaven  with  Civan,  and  was  exalted  to  that  divine  rank. 
The  father,  too,  who  had  been  guilty  in  his  ignorance  of  such  impiety  to  the  God,  and  had  been 
punished  by  the  hand  of  his  own  son,  was  forgiven,  restored,  and  with  the  whole  family  passed  into 
Civan's  abode  of  bliss. 


i88 


as. 

SfTLDSST  S_l_6V, 


•e.. 

<oT<S$rn$(Ttj61](TifjJB<gLn  (oL/SM^SJO 
LJJLLLD  GTSST 


X. 

- 

Vishnu's  devotion  and  reward. 

From  out  a  thousand  lotus  flowers  one  flower  was  wanting  still ; — 
His  eye  Mai  straight  dug  out,  and  placed  on  Aran's  foot,  our  Lord  ! 
To  Him  then  £ahkaran  forthwith  the  mighty  discus  gave,— 
A  gracious  recompense.    Thus  everywhere  extolling  Him, 

PLAY  WE  TONOKKAM  !  40 

XI. 

The  Bliairava. 

Kaman  his  body  lost,  Kalan  his  life,  the  fiery  Sun  his  teeth, 
The  Goddess  of  the  tongue  her  nose,  Brahma  a  head,  Agni  his  hand, 
The  Moon  his  crescent,  Dakshan,  E99an  too,  a  head  they  lost. 
These  holy  deeds  in  righteous  wrath  He  wrought;  and  thus 

PLAY  WE  TONOKKAM  !  44 

XII. 

Arimapalam l. 

Brahma  and  Hari  through  their  foolishness  said  each  : 
'  The  Deity !  the  Deity  supreme  am  I ; ' 
To  quell  their  swelling  pride,  Aran  in  form  of  lustrous  fire, 
In  grandeur  measureless  stood  forth,  the  Infinite;  and  thus 

PLAY  WE  TONOKKAM  !  48 


37.  Comp.  XII.  71,  72.  41-44.  See  XIII.  13-16.  '  See  introduction  to  XI. 


G     IT 


XIII. 
A  wasted  life. 

Poor  servile  worshipper, — how  many,  many  a  time 

I've  watered  barren  soil, — not  worshipping  the  Lord  Supreme ! 

The  Eternal- First,  th'  imperishable  flawless  Gem,  to  me 

Came  down ;  and  bar  of  my  '  embodiment '  destroyed  ;  and  thus 

PLAY  WE  TONOKKAM  !  53 

XIV. 
Deliverance. 

The  inner  Light,  past  speech,  the  Worthiest  entered  within 

My  soul,  and  brought  me  through  lust's  mighty  sea  that  knows  no  shore, 

And  then  the  craving  senses'  sateless  vultures  routed  fled  ! 

Sing  how  a  royal  path  in  glory  was  made  plain  ;  and  thus 

PLAY  WE  TdNOKKAM  !  56 


53-56.  See  V.  105-108. 


ICJO 


5  SIJ  IT  3-  <$  LD 


[Metre: 


As  in  V.  §  ii,  but  in  verses  of  six  lines.] 


S. 


tu  <sm<5$r  <Jj   iurr  js  fr<sm  LD  <sv 


Qu  JIT  ^  IT  (oGujb  &<s 


QLJ  nrssr^)!T 


<sa_ 


THE  SACRED  GOLDEN  SWING 

OR 

PURIFICATION    BY   GRACE. 

HYMN   XVI. 
I. 

Let  precious  coral  be  the  posts,  strung  pearls  the  ropes, 

Pure  gold  the  beauteous  seats. — Mount  we,  and  sweetly  sing 

The  flow'ry  Foot  Narayanan  knew  not,  to  me 

His  currish  slave  in  Uttara-ko9a-mahgai  given 

As  home.    Ambrosial  grace,  that  never  palls,  His  feet  impart. 

Ye  guileless,  bright-eyed  ones,  MOVE  WE  THE  GOLDEN  SWING  ! 

ii. 

Three  gleaming  eyes  His  face  displays;  His  flow'ry  feet 
The  gods  that  dwell  in  heaven  and  grow  not  old,  see  not ; 
In  Uttara-ko9a-mahgai  seen,  in  flesh  abides 
The  King,  while  honied  sweetness  of  ambrosia  flows. 
Sing  Idai-maruthu,  His  home  !    O  ye  like  peafowl  rare, 
Whose  walk  hath  swanlike  grace,  MOVE  WE  THE  GOLDEN  SWING  ! 

4.  'Given  His  feet  as  a  town.'     Comp.  Psalm  xc.  i. 


a.*> 


III. 

He  Who  no  end  and  no  beginning  knows, — while  saints 
A  multitude,  and  countless  heavenly  ones,  stood  round,— 
His  sacred  ashes  gave  in  grace  ;  and  mercy's  tide 
Flow'd  there  :  sing  Uttara-ko9a-mahgai's  gemlike  home 
Of  palaces,  with  terrace  high,  where  lightnings  play! 
Maids,  bright  with  gems  and  gold,  MOVE  WE  THE  GOLDEN  SWING  !  18 

IV. 

His  throat  the  poison  holds  ;  Lord  of  the  heavenly  ones ; 

To  Uttara-koca-mangai's  gemlike  cloud-capped  heights 

He  came,  with  Her  whose  words  are  music ;  fill'd  the  mind 

Of  us  His  slaves,  ambrosial  sweetness  gave  and  grace 

That  cuts  off  '  death  and  birth  '!     His  holy  praises  sing  ! 

Ye  who  wear  store  of  bracelets  bright,  MOVE  WE  THE  GOLDEN  SWING  !  14 

v. 

The  god,  Whose  form  the  Two  might  not  discriminate ; 
In  tender  mercy,  that  the  gods'  assembled  band 
Might  not  know  shame,  but  'scape,  made  them  His  own,  and  poison  ate 


25.  See  XII,  verse  8. 


IQ2  $  (5  SU  IT  ft  *  U  . 


^SSST  (SjoSSTLL  UJG&LJ, 


Si. 


G8lfr(Lp%SVlfitJ\   QurTGSTgpJT&GV 


CT. 
a_S3TS5T/D 


jS  LLULL65)fD(olLJ[TSSr 
LJ7fiU/B/d56yr 


As  food  :  He,  Uttara-ko9a-mahgai's  Dancer,  crowned 

With  crescent  of  the  moon.     Praise  we  His  worth  !     O  ye 

With  jewell'd  bosoms  fair,  AND  MOVE  THE  GOLDEN  SWING  !  30 

VI. 

The  Lady's  Half  is  He  ;  His  braided  lock  with  flow'ry  cassia  dight 

In  Utt'ra-k69a-mahgai  'midst  his  saints  He  dwells. 

He  freed  my  soul  from  sin ;  made  me,  a  cur,  His  own ; 

From  'birth's  old  ill '  His  glorious  coming  saves. 

His  pendant  ear-rings'  swing  sing  we  with  melting  love,  O  ye 

With  flower-crown'd  bosoms  fair,  AND  MOVE  THE  GOLDEN  SWING  !  36 

VII. 

He  dwells  in  beauty,  Lord  of  the  great  mystic  word, 

Of  Utt'ra-ko9a-mangai  shrine,  past  thought ;  His  praise 

Who  sing,  and  worship,  and  bow  down,  He  frees  from  bonds  of  sin. 

As  gem-bright  peafowl  moving  beauteous,  on  a  swan, 

My  Father  came,  and  made  me  His !     His  beauty  sing, 

Ye  with  gold  adorned,  AND  MOVE  THE  GOLDEN  SWING  !  42 


G  U  IT  far  §5)/T  S-  GO  .       tLSn. 

s\. 


L^^LJUffKoLL/O  Qd?/T<S35r(5),  JEGftLD 


^ir<3F<si) 


<5TfEJ3S6fT 


VIII. 

From  glorious  mountain  height  to  earth  He  came, 

Ate  plenteous  food,  arose  upon  the  lower  seas, 

In  magic  form  upon  a  charger  rode,  and  made  us  His; 

In  sacred  Uttara-kofa-mangai  where  His  virtue  shines, 

With  loud  acclaim  Him  whom  Mai  could  not  reach  we  praise, 

And  while  our  full  hearts  melt,  MOVE  WE  THE  GOLDEN  SWING  !  48 

IX. 

In  sacred  Uttara-ko9a-mangai's  groves  of  cocoa-palm 

He  came,  in  form  unique  a  gracious  light  shone  forth; 

Our  '  birth '  He  caused  to  cease,  made  such  as  us  His  own ; 

The  Queen  His  Partner,  and  Himself,  received  our  homage  due; 

We  sing  His  worth  Whose  crest  breathes  cassia's  sweet  perfume ; 

Ye  maids,  whose  jewell'd  bosoms  heave,  MOVE  WE  THE  GOLDEN  SWING  !          54 


IQA 


$  5  SU  IT  ff  a;  &  . 

aer.    <%&£] 
GST  %SST  U  U 


[Metre  :  *«v»  *<s#f*.     See  V.  v.] 

C. 


LJ65>/DuSl<55TIT  J  ,_£/  SS 


THE  MOTHER-DECAD;   OR,  ' SOUL'S  PLENITUDE.' 

HYMN   XVII. 

This  decad  is  a  series  of  exclamations  uttered  by  a  little  girl  to  her  mother.     See  Vatha-Urar- 
Puranam  V.  66.     It  is  called  praSoD*Quirif  =  '  the  broken  rhythm.' 

I. 
'  His  word  is  the  Vedam  ;  ashes  white  He  wears  ; 

Rose-red  is  His  form  ;  His  drum  is  the  Natham  ; 

MOTHER!'  SAITH  SHE. 

'  His  drum  is  the  Natham ;  to  the  Four-faced, 
And  to  Mai  too,  this  Lord  is  the  Lord ; 

MOTHER  ! '  SAITH  SHE.  4 

ii. 

'  His  eye  gleams  black ;  He  is  compassion's  sea ; 
Within  He  dwells,  He  melts  the  soul, 

MOTHER  ! '  SAITH  SHE. 
'  Within  He  dwells,  and  to  the  melting  soul 
Tears  of  undying  bliss  gives  He, 

MOTHER  ! '  SAITH  SHE.  8 


2.  See  Lex.  er0&,  -and  XIX.  32.  2-4.  A  play  on  the  words  Natham,  =  l  s.n  instrument  of 

music,'  and  Ndthar,  = '  Lord.'     In  the  later  Qaiva  philosophy,  Natham  is  '  the  male  energy  of  the 
Deity.'    The  Four-faced  is  '  Brahma.' 


dj  ear  8ajr  u  u  4  41 .      i(TT. 

J95 


(fig. 


SZpSmr,  ^[JLLU 


III. 

'  Th'  eternal  Bridegroom,  He  in  minds  devout 
Abides  with  perfect  beauty  crown'd  ; 

MOTHER  !'  SAITH  SHE. 

'  In  minds  devout  abides,  the  southern  Lord, 
Perun-turrai's  Sire  ;  the  Blissful ; 

MOTHER!'  SAITH  SHE.  «a 

IV. 

'A  dancing  snake  His  jewel,  tiger-skin  His  robe, 
A  form  with  ashes  smeared  He  wears ; 

MOTHER!'  SAITH  SHE. 

'  The  form  He  wears  whene'er  I  see  and  gaze, 
My  soul  within  me  faints,  why  this  ? 

MOTHER  ! '  SAITH  SHE.  l6 

v. 

'  Long  are  His  outstretch'd  arms ;  loose  flow-  His  locks ; 
Lord  of  the  goodly  Pandiyan  land  ; 

MOTHER!'  SAITH  SHE. 
'  Lord  of  the  goodly  Pandi  land,  He  rules 

My  wandering  thoughts,  and  shows  His  love; 
MOTHER  !'  SAITH  SHE. 


J5  su  IT  9  ft  li). 


SV,  <_gysarG>(55r! 


srssrjgyz.  a-*3 


CT. 


U  6ff  Gffl&  (3JLJ  LJfTlU<£  <£  IT,  J9J6$ 


a_syrsrr/E7  SGLHTGU 


VI. 

'  Whose  glory  none  may  know  in  Uttara-mangai  'bides ; 
He  in  my  heart  and  soul  abides; 
MOTHER  ! '  SAITH  SHE. 

'He  in  my  heart  abides,  Whom  Mai  and  Ayan 
Could  not  see  !     How  wondrous  strange  ! 

MOTHER!'  SAITH  SHE.  24 

VII. 

'White  is  His  steed,  and  white  His  shaven  head  ; 
He  wears  the  sleeper's  mystic  dress, 

MOTHER!'  SAITH  SHE. 

'  Wearing  the  sleeper's  dress,  a  prancing  steed 
He  rides,  and  steals  away  my  soul, 

MOTHER!'  SAITH  SHE.  28 

VIII. 

'  He  wears  the  twining-wreath ;  the  sandal  paste 
He  smears  ;  He  rules  and  makes  us  His, 

MOTHER!'  SAITH  SHE. 

'  He  makes  us  His  ;  in  lowly  servants'  hands, 
Hark,  how  the  lordly  cymbals  sound, 

MOTHER  ! '  SAITH  SHE.  32 

25.  This  is  ambiguous.  See  Lex.  29.  See  XIX.  36.  32.  In  the  legend  of  Sambandhar  it  is 
said  that  Qivan  gave  him  a  pair  of  cymbals  inscribed  with  Namafivaya ;  but  this  cannot  be  referred 
to  here.  See  Periya  Puranam  II.  (I.)  102. 


«f  GW  86BT  LJ  U  *  &| .        £67. 


GgiULQ  Lj(<3jj5<£<si][T 


SO. 


IX. 

'  The  fair  One's  Half,  ascetic's  garb  He  wears, 

Enters  our  homes  an  alms  to  ask, 
MOTHER!'  SAITH  SHE. 
'  He  ent'ring  alms  to  ask,  my  inmost  soul 

In  sorrow  sinks ;  wherefore  is  this  ? 

MOTHER  ! '  SAITH  SHE.  36 

f 

x. 

'  Cassia,  the  moon,  the  vilva  flower,  and  wild 
Phrenzies  crowd  thick  His  head, 
MOTHER  I'  SAITH  SHE. 

'  The  vilva  flower  that  crowns  His  sacred  brow 
Wild  phrenzy  bringeth  me  to-day, 

MOTHER  ! '  SAITH  SHE.  4° 


39.  There  is  a  play  upon  words  here,  not  producible  in  English. 


5  si!  n  s-  $  us. 


uS  tb  upjgj. 


[For  metre,  see  note  at  the  end  of  the  lyric,  p.  202.] 

&. 
GyfllU  (3jl£!(ooV\ 


a..    For  UTfrerit. 


THE    KUYIL-DECAD1. 

HYMN   XVIII. 

The  Kuyil*  is  often  referred  to  in  these  poems.  Our  Sage,  like  St.  Francis  of  Assisi,  was 
exceedingly  fond  of  birds,  and  indeed  was  filled  with  love  for  the  whole  creation.  In  this  poem  he 
calls  upon  the  Kuyil  to  join  him  in  the  praises  of  his  Master,  recounting  the  chief  themes  on  which 
he  was  wont  to  dilate.  The  epithets  applied  to  the  Kuyil  are  skilfully  varied ;  it  is  pictured  to  us  as 
a  diminutive  bird  haunting  the  leafy  groves  (13,  37);  of  a  dark  azure  hue  with  a  golden  tint 
(9>  33)  !  ^  uttering  a  sweet  call  of  a  peculiarly  tender  kind  (i,  8);  as  possessed  of  a  beauty  glad- 
dening the  eye  (17);  and  as  imparting  pleasure  to  all  that  hear  its  inviting  notes  (17,  21,37). 
Mystically  the  Kuyil  is  the  human  soul.  Comp.  Psalm  ciii. 

I. 
Civan's  infinity. 

O  KUYIL,  sweet  of  song,  if  thou  dost  seek  our  Peruman  to  know ; 
If  thou  would'st  ask  of  His  twain  feet ; — they're  planted 'neath  the  sevenfold  gulf. 
Would'st  hear  of  His  bright  jewell'd  crown  ?  'Tis  glory  old  that  passes  speech. 
Nor  origin,  nor  qualities  hath  He,  nor  end  ;  CALL  HIM  TO  COME  !  4 


i.  See  XX.  9.  2.  Comp.  VII.  37.     Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  387.     The  Tamil  Aruna^ala-Puranam, 

chap.  ii.  '  The  Sacred  Hill,'  is  the  best  account  of  this  appearance  of  Civan  as  a  mountain  : 
'  Whose  crown  above  the  highest  height  ascended, 
Whose  base  beneath  the  lowest  depth  descended.' 
Southey's  'Curse  of  Kehama'  is  a  beautiful  version.         4.  Martineau's  Types,  vol.  i.  p.  129. 


1  T.  V.  U.  P.,  V.  67.  2  The  Kuyil  (or  Kokila :  Eudynamys  indicus)  is  found  in  all  parts  of 

the  peninsula  of  India,  and  is  a  great  favourite  with  the  people.  Its  somewhat  monotonous  cry  is 
more  appreciated  by  the  natives  of  the  East  than  by  those  of  the  West,  yet  it  is  not  unpleasing, — in 
moderation.  Its  note  is  sweet  and  plaintive.  It  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  English  cuckoo, 
though  it  is  of  the  same  species,  and  not  unlike  it  in  some  particulars.  [See  Catalogue  of  Birds  in 
the  Museum  of  the  Honourable  East-India  Company,  by  T.  Horsefield  and  F.  Moore,  1856-1858.] 


e.. 


/u  <su  /raj  /T/i)  @  u9(?sv  !  Qp  GSTU  frsabnf.  pm—  Sssr*  a^eu  vu'i  ! 


esrr<S5T  UL^glfflSfrLD  LSST      SVSSSTITGU       GUJILJ 


n. 

His  grace  to  Manddclari. 

Him  the  fair  sevenfold  world  extols, — since  every  being's  form  is  His; — 
In  southern  sea-girt  Lanka  He,  the  Lord  Who  Perun-turrai  owns, 
Vandothari  the  beautiful,  made  glad  with  His  abounding  grace  ! 
KUYIL,  the  southern  Pandi  Chief,  CALL  HITHER  with  thy  voice  divine ! 

III. 

In  His  capital.     (XIX.  9-12.) 

KUYIL  with  form  of  azure  hue  !     In  Uttara-ko9a-mangai's  shrine, 

Where  bright  the  sacred  temple  stands,  whose  storied  tenements  rise  decked 

with  gems, 

One  with  the  graceful  Lady's  flower-like  form  in  virtue  sweetly  rich  He  dwells,— 
The  loving  Lord  by  whom  the  world  gro  ws  bright,— go  thou,  and  HITHER  CALL!  i  j 

IV. 
His  voluntary  humiliation. 

Thou  KUYIL  small,' that  dost  frequent  the  grove  with  sweet  fruit  rich,  hear  this  ! 
The  Gracious-One  Who  left  the  heavens,  enter'd  this  earth,  made  men  His  own  ; 
The  Only-One,  despised  the  flesh,  entered  my  soul,  and  fills  my  thought  ;  — 
The  Bridegroom  of  the  Fawn-eyed-one  that  gently  rules,— GO  iimii  R  CAI  i 

7.  Mandodari,  (in  Tarn.  Vandothari),  the  chief  of  the  queens  of  Havana,  the  giant  kinj;  o! 
Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  466  ;  and  notes  to  XIV.  16.  Uma.    Sans.  Mri&ikshT. 


2OO  QJ  IT  ff  «  l    . 


@. 
l_ 

-Siy-lLJGUtT  ^Gfo 


ft. 

(3}LD(Lp(L£)  <£(TGlfl, 


6T. 


LGSSTSSTSST, 

ST,  @IT  LJL//L//iH<g5(S3T,  <SlJ/7c5  ^L_SUT//  J  ! 


V. 
His  gracious  appearing. 

KUYIL,  whose  beauty  is  delight !    Like  sun  .with  circling  radiant  beams, 
Through  upper  heaven  come  down,  He  frees  His  saints  from  thrall  of  low  desire; 
The  First,  the  Midst,  the  End  is  He ; — the  Three  knew  not  His  sacred  form;— 
His  feet  are  bright  with  crimson  glow; — the  mighty  Warrior  CALL  TO  COME  !     20 

VI. 
The  manifestation  in  Madura. 

KUYIL,  glad  pleasure  give  I  Thee!  the  sevenfold  worlds  He  rules; — 

The  Loving-One  ambrosia  gives; — the  Blissful-God  came  down  from  heaven, 

And  on  the  goodly  charger  rode  like  jewel  set  in  ruddy  gold. 

KUYIL,  'mid  branches  twittering,  Gokari's  Lord  GO,  CALL  TO  COME  !  24 

VII. 
The  monarch  of  the  Tamil  lands. 

K.UYIL,  I'll  joy  in  thee,  and  be  thy  comrade,  ever  by  thy  side; — 
Him  of  the  beauteous  form  Who  shines,  more  choice  than  gold,  in  glory  bright; 
The  King,  Who  on  the  horse  in  splendour  rode,  in  Perun-turrai  dwells! — 
The  Southern-One,  the  £eran,  Qoran,  great  Buyangan,  CALL  TO  COME  !          38 


28.  Qivan  is  King  of  Pandi ;   and  also  of  the  western  and  of  the  eastern  realms.     See  Pope's 
Ndlatfiydr,  p.  414. 


eurr 


*.a_ 


(KL.6U  JtU ! 


<so. 


VIII. 
Ar unapalam  ' . 

O  tender  KUYIL,  come  thou  here  !   Mai  sought  Him,  and  the  'Four-faced '-one, 
Nor  found,  then  ceased,  and  pondering  stood.  Cleavingthe  heaven,  in  shining  fire, 
Beyond  all  worlds  He  rose  that  day,  His  body  like  the  light  rayed  out. 
On  prancing  steed  a  groom  He  rode;  CALL  Him  with  streaming  lock  TO  COME!  32 

IX. 
The  gracious  initiation. 

KUYIL,  thy  dark  form  gleams  with  gold;  thou  in  the  fragrant  grove  dost  joy! 
The  Blest,  Whose  glorious  form  is  bright  as  splendour  of  the  lotus  red, 
On  earth  showed  us  His  feet;  set  free  from  every  bond,  and  made  me  His. 
The  beauteous  cinctured  golden  Form,  th' Ambrosial-One,  GO  CALL  TO  COME  !  36 

x. 

His  manifestation  as  a  guru. 

Hear  this,  thou  KUYIL,  calling  'midst  the  grove  whose  shady  boughs  enlace ! 
A  Brahman  here  He  came,  revealed  His  beauteous  rosy  feet  to  me. 
'This  man  is  one  of  us,'  He  said,  and  here  in  grace  made  me  His  own  ! 
The  LORD  OF  GODS,  Whose  sacred  form  is  as  red  fire,  GO  BID  TO  COME  !          .40 

1  See  VII.  18.  40.  See  XIX.  4. 


2O2 


J5  QJ  IT  S-  S>  W. 


METRE   OF  XVIII. 

j.  Here  the  metre  is  A9iriya-Viruttam  of  six  feet. 

2.  These  are  all  of  two  metrical  syllables  (G.  174),  &<up9t.     They  represent  the  spondee,  and 
the  three  feet  formed  by  resolution  of  each  long  syllable  into  two  short  ones ;  i.  e. 


3.  Each  of  these  feet  has  two  full  'measures'  (i&rfgiemr,  G.  16)  ;  thus  the  time  of  a  line  is  twelve 
measures  (long  syllables),  or  twenty-four  half-measures  (short  syllables). 

4.  The  four  lines  of  each  stanza  have  initial  rhyme  (G.  182). 

5.  Each  line  is  divided  by  caesura  into  two  equal  parts,  with  assonance  (G.  183),  generally  at 
the  beginning  of  the  fourth  foot.     The  lines  have  most  often  eight  long  and  eight  short  syllables. 

6.  The  scheme  is  : 


w  w  v  v 


The  first  half  begins  and  ends,  and  the  second  half  ends,  with  a  metrically  long  syllable. 

7.  Nasals  and  double  letters  are  often  slurred  ;  thus  ^«6(<*)p  is  lyWJior,  and  Qsrifjo(a)fa>s  is 

8.  Very  many  lines  are  dactylic  Hexameters,  rather  after  Greek  than  Latin  models  : 


<J  \ —  uu-uw 


«<*,. 
$  (ffj  p  p  &  rr  nil  &  LD  . 

[^1^.53)11)0*11  S&IU     {^  65)  B53)  ID.] 

[Metre:  C«n/W  O««irur.    See  XLVil,  XLVIII.] 
5. 


THE   SACRED  TEN  SIGNS:   THE   ROYAL  INSIGNIA. 

HYMN   XIX. 

I. 
The  Name  of  the  King. 

'  Parrot  fair  and  tender  !  soothly  tell  the  glorious  NAME 

Of  Perun-turrai's  King ! ' — '  Lord  of  Arur, — the  ruddy  Prince,— 

The  White-flower-god, — and  he  of  the  milky  sea  praised  Him  thus  : 

Name  we  our  Peruman,  the  PRINCE  OF  GODS  ! '  4 

ii. 

King  9ivan's  Land. 

'O  Emerald,  whose  blameless  speech  is  sweet !    The  LAND  declare. 
Owned  by  the  Lord  of  all  the  sevenfold  world,  Whose  own  we  are.' 
'  He  rules  His  loving  ones  in  love,  and  gives  unfailing  grace, 
His  LAND  is  aye  the  southern  PANDI  realm!' 


i.  Comp.  Ovid,  Amores  ii.  6:  '  Psittacus,  eois  imitatrix  ales  ab  Indis,  rari  forma  co! 
2.  Or  'ruddy';  see  O*  in  Lex.  For  legend  of  Arur,  see  Periya  Puranam,  vol.  i.  p.  45.  A  whole 
canto  is  allotted  to  it.  Called  also  Muthilr,  In  Devaram,  pp.  647-703,  are  thirty-four  lyrics  in  its 
honour.  Comp.  for  the  whole  song,  Pattanattu  Pillai's  poems,  Vithya  Vinothini  Scries,  Madras, 
1892,  pp.  4-8  ;  and  in  this  collection  II.  101-124.  The  differences  are  instructive.  4.  So  II.  laz; 
VII.  40;  XVIII.  40  ;  XXV.  27.  5.  The  beautiful  chapters  Ixxiv.  &c.  in  the  Kurral  illustrate 

this.  6.  Peril,  '  world,'  may  be  translated  also  '  grove.'  8.  The  Pandtyan  land  is  sa«. 

Qivan.     One  of  the  greatest  shrines  is  at  Madura.    See  XXXVI;  and  II.  118.    Others  say  that  the 
Qora  land  is  the  '  holy  land,'  on  account  of  Cithambaram  and  Arur. 


204 


Q&lLJtU  6U  JlULJ6tnLJ(&IjS<FlfD!£libQ<F<SV  6$  I  JBi^^ljBSS)^  Q&IT 

ST,  Qu(rrjj!>jgi<sn;nujrT<oST 

LD  6V  tEl<£ 
2_(55)/_/L//rS5T 


III. 
The  City  of  the  King. 

'  O  babbling  bird,  dweller  in  flowery  grove  with  fragrance  filled  ! 
What  is  the  TOWN  where  dwells  our  Lord,  the  partner  of  the  Queen  ? ' 
'  The  CITY  Uttara-kofa-mahgai  named  by  men  devout 

And  true,  as  £iva-town  on  earth  is  prais'd  ! '  1 2 

IV. 
The  King's  River. 

'  Red-mouth'd,  green-wing'd  bright  bird  !    Tell  us  the  RIVER  of  the  Sire 
Who  makes  His  home  within  our  heart,  great  Perun-turrai's  King ! ' 
'O  maid,  the  Master's  RIVER  is  the  rapture  sent  from  heaven, 

Come  down,  the  foulness  of  our  mind  to  cleanse.'  16 

v. 

The  Mountain  of  the  King. 

'  O  parrot  purple-mouth'd  !    Tell  me  the  ever-during  MOUNT 
Of  Perun-turrai's  King,  that  hides  its  head  in  clouds.' — 'O  maid, 
Behold  and  study  well, — His  MOUNT  is  bliss  of  sweet  "RELEASE"; 

Where  the  soul's  darkness  flees,  and  light  shines  forth.'  20 


9.  Tath-a4u>  'where  bees  feast  on  the  pollen.'  11.  See  II.  120.  15.  See  II.  105,  106. 

Kurral,  737-     Comp.  Kurral,  ch.  Ixxv,  especially  742.          17.  Ovid,  Amores  ii.  6  :  '  Tincta  gerens 
rubro  Punica  rostra  .  .  .  .'         19.  See  II.  123,  124. 


(Lp[T^llUL£>U!Tlij\ 

(oLJrfl<5XTLJ<£  (o<5  (TIEl^LCi 


VI. 
The  King's  Courser. 

'  Come  hither,  parrot  mine  !  and  tell,  before  thou  seek'st  thy  cage, 
The  Lord  of  matchless  glory,  what  rides  He?' — 'He  joyous  rides 
Upon  the  COURSER  of  the  sky ; — with  honied  thought  the  maids 

Divine  attending  chaunt  melodious  praise  ! '  14 

VII. 
The  King's  Weapon. 

'  Parrot,  whose  words  are  honey  from  the  bough  !   What  WEAPON  pray 
O'ercomes  the  foes  of  Perun-turrai's  blameless  King  ?  ' 
*The  triple  WEAPON  that  He  wields,  transfixes  threefold  sin, 
Causing  the  souls  from  malice  free  to  melt.' 

VIII. 
The  King's  Drum. 

'  Parrot,  whose  words  as  milk  are  sweet,  tell  me  the  martial  DRUM 
That  awful  sounds  before  our  Perun-turrai's  King  ! ' — '  In  love 
It  bids  the  foe  of  "birth  "  confounded  flee,— and  makes  arise 
All  bliss  of  heaven  :  the  joyous  NATHA-DRUM.' 


22.  See  II.  116.  27,28.  See  II.  109,  no.  32.  See  II.  107,  108 ;  XI  VI. 


2o6  £  15  QJ  tr 

a*. 


T  67657?  - 


p  JIT. 

ao. 


Qu  trsSliLj  ita  Q&  nuf-  <3n-(iyiLi  \  —  dF  TSV  siy  LD 

^1  oSSrQsmGSTSST  CoLDSVSlS)sr7/EJ^  Gji&ITLLGJlLLt 


IX. 
The  King's  Garland. 

'  Parrot,  whose  word  is  music,  say,  what  is  the  GARLAND  worn 

By  Perun-turrai's  Lord,  Who  dwells  in  hearts  where  love  wells  up?'- 

'  Who  owns  me,  worthless  cur,  and  daily  wards  off  "  evil  deeds, "- 

He  wears  as  WREATH  the  TaH-arrugu.'  36 

x. 

The  King's  Banner. 

'Green  parrot  of  the  grove  declare,  what  BANNER  glorious  waves 
Above  the  King  of  Perun-turrai's  waters  pure  ?' — 'Aloft 
The  stainless  BANNER  of  the  bull  resplendent  gleams 

In  beauty  manifest,  while  foes  flee  far.'  4o 


36.  See  Lex.  and  II.  113,  114,  where  (Divan's  garland  is  said  to  be  made  from  the  red  water-lily. 
The  Cassia  fistula  (Kondrai),  whose  leaves  are  beautiful,  long,  yellow,  and  fragrant,  is  his  general 
adornment  (Ainslie,  vol.  i.  p.  60).  37.  See  II.  103,  104,  which  is  corrupt ! 


•  ' ' 


i  J  LJ  srr  syf?  Q 


[Metre:  ,gftft<u  *<s*f*.    Formula: 


MORNING    HYMN    IN    THE   TEMPLE 


OR 


THE    ROUSING   FROM   THE    SACRED   COUCH1. 


'THE   FREEDOM   OF  THE   UPLIFTED   SOUL.' 

HYMN   XX. 

I. 
Hail !  Being,  Source  to  me  of  all  life's  joys  !    'Tis  dawn ; 

upon  Thy  flower-like  feet  twin  wreaths  of  blooms  we  lay, 
And  worship,  'neath  the  beauteous  smile  of  grace  benign 

that  from  Thy  sacred  face  beams  on  us.     Qiva-Lord, 
Who  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai 2  girt  with  cool  rice-fields, 

where  'mid  the  fertile  soil  th'  expanding  lotus  blooms ! 
Thou  on  Whose  lifted  banner  is  the  Bull3 !    Master  ! 

Our  mighty  Lord  !  FROM  OFF  THY  COUCH  IN  GRACE  ARISE  ! 


1  The  image  of  the  god  is  laid  upon  a  couch  each  evening,  and  taken  up  in  the  morning.  This 
reveille  is  the  first  business  of  the  day.  This  seems  strangely  at  variance  with  ver.  5.  a  This  was 
composed  in  Perun-turrai,  '  the  great  harbour,'  where  the  poet  went  to  buy  horses  for  his  King,  and 
was  made  a  disciple  (p.  xxi).  3  The  bull  is  Divan's  emblem.  He  rides  on  a  white  bull.  It  U  also 
on  his  banner  (XIX.  40).  The  bull-headed  Nandi,  whose  image  is  everywhere  in  South  India,  is 
his  Lord  High  Chamberlain. 


208  $  5  en  n  <ff  a 


II. 
The  sun  has  neared  the  eastern  bound  J;  darkness  departs  ; 

dawn  broadens  out  ;  and,  like  that  sun,  the  tenderness 
Of  Thy  blest  face's  flower  uprising  shines  ;  and  so, 

while  bourgeons  forth  the  fragrant  flower  of  Thine  eyes'  beam, 
Round  the  King's  dwelling  fair  hum  myriad  swarms  of  bees2. 

See,  (piva-Lord,  in  Perun-turrai's  hallowed  shrine  Who  dwell'st  ! 
Mountain  of  bliss,  treasures  of  grace  Who  com'st  to  yield  ! 

O  surging  Sea  !  FROM  OFF  THY  COUCH  IN  GRACE  ARISE  ! 

in. 
The  tender  Kuyil's3  note  is  heard  ;  the  cocks  have  crowed  ; 

the  little  birds  sing  out  ;  sound  loud  the  tuneful  shells  4; 
Starlights  have  paled  ;  day's  lights  upon  the  eastern  hill 

are  mustering.     In  favouring  love  O  show  to  us 
Thy  twin  feet,  anklet-decked5,  divinely  bright;  — 

£iva-Lord,  in  Perun-turrai's  hallowed  shrine  Who  dwell'st  ! 


1  The  original  says,  '  India's  region,'  since  he  is  regent  of  the  East.     There  are  eight  points  of 
the  compass.     Over  ea.ch  a  deity  presides.  "  This  passage  is  a  curious  double  entendre.     It  may 

also  be  rendered  'the  vast  assembled  host  sing  the  six-syllables ' :  om-fi-vd-ya-na-mah.     The  bees,  or 
winged  beetles,  are  called  by  metonomy  '  six-feets.'  3  Comp.  VII.  29.     The  Koil  or  Kuyil,  for 

which  there  is  no  English  name.     See  XVIII.          4  The  Caiikha,  or  conch-shell,  used  in  the  temple 
music.  5  Worn  especially  by  kings  and  heroes. 


a.o. 

-  "> 


©. 

'  y^/rads  (oiL  ngyfl  ssT(yiu  '  srssf?  ssr  ^  <sv>  sv  /rsv 


Thee  all  find  hard  to  know  ;  easy  to  us  Thine  own  ! 

Our  mighty  Lord  !  FROM  OFF  THY  COUCH  IN  GRACE  ARISE  !  1  2 

IV. 

There  stand  the  players  on  the  sweet-voiced  lute  and  lyre  ; 

there  those  that  utter  praises  with  the  Vedic  chaunt  ; 
There  those  whose  hands  bear  wreaths  of  flowers  entwined  ; 

there  those  that  bend,  that  weep,  in  ecstasy  that  faint  ; 
There  those  that  clasp  above  their  heads  adoring  hands  ;  — 

Qiva-Lord,  in  Perun-turrai's  hallowed  shrine  Who  dwell'st  ! 
Me  too  make  Thou  Thine  own,  on  me  sweet  grace  bestow  ! 

Our  mighty  Lord  !  FROM  OFF  THY  COUCH  IN  GRACE  ARISE  !  16 

v. 
'Thou  dwell'st  in  all  the  elements/  'tis  said  ;  and  yet 

'  Thou  goest  not,  nor  com'st  ;  '  the  sages  thus  have  sung 
Their  rhythmic  songs.    Though  neither  have  we  heard  nor  learnt 

of  those  that  Thee  by  seeing  of  the  eye  have  known. 
Thou  King  of  Perun-turrai,  girt  with  cool  rice-fields, 
to  ponder  Thee  is  hard  to  human  thought.   To  us 

p 


2IO  |5  GVJ  IT  ff  a  UD  . 


<5T(l£>J5&Qfj<5an(]>lLl\ 


m. 

LJ  LJ  Uf 


<oTLC>Qu(TfjLL[T<58T\   LJsfrSlffl 


CT. 


1  Compare  Pope's  Ndlcufiydr,  chap.  xi.  pp.  66-68. 


In  presence  come  !    Cut  off  our  ills  !    In  mercy  make  us  Thine  ! 

Our  mighty  Lord!  FROM  OFF  THY  COUCH  IN  GRACE  ARISE  !  20 

VI. 

Thy  saints,  who  sinless  in  Thy  home  abide  and  know, 

have  come,  their  bonds  cast  off;  and  now,  a  mighty  host, 
With  beauteous  garlands  decked,  and  clothed  in  human  shape, 

they  all  adore  Thee,  Bridegroom  of  the  Goddess  dread  ! 
(^iva-Lord,  Who  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai's  hallow'd  shrine, 

girt  with  cool  rice-fields,  where  th'  empurpled  lotus  blooms  ! 
Cut  off  this  'birth  ','  make  us  Thine  own,  bestow  Thy  grace  ! 

Our  mighty  Lord  !  FROM  OFF  THY  COUCH  IN  GRACE  ARISE  !  24 

VII. 

'  The  flavour  of  the  fruit  is  that;'  '  ambrosia  that ; ' 

'that's  hard;'  'this  easy:'  thus  Immortals  too  know  not ! 

'This  is  His  sacred  form;  this  is  Himself:'  that  we 

may  say  and  know,  make  us  Thine  own ;  in  grace  arise  ! 


i§.     SLO. 


u^isu  srriQu  Jilib 


5r!  L/sfrsyfl 


i  <5T(LgJBpQf)  QtfllLJLJ  fjQ<5ST  \ 

S5)  (j 


GMT 


In  Uttara-kofa-mahgaiV  sweet  perfumed  groves 

Thou  dwell'st !    O  King  of  Perun-turrai's  hallowed  shrine  ! 

What  service  Thou  demandest,  Lo  !  we  willing  pay. 

Our  mighty  Lord  !  FROM  OFF  THY  COUCH  IN  GRACE  ARISE  !  a8 

VIII. 

Before  a:ll  being  First,  the  Midst,  the  Last  art  Thou. 

The  Three 2  know  not  Thy  nature  :  how  should  others  know  1 
Thou,  with  Thy  tender  Spouse,  Thy  servants'  lowly  huts 

in  grace  didst  visit,  entering  each,  Supernal  One  ! 
Like  ruddy  fire  Thou  once  didst  show  Thy  sacred  form  ; 

didst  show  me  Perun-turrai's  temple,  where  Thou  dwell'st ; 
As  Anthanan 3  didst  show  Thyself,  and  make  me  Thine. 

Ambrosia  rare  !  FROM  OFF  THY  COUCH  IN  GRACE  ARISE  !  32 

IX. 

The  gods  in  heaven  who  dwell  may  not  approach  Thy  seat ! 
O  Being  worthiest !   Yet  us  who  at  Thy  foot 


1  Uttara.k69a-maiigai,  an  ancient  Pandiyan  capital,  eight  miles  south- west  of  Ramnad.      *  i.e.  Indra, 
Brahma,  and  Vishnu.        3  A  title  of  Brahmans.     See  Pope's  Kurraf,  in  Lex. 

P  2 


212 


<S<5S5T6S5T&3>/B      <S5T  JW  <£ 


<oTL£>Qu(TfjLC>(T<SST\  LJGf 


(oLJ!T&(Vj£l<SSr(o(yLC>  jyQjCoLD. 


Pay  homage,  Thou  to  earth  descending,  madest  blest. 

Dweller  in  fertile  Perun-turrai's  shrine  !  our  eyes 
Beheld  Thee ;  honied  sweetness  made  our  being  glad. 

Ambrosia  of  the  sea !    Sweetest  of  sweets  !    Thou  art 
Within  Thy  longing  servants'  thought ! — Soul  of  this  world  !— 

Our  mighty  Lord  !  FROM  OFF  THY  COUCH  IN  GRACE  ARISE  !  36 

x. 

Said  sacred  Mai  and  flower-born  Ayan  as  they  gazed 

on  Divan's  form,  '  This  day  in  vain  we  spend  and  cry. 
'Tis  time  we  went  to  earth  and  there  were  born.    'Tis  earth, 

'tis  earth  alone  where  (Divan's  grace  is  wont  to  save.' 
Thou  King,  Who  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai's  *  hallow'd  shrine, 

mighty  Thou  wert  to  enter  earth,  and  make  us  Thine  ! 
Thou  and  the  Grace,  that  flower-like  blooms  from  forth  Thy  form, 

Ambrosia  rare  !  FROM  OFF  THY  COUCH  IN  GRACE  ARISE  !  40 


1  Perun-turrai  ('  the  great  haven ')  was  to  the  sage  very  much  what  Jerusalem,  the  Holy,  was  to 
the  Hebrew  Psalmists  and  Prophets;  and  what  Jerusalem,  the  Golden,  is  to  Christians  now. 


LI  LJ     «      .       .  213 


LJ  U       &  U). 


[Metre  :  4jfi//?u  <%.*M     Formula  :  -uw  |  -MI  |  -*r£  twice.] 


Lfffl  ILJtTlLJ,  QufTGST  65nJ 


THE   ANCIENT   SACRED   TEMPLE-SONG 

OR 

'ETERNAL   REALITY.' 

HYMN    XXI. 


The  Mistress  dwells  in  midmost  of  Thyself; 

within  the  Mistress  centred  dwellest  Thou ; 
Midst  of  Thy  servant  if  Ye  Both  do  dwell, 

to  me  Thy  servant  ever  give  the  grace 
Amidst  Thy  lowliest  servants  to  abide  ; 

our  Primal  Lord,  Whose  Being  knows  no  end, 
Who  dwellest  in  the  sacred  golden  porch, 

still  present  to  fulfil  my  heart's  intent ! 


i.  NOTE  XIII.  faff*  is  'divine  grace.'  3.   Lines  3,  13-16,  34  arc  irregular  in  metre. 

4.  Comp.  Psalm  xxvii. 


214  $  jj  GU  IT  a-  a  ii  . 


TGsflsST  (jySSlffl—iriLl  <oT%o5r(Lp<S$TG5TtJC>', 


II. 

I  have  not  swerved. 

E'erwhile  in  presence  here  Thou  mad'st  me  Thine ; 

and  I  even  so  to  be  with  effort  strain  : 
I  follow  Thee,  and  Thy  behests  fulfil ; 

but  still  I  here  behind  am  left,  great  Lord ! 
If  Thou  appear  not  now  in  grace,  and  bid 

me  come,  will  not  Thy  servants  doubting  say, 
'And  who  was  he  that  stood  ere  while  with  Thee,' 

Who  joyest  in  the  golden  hall  to  dance? 

in. 
'  He  joy'd  erewhile  in  loving  service  done,'- 

if  I,  with  heart  of  feeling  reft  made  hard 
By  grief,  complain,  for  all  the  world  to  know,— 

will  they  not  say, '  This  is  no  fitting  thing  ? ' 
Thy  faithful  ones,  the  sacrifice  performed, 

now  dwell  in  bliss  with  Thee,  and  Thou  with  them. 
If  Thou  Thy  face  to  me  turn  not,  I  die,— 

life's  Source,  Who  dwellest  in  the  golden  court ! 


ii.  See  legend,  §  5,  p.  xxviii. 


ffi. 


tBl(2)JB<£[T&)  GJPrrQjlT? 


IV. 

Thou  Source  of  All !    Guide  to  the  senses  five ; 

and  to  the  Three ;  to  me,  too,  in  life's  way ! 
Thine  ancient  servants'  thronging  multitude 

is  gathered  now  within  the  heavenly  courts. 
Fount  of  all  brightness  !   Thou  hast  given  them  grace ; 

shall  I  not  cry, '  To  me  show  pity  too  ? ' 
And  so  I  weep, — what  other  can  I  do? — 

Thou  King  of  Tillai's  sacred  court  of  gold  !  16 

v. 
'  King,  Dancer  in  the  golden  court, 

Ambrosia,' — looking  for  Thy  grace, — I  cry. 
Like  patient  heron  watching  for  its  prey, 

by  night  and  day,  I  drooping  'bide  and  mourn. 
Thy  saints  have  reached  the  shore, — in  joy  they  shine  ; 

to  me  if  Thou  deny  that  vision  bright,— 
Like  butter  hidden  in  the  curdled  milk,— 

still  silent,  will  not  they  reproach  ?  ao 


13.  '  Accende  lumen  sensibus.' 


Q..SP 

CT. 


LJSVdS 


L-  fTlLJ  J 

iLtrQe 

QpQIjrEi(9jLCt  ^I^IUITJ 


fFrrjsjgi  <suut 

SUT  GTSsr  {b(Trj<5rrtT(oiu 


VI. 

Even  they  will  heap  reproach  upon  my  name, 

revile,  and  scoffing  point  me  out  as  Thine ; 
While  others  all  will  utter  various  speech  ; 

but  I  will  cherish  yearnings  for  Thy  grace. 
Teacher ! — that  I  amid  Thy  loving  ones 

may  render  service  in  the  sacred  hall,— 
Father ! — Who  dancest  in  the  golden  court, — 

henceforth,  O  Ruler,  pity  show  to  me  !  24 

VII. 

'  Show  pity,  Dancer  in  the  golden  court,' 

with  ever-yearning  soul  I  pray.     Of  old, 
Rare  teaching  didst  Thou  give,  and  mad'st  me  Thine ! 

Shall  I  become  mere  beast,  with  none  to  own  ? 
Thy  saints  around  Thee  throng,  where  Thou  and  they, 

in  happy  sport  commingled,  ever  dwell. 
That  I  may  thither  rise  to  join  the  band, 

our  only  Bliss,  in  grace  O  bid  me  come  !  28 


a.*. 


217 


QuwssrQssrl 


SU/T 


Qp  -5(0,5  Qu[T(<5S)n) 


(o&LLufTlT9 


Qu  /TSSTSSTLD 

UIT,  (oTSSTUnriT.     <-.gf6UIT(Lp<a$T(0<o$T 
JSir(olUSST 


VIII. 
Whom  have  I  save  Thee? 

Grace  if  Thou  show  not  to  Thy  servant,  who 

is  here  to  bid  me  cast  away  my  fears  ? 
All  gold,  Thou  entering  here,  mad'st  me  Thine  own, 

as  thing  of  worth  ;  Dancer  in  court  of  gold  ! 
Me,  from  Thee  severed,  with  bewildered  mind, 

and  troubled  sore,  ah  !  bid  to  come  to  Thee. 
If  Thou  show  not  Thy  glorious  fellowship, 

I  die  ;  and  then  will  not  men  scoff? 

IX. 

The  joys  of  Divan's  paradise. 
They  smile,  they  joy,  honied  delights  they  quaff, 

in  thronging  crowds  Thy  words  expound  and  hear, 
And  loud  extol.    Then  each  apart  repeats 

the  saving  mystery  of  Thy  sacred  Name. 
'Our  Head,  Who  dancest  in  the  golden  court,' 

they  cry.     Before  these  blessed  ones,  shall  I 
Like  dog,  that  jackals  chase  and  scare,  remain? 

My  Teacher,  even  now  bestow  Thy  grace  ! 


218  ^  15  ai  IT 


SO. 


6UlTlLJ(9jLp(y 
LD  <S5T<!B  £>  fr  6 


LJ/TSl^LJ,  QuiTSSTSSTLD  LJ6VLL  <5TSSr(ofD 


X. 

Let  not  my  trust  be  vain ! 

'  He  will  not  cease  to  pour  on  us  His  gifts/ — 

thus  have  I  raving  named  Thy  Name, 
My  eyes  with  tears  were  fill'd, — my  praising  mouth 

falter'd,— I  bow'd, — in  thought  with  melting  soul 
Many  a  time  Thine  image  I  recalled, — 

and  uttering  praises  named  the  golden  court. 
My  Master,  grant  Thy  grace  to  me,  and  oh  ! 

have  pity  on  the  soul  that  pines  for  Thee  ! 


.      S.S.. 


210 


a.  a.. 


Q&nuSlrbt$(TljLJLJ$£l£LQ. 

[Metre :  ^Glfa  aJ^^ii.    Formula :  -•»  |  -tar  \  -«s  |  -<or\\  -«9  |  _  j  |  _, 


THE   SACRED   TEMPLE-LYRIC 

[AN   ANAPHORETIC   DECAD.] 

'THE   CHARACTERISTICS  OF  SACRED   ENJOYMENT/ 

HYMN  XXII. 


Show  me  Thy  Face. 

With  changing  wiles  the  senses  five  bewilder  me : 

their  course  Thou  dost  close  up,  Ambrosial  Fount ! 
Come,  Light  Superne,  that  ever  springing  fill'st  my  soul ! 

and  give  me  grace  to  see  Thee  as  Thou  art. 
Essential  Sweetness  pure  !    O  mighty  £iva-Peruman, 

Who  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai's  sacred  shrine ! 
O  Thou,  the  bliss  all  endless  happy  stations  yield, 

transcending  far,  my  Pleasure  and  my  LOVE  ! 


i.  See  T.  V.  U.  P.,  Canto  V.  62.     Comp.  the  beautiful  Aphorism  (Suttram)  riii  in  giva-ftana-bodhwn. 


220  5  eu  IT  *  a  i  . 

« 

a.. 


<oT68TLJ!TL£><SV6\)(r       )  <33TS5T(77j  1—jBp  fTlLJ  ; 

<35/if£>/rj 

LA  rriuuu  rTjB<5 


L/  (55)  ff  q  S5)  /TdKOT    //J  U  q  (9jJSgil     S5T 


II. 
Praise  for  grace  imparted. 

In  LOVE,  Thy  servant's  soul  and  body  thrilling  through, 

and  melting  all  my  heart  with  rapturous  bliss, 
Thou  hast  bestowed  sweet  grace  beyond  my  being's  powers ; — 

and  I  for  this  have  no  return  to  give  ! 
Thou  art  before  !  Thou  art  behind  !  Thou  art  the  Free, 

through  all  diffus'd  !    Thou  First,  without  an  end  ! 
South-Perun-turrai's  Lord  !    O  £iva-Peruman  ! 

£iva-Puram's  ever-glorious  KING  ! 

in. 

inspire  me  to  feel  and  utter  the  very  truth  regarding  Thee. 

O  KING,  the  slave  of  Thine  own  loving  ones  am  I. 

Father  !  not  soul  alone  but  body  too, 
Thou  enterest  melting,  and  with  sweetness  fill'st  each  pore. 

Thou  dost  disperse  false  darkness,  O  true  Light ! 
Ambrosial  Sea,  whose  clearness  knows  no  ruffling  wave  ! 

£ivan,  Who  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine  1 


Q.Q.. 


©. 


Thou  Thought  unique,  thinking  what  passes  word  and  thought  ! 

teach  me  to  KNOW  the  way  to  speak  of  Thee  !  1  1 

IV. 

Sages  that  KNOW  all  else  ;  the  heav'nly  ones  and  all 

the  others,  scarce  can  KNOW  Thee,  Being  rare  ! 
Life  of  all  lives,  with  none  confused  !    My  healing  Balm, 

that  from  '  Embodiments  '  my  spirit  frees  ! 
Pure  Light,  clear  shining  'mid  the  darkness  dense  ! 

£ivan,  Who  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine  ! 
O  Bliss,  of  qualities  devoid  !    Henceforth  to  me, 

who  have  to  Thee  drawn  nigh,  what  can  there  LACK  ?  16 

v. 
Fulness,  that  knows  no  LACK  ;  ambrosial  Essence  pure  ! 

O  unsealed  mount  of  ever-blazing  light  ! 
Thou  art  the  Veda,  —  Thou  the  mystic  Veda's  sense. 

Within  my  mind  Thou  coming,  'bid'st  its  Lord  ! 
As  torrents  burst  their  bounds,  Thou  rushest  through  my  soul  ! 

£ivan,  Who  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine  ! 

12.  See   Martineau's    Types  of  Ethical  Theory,  vol.  i.  pp.  83,  200.      Aristotle's  definition  of 
God  :  KOI  fffnv  -?i  vbrjais,  voriatais  vorjats  :  '  thought  of  thought.' 


222  #  5  su  IT  a-  s>  li . 


\  &  sifl<&<£  ssrssr 

651  Q     \ 


6T. 


O  King,  my  body  hast  Thou  made  Thine  home ;  henceforth 

what  blessings  shall  Thy  suppliant  ASK  of  Thee  ?  20 

VI. 

That  I  may  ever  ASK  and  melt,  within  my  mind, 

0  Light,  Thou  dost  arise  !    In  beauty  shines 
On  heavenly  heads  the  lotus  of  Thy  roseate  feet ! 

£ivan,  who  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine  ! 
The  boundless  ether,  water,  earth,  fire,  air ; — all  these 

Thou  art ;  and  none  of  these  Thou  art ;  but  dwell'st 
In  these  conceal'd,  O  formless  One  !    My  heart  is  glad 

that  with  these  eyes  THIS  DAY  I've  seen  Thee  clear  !  24 

VII. 

THIS  DAY  on  me  in  grace  Thou  risest  bright,  a  Sun, 

bidding  from  out  my  mind  the  darkness  flee ! 
That  thought  may  cease  upon  Thy  nature  manifest, 

1  think.     Beside  Thee  all  that  is  is  nought,— 


24.  A  various  reading  (a^C*)  gives  '  O  Form  unique! ' 


Q.Q.. 


557 


Moving  ever, — as  atoms  ever  wasting, — Thou  art  One  ! 

£ivan,  Who  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine  ! 
Thou  art  not  anything ;  without  Thee  nothing  is  ; 

who  are  they  that  can  know  Thee  as  Thou  art  ?  as 

VIII. 

Expanse  of  light,  that  everywhere  through  every  world, 

o'er  earth  and  heaven  springs  forth  and  spreads  alone  ! 
Thou  Fire  in  water  hid  !   O  Pure  One,  if  of  Thee 

we  think,  Thou'rt  hard  to  reach.    Fountain  of  grace, 
Upspringing  in  the  thought  devout,  as  honey  sweet ! 

£ivan,  in  Perun-turrai's  sacred  shrine 
Who  dwell'st, — who  are  my  kindred  here,  and  strangers  who? 

my  LIGHT,  Thou  changest  all  to  rapturous  joy !  3J 

IX. 

O  Form,  beheld  in  radiant  LIGHT  made  manifest ; 

Thou  only  Mystic  One,  Who  wear'st  no  form ; 
Thou  First !    Thou  Midst !    Thou  Last !   Great  Sea  of  rapturous  joy ! 

Thou  that  dost  loose  our  being's  bonds  ! 


224  $  5  6U  IT  &•  &>  &  . 


U(T6u(o<$iTtr 

ST  6$fl%553T 


so. 


@JB65><£(olU  (o&lTuSlGV  Q&JSKfTL-  OTL 


l  IT-PIT] 

£}<SV6ST 


Thou  sacred  Hill  of  grace  and  good,  from  evil  free ! 

£ivan  in  sacred  Perun-turrai's  shrine 
Who  dwell'st !    There  is  no  way  for  Thee  to  part  from  me  ! 

Come,  GIVE  to  me  to  worship  at  Thy  feet !  36 

x. 
What  Thou  hast  GIVEN  is  THEE  ;  and  what  hast  gained  is  ME  : 

O  £ankara,  who  is  the  knowing  one  ? 
I  have  obtained  the  rapturous  bliss  that  knows  no  end ; 

yet  now,  what  one  thing  hast  Thou  gained  from  me  ? 
Our  Peruman,  Who  for  Thy  shrine  hast  ta'en  my  thought ! 

£ivan,  Who  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai's  courts  ! 
My  Father,  and  my  Master  !  Thou  hast  made  this  frame 

Thine  home  ;  for  this  I  know  no  meet  return  !  40 


40.  See  lines  4,  6,  and  20. 


u 


Q  <f  <5 


<SV  !T  LJ     U 

54  sir  GVJ  op  4    Gannon  ID.] 

[Metre:   «&»Au  «?o4^i»,  eight  feet.] 
S, 


QurrtLHu(o(Ssr6sr 


(oLCxS&lU  &l<SuG>6$T\ 


WEARINESS    OF  LIFE. 
(THE    INFINITY   OF   BLISS   IN   £IVAN.) 

HYMN   XXIII. 


Sever'd  from  Thee  X  cannot  live. 

I,  false,  am  sever'd  from  the  flow'ry  feet  that,  entering  here, 

made  my  soul  melt,  distilling  nectar  sweet. 
Yet  I,  poor  wretch,  die  not  as  yet ;  but,  in  a  waking  dream, 

the  inner  purpose  of  my  soul  I've  lost. 

0  Teacher,— King,— Great  Sea  of  grace,— Father,— Whose  roseate  form 

Ayan  and  Mai  could  never  come  to  know,— 

1  know  not  what  to  do,  O  £IVAN,  Thou  Who  didst  draw  near 

IN  SACRED  PERUN-TURRAI'S  SHRINE  TO  DWELL  1 


4.  See  L.  a8. 
Q 


226  #§—••*• 

a.. 


ii. 

i 


Ant-hills  were  they,  and  tree*  were  they ;  water  and  air 

their  food ;  thus  heavenly  one*,  and  others  too, 
Were  sore  distresst,  but  none  Thy  rtow'ry  feet  beheld, 

0  King  1   Me,  mastered  with  a  single  word, 

Thou  held'st  crcwhile.     I  pant  not  now,  nor  melt  in  mind  subdued 

1  feel  no  love  devout ;  this  loveless  frame 

I've  not  subdued  ;  I  wander  yet,  QIVAM,  Who  didst  draw  near 
IN  SACRED  PERUH-TORRAI'S  SHRIKE  TO  DWELL! 

in. 

Wh«  r.  •*•  my  oU  )oy»  » 

Ev'n  me,  the  meanest  one,  Thou  didst  as  thing  of  worth  regard, 
and  gav'st  Thy  grace ;  and  giving  mad'st  me  glad. 

I  trod  on  air,  O  Rider  of  the  Steed  !- Author  of  good ! 
To  all  heaven's  countless  hosts  the  Dwelling-place ! 

Eternal  One !   Who  atest  poison  from  the  billowy  sea ! 
The  cities  of  Thy  foes  Thou  didst  consume ! 

5.  Comp.  VIII.  19,  ao.  They  performed  ardaoot  penaocc*.    Soeh  kfwdt  Mela  emy 

10.  Lit.  'walked  on  my  bead.' 


didst  draw  near 

SACRED  PERUNTURRAl's  SHRINE  ! 


IV. 
Why  didst  Thou  make  me  Thine? 

ovmg  ones,  and  those  who  wrought  hard  deeds  of  penitence 
Ayan  and  Mai  too,  joyous,  melted  then 
e  wax  before  the  fire,  thinking  on  me ;  while  many  a  one 
lere  stood  around  I    Why  didst  Thou  make  me  Thine  ? 
mnd  was  like  the  gnarl'd  and  knotted  tree;  like  senseless  wood 
eye ;  harder  than  iron  my  dull  ear 

the  south-shore  I    Lord  of  <>,world,  Who  didst  draw  near 
SACRED  PERUN-TURRAI'S  SHRINE  TO  DWELL  ! 

v. 

I  know  no  other  gods  but  Thee. 

the  law  of  'sportive  gods.'     In  love  I  neared  Thee,  named 

Teacher ';-in  Thy  gracious  way  I'll  'bide 

mg  rare,-Whom  ev'n  the  'earth-born  gods'  find  not,-that  Thee 
I  may  not  quit,  O  Ruler,  show  me  grace  ! 

(a)  Brahmans  and  deified  saints  ;  and  (3)  the 


16 


Q  2 


228  £  j  en 


srrtu  LDrrujpisnpa;  sijjBfcrjGtT  Q&ILJILJJHJ; 


0-0 


Sn. 


sir  IT®  Q-soGsr:$qij 


CT. 


6UUIU,  OTS5T  JVSST^l^.  USttfilUJU 

Show  me  Thy  jewell'd  feet,  O  God  ;  body's  illusions  all 

be  by  Thy  grace  for  ever  swept  away. 
Lord  of  the  gods  that  rule  the  'evolving  gods'!   QIVAN,  our  God 

WHO  DWELL'ST  IN  SACRED  PERUN-TURRAI'S  SHK 

VI. 
Z  cannot  endure  this  severance. 

I  loose  not  body's  bonds,  nor  enter  fire  to  end  the  strife  ; 

nor  know  the  method  of  Thy  sacred  grace. 
I  cannot  bear  this  'frame  ';  yet  way  to  'scape  I  none  discern. 

Praise,  praise,  Thou  Rider  on  the  warlike  bull  ! 
I  die  not  yet  !  sever'd  from  Thee  what  pleasure  can  I  take  ? 

In  grace  vouchsafe  to  bid  me,  'This  do  thou  !' 
£IVAN,  Who  didst  draw  near  where  waters  flood  the  fertile  fields, 

AND  DWELL'ST  IN  SACRED  PERUN-TURRAI'S  SHRINE  ! 

VII. 
Z  am  not  worthy,  yet  hear  my  voice  I 

Illusionist;  Who  at'st  the  poison  from  the  refluent  sea;  — 
heaven's  Lord  ;  our  azure-throated  Balm  of  life  ! 

A  cur,  I  cannot  ponder  Thee,  nor  bow  me  at  Thy  foot, 
'  Nama-£ivaya  '  humbly  breathing  out  ! 


u 


sr,  QufT(frj<£i_(b  Qi—jBQprrssT 

fltf)SLnfb  Qrb<S51%55T3i 
(3j<5S)[T&Lp<SV  cS/TLlz^dJ 

&Gsrgy^ssr 

Q&IU6U  Q<5  GST  fiqijIBp  <S$T6$T9 
^L^ILJ  Q 
&<£  6LI1IT  L-l<a$T  S 


(oLcsiS)/u 


sis.   ?  •«•<?©/  (for  metre). 

Vile  as  a  demon  I, — show  me  Thy  mighty  way.  Thou  o'er 

Whose  braided  lock  wanders  the  crescent  moon,— 
Beseems  it  far  from  Thee  I  roaming  weep  ?   £IVAN,  Who  cam'st 

IN  SACRED  PERUN-TURRAI'S  SHRINE  TO  DWELL  !  28 

VIII. 

Can  my  sufferings  be  pleasing  to  Thee? 
Ayan  who  in  the  lotus  dwells,  the  Sleeper  on  the  warring  sea, 

Purandaran,  and  all  the  rest,  stood  round. 
From  dregs  of  ill  Thou  mad'st  me  clean,  showing  Thy  jewell'd  feet ; 

didst  give  the  sign,  and  with  Thy  servants  join  ! 
Then  sore  amazed  I  knew  not  what  to  do.     Balm  of  my  soul, 

and  is  it  sweet  Thy  servant  suffer  pain  ? 
£IVAN,  Who  didst  draw  nigh  where  cooling  waters  flow  around  the  fields, 

AND  DWELL'ST  IN  SACRED  PERUN-TURRAI'S  SHRINE  !  33 

IX. 
Is  there  no  place  for  me  among-  Thy  saints? 

Indra,  the  Four-faced,  and  the  heavenly  Ones  stood  round,— on  earth 
with  tender  sweetness  then  Thou  mad'st  me  Thine,— 


29.  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Indra.     See  lines  13,  14. 


2OQ  rff  !Ij  GU  IT 

<£tTG\)<s5T  t-jQirg-uSl 

lUfTlU\ 


L  S^SVL^iL  l 


ao. 


Thou  of  the  flow'ry  Foot,  that  took  the  life  from  Death  ; 

Gahga  is  Thine ;  the  fire  burns  in  Thy  hand  ; 
And  Mai,  in  triumph-songs,  to  that  same  flower-foot  sings ; 

command  me  too,  whose  eye  sees  not,  to  come  ! 
Bright  flow  the  flow'ry  streams  around  the  fields  where  QIVAN  came 

IN  SACRED  PERUN-TURRAI'S  SHRINE  TO  DWELL  !  36 

x. 

I  languish  thinking  on  heavenly  joys. 

Ill  tender  grace  Thou  cam'st,  and  bad'st  me  come,  didst  banish  fear  ; 

then  in  Thy  grace's  mighty  sea  I  plunged. 
I  drank,  was  sated  ;  now  I  melt  no  more, — £IVAN,  Who  cam'st 

IN  SACRED  PERUN-TURRAI'S  SHRINE  TO  DWELL  ! 
He  who  the  armlet  wears,  and  flowery  Ayan  know  Thee  not, 

heaven's  Lord,  sole  Partner  of  the  Mountain-Maid  ! 
I  wilder'd  stand,  while  rising  swells  the  mighty  joy,— O  SEA 

WHOSE  WATERS  REST  ON  KAILAl's  LOFTY  HILL  !  40 


34.  See  p.  63.         39.  Vishnu. 


%  S>  6O  LJ  I>J  jb  $| . 


u,ii®.     The  metre  is  confused.     Each  line  has  four  feet,  and  the  formula  is  often 

-  aniu  |  -  IOT  I  -  arid  \  -  grid.'] 


p  jslrrsrr 


THE    REFUGE-DECAD 

OR 

'THE    ASSURANCE    OF    MATURITY.' 

HYMN   XXIV. 

It  seems  probable  that  this  song  was  founded  upon  the  Buddhist  formula  which  required  the 
devotee  to  utter  nine  times  the  word  saranam  (*j«ni  =  «iy«»j_A*«vMo))  three  times  to  Buddha,  three 
times  to  the  law  or  doctrine,  and  three  times  to  the  congregation  (  =  church,  or  order.  Frankfurter's 
Handbook  of  Pali,  p.  81).  This  entire  abandonment  of  self  on  the  part  of  the  disciple  was  his 
initiation  into  the  Buddhistic  system.  Here  our  author  takes  'refuge'  at  the  foot  of  the  loving 
Master  Who  has  called  him,  and  will  at  last  receive  him  to  Himself.  This  element  of  personal 
devotion  to  One  W,  horn  he  believes  to  have  been  the  Supreme  manifested  in  the  flesh  is  very  striking, 
and  gives  a  power  that  was  wanting  in  the  Buddhist  system.  We  must  remember  that  all  his  life 
our  sage  was  brought  into  hostile  contact  with  the  Buddhists,  and  that  he  fashions  his  poems  so  as 
to  afford  the  strongest  possible  contrast  to  that  which  he  hated. 


Thy  saints  like  clustering  lotus-flowers  have  joined  Thy  roseate  foot ; 
Mature  of  mind,  with  Thee  they're  gone ;  while  I,  a  sinful  man, 
In  body  foul  and  vile  remain,  devoid  of  wisdom's  lore, 
Of  mind  impure.    MASTER  !  THY  SLAVE,  I  THEE  MY  REFUGE  MAKE  ! 


i.  Comp.  L.  i.          2.  NOTE  V.         4.  Comp.  XXIII.  10;  L.  3.    The  use  of  the  word  'refuge' 
in  Holy  Scripture  should  be  compared  here.     See  Psalm  xc.  i. 


232  d§  J5  su  IT  <ff  a;  li. 


a.. 


Q<P£)]LJUGlj(o<55r  !  ^SbTnftQfjJpfqij  QT/TSV  67(5377-9/9  <S1$)<S5)  HJ  Co  SI/  /f 


',  ILMSST 


ii. 

My  meanness  only  hateful  things  can  do ;  Thy  greatness  still 

Forgives ! — The  serpent-gem  Thou  wear'st ;  swells  Gahga's  stream  Thy  crest ; 

Thou,  by  Thy  sacred  grace,  the  root  of  these  my  '  births ' 

Dost  cut  away.     MASTER  !  THY  SLAVE,  I  THEE  MY  REFUGE  MAKE  !  8 

in. 

Great  Peruman,  Thou  who  dost  free  from  '  birth ' !  Thou  frenzy  giv'st 

O  Peruman  ! — Within  my  mind,  O  Peruman  the  wise, 

Thou  com'st.    The  flow'ry  One,  and  giant  Mai  too,  knew  Thee  not ; 

Rare  Peruman  !    MASTER  !  THY  SLAVE,  I  THEE  MY  REFUGE  MAKE  !  12 

IV. 

In  floods  from  sorrow's  pouring  clouds  that  rise,  Thy  loving  ones 
Sinking  have  seized  the  raft  of  Thy  blest  foot,  and  risen  to  heaven. 
Whirl'd  amid  trouble's  sea,  where  women-billows'  dash,  and  lust's 
Sea-monster  wounds,  I  sink.  MASTER  !  I  THEE  MY  REFUGE  MAKE  !  16 


13-16.  Comp.  V.  105-108;  XLI.  1-8. 


©. 


9.0 


<SLIS3TL£><S 


!  9_<55)£_//j/r«L/  !      uujGsr  SLSST 


CT. 


V. 

Fall'n  'mid  the  circling  troops  of  them  of  curling  locks;  Thy  power 
Forgetting ;  in  this  body  dark  I  wearied  lay.    Thou  Half 
Of  Her  with  wide  black  eyes  and  glance  like  startled  fawn !    Heaven's  Lord  ! 
Give  me  Thy  grace  !    MASTER  !  THY  SLAVE,  I  THEE  MY  REFUGE  MAKE  !         20 

VI. 

Broken  by  mighty  churning-staff  of  those  of  jet  black  eyes, 

Like  cream  in  churn  I  bounded,  suffered  pain.    O  flow'r-foot,  Hail !  . 

When  com'st  Thou  ?  When  shall  I  whose  deeds  are  '  mighty '  worship  Thee  ? 

Lord  of  the  Earth  !    MASTER  !  THY  SLAVE,  I  THEE  MY  REFUGE  MAKE  !          .-.» 

VII. 

Caught  in  the  net  of  hot  desire  for  those  of  glancing  eyes 
And  slender  form,  I  writh'd  and  roll'd  in  sorrow  sore ;  that  I 
Wallow  no  more,  pity  my  fault,  appear,  pour  sweetest  balm  ! 
Lord  of  the  temple-court !    MASTER  !  I  THEE  MY  REFUGE  MAKE  ! 


23.  See  «*in  Lex.  25.  Naladiyar,  331. 


234  d§*  (5  GU  rc 


STU!T  rfjl  GST  j£f(tIjL.- 

tD  (yi 

®sfis$j'8ssT 


•o. 


VIII. 

Thou  Half  of  Her  with  beauteous  eyes  !  unto  Thy  flow'ry  fe,et 

Thou  call'st  me, — then  dismisses!  me  to  deepest  depths  ;  Thy  thought 

I  know  not.    Like  pipe's  changing  tones  now  sinks,  now  swells  my  soul. 

Alas!  I  perish  quite  !     MASTER  !  I  THEE  MY  REFUGE  MAKE!  32 

IX. 

Thy  loving  ones  beneath  Thy  jewell'd  feet  that  grace  confer 

Abiding,  gain  the  bliss  that  knows  no  refluent  tide.     No  way 

To  worship  Thee  I  find ;  in  sooth  I  know  not  Thee,  nor  lore 

That  tells  of  Thee  !     MASTER  !  THY  SLAVE,  I  THEE  MY  REFUGE  MAKE  !          36 

x. 

Eager  I  took  ambrosia  of  Thy  grace  so  freely  pour'd; 
I  strove  to  drink  :  my  sinful  soul  by  evil  fate  was  bound  ! 
Give  me  to  taste  the  rare  stream  gushing  honey-sweet,  and  save ! 
I  sink  in  woe  1     MASTER  !  THY  SLAVE,  I  THEE  MY  REFUGE  MAKE  !  40 


a.©. 
<S5>  <F 


[Metre:   ^Qiflu  fS^f^.     Formula:  -iei  \  -ar\  -u>r\  -  tar  \  -tor  \  -»• 

a. 
<sirs3sr 


a.. 


THE    DECAD    OF    DESIRE 

OR 

KNOWLEDGE    OF   'SELF.' 

HYMN   XXV. 

I. 
X  long-  for  Thy  summons. 

0  flawless  Gem,  who  gav'st  the  wealth  of  Thine  own  roseate  feet,— 
By  the  kite-banner'd  King  unseen,— and  here  mad'st  me  Thine  own  ! 
My  darkness  drive  far  off;  say  'hither  come'!    The  grace  to  gain 
That  calls  me  there  to  dwell,  BEHOLD,  O  SIRE,  MY  SOUL  HATH  YEARN'D  ! 

n. 

Weary  of  the  flesh. 

1  not  endure  to  wear  this  garment  of  the  flesh, — of  joints 

And  bones  compact,— with  fatness  filled,— covered  with  skin  !   O  King, 
Call  me  !    To  men  of  every  sort,  as  fits  their  case  Thou  com'st ; 
Ambrosia  rare,  ah,  Thee  to  see,  BEHOLD,  O  SIRE,  I  YEARN  ! 


2.  Vishnu,  on  whose  banner  is  Garucin. 


236  $  (5  6U  IT 


dk_  su/r/u 


t. 


<oTSST(<58)J  <J£J(LpQp\   <S^, 

St-0 


III. 
Let  me  hear  Thy  call. 

Call  me,  my  King,  that  this  poor  frame,  with  vileness  fill'd,  may  die ! 

Thou  '  Dancer,'  Guru-gem,  Who  guarding  makest  me  Thine; 

O  God  by  gods  unreach'd  !    £ivan  !    Look  on  my  face  awhile. 

For  Thee,  to  hear  Thee  call,  BEHOLD,  O  SIRE,  MY  SOUL  HATH  YEARN'D  !        12 

IV. 
I  wait  in  humble  hope. 

This  walking  cell,  with  loathly  filth  filled  full,  contemptible, 

Clings  to  me,  and  afflicts  my  soul !    Hail  to  Thee,  mighty  Lord  ! 

Broken,  subdued,  and  melted,  looking  ever  for  Thy  light, 

Thy  blest  feet's  flower  to  gain,  BEHOLD,  O  SIRE,  MY  SOUL  HATH  YEARN'D  !     16 

v. 

Where  are  the  old  joys? 

Within  this  frame  is  loathsome;  and  without  skin-covered  sores, 

Sore  grief!    Thou  Rider  on  the  Bull !    Bedeckt  with  ashes  white, 

Stooping  to  me,  Thou  cam'st,  and  mad'st  me  Thine ;  Ambrosia  rare  ! 

For  word  of  tenderness,  BEHOLD,  O  SIRE,  MY  SOUL  HATH  YEARN'D  !  20 


u$i.     e..  237 

St. 


a.f 


CT. 
LJ  /rG?  fJfTfT<S)S<Sm(a  <GVS)  j 

;  QJ/TW 


65>&lUJlbQ(y(L£)3j](abT 
QfJ-t/JfU/rQ^SW^^^^^LD^SWiSl/^Q^/iQLJ^triT^ 

<s?Dfl)//j/r,  toTGsrpsbr  eumurrsv 


VI. 

X  long  for  the  life  of  heaven. 

Weary,  mere  dog,  I  cannot  here  abide.    Take  back  earth's  joys 
Thou  gav'st,  O  Thou  whose  roseate  feet-flowers  heaven's  sons  know  not  !— 
Thou  know'st  no  bond  !    Thy  face's  light,  the  gleaming  of  Thy  smile,— 
To  see,  BEHOLD,  O  SIRE,  HOW  EAGERLY  MY  SOUL  HATH  YEARN'D!  .-» 

VII. 
I  long  to  praise  Thee  there. 

Thou  Infinite,  Whom  earth  and  heaven  extol,  Thou  Light  superne,— 
Thou  cam'st  to  make  me  Thine  !    Give  me  the  world  of  final  bliss ; 
Thy  thousand  names  I'd  circling  sing.    Thee  mighty  Lord  to  praise, 
Th'  Ambrosia  ever  new,  BEHOLD,  O  SIRE,  MY  SOUL  HATH  YEARN'D! 

VIII. 
My  whole  being  worships  Thee. 

With  hands  Thee  worshipping,  embracing  close  Thy  jewell'd  feet, 
And  placing  still  unwearied  on  my  head,  'Our  Lord,  our  Lord,'  I  cry ;  - 
1  My  Teacher,'  with  my  mouth  I  cry.     Like  wax  before  the  fire, 
King  of  Aiyarr'!   BEHOLD,  O  SIRE,  MY  MELTING  SOUL  HATH  YEARN'D! 

25.  Comp.  V.  2.  32.  A  famous  shrine :  Tiru-vaiyami. 


238  $  15  QJ  IT 

An. 


BO. 


-3rL-(o!T\  JS  T(O  <<5S)[Tcg[i%5m<£rT(o  <S33TS57 


IX. 
When  shall  I  join  Thy  saints  ? 

To  cast  quite  off  this  sinful  frame  ;  to  enter  (Divan's  home ; 

To  see  the  Wondrous  Light,  that  so  these  eyes  may  gladness  gain ; 

0  Infinite,  without  compare  !   Th'  assembly  of  Thy  saints 

Of  old,  to  see,  BEHOLD,  O  SIRE,  THY  SERVANT'S  SOUL  HATH  YEARN'D  !          36 

x. 

Thy  voice  stills  passion. 

Caught  in  the  net  of  passion  fierce  by  those  whose  eyes  shine  bright, 

1  languish'd, — I  a  cur, — O  light  of  truth  !  and  saw  no  help. 
Thou  Half  of  Her  with  gentle  foot !— Thou  only  One  !   To  hear 

Thee  say  with  coral  lips, '  Fear  not,'  BEHOLD,  O  SIRE,  MY  SOUL  HATH  YEARN'D  !  40 


.       S.ST. 


flULJU 


[Metre  :  .gftAu  ^orA**.     Six  feet  :  -«or|-J|-rf|_j|_rf 


<Sj>Ul5l  <o 


a.. 


UJ/T657 


THE    DECAD    OF    WONDER. 
(RELEASE.) 

HYMN    XXVI. 

I. 

With  melting  mind  I  said  not,  'He  is  gold/  '  His  is  a  ruby's  light ;' 
I  languish'd  pondering  charms  of  damsels  young.     Boon  indescribable, 
Mercies  beyond  compare,  to  me  were  given  ;  He  of  the  flowery  foot, 
THE  FATHER,  MADE  ME  His,  AND  JOINED  ME  TO  His  SAINTS  : 

SUCH  WONDER  HAVE  WE  SEEN  !  ^ 

II. 

Of  righteous  deeds  I  had  no  thought,  nor  joined  those  who  think  on  these; 
To  sorrows  born  and  deaths,  I  wandered  here.     He  said,  'This  is  my  slave.' 
He,  the  Supernal,  stood  in  nearness  manifest, — His  half,  the  Queen. 
THE  FIRST  ONE  MADE  ME  His,  AND  JOINED  ME  TO  His  SAINTS  : 

SUCH  WONDER  HAVE  WE  SEEN  ! 


I.  This  may  be  '  place  and  wealth '  or  '  a  hoarded  treasure.' 


240  $  15  GVJ  IT  ff  «  &. 


sfliususw,  GrsffliLKsussr 
T  i-]rf)<p<55)L- 


©. 


e.o 


in. 

Aforetime,  that  my  'mighty  deeds'  might  pass,  the  Father  triple-eyed,— 
Whom  all  find  hard  to  know,  to  servant-bands  abundantly  revealed,— 
Who  plae'd  the  crescent  moon  on  'braided  lock'  of  more  than  golden  slice  n, 
THE  SIRE, — He  MADE  ME  His,  AND  JOIN'D  ME  TO  His  SAINTS  : 

SUCH  WONDER  HAVE  WE  SEEN  !  12 

IV. 

Perpend  the  one  sole  cause  for  which  the  world  a  madman  nameth  me  : 
I  liv'd  as  others,  knew  no  way  to  join  me  to  His  grace  divine ; 
To  deaths,  to  fallings  into  direful  hells,  I  gave  myself  a  prey. 
THE  FATHER  MADE  ME  His,  AND  JOIN'D  ME  TO  His  SAINTS  : 

SUCH  WONDER  HAVE  WE  SEEN  !  16 

V. 

I  hasted  not  to  join  the  choirs ;  I  pluck'd  no  flowers  nor  worshipped ; 
A  slave  to  charms  of  those  of  perfum'd  locks  I  squander'd  gifts  of  life. 
By  night  our  King  dances  midmost  the  fires, — the  snake  amidst  H  is  braided  hair ! 

HE  MADE  ME  HlS,  AND  JOIN'D  ME  TO  His  SAINTS  : 

SUJbH  WONDER  HAVE  WE  SEEN  !  3O 


a.*. 


241 


CT. 


&G38Ji—n 


Qub\ 


VI. 

Through  my  mere  folly  I  the  Letters  Five  forgot,  that  speak  His  sacred  Name ; 
I  drew  not  near  those  wise  in  lore  divine,  longing  to  share  their  virtuous  deeds. 
Born  on  the  earth  and  dying  there  mere  thing  of  earth,  to  earth  I  gave  myself! 
THE  MIGHTY  MADE  ME  His,  AND  JOIN'D  ME  TO  His  SAINTS: 

SUCH  WONDER  HAVE  WE  SEEN  !  24 

VII. 

This  hut  untrue,  whose  walls  are  flesh,  worm-stuffed,  decay'd,  dripping  with  all 

that's  foul, — 

This  did  I  take  for  true,  whirled  round  in  sorrow's  sea.    He  Who  of  rarest  gem, 
Of  pearl,  of  ruby,  adamant,  and  coral  red, — the  gleaming  splendour  wears,— 
MY  FATHER  MADE  ME  His,  AND  JOIN'D  ME  TO  His  SAINTS  : 

SUCH  WONDER  HAVE  WE  SEEN  !  a8 

VIII. 

Erewhile,that  I  no  more  might 'bide  with  Him,  He  sent,  and  plac'dme  in  this  cell. 
He  look'd  on  me,  spake  gentlest  words  of  mystery;  brake  off  the  yoke;  His  hand 
Upraised,  made  former  falseness  cease,  removed  all  fault,  filled  me  with  gleam- 
ing light : 
TWAS  THUS  HE  MADE  ME  His,  AND  JOIN'D  ME  TO  His  SAINTS  : 

SUCH  WONDER  HAVE  WE  SEEN  !  3* 


25.  The  body.     Nslat/i,  231  ;  ch.  v.         29.  The  body. 
R 


212 


ai  IT  a-  a  il  . 


IX. 

Like  fragrance  hid  within  the  blooming  flower,  the  meaning  of  this  frame 
No  mortal  mind  can  reach :  the  Being  infinite.    That  Being  I  knew  not. 
I  trusted  words  of  fools  that  pluck  the  fruit  of  deeds.  From  sensual  snare  to  save 
THE  FATHER  MADE  ME  His,  AND  JOIN'D  ME  TO  His  SAINTS  : 

SUCH  WONDER  HAVE  WE  SEEN  !  3^5 

X. 

This  hut,  with  darkness  dense,  the  fruit  of '  mighty  deeds/  I  took  for  wonderful, 
Rejoiced,  and  so  was  falling  into  deepest  hell.    He  gave  my  soul  true  light ! 
He  that  with  angry  foot  and  ruddy  fire  forthwith  the  triple  walls  threw  down 
The  true  way  showed  to  me  in  grace,  the  false  destroyed  : 

SUCH  WONDER  HAVE  WE  SEEN  !  40 


43 


sssr  rr  p  &  u 


THE    DECAD    OF    MYSTIC    UNION 

OR 

THE    NATURE    OF    RELEASE1. 

HYMN   XXVII. 


When  shall  Z  reach  the  Inaccessible  ? 

The  gleaming  golden  Hill,  the  flawless  Pearl,  the  Shrine  of  tender  love 
Who  made  me,  last  of  man,  His  own,  in  speechless  service  glad  !    He  Whom 
Dark  Mai  and  Brahma  baffled  yet  approach  not, — gave  Himself,  rare  Balm  ! 
When  shall  I  dwell  in  MYSTIC  UNION  JOINED  WITH  HIM,  MY  FLAWLESS  GEM  ?   4 

ii. 

My  8<ml  cries  out  for  Thy  rest. 

Thy  servant  I  endure  not,  O  my  king,  upon  this  earth  in  mire 
Of  fivefold  sense  to  sink  !     In  thought  adoring  £ivan  as  my  Lord, 


1  See  NOTE  III. 
R    2 


244  ^  5  eu  it  *  a  A 

oUfr  Qga 

Q<g<s$T£)] 


Ql—ULJ   Q^SST^i  Q<£lT<S\)(o'SVfr9  STSSTQuJSV  SV/TLOSS^n  GtfllUU 


ffi. 


J  UlT^SV  ^(SS^fQl^K^il  GVT(LpS5).£ 


With  mind  that  melts,  like  sands  where  waters  spring,  with  cries  of  jubilee, 
When  shall  I  praise,  in  MYSTIC  UNION  JOINED  WITH  HIM,  MY  FLAWLESS  GEM?  8 


in. 

When  shall  Z  join  the  happy  saints  ? 


While  lofty  Mai  and  Ayan  fear'd,  a  hill  of  fire  Who  rose,  He  loveless  me 
Made  His  !   Ambrosia  rare  !   Amid  His  saints,  whose  souls  gush  out  with  love, 
..To  hearts'  content,  my  praise  outpouring,  wreath'd  with  fragrant  flowers, 
When  shall  I  lie,  in  MYSTIC  UNION  JOINED  WITH  HIM,  MY  FLAWLESS  GEM?     12 


IV. 
His  blissful  presence. 


With  Ayan  of  the  Lotus,  Mai,  and  all  the  rest, — with  the  Immortals'  King, 
Speak  praises  to  His  name  !   The  Light  surpassing  speech  and  words'  intent ! 
TheNel/i's  Fruit;  Milk,  Honey,  Balm  with  sweetness  fill'd; — Ambrosia  pure. 
When  shall  I  clasp,  in  MYSTIC  UNION  JOINED  WITH  HIM,  MY  FLAWLESS  GEM?  16 


15.  Phyllanthus.     When  ripe,  the  fruit  is  almost  transparent. 


|.        2.67.  2 


©. 

^^^(^^^^Au^<^^^Q^^iu^u,LLtr^^ 


C5/TS33T 


Qugisu  Q<£<5ST£]  QxrTGvQsvrr,  grssrQuTsv 


LJ/T/L/L 

u  Q<56srg]  Q&jsvQsvrr,  ^rssrQurrsv 


».*» 

CT. 


V. 
Hidden  from  gods :    to  me  revealed. 

To  see  the  foot  and  crown,  that  gleam  with  light,  Ayan  and  Mai,  down  deep, 
Up  high,  they  dug,  they  flew;  but  could  not  see  His  form  !  While  all  this  earth 
Stood  round,  my  service  claimed,  made  me  His  own,  and  bade  me  come !  His  love 
When  shall  I  praise,  in  MYSTIC  UNION  JOINED  WITH  HIM,  MY  FLAWLESS  GEM?  zo 

VI. 
When  shall  I  recover  the  old  rapture? 

In  love  He  came,  and  rapture  gave  in  olden  days,  to  me  His  slave! 

And  then  He  left  me  on  this  wide  vast  earth  to  wander  'wildered ! 

With  floods  of  gushing  tears,  and  frame  with  transport  thrilled,  in  joy  and  love, 

When  shall  I  stand,  in  MYSTIC  UNION  JOINED  WITH  HIM,  MY  FLAWLESS  GEM?  34 

VII. 
When  shall  I  know  Him? 

Hard  to  others'  thought,  thou'rt  fire,  water,  wind,  earth,  ether;  Him, 
Sole  One  to  whom  none  can  compare ;  in  joy  beholding,  praising  loud, 


246  $  (5  61J  IT  ff  <$ 


QsnsvQsvi',  GrssrQurrsv 


8m. 


(oU  JjStriLJJB  p$S8ST<SU  QpSSTJgl  Qs  tTSV(o0V  /T,  OTSSrOu  T^)  SDffLDSMf)  GSHLJLJ 

* 


While  tears  in  torrents  flow,  adoring  hand  out-stretched,  fragrant  flower-wreaths 
When  shall  I  bring,  in  MYSTIC  UNION  JOINED  WITH  HIM,  MY  FLAWLESS  GEM  ?   28 

VIII. 
The  heavenly  re-uuion. 

In  bliss  dissolv'd,  soul  melted  utterly,  with  every  gesture  meet : 
Laughter  and  tears,  homage  of  hand  and  lip, — with  every  mystic  dance, — 
To  see  with  joyous  thrill,  that  Sacred  Form,  like  ruddy  evening  sky, 
When  shall  I  pass,  in  MYSTIC  UNION  JOINED  WITH  HIM,  MY  FLAWLESS  GEM  ?  32 

IX. 
PSrvathi  praised  as  one  with  Civau. 

Sire  and  Mother  of  the  seven  worlds  old  ;  Who  me,  a  dog,  mad'st  Thine ; 
Thee  only  Balm  for  woes  of  life;  Thee  wisdom's  honey-dripping  Gem, 
For  ever  praising, — night  and  day.     Thy  beauteous  foot  with  flow'ry  wreaths 
When  shall  I  deck,  in  MYSTIC  UNION  JOINED  WITH  HIM,  MY  FLAWLESS  GEM  ?  36 


33.  Lit.  'fool!  who  .  .  .  ,'  since  he  was  so  unfit. 


63M   ft  &  #  U    Il£fc$|.       Q.6T.  247 


ao. 

&(TULJITIL1 


iu^ssra)  (Lpp<sv<sutTt  (LpGsrQssr 
umTUurr  QSSTGTLL  L/OTLD/T  OTSiirjy  um^-U  LJ/T^_U  usysfij^i  utrpu 

65HUU 


X. 

His  eternity. 

Thou  guard'st,  creat'st,  destroy'st ;  'midst  all  that  fill  the  spacious  heaven 
The  ELDER  Thou,  and  First,  Who  knows  no  eld;  Brahman,  Who  mad'stmeThine; 
Thou  Infinite  !    For  ever  singing,  bowing  low,  Thy  foot's  fair  flower 
When  shall  I  clasp,  in  MYSTIC  UNION  JOINED  WITH  HIM,  MY  FLAWLESS  GEM?  40 


248 


SU  IT  Lp  fT  LJ  LJ 


[Metre  :  <a«M«/  •»<&**<».     Formula  :  -  ••  |  -  w  |  -  •»  |  -  «r  |  -  •»  |  -  •!  |  -  »*.] 


a. 


'NO  JOY  IN  LIFE: 

HYMN   XXVIII. 

I. 
Longing  for  release. 

Transcendent  One,  extending  through  both  earth  and  heaven, 

THOU  SEE'ST  TO  NONE  BUT  THEE  I  CLING  ! — 
O  £iva-puram's  King!    In  glorious  beauty  bright, 

£ivan,  in  holy  Perun-turrai's  shrine 
Who  dwell'st !    To  whom  make  I  my  plaint,  whom  blame,  if  Thou 

Who  mad'st  me  Thine  deny  Thy  grace  ? 
THOU  SEE'ST  NO  JOY  have  I  upon  this  sea-girt  earth  ; 

BE  GRACIOUS,  BID  ME  COME  TO  THEE  ! 

II. 

Me,  worthless  one,  Thou  mad'st  in  grace  Thine  own,  great  Gem, — 
THOU  SEE'ST  TO  NONE  BUT  THEE  I  CLING  ! — 


L]<£(LpLc> 

sr  ££vi}/r$!(o6V<35r, 


ev  sir, 


Whose  form  unique  even  those  in  yonder  world  know  not, 

past  thought  of  both, — all-piercing  power 
Thou  art,  the  glorious  Lord  !    O  £iva-puram's  King ! 

£ivan,  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine 
Who  dwell'st  our  mighty  Lord,  Thou  Ruler  of  my  soul, 

BE  GRACIOUS,  BID  ME  COME  TO  THEE! 

III. 
That  foot  alone  I  seek  that  Mai  in  songs  extolled ; 

THOU  SEE'ST  TO  NONE  BUT  THEE  I  CLING  ! — 
Thou  sought'st  me,  mad'st  me  Thine,  O  £iva-puram's  King! 

£ivan,  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine 
Who  dwell'st.    Though  I  complain,  in  Thee  my  soul  delights ; 

to  gain  anew  Thy  love  my  thought ; 
Thou  see'st  my  heart  is  faint,  I  have  no  joy  in  life ; 

BE  GRACIOUS,   BID  ME  COME  TO  THEE  ! 


9.   See   Muir,  vol.  iv.   p.   193,  &c.     And   Aruna.   Puran.  Tirumalai?.   67,  5rc.     Also   Kifik. 
XXXI.  19-28. 


250  #5  auras  it. 


9-0 


IV. 

Thou  Who  the  gleaming  rebel-town  didst  swift  consuim , 

THOU  SEE'ST  TO  NONE  BUT  THEE  I  CLING! — 
Dancer,  Who  bid'st  in  Tillai,  £iva-puram's  King ! 

£ivan,  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine 
Who  dwell'st,  the  three  worlds'  bounds  that  day  the  twain  pass'd  through, 

and  saw  nor  first  nor  last  of  Thee, 
In  might  so  didst  Thou  rise !   Thou  see'st  I  joy  not  here  ;— 

BE  GRACIOUS,  BID  ME  COME  TO  THEE  !  K> 

V. 
Absolut*  Belf-iurrender. 

Partner  of  Her  whose  words  are  sweetest  melody ! 

THOU  SEE'ST  TO  NONE  BUT  THEE  I  CLING  !— 
Surely  Thou  mad'st  me  Thine,  O  Qiva-puram's  King! 

£ivan,  in  holy  Perun-turrai's  shrine 
Who  dwell'st,— the  whole  :  my  body,  mouth,  nose,  ears,  and  eyes  :— 

all  these  in  Thy  control  I  place. 
THOU  SEE'ST  THY  SERVANT  HATH  NO  JOYS  UPON  THIS  EARTH  ;— 

BE  GRACIOUS,  BID  ME  COME  TO  THEE  !  3O 

13.  See  Lex.  jyr*«/,  and  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  223,  &c.  19.  Being  the  live  organs  of  sense. 


251 


LJ([f)j&l<SU[r  QipffS^lUfTiLll   LJffl^CoLD 


VI. 
The  senses'  power. 

Partner  of  Her  with  footfall  downy  soft, 

THOU  SEE'ST  TO  NONE  BUT  THEE  I  CLING  ! — 
Thou  mad'st  me  wholly  Thine,  O  Civa-puram's  King ! 

£ivan,  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine 
Who  dwell'st, — me  trembling  cur,  Thou  mad'st  Thine  own ;  that  grace 

through  senses'  perturbations  I  forgot ; 
THOU  SEE'ST  THAT  IN  DECEPTION  LOST,  I  JOY  NOT  HERE  ; — 

BE  GRACIOUS,  BID  ME  COME  TO  THEE  !  24 

VII. 

Thou  Light,  that  shin'st  a  Sun  through  a,ll  the  spheres, 

THOU  SEE'ST  TO  NONE  BUT  THEE  I  CLING  ! — 
Sacred,  supremely  glorious  £iva-Puram's  King ! 

Qivan,  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine 
Who  dwell'st,  Thee  I  see ;— my  melting  soul  dissolves, 

'wilder'd  I  know  not  any  way  in  life  to  joy. 
THOU  SEE'ST  I,  FOLLY'S  CHILD,  CAN  IN  THIS  LIFE  PARTAKE  NO  JOY, 

BE  GRACIOUS,  BID  ME  COME  TO  THEE  !  *8 


252  $  J5  Gil  IT  9 


svsffr,  &GSSTL-  mu  ; 


IK,0. 


LLIT  &jfl  lLJj(o<5ST\ 

GTSST  p(!T)&TL-l(Fl  lLI!jQlU\ 


VIII. 

Partner  of  Her  whose  fingers  jewels  rare  adorn, 

THOU  SEE'ST  TO  NONE  BUT  THEE  I  CLING  ! — 
Thou  art  like  ruddy  flame,  O  £iva-puram's  King ! 

£ivan,  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine 
Who  dwell'st, — endless  Ambrosia, — Essence  rare  and  great, — 

Ambrosia  rare, — Thy  servant  Thou  didst  save, 
And  mad'st  me  Thine.    IN  LIFE  I  CANNOT  JOY  THOU  SEE'ST  ; 

BE  GRACIOUS,  BID  ME  COME  TO  THEE  !  32 

IX. 

Thou'rt  sin's  Destroyer,  save  Thy  healing  foot  alone, 

THOU  SEE'ST  TO  NOUGHT  BESIDE  I  CLING  ! — 
God  of  all  gods,  O  Civa-puram's  King !  £ivan, 

in  sacred  Perun-turrai's  shrine  Who  dwell'st. 
Through  the  three  worlds  passing,  above  below  the  twain, 

as  roaring  flame  Thou  didst  uplift  Thy  form. 
Lord  of  the  bull !  THOU  SEE'ST  IN  LIFE  I  CANNOT  JOY  ; 

BE  GRACIOUS,  BID  ME  COME  TO  THEE  !  36 


36.  Or  (iar  o-fiursn)  ='  Whose  is  the  beast's  skin,'  i.e.  the  tiger's.     See  *JI  in  Lex. 


•O. 

LJ/E/c5  !  j£  ^GV  6V  IT  ID 


X. 

Partner  of  Her,  Thy  bride,  of  faultless  old  renown, 

THOU  SEE'ST  TO  NONE  BUT  THEE  I  CLING  ! — 
Thou  wear'st  the  crescent  moon,  O  Civa-puram's  King ! 

£ivan,  in  sacred  Perun-turrai's  shrine 
Who  dwell'st, — shall  I  bow  down  to  others?  shall  I  praise? 

or  may  think  them  aids  for  me  ?  speak  Thou  ! 
Lord  of  the  youthful  bull !    THOU  SEE'ST  I  KNOW  NO  JOY  ; 

BE  GRACIOUS,  BID  ME  COME  TO  THEE  !  4° 


254  $  J  QJ  IT  ff  «  U)  . 


a.*, 


[ID  air  ic  (raj  &*£$.] 
[Metre:  +6)fa  .»<yA»<A.     Formula:  -•»  |  -u>r  |  -•»  |  -ior  |  -«S  |  -•»  |  -»*•.] 


THE    DECAD    OF    GRACE 

OR 

'CLEANSING    FROM    DELUSION.' 

HYMN    XXIX. 

The  T.V.U.P.  states  that  this  was  one  of  the  earliest  of  the  Sage's  poems,  and  that  it  was  sung  at 
Tiru-perun-turrai.  It  certainly  bears  the  impress  of  youth,  and  in  many  respects  is  inferior  to  some 
of  his  later  poems.  It  is  said  to  have  for  its  subject  the  purification  of  the  soul  from  the  great 
delusion  (Maha-maya).  What  this  is  can  only  be  known  by  a  careful  study  of  the  Qaivn  Siddhanta 
philosophy.  A  note  on  the  subject  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix. 

The  metre  is  the  same  as  in  XXII,  and  is  very  sweet.  In  each  stanza,  the  two  latter  lines  nearly 
correspond  throughout  the  whole  poem,  an  epithet  or  two  being  changed.  £ivan  is  addressed  as  the 
god  who  appeared  in  the  Triclinia  (Kuruntham)  grove  near  Tiru-penm-turrni,  and  about  thirty 
different  epithets  are  applied  to  him,  some  of  which  are  mere  repetition's.  The  epithets  applied  to 
Tiru-perun-turrai  are  also  varied.  The  last  line  in  each  stanza  contains  a  Telugu  phrase  equivalent 
to  'and  what  is  that'?  so  that  the  line  literally  reads  :  'Save  Thou  in  grace,  saying  "what  is  that"?' 
or  in  other  words,  '  What  is  there  to  fear?  fear  not.'  The  poet  is  complaining  of  the  power  of  earth- 
born  delusions,  and  prays  the  god  to  take  away  his  anxious  fears.  I  cannot  trace  any  sequence  in  the 
thought  from  stanza  to  stanza.  Comp.  'the  Life,'  §  2. 

In  the  Siddhanta,  very  great  stress  is  laid  upon  the  idea  that  all  embodiment,  while  it  is  painful 
and  to  be  got  rid  of  as  soon  as  possible,  is  yet  a  gracious  appointment  of  £ivan,  wrought  out  through 
Qakti,  for  the  salvation  of  the  human  soul  through  the  destruction  of  deeds,  which  are  the  root  of  all 
evil  to  mankind  (NOTE  VI).  Now  the  Buddhist  formula  represents  suffering  as  being  the  whole 
account  of  the  matter :  '  Birth  is  suffering,  old  age  is  suffering,  sickness  is  suffering,  death  is  suffering. 
The  origin  of  suffering  is  the  thirst  for  pleasure,  being,  and  power.  The  extinction  of  this  thirst 
brings  about  the  extinction  of  suffering.'  The  £aiva  Siddhanta  doctrine,  on  the  contrary,  gives  to  life 
and  suffering  a  real  significance.  The  present  life  is  a  probation,— a  pnrgatory, — a  preparation  for 
endless  fellowship  and  communion  with  the  Supreme.  Thus  Grace  is  recognised  where  the  Buddhist 
sees  only  suffering;  and  the  instrument  of  man's  release  is  that  wisdom  which  understands  the  divine 
purpose,  and  adapts  itself  to  that  purpose.  Our  Sage  dwells  much  upon  the  value  of  prayer,  and  of 
humble  worship  paid  to  the  divine  guru,  while  in  Buddhism  all  is  to  be  done  by  unaided  human 
effort.  At  every  point  the  two  systems  are  in  directest  opposition ! 

I. 
O  Light !    O  Lamp  girt  with  effulgent  beams  ! — 

the  dame  with  curling  locks  and  beauteous  form 


I .  This  is  toned  down  ! 


•  *,  / 


Is  Thine.     Supreme,  Who  wear'st  the  milk-white  ash  ! 

The  Just,  Whom  Ayan  of  the  flower  knew  not, 
Nor  Mai !    In  happy  Perun-turrai  Thou 

'neath  the  Kuruntham's  flow'ry  shade  didst  rest. 
Great  First  of  Beings  I  when  I  craving  call, 

BID  THOU  IN  GRACE  THY  SERVANT'S  FEARS  BEGONE  ! 

II. 

O  Dancer !   Spotless  One  !    O  ash-besmear'd  ! 

Thy  brow  hath  central  eye  !    Lord  of  heaven's  host ! 
Sole  Deity!  through  all  the  world  Thyself 

I  sought  lamenting  loud,  but  found  Thee  not. 
Thou,  Who  by  Perun-turrai's  pleasant  lake 

'neath  the  Kuruntham's  flow'ry  shade  didst  rest. 
Great  Source  of  Being !  when  Thy  servant  craving  calls, 

BID  THOU  IN  GRACE  MY  FEARS  BEGONE  ! 

III. 

Our  Leader  !    Ruler  of  my  life  and  soul ! 

Whom  ladies  twain,  with  perfum'd  flowing  locks, 

9.   Parvathi  and  Ganga.     See  Lex.  *&a>*. 


5  ®!  IT 


ffi. 


p  stfliu 

<Sl9/X)SV(?S5r!    <5TL£>3i(<5j  QsU  Sffl  U  LJ  I—  fTlLJ  toTSSTSST 


LD  <SVtT<£         Tf   B       o  LD 


<SfTtlQlU\ 


SSr 


Claim  as  their  Spouse  !    Lord  of  the  fiery  eye ! 

Whose  glance  caus'd  sudden  fire  from  Dakshan's  frame  to  spring, 
And  goodly  Kaman's  too  !     In  sacred  Perun-turrai  Thou 

'neath  the  Kuruntham's  flow'ry  shade  didst  rest. 
Great  Anganan  !  when  I  Thy  servant  craving  call, 

BID  THOU  IN  GRACE  MY  FEARS  BEGONE  ! 


IV. 

The  Lotus-god,  the  four-fac'd;  Kannan  too, 

dark  as  the  azure  sky,  could  not  approach 
Thee,  Pure  One  !  when  They  pray'd  Thee  to  shine  forth, 

Father !    Thou  wert  as  mighty  flame  display'd. 
In  Veda-echoing  Perun-turrai  Thou 

'neath  the  Kuruntham's  flow'ry  shade  didst  rest. 
Great  Being  spotless  !  when  Thy  servant  craving  calls, 

BID  THOU  IN  GRACE  MY  FEARS  BEGONE  !  16 


12.  See  Lex. 


31 


a. 


V. 

[These  two  lines  are  not  translateable!] 


Thou,  Who  in  Perun-turrai's  sylvan  groves 

'neath  the  Kuruntham's  flow'ry  shade  didst  rest. 
O  Teacher  glorious  !  when  Thy  servant  craving  calls, 

BID  THOU  IN  GRACE  MY  FEARS  BEGONE  !  ao 

VI. 

O  Happy  One  and  Pure  !   Thou  like  to  gem 

whose  radiant  beams  'mid  pure  white  ashes  shine  ! 
In  mind  of  those  who  think  of  Thee  Thou  giv'st 

sweetness  intense.   Thou  rare  Ambrosia,  Who 
In  sacred  Perun-turrai's  home  of  Vedic  lore 

'neath  the  Kuruntham's  flow'ry  shade  didst  rest. 
O  Father  glorious  !  when  Thy  servant  craving  calls, 

BID  THOU  IN  GRACE  MY  FEARS  BEGONE  !  *4 

s 


IfnQ- 


VII. 

Thou  True  One  changing  oft  Thy  form  ;  Meru  Thy  bow, 

Thy  foemen's  cities  three  Thy  HAND  consumed  ! 
Thy  FOOT  burnt  up  death's  king !    O  ruddy  One, 

Whose  FORM  was  as  a  fiery  column  seen  ! 
Thou,  Who  in  Perun-turrai's  happy  home 

'neath  the  Kuruntham's  flow'ry  shade  didst  rest. 
O  glorious  Teacher  !  when  Thy  servant  craving  calls, 

BID  THOU  IN  GRACE  MY  FEARS  BEGONE  !  28 

VIII. 

The  Free,  the  First,  the  Triple-eyed,  the  Sage,— 

Thou  giv'st  the  heavenly  goal  to  those, 
Who  off'ring  flowers  with  clustering  buds  adore, 

devoutly  pondering  praise ;  consummate  One, 
Thou,  Who  in  Perun-turrai's  happy  home 

'neath  the  Kuruntham's  flow'ry  shade  didst  rest. 
O  Sire,  all  glorious  !  when  Thy  servant  craving  calls, 

BID  THOU  IN  GRACE  MY  FEARS  BEGONE  !  32 


LD 


,4£7  Q/  /r/f  QLJ  fTils 


(ou  tip  rrrriLi, 


IX. 

Regarding  me  distraught,  Thou  bad'st  confusion  cease, 
destroying  thought  of  this  world  and  the  next, 

Thou  very  God,  Thou  Holy  One,  upon  Thy  crest 
the  swelling  lustrous  snake  and  Ganga  bide. 

Thou,  Who  in  Perun-turrai's  home  of  lucid  Vedic  lore 
'neath  the  Kuruntham's  flow'ry  shade  didst  rest. 

Glorious  in  mercy  !  when  Thy  servant  craving  calls, 

BID  THOU  IN  GRACE  MY  FEARS  BEGONE  ! 

X. 

In  Perun-turrai  girt  with  ordered  stately  groves, 

'neath  the  Kuruntham's  flow'ry  shade, 
I  call  to  mind  Thy  glories  all,  and  pondering  yearn, 

and  as  my  mighty  Lord  Thee  oft  invoke. 
Ascetic  rare  !  when  I,  Thy  servant,  craving  call, 

struggling  amid  the  billowy  sea, 
In  grace  declare  the  fitting  path  to  reach 

the  silver  hill,  and  BID  ME  COME  ! 

s  2 


260 


[Metre:  -»r  |  -«S  |  -»r  |  _J  |  -ior  |  -  «S  |  -rf.] 


THE    LYRIC   OF   THE   'EAGLE-MOUNT.' 
THE   SIGHT   OF   THE    'GURU.' 

HYMN   XXX. 

This  is  one  of  the  places  which  the  Sage  is  said  to  have  visited  before  seeing  £ithambaram.  It 
would  appear  that  here  he  had  some  peculiar  manifestation  of  the  god,  who  had  revealed  himself  to 
him  in  Perun-turrai.  It  is  open  to  conjecture  that  the  Guru,  whom  he  regarded  as  £ivan  manifested 
in  the  flesh,  resided  there,  or  at  least  was  a  constant  visitant.  The  place  itself  is  a  renowned  Qaiva 
shrine,  and  has  its  own  legend,  a  considerable  poem  of  833  quatrains.  This  is  of  recent  origin,  and, 
I  should  suppose,  of  small  authority.  It  states  that  the  original  name  of  the  hill  was  Veda-gin,  or 
the  hill  of  the  Veda.  It  is  said  to  have  four  hills  clustered  together,  each  being  one  of  the  four  \ 
while  the  central  peak,  which  is  of  basaltic  formation,  is  Qivan  Himself  in  the  form  of  the  Lingam. 
It  is  curiously  stated  that '  in  Ariir  the  god  dwells  for  the  first  watch  of  the  night,  and  in  ^itliambaram 
for  the  midnight  watch ;  but  in  Veda-giri  he  is  always  to  be  found.'  The  name  of  the  hill  of  the  \  <  '<!a 
was  changed  to  that  of  the  hill  of  the  Eagle,  because  two  eminent  persons,  having  disputed  an  order 
of  Qivan,  were  sentenced  to  perform  pennncc  there. 


O  peaceful  Perun-turrai's  mighty  Lord  \ 

to  those  whose  talk  is  of  Thy  thousand  names 
One  even  stream  of  matchless  pleasure  flows. 

My  Lord,  Who  once  didst  wipe  away  sore  griefs, 
When  good  and  evil  deeds  were  balanced,— 

(for  aftermath  of  ill  no  living  seed), — 
In  sacred  glories  countless  didst  Thou  come, 

AND  SHOW  THYSELF  UPON  THE  EAGLE'S  HILL. 


3.  This  is  called  *j£>-i6urf<b.     See  NOTE  V.         4.  A  hill  with  a  temple  nine  miles  south-east  of 
Chingleput. 


a. 
(?iiu£-£D«ar*          Qu 


II. 
Thou  Who  for  hire  of  cakes  didst  carry  earth  ! 

Thou  madman  great,  of  the  great  haven's  shrine  ! 
While  I,  who  knew  no  law  of  right,  to  Thee, 

through  ignorant  delusion  drew  not  near, 
O  Best  of  Beings,  Lord  of  £iva-world, 

me,  lower  than  the  meanest  cur,  a  man 
Of  evils  sore,  Thou  cam'st  to  make  Thine  own, 

AND  SHOW'DST  THYSELF  UPON  THE  EAGLE'S  HILL. 

in. 
In  wilderment  I  strayed  from  Perun-turrai  far, 

where  tears  were  changed  to  joy,  and  foulness  purged ; 
By  sinful  deeds  to  ruin  brought,  henceforth 

I  sinner  knew  not  what  should  after  grow. 
Reft  of  the  home  where  Thy  bright  feet  once  stood, 

a  prey  to  dire  perplexity,  I  dwelt. 
To  save  me  from  confusion  sore  Thou  cam'st, 

AND  SHOW'DST  THYSELF  UPON  THE  EAGLE'S  HILL. 

IV. 

That  I  the  matchless  ornament  might  wear 

of  love  unique, — draw  nigh,  and  daily  praise, — 

Abashed  with  awe  of  reverence, — the  shame 

that  knows  no  shame, — sinking  amid  the  sea ; 

5.  I.e.  Qugiiffeap.    Life,  $  iv. 


262  $  jj  QJ  IT  ff  a  tt. 


<oT6$T 


Or, 


6T$6Vtri(Lp6lSTLn 


Of  Perun-turrai,  dear  beyond  compare, 

the  glorious  ship  I  seized  and  climbed  thereon ; 
Straightway,  in  splendour  no  eye  sees,  Thou  cam'st, 

AND  SHOW'DST  THYSELF  UPON  THE  EAGLE'S  HILL.  16 

v. 

In  glorious  form  displayed,  Thou  teeming  cloud 

of  perfect  good,  in  Perun-turrai  seen  ! 
O  matchless  Gem,  Who  putt'st  Thyself  within 

the  thought  of  me,  who  naught  of  virtue  knew ! 
The  world  itself  shall  witness  bear  that  I 

desired  Thee  ^eagerly,  and  then  Thou  cam'st, — 
That  when  I  called  Thee,  then  Thou  cam'st,— 

AND  SHOW'DST  THYSELF  UPON  THE  EAGLE'S  HILL.  20 

VI. 

Great  flood  of  Perun-turrai's  shrine,  Thou  didst 

the  love  that  knows  no  change  bestow ; 
When  foes  with  many  an  impious  speech  stood  round, 

what  didst  Thou  unto  me  before  them  all? 
Thy  Foot  shall  be  my  only  refuge  still, 

from  every  death,  and  every  various  ill,— 
And,  therefore,  when  in  love  I  called,  Thou  cam'st, 

AND  SHOW'DST  THYSELF  UPON  THE  EAGLE'S  HILL.  24 


&,  i$  &  $  sir  JD  u  LJ  $  «  u  .     ffco.  263 

CT. 


5337 


VII. 

O  I9an,  Who  the  four  and  sixty  demons  mad'st 

to  share  the  eightfold  qualities  divine,— 
When  I  had  sunk  in  evil  deeds, — the  fruit 

of  triple  foulness  that  confusion  brings, — 
Thou  didst  the  bands  of  clinging  sorrow  loose ; 

mad'st  me  Thine  own  ;  gav'st  me  Thy  feet's  pure  flower ; 
In  presence  of  Thy  servant-band  didst  come 

AND  SHOW  THYSELF  UPON  THE  EAGLE'S  HILL.  28 


.  This  may  point  to  the  legend  in  NOTE  VI.  (?) 


264  $  15  su  IT  ff  &  ii. 


SSST  /_  LJ 


[Metre  :  Qat*f**a<s$uur.     See  V.  §  ii.] 


'MINE    EYES    HAVE    SEEN.' 
THE  SIGHT  OF  THE   MYSTIC   DANCE 

OR 

THE   UNSPEAKABLE   VISION. 

HYMN   XXXI. 

Tillai. — In  the  legends  of  the  Sage  it  appears  that  he  did  not  visit  Tillai  till  he  had  seen  the 
other  shrines  of  Qaiva  worship,  and  had  become  renowned  both  as  a  devotee  and  as  a  poet.  It 
almost  appears  as  if  there  existed  some  rivalry  between  the  great  temple  of  the  Piindiyan  land  in 
Madura,  and  the  famous  shrine  of  the  Qora  land  in  Qithambaram.  It  is  quite  certain  that  this  latter 
in  great  measure  superseded  the  former.  It  does  not  appear,  indeed,  that  M&nikka-V&cagar  ever 
revisited  Madura  after  his  formal  renunciation  of  his  position  there.  It  may  almost  be  inferred  that 
he  was  never  heartily  forgiven  by  the  king  for  the  misappropriation  of  the  cost  of  the  horses.  Of  the 
fifty-one  poems  about  a  half  were  composed  in  Tillai ',  and  these  may  be  divided  into  two  classes : 
the  lyrics  that  express  his  own  feelings  and  illustrate  his  life;  and  those  which  were  composed  (as  is 
believed)  for  the  use  of  others,  either  in  the  temple,  or  in  their  sports.  These  last  are  much  more 
artificial  than  the  former.  I  wish  that  it  had  been  possible  to  re-arrange  the  poems. 

Among  the  Tillai  lyrics  are  to  be  found  his  most  impassioned  utterances.  With  this  poem  (XXXI) 
must  be  compared  (XL),  both  of  them  expressing  his  enthusiastic  joy  at  being  permitted  at  length 
to  behold  the  greatest  shrine  of  his  Master. 

On  the  legends  of  Tillai  I  have  written  a  separate  paper.     NOTE  VII. 

Tillai  in  the  time  of  the  Sage  was  to  the  devotees  of  Qivan  what  Jerusalem  was  to  the  Jews  of 
old ;  and  many  of  the  expressions  in  these  two  lyrics  will  remind  the  reader  of  Psalm  cxxii  ;  and  not 
a  few  of  the  expressions  are  identical  with  those  in  the  rhyme  often  attributed  to  Bernard  of  Morlaix. 
One  is  frequently  reminded  of  'Jerusalem  the  Golden,  with  milk  and  honey  blest.' 


In  senses'  power,  sure  cause  of  death,  I  erewhile  'wildered  lay,— 

Oft  wrapt  through  realms  of  boundless  space,  then  plunged  in  dismal  hells ! 

He  gave  perception  clear,  made  me  all  bliss, — made  me  His  own  ! 

I'VE  TILLAI  SEEN  that  holds  the  Gem,  which  endless  rapture  yields !  4 


1  These  are— (i)  2,  3,  4,  31,  40,  44-46,  49-51 ;  (ii)  9-19,  21,  22. 


i      $|.     [&,«.  265 

a.. 


II. 

Enmeshed  in  grievous  memories  of  deeds  and  fated  births 
Outworn  I  lay ;  nor  knew  my  soul  one  faintest  thought  of  Him, 
The  Matchless  One,  Who  cuts  off 'birth';  Who  made  me  His  with  power! 
HIM  HAVE  I  SEEN  IN  TILLAI'S  COURT,  where  worships  all  the  world  ! 

in. 

His  form  I  knew  not, — even  then  He  fixed  His  love  on  me, 

Planted  Himself  within  my  thought  and  flesh,— so  made  me  His  ! 

The  Lord  of  sacred  Turutti,  I,  currish  slave,  with  joy 

HAVE  SEEN  IN  TILLAI'S  FANE  ADORNED,  the  sweet  and  blissful  seat !  u 

IV. 

To  me,  untaught,  most  ignorant,  the  very  lowest  cur, 

In  mighty  grace  He  came,  with  heavenly  beauty  me  to  clothe, 

And  loosed  my  '  servile  bonds  of  sense '  in  sight  of  many  men ; 

His  form  I'VE  SEEN  IN  TILLAI'S  TEMPLE  COURT,  where  all  bow  down  !  16 


II.  Another  name  of  Kuttalam.  14.  Fay-u-pavam.     See  NOTES  XI,  X\  . 


266  $  J5  su  T 

@. 


ft. 


6T. 


GT<S5T<oT<5Sr 


V. 

Me  whirled  about  'mid  'caste'  and  'clan  '  and  'birth,'  and  sore  perplexed,— 
Vile  helpless  dog, — He  made  His  own,  all  sorrow  rooting  out ; 
Destroyed  all  folly, — alien  forms, — all  thought  of  '  I  '  and  '  mine  ' ; 
Ambrosia  pure,  HIM  HAVE  I  SEEN  IN  TILLAI,  where  the  saints  consort !         20 

VI. 

From  birth  itself,  from  sickness,  age  to  'scape  ;  earth's  ties  to  loose ; 

I  went, — I  SAW  the  'Only-First-One,'  Owner  of  the  world, 

Who  dwells,  while  Vedic  sages,  hosts  of  heavenly  ones  adore, 

IN  TILLAI-CITY'S  SACRED  COURT,  girt  round  with  leafy  groves.  24 

VII. 

My  servile  bonds  of  sense  in  grace  He  loosed, — me  loveless  mean,— 

Fast  tied  He  to  His  sacred  Feet  by  willing  mind's  stout  bonds, 

That  never  part ;  made  me  a  fool  in  sight  of  men  ;  and  now 

I'VE  TILLAI  SEEN,  where  sportings  of  the  wondrous  Mage  are  known.  28 


20.  See  Kulavu-tillai  in  Lex.  25.  Line  14.  28.  NOTE  I. 


flb, 


2_QV>L//_9a;/r  .-gjssruQrjGifl, 

,  LQ6VLL 


h, 


VIII. 

Sunk  here  midst  infinite  conceits,  all  ignorance  was  I ; 

I  lay,  poor  empty  soul,  unweeting  aught  that  might  spring  forth  ; 

Now  Him  who  made  me  His,  bestowing  raptures  infinite, 

I'VE  SEEN  IN  TILLAI,  where  the  guileless  heavenly  ones  bow  down  !  31 

IX. 

To  me,  a  dog,  who  knew  not  anything  of  seemly  right, 

He  gave  His  heavenly  grace,  took  me  and  cut  off  actions'  guilt ; 

He  gave  unfailing  love:  light  high  and  higher  shone;  Him  I 

IN  TILLAI'S  COURT  HAVE  SEEN,  where  the  four  mystic  scrolls  are  conned !      36 

x. 

The  elements,  the  senses  five,  He  is ;  and  substance  too. 

All  diverse  forms  He,  mighty,  wears :  knows  no  diversity. 

The  gleaming  Light  that  rules,  and  ill  destroys  ;  the  Emerald  ; 

HIM  HAVE  I  SEEN  IN  TILLAI  BRIGHT,  where  Vedas  worship  and  extol !  4° 

37-39.  NOTE  XII. 


268  $     su  IT 


IS,  8.. 
[f  IT  IT  oST  LJ 


[Metre  :  «$8Au  tSafotb.    Irregular.] 

C. 


THE    SUPPLICATION. 

HYMN    XXXII. 
[See  Life,   §  ii.] 

I. 

Alternations  of  feeling'. 

Mingling  with  Thy  true  saints,  that  day  in  speechless  joy  I  stood  ; 

Next  day,  with  dawning  daylight  trouble  came,  and  there  abode. 

My  soul  grows  old.    Master  !  to  seek  the  gleam  of  fadeless  bliss 

Wand'ring  I  went.     In  grace  to  me,  Thy  slave,  let  love  abound  !  4 

ii. 

Impatience. 

Some  of  Thy  saints  have  gained  through  plenteous  love  Thy  grace.  Grown  old, 
All  vain  my  griefs, — of  this  vile  corpse  I  see  no  end. 


afT/L./r/L/,  <oTLLLL!T(o<S5l\ 


<fO. 


mu 


gtfTsssTL—  frsjSl  syr<s  &l<s$r&i_  rr^ssiiu  mil  I 


Remove  from  sinful  me  my  deeds  of  sin ;  let  mercy's  sea  o'erflow ! 

0  Master,  to  Thy  slave  give  ceaseless  soul-subduing  grace  !  8 

in. 

Fortitude — strong  in  love — needed. 

Deep  in  the  vast  Ambrosial  sea  of  grace  Thy  perfect  saints 
Have  sunk.     Lo,  Lord,  I  wearied  bear  this  frame  with  darkness  filled  ! 
Men  see,  and  cry,  'A  madman,  one  of  'wildered  mind  is  here.' 
Master,  that  I  may  fearless  live,  true  love  I  NEEDS  must  gain  !  u 

IV. 
Craving  for  consummate  bliss. 

1  NEED  !  I  NEED  !    Midst  Thy  true  faithful  ones,  in  grace  desiring  me, 

Thou  mad'st  me  Thine,  my  griefs  expell'd, — Ambrosia  !  precious  peerless  Gem, 

Like  gleam  of  quenchless  lamp  !     And  I,  Thy  servant  too,  shall  I 

Reach  Thee,  and  ne'er  again  know  NEED?   Thou  all-abounding  Love!          16 


su 


QGUGSST®?  QLDWJ/L/SWL/, 

J  l5l[fi®SlJV6VlT 


6T. 


V. 
Shall  X  get  free  from  Self? 

Thou  Partner  of  the  bright-eyed  maid  !   To  dwell  among  Thy  saints, 
Desiring  Thee  in  truth,  shall  it  be  giv'n  to  sinful  me 
By  Thine  own  grace,  gaining  the  ancient  sea  of  bliss  superne, 
To  rest,  in  soul  and  body  freed  from  thought  of  '  I  '  and  '  mine  '  ? 

VI. 
Longing  desire  of  the  Infinite  Bliss. 

Thy  loving  ones  have  gained  '  cessation  '  absolute  ;  but  here 

My  spirit  ever  melts,  outside  I  lie,  —  base  dog,  —  and  mourn  ! 

O  Master  mine,  I  would  attain  true  love's  vast  sea  of  bliss, 

That  change,  surcease,  oblivion,  sev'rance,  thought,  bound,  death  knows  not  !  24 

VII. 
Cut  short  Thy  work  I 

They've  seen  the  sea-like  bliss,  have  seized  it,  and  enjoy  !    Is't  meet, 
That  I,  low  dog,  with  added  pains  and  pining  sore  should  bide  ? 


I?  T  IT  ff  $> 

a.6s>t_iL//r/L/! 


&  6U  Q<SST  \  !$<5M  -gl  Qp  ILJ  Si  QS1  QpGST  ; 

syrsyr 

yr  ^/  sift  tup 


Master,  do  Thou  Thyself  give  grace,  I  pray  !    I  faint !    I  fail ! 

Cut  short  Thy  work  !    O  light,  let  darkness  flee  before  Thy  mercy's  beam  !   a8 

VIII. 
Come  quickly. 

Enter'd  amongst  Thine  own,  to  whom  true  melting  grace  abounds, 

I  stand  with  soul  like  tough  bambusa  stem,  and  wear  away. 

O  £ivan,  grant  the  love  Thy  crowned  servants  bear  to  Thee  ! 

O  swiftly  come,  and  give  to  me  Thy  tender  beauteous  Foot !  .u 

IX. 

Was  I  not  made  Thine  own? 

Thine  own  stood  round,  and  all  declar'd  :  '  No  grace  withheld,  all  grace 
Is  given/— and  I,  Thy  servant,  shall  I  mourn  as  aliens  wont  ? 
Thou  King  of  Qiva-world,  by  glorious  grace  didst  change  my  thought, 
And  make  me  Thine.— I  pray  Thee,  Lord,  place  me  in  changeless  bliss  !       36 


30.  The  friction  of  the  bambu  kindles  fire. 


272  5  SU  IT  ff  4  U3. 

SO. 


T,  &=lrf)uurTJ, 


GU/bjD  S5TLD  /Ti£)  (?  LJ  tTSbflfb  ($Lj(o<(o9)  ? 
pgrr/y   a_S3)/_fL/frQ/L//r® 


x. 

Xs  aught  grained  by  delay  ? 

Thou  Partner  sole  of  the  Gazelle  !    Sweet  fruit  to  them  that  worship  Thee  ! 

Teacher!    If  I  am  like  an  unbar1  d  gourd,  doth  thus  Thy  glory  live  ? 

O  King,  when  comes  the  time  that  Thou  wilt  grant  in  grace  to  me 

A  soul  that  melts  and  swells  in  knowing  Thee,  Who  cam'st  in  flesh  ?  40 

XI. 
Must  I  languish  here? 

In  concert  joining  shall  Thy  saints,  there  bending  smile  and  joy? 

O  Master,  drooping,  all  forlorn,  like  withered  tree,  must  I 

Stand  sullen  while  they  mingle,  melt,  souls  swelling,  lost  in  bliss 

In  rhythmic  dance?    Grant  bliss  of  sweet  communion  with  Thy  grace  !          44 


38.  This  could  not  make  a  lute.  43,  44.  This  is,  in  Tamil,  somewhat  incoherent. 


273 


[Metre:  .gftfo  «%^,  six  feet.     Formula  :  -mr  |  -• 

A. 

*,<oJ<»/r 


ffiiseeusAr 

(?ftJ/T,  OTG5T 


THE  DECAD  OF  THE  BRUISED  HEART 

OR 

'SELF-DEDICATION/ 

HYMN  XXXIII. 

[Comp.  Life,  §  v.]     It  would  be  hard  to  find  a  more  touching  expression  of  absolute  mystic 
self-renunciation  than  these  verses  contain. 

I. 
Useless  suffering-. 

If  cruel  pain  oppress  from  'deeds  of  old,'  guard  Thou 

Who  ownest  me  !    If  I,  a  man  of  '  cruel  deeds ' 
Suffer,  from  this  my  woe  doth  any  gain  accrue  ? 

O  light  of  Umai's  eyes,  take  Thou  me  for  Thine  own  ! 
And  though  I  err,  ah  !  should'st  not  Thou  forgive, — 

Thou  on  whose  crest  the  crescent  rests  ?    If  I  appeal, 
Wilt  Thou  withhold  Thy  grace,  Father,  from  me  Thy  slave? 

ii. 

Why  is  the  affliction  of  embodied  existence  prolonged? 

Thy  slave's  afflictions  all  to  drive  far  off  I  deem'd 

Thou  mad'st  me  Thine,  erewhile ;  Thou  Partner  of  the  Queen, 

Whose  form  is  like  the  slender  creeping  plant !    Our  King; 
bidding  me  come,  why  didst  Thou  not  in  grace  destroy 

i.    =  Fate,  Pope's  NdlaJi,  pp.  66-69.     Also  —'evil  deeds,"  A'urra/,  Lex. 

T 


274  ^  (5  eu  IT  ff  a  ii . 


This  body  vile  ?    Our  Lord,  Who  dwell'st  in  yon  blest  world  ! 

Thou  called'st, — if  my  service  not  accepting  now 
Thou  dost  afflict,  Master,  will  any  gain  accrue  ? 

in. 
Pardon  my  offences. 

Thy  mercy  given  to  save  one  void  of  worth, 

a  dog  like  me,  hath  it  this  day  pass'd  all  away  ? 

Thou  Partner  of  the  Tender  One,  our  Mighty  King, 
ev'n  faults  that  like  a  mountain  rise,  to  virtues  turn, 

If  Thou  but  say  the  word  !    If  Thou  didst  take  me  once 

for  Thine,  why  dost  Thou  not — though  ruined — pity  take 

On  me?  our  Lord, — Thou  of  eight  arms  and  triple  eye  ! 

IV. 
When  wilt  Thou  call  me  back  to  Thee  ? 

Bridegroom  of  Her  with  fawnlike  eyes  !    Our  King  !    If  Thou 
hast  caused  me  Thine  abiding  glory  to  forget ; 

If  Thou  hast  thrust  me  out  in  fleshly  form  to  dwell ; 

if  Thou  hast  caused  Thy  slave  to  wander  here  forlorn  ; 

Knowing  Thy  servant's  ignorance,  O  gracious  King, 

when  comes  the  day  that  Thou  Thyself  wilt  show  Thy  grace  ? 

Ah  !  When,  I  cry,  when  wilt  Thou  call  me  back  to  Thee? 


275 


9J  JD  6ST61&  (7fj  LJ 


CT. 


V. 
AU  is  Thyself! 

The  tongue  itself  that  cries  to  Thee, — all  other  powers 

of  my  whole  being  that  cry  out, — all  are  THYSELF  ! 
Thou  art  my  way  of  strength  !    The  trembling  thrill  that  runs 

through  me  is  Thee  !    THYSELF  the  whole  of  ill  and  weal ! 
None  other  here  !   Would  one  unfold  and  truly  utter  Thee, 

what  way  to  apprehend  ?   Thou  Lord  of  Qiva-world  ! 
And  if  I  trembling  fear,  should'st  Thou  not  comfort  me  ?  ao 

VI. 
Desires. 

Thou  know'st  what  to  DESIRE  is  meet,— when  we  DESIRE 
Thou'rt  He  that  wholly  grants  !  To  Ayan  and  to  Mai 

DESIRING  Thee,  how  hard  to  reach !  Yet  me  Thou  didst 
DESIRE,  my  service  claim  !  DESIRING  what  didst  Thou 

Bestow  Thy  grace  ?  That  and  naught  else  do  I  DESIRE  ! 
And  if  aught  else  there  be  that  stirs  in  me  DESIRE, 

That  too,  in  sooth,  is  Thy  DESIRE,— is  it  not  so? 

VII. 
I  am  wholly  Thine. 

That  very  day  my  soul,  my  body,  all  to  me 

pertaining,  didst  Thou  not  take  as  Thine  own, 
Thou  like  a  mountain  strong !   when  me  Thou  mad'st  Thy  slave  ? 

And  this  day  is  there  any  hindrance  found  in  me? 

T  2 


276  $  5  GU  IT  ff 


a.  jy 


LQfTlUUl5liDG)Sl&-.G$TG)J&:(oLO 


LLG35T(0L£>6VlLirT&<3D5<SlSl(!>lL£>[Tg)]LC>, 


Our  Mighty  One  !    Eight-arm 'd  and  Triple-eyed  ! 

Do  Thou  to  me  what's  good  alone,  or  do  Thou  ill, 
To  all  resigned,  I'm  Thine  and  wholly  Thine!  28 

VIII. 
My  destinies  are  in  Thy  hand. 

Me  dog,  and  lower  than  a  dog,  all  lovingly 

Thyself  didst  take  for  Thine.    This  birth-illusion's  thrall 

Is  plac'd  within  Thy  charge  alone.     And  I  in  sooth, 

is  there  aught  I  need  beyond  that,  with  care  search  out  ? 

Herein  is  there  authority  at  all  with  me? 

Thou  may'st  again  consign  me  to  some  mortal  frame ; 

Or 'neath  Thy  jewelled  foot  may'st  place  me,  Brow-eyed  One!  33 

IX. 
My  soul  is  fixed  on  Thee. 

Thou  in  Whose  brow  a  central  eye  doth  gleam  !    Thy  feet — 
the  twain — I  saw ;  mine  eyes  rejofc'd ;  now,  night  and  day, 

Without  a  thought,  on  them  alone  I  ponder  still ! 

How  I  may  quit  this  earthly  frame,  how  I  may  come 

To  enter  'neath  Thy  feet  in  bliss,  I  ponder  not ! 

Save  Thee,  O  King,  should  I  Thy  servant  ponder  aught  ? 

Thy  service  here  hath  fulness  of  delight  for  me  !  36 


35.  Mystic  quietude,  Psalm  Ixxiii.  23-25.   See  Hierotheus,  &c.,  in  Inge's  B.  L.,  pp.  103,  222,  223, 
23I-245- 


ffnITv).  277 


d5/nl£- 
L]&(oLp\   QuifllU  U45LL\  GTSST&tlJjU  LJtTJGSSl] 


x. 

The  hope  deferred. 

Thy  beauty  only  I,  a  slavish  dog,  desire, 

and  cry  aloud.     O  Master !  Thou  didst  show  to  me 
Thy  sacred  Form  in  lustre  shrin'd,  and  didst  accept 

my  service.    Thou  my  Glory  !— Mine  august  abode, 
In  ancient  days  assur'd,  Thou  now  withhold'st; — and  so, 

O  beauteous  Lord  ! — Thou  of  the  glorious  mystic  Word  ! 
My  King,— sorely  indeed  hast  Thou  bruis'd  my  poor  heart !  4° 


278  ^  5  su  IT  ff  a 


U 

[#  GU  IT  SJT  |i  ^  i! 
[The  Tamil  metre  is  Kali  -Viruttam,  four  lines,  of  four  feet  under  one  rhyme.] 


LJL-  ^jo61Jlf  <J£JSO(9j6V  e_<S5)LCLJ/T  <£LD  <£tTlLJ  OTS3T 

QLLIUJB  jBir  Q/_/rj37Lb  iSlrfliunr 


u^ 


•MY  SOUL  is  CONSUMED; 

RAPTURE   OF  LIFE    IN 


HYMN   XXXIV. 
The  lyric  is  a  good  example  of  the  enthusiastic  expression  of  Bhakti.    See  NOTE  VIII. 

I. 
His  praises. 

Partner  of  Umai's  loveliness  !    Destroyer  of  the  '  deeds  ' 

That  to  this  frame  cling  fast  !   Thou  Guardian  of  the  Bull  !   Who  dwell'st 

In  Perun-turrai's  sacred  shrine  by  well-skilled  bards  extolled  ! 

When  shall  I  joy,  O  when  exulting  sing,  henceforth,  I  too  ? 

ii. 

His  condescending  love. 

And  who  am  I  would  reach  His  foot  ?   To  me,  mere  cur,  a  throne 
He  gave  ;  enter'd  my  flesh  ;  mixed  with  my  life  ;  leaves  not  my  soul. 
With  crown  of  honey-dripping-locks,  blest  Perun-turrai's  Lord 
On  me  a  gracious  boon  bestow'd,  that  heavenly  ones  know  not  ! 


I.  The  Tamil  line  is  a  sad  blemish  !  2.  ' Karma'1  or  'vinai.'  NOTE  V.  4.  This  is,  in  fact, 
the  idea:  'When  will  it  be  granted  to  me  to  join  the  saints  in  Qivan's  paradise?1  There  are  four  of 
the  stereotyped  invocations. 


III. 
Sacred  enthusiasm. 

I  know  myself  no  more  ;  nor  day's  nor  night's  recurrence;  He 

Who  mind  and  speech  transcends  with  mystic  madness  madden'd  me ; 

He  owns  the  angry  mighty  Bull, — blest  Perun-turrai's  Lord  ; 

The  Brahman  used  to  me  wiles  I  know  not, — O  Beam  divine  !  u 

IV. 
None  like  to  Him. 

And  are  there  other  sin-destroyers,  say !  in  this  wide  world  ? 

Ent'ring  me  too,  He  made  me  His,  melting  my  very  bones ! 

He  bound  me  fast,  O  joy !    Lord,  Who  in  Perun-turrai  dwells, 

He  fills  my  mind,  in  eye  enshrin'd,  midmost  in  every  word !  16 

v. 

Cliugr  to  Him  with  reverent  love. 

Ye  who  are  freed  from  clinging  ties,  cling  ye  where  man  should  cling ! 
If  ye  desire  the  blissful  goal  to  reach,  swift  hasten  on  ! 
Learn  ye  the  glory  of  the  King,  Who  crowned  with  braided  lock 
In  Perun-turrai  dwells;  join  ye  with  those  who  cherish  there  His  foot  f         ao 


17.  uf>p,  Kurral,  350;  Wd/a</i,  171. 


280  $  jj  eu  IT 


CT. 

LCX59ST 


VI. 
Z  am  His,  body  and  soul. 

Foulness  that  heaves  like  billows  of  the  sea  He  all  destroy'd ; 

My  soul  and  body  enter'd, — fills,  and  quits  no  more.     He  Who 

In  Perun-turrai  dwells,  with  crown  of  spreading  braided  locks, 

Wreath'd  with  the  moon's  bright  beams,  our  Lord  Supreme.  This  is  His  wile!    24 

VII.  . 
The  goal  reached. 

Glory  I  ask  not ;  nor  desire  I  wealth ;  not  earth  or  heaven  I  crave ; 

I  seek  no  birth  or  death ;  those  that  desire  not  £ivan  nevermore 

I  touch.     I've  reach'd  the  foot  of  sacred  Perun-turrai's  King, 

And  crown'd  myself!    I  go  not  forth  !    I  know  no  going  hence  again  !  28 

VIII. 
Honey  or  nectar? 

Shall  I  name  Thee  'honey  from  the  branch'?  'nectar  from  the  sounding  sea'? 
Our  Aran  !  precious  Balm  !  my  King !    No  powers  have  I  to  sing  Thy  praise, 
Who  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine,  by  loamy  rice-fields  girt, 
Thou  Spotless  One,  Whose  sacred  Form  the  holy  ash  adorns  !  32 


281 

&>. 


GU  J6ST  LJ  fT<s£llU 

&_Lj2sV&&LLjr>  j5l—SiSL£>[fL£>  ^(oSaTS 


IX. 
Withdrawal  of  comfort. 


Thee  I  know  I  need  ;  and  all  I  need  I  yet  know  not  ; 

Ah  me  !  our  Aran,  precious  Balm,  Ambrosia,  Thou  Whose  Form  is  like 

The  crimson  flower,  Who  dwell'st  in  sacred  Perun-turrai's  shrine, 

And  still  remain'st,  the  very  self  within  my  soul !  36 

x. 

Prayer  permitted  still. 

While  dwellers  in  the  heavenly  world  do  holy  deeds,  in  vain 

Bearing  a  frame  of  flesh  compact,  I  stand  like  forest  tree. 

Thou  dwell'st  in  Perun-turrai's  shrine,  where  honey-dripping  cassia  blooms ; 

Though  I'm  a  sinner,  yet  I  may  implore, '  give  grace  to  me  ! '  4° 


282  ^  5  cu  IT  ff 


COT  l     £>  li      £L  (01 


[The  metre  is  .gfi/iu  tS^fit,  six  feet  in  each  line.     The  formula  is  :  — 


«3 


tSaib  I  Lfcfl  |  u>r 
{<**] 


<?j»   ) 
tft] 


<F65)l—<oTLr> 


THE    DECAD    OF    DREAD 

OR 

'ABSORPTION    IN    DIVINE    KNOWLEDGE.' 

HYMN   XXXV. 

I. 
Heretics. 

Not  the  sleek  snake  in  anthill  coil'd  I  dread  ; 

nor  feigned  truth  of  men  of  lies, — 
As  I,  in  sooth,  feel  fear  at  sight  of  those 

who  have  not  learnt  the  Lofty-One 
To  know;  who  near  the  Foot  of  the  Brow-Ey'd, — 

our  Lord,  crown'd  with  the  braided-lock, — 
Yet  think  there's  other  God.    When  these  unlearn'd  we  see,— 

AH  ME!   WE  FEEL  NO  DREAD  LIKE  THIS  ! 


I.  In  T.V.  U.  P.,  Canto  V.  68,  it  is  said  that  he  composed  this  when  he  had  made  a  hut  of  leaves 
for  himself  outside  the  city  of  Qithambaram,  and  withdrawn  to  it  as  a  Y5gi,  p.  xxx. 


_,;< , 


II. 
False  teachers. 

I  shudder  not,  though  evil  yearnings  rise ; 

nor  fear,  though  sea  of  rfm/s  o'erwhelm  ! 
Beside  His  sacred  Form,  our  Lord  of  lords,— 

in  which  the  Two  no  change  discerned, 
When  name  of  other  gods,— whate'er  they  be,— 

by  lips  profane  is  but  pronounc'd  : 
If  I  see  those,  who  loathe  not  such  discourse,— 

AH  ME  !    WE  FEEL  NO  DREAD  LIKE  THIS  ! 

III. 
The  unloving. 

I  dread  not  mighty  jav'lin,  dripping  gore ; 

nor  glance  of  maids  with  jewell'd  arms  ! 
But  those  that  will  not  sweetly  taste  His  grace,— 

Whose  glance  can  melt  the  inmost  soul,— 
Who  dances  in  the  hallow'd  court,— my  Gem 

unstain'd  and  pure,— nor  praise  His  Name:— 
Such  men  of  loveless  hearts  when  we  behold,— 

AH  ME  !   WE  FEEL  NO  DREAD  LIKE  THIS  ! 

IV. 
The  unfeeling'. 

I  dread  not  chatter  vain  of  parrot-tongues ; 

nor  fear  their  guileful  wanton  smile  ! 
If,  drawing  nigh  the  Vethian's  feet,  Whose  Form 

the  sacred  ashes  white  displays, 


7.  See  Arundfalam  in  Index. 


284  £  Jj  OJ  IT  ff  «S  li  . 


dssaarsaan 

*  63371—  /T6V, 


@. 


ffit. 


LL6$>[r<£<srr 


Men's  souls  nor  melt,  nor  weep  they  worshipping, 

their  eyes  with  gushing  teardrops  fill'd  : 
If  these,  of  tender  feeling  void,  we  see, — 

AH  ME  !    WE  FEEL  NO  DREAD  LIKE  THIS  !  16 

V. 
The  undevout. 

I  fear  not,  though  diseases  all  should  come ; 

nor  dread  I  birth  with  death  conjoin'd  ! 
The  crescent  moon  as  ornament  He  wears, 

yet  men  praise  not  His  roseate  Feet, 
(Which  Mai,  though  the  firm  ground  He  clave,  saw  not,) 

nor  join  His  worshippers  devout! 
If  those  that  wear  not  ashes  white  we  see,— 

AH  ME  !    WE  FEEL  NO  DREAD  LIKE  THIS  !  ao 

VI. 
Not  real  worshippers. 

I  dread  not  angry  flash  of  gleaming  fires ; 

nor  fear,  though  mountains  on  me  roll ! 
His  shoulders  ashes  wear,  Lord  of  the  Bull, 

Sire,  passing  utterance  of  speech,— 
Yet  men  praise  not  His  lotus  Feet,  nor  bow, 

nor  crown  them  with  the  full-blown  flower ! 
If  those  hard  hearts,  that  yield  not  to  His  power  we  see, — 

AH  ME  !   WE  FEEL  NO  DREAD  LIKE  THIS  !  24 

21.  Psalm  xlvi. 


9  u  u$$i.    fa®.  285 

ST. 


UfljBIJb  ST^lS 


<F(55)L-.UJ<a$r  ^JUUGST  <o<SXfr<SSSrSUIT  JB65BT638T 


VII. 

Devoid  of  enthusiasm. 
Not  guilt  unseemly  that  swift  vengeance  brings; 

nor  stroke  of  instant  death  I  dread  ! 
He  dances  in  the  beauteous  court,  and  waves 

'mid  smoking  clouds  His  fiery  axe ; 
The  cassia- wreath,  all  bright  with  jewell'd  buds, 

He  wears,  of  beings  First !    Yet  men 
Praise  not  His  Foot !    If  these,  unmov'd  by  grace  we  see,— 

AH  ME  !    WE  FEEL  NO  DREAD  LIKE  THIS  ! 

VIII. 
No  high  aspirations. 

I  fear  not  elephant  to  pillar  chain'd ; 

nor  tiger  fiery-eyed  I  dread  ! 
The  Sire,  whose  crest  sweet  fragrance  sheds,— His  Feet 

that  heav'nly  ones  may  not  approach,— 
Men  praise  not,  nor  with  triumph  haste 

within  His  shrine  to  sweetly  live  ! 
If  we  behold  these  men  of  wisdom  reft,— 

AH  ME  !    WE  FEEL  NO  DREAD  LIKE  THIS  ! 

IX. 
False  shame. 

I  fear  not  thunderbolt  from  out  the  cloud ; 

nor  changing  confidence  of  kings  ! 
Our  Lord  of  lords  the  very  poison  made 

Ambrosia,  by  His  gracious  act ;        


34.  See  note  on  XII. 


286  $  J  su  rr  s-  a  &  . 


&>O. 


GUfT653fl<SVtTlEI  &<S55T&6fT  (o&fTff,  <SU  IT  L)     GST 


He  makes  us  His  in  way  of  righteousness ; 

yet  men  smear  not  the  sacred  ash ! 
If  those  who  from  His  side  shrink  thus  we  see,— 

AH  ME!    WE  FEEL  NO  DREAD  LIKE  THIS !  36 

X. 

Men  that  worship  not. 

I  dread  not  arrow  that  unswerving  flies ; 

nor  wrath  of  death's  dread  King,  I  fear  ! 
Him  Whose  adornment  is  the  mighty  moon 

men  praise  not,  nor  with  hymns  adore ; 
They  ponder  not  with  souls  subdued,  while  tears 

from  brightly  beaming  eyes  pour  forth. 
These  thankless  men, — not  men  ! — if  we  behold, — 

AH  ME  !   WE  FEEL  NO  DREAD  LIKE  THIS  !  40 


LJ^fcli.       [fcS,.  -,!-- 


U 

[#  SU  IT  GOT  jl  ^  Q?  3o1T  aj .  ] 

[For  metre,  see  VI.] 


THE    SACRED    PANDI. 
[THE    GROWTH    OF    RAPTURE.] 

HYMN  XXXVI. 

The  Lyric  of  the  Sacred  Pandi.— NOTE  IV  should  be  studied  as  introductory  to  this  very  dramatic 
poem,  which  is  in  every  way  a  remarkable  composition ;  yet  I  should  hardly  venture  to  affirm  that 
Manikka-Va9agar  was  its  author.  In  order  to  understand  it,  it  is  necessary  to  call  to  mind  the  strange 
legend  of  Divan's  appearance  at  Madura  as  a  horseman,  or  as  He  is  here  called  a  warrior.  [Life,  §  iv.] 
The  first  stanza  is  supposed  to  be  uttered  by  the  poet  as  he  contemplates  the  God  entering  Madura  on 
that  occasion,  surrounded  by  the  other  gods,  all  on  splendid  chargers.  Civan  Himself  is  mounted  upon 
such  a  steed  as  the  world  has  never  yet  seen,  and  combines  in  His  appearance  the  attributes  of  the 
leader  of  a  band  of  foreign  merchants,  the  graces  of  the  accomplished  knight,  and  the  majesty  of 
a  king.  He  has  come,  according  to  His  promise,  to  save  His  servant  from  suffering,  and  to  vindicate 
His  fidelity.  The  poet  in  his  soul  adores  his  Deliverer  and  his  God. 

In  the  remaining  stanzas  he  addresses  the  assembled  multitude,  and  expounds  the  mystery 
(NOTE  I)  :  '  Fear  not  as  though  it  were  the  Avatar  of  some  ruthless  conqueror !  This  horseman  is 
Civan,' — the  founder,  according  to  legend,  of  the  dynasty  of  Paudiyan  kings.  '  He  is  the  abiding  King 
of  Madura,  and  now  He  comes  in  grace  to  the  mortal  king  of  Madura,  Arimarttanan.'  The  whole 
typifies  the  sacred  war  that  He  wages  as  the  Pathi  (NOTE  XII)  against  the  enemies  and  tormentors 
of  His  people's  souls.  The  third  stanza  skilfully,  though  by  an  anachronism,  allegorizes  the  flood 
that  Qivan  brought  upon  the  city,  when  at  His  command  the  Vaigai  overflowed  its  banks.  In  the 
fifth  stanza  he  spiritualizes  the  idea  that  Qivan  appears  here  as  a  merchant,  a  seller  of  horses.  The 
sixth,  referring  to  His  previous  appearance  at  Perun-turrai,  hints  at  His  character  as  a  Guru,  a  giver  of 
spiritual  light ;  and  the  whole  ends  with  an  urgent  call  to  the  people  to  throw  aside  all  foolish 
delusions,  and  to  march  boldly  forward  under  His  banner,  and  accept  Him  as  their  King.  The 
way  in  which  the  whole  legend  is  allegorized  points,  it  may  be  thought,  to  a  later  period,  when  the 
Caiva  Siddhanta  system  had  been  more  developed  ;  and  when,  under  the  influence  of  the  Santana- 
Teachers  (NOTE  XI),  the  whole  system  was  being  harmonized.  There  is  here  a  disposition  to  make 
little  of  the  myth,  and  to  bring  into  prominence  its  spiritual  teaching.  This  was  the  second  stage 
of  the  Caiva  developement.  This  however  is  mere  conjecture,  and  there  seems  to  be  scarcely  any 
means  for  its  absolute  verification. 

The  state  of  the  saint,  and  his  experiences  are  shown  in  chapter  viii  of  Uma-Civaflriyar,  which 
is  given  in  NOTE  VI. 

The  metre  is  to  my  ear  the  most  rhythmical  of  all  the  species  of  Tamil  poetry.  The  student 
should  learn  to  recite  and  enjoy  the  verses,  if  he  would  fully  understand  them ! 

I. 
The  God  appears,  and  is  recognised  by  the  Sage. 

The  Bridegroom  of  the  mountain  Maid,— the  Pandiyan's  Ambrosia  rare,— 
The  One,— Who  is  from  all  diverse,— I  worship  at  His  flow'ry  Feet ! 


288 

t—  (a<3~6U&<<oS)lT 


a. 


LL65TGST65T  LOllSlfOLJ  (o  LJ/T/_ 


dfti  (j£)<55TLJ 

issru  Qfiusfrsrr/E/  Q 

/r(S3bT/_(S«j^(5^ 

fTSirggjlLL  QlJlU&Lp  (oSvQ&GSTg)]  QuGS3)\1-B(oG5T  \  so. 
ffi. 


SV£Z).  <ST<35 


TnfltLJLD  /_9/DL/(SZDU  ST^/f^T/f  /-//TSTT  ^ 


Made  manifest  in  grace,  He  on  a  charger  rides,  and  thrills  my  soul 
In  Warrior-guise  !  no  other  form  beside  my  inmost  soul  doth  know  !  4 

ii. 

'  Behold  His  condescension.' 

They  gather'd  round,  bewilder'd  all,  as  in  a  waking  dream  ; — I  spoke : 
'  Like  sun  that  veils  its  beams  He  comes,  His  hand  divine  holds  warrior's  spear. 
He  on  a  charger  rides  !  Ye  see  our  race  with  ruin  threatened  sore  ! 
'Tis  thus  for  Madura's  king  he  stays  the  flowing  tide  of  future  birth  !'  8 

in. 

The  Flood  in  Madura.     (See  p.  xxvi.) 

'  Ye  who  a  soul  possess  that  swims  and  bathes  in  rapture's  rushing  tide ! 
A  Pandi-king,  He  mounts  His  steed,  to  make  all  earth  the  gladness  share. 
He  takes  the  form  of  flood  of  joy  unique,  and  holds  His  servants'  hearts. 
Plunging  in  flood  of  heavenly  bliss,  O  cherish  ye  His  sacred  Foot ! '  12 

IV. 
The  Holy  War. 

'Good  friends,  persist  not  in  this  round  of  BIRTH  !  This  is  the  time  !   The  King 
Of  the  good  southern  land  shines  forth,  and  ever  draws  from  out  its  sheath 
His  gleaming  sword  of  wisdom  pure,  His  steed  of  rapture  urges  on, 
Makeswar  withwarringBiRTHthroughthewideworld,andfoes  confounded  flee!'  16 


n.  Compare  XIX.  13-16.          14-16.  Compare  XLVI  and  XIX. 


uf&&.     n.s,. 


©. 


3ft. 
LD/T/L//T  (T 


,  rfcrai  jpgO 


r  QriuSesrp  ypftu 


_  0.4P 

6T. 


/LJGWj|32//_c  LJSZOdJsfr 

*/T«J  <J?/([5U>QUQ5&  ^«)^  ^6W6W(J5  3™^®^ 
QflLJ  QfB®lBlQ^fT<SS)L,^  Qp<5V<SST<su<5ST  QfSUl^_  GfffLBeSTsQeir  !       a.* 

V. 
'Wow  are  His  good  gifts  to  be  gained:'   a  merchant. 

'  While  there  is  time,  give  Him  your  love,  and  save  yourselves  !  Haste  ye  to  Him 

Who  ate  the  poison,  Whom  'tis  hard  for  him  who  ate  the  earth, 

And  him  effaces  four,  and  all  the  heavenly  ones,  to  draw  anigh  ; 

Who  to  His  servants  stores  of  grace  dispenses,  our  good  Pandi-lord! '  30 

VI. 
'  This  is  His  day  of  grace  : '   a  teacher. 

That  gathering  darkness  may  disperse,  illusions  cease,  and  all  be  clear, 
The  Splendour  urges  on  His  steed.    The  Minavan  himself  knows  not 
To  utter  all  His  praise.   Would  ye  all  joy  obtain,  seek  His  blest  Foot  I 
This  is  the  gift  in  rarest  grace  the  Pandiyan  gives,— RELEASE  for  aye  ! '          24 

VII. 
'  He  gives  audience : '    a  conquering-  king. 

'When  on  illusion's  charger  He  in  beauty  rides,  and  gathers  round 
His  waiting  hosts ;  the  enmities  whose  name  is  "  earthly  birth  "  shall  cease. 
To  those  who  refuge  find  He  gives  grace,  glorious,  vast,  inscrutable. 
Draw  near  the  South-king's  mighty  Foot,  Whose  conquering  banner  proudly 
waves !'  a8 

1 8.  Vishnu  is  said  to  have  swallowed  the  earth.     But  see  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  116 ;  and  Lex.  •»*. 
20.  Brahma.  22.  Minavan  means  'He  of  the  Fish- (banner)';  and  is  a  title  of  Pandiyan  kings, 

a  fish  being  on  their  banner.     Sometimes  it  is  =  Qivan,  as  the  ideal  Pandiyan.         33.  Seem»  corrupt 
25.  The  horses  were  jackals !    See  Life,  §  iv.  28.  There  is  nn  alternative  (and  better)  reading : 

'  Whose  gifts  of  mercy  wide  extend ; '  see  Tamil,  Lex.  Q«r«M_. 

U 


2QO 


6U  IT  iff  *  IX. 


•0. 


VIII. 
'  Seceive  His  gracious  gift.' 

'In  deathless  rapture's  flood  our  souls  He  plunges,  shows  His  changeless  grace ; 
Drives  far  away  our  DEEDS,  dissolves  the  bonds  of  old  impurity ; 
And  makes  us  His !     Come  draw  ye  near  the  Pandi-ruler's  mighty  Foot. 
Press  forward,  take  the  gracious  boon  of  Him  Who  made  the  circling  world!'    3  a 

IX. 
The  magic  power  of  His  appearing. 

'That  men  may  cross  the  mingling  sea  of  evil  DEEDS  and  future  BIRTH, 
The  Pandi-king  supreme,  Who  melts  the  soul  of  those  that  love  and  praise, 
Upon  His  charger  came.    When  this  the  slender  flower-like  maidens  knew, 
Like  trees  they  stood, — their  senses  rapt,  themselves  forgot,  and  all  beside!'     36 

x. 

'  In  faith  and  love  cling  to  Him.' 

'As  once  He  conquered  death,  so  now  the  five  sense-kings  He  conquered  too  ; 
And  then,  in  beauteous  state,  Himself,— and  the  great  Goddess  with  Him,— sat! 
Strong  Warrior,  on  the  Bull  he  came  to  Minavan,  and  slew  his  foes ! 
O  ye  of  weak  and  wavering  faith  !    Draw  near,  hold  fast  His  roseate  Feet!'  40 


32.  Compare  XLVI.  37.  See  Pope's  Ndlcujiyar,  p.  6 :    Through  Him  the  faithful  have 

victory  over  death  and  the  phenomenal  sense-world  J  40.  This  is  Tiruvilai-adal,  30. 


[The  metre  is  <gfiAu  «%AW»;  and  the  formula  -«y«ii  I  -«»  |  -«»  ||  -rf«,4  |  _ 


.„»  i 


617  /TLJbiSlJ/D 


THE    DECAD    OF   THE    'TENACIOUS   GRASP.' 

HYMN   XXXVII. 

This  is  one  of  the  most  characteristic  of  the  Sage's  lyrics,  and  would  seem  to  belong  to  a  later  period 
than  that  when  the  '  cry  of  the  forsaken  '  (VI)  was  composed.  It  is  in  singular  contrast  to  that  lyric. 
He  had  meanwhile  visited  many  shrines,  and  had  passed  through  much  struggle ;  but  when  he  reached 
what  is  here  called  Tiru-toni-puram  (the  sacred  Boat-town),  of  which  the  modern  name  is  Shialli ',  he 
found  a  magnificent  temple  there,  that  seemed  to  him  like  a  reproduction  on  earth  of  the  silver 
mountain  Kailasam,  on  which  the  God  dwells  in  splendour  with  Parvathi.  This  shrine  has  always 
been  remarkable,  but  is  especially  honoured  now  as  the  reputed  birthplace  of  Tiru-flana-sambandhar ; 
who,  in  popular  estimation,  is  perhaps  the  greatest  of  the  Qaiva  saints.  In  his  legend  we  have 
elsewhere  given  some  notices  of  this  his  home.  It  has  twelve  names  connected  with  wild  legends  ; 
but  is  called  here  'the  sacred  Boat-town,'  because  when  at  the  end  of  each  aeon  the  deluge  of 
universal  destruction  overwhelms  the  universe,  this  shrine  floats  securely  on  the  waters, — the  everlasting 
ark !  Here  it  seems  that  the  Sage  renewed  his  vows  to  his  guru,  from  whom  he  had  somewhat 
departed  in  thought  and  practice.  He  seems  to  regard  himself  now  as  a  9**t<y>tt+  (NOTE  V) ; 
and  declares  that  he  will  henceforth  hold  fast  his  allegiance  under  all  circumstances,  in  life  and 
through  death.  Compare  NOTES  IV  and  VII. 

I. 
Thou  art  our  own ! 

O  King  of  those  above  !— O  ceaseless  Plenitude 

of  mystic  bliss  ! — To  me  defiled  Thou  cam'st, 
Fruit  newly  ripe,  and  mad'st  me  Thine  own  dwelling-place. 

Balm,  yielding  bliss  all  earthly  bliss  beyond ! 


1  This  is  variously  written.     In  Tamil  it  is  Cri-kari  =  9**rifi. 
U   2 


292  ^  g  «u  t  »  *  A. 


HplxQ&SSTLJ  /_&£_<£  (o^  657; 


8.. 
61$  65STS3STGU  J 


True  meaning's  Certitude  !    The  Foot  in  glory  bright ! 
My  Wealth  of  bliss !     O  £iva-Peruman  ! 

OUR  VERY  OWN — I'VE  SEIZED  THEE, — HOLD  THEE  FAST  !       HENCEFORTH, 
AH,  WHITHER  GRACE  IMPARTING  WOULD'ST  THOU  RISE  ? 

II. 
My  only  Help  in  this  life. 

Ever  the  bull  Thou  boldest, — King  of  heaven's  glad  host ! 

To  me  a  man  of  sin  Possession  true ! 
Thy  slave  is  foul  decay  that  quits  not,  merest  earth ; 

within  a  very  nest  of  worms  I  lie  ! 
Thou  mad'st  me  Thine,  and  safe  hast  kept,  lest  I  should  fail 

at  last ;  O  God,  O  mighty  Sea  of  grace  ! 

FOR  EVERMORE — I'VE  SEIZED  THEE, — HOLD  THEE  FAST  !     HENCEFORTH, 
AH,  WHITHER  GRACE  IMPARTING  WOULD'ST  THOU  RISE? 

III. 
Reality  amidst  illusions. 

O  Mother !    O  my  Sire  !    My  Gem  beyond  compare  ! 
Ambrosia,  ever-precious  yield  of  love  ! 


293 

LH1(L£><2>t'&o$r&  <^(J5*(gt/) 
J  L/&U/uCW<S5T 


)/i<55)LDG?HJ  &_6$T%S5r<F 


mm. 


(ourr<sQijD\ 


J0<53T^3r<5F  Sfl&Q&GSTLJ 


I,  vile  one,  dwell  in  short-lived  house  of  worms, 

where  false  illusions  ever  growing  press. 
On  me  Thou  hast  bestow'd  the  true  and  perfect  rest ; 

my  Wealth  of  bliss  !   O  Qiva-Peruman  ! 

UPON  THIS  EARTH — I'VE  SEIZ'D  THEE, — HOLD  THEE  FAST  !     HENCEFORTH, 
AH,  WHITHER  GRACE  IMPARTING  WOULD*ST  THOU  RISE? 

IV. 
Lig-ht  in  the  darkness. 

Splendour  of  grace  !    Well  ripen'd  luscious  Fruit  unique  ! 

King  of  ascetics  stern  of  all  prevailing  power ! 
Science  of  meanings  deep !    Delight  transcending  praise  ! 

Of  mystic  sacred  musings'  Fulness  blest  ! 
Thou  enterest  Thy  servant's  thought,  and  all  is  clear  ! 

My  Wealth  of  bliss  !    O  Civa-Peruman  ! 

IN  EACH  DARK  HOUR— I'VE  SEIz'o  THEE,— HOLD  THEE  FAST  !     HENCEFORTH, 
AH,  WHITHER  GRACE  IMPARTING  WOULD'ST  THOU  RISE?  I 


13.  See  Pope's  Kurraj,  pp.  192,  232,  &c.;  chap.  iii. 


Jj  QJ  (I 
@. 


StsVGVJ  <SpQfj<Su(o<S$r  ! 


J1-<£rb  SffilLJ 


ft. 

sj  LDSsr(oLc>  (ofiifloVrrs  Q  &rr  start—  .IT  sssr 


iSll)  5l9  (o  <SU  j 


V. 
The  One  Helper  in  life's  struggle*. 

Thou  only  One,  to  Whom  can  none  compare  !    Thou  Light 

shining  within  the  very  soul  of  me,  Thy  slave  ! 
On  me  who  knew  not  the  true  goal,— of  merit  void,— 

O  Love  unique, — Thou  hast  choice  grace  bestowed  ! 
O  radiant  Form  Whose  splendour  bright  no  tongue  can  tell  ! 

My  Wealth  of  bliss  !    O  £iva-Peruman  ! 

IN  WEARINESS — I'VE  SEIZED  THEE, — HOLD  THEE  FAST  !     HENCEFORTH, 
AH,  WHITHER  GRACE  IMPARTING  WOULD'sT  THOU  RISE? 

VI. 
In  death,  as  in  life. 

O  Pinnagan,  our  great  Possession,  Thou  hast  held 

as  sacred  shrine  my  empty  worthless  mind  ; 
Hast  given  me  rapturous  joy  that  knows  no  bound ;  hast  cut 

the  root  of  '  birth/  and  made  me  all  Thine  own  ! 


31.  Sans.  Pinaha  (or  Pinaddhd),  'one  fully  accoutred,  or  adorned.' 


ST. 


FT-fQ(SST\ 

OJf 


O  mystic  Form,  by  me  in  open  vision  seen  ! 
My  Wealth  of  bliss  !    O  Civa-Peruman  ! 

IN  HOUR  OF  DEATH — I'VE  SEIZED  THEE, — HOLD  THEE  FAST  !     HENCEFORTH, 

AH,  WHITHER  GRACE  IMPARTING  WOULD'ST  THOU  RISE?  .14 

VII. 
The  revelation  of  the  way  to  worship. 

Thou  Who  didst  teach  the  way  to  grasp  that  Ancient  One, 

Who  cuts  the  root  of  every  servile  '  bond ' ! 
O  Being, — Who  didst  show  to  me  Thy  flowery  feet; 

my  worship  didst  accept;  ent'ring  my  soul  ;  — 
Resplendent  Lamp  !    Thou  mystic  Form  of  splendour  bright ! 

My  Wealth  of  bliss  !    O  £iva-Peruman  ! 
RULER  SUPREME— I'VE  SEIZED  THEE,— HOLD  THEE  FAST  !   HENCEFORTH, 

AH,  WHITHER  GRACE  IMPARTING  WOULD'ST  THOU  RISE  ? 

VIII. 
The  Deity  everywhere  present. 

O  Father  !  worlds  on  worlds  Thy  presence  fills  ! 
Thou  Primal  Deity !   O  wondrous  One 


296  $  |5  QJ  IT  *  a  IB  . 

J  l5liy.<£<5 
LL!l(o<o5T\ 


<S5T 


Who  knows  no  end  !   Thy  saints  devoutly  cling  to  Thee  ! 

My  Wealth  of  bliss  !  O  £iva-Peruman  ! 
Wild  Vagrant,  living  Germ  in  being's  every  form,— 

diverse  Thyself  from  every  living  thing  ! 
ILLUSIONIST — I'VE  SEIZED  THEE, — HOLD  THEE  FAST  !  HENCEFORTH, 

AH,  WHITHER  GRACE  IMPARTING  WOULD'sT  THOU  RISE?  33 

IX. 
The  rapture  of  devotion. 

The  mother's  thoughtful  care  her  infant  feeds :  Thou  deign'st 

with  greater  love  to  visit  sinful  me,  — 
Melting  my  flesh,  flooding  my  soul  with  inward  light, 

unfailing  rapture's  honied  sweetness  Thou 
Bestowest, — through  my  every  part  infusing  joy ! 

My  Wealth  of  bliss  !  O  Qiva-Peruman  ! 
CLOSE  FOLLOWING  THEE — I'VE  SEIZED,  AND  HOLD  THEE  FAST  !  HENCEFORTH, 

AH,  WHITHER  GRACE  IMPARTING  WOULD'sT  THOU  RISE  ?  36 


31.  Lit.  '  maniac.'     See  NOTE  I  on  '  Qivan's  acts.'     These  terms  are  untranslateable. 


so. 

L./<S5)Jt  /<an/7  &6tsfllUU 
/I  LJ 


IT-fQ<5Sr\   LOtf&SVfT 
lSllDLj(oU 


X. 

The  delight  of  His  indwelling. 

O  Ruler,  spotless  Gem,  Who  mad'st  me  Thine,  thrilling 

my  frame  through  every  pore  ;  in  friendly  shape 
Didst  enter  it, — as  'twere  a  vast  and  golden  shrine, — 

making  this  body  vile  of  sweetness  full ! 
Affliction,  birth  and  death,  bewilderment, — all  links 

of  life, — Thou  hast  cut  off,  O  beauteous  Gleam  ! 
MY  SOUL'S  DELIGHT — I'VE  SEIZED  THEE, — HOLD  THEE  FAST  !    HENCEFORTH, 

AH,  WHITHER  GRACE  IMPARTING  WOULD'sT  THOU  RISE  ?  40 


298  $  5  su  n  ff  «  ii. 


<SU  <F  p  (SI/. 

GO.] 


[For  the  metre,  see  V.  §  ii.  p.  48.     The  formula  is : — 

-mtti  I  -mrti 

(-»)  I  (— •) 


St. 


e.. 


/.c  szar  (€33)  i^^  /-9/o  LJ  ugjpjslLL.  L-  rr<sh  <su  mu  I 


SACRED    SADNESS. 
['ABSTRACTION    FROM    OBJECTIVE   THOUGHT.'] 

HYMN   XXXVIII. 

I. 

My  iron  mind  full  often  didst  Thou  draw,  and  melt  my  frame ; 

Thy  feet  to  me  didst  show,  as  though  the  sweet  cane's  pleasantness ; 

Thou  of  the  braided  lock,  where  waters  wander  wave  on  wave ! 

The  jackals  all  Thou  mad'st  great  horses ;  thus  didst  show  Thy  grace.  4 

ii. 

Thou  Partner  of  the  maid  whose  words  are  music  !    To  thine  own 
Ambrosia  precious,  sating  every  soul !    Master,  Thy  slave 
Rule  Thou  !    Cut  off  these  earthly  'births.'     When  Thou  didst  pity  me 
I  saw  Thy  foot  in  vision  clear,  and,  ah,  my  soul  was  freed  !  8 


i.  His  heart  was  hard  like  iron,  yet  the  sacred  magnet  drew  him.       3.  The  Gariga.       4.  Life,  §  iv. 


iurr<55Ti5liDLJ  iSljD 


p&eSSTL.  i2_«J)Z_JL/T(o65T  ! 

tSSfQ,  OTti  LJ/Tii/J  j(?S5r! 


SUTdB^/L/oV/TSV  6UJ!T&LpeV6UJB 


4ft. 


A. 


III. 

No  hiding-place  had  I ;  in  hell  of  births  and  deaths  I  sank ; 
No  loving  hand  was  stretched  to  aid ;  Master,  Thou  bad'st  me  come, 
Who  didst  the  poison  eat  from  out  the  swelling  sea  !    To  me, 
How  Thou  didst  show  Thy  flowery  foot,  our  Deity  supreme  ! 

IV. 

Dancer  with  serpent-girded  foot  1    Thou  of  the  braided  lock  ! 
Lord  of  the  saints  crowned  with  Thy  flowery  foot !  me  dost  Thou  save, 
From  praising  meaner  gods  that  others  praise.     O  wondrous  grace ! 
I  ponder  how  Thou  to  my  soul  didst  show  Thy  saving  power. 

v. 

No  lore  of  wisdom  had  I,  melted  not  in  rapturous  tears;— 
Yet  other  gods  knew  not !   And  by  Thy  word,  our  mighty  Lord  ! 
My  soul  exulted  when  I  gained  Thy  foot.    To  me,  Thy  slave, 
As  though  one  gave  to  cur  a  golden  seat,  Thy  grace  was  shown. 

VI. 

Sore  troubled  by  the  glancing  eyes  of  damsels,  soft  of  foot, 
A  poisonous  anguish  pierc'd  my  trembling  frame  ;  yet  by 

ir.  See  Lyric  XII.         13.  Some  read 'green-tnngueci.'    See  «w*  and  */*•     r..mp.  Nm    \. 


3<X> 


Thy  grace  I  'scaped,  my  Lord,  my  Owner!  Me  Thou  bad'st'Fear  not,' 

And  mad'st  Thine  own, — Ambrosia  of  the  sacred  temple  court !  24 

VII. 

For  me  Thou  caused'st '  birth '  to  cease,  great  Lord  of  bliss,  Who  dwell'st  unknown 

By  even  the  heavenly  ones  in  Perun-turrai's  southern  shrine  ! 

Entering  in  love,  melting  my  heart  within,  Thou  madest  me  Thine  ! 

Great  Lord,  such  was  the  way  that  Thou  didst  look  on  me  !  28 

VIII. 

O  Ancient  One !    First  One,  that  grows  not  old  !    The  Endless 

Chaunted  word  !    True  Essence  !  Burgeoned  forth  as  that  WHICH  is, 

AND  is  NOT.     Entering  here,  me  who  in  error  rolled,  Thy  grace 

Restored,  and  made  Thine  own.     Such  was  Thy  way,  O  mighty  One  !  32 

IX. 
Special  manifestation  in  Idai-maruthur. 

Sprang  up  Thy  foot,  as  sweetly  fragrant  flower  within  my  mind,  melting  my  soul ! 
In  every  street  I  wept,  and  praised  Thee,  mighty  Lord  of  bliss ! 
Mercy  supreme  that  as  wide  ocean  rolls,  I  tasted,  plunged  therein  ! 
Father,  in  Idai-maruthur  Thou  show'dst  Thy  grace  to  me  !  36 

36.  See  Lex.  ®«»i_. 


d£  5  C  eu  9  po  aj 


a»o. 


x. 

No  desert  in  me :    all  is  His  grace  I 

Have  I  indeed  performed  ascetic  deeds,  £i-va-ya-na-ma  gained  to  chaunt ! 

£ivan;  the  mighty  Lord,  as  honey  and  as  rare  ambrosia  sweet, 

Himself  He  came,  entered  my  soul, — to  me  His  slave  gave  grace ; 

So  that  I  hated,  loathed  this  life  of  soul  in  flesh  enmeshed,  that  day.  40 


302  $  5  QI  IT  *  a  ix  . 


[.'Pain  ; 

[Metre  as  the  preceding.] 


LJ6S)L—lU(l(o<S5T\ 


THE    SACRED    LAMENT. 
['THE    MATURITY    OF    RAPTURE.'] 

HYMN    XXXIX. 

I. 
X  praise  none  but  Thee. 

O  Thou  Whose  way  Ayan,  from  flow'ry  lotus  sprung,  knows  not,  nor  Mai ! 
Partner  of  her  whose  swelling  bosom  wears  the  Gohgu  flower !    Whose  form 
White  ash  displays  !    Owner  of  blest  Arur,  begirt  with  lofty  wall ! 
Saving  Thy  flower-like  feet,  nought  else  will  I  Thy  servant  ever  praise  !          4 

n. 

To  Thee  alone  Z  look  for  help. 

Thou  of  the  braided  tuft !    Fire-wielder !    Thou  Whose  weapon  is  the  dart 
Three-leav'd  and  gleaming !    Light  superne  !    Lord  of  the  flock  !    The  soft, 
white  bull  

i.  Comp.  Psalm  Ixxvii.  19 :  'Thy  way  is  in  the  sea, 

And  Thy  paths  in  the  great  waters, 

And  Thy  footsteps  are  not  known.' 

See  Index  :  Aruna$alam.  3.  Aritr,  see  Lex.  5.  See  Muir  (1872),  vol.  v.  p.  462. 

6.  Pa9upati,  Pa9unam-pati  = '  Lord  of  kine.'     Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  336;    vol.  i.  pp.  108,  44.4.     > 
X-XII.     Bhutapati,  Prajapati  =  '  Lord  of  created  beings.' 


so_<S3)*_<L//rG?65r! 


Is  thine  I    O  Lord  of  Perun-turrai  girt  by  spreading  groves  !    Thy  slave 
Am  I.   Owner,  I  know  in  truth  no  other  present  help  than  Thee. 

in. 

Nor  friends,  nor  kin  I  seek ;  no  city  I  desire ;  no  name  I  crave ; 
No  learned  ones  I  seek ;  and  henceforth  lessons  to  be  conned  suffice. 
Thou  dancer,  in  Kuttalam  dwelling  blissful,  Thy  resounding  feet 
I'll  seek,  that  as  the  cow  yearns  for  its  calf,  my  longing  soul  may  melt.          u 


II.  Kuttalam.  Called  by  Europeans  Courtallam.  There  are  two  places  of  this  name,  both 
Qaiva  shrines ;  one  a  few  miles  W.  by  S.  from  Mayavaram  in  the  Tanjore  district,  and  the  other  in 
Tinnevelly.  (See  Sewell,  Archaeological  Survey  of  Southern  India,  vol.  i.  pp.  272,  308.) 


304  $  5  su  IT  8-  *  li. 


u  u  it  on  in  .] 

[Metre  as  V.  §  ii.     Formula:     -u>r    —  *rk    -miii    -*r<u.] 


r  «*ri_«*(?p  = 

e.. 


(o<$rT68sr<ssy<PiurT6V 


THE    DECAD    OF    'GLORIOUS   TILLAI  '.' 
['UNINTERMITTED-  ENJOYMENT.'] 

[See  T.  V.  U.  P.,  Canto  V.  62.     Life,  §  vi.] 

HYMN   XL. 

I. 
He  enters  on  a  life  of  absolute  renunciation. 

The  potsherd  and  the  skull  I  deemed  my  kin ;  my  soul  dissolved ; 

Wealth  to  be  sought  was  (Divan's  foot  alone,  I  clearly  saw ; 

With  soul  and  body  to  the  earth  in  worship  bent,  a  slave, 

I'VE  REACH'D  HIM  WHERE  HE  DANCES,  LORD  OF  TILLAI'S  HOME  OF  JOY  ! 

ii. 

Here  shall  I  be  set  free. 

Through  fond  desire  of  those  of  slender  form  and  gentle  words, 
How  many  deeds  soever  guilt  increasing,  I  have  done, 


1  Comp.  Lyric  XXXI.  In  Tillai  he  built  himself  a  hermitage,  and  entered  on  the  last  stage 
of  his  service.  See  XXXV  ;  Kurraf,  chaps,  xxxv-xxxvii ;  JValajiydr,  chap,  vi ;  and  especially 
NOTE  VI. 


U 


«r.   /J«w  01  it  =  fid*  ^lt9.mtfHj)  G.  63. 
fe, 

OTSSTL/STT  (6^(75^, 


(LpssiLj&r  erreunxstflfD  (Lp(L£>pi£luj  g-a 


LLG$T<5<£JIT 


@. 


S337L_/ 


Nor  'death  '  nor  'birth  '  I  dread  !    He  caus'd  me  to  embrace  His  feet  : 

A  slave,  I'VE  REACHED  HIM  WHO  BEARS  RULE  IN  TILLAI'S  HOME  OF  JOY  !        8 

in. 

He  brought  bacfc  my  wandering1  mind. 

Melting  my  inmost  frame,  He  killed  the  germ  of  twofold  deeds;  — 
Pluckt  out  my  rooted  griefs;  —  made  purely  one  the  manifold;  — 
So  that  all  former  things  might  perish  quite,  He  entered  in  ! 

I'VE  REACHED  HlM  WHO  IN  LOVE  BEARS  RULE  IN  TlLLAl's  HOME  OF  JOY  !  1  1 

IV. 
(JJivaii  made  known  only  to  disciplined  minds. 

Who  severs  not  Himself  from  those  whose  minds  are  severed  still 
From  vain  assemblies  void  of  sign,  and  way,  and  temper  meet,— 
The  'goal  of  bliss,'—  Ambrosia's  mighty  flow,—  to  chastened  thought 
Revealed,—  I'VE  REACHED  HIM  WHO  BEARS  RULE  IN  TILLAI'S  HOME  OF  JOY!  16 

v. 

The  consummation  gained  in  Tillai. 

This  same  embodiment  bound  up  with  name  and  quality 

To  consummate,  He  cuts  off  sin  that  clings  !    His  servants  all 

14.  The  three  notes  of  a  Qaiva  assembly  of  saints.    The  heretics  ispecially  boasted  of  their 
own  emblems,  way,  and  qualities.         15.  Qiva-patham  XXXI.  1  1.        1  7,  '8.  The  who 

embodiment.     NOTES  V,  XIV. 

X 


306  $  15  QJ  IT 


Si. 


<oTG$r£lj5<55)1£  ^Jttjy^fi  GUSSSTGSSl  LbjBnSS 


61. 


As  they  draw  near,  the  honey  taste  of  (Divan's  mercy,  and 

Are  filled,  where  I'VE  REACHED  HIM  WHO  RULES  IN  TILLAI'S  HOME  OF  JOY!    20 

VI. 
My  being  in  His  hand. 

Bud  on  the  bough,  then  rounded  flower,  next  fruit  unripe,  then  fruit 
Matured, — my  frame  thus  formed  He  made  His  own,  nor  hence  departs;— 
That  trusting  thought  may  ever  cling  to  Him,  as  it  clings  now, 

I'VE  REACHED  HlM  WHO  BEARS  RULE  IN  TlLLAl's  GOLDEN  HOME  OF  JOY  !  24 

VII. 
The  mighty  foot. 

The  demon's  arm  for  strength  renowned,  by  the  same  sacred  foot 
That  pressed  upon  my  head,  was  crushed,  and  glorious  rested  there; 
Thus  by  His  grace  I'm  freed  from  galling  bonds  of  life,  and  here 

I'VE  REACHED  HlM  WHO  BEARS  RULE  IN  TlLLAl's  HOME  OF  THRILLING  JOY  !     28 

VIII. 

The  sacred  foot  that  walked  within  the  wilds  after  the  wild 
Black  boar  that  digs  deep  down,  He  planted  on  my  head ; 


21-34.  A  little  obscure  !   Comp.  IV.  11-25.    Psalm  cxxxix.          25.  Arakkan,  i.e.  Ravana.     See 
Lyric  XIV.          27.  Comp.  XXXI.  15.         29.  Qivan  as  a  hunter  chased  the  boar,  XLVIII.  9. 


U  l_l$|.       £0. 


307 


fr/b  SlifluS®  (o/BiruL-.($i<£ 


And  so  surpassing  power  of  the  five  fierce  ones'  mighty  play 

Doth  cease,  when  I'VE  REACHED  HIM  WHO  RULES  INTILLAI'S  HOME  OF  JOY!   32 

IX. 

I  lay  as  one  who  tills  a  barren  field  and  reaps  no  crop  ;  — 

'Twas  then  the  gain  of  penance  done  of  old  accrued  ;  and  thus 

Before  the  £aivan's  roseate  lotus  foot  I  bent  my  worthless  head 

His  own,—  I'VE  REACHED  HIM  WHO-  BEARS  RULE  IN  TILLAI'S  HOME  OF  JOY  !  36 

x. 

Her  form  He  shares  who  by  His  side  grows  as  a  tender  bough  ;— 
To  Him  I  with  right  mind  my  sacred  ministries  perform  ;— 
This  here,  abolishes  whate'er  results  this  state  can  yield; 

I'VE  REACHED  HlM  WHO  BEARS  RULE  IN  TlLLAl's  HOME  OF  HEAVENLY  JOY  !    40 


31.  The  senses.  34.  Virtue  in  the  present  is  fruit  of  past  deeds.    See  A'ttrra/,  chaps,  xxvii 

and  xxxviii.       37.  Not  literal  !        39.  See  Pope's  Ndlaji,  p.  68  :  Agamiyam.   Comp.NoTEV. 
On  the  whole  song  compare  the  Devaram,  pp.  1-16,  and  especially  Appar's  hymn,  p.  7. 


X   2 


IT  9 


[The  metre  is  rather  rugged,  but  is  mainly  -«r  |  -rf  |  -«!|-J||-«S|  -*nti.~] 


THE    MIRACLE-DECAD. 
[THE    UNUTTERABLE    EXPERIENCE1.] 

HYMN    XLI. 

The  following  decad  was  composed  at  Tiru-perun-turrai,  and  is  probably  one  of  the  first  sung  by 
our  bard.  It  is  in  some  respects  quite  unique  among  his  compositions,  and  ceitainly  has  not  the 
flowing  ease  and  rapture  of  some  of  his  subsequent  verses ;  but  perhaps  it  reveals  more  of  himself 
than  any  other.  It  was  put  forth,  as  would  seem,  immediately  after  his  conversion ;  and  is  a  thankful 
acknowledgment  of  the  grace  that  has  delivered  him  (as  he  now  thinks)  completely,  and  for  ever,  from 
the  bonds  of  sensual  passion. 

The  three  things J  which  a  Caiva  saint  has  to  get  free  from  are  sensual  passion,  \\rath,  and  the 
infatuation  that  regards  the  phenomenal  as  the  real.  Our  Sage  seems  never  to  have  been  troubled 
with  wrathful  tendencies  ;  and,  in  fact,  must  have  been  a  very  gentle  and  sweet-tempered  man ;  but  it 
must  be  remembered  that  at  the  time  of  his  conversion  he  was  yet  in  his  early  youth,  the  Prime 
Minister  and  favourite  of  the  great  Pandiyan  king,  the  virtual  ruler  of  that  ancient  realm,  boasting 
a  pure  and  lofty  lineage,  of  prepossessing  appearance  and  manner,  instinct  with  the  glow  of  a  poet's 
enthusiasm ;  and,  in  fact,  possessing  all  that  the  phenomenal  world  has  to  give.  Remembering,  too, 
the  tone  and  manners  of  his  time  and  people,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  this  poem  makes  acknow- 
ledgment of  a  previous  utter  absorption  in  worldly  enjoyments,  and  a  habit  of  mental  infatuation, — 
apparently  absolute.  From  the  first  and  third  of  the  trio  of  evils,  he  had  very  little  chance,  humanly 
speaking,  of  ever  becoming  free.  Yet  the  history  tells  us  that  he  had  previously  sought  for  light,  had 
consulted  teachers  of  many  systems,  and  had  waited  in  darkness  and  in  bonds  for  the  coming  of  the 
Master  Whose  service  should  be  '  perfect  freedom '  from  sensual  thraldom.  This  poem  is  his  thanks- 
giving for  (what  he  believes  to  be)  his  final  deliverance.  It  will  be  noted  that  he  dwells  with  persistent 
monotony  on  one  theme  :  he  is  '  free ' ;  the  time  has  not  yet  come  for  the  analysis  of  his  feelings,  or 
for  considering  his  future  career.  There  is  here  an  almost  entire  absence  of  mythology, — the  one  idea 
of  God  that  he  has  before  him  is  the  loving  Guru  Whose  feet  have  crowned  the  suppliant's  head  ;  even 
Uma,  the  mother,  is  not  mentioned  or  alluded  to ;  he  utters  no  invitation  to  others  to  join  him  in 
praise  :  his  is  a  gladness  with  which  no  stranger  can  intermeddle. 

The  other  poems,  sung  in  the  same  place  soon  after,  show  him  recovering  from  the  overwhelming 
effect  of  his  first  glad  surprise,  and  in  them  he  finds  it  possible  to  dwell  upon  other  topics. 

The  Tiruvdfagam  is  a  veritable  Pilgrim's  Progress,  and  surely  reveals  the  experience  of  a  devout 
and  godly  soul.  It  is  possible  that  in  this  and  in  other  of  the  poems,  lines  may  have  been  altered  and 
even  verses  added ;  for  there  is  a  noticeable  discrepancy  here  and  there;  but  internal  evidence  justifies 
us  in  concluding  that  mainly  we  have  here  the  unrestrained  utterances  of  a  Caiva  mystic  of  the 
eighth  century. 

1  One  editor  says :  '  The  sobbing  utterance  of  unspeakable  and  unbearable  experiences.' 
a  See  ATalaifi,  p.  i .' . . 


a.. 


^  LJ/r^ALrrsw^uT^^ 

£f^^^  ^ 


i. 

The  Truth. 

By  lust  bewilder'd  ;— in  this  earthly  sphere 
caught  in  the  circling  sea  of  joyous  life  ;— 

By  whirling  tide  of  woman's  charms  engulf 'd  ;— 
lest  I  should  sink  with  mind  perturb'd, 

He  gave  His  sacred  grace,  that  falseness  all 

my  soul  might  flee,  and  showed  His  golden  feet ! 

The  TRUTH  Himself, — He  stood  in  presence  there : 

THIS  MATCHLESS  MIRACLE  I  TELL  NOT,   I  ! 

II. 
The  King. 

I  gave  no  fitting  gift  with  lavish  hand 

of  full-blown  flowers ;  nor  bowed  with  rev'rence  meet. 
He  grace  conferr'd,  lest  I  should  tread  the  paths 

of  grief,  with  mind  bewildered  by  soft  dames 
With  fragrant  bosoms  fair.     He  came  to  save, 

and  showed  to  me  His  golden  jewell'd  feet ! 
As  KING  in  presence  manifest  He  stood  : 

THIS  MATCHLESS  MIRACLE  I  TELL  NOT,  I  ! 


4.  Each  verse  contains  a  different  epithet  of  the  Guru,  except  ver.  5. 


310  f  5  ai  IT  a  «  ii. 


nv>. 


gj]  LD633r63sf)<2n/_LJ  QLJ/T.U  iflfiottULJovQ&iLgii  JBITG&T  <5j<a$i 

LElTlULCt 


Quiriu&QsfT  L/dssirjy 


** 


in. 

The  Ineffable  Essence. 

Busied  in  earth  I  acted  many  a  lie ; 

I  spake  of '  I '  and  '  mine,' — illusions  old ; 
Nor  shunned  what  caused  me  pain ;  while  sins  increased 

I  wandered  raving.     Me,  that  BEING  RARE, — 
By  the  great  mystic  Vedas  sought  in  vain, — 

held  fast  in  presence  there ;  to  lowly  me 
Essential  sweetness  was  the  food  He  gave : 

THIS  MIRACLE  OF  GRACE  I  KNOW  NOT,   1  !  12 

IV. 
The  Helper. 

To  '  birth '  and  '  death '  that  cling  to  man,  I  gave  no  thought ; 

and  uttering  merest  lies  went  on  my  way. 
By  eyes  of  maids  with  flowing  jet-black  locks 

disturbed,  with  passion  filled,  I  helpless  lay. 
He  came  !  the  anklets  on  His  roseate  feet,— 

I  heard  their  tinkling  sound  ;  nor  parts  the  bliss ! 
In  grace  my  precious  HELPER  made  me  His : 

THIS  MIRACLE  OF  LUVE  I  KNOW  NOT,   I  !  1 6 


©. 


Sir. 


V. 
Freedom. 

I  wealth  and  kindred  and  all  other  bliss 

enjoy'd  ;  by  tender  maidens'  charms  was  stirr'd  ; 
I  wandered  free  in  joyous  intercourse ; 

such  goodly  qualities  it  seemed  were  there. 
He  set  me  free ;  to  stay  the  course  of  'deeds' 

my  foes,  He  showed  His  foot-flowers'  tender  grace, 
My  spirit  stirred,  entered  within,  and  made  me  His: 

THIS  MATCHLESS  MIRACLE  I  KNOW  NOT,  I  !  3O 

VI. 
The  '  Sea  of  excellence.' 

I  gave  no  thought  to  '  birth '  and  '  death/  that  yield 

their  place  successive ;  but  with  maidens  joined 
I  sank  engulfed  as  by  a  mighty  flood : 

their  rosy  lips  my  death  !    I  madly  roamed. 
The  SEA  OF  EXCELLENCE,  Whom  neither  quality 

nor  name  of  excellence  defines,— 
He  came,  and  tenderly  embracing  made  me  His : 

THIS  MIRACLE  OF  GRACE  I  KNOW  NOT,  I  !  »4 


312  £  5  oi  IT  ff  « 


CT. 


)LJ/-9/DLJ  S^ 


E  ®L-rT<gj]JB[TG5r(DL-(lp%SO 
<S5>LDLJL/SUT/EI  <S533T6»)7X)  STjJ/oMT®  ®£_Lj(?Lj2s5T  L/>6VJf£.  ^jBoStff  S!J  LJLSf. 

ar  L-grjGifliiJ 


fGV 


b  ^^ssrssteu  uppj&p  ^luipppesr  u3u>Quqrj'Ei  SQ^SSSST 


VII. 
Th«  Father. 

Though  born  a  man,  unfailing  gifts 

I  laid  not  at  the  golden  feet ;  nor  did  I  cull 
The  cluster'd  flowers,  by  rule  and  wont  prescrib'd ; 

nor  chaunted  the  '  Five  Letters '  due.    O'ercomc 
By  the  full-bosom'd  damsels'  jet-black  eyes 

I  prostrate  lay.     Showing  His  flowVy  feet, 
To  me  the  FATHER  came,  and  made  me  His : 

THIS  MIRACLE  OF  GRACE  I  KNOW  NOT,    I  !  38 

VIII. 
He  Whom  words  express  not. 

He  caused  the  'twofold  deeds'  to  cease,  that  cause 

this  swing  of  soul  with  body  joined.     He,  Whom 
'Tis  hard  to  learn  by  uttered  sound  to  know, 

gave  me  to  know  Himself:  thus  made  me  light ! 
He  cut  asunder  bonds  that  clung ;  fulfilled 

with  His  own  mercy's  gift  sublime  my  soul's 
Desire;  and  joined  me  to  His  servants'  feet : 

THIS  MIRACLE  OF  GRACE  I   KNOW  NOT,   I  !  33 


*J   %5 


x&fl  ^. 


ao. 


6V6V  [T<£<56sr(e?ji0(MI  LDwj&sLpsv&rrLja 


I    fO 


IX. 

The  Imperishable. 
In  tangled  wilderness  of 'birth'  supine 

I  lay ;  like  wretched  cur  diseased  I  roamed  ; 
Did  as  I  lusted ;  dwelt  with  creatures  vile, 
with  them  complying,  satisfied  in  soul ! 
He  showed  me  there  His  flowery  fragrant  feet, 

by  Hari  and  by  Ayan  unattained  ; 
ThJ  IMPERISHABLE  made  ev'n  me  His  own  : 

THIS  MIRACLE  OF  GRACE  I  KNOW  NOT,  I  !  ,6 

X. 
The  Lord  Supreme. 

I  gave  no  thought  to  thronging  'births'  and  'deaths/ 

but  dwelt  on  tricks,  and  wiles,  and  glancing  eyes 
Of  maids  with  wealth  of  braided  tresses  fair ; 

and  thus  I  lay.     The  King,  our  LORD  SUPREME, 
His  jewell'd  feet,  that  traverse  all  the  worlds, 

to  me  made  manifest  like  clustering  blooms  ; 
He  wisdom  gave,  and  made  me  all  His  own  : 

THIS  MIRACLE  OF  GRACE  I  KNOW  NOT,  I !  40 


36.  A99an  is  probably  for  Sans.  Akshayan.    See  Lex. 


314 


Q  f  65T  Gsfi  LJ    UfJ. 


[Metre  : 


T,  QpGsrQu  (ffj££70ni  0 


turreu 

LL!rLL6Vli&  (of  SUIT'S  SGSSTplj  Q&SSTQsfl  LD68FGffi<T  <£I_(7?)G>  /  f 


e.. 


THE    HEAD-DECAD. 
[THE   CERTAINTY   OF   BLISS.] 

HYMN   XI  I! 

I. 
91van  a  light. 

The  God  of  gods  ;  the  Warrior  true ;  south  Pcrun-turrai's  Chieftain  dear  ; 
The  First ;  the  Blissful  One,  Whose  form  the  Three  could  not  attain  to  know ; 
The  Flower  full-blown  of  LIGHT  is  He,  to  all  save  to  His  loving  ones,  unknown ! 

UPON  HlS  MIGHTY  ROSEATE  FOOT*S  PURE  FLOWER  OUR  HEADS  SHALL  GLEAMING 

REST  I  4 

II. 

91  van  the  beautiful:    Bandar  an. 

The  eightfold  FORM,  the  Beautiful,  the  sweet  ambrosial  Tide  of  bliss; 
Most  Worthy,  Prince  of  (^iva-world  ;  south  Perun-turrai's  Warrior-king; 


1-4.  Eight  epitheti.    See  T.  V.  U.  P.,  Canto  V.  12.        5-8.  Seven  epithets.    See  I>cx. 


G  ff 


U    LJ 


«J    O 


:  «a 


urrnurrszT  urrrflsv  euggaurriiu  ujQ<ssr<5sr& 


The  Beautiful,  Who  made  the  Queen  with  flowing  locks  part  of  Himself; 

UPON  HlS  ROSEATE  FOOT'S  FULL-ORBED    FLOWER  OUR    HEADS   SHALL  BLOOMING 
REST !  g 

III. 
Loving  and  gracious. 

Ye  maids,  the  Lord  whose  eye  looked  on  me  sweetly,  claiming  service  due ; 
The  Warrior-lord,  in  Perun-turrai  girt  with  cocoa-groves  Who  dwells ; 
Who  takes  the  maidens'  armlets  bright,  and  claims  our  soul  and  service  true. 

UPON-  HlS  ROSEATE   FOOT's    EXPANDING   FLOWER  OUR   HEADS   SHALL  GLEAMING 
REST  !  12 

IV. 
Gracious  manifestations. 

With  pious  men  around,  Parabaran J  on  earth  appeared,  a  Seer. 

Mid  saints  made  perfect,  £iva-Lord  dances  in  Tillai's  city  old. 

Mystic !    He  comes,  enters  our  homes,  makes  us  His  own,  our  service  claims. 

UPON  THE  MIGHTY  ROSEATE  FOOT's  FLOWER  GIVEN  OUR  HEADS  SHALL  BLOOMING 
REST  !  16 

1  This  is  the  word  most  widely  used  by  Tamil  Christians  for  '  God.'  See  Lex.  uirumtr.  14.  The 
story  given  in  Canto  II  of  the  Koyil  Puranam  illustrates  this  and  the  preceding  verse.  NOTE  VI. 
15.  NOTE  I. 


c  <? 


St. 


ussrLLSv 


67. 

LJIJ 


OTsir/Dtf.  JL/T7si/E/«6rr 


V. 
His  disciple. 

He  gave  the  boon  that  I  should  not  vain  joys  of  life  as  true  regard. 
Partner  of  Umai's  grace,  He  came  to  sacred  Perun-turrai's  shrine. 
And,  while  ambrosia  flowing  filled  our  frames,  showed  us  His  foot,  and  said 
'Behold'! 

UPON  THAT  MIGHTY  ROSEATE    FOOT*S  AUSPICIOUS    FLOWER    OUR    HEADS    SHALL 
REST  !  30 

VI. 
He  givei  an  aunred  hop*. 

Our  mind  He  entered,  made  us  His,  destroyed  'ill  deeds,'  and  piety 
That  saves  bestowed.    Unto  His  jewelled  foot  when  wreath  of  flowers  we  bring, 
He'll  give  our  souls  release ;  grant  to  dwell  safe  beyond  this  threefold  world. 
UPON  THAT  FATHER'S  ROSEATE  FEET,  THOSE  FULL-BLOWN  FLOWERS,  OUR  HEADS 
SHALL  REST  !  24 

VII. 
Fellowship  with  His  saints. 

That  I  might  swim  this  sea  called  'birth,'  great  grace  in  love  He  gave; 
Caused  me  released  to  join  the  gracious  band  of  saints,  and  made  me  of  their 
goodly  kin.  

21.  See  Kurrol,  chap,  xxxviii,  with  notes  ;  and  Nalcufiy&r,  chap.  xi.  p.  66,  &c.  25.  S«? 

Kurraf,  chap.  i.  p.  10,  and  the  notes  there,  p.  188. 


.     &>Q_. 


SLLfTLQ 


A,  a. 


db. 

(<55)lU<£J£lrfl  (oSU^oSIGUfT  STSiJTJW  QJS 

<oTLLl5l  [TRloST, 


<F  (o<f  <5Ul$-<£  <£  <583T<51)   Q  'dFSSTS&fl   L£><5$T<S3fl<£ 


To  save  me  thus  the  Lord  His  truth  displayed,  in  greatness  of  His  grace ! 

UPON  HlS  ROSEATE  FEET, WHO  SHOWED  SUCH  MIGHT,  OUR  HEADS  SHALL  BEAMING 
REST  !  i8 

VIII. 

Unfailing  Refuge. 

The  falsehood  of  these  bodies  vile,  worm-filled,  Thou  dost  abolish  quite, 
'  Bright  Splendour,  Ruler,  Lord,  our  Father,'  evermore  they  cry,  and  lift 
Adoring  hands ;  their  eyes'  pure  flower  with  tears  o'erflows ;  to  these  Thy  saints 

THY  ROSEATE  FEET  FAIL  NOT;  UPON  THOSE  FLOWERS  OUR  HEADS  SHALL  FLOWER- 

CROWN'D  REST  ! 

IX. 
Lord  of  Earth  and  Heaven. 

Me  vainly  wandering  here  Thou  bad'st  to  come,  didst  slay  the  'hate  of  deeds/ 
Celestial  Lord  !   This  world  Thou  dost  transcend,  Lord  of  the  realms  beyond, 
Pleasures  of  grace  shall  spring  perennial  to  Thy  loving  servants  true. 
UPON  THY  ROSEATE  FEET'S  PURE  GOLDEN  FLOWER  OUR  HEADS  SHALL  BEAMING 

3$ 

REST  ! 

33.  Lit.  'strong  deeds,'  for  the  soul  cannot  escape  them.     Comp.  •»*». 


318 


ao. 


X. 
All  join  in  His  praiM. 

The  Free,— the  Primal  Splendour, — Father  Triple-eyed,— all  being's  Germ! 
The  Perfect,— Lord  of  £iva-world, — sing,  chaunt  His  name,  O  mm  drvout ! 
Hither  draw  nigh  your  bonds  to  loose  !  O  bow  ye  down  and  worship  ht-n  ! 

UPON  THE   ROSEATE   FOOT,  THAT  KILLS  THE  SOUL,  OUR  HEADS  SHALL   GLEAMING 
REST  !  .,0 


it  ff  <&.          .  „ 


su  /r 


<£. 


a. 
Qj^^ajs0r/B/<s^sij^ 


THE    SACRED    WORD. 
[GRATEFUL   LOVE.] 

HYMN  XLIII. 

I. 
The  gracious  incarnation. 

The  Lady's  Spouse ;  of  mystic  word  Proclaimer  skill'd  ; 

Light  seen  mid  blooming  flowers ;  the  faultless  Grace  supreme ; 
Who  to  His  servants  grants  the  boon  of  justice  bright; 

the  King  of  virtuous  excellence  Who  reigns  benign, 
In  Perun-turrai  girt  with  fragrant  flowery  groves ; — 

Himself  hath  come^and  on  this  earth,  a  gracious  Form, 
Descending  hath  revealed  the  Primal  Deity. 

THAT  GRACE  WHO  KNOW  WITH  OUR  SUPERNAL  LORD  ARE  ONE  ! 

n. 

His  condescension. 

Mai,  Ayan,  and  the  King  of  heavenly  hosts  approached 

and  lowly  bowed  before  Him,— ^an  gave  them  grace  !— 

Descending  to  this  world,  He  showed  the  perfect  way 
unto  the  simple  dame  that  dwelt  in  Idavai, — 

i.  I.e.  'in  devout  souls.'     Kurral,  3. 


320  £  5  ai  it  *  s 


GTLL 


6UJ6B1 


r, 


^  53ST®  Q  &  J  3011—    @fttUGVUJ$6Uli   CT/C/  9/7/7  S5T 


Where  mansions  fair  arise  with  goodly  splendour  bright, 
of  sparkling  gems,  and  saints  hold  converse  sweet,  — 
Grace  of  abounding  excellence  He  gave. 

HlS  POWER  WHO  KNOW  WITH  OUR  SUPERNAL  LORD  ARE  ONE  1  8 

III. 

The  crown'd  Eternal-One,  —  King  of  th*  immortal  host,  — 

the  rapturous  Dancer,  as  the  six  sects  homage  pay, 
Ascends  the  boat,  accepts  and  crowns  their  service  due  ; 

while  heaven  and  earth  adore  and  praise  their  King. 
He  grants  infirmity  should  die  !  —  In  Perun-turrai's  shrine 

He  dwells  in  mighty  grace!—  In  love  to  her,  His  bride, 
He  brought  a  jewelled  net,  to  catch  the  mystic  fish  ! 

HlS  WAYS  WHO  KNOW  WITH  OUR  SUPERNAL  LORD  ARE  ONE  !  1  1 

IV. 

A  woodman's  form  He  bore,  on  mount  Mahcndiram 

when  sore  distressed  the  suppliants  came 
And  sought  Him,  £ivan,  mighty  Lord,  was  nigb  to  save  !  * 

That  we  His  servants  pondering  Him,  should  safety  win, 
The  Teacher  on  a  prancing  charger  mounted  came,  —  • 

of  Perun-turrai's  shrine  th'  Eternal  Deity,  — 
That  day  His  friends  from  every  side  He  made  His  own  ! 

THEY  WHO  His  NATURE  KNOW  WITH  OUR  SUPERNAL  LORD  ARE  ONE!      \<> 


12.  Sec  note  on  VIII.  1 1.  13.  See  Tirnvihi-ailal,  22. 


&x^      •  . 


n  0.0 


srai/p    fuitof  Qfeui  y&Qe,  CTliQU(5  ^A/y  A 


SLf 


v. 


He  came.   The  gods  in  reverence  bowed  their  heads,  and  praised. 

A  sea  of  mighty  mercy,— He  in  grace  brake  off 
His  servants'  bonds,  and  set  us  free.    Our  Deity,— 

thj  Eternal-One  of  Perun-turrai's  shrine,— that  day 
Himself  passed  o'er  the  sea,  whose  surging  billows  rose; 

His  grace  He  gave  within  the  lofty  walls 
Of  Lanka's  home  to  the  soft-fingered  captive  maid  ! 

HlS  WORTH  WHO  KNOW  WITH  OUR  SUPERNAL  LORD  ARE  ONE! 

VI. 

Lord  of  the  bow  that  wrapt  the  cities  three  in  flames  ;— 

a  huntsman's  guise  he  took  with  guard  of  dogs  around  ;— 

Before  Him  gathered  gods  obeying  His  behests  ;— 
our  mighty  Lord,  in  forest  wilds  where  He  abode 

Took  pity  on  the  hunted  boar  I    fyan,  that  day,— 

our  Father,  Perun-turrai's  King,  the  Eternal  Deity,— 

A  pig  became,  wonder  unique,  and  milk  bestowed  ! 

HlS  DEEDS  WHO  KNOW  WITH  OUR  SUPERNAL  LORD  ARE  ONE  ! 


19.  See  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  461 ;  and  Song  XVIII.  6.  23.  See  forty-fifth  and  forty-sixth  of 

the  '  sacred  sports.'     A  strange  legend  ! 


222  f  5  6U  IT  dF  «  U) . 


CT. 

2_<S5>/_<L/(2J<$  trijBjbx  LDSULJ 

}JB  j5GVirgjii6)Sl  <&{&{&  epsift  eustrj  (afir^s)  srti  FT-PSST, 

o)Ljnfjtj>£jl<5S)jO  GI  IJb  LJt558TG55TlUJS$r, 
• 
LJ 


VII. 

In  their  fair  garden  home  'mid  lotus  flowers  and  hum 

of  bees,  the  maids  with  beauteous  brows  assemble  round, 
Chaunting  bow  down,  strew  full-blown  flowers,  and  praise 

our  I?an, — radiant  Beam  of  rosy  growing  light,— 
Who  ever  bides  in  Perun-turrai's  flowery  grove, — 

our  Holy-One.   To  earth  He  came, — appeared, — destroyed 
Earth-born  diversities,— gave  grace.     His  MIGHT  OF  LOVE 

WHO'VE  POWER  TO  KNOW  WITH  OUR  SUPERNAL  LORD  ARE  ONE  !  «8 

VIII. 

His  breast  wears  garlands  of  the  opening  cassia  flower  ;— 

Hero,  He  slew  the  tiger  strong  of  claw; — 
The  Partner  He  of  Umai,  lovely  queen  ; — 

of  Perun-turrai  girt  with  rich  groves  King ; — 
T^an,  in  great  and  spotless  glory  bright ; — 

He  folds  the  beauteous  ones  in  soft  embrace ; — 
He  to  the  vast  sea's  king  in  fiery  form  appear'd ; — 

HlS  FORM  WHO  KNOW  SHALL  UNION  GAIN  WITH  OUR  SUPERNAL  LORD  !       31 


31.  Sec  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  of  the  •  sacred  sport*.' 


IT  ft 


&IEKEIEI 


LDIEI<55)&IU[T    LL6V&    LLg]  <55>  ffQf  jp    Sl/SZDdf 


IX. 

Our  mighty  Lord  with  pure  white  ashes  decked  ;— 

Who  came  Bright  Ruler  of  Mahendiram  ;— 
I9an,  Whose  planted  foot  the  gods  adore  ;— 

the  southern  Ruler,  Perun-turrai's  King ; — 
Who  loving  pity  showed  to  me  that  day, 

showed  me  His  jewelled  foot  to  melt  my  soul, 
My  sorrows  soothed,  in  grace  made  me  His  own ! 

HlS  DEEDS  WHO  KNOW  WITH  OUR  SUPERNAL  LORD  ARE  ONE  !  36 

X. 

The  Beauteous-eyed ; — the  Immortals'  Lord  and  ours  ;— 

Ambrosia  to  His  servants ; — Prince  Who  came 
To  earth  to  loose  our  mighty  bonds,  that  we 

a  bliss  unique  in  earth  and  heaven  might  gain ; — 
With  strong  control  he  sways  th'  ASSEMBLY  wise ; — 

skilled  Leader; — Perun-turrai's  King; — that  day 
To  Madura  with  damsels  thronged  He  came : 

HlS  WAYS  WHO  KNOW  SHALL  UNION  GAIN  WITH  OUR  SUPERNAL  LORD  !     40 


37.  See  ^Baamsr.    It  may  be  =  «syaueu«ir,  'He  of  the  hall.'  39.  The  Madura  Qahgam,  or 

Academy  ?    (But  also  =  «*r  ?)    See  Pope's  Kurral,  Introduction,  p.  iv. 


Y  2 


324 


JT  SSST  SSST  U  U         <5  Lb. 


[Metre:  ^fi/u  •Ststf*.     Formula  :  -  •*  |  -"'  |  -•>  \  -•»  ]|  -  •*  |  -•»  |  -wr,  with  variations.] 

*. 
LJfTQfjQfj  6UJIU  iSltDLJLJiD  G?6U6»T®LC; 


DEVOUT    MUSINGS. 
[JOYOUS   EMOTION.] 

HYMN   XLIV. 
This  poem  expresses  his  intense  longing  to  rejoin  at  once  the  Master  and  His  disciples.   [Life,  (  v.] 

I. 

Longings  for  endle»»  joy. 

Would  birth  in  earthly  forms  might  cease,  devoted  love  so  might  I  gain  J 

0  £iva-Peruman,  Whose  form  is  beauteous  like  red  lotus-flower; 
Thou  art  my  rare  Ambrosia ;  midst  the  assembly  of  Thy  saints 

Thy  sacred  grace  unique  show  Thou ;  be  gracious,  take  me  too  and  save !      4 

n. 

He  pleads  the  promise. 

I'm  not  my  own,  Thy  slave  am  I ;  sever'd  from  Thee  no  moment  can 

1  live ;  a  cur,  I  nothing  know, — O  (^ahkaran  !    In  pitying  grace 


ST  sear^Qair&r 


iSlifl(oiu<ssr  GrssrQfDGsr  pqrjsifli 
QuiTiuQiuir,  sr/scssy 


<5JGS)lLn 

umu  (oTLD  QLJQJJ 


(LppsvGu  (ossrl  (zpssx/p  (oiurr,  CTSS 


Thou  Mighty  said'st  to  me,  'Behold/  and  showed'st  Thyjewell'd  feet.  Our  Lord, 
And  was  the  promise  false  that  said,  'I  sever  nevermore  from  Thee  ? '  8 

in. 

Love  that  '  maketh  not  ashamed.' 

Melting  my  frame,  granting  Thy  grace,  showing  to  me  Thy  flow'ry  feet, 

Erewhile  Thou  madest  me  Thine  own,  O  Sage,  O  First  of  sages  all ! 

My  Bliss,  Thou  didst  dissolve  my  soul,  and  dost  my  life  consume. 

Grant  me  Thy  love,  King  of  my  soul;  that  soThy  grace  from  shame  may  shield  1 1  a 

IV. 

He  laments  his  deaduess  of  soul. 

Of  piety  I'm  void,  nor  bow  at  vision  of  Thy  golden  feet; 
My  heart  is  dead,  my  lips  are  seal'd ; — yet  cause  this  'birth '  to  cease,  our  Lord ! 
Pearl-like  Thou  art,  gem-like  Thou  art !    First  One,  I  utter  my  complaint : 
So  oft  I've  follow'd  Thee,  henceforth  apart  from  Thee  I  bear  not  life  !  16 


QJ  IT  a  a 


@. 

6sft<SST1$Q}jLJ 


35755JT 


UP  fh]& 

fi  QLLILJ  UJI^.IUITJS  s^iL®  stop  cgj  sift*  @  ./ 


,  OTSOT  ssr(Lppt 


c^OJ  67657/0(5 


V. 

Spiritual  decl«n«lon. 

I  see  Thy  gracious  feet  no  more,  which  seeing  erst  mine  eyes  were  glad ; 
I've  ceased  to  cherish  Thee ;  I've  ceased  to  utter  childlike  praise ;  and  thus 
Tanu,  my  mighty  Lord,  I'm  lost ;  the  state,  that  melting  thinks  on  Thee, 
By  meannesses  I've  ceas'd  to  know;  'twere  shame  to  me  to  see  Thee  come  !  ao 

VI. 
Supplication. 

Thee,  Lord  supreme,  with  milk-white  ash  adorn 'd,  meeting  with  grace  superne 

Thy  servants  true, 
Who  dost  appear,  and  show  the  hav'n  of  grace, — Thee,  glorious  Light,  I,  void 

of  righteousness, 

Extol asmyAmbrosia,praisingThee, — praise, glorify, invokewith weepingsloud  ! 
Master,  thus  working  in  me  mightily,  in  grace  O  speak,  in  pity  speak  !  24 


19.  Tanu,  an  epithet  of  Qivan.    [Sans.  Sthanu.} 


327 


(55)  fj  u 


[Metre  : 


.    Formula  :  -•*  |  -a.,  |  _„,£,.] 


GTSSTGSTU  U  L-LJSSI  LJ  JILJ 


<£rr<sVLc> 


THE    PILGRIM-SONG. 
[RAPTURE.] 

HYMN   XLV. 

This  is  our  Sage's  wonderful  '  psalm  of  the  up-going,'  Psalm  cxxii.  He  commemorates  his  first 
visit  to  Tillai,  and  thence  mystically  sets  forth  the  soul's  pilgrimage  through  the  world  of  sense  to 
union  with  £ivan  on  the  silver  mountain. 

I. 
The  setting-forth  on  the  journey. 

Our  King  with  head  flow'r-wreath'd,  BHUYANGAN-LORD, 

by  mercy's  swelling  flood  that  all  dissolves, 
Commingled  ever,  like  perception's  self, 

within  our  souls, — '  O  come/  hath  said  in  love, 
And  made  us  lowly  ones  His  own  !    Come  ye 

with  one  accord ;  behold,  the  time  hath  come ; 
Pass  we, — falsehood  for  ever  left  behind,— 

to  enter  'neath  the  Master's  jewelled  feet !  4 


i.  Each  stanza  contains  this  epithet.  See  Lex.          a,  3.  There  is  a  play  npon  the  word  'come.' 


328  £  JO!   IT  «   4  LT. 

a.. 


L//L//B/SL 


(?6us»ri_/r  QUITS 

6U  {oprT 

jBfr(oiu 


I/J/TO)  c^T,  CTLD^T/f,  LJT^li 


,  LLITlULb? 


II. 
Th«  pilgrim'*  preparation  of  •onl. 

Enter  no  more  the  juggling  senses'  net ! 

BHUYANGAN'S  flow'ry  feet,  the  mighty  Lord, 
Ponder  intensely, — other  things  desire  ye  not : 

dismiss  them,  let  them  go,  and  pass  ye  on ! 
With  joyous  smile  He,  entering  this  world, 

made  us — who  were  like  curs  impure — His  own. 
As  it  befits  to  draw  anigh  the  Lord, 

let  each  with  no  weak  faltering  step  move  on  ! 

in. 

Earthly  tie*  must  be  loosed. 

Each  to  himself  be  his  own  kith  and  kin  ! 

each  to  himself  be  his  own  law  and  way! 
For  who  are  'WE'?  what  'OURS'?  and  what  are  'BONDS'? 

illusions  all, — let  these  departing  flee ! 


7.  This  joyousness  of  Divan's  manifestations  is  much  insisted  on.    (NOTE  I.)     All  is  the  '  sport ' 
of  the  Supreme. 


on  Ju  LI 

329 


sr,  Quiriui£&£lu 


And,  with  the  ancient  servants  of  the  King, 

taking  His  sign  alone  for  guiding  sign, 
Shake  falsehood  off;  go  on  your  happy  way, 

unto  BHUYANGAN'S  golden  foot,— our  King!  u 

IV. 
Sober,  hopeful  assurance, 

All  ye  His  servants  who've  become, 

put  far  away  each  idle  sportive  thought ; 
Seek  refuge  at  the  Foot  where  safety  dwells  ; 

hold  fast  unto  the  end  the  sacred  sign ; 
Put  off  from  you  this  body  stained  with  sin  ; 

in  Qivan's  world  He'll  surely  give  us  place ! 
BHUYANGAN'S  self,  Whose  Form  the  ashes  wears, 

will  grant  you  entrance  'neath  His  flow'ry  feet !  16 

v. 

Faint  not,  press  on! 

Free  ye  your  souls  from  pains  of  wrath  and  lust ; 
henceforth  the  time  shall  not  be  long  drawn  out ! 


330  5  eu  IT  «  a 


,  flevevrr 


Beneath  our  Master's  feet  with  glad  acclaim 

that  we  in  one  may  go,  in  one  combine  ! 
Even  we  in  (Divan's  town  shall  refuge  find, 

whose  flow'r-wreath'd  gates  to  us  shall  not  be  clos'd  ! 
There  enter'd  we  in  ecstasy  shall  sing 

the  glories  only  of  BHUYANGAN-KING  !  ao 

VI. 
Perievere  I     The  glorious  consummation  await*  you. 

Praise  ye  1   Adore  1    Bring  beauteous  flowers  ! 

BHVYANGAN'S  foot  plant  ye  within  your  souls  ! 
Despise  adversities  of  every  form  ! 

Henceforth  no  hindrance  bars  your  happy  way 
To  (Divan's  town,  that  fill'd  with  glory  shines. 

To  (Divan's  foot  go  we  to  worship  there  ! 
Before  the  saints  that  there  abide  we'll  move, 

and  stand  in  soul-dissolving  rapture  there  !  34 

VII. 
loiter  not,  scatter  not  1 

Let  those  that  bide  abide,  —  abide  not  we 

in  world  that  not  abides.     Straight  pass  we  on 


on  y  LJ  LJ  J>  ay  .     n>fo 

331 


QLJ(TljLD!T<5$r 


M. 


Unto  the  foot  of  our  BHUYANGAN-KING, 

Whose  sacred  form  is  milk  with  golden  hue  ! 
All  ye  that  loitering  stand  delay  not  now  ! 

Gather  in  one  to  march,  where'er  ye  stand  ! 
Unto  the  Mighty  One  access  henceforth 

is  hard  to  gain,  if  ye  should  loiter  now  !  as 

VIII. 

The  grate  opens  : 
Ye,  with  the  Lord,  in  rapture  infinite 

conjoin'd  for  ever,  who  have  gained  to  dwell  ! 
In  strong  illusion  henceforth  sink  not  ye, 

in  sooth  ;  nor  utter  senseless  words  profane  ! 
The  sacred  door  where  dwells  the  priceless  Gem, 

is  opening  even  now.   To  Divan's  town 
Come,  move  we  on,  to  reach  the  sacred  foot 

of  BHUYANGAN,  to  Mai  divine  unknown  !  33 


28.  Tennyson: — 

1  No  light :  so  late !  and  dark  and  chill  the  night  I 
O  let  us  in,  that  we  may  find  the  light ! 
Too  late,  too  late !  ye  cannot  enter  now. 

'  Have  we  not  heard  the  bridegroom  is  so  sweet  ? 
O  let  us  in,  tho'  late,  to  kiss  his  feet ! 
No,  no,  too  late !  ye  cannot  enter  now.' 


332  f  5  eu  R  *  « 


IX. 
Anticipate  the  joys  of  fruition. 

Ah,  think  how  ye  may  reach  the  goal  !    Your  thoughts 

correct,  and  duly  chastcn'd,  ponder  this  I 
Ye,  who  are  sinking  now  in  love's  excess,— 

enjoying,  never  sated,  the  ambrosial  grace 
Of  BHUYANGAN,  the  Spouse  of  Her,  whose  eyes 

are  like  the  gleaming  spear  that  warrior  wields,— 
Joy  ye  to  go  to  (Divan's  jewell'd  foot, 

nor  wallowing  lie  ye  here  in  falsehood's  mire  !  3<s 

x. 

They  enter  in  t 

Will  ye  not  come  this  day,  and  be  His  own, 

and  prostrate  fall,  and  worship,  and  adore  ? 
Those  lost  in  wilderment,  who  would  esteem  ? 

Ye  who  bewilder'd  and  confounded  stand, 
If  ye  would  perfect  clearness  gain,  this  do  ! 

Ye  who  would  gain  in  this  wide  realm  the  grace 
Of  sacred  BHUYAWGAN,  of  Qiva-world 

the  King  !   Ah,  haste  ye,  haste  ye,  haste  ye  on  !  40 


ass 


U  U  <S5> 


<£. 


LLJB!  QsnA  (5<s3>/_  <f£siM<s5r; 


;  uppirsfr&r, 


THE   SACRED   MARCH. 
[THE    HOLY   WAR.] 

HYMN   XLVI. 
I. 

Strike  the  sounding  drum  of  the  Guru,  Wielder  of  wisdom's  sword ; 

Spread  the  white  canopy  over  the  Guru,  Who  mounts  the  charger  of  heaven ; 

Enter  and  take  to  you  armour  of  ashes,  fragrant,  divine ; 

Possess  we  the  heavenly  fortress,  where  hosts  of  illusion  come  not !  4 

« 
ii. 

Servants  of  His, — march  on  in  the  van;  ye  Devout  ones,— move  on  the  flanks; 

Ye  Sages  of  power  illustrious, — come  fill  up  the  swelling  ranks; 

Ye  Mystics  of  strength  unfailing, — advance  and  close  up  the  rear : 

We  shall  rule  the  heavenly  land,  no  hosts  of  evil  for  ever  to  fear !  8 


a.  Comp.  XIX.  24,  where  His  charger  is  called  w«rt/<r«y,  i.  e. '  the  horse  of  heaven,'  hence  <orar* 
here  seems  to  be  for  arson*.  £ivan,  as  Agni,  is  called  Rohitafua  (  =  ' possessing  red  horses').  The 
Maruts,  or  personified  winds,  are  sons  of  Rudra,  and  also  his  charioteers.  Some  reminiscence  of 
this  led  to  such  expressions  as  that  in  our  text.  5-7.  Here  are  four  classes  of  holy  warriors : — 

(i)  Servants  (O^»«ln_/),  i.e.  the  seventy-two  legendary  Qaiva  saints.    (2)  Devout  men  (ujff),  i.e.  the 
ordinary  good  £aivas.     (3)  Yogis  (<?ur©),  i.  e.  ascetics,  or  contemplative  saints.    (4)  Mystics 
i.  e.  those  who  have  gained  supernatural  powers  by  austerity.    See  Lex. 


334 


$Sl  (5  Q  6U  <S5ST  U  IT. 

£  or  an  UK] 


Tt  —  Q&iuiu 


e.. 


LJJiitJj(?65T! 


srefiurtiT 


THE    SACRED    VENBA. 
[THE   STATE   OF   'THOSE  WHO    HAVE   ATTAINED1.') 

HYMN    XLVIF. 

This  purports  to  have  been  composed  immediately  after  his  return  to  Peran-tunal,  when  he  was 
hoping  for  speedy  consummation,  bat  felt  impatient.    [Life,  i  v.] 

i. 
How  shall  X  endure  thia  state  of  Imperfection? 

What  shall  I  do  while  twofold  deeds'  fierce  flame  burns  still  out,— 
Nor  doth  the  body  melt, — nor  falsehood  fall  to  dust  ? 
In  mind  no  union  gained  with  the  '  Red  Fire's  honey* 

The  Lord  of  Perun-turrai  fair !  4 

n. 

How  employ  the  weary  time  of  waiting? 

Shall  I  cry  out,  or  wail,  or  dance,  or  sing,  or  watch  ? 
O  Infinite,  what  shall  I  do?   The  Sire  Who  fills 
With  rapturous  amaze, — great  Perun-turrai's  Lord 

Let  all  with  me  bending  adore  !  8 


i.  For  metre,  see  Pope's  Nalajiydr,  Introduction,  p.  xxvi.  No*.  XIX  and  XLVIII  are  in  the 
same  metre  :  in  all  twenty-eight  quatrains.  3.  Qivan's  colour  U  red,  and  he  is  the  fiery  one, — 
the  later  representative  of  the  Vedic  deity  Agni.  Here,  '  honied  grace'  comes  from  the  '  fiery  one'! 
1-3.  G.  83.  Old  future  forms.  

1  See  Qiva-Piraga9am  II.  42,  &c.  These  are  Jivan-muttar :  'saints  perfected,  though  still  in 
the  flesh.'  NOTE  V. 


da. 


<f  * 


FTGSTfD 
Jb  j 
(oLDlU  Qu(f^LLJSST 


0-0 


III. 
The  wonder  of  his  conversion. 

No  sense  of  fault  had  I !    Nor  of  refreshment  knew, 

In  safety's  path,  by  worship  at  His  roseate  feet. 

He  stood  on  earth,  His  dart  shot  forth,  and  to  my  thought 

Linked  Himself; — Perun-turrai's  Lord  !  ia 

IV. 
He  came  in  grace. 

He  stood  before  me,  rooting  out  my  'twofold  deeds/- 
The  mighty  Ruler  Who  at  last  shall  cut  off  'birth'; 
Lord  of  the  south ;  in  Perun-turrai  great  in  grace, 

Who  dwells ;  Balm  of  all  human  woes  !  16 

v. 

Praise  superfluous. 

To  them  that  know  what  word  can  praise  the  King?— Him,  Who 
All  worlds  brought  forth,  Whom  Vedic  god  and  Mai  knew  not  ; 
The  mighty  Lord,  Whose  seat  is  Perun-turrai's  shrine ; — 

In  me  to-day,  and  evermore  !  ao 


eu  n  *  a 


3n. 


CT. 

iflc-piqrjsifl  <aj/£Q$6sr<£@ 


VI. 
Th*  bliBi  of  Hii 

He  filled  with  frenzy ;  set  me  free  from  '  births  ' ;  my  soul 
With  speechless  fervours  thrilled,— blest  Perun-turrai's  Lord,— 
The  Sire  in  grace  exceeding  made  me  His  ;  the  balm 

For  all  my  pain ;  the  deathless  BLISS  i  j4 

VII. 

Leading  and  light. 

He  showed  the  realm  where  'births '  return  no  more;  He  came 
In  grace  that  no  requital  knows,  Ambrosia  sating  not ! 
This  is  the  light  diffus'd  within  my  thought  by  Him, 

The  Lord  of  Perun-turrai's  shrine !  a8 

VIM. 
Condemcendingr  love. 

Glorious,  exalted  over  all,  the  Infinite,— 

To  me  mere  slave,  lowest  of  all,  Thou  hast  assigned 

A  place  in  bliss  supreme,  that  none  beside  have  gained  or  known ! 

Great  Lord,  what  can  I  do  for  Thee?  33 


337 


IX. 
Unparalleled  gift. 

The  three,  the  thirty-three,  all  other  gods  beside 
See  Thee  not,  Civan,  mighty  Lord  !    Riding  the  steed 
Hither  descending  didst  Thou  come.    When  at  Thy  foot 

I  lowly  bow,  bliss  thrills  my  frame  1  6 

x. 

Be  not  afraid  to  ask  of  Him. 

Soul,  ponder  His  twain  feet  Who  here  made  me  His  own  ! 
Beg  for  His  grace  I   Behold,  He  will  give  all,— the  King 
Who  grace  bestows,— Whose  seat  is  Perun-turrai's  shrine,— 

Dwelling  ambrosial  in  my  soul !  40 

XI. 
Light  and  love  from  His  indwelling. 

He  hath  increased  delight,  hath  darkness  banished, 
For  aye  cut  off  afflictions'  clinging  bond,  and  light 
Of  love  hath  given,— the  Lord  of  Perun-turrai  great, 

Well  pleased  to  make  my  heart  His  home  1  44 

^  33-  See  Muir,  vol.  v.  pp.  8-12.  The  three  are  Agni,  Vayu,  and  Surya;  or,  at  a  later  time,  the 
Trimurtti,— Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  givan.  The  thirty-three  are  Vasus  (eight),  Rudras  (eleven),  Adityas 
(twelve),  with  Dyaus  and  Prithivl.  Beside  these  we  find  Prajapati,  Indra,  &c. 


338  ,£  Jj  6U  It  ff  T.  U  . 


LJ 

[AJ  @M  u  QJ  £  $i  &  sa)  &>  tij  i£  sSr  sn  ic  ILJ  an  T£  $  sJ>.] 
[Metre  as  XLVII.] 

A. 

LJfrsu-gyjggMS/r  LdTGV^gjiugpj 


GTIE1 


e_Gyr<siT 


THE    ANCIENT    MYSTIC   WORD. 
[THE    REALITY   OF    DIVINE   GRACE.] 

HYMN  XI.VIII. 

I. 

No  requital  of  electing  grace. 

The  ancient  fourfold  mystic  word  draws  not  anigh  His  seat  ;— 
Nor  Mai  nor  Ayan  Him  have  seen  ;  yet  me,  the  most  abject, 
By  grace  He  made  His  servant  1   To  Gokari's  King,  my  heart, 
Say,  is  there  any  just  return  ? 

n. 

The  great  manifestation  in  Pernn-tnrrai. 

Praise  Perun-turrai  I    There  the  King,  who  on  the  charger  came, 
Abides,  and  gives  a  mighty  flood  of  honied  sweetness  forth, 
By  which  my  soul's  threefold  impurity  is  swept  away ; — 
So  roots  of '  birth's '  wild  forest  die  ! 


4.  So  in  XLVII.  29-32. 

• 


u  ©JOT  i_  rr  uj  p  n  sSr  u)  on  ,,, 

339 


0-0 


III. 

He  assumes  many  characters  to  save  men. 

In  wilds  a  Huntsman ;  in  sea  He  casts  a  net ; 
On  land  He  rides  the  charger:  thus  our  ' deeds '  destroys. 
The  fair  foot-flower  of  Perun-turrai's  Lord  praise  Thou, 
My  heart,  that  error  thus  may  die ! 

IV. 
The  Centre  of  Worship. 

Householders  devout;  saints  who  mighty  'deeds'  destroy;— 
Those  whom  'tis  meet  the  world  should  bow  before,  and  praise  ; 
Immortals  too  in  worship  circling  move,  and  laud  !   O  friends, 
In  Perun-turrai  blest  adore  ! 

v. 
Come,  see  the  King-. 

To  Perun-turrai  drawing  near,  that  woes  disperse, 
Ponder  the  King  of  lofty  Gokari ;  and  see 
Him  Who  with  Her  whose  words  are  music  sweet  abides 
In  Utt'ra-k69a-mangai's  shrine  ! 


13 


9.  See  XLIX.  8,  and  note  to  VIII.  ir.        13-16.  Four  classes  of  worshippers  visit  Perun-turrai : 
(i)  devout  householders,  (2)  ascetics,  (3)  distinguished  sages,  and  (4)  gods. 


Z   2 


340 


/Els  QsfTSOSVrTL£>(oU  [fl<S8TuQL£>65TU 


eujiurrffu  Qu&l 

CT. 


VI. 
Bver  praise  the  Ood  of  Porun-turrai. 

The  eyes  that  see  Him  there  are  all  a  rapture  of  delight ; — 
The  saints  that  cherish  Him  are  freed  from  mortal  birth  ; — 
The  Mighty  One,  in  Perun-turrai  dwells  for  aye ; — 

My  heart,  give  Him  unstinted  praise!  24 

VII. 

•  Pernn-tnrroi  '  is  the  moving  word. 

This  is  the  purport  sole  of  all  men  say;  all  speech 
Surpassing,  gem-like  word,  as  flawless  jewels'  sheen  I 
Utt'ring  but  '  PERUN-TURRAI,'  I'm  from  'births'  released  ; 

That  healing  foot  fixt  in  my  mind !  a8 


27.  This  is  the  key-note !  Perun-turrai  -  '  the  great  haven :' 
1  Then  are  they  glad  because  they  be  quiet ; 
So  lie  bringeth  them  onto  their  desired  haven!    Psalm  cvii. 


[Each  verse  contains  four  lines  under  one  .JW.  Each  of  these  is  divided  into  two  precisely  similar 
halves  which  are  hexameter  dactylic  hypercatalectic.  Each  of  these  half-lines  has  generally  a  c^ura 
in  the  fourth  foot,  diving  the  half-lines  into  quarter-lines,  all  the  four  having  the  same 

~  quarter~lines'  or  eight  half-lines-  They  are  best  rcad 


Metre  :  ,gS4«j  e%A*a.    Formula  :  -  J  |  -«•  twice  ;  followed  by  -•»  |  -«*.] 


THE    MARSHALLING   OF    THE   SACRED    HOST., 

[THE    CESSATION    OF   LIFE'S   EXPERIENCES.] 

HYMN    XLIX. 

It  was  no  easy  task  to  work  out  a  version  of  this  lyric,  the  rhythmic  beauty  of  which  is  very 
remarkable.  I  have  striven,  at  the  risk  of  sundry  irregularities  in  metre,  to  imitate  the  flow  of  the 
original ;  but  the  numberless  allusions  in  a  poem,  which  sums  up  the  whole  £aivite  idea  of  the 
blessedness  of  Qivan's  final  manifestation  to  the  emancipated  soul,  will  give  the  reader  trouble,  if  he 
is  at  all  to  enter  into  its  spirit.  The  metre  itself  is  very  unusual,  resembling  somewhat  that  of  the 
Attys  of  Catullus,  and  is  much  admired  by  those  who  use  the  poem  in  their  temple  service.  My 
rendering  is,  I  believe,  strictly  and  almost  literally  exact ;  but  it  differs  in  some  respects  from  the 
Tamil  paraphrases.  The  intense  mystic  fervour  of  the  song  must  make  itself  kit  \ 

I. 

His  appearing1. 

Eyes  the  twain  His  jewell'd  Feet  beholding  shall  be  glad;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
Joy  amid  joys  of  damsels  beautiful  shall  cease  to  lure ;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE  ? 
The  round  of  birth  in  earthly  worlds  shall  in  oblivion  pass;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE  ? 
Twin  flow'ry  Feet  that  Mai  knew  not  adoring  shall  we  bow ;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE  ? 


242 


Q.. 

erssr 


To  sing  with  gladsome  melody,  and  dance  our  endless  task ;— SHALL  IT  NO  i 
The  warriors  of  the  fair  PSndi-land's  Lord  we  shall  sing ; — SHALL  IT  NOI 
The  mystic  change  for  which  the  heav'ns  are  glad  will  come;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE, 
If  He  who  cast  the  net, — the  Woodman, — come,  in  grace  made  manifest  ton 

11. 

One  with  one,  and  five  with  five,— the  life  shall  last; — SMALL  n  NOT  ; 
Thy  servants'  servants'  servants  made,  we  shall  be  free;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
The  Mother  thinks  on  her  young,  and  rising  hastes ;  so  shall  1 1<  r "in-  ;— si  I.M.I. 

IT  NOT  BE  ? 

The  causal  qualities  that  no  beginningown  shall  fill  the  thought; — SHALL  JTNOT  BE? 
At  'this  is  good,' and 'this  isill,'no  more  shall  tremblingshake;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
We  too  to  join  Thy  saints  above  shall  onward  pass ; — SHALL  IT  NOT  BE  ? 
Th' Ambrosia  supreme  that  fills  my  loving  thought  we  then  shall  gain;— SHALL 

IT  NOT  BE, 
If  the  bull's  Lord,  my  Master,  Whose  I  am,  within  my  soul  shall  entering  conic?  16 

in. 

Bonds,changes,qualities,allloos'dand  cast  aside  shall  fall  away; — SHALL  ITN<> 
Within  nty  mind,  ere  while  with  fancies  fill'd  Ambrosia  supreme  shall  flow; — SHALL 

IT  NOT  BE?  

7.  «=CM§«»;  or,  Vedic  Sage,  see  Tiruvilai-adal,  16.  [<?«^«i».]  8.  'The  net,'  see'XLVIII.  .,. 
and  note  VIII.  1 1.  '  Woodman,'  see  Tiravijai-adal,  57.  9.  One  body  with  one  soul  ?  Five  senses 
with  their  objects?  But  here,  more  probably,  'The  soul  with  Qivan,  and  the  body  of  five  elements 
merged  in  the  fivefold  supreme.'  **M,  v. »'  live.' 


343 


^  glVsrruuesr, 


The  Endless,  Indivisible  shall  in  us  dwell;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 

The  heav'nly  Light,  from  endless  days  supreme  shall  then  appear;— SHALL  IT 

NOT  BE  ? 

The  pains  from  silly  ones  with  crimson  lips  shall  be  dispell'd;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
The  sparkling  eyes  His  sacred  form  shall  then  embrace;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
Sorrow  of  grief-ful  birth,  that  from  illusions  springs,  shall  all  depart;— SHALL  IT 

NOT  BE, 
If  I  fan,  my  own  loving  Lord,  in  presence  meet  me  here?  24 

IV. 

The  bliss  to  rest  within  His  lov'd  embrace  shall  we  enjoy; — SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
In  mercy's  vast  and  boundless  sea  sweetly  this  day  shall  we  disport; — SHALL 

IT  NOT  BE? 
The  mystic  music  of  the  beauteous  gems,  within  my  soul  shall  thrilling  sound;— 

SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 

The  sacred  ashes  that  the  Lord  for  aye  adorn  shall  we  approach ; — SHALL  IT  NOT  BE  ? 
'Mid  steadfast  loving  ones  foremost  in  service  there  shall  I  abide; — SHALL  IT 

NOT  BE  ? 
The  flow'ry  Feet,  to  even  the  mystic  scrolls  unknown,  shall  we  adore;— SHALL 

IT  NOT  BE? 

The  sweet  red  water-lily  Flower  my  head  shall  crown; — SHALL  IT  NOT  BE, 
If  Peruman,  the  gracious, — I9an,  He  Who  owns,  arise  to  visit  me?  3» 


344  f  5oni*«iS>. 


LDMJS<3yj//, 
C 

/j)  QJ  /s  <s  <S6V<KSjp/u>, 


V. 

Fond  fancies  all,  that  valued  earth's  illusions  vain, shall  cease ;— SHALL  IT  N<  > . 
Before  the  flowVy  Foot  to  heavenly  ones  unknown  we'll  bow;— SHALL  IT  N<  > 
The  perturbations  all  from  blindness  sprung  shall  cease;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
The  mind  of  loving  saints  this  day  shall  greatly  joy;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
Entanglement  of 'sex  diverse,' and  self  shall  now  be  loos'd;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
States  manifold,  their  very  names  unknown,  we'll  'scape;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
Innumcrous  mystic  powers  my  soul  shall  then  possess;— SHALL  IT  NOT  i 
If  PerumSn,  the  gracious  lean,  He  who  owns,  arise  to  visit  me?  40 

VI. 

The  ashes  white  upon  His  sacred  golden  form  all  beauteous  shine; — SHALL  n 

NOT  BE? 

A  rain  of  flowers  adoring  hands  of  mighty  saints  shall  shower;— SHALL  i 
The  heart's  intent  of  damsels  bright  with  slender  form  shall  then  appear;— 

SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 

The  sounds  from  smitten  lyre  that  rise  shall  multiply  delights; — SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
His  servants'  feet  upon  my  head  shall  flourish  then; — SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
Himself  to  set  His  servants  free  shall  forthwith  come;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 


37.  See  Siva-fana-bddkam,  first  aphorism.  The  whole  creation  b  arranged  under  three  categories : 
he,  skf,  it;  \.  e.  organized  beings,  male  and  female  ;  and  unorganized  beings,  neuter. 


345 


6T. 


Sweet  instruments  of  music  dulcet  strains  shall  everywhere  rehearse;— SHALL 

IT  NOT  BE, 

If  lean,  Whose  of  old  I  am,  my  Sire,  in  grace  arise  to  visit  me?  48 

VII. 

The  pure  gems'  wordless  music  then  shall  rapture  yield;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE  ? 
The  light  that  hides  within  my  soul  sudden  shall  rise  and  burn; — SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
That  manifold  phenomena  may  cease  the  Deity  shall  come; — SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
Experiences  divine  unknown  before  shall  unfolding  rise; — SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
Distraction  caused  by  those  whose  lovely  brows  are  bows  shall  cease  this  day  ;— 

SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 

The  Essence  excellent  that  even  heavenly  ones  know  not  shall  be  with  us;— 

SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 

The  eightfold  qualities  that  know  no  bound  shall  we  attain;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE, 
If  He,  Whose  crest  the  crescent  moon  adorns,  to  make  us  His  in  grace  arise?  56 

VIII. 

From  shell  that  music  breathes  the  sounds  shall  then  burst  forth;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
The  qualities  that  quit  not  earthborn  race  shall  fret  no  more;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
Delusion  that  declares  this  good,  or  that,  shall  all  die  down;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
OurwholedesireshallasktoserveHisservants'neathHisfeet;— SHALLITNOTBE? 


346 

SSSTmSSSTLL  L-JBGtn<$ILlJB6S>$         olTLJUGST, 


G?«JTSST  OT^SST  ^etr  6T(i£>jBj&(iij  etr 


The  thought  of  damsels  bright  of  eye  shall  then  rejoice;— SHALL  IT  NOT  i 
The  bliss  of  ^"ivanshared  by  glorious  saints  we  then  shall  know;— SHALL  IT  NOT  BE? 
The  heavenly  all-pervasive  Light  Ambrosial  shall  we  gain;- SHALL  IT  NOT  BE, 
If  He,  the  endless  Vedic  Lord,  to  make  me  His  in  grace  arise?  64 


ear  jl  ft  ID  ii  Sso  .     @o_ 

347 


[#  QJ  n  gu  u  su  a?  15  u  u  ii.] 

[Metre  :  «s»Au  «%A*4.     Formula:  -<or  |  -««• 


T  <S&  lUGg]  GV  &  LO 


a.. 


THE    GARLAND    OF    RAPTURE. 
[DESIRE   OF   THE   EXPERIENCE   OF  £IVAN.] 

HYMN   L. 

I. 
How  may  I  join  my  friends  beyond? 

Th'  Immortals  all  have  gained  Thy  flower-like  feet, 

bright  as  the  lightning's  glance;— have  crossed 
The  world's  wide  sea,  and  bearing  golden  flowers 

they  praise  !    Reveal  in  love,  I  pray,— 
Thou  Refuge  of  the  stony  worthless  heart, — 

how  one  like  me, — distressed, — cast  off,— 
Sunk  in  the  sea  of  fond  desire, — at  length, 

how  may  I  come  to  Thee  ? 

u. 

Have  pity  on  my  lonely  grief  I 
Thou  gav'st  the  station  blest  I  knew  not  of  ; 

but  I  knew  not  Thy  grace,— was  lost ! 


£  5  a»  "» 


LJ  6337^/5  Co  p^gH  LD 


m, 


Li}.  eutJ)$tiLLi}. 


M aster,  no  failure  is  in  Thee  at  all ; 

Who  comes  to  aid  Thy  slave  ?    I  cry  1 
Not  joined  with  Thine  own  ancient  saints, — 

who  serve  and  praise  Thee  many  a  day ; 
My  Leader  loved,  here  left  behind  I  stay  ;— 

Thou  see'st  my  lonely  pain  !  * 

in. 

Z  am  His — when  »hall  I  join  Him  ? 

Of  virtue  void,  of  penitential  grace 

devoid,  undisciplined,  untaught,— 
As  leathern  puppet  danced  about,  giddy, 

I  whirling  fell,  lay  prostrate  there  ! 
He  showed  me  wondrous  things ;  He  showed  the  way 

to  pass  to  worlds  not  reached  before  ; 
The  raft  He  show'd ;  when  shall  I  come,  a  wretch, 

to  Him  Who  made  me  His?  12 

IV. 

Am  Z  rightfully  abandoned  ? 

I  perish,  as  to  perish  is  my  doom ; 
the  blame,  Imperishable  One, 


SOT  j|  $  1C  T  8SV>  .       @0. 

349 


Sn. 


sr  Q&i_(o<su  .-gyswLDttyC?/^, 

Thou  tak'st  ;  and,  if  to  suffering  doomed,  I  bear 

my  destined  woes,  what  is  the  gain  ? 
O  Guru-Gem,  Who  dost  defend  and  rule,— 

that  I  sink  not  in  cruel  hell  ; 
Is't  good,  our  Leader  lov'd,  that  Thou  withdraw, 

and  stand  not  in  the  midst  ?  16 

v. 

Is  there  no  pity? 

Thou  Who  dost  cherish  men  like  mother  dear,— 

uncherish'd,  left,  a  weakling  here,— 
And  must  I  perish,  I  a  cur  !    In  love 

henceforth  Thy  goodness  show  to  me  !  — 
I've  called  Thee  '  Mother*/  sought  Thy  sheltering  foot,— 

but  now  Thou  hast  no  grace  for  me,  — 
Vile  me,  whom  Thou  'mid  saints  didst  make  Thine  own  ! 

I'm  he  !    Should'st  Thou  not  save  ?  ao 

VI. 
I  claim  Thy  consolation. 

O  King,  should'st  Thou  not  show  Thy  grace  ? 
I,  wretched,  lie  at  ruin's  door. 


350  f  5aiir*«il>. 


Sl)  OT<S5TLJT/ 


:  &-*> 

I      I        V.X 

CT. 


JBffl65)UJ&  (Sj^Snj 


...JJ/LJLJ.T 
Qpfnu  eurfliu 
Q&iueu 


And,  if  Thou  bid  me  not  to  come  to  Thee, 

who  is  there  here  to  calm  my  fears  ? 
Are  they  who 're  doomed  to  die,  my  fellows  all? 

'  This  is  unmeet,'  will  not  men  say? 
O  God,  Dancer  in  Tillai's  hall,  I  tremble, 

henceforth  comfort  me  !  M 

VII. 
Z  »ink  pow«rl«M  before  Tb*«. 

Thou  mad'st  the  jackal  be  a  charger  fleet ! 

Didst  work  enchantments  manifold  ! 
The  mighty  South  King's  Madura  Thou  filFdst 

with  madness,  Perun-turrai's  Lord  ! 
O  Being  hard  to  reach  !  O  AvanS9i's  Sire ! 

The  PSndi  kingdom's  rushing  flood  ! 
O  Splendour,  infinite,  unknown,  in  sooth 

I  know  not  aught  to  do !  28 


25.  Life,  $  iv.  37.  Avaitdfi,  a  shrine  near  Madura. 


35 l 


[Metre:  *«Ba»<yA»i4.     Formula  :  -««a  |  -«„&  |  -«d  |  -*ri. 


THE    WONDER    OF    SALVATION. 

[ENJOYMENT    INEFFABLE.] 

HYMN   LI. 

This  hymn  was  composed  after  he  had  settled  down  in  Tillai,  his  active  life  finished,  and  was 
waiting  for  the  great  release.  He  surveys,  as  he  was  so  fond  of  doing,  the  whole  course  along  which 
his  Master  had  guided  him ;  acknowledges  how  often  he  had  fallen  through  an  undisciplined  and 
unpurified  mind ;  and  records  with  thankfulness  that  grace  had  given  him  the  victory  at  last.  No 
rapture  is  like  his  !  Each  verse  addresses  his  Master  variously  as  (i)  Father,  (2)  the  Mystic  Dancer, 
(3)  the  Guru,  (4)  the  High  and  Lofty  One,  (5)  the  Master,  (6)  the  Blissful,  (7)  again  as  the  Guru, 
(8)  the  Author  of  all  things,  and  (9)  the  Mother  (being  one  with  Umai).  See  T.  V.  U.  P.,  chap.  vii.  p.  a, 
and  the  Memoir,  §  viii. 

I. 
The  Father's  converting  grace. 

To  me,  who  toiled  and  moiled  'mid  fools,  that  knew  not  WAY  of  final  peace, 
He  taught  the  WAY  of  pious  love;— and  that  'old  deeds'  might  cease  and  flee, 
Purging  the  foulness  of  my  will,  made  me  pure  bliss,  took  for  His  own ; — 
'Twas  thus  the  FATHER  gave  me  grace :  O  RAPTURE  !  WHO  so  BLEST  AS  I  ?    4 


allusion 


1,2.  In  this  and  the  next  verse  the  word  '  way '  or  '  path  '  is  used  again  and  again  ;  perhaps  iu 
ision  to  the  Buddhist  use  of  it.         2.  See  Pope's  Nala4i,  chap.  xi. 


352  £  IJQJ  It  ff  «li. 

a. 


d&_<<Sn<£  <oT68T<£ 
GUGSSTSSSTLG 


OTSSTJJ/,  Lj688TiT(Lp%svujrrtj 

j23OT  LD/T61Tff(?LD  ^IT^Q^S 

Qd5/rs20j£_/-9«7/r65r  nyssr&ipQsi)  (J^d^ 


II. 

The  mystic  Dancer  converts  the  heretic. 

A  WAY  that  was  no  rightful  WAY  I  followed,  deeming  it  the  WAY, — 

That  I  might  seek  no  meaner  WAY,  but  only  seek  His  sacred  grace 

To  gain,— He,  Whom  no  signs  describe,  His  mystic  DANCE  has  given  to  know! 

'Twas  thus  the  DANCER  gave  me  grace :  O  RAPTURE!  WHO  so  BLEST  AS  I  ?    8 

HI. 
The  Teacher  leads  and  guards  in  the  way  of  truth. 

Me  trusting  every  lie  as  truth,— plunged  in  desire  of  women's  charms, — 
He  guarded  that  I  perished  not  with  soul  perturb'd,— the  Lord  Supenu  , 
On  whose  left  side  the  Lady  dwells!  He  brought  me  nigh  His  jewell'd  feet, — 
'Twas  thus  my  GURU  gave  me  grace :  O  RAPTURE  !  WHO  so  BLEST  AS  I?       i; 

IV. 
The  Lofty  One  purifies  by  discipleship. 

To  me,— born  in  this  clay,  and  doom'd,  o'erworn,  to  perish,  and  to  fall, — 
Love  inconceivable  He  gave; — made  me  His  own  ; — caused  me  to  wear 
His  own  perfumed  ashes  white  ;— that  I  the  way  of  purity 
Should  reach,  the  LOFTY  gave  me  grace :  O  RAPTURE  !  WHO  so  BLEST  AS  I  ?  16 


7,  8.  Note  the  connection  of  the  dance  with  heresy,  and  compare  the  legend  of  ^ithambaram. 
NOTE  VII.        1 2.  See  NOTE  IV.  'The  Gum.' 


353 


F  @>OT  MBUrtOirt  ^ a,u&r  ,  CT 

^V@g^    ^^'^gg^U^^O^^^,^  ?  j^,^ 


<ss>uiuQ®j  QsaQQ 


v. 

The  Master  relieved  my  soul  of  its  fear. 

Afflicted  sore  by  glancing  eyes  of  silly  damsels,  soft  of  foot,— 
I  stood,  my  mind  by  sorrow  pierced;  and  then  Thy  grace  I  gain'd,-was  sav'd,- 
Ev'n  I,  O  MASTER  mine  I  Thou  bad'st  Thy  servant  come ;  <  Fear  not/  Thou  said'st ! 
Twas  thus  that  grace  to  me  was  given  :  O  RAPTURE  !  WHO  so  BLEST  AS  I  ?    3o 

VI. 
The  Last-One  saved  me  from  sensual  servitude. 

Birth  of  this  frame  that  burns  and  falls  I  took  for  true,— did  many  deeds; 
In  converse  joy'd  with  maidens  wreathed  in  flowers, with  lustrous  armlets  deck'd. 
My  bonds  He  cut,  made  me  His  own,  cleansed  foulness  so  no  trace  was  left ! 
Twas  thus  the  LAST-ONE  gave  me  grace :  O  RAPTURE  !  WHO  so  BLEST  AS  I  ?  34 

VII. 

The  Guru's  esoteric  teaching-. 

Prostrate  it  was  my  fate  to  fall  in  'wilderment  of  fair  ones'  charms. 
In  gentle  love  He  led  me  forth,  loosing  the  prison  bars  of  'bond  '; 
Showed  me  the  way  to  'scape ;  and  taught  the  meaning  of  the  mystic  OM. 
'Twas  thus  the  GURU  gave  me  grace :  O  RAPTURE  !  WHO  so  BLEST  AS  I?       38 

24.  This  is  considered  to  be  especially  Divan's  glory.  He  is  the  Omega  J  When  all  phenomena 
have  disappeared,  merged  by  Him  in  original  Maya,  He  remains,  an  abiding  refuge.  See  'Fruit  of 
Grace,'  chap.  i.  4.  fiva-ndna-bodham,  Aphorism  I:  'The  Last  is  the  First:'  ANTHAM  ATHI,  the 
Involver  (destroyer)  is  the  Evolver  (creator).  NOTE  XIV.  27.  Om.  Ongaram.  NOTE  II. 

A  a 


354 


c.0. 


(Lpp  SVSU3ST  (y69T 
JSU>3S)U>tLJU>jpJ 


VIII. 
Th«  rirat  wT*d  m«  by  flit  of  p«noa*l  dcroUon. 

My  troubled  soul  was  whirled  around  in  circling  tide  of  death  and  bii 
I  fell,  enamoured  with  the  charms  of  those  with  jewels  rare  adorned  ; 
The  Lord,  whose  Form  the  Lady  shares,  in  mercy  drew  me  to  His  feet. 
Twas  thus  the  FIRST-ONE  gave  me  grace :  O  RAPTURE  !  WHO  so  BLEST  AS  1 

IX. 
•ATM  m«  with  a  Mother'!  lov«. 

With  those  that  knew  not  right  or  good, — men  ignorant, — I  wandered  too. 
The  First,  the  Primal  Lord  Himself  threefold  pollution  caus'd  to  cease; 
Even  me  He  took  as  something  worth, — like  dog  in  sumptuous  litter  bor: 
Twas  thus  the  MOTHER  gave  me  grace:  O  RAPTURE!  WHO  so  BLEST  AS  I? 


32.  He  is  also  the  Self-existent,  First,  Eternal  Being.  See  '  Frail  of  Grace,'  chap.  i.  6.  NOTE  IV. 
36.  The  Qaiva  doctrine  is  thai  the  first  exercise  of  grace  on  the  part  of  Ihe  Supreme  is  through  His 
fat/i  (faktim  energy)  ;  which  energy  is  personified  as  His  inseparable  Bride,  and  is  the  fountain  of 
wisdom,  of  desire,  and  of  action.  Sorely  there  is  an  analogy  here  with  the  Christian  belief  in  the 
Holy  Spirit  proceeding  forth  to  be  the  Author  and  Giver  of  life  to  the  souls  of  men.  '  Fruits  of 
Divine  Grace,'  chap.  i.  a,  and  NOTE  XIII.  See  Lex  , 


END   OF   TIRUVAC.AGAM. 


PART  III. 


AND 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


TO  THE 


TIRUVACAGAM. 


The  references  in  the  Lexicon  are  as  follows  :— 
The  numbers  refer  to  the  lines  of  the  Text 
§  refers  to  the  Tamil  Handbook,  or  First  Lessons 
G.  1S  the  Catechism  of  Tamil  Grammar,  No.  r,  2    or  3 
K.  points  to  words  in  the  Dictionary  to  the  Kurral 
N.  points  to  words  in  the  Dictionary  to  the  Naladi 


,  that  self-same,  3. 132. 
See  N. 

u>  [S.  A  +  KHANDA],  that  which 
is  entire;  the  indivisible  Divine 
essence,  49.  19. 

">,  ».  [An  original  Tamil  root; 
but  from  S.  AHAM  came  another 
form,  confounded  with  it.] 

I.  n.  mind  :  s^etrerrw^  41.  20. 

^•Bosrojp^withmeltingmind^.e;;  5. 53;  16. 48. 
^«Q«r*,  so  that  mind  softens,  5.  389 ;  35.  28. 
^auGiy,,  while  my  heart  is  glad,  13.  70.   Comp. 
in,  5.  42-44. 

II.  n.  =  a_<srr,  the  inner  part;  opposed 
to  L//r>ii>. 

'That  contains,'  'dwells  in',  9.  65-67. 

Hence  a  sign  of  locative  case,  dya&gi,  «^*4<7^=in, 
within,  3.  172;  5.  44;  20.  33-36;  47.  35,  36; 
48.  9. 

^f«iij®,  ».  »«^r.  [§  56.  (II)],  be  taken,  held  by, 
gained,  41.  i;  48.9;  49.  19. 

3f«i|u®,  ».  ^.  [§  64],  subdue,  9.  46. 

sutasra00iDft}  4.  jjg. 

dyA^rcfr,  one  who  dwells  within,  34. 16. 
I 


,  z/.  [§56.(III)j,  N. 

,  the  wide  world,  45.  40. 
^««",  yield  place,  depart,  7.  70;  19.  19;  33.  5; 

Curassu,  1.  37. 

«^*«ur(^),  not  separate,  6.  5  ;  41.  15. 
^tyasw-p,  widely  diffused,  1.  35. 
^aajrCcw,  one  who  transcends :  st-jkCfrar,  3. 51. 

Sfa+Vunif&f&i  darkness  has  fled  away,  20.  5. 

^<s<^\eSl  [§  160],  cause  to  depart,  1. 40. 
»  v.  [§  57],  delve  down,  27. 18. 

Comp.  g)i_.    N.  hi  loc.;  K.  151. 

[§  1 60],  drive  far,  dissipate, 
36.  30  j  47.  41. 

)  [or  «jy<50,  S.  AGARU,  Aquila  or 
eagle-wood],  n.  a  fragrant  wood, 
3.  90. 

\Q&)QeoG5r:  joined  to  V§>&>  =  be  able, 
3.  167.    See  £>&. 

SeuGsurar,  this  is  @®4*  +  ®  +  SsAtCtodr  ?  25. 6. 


sir,  n.  £ivan,   'Lord  of  the 
Court':   gjLcued&r,  from  S.  AftGA- 
NAM  ;   or  '  He  whose  eye  is  gra- 
cious ' :  Sl(^unQiEnssQp&r&rsu&5f  from 
*B 


+*  +  ***  [K.],  8.  5;  24.  28;  29. 
12  ;  43.  73. 

of  beautiful  eye: 


5.  284. 

This  may  be  :  '  Lord  of  the  fair  place  I  ' 

ivS  for  4318,  jfaQeati  [S.  AGNl],  the 
god  of  fire,  13.57;  14.  19;  23.  24. 
»(5,  there,  41.  18.  With  Qunfar&, 
like  to,  16.  12.  In  16.  7  a  mere 
expletive. 

jy/E//K76BT,  SO,    5.  384. 

jf<*iiq,  ;/.  foulness,  ordure,  26.  25. 

jf+AQur&Ou,  N.,  p.  29,  &c.,  especially  47. 

jy  *irfiBr  [S.  ASURA],  a  spirit,  a  demon, 
1.  29.     Muir,  vol.  v,  Index. 


I.  v.  n.  [§  57],  wander,  suffer,  3.  82. 

II.  v.  a.  [§  64],  brandish,  move,  1  1  .  :  i  . 
ffti>,  dread,   fear   [jf®*],   3.  98  ; 

5.  3*3  1  6-  32  ;  7-  73  J  35«    Source, 

or  object  of  fear,  11.  30. 

ssesr,  father,  for  JJ^/SOT,  5.  1  1  5  ;  41  .  36. 

But  ?  =  jf*f.tuear.     [S.  AKSHAYAN.] 
**,  «.  axle,  11 

sa\  jy*<2>ff!  Oh,  wonderful  !  34. 
34- 

/,  an  intcrj.  of  astonishment. 


!  i  j  M<r  r<r/roi«  :  '  O  behold  !  ' 

t  n.  [S.  AfljALl],  reverential 
clasp  of  hands,  8.75;  5.  287;  I 
With  */ril®,  «L.UL/. 

>  [S.  ANJ],  a  dark,  magic  col- 
l}'rium  for  the  eyes,  17.  2. 


I.  t'.  /r.  [§  62],  fear,  dread,  revere, 
4.  172;  5.45;  6.  61,  125;  21.  29; 
35.  i,  &c.  [jff*u>];  50.  22  [G.  92]; 
51.  20. 

II.  =g«^7,  comp.  u©*,  five  (letters, 
senses,  elements),  4.  19;  5.  107;  6. 
32,41;  41.  25. 

2 


jp^tD,  «.  parrot:  @siR,fj$ea><f,  19.  i  7. 
.     N.  and  K. 

(5,  z/.  a.  restrain,  repress,  40. 
/(5,   i'.  n.   for  ^/t—isSeS(Sii)t   be 
subdued,  49.  59. 
f,  t'.  throng,  press  on,  0.  148,  149. 

,  n.  [S.  ATAVI  ],  a  forest  : 
34.  38. 


I.  :-.  a.  [§64],  strike,  blow,  4.  55;  1  1.  i  : 

II.  //.    foot:    0ITGT,    <5ip6X),    UIT0U>,    ffff6SOrt 

1  •  5,  6  ;  4.  5  (ftassiw). 

.JIM***,  on,  at—  his  foot,  ;th  case,  42.  4,  8,  &c. 

See  Qf,  •«»/,  9t. 
As  adj.  jr^-l-rCw*,  88.  37. 
jpt.|A0<«.*,  suburb,  3.  160. 
As  rfto*»»p,  constantly,  1.  .»;,  <o;  -'.  1  19,  144; 

8.  160. 

rj4tf>l',tTietBiJjirir,   1 

-*'  y^.14  7  JT*!*"- 

t,  jf^juutt,  .r>  IO. 

.  6.  9  ;  88.  4.    j»»*«*, 
,  «•  &  guru,  29.  ao. 

,  r.  kill  :  Q*fr^>,  §  6S. 

<?•(*>,  '  murderous,'  C.  i; 
.J*?*  !  6.  144,    jp-fi  •*,  «•  i  J  t    '  >? 


I.  v.  [§57]J>«-],  reach,  attain  to,  t 
refuge,  4.  26,  161;  1  . 

46.3;  50.  i. 

4«M-«jr<?iB,  45.  19,  22.     +~<-uii,  foes,  28.  1  1. 

II.  [§64],enclose,  dose  up,  stop,  2:J.  I, 

jpvi-jGfrdr,    8.  28. 

III.  ;/.  a  refuge:  jyooi-ja/. 
iMrA»«m_ur6  !  O  refuge  of  my  soul  t  •'•• 

4«><_>««>ift,  n.,  24.  -*»«wA,  7. 
jyilt-ii    [S.   ASHTAN].   ei^lit  :     CTL!®, 

2.63;  42.5-   [V.U.  P..  iv.  vM 
_gy/_L(5),  v.  <7.  pour,  put  to,  apply  ; 
QUIT®.     [K.  1093.]     Comp.  5>il®. 

rt».  ^cS,  '  put  to  shnmc,'  18.  1  2. 

is;(5,  «.  beauty  ;  goddess,  fairy  : 

vrf  [K.],  18.27;  20.  22. 
,  z>.  (^assara/),  join. 

Qur^f,C  fried,    '  the   luxilrilllt    groVC 

where  branches  interlace,'  18.  37. 


I.  v.a.  and  n.  [§  57],  wear  as  orna- 
ment, adorn,  2.  1 14 ;  3.31:9. 
12.41;  13.17.     [P.  N.N.i.] 

.SyejoflSsw^asu/r,   35.  2O. 

^e^leS,   v.  causal  [§  160],  cause  to  wear  as 
ornament,  adorn  with,  51. 15. 

II.  n.  line  of  battle,  5.  354 ;  13.  67 ; 
16.40;  46.  6;  49.  25;  51.  30. 

i,  n.  [S.  ANUS],  atom,  3.  5,  45 ; 
4.  112;  5.  97;  22.  37. 
^|(5,  v.  [§  62],  draw  nigh : 
20.  5;  40.  23;  48.  i. 


*•  ^  [§  57],  embrace,  20.  30;  26.  17  ; 

27.  36,  40  ;  28.  29  ;  34.  5  ;  41.  24. 
II.  n.  dam,  13.  3. 
csy<swn_u>  [S.  ANDA],  the  material  uni- 

verse, 3.  i  ,  95  :  s_6x>(3  ;  heaven,  8.  52  ; 

opposed  to  utrir,  3.  95  ;  12.  22,  23  ; 

18.  31;  22.29. 

The  '  macrocosm  '  in  opposition  to  tS«fri_to,  the 

'  microcosm.' 
^«OT«_|«ur«5irr,  the  celestials,  23.  5. 

L-r/s/rQ,   46.  8.      «sy«m_ff«>!rL_!o,   37.  29. 
-20€ar,   16.  19. 

-iJu<sgi}  title  of  3,  and  3.  i. 
33T=  /zreabr:  a  root  with  the  notion 
of  '  nearness,  or  height.' 
6Mr6agr&),  n.  a  ruler,  2.  101  ;   20.  6  ; 
26.  24;  35.  2;  51.  16. 

iseiDjSS,  4.  149;  33.  36. 
,  v.  [§  64],  draw  near,  1.  4. 
/,  ^.  approach  :  iseaar^ii,  49.  20. 
unapproachable,  5.  39,  83. 

J,  4.  149;   7.  69;   8.  60.    ^jg^ffGjfi. 

<°>/<5siir<ss)LD=ffu!>'uu)}  nearness. 

-  ?  6.  87. 

ii,  «.  [S.  ADHIKARA],  33.  31. 
u),  n.  [S.  ATI^AYA],  wonder,  4. 
72  ;  17.  24  ;  26.  title,  4,  8,  &c. 

li,  v.  a.  and  n.  [§§  64,57],  acclaim, 
40.  28. 

|^=that:  jyo0^  [G.  12],  often  re- 
dundant, 2.  27.    ^ip®s 

.     So  2.  31,  63. 


tsrgit  moreover,  3. 


,  v.  [§  62],  swarm  on,  6.  144. 

[T.  ADENDUVE],  in 
^  refrain  ;  lit.  What  is  that  ? 

'  Bid  thou  in  grace  my  fears  begone  !' 
«ff,  n.,  ai-ey&r,  deity,  17.  12. 

ear,  n.  Father:  jy^or,  1.  79;  4. 
I23;  0-9,335;  6.64;  7.9;  9.4; 
15.  24;  16.4i  ;  25.  24;  37.  29  ;  51.4. 
[S.  HASTI],  elephant,  4.  163  ; 
11.46;  19.  73. 

[Tiruvilai-adal,  21.] 

gi<5&>u  [S.  ANUKULAM],  in  accord- 

ance with,  4.  67. 
y^ijffl/ii,  n.  [S.  ANUBHAVAM],  experi- 

ence.    See  uj/r,  49.  52  ;  and  &e/, 

49.  62. 

sr  [S.  AN  +  ERA],  the  manifold, 
1.5;  3.39;  5.97. 


(i)S.ANDHAGAN,ademonslainby(^ivan,13.57. 

(2)  From  dy*^ifi  [S.  ANTAKA],  12.  13. 

(3)  A  blind  man  [S.]. 

<syii><$6osr63rt  a  Brahman:  QGU$UJGST  [K. 

Lex.  /»  /i?^],  2.  42  ;  8.5,  108  ;  10.55  5 

11.  a;  18.  38;  20.32. 
«5y/^to,  ;z.  [S.  ANTA],  end  :  (joff  Q/,  /F^, 

1.73;  2.22,92;  3.51;  5.88,io8; 

7.i;  12.37;  18.4;22.34,38;  49.19. 

An  epithet  of  Qivan,  51.  24. 
c^y/B^jto,  #.  [S.],  space  :  Qeueifl. 
Air,  ether,  2.  98;  8.  14,  87.     Sky,  18.  18. 
^paGus,  at  random,  31.  2. 

sreuirisfirib,    12.  43.      [«f  «uii.]     gjtfijt,  9.  1  1. 

i/itQstr,  inter  j.  alas  !  behold  !  3.  34  ; 
5.  87;  45.  40.    =^ffQffn. 
uuasr,  22.  9;  41.  28;  42.  30,  37. 


3 


6or,   10.  13.     See  ^H- 

/L/,  v.  apply,  as  a  poultice,  &c. 

In  aexrescrCiueir  the  Com.  says  he  was  so  called 
because  he  applied  his  eye  as  a  remedy  to  the 
bleeding  eye  of  the  image  :  *«*8s»»  j»*i*»«*; 

but  see  ^CMJOT. 

L/,  n.  water,  6.  80;  8.  64;  40.  29. 
|u>/H?,  n.  [S.  A  +  MRI],  the  immortals, 
7.  25;  27.i3(Indra);  43.  73  ;  48.14. 
*  B  2 


)t  v.  [§  60],  2.22;  4.  M7- 

Comp.  c^«oto. 
Gt+  JT*  <?*,*,  2.  73,  98;  !«.  19. 
JHM-*,  18.  6. 
.ip***,  seated  pleasantly,  8.  78;  10.  a;  89.  1  1. 

,  //.  [S.  AJMALA  ?  M.],  a  bed. 
Cur  fit  jfo*,  a  flowery  coach.  7. 

css  down 


be  pressed  down. 

JT<J»|  *«,  M.  depression. 

[§  j'.s  \  be  rank  in.  31.  29. 

*"  [S.  AMRITA],  (  i  )  am- 
brosia.  3.  i;c.  4.  14:,  173;  10.25; 
(2)  food  40.  15. 

An  efiithet  of  Civan,  5.  197. 

t   3.  l8i;   49.   18. 

i  I-  57  ;  4.  198;  iO.  40. 

I 
,  7.  3  ;  43.  74. 

eat.  14  75  ;  l:». 
40M*«>g,  feed,  cause  to  eat. 

.  174.  4QM'"-*,  4.  150:6.  103. 


I.  =  j»u*f,  f.  it.  fit,  suit,  suffice,  agree 

i. 

MM*»  !  46.  !>.     ^••V*  1  enoogh  I 
6.317;  •*.  10.     Qu*t>um**f,  10.  I. 
47.  J6.     +mmw     I 

!  it  mtut  be;  i»  it  fit?  60.  at.    Suffice, 
6.  3^7. 

II.  r'.a.  [§64],  fix,  3.  20,  177;  47 

III.  //.  bambu,  3.  103.     QpmiQet. 

^fiJD,  n.  beauty:  Jn^y,  2.  140;  6. 

149,  sweet;  10.  44;  16.  21  ;  20.  6  ; 

41.38;  48.  n. 
jfiiuou)  [S.  AMHARA]. 

i.  Garment,  12.73.  .*•*"'••*-«<»»««'*,  whose 

garment  is  pore  intelligence. 
a.  Ether,  6.  80. 

jftiu&ti,  n.  [?  corr.  of  S.  AMOARA,  an 
open  court],  porch,  hall,  open  court, 
5.69. 

21.  3,  8,  24,  &C. 

t    21.   25. 

V'van»  6-  304J  1°-  7»  67. 

,  11.  79;  18.  3,  37 
r.    See 
I  88.  24. 


j)fu)L/,  ».  arrow:  u/r«ro>,  14.  4,  5. 

jf»",  iw/w.,  86.  4,  &c.     jf6-r,  86.  1  8  ;  46.  30. 
j/iiwfii,   jyuiuju),  a  woman's   breast, 

4.  17. 
jfujtwrasw,  a  female  play  with  balls, 

8.  19;  t).  4- 


tiuatir,   father,  4.  168;    9.  4  ; 
27.  18;  33.4. 


I.  //.  [S.  AMBA],  a  mother;   I'.uvathi  : 
fliriu,  37.  9. 

II.  So  ")  1  .  56  (see  note  there)  ;  =  jy> 


III.  =JT^(5  [jr">].  beauty,  40.  40. 

n   "'••'•  L$  57]»  languish  :  ^*r»,  «//r®, 

^tr,  82.  34. 
jytvtv,  n.  what  is  foreign  .11.4: 

J»w*«f,  4.  46,     j»««^/.  7.  40 
4«C««i4pCte,  •  at  a  stranger,'  6 

jfiuar=:iSffu>cart  n.  [S.  AJA=thc  un- 
born], Brahma,  5.  5  ; 

n        a  ,. 

'  A  ja  (  -  Brahmi)  is  the  father  of  Daksha,  whose 

daughter  £atti  married  yivan.' 
QutfCft  j***,  28.  39.    Comp.  «**>**. 
•«•/•*,  l1 

«,  v.  eat,  5.  275  ;  6.  173.    [Or= 


»  »•  a  snake.   Sec  N.  under  jfoa. 
«lr,  '  His  ornament  was  a  dancing  snake/ 
17.  13. 

r«Br,    4<  > 


,  ».  kingly  rule,  king  [K.  and  N  ), 

Comp.  &mfi\m+.     Written  also  jf*»». 
ju>,  ft.  [S.  RAK  I  A  |,  redness,  5. 

>,  6.  139.    g>a//ruj/7a/tD.    See  N., 
pp.  279,  2«0. 

«Ajr,    6.  134. 

.  5.  68  :  uaatu,  34.  1  ;  3.').  I.  [K. 


8.  106.    jr/*ni*.  38. 
•«•/•(,  8.  70.      j».-**,  2«.  20. 


,  n.  [S.  RAVA],  a  sound. 

irCiuasim>    7.  47. 

&,  v.  [§  62],  weep  aloud,  make  a 
sound,  loudly  affirm.     With  ^p, 
;  4-  535  9-  53  ;33.37.    Comp! 


the  destroyer,  1.  85,  but  see  ay/r^r; 
4.123,192;  6.138;  12.71;  15.47; 
34.  30. 

&i,  ^IHMU  [s.  SARPA],  5.  258; 
9-  55,  76  ;  24.  6. 

/Tffl/,  v.  [§  62],  sound;  clash, 
tinkle,  5.  68. 


Comp.  S.  RATI  and  ARTH 
v.  eat,  6.  71. 

IS^     11.    17. 


I.  «.  red  streaks  in  the  eye. 

^/fi&aair,   9.  47. 

II.  Moon;  =^iifi\Qsffti,  4.  189.    See 

(oWt£>65T,    15.   43. 

III.  ».  [§  64],  gnaw, 

^/ifiuL/ttiT,    Q.  97. 

IV   »•  [§57].  cutoff,  nip-  off. 

ffauilt*g>,  8.  86  ;  14.  53. 

V.  «.  [S.  HARI,  see  uxreu],  Vishnu,  2. 
35,115;  11.9;  13.58;  15.45. 

,  «.,  Qusssr,  female,  16.  25. 
>  «.  [S.  RUPA],  formlessness,  22. 
24.     See  £.(75. 

f,  10.  55;  22.  33.     ^araii,  4.  192. 

ff/r  [corr.  of  S.  RAKSHA,  RAKSH], 
confounded  with  ^gy^/r,  with  ^'. 
«a//rsrr,  their  city  was  burnt,  13.  57. 
See  14.  1-4. 

aezir,  n.  [S.  ARKA],  U<s^  ^^-^ 
10.  1  8. 

Bhaga's  eye  and  Puda's  teeth  were  destroyed, 

9.  69.     K.  K.,  89.  38. 
The  sun,  3.  20  ;  13.  14,  57  ;  [14.  43,  44.] 

dFSsBr,  «.  [S.  ARCH],  worship,  8.93. 
3r,  ;?.  [S.],  the  ruddy;  dawn  ; 
sun,  20.  5. 

ifi,  «.}   15.  45-48;    18.  29-32.    See 


.) 
=  very  stupid. 

3  tf.  loathe,  35.  8. 
,  n.  a  cataract,  27.  27. 

n,  n.  preciousness,  rarity, 
difficulty  [opp.  to  vw,  N.l,  4.  126  • 
9.46. 

Its  adj.  forms  are  j,/,  ^4,  ^^  ^^  §  i3I,  G. 

4&»£,  ^.a,^  5.  366  .  2Q_  I2_ 

^UMir,  ^.ir*,  jyrfC.wdr,  1.  93.  3>  ^.  §^^ 

^flUgl,  <cy/fl^j    3.  4?f 

^•"i  1,  76,  78;  8.47;  50.  28. 

,1.52;  8.95,138;  5.190;  6.64;  7.i;  29.  39. 

,  4.  75  ;  5.  1  8. 


I.  v.  intr.  [§  62],  swell  as  a  flower-bud, 
4.  85  ;  5.  i. 

II.  n.  a  bud,  40.  21. 


I.  n.  grace,  benignity,  1. 18,42 ;  28.23 ; 
43.4;  51. 

Jj)OTW<5ar,   2.  14.      ^(ye/feart  5.  2OO;   49.  32,  40. 
c3ft3ar4/#,  19.  7;   28.   Comp.  a^'faxr,  g/efl,  ^/ory,  fUg. 
gigesfigl,    20.  8.      <$£l. 

II.  V.  [§  62],  1.  16;  2.  10,  I J,  138,  143, 

145;  3.  97;  4.  76;  20.  4,  &c.;  5l 

(refrain}. 

^(j-arsu,  5.  232.      .jyoHg*,   7.  77,  &C. 
«3y0iJ.®<s>xz),  44.  22.      ^cjxLa^A;,    11.  63. 

_gy<55)/7",  the   waist:    ^)ao/— ,  U>T^IEIQ, 
11.  21. 

jysroj | Qiuifesr1   3.  32. 

tSiaoffiuax  =  {jfriifefr,    ^jaanaf}    gjaat,     king,    12.    49- 


=  e|y,7<sJ    6.   144,  145;   21.  l6,   17. 
esr,   22.  9. 

J,  ^/r  [§131]-     See 


n. 


.     See 


29.  8. 
5 


,  «/.  [§  66],  be  distressed,  4.  185; 
6.  97  ;  32.  4.    Comp.  <s>{%v. 

jejair\i£lp<gu>  =  geiruijLjGiiii  [G.  80],  that  suffers, 
5.  216. 


EJ&&),  n.  garland  :  yio/rSeo,  6.  115. 
5(5,  v.  [p.  «#  xiDisQpear  for  ^a^ff/fr 
ar],  be  agitated,  confounded,  6. 
77;  11.  17,  where  comp.  <s>i(rrju>ii;f. 

y5Vfi>L^,  z>.  [§  62],  murmur  as  a 
stream,  11.  79. 


I.  71.  bloom,  expand  :    ujso/f,  y,  U/T, 
3.  122;  8.  87;  20.  39. 

II.  n.  a  full-blown  flower:  u><a>/r  ;  guilt, 
blame:  uyP,  4.  20;  12.  72;  39.  2; 
43.5L 


Brahma,  12.  21. 

,  v.  weep  aloud,  2.  134;  3.  152; 
6.71,87;  27.ii. 

,  what  is  not  (male  or  female),  3. 
57,134;  5.115,166;  6.88;  16.a5; 
49.  37. 


I.  ;/.  a  wave  :  J0«a>/r,  puma^  3.  1  22,  i  ;,  i  . 

II.  v.  [§57],  be  disturbed,  6.  61;  26.26. 

4)M«i_*,  8.  151;  4.  307;  14.  39. 
Qfi*  jfJw  Jfcr. 

III.  v.  tr.  [§  64],  beat  upon,  3.  85. 

y,  distress 

|  265],  6.  8l. 

a).    See  JK«rjy,  G.  125. 
£(5«;,  ».,  5.  258;  84.  I. 
axaP,  «.  the  inner  petals  of  the  lotus, 
27.  13. 

f**»,  thou  art  not  all  things  [G.  93],  1.  71  ; 
22.  23,  28;  87.  31. 

«*•£«*,    1.  73. 

AtMVMrf,  and  the  others,  27.  13. 

,  22.  26. 

-  jf*»«une*,,   28.  9,  17,  21. 

vG)G)t  sadness,  1.  91  ;  4.  39. 

,  81.  18;  38.  5;  45.  22. 
6.  8. 


o,  «.  [S.  AVA],  whaj  is  vain,  3.  82  ; 
5.i8;  7.  14;  11.13;  20.37;  32.5; 
34.  37. 

®  [S.  AVAGATI],  perception,  11. 


,  «.  [S.],  a  £ivan  shrine,  near 
Madura,  50.  27. 

,  n.  [S.],  limb,  3.  156. 
[^  +  usoto,  S.  ABALAM],  5.  So  ; 
50.  3.     See  K.  1072. 

,  «.  [S.],  earth,  4.  75;   8.  14  ; 
11.  21,42;  20.40;  27.5;  43.37. 
,  n.  desire :   «&S»«F,  4.  37 ;   5. 
95,  216. 

[S.  HAVIS],  an  oblation. 

t   a    share  of  the    oblation,   14.   iC» 
Comp.  5.  13. 

=  Qpeayn,  complaining  cry,  ">.  1 4. 
,  i>.  [S.  AVIH,  sun],  gleam,  (%>.  14^. 
N.  89;  P.  N.  N.222;  K.  1117. 

>,  f.  w.  open  out,  3.  !V 
i  f/-  beauty,  4.  126;   18. 
23.  28  ;  33.  36,  37.     See  ®^g. 

J»»<w,bcauteoui,  2.37,  ^3.  jfipM/,2.98;  18.6. 
,   17.  9. 

,   7.   12. 

Br  =  S.  SUNDARA,  the  beauteous : 
•49**,  4.159;  40.5;  4- 

Hence  the  name  uAQ«>»>u>*t  of  the  great  < 
mcntator  on  the  A'urraf. 

,  ;/.  fire,  2.  92;  5,  i  i ;,.  349;   1."). 
47;  25:  one  of  the  five  elements, 
23.  13;  25.3i. 
,  12.  ai. 


I .  ; .  a.  [§64],  destroy ;  surpass,  1 .  4^  ; 
2.  5;  5. 117;  40.  9.     Sec  »©. 

•i- 1  «y,  i.  88. 

II.  v.  n.  perish,  4.  133  ;  6.  125 ;  13. 
59;  40.  ii ;  44.  19. 

J»i*cA  8. 118.    jfrfh,  4. 132. 
,  f.  ».  [§  60],  weep,  2.  136;  4. 
61;  6.348,349;  21.16;  27.  30. 

,  «.  weeping,  20.  14. 
jl<yt*>»tjt,  those  that  weep. 
!«V,  weeping,  21.  16. 

a^,  w.  filth:    U>SDLD,    u>/r<*,    1.  53  i 
2.  109  ;  24.  4  ;  25.  9. 

j/(l^|fi7(3i,  2/.  sink  down: 
24.  40  ;  45.  30. 


v.  tr.  plunge,  sink  any- 
thing under,  8.  28 ;  36.  29. 

[§  160],  cause  to  sink,  12.  33,  39. 
gl,  ^  sink,    10.  65;   27.  6; 
35.  18;   38.  10;   41.  32;   45.  35; 
50.  15.     See  «g£,  ,,5/r/p. 

,  v.   [§  64],  call,  invite,  in- 
voke, 4.  49;  5.  178;  29.  4;  33.  4. 
,  ».  [§  66],  measure,  4.  3. 

a  measure:  <sv<otsffLU6s)^)  1. 415 
2.35,  115;  15.47;  31.  29,  31;  50. 
23- 

f«ra/j»=<*^g2',   z>.  discern,   measure, 
5.  136,  137. 

UL/,  «.  measure,  3.  2. 
[§  57]-     Comp.  jy$. 

I.  v,  intr.  become  mellow,  mature : 
.ssafl,  4. 142 ;  37.  13.    See  us^enw. 

II.  v.  />•.  grant  in  mercy,  cherish,  3. 
101;  8.57;  23.37;  25.  17. 

III.  n.  (i)  grace,  tender  compassion, 
love  ;  grief;  decay,  3. 120.    Comp. 
eierr. 

^eltlaiiisp,  gracious,  8.  108. 

^ijfSlQiuea  =  eieflujeuesr}   25.  2O  ;   35.  1 6. 

(2)  A  winged  beetle,  or  any  humming 
insect:  tg/gvair®),  6.  18. 

,  v.  [§57],  embrace :  L/<%>/,  49. 25. 
j  n.  a  handful ;  abundance,  3. 
177;  5.389;  7.9;  19.33;  27.10. 

Only  used  with  ssxjy,  q.  v.,  =  abounding  in,  satu- 
rated with. 

/i,  n.  virtue:   <g(j?ju}i}>,  rseoeS'&sr, 
1.  52;  2.  90;  11.  30;  12.  62,  63, 
77,  79.    See  Pope's  Kurral,  p.  196. 
,  37.  21 ;  42.  26. 

irenp ,  one  desolate,  Cut  off. 

,  v.  [§  57]>  know,  1.  25 ;  2.  35 ; 
3. 163,  166;  5.196-200;  24.35,36; 
43.  8,  &c.;  51.  i. 

/,  «.  epithet  of  Civan,  1. 40,  81; 
4. 107;  5.  125. 

jjBiiG freer,  3.  36.      ^aiein,  ^ivan,   5.  19?. 

ifiiur  =  gjsusvir,  that  knows  no  . . . ,  4.  78  ;  49. 64. 
Comp.  49.  4. 

7 


,  20.  39;  84.  8-ij. 
conscious  folly,  4.  71. 
|«S,  z>.  ^?«.  cause  to  know,  5.  86  ;  61.  j. 
|<ur[a>>!o,  n.  ignorance,  88.  15. 

euifliuTtsr,   7.   1  8,  22. 


I.  v.  n.  [§  68],  cease. 

£l£i0&i,  cessation,  release  :  < 

•9/&P,  -less,  freed  from,  without,  1.  62  ;  84.  17. 

^IP  =  without  :  opposed  to  a-p  ;  completely,  8.  78, 

132;  37.  6  (mere  earth). 
«syp<?«,  5.  343;  82.  si. 
<5yC7,  that  severs  not  from,  5.  182. 

@£53i_lU(J7  ,  @«»t/(J?,    4.   64. 

II.  z/.  0.  [§  64],  cut  off:  (J*#  1.  64; 
2.  105,  in;   5.  126,193;   10.35; 

18.  1  8.      See 


&ujp,  1.  7,  48  ;  11.  6  ;  16.  23. 

>.  f««j.  [§  1  60],  51.  3. 
III.  adj.  of  ^p?',  six,  3.  17;  43.  18. 
Comp.  3.  79. 

s\s>  airev,  a  winged  beetle,  6.  18.     Comp.  20.  7, 

and  note. 
So  P.  N.  N.  70  :  stf>f>  etiLt-fs  fi&*rf>  Lift**,  'the 

winged  creature  with  six  legs  that  explores 

perfumes.' 

n.  any  creeping  grass,  9.  1  7  ; 

19.  36.     See  jStrerft. 

Nig.   gjgiQaairu   9lB8ib 


,  v.  [§  57],  smite  ;  call. 

itfirta,  drive  in,  4.  65. 

r,  'I  will  proclaim,'  6.  184. 

a/,   3.  148;  8.5. 

ir,  46.  I.     ^eopQurl  47.  17. 

ti,  ^.  [S.  ADBHUTA],  a  wonder, 
3.  174- 

IJ  upgi,  'the  hymn  of  marvels,'  41. 

Au««**j  3.  39. 
iEJseisr  ^sjrBra3sew\=.Qeu<siT  [S.  AN  + 

ANGA],  Kaman,  Cupid,  12.  13. 

[Muir,  v.  364,  'the  bodiless.'    Kamb.  Kam.  I. 
viii.  i,  a.] 

rt,  n.  fire:  #  Q^u4,  6.  80;  8. 
101. 

*^  [S.  AN  +  ADI],  ancient, 

49.  12. 

ii,  ?/.    See 


r,  so  much,  such.    See  JpSew,  sr'Sesr. 

+  aj».  every,  1.  41  ;  3.  38;  5.  302  ;  10.  1  1  ; 
22.  39. 

JTfcru,  6.87;  50.  I,  a,  3. 
«M*Carf  jfferCur/,   8.  14?  J   50.  4.      See  <?•>. 

-i/r*,  she  who  is  like  to,  40.  37  ;  such  an  one. 
,  5.  355;  44.  15.     jffcrwri!  88.  36. 

/,  2.  7  ;  3.  93  ;   4.  64,  81  ;   5. 
178;  22.4,5;  51.14- 

•flfdrurtr,  1.  71.      jpfru/,  5.  l8l,  373  }   22.  9. 
,|)r<»iy«Dt_«M>,   7.  31,  II. 

the  absence  oflove,  10.  13,  49. 


I.  that  day,  2.  61  ;  4.  4  ;  83.  25  ;  38 
(refrain). 

II.  For  jffi,  40.  4. 


III.  jy«r|.0r(,jf«>),  it  is  not,  5.282,283. 

JT*Cp,  will  (they)  not  ?  6.  34  ;  88.  34. 
JT*A  without,  22.  a8. 
jr|*|~*,  mch  as  it  is,  8.  36  ;  6. 
j»|*j«r,  like  to.  6.  16.     jr****,  8.  114. 
JT»,  6.  151  ;  24.  i;  49.  33.    See  also  jptoml. 
Jr*—*.  7.  35- 
*,  6.  350. 

fflr«ro>  [S.  HANSA],  swan  [N.],  10. 
43;  16.  12,40. 

fiBrBanr  [S.  AM  DA],  Jf^unr,  jfu>ea>u>, 
mother  ;  elder  sister  ;  companion, 
6.  64;  26.  i: 


.  n.a.  cow: 

a  cow  with  its  calf,  4.  73;  39. 12. 
—".  6.  347- 
*AJ*^(*  -  "*£*»,  the  cow  of  paradise,  6.  230. 

II.  n.  manner:  ,g0r,  8.  36;  11.  i6,&c.; 
13.6,  sing  how;  15. 12,  &c.;  =«/«r 
eonru>,  jdpo>,  11.  12. 

*!J»t-,  and  so,  thus,  meanwhile,  therefore,  8. 83. 
®<M",  as  his  abode,  2.  8. 

III.  r.  4j,  4K3,  ^u/,  ^ey,  become,  5. 
388 ;  48.  13. 

**JJ,  4.  133.     «*!••>«.  9.  61. 

4(«r<?^  49.  i,  &c.     ««!•"',  43.  3,  &c. 

^(•r*,  7.4.       «|(U"«r«4(«r«*,  8.42.    See  8.  52. 

•ft|«(5,  make, cause, create:  u^  1.42; 
5- 
8 


,  having  caused  to  become  (devoted  to), 
changed  into,  2.  36;  5.  101-103  J  16-  33- 

**®K  ?.,  8.  63  ;  81.  36. 

4(**i»,  w.  increase,  developement  ;  wealth,  1.41. 
See  K.  N.  and  Nannul,  375,  &c. 

IV.  inter.  Oh!  Ah!  Alas!  44.  24. 

4(*,  5.  14.     «3«",  14.  16.   Ihit  *r  =  comein. 

V.  For  jy,  that. 

,g«u>u>,  «.  [S.  A-T-GAM],  the  (^aiva 
supplement  to  the  Vcdas,  1.  4, 
Q!!ivan  is  the  Agamam—  the  out- 
come and  real  meaning  of  the  V.; 
5,  •  He  received  the  A.,  the  great 
object  of  quest.' 

4t*u>,  n.  bodily  frame;  bosom:  utiray, 

5.  287  ;  13.  34,  67  ;  49.  25. 
«•'"*.  <«'^*,  ft.  [S.  AKAfA],  ether,  5.  115; 
S2.  33 

H*ffar  in  *<3^)«ur«ar  [S  .  A  K  A  R  A  ]  ,  abode 
of  mercy,  6.  159. 

=  unseat*  :  e_(_u>L/,  ».£_»),  body, 
6.37;  22.5,9;  20.33;  32.20.   ' 
T+;SO*«»*,  8.  177. 

^"fxs  +*mm,  the  body  that  deserves  no  pamper- 
ing. 8.  133. 

*«•«,  8.  u  8.     u»  *-*•»•,  5.  i 

*«,  26.  33.    Q«fi0iU  ^*«>«,  3.  1  37. 
,  6.  156.     a^"/  **•>«,  32.  10. 


I.  As,  30.  37. 

•Afiufto,  as  if  it  licked,  6.  49,  53. 

II.  There,  22.  23;  34.  17-20. 

),  n.   [S.  AHANKARA],  pride, 
self-confidence,  IxJ.  24. 

[S.  A£A,  A^ANSA],  desire,  hope. 
See  25.  title. 

•0*0  ucCtj*,  6.  338  ;  20.  39  ;  49.  60. 
*  .£•",  inordinate  desire;  lust,  8.  13  ;  18.  37. 

.  .  .  ,  insatiable  desire,  18.  70. 
«>*  jyijiiur*,  He  will  root  out  desire,  18.  18. 
«>*  ?',  satisfy  desire,  41.  33. 

l>,  «.[S.],gold,  4.9055.43;  9.  28. 
,  v.  dance,  move,  ride;  use,  2.  i  ; 
4.62;  5.27,121;  9;  11.21-24,79. 

See  iBi—ti,  mi—esruDf  /FL!L_LD,  &-$£), 
mitt—su).  See  esp.  16.  ^i—nQi^ir,  an 
imp.  'let  us  swing!' 


Q#«*tt-f®,  play  at  ball,  9.  69. 
4{i-«JU«*r,  17.  13.     ^t-A,,  12.  So  ;  49.  5. 
In  19.  9,  10,  merely  for  rhyme;  5.  17,  18. 
gjjuj-i_r,  matchless,  19.  22. 
GWafr^Q,  extol,  19.  1  1.    aSa^,®,  sport,  21.  27. 
Comp.  5.  27.     4{®|rf^|«r,  5.  379,  380;'  41.  20. 
41*,  4.92;  7.42.     .gal  39.  2,  5. 
«j»  <««•©,  declare,  speak  forth,  11.  23. 
n.  a  garment  : 

12.  9.     From 

tl.     See  .srr. 


I.  «/.  [§  160],  brandish,  cause  to  oscil- 
late, dance,  3.  106. 

With  cm#&»,   41.  29. 

<?«f*nia  (see  <?«*),  purify,  16.  33;  19.  10. 
.gc.*,  38.  13. 

II.  n. 

«J2anurtl©,  sport,   45.  13. 

•&«viL®,  powerful  impulse,  40.  31. 

^/7il®,  dancing,  50.  10. 

©^  <?£«/#=  aSaanuttl®,  Qurui,   23.  17. 

^,  I.  fern,  of  «^srr;  II.  from  ^®, 


,  n.  a  nail,  wedge,  4.  65. 
6^,  «.  a  male,  3.  134;  5.  115,  166; 

36.  25;  49.  37.     See^sn-.  * 

«g«*r|ai>io,  virility.     ^«BBr|oDioius3r,  6.  88. 
^saif,   35.  40. 

See 


I.  «.  a  year,  4.  26. 

^j«*r©ii  ^eshr®,  5.  296. 

II.  See  cgjsff-. 

4}j^u),   n.,  =  ^^n^  support,   31.  18; 
38.  9. 

Comp.  S.  ADHARA. 

,  n.  [S.  ADARAS],  desire,  4.  5. 
,  v.  [§  64  ;  S.  ADRI],  crave,  29. 

4,  &c. 

[K.],  n.  [S.  ADI,  ADYA,  ?  der.]t 
beginning,  2.  221  ;  3.  97  ;  4.  107; 

5.  285  (=and  others)  ;  7.  i  ;  18.  4; 
22.  24;  28.  15;  29.4;  49.  20. 

0i03=*tLt/j  friendship,  4.  46.     C?# 
fl,  p.  149,  line  5. 

9 


fl  [title  of  33]  = 
dedication. 

^,  «.  [S.  AMANDA],  rapture,  2 
106;  4.  i32;  5.  28i,&c.(5.viii); 
***•&>  39i  tS>'5Xi59i  19.  16;  22 

5,34,3«. 

In  comp.,  42.  5. 

«r^>  17.  7,  8.  «.*,*««*,,  8.  title 
*i  10.  n.    ^.^  17>  u< 

ff,  36.  I5> 

(p»  of  present  tense,  6.  84. 
T,  inter.,  12.  43,  67. 


I.  v.  a.  [§  57],  cull,  investigate,  27. 35 ; 
33.  31. 

H-  48^  4j{a0aw_.     See  «$  II. 
4ji|«>w/,  choice  flowers,  5.  ar.    ^j,,  19.  2O. 
III.  n.=fiiriu,  mother,  5.  185. 

n.  Vishnu,  5.  89.    [S.] 
A  a  thousand,  4. 199;  11.  3 ;  15.  37.  25  2? 

7.     Comp.  19.  5-8. 

I.  =dy/f,  <«y//k;,  ^(TjLD,  rare,  precious, 

«SC3r«to,  10.  67 ;  36.  39.     ^-TQP^,  27.  3. 

II.  2;.  «.  [§  57],  be  full,  3. 166;  5.  276; 
38.  5-8. 

Qutrpiri-,   7.  10.      Offrgtii,  16.  2  ;   19.  I. 

*«/,  1.  15;  16.  i.     GfiMf,  5.  276;  13.  71. 

y,£0ir(!;it>,  15.  I  j  40.  20. 

^/rfitfeuair,  I  bring  not  to  full  effect,  23.  ai. 

fffBTQitj  thick  clustering,  15.  2. 

Often  «gf  simply  fills  up  the  metre,'  1.  22. 
«gir,  3.  94  ;  45.  35.      wwiir,   16.  47. 
safai^atir^  5.  193.    Comp.  33.  33. 
^irif  =  Qfe&i'i  ,r0}  1.  16 ;  13.  70 j  45.35. 

III.  v.  [§  64],  shout,  fill ;  sound,  roar, 
bellow;   bind,  3.  142,  151;  4.  55; 
6.  31,  and  note;  7. 45, 47;  9.25,&c.; 

47.5. 

ttyifCiu $  evib     7,  47* 

TN.pron. inter,  =.uunn,er^jns&r,  Who? 
10.  5.  Used  for  all  persons  and 
numbers. 

=  ^)fniHujesr  [S.  ARYA],  a  guru, 
1.64;   2.  22. 

_  ff,  n.  Arur,  one  of  the   ancient 
capitals    of    the    £qra   kingdom, 


2.73;  4.147;  5.3*3;  6-10;  n-8- 

See  Periya  Puranam. 

ar  =  Qivan,   3D.  3.      This  lyric 
was  sung  there. 

rj*^,  n.  the  sea  :  'the  resounding,' 
18.6. 

/?a/u>,  «.  [in  K.],  affection,  32.  4,  5  ; 
45.  35- 

),  «g[«>/r«>a>  [S.  HALA,  HALAHALA], 

poison,  6.  200  ;  12.  30,3  1  ,  73  ;  13.4;. 
^&)ujLDt  n.  [S.  ALAYA],  a  habitation. 

<£«*•*,  27.  a.  See  «09«u*.  Comp.  .$•/*. 

I.  4|«»,  -g«>u>  [S.],  the  banyan  tree, 

Ficus  Indica,  \  2.  62,63,  77  ;  13.  49. 

£ivan  taught  under  it.    See  i6tb  and  33rd  of 


II.  ^A>,  a  case  ending. 

III.  ^«>,  a  redundant  particle,    17. 
8,&c. 

4«/,  ^^ff,  <wt  inter  j.  Oh!  Ah!  3.  165; 

5.  294;  11.  25.     Sec  -ft  and  «//r. 
C=^afi=«.t9/f,  «.  soul,  5.  87  ;  22.  5,  9; 

82.  20  ;  33.  25. 
c^tp.     Comp.  ^/ry,  Jt(yiji. 
*'-  [§  57],  sink  down,  1.  35;  4.  119; 

5.  77.  78,  3*3- 
=  e**ffu>t  discus  :  a  weapon  given 

by  £ivan  to  Vishnu  :  «/3br,  12.  69. 

Comp.  15.39;  %*•  24- 

/*,  sea,   i 
,  (i)  a  king,  »*«/«//£;  (a)Vi*hnn,7.3i; 


0.  n. 


I.  ».  a  person,  servant,  88.  5. 

4«rr0,  46.  37.    ^iiuO,  12.  46.    «•*,  48.  a  a. 
^•^•w^*/,  those  who  are  not  devotees,  85.  24. 

II.  7'.  [§  70],  rule  ;  take  for  one's  own  ; 
use,  1.3;  8.55;  46.8. 

4«MSO«r«ln_r6,  8.  63;  5.  91,  a8l  (fassim). 
^•m-r^r.  2.  40  ;  40.  4,  8,  &c. 
4«fch^6*<g,  '  to  Thee  who  didst  make  me  Thine* 
[Pope's  A'tilaji,  p.  xxi  ;  grammatical  note  on 
G.  9.s],  6.  203. 

,  exercise  love,  19.  7. 
,  ruler,  18.  ai  ;  43.  34.    Comp.  30, 

ir,  45.  I  a.      .^A-r/**,  21.  26. 


,  ;/.  method,  way. 


I.  [=4J,  from 

10 


1.  25;  5.  225-228;  7.  31;  22.  12  ; 
45.  12;  51.  4,  &c. 
f^fer  41*,  He,  so  manifold,  9.  4;  as,  as  much 
as,  85.  4,  &c. 

II.  «.  river,  2.  106  ;  4.  81  ;   5.  2«N ; 
.  14,  16. 

>t,  6.  9. 

f>ru>  for  .gjy  [see  <?*rf],  'way,'  1-44- 

But  ?*rf>f*. 

iyp,  i'.  bear,  sustain  :  pfl. 

pfSHuG***  [<g  +  fi|*i],  L' . 

(^Cp*,  I  cannot  endure,  1.  85 ;  3.  34  ;  :• 

84.  30 

)<*U<A,  overpowering  delight,  •• 
».,  •4HMM>,  strength,  2.  103 ;  5 
•-*,  a  snstaincr,  44.  24. 

vfitit.    See  w*0u). 

',  2'«  [§  7°].  move,  remove. 
',  steadfast  wisdom,  ^ 
Kamb.  Rim.  I.  iv.  70:  49*  «ri^P-«-,  in  the 
atmling  mansion. 

n.  an  elephant,  -1.  i  i  ;  •">.  1^1  ; 
6.  8  j ;  8.  79.     Sec  oj/r8«r. 
y*.    See* 

i,  from  4**<p,  moreover,  8.  28.    See  4*. 


g)«J>,  n.  [S.  i  HA],  this  world,  6. 

48.  76.     Opp.  to  uo u>. 
£§)<fifp,  r.  contemn,  4.  7; 

a2.    Opp.  to 


I.  ;/.  [S.  YA<PAS],  sound,  3. 
**  +  £••*,  20.  13. 

II.  =g)«Dcu,   v.    [5§  57,    64],    make 
melody,  chaunt,  harmonize,  com- 
bine, resemble,  3. 35 ;  4.  209 ;  7. 50 ; 
9.  2;  19.  23. 

»,  2.  39. 

, n. [S.  ICHCHH], 5. 322 ;  H..H- 

j§)/_,  v.  [§66],  (i)dig,  delve  down. 

Cjrafc®,  0*,  jj«i»,  4. 7  (as  a  boar) ;  8.  i ;  1 

(2)  Dig  out,  12.71;  15.  38. 

fltii-A»  for  fl«^*,  14.  7. 

(5, ;/.  straitness,  compression.  1 . 
84.     [Or 


J>  [S.  RISHABHA],  etistDu.,  <sjvu  12 
58,  60. 

5)/__£i,  left  side;  place,  6.  65;  51.  u. 

SMjQ«-dr,  take  up  one's  abode,  22.  20,  40. 

k-/f,  n.  affliction,   4.  101  ;  38.  21  ; 
49.  23. 

S)«-W«_*,  24.  14;  26.  26. 

_,  v.  [§  64],  pound ;  shatter,  3.  85 ; 
9.  4,  &c.     Comp.  ^>/Lf-,  941.,  e_sa>i_. 

j§)®,  */.  [S.  DA,  DHA],  give,  put,  place, 
33.  32. 

®*gy4,  though  he  is,  12.  3.    Often  =  a?®,  u®. 
As   an   auxiliary   =0?®,  5.  254,  255-   24    30- 
49.  3,  8. 

'^j-,  'included,'  12.  31. 


I.  =g)«-a>,  place,  3.  81. 

Sign  of  locative,  and  even  of  instrumental  case  = 

with,  in. 

*mt^«ni_,  in  the  wild,  6.  97;  24.  31. 
4^aw_,  thereupon,  3.  83;  4.  137-141. 
J)sot_iuj«!r,  who  is  in  the  centre  of,  34.  16. 

usurp  jdaou.,  26.  1,2. 
II.    =/F®,  iO^^,   LD^LUU)^    4.   37. 

g)s»5i_iosr^j-r,  a  town  in  the  £6ra  country,  on  the 

south  bank  of  the  Kaveri,  2.  75  ;  4.  145  ;  13. 

7,  8;  16.  ii  ;  88.36;  43.  7. 

The  sage  went  to  this  place  after  U.  K.  M. 

[Vatha.  Pur.  v.  28].   See  Vithya  Vinothini  Series, 

Pattanattu-Pillaiyar,  pp.  73-129.     The  IOQS&O  (or 

<°<5&)  tree  (Terminalia  Alata)  is  in  S.  ARJUNA  ; 

and  hence  the  name  of  the  town  has  been  rendered 

in  S.  MADHYARJUNAM.    See  also  «o0£<s.    In  the 

G>«r/ri5  twelve  lyrics  are  in  praise  of  this  shrine, 

six  by  Sambandhar  ,  five  by  Navukkara9ar,  and  one 

by  Sundarar,  pp.  418-434.     It  would  seem  some 

special  experience  was  connected  with  this  visit. 

Jj)aoi_Cuir,  be  interposed,  introduced  between, 

4.34- 

,    32.  29. 

,  unintermitting,  4.  64;  5.  43. 
glsm-y,^,  n.  impediment,  33.  27;  45.  22. 

III.  n.  the  female  waist,  4.  33;  7.  61  ; 
U.  35- 

©soi^/rar,  24.  25  ;  33.  6  ;  49.  43. 

x*S«jrso/?«Di_,  9.  49. 

^)il@,  adj.  small,  delicate. 

7.  6l. 


,  root  with  notion  of  'agree- 
ment :  ' 
II 


,  v,  have  union  with,  5.  qoo  • 
13.26;  41.34. 

«w*®,  n.  comparison,  80.  a. 
S,  unmingled,  22.  14. 


I.  n.  a  pair,  13.  i  ;  20.  i  ;  41.  3,  &c. 

^roflW,   16.  5.     •fpiJtar,  5.  286  ;  33.  33. 
iflsu/r^uSaiwr,  4.  9,  77;  22.  36;  41.  27. 

n-  »•  [§§  57,  64],  31.;;  41.25. 

®2aw|tl4,  equality,  3.  46. 

J§te">,  ®^«"^,  a  corr.  of  Qgfiuu*,  from 
S.  HRIDAYA,  heart,  2.  139. 
,  ».  lip,  9.  54;  41.  22. 
,  ».  a  fig-tree,  4.  163. 

,s  for  Sisap,    26.  26. 

ln&r  [S.  INDRA],  eurreorsusor,    L/CT/J 

BT,    8.13;    9.IOJ    13.58;    20.5. 

*^aD*,  the  east,  of  which  Indra  is  guardian. 
PMl  [  =  S.  INDRA-  JALA,  juggling],  2.  43  ; 
49.  23. 

%?  [S.  INDU],  the  moon,  13.  14. 

)isS>@airiosxd)t  ^ivan,   49.  56. 

)*£)Aui4,  ».  organ  of  sense,  81.  I. 
)*^)/fliu[ijlups!na;  [S.  INDRIYA],  senses—  birds  of 
prey,  15.  55. 


,  n.  Mount  Himalaya,  2.  140. 
.  HiMAVAN],the  personified 
Himalayas,  9.  50. 

[N.],  the  twinkling 


jn-  — 
of  an  eye. 

taarnijQuTQfgiib,  even  for  an  instant,  1.  2. 

iaoin(?iu«vf,  5.  65,  98;   16.  14;  22.  21. 
vmaiutar,  5.  137;  38.  25. 

i>u/f,  «.,  9.  67.     See  &.tiujr. 
jDGtsw,  n.  this  world,  9.  31;  37.  12. 
See  SWIG. 
Dgj,  #.  walk,  abide,  43.  44. 

$u&Qioirt,  meaning  here  unknown,  may  \xfemale 
demons,  30.  25. 

\iuu2Lj,  v.  [§  62],  utter  sounds ;  tell, 
say,  declare,  3.  147;  5.  36;  7.  29; 

12.58,74,78;  19-21,30;  20.19; 

49.  47 ;  50.  4. 

£uu>,  «.  any  musical  instrument,  49. 

47.      [For  eunff&UJti  —  S.  VADYAM.J 
((Uioj-sors*  =  a-iSr  [S.  VAJAMANA  and  YAMANA], 

life,  soul,  lord,  1.  36;  5.  252. 
*•,  14.  40. 


I.  n.  nature,  8.  j  i  j  ;   9.  5  ;  36.  36  ; 
38.  1  8. 

@ttj|<a>|(_/,  «.  essential  property,  —  so 
£ivan  is  to  all  that  has  life,  2.  24, 
140;  12.45  20.  22;  41.5,25;  43. 
32;  49.  43  :  with  only  one  vesture, 
2.77. 

II.  v.t  49.  41,  49. 

JHlJM,  habitude,  2.  33  ;  12.  80. 

,  v.  [§  57],  agree,  unite,  9.  71. 
For 


«£C*»«i6,  &*«*,  12.  36. 
,  M.  two,  5.  196.    See  00,  *'. 

n.  Kavanan,  18.  57.    See  14.  55-57; 


18.6. 

§)j,  v.  beg,  5.  22;  22.  20,  21  ;  47.  38. 

A*  |*0,  p.  hare  mercy,  07  oat,  5.  307;  6.  199; 
•Jl    15,  34;  88.  13;  84.37. 

,  n.  the  sun,  7.  70. 
,  g)ff<r  [S.  RA].  20.  19;  27.  35;  33. 
34  ;  34.  9%     Comp.  ®<3«r. 

to/return*,  7.  4. 

)/f/,  f.  /r.  and  i»/r.  flee  away,  perish, 
8.70;  15.55.  Sec  N. 


HI. 


I.  <&#.  form  of  g)ff«r®.     See  »/f. 

£O|OP  -  JT^,  «*,  8.  79.    Comp.  8.  17. 
A0|*H  in  both  directions,  6.  33,  33. 
fry*"*,  a  doable  state  ;  two  worlds,  present  and 
future,  4.  15. 

II.  ®(5">,  adj.  great. 

,  86.  16.    *o*9"*,  7 
,  7.  48.    Aa**-*,  48.  63. 

,  4.  139.     Jjfapturw**,  2.  69. 

5,  t>.  [§  60],  be. 
,  thon  art,  21.  n. 

,*!.  cause  to  remain,  hoard,  5.  373;  80.  10. 
>,  4.  37  ;  82.  36. 

[S.  RIG],  the  Rig-Veda;  any 
mystic  chaunt,  20.  13. 

>,  n.  [S.  HRID],  heart,  4.  84. 
Comp.  ^fu>,  ®jfuuo. 

,  n.  iron,  5.  86  ;  23.  15  ;  38.  i. 

,  adj.  of  iron,  5.  317. 

«r,  darkness,  2.  123;  4.  18;  6.  68; 
9.  78;  19.  19;  20.5;  22.io;  26.  37. 

12 


I.  «.  prey,  ravenous  birds  of  prey, 
15.55;  21.  1  8. 

II.  v.  [§  64],  roar,  hiss,  9.  55. 
@)&>sQfiij>  [S.  LAKSHITAM].   what  is 

characterized,  48.  25. 
@o>]«/(5  =  a9«r«7(5,    t;.   shine,    appear 
conspicuous,  4.  91;  5.  365;  9.  30; 
13.67;  l-">.7;  16.7. 

,  n.  [S.  LANKA],  Ceylon,  18.  6;  43.  19. 

,  n.  a  leaf. 

,  the  three-pronged  javelin  : 
6.36 

89.  5. 


I.     .  not  :  @«ar. 
S>G»,J>,  7.  36.    fi*|«.r,  22.  i'.. 
ft*<V).  thou  art  not,  2i' 
A~K  82.  6.    «*/9,  88.  10. 


II.  g)«»,  ^A)A>U>,  //.  a  house  :  ^t&a- 
66;  42.  15. 

•*»^»  (**•»). 

aji«f«MA,  making  their  bodies  Thy  home,  ' 
-J^_*,  22.  jo. 

III.  Case  ending,  §§  : 

A«*»  '  —  less  person;'  but  also  ~  '  lets,'  •"• 

1J.  10,  M  ;  -I    ift;    I'.t.  3: 


«f  ,  so  that  grace  abound,  21.;. 
Pi  a  root  w'1^  '^ca  °^  'de-scent.'] 
.^  '/,«/.  [§  66],  lose,  4.  74;  23.  2. 


[^  64].  disgrace,  degrade,  =u$, 
5.  i,  260,  261. 

II.  v.  [§  57],  descend,  embark  on; 
go  down  into;  perish;    =@/p«/(5, 

fi)rf|«,2-98;  5-3°;  1H-  J«;  19- 

15  ;  24.  14  ;  47.  35.     Opp.  to  ejjp. 

§!)$\fi(!5>  V-  intr.  pass  away,  5.  30. 
Comp.  a/I  [S.  Ri], 

(j£l<3S)L£,  n.  thread  ;  jewel ;  lady.   Sec 
N.  andK.;  G.  162. 

<?«/«BJP,  a  lady  adorned  with  seemly  jcwc 
it,  &c. 

QfiSm>if,  9.  54. 


(for— aSfr. 


'.  tender,  young,  §  1  3  1  ./ 

(with  Qaidr),    4.   34;    5.  2IOJ    14.  13. 
,    19.  j.      §leir^eflr)   5.  135. 

,  v.  /«/r.  [§  56.  Ill],  tire,  grow 
weary,  1.  31. 

)p>  v-  [§  66]/pass  away;  surpass; 
die,  1  .  24  ;  4.  j  24  ;  47.  24  ;  transcend, 
5-  T53>  173;  26.  3. 

flA>|«n/,  «.  death,  5.  45,  95;  41.  13,  21. 
@>p\%  n.  death,  37.  24. 

,  v.  [§  68],  ®a>  +  jz7.     See  s^. 

®/&|sgi,   14.  56,  57. 

g)jy|P  [  =  <yii9.ai}  ^fih}  rp],  1.41;   3.  54;  5. 

372;  20.  29. 

&wn,  v.  [§  56],  5.  16  ;  10.  78  ;  34. 
4;  38.  19. 


I. 


.  v.  [§  64],  irrigate,  15.  50. 

king:    ,£3sva/g5r,   1.  5  ;    2.  96,  144; 

4. 102;  5.  7 ;  34. 19 ;  36. 14;  47.  18. 
III.  n.  the  fold  of  a  garment,  5.  227. 
®&>F\&#,  pay  homage,  1.  22;  5. 5,  6; 

7.  18  ;  16.  39. 

muggi,   6.  167. 

(or  e&As»),  thus,  5.  134. 

-o,  «.  kind,  sort,  race,  species. 

5(25"©*>W0.   7.  4Q.      «u6obr£$Lcsnfi    9    07 

',  yet,  hereafter,  5.  107,  327. 

T.     See  .jySsar,  srSsBT. 
r,  such  an  one,  5.  86. 

'ssr.     See  g$60. 

an,  non-existence,  5.  58,  298  ;  22.  26  ;  28. 

15  J   38.  30  :   Opp.  to  «-6Birj(SiD(o,     f£D&i,  a-sir.] 

,  **•  o^y,  37  • 
<°yssrL$esres>in}   10.  13,  49. 

II.  ^|)ssr,  a  euphonic  and  connective 
particle,  §  22. 

III.  g)s5r,  sweet :  {jftesft. 

\ff,  sweetly,  2.  145;  15.  2. 
saT-jua),  ^eart-i,  n.  pleasure,  1.  1 6,  70; 
3.122;  5.285;  9.78;  19.i9;  22.4; 
86.9-13.     See  Qua. 

eisri-isi,   49.  25.      g)GJr| aeosu,  3.  25. 

OT-lssflan^  sweet-voiced,  20.  13. 

rarJOTQ/j^  27.  15. 

i,  yet,  5.  316;  7.  13,  22. 

,  5.  1 60.      ^DairgviOj  27.  3. 
13 


&*<?„,  this  day,  1.  3a  ;  88.  10;  46  37 

And  see  fi)A). 
In  verbal  terminations  for  g>  or  &»*. 

FT- 
IT'. 

L  ^[§571,^6,5.275;  8.53;  14. 

49  5  34.  8. 

II.  ».afly,  6.  181;  25.  9. 
*«%>  here,  2.  129.     [g)^.] 
FF&Gsffdiu!*,*,  n.  a  town  with  a  £ivan 

shrine,  2.84;  4.  158. 

See  Devaram,  p.  332,  one  nymn  by  Sambandhar. 


> 

own],  owner,  Lord,  1.  1  1  ;   2.  25  • 
3.  46;   4.102;  5.201,308,309! 

7-  3  ;  8.  45. 

/F^(CT)/f,    7.  8. 

ff®,  ».,  from  g)©,  equivalent,  result, 
retribution,  40.  9,  34. 


I.  adv.  here,  thus  ;  much,  2.  14,  39. 

II.  v.  intr.  crowd,  join,  press  together, 

2.  144;  4.  27;  36.  21. 

*»  =  &#,  5.  308  ;  7.  4. 
/=T/f. 

!•  —^>&>  v.  [§  64],  draw  both  ways, 

3.  99  ;  6.  32  ;  38.  i. 

II.  =^(75,  two,  4.  2  ;  14.  4. 
/F/f<s(aj,  ;/.  a  straw,  4.  34. 
/Fj2/=(3oif<a/,  «jjf^u>,  «.  end,  4.  u,  211  ; 
5.279;  16.13522.4;  28.15.  From 


),  n.  defect.     fpenruSti),  complete, 
perfect,  4.  14. 
ar,  2;.  [§  56.  (Ill)],  produce,  47.  17. 


=&_©;),  z/.  /«/r.  [§68],  =e8@u>i-it 
p,  delight  in;  accept,  szsu,  2.  68; 

7.35;  8.81,88;  12.33-35,5708; 

18.25;  21.9;  27.23;  27.5,26. 

n.s\iji-l  =  iDG>lji*8,  n.,  11.  1  8. 

f  =  /F<SLD,  «.  nail,  claw,  18.  54  ;  43. 


5*. 


,  v.  {§  57],  fall  off,  pour  down, 
drip,  5.  142;  48.  5. 
<3»<s  =  Qfffsxpg!,  v.  [§  64],  urge  on, 
30.  15. 

fffft£  =  v-tuiTff8,  n.  [S.  UCHCHA],  the 
crown  of  the  head. 

fjfti,  those  on  whose  heads  rests  .  .  .  ,  38.  14. 
tii-i,  atrium,  0iF0u>t  QiDtLit  n. 

body,  4.  6I;  5.  255;  15.  41  1  22. 
20,  40  ;  23.  7,  21,  22  ;  28.  19  ;  33. 
7,25;  34.  22,  38;  51.  21. 

,  v.  afflict,  13.  31. 
*,  together.     [#®,  9®.] 
,  60.  ao.    See  93*9. 
,  accompany,  6.  aio;  24.  a. 

,,   2.  130.      &J-4*«M,  2.   131. 

a.®,  v.  [§  64],  invest,  clothe,  5.  28,  1  60. 


I  .  ;/.  possession  [C.  OPE|YA,  M.  upAJYAN, 
T.  OPA|YADU,  equivalent  to  S 


As  a  particle,  18.  33-36.     In  49.  40  governs 

r,  49.  48. 

sr,(  i  )owner,  master,  5.  9,  220, 
fai;  I1-',  i  '    .">l.i  9,49.  Corr.to^ar. 
(2)  one  possessed  of,  5.  222. 

In  24  throughout  we  find  Voc.  »**-ut*  !  -  O 
master!  4.  no;  88.  i. 

«.«>i_|<u/r«r   [  =  S.  l^VARl],   mistress, 
7.  61;  21.  i. 

$    l84],    47.43. 
r,  6.  384,  385.     9(s~t-ur+,  47.  39. 

|oou>,  w.  possession,   7.  11. 
32.  25. 
1  1  .  n.  a  garment  :  ^o>i-,  1  2.  45.    [«-®.] 

•JVt-AjM*,    6.  3. 

III.  v.  [§  57],  be  broken,  10.  7;  24.  21. 
«-/-!.     See  fi-or. 

B.  6otr|<*  @  =  eupjpp&jt.  d  ry  and  withered 
condition,  30.  3. 

>,  v.  yearn  for,  5.  298. 
T,  ?'.  [§  57  ;  N.  «-«r],  feel,  per- 
ceive, understand,  know,  5.  139,  165, 
228;  7.20;  11.  i;  20.2i;  22.12,13; 
41.  30. 

+.fart\tg!,  T-.  cam.  [K.l,  teach,  22.  u;  32.  27. 

"4 


.€oert\*ii  understanding,  8.  49  ;  -1.  1 10,  124  ; 
8.91;  11.  71;  21.9;  22.  12,  13. 
,  perception,  8.  na. 

265. 

I-  v.  [§  56.  (Ill)],  eat;  suffer,  5. 160, 
164;  7.  66  (imbibe);  12.30,31;  19. 
74;  23.  ii ;  32.  25. 

Forms  a  passive,  6.  105,  &c. 
•.«*r|u«P,  alms,  10.  7. 
•.otrtarf  in  34  is  '  one  who  is  consumed.' 

8^caijqL  =  a-688r6y,  food,  23.  5. 
II.  «-««r,  ».«8br®,  «j.68br€a)u).     See  c_«r. 
«i.«iircDi_  (from  «-<3©),w.  a  sphere,  3.  i . 
ft.^ojti,  n.  [S.  UDAYA],  rising. 

4  The  light  of  the  dawn,'  20.  5. 
'The  mount  where  the  sun  rises:  the  eastern  kill,' 
20.  10. 

*.0ou>=.QiLiireofi,  n.  [S.  UDAKA],  womb, 

4.  13. 

,  v.  a.  [§  64],  kick,  spurn. 

9.  70. 
a>  [S.  UD  +  TAMA]. 

,  'the  best  one,'  6.  8,  9;  15. 

KiGDs,  2. 48,  220 ;  f>.  i  20  ; 
16;  17.  21:  1'.'.  i:.  Sec  introduc- 
tion to 

.  ^  was  the  first  place  he  was  sent  t«.  Yfithaviirar 
1'ur.  iv.  93,  v.  a6. 

-jjraf)t  i>.  besmear:  y«,  H. 
- V»  v.  skip  ;    push   away,   10.  37 ; 
spring  forth,  rise,   10.  60  ;  12.  40  ; 

43.371  46.6;  47 

f,  14.    See  note. 

u),  n.  [S.  UPAYA],  means,  sti 
gem,  26.  14. 

&.6B>u>,    K-GDiAtuiT&r,    ;/.,    SutnQlpeS,    the 

goddess  Umai,  2.  142;  f».  II 
12 ;  33.2  ;34.  i ;  42. 18.  [See  Muir.] 
/f,  ;/.  the  gods  ;  paradise ;  above, 

5.  243,  255,  264;    6.   99;    37.   i. 

{§}u>L//f,  C^a//?,  Qp&trupeS,  Qtceo. 
jbui rttr  =  (Jivan,  5.  330,  a68  ;  42.  34. 

J,  root  with  idea  of 'uprising.' 
I.  e_f/*/,  t'./r.and  «.  [$§  57, 64],  escape, 
live;  save,  release,  1.  33;  2.  ^ 
205;  5.  107,306;  7.  44;  14.  10 ;  16. 


27;  20.38;  33.9;  36.  17;  37.  14 
16;  38.  23;  47.  10;  49.  10;  51.  ig 

[s-iua^Qfesr  for  a-tu/FCJsSesr],  27. 

II.  aju/f,  z;.  [§  57],  be  lofty,  rise  high 
2.  146;  3.ii5;  5.62, 

«ju*|Ap,  z;.  ram.  [§§  62,  1  60],  raise,  5.  39. 

III.  a_H&f  ,  «.  life,  soul,  spirit,  breath 

air  («j  0«  element}  —  <j£\uw 
sr],  3.  2;    4.  1  80;    5.  278,  279 
8.  91;  11.  71;  15.  17,41;  34.22. 

«-«Jr  a-rabrssofl,   34.  title.      See  a-esar. 

a-*,  ?A  a.  [§  64],  revive,  excite,  breathe  out. 
tL.MiJLj,  8.  22;  47.  10  ;  49.  9. 

a),  n.  a  mortar,  9.  13,  21,  33. 


I.  «.  property,     [^ifi-emu*,  §  131.] 
^-iflQiudr,  5.  206,  383,  390  ;  44.  5. 

II.  n.  bark,  skin:  Qpit&>,  IB  nit,  3.  32; 
6-  95,  195;  9-  7°- 

III.  v.  [§  64],  strip  off  skin,  4.  97  ; 
6.76;  11.33;  13.35,73- 

s9L(75,  either  S.  URAS  =  strong,  or  the 
Tamir  form  of  S.  RUPA=a  form. 
See  g-tgisuu),  e_(5Q/.  Comp.  SL^. 

=-(54^  =  having  taken  a  visible  form  [G.  93],  40 
4  ;  44.  1-4. 

In  22.  6.  iv.  there  are  two  readings,  *-#<?«/  and 
3I®Q*>.  Ellis  (p.  33)  prints  the  latter.  In  the 
former  the  sense  would  be  :  '  These  are  the 
sensible  forms  behind  which  thou  dost  hide 
Thy  form  ;'  and  in  the  latter  :  '  Thou  hast  no 
form,  but  liest  hid  in  these,'  2.  66;  18.  5,  9, 
345  36.  4. 

«9W8ff<y|««a,  in  form  of  fire,  2.  92  ;  15.  47;  47.  40. 

&<3<y®,  35.  7. 

o-<S*QsireiarGl,  assuming  a  visible  form,  as  guru, 
2.  64,  66;  36.  n. 

a-GT«u*^;,  11.  2,  18. 

'  in  form  not  understood,' 


31.9. 


n-  melt>  4-  6l  i  5-  44, 
z;.  a.  melt,  5.  230  ;   36.  3  ; 

38.  i. 

6y,  «.  [S.  RUPA],  a  form, 

J.  93J  4.  96;  10.27;  11-3;  22.33. 

Comp.  a_(^. 

3|«?,z'.[§62]>  penetrate,  passthrough, 

4.7;  3.  88;  28.  6,15,35;  51.  26. 

T5 


.  [Muir 

iv.  299,  &c.] 

Most  of  the  Sanskrit  epithets  applied  to  Rudra 
are  adapted  in  the  Tamil  to  Qivan. 
^,  n.  a  thunderbolt,  35.  33. 
,  w.  intr.  [§  56.  (Ill)],  roll,  5. 


explain,  declare,  ].  20;  11.  23  •  19 

6,14;  22.12;  28.  3;  33.  19;  48.  4.' 
II.  n.  word,  speech:  &*£&,  ^^QD^ 

4.69,  124;  22.  12;  31.  19. 
tVn'u&miidt  n.  [S.  ROMAN],  4.  83; 

8.  22;  27.  23. 

&.&),  v.  [§  66],  die,  cease,  diminish, 
5.  212,213;  7.39;  32.3. 

,  ceases  not  to  be  chaunted,  7.  39. 


, 

tears   of  endless   rapture,    17.  2  ; 
31.  34. 

.aj(5,  ».  [S.  LOKA],  world,  4. 
1  25;  9.  21,  22  520.36;  28.  4;  48.  14. 

nrrotnstb,  50.  U.      ^.tuCaaxS,  8.  41. 

-«•*,  4.  36;  13.  18;  34.  37.     *.«,«•/,  26.  13. 

j<s<s33«,  n.  a  pestle,  9.  13,  21,  33. 
^  av,  z;.  move  [comp.  S.  HVAL],  16. 
49-54  J  38.  3.  See  e-su/ra/  and  (jsuey. 

gsua/)  waz;,?.     £D(9ex,«,,  abiding  OTW^. 
sua/,  accompany. 
ngeua/,  fragrance  is  wafted. 
c7@6ua/,  swelling  MraJ. 

f  ,  %  [§  60],  dry  up  ;  pine,  32.  3. 
,  z;.  howl,  5.  87.     See 


aLfti/ri6  =  a.sura;ifl;  35.  15,  21,  22,  33. 

£jofl  o.<wrEi8s&resai  —  those  whose  eyes  are  filled 
with  (tear)-drops,  41.  27. 

-.Q&>!rarruj£drt  an  atheist,  4.  56. 

[S.  LOKAY  ATA  =  prevalent  in  the  world.  Sar- 
va-dar9ana-sangraha,  Cowell  and  Gough, 
(Triibner),  p.  2.] 

2L61/,  v.  [§  66],  delight  in,  19.  36  ; 
28.  1  1  ;  47.  44.     See  a.*. 

jr  [S.  UPA-MA],  Similitude,  5. 
153;  26.  i. 

6.  6l.     = 


,  n.  twigs  and  sprays,  11.  65. 
e_a//r,  n.  [S.  YUVA],  fulness. 

•L«if|*|*t_*i  =  thc  swelling  sea,  3.  169. 

&-LpSti,  v.  [§56.  Ill],  wander,  5.  212; 

11.43;  26-  65  33-  H- 
e-t^,  place. 

«-<^<j,  wander,  5.  a8,  29.  «IP«I,  £A  (See  *«•*<.) 
In  5.  31  «-t0  =  «««S. 

,  z>.  [§  60],  plough,  cultivate. 

j,  w.  cultivation.    «-to«<',  cultivators,  3.  94. 
*,  w.  a  tiger,  5.  a8 ;  36.  29. 
&.«»(?,  v.  [§  64],  suffer,  6.  1 80  ;  33.  2. 

*-t*lfifl<3<2it*Q*>*,  6.  18 1. 

n.er/?,3.I27.  (jpfiD/ju^ofljduly.  Seea-ar. 
*-©>  v.  [§  64],  be  decayed,  worm- 
eaten,  26.  25. 

a^Diy,  unsoundness,  16.  a  a. 

fi-3s»r,  t;.  [§  57],  suffer,  perish,  3.  i.',o  ; 

14.  2.     Comp.  ft-a>,  a-enif . 
a_sfr,  a  root  signifying  'existe; 

reality,  residence  within/  =  jy<«u>. 

In  comp.  often  becomes  *-±i  or  a.«*r. 

I.  An  adverb  or  preposition.     Sign 
of  ;th  case=*«r,  5.  138;   8.  37  ; 
22.  2;  40.  i.   Anotfierform  is  «.«#, 

a.  127. 

Doubtful  in  *.*  Jfer,  deeds  inhering. 
•j^Qur0+,  esoteric  meaning,  12. 61;  51.  27. 
•-*WMi_,  including,  18.  31. 
•-CuQ,  p.  [(  64],  bring  under,  28.  6. 
•oiiyij,  enter  in,  81.  9.     •.*•«*,  8.  7,  37. 
•-»,  things  within,  6.  139. 
•.*<;•«*,  '  I  think  not,'  5.  8 ;   or  '  I  am 
within,'  6.  7. 

II.  «_ir|£$,  r.  think,  =  *-caerfft   Afar, 
cr«r£p,  5.  8;  10.  61. 

III.  tar |<5  =  tar®,    5.  221;    8.  37; 

22. 

IV.  C-fi»rarLD  (e.«ru>)  =  jjTtftc,  mind,   1. 
33;  2.7;  3.112,121;  4. 61;  5. 161, 
221;  6.55;  8.  10;  21.  9;  35.  15; 
86.4,  II. 

V.  e-«ar |®,  ft-orar  [G.],  there  is,  there- 
are,  that  are,  5. 1 13,  165, 167;  6.92, 
93;  22.2;  33.24;  30.17;  48.4,5- 

Opp.    tO  £j}€X>. 

VI.  «-«W|«DU>,  ;/.   existence,  reality: 

OuKUfiBU),    5.   58,   298,  306,   312,    369, 

370  ;  38.  30.     Opp.  to 
16 


(s?(5,  V.  [§  62],  slumber  profoundly. 

•_/>|4«ii,  «.  slumber:  &**>l>,  7.  31. 

e-/D|e/,  w.  relationship,  4. 181 ;  22.  32; 
35.  33;  40.  i ;  42.  27.    For 


I.  v.  [§  68],  suffer,  1.  32;  10.  37,  &c.; 
26.  33- 

-  «-®,  be,  combine,  unite  with,  5.  298  ;  89.  9. 

Whom  all  may  gnin,  2.  20  ;  8.  55. 

=  Quf<3*£i,  5.  179;  6.  92. 
e_/£>/Dffl//f,  3.  129. 
8-/r>(2?/?,  7.  40  ;  39.  9. 

mJnmtfpA  ^pp,  so  that  I  may  gain  union  \vith 

thyself,  6.  360  ;  7.  24. 
*<3f9,  fire  pervading  water,  '2*2.  30,  31. 

In   comp.  with   other   verbs,   <y«*<api*   for 

<y>«*O<i,    15.  3. 
•-/>•  m_,  2.  12;  61.  10.     mt*Bif>  «  ^j»,  22. 

II.  <M)'.  intense,  great.     Comp.  a-cj. 

«.,*•«,  6.  8a;  6.9;  29.  22;  89 

III.  =e.«rar,  2.  143;  22.31.    Opp.  to 


/,  a.  member  ;  the  body,  5.  213. 

IV.  v.  ;/.  [§  64],  be  firm. 

,  «.  assurance;  benefit.  ^S.  i  i  ; 
33.  2. 


I.;/.[frome.^>],ashcath,36.i5;  47.  1  1. 
II.  7'.  ////r.  [§  57],  dwell,  22  and  28  ; 
passim. 
•J-P(*J*),  8.  127;  18.  10;  84.3,  7,  1  1,  15,23,  31, 

35. 
«j»^ey*,  a  dwelling. 

B_G8T   (9.€irgg)t  v.  [§  62],  meditate. 
See  fi-«BBr. 

*j*art,mfut  hard  to  be  comprehended,  7.  25  ; 
16.37;  1".  »;  l8-3°- 

>>^u>,    «.    [S.    UN-MATTA,    UD  + 

MAD],  5.  28;  17.  39,  frenzy;  32.  1  1  ; 
34.  10.    See 


rsu>, ;/.,  ($puj/p&,  energy,  3.  24.  [K.] 
*•**,  n.  a  swing,  16;  41.  29. 

I.  v.  [§  62],  =.i3enisj(5,  LJ&),  feign  aver- 
sion, sulk,  28.  n.  Comp.  K.,  ch. 
131-133;  N.  222. 


II.  //.  =  eLen-jorji/,  what  is  within. 

fGf,  'in  my  inmost  soul,'  5.  44. 

-GT«V,  penetrate,  pass  through,  28.  6. 
/£»,  pierce,  42.  34. 

L®,  z;.  feed  with,  supply,  6.  20;  37. 
33.     Causal  from  e_«ar,  §  160. 
Bsr,  «.  food,  12.45;  16.28.  [taw.] 
,  v.  [S.  VA  ;  see  «,/»/],  breathe, 
10.  4,  8,  &c. 
r^sK^,  «.  filth,  excrement,  25.  13. 

[Comp.  S.  CRIDH. 


aerrjT. 

I.  n.  town  :  eutrifujs;},  5.  212 ;  16.  4 ;  ]  9. 

9-12;  39.  9;  47.44. 
•sri  tar/?,  <  from  town  to  town,'  5  n. 

fatgrti,    5.   222.       ear/f^,    5.  347. 

Ir-  ^  [§57],  ride,  mount,  19.  22,  24. 
«\&,  n.  a  vehicle,  that  which  con- 
veys, 2.  123;  5.  250;  =ass.ir@ujirsar 
8.  50. 

:LP,  n.  eternity,  eternally,  3.  86. 

^yJ,  3.  9;  4.  8.    esr^Qfl^tM,  from  eternity,  15.  51. 
tuttfOfjlamtir,  'He  who  is  from  eternity,'  7.  32. 

V  In    5.  3  I    H_yS  =  «ffiryS. 


I.  ?.  gush  out:   *irt  1.47;    5.  114; 
7.i8;  18.22;  23.i;  49.63.     See 


rjj«oti(?i_,  honey  gushing  out,  6.  43. 

,  ;/.  a  fountain,  3.  121. 
II.  11.  injury. 

esrtDeut,  4.  2O  :     =  g&aDL-tygiih  u^^io. 

[gHsrutb  L,$  =  sorrow  and  shame  ?] 

«D/p=^(jafffia>*;  perhaps  for  s^szoj. 


,  '  foul  me/  37.  i. 

i,  ».  [S.  UNA],  defect,  2.  105: 


Ssv^  infinitely  various,  4.  12. 

sr,  n.  flesh,  5.  58,  230,  379;  meat. 
10.7;  15.io;  the  body,  8.  91;  11. 
7i;  37.34. 

sarl^/,^  dwell  in  a  human  body. 
5.  58. 


j  8.  23. 


v,  34.  38 

;    13.  iH;  31.  10. 


E/^,  where  ?  5.  236. 

e*,  everywhere,  7.  29  ;  50.  63. 
«r  [S.  YAJ],  the  offerer.  8.  86;  12. 
19;  13.14,59;  15.43: 


>  others;  or  'the  sacrificers,'  88.  15. 

}  v.  be  deficient,  3.  76. 

«***,  ».,  saop,  deficiency,  84.  33. 
6T®,  «;.  [§  64]  take  up  ;  present,  offer 
7.56;  9.i7,i8;  28.3. 


I.  »•  eight,  5.  196.    See  CTSWT. 

II.  v.  reach  up  to,  1.  22;  41.  35. 


I.  n.  number  ;  thought,  regard,  1.  24; 
*5'  33=  <J'n  piteous  case,'  or  're- 
nowned in  story,'  20.  36.     [er&r.] 

*•*!«£*,  numberless,  2.  3;  23.  10. 
trabaxjt^  innumerable,  49.  39. 

II.  (<sT6tsorwj),v. think,  count,  calculate, 
1.  22;  5.107;  26.  21 ;  33.  34,  36- 
48.  1 8. 

fr«tr|Bwifi,  «.  calculation,  thought,  6.98;  28. 19; 
45;  51. 14. 

III.  adj.  form  of  srtl®,  eight,  30.  25; 
33.12;  49.55. 

erastirQetsarL,  n.  oil,  5.  184.     See  si  sir. 
STJBff,  v.  confront,  5.  179;    6.  136; 
36.  16  ;  44.  21. 

er.g)/rjiu®,   49.  24. 

^ear,  «.  a  deceiver,  37.  32 ;  42.  i;, : 

5" £37",   cSC/T 51/657".   LDfTttJ&ST. 

y  r 

^7(1)  for  sr/r),52/ ;   comp.  ergsr,  jyear, 
@esr,  7.  II.  er^Co^flr?     (2)  «.  deceit  : 


5,  why?  33.  7. 
57/^/ruJ,    O   father!    4.  101  ;    6.  162  ; 
21.  6;  or  'our  mother,'  13.  5. 

[«io  +  ^»iro^ ;  but  s  =  father.] 

our   Father,  =0iss8)f,  isisi 
1.  n ;  5. 184,  185;  22.40. 


1,1       .  r  HI  |. 


fj,  our,   [from  istresr,  I.     It  forms 
compounds.    Comp.  67/5«o$,  £««»,*, 


Br,  5.  33,  36,  1<\-  ;    I'.'.  :.     Sec 


eor,  23.  39. 
esr,  48.  3. 
fefti  uirenaj,  our  lady  friend  !   7.     See 


«•>«>,  us,  20.  40. 

Qearl  'our  God:     ."».  201  ;  33.  i  :. 
27. 

ou>?ksr,  ;/.  a  m<  >tlu  r  :  jjrti/o&w,  ^eartor, 
jy&arr,  pCcuftsa,  jniii,  10.  31.  [Hut 
see  u>2nr7.] 


I     ;•.  [§  64],  grow  \vcary,  4.  - 

6  I  ;  X'  1  .  l  >•  :  .M  .  I   ;  .    U  th.it  \\  c  grow 

not  weary,  7.  44. 

•     "iy,  weariness,  adversity,  8.  10?  ; 

10. 
mlt/lCf*,  8.  80.  -'.10. 

II.  7-.  [$58.  I],  shoot  at;  put  into, 
impart,  8.  2.  71. 

«w,  //.  wall,  fortress,  city,  39.  3:  u>j&*>. 

ft.  tusk  :  t«.oth 
«<u|,f>|,r.[$6.:],  approach,  attain  unto, 
Lai  oi;4.;,7; 

,:  ll.i.s;  1!>.39. 

^•^•^,5.113;  50.6.V     •400*.  5.  31  4;  49.  55. 
4<r4Ow.p,  81.  6.     fi&pf  <:•«*.  :. 

vufVPf,  •> 

GTffl. 

I.  //.  fire  :  j|r*fi«f?,  ^,  QHQUH,  jyow, 
jy>6»,faar&,  2.  132;  3.  i-,8;  13.21; 
35.21,26.    Sec^MANuIII-.S;,. 

•/,«»«,  26.  19. 

II.  f.  «.  [$  64],  consume  with  fire,  6. 
40;  1X>.  ;.ly;  1:5.  M,24J   1"'.  .;.',;  the 
god  of  fire,  13.  42;  i:\.  \  \. 

u>L/,  ;/.  a  bone  :  WCWL/,  12.  4  1  . 


.  i  i. 

u(?6U,  an  interjection,  <?///  34.  i,v 
|fe),;/.  limit,  1.24;  5.  1  91,  301  j 
49.26, 

a-to,  ;/.,  ^)i_<f,  affliction.  5.  1^2. 
18 


.j//yvoV,  //.  beauty  : 
ejLfl&Qup,  1.  22;  -'.  3,«S4.  i  14.  i4c 
3,72;  7.76;  9.10,  27.35;  42.30. 

sfjj,  letter,  syllable.    [ST<T££/.] 
»,  5.  107.     See  •io*W«wu. 

>,  7'.  rise,  4.  i  ;  r>.  136;  MM.  :. 
49. 57  ;  as  sounds,  49. 44,  49.   With 
jf(5«r,  visit  in  gracious  majesty.  '-< '. 
4,&c.,3o;  7.66;  37.4,^-:  W- 'M- 
Comp.  fl^y,  GtrifLDLj, 

«&,  noble,  48.  18.     ^»v»» 
•<y<? •*  =  »(y<?«(** ,  5.  -•!''.  ;,.'/>. 
«(yOcy,  f.  roiiM  .    7    .-I. 

srsfr. 

I.  //.  scs-amum  seed.  .">.  iS4. 

II.  n.   \\liat    is  easy,  li^ht.      (  >|>l>.  to 
JTCJ.     [Sc,    \     LCX.] 

»•*»«*,  5.  137.     «rfw.  4.  117.  i 

a  is  easy,  4.  10.     «••«"./,  -«'.  12. 
/,  coming,  cnsy  of  access,  5. 
I, condescend,  appear  in  luwlyj;uis<-,-':.  117; 

8.18;   25.  19. 

III.  C7«[«5,  7'.  de^pis, 

I.  ffni5J,  '/•  a  throw,  toss;  blow,  1)1 
3.  II. 

'I-  •'.  [§."»7], throw. strike:  dash,  3C>.  16. 

.,.:,•!.    '.'.    ti  ;    -!     15. 

iit^,  ;/.  an  ant,  4.  i  i  ;  ' 
iyj/,  7(.  beat,  toss.      Comp.  af&. 
<tp«lr0  [§  365],  buffeted,  .">.  10.-,. 

Nig. 


war  @>«r,' my  own,  Lord,'  7.  27  ;  S.  i  i  ;,. 

OTCT-jy,  I.  from  6T«or,  say. 

II.  when  ?    See  g)*^,  jyrarjy. 

•<*<*0,ab,  when !  50.  i  j.    a* fit,  alw 

«i*pO«f*»,  when?  5. 172. 

I.  673^7,  how  many?  4.  27;   .">.  304. 
Comp.  jySsjT-,  g)2s9r. 

II.  for  676Br&sr,  me,  3.  27? 

I.  6TS5T,  71.  say,  33. 1 2.  &M& 

II.  67J6W-,  what? 

•rdr<;«r?  5.  107;   7.  4;  5<X  14. 

676JTL/  for  GTffitAt-j,  bone,  4.  'Vo  ;  .">.  i  2  F  ; 
35.  10. 


57 

&s\u>uw  [Conjeveram :  Kanji].  De- 
rived from  S.  EKA  + AMBARA,  2.  77  ; 
4.151;  13.54. 

£7<SLOi_//7.    IMVan     3  <s    r1\»7f»1ll'r»rr     1^.          .        •          • 

•)  viv    li  *s  uweuing  in  'SJSLDLJLTI 
or  Kanji,  9.  15,  19 ;  14.  4.  There  is 

a  play  of  words ;  as  if  &$  +  ^ ^  + 
^IT  =  the  one  arroived. 
sr-sjasr  [S.  EKA],  the  one  =  9^ 

U&idr,  1.  5  ;    5.  97. 

fJs  ~  gsaflavutjQu/rQjGGv  I    5.    286. 

57®,  z/.  [§62],  [S.  i.  ETI],  go,  pass 
away :  (olf^   $/&(&. 

577fi/(^,  ?'.  [§  62],  yearn  after,  2.  i<?o- 

.J7  ' 

4.  80. 
[57<£.    Comp.  GW,  S.  ESH,  CW ;  s? 

gives  sense  of  'yearning.'] 
sw^  ?,'.  grieve:  Qfietr,  tglsS!)  21.  18- 

29.  38  ;  32.  26. 

',  38    [or  QsL/fmisy}. 

,  ?:'.  abuse,  5.327;  6.196,197;  7.  7; 
21.  20,  21. 

=r  [S.  ISHTAN],  a  friend,  comrade, 
43.  1 6. 

f, /<?;;/.  [S.iSHTi],m> 


.  ;/.  praise,  l.'J.  :-i  (?). 

^,  wield,  wave,  bear  up,  carry 

2.8i;  6.36;  0.63,66;  4fi.  ,. 

**,«.  one  who  carries,  8.  joi. 

,.  [§66],  be  haughty,  inflate,!. 
*"••  25  :   <j&&u>n, 

orLArrgu,  v.  be  disappointed,  10.  78. 
S7//J,  *.«.[§  57;  S.YA],  be  suitable, 
pertain  to,  5.47,  301;  9.12;  U.   , 


<S7/7. 

I.  «.  beauty,  7.  60;  16.  2 ;  19.  i    ,0- 
50.!. 

II.  resemblance, 4. 135;  5.  217 ;  33.  6  • 

f)f)    r       P  fT^ '       /- 

•^  •         •     ^  ID  IT ,         I     OTTl  n      CT I  n/  * 

57SVti,  ;/.  [S.  ELA],  fragrance,  aro- 
matic  unguent. 


a  iac]y)  one  with  perfumed 
373  ;  29.  9.    [See  Naladi,  Introd.,  p.  40, 


,  greatness,  5.  336. 


I.  w^  (sj£,)}  n.  suffering,  26.  6  ;  defect, 
fault,  19.  5  ;  20.  20  ;  30.  22. 

S7,®^=r  faultless,  43.3  T.  [Comp.  STQ/^, 
GT&JGUW,  S.  HETU.  Often  used  in  K.] 

Nig.     fTjglsgiiNLIEI     (gprztJGuir. 

v&^>  n.  alienation,  3.  .104.  [Comp. 
1.8.] 

*^B7?,  ;/.  strangers,  enemies,  3.  104  ; 
19.  39  ;  30.  22.     But  see  v^,  e&>. 
II.  <57|.^y  =  £u/rjy?  5.  ^75. 
*&*,  any  at  all,  SO.  iS.'    «r%io  p^gy^  7.  4. 


I.  •?/.  [§  62],  extol,  1.  49  ;  5.  24  ;  6.  1  97  ; 
7.48;  19.  23;  35.  n,  &c.;  48.14- 
16.     [CT^^.     Opp.  to  si*?.] 
19 


I.  In  7  [T.  ELA  =  why?]  wsu        s 
doubtful,  ?  friends,  pi.  of  v&)neir  = 
®'f!f$\  a  female  friend. 

II.  =if=^uS&>,  10.6;  22.30;  36.  7. 

III.  v.  [§  70,  as  *«;],  receive;  be  suit- 
able for,  5.  179  (with  eigln  &£&=: 
GT@rr<$jv),  373;  36.  39.    ^Qutrgisj,. 

IV.  ;/.  what   befits  :    Qua^fti  ;    :J. 
114. 

,  v.  send  forth. 

x),  I.  ;/.  a  command,  21.  6  ;  43.  22. 
II.  «.  an  arrow  :  ^LCL/. 
6ra/«m_,  wounded,  4-3.  23. 

^5  CT®»,  seven,  4.  7  ;  7.  37. 
&$&),  a  Jute,  7.  29.     Comp.  <u/rt£. 
zjetntf,  11.  [S.  HEL],  what  is  poor,  9. 

71;  15.  49;  woman  (pi.  S7sw^>j«j/r), 

7.  32;  33.  10  ;  41.  34. 

csn>jpj«oio,poornessof  spirit,  meanness;  ignorance, 
26.  21. 


I.  11.  '  a  bull/  as  Civan's  vehicle,  and 
as  the  sign  on  His  banner,  '2.  :  -,  ; 
*c  2 


any  male,  13.  61 ;  19.  10;  4!>.  i'». 
tsSg  Osier  e9«ni_«  Q*Tif .] 
86.  a  a. 

—  ^KisiD,  of  Civan,  •">.  209. 
=ueoifS,  a  hog,  5.  ^i  : 
By  met.  -  P,D**«-*,  Lonl.  ~> 
II.  =  <?u>/f>Q*/r<w,f'.ascend, mount, riclr. 
5.2io;  10.  j    4;    I.'  Mi.  2. 

17,  is.  i;     4 .  :.<».  1 1. 

9?,  utterly,  2.  6. 

«7j»««r®,  having  become  excited,  41. 

14.  iS.  -.     *.«r,  §  : 
^,  r.  [$  62],  induce;  exalt;  take, 
3.  u  Mi  17;  47. 

50.  26. 

SJ,  ?•.  [$  160],  cause  to  ascend. 
10.30;  51. 

j>(yit  foes,  8.158;  19- »*• 
*7<vu>,  n.  a  wild  boar,  3.  31 ;  4 
40.  29.     Comp.  «*8j*. 

[See  Tmivi|ai-adal,  45,  46.] 

,  other,  any,  5. 149,  378. 
*,  others,  4.  i  1 7 .  *   i  j . 


,  the  five  (senses) 
>,  6.  139. 


I.  ga,  minuteness,  subtilty,  beaut 
S|0,uf*.  //  ..  :?  4.-,;  5.  io;(?). 
H.  =  SB  v,  five,  49.9. 
52«/ff<u.  as  the  five  clean-  1  :  .   I    > 
[Coap.  2.  a>-a6.] 
g|  /  |t/«i*ar,  the  five  senses,  4.  3  ;  5.  280, 

,   8.  70. 

ii,  (Divan's  five  faces,  2.  20. 


,  r.  [§^4]-  resemble;  agree. 

,  like  a  heron,  6.  33,83:  8.  S  i  .  ~2\   i  s. 

,   5.  l6l    [NOTE  V];    • 

w.  comparison  ;    re-cmbl.u 
6.62.  ii,-;   S.  65;    19,  ,  .  17. 

t_»,  5.  34). 

9tf*f,  what  each  deem-  meet,  •">.  1  1  . 
u»ffur*»,  2-"' 
,  like  K« 

,  27.  a6.     yfmmQuitu,  5.  . 
,  go  in  harmony  with,  20.  i  , 
5.  i  i 


J,  1: 

.=jr<-|€7(5. 

,  f.  retrain,  subdue,  M.  r6l. 

,  p.  subside,  be  subdued,  <> 
15.46. 

l®,  f.  (i)  betake  oneself  to.  ad: 
to,  1C  .')  permi: 

34. 


ggioo),  alms  :  L9^€»*,  17.  34,  3  -,. 

ggiucar,  «.,  jyiutueSr,  Qmp+iGr,  Guru, 
I  \ither,  Lord,  God,  1.  35;  5.  288  = 
f*es>fi\  1<  .  Id.  1,  2. 

«»<?«r  •     gvtJtiCm  !  -  GjviGf+G,*  !     God    Of 

gods,  9.  46.    See  NOTE  XII.  '  The  Guru.' 
$>\'uff&,  tt.  [  =  five  rivers],  a  town  with 
a  £aiva  shrine,  seven  miles  N.  of 
Tanjon  1    14-^- 

a^r^-c* 

20 


I.  [K.  I.cx.     Sec  £«*.] 

*fl*rjOu*a*  (9*«fe),  'frxplemli-  'inS 

(otherwise  in  I 

9«*rb^4«,  18.30.     9<*«^^,  4 
y-to  —  .  brilliancy.     y«*r«M««C-r  |  ft.  s  , 
9«*r««ar.  49.6i.     ^«*«J»»',  86.  15. 

*-»M*/0«*.    7. 

II    possibility.     Comp.  5>«>. 
9«*r.fi8cr,  »'•  be  possible,  .">.  I'M. 

j*^  •»•  y**'  •*•  »  +  <i*"t-  0,  t- 

9*-..  that  <-a«/w.'. 
1  1 

^(tt)%adj>  unique  :  5XJU/p/p,3.  79.  [^ 

99|«Mo,  nnitv.   t    \(>. 

9®  *><&tv.  [Ndladi,  p.  317],  be  unit,  d, 
4.  31  :  HH.  ^    /f  '////  «-4_wr,  at 
altogether,  X'.  10;,  ;    11 

90{O|uQ,  muster,  collect,  go  on  in  a 
10;   L'0.   15,  ,3;   4:,.  3,   it,  27 

»«l«*t.s 

,  the  only  o 
t  R.  aa6. 


.      (..'..nip. 


not,  3. 1 67. 


I.  «.  sound,  6.  38  ;  7.  2. 

9*»  ft®  «»*&v, < resounding  with  rapturous  sones  ' 

2-53,  J46;  13.69. 

II.  v.  sound  :   <fl&)il,^,  ^ 
745  9.  53. 

S^fcu,  swiftness,  5.255;  8.30;   14, 
53  ;  32.  32. 

•  v-  n-  [§57],  cease;  stand  aloof ;  re- 
main over  ;  leave  :  /?/E/@J,  ©9®}  ^ ^ 
3.  1 1 8,  cease  (to  be);  6.  8;  V.'44' 
=  e$®  (#;/.*•);  10.74;  11.15;  12.51 ; 
13.2;  21.6,29;  32.27;  33.4;  44.' 
17,  19,  20;  50.  16,  17. 

910*0,  s-iflmflrt,  the  rest,  the  other.  11.53;  22 

J3;  4~.  33. 

9&»,  10.  75;  32.  23;  34.  22. 
S«S«/  («syp).  3.  116;  4.  214;  37.1. 

II.  v.  tr.  [§  64],  ^gj,  abandon,  2. 1 29 ; 
5.264;  23.  17;  40.39. 

III.  v.  causal,  §>$\s8,  cause  to  leave, 
42.  29. 

5>Cf(5>  v.  [§  62],  leak,  drip,  26.  25. 
6£>syr,  «.  [see  ^^si],  brilliancy.  Comp. 

&-&r,  Qsueir. 
**«*«,  3.  177. 


*•  ft.  lignt :  Gva/fcTn^  Gsusiflffu)    1.  2<?  ' 
5.  57,  229;  11.  23;  20.  10. 

^«rO@)^)  '  white,  silver-light.' 
Ou/r«jr(@)<nR;  'niddy,  golden-light,'  3.  125. 

II.  v.  tr.  and  ///#-.  [§  64],  hide,  lie 
hidden,  3.  126-145;  6.  168. 
,  6.  177. 


,  shine,  6.  ,.1;37.,  7 
>       [§  64],  subdue,  chastise  ;  be' 
disgusted  with,  6.  23;  33.  8;  38.4o. 
^  Join,  touch,  3.  127.  [5^^,] 
Msa>  pledge,  pawn,  6.  69. 

',  a  town  close  to  ^ithambarain. 
«o,  concentration,  3.  128. 
,  adj.  form  of  yea^. 

.«««r,  36.  39.     9^*^  6.  158. 


I.  «.one,  3.3;  33.  8;9;  49.  9.     See 


II.  v.  join,  combine,  be  concentrated, 
2.131;  4.82. 


,    1.  33  J    51.   27. 

$>®05,  ^  [§62],  6%#®  jyaDL.,  e.^^ 
^L*®,  spring,  rise  up,  1.  35  ;  3.  78,  86  ; 
18.30;  19.3i;  31.  34;  39.3;  43.ic;. 

©  aJ,  e-iuujQfiu,  1  .  I  o. 

*,  e/.  lift  up,  9.  21. 
,  «.  sound,  41.  30;   49.  44,  49. 


I.  v.  run;  extend,  run  on,  6.  180;  16. 
34;  34.i8;  flee  away,  cease  (?),  36.  8. 
' 


and  OTTI  =  cracked;  C.  6pu  =  pot- 
sherd; </op|i,  break],  an  earthern 
pot:  (ueS^uapjiiai,  40.  i. 

|t>/l®,  n.  =g?Lli_ii,  SQsjuuJd,  a  current, 

3.88. 

fptLGis,  v.     See  a.<s. 
g,ti®**^,  8.  8  1.    g>ti®**,».  8.  88. 
g?^,  «.  [S.  UD],  the  sea,  38.  n. 


1  See  Muir,  vol.  iii.  p.  44,  and  note  on  5.  245;  also  n-RfcrsmioaSorAaii,  34,  and  T.  P.  A.,  Ixxxii. 
p.  xl.  '  p  rom  the  ether  of  the  supreme  Brahma's  heart,  when  he  was  plunged  in  meditation,  there 
issued  a  sound,  which  is  perceived  (by  the  devout)  when  they  close  their  organs  of  sense.  By  adoring 
this  sound,  devotees  destroy  the  soul's  threefold  taint,  extrinsic,  inherent,  and  superhuman,  and  become 
exempt  from  future  birth.  From  this  sound  sprang  the  ohkdra,  composed  of  three  elements,  self- 
resplendent,  of  imperceptible  origin,  that  which  is  the  emblem  of  the  divine  Brahma,  the  supreme 
spirit.  He  it  is  who  hears  this  sound  Piranavam  (dum&io) ,  when  the  ears  are  insensible  and  the 
vision  inactive, — through  which  speech  is  revealed,  and  which  is  manifested  in  the  ether,  from  the 
Soul.  This  (ohkdra}  is  the  sensible  exponent  of  Brahma,  the  self-sustained,  the  supreme  spirit ;  and 
it  is  the  eternal  seed  of  the  Vedas,  including  all  the  Mantras  and  Upanishads.  In  this  \oitkara]  then.- 
were  three  letters,  A  and  the  rest,  by  which  the  three  conditions,  the  .three)  qualities,  the  three  names, 
the  :vthree)  significations,  the  .three)  states  are  maintained.'  Comp.  also  Chhandogya-Upanishad,  I.  II. 
21 


—    I  ' 


'.  read,  chaunt ;  call  upon,  20. 
24;  3D.  30;  41.  25. 
#£?,  n.  Vedic  text. 

3°- 
LOL/,  i\  cherish,  5.  152,  160. 

/'/,  i'.  [§  57],  come  to  an  end.  cease, 
1.2o;  5.152;  8.37.    Comp.  £>y#. 
£?iL>\sy  =cjy/^/€)/,  //.,   5.  I53' 

I.  =5?(3  from  pary,  adj.  [§172],  one, 

only,  37.  13. 

II-  v-  [$5/].  consider,  regard.  •.'<».  7. 
,/f,  a  £aiva  shrine,  2 
««u>,  ».  an  assembly,  '-'  1 . 

9,  'minister  in  the  assembly.' 

),  sound,  invocation  :  *JJFU>, 

LO,  5.  2ly7  J   7.   20;    13.  Uy 

',//.a  palm  leaf,  1 1.29.  [Sce.V<;A/<//. 
»56.] 

u>,  ;/.  a  picture  :  Qjfdou*, 

.  case:  ^x/,  §>yj?,  ?.  18. 

30;  20.  10 ;  32.  H;  45.2. 

/, 
i,   n.   [S.    KAN  +  KAN  -*-A],  a 

biacelet:   «i_«a>,  «B<f fi/Jfen. 
*>,  n.  night :  @/7«v,  7. 
,  //.  [S.  GANGA],  a  sister  of/' 
•;vr////  [Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  364,  &c.].  the 
Ganges,  the  eldest  daughter 
of  1  limavat,  as  Uma  is  the  second, 
4.30;  5.  2;/>;   (5.  102;   D.  i 

*'  *'•  [§  57]'  grow  moist,  soft,  tender  ; 
melt,  L  57;  r>.  22  ;.   15. 13;  :.' 
Connected  generally  with 


&,  n.  [S.].  '  Kanci,'  or  Conjcvcram, 

•  '.  i  ,",.     See 


,  n.  a  girdle  : 
8.96;    1.  p;  !'.  ;.v 

,     G.     I.  -4. 

See  N.  Lex..  ]>.   ;:i. 
I.  *i_.or  *t_«a/  =  obligation.  ii< 


a  //('////,  used  as  a 
[Pope's  Gr.,  §§  93,  12.-,].  and  so  a 
kind  of  defective  verb,  =  ought 
[  §  1  40]  ;  what  owe  I  ?  5.  4-,  ;  ought 
I  to  .  .  .?  33.  31  ;  compelled,  bound 
to  be,  51.  10.  i  ;,. 

II.  «<_,  T1.  a.  [§  66].  pass  beyond  or 
over,  'who  have  passed  beyond.' 
5.  95  ;  transcended.  .3.  40  ;  1<> 

IS.     ;i    ;    •.".'     .,  .    ."I      10. 
ft-*  0*1  •&u&  m-susib.   5O.   I. 

III.  «L_!  ana),  //.duty:  «i_jf3r,«i_  u\un<8, 
."i.  263. 

I\".  ft-  «v,  V.  ride,  drive,  Mf'».  I,',.     Sre 

uwr.     [  =  Ma<5,  !'.».  22,  24.  j 
V.    att_LO,  ;/.  [S.  KATA],  that    \\hith 
exudes  from  the  temples  of  a  male 
elephant:    u>pu>,    .'>.    i;,-;    (i.   1^4. 

c  fine). 
m^tfmmft 

\"I.  *I_LD^/T,  «.  a  £aiv.i  shrine  near 
Madura,  2.  83  ;  4.  1^0.    > 
ram,  p.  207,  when-  tl 
in  its  honour. 

\'II.  «<_«>,  ;/.  a  ').  i^tS.  i 

:..  103:  6.48,49  s-  '  '  :  ln- 

•«.  34: 

40:  2s.  4  ;  i     -i  .    r: 

43.  17,  ny.  [Comp.  Q««rmi.] 


\'III.  *i_]«y«r,  //.  god,  deity.  .'}.  14,  1  6, 

- 
/.  /  .      Sec  N.  Lex.,  p.  321. 

''•  [§  .'»/l'  cut  away,  destroy, 

rffcr  «i»..<!.  :  .  J.  10,  .'5  .      | 

II.  :•.  rf.  [§  64],  grasp,  hold   in  the 
mouth  ;  bite.  11.  10. 

ftiuu,  •  so  that    ft-  \\licn    they  ^i-i/ci.'  '-.  i'n. 

III.  //.    swiftness:    a  13.*-  42; 
fragrance  [S.fiANDll],  brillian 

25.34;  45.  14. 

iv.  «if!'u,  «.?  [<?!/'  -^>u). 

. 


l-lli — 


deadly.     [N.  Lex.,  p.  321.     See 


*G),  «?._*,  4.57.     .Orffcr,  33.  ?.     .^J&r,  3«.  30. 

*®-»,  6.  48.     .®AO«*,,  broad  daylight,  4.  28. 
*4L^«7,  <one  flagrantly  wicked,'  5.  332;  10.  73; 

•  >-.  7. 
.    «S)Qpj«4r  wamOj   4.  6. 

<s<-L<_^5  ;/.  [S.  KASHTA],  distress,  4.  22  ; 
5.  192. 

Oa/B^Lic-aJr,  <  one  sorely  afflicted,'  30.  8. 

^Llif,  //.  anything  congealed,  har- 
dened, coagulated  ;  sugar-candy. 
5.  143  ;  8.  92.  [ff^l©.] 

*il®,  I.  v.  a.  tie,  confine,  1.  53;  3.  89  • 
9.75- 

II.  v.  n.  coagulate. 

III.  11.  a  bond,  5.  193  =  ^/7,5^0.    [«®.] 

sCGJIaJ  [§   160],    31.   27. 


I.  //.  end. 

*«roi_G/3.»p)  at  last,  3.  178. 

II.  baseness,  1.  60;  5.  223. 

aas>L-\iusist,    5.  89,  364,  387. 
«ani_|iua;(?657-ssr.    6.   I,   2OO. 

III.  door:  ^a/,  a£<suu>t  7.  10,  18. 

«<roi_[£  «.s»(0;  «.  the  rear  of  an  army:  <SS-«»(PUL;«O(_, 

46.  7. 
*«ni_  ijju®,  sink  into  insignificance;  be  low  and 

mean  :  S^aur®,  5.  1  54  ;  8.  25;  9.  31;  37.  7;  49. 

2.  =  ««Ot_ULl(?t_OT,     27.    2. 

*ani_|*  sob-jthe  outer  corner  of  the  eye  :  «LL««OI_, 
a  wanton  glance,  35.  9;  38.  21  ;  51.  17. 
««ni_  J*',  *«!ofl;  v.  [§  64],  cast  a  favouring  glance, 
11.  19. 

«s»i_  4j^r2s\),    the    OUter   COUrt:     efaleuireSea,   15-9; 


i\Qsirar>  v.  hold  fast,  persevere,  45.  14. 

@,  //.  reckoning  ;  result,  affair, 
30.  4;  49.  n. 

D,  n.  [S.  GANA  from  GAN  =  ST6zJar, 
reckon  up],  troop,  herd,  host,  1.  28. 

OT  asoariOj    3.  80.      Gpeui  \saxria!  12.  I7. 

sasr,  «.  [S.  root  KHAN],anarrow  :  ^>/WLJ. 

\)rfi«26iror,  5.  73-      Ljjj>uuirewru>}  5.  157* 


I.  «.  an  eye:  e8$,  3.  80;  4.127;  5. 

«3^  73  ;  7.  67;  9-  3«5  15.  38;  17.  .5; 
33.33;  35.39;  49.6i.   [See  N.  Lex. 


Sec  also 


1  1.  .///«/«'  benignity,'  4.  ,  -o  ;  . 

[See  Knrral,  184,  ,y,.] 
III.  a  place:  @<_u>. 

**--  r,  20.  6.     .*w/>  7.  7o;  37.  37. 
(  i  )  **,«<fi  I  «  Ye  whose  eyes  arc  like  . 
[G-  930 

(2}    acetronr/,  tears,  17.  8;   '27.  27.      [//  ] 
*a*r«w',  35.  15.     ««*,<K3,A)  3j>.  ,8 
(1)  -«*«,«  ^  ««*ra,«_lu«4t  -she 


=uwja,>  a  flower-garland,  5.  33,  74; 

iuio,  visual  juggle,  5.  168. 

irgB,^,*,  'Qivan,  who  ha«  a  tl.i.d. 
or  frontal  eye'  (  Muir,  vol.  iv.  j,.  2~IQ;  Kauib. 
Ram.  I.  viii.  i),  1.  2J;  15.34;  35.  2. 
«frcgrt0#C*w6  !  33.  33.     [See  8.  46.J 
awsOT^udr,  one  of  the  Caiva  devotees  ;  see  Ms 
legend,  P.  Puran.  II.  (in  ,  10.  13.    [15.  9-13.] 
eto'^p  [•..sn],  in  open  vision,  22.  24. 
)  visibly,  5.  193,  332. 
)  one  who  has  eyes;  Vishnu,  29.  13. 
.  eyeless,  49.  35.     [®*i.] 
Qsir<Tfesiri  a  husband,  7.  35;  :>:;.  .-. 
5r=z  J?L.i_€3T    [S.     KANTAKA  = 

'thorn,'  hence  'jungle'],  savages, 
40.  31. 

6OTr£_to,  //.  throat  :  &(y0j;>,  i^lt—jf. 

sa>1D*\saxrL.f6r}  6.   128. 

0Gf$0   aenrL-n   afariu,  '  my   throat  hoarse   with 
emotion,'  27.  26. 

&GMU.BJ  atftiurcsr,   8.  5!. 

manjp[;2(75|a«isTi_«sr)  6.  183.      iDesatl\*asai—ibl  23.  2*  . 

arQ,  &C.      See  siressr. 
i,  what  I  saw,  5.  162. 
6v«jr.  I  saw  not,  5.  162,  168. 
soiyiy-ffuio,  we  saw  not,  14.  -j. 
«OT®ifl.  though  I  saw,  5.  168. 

aOTL.fCM,  26.  4,  &C. 

«OTi_nu  =  */ra*r,  '  Lo  !  '  a  mere  expletive,  i  > 
See  28.  i  ,  &c. 

O^L-I&I,   35.  4,  &C.      a«*r(?i_(?«ir,   31.  4,  &C. 

«Bijrt_Ss!!r,  thou  sawest,  5.  131.     *e*i-ut4i,  31. 
«OTi_,  exposed  to,  4.  60. 

,  $$e>JLO,  II.  [S.  KATATA,  KAVATAJ, 
a  door:  suat-u>,  45.  19,  31. 

/,  v.  cry  ;  low,  bellow,  bray,  4.  73. 


I.  //.  [S.  GATi],a  going,  course,  nic.ins. 
fortune,  goal  ;  desire,  4.  72  ;  6.  165. 
Applied  to  Civan,  4.  108. 


,  (if>'?&),  ~9.  I  7.]      j      *p  ditiiutiu.  one  all  ioiluin,  •">.  .'7. 


£,  auspicious  goal,  G.  164. 
,  final  resting-place,  5.  35  ;  29.  30. 
«£  [?for»«irp  +  ,g<fi],  the  happy  goal  .  34.  18. 

II.  v.  [§  64],  grow  thick,  swell,  in- 
crease, 4.32  (where  text  is  efiffAft)', 
40.27.  =  i/0(5. 
«^ff,  w.  beam,  gleam,  3.  5  ;  4.  4  ;  7.  70  ; 

36.  6,  15. 
jy*,/  m&Qit+,  the  sun,  8.  87;  15.  41. 

,  in  4.  32,  seems  for  *£>«  ?   See  •£>  II 
¥>  f.  seize,  perturb.  <>.  i  i  ~.  141. 
u>,  «.   [S.   KAMALAM],  a  lotus  : 
Nelmnbinm:  0iru>sa)ij,  UJHOW. 
m^*\m**\urfQ»,  'Thou   of  the   flower-lotus- 
foot  !'  6.  370.     By  met.  '*  foot,'  10.  8.    [See 
*'M~r**r*,  6.  179.] 

««•*  7*«iM»"!  'Thon  of  the  Iotas-  like  roseate 
foot!'  22.  aa;  21    I, 

.e*.4S<"".  29.  13;  89.  I.  [See  jfu*.  and 
Muir,  vol.  iv.  pp.  43,  J  19,  .-66,  477,  •*•*»<*+. 
Brahma  is  said  to  have  sprung  fiom  the  lotus, 
springing  from  Vishnu's  navel.  ] 

*u>tp,  v.  [  §  57],  exhale,  35.  30.     [See 

Naladi,  180.] 
«t/>,  //.  (S.  KAM  or  KHAM],  whiteness. 

j»«4  +  «*•»•  3WO  v?  ,  'the  beautiful  white  I: 
7.49. 

«Lc<jti,   >/.  [S.  KAMP],  a  trcmbl; 

5.   2 

*ii>iS,  v.   [§  ^4],  tremble  :    *®«®, 

4.  61  ;  6.  106. 
«tu|«($,  7'.  rub  :  «*|«0  ?  30.  28. 

[In  I'.  P.  V.-  ««*®,  pp.84,  98.    So  here  'filling 
me  with  mystic  emotion.'] 

«(uto,  «.  [S.  GAJA],  an  elephant,  9.  70. 

[An  Asuran  called  (iaya  was  slain  by  (,'ivan  ] 


[N.  Lex.] 

QMPJ*U*J«**,  9.  38;    11.  41. 

,  «.  [S.  KAILASA],  (Divan's  moun- 
tain, 6.  136;  23.  40.     See  «a>*?6u. 

«.!««/  t>i>,  6.  159. 

i5jp,//.  [K  4^:],  a  rope,  1.52;  16.  i  ; 
25.5;  31.27. 

(7,  t'./7.  [§  66,  toen^)],  conceal  ;  destroy, 
involve  ;  ::  //.  lie  hid,  2.  ,',',,  65,  92  ; 
3.  .4,  15,  7.  7.46,  70;  2X'. 

•'1    ;, 


c,  //.  [S.  KARANA].  any 
sense,  intellectual  faculty.   In 
33.  17;  48.  21. 
i,  w.  [S.  KARA],  hand:  ens. 

jietat,   4.  84. 

•*  cjrf,  fold  the  hands,   1.  9.     [O^«>.] 
/  [S.  KAkT],  an  elephant:  «§i»,  *tHi,  6.  76, 
'-'5,  '94- 


I.  //.  a  witness,  30.  19.     [K.  Lex.] 

II.  see  *<3,  black. 

III.  see 


I.  W.[S.GARBHA],  agerm,  core,  l<».  -  _•  , 
obstinate  to  the  core,  4().  29. 

•.•r**^,  my  inner  being,  5 

-••i-,  that  birth  may  wholly  cease,  U 
i  i.  8.     [  J^ilu/..] 

NVith  J,prf.    «9  •;•'.  11   (>,  19. 

II.  used  as  =  OiJ(5,  2.  55. 

III.  black.     Sec  «(5«Du>,  «ff/f,  «/f9. 

/A,  ;/.  [^  131.^],  blackiu-ss.   In 
adj,  use:  «(3,  *<3tD,  ^r/^oj,  ^/rrf^  ;>.  4^. 
lack,  8.  67.     «?I«/AI,  see  «"*<. 

.  66.     -«^,  r«. 
Thon  art  black.'  »'..  i  .-  ... 
,  •  He  is  1.1 

ar,  «.  [S.GARi  [>.\]  .1  mythic  bird, 
vehicle  of  Vishnu,  XT),  i. 
<5asaer,  «.  [S.  KARUNA  ;  not  in  K.  or 
N.].  pity,  com  passion,  grace:  jy(3«r, 
2.107;3.  180;.").  37..-,;  6.  i;  11.33; 
15.  13,  94;  $1.10,35;  88.9;  i 

a-*^*,.  10.36;  17.5;  82.7;  88-  35-    l7    '.- 

«9lw«jr<r*,  5.  387.      «0kw4>«lr  9/1* 
•<#***••*»,    1.  II.      «<5taer><?^<<r, 
«9fa»O«*«i6,   6.   ijl;    8.   37;    IT, 

«a«9«M*  [S.  XGARA-AI.AYA,  abode],  6.  in, 
'59- 

«(f«V«uurir,    27.  ]. 

«o3OTJiailQ,  6.  129.     [See  •««*.] 

Q5\£>>  V'  think  of,  regard,  'J.  i.~>  :  1  43. 
171  ;  5.  366;  10.66;  26.  2'.  ,  :jri.  17, 

45-33-  ^ 

•iff,  n.  [j  190],  thought,  attention,  intention, 

19,  r*. 

tj),  //.  fS.  KARMA],  act  (of  worship), 

:,',.    Comp. 


//.  sugar-cane :  sesresrov,  5.218- 
8.  92  ;  38.  2. 

',»>fc*nk,8.85,9i;4.8i;5.io8; 
6.9. 

a.andtt.  [§  66], blend, mix  with, 
commingle :  CW,  1 . 46,  57  ;  5.  290- 

32.  i ;  34.  20. 

GP&aeoitg,,  rushing  on,   4.  6.      a_i_«Jr«W)   2.  131. 

a*>asj>,  perplexity,  bewilderment:   lof?®,^^^ 

10.  23;  34.  21. 
*ev\a®,  v.  intr.  be  confounded,  6.  in,  117;  14. 

21 ;  19.31;  30.  12;  41.  14. 
*«u|*O,  v.  a.  mix,  3.  180;  9.  22. 

sev*(5«ftrS)  [§   265],    5.   Io6. 

«ft»fi®  [§  263],  12.  52;  23.40. 
«su|»J,  close  intimacy,  51.  30. 
•wijiity,  power  of  intermingling,  3.  23. 

i  [S.  KALA^A],  cup,  15.  10. 
',  n.  [?  der.],  a  wretch,  10.  73. 
i,  «.  vessel  ;   place.      [Comp.  S. 
KHALA,  and  <56rro).]  SeCcSV 
««*•,  jewel,  7.  53. 

w,  cresset-boat,  6. 188. 

See 

See 

',  as  n.  [S.  KALI]  =  sound ;  calamity. 
[As  v.  —  flourish.]  Hence  a<s8  LAgj-anrj 
=  'M.  then  in  distress;'  [or  'great 
M.'],  8.  46. 

i,  n.  a  horse.  [See  S.  KALINGA.] 

*,  17. 25. 

',  n.  [S.  KALA],  a  small  portion  ;  a 
part  of  the  moon's  disc ;  any  division 
of  science  or  learning,  4. 189 ;  6. 159; 
12.  52;  15.  43.  [See  ff/oiy.]  Used 
as  an  epithet  of  Civan. 

3iu,j}/rOT!i>,  sacred  philosophy,  38.  17. 

Ts*j^yrasRt    26.  22. 

«nr|<?n0io,  heresy,  4.  57.     See  Cu^io,  and  NOTE 
IV,  and  ««ur. 


I.  v.  [§  70],  learn. 

*Ai«nr,  f&euir0}  unlearned,  8.  25;   31.  13.     [Or 

a^eaeib)  see  aev  H.] 

«^>l»,  having  learnt,  34.  20;  38.  17. 
afiuesr,  things  to  be  learned,  39.  10. 
*>a?^,  the  learned,  39.  10. 
160],  teach,  21.  26. 


*«>K  «•  learning,  2.  ;-,  ;  4.  38  ;  10.  21  • 

24-3-    [N.Lex.**.]  ' 
II.  ».  a  stone,  1.  28  ;  5.  ,48,  ,9a,  „, 

3745  8.25,27;  11.  33;  13.  35;  15.13. 

oee 
[The 


or  AM;-/  is  a  stone  r«4.«.,  . 
grace  softens  it,  make*  it  like  a  sweet  ripe  fruit  •' 
*w  becomes  **#.] 
*f>  I  Qutif.,  debris,  12.  12. 


Caiva  shrine,  2.  1  1  . 

,  «.  [S.  KAVACHA],  armour. 

.mt    46.  3. 

,  «.  rr.srszoa/,  forked  branch,  10.  29. 
[N.  Lex.  <5ia/.] 

^®,  ;/.  [S.  KABANDHA,  KAVANDHA], 
for  *a,w^o),  a  skull  ;  or  headle.ss 
trunk,  40.  i. 

,  ».  [S.  GAURI],  a  fan  made  from 
the  tail  of  the  bos  gaums,  used  in 
temples,  9.  3. 

t,  v.  [§  57],  captivate,  seize,  ravish, 
17.  28;  32.  25;  43.39. 

,  «.  care,  distraction,  anxiety  of 
mind,  11.67. 

,  v.  [§§  57,  64],  bend,  overshadow, 
9.  75  ;  46.  2.  Comp.  (509. 

,  n.  anxiety  ;  a  branch,  4.  1  86  : 


a>,  ;/.  [M.  =  'foot';  C.  KERAL  = 
'  anklet  '],  an  anklet  worn  by  war- 
riors ;  by  met.  '  a  foot  '  :  jgrreir,  jy^. 
[afj  Qffl/ezsjraoL.ujLo,  effp  safari—  IT  iLassft, 
effa  <56OT«ot_.  In  Mahratta,///J/i-n": 
Pope's  Ind.  Hist.  (4th  ed.),  p.  302]  ; 
1.  1-15  (where  &rr®r,  ^up.,  and  «^oi> 
are  synonyms  ;  see  OuuJ,  L^ISJ,  euna, 

LDGDIT,  j$GSSr,  L/353B7-)  J   5.  94  J    13.  25,  j  I  J 

23.i;24.  13,  -33.33,  &c. 

'tem,    20.  I  I  . 

',  v.  urge  on,  press  forward,  41.  10. 


_/- 

^. ;/.  [§  57],  pass  away,  or  beyond  ; 
waste  away,  1.  45;   6.  165,  171  ; 

32.  27;  48.  20;  50.i8. 

«i<4,  when  they  pass  away,  5.  3;.    See 
«y,  n,  excess,  waste,  7.  37 ;  36.  30. 


II.  v.  a.  [§  64],  purge  away,  5.  32  ;  23. 
9;  draw  from  the  scabbard,  36.  15. 

ftfuL/,  H.  guilt  ;  what  is  rejected,  refuse,  50.  3. 

,;/.  trident,  spear:  £>£(§&)&, 
),  ffilif  ,  2.  J  io;  19.  28  ; 
36.  6.    See  US^L-. 
g\s\(§€8rpu>  (or  ®€sr^>),  ;/.  name  of  a 
place  :  Eagle-hill,  2.  89  ;  4.  i  iy  i  . 
introduction  to  30. 
t$gj,   n.  a    demon:    iSffiifiM,   5. 
[Conip.  Kaci  Kh.  87.  y  ;  and  Muir. 
vol.  iv.  p.  379.] 

ir,  //.  a  water-lily.   :J.  i  i  ]. 

t/),  a  £aiva  shrine  ;  a  name  of 
9*n$,  2.  88. 
Q$  Q/>>  v-  join,  25.  29.    Comp. 


,  7.50.  [«< 
,  a  perfect  Kfin,  «'•.  ioX. 
««r«r,    «.    [from    various    S.    roots]. 
ex  pan 

r,  open  plat< 


I.  //.  joy.  gladm  --  .    In 
[Sec              \D.] 

««*!«./.  r.  joy  cxcectlingi} 
33  ;  4tf.  5.    See  «^. 

II.  r.  [  ^  64],  joy,  exult  ;  make  ^lad, 
8.  121  ;  6.56,  129;  2. 

!.  -|  ;    |0L  i. 
.  joy,  2.S.  4a 

,  //•  a  male  elephant.  3.  178. 


,  ?-.  [§  66],  milk.  1.46. 

Ei(8),v. sound,  rustle,  2.  108;  11.  29. 

[See  N.  Lex.] 

y,  2-.  [§  64],  detest,  be  wroth  will-,, 

5.  i 

,  n.  ( i )  a  stain,  blackness.    Comp. 

6S)LO. 

«*n_«iP»*«».i)i*i_^«ir,    6.  I  j8  ;    1" 

>*m>f>  =  J«BI>  (met.),  6.  138.  [,\,//  151, 

(2)  a  mortar:  .SOT/D  «LJ%W,  '.».  i  ;. 

u>,  a   tree    of   Iiulra's   paradise. 
yielding   every   fruit :    ^mjdijGsr&p 
usu>t  ajbuaeS^iLfii,  0.  10. 
DUub,  n.  |  S.  KAI.PA].  an  aeon  ;  period 
of  phenomenal  existence,  3.  -,4. 
c/awr,  n.  [S.  KALI-ANA],  instruction, 
21.  26.     Comp.  ««v,  api$. 
lL$,  v.  [^  160;   ?  from   S.  KI.KII'|, 
teach,  21.  26.     Sec  &&>. 
iji  n.  =  spufatr,  '.',( ).  1 1 . 
*pjp.     Sec  (i)  &&) ;  (2)  «OTjpr. 
«A».    See  4. 

*fbes>ptn. acollcction of  haii  s.  ra\  s.  vvc. : 
apenpffmi-,  '.).  55  ;  .V>.  2. 
J>,  «.  [S.],  gold,  2.  39;  4.  (yS. 

)r ;/.  ,i  dream,  sleeping  state. 
[Comp.  *OT«V  and  K.  I  <\.| 

mGfnfk,   CNCII   in  n  tirc.im,    I 
II. 

at,  n.  fire:   jqcareo,  j&,   ~>.  29.     j  V 
Lex.] 


'••''•[§  .">/],  root  out, destroy,  1. 101  ; 

5J  8-75.  ".;•'' 

II.  //.  weariness;  fault,  6.  i  ;:. 

dBSYT. 

I.  n.  the  honev  in  flowers;  falsehood 

:..  i 

•».<?««•,  false  me,  6.  8. 

sate  for  «*e»ii,  falsehood,  4.  171. 

II.  71.  [£  ;/>.    Ill'],  deceive,  steal.  [**w 


,  Ixjccmc  false.  !«'.  6.\ 
m**i,  H.  theft,  evil,  .">.  138;  ::i 
**)•»«*',  a  dc-ceixer.  •">  ^3  ;  H>.  41.  7;, 

«<Sr»C. 

26 


I.  //.  ripe  fruit,  sweetness:   u4 
1 4 -(A3)  =  sweet:  3.  [62,1 

5.lo6. 'like  sweet  ri|>c  fruit  ;'  5.  ',74  ; 
8.27;  9.54(Q*«);:5;.  i  ;. 
1I.71.  [^57], grow  sweet ;  be  filled  with 
sweet nc  I,  22,  i     .   '•'>'•  •  }J. 
aesftsS,  7'.  [§  160].  H.  i  ]~t. 

s^esr,  7'.  sound  :  ^aJiity,  11.  37. 
«&v«j0<;a»dr,  'Thou  with  tinU 

.  sen  in  comp.  for  Wi'.   10.  42. 
se&ffi,  n.  a  calf.  10.  ]7  [e./i 
!'.».  i  i. 


X.4  S3To\) 


The  adj.  form  is  *&j».    [§  131.1 

Hence,  *z>cy,  a  cow  with  her  calf,   4.  73 ;   <jy 

"•    [45-] 
esresr^,   n.   [T.  KANNA,  sweet  cane], 

sugar-cane:  «^4,  1.  46;  8.178,' 

5.  229;  6.  83;  8.  82. 
,  ?'.  [§  64],  defend,  guard  ;  sustain, 

uphold,  1.42;  3.  14;   4.98,  100; 

5.32,100,117,224;  7.46;  25.io; 

27.  37  ;  33.  i ;  50.  15. 

,  n,  [S.KAc],  gems,  precious  stones, 
9.  13. 

LL®,  n.  sight,  view,  perception,  know- 
ledge :  unffGmsu,  Qsnppu),  2.  88  ;  3. 
113;  37.  23;  phenomena,  3.  a1. 
[See  K.  Lex.] 

),  «.  a  wilderness,  forest,  jungle: 
for    «-®<£/r®,    12.   45.     [See 
S.    KASHTHA.] 
With  priam?,  aj&nr,  5. 104;  6.  73;  12.45;  48-  8,  9. 

«Td$Laoi_;   5.  27. 

«©«/r®,  a  burning  ground  :  iftu/rara,  6.  151. 
tf/ril®,  v,   [causal    of   ^/TOT-  =  aireoar'SI, 
§160],  show,  5.99;  10.39;  21.32; 
23.  19;  30.  4,  8,  &c.;  36.  30;  41. 
3;  4,  &c.     See  ^i/^f&S. 

•K/TLL^L®,  manifest,  2.  66. 

I.    <S/T(bW5    V.     [§   70.        See    #683T 


*<ril®,  */r<ia  I,,  T.  KAN-L]  sec,  be- 
hold,  5.  332,  333.  |>«r«u_»«^f.] 
II  make,  8.24;  5.  25.    [j^.] 

««*,  Lo  !  a  mere  expletive,  8.  6,  &c  ; 

[Comp.   *s*ri_»uj,  (}.  2>  &c.] 

*f(*s«"  =  ««9,'  that...  set-  not.1   I 
;5-r>-  6,19.  [See  »&,  but  u  it  ®  +  fl>*»  v   ' 
Introduction,  p.  xx.] 

a/rswwjii,  5.  173.      *r««r3«,  5.  ,,J4. 

****  [§  140],  'See!' 

*,«*«;«*•--  area,  [§  9^  NOTK],  5.  49,  213, 

i-rswu/fliu  [a/rebiy,    §  9^  \OTE],    8.   |. 
firanrt-paifliuirssr  for  *'&i#&*(5,  8.  8. 


>,  ;/.  affection,  5.  113,  221  ;  !).  -/>  ; 
30.  24;  36.  17.  [Ndladi,  p.  330; 
K.  Lex.] 

r0euesrt  a  lover,  loving  one.  2.  1  13;  a.  103,  105  ; 
19.  6;   pi.  ar/gtar,  srfleonr. 

0a3,  v.  [§  64],  delight  in,  12.  42. 

,  n.  ear:  QeeS,  &Qntrpjsl!iiJ>,  7.53  ; 

16.  35. 
sans  par  ?=.Qjit£irf9t  sirii^ssysuL^,  Glo- 

riosa  snpcrba,  a  tree  with  beautiful 

red  and  white,  lily-like  flowers,  3.  7  -. 
struiT&S,  n.  [S.  KAPALI],  '  Civan  :  he  of 

the  skull/  13.  39.  Comp.OsusaarL.fea. 

See  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  379;  Bhaga- 


1    The  word   (*/rii8),  in  frequent  use  by  Tim-VaJluvar,  and  other  more  recent  South-Indian 
authors,  literally  means  '  vision,'  and  is  used  to  express  that  instinctive  apprehension,  or  spiridi.il 
perception,  of  the  right  and  true,  that  belongs  only  to  devout  souls.     It  takes  the  place  of  '  faith,'  for 
which  there  is  in  pure  Tamil  no  exact  equivalent.     It  is  to  this  faculty  that  the  revelation  of  dui\  i^ 
assigned  ;  and  the  following  verse  exhibits  the  sanctions  of  right  conduct  in  a  remarkable  way  : 
'  Ev'n  when  resources  fail,  they  weary  not  of  kindness  due, 
They  to  whom  duty's  self  appears  in  VISION  true.'     (218) 

This  spiritual  faculty  may  be  injured  by  the  dominance  of  the  senses,  and  is  only  fully  exercised  by 
those  who  have  attained  to  self-mastery  : 

'  Men  who  have  conquered  sense,  with  sight  from  sordid  VISION  freed, 
Desire  not  othei  good,  e'en  in  the  hour  of  sorest  need.'     (174, 
Again  : 

'  The  men  of  VISION  pure,  from  vvildering  folly  free, 
Not  e'en  in  thoughtless  hour  speak  words  of  vanity.'     .;  199) 

In  another  place  he  talks  of  'pure  and  passionless  vision.'     And  again  he  sajs: 
'  Darkness  departs,  and  rapture  springs  to  men  who  sec 
The  mystic  VISION  pure,  from  all  delusion  free.'     (352) 


And  : 


'  Though  troubles  press,  no  shameful  deeds  they  do 
Whose  eyes  the  ever-during  VISION  view.'     (654 

Hence  to  the  Tamil  poet  duty  is  nothing  arbitrary,  but  is  the  revelation  to 
ich  is  within  the  veil. 


cu>  c-l  that 


1  nr  li 


Jr. 


viita  Putana,  IV.  §§  2-7  ;  Ka^i  Kh. 
87.  IT,  &c. 

'.    .    .    .    fttar   fiftf    Q»atr._fc> 
fotfu  frtam>t    Qrmt*f   Qfrftn-Gf  I  ' 

O,  «.  [S.  KAMA],  love  ;  lust. 

uxir,  the  god  of  love,  1">.   41;    -'.'.   10. 


to*  »,B«f,  'the  sword-fish  lust,'  5.  106;  i'l.  15. 

iq,  n.  a  handle,  9.  13. 

i,  //.  [S.  KAY  A"),  the  body,  "> 
241;  6.  163;  11.29; 

o  •  •  O 

oee  ft-L.  6U.  tLi—Lct-if  ajirsanS)  (&LDLJ. 
*/r«J,  v.  dr.  and  «.  [§  57],  be  hot,  angry ; 
consume,  6.  200  ;  1 2.  ;  .  1 ."»  4 
26.     [Comp.  S.  KAC  and  KAM.] 

airoaartJ),  H.  [S.  KARANA],  cause 

26.  13  ;  81.  i  ;    i'.». 

eaotmfia,  n.  a  causer,  4.  2:4. 
Wteo*,  ».  [S.  KARIKA],  a  lady. 

*r*.«ur/,   49.  3. 

5^/tJ),  blackness,  dark  n 

9;  7.49>/o;  1  "3- 

See  sQeoLD.     [Comp.  S.  KALA.] 
es>>}&*n#>  jyo>uMr«r,  legend,  7.  57,  &c. 
i,  //.  [S.  KALA],  time  :  «*«>,  5. 30- 
y,,  i;:.  ^13.314:  "•  M-  l-'-44 
20 ;  3«.  1 4 

•Mtf;*,  it.  \',  an  interval  of  time, 

12-43- 

ar,  n.  [S.  KAIJV],  the  god  of  death : 
weir,  9.  70 ;  15. 41 ;  23.  34 ;  29.  26. 


I.  //.  a  leg,  foot,  post,  stalk:  unju 
13- ;  9.  70;   16.  i;  29.  26.      See  ' 


«5iS*«/*i,  root  of  the  hair,  3.  1  70. 

II.  a  channel:  «/ff!t/**/r«>,  23.  5. 

III.  for  <*/r«ui,  time,  7.  ;,; 

IV.  [C.  GALI],  wind  :  *np&, 

3.  24;  5.29,106,277;  6.80;  :J. 

27.  25. 

>,  the  restless  wind  :  **'«£. 

i)  *ff6utr,  4.  26  ;  (2)  morning  : 

,  4.  28. 

«ne8,  n.  the  blue  lily.  3X'.  18. 
*aeifl,  //.  |S.  KALI  =  the  black  one],  a 
28 


wife  of  Civan  ;  a  demoness   "2.  142  ; 
12.56.  Comp.Muir,vol.iv.p.42i,&c 

«/r/f>jp',».theair,wind,5.252.  [«ff6ul\'.j 
As  an  element  :  euaty,  euetfl. 

sircar,  anesrw,  n.  [S.  KANANA  j.  ii  \\ikler- 
ness,  forest  :  «/r®. 

«r«riJiv«J,   8.  32;    11'.   .45:     40.  3(). 

«rar«M*,  a  forester,  hunter,   »'.».  s.     St>e  S>?tf*'. 

LO,   «.    [S.    KIN<  IKA],    (i)   the 

frondosa:    (if^ss^L^. 
crimson    colour  (like   its   (lowers  V 
2,  i.-;    1!».  .;. 

/?/    ,  r.  [§  65],  lie  ;  remain  inactive, 

1.  60;  37.  6. 

fc-^Jbr,  5.  85  ;  6.180;  7.4;  10.  (.'. 
41.  14.  .  10. 

[Narayanan],  2:i 
iJutr,  8.  109. 

»^,  •  ihcc.  who  hast  lain.'  •"•   i  :<t. 
,  '  wilt  tliou  lu 

JP,  r.  [§  160],  lay  to  i 

ior  »i->#  [HI  Gr.  86],  laying  t.> 
8.  109. 

9i_  u^,n.  state,  condition,  13.  ^4 
Qcoartaerii,  n.  a  cup,   5. 
Qoufar,  n.  [S.  KIKATA],  Qa(tfiQ&ii—(v, 
in  disguise  «•!  .1  iiKMint.iiiKci    '.'    i  ;, 
[Comp.  Mahabharatii  III.  x.\\\ii. 
63,  &c.] 

,  //.  =4(y  [S.  Kin  MI],  ii  \v«'rin, 
4.  14- 

<b)=npp*>-  Thi  '1«1 

as  a  verb  (like  *<w);   £to  (* 
Qp9Qe>eir,  GpQpcor,  QpQuas  . 
lows  an  infinitive,  and  may  =  'be 
able.'    But  *  is  not  doubled  ! 

fi/q  seems  often  redundant. 

r,  I  cam  164. 

r,  one  who 

mtf,  ever  active,  rcstlcs- 
or,  5.  132,  .-60.     Here  may  be  -  &*:?•* 


,  I  cannot  remain,  - 
,  22.  38. 

:  Spent*,  ownership. 
«//r«or,  owner,  =  fc-SDi_aMar  ,  'J  1  4  '»  : 
3.  19. 


,  v.  [§  64],  tear  ;  wound,  pierce  : 
,  5.  157. 

),  a  prize  :  ifi&uQurgi,  L,™^*,,  40.  34. 

,  «.  lineage,  relationship  : 

6U/T63T,    5.   IOO. 


,  w.speech,  35.  13.  [From  v.  @&r, 
(i)  speak;  (2)  rise.] 
ff,  «/.  shine  forth,  resplendent,  8. 
103;  31.39;  36.  14. 

n.  parrot  :  =  the  speaker,  [®«r] 
,  Ji<®ar&u>,  19.  i,  &c.;  35.  13. 

Voc.  SareririLi,    19.  25. 
Qvflojiijs,  parrot-like,  8.  18. 

ufmSta,  green  (golden)  parrot:  «nu«bSef?,  10. 

70;  19.  37.     [By  metonomy  lor^ia.] 
•/KaraWiAlfieS,    7.  jj. 

«.  anything  false,  5.  128;  8.  31  ; 
13.32;  41.38.     See  8&. 

•!&,  wanton  smile,  35.  13. 

i,  «.  [S.  KITA],  an  insect,  worm, 
3.  19;  8.  79.     [Comp.  L/(£,  1.  26.] 

*  [S.  GITA],  song,  18.  i  ;  20.  18. 

*fft  n.  [S.  KIRTTI],  fame,  8.  45. 
i£,  n.  what  is  beneath,  5.  1  83.    Opp. 

tO   (oLD6V. 

(1)  As  a  case-ending  [§  251],  'under,'  5.  70;  7. 
37  1  47.  30. 

(2)  As  adjective,  12.  22,  23. 
SpGioevaa,  upside-down,  5.  82. 
SpuuQffritt,  thou  hast  subjected,  5.  128. 
StffQffiu,  done  before,  40.  34. 

ffjo^io,  n.  abasement;  what  is  low,  5.  364;  41.  38. 


I.  v.  cut,  rend  :  &)L$,  5.  132,  147. 

II.  //.  luck  ;  writing  inscribed  on  the 
brow :  ^yevQ/u^gg],  <aSj$. 

GsSewTfiQiei®*,  a  luckless  heart,  a  heart  unblest, 
5.  364. 

(1)  As  a  formative,  added  to  a  root.    See  «-*|®, 

Q^crj@.      So   t5tf,   c&  ($,    *$!, l^j    Qt-iff,  QUIT  (^.  QLHTUJ. 

Comp.  £>&>, 

(2)  S.  =yi<S,  earth.    Thus.  (glujetfaoDL.  =  profound 
obeisance,  40.  3. 

<3®@,  n.  hair;  tuft  of  hair,  top-knot; 
head,  5.  287;   17.  17.     [Comp.  S. 

GUCHCHHA,  GUNJA.  GUTSA.] 


I.  <§u.u>,  ;/.  [S.  KI;TA],  an  earthen  pot 

0«^0^,  an  oil-jar,  «.  y; 

<yfor*®._ia(  a  p0t  of  young  plantt,  i».  i. 

II.  ©i-ii,  ;/.  a  district  the  west: 
*/r®,  2.  27.    [See  u/^r^jr,  1 

,;/.  =  (5t_^)>bowels,entrail8  r 
//.[S.KUT],  family,  lineage,  house; 

body  ;  subject,  2.  8;  5.  iiv;  37.  2, 

22.     [Ndladi,  p.  334  ] 

,  5.  g;  26.  1  8.     cs^ffl,  86.  7. 

n.  [S.  KUT],  a  hut  ;  the  body, 

.-4. 


a  little  hut  ;  the  body,  25.  9  ;  26.  37. 
»,   3.  1  60. 


«.  crest  of  a  hill,  16.  43. 

Nig.    ®5)uJ7u  Q*f,i0q*S). 

,  v.  [§  57],  scoop  out,  make  hol- 
low ;  bathe,  7.  52. 

With  «^©,    5.  120.       «w«wr*,,   7.  41,  &C. 

tlt_J>,«.  [from  (5«sjri_£i],a  hole,  tank, 
3.  78. 

sror^,  ;/.  [S.  GUNA],  quality,  8.  117. 
Quality,  13.  46;  41.  18. 

g«BSfi^«\S,  unqualified,  6.  183.    See  XOTE. 

Disposition,  15.  2. 

Attribute,  18.4;  22.i6;41.23;49.i2. 

Excellence  (@6ZJBr<s<si_6u),  2.3;  4.  1  14; 

13.  28,30;  15.  7;  33.  u  ;  40.  i^; 

41.18,23. 

,  n,  horse:  tc/r,  L/ja9,  u/r^  2.  27  ; 

8.  116;  36.  7;  38.  4;  50.  i-}. 

7  (S&LJi-i,  n.  eagerness,  intense  de- 

sire :    L$(8j  LcQtffQ,  @  •gj(§e$unt  G. 

132,  133.    [An  imitative  word  ;  but 

comp.  S.  KUTU-KA  and  Qsirjd.] 

,  n.  [S.  KURPASA],  a  coat  of 

armour;  bodice;  garment,  25.6. 
uuiriujpi,  one  who  wears  a  rustic  garb,  1". 

26. 

tir,  n,  [S.  KUMARA],  a  son:  (i) 
Upamanyan,son  ofVasishtha  ;  (2) 
Subrahmanyan,  elder  son  of  £i  van, 
14.  51  [NOTE]. 
0^,  n.  [S.  KUMBIII],  hell  : 
24.  30. 


MH.x     - 


cu,  ;/.  [S.  KOKII.A],  a  bird,  famous 
for  its  song,  14.  25.  [See  note  on 
20.  9.] 

Imlra  became  a  Kuyil,  2<>.  9.     [See  Kfui  Kh. 

89.  32.] 
<ySj>u£f,  the  Kuyil  dccrul.  Is.     Coiu]«.  tla    tui 

forms  of  addros ! 

(3fftr«i>ij,«.the  body  :  <F/fVti  [^i-iisou] 
a.®J>ty,  3.  172,  i".:; ;  ").  2 1.1 ;  :.  l.  ; . 
26.  29 ;  37.  6 ;  4'i.  29. 

(5ff«V,  //.  perfume,  5.66 ;  26. 18.  [Comp. 

S.  KHURA.] 

I.  (9)@t  n.  [S.  r.TRi'].  a  divine  teacher. 
4.  91;  25.  10.  =GjQ*'t<pjBeoru>. 

«»;«••*,  1.3;  *"•  >•• 

<&$•**,  6.  270.      O3U-*,    I 

II.  splendour:  cso^juyp  [S.  r.iiw), 
the  bright  moon,  6.  104. 

> "•  a  small  bird  :  <5(5Ja?,  <J/fi) 
],  7.  29,49;  20.  9. 
(5(5(2?,  4.  2oS. 
($05®,  blindness. 

[j  131],  a  blind  cow.  5. 

W,  (5(5*,*^,  w.  a  fragrant  tree: 
/////>/,  2.  ,,         I;  was 

under  one  of  these  trees  that  Qivan 
appeared  to  Mfinikka-Ya^agai .  ( T. 
Va.Or.  1'ur.  II. 

,  M.  the  young  of  wild  anim.ils.  4 

,  f.  //.  [§  64],  [S.  KUR],  sound. 

<9».'|«jp*,«*.  tinkling  anklets,  18.  41;  23.  30. 
<9»r  *_*,,  13.  29;  34.  29. 

up,  «.  caste,  race :  (5^.,  5.  i  .-,4 
i  i ;, ;   1<>.  21 :   11.--;  SI.  i  -. 

9*Jgf*<*,  upholder  of  tl.< 

Qf&G*1*,  *  Hrahman,  6.  1 1  .-. 
«*,  ailj.  rare,  distinguished,  16.  1 1. 

af  [a.6D/r«v],  r.  hold  familiar 
intercourse,  shine  resplendent,  \\\. 
20;  41.  18;  43.  2,  7. 

:.  cuive  :  «4r,  7.  63. 

Shine,  or  curve,  or  walk .  _:•.  :  7.    &»n<b  -.  ^«,/«,iA. 
<S*".  <»•"•(,  <p*»»^*)«J«J>j»,  'the  decad  of  joyous 
commanion    with   the   saints   in   resplcmlcnt 
^*Sw,'  40. 

®<wr.4P*lM,  'Tillai  the  joyous,  resplendent  home,' 
40.  4,  Ac. 

«®,  7'-  "•  shake.  1  1.  ;]. 
30 


,  11.    |S.    Kl'VAI.AYA],  i-artll,    7. 

;  16.  43. 

,  ».  [S.  KUVALA],  the  water-lily, 


,  <  whose  eyes  are  like  K.  il->v. 


/  io««/,  'the  <lark   ilo\\t-r>  of  tlir 
blooming  K..'   7.  49. 

«>,  //.  a  heap,  .'V  i  24. 
,  t(.  //-.  and  /////-.  be  conical,  glo- 
bular; clasp,  as  hands  in  pi. 
>.]    Comp.  «a9. 

,  89.  a;  51.  22. 
,  40.  21.     «/*  «J«»/.   1 

ft.-*  ^rf«.f/,    ].   10. 

5«o«/,  «.  lu-ap.  conical  pile. 
9*0«OuP,  4.  i 

,  beauty. 

,  epithet  of  (,'i  von  --•«**.•<*,  the  Ix-antilul, 

.  ;  ;W.  40. 

«»,  n.  a  musical  pipe,  flute.  '.'1.   ;i. 
[(5P,  hollow.  ] 

Mian's  hair,  a  >  !. 
See  *•*,  »>^*. 

«\5*r/  leWA  9i#*ier^  «  «.«.- 
-»*l,  »he  with  h*ir  n.llul  u, 

,   16.  8.     ««•}«•«.  41    i  | 

,  •"•  stammer  out.    .1 

ti,  //.  company,  band,  su.irm  . 
*ul«_i/>,  1.4^  1.4-; 

I''.,  i  ;  I'.'. 

h  ll  '/  >  •     [*•  K1  '  -  Kl  '  Al-  oilli-M, 
flock  together:  «_tli_»  «L.©,  21.  1  4. 


'•  :-  ($  ^4],  make  soft,  bruis--  ;  titter 

softl\-  and  sadly,  4.  219; 
<9~<P*f\u*f,  88. 

II.  r.  [§  -,-\,  languish;  .^r^w  tender, 
be  crushed. 

jf»t  gOT^Cudr,  my  mind  grows  i 

III.  //.  car-rin  1<>.  69. 

ti,  n.  [S.  Kf'i..\],  a   tank.      Com;). 


0«r«>ru,  8.  QO. 

,  7'.  [§  64).  bathe,  T,.  i/iS  ;   3fi.  iy. 


'ff>  7'-    L§  .•>/}   be   gracious,,  well 
pleased,  10.52,72;  11.57;  13.  42. 


I.  n.  sign  ;  name,  2.  91  ;  4.  1  14  ;  40.  13  ; 
41.  23  ;  51.  7.    \Naladi,  p.  337.] 

@^9A  Qff/rar,  understand  the  sacred  sign    23   ao  • 
45.  ii. 

©OTigi^CW.*,  one  possessed  of  good  qualities, 
13.  46. 

II.  v.  [§  64],  indicate. 

($<S\OLI,  «.  intention;  will,  5.  146,  219;  6.  133; 
24.  30;  45.  n. 

>,    smallness.      [See 


§ 


f,  sudden,  hot  perspiration  through  emo- 
tion, 5.  227. 

P*\£ffi,  underwood  in  a  forest,  6.  81. 
i,  ?j.  draw  nigh  to,  5.  151;  22.  16. 

',  11.  deficiency :  (wsofljsu.  (wsro/Dij 
LWT®,  17.  1 6,  36;  22.  16,  17  ;  43. 13. 
r>£>ti>,  ;/.  a  fault:  iSs^ip,  6.  113;  8. 
117;  33.  ii. 

r>,  a  £aiva  shrine,  2.  91 ;  39. 
ii.     [See  NOTE.] 
bgy,  I.  z>.  diminish,  6.  105  ;  10.  32  ; 
15.  7.     [(5^z/,  Ndladi,  p.  337.] 
II.  «.  a  (tapering)  hill,  4.  98;  5.  96; 

6.  76,  105;  22.  17,  35;  27.  j;  33. 
ii,  26. 

©safl,  v.  a.  and  n.  [§  64],  bend,  dance, 
5.  51;  32.4i;  40.3. 

(gafiiJLj,  a  dance,  10.  12. 
(grsfiti  Quireur>  a  dancer,  3.  102. 

:,  v.  be  timid,  shrink  back  abashed  ; 
'that  even  celestials  fear  to  praise/ 

7.  2. 

i,».  [S.  KUTA],  'hut,'  i. e.  the  body. 
C-omp.  ai_@  (Stf-  (S1?  ^- 

ni_[*  «.!_<£,  a  walking  tenement,  25.  13. 

50,  «.  a  name  of  Madura,  =any 
gathering  together,  a  confluence  of 
rivers  :  aUStpeo,  4.  9 1 .  [See  Tiru- 
vilai.  9,  19.] 

',  I.  v.  join,  embrace ;  be  possible, 
fitting,  5.  219,  399;  8.  98;  13.  46; 
15.  3  ;  26.  5,  7  ;  34.  20 ;  50.  4,  7,  12. 

31 


body,  19.  21  ;  40 

,   5.   220,  2J4,  399. 

asscmblage: 


,  I.  *'.  «.  [§  1  60,  from  *J*l  join 
gather,  collect,  6.175;  U.  J*J  L'f; 
4,  &c. 

II.  «.   assemblage;  connection    U> 
56,  64. 

,  completely,  23.  30. 
,  «.  [S.  GURI),  Kwml,  p.  332],  ;l 
dance  :  ist-eoru,  ist-wy  3.  1  02  ;  .">.  121; 
51.  7-     See  NOTE  VI  to  'life.' 

i7swi_aj/7€OT,  the  dancer.  .">. 
170;  7.46;  15.4;  43.  9;  51.  7. 

,  the  dance,  50.  10. 
ULj,  v.  a.  close,  clasp  hands  in 
worship  :  (geS,  O^/r^,  20.  15. 
Jiity,  z/.  «.  close  up.   Comp.  O«/rJ>Ly. 
,  n.  a  thatched  roof;  a  hut,  shed, 
cottage:  QumLs  aL.eoir/of  the  body  ' 
26.  25. 

,  n.  sharpness. 
•a^/f,  ^'.  intense. 

«-(%*,    3.   IO2. 

«_/f,  <si.(3,  ?;.  be  intense. 

«-jtjjuj-^,  singing  with  concentrated  devotion, 

13.  28. 
This  verb  is  generally  added  to  nouns,  as  *rf, 

«Sjfia/iD}  <oy«irL/,  /*3s3ra/,  &c.,    7.   57;    4").  35. 

«-/f^  /FIUOT*  Qa/rar&r,  '  the  plague  of  piercing 
eyes,'  4.  35. 

«_«#,  n.  daily  wage,  8.  47. 

i_©96*ru),  Bel,  Indian  pomegranate: 
Crataeva  Marmelost  L>\  a  tree 
sacred  to  Civan,  17.  37.  [See 
Ainslie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  86-88,  where  it 
is  called  Qsirsus^iruo  (Qsn  may  be 
correct?).  S.  VILVA  (or  BII 
Acgle  Marmclos.  T.  MAREDU.] 

&_|o/,  v.  a.  and  ;/.  call  :  a^urf®,  3. 
148;  20.9;  25.3;  28.8;  33.16. 

«-w<&,  call  Him  !  18.  4,&c. 

«LIU  for  «-eV,  5.  18  1.     «_^  for  «-«<"•  IS. 

^oJ®,  24.  30.    [®®.] 

,  «.  [S.  KI~LA],  the  rear  of  an 


army:  asai—ssLeD^,  4f>.  7  ;  women's 
back-hair?    «.6a>cctu/7,  24.  17. 


I.  :•.  proclaim,  publish,  tell  out,  im- 
part:   @<L/a»L/,  UHQ,  ft-ew.    1' 

33.  16,  17. 

II.  ;/.  share,  part :  u»(5,  uir^t  2.  107  ; 
51.  31. 

«**,  8.  64 ;  6.  266  ;  88.  6  ;  89.  2  ;  4- 

\  a  man  :    **-ppii>y   &^  JDJPGP, 
tar,  5.  i8c 
36.  37. 
glory. 

I,  O  noble  ones !  84.  18. 


I  ,    in(r.  [$  68  ;  see  A'J/.  and  comp. 
S.  KIUD.    See  also  0«®J,  perish,  be 
destroyed,  5. 1 1 8 ;  1 1 .  fn, 

39 ;  2  I.  32  ;  2f>.  1 8 ;  43.  1 1  ;  5(  > 

II  ;.  .';.  [$64],  destroy,  1.6;  5.  i 
11. 

eft-*,  1  reined  one,  10.  j6. 
P,  my  rained  state,  S3.  i  j. 
t.l.n.i.  :,. 

.,  w.  carp-fish  :  *iu«0,  41.  ',s 
TJXBUI  [S.  KA^ ;  see  <?«(}, 
i«r,  C»ff  ],  splendour. 

:-,  O  source  of  light  I  tl.  15.  Hence 
v.  Q*O<y.  O»BR.  The  root  indicates  'oon- 
ncction  ;  light.'  Its  form,  are  O«<yA,  0«^. 

«a/?jy  (<7«ifj»),  «.  a  large  fish. 
[Comp.  S.  KHALIFA.] 
5,  w.  destruction,  5.  109,  228. 

It  18;  r.'.  17 .  50.  .3.    [O«®.] 

C««uO,  10.  26. 

C«t^*,  a  destroyer,  84. 3, 13 ;  one  rained,  80.  10. 
[Se*  rfW.] 
»o)  [S.  KM  FDA],  distress 

;  31.39;  43.36.     Comp. 
««/«>J\  ;/.  [S.  KFVAI  A],  absoluteness, 
isolation,  43.  24. 

mQ*ii-n  [S.  K£VARTA],  a  fisherman, 
2.  17.  [See  Timvijai.  57;  Note- 
on  8.  11.] 

it,  n.  swine,  boar,  hoc; :  u^nfS,  43. 
24.     [Tiruvilai.  4;,.] 
32 


I.  brilliance.  8.  103.    See 

II.  comparison.     Comp.  (?««r. 

<7«^*»,  incoiiipnraMc,  7.  30. 


I.  :  (t.  [§  70],  hear;  ask;  <  109, 
in,  ^09  1  s.  31,  67;   -T,.  ,3. 

<?**'<*,  w.  hearing,  6. 

C«tl  J,  r>.  [|  i6o"l,  cause  to  hear.  ",.  1  1  1. 

II.  aflRnity.  kinship:  G«<Tf,  Qs£, 
(?*«ra/«Br,  «.  husband,  '.'.  -,i.    [? 


on*. 

I.  //.  a  hand  :  *7ir.  3.  16:  ;  .">.  :.  ^.  ] 

14,  a   .  :i:.. 


Q^rqM***.  a  worship] 
•«4QM*.  wield,  carry,  2.  no;  19.  18. 
•»«  ^  t,  v.  help,    I 
•*»*  m*ut*r,  Vishnu,  23.  39. 
•NMlMvp,  recompense  .    J/*V«'"*.   22.  6,  40  ; 
«-•  -. 

II.  trunk  of  an  elephant:  ^a>L9d»*, 

5.  i  '>  i  :  (J.  94. 
Ill   place;  spacr 

>,  completely,  M>  as  to  (ill  up  th< 

i  tutor  =  «<u<ar,  a  base  fell 

[Scr  K.  an«!  \.   Lrx.J 

S.  KAIL  ASA],  (,'iv.in  's  ] 

»,    'J.    14'!. 

,  //.  a  heron,   11.   77.     [Tiru- 

vijai.  4»-l 

n 

....  'having  coil*  of  claik 
hair  that  drinks  in  prrhm 

Qsamims,  «.  the  bosom,  XI  ;oo  ; 

7.52;  14.  33. 

t,  women,  6.  5. 

*i*>'r  [from  QsnV, 
crooked,  flexile.     S.    K«H..\J.    I    ;t 
flag,  banner,  ii.  104;  !>.  10  ;  I 
40;  25.  i. 

*«•«,  a  place,  1ft.  10. 
OwA.OM9.Ou/tlr,  4.  95  ;  9.  63. 

II.  a  creeping  plant,  '  18   <r>. 

Qanuf.jp  =  ®ff>®,    pine  an 

elephant  '<  jaw,  4.  63. 


Gait®-— Ganifrg. 


I.  v.  [§  64]  =  FF,  PQ,  csy®^,  give,  2.  88. 

Q«f«Di_,  ».  a  gift  [?  for  Q*^],  36.  32. 

\\.adj.  =  $®,  evil,  base,  cruel,  severe, 

33.  I,  a;  50.  15.     Comp.  <s<sa>i_. 
Q«/r®|srou>,  «.  [§131],  cruelty,  6.339. 

QarGJia,  fierce,  6.  76. 

QsrijLiu,  Q«K$.(?(uasr,  3.  171;  5.  212;  32.  40. 

III.  for  Q<s/r633r®,  7.  14;  51.  26. 

QcSTL^,  v.  [§  62;  Kurral,  663], 

send  whirling  away,  3.  12. 
Q&mL®,  v.  [§  62],  strike  on  a  tambour. 

In  xi.  Q«iiL_»(?iar  seems  to  be  the  Telugu  im- 
perative, first  person  plural:  KOTTAMU/  strike 


OTTi_60,  «.  a  cloud:  CWti,  30.  17. 
Comp.  3.  65-95. 

An  epithet  ofQivan:  CID«RJT.  [Comp.Tiruvilai.ig.] 

].  '  In  40.  4 


p,  n.  cluster,  6.  119. 
fsg)  for  Qsrrpgj,  18.  37;  51.  22. 
u>|L/,  ;/.  a  branch,  bough:  Q-S/UJL/, 
6.76;  18.  24;  40.21,37. 

QsFibui,  n.,  =  Qaru>L/}  QatQfGisii&Li,  5.  266;  6.77. 

G<!F/ra>|<sroLo,  roundness  :  £>ffLL&}  40.  37. 
ui  v.  [§  57],  pluck,  cull  :  ufS,  13.  4, 
&c.  ;  41.  25;  42.  22. 


rter*  \   It  may  be  a  Telugu  form  :  AMU  +  6. 


I.  v.  [N.  Lex.],  kill,  destroy,  5.  384; 
9.  70;  12.  9,  64. 

II.  Q.s>/ra;|GW,  an  expletive,  generally 
with  an  interrog.,  5.  329;  22.  37. 

trc&rff  Qsr&i  (Sear,  'When,  ah  !  when  ?'  27.  4,  &c. 

o/szoa/,   n.    a  creeper,  a  kind  of 
ia,  6.  5  :  Qsrr&ieaxsuff  Qfsueunii. 

l,  v-  [§  64],  sweep  down,  carry 
away  —  as  a  torrent,  3.  84;  6.  187. 
Comp.  ai£l. 

&n(Lg—<55)LE.    The  idea  is  'luxuri- 
ance,   softness,    tenderness.'     See 
[§ 


,  6.  144.     Q*ro>!^j*»-*,   22.  17. 


33 


.  104,  105.    Comp.  •&*-*. 
r,  husband,  9.  12. 
,  tender  shoot,  B.  270. 
^*  OsrW*^,  c.  14.    Comp.  6.  138. 
<a/,  p.  kindle;  burn  up,  6.  73. 
))  n.  a  fire-brand,  6.  33. 
, «.  pillage,  booty ;  pestilence, 
4-35- 

^.  take,  receive,  acquire, 
comprehend,  3. 112;  5.  5, 1 81 ;  22. 
37,&c.;36.  9-ii;46.4.  [Corr.  t<> 
Q^/r®,  §  56.  (III).]  See  .gar. 

Qff<rar|Ccinr,   6    K 
i         /         \JB 

«rairQaj-afr®,  by  what  means?  6.  316,  352. 
Q«/r«frj_£?,  what  (it)  has  seized,  4.  63 ;  22.  37. 

[But  See  0«/r«!*n_6Brj>.] 

sirefr\<5s)s,   n.,   Qsrr&r(il.)uirQJ  tenet ; 
fact,  2.8,  30,45,61;  5.i8o. 

m£uoflQair:5L(sirp)&3sv>,  'Tillai  that  contains,  holds, 
Qivan,  the  Dancer — my  gem,'  31.  4,  &c. 

ib.  n.  victory :    QeupfS  ;    from 
®),  9.  63. 

*  <3$<x>!i,  a  royal  charger,  8.  116. 
/r*i>#  gSeu.  6.  113. 

1  2 

Nig.   O«r/6^)CiD   «I«BTO»ID  Qeifirf) 

3 
Garj?  sunQiUfBT — (tpuGur. 

t  n.  a.  tree :  Cassia  fistula^ 
8.  94,  97;  9.  735  13.i7;34.39.  It 
has  long  fragrant  yellow  leaves. 
[Ainslie,  vol.  i.  p.  61.] 

Qu/r<5jr«Bflajr  ^Jrargi/E)  Oa/reSrsro/),  '  cassia  that  gleams 
like  gold,'  6.  1 14. 

Qa/rsiraopiu/raJr,  Qivan,   5.  l82. 

[aairssofl  arr»j>D  Q«/r«Br«n/) ;   «riar 
«a/6BB'6i)!T  idtriiSfi  GJCJCi  Qarfiraif)  • 

'  His  chaplet  torwa,  whose  perfume  fills  autumn- 
groves; 

And  cassia-garlands  bright  His  beauteous  breast 
adorn.' — Perun-devanar,  ypgrgrp,  1.] 

I.  <?*ff,  «.  a  king,  god :  jjff»t  4.  157; 

5. 116-119;  8.47; 9- 28; 13-  2°J 

33. 6,  j  o ;  36.  37 ;  37. 5.   See_<?*ff«fr, 

Ctf/r co/7  637",  QsrresTSiiesr. 

II.  as  *#.  great;  beauty,  2.  72. 

G*/r]atf9,  a  Qa'iva  shrine.  =^(j««r«/®5*pP,  the  great 
estuary:  Qu^g^p,  1.3;  4.  157;  18.  24;  48. 
3,  &c. 

See  CwSAi  [G«f  +  fi)*>],  a  palace,  temple. 

III.  v.  [§  64],  link  to,  string  on,  47. 1 1 . 
Gsnn®,  n.  the  silk-cotton  tree,  Bom- 

bax  gcssipimimt  39.  2. 

*D 


(2«s?/rif,  n.  [S.  KOTI],  ten  millions,  8.4; 
4.44;  16.14. 

[For  Q«ri».,  a  banner,  2.  104.] 

Qsnes)L^y  n.  the  intense  heat  of  the  hot 

season,  3.  71. 

I  .  Q&neaar,  n.  [S.  KONA],  a  curve,  16.  29. 
Car^r-/  ifc»;>,  the  much-curved  crescent  moon, 

86.37. 
II.  Gaii  sga  }  v.  n.  bend.    See  (?«IT®. 

G"&tf*>,  4.  70. 

Gang},  n.  fault,  impurity,  7.  39  ;  19. 

40,  25  ;  43 
C«r,»rii®,  r.  purify,  7.  19,  66;  8.  117;  19.  10; 

88.30. 
C«/P««(  pore,  22.  1  7  ;  81.  ao. 

,  n.  a  wreath  of  flowers  :  Q*n 
*(5y)&t  7.  53. 

fi£;u>t3,  the  dragon-fly,   7:////<w 
sflcndens,  10.  4,  &c.     See  <?*/r  and 


j),  n.  [S.  KOPA],  anger:    8«rti, 

3-73- 

iTuniru),  n.  [S.  KOMALA],  tenderness, 

;  41.  23.    [Or,  by  met. 

=  C-  €&>(£.] 


45.  10;  48. 
QsirtSej,  n.  [Gfir  +  £)«],  a  palace,  tcm- 

Pk  5-  55,  3«*J  9-  »5,  J9J  12-9; 
39;  37.21,37. 

I.  ft.  beauty:  Qsa«t  «/?b»r«u/r«r,  11-77; 
51.  22.     Comp.  Q&n®)u>. 

II.  branch  of  a  tree:  u)jr«O«ff(ic/. 

G»rf>  C^«*  -  O«»iit/jC/*.  honey  from  the  bough, 
8.  157;  19.  .15;  34.  39. 

ut,  H.  [S.  KOLAHALA],  ?  = 
LD,  uproar,  12.  29. 


I.  ;/.  [S.  KOLA,  GOLA],  majesty,  splen- 
dour, beauty,  seemly  array,  form, 
2.30, 72 ;  5. 170,257  ;  7.\<)(adv.);  8. 
50;  10.72;  IS.io;  30.16,17;  43.7. 

Cjrtui  <y£itf,  in  auspicious  majesty,   18.  42. 
C*r«^  *«_*r*,  14.  50;   16.  43. 

C«/«u  loot--.  Qurar,   88.  40. 

II.  epithet  of  £ivan,  =  '  form  unique,' 

").  170. 

34 


III.  a  raft  :  O^ULAC,  L/Ssror,  50.  i  z. 
GsirojeauriJ),  n.  [S.  KAUPlNAJ,  a  small 

waist-cloth,  12.  2. 

)   n.   domestic    or    wild    fowl  : 

D,  7.  29;  20.  9. 
Q&n&r.     See  Q&ir&r. 
Qairesr,  ;/.  a  king  :  QSIT,  Qsir\u)irGsrt  1.9; 

2.40;  5.59,118,119,^  7.50; 

9.  7;    10.  i,  52;   16.  i  i  ;    l'.».  i,  17, 

25,37;  33.  16,  40;  43.  9. 

C«rorM»,    8.  83;   18.  46. 


Q*eiriftt  n.  [S.GAURl],  a  name  of  (^atti, 
Q<f«r«y,t/.<7.  grasp,  take,  3.133. 


>t  n.  [S.  JAGAT],  the  world: 
4.68;  .21.10;  41.35. 

*j««>u>  (**era>),  [S.  (AKALA] :  (i)  all ; 
(2)  material  being. 

*|««ir.     NOTES  IV,  XII. 

I.#»«ti,  #W(5,H.  [S.9ANKU.\].a  conch- 
shell,  7.51;  9.53;  20.9;  41).  57. 
Q«**y*ai  7. 39. 

II.  ;/.  an  assembly  [S.  SAM  +  GA],  43. 
39.  [Sce^<5^ir«uffi-A,5i,55,56.] 

*fjsu>u)t  n.  [S.  SAM  +  GA],  association ; 
opposed  to  fireuoui  [S.  ST«i.\]:  that 
which  has  power  of  locomotion, 
1.  30. 

*»«ff«or,  n.  [S.  £AN-K.\R.\  =  maker  of 
I.   Comp.  fAM-BHu],  an  epithet 
ofC^ivan,  5.24i,2.-/»;  lO.fl 
23.io;44.6.  (=.&ap6s> 
G&iirear ;  but  from   S.  r.\M 
destroyer.      Sec   Tiru-aru}-payan 
I.  8,  9.    NOTE  XII.) 

efeDftuear,  n.  the  essential  Being,  0. 
1 20,  121. 

«r*i«iri>  Ou/ci*«8*S^  *rtioriS<3iju*fir.     [S.  SAfi- 

JAN.]    •**>fm.»fi*>fi  —  fti&,  essence. 
^aoi_, «.  [S.  JATA],  top-knot  of  braided 
hair,  5.256;  6.144;  12. 26. 
34.7,24;  3' 

*«>(-|iVtl6e«4r,   23.27.      •£**?  *ri  »m>L., 
*mM-u~ar,   6.  4.      *«M-utJLM*,   8.  64. 
Qirttrmt*  *«Bi_i»riar,    1' 


fil.t-.u>,  n.  rule,  regulation,  30.  6.  [Per- 
haps S.  SHASH,  SHAT.] 

LL®  [S.  CATH],  evil,  10.  25(?). 
w,  n.  [S.  CHANDA],  violence. 

ia,  a  hurricane,  4.  55. 

S.   CHANDA-flc- 

VARA  +  NAYANA  =  'Durga'V  Lord's 
devotee'],  a  devotee,  15.  25-28; 
P.  Puran.  III.  (vi),  vol.  i.  p.  512. 
337/r,  n.  [S.CHATURA;  comp.*/^7rf?ajt 
(i)  ability,  cleverness  :  egjffuut, 
eiru>irji&uij>f  4.  71;  5.  56;  12.  30,  74  j 
86.5. 

#3rfui_,  cleverly,  2.  28.  ^j*,  #^^;  22.  37;  43.  39. 

•^j<riJJQu0io/rsijr)  24.  io. 

(2)  four  [S.  CHATUR]. 

«-j»*|GP*dr=»r«*j<jp*«r,  Brahma:  jyio*,  14.  18. 

<^[S.CAKTi]/energy,'4.44;  9.i.  See 
introduction  to  7,  and  NOTE  XIII. 

In  Civa-iiana-bodham,  p.  g9>  is  a  va]uabie  ex. 
cursus  on  C.atti. 

fB0esru>,  f&gi,  n.  [S.  CHANDANA],  san- 

dal-wood:  Santalum  album,  8.89; 

4.  203;  17.  29. 
endear,  n.  [S.  CHANDRA],  =Qfrru>Gsr, 

the  moon-god,  8.  85  ;  12.  13  ;  13.  58. 

In  the  slaughter  at  Dakshan's  sacri- 

fice he  lost  his  head. 

Or<o**£r«lr,  a  name  of  C.ivan. 
et&nfiguih   [S.  CHANDRA-DVlPA],   a   shrine  so 
called  (?),  2.  97. 

<FU>^,  n.  [S.  SAM  +  1  =  together],  sect, 
3.17,  79;  11.65;  15.2i;  43.9. 

eiDveiirjf),  n.  sectarian  disputant,  4.  52. 


I.  [S.  JAVA],  victory,  2.  58. 

#io|#iu!  [S.JAYA-JAYA],  victory!  4.8;  5.3,248. 
See  Qaipfl,  QOJ&IS. 

II.  «.  [S.  KSHAYA],  destruction,  12.  j  6. 

fff®,  n.  [S.  SARIT],  a  thread,  string, 

12.  2. 
fa<sssri^)  n.  [S.  CHARANA],  a  foot;  sup- 

port, 4.  105;  10.34. 
<F[T<o98r,  n.  refuge:  ^GS>I—&&&)LC>)  5.  257; 
30.  23. 

w,  n.  [S.  fRADDHA,  \/CRAT],  faith; 
devotion:  QffjSemjS,  4.51. 
^  [§  57],  be  overturned,  14.  13. 
35 


I-  n.  [S.  JALA],  water,  12.  6,  7. 
II.  malice  [S.  CHHALA],  12.  6,  7  ,8. 
(.Comp.  Muir,  vol.  v.  p.  365.] 

#»4w*,   «.   [S.  JALANDHARA],  an 
Asura  slain  by  £ivan,  12.  69. 

°>  ^  [§  64 ;  S.  CHAL],  be  weary: 
spent,  4.  59;  49.  58. 
:^P4,  «.,  2.  139;  n.  70. 

«•  [S.  CHAPALA],  fluctuation: 
tfa/fcwfftfi.^  weakness,  as    of  an 
infant,  11.66;  50.  17. 
*®,  «•  fault ;  ignorance ;  falsehood: 

7,  f.  /m^.  [§  58],  die:  g)/r,  u,/rar, 
3.165;  5.  12,13,72,335;  14.  17; 
35.  25 ;  50.  23. 

*,z£W,  23.    ftib  =  fr(S&t  5.  j(j, 
fi«o  =  frail  death,  30.  23;  51.  29. 

o,  n.  [S.  SAGARA],  a  sea,  4.  25. 
',  ^.deviate;  'the overturned  offer- 
ing/ 14. 13. 

A  «.  [S.  JATI],  tribe,  caste,  15.  26; 
31.17;  49.58. 

,  «.,  =&rs0,  stev  [S.  SASTRA], 
science,  2.  96;  4.  51;  11.  65. 


I.  n.  acclamation,  with  loud  acclaim. 
In  2.28,  Com. says (g^sroj^G^a/^OT. 
If  so,  from  S.  SARATHI  ;  43.  39 ;  45. 
1 8.    [Comp.  fn/r&i  and  S.  SADHU.] 

II.  v.  apply,  put  to,  close,  12.  8. 
isfu),  ffitrisgr,  n.  [S.  CANTA],  aromatic 
fragrant  paste,  2.31 ;  4. 203 ;  6. 1 20 ; 
10.  70;  41.  6. 

par*  frtgiesrr,  those  anointed  with  sandal-wood 
paste  perfume,  17.  29. 

,  v.  tr.  and  intr.  bend,  bow,  5.  25. 

iur  <5y«>ri/>  undeviating  affection,  4.  86. 

d,  n.  beauty,  4.  31. 

Nig.   fruiio  atarugi  QtaburQ 


T  =  @fir,  v.  [§  60],  cling;  approach, 
draw  near,  1.  87;  4.  71;  5.  56;  7. 
50;  10.34;  11.50;  21.28;  27.3; 
86.5;  45.  8. 

V,  v.  [§  70],  abound :  fireo, 

*D  2 


II  If  60 


much,  abundantly,  utterly,  16.  44  ; 
19.38;  25.24;  33.36. 
•PJL£6V,  tt.a  woman's  play  : 
12.    See  introduction  to  12. 

,  v.  speak,  declare  : 
14.  22;  36.  5.    Comp. 


on  the  crest:  Qivan,  30.  18;  49.56. 

QaQsear,  adv.    [§  273,   eresr  =  eresyp], 

tightly,  5.  130;  36.  40;  37.  4,  &c. 

$Ll®,  ;/.  excellence,  10.  28. 

6±L-eor,  ».  [S.  C.ISHTA],  the  excellent 
one;  pi.  GtLi-ir,  saints,  9.  74  ;  10.  28  ; 
80.7;  42.6.  Comp.eS&LLL-ir.  Some- 
times confounded  with  ®fifiii. 

&tfi_/r,  n.  blind  men,  ignorant  persons: 
<5(3t_/r  [fy®=<50®],  51.  33. 

See  wimtf,  78.  7  :  ^^»;i^j;Ju/u|»^-*iCuf  •., 
like  a  blind  man  that  has  stumbled  over  a  sleep- 
ing tiger.  See,  also,  the  same  28.  i  ,  where 


and  «<j*  are  the  eight  imperfect  forms  in  which 
a  human  embryo  may  devclope. 

,  n.  white  ants  :  fyeo,  seDpiuirear, 
.  163.     [See  N.  Lex.] 

,  v.  /r.  [§  64],  destroy  :   Q«®, 
15.  25;  33.  7. 
v.  m/r.  [§  57],  perish,  25.  9. 


I.  n.  [S.  CHITTA],  mind,  as  scat  of  voli- 
tion, 3.41  ;  7.  57;   11.64;   15.  22; 

17.  10,  11  ;  31.  27. 

6/MtttwA,   51.  3.      Bjf<eif£>urt,    7.12. 

OtfJmrub,  changeful  moods  of  mind,  10.  33. 

II.  n.  [S.  SIDDHAM],  assurance,  4.  42 ; 
42.  40. 

8,0,0  ear,  n.  [S.  si  DOHA],  the  perfect,  the 
perfecter;  an  epithet  of  £ivan,  29. 
31;  37.30;  46.  7. 
&,  n.  [S.  SIDDHI],  (i)  a  name  of 
fpj&,  9.  3 ;  (2)  a  supernatural  gift, 
2.  93 ;  49.  39.  [See  T.Va.  Or.  Pur. 

IV.  93-] 
s#'fasTy  thought :  &*&>?,  1.  47,  82  ; 

5.101  ;  20.19;  45.33;  47.ii. 
ii&,  v.  [§  64],  think,  5.  100,  312; 

8.  100 ;  45.  33;  47.37. 
36 


I.  v.  perish:    £.5^,5,  15.  51;  49.  21. 
A  play  on  ^/B^/rtoczof?. 

II.  scatter,  8.  88;  9.  9. 

^/iypo-ti,  ;/.  [S.  SINDURA],  vermilion, 
18.  20. 

fdiseiap,  n.  [S.  CHIT,  CHINTA],  thought, 
mind  :  ^i^Stesr,  800u>y  1.  17,  i 
312,  313;  10.57;  17.  19;  1'.' 
22.  19,39;  23.  15;  30.  18;  47.  43. 

fi/FSD^OJ/f,    19.   23. 

u>,«.[S.f  IRAS],  =  O^€Br6B/?,^?i6v),hcad, 

I.  10;  13.22;  14.37,56;  522.  22. 
jiTuuarzffl,  n.  Trichinopoly,   4.  154. 
[Tiru-9i'ra-palji.] 

,  v.  [§  64],  smile,  deride,  mock, 
4.68;  5.  232;  11.  12;  21.  32,33; 
32.4i. 

jOJ,  v.  [§  «6o],  cause  to  deride,  6.  192,  193. 

>,  some.  [See  K.;  N.;  Nan.  Sut., 
170.] 

In  7.  6,  25,   j8*»>«i«^fl«wS«r  ?   '  Are  these 
t  r  i  lies  ?  '     Comp.  »f>,  6)f,  «*. 

&SVLH  /. 

I.  ;/.  an  ankle-ring  worn  by  dancers, 

;;   7.51;   !'       ;.    11.  Ho;   IS.fiy; 

II.  .;, 

II.  v.  tinkle,  sing  ;  sound  (as  a  ®6\>iii-/), 
7.29,47,51;  8.73;  13.69;  41.  15. 
See  ^/f,  95^. 

ii,  v.  [§  64],  rise.bristle  as  hairs  on 
the  body  from  emotion,  4.  83.    So 
rrQeSHr,    27.  31.     Sec 


,  n.  [S.  91  LA],  a  bow  :  aS^,  =  a 
mountain  bent  as  a  bow,  .r>.  51  ; 
6.40,  113. 

OVudr,   23.  12. 

J),  «.  [S.  ^IVAM,  -/9VI],  blessed- 
ness, 5.  19;  8.  33;  11.  10,  16,  17; 
15.6;  51.  3,339. 

K»m&,   6.  164. 

v.  n.  [§  66],  be  red  :  Q*&.     See  Qf. 
Qeuesr  (Qeuu),  «.,  1.  12,  17;  3.  56,  62; 
5.34;  7.  12;  11.25;  22.8. 


#,Kail§9a,  19.ii, 

GmdwtfiffG,  !  13.  61 ;  22  and  28  passim. 

BaitiLtntar,    1.  63.       QeuJLjfgst,    25.  33. 

£?<a/aLyj/r6ssm>,  1.  19. 
e«C«indr,  5.  331  ;  33.  7,  20. 

i.  31.  ii. 

-,  49.  62.    See  jpw.io. 
,  n.  a  palanquin,  litter,  10.  30; 
51.  35.     [Kurral,  37.] 

',  z;.  [§  66 ;  S.  £Ri;  comp.  £/?],  in 
glory,  excel,  1.  47,  61 ;  35.31. 
JLI  =  &at  glory,  3.  8. 
'a/,  5.  344;  4.  181. 

wing:  tHtoSiff)  ©/eg)    19. 13. 
7-  [§  I3I]>  small,  mean  :  ^pu. 

Comp.   £?6tf,   &68T. 

>,«.meanness,4.77;  5. 34;  24.5. 


!"«*•,  1.  58  ;  5.  70;  6.  145. 
,  little  things,  3.  6. 


f  5.  205.      i/OTwaoa,  2.  143. 
,  26.  37.     %»Q,s»9,  51.  6. 


8/bjpuSf,  short-lived  mortals,  6.  199. 
Jr,   6.  17. 

,  w.  restraint,  imprisonment,  3. 
89;  6.  1  88;  22.  19;  23.  24. 
puuetiLD,  n.  [S.  CHIT  =  heart,  soul], 
the  hall  at  '  Chillumbaram  '  :   g\w 

O  for  ^ftiuffii>}  7.  54;  9.  74. 

aiair,   5.  267. 

>,  n.  wrath  :  CW/JLO,  14.  28. 

&GBT  ^euii  c.asjrL.fiuJ   6.  2OO. 
ireoeSea>i^.  ajsaL-jwreir  y   34.  II. 
aisy,    11.  40. 
ty^iA,  angry  word,  26.  39. 

i>)  n.  [S.  CHINHA],  sign,  clarion- 
sound,  7.  26. 


I.  «.  [S.  £Ri],  glory.    See  ,1 

II.  reproach,  10.  47. 

III.  matter,  pus,  25.  9. 
8G,  inter.  Fie!  Fie!  7.  6. 
^LD,  n.  [S.  f  ITA],  coolness  : 

?/f,  20.  19. 

UL/OTSU,  7.  54;  22.  32. 

37 


'',  «•  [S.  £Ri],  excellence,  rectitude, 
dignity,  glory:  QpUL,,  <****>*,  \. 
15,24;  7.57;  13.4,29,60;  15.7, 
10;  16.i;28.2;29.3,&c.;36.27. 

*''",  18.  8. 

»'**•,  '  Thy  glorious  excellence/  6.  396. 

^K  'all-glorious,'  1.  15;  8.  10;;  13.  69; 

16. 1 ;  19.  3. 

£/|U*-I_A,  an  auspicious  song,  11.  54. 
9 fit*,  5.  313. 

o.  Thy  devoted  ones,  7. 34. 

7.  25;  19.  22;  22.8;  47.29. 
?(?/7/r)if  uj/r/f,  true  servants,  5.  211 ;  6. 
192;  49.62. 

tftV/.[S.flL],  goodness,  virtue,  7. 19; 
16.  46;  18.  n ;  30.  18;  43.  8;  50.  9. 
v,  v.  be  angry,  6. 1 93. 

',  n.  wrath,  35.  37. 


I.  v.  gleam,  6. 127;  34.  23;  42.4. 

*i_r  Qur^  gorjjt,  an  epithet  of  Qivan,  27.  i. 

II.  n.  lustre;  a  heavenly  body:  saisp), 
1.38,62,80;  2.H2;  8.77;  5.252; 
6.151;  18.17,31;  25.38;  27.i4; 
34.  12,  23;  37.  19. 

<9r®,  ^'  [§  68],  burn,  inflame,  5.  157; 
6.  127. 

<*6W®,  burning-ground,  6.  151,  195;  12.  9. 
G-Gsareaaru),  n.  [S.  CHURNA],  fine  powder 

of  aromatics:  spu>uu(o)unu).t  10. 16. 

See  9. 
<$?/5^7Lo,  n.  [S.  SUNDARA],  beauty :  «$f#>(5, 

@tp(5,  2.  93,  99;  9.  9 ;  18.  17. 

«*^j«5r=«^(p«<*,  a  name  of  £ivan,  4.  203. 

«</>,  z/.  [§  66 ;  S.  KSHAM],  bear,  2. 47 ;  8. 

43-48;  30.5;  34.38. 
sir,  v.  [§  66  ;   S.  SRU],  used  in  both 

neuter  and  active  senses ;  3.  59 ;  7. 

64.     Comp.  Qffnfr,  fift. 


vift,  v.  n.  [§  57],  curl.     Comp.  *#P. 

*fl<50A»,  curling  locks,  29.  17. 


<«7(3iP«u,  ciuiint;  iui,i\3,   "v.  «/• 

sp^srr,  «.  curl,  ringlet,  24.  5. 
/.  n.  shrink,  6.  167. 


<5,  v-  a-  diminish  ;  waste  (?),  6. 
89;  7.  61  ;  37.  10.     Comp.  Qjp. 

,  n.  a  bottle  gourd  :    Cucurbita 
lagenaria,  used  for  lutes,  32.  38. 

,  ;/.  stirrup(P),  18.  33  ;  trace,  mark, 
11.  27;  20.17. 
/?,  n.  [M.  ^UVAR],  a  wall,  26.  25. 

&&u>t  n.  'Svarga,  the  paradise  of 
Indra,'  4.  21  ;. 

,  «.  savour;  sweetness,  3.  25;  9.  5^  J 
20.  25;  27.  15;  29.22;  38.2;  49.  4^ 
[See  N.  Lex.  ] 

•~»*3t  8.  158. 

tpjjy,  :'.  [$  .'A  (HI)],  revolve,  be 
whirled  round  [K.],  6.  116,  127; 
50.  10.  Comp.  ®t£,  *<5«rf 


I.  v.  whirl,  3.  85  ;  4.  55;  21.  i  ;,  ;  26.  26. 
II   ;/.  an  eddy,  3.  84  ;  51.8. 

,  */"¥>  "•  sword-fish,  shark,  5.  106; 
24.  15. 

?,  v>  throw  around,  gird,  go  round, 
3.  144;  c>.  i  n,  ;  s.  i  is.   Sec*£,  <5«£. 

pu>t  n.  kindred,  environment,  4 
8.  i  iS;  11.4:;  1:5.  2,  5;  41.  17;  45.9. 
[See  Kurral  and  Ndladi.  ] 
»fifA*+,  relationships,  1  '• 

»pfiu  «^>o>«_/«r,  8.  118.    [*^«r,  «^.] 
,  w.  spring,  fountain,  7.  48. 
dFo>,  n.  [S.suKSHMA],what  is  subtle, 
spiritual:  opp.  to  jro»u>t  8.  10;  title. 
>,  n.  a  bracelet  :  «D*«/asrf  9.  25. 

»  (0  [S.  CHUDA];  (2)  ace  ^tl; 
(3)  v.  intr.  wear,  assume,  wreathe 
oneself  with,  5.  123;  8.  97;  34.  23. 
tl®,   (trans.}  crown,   adorn   with 
wreath,  &c.,  5.  123. 

or,  n.  [S.  SURYA],  sun  :  jy<3«r6Br, 
SSST,  14.  43;  sun  of  grace,  20. 
6.     Comp.  usear. 

>,  n.  [S.  90  LA],  £i  van's  trident  : 


_,  t 

_,  9.  67;  10.  71  ;  39.  5. 

«A  v.  [§  57],  surround,  3.  100,  144  ; 
4.58;  7.  55  18.32;  18-  17;  20.  3;  de- 
vise, 5.  79,  228.    Comp.  &$,  &p&. 
38 


for  &£*&, 
,  a  company,  24.  17. 

,  84.  31.    See  4(5- 

,  a  whirlwind,  3.  10. 
Comp.  <*/>,  <5«£. 

;    S.  ^iv],   the   mean- 
ings   are    (i)    ruddy  ;    beautiful  ; 
(2)  right. 
f}  QfftLt,  QffiLiu,  crimson,  1() 

,  H.  and  adj.  redness,  red,  '27.  31. 
«/*,  the  ruddy  one,  Qivan,  7.  43  ;  2i».  ^7. 
»*,  s 

«war,  one  just,  impartial,  <>.  28. 
M*r,  40.  .-,-. 

-  QmCJCt,IxorafOchinfa,A  tree  front  •>•• 
crimson  flowers  wreaths  were  made  for  s 
ful  freebooters.  6.11  '>  [P.P.V.] 

,  6.  123.     O*«J«j  «/<>,  I'.* 
ituit,  10.  68. 

i,  red;  right,  good,  7.  47;  -S7.  .?. 

r,  AH  irreg.  redup.  -  coi  , 
85.  35- 

Q»g;«<_/,  8.  77.      O**^IP*»,  18.  40. 
O^MO,  87.  II  ;  40.  .v 
Q,*  .-*r,  7.  65;  8.  i;  13.  58;  2'.».  II, 

,  49.31.     0*4«^*A*,  7.67;  18.34. 
,  y 

,  49.  31.     O»it|<7Mrfurrir,  B 
C**  .r  •*;/,  skilful  bards,  -  • 
,  6.  267. 

,  19.  3  ;  28.  7. 
,  6.  305  ;  9.  1  5,  1  9,  64.    O  •  - 
,  8.  89. 


•»!>>««>,  6.  i^it. 
>,  2.  141  ;  6.  ; 


«ar,  5.  331;  33.  7;    10.  & 

(2)  a.shrub,  thick  foliage,  ^1).  ny. 
Qf6aar<St  ;/.  a  ball  :  u/j^7.     With  «g®, 
9.69. 

r,    &C.,    3.    l^j. 


I.  adj.  form  of  Q*ti^  :  '  of  copper.' 

II.  //.  a  casket  of  gold,  ivory,  &c.  : 
Qffuutrit  Qptev  uiiaeitr,    8.  6  1  ;    20. 
23. 


GffULJIX 


III.  v.  [S.  JAP],  say. 

QffiJLjtu,  19.  3.     Qftii-ijzev,  37.  19. 

Off  uuu>y  n.  correctness,  truth  : 
uorr  uxsnp,  29.  23.     See  Q&. 

QflLJ. 

I.  tf.  [§  58 ;  S.  KRI],  do,  make,  5. 381 ; 

30.  22. 

Q-yul/lisroff,  «.,  5.  313. 
Of  LU&),  n.,  11.  44. 

II. «.  cultivated  ground :  <ajiu®)y  40. 33. 
uL/,  «.  a  slipper,  15.  10. 

,  «.  a  nest :  G)^^,  O^^ia/,  4. 14. 
Comp.  Qfgueq. 

y  n.  ear:  «/^7,  7.  2 ;  23. 15 ;  28. 19. 
,  «;.  [§56.  (Ill)],  go,  3. 41;  8.  87; 
10. 4,  &c. ;  11.  i;  34.27;  exist,  1.30; 

6.  175;  pass  into,  5.  301  ;  22.  27; 
36. 13. 

i,  the  transitory,  3.  53;  march,  46.  5,  7. 

£i2t/u>,  «.  [N.  and  K.],  wealth,  4.  39 ; 
5.  189;  9.  62,  74;  worldly  felicity, 
10. 65;  29. 3,27,31;  34.25;  37.3,19. 
Opposed  to  /5sO(3j/7ffl/. 

fAitudr,  theblessed  one :  =  £«*,  2.  54;  5. 188 ; 

7.  42  ;  10.  32  ;  18.  34. 
f&eaif,  the  blest,  1.  94. 

Q*<ke9,  gem,  10.  2;  19.  13. 

i.     Comp.  ©<F/$,  QffQg. 

,  v.  intr.  [§57],  thrive,  luxuriate ; 
blaze  up,  6.  17. 

ffQg,  adj.  thick ;  rich  ;  swelling ; 
luxuriant. 

Qfftyteeut,  5.  26;  24.  i;  29.  23. 

Q*Qfu,  3.  168;  5.  117,  156;  6.  16;  37.  19. 

QfQf'it>&,  28.  38. 

<fn$9  v.  be  closely  crowded ;  re- 
strained; concentrated,  fixed,  35. 
29;  86.13;  41.37. 

f^a\s<sffft  thought  concentrated  in  devotion, 

40.  15. 

*^9|*fl»^j®*,  a  foot  loaded  with  anklets,  20. 1 1 ; 

35.  31. 

r^ieftirast,  'who  dwells  immanent,'  8.  76. 

*/0|«/>  closeness;  self-restraint:  ^i-4*ti,  9.  19; 

50.9. 

^jy,  v.  tr.  [§§  64, 68],  destroy ;  con- 
fine.     Comp.  &<SS>rr). 
yt&Qspp,  9.  63;  43.  21.     QffiflGw*,  23.8. 

39 


,  who  dost  confine,  24.  7. 

ar.     See  Q*o>. 

,/.  head,  4.  130;  1C.  29;  17. 
39i  20.i5;  42  title,  &c.;  45 

Qfssraffuf,   17.  38. 

.    See  O#,  fis>;  ;  S.  ^iv. 

I.  n.  a  bull,  4.  95  ;  10.  4. 

II.  «^'.  red  :  Q<F,  O<F(o,  O^f  Q^a,. 
C*|.IJL,  the  roseate  foot,  1.  u;  8.61;  10.4;  18. 

20;  24.i;  36.  28,40;  42,  4)&c. 
G**JS>,  5.  97. 
<?#|nlana)(jj,  ye  who  wear  ornamcnU  of  pore 

gold,  9.  54. 

III.  v.  neuf.  [§  57],  redden,  for  £«/, 


,    n.   [S.    ^RESHTA],    goodness: 

,    15.   I  I. 

,  n.  [S.  CHESHTA],  work, 
effort;  Indra,  &c.,  23.  20.  [See 
Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  97,  &c.] 

,  the  Remote,  8.41.  [Qsen.] 
sr,  n.  breadth,  height,  distance, 
3.135.    -[0*.] 

,  V.  a.  [S.CHHEDA,  CHHID  ;  COmp. 

QsiL\  cut  off,  15.  27. 

iLtn.  (j)distance,  remoteness  :  ge  ou>. 

(2)  a  child  :  ^Lpises)^.     (3)  see  Gf. 


Qfiutiu  \  6.  87. 

QfQiurfsr,  Q&  tutor,  one  remote  : 
«*,  1.  8,  44';  8.  38  ;  23.  28. 
G*io^7,  difficult,  5.  97.     Opp.  to 
G*u,  rare  :  g/iftiu,  36.  28. 


I.  v.  [§57],draw  nigh  to,arrive  at,  join 
oneself  to,  cling  to,   5.  211,  222; 
6.  146-149  ;  24.  i  ;  33.  3,  7  ;  34.  27  ; 
45.  33.     See  fnn. 

II.  v.tr.  [§  64],  join,  42.  22. 

QfiiS^aQarl  36.  28.     G*i\f<5  =  <?*(*<*,  6.  188. 

sr  —  QffS'ssf,  king  of  £era,  18.  28. 
&),  n.  a  carp:  &iueo,  Q&esxeoi-,  11. 
56;  23.36;  25.37.  [Cyprinus.} 

In  S.  ROHiTA-the  red;  so  O*>  from  C*. 

/,  «.  [S.  SEVA],  service,  worship. 
,  v.  a.  [§  64],  attend,  wait  on, 
serve,  21.  23. 

faimib,  n.  service,  9.  63. 


£«•«<*,  H.  warrior,  horseman,  2.  45,  59,  Si  ;  3. 
98;  4.  130;  8.38;  18.  30  ;  86.  3;  42.  i,  6. 


y  n.  mire,  loam,  any  paste  ; 
sweetness,  20.  3;  27.  6  ;  34.  31. 
[See  N.  106,  and  Lex.] 
ffi&ear,  ;/.  [S.  C^AIVA,'  from  £iva], 
£ivan  as  a  guru,  2.  85;  4.  113  ; 
40.  35- 

,  v.  [§  57  ;    S.  SRU,  £RU],  flow 
down;  emit,  diffuse,  10.  u;  27.23. 

Q+r*ffi*  =  0tift*t  2.  34.  [From  O*»*®- 
beauty.] 

Q&IT6V  (Qfir&tm). 

I.  ;/.,  =QLDirtflt  6.  149. 

II.  v.  [$  70],  'The  Ancient  One  be- 
yond utterance,'  3.  40,  1  1  1  ;  18.  3. 

Q*rtut*e,  what  may  be  spoken  with,  16.  1  6. 

Q+t*itft*fu,  :  49. 

,  ».  [S.  JYOTIS],  light  :  *<_/?,  y«fl, 
1.  62;   lustre,  3.  20;    7.    i  ;   9.  78; 
18.3;  22.21,32,33;  29.i;  47.4: 
u/6<?*r£,  7.  5  ;  89.  6. 

or,   1. 
•eievQttP,  the  sun,  10.  3. 

Qfirjfj,  a  corr.  of  S.  STO- 
TRAM;  in  ust=QuirpfSt  —  QtjUjirtr 

QftLHLIU)  Jf(£5*olf  '-4- 

enuxar  [S.  SOMA],  the  name  is  vari- 
ously applied  (see  Muir),  the  moon- 
god,  14.  38  ;  15.  43. 

,  name  of  a  £atti,  9.  2.     NOTE 
XIII. 

/?,  v.  [$  60;  S.  SRU],  drip,  ooze, 
distil,  1.54;  drop,  fall,  5.  227;  droop, 
faint,  languish,  5.  87,  226.  Com  p. 


sf    [S.    CHORA],    an    adulterer, 
5.  226. 

firVev,  n.  a  grove  :  Quirifieo,  2.  73  ;  8. 
4J  18.  13,  37  ;  19.  9,  37,  &c.  [Comp. 

S.  £ALA.] 

tp«r,  a  £ora  king,  18.  28.  [Naladi, 
P-4M1 

,  //.  boiled  rice  ;  anything  soft, 
15.  28.     (Gfirjpupgv,  be  effaced.) 
Q  fnpjp  [S.  SVASTU],  hail!  0.  i  75;  9.  30. 
See  Qffirpp 
40 


t  the  sun:  g)/ra9,  (^ifliueort  7.  76  ; 

18.  17;  22.25. 

^^         • 

I.  //.  the  carth=;u36zw;  for  isnetLD,  from 
»/rfi»,  5.110,171;  7.  5,  iS;  13.43;  1H- 
12  ;  23.  33;  30.  19;  36.  1  8  (Vishnu). 

II.  for  S.  JALA  =  dcccit7  magic,  X' 
16.45;  49.  23;  50.  »£ 

u)  [S.  JNANA],  sacred  knowlc. 
mystic  wisdom,  1.  38,  39,  40,  75; 
2.74J  24.3. 
,  26.  a  a.    e"»*«*,  10.  5. 
A,  6.  380. 

O^^,   <». 
Or«r«^y,   26.38.      er«r|«.r*,    40.    I. 

tiar&,  «.,  =  *ff«»-,  a  day. 

^>  when? 
*,  ever,  47.  41. 


,  //.    father,    ('.  51.      Sec 


I.  //.  .1  i.un,  5.  13.     It  was  an  ///«^- 
nutliatn  [S.  AJA-MI:DHA]. 

II.  ;.  /;-.  [^  64J.  shatter,  K.  H;. 
*«r,  ».  [S.  DAKSIIA],   Dakshan 
13;  8.85;  12.  17;   L8,  14,591  ll- 

1  10.  [Sec  Muir,  vol.  iv. 
pp.  200,  372,  &c.,  and  !).  69,  &c.  ; 
14.  5-48.] 

>  v.  [§§  68,  117],  be  fitting,  5.  40, 
240. 

AM|*«d,  «acred,  eminent  :  Gu>'f<g,  8.  16,  20,  23. 

*•<:«,  5.  38;  «.  8.    O««r  -4«»««r.] 

t**r&,  any  befitting  form,  2.  67. 
**«*,  5.  225  ;  88.  ai.    *C««*,  6.  37,  (38,  40). 
f**,  befitting,  4.  24.    *«>«|«<,  «.,  86.  25. 
^<B«,  «.  beauty,  fitness,  6.  44-48. 
0«0**-«,  6.  44,  45. 

($,  v.  abide,  16.  8,  £c.,  50;  23.  34. 

Comp.  pins®. 

rriBsu)  =  u00ea)L-iuiTGiru)[S.  DAf  A,  ten, 

+  jyis}au>,  member],  the  ten  attri- 

butes or  adjuncts  of  the  king,   11). 

(title). 


[S.  DA^A],  tenth,  4.  24. 

p*  [S.  TAKSH],  the  structure,  frame- 
work, 14.  7. 

,  n.  [S.  TATA],  width,  extent, 
51.  29  ;  a  hill. 

'-\A\ms,  the  palm  of  the  hand;  the  open  hand 
3.  162;  6.  94. 

'"<?*,  very  great,  3. 155.     fL^gt*,,  12.  59. 

°>J,  5.105.     ni-*>*<-*>,  11.58. 

S/Srar,   24.  22;    35.  23. 

*,  7.  i;  24.18. 

*>#«&.,    13.  55.      ^L_*^rsr,   6.  124. 
,[2.  i6J;  6.5;  41.26. 

.,v.a.  [§57],  cut,  12.i8. 

,  v.  be  confused,  bewildered,  3. 
152;  4.  83;  5.  98;  11.66;  31.17; 
51.  29.  See  ^'Ssw. 

a  hindrance,  27.  3.     [^®.] 
1®,  a  cant  word  used  for  '  utter ' 
15.  6. 

lOQtJL/LluLl©,  falling  to  titter  decay. 


<sa)u>}  coolness,  3.  21. 

0tfliDl  soft  Tamir,  8.  57. 
Ljdr,   6.  117.      ^SSBTUISUF,   5.  17. 
raiiu&i,    20.  3.      jsafouirasbri^ist®,   8.  57. 

L/OTfW,    6.    121.        ,S«OT|6SBp/f,    2.    58. 

uiruj  \  Thou  art  the  cold  !  1.  36. 
iurrLwvsii,  Thy  refreshing  presence,  5.  356. 

?,  ?/.  [§  57],  delay,  be  slack,  32.  32. 
.,    v.    [S.  BAND],   punish:    e?^z/, 
12.  15. 
pesar®,  n.  [S.  DANDA],  staff,  13.  63. 

fissarisLffasr,  ^eari-ty.serr)  a  name  of  (Jande9Uvarar, 
15.  25. 

^7">L/,  z/.  swell  (as  tears),  3. 1 69  ;  5.  2 ; 
6. 143. 


I.  n.  a  stumbling,  tripping: 
6.  120. 

II.  a  pet  name  for  a  parrot,  19.  9. 
^j^o/gOT-,  ;/.  [S.  TATTVA],  he  who  has 

the  nature  of,  1.  61 ;  8.  41. 
•siitSdffLD,  n.  [S.  TANTRA],  a  system, 

3.  131,  132. 
pise&jS,  n.  a  father:  p&uue&j  5.  186; 

12.    IO,   II.      Comp.  STISSSp,  JPKSRp. 
Voc.  fE0riu  !  (but  see  also  ^jiu.) 
[?From  ^,  SB* <uair;  &  being  euphonic  insertion.] 

41 


4»  «•  (a  fault). 

v.  fail,  8.  62. 
o,  from  ^esr.    [See  N.  Lex.] 

^pefluitt,  5.  372. 
,  4.170;   5.53;   6.65,152. 

,  n.  friends. 

"*  **  ^  ««*,  this  is  one  of  my  friend*, 
18-  39!  82.  33. 
,  an  elder  brother,  9.  51. 

r,  5.  186. 

,  n.  Tamil,  8.  57. 
®,  v.  glitter  ;  vibrate,  39.  5. 
,  n.  [S.  DAYA],  kindness,  1.  f>i  , 
13.  10  ;    50.  19.     See  ^tuay, 


sr,  the  gracious  One,  2.  96. 
,  n.  [S.  DHARANI],  the  earth. 
12.  27. 

fiffu>,  n.  [S.  DHARA,  TARA],  sort,  kind. 


/rii,    8.  3,  15;   9.  12. 

=  tSi-iR)  the  nape  of  the  neck  ; 
figuratively  for  a  kind  of  recitative 
preparing  for  the  fiir$mf  in  Qsnf 
ffsssffSuurr.  See  5.  2  ;  10-13  ;  15  ; 
31;  38-40. 

ar,  n.  one  who  supports.     [,#/#.] 
<3«ajfi<rtir  (or=S.  TARA,  excellent),  7.  39. 

,    V.    [§    64;     S.    DHRl],    put   On, 

bear. 

•5ifl\(oiu63r,  3.  164;  4.  179;   5.  72,  240, 
241  ;  44.  6. 

)   12.  44. 


I.  v.  ^.  [§  70  ;  irregular,  taking  ?,  fa, 
and  £iTrr  as  stems  ;  com  p.  S.  DA. 
DHA],  give,  47.  38. 

®*,  grant!  5.  272.    frwul  5.  345. 
ay,  22.  36,  37;  25.  2,  26  ;  32.  33. 

^e^&r,  Thou  hast  given,  5.  104. 
@LL\i-(3aiiriii,  Thou  givest  grace.  This  is  (Divan's 
fourth  work,  1.  42. 

ezsGairiit,   83.  21. 

[I.  an  auxiliary.     G.  124. 

iff  Banff?,  urged  by  longing  for  water,  3.  80. 
£rjr|aJij.«vi,  if  Thou  give  not,  21.  3  ;  32.  33. 

(Vj  is  used  as  an  jgJaDL-^Sw,  with  no 


meaning.     See  5. 28-32.     [Comp. 
G.  124-] 

>«J*®io,  2.  146. 

-QurtiStfo,   '2.  144,   '4^-     ma^f<5>  2.  '4-- 

u>)  is  sometimes  =  fi-«rar,  ^OT, 
3.45;  38.i,2. 

;?(5<*(5»  v*  "•  be  proudly  obstinate,  con- 
ceited, 6.  153.  [Sec  Kurral,  93.').] 

pQuueanu)  [S.  DARPANA],  a  mirror: 

to  [S.  STHALA],  in  y^*«»u>.  Comp. 


>  [S.  STHALA],  region,  2.  i 


I.  tf.  head  :  $ff*,  <§  u/r«>tc,  3.  7  1  ;  5.  147, 
6.  33-36,  159;  9.  69;  12.  17,  20;  13.  i; 
25.30.  [N.  Lex.] 

*fe«M»,  5.  155.  333;  6.  160. 
Xi®,  begin,  49.  46. 
,  grant  especial  fov> 
,  a  skull,  10.  7. 

,  8.  i  ;  -•  :   II.  .«,  6. 
,  on  both  ends,  6.  33,  33. 

t  6.  153;  88.  io.   («-,  be  reckless.) 

1  1  .  =  ®#>  [S.  STHALA],  place,  as  cn< 
of  locative  case,  •  •  S9;  41.  2. 

eiu>t  n.  [S.  TAP,  TAPAS],  ."• 

The  Knrral  lifts  ?*iu>  into  a  loftier 
sphere  in  ch.  xxvii  : 

c  penitential  pains  to  bear,  while  no  offence 
1  1  e  causes  others,—  is  the  type  of  r  EX  ireNCB.' 
*w,  8.  97;  5.  16;  27.    *~6  •**,  5.  313. 
«»  !  'O  mighty  ascetic  t  '  29.  39. 

=  uP*  [S.  TU,  TAVAS],  very,  3.  H  i  . 
*,  «.  seat,  5.  no;  10.  79;  34.  5; 
20. 


I.  ;•.  [§  64],  put  away,  expel,  3.  98; 
11.  30;   12.24. 

I'    ---[§57],  5.  3. 

r<5ipsv,  n.  fire  :   Jf^«>,  jy«w«>,  4.  66  ; 

14. 

With  *A   12.  59.     gKrfn-tf*,,  18.  30. 
,  20.  31.     ^io«r»,  89.  5. 

,  v.  resound,  24.  39.  [N.  Lex.] 
,  //..  fi.  iS8.  =^sr/?,  rain-drop  (?). 


,  stammer,  27.  2I1). 
,  ;/.  a  scar. 

».  ;.).      See  «r. 

,  *'.  ^.  [§  62],  embrace,  25.  29. 
[N.  Lex.] 

,  :-.  [^  64],  flourish,  abound  in, 
3.  171;  4.  86;  27.  26;  37.  31;  4 
49.4.1. 

,  f.  //.  [§  57],  droop,  faint, 
fail,  4.  170;  6.  4;  24.  22;  45.  8. 
'!•<,  faintness,  8.  81  ;  31.  6. 
f,  //.  shoot,  5.  135;  7.  77  ;  3X1. 


,  //.  fetter. 
*'•-»»-  «'«J**«,  fetters  for  the  feet,  ;{.  m. 

-'• 

••'•  [§  64].  cut  ofT,  14.  ^o. 
II.  //.a  post,  35.  29. 
,*65T,  >^,  A^,  from  finenr  [S.  TADJ. 
^«rf?,  n.  lone! 

uniqiu  ness,  5.  104  ;  ('..  i  -ti  ;   1  !.  -i  ; 
l';.  :>o;  27. 

jeefl<ufsrt  one  who  is  a!«>iu.\  5.  104,  iOt',  ; 
12.  io,  n.     See  fu>. 
\mu>t  loneliness,  5.  27 
,  (so)  much  :   gftf-jp-vfijZc' 
302-304;  10.  9,  n. 

r  [S.  TAN-MAYA],  the  self-sub- 
sisting, 11.  70. 
0esi\GB>u>t  state,  nature  :  ^|^/«/t/>,  2 

95,995  5.  ;> 

£fr|<iy(3>,  f.  [S.  DIIA],  bear,  H.  4  ;  12. 
60.    [K..N.] 

6.  91. 

[S.  STHANU],  an  epithet  of 
Qivan  as  the  liiiga,  44.  K;. 

[S.  DHATU,  DATC],  the  pollen  or 
filaments  of  a  flower,  13.  -,:     ! 
19.  9. 

es>fifi{ipauj\  Vishnu  is  Hrali- 
ma's  father.!",  i  i  ;  10.  ?  i  ;  14.  i 
15.  26  ;  27.33.  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p. 
nufi  adj.  [S.  TAPASA],  ascetic,  1  7 
i,  ;/.  [S.  TATA],  thirst,  3.  #2. 
j),   n.  [S.  IIAMAN;    DA,   bind 
chaplct.  !>.  i. 


,  n.  a  lotus  :  <sru)s\>u>,  5.  104,  179 
6.  1  15.     See  <5tr&r. 
&>  mil. 

I.  «.  mother:  io/r^/r,  ^uj,  ^/uxsnu*,  1.6i 
5.155,186;  8.41;  12.io}ii;  27.33 
37.33;  49.ii;  60.17,19. 

•avsj^j-aj,    13.  5. 

II.  [T.  TA;   S.  TAYA],  for  ^nuSluj  = 
0tr<sSluj,  as  from  ^|a/  =  ^gush  forth,' 

6.  124. 

^irffssis,  n.  [S.  TARAKA],  star,  6.  189; 

7.  70;  20.ii. 
ii.     See  ^(^. 

r,  «.  a  drop  :  gj&f),  3.  174;  5.  288  ; 
7.58. 

/?=u3/r<3so,  a  garland,  4.  200;  5.  63; 
6;3J;  7-55;  8.89;  19.34.  [Comp! 

S.  DHARA,  TARA.] 

fiff*iGar}   6.  1  88. 

<ziTffu>,  a  humming  sourid,  6.  143. 
®),  n.,  IB  IT,  tongue,  38.  13.    See^ir&r. 
ui,   n.  [opposed  to  fisisu^ui  :    S. 
STHAVARA],  any.  living  thing  not 
capable  of  locomotion,  1.30. 
,  v.  leap,  18.  32. 


- 

I.  v.  n.  [§  57],  descend,  flow  down, 
delay,  4.  21;  5.81,82;  10.58;  12. 
16;  16.44;  18.32;  45.  27;  47.  8. 

fHt$pff)  v.  [§  1  60],  bring  down,  5.  62. 

II.  =<5rrefr,  bolt,  bar,  51.  26. 
,  n,  a  churn,  24.  22. 

o)  [S.  TALA],  a  cymbal,  17.  32. 
,  11.  (=  footed),  a  running  plant: 
Convolvulus  striatus  ;   see   <sn&)eSl. 
With  <2]gi(3),  'one  of  (Divan's  gar- 
lands/ 4.  200;  19.  36;  s 

0iref!iLJS,S6srf)   4.  2OO;    17.  29. 


I.  «.  a  foot  :  <jy£f,  <5te^,  u/r^ii,  1.  1-4, 
18;  3.  143;  5.  153.     Comp.  piry?. 

ioeutJ5>J3irar)    16.  3.      pinnon  3  g  f  'sir  ',    5.  179. 
frC-i—irmemiT^  8.  34.      ^/rerfinnsafeir>  6.  124  J  35.  23. 
(?^5«u  ffp  GlfrS  stffi  (TysflSaJOTj    20.  I  I. 

II.  for^/r  so,  jaws,  throat,  tongue,38.  13. 

u#ai>f$  /xirerfiy.      Comp.  34.  I. 

43 


w,  «.  [S.  DANAVA],  giants,  13.  65. 
fS,  n.  a  tree  and  its  sma" 
berries  :  Terminalia  bcllcrica,  i 
[Ainslie,  vol.  i.  p.  236.] 
*tf»  ^  [§  57],  gleam,  2.  71  ;  3.  ^ 
125;  5.236;  7.48;  15.3;  16.  34; 
18.  10  ;  27.  17;  42.  20,  &c. 

<S3)=S  =  <JW7,  drsD/%,  v.  „.  [§  64],  be 

confused.all  abroad,  tremble,  6.  109; 
9.43J  33.i8,  20;  50.  24. 

a»«ty,  a  thrill  of  fear,  33.  18. 

anaCii3i  v.t   6.  109. 

/E/tfenr,  «.  moon  ;  month  ;  ^  4.  1  8- 

22. 


,  quarter; 

point  of  the  compass,  3.  69  ;  7 
8.88;  10.59. 

j^LSjuKBTj  .jyiuair,   3.  126;   7.65. 

aor,  the  east,  20.  5.    *r^  ^»,t  4.  3. 

,  ten  regions,  15.  19.  Of  these,  eight 
are  generally  enumerated,  here  rfafr  and  ax*  are 
added.  ,jiii_£)sD#. 


KJT,  adj.  [S.  DRIDH,  DRINH],  firm, 

stable,  strong:  jsiiL. 

,  2.  81;  6.  40.     &ettq-p*it  3.  _>i     I"'..  -. 
<r,   5.  156.     PcBra/Jsu,   6.  156. 
'uirir  a9sa>t_io/r«r,   13.  6 1. 

r,  13.  69.    .glafrjriSjx,  31.  j;. 


I.  «^'.  firm,  5.  355;  32.  30;  35.  19. 

II.  z;.  [§57],  be  filled  with  dense  dark- 
ness, 26.  37. 

^lesar  <S®LD,  firmness,  3.  26. 

D,  of  a  truth,  5.  100;  28.  18. 
60y^i5S)s,  yellow  (beauty?) 
spots,  6. 164. 

pjsl,  v.  n.  [§  64],  be  sweet,  5. 359 ; 
7.io;  11.48;  24.27. 

D,  n.  a  great   din  :    QUIT   §>s&, 
29.  15. 
iLUTSLb,  n.  [S.  TYAGA],  renunciation. 

»urat,  Pu/rjs|jj-ttir,  friufGafr,  epithet  of  Qivan  as 
worshipped  in  Arur,  &c. 

«.  Comp.  flfi,  &&\*y  '• 
the  idea  of  'return  into  itself,  cir- 
cuit, globe.'  [N.  Lex.] 


I.  ;/.  a  globe,  a  rounded  mass,  aggre- 
gation ;  an  assembly,  4. 103 ;  21 . 14 ; 
24.i. 

$oQi—n<aTt  huge,  mighty,  5. 130 ;  8. 97. 

II.  v.  intr.  [§  56.  (Ill)],  be  collected 
together,  throng,  20.  7 ;  49.  57. 

jdfftl.®  [§  1 60],  collect,  assemble,  14. 1 9. 
jdffu,  n.  [S.  STHIRA]. 


I.  v.  intr.  [$  •,;],  wander,  5.  n,  16; 
12;  25.9,27;  31.2;  41.  10,18,22, 
34;  51.  33.    [See  N.Lcx.] 

II.  «.  [S.  TRl],  three  :  <y>fiffjpt  js}iflLjau>t 
43.41- 

^75,  the  real  Tamil  form  of  £/?. 

I.  adj.  [S.  ^Ri],  sacred,  applied  to  any 
person  orthing  belonging  to  ( 

i  :  i ;  .">  1 .  6. 

#9**,  1.93;  2.  I.     AJOP««,  2.  143. 

Ay, P»%  wealth,  glory,  8. 68;  6. 19 ;  10. 56; 

U.J,  loj  i-1  49;  n.  15. 
As»<s«*,  eminently  ucrcd,  8.  16,  20,  69. 
fljMwjl,  4.  148. 
09|«r*,  Vi*hnu,  4.4;  14.  16. 
fcj/p,  44.  a  i.    Ms.Ju^tt/,  2.  87. 
[P<3  and  9/  are  different  versions  of  S.  V*' •] 
ftjfgfiW,  2.  79. 

II.  in  4.  4,  &@= &<5u>**r,  Lakshmi? 
Sec  #3  and  0/r. 

>,  ''•  *r.  set  right :  ?0<r«<5,32.35. 
,  order,  regularity,  29.  7. 

, *'•  ;;//;'-  DC  (or  become)  right, 
in  order,  3.  138;  12.  20;  29.  37; 
41.  15;  45.33. 

55) J,  //.,  =  JfSw,  wave,  3.  151, 168  ; 
5.  105;  6.  147;  22.  ii ;  34.  21. 

/,  24   15. 

[S.   TIRO-DHA,   '  conceal '], 
NOTE  V. 

t  n.  the  ancient  name  of  Qitham- 
baram,  from  a  grove  of  trees  of  that 
name,1.90;2. 1,1 27; 3.  i;  12. 5;,:  1  '.. 
3,55;  31.4,&c. :  •"><).  24-  NOTK  VII. 

»«#,  8.  29.     In  40.  ®A>r4$*to. 

r,  v.  [§  64],  (i)abound  ;  (2)disport, 

10.43; 23-  38;  49- 6l- 

/D,  ?'.  [§  66],  open,  7.  10,  18;  45.  31. 

p|%  n.  an  opening  :  Q»*f,  87.  23. 
ftSQtn,  fully  manifested,  in  open  vision. 

44 


)u),  //.   authority,  power,  influence, 
2.125;   3.  130;  7.55,56;  24.  17; 

25.33- 

ioi_«-oi«jf  ia«4r£)piA,  the  charms  of  silly  women, 

-V..  i. 

«»so  that,  11.12,  2  2,  or  in  the  way  that, 
power,  ability,  42.  28. 

>,  «.  [S.  STHIRA],  vigour: 

ow,  36.  39;  37.13;  40.  25;  46.  6. 

t  8.  21  ;  •!«'•.  7. 


w.    millet-seed,    5.   146,   302; 
6.  156;  10.  9.    [With 
U/J.SLO. 


^fisir,  7-.  [§  56.  (Ill)],  eat,  5.13. 
j?,  a//;',  evil. 

9H»,».,  88.  18;  40.6.    ^rfV- 

^j*.  «.  anything  evil,  16.  25  ; 
49.  13.    jfo,  //.  evilthings. 

^,  «.  fire,  one  of  the  five  elements, 
8.22,160;  5.156,251,277;  < 
7.26.   [N.  Lex.    See  jy«ffev,^6i).] 

,  v.  marry,  offer  in  the  fire,  12.  50,  51. 
-  £ivan  (as  Agni),  10.  So. 

rtf 

«ir®,  v.  [§  62],  touch  : 
3.  61;  34.  27. 

uti,  «.  [S.  DlPA],  a  lamp,  2.  97  ;  i).  i  . 
u>,  #<#.  sweet  :  @«5r,  8.  92. 


1       "•  [§5?].  be  free  from,  complete, 

3.  22;  5.  273. 
II.  :-.  a.  [$  64],  remove,  abolish,  S.  272, 

293;6.28,29;  7.  1  1  ;  15.3;47.i6. 
pnjfii),  n.  [S.  TIRIHA,  TRI]. 
,  7.  45. 

,  w-  [S.  DV!FA],  an  island,  XI.  71. 
jp,  v.  [§  62],  feed  with  choice  mor- 
sels: fitetl®,  41.  12.  [Sec  N.  I 

t,  n.  dust,  fault,  26.  31.    See  giren. 

),  n.  garment,  10.  69. 

,  folds  of  garment,  5.  227. 

«sii,  «.  [S.  DUHKHA],  sorrow,  i 
*,  ^.  perish,  14.  2S. 

-QfiJL,,  denth.   Hi.  23. 

,  ;/.  a  double  drum,  40-5. 
388.] 


J'f »  V-  [§  64],  throb,  quiver,  5.  227 
9.41,54;  29.  17. 

/<S5)L_,  v.  [§  64],  wipe  out,  or  off; 
destroy:  sy)  3.  100;  4.  100,  131; 
30.  2. 


I.  ».  a  slice,  piece  ;  certainty. 

^jescflu®,  make  sure  of,  23.  21. 

n-  v.  [§  57],  resolve,  clear  up  doubts, 
32.  28,  29. 

',  n.  certainty,  37.  3. 

',   n.    association  ;    help ;   pair  ; 
measure.    [Comp.  £D?W,  @%SST.    S. 

DVI.] 

Help,  sitemuSeS,  5.  123;  6.  152,  153;  13.  2: 

25.38. 
Loving  associate,  18.  25. 

',  a  pair,  20.  i;  29.  17. 
««*•,  a  helper,  4.  120;  41.  16.     ^SOTM- 
*•,  5.  391. 

'lugo/iA,  even  as  much  as   a  grain 
of  millet,  6.  156. 

,  an  imitative  word,  hence 
BT-,  2/.  [§  273],  start  back 
dismayed,  19.  39;  49.  50. 
erni—w,  n.  [S.  TUND],  a  slice. 

«>iri_uLlsrop(us-sjr,  '  He  who  wears  a  piece  of  the 
crescent  moon,  8.  49. 

',  v.  [S.  STUTI],  praise,  7.  38. 

>  v-  [§  5<5]>  join  in  with,  stand 
thick  ;  crowd  together :  Quff(^^} 
2.99;  9.30;  29.21. 
JL/,  from  j?,  ^.  [§ 64],  enjoy;  «.  food : 
^/uusar,  5.  391;  29.  21.    See  gigi. 
ntS.     See  (osrrggjiAiSI,  10. 

f@,  «.  weakness ;  sorrow,  30.  27. 
[Comp.  ^/«j/f,  ^sar.     S.  DUR.] 

T,  «.  affliction,  4.  25;  10.  75;  38. 
22.     [N.  Lex.] 
',  3.  71. 

',  z>.  '  suffer  a  ..."    See  «-jv. 

,  n.  sleep,  7.  16,  28. 
v.  [§  56.  (Ill)],  7.  14. 

?  'sleepest  thou?'  7.  27. 


,2.6.  [From  S.  DORA. 
Comp.  ^p.] 

,  disperse,  26.  3. 

o,  «.  [S.],  the  fourth  of  the  five 
avasthai  or  states  of  the  embodied 
soul,  4.  194. 

,^  name  of  a  town,  2.  86;  31.  u. 

It  is  also  called  <sf><3^.  See  Devirtm,  p.  459, 
&c.  There  is  a  song  in  Us  prauc  by  each  of 
the  three  great  bards.  Sundara  was  healed 
here. 

f  [S.  DUR],  evil.     Comp.  ^«ar. 
l&,  affliction,  evil,  sin  :  ui>&,  (sppfc 
40.  18;  51.23. 

t  v.  n.  be  agitated,  6.  112. 


)  [S.  DVANDVA],  duplicity, 
40.  10. 

.  coral  :  usu&ru),  5.  106.    \\'ith 

i  and  a//r<u. 

,    9.  49;    11.  35;    49.  21. 

tr,  v,  n.  waver,  faint. 

,  a  swoon  of  ecstasy,  20.  14. 

,  n.  a  ladle,  6.  93. 
,  «.  orifice,  hollow,  3.  175.     See 


,  v.  a.  [§  66],  reject,  abandon, 
3.  137;  13.2.     [K.  Lex.] 
,  v.  [§  68],  enjoy. 

ai,   3.  137. 

,  n.  harbour,  place  of  refuge, 
home,  goal  ;  ford  :  L/<sa0i_u>,  ^SO>L.S 

<56ULD,   S8)<SUJ(53)t_,    4.   36,  4!.  • 
QiLSlsnp,   44.  22.      See  ^(jO  Ou(5*  ^op. 

=gjujiT,  jyssw,  affliction,  1.7°  I 
3.ioo;  24.13.     Comp.  ^)6ff|aJ). 

[u<4  is  added  to  many  primitive  roots  :  •*• 
{jfraxuiG  ;  giesr,  gioruia  ;  #«4r,  fkLutt  ;  4**,  ^Cx«*.] 

«/.  w.  [§  62],  crowd,  be  full  of: 
j,  15.2;  17.38. 


i  (go),    v.    be    thick,    densely 
crowded  in,  1.  72  ;  2.  5  ;  3.  5  ;  1 
13.  34;  20.  14. 


45 


i,  >/.  a  stitch. 

«*  *o*i6,  a  clouted  waist-rag,  12.  6. 

$lTiU,  adj.  pure  :  *^*. 

,   80.37. 

rdj\Quorry$iuiTff,  40.  5. 
r|*J,  19.37;  22.45  43.65;  49.49. 

ft***,  2.  51.      Sec  «>«*r««no.    . 

r<u,  <?#.,  2.  1  1  2  ;  9.  9  ;  16.  23  :  :,".).  :  i  . 

,  61.  15. 

,  15.44;  40.3. 

,  v.  strew,  5.  71.     See  jry,  jrjp. 
t  f.  sweep,  cleanse,  5.  51.    See 


*(9j,  v.  lift  up;   suspend,   9.  i  : 
26.31.     (Trans,  of  ^r«7<5.) 

,  ».  'the  van  of  an  army:'  (y>«r 
«r«Bfluuaw_,46.5.  [The  van  carries 
forward  the  standard  ;  hence  Q«/r 
<f  LHjaot-.  See  S.  'DHVAJA.] 
^r«br®,  r.  trim  a  lamp  ;  stir  up,  2.  4  1  . 
jrmiQQefjBszvcry  brigh  t 

J)  [S.  DHUPA],  incense,  9.  i. 

T,  :-.  intr.  [§  60],  40.  5. 

,  •  »o  that  .  .  .  might  be  filled  up,  closed.' 
,  r.  scatter,  stre\v. 

, 

r|a«ru>  [for  ^rA/«ircara>,  purc-hucd], 
51. 

u)  [S.  STHUL],  palpable  essence: 
opposed  to  <5**u>,  3.  10,  and  title. 
>  n.  a  thicket,  shrubbery  :   <^j»« 
r,  6.  81. 

«'|<5>  «•  tnc   cocoa-palm,   16.  49. 


,  the   grove  where    the    cocoa- 
palms  wave,  8.  4  ;  42.  10. 

xr,  clear,  bright.     See  Q0or. 

atr  •!_*.,   22.  1  1.      O^aAr  •//,   6.  48. 

(u«/u)  =  a  divinity,  ,®«/a9(L/u);  from 

ar,  4.  42  ;  5.  8  ;  35.  3. 

•*.£«,  19.  33. 

/,  the  idea  is  'clearness.'     See 


r,  n.  clear  perception,  21.  32  ; 
37.  15.     Opposed  to  u>(^&r. 

Q*<59,  ».,  -  O^rf,  be  rcnowiitd. 
understand,  45.  39. 

Qpfi. 

Lf.f§57]»beintelligible;beperce2ved  ; 
ifluj.  :\t' 

,  5. 

/,  ».f  4.  195. 

r,  if  one  would  cuinjTi-liciid  Hin 

II.  [§  64],  make  known,  reveal,  3.  i 
11.  10. 

,  «•  a  street,  5.  1  24  ;  ;K  ',4. 
l®,  7'.  abound  exceedingly,  .'>. 
n.    See  (a^<nr,  O//f. 
T^,  ;-.  shine  clearly  forth.  Id. 


I.  ;/.  pure  clear  essence,  5 


«.,  4.195;  6.218,359;  - 

11    •"•  [§  57],  bc  flcar,  pure,  bright  ; 
understand,  rely  <  -n. 
91   !'.».  j 
,  for  O^M.  8.  18. 

,  :-.  [^  160],  clear  up,  illumine, 
10.23;  31.3. 

»(?«r«ru>,  seems  tobc  an  iinitu 
word.     See  11. 

a  twisted  tuft. 
or  Qjj*-  entanglement,  «  : 

5T,  adj.  souther;  5,  :  i  s. 

(yoc.  O^^e),  '^ivan,  sout 
8.  4,  &c.;    11.  ;/,,  -f>-  15.  30;   17    ii; 
86.13;  47.  M. 

r**,    18.  28. 

0^4*9.  •»c*_/«*rf  1.  90  ;  19.  8. 
ui*,  to  the  south  of,  - 

,  //.  [S.  DE],  grace  : 
10.40;  11.  28. 
s<§,  v.  tr.  fill  : 
fQfiLpeoreor,  3.  171 


46 


I.  in  S.  we  have  -/Dif,  'show;'  hence 
Qfffu),  Qpeear,  Qfi&seist^  Gfff&sor. 

II.  we  have  also  \/TU.  and  thence 


TEJAS  ;    from   which   comes 

^  n.  (i)  country,  9.  15 ;  (3)  splen- 
dour, 4.  103. 

BT,  either  (i)  from  C?^,  a  man  of 
tne  land,  ruler:  tsiriLL^rricsr,  tunL-irear' 
or,    (3)   ?  a   teacher  [019],  comp.' 
®-uG>£&LD}  &-uQ^&i\  or,  (3)  a  bright 
glorious  being  [TIJ],  1.  13,  63;  5.' 
204,313;  7.  8;  21.  33. 
:,  «.  splendour,  6. 199. 

',  v.  seek:  BIT®,  3.  136;  5.  134; 
6. 179;  8.  100. 


I.  v.  intr.  [§  57],  waste,  wear  away, 
wane,  22.  7  ;  32.  30. 

Gj&e&udr,  '  He  of  the  waning  moon,'  6.  183. 

II.  v.  act.  [§  64],  diminish,  attenuate, 
8.  85. 


I.  n.  a  car:  jD^ti,  12.  57;  13.  71; 
14.  55.  [Comp.  S.  TRL] 

GuiujGft,  mirage,  3.  79;  15.  2. 

!*•  v-  [§  57],  examine;  ponder  well, 
wait  for;  seek,  19.  3;  21.  18;  ex- 
plore, 3.178;  6.  38;  10.  7. 

(JjSa/eBr,  «.  [S.  DEV,  DIV],  a  god  :  G?£<a//f, 
1.  15,  39;  10.  17-30,  34;  20.  33; 
23.  17-20. 

gtGgait,  5.  312. 

Qfzea,  in  comp.  =  divine,  20.  u.     See  Qjsiuea. 

Qp€uQfttuat}  2.122;  5.  117;  1°-  2°;  42.1.  [In 

K.  P.  IV.  59  We  have  Q^aiiraQi—aiQ^aieir  I] 

GjStutLSrrsir,   19.  4.    Q^tuHQar,  India,  5.  117. 
Ou^lG^aS,  9.  8;  36.  38. 
QurBi,s]Offl/,  10.  18  [comp.  23.  17-20];  11. 
28;  50.  24. 

C^/f,  Q<$®jfvuriT,  a  ^)aiva  shrine,  eight 
miles  W.  S.W.  from  Negapatam, 
and  two  miles  from  the  sea,  2.  71. 

(o<£jru,  v.  be  clear,  certain,  confident. 
[See  Q<sgv,  Qgir,  O^&r}  and  N.  Lex.] 

x>s$g>£  G/sfl,  gain  certainty,  recover  confidence, 
9.  43;  33.  18,  20;  confide  in,  3.  62  ;  5.  130; 
6.  92  ;  43.  19. 

47 


>,  clarified  juice,  honey,  5  i«>  • 
8-  105;  22.3. 

/to,  v.  [§  160],  inspire  confidence 
impart  clear  certainty,  strengthen,' 

33.  30;   50.  24. 


,  n.  certainty,  1.82. 

,  1.  82. 


<?**,».  honey,  1.63;  2.  73;  3 
5.3i8;8.82;10.9;19.JJ.    W> 


34.  29. 


,  flow  with  honey,  1.47.  [K.  nai;  N.] 
,  honey  from   the   branch    19  'a<- 


9.  65. 


)  g.  34. 

^l^t,  large  flowers  containing  honey, 


,  10.ii. 


isu**,  10.8. 


, 

beautiful  one,  10.  58  ;  19.  14  ;  41. 
2,  6;  51.  ii. 


>  ^  [§  681»  J°in,  be  united. 

O^rAff|a;&r,    10.  71.      Q0r<S\$l,   6.  22. 

QjSTisar,  lit.  'things  assembled,'  with  •>*/>«'« 
'the  whole  assemblage,'  12.  18,  19. 

Q,$iT<oB)s}  n.  assembly,  company,  3.  7  ; 
44.  3. 

i^  v.  begin,  4.  45.  See  QpiriL, 


',  ?.  tf.  [§  60],  follow  after ; 
cling  to  ;  track  out,  3. 144;  5.  351 ; 
6.137;  14.  30;  37.36;  44.i6;  49. 
50.  [See  QpiriL  ;  N.  Lex.] 

QpfLjr  §>&#,  that  cannot  be  traced,  5.  377. 

Qfri— faifiiUTiu}   6.  152. 

Qs/ri-rey,  connection,  8.  118;  47.42. 

j?a/,  entanglement,  87.  39. 

.,  n.  a.  bracelet ;  a  woman  who 
wears  it :  QunpQ(yuf-pG>pn<3ir,  9.  47. 
),  v.  [§  68].  touch;  attain  to. 

.&>,  6.  127. 

jar®,  n.  service.     See  Qpnif. 

jar,  a  devotee,  5.167;  6. 1 26 ; 
7.  39;  9.  35;  36.  ii ;  46.  ;,. 

^j6OTt_  c-0«ur,  devotee-cultivators,  8.  94. 

.,  ;/.  throat,  14.  43. 
»  v.  [§  64],  destroy,  12.  1 8, 1 9. 


Q  jSJSV,  adj.  old  :  up,  <y>,  3.  3  1  ;  8.  1  1  8  ; 
16-  33- 

,  M.  antiquity,  14.  39. 
rer  «  u«>f0?urdr,  3.  40,  III. 
«o  =  otp«wo,  antiquity,  2.  34,41,51;  6.88; 
10.  71  ;  18.  3. 

4,  4.  40.      Qfi*>u»*  <gpr6«+,  4.  48. 

t  z>.  [§  60],  worship,  serve, 

5.  62,351;  6.175;  20.  2;  45.  21. 
Q0rT(y\@&)i}>,    n.    Brahman    caste,   a 

Brahman:    jf/wF«r«ar,  Q&jdujear,  6. 

i  1  1. 

Q0ir<y\eDs,  n.  worship,  20.  14. 
QfnQf  |tf>L/,  n.  servitude,  1.  43  ;  6.  6  ; 

7.35J  8-83;  27.  i. 

0,r<yj.4u*,  ».  a  »lave,   6.  151,  175;    10.  37; 
15.  49. 

,,  adj.  farm  [|  131.  (<•)]. 
*'cyiju9.?ur*«*,  '  we  thine  obedient  slaves,' 
20-33. 

rmt,  6.  391.     Comp.  Qf***Q. 

,  8.  33  ;  10.  10.     See  Qfnjp. 
C>/r®,   n.  'an  ear-jewel,'  or  'cm  led 

leaf  worn  in  the  pierced  lobe  of 

the  ear,'  10.  69. 

<2>ir«B0,  n.  a  boat,  6.  103;  30.  15. 
Q?afpli}u>=.5)p,  n.  [S.STOTRA],  praise, 

'3- 

uch,  16.  20;  i»!>.  17    [See 
'N.  Lex.] 

?  /.  /  \  ,  n.  skin  :  «./#,  ^(5u>u>,  (^iv 
tiger-skin,  5.28;  <).  69;  12. 

45;    17.  13  ;    human   skin,    1.  53; 
25.  5,  17;  leather,  50.  10. 

=  fellowship.     Comp. 


,  4.  I  ao  ;  7.  39. 
,  7.  4;  8.  31;  18.  37. 

r  [S.  DOS],  shoulder,  5.  130; 
8.  97  ;  40.  25.     [See  N.  Lex.] 

<?0»LLQ*ratr4_/Cp«4r.      Sec  *f>. 

Gft*G*t,  v.  embrace,  7.  74;  8.  3;  form,  5.  338. 

7*rC®*«ii  [<?^»*  +  Gir***  —  '  shonlclcr-aim  '], 
a  play  of  Tamil  women,  in  which  they  strike 
one  another's  shoulders.  This  word  is  the 
burthen  of  the  chorus,  16. 

Qftreif),  she  whose  shoulders  arc,  3.  103; 
11. 
48 


r,  v.  be  perforated,  27.  i  .  Comp. 
G^/rSsrr,  Quirar. 

Gfrtrr\(ipjff)  in  unperforated  pearl,  I.  \^~ 
38.      Comp.  Quriatur  wtaaR  for  Ourdrcrr. 

Co^Tjjy  or  OsS/r^jy  (O^ff^o/),  ;/.  col- 
lection, crowd,  4.  26. 

When  »jA  is  added,  this  is  used  as  =  '  evcrj', 

each,'  8.  136. 
8.  175,  with  a  noun;  10.  10,  with  «Saar>O/»r«»«  : 

Air,  «r«fr,  Cu*i6. 

Qpnpjp^  v.  (Gfirear),  2.  4  i  ;    ;ip[)car,  3. 

108;  44.  22;  create,  2.5. 
Gffi*]*,  show,  2.  10. 

QfiirjbfDu>,  ;/.  rise,  source,  3.  8;  5.  :;S  ; 
7.  78;  8.  70;  appearance,  1.  Ho; 

1  6. 

QfaeatfQ,  n.  the  Gloriosa  snperba,  a 
kind  of  lily  with  large  red  and 
white  flowers:  sirsfer,  3.  72  (?). 

,  v.  (C?^j>),  appear,    1. 
8.67,  134;  5.  i 


,  «.,=c/ffo)  [S.  NAGARA],  chief  city, 
Also  ««ffu>>  ««^. 

4A*»t,  8.  29.     OU*OT«/,  r>.  309. 

•»«/,  6.  159.      I0j^/0  Ouj«<*  <o/«a/,   2.  44. 

v-   [56<S1.  -s"ii^'.  l.'iu^h  ;    -hinc. 
5.2 
dm^ft,  it  is  something  to  laugh  at,  5.  40; 

I-V  S. 


I.  a  laugh  ;  teeth  as  shown  in  smiling. 
Gtjp***,  a  '43;  6.  aS" 

8.  M 
Q»«fc  mmmf,  a  bright  smile,  4.  30. 

II.  a  jewel,  fi.  io;;;  35.  27. 
•T^MD«,  s.  158. 

*«($,  t'.  lick,  fi.  49.     Comp.  */r,  &c. 
fiEjena,  n.  a  lady. 

Voc.  «*«ri:  12.  41.  .««>«^*!   I 

,  w.  desire,  3.  80. 

,   40.  5. 


I.  ^'.  from  »©*,  poisonous  :  is**  trey, 
3.  1  06;  5.  384. 

II.  ?'.  dc  C 


o,  poson  :  , 

4.173;  5.275;  6.138;  11.78/13.39- 
16.  19,  a;;  35.  34;  38.  22.  See 


•>  =*©*;  or,  P 
5.  13. 

JBL.,  v.  [§  66],  walk,  4.  208  ;  happen  ; 
pass  away  :  /su.®^,  49.  13. 

"-a***,  events,  3.  109.    ftoa&m.jK:^  23.  io. 
™-|*$7,  v.  [§  160],  conduct: 

for  ffi_#£[H  I  Gr.  86],  3.  109. 
*«w-,  step,  walking  : 

25.  13. 

/w.^,  n.  [S.  NAT],  a  dance,  2.  141 
(*a9«>);  13.i9(u^,56(^®);  15.  3 
(Qfiu), 

Bif.,v.  [§64],  dance;  busy  oneself,  41.  9. 
JB®. 

I.  v.  [§  68],  plant,  set,  40.  30. 

II.  ».  middle.     See  /*srr. 

u,  «.  agitation  :  eetearw,  49.  ^ 
f  «/.  tremble,  38.  23. 
^-fSL.w}  1.  89  (uttffsu);  12.54,55. 
ggy^   draw   near,  40.  23. 
See  /Fsr. 


I.  See  iseff". 

II.  near.     See 

r)  one  near,  1.  44. 
/}  v.  draw  near,  12.  66;  20.  33  ; 
29.13;  35.2 


sr,  I  draw  not  near,  26.  22. 

-LI),  n.  affection,  44.  12. 
,  ».  [S.  NADl],  a  river  :  ^jy,  4.  109. 
^wUiT^L}  either  '  our  own  village/  or 
the  name  of  a  £aiva  shrine:  $><3 

,  ?.  21. 

v.  waste  ;  '  ever-flowing  (un- 
wasting)  honey:'  isis^irjsQ^ssr}  9.57. 
[Naladi,  p.  373.] 

,  1.  i  ;  5.  245-248. 
[This  is  S.  NA|MA|-9i|vA|YA,  'salutation  to 
fivan.'  It  is  also  written  fyvdya-nama.  It 
is  the  famous  five-letter  (syllable)  formnla. 
Its  mystic  use  is  explained  in  the  a-afroou  fSa&aib 
by  a  disciple  of  Mey-kanda-devar.  See  gj<& 
Q*ot?s>.  Comp.  NOTE  II.] 

49 


5.  14. 
odr, 

4.io8;  12.66. 


(from  ,.t)t  my  fricnd- 


v.  [§  62],  trust,  40.  23. 
i,  ».  affection  :  probably  for  <? 


^,  v.  desire,  love,  4.  173;  5  71- 
9-72;  10.38;  33.29. 
IBILJ\ULI)  love,  2.  12. 


=*«w-  [S.  NAYANA],  an  eye 
35;  12.15,71;  20.6. 

KBrtftk,   16.  7. 

n.   [S.  NARAKA],  hell:   W9f 
4.n8  (espOa^);  5.6;  26.38; 
31.  2;  38.  9.  [SeeKa9iKh.,ch.xvi, 
and  Jlv.  Chin.,  pp.  761-765.] 
,  ».  sinew,  12.  41  ;  25.  5.  See  muir. 
».  a  fox,  jackal,  2.  36  ;  38.  3  ; 
50.  25. 

v.  [§  57],  afflict,  25.  14.    As 
.=s(?«ffju,  disease. 

,   good  :    /5€3r,  /zr^,   1.  40  ;    2.   -'o  ; 
36.  13. 

uA«,  kindly,  9.  33. 

n.  goodness;  piety;  beaut)', 
1.58;  2.127;  5.5o;  7.68;  11.78; 
12.70,71;  51.33. 

e&ieaeor  (-sir,  -tit,  -«/),  2.  12  (=  **MO\  36.  13/22. 

IS^ST\<SS}U})   goodness,   2.  36,  59,  74  ; 
22.  35  ;  33.  18. 

eosrgt  (eea  +  gi),  what  is  good. 
eon<T!jsi  well,  12.  61;  49.  13,  59. 

iB&)\(3jt  v.  grant  kindly,  1.  58  ;  2.  74  ; 

7.  36  (/EM\&\@\Qiu&y  '  if  Thou  wilt 

grant'),  76;  11.15;  34.  40;  42.  17. 
/Fstfgjja/,  n.  poverty,  4.  40  ;  5.  1  89. 
is0uu>t  n.,=Ljg]<ss)u>  [S.  NAVA],  newness, 

novelty,  11.  15. 

V,  v.  [§  56.  (Ill)],  tell,  sound 

out  ;  learn  ;  perform,  2.  108,  141  ; 

12.  52. 

gi',  v.  [§  1  60],  declare,  27.  30. 

*E 


Comp.  e.«r. 

I.  n.  the  middle,  3.  169;  5.  183.    See 
mass,  *®,  */r®. 

»*«*<j*,  thick  darkness,  1.  89. 

•®,  the  middle  :  nor  +41. 
m®\Qeut  in  the  midst  of,  5.  41  ;  20.  29  ; 
21.1-3;  22.34;  44.3. 

•Qwr64*,  intervene,  60.  16. 

II.  *«•(<«$),  if.  form  friendship,  5.  6. 


I.  fragrance. 

a,  26.  33.     See  mirjpt, 
ti,  n.  fragrance,  6.  14:. 

II.  goodness. 

•fVf,  9.  1  8. 

*$£>,  what  is  good,  for  *«arj>,  34.  18. 

Sec  *«tf. 
•ore/,  «.,  =  */r*9ffii,  'a  state  of  wake- 

fulness,'  4.  144;  11.  39.    Opp.  to 


,  ».  (i)  greatness;  (2)  used  ad- 
verbially: much,  3.  59;  abundantly, 
3.133;  8.155,214;  11.45. 
orjp,  a  good  thing,  49.  1  3,  59.  See  ••>. 
IT,  n.  tongue  :  **q,  »<r«<3,  5.  395  ; 
6.53;  88.17;  84.1.  [N.  1 


•  «/*.£,  0.  3  ;  U.  37.    [  AW*V  'i 

::6  30;  ••  59-  WWi  •*  -  fbt 
float.'    [See  JPO.^4,  76.] 
~  |»~/.  34.  3. 

,  n.  [S.  NAGA],  a  snake  : 
11.21.     Comp 

mjf^tf,  n.  an  earth-worm,  6.  97. 
i,  ».  [S.  NA9J,  destruction  : 


«N*T  J/W  fffGtvl  5.  JOJ.     u»«  »r^,   9.  57. 

t  n.  nose,  14.  37. 

i>,  //.  [S.  N&PAGA],  a  comedy, 
dance,  5.  27,  40,  41,  379,  38°- 

*/rt_  drear,  2.  138.    See 


Also  »n_«<4  may  - 
•  the  earth,'  5.  37,  38. 


to  match 


I.  country,  cultivated  land,  15.  15  ; 
19.  6,  8  ;  23.  1  8  ;  36.  13.  From  *®  ; 
Opp.  to  sir®. 

*,  a  ruler,  owner  of  the  land,  18.  8. 

50 


•»i_«rf. 

•«-/,  inhabitants :  ~i&-t,  18.  20. 
»fCj_r*.  .riii-*/,  1.  90 ;  6.  1 10 ;  8.  35 
OL_|.r«,  2.  27.     of*»l»®,  2.  118;  19.  8. 
•rtlOjC***,  23.  1 8.     »«''• 

II.  v.  seek  out:  Q»®,^, «ffff^,  9-  57 1 
i:j.  1 8. 

,  28.  1 8. 

a>,  3. 19.     Sec  *»«r. 
l®,  v.  plant,  9.  10.     Sec  «®,  »ff®. 
r  v.  be  ashamed.  1(>) 

27;  30.  14;  44.  ii,  20. 
*<T«BBT,  sir  tars,  n.  shame,  -1 
30.14.     [See  K.  Lex.  1 
•ff^ii,  n.  [S.  NADA],  sound  ;   music. 

•MO  OLqpl  ump,  S.  Io8. 

vr^O  w»^,  19.  31;  46.  I.     ftfuumtfJ^t,  17 

r,  n.  [S.  NATHA],  L«>nl,  1.  i. 

,6;  4.82;  5.  90;  9.  11,72;  17.4: 
19.6;  4'J.    ,     Mb  19, 

ii,     ».    [S.    NA  +  ASTI  =  NASTl], 

atheism,  4.  47. 

u>,  ».  [S.  NAMA],  name,  11.  j,  4  : 
9.64.  :i".  l, 

19.  j;  26.  31. 

u>,n.  [S.  NAYAKA:  \/Nl  =  'Iead1], 
a  central  gem ;  excellence 
Lord,  lover,  husband,  my   I 
for  ma <umor t  50  -*. 

maumor,  n.  Lord,  8.  40;  10.  4;,;  12. 
15;  18.  i  i,  10  ; 

49.  16. 

«<fit/,  n.  a  dog:  maiuiiQiuor,  6.  4  < '  1() 
30;  16.  3.    See  */r  and  **Q. 

t<i,  meaner  than  a  dog.  1.  60. 

••/•/ J/««M_,     0. 

C«r*.  'ladog,'  2. 1 37;  6.90, 1 97.   With  jyi^ 

r,  4.  319;  88.  ., 
>nf/n»i  irrtr^i^  88.  29. 

mffaotrar  [for  S.  NAR 

[8. 

itnu~*+,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  16.  3.    See  M«I. 
,  «. bark;  outer  fibre,  1 
With    m.fl,    proverbially    '  peel    a 
stone/  'skin  a  flint.' 

,  n.  four.     See  **«>,  «<r«r, 
mitor(gt  it  or. 


br),  n.  a  day,  33.  16. 

tsr,  to-morrow,  7.  21. 

c.Ul  ««*«,«,/,  a  newly.blown  flower,  9.  23  ; 

GlL.r&ib,   3.  19;   34.  2. 

,  v.  exhale  fragrance ;  stink.    See 


p,  ».   [M.,  C.  NATA],  fragrance, 
j^Wtf*     *n**);*.il5., 

•'W^vrilvt  [.rA  +  fW],  ascetics  from  all 
points  of  the  compass,  4.  3. 

i,  «•  fragrance,   46.  3  (?).     See 


.i38;  5.89,397;  10.2; 
12.17,61,  77,79;  14.40. 

4>«S,    12.  6l. 

a,  the  pendent  world,  4.  213.   [«•*,  p.    See 


•rariaeapQuta,,  '  one  learned  in  the  four  Vedas  ' 
2.  21.     [wg».] 

p££3r=-9:<gj[r(ip<56BrJ  n.  Brahma 
4.  i ;  14.  52  ;  29.  13.  See  i3ffu>ek 
and  isirgy. 

@£{£,  z;.  [§57], stand,  subsist;  cause, 

8.25;  4.138;  27.i8;  45.24. 
8*$eS,  cause  to  be,  50.  25. 
'8,  «•  [S.  NI^A],  night,  4.  28. 

„.  1  2  3 

9*^^.0  for  rfA*0«a  [S.  NITVA],  continually,  8.99; 

4V/.  2o. 


».,  probably  for  ^^f(i  rs 
NIR  +  ANTARA],  unbroken,  continu-' 
ous,  5.  24  ;  22.  23  ;  26.  7. 
|ii)/_/,  z,.  become  full:  ^a,^  3.  ,7- 

S  ^ '  =  much;  (Com-  Qrtu !)  17-  9* 

[SeeH.B.,  §  1?I.] 

^,  (i)  [S.  NIRUKTA],' what  is  unutterable;' 
(a)  [S.  NRITTA],  'dancing,'  title  Of  31. 

^«fr,     ».     [S.    NRIT],    =-L.^«r, 

dancer,  4.201;  5.  244;  29.5. 
,a  line,series, swarm,  20. 7.  Comp. 


w'.,  =  tSfSluju)  ever   34.  ^6. 

',  ».  [S.  NIDHl],  =  l8Q<K£Ui  > 

a  treasure-house  ;   treasure,  9.  o  ; 
10.  21. 

«5y0ssjfi^),   20.  8. 

^  [for  S.  NITYA],  eternal,  17.  9. 
See  also  iS^^lujii  and  iSlff®), 

',  4.  175;  23.  n. 

">,  continually,  5.  143. 

tf,  n.  [S.  NIDRA],  sleep,  4.  29. 

•o,  w.  a  pearl :  (Lpggj,  7.  13. 

,  tSesrwG)^,  n.  [S.  NIR  +  MALA], 
purity:  tsl\ui6\}sor  I  =©5' LDgussrl,  the 
stainless  :  tn/r^^a/esr,  1.13;  4.  175; 
29.5. 


fT,  v.  spread  out,  rise,  lengthen 
out,  2.  104;  4.  32;  28.  35.   [  =  £*.] 

51 


^sv,  2;.  [§  70],  stand,  remain,  exist, 
be  present,  1.  4,  13,  I?>  69 ;  45. 
25-28.  [See  iSgipsi,  which  is  its 
causal,  3.  no.] 

dp*,  'though  they  stood  ready,  I  was  selected  ' 

23.  33- 
*f*v  (pi.  *jftt«r),  =^»J<a,  'that  which  stands/ 

3-  53,  no. 

/^euja/ac*,   26.  29.      iflwwr,   5.  23. 

With  (jo*,  Jair,  a.6*-,  w<fr,  21.  4-8. 

^ssrjx  in  18.  1 8  seems  a  case-ending  ='  from.' 

i8&)u>t  n.  the  earth,  1.  59;  12.  22;  15. 
17:  r$&)fvry  27.  25. 

/^sosi/,  iBeMey,  v.  exist,  spread  abroad, 
flourish,  5. 158, 159  ;  idrsuiQ^ne^s  \ 
9.  14;  18.  9;  21.  27;  23.  24,  &c. 

ifleuiiu)=.iSewr&jtbl  35.  39. 

iS®)ir  (i§&)ey)}  n.  the  moon,  moonlight : 
=  the  changing  one  (?},  5. 1 74;  35. 1 8. 
,  n.  stability,  3.  9. 

,  immaterial,  26.  34. 
,  23.  ii.    nSSsuOu®,  unenduring,  8.  70. 

>  [S.  NIVEDANAM],  dedication. 

ita  iSGeu0ecnb}  self-dedication,  title  of  33. 

,   n.  shade,   shadow,  coolness, 
3.  24;  4.  78.     See  £tp&>. 

tf  n.  colour,  quality,  tinge,  1. 49; 
29.  13. 

gt,  v.  [§160],  maintain,  establish, 
stop,  3.  no.    See  iS&). 

for  iBfffft.    [Ill  Gr.  86.] 

=  fulness.     Comp.  iSn\^n. 
I.  ;/.  excellence,  13.  51. 

*  E  2 


—  SIT  gi. 


II.  f.[§  57],  be  full;  fill,  1.23 ;  3.  90; 

34.  22. 

iBa>p>\iu,  as  adv.  full,  5.  94;  9.  34. 
uSaopja/,  fulness,  22.  17. 

r,  v.  [§§  64,  57],  think,  reflect, 
remember :  $15$,  CT^TCT^,  3.  33  ; 
5-  9,  J57,  203,  300,  301 ;  10.  25 ;  22. 
26;  26.5;  27.25;  35.  38  ;  37. 13  ; 
41.  13,  21 ;  44.  23;  49.  n. 

ULJ,  n.  thought:  Iflispltesr,  11.  51  » 
22.  26. 

iSBosrfai  ;/.  thought:  QiBGnp,  4.  II5> 
5.  10. 

I.  =».(sar  from  /£,  20.  21,  &C. 

II.  a  negative  prefix  [S.  NIR,  NISH, 
NIH]  :  i$,  iSir,  /#.£. 

4drju>cutar_  tfiOMdr,  5.  244,  311. 

4 

I.  /n?».  thou  :  /£/?,  33.  1 7-20,  &c. 

II.  v.  [§  64],  forsake.  [Comp.  S.  NIR.] 

*A0*>  =  tssta,  'abandonment,'  title  of  6 :  =  «8®^Ai. 

fisaii,  n.  extension :  as  if  &L-L-UD,  3.  9. 
*<5,  v.  a.  put  away,  5.  331,  399;  8. 
117;  26.  29,40. 
IB®,  v.  n.  quit,  remove,  6.  13. 

tf>sr first*,  'He  who  dcpaits  not,'  1.  2. 
/f^jisar  [S.  Nl|CHA]  :    /f^GsorsBr,  5.  203, 

311- 

/f®.     See  /fefr. 

i$ saw*-,  /^^/  r^/.  /«r/.  long.     See  /£ err. 

/eAr^.  aippt   17.    17.      /«ri_  usjiu,   27.  9. 

/£„#, ;/.  [S.  N!TI],  justice,  right,  26.  5; 

43.  4;  44.  22. 
i(sgiy  v.  [§  62],  swim:  iis$&&i—t  cross 

over  water,  36.  9 ;  42.  25. 

jjjir ,  pi.  of  /£. 

^/r,  «.  fluid;  water;  essence;  nature, 
2.59;  3.25,  88;  4.138;  5.251, 277; 
19.  37  ;  27.  25.  Comp.  fnnu>.  See 


/[souj,  ».,  flataoiD,  iSfaimio,  ocxrii,  goodness,  essen- 
tial excellence,  27.  19. 

&)u>,  n.  [S.  NlLAj,blue ;  the  bluelotus : 
&@isi(9je>j'<far)  18.  9 ;  23.  36. 
LD&)  for  /%>ex>,  shade,  13.  49. 
52 


,  ^.[§56.(III)],belong:  /f^./f©; 
«c^'.  zw  ;//a;y  senses: 
bright,  4.202;  35.38;  mighty,  [ieatsr, 
li  tLt  QrsiL,  CD/FL!.] 

fir  ap&msT,    1.  59.      afOi_y9A),   3.  72. 
jfaifioajofl,    18.  9.      /«*^^L,    6.  15. 

*®,  otfo.  long,  long  since,  43.  13. 
/«4ri_,  27.  9  ;  applied  to  Vishnu  in  his  incarnation 
as  Vikraman.     [Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  67.] 

,  n.  ashes:  $@£g>i,  3.  108;  5.  94; 
16.  15. 

,  5.  194. 

Qmmtrt-  fibfteor,  8.  3.     Comp.  8.  50. 
a.«ur'  if  par,   35.  22. 
,  12.  I. 

f,   5.  266.      Qvetifstfppt,    17.  I. 
,  3.  33. 

«briOTu  Ouror  efppea,  10.  l6.     IItTC<p  =  '  Sacred 
powder.' 

[for  Oaj-41.-,  ?  ash-strown],  2.  104. 

/f,  z;.  enjoy,  26.  35. 
EiQ,  v.  waver,  be  tremulous,  1  1  .  35  ; 
24.  25. 

,  v.  crawl  :  Qrseifl. 


,  minute:  @LL®n>. 

,    1.  76,  80. 

,  subtility,  1.  76.    .paircjoftL/,  26.  30. 

dr,  .prabrarfCuft*,    1.  35  ;   3.  49  ;    11.  54. 
,   3.  76  ;   4.  85.      jjwbrtooflaoi-,   49.  43. 

See  .sKiuii,  jsnfl. 

u  [T.NUDURU;  C.  NOSAL;  M.  NU- 
DAL;  S.  NiTALA],brow: 
3.135;   12.49.    See  SCOOT, 
toit,  49.  53. 

&jp,  v.  stir  up  :  e./^?,  6.  187  ;  10.  37. 
,  v.  [§  57],  enter,  3.  5. 


ji««>tf)|«/,  11.  54. 
<S,  V'  thrust,  33.  14. 

«<i,  impulsive  energy,  3.  24.    [? 

),  n.  a  thread  ;  scientific  manual  ; 
the  Veda,  8.49;  11.54.  Play  on 
two  meanings.  [Comp.  S.  SUTRA  ] 

ai0  Qiaue  jyiiv,  6.  170. 

^  giwrdr,  8.  50.     See  ^A 


I.  v.  be  crushed  to  powder,  perish, 
16.  16.     Comp.  jprir,  £gi. 

II.  w.  a  hundred,  3.  4. 


Cjig- 

J,  v.  n.  [0/stfG*^  §  68],  melt,  5 
I43,  397;  35.38,38.   Comp.  e.^ 
•;  found  with  ^sii,  23.  i. 

5   Gta©«,  n.  mind,  heart 
L  2,  65;  5.  139,  223,  317;  7.  28: 
10.41;  15.  13,14;  19.  18.    Comp. 
[See  K.  and  N.  Lex.] 

g<?*!  5.  123,  127.    iDt-O/y^C* !  5. 121 

[<2*®u],  ^'.  long,  wide,  tall. 
Comp.  /fsfr,  /fisror,  /f*_L. 

QjrSte  asoir  lo/rsir  *SOT^   3.  80. 

""      >  '    T"/  '  Snvauj^    jjt    J^  J# 

O/sQw  0t&>3,  7.  58.     O«©  ar^  6.  168. 
O/s©  IO/TSU,  Vishnu,  4.  4  ;  8.  I ;  24.  u. 

O/F(U,  n.  [S.  SNEHA],  Ghl,  butter-oil, 
1.  46;  21.  20. 

^jOaJraciL;,    5.   150.       Qistui<gt^ibt   6.  06. 

Qmfl=:Qisf$}  v.  [§  64],  bruise,  crush, 
8.  86. 

L/^a,  O«/fl,  frown,  for  Q/ffV,  13.  22;  break,  14. 
38,44;  40.25. 

Q/F<3/E/(Sj,  v.  be  narrow;  crowd;  press 

on,  4.  31 ;  21.  27. 
Og^ULf)  n.  fire:    ^,  5.319;   27.  9, 

25- 
O/Fsuja57,«.  a  plant :  Phyllanthus,  3. 162. 

[See  Ainslie,  vol.  ii.  p.  150.] 

The  *<$  O/?A«J?A  asofl  is  transparent, — hence  an 
emblem  of  £ivan,  whom  His  people  hold  and 
know. 

a*,  as  an  epithet  of  Qivan,  27.  15. 

<s<sru>,  13.43;  40. 13;  51.  5.  An 
epithet  of  £ivan,  4.  115. 

xtsfL>@($@^&}tufr  =  O/ft^Pyy^  O/y^9^^5  lonsf  streamini? 
locks,  17.  17. 

?u>G)6OTvr9,  the  higher  path  of  <jj«5Hi,  5.  126. 
3^,  way  of  salvation,  51.  I. 
^,  way  of  piety,  51.  2. 
9,  by-paths  of  evil,  51 . 6.    Qu(jQ»«9,  23.  27. 
n&,  provide  a  way,  13.  29. 
jJ,  51.  15.     tutHLjQnfl,  51.  27. 
A  5.  154. 

G«/r5>juirsJr,    39.  I. 

;z.  forehead :  jppe 

ft  aeirescrQar  \   29.  5- 

53 


yesterday:  0«OTflr%»,  7.  2i  ; 
[for  O/F^/f^.    Comp. 
}..**^  Jove,  5.  9.5. 
i.  65. 

«.  tenderness;  affection,  7.6; 
9.  14. 

[This  is  oftencr  written  CM*  (lomctimc*  «u4 
and  is  for  S.  SNEHA.    <*?••*  ,  another  fan 


See 


in  tender  love,  1.  13. 


I.  ».  what  is  directly  in  front  ;  straight, 
right.    Comp.  Qg@. 

C»f  [«>•*,  6.  139. 

<?»/|u®,  be  obtained,  occur.tgree,  80.5,6;  40.  14. 

<?«r/|ur^A,,   11.  51. 

II.  gjq.  Q&irQeoart  gj€Of_(u/r«r,  minute- 
ness, 29.  1  7.    See 


<7»iflsB)(p  [G.  162"!,  refined,  exquisite,  7.  6.    See 

®a"(fl  and  <gito>(p. 

III.  as  a  verb  [§  57],  =  resemble. 

*CT»«DIU  <?*/,  5.  1  06  ;  50.  1-4. 

IV.  as  a  ttiftff:  resemblance,  =rlike, 
3.  30,  147. 

flat  Qesri  g)A,ffiurdr,  the   Incomparable,   8.  146. 
[Xttrraf,  7.] 

,  n.  the  subtile  being,  1  .  44.  See 
/?  (II).    But  also, 

Li,  'Thou  who  goest  undcvia- 
tingly  on,'  1.  44.    See  Q*i  (I). 

,  v.  n.  [§  56.  I],  languish,  waste 
away,  perish,  4.  80  ;  5.  380,  397  ; 
1  7.  36  ;  25.  15,  38  (eB*QQ*tir=  «M« 
G^or);  26.a;  35.23,38.  Sce««: 
so  so*  and  &f.  Comp.  ^-(51(5,  O*|<5- 
jBJty-,  n.  a  riddle,  a  mysterious 
utterance,  a  snap  of  the  finger,  an 
instant  of  time. 

istruf-iuesr  (for  j(ar€ar)t  enigmatical. 
26.  30. 

erif-umr,  in  an  instant,  26.  39. 

BJ,   <?/F/r|<5,  ?'.  suffer  pain  ;  ache, 
complain. 

irGsttr,  I  shall  complain  :  &mf*Q,  28.  j. 

'u,  «.  pain,  disease  :  tStrt,  10.  37; 
33.  i  ;  45.  17;  47.23;  50.8. 


I.  v.  regard,  1.  76;   5.  235;  21.  17; 
38.  28;  42.  9. 

II.  «.  eye,  1.  76;  6.  157. 

G,r*Q,  4.  135;  5.  151,  217;  18.  16;  33.  13. 
<?*r*fiu/,  6.  157. 

LJ 

u&rr,  v.  [§  60],  declare,  say :  from  U(^, 
2.102;  3.3;  7.  22;  19.  1 8,  26;  26. 
13.  Comp. 


—  LJ  u^  u>  ix. 

uiEJSijeireJsry  7.  32. 

These  all  refer  to  £ivan  as  united  to  Parvathi, 
as  Arddha-nari-j-uran. 

u£,  n.  hunger,  4.  28. 


LJS&),  n.  day-time,  4.  28  ;  33.  34;  34.  9. 

Opp.  Jj)/ra/,  i@&.     [<J(5.] 
u«(?«wr«*,  the  sun,  15.  17. 

L/SS3T. 

I.  n.  [S.  BHAGA],  one  of  the  Asuras, 
sons  of  Aditi. 

II.  one  of  the  suns,  sometimes  said  to 
be  twelve  in  number.   His  eye  was 
plucked  out  by  Rudra-^ivan1,  14. 
31.    See  ^(Tj-ssear.  [9.  69  ;   13.  14.] 


,  n.  [S.  PRA-KRlTi],  original, 
source  ;  nature,  constitution,  3.  i, 
1  8  (and  title).  See  «$y«an_u>  and 


,  n.  enmity,  14.  22;  19.  31  ;   an 
enemy,  36.  25.     [u&.] 
i/au)  [S.  BHANGA],  shame,  13.  59. 

},  «.[S.  PANKA-JAM  =  mud-born], 
a  lotus  :  firiASBff,  &to&)u>t  7.  52,  68  ; 
15.  10  ;  29.  2. 
(5,  «.,  =utTaiJ),  a  part,  share:  uirjs), 


>.     [N.] 

u/E/ff637-(ff),  4.  1  84  ;  5.217,373;  6.164; 
28.  17,  &c.;  33.  10;  36.  i  ;  45.  34. 

U/E/©6BT65T=:<$fi_(£>65r)    U/T 

9.  27  ;  17.  33. 


I.  n.    [S.  PA^U],  an  animal,  4.  48. 
NOTE  XII. 

u*ur#ii,  81.  15,  25  ;  40.  37. 

L/*M#  [S.PA9UNAM-PATi],name  of  <^ivan,  89.  6. 

II.  [§  131],  green,  yellow,  bright,  pure. 

See 


ib,  4.  65.    uf^jfitfft  yellow  sandal,  10.  ;o. 
,  19.  37. 

t  n.  greenness,&c.,  38.  1  3.  See  uf. 

dl,  n.  a  shrine,  u.  *<sot&*$'.<suu$t  2.  13. 

*,;/.  cotton,  4.  184;  25.39;  28.  2J; 
38.2i;  51.  17. 

o,  n.  [S.  PATA],  a  picture,  13.  53  ; 
a  snake's  hood,  34.  i. 

LJl!_ff,  v.  intr.  [§  60],  spread  :  eSlifl,  us. 
ut-Qu&fly    expanding    light,    22.  8  ; 
34.  24. 


.,  88.  13. 


,  a  boat,  43.  19. 


I.  n.,  =£UL/,  comparison  :  the  match- 
less Infinite,  25.  35;  a  step  ;  earth, 
4.  211  ;  manner. 

,  not  so  as  to  manifest,  11.  10. 


II.  v.  sink  down;  submit;  repose  in, 

2.  16. 

L/if  |a/,subsidence;  submission,  38.  35. 
i,  «.,  from  UI$.&LD  [S.  SPHATIKA], 

crystal,   purity:    uifl&ffu),    2.    76. 

Comp. 


1  In  Ka9i  Khandam,  89.  38,  it  is  said  that  when  Vira-bhadra  (a  son  or  manifestation  of  £ivan) 
came  with  his  demon  rout  to  interrupt  the  sacrifice  of  Dakshan  : 


Qmit 


u-$ur 


'  Bhagan,  —  who  pours  forth  clustering  rays  of  fair  light,  who  devours  the  gross  darkness,  who  owns 
a  beauteous  one-wheeled  chariot,  —  a  demon  fought  with,  seized,  plucked  out  his  eye  from  the  root, 
stabbed,  threw  down,  and  dragged  away.' 

54 


it  n.  [S.  VATARA]  :  ev^ 
$$ti,  5.  158;  6.  137;  34.  12,  24. 

sm*,   5.   175.      Qi_mu  «u_jAL/. 

ui$./  !  deceitful  maid  !  7.  5.     a/^ff. 

u(Si. 

I.  ?.  [§  56.  (II);  S.  PAD],  fall  into;  be 
caught,  3.  42;  5.  325-328;   suffer, 
50.  14. 

II.  v.  [§  60],  lie  down,  effect,  make, 
10.  79.     With  QuirQijetr. 

KpuTpu®,  rectify  my  being,  15.  15  ;  affect,  5.  334. 
Catch  ,  ensnare,  2.  1  7  :  u>®,  ^«iju®^^. 

LJ<55)*_,  tf.  [§  64],  create,  7.48;  8.43. 

uea>t^£0itir,  umt-CiGursir,  the  creator  :  not  /CrjCTTljS, 

but  SrjfMovp-yos,  5.  25. 

uaDt_iJuiriu,  'Thou  makest  the  maker,'  3.  13,  52; 
4.  100  ;  27.  37. 


I.  n.  weapon  :  ^ILJ^LD,  19.  26,  28;  39.  6. 
See 


II.  host:  &GSOTLD,  13.  15;  46.4. 

uam_  aQf*8>  46  (title).     ua»t_  4jO.fi,  49.  6  (title). 

ULLi_Lo,  «.  [S.  PATTA],  dignity,  royalty. 

uCi_<flib«o*,  a  (Jaiva  shrine  near  Ramnad,  2.  62. 

utlif  ,  n.  place  (a  wide  place?),  5.195. 
uessru)   [S.  PHANA],  cobra  (prop,  its 
hood\  3.  96. 

LJ533T,  «.  melody,  28.  1.7;  38.  5. 

uohia-iaisp  u/ri—su,   8.  43. 

u«o5ruLU_,  renowned  in  song,  13.  13. 

Ljafaeoaioj-^    9.  49. 

L/6zari_/7flrii,  «.  a  religious  mendicant, 

36.  20. 
uesor®,  n.  what  is  ancient  : 

65T^7,    5.238;    6.I3I;    8.53. 
u«4ri_riu,   48.  I. 
ua*ra»t_,  a^'.,   33.  I;   45.  II. 

usBbrCi_,  arfy.  of  old,   27.  21. 


I.  «.  [S.  PAN,  PAN],  service,  6.131; 
40.  38. 

uwofllQ*rdr,  z>.  accept  one's  homage  and  service, 

5.  181,  214;  10.47;  13-63;  16.  52;  33-8- 
ua^lO^^,  w.  serve,  7.  35,  75;  13.  33. 

II.  v.  [§  57],  serve,  bow  before,  1.  95  ; 
5.  122,  140,  352,  353;  7.  34. 

55 


III.  v.  [$§  64, 160],  cause  to  bou 
down,  5.39;  fl.  ,3,;  n 

IV.  v.  [§  64 ;  S.  BHAN],  say,  declare, 
bid  :  siLL3etrjtfdt  2.  20 ;  5. 163, 386, 
10.  1,5;  23.  12;  give,  6.  131.   ' 

-o,  w.  a  chank  :  *»(£,  6. 186. 
',  v.  make :  umggy\sS  (causa/), 
33.  14. 


I.  v.  expand,  4.  32;  14.  24. 

II.  «.  [S.  PHAN],  rice-field,  12.  14. 
ugOTL/,  «.  quality  :  (jwrti,  2.  53.    [Sec 

K.  Lex.] 

up&feS  [S.  PATANJALI],  a  (^aiva 
devotee,  whose  legend  is  given  in 
the  Koyil  Puranam,  B.  ii,  2.  138. 
See  the  legends  of  £ithambaram, 
NOTE  VII. 

ustb. 

I.  [S.PADA],  station,  5.  362;  20.7.  See 

utrptb. 

ufCiuffrQuff,  6.  ioo  ;  22.  4  ;  88.  39  ;  60.  5. 

Qugibuf*,  36.  31.     fiwu^,  81.  n;  87.  n. 

Qioiiiijufiio,  37.  1  8.     Sitruuf*,  26.  39. 

II.  word,  3.40,  in. 

,  v,  rush  precipitately,  4.  49,  73. 


ui?.    [As  noun  S.  See  NOTE  XII  ] 

I.  v.  a,  [§  64],  insert  ;  plunge  into, 

11.47- 

II.  n.  [?S.  PADA],  town:  tae.a,  2.  iiK 
(seems  =  '  habitation');  12.45;  13- 
13;  19.10. 

u,g)«yani_]«ir*|jf!r,  6.  167. 

u^«ii  [?  S.  PADYA.  Not  from  ujj>  : 
does  not  always  consist  of  ten 
verses],  titles  of  21  and 

LJ6W  <£,  v.  [§64],  pant  :  ufi,  up*,  5.  74  ; 
throb  in  sympathy,  5.  82,  122;  23. 

usBfi&i-l,  //.presumption,  16.46. 

u?$,  n.  [S.  BHAKTI],  piety,  devotion, 
2.  119.  Comp.  NOTE  VIII. 

9,  61.  J.     u>*»*  «*.*,  H   47 
)j«V>,  8.  42. 
<;~*  for  uAp  ftC«-»  or  u/^  JK**,  * 


u 


LJSO. 


uj&]a>>ie,  31.  25  ;  44.  I. 
In     7.    IO    u#giaD!—iiSi  = 

44.  13. 
u&pr,  4.  1 76.     [Either  '  spouse 

'devotee.'] 
utfft,  19.  ii ;  37.  30;  46.  5. 

v,  1 0.19.  Where  u, 


So 

,'  S.  BHARTA,  or 
u*.p. 


I.  =  u/r<Fu>,  «il®  [S.  BANDH],  bondage  : 
3.52,  70,85;  5.126;  8.17;  13.6; 
22.  34.    [NOTE  V.] 

II.  beauty:  jf  4^5,6.187;  30.  ai;  48.18. 

UIS^IT,  a  pandal,  2.  58. 
n&j,  n.  [S.  RANDHU],  a  ball. 

rA,  20.  30;  28.  29;  43.  20. 

/,  «.  resemblance:  uuur>f  20.  21. 

[Some  say  =  D.'iJL/,  uxtrtXurOty,  distraction.] 

LJ//J,  TA  yield;  produce,  create,  5.  1  17. 

ir,  ;/.  fruit,  profit,  26.  35;  50.  14. 

sv,  v.  [§56.(III)],  practise  (an  art), 

W-54,55'*  energize  in,  2.2;  18.  13; 
frequent,  haunt,  4.  210  ;  6.  143  ; 
31.  36. 

•i_i4ut/fti,  1.  89  ;  18.  19.    loaopmSA,  10.  55  ;  43.  I. 

iMSA>'id  =  u<Seiifa£it  G.  136. 

u/r,z>.w.[§66;S.PARA,PRA],spread,be 
diffused:  ",0,4.33,137;  5.2i;  17.19; 
22.  7,  29;  24.  31;  28.  1  549.52. 

UU  LJI-f. 

I.  n.  diffusion,  extension,  complexity, 
multiplicity,  4.36;  22.  29;  49.5i. 
[Used  for  L9ju^«?a).] 

II.  v.  spread,  scatter,  9.  9. 

LJJU).      [S.] 

I.  the  bestand  highest,  4.  50,72;  15.48. 

II.  £ivan,  5.  173. 

III.  the  other  world,  6.  68.  Opposed 

to     )&ti. 


ib,  4.  222  ;    =tiS*a/ii  Cio««r«8r}   2.  119. 

jssr,  the  supremely  excellent,  4.  222  ;  6.  136; 
20.  30;  28.  i;  34.24;  47.6. 
ujfiQ0r<s*Miir}  4.  ^5. 
TiA  ^jAisar,  beyond  my  power,  22.  6. 
utruirib>  uftuten,  the  Supreme,  13.  41. 


uar  !  5.  386  ;  9.  27  ;  42.  16. 

t  the  highest  goal,  4.  214. 


fsl,  light   supernal,  5.  334  ; 
11.47;  22.2;  25.25. 

i,  the  supreme  Deity,  15.  46. 

Luria,  adj.,  2.  138.      u  tutor,  3.  37. 
uiiorrantrpiA,  supreme  rapture,  3.  66. 

,  z/.  praise,  34.  3.     See  u/r,  L/JQ/. 
,  ?;.  praise,  5.  64,65;  11.  60;  13. 
8,  13;  25.  25,  27;  35.  19.    See  un, 


56 


U-JIT,  adj.  [S.PARA],  supreme,  supernal, 
3.  18 1 ;  49.  15. 

urrjiu»ifiafrl   49.  52. 

LHTITIU.     See  u@. 

utf. 

1. 11.  charger :  urf>u>iT,  2.  38, 1 16;  8. 1 7 ; 
12.57;  17.27;  18-23;  36.io,25; 
43.  15;  50.  25. 

uAuuraOr,  groom,    18.  32. 

II.  v.  love,  11.55;  27.21;  37.  33. 
[Comp.  S.  BHRI.] 

r,  I  cherish  no  affection,  23.  7. 
A>,  the  loveless  body,  23.  7. 

fS.  SPARTA],  boon,gift,  present: 
ufl®eoy  5. 132,  362;  manner,  2.  47, 
57, 102,  &c. ;  5.  35,  36 ;  7.  4,  20,  28, 
35;  33.  19,  24;  43.  20;  honour,  dig- 
nity, propriety,  13.  59;  31.  25,  33; 
36.  24. 
utfp,  entirely,  51.  23. 

^'.great,  4.  IS3(=^U3^ 
23.  15,  16;  36.  i.     Comp. 
,  and  Naladi,  246. 

,  v.  [perhaps  S.  PARI-MITA], 
triumph,  exult,  19.  32. 
Ud5(5,  v-  drink,  3.  8 1, 1 66;  5.379,390; 

6.  129;  11.58;  45.35. 
U05$,  n.  [prop,  uiflgl;    S.  PARlDUl], 
the  sun,  28.  25. 

,  n.  a  board,  16.  2. 

w,  n.  jack-fruit,  6.  181. 
ueS, «.,  =LSfets)f,  alms,  food  given  to  a 
religious  mendicant,  10. 7;  12. 65. 

LJSV.      [up,  L/OT.] 

I.  many,  1.27,95;  8.27;  5-2i4;  15. 20. 

[!/*.] 


IJA) 


u*«n*Q,<m.iny  years':  a  song  of  praise,  9.  a. 
II.  tooth  :  GruS0f  8.  87  ;  14.  43. 

*,*  [S.  PAN  NAG  A],  the  fanged  cobra  :  (u*.  + 
aib}  an  imitation  of  uajrrarsta,  is.  68. 

<i  [S.  BHU,  BHAVA],  state,  condition 
of  existence,  worldly  life  5.  20-  11 
14;  49.  38. 

ueueir,  Civan  :  Afc  Existent,  4.  175  ;  5.  33.    For 
urtuu,  (?),  6.  28. 

a/aru>,  «.  coral,  16.  i;  26.  27.     [See 

S.  PRABALA.] 
QfihuaiarQaifiLj,   6.  198. 


y>u>,n.  ripe  fruit,  1 8.  j  3 ;  20. 25 ;  25. 1 8. 
p,  old,  30.  26.    [Written  also  usa^, 
so  ^)er  and  £§)3srr.] 

'tf>««9-<w/f,oldservants,6. 137;  7.io;  21. 14;  25.35. 
'  "«"">  old,  5.  353. 
«>>0><?<w«5r,  the  Ancient,  the  Eternal,  3.  13,  37. 

'jf&Qurtger^   7.  33.      UjfEsi^Ai    3.  65. 
y>E(F)t$.&)    20.  30.      Liy)G$%e8r    13.  ^1*  51    2 
tf&euta>   36.  31.      u^^Q^irQfiltLjj   6.  185. 

to, «.  a  rice-field ;  a  tank.  Here  for 

9,  the  hill  of  Pulney,  4. 159. 
u^>  *'•  [§  64],  despise,  4.  69;  5.  262; 
18.14-16;  (surpass),  6.185. 

«jyp,  uytoty,  «.  blame,  guilt,  6. 185 ;  35. 25 ;  50. 13. 

LJ(Lp,  v.  [§64],  ripen,  become  mature: 
ua'(5«27UL/®,   24.  2  ;   37.  2,  22. 

17,  ;/.  a  fault,  flaw,  5.  252;  6.  176; 
28.  37.     [L/tp  =  old.] 

for  uz$,  fault,  6.  184. 
\=1(SPPt^)  ^u^t,  5.  140. 
E/@,  «.  crystal :    LJ^GW,   4.  103. 
[Comp.  S.  SPHAT.] 
usirerfl,  n.  couch,  20.  4,  &c. ;  village  (?), 

2.I3;  17.27. 
LTD,  v.  [§  66],  fly,  14.  2,  &c.;  27.  17. 

IJJDJSSJSU,  any  winged  creature,  1.  27. 


4g  j         2-  108;  17.  a,  3;  19. 3,; 

"•  v-  H  57],  publish,  5.  339. 
U-bjpj.    [K.  350.] 

I.  v.  [§  62],  grasp,  3. 145 ;  4.  49 ;  8.35; 
10.19;  34.17;  37. 

II.  ».  a  support,  something  to  gnup, 
a  stay ;  a  grasp,  hold,  3. 145 ;  5. 105,' 
289;  8.119,120;  10.i9;  16.39;' 
28.  passim  ;  34.  17. 

uf>f>*,  grasp,  26.  34. 

usjrffl/sir, ;/.  a  Brahman :  Q&put*  34. 
12.    Comp. 


I.  ».  (i)dew:  uaftftr;   (2)  coolness: 
(5<sr/?/f,  ^awszou),  5.  33  ;  9.  38. 

II.  v.  [§  64],  bedew,  7.  58. 
u&^/i,  2.  87.    See  ,%. 

See  Devaram,  p.  597,  &c.  Two  songs  by  Sa*M. 
and  Sund. 

rfQ,  n.  a  boar;  euansu>t  asaru>   11    i 


I.  z>.  2«^.  [§  57],  be  gone. 

uifluuifiu,  so  that  bonds  were  loosed,   8.  17; 
49.  17. 

II.  v.  tr.  [§  64],  pluck,  3.  87;  9.  16,  69; 
26.  17;  29.  29. 


I.   =  QfinffLD,    n.   a    drum  : 
57 


}.     Sec  L/.&. 

v.  utter  praise,  5.  396. 
LJ/T,  «.  music  ;  song,  24.31.  [u«w, 
)  [S.  BHAGA],  part,  portion  : 
®,  2.78;  4.152;  5.66;  12.25; 
14.  1  6;  42.  7. 

rajfidr,  ur«dr,  a  partner:  u***,  «.;*,  8.44; 
16.  31;  19.  10. 

iaafrii,  84.   I   (+JTJH-^fl). 
lteriSarurs<ytl>,  5.  146. 

rfjB>0  *-aot-umidrt  sharer;  who  has  U.  as  a  part 
of  Himself,  8.  58;  43.  i. 

ar  [in  Mahratta  PAGA,  a  stablt\t 
groom. 

«yaBi_!ii'ur««ar,  herdsman,  1.  34;  28.  10;  84.  2. 

uAlur«dr,   18.  33  J   48.  IO. 

,  «.  insippated  sweet  juice,  9.  57. 
ngj,  n.  [for  uiagf],  propriety:  fit 
QetirQfs&ti,  4.  159;  7.  JO,  34. 

urA®«o«_ir/,  81.  33. 

ur/tmHi,  in  a  seemly  manner,  2.  47.  6  1. 
UT&LD. 

I.  «.  [S.  PA?A],  devotion.  7. 


UilSlJUJ. 


II.  the  bond  of  impurity  : 

8.  119;  9.  16;  18.  35;  31.  15,  25; 

41.  31;  51.  26.    [NOTE  XII.] 
uiri—su),  n.  [S.  PASHAKA],  a  female 

foot-ornament,  9.  27. 
.,  n.  district,  village,  2.  21. 


I.;/.(i)aplace,11.49,5o;  26.  17. 
(2)  a  song,  1.93. 

SiuurCi-,  hither,  19.  ai. 
II.  v.  [§  62],  sing,  5.  87  ;  6.176,177; 


o,  '  Let  us  sing  !'  8.  6,  &c. 
uii_*i,  a  song,  8.  43  ;  11.  4,  &c.;  18.  64  ;  49.  5. 
ur®|  J,  10.  45. 

uneeof^sr  (UH^IBSST\  ;/.  a  worthless  man; 
or  a  minstrel,  5.  175.     [L//T®.] 

Or  =*»«*»•<*,  and  this  either  (i)  *r(ySf>»*tr  or 
(a)  for  «f«r«Jr.  [This  is  best  !] 

wr,  music,  5.  334.    [UIT.~\ 

,  ;/.  the  ancient  Madura  king- 
dom, 1.90;  2.u8;  17.  18,19;  19.H; 
36.  19,  31;  49.  6. 

uireaar^.iu€sr}  n.  [S.],  any  king  of 
Madura,  2.  38;  4.  214;  13.63; 
36.  i,  10,  24,  34. 

f><5i}|ur«4r«fiJ  u&m*,  86.  title. 
ur**rii\u\iSir*r,  Lord  of  the  rindi-land,  8.  57  ; 
13.  6  ;  36.  19. 

utrenrQir,  a  £aiva  shrine,  2.  70. 

u),  n.   [S.  PATAKA],  a  heinous 
offence,  15.  28. 

LD,  n.  [S.  PADA],  foot  :  fir&r,  «$yif, 
•^,2.53,76,137;  5.49,101,262, 
304;  26.  3.  Comp.  u0u>. 

vlijurfiia,  5.  207  ;  8.  a  ;  25.  1  5. 
rfiLtat,  6.  305  ;  38.  12,  13. 

iT$neinJDt   18.  2. 

i),  n.  [S.  PATALAJ,  the  sub- 
terranean regions  of  the  Nagas, 
of  which  there  are  seven  : 


iJD,  and  utTptrefTLD,  7.37;  11.49, 
73;  18.  2. 

tflrerpfiri,   8.  7. 

TJd,  w.half:  uir^Luesr}  8.  39,111;  9.79. 

See  UITSG8T. 
i,  26.  7. 

58 


/r,  v.  guard,  5.  307.     See  str. 
L//ra>L/,  ;/.  a  snake,  1.  27;  4.  56. 

LJiiu,  i'.  [§57],  rush,  spring,  2.  132; 
3.84;  7.51,52;  12.26-28;  17.27; 
22.19;  34.39. 

\Vith  <g®,  7.  52,  60. 

f""|>tf,  v.,  =  uiiutS,  causal,  3.  1 73. 

urrtfl,  v.  [§  64],  guard,  1.  64. 

UJ1T. 

I.  v.  [§  64],  see  :  sneesr,  Ql&n&(9j,  14.  23 ; 
26.34. 

II.  n.  earth  [comp.  S.  PRITH],  2.  69; 
4.137;  11.49;  19.n;  22.  29;  28.i; 
42.  13;  44.  1. 

urtrt,  8.  7.      urGart,   25.  25.      uif<Auib>  86.  IO. 
ur/<o«er  — yuJ**,  yuJC^aJ,   9.   3. 

urtuufim>urt»if>l  the  mountain  mnid  :  a  name  of 
givan'«  bride,  9-3;  18.  *5i  H.  22. 

uiriruuirear^t.  a  Brahman,  27.38  ;  42. 13. 
Lj/r/ipL/  [?S.  PARVATA],  a  fledgling, 

young  bird  :  upemeus^^f;  5.  1 74. 
L//T6\)«63r,  «.[S.BALAKA],achild,  youth, 

2,69;  14.49. 

urrsv. 

I.  ;/.,  =u(§js)  (for  u&&>),  place,  part; 
quarter,  2.  71;   5.26;    12.33-36; 
20.  13-15;  38.  26;  48.  i. 

II.  as  a  case-ending:  with,  at,  =j$i—p 
£<*,  7.  65;  22.38;  88.25-28. 

ttotrurAix  yuS»S*<,    13.  62.       jytJurcudr,    5.26. 

(4T  It  often  takes  0,  8.  66 ;  88.  25. 
ttirurAi,  towards  thee,  5.  271,  349. 
•fiutfiuG)  [§  64],  set  right,  15.  15. 
umftermr,  so  as  to  become  object  of  (my  praise), 
15.  16. 

(yxtrur*!  =  (y>*4,    19.3O. 

In  «tiur*»W  —•««>*,  27.  7. 

III.  milk,  1.  46;  7.  18;  8.  82;  21. 20. 

uf/«i_*,  3.i68;  5.  229;  14.49;  I9- 3;  white- 
ness, as  of  milk,  10.  70;  44.  21 ;  sweetness,  as 
of  milk,  2.  13;  19.  29. 


1.  n.  a.  desert  region,  2.  98. 

2.  for  urr&). 

Uteusii,  «.,  urrojsesr  [S.  BHAVAKA],  ap- 
pearance,form ;  conception.thought, 
2.82;  4.2io;  11.55;  31.29. 
rawu),  n.  [S.  PAPA],  sin :  fleS'Zssr,  1.  52  ; 
5.  16  ;  11.  30. 

r«B,  a  sinner.         urt8\^QflrQfiiut,  10.  27. 
rrf|<?t»dr,  5.  214,  307  ;  24.  2  ;  34.  40. 
ut+trttb,  2.  57.       uf*»r**,  5.  396;  28.  7,3. 


un  en  Ssw,  n.  [S.BH  A  VAN  A],  imagination: 

GT6BBT600TW,     5.    148;    49.    l8. 

u/ray,  v.  [§62],  pervade,  touch,  spread, 

24.  21,  22;  34.  37,  38.     [u/r«y.] 
UnSftGU     [S.    PRABHA,    PRATIMA],   a 

lady,  image  :  UNSOLD,  Qutrwenu). 
StQf'ihtSfaruraneu,  puppet  ;  a  statue  of  iron,  5.  86. 

CpreflcBruiraaeUj   50.  IO. 

niijurswa/,  a  lady,  12.  49.   See  7.    Voc.  ur«ri! 
{-//rip,  waste,  wilderness  :  uirgpp,  5.  64. 


uirifisdr.      See  urawaJr,   5.  1  75. 

u/r^Q/F(g<jF,  5.  74. 

uirtf>#Q0iu,  a  barren  field,  40.  33. 

LJ/TJ27,  z>.  z«#*.  [§  62],  flee  away  :  9®, 

51.  2. 
urresr®),  n.  the  blue  lotus,  Pontederia  : 

3(rjjrsj(3j®j'2ofri  lieoii,  5.  74;  9.  60. 

l_S!<55)3=,  v.  [§  57],  knead,  8.  27. 

i5l<f&r9  for  /J?^7  [S.  PITTA],  mad- 
ness, fill  with  frenzy  :  iSlfQfpgv, 
8.107;  8.  9,  26;  24.  9.  Comp.  u>ir®), 
47.  7. 

iS&fffisr,   5.   283;   6.  195,  196. 

,  n.  [S.  BHIKSHA],  alms  :  g>«J">. 

/6BT,     5.    324. 

8r  =  ^)ia/<537-,  said  to  be   from 
S.  PINADDHA  =  dressed  ;   braided  : 


ar,  1.  7>    8.  IIO;    23.  27; 
37.  22. 

,  w.  [§64],  seize,  5.  107,  226;  11. 
39;  37.  4,  &c.,  title;  41.  u.  See 
eueSI,  11.  26. 

l®,  n.  [from  t5sn-  =  S.  PISH  ;  hence 
S.  PISHTA],  a  cake,  13.  62;  30.  5. 
(5,  «.  disagreement,  entangle- 
ment, 30.  i;  49.  37. 
lsssr  ti,  «.,  =  f<suu>,  corpse,  32.  6. 
[See  N.  and  K.] 

LS«BarO/jr<g(?#  !    5.   123,   127. 

lgss)  =  QL/SOTT,  7.  39. 

,  «.  bond,  disease,  5.  353;  31. 
21;  35.  17. 

iL&ffilBfl,      27.    34- 

59 


,  ?'.  intr.  [§  57],  be  conjoined, 
entwined  :  L/«r/f,g)&w,Lfc«0,  ^0.  1  4  , 
41.  22. 

tSl'2eecriu&)>  n.  a  garland,  3.  142. 

Sleoon^u  [S.  piiypA],mass;  body,13.37. 

Pin4am   is  the   '  microcosm  '  u   oppotcd   to 

Anjam,  the  '  macrocosm.' 

,  v.  babble,  rave,  44.  14,  iS. 
&i,  n.  bewilderment,  mad- 
ness, 7.59;  13.  74;  44.  14. 

i-!,*£a/«vg,   4.  36;   10.  22. 

cS^vdr,  ;/.  a  madman  ;  an  epithet  of 

^ivan,  11.62;  12.34;  26.13.3;,; 

30.  5;    31.  27;    37.  31;    41.  22. 

[NOTE  I.] 
iJWfcOT,  ;/.  [S.  BRAHMA],  Brahma,  2. 

115;  3.38,182;  11.9;  14.37;  15. 

6>  35>  45-       See 


LD,  n.  the  eternal,  absolute  Being. 
43.  4. 

island,  n.  [fern.  iSaniLuf.  ],4.  J  7  7  ;  10.6,63; 
11.5,7;  13.30;  51.ii.   Comp. 

Q#ii]iJ/rr«r,  5.  267. 

««4[  Jjrdr,  5.  33-36,  265,  305  ;  86.  6. 

e&iSzror,   35.  6.      C^r^Jjr*,   19.  4. 
ar,   10.  6;   18.  40. 


fu),  it.[S.  pRAPANCHA],universe; 

all  that  is  phenomenal,  6.  and  46. 

titles. 
tStoirfffiffatr,  n.  [S.  PRARTH],  supplica- 

tion, 32.  title. 
iSlffl,  v.  n.  separate  from  :  tSfl,  "> 

191;  21.31;  23.  i;  32.23;  44.5. 

iMuf,  34.  2,  6.    Mqts,  28.  18. 
iSlena,  fermented  curds,  runnct,  21.  :o. 
i&tfio,  n.  [S.  VILA],  an  aperture. 

LVeucp^ii  =  LSeofamir  iii,  the  entrance  to  a  subterra- 
neous passage,  12.  28. 

i5lsV(3j,  v.  emit,  spill,  27.  34 
L%>U>L/,  «.  a  column. 

jUffldtfiliLI,    a  fiery  form,   29.  26.      [Comp.  i 
PITAKA,   PINDAKA.] 

/_9«OLp.     [Comp.  ui#.] 
I.  «/.  [§  64],  live  ;  escape  ;  commit  a 
fault,  4.  12,  &c.;  6.263;  81 


II.  n.  a  fault,  5.  338;  6.  29,  89,  197; 

10.46;  24.  27;  33.  28;  47.9. 
L0<swtp|L/L/,  the  false,  4.  219. 

,  v.  [§  66],  split,  cleave,  18.  30; 

35.  19.     LSsrr|o/,  n. 

or&rr,  «.  a  child,  7.  73;  9.  66;  13.  74. 
[See  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  203,  &c.] 


I.  2'.  [§  68],  be  born,  5.  352;  8.  69; 
20.  37;  51.  13.    [Comp.  S.  PRA.] 

Gfangfl,  3.  i,  124.  (?) 
»(5,  v.  be  raised  up,  7.  71. 
i$/r|uL/,1.7,i4;  4.13;  5.  45,95;  14.  30; 

31.17;  41.  13.  21.     See  «sy^2/. 
£-9;p|ffl9,  birth,  embodiment,  3.  73  ;  5. 
105,201;  6.139;  8.68,69;  16.31; 
36.  13;  49.25. 

II.  adj.  other:  dp,  5.  8;  7.  18,  22. 

iSflt,  others,  5.  145,  233;  21.  ai. 
,  other,  5.  256. 

=  i$fitv.  [§57],  He  asunder,  5.  146; 
40.  14. 

fyz9ja/,  11.  severance,  4.  78;   5.  127; 
24.  33- 

]<3R7),  n.  the  crescent  moon,  23.  27  ; 
33.  3. 

i,  C.  1  88.      ff»tft-Ct3mpt  8.49. 

,  after,  4.  7.     [ttyr>.] 

,  22.  7.      Jdr®«Sr,  6.  395;   8.  1  10. 

i,  ».,  21.6.     iSfiu®,  21.  6. 
,  34.  15.     iSt6rt>r}  what  comes  after,  7.  33. 


I.  (s»),   v.    [§  70],  say,  declare;    I 
know  not  how  to  endure,  3.  123; 
41.  13. 

II.  (4®),  refuge:  ^/etai-sseoti,  5.  246. 
V**»,  say,  10.  77.        ty*«Ti_ifl.  6.  65. 


J-  v-  [§  57],  praise  :  er^r,  u/7«v,  1.  25; 

5.  177;  27.  19;  39.  4;  45.21,37. 
II.  ;/.  praise;  epithet  of  £ivan,  88.39  > 

glory,  34.  25  ;  45.  20. 
lysjjyfi,  praise,  37.  14. 

,  v.  [§  68],  enter,  2.  145;  4.  236, 
60 


237;  5.  36,  37;  7.41;  8.29510.65; 


,  18.  14,  15  ;    19.21. 

See  ft-A-'ty®,  aarrarJL/®,   31.  9,  IO. 
il^O,  solicit  alms,  17.  34. 

7,  v.,  =L,&,  5.  368;  6.  37. 
,  causal,  1.  43. 


I.  «.  smoke,  3.  91  ;  35.  26. 

II.  v.  [§57],  6.141. 

L//E/ffu>  [S.  PUNGA,  PUNJA],  elevation, 

5.  284. 
t-]<Gjjfj>  [S.  puffjA],  a  quantity,  collec- 

tion, 16.  24. 
L/6B)<_,  n.  place,  34.  31. 

extending  wide,  4.  33. 
,  8.  33,  89. 
,  approach,  reach,  27.  3. 

f  /S33777,  7'.  [§§  57,  64],  join,  embrace, 
27.  passim;  43.  63;  51.9.  [Comp. 
e.«Br/r;  S.  PUNAR,  -/PUT.] 

q«*r*!B«ur,  that  is  not  understood,  5.  280. 

4«wif|*aD*,  explanation,  5.  280. 

L/taerf\ijugi,  mystic  intimate  union,  5.  281-184. 

ty«T/'*fl,  union,  27.  title. 

Ljtavfitu,  in  order  to  reach  to,  3.  8. 

L/3sscr,  n.  a  raft:  wn&s&iu),  5.  107; 
24.  13. 

ty&wu/rwair,  a  raftsman,  13.  4.    [A'«rr«7,  306.] 
L/6OTr,;/.awound,8.47;13.  16,64;  25.17. 
),  n.  [S.  PUNDAR!KA],  =^5/r 
/E/tfujii,  a  lotus,  7.  79. 
,  n.  [S.  PUNYA],  merit. 

,   48.  6,  54. 

,  n.  what  is  new,  5.  251  ;  fresh,  23.  i. 

,  w.  novelty,  7.  33. 
v.  renew,  7.  73. 
,  new-town.     Two  are  given  in  2.  29,  31. 

sar,  «.  [S.],  a  Buddhist;  Buddha, 
11.6i  (some  say  =  i-igjGinui'uiTesreu&rr)  ; 

15.  21. 

,  «.  [S.  BUDDHI],  understanding, 
13.  76. 

7,  7.  n,  from  L/^r.  [G.  121  ;  H.B., 
§  131-] 

Opp.  to  uipmtq-fi}. 

n,  n.  deities,  6.54.  [See  K-58.] 
B^  (for  i-i&$),  n.  understanding,  36. 
35;  45.  21. 


/*«5r  [S.  BHUJANG,  a  snake],  an 
epithet  of  £ivan,  4.  222  ;  5.  245  ; 
6.  147;  18.  28;  45.  passim. 

,  a  tempest,  24.  13.    [4* 


[S.  PUR,  PUR,  PURA],  a  fortified 

town,  4.  221  ;  6.  40;  14.  2,  &c.;  29.  25. 
Hence  names  of  Qivan  : 


»•  [S.  PURANDARA,  =  splitter  of 
fortresses],  Indra,  5.  5,  285;  10.  i ; 
11.  61;  14.  25,42;  23.  29.  [See 
Muir,  vol.  v.  p.  113,  &c.] 

1,  n.,  =a>/r,  (s^l<ss)u,  ufl,  a  charger, 
19.  24;  36.  34. 

v.  [§  56.  (Ill)],  roll,  wallow; 
overflow,  2.  134;  3.  152;  4.  81 ; 
5.177;  7.358.74;  24.26;  35.2i; 
36.  16;  38.  31;  45.  36,  37. 

•°  |_       J  '    l~\ynj£6BT  GTfiBrLljSsST   UlfitlJtl 

u-ii-c.     See   1.   £?<a;L//r/r<5sz>Ro,   ancient 
deeds. 

mrftmrs!r=^us<nif)Q(ufiir)   the  Ancient,   4.  221,  224: 

33.  39. 


I.  ;/.  cord,  twisted  strand,  ringlet,  8. 
50;  24.17;  26.ii. 

II.  v.   [§   57],    do,   desire,   exercise 
(grace,  &c.),  2.  117;  5.  17,369;  19. 
7;  20.i6;  21.  3;  23.  37;  24.  18-20; 
27.24;  28.  4,  &c.;  45.36. 

u>,  n.  [S.  BHRU],  brow  :  4 
pfSl,  7.  62  ;  13.  22. 


^  [§  57]>  resemble,  3.  19;  20.  31. 
,  like  unto,  3.  5. 

oa  HyQ  QieaapiLir  ,   5.   Il6j    19.  23. 

v.  [§  160],  make  like,  3.  168. 

yuiysTOiTj   3.  75. 

II.  ;/.  tube,  hollow;  pore,  22.  n. 
L/Sffi,  LyioVsar,  ;/.  sense,  perception; 
learning. 

Ljeaiai-&(g>  v.  reveal. 

4<*CW/f,  sages,  6.  81,  108  ;  20.  17. 

L/e»esray)A>,  the  foot  where  wisdom  is  found,  6.  108. 

ty«u®iu«ouJS/S«i',    15.  1  8. 

4«u«ir:  Qu/<i9,  3.  113;  4.  209;  5.  176;  6.  81,  95, 
97,  109;  31.  37. 

61 


, 


6.  117. 


it/,  v.  [§  62],  speak  foolishly  and 
sadly,  rave,  10.  18  ;  $9. 


l-  v-  [§  57]»  fade,  die  away,  4.  209. 

Comp.  B.6v/f. 


II.  dawn,  7.  13,  22;  20.  i;  32.  2. 
,  «.  carrion,  35.  9;  37.  37. 
».  a  tiger,  3.  32  ;  4.  206  (OP^); 
43.  29.  Comp.  Lfirafi. 
B'I  Tiger-town,  a  name  of  VithamtMuam, 
2.  145.    See  legend  and  ?«/t*m//w4. 
0«*,4«J4C^*,  12.  9,  45;  [12.73.] 

L/?SU,   ;/.   worthlessness  :    L/«>.     [Sec 

Ndladi,  p.  209.] 
t/bii/ffardr,  5.  383;  28.  9;  37.  10. 

ifeJtrQiLKer,  82.  2  a. 

<-/<$u,  n.  grass  ;  anything  mean,  1.  26  ; 
4.  41;  5.  190.    See  iy«r. 

tyeuw^a/,   31.  13. 

Lj&)<suinuJ  n.  deer,  antelope  :  «fexarar, 

4.  207. 

LjQjesfl,  n.  earth:  ^a/arf?,  3.  61  ;  20.  37. 
L/a/«ir,«.  [S.  BHUVA,  Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  25], 

the  Self-existent:  *<uo>L/,^ff<J«r«.«ir 

i_ff63Tffl/65r,    5.  36. 

L/a9,  n&6&,  Ljojsffu)  [S.  BHUVANA],  the 
earth,  2.  25;  3.  61  ;  4.  21  ;  5.  251, 
277;  20.37. 
n.  a  maggot,  1.26,53  ;  5.  189,  220, 

224;  26.  25. 

Qftaeto,  n.  rottenness,  -I.  ;,. 

,  n.  [§131],  acidity;  the  tamarind: 


Lj&rerfl,  n.  spot  ;  by  met.  for  '  tiger,' 
12.  73.     Comp.  i-ieti. 

>,  n.  outside;  away,  1.  53;  6.  7;  25. 
17.   [Opp.  to  jy*^,  «-•".  See  iV] 

C«i  Cur*,  5.  234,  340,  341,  346;  84.  «8. 
(-others)  :  tiff,  1.8',  8-7* 

ur*«A»,  5.  347* 

iuuju),  ;/.  a  ^)aiva  shrine,  2.  90, 


i.|f)2)i  —  GUI. 


^flj/, ;/.  an  anthill,  8.  20;  23. 5 ;  35.  i . 
L/esru),  n.  high,  unirrigated  land,  11.38. 

[From  L/esr,  as  in  L/esrQ^iu.] 
Ljesr&))  «.,=/£/?,  water,  5.  29;  7.  52,  60; 

13.3;  15.  i ;  23.5- 
L/6B#i!s£37')  «.  [from  S.  PU],  the  pure  one : 
an  epithet  of  £ivan,  29.  34. 

r,  v.  [§  57],  adorn  :  yuL/3ss7,  5.  50, 
54;  13.51;  35.  23;  45.  21. 
ear,  7.  ii ;  44.  19.     See  t-/ei>. 

Ciuw,  5.  234.      tyaJraoiot,/,  5.  38. 
<tou,  24.  3.     <y*««tr,  24.  36. 
rAi,  87.  37. 


I.  ;/.,  =  flower,  10.  i  ,  9;  as  #<//.  [§  131],  = 
flowery,  beautiful,  3.  75,  115;  7.  48; 
11.27. 

II.  v.  intr.  [§  64],  blossom,  burst  into 
flower,  15.*  i  ;  38.  31. 

U«MB(0,   49.42.      UQP9-,  6.  19. 
u|<?*j»<?*fdr,  Brahma,  10.  i,  77. 

u|A«ia«w^MJr,   39.  I.      y]iQjft»ju»/,   86.  35. 

j,  like  lotus  flower,  3.  75. 

gi,   27.  40.      u]iiiy«rAi,   7.  52,  60. 
*•,  1.  8;  50.  i.     u|iiQur«y*>,  6.  39. 
,  19.  9.     u;*®«l*>,  14.  25  ;  20.  9. 
u  '  *A,tS,  a  flowering  creeper  :  com'olvtiltis,  2.  1  34  ; 
13.  passitti. 

III.  «.[S.BHO],  the  earth:  ^00,88.31. 

tt|0«4<?S,  2.  134;  8.  2  ;  10.  18;  11.  26. 

/,   6.326.      tt|^«>4^»',    11.  18. 

eo,  battle,  din,  14.  i.    [See  K.  71.] 
[S.  PUj],  act  of  worship,  15.  9  ; 
32.  26. 

,  z/.  besmear,  5.  94,  326;  12.  i,  3; 

17.  13. 
®,  n.  any  shrub  :  y«wr®,  1.  26. 


I.  «.  [S.PUT],  an  ornament  : 

4.70;  6.12,164;  7.6o;  16.  1  8;  17.13. 

II.  v.  [§  62],  put  on  as  an  ornament, 
have  on,  wear,  5.  176,  281;   12.  i; 
24.  6  ;  30.  30. 

«  «w®,  5.  295  ;  24.  6  ;  34.  28. 
,  7.  53. 
,  never  worn  before,  30.  13. 


I.  [S.  BHOTA],  an  element  : 
3.  114;  20.17;  31.37. 
62 


II.  a  demon,  demon-host: 
13.  15. 

,  «.  [S.  BHUMI],  earth,  20.  37.  [y.] 
for  ytfl^,  16.  8. 
),  «.  a  town  near  Madura,  2.50; 

4.  191. 

i),  a  £aiva  shrine,  2.  56. 

SST,   n.  a  female,  2.  78;  3.  57; 

5.  115;  19.  23;  49.37. 

Qu«*r|t»./(  M.  a  female,  5.  166. 

Plur.  Oualriar,    10.  21. 
Oualrjecifl,    «.,  6.  88.       Ou«Bir|CT.(g,  ».,  8.  58. 

Qut*rut&>,    43.  22. 

QuefriKj,  Ou**^^^,  blessed  woman,  12.49. 

Qu«*rg»(j,   4.  I.S2. 

QL/J)U)/re5r,4. 2OO;  21.6.  SeeQ/J^axreBr. 

QLJ//JT.     [Gu/f.] 

1. 7'.  rt.  [§64],  scatter,  overthrow,  3.  1 2. 

II.  v.  n.  [§57],  be  removed,  changed 
into,  3.  134;  6.  100. 

III.  =Quir,  n.  [C.  HESARU],  name: 
isrru)u>,  2.  122. 

QLJ;/J,  v.  act.  and  «.  [§  58],  put  on, 
scatter;  fall  (as  rain);  shed. 

QLJU  |  «(0«,«dr,    1.    7;    5.395;    26.  29   [  =  Q*(t/<ji"1; 

86.  12. 

Oui|«<Jsr,  «.  a  lady  :  Qatti,  7.  56. 
ffttraritQuij,  to  which  patches  are  put,  12.  6. 

QL/^/FI^SD^,  the  great  haven,  1.  15; 
34.  23.  [Generally ^(3.,  see  22  and 
28.  passim.'] 

In  the  south,  O>*,  22.  8  ;  42. 
£ivan  is  its  mruadr,  42. 

G>u<sk\gi*>f,\utfirt  8.  I,  &C.  ;    19.  14,  34;   47. 

passim. 

G>u<5*\ffi~>jD\*<:mr*,   19.  I,  17,  25. 
Surrounded  by  groves  of  cocoa-palm,  8.  i ;  42.  3. 
,  34.  3. 

sr,  &eu-t  erti>-,  rsm-,  1.  48  ;  5.  33, 
&c.;!8.4;  20.4, &c.;  24. 9-12;  45.8,9. 

ftbQuQiordi,   10.  31. 

OuijioraSr,   4.  199;   21.6;   84.   15. 

Q*(i(Qu(5|<o/r«fr,  19.  3,  &c.;  28.  2. 

L/UBSU  Qugtater,   4.   222. 

QLJT  [§  131.  e\,  great :  C?/j(5,  Qu^ii, 
Qurftuj,  Gut,  1.24;  5.139.  [H.B., 
§131.*.] 

Qucji^aror,  7.  I.      Qufursa,    4.177;   &.  7°- 

,  epithet  of  the  Supreme,  8.  6,  38, 107. 


Ou/flCwr/,  5.  263,  383;  6.  24. 
2.  92;  5.  274;  'c.  187;  24.  5. 
jii,  27.  22.     Comp.  27.  18. 
^,  14.  6. 


,  v.  swell,  grow  great,  11.57; 
32.39,43- 

u(5|«(5,  t/.  multiply,  6.  89;  37.  10; 
47.  28. 

utjAaii,  42.  27. 

,  v.  [§  56.  (II)],  obtain;  take, 
2-  39  J  3-  55  J  5.  46,  206,  358  ;  6.  37  ; 
22.38;  25.4;  26.  35. 

upAi,  3.  95.     [Ndlafi,  34,  381.] 


nature,  8.57,  182;  7.  33;  8.115. 
GYjcfr,  2;.  [S.  BHASH],  speak  ;  affirm, 

4.  47;  5.  92,  93,  310;  10.i8;  12.  1,3; 

21.  20,  22. 

QU&&,  n.,  47.  21. 

\oUSSST  ^V.^Qu&r^Qusssr^Queir]  S.PENJ, 
cherish,  appreciate,  30.  15. 

Gu&yiAfir,   36.  12.      QuesaHesrr,   34.  2O. 

<?u@y,   8.  58,  1  10. 

Gu^m>  ifl/hGueir,  I  long  for,  21.  22. 

QU<$LD}  n.  [S.  BHID,  BHEDA],  difference, 

5.  310;  30.  21. 

aeatGufiiSi,  heresy,  4.  57. 
0q0,    v.    fr.   [§64],  7.  56;    31.38; 

43.  55. 

Quss)^,  n.  [S.  BHI,  BH!TA],  a  foolish 
person,  7.  28  ;  a  woman,  7.  38. 

T,  5.  310. 

tWTO,  folly,    15.  2  J   31.  19. 
.oi,  15.  45.     Gu0rt£j  (vOC.),  12.  35;   27.  34. 

(u,  «.  a  demon,  1.  28;  4.  68. 

Cum**,  one  possessed  by  a  demon,  5.  92;  23.  27. 
GuGiuesr,  '  I,  a  demon,'  10.  46. 
Gutu$G0i  =  srearej>  mirage,  3.  79;  15.  I. 

Quiff,  n.  [S.  BHERI],  a  drum,  3.  83. 

QLJST.    See  Ou^,  Quiuir. 

I.  =Q/_/<25LD,  Quiftiu,  3.  103;  4.  1  8. 

Quvrarair  =  Ou/flCiu/rrar,  iJjS^/zcJr,  the  renowned,  the 
great,  from  <?uf  =  QUOJ  j  ;    or  from  Quftu,  8.  9  ; 

24.  9  ;  47.  4. 
Guffreaf,  8.  12  ;  13.  37. 

Ci-iAAuii,  QunireSiSib,    19,  31;   32.  36;   36.  12. 

II.  name:  QUIUIT,  IB  mow,  4.  199;  7.40; 

25.  27;  39.  9. 


lllv.  [§57], move, be  removed, 5. 346 

(or  Quit ga);   31. 
38.  32. 

>*•».  again,  6.  »j4-  7.33;  8  IO|. 

',  v.  delay,  45.  28. 
n.  gain,  acquisition.  From  Qu&. 

f,  3.  18;  5.  306. 

«.  a  pouch. 

sou*«r,  34.  i.     *>uu;q    9.  48. 
»,  6.  167. 

sv>,  w.  affliction,  5.  307. 
eBui£=u*u>t green;  fresh;  bright:  u», 

a/,  ^2/.  gently,  51.  26. 
v.  /r.  [§  64],  =  perforate. 
^7,  ^.  mend,  patch,  6.  25. 
Quirl-s^to,  falsehood,  7.  175. 
G/LJ/r/E/(^,  ^.  /«/r.  [§  62],  boil  up ; 
swell ;  rage,  7. 5 1 ,52 ;  8. 2 ;  9. 29, 56 ; 
13.  60. 

QuiBSftiib,  a  serpent  puffing  with  rage,  6.  758; 
12.  i. 

Quiii<5*s>aDt,  24.  6  ;  42.  1 3. 

Quir\ffea)f,  nest  of  insects :  L/<T£ <§ *_S, 
41.  33.     Comp. 


I.  «.  dust,  ashes,  5.  355;  13.  la;  fo, 

17.  13. 

apQurif.,   12.  12.      QuriM"*!  25.  18. 

II.  v.  [§  64],  spring  up,  bedew,  5.  228. 

,  perish,  47.  2. 

v.  [§  57],  fill,  6.  104;  26.  25; 
42.  29. 

,  assembly,  2.  128,  141. 

One  of  many  names  given  to  the  hall  of  (^'itham- 
baram.     [Comp.  Koyil  Puranam  I.  19.]    See 


JLi,  n.  a  hole,  hollow  place: 

QUIT  isg},  6.  140,  141. 
Qunpfds  Q&irexrt-,  6.  25.     See  Out. 
Qutr\fi<cs>p,  anything  gross  and  clumsy, 

26.  25. 

Qurnsg/,  n.  the  hollow  of  a  tree,  13.  8, 
Quu\iut  falsity,  1.  37;  5.  290,  321, 

356,  357,  358;  6-  24;  22.10:  *•. 

41.9,  13;  45.36;  51.  9. 

Quru?tt  pure,  3.  22.     Qu»U*«,  10.  65. 


—  GUIT§>I. 


Qurr\iu\tl>\ea)LD  [S.  MAYA],  falsehood,  5. 

274. 

ir,  5.  206,  208,  249 ;  9.  47 ;  35.  i. 

IT,  5.  290;  6.  25. 

i<_r«io,  tank,  lake,  7.  41,  48;   15.  i; 
29.7. 

Qurri  ((77j),  z/.[§6o],  join;  collide  with; 
war  against,  3.  85;  6.116;  24.15. 

fWQurjr,  22.  II. 

&>,  the  raging  sea,  23.  29. 
sir,  wealth,  25. 2;  being, essence, 
4. 43;  20.1 ;  37.  3, 14,  25;  meaning, 
1. 93 ;  6.  24, 64, 65 ;  7.  33,  54 ;  8.  70- 
72;  12.52;  26.33,34,38. 

Our  3]  «;*,  epithet  of  Civan,  21. 30;  29.34;  88.30. 
Comp.  jfcy/M*,  the  wealthy  one,  29.  8. 
-u®A»,  10.  79. 

*,  &c.  =  being,  8.  1 1 8  ;  5.  1 65. 
Ourojar,  5.  190;  41.  it;  49.  54. 

!r,   26.  34. 

L®,  5.  160;  37.  4. 
\xgi.  v.  befit,  harmonize  with  ; 
occur;  cling  to,  5.51 ;  80.13;  41.13. 
ppiJD,  n.  what  is  befitting,  5. 368, 


f 
uLj,  n.  a  mountain,  4.  192. 

Qu/r<25«r  u^/S=  real,  having  regard  to 

the  object,  15.  9. 
QuffSV.    See  Qurresr. 
Quir&S,  v.  n.  [§  57],  7.  62  ;  22.  22. 

[Comp.  S.  PUL,  POLA.] 

Shine  bright,  2.  50,  145;  8.67.    [&*•»;>(  <5  ^Qu/ 


Qur«B«/,  «.  fulness  of  beauty,  2.  30  ;  37.  1  4. 
With  ?/,  28.  2  ;  flourish.  6.  36,  37  ;  16.  38;  19.38; 

shine,  35.  26;  42.  12;  45.  34. 
Qur&tar,  evil,  1.25;  5.  202,  233;  24.  3;  appears 

to  be  a  negative  from  a  v.  Our  A>gi  ? 
Qur*i«ur|«xBtfl,5.37;  25.2;  27.4,8,&c.  See  Our*. 
QurcvriDooR,  35.  II.      Qur&«u/oDu>,  30.  23. 


,  v.  [§  57],  pour  down  :  Qfrrift, 
7.64;  24.  13;  49.42. 


I.w.aluxuriantgrove: 

6.39,67;  8.  89;  18.37;  20.27. 
II.  world,  3.  44;  5.  117;  19.5. 

j,  n.  [§  25],  time,  1.  2;  37.  10. 


64 


Here  Our*  seems  to  be  an  imitative  word  :  'the 
rending  flame.'  This  is  corrupted  into  Our  AS"; 
hence  OurAi«vr  =  Qurer«rr/»,  unbored,  25.1.  With 
u>«ofl  ==.  a  ruby  as  from  the  mine,  flawless,  un- 
sullied, 27.  4. 


I.  v.  inscribe. 

Qur^AjgiCio,  as  soon  as  He  impressed,  11.  27. 

II.  ».  the  five  sense-organs,  T.  A.  P. 
44,  NOTE  IV. 

Qun&i.  v.  [§64],  endure,  bear;  forgive, 

s-1^;  5-338;  6.24,156,163;  10. 

46;  24.  6;  32.  10;  33.  3. 

Qur^l****,  n.  forgiveness,  5.  263. 

Qur.pA  £><?«,«*,   23.  22. 

Gurrf)\Lf  =  «3ftf>(5,  10.  1  ;  45.26. 
Quired,  n.  gold,  27.  i  ;  38.  20. 

Ourdr  aributvte,   21.  3,  30. 

QuifirGar  \  my  golden  one,  21.  30. 

Curdrjorjrr,   5.  209. 

lijr^io,  5.  205. 
jp*,  5.  236,  350;   10.  44. 
»,  5.  51. 

A  [=S.  HIRANYA],   7.  78. 
QurarGioaft,   8.  48.       Our/,*««r«<r(i,  9.  4. 

Qu/r/f  IL/^O),  6.  147. 

Our/ur«D«,   12.  49. 

(?LJ/T,  <?uir|®,  GL»/j|^7,  v.  [§  58],  go, 
5.  340;  24.  2;  45.  4,  6,  10,  12. 

GmiijQfli  for  QunSf>Q(st  38.  lo. 
Cur*&,  the  going,  5.  36  ;  6.  95  ;  17.  35. 
Curjff/,  O**.[rfr,  '  Go  ye!'  46.   Also  aSdr, 


I.  ;/.  an  exit,  way  out,  20.  17  ;  23.  22. 

II.  v.  causal  [§  62],  destroy,  waste, 
spend:   *t#  1.  43;   6.  37;   7.  14; 
20.  37. 

GLU***I  (u^ii),  rejection,  5.  247. 
<?ury*«(,  5.  36. 

(Surrsui,  n.  [S.  BHOGA],  enjoyment,  5. 
284,  285;  7.  78;  37.  14;  41.  17; 
51.  9. 


I.  v.  [§  62],  come,  5.  85,  369. 

<?ur*4)  =«*£,,  5.  209;  8.  2;  21.  7;  27.  22;  61.  26. 
GuttGfar,  5.  341,  345. 

$gT  Seems  a  past  tense  of  Cur,  reversing  its 
meaning. 

II.  V.   [§  117],  suffice:    upjp, 
9.  21  ;  33.  8,  9. 

III.  -Qu/r<T£^,  time,  33.  26. 


IV.  a  flower,  5.  101 ;  6.  119;  16.  36 
23.  29;  43.  50,  53.    [See  K.  1227." 

Gurjsrf  ^/io^)  a  bed  of  flowers,  7.  3,  5. 

gjtou  Quiff  f   13.  53.      avf>Qu,ft  5.  398;   86.  2 
QuF0ifl&a;eaar.      UffiijGufgi,   27.  35. 

Quirfr. 

I.  v.  a.  [§  64,  from  Qu/r/f],  wear,  put 
on  :  QurrtTjgjSGd,  9.  70. 

II.  «.[from  z>.Qu/7/f],war,  13.40  6 1  73 
43.58;  45.34. 

Oo/ii  Curr,  6.  8i;  16.6. 

GurQrjp,,  of  givan, '  Lion  in  the  fight,'  5. 208, 209 

23.  22. 

tfurjr,  entirely,  45.  36. 

CoLJ/rsv,  v.  [§  227],  resemble,  5.  249; 
11.  29;  34.  21. 

Quwfisr&.    7.   17,  50. 

Qunpfi  n.  praise,  1.  11-16:  5   <?•  7 

r>  tfl      '  • 

77-80. 

In  1.  11-15;    3.  106;   4.  87  ad  fin.  it  seems 
equivalent  to  S.  NAMAH  !  eaeoar&sib. 

Quffpgy,  v.  tr.  [§  62],  5.  295;  cherish, 
3.  123  ;  guarding  against,  5.  176; 
praise,  5.  237;  13.  66;  50.  2. 

FIB,  n.  [?  from  S. BHOJANA],  food : 
7,  9.  68;  13.  48. 
usmsuLD  a  sea: 
5.  105. 


LD 


T,  n.  son,  9.  51. 
LOS&T,  ^.  daughter,  9.  50;  14.  37. 
toaserr^  children,  10.  2i  ;  14.  47. 

eueir<sS  [see  S.  MAKHA,  MAGHA, 

M  AH  A],  sacrifice,  21.  u. 


p,  v.  [§  60],  rejoice,  exult,  1.  9, 
19;  2.  80;  9.24;  13.  70;  19.  24. 
,  n.  joy,  delight,  6.  169. 
.,  =  <y>u}.  [S.],  crown,  34.  24. 
ij>t  n.  [S.  MAHENDRA],  a  moun- 
tain, 2.  9,  19,  100  ;  43.  25. 

The  mountain  is  thirty-two  miles  S.W.  of  Ber- 
hampore  :  many  ruins  of  Qaiva  temples. 
laQais^l^erfiir,   48.  66. 

)  n.  [?  from  ifl^sro^],  a  lady: 
2.  26;   5.  259,  266;   6.  164; 
9.  27;  15.  29;  41.  17,  21  ;  42.  7. 

See 

65 


*,«.,  ?^f**,  a  boarded  ceiling,  1  1.  «. 


«.  [S.  MASju],  beauty. 

*.  ^e  bcaut.lul,  4. 
-«—•  ;   wd  then 

II.  cloud:  (?u)^,  16.  jo;  85.  « 
r,  «.  saffron,  9.  34. 

,  «.  [S.  MAYURA],  a  peafowl: 
out  16.  n. 

,  ».  be  bent,  broken,  6.  72,73. 

")Z-")»  «.  [from  S.  MATH,  MAD],  sim- 
plicity, 9.  29. 

HL.Q*gc»!  folly,  5.  139. 
«-«",  38.  21  ;  49.2i;  61.  17. 

<DL-*ao/»,  woman,  6.  147. 
"tt-l^wr*,  simple  maid,  43.  1.4. 
ioi_|«r«5r,  6.  66.     «k_|«f7«»or/F  26.  J. 

6u,  «.  a  palm  leaf,  6.  52. 
^  [§57],  perish,  14.  48. 

LL®. 

I.  z/.  [§  64],  penetrate;  fill,  5.  318; 
47.ii. 

II.  n.  pool,  tank,  6.  103;  7.  51. 
i£)Ll(5),  «.  limit;   sweet  juice,  sap, 

honey;  calyx,  3.  89;  6.  43;  42.  7. 
acjO^juuiQ,  sweet  juice  of  the  sugar-cane,  5.  318. 
ioi_«Jasr  wii®,  palm  wine,  6.  52. 
•03-aaw  IDC®,  honey  of  grace,  6.  119. 

laCjSlearis  Q^reoi—  tertiSanir,  he   on   whoK    bfCHt 

was  the  garland  dripping  with  honey,  A'aij. 

28.5.  i 

Nig. 


•,  v.  [§  66;  comp.  S.  MANGALA], 
exhale  fragrance ;  wed,  6.147. 
iBBTii,  «.  fragrance;  nuptials. 

io,g5)«rsjr(voc. -««•*!),  'O bridegroom!'  4. 135,183. 
[It  might  be  =  to«tr  +  «^«rdr,  earth-ruler.] 
<oCT«r/,  17.  9 ;  18.  16. 
wemreiradr,  6.  1 60;  20.  33  J  88.  13. 

Dsszir?,  «.  [S.  MANI],  a  gem,  5.  215;  6. 
21,  41 ;  16.  16. 

ar  io«rf,  3.  134;  26.  27;  28.  5;  45.  31. 

@cj  u>taaH,  blackness:  •*«*/,  1.3;  23.  35;  26. 10; 

50. 15. 

QurA»«uf  (ootfl,  25.  2 ;  27  (ten  Urnet). 
*«*ifl«o»,  15.  51.     C«pr«»«*,  27.  35. 

LD533T.      [Opp.  a^«sr.J 

the  earth,  1.23;  2.4;  5.297;  41.1,9; 
51. 13. 


ICSOTT LD1JI&3). 


loetrfsr,    49.  2. 

lofdaeasib,   5.  381;   20.  34. 

ic«rtr(?es»/,  inhabitants  of  earth,  11.  74. 

II.  earth,  clay,  2.  47  ;  8.  47  ;  13.  62  ; 
37.  6. 

III.  earth,  as  an  element,  3.  26;  5.  29, 

57;  26.23. 

r«««fr,  a  ruler  of  earth,  5.  46. 

u>,  n.  [S.],  a  porch,  outer  court, 
5.  195. 

Lo,  it.  [S.],  a  sphere  ; 
i/>,  the  earth,  8.  45. 
tz>6»rao£_,  ;/.  skull,  head,  top: 
40.3. 

LCSZBT®,  z>.  come  in  flocks,  throng, 
press,  2.  135. 

LD  <£££>. 

I.  n.  sect,  4.  52. 

II.  n.  [S.  MAD],  exudation  from  a  fierce 
elephant's  temples  ;  exultation,  3. 
155- 

III.  //.  intention:  .^LC^LO,  4.  17. 


I.  n.  [S.  MADAM],  joy,  desire. 

II.  v.  [§  64],  rejoice;  desire  intensely, 
4.  31. 

(40. 

I.  ».  [S.  MAN],  understanding,  5.  1  29  ; 
9.73;  10.6;  45.38. 

II.  v.  [§  64],  respect,  value,   5.  46  ; 
40.25;  42.  17;  45.38;  49.33. 

[Wax  fat,  —  from  <o^i4,  be  elated,    3.  153.     Or 


III.  n.  [S.],  the  moon;  month,  3.  21  ; 
4.i5,&c.;  5.33,157;  6.14;  34.23; 
46.  2. 

»£kjJ*ir,  the  crescent  moon  on  Divan's  head, 
9.66. 

Gfliitofktfir,   6.  183. 
U>$UJLD,    17.    37. 

LDJB)®),  n.  wall  :  CTU&JO,  8.  32  ;  13.  55. 

Qpib'u>$ii  -  (y«l[L/iri6,  9.  19;   12.  59. 

ug},  n.  [S.  MADHU],  sweetness;  wine; 
honey:  Qp&r,  5.  251;  6.  52,  135; 
20.  27. 

ii,  ».  a  bee,  5.  63. 
66 


,  ;/.  Madura,  2.  44  ;  4.  90  ;  8.  46  ; 
13.  62. 

iaDfiut,    36.  8. 

<$u>y  n.  [S.  MATT  A],  frenzy,  madness, 
4.  37;  5.  10  ;  9.73;  17.37;  47.  22. 

pr,  wild  enthusiasts,  3.  153. 

Qprosr  (Dfipdir,  an  utter  madman,  34.  10.     See 


4£/,  «.  [S.MATHis],  a  churning-stick, 
6.  116,  117;  24.  21. 

10^®,  churn,  6.  158. 
u)iti$ix>,  n.  softly,  6.  143. 
u>tsj$!ju>  [S.],  Mount  Mandara,  2.  100  ; 

4.  204.     [Spelt  to/s^jii.] 
uifpirQesR,  n.  the  heavenly  Ganges, 

6.  187. 
uiisprnnj),  one  of  the  trees  of  Paradise: 

Erythrina  Indica,  6.  143;  8.  90. 
uj/B^jub,  «.  [S.],  sacred  spell;  a  dwell- 

ing-place, 2.100.  [Or,  S.MAND1RA.] 
u>isQ0ir0ift.     See 
LLILJ.     Comp. 
LD<u&(3j,  u>uj|«<5u),  ;/.  confusion,  2.  133; 

10.35;  22.i;  29.  33  5*49.33.   With 

Lorr&),  30.  26.    Comp.  toffojo),  <SB)LDUJ&). 
u>iL/|/»(5,  t/.  be  bewildered,  confounded, 

3.153;    5..  2451  8.98;   10-6i  U- 
45  ;  31.  i  ;  45.  38. 

u)iu&}>  n.  confusion:    wiu&aw,  s»axiJ6x>, 
5.348;   11.43;  49.53. 
/f,  «.  hair  :  vJ3>attunu>. 

A)  =  roots  of  the  hair,  3.  170. 

su,  n.  peafowl,  4.  30;  16.  40. 

u>,  n.  [S.  MARAKATA],  emerald, 
3.  124;  31.  39. 

ii,    n.    [S.    MARANA],    =  jfipULj, 
i),   10.  35. 
ii,   n.   [M.,   C.,   T.   MRANU,    MANU], 

tree  ;  a  senseless  eye,  1.  26  ;  3.  87  ; 
6.  9;  14.  26. 

*««*r,  5.  84  ;  23.  15,  35.     M/rrf«&.,  36.  35. 

,  n.  perfume,  2.  80;  10.  54;  38. 
33.  [See  u>(9%  ">C5©;  S.  MARUVA.] 
OT,  «.  a  son-in-law,  9.  24. 

fTj/E/gjeu,  waist  of  a  female, 

5.  266;  7.  42;  side,  place,  21.  28. 


.  See  ®< 
a  title  of  £ivan. 

7,  n.  medicine,  balm,  4.  116;  7. 
5;  11.  74;  23.  31;  34.30;  37.  2. 

,  or  ^)/LS!iT£ii.'] 

6.  72. 

®/»  v-  J°in>  approach,  3.  48  ;  1  1  .  7  ; 

19.18,   19;    47.  4. 


I.  7^.  mental  confusion,  3.  154. 
IL  v-  [§  57],  be  bewildered,  21.  31  ; 
28.  23;  32.  ii  ;  45.38. 

logarGesrsa',   28.  28  ;   29.  33. 

u>a>|/s/<5,  v.  z/z/r.  [§  62],  feel  distress, 

1-  55  j   30.  9.       ffly  (5/5^7,  ,?6$. 

">6i>u>  [S.  MALA],  filth:  <2i(ga,  1.54; 
2.  in;  4.28;  5.215;  7.50;  30.9, 
26;  34.  31.  [See  /£,  ©9,  to.  NOTE 
XV.  «^6sana/io.] 

®ess>fi  iaeata}  19.  jg  ;  51.  j. 
Gpi2ii06\jE«*,  19.  27;  51.  34. 
losjnasir  (gB/jr^)),  6.  Il6. 

LDSV/f. 

I.  «.  [  =  ^6U/r.    K.,  N.],  a  full-blown 
flower,1.62;  8.90;  4.  9,84;  5.  205,  207, 
370;  6.41;  8.2,87;  14.52;  20.6. 

gffiLjtowr,  stainless  flower,  30.  27. 

ere&riaeair,   8.  142  ;   9.  31. 

II.  v.  [§  57],  bloom,  expand  :  ^socj, 
1.62;  4.  3,  84;  8.101;  20.2,6;  42.8. 

uxsdffGuetsr,  LDGtiGarresr,  Brahma,  20.  39  ; 
23.  39;  24.  n. 

LL<sQ,  v.  [§  57],  abound  in,  2.  127; 
4.  187. 

LoSoV.      [Comp.  S.  MALAYA.] 

!•  v.  [§  57],  wrangle,  4.  53. 

II.  v.  [§  64],  be  bewildered,  6.  158. 

III.  n.  mountain,  ].  16;  2.  9,  84,  100, 
124;  5.103;  6.103;  9.24;  14.56; 
19.  18,  30. 

/oSso|*j©,  4.  189. 

ic26u|io.sor)  Himalaya's  daughter,  12.  25. 

io26\j<uirs5-  =  L/rr  «/.£),   6.  l6o. 

(oJeuJiusn/nueBrj    12.  49.      mSsu^Swa/eBr,  6.  l6o. 
.SyQjsobrioSsv),   2.  124. 

too)  (^,  z;.  become  full,  11.  40;  42.  31  ; 
43.  79.     With  §L 
67 


"H«>«>,  //.  abundance,  5.  107.  [mm,.] 
">iP,  tender:  e5<y,O«»(V,  5.  \f^  •  28  4 
39.6. 

*&,  n.  a  battle-axe  :  uj»t  9.  67. 
">(^"»(5,  f.  grow  dim,  7.  70.    [See 
20.  10.] 

>,  ».  rain,  49.  41. 

*>if\f<s'*+iLj+  [-blacknml.  «   1  8s-  clooJ 
7.64. 

v.  forget,  7.3;  10.  26;  11.3,; 
15.  29;  24.  17;  28.23;  36-5J  40.J. 

MP!OJ,  z/.  cause  to  forget,  &; 

v-  [W  57,  64],  roll  back,  check  ; 
reflect  rays  :  ^®,  36.  8  ;  49.  1  7. 

,  28.  »£. 


I.  Z'.  [§  64],  deny,  refuse,  6.  20,  21. 

II.  n.  spot,  5.  376. 

III.  other,  36.  8.    Comp.  <?«MT,  ux*. 

u>pierf>p*t  34.  1  6. 

M/*,  6.  257;  85.  3,  &c.;  47.  32. 

,  v.  «.  whirl  :  *t^.     Comp.  o>^. 
iDffS,  agitated  like  the  sea,  4.  66. 


I.  v.  n.  be  concealed,  lie  hidden,  1. 
50,  5i. 

II.  v.  a.  hide,  36.  6. 

III.  n.  a  mystery;  the  Veda:  Q*fu>, 
4-941   5.337,377;   12.2;  13.49; 
22.i8;  41.  ii  ;  43.  i. 

iBsmpJ  fifth,  3.  130. 

loaopCurc*  =  QuifkjOr,  title  of  Qivan,  and  uf  Brahmi, 
1.44;  2.  21  ;  3.  149;  4.  179;  5.337;  16-38; 
33.  40;  47.  1  8. 

inaopt/rKJr,   8.  49* 

tflOT-ii  [S.  MANAS,  MANO],  1.  56  J  6.349; 

8.25;  24.3. 

taarfiGfidr,   5.  192,  223;  84.  l6. 

ioC®cwwii,  loss  of  consciousness,  ».  title. 

,  22.  1  8.     «»***«,  6.  155. 


I 
,   10.  25. 


In  50    3,  *«r*«w-*»      «  ambignons  :  •«•  + 
«*-  +  .»*,  'being  lowest  In  mind/ 
(far  «w^*«)  +  •»"*-»  'Thou  *"*" 
mind  !  ' 

r  [S.  MANUSHA],  1. 
,  ».  house;  race,  10.  31.  .[K.,  N.] 
*  F  a 


U3SJT 


LOS5T,  ;/.  endurance,  all  that  endures, 
16.  16;  22.  1  8. 

uxtraiar,  king,  1.  14;  5.  296,392;  20.  19;  33.13- 

lofsr&ar,   loareermdr,  6.  l68,  169;   8.  III. 

aarsii,  v.  [§  62],  abide,  stand  fast,  2.  9;  4.  128; 
of  cities,  6.  3,&c.;  8.  29;  16.  16;  17.22,23; 
81.9;  34.  7,&c. 

totar£i=feDu,  jytiuwii,   COUrt,    4.  92. 

LD/T. 

I.  [S.  MAHA=  great],  2.  9,  18,  44;  3. 
124;  5.  214;  6.  94;  9.  33;  10.  3; 
49.  42. 

r,  Qivan,  7.  2. 


II.  eS&KjQesr  Qutrg],  any  beast,  10.3  (?); 

47.34. 

iwa/rt,  the  skin  of  an  animal,  28.  36. 
uA\<Dr,  a.  charger,  2.  116. 

III.  mango  :  u>ff|«/©,  a  young  unripe 
mango,  24.  29. 

ioff*.  w.  stain,  spot,  flaw  :  .3*,  1.  62  ; 
5.  96  ;  37.  38. 

u),  n.  [?  der.],  a  rock-snake,  9.  75. 
ii>,  «.  [S.  MADI],  palace;  (?)  a  story, 
16.  17,  20;  18.  9;  43.  14- 
LOT®,  11.  [S.  MAD],  gold  :   u>ir®n>es)&, 
9.  ii  ;  41.  17. 

«D«JL/  iof®,  hoarded  gold,  26.  I. 

u)fftl®,  z;.  [§  1  1  7],  be  able  (mostly  used 
in  the  negative). 

•otCj-r  =  9**&f,  that  cannot,  5.203,215;  20.  33. 
UiiTesoft  =  lSlou>flTtfl    [cor.    of    S.    MANA- 

VAGA],  a  young  Brahman,  15.  7. 
wiressfisau),  n.  [S.  MANIKYA],  a  ruby, 
26.  i,  27. 

LCtJG&T,  LPTgg3)f,  ^.  [§  56.  (Ill)  ;    S. 

MAH,  MAN],  be  worthy,  11.  41. 
wireear®,  wtTeaori—,  past  forms  of 

and  i£/r<6^,  11.  41-44. 
u>/r«ar[L/,  «.  excellence,  8.  56. 
T,  n.  [S.],  mother,  4.  13. 
,  plur.  loir^fr  ,  n.  [S.  MATU],  a  woman  : 
Uma,  2.  107;  5.  118;  7.  2  ;  8.  39, 
in;  19.  10;  43.  i. 
wirpirpfismr,  4.  34;  24.  15. 
LLJILJ,  z>.[§  64],  destroy:  (Mnu40r[§57]i 
perish,  5.  215;  11.  69;  12.  14  [?  see 
wrretotu'];  31.  19;  42.  33;  48.  13. 
68 


),  the  later  Vedanta, 


iair<3s)iu) 

4-54- 
tairuju),  tLtnuir,  n.  [S.  MAYA;  der.  un- 

certain], delusive,  1.  14,5!;  4.  44; 

33.30;  41.9;  42.  17;  45.io;  49.  33. 

*o*rior(ui4,  a  visual  juggle  :  iau*®,  5.  168  ;  36.  25. 

(o/iiCsjr  !   23.  25.      umiioruiii,   11.  14. 

">ru,   13.  II  ;  36.  21.     aiur  ®GF*,  4.  44,  45. 

u)fLit!iuaDi_,   46.  4. 

if>tT(r5<$u>,  n.  [S.  MARUT,  MARUTA],  wind, 
^•j  one  of  the  elements,  3.  10;  4-55; 
11.  69. 

iDirJTSLfl,  name  of  a  month,  half  of 
December  and  half  of  January, 

7.  80. 

[From  S.  MARGA-flRA  from  MRIGA-£IRA  = 
antelope's  head,  a  constellation  containing  three 
stars,  of  which  X  in  leo  is  one.  The  full  moon 
enters  it  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  first  half 
of  this  month.] 

lat^ftf  ft  «g®,  bathing  in  the  month  M.  [T.  V. 
V.  P.,  V.  41]. 

,  n.  breast,  chest,  29.  18. 

ir,  43.  57. 

,  ;/.  [S.  MALA],  garland,  2.  113 
(*(y/£ff);  6.  119  ((3L_/r),  189  (^nn)\ 

8.  90;  9.  I  (y). 

1  9 

Nig.  artuCti  tS  a  Gf 

4 


LLfTSV. 

I.  n.  [S.  MALA],  delusion,  one  deluded  ; 
bewilderment,     ecstasy  :     GBLDUJG) 
u>uj&),  2.  133;  5.  10,  103;    27.  22; 
45.30;  47.  7,  18  (=iW»);  50.  n. 

jy^ior*),  conscious,  frenzy,  36.  5. 

II.  greatness:  Qu^etsui,  5.  259;  34.  II. 

III.  n.  Vishnu,  8.38;  4.4;  5.67,  393; 
8.13;  10.'  77;  11.  i  ;  17.3;  23.35; 
33.  6. 

For  this,  o'wii  is  found  in  23.  33,  but  compare 
36.  1  8,  He  swallowed  the  earth.  See 


He  is  called  •rSar*an«t»r«At  (see  •**),  23.  39. 

f.Qtjrcsr,  25.  I. 
gEst-f,  g)i_*(?£rc3r,  23.  29. 
rA>,  27.  9. 

*A*Oa«r®mrA,  4.  4  ;  7.  65  ;  8.  I.    \Ndladi, 
373-] 


Vishnu  sang  Qivan's  praises  at  various  times, 

28.  9. 

aafiar&i,  '  dark  Vishnu,'  27.  2.      ior«u«i«*r,  8.  7. 
Pa|«orA>,  45.  32;  became  Divan's  bull,  12.  60; 

14.  16;  dug  out  and  offered  an  eye  to  (Jivan, 

15.  37-40. 

u>n<ss)Lp  =  LctrtlitSliGTj&evnSlefrey,  Lo/ra/®,  a 
very  young  mango  fruit,  24.  21. 

u>/7-0rfl<5»<s,«.palace,16.i7.  [PAr.MALK, 
'king.'  See  u>irt-.u).] 

LLtT&T,  V.  die,  5.  296;  51.10,13. 
[Comp.,  as  to  forms,  uweasr.] 

uurarr,   5.  76.      lorob'iy.CeuRJr,  5.  370  \   11.  42,  &C. 


I.  «.  (i)  a  change,  35.  6.    [From  IAS*. 
Comp.  CVgz/;   and  see  K.  and  N. 
Lexicons.     S.  VARAM,  VRI,   MRI, 
MARA  ;   Gk.  /xo?pa,  jueipoo  =  uifi-u>rr^n  ; 
Lat.  VAR.] 

(2)  enmity,  a  grudge,  6.  40,  41. 

icr/byf,  foes,  19.  26. 

(3)  a  recompense,  return  for  favours, 
5.  361;  6.  169;  47.  25.     See  «»<*. 

II.  v.  n.  change,  be  hostile  to,  22.  i. 

Ltaoa}  v.  a.  requite,  5.  129;  7.  31. 

,  v.  waver,  5.  127. 

rij-,  '  millions  ever  shifting/  4.  44.  (Or^p.) 

u),  n.  (i)  a  reply;  word,  1.  45;  34. 
1  6.     (2)  change  :  tc/r^u/r®,  1.  81. 
i,  v.  [§  160],  change,  30.9;  31.  21. 

LDfTSSTLB. 

I.n.  self-respect,  4.  167;  15.29.  [Pope's 

Naladiydr,  p.  188,  &c.] 
II.  heaven,  46.2.  For  eutr&srw.  [Comp. 

19.  24.] 
unregtiL-u>,  n.  [S.  MANUSHYA  from  MA- 

NUSHA],   what  belongs   to   man  ; 

human  form,  4.  13;  5.  363;  20.  22. 

io/r«fli_«jr,  rargji/i-jr,    6.   183  \   8.  14,  79' 

JLD/T55T. 

I.  Lord,  5.  360.  [It  seems  to  be  from 

S.  MAHAT.      See  OTtko/TOT-,   5.  2l6.] 

II.  =g)j'3so,  deer,  antelope,  fawn,  3.  80; 
4.135;  5.158,217,337;  6.1575  7. 
21  ;  18.i6;  82.37;  33.  13. 

>,  v.  [§§  64,  68],  surpass,  1.  23. 
[See  Ndladi  Lex.] 
69 


greatne*,  8.  7. 

-,  abundance,  M|*rfluity,  IS.  *o  ;  I  , 
,  6.  iai,  178.     ^«A,p«uyi  , 

,  8.  73. 

,  the  r«t  of  the  world,  6.  190. 

,  upon,  on,  in,  2.  27. 

,   4.  207. 

,  throat  :  «t  «rt_u»,  6.  26. 

dr,   10.  33. 

,  7;.  [§  57],  be  crowded,  full  of, 
6.162;  25.13. 

L&sssr®,  v.  [§  62],  act  hastily  and 
presumptuously,  4.  54;  6.  130. 
,  v.  [§  64],  tread  down,  40.  a6. 


I.  v.  [§  64],  stare  in  bewilderment, 
6.  159- 

Mr*rt£&uA«A    ®(5il4_f    tflki^    [?  ithi    for   «fc«3. 

6-  347- 

II.  v.  [§  57],  wear  as  an  ornament  : 

cSyswfl,  @tl®,  6.  119. 

[§  1  60],   =uS3w,  6.  Il8. 

g,,  v.  twitter,  18.  24.    [Comp. 

u>y>.      S.  MLECHH.] 

/f,  v.  [§  57],  gleam,  1.  38;  3.  72  ; 
6.  14,  85;  26.  19. 


I.  n.  lightning,  6.  62;  16.  17;  24.25. 

uSarafiuAi,   49.  43. 

tSarQwtS,  3.  69,  1  25.      4+e/  (V*^)>  6>  35°' 

iSeaaruitar,  6.  170. 

II.  v.  gleam,  6.  16;  7.  62. 

uf,  a^/,  on:  (?a)^),  oPca)^,  2.  7;  3.  92; 
49.  45- 

ft  4.  207.     Comp.  off®,  i^«»*. 

n-,  v.  w.  and  v.  a.  [$  56.  (Ill)],  re- 
turn ;  bring  back,  restore,  5.  376. 

eb®,  again,  2.  117. 

il®,  Al<?i_v4,  again,  1.  87;  5.  III. 


I.  ;/.  fish,  6.  ioj.  [S.  MlNA.  See  note 

to  8.] 

itara*,  86.  22,  38. 

rfortfflji,  8.  ii  ;  48.  23;  49.8. 

II.  a  star.    [From  dor.] 


,  adj.  form  of 


See 


Gp'*««*r,  9.  20;  29.  29;  33.  12. 

Gp|*«fr,  the  ocean.     OP^L/TIA,  9.  71  ;  14.  1-3. 
Qp|io«B>u),  triplichy,  51.  34. 
Oo|i4io«uii,  2.  in;  30.  26. 

,  v.  tr.  [§  66],  draw  from  : 
£»u>  (&.&),  11.  57;  15.  i;   35.  26. 
Lo  [S.  MUKHA],  face,  2.  20  ;  4.  i  ; 
5.  227.     See  isneo. 

GP<*Jgi,  from  Thy  face,  20.  2.     op*Q««-«f),  25.  23. 

GP**|j*cy,  admit  to  one's  presence,  21.  12. 

mrdi!y>a^QjSrtymitir>  Brahma,   5.  393. 

fwQpsjflrAi,  with  her  watery  face,  with  deceitful 
purpose,  12.  24,  26,  27. 

Qp8&),  n.  cloud  :  QLDSUD,  3.  67  ;  4.  1  27  ; 
20.13.  [Comp.S.MUDIRA,MIHIRA.] 

slr  676OT637-,  an  imitative  word,  '  with 
a  splash,'  7.  41. 

,  n.  a  bud  :  Qf>Q£. 

t  n.  dying,  4.  19. 


I.  n.  head,  crown:  ^Bew,  @fi—tl>t  4.  4,  5; 
5-  25,39*;  6.15,19;  18.3. 

GPipu*,  5.  391. 

II.  v.  n.  [§  57],  come  to  an  end,  attain 
completion;  die,  21.  4,  12;  40.  7. 

GP*|«/,  end,  5.  88  ;  22.  7  ;  32.  6. 

III.  z/.  rt.  [§  64],  finish,  tic,  ordain, 
5.  224,  225. 

,«.  a  stench:  iBirppii,  5.224;  37.6. 


I.  ;/.  obstacle. 

II.  v.  n.  be  deficient,  stinted. 

<jpili_r$;,  without  stint  or  hindrance,  5.  17,  21; 
41.5. 

III.  v.  a.  butt  against,  rush  on. 

(jpiL^(?A>c£r,  5.  147.      Cuu£)*Q«r<SrCK;«udr. 

(3D6zari_LD,  ;/.  [S.  MUNDA],  head,  shaved 
head,  17.  25;  ashes,  9.  30;  35.  35. 
),  n.  a  crocodile,  6.  161. 


I.  beginning,  4.  i  ;  5.  88,  108;  22.  7. 

II.  source,  18.75;  21.4,13-15;  spring, 
chief,  best,  greatest,  20.  i  ;  27.  38. 

III.  =&c.,  3.  113;  21.4. 

(jpj*,**,  4.8,  94;  5.ii8;  21.  4;  27.  38;  29.29; 
51.34- 
70 


5  =  S.  MUK. 

|ssr  [S.  MUCH,  MUKTA],  greed  ;  an 
epithet  of  £ivan,  4.  122;  22.  7  ;  25. 
23;  29.  29. 

>pgl  [S.  MUKTI],  final  release,  1  1.  45; 
19.i9;  36.24;  42.23;  51.i.  [See 
NOTE  III.] 

j57,  G0^"',  ».  [S.  MUKTA,  MUTYAM], 
7.9;  9.1,37;  16.  i;  26.27. 
(tp\is<os).$,  adj.  original;  former,  1.  20; 
5.  314. 


I.  n.,  =&&,  &?£),  18.  19. 

II.  v.t  5.  361;  20.  29;  36.  20. 

<y*,£)  =  GP«*,  5.  187. 

See  <y>,  qp&sr. 

>*£ff,  n.  ocean.  [  =  '  Triple  water.' 
The  sea  contains  (i)  spring  water, 
(2)  rain  water,  (3)  river  water;  or 
it  makes,  sustains,  and  destroys, 
pcrformingthree  divine  operations: 

' 


See  (jo. 
,  v.  embrace,  8.  98. 

,   40.  7. 


23.13;  51.i. 

opu&l^  m.ff>  persevere,  21.  5. 

II.  n.  a  hare:    Qpf®),  6.  138.     See 


[S.  MURAJA],  19.  30; 
67/Z9,  3.  74. 
ar,  ^.strength  ;  wrath;  hate,4.6,  1  1  8. 


1  2 

Nig.    OPT**   micS  urns   trdau. 

<y>n®),  v.  [§  70],  sound,  hum,  5.  63; 

6.143;  20.7;  49.44,57. 
(z/)(25®,  for  Qpa®,  (^passer®,  n.  a  knot  in 

wood,  a  stump,  23.  15. 

Its  adj.  form  is  <jj(ju.®  ;  (ypti®,  40.  29. 

,  n.  a  woman's  breast  :  Q&iriEiena, 
dug,  udder,  4.  34;  5.  210;  6.  164; 
7.  60;  16.  18;  40.  37;  41.  6;  50.  17; 
51.  9. 


mitt   aflaiQuiiirQfl'tMurar.      Met.  =  a-«ou>iuf *}   g.   6l ; 

14.  12,  24. 

»«**«&,  nipples,  29.  17. 

roar,  sound,  thunder,  8.74; 
19.3o;  28.35;  49.27. 

),  adj.  complete,  entire,  whole. 

<y>Gt\3>,  n.  what  is  complete ;  as  adv.  completely, 

2.33;  6.  172,  173;  37.  2,6. 
QPOf&u,  QpiyeigiA,  3.  12;  5.  24,  25,  381;  22.  7; 

27.  37- 

GP(y\£Gfirgi>  absolute  splendour,  26.  27. 
op<!£\<y>0&>,  the  absolute  first  One;  origin,  11.  73; 

13.  75;  21.  12,  13. 

f,  the  All  in  All,  3.  29. 

j,  v.  bathe  in,  6.  173. 
?,  n,  a  cave,  6.  166. 


I.  72.  a  germ. 

OpSarAoi-iri,  a  pot  of  sprouting  seeds,  9.  i  . 

II.  v.  germinate,  10.  29;  22.  29. 


I.  «.  a  bond. 

Qp«SO#iD,  enslave,  13.  31. 

II.  v.  11.  be  broken,  14.  8. 
QpgvGu®),  n.  a  smile,  9.  20  ;   25.  23  ; 

35.  13. 

(Lpstnp,  n.  [C.  MORRE  ;  T.  MORA  ; 
M.  MURRA],  (i)  order,  turn,  course, 
law;  (2)  complaint,  3.  127. 

(yanpGuf,   3.  163;  4.  179;    5.   88,   372;  6.  163; 

33.  3;  44.  15. 

dfetap  g)G),  complain,  21.  10. 
ff6K>i_(TpsDp,  at  last,  3.  178. 


I.  n.  end,  consummation.  Comp. 


145; 


8.  109  ;  9.  79. 

II.  QPP&,  v..  ripen,  grow  mature: 


i  5.  135. 


Nig.   GP/6/Dej 


I,  v.  n.  be  angry,  morose,  4.  79. 

,  3.  133;  4.  43;  32.  6. 
<y>6afl®j<osr  [S.],  an  inspired  sage,  1.29) 
4.3;  5.  214;  29.  29;  44.10. 

«B/?a;r@£flino,    11-43;    16.  13. 


71 


,  80.  aa.    <**»*,  aforrUm,  SI.  |;  Me  j*. 

*(  80.  a8. 
-*  ,  a  mighty  being:  *•>«*.  6  88.108.147. 

,  22.  7.    (!»*»**,  «.  ,7,;  a.. 

!  6-  394;  8.  109. 
,  v.  appear  to,  21.  4,  5. 
,  former  time,  day*  of  old,  7.  jj. 


v.  precede,  draw  near,  7 


I.  adj.  form  of  Qparjp.    See  (y>,  4.  a. 
ff,  three  persons  :  (pti&ajp,  5.  15, 
118;  8.  109. 

,  triple-pronged,  6.  36  ;  89.  5. 

,    6.  34. 

1  1.  v.  [§  64],  grow  old,  ripe,  inveterate, 
4.94;  10.  37;  37.  6;  38.  29. 

,  82.  >6. 


III.  =  (y|«£7,  ancient  : 
3.  158;  42.  14. 

GfllfroDfi,  grandsire,  5.  118. 
CP'IJL/,  age,  27.  38  ;  81.  26. 
epjrt,  old,  6.  173;  or,  intense  : 
CP«r,  4.94;  27.38. 

(5,  n.  nose  :  ISIT&,  28.  19. 
siQ&),  11.  a  bambu,  5.  89. 

,  v.  cover:  (?L»/r/f,  1.51,53;  i.' 
nssJo,  n.  [S.  MURKHA],  stupidity, 
51.1. 

HaQartit,   5.  IO8,  314. 

/f^,  n.  [S.  MURTTI],  form  ;  personi- 
fication, embodiment  :  ^f/^ww, 
2.i2i;  5.  118;  37.  19,  27;  42.  a,  5. 
o=  siroeeoiu  [S.  MULAJ.cause,  root, 
2.  in;  36.  20. 

^>(5,  ^-  plung6  down  into,  sink  in  : 
Of  OS®,  6.  161. 

,  «.  marrow,  brain,  25.  5. 
TJZ/,  «.  three,  a  triad  of,  13.  21-24. 

QLLILJ. 

I.  n.  [  \/<?u>a/],  body:  «-t_«,  5.  i,  367; 

34.  2. 

1  1.  reality:  e-«Mr«ou>,  truth,  1.38;  2. 
4.  88;  5.  292;  8.  70;   10.  20,  66; 

35.  i  ;  42.17;  51.9. 

In  compounds  :  true,  1.  38  ;  30.  39. 
QUA  iop,  lose  consciousness,  7.  3. 

rfi/ortS*,  5.  §  I. 

;M,  reality,  5.  293,  36l»36"  J  '•  77  5  •••  '9- 


— GitJircaf. 


toiu{tiuiufBr,  Qiei/|iur«r,  one  who  is  true, 
1.34,8655.207,356,400;  6.  26;  8.  77;  9.47; 
29.  25  ;  one  in  bodily  form,  18.  31  ;  41.  4. 

Qu>su?,  v.  grow  soft,  waste  away:  {jgfoir, 

6.  38. 
Qtosx),  tender,  6.138.  See  QLDSST,  Quxsrr. 

Oifl*Br|(3p&utjr«Sr,  5.  2IO.      Qu*Sr|«i*,  5.  374. 
QIO&IRK^,   9.  27;  28.  21. 


I.  n.  wax,  4.6o;  5.350;  7.26;  23.  13; 
25.  31. 

II.  v.  [§  62],  anoint,  5.  55;  9.  9. 
OLD&r&resrQei/t  softly,  6.96.  Comp.Otoa>. 
Qiosjr,  soft,  6.  138;  8.103;  18.  16.  See 

OLD®). 

QILSW  [S.  MEGHA],  a  cloud  :  Qj>Q&). 

Gioaar,  an  epithet  of  Cjvan,  3.  95. 

Gu>jsir\u>eBtsf)  [S.  MEDHA],  excellent  gem, 
or  gem  of  understanding,  27.  35. 

<?u>(5,  n.  Mount  Meru,  9.  33  ;  (Divan's 
bow,  29.  25. 

(OLLSV,  n.  the  upper;  upon,  14.  52; 
47.  29. 

C.owru,  8.  55  ;  12.  32. 

CiuJw,  adj.  upper,  5.  169;  8.  35. 

<?io/>Q*r«lri_/dr,  He  mounted,  8.  17;  86.  10,  25; 

assumed,  5.  28. 
Qiofim-,  above,  8.  4. 
<?*>*»  «S»*o,  be  displayed  aloft,  19.  39. 
GiodrQio*),  8.  92  ;  5.  67,  120. 

Gu>\ey,  v.  [§  62],  attain  to,  abide  with 
or  in,  fill  :  Qun^fs^j,  5.  1  20,  207, 
362,  367.  See  c-szo/p,  u>(5o/. 

C<o|u-<;«)Jw,  8.  1  16;  11.  5;  18.  7;  43.  I  ;   47. 

12,  15.     Comp.  23.  4,  &c. 
Ciaurar,  the  dweller  in,  4.  204  ;  8.  39;  81.  1  1. 
<?«>|%**>,  82.  16,  17.    <?io;A(j5,  3.  23;  9.  34. 

&)  or  67i^6\),  a  lute,  7.  29. 
),  n.  body,  form,  2.  33,  51,  112; 
5.  236,  371  ;  6.  115;  8.  48.  [<?u>^.] 

QarsaQuxaH}  30.  17.      O*ii(?uj<a9,   8.  51. 

9,   10.  80;  49.  22.      *8Jr<?u»fl,   18.   26. 

,  35.  14.     QfAQiofsfliuf,  17.  i. 


I.    [S.   MASl],   blackness  :    ^j^ 
s(^ss)u))  tfjuJL/,  5.  291;  6.  27;  7.43; 
8.67,  74;  9.45. 
72 


ULj  =  33)i:gj$&))  20.  22;  41.  27. 

II.  SS)LDIU&)  =  LDlU<S<Stl>  J  LDirS^,LDlU&),  4.  2  I  8; 

6.93541.1;  51. 10.  [Comp.  S.MAY  A.] 

esfljIffSr,    5.    1 8. 

,  n.  a  gram-bag: 

2.33- 

Mjfgjsstir,  v.  be  beaten,  8.47. 
=a  stroke.] 

Liq-)  v.  close  in  like  a  bud,  4.  84. 

!®,  ;/.  a  flower-bud,  29.  29. 

QLLITIU. 

I.  =  QiLiTtLuLi,  n.  a  crowd,  throng,  7. 
41;  9.37;  25.6. 

II.  v.  [§  64],  swarm:  ffQuuTiLpgi,  6.  96 ; 
25.9. 

QLfMifl,  n.  a  word,  2.  13;  7.  13; 
8.  103.  [See  N.  Lex.] 

(Met.)  urAi  Qiartfmu  O.SD<_JU«/CT  [G.  162],  19.  25, 

33;  38.  5. 

uotroctiCar/  Q*r£iirir,   28.  17. 

«guQior«9 ?  =  «£«rQuw09 ;  or  s=^iu*fit  'choice;'  or 
as  in  <gt/A(5tpA>,  'sweet  words  such  as  shepherds 
sing.' 

GmifiQiartfut,  'HcWho  utters  the  Vedam,'  17.  i. 
[Comp.  Tiruvijai.  16.] 

Q&Quirtfurt,  C.  17. 

ILJ 

lutr. 

tutrsens,  n.  body  (generally  «^««D«), 
25.  17;  33.  35.  [See  K.  and  N. 
Lex.] 

jdeiDff,  n.  [S.  YATRA],  a  journey, 
4.  29;  45. 

ir\eu(rrju),  all,   20.  12.     [uj/r  =  e76\>.] 
g,  a   lute :    aS'Ssacr.     [?  «7t£,  seven- 
stringed.] 

urtfsort,  20.  13. 

ju/rSsar,  «.,  4.  ii ;  5. 161.     See  ^fasr. 

ILI  IT  GST = IB  near,  5.59;   31.19. 

QLUITSW,   n.   abstract   contemplation, 

bliss,  37.  i,  14. 
QajtrS,  n.,  46.  6. 
<2W(5,;/.  [for  S.  VI-YOGA?],  separation, 

12.36. 
Qujir&sfl,  n.  [S.  YONI],  womb,  matrix, 

4.   12. 


oi 


611 

6U.     See  si//r,  ©/(Tj. 

i,  a  slice,  section,  9.  6;  24.  29. 

,  ^  [§  64],  distribute;  assign  to 
each  his  place  and  office,  3.  114; 
49.  33.  See  u@. 

[K.],  division,  sort;  manner; 
means:   @earu>,  8.17;   5.192;  33. 
iS,  20;  =so  that,  42.  17. 
eufu>,  n.  [S.  VAfA],  charge,  care,  38.30. 
a/®*u>,  ®j<&ff%osr,  #.  [S.],  deceit,  1.  55; 

o/<jj*(?eBraJr,  5.  289,  317. 
6U(g,y,sio,  «.,   =  tu&fio,  5.  382. 

«"<s®,  P.  [§  64],  deceive,  6.  41. 

,  ».  a  creeper;  epithet  of 

,  Umai,  6.  76. 

v,  72.  [S.  VAD],  form,  5.  99;  6.  103; 
13.  74. 

a/©,  «.  a  wound,  12.  14;  unripe  fruit: 

LS<£rj3r,  9.  6;  24.  29. 
<®LLi-ii,  n.  [S.  VATA,VRITTA],  any  thing 

round,  9.  73;  42.  8. 

6l/533r/57(^,  z;.  [§  62],  bow,  bend,  wor- 
ship, 1.  1  8;  5.  296,  297,  299;  13.  25; 
20.  22;  24.  23;  41.5;  45.  23;  yield, 
41.  21.  [See  N.  Lex.  -/VAN.] 

6U600T  IB  (*!%£)  U),    49.  4,  34. 

<SU<o99T.      See  a/err. 

<a/63Br®,  a  scarab  :  S-^LC,^  3.  91  (?  for 
6u);   6.  143;  7.  53. 

[S.  MANDODARl],  wife  of 
Ravana,    18.  6;    [43.  39.]      See 
uiaQjSirjSff},     [Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  466.] 
tsveosr  soar  w  [S.  YARN], 

(1)  way,  manner:  evens,  5.  96;  9.  32, 
42;  15.4. 

(2)  quality  :  gjsazno. 

(3)  form,  beauty,  5.99;  7.13 


(4)  good  :   rseoretnu),  5.  308. 

(5)  colour,  5.  97. 

eusaaestirCiueseR£gi>    10.  15. 

=  u/f  ,  so  that,  51.  2,  6,  8,  u,  15,  31  ; 

21.  4.    Comp.  a/6n>d>. 
©y/s^SboT,  (  i  )  worship  [S.]  ;  (2)  =  eals^nilj, 
5.  102,  103;  28.  passim.     See  a/<3. 

73 


,^  empty, 

40.  22.    [*««,,  rf«*.J 

^il,.^  Quatiu*,  42.  33. 

newly,  suddenly,  37.  a. 
/tDuQajrsir,  5.  230,  372;  28.  5. 

tyftfr,  ewe  y^  9.6;  34.  i8;42.9o. 

See  a/^. 

,«.,=ffl/^  [S.VA£4power,31.i. 
,  ».  field,  3.93;  20.3,  ,9,  &c.; 
34.  31. 

,  for  am«ru>,  a  variant  of  *«r 
«ru>,  ='and  others,'  12.  14. 

),  ».  [S.  VAJRA],  diamond,  26.  27  ; 
29.  21. 

place,  3.  28,  83,  132.    Comp. 

68)611    SUfflU. 

**df>uQtfi  [for  «„»],  mbduing  all  tKfay  to 
himself,  2.  95. 

>4  =  a/sa)^,  a>il©,  «.  a  limit,  4.  41  ; 
5.  190. 

,  n.  [S.VARAHA],  a  boar,  80.  17. 
a//^,«.length,9.29;beautyspots,  40.37. 
617(75,  v.  [§  70],  come.  See  «/*,  «  J»,  *«. 

firf  «*£  Oa«r  OMryJur*,  8.  1  8.  Here  •**  -  aukv  « 

«SOT=A*fiu,  6.  57-60. 
«j*  «.wr£,  IS.pasiim.     »ym  \  28.  4,  Ac. 

a/j|a/,  a  coming,  20.  17. 

g)s»«  utgiQuiii,  '  these  shall  come  and  go,'  5.  1  7  1  ; 

46.4,8;  47.  25. 
•rirr,  8.  10;  25.  26;  50.  II.      «r/rt>.  26.  16. 

•M9J^c?[^x*uii,  continual  snifering,  4.  33. 

pu>,  n.  trouble,  5.  370. 
^j  ^.  n.  suffer,  3.  129,  130;  4. 
5.  48,  49,  52;  21.  31. 
,  ».  a  hill,  3.  68,  88  ;  6.  148;  35.  21. 

sofftsgi,  a  bank  ;  limit,  bound  :  *«•/,  5.  156. 
ar  up,  up  to  the  bank,  3.  77. 
e»r  ^®ua»n«  =  uii»ift,  'the  moaotain-maid,' 

11.  22. 

,  v.  [§  64],  draw  :  /QjprtiQmr, 
11.  26. 
si/sv,  sua'sv  [S.  BAL],  strong,  6.  47. 

*«xA,  right  hand,  6.  36.    ••*••,  ».  35  »**• 


I.  [N.  398,  and  K.]  =thou  art  able, 


GUIT6MI. 


5.  376  ;   a.  mountain,  28.  16.     [G. 

93-] 
II.  for  «/A|(?a),  swiftly,  28.  13. 

•i&cuor  (or  jyA>«w*  ?),   5.  2OO  J   36.  22  J  43.  56. 
mAiQwsor,   5.  342.      •»A)eura«Bf,   31.  14. 
•i&JcurtL®,  40.  31. 

,  6.  73,  148;  13.  n.      [See 


/r,    mighty    demons,    1.  29. 
Comp.  28.  13,  and  40.  25. 
,  n.  strength,  6.  40. 

jeJr,   10.  41. 

£,  Thou  \Vho  art  mighty,  20.  40. 
r,  3.  IO8.      «^«ur«rejr)  8.  26. 

[S.  VALLI],  a   creeper:    u<_ff 
Q*/r*f  ,  13.  title. 

o,  ».  a  net,  8.42;  6.  156,  157;  :.'  1. 
25;  25.37;  43.23;  48.  9;  49.8. 
6L/Lp/E/(3j,  v.  distribute,  24.  37  ;  36.  20. 
euy$l,  n.  a.  way;  so  that  :  QiefS,  2.  117; 
5.  344;  6.  20;  22.i;  50.ii. 

*yj  ]  •.*£!/  [K.  EL],  men  of  tried   faithfulness, 

6.344C);  21.  3- 

7.  42;  12.48  ;  20.  34. 
r,  5.  99  ;  82.  42.    •>#&>**>,  21.  4. 


I.  ;/.  a  fault  :  e/(y>a/,  42.  32;  faultless. 
v.  [§  64],  (or  a/(y>*(5,  §  62),  err,  fail, 

slip. 

II.  a/(if|e/,  v.  fail  :  ^UL/. 

•tpracio  =  •iQpwrwio,  without  fail  or  exception. 

euQgpgj,  v.  extol,  4.  9,  10.     See  evtrtp. 

euetri. 

I.  7;.  sleep  [§§  57,  64],  —ea&r^^Quun  ? 
dost  thou  slumber?  7.  2. 

•xrtoCurdr,   3.  48. 

II.  grow,  abound,  6.  13;  20.  27;  28. 
16;  31.34;  88.33. 

III.  v.  [§  64],  cultivate,  5.  383  ;  bring 
up,  save',  4.  87;  6.  12;  7.  56. 

eueifi,  n.  wind  :  &ITG),  &np&,  3.  1  1  ;  4.  1  40  ; 
5-57- 


I.  ;/.  an  armlet,  7.  47;  10.  71. 

/,  women,  35.  9;  42.  n. 

(the  disc  or  (Aakram),  Vishnu  : 
«(r(i,  23.  39. 
|  «*»;«?/,  16.  24.      <?«r*wb,   11.  77. 

74 


II.  v.  intr.  [§57],  bend,  14.  i. 
6i/syr,  «.  strength,   beauty,    20.  34. 

Comp.  o/ei),  Q/szOTJisrou). 
eu&ruD,  n.  abundance,  3.  2;  34.  8. 

e/<DirQ«re0>s,    9.  29. 

<su&T\srTS\),  11.  a  gracious  one,  5.  249; 

10.74;  13.75;  18.  14;  48.6. 
Q//DJ?',  7'.  wither,  dry  up;  be  utterly  at 

a  loss.     [\/ew^2';  and  eu&)  ?] 

«/>/9i/ti,    8.   20. 

»t>fi,  G-  S3!  23.  6.     •>f>p**i<b,  82.  42. 


/f,   16.  5j  36.  25. 
j,  n.  beauty,  31.  14. 

ri  [S.  VALMl  =  an  ant;  VAL- 
MlKA  =  an  anthill],  an  epithet  of 
£ivan    as    worshipped    in    Arur. 
Comp.  t-ipgv,  p.  1  19. 
6U35T,  hardness:  eu&). 

•Kir'uirAwQ,   23.  4.      «MirjQ»«9,    7.  2. 

i,   18.  21.      •M*-[i/<ur*  ?•>«;,   85.  9. 

34.  21. 
i,  7.  28  ;  10.  41  ;  14.  19. 

eurr,  11.  26;  42.  43.     See  a/^. 
e;ff«(5,  n.  [S.  VACH],  word  ;  speech  ; 

tongue,  5.  102,  301,  313;  38.  18. 
Giirses)&  for  a//r<s(3>,  26.33.  [Or  «g«sro«.] 
a//r/»(5,  v.  take,  receive  ;  bend,  2.  1  8  ; 

5.  271;  6.  13;  31.35. 

«/6<g«r6,  'Thou  wilt  destroy,'  i.e.  bring  back 
under  Maya,  5.  382;  25.  22. 
6u<Tf\siM,  n.,    =a//r<5(5   [S.  VACHAKA], 
speech,  utterance. 

Title,  &<5*rr*&.       (Oflir«rr#«iA,    11-43;   34.  10. 

sr,  43.  2. 

a),  n.  a  town,  2.  79.  See 
Devaram,  p.  589,  &c.  ;  Periya  Pura- 
nam,  II  Kandam,  p.  326. 

<5U(1®,  v.  fade,  pine  away,   5.  214; 

8.  101;   11.45;   I?-  1  6. 
eutresaresr,  ?  for  unseorsar  [S.  VAN],  5.  J  75  ; 

9.  36;  43.  31;  48.  9.    Or,  for  euir(t$  GIT 
=  '  those  that  live  and  flourish.' 

jy«*ri_  mitsaert,  the  celestials,  23.  5. 

^/tiiusa  mfstaar.     See  ^ii*  tartar. 

GlHTSSST.     See  euirar  and 


)y  ;/.  gate  :    eniriLi)  eurrf®)    1   54  • 
5.  382. 

GiOTlU. 

I.  «.  mouth,  lips:  «gr«m>,  2.  15;  5.  106, 
318;  6.5,18;  7.57;  13.12)14.43; 
19.13;  25.39;  27.ii;  28.  19;  41. 

10,  22. 

•viujluQ,  fall  into  the  mouth  of,  5.  106. 
auriLj^Kiut,  those  with  ruddy  lips,  6.  161-. 

turiLiaier    2.   IK. 

II.  for  eurruSeo,  gate,  5.  209. 

III.  a  sign  of  seventh  case,  7.3  ;  13.  25  ; 
22.i9;  24.14;  34.29. 

IV.  v.  [§§  57,  64],  succeed,  flourish. 

^iinu\ijLj,  fitness,  4.  218. 
iug®)  for  eurruS®),  euuf&)i  36.  23. 

>  v-  [S.  VAR,  VRI],  sweep  away  as 
a  flood,  14.  44. 


I.  v.  intr.  [§  57],  pour  forth,  5.  275  ; 
24.  37. 

II.  v.  tr.  [§  64]. 

III.  «.  variously  used  as  'great/  'ex- 
panded/ &c. 

eatriau.£>}   4.  Io;   28.  4. 

eairiscpea,  cinctured  foot,  13.25. 
«urf  erflevQuieirqf'fcj,  5.  2IOJ  6.  12. 


)  18.  36. 

,  7.  47. 

tuirifse>u-!   9.  5. 

a//rjQu/r«Seu,  a  stately  grove,  29.  37. 
.     See  sv^. 

io,  46.  4,  8. 

,#.  [S.vRi,  VAR,  VARU  ;  Lat.  MARE; 
Gk.  cup-],  sea:  <si_ei). 

^isisff  turf,   4.  132.      s/r/fliutOT,   8.  12. 

6urriT<i<sB),g)  n.  [S.  VARTTA],word,  tidings, 
report,  5.  102;  23.  6;  praise:  L/#tp, 

7.47- 
ia//r<szD  tp,  w.  plantain  :  Musaparadistaca, 

6.  135- 

p,  ^.  «.  flourish,  live,  5.  6  1.  76,  77  ; 
19.  10520.34;  21.  n  ;  28.14.  [Root 
eup,  of  which  <su®r  is  a  variation. 
See  N.  Lex.  and  K.     G.  153.] 
<a//rt£|««c<sr,  11.,  5.241;  25.  21;  88.40; 
42.  17. 
75 


f£K  «•  felicity,  4.  Jii  ;  5.  5,  a6o, 
264;  37.2;  41.  j;  40.2. 

ff^lo^w,  source  of  bliss,  6.  oj 
160;  20.  i. 

^|ffpc^,  'no  joy  in  life!'  28. 

ir$t  24.  23. 

il!  1.1-5;  3.95-105.  [G.85.J 
Br,  28.  4,  12,  &c. 

a//rtp|,%7,  v.  salute,  worship,  hail,  5.  60, 

61  ;  7.2-  0.14,59;  13.25. 

a//rtp|ffl9  [§  1  60],  37.  2. 

,  silently  (as  from  a  v.  **«,  ** 
t,  Giaarit),  7.  28;   21 


n. 


I.  a  sword,  28.13;  86.15. 

II.  brightness,  5.  258;  9.  41  ;  19.  19; 
35.  21.    Comp.  5>ar. 

r  -  'bright  as  moon-beams,'  5  1  74. 


trous,'  7.  i  ;  9.  29  ;  46.  i. 

=5?sr/?),3.70,72;  20.34;  3">.  i  . 
&>l  shining  brow,  3.  135;  12.49. 
<surreir\eS>&)  19.  19. 
ajrretfl,  ;/.  an  arrow,  35.  37. 
sw/rsar,  SUTSSTLD. 

I.  n.  heaven,  sky,  5.  46. 

II.  11.=.  greatness:  eaaessp^  5.  106; 
12.40;  29.19. 

,  4.  136;  9.  66.    [«iy*">.] 
or  euisft  8.  19,  24;  19.  15. 

III.  eunesren^sr—^ie^assr^  ^ivan,  8,84; 
13.  45- 

*r®!«_*  (7«r«*),  Indra;  Qivan;  gods,  "• 
12.  48  ;  13.  20  ;  16.  8.    [•**  +  •««.] 

a/jOTtt/CaraJr,    14.  2  7.      ««r«ar^/,  46.  4. 

«/r<fr|<E>(0&,  sun,  29.  1  8.     *rar  C/x*,  S.  180. 
•Mfrjiprf,  19.  24.     [Comp.  46.  2.] 
•/rear«/,  the  celestials,  4.  1  ;  5.  61,  169;  13.  16. 
«r(?©/,  2.4;  8.13;  10.6. 

•r«BT^O^r(3(xiu/,  6.  175.     *r«r*,  Qivao,  5.  376. 

IV.  ether  :  eSeear,  ^siriuu),  3.  23  J  5.  57, 
252,  277;  11.  69. 

a9  for  6tf=u>6Dff,  6.  136.    [Some  say 


u,  n.  [S.vi-KRi],  change,  pertur- 
bation. 

10.  23;  *9.  1  7- 


eSQirfatr,  «.  [S.  vi  KRi|TA],  one  who 
changes ;    one  who    is  false,  dis- 
sembling, 4.  96,  105 ;  29.  25. 
8(5,  v.,  24.  38. 

7,  v.  cast  a  net :   efT*,  8.  1 1 ; 
43.  23.     See 


I.  «.  heaven:  =  <a9«ar,  5.  171. 

«8«iiiy*cr/f,   8.  7. 

II.  ether,  as  an  element: 
27.  25. 

/*•»  .  .  .  ,  15.  17. 

6St65><ft  11.  impetus,  swiftness. 

«r*  J«o*4  <?*"»-,  running  like  the  wind,  2.  1  35. 

[S.  vIjA,  BIJA],  seed:    o&£0r, 
,  5.  381. 

J***GmQ,  destruction  of  the  germ,  5.  331. 
eSfetaff  for  eSpeop  [from  S.  VIDYA], 
wisdom,  magic  power,  a  wonder, 
5.  103,  112,  113,  320,  374,  380. 

•t>«B«udr,  «.,  6.  122. 


,  flesh,  6.  162. 

8T,  «.  [S.  VIDANGA], 
as  worshipped  in  «t_ii^/r,  4.  160  ; 
6.  74.    See  aS[j®  eSt—iEJsu  QuQu>nesr. 


J>,  ;/.  [S.  VISHA],  poison,  sting, 

4.  40;  6.  26;  23.  25. 

e9L_/f,  y/.a  fissure  ;  (?)debauchery,  6.  1  50. 

effi-fev)  [S.  VRISHALA],  a  youth,  or 

young  steer,  in  opp.  to 

5.  241. 
fi9i_a/ar,  5.  254. 


I.  v.  n.  [§§  68,  254],  leave,  abandon, 
3.  144;  5.  234;  6.  2,  &c.;  33.35; 
37.  5;  45.  13,  &c.  [Ill  Gr.  92.] 

rfi_&>,  6.  50,  126.      «fi-<?«udr,  6.   150. 

•8£i_jb«a !  we  leave  not,  5.  299. 
JCi_*»!  6.  176. 

II. «;. «.  [§64],  send  away,  3. 136 ;  14.7. 
eSeni—  [S.  VRISHA,  RISHABHA],  a  bull, 
37.5. 

6.  31.      uvAiaCox-,  5.  259  \  34.  II. 
jwar,   13.  6l.      J«>i_urdr,   8.  30;  31».  7. 

76 


6. 8l.      «J«B>i_tJlur*r,    1.34;  34.2. 
6.  2. 

l.ip.6i>,  a  moth:  e&LLq.  pupeoxsu^Gtiuu), 
UjSiEj&u),  6.  17. 

sfilsssr  [T.  VINU  ;  S.  VISH,  VISHNU  ; 

M.  VINNU],  the  firmament,  2.  4; 

sky,  1.  23;  5.  381;  8.  55;  18.30; 

28.  i  ;   49.  7.     Opposed  to  u>«ar. 

Comp.  eS&r. 
eS6safun&),  heaven,  5.  297 ;  12.  36. 

•BotravwS  .  tSebmt,  87.5. 

/,  8.  18;  6.  81,  189;  6.  78;  11.  73. 
A,  20.  33. 
,  dwell  in  heaven,  13.  15. 

Air  (as  an  element),  3.  114;  6.  121. 
eSeaareaaruuu),  n.  petition,  6.  title. 
a9^&y,«. trembling, shivering:  /5®««Lo, 

6.  162. 

eSjs),  n.  [S.  VIDHI],  fate ;  good  fortune ; 
I'.rahma,  14.  31. 

•fjUdrwxo,   24.  38. 

J&tMiGukr,  ill-fated  me,    G.  166 ;   ordinance, 
17. 

•Sfimmm,   45.  9. 

ff,  v.  «.  [§  64],  tremble,  4.  67. 
ff\eS^iT,  v.  n.  [§  64;  S.VYATH;  Gk. 
r-],  throb,  5.  i. 
L/L/,  «.  strong  desire  : 


,  6.  134. 

0<§u>,  wisdom  :   <^rresnJo,  2.  49. 

fsBsr  [S.  VITTA-KA],  the  renowned, 
7.59;  8.  104;  10.  24;  31.  28. 

ffit  n-  [S.  V!JA],  seed,  germ,  source  : 
eSenp,  eSeaw,  8.93;  6.  Jl8;  11.73; 
30.3;  42.37- 

esif, ;/.  [S.  VIDYA],  =  eSfet^f,  learn- 
ing, skill,  magic,  26.  37. 

,  v.  admire,  wonder  at,  3.  154; 
5.  71;  6.  178;  7.  title. 

/UIJLI,    8.    54. 

or,  n.  expansion,  6.  34,  94,  102; 
8.45;  16.17;  29.141  34.14- 
iDeoesr  [S.  vi  +  MALA],  the  pure  One, 
1.  34-36;  4.  106;  29.  14.     Comp. 

U5SULD 


v.  [§  62],  sob,  sigh  deeply,  7.  3. 
&ff*r  [S.  VYAPRITA],  minister  : 

sr,   14.  28. 

b,  n.  [S.  VRATA],  vow,  self-im- 
posed restriction,  penance,  4.  50. 

jeur*,    eSu<tS}  a   songstress;   damsel,  20.  30; 
28.  29. 

,  aflj/ray,  2;.  [§  62],  unite,  2.  16; 
5.67;  86.33. 

T,  enemies,  6.  30,  46. 
,  v.  [§§  57,  64;  S.  VI-RI;  RI,  Rf, 

Ri],  expand,  3.  4,44;  4.  125;  5.  81; 

6.150;  39.7. 

«V&wC(u«5r,  a  wild  fellow,  6.  34.    [Coll.  use.] 

/flj#sni_=.u/r/fr,z-,  expand:  «fl<fl«i_A>,  33.  19. 

AiJj  &.  cause  to  unfold,  6.  194. 

A*i_/,  radiant  with  splendour,  18.  31. 

i,  for  i£l(^si£it  1.  27. 

.  VRIDDHA],  ancient,  5.  242. 
[K.],  a  guest  ;  eSqrjiB/desrea; 
'me,  once  Thy  guest,'  2.  60;  6.  70; 
50.  8(?). 

Qrj  I  ti>L/,  2/.  desire. 

Lii$-  oj/r/r  (for  e^ti/L/ii),  that  will 
desire,  6.  54;  20.  35. 

L/,  «.  desire,  5.  320  ;  33.  24. 

tiGiuiugi,  feel  desire,  20.  39  ;  27.  9. 

yOuaJr,   2.  87. 

f|t^gy,  ?/.  desire,  5.  320;  15.  u. 


I.  n.  fragrance  :  Loessnl>)  eurrff'&sr,  4.  105  ; 
5.  i;  6.  130,  142;  41.  35. 

II.  v.  desire,  5.  42,  56. 

&fZj,  n.  hindrance  :  upSui-f. 

,  36.  23. 

Kia®)  =  u)'fo)i  Meru,  6.114. 


I.  v.  n.  recede,  6.  no;  30.  10. 

II.  n.  a  beast:  LSI0<stl>,  1.  56. 

g(5®2ar«DiusflLl.G)      ep@Sl'fciru 
Cursu  ;   or  from  V.  =  £B 


I.  «.  a  bow,  2.  32;  14.  i  j  29.  25.  See 


xsSI,  n.  a  bowman,  9.  19  ;  43.  41  ; 
49.  53- 
77 


II.  v.  sell,  2.  38;  6.  69. 


I.  v.  [§  64],  behold,  5.  no;  6.  186; 
29.  10. 

II.  11.  an  eye,  35.  29. 


I.  «#  great,  6.6;  excellent,  20.  33. 

JotfiQfftetH-i,  0.  136.     <fy*/*,  87.18. 
•JaxiQurojdr,  'worthiest  of  Being*,'  7.  15;  JO.  j«; 
49.  54. 

II.  v.  fall,  5.  315. 

•0<y|«<9»  v.  swallow,  3.  167;  6.  66  ; 
14.  19;  24.  38. 

7,  ;/.  fat,  butter,  6.  1  74. 
,  v.  lust  after. 

»i1eTl  6.  183. 

,  wood-apple  tree.  See  Ndladi. 
u>L/,  v.  speak  out,  41.  4,  8. 
,  n.  a  murmuring  sound,  6.  38. 
,  v.  mingle  ;  cultivate,  40.  33. 
a22srr,  v.  intr.  [§57],  grow,  spring  forth, 
4.141;  14.  i;  30.3,10;  37.9;  40.53. 
v.  tr.  [§  64],  cause  to  spring,  2.  14,  32  ; 

4.  125;  31.30. 

,  «.  result,  5.  381. 
riur®,  ».  play,  sport,  7.  6,  46;  21.  37;  81.  28. 

•SJbri/ftl®,  «.,  7.  43. 

Comp.  t5e«r. 

*^,  ;/.  a  lamp. 
e3eir\isi(^)  v.  shine  forth,  1.  23  ;  2.  3  ; 
6.10;  18.12;  19.39;  31.28;  36.21. 
eS&rfa),  v.  [§  56.  (Ill)],  open  out,  ex- 
pand, burst  forth,  sever  from,  5. 
387,315;  6.6,54;  43.18. 
<sSln)t  v.  have  power  to,  23.  23. 
eSlpeo,  n.  power  :  a/a),  6.  2. 
eSp&,  5.  134.     See  ^PJ». 
fflffjg),  a9(6B)ey,  aJeara/,  V.  [S.  VI-Nl],  ask, 
18.  2. 

aJSssr,  «.  action,  deed  :  Qfin$oit  *(5 
i0u>,  1.  20;  5.  85;  31.  5.    [Comp. 

5.  vi-Nl;  M.  VINA.] 

QmnuiuiSter,   47.  I. 

r,   1.  25,  50;  6.  4>. 

r,  5.84;  6.  33.      rffcri/?**,   87.  5. 


<zars<Jsi-sir,  5.  85;  30.  io;  one  ruined  by  deeds : 
j3e!2s!7-oDiuii/sni_(u«KBr  (  =  ureuw^er),  34.  2,  13. 

P  •      (F*      •  oy*         ^ 

•"fu|o9as57-,  5.  77;  13.  ii  ;  42.  43. 

Q«rG)jrf&ar,   33.  I,  2.      •$&&•*«(_&,  35.  5. 
«_*«f  Tear  =  ssrijisSZar,  fated  action,  4.  1 2  (?). 


e£»,  v.  [§  62],  diffuse,  emit: 

19.  19.     Comp.  <a5^j2'. 
With  «jyp  =  cast  away:  «?;J,  25.  33. 
»>•«?«,  brandish,  35.  26. 

y  the  net,'  49.  8. 


I.  ZA  (for  e$®  or 

(1)  *>//r.  perish. 

(2)  /r.  quit,  5.  400. 
t+j08*+m4£M*mtp*mrt  6.  178. 

II.  n.  release  ;  heaven:  (tppfi,  1.  32; 
8.52;  5.400;  8.5,35;  9-  79;  20.2i; 
41.19.     [«0®.] 

uj,,  3.  18.     tfi-f^Cf,  6.  42. 

1®,  v.  [§§  62,  i6o/],  slay,  41.  19. 
[A  causal  from  etf®=a9®,  die.] 

r,  n.  [S.  V!NA,  said  to  have  been 
invented  by  Narada],  a  lute,  49.  44. 

tut,  lutists,  20.  13. 

,  n.  [S.  vlTHi],  a  street  :  G^GJ,  7.3; 
13.  71. 

L/(75u)/r6Br,  an  epithet  of 
as  worshipped  in  Arur.    See 


sr,  n.  [S.  V!RA],  a  hero,  43.  58. 

air  [S.  vlRA-BHADRA],  an  ema- 
nation of  (^ivan,  13.  15. 
£,z;.(fore%>),fall,2.i34;  5.80,156; 
11.19;  31.  2. 

[§  1  60],  (for  eSQf\eS  =  eS(ifff^])t 
cause  to  fall,  3.  159. 
,  n,  'splendour  was  dimmed,'  7.  69. 

<areDu*S&«>rfiff}   25.  13;   37.  l8. 

,  ^  .  rest  in  state,  36.  38  ;  40.  26. 
G/(SL/,  hot;  cruel  (QeuiL^uu,  Oa.  J>}  QSVIB, 


.grf  [N.  Lex.],  hot  desire,  24.  25  ;  25.  37; 

45.  17. 

«*|«»',  fierce  elephant,  6.  194. 

fy  bright-eyed  carp,  25.  37. 

r,  burning  with  wrath,  14.  28. 

,  severe  affliction,  3.  71. 

78 


— Csush". 

Qmitft,  hot  water,  6.  161. 
Qo/ioGuirj,  fierce  fight,  6.  81. 

Qtuiaeaia,    heat,   3.  22. 
QO/IUIU,    14.  19.      Oa/i/iuaSSsar,   47.  I. 
Q>»nuuai.f>ff,   6.  98. 

O«/£KUfiu!  'Thou  art  the  heat,'  1.  36. 
Qa/AsD^  a  fried  cake  of  meal,  5.  315. 

G/suoaafT,  G/SL// .     See  Qeu&r. 

n.  a  ^aiva  shrine : 
3,   2.  60.     This   is  in  S. 
ii>.    It  was  the  birthplace 
of  QutiLiseaon—QpeijiT,  author  of  the 
&eu^nesrQuir^LD.       See     DevAraui, 
§  ii  (six  odes). 

lii-/,  z>.  and  ;/.  glow,  5.  2;  6.  142. 


jLy,  z;.  wither,  6.  78. 

,  v.  fear,  6.  102. 

,  z/.  tremble,  6.  30,  46;  27.  9. 

/()5,  v.  shudder,  35.  5. 

rr,  n.  dread,  6.  66;  24.  19. 

w,  7'.  be  frightened,  32.  12. 

),  z^.  [§  70],  conquer,  surpass  : 

jS  jy«ci_,  26.  11;  36.  37. 
)  Qairiy-Qujirezsr  [G.  153],  9.  63. 
|<s!  [G.  85],  1.  6-10. 


I.  light:    Qeueifleffiu,   6.  68;    22.  15. 
Comp.  epstfl  and  Qsu&r. 

II.  the  open,  outside:  40^,  41.  8. 

7,  ».,  6.  58  ;  8.  104. 
iv®,  8.114;  49-  7>  8. 
c®,  &.  exhibit,  41.  4. 

III.  the  ether  as  element: 
4.  141. 

IV.  whiteness,  6.  122. 

,  5.  97. 

,  z/.  be  afraid  or  ashamed  : 
Qa/tl<5,  5.  315. 

sL/sfr  (Qayezar),  adj.   white  ;    pure, 
bright,  35.  14. 

Q««*r'i_&u,  a  skull,  6.  118,  166. 
O«/«)ir<B^f    12.  i;  29.  21. 
Quebatppt,   8.  51;    17.  I. 

O»c*r|io«u?|«-«f,    19.  3. 

Qa,tdbrmaDi\iur£i  \  5.  73  ;  6.  146  ;  7.  9. 
fit,    17.25- 


O»«»|M.|I<C«!  'Thou  Who  art  while,'  6.  86. 
Q-drkwA,,  a  glowing  fire,  white  heat,  0.  94.  ' 
Oa/drjaJtr,  white,  or  silver,  16.  24. 
0«/*OT<4,  a  torrent,  flood  white  and  foaminc 

3    77;  6.80,81,84;  6.53;24.,3; 

45.  2.      See  acyfcOTr,  glsoruiA,  gKsutli. 

^^T  Qa/drs,*  «*«*,  a  deceiver  plunged  in 

the  flood  of  desire,  5.  95. 
0«*»r,  whiteness,  6.  103  ;  10.  70  ;  17.  25;  39.  6 
43.  65. 

,  n.  drunkenness;  palm-juice; 
sap,  3.  90  ;  5.  207  ;  6.  1  8,  1  74  ;  35.  30. 
{Naladi,  180.] 

]t  v.  [§  64],  hate,  loathe  : 

,  5.  213  ;  6.  22  ;  24.  5  ;  38.  40 
<S5)LC,  /2.  emptiness  :  Qa/.g2», 


sjr,    6.  90,  98.       Qajpdtifir,   31.  30. 

/,  ;/.  a  hill,  6.  198. 

Qsupuar,   2.  100.      [S<f*sar.] 


,  victory  :   Qfiuu.    [Qa/^>  +  ^ 
G.  96.]  ^ 

sr,  Qtsup.     See  Qa/si). 
G?S17,  «/.  [§  58],  burn,  11.  19;  14.  3. 
See  Q<sv.     [Comp.  S.  vi.] 

Qaiaij    43.  41.       Qeuieap,    5.  315. 

Qmi*u>  [S.  VEGA,  vij],  agitation,  heat, 
desire:  QSUUULD,  1.  6. 

s,  ;z.  tiger  :  ty<a0,  6.  2. 
[<5J#\  T.  VESARU,   VESARl]. 

[§  68],  grieve  :  ^CTTL/JZ',  Ou>aff, 
,  6.198;  21.  1  8. 

,  repining,  38. 

[S.  VESHA],  shape,  disguise, 
2.  15,93;  17-  H,  15- 

'one  who  assumes  a  garb,'  17.  33. 

r  [S.  VYADHA],  a  hunter,  2.17; 
15.  ii  ;  48.  9. 
,  n.  hunting,  2.  18. 

the  guise  of  a  hunter,  43.  13. 

,   2.  64;   43.  21. 

t,  diversity  (?),  49.  7. 

L  =  wes)f>  [S.  VEDA],  sacred  book, 
1.34;  5.  297;  9.  77. 

06>,    7.  38.      Qa>0Qw$iUf,    17.  I. 
4.  IO6.       GaipQicibiigfAi,    6.  170. 

ur(ysT>  7.  15,  54. 

sr,  n.  Brahma.,a.£ra/iman,3.  7  ; 
8.28,39,55;  15.26;  35.14. 

79 


,  "•  Is    vtoANA],  affliction. 

. 

****,  «.  a  king:  g)«^)*^  a«»» 
^«r«r,   1.6;  41.  8.     [Properly 
Va/oj^fir,  from  (?»c/.     S.  VE.] 
/«t/,».  abambu,  11.  38. 

•«,  bambu-like,  42.  18. 


I.  n.  perspiration: 


<y>'*\<ss>\G~t,  6.  227. 

II.  v.  [§  64],  stand  in  awe,  6.  30. 

III.  n.  root  :  Qf«3u>t  QpgiQ. 

^•3^  =  06  rooted,  6.  10. 
C-M*,  extirpate,  24.  7,  9.    [Coop.  81.  n.J 
[See  *<5,  J^rf,  u»»^.    In  K.  Kh.  MM  QJ^J. 
Nig.  C«/  <7<*u  o/Cw  Cw*«4.] 

<?«/«>,».  a  javelin,  6.36,4-  .'.56; 

16.  6;  35.  9545.34;  47.  ii.   Comp. 

,  a  Qaiva  shrine,  2.  29. 
n.  :  (juwear,  9.  1  1  . 


I.  n.  [S.  VELA],  sea,  6.  182. 

II.  n.  work,  4.  29. 


I.  v.  [§  70],  marry;  offer  in  sacrifice; 

desire:  SGsuil.i-.nGar  12  «;o  II. 
*  »  •  *••  jw»  j  *  * 

Q®jL-\t—t  5.  8 1. 

QSUL-<ZB>&)  6.  161;  35.  5;  45.  17. 

II.  Cupid:  u)6oru>0eorf  5.  73, 157. 
(?a/6wr®u>,  imp.  v.t  5.  292 ;      I 

(?.«4ri_r,  33.3,20;   46.5. 

QeuenrG),  v.  desire,  ask  for,  5.  46,  285; 

32.13,16;  33.  2 1-24,  &c.;  34.25, 

26;  39.  9-12. 

?a/tpu>,  ;/.  elephant :  *fl,  &&,  6.  95. 
GWor|ffl9= £u/r«ti),  sacrifice,  5. 13 ;  8.  85 ; 

9.77;  14.13,21,28,48. 
*6iljp]t ».  other,  33.  1 9.  Comp.  uxjp. 

3~f<:»£i,  2.  23 ;  4.  45. 

Iv^tir,  incomparable,  6.  362.    C«p_'Lrfl,  d.  4*. 
O»«0«»5«i,  apart,  7.  27. 

^eueofi&i,  n.   the  spring-tide:    **M 
5.  73,  I57- 


63)  OJ' 6!T6UJIT<&($I1JIX). 


I.  v.  [§  64],  place ;  impart ;  cause, 
3.  21,  23,  26;  5.  256,  321,  392 ;  9.  i. 

<as)euff&—GS)<su£gj,  create,  5.382;  13.  i; 
33.  30;  35.  15. 

Cause,  5.  379;  13.  25,  26. 

Used  for  «J  in  forming  causals,  5.  379. 


Store  up,  10.  21. 

(sosa/l/JL/,  «.  a  hoarded  treasure,  3.  106; 
4.  121 ;  6.  155;  11.74;  26.i. 

aoa/tiu**-,  'He  Who  is  a  treasure,'  5.  392. 
a»«/tiLSi_io,  resting-place,  30.  n. 

II.  n.  the   earth:    s»Q/aJu>,  sroa/ujau), 
1.8i;  5.380,392;  0.33;  47.35. 
u),  n.  [S.],  zeal,  6.  title. 


80 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


Aditi,  p.  175. 

Agamas,  pp.  i,  8. 

Agaval  metre,  p.  Ixxxix. 

Agni,  Hymn  14.  19;  pp.  Ixiv,  175. 

A-kalar,  p.  xlvi ;    '  those  freed  from  diversities/ 

p. Ixxx. 

Al  (<&&,  <$«wtA),  fig-tree,  Hymn  12.  77. 
Ambrosia,  p.  162. 
Ammanai,  pp.  117-127. 
Anavam,  pp.  xlv,  Ixxx ;  NOTE  XV. 
Anthathi,  or  'Anaphoretic  verse,'  pp.  44,  85. 
tree  (BSdhi),  p.  Ixviii. 
=  Qivan,  p.  37. 
Aristotle,  p.  221. 

Aral  (jy<y*),  grace,  p.  xlviii ;  Hymn  29. 
Aruna9alam,  legend,  pp.  103, 117,  152, 198,  244; 

•Hymn  4.  i-io. 
Ariir,  pp.  203,  302. 
Arya,  p.  xx. 
Asuras,  pp.  165,  175. 
Athi-9eshan,  p.  Ixv. 
Atom,  NOTE  XV ;    pp.  Ixxxvi  («sy®r),  Ixxxvii, 

18. 

Attuva,  p.  xlvi. 
Augustine,  St.,  pp.  xx,  li,  Ixvi. 
Avan§9i,  p.  350. 

Barth,  Dr.,  p.  Ixix. 

Bhagavad-Glta,  pp.  xxxvi,  xlvii,  Ixvii,  Ixxxiv. 

Bhairavan,  pp.  95,  137,  177  (Vira-bhadra,  Vai- 

ravan),  xxxviii. 

Bhakti  (u^),  NOTE  VIII;  p.  278. 
Bhaskara,  p.  xliii. 
Bhavan,  p.  47. 
Bhttvan,  p.  47. 
Bodhi,  tree,  p.  167. 
Bond  (urfiH),  NOTE  XV. 
Brahma,  pp.  46,  175,  177,  194. 
Brihaspati,  p.  33. 
Buddhism, p. xxx ;  NOTE IX;  Hymn  12;  pp.254, 

351- 

81 


Caiva    teachings    contrasted    with 

p.  xxxiii;  NOTE  IX  ;  p.  |j 
Ca-kajar,  'those  still  involved  in,'  pp.  *M,  UH. 
Cami-nathaiyar,  Ve.,  of  Kombak&uua,  p.  l"f< 
Cande9uvara  Nayanir,  p.  185. 
fankara,  p.  177. 

Achirya,  p.  IXXT. 

Qanthi,  p.  xlvii. 

Qaral-song,  pp.  159-167. 

Qarithai,  p.  52. 

Qatarudriya,  p.  17. 

gATTi  (Qakti),  NOTE  XIII;  pp.  17,  ioj. 

Qatti-nibatham,  NoTEV;  p.  xlvi. 

Catullus,  p.  341. 

Causes, — first,  material,  instrumental,  p.  lx»L 

C.  era  land  (Pope's  Nd/at/i,  p.  414). 

Chaitanya,  p.  Ixvii. 

Charles,  Dr.,  pp.  Ixi,  IXCT. 

Charvaka,  pp.  xlii,  Ixxxiii. 

Cilapp-athigaram,  NOTE  IX;  pp.  Ixxii,  Uurii 

(jithambaram,  NOTE  VIl ;  pp.  xxx,  Ixi. 

givan,  as  pictured,  NOTE  X ;  pp.  xxi,  Ixxii,  i^> 

is  red,  p.  89. 

the  beautiful,  p.  xxvii. 

wears  a  tiger's  skin,  Hymn  6.  »8 ;  NOTE  VIL 

his  throat  is  black,  p.  177. 

has  a  bull  for  banner  and  vtki*l<,  Hymn  19. 

39?  P-1??- 

destroyed  the  three  towns,  pp.  175, 158. 

as Bhairava,  Hymn  6. 118,119;  PP95.  «77- 

'Ways  of  Old,'  Hymn  1,  pp. 

five  operations,   Hymn  1.  41;    Sort  I; 

pp.  17,  19. 

renowned  acts,  Hymn  2,  pp.  8-16. 

dance,  pp.  16, 125,  352;  NOTK  I;  p.  bnri. 

in  Madura,  Hymn  86 ;  p.  junrii. 

as  imagined  in  the  sooth,  p.  17. 

a  bowman,  pp.  49,  175.  158. 

a  fisherman,  pp.  118,  342. 

as  Ekamban,  p.  130, 

in  Iriir  as 'Lord  of  the  anthill,'  p.  119. 

*G 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


C,ivan,  called  by  names  apparently  disparaging, 

pp.  xxxvii,  159,  176. 

his  insignia,  Hymn  19. 

a  woodman,  p.  342. 

garland,  p.  206. 

as  a  mendicant,  pp.  Ixii,  140,  156, 160,  166. 

C  iva-Hana-bodham,   pp.  xxii,  xciv  ;    NOTE  III ; 

PP-  219.  344- 

(^iva-Piragafam,  NOTE  III ;  p.  xciv. 
Cloud  (allegory),  pp.  22,  114. 
C.  okka-Nayagar,  pp.  xxvii,  xxxii. 
Colours,  their  mystic  meaning,  p.  5. 
Compass,  points  of;  p.  208. 
Coppleston,  Bishop  of  Colombo,  p.  Ixx. 
(Jora   land,   pp.   xxxviii,    203   (Pope's   Nalaji, 

p.  414). 
Crystal,  pp.  xlvi,  Hi,  Iv. 

Dadici,  p.  176. 

Daityas,  p.  175. 

Dakshan,  pp.  159,  173,  175,  179. 

Dance (asamysticterm),NoTEVII;  pp.  xxxviii,  xl. 

Dante,  pp.  xxxii,  Ixxxiii. 

Davids,  Prof.  Rhys,  p.  Ixx. 

Death  slain,  pp.  63,  258.    See  Yaman. 

Deeds,  good  and  evil,  pp.  xlix,  lii,  2,  5,  iS,  47, 

273.     See  Karmma. 
Demiurge,  pp.  17,46. 
Desire  for  grace,  pp.  235,  375. 
Devaram,  p.  203. 

Devotee,  the  '  lowly,'  or  'little,'  NOTK  I. 
Durga,  or  Kaji,  pp.  Ixiv,  104,  175. 

Eagle-mount,  Hymn  80,  p.  260. 
Elements,  five,  p.  5. 
Emancipation,  NOTE  III.     See  Mutti. 
Embodiment,  NOTE  VI;  pp.  3,  31,  254. 
Epichoriambic  metre,  pp.  Ixxxviii,  48,  85. 
Eternal  (<i  partc  ante)  entities,  p.  li.' 
Euhemerism,  p.  163. 
Evolution,  NOTE  XIV;  p.  17. 

Ficus  religiosa,  p.  Ixviii  (Ara9u,  Bodhi). 
'Five  letters,'  NOTE  II ;  pp.  xix,  xxxix,  i. 
Flock  (of  souls),  see  Pa9u. 
Flowers,  p.  46. 
'  Forsake  me  not,'  p.  85.         . 
Frankfurter's  Handbook  of  Pali,  p.  231. 
4  Fruit  of  Divine  Grace,'  NOTES  II,  IV,  VI,  XII, 
XV ;  pp.  xxxix,  xliv,  xciii. 

Ganges  (Ganga)  on  Civan's  head,  p.  70;  Hymns 

5.  256  (note);  6.  102. 

Garuda,  the  kite,  the  bird  of  Vishnu,  p.  235. 
Gayatri,  p.  175. 
Gods,  their  number,  p.  337. 
Gold  dust,  Hymn  9. 
Golden  Porch  or  Hall,  pp.  xxx,  xxxviii. 
82 


Grace,  p.  xlviii ;  Hymn  29,  pp.  254-259. 
Grote's  History  of  Greece,  pp.  103,  163. 
Guru,  NOTE  IV;  pp.  xxi,  xliv,  17. 

Hala-hala  poison,  p.  162. 

Haran,  p.  37. 

Hell,  Hymu  5.  6,  p.  45. 

Heresy,  dread  of,  Hymn  35. 

Himalaya,  Himavat,  pp.  16,  135,  176. 

Hoisington,  p.  xlii. 

Hospitality,  p.  xxxvii  (Kurral,  81-90). 

Humming-bee,  Hymn  10,  p.  139. 

Idol-worship,  p.  xxxv. 

Incarnation,  p.  xlv. 

Indra,  pp.  45,  175,  208. 

Inge's  Bampton  Lectures,  1899,  pp.  Ixxvi,  276. 

IjCam  =  Ceylon,  p.  xxxi. 

Jaimini,  p.  Ixiii. 

Jain  system  and  writings,  pp.  xxxvi,  Ixxii,  Ixxxvii. 

JIvaga  Chintamani,  p.  Ixx  (Pope's  Ndlaji,  p.  xli); 

NOTE  IX. 
Jivan-mutti,  p.  xlvii. 

Kabali,  an  epithet  of  (Jivan  («/uraJ),  p.  171. 
Rayi  Khandam,  pp.  95,  137,  159,  175-178. 
Ka9yapa,  p.  175.    [>rfiu«r.] 
Kail§9a  (««SJw),  'C.ivan's  holy  hill,'  pp.  xxviii, 

'75- 

Kaji,  p.  104.     See  Umai,  Durga. 
Raman,  pp.  160,  256 ;  Hymn  5.  73-76. 
Ramba-Ramayanam,  p.  162. 
Kandhas,  the  five,  in  Buddhist  philosophy  (San-,. 

Skandha),  pp.  xlii,  Ixviii,  Ixxi. 
Kannappan's  legend,  p.  141. 
Kapila,  pp.  xlvii,  Ixxxiv. 
Raraikal,  legend   of  the  lady  of,  Hymn  7.  57, 

pp.  111-113. 

Karmma  (  —  deeds),  pp.  xlvii,  xlviii,  142. 
Karttikeyan,  p.  39.     [<?•/««*•,  Velan.] 
Kingsley,  C.,  pp.  xlvii,  Ivii. 
Koyil  Puranam,  pp.  33,  176;  Nun.  VII;  pp.  Ix- 

Ixvii. 

Rumania  Bhatta,  p.  Ixxv. 
A'urraf,  pp.  xxiv,  xxxvi,  Ixxvii,  Ixxix. 
Kurunthu  (®<5*sj),  pp.  xxi,  254. 
Kuyil,  pp.  198,  208  ;  Hymn  18. 

Lanka  (Ceylon),  pp.  199,  321. 
'Lily-flowers,'  song  of  the,  pp.  168-174. 
Lingam  = '  sign,'  pp.  Ixi,  Ixii,  Ixvi,  143,  152. 
Lokayattar,  NOTE  III ;  pp.  xlii,  33. 

Madhava  Acharya,  p.  xciii. 
Madura,  p.  264. 

Sthala  Puranam,  pp.  xvii,  xxxvii. 

Manual,  Nelson's,  pp.  xviii,  118. 

Mahadeva,  p.  177. 


GENERAL   INI>I  X. 


Maha-maya,  p.  254. 

'  Maidens'  Song  of  the  Dawning,'  pp.  103-116. 

Mai,  a  name  of  Vishnu  («»*»),  pp.  243,  355. 

Malam,  p.  95  ;  NOTE  XV. 

Mandodari,  p.  199. 

Manikka-Va9agar,  legend,  pp.  xvii-xxxvi. 

Mani-Megalai,  pp.  Ixxii,  Ixxxvii  ;  NOTE  IX. 

Manu,  p.  170. 

Margari  (month),  p.  103. 

Martineau's  Types  of  Ethical  Theory,  pp.  101,  221. 

Materlinck,  p.  Ixxxii. 

Maya,  pp.  xlvii,  Hi,  Ixvi. 

Meru,  mount,  pp.  95,  258. 

Metempsychosis,  Hymn  1.  26-31  ;  pp.  3,  31. 

Metrical  Introduction  to  Tiruv^agam,  p.  Ixxxviii. 

Meykandar,  pp.  xxii,  xciv. 

Mimansa,  p.  Ixiii. 

Mirage,  pp.  23,  183. 

M5ksha,  see  Mutti. 

Morning  Hymn,  p.  207. 

Mother-decad,  p.  194. 

Mrikanda,  p.  63. 

Muir,  p.  xcv,  and  passim. 

Mutti,  ®>A£>,  NOTE  III,  p.  xlii  ;  Hymn  19.  19. 


Ndladiyar,  pp.  xxiv,  xxxvi,  xlvi. 
Nalla-sami  Filial,  J.  M.,  pp.  xlii,  li. 
Na-magal,  the  goddess  of  learning,  pp.  139,  180. 

In  Ji.  Chin,  the  first  canto  bears  her  name. 
Nandi,  p.  207. 
Nandi9vara,  p.  177- 
Nannul,  p.  i. 
Naradar,  p.  176. 

Naranan,  Narayanan,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  p.  166. 
Natham,  p.  194. 
Nelli  fruit,  p.  244. 

Nelson's  Madura  Manual,  pp.  xviii,  118. 
Nestorians,  p.  Ixxv. 

Nirvana,  pp.  xlii,  xlvii,  Ixxii  ;  NOTE  III. 
Nishkala,  pp.  Ixvi,  Ixxvii. 
Novalis,  p.  Ixxxii. 

Oldenberg's  '  Buddha,'  pp.  xlii,  Ixx. 
Om,  Ongaram,  Hymn  1.  33  ;  pp.  xl,  353. 
Ovid,  pp.  203,  204. 

Pa9u,  pp.  Ixxv,  Ixxvi,  Ixxix. 
Pandi,  Hymn  36  ;  pp.  200,  203. 
Para-9atti,  NOTE  XIII. 
Parrot-song,  Hymn  19. 
Parvathi,  p.  176. 

Pathanjali  (Sans.  Patanjalf),  pp.  Ixii,  Ixvi. 
Pathi,  p.  li;  NOTE  XII;  p.  17- 
Pattanattu  Pillai,  P-  203. 
Periya  Puranam,  pp.  xciv,  in. 
Perundevanar,  p.  163. 

Perun-turrai,  p.  xx;  Hymn  29.  3,  &c.;  pp.  212 
225,  34°- 
83 


Philo,  p.  Ixxvi. 

Pleiades,  p.  39. 

Prabhakam  §y»tem  (Uttti*  Mlml**),  p.  »Uu 

Prajipati,  p.  175. 

Pralaiya-kajar,  pp.  xlvi,  Uxi. 

Prayer,  p.  254. 

Preface  (Nannul  ,  \>.  \. 

Purra-Nannuiru,  pp.  xxxv,  163. 

Quietism,  p.  276. 

Ramayanam,  pp.  160,  162.     Sec  Kamb**KioU- 

yanam. 

Ravana,  pp.  173,  177. 
Real,  unreal,  p.  Ixxxi. 
'Refuge,'  Buddhistic  formula,  p.  131. 
Release,  p.  239.    See  Mutti. 
Rishis,  p.  Ixii. 
Rudra,  pp.  Ixiv,  Ixxv,  152,  165,  175. 

1  Sacred  gold  dust,'  pp.  128-138. 

Sakala,  p.  Ixvi.    See  Qa-kajar. 

Sambandhar,  pp.  xvii,  xviii,  196. 

Sangamam,  p.  liv. 

Sahkhya  systems  (atheistic  and  theistic),  pp.  xlui. 

xlvii,  Ixvi,  Ixxxiv. 

Karika,  p.  xlvii. 

Santana  gurus,  pp.  xxxiii,  Ixxr  ;  NOTE  XI. 
SarasvatI,  pp.  xxxi,  139,  180. 
Sarva-dar9ana-sangraha,   pp.  xlii,  Ixriii, 

xcv,  33.     (Cowell  and  Gough.) 
Savitri,  p.  175. 

Self-surrender,  Hymns  5.  5-8  ;  33. 
Siddhis,  the  eight,  pp.  xliii,  Ixv. 
Souls,  pp.  Ixix,  1 8.    See  Pafu. 
Soul's  cleansing,  p.  liii. 

enlightenment,  p.  li. 

gain,  p.  Ivi. 

Southey's  '  Curse  of  Kehama,'  p.  198. 
Sports  of  Qivan,  pp.  xvii,  xxv,  xxxv: 

in  Madura,  pp.  xvii,  39,  1 18. 

Suffering,  p.  254. 
Supplication,  Hymn  82,  p.  268. 
Surya,  p.  139- 

Tambour  song,  pp.  IS2-^8- 

Tantric  system,  p.  103. 

Tanu,  an  epithet  of  Qivan,  p.  326. 

Taruvanam  (Tarnga-vanam),  pp.  Uil,  16. 

Taylor's  Oriental  MSS.,  pp.  xvii,  118. 

Temple  influences,  pp.  xxxv,  85. 

of  Cithambaram,  NOTK  VII. 

of  Kanji  (Conjeveram),  p.  130. 

'  Tenacious  Grasp,'  Hymn  81 
Theologia  Germanica,  p.  xlvii. 
'Tiger-foot,'  see  Vyaghrapida. 
Tiger  slain  by  Civan,  p.  Ixiii- 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Tillai,  pp.  Ixi,  264  ;  Hymn  81. 

Tirotham,  pp.  xli,  xlvii ;  NOTE  V. 

Tiru,  p.  xvii. 

Tiru-arul-payan,  NOTES  II,  IV,  VI,  XII,  XV ; 

p.  xciii. 

Tondai-mai.ulalam,  pp.  xcv,  141. 
Transliteration,  p.  xcvi. 
Tri-pi|aka,  p.  Ixviii. 
Tri-pura,  p.  175. 

Uma  (Umai),  pp.  Ixxxiii,  91,  159,  175,  1 77. 

Umapathi,  pp.  Ixi,  xciii. 

'  Unspeakable  Vision,'  Hymn  31. 

Unthiyar  (*J*£),  p.  175. 

Upamanyu,  Sans.  (T.  Ubamanyan),  «=  zealous : 
«.ua>«r«fl«/  »rQp«rf«(/,  a  sage  mentioned  in  tlie 
Koyil  Puranam,  NOTE  VII ;  p.  181. 

Uttara-kd?a-mangai,  Hymn  6.  u,  15;  pp.  86- 
93»  2°4,  339- 

Vaii  a  van,  Bhairavnn,  Yira-bhadra,  p.  177. 

Vanddthari,  p.  199. 

Vathavurnr  Furanam,  pp.  xui,  xviii ;  NOTE  IX  ; 

P.  i. 


Veda,  p.  175. 

Veda-giri,  p.  260. 

Vedanta  system,  pp.  xliii,  Ixvi ;  Hymn  4.  54. 

Velan,  p.  130.   Kumaran,  Subrahmanyan,  Muru- 

gan,  Karttikeyan. 
Vidangan,  epithet   of  Qivan  as  worshipped   at 

Arur,  Hymn  G.  74. 
VifSfiana-kaJar,  pp.  xlvi,  Ixxx. 
Viftftanam, '  true  wisdom,'  one  of  the  five  Buddhist 

Kandhas,  NOTK  IX. 
Vira-bhadra,  pp.  169,  177. 
Vishnu  (Mai,  «»*•),  pp.  Ixii,  30,  46,  165,  17;;, 

>?3,  335- 

—  Pnranam,  p.  163. 
Vyaghrapada,  p.  Ixi. 

Williams,  Sir  Monier,  p.  Ixx. 
\Vilson,  Prof.  H.  H.,  pp.  Ixvii,  175. 
Wonder,  decad  of,  p.  239. 

Yaman,  the  god  of  death :  «««*•,  pp.  xxiv,  63, 

•75-258. 
Yoga,  p.  Ixvi. 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


PL  Manikkavacakar 

4758  *The  TiruvmcagMB 

.9 

M266T5 
1900 


