===== Internet Archive OCR: Sacred Books of the Hindus Vol 01 - Upanishads - Isa to Mandukya with Madhwa Bhashya_djvu.txt =====



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2010 with funding from 
University of Toronto 


http://www.archive.org/details/isakenakathapranOObasu 












/S. t?2o 


THE 


SACRED BOOKS OF THE HINDUS 


P 


Translated by various Sanskrit Scholars 

i 

VOL. 1 

ISA, KENA, IvATHA, PRASNA, MUNDAKA AND MANDUKA 

UPAN1SADS 



from the panini 


PUBLISHED BY 

SUDHINDRANATHA VASU 

'FICE, BHUVANESWARi aSRAMA, BAHADURGANG 


Bllababab 

Printed by Panch Kory Mittra at the Indian Press 


1911 









i Ji t 1 • A j 

































INTRODUCTION. 


The Upanisads, when first presented to the scholars of the West, 
through tire Latin translations of M. Anquetil Dnperron, evoked an 
amount of enthusiasm perhaps second to none. But the aspect of the 
Upanisads that the West learnt, was the Philosophical side of them—the 
side whose ablest exponent' in India was the great Sahkaracharya. 
The religious and devotional aspects of these Revelations were never 
brought into prominence before the- Western scholars, and many forget 
that they have any such side. The great Vaisnava teachers like Rama¬ 
nuja and Ananda Tirtha (Madliva) were exponents of the religious and 
devotional sides of these heirlooms of humanity. The masses of India are 
saturated with these Upanisad teachings in that aspect only. 

There are scarcely however any translations of these Upanisads in 
English in this light. Therefore we need not make any apology in present¬ 
ing to the readers of the Sacred Books of the Hindus with a translation of 
these books from the religious and devotional points of view, according to 
the school of Madliva Acharya. Our attempt covers a different field alto¬ 
gether—a field not much known to the public either in the East or the West, 

Madliva was the great teacher of the dualistic Vedanta. He was 
born, according to Mr. Krishna Swami Iyer, in 1199 A.D., but according 
to Mr. Krishna Sastry, 123S A.D.* His death is shrouded in mystery. 
He is said to have been touring in his last years (that is, towards 
the close of the 13th or beginning of the 14th century) in the Sub- 
Himalavan regions from which he never returned. During the Middle 
Ages, Sanskrit learning took shelter in Southern India—all the great 
Reformers and Founders of the different schools of thought, generally hailed 
from the South, fsafikara, Ramanuja, Madliva, Sayana, Ac., were all South¬ 
ern Brahmins. Madhvacharya appears to have received a liberal education. 
In those days a knowledge of Persian was considered to be a sine qua 
non of an elightened scholar. It is surmised that Madliva knew Persian 
and held discussions in that language. The horizon of view of Madliva 
was consecpiently wider than that of purely Sanskrit scholars. 

The Upanisads were employed by Sahkara as a weapon to fight the 
Buddhists. He, therefore, naturally ignored or kept in the background 
the doctrines of faith and devotion and prominently laid stress on 
those texts which afforded an answer to the rationalistic atheism or 
agnosticim of the heterodox sects passing under the name of Buddhism, 

* Sri Madliva and Madhvaism by C. X. Krishna Swami ’Aiyer, M.A., p. to 







( ii ) 


Jainism, &e. When Brahmanism was again established in India—the time 
came to revive these peculiar dectrines — essential features of every devo¬ 
tional religion. Madhva had not, therefore, far to go for them. The 
doctrine of Monotheism is in the Vedas, but later innovations had thrown 
it into the background. 

All religions, if they are religions and not merely man-made medley 
of morality, ethics, philosophy and rhapsody—are from God ; as all poetry 
is from the Higher Self, if it is not a mere versification All religions, 
.j 1 therefore, must have all the elements of truth, more or less well defined. 
Some religions, in the course of their development, lay more stress on one 
aspect or element of Truth, and put the others in the background, while 
other religions bring forward some other element. Thus arise all their 
differenc s. But as all living creatures— vegetables or animals—have one 
protoplasm for their bodies—so with all religions. They have one basic 
body of Truth called the Veda in India. 

It gives me great pleasure to acknowledge here the help 1 have 
received from the translations of Raja Ram Mohan Roy, Prof. Maxmuller, 
and Dr. Roer. 

^ Among the Upanhads the JsA vasya stands first. Jt is perhaps the 
oldest of them all. It forms a part of the Mantra portion of the Veda 
itself, in fact it is the fortieth chapter of the White Yajur Veda, while 
other Upanisads are generally portions of the Brnhmnnns. v If the Mantra 
portions are older than the Brfihmanas, and they must be so, as the text is 
always older than the commentary, tlien there can be no doubt that this 
Upanbad is older than the Bj ihadaranyaka which, according to some, is the 
oldest of all. Many Mantras of this Upanisad are to be found in the 
Bi ihadaranyaka. Thus the traditional order of the Upanisads, with the 
hr.vasya as the first, has an historical foundation. 

This J^avfisya is perhaps the most mystical of all. As Madhva points 
* out, it contains the great ineffable name of God, i. t\, “ 1 AM THAT 1 

I AM’ 1 :—“ SOllAM xVSMI.” In the Zoroastrian Faith also this is one of 
I the most secret names of the Lord, as is shown in the following extract 
from Hormuzd Yasht : — 

Then spake Zaratlmstra : Tell me then, 0 Pure Ahuramazda, the 
name which is thy greatest, best, fairest and which is the most efficacious 
for prayer : 

Thus answered Almramazda: My first name is Ahini —I Am— 
* o & 0 an( ] my twentieth is Ahini yad Ahmi Mazdao — I nin that Tam. 

(Avesta, XVII, 4 and G.) 







( iii 


This too was also the most secret name of God among the Jews, as 
we learn from the Old Testament, Exodus, Chapter III, verses 13 and 14. 

“ And Uoses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the Children 
of Israel, and shall sa} r unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me 
unto you ; and they shall say to me, what is his name ? what shall I say 
unto them ? 

“ And Go l said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said 
Thus shalt thou say unto the Children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto 
you.” 

Thus among the Israel also both these names were well-known 
—God is called 44 1 AM ” or Ahmi of the Parsis, and Asmi of Madliva ; 
and also “ I AM THAT I AM,” the same, word for word, as “ Ahmi yad 
Ahmi ” of the Parsis, and So’ham Asmi of Madhva. 

Another point which .Madhva clearly brings out is the indwelling 
of the Lord in Asu. Now Asu is a word derived from y/as 4 to be,’ 4 to 
breathe.’ Asu means 4 life,’ 4 breath,’ or Prana. It is the First Begotten 
of God, the Spirit. The God dwelling in Asu is called Asura (or Ahura 
of the Parsis)—the Active Saguna Brahman. This Asu or Prana is the 
Christ-principle of the Gnostics. These strange coincidences cannot all 
be accidental. They prove that all prophets—whether Zarathustra or 
Moses or Madhva—were messengers of the Great White Lodge : and so 
naturally taught the same doctrine. In fact, Dr. Speigel is of opinion 
that the word Ahura (the principal name of the deity in the Zendavesta) 
is identical in meaning with the word Jehova. Ahura literally would 
mean the Lord of Ahu or Life or existence. The word 44 ra ” means 
44 who takes delight in.” it is Ahu or Asu or Christ in whom the Lord 
takes delight, and through whom and by indwelling in whom the whole 
universe is created. Aim or Asu is also the name of God, and Asura 
would mean 44 The living delight.’’ 

Another keynote struck by Madhva is his interpretation of the 
triplet verses 9—11. He enunciates the great altruistic doctrine, so glori¬ 
ously illustrated in the l T >es of all great Teachers, that a great responsi¬ 
bility rests with him who , wvs. He is bound to teach others in order 
to dispel the ignorance of thu Hd : otherwise his lot is even worse 
than those of the ignorant. 








isa vasya upanisad 


Peace chant. 

* i qifcr II 

3 s SUfon sirfou ?nf%; || 

Purnam, full. =sr^r Adas, that, the above. tprr* Purnam, full, 
idam, this, the manifest. ^qrrq; Purnat, from the full. Purnam, 

I the full, Udachyate, proceeds, <£in^q POrnasya, from the full, <£*rrq 

PQrnam, full, ^1^13 Adaya, subtracting, <j*§q Purnam, full, it ? Eva, even. 

Avasisyate, remains behind. 

Om. That is Full, this is full, from that Full, this full emanates. 
Taking away this full from that Full, the Full still remains behind, Om. 
Peace, Peace, Peace. 

| MADHYA’S SALUTATION. 

Salutation to Hari, the Lord of all Sacrifices, who is full of bliss, whose body is of 
wisdom, and who is eternal, and the upholder of this universe which consists of the eter¬ 
nals and non-eternals. 

Note.—Vis mi is called the Sacrifice also, because He is the enjoyer of all Sacrifices. / 
Sacrifice or Yajiia is another name of the Lord. Beings whose happiness is imperfect^ 
are running after external objects in order to complete their happiness. Surely Hari is 
not the enjoyer of sacrifices in this sense, for His happiness or bliss is perfect and full. 
His enjoyment, therefore, is a mere ‘ lila ’ or sport, in order to show condescension to His 
devotees by accepting their offerings. Hari possesses infinite bliss, because He is the 
upholder of the universe. The eternals are the Jivas or souls, The non-eternals are the 
bodies and other material objects, which change their forms. If the Lord be absolutely 
without a body, then He cannot uphold the world ; if He has a body then He would be 
subject to death and decay. To answer this dilemma the verse uses the words “ whose 
body is of wisdom ” and “ who is eternal.” The body of the Lord consists of jnana matter, 
and is eternal. 

Salutation to the Guru, and to Hari from whom alone comes incessantly the illumi¬ 
nation and increase of the knowledge of Brahma, T.lndra and of other devas, and even 
of Sri. 

Note.—It is customary to salute the Guru .after saluting the Jsta devata : Madhva 
follows this custom by bowing to his Guru also ; but that Guru is Hari Himself. In the 
case of Brahma and other devas, there takes place an acquisition of knowledge. In 
the case of Sri there is never a want of knowledge in her, and so she is mentioned 
separately. Though Sri, called also Kama, is eternally free and possesses knowledge, 
yet that knowledge is under the Lord. Hari is, therefore, the sole and the only Guru, 
Others are Gurus by His command and direction. 





2 


ISAVASYA-UPANISAD. 


I 


MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

Manu called Svayambhava praised the Lord Vi sun when He appeared as Yajiia, the 
son of Akuti, with the verses of this Upanisad. 


[.Vote.—There is an ancient warning that no one should perforin a sacrifice for himself 
or for others, study himself or teach others, unless he knows the four-fold laws regarding 
every mantra. These are (1) the devata of the mantra, (*2) the musical note of the hymn, 
(3) its seer or Risi and (4) its meaning. The meaning and the metre of a mantra can be 
found by reading the mantra itself. The other two require to be taught. This is done 
here. The Risi is Svayambhava Manu and devata is that incarnation of Visiiu called f 
Yajiia, the son of Akuti. But how do you know this? Madhva answers it by quoting 
Brahmamla Purana/J 

Thus we learn from the Brahmainla Parana. “Svayambhava Manu praised with 
collected mind Visnu who had incarnated as his daughter’s son, and was named Yajna, 
by means of these verses of the I-uivasya Upanisad, 

“ The ferocious Raksasas, who had coiue to devour him, as soon as they heard the 
chant of these mantras, could not bear (the strong vibrations of these) and so they left 
him unmolested, and thus he was delivered by Yajna from them. These Raksasas, who 
could not otherwise be destroyed, were killed by Yajiia. 

“ The Lord Hara had given two boons to these Raksasas, by which they had themselves 
become incapable of being slain; and they could kill with impunity everybody else. 
But Rari is Lord of all, and so He transcended fciva also, for who is higher than he ? ” 

In the Bhagavata Parana also this is the meaning given to this Upanisad. (See 
Bhagavata Parana, V1TT Skandha, I Adhyaya, &c.) 

Note.—hi the Bhagavata Parana, Book VIII, Chapter I, Svayambhava praises Hari who 
had incarnated in his family as his daughter’s son. As ho uses the first of these verses to 

praise Hari, it is clear that he must have been the seer of these verses; and as Hari in 

His incarnation as Yajna is the person addressed in that Parana, He is fitly called 
the dovata of this Upanisad. Madhva always quotes some Puranic authority for his 
apparently strange* interpretations. It is clear from those apt quotations, that the school 

of thought which he represents existed long before him. These Bhagavatas had already 
propounded a system of interpretation of their own. Madhva, by his genius, gave an 
impetus to it, which still reverberates throughout India, wherever the religion of the 
Heart has nourished, and is not overpowered by the religion of the Head. 

Manira i. 


^ gsfror m Td: W4 n % n 

Isa, (fnw ?TRK5=|i(rTff^) by the Lord, of the Lord. Vasyam, 

worthy of being dwelt in, entered. Idam, this. 

Sarvam, all. Yat-kincha, whatsoever. Jagatyam. (n^srf) 

in tke Prakriti. 3 HTnr Jagat, moves, becomes modified or undergoes change. 
^Teiia (f^ttr) by that, (Lord). Tyaktena f%?PT) renounced, 

allotted, given, e., whatever comes providentially. gsiftzR: Bhunjithali (hht 
ajqr:) enjoy thou. «rr M<1, do not. q-j: Gridhah (beg, covet. 
Kasya from any. m* Svit (arfr) even, verily, Dhanatn, wealth. 









ISA VASYA-UPAKISAD. 


3 


1. All this whatsoever that moves in Prakriti (does so because 
it) is indwelt by the Lord. Enjoy thou what lie hath allotted to thee, 
and do not beg from any (though he be a king), lor wealth. 

MADHVA'S COMMENTARY. 

The words isa vasyam mean “worthy or capable of being dwell in by the Lord.’ ‘Ja- 
gatyam,’ ‘ in the prakriti.' * Tena * means 4 by Him, the Lord.’ ‘Tvaktena/ given. Enjoy 
thou what is given by him. 

A lot?. —All motion that we see in nature is caused by the Lord, by His entering into 
and taking up his residence in each atom of Prakriti. The Prakriti is under the Lord ; 
and all this motion that we see in matter is of the Lord, because He lias permeated it. He, 
therefore, is the only Free Agent. Be ye content with what the Lord has given you. Since 
none but the Lord is truly Free, so no being, howsoever high, can give anything to any 
one. .Therefore, do not go soliciting for wealth to the rich—ask the Lord alone. 

Thus says the Brahma nil a P nr an a “ Because Prakriti is incapable of motion of her¬ 
self, therefore, the firnti says ‘ the world is indwelt by the Lord who causes all its motion/ 
Since Yisnu has entered into Prakriti, in order to cause her evolution (pravritti), there¬ 
fore He is called the Lord of Prakriti. Since the evolution is under His control, every 
thing is said to belong to Him. Enjoy thou that only which Helms given ; and do not beg 
from others. ” 

Note. —This quotation from the Brahmamla Purana is Madhva’s authority for the 
interpretation that he has given. 

Mantra. 2. 

3vRTT% HHT: I 

oyr II R II 

Kurvan, doing (without desire of fru't.) q^ Eva, even, Iha, 
here (while born as a human being.) Karmani, doings, works, Agnihotra, 

&c Jijiviset, let him desiie to live, Satam, a hundred, the fuil 

period, rjr-' Samah, years, qqq Evam, thus, doing works, cqfa Tvayi, for thee. 
U Na, not. Anyatha, any other, the sin of not doing Karma. fR: 11 all, 

from this. Asti, is. r Na, not. Karma (qp?) sin, Karma. 

Lipyate, binds, stains, Nare, in the man. 

2. Performing works even here, let a man live his allotted hundred 
years; thus is it right for thee, not otherwise than this ; karma will not 
bind that man. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

If Karma is not performed, then the man doth incur sin : for says Narada : “If a man 
is ignorant and does not worship the Lord Krisna, then he incurs sin ; but if he is a Jnanin 
and fails in this, verily the bliss of his self-realisation is diminished thereby. Thus the 
Jnanin who is free from the taint of Karma, becomes tainted by his omission : therefore 
let all work always. ” 

Note. —The ignorant Jivas incur actual sin by omitting to worship the Lord. The 
Mukta Jivas suffer diminution of heavenly bliss if they omit (which is almost an impossi¬ 
ble contingency) to worship the Lord. Thus the first verse teaches Yairagya or indiffer¬ 
ence to all worldly objects ; by realising that the Lord is the sole and only motive power 








4 


ISA V A 8 YA-UPAXIS AD. 


of the whole universe, that a man gets all that he deserves and should not hanker for 
other’s wealth. The second verso teaches that not only he must possess Yairagya, but per¬ 
form action as well. Here also the Naradiya is the authority for Madhva’s interpretation. 

Mantra 3 

^TT ?T qTT^T rWHTfrm i 

cTT^ ^ 3RT: II \ II 

Asuryali, full of great sorrow, belonging to the asuras, miserable, 
terrible, fit only for asuric natures. NAma, named, certainly. % Te, those, 
ofr^r: Lokak, worlds, births. Andhena, by blinding, 

deep. rfTOr Tamasa, by darkness. Avrit&h, covered, pervaded. rTP^ 

Tan, them, refers to worlds. ^ Te, they, also refers to worlds. The word 
“ye Sr” is understood. % mw. rTF^Pretya, dying. Abhi- 

gachchhanti, go down to, constantly revisit, g Yc, who, ^ Ke, those. ^ Cba, 
and. Atma-hanah, self-killing; worshiping Visnu wrongly or not 

worshipping Him at all. Atma = Visnu, killers of Visnu are those who re¬ 
nounce the worship of the Lord and go after false gods, srt: Janal.i, men, 
creatures subject to continual birth and death. 

3. Those worlds called asurya are covered with blinding darkness: 
dying, to those worlds they go, who kill the Self 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word ‘ asuryali ’ means ‘ that where the asuras go ’ and “ where there is absence 
of good (sn) enjoyment (ra).” 

Note— It does not mean the land where t lie sun (surya) docs not shine. The autho¬ 
rity for giving this interpretation to the word asuryali is (he Bhagavata Purana again, 
which Madhva next quotes. 

Por says the Bhagavata Purana “ O ! the killers of t he Atman are those who worship by 
erroneous methods. They are called asuras or miserable for they do not (=sr) enjoy happi¬ 
ness ( S u g+l ra) and suffer great pains.” The Yamana Purana thus explains this 
Mantra:— “These Lokas arccalle.l asuryali, first because they are full of intense misery, 
secondly because they are the fit abode of asuras or materialists. To such Lokas they 1 
go who have turned their face away from the Lord. 

By the word ^ ^ “ whosoever ” a general rule is declared. xYll who are opposed 
to Hari goto darkness, not that some go there, and some do not. As says a text ; “ All go 
to darkness who are opposed to Hari—this is the law.” 

Mantra 4. 

wAr 3T#fr i 

srrcrfpffr ^rr% u 2 u 

Anejat, untrembling, »>., fearless, unagitated, tr^q. Ekam, one because 
supreme : and not ’'■ecanse there is no other object than He. qqtj: Manasah, than 
mind, spfiq: Javiyal.i, swifter. q Nn, not. trqq Enat, it, the Supreme Brahman. 

Devah, the shining ones, like Brahma and other devas ^rrcrl^q. Apnu- 
van, obtain, fully comprehend. POrvam, from before (the beginning of 













ISA VASYA-UPAKISAD . 


5 


• time), beginningless, eternal, Arsat, knowing. He knows all from before. 

^ Tat, that Brahman, ^rT Dhavatah, running. Any an, these others. 

Atyeti, goes beyond, surpasses. f?n??T l isthar, staying at one place, 
resting, sitting. rrfWi Tasinin, in that atrnan or Hari. sjcp Apah, lit that 
which protects from all side, namely, karmas, FtTrlPo^r Matarisva, the principal 
Vayu, or spirit, the mover in space, SQtratma, the prana, the Matut. 

Dadhati, offers as puja, supports, allots for, establishes. The karmas done by 
all beings are stored up in Him, by the Spirit, the great Saviour, called Christ 
in the west and the Thread-soul or Vayu here, 

4. He is fearless, supreme, and swifter than the mind. The Devas 
even know Him not fully but He knows them all, as He is the eternal. 
He staying in one place surpasses them all, though they be running. In 
Him, the Mataris'vaii offers up all karmas of all creatures. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

4 Anejat ’ means not trembling, because He is fearless, and so also, He is ekamor one, 
because He is Supreme. ‘ The devas even cannot reach Him ’ means that they even are 
incapable of understanding Him fully and completely. By His very nature He knows 
everything, from before the beginning of time. And because His powers are inconceivable, 
and He is All-pervading, therefore, though others be running He surpasses them. And 
Marut plaees all karmas in Him. Beeause all activities proceed from prana or Marut, 
I therefore, let men resign all their actions into the Lord. For says the Brahma pda Purana: 

Since all actions depend upon Spirit (Prana) let one resign all actions to Hari.” 

The word arsat comes from the root 1 to know.’ 

Note .—There is no such root as gjq- in the Dkatupatha, but in the Maha Bhashya 
it is said, there is such a root. 

Note .—This verse describes the nature of the Lord or the Atman. A wrong know¬ 
ledge of this atrnan leads to darkness, as has been taught in the last mantra. The Atman 
is fearless and supreme. He is swifter than the mind. The Devas even know Him not 
fully : but He knows them all from eternitj". Though all may be straining their utmost 
to catek Him and be running after Him, yet He by merely staying in one place is beyond 
their reaeh. The great Mediator, Matari svan, the Son of the Mother-space, offers to Him 
all the actions of creatures. When a person does an act with perfect humility, believing 
that the true agent is Hari and not he, that all acts are sacred and must be performed 
with the idea of their being sacred, and with full love and devotion towards God, such 
acts become holy and are carried by Vayu to the Lord. Since the man has renouneed all 
fruits of aetion and does all act for the Lord, they remain in Him. This of course refers to 
karmas of good men. 

Mantra 5. 

cri^TTcT agfcrifc I 

^tuct: 11 * 11 

Tat, from him, the word ‘ tad * is an indeclinable here = tasmat. 

Ejati, tremble in awe. c^Tat, He Himself, n Na, not. Ejati, trembles, 

fears. ^ Tat, He. Because all-pervading, He is. Dure, far off'. ^ Tadu, 














6 ISA VA&YA-U PARIS AD. 

- -- — I 

so also. Antike, near. fr far, He. ^*1 Antar, within, Asya, of 

this, Sarvasya, of all. ?R 3 1'at u sarvasya, that very of all. 

Asya, of this. 3[gjrp Balnatah, outside. 

5. All tremble from fear of Him, but He is afraid of none; (anti since 
He is All-pervading) He is far off as tvell as near, He is without as well 
as within.—5. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The words ‘ tad ejat * mean that “ the others tremble from fear of him.” But He 
Himself is afraid of none and so does not tremble. As we find in the Tattva Samhita:— 
“All even are afraid of Him, but Hari is afraid of no one. As He is all-pervading. He is 
said to be far off as well as near : to be outside of all as well as inside of all.” 

Note.— The words “tad ejat” do not mean either that Brahman is agitated or active 
Himself ; or that He is afraid. In fact the word ‘ tail ’ is an indeclinable here, and means 
‘from him ’ or ‘ on account of him.’ The indeclinable has the force of the ablative case. 
The word ‘anyat, ’ “ others” is understood here and is the agent to the verb “ejat.” This 
verse caunot be consistently explained on the theory that Brahman is actionless. 

Mantra 6 . 

^ i I 

rTcTT ?T II II 

q. Yah, who. g Tu, but, and. Sarvani, all. *jrR BhQtani, beings, 

creatures, from avyakta downwards, those having consciousness, and those that 
have not. =5HRR Atmani, in the Supreme Self, ir Eva, only, even. ^^FRRR 
AnGpasyati, beholds, sees, experiences, knows without any doubt. 
^^3 Sarvabhutesu, in all beings. Cha, and. ^RRq; Atmdnam, God, who 
rules by being their innermost self, fr: Tatal.i, therefore, by reason of this rea¬ 
lisation. ?T Na, not. Vijugupsate, wish.es to guard and save himself. 

0. He who sees all beings in the Supreme Self (knowing that Brah¬ 
man is the support of them all), and sees the Supreme Self in all beings 
(as the Ruler and controller from within of them all) becomes fearless and 

is not anxious about saving his self.— 6. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

As says the Sruti of the Sankarayanas:—“ lie who sees the Supremo Self as pervading 
all, and everything in the Supreme Self (lops not wish to guard himself, because ho ha* 
no fear from any one. Being fearless he is never anxious about preserving his little self.” 

Note. —The last mantra showed (hat Lord is the greal support of all beings as He is 
inside of them all, and pervades all. The result of the realisation of this knowledge is 
mentioned in the present verso. The verse cannot apply to the Jiva, but to Ihe Supreme] 
The ambiguity, if any, of tlio mantra is cleared up by another mantra of the 'Sankarayanag 
which uses the word Parama Atman and so leaves no doubt that it refers to the Supremo 
Self and not to the Jiva self. It also shows that the Jiva is no( identical with the Lord, 
for the Atman is shown here in the locative case, and is t lie receptiele of all. The contents 
and the container are always different. He who realises that ihe Lord is the support of 
all and the Inner Ruler of all, becomes fearless, for he knows that none has any real 
power, all their power belongs to the Lord. 








t&AVARFA-l 1‘AKISA 1). 


| Mantra 7. 

srRFHWTmr wri • 1 

rTW 3TT HTf: ^ q^JT^y^T; II V3 11 

Yasmin, in whom, t.e ., in the Supreme Self, SarvAni, all. 

Srrrft BhQtai. beings (exist) the word is understood here. He is their 

support. Atma, the Supreme Self, Eva, even, indeed. AbhQt, 

was, existed, or exists inside those beings also,* that the Supreme God is 
the controller of all beings by dwelling within them. f^TR^T- Vijanatah, who 
understands (by differentiating the Jiva from Jsvara) understanding. rR' Tatra, 
in those beings. 37 : kab> what. Mohah, delusion. Kali, what, scrr^L 

Sokah grief. Ekatvani, unity, the indissoluble and eternal relation 

between God and Jivas, as between attribute and substance, life and form. 

I he unity of the Lord in all creatures and of all beings in one Lord. 3 T 3 <?S 3 rT 
Anuapasyatah, experiencing, seeing, realising. 

7. “ That Supreme Self in whom all beings exist, lias existed indeed 

within all beings (from eternity.) ”—How can lie who knows this have 
delusion or sorrow? For he realises the unity ; (by which the Supreme 
is in all, and all in Him.) 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

“ That Supreme Self, in whom are all creatures, is indeed that same Supreme Self, who 
exists, and ha existed within all creatures too (from eternity).” This is the Truth. He 
,who knows this truth, and sees the Supreme Self thus residing in all creatures as a unity, 
can have no delusion. That Atman in whom are all creatures, is all-pervading and is 
inside of all beings. He who thus sees Yisnu everywhere, has no delusion nor sorrow*, 
for he has known the truth, 

Note— The life-giving truth is this that in the supreme Lord exist all beings, and He 
dwells in them all from eternity. He who has realised this truth and know’s that the 
Lord is still a unity, existing in all and all existing in Him, transcends all sorrow' 
I and delusion. Both the words vijanatah and anupasyatah have the same meaning, viz., 
vijanatah “Of him who know’s.” That Supreme Self in whom stay all the beings, is 
the same Supreme Self who already was in those beings. As the support of all 
beings He exists in all bei ags from eternity. He w*ho knows the Supreme Self thus—intel¬ 
lectually as well as by realisation- and also knows that though the beings are many, yet 

the Sup eme Self in them is one,-and thus know*s that the Lord is merciful and he, the 

devotee, is the object of His mercy-has no delusion and no grief. But how can this 

mere knowledge remove all grief, &c.? To this the commentator answers : 

“ Since the knower of the Lord completely attains the Lord, hence takes place the 
cessation of all sorrow and delusion” thus says the Pippalada feruti. The last verse 
declared that the know*er of Brahman becomes fearless: this verse makes an addi¬ 
tional statement that such a knower has no delusion and sorrow. 

Note.- In verse 6 it was declared that he who sees (i. c., knows) Brahman as the Sup¬ 
port of all and pervading all, becomes fearless. The present verse is not a mere repetition 
of the same idea. It further states that the same knower of Brahman transcends sorrow 












8 


IS A V A S YA-UPA Is! IS AD. 


and delusion. The same person who had become fearless on account of the knowledge of 
Brahman, becomes also free from delusion and grief as a result of the same knowledge. 
So there is no tautology. The last verse described the fruit of seeing Brahman as 
pervading all and the support of all. The present verse declares that something more is 
gained when this knowledge of Brahman becomes more specific, when his unity is perceiv¬ 
ed in all the diversity of the universe. 

(But verse 5 also expressed the same idea that Brahman is the support of all and 
is All-pervading—for the phrase ‘He is far, he his near, He is outside, He is inside’ denotes 
the same thing. What was then the necessity of verse 6, which expresses the same • 
proposition? This objection is next answered by the commentator.) 

The repetition is for the sake of explaining the full significance of the All-pervading, 
ness of Brahman. 

Mantra 3. 

1 

HJTrR: II q II 

*T: Sah, he, the Adhikfirin who meditates on the Self thus qsqnr* Paryagat, 
attained, Sukram, free from sorrow, Akavam 

incorporeal, without the subtle body. Avranam, eternal and full.j 

WTTrerg Asn&viram, sinews less, without muscles, without the dense body. 

^uddham, the purifier. Apapaviddham, untouched by evil, 

untouched by karma-effects, good or bad. qrfq: Kavili, the seer, the knower or 
seer of all, the wise, the omniscient. *Hnqr Mams!, the ruler of mind, or the 
controller of Manas and Intelligences like Brahma, &c. quoj: Paribhuh, omni¬ 
present, all-existent, all-controller, overessence, conqueror of all passions, the 
best of all. Swayambhuh, self-existent. Self-reliant. Yathata- 

thyatali, in its full and proper sense, really and truly, and not as an illusion. 
^qi^Arthan, things, Vyadadhat, disposed, ordained. STR^tf>-q: £>asvat! 

bhyah, through eternal or recurring. R*TRq: Samabhyah, yeais, ages. 

8. He attains the Lord Who is free from grief, free from subtle 
body, free from smallness, free from dense body, tlie Purifier, not tainted 
by sin. He creates the objects (like maliat, &c.) really and truly, from 
eternity. He is wise and omniscient, the Ruler of all intelligences, the 
Best of all and Self-dependenl. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The YarAha Parana explains this mantra as follows 

Brahman is called ‘Sukram,’ ‘ griefless' because He is free (ra) from grief (Suk). 
He is called avranam, not small, (vranam^ small), because He is Eternal and Full ; as 
He is the Purifier, He is said to be always pure ; as He has no Linga deha or subtle body 
He is called ‘incorporeal’; as He has no dense body, lie is called bodiless or without 
sinews. Though He is thus bodiless, yot He is called Kavi or Wise, because Ho is omni¬ 
scient: He is called manis! or the Lord of Manas, because He rules the Intelligences 








ISAVASYA-UPAKISAB. 


0 


(Manas) of all beings from Brahma downwards, and even Prakriti and Manas itself. 
He is called “ Paribhu ” because He is best of all and He is Svayambhu because He 
never depends upon another. The Lord Purusottama creates the world under fixed 
rules, in beginningless and endless times, in one uniform course. He creates this world 
as a reality, and it is eternal as a current (though ever changing), lie the Lord has a head 
consisting of pnre Being (sat), Intelligence (joana) and Bliss (ananda). His arms are pure 
Being, Intelligence and Bliss, His body is Being, Intelligence and Bliss, His feet are 
Being, Intelligence and Bliss. Such is the Great God, the Maha-Visnu. The Lord 
created this real world, which is beginningless and endless, by His mere Will.” 

Sate— In the preceding verse it was said that the wise become free from grief 
and sorrow, when they reach Yisnu. This verse gives the reason why it should be so. 
It is divided into two parts —one consisting of almost all negative attributes, describing 
that He is bodiless, &e., and naturally giving rise to the doubt how can such a Being 
be reached who has no body, &c., and how can He create? The next half beginning 
with kavih, &c., shows that He has positive attributes also, and so He can be reached 
and can create the universe. Sri Madhva has explained this verse, not in his own 
words, lest some one may question his authority, but by quoting Yaraha Purana where 
this verse has been fully and exhaustively explained. The wise reaches the Lord and 
becomes similar to Him, in shaking off the dense and the subtle bodies: and when these 
bodies do not exist, there can be no sorrow, for they are the seeds of all misery. There¬ 
fore it has been properly said that on reaching Brahman one becomes free from grief, 
delusion, &c. 

But how can God who is without body create? Xor is it right to say that the 
creation is an illusion, like the seeing of silver in a mother-of-pearl shell. For 
the true notion of the shell removes the false notion of silver, but no one has ever 
observed the notion of the world being sublated by anything higher. The world, there¬ 
fore, is real. Nor can it be said that time will create of itself. For creation is begin- 
ningless in time, like the (low of a river, the particles of which are constantly chang¬ 
ing, the river yet retains a permanent form as a current. The creation being thus begin¬ 
ningless, is not subject to measurement. 

The Lord has no material body, but has a body all the same consisting of Being, 
Intelligence and Bliss, and thus the objection, how can a Being without body create any¬ 
thing, is answered. 

Mantra 9. 

EPirPT: HFm-rT I 

rlvft ^ ^ q- s T^TPTT^ TrTT: I) 5. II 

Andham, blinding. Tamah, darkness. su^TCIPcr Praviganti, 

enter. 3 Ye, who. Avidyam, wrong conception of Deity; anyone 

other than Yisnu. Upasate, worship. Hep I atah, than that. 

BhQyah, greater, Iva, undoubtedly. % Te, they. cpn I amah, darkness, 
% Ye, who. 3 U, but. Yidvayam, knowledge, immersed in spirit alone, 

and not correcting the false notions of others, *r?f: Ratal), devoted, delight in. 

9. They who follow after Avidya (worship deities other than the 
Lord) enter into gloomy darkness ; into, undoubtedly even greater dark¬ 
ness than that go they who are devoted to A idya only (and do not correct 
the wrong notions of others.) —9. 




10 


ISA VA S YA-U PAN I. SAD. 


Mantra io. 

fra srau $\jm\ ^ ^rrafl^^f^ m ° u 

t^cr Anyat, different, one thing, Devaloka, partial liberation. The means 
ot liberation is different, is something else than mere vidya. ^ Eva, even, 
truly, verily, indeed. ssng: Ahull, they say. The Upanisads declare, 

Vidyaya, from vidya, from knowledge devoid of practice, Anyat, 

one thing, different, is the means of liberation, partial. Ahuh, they 

say. Avidyaya, from avidya or practice without knowledge 

Iti, thus, ^usrumah, we have heard vfrUTUrs Dhir&n&m, from the 

wise, of the steadfast sages, q Ye, who. 3: Nah, us. rt* Tat, that. 
Vichachaksire, explained, taught. 

10. One thing they say is verily obtained from vidya, another thing 
they say from avidya : thus have we heard from the wise who explained 
that to us. —10. 

Mantra i i. 

^ n n n 

Vidyam, vidya, knowledge, wisdom. Theoretical knowledge of 
religious truths. The meditation on Brahman. The right knowledge of 
Visnu. Cha, and. 'zft'ZU* Avidyftm, non-knowledge. Correcting and 
condemning false knowledge. The Karmas which are a necessary part of 
and lead to knowledge. Cha, and. sp Yah, who. rf^ Tat, that. Veda, 
knows. Tlie correlation of these two ; the principal and subordinate nature of 
these two, the necessity of both. 31733 Ubhayam, both. *73 Saha, at the same 
time, together. Avidyaya, through not-knowledge (by Karmas 

ordained as auxiliaries of knowledge). ^33 Mrityum, de^b, mental impurity 
as result of forgetting one’s true self. The past karmas, like virtuous and 
evil deeds; the Destiny. Evils like grief, ignorance, &c. Tirtva, 

having overcome, crossed over. Vidyaya, through knowledge. =^3 

Amritam, immortality; one-ncss with Devas only. ^*3% Arfnutc, enjoys, 
obtains, reaches. 

11. Of these two, ViclyA and Avidya, by a knowledge of Avidya 
alone death is overcome ; but knowing, both these together, by a know¬ 
ledge of Vidya also, he obtains liberation. —11. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

These mantras are thus explained in the Kftrma Purana“ Undoubtedly the wor¬ 
shippers of other deities than Visiiu go to blinding darkness, but undoubtedly to greater 
darkness they go who do not censuro and condomn such persons (and fail to try to correct 
















ISA VASYA-UPA KTSAD. 


11 


their mistakes). Therefore those, who know the Lord Narayana, in His true form as 
free from all evils and who also condemn the worshippers of false deities, are truly the 
good people. 

Such persons by condemning the falsehood, whose nature is grief and ignorance, cross 
over grief and ignorance, and by knowing the truth, whose nature is joy and knowledge, 
attain such joy and knowledge. 

Mantra 12. 

3F* qq: I 

rRT 'qq qq q qfft q 3 TrTT : \\ II 

^q^qq: Andbantamah, blinding darkness. qr^STT^q Pravisanti, they enter, 
q Ye, wlio. Asambhutim, destruction, called vinasa in verse 14. 

Hence the cause in which things merge at destruction. Destroyer, Non¬ 
creator. sqr^Tq Upasate, worship. qq: Tatah, than that. Bhuyah, 

greater. fq Iva, surely. % Te, they, qq: Tamali, darkness. 3 Ye, who. q 

U, but Sambhutyam, merely as Creator and not Destroyer, 

Ratah, devoted. 

12. They who worship That as Destroyer only enter into gloomy 
darkness, into surely even greater darkness than that go they who are 
devoted to Him as Creator alone.--12. 

Mantra 13. 

qwr qrcrcrf q 11 \\ n 

Anyate, one thing, different, qq Eva, even, indeed, qrrg: Ahull, 
they say. q*viqrH Sambhavat, creator. Anyat, different, one thing, qqg: 

Ahull, they say. qrq*qqr?T Asambhavat, destroyer, ffq Iti, thus. TTJgq Susruma, 
we have heard, Dhiranam, of the wise, of steadfast sages, q Ye, who. 

q: Nah, to us. Tat, that. fq^f^?; Vichachaksire, explained, taught. 

13. One thing they say is verily obtained from devotion to That 
as Creator : another thing they say from Him as Destroyer. Thus have 
we heard from the wise who explained it to us.—13 

Mantra 14. 

=q fqqm q q^iqmq^ I 
f^rr^R ^ cfterr n w 11 

Sambhutim, knowing him as Creator. Cha, and. fqqr^T* Vina- 
sam, knowing him as destroyer also. ^ Cha, and. q: Yah, who. q?r Tat, 
that, qq Veda, knows their inter-dependence, qqqq Ubhayam, both, qq 
Saha, together, ftqmq Vinasena, by destruction, Mrityum, death. 

MAT! IAL ROY 

j m " ^ ^ ^ ' ' 








12 


tSAVlSYA-UPAhJISAD. 


Ttrtva, having overcome. Sambhutya, by the knowledge of 

production or effect, Amritam, immortality. Asnute, enjoys, 

obtains. 

14. Of these two, the Creator and the Destroyer, by (a knowledge 
of) the Destroyer alone, death is overcome; but knowing both these 
together by (a knowledge of) the Creator also, he obtains liberation.—14. 

- MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

(Quotation from the Kurina Purana.) 

“Similarly those also, who do not acknowledge that Hnri is the Creator, go to 
deep darkness and so also those who do not acknowledge Him as the Destroyer. 
Therefore those, who thus know the Lord, as possessing all qualities, as the Creator 
of all, as the Lord of Lords, as the destroyer of all, become freed from the bonds 
of embodied existence through their knowledge that the Lord is the destroyer; and by 
the knowledge that He is the creator of all joy and knowledge, &c., get verily joy 
and knowledge. Lot one know that the Lord, the sifter of men, is eternally free 
from all faults and full of all auspicious qualities; and let him not divide or take away 
any of His attributes, nor let him imagine' that the released souls can ever become 
equal to Hari, or that they become identical with Yisnu. Nor similarly should he imagine 
that a freed soul can become equal to Brahma and the rest. Let one know that even among 
the Released souls from men up to Brahma, there is difference between them and that 
Vis mi is the highest of all beings (whether they be bound or released souls)—for only 
by such complete knowledge is there iniikti.”—Kurina PurnA. 

[Having described the nature of God, and the realisation of Him in His two aspects, 
Matter and Spirit, Creator and Destroyer, as the means of perfect liberation, the feruti 
next teaches that such direct God-vision takes place only through the grace of God and 
not by mere self-exertion. J 

Mantua 15. 

cM <jp?TqT^ II $ * II 

flwwr Hiranmayena, by the golden, briliiant. Patrena, disk. 

Who evaporates the water and saves the world. The solar 01 b is called the 
golden disk. Satyasya, of the True, of the Indestructible Person, of 

Brahman, i.e., Visnu ^THTtcT* Apihitam, is covered, concealed, not known to 
all Veiled, Mukham, face, t\e. t the whole body. Part taken for the 

whole, Tat, that. cggTvam, thou Pusan, O Full, O Nourisher. 

Apavrinu, open, unveil, remove. Satya-dharmaya, he who 

holds (dharayat), in his heart of hearts, the True, ie ) the devotee of the 
True. The lover of the Lord Visnu. The upholder of the True, 
Dristaye, to see, or I may see, or find. 

15. The entrance to the True is covered by a shining disk, that 
(disk) do thou, 0 Pusan, remove, for me who is devoted to the True, that I 
may see Thee.—15. 











ISA vasya-upanisad . 


13 


MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The phrase ‘ By the golden disk ’ means by ‘ the solar orb.’ The phrase ‘ Of the true ’ 
denotes ‘of Visnu.’ By this solar photosphere is constantly hidden the body of the Lord. 
Pusan, the Full Lord Visnu, reveals that form Himself to His devotees, called here Satya- 
dharmas—the Lover of the True. 

Note.—The word hiranmaya means “ like a golden,” i. e., full of light, effulgent. TL-e 
word patra means that which drinks (pa) the water and saves (tra) the world. Therefore 
the whole phrase hiranmayena patrena means “ by the solar disk which is refulgent as 
gold, and which saves the world by evaporating waters and raining them back.” The word 
satyasya means of him who is full of or good qualities. He is inside the solar orb and 
His body is covered by the solar disk. O Pusan, remove the veil from Thy face that I 
may see Thee. 1 who am a Satya-dharma—who constantly meditate on Thee, the Satya. 

Mantra < 6 . 

51% II 

qq^ Pusan, O Pusan! O Nourisher ! O Full! q^jq Ekarse, Eka-rise 
who is principally knowledge or wisdom. Eka = liighest, supreme, risi = know 
ledge, Supreme knower, Omniscient, sjh Yama, C Yam a or punisher or Judge 
of all. Surya, O the Goal of the Suris or wise, />., thy Devotees, especi¬ 

ally of Hiranyagarbha. qrSTrq^T Prffjapatya, O Goal of Prajapati Hiranyagarbha, 
because thou hast taught him the Vedas, and he merges in Thee. Vyuha, 

spread, expand. Ragmin, the knowledge of self or soul. The knowledge 

of the true form of God. Samuha, gather, in-draw, collect. Tejah, 

the knowledge of the 11011-self or of external objects. Yat, what. % Te, 
thy. Rupam, form. Kalyanatamam, most auspicious, fairest, 

loveliest. ^ Tat, that. % Te, (through) thy (grace.) q^rfq Pasyami, 1 see, 
I may see, I wish to see. 

16. 0 All-full ! 0 Sole-wise ! 0 All-Judge ! 0 Goal of the wise ! 0 
the Lord of Prajapati ! expand my knowledge of the self, and increase 
my knowledge of the non-self, so that through Thy grace, 1 may see that 
form of Thine which is the most auspicious. 

1 MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word Ekarse means “ O thou who art principally (eka), all knowledge and 
wisdom (risi).” The word ekarsi is thus the name of Visnu. Hari is called Yama because 
he controls and punishes all—He is the Great Judge. He is called Surya because he is 
the Goal of the wise (suris). He is called Prajapatya, because he is specially the Goal of 
Hiranyagarbha Prajapati. 

Note.—The rasmin and tejas have no reference to the rays of the sun and his heat 
and light rays. For no amount of enfeebling of the light and heat rays of the sun will 

give one the divine vision. Therefore rasmin is translated as ‘ knowledge of the self’_ 

expansion of rasmi means the expansion of consciousness. While the expansion of tejas 
means controlling the non-self—getting more and more power over the forces of nature. 
In short it is a prayer for the expansion of one’s consciousness and the growth and 
purification of one’s vehicles. When the rasmin and the tejas, the consciousness and the 
vehicles of consciousness, are fully developed, then there is the possibility of God-vision. 


3 




14 


ISA VASYA-U PANT SAD. 


Mantra 16 — (continued.) 

^TtSHT^HT 3^: tltsfRTRT II H II 

3 Yah, who. ^TT Asau, in life; it is locative singular of “life.” 
that person in the solar orb is in life. The word sthitali must be supplied. 

Asau. yonder that person in my heart, tprq: Purusah, person, all-full. 
The sleeper or dweller-in-the city. Sail, he. Aham “ I,” not-inferior : 

Supreme. It is derived from the root to abandon, with the negative affix ST, 

“ that which is not abandoned, hence Supreme.’’ Asmi, “ I 

am” it is an Indeclinable, meaning “essence,” “ Being” i\e. . he who is in in}'' 
life breath, that purusa is the great ‘ I am,” is the supreme being, may I see 
him. to be+^r 'to measure.’ 

That yonder person who dwells in Asu (Life) is known by the 
name of Aham “ 1 ” (i.e , the Supreme) and Asmi “ I am ” (i.e., the only 
standard of existence.) 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

He is called Aham, because he is not discardable (aheya). In other words 

“Aham ” means “ the Supreme.” He is called “ Asmi,” because he dwells in all beings and 
thus He is the measure (ma) of their existence (as'—(their existence or be-ncss depends 
upon His being in them—lie is the standard of their existence). But Hari, the Supreme 
Lord, however, is apart from all His devotees (Jivas), though ensouling all. 

Note —Though the words aham and asmi are used in the Mantra, and ordinarily they 
would mean kk l am lie,”—lest one should fall into this error of identifying himself with 
the Lord, the author says *31} g TUT “Hari, the supreme, is quite 

separate from all Jiva , however devoted they may be to him. In ecstasy one may exclaim 
“ I am He ’’—but as a truth, the Jiva can never become He.” 

Of the two W in the above verse, one is a pronoun nominative singular of «d«s 
and means ‘ that,* the other is the locative singular of the noun ^Tg meaning ‘ life,’ i.e., 
in the life. 

Note. —The meaning of the verse is that the well-known Person who resides in tho 
Prana, also dwells in His devotees as aham and asmi, i. c., lie is the very “ I ” and the 
very “lam” of tho devotees. He is in Pusan, Nrc., and is then called by the name of 
Pusan, Yama, Ekarsi, &c. He though in all these is one alone, and does not become 
differentiated, owing to the differences of beings in whom He resides. The Brahman is 
one in all. 

Mantra 17. 

Vayuli, the Prana. Anilam, sutrntman. Brahma-abiding: bt 

= Brahman abiding. Amritam, immortal Atha, now then. 

Idam, this (visible dense body). vrtFcT? Bhasmantam, ( grf ) End-in- 
aslics, thrown into fire. Sariram, body. 

17. Though this body be reduced to ashes, the Indwelling Spirit, 
the Lord does not die, He is immortal : nor does the Jiva die. For the 
Viiyu has become immortal, because Brahman dwells in him (why should 
not then the Jiva he immortal in which also the Lord dwells.)—17. 










ISA VASYA-UPANTSAD. 


lo 


MaDHAVA’S commentary. 

Because the Supreme Lord is in Vayu, the Vayu, has become an Immortal, (how great 
must He be whose very presence makes others immortal)—how great must be the Immor¬ 
tality of the Supreme then ? The word anila is compounded of two words ^ meaning 
Brahman, and nilayauam, abode. The Yayu, is called Anilam because it is the abode of 
Brahman (Bralima-dhama) : or because it is supported by Brahman. 

Note, It has been said before that the Supreme Lord dwelling in the Jiva is eternal 
existence and of most auspicious form. A doubt arises : when the man dies and his body 
is reduced to ashes what becomes of the Lord? Does He also die like the jiva? This 
verse removes that doubt. Though this body is reduced to ashes, yet the Supreme Lord 
within it is not tainted with the faults of dying, &c., Why?' Anila, &e., When Yayu, by 
merely taking refuge in Brahman, has become an Immortal, how can that Brahman, the 
giver of Immortality to others, be Himself subject to death ? But how is Yayu immortal ? 
This is answered by Sri Madhva by a quotation. 

Yayu is called Immortal, because His knowledge does not get obscured even in the 
Pralaya. (In the case of other Jivas there is an obscuration of consciousness in the 
Pralaya-) 

Note —The knowledge here refers to the functional knowledge obtained through the 
vrittis or modifications of the vehicles. Such functional knowledge or Vritti-Jnana per¬ 
sists in the case of Yayu alone in Pralaya. In the case of other Jivas, they cease to func¬ 
tion them. The functional knowledge of Bharati also remains unaffected by Pralaya. In 
the Pralaya, Yayu and Bharati also go to sleep, but they are not completely unconsci¬ 
ous, they dream. Their functional knowledge in the Pralaya is something like our 
dreams : i.e., their Manas remains active: though their external functioning ceases, while 
in the case of other Jivas, there is total unconsciousness in Pralaya, something like 
deep sleep. 

For thus says Rama Samhita :—“ The Lord Himself is the Chief Immortal, (others are 
immortal, in a secondary sense only). The Supreme Self is alone the Eternal, with his 
Nada (of voice ever vibrating through the eternities of the Pralaya). 

Note. —The word immortal is primarily applied to the Lord alone, for two reasons 
that His body never falls off: and His knowiedge never gets obscured. Even the highest 
Jivas, like Yayu, lose their bodies at the Pralaya ; and there takes place some diminution 
in their knowledge. They cannot carry their consciousness intact through the Great 
Pralayic sleep. The word is another form of ‘Along with Nada—whose 

Nada constantly vibrates.’ 

Some take this verse as a prayer of the dying man; asking that his vital breath 
should leave his body and that the latter should be reduced to ashes ; and that the vital 
breath should join the eternal. This explanation is open to the objection that a thing 
which is inevitable is never prayed for; and the reduction of the body to ashes is 
inevitable, and so there is no need for praying that it should be reduced to ashes. The 
real sense of the verse, which is not a prayer, but a statement of fact, is that when Yayu 
has become immortal by the mere indwelling of the Lord in him ; a fortiori the Lord must 
be immortal; and His immortality is beyond all questions. 

But, says an objector, the verse has two words only “ Yayu ” and “ amritam.” It 
does not say “in the Vayu there is the Lord, and so the Yayu is immortal.” How do 3^011 
read all this meaning into it ? To this it is answered, that the word anilam suggests the 
above explanation. This word literally means “that whose support or refuge is Brahman 
called The Yayu is called anila because he has the Lord for his refuge. 






16 


1SAV ASY A-UPANISAD. 


& 5fRT RT W^J RR ir^jr U^n 

rsfj* Om, the symbol of Hari : from ‘ to Protect/ ‘ to pervade/ 1 obtain/ 
‘to shine.’ O all-pervading! 3 r<r Krato, O Sacrifice ! O Creator ! O Hari! 
O all-pervading. O radiant. Sinara, remember, have mercy on me. 
^ 5 rT Kritam r duty. Smara, remember. Krato !0 Hari ! O Creator ! 

*■5^ Smara, remember me, forgive, pardon or be compassionate. fjrT 9 Kritam, 
my deeds, evil deeds and good deeds, R* Smara, remember. 

17. 0 All-Pervading Creator ! remember me. Have mercy on me. 

0 Soul ! remember thy duty.—17. 

MADHVA’S commentary. 

Ill the Brahma-tarka it is declared:—“The phrase] ‘ O Vis nil ! remember Thy 
devotees,” means have mercy on Thy devotees : for memory in reference to the Omniscient 
Lord has no meaning. He always remembers or rather knows everything : for past, present 
and future is one to him : His knowledge is Eternal. Therefore “remember” is not to be 
taken here in its literal sense but in the sense, of “Have compassion upon thy devotee.” 

Note. —When a thing passes out of perception then arises the memory of it, from the 
impressions left by the object on the mind. In the ease of the Lord, no object can ever 
vanish out of His perception—in fact all objects owe their be-ness to His perception of it. 
So the Lord has no Memory, but Eternal perception and cognition : for the essential nature 
of the Lord is eternal knowledge. This portion of the verse is a prayer to the Lord, 
symbolised as Oin, to have compassion on his worshipper. Not only must one pray for 
mercy, but should never forget his own duty. Both are necessary—performing diligently 
one’s duty and praying for the mercy of the Lord. 

Mantra iS. 

' HRsr it urn n u 

& pSup i pomps putfsisf 5 i«ss 11 

& STtfo: SltCcT: SlttrU II 

11 l II 

3RT Ague, O agni! lit. “ Leader and Director (ni) of tlie universe.” 
O Hari! trt Naya Lead; Direct. fjTTr Supatha, by a good path, by 

Deva-yana, by a path from which there is no return The path of Archis, &c., 
qq Raye, to the wealth (of mukti). Asmnn, us. f^rR Visvani, all 

(our knowledge leading upto release.) ^ Deva, O God. ^rgRrR Vayunani, 
thoughts, knowledge : efforts for salvation. r$r Vidvan, knowing. 
Yuyodhi, remove, separate Asmat, from us. Juhuranam, 

degrading, contracting, making small : causing rebirth into Sdm^ara. 

Enah, sin, evil deed, detrimental to Purusartha. Bhuyistham, fullest. 






ISAVASYA-UPANISAD. 


17 


full of devotion and love. % Te, to thee. w. Namah, praise, salutations, all 
hail. Uktim, word. Vidhe.na, we shall offer, do. We ourselves 

are too weak to overome evil ; and so help us to conquer sin. 

18. 0 Agni! lead us by that Path (from, which there is no going 

backi, the good Path, in order that we may get the treasure of Salvation. 
0 God ! thou knowest all our efforts for salvation. Remove from us the 
degrading sin. We offer Thee salutations over and over again.—IS. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word vayunam means k knowledge.” The word is used in this sense in the 
following line addressed by Dhruva to the Lord in the Bliagavat Purana, tvad dattaya 
vayunaya idam achasta visvam. “ This all is energised by the knowledge given by Thee.” 

The word ‘asimin,’ ‘ us,’ should be repeated after Jahuranam. This last word does not 
mean crooked, but degrading, making small. means the sin that degrades us, 

makes us small. The verb gqtfH * s imperative second person of the^^^ meaning to 
separate. Separate from us our sins, which degrade us and throw us back into Samsara. 
As says the Skanda Purana “ Remove from us that sin which makes us look very small 
(i.e., causes re-birth) and be thou our Leader to make us acquire the treasure of 
salvation—thus prayed the Monarch Maiiu to Lord Yajha.” 

Note .—This shows that the Lord can forgive sins, and give salvation in spite of all 
karmas. This is a prayer for Moksa, after one has obtained Saksatkara. 

MADHYA’S SALUTATION. 

All hail to Thee, O Lord ! O Narayaua 1 0 my best and dearest Friend ! O who has a 
definite and distinct form, consisting of full power, intelligence and bliss and Sri and 
Light. 

Peace chant. 

Om. That is Full, this is full, from that Full, this full emanates. 
Taking away this full from that Full, the Full still remains behind. Om. 
Peace, Peace Peace. 

[N. B .—Here “Full” means “Infinite.” The infinities described in this verse are of 
different orders. “This Full” (This Infinity) is lower in order than “That Full 2 ’ (That 
Infinity). Thus an Infinite straiglit line is an infinity of a lower order than an infinite 
surface. If an infinite straight line, which is merely length without breadth, is taken 
away from an infinite surface, the remainder is still infinite. Similarly an infinite surface 
has length and breadth, but no thickness. If such infinite surface is taken'away from 
an infinite solid— i.e., an infinity of two dimensions taken away from an infinity of three 
dimensions—the remainder is still infinite. 


THE END. 




Alphabetical Index of the Mantras. 


Page. 


... ... ... 16 

... ... 9 

srsrto a *W3%g'*r*rer ... ... ... 11 

*n$qig: fqsrqr ... ... ... ... 10 

: ? 3 WrT^ ... ... ... ... 11 

... .. ••• ... 4 

^gssrt & ... ... ... ... 4 

f^ararcq ... ... ... ... 2 

eRwifftn ... ... ... ••• 3 

chafer cT5T5t% ... ... ... ... 5 

< 35 ^*$ *m ... ... ... ••• 13 

... ... ... ... 6 

... ... ... ... 7 

qnj?;fa3iFj?rjro^ ... ••• ••• ... n 

... ... ••• ... 10 

STWTT^fpR ... ... ... ... 8 

... ••• -. ••• 11 

... ••■ — — 12 




















INTRODUCTION. 


This is also called Talavakara Upanisad. In a manuscript in 
I Sarada characters in the Adyar Library, it is called Brahmanopanisad. 
It is called Kena from the first word of the Upanisad. It forms, 
according to Sankara, the ninth chapter of the Brahmana of that name. 
For a long time the very existence of the Talavakara Brahmana was 
doubted. But of late a manuscript of it has been found by Dr. 
Burnell : and so the statement of Sarikara that this Upanisad forms 
part of the Talavakara Brahmana has been verified. This Brahmana 
appertains to the Sama Veda and is called Jaiminiya Brahmana also. 

This Upanisad contains the well known allegory of the victory of 
the Devas over the Daityas, and the ignorance of the Devas that the 
victory was due really to the working of the Brahman through them. 

According to Madhva the question is put by $iva to Brahma as to 
who is the real prime mover of Manas Prana and the senses. 

The whole of Madhva’s commentary except the last few lines, is an 
extract from the Brahma-Sara, a book from which he copiously quotes in 
other Upanisads also. This Brahma-Sara appears to be a metrical 
commentary on the Upanisads and I do not know whether any manuscript 
of it is available and who is its author and when it was composed. If it 
is not the work of Madhva himself, it shows that the doctrines systematised 
by him were current long before his time and he was its chief and most 
illustrious exponent. 

This Upanisad also lends itself to Madhva’s view of Prana. Its very 
first line uses the epithet prathama “ The First” with regard to Prana : and 
thus shows the great function performed by Him. 

Another point which strikes the reader brought up under Sahkara’s 
system is the statement that Brahman as Yaksa does not appear alone but 
is accompanied by at least ten Shining Ones. All the devas did not fall 
into the error in which Agni, Nasikya Vayu and Indra seemed to have fallen. 
The Upanisad expressly mentions that Uina, daughter of Himavat, taught 
the true nature of Brahman to Indra. Thus she at least was free from the 
egoism of Indra and the other devas. If she did not fall into that error, 
it follows that her consort $iva was also free from it, as He is higher in the 



( ii ) 


scale than she. Thus there must have been some devas who were free from 
that error. In Madhva’s system of the hierarchy of gods there are several 
divinities above Siva. So they also must have been free from error. 

This Upanisad gives the mystic name of Brahman as Tad-vanam “ the 
All-pervading Beloved just as the m 5 r stic name of Brahman in the Isa- 
Upanisad is Aham “I” or “Supreme” and Asmi “I Am.” 

S. C. V. 


M rrT ’ 


j;< 



KENA UPANISAD- 


First Ivhanda. 

Peace chant. 

^ imr^TR siran^: srnm^r ^ 11 

^srtnn snptirfH'U?' wr?r suprtt^iV nr nr srgr R^rfj^T^R^^Tnn^fn- 
f?rfr^^n^3 rr^nnfa n srqR<ic§ sufas nftr ^ffg ^ nfn ^tfg n 
sri 5 rrffrr: sitrh satf?^ 11 

^TT* Om, Om Apyayantu, Jet (them) increase, grow or be 

perfect. Mama, my. ^jjrm Angani, limbs, members. ^ Vak, speech. 
STTCU Pranah, breath, sense of smell. =^: Chaksuh, eye. Srotram, ear. 

Atha, and then, another reading is vpu m - Yasas, fame. Balam, strength, 

bodily vigour, the organ that concentrates the ojas or odyle force, ff ^ g q rftr 
Indriyani, the senses. ^ Cha, and, yea. m\m Sarvani, all. spf* Sarvam, all. 
&& Brahma, Brahman, the Sacred learning, the Vedas, Upanisadam, 

The Upanisad, secret doctrine. m Ma, not. =5 T^t Aharn, 1. ^ Brahma, Brahman, 
the Vedas. Nirakuryam, should cut of), m Ma, not. && Brahma, 

Brahman, the sacred lore, the Vedas, m Ma, me. Nirakarot, cut off, 

leave off Anirakaranam, no break in studies, not cutting off, non¬ 
removal. ^r*g Astu, let there be. Anirakaranam, no break in 

studies, non-removal ; not cutting off. ^*g Astu, let there be. ^ Tad, 
(in) that. Atmani, in the self. 1 %^ Nirate, (In tne who is) delighted (in). 

3 Ye, which. Upanisatsu, in the Upanisads. Dharmah, virtues 

and duties. % Te, those. *rfir Mayi, in me. g;g Santu, let (those) be. % jjfq 
Te mayi santu, let them be in me. 'sfrc.Jtrrren Om ^antih, peace. 

Om ! May all my bodily organs and senses, those of speech, smell, sight, hearing 
and vigour grow in perfection. May the Vedas and the Upanisads be my all in all. May 
I not abandon the study of the sacred lore, may not the sacred lore abandon me. Let 
there never be any break in my studies, let there never be any break in my studies. 
Let all the virtues of the Upanisads repose in me, repose in me whose sole delb ht is 
That Self.—(Paraskara Griliya Sutra, III. 1C. 1, partly). 

MADHYA'S SALUTATION. 

Salutation to Thee, O Narayana! who, owing to possessing infinite qualities, art not 
fully known even liy the wise (suras) and who givest all wished for objects to the Devas 

4 










22 


KEN A-U PAN IS AD. 


Mantra i. 

Wrr sjrcr: sn?i?T: sfcr |te: i 

^TNrrf sfHr ^ s ^fir 

^F?T Kena, by whom, at whose, ff^rf Isitam, wished, behest. By whose 
wish merely. Patati, falls, lights upon, proceeds (toward its objects, good 

or bad.) qfarT Presitam, appointed, sent forth on errand. Manah, mind, the 
inner organ, the jnana-sakti, knowing faculty. Kena, by whom. qro: 

Pranafi, breath, life. The Kriya-sakti or volition or acting faculty, Pra- 

thamah, the first-born of isvara. The first son of God. Praiti, goes 

forth, proceeds, Yuktah, commanded, ordained, appointed. Kena, 

by whom. Isitam, wished. Vacham, speech. Imam, this. 

Vadanti, utter, pronounce. Chaksuh, eye. Srotram, ear. 

Kah, what. 3 U, verily or vocative, O teacher ! 1 &: Devali, God, The Shining- 
One. Yunakti, directs, assigns. 

1. Sent by whom does the mind go towards (its) wished for object, 
by whom ordained the First Breath goes forth (to perforin His functions) ? 
By whose direction they utter this speech, O (Brahma) ? What deva 
directs the eye and the ear ?—1. 

(Note .—The manas is an organ of perception and so must be under the control of 
some one that uses this instrument. The jiva or human soul is not the director of the 
mind, because we see that man cannot control his mind. Therefore, there must exist some 
other being, who is the director of the mind—who is that being?) 

By whose appointment does the First Breath perform his activities ? 

(The Prana is said to be the first, as it is superior to all the jivas : even higher than 
JSiva who questions, and Brahma to whom the question is put. Even Raimi who is next to 
Visnu, cannot directly be the controller of the l’ra na, as She herself is not independent. 
The question is about the direct controller and not the indirect ones. 

By whose direction and inspiration the wise speak these words of wisdom and 
authority ? 

And what shining one does direct the eye and the ear ? 

(The speech, eye, ear), &c., are seen not to be under the control of man, jiva, so there 
must be some divinity who is their regulator. Who is that divinity? If Narayana is the 
regulator of mind, &c., then what are the attributes of this Lord ? The mind, breath, eye, 
ear, speech, &c\, denote here also the various Devas of these organs : the question is who 
regulates those devas of the eyes, &c„ and who controls the highest among the Devas, 
the first breath—Prana, the first begotten. The question is illustrative only. The senses 
not mentioned herein are also to be included. 

Mantra 2. 

stuirsif *4fTr: irii 

Srotrasya, of the ear. ^retrain, ear. The transcendental 

cause, the giver of the power of hearing, Manasah, of the mind. 





1 KIIA.NI)A, 3. 


23 


ir: Manah, the mind. The giver of the power of thinking, jjst Yat, because 
who. Vachafi, of the speech, 5 Ha, verily. ^ Vacham, speech, 

the giver of the power of speaking, g- Sa, lie. 3 U, indeed, Pr&nasya, 

of the breath, or life, qrup Pranafi, life, leader, commander, Cbaksusah, 

of the eye. =^: Chaksuh, eye. The giver of the power of seeing. 
Atimuchyah, being free, having abandoned the “ I-ness ” in these. Freeing 
themselves from the bond of Linga-sarira. vfap Dhirah, the wise. ^ Pretya, 
on departing. Having renounced “ 1 -ness ” in all worldly objects. ^ 
Asmat, from this. Lokat, world or body. Amritah, immortal, free 

mukta. Bhavanti, become, 

2. Brahma said, who is ear of the ear, mind of the mind, verily 
He is the speeclt of speech, He is the Brfina of Prana, and the eye of 
the eye, He verily (is Visnu). The wise (knowing Him thus), after going 
forth from this world, and freeing themselves from the final body, become 
immortal. —2. 

Note .—(Tli us ffuosfciouoil, the four-faced Brahma having meditated 011 Narayana, gave 
the following reply:) 

He who is the ear of the ear (who gives to the ear the power of hearing), who is the 
mind of the mind (who gives to the mind the power of thinking), who is the speech of 
speech (who gives to the speech the power of speaking), is verily the Life of the First 
Life (who gives the power of life to the First Prana), the ear of ear (who gives the ear 
the power of hearing). The wise, whose mind is under control, having known the Lord 
thus and realised Him, leave their final body through Susnmna nadi, and being released fully 
of their Prarabdha Karinas, become Immortal, i.e ., attain mukti. 

Mantra 3. 

q ^ 5? 5fr *RT q fWt q 

\\\\\ 

Na, not. ^ Tatra, there, thither (in that Brahman), in the matter of the 
majesty of Hari, and His ruling the Universe. Chaksuh, the eye, the 

presiding deva of the eye. Gachchhati, goes ; as it is impossible to enter 

one’s own self, h Na, not. qpjK Vak, speech, the presiding deva of speech. 

Gachchhati, goes, these devas do not know Him fully. % No, not. 
Manah, mind, (can think of Him) the presiding deva of manas. Na, not. 
Vidmah, we know (from our own intellect.) H Na, not. ft^TPTPT: Vijanimali, 
understand (as taught by scriptures, and teachers and by others.) Yatha, 

how, in what way or manner, by what means, Etad, this Brahman, this 
Universe of Prana, &c. Anugisyat, can teach, explain, He may be con- 

tro\\ing or directing or governing. Anyat, different from, Eva, indeed. 

Tat, that. Viditat, from the known, the Vyakta, from the universe so 

far as it is known and demonstrated. ^ Atha^i, also. Aviditat, 









24 


KENA-UPAKISAD. 


from the unknown, the Avyakta, the world of imagination and fancy. Adhi, 

above, different, the best of all. Iti, thus. fpgq: ^usrumah, we have heard. 

Purvesam, from the sayings of old teachers. q Ye, who. q: Nah, to us. 
cT£ Tad, this. Vyachchhaksire, taught. 

3. The Deva of eye cannot full}- enter into the majesty of That 
Hari, nor the deva of speech, nor of mind. We do not know nor under¬ 
stand how He may be governing all this. He is indeed more wonderful 
than all that can be known or all that can be imagined. He is the Best. 
Thus have we heard from the Teachers of old who taught Him to us.—3. 

(Note*.—Admitted that Narayana is the Kegulator of the eyes, &c., of men ; what are 
the attributes and marks of the Lord ? To this question the answer is that He is not fully 
known by anybody and so no definition of Him can be given.) 

The Deva of the eye does not know the Lord, nor the Deva of speech nor of mind ; nor 
the Deva of any other senses. (The Lord though unknown by the sun, &c., the Deva of eye, 
&c., yet thou, O Brahma ! must at least know Him. To this he replies.) 1 do not know Him 
nor understand Him. 

(Or it may mean that he cannot be known in all His details and attributes. The 
repetition of vidma and vijanima is to show that neither the paroksa nor the aparoksa 
jfiana is possible regarding Him.) 

I do not know how to’impart properly any instruction about Him, and His essential 
nature, to yon, O feiva, and to others like you. 

(Or it may mean : Thou, O feiva, also art great- canst thou not teach Him ? Or there is 
no object by comparison with which we can know Him, as we can know an antelope 
by comparison with a cow.) 

(How is then the supreme to be known? He can be known only as distinct from 
everything that exists in this universo of cause and effect.) 

He, the supreme Brahman, is distinct from the known, i.e., the phenomenal world which 
is an effect, and has no similarity with Him. Not only this, He is distinct and different from 
the unknown, /.<?., I'rakriti, the cause of this manifested world, called also avyakta. 

(Not only Ho is different and distinct from cause and effect—from the known and the 
unknown : but) 

He is adhi or great, lie is higher than the cause and effect. 

(He is incomparable and the Highest.) 

This we have heard from the former sages who taught us about Brahman. 

Mantra 4. 

Yat, what (Pure conciousness.) 3t=srr Vacha, by word (human or 
revealed) or speech. Anabhyuditam, is unexpressed, un-revealed, 

not fully described, Yena, by whom, by what Lord. Vak, the word 

or speech, ttp-’fqtr Abhyudyate, is expressed, revealed, is uttered by men. 
qtjr Tat, that. Eva, alone, indeed, Brahma, Brahman, ftf Tvant, thou. 

Viddhi, know. ^ Na, not. Idam, this, jiva. qa Yat, which. ^ 

ldam, this people here. Upasate, they adore, worship, meditate. Madhva 

takes this word as “ ” and “ a ” " thy ” ^ “ He is near thee.” 






T KHANVA, 7 . 


25 


4. What cannot be fully expressed by speech, but impelled by 
whom the speech is uttered by men, Him only, know thou as Brahman, 
for this (jiva) is not Brahman, but He who is near to thee (as thy Inner 
Guide and Ruler.)— 4. 

He who cannot be completely expressed by the organ of speech, who reveals all that 
the speech utters (namely, the Ycdas, &c.), know Him alone to be the Brahman, and not 
the jiva. 

(This shows that the jiva is not Brahman : and is different from him. If Brahman is 
not the essential form of the jiva, what is He then ? To this the Sruti answers.) This 
well-known Being who is near thee, O jiva ! as thy controller is Brahman : know Him 
alone as such. 

Mantra 5. 

h h^h *rcR. n 

m hfe Hi ii*ii 

Yat, that, which. Manasa, by the mind. a Na, not. ^5% Manute, 

thinks, is thought of (fully) by man. zr Yena, by whom. 9^: Ahuh, they say. 
HHi Manah, the mind. Matam, is thought, is pervaded, is known, is made 

capable of doing its functions, (&c., Tadeva), &c. 

5. He who cannot be fully apprehended by the mind, but who causes 
the mind to apprehend all mental objects, know Him alone as Brahman, 
and not this jiva. He stands so near (to thee as thy controller.)—5. 

Note. —That Which the man cannot think out by mind, but by Whom the mind is 
perceived, Him alone as Brahman know thou. This (jiva is) not (Brahman) but He who 
is near to thee (as thy Inner Controller). 

Mantra 6. 

h hh 11 

Hi? <q ftrfe Hi 11% 11 

qa Yat, that, which. ^^[qT, Chaksusa, by the eye. a qqqra Na pasyati, 
does not see. zpr Yena, by whom, Chaksutnsi, eyes, Pasyati, 

sees, “ are seen/' rftq, &c. 

6. He who cannot be seen by the eyes, but who causes the eye to 
perceive all visible objects, know Him alone as Brahman—Him who stands 
so near (to thee as thy controller) and not this jiva.—6. 

Note. —That which the man can not see by the eye, (but by Whom the eyes are seen), 
Him alone as Brahman know thou. This (jiva) is not (Brahman) but He who is near to thee 
(as thy Inner Controller). 

Mantra 7. 

H >ZWTH 'in srraftrt WHH I 
rfqq SlfT # hf% Hi llvsil 









26 


KENA-UPANISAD . 


Yat, that which. Srotrena, by the ear. ^ Na ^rinoti, 

does not hear, qq Yena, by whom. Srotram, ear. fqsr Idam, this, 

jgqj? Srutam, is heard. qqq, &c. 

7. lie who cannot be heard by the ear, but who causes the ear to 
perceive all sounds, know him alone as Brahman—who stands so near (to 
thee as thy controller; and not this jiva.—7. 

Note. -That which (the man) can nob hear by the ear but by whom this ear is heard, 
Him alone as Brahman know thou. This (jiva) is not (Brahman) but lie who is near to thee 
(as th}' Inner Controller). 

Mantra 8. 

* SURTTcT II 

^ imn 

TO*: *3^: II { II 

Yat, that which. qpiH Pranena, by breath. ^ qrRUPT Na Praniti, 
does not smell, (?t does not work.) Yena, by whom, qrqp Pranali, 
breath. qqfr^% Pranlyate, is led, is controlled, directed. 

8. He who is not enlivened through the functioning of the Chief 
Prana, but who gives to the Prana his power of enlivening all beings, 
and who fully controls the Prana, know Him alone as Brahman, who is so 

near to thee as thy controller, and not this jiva.—8. 

[The Bold is alive but not through the activity of Prana, but independently of Him. 
The Lord is not dependent an any thing for Ills activities. Even the Chief Prana, the 
Highest among all beings, is controlled entirely by the Lord : what to say of beings lower 
in scale of creation]. 

Note .—That which does not work through Prana, but by whom this Prana is (itself) 
led forth, Him alone as Brahman know thou. This (jiva is) not Brahman (but He) who 
stands nearest to thee (as thy Inner Controller). 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Says the Brahma-Sara : — 

“Brahma, the four-faced, was seated alone in his heaven called Yaijayanta, when Sada 
Siva approaching, him, asked the following questions in order to know the truth about 
Vis an :— 

“The mind thinks objects of (desirable and undesirable) not under the control of 
the human soul (Ptirusa), (its action is involuntary as is the action of breathing over 
which also the man has no control.) By whom sent, therefore, the mind goes to its object ; 
by whose command does similarly the Chief Prana, the best of all, function ? What divinity 
controls and directs to their proper objects, eyes, ears, speech and the rest?” 

“ Being thus asked, Brahma first meditated on (lie Lord Narayana who is the support 
of all, who is incomparable, the omniscient, the omnipotent, and free from all imperfections 
and then replied to the Lord of Uma :— * 

“lie, who is the controller and regulator of Prana and of all senses like the eye, &c., 
is not fully comprehensible by even all the devas, because lie is all-full. He is the 
leader of Breath (Prana) and the rest, He knows everything in all time. He is the best of 
all, He is present everywhere, Ho is Visnu, know Him as such.” 




Second Khanda. 

Mantra i. 

<3 qq^r q qq^qq 5 uruRqkq % rr^r 

fqf^TH. II ^ M u 

qfq Yadi, if, O Rudra! Manyase, thou thinkest. Su-veda, 

I know well, being taught so by you. Iti, thus, Daharam, little, 

minor, qq Eva, surel)', indeed, A pi, but. Nfinam, certainly, cq 

Tvam vettha, thou knowest. Brahmanah, of Brahman. Riipam, 

form, nature. 3foT Yat, because, Asya, of this (Unconditioned Brahman, 

above Time, Space and Causation.) ^q Tvam, thou (art but one of the many 
conditioned Consciousnesses.) In thee, the nominative used in the sense of 
locative. That aspect which is in thee. qq Yat, that (form of Brahman which 
is other than thy conditioned self.) Asya, of this (Brahman in nature.) 

qqg Devesu, in the Devas, nature gods like India, Agni, &c. Atha, there¬ 

fore. 5 Nu, now. qrqhqq Mimamsyam, should be thought out. qq Eva, 
indeed, alone. % Te, of thee, by thee. Manye, I think, fqfq^ Viditam, 

known. 

1. (0 Malies'vara !) If thou thinkest “1 know (Brahman) fully” 

then even thou also verily knowest but the minor manifestation of Brah¬ 
man. Because (of this little knowledge), therefore, now thou must think 
(over the other) manifestations of Brahman, as it is in thee and the Devas. 
“ I think 1 know. 9. 

Note. —(A11 objection is raised, “you have said that Brahman is not known by the Deva 
of the mind even. But that is improper. I, Rudra, am the Deva of the mind, I certainly 
know Brahman completely. W T liv do you then, O Brahma ! say that the Deva of the 
mind even does not know Brahman completely.” This objection raised by Rudra, is 
answered by Brahma in the present verse.) 

O Rudra ! if thou thinkest “ I know Brahman well, ” then thou even, like others, hast 
known only a small portion of the essence of Brahman. Because thou knowest only a 
small aspect of Brahman (the Dahara Brahman) therefore, that aspect of Brahman which 
is in thee and that aspect which exists in the Devas, must now be investigated by thee. 

Mantra 2. 

♦ ^ '*\ , *\ rs > r\ ^ 

*^q §qqiq qr q qqrq qq q 1 
qt q*q|q qlq qt q qqfo qq q M ° II * II 

?T qjq Na aham, not I, t\e. t even J, Brahma. q?q Manye, think. Madhva 
reads it as “ others,” q Vti, gqq Suveda, 1 well know (or 1 fully know 








28 


KENA-UPANTSAD. 


Brahman). fr% Iti, thus, 3T No, not. 3 3^ Na veda, I not know (i.e. f I do not 
know at all.) ff3 Iti, tlius (nor is this knowledge an uncertain thing, lor). 3^ 
Veda cha, and 1 know (and knowing it, l do not know. It is no object as I have 
no idea of difference between me and it for l know), 3: Yah, who (different from 
me.) 3: Nab, amongst us (pupils.) 3^ Tad, that (as I have described above, />., 
not fully known, nor totally unknown, but known as near one) 33 Veda, 

knows, Tad, that. 33 Veda knows. 3T No, not. 3 33 Na veda, I do not 
know, Iti, thus 3^ Veda, he knows. =3 Cha, and. 

2. I do not think I know Him fully ; though others (say) ‘ we know 
Him fully.’ Nor do 1 say I know Him not at all, for I know. Amongst 
us who says “ I know Him, ” he knows Him not. He who says “ I do not 
know Him, ” he knows indeed.—10. 

Note .—The words 353 (3*33 “1 think I know or it is known,” arc taken by Maclliva 
as part of the next verse. 

Note .—(Admitted that none knows Brahman completely except thee, O Brahma ! But 
thou at least knowest Him fully, for such we have always heard. Therefore, it is not 
correct to say that Brahmin is unknown to all the Dcvas : To this Brahma replies :) 

I do not think that Brahman is fully known by me. 

(How does then the world say that thou knowest Brahman fully ? The world says so, 
through ignorance.) 

The others (namely, the ignorant only) say that 1 (Brahma) know Brahman fully. 

(Dost tliou then know nothing of Brahman ?) 

It is not a fact that 1 do not know Brahman at all. 1 know him a little. 

(If thou dost not know Baahman fully, then thou art also an ignorant being and 
cannot be the Teacher of the whole universe. To this Brahma replies,I am not an a.jnanin 
but a jfianin. For he is an ajiiunin or a non-knower of Brahman who thinks that he 
knows Brahman fully ; while he, who thinks that he docs not know Brahman fully, is 
called a jhanin. Thus Brahma establishes the truth that Brahman is unknowable in Ilis 
entirety, but knowable in part only.) 

Amongst ns, that person who says “I know that Brahman completely,” is a non- 
knower of Brahman (for he would not h ive said so had lie known Brahman—for lie takes 
the partial knowledge of Bralunan to be full knowledge, and thinks Brahman to be a 
limited being thal call lie fully known). 

But he, who says “ I do not fully know that Brahman,” knows Him (for lie has not 
limited Brahman by the littleness of his knowledge). 

Mantra 3. 

3*3U# ^ ^ 33 3*3 3 33 u: 1 

wfaqrm T33H3T T33T33r33T33r3 II n 3 . mi 

3*3 Yasya, by whom (of that knower of Brahman.) =333 Amatam, is not 
thought (who thinks that he does not know Brahman) not to be reasoned or 
thought out or determined. 3f3 Tasya, by him; of him. 33 Matam, it is 
known. 33 Matam, it is thought (who thinks that he knows Brahman.) 3*3 
Yasya, by whom. 3 Na, not. 33 Veda, he knows. 3: Sah, he. 3Tr3?r3 Avi- 
jnatam, not known, not realised. f^RrTT Vijanatam, of (by) the difference- 




IT IKE ANT) A 4 . 


29 


knowers (who still have the idea of distinctions of the knower, knowledge and 
known) RgrrFT Vijnatam, known. Avijanatam, by (of) non-difference 

knowers, who do not know distinctions of knower, known, and knowledge. 
The force of is to denote “ distinctions, manifoldness.” 

3. Of whom (the opinion) is “ Brahman is not to be thought of,” 
by him He is (rightly) thought. He who thinks “Brahman has been 
thought of by me," he does not know. By those who consider “ we have 
realised Brahman,” He lias not been realised. By those who consider 
“ we cannot fully realise Brahman,” He is realised.—11. 

Note .—He who thinks “ I cannot completely think out Brahman” lias got an idea 
of Brahman—(has brought some portion of Brahman within the grasp of his mind. For he 
does not fall into the error that Brahman can be made an object of complete mental 
apprehension.) 

But he who thinks “ I have completely thought out Brahman,” has got no idea of 
Brahman (for he has got the wrong notion that Brahman can be completely thought out: 
and he limits Brahman .) 

He who thinks “ 1 have made the entire Brahman an object of my meditation, and 
in my meditation, I have known him entirely” has not known Brahman. 

But he who thinks “I cannot know Brahman fully even in meditation,” knows Him. 

Mantra. 4 

STTcfTTU fTrUPJrR# % TqF^ I 

finsPTT II \ * It* II 

Prati-bodha viditam, known as (a witness of or behind) every 
(act of) cognition (or intelligence), know according to one’s intelligence, under¬ 
stood as an object of intuitive knowledge, realised by direct preception. 
Matam, thought of (according to the extent of one’s intelligence.) Is to be under¬ 
stood (It is to be realised in every act of cognition, and not where cognition 
ceases, as in deep sleep or trance.) By meditation, matam or meditation is the 
means of pratibodham or realisation. Amritatvam, immortality, Brahman. 

Hi, indeed, because. Vindate, he obtains, is made to obtain (causative.) 

STT^RT Atrnana, by (the knowledge of) self, by performance of sacrifices, by his 
own effort or by his lower Self, by the grace of the SELF, Vindate, he 

obtains. Viryam, power, strength, like wealth, &c., but not immortality); 
or the strength (to destroy ignorance) intense joy. Vidyaya, by knowledge. 

Vindate, he obtains. Amritam, immortality. 

4. Understanding (thinking and realising) Him according to one’s 
intelligence, as a direct object of intuition, verily lie obtains immortality. 
By one’s own (exertion in the performance of duties even after attaining 
wisdom) he obtains inetnse joy, through the grace of the Supreme SELF; 
and by direct knowledge of Brahman, he obtains immortality.—12. 

Note .—He who has realised Brahman directly in the method mentioned above, 
attains immortality. The words “pratibodha viditam ” mean intuitive and direct per¬ 
ception of an object. When Brahman is thus directly realised, He gives salvation to such 

5 




30 


KENA-UPAmSAD. 


a person. But what is the nature of this “ aparoksa ” called here “ pratibodha” and how 
is this to be gained? The answer to this is “matam,” meditation: meditate, meditate 
meditate—matam, matam, matam-—and yon will have pratibodha or aparoksa -direct 
beatific vision. 

But there are texs—such as “ the drinking of ambrosia gives immortality”-show¬ 

ing that salvation may be obtained by things other than meditation, namely, by karma- 
or action. The jnana is not the only means of getting immortality or salvation. 

This objection is raised under a misapprehension. The salvation always depends 
upon jn£nain or knowledge and never on karma or action. The karma is a contributory 
cause of Mukti. The Pravritti or self-related karmas never lead to mukti. The Nivritti 
karmas or actions performed unselfishly, purify the soul and are instrumental in produc¬ 
ing knowledge. The action performed before Mukti leads to knowledge and not to mukti. 
The actions performed after attaining mukti have a specific effect of their own. This 

is mentioned in the verse “atrnana vindate viryam, vidyaya vindate amritam”-The 

actions performed after the attainment of wisdom produce the grace of the Lord, and 
through such grace of the SELB 1 (atrnana) there results viryam or intense felicity or ex¬ 
pansion of power—the man attains to the fulness of his viryam or manhood. But the 
immortality or amritatvam depends upon vidya alone—the mukti is obtained through 
knowledge alone. Thus if a person after attaining mukti, performs karmas, they tend 
towards the increase of his bliss : while the non-performance of any karma then, keeps the 
bliss stationary: there is no increase in it. 


Mantra 5. 


'TRT: HTFcT 11 \\i\l 


SfcT ^55 iftll 


^ Ilia, here, (in this body) or here when one has the good fortune of get¬ 
ting a true Guru like Brahma. Chet, if. =sr%^<r Avedit, knew. If persons 

like you, O Siva! know Brahman, Atha, then. Satyam, true, the Su¬ 

preme end, the Brahman ; well, good. The salvation, nioksa. Asti, is, hap¬ 
pens through the instruction imparted by a Sad Guru. ^ Na, not. Chet, if. 

Ilia, here. Avedit, knew. JTScft Mahati, great, long, giving rise to three 

sorts of pains. RrT?- Vinastih, calamity, loss; destruction (new births and 
deaths): the region of the asuras, the blinding darkness. Bhutesu 

BhCitesu, in all things, in every life. The first bhutesu means “in all beings,” 
the other bhotesu means “ among the beings who have reached the status of 
Sad Gurus.” Vichitya, having realised or known, having thought or 

seen, discovered (oneself in all lives); having selected by discrimnation the Sad 
Guru suited to one. v/ftp Dbirah, the wise, the thoughtful. Pretya, depart¬ 
ing ; pra=thorough and itya = knowledge, pretya, having obtained thorough 
knowledge, Asmat, from this, Cokat, world or ” loka ” may mean 

“the teacher,” “the seer,” through whom one gets sight” (look) 
Amritali, immortal. Bhavanti, become. 

5. If lie knows Him here then there is good for him. If he knows 
Him not here, then there is great loss. The wise knowing Him in all 










II KHANVA 5 . 


31 


beings, going out of this world, after getting full knowledge from Guru, 
become immortal.—13. 

Note .—Admitted that Rmhma-jffanam is the means of gettiug mukti, but where is 
the hurry of getting this jiianam ? The life is eternal, and some day or other every 
jiva will attain this perfection: so there is no need of exerting in the present. This 
danger of laziness must be guarded against: and the present verse gives a warning. 
Strive to attain the Divine Wisdom—the Brahma-jiianam—the theosophia, in this very 
life. When one has reached the presence of a True Teacher, like Brahma, he should not 
procrastinate. It is a great good fortune to get a Sad Guru and when a guru is got, the 
man must be unlucky if he fails to learn wisdom from him. For if he gets sueh know¬ 
ledge, then there is satyam or good for him, i.e., he gets mukti. For knowledge obtained 
from the instructions given by a Sad Guru alone leads to salvation. If, however, he 
fails to take advantage of such a Sad Guru, and does not understand from him the true 
nature of Brahman, then there is great ‘‘calamity”—namely, going to utter darkness— 
called also the darkness where the asuras dwell. For this is the law, that the person 
who hears the gospel and rejects it, is himself rejected—for when the Perfect Teacher 
comes to a man and the latter rejects him, he does so at his own peril. Thus there is 
a great danger in disobeying the instructions given by a Sad Guru. Therefore, the thought 
ful man should select, from among all beings and among all teachers professing to be 
Sad Gurus, the True Teacher, and having so selected with discrimination, stick to him 
with faith, believing “through the kindness of this teacher I shall know Brahman and 
by his instructions and help I shall reach Dim.” Then having thoroughly learned from 
such a teacher the nature of Brahman, and having realised Him, he attains immortality, 
on throwing oil his last body. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

(Brahma-Sara continued.) 

“ No one knows Him fully and completely in all His aspects and attributes. He who 
entertains the notion ‘I know Him fully,’ does not know the Lord, He remains un¬ 
known to such a person. But he who never has this notion, knows the Lord always- 
Similarly, he who thinks that he has completely meditated upon Brahman, has not per¬ 
formed the true meditation, and the Highest Person is far beyond the scope of the medita¬ 
tion of such a person. 

“ Thus the Supreme Lord is neither completely unknown, nor one who can be known 
iu all His entirety. This jiva-form is not that unchangeable Brahman, called Yisnu. But 
He is that who is constantly near thee, and controls all thy functions. Know Him as 
Brahman who is named Visnu, the unchangeable. He is the highest and ruler of the 
Devas even, what to say of men. Without His Grace, there is no salvation, nor does the 
desire for it and effort to attain it, arise in the hearts of men, without such command on 
the part of the Lord. Thus the jiva should never think that he can ever become Brahman. 




Third Khanda. 


Mantra i. 

^ 1 RRT RRTR ^ j^RJT R^R RT 

RRfRJR cT q^TRRRTRqR RW^RR^RR RTf- 
*rfrT II \ 8 M II 

Brahma, the Brahman, in His aspect as Inner Ruler. ^ Ha, once, 
certainly, verily, Devebhyah, for the Devas, (in order to help the Devas) 

that they may get power, nnnii Vijigye, obtained victory, won the fight, 
over the Daityas and Danavas. 3*3 Tasya, of Him, His, Brahman’s, f Ha, 
so, an exclamation of wonder, ^ixrr: Brahmanah, of Brahman. Vijaye, 

in the victoiy. ^T: Devah, the Devas (like Indra, Agni, Vayu.) 
Amahiyanta, became elated, triumphant, were honored, became proud, Te, 
they, (Devas) ignorant of r the power of Brahman. Aiksanta, thought. 

Asmakam, ours, <rq Eva, indeed, verily, only. Ayam, this, 
Vijayab, victory. Asmakam, ours, rcq Eva, only. ^ Ayam, this. 

Mahima, greatness (that we are worshipped with praises and puja by all 
creatures.) Iti. 

1. Brahman (being immanent in the Devas) verily conquered (the 
Daityas) for the sake of the Devas. (But though) the vietory was of Him, 
the Brahman, lo! the Devas became puffed up. They considered— “'This 
victory is ours only, ours only is this greatness.”—14. 

Mantra 2. 

^qf r^t f srTfqnq ^ rt^r 

u * vt n ^ II 

rfH Tat, be, that, />., that pride, conceit, &c. £ Ha, verily, Esam, 

of them (the Devas ; the ignorant, self-conceited.) Vijajnau, perceived. 

^>■3: Tebhyah, for them, for their sake ; in order to teach them their true self, 
and His true SELF. 3 Ha, then, Pradurbabhuva, appeared accom¬ 

panied by Brahma, Vayu, j^esa, Garuda, Rudra and their spouses, cfH Tat, 
him. ^ Na, not. Vyajanata, they knew, Kim, what, t.e. } what 

is the true nature of this being standing before us. ldam, this, 
Yaksa, Yaksam, adorable one. iti. 

2. (Brahman) veiily perceived this (conceit) of theirs. For (the sake 
of teaching) them, He appeared (as a Yaksa accompanied by l T ma, Siva, 
and Brahma.) Him they did not know, who was this Yaksa.—15. 








JIT KHAhJT)A, 6 . 


33 


Mantra 3. 

rT^frT r <^l3 

Te, they (the Devas.) Agnim, to Agni (///., the fore-runner of 

the Devas), the mind (Principle of the Cosmos.) Abruvan, said, 

Jatavedah, O Jatavedas ! all-knower, source of all knowledge, (or all-mind.) 
<1^ Etar, this (being who is in front of us.) Vijanihi, discover, find out 

fully. Kim, what, Etat, this, Yaksam, Yaksa, adorable one. 

Iti, thus. (Then Agni said :) rpqr Tatha, so (let it be); yes. Iti. 

3. They said to Agni : “ 0 Ivnower-of all-that-are-born ! Find this 
out, what is this Yaksa ?” Agni said <c all right. ”—16. 

Mantra 4. 

3T II ^ VS II ^ II 

Tat, to Him. (Yaksa.) Abhyadrava*, he ran towards. 

Tam, him (the Agni.) Abhyavadat, addressed (He, the Brahman.) 3F>: 

Kah, who. Asi, art thou. fRr Iti, thus (Agni replied.) ^na: Agnili, Agni. 

% Vai, indeed. Aham, I. Asmi, am. fPT Iti, thus, Abravit, 

he said. Jatavedah, Jatavedah. % Vai, verily, well-known. 

Aham, I. Asmi, am. Iti, thus. 

4. He went towards that Yaksa. He (Yaksa) said to Agni:—“ Who 
art thou ? ” Agni replied “ I am Agni, indeed, I am the well-known Jata- 
vedas.”— 17. 

Mantra 5. 

T% #T3qT- 

ftTrt II II * II 

Tasmin, in that, in such (thee) Tvayi, in thee. r% Kim, 

what. qt&R Viryam, power, strength In, thus. (Agni replied.) Apr, 

verily, certainly. Idam, this (dry as well as wet, moveable and immove¬ 
able ) ^ Sarvam, all. Daheyam, 1 can burn. 33; Yat, what, ldam, 

this, Prithivyam, on the earth (as well as in heaven.) Iti. 

5. (The Yaksa said:) “ What power is in thee so styled ? ” (Agni 
said) “ Whateverjs in the earth, all this verily I can bum. ”—18. 

Mantra 6 . 

^ ftfWrTfffrT cT<|WTTq rT^T 

W ^ TWT5 q^r^T- 

mfa 11 h \\i 11 












34 


KENA-UPANISAD . 


Tasmai, to him (the Agni,* who was so conceited.) Trinam, a 
straw. Nidadhau, put or set before. Etat, this (dry straw) ^ 

Daha, burn. fR Iti, thus. Tat, that (straw.) Upapreyaya, went 

towards, dashed at, approached fully. Sarvajavena, with all might, 

Strength, with all swiftness, cfrr Tat, that (straw.) ?r Na, not. sotcir? 
Sasaka, was able. ^ Dagdhum, to burn (to ashes.) Sah, he (Agni with 
his pride fallen.) ?R. Tatah, from that (reason of not being able to burn a dry 
straw, and so ashamed ; or from that Yaksa.) with this trial of power 
returned. R^eR Nivavrite, desisted ; ceased, Na, not. iRcr Etat, this 
(Yaksa.) Asakam, 1 could. Vijnatum, to know, find out. qa Yar, 

what. iTffrT Etat, this. Yaksam, adorable one. fR Iti. 

0. (The Yaksa) placed a straw (in front of Agni and said) to him, 
“burn this.” He approached it with all swiftness. But lie could not 
burn it. He desisted after this one trial ; (and returning to the devas) he 
said, “ 1 could not find out who is this Yaksa ”—19. 


Mantra 7 


2R 

r^rfcT II Ro II V3 || 


Wl Atlia, then, Vayum, to Vayu, the Nasikya Vayu, the breath in 

the nostrils : the deity of air. Abruvan, they said, grar Vayo, O Yayu (O 

blower.) qga; Eiat, this. pniFftf! Vijanthi, discover, find out. fgj^Kint, what. 

Etat, this. Yaksam, adorable one. ffir Iti, thus (Vayu replied.) ggr 

Tatha,yes. fm Iti. 

7. Then to Vayu they said “ 0 Vayu ! find this out wliat is this 
Yaksa ? ” (Vayu said : Let it be) so.—20. 


Mantra 8 . 





fjw Tat, to Him (Yaksa.) ttpqygcr Abhyadravat, be ran. gq.Tam, to Him 
(Vflyu.) Abbyavadat, (the Yaksa) said or addressed, g;: Kali, who. 

Asi, art thou. ?fg Iti, thus (Vayu replied.) grg: Vayuh, Vayu. % Vai, 
verily, indeed. ^53 Attain, I Asmi, am. ffg Iti, thus. Abravit, 

He said, grgtOTr Matarisva, mover-in-motber-space. (qigft sjgfg, 

tTr*5rrg ?(%) % Vai, indeed. 3T?n Aham, I. Asmi, am. 

Iti, thus. 

8. lie (Vayu) went towards that (Yaksa.) He (Yaksa) said to (Vayu) 
“ Who art thou?” Vayu replied “ I am Vayu indeed, I am the well-known 
Matarisva, the mover-in mother space.”— 21. 







Ill KHANDA 11. 


35 


Mantra g. 

#rs*rifafcr n n $. ii 

cTfOT^ Tasmin, in that, r^fq Tvayi, in thee. r% Kim, what, ^fqa Vir- 
yarn, power, strength. %{$ hi, thus, Api, certainly, Idam, this, srq* 

Sarvam, all. ^rrq'TPig Adadiyam, I can take up, blow up in space and carry it 
away. qa Yat, what, Idam, this, 'jnisqn* Prilhivyam, on earth. f|q Iti, 
thus. 

9. The Yaksa said “In thee so styled, what power exists? (Vayu 
said) “ whatever is on this earth, all this verily I can take up.”—22. 

Mantra io. 

^ ^ qfHWq rtfT 

a cR ^ RWfa RfTTg q^T- 

n ^ Hto n 

rpq Tasmai, Him (Vayu.) Trinam, a straw. R^*fr Nidadhau, put 

before, tiqa Etat, this. Adatsva, take it up or blow it away from the 

ground. fRT Iti. qa Fat, that straw. scfaqrq Upapreyaya, went towards, ap¬ 
proached. Sarvajavena, with all might. qa Tat, that (straw.) q Na, not. 

s^ncrrar SSasaka, was able. ^rrqrg Adatum, to take up or blow. q: Sah, He (Vayu.) 
qq Tat all, thence, qq Eva, only, fqqfq Nivavrite, returned (and said.) q Na, 
not. trqa Etat, this. Asakam, I could be able. ftjqrgq Vijnatum, to know 

or find out. qq Yat, what, trqq Etat, this. q^j Yaksam, adorable one. ^rq Iti. 

10. —(The Yaksa) placed a straw before (Vayu) and (said) to him 
“ take it up.” He approached it with all swiftness. But he could not 
take it up. He desisted after (this one trial and returning said) “this I 
cannot find who is this Yaksa.”—23. 

Mantra n. 

rTqfrT II W II \\ II 

3Tq Atha, then (after return of Vayu with his pride lowered.) Indram, 
to Indra (the lord of the three-worlds, the buddhi-principle in cosmos.) 
Abruvan, they said. qqqq Maghavan, O Maghavan ! O powerful one ! Mighty 
one ! (Trig Etat, this (Yaksa.) RrsTTqrrt Vijanihi, discover, find out. Kim, 

what, tiqa Etat, this, q^ja Yaksam, adorable one. ^fq Iti, thus (Indra replied.) 
qqr Tatha, yes. frq Iti, thus, qa Tat, to that (Yaksa.) ^pqyqa Abhyadravat, 
he rati, q**qa Tasniat, from him (Indra) from that (spot.) Or q*q[q may mean 











36 


KENA-UPA NISAD. 


“ therefore,” />., therefore He (Brahman) vanished, because India was ap~ 
proaching and was not tit to be taught by Brahman or &va or Brahma. So he 
disappeared with all his companions, leaving Uma. Tirodadhe, dis¬ 

appeared, vanished. 

11. Then to India they said “ 0 Magliavail ! find this out what is 
this Yaksa?” (Be it) so.” He went towards that. (The Yaksa) vanished 
from that spot.—24. 

Mantra 12. 

h f*r- 

ftaR 11 11 11 

5RT \\ \ \\ 

3 T Sah, he (Indra.) rN?*R Tasinin, in that, Eva, same, very. 

Akase, space, spot (where the Yaksa stood, he, the Indra, remained meditating 
on Him and while he was thus engaged anxious to see the Yaksa, Brahma-vidya 
appeared to him in a woman's form.) Striyam, a woman (the personified 

Brahma-vidya.) ^TT^rrrR Ajagama, he came upon, He approached or went near. 

Bahusobhamanam, very fair, highly adorned. Uniam, Uma, 

splendid. f^rTT Haiinavatim, refulgent or decked in gold, or the daugliter of 
Himavat. That portion of Upamsad which deals about Brahman is called so, 
because Brahman who is always self-luminous like snow (or liima) is treated in 
it, therefore the Upanisad is called Himavat; daughter of it would be Haimavati. 
rU^Tam, her. ^ Ha, then. sqpr Uvacha he said. 1% Kim, what, tjrpr Etat, 
this. 3^9 Yaksam, adorable one. Iti. 

12. He (seeing) a woman in that very space (where the Yaksa had 
lately stood) came towards (her.) (She was) the very fair Uma, the daughter 
of Himavat. He asked her “ who was that Yaksa ?”—25. 

MADIIVA’S COMMENTARY. 

(The Brahma-Sara—continued.) 

“ Now 1 shall tell thee a story, listen to it attentively, O Maliesvara! That Brahman 
abiding in the Devas, conquered the Daityas and the Danavas : and thus obtained victory 
for the sake of the Devas. But the Devas being obsessed by the Asuras, thought that the 
victory was theirs, and not of Brahman. The Sifter of men assuming the form of a Yaksa, 
appeared before them in order to teach them a lesson and give them enlightenment. He 
was accompanied by Uma and Siva and Braluna, in order to show to the Devas that Ho 
was highor than even these and that these were also llis servants and members of His 
hierarchy and household, and under His dominion. Another reason of His being so 
accompanied was to tell to the Devas:--“Ye Devas cannot know even these members of 
my household, how can yon know me ?” 

The Fire and Air successively went to find out who was this Yaksa: and lastly, 
Indra also went, but were unable to understand that Yaksa. The Lord Janardana thought 
when Indra approached him : “This Indra has greater intelligence than the other Devas, 
and will ask me questions as Agni and Vayu did, but he is not in a (it state of mind now 
to be taught by me or by Siva or by Brahma so 1 must disappear from his sight. ” Thus 









Ill KHATSQA, 12. 


37 


thinking Brahman became invisible along with Siva and Brahma: leaving behind Uma 
alone, in order to intimate to Indra that she was the proper person to instruct him and 
not Vi suit, Siva or Brahma. 

Note .—This parable is given-here to strengthen the statement already made before 
that Brahman is not fully and completely cognisable by the Devas even. The Brahman, as 
the Inner Ruler of the Devas, obtained the victory for the Devas. Had he obtained victory 
by an incarnation like that of Rama or Krisna, then there could not have arisen any 
question as to whom the glory of the victory should belong. It is only when the Lord 
does not incarnate, but uses jivas—whether Devas or men—as His instruments, and 
accomplishes some great work, that these jivas become vain-glorious and attribute the 
success to themselves and not to the Lord within them. 

The Devas are generally wide awake, but in the parable it is said that they were 
obsessed by the Asuras l and hence they fell into the natural error of thinking that the 
victory was theirs and not of the Lord within them. These Asuras or Dark Powers throw 
such glamour over the brightest intellects, even those of the Devas. All the Devas, how- 
over, had not fallen into this error. Brahma, Siva, Uma and the consort of Brahma were 
free from such error. The Upanisad clearly states that Uma had not fallen into this error 
for she taught the truth to Indra. When Uma was free from this misconception, it is easily 
inferred that Brahma and Siva, who are higher them Uma in the cosmic scale, were also 
free from this error. Therefore Maclhva says that the Lord appeared accompanied by 
Uma, Siva and Brahma. There were two reasons why the Lord appeared along with these 
three. The first was to prove to the Devas that He was greater than these even, and 
that they were merely His ministers and servants and a fortiori the Devas also were His 
servants: and thus the victory was really His and not of the Devas who were merely His 
tools. The second was to teach them humility—that they who were ignorant even of 
Uma, .Siva and Brahma should not be vain enough to attribute all glory of the victory to 
themselves. 

The Upanisad says when Indra approached the Yaksa, he vanished. Why did 
Brahman vanish at his approach ? The Brahman thought “ Indra is the wisest of all and 
he would ask questions and so let me vanish.” But what harm was tlierb if Indra asked those 
questions? Indra was not so advanced as to be taught the true nature of Brahman by 
Brahman himself : nor was he advanced enough to be taught by Siva and Brahma. Not 
only this, but owing to Indra’s being obsessed by Asuras, he was still more unfit to be 
taught by these. Therefore Brahman vanished along with Brahma and Siva: leaving 
Uma behind, to answer all questions of Indra. 


G 







Fourth Khanda. 


Mantra i. 

agrfa t'nrrs st^rorT nafesra 
<ra> %r faff=rarr agrfs n h M m 

Sa, she (said to India, this Yaksa was.) srgl Brahma, Brahman. (Your 
Inner Ruler.) ff% lti, thus. ^ Ha, then (further she) verily, fully. 
Uvacha, said, replied, ggnir: Brahmanali, of Brahman. % Vai, certainly. 
q?T<T Etat, this, of this victory. R3fq Vijaye, victory, conquest.. g^f: Devah, 
O devas. (^r) Mahiyadhvam, you have become great, you have got 

all this honor (from men who worship you as conquerors of Asuras) or 
have bocome puffed up with pride, ffs Bi, thus. Srp Tatali, from this instruc¬ 
tion of Uma. f Ha, verily, qf Eva, only. Madhva reads % (Vai) instead of, qq 
meaning ‘ certainly.’ Vidanchakai a, he (jndra) knew that it was 

sT3T Brahma (Brahman) the Yaksa that had disappeared. Bi, thus. 

1. She said “ Verily this is Brahman. Verily in the victory of this 
Brahman, you, 0 Devas ! have become great and vain ; and therefore you 
should not be proud. ” Thence lie knew that It was Brahman.—26. 

Mantra 2. 

TRKT3T HTt ^tT -t|« R( Stfgfc 

Wrts ijataimr iroirii 

^I?t Tasmat, therfore; because these Devas had seen and discoursed 
with Brahman, or because they had ceased to be proud, or because they 
first learnt the true nature of their self. % Vai, also, even. q% Ete, these, 
^j. Devafi, Gods—Agni,Vayu and India. Or Brahma, Vayu, Sesas, Garuda, 
Vindra, Siva and their consorts or Kama, Daksa, Brihaspati, Svftyambhuva 
Manu, Aniruddha, SOrya, Chandra, Dharma and Varuna. ^rf%fTtRt Atitaram, 
excel to be above, to surpass. Iva, as it were. T'lieir superiority to other 
Devas was innate, as Brahma, &c., had no self-pride and never fell into the error 
of attributing to themselves the victory won by the Warrior Within, 

Anyan, others (than Agni, NSsikya Vayu and Indra.) Devan, Gods (like 

Chandra, Varuna, &c.) “Other Devas ’’ like Indra, <&c. ^ Yat, namely. =5jf&: 

An-nih, Agni. ^3: Vayuh, Vayu. TTtRPfq: Nasikya, the ordinary air of respira¬ 
tion. f??: Indrah, Indi a. The Devas like Kama, Daksa, etc., should also be 
included. % Te, tliese (Agni, Vayu and Indra.) f| Hi, because. qTRT Enat, it : the 
Brahman in the form of Yaksa. Nedistham, nearest, dearest, earliest, 

first in time, qpjg: Paspri&th, touched, reflected, cogitated. % ft Tehi, because 






IV KHANVA , 


39 


o. 


they (Agni, Va}'u and Indi a.) Enat, it (the Brahman in the form of a Yaksa.) 

: Prathamah, the first, the foremost (of the Devas), the first, (as an adverb 
of time.) Vidanchakara, knew. The singular verb used instead of 

the plural, agj Brahma, Brahman. iti, thus. 

2. Only for this (reason), these Devas, Brahma, Vayu, Sesa, &c., are, 
as if, superior to other Devas, namely, to Agni, Vayu and Indra. And 
because Agni, Vayu and Indra reflected first on that Brahman and 
touched Him the nearest, and because they first knew “ This Yaksa is 
Brahman ” therefore, they are also superior to other Devas.—27. 

Mantra 3. 

u fkrspqm 11 rs u ^ n 

r^ificr Tasmat, therefore. % Vai, also. Indrah, Indra. It includes 

Kama also. Atitaram lva, excels, surpasses, as it were, 

Any an, other (than Agni and Vayu who merely saw and had a conversation 
with the Yaksa, but were not taught, as Indra was by Uma, that this was 
Brahman.) Devan, Gods, u Sa, he (Indra.) f| Hi, because, Enat, 

it (Brahman.) Nedistham, nearest, first, Pasparsa touched, reflect¬ 

ed. Sa, he. ft Hi, because. (The rest like the last words of the preced¬ 
ing verse.) 

3. For this alone Indra is, as if superior to other Devas : because he 
first reflected upon That, because he first knew “ This is Brahman. ”—28. 

MADHVA’S commentary. 

Uma then fully tolcl Indra all about Vismi, the Supreme Goal, and because Brahma, 
Vayu, Sesa, Vindra and Siva along with their respective spouses were not proud, (but 
knew that the victory was not theirs, but of Brahman) therefore they excelled the other 
Devas. 

[Note .—The mention of Vayu, Sesa and Yimlra and their wives, shows by implication 
that when Brahman appeared as a Yaksa, He was accompanied by these also. In other 
words. He was accompanied by five great devas : Siva, Brahma, Vayu, Sesa and Vindra and 
five great devis, the wives of these. These ten, by their humility and perfect knowledge, 
never fell into the great error of “1” and therefore they became superior to other Devas. 
The statement in the text that Indra, Agni and Vayu became superior to all Devas 
should be read in the light of the above remarks. They are not superior to Brahma and 
the rest mentioned above. Nor is Indra superior to Kama, nor is Vayu of the breath 
superior to Daksa nor is Agni superior to Surya.] 

But Indra came to know Brahman first, (£.<?., he knew when taught by Uma, that the 
Yaksa was Brahman) and therefore, he alone became the best of all Devas. So Kama 
alone became higher than Daksa and the rest, because he learnt Brahman prior to these, and 
taught them. (The true nature of the Yaksa was learned by other Devas from Kama.) 
They were told to learn the truth about this Yaksa from Kama, and to that command, these 
(namely) Daksa, Brikaspati, Manu, Kama’s son, the Sun, the Moon, Dkarma and Vanina, 









40 


KEN A-UFA Is! ISA 1). 


said “ Oni! yes (we shall learn from Kama)” and thus they became better than those Devas 
who had not so learnt. As the Nasikya Yayu and Agni saw the Yaksa first, but they did not 
understand Brahman. (Tndra learnt and understood Brahman first, while Nasikya Yayu 
and Agni sow Him first, though they failed to understand Him.) Therefore all these Devas, 
namely, Indra, Kama, &c., are described as best of all the Devas ; Indra and Kama are the 
two highest of all Devas, higher than these two are Brahma and the rest. Among the Devas 
Agni is the lowest, and Yisnu the highest. Like Brahma, &c., all other devas are between 
these two. (The reason why Agni is lowest, is that he learnt the Yaksa to be Brahman 
last of all and that also through Tndra. While the Devas like Kama, &c., learnt from 
Uma simultaneously with Indra.) Agni is lowest because he learnt last from the 
teaching of Tndra. This is the precedence among the Devas, some being higher and some 
lower, according as they know Yisnu better and more fully or partially and less fully. 

Note .—The difference among the Devas arose from the fact that some learnt the truth 
about Brahman early and some late. Thus Indra learnt first, then Kama, next Daksa, 
then Brihaspati, then Mann, then the son of Kama, then the Sun,then the Moon, then 
Dliarma, and then Yaruna, and then Nasikya Yayu and then Agni. 

Mantra 4. 

rKtq fTRSTT TTrfnHJrTT ^ feftfrf ^4t- 

TK^T \ II *5. II 2 II 

CTTO Tasya, of Mini (the Lord.) qq: Esab, this, which will be mentioned. 

Adesah, teaching, instruction by illustration or mode of meditation. 

Yat, that, qr?T Etad, this (the form called Kapila.) rsjh* Vidyutah, the splendid 
objects of lightning : the luminaries like the sun, &c. Abhi, from 

all sides. Vyadyutad, flashed forth, illumined fully. =5TT^ All, 

full, or purnam It has the Pluta stress, indicating wonder ; i c. t Wonderful 
is the brightness of Brahman. Or ^rr may be an adverb and combined with 
vyadyutad, />., a-vyadyutad, fully illumined. T he Brahman is called be¬ 
cause He is full, ^tct Iti, thus. It, and, thus, similarly. RHtRqH Nyami- 

misat, closed the eyes : and slept on the Ocean of milk in Pralnya. Ah, 

(/. r., Brahman) the Full. Fully closed the eyelids, Iti^this (illustration) or 
teaching. Adhidaivatam, with regard to gods or Devas or super¬ 

physical. Super-divine. Or the above two illustrations describe Brahman 
in its aspect of Hiranyagarbha—the One behind all forces—the Over-God of 
all. It flashes in the flash of the lightning. It winks in the winking of the 
eye. It is behind all these physical phenomena. 

4. Of Him this is the Adhidaiva teaching, lie who illumines all 
luminous objects at creation, He who closing Ilis eyes, sleeps on the Ocean 
of milk in Pralaya, that is Brahman called the A (Full.) This is Adhidai- 
vata,—29. 

Note— Of That (Brahman) tins is an illustrative teaching: “Behold! the flash of 
lightning. This is that.” “Behold! (the eye) winketh— (and there It is too.)” This is 
the adhidaivata or physical. 

Note .—This verse describes Adhidaiva fonn of Brahman, for the purposes of medita¬ 


tion. 







41 


IV KIIANT)A, 6 . 


MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The instruction about Brahman, so far as His Adhidaiva (cosmological aspect) is con¬ 
cerned is this:— 

Hari, called Kapila, illumines even the lightning itself and others. He closing His 
eyes, sleeps on the Ocean of Milk at the time of Pralaya. He alone is the one and the 
Supreme Brahman. 

Mantra 5. 

n \o 11 y. 11 

?nr Atha, now; next after describing the Adhidaivic aspect. Adliyat- 

niam, psychological, the teaching as regards the Pratyagatman— the substrate 
of all consciousness, the subjective self. Dehe, ' in the body ’ as opposed to 
non-self, qx Yat, that which. iprT Etad, this, Aniruddha aspect of Brahman. 
*n= 3 T% Gachchhati iva, seems to move, goes as it were, tries to enter into or 
know, seems to perceive as it were (but really mind does not fully perceive it, 
because Brahman is not an object of complete mental perception), does not fullv 
go, does not fully comprehend. ^ Iva, fully. =* Cha, and. Manah, the mind. 

Anena, by whom, by Aniruddha. Cha, and. alone is another reading. 
qHT Etad, this Brahman. Madhva reads by this Aniruddha alone that 

things of world, sJHWnr Upa-smarati, becomes an instrument of memory, re¬ 
members. The power of memory of the mind conies from the Aniruddha aspect. 

Abhiksnam constantly, again and again, multitude of objects, untiring. 
5 RW 7 : Sankalpah, desire or thought. Thought-maker, imagination, will. 
The sankalpa is here taken to mean mind, the part for the whole. 

5. Next the adhyatma teaching, that which is this Aniruddha 
aspect of Brahman whom the mind, as if, struggles to enter into and 
comprehend, but whom it never fully knows, is the Lord, through whom 
this eternal thought-maker (the raindj gets its faculty of memory.—30. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The instruction about Brahman, so far as adhyatma (Psychological) is concerned is 
as follows :— 

“ That whom tho mind partly apprehends, but whom it does never completely com¬ 
prehend (literally, in whom the manas enters, as if, and at the same time does not enter) 
by whom the memory even functions, that Lord of Lords, called Aniruddha, is praised as 
the Supreme Brahman.” 

Mantra 6 . 

14 Hqfftr mtttr n n z \\ 

5T?r Tat, that aspect of Brahman, called Aniruddha. ? Ha, verily, 
Tad-vanam, all-adored, all-pervading. ^=5^ and ^ = qspfhl», adorable. 










42 


KENA-UPANISAD. 


The all-pervading adorable Lord. Nama, called. rTfq Tadvanam, by 

the name of Tadvana or the all-pervading, adorable one. lti, thus, 

Upasitavyam, is to be worshipped, meditated upon, realised. Sail, he 

(the worshipper.) Yah, who. Etad, this aspect of Brahman called Ani- 

ruddha. qq Evam,thus, as described above (t.e., as Tadvanam.) Veda, knows, 
meditates upon, Abhi, an Upasarga qualifying the verb Samvanchhanti. 

I his is a Vedic use of the preposition detached from the verb. ^ Ha, verily. 

Enam, Him (the worshipper of tadvana.) Sarvani, all. ^rTrR Bhutani, 

beings. Samvanchhanti, have a desire or Samgachchhanti, 

approach. 

6. That indeed is known as Tadvana “ the all-pervading adorable 
one.” He should be worshipped as Tadvana. He who knows Him thus, 
all creatures love him.—31. 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

That Vis mi is called Tadvanam : because He is Tatam or all-provading, and because 
He is Vananiya or all-beloved. Thus Tadvanam means the All-prcvading Lord, beloved 
of all. lie who knows Him thus becomes verily loved of all. 

Mantra 7. 

-*r zfr^WA ^ sqfaq^rsfi qur q ^qRq- 

qHfRTcT II II VS II 

Upanisadam, the Upanisad, the secret doctrine, the Theoso¬ 

phy or the wisdom about Brahman. ^ Bho, O Lord, O Brahma. gft Bruhi, 
say, tell me with all its basis and its abode ftW lti, thus. Ukta, has been 

told. % Te, they or to thee. Upanisat, Upanisad. (literally , near, 

r wholly, to destroy, to approach, to loosen. That which destro}'s Avidya 
with all its latent effects, that which loosens the bond of egoism, in the shape 
of “ 1 " and “ mine,” and thus carries the soul wholly to the vicinity of Brahman 
and makes it realise its similarity with it. Maxmuller derives it from upa- 
near, ni-down, sad-to sit: an assembly or session where pupils approach and 
listen to their teacher.) Brahmim, the Brahmi, the doctrine relating to 

Brahman. Vava, alone, undoubtedly. ^ Te, to thee. Upanisadam, 

the Upanisad. Abriima, we have told, fR lti, thus. 

7. “0 Brabmfi, tell me the Upanisad.” (Brahma answered) the 

Upanisad has been told to thee : undoubtedly we have told thee the Brahmi 
Upanisad.—32. 

N. li . —The question, “ Teach me, Upanisad " may have three meanings : (1) teach mo 
the 13 rail mail—the subject matter of all Upanisads, (2) or the means by which the know¬ 
ledge obtained through Upanisad may be retained—the qualifications necessary to tit 
one to be the receptacle of this knowledge, (3» or the cause of this knowledge. To tho 
first, the answer is (he Drahmi Upanisad has already been taught. The next verse 
answers the other portion of the question. According to Sankara, the meaning of this 
question is that wliat has already been explained is the tvholc Upanisad, and there remains 













IV KHANDA, 8. 


43 


nothing to supplement or complement it. The next verse, according to him, would be 
almost redundant, and is not a portion of the Upanisad, “ nor as a distinct aid for achieving 
the end with the Upanisad.” 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Siva hearing this again asked Brahma “ Tell me who is the main topic of 
this science.” Brahma replied to him :—“ I have already told thee what is the chief 
topic of this science : now I shall tell thee the sources from which this may be learnt.” 

Mantra 8. 

cT# cNT U^TR URR- 

*TcRU. (I ^ U c: II 

Tasyai, ( rt&t STTm-^R^rfrPr) for that (in order to obtain that Upani¬ 
sad or realise that secret teaching). Tapah, penance or austerity, like 

Cbandrayana (the equilibrium of body, the senses and the mind : the one- 
pointedness of mind and senses, according to one’s inner nature, in order to 
purify the dense and the astral bodies.) ^: Damah, restraint, control of the 
senses. ^ Karma, sacrifice like asvamedha or action according to one’s 
caste and life-stage. fm Iti, and so on (like humility, &c.) Ernrsn Pratisthali, 
basis, or foundations ; feet on which the Brahma-vidya rests or stands. This 
knowledge has firm basis in those persons only who possess tapas, &c. 
Vedah, the Vedas: (i) Kik, (2) Yajus, (3) Saman, (4) Atharvan, (5) the Panchara- 
tra, (6) the Bharata, (7) the Ramayana, and (8) the Bhagavata Purana. 
Sarvangani, all the aAgas, like the Phonetics, the Ritual, the Grammar, the 
Prosody, &c.° Satyam, truth or the true (which remains unchanged through 
all times) Brahman, hence the Mimamsa, by which the True is determined. 

Ayatanam, abode. 

S. ("Of this Brahma-vidya), austerities, subduing of senses and the 
performance of works ordained for one’s particular occupation and social 
status, are the foundation. And the Vedas, with all tlieir Ahgas and the 
Mimamsa, are its superstructure or abode.—33. 

MADHAVA’S COMMENTARY. 

This science resides permanently in those who are well established in tapas 
(penance) and dama (control of conduct) and who discharge the duties of their order and 
stage in life. The sources or books from which this science may be learnt are the Vedas, 
the Vedahgas and the Mimamsa. He who knows these thoroughly, abides in Vismi.” 

The whole of the above commentary is from Brahma-Sara. 

(In mantra 4 “yad etad vidyutah vyadyutad ah” was explained as referring to the 
visible lightning and the letter was then taken as a separate word meaning Brahman : 
and the meaning of the verse then given was—this visible lighting is the supreme Brah¬ 
man analogically. Now the commentator gives another meaning, and takes the letter 
as an adverb ( ) or upasarga meaning fully ( completely .) 

The word vidyutah means literally lightning, but here luminaries like the sun and 
the rest. The word means “ illumines thoroughly all round.” The verse would 

then mean “ He who fully illumines all luminaries like the sun &c., even.” 






44 


KEN A-U PAN IS AD. 


As we find in the Gita (XV. 12):—That splendour issuing from the sun that en lighten¬ 
ed the whole world, that which is in the moon and in lire, that splendour know as from 
me. 

And in the Upanisad (Kath, V. 15):—When He shines forth, all shine after Him, by 
His light all this world becomes illumined. 

Similarly, 3Tf may be joined with nyamimisat, then it would mean—“ who closed his 
eyes to everything, i.e., went to deep sleep.” 

(The authority for holding that the Supreme Brahman also closes His eyes is next 
given.) As says the text : — 

“He verily is this Ancient Person who alone existed in His own unsurpassed Self— the 
Iswara, when even the Guuas like Sattva, &e., had not become separate and manifest. He, 
the Self of ; the Universe, the Lord, existed in His own self, with eyes closed, in that Great 
Night of Pralaya when all the Powers were asleep.’ 

The letter has been explained as denoting the Supreme Brahman : because gjf 
means ‘full,’ and Brahman is full. 

The words abhiksnatn sahkalpah qualify the word manas in verse 5 : the meaning 
being “Mind which is full of many multitudes of imaginings of determination.” 

(Now an objector might say—Sankalpa or formative Will is only one of the 
faculties of the mind, how do you deline mind as sankalpa ? To this the commentator 
answers :) 

The Sankalpa here means sahkalpakah the maker of imagination or formative 
will. The mind is not merely will, but will-maker: or that which wills. 

On being asked “ tell me the Upanisad with all its basis and ils abode,” the answer is 
“l have told you fully the essential form of the Upanisad, that is, the Brahman, about that 
there is nothing more to be said. But the knowledge or the science so learnt requires 
certain helps to strengthen it. Austerity, self-control and performance of action go to 
strengthen the knowledge. They are the foundation of such knowledge or Vidya. Those 
who possess these qualities are the recipients of such knowledge and it remains in them 
firmly.” 

The word in Mantra 8 moans the science of determining the truth, the science 

of interpretation or the Mimamsa. Thus in Sabdi-Xi rn;i yn we read : “Through Mimamsa 
the meanings of the Sruli and the Kmriti become determined and rightly settled. There¬ 
fore the Mimamsa is called Satyam because it leads to the right or true determination as 
to Brahman.” Similarly in Vidyfi-Nirauya we are tokl:—“The Vedis mean according to 
the Good People, the Rik, the Yajus, the S.linan, the Atharvan, the Paiicharatra, the Malia- 
bharata, the original Kamayaua and the Bhagavata Parana. The Smritis and the six angas 
called phonetics, Xc., are all generally styled angas. While the sciences of Reasoning 
and Interpretation, namely, the Park a Sislra and the Mimamsa aro called the Satyam. 
Thus the abodes of Vidya are three-fold : namely, (l) the Ve das, (2) the Angas, and (8) 
The Satyam.” 

Mantra 9. 

iff ^ ^ ^ 

RTRTcTSR RRTdSTd 11 II S. II 

tfci II a II 

Yah, who, the adhikari. % Vai, verily. Etim, agjmrT this (Brah- 

ma-vidy&) (another reading is) etam Upanisadam evam Veda, this Upanisad 









IV KHANDA, 9 . 


45 


with its basis and origin. <if Evam,(^qi?ff^ WS) thus (with Vedas as feet, &c.) 
^ Veda, ( *tRrR ^'Trer) knows, meditates upon, worships. Apahatya, 

RWRq) having shaken off, having destroyed. Papmanam, 

sins, evil, the seed of Samsara, the obstacles to the attainment of Brahma- 
vidya. ?R5% Anante, endless, that which is never destroyed at the end of kal- 
pas, even above time, space and causation, unconditioned. Svarge, in 

Swarga, blissful, the song of the residents of Swar loka, in the Self of bliss 
and knowledge. Sva=Self, r=enjoyment, ga=knowledge. sirtiLoke, world, self- 
luminous. 5^^ Jyeye, Ajyeye, the greatest, the highest, unconquerable, 
in Visnu, the best. srRT^STq Pratitisthati, stays for good, does not return. 

9. He who thus knows this Upanisad, having destroyed all sins, is 
verily established in the unconditioned, all-blissful, resplendent, Highest 
Visnu, is verily established in Him. —34. 

MADHAVA’S salutation. 

Salutation be to Visnu, the most beloved of all my beloved objects, who is knowledge 
bliss, existence, power, fullness and the Highest God. 

Peace chant. 

jrorfFifa ^ 11 

uq**n ilssg foe* q 3qRqr§ snfaeT qfq || ^ 

snfan sirfrcn sirfen II ?f?r simqfrq#£irqfffqe^mrHT ii 

Om! May all my bodily organs and senses, those of speech, smell, sight, hearing 
and vigour grow in perfection. May the Vedas and the Upanisads be my all in all. May 
I not abandon the study of the sacred lore, may not the sacred lore abandon me. Let 
there never be any break in my studies, let there never be any break in my studies 

Let all the virtues of the Upanisads repose in me, repose in me whose sole delight is 

That Self.—(Paraskara Grihva Sutra, III. 16. 1 partly). 


THE END. 






Alphabetical Index of the Mantras. 

Page. 


(IV. 5) ... 

wtefnasR;(III. ll) 

(II. 5) 

$rr (I v. 7)... 

#&fqcT (I. 1) ... 

%Tsgtf?T srgg’r (ill. 8) ... 
4) ... 
fe*T§rt (HI. -) 

cT*§T <^9R ( 15 . G ) ... ... ... 

tWIT5T <*3 (IV. -) 

TOnjcrr??t (iv. 3)... ... 

rrf^^Pifas^9 (Hi. ;>).., 

RR sftarfiT5q<?T5 (III. •>) 

rRW 3*0 (HI. 10) 

cN-n 3*0 (Ul. (5) ... 

sr^ta ht^sit (IV.-l) 

5R^ 51^1 ^n: (IV. s) 

^5f5mR^R.(lII. ») 

R 3R <g$j: (l. o) ... 
a^RTVI Rf^ (II. 1) 

(111. 1) 

(jt*^ fsrRfct) *tt^ R**t (11 • -) 

*T5?3tR*o h (l. 7) 

*jf^ rr% (11. i) 
qfSRStt ** (I. •')) 

*jgrer *i (1. 4) 

tranra a*s*i(ii. 3)... 

«pb^rtr( 1. o) ... 

r (1. 8) ... 

*tt *it qaita (lv. y) 
site*** «ftaf (1. -) ... 
e crfiERW^Tf;T?r (HI. i-') 

*n a^fer (iv. l) ... 


34 

41 

35 
30 

42 
22 

34 
33 

32 
41 

38 

39 

• I ♦ I 

oo 

2)5 

35 

33 

40 

43 
33 
23 
29 
22 


27 
25 

24 

28 

25 

26 
44 

•> '> 

ml mi 

36 

38 





fcAfl ut #;i)f 

IKm 












INTRODUCTION. 


Regarding this Upanisad Max Muller writes:— 

One of the best known among the Upanisacls is the Katha Upanisad. It was first 
introduced to the knowledge of Europoan scholars by Ram Mohan Roy, one of the most 
enlightened benefactors of his own country, and, it may still turn out, one of the most 
enlightened benefactors of mankind. It has since been frequently translated and 
discussed, and it certainly deserves the most careful consideration of all who are interest¬ 
ed in the growth of religious and philosophical ideas. It does not seem likely that we 
possess it in its original form, for there are clear traces of later additions in it. There is 
in fact the same story told in the Taittiriya Brahmana, III, 11, 8, only with this difference 
that in the Brahmana freedom from death and birth is obtained by a peculiar performance 
of a sacrifice, while in the Upanisad it is obtained by knowledge only. 

The Upanisad consists of a dialogue between a young child, called Nachiketas, and 
Yama, the ruler of departed spirits. The father of Nachiketas had offered what is called 
an All-sacrifice, which requires a man to give away all that he possesses. His son, hearing 
of his father’s vow, asks him, whether he does or docs not mean to fulfil his vow without 
reserve. At first the father hesitates; at last, becoming angry, he says: “Yes, I shall 
give thee also unto death. ” 

The father, having once said so, was bound to fulfil his vow, to sacrifice his son to 
death. The son w*as quite willing to go, in order to redeem his father’s rash promise. 

44 1 go, ” he says, “ as the first, at the head of many (who have still to die); I go in the 
midst of many (who are now dying). What Yama (the ruler of the departed) has to do, 
that he will do unto me to-day. 

“ Look back, how^ it was with those who came before ; look forward how it will be 
with those who come hereafter. A mortal ripens like corn;—like corn they spring 
up again. ” 

When Nachiketas, entered the abode of the departed, their ruler, Yama, was absent, 
and his new guest was left for three days without receiving due hospitality. 

In order to make up for this neglect, Yama, when he returns, grants him three boons 
to choose. 

The first boon which Nachiketas chooses is, that his father may not be angry with 
him any more. 

The second boon is, that Yama may teach him some peculiar form of sacrifice. 

Then comes the third boon : 

Nachiketas says: “ There is that doubt, when man is dead, some saying that he 
is, others that he is not: this I should like to know, taught by thee. This is the third of 
my boons.” 

It has been taken implicitly by all translators, that the third boon 
asked by Nachiketas was regarding what is now-a-days called the survival 
of human personality after death. Whether man has a soul, and whether 
it survives death are no doubt questions of primary importance: and all 
religions (except perhaps Judaism) give a decided answer in the affirma¬ 
tive to these questions. As regards the Jews, it is said that the immor¬ 
tality of the soul was not revealed to them. Be that as it may, in India, 





( ii ) 


however, the existence of the soul, its pre-existence and survival of death 
were taken as axiomatic truths : and no doubts seem to have been ever 
raised on these points. It is not, therefore, likely that Nachiketas should 
have asked, as his highest boon, the answer to the queston whether the 
soul of man was immortal or not. The unknown author of this Upanisad 
could not have meant that, for the following reasons 

Firstly .—Nachiketas is shown to be a boy filled with Holy Spirit, 
(Sraddha) and admonishes his father thus :— 

“ Unblessed, surely are the worlds to which a man goes by giving 
(as his promised present at a sacrifice) cows which have drunk water, 
eaten hay, given their milk and are barren. ” (1-1-3.) 

Thus in the very third verse Nachiketas speaks of the worlds of the 
unblessed, the regions of pain and sorrow, in after life, to which a man 
goes after death, who cheats the officiating priest by giving him poor and 
worthless presents. Nachiketas, who believed in regions of the unblessed, 
could not have asked a truism like the survival of the soul after death. 
Nachiketas knew well the law of rebirth also and believed in it, for he says 
\l. 0) “ A mortal ripens like a corn, like corn he springs up again. ” 

Secondly .—The story says that Nachiketas was sent to the region 
of Yama—the abode of the dead. He had left his physical body and 
was talking with Yama all the same. From his own personal experience, 
he could not have entertained any doubt as to the existence of the soul 
after death. Madliva, therefore, very pertinently remarks:— 

“ wr srer ?r 3 ** 1 % “ To Nachiketas, who had 

died and was (consciously still) present before Yama, the doubt whether 
the dead exist or not would be inappropriate, ” (his own present experience 
being a direct answer to his own question.) A person who is undergoing 
a particular experience, at a particular time, would be the last man to ask 
whether such an experience exists or not. 

Thirdly .—According to Sankara, the second boon, which Nachiketas 
asks is regarding heaven, “ Thou knowest, 0 Death, the fire-sacrifice which 
leads us to heaven ; tell it to me, for I am full of faith. Those who live 
in the heaven-world reach immortality—this I ask as my second boon. ” 
Nachiketas believed in a future state of recompense, where soul 
enjoyed the fruits of its good works. He believed in heaven. A person, 
who believes in Heaven, could not have any doubt as to the existence of 
soul after death. Ramanuja, therefore, in his comment on the Vedanta 
SQtra 1-2-12., in interpreting this Upanisad, rightly remarks " For 
his second boon, again, he chooses the knowledge of a sacrificial fire, 
which has a result to be experienced only by a soul that has departed from 




( iii ) 


the body ; and this choice also can be clearly made only by one who knows 
that the soul is something different from the body.C^"' 

Thus Nachiketas, who is represented here as believing both in 
Heaven (Swarga-loka) and Hell (Ananda-loka) could not have asked the 
third question as popularly understood. 

No doubt, to a mind like those of Myers and other seientitic men, this 
appears to be the problem of problems : and answer to it is eagerly sought 
for, in seance rooms and from the apparitions of the living and the 
dead. To a materialist or a follower of Charvaka this is a pertinent 
question. But it does not come with good grace from the mouth of a 
Nachiketas, who admonishes his father with the terrors of Hell, and wants 
to learn from Yama the secret of getting into Heaven. 

Fourthly .—The story of Nachiketas has another version in the 
Taittiriya Brahmana of the Yajur Veda. There the third boon which 
Nachiketas asks is not whether the soul survives physical death : but how to 
conquer re-death (punar-mrityu). In other words, Nachiketas asks how to 
get Mukti or Release, so that there may be no necessity of re-birth (punar- 
janma) and a fortiori of re-death (punar-mritvu.) This version we find 
in Taitt. Br. Ill-11-8. Thus it reads i 

ffir t “ ( Yama said) : ask the third boon. (Nachiketas replied) Tell 
me the method of vanquishing re-death. ” This also indicates that the 
Katha version of this well-known legend could not have meant, by its 
third question, a simple point like the survival of soul after death. 

Even the western interpretators of the Vedas are unanimous in 
admitting, that the Vedic Risis, in spite of all their worship of the 
elemental forces of nature, had a firm conviction of After-life. The Upa- 
nisads which represent an advance on the Vedic age could not have, 
therefore, asked such a primary question. Nor do we find, in any other 
Upanisad this question asked. The interpretation, therefore, of Madhva 
and Ramanuja is more near the truth, i.c., that the third question does 
not relate to survival of soul after death, but to the far more transcen¬ 
dental question—the survival of individual consciousness in the state of 
Nirvana or Mukti, and whether the Released are within the government 
of God or transcend that even. 

The following extract from the Taittiriya Brahmana, 111-11-8 as trans¬ 
lated by Max Muller is given -here to elucidate the points above urged :— 

Vdjasravasa, wishing for reward, sacrificed all his wealth. He had a son, called 
Nachiketas. While he was still a boy, faith entered into him at the time when the cows 
that were to be given (by his father) as presents to the priest, were brought in. Ho said : 
“father, to whom wilt thou give me?” He said so a second and third time. But father 
turaed round and said to him : ” “ To Death I give thee. ” . 





( iv ) 

Then a voice said to young Gautauia, as he stood up : “ He (thy father) said “ Go 

away to the house of Death, I give thee to Death. ” “ Go therefore to Death when he is not 

at home, and dwell in his house for three nights without eating. If he should ask thee 
u Boy, how many nights hast thou been here? say, “ Three. hen lie asks thee, “^\hat 
didst thou eat the first night?” say, “ Thy off-spring.” “ What didst thou eat second night ? " 
say, “ Thy cattle. ” “ What didst thou eat the third night ? ” say, “ Thy good works. " 

He went to death, while he was away from home, and he dwelt in his house for three 
nights without eating. When Death returned, he asked : “ Boy, how many nights hast 

thou been here?” He answered: “Three.” “What didst thou eat the first night ? " 

“ Thy offspring. ” What didst thou eat the second night ? ” “ Thy cattle, ” “ What didst 
thou eat the third night ? ’ Thy good works. ” 

Then he said : “ Mv respect to thee, O venerable sir ! Choose a boon. ” 

“ May I return living to my father, ” he said. . 

“Choose a second boon. ” 

“ Tell me how my good, .works may never perish. . 1 

Then he explained to him this Naehiketa fire (sacrifice), and hence his good works 
do not perish. 

“Choose a third boon. ” * .I 

“ Tell me the conquest of re-death. . B 

Then he explained to him this (chief) Naehiketa lire (sacrifice), and lienee he con¬ 
quered re-death. 


[fchctnael front Uanuinu]<i s Sri Bhdsjja on I. 2. 12 as translated in the 
,S. u. E. Vol. XLYUL , p. 201I, by Dr, 0. Thihaui .] 

But a new objection is raised, the initial passage, 1,- 1, 20, 4 That doubt which tliere 
i^ when a man is dead—Some saying, he is ; others, he is not ; clearly asks a question as to 
the true nature of the individual soul, and we hence conclude that that soul forms the topic 
of the whole chapter. — Not so, we reply. That question does not spring from any doubt 
as to the existence or iiou-existencc of the soul apart from the body ; for if this were so, 
the two first boons chosen by Nachiketas.would be unsuitable. For tin* story runs'as 
follows: When tin* sacrifice offered by the father of Nachiketas—at which all.the pos¬ 
sessions of the saertlioer were to be given to the priests-is drawing towards its close, 
the bov, feeling afraid that some deficiency on the part of tho gifts might render the 
sacrifice unavailing, and dutlffilly wishing* to render his-father’s sacrifice' complete by 
giving his own person also, repeatodly asks his father, ‘ And-to whom will you give me '? 
The father, irritated by the boy's persistent questioning, giv.es an angry reply, and. in 
consequence of this the boy goes to the palace of Yama, and Yama being absent, stays 
there for three days without eating. Yama on his return is alarmed at this neglect of 
hospitality, and wishing to make up for it allows him’to choose three boons. Naehiketa, 
thereupon, full- of faith, and piety, chooses as lus .first boon that his father should-for- 
give him. Now it is clear that conduct of this kind would not be possible in the ease of 
one not convinced of the sou) having an existence independent of the body. For his 
second boon, again,'lie chooses the knowledge of a sacrificial fire, which has a result to 
be 'experienced only by ll soul that-has departed from the body ; and this choico also 
can clearly be made only by one who knows that the soul is something different from tho 
body. 'When, therefore, he chooses for his third boon tho clearing up of his doubt as to 
the existence of. tho soul after death ( as stated in v. 20), it is evident that his question 
is prompted by the desire to acquire knowledge of the true nature of the highest Self— 
which knowledge has tho form of meditation on the highest Self,—and-by- means thereof; 





( V ) 


knowledge of the true nature of final Release which consists in obtaining the highest 
Brahman. The passage, therefore, is not concerned merely with the problem as to the 
separation of the soul from the body, but rather with the problem of the Self freeing 
itself from all bondage whatever—the same problem, in fact, with which another scrip¬ 
tural passage also is concerned, utr., ‘ When he has departed there is no more knowledge ’ 
(Bri. Up. 11,4,12). The full purport of Nachiketas ’ question, therefore, is as follows : 
When a man qualified for Release has died and thus freed himself from all bondage, there 
arises a doubt as to his existence or 11011 -existence—a doubt due to the disagreement of 
philosophers as to the true nature of Release ; in order to clear up this doubt I wish to 
learn from thee the true nature of the state of Release. — Philosphers, indeed, hold many 
widely differing opinion as to what constitutes Release. Some hold that the Self is consti¬ 
tuted by consciousness only, and that Release consists in the total destruction of 
this essential nature of the Self. Others, while holding the same opinion as to the 
nature of the Self, define release as the passing away of Nescience (avidya). Others 
hold that the Self is in itself non-sentient, like a stone, but possesses, in the state of 
bondage, certain distinctive qualities, such as knowledge, and so on. Release then con¬ 
sists in the total removal of all these qualities, the Self remaining in a state of pure 
isolation (kaivalya). Others, again, who acknowledge a highest Self free from all imper¬ 
fection, maintain that through connexion with limiting adjuncts that Self enters on the 
condition of an individual soul; Release then means the pure existence of the highest 
Self, consequent 011 the passing away of the limiting adjuncts. Those, however, who 
understand the Vedanta, teach as follows : There is a highest Brahman which is the 
sole cause of the entire universe, which is antagonistic to all evil, whose essential nature 
is infinite knowledge and blessedness, which comprises within itself numberless auspi¬ 
cious qualities of supreme excellence, which is different in nature from all other beings, 
and which constitutes the inner Self of all. Of this Brahman, the individual souls—whose 
true nature is unlimited knowledge, and whose only essential attribute is the intuition 
of the Supreme Self—are modes, in so far, namely, as they constitute its body. The true 
nature of these souls is, however, obscured by Nescience, i.e., the influence of the begin¬ 
ningless chain of works; and by release then we have to understand that intuition of the 
highest Self, which is the natural state of the individual souls, and which follows on the 
destruction of Nescience. When Nachiketas desires Varna graciously to teach him the true 
nature of Release and the means to attain it, Yama at first tests him by dwelling on the 
difficulty of comprehending Release, and -by tempting him with various wordly enjoy¬ 
ments. But having in this way recognised the boy’s thorough fitness, he in the end 
instructs him as to the kind of meditation on the highest Self which constitutes know¬ 
ledge of the highest Reality, as to the nature of Release—which consists in reaching the 
abode of the highest Self,—and as to all the required details. This instruction begins at 
1, 2, 12, “ The Ancient one who is difficult to see, A*c., and extends up to 1, 3, 9, and 
that is the highest place of Visim. ” 

Extract from the Taitt. Bi\ III . 11. 8. 

i ctr 5 »rf%r%c!T hut ;pr 1 
K fftTTSi snrrq. 1 1 e trerar 1 cttct 

nt ^TRHTfcT || 

cT& 5 <TCTcT I RT ^RlfcT, I 

?r£s 5 srrrFe^cr (K) 1 s? Irtr 1 

8 





t vi ) 


cf I TRTTOrra- tram i ?rra ^ Trarmrramit ^rera raj 

*1 raT I f HR 3 u% *ratmTF#RfrT | RT^r ?% SIRrSETT^ I f¥ 

iraw& RjwSTT *RT (R) ST 5 TT cT ?fcT I f¥ ft£raTm% I ^T I ft? 

FJ^raTWft I RTpmt FT ^RT f ft, II 

cf I sr^Rcf 3r*TTO I FTTFJ 5 ftmt 'CMT-Ml^F^ S3RT I cTRFira 
q^Rlj | fJTR ^ft RftmtmTRft | RRT ift irapTm fa) ft? iraUT^ 

nftraraT ?ft i srarr ft fft i ft? ftftrararft i q^t&ra sft i ft? <jararftft 
RFpmf ?T fft, ?ft | 

3R3 w sft tram i hr fstTraft, ?ft i 
farT^T ^ra^raHlft, ^ft | 

ftftra fRpftft («) i ?i3T^ms%frf afift tram i tcrafjf 

HTR^d^rm I FTft | HRWft HT SjftcT, 1% I 

FTRtsT^ s?ft?r | q T5 fjf raftftft jftjpr i *j s 4raira nft, sft 1 
Fj^ra gw 4 ft 1 g/mramraraft atrft tram 1 ?t*tt |?rafsr ^rm- 
%rrg^m 1 FTcft I rtsr '{'/) 2 /m ;jraft 1 qrsra 

rara^rf ra 3 % 1 ?r s %^sr § 5 , cfra 1 


I’ltAVAG, September, 1DV0. 


S. C. V. 

















KATHA UPANISAD. 


First Valli. 

Peace chant. 

w frfe’Jnrt it irn^ sn%: suffer: n 

Sah, lie, Mitra and others. ^ Ha, verily. Or is one word meaning 
‘‘together.” ;ff Nau, us two, the teacher and the pupil. Avatu, may 

protect, and remove ail obstacles. ^ Sa, he. ^ Ha, verily. ^ Nau, us two. 

Bhunaktu, may nourish by giving food, &c. Or may cause us to enjoy the 
bliss of mukti resulting from right stud} 7 . Or taking as one word, then the 
meaning would be f^f^TTT HT^T^ 1 Saha, together. Viiyam, energy : be 
energetic in explaining the hidden meaning of the Scriptures. Kara- 

vavahai ( = §ff:) may we two acquire or make. Tejasvi, splendid, most 

strong, fruitful. ?ff Nau, by us two. Adhitam, studied. Astu, may be 

or may our studies be fruitful, rtf Ma, not. Vidvisavahai, may we 

two quarrel, or hate. 

Om ! May Pie protect us both (teacher and pupil). May He cause us 
/“both to enjoy the bliss of Mukti. May we both exert together to find out 
the true meaning of the scriptures. May our studies be fruitful. May 
we never quarrel with each other ! Om ! Peace ! peace ! peace ! 

MADHYA’S SALUTATION. 

The Bhagavan, the Supreme Lord, whom I bow to, is above all things. Thou who 
dwellest in the hearts of all living creatures—Salutations to thee, OYamana! Saluta¬ 
tions. 

Note.—He who possesses the six-fold qualities of lordliness, &c., is called Bhagavan. 
The wordYamana shows that the Lord has a form which the devotees meditate upon. 
The Devata of this Upanisad is Yamana and the Seer is Yama. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

In the Bralima-Sara we read : —“He who meditates on Yisnu in Agni constantly, and 
performs three times the Nachiketa Fire sacrifice reaches Heaven ; and there, free from all 
fears, resides for a manvanteric period and after that attains immortality in due time. ” 

Note. — This shows that mere fire-sacrifice does not lead to Mukti: but to Sva ’ga 
only. The “ immortlity” here means moksa. The performers of Nachiketa Fire-sacrifice 
first go to Swarga and then obtain moksa along with Brahma. Thus it is Kmma-Mukti, 








56 


KATHA-UPANTSA D. 


While Juana gives direct Mukti. The above quotation also shows that the second boon 
asked by Nachiketas refers to Mukti and not merely to ordinary Swarga. The second 
boon relates to Krama-mukti, obtained by those who meditate on Visnu in Fire. 

It is clear from the above that Madhva has taken up the explanation of the verse 
pjif (Kath I. 18) first. This shows that he attaches great importance 

to that verse and that he differs fundamentally from Sri Sankara in its interpretation. 
According to Sankara, the knowledge of Heavenly Fire is a secondary thing and has 
nothing to do with Mukti. The knowledge of such Fire is Upanisad only in a secondary 
sense of the word. 

Mantra i. 

I f't I 

rT^T f WTU II % II 

arsfR. Usan, wishing, desiring (the fruit cf|Visvajit sacrifice), desiring 
heaven. ^ Ha, once. % Vai, now, Vajasravasah, Yajasravasa, 

Uddalaka. Sarva-vedasam, all-wealth (as fee to priests). ^fr Dadau, 

gave. Tasya, his. ^ Ha, (mere expletive) Nachiketa, Nachiketa. 

Nama, called, Putrah, son. Asa, was. 

1. Desiring once (the heaven-worlds), Yajasravasa gave away all 
his possessions as fee to the priests. Tie had a son called Nachiketas.— 1. 

' Mantra 2. 

cTStg fifclRRTS UTSR^cf RII 

<T Tam, him (Nachiketas). ^ Ha, when, grort Kumaram, a boy 
Santam, being (still). ^r%Trrn5 Daksinasu, when the presents. Niya- 

manSsu, were being given to or brought (for the priests), to be led. 
£>raddha, faith, strong desire (for the welfare of his father), earnestness. 

A-vi-vesa, entered, r: Sah, he. Amanyata, thought, said to him¬ 

self, pondered. 

2. Faith entered him, though still a hoy, when the cows were 
being given as presents to the priests. lie thought.—2. 

Mantra 3. 

<frcTt^RT faftf^TT: I 

RTR R cff II 3 II 

Pitodakah, drunk water. srnjfJUT Jagdlin-trinSl.i, eaten hay or 
grass (but cannot do so now), gnrersr. Dugdha-dohati, given milk. RTO^r 
Nirindriyah, barren, without strength (to breed). Anandflh, Unblessed, 

joyless, Nama, called, surely. % Te, tliose (well known). STraP Lokah, 

worlds, births. 3PI.Tan, to them, to which. *r: Sail, lie ii? 5 R Gachcbliati, 
goes. ?rr: Tali, them, Dadat, giving. 










I VALLI , 4. 


57 


3. Verily joyless are the worlds of him who gives decrepit old cows 
that have drunk water (and owing to the weakness of old age can drink 
no more), eaten hay (and can eat no more), given milk (and are dry now), 
and are barren.—3. 


Mantra 4. 

U fRFT NcR cTTcT *TT I 

srr ^Trftfrr u # 11 

Sah, he (Nachiketa thinking that ‘fihe giver of such cows suffers such 
calamity, my father is going to give such cows ; let me prevent the calamity ”) ^ 
Ha, verily, Uvacha, said. farHH Pitarain, father. cTUT Tata, O Father ! 

Kasmai, to whom (to what priest, as a daksina-fee). Mam, me. Das- 

yasi, wilt thou give (for by giving me away thou shah fulfil thy vow of giving 
every thing), 11 i, thus. (The father having heard this kept quiet thinking 

that it was a boyish whim of his son, and so he did not mind his question). 

Dvitiyam, a second time (Nachiketa repeated the question twice), ^rfpsr 
Tritiyam, a third time (the father keeping silent, he said again.) ^ Tam, him 
(/>., to the son, the father being angry.) f Ha, Behold ! Ha ! Uvacha, 

said. Mrityave, to Mrityu, the son of Vivasvat. Tva, thee, 

Dadami, I give (Madhva’s reading is let me give). fHT Iti, thus. (Namely, 
the father said “Be theu dead.”) 

4. He said to his father then : “0 father! to what (priest) wilt 
thou give me.” Twice and thrice, (he put this question). The father 
said to him “To Heath I give thee.”—4. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Thus we record in the Gati-Sara :— 

Uddalaka, the grandson of Yajasravas, desiring to attain heavenly regions, gave 
away all his possessions, as fee to the officiating priests. He gave also cows who were 
decrepit. The young son of Uddalaka seeing this, said to his father “Such cows should 
never be given in gift, better give me away to some priest, and thus fulfil thy pledge 

of giving cows.” On hearing this, the father cursed the boy. 

/ 

Note.—In another version of Yajur Veda Katha Sakha the story is given in these 
words :—“The boy said—father ! to whom shalt thou give me ?” He said this twice and 
thrice. To him the father answered in anger : “I give thee to Death. Thou shalt reach 
the palace of Death when he will not be at home. There thou must dwell for three nights 
without taking any food. When on his return, he will ask thee, ‘child ! how many nights 
thou hast been here ?’ Tell him “three nights.” ‘What didst thou eat, the first night?’ 
Thy offsprings. ‘What didst thon eat the second night ?’ Thy cattle. * What, the third 
night ?’ All thy meritorious deeds.” 

This recension shows in greater detail the scope of the curse : which may have been 
uttered in some such language as the following:—Die thou, and going to the palace of 
Death, remain there, though he be out, for three nights without any food. 






K AT HA-UP AN IS AD. 


r>8 


Mantra 5. 

fax fasnro u v, u 

Bahfinam, among the many who will die or are dying, 1 being the 
first, go to Yama. Many will die after I am dead, lift Emi, 1 go. 
Prathamal;, first. Bahunam, of many, oft Eu.i, I go. ww. Madhyamah, 

middle. Among many who are dead, I being the middle, go to Yama. I go 
either in the front rank or in the middle of those who are going to the Yama's 
abode, but not the last, for many will still follow me : why should I grieve 
about it; when death is inevitable to all. Kim, what, Svid, else, both 

together mean “Nothing.” Yamasya, of Yama. ZRQzq Kartavyam, to 

be done, object, necessity. I can be of no use to Yama. Yama is above all 
desires and so I can be of no use to him, and so my father will get no merit by 
giving me to Yama, as he would have got had he given me to some priest. 
Therefore, do I grieve, not because I die, but that my death will be of no avail 
to my father, qx Yat, which, nm Maya, by me, (being given to Yama). ^ 
Adya, to-day. Karisyati, he will do. 

5. Among many I go as first, among many I go as middle. What 
object lias Yama, which through me, will he accomplish to-day.—5. 

Mantra 6. 

mvd: i 

g?r: ii s. ii 

513 Aim, back, (towards the by-gone fathers and grandfathers, who stood 
firm on their duty of telling truth, &c.) 7*7 Pasyn, look, ponder, think deeply, 

qm Yatha, how, in what way. Piirve, the prior ones (who have gone before ; 
the fathers and grandfathers, &c.) Having seen those who have died before 
me. sjjrt Prati, forward, rptq Pasya, look ; looking also to the fact that others 
also must die. I go to Yama without any sorrow. <jw Tatha, how. Tpft Apare, 
others (men who are alive.) Sasyatn, corn. The illustration shows that 

there is never absolute annihilation like the breaking of a pot, but a mere 
change of form. The grass grows so long as the root is in the soil. So the 
jivas are rooted in the Lord. ?7 Iva, like. 7^: Martyah, the mortal, the 
man 7^3% Pachyate, ripens, decays and dies or becomes cooked, becomes 
mature, fitted. Sasyam iva, like corn. 7 Tr 5 tr 7 % Ajayatc, springs up, 

appears (Madhva leads sir7% without m) 77 : Punal.i, again (as birth and death 
is the fate of all creatures, I feel no grief by being given to Death —to one 
whom l must meet some day). 

jVote.—Look at those who have died before mo, so also look round on those others 
who aro now dying and will follow mo and thus learn that the mortal man matures and 
dies like the corn, and is horn again like the corn. 






1 VALLI, S . 


59 


(i.—Look at those who have died before me (Nachikctas and also 
at those others who are now dying and will follow me ; and thus 
learn that the mortal man matures and dies like the corn, and is born 
again like the corn— 0. 

Mantra 7. 

ii vs n 

Vaisvanarah, lire, (like fire.) Pravisati, enters, ^rf^pr: 

Atitliih, a guest. argTO' Bralnnanah, a Brahmana. n^r^Griiian, in the houses 
(as if burning the houses.) ^*2* Tasya, of that (burning), Etatn, this (offer¬ 
ing of water for the feet, seat, &c.) SHT^r Sautim, peace (or quenching.) 
Kurvanti, they do. ^ Hara, bring, fetch, take. %^TrT Vaivasvata, O Vaivas- 
vata, the son of the Sun. Udakam, water (for washing the feet of Naclii- 

ketas.) 

Note —(Then Xaehiketas went to Yama. Yama had gone to another place and was 
not at liorne. The wife of Yama offered welcome and puja to the guest. But Nachiketns 
said “The host not being at home I cannot accept these at your hands. ” Nachiketas 
thus remained for three days without food. When Yama returned, his wife said to him.) 

7. —Like lire a Brahmin guest enters the bouse. The wise quench 
it thus by peace-offerings. Fetch water, 0 Vaivasvat—7. 

Mantra S. 

stT^*ot ii^ii 

^TRTr Asa, hopes, the desire to obtain an object which one has not. !Trft% 
Pratikse, expectations : such as—this will take place after such a time, ^rrrf 
Samgatam, friends. fjJTcfT Sunritam, good opinion of men, good report. ^ Cha, 
and. Istapurte, istam purtam. The lengthening of the vowel ijf of ista 

into ^rr ista is by Panini VI. 3. 137. Ista —sacrifice, purtam = charities, the fruit of 
religious sacrifices, viz., Deva-loka and the fruits of his public charities or secular 
liberality, viz,, Pitriloka, Putra-Pasun, sons and cattle. ^ Cha, and. 

^foSarv&n, all. tr^ Etad, this, the sin of fasting. 33^; Vrinkte, destroys, 
deprives. 3^3*3 Purusasya, of the person. Alpamedhasah, of small 

understanding, foolish, Yasya, whose (house). Anasnan, without 

eating food or without experiencing, qgfsr Vasati, dwells. ^T^irr: Brahmanah, 
a Brahmin. Grihe, in the house. 

8. All his hopes and expectations, friends and reputation, the fruits 
of religious and charitable deeds, sons and cattle perish, in the house of 
that man of small intellect, where dwells a Brahmin without any food.—8. 









60 


KATHA-UPANISAD. 


TcRTT 


Mantra 9. 




sH|FRT% US^J TORSfTrt II 5. II 

T^T Tisrah, three. *rar: Ratrili, nights, ihree days, Yat, as, because. 
or ^ avatsT, or of thou hast dwelt. *j| Grille, in liouse. % J\le, my. 

Anasnan, not eating, Brahman, O Brahmana. Atithih, a 

guest, ^^w. Namasyali, venerable, worthy of salutation, honorable. w 
Namah, salutation, hail. % Te, to thee. Aslu, let be. Brahman ! O 

Brahmana. hRtT Svasti, an ideclinable, prosperity, welfare. H Me, to me. 

Astu, let be. rftjjpr Tasmat, therefore ^because you remained without food 
three nights, I became guilty) or tasmat prati irfertiq “ in order to remedy 
the evil effect of that". sjr?r Prati, for each (night) or (qrrf^TRR) in order to 
remedy. Trin, three, Varan, boons. Vrinisva, ask, elect, 

choose, take for thyself. 

9. Because in my liouse, O Brahmana! thou, an honorable guest 
Iiast dwelt for three nights (without food) so let there be salutation to 
thee and peace to me and therefore ask three boons, one for each night 
passed without eating—9. 


MAI)1IVA\S COMMENTARY. 


That ‘youthful lira h mac Jkumu went to Varna’s abode. Though the wife of Varna 
offered hill) food and arghya with all due honors, he did not accept them. When Varna 
returned she said to him—Ketch water. On being so addressed, Varna brought water, 
and doing honor to the voting guest, gave him three boons. These were (I) reconcilia¬ 
tion of his father towards Nachiketas and the forgiveness of Naehiketas' sins (2) theknow- 
ledgo appertaining to Hari dwelling in the Niiehiketa Eire Sacrifice. (3) the knowledge 
that Yisiiu dwells in the Muktas and controls them too. These were the three boons. 
This we Jiiul in the Gati-Sara. 

Mantua 10. 

msm sm it n ^ n 

Santa-sankalpah, calm of thought; having no anxiety as 
regards me, f.r., my father should be Iree from anxiety on my account—not 
troubled with the thought “ how is my son faring in Yama’s abode;’' free from 
doubts (regarding my fate), Sumanflli, quiet in mind, tranquil in heart. 

Yatha, so, as that, mjn Syat, he may be. Vita-manyujj, fiee from 

anger, mcW: GautamaJi, Gautama (my father of the clan of Gotama) m 
Ma abhi, towards me. Mrityo, (f y&O O Death ! 1 vat-prasris- 

lam, by thee discharged oi sent back (towards home.) jjj Ala, me 
Abhi-vadet, bless (me) greet me. [or hj a fa towards me, be may 

speak, as one who recovered his memory]. Pratitah, assured in mind, 














I VALL1 12 . 


61 


remembering, assured of (soul-identity, not thinking that the corpse has been 
obsessed by some elemental, and thus may not shun me, as people ordinarily 
do in cases of persons recovering from death). Etat, this, ^sr^nuf 

Trayanam, of the three. Prathamam, first (^psj). ^ Varam, boon. ^ 

Vrine (srrcrqq) I ask or choose. 

10 — o Death ! Let my father Gautama be calm of thought, pleased 
in mind, free from anger towards me, and when sent back by thee, may 
he recognise and greet me with old affection. This is the first boon 
I ask for.—10. 


Mantra 11. 

srfarrr \ 

*WT Yatha, as. P urastat, before, or a person coming back from 

sojourn in another city. >Tr?<TT Bhavita, will be. jfcffa: Pratitah, assured or 
recognised with old affection, ^rrfTSTRlv Auddalakih, the son of Uddalaka; 
or Uddalaka. ^TTCI%: Arunih, the son of Aruna or Aruna (mother). Son of two 
fathers, according to Sankara. The son of the father called Uddalaka and the 
mother called Aruna, according to Madhva, of the clan or Gotra of Aruna. 

Mat-Prasristah, through my favour, or (when you will be) sent 
back by me. Sukham, peacefully, with tranquil mind, Ratrih, nights. 

mortf Sayitd, will sleep. Vita-manyuh, free from anger, Tvam, 

thee. stTCHfR Dadrisivan, seeing, having seen. Mrityu-mukhat, from 

the mouth (or proximity) of Death, sjgrft Pra-muktam, freed fully. 

11. As lie loved thee before, so also Auddalaki Arnni will even now 
love thee. He will have pleasant sleep in nights, and free from anger 
towards thee, will see thee freed from the mouth of death and will recog¬ 
nise thee when thou art sent back to him by me—11. 

Note. —(You) being dismissed by me, will be recognised (by your father), as (a person 
returning home) from another city. The son of Uddalaka will be free from anger, having 
seen thee freed fully from the jaws of death. 

Mantra 12. 


* -m * tra er * srjtt i 

atofaHrarfiwra sffarrant fir?* u« r n 


Svarge, in the heaven (the loka of Visnu) Svarga is equivalent to 
Moksa here. 5TT^ Loke, world, h Na, not. Bhayam, (fear from disease, 
&c.) flr'T'r Kinchana, not the least. =srr«T Asti, is. Tatra, there (the Heaven- 
World.) Tvam, thou (O Death, art not there). Na, Not. 5 ^ Jaraya, by 
decay or old age. faprf^ Bibheti, is afraid, i.e., the inhabitant thereof, 





62 


KATHA-UPANISAD. 


Ubhe, both, rft^f Tirtva, crossing over, leaving behind. Asnaya- 

pipase, hunger and thirst, Sokatigah, out of the reach of sorrow, 

being above sorrow, free from mental pain. HT^rar Modate, rejoiees, experiences 
pleasure, ^rrSvarga-loke, in the heaven world. 

12. In the Heaven-world there is no fear. 0 Death, thou art not 
there, and decay does not frighten one. Crossing over both hunger and 
thirst, the sorrow-transcended rejoices in the Heaven-world. 

Mantra 13. 

tot ii u ii 

^ Sa, he. ^ Tvam, thou, i.e , youi' honour. ^f3r Agnim, the God Hari under 
the designation of Agni, as He is the Foremost (Agrya). § Svargyam, who 
is the means of attaining heaven. t^ifsrarsR that whose purpose is Heaven. 
The affix n is added by the Vartika to Panini \ r . i. i r i. Adhyesi, thou 

knowest better than (adhi = more) any. Mrityo, O Death ! sf-adlt Pra-bruhi, 
tell fftily, speak or describe. ^ Tam, that or this (the Fire on the altar which is 
called Hari.) sapTHR Sraddadhanaya, to the faithful. To me who desires 
moksa. Mahyam, to me (who desires heaven) Not merely because it 

leads to heaven, that this Fire sacrifice should be learnt; but because it further 
leads to Mukti also as follows. Svarga-lokah, the heaven-world- 

dwellers. Those who live for one Manvantara in the Svarga world, and obtain 
afterwards Mukti there 'Those who get Krama Mukta—liberation after dwell¬ 
ing in Svarga. Amritatvam, immortality, Mukti or liberation. 

Bhajante, reach, attain gradually, Etad, this (science of Fire.) ffrftiR 

Dvitiyena, by the second, or second. Vrine, I choose, I ask. toj Varcna, 
by the boon. 

13. 0 Death ! thou verily kuowest the Heaven-giving Fire ; teach 
that to me who have faith. The dwellers of Heaven world enjoy immor¬ 
tality. This as the second boon 1 choose—13. 

Mantra 14. 


sr ^ ^ u Rdm i 

srr%sr fefe ^ \\\%\\ 


5T Pra (an upasarga, qualifying Placed out of the context as a Vai- 

dika form). % Te, to thee. Bravimi, I tell, explain. ^ Tad, that, the know¬ 

ledge desired by thee. 3 u, which alone, (thou hast asked). ^ Me, from me or from 
my (words;. prfhT Nibodlia, understand (with concentrated mind) know, learn. 
tvhn Svargyam, (^f^ heavenly, Icadingto heaven. The instrument 

of attaining heaven, Agnim, the God Hari—ealled Agni—or Hari in File. 

Nachiketa(i, O Nachiketa. shtfr. Prnjanan, (1 who) know (this fire) well 









1 VALLI , 15. 


63 


thoroughly. Ananta-lokaptim, the means for the attainment of 

the un-ending world or the Heaven-world or the world of Visnu. Lit . 
Infinite world attainment. By whom the world, of the Infinite is obtained or 
by whom the endless world is obtained, Atho, also, moreover; after 

reaching the Heaven-world. Pratistham, the support (of worlds in the 

form of Virat, the cause of the maintenance of all worlds.) umjf Viddhi, know. 

Tvam, thou, q^r Etam, this (Fire). The Lord. Nihitam, placed, com¬ 

pletely placed, hidden, gfrgf Guhayam, in the cavity, in the cavity of the heart 
of all creatures. 

14. 0 Nachiketas ! I know well this Heaven giving Fire, and 
will describe Him to thee — learn that He is the Giver of the eternal world, 
the Support (of the universe), and Dweller in the hearts of all crea¬ 
tures. —14. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word ‘ Agni ’ is the name of Hari, because He is the Foremost (agrya) of all. 
He abides in the Nachiketa Agni. Tho phrase Anantaloka-aptih means the instrument 
by which one reaches (aptil?) the region (loka) of the Infinite (Ananta) : or the means by 
which one reaches the eternal (Ananta) region (loka)- The ananta means Visnu—and so 
Ananta loka means the Visnu loka. Or ananta may mean eternal, and so ananta loka 
will mean the endless or eternal region. The word pratistha means "the foundation 
of all regions. ” Visnu who dwells in the heart of all beings is the great Pratistha or the 
Foundation on which all the Universes rest. 

Mantra 15. 

P WT HUH 

Lokadim, the source of the worlds, the beginning of all the worlds 
as being their cause, the cause of the worlds, Agnim, the Lord Hari 

dwelling in Fire. rp^Tam, that (fire about which Nachiketa had questioned) or 
Hari who is in the heart and called Agni. Uvacha, he (Yama) said. 

Tasmai, to him (Nachiketas). gp Yah, what. / e., the particular natures, 

Istakah, bricks, that is, the Devatas to be invoked, grarfh Yavatih, how many 
(in number, />., 360.) qr Va, or, and. zwj Yatha va, and how (they are to be 
known) or how much they should be quantitatively.) Sa, he (Nachiketas). 
^ Cha, and. Api, also. qqTat, that nature of the Lord which was told by 
Yama. Pratyavadat, uttered again, repeated. qzfFFra, Yathd-uktam, 

as it had been told (to him by Yama). Atha, then (because of his aptness 
in repeating it) or after the repetition, Asya (pleased) with him (Nachike¬ 
tas) ^3: Mrityub, the Death, Yama. <priq Punar eva aha, again 

then said (in order to give another boon over and above the three), gs: 
Tustah, pleased. 

15. Yama told him about that Fire who is the cause of all the 
worlds, and what the nature of the Devatas are, how many (they are in 




64 


KATHA-UPAN1SAD. 


number), and how (they are to be known). Nacliiketas repeated that as 
he was told. Then Yama, being pleased (with his aptness)said again.—15. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word “ Lokadi ” means “ the Beginning of all worlds.” Hari is verily the great 
beginning or source of all worlds. By knowing Him one certainly attains mukti. The 
J word istakah or bricks here mean the devatas. As says a text: “ One becomes free from 
the fetters of karma when he understands rightly the number 360 which represents 
Visnu, the complete circle called also the Brick or angle devata. ” 

Note .—Was this altar made in the form of a circle consisting of 360 bricks, each being 
an arc of one degree: the whole circle being called Visnu and each brick an istaka 
devata? In the Aitareya the number is 1080 or 3x360 in which case each brick would 
represent an arc of 20 minutes. 

Mantra 16. 

WT: I 

dfsr mw vrfocmmfa: 11 H U 

Tam, to him (Nacliiketas). Abravit, (he) said, Pri- 

yamanah, pleased, being satisfied (at finding him an apt pupil). 
Mahatma, the Great-Souied, the generous: the high-minded. Varam, a 
(fourth) boon. ^ lava, to thee, Iha, here (because 1 am pleased with 
thee) or here (relating to the Fire Altar). ^ Adya, to-day, now. 
Dadami, l give. “ Let me give. M Bhuyah, another (other than the three). 

Tava, thy (Nachiketa). Eva, alone. mar Namna, by name (known or 
called after thy name, as NachiketSgni). vrpffii Bhavita, will be (famous) or 
let it be. Ayani, this (whose bricks, &c., have been detailed above) 

Agnih, fire, Srifikam, necklace, chain. ^ Cha, and. 

Imam, this. AnekarQpam, golden. Lit.—" having many forms. ” 

ij^nu Grihana ( ) take, accept. 

10. Being pleased, the higli-minded Yama spoke to him : —“Let 
me give thee here another boon to-day. By thy name alone this fire 
will be (known among men). Accept also this golden necklace. ”—10. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

Tho word “ aneka-rtipam,” means ‘golden; and not multi-form.’ For tho Lexicon 
says : — * The word bahu-rupam means gold.’ 

In the Padma-Purana also it is stated: — “ The Lord Yama being satislied with tho 
aptness of Nacliiketas in reciting the teachings faultlessly, named the Fire after Na- 
chiketas and gave him also a necklace of gold. ” 

Mantra 17. 

fl^r % on 





65 


T VALLT , i7. 


pTCOTT^KrP Tri-Nachiketah, he who lias performed thrice the Nachiketas 
fire-sacrifice; the proper grammatical form is Nachiketasah ; the elision of 3 ^ 
is a Vedic irregularity, rare: Tribhih, with the three Vedas, Rik, Yajus and 
Saman. Etya, having obtained, Sandhim, alliance, not acting against 

the three. pRSHfrl Tri-karma-krit, three-duty-done, i.e. t who has performed 
the three duties, sacrifice (Yajna), austerity (tapas) and alms-giving (dana). 

Tarati, passes over, crosses over, becomes free from; overcomes. 

Janma mrityu, birth and death. Bralima-ja-jnam, Veda-revealed- 

all-knower, i.e t , the omniscient Visnu. Brahma = Veda; He who is revealed 
(jayate) by the Vedas is Brahma-ja, namely, Hari. Jna = Omniscient. He who 
is revealed by the Vedas and is Omniscient is Brahma-ja-jna. Devam, 
God (because he illumines all, knows all, or because he sports in all, the whole 
universe being his playground), divine, Idyam, worshipped, praised 

(by Brahma, See.) filter Viditva, having known. Prqrss Nichayya, having 
realised, discriminated, having reflected over, understood. Imam, this. 

Santini, peace, liberation, moksa. Atyaniam, everlasting, extreme. 

Eli, goes to, attains, obtains. 

17. He who has performed the Nachiketas sacrifice thrice, and 
has discharged the three duties and has attained harmony with the three 
Vedas, crosses over birth and death. Having known and realised that 
adorable God who is omniscient and revealed by the Vedas, he attains 
everlasting peace.— 17. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The phrase “ having attained union with the three” means having attained union 
with the three Vedas, i.e., the Rik, Yajus, Saman (and Atharvan). Who does nothing 
opposed to the Vedas. Who knows the true nature of the Lord (and the Jiva and Pra- 
kriti) as revealed in the Vedas. The phrase “who has performed the three duties'* 
means “he who has performed Yajna (sacrifice), dana (alius-giving), and tapas (austerity). ” 
As says the Gita 

“ Acts of Sacrifice, gfft and austerity should not be relinquished, but should be 
performed ;” (Gita, XVIII, 5), 

Note.—The word 4 tapas, ’ of course, includes study, &c., see the Bhagavad Gita, XVII, 
14—17. 

The phrase 4 trayarn etad’—“this three”—in mantra 18 means (1) the bricks, (2) 
) their number and (3) their arrangement. 

The word “Brahmjajua ” has been thus explained in Nama-Nirukti : — 

“By Brahman is meant the Vedas, as Visnu is styled Brahmja because the Vedas 
reveal Him. That Hari is the Jila or the knower of the whole universe. The wdiole 
compound word, therefore, means Hari, the know T er, whom the Vedas have revealed. ” 

The epithets “ the Beginning of the Worlds,” “the Great Foundation or support,” 
“ the Omniscient whom the Vedas reveal, ” “ The Infinite World attainment” and the rest 
show that the Agni, (the topic of the second boon, means the Lord Visnu here: and not 
fire. The phrase “ the Mighty one praised by all hymns ” in mantra 11 of the second 
Valli also suggests the same idea. Iu fact, that mantra expressly uses all these words 
’ “The great support (pratistha) of the world,” “ the giver of endless rewards,” &c., with 
regard to Vis^u and nqt fire. . _ . . . 




66 


KATHA-UPANISAD. 


Note .—If we analyse and compare the mantras 15, 16, 17 of the First Valli and 
Mantra 11 of the Second Valli, we find that almost word for word, epithets applied to 
Agin are applied there to Vis nil: and thus we infer that Agni here must mean Visnu. 
Thus— 

Ananta-loka-aptih (I. 14) = Kamasya aptih (II. 11). 

Pratistham (I. 14) = Jagatah pratistham (II. 11). 

Ananta-loka-aptim (I. 14) = Krator anantyam (II. ) 1). 

Tarati janma-mrityu (I. 17)= Abhayasya param (II. 11). 

Brahma-ja-jnam (I. 17) = Stoma-mahat-un(gdi/am (II 11). 

The epithet “urugaya” (II. 11) is a well-known designation of the Lord, and means 
“ He whom the Great Ones Sing. ** So also the epithet “placed in the cavity” (I. 14) 
applied to Agni is the specific attribute of the word Visnu, and so the Lord Agni there 
must mean Visnu. Nor does one attain the endless world by the mere knowledge of Agni 
as fire, or Fire-god, but the knowledge of the Lord alone gives such position. For we 
find in the Bri. Up. III. 8. 10, it stated expressly that a diligent performer of fire-sacrifiees 
fails to reach the endless world if lie is ignorant of the Lord. 

“ O Gargi! He who offers oblations to Vaisvadeva, &c., in this world or gives alms, 
or performs sacrifices like asvamedha, &c., or undergoes protracted penances for thou¬ 
sands of years, but does not know the Imperishable, reaches the world which has an end : 
and never the endless world.” 

Moreover, where the primary meaning of a word gives a sensible and reasonable 
interpretation, it is not proper to take the secondary meaning. The primary meaning 
of the word ananta-loka—the endless state—is Mukti and not Heaven. Swarga is only a 
secondary meaning of this word. Nor is the knowledge of fire a direct means of mukti, 
it may lead indirectly to Mukti : while the knowledge of Visnu is the direct means of 
Mukti. For this reason, too, the word Agni must mean Visnu, here. 

Mantra 18. 

h ^qren^Tcr: jfiPFTTcRr pr# \\ r m\\ 

ITinfichiketas, he who has thrice performed the Nachiketa 
firc-sacrificc. Trayam, m fH^iT 

S^PTfRnU the three (the bricks, their 

number, and arrangement. That is, Visnu the Devata of the bricks, their 
number, t.e., 360, and their attribute), Etad this, f^f^r Viditva, having 

known, Yah, who. Evam, thus. Vidvan, the wise, who knows 

Visnu in the Nfichiketas (ire. Chinutc, accomplishes. 

Nachiketam, the Nachiketa dliyana who makes the Fire-altar in the shape of a 
falcon, toi toisc, &c., with (the bricks). ^ 5 a, be. Mrityu-pasan 

5TWR WUXir^) the death chains, the wheel of birth and 

death, gcff: Puratal.i, first. iTJiiiJq Pranodyah, thrown off, shaken oh 
Sokdtigah, passed over sorrow, beyond the reach of grief. Modate, rejoices. 

Svarga-loke, in the Heaven-world, the world of Hari. In Visnu 
who is essentially all bliss, knowledge and illumination. 

18. That wise Three-fold-perfonner of Nacdnketas ^sacrifice, }vho . 
having known these three, thus performs the Naohiketas meditation, 




7 VALLI, 20. 


67 


having thrown of! the toils of death lurking in the heart, transcending all 
sorrows, rejoices in the Lord Visnn, and thus is liberated.—18. 

Mantra 19. 

qqr Esah, this. % Te, by thy (name will be known). Agnih, fire. 

Nachiketah, as Nachiketa fire. Svargyah heavenly, 

leading to Svarga. Yam, which (fire). ^TcRrnin Avnnithah, thou didst 

ask or choose. ffrTfifa Dvitiyena, by the second. =wu Varena, gift, boon. 
qcT^ Etarn, this, Agnim, fire. rfq Tava. th}', />., by thy name alone, qq 

Eva, only. Pravaksyanti, will call. Janasah, people. This is an 

archaic form of plural. Tritiyam, third, qt Varam, boon. 

Nachiketah, O Nachiketah. gnffaq Vrinihhsva, ask, choose. 

Note .—0 Nachiketas ! to thee this Heavenly Fire has been taught, which thou didst 
ask by thy second boon. The people will call this Fire by thy name alone. O Nachiketas. 
ask the third boon. 

19. This heavenly Fire which thou didst ask for in thy second boon, 
will be known by thy name as Nachiketa Agin. People will call this by 
thy name. 0 Nachiketas ! ask the third boon.—19. 

Mantra 20. 

ijd fqferqRur 1 

m Ya,that which (well-known), fqq Iyarn, this, Prete, about the dead 
and the liberated. The wise say that the God rules not only living but the 
“ dead ” and the men who have become fully liberated; the unwise say the 
“ dead ” and the “ liberated ” are not under God’s control. The word preta 
literally means “gone (ita) fully (pra) ”—and thus the “dead” are preta in a 
secondary sense, for they return after enjoying heaven. Vichikitsa, 

doubt. qgsq Manusye, about men (who are dead or liberated). It should be read 
along with prete i.e , 5^ about the Preta Men. qrT%r ffR q% Asti iti 

eka, “ Is ” says one. Some wise one says that there is a God who iules and 
controls the souls of the dead and the liberated. ^ fTST Na avam 

asti iti cha eka “and it is not” (say) the others. That God is not the ruler of 
the souls of the liberated. The Liberated is equal to God, and Free, q^ 
Etad, this doubt, Tqsttq Vidvam, I may know, ^gftrs: Anusistah, taught, in¬ 
formed, instructed. <qqt Tvava, by thee. qrt Aham, I. quTtir Varanam, among 
the boons qq*: Esah, this, q^: Varah boon. Madhv«*s reading is ^ “chosen” 
Tritlyah, the third. 


^ ♦ 













68 


KATHA-UPANIBAD. 


Note— There is this doubt, when a man dies, some say that the soul exists, others 
that it does not. May I know this being taught by thee. Among the boons this is the 
third. (Sankara). 

20. Some say that the God controls the dead and the (liberated) 
jivas, others say that He does not. Therefore this doubt has arisen. May 

I know this being taught by thee. Of the boons, this is the third that I 

have chosen.—20. 

Note .—There is this doubt regarding (the condition of the) man in Moksa, some say 
there is (still an Individual self or form or centre in Moksa) others say it is not. May I 

learn, being taught by thee, this (true nature of Moksa). Of the boons, this is the 

third. 

Note .—The meaning generally given to this question is—some say that there is such a 
thing as an atman, which survives after death, and which is distinct from body, senses, 
manas, and buddhi, while others say there is no such entity as atma, This is a subject 
which we cannot know either through perception or through reasoning, hence the neces¬ 
sity of revelation about it. This interpretation is set aside by the eommentator. The 
question is not about the survival of Personality after death, but about the nature of God 
and the Liberated jiva, and their inter-relation. 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

The wise say that the Lord controls the embodied and unembodied, the bound as 
well as the liberated jivas. The ignorant say that He rules only the living and those 
souls which are bound, but over the liberated He exercises no control. They are per¬ 
fectly free. Let me know, O Yama, the true nature of the controller. Teach me this. 

That the question is about this Controller, and not about the survival after death, 
is also clear from mantra 4 of the Fifth Yalli:—“ What remains w r hen this soul, the dweller 
in the body, goes out leaving the sense body (at death); and is freed also from the subtle 
body (at Mukti). This is that indeed." This question also shows that the Lord dwelling 
in the Freed Ones is the subject of enquiry. The word there is “ Vimuehyamansya *'— 
“ completely freed ’’—that is, the soul that has shaken off even the subtle body. The 
Mukti alone can be called vimuchyamanam i.c., visesena-mochanam : merely physical 
death is not called vimuchyamanam. Of course, Yama in I. 25, says “ do not ask me about 
death (maranam).” But that does not show that Nachiketas asked about ordinary death. 
The word maranam or death is applied to the Freed Souls also for they had been under 
the control of death. In Y. 41 there are two epithets used, visramsamanam and vimuch¬ 
yamanam— the first means, to throw off the dense body, the latter to discard the subtle 
body. If both meant leaving off the dense body, there would be tautology. So the use of 
these two epithets in that verse also proves that the enquiry really refers to Muktas 
and not the ordinary dead. 

[The second and the third questions both relate to the mysteryjof the Lord. Yama 
answers the second question very promptly, but the third he answers with great reluc¬ 
tance.] The reason for this is thus given in the Tattva-Sara:—“A person who knows 
the Supreme .Self in a general way, as residing in Agni, but does not know the Lord 
particularly, as residing in the heart of all jivas even when they are freed, and who is 
ignorant of the fact that the Lord is also always the controller of all Mukta Jivas and 
that He possesses super-relatively excellent qualities-a person who is thus ignorant of 
the greatness of Hari does not get Mukti. Therefore Yama answers the third question 
with great reluctance, in order to show that tho question implies a great mystery. Still 
by knowing the Lord as residing in Agni there accrues an increase of happiness in the 
Mukta state. Therefore the third question is separately put/’ 





I VALLI, 21. 


69 


Note .—The second and the third questions both relate to the Lord : but the know¬ 
ledge of the Lord as the indwelling spirit of Fire does not alone lead to Mukti, hence 
the necessity of the third question. It is the knowledge of the super-excellent qualities 
of the Lord as described in answer to the third question, and the knowledge that He is 
the Controller of the Mukta Jivas also, that leads to salvation. In the state of Mukti 
there is happiness, but this happiness is considerably enhanced if one possesses the know¬ 
ledge implied in the second question also. In Yalli 5, Mantra 7, the Sruti recites “ Some 
jivas ready for birth go into the womb and obtain a body, others enter into immoveable 
object, according to their action and their knowledge. ” Then the Sruti goes on to declare 
in the next Mantra :—“He the Lord who is awake in those who sleep, shaping one desir¬ 
ed object after another—that is the bright, that is Brahman, that alone is called the 
Immortal.’' 


This also indicates that the Lord dwells in the jivas; and as this is said in answer 
to the question put in Mantra Y. 4, we conclude that the question there also was about 
the Lord and His control over the jivas, both bound and free. Otherwise there would be 
no relevancy between the question and the answer. In the third boon of Xachikctas the 
question relates to Mukta Jivas only, while in Y. 4. the question refers to all jivas whether 
bound or free ; iu the third boon &c., the word used is prete, which means the 4 dead’ 

as well as ‘Mukta.’ So that question is confined to the enquiry whether the Lord con¬ 
trols the ‘ dead ’ and the ‘ freewhile the question in Y. 4. relates tu jivas in general, 
whether alive, dead or free. Thus there is no contradiction between these two. 


In Y. 6 also Yama says “ Now I shall tell thee about that mysterious ancient Brahman 
how He the Supreme, governs the dying and the dead.” The same idea is more definitely ex¬ 
pressed in the Brahmarula Purana “ The mysterious Supreme Brahman, though dwelling 
in the dying and decaying bodies of the jivas yet He is awake in all the jivas whether 
they be asleep or not.” 


Mantra 21 . 



ur hr hi 

Devaib, by the Gods, by the sages. ^ Atra, here, with regard to this 
matter the subject of thy question whether the liberated are absolutely 4 free ' 
or still remain under the control of God. Api, also. fqpqfei%cT doubtful, 

undecided, ga Pura, before, in former times. ^ Na, not. f| Hi, because. 
Sujheyam or well-understood or easily understood. ^55: Anuh, subtle, qq 

Esa, this Atma. vjb: Dharmah, the upholder—the Lord upholds or is Dharaka of 
all, therefore He is called Dharma. Anyam, other, qi Varam, boon. 
Nachiketas, O Nachiketas. Vrinisva, choose, Br Mfl, (Hi) me. The 

two BI both denote negation in a strong and double form, do not press, i.e . 9 do 
not press, hj Ma, not. 3W^fr Uparotsih, press as the creditor presses the 
debtor to discharge the promise. ^1% Ati, an upasarga to be connected with 
^ l BT Ma (BTqfcl) to me, not. Srija or let go this boon, qqq^ 

Enam, this boon. 

21. This (question) was left undecided even by the gods of old, 
because it is not of easy comprehension. This God is subtle (and of 

10 








70 


KATHA-OPANISAD. 


unmanifested nature) 0 Nacliiketas! ask any other boon. Do not press me. 
Free me from this (pledge of answering thee).—21. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word “Pharma” here means the supporter, He who upholds all the worlds. 

Note.—About this the devas, even of yore had their doubt because it is not easy of 
understanding because this Lord is very subtle. O Xachiketas 1 ask another boon, do not 
press me; let go to me this boon. 

Mantra 22. 



: Devaili, by the Gods. Atra, in this matter, ^nq Api, even. 

Vicbikitsitam, doubtful or had doubted, fir* K i 1 a, verily. 1 hear 
from Thee, O Death, that devas had even doubted about it. Tvam, thou. ^ 
Cha, and. Mrityo, O Death. ^ Vat, because. Na, not. g|[q Sujneym, 
well understood. T he nature of the Lord is not esay to understand. Attha, 

sayest. Vakta, speaker, teacher. ^ Cha, and. Asya, of this or the 

subject of my question, Tvadrik, like Thee. Anyah, another. 

Na, not. Labhyah, to be found even after search among the learned, 

q 3q;q: Na Anayah, not any other. q*: Yarali boon. Tulyah, equal, like. 

Ltasya, of this. cfiPHt Kaschit, whatsoever. 

22 . 0 Death ! because even thou sayest ‘the devas even verily had 
doubts about this and it is not easy of understanding ’— (therefore that 
is the boon which I ask), because there can not he found a teacher like 

thee, nor is there any other boon equal to it*— 22 . 

Note . —(Nachiketa said) O Death, about this certainty of old the devas even were in 
doubt and thou also sayest that it is not easy of understanding : of this truth, a speaker 
like thee no other can be obtained, therefore, like this there is no other boon, 

Mantra 23. 

^ ^ mil \\R\W 

SJcTni^r Satayusafi, centenarian, or who lives hundred years, 
Putra-pautran, sons and grandsons. Vrinisva, choose. qg* Bahtin, many, 

q^ Pasun, cattle. Hasti, elephants, Hiranyam, gold. 

Asvan, horses. Bhumeh, in the earth : the ablative case here has the force of 
the locative. Maliat, wide, very broad. ^rqqq Ayatanam, abode, that is, 
an empire, qrrffeq Vrinisva, choose. Svayam, thyself. ^ Cha, and. sftq 

Jiva, live (thou), SHq: Saradah, autumns or rains. 3T3H Vavat, as long as. 
lchchasi, thou wishest to live. 

23. — (Yama said) choose sons and grandsons living for a hundred 
years ; choose many animals, horses, elephants and gold. Choose a wide 








I VALLI , 25. 


71 


empire oil earth and live thou thyself as many autumns as thou desir- 
est.—23. 

Mantra 24 . 

qq^q qfq iqffrq fq=q Tqrsmqqq q i 

q^rwrr qfq%q^qqfq qqqiqr q;um \M\\ 

Etat, this. g^q Tuiyam, equal to, like. qfq Yadi, if. q?q*T Manyase, 
thou thinkest. q=c Varam, a boon. ^qfreq Vrinisva, choose, RtT Vittam, wealth. 

^ Chira-jivikam cha, and the means cf living long or long life. q^PiKT 
Maha-bhumau, king of a mighty empire. qr%q;q: Nachiketah, O Nachiketas ! 

Tvam, thou, qfq Edhi (qq or M. qq*q) be (Imperative of qm to be). “ Be 
thou (born or a king) in a big (or) sacred land.” Or the word “ edhi ” may be 
derived from qq 1 to increase ’ and then, qfq would mean gq*q 4 increase/ that is, 

‘ be thou prosperous as ruler of a great empire. ’ qqqiqi* kamanam qvq of desires, 
(divine and human), amongst those who are wished for. cqr Tva, thee. qqqqiq 
Kama-bbajam, enjoyer, sharing in desires, worthy of having objects of desire, 
a sharer amongst those who are desired, i.e., One of the “ adored ” or “desired 
ones” of earth. q;ufq Karorni, I make (for I am One whose will is never 
frustrated). 

24. If thou thinkest (there isj any other boon like this, choose 
that also. Choose wealth and long life, 0 Nachiketa, be thou a king of 
wide world. I shall make thee an object of desire even to those whom 
the world desires.—24. 


Mantra 25. 

q q qqWmRWqq: I 

fTTT TRT: qt^T <^¥RTqT qjpq: I 

3 ij Ye Ye, what what, />., what-so-ever. qqqp Kamah, objects of desire 
or solicitation. goW Durlabhah,’difficult of attainment, q^qq? Martyaloke, 
in the mortal world, in the Bhur-loke or in the human body, Sarvan, 

all those. qjRrq Kaman, desires (or objects of desire and solicitation). 
Chhandatah, as desired, according to (thy) measure, as wished. qrqq*q Prartha- 
yasva, ask thou, fqp Imah, these. {Rr: Ramah, women, ///., delight-givers, 
charmers, fair maidens, ^qr: Sa-rathah, with chariots, or seated on chariots. 

Sa-ttiryah playing on musical instruments, q Na, not. f| Hi, verily. 
%Z*JV Idrisah or Idrisi, like these, spqqrqp Lambhaniyah, to be obtained, 
to be got. Manusyaih, by men (or mortals), qnfq: Abhih, by these, damsels, 
qsr qrTn^: Mat prattabhih, by me given. qR=qRq*q Paricharayasva, be served 
by them, cause them to wait on thee. qfqqR: Nachiketas, O Nachiketas. q*qj 











72 


KATHA-UPAMSAD. 




Maranam, death (the question relating to the nature of God as He is among the 
dead and dying). About the dead and liberated persons and the Lord living in 
and guiding them, qr ^Tg*IRfp Ma anupraksih, thou shouldst not ask, do not 
ask. 

25. —Whatever desires are difficult of attainment in the mortal body, 
all those desires, fully rnayst thou ask. Take these—fair maidens seated 
on chariots and playing on musical instruments, men verily cannot get 
like them. Be thou served by these given by me, 0 Nacbiketas ! Do 
not enquire about the Lord of death and life. —25. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The words maranam manupraksih mean do not press me to tell thee about the Lord 
who controls the dying. The word maranam does not mean death here, but the dying. 

Mantra 26. 

vtrqr q^q qq?ci%3^ffqqTqri sRqfcr 1 

r £TR Hq ffqq qt^Rriq WiiW 

Svah, to-morrow (whether they will or will not last till to-morrow ; 
things whose existence is so doubtful.) vj: qpTffr “not lasting till to¬ 
morrow." qprrqr Abhavah not-lasting; not-existing, not stable, transitory, 
which do not last till to-morrow. Martyasya, of the mortal (man). qq 

Yat, because or these, all these. Antaka, O Ender! O Death! qqa; 

Etat, this, these sons, &c., Singular for Plural. Sarvendriy^nam, 

of all the senses. tSRSifcT Jarayanti (they) cause decay, wear out; exhaust; 
take away. The effort in preserving these objects of enjoyment causes the 
decay of the vigour of all senses. The apsaras, &c., and other sensual enjoy¬ 
ments are all evils. Tejab, vigour, qqq Api, also. nlq Sarvam, all. 

Jivitam, life, "all life’’—even aeonic life, living for a Kalpa. 

Alpam, short, qq Eva, ever. qq Tava, thy. qq Eva, even, qrqp Vaiiah, 
chariots. qq Tava, thy, thine, jpqrftq or gyrurFf Nritya-gite or Nrityagitam, 
dancing and singing (let be). 

26. 0 End-maker, all these enjoyments are transitory. They cause 
decay of the senses of man. The longest life is indeed short. Let thy 
vehicles, thy dancers and singers remain with thee.—20. 

Mantra 27. 

q fq%q FTWTCT qsjsqt Qreqmt fqqqqiqq I 

<q q qmTrq: u qq urvsii 

^ Na, not. rq%q \ittena, by wealth. cfqqTrq: Tarpaniyah, satisfied, made 
happy. ^3^*. Manusyah, man. Lapsyamahe, we shall obtain. RtT 

Vittam, wealth, Adraksma, when we have seen, Chet, if. If or 









J YALTA, 28. 


73 


when we have seen thee, then certainly we shall get wealth, for life, wealth, &c., 
are secondary rewards that necessarily follow the sight of a Great One like 
Thee—they need not be asked for separately. Where is the difficulty in 
obtaining wealth when we have had the good fortune of seeing Thee, which is 
more difficult. Tva, thee, jivisyamah, we shall live. Yavad, 

so long (as on the post of Yama art thou the occupant. So long as of my 
life, thou art the lord, up to that time I shall live : for thou art the lord of life.) 

isisyasi, thou wilt rule (thou remainest lord, or art lord of my life). So 
long as thou boldest the office of Yama. So long as the lordly authority of 
Yama is vested in thee, there is no one who can take away our life, by disre¬ 
garding thy command. ^ Tvam, thou, Varah, boon. Tu, only, verily. 
% Me, mine, Varaniyah, to be chosen. ^ Sa, that which I have already 

asked, Eva, indeed. 

27. No man is ever satisfied with wealth. When we have seen 
thee, we shall obtain wealth. We shall live, so long as thou rulest (as 
Yama). So that indeed is the boon chosen by me, I ask no other boon.—<27. 

Mantra 28. 

sfn^r qfr Ret ir- 

Ajiryatam, of not-decaying, free from decay. Amritanam, 

of the immortals, of the Devas : free from death. Upetya, having reached 

(the company), having approached, Jiryan, (^ROT^O decaying by not 

receiving teaching about the Lord, Martyah, mortal. Where (is) down 

going. Going to regions of darkness. Where, ^rv^ := has been drawn 
down. Where has the man who has approached the Immortals ever fallen 
down ? Never. He always becomes or remains great and undecaying. 
sfSTR*? Prajanan, knowing. It may qualify “ martya ” or Yama; O wise one. 

Abhi-dhyayan, reflecting over, meditating over, pondering on. Re¬ 
membering. Wisely understanding. Varna, colour, beauty, Rati, 

play, love, the pleasure derived from sensual gratification. SRjrqnr Pramodan, 
pleasures. Or the pleasures of music (varna) and sports (rati). Ati- 

dirghe, in a prolonged. JIvite, living Kah rameta, who delights. 

Beaching the presence of the undecaying and the undying and (knowing that higher 
gifts can be obtained from them than wealth, &c.) how a decaying mortal, a denizen 
of the lower sphere, (can ask lower gifts; ? Who can delight in long life while contem¬ 
plating (the transitory nature of) the pleasures of beauty and love (Sankara). 

Knowing (the nature of the Muktas who are) free from decay and death, how can the 
decaying Mortal, who has realized (his own imperfections), put any faith in these (apsaras) 
constantly meditating over the Radiant Form, the Bliss-of-union, who can find joy even 
in the longest (earthly) life.— (Ramanuja School). 

28 . 0 wise (Yama)! Having (once) approached (the vicinity) of the 
Undecaying and the Undying where (has ever) a decaying mortal been 









74 


KATHA-UPAN1SAD . 


drawn down ? (Even a long life is not desirable for) remembering (the 
bye-gone) beauty, pleasures and joy (of dead beloved ones) who can find 
happiness in a long life ?—28. 

Mantra 29. 

Hffcf fff 35^ I 

qisq to ^ijjsrrast unra irs.ii 

Yasmin, in which, about which, Idam, such, this, (doubt: 
whether there is such ruler of the dead and the liberated.) f^fro%^FcT 
Vichikitsanti, people make enquiry or raise doubt, Mrityo, O Death! 

^ Yat, what. (Madhva has not this qa in his text). TO*TO3 Samparaye, in 
the Mukti, In liberation. Hereafter Blessing. Mahati, in the great. 

srf| Bruhi, say, teach. ^: Nah, to us. rfcT 'fat, that, />., the essential form 
of the Lord who rules the dead and the liberated, g: Yah, what, as. tojr Ayam, 
this. TO Varah, boon, Gudham, occult, deep, secret, hidden, 
Anupravistah, has entered or attained, or is related to. Na, not. 
Anyam, any other (boon). Tasniat, than that (boon); or therefore. 

Nachiketa, Nachiketas. Vrinite, chooses. 

29. 0 Death, as with regards to the Great Beatitude (the condition 

of Mukti), they have raised this doubt, that indeed tell thou to us. As 
this boon relates to the Hidden, therefore, Nachiketas does not choose 
any other boon.—29. 

About which (people) have raised such doubt, that (God) indeed, 0 Death, reveal 
thou to us (that we may get) the Supreme Liberation. As (the subject of) this boon has 
been kept a secret (so long), therefore, no other boon does Nachiketa choose. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The words Mahati samparayc mean the Great Blessing, i.e., the Mukti. 

S'-TOSWFI STOW II \ II 









Second Valli. 

Mantra i. 

^TRHT ^qffhffRT: I 

mU *rqr% s qqr numn ^ u 

3TFq^ Anyat, other, different. »jq: Sreyah, good, the most praiseworthy, 
the knowledge of Brahman. The Brahma Vidya, because it brings about 
liberation (nihsreyas). Anyat, different, other. StT Uta, also, and. trq 

Eva or fq Iva, as if, alone, ffq: Prey ah, pleasant, the objects that give pleasure 
such as wife, children, &c. % Te, these two (the good and the pleasant), ^vr 
Ubhe, both. Nanarthe, different objects, such as liberation and bondage. 

Purusam, the embodied soul, the jiva. Sinitah, bind, Tayoh, 

of these two (good and pleasant) $rq: Si'eyah, the good (the Brahma-Vidya.) 

Adadanasya, of him who accepts, who clings, erg Sadhu, mukti 
or emancipation, (literally) well, auspiciousness, freedom from rebirth and 
worldly existence, Bbavati, is or becomes, Hiyate, misses, loses 

or becomes low (is bound in the chains of rebirth), Arthat, end, the su¬ 

preme object of man, the Eternal, the Mukti. q: Yah, who. 3 U, indeed, sfa: 
Preyah, pleasant, (wife, children, &c.) Vrinite, chooses. 

1. Different is the Good and different indeed is the Pleasant; both 
these towards diverse objects draw down the man. Of these two, for 
him who accepts the Good, there is freedom ; but lie who chooses the 
Pleasant, misses the end.—30. 

Mantra 2. 

srqsr qqsr ffqfrer sffr: 1 

srt 

$21^ Si eyas, good. =sr Cha, and. Preyah, pleasant. ^ Cha, and. 

Manusyam, (j^q) man. tr<r: Etah, (?tr fcT ft is a compound verb; 
the upasarga ^rr is added to the present 3rd pers. Dual frp from f “to go”) 
approach, ur Tau, these two (the good and the pleasant, the Brahma Vidya 
and the Kama objects) Dharma and Adbarma. Samparitya, fully 

understanding, reflecting with mind, fully knowing, literally going round 
about; examining, fqnffiirf; Vivinakti, separates, distinguishes (that the Good 
causes liberation, and the Pleasant causes bondage). Dhirah, the wise 

the discriminating one. srcc Sreyah, the good, the Brahma-Vidya. f| Hi, only. 
Madliva does not read it. tfn;: Dhirah, the wise one. Abhi, an 

upasarga to be joined to the verb Vrinite. According to Madhva it governs the 


mimimt 


*\ '■n r\ rs r\ ^ r\ 

STCT fWTcT 







76 


KATHA-UPANISAD. 


noun preyasah and means “ rejecting.” Preyasah, the pleasant. 

Vrinite, chooses. Sr: Preyah, the pleasant. *1??: Mandah, the dull, the man 
of small understanding, devoid of discrimination. griT%»ir<T or ^ Yoga-ksemSt 
or Yoga-kseman, acquisition (of new wealth) and preservation of the old ; 
the path of samsara. Vrinite, chooses. 

2. The Good and the Pleasant both, through past causes, approach 
the jiva. The wise frilly examining them, distinguishes (them). The 
wise chooses the Good over the Pleasant. The ordinary man chooses the 
Pleasant objects and their acquisition and preservation.—31. 

Mantra 3. 

Jmr.rji-Tir firaurfbmat q*qt nwfo 11211 

Sa, he (merely emphatic, not to be translated). Tvam, thou, 

Priyan, the pleasures, (objects, like sons and wives.) Priya-rupan, 

which are delightful and attractive, seeming pleasant (such as apsaras, &c. 
or houses, gardens, &c). ^ Cha, and. Kaman, desires, pleasures, 

objects of desires, Abhi-dbyayan, reflecting, meditating, pondering, 

thinking over (their transitoriness and worthlessness). Nachiketah, 

O Nachiketas ! Atya-sraksili, hast rejected, dismissed. 

Anyat-prffksih, (?pT^=grgi^:q, II ^ omitted as a Vedic 

irregularity) thou didst ask the other (about Brahman)], q Na, not. qqr Etam, 
this, Srinkam, the chain, the fetters. RtTC 3T Vittamayim, golden, 

Avaptah,-didst accept, Vasyam, in which (chain), by which fetters. srSTRT 

Majjanti, sink, fall, or are attached, bind themselves, s^q: Bahavah, many. 
^5^: Manusyah, men. Many men bind themselves willingly in those golden 
fetters. 

0 . 0 Nachiketas! Thou having pondered over all desires—Tie 

attractive form, hast renounced them. Thou didst not accept the golden 

fetters with which many a man binds himself voluntarily.—32. 

MADHYA’S COMM ENTRY. 

Srinkam means fetters. 

Rote,- _In Mantra 1, 10 the word Srinkam was already explained as a necklace or 

a chain. Where was the necessity of explaining this word here again? The Sriuka 
there was a golden chain given by Yama to Nachiketas and the latter had accepted that 
as an additional gift. Bat it could not be the same Sfihkam referred to here; for here 
Yama speaks of a Srinkam which Nachiketas had rejected. Therefore the Srinkam of this 
verse has a different meaning from that of I. 16. It means the fetters of pleasure which 
bind the unthinking humanity. 

Ma.ntra 4. 

urcfra ftfqt qr =q r%ur% strar i 
fasmfrfapi qfq%qu ur q <qt w,m qgqt oTfi^q: iisu 









IT VALLI, 6. 


77 


Duram, wide apart, distant, separated from one another by a great 
interval. tr% Ete, these two. Viparite, contradictory, opposite, leading to 

different points. Visuchi, pointing to different directions, going to con¬ 
trary directions, Avidya, ignorance (objects of pleasure), qr Ya, what. 

^ Cha, and. Vidya iti, Wisdom (leading to emancipation). That 

which is avidya, other than vidya, known as a means of attaining temporal 
pleasures, and that which is vidya, these two are far apart. Jnata, is 

known (by the wise.) r?€ir-3r*ftTCR or Vidya-abhipsinam or tarn, Wisdom- 
desirer, Seeker of knowledge. Nachiketasam, Nachiketa. ^ Manye, 

I think, 1 believe or know. ^ Na, not. Tva, thee. Kamah, desires 

(like Apsaras, See.) Bahavah, many. or Alolupanta or 

-lolupantah, tear away, causing expectation ordesiie, />., the various Kamas 
did not produce any desire in thee, did not attract thee away from the Path of 
the Good. 

4. These two, Avidya and what is known as Vidya, are distant 
and wide apart from each other, opposing and different-pointed. I think 
Nachiketas to be a seeker of wisdom, for all these temptations did not 
move thee. — 33. 

Mantra 5. 

3R&TRT: Tw: I 

qfarRT UV.I1 

Avidyay&m, in ignorance, in objects like sons, wives, Sec. 

Antare, midst. ^rj-PTHr: Vartamanah, dwelling, being surrounded, Svayani, 
themselves. vfKf: Dhirah, wise (saying ‘ we alone are wise ’), wise in their own 
conceit. Panditam, learned in scriptures. Manyarnanah, con¬ 
sidering (puffed up with vain knowledge). Dandramyamanah, going 

crooked, staggering to and fro. Pari-yanti, go round and round, wander. 

Mudhah, the fools, non-disenminating. Andhena, by the blind, 

Eva, indeed. Niyamanah, led. uw r Yatha, as. Andhah, blind 

men. 

5. Dwelling in tlie midst of Ignorance, but thinking themselves 
wise and learned, the fools wander about hither and thither, as blind men 
led by the blind.—34. 

Mantra 6 . 

q RiqjTir: qfawrfa qra swrijR farRTfsr i 

q? HRf g^mnrqq^ h iiS.ii 

ff Na, not. Samparayali, the moksa, and the Lord. 4 'he God as 

the means of that moksa or liberation. Prati-bhati, appears, manifests, 

(God does not become the object of knowledge). BMam, the child, or who 

11 









78 


KATHA-UPA2USAD . 


is like a child (ignorant and non-discriminating). SRrSRT Pramadyantam, act¬ 
ing carelessly ; heedless, whose mind is attached to sons, &c. Vitta- 

mohena, by the delusion of wealth. Tgz Mudham, deluded (surrounded or 
enwrapped in Tamas). Ayam, this (visible consisting of wife, food, drink, 
&c.) Lokali, region, world. ?T Na asti, there is no. Parah, the 

other. The invisible world. 1 1i, thus. *trt Mani, thinking. 3^: jfp 

Punah, punah, again and again Vasain, control, sway. Apadyate, 

falls, h Me, my. 

6. The way to the supreme Liberation does not appear to the 
child deluded by the illusion of wealth and acting carelessly. He who 
thinks that this world only exists and not the other, falls again and again 
under my control.—35. 

Mantra 7. 

^ TR3J: ( 

Wmx RrFTr SR ^TTcTT llvsil 

Sravanaya, for the sake of hearing, to hear. What does not be¬ 
come object of knowledge produced by hearing. Many persons have not the 

good fortune of having heard even of tlie Supreme or the Supreme liberation. 
=srfqr Api, even. Bahubhih, by many, to many. q: Yah, who (the God 

called here the Samparaya or Liberator or Hcre-after). The Supreme self. 
?T oW Na labhyah, not become the object of knowledge. sjipRr Srinvantah 
api, even hearing ; Madhva docs not read api. Bahavah, man\ f (others), 

q Yam, whom (the Atman). q Rn: Na Vidyufj, did know (fully or rightly). 

Ascharyah, wonderful, difficult to obtain ; rare. Vakfa, the speaker 

who leaches (Him as He really is), Kusalah, able, competent (is the 

person who after hearing of Atman finds it). Asya, his, of the Supreme 

Atman, Labdha, finder. As'charyah, wonderful. ^Rr Jnata, 

knower, he who comprehends, KusaU-nusistah, taught by an able 

teacher, taught propel ly or ably. 

7. To many the Lord is not even an object of hearing, while many 
who have heard of Him do not know Him fully. Hare is the teacher, and 
able is Hib finder. Rare is the knower, even when taught properly.—30. 

Mantra 8. 

?T sjtTfi rrq R|‘RT | 

TIRR ll^ll 

7 [ Na, not. nOT Narena, by a sectarian man, by a bigot or a prejudiced man. 
OTRJ Avarenn, by an inferior, by a person of uncultured intellect. By a person 
who studies Vedanta merely to acquire learning, not realization. Madhva’s 
reading is. 3R*: Avarah, not excellent. The teaching of a bigot is always an. 






79 


II VALTJ, 8. 


avarali proktab inferior teaching. They always laud their particular deity 
such as Surya, Ganapati, &c., and say Visnu is inferior to these, tfrff:: 
Proktah, taught, teaching, description, irq- Esa, this (self), gjg; Sujneyah or 
Suvijnevah, able to be understood well and completely, well under¬ 
stood, easy to be known. srgqr Bahudha, full of many qualities. The Lord 
possesses many and diverse qualities, because He is All Full. 
Chintyamanah, has been thought upon by the scriptures, &c., conceived by 
the Vedas. Ananya-prokte, not-another-taught, a teacher who does 

not see another, any tiling (separate from him self), who imagines "I am 
not other than Brahman,” who does not know that he is another and Brahman 
is different from him. An Advaitin. A pantheist. An Idealist, nra" Gatih 
entrance, going, i.e., full knowledge. %rw Atra (here) in regard to Brahman. 

Na asti, is not. AniySn, smaller. The Lord is smaller than 

the jiva whose size is anu (atom), f? Hi, verily, because. Atarkyam 

not to be argued upon, not subject of inference, inconceivable. 
Anu-pramanat, than the jiva, the jiva is called so, because it is of the measure 
of an atom. Its size is an atom. 

8. The Lord cannot be well understood, when taught by a sectarian 
for he describes Him as inferior to his own deity. The Lord, however, is 
full of all qualities and lias been so conceived by the Vedas. Nor is 
the true knowledge of him obtained when taught by an Ananya (Pan¬ 
theist or an Idealist). The Lord is smaller than the jiva whose size is that 
of an atom. He is inconceivable.—37. 

Note.— It is not understood well when taught by a person of Lower Intellect for it 
has been diversely discussed (by such scholars without coining to any satisfactory conclu¬ 
sion). When taught by a non-spiritual teacher, there is no going into (understanding) it 
Because it is subtler than the measure of an atom, and not to be argued. 

The sentence ananya prokte gatih atra nasti, has been the subject of different expla¬ 
nations. Sankara gives the following four explanations : — 

1. Anauya—one who does not see another, who sees all as one, an Advaitin. Gatih = 
doubt. “ When taught by an Advaitin, there is left no doubt about it.” 

2. Ananya—not—another, not different from Brahma, the atma being the same as 
Brahma. Gatih—knowledge or object of knowledge. “ When taught as non-different from 
Brahma, then there remains no other snbject of knowledge here”—for that is the highest 
state of knowledge when the unity of the self is realised. 

3. Or gatih may mean Sam sir a gatih, going the round of transmigration. “When the 
non-otherness is taught then there is no coming back here.” 

4. Or the word might be a gatih, “ wantiof penetration or comprehension.” « When 
taught (by a teacher who has realised) the non-othornoss, then there is no want of com¬ 
prehension here.” For such a teacher does not merely teach by words, but opens the 
interior faculty of the hearer, by which he is made capable of understanding the non¬ 
duality. 

According to the Madhya School, this verse means : When taught by a learned but not 
a (jnani) person, it is inferior teaching, because it has been diversely discussed and is not 
easj of understanding. But when taught by a non-difference-seer (an Advaitin) there is 
no knowledge at all (not even of an inferior kind) about it. Ft is subtler than the measure 








80 


KATHA-UPANISAD. 


of an atom (and therefore is not subject of perception) ; It is not to be understood by 
reasoning (and therefore not subject of inference). 

The word “anya ” should be taken in this verse in the same sense, as in the next 
verse. There Sankara explains to mean a teacher versed in scriptures (agamas) not 
merely a scholar and a sophist, but a student of sacred science. Ananya therefore 

would mean, a person other than such a teaeher ; a mere learned man, a non-spiritnal 
teacher. Madhva is consistent in both verses—in verse 9 lie takes anya to mean 
“ another ”—i.<\, one who knows himself other than or separate from Brahman. In verse 8, 
therefore, “ananya” means one who identifies himself with Brahman. 

The Ramanuja School explanation is “The understanding (ava-gatih) which a person 
gets about the Atnia, when taught by a person who has realised Brahman and Atma, is im¬ 
possible to be attained when taught by a person of lower capacity. Or, when taught by a 
person who has realised Brahman and Atma, then there is no wandering (gatik) in fiamsara. 
Or ananya may moan not other, i. e., one’s own self, i.c., when one tries to learn it by his 
own effort, heeannot enter into it. Or ananya may refer to avara of the first line : when 
taught by a lower mind there is no understanding of it.” 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word Ananya means “ he who does not realise that the Lord is separate (anya) 
and he is separate (anya).” If such a person teaches another, then there is no understand¬ 
ing of Brahman. Gatih means knowledge. (In other words, the teaching of a person 
who is a monist, and does not know the difference between jiva and the Lord, and thinks 
them to be identical is nnfructuons.) While if the “anya” or the person who realises that 
he is separate from the Lord, declares Brahman then there is understanding of Brahman : 
as tho mantra (IT. 9) says : “ when declared by an Auva, there is elear knowledge, O dear.” 
Ro also in the Brahma ‘Vaivarta Parana “ The man who does not know tho difference 
between the jivas and Vis mi, and those also who follow the teachings of such a person, 
can never get Supreme wisdom—jiianam—so long as they entertain this erroneous notion.” 

Mantra 9. 

qt RHTff: WTT3T%%cT: SRT 113.11 

Na, not. tTSfr Esa, this understanding or belief (about Brahman.) 
fpfrrj Tarkena, by argument (evolved out of one’s own brain, untaught by a spi¬ 
ritual teacher). Matih, belief. ^rPT^r Apaneya, to be destroyed. There 

are two prepositions here %(\ and added to the verb %qr They are of oppo¬ 
site meanings and so cannot be applied simultaneously to and should be 
applied separately. The result is that we get two verbs and qrpRr aney& 

= bring about: apaneya=to destroy. The belief about Brahman is not to be 
brought about by reasoning nor set aside by reasoning. sfirKT Prokta, declared, 
taught. gpSjg Anyena, by another, by a 1 heist as opposed to a pantheist or an 
idealist. By a person who knows “ 1 am other than Brahman.’’ iTq Eva, verily, 
even. g^RR Sujnftntiya, for realisation or Saksfttkara, full understanding or 
easy to understand, to realise, qg Prestha, O dearest. qr Yam, which (doctrine 
or belief) Tvam, thou, tmq: Apali, hast obtained. Satya-dhritih, 

true resolve, fixed in truth, whose patience is never shaken. *?f Bata, oh ! an 










II VALLl, 10. 


Si 


exclamation of wonder. Asi, thou art ^r-^Tvadrik, like thee.‘ r sfr 

No Bhuyat, there will not be. Nnchiketah, O Nachiketas. Piasta, 

questioner. 

9. This belief which thou hast got, can not be brought about nor 
destroyed by argument. When taught by the True Teacher the Self 
becomes easily realised. 0 dearest! strong is thy resolution. Inquirers 
like thee, 0 Nachiketas! are not many.—38. 

Mantra to. 








1% p I 

m Jauami aham, I know. srpj: fR Sevadhib iti, a treasure, a 
mine of bliss. Anityam, the Eternal Brahman (^r-Brahman). The 

Brahman known by the letter A is eternal, and is like a treasure. ^ Na hi, 
not verily. Adhruvaih, by non-firm ones : by those who are devoid of fixed 

faith ; by (those who have) not the (knowledge of the) eternal (Brahman) : who 
have not firm faith in Visnu. Prapyate, is obtained. j% Hi, because, sr 

Dhruvam, the fixed one ; the eternal, the ancient Brahman, Visnu. ft* Tat, that, 
rfrf: Tatah, therefore, *Rr Maya, by me. UTT^%rT: Nachiketah, the Nachiketa 
Fire, ?%r: Chitali, lias been laid, ^f&: Agnih, fire ^trIt: Anityaih, by those 
who have Brahman () always (r^t) as an object of meditation, or those 
who meditate on ^ A as eternal Brahman. 50^: Dravyaih, substances or facul¬ 
ties (like Manas, &c., as enumerated in logic), ?^: = by faculties fixed 

on the eternal Visnu called A Madhva re ids anitya-dravyaib 
Pi aptavan asmi, I have obtained. r?T Nityam, the eternal Brahman. 

10. L know that the Eternal Brahman is a “ Treasure and that 
the Permanent is not obtained by those who liave no strong devotion to 
that Permanent. Therefore 1 even, with faculties (mind, senses, Ac.) fixed 
on the Eternal Brahman, have performed meditation on Nachiketa Fire 
and liave thus obtained the Eternal.—39. 


cTcTT wn ^TR%^TkcTTiP<H M <3 £8*4 


Note .—This shows that Yama knows the Brahma-vidya and all his offerings of wealth, 
&c., to Nachiketas was to test his Vairagya and Yiveka. It further shews that the Eternal 
Alpha — Lord Visnu-—the A-nitya— is a sevadhi—a store house of all sweetness. Visnu is 
dhruvam — fixed and firm—and cannot be obtained by those whose faith is shaky and not 
firm. With the faculties (dravyaih) fully absorbed in the Eternal Alpha (Anityaih) one 
obtains that Eternal. 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

The word ^Rc ^U, anityam is a compound of ^T+RcSpr I The word means Visnu so 
^TR^T* means the Eternal Visnu. He who has Visnu for his sevadhi or treasure, has an 
Eternal Treasure. Yama says “ I know that the treasure consisting of z; Visnu, is eternal 
and unending.” [The “words anityaih dravyaih ” also must be similarly explained. 
They should be read as “ nityaih a-dravyaih.” The compound adravyaih means “ by the 
things belonging to ^ or Visnu.”]— By things like mind, &c., constantly engaged on 8? or 











82 


KATHA-UPANISAD. 


Yisnu; through the means of such eternal things like mind, &e., when fixed on Yisnu 
who is called ^ and ; I, Yama, have attained the Nitya or the Lord. For the Lord 
called Dhrnva or unchanging cannot be attained by those who arc adhrnva, i.e. y who are 
not devoted to the Lord, who are devoid of bhakti for the Dhruva. 

Mantra ii. 

Kamasya, of Desire. ^nf& Aptim, fulfilment, attainment. ^rTcf. 
Jagatah, of the world. Of the Heaven world. irf^ST 3 * Pratistham, the refuge, 
the foundation. The supporter. 3^: Kratoh, of good deeds (the reward 
like the states of being a Hiragyagarbha or the First Logos). Of the 
works or knowledge (relating to God). Anantyam, (^rr^T^T ^TT^Fqftg. 

the endless, (giving) unexhausting (fruit', Abhayasya, of 

no fear, qrt Param, the shore (where there is no fear). Stomam, the 

Mantras or hymns of praise. The \ T edas. *n*er Mahat, great. That Mighty 
who cannot he demonstrated fully by all the Praise-songs of the Vedas. 
Urugayam, the word uru lias three-fold reference here. Uru — Vedas. Uru = 
Brahma, &c., Ui u = the best. Uru gaya = sung by the Vedas, sung by Brahma 
and the rest, sung as the best, is sung by the great ones (like Brahma, &c., or 
sung by the Vedas). sjfrfST Pratistham, the foundation, the rest, the refuge 
of the liberated, Dristva, having seen, or known, Dhritya, with firm¬ 
ness of mind, with firm resolve. DhTrah, the wise. uf^T%rT: Nachiketah, 

O Nachiketas. Atyasraksih, rejected, thou hast thoroughly renounced. 

11. 0 Nachiketas! thou art wise; for with firm resolve thou 
hast renounced the attainment of desires, having seen ( the Brahman who 
is) the Foundation of the universe, the Infinity of knowledge, the Shore 
where there is 110 fear, the Mighty one praised by all hymns, chanted by 
the Great Ones, and the Refuge of all.— 10. 

MADHYA’S COMMEXTAUY. 

The words “krator anantyam” mean the infinity or endlessness of knowledge 
(kratu=kno\vlcdge). Since the knowledge of the Lord is endless and infinite, therefore 
He cannot be understood in His entirety by all the Vedas (stoma— Ycdas). The words 
“stomam mahat” mean greater than even all the Vedas. The employment of the 
term urugaya in this Mantra shows that Naehiketa’s third question had no reference to 
the survival of the soul or human personality after bodily death, but to the Lord who 
is called here tne Infinity of knowledge, Greater than all the Vedas and Urugaya. [The 
word Urugaya has already been shown to he the name of the Lord exclusively. Nor 
can it be said that the verses applying to Brahman may be applied to the Jiva also, for 
both are identical: because there is no proof that they are identical: while the scrip¬ 
tures show that they are separate, such as the following.] 

“ Jivatman is like an arrow and Brahman the target Mniulakopanisad, II. 2. 4. This 
also shows that the Jiva and Brahman are separate, for one is the target and the other is 
an arrow. “ Like an arrow let him bo fixed in Him”— MimJak, II 2. 4. This also shows that 











11 VALLl, 12. 


83 


the Jiva is the worshipper and the Lord is the worshipped. So also in lva thopanisacl, 
I. 3 . 2., we find Brahman described as the bank of safety for those who desire to cross 
the ocean of samsara. So also “he becomes like Brahman Kathopanisad, II. 4. 15. This 
also shows that the Jiva becomes similar to Brahman and not Brahman itself. Thus all 
these texts show that everywhere difference between Jiva and Brahman is taught in 
the Upanisads and uot that the Jiva is identical with Brahman. 

In the verse I. 3. 2, Yama says :—“May we be able to know the Naehiketas Fire,” 
where the meaning is“ may we know the Lord in-dwelling in Naehiketa Fire; " otherwise 
the attributes given there such as “the shore of security, ” “ the imperishable, ” “ the 
goal of worshippers ” become inappropriate. 

This also shows that the second question asked by Naehiketa related to Yisnu and 
not to fire. The verse, 1. 2. 11, should be construed as 

“having seen the Lord sung by the Great Ones, &c., thou hast renounced the attainment 
of desires.” 

The third boon of Naehiketas does not relate to the survival of the Jiva after 
death, because Naehiketas himself had died and was consciously conversing with Yama, 
and so he could not entertain any doubt as to Jiva surviving death or not. 

[If it be said that Naehiketas did- not die, but went bodily to Yama’s abode, 
then it would contradict the text where the father cursed the son by sa 3 'ing “die thou-” 
Moreover in another recension (Taitt. Brail., III. 11. 8 ) we read 1 “ let 

me, coming back to life, return to m 3 ' father” the word “ Jivan ” shows that Naehiketa had 
died actually and so the first boon he asked was to get back life.] 

Mantra 12. 

Tam, that. Durdarsam, difficult to be seen, known with great 

exertion. Gudham anupravistam, who lias entered into the dark ; 

who is unmanifest and thus become most secret and mysterious. 
Guhahitam, hidden in the cave or the hearts of the Liberated Jivas. 
Gahvarestham, who dwells in the Abyss ; who dwells in the Mukta Jivas. 5?^ 
Puranam, the ancient. Adhyatma-yogadhigamena, the word 

Adlii means Supreme and Atma^self; therefore, adhyatma means the Highest 
Self. Yoga = means of getting Moksaor liberation. Adhyatma-yoga = the Highest 
Self is itself the means of getting liberation. Adhigama = realisation : Aparoksa- 
jnana [by the understanding obtained from Adhyatma-Yoga or withdrawing 
the mind from all objects, and fixing it in the Self] by the realisation that the 
Highest self is alone the means of attaining liberation. ^ Devam, the God. 

Matvfi, having thought over or known or realised. Dlnrah, the wise 

(having the qualifications of sravana, maiinna, &c.) Harsa-sokau, joy 

and sorrow ; joy at the attainment of objects of desire, sorrow at their non- 
attaininent: being fully r satisfied with the bliss of divine knowledge. The 
word harsa means physical joys ; the state of Mukti is not a state of joyless¬ 
ness : as will appear from the next verse. Jaliati, leaves behind. 

12. The wise leaves behind worldly joy and sorrow, having realised 
tbat tlie Supreme Self, the Lord Himself, is the means of attaining liberation, 







84 


katha-upavisad. 


and that He is difficult to be seen, is most mysterious, is in tlie hearts of 
all Jivas, dwells in the Muktas, and is the Ancient of Days.—41. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 


The word “ gahvarestham ” does not mean “ He who stays in great difficulties and 
dangers ” but “ He who dwells in the Mnkta Jivas.” The Muktas are called gahvara, lit., 
deep and inaccessible because worldly and noil-free Jivas cannot know them or reach 
them, the only means of knowing them is the sastra or the scripture. 


Mantra i 3 


^ 

h ft u \ \\\ 



q^r- Etad, this Lord as the Ruler of the Muktas even. Srutva, having 

heard. H WK H I H Sam-pai i-grihya, having fully known him (from the teachings of a 
competent and able Teacher). Martyah, the mortal, the man. sppi Pravrihya, 
having separated Him from the jivas, as being distinct from them: having 
become Mukta by the aparoksa knowledge obtained through deep concentra¬ 
tion. or vjjqq Dhai myam or dharmam, being the Upholder of (of worlds). 

Anuni, subtle, qrRJ Etam, this (Atman) or q?r (*HT3ri) = Gc d. Apya, 

having reached. ^ Sa, he. Modate, rejoices Modaniyam, what 

causes rejoicing,/>., the Self or God. f| Hi, because. Labdhva, having 

obtained. f%a[rt Vivritani, open. Sadma, the house of Brahman, the door 
of Vaikuntha, Heaven. Nachiketasam, for Nachiketas. Manye, 

I knew. 

13. Having heard this (teacliing about Brahman) and fully com- 
preliending Him, the mortal, who separates (Him from the divas) readies 
this Subtle Upholder, and rejoices because lie has found the Source of 
all jo} r . I think that for Nachiketas the abode of Brahman is open. — 42. 

Xote.—Tliis shows that the state of Mukti is not a joyless state as the phrase 
harsa soknu jahati of the last verse may lead one to infer. In the state of Manana or 
deep thinking, there should not lie allowed the entrance of any emotion or feeling into 
the mind. The state of Manana is without joy and grief, if it is true Manana. Hut after 
Manana comes realisation—when the Jiva sees the Lord—that is a state of pure emotion, 
deep, intense, ineffable bliss. The last verse used the word Matva- 1 * thinking out.” The 
present one uses the word apya “ reaching. ” One is the state of “ thinking, ” the other is 
the state of “ attaining.” This verse describes the state of Mukti or reaching the Lord. 


MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word Pravrihya means having discriminated the Lord as separated from 


the Jiva. 

Xote . — The word pravrihya means making separate or knowing separately. The 
question is separating what from whom? It n.av mean separating the Jiva from his 
various bodies or sheaths; or separating the Jiva from the Lord. It cannot mean the 
first, because the latter part of this verse shows “enam apya sa modate” reaching Him 
he rejoices. This shows that the discrimination is from a Doing, by reaching whom, one 
rejoices. Therefore, the separation meant here is to know that the Jiva is not Brahman, 
but that the Brahman is an object to be attained by the Jiva. 









II VALLl, 15. 


85 


How do yon say that this verse refers to the state of the Muktas ? and not to 
ordinary ji vas ? This question is answered by the author by an extract from Mahavaralia 
Purana. 

The Mukta having attained Him, who is the source of all joys, rejoices constantly, 
having also realised that Visnu]dwelling in the Mukta jiva is separate from the jiva. 

Note .—The topic here is not jiva but Brahman, for the question that Nachiketas asks 
in the very next verse is Tell me that who is different from tlie I10I3' and the sinful 
from the cause and the effect from the past and the future ” aud the reply is that such a 
being is Brahman, all the Yedas declare Him ; to attain whom they perform austerities, etc. 
All this shows that Brahman is the topic and therefore the word pravrihya must refer 
to distinguish Brahman from the jiva. 

Mantra 14. 

q-qq qTr^qm 33^ nt$n 

qpTST W* Anyatra Dharmat, other than Dharma, other than a saintly 
jiva ; a holy jiva is called dharma. Anyatra Adharmat, other than 

non-dharma, a sinful jiva. Anyatra Asmat, other than this (mani¬ 
fest). Kritakritat, effect and cause : the material universe, the insen¬ 
tient world. Anyatra Bhutat, other than the Past. Cha, and. 

Hoqr* Bhavyat cha, than the future and (the present), q3 Yat. what, as. in 
what manner (thou seest). rT 3 Tat, that (Supreme Lord, the Ruler of the 
muktas) qqqfH Pasyasi, thou seest or knowest. ^3 Tat, that, in that manner, 
so. qq Vada, say thou (to me). 

14. Different from the holy, different from the sinful, different from 
this insentient universe of cause and effect, other than the past, present 
and future, is the Lord. Tell that to me exactly as thou knowest 
Him.—43. 

^ y Mantra i 5. 





Hq Sarve, all. qqr: Vedah, the Vedas. q 3 Tat, whose, qq Padam, nature 
or real form. qrFRfor Amananti, uniformly declare or demonstrate, or express 
principally, record. HTHH Tapamsi, penances or sacrifices ; or for attaining 
Whom penances are taught by the Vedas. Sarvani, all. Cha, and. 

qq Yat, what. qqfsq Vadanti, they say. qq Yat, what or whose. 
Ichchhantah, desiring. The great ones desiring Whose satisfaction or wishing 
to know Whom, ^giqqq Brahmacharyam, the life of a religious student; livino- 
in the house of his preceptor ; or the vow of celibac}', Charanti, perform, 

rpr 'Kat, that (form of the Lord), q Te, to thee, qq Padam, the form of the 
Lord, the Symbol. Sangrahena, concisely, briefly, spftfq Bravimi, I tell. 

12 












86 


KATHA-UPANISAD . 


Om, it is either the sound or the thing signified by it. Om. He is full of all 
auspicious qualities, worship him as such, ffq 11i, thus. It shows the end of the 
teaching, it qq Etat, this. 

15. Whose form and essential nature all the Vedas declare and in 
order to attain Whom the} 7 prescribe austerities, desiring to know Whom 
the great ones perform Brahmacharya, that Symbol 1 will briefly tell thee, 
it is Orn.—44. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

This Indestructible Brahman is called Vis nil. He is the Supreme and unchangeable, 
knowing Him as the Supreme, the refuge of all, the jiva undoubtedly gets liberation. 

Mantra 16. 

^ 'HR I 

5TTRT ST ctqUHU 

q^Etat, this Om (which thou hast asked.) f| Hi, verity, qq Eva, even 
(qualifying agi, />., Aksaram, (qrr^rfa) Indestructible. Imperishable, 

unchangeable, Brahma, Brahman, full of all qualities, qqcr ft ^ Etat hi 
eva, for this even. Aksaram, Indestructible, qt Param, the Supreme, the 

Highest of all. qq?? qq qrqjt Etat hi eva aksaram, this verily even imperish¬ 
able. Jnatva, having known Yak, who. zpr Yat, whatever. 

Ichchhati, desires. Tasya, for him. qa; Tat, that (takes place or is 

obtained.) 

16. This Indestructible is verily the Full. This Indestructible Om 
is the Highest. Having known this Indestructible One, whatever any one 
desires that lie obtains.—45. 

Mantra j 7. 

*TTRT UfTqa II^VDII 

qqq; Etat, this (the Brahman called Om.) Alambanani, the support, 

the refuge. Srestham, the best. qqq qjR* iq Etat alainbanam, this support, 
qt Param, highest, extraordinary. qq.T ^qR*qq Etat alambanani JnatvA, 

having known this support. qqfsq Brahma-luke mahiyate, is magnified 

in the world of Brahma. Brahma-loka means Satya-loka or Visnu-loka. Is 
respected or honored in the world of Brahma or of the Lord by those lower 
than himself. Brahma-loka means brahman itself as the world. Is honored in 
Brahman: becomes Mukta. 

17. —This refuge is the best, this refuge is the highest, having 
known this refuge, lie is honoured in Brahma-loka.—46. 















II VALLl, 18. 


87 


Mantra 18. 

?T STFR T5TCRT =TT T^TTWR frTRJvT W-X? I 

WZt HR: STPSHTStf gRUT ?T f*H ^TH UTR IR^U 

?T Na, not. strr Jayate, is born. fkkk Mriyate, dies. The ‘ not * should 
be read here also, Va, or. PnpkrT Vipaschit, the wise, the knowing, the 
Mukta. One who has reached the Brahma Loka. r Na, not. k Ayam, this 
Lord. epcTf^H Kutaschit, from any cause; from anywhere; (this Lord is not 
born from anywhere, nor does He die. As the Lord is without birth and death, 
so those who know the Lord transcend birth and death.) r Na babhfi- 

va kaschit, No jiva is ever born or was brought into existence. (The bodies 
only take birth.) In its svarupa no jtva is born, was born or will be born and so 
in its svarGpa no jiva can die. Essentially for every jiva, whether free or bound, 
there is no birth and death. The birth and death belong to the body, i.e. t the 
the jivas entering into it or leaving it. The wise have no such birth and death 
even. They no more come in contact with body. So he never is born nor dies 
in this sense also. Ajah, unborn (essentially, though appearing to 

be born.) Nityah, eternal, perpetual. ^rp^cT: ^as'vatah, eternal, everlasting, 

without change or decrease, Ayam, this, jtfur Puranali, incarnate. That 
which enters (anati) into bodies (pura) embodied. ^ Na, not. ^rr Hanyate 
( fiMk) is killed or injured, Hanyamane, being killed. safrc Sarire, the 

body (Locative Absolute) or Api dehe, even the body. 

18. The Wise (the Mukta) no more undergoes (compulsory) 
birth or death, because this Lord also is not born from any cause (nor 
does He die, and so the Mukta by seeing the Lord is freed from birth and 
death). (The jiva as such is eternal) and so never was born (nor can ever 
die). It is unborn, eternal, changeless, and though dwelling in the town 
(of the body), is not destroyed when the body is slaughtered.—47. 

Note .—He is not born, nor cloth he die ; nor having been, ceaseth he any more to bo 
unborn, perpetual eternal, and ancient, he is not slain when the body is slaughtered. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Mukta or the Perfect Jnanin, called here Yipaschit is never born again nor 
dies, in the sense that there is no compulsory incarnations and disincarnations for 
him. Why ? The verse gives two reasons. First, na ayam kutaschit—This Lord came 
from nowhere, was never born (nor dies)—therefore the knower of Lord, also never 
takes birth nor dies. Secondly, na babhuva kaschit, the jiva ica« never born. In its 
essential (svarupa) nature, the jiva is unborn and incapable of dying. In its own form, 
every jiva, as a jiva, is unborn and undying. The Mukta jiva has however this additional 
attribute, that it never assumes any body, and so the ordinary birth and death are no 
longer ascribable to him. This jiva is purana or dweller-in-the-town. But it does not 
die with the destruction of the town (the body). 

The origin and destruction in the sense of the birth of a body and the destruction of 
the body do not take place in the case of the wise jiva (Mukta) because Yisnu Himself is 
ever born nor dies, therefore those who have seen Yisnu are never born nor are subject 











88 


KATIIA-UPANISAD. 


to death. As the jiva in its essential nature is eternal and so is not born nor dies, the 
wise (Mukta) has this additional quality that he is never born nor dies in the sense of 
compulsorily taking a body or leaving it. 

Every jiva is in its essential nature unborn, eternal, unchanging and dwelling in the 
body (purana equal to puram deham anati gacchati). 

Because this Lord was never born from anywhere and from any cause and never dies, 
therefore the knower of the Lord also the vipasehita (the wise) is never born nor dies. 
Moreover no jiva in its essential nature is ever born, but is said to be born when it 
assumes a body and is said to die when it leaves the body. The wise however has not 
this sort of birth and death also, because he never comes in relationship to any body 
(nor gets embodied) because he has no Karmas. Every jiva being immortal in its essential 
nature, he who thinks that the jiva is killed or that it kills (another jiva) is ignorant, for 
slaying and being slain has reference to the body and not to the jiva. 

Thus (the Eternal, Undying Lord) dwells in the cavity (of the heart) of the eternal 

Jiva. 

Mantra i 9. 

fRT fTO I 

s*¥r fr * iihii 

Hanta, the killer. (The jiva is essentially unborn, &c. How then one 
gets the idea that he is the killer or the killed ? This idea is merely a delusion 
as shown in this verse ; all that is killed or kills is the body.) ^ Chet, if. 
Manyate, thinks, or meditates. Hantum, to kill (if he thinks 41 1 will kill 

him the Atman”) to kill the essential nature of the jiva. Hatah, the killed. 

^cr Chet, if. Manyate, thinks. ^ Hatam, killed (i.e.) I am killed, my 

Atman is killed. 3*f Ubhau, both. ^ Tau, they. ^ frsTpftrr: Na vijanitah, do 
not know or understand (their true self or jiva) ?f ^ Na ayam, neither this. 

1 lanti, kills. ^ 3 * 1 % Na hanyate, nor is killed. 

19. If the slayer thinks to slay, if the slain thinks himself to be 
slain, they both do not understand (its nature), for this one neither slays 
the jiva nor is the jiva slain. — 48. 

Mantra 20. 

=SjTjfr: An oh, than an atom, Aniyan, more subtle. Mahatah, 

than the great, the big. MahiyAn, greater, bigger, Atma, the Self, 

the Lord, Asya, of this (Jiva who is also immortal and eternal essenti¬ 
ally) is atomic. Jantoh, of the creature, of the Jiva. The Jiva itself is 

atomic in size, but the Lord is even within this atom. RftrT Nihitah, placed, 
remained as self; entirely placed, hidden. Guhnyam, in the cavity, in the 

heart. rfH Tam (^TRPT) Him (the self). Akratuh, 9 ^ means Visnu and kratu 

means faith, Believer {kratu) in Visnu (^). A firm believer in Visnu called ^ ! 










II VALLl , 22. 


89 


one whose faith in ^ is strengthened by study and meditation. Pasyati, 

SUTTON sees, realises ill meditation, 

or realises I am that. Vitasokah, free from grief or sorrow, qrg: Dh&- 

tuh, of the Upholder, of the Hari or Creator, the Supreme Self. Madhva reads 
it as dhatuh genitive singular of dhatri. STtfRlH Prasadat, by the grace. 
Mahimanam, mahi means greater, manam means quantity of attributes. The 
number of attributes are greater than all. Atmanah, (the word is in the 

oblative case) from himself, as compared to himself, than the Jiva. 

20. More subtle than the subtlest, greater than the greatest, the 
Atman resides in the cavity of this jiva, Him the firm of faith in Visnu 
sees: and through the grace of that Creator becomes free from grief and 
sees the superiority of the Lord over himself.—49. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word akratuh means “ having firm faith in Visnu.’* The latter means 

Visnu and kratu means “firm faith.” He who has firm faith in ^ (or Visnu) is akratu. 

The words inahiniaiiam atuiauah do not mean “the greatness of the Self,” but “ the 
superiority to the self (Jiva).” [The mukta realises the Superiority or greatness, (raahi- 
raanam=mahamanam) of the Lord to all selves or jivas]. As says a text;—“In the Sruti 
mahimanam atmanah means that Visnu is greater both in quality and quantity than the 
jiva hence He, Lord Visnu, is called jivat mahima greater than the jiva.” 

Mantra 21. 

STTCfcft ft sTjtfrT wit ^TTRT tTTcT: I 
^ IR r < II 

A si nail, sitting still. Diiram, far. Vrajati, He walks, 

^ ay a nah, lying down. qrRl Yati, He goes. 13 ^: Sarvatah, everywhere: be¬ 
cause of His superexcellent qualities. 37 : Kah, who. 1 Tam, that. j^r 4 
Madamadam, the giver of joy and pain: joy to the good, and pain to the 
sinners. Who is the cause of rejoicing and grief. 14 Devam, the God. ^ 7 : 
Mat anyah, another than myself or like myself. *rrj Jnatum, to know. 

Arhati, is able, or is worth}'. 

21. Sitting He goes afar, resting He moves everywhere, who other 
than my Self is able to know that God who is the dispenser of pleasure 
and pain. — 50. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The phrase “ Lord goes far by mere sitting,” &c., shows His lordliness and divinity. 
As says a text: —“Sitting He goes to distant places, lying down He visits everywhere, 
because by His lordly power, Visnu brings about the most contrary things." 

Mantra 22. 

W *tNt% IRHII 














90 


KATHA-UPAWSAD. 


Asarlram, bodiless, (who lias no prakritic body,) SKTCg Sariresu, in 
the bodies (physical, astral and devachanic, Anavasthesu, in not per¬ 

manent, among the changing. In the transient badies of the living creatures, 
that bodiless One exists, free from the changes that are inherent in bodies 
According to Maahva, this word qualifies Avasthitam, existing 

or staying in. Mahantam, great (in regard to Time, Space and Qualities.) 

Vibhum, all-pervading, all-powerful. Atmanam, the Master, the 

Lord, qsqr Matva, having know, Dhirah, the wise. q Na, not. 

^ochati, grieves, He becomes liberated. 

22. The wise, having known that self as resting nnembodied in 
these - changing bodies, as great and all-pervading, becomes fully 
liberated.—51. 

Mantra 23. 

rftrtot «r*fr r rw r sra* i 
ztmv WT^TT T^JcT WR\W 

q Na ayam atma, not this Self, or this Lord is not. 

Pravachanena, studying many Vedas or sciences ; by commentaries, lectures, 
by the explanation of the Vedas. Labhyah, obtained, known, seen, 

q Na medhaya, nor by understanding, by the power of quickly apprehend¬ 
ing the sense of books, by the power of one’s own intelligence, q’ Na, not. 

Bahuna, by much, gfqq Srutena, by hearing or learning. qq Yam, whom, 
qq Eva, even, qq Esa, this (God), ^ojq- Vrinute, accepts or elects, i.e. t on whom 
He shows His grace : with whom He is pleased, qq Tena, by him. Labli- 

yah, (is) obtainable, knowable, visible, becomes gracious, Tasya, of him or 

by him (who is the object of Divine grace.) qq Esa, this. ^TT^ir Atma, the Self, 
the Lord. Vivrinute, reveals, shows. q^Tanum, body. Svam, own 

(its true nature) the direct knowledge can be obtained through the grace of God 
alone. 

23. The Atma is not to be obtained by many explanations, nor by 
the intellect, nor by much learning. lie whom alone this Atma elects, 

by him is He obtained : for him this Atma reveals 1 Lis own nature.—52. 

Note,— In verse 20 it was said that the grace of the Dhata, or the Lord is necessary 
to see Him. This verse also reiterates the same idea, and shows that the means of getting 
grace is not much scholarship, intellect or memory but bhakti : and is entirely dependent 
on the will of the Lord. Thus Juana and Moksa result from Bhakti and the graco of the 
Lord. Are then Sama, datna, &c., unnecessary ? The next verse answers this. 

Mantra 24. 

RTT^TT ^fcrraTSTr^r 1 








II VALLl, 25. 


91 


If He is visible by His grace only, what is the nse of Vairagya, &c.? To this the 
fcruti replies that jnana is necessary in order to get that grace. 

H Na, not. A-vi-ratah, ceased to be attached, not turned away. 

JVRrHH Dus'charitat, from evil-conduct, from sinful works prohibited by the 
Vedas and Dharnias'astra, wickedness. Who has controlled his conduct, and 
learned ^ Na, not. sparer: A^ntali, not tranquil (who has not controlled 
his mind.) Who is not devoid of devotion to the Lord and does practise studv, 
meditation and contemplation, who has got ^tp. H Na, not. ^ HHI U p T.' A-samahi- 
tah, not concentrated, not one-pointed-mind ; mind-dispersed. Who is not devoid 
of the true knowledge of things. Who possesses the attribute of 3 Na, 

not. y.ll»rf-NHH* A-santa-manasah, not-tranquil-mind, who not being immers¬ 
ed in the enjoyment of sense objects, is not devoid of right understanding. 
31 ?nr Vi api, or also. Prajnanena, by knowledge, by Brahma-knowledge. 

ir Enam, this (God and His grace.) ^rrcjKlPT Apiniyat, he obtains. 

24. He who has ceased from evil deeds and is controlled (in 
senses), concentrated (in intellect) and controlled (in mind) obtains this 
Atma through the knowledge (of Brahman).—53. 

Note .—This shows that sama, datna samadhana, &c., are also means of knowing the 
Lord : for His grace would naturally fall on such a person. 

Mantra 25. 

TO m ^ ^ I 

^ h: hr *11 

rfcr snsmsarcr f|[#Rr sj# ir h 

Yasya, of whom or whose, of God. Brahma, Brahma, the Lord of 
the Brahmana (caste). =sr Clia, and. ^ Ksatram, Vayu, the lord of the Ksatriya 
caste. ^ Cha, and. Ubhe, both. HTrP Bhavatah, are. SRjcR: Odanali, food. 
^ 3 : Mritvuh, death, i.e., Rudra. qR Yasya, whose. Upa-sechanam, 

over-sprinkling sauce, butter, ghee. 5 ft : Kah, who or Brahma, called cj? or it 
is equal to q: who. Ittha, thus. ^ Veda, knows, srt Yatra, where in 

Vaikuntha. Or in tg or in Brahma H Sa, he (the Atma or the great destroyer 
of the universe.) 

25. Who thus can know where that (Self) dwells, of whom Brahma 
and Vayu are both as food, and Rudra but a condiment.—54. 

Note.— Or that God whose food is Brahma and Vayu and whose condiment is Rudra is 
known to Brahma because He dwells in Brahma. Or he who knows Him thus dwells where 
He dwells.” 










Third Valia. 

Mantra i. 

qjrT git SlftsT TOT ffOTT I 

tttot qsrrswt q ^ u^n 

Ritam, truth, the fruit of good w^rk. p^rr Pibantau, enjoying; both 
drinkers; the two particular “forms” or aspects of Visnu called Atma and 
Antaratma. Sukritasya, of good deeds, to be construed with “ loke.” 

Sukiitasya loke=in the body formed from the merits of good deed. Loke, 

in this body, Jj?r Guham, in the cavity of the heart, uftir Pravistau, entered. 
^ Paranie, in the highest; in the best of all Jivas. In the Prana, or 

Parardhe or—dhye=^r +^=^4 ‘ highly splendid' most highly 

splendid. In the most excellent and exalted. In the Principal Vayu. ©pqrarfi 
Chhavatapan, giving shade to the good; and heat or punishment to sinners. 
Shade and heat, t.e., pleasure and pain. agiRfg: Brahma-vidah, the ki’owcrs 
of Brahman. Vadanti, say. q^nrq: Panchagnayah, the house-holders 

who are the keepers of five fires, i.e., performers of Deva, Pitri, BhOta, 
Manusya and Brahma Sacrifices. Or who tend the five fires of the Chhandogya 
Upanisad. V. 10-10. ii Ye, who =et Cha, and. Trinachiket&h, 

who have performed the Nachiketa fire sacrifice thrice. 

1. There are the two (aspects of the Lord) the Drinkers of truth, ex¬ 
isting in the body obtained by good works, both dwelling in the cavity of 
the heart, in the most highly splendid Paratn (i.e., Vayu). The knowers 
of Brahman and those who perforin the five great Sacrifices and observe 
the triple Nachiketa Fire describe these as shade and the sun.—55. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Lord, though one Ins two aspects—one as Atma and the other as Antar-atma 
(the Inner Self). That Visnu talo-s up His abode in the P.iram or Highest, namely, Vayu 
who is more excellent than all High Beings (like Rudru, &c.) and whose form is All-Full 
The Lord drinks, i.e., experiences all the f/ood fruits of Karmas : (and not the evil). He is 
like the cool shade (chhfiya of a t ree to the tired soul of the weary hut holy pilgrim who 
has attained mukti), and He is the cause of his joy; while He is like a burning sun, hot 
and scorching (atapa), to the sinner. 

Xotr .—The meditation on the Lord has been taught in the verse adhyatma-yoga- 

dhigaincna, &c., whero is the Lord to be meditated upon will now be taught. But before 

doing so, He is again glorified in this verse. Home think that the two drinkers, referred 
to in this mantra, are the Jiva and Buddhi: because “ pibantau” is in dual number. But 
Buddhi being insentient cannot be the enjoyer of the fruit of action. Moreover the Jiva 
is sentient, and Buddhi is insentient, and so the reference in “ pibantau ” cannot be to two 
such entities belonging to two different classes—one sentient and the other insentient. 
If the Jiva be taken as the “drinker” then Buddhi must be also taken to be a sentient 




Ill VALLl, 2. 


93 


entity, which doctrine no one holds. Nor can it be said that the reference is to two Jivas 
dwelling in the same body. For it is impossible for two personalities (Jivas) to dwell 
in the same body and to be enjoyers of both. 

Then it is said that the two “ drinkers ” are the Jiva and the Lord. The Lord also 
drinks or experiences the fruit of karma metaphorically. For being always associated 
with the Jiva, He is said figuratively to drink, while the Jiva really drinks. But this view 
is incorrect. For here also recourse is had to a figure of speech in order to make Lord 
experience the fruit of action. The result therefore is that this verse has no reference 
to the Jiva at all, but to Is vara alone. The two that drink are the two aspects of the one 
and the same is vara — one as Atrna dwelling in the heart of the Cosmos ; and the other as 
Antar-atma dwelling in the heart of every Jiva. This explains the phrase “ guham pravis- 
tau ” also : for both these aspects of the Lord are in the guha or heart. 

The phrase “ Parame Farardhe ” is taken by some to mean the ether (Akasa) of the 
heart, which is superior to the external ether of space : because Brahman becomes mani¬ 
fest in the heart. This explanation is not accurate : for there is no authority for holding 
that the Akasa of the heart is higher than the Akasa of space, nor is there any law 
restricting the manifestation of Brahman in the heart and not in the external nature. For 
to the deserving He appears outside the heart also. The word “Parame” therefore 
means here Vayu, the best of all Jivas, the abode of Brahman (the Christ of the Gnostics). 
This Vayu is a higher principle than the High Ones like Rudra, &c. 

Therefore He is called Parardha (= parebhyo’pi riddha rupake)=Higher than the 
Highest Ones. The Lord Visnu is one, but in the heart He dwells in two forms, Atma and 
Antar-atma. In the heart, also He dwells in the Vayu who is higher than all the High Ones. 

If it be said, how can this verse apply to the Lord who does not enjoy the fruits of 
action, we reply, it is not so. The Lord does enjoy the fruit of action, as says the text 
rasam pibati karmajam. If so, then the Lord would suffer pain and sorrow also. 
That is however not so, for he enjoys the auspicious (subham) fruits only. Moreover the 
word yitam means true and the Lord enjoys the true works and not evil works. So when 
it is said “ He drinks ritam,” it means “ He enjoys the fruits of the good deeds, ” This also 
is a reason to hold that the verse applies to the Lord and not to the Jiva : for the Jiva 
^drinks both ritam and anritam— good and evil. 

The words chhaya and atapa in the verse, do not mean “ shade” and “ light ” but that 
the Lord is like a cool shade to the virtuous, and a hot sun to the sinner. 

But what is your authority for saying that the verse applies to Visnu alone and 
not to the Jiva and Visnu. Our authority is the phrase guham pravistau “eutered the cave” 
of this verse itself. 

For the phrase entered the guha “or cavity ” is specifically applied to the Lord alone 
in the Upanisads. Nowhere the Jiva is said to have entered the guha or cavity. 

Moreover, though in the verse the word “ pibantau ” is in a dual case yet the 
real drinker is one and not two: and there are not two Lords but one. The singular 
number “He who is the limit ” of the next verse clears up the ambiguity, if any, 

of the verse under discussion. 

Mantra 2. 

Rfcfctd IRII 

q: Yah, who. The Lord Visnu having these two aspects, grg: Setuh, 
boundary, limit. Ijananam, this word is formed from the root ^ to 

13 







94 EATHA-UPAmSAD. 

%: 

sacrifice, vvilh the affix g*R^r causing the change of ^ into f ( R^H qh**RT, the 
worshippers of Visnu). Aksaram, imperishable, indestructible. 

Brahma, the Brahman, qg■ Yat or rfn; that, which or that, Param, the highest 
(refuge), (the best, Supreme) Abhayam, the Giver of fearlessness, the 

Renrover of fear, the shore which gives security from fear. RflfaRT 1 itirsatam, 
who wish to cross (the ocean of the fear of Samsara, births and deaths). 
Param, shore. The aspect of the Lord dwelling in the shore opposite to Sam- 
sara, and regulating the Muktas. Nachiketam, the Lord dwelling in 

Nachiketa Fire, or srrrt Sakennhi or Sakemasi. (The ^ declension 

is a Vedic irregularity. The affix hRt is added by Panini VII. I. 46) we are able. 
Yama hereby shows that he knows the Lord both as the Spirit of the Nachiketa 
Fire, and the Director of the Liberated. 

2. I know the Lord Visnu both as the Spirit in the Nachiketa Fire, 

and as the refuge of all His worshippers, the Imperishable Supreme Brah¬ 
man, the Giver of security to the frightened voyagers on the ocean of 
Samsara,—the Lord dwelling in the shore opposite to Samsara (as the 

World-Spirit directing the Muktas)—56. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

By Sctu is not meant bridge but limit or refuge. By ijandnam is meant 44 of wor¬ 
shippers of Visnu.” The Cord is the refuge to Ilis worshippers. (Param literally means 
shore. It is the opposite shore of Samsara, therefore, it is nmkti. The Lord dwells in 
muktas). That Lord Visnu dwelling 011 the shore opposite to Samsara has two aspects. 

Mantra 3. 

3 urr urfe ^ 11 \ u 

^TTRR Atmanam, the Self (the individual, transmigrating, evolving Ego.) 
the Jiva (pervading throughout the body). *fzR Rathinam, the seated in the 
chariot or the lord of the chariot. rr* Viddhi, know thou. Sariram, the 

body, w Ratham, the chariot, r Eva, even. Cha, and, or g Tu, verily. 
Buddbim, the Buddlii; the Pure Reason, the power of determining, g Tu, 
verily. Sarathim, the driver or charioteer. rhs Viddhi, know thou. *r: 

Manah the Manas, the mind. jjsrit Pragraham, the reins. r Eva, even, xj 
Cha, and. 

o. Know thou the Jiva Atimi as seated in tbe chariot, the body 
even as the car; the Buddlii, as the driver and Manas as the reins.—57. 

Mantra 4. 

11 2 11 

Indriyani, the senses (like (lie eye, the ear, <5tc.) Haydn, 

horses. Ahull, say (the wise.) Visaydn, the objects (of senses). 






Ill VALLl, 7. 


95 


?T5 Tesu, their. GocharSn, the roads, the places on which horses can 

run, the race-course. Atm a indriya-mano-yuktam, the 

Atma in union with the senses and the mind, but devoid of Buddhi, is bhokta 

or sufferer : as a chariot-master, without a driver. Bhokta, the experiucer 

of pain. fRlti, thus. ^rf: Ahull, say. RffrfattT Manisinah, the wise. 

4. The wise say that the senses are the horses and the objects their 
roads ; they also say that the Atma, joined with the senses and the mind 
(only, but devoid of Buddhi) is the sufferer.—58. 

\ Mantra 5. 

R3T I 

fsror j? rrst: ii * n 

n Yah, who (the Buddhi, charioteer), f Tu, but. Avijnanavan, 

without wisdom, not dexterous, without discrimination, vrr Bhavati, is. 

Ayukteua, unjoined ; without reins, without balance (of mind), without 
concentration (of mind) RRRr ManasS, with the mind, R^r Sada, always. 
Tasya, his (i.e., of such a Buddhi charioteer). Indriyani, the senses (i.e., 

the horses). Avasyani, unmanageable, uncontrollable. gHT^T: Dusta- 

svah, vicious horses, unbroken or untamed horses. ^ Iva, like. RRq-; Saratheh, 
of the charioteer. 

5. But lie who is without discrimination, and with Manas out of 
harmony, his senses are always uncontrolled like the unbroken horses of 
a driver.— 59. 

Mantra 6 . 

9^3 T^Rsn^Tcr *RRT R3T I 

^TRT R^T p - RR^T: lll.ll 

Yah, who. g Tu, but. Vijnanavan, having understanding, 

whose mind-rein is firmly held, R?rrR Bhavati, is. gRjR Yuktena, joined, balan¬ 
ced, harmonised, jrrr Manasa, with the mind. R^r Sada, always, Tasya, 
his. Indriyani, the senses. R^RrRT Vasyani, manageable, under con¬ 
trol. Sadasvah, good horses p iva, like. rr^j Saratheh, of the 

charioteer. 

6. But he who discriminates, and has Manas always harmonised, 
his senses.are controlled, like the good horses of the driver.—60. 

Note .—These last two verses show that through the control of senses the mincl can 
be controlled. But what is the good of thought-control ? It is an indirect means of ac¬ 
quiring Moksa. 

Mantra 7. 

R R cRTRJTJITTR RXRR II \S II 









96 


KATHA-UPANISAD. 


Yah, who. g Tu, but. Avijinanavan, who has no under¬ 
standing, who has not Buddhi as charioteer. Bhavati, is. STOReR: Ama- 

naskah, unmindful, who has not controlled the mind, Sada, always, 

Asuchih, impure (being-immersed in sensual gratifications). ^ Na, not. ^ Sa, 
he (the charioteer), Tat Padam, that place, (that above-mentioned 

Imperishable highest Brahman) The Padam referred to in II. 15. That 
goal. ^rrRFT^ Apnoti, reaches, g-grt Samsaram, the transmigratory circle, the 
round of births, the current of births and deaths. ^ Cha, and. 
Adhi-gachchhati, goes over or enters. 

7. He who is without discrimination, and Manas uncontrolled, 
being always impure, never reaches that place, but returns again to 
the world.—61. 

Mantra 8 . 

U 5 ?T^UT?frfrr wit r 11 q 11 , 

Yah, who. 5 Tu, however. Vijnanavan, having understanding. 

Bhavati, is. Samanaskah, balanced mind, of controlled mind. 

Sada, always. Suchih, pure. ^ Sa, he. g Tu, verily. ^ Tat 

Padam, that place or goal. Yasmat, from which (having fallen down). 

Bhuyah again. ?r Na, not. Jayate, is born (in the world). 

8. But lie who discriminates, with Manas always harmonised and 

(senses) pure, verily he (reaches) that place from which he is not born 

again. — 62. 

Mantra 9. 

*R: I 

RiwmfcT qur ii^ii 

Vijnana-sarathih, who lias understanding for charioteer. Lit., 
Intelligence-driver, q: Yah, who. g Tu, but. jr: Manah-pragrahavan, 

who holds the rei is of the mind, the balanced mind. Narah, man. sr: Sail, he. 

Adhvanah. of the road or journey of the Sams&ra. mi Param, (qr^lRp 

the end, the shore. ^sfrra Apnoti, he 
reaches. ^ ftsm: Tad visnoh, (s^TT^mra^ ) of 

that Visnu (the all-pervading Brahman, the Supreme Self, called Vasudeva.) 
mA Paramam padam, (qf^ *t^t) the highest place, the same form as 
that of Visnu. 

9. But the man who lias Reason for his charioteer, and holds 
the reins of Manas, he reaches the end of the road, that highest place of 
Visnu. — 63. 

Note . — There is aggradation by which the knowledge of the Lord is acquired. There 
are stages, and degrees, of initiation, by which the consciousness expands and moro an 1 





Ill VALLl, 11. 


97 


more of the divine knowledge flows in. These stages are represented here by the names 
of the devatas presiding over them. The next verse describes this hierarchy. 

Mantra io. 

qrr trcfi qt ift: i 

qTT *T^T?qT: \\ \ o II 

Indri}ebhyah, than the sense?. The present verse refers to the 
various divinities presiding over the karmendriyas and jnanendriyas, as shown 
below:— 


Indriyas. 

Presiding 

divinities. 

Arthas or objects. 

Presiding 

divinities. 

Srotra (the ear) 

Tvach (the sense of touch) 
Chaksnh (the eye) 

Rasanafthe sense of taste) 
Ghrana (the sense of smell) 
Vaeli (speech) 

Pani (hand) 

Pada (feet) 

Payu (rectum) 

Upastha (organ) 

Soma 

Kubera 

Surya 

Varnna 

As wi iiau 

Agni 

Indra 

Jayanta 

Yama 

Daksa 

Sabda (sound) 

Sparsa (touch) 

Rupa f sight) 

Rasa (taste) 

Gandha (smell) 

Suparni. 
Suparni. 
Yaruni. 
Yaruni 
Parvati or 
IJnia. 

1 


The three J)evis—Suparni, Yaruni and Parvati—preside over arthas ; Suparni on 
Sabda and Sparsa ; Yaruni on Rupa and Rasa, and Parvati on Gandha only. 

qu: Parah, higher, superior. That is, the three Divinities presiding over 
arthas belong to a superior hierarchy, to those concerned with the Indriyas. 
H* Hi, verily Arthah, the objects. The three Divinities presiding over 

the objects, Arthebhyah, than the objeets, than the three Devis. ^ Cha, 

and. Parani, superior. Manah, the Manas. The Divinities presiding 

over the Manas, viz Rudra, Vindra and ^esa. Manasah, than the Manas, 

than the presiding devas of Manas, g Tu, qqT Para, superior, Buddhih, 

the Buddhi, the goddess Saraswati presiding over Buddhi. Buddheh, 

than the Buddhi, than Sarasvati. ^Tcrrr Atma mahan, the great Self, 

the Hiranyagarbha, the Virlncha presiding over Mahat Tattva. Parah, 

superior. 

10. Higher than the Devas of sensation are the Devas of percep¬ 
tions, higher than the Devas of perceptions are the Devas of manas, higher 
than the Devas of manas is Sarasvati, the devata of Buddhi, higher than 
the Devata of Buddhi is the JIahat Atma or Brahma called Virificha. 
—04. 

Mantra n. 

qr: i 

!pqT?r qt st q*r nfa: m s n 




















08 


KATHA-U PANTSAD. 


1 


JT^rT: Mahatah, than the Mahat. Than the four-faced Brahma or Virincha. 

Param, superior. Avyaktam, the undeveloped. (The seed of the 

whole cosmos, unmanifest by name or form, the collection of all forces, 
effects and causes, variously called Avyakta, Avyakrita, Akasa, &c., mixed up 
with and inherent in the Supreme Self, like the web and warp; the power 
latent in the acorn that gives rise to the oak of the universe.) The Goddess 
^ri presiding over Prakriti. Avyaktat, than the Avyakta, than the Sri 

Tattva. ipq: Purusah, the person, the Purusa. Jhe Lord (Visnu because He 
pervades all and is Full.) q?;: Parah, Superior. Purusat, than the Purusa. 

q Na, not. q* Param, superior. Kinchit, anything, m Sa, she (Feminine 

pronoun because of the subsequent feminine noun kastha.) qqgr Kastha, the 
end, the limit, the goal, the Head of the hierarchies, m Sa, he (lit. She) q^r 
Para, Supreme, the Great, the best. iqq: Gatih, the path, the object of 
attainment. 

11. The Avyakta is higher than Mahat, the Purusa is higher than 
Avyakta. There is nothing higher than Purusa. He the end, He the 
supreme goal.*-"05. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 


4 


Higher than the devas presiding over the sense organs are the devas presiding over 
the sensations. Sonia (the moon), the Lord of Wealth (Kubera\ Surya (the sun), Apas 
(water), Asvinau, Agni, Indra, the son of Indra, Yama and Daksa are the ten devas of the 
sense organs. Supariii (or saiiparnP, Yarum and Uni a are t lie godesses presiding over 
arthas or sensations. Suparni and Yiiruin preside over two sensations each, Uma on one 
alone. The presiding deities of manas are three, Hndra, Yindra and Scsa. They are 
superior to the Devis of artha. Higher than the Devas of Manas is Sarasvati, the presiding 
deity of Duddhi. Higher than her is Brahma (and Yayn) the presiding deities of Mahat 
Tattva. Higher than these is mT or Hama the presiding deity of Avyakta. Higher than 
her is Visnu called Purusa because lie is Full (Purna), and there is no one anywhere equal 
to Ilim. It is out of question that any one should be greater than Him, when no one is 
equal to Ilim. 

Mantra 12. 

rrq uqq Hrtg ^rs^r q 1 




qq Esa, this (Purusa.) qqq ^5 Sarvesu bhfitesu, in all beings (from the 
highest Bralnna downwards to a tuft of grass.) tj ■£: Gudah, bidden, the hidden 
Self=lhe inmost essence or nature of all. Atma, Self, q Na, not. 

Prakasate, shines foi th. ^q^q Drisyate, is seen, g Tu, but. The force of 
“but” is to indicate that the Grace of God is the onl}' means of seeing him. 

Agryayfi, by sharp, by the intellect, pui ified and prepared by the hearing, 
&c., about Brahman, and accompanied by the grace of God. Buddhya,, 

by the Buddhi. Suksmaya, by the Subtle (by the intellect capable of 

finding subtle things.) Suksma-dansibhib, by the subtle-seers. 






Ill VALLl,-14. ■ 


09 


12. This is concealed in all beings : this Atma does not manifest 
itself, but is seen through the pointed subtle Buddhi, by men of subtle 
sight. — 66. 


Mantra 13. 


qTHURqfq TT^frT ll^ll 

3=c^=r Yachchhet, should merge ; cause the layer. Should meditate that the 
lower is governed by the higher ^rt Vak, the speech. The Devas presiding 
over the senses, namely, Soma, &c,, should be meditated upon, as governed by 
the three Devis, Parvati, etc., the presiding Devis of Vakor Artha. Then the Vak 
or the three Devis should be meditated upon as governed by the Devas of manas. 

Manasi (*P=refr, the long vowel is a Vaidic irregularity), in the Manas, in the 
Devas presiding over Manas, viz., Siva, Sesa, and Suparna, i e., Parvati, in Siva, 
Varuni in Sesa, and Sauparni in Suparna. srr^T: Prajnah, the wise, PR Tat, 
that, (Manas, &va, Sesa and Suparna). ZRgR Yachchet, should merge. *tr Jnane, 
in the (luminous) Budhi, in the Devi, Sarasvati or Bharat!. qnRR Atmani, in the 
self of Jnana, i.e ., Sarasvati. ^tr Jnanam, the Buddhi or Sarasvati, the pre¬ 
siding Devi of Jnana. qftRR q^R Atmani mahati, in Mahat Atma; in the First¬ 
born, in Brahma and Vayu, the presiding deities of mahat. R^R^ff or 
Niyachchet or tad-ichchet, should merge or PR that (mahat) f^rr should wish 
(to merge). qrPRR Saute atmani, in the Atma of peace or pr 5 TTR 

qRRR Tad-yachchet same atmani, should merge that in the Self which is 
Peace or Quiet. 

13. Let the wise meditate that the Devas of the sense are control¬ 
led by the Deities of speech who are governed by the Devas of manas, that 
the Devas of manas are governed by the Devas of Buddhi, that the Devas 
of Buddhi are controlled by the Devas of Mahat who are controlled by the 
f>ri Tattva, who by the Self of Peace. — 67. 

Note— The omission in the verse should be supplied from the context. Thus indriyas 
are not mentioned at all; and so also the Sri Tattva. 


MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Let him meditate that the Devis, Urna, &c., presiding over speech, &e., are controlled 
by the Devas Siva and the rest. That Siva and the rest are controlled by Brahma and 
Vayu, the presiding deities of Mahat. Let him meditate that these two are controlled by 
Rama, the Supreme Bliss ; and that She is governed by Visnu, the Supreme Self. The word 
niyarna (nij^achchet) means here meditating that the lower is governed by the higher: and 
not that the man is to control the lower by the higher. For how ean any man control 
the Devas who are rulers set over men ? 

v Mantra 14. 

ST^q I 




p 


qrcr Hrerar f^qqr fq qq*cRq>qqT qqrR iu>#u 















100 


KATHA-UPANISAD. 


STrigrr Uttisthata, arise (O creatures ! turn your face towards the acquisi¬ 
tion of spiritual knowledge. O aspirants ! immersed in Samsara, cease thinking 
of various worldly matters.) :stP7rT J^grata, awake (destroy the sleep of igno¬ 
rance, the seed of all miseries) leave off laziness, srpsj Prapya, having ap¬ 
proached, having obtained. Varan, the elect, the best Teachers, having 

obtained boons (from the Great ones). Another reading is qrnj, the Great 
Ones, the High Ones. RSiTOT Ni«bodhata, learn, understand (the true nature 
of the Lord.) Ksurasya, of a razor. This describes Samsara. 

Dhara, the edge, fqftrar Nisita, sharpened, very sharp, Duratyaya, 

difficult to pass over. The Samsriti or Samsara is difficult to pass over, like 
the sharp edge of a razor. 51T Durgam, (This refers to the Brahma-knowledge 
that destroys Samsara) difficult to go ; to be understood with great difficulty, 
cpj: Pathah, the road, the path of Mukti. Fat, that, Kavayah, the 

sages, Vadanti, sa}\ The sages say “ the Path which destroys Sani- 

sriti is inaccessible or accessible with great difficulty.” 

14. Awake, arise, having approached the great teachers, learn. 
The sages say that the road is difficult to travel on, and that the crossing 
over (of Samsara) is difficult as the sharp edge of a razor.—68. 

Mantra 15. 

' p||» VII 

Asabdam, without sound ; not having the attribute of sound, not 
to be known or perceived through sound. Different from the Tanmatra of 
sound. Asparsam, without touch, not to be perceived by touch : 

different from the Tanmatra of touch. Ai Qpam, without form, therefore, 

not to be perceived by the eyes, different from the Tanmatra of sight. 
Avyayam, without decay, (because he has no material form.) Unchangeable, 
rpqr hatha, so, also, Arasam, without taste, without the attribute of 

taste and so cannot be perceived through taste : different from the Tanmatra 
of taste. FPT Nityam, eternal. Agandhavat, without smell, not to 

be perceived by smell : different from the Tanmatra of smell and scent. Oha, 
and. Yat, that, which Anadi, without beginning or cause, not sub¬ 
ordinate to any, Anantam, without end or effect, not limited by time, 

space or causality. qt Mahatah param, beyond the Mahat, above the 

I Four-faced Brahma, the presiding deity of Mahat Tattva. gj Dhruvam, the 
fixed, always the same. Nichayva, having understood or reflected 

upon, or verified by Sravana, etc., from the teachings of a Sad Guru. sr Tam, 
Him. Mrityu-mukhat, from the mouth of death, from the bondage 

of Samsara. 33^3% Pramuchyate, is fully liberated or freed. 

If). Having reflected on him, whose nature is not sound, or touch, 
or form, or taste, or smell, who is changeless, eternal, without beginning 






Ill VALLl, 17. 


101 


and without end, beyond Maliat, eternal in its fixity; he escaped from 
the mouth of death.—69. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

Beyond Maliat is Sri Tattva, how is theu the Lord said to be beyond Mahat? There 
is no contradiction in it. Since Sri, the wife of Yisiiu, is higher than Mahat. He also is 
higher than that, because He is higher than His spouse Sri. 

Mantra i6. 


^ ^nfr \\»z\\ 

Nachiketam, obtained by Nachiketas or relating to Nachiketas. 
Upakhyanam, the story, ^3-srFf; Mrityu proktam, told by Death. 
Sanatanam, the ancient, because Vaidic : received thus from the old 
traditions. grrRT Uktva, having repeated (to the Brahma enquirers.) 

Siutva, having heard (from the teachers.) ^ Cha, or. Medhavi, the 

wise man. Brahma loke. (See II. 17) in the world of Brahman. 

Mahiate, becomes worshipped. 


16. The wise man, who repeats to the enquirers of truth this 
ancient Nachiketa’s story, told by Death, or who hears it (from his teacher), 
becomes great in the Bralimaloka.— 70. 




Mantra 17. 



STCrf ^TT c^R^T^T ^TrT ffrT^ 

f fa smirrwm sr q# h 3 h 

tJz JPqfrrtfsnq: *nmn || \ || 


q: Yah, who. f* Imam, this (book). ^ Paramam, best, most, greatest. 
Guhyam, to be hidden, kept secret, mystery. ajpRI Sravayed, makes it 
heard, recites, repeats. Brahma-samsadi, Brahma-session, assembly 

of persons who are enquirers of Brahman. 5^: Prayatah, being pure, full 

I of devotion. Sraddha-kale, at the time of Sraddha (when the guests 

are eating.) ^Va, or. ^Tad, that (Sraddha or Sravana.) Anantyaya, 

infinity or unendingness, infinite rewards. Kalpate, obtains or be¬ 

comes fitted for (infinity.) ?RR?£TR 3wqR Tad-anantyaya-kalpate, that Sraddha 
becomes infinite in its effect. 


17. He who recites this upanisad, the greatest of all mysteries, 
at an assembly of seekers for Brahman, or being pure, at the time of a 
Sraddha, causes that Sraddha and recitation fit to produce infinite results, 
fit to produce infinite results.—71, 

14 







Fourth Yalli. 


Mantra i. 


<mR I 

^T2J#(: II * II 

Wtif Paranchi, going outwards, or forwards, face turned away, outwards : 
addicted to external objects, Khani, the openings ; the senses, szifZTR 

Or Vyatrinat, or at, made light of, treated with contempt, made them 

ugly or contemptible. Forced them or subdued them : so that they do not 
follow the natural outgoing bent: do not run after external objects. 
Swayambhuh, the Son of God, />., the Brahma, cTasmat, therefore: 
because forced away from external objects. Parah, outside forms, the 

external objects. ^ Na, riot, tpRfa Pasyati, sees, experiences. 
Antar-atman, the Inner Self. In the depth (or inmost recesses) of his own 
Inner Self. It is in the Locative case. Becomes attached to the Inner Self. 

Kaschit, some, vjft: Dhirah, wise. JRmrRH Pratyagatmanam, the Pratya- 
gatma, the Inner Self, the God within, tr^nr Aiksat, saw (past used for present, 
t.e,) sees or let him see. Avritta-chaksuh, averted gaze. Eyes 

turned away from (external objects.) Amritatvam, Immortality, libera¬ 
tion. Ichchhan, desiring. 

1. The Self-existent graciously subdued (and turned inwards the 
current of) the senses which goes outwards, therefore, the wise sees not 
the external objects, but is attached to the Inner-Self. Some tranquil- 
minded sage sees the Pratyag-Atman with eyes turned inwards, desiring 
liberation.—72. 

Note ,—The power of seeing the God within is given by the God Ilimsclf to man. 
When He wants that the man should see him, lie stops the outward flowing current of 
the senses and makes it turn inward, and thus the sago devoted to the Lord secs tho 
Inner Self—the God Within. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Tho word vyatrina comos from tho root ‘to humiliate,’ ‘to lay flat.' 

Hence tho word means to subdue and mako low. It dees not mean to hurt or injuro or 
destroy : for no such moaning is given to v/t.riuu anywhere. 

Note ,—The Mayavadins sec in this Adhyava of tho Upanisad, authority for their 
doctrine that the Jiva and the is'vara are one : and they rely on tho verso 3 

3TTRH &c. (IV. 5) where, they say, the Jiva and the Atman arc read in 

tho sarao case, and therefore tho Jiva and tho Atma are identical. They also rely upon 
&c., UV. 10.) But their interpretation of these verses is wrong. In the 
verse (V. 0) a clear difference is laid down between tho Jiva and tho 








IV VALLl, 1. 


103 


Lord: and the explanations of the above verses given by the Mayavadins must, there¬ 
fore, be incorrect. To prove this, the Commentator (Madhva) takes up this verse V. 6. 
first]. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

“Now I shall tell thee this secret Brahman,” says the Sruti (V. 6) and then goes on 
to say : “ I shall also tell thee the condition of the Jiva after death. ” This is said in order 
to indicate the difference between the Jiva and Is vara. 

[This verse Y. 6. containing a promise to teach should be read immediately before 
the verse I^ r * 4 and therefore that sentence is explained here first by the 

commentator. The word is explained there as mriyamana—the dying and not death ; 
and the whole verse is shown as applying to the Lord. Here another explanation of the 
same verse is given. These are not contradictory, but complementary. The question 
of Nachiketas did not relate to the nature of Brahman or of Jiva. He did not ask what is 
Brahman, or what is Jiva. Why should then Yama promise “I shall now tell thee the 
nature of this mysterious Brahman and of the Jiva that dies ?” To this the commentator 
answers, the Yama says so in order to indicate that the Jiva and Brahman are not identi¬ 
cal. The difference between the Jiva and Isvara cannot be known unless the essential 
natures (svarupa) of these two are described.] 

The Jiva is that which experiences the fruits of action, and is subject to obscuration 
consciousness in deep sleep, pralaya, &c. The Supreme Brahman is the Lord Visuu who 
remains awake when all the Jivas are asleep in the deep sleep of Pralaya or Susupti, &c. 

[Thus Y. 7 describes the Jiva in these words Some, ready for re-birth, go into 
the womb in order to obtain a body, others enter into minerals, according to their Karma, 
and according to their knowledge.” While the next verse (Y. 8) shows the nature of 
Brahman thus : “ That Person who is awake in those that sleep, and who builds all objects 
of desires, that indeed is the Pure One, that indeed is Brahman, Immortal He is called. 
In Him all worlds are contained. This is that Yerily nothing goes beyond Him.” 
This shows that the Lord is awake in the Great Pralayic sleep of all Jivas : and He causes 
the Pralayic Dreams also by creating pleasant dream objects for these sleeping souls. 
The souls of the highest type only dream in the Pralaya Night—such as Brahma, &c. Their 
mind continues active in Pralaya, like the human mind in an ordinary dream. Thus the Jivas 
are subject to dream and sleep, not so the Lord. The Jivas are subject to re-birth, not 
so the Lord. The Jivas experience Karma-phala, fruit of action, but not so the Lord. 
But wiiy do you say the Lord is not born ; for He being the Inmost self of the Jiva, must 
necessarily enter the womb, when the Jiva does so ? To this the Commentator replies :] 

The Brahman is not affected by the Jiva’s entering the womb when re-incarnating. 
[Though the Brahman is there, along with the Jiva in the womb also, and He enters 
the womb in order to control and regulate the Jiva : yet He does not get the body to 
experience any consequences of His action. The jailor enters the prison along with the 
prisoner, but only to watch and reform the prisoner, and does not himself suffer as the 
prisoner does. In Y. 0, Yama promises to teach two things—the Sanatana Guhya Brahman— 
the Eternal Hidden God, and the marauam—the Jiva subject to death and re-birth; and the 
subsequent portion of the Upanisad is an explanation of these two topics. But why 
should Yama teach the difference between Jiva and isvara, when Nachiketas had not put 
that question ? To this the commentator replies :] 

The Brahman is known rightly then only when He is known as separate from the Jiva. 
[But does not IV. 5 say Atmanam, Jivarn antikat, the Supreme Self is the Jiva ? No. 
That verse should be construed as Jivarn antikat = Jivasya antike “near to the Jiva.” 
For if Jiva and Brahman were the same, we could not say “Brahman who is so near to 
the Jiva—for then it would be " the Jiva wTio is so near to the Jiva.” A thing cannot be 






104 


KATHA-UPAN1SAD. 


near or distant to itself. It is only in relation to another object that a thing is said to be 
near or distant.] 

Mantra 2. 

qRR: 3TRTRT RRcTRI qmR I 

2RT ^Rr 3RJRRT fqf^T aqugqferf R SrqqRf IRI1 

Parachah, external, outside staying. 3imT^ Kaman, desires (desired 
objects, like sweets, scents, etc.) Anu-yanti, go after. Balah, 

children, undiscriminating. r Te, They, Mrityoh, of Death, of Yama. 

3 RR Yanti, go, fail into. RTrRRq Vitatasya, the spread out, all-pervading, the 
time-worn or eternal, widespread, in time and space, qixr Pasam, the noose; 
snare, *>., death. ^ Atha, (URRl) therefore, vftu: Dhirah, the wise. 
Amritatvam, the Immortality, the moksa Viditva, having known. 

Dhruvam, the fixed, this word qualifies amritatvam, i.e. t dhruvam amritatvam. 

A-dhruvesu, in the unstable (things like wealth, etc.) Iha, here 
(in this world or Samsara). r Na, not. SIRI3RR Prarthayante, do ask for or 
look for. 

2. Men of small understanding go after external desires, and they 
thus fall into the wide-extended noose of Yama, therefore, the controlled 
in mind, having known liberation, do not here seek for the permanent in 
the unstable.—73. 

Mantra 3. 

r ^q tr ^R*q*T?^r %rr[ i 

fqRRTfcT qftrWRT rfrf^ II 3 II 

RR Yena, by whom, by what Lord. It refers to Brahman. The first-two 
verses of this Valli are spoken by Yama, in indirect praise of Nachiketas. This 
verse is spoken by Nachiketas, who interrupting Yama's complimentary 
speech, again asks him about Brahman. RDpam, form. Rasam, taste. 

iRvj Gandham, smell. Sabdan, sounds. Sparsan, touches. Cha, 

and. Maithunan, couplings, pairs The perception of pleasure arising 

from the coming together of pairs, loving (touches). itrr Etena eva, by that 
even, ie. t by that Self even, which is separate from the body. Madliva also 
reads these two words along with ; as qq sgimr ^Rr: “ordained by 

which Brahman, (one knows form, &c.)” MaxMuller takes it as the beginning 
of a separate sentence. “ That by which wc know form, &c., by that also we 
know what exists besides.” Vijanati, knows, perceives. [srr =5 TR 

rRRt 5 RR Kim atra pari-sisyate ; ///., What here remains. According to Sankara 
u Does anything remain unperccived by the Anna in this world ? Nothing 
remains. All verily are known to the Self.” According to Madliva “ Because 
by the command of Brahman, the Jiva perceives form, &c., while alive; does that 
Brahman remain here (even after liberation) as controller of the Jivanmukta ? 















IV VALLt, 5. 


i05 


What is the nature of this Lord ? What are His specific attributes ?’’ 

Etat vai tat ; lit. “ This verily That,” this is the reply of Yama. 

3. By Whom (one perceives) form, taste, and smell, sound, touch 

and love, even by that he knows (everything else.) Does that Lord remain 
here in moksa controlling the Jiva ? Yes : This verily is so. This verily 
is That—74. ^ 

Mantra 4. 

bnfUFSTR W3T V UTT ^ tfr^Tcf II 8 II 

^PTPtT Svapnantam, lit. y dream-end, in the dream, in dream consciousness 
the Susupti is also to be included. The word antar means “ place.” The 
regions of dream and sleep. snTTfcrFvT Jagaritantam, ///., Waking end. In 
waking consciousness. The region of waking. ^ Cha, and. 3 HF Lbhau, both 
(waking and dreaming and Susupti). zft Yena, by whom, by whose command. 

Anu-pasyati, sees (the Jiva.) Mahantam, &c. The same as in 

II. 22. 

Note . —Both transcending the state of Swapna and transcending the state of Susupti 
that by which both (these states) are seen ( v that centre of consciousness verily remains 
even in Moksa) The wise having known that Self as great and all-pervading, does not 
grieve. 

4. The wise does not grieve when he understands the Supreme 
Self who is Great and Almighty, and by whose command he sees both these, 
viz. y the objects of dream and the objects of waking consciousness.—75. 

Mantra 5. 

?T ^ II V. II 

m Yah, who. Imam, or idam, this. Madhu-adam, A/,, honey- 

eater. The Drinker (or Enjoyer) of honey (or pleasure); the Experiencer of 
the essence in the body. Veda, knows. srrW 5 ! Atmanam, the Atma. The 
Supreme Self. The Lord, sffa Jivam, the Jiva of the Jiva. ^rfirT^rg; Antikat, 
near, close by ; always near the Jiva,as its controller. fitfR Isanam, the Lord or 
Ruler or Director, Bbuta-bhavyasya, of the Past and Future (of the 

Three Times.) Na, not. cR: Tat ah, thereafter (i>„ after such knowledge. 
After knowing that Isvara is the Ruler of the Jiva.) Vi-jugupsate, 

wishes to protect, fears, knowing the Atman, he no longer seeks to save his soul, 
feeling that he is ever-saved. Does not seek to protect his self, fully trusting 
in the Lord, who alwa3 r s, and everywhere protects him ever, qrn[ 3 Etad 
vai Tat, This verily is That. 

5. He who knows this Supreme Self, the Ruler of the Past and 
Future, the Experiencer of all Sweetness, always standing near the Jiva, 
does not thenceforth fear. This verily is That.— < 6. 













106 


KATEA-UPAmSAD. 


Mantra 6. 

*r: ^ cTCHT ^^PRT I 

gft srfipRr m^-rT *tt nyrt ^ n 4 n 

q: Yah, who, The God. Purvara, the First (Unborn). cTW: Tapasab, 
from before Siva. The God, who begot first the unborn (Brahma), before the 
Tapas (Siva), and before the Waters (the material universe.) Ajatam, 

the Unborn, the four-faced Brahma. Adbhyah, than the waters (elements.) 

Purvam, before. Ajayata, who produced or caused to be born. 

Guham, in the cavity (of the heart.) s?f^3 Pravisya, entering. i%^ci Tisthan- 
tam, stays there, abides therein. His own Self. 3: Yah, who. Bhfi- 

tebhih, with the elements, who perceives his Self along with these elements, 
was perceived from the elements. Vi-apasyata, or f%o = ti, perceives. 

CTrf% Etad vai tat, 1 his is verily that. 

Note .— (He who sees the First-born (Hiranyagarbha) who manifests himself before 
Siva and the cosmos, sees Brahman, (for no one can sec the Father but the Son : the highest 
perception is of the Unborn, the First-begotten—beyond Him consciousness ceases). 
As a man who sees a golden ring knows gold, so he who sees the Child-of-Light, sees the 
Light.) 

6. He who first produced the Unborn one (Brahma) before the 
Lord of tapas (Siva) and the Lords of elements (Waters) who entering the 
cavity abides therein, and perceives all tilings along with the elements; 
This is verily that.—77. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

“That Visim verily dwells in the heart. He is the Great Warrior, who constantly 
sees Himself seated in the cavity, surrounded by all the Lords of elements. He created 
the Four-faced, the Unborn of yore, before the Elements called Waters and tho lords 
thereof ; yea, before even Siva, the Lord of Tapas.” (Ibid). 

Brahma is called purvam ajatam—the unborn from before— because he is not like 
Indra and Agni and others, who once being born from tho mouth of Brahman, are born 
again from Kasyapa. Not so the Lord Brahma. But never being born before, he is pro¬ 
duced prior to feiva and Waters. 

(This verse does not relate to Mumuksu but to Visnu. Nachiketas did 110 b ask the 
nature of Mumuksu, but of the Lord. The phrase, ‘ entering the cavity ’ is the specific 
attribute of the Lord and not of the Jiva. Waters or apas is taken hero as illustrative 
of all the Elements: and denotes also the presiding deities of elements. One pfirvam 
qualifies ajatam ; the other is an adverb qualifying ajayata. The word ajayata generally 
means “ born ” or “ self-born ” but here it has a causative meaning “ was caused to be born 
or was produced or produced.” Therefore the commentator says ) 

The word ajayata is to be taken in a causative sense, as in jajno bahujuam. 

Mantra 7. 

qT srmd 1 

*tt qn'l drp 11 vs 11 









TV VALLl , 8. 


107 


qr Ya, who, namely, Visnu, in His Female aspect as Bhagavati. qr$R 
Pranena, with tlie Prana, the Hiranyagarbha of the last verse, the Spirit. The 
Chief Vayu. Sam-visati, abides with. Aditih, the Aditi, (the 

eater, the destroyer of the whole universe) qqqrHsiT Devata-mayi, the best of 
all deities, qflreq fqg?rfr Guhain pravisya tisthantim, entering into the 

heart (cavity), abides therein, qr Ya, who. Bhutebhih. with the ele¬ 
ments. V aja\ata, who produced in manifold ways; who manifested 

Herself in the forms of Fish-Avatara, &c., and produced all living beings. 
tT^; q Ftad vai tat, This is That. 

7. She who enters the cavity with the Spirit, She the Consumer, 
the best of all devatas, who is concealed in the cavity of the heart and 
abiding therein, manifests herself also through the elements (as various 
incarnations), This is that. — 78. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

[The word Aditi in this verse would prima facie lead one to the view that the well- 
known Goddess Aditi, the Mother of all the Devas, is described here. But that is not the 
case : because Yachiketas asked no question about Aditi, therefore a description of Aditi 
would be irrelevant. Consequently, the verse is to be explained as applying to Visnu. 
Hence the commentator says :—] 

“Visnu is called Aditi because He is the Eater (ad = to eat). He dwells in the cavity 
along with the Chief Prana. He is the best of all devatas : transforms Himself into 
various avataras such as the Fish, the Tortoise, &c., from his seat in the cavity. This 
Supreme Self, the Great Visnu, in every age manifests Himself as Avataras surrounded by 
the lords of elements.” (Ibid). The word Devata-mayi means the best of Devatas. The 
pharse ‘ pranena samvisati * means pranena sahita bhavati = along with the Prana enters 
or dwells. The Lord, entering the cavity and staying there, manifests himself in various 
ways through the elements, as Incarnations. 

Note . — The words of this verse are in the Feminine gender and would prima facie 
more appropriately apply to tbe Great Mother, Bhagavati: but the context requires that 
the Mantra be interpreted as applying to the Lord. Dwelling in the cavity, along with 
the Great Prana and the lords of Elements, He materialises from time to time, into the 
outer world as Great Incarnations. As a spiritual medium, placed in the cabinet, projects 
or materialises from outside in a seance room, such is the case of the Lord in the cavity. 

Mantra 8 

<ir tjh ^ ^ I 

imt cth ii-ii 

Aranyoh, (=?h is derived from the verb * to go * by the affix q 
causing guna ^n:: = is known; qj: = Joy, Hari as Joy) Those two, through whom 
Visnu, the All-Joy or All-power, is known as Aran!, between the Aranis or “fire- 
sticks.” This word is a compound of ^ and qj II The final f is a Samasanta 
affix. It means the Guru and Sisya—“ the Master and the Disciple.” THrirf: 
Nihitah, placed, concealed. sriqq^T: Jata-vedah, the knower, of all ; the Omni¬ 
scient Hari. Garbhah, womb, i.e., the child in the \tomb. fq lva, like 

i 


r\ ^ 

t^t 








108 


RATHA-UPANISAD. 


Subhritah, well-guarded, well-held. Garbhimbhih, by the 

mothers, pregnant women, by women. fspf Dive dive, day by day, every 
day. Idyah, praised, worshipped, Jagr'tvadbhih, by waking; 

by persons who are not heedless, by the knowers of the Lord, Havis- 

madbhih, by the offerers of oblations, by performers of Sacrifice. *T 3 ^pT: 
Manusyebhih, by the men. ^fir. Agnih, the Agni. The God called Agni 
because He eats (ad) all in the Pralaya. 

8. The All-knower is concealed between the Guru and $isya like as 
the child in the womb is well-guarded by the mother ; daily is this Agni 
adored by men who are awake and who offer Him sacrifices. This verily 
is That.—79. 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

“ The Omniscient Lord, Visiiu, well-guarded between the Master and the Disciple, 
is always praised by those who know Him as the Highest Person.”— {Ibul.) 

That through the help of which two is perceived (aryate = jnayate) the Joy (n = anan- 
da) is called arani. 

Mantra 9. 

qSSTRfa ^ ^ 1#I I 

3 V^rr: n "Tit ^ 11 «. it 

mi: Yatnh, from which (God, the Sun arises at the time of creation.) 
Cha, and. LJdeti, arises, takes birth or comes out. Sfiryah, the Sun. 

Astam, setting, vanishing, i.e ., in which Gcd, the Sun is absorbed at the 
Pralaya. ^ ^ Yatra cha, in which (God, it vanishes at the Pralaya). 
Gachchhati, goes. ^ Pam, Him, the God, Hari. rft Devah sarve, all Devas, 
(whether cosmic, as Fire, &c. ; or micro-cosmic, as Speech, &c.) ^pfrlT •* Arpitah, 
are contained, are fixed (as the spokes are fixed) in the nave, so all Divinities 
are fixed in and supported by that Hari, from whom arises even the Solar 
Logos.) 35s Tadu, Him, verily. * Na, not. 3 T 3 HT Atyeti, surpasses, goes 
beyond. Kaschana, any one. Etad vai tat, This is verily That. 

9. In that Brahman, from whom the Sun arises in the beginning 
of the creation and in whom it merges in the dissolution thereof, all 
the gods are contained. No one verily can go beyond Him. This is 
indeed That. — 80. 

Mantra 10. 

i 

qx Yat, what, what form of the Lord, jt^ Eva, even, fjj Ilia, here, on 
Earth and other lower planes or here in the body, &c. ^ Tad, that, 

Amutra, there, in the Highest Plane, the Vaikuntha. 33 Yat, what. ^5^ 
Amutra, there in the Vaikuntha (as the Arche-type.) ^3 Tat anu, that verily. 













IV VALLl, 11. 


109 


?? Ilia, here, on the earth, &c. Mrityoh, after Death. ^ Sa, he who sees 

difference. Mrityum, to death. The death, as Tamas: the blinding dark¬ 
ness, the hell, Apnoti, obtains. 3: Yah, who. Iha, here, jjfh 

Nana, difference between the Root-form as in the Vaikuntha and the Avatara- 
form as on earth. 57 Iva, even the slightest. Or as contrasted with Nana, 
it wou'd mean identity tfrorW Pasyati, sees. 

10. That which is even here, the same is there ; what is there, 
that verily is here. From Death to Death lie goes who beholds even 
the slightest difference in these two.—81. 

MAnHVA’S COMMENTARY, 

[The MSyavaclins, of course, explain this verse as an authority for holding that the 
Jiva and Brahman are identical, that the Man here below is the same as God above in 
Heaven. The Commentator answers the Advaitins thus :— ] 

That Lord Visuu who exists in the manifested Form (Av.itara) and in organised 
bodies on this earth, is verily the Root-form, and the entire Lord Nardyana Himself. 
The Lord as the Root-Form iu Heaven is verily also the Lord as existing in the mani¬ 
fested Form (Avatdra.) He who makes the slightest difference between these two (the 
Lord in Heaven and the Lord on earth), whether as regards their attributes or essential 
nature, undoubtedly goes to blinding darkness after death. So also undoubtedly to dark¬ 
ness they go, who are bheddbhedavadius, (who hold that the Avatdra is different 
from as well as identical with the Lord), — {Ibid.) 

Mantra ii. 

trst h ^ r <mfcr 11 n n 

Manasa, by the mind, purified by instruction and yoga; by the reflec¬ 
tive mind or antahkarana. rrq Eva, alone, even, Idam, this fact that 

there is no difference in essence, though the forms be different, Apta- 

vyam, can or may be obtained or known. Na, not. Iha, here, in the 
Brahman, in the Archetypal form, or in the lower plane forms, Nana, 

difference, many. stRh Asti, is. Kinchana, any. ^qt: Mrityoh, from 

death, Sa, he. ^ Mrityum, to death. Gachchhati, he goes. 

HHr TWH Yah iha nana iva pasyati, who here difference like sees. 

11. Even through the purified mind this knowledge is to be obtain¬ 
ed, that there is no difference whatsoever here. From death to death he 
goes, who beholds this here with difference.—82. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

[This should be kept in one’s mind ; and not indiscriminately told to others. As those 
who see difference in the Root-form and the Incarnation-form go to blind darkness, so go 
they too who see difference in the various bodily members, &e., of the Lord.] 

“ Similarly those who see the slightest difference, among each other, in the various 
bodily members, attributes and actions of the Lord, or who see difference plus identity 
(bhedabheda) therein, go to blind darkness. There is not the slightest doubt in it.” 
-(Ibid.) 

15 




110 


K ATE A-U PANTS AD. 


[The word Iva has three meanings (1) Like, as a comparison, (2) a little, some¬ 
what, (3) like-and-nnlike, Difference in identity. All these three meanings of Iva have been 
shown in explaining the phrase nana iva, i.e., (1) as different, (2) the slightest difference 
and non-difference. The commentator now gives his authority for giving this three-fold 
meaning to Iva.] 

In the Sabda Nirnaya the following meanings are given to Iva. “ The word Iva is 
used when two quite contradictory attributes are collocated together or when compari¬ 
son is intended or when littleness is meant.” 

Therefore, in the phrase nana iva, the Iva has the force of denoting “little,” and 
‘difference plus non-differencc.’ In the verse3 (IV. 10) the force of 

is to prohibit difference in the Swarupa or essential nature of the Lord (as manifested in 
the highest heaven or on earth.) While in the verse under discussion (1Y. 11) the force 
of the word fEjngpT Kinchana in R’dlHcI IS to indicate that there is absolutely no 

difference in the various members, attributes and actions of the Lord; nor is there differ¬ 
ence plus identity. 

(The word Kinchana being a Pronoun denotes snbstanee. The substance of the body 
of the Lord is one and homogeneous ; not like those of the Jivas, made up of different 
substances. Thus His body is such a homogeneous one that “ He sitting goes to all distant 
places, &c. Similarly, His attributes are all uniform, as “ the Almighty, the Lord, 
the Self, &c.” Similarly, His actions arc one, as “ Who creates Brahma, the first unborn, 
before Siva and lords of elements, &c.” 

Lest one should mistakenly think that those two verses prohibit only difference-in- 
identity and not difference, the Mantra IV. 11 clearly shows that “ difference ” is also 
to be condemned : for it says “ He who sees the attributes as different goes to the down¬ 
ward incline.” Thus there is danger if one sees any difference in tho attributes of the 
Lord, in His bodily members, in His qualities, and in His action. 

Mantra 12. 


R: WRfiR fcT2T% I 

f*THT * rTcTT cTH \\\R\\ 


Angustha-matrah, of the measure of the thumb. The heart of every 
creature is of the size of its own fist or thumb. The Jiva in the causal body 
or auric egg a n t a h - k a r a n a -11 p a d b i is also said to lave this size. This particular 
measure of the Immeasurable is given for the facility of meditation only. The 
Tom-Thumb represents perhaps this? gqq : Purnsah, the Purusa, the All-per- 
vader, the Person, the Full. qsq Madhye at man i, in the midst of the 

self, (Atman here means “ body ”) in the heart (madhye-heart) of the Self or 
Jivas. In the heart, in the body. RSR Tisthati, is, stands, stays. fSTR: 
Isanah, &c. The same as in IV. 5. 

12. He who so knows the Purusa, of the measure of a thumb, as 
dwelling in the cavity of one’s body, the ruler of the past and future, 
does not thenceforth fear. This is verily That — S3. 


Mantra 13. 

f^TRT H qTR qdf II \\ U 








IV VALLl, 15. 


Ill 


: Angustha-matrah purusah, the person of the size of a thumb, 
wfir: J3 r otill, light, fq Iva, like. Adhumakah, smokeless, pure, lumin¬ 
ous. fstfR: Isanah bhutabhabyasya, Lord of the Past and the Future. 

^ Sa, he. qq Eva, even. Adya, to-day. Sa, he. 3 U, verily, Svah, 
to-morrow. 

13. The Purusa of the measure of a thumb, like to a smokeless 
fire is the Lord of the Past and Future ; He is verily to-day and He will 
be so to-morrow.—84. 

Mantra 14. 

fqqurfcf I 

q# q^r[R^T5T% v TT^T% MS II 

Yatha, as. sqqr Udakam, water. <|rf Durge, on the summit, on the 
inaccessible (summit). Vristam, rained, fallen. qqqj Parvatesu, should be 
read as ^ff on the tops of hills, fqqrqrq Vidhavati, runs down, qq 

Evam, thus, Dharmau, qualities, all dharmas of Visnu. <jqcK Prithak, 

separate, Pasyan, seeing, knowing. qpr Tan, them, qq Eva, even ; 

because of seeing them as different. =q«j Anu, after, fqqiqfq Vi-dhavati, down¬ 
ward goes, obtains the Tamas. 

14. As water falling on an inaccessible mountain top runs down 
thus, seeing qualities of the Lord as separate a man runs down to Dark¬ 
ness. — 85. 

MADHAVA'S COMMENTARY. 

As the rain water falling on the tops of hills quickly runs clown similarly he who 
sees the atiributes of Visnu as separate from Him runs clown quickly to darkness. 

Mantra 15. 

qqt^F 1% qrcqq qqfrT I 

q# gqfeRrf 3TT3TT nTT% qfqU II *Vt II 

^fcr gr# ii *ii 

3 qqr Yatha udakam, as water. Suddhe, in the pure. Sud- 

dham, pure. Asiktam, poured (into ) qq Tftdrik eva, like that (but 

not identically that ; because we see that the bulk of the water is increased). 
qqR Bhavati, becomes, qq Evam, so ir: Muneh, of the sage, the thinker. 

Vijanatah, the knowing : the liberated. 3 TIRT Atma, the Self, the Master, 
Vayu, four-faced like Visnu, but does not become identical with him.) nqfq 
Bhavati, becomes. ifpnR Gautama, O Gautama ! />., O Nachiketas ! 

15. As pure water poured into pure water becomes like that, 0 
Gautama, so the Atma of the Muni, who knows, becomes like that (with 
Brahman).—86. 






112 


KATHA-UPANISAD. 


MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

Even the Atman or Yayu of tlie liberated sage becomes like into Him : but not iden¬ 
tically the same l what to say of the non-liberated Jivas. As says the Bhavisya Purana:— 
“ The atmans of all the Liberated Jivas, whether men or Devas, attain similarity and 
specially the atman of the eternally free Yayu attains similarity only with Yisnu, and not 
identity with Him ; what to say of other non-liberated men and devas. All Jivas are either 
direct reflectio-is, or reflections of reflections of the god Yayu.” 

Note .—This verse shows that even the Mukta Jivas—the Perfect Souls, the Liberat¬ 
ed—called here Pure Water—do nob get identity with the Lord in the state of Mukti, 
but similarity (tadrik) only. The reason for this is that even the highest Jfva, the Great 
Yayu, the Christ, is similar only to God, and not God. Yayu or Christ is the Master or 
Swamin of the Liberated Ones, he being the Great Savionr. The Yayu is however different 
from God, though similar to Him, 









Fifth Valli. 


Mantra i. 

^ #qT% fqgrf^ I ci^ II % II 

<jt Purain, city (the body). ^r^T-fK Ekadasa-dvaram, eleven-gated. 
Two openings of the eyes, the two ears, the two nostrils, and the mouth make 
up the seven upper orifices. The navel, and the two lower make up ten. The 
eleventh is Brahmarandhra in the skull. Ajasya, of the Unborn, of the 

Atman, of the Bhagwan, the Lord. Avaki a-chetasah, of the non- 

crooked-hearted. Whose knowledge is direct and straight, Anusthaya, 

having firmly settled in his mind that he is under the control of God. Having 
firm belief. Na sochati, he does not grieve. So long as one thinks 

that the body is his, there is sorrow, but when one realises that it is Lord’s 
and under Him, all sorrows cease, Vimuktah cha vimuchyate, 

and freed (even while living) becomes free (totally after death, />., he is not 
born again— Sankara). Having got freedom through aparoksa, while still in 
the body, gets total liberation after death. 

1. He who has this firm faith that this town with eleven gates 
is under the control of the Unborn, the Righteous Lord, never grieves, 
and realising freedom in this life, becomes liberated after death. This 
is verily That— 87. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

Let one have this firm faith that this town is under the control of tho Lord : he 
should have this conviction that this town belongs to the Unborn. “ The person who 
has got intuitive vision (aparoksa) becomes vimukta or free through humility and absence 
of egoism, even while still in the body. He next becomes Mukta in the highest sense of 
that word, when all sorts of sorrows and their reflections in conciousness are destroyed.' * 
—(Ibid.) 

[The difference between vimukta and vimuchyate is this, the first, is aparoksa realisa¬ 
tion and humbleness of spirit and freedom from egoism : the other is freedom from 
all sorrow, which follows the first stage.] 

Mantra 2. 

f 1 r qjrnu frfesrr * 11 

Hamsah, (The Swan.) Free from faults and the essence of all. 
The word is a compound of ^ (free from all faults) and H: (essence) ‘ Ham ’ 
is derived from the root ^U*t, by adding the afix ^5 1 There is 







114 


KATHA-OPANISAD. 


elision of the final syllable. The word g\- is derived from by the elision of 
the final *, and shortening the long ^TT H (t ^JT#r ^fr^TST, 

H £>uchi-sad, dwelling in the Pure (?>., Vayu). Vasuh 

3*5:11 The * of 3* is elided) Vasu, the best and the 
joy. Antariksa-sat, dwelling in the firmament. Moving in the firma¬ 

ment or sky. firH Hota, the Hotri priest, The presiding deity of the senses. 
3^^ Vedi-sat, dwelling in the Vedi or Earth : Honoured, Atithih, 

(the guest.) It is a compound of “much” and ij “food.” The rich in 
food: the wealthy, Durona-sat, durona = bottled Soma. Sat = dwell¬ 

ing in: dwelling in the jar of Soma. 5 jqH iNri-sat, dwelling in men. 3*3^ 
Varasat, dwelling in the Devas or God. Rita-sat, dwelling or existing in 

Truth of Veda. osfprepT Vyomasat, dwelling or existing in Space. Existing 
in Prakriti. Vyoma is the name of Sri —she in whom the whole universe 
is weaved (vyota.) Abjali, water-born (like conch, shells, etc.) He 

who dwells or exists in the water-born creatures. *Tr 3 tr Gojah, herbs, &c. 
Earth-born (like wheat, etc.) He who exists in the plants, &c., growing on 
earth. 35^1: Ritajah, the liberated are called Ritas. He who dwells in 

the liberated, as their Controller. 9 TRP 5 U: Adrijah, Mountain-born. Rivers, 
etc., born of mountains. He who is in the mountain-born. (The perfect ones 
living on the mountain). 5^33 Ritam, truth, that which is principally estab¬ 
lished by the Vedas* Brihat, the Great. Full of all qualities. 

2. He is Hamsa (free from all faults and essence of all), residing 
in the Pure Vayu, He is Vasu (the best and the blessed) dwelling in the 
Firmament, He is Hotri tthe Lord of the senses) dwelling in honored 
places, He is atithi (the rich in food) dwelling in the Soma-jar. He 

dwells in men, in Devas, in Scriptures, in Space, in the creatures of 
water and earth. He dwells among the Liberated, and the Mountain-born. 
He is the Truth (established by 1 he Vedas) and the Great One (full of 
all qualities.) —88. 

Note . —That dwells as Ilainsa in the pure heaven, as Vasu it dwells in the Antariksa, 
as the sacrificer it dwells near the altar, as a guest it dwells in the houses : (Or vessels 
of food.) It moves in men, it dwells in the Gods, it lives in Truth, existing in space ; 

it is (as the lish) in the waters, (as tlio trees; that grow 011 earth, it is the knowledge 

Unit the Vedas reveal , and like the rivers that come from the mountain. It is the great 
Truth. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

As Hari is eternally free (liina) from all faults and is the essence (Sara) of all, there¬ 
fore He is called llamsa (Ha = hina, free, in = eternally, sa-sara, essence). The Vayu 
(or Christ) is called Suchi or 1’ure. lie dwells in Vavn and hcnco is called the Dweller 
in the Pure. As He is the personification of highest (vara) happiness (sukham) He is called 
Vasu. lie as Vasu dwells in the Firmament. He is called Hotri as He regulates all senses. 
He is called Vcdisat because He is honoured (vedya) of all. lie alono who possesses 
great (ati) riches (tha) is called atithi. As Atithi or Master of vast riches He resides in 
Soma called hero the Jar. He dwells among men and among the Rest, i.<\, the Devas 
also is Ho indeed. Ho is in the Vedas called Rita or Truth, lie is in tho great Nature 






V VALLl, 4. 


115 


called A yoma, Sri is called Yyoma because this universe is supported (vyotam) in Her. 
And since Ho is in the creatures of water and the plants of Earth, and in the mountain" 
born rivers, therefore He is called abja, &c. The Muktas are called Ritas, literally 
meaning ‘‘gone,” from •Jvl to go. They who have gone into Yisnu are called Ritas. 
The Lord is called Ritaja because he dwells among the Liberated as their controller. 
He is Ritaui. The Veda is called Ritam. As all the Vedas declare principally Visuu and 
Visnu alone ; so Ritam comes to mean Visuu also. He is called Brihat because He is full 
of all qualities. He is indeed the Highest Person. 


v ' * \ - 

STOgSRSTOH SRFTRrcT I 
HR qrHHHRftH SHTUH II ^ (I 


Ordhvam, up. SJTHI* Pranam, the Prana-vayu. The Chief Prana, in his 
aspect as Prana SsiHTH Unnayati, sends up, takes up. =£Apanam, the 
Apana-vayu. d'he Chief-Prana in his aspect as Apana. Pratyag, down, 

or back. Asyati, throws, sends, Madhye, in the middle. In the 

heart. Vamanam, the dwarf. The adorable. The person of the size of 

the thumb mentioned above. Vama = Beauty, Na = leader, Vamana = the Lord 
of Beauty. Asinam, sitting or is seated. Visve, all. Devalj, 

gods, the senses like sight. (Jpasate, worship. 


3. He leads the Prana upwards, He throws the Apana down, in the 
midst of the body sits this Adorable One, whom all the Gods surround 
and adore—89. 


Note —The Prana or the wisdom is above, the Apana or strength is below, in the 
middle is Beauty or Vamana. The Good, the Wise, the Beautiful. 

Mantra 4. 

sir Brthhthr qrfH: i 

^rfegRHRR i ctat n « 11 

Asya, of this, of the Jiva dwelling in the dense body. 
Vi-sramsamanasya, being torn away, leaving the dense body. Dying physically, 
s&ftwrei Sarirasthasya, of the dweller in the body. ^f|g: Dehinah, of the em¬ 
bodied, of the Jiva dwelling in the suksma or subtle bod}'. Dehat, from 

the subtle body. Vimuchyamanasya, being freed perfectly, becom¬ 
ing a Mukta. Kim atra parisisyate, what remains here behind. 

4. What remains when this soul, the dweller in the body, goes out 
from the dense body at death and is freed also from the subtle body (in 
Mukti) ? This is verily That—90. 

Note— It appears that Yaina after having recited some attributes had stopped with 
the last mantra, Yaeliiketas, therefore, asks him again, to further expand the answer to the 
third question. It is the same question ye yam prete vichikitsa, &c., put in different 
words. The phrase ‘ This is verily That’ is an answer to the question put.) 





116 


X KATHA-UPAKTSAD. 


Mantra 5, 

srniN HvTT 3 tNTcI I 

3 sfhrfcr 3r%r^Tf}TTSffit u * n 

spnijFf Na pranena, not by Prana. Na apanena, not by Apana. 

Many all, the mortal. Jivati, lives. cK^ Kagchana, any one. frTOT 

itarena, by the other, i.e. } through the Lord, g Tu, but. Jivanti, they 

live. Yasmin, in whom, Etau, both these (Prana and Apana). 

Upasritau, repose. 

5. Not by Prana, not by Apana does any mortal exist, but by 
another do they live on Whom both these depend.—91. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Chief Prana aloue is not the Supporter of all sentient beings ; but refuged in 
Visnu, Prana supports all these Jivas. Thus the Highest and principal support of all 
sentient Beings is Visnu—He is Absolutely Independent. 

Mantra 6 . 

rf ft m m i 

^ srrsq wr^rr H'Trt *ffcR ii t u 

^ Hanta, well then. H Te, to thee. ldam, this. sj^suh Pra-vaksyami, 
1 shall tell, ggj Guhyam, mystery, secret. && Brahma, the Brahman. 
Sanatauam, the old, the ancient, gqr Yatha, how. not in Madhva, 
and.] Maranam, the dying : the Jivas, the Mortals, or death. SRcq Prapya, 

reaching: working through. Atma, the Atma. T he Supreme Self or the 

Jivatma. Bhavati, becomes their Controller and Saviour. nfaff Gau¬ 

tama, O Gautama. 

(Yama again promises to describe the nature of the Lord.) 

G (a) And now 1 shall tell thee this Mysterious Ancient Bialnnan, 
and how, working through the mortals, this Atman becomes their Ruler 
and Saviour, 0 Gautama !—92. 

6 ( b ) 1 shall tell thee this Hidden Ancient Brahman and also what 

is the condition of the soul when death overtakes it, 0 Gautama ! 

i Vote._That Brahman is different from all Jivas was already declared in verse Y. 5 : 

the promise in the present verse is to declare the same distinction between the Jiva and 
Isvara: and therefore, a description of both. In that view the verso should be translated 
thus 1 shall tell thee this Hidden Ancient Brahman : and also what is the state of the 
Atma [here atma should be taken as meaning the Jivatma) when death overtakes him. 
This clearly shows the difference between Jiva and Brahman. 

Mantra 7. 

q’TTsmn. n vs 11 







V VALLl, 8 . 


117 


Yonim, the womb : birth as man, &c. Anye, some (disincarnate 
Jivas). Pra-padyante (srmiRT Madhva STr^fcr) enter, obtain, 

Sariratvaya, in order to have a body; for the purpose of becoming incarnated. 
?*npT: Dehinah, embodied ones, when ready to become embodied. And the 
Lord also enters the womb along with such Jivas to guide them, Sthanum, 
immoveable, inorganic body or mineral. The Lord also enters the mineral 
along with such Jivas to guide them. ^ Anye, others, who are evil-doers. 

Anu-sam-yanti, go into. Why some go to the organic and others to 
the inorganic incarnation ? The answer is here given. ^ Yatha karma 
according to karma (actions done on the Physical Plane). W Yatha 
srutam, according to their knowledge (energy set free on the mental plane). 

7. Some Jivas, ready for re-birth, go into the womb to obtain a 
body: others enter minerals, according to their karma and according to 
their knowledge.— 93. 

Note.—This verse further shows the difference between the Jiva and Brahman. The 
experiencer of fruit of action is Jiva, as shown in this verse : while Brahman who also 
enters the womb or the mineral along with the Jiva experiences no such fruit, but on the 
contrary awards the Jiva such fruit. 

Mantra 8 . 

q tn* mmRRT: 1 

cf^ Usfe i 

5JJ3R I llsll 

Yah, who, qualifies Purusa —the person. Esu, in these Jivas. ggij 
Suptesu, when (they are asleep in Pralaya, &c.) Jagarti, is awake (does 

not sleep). Kamam Kamam, according to His Desire, g^q-j Purusab 

the person : the Full, possessing the six gunas in their fullness. Or the dwel¬ 
ler in the town (pur). fanfare: Nirmimanah, creating, shaping. ^ Tat, that, 
he. ^ Eva, indeed, alone. ^ Sukram, free from sorrow. ^ Tat, that, he. 

Brahma, the Brahman. The full of all qualities. ^ ^ Tad eva, that, 
indeed. He alone. =spjri Amritam, immortal, indestructible, unchanging. 'T he 
Eternally Free. 3^ Uchyate, is said, are called (in all scriptures or by all 
wise men). Tasmin, in Him. srreff: Lokali, the worlds, tott: Sn'tah, 

contained, refuged. 3^ Sarve, all. 35 3 Tad u, that indeed. ^ Na atyeti, 

does not go beyond, Kaschana, any one. 

8. That Almighty Person who keeps awake, when these Jivas are 

plunged in sleep, who makes according to His will (various objects for 
them to dream of) He alone is free from sorrow, He alone is Full and Ab¬ 
solute- He alone is said to be the Eternally Free. I 11 Him are all worlds 
refuged. Beyond Him verily no one can go. This is verily That._94. 

Note —This Purusa who is awake in those that sleep, and who builds (all objects) 
as a desire, that indeed is the pure one, that indeed is Brahman immortal he is called. 

16 








118 


KATHA-UPANISAD. 


In him all words are contained. This is That, Him verily nothing goes beyond. “ He the 
person who is awake in those who sleep, shaping one desired thing after the other.” 

“ That is the bright, that is Brahman, that alone is called the Immortal.” 

Note : —This verse again indicates the difference between the Jiva and Brahman. That 
which sleeps is Jiva. He who is always awake, while the Jivas are asleep, whether in 
ordinary or Pralayic sleep, is Brahman. Brahman is fcukram or free from sorrow, Jiva is 
full of misery. Brahman is full and absolute not so the Jiva. He is Eternally Free, the 
Jiva is not so. He is the refuge of all worlds, not so the Jiva who dwells in some world or 
other. No one can transcend Him ; while Brahman transcends all Jivas. Thus all these 
epithets establish that the Jiva and Brahman are distinct and not identical. The next 
two mantras also further describe the same difference between the Jiva and Brahman ; by 
means of two illustrations. 

Mantra 9. 

srfirsT ^q ^q srfrrw snjq 1 

^q ^q srfaw 11 11 

Agnib, the fire : The conscious Fire-Devata in heaven and his reflec¬ 
tions in the unconscious material fires of the physical plane. Yatha, as, 

tnough. q^: Ekah, one. Though the Devata-form of agni is one only, and 
having entered in the world, as agent of cooking, &c., it becomes many : yet for 
every form of this Deva Agni there is a counter-form or reflection in insentient 
material fire, Bhuvanam, the world. ur%: Pravistah, entered, having 

entered. Rupam rupam, for every one of his forms, srfa^r Pratirupam, 

counter-form or reilection. Babhuva, became, there exists, rr^: Ekah, one. 

Tatha, so. Sarva-bhuta-antaratma, the Inner Self of all 

creatuies. Rupam rupam pi ati-rupah, for every form, its counter- 

foi m. *et Balnli cha, different even or indeed, i.c. t the reflected form is 

outside of a separate from the original, <S:e., from the Supreme Self: because 
its very existence is dependent upon Him. It does not become one identically. 

9. Though Agni (as a Devata) is one only, who having entered the 
worlds, becomes many, yet for every one of his deva-forms there is a 
reflected (insentient) form ; so the Inner Self (Ruler) of all creatures is 
One only, yet for every one of His forms, the reflected Jiva is indeed 
different (because outside of liim, and not independent).— 95. 

Mantra 10. 

qrgJHHfit srfqsr ^q ^q straw q^q 1 

wA wA srfrtW qf|2J \\ \° II 

Vayub, the Devata Vayu, in his Devata aspect. w Yatha, though, 
q^: Ekah, one only, Bhuvanam pravistah, having entered the 

worlds becomes mainfold as upholder of various things, yet for every form of 
the Deva Vayu, there is a counter-form in the insentient Vayu. 





V VALLl 11. 


1L9 


The words are the same as in the last verse. 

10. Though Vayu as a Devata is one only, who having entered the 
worlds, becomes many, yet for every one of his deva-forms there is a 
reflected insentient form, so the Inner Ruler of all creatures is One only 
yet for every one of His forms, the reflected Jiva is different because out¬ 
side of Him.— 90. 

MADHYA’S COMM EXTAR Y. 

As says the Kurina Pur ana :— 

“ The Fire (Agni-devata) is one only and not many, who however entering into the 
worlds becomes manifold as agents of cooking, &c., yet for every one of the forms that 
this Deva assumes in the worlds there is a counter-form or reflection in the shape of 
insentient material fires. Similarly, the Deva Vayu is alone the upholder and no one 
else, yet when he enters the worlds he becomes manifold, and. for every one of his deva- 
forms there is a reflected insentient form, such as we feel by touch when the air blows, 
thus is the Lord Janardana, the Sifter of men. He alone is independent and one : staying 
within every Jiva. Every conscious Jiva is a reflection of a particular form of the Lord 
when He enters the world, But these Jivas are all outside of Him, therefore, they can 
never be identical with Him. These Jivas, though reflections, are however beginningless 
and endless. 

Note .—The Lord is one and homogeneous yet these reflections are of infinite variety : 
in the sense that thir experiences are of infinitely diverse kind. If Lord is the Inner Self 
of all, He must suffer the pains of the Jivas, because He is inside them. To this doubt, 
the next verse gives the reply. 

Mantra i i 

:§RSTTH: \\\\\\ 

Suryab, the sun. Yatha, as. Sarva-lokasya, of all worlds: 

of all creatures. =q=g: Chaksuli,.the eye. 'The eye is of two sorts—the external 
and the internal. '1 he external is material and inert. It is the organ of sight. 
The internal is living and conscious, as it has tor its presiding deity the Surya 
or sun. Na, not. Lipyate, is contaminated or besmirched. 

Chaksusaih, relating to the eyes. ( The impurities which the eye sees.) ^rST^rlr: 
Bahya-dosaih, external impurities affecting the organ of sight. rTqj 

hatha Sarva-bhutantaratma, so one is the Inner Self of all 
creatures. Na lipyate, is not contaminated. Loka-dulikhena, 

by the world-sorruw. Bahyah, vbeing) without being different from the 

Jivas. 

11, As the one Surya, the eye of all the Jivas is not affected by the 
external defects in the organ of sight, so the one Inner-Self of all is not 
affected by the sorrows of the Jivas being outside of them.—97. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

(THE KIJRMA PURANA— continued.) 

“ As the Sun (Surya Devata), is the Inner Eye, the external organ of sight being its 
reflection, and as this inner Eye is not contaminated by the defects affecting the external 






120 


katha-upanisad. 


organ of sight—because the Inner Eye is Surya Devata ancl the External Eye is his insen¬ 
tient reflection only:—so the Supreme person being separate from all Jivas, because He 
is independent, is not contaminated by the sorrows of the dependent Jiva. [Bat the Jiva 
and Isvara are both conscious beings, and not like the conscious Surya Devata and the 
unconscious eye ; why should not then the sorrows of the conscious Jivas affect the 
conscious God ? To this, the Parana replies]. The Jiva is merely a reflected consciousness, 
the supreme Lord Hari is the Highest consciousness: and as He is independent, He is 
not tainted by the defects of His reflection, for the Highest consciousness can never be 
tainted, otherwise it would not be highest and independent.” Thus we read in the Kurina 
Parana. 

[Having explained the above three verses, by quoting the Kurma Purana and in the 
very words of that Purana ; the commentator now explains them in his own words.] 

He, the Lord, is one only, and the inner self of all beings. The Jiva is called His 
reflection and for every form of His, there is a reflection but this reflection is bahir or 
outside the Supreme Self, that is to say, totally separate and different from Him : because 
it is dependent. 

[If the Jivas as reflections have no beginning and are anadi, why the Sruti uses the 
word babhuva in the past tense, shelving that the Jivas came into existence at a certain 
period of time. To this the commentator replies.] 

The past tense in babhuva is to be explained in the same way as the past tense in 
asit in the text atma eva idam agre asit (Aitareva Up.). “ The Supreme Self alone ivas 
in the beginning. ’ It does not mean that the supreme Lord had a beginning. [The asit 
shows that the atman is above all times and pervades all time. The use of a particular 
tense should be taken as meaning all the tenses. Just as in the phrase “ Visnu saw the 
past tense must be interpreted as meaning all the tenses— i.c., Visnu ahcays sees : because 
lie is eternally conscious.] 

[If the Lord as the Inner Self of all is not touched by the sorroAvs of the Jh'as ; Avliy 
should the Jivas be touched by sorroAv ? If there be tAvo tenants in the same house, and 
the house be on fire, either both must suffer and bo burnt, or both must escape. You can 
not say one tenant remains unburnt Avliile the other is burning. The answer to this is 
given in the next verse, Avhich shows that the might of the Lord is greater than that of 
the liva, and as a person who knows the secret of controlling fire, is not burnt by fire, so 
the Lord by His poAAcr, prevents the sorroAv affecting Him]. 

Says a text :—“ By knoAving Hari Avho is within one’s self, the man becomes liberated 
undoubtedly. But he who meditates on Him as identical Avith the Jrva, verib* falls into 
binding darkness.” 

Mantra 12. 

Aj TRcRI II * HI 

Ekah, one. Verily that Supreme God is all-pervading, self-dependent 
and One, there is no one else who is either equal to Him or greater than 
He, The word “One M indicates that He is self-dependent. How can one 
God control and rule infinite number and variety of Jivas. To this, the answer 
is given in this verse, i.e. } the God assumes infinite forms in order to govern 
infinite worlds and Jivas. qtft: Vasili, the controller, the Ruler. All are under 
His control. Sarva-bhQta-&ntar-aima, the Inner self of all creatures. 







V VALLl, 14. 


121 


Ekam rupatn, one (from which is one essence, pure intelligence) 

Bahudha, manifold (according to differences of name and form.) The Jivas 
to be ruled are many, and so He becomes many in that sense, q: Yah, who. 

Karoti, does, makes. Tam, He. W Atmastham, seated-in-the-self 
(placed in one’s own heart, in the Buddhi.) g Ye, who (free from out-going 
tendencies.) Anu-pasvanti, see, experience, perceive. #: Dhirab, 

(the wise ) I esam, theirs. §*3r Sukham Sasvatam, eternal happiness 

(the bliss of the self.) ^ fffRR.Na itaresam, not of others. 

12. He is One, the Ruler, the Inner Self of all creatures, who makes 
(his) one form manifold ; those tranquil-minded ones who see him seated 
in their atma, eternal happiness is for them and not for others.—£)!). 

Note. —This describes the joy of the Free. The Muktas get bliss by seeing the Lord : 
so the form of the Lord must be the highest joy. This will be mentioned in Y. 14. 

Mantra 13. 

RRTSRRRT ^rRStrRRTW Tt fawft ^RT«T I 

'TTTTRR RTT^rT: $TR 3 <ft 

rr: Nityah, eternal. ^TRRRi* Anityanam, among the eternals 
Rc^RPT Nityah nityanam, the Eternal among the Eternals: The highest 
Eternal. Or who gives to the other eternals, their eternity], Chetanal], 

%rRRr Chetananani, the Thinker among all thinkers, or the Highest conscious¬ 
ness among all consciousness, (like Brahma, &c.) who gives consciousness 
to all consciousness. *13;: Ekah, the One. Baliunam, of many (con¬ 

sciousnesses.) Yah, who. R3UTR SRRr^ Vidadhati kaman, fulfils the desire, 
g Tam atmastham ye anupasyanti dhirah, The wise who 

perceive him within their self. Tesam, of them. snr%* Santih, peace, happi- ♦ 
ness. Release, Moksa. Sasvati, eternal : that in which there is no 

return to re-birth, ^ Icf^r Na itaresam, not of others. 

13. The Eternal among the eternals, the Consciousness among all 
consciousnesses, the One who bestows the fruits of Karmas to many Jivas, 
the tranquil-minded ones who see him seated in their Atma, get eternal 
happiness, but not the others.—100. 

Mantra 14. 

5 sfl^Rtar fog *rrr% t^trr n 11 

Tat, that. That form of the Lord which He multiplies in all beings. q-^=- 
Etad, this single form in the Jiva. fi% hi, thus. Manyante, they think. 

The wise think. Anirdesyam, indescribable, undefinable, inexplicable. 

I'hat which cannot be fully described. 573 Paramam sukham, supreme 
happiness. The wise think the form of the Lord as the Indescribable essence 








122 


KATHA-UPAmSAD . 


of the highest happiness—that Brahman, which, in one aspect is a Mystery, 
and in the other the All-form —between the Unknown and the known lies the 
third aspect of Brahman—the Supreme bliss, 3*3 3 Katham nu ( %3 33 TOu), In 
what way, how without His grace, Tad, that (form). That Ineffable Supreme 
Form of Bliss and Joy. Vijamyam, can 1 know. How can I know that 

Bliss aspect of Brahman without His grace? ( 33 ^ ^7 313 3 53^3! 33 3 J 3 ) 

Kim u, does it verily or indeed. 333 Bhati, shines forth. Nachiketas asks : 
“can That Highest Form be fully known, through His grace?’ 3 333 3 r Na 
bhati va, It does not shine forth. The reply is “ It cannot be fully known.” 

Note .—“ This is that”—so say the ivise : how may 1 know that supreme bliss, not 
to be defined ; is it manifest or is it not manifest ? 

14. The wise say : “ That is this (namely, the Universal Form is 
this Single Form in the Jiva)—It is Ineffable Highest Bliss,” (Yama says) 
“How can I know That Form (without His Grace? I cannot).” (Nachi¬ 
ketas asks :) “ But even with His grace, can It be known fully ?” “ No, 

It cannot be fully known.”—101. 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

This Form of the Lord is alone the Highest Joy, the “ paramam sukham” of this 
verse: (and not the bliss of tlie Liberated—which though Joy is not the highest^. The 
bliss of the Liberated Wise One is but a portion of it (infinitely small when so compared). 
“The Joy of Brahma and the rest, or of the Liberated is but a reflection of the bliss of 
the Lord, a small grain of the bliss of Visnu. The bliss of Yisnu alone is the highest 
bliss. Can this Bliss-Form be fully known by any ? No, It cannot be so known. How can 
1 know it without His grace This Form which is Divine, Ineffable Supreme Joy.”—(Maha 
Vara ha.) 

Note: — The explanation of this verse according to Sankara seems inappropriate. He 
takes the Joy of this verse as referring to Mukti and the bliss of the Released. But 
Yama is a Released Jiva. Why should he say “ IIow can I know this Joy of Release.” 
Yama knows the Lord, as he asserts in a previous verse. What Yama means to teach 
here is that the grace of God is the chief cause of bliss and nothing else : and even then 
no one knows this Bliss-Form in its entirety. Yama here relates his own personal 
experience. 

Mantra 15. 

^ 3TT3 ?T 3TR3 I 

rRFT 3R3333TT% 3T3T fl3TT% IIRII 

?fcr Hr# stotot 11 h ii 

3 Na. not. 33 Tatra, that Form. 33: Suryali, the sun. 33*3 Bhati, reveals, 
manifests. 3 Na, not. Chandi a-tarakam, tliepnoon and stars. 3^13: R^3 : 

33% Na imah vidyutah bhanti, not these lightnings reveal, ^3: ^33^73: Kutah 
ayam agnih, how this fire? 33 3 ^ HP 3 Tam eva bhdntam, when verily He 
shines, following after His shining forth. 313-333 Ann-bhati or 333 (anu is 
*.aken with the preceding clause) shine after Him (not by their own light, but 






F FALL/, 15 . 


123 


by his light.) Sarvatn. all (Sun and other stars, &c.) Tasya, His. vn^r 
Bhasa, by (His) light. ^ Sarvam, all. Idam, this (sun, &c.) Vi-bhati, 

is lighted. 

15. That Form the sun does not reveal, nor the moon and stars, 
nor these lightnings reveal Him, how then this fire ? When He shines forth, 
all is illumined after Him, by His light all this becomes lighted.—102. 





Sixth Valli. 

Mantka I. 

^ts^m ^ rrr : i 

T^TcTT: hW cTf JU^TTcT ^rft ^ M II 

Ordhva-mulah, grounded in the Highest. Ordhva=the highest. 
I'he word mula means the root, but here it means the ground in which the root 
is fixed. The second meaning is : “ whose root is Rama called Ordhva because 
she is higher than Brahma, &c.” That world-tree whose base is in 11 Ordhva ” or 
High God, i.e., Visnu. Avak-sakhah, down branched, whose-branches 

are the Lower Devas (avak lower hierarch)', i.e., devas lower than Rama) trq: 
Esah, this, Asvattah, is formed by adding the affix qR to the root 

“ to blow” preceded by the upapada ‘quick’ ^TPg+3r + 37 (^) » (the 3 TT 
is shortened.) 3TW 3 tR*R or ^ the fig-tree, that which 

stands firm like the fig-tree or may mean f ‘ the abode of God or the food 

of God.” means then “ He who goes very quickly, i.e., the all-pervading 

God : and zj is the elided form of *zrr “ to stand ” or q “ food.” San&tanah, 

ancient, beginningless as a current. The current of creation has no beginning. 
tpr 'Pad eva, that verily or indeed, that root of the world tree, gaR Sukram 
bright, pure, free from sorrow. rf£ agT Tad Bralnna, that is Brahman. ^ ^ 
Tad eva, that indeed, Amriiam, immortal. 3^3% Uchyate, is said, rffW* 

%T^:r: mm: rn a? 3 H ll same as in V. 8. 

1 . Grounded in the Highest, with lower devas as its branches, is 
this beginningless Asvattha tree (the universe). He alone is free from 
sorrow: He alone is full and absolute. He alone is said to be the 
eternally free. In Him are all worlds sheltered- Beyond Him verily no 
one can go. This is verily that. 103. 

Note. _ With roots above aiut branches below, this (manifested Brahuia) is as an 

ancient asvattha tree, that indeed is the bright one, that is Brahma, that indeed is called 
Immortal.' In him all worlds aro contained, Ilim verily nothing goos beyond. This is that. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

As the earth is the soil in which all trees have their roots, so the Lord Visnu, the 
highest of all, is the root-soil of this treo called the universe : whose branches are tho 
devas all being lower than that root-soil. Tho goddess Rama is tho root. This treo is 
called asvattha. [The word asvattha is thus derived quick-)-/ ^ togo + ^; afllx=sj>^ 
‘ quick moving.’ The elision of 3 and the shortening of T}( into sq aro Vaidic anomalies. 

+ m (asvah asrnin tisthatlii that in which the asva, tho swift moving dwells=3mnr:d 
or food (if-food) of Hari called asva). 









VI VALLl, 3. 


125 


Lord Hari is called asva because of His quick motion. As this universe is pervaded 
by Hari, and as it is the food (2T = food) of Hari, it is called asvattha. This universe is 
beginningless as an eternal current of existence,''but the highest eternal and immortal is 
the Lord Hari. (This asvattha or universe is called San fit an a or eternal in the sense that 
there is no beginning of it. It is a pravaha or current —changing but ceaseless and eternal. 
But Lord is the true eternal, for He is both changeless and eternal.) 

He alone is the one and true eternal, the world is eternal only as a phenomenal current. 

Mantra 2. 

II * II 

sj^Yat, what, ldam, this. r%^ Kimcha, so-ever. siHrl Jagat, the 
world, Sarvam, whole, all. SHirr Prane, on account of (the fear of) the 
Prana (in the Supreme Brahman, in the God Hari). Ejati, trembles or 

works (by His direction), fq: Nih-sritam, come out, gone forth. All this 

world is contained in the Prana, it comes out of Prana—from whom this universe 
trembles, as if in fear, or works under whose command. vr Mahat bhayam. a 
great terror, great and terrible, giver of great terror. Vajramudyatam, 

thunder-bolt raised, the thunder-bolt as if on the point of being hurled. The 
great giver of terror, like the thunder-bolt, g Ye etad viduh, who 

know this (Brahman.) 3PJrTr Amritah, Immortal, muktas % Te bhavanti, 
they become. 

2. This whole world trembles through (fear of this) Prana because 
it has come out of Him. He is a great terror like an uplifted thunder¬ 
bolt. They who know Him verily become immortal.—104. 

[Another reading is WU that from whom has come out Prana, as well as all this 
universe, in whom they all tremble or carry on their functions. Or that from whom the 
whole world has come out, and on whom that Prana (Brahman) re-aets.] 

Note.— Whatever is in this world, the whole moves in the Prana and comes from it. 
It is like a mighty reverence, like an uplifted thunder-bolt, they who know this, they 
verily become immortal. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

The whole world trembles through fear of this Hari called Prana, because it has come 
out of Him. To those who transgress His law, He is a terror like a raised thunderbolt. 

Mantra 3. 

W^TTWqrcT I 

q&mi 11 ^ 11 

Bhayat, from terror, Asya, of Him (the supreme God.) rTTHT 
Agnih tapati, the fire burns. bhayat tapati Suryah, from awe 

the sun shines, vrapj ^ ^ Bhayat lndrah cba Vayuh 

cha Mrityuh dhavati panchamah, from awe India and Vayu, and Mrityu, the 

17 





126 


KATEA-UPAmSAT). 


fifth runs, t.e., “ engage in their respective works,” such as Indra causes rain, 
the Vayu blows, &c. 

3. From fear of him, Agni burns, from fear of Him, Surya shines, 
from fear of Him, India (rains), Vayu (blows), and Mrityu runs (to work) 
as the fifth [one].— 105 . 

Mantra 4. 

stsr mm ? rrrt: i 

cRT: II 3 II 

Iha, here (while alive on this physical plane or while having a human 
body.) Chet, if. Asakat, is able or became able, Boddhum, 

to understand, Rsrt Prak Sarirasya visrasah, before. (If a man 

is able to understand Brahman, then even before) the decay of his body, (he is 
liberated. If he is not able to understand it, then lie has to take body again 
in the created worlds.) mnw f^RT: Sarirasya visrasah, the falling asunder 
of body, Tatah, then, ^ifg Svargesu, in Heavens, ^Rfig Lokesu, in 

worlds. Sariratvaya, for a body, for a Spiritual body. Kalpate, 

becomes fit or capable. *gug ^r%g 3wg% Svargesu lokesu Sarirat¬ 
vaya kalpate, (%fi?fp?g 3T^)in 

Heaven worlds (like Vaikuntha Anantasana, Svetadvipa, See.) he is born 
in order to take a body (which is immaterial, and consists of the bliss 
and intelligence)— t.e., He takes an undecaying Spiritual body in the 
Heaven-worlds. Sankara reads ^ug and not *gug, ^ng means “in the created 
world.” 

4. If a man here is able to understand Him (Hari), before the 
disintegration of the body, then in the lokas of the self-effulgent One he 
obtains an (a-prakritic) form. — 10 G. 

Note.— 1 This shows that God must be known before dying. If He is so known, then 
the knower obtains a spiritual body in Vaikuntha and other Lokas. 

Mantra 5. 

rmrRTRT SRIT I 

qwg rT^TT % ^rqTcmTRq IIVUI 

Yatha, as. Adarse, in the mirror, as the face is seen fully re¬ 

flected in the mirror, so the Brahman is seen completely reflected in the Atman, 
by the Risis. rRH Tatha, so. Atmani, in the Atman. In the Jivatman. 

The word pari-drisyate “ fully seen ” should be supplied here, qm ^ YathA 
svapne, as in dream (not fully, not completely), rzr Tatha pitri-loke, 

so in the world of the Fathers. There is not complete realisation, because the 
dream objects are not so vivid as the picture in mirror. The word dri^yate 
4 seen ’ should be read here. Yatha apsu, as in waters. gftg or 








VI VALLl , G. 


127 


Pariva dadrise or drisyate, as ij fully seen, a little more fully seen. 
rRI Tatha Gandharva-loke, so in the Gandharva world, a little more 

distinct than the Pitri loka. Chhaya, shade, darkness. Atapah, 

glare, too much light, fq Iva, like. Brahma-loke, in Brahma’s world. 

5 RRT3T: Chhayatapyoh, in the light and darkness : when there is a combina¬ 
tion of light and darkness, />., in the morning. SRP^IRq^r: grgrcjfsR Chhayff- 

atapayoh iva Brahmaloke, as in daylight when there is neither too much 
glare nor darkness, but harmony of light and shade, so in the Brahma loka. 

5. As a reflection in the mirror, so in the Atman is Brahman fully 
seen, as one sees in dream so in the Pitri loka, as in waters a little 
more fully visible, so in the Gandharva loka ; in the Bralnna loka, the 
Lord is seen as in the day, when there is proper light and shade.—107. 

lYofe.—This shows that the beatific vision of the muktas is not of a uniform nature. 
It differs according to the class to which the Released belongs. In one’s self (Buddhic 
and atmic body) the God is fully seen, in the astral and lower mental body He is dimly 
seen, as in dream; in the higher mental body (Gandharva plane) He is seen better: but 
in the Brahmic body, He is seen in full relief, with harmonious light and shade. 

So also it is said “ The Lord dwelling in the Jiva is seen by the Risis through 
their sights of wisdom, as fully as one sees his own face in a mirror. But He is not seen 
so distinctly by the dwellers of the Pitri-loka. A little more distinct than this is the 
form of the Lord as seen in the Gandharva-loka. As in the morning, day-light, when 
there is neither too much glare (of noon) nor too much darknesss (of evening) but when 
it is both light and darkness, an object is seen distinctly, so the Supreme Person is seen 
in the Brahma-Loka.” 

Mantra 6 . 

f Pamiri ^ ^ i 

W3T wf * *fNrfcT II $ || 

Indriyanam, of the devas of senses (like the ear, &c.) 
Prithak-bhavam, difference between each other, Udayastamayau 

rising and setting. Origin and destruction. This origin and destruction of 
the world, takes place in order to make the senses apprehend different objects. 
^ Chayat, and what these two. ^‘T’a'TRRr Ppthak ut-padyamananam, 

produced from different origins (such as akasa, &c.), born in different ways! 
Their different modes of origin ; and the different modes which these 
devas originate. Matva, having thought over, knowing, understanding 

that they are under the control of God. q W^R Dhirah na sochati, the 
wise does not grieve. Understanding that all these differences of condition 
these creations and destructions of worlds, these perceptions of objects by the 
devas of the senses who have different origins are under the control of God, the 
wise does not grieve. 

6 . Knowing the difference between the devas of the senses, their 
origin and destruction, of tilings and the difference in their inodes of 
origin the wise does not grieve.—108. 





128 


KATHA-UPANISAD. 


Note .— This shows that uot only the knowledge of the Lord is the cause of Mukti, 
but that the knowledge of the difference between the various orders and grades of the 
Devas is also necessary. 

Mantras 7 and 8. 

ffepfaq: q^ 3 FRT I 

II vs || 

qr: sqTqqqsfirf gq =q 1 

q^qr g^qq ^TfrRq =q *r^T% 11 s n 

fpjqj-q: gt *FT: indriyebhyah param manah, the Manas is higher than the 
senses (the presiding deity of Manas is higher than those ruling the senses. 
See ante, 111 . 10.) The Artha-Devas are higher than the Indriya Devas. Higher 
than the latter is the Deva of Manas. Manasah sattvam 

uttamam gfe:) The Buddhi is higher than Manas, grqrq qrpq 

Satvat adhi Mahan atma higher than or over Buddiii (as penetrat¬ 
ing it even) is the Mahanatma (the great self). Mahtah avyak- 

tam uttamam, higher than Mahat is the Avyakta. g W Avyaktat 

tu parah purusah, beyond the Avyakta, is the Purusa. Vyapakah, the 

all-pervading. The unbounded. qq =q Aliugah eva cha, without marks 

also. That by which a thing is understood is called u linga such us Buddhi, 
Manas, &c. He who has not these is a-linga. He who has neither a Prakritic 
body nor an Elemental (compounded) body. (Bodiless), q Yam or q tam, 
whom or Him ; g refers to qricRTTqn, />., knowing this gradation, ^r*qr Jnatva, 
having understood (being taught by Teachers and Scriptures) geqg *rgj: 
Muchyate jantu]?, the creature is liberated from the bonds of Ignorance even 
while alive ; or from the toils of existence, qpjcfcq ^ Amritatvam cha 

gachchhati, and goes to Immortality (after death, and has non-rebirth.) 

7 and S. Higher than sensation is Manas, Higher than Manas 
is Buddhi, higher than Buddhi is the Mahat-atma. Higher than the 
Mahat is the Unxnanifested. Beyond the Umnanifested is Purusa, the 
all-pervading, one having no attributes, whom having comprehended the 
man is liberated and goes to the state of deathlessness.—109 and 110. 

Note.—How does the knowledge of the different grades of Devas lead to Release is 
shown in these verses. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

This gradation was shown in Mantra 10 of the Third Yalli also. There it was stated 
merely as a fact of nature. Here it is repeated in order to show that the knowledge of this 
gradation is necessary for Release : and that the Highest Esoteric object of all scriptures 
is to impart knowledge of the Lord as the highest of all Devas and to distinguish and 
differentiate Him from the rest. [All the Vedas describe many Devas with the object of 
showing the superiority of the Lord over them all. As says the following“The 











VI VALLl , 10. 


129 


highest aim of all the scriptures is to establish the pre-eminence of the Lord, and to show 
that Hari is the best of all Devas : and this is effected by showing the gradation of Devas 
inter se and their being all under the Lord.” * 

Mantra 9. 

#qT irii 

[The knowledge of the Lord is never obtained through the exertion of physical senses, 
but through mind strengthened by sravana and manana, &c.] 

Na, not. Sandrise, the object of perception, of complete concep¬ 

tion or knowledge, RER Tisthati, exists or is found. ^ Ruparn asya, His 
form (His = of God the Source of all Avataras, the Arche-type.) He cannot 
be easily perceived. Why ? Because no one can see the Lord by the senses. 

H Na chaksusa, not by the eye (or any other sense organ.) qiRR 

Pasyati kaschana, sees any one. Enam, Him. ^ Hrida, through soft 

and loving : qualifying manas. ?Rfqf Manisa, through knowledge (obtained by 
Sravana, &c.) knowing, qualifying manas. fRur Mauasa, by the Manas. 
Abhi-khiptah, is revealed, is made known ; is meditated. 3 Ye etad 

viduh, who know this or qq Him ^Ti?rr: ^ Amritah te bhavanti, Immortals 

they become. 

9. His form is not an object of perception to any one, nor by the eye * 
does any one see him ; but by mind endowed with love and knowledge is 
He made known. Who thus know Him, become verily immortal.—111. j 

[This asserts that the form of the Lord is not perceptible by senses. Is it not rather 
a too wide assertion? For when the Lord incarnates, He certainly becomes visible to 
all. This doubt is next answered by the commentator:—] 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

No one can see the form of Yisnu through his senses, except when He assumes a body 
and incarnates ; and even the mere seeing of incarnation-forms of the Lord does not lead 
to Release, unless the person seeing realises the Lord in that Form through Jhana Dristi. 
The Yogin gets release only when he sees the Lord through wisdom-vision, never by 
physical sight of the senses. 

Mantra 10. 

qqr I 

iter ft rrmrf; qnrr M © 11 

3 RT Yada, when, Pancha, the five (qualifying *>., the five 

Jnanendriyas.) The five organs of knowledge and perception, i.e., eye, ear, &c. 

Avatisthante, remain aloof (from their objects). Do not run after sense 
objects. ^THTR Jnanani, (the organs of) knowledge. *R*rr Manasff, (with j the 
Manas, the emotional faculty. ^ Saha, with. Buddhih, ^ijj \) 

the Buddhi. q fiHrefq Na vi-chestati, does not go towards (its objects.) Is not 
active. Then one becomes God-knovver. qp* Tam, that (Pratyahara state 









130 


KATHA-UPAN1SAD. 


from seven-fold objects of consciousness) or ^ Him. : Ahuh, they say. 
WTf Paramam gatim, the highest goal or way (because it is the highest 
means of acquiring Jnana or wisdom.) 

10. When the five organs of perception along with emotions are 
at rest and apart from their objects, and the Intellect even does not exert 
itself, that state they call the highest road (to God-Vision).—112. 

[In the last verse it was said that the Lord is to be seen by the loving and knowing 
mind— hrida manisa manasa — that is, through Bhakti illumined by Jiiana—Devotion plus 
wisdom. This can only be when one is calm and tranquil and not a dancing dervish.] The 
senses must be quietened. The emotions must be at rest: and Reason cease to exert. 

Mantra ii. 

rft STHTTUfa I 

smTr^r Wei shir % smsrsst n u n 

fri* Tam, that (state.) jjfiT Yogam, the Yoga, frlr hi manyante, they 

hold. R3TT5 Sthiram, steady (unmoved.) ff?3rg-*n-{{Tjrq Indriya-dharanam, (^T^n^rT: 
siTOprr Madhva srrOTfaf 

the restraint of the senses. 3DT?rrr: Apramattafi, not heedless or negli¬ 
gent, becomes knower of God. rf^r Tada, then, Bhavati, he becomes. 

f| Yogah hi, because Yoga (is or should be with regard to.) 

Pi abhavapyayau, coming and going away. The origin and destruction. 

11 . That they hold to be Voga, which is the firm restraint of the 
senses. Then one becomes not heedless. Yoga should be performed with 
regard to the Lord, from whom is the origin and destruction (of all 
things.)—113. 

[The state described in the last verse is called Yoga. This Yoga is the highest 
Path—parama gatih—because it leads to the Lord, the Creator and Destroyer of the world. 
Yoga should be performed with regard to this Lord from whom proceed this origin and 
destruction of the worlds.] 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The phrase Yogah hi prabhava-apyayau does not mean “ the Yoga is the origin and 
destruction or that Yoga creates and destroys things,” but that Yoga should be made 
with regard to the origin and passing away of objects, and that the coming and going 
away of objects is from the Lord. 

Mantra 12. 

^ wfr ^ i 

WtTcT w \ \ w 

^ Na eva, not indeed. <n=qT Vacha, by speech. ^ Na manasa, 

not by mind, qrqj Praptum, to obtain, to know: to reach, Sakyah, is 

able. ^ =qr=^qr Na chaksusa, not by eye. ^TRrT Asti iii, “it is." =£^Great. 
RcT—existence or goodness or reality, the Great Existence or the Great Good. 










VI VALIA, 13. 


131 


Or ^r=greater than f|rT=^T ah beings: asti = Greater than all beings. 
Bruvatah, (s'Tf^cT *jth) from one who says (i.e.) from the Guru who knows that 
“ He is,” and not from one who denies the 'existence of God. Anyatra, 

anywhere else. ^ Katham, how. rVl lad, He. Upa-labhyate, is to 

be found. That God-form cannot be known otherwise than through the grace 
of Guru. When the Guru, through His infinite compassion, shows for the first 
time to the disciple, the majesty of the Self; then it is for the pupil to retain 
that form in his heart, by constant’meditation and contemplation. 

12. Not by Speech or mind is one able to know Him, nor by the 
eye, how then is He to be obtained from any, save the one (Guru) who 
knows that the Lord is “ the Great He Is." —114. 

[In mantra 9 it was said that the Lord can not be seen by the eye which being taken 
as a representative for all the senses. This idea is expressed here. If the Lord cannot be 
known by speech, by mind, or by the eye, how is he to be known ? He is known only through 
instruction imparted by a Sad Guru : who knows that the Lord is called Asti “ He is”—or 
^=great existence : “Great Existence.” Like ^rf%T “I AM ” of the isa Upanisad, 
“HE IS ” is also a name of the Lord.] 

MADHVAS COMMENTARY. 

[Existence is a generic attribute of every thing : why is the Lord called existence? 
This is answered by the commentator :— ] 

The Lord Kesava possesses super-relative existence and reality and goodness, hence He 
is called asti (* = greater than all; beings; Or goodness or reality or ^frf) 

So because His name is Asti; therefore He should be known as such. How can any one 
know Him who does not realise His Supreme Goodness and Excellence. 

Mantra n. 

' 

SHRTcT U \\ \\ 

Asti iti, lt He is ” : or “ the Greatest of all ” : 14 Supremely Good.” 
qq* Eva, indeed. Upa-labdhavyah, is to be found or known, or appre¬ 

hended. rTS^-vn^T Tattva-bhavena, through (the grace of) Tattva-bhava (a 
name of Visnu). It literally means the Giver of reality. By the grace of God. 
?ptf=the truth (of Prakriti and Purusa) ; vn^=tbe creator : i.e. t the creator of the 
truth or condition of Prakriti and Purusa. That is, the God. = by (the 

grace of) the Origin ol Truth (Prakriti and Purusa). ^ Cha, alone : only, 
Ubhayoh, and of both. Of both (Prakriti and Purusa), Spirit and Matter. 
^rf?cT qq Asti iti eva upalabdhasya, of one who has understood it as 

“ He is.” The God is named “Asti He is,” because He is the Supreme 
existence above all existences. The person who knows God as *' Asti ’’—such 
a person becomes the vessel of grace, Tattva-bhavah prasidati, 

Visnu becomes especially gracious. The God is pleased. 

13. He is reached when known as Asti (He is) and only when 
there is the grace of the Giver of reality to both (Matter and Spirit). 






132 


KATHA-UPANI8AD. 


To liim who knows Him as Asti, the Giver of reality becomes specially 
gracious.—115. 

[In the last mantra it was said that tne Lord must be realised as Asti “ Greater than 
GO all beings (RtT)." He who does not realise Him as such, cannot know him. This 
verse states the method of acquiring such knowledge, namely, trying to get the Grace of 
God : for finally all depends upon His grace.] 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

[The pharse “ Tattva-bhavena cho’bhayoh ” does not mean “ by admitting the reality 
of both.” The commentator explains it thus :—] Visnu is called Tattva-bhava, because He 
produces or unfolds distinctly (bhavayate) the reality or be-ness (Tattva) of both (ubhaya) 
the Prakriti (matter) and Purusa (spirit). His greatness over all is known through His 
grace, and His grace is obtained through the knowledge of his superiority over all- 

[Is it not arguing in a circle that His grace depends upon His knowledge, and that 
His knowledge is acquired through His grace ? It is not so. The two propositions refer 
to two different sets of aspirants : namely (l) those who know from beginning the greatness 
of God : and (2) those who do not so know. In the ease of the first class the grace 
increases their knowledge, i.e., knowledge leads to grace; in the case of the second class 
the grace produces such knowledge, i.e., grace leads to knowledge.] 

Those who know from beginningless time the superiority of Hari over everything else, 
get increase of their knowledge, through the grace of the Lord, in every successive birth ; 
but those who do not possess from before, this knowledge of the superiority of Hari, get it 
subsequently through the grace of the Lord : and this knowledge, thus acquired, is 
never lost again : and the ignorance once conquered is never revived. Hence this 
knowledge is the highest. 

[Thus grace is of two kinds, that which produces knowledge or the general grace, 
and that which increases knowledge or the special grace]. 

Mantra 14. 

^ ^ srgxSRi ire fcmr: i 

3 RT Yada, when. Sarve, all (qualifying ‘ desires ”). srg^ir Pramu- 
chyante, are entirely given up, become freed, are exhausted : become destroyed 
along with their root, i.e , vasana. tsw: Kamah, desires : worldly desires, 
q Yc° which, Asya, of this Jnftnin, or the wise, gr? Hridi, in the heart, 

in the antahkarana. In the astral body. faHT: ^ritah (another reading is 
dinging to, depending on, residing in. Atha, then. Martyah, 

the moital. Amrital.i, immortal. Bliavati, becomes. That is, never 

is reborn, and so never dies. ^ Atra, here (in this life) in the Bralnna- 
lokn fsvetadvipa, &c. Or in this state of Mukti. agt Brahma, Brahman : or 
divine felicity. H'TCjpT Samasnute, attains : enjoys 

14. When till those worldly desires, that cling to the antahkarana 
are entirely given tip (and spiritual desires spring up) then the mortal 

becomes immortal, then he enjoys here Jhahman. 11(3. 

[Tliis verse describes the state attained through the special grace of God. It looks 
very much like a state of physical immortality or Jivan-muktij. 





VI VALL1 , 16. 


133 


MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

[The giving up of all desires is not meant here, but 011 I 3 - of those which appertain to 
the antahkaraua, i.e., worldly desires. This the Commentator establishes by an authority], 

Wkefi the desires of the Inner Organ (antahkaraua) are renounced, and there takes 
place the manifestation of the desires belonging to the body of the intelligence (chidatman) 
then becoming Released he never dies again. 

[The desire belonging to the higher vehicle or chidatman is to be cultivated rather 
than discarded]. 

Mantra 15. 

SRT ^^RR^JSTRl*. HUH 

2 TCT Yada, when, through the grace of God. ^ Sarve, all. nfvreRr Prab- 
hidyante, are cut asunder, broken through. Hridayasva, of the heart: 

residing in the heart. Iha, here, (on earth). Granthayah, knots of 

ignorance, caused by avidya. =qzr Atha, then. Martyah, mortal. 

Amritah, immortal, free. Never dies again, because he is never born again. 

Bhavati, becrmes. qrrR^ Etavad, so much, for tins Release alone. Is for 
this purpose only. f| Hi, verily (It is omitted in some texts). 
Anusasanam, instruction of all Scriptures. The teaching of Vedanta. 

15. When all the knots of the heart are cut asunder here then the 
mortal becomes immortal, for the sake of this is all the instructions of the 
scriptures.— 117. 

[The worldly desires are renounced only then when the fetters of false knowledge are 
cut asunder]. 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

When a person is fully liberated from the bonds of false knowledge, then ho attains 
to immortality. All instructions have this object in view. 

Mantra 16. 

SR ^ I 

sort Satam, a hundred. ^ Cha, and. q^r Eka, one. One hundred and 
one are the nadis issuing from the heart. Cha, and. Hridayasya, 

of the heart. : Nadyah, vessels, nerve-cords, arteries (a term for all 

tubular structures), rH^f Tas&m, of them (one hundred and one.) 
Murdhanam, to the head, (piercing through the brain ) Abhi- 

nihsrita, coming out towards, q^jr Ekd. one (the Susumna) the principal, 
the chief, rpaj Taya, by that (nadi, the Susumna) LJrdhvam, up¬ 
wards. 3 Trag Ayan, going. Amritatvam, immortality. Release, 

moksa. qi% Eti, obtains, Visvah, diverse. Anyab, the others: 

to other lokas. Utkramane, for the sake of going (to other lokas). The 

locative has the force of the dative. Bhavanti, become, are. 

18 











134 


katha-upanisad. 


16. There are a hundred and one vessels of the heart, and the 
chief of them (proceeding from the heart) pierces through the head. 
By that one going upwards, he obtains deathlessness The others 
are for the purpose of carrying the soul to diverse other lokas.—118. 

[It is only when the soul passes out of the Brahma Nadi that there is Release]. 

Mantra 17. 

gVTTS-cRRHT 3TCHT f ^ URTlfe I 
ct rt 11 w u 

Angusthamatrab, of the size of a thumb. Either the size of the 
thumb of Jiva, or the size of the thumb of the body. g^q\* Purusah, the Purusa. 

Antaratma, the inner atma. Sada, always. Jananam, of beings, 

of creatures, Hridaye, in the heart : in the heart of the svarupa of the Jiva. 

In the centre of the essential (svarupa) body of the Jiva. Or in the physical 
heart. Sannivistah, seated. ?! Tam, that. Visnu. Svat, from sva. 

Sarirat, from the body called sva. The Jiva is called sva. The Jiva is 
the body of the Lord. Svat therefore = from Jiva. Pravrihet, should 

know as distinct and separate. Muhjat, covering, sheath ; a kind of weed. 

iva, like, fq^r Jsikam, inner pith, stock ; a kind of straw. Dhairyena, 

with patience : with reason not led astray by fallacious arguments, cl Tam, 
that. Him. Vidyat, should know, Sukram, free from sorrow, 

brilliant. Amritam, immortal, eternally free. 

17. The Purusa of the size of a thumb, the inner Atma of all beings 
is always seated in the heart of all creatures ; one should distinguish Him 
from the Jiva, as the pith is separate from its covering ; with reason not 
led astray by fallacious arguments. That should be known as the Griefless, 
the Immortal: that should be known as the Gridless, the Immortal.—119. 

[The knowledge) that Jiva is separate from Isvara is the means of getting release. 
This mantra re-asserts that proposition]. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

[The third question of Nachiketas and answer to it, do not relate to the Lord, but to 
the human soul—thus says the Purva-paksiu— the opponent. And lie quotes this verso 
as his authority ; for it says that the soul must be realised as separate from ones own 
body, svat sarirat. Thus this concluding verse also establishes the proposition that the 
immortality of the human soul is the main topic of this Upanisad. This argument of the 
opponent is mot by the commentator by saying that the phrase svat sarirat does not 
mean “from one’s own body” at ail : but that the words sva and sarini have a peculiar 
meaning here. 

The Jiva is the body of Visnu and therefore it is called sarira or body. But Visnu 
has a body of Ilis own, how is it then that the Jiva is said to be the body of Visnu. It 
is called His body because it is under His control (just as the human organism is under 
the control of tho Jiva ; so the Jiva organism is undor the control of the Lord). 










VI VALLl, 18. 


135 


[Sarira therefore means Jiva.] Let one realise that the Lord presides over the Jiva 
and is separate from it (just as the Jiva presides over the physical organism but is separate 
from it. The Unchangeable Yisim should be distinguished from the Jiva called sva ; and 
the difference between the Jiva and Brahman should be thus realised. [That Jiva is the 
body of the Lord, is proved by the following Scriptural text]:—“He whoso bod}'is 
the Jivatma,” “He who controls the Jivatman from within ”—(Br. Up.). Moreover the 
phrase “in the hearts of the creatures” of this verse shows that Hari is separate 
from the Jivas [— for the container and the contents are alwaj's different. The word 
Jananam hridaye may mean either (1) >n the heart of the Jivas, or (2) in the heart of the 
bodies: for jana means both the Jiva and the body. In the first case, the meaning is 
“in the heart of the soul,” t.e., in the soul which is itself the heart. In the second case, 
the meaning would be “ in the heart of the body’ —t.e., in the physical heart. The first 
would apply to the Lord and the second to the Jiva. The “ thumb-size” must also be 
interpreted in a two-fold sense. ’When the physical body is concerned then the size 
of the physical thumb ; when the soul-body is taken, then the size is of the thumb of the 
sonl. But the soul is atomic in size, what can be the size of its thumb? Smaller than 
the atom—] In the heart of the physical body, the size of the Thumb of the physical 
hand ; in the heart of the soul (Jiva), the size is of the thumb of the soul. Thus should 
the Lord be understood as separate from the Jiva, in order to attain Release. 

[But may not the words svat sarirat be taken in their primary sense •* from his own 
body” and not in the metaphorical sense “ from the Jiva which is the body of the Lord ?” 
To this the commentator answers]No school of thinkers say that the Lord is identical 
with the physical body of man : [and so the verse cannot be translated “the Lord must 
be understood as separate from one’s body ” for there was no necessity of teaching this 
truism]. No one among the un-informed (loka) even say that the Lord is identical with 
human body. (The advaita theory is that the Brahman is identical with the Jiva, but they 
even do not say that It is identical with the human body.) Moreover the very phrase “ tho 
Lord is in the hearts of men” shows that the Lord is not identical with the bodies of men : 
(for He is in the heart). 

[But may not svat sarirat “ from his own body” be interpreted as teaching the 
distinction of the soul from the body? For the materialists like Charvakas, &c., hold that 
there is no soul distinct from the body. But there are objections to this view also. The 
words of the mantra are tam svat sarirat pravrihet, let one distinguish that from sva-sarira. 
The word “That” must refer to some antecedent noun mentioned before in the first line 
of this mantra. Now Jiva is not mentioned in tli» first half of this stanza, a being of 
thumb-size is mentioned therein. This thumb-size being cannot be the Jiva, for the 
soul is atomic in size. So it cannot be of the size of the thumb—whether that thumb be 
physical or psychic. Therefore, the commentator says :—] The Jiva is not of the size of 
the thumb. Therefore, this mantra teaches the difference between the Jiva and Visnu. 
Thus it is conclusively proved that Visnu is the Best of all. 

Mantra i8. 

*fr n^n 

ffk f^^Ty^TFT: || R || 

Mrityu, Yama. Proktam, spoken. Nachiketah, Nachi- 

ketas. Atha, then. Labdhva, having obtained. f^tT Vid3'ani, the know¬ 

ledge. Etam, this. qpflfwf«r Yogavidhim, Yoga-practice. s? Cha, and. 





i.36 


KATHA-UPANISAI). 


Kritsnam, all. Brahma-praptah, having attained Brahma. f%U3T: Virajah, 

free from activity (rajas), or sin. Abhut, became. Vimrityuh, beyond 

death, Anyah, another. Api, also, q^ Evam, thus, sp Yah, who. 

Vid, knew, Adhyatmam, the doctrine of Spirit, q^ Eva, even, 

18. Nachiketas having then obtained all this knowledge and 
practice imparted by Yama attained Brahman became free from rajas 
and beyond death ; another who thus knows the Spirit certainly becomes 
so,—120. 

MADHYA’S SALUTATION. 

Reverence be to that Lord Visnu who is erer-victorious : whose beloved and elect 
(Apta) I am, and who is most beloved (apta-tama) of all beloved Ones (aptebliyah) to me- 

Peace chant. 

& i ^ It 3^ 1 sr? ^rr^rt 1 IsrfefJwitcrTreg 

TIT U ^STTRT: 5ITf%: STTRn II 

Om ! May He protect us both (teacher and pupil). May He cause us 
both to enjoy the bliss of Mukti. May we both exert together to find out 
the true meaning of the scriptures. May our studies be fruitful. May 
we never quarrel with each other ! Om ! Peace ! peace ! peace ! 

Peace be to all. 


THE END 





» v 











Alphabetical Index 'of the Mantras. 


o 


Note.—The Homan numerals denote Adhyaya; and the second figure denotes Yalli, 
and the third figure the mantra. 




3*3^ qqr ^...1, 1, 6 ... 



3^r...ll, 6, 8 

SKT^T...!, 2, 22 


frfe...I, 3, 3 



•H 


^frt^rT ST^T...!, 3, 14 


5, 9 


Page. 
... 64 

17 

# • • 

... 80 

..II, 4, 13 

# • « 

... 56 

2 

... 

... 56 

..I, 1, 28 


... 19 

, 20 

< • • 

... 34 



4 

1 

• • • 

... 21 

2, H 

... 

... 31 

If, 4, 8 ... 

... 

... 53 

o ... 

... 

... 23 

... 

• • • 

... 74 

0 


... 46 

... 


... 35 

[I, 6, 13 ... 

• • • 

... 77 

II, 5, 4 ... 


... 61 

... 


... 40 

1 , 8 


... 5 

2, 21 ... 


... 35 

. 11 , 6, 6 ... 


... 73 

.1,3,4 ... 


... 40 

, 3, 10 ... 


... 43 

6, 7 

• . • 

... 74 

...II, 6, 4 

,,, 

... 72 

« • • 

... 

... 45 

..II, 3, 3 

• • • 

... 61 

11,6,1 ... 

• • • 

... 70 

5, 1 

• . • 

... 38 

5, 12 ... 

> • • 

... 66 

...I, 2, 13 

• • • 

o 

CO 

















( ii ) 


II a* || w ^rsrsr^...! 


... 1, 2,12 

rT^T5I%^3Tm^T H?TtHT... 1, 1, 1 

zm §toss *rt*...i, i, 2 

?rt ^rnfafcT trrt...H, 6, ll 




f%55...l 


?t jtfIh *f II, 5, 5 


H yW<T?j: iTtcTVTrfcr 

?nFi^d««ins^nvi ^gst^...!, 


km cr£*n Trfcnrq^TT 


M<l f»-d *3TR 


4 


Page. 
... 17 

.X 2, 16 


... 32 

...1, 2,17 

. . • 

... 32 

..T, 1, 19 

. *. 

... 13 

2 


... 44 

1, 1 ... 

« • • 

o 

1 

• • « 

... 28 

10 ... 

• • • 

... 27 

5, 14 ... 

• • • 

... 67 


« • • 

... 29 

6 

• « • 

... 10 

... 


... 2 

... 


... 76 

9 

• • • 

6 

18 


... 12 

17 ... 

« • • 

... io 

2, 4 ... 

• • • 

... 22 

•)■> 

9 - 


... 16 

,21 ... 


... 15 

, 2, 18 ... 


... 33 

IT...II, •>, 15 


... 68 

.1, 2, 8 ... 


... 24 



... 62 

27 


... 18 

3, ^ 

• • • 

... 75 

R...T, 2, 6 

* • • 

... 23 

3, 16 ... 


... 47 

23 


... 36 

24 

• • • 

... 36 

...II, 5, 13 

... 

... 67 

12 


... 76 

’...I, 2, 9 

# # 

... 26 

1,4,2 ... 

• • • 

... 50 

4, 1 ... 


... 48 

1,3 ... 

• • • 

... 2 

II, 5, 1 ... 

• • • 

... 59 


















( iii ) 


sT^Tfor 1, U 

qfRftftr snsrftr...I, 1 , 5 ... 

tfqT^qrfjRTqfr JfTiTTxrqicr... U , 6, 3 ... 

JTT^TTfel...lI, 4, u ... 
H?rT qwaRqSTrfTR. ..1,3,11 
jjcgjftrKRrR^rrOT 3flOT...II,‘t>, 18 ... 

q: tjdhrq^T 3Tr?rag¥q:...lI, 4, 6 
qs #g6 , 5TT?n^TR^aiT...T, 3, 2 
q ?rr tot gii «rr^ asrcraig...l, 3, 17 
q 5»i mqg 5HcfTFT...n, 4, 5 
q ^3 3tmfcr TOT...II, 5, 8 

srTfrwix^^5frT5r...I, 3, 13 
q dj frl ffir SgqW...II, 4, 9 
qmssgsr crscrr^scnFr q«n ...II, 6, 5 
qqr s*Rrq*rPRTT jr#Trr...I, l, li 
qqrgq^gq fg*is&3...Ll, 4,14 
qqtgqj^g 5j^[iTT%TRfcrT^^...II, 4, 15 
qgT M^Nplg^ 9RT&...II, 6, 10 
qgT qf¥I€r^...tr, 6, 15 
qgr ^q sra^q^ qrraT...II, 6 ,14 
qfgg %>q WIctfR UTO *^3TfcT...II, 6,2 
q^ifl? <Rgq qg*pT cTgfcR...U, 4, 10 ... 
q^q 5151 =q S^snsq I, 2, 25 
q*g RWHqML *wfo...I, 3, 6 
q*jj P-1¥ T ^R vrqfcT ^repress... I, 3, 8 ... 
q ^q fqsT H q R vrqeqqq^:... I, 3, 7 
q^H^RqH *Tq31gq;q...I, 3, 5 
qftqfsig PrwitofR Jjsrt.. J, l, 29 ... 
qi STT^R iqqi... 11, 4, 7 

^q qq^ST »Tpq 5TRR...II, 4, 3 

^ foN^lT.. J, 1, 20... 

^ q qqm g^T h4^i%...I, l, 25 
frrMFFfr s iq ^ ^lCKRW ...[I, 5, 7 
&TqqT^qfaqnjqra q*t...I, l, 15 
qrgq^r gqq sriq^t qti...Il, 5, io ... 
fc^HMKfa q*g*W-..I, 3, 9 


Page. 

8 

4 

71 

55 

43 

81 

52 

39 

47 

51 

63 

45 

54 


57 

57 

75 

79 

78 

71 

54 

37 

41 

42 
41 

41 
20 
52 
50 
13 
17 
62 

9 

64 

42 









( iv > 




1 ,7 

R g^WT...H, 6, 16 
5TcTT3^: 5^IT^15!St5^...I, 1, 23 
^TRTSrpq: f|*RT *TOT...I, 1, 10 
SIWT’Trn gfm’TT R 55Wr:...I, 2, 7 
srsr njpj&r^T...I, 2 , 2 
wrsviwr nf&g *^#^...1, l, 26 ... 

wrUrsa J5?w...T, l, 13 ... 

ST R firqi^ftrawa^X..I, 2, 3 
^ 4lrq^fmTSTf%...[, 2 , 15 
stIrtr fare mcr ^...l, l, 4 
s^rt *p:rT sHr&nrs*! fe«T^...li, 5, 1 i 
s^rn r vr?7 i%sxRTfer...l, l, 12 ... 
^irpcf 3rnm:^w>^wr...I[, 4, 4 

gR^F^fe^TST^T ...U, o, a ... 
5 R cT ajar*...11,.% 6 

5RT ^‘3‘ ire%. ..1,2,19 


Page. 

5 
79 
16 

6 
24 
21 
IS 

8 

22 

31 

3 

6 A 

7 

51 

59 

62 

34 


















































INTRODUCTION. 


The Praifna is one of the three classical Atliarvan Upanisads. The 
classical Upanisads are generally counted as ten and sometimes twelve. 
They are :— 

1. Isfa or Lfavasyacor Vajasaneya Samhita Upanisad. 

2. Ivena or Talavakara Upanisad. 

3. Ivatha Upanisad. 

4. Prashia Upanisad. 

5. Mundaka Upanisad. 

6. Mahduka Upanisad. 

7. Taittiriya Upanisad. 

8. Aittareya Upanisad. 

9. Chhandogya Upanisad. 

10. Brihad Aranyaka or Vajasaneya Brahmana Upanisad. 

11. fivetatfvatara Upanisad. 

12. Kauffitaki Upanisad. 

The Prasfna, Mundaka and Mandukya Upanisads belong to the 
Atliarva Veda. One uniform idea runs through them and they have 
a family resemblance. All of them lay great stress on the mystic 
sound AUM or Pranava. In fact, the whole of the Manduka Upanisad 
is an exposition of that syllable : while each of the other two have portions 
devoted to this. 

The Pra^na Upanisad is also called the Secret Doctrine of the Six 
Questions. Six searchers of God go to a Sage called Pippalada and put 
to him six questions : and these questions and answers form the sub¬ 
stance of this Upanisad. These questions are arranged in a graduated 
scale of difficulty, while the first question is the most general, the sixth 
is the most specific and particular—the first deals with the creation in the 
Universal sense, or the cosmogony, and the macrocosm, the last deals 
with the God in man or the microcosm. The great law of Polarity, the 
law of the Positive and the Negative, the Light and Darkness, the Spirit 
and Matter, the Life and Energy, the Ahuramazda and the Ahriman 
is the key note of this Upanisad. The first creation of the Lord, or rather 
His first emanations are the Prana and the Rayi—the Life-Principle or 
the Consciousness side ; and the Rayi or the energy or the Matter or 
the Form side of creation. It is the intermingling of these two that 
gives rise to all this diversity. The one is active, positive and the male 



( ii ) 


principle, the other is the passive, negative and the female principle. 
The first question and answer mainly deals with this. It shows how Space 
and Time, and Causation arise and fix the limits of a universe and how 
the various hierarchies of the Devas begin to take part in administering 
the so-called Laws of Nature, when the creation starts. The various 
names given to these Prana and Rayi are the Sun and the Moon, the 
Day and the Night, the Life and the Form. The following list shows 
this duality :— 


Prana 

Aditya 

Day 

The Sun 
Amurta 
Life 
Spirit 

Northern Path 
Invisible 


Rayi. 

Chandramas. 

Night. 

The Moon. 
Murta. 

Form. 

Matter. 

Southern Path. 
Visible. 


The Prana plays a very important part in the Hindu systems of 
Philosophy and Religion—but it occupies perhaps nowhere so pre-emi¬ 
nently high a position as in the system of ^ri Madhva. With him this 
Prana is the Great Mediator, the Intercessor, the First Begotten, the 
Anointed, the Light that shines in the Darkness, the Abode of God, 
the Saviour. Next to God, Prana occupies the highest place of honor. 
At the time of the final Release, it is He who leads the liberated soul 
to the presence of the Most High. lie is the Great Geometrician of the 
Universe; as the Rayi may be called the Great Architect of the Uni¬ 
verse. These three — Tsivara, Prana and Rayi—the Lord, the Breath, 
the Wealth — are the Eternal Trinity. The great hymn to Prana in Prasfiia 
chapter 2, fully bears out the high estimation put on this principle by 
&5ri Madhva. This Upanisad is in a way a fuller exposition of some 
of the points dealt with in the Mundaka. 


Prayag, August , 1909. 


S. C. V. 


PRASNA UPAN1SA D- 


First Prasha. 


Peace chant. 


¥T^' ^TP II I) 

ii ^r%rf ^ \\ 515 T 71 

fr>at^T: || 11 i^fcr^ng 11 & sttfcp 

5Trf*rP ^(ll^ctJ || 


(a) O Devas of senses ! May we (live long to) listen with our ears what is pleasant, 
and to see with our eyes what is beautiful. O Holy Ones ! may we with firm limbs and 
bodies strong, extolling you always, attain the full term of our God-ordained life. 

-(Rig. Yeda, I. 89. 8.) 

(b) May Yisnu, the powerful, the ancient of fame, vouchsafe us prosperity, may 
Visuu, the nourisher, the knower of all hearts, give us what is well for us, may Yisnu the 
Lord of swift motions, the felly of whose wheel never wears out, be propitious to us, may 
Yisnu, the protector of the great ones, protect us too.—(Rig. Yeda, I. 89. 6.) 


MADHYA’S SALUTATION. 


Om ! Salutation to the Lord who is the origin of Life (Prana) and the rest, which is 
the ocean of pure bliss, the Omniscient, all-pervading Yasudeva. 

Mantra i. 

& g%?TT =q *R§;T3T: ^Wmft 

^ UFq: 3v^TT ^TWT- 

^rfrfd ^ f ^m^qTw fq^T^gq^r: n % n 

Om. g#;^TT Sukesa, Sukesa. =q Cba, also (called). Bharad- 

vajah, Bharadvaja, son of Bharadvajah. £>aibyah, Saibya (son of Sibi). ^ 

Cha, also (called), ^pq^pr. Satyakamab, Satyakama. %rsrsU!fi Sauryayani, 
Sauryayanf. The long fi is a Vedic anomaly. =^r Cha, also (called). *TF^: 
Gargyah, Gargya. By gotra a Gargya. Kausalyah, Kausalya. ^ Cah, 

also (called). Asvalayanah, Asvalayana, son of Asvalayana. 

Bhargavah, Bbargava, son of Bhrigu. Wd: Vaidarbhih, Born in Vidarbha. 
3;3p\ff Kabandhi, Kabandhi. Katyayanah, son of Katya, of the gotra of 










146 


PRA&NA-UPANISAD . 


Katyayana. % Te, they. ^ Ha, verily, once. q% Ete, these (Suke^a, &c.) s&w: 
Brahmaparah, devoted to Brahman ; proficient in the Vedic study. sgjr%r* 
Brahmanisthah, intent on Brahman, qir Param, Supreme. Brah- 

manvesamanah seeking Brahman, seeking to know God, the all-pervading 
Vasudeva. qq: Esah, this (teacher called Pippalada). ^ Ha, certainly, well 
known. % Vai, alone. This word shows that Pippalada was competent 
to answer their questions. rfr[ Tat, that (object of enquiry, question). ^ 
Sarvam, all. Vaksyati, will explain or will tell, Iti, thus. % Te, 

they (Sukesa and the rest). ^ Ha, once then. Samitpanayah, with 

sacrificial fuel (samidh) in hand (pani) according to proper scriptural direc¬ 
tions. Bhagavanta, the venerable, revered, lit. Lord of Bhagas, i.e , the 

Lord of Wisdom, Dispassion, &c. Pippaladam, Pippalada. 

Upasannah approached. 

1. Sukesa by name also Bharadvaja, Satyakama also called Saibya, 
Gargya, Sauryayani, Ivausalya called A^valfiyana also called Saibya, 
Gargya Sauryayani, Ivausalya called A4valayana, Bhargava of Vidarbha, 
and Kabandhi of Katyayana gotra, who were verily firm in Brahma jnana 
and understood it, seeking the Supreme Brahman, once approached 
with sacrificial fuel in their hands, the reverend teacher Pippalada, think¬ 
ing lie would tell all this to them. — 1. 

Mantra 2 . 

cTFf U WT CTTHT snp^Nr siw 

WSRUT W'ZXr'jySH T^TFTTU: 

f it II R II 

Tan, to them who had thus approached and asked the question. ^ 
Ha, then. Sail, He (Pippalada). qjfq: Risih, the seer of things transcending 

senses. Uv&cha, said. Bhuyah, again (thougli you have already 

practised tapas, &c.) trq Eva, also, rprer Tapasa, by austerities (by control¬ 
ling the senses, and subjugating the body). Brahmacharyena, by 

Brahmacharya (by studying the Vedas, or by practising meditation), or by 
celibacy [by not ( 1 ) thinking about women, not ( 2 ) talking about them, nor ( 3 ) 
playing with them nor ( 4 ) looking at them nor ( 5 ) talking in a retired place 
with them, and nor ( 6 ) willing them, nor ( 7 ) trying to obtain them, nor ( 8 ) enjoy¬ 
ing them.] Sraddhaya, by faith (in the teachings of the scriptures). 

Samvatsaram, one year. Samvatsyatha, live ye (serving your 

guru). qqrqnq Yath&kamam, as (you like, as you please, as you desire.) 
Prasnan, questions. Prichclihatha, ask ye. Yadi, if. 

Vijnasyamah, we know.^q Sarvam, all (without concealing anything). ^ Ha, 
verily, q: Vah, to you. q$qfq: Vaksyamali, we shall tell, ffq hi, thus. 

2. To them the sage said :— u Live here one year more, performing 
penance and celibacy, with earnestness and faith ; then ask the questions, 
that you wish to put, according as we know, we shall explain it all to you.—2. 





1 PRASNA, 4. 


147 


Note.—This word “if” indicates the modesty and want of conceit of the teacher, and 
not that he did not know the subject. “ If I know’ those things, I shall tell you all without 
withholding anything. But if you doubt my knowledge and think it hard to pass another 
year in probation, then you are free to go.” The pupil must approach the Guru without 
questioning His pow r er to teach and must serve him. The Guru also must love his pupil. 

Mantra 3. 

SfT fTTT: 5F5TT: SHTFFrT ffall ^ II 

Atha, then (after a }^ear having performed tapas, &c., as told). 
Kabandhi, Kabandhi. Katyayana]}, of the clan of Katyayana. 

Upetya, having approached (Pippalada); having done the upasadana. qs^5 
Paprachchha, asked. Bhagavan, O Master ! Kutah, from what 

(material cause, or efficient cause); from what Purusa. ^ Ha, verily. % Vai, 
indeed. Imali, these (Devas, See.), P raj all, creatures. Prajayante, 

are produced. fPT lti, thus. 

3. Then Kabandhi of the clan Ivatvayana having approached him 
said. 0 Master, from whom indeed these creatures are produced.—3. 

Note .—The tw’o participles ^ and ^ indicate the w T ell-known fact that creatures are 
born—the fact of the production of beings is well-known : one being reproduces another. 
There is no instance to the contrary, i.e., one being produces another similar to itself. The 
cause cannot be an insentient thing ; for an insentient object is not seen to work unless 
moved by some sentient being. The Jiva cannot be the Supreme Ruler, because he is not 
independent. Nor is Isvara, as He is an object of perception or apprehension. This is 
then the doubt. Pippalada removes this doubt, by showing that though the Lord does 
not create beings in the presence of all, like a potter making his pot, yet He has produced 
Prana and the Rayi, and has entered into them and though these are the direct causes of 
creation, they are, bowerer, the instruments used by the Lord, and with them He creates 
all these creatures. Though Kabandhi is enumerated last among these six Seekers and 
questioners, yet he opens the discourse, because his question is the most comprehensive of 
all. They become more and more specialised as we proceed further. The occult teaching 
proceeds from the most general to the particular. 

Mantra 4. 

rTFT ^ ffrrq 'I srsnqfcr: h 

5RTT: qnTSTrf fTcf II 3 II 

Tasmai, to him (Kabandhi Katyayana). Sail, he (Pippalada). 5 Ha, 
then, Uvacha, said. srsfnWfT Prajakamah, desiring creatures. Desiring 

to create beings. Desiring to have beings like Devas, &c., for one’s self. % Vai, 
verily. srsirTRr: Prajapatih, the Supreme Self or Param-atma, the Protector of 







148 pra£na-upanisad. 


all creatures like Brahma and the rest. (The Supreme God). In the begin¬ 
ning of the kalpa, He desired to have again Devas, &c , as His progeny. 

Sah, He (the Praj&pati). rT?: Tapah, austerity. Penance here means reflection 
or meditation on what is to be done. (The recollection ot the past kalpa and 
the things to be created.) The reflection as to how and what are to be creat¬ 
ed. Made a plan on the model of the past. Atapyata, performed Sah, 

He. rTT: Tapah, the austerity, the plan. cf^T Taptva, performed, having settled. 

Sah, He. Mithunam, couple. The Life and Energy, Prana and Rayi, 

Male and Female. 3^ 71 53 3 Utpadayate, produced. The force of the Present 
tense is to indicate that it is the nature of the Lord to create, not that He had 
some object to gain by creating. Rayim, Rayi (called also Prakriti, food, 
moon, that which is enjoyed, having the preponderance of water). The Bharati, 
the Goddess of wisdom and wealth, Sarasvati. ^ Cha, and. jfpJl Pranam, 
Pi ana (Spirit, Purusa, eater), the sun, the enjoyer, having the preponderance 
of Agni. The Supreme Prana. Cha, and. fr<T Iti, thus. ^ Etau, these two 
(the Spirit and Matter). % Me, for me or mine, Bahudhd, manifold, va¬ 

rious. JT5TT- Prajah, creatures, progeny (from Devas down to mineral). 
Karisyatah, will produce or do I entering these two will produce various 
creatures. They will be my instruments of creation. Iti, thus. 

4. He said to him, “ the Lord of beings wishing to create, performed 
meditation : He then produced the two, Prana and Rayi (thinking) these 
two would form for him the manifold creation.”—4. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Visnu is called the Prajapati because He protects (pati) all creatures, praja. He, 
the Supreme Spirit, the Highest Person sends out, in the beginning of every Kalpa, Vayu 
called also the Surya (the sun) and Sarasvati called also the moon. He makes these, Vayu 
and Sarasvati take their abode in the Sun and the Moon. Then entering these two, Visnft 
Himself the Unborn creates all this Universe. He dwelling in Vayu is formless (amfirta.) 
Ho dwelling in Sarasvati is with form. 

Note .—Ho (Pippalada) then said to him (Kabandhi) “ The Lord of creatures once 
more desired to have creatures (in the beginning of a kalpa). He revolved over the 
plan. Having settled the plan, He produced a couple—the Rayi and the Pr&na : (and said) 
“ these two will produce manifold creatures for me,” 

Mantra 5. 

ft srurr uw zfw 

^ rn : I) * II 

=grf^: Adityah, the Sun, the eater (from the root ad 4 to eat’), the enjoyer. 
Hence, the Spirit. The Prana entered the sun and took its abode there. The 
Lord placed the Prana in the Sun. f Ha, verily. % Vai, indeed. srr^IT: PrAnab, 
the Praija, the Fire, zfq: Rayih, the Rayi, the enjoyed (the food, the matter.) ^ 
Eva, alone, also. Chandramah, Moon. The gladdener or joy-giver (from 

ckadi 44 to gladden”). The Rayi called also Chandrama was made to enter the 









I PRASNA , 6 . 


149 


Moon, qij: Ray ill, the Rayi (tlie matter, the food, the Moon.) % Vai, cer¬ 
tainly. q<T<* Etat, this (manifest ) srq Sarvam, all. ^ Yat, what. ^ MOrtam, 
gross, solid, liquid, and fiery. ^ Cha, and. tt# Amurtam, subtle, prakriti, &c., 

ethers, &c. The (air) and akasa or (ether). ^ Cha, and. Tasmat, 

therefore, the material cause of the whole universe is thus two-fold, subtle and 
dense. Amongst these two, the dense or form is matter, the subtle acts as life. 
The subtle kind of matter always animates the visible dense form : “from that” 
—other than that called or classified as subtle, namely, the gross is called 

matter, because it alone has a form. jjfcT Murtih form, made of the five ele¬ 

ments. q^ Eva, alone, tfif: Ray ill, food, matter, Bharati. 

5. The Prana verily entered the Sun and the Rayi entered the 
Moon. All this verily is well-known as matter (Rayi) whether it is subtle 
or dense. Among these, The dense) is the form (and) is alone called 
matter ; (while the subtle acts as the indwelling life of the dense.)—5. 

Note .—This verse is differently interpreted by Sankara and Ramanuja Schools. 
These are given below :—Prana entered into Aditya, the Sun, hence sun itself is called 
the Prana. The Lord created the Sun, and the Prana entered into it. Or Aditya literally 
means “ created in the beginning”—adi, beginning. The “ first creation.” Prana is the 
first creation of the Lord, and lienee called Aditya. 

The enjoyer is verily the Spirit and the matter alone is the (joy-giver). Matter 
verily is this all, whatever is gross or subtle. Out of these (two) the form alone is gene¬ 
rally called matter, the subtle is not so termed.—(Ramanuja School.) 

The Sun is verily the Prana, and Moon is the Rayi. The Rayi certainly is this all— 
whatever is visible or invisible. (Different) from that classified as (invisible), the form, 
(or the visible) alone is (however generally called).—Rayi (Sankara). 

Mantra 6. 

STT^TT- 

i 

t^tt sramfer 

n * u 

ggp* Atlia, now, therefore, because, snt^r: Adityah, Sun, soul or Jiva, the 
enjoyer. The Prana whose abode is the Sun. Udayan, arising on awak¬ 

ing from deep sleep, ^ift Yat, when. qpEff Pracbim, east, front, fist Rigam, quar¬ 
ter, portion (of the body), Praviiati, enters, pervades, illumines. 

Tena. by that (self-pervasion), for this reason. sn^F^ Prachyan, eastern, 
objects in front of one, the sensory organs in the front part. Presiding deities 
ol eastern quarter. Pranas, sense organs, like sight, &c. STOPf Pranan, the 
Pranas. Rasmisu, in the rays, in the rays of consciousness. San- 

nidhatte, upholds, presides over, or directs, Yat, when or because. ^l%fOT 
Daksinam, south, right side of the body, Yat, when, because, Pratl- 

chim, west, organs on the back side. ^cr Yat, when, because. Udichim, 

20 




150 


PRASNA-UPANlSAD. 


north, on the left side, qx, Yat, when, because, sp*: Adhah, down, q* Yat, when, 
gjs’d Urdhvam, above, Yat, when, because. Antara, in the middle, f^j: 

Disah, quarters, or portions, gn Yat, when, because. ^ Sarvam, all. JT^rsaatTlr 
Prakasayati, he illumines. Tena, by that (all illumination) thereby, 
Sarvau, all (quarters), stmupt Pranan, Pranas, senses, Rasmisu, in rays, 

in consciousness. Sannidhatte, pervades, upholds. 

6. Kow (when the Prana in the) Sun on rising illumines the 
eastern quarter, it upholds m its rays the wardens of the eastern quarter 
(Agni and Indra with their consorts', when it enters the south, then it 
upholds the wardens of the south (Yama and Kirriti with their respective 
consorts), when it enters the west, it upholds the wardens of the west 
(Varuna and Vftyu and their respective consoits), when it enters the north, 
then it upholds the wardens of the north (Soma and Tsana with their 
respective consorts), when it enters the nadir, it upholds the wardens of 
the nether world (Sesa and Mitra and their consorts) when it enters the 
zenith it upholds the wardens of the upper world (Vindra, and Kama and 
their consorts) ; when it enters the middle quarters (the intermediate 
between the above) then it upholds the Prapas of those quarters. It up¬ 
holds all Pranas in its rays.—6. 

IVote.—Because the Sun, on rising, enters the eastern quarter, therefore by that per¬ 
vasion he draws up into (his) rays the eastern Pranas, because he illumines the south, 
because west, because north, because above, because middle, because all quarters he illu- 
miues, therefore, by that ( illumination) he draws into his rays all Pranas,—(e a nkara.) 

JS T ow because the Soul, on awaking, enters the frontal sense organs (eyes, &c.) thereby 
(it) directs or brings into activity, these senses (that perceive the objects) in front (of one) 
through its rays (of consciousness); because it enteis the senses on the right side, there¬ 
by it directs those senses to apprehend objects on one’s right band, because it enters the 
organs iu the back, on the left, in the down, on the above, the middle, in all parts, thereby, 
it brings into activity through its rays (of life) the various organs.—(Ramanuja School). 

For when the sun on rising enters the eastern quarter then he supports by liis rays 
the creatures in the cast, when he enters the south, the west, the north, the upper and 
middle quarters, he illumines thereby all portions and supports by his rays, all life. 

Mantra 7. 

^ i ciqdf : iivsii 

Sah, lie, the Invisible (Prajapaii). qq - : Esali, tins (visible), qJtdrd*: 
Vaisvanarah, Vaisvanara, the Sun, the Lord of all men, the self of all Jivas. 
The leader of all men. All-soul. VisvarOpah, all-foim, all-body, full. 

npjT: Pranah, the Prana, the Sun. =sn?j: Agnih, the fire, the destroyer, the 
Leader, the eater, Udayate, arises, Pat, that, qd^ Etat, this, 

Richa, b) the hymn, Abhyuktam, has been said, lias been clearly 

described or alluded to. 

7. He, called Vai^vanara, the All-form, the Life, arises as Fire : 
this is described in the following verse.—7. 





/ PRASNA , 8. 


151 


Note .—That (Invisible) i s t liis (Visible) sun, the Self or totality of all jivas and of 
all forms ; the life, the death. He arises. He by this hymn has been described.—(Sankara). 

He (Prajapati) is this Leader of all men, pervades all bodies, is the Prana and the 
Agni. He arises. He is described by this (following) hymn.—(Ramanuja School.) 

That (Invisible) is this (Visible) Sun, the Self or totality of all jivas and of all forms : 
the life, the death. He arises. He by this hymn has been described.—(Sankara.) 

He (Prajapati) is this Leader of all men, pervades all bodies, is the Prana and the 
Agni. He arises. He is described by this (following) hymn.— (Ramanuja School). 

The sun illumines the whole worl<J and thus, is in a way, the Lord of creatures, 
a Prajapati. Moreover the Sun is the abode of the All-form, the great Agni, namely, 
the Prana. The Sun is called Vaisvanara, because he is connected with the activities 
o all men- all the activities such as heating, cooking, drying, &c., are possible, because 
of the Sun. He verily is the Life of the World. 

Mantra 8 . 

WTT 3&TR: 3RT: llqll 

Visvarupam, the all-form, the self of all form, the pervader of 
all bodies, the omnipresent. fRof Harinam, full of rays, Hari (ttj is archaic). 
Madhva reads it as Karinam “full of rays.” The all-knower, the source of all 
knowledge, the cause of creation, maintenance and dissolution, the knower 
of all that are born, the producer of all-knowledge. Jatavedasam, 

omniscient, the knower (Vedas) of all beings that are born (Jata). 
Parayanam, the final goal, the desired, the highest refuge of all beings. 3 ^%: 
Jyotih, the light, all-illuminator, Ekam, one, the chief, the secondless. 

Tapantam, the heat-giver, the producer of vital heat, (as jatharagni), 
through body. ^^rcrwSahasrarasmih, thousand-rayed, possessing knowledge 
of manifold things and having infinite energy. SHTH ^atadha, in hundred ways, 
manifold, existing in various forms, eg , Devas, men, &c. Vartamanah, 

existing, obeying the command of Hari. STfur: Pranab, the spirit (like the Sun 
of the microcosm), upholder. srsTHTHT Prajanam, of beings, in creatures. 
udayati, arises, awakes from Susupti sleep or awakes at the dawn of a new 
kalpa. ijq*: Esah, this. Suryah, Sun, the jiva compared to the Sun. 

8. He, this Sun, arises, the Self of all forms, full of rays, the omni¬ 
scient, the final end, the light, the one, the heat-giver, the thousand-rayed, 
the life of all beings, existing in a hundred ways. —8. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Vayu dwelling in the Sun takes up all the spirits of various quarters and makes 
them enter into his rays. The spirits or the Pranas of the east are Indra and the rest, 
of the south, are the Yama and the rest, of the west, are the Yaruna, and the rest, of 
the north, are the Soma, and the rest: Sesa and Mitra are the pranas of the nadir, Vindra 
and Kama of the zenith. Four are in each quarter, counting their consorts and the 
intermediate quarters. 

(Note.—Thus Indra and his consort, and the ruler of the Intermediate quarter and 
his consort are in the east. So on with other quarters). 







152 


PRASNA-UPANISA D. 


The All-form, the radiant, the omniscient, the highest goal, the one-light, the 
heat-giver, the thousand-rayed, cxi ting in hundred ways, the life of (all) creatures, 
(behold ! ) this Sun arises.—(Ramanuja School). 

In obedience to Hari, the Omnipresent, the Omniscient, the Supremely desired, 
the Light, the Second-less, the all-nourisher, (behold) this (jiva) the (real) life in all 
creatures of hundreds of kinds, having thousand jays (of intelligence) arises (from its 
Susupti or Pralayic sleep) (like another) Sun.—(Ramanuja School). 

Mantra 9. 

qr%t!T I qq f q n s. n 

Samvatsara, a year ; the Supreme Self in the form of continuous 
break-less Time. % Vai, verily. Prajapatih, the Lord of creatures ; 

Hiranya-garbha. rfTO Tasya, his. Ayane, two Paths or courses. ^(%xfr 

Daksinam, southern. =q- Cha, and. 3 tK Utiaram, rorthern. ^ Cha, and. 

rTF^Tat, that, therefore, in them (Brahmanas, &c.) amongst them (the aspi¬ 
rants). q Ye, who. ^ Ha, verily. % Vai, indeed. Tat, that (karma). 
Istapurte, religious (sacrifices, &c.) and gocd (secular) acts; sacrifices 
and gifts. Ishta-Desire : Purta, fulfilment, Kritam, done, accomplished. 

Work ; goal or deed, ffid 1 1i, alone. Hpasate, perform, desiring the fruits; 

worship. % Te, they (the Devotees of sacrifices and gcod deeds.) 
Chandramasafn, the lunar. q^ Evadokam, only the world, ^nvt*T3;% Abhija- 
yante, fully attain, reach. % Te, they (who have reached moon). q^ Eva, alone 
(and not others; 5^: Punah, again (in another birth). Avartante, 

return (to this earth and are born, according to their Karinas). rpqr?t Tasmat, 
therefore, Ete, these (followers of Karma Path). Risayah, sages, 

seers, short-sighted, srsu^rqr: Prajakamal), desirous of offspring. Desirous 
of small fruits like svarga, Sec. Daksinam, the southern (leading to the 

moon the path ot smoke, See.) Pratipadyante, obtain, qq- Esa, this 

(moon, world). ^ Ha, verily, q Vai, indeed, uq: R. O' 1 h, rayi, food, the place 
of objective enjoyment. 3: Yah, which, Piiri-yfina, pitriyanah, the 

Path of the Pitris. 

9. The Year is as the Lord of Beings. Of it there are two Paths, 
the northern and the southern : they who perform acts, desiring fulfilment, 
reach the path of the moon, and return again : those knowing ones, desirous 
of offspring, obtain the southern path ; this Path is that of Pravj itti and is 
called the Pitriyana.—9. 

Note. —The Great Year verily is the Lord of creatures, of it, there are two Halves— 
the downward arc and the upward. Among them the egos who think “ that the fulfilment 







I PRA&NA, 10. 


153 


of Desires is their work” they only enter into the downward sweep or the lunar world, 
htey alone again come back to acquire experience, being new souls. Therefore these souls 
because desiring to procreate, enter the Downward Path of evolution. This Path is verily 
Rayi, Matter, which is called Pitri-yana. 

Among the aspirants, those who desire offspring, desire fruit other than tlio moksa, 
who perform sacrifices, and make gifts—namely who are devoted to Karma, go by Pitr-i- 
yana, the southern Path. They reach the Lunar World. When the reward of the Karma is 
enjoyed, they come back for re-incarnation. As Rayi is the presiding deity of the moon, 
they are under the moon. Thus Rayi»is the Pitri-yana. 

Mantra io. 

qJIRrTRR fofiqRqq SRTqi: \\ \o \\ 

Atha, next. SvTRT Uttarena, by the upward or northern, rR^r 
Tapasa, by austerity, Brahmacharyena, by celibacy, Sraddhaya, 

by faith. R?Rr Vidyaya, by knowledge. ^TTcRR* Atmanam, the Self, the 
Prana, the Sun, the upholder of the universe. The Supreme Self. 

Anvisya, having sought, or known, ^rfs^q Adityam, the Sun. Abhija- 

yante, obtain, qcR Etat, this. % Vai, verily. qr*ZTRR Prananam, of Pranas 
or senses of all living beings, like Indra, &c. ^T3?R*1 Ayatanam, the reservoir, 

the support of Indra, &c. qcTfj Etat, this. Amritam, immortal, free 

from nescience; indestructible, Abhayam, fearless, (no fear of rebirth, 

or like moon, the fear of increase and decrease), q?R Etat, this, q^jrj 
Parayanam, the Great Path or goal. T he refuge (even of the) Great ones 
(or Muktas). qcTRTcf Etasmat, from this. ^ Na, not. Punai Avartante, 

again they do (not) return. ff% 1 ti, thus, qq-; Esali, this, Nirodhah, 

obstacle (to rebirth). The cessation. The Ring Pass Not, cessation (of expe¬ 
riences), destruction (of Desires), liberation. T he stopper from rebirth of those 
who have reached Him. Fat, about it (the two Paths), qq*: Esali, this 

(following). Siokah, (is a) hymn. 

10. Others again by tapas, by Brahmachaiya, by earnestness, by 
knowledge, having known the Self, obtain the Sun by the northern path ; 
this verily is the container of all beings, this is the Indestructible, this is 
the Fearless, (or this is the Supreme path): from this they return not, for 
it is cessation. Of that there is this verse. —10. 

Note .—Next (after acquiring the experiences of the downward sweep, these egos) 
through the upward are, through austerity, celibacy, faith, knowledge, seeking the Self, 
enter the Sun. This verily is the reservoii’ of all Pranas. That is Immortal, Fearless, 
the goal of the Great ones, from this they do not comeback. This is the Nirodha or 
cessation. About it is this verse. 






154 


PRASNA-UPA NISA D. 


Mantra ii. 

q^qr^ NcR ^Tq^TTf^ fqq ^T|: q> ^ gf n q^ II 
^q\ fq^qrqi ^H=q% q^r HWmfcm s * n 

< 7 >^rq Panchapadam, Five-footed. Five seasons are five feet. The five 
years called Samvatsara, Parivatsara, Idavatsara, Anuvatsara, Vatsara, Or 
Time, Agni, Adity a, Chandrama, and Vavu. t fqcT* Pitaram, Father, Creator of 
all. Protector of creatures. Dvadasakritim, Twelve-faced or limbed. 

The twelve months. The Devas of the twelve months are his faces or form. 
f%q: Divah, beyond, or than the Dyu world ; i.e . 9 beyond Bhuli and Bhuvah ; 
te , 9 in the third world or Swar; beyond the antariksa : (beyond) Heaven 
or Svarga ^rrf: Ahuh, the } 7 say (the knowers of Time) or some karmavadins. 
<PC Pare, in another, in the high, or summit, on the other side, somewhat 
towards south. ^ Ardhe, place. £??fqTTrt£ Purisinam, having water. The cause 
of rain. Purisa is the name of that covering of the cosmic egg (Brahmanda) 
which is in contact with the region of gold. He who dwells in Purisa is called 
Puiisin. Atha, on the other hand, fq Ime, these (knower of Time-cycles.) 

Anye, other (than tliose mentioned above.) The jnanins as opposed to 
the above. 3 U, also, or, certainly, but. Pare, others (qualifying anye). 
Excellent; somewhat towards north. On the other side, fq^^T^j Vichaksanam, 
all-wise ; omniscient, skilful, free from all accidents, skilfully fixed ; immoveably 
the wise, jnanins. Saptachakre, in the seven-wheeled ; the (seven- 

horsed sun ; the seven chhanclas, ?>., Gayatri, Tristubh, Jagati, Anustubb, 
Pankti, Brihati, and Knkudmati. Or the reading may be 44 sarpa ” serpent : in 
the serpent-wheel or cycle, /'. c. } moving like the undulatory snake). ( The 
seven Planets), seven-horsed, Sadare, in six-spoked, the six seasons, 

qng: Ahuh, (they) say. Ai pitam, placed, founded, inserted, fixed, settled, 

residing. ff% 1 1i, thus. See Rig Veda, 1 . 164. 12, for this mantra. 

11. Some (performers of Kninya works) say (that the place they 
reach is that presided over by the God of Rain)—Puiisin (situated some¬ 
what towards the) south of the Heaven, which the Sun, the five-footed, 
twelve-faced Protector, crosses over in his southern course seated in his 
seven-horsed, six-spoked (ear). Rut the others; (the jnfmins) say that 
(their place is) on the other side of Heaven (which the Sun crosses when 
in the north).—11 

Some (k arm a-va dins) call him the five-footed Father with twelve-faces (or forms), 
dwelling in Purisa, in a high place beyond the Ryu (Heaven). But while these others call 
him the omniscient, seated in an excellent seven-wheeled, and six-spoked (chariot). 

Some call Him “Purism” the Father, having five feet and twelve forms, dwelling 
beyond the Heaven, in a high place ; whilst these other excellent (people) call Him “ Vi- 
chakshaua” seated in a seven-horsed, six-spoked chariot. — (Uamannja School). 

Some call him (the Year) the father : moving with five-feet, twelve-faced, living be¬ 
yond and in the higher place, with water. Others (again call) him all-wise set with 
seven wheels, having six spokes. 






1 PRASNA, 13. 


155 


[ I have given above the meaning generally ascribed to this verse by the commenta¬ 
tors. But may not the five-footed father mean the Prana having five feet or modes of mo¬ 
tion, namely, prana, apana, vyana, samaua and \idana — the sensory, the assimilative, the 
circulatory, the respirator}’ and the hypnotic functions. See Chapter II, v. 3. The six 
spokes are also mentioned in that chapter further on in verse G ; namely, tfik, Yajus, Sa- 
man, Yajna, Ksattra, and Brahma. The twelve faces are the twelve aspects of Prana in 
the tweleve kinds of souls or Jivas. The seven wheels are the seven Iaj’a centres through 
which theTrana passes. If it be applied to the year metaphorically, then the year should 
mean Brahma’s year, one Cyclic period of manifestation. This manifestation takes place 
on five planes ; it has twelve aspects and seven incarnations of the wheels and spokes.] 

Mantra 12. 

^7: IP fTT II ^ II 

Masah, month (of th'rty days.) % Vai, verily. Prajapatili, 

Lord of creatures, Tasya, its. ^TTrq^: Krisnapaksah, Dark-half, the wan¬ 
ing fortnight of the moon, trq Eva, indeed, alone, Ray ill, Ravi, Suk- 

lah, white. qnjj: Pranab, prana, Tasmat, therefore (because they see 

the prepondei auce of Prana in the white half), Ete, these. Risayali, 

seers (of Mantras), wise. ufS Sukle, in the white half. Istam, sacrifices, 
ail auspicious works. Worship of Prana without desire of fruit. Kurvanti, 

do, perform Itare, others, (not seers, but ignorant). Itarasmin, 

in the other half The Kamya works are performed in dark half : the 
niskama works in the bright half. 

12. The month is verily the Lord of creatures ; its dark half in¬ 
deed is Rayi, its bright half is Prana. Therefore these seers perform all 
auspicious works in the bright half ; the ignorant others, in the dark 
other half.—12 

Note, - The Lord of Beings is as the month : the dark fortnight of it is as Prakrit i, 
the light fortnight is cis Purusa. Hence wise ones perform sacrifices in the light half, 
others in the other half. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Lord dwells in the year: in the winter half dwells His Sarasvati aspect, in the nor¬ 
thern or summer half, His Prana aspect. The Lord dwells in the month. I 11 the Bright fort¬ 
night is His Prana aspect, in the Dark fortnight, is His Saraswati aspect. The Lord 
dwells in the day and night. His Prana aspect is in the day, His Saraswati aspect is in 
the night. 

Mantra 13. 

't STT^ft TTTTO UT: 5TO 

WZZjft t&t n n n 






156 


PRASNA-UPANISAD. 


^rtnr^: Ahor&trah, day and night (a period of thirty MuhQrtas whose du¬ 
ration is different in the cases of men, Pitris, Devas and Brahma). % Vai, 
verily. Prajapatih, Lord of creatures, cRzt Tasya, its (Day-Night). 

Ahah, day. inuj: Pranah, prana, qq Eva, indeed. *nif: Ratrih, night. 
Rayih, Rayi. qnqq Pranam, prana, life, vitality. % Vai, verily. q% Ete, those. 

Praskandanti, discharge, omit; dry up, force out, expel, ij Ye, who, 
f^r Diva, in the daytime, Ratya, by intercourse with women. ^313^ 

Samyujvante, are connected. Brahmacharyam, celibacy, qq Eva, 

certainly, indeed. rT£ Tad, that. ^ Yad, which, u^JT Ratrau, in night time. 
im; Ratya, by intercourse. Samyujyante, are connected. 

13. Day-and-Night is verily the Lord of creatures. Its day (poi- 
tion is) Prana indeed, and night is Rayi. Verily those waste their vitality 
who enjoy love by day. Indeed it is celibacy who enjoy love by night.—13. 

Note .— To complete tlie context we must insert after “night is Rayi,” the following, 
“ The husbancl-ancl-wifo is Lord of creatures. The husband is Prana, the wife is Rayi.” 

Mantra 14. 

fTST 'I f q SRT: 

5F5TT*RT ffa U II 

^ Annam, food. % Vai, verily, Prajapatih, Lord of creatures. 

rfrT: Tatah, from that (food). 5 Ha, verily. % Vai, indeed, cpr Tat, that. 
Retail, seed or semen. u*qpr TasniAt, from (semen). f*?r: lmah, these, q^tr: 
Prajah, creatures. Prnjayante, are born. ffar bi, thus. 

14. Food verily is Lord of creatures, from it verily is produced 
tlie seed, from it all these creatures are produced.—14. 

Mantra 15. 

qqfaqq qqf srfafeqqlinn 

Pat, there (in this world). Among creatures. ^ Ye, who. ^ Ha, 
indeed. % Vai, verily. cP* Pat, that (above-mentioned). qwqfapffi Prajapati- 
vratam, the vow of Prajapati : the approaching the wife in due season, as 
Prajapati Manu did with Satarupa. Eating (vrata = vrita = bbaksana) of food 
(prajapati of the last verse). Given to consumption of food in a large quantity, 
and devoid of abstemiousness. The works (vrata) of Prajapati. Charanti, 

follow, know. % Tc, they, Mithunam, pair, male and female: beings. 

Fathers of good children. Utpadayante, produce. Tesam, 

theirs, qq Eva, indeed, qqi Esah, this. Bralunalokah, brahma-world. 

Moon-world. Satya loka. sjqr Yesam, whose, qq: Tapani, austerity, the 
vow of a Snataka, mind and sense-control. Brahniacharyam, celibacy. 

213 Yesu, in whom (followers of Nivritti Path), Satyam, Truthfulness. 

Pratisthitam. is established, firmly fixed as a law. 













IV PRASNA, 16. 


157 


15. Among them verily, those indeed, who know the abovemen- 
tioned works of God (prajapati) become fathers of good children ; by them 
alone (is attainable) this Satya-loka,—by them, who practise austerity and 

celibacy, in whom truth is fixed as a law—15. 

Note .—Here verily who follow the above law of Prajapati (law of procreation) they 
alone produce pairs. Theirs indeed is this Moon-world. Theirs is that Brahma-world— 
theirs in whom no crookedness or falsehood or deceit doth reside and who practise 
austerity and celibacy, and in whom truth is firmly established. 


MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Lord Visnu dwells in the husband and wife—Yayu dwells in the husband, Saras- 
vati in the wife. He who knows thus gets Release. Thus we find in tho Prajapati Sam- 
hita. 


Mantra i6. 


v r\ 








^ ^* mm m % iihii 

sr«ms srtj ii l ii 

Tesam, theirs (devotees of austerity, celibacy and truth), Asau, 

that (above-mentioned Sun-Path), Virajah, Rajas-free, pure, unalloyed, 

free from increase and decrease like the moon. Non-Prakritic. Faultless. 

Brahinalokah, Brahma-loka. ^ Na, not. qq; Yesu, in whom, nrgj 
Jihmam, crookedness. Anritam, not-righteousness, falsehood. Na, not. 

mm Maya, hypocrisy : dissimulation, deceit, m Cha, and. ffW Iti. thus. 

16. Theirs is that pure Brahma-loka—theirs iu whom there is no 
crookedness, nor falsehood, nor any dissimulation.—16. 

Note .—Thus the First Prasna describes the Seven Prajapatis or Creative Logoi 
arranged in a descending order, and each giving rise to a pair. These seven Prajapatis 
and the pairs belonging to them are shown below 




Prajapatis . 
First Prajapati 
Second ,, 
Third „ 
Fourth „ 

Fifth „ 

Sixth „ 
Seventh „ 


Name . 

The Great Cause 
The Great Space 
The Great Time 
The Mann or Month 
The Day-Night or Deva... 


Pair . 

The Prana ... The Rayi. 

The Sun ... The Moon. 

The Ascending Arc... The Descending Arc. 

The Bright half The Dark half. 

The Day ... The Night. 


The Husband-Wife or Man The Husband ... The Wife. 

The Food or Mineral, &e. The Sperm ... The Germ. 


The above hierarchy of seven shows how these Prajapatis havo each their respective 
spheres : from the guardian angels of the Physical plane and of the human and the Deva, 
plaues, and then the plane of the Manus or Risis, the plaue of the Year or the Great Time 
or the Planetary Logoi, the plane of the Great Space or Adityas, the sons of Infinity or 
the Solar Logoi of different solar systems, and the last plane of the Most High or the 
Absolute or Yisnu. 


21 






Second Prasna. 

Mantra i. 

whtT It ^t^F^N^TT: 

g^N 1 fftnmi 

Atha, then, next. ? Ha, indeed, qfjw Euam, him (Pippalada). vrpfa: 
Bhargavah, Bhargava. fNpf: Vaidarbhih, of Vidatbha. qtre^ Paprachchha, 
asked, vtn^ Bhagavan, O Master ! O Venerable One ! sfiRf Kati, how many, 
qq Eva, indeed, ^t: Devab, gods, senses, organs. sr^TT Prajam, creatures. 
OTTO Vidbarayante, uphold. ^ Katare, how many of them (whether 
Devas or non-Devas). qrpj Etat, this (body). Prakasayante, manifest, 

illumine. That is, through the instrumentality of what Devas, does the Lord 
preserve these creatures, and make them know the external world, g;: Kali, 
who. 3?r: Punali, again, qsff Esim, among these (Devas), who support and 
illumine, qfis: Varisthah, the greatest. hi, thus. 

1. Then Bliargava Vaidarbhi asked him, “0 Master, how many 
Divinities support the creatures, how many of them illumine them. And 
again who amongst them is the highest.”— 17. 

iVote.—The question is three-fold. What energies or devas support the body; what 
energies or devas illumine it or are involved in the acts of sensation and cognition. 
Lastly, what is the highest. In the first chapter, it was taught that the Lord created 
all Including Prana and Itayi. After the creation, comes preservation . The questions that 
now follow relate to this. The Prana has been declared to be the best, that statement 
would be established now in the subsequent questions and answers. 

Mantua 2. 

TfefT $rHr ^ I % 

II R II 

Tasmai, to him. *r: Sail, lie (Pippalada). ^ Ha, indeed. Uvacha, 

said. Akasah, Ether. The deva presiding over ether. This is illus¬ 

trative of earth, &c„ />., the deities of all elements subtle and gross.— All tattva 
devas. 3 Ha, indeed. % Vai, verily, qq 1 : Esalj. this. He supports the crea¬ 
tures. 1 &: Devah, Deva. “ Swift-moving. M qfg: Vayuh, air. The ele¬ 
mental air. ^rfSr: Agnili, fire, Apah, water. Prithivi, earth. 

Vak, speech (and the four other organs of action — hand, feet, rectum, 
membrum (virili). *h: Manah. mind, the inner organ—the four-fold antaiikarana. 





II PRA&NA, 3. 


159 


Chaksuh, the eye. £>rotram, the ear. ^ Cha, and. % Te, they. The two 
kinds of the devas —these who support and those who illumine, Prakasva, 

having manifested (their greatness) openly) loudly. Another reading isprakasyab 
'luminous’ Abhivadanti, dispute among themselves : began to speok } 

compete with each other. The force of abhi is to denote " loudly. ” 
Vayam, we. qq?j Etat, this. 3THJ Banam, reed , shaft, body , lit., that which 
carries bad odour, or that which undergoes decomposition; arrow . 
Avastabhya, supporting, entering into. jw^PT. Vidharayfimah (we) uphold 
and manifest. 

2. To him he said : Ether verily, and this always moving the 
air, fire, water, earth, speech, mind, eye and ear (are the Devas). They, 
the Shining Ones once loudly disputed with each other saying: We 
(alone) uphold this body, by supporting it—18. 

Note. —The dharaka or the Supporter is Akasa or the divinity of ether or space ; so 
also vayu, fire, &c. These are the substances which support the body— they are the 
dharaka devatas. They here refer to the five dense elements and their subtle Tanma- 
tras. The prakasa devas are the eye, ear, &c., the devas of sight, hearing, &c. The Vayu 
of this verse means the elemental air, and not the first-born or the chief Prana. 

MARTA’S COMMENTARY. 


In this verse by Vayu is meant the elemental air : while Prana denotes the chief 
air or the first-begotten. 

Mantra 3. 

mrk mTPTTtftfrT II 3 II 

<TPI. Tan, to them (thus conceited), qftg: Varisthah, the sepreme, the 
best, the principal. sm>j: Pranah, Prana. sqpq UvScha, said, rtr Ma, do not. 
HR* Moham, delusion, wrong knowledge, thinking that you are the supporter 
and illuminer. =OT*EI Apadya, fall into. qpq- Atha, because. Aham I. 

iif Eva, alone, Etat, this (self), Panchadha, in five ways (by dividing 

myself into Prana, ApSna, Vyana, SamSna and UdSna). Atmanam 

myself, Pravibhajya, having divided Etat, this, 5^3 Banam' 

body. Avastabhya, supporting, VidharaySmi, uphold". I t j’ , 

thus. 

3. The chief Prana said to them, “Do not fall into (this) error. 

I indeed, dividing this self (of mine; into five parts, uphold this body by 
supporting it.” They, however, did not believe him—19. 

Note .—The chief Prana spoke to them who were thus contending, “ Why have you 
fallen into this error, each thinking that he supports or illumines this body. It is I who 
dividing myself five-fold in this body, support it aud illumine it.” The other Devashow- 
eyer did not believe him. 





160 


PRASNA-UPANTSAD. 


Mantra 4. 

^SSf^THT ST® I 3^1- 

^ q^TIWlTfR l STT^^R *Hl 

^ STTc^ I cR’TT *TT%^T ^q^RRfJ^ETOR ^T 

u^nrr^^sr rt%shr ^t srfcTH cf q# 

^TffRST^;: ^ ^ I ^ rfTrTT: ITO *$prfer II 2 II 

% Te f they (ether, &c). %T»TfqTqr Asracldadhanah, disbelievers. ^5: 
Babhuvuh, became, ^r: Sah, lie (the Principal Prana). 3TPtaRT<( AbhimAn&t, 
through pride or wounded self-respect; from the body; abhimana means body, 
because it is the chief object of one’s self-conceit. 3^qq Ordhvam, upwards 
(above the 108 vital centres). Utkramatah, going out. fq lva, as if. 

cTR*T^ Tasmin, in him (By Prana’s). By his (case absolute). Utkramati, 

going out. ^ Atha, then, fcft Itare, others. ^q Sarve, all. qq Eva, indeed. 
3c^FR?% Utkramante, began to go up or out. cfR^ Tasmin, in him. ^ Cha, and. 
RRS*IR Pratishthamane, remaining, ^q Sarve, all. qq Eva, indeed. qRg% 
Pratisthante, remain cR Tat, that, there, Yatha, as. Maksikali, 

bees: the honey making bees. Madhukara Rajanam, bee-king. The 

Queen bee. Utkramantam, going out. ^qr: Sarvah, all. qq Eva, indeed. 

Utkramante, go out. Tasmin, in him, by his. ^Cha, and. qRg*TR 

Pratisthamane, remaining, ^rqf: Sarvah, all. qq Eva, certainly. qRgyq Pratis¬ 
thante, remain, qq Evam, thus, qiq^ Vak, speech. Manah, mind. 

Chaksuh, eye. Srottam, ear. ^ Cha, and. % Te, they. qfrTf: Pritali, being 
satisfied, or delighted (because convinced of the greatness of Prana, and its 
sole power to support the body). gr*ir Pranam, pranam. *gqf?q Stuvanti, praise. 

4. They however, did not believe him. lie (thereupon) began, as 
if to go out of the body, moving upwards. As he goes out, all the others 
indeed begin to go out: on his remaining, all others remain, (in the body). 
As the Queen-bee going out, all bees indeed go out (of the hive) her 
remaining, all indeed remain, thus (it was with) the speech, mind, eye and 
ear. They being satisfied praise Prana thus: — 

Note - He then through pride, began as if to go out from the body, movingupwards. 
By his going out, all these indeed began to go out also, for in him all stand. And as all 
bees go out when the Queen-bee goes out, and all remain when she remains, thus it is with 
speech, mind, eye and ear. They being satisfied praised Life thus.—(Sankara). 

When the devas showed their incredulity at the assertion of the chief Prana, tho 
latter, in order to convince them, began, as if, to go out of the body. Madhya takes tho 
word “ abhimana ” to mean “body.” It generally means ‘pride.’ According to Sankara, 
Prina felt hurt when the Devas disbelieved him, and through wounded pride began to go 
out of the body. According to Madhva, abhimfina lias not this meaning. 










II PRASNA, 7. 


161 


Mantra 5. 

qqrsrq*qq<qq ^ qq, q^?q> qqqfqq qr^q 
qrqqr uq^q: =q ^ 11 * n 

trq-; Esah, this (Prana is). ^f£r: Agnih, fire. rfqra Tapati, heats, burns. 
q*T Esah, this (is), ng: Suryali, sun (illumines) qq: Esah, this (is), 
Parjanyah, the Rain (rains). ( This being), Maghavan, Maghavan (pro¬ 

tects the creatures), qq: Esah, this (is), qrg: Vayuh, air. qq: Esah, this (is). 

Prithivi, earth. *f®T: Rayih, Rayi (moon). qq: Devah, air. the Shining 
One. u The Deva, Rayi or Moon.” Sadasat, Being and non-being; form 

and form-less. =q Cha, and, (Nescience) too. Amritam, immortal. The 

released souls. =q Cha, and. ajq Yat, what (is). 

5. This as Agni burns, this as the Sun illumines, this as Parjanya 
rains, Indra this, Yayu this, Earth, Rayi, Deva, form and formless, and 
what is immortal.—21. 

Note .—This Prana is all energy, wherever it is found, whether in the sun, or fire, 
or rain or wind, or gravity, subtle or gross. He is the Released souls also. 

Mantra 6. 

fq srrqf m srr%fl^ 1 
qjqr qwq hwth q^: qrq s^r =q w i u 

Ara, spokes, qq Iva, as. ^qrnf Rathanabhau, in the nave of chariot 
(wheel). qr$f Prane, in Prana. 3’q Sarvain, all. qrqf^qq Pratisthitam, is establish¬ 
ed. qfq: Richah, the Rik Veda, Yajuilisi, the Yajur Veda. emrR Satnani, 

the Sama Veda. gjq: Yajnab, the sacrifice. qjiq Ksattram, power, king. 
Brahma, wisdom, priest. =q Cha, and. 

6. As the spokes in the nave of a chariot-wheel, so in Prafia are all 
fixed—the Rik, Yajus and Sama A 7 edas, the Sacrifice, Power and Wisdom, 
— 22 . 

Mantra 7. 

srsrrqfrfsjTfe qu <qqq qfcRtqu 1 

§*q qTW: qsrrfeqqr qfir fifcr q: qrir. qfrTUTSm llvsil 

snuqfq* Prajapatih, the Lord of creatures, whose body is the Triloki; 
the Virat. As protector of creatures thou movest in the womb, as Prana 
and other Vayus, i.e., thou makest the foetus to grow. As Daksa and 
others. Charasi, thm nmvest or walkest. Causest to grow, ipf Garbhe, 

in the womb (of the cosmic sphere) ” thou indeed being in the womb, causest 
the quickening of the foetus/’ ?qq Tvam, thou. qq Eva, alone. Prati- 

jayase, art born (as son, &c.), Thou alone dost the act of reproduction, i,e. } 




162 


PRASNA-UPANI8AD. 


emittest the child from womb, Tubhyam, for thee or thine are these crea¬ 
tures. i rnu Prana, O Prana, Prajalj, creatures. g Tu, verily. Imab, 

these (all Devas and the rest), Baiim, offering, Haranti, bring. «r: 

Yah, who. Pranaih, by Pranas. stRittoRt Pratitisthasi, dwellest, sittest 

(divided into parts) 

7. As the creator-of-beings thou qnickenest (the foetus) in the womb, 
and thou alone expellest (it from the womb when grown). Thine, 0 Prana! 
are these creatures and they bring offering (for thee), who with the (other) 
life-currents dwellest (in the body).—23. 

Note. —In the previous two mantras, the Prana has been eulogised in the third per¬ 
son. Now he is directly addressed. Thou, O Prana ! art the Prajapati such as Daksa, &o. 
Thou raovest in the womb and qnickenest the foetus : and thou he!pest the coming out of 

jb 

the Jiva from the womb. Thine are all these Devas and other croatures, because thou 
dwellest in the body and supportest it through the subordinate pranas, like the Devas of 
the eyes, &e. 

The reading in Madhva’s text is slightly different. In the second lino there is 
jjfxrr srfWfhsr^T 1 “ 0 Prana ! these creatures are thine, because thou 

dwellest in and supportest the body through the other pranas. ” 

Mantra 8. 

fqrprjf I 

SfJTTOr II q II 

Devanam, of the Devas (Indra, &c.) Asi, thou art. 

Vahnitamah, the best carrier of offerings. The Divine Fire. fq’^XOT Pitrinam, 
the Pitris (like Agnisvatta, &c.) 5 T^?rr Pratbama, the first, the best carrier of 
Svadha offerings. Svadha, Svadha oblation, thou even art the principal 

carrier of Svadba offering to the Pitris. Lit. “ self” ; qr “ to run'’—self impul¬ 
ses, emotional impressions, Risinam, of the Risis or senses like sight, &c., 

or the word should be read with athar vangirasam— i e. atharvangirasam 
risinam. ^Rq- Charitam, action, event, good conduct. Satyam, true, true 

words. Atbarvangirasffm, of Atharva-angirasa, of the body, the 

etherie (atliarva) body (ahga) fluid (rasa) or etheric (atbarva from athar-' fire’) 
fiery (angiras-fire) : ctheric-fiery senses. Asi, thou art. 

8. Thou art the best carrier (of liavis, oblations) to the Devas (in 
the Svarga) and of the Svadha, oblation to the Pitris fin the Pitriloka); 
thou art the good conduct and the true speech of the Iiisis Atliarva- 
Ahgiras (on earth) — (or thou art the carrier of true impressions to the 
senses of the body of etheric-life-flu id on earth)—24. 

Note.— Thou art the best carrier, as the Pranic mental atom, the thought- impressions 
called Svalia, to the Devas in Devachan, thou art the best carrier as the Pranic astral 
atom the desire impressions called the Primeval Svadha to the Pitris in tho astral world, 
thou art the best carrier of the impressions of the true events on the Physical Plano to 
tbP astro-etlieric senses of man on the earth. • 







163 


H PRASNA, 11. 


MANTRA 9. 

spsre# ^tsRt qfarW i 

Tjfe# sq>r%qf qr%: n s. n 

g?g: Indrah, Indra, Supreme Lord, cq Tvam, thou. 5 TTXH Prana, O Prana. 

Tejasa, by heat, or splendour: in energy, in destruction, Rudrah, 

Rudra (the destroyer, the cause of weeping). ^rnq Asi, thou art. wf^rtr 
Pariraksita, all-guardian, all protector (through thy beneficent aspect). 
Tvam, thou. qr?cin;% Antarikse, in firmament, in space, in heaven. xnr% 
Charasi, vvalkest, wanderest. SOryah the sun. The heat of the sun comes 

from Prana, so also of other stars, Jyotisam, of luminaries, of stars, as 

the sun the best of illuminers. qfq: Patih, the Lord, the chief. The superiority 
of the sun over planets is through Prana. 

9. Thou art Tndra the great ruler, 0 Prana, in thy splendour. As 
destroyer, thou art Rudra. Thou art even the All-Preserver. In heaven, 
thou movest as the Sun, the Lord of all lights— 25 . 

Note ~0 Prana ! Thou art the powerful Indra in thy splendour. Thou art Rudra— 
the beneficent All-protector. Thou art Yayu, the mover in the firmament. Thou art 
the heat of the sun, and the light that illumines all planets. Thou art the Lord of all 
lights. 

MANTRA lo. 

3TT STTO % SRT: I 

^fq^TcfrfrT II 1| 

qgT Yada, when. <cq* Tvam, thou (becoming the Rain-giver) qjRqqW 
Abhivarsasi, rainest on all sides. Atha, then, gqr: Imah, these. [qiUI 

Prfina (\ qrcu) O Prana 1 % Te, thy] or qnim Pranate, live, become vivified, inhale 
life, snip Prajali, creatures (moving and fixed — trees and animals’, 
Anandarupah, joy-formed, full of joy. fqgr?cr Tisthanti, remain, stay, and 

dwell. Kamaya, desirefull, plenteous. ^ Annain, food. Bha- 

visyati, will be. fR Iti, thus. 

10. When (as cloud) tliou rainest on all sides, then this (whole) 
creation becomes alive, and dwells full of joy, (thinking) there will be 
plenteous food—26. 

Note —If the reading be “ Prapa, te, ” the meaning would be “ Then these thy crea¬ 
tures, O Prana, rejoice.” 

MANTRA I I. 

qqHiqrer qran:: faqr <q ii %% u 








164 


PRASNA-UPANISAt). 


Vratyah, Un-initiated : (thou being the first, there was no one to 
initiate thee) />., born pure : self-pure. pTrTH#: Vratanisthafi, devoted to duty 
or vows. Immaculate. ^ Tvam, 'thou, Pranaikarisihh, O Prana ! 

Eka-risi (the famous Fire of the Atharvans). The sole-seer ; the principal 
revealer of all Mantras. ^rfr Atta, Eater y enjoyer, destroyer, like Yama, &c. 
IWW Visvasya, of the all, of the universe, Satpatih, Lord of all exist¬ 
ence ; Lord of truth. Protector of the good. Good Lord, gg Vayam, we 

(devas like ether, &c.) Adyasya, of the eatables, of enjoyables. 

Ddtarah, givers. ^sr^T: Karapradah, tribute-givers, homage-givers, servants. 
<£ 3 ^: Pujakah, worshippers. pfcU Pha, father. c 4 Tvam, thou iftrriw Mata- 
risva, O Matarisva. Nah, ours. Or Matrisvanah may be one word, meaning 
thou art father of Mdtarisvan, the elemental air. 

11. 0 Prana ! thou art the vow-devoted Ekarisi, (the Revealer of 
all the Vedas). Thou art the destroyer of the universe, and art the 
Lord of all existence as well. We are offerers of oblation (to thee, as thy 
worshippers). 0 MMtarisvan ! Thou art our Father !— 27. 

Note .—An un-initiate thou O Prana ! but the sole revealer (of all Mantras). Destroyer 
of all this universe, yet protector of the good. We are mere tribute-givers of all objects 
to thee. O Matarisvan ! thou art our father. 

MANTRA 12. 

*TT & STTcffecTT *TT UT ^ I 

m ^ mm mm mm m ^ ii ii 

Yd, what. % Te, thy. fi Tantih, body or portion (as apana vayu). 
Form. Vachi, in speech and its correlatives Fire and Earth. CTf^fSTdr 

Pratisthita, abides , is established, exists, causes the act of uttering words. 
3T Ya, what (as Vyaua Vayu). sjfir Srotre, in hearing, (and its correlatives 
Moon and Akasa). Ya, what (as Prana Vayu). ^ Cha, and. xr^jfqr Chak- 
susi, in eye (and lejas and water and food), Ya, what, (as Samana Vayu). 
xy Cha, and. Manasi, in manas. Santata, fully spread out ; existing 

as all-pervading. mm Sivam, auspicious, healthy, peaceful, fixed so that they 
may not leave their proper ."posts, rd Tam, them. ^ Kuru, do thou, make 
thou. UT Ma, do not. Utkramih, go out. 

12. What form of thine exists in the speech, what in hearing, and 
what in the eye and what in the mind is fully spread out, make them 
auspicious, (and 0 Prana) do not go out .of this body)—28. 

MANTRA 13. 

sr tw srer ^ 1 

umT sfrsr ^ ffrt 11 11 

SRT5 || ?. || 








II PR A SNA, 13. 


165 


nxur^T Pranasya, of Prana, Idam, this (universe of perception), zrj Vase, 
in control, Sarvam, all, whole. Tridive, in Triloki, in Svarga, &c. 

^ Yar, what, snared* Pratisthitam, abides, exists, *imr Mata, mother. 

Iva, like, tprpi Putran, sons. Raksasva, guard thou. ^rih, Fortune, 

wealth, prosperity. snTPTrOT^prf Praja-dharana-sobham, the glory of maintain¬ 
ing offspring - the procreating power. ^ Cha, and q^T Prajnam, wisdom. 
The power of perception. Cha, and. f%%rt Vidhehi, give thou m Nab, to us. 
Iti, thus. 

13. This whole world is under the control of Prana, and even 
what in Svarga abides. . As a mother protects her sons, so protect thou 

us. Give us bodily and mental vigour.—29. 

Note .—The Second Question deals with the powers of Prana. It is this Chief Prana 
that supports the microcosm as well as the macrocosm. He also illumines them, and is 
thus the best of all. This rivalry between the pranas and the prana is spoken of in other 
Upanisads also. See Bri. Up. YI. 1. 7 to 13 and Chli. Up. Y. 1. The superiority of Prana 
is thus a well established fact and to all devotees this only Saviour, this Eka-ftisi must 
always be an object of fervent love and gratitude. 


22 




Third Prasna. 

Mantra i. 

ZW '|?T 'W?®, I VTWfcT ^ 

STxrft 3TRHH ^ 

srr%^ wri ^wRR?rrHT% n \ u 

Atha, next. ^ Ha, verily, qqq Enam, him (Pippalada). Kau- 

salayah, Kausalya. ^ Cha, also (called). As'valayanah, Asvalayana. 

qsTss Paprachchha, asked. vprT^ Bhagavan, O Master 1 O Venerable One ! 
Kutah, whence, from what efficient cause. From what Purtisa or Spirit, qq*: 
Esah, this (visible), qnir: Pranah (under five modifications). Jayate, is 

born, is produced. How can Prana, possessing such high and glorious powers, 
be born of any one? qjqq Katham, how, in what manner. For what purpose. 
Why such a mighty entity limit itself voluntarily into a human body, ^[qrfq 
Ayati, comes, enters, functions. Asinin, in this (dense). Sarire, 

body. ^rr^TFTq Atmanam, himself (the Principal Pi ana), ar Va, or. qfqvrsq 
Pravibhajya, having divided, Katham, how. qfqgq Pratisthate, abides. 

In what parts of the body, each one resides. Kena, by what (particular 

mode): or by what subdivision of prana, he takes hold of the Jiva at the time 
of death and goes out. Utkramate, goes out (of this body), q;q Katham, 

how, by what particular aspect of prana. Bahyam, external, (physical and 

celestial, t\e . 9 the adhibhuta and adhidaiva functions). Abhidhatte, 

upholds. Katham, how. Adhyatmam, physiological, ffq Iti, thus. 

10. Next Kausalya (called) also Asvalayana asked him. 0 Master ! 
whence is this Prana born ? How does he enter this body ? How does he 
abide dividing himself (into five parts)? By what passage does he go out 
(of the body) ? How does he uphold the external (world), and how the 
internal (body) ?—30. 

Note . — This chapter shows that the Supreme Lord is not*only the creator of the 
whole universe but as five-fold prana rales the microcosm also. 

Mantra 2. 

si 11 \ u 

cf^f Tasmai, to him. Sab, he (Pippalada). ^ Ha, verily. Uvacha, 

said, Atiprasnan, great questions, deep and difficult questions s questions 

Which arc above ordinary understanding: or not fit to ask : about mysteries 








Ill PRASNA , 3 . 


167 


that should not be probed into; good questions Prichchasi, thou askest. 

Brahmisthah, Brahma-fixed, Brahma-devoted, knowing the Vedas but 
really ignorant. “Almost a knower of iJrahman.” Who has studied and re¬ 
flected over the Vedas, can put such questions. Asi, art. lti, 

thus. rT^r^r Tasmat, therefore. ?r Te, to thee. =5^ Ah am, I. Bravimi, 

(will) tell. 

2. He replied to him : Thou askest pertinent questions, thou must 
have reflected over the Vedas to ask such questions. Therefore, I shall 
answer thee.—31 

Mantra 3. 

fTRJR qinfr I ^ 

II } tl 

A 

3 TTWT. Atmanah, from the Self: the Supreme Purusa, the Indestructible. 
Another reading is ^TTRrT: Atmatah, “from the Self, t\e. t the Supreme Lord.” trq-: 
Esah, this, mighty Prana even is secreted by the Lord. qmj: Pranah, Prana 
(five-fold). Jayate, is born. ^ Yatha, as. trqr Esa, this. 5^ Puruse, in 
man (in the human body). The Jiva. ©T^rChhaya, shadow. Etasmin, in this 

(Brahma, Prana, causal self). In this Man (Purusa). qcpT Etat, this (Prana-thread) 
This Manas. Atatam, is spread out, abides. Totally dependent on the body, 

through the karma arising from will. Manodhikritena, by mental act or 

by thought power, by willing and wishing, or Manas here means the Lord and 
Manas adhikritena would mean then, “ by the command of the Supreme Mind 
or Brahman." 3 rrarm Ayati, enters, srfwjr Asmin, this, Satire, body. 

3. From the Supreme Self is born this Prana. As when a man 
(walks) his shadow (also moves, no distinct effort is made to move the 
shadow, as in this man) this Manas without any effort is spread over (the 
whole body), so also the Prana (without any effort) enters this body.—32. 

Note .—The Manas and Pranas are shadows of the Jivas. They always accompany 
the Jiva, therefore no separate cause of the Pranas entering the body should be sought. 

From the Supreme Self is b«rn this Prana, as this shadow inheres in man so 
in this Brahman is this (Prana) spread out. By a mere mental act it enters this body. 

From the Supreme Self is born this Prana. As this shadow is entirely dependent on 
Man, so on this Supreme depend all these Pranas. By the command of the Great Mind 
(God), it enters the body. 


MADHAVA’S COMMENTARY. 

The words “from the Atman” mean from tha Supreme Atman, from God as in the 
Prabhanjana “ From Visnu came out Vayu, from Vayu were produced all other Shin¬ 
ing Ones, like prana, apana, &c. The first-begotten rules and commands them as a king 
commands his officers. Himself being five-fold, the Lord thus gives salvation to men.” 







168 


PRASNA-UPAmSAl). 




Mantra 4. 

qsrc 1 ^cTr^mRcrr^TT- 

ctht: 1 faRnFsrrcr 

II s 11 ' 

sr[ Yatha, as. sri? Samrat, an emperor, a sovereign. qq Eva, alone. 
^TL^rTR Adhikritan, the officials, ministers, fqRgi;# Viniyunkte, appoints. q<TR 
Etan, these. qr*TR Graman, territories. qrTPTqRI* Etan graman, these terri¬ 
tories. Adhitisthasva, rule ye over, or preside ye over. fR Iti, thus, 

qqqq Evameva, so indeed. qq: Esah this (supreme). qRT Pranah, Prana. 
^RR Itaran, others, qR3R Pranan, pranas, senses. Ppthak pritbak, 

separately, qq Eva, alone, Sannidhatte, appoints, ordains. 

4. As a king appoints liis officers (telling them) “Rule ye over these 
particular territories,” so indeed this Prana directs the inferior pranas of 
the senses to the separate objects.—33. 

Note .—Tlie pentad called Prana is of two kinds, the Higher Prana pentad and the 
Lower Prana pentad. From the Principal Prana are born as His children, the Lower 
Prana pentad. They are separate from the Prana as individual entities. The Higher 
Prana pentad is the five-fold aspect of the one and the same Prana. As they are aspects 
of the chief Prana, thoy are not separate and distinct from Him. The chief Prana (which 
always means the Higher pentad) appoints these Lower Prana pentads —prana, apana, vya- I 
na, samana and udana—each to his respective organ and function, and Himself guides them. 
Thus the Apana aspect of the chief Prana presides over the apana of the Lower pentad ; 
and so on. 

Mantra 5 . 

=q^r: srr% ctr: ^4 

g hhpt: i qq uprqfa 

rTRT^cTT: UHrfqq> VTTFrT II V. II 

Payupasthe, in the anus and the generative organ, presiding over 
the function of defaecation and micturition. Apanam, apana of the 

lower pentad governed by the Apana of the Higher. Chaksuji srotre, 

in the eye and the ear. Mukhanasikabhyam, by the mouth and 

the nose. Going out of the mouth and the nose as expiration and inspiration. 
Ctrl Pranah, prana (the supreme prana) the supreme prana of the Higher 
pentad governs and directs the prana of the Lower pentad in the organs of the 
eye, the ear, &c. *qqq Svayam, himself. qRg*T Pratisthate, presides. qtR Madh- 
ye, in the middle, in the navel, midway between the Prana sphere and apana 
sphere, g Tu, only, srr: Samanah, the Samana which equalises the seven hu- 
mois and divides all food into seven humours. The Samana aspect of the chief 


1 












Ill PR A SNA, 6. 


169 


Prana, governs the samana of the lower pentad, frq: Esah, this (samana) f| Hi, 
because, Etat, this. Hutam, offered (eaten and drunk), Annam, 

food, Samam, equally or similar. Makes the food eaten, similar to the 

tissues of the body : thus makes out of food tissues like muscles, bones, &c. 
This power of converting a heterogeneous food to a homogenous mass with 
that of the body is the function of samana or the similar-making life-energy. 

Nayati, leads, i.e. } makes it a homogeneous mass, and carries it equally 
to all parts. Tasmat, therefore. Because it equalises the food. tTrfT: 

Etah, these, the seven lights, i.e. y the two ears, the two eyes, the two nostrils 
and the one mouth or taste, all depend upon the food digested by the gastric 
fire and carried to them through the nadis. Sapfa, seven. Archisah, 

lights, the action of the Sam&na Vayu. From the gastric fire arise the seven 
flames called Kali, Karfili, Manojava, Sulohita, Sudhumravarna, SphulinginI, 
and, Visvarfichi, see Mundaka Upanisad, II These are the principal flames, 
their sub-divisions and ramifications are thousands in the body. The Vyana 
flows in them. The seven modifications of the perceptive senses or organs of 
knowledge are also called seven flames. Bhavami, become, are produced, 

manifested. 

5. The Apana Vayu presides over (1 ) defecation and (2) micturi¬ 
tion, the Prana itself presides over the (3) sight (4) hearing (5) taste and 
(6^ smelling. In the middle is indeed Samana so called) because 
it assimilates all food offered to it. Therefore, these are the seven 
lights.—34. 

Note .—This verse shows the various localities where these vayus have their resi¬ 
dence. The spheres of action of these are thus defined and distinct. Much confusion 
exists as to the proper functions of these five Vayus. But from this verse it would 
appear that apana is the vegetative or digestive function throwing out the effete matter 
from the body. Or it may be called the excretory life function. The Prana is the sensory 
life function, siucejseeing, hearing, &c., depend upon it. The samana is the assimilative 
function, by which the food taken in becomes assimilated to the tissues of the body, and 
would correspond with the lacteal circulation of the chyle. 

Mantra 6. 

m sTT^rr i dmi virt 

SRRSjffrf II i II 

fft Hridi, in the heart, where the Prana dwells in the form of Vyana, 
there the Jiva also dwells. f| Hi, certainly. <rq\* Esab, this Jivatma. ?rr^TT Atma, 
Five-fold Prana together with the Self: the Lingatma. Atra, here 
(in the heart or in the body), Etat, this Ekasatam, one hundred, 

one hundred and one. Nadinam, of the nadis. The word “ is *' should 







170 


PRASNA-UPANISAD. 


be supplied here to complete the sentence. ^Tw TasAm, amongst them, 
out of those nadis. SSatam, one hundred. ^TcRSatam, hundred, 

Ekaikasyam, of each one. 'I he principal one hundred and one nadis, have each 
a hundred sub-nadis, thus there are 10,100 sub-nadis. fRlRTcT Dvasaptatih, se¬ 
venty-two ; each sub-nftdi is divided into 72 sub-branch-nadis ; each of it 

again into 1,000 or each sub-nadi is divided into 72,000 sub-branches. qRSTRir 
Pratisakha-nadi-sahasrani, sub-branch-nadis thousands (each.) Bhavanti, 

become, Asu, in them. Vyanaf), Vyana. Charati, moves. 

6. In the heart verily is this Jivatma. Here aiise one hundred 
and one nadis. Each one of them lias a hundred sub-nadis. Each sub- 
nadi lias 72,000 branch nadis. The Vyana moves in them. — 35. 

Note. — The phrase ‘ hridi hi esa atma ” is read by Madhva as part of the last verse, 
connected with the sentence “these are the seven flames or ray.” Docs the Jivatma 
perceive the external objects by directly coming in contact with them or through some 
intermediary? The verse answers this, by saying “ the Jivatma is in the heart ” —it can 
never come in direct contact with an external object. The objects are therefore perceiv¬ 
ed through these seven rays or wires. 

The remaining portion of the present mantra describes the vyana. The description 
shows that it refers to the circulation of blood, and the 11aills are the arteries and caiiiila- 
ries. They arc all connected with the heart. 

The vyana would thus correspond to the circulatory function of the blood through 
the arteries and vein, and its oxygenation in the lungs. 

Mantra 7. 

gtTqff 3*4 44? 

qrqg^qmq u vs 11 

Atha, next, but. Ekava, by one of these 101 nadis, (by susumna.) 

Ordhvah, upwards, ascending. Udanali, UdAna. g*fqq Punvena, by 

good deeds, g**2R Punyam, good, heavenly, Lokam, worlds, places. 

TO Nayati, leads. qfcR Papena, by sin or evil deed. qrq Papatn, sinful worlds 
or hells. Ubhabhyam, by both (good and bad). Eva, indeed. 

Munusyalokam, human world. 

7. But by one (of these 101 nadis) the upgoing Udana leads by 
virtue of good deeds to the worlds of the good, by sin to worlds of the 
sinful, by both to the world of the men indeed.—3G. 

Note.— The u china function, though a well recognised one, has no physiological centre 
ascribed to it by modern science. The existence of the susumna is considered as mythical. 
But mail goes to sleep every day, and the Jiva leaves the body in deep sleep as well as in 
death. The life-energy that takes the Jiva to the region of deep sleep and out of the body 
should bo recognised as a form of Prana. 1 have called it the hypnotic function of Prana. 
It is a distinct and positive function and not a mere negative weariness of the nerves or 
oxhaustion of vitality. ) 










Ill PRASHA, 9. 


171 


Mantra 8. 

i q qru: sot .sqq^qq iri ^ifq qrcr- 
rrg^R: n qf^rqr^r§Rg^q^TqR^EvqRri?T 

q^RT: H H*TRT qt^RR; II q II 

^nf^czi: Adityah, the Sun, the Being presiding over the Solar orb. The 
Prana dwelling in the Sun. f Ha, verily. % Vai, indeed, ^ej: Bahyah, exter¬ 
nal : the Prana that has its source or existence outside: the Cosmic, srt^rj: 
Pranah, Prana. 3SSR Udayati, arises, goes up. tiq 1 : Esali, this, external prana. 
Mandalatma, the Prana in the Sun. f| Hi, verily, Enam, this. 
Chaksusam, belonging to the eye : the prana that has its source or existence in 
the eye. 5 JTJIR. Prfinam, Prana. ^rgg^R: Anugrihnanah, benefitting, favouring. 
Thus the Chief Prana in his aspect of Prana supports the external sun. While 
this Solar Prana helps the ocular prana by guiding and directing it. 
Prithivyam, in the earth, the force of gravity in the earth is the Apana aspect 
of the Chief Prana. This regulates the physiological apana in man. gr Ya, 
what. Devata, Deity, (presiding deity of the earth), gr Sa, that, qqr 

Esa, she. Purusasya, of the Purusa. bt<?r* Apanam, apana. 

Avastabhya, drawing up, controlling, directs it downwards. 3RTU Antara, in 
the interval (between the Sun and the Earth): in the middle region, Yat, 

what. ^rr^RT: Akasah, space, g*: Sah, that (inter-space). Samanah, 

Samana. 3Tg: Vayuh, the Vayu, atmosphere, s^r: Vyanah, the Vyana. 

8. (The Cosmic correspondences are).—The sun is (the reservoir) 
verily of the Cosmic Light or Prana. He rises helping the ocular or the 
microcosmic prana (to see objects). The goddess who presides over the 
Earth (is the Cosmic Apana) and she helps man by attracting downwards 
the apana of the person. The space which is between (the Earth and the 
Sun) is the Cosmic Samana, (and it helps the samana inside the man); 
the atmosphere or Vayu is Cosmic Vyana (and helps the vyana inside 
the man).—37. 

Note .—The Higher Prana Pentad is cosmic, and governs through His five aspects the 
Xower Prana Pentad in the Microcosm or the Jiva body. 7 

Mantra 9. 

% 3 TT I ^qR^RT^q^TRRTTT: I 
qTRR Hq^RR: II II 

Tejah. energy, external fire, the fire that burns* and illuminates. 
^ Ha, verily. % Vai, indeed, ^r: Udanah, Udana. rfRR^ Tasmat, therefore. 

Upsantatejah, lost energy : persons whose energy has gone out, 
debilitated. Punarbhavani, again-born, taking another body, another 





172 


PBASNA-UPA&ISAD. 


birth, i.e. t death. Indriyaih, with the senses. Manasi, in the Manas. 

Sampadyamanaih, entered, merged. 

9. The Cosmic Fire verily i,s Udana. (It helps the Udana in man), 
therefore, when a person becomes exhausted of energy, he goes to another 

birth, with his sense-faculties merged in the mind.—38. 

Note.—The five energies appear to be correlated with the five elements and the five 
planes. This is a tentative table of these correspondences. 


Cosmic. 

Micro-cosmic. 

Cosmic Plane. 

Human Organ. 

Element. 

Prana 

Prana 

Atmic or Solar ... 

The Light and other 
senses and optic and 
other centres of the 
senses in the brain and 
the whole brain. 

Light (tther or 
akasa.) 

Apana 

. Apana 

Earth or physical 

The intestines and other 
excretory organs. 

Earth. 

Sam an a .. 

. Saraana 

Astral or antar- 
iksa. 

The assimilatory organs, 
e.g., stomach, liver, 
pancreas and lacteal 
circulatory vessels. 

Water. 

Vyana 

. Vyana 

Buddhic plane ... 

The heart and blood cir¬ 
culatory vessels. 

Vayn or Air. 

Udana 

. Udana 

Mental plane ... 

The throat (?) 

Fire. 


Thus the five physiological pranas may be translated as : 1. Sensory, 2. Excretory, 
8 . Assimilative, 4. Circulatory, 5. Hypnotic and Respiratory, or ejectory functions. 

Mantra io. 

w U^qrt QTtqr W II II 

Yat, as. 3 Th{%tT: is a compound word meaning “ the state of mind at 
the time of death.” The last modification of the mind-stuff at the time of 
death. The thought uppermost then. P^tT: Chittah, mind, idea, thought, 
recollection ; the last thought relating to the deva, animal or other bodies. 
Tena, with that mind, with that thought foremost qq*: Esah, this (jiva at 
the time of de.ith). srnuq Pranam, to Prana, to the Supreme Prana, 

Ayati, comes to, approaches. Then all functions, such as thinking, remember¬ 
ing, &c., cease, only respiration goesym: for the jiva is merged in Prana. He 
comes to the presence of the mukhya or chief Prana, : Pranali, the Prana. 

Tejasa, with the energy (of Udana). Yuktali, joined, Saha, to¬ 
gether. Atmanfi, with the Supreme Self, zrt Yatha Sankalpi- 

tam, as desired, as thought. Lokam, world, body, ?RR Nayati, leads, 

conducts. 

10. As is one’s idea at the time of death, such is his next incarna¬ 
tion ; for with that idea uppermost, the jiva approaches the Prana. Then 
the Prana joined with the Udana energy, together with the higher self, 
carries the jiva to that particular world which is desired by it—39. 

Note .—Tlie jiva surrounded by the chitta or mental body appears in the presence 
pf the chief Prana at the time of death. The Prana joined with udana and the Supreme 









TIT PRASHA, 12. 


173 


Self carries the jiva to the region desired and thought by it. The jiva is endowed with 
a body appropriate to the plane where it goes. The udana thus ejects the tenant soul 
from its house, the body. It may be called the ejcctory function. 

Mantra ii. 

*#T5R: II \\ \\ 

V : Yah, whoever, qq* Evam, thus. ftfIR Vidvan, the knowing, wise, 
learned, slurp* Pr&nam, the Prana. Veda, knows. Na, not. ^ Ha, verily. 
3TW Asya, his. srsin Prajah, descendants, dynasty. Hiyate, are lost, 

become extinct, cut off. 3733: Amritah, immortal. vrir Bhavati, becomes, 
rff Tat, therefore. q>q: Esah, this (following.) Slokah, verse. 

11. The wise one, who knows Prana thus, becomes prosperous, and 
verily his line never becomes extinct, on this earth, and he becomes im¬ 
mortal. Therefore the (following) verse.—40. 

Note .—He who understands this mystery of Prana, gets in this world prosperity— 
his line never comes to an end or becomes extinct, and he himself after death, becomes a 
Mukta and thus transcends death. 

Mantra 12. 

STRTR fR II U II 

rlSVli ST4TJ II ^ || 

LJtpattim, origin, origin of Prana from the Supreme Self. 

Ayatim, the coming, the entrance, coming with the manas into the body. Enter¬ 
ing the body at the command of the Supreme. Sthanam, the residence, 

the seat ; the local organs, as the eye, &c. Vibhutvam, the pervasion, the 

agency, the sovereignty as described in verse 4. Pervasion in the Sun, the 
Earth, Akasa, Vayu and Agni, i.e mj the five planes of physical, astral, k&rana 
and Buddhi, &c. R Cha, and (the outgoing of the Udana). qq Eva, alone <?>RRT 
Panchadh&, fivefold, Adhyatmam, physiological, r Cha, and (physical 

and celestial), qq Eva, indeed. Pranasya, of the Supreme Prana. The 

first begotten. rrir Vijnaya, having known, Amritam, immortality, 

freedom, liberation, moksa. qrq«|R Asnute, enjoys, attains. 

12. Having known the origin, the entrance, the localisation and 
the five-fold sovereignty of Prana, as well as liis physiological, physical 
and celestial aspects, one enjoys immortality, indeed thus knowing, one 
enjoys immortality—41. 

Note .—Having known the origin, the entrance, the localisation and the pervasion of 
Pr&na in the Sun, Earth, &c„ as well as the ascending of Udana, and its being five-fold 
only, not more not less, both in the microcosm and macrocosm, and its physiological (and 

I physical and celestial aspects—knowing these as functions) of Prana alone, and not of 
the Sun, &c.—one attains immortality, one attains immortality— ( Sankara). 

23 





FourI'H Prasna. 

Mantra i. 


1ft qftr: qsr^i i 



Ffl ^frrf^TT VT^rftfrT II S II 


qj?7 Atha, next. ^ Ha, verily. qft Enam, him (Pippalada). Saurya- 

yani, Sauryayani. Gargyah, Gargya. qq^ Paprachchha, asked 

Biiagavan, O Master ! q?if?qq Etasmin, in this, g^q Puruse, person, (body when 
it sleeps 1 , the embodied Self. ^FR Kani, what (organs or senses) *qqi?cf Sva- 
panti, sleep (cease functioning). cfiFR Kani, what (organs), divine energies, 

Asmin, in this (body when it sleeps or when this jiva goes to sleep). ‘ 3 TT*rfiT 
Jagrati, remains awake, / e„ always functions. qFR*; Katarah, who out of these, 
qq; Esah, this. Devah, Deva. By what organ the jiva dreams dreams. 
*qqrq Svapnan, dreams. qqqR Pagvati, sees, dreams. gfi$q Kasya, whose, q?rq 
Etat, this (susupti). gqj Sukham, happiness. vrqR Bhavati, becomes or is 
produced. gqRq Kasmin, in whom (in what body or where), g Nu, indeed 
a participle expressing a query, doubt, discussion). Sarve, all. HqT^fiRr: 
Sampratisthitah, fully established. VRIR Bliavanti, become. ^ Iti, thus. 


1. Next Sauryayani Gargya asked him: “0 Master! when this 
person sleeps, what devas cease functioning and what continue to function. 
What deva out of these causes dreams to be dreamt? Whose is the 
experiencing of bliss in a dreamless sleep ? In whom are all firmly 
established? —42. 


Not.c —The word “ sleep ” includes both the 1 dream ’ and deep dreamless sleep. The 
question relates to both states. Through the mediation of what deva of the senses does 
the jiva dream, and whose is the happiness enjoyed in dreamless sleep : for then the jiva 
is not in contact with any one of the organs of sensation, how does he feel happiness. 
The dream and the deep sleep are independent of the jiva: nor are they subordinate to 
the Chief Prana, for He also is a jiva. On whom then do these states depend? The 
devas, of course, never sleep. The question “What deva dreams dream?” therefore» 
means ‘ What deva causes the jiva to dream dream,’ for the devas never dream. Though 
thero are many devas in the human body, they are not independent of each other, but act 
in co-ordination. 

In the previous pragmas, the entire universe has been proved to be under the Lord. 
All beings are under llim, not only in their waking state, but in the dreaming and sleeping 
states also. This chapter enunciates this truth. It is the jiva that goes to sleep, that 
dreams dreams or enjoys the rest of the dreamless sleep. The devas that carry on the 
functions of the body, never sleep—they only cease to function. Some, however, never 
cease to function even. 










IV PR ASF A, 2. 


175 


Mantra 2. 

H I W TTF*? *T^rT: 

U^TT q#T*RftcT I) cTT: Jpb’pT^b 

ST^J^TW f ^ ’ft ^ I rR 

?r ^noftftr ^ ’OTTrr ^ fasftr ?r T^ftr *t 

JTT^% qR?^| ^ w*\ 

3& Tasmai, to him. sd Sah, lie (Pippalada). Ha, then. ^IHT Uvacha, 
said. vpiT Yatha, as. *Tf T 4 Gargya, O Garva ! Marichayah, rays of 

light. Arkasya, of the sun. Astam, setting (to a place down the 

v.sible horizon). n^$?T' Gachchhatah, going, Sarvah, ad (rays), qcfH^ 

Etasmin, in this (visible). Tejomandale, light-orb, *>., the sun. q^T 

Eki, one, unification. Bhavanti, become, attain. rtf: 1 ah, those (rays). 

3^: Punah, again. 3^3*13: Punarudayatah, of the arising (sun), Pra- 

charanti, spread out (in all quarters). q^ Evam, thus. 3 Ha, verily. ^ Vai, 
indeed. ^ Tat, that (sense product). Sarvam, all. qft Pare, in the 

higher. ^ Deve, God. Manasi, in the mind, qgft Eki, one-ness. 

Bhavati, becomes, attains. ftH Tena, therefore. Rrf Tarhi, then, qq: Esah, 
this. 3^: Purusah, person (Dense-body). ^ ^JTDTlft Na Srinoti, does not hear. 
^ Na Pasyati, does not see. fsmfft Na Jighrati, does not smell. ^ 

Na Rasayate, does not taste. ?r Na Sprisate, does not touch. ^ 

Na Abnivadate, does not speak. ^3% Na Adatte, does not take up any¬ 
thing. ?t Na Anandayate, does not enjoy. ?t Na Visrijate, does 

not defoecate. ^ Na Iyayate, does not walk, Svapiti, sleeps 

[Attains (apeti) the self, the independent (svam)]. fift hi, thus. 
Achaksate, say (the learned). 

2. He said to him “ As, 0 Gargya ! all the rays of the sun when 
going to set, become one in that orb of light, and on his rising again they 
again spread out in all directions, so verily these all devas become one in 
that High Divinity that dwelleth in the mind and then the jiva is made 
to dream dreams; therefore that person, (when dreaming has no cog¬ 
nisance of the external) he hears not, sees not, smells not, tastes not, 
feels not, speaks not, grasps not, procreates not, excretes not, walks not, 
men say “ He sleeps, i.e Jie has attained the Independent ” (Yhnu as 
Tejasa).—43. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The rays of the sun really never are withdrawn into the solar orb. It is only a con¬ 
ventional mode of ^speaking that the sun sets and the rays are withdrawn, for when the 
sun sets in one place, he is visible in another place. Therefore by the phrase ‘the rays 
enter the sun when he sets/ it is meant that the sun becomes invisible in that particular 












176 


PRA&NA-UPAMRAD. 


locality. Similarly all the devas of the senses and the jiva gone to sleep are said to be¬ 
come one in Visiu, in the sense that they cease to function. 

Note .—Though the rays of the sun are never withdrawn into the solar-orb and the 
sun never sets or rises, yet in relation to a particular place he is said to set and rise and 
people mistakenly assert that the rays have been withdrawn, or have come back again. 
The whole thing is an illusion or . This verse shows the great bhrunti into which 
the people fall with regard to dream and sleep. Becoming one with Visnu in sleep really 
means coming to the same place as Visnu just as we say at night time all cows become 
one in the cowpeu, i.e. y they congregate in one place, while at day time they roam about in 
the pasture land. In the dream state they approach Visnu, in the manas ; in Susupti or 
dreamless sleep, they approach Him in the hollow of the heart, and as the sense-devas stop 
their activities then, the state of sleep arises. In dream, all sense-devas cease function¬ 
ing except the manas. 

Mantra 3. 

STRirad STRlcT f TT TTT 

s^ref ^ftw^refre^ srwrrer- 

prere: siren ii ^ u 

qTOHTSh Pranagnayab, the Prana fires. The fires which consist of prana, 
apana, &c. The physiological energies, <tt Eva, alone. Etasmin, in this. 

5* Pure, city (with nine gates), i.e., in the body, 3IRH Jagrati, keep awake or 
keep watch : go on performing their functions of maintaining the organism. 
TTrftpT Garhapatya, Garhapatya. ^ I la, verily. % Vai, indeed, rr^: Esah, this. 
trr: Apanah, the Apana. The similarity between the Ap&na and Garhapatya is 
that both are situated west, as Garhapatya fire is lighted on the western hearth 
of the house, so the Apana is the west or downward going function, the extre- 
torv function, s^r: Vyana, the Vyana. Anvaharya pachana Daksi- 

nagni, The Vyanah goes out of the rig hi side of the heart, therefore it is called 
Daksinagni (south or right-hand fire). The similarity consists in that both burn 
up oblations or homa. <er Yat, because. Hrl^ifT Garhapatyat, from the Garha¬ 
patya (fire). Praniyate, is taken, or led out, or separated or obtained. 

SRprefcT Pranavanat, by being taken out. The ahavaniya fire is kindled by 
bringing fire from the Garhapatya altar and placing it on the ahavaniya. 

Ahavamyah, Ahavaniya. nrxrj: Pranah, the Prana. 

2. The Prana-fires alone are awake in this town. The Apana is the 
Garhapatya fire. The Vyana is the Daksinagni. The Prana by reason of 
its Pranayana is tlie Ahavaniya fire, because it is obtained (praniyate) from 
the Garhapatya. — 44. 

Note , — The western gate of the human, body is the alimentary canal and as the Apana 
has its seat in it, it is analogically said to be the Garhapatya fire. Perhaps it is also so 
called because it cooks all food-all food is digested in the alimentary canal, beginning with 
the saliva of the mouth and ending with the large intestines. Garhapatya is the fire of 
the household, the kitchen fire. The food when digested goes to nourish the organs by 
becoming blood, so Prana, by which blood also is meant, is extracted from the Apana. The 
arterial circulation is Vyana. 








TV PRASHA, 5. 


177 


Mantra 4. 

FR ^TT^ftfcT FT ^FRR: 
SRT f WR 3SRR f5<tf5Rq^R: *T *R q^RRRTTf- 
S^T TR*TR II2II 

Yat, because. Ucljchhvasa nisvSsau, expiration and ins¬ 

piration. q^r Etau, these two. ^rrfcff Aliuti, oblations (like oblations to fire). 
SR Samam, equal, at equal intervals of time, periodically making all humours 
of the body balanced. Constantly establishing equilibrium between the venous 
and the arterial blood Nayati, carries, distributes, ffk Iti, therefore, 

Sal), He. HHR: Samanah, the Samana. The Adhvaryu or the officiating priest. 
HH: Man all, the mind, the manas, ^ Ha, verily % Vai, indeed, qq- Eva, alone. 
^TarT^r^r: Yajamanah, the sacrificer. Istaphalam, sacrifice-desired-fruit, 

qq Eva. indeed, alone, Udanah, the Udana. m Sal), He. qq Enam, this 

(the Manas-typified as the sacrifice!*), zrrrii Yajamanam, the sacrificer. 
Aharahah, daily (at Susupti) day by' day. ^ Brahma, the Brahman ; the 
Susumna-dwelling Lord, the Prajna. IR3R Gamayati, leads or carries. 

4. Because he equally distributes these two oblations—the expira¬ 
tion arid inspiration, therefore, he is called Samana. The mind alone verily 
is the sacrificer. The fruit of the sacrifice is indeed the Udana. He 
carries this sacrificer daily to Brahman that dwelleth in the Susumna.—45. 

Note .—The Samana or the same-maker is thus connected with the respiratory func¬ 
tion also. It constantly establishes the equipoise between expiration and inspiration. It 
would correspond to the priest in a fire-sacrifice, while manas is the yajamana for whom 
the sacrifice is made—and Udana or hypnotic function is like the fruit of the action—that 
manifests in some future time. It is the upward carrying function—the function by which 
the jiva is separated from one vehicle after another : by which the self projects himself. 
The joy of the dreamless sleep depends upon Udana. 

Mantra 5. 

q^R 

^R5^f ul qRT% \m\ 

Atra, here (in sleep when the Prana is withdrawn from sense organs, 
ear, &c., but only vital functions are carried on ; and the manas alone, out of the 
eleven senses, is active) qq*: Esab, this. qq: Devah, God, />., mind. ^ Svapne, 
in the dream (state). Mahimanam, mightiness, greatness (in creating 

the dream world Tne almightiness of the Supreme Self). Anubhavati, 

experiences, sees, realises. Yar, what (objects like the horse, &c). Dristam, 














178 


PRASNA-OPANISAD. 


is seen (in the waking state). Dristam, seen-like, sight-pictures. 

Anupaiyati, sees (in dream) again, jrff Srutam, is heard. Srutam, heard. 

^ Eva, indeed. Artham, object. Anusfinoti, again hears. 

Desadigantaraih, in different countries and quarters. If the reading be 
then the rendering would be “in different bodies and quarters.'’ Cha, and. 

PratyanubhQtam, experienced, Punafc, again. 5^: Punah, again. 

Pratyanubhavati, experiences. ^ Dristam, seen, Adristam, not 

seen. ^ Cha, and. Srutam, heard, Asrutam, not heard, n Cha, and. 

^3*^5 Anubhutam, experienced (in this life). ^ Cha, and. Ananubhfl- 

tam, not experienced (in this life but in some past life). ^ Cha, and. gsr Sat, 
existing, true, tiiat which is in the present. ^ Cha, and. Asat, not exist¬ 

ing in the present, hence the past. ^ Cha, and. gif Sarvam, all. 
Pasyati, sees, beholds. g*: Sarvah, all (being all. e , mentally modifying 
itself as a Deva, an animal, &c.) Pasyati, sees. 

Then this shining one in dream experiences the greatness of the 
Lord, whatever was seen (in the waking state), he perceives^ t again as a 
picture; whatever was heard, he hears it again as a sound object: what¬ 
ever was experienced in different countries and quarters, he experiences 
that again and again —whether seen or not seen, heard or not heard, ex¬ 
perienced or not experienced, true or false, lie sees all ; being all, he sees 
all.—46. 

Note .— In dream one sees the glory of the Lord. When objects perceived in this 
life or the past lives, seen in this locality or another, are all brought together, losing all 
coherence of time anil space, and the dreamer mistakes them for the present, then arises, 
the bhranti or the illusion of dream. It is the vivifying of the mental impressions. 

Mantra 6. 

vnrfcr win 

Sail, he (the jiva). Yada, when. Tejasa, by the Light, by the 

Sun or Brahman. By divine energy. AbhibhQtah, overpowered, 

embraced or wrapped round, enveloped, covered, />., when the jiva enters God. 
^[3 Bhavati, becomes. ^ Atra, then, in that state of dreamless sleep, susup- 
ti. qq: Esah, this. 3^: Devah, the shining one i.e. t the mind. Svapnan, 

dreams. H Na, not. q^Rricf Pasyati, sees, because the manas even ceases to 
function then, Atha, next, therefore, because ol this proximity to God, 

born from this union with God and realization of one’s true form. 33T Tada, 
then (in susupti). Etasmin, in this, ^arire, this body. The “body” 

here means the jiva. When the jiva, forgetting himself, makes himself the 
body of the Lord, th channel for His Will, then the jiva is said to be the Carina 
of God. *1773 Etat, this (susupti called), gtgf Sukham, happiness, joy. *^3 
Bhavati, becomes, is produced. 






7V PRASNA, 8. 


m 


6. When he even is embraced by the Light, then this shining one 
does not dream dreams ; therefore then in this body is produced this 
susupti happiness—47. ' 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

The happiness wells up in the jiva, when it loses all its activities and makes itself 
a body of the Lord. The question asked was “who enjoys the happiness in the dreamless 
sleep.” The reply is : The soul or the jiva enjoys happiness, and not the non-intelligent 
body. Moreover there is a Sruti which declares that the human soul is the body of the 
Lord (Bri. Up.) When, therefore the jiva converts himself into the body of Visnu, then 
he enjoys the divine happiness. The Lord brings on sleep, in order to give happiness 
to the jiva. 

Note.- The word sarira ordinarily means a body ‘a vehicle but here it is used in a 
very peculiar sense. It means the jiva himself. When the jiva, losing his personality, 
converts himself into the vehicle of God, then he is called the vehicle or Sarira par ex - 
celhince for there is no higher vehicle, than the soul itself, as the channel of God. In the 
state of deep sleep even the tamasic soul experiences happiness, because the Lord gives 
happiness to all. The true happiness of self-realization is however for the wise only. In 
susupti the m*nas also ceases its activity. The only “organ” then active is the svartipa 
Indriya (the causal body). This svarupa indriya or the causal body is the organ through 
which happiness of susupti is perceived. The jiva is to God, what the body is to the 
soul; and because of this correspondence, the jiva is termed Sarira or body here, and 
it is said “ happiness is in the bodi/.” This Svarupa-Indriaya or “ the sense or organ of 
self-perception ” is not organised as yet in ordinary persons. The Manas is the highest 
sense as yet developed. With the unfolding of Svarhpa-Indriya, the sense of intuition, 
knowing a thing as it is, will develop. 

Mantra. 7. 

rRR VX WTRH II VS II 

A 

^: Sah. mere expletive, qqr Yatha, as. Somya, O dear, O Initiate. 

One entitled to quaff the Soma drink ^fr% Vayamsi, birds. Vasovriksam, 

on the dwelling tree, the roosting tree. Sampratisthante, fully gather, 

go to, and remain there, repair. ^ Evam, so. ^ Ha, verily % Vai, indeed, 

Tat, that. Sarvam, all. <f< Pare, in the highest (above the Avidya, and its 
effects and modifications). Atmani, in the self (the self-luminous, 

blissful, imperishable) in Visnu. Sampratisthate, fully gathers or 

repairs. 

7. As, 0 clear ! birds go to their roosting tree and remain there for 
the night, so verily this all repairs to the Supreme Self in deep sleep.—48. 

Mantra 8. 








180 


PRA§NA-UPAmSAD. 


rt^q ^ =q ^qjqfqqsq =q qtfi ^ TrrM ^ f^T 
qi-qrasq ^ qiqsj Brerffq^ =q 

qrft =q q?qsq =q *r$t *FcT5?i ^ qr^ =qrf- 
f qro^rtq^T =q ferT =q %cfFTrT^T q qq?q fqsrTctrq- 

qsq q qrw^r Tqqruqqsq ^ u q n 

A 

Pnthivi, the earth, the physical atom. ^ Cha, and. <jfq^rqTqT 
PrithivimAtrA, the earth’s (subtle) measure. The subtle Tanmatra of the earth. 
IVlAtrA means the measure, the vibratory swing of the atom of the physical 
plane, ^jq: Apah, water, the astral atom. ^rrqr^r^T Apoinatia, Tanmatra of 
water, the rate of vibration of the Atom of the astral plane. Tejah. light, 

fire, the mental plane atom. frqTqriqr Tejomaira, the tanmatra of light. The 
rate of vibration of the atom of the mental plane, qjg: Vayuh, air or theBuddhic 
atom, qrg^rer Vayumatra ihe Tanmatra of Vayu or the rate of vibration of the 
Buddhic atom. ^rqtr^T: Akasah, the akasa or the atom of Ahamkara plane. 

AkasamatrA, the Tanmatra of akasa, or the rate of vibration of the 
atom of that plane. t q^j: Chaksuh, sight. ?cq£ Drastavyam, form. ajrrq Sro- 
tram, hearing. Sro'avyam, sound, qr*lj Ghranam, smelling. qrqoq Ghrata- 

vyam, scent, Rasah, tasting sq Rasavitavyam, taste, sensation. 

sq«K Tvak, touching Sparsayitavyam, sensation of touch, qfcF; Vak, 

the speech, q^q Vaktavyam, the word, utterance, Hastau, hands. 

Adatavyam, what is to be held. 3^*7: Upasthali, the organ. 
AnandayTtavyam, enjoyment qrg: Payu, rectum, Visarjavi'tavyam, 

excrements. qplt’ Padau, feet. ipqoq Gantavyam, the place where to go to. 
Yfff: Manah, the mind, q;qsq Mantavyam, the thought, Buddhih. intellect, 

reason, qrysq Boddhavyam, understanding, qr Ahamkarah, 11 1 -ness.” 

Ahamkartavyam, egoism, Cliittain, memory %qiqqsq Chetavita- 
vvam, remembered, q:q: Tejah. light Perceptive faculty, the jnana-sakti, 
sentiency, or consciousness or clietana Vidyotayitavyam, illumined, 

objects cognised. qrqr PrAnah, the Prana, the Prana as a thread upholding 
the inner or subjective objects and external or objective objects. fqqnrqrTsq* 
VidhArayitavvam, the object that has to be supported, the whole world, (strung 
on the SOtrAtma PrAna). 

8. The earth and the earth measure, water and the water measure, 
fire and the fire measure, air and the air measure, akfisiaand theakarfa mea¬ 
sure, the seeing and the form the hearing and the sound, the smelling 
and the scent, the tasting and the taste, the touching and the touch, the 
speech and what is uttered, the hand and what is handled, the organ and 
what is enjoyed, the lower apertures and what is excreted (from them), 
the feet and the place to go to, the mind and the thought ; the intellect 













IV PR A SNA, 9 . 


181 


and wliat is understood, the I-ness and what is posited as I, the memory 
and the object remembered, the perceptive faculty in general and all 
objects of preception, the Prana (the great support; and all objects that 
are supported upon.—49. 

Note .—The analysis of this verse will show the various tattvas so well known in 
the subsequent Indian literature. They are the five states or maha bhutas, the earth, 
water, fire, air and ether, the flue RATES of vibration, named after these, the ten Indriyas 
or sense-organs, the ten Visayas or objects of those sense-organs, the five-fold mind 
namely, tnanas (lower mind', buddhi (Reason \ chitta (memory), Akamkara (self-eonseious- 
ness) and ehetana or consciousness or 35 in all. Manas is that which cogitates , should I do 
this or should I not do this. The Buddhi or Reason deteniiines 1 must do this. Egoism or 
Ahamkara is the idea of I-ness in a vehicle whieh is not the true I. (Asvarupe svarupatva 
buddhih). In other words, the false notion of freedom and independence. The real 4 I * 
always feels and knows its entire dependence on God. The Chitta is evanescent, unstable 
memory. While ehetana or Tejas is the pervasion into the objects of chitta—conscious¬ 
ness thereof. The ehetana always deals with multitudes of notions. These ai’e secondary 
objects or controlled or supported ones under the isvara—they are emtroiled by Him but 
indirectly. The principal subject or controlled one is the Prana, the Life principle, the 
Great support of all the other principles like the earth, &c.; while he himself is supported 
directly by Isvara alone. 


Mantra 9. 

rrq ff tSST sfmT STRTT THPTcTT U-TT 

I [H WRHTd IIS.II 

Esah, this (all supporter, Supreme Self.) ft Hi, verily. Drastfi, 

the seer, speculator, beholder. He gives the power of seeing to the sight and 
the deva thereof. Sprasta, the toucher. He gives the power of touch to 

the sense of touch, &c. sfrrTT f^rota, the hearer. He gives the power of hearing 
to the sense of hearing and the deva thereof. sir! Ghrata, the smeller. He 
gives the power of smell. Rasayita, the taster. He gives the power of 

taste. JFcTT Manta, the thinker. He gives the power of thinking, Boddha, 

the determiner. He gives the power of determining Karta, the doer. He 

gives the power of acting. f^FRrRF Vijnanatma, the Knowledge essence, whose 
nature is knowledge, Omniscient. The Vijnanatma. 3^: Purusah, the 
Purusa, the all-pervader, the Full. [h: Sah, he, that Vijnanatma Omniscient. 

Pare, in the highest, ^trr Atmani, self (Brahman). Sampratisthate, 

enters, repairs. So much is not in Madhava’s text]. 

9* ■ Verily he is the beholder, the toucher, the hearer, the smel¬ 
ler, the taster, the thinker, the determiner, the doer, the Vijnanatma, the 
Purusa. ■ [He (who knows this Purusa) becomes established in the Highest 
Self.]—50. 

24 






182 


PRASNA-UPANISAb. 


Mantra io. 

<TPfaT^TT ST *TT f 'I 

%<r wif w% i 

33 W: II \° II 

q-^5 Param, The Highest, trq Eva, indeed. Aksaram, the Imperish¬ 

able. sjr<T$r Pratipadyate, obtains. Sah, he. Yah, who. f Ha, verily. 
% Vai. rTf^r Tat, that (Vijnanatma in the body). Achchhayam, the 

shadowless, free from tamas and ignorance : free from avidya. Asari- 

ram, the bodiless. 3 T 5 nT 3 <rat Alohitam, the colourless, without any attribute, 
without any Upadhis, without the prakritic body. ^ Subliram, white, pure 
Having a non-prakritic body. Aksaram, the Imperishable. Vedayate, 

knows. 3: Yaji, who. g Tu, again. $1*3 Somya, O Dear, O Initiated ! m Sah, 
he. Sarvajnah, the knower of the All, i. e. y the knower of God. Sarva or 

all, means Visnu ; Sarvajnah means he who knows Visnu. Sarvali all, chief, 
A great one. Biiavati, becomes, Tat, therefore, irq': Esah, this. 

^iokah, verse. 

10. He indeed obtains the Highest Imperishable (one). Who in¬ 
deed 'knows that shadow-less, colour-less, pure, Imperishable—he truly, 0 
Initiate, becomes the knower of the All, and a Great one. Therefore here 
is this verse.—51. 

Mantra u. 

ftsTHRRT ^ psj #f: STTWr HrTTft HsrfrfsfcT ^ I 
^ H II %% II 

?fcT SRR: || « || 

f^TRnm Vijnanatma, the Vijnanatma, the jlva. Saha, together with 
Upp Devaih, the deities (agni, &c) The presiding divinities. spur: Pranah, 
Pranas (the eyes, &c.) Bhutani, the elements (the earth, &c.) % g pn/P cT 

Sampratisthanti, enter, gsr Yatra, where (in which Highest Self). <pr Tat, 
that (Imperishable). Madhva reads 4 etad’ after 1 tad'. Vedayate, knows. 

q:Yah, who. g Tu, again, Somya, O Somya. Sah, he. Sarvajnah, 

the knower of Sarva or the Absolute, Sarvam, all or the absolute. 

Avivesa, entered, penetrated. ffH Iti, thus. 

11. The Vijnanatma (jiva) along with all the Devas, the Pranas 
and the Great Elements are all firmly established in Him. He who 
knows that Imperishable is called the knower of the Absolute, he enters 
indeed into the Absolute.—52. 












Fifth Phasna. 


Mantra i. 


't?r qsr^ i sr *it f t 


^#it% n $ ii 




I 3BT *T rH 


Atha, next. ^ Ha, verity. ir^ Enam, him (Pippalada) %*q: ^aibyah, 
$aibya. Satyakamah, Satyakama. <^=53 Paprachha, asked. : Sab, he. 

q: Yah, who. ^ Ha, verity. % Vai, indeed. ^Tat, that (Tad is here to be 
taken as an Adverb, and means “in such a wonderful manner/’ Roervrirq^ 
Bhagavan, O Master. Manusyesu, amongst men. UTTUffPci Prayanantam, 

up to departure from the body. Up to death, Omkaram, Om-kara. 

The Supreme Self symbolised by ‘ Om.’ ^rpTSSPflrr Abhidhyaytta, meditates 
Katamam, what (out of these several lokas). gfff Vava, a mere expletive. 
Sr: Sah, he. gg Tena, by that (Om-meditation). Lokam, the world (the 

fruit of knowledge.) Jayati, conquers, obtains. ffg iti. thus, Tas- 

mai, to him. sr: Sab, he (Pippalada). ^ Ha, verily. sgr^T Uvacha, said. 

1. Next Saibya Satyakama asked him: “0 Master! what world 
does he conquer by such (meditation; who amongst men unceasingly 
meditates on Omkara, up to his death.—53. 

Note .—This chapter teaches the Great Ineffable Name by which the Supreme Brahman 
is to be meditated upon. It also teaches the fruit obtained by such meditation. 

Mantra 2. 


rT# *7 I rrfft it m 



Etat, this (Brahman). % Vai, verily. ^nggn - *? Satyakama, O Satya¬ 
kama. cjt Param, the Supreme, the Higher, the 'Irue, the imperishable, the 
Purusa. ^ Cha, and. Apai am, the inferior, (the Rig Veda, the Prana, the 
first-born) The Brahma. ^ Cha, and. a’gj Brahma, Brahman. The Om pri~ 
marily signifies the Supreme Self; and secondarily it denotes Virincha also 
because he is the image of the Supreme. gg; Yat, what. gfrg?R: Om-kara, 
Om-kara. Tasmat, therefore, Vidvan, the knower (of the pervasion 

of Om). qrpr Etena, by this (Omkara). gg Eva, alone, surely. grRcpR Ayata- 
nena, (refuge,, support) vehicle. qgjrTC* Ekataram, one of them (the Superior or 
the Inferior). gjygfg Anveti, attains to, goes to. 

2. Then he said to him 0 Saiyokama ! that which is denoted by 
“ Om ” is this Brahman, both the Higher and the Lower. Therefore, the 
knower of it, through this vehicle alone, reaches one of these two. —54. 








184 


PRASNA-UPAmSAD. 


Mantra 3. 

^q^mfvp^rqTT i cp^t h asr ^q^r 

sl^ifcr ^TT ^qffr II ^ II 

Sab, he. 31^ Yndi, if. iT^qr^T Ekamatram, one measure. The letter ^ 
alone. I he short pranava, i. e., the Om pronounced in a short tone, denoting 
the Inferior Brahman. That aspect of Brahman which is denoted by the letter 
only. Abhidhyayita, meditates upon. If he meditates upon only 

one aspect of Brahman, being ignorant of the other. h Sah he. Tena, by 
that (meditation). Knowing only one aspect and not the other two. Eva, 
alone. Samveditah, addressed, fully understanding, illumined, enlighten¬ 

ed. The sattva being purified, he is addressed by the Supreme, as if He said 
“come to me.” Turn am, quickly. ^ Eva, surely. Jagatyam, on 

the earth, the physical plane. Abhisampadyate, obtains ; is fully 

endowed with ; is prosperous, attains the good. Is born ; obtains birth. h 
T am, him (who has mastered the physical plane), Richah, The Rik 

(Mantras). The Deity of the Rigveda. Manusyalokam, the human- 

world (the joys of a perfect man, as a sovereign or a true Brahmin). A human 
body, such as that of a sage or a sovereign. Upanayante, lead to ; give. 

*T: Sah, he, the worshipper ofone “Matra.” ri^r Tatra, there (in that human body) 
In that life or birth. cTTHr Tapasa, by austerity (by performing his own duties 
and by controlling the senses . grgi^J&i tj Brahmcharyena, by celibacy (by living 
in the Preceptor's house and acquiring knowledge). ^raddhava, b) r faith. 

Sampannah, being endowed, being joined. Mahimanam, mightiness, 

greatness, the glory of the Manhood. “A great adept; the meditation on Brah¬ 
man.’' Anubhavati, experiences, realises, obtains. 

3. If he meditates on one measure (realises Brahman in His one 
aspect only) then by that meditation alone, (after death ) lie is welcomed by 
(the Supreme), and soon obtains another birth on this earth. The Devas of 
the Rig-veda led him to a human body. He in that (birth) endowed w T itli 
austerity, celibacy, and faith, realises the greatness (of the fruit of 
these).—55. 

Note .—If lie meditates on one (of the Measures of pranava), being illumined by such 
meditation alone, lie quickly and surely attains all prosperity on this earth. Him the Riks 
(verses) give (all) human joys. He then being endowed with austerity, eelcbacy and faith, 
realises the greatness (of his humanity)—Sankara, 

If he meditates on one iMatrfi (the A para Brahman), being purified by that alone, 
soon he attains a high state on this earth. The Rik (Mantras) lead him to the Man-birth. 
Being born as a man, if he bo endowed with austerity, celibacy and faith, he experiences 
the greatness (of meditating on Para Brahman)—Ramanuja, 









185 


V 'PRA&NA, 5. 


Mantra 4. 

UT^crfNr 

$5fta?r b dmdw n h drfRr% f^j^tagsp 5 ^ttt- 
w^r 11 « n 

3 Tq Atha, next, again, qfe Yadi, if. Dvimatrena, by two measures. 

The measures denoting Brahman. Meditating on Brahman in His two-fold 
a spects; who know the two, but not the third." Manasi, in the mind, jn the 

inner organ, the Yajur-veda, soma-deva-presided -Manas. Sampadyatc, 

(meditates on the Supreme) joins with the Supreme in mind, Sail, he. 

Antriksam, firmament. Fixed in firmament (qualifying the soma-loka). 
qsjfq: Yajurbhih, by Jajus-mantras. By the Devas presiding over the yajus- 
mantras. Unnlyate, is led up to. Somadokam or Deva-lokam. 

Soma-world, Moon-world. Soma = beautiful. A more beautiful world than the 
physical: Pitri-loka. This is typical of the other higher lokas also. I he up&- 
saka of one matra gets all his reward on the physical, the two matra man goes 
to the Astral and Deva chanam. Sah, he. Soma-loke, in the Soma- 

loka. In the Pitri-loka. Vibhutim, power, greatness, lordliness. ^ 5 ^ 

Anubuya, having realised. qq: Punah, again. Avartate, returns. 

4. Next, if he meditates in his mind with two measures, he is carri¬ 
ed up by the Yajus-mantras to the Antariksa or the world of the Moon. 
Having enjoyed the vast powers of the Moon-world, he returns again.—56. 


Mantra 5. 

B ^TT% ^5 B^i I ^TT qT^S^RT 








WRi \m\ 

Yah, who. 3 ^: Punah, again. Etat, this (Om). Trim£- 

trena, by three measures, that is, in all His aspects. & Om, Aum. fiq Iti, 
thus. qqq Etena, by this, rrj Eva, alone. Aksarena, by the syllable, the 

Imperishable, Indestructible. qL Param, Supreme, Purusam, Person. 

The All-full. ^(^ST4[rr Abhidhyayita, let him meditate with one pointed mind, 
and thus realise Him, the Supreme Lord. Sail, he. cf5TPT 1 ejasi, in the tejas. 
In the orb of light. ^ Surye, in the sun. Sampannah, obtains, reaches, 

being in the compan)' of; and after reaching the sun. Yatha, as. qRRJU 

Padodarah, the belly-footed, the serpent. Tvacha, from the old skin, 








186 


PRASNA-UPANISAJ). 


slough. Vinirmuchyate, is fully liberated, q 1 ^ Evam, thus. ^ Ha, 

verily. % Vai, indeed, sp Sah, he (having reached the sun). Papmana, 

from sin (from the slough of sin). iVom all Prarabdha-karmas. Vinir- 

muktah, freed. Sail, he (being thus freed from sin). gpfPT: Samabhih, by ihe 
Sama Veda mantras, or “ Sas^mabhih H may betaken as one word, meaning 
“ accompanied by angels or souls singing hymns. H By the 
Devas of the Sama Veda. Unntyate, is led up (from the Sun), 

Brahmalokam, to the Brahma-world, the Satya-loka, the world of Hiranyagar- 
bha, the Karya*Brahma. Sah, he (who has reached the Brahma-loka.) 

qviRR Etasmat, from that (Brahma-loka, or from tnat Hirangarbha.) From the 
ruler of that Satya-world. Jivaghanat, from the jiva-mass, i m e. t Brah¬ 
ma, the Inner-soul of all jivas. from the Samsara-sphere, “ the 

sphere of causation, where a body must be assumed in accordance with one’s 
Karma. Brahma is not above it,” ghana = mQrti, or form, or solid, in other 
words, it means “ body ” Jiva-ghana = “ land of the jivas, the land of the embo¬ 
died jivas. M “ from the best of the jivas, the Highest of all jivas,/>., 

the Prana or Brahma. I hat is from the instructions received from Brahma], 
*rcr«r Parat, from that High (Jiva-ghana). qx* Param, best. The pure self: the 
Purejiva. Or Paratparam is one word meaning the best of the best. 

Put isayam, the In-dweller, the dweller in the town, or cavity of each soul. The 
Lord. I he dweller in all hearts. The lull. Purusam, the person, All¬ 
full, Vasudeva. tksate, sees, beholds, i.e., attains to Vasudeva. Gets 

increase of knowledge. ^ Tat, that, to that effect, q?fr Etau, these two 
^TRilr ^Jokau, verses. Bhavatah, are. 

5. But he who understands this Aum to consist of three measures, 
should, with this Imperishable syllable, meditate on the Supreme Purusa 
alone, for thereby lie would reach the tejas or the sun. As a snake be¬ 
comes fully liberated from its old skin, thus he verily becomes liberated 
from all his sins. By the Saman verses he is carried up thence to the 
Satya-loka. From that High Being, the Group-soul of all jivas, (from the 
Chaturmukha Brahma) lie gets instruction about the Supreme In-dwelling 
Purusa. To that effect are the following two versus.—57. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Worshipping Hari through tho Ineffable Name, he reaches the Brahma-loka, and there 
receives the final Initiation in wisdom from the Chaturmukha Brahma, and thus undoubt¬ 
edly gets salvation. 

Note .—Thus the salvation or mukti depends upon this last teaching given by the Jiva- 
ghana, the Great Group* sou I, the Last Teacher, tho First Begotton. 

Mantra 6. 

fNff srgr&T 1 













V PRASNA, 7. 


187 


Tisrah, three ( ^T + 3-f* )• Ma trail, measures, Mrityu- 

matyah, mortal, leading to tlie transient worlds, causing death, useless. ^3*7*3: 
is one reading, meaning <k where the der*th has jurisdiction . 91 srg^r: Pt ayuk- 
tah, designed. Anyonyasaktah, another-another-related, joined in 

couples or pairs or chords of two. Each connected with the other. Inter¬ 
dependent. One clinging to the other, one sound merged in the other owing 
to the too rapid utterance. Anaviprayuktah, properly used. Those 

who are one-pointed at the time of meditation, too much distinct or separated. 
Singly. “ffJTJrfi:’' means separated, detatched. Aviprayuktah, “ Not 

separated, not detached.'’ means not-not-separated, i.e., separated, 

the same as viprayuktah. When the letters are very quickly pronounced, 
there takes place a blurring and indistinctness of utterance, one sound 
becomes merged in the other, this she uld be avoided. But if each letter be 
pronounced separately and with not a proper but a long interval between 
each, then one goes to the other extreme, the inter-connection of syllables is 
broken up. The AUM should be pronounced with the inter-connection of 
syllables kept intact, but each syllable uttered distinctly. According to 
Madhva this word means : “ not related to each other one who knows them 
separately, but does not know their harmony. Anyonyasaktah means joined 
with each other in couples. He who knows them in couples —^ and 3, or 
37 and n, etc. The high or shrill tone or treble, the low tone or bass and the 
middle or the three octaves. The three syllables should be pronounced in 
these notes. Kriyasu, in actions. Bahyabhyantara- 

madhvaniasu, external, internal, and intermediate (waking, dreaming, and deep 
sleep, or external sacrifices, internal regulation of breath, etc., and the inter¬ 
mediate mental japa, &c.). High, low, and middle tone. 3*337 Samyak, all 
(not separate), full, properly. sr gT ftr g Prayuktasu, united. 3 Na, not. 
Kampate, shakes, does not come to re-birth. 57: Jnah, the knower (of Brahman). 

6. The three notes become fatal, when uttered either singly or in 
couples, and without harmony. But when properly uttered in high, or low 
or middle tones, there is no fear to the wise.—58. 

Note .—Tlie three measures are all temporary (in their effect) when separately 
employed. But each in conjunction with the other, and not separately but conjointly 
employed, in actions external, internal and intermediate—(produces immortal effect)— 
that knower does not tremble. (Sankara School). 

The three measures (notes) are fatal when uttered (with too much rapidity) one note 
intermingling with the other ; or too separately, one note sounded after a long interval 
from the other. But when properly uttered, in all actions, whether external, internal or 
intermediate—the wise (need) not tremble. (Ramanuja School). 

Mantra 7. 

tfcT II II 








188 




PR A SNA-UPANISA D. 


Rigbhih, by the Rik (Mantras). Etani, to this (physical plane). 

Yajurbhih, by Yajus (Mantras). Antariksam, the firmament 

(the Soma-loka). Samabhih, b ( v the Sama verses. ^ Yat, that world, cRr 

Tat, which. Kavayah, the seers, the learned, the Brahma-knowers. 

Vedayante, per.ceive, know, declare, teach. cf* Tam, that (Brahma-loka). 

Omkarena, by the word Om. xt? Eva, only. Ayatanena, (by) 

the vehicle. Anveti, goes. Vidvan, the knower, the Brahma-knower. 

3 * Yat, which, Tat, that. ^FRcT Santam, peaceful, Ajaram, undecay- 

ing. Amritam, undying, Abhayam, fearless, tpc Paranl, supreme, 

^ Cha, and. Iti, thus. ; 

7. By the Rik (one gains) the (physical), By the .Yajus, the Soma- 
loka (the astral), by the Sainan that which the wise (only) know (the 
Brahma-loka). (But) the Brahma-knower, by the vehicle of the word 
AUM alone, reaches also that which is Peace, Undecaying, Free from fear, 
and the Supreme. —59. 

Note . —Thus the Vedas denote knowledge—the Rig Veda would mean all the sciences 
dealing with the physical or objective plane; the Yajur-Ycda—all the sciences dealing 
with the subtler or finer planes, the non-objective planes ; and the Sam a- Ye da —the know¬ 
ledge or the science of God, the Theosophy or Brahma-Yidya. All sciences deal with 
m&tras or measures, and the knowledge of all the vibratory measures of AUM leads to 
the knowledge of all the forces of nature. The Pranava is the key-note of the universe. 








Sixth PiJasna. 

Mantra i. 

TT^gqr qrgq^qq q u qtesrq^ 

<pq q<q [4 *tir qqr#r% i ] mi §*rrc**gq qifnw qq 
q^fT%4qfqq qj4 4 qiqsqftfrq i ^ofrqr qq qrr^rfrT 
qts^qHmqqr% q^fi^Tf r$q^4 q^ i pr ^wr t wpr 
qqqrq i 4 <qr ^tt4 3 ^? f fir n $ n 

^pq Atha, next. ^ Ha, verily, trq Enam, him (Pippalada). g^STlSukes'a, Sukesa. 
vnrfr^: Bharadvaja, Bharadvaj. qq^ Paprachha, asked, vprq^ Bhagavan, O 
Master ! ftm^qr^T: Hiranya-nabhah, Hiranya-nabha. Kausalyah, Kausalya 

(born in Kosala), King of Kosala. ^3^": Rajaputrah, a Raja’s son. r\\x Mam, 
me. sq^q Upetya, approaching. Etam, this. J7$pr Prasnam, question. 
Aprichchhata, asked. qr¥SJqiqT Sodasakalam, sixteen-digited, sixteen-membered, 
vnrfT5T Bharadvaja, O Bharadvaja. Purusam, Purusa, the soul. Vettha, 

knowest (thou). The question really is: “ I have heard it in a general way, of a 
sixteen-kala Being, but I do not know Him in detail, can you teach me 
any particular details about him ? ” [qsr Tam, him. The Purusa, with the 16 
kalas. qgjq Mahyam, me. ^Crft Bravihi, tell (me). Where is that Purusa ? 
What are the names of the sixteen kalas and why is He called sodasa-kala.] 
rpr Tam, him. srt Aham, l. Kumaram, (to the) prince, or the young man. 

srgqq Abruvam, said, q qfS* Na Aham, not I. fq Imam, this (16 kal& Being) 
Veda, know, atft Yadi, if. Aham, I. fqq Imam, this, qfqfl? Avedi- 

sam, knew, had known, cfizr Katham, why. ?f Te, to thee, who art a fit and pro¬ 
per person to be taught. q qfq^-q^ Na avaksyam, shall I not tell. ffq Iti, thus. 
fFgt: Samulali, from the root (all his good deeds perish). % Vai, verily, irq: 
Esah, this (who tells falsehood). qR^sqTq Parisusvati, dries up. Loses all his 
sap or essence All the merit acquired by his good works perishes, q: Yah, 
who. sqgqq Anritam, false, not true, ^rfaqqf^ Abhivadati, speaks. rTWcfTasmat, 
therefore. q ^nrfrq Na arhatni, I cannot, I dare not, not possible for me. ar^jct 
Anritam, not truth, falsehood qg; Vaktum, to speak. Sah, he (the prince). 

TOsnim, silently, being convinced that I was speaking the truth and did 
not merely throw him off. Ratham, chariot. qiTC?J Aruhya, riding, ascend¬ 

ing. srq^rr^T Pravavraja, went away (quickly). q Tam, that (question). ?qf 
Tva, to thee. ^srH Prichchami, I ask. ^ Kva, where (is). =sr^ Asau, that. 
g*rq: Purusah, person, soul? What are the sixteen kalas. Iti, thus. 

25 














190 


PEA &NA-UPA VIS A D . 


1. Next Sukesa Bliaradvaja asked him, 0 Master ! Once Hiranya- 
nablia, a prince of Kosala, approaching me, asked this question “ 0 Bha- 
radvaja ! knowest tliou the Purusa who has sixteen parts? Tell that to me/’ 
1 replied to that prince “I do not know this. Had I known it, why should 
not I have told thee ? He dries up from the very root who speaks an 
untruth. Therefore, I dare not tell an untruth.” He in silence went 
away ascending his chariot. That question I ask thee, where is that 
(sixteen-membered) Purusa—60. 

Note .—In a preceding chapter, it was shown that the Lord rules Prana, &e., and all 
the jivas in tlieir three states of jagrat (waking), svapna (dreaming), susupta (dreamless 
sleep). The present chapter shows that He rules them even when they are mukta or 
released. It further shows how Prana, by His devotion and wisdom, has become the 
Great Saviour, the Mediator and the Prime Agent. It thus justifies the greatness of Prana. 

Mantra 2. 

^TWncfr: <5T^^«TT: II R II 

riA Tasmai, to him. Sab, be (Pippalada). % Ha, verily, ^psr Uvacha. 
said, ilia, here, (in this place). ^ Eva, (alone and nowhere else). 
Anlahsarire, in the interior of the body. In the Ictus of the heart. No one 
has to go far to seek Him. Somya, O dear ! O Initiate ! Sab, he (the 

Purusa). Purusah, Purusa. Yasmiu, in whom (in what person). 

Etah, these (to be told hereafter). qtsvr Sodas'a, sixteen. ^\: Kalah, 
parts; parts of a jiva's body. The helpers in the jiva, organism, 

Pi abbavanti, exist, from whom they rise, by whom they grow, and in whom 
they merge, ffri Iti, thus. 

2. To him he said : 0 dear ! In this heart, verily indeed, is that 
Purusa, in whom originate and subsist these sixteen parts.—61. 

Note.—\\s\iu is the Purusa, from wlicin arise these sixteen parts, of a jiva organism, 
they subsist in Him ; and even in the stale of rnukti, they depend upon Him. That 
Purusa, is always sixteen-membered, in this sense. 

O Saumya 1 that person from whom these sixteen parts of a jiva’s body originate 
is here indeed in the body-is indeed in the interior of the body. One need not go out or 
far to find Him. And as the jiva with his sixteen parts has his origin from Him, it follows 
that he can never loso his identity even in the stato of rnukti: for He is always with him 
even now, much more so in tho state of mukti. 

O Saumya! in what person these sixteen parts (of a jiva’s body) arise (from 
whom they originate and by whom they are sustained, and in whom they exist and are 
never dissolved, namely, oven in muktas, these 1 G kalas exist through in latency, for how 
can there be the dissolution of this 16 kalas of the jiva which is its very essence that 
Purusa is here indeed in the body—is indeed in the interior of the body. One need not 
go out or far to search Him in order to find Him. 







VI PR ASX A, 4. 


191 


Mantra 3. 

^%F^HTTcTTg?f 5TT%gR^mrRT 11 3 11 

^T: Sa]j, he (the Purusa) in the beginning of the kalpa. Iksanchakre, 

looked round, and reflected ‘ let me create katas.’ 3^7^ Kasrnin, in whom (in 
what Tattva, or agent or body) ca*e absolute; what is that Purusa, on whose 
leaving the body, 1 shall leave the body, on whose remaining in that body, I 
shall remain therein, and so on. Aham, I. Utkrante, on going out. 

^^T^cT: LJtkrantah, gone out. Bhavisyami, l shall be. Kasrnin, 

in whom, Va, or. Pratischite, remaining, srfagf^fpr Pratisthasyami, 

1 shall remain, ffa* Iti, thus. 

3. He reflected <£ what going out, 1 shall go out, what remaining 1 
shall remain ?”— 62. 

Note.*—In the beginning of a new creation, the Lord meditated as to the best agent 
who would help Him in creation. He thought “Who is that Being who can, by his extreme 
devotion and love and wisdom, keep me, as if it were, under his control, whom must I make 
my instrument in this act of creation? ” He found that Prana was such an agent, who by 
his devotion and wisdom, was fitted to be the co-worker with God. He is the Hiranya- 
garblia—the Golden Child the First-born. 

Mantra 4. 

I rT’TT *F5?r: ^ 

^ h « n 

Sah, lie (the Purus 1). srnu* Pranam, Prana (the thread-Prana, the cosmic 
Prana) the Jiva-principal, Hiranyagarbha. Asrijata, produced 7HTff5r 

Pranat, from Prana (the first-begotten.) Through the instrumentality of Prana. 

Sraddham, faith. Bharati; the goddess of learning. The principle of self- 
identity in jiva. The spouse of Prana ; the source of all. ^ Kh.am, akasa. 
Through the instrumentality of Sraddha, He created akasa. Vayuh, air, 

the elemental air, its devata is Marut. tsTht: Jyotih, light, fire. Pavaka is its 
devata. ^rig: Apah, waters. Prithivi, the earth. ffsjg Indriyam, organ 

(karma and JnSna indriyas). im: Manah, the mind. ^ Annam, food. 

Annat, from food, making food the instrument, he created seed. Viryam, 

seed, vigour, Tapah, austerity, the mean? which produce knowledge, &c., 
in the jivas, and so cause happiness, Mantrah, the mantras, the Vedas like 

Rik, &c., the means by which perfect wisdom is attained. ^ Karma, karmas, 
sacrifices. Good and bad deeds, causes of pleasure and pain. Lokah, 

the lokas, the worlds, the organs of sensation, Lokesu, in the lokas or 

worlds. ^ Cha, and. Nama, names, individuals. ^ Cha, and. 












192 


PRASNA-U PANTS AD. 


4 . He produced Prana, from Prrna came Faitli, ether, air, light, 
waters, earth, sense-organs, mind, and food. From food vigour, austerity, 
hymns, actions, worlds, and in the' worlds, name.—03. 

Note. —Thus Pr&na is the first-begotten. Through Prana, He created Sraddha or 
Faith, from Faitli the five elements, and the organs of cognition like the eyes, etc., and 
action like the hands, etc. lianas is the highest among these organs. The Lord creates 
every succeeding emanation or kalii, with the intermediation of the one preceding it. 

* These kalas are not non-intelligent material substances, but denote here hierarchy of 
intelligences presiding over these. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Puskara presides over karma, the presiding deity of name isUsa. Parjauya is the pre¬ 
siding deity of the lokas. Svalia, is the devata of the mantras. Yahni presides over Tapas, 
and Yaruna over virya or seed, Soma presides over food, Aniruddhaka over the manas; the 
Sun, etc., are the Lords of the lndriyas or senses, presiding over the eyes, etc. Rndra, 
Yindra, besa, and Kama are devatas of manas, braddha or faith is the consort of Prana— 
she is the origin and dissolution of all. She controls all the subsequent emanations, 
prana is the cause of braddha herself. He is thus superlatively excellent. 'While the Lord 
Vasudeva is the cause of Prana himself—the Supreme, the Changeless. There is no one 
like unto Him ; there is no one Highe r than Him. Knowing Him the souls get salvation. 
He is higher than the high. (Tattva-vivcka). 

The order in which these hierarchies arise is given in another mantra (Mu. Up. II. 

I. 3.) “ From Him arise Pr-inas, Manas, all senses, akasa, air, fire, water, earth, the support 
of all.” The order given in the Prasna Up. is not the standard. Manas does not arise 
from the senses. (Note :—does not the activity of the mind arise after senses have sup¬ 
plied the material ? This is also clearly laid down by Badarayana in the Vedanta butra 

II. 4. 3. From Yisnu arises (l) Prana : from Him, (2) .. raddha, from her, (3) Jludra, the Lord 
of Manas, and otherwise called Manas, from him, (4) lndra, the devata of the senses, from 
him (5) Soma, the devata of food, from Soma arises, (G) Yaruna, from him, (7) the Higher 
Agni, from him arises (8) Vighna, the Devata of akasa, thence arises, (9) Marut, the son of 
Vayu, from him arises (10) the Lower Agni called Pivaka, the soil of first Agni, thence, (11) 
Parjanya, thence (12) Svalia, the Devata of mantra, from her (13) Budha, the Lord of water, 
thence (14) Usa, the gooddess of Name, thence (15) bani, the Lord of earth, and (16) Puskara, 
the deity of karma. Each succeeding is lower in order than the one preceding it. They 
maintain this gradation even when they become free from all gun as, in the state of 
Mukti. Ike eternally free Yisnu is higher than Prana even and is the best. 

H PHI *EF3RRT: 

wSrt mm mmm ng? i 

mm mmm f u uyfr- 

s^rsmcTT mm mm u x u 

Mantra 5. 

Sail, mere expletive, Yatiia, as. fR: Imah, these. Nadyab, 

rivers. Syandam&n&h, flowing. Samudrayanah, ocean- 











VI PRASNA, 5. 


103 


going, ocean-souled, tending towards the ocean ; whose nature is to go to the 
sea. Samudram, ocean. Prapya, having obtained, entered, reached. 

Astam, end, vanish, rest, setting. Simply become invisible, do not pro¬ 
duce any appreciable change in the ocean, neither increase nor decrease it. 

Gachchhanti, go to, become. Though invisible to the ignorant, they 
exist in the thought of the wise, by the differentiating attribute of their name 
or form. Bhidyete, remain in the abstract idea, ^r^TT Tasam, their (of the 

rivers). Namarupe, name ahd form (such as the Ganges, the Yamuna, &c. 

or white or blue, &c.) Samudre, in the ocean, iti, thus. ^ Evam, 

alone. Prochyate, are called, trqw Evam, so. Eva, indeed, tnryj: 

Paridi ast »h, of the all-seer, the witness; of the jiva who is the seer, the doer, the 
enjoyer, the experience!*. f^T: Imah, these (Prana, &c.). Sodasa, sixteen. 

Kilah, parts or principles. Instruments or organs of enjoyment and ex¬ 
perience. Purusayanah, going to Purusa “ w T hose existence depends 

on the very idea in the Purusa ”—who have no independent existence but in 
the thought of the Purusa. Purusam, Purusa, Vasudeva. Prapya, 

having obtained. Astam, end, vanishment, not known to the ignorant. 

Gachchhanti, go to. (As the razor’s edge becomes blunted when struck 
on a stone, so these principles smash up). Bhidyete, remain in ab¬ 
straction, in the idea of the wise. ^ Cha, and. Asam, their. 

Namarupe, name and form. Puruse, “ In the Purusa,” “ in the bosom of 

the Lord.” lti, thus, gq Evam, alone. 51^3% Prochyate, are so called 
by the wise). Sah, he. Esali, this (jiva). ^T^rT Akalah, non-part; 

above all Principles. * The kala Devas having attained liberation.” 
Amritah, immortal. Becomes one whose insentient principles are lost, and 
therefore “deathless for the death of the jiva is caused by the kalas or princi- 
ciples, />., the jiva stands stripped of all principles, vreffi Bhavati, becomes, is. 

Tat, (about) that, qq*: Esah, this. : Slokah, verse. 

5. As the rapid oeean-goiug rivers, on reaching the ocean, go to 
rest, but do not lose their name and form, and are said “ they are in the 
ocean ” ; so indeed of the Great Beholder, these sixteen Purusa-going Prin¬ 
ciples, on reaching the Purusa, go to rest, without losing their name and 
form, and men say, “ They are in the bosom of the Lord,”—He is this 
above all Principles, the Immortal. About it is this verse.—64. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word is ‘ samudre ’ in the locative case, and not * samudrah ’ in the nominative 
case, similarly it is “puruse” and not “ purusah.” If they are taken in the nominative 
case, then the meaning would be that the rivers and the jivas become identical with the 
ocean and the Purusa : and thus would contradict the next sentence which says, “ they 
do not lose but retain their name and form.” Though the ignorant do not perceive the 
names and forms of the rivers, when they rest in the ocean, yet the names and forms per¬ 
sist, so the Released souls, the Muktas, resting in Visnu retain their names and forms 
intact. The word “ bhidyate ” comes from the root “bhid, ” which nowhere has the sense 
of 4 to lose ‘ to destroy.’ Even when applied to pots, jars, &e., by‘bheda’ is meant 
breaking into several parts. That is the primary meaning of 1 bheda * 4 Division.’ It is 




194 


PRA&XA-UPAMSAD. 


only in the secondary sens© that we say “the pot is lost.” when it is broken, Butin 
this verse the secondary sense cannot even be taken. The name and form cannot be scat¬ 
tered in different places, like unto the fragments of a pot. Therefore, the word “ bhidyaie” 
must mean “ remain divided from each other, and from the ocean or Purusa, by their names 
and forms.” These two keep each separate. Moreover in the next verse, it is clearly de¬ 
clared that the kalas are not lost in the Person, but remain steadfast in Him. Therefore, the 
sense of the whole verse is that in that Purusa, every jiva retains his separate name and 
form each ; and so also the kala devatas. The setting mentioned here is like the setting of 
the sun, an illusion to the ignorant, who think that the sun has set, because they do not see 
him. So also in theSattatva, we read:— “Salutation to Him in wiiom exist Prana and the 
other kalas, in Mukti, separate from each other, retaining their name and form.” More¬ 
over in the sentence “nama-rupad vimuktah” generallj’ translated “free from name and 
form,” the word vi-mukta does not mean “ freed ” but “ not freed ” for such is the force of 
the participle vi , as vi-priya=“ not loved,” vi-yoga = not united, i.e., separation. Similarly 
in the sentence “ nama-rupa vihaya,” the word is not vihaya but a vihaya, as we have already 
explained before. Moreover the Sriiti says “ Verily the name is eternal, the Visvadevas 
are eternal.” (Vote : —Visvadevas denote form). So also there are numerous texts showing 
that identity is not lost in Mukti. Thus the Rig Veda, X. 90-16 speaks of Devas who 
had attained Moksa (perfection) in the past kalpas and came out of the primeval Purusah 
in the beginning of this creation to co-operate with Him. “The Devas who had worship¬ 
ped Visiiu (Yajfia) in the past kalpa, with the yajfia consisting of knowledge and action, be¬ 
come the First upholders of the cosmos in this kalpa; they, in that, world, where the Per¬ 
fected Devas of the past Kalpa, like Brahma and the rest reside, enjoy beautitude and great¬ 
ness be-fitting them.” The plural number in purve sadhyah shows that the Muktas retain 
their separate identity. So also in the Chliandogya Up. VIII. 12. 3, we find the Muktas 
retaining their consciousness. “ lie wanders about there eating, sporting, delighting, #c.” 
So also the Taitt. Up. II. I-1, declares that the knowors of Brahman enjoy all desireable 
objects, along with the Omniscient Brahman. So also the Rig Veda, X. 71. 11, shows that 
even after Mukti, the sages perform certain functions: Some sages devote themselves to 
the maintenance and preservation of the Richas (Cosmic Physical Laws): other sages 
similarly maintain and preserve the Yajus (Cosmic Astral Laws) ; a third class of sages 
after Mukti, preserve the sciences of humanity and teach them to the mankind, &e.” All 
this shows that the final Release is not a state of the loss of identity, nor one-ness with 
Visnu in the sense of identity, lie is the best, higher than all the Muktas, the All-full 
Narayana. 

Note. — The sentence is analysed as If there be no 

elided then the phrase would mean “ losing name and form :” Otherwise it would 
mean “ not losing name and form”—a diametrically opposed meaning. But to the elision 
of there is this objection, that the word nama-rnpc is in dual case and no san¬ 
dhi can take place after a dual case ending in ^ and because it is pragrihya, (Panini 

and I* 1* 11 anc I VI. I. 125. This rule of Pragrihya, however, is not 

of universal application, ) 

Mantra 6 . 

mj ^IT I ?T 

TOT spg: qpsTm ffa II i II 

Arff, sp ikes, fq Iva, like. Rathanabhau. in the nave of the 

wheel, Kalah, parts, Yasmin, in whom. ^fg^TT: Pratisthita^i, ar$ 










VI PRA$NA, 8. 


105 


firmly established. r Tam, him. tsi Vedyam, knowable. Purusam, the 

Purusa. Veda, know. zrqT Yatha, so that. *tt not. q: Vah, you. 
Mrityuh, death. 'TTft°3OT'‘ Parivyathah, ma’y cause pain. ^ Iti, thus. 

6. Like the spokes in the nave of the wheel, in whom the kalas 
are established, know ye Him, the knowable person ; so that death may 
not pain you.—65. 

Mantra 7. 

* 

^TTrT: TORrftfrI U^ll 

cRR Tan, them. Bharadvaja and others. £ Ha, verily. Uvacha, said. 

Etavat, so that, only so far, not beyond this, qq Eva, indeed. Aham, 

I. Etat, this Brahman. qr Param, high, supreme. agj Brahma, Brahman. 

Veda, I know. ^ Na, not. ^3: Atah, than this. qr* Param, greater. 

Asti, is. ffa Iti, thus. 

7. To them, he said : Thus far 1 know this Supreme Brahman. I 

know not any greater than He.—66. 

Note — None knows Brahman fully : even the great sages like Pippalada, or the Eter¬ 
nals like Kama, Brahma, &c., know only a portion of Him. 

Mantra 8. 

% % ?T: TTdT qt 

TR cTRTUtfrT I TO TO qRRTfqvq: ||q|| 

ife VW II % II 

R Te, they, rw Pam, him. =sHfo?cr Archayantah, praised, worshipped. 
Tvam, thou. fq, Hi, verily'. q: Nah, our. fqcH Pita, father. q: Yah, who. 
WUcK* Asmakam, ours, or us. Avidyayah, ignorance, qt Param, 

extreme. qru^Param, the end. Tarayasi, crossest; showest. qrq Iti, 

thus, to Namah, salutation, qrq Paramarisibhyah, to the Great Sages 

and Seers. to Namah, salutation. q*q Param arisibhyah to the great 

sages and seers. 

8. They praised him : Thou art our father who carries us over the 
infinite ocean of our ignorance. Salutation to the Great Risis, salutations 
to the Great Risis.—67. 

MADHYA’S SALUTATION. 

Reverence again ancl again to Hari—to Thee who art my dearest and most beloved: 
Thou art the totality of the highest joy ; and Thy body is the most beautiful of all visions 
and giver of all happiness. 

& sierra ii 

srenjftr: 11 aid* 57^5:11 f^ssrsrr: II 

11 n n ^ srrfcr: 

5TT%: 5IT%: l| 


P ' "t <V -1} 


Finis. 














Alphabetical Index, of the Mantras. 


Page. 

5 ... ... ... 33 

W'l q;q?4t q^q...I, 3 ... ... ... 3 

yq ztfk TgTqr^n qqfcr..’.v, t ... ... ... 41 

W'l |ft qTTSraqgnsqerqq: qq^j qqqrq.fq qq...FII, 1 ... 22 

3Pq |q ¥imqr q^W: qq^5 qqq?qrcqq |qn...H, 1 ... 14 

3TO |ft |pq: SftqqiW qqs» ST qT f I...V, 1 ... ... 39 

W'l |q ?5%5Tf 4TK545T: qsp*j qqqr?5S<rcrenT:...Vf, l ... 45 

W'l |q ^TqWiDT qpq: qsr^ ¥FTqqqfSTq...lV, 1 ... 30 

?TqTR[cq q^qq.qqqr^...!, 0 ... ... ... 5 

^qq^rnq q^rq:...ni, 7 ... ... ... 26 

?iqrqbjiqqHTsIirqqqr...T, 10 ... ... ... 9 

5Rr‘ q srarTqforeq?q...T, 14 ... ... ... 12 

3TST sq 1 sqqTifr q^T...Vr, 6 ... ... ... 50 

3TST ?q tqqT^T...n 6 ... ... ... 17 

?rtT?:rqt q q3qqfq^t5q...T, 13 ... ... ... li 

?qq?q qq qror 3iTq^...in, ... ... ... 23 

sm^qr ? q stot sfq^q...T, 5 ... ... ... 4 

?!T^cqT 5 q qrn: qpn:...IIJ, 8 ... ... ... 27 

S^Scq smOtrjTSTT...II, 9 ... ... ... 19 

qcqfrWTqRT STTq...IIT, 12 ... ... ... 29 

qrfnrsq q^fqsqrft?jT...v, 7 ... ... ... 43 

qq % s;qr sfrqr...iv, 9 ... ... ... 37 

qqnfsieqrqq ^:...([, 5 ... ... ... 17 

?fi 'fl'T qrrufsTJ 5£TgqTJT ^qr* I ?[Tfffqi...Beginning and ending 

with ... 1 

# i;%qir =q ¥TT^[3T:...r, 1 ... ... ... 1 

q^rf qc!*jTTqfqqq...T, 15 ... ... ... 12 

qsq st |t qrqTaRRlr qr...ir, 2 ... ... ... 14 

qsq sr |TqiqTfqq5rpi.^j^T...iiT, 2 ... ... 22 

qst ^Irqrq 1 ?|qren 5 rfts...vr, 2 ... ... 46 

qsq ST tTqpq I qq| ST=qqqq...V, 2 ... ... 39 

qsl srfirqrq 1 qsrrqq^T I...T, 4 ... ... ... 3 

q*q ST liqrq 1 qqr qpq [V, 2 ... ... , tt 14 

?6 














( H ) 


cnrft^T%cTT^;...VI, 7 


?r %...vr, s 

5*iJg:...U, 4 

cmra^T f?r^T...i, 10 

srffcW...U, 8 


’7r^^sTTfr...iir, 


a5rnrf?raiT% *ra...ll, i 
strnT^ *HL.ti, 1; 


in ?mOT...iir, c 





Page. 

3 

... 

... 

• • • 

15 

..T,'2 

• • • 

... 

... 

2 


• • • 

. • . 


51 

TJ...V, 0 

• • • 

• . • 

• • « 

42 


• • • 

... 

• • • 

27 


• • • 

... 

*#. 

51 



... 


16 


• • • 

... 

• M 

13 


• • • 

• • • 


18 

..T, 11 

• • • 

... 


10 

10 

... 

... 

... 

38 

94. 

', 8 




£ 4: 

35 


... 

• • • 


17 


... 

... 

•.. 

20 

V,3 



« . . 

32 

12 


... 


11 

1, U 



•. • 

20 

V,o 




41 

3 

... 

... 

... 

28 

[1,4 

... 

... 


24 

1, 10 




19 

I V, 4 

... 

... 


33 

.11, 12 

... 

... 


20 

S 11 


• • • 

... 

38 

..], a 


• • • 


7 

..it, u 



... 

19 

O 

9 




47 

...I, 7 

• • • 


. • . 

0 

0 




s 

•...VI, 4 

• • . 



47 

...IV, 7 

... 

... 


35 

..vi, 5 

... 

• • • 

... 

48 

T , fi 

... 

... 

... 

34 

■V,3 

... 

* • • 

... 

40 



... 

*♦» 

25 































INTRODUCTION. 


The words “ Mundaka Upanisad ” literally mean “ the Secret Doc¬ 
trine (upanisad) for the shaved ones (Mundaka). Was the total shaving 
of the head; the mark of a monk among the Atharvans and is this which 
is referred to in the last verse of this Upanisad by the phrase Siro-vrata 
“ Vow of the head ”? 


SRlSA CHANDRA VASU. 















MDNDAKA UPANISaD 

• • • 

FIRST MUNDAKA. 

m • 

First Ivhanda. 

• • 

Peace chant . 

£TTT3 ; 11 

>7? Bhadram, good. Karnebhih, with (our) ears. Snnu- 

yAma, may we listen to. Devah, O Gods ! Bhadram, good. yi&w 

Pa^yema, may we see. sg^pT- aksabhih, with (our) eyes. 7 T 5 RT: Yajattrah, 
Holy ones! Rsf*: Sthiraih, firm. Angaih, with limbs, Tustu- 

vamsah, extolling you. *T^PT: Tanubhih, with bodies, ft Vi, fully. 

Asema, we attain. Devahitam, appointed bv the God. Divinely ordained. 

Vat, which. 3TTg: Ayuh, term of life, 

(a) 0 Devas of senses ! May we (live long to) listen 

with our ears what is pleasant, and to see with our eyes 
what is beautiful. 0 Holy Ones ! may we with firm limbs 
and bodies strong, extolling you always, attain the full term 
of our God-ordained life. (Rig Veda 1. 89. 8.) 

3* mfcr: ^TT-cT: STTFcI: II 

^T?rf Svasti, prosperity ; immortality ; indestructibility ; welfare. Nah, 
us. Indrah, Indi a or the Powerful, a name of Visnu. Vriddhasra- 

vah, illustrious ; far, praises (srava); whose praises are sung far and wide, of 
ancient fame ; praised of yore. Svasti, prosperity, m Nah, us. Pusa, 

PQsan, the nourisher, a name of Visnu. Visvavedah, the knower of 











202 


MU NT) A KA-UPA VIS AD. 


all or the possessor of all wealth (Vedamsi, Dhanani.) Svasti, welfare. 

Nah, us. T&rksyah, the son of Triksa or motion, i e. f Garuda, a name of 

Visnu. Arista-nemih, uninjured chariot felly. Nemi or the rim of whose 

chariot wheel is perfect and imperishable, whose weapons or nemi are not 
injured (arista) by any opponent ; safety-wheeled. Svasti nah, pros¬ 
perity to us. Brihaspatih, the Lord of Mighty Ones, a name of Visnu. 

Dadhatu, may vouchsafe. 

(b) May Visnu, the powerful, the ancient of fame, 
vouchsafe us prosperity, may Visnu, the nourisher, the 
knower of all hearts, give us what is well for us, may Visnu, 
the Lord of swift motion, the felly of whose wheel never 
wears out, be propitious to us, may Visnu, the protector of 
the great ones, protect us too. (Rig Veda I, 89. 6.) 

MADHVA’S SALUTATION. 

I bow to the Supreme Spirit (Purusotfama) whose powers are infinite, 
who is omnipotent, bliss, undecaying, eternal, unborn, undying, and 
unchanging. 

Mantra i. 

3* tot %tot srw tto^ tot tot i 

*T TOT^IT TORTOT%TO2] r TO SITf ii > w 

Brahma, Brahma, the four-faced one, called Virinchi. Deva- 

nam, of (among) the Devas, the Shining Ones, the enlightened, like ^esa, &c. 
TO*: Prathamah, first in time or by qualities. The firs-tbegotten of 
Visnu, the eldest son. Sam-ba-bhGva, fully manifested, was created 

by Visnu, was born. Visvasya, of full, of the whole Universe. 

Karta, the Creator Bhuvanasya, of the world, of the created. ttfht 

Gopta, protector, preserver. Sah, he (Brahma.) TOTT^r Brahma-Vidyam, 
the science of the Supreme. Sarva-Vidya-pratistham, the basis 

of the foundation of all knowledge. =to^T3 Atharvaya, to Atharva. SRgj^TO 
Jyestha-putraya, to the eldest son. Praha, told fully. 

1. Brahma, the Creator and the Protector of the whole 
universe, was the first-born (of Visnu) among all the Shin¬ 
ing Ones. He taught the science of Brahman, the foundation 
of all sciences, to his eldest son, Atharvan.—1. 

MADHVA’S COMMUNTAUY. 

In the Vaivasvata Manvantara, Atharvan was the first-bom of Brahma, 
while Mi Ira, Varuna, Praheti, and IT eti were born after him. 





J MUNDAKA, 7 KHANPA, 3. 


203 


la the first Ivalpa, Siva was the first-born of Brahma. Sanaka 
and the rest were the first-born in Yaraha Kalpa, while Brahma, is the 
first-born of Visnu. (Brahmanda PuranA). 

Mantra 2. 

^ ^TTT^T^PT WRW 

Atharvane, to Atharvan. qf Yam, what. Pravadeta, told, 

ggn Brahma, Brahma, Tam, that. g*r Pura, of old. Uvacha, told. 

Angire. to Angir. The word ends with r and is declined as 
srsjf^r Brahma-Vidyam, Divine Wisdom. Sail, he. ^TRsnrra Bharadvajayaj 
of the family of Bharadvaja. usmsra Satyavahaya, Satyavaha. gr? Praha, 
told. Bharadvajah, Bharadvaja’s son. Angirase, to Angiras. 

Paravaram, higher (esoteric) and lower (exoteric). The science which 
is both Para and Apara Vidya. 

2. What Brahma had taught to Atharvan, that science 
of Brahman, Atharvan taught in ancient times to Angir ; he 
taught it to Satyavaha, son of Bharadvaja, and Bharadvaja 
taught it, that which is both exoteric and esoteric, to 
Angiras.—2. 

Note.— Paravaram is a Karmadharaya compound showing that the Para and the Apard- 
vidyas are really identical, contained in one and the same texts of the Vedas, 

Mantra 3. 

*fR^T ^ 1 *T^TSTT«rTSr^T | 

ferret *nr<frfcr 11 ^ 11 

^aunakah, Saunaka. ^ Ha, indeed. % Vai, verily. Maha- 

^alah, of the Great Hall, means he who performs annually great yajnas. ^rrjf^r 
Ahgirasam, Angiras. Vidhivat, according to the rules, Upa- 

sanna^, approached, cpjxS Paprachchha, asked. Kasmin, by what, 

in what. 3 Nu, verily, Bhagavah, O Lord ! f^n% Vijnate, being known. 

^ Sarvam, all. Idam, this. The Karmas and the Devas. pf*TRT Vijhatam, 
known. Bhavati, becomes. 

3. Saunaka of the Great Sacrifices, having duly ap¬ 
proached Angiras, asked, “ 0 Lord, by knowing what can 
all this be known.”—3, 


27 









204 


MUNVAKA-UPA mSAD. 


Note .—The question asked is really three-fold. First, by what authoritative teaching 
do we know the Karraas and the Devatas. What are the Books or sources from which we 

may learn the nature of the Devatas and the method of approaching them. Secondly, even 

<1 

when the method of performing Karinas is known, what farther must be known, in order 
that the knowledge of the fruit may be obtained. Thirdly, even when the knowledge of 
the fruit of Karma is obtained, what further must be known that the fruit may be obtained. 

Mantra 4. 

cT# 1 

t im fw ^ n« n 

Tasmai, to him, to £>aunaka. Sab, he, Augiras. ^ Ha, verily, 
gladly. Uvacha, said. \ Dve, two. fqsq Vidye, teachings. Vedit- 

av r 3 r e, ought to be known. ffS Ri, thus. This word should be construed with 
the last word. ^ Ha, verily, w Sma, indeed. ^ Yad, what. Brahma- 

vidah, the knowers of Brahman. Vadanti, sav mi Para, the Higher 

(Esoteric.) The teaching that refers to the Supreme. When a mantra is 
understood as applying to the highest. Cha, and. trq Eva, even, only. All 
sciences are of two kinds and not more, Apara, the lower (the exoteric). 

^ Cha, and. 

4. To him replied Angiras, c Two Sciences ought to 
he known, for thus say the knowers of Brahman, the higher 
and even the lower science.’—4. 

Note .—The words convoying these teachings are not different. When higher and the 
principal meaning is read into them, it is called esoteric, when the scriptures are read in 
their ordinary meaning they arc exoteric. The force of the word “ Eva,” in the above 
indicates that the tilings are not really two but one. When a person reads with the 
highest vehicle, which reveals to him the inner purport of the sacred book, the teaching 
becomes esoteric, blit when ho reads them with his lower intellect it is exoteric. 

This verse answers tho first question raised in the last mantra as well as tho second. 
All lvarmas are to bo learnt from the Apara Vidya. When so learnt, this knowledge becomes 
perfected when it is supplemented by the knowledge of the Supremo Self, the subject 
of the Para Vidya. This answers the second question. Therefore the verse says : Two 
Vidyas ought to be known, &c. 

Mantra 5. 

wmiismmt tW q^qf 

sqtmqmfri 1 q?r w nvui 

Tatra, among these two. Apara, the lower (are). Rig- 

Vedah, the Rig-Veda. Yajur-Vedah, the Yajur-Veda. Sdma- 

Vedah, the Sama-Veda. Atharva-Vedah, the Atharva-Veda. Rr^r 

Siksa, the Orthography, and phonetics, Kalpali, the Rituals. 

Vyakaranam, the Grammar. Niruktam, Etymology, and lexicography. 

Clihandah, Prosody, sairRR? Jyctisam, Astronomy. ^nr Iti, thus. 
















1 M UVD AKA, I KHAVDA, 5. 


205 


Atha, now. q*r Par§, the higher. 3ST Yaya, by which, Aksaram, the 

Imperishable ; the Wcrd (Brahman). Adhigamyate, is apprehended. 

5. Among these, the lower sciences are theEig-Veda, < 
the Yajnr-Veda, the Sama-Veda, the Atharva-Veda, the 
phonetics, the liturgy, the Grammar, the lexicon, the proso- ' 
dy and astronomy. The hi gher is that by w hich the I mperish - j 

able is known.—5. 

- “— 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Vidyas like the Rig-Veda, &c., are considered Apara, when they 
do not designate Visnu, hut are employed in a ritualistic sense. But these 
very sciences become the Para Vidya, when they express the Lord Visnu. 
Thus we find in Parama Samhita. 

The true Bhagavatas chanted the praises of Visnu through the hymns 
of the Rig-Veda (when acting as Hotri priests), they praised the Lord 
through the songs of the Sama-Veda (when officiating as Udgatri priests), 
they offered oblations into the fire with the mantras of the Yajnr-Veda, 
in honour of Visnu alone, and they recited His praises through the 
Atharva-Veda, and the Itihasa and Puranas. 

They who do not consider any one to be equal to Visnu, nor superior 
to Him ; who know Him to be the Best of All are verily the best of the 
devotees and Bhagavatas. 

In the Vedas, in the Ramayana, in the Puranas, and the Mahabharata, 
throughout these scriptures—in their beginning, middle and end, Visnu 
alone has been sung everywhere. Those who know that the Brahman 
alone has been taught in the beginning, middle and the end of these 
books, get the grace of the Sabda Brahman, that abides five-fold in the 
four Vedas and the Itihasa, the fifth Veda. 

That true, whom the workers of the True praise in the true Vakas 
and Anuvakas (two topics of the Yajur-Veda), in the true Hisads and the 
Upanisads (two topics of the Atharva-Veda), in the Satyas (the Rik ?) 
and in the Samans is the Lord Visnu alone. 

That goal which all the Vedas declare, for whose sake they lay down 
austerities, desiring whom Great Ones perform Brahmacharya, that path 
I will declare to thee with brevity. vKath Up., I. 2, 15 ; Gita, VIII. 11). 

And that which is to be known in all the Vedas am 1 alone and I 
indeed the Veda-knower and the author of the Vedanta. (Gita, XV. 15). 
(This also shows that Visnu alone is the Primary object of worship taught 







206 


MUNDAKA-UPANlSAD. 


in all the Vedas and no other deity ; for such is the force of the word 
* eva.’) So also the original Sruti:— 

“ The fourteen sources of the great Vidyas should be known.” 

Note —The four Vedas, tkeltikasas, the Puranas, the six Vedangas, the Smritis and the 
Mimainsa constitute the fourteen sources of the Vidyas. 

In ancient times the Paiicha-Ratras and the Vedas were all one ; and 
in that Krita age they were known by the single appellation of the 
Root-Veda (because it taught or revealed the great Root, Lord Visnu). 
Then they were not known by the names of the Rig, Saman, &c. Nor in 
those days, the names like Indra, &c., were applied to any being other 
than Visnu. For in those times, Hari alone was designated by the 
names of Brahma, Iiudra, Indra, &c. He alone was worshipped as the 
Supreme God. The Devas like Brahma, &c., called also Manu, were 
worshipped with love, in that age, because they were the revealers 
of the Truth about God, because they were the fathers and the 
guardians of humanity and because they were agents of the Lord. 

/ (They were not worshipped as the Supreme God). Bec ause men were 
the worshippers of one God alone, therefore in the Krita age they 
obta ine d Hari alone. Thus there is nothing else in the VedasTmt 
the highest Truth. There is really no such thing in it as a higher or a 
lower Vidya, because all the Vedas beginning with the Rig-Veda 
and ending with Anuvyakhya have come out of the Lord : therefore let 
all worship Hari alone. For Brahma and Devas, Manus and men worship 
Him with the entire undivided, single Veda and know Him alone. Thus 
it was in the Krita age. In the Treta age, when intelligence declines 
and men become incapable of such worship, then even they should adore 
Hari with the Pancha-ratras and the divided Vedas, Rig, Yajur, Sama, 
&c. Hari should then be worshipped through the divided Vedas and 
the Pancha-ratras, by men of the Treta Yuga. In the Dvapara age 
men should worship Visnu through Pancha-ratras alone (if they are 
incapable of worshipping Him through the Vedas). Similarly in the 
Kali age men should worship the Lord Hari by reciting His name only 
(if they are incapable of worshipping Him through the Vedic and the 
Pancha-ratra mantras). 

The Veda was one in the Krita age. It became three-fold in the 
Treta age. In the Dvapara age it became five-fold, while in the Kali age 
the Veda is almost going to disappear everywhere. 

The highest Dharma of the Krita age should be observed in the Kali 
also. The other Dharmas taught for Treta, and subsequent ages were meant 







1 MUNI? AKA, T RUANDA, 6. 


207 


for those only who were totally incapable of observing the highest Dharma, 

(so in those ages also the highest was observed by those who were capable 
of it). 

Because all men were worshippers of one God in the Ivrita age, ( 
therefore all the Vedas were understood then as directing the worship of / 
one Lord. But in the Treta, men began to love other objects than the I 
Supreme, and so the Vedas same to be divided into three parts (and so ) 
understood by the people of that age, according to their three-fold 7 
nature of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas and they employed the Vedic mantras • 
for the attainment of those objects). 

Therefore, the one Visnu, the Eternal, should be understood through 
all the Vedas, adored in all sacrifices and ceremonies, always to be medi¬ 
tated upon and reverenced. (Narayana Samhita). 

The words of the Vedas degenerate in their meaning with the age and 
with such decline lose their power of denoting Visnu, thus have we heard 
(Mahabliarata). 

So also in the Varaha Purana : — 

“I am to be seen through the Vedas, the Pancha-ratras, through 
Bhakti (Love), and through sacrifice and through nothing else can I be 
seen even in millions of years. 5 ’ 

Even in this Upanisad, there is taught first the Apara Vidya the 
Karma in the verses “Mantresu Karmani, &c. (I. 2, 1). Then is taught 
the highest Vidya, the knowledge of the Imperishable, commencing with 
the verse “Yena Ak^aram Purusa Veda” (Mu. Up., I. 2-13). Then it 
is further shown that persons who have studied the four Vedas, or whose 
Samskaras have been performed according to the four Vedas, are alone 
Adhikaris of this Vidya—(for they alone by their previous training and 
education, can profit by this teaching). For at the end, the Upanisad 
says:— “ this must be taught to him alone who has performed the vow of 
the head.” Now J$iro-Vrata or the vow of the head, is merely illustrative 
of other ceremonies peculiar to the other Vedas also. As says the Vyasa 
Sinjuti *—‘‘ He who performs the vow of his own Veda and who has gone 
through all the Vedas, is entitled to study the occult Vidyas, but never 
those who have not performed the vow of their Vedas.” 

Mantra 6 . 

crqqrftjqTq fqg 

WlTJi II i II 




203 


MUKVAKA-UPANISAD. 


Yat, which. ft? Tat, that. 3 ^ 3 ? Adresyam, invisible, other than 
the visible, cannot be apprehended by the senses. Agrahyam, cannot 

be seized (by the mind of the ignorant, or cannot entirely be comprehended 
by the mind), Agotram, without clan, without genus. Avarnam, 

without caste, without species, Achaksuh-srotram, without eyes 

and ears. FT? Tat, that. ^PTTfiQ'Tr^? Apanipadam, without hands and feet. 
Rcq Nityam, eternal, ftjg Vibhum, All-powerful or all-pervading. ^*TFf? Sarva- 
gatam, omnipresent, cntei ing in all. Su-suksmam, extremely subtle, 

infinitesimal. FT? Tat, that. 3T^T? Avyayam, unchanging, *T? Yat, who, 
Bhuta-yonim, womb of elements, cause of beings or of creatures. 
<TTCTF3f^FT Pari-pasyanti, sec around or clearly see. WJ- Dhirah, the wise, the 
tranquil ones. 

6. The tranquil in heart see the Imperishable, as the 
source of all beings, and know Him to be invisible, unseizable, 
without genus, without species, without eyes or ears, without 
hands or feet, all-powerful, eternal, all-pervading and ex¬ 
tremely subtle, as the unchanging source of all beings—6. 

Mantra 7. 

WT m: ||VSU 

Yatha, as. Orna-Nabhih, wool-navel, the spider. ft*t% Srijate, 

emits, throws cut. rr^ Grihnate, takes up, destroys, Prithivyam, in 

the earth. Osadhayah, herbs, plants. Sam-bhavanti, grow, come 

out. ?ETFT- Satal.i, fi om the living. J^I? Pui usat, man. ^JdSTFmq Kesa-1 omani, 
the hair of the head and of the body. ft^T hatha, so. ^T(? Aksarat, from the 
Imperishable. snrei? Sam-bhavati, comes out. %% Ilia, this. Visvam, 

the universe. 

7. As the spider stretches forth and gathers together its 
thread, as herbs grow out of the earth, as from a living man 
come out the hair, so from (he Imperishable comes out this 
universe. — 7. 

Note . — The illustration of the spider and its thread shows that the material universe 
is a reality by itself, not a Parinama or modification of Brahman, and always remains out¬ 
side of Brahman ; as the thread remains outside tho spider, when he streteheth it out, it is 
creation ; when he gathers it together and wraps it round himself, it is Pralaya or destruc¬ 
tion. This shows that the material world is neither a modification (Parinama) of Brahman, 
nor an illusion (vivarta) superimposed upon Brahman. The second illustration shows that 
j ivas also come out of Brahman ; as seeds remain latent under ground in the winter but 








1 MUNDAKA, I K HAND A, 9. 


209 


burst forth into herbs and plants in the summer, so the jivas remain latent in pralaya with 
their different karraasas their seeds, and come out at the time of creation, as trees of differ¬ 
ent kinds, but with their root always in Brahman. The third illustration shows that as 
out of a conscious man come out unconsciously and without any exertion on his part, hairs, 
nails, &c., so the jivas and the lokas come out of Brahman without any effort on His part. 

Mantra 8. 

cTWT m I 

HFT II q || 

Tapasa, by tapas or penance, by meditation or thought, Chiyate, 

swells, becomes joined with, srgf Brahma, The Brahman, efrf: Tatah, from that 
(union). Annam, food, the Matter or Prakriti. Abhi-jayate, is 

born again (in the beginning of a Kalpa.) Annat, from the Prakriti. 

qfZTf: Pranah, the Cosmic Life-breath. jr; Manali, the Cosmic mind, the thought 
world. Satyam, the true, the vijnana or Buddhi or the Cosmic Reason. 

The five elements like akasa, &c. Lokah, the (seven) worlds. Kami- 

asu, in the works or in the jivas. ^ Cha, and. i ^ Amritam, the undying, 

the Nectar, the immortal. 

8. The Brahman united with Tapas (the root of Matter 
and Thought), and thence arose the Matter, from the Matter 
arose the Breath, the Manas, and the True, as well as the 
worlds (and karmas) and in the Ivannas the immortality 
itself.—8. 

Note— The 1 rooding or Tapas denotes reflection on the shape and character of the 
previous world which Brahman is about to reproduce. He creates the new world on the 
pattern of the old. (Ramanuja.) 

This also .shows that by the mere thought of Brahman (not by any modification of it 
or by any vivarta in it) comes out Matter and Karmas or jivas. The matter or annam 
gives rise to the seven lokas and triple powers, viz., Kriya-sakti (Prana) Jnana-s'akti 
(manas) and Ichacha-s'akti (Satyam). This on the side of form ; while among the karmas 
(jivas) the Immortal Brahman himself takes up His residence. This verse further shows 
that the Prakriti and the jivas are co-eternal with Brahman, together with the Logos or 
Brahma. 

Mantra 9. 

,3: PdTRfMkM fTRH?! cR: I 

^ ^ stfkt 11 11 

fra - JTSW Igvgi 11 \ II 

3 : Yah, who. Sarvajnah, all-knowing. Sarvavit, all-understand¬ 
ing, or all-attaining (vindate.) ^ Yasya, whose. Jnana-mayam, con¬ 

sisting of wisdom, pure wisdom, ht Tapali, the meditation, the penance. 







210 


MUUD AKA-UP Am IS AD. 


rTW^T Tasmat, from Him. Etad, this. ggj Brahma, Brahma the Chatur- 

mukha or the Four-faced. Nama-rupam, the name-form, the Spirit- 

matter, the jiva. ^ Annam, Prakrit!. Jayate, is born. 

9. From Him who is All-knowing and All-understand¬ 
ing, whose tapas is the Primeval Wisdom comes out of this 
triad :—Brahma, the Nama-rupa or the Jivas, and the Annam 
or the Prakriti.—9. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

The words “etat Brahma” mean this Chaturnmkha Brahma. 

Note.-— The first Chapter opens with the statement that Brahma was the first of the 
shining ones that came out of Visnu at the beginning of a creative period, and that 
He is the First Teacher of the secret doctrine, the Theosophy, the Brail ma-Yidya. It 
then goes on to mention how this Brahma-Yidya or Theosophy, is preserved for man¬ 
kind by a Lodge that is coeval with creation and whose present Head is known by the 
name of Afigirasa. An initiate called Saunaka Js the questioner in this Upanisad : and 
he puts the enigmatical question what is that one science, one substance by knowing 
which everything else is known. Hoes there exist any science from whose principles 
the principles of all other sciences can be deduced ? The answer to that is : “ Yes. 
There exists such a science. It is the science of the Syllable—Aksara-Yidya ; as distin¬ 
guished from the science of the words." All sciences like the Physical (Itik) Theological 
(Yajus), Spiritual (Saman)— Occult (Atliarvan) are summed up in the science of the 
Syllable, the science of the Imperishable Aksara-Yidya. But this science is not contained 
in any particular book. All religious scriptures of every people—scriptures that 
have come from the Great Lodge—contain it : but one must read these scriptures between 
the lines ; or rather between the Syllables (Aksara). This reading between the syllables, 
known as Kabbalistic science in the West, is almost lost now’ in India. Every aksara or 
letter had a numerical value as well as denoted a particular substance or quality. 
The sacred scriptures must be read wfith this key in order to understand their secret 
meaning. When the Scriptures are read in their exoteric sense, with the surface meaning, 
they are called Apara. When read with this key of the Imperishable, they are 
turned into Para Yidya. All sacred scriptures have thus a tw T o-fold meaning ; and 
hence the impossibility of translating them, and prohibition against translating them. 

The Science of the Imperishable has some broad outlines, and it is these that the 
Mundaka gives in its six chapters. The three Great Imperishablesare God (Brahma), Soul 
(Karma), and Matter (Annam), tho last tw r o subordinate to the first. 







FIRST MUNI) AKA. 

Second Khanda. 

Mantra i. 

^cTUTI 

^RTrH I rTF^rmsT R?T<T ^ R=^TT: 

^rT^T sir#; n $ ii 

Tat, that. q^ Etat, this, Satyam, the true. q?#g Mantresu, in the 
Mantras, in the inspired hymns (in the four higher planes whence the mantras 
are intuited.) ^rrTO Karmani, the works, the energies. Kavayah, the 

poets, the seers, the sages, grfa Yani, which, Apasyan, saw, discover¬ 

ed, were inspired with. rTIT^T Tani, them. %ciT3r* Tretayam, in the three lower 
planes'. Bahudha, diversely, in many ways. Santatani, branched 

our, stretched out, were performed. rTff^ Tani, them, Acharatha, prac¬ 

tise ye pw? Niyata n, regularly, diligently. ^r^T^T^TT- Satyakamah, ye 1 jvers 
of the truth, qq: Esah, this, q: Vah, for you. Pantha, the path. 

Sukritasya, of good works, Loke, to the world. 

1. This is the True. The karrnas which the sages 
revealed in the mantras, (were and do still exist in harmony 
as if one, in the higher beings, i.e., men of Ivrita age). They 
became in the three lower ages diversified in many ways 
(and crystallised into exoteric creeds). Practise, ye lovers of 
the True ! as a rule, the karrnas of the Kavis (the seers) (and 
not the diversities introduced into them by intellect unillu¬ 
mined by inspiration). This is your path to the world of 
the Good.—10. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word “ Satyam ” means “ the Lord.” Tat etat satyam means 
“ This is the True, i.e., God.” 

Satya-kamah means “ devoted to the True ”—desiring to please the 
Lord. Perform work desiring to please Him, for then even such work 
would become Part Vulva. Works not performed with this motive 
become but frail rafts”—“adridha yajna rupah.” 


2 S 



212 


MUNDA KA-UPA Is 1 ISA D. 


Mantra 2. 

rT^T-q-yriTTT^rR^Ifcfr: STrfwN^^T II R U 

Yada, wlien. Lelayate, plays, flickers. f| Hi, verily. 

Archis, the flame, the current. Samiddhe, well lighted, well attuned. 

Havya-vabane, in the vehicle of oblation. Tada, then. ^HT^dPTT 

Ajya-bhagau, the two portions of the clarified butter. Antarena, in the 

interspace, between. The space set apart for the two Ajyas or the offerings, 
snfrfp Ahutih, oblations. Pratipadayet, should perform, 

Sraddhaya, with faith. grfR Hutam, offered. 

2. When the current plays in the fully kindled vehi¬ 
cle of invocation, let a man make his invocations between 
the space set apart for the two oblations of butter, an invoca¬ 
tion of Faith.—11. 

Note.—When the Knmlalini—the archis, the flame in the ark—is fully active and moves 
freely up and down the vehicle of invocation, i.e., through the spinal cord, between the 
two natlis called Iila and Pifigahi, which are on the right and left of the Susumna, and 
called here the two portions of the clarified butter, then is the proper time to invoke with 
faith. 

Exoterically, in every Fire sacrifice two oblations are first made, on the right and 
left of the fire on the altar, when the fire is fully kindled. One on the right is offered with 
the words “ agnaye svaha *' that on the left with “somaya svaha.” This offering to tho 
two Eternals, Agni and Soma, must be made before any Deva can be invoked. 

The offerings must be made when the fire is fully kindled, never when it is imperfect¬ 
ly kindled, or smoking, &e. The seven stages through which the fire passes before it 
is fully lighted and fit to receive ahutis, are described in the fourth verse. 

When the kruti says “perform karmas” it means perform acts which are religious, 
which are duties and not acts in general. The karmas thus include all acts taught in tho 
S'rutis; and cover the control of thought (Sama), control of conduct (Dama), tolerance, 
meditation, &c. The Karmas do not mean merely ritualistic karmas. Tho karmas thus 
are of many kinds : (1) The offering to the Devas. (2) Tho study of sacred literature. 
(3) The offering to the ancestors. (4) The feeding of the stranger, &c. The Dcva-Yajna 
or offering to the Devas is the type of all Karmas. It is performed by offering oblations to 
fire and its other name is Homa. The verse gives the inner meaning of this Uoma and the 
method of its performance. The fire oblations are commenced by the offering of clarified 
butter (ajya-bhaga) unto fire. Then take place offerings of rice, cake, barley, sugar, scents, 
cliaru, &c. The ceremony is closed by another offering of clarified butter. Thus clarified 
butter (ghee) begins and ends all offerings—therefore the text sa}’s “ between the two 
Ajyabhagas all other oflerihgs should be made." This is then the method of all Homas : — 
Ajya-bhagas— other substances like Cham, &o M called ahutis and the second Ajya-bhagas. 
A brahinaehari oilers mere fuel to the fire. A householder should offer barley, rice, milk, 
curd, &c. All must oiler according to the stage or a crania in which they arc. 









I UUNDAKA, LI RUANDA, 


213 


MANTRA 3. 

*rerrr?r ^ 

^^^wfirfa?rr %r\wmzimw oftarf^fer 11 b n 

WA Yasya, whose. Of what Aduikai i. the sacrcJ fire (Saptaman) which 
remains without oblations (ahutam), destroys completely the seven worlds. 

Agni-hoti am, the fire sacnfice. Adarsum, (is) without the 

Darsa or the new-moon sacrifice. ^rfttO’TCrai A-paurnamasam, without the Full- 
moon sacrifice. A-chaturmasyam, without the f »ur months’ sacrifice. 

Anagrayanam, without the harvest or six-monthly- sacrifice. 

Atithi-varjitam, guest-devoid, unattended by guests. 

Ahutam, not offered, not having Homas. A-vaisva devam, without 

the Vaisvadeva ceremony. It is typical of the five Great Sacrifices, 

Avidhina, not accordin • to the rules, (as laid d nvn in the Grihya Sutras.) 
igcf* Hutam, offered. A-saptaman, up to seven. Or saptaman means a 

Septenary (lit.) that which has seven. It is a name of fire, because fire has 
seven flames. The word a, should be joined with hinasti. cRSl Tasya, his. 

Lokan, worlds. Hinasti, destroys. Becomes an obstacle. 

3. The seven worlds are lost of that man whose Agni- 
hotra is not accompanied by the new-moon and the full- 
moon, the four-monthly and the six-monthly offerings, or in 
which guests are not honoured, or who offers no sacrifice 
or who performs no Vaisva-deva ceremony, or who offers 
according to wrong rule. Or of such a person the Septenary 
(Fire) destroys completely the seven worlds, i.e., the Septe¬ 
nary does not allow that person to enter those worlds.—12. 

Note. -The person who in spite of being an adhikari does not offer oblations to the 
fire, loses the advantage of getting the help of the Fire Devas in his passage to the 
Higher worlds. 

Thus the Agnihotra is ordained for all men in the three Asramas : with appropriate 
meditations, &c. But this Agnihotra itself has several culminating periods or days, 
when ordinary daily offerings assume a little more gorgeous aspect. All the fortnightly, 
the monthly, the quarterly, the six-monthly or harvest offerings mast be performed. 
Lest the daily Homa should degenerate into individualistic prayer service, and the 
congregational aspect of it be forgotten, the daily individualistic Homa must be supple¬ 
mented by congregational service. The simplest of these is the fortnightly service 
called Darsa and Paurnatnasa— the New-moon and the Full-moon offerings. Those are 
done in assemblies and not in the solitude of one's family hearth. On these days one 
should throw open the door of his house to his neighbours, and invite them to participate 
with him in the worship of the Lord. The man who does not do so, who rests satisfied 
with his daily prayers, does not reap the full reward of the Agnihotra. Therefore the 
verse says “He whose Agnihotra is not accompanied by Darsa, &c., is as if he had not 











214 


MU FDA KA-UPANISAD. 


performed any sacrifice.” The Lord Agni (called Saptam&n the Septenary) destroys 
the worlds of such a man - that is obstructs the passage of that soul to higher worlds. 
Not only these congregational and seasonal services should be duly performed, but 
scrupulous attention should be paid to the proper discharge of the daily Agnihotra 
also. Not only this but other Yajnas also should be performed, such as, feeding the 
stranger, the Vaisvadeva offering, the c'raddha or offering to the Pitris, offering to 
the BhGtas and the poor and all animate creation. In fact, the well-known Five Great 
sacrifices should be performed by all who desire for their physical, moral and spiritual 
welfare. •> 

MANTRA 4. 

^ToTf ^ SRFSr* T ^ cfT 3T ^ I 

^ Wt %«TR5TRT 37% T: II3H 

Kali, the Black, the absence of all colours. Karali, the Terrific, 

the red colour. Cha, and. srpsRT Manojava, the swift as thought. ^ Cha, 
and. g^rrtrrr Su-lohita, very red. m ^ Ya cha, and what, rpjgfrrjr Su-dhumra- 
varna, deep colour of smoke, (purple). Sphuiingini, sparkling. 

Visva-rupi, having all foims, or colours, i.e. f pure white, another read¬ 
ing is Visva-ruchi. %Cr Devi, the shining one. SRTRHRr Lelayamanah, flicker¬ 
ing. Sapta-jillvali, the seven tongues. 

4. The black, red, green, yellow, purple or blue, violet 
and the shining white, are the seven tongues of the fire as 
displayed on the altar.—13. 

Note .—The Agnihotra is to be performed only in well-lit fire not in a fire which is 
smoking, &c. The seven tongues or flames of fire arc known by their respective names 
of Kali, &c. 

Mantra 5. 

trag 5TRPRR3 TWTTiM > 

^TRT qRT^tsf^TRT: 11*11 

Etesu, when these. ^RRR!i Bhrajamancsu, are shining. 3 : Yah, who. 

Charati, performs, offers oblations. 3RRFRT Yathah-kalam, at the right 
time, in due time. Cha, and. ^lgrT3: ahutayah, the oblations, or offerings. 

Hi adadayan, verily offering or giving. Tam, him. Nayanti, 

carry, qt[\: Etah, these (('blations). SOryasya, of the sun. Rasma- 

yah, ra\s. sr Yatra, where. ^fRr* Devanfim, of the devas. <tr: Fatih, lord, 
q*: Ekah, one. Adhivfisali, dwells, reigns supreme. 

5. He who works when those (seen) are shining 
throwing oblations in them in due time, (can go out of his 
body, for) these flames as solar rays, carry him there where 
reigns supreme the one Lord of the Devas.—14. 












/ MUhJVAKA, II K11 AlSOA, 6. 


215 


A T ote. — The man who makes his offerings in these flames properly and in propel 
season, is carried after death by these. 1 he last line of this verse really contains two 
sentences (1) tain nayanti etah yatra devanajn, &e. (2) tarn nayanti isuryasya rasma- 
yah yatra, &c. In the first “suryasya rasmaya” is omitted; in the second “ Etah ” 

is omitted. The verse is to be so interpreted, in order to show the two-fold objects- 

goal and the means of reaching it. The first tarn nayanti etah yatra, &e. “Him carrj 
these where dwells for kalpas the one Lord of the Devas shows the fruit or goal 
reached by karmas. The second “ tam nayanti suryasya rasinayah, &c.” shows the means 
or vehicles of reaching that goal. 

The Bkagavatas who are karmins are of two kinds: Apratikalambanas : who 
worship without any symbol: who do not take the help of any symbol : (2) Pratika- 

lambanah, those who take such help of symbol. The first class consists of Devas and 
others who see the Lord as All-pervading. All Devatas, one hundred among the Hishis, 
one hundred among the Gandharvas belong to this class of Adliikarins. The Pratikalam- 
banas are of two kinds (1) Dekalambana and (2) Pratimalambana. Those who see the 
Lord in their body, they are Dehfvlambanas. The ttishis, &e., called Madliyama Adhikaris 
belong to this class. “ They see the Atman in the Atman (body).” While the Pratima- 

lambanas are those who see God in an image-who can not imagine Him without some 

form. Men belong to this class. 

These homas—these sacrifices, gifts, penances, &e.—carry him, the worshipper, 
if he is an Apratikalambana to the abode of the Lord, namely to Vaikuntha Loka, where 
the Lord of the Devas, be., Yisnu dwells for ages. If he is a Dehalambana Adhikari, 
then these Homas carry him to Satyaloka, where dwells the Lord of the Devas, namely, 
Brahma, the Four-faced, If he is a Pratimalambana Adhikari then these Homas carry 
him to Mahar, Jana or Tapas Loka. They (the Pratimalambanas) dwell in these lokas 
for long aeons. When the fire kindled by Sankarsana's Breath—the great Pralaya fire 
burns up the three low^er planes, Bliur, Bhuvar, and 8var: the Mahar Loka becomes 
uninhabitable, and so thej" go leaving Mahar, Jana and Tapas Lokas to Satya Loka. The 
Karmas become fruitful of the highest results through Juana alone. 

The cpiestion then arises, how can the Yajamana go to Yisnu Loka when he is clothed 
in a body, for even after death, there remains a body in which the soul is clothed and 
Yisnu Loka is a place where no Prakritie matter can enter ? This is answered by the 
second sentence—the Surya rays carry the soul. The word “ Surya ” means He w'ho is 
attained by the Stiris or Wise—that is, the Supreme God Yisnu. The rays or powders of 
Yisuu carry the soul to Yisnu Loka. These Yisnu rays carry the soul to that place where 
dwells the one Lord of the Devas. They carry the soul to the Heart where the Lord 
dwells. The first stage of death is that these Surya rays—these Divine rays (the w r eb of 
Life)—carry the Jiva into the heart—and there they begin to glow T into a steadj T flame. 
There in the heart, the Lord Yisnu carries His devotee outside the heart: as is said: 
“ Then Yisnu with his light illumines the heart and the passage at its top, and through 
that goes out taking the Jiva with Him.” 

Mantra 6. 

tsrt ^ m s ii $ 

qrf| ijft Ehi ehi, come, come, Iti, thus. cf* Tam, him. =5rrfrR: Ahuta- 
yah, the oblations, the offerings. Su-varchasah, very powerful, the 

resplendent, the brilliant. * 3^3 SQryasya, of the sun. Rasmibhih, by 








216 


M U ISO) A KA-UPA NISA D. 


or on the rays, 3T5RR* Yajamanam, the saci ificer. ^jTprT Vahanti, carry. 

Priyaro, welcome, pleasant, Vacham, speech, word. Abhi- 

vadantyab, speaking 1 espectfully, utfering, honoring. Archayantyah, 

praising, saluting, qq: Esah, this, q: Yah, your. Punyah, holy, merit¬ 
ed. Su-kritah, well performed, good works, self-created, (svakritali). 

Braiima-lokah, the Brahma world. 

6. The respondent devas thus invoked say to him :—* 
“ Come, come.” They carry the sacrificer on the rays of 
the sun, while they utter pleasant speech, glorifying him 
with the words :—“ This is your holy Brahma-world, self- 
created by your thought.”—15. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The words “ Sukrita ” means the good deeds performed for the sake 
of the Lord. A work so done is Sukrita or “ well done/’ it alone is a 
virtuous, or sukrita work. 

The word “ Brahma-loka ” in the text means the loka of the Supreme 
Brahman. 

(The acts done to please the Lord are the means to attain Brahma- 
loka). For says the Vyasa Smriti :— 

“ A work performed without desire (of acquiring heaven, Ac.) and 
with knowledge That I am not die true agent, but the Lord is the real 
agent) carries the performer to the Eternal Brahman. Such a karma is 
the true renunciation. This renunciation constantly practised leads to the 
‘ Ancient Eternal.’ ” 

So also the JSruti: — 

“ For him who worships the Atma, the great refuge alone, there is no 
exhaustion of Karinas.*’ 

So also in the Gita the Lord says :— 

“ Having in ancient times emanated mankind together with sacrifice 
the Lord of emanation said, Ac., Ac.” (Gita 111. 10, 16.) So also in another 
passage (Gita IX. 25) lie says: — 

“My worshippers come unto Me.” “ I am indeed the enjoyer, Ac.” 
(Gita IX. 24 .) and though in the Gita III. 17, lie says :—“But the man who 
rejoiceth in the Self, with the Self is satisfied and is content in the Self 
for him verily there is nothing to do” ; yet He says also “as the ignorant 
act from attachment to action, 0 ! Bhfirata, so should the wise act without 
attachment, desiring the welfare of the world.” (Ibid III. 25). “ Who carp 

at My teaching and act not thereon, senseless, deluded in all knowledge, 
know thou these mindless ones as fated to be destroyed.” (ibid III. 32) t 








217 


t MUNDAKA , II KIIANDA, 6. 


(Objection.)— If work is to be performed always , then there remains 
no necessity of Sannyasa asframa, for that is a stage in which all actions are 
to be renounced ? 1 

No there is no such conflict. For the Gita itself shows that there 
are two-fold teachings in it, one addressed to the anchorites (Safikhya 
yogins) and the other to the householders (Karma yogi ns) : — 

“ In this world there isj a two-fold path as I before said, 0 ! sinless 
one : that of yoga by knowledge, of the Safikhyas; and that of yoga by 
action of the yogins.” 

(Therefore though the anchorites need not perform the agnihotra, Ac., 
like the householders, they must perform actions appropriate to their 
asTama, such as control of thought, conduct, Ac.) 

In the Treta then Pujas were performed in diverse ways : but in 
the Krita all Pujas^ were performed in one and the same way. On this 
there is the following authority :— 

“ In the Krita age, people worshipped Hari alone, the abode of all 
Devas, by sacrifice like agni-stoma. Ac. They considered Hari as the 
Cause working through all the Devas, and the Devas as his servants. 
Thus did worship the man Vasu.” (In the Krita age even when offerings 
were made under the name of Indra, Ac., they were made with this formula 
“ Svalia to Haii the Antaryamin or inner Ruler of Indra.” “Svaha to Hari 
the Ruler within of Agni,” Ac). 

“ But in the Treta age, the host of Devatas began to be worshipped by 
the ignorant, on their own account, and not as servants and agents of Hari,” 
as says the Upanisad : —“ treta yam balmdha santatani.” — v Padma Purana). 
The names like Indra, Ac., were names of Hari in the Krita age : —“Him 
whom they call Indra, whom they call Vanina (the All-pervading) whom 
they call Mitra l the Friend), whom they call Satya (the True), He who is 
the highest Deva among all the Devas, who is the father of Vnyu, to Him 
I offer this Soma through these names tof Indra, Ae.l 

“ In the Krita age all the people thus worshipped only Visnu, the 
Father of Vayu, along with the other Devas (mentioned above as so many 
qualities of Visnu \ In the Treta some only worshipped Visnu in this 
way. Others began to worship Indra, Ac., as separate from Visnu, as inde¬ 
pendent Devas : but at the end uttered the formula “ I offer all this to 
Visnu.” While others even omitted to do that also.”— (Brahmanda 
Purana.) 

Note.— Having thus described the going out of the Jiva from the heart, this verse 
describes how after leaving the heart the Jiva next leaves the body, and enters the path of 
Arehis, &e., in order to reach the Visnu Loka. The verse, ehi ehi, &<?., like the last verse, 
has also two sentences mixed up in one. The one sentence is : tarn ahiitayah suvarchasah 




218 MUNDAKA-UPANI8AD. 


suryasya rasmibhih Yajamanam vahanti. This describes the method of getting out of the 
body. Its meaning is: “The oblations or works done to please the Lord, carry the 
Yajamana by the solar rays.” “ These solar rays ” are solar forces residing in the n£tlis or 
astral currents of the body : as is said “ verily a thousand rays of the sun are spread into 
these nadis : of these the white is the Susumna called also the Brahma-yana, the Path of 
Brahman. As the solar rays are in the Susumua, tliey r illumine the path, and by that light 
the soul goes out.” This shows that the path here is iu the nadis and the rays of the sun 
are also in the nadis. These rays take out the Yajamana from the body, and carry him 
dwelling in the buddhie web of life to the Turiya state. Because the Jiva was performing 
Bhagavata works, therefore he goes out of the heart by the path of Susumna lighted by 
the rays of the sun. As has been said : Visuu in the form of Turiya dwells in the 
Dvadasanta. That is the form which the muktas reach.” 

Even among the nadis there is a distinction. The Susumna has five sub-divisions : 
the middle portion is the Susumna proper called the Brahma-nadi and on four sides of it 
are the other four nadis called Vajrika, Arya, Prakasini and Vaidyuta. The Apratikalam- 
banas go by the central uadi, the Susumna proper, the Brahma nadi and pass out of the 
centre of the head : as is said : “ Those who reach the highest Yisnu Loka, Vaikuntha, pass 
out of the middle of the skull.” The Delialambanas pass out of the body by any one of 
the remaining four nadis of the Susumna, except of course the Brahman nadi. They reach 
Satyaloka, the Loka of Brahma. The Pratimalambanas go out by the nadi called Pihgala. 
This is the path called Devayana: while the Susumna Path is called the Equatorial Path. 

Thus going out of the body—whether through Brahman nadi, or through Vajrika, &c., or 
through Pihgala, the Jiva reaches the Turiya. Thence he goes on the path of Areliis, &e. This 
is done under the second interpretation which is to be given to this verse. The ahutaya 
must now mean the Devas presiding over the Archiradi Pa h. They are the Day, the Bright 
Fortnight, the Northern six months of the year, the Lightening, Yaruna, Prajapati, Surya, 
Soma, Yaisvanara, Indra, Dliruva, Devi and Deva. These fourteen successively carry the 
Jiva, till the First Begotten -the Highest Yayu is reached. Then Yayu, the great media¬ 
tor, carries the soul io the Lord, the Highest Spirit. These Devas address the soul saying 
“ This is your Loka obtained by you through your performing the will of the Lord.” 

The Brahmaloka of this verse is to be interpreted differently according to the adhi- 
kari addressed. If the Apratikalambana is addressed, then the Brahmaloka is the Loka 
of the Supreme Brahman, Vaikuntha. If the Dehalambami is addressed then the Satya¬ 
loka is meant; and if t lie Pratimalainbana is addressed then Mahar, &c., loka is meant. 

The God is reached only through the Soil, the Supreme Vayu : the other Devas on the 
path like the Day, &v., are secondaries only. 

Mantra 7. 

&3T m wfsi wpt ^ 1 

u;^%Tt \m\ 

gqfr- Plavah floats, boats, f| Hi, because, but, in truth. Ete, these. 
Adridhah, not strong, frail. Yajna-rupah, semblances or mere 

forms of yajnas, (in which there is mere ritualism). Asladasa-uktam, 

taught in the eighteen. See verse 1. 5 for these eighteen Vidya sthdnani. 

A-varam, lower, exoteric, Ycsu, in which, cfiH Karma, work or 

sacrifices, Etat, this. Sreyas, the highest good, qiggr- Ye inudhah, 

fools who. Abhi-nandanti, rejoice, praise JnrA-mritymn, 

decay, old age. h le punar, they again. Eva api, even also, 

Yanti, go, undergo. 











I MUNI) AKA, IT KHANDA, 9. 


210 


7. But these symbolic rites, which consist in the per¬ 
formance of the lower mysteries, as that taught by the 
eighteen, are verily like rotten boats, dangerous to the sailor. 
The fools who think this to be the highest and rejoice there¬ 
in suffer again and again birth, old age and death.—16. 

Mantra S. 

qqqrqn *qq qnr: qfeqq-qqrqT: i 

qiqBHT qqT?qT: I mil 

qrfteTrcr* 3RK A-vidyam antare, in the midst of ignorance, in darkness, 
qqqtqp Varttamanali, remaining, dwelling, Svayam, own (conceit). 

Dhirah, wise. qnilcr q*qqRF: Panditam-manyamanab, thinking themselves to 
be learned. :qf?qqrqp Janghanyamanab, oppressed by misery, staggering to 
and fro. Pari-yanti, go round and round. Mudhah, the fools, the 

deluded, qRqq trq A.idhena eva, even by the blind. q'rqqrqp Niyamanah, led, 
guided, qqr Yatha, as ^?‘qp. Atidhah, the blind. 

8. Fools remaining in ignorance, wise in their own es¬ 
timation, thinking themselves to be learned, oppressed by 
misery, go round and round, even as blind men led by the 
blind.—17. 

Mantra 9 . 

qqqr qqqiqr qq ^qrar f^rmn-qFq qr^rr: i 
qtqnqqfr q qqqqiR TTqT%qr^n: ^rwqn^qq^q ii 5. 11 

Avidyayam, in ignorance, in darkness, Bahudha, long, di¬ 

versely. q^qmr: Vartamanab, remaining, dwelling, qqq Vayam, we. fiqRP 
Kritarthab, gained our end, happy. ^rq Iti, thus. Abhi-manya.nti, 

consider, imagine, qrar Balak, children, fools, q<r Yac, because. qjrifo: 
Karminab, the ritualists, performers of lower karmas. q Na, not. qqqqfsq Pra- 
vedayanti, know from before, foresee, provide. Ragat, because of attach¬ 
ment to external rewards, qq Tena, therefore, Aturah, miserable, 

unhappy. Ksinadokab, world exhausted, fruit of work finished. 

Chyavante, fall. 

9. Because the fools have dwelt long in darkness, they 
consider “ we are happy.” Because these ritualists have no 
foresight, on account of their attachment to rewards, there¬ 
fore when there takes place the exhaustion of their merit, 

they fall miserably back into re-birth.—18. 

20 







220 


MU NO A KA-U PAN IX A D . 


Mantra 10. 

fST^c? TRTRTRT SPJjCT: I 

?tt^t ts % 3^33^ fx^k ns©n 

fgp^T istapurtain, Srauta and SmSrta rites, oblations and pious works, 
»W*TRT : Manyam&nah, fancying, thinking, considering. ^Rgg Varistam, the 
highest, the best. ?T Na anyat, not anything else. Sreyas, good, 

supreme good. ^3?% Vedayante, know. Pra-mudhah, great fools, great¬ 
ly deluded. Nakasya, of heaven. <jg Pristhe, on the height, in a parti¬ 
cular part of heaven. % Te, they. Sukrite, good deeds. Anu- 

bhQtva, having enjoyed. Imam, this, ^3* Lokam, world. CpTcTC* Hinataram, 
lower. ^ Cha, or. ^rrf%STr% Aviganti, enter. 

10. Considering sacrifices and gifts to be the best, 
these deluded ones know no higher ideal. Therefore, hav¬ 
ing enjoyed their reward irTthe wide stretched realms of the 
heaven called Naka, they come back to this world or to 
some lower one. — 19. 

MADHVA'S COMMENTARY. 

Those who believe in Visnu as somewhat higher than all other Devas 
take their re-birth on this earth. Those who believe Visnu to be equal to 
other Devas or inferior to them, enter into Darkness— the plane lower 
than the earth, as says an authority : — “ The worshipper who considers 
Visnu to be higher than all other Devas in lordliness only, as a king is 
higher than all men (in lordliness only, and may not be so in wisdom, 
&c.) reach the world of men. But those who consider him as equal or 
inferior to other Devas, go to the world of Tamas.” So also in the Gita 
(IX. 20. 24) 

“ The knowers of the three, the Soma-drinkers, the purified from sin, 
worshipping Me with sacrifice, pray of Me the way to heaven ; they, ascend¬ 
ing to the holy world of the Ruler of the Shining Ones, eat in heaven the 
divine feasts of the Shining Ones.—(20). 

“They having enjoyed the spacious heaven-world, their holiness with¬ 
ered, come back to this world of death. Following the virtues enjoyed 
by the three, desiring desires, they obtain the transitory.—(21). 

“ To those men who worship Me alone thinking of no other, to those 
ever harmonious, I bring full security.—(22)- 

“ Even the devotees of other Shining Ones, who worship full of faith, 
they also worship Me, 0 son * of Kutiti, though contrary to the ancient 
rule.”— (23). 








221 


I MUNVAKA, TI RUANDA, 12. 


“ I am indeed the enjoyer of all sacrifices and also the Lord, but they 
know Me not in Essence, and hence they fall.—(24). 

The trai-vidyas or the kuowers c»f the three Vedas are those who 
sacrifice without knowledge. 

Mantra ii. 

sr ijqq^q^q srr^r t^trt ^cr: i 

ir ffem * gw m&imm wuw 

?T7: vjsg I a pah Sraddhe, penance and faith, meditation and contemplation, 
q ft Ye hi, who verily. Upa-vasanti, dwell, practising. Or abhi-upa- 

vasanti according to Rladhva. =5juiq Aranye, in the forest, in any holy place. 
SOTPHT Cantab, tranquil, with mind controlled, f%fTU: Vidvamsah, wise, pos¬ 
sessing knowledge BhaiksacharySm, duties of a mendicant, the duties 

of a hermit or third stage. =^r?ct: Charantah, practising, living on alms, 
Surya-dvarena, through the sun, i.e., having reached the sun through his 
help, ftcsir: Virajah, free from passion. Pra-yanti, depart, go. Yatra, 

where, Amritah, immortal. Purusah, person, ^irtrr Avyaya 

atma, of unchanging nature or essence. 

11. But those who practise meditation and contem¬ 
plation, in a retired place, tranquil, wise and living on alms, 
reach through the help of the sun, being free from rajas, 
that Immortal Person whose essence is unchanging. —20. 

Mantra 12. 

snftpq % R 

Pariksya, having examined. sirsFR, Lokan, the worlds (other than the 
Brahnia-loka). Karma-chitan, gained by works (performed for reward), 

?fgan: Brahmanah, the seeker of Brahman, who is fit to know Brahman, 
Nir-vedam, vairagyam, freedom from all desires ; not desiring the fruits of kamya 
karnias. Ayat, acquire, attain. ^ ^rr??T Na-asti, there is not. ^ A-kritah, 

the un-created, the Moksa or release. Kritena, by means of the created, by 
means of karmas. fWRPTT Fad vijnanSrtham, for the sake of the understand¬ 
ing that or “ tad ” therefore, vijnSna-artham, in order to know or gain knowledge. 
U: Sail, he. Gurum, the teacher, it^ Eva even, only. abhigachchhet, 

approach. UR?r 'Trfw: Samit-panih, fuel in his hand, with folded hands, (as a 
mark of humility). sffr%q*r ^rotriyam, learned who knows the Vedas, who hears 
the voice. Brahma-nistham, devoted to Brahman, who dwells in Brahman. 

12. Let a seeker of Brahman, after lie has examined 
(and thoroughly mastered the forces of) the worlds, that are 










222 


MUNJMKA-UPA NI SAD. 




reached by the occult) works, acquire freedom from desires 
for them. For the uncreate world of Brahman, cannot be 

. o 

gamed through the created worlds. Therefore to know this, 
let him approach with folded hands, the Guru, who is inspir¬ 
ed and dwells constantly in the eternal.—21. 

Mantra 13. 

a# h i 

\\\\\\ 

fgr^T^r: II y || 

rT^ Tasmai, to him (the pupil) i.e. y to Saunaka. ^ Sa vidvan, lietlie wise 
(teacher), Ahgiras. Upa-sanna)a, who has approached according 

to due rite, who has approached respectfully, the humble, who had reached his 
(Ahgiras) presence ready for initiation. Samayak, perfectly, Samyak pra- 

santa, who is disgusted with all phenomenal objects, who is virakta. 
Prasantachittaya, whose mind is at rest, whose thoughts are not troubled by any 
desires. s^RIT^rTR Samanvitaya, who has obtained perfect peace, who has got the 
quality of sama, who is devoted to the Lord, Yena, through which, by what 
esoteric instruction. 3^^ Aksaram purusam, the Imperishable Person. ^ 

Veda, he knows, Satyam, the true who is not subject to another. Pra- 

vacha, told fully. Tam, that. Tatvatah, in its essence. The hidden 

meaning of the Vedas Brahma-vidyam, the science of Brahman, the 

Theosophy, the esoteric sense of the Vedas. How to convert the apai a-vidya 
into para-vidya. 

13. Then Ahgiras taught the truth to S'aunaka; to 
him who had penetrated to his presence, whose mental body 
(chhitta) was in perfect calm, and who had thought-control 
(sama). To him the wise Ahgiras fully explained, in all its 
essence, that Divine Wisdom, by which one knows the True, 
the Imperishable Person. — 22. 

Note . — What arc the authorities from which we can learn the rules about the per* 
formanco of Karinas, the rewards of such performance, &c.? “ The eighteen sources of 

Vidyas,” is the answer, namely, the four Vedas— Tvik, Yajns, Sam an and Atharvan, the six 
Vedangas, Phonetics, Liturgy, Grammar, Lexicon, Prosody and Astronomy, Logic, Exegetics, 
the Law books, the Puranas, Medicine, Music, Archery and Political Economy. When one 
has learnt all that these can teach, what else must lie learn which will harmonise all these, 
which will make all these knowlc dge fruitful? The knowledge of the Imperishable, the 
Aksara, the Para Vidya, the science of sciences is the keystone of all Yidyas. When acts 
are done with the motive of pleasing the Lord, then tho Karinas which were lower before, 
become higher ; but when not performed with this motive they are “ frail boats.” Therefore 
the injunction Satya lvamah Karmani acliaratha—“ perform all acts desiring to please IJinj 
who is called the Truo.” When we act thus wo go to Iloaven. 











I MONO AKA, II K HAND A, 13. 


223 


Iu the Krita age all acts were performed with this single motive—Satya karuah-r- 
the desire of pleasing the True, the Lord. In the next age, the Treta, the motive became 
diverse : the true Bhagavatas still retained the highest motive—desire to please the Lord. 
The second class, the Ritualistic worshippers called Traividyas, had the motive to attain 
Heaven; but even they at the end of all their acts uttered the formula “We offer the 
fruit of all our works to the Bhagavat.” The third class, the haters of the Lord, omitted 
even the utterance of this formula : and performed all acts with the simple motive of self- 
gratification. But those who desire in all their acts to please the Lord alone—who are 
tatya Kamas—sedulously perform id every age (whether it be Treta, Dvapara or Kali) 
the dharmas of the Krita age—with the object of pleasing the Lord alone. Therefore the 
fcruti says “O Satya Kamas (iu the plural) perform ceaselessly good works with the 
highest motive ; for work thus done is the only way to the abode of the Lord—this is the 
only way for you to obtain the knowledge of God. But if you perform aets like the 
Traividyas or like the haters of the Lord, then your place is either in this world or to some 
lower plane.” Thus threefold is the reward of Karma, according to the motive. With 
the highest motive—the Satya Kama, the desire to please the Lord—the Ivarmin goes to 
the abode of the Lord, i.e., gets fitted to obtain the knowledge of God. When performed 
like the Traividyas with the desire of Heaven, the Karmin goes to Heaven after death, 
but is born again on this earth when the fruit of Karma is exhausted. The third class— 
the haters of the Lord, also go to the subtler plane after death, but their re-birth is in 
some lower plane. 

When all yajnas, whether offerings to Agni or Yayu or Soma, &c.—are performed in 
this spirit, as offerings to Vismi, they become the highest Karinas and lead to unending 
lokas. But when Yajnas are performed as worship of inferior deities, they lead to finite 
lokas, from which there is a return and re-birth. Then these Yajnas instead of being a 
strong ship which could carry the sailor beyond the troubled sea of Sarasara, become 
adridha plava—frail rafts which bring disaster on those that try to cross the sea through 
their aid. All lower Yajiias aim at the three worlds excluding the three higher planes of 
the mental world even. The seven sub planes of the physical Bliuh Loka, the seven 
sub-planes of the astral (Bhuva loka), and the four sub-planes of the mental (called Rilpa— 
Svarga) form the 18 sub-planes of lower Yajnas. It is this IS which is decried in this 
second chapter. The three higher sub-planes of the mental are not reached by such 
yajiias ; hence their transitory and phenomenal nature. These lower yajnas are performed 
with the eighteen only, namely, with the Suksma ^arira (consisting of the well-known 
17 elements) and ahamkara. The higher manas or Vijnana does not enter into their 
performance. Hence they are deprecated. But when Yajnas are performed with Yijnana, 
they lead to Immortal worlds. Moreover these lower Yajiias are performed under a 
partial and superficial understanding. The 18 Scriptures or sources of knowledge are 
enumerated in the following verse:—“The four Yedas, the six Yedangas, the Puranas, 
Nyaya, Mimamsa, the Dharma Sastras, the Ayur Yeda, the Dhanur Yeda, the Gandharva 
Yeda and Political Economy are the eighteen classes of Science.” Therefore it is said 
the Yajiias taught by the eighteen are inferior and lead to transitory results. See also 
Chhandogya Up. VII. Prapathaka where these 18 Sciences are enumerated. The enumera¬ 
tion in this Upanisad is incomplete. The soul is carried to those worlds by the rays 
of the sun. The soul is not immaterial though atomic. The Jiva is no doubt an ams'a or 
part of God, spark of divine fire, but a spark encased in matter. The coverings of the 
soul in its most pristine state even has an atom of the matter of all the planes, mental, 
astral and physical. These are the permanent atoms that constitute the body of the 
soul — the undying Lingadeha : which drops only when Mukti is obtained. This atomic 
bodj: is carried to its appropriate heaven by the solar rays. The heaven may be op 



224 


MON DA KA-VPANISAD. 


a physical globe like the earth er on a globe of non-physical matter but the solar rays 
(physical or super-physical) are the vehicles through which the souls pass from globe to 
globe, sphere to sphere, one plane to another. The good that men do in this life become 
thought-forms, living entities in the interior subtler planes. If a man thinks high thoughts, 
performs noble actions, sacrifices his own interests to the interests of the community; 
his thoughts, words and deeds create a host of elemental forms, called thought-forms. These 
welcome the soul when it leaves the body and proceed towards the heaven plane. The devas 
of those planes also join in welcoming him; such souls are carried beyond the Triloki 
(Bhuh. Bhuvah and Svar—Physical, Astral and Mental) to one of the three higher planes. 

But the souls of the ordinary good people, who perform mere Yajnas without love 
of God, go the round of birth and death [in the Triloki. Karinas maybe performed with 
various motives ; but these latter may be broadly divided into three classes—Divine, 
Human and Demoniac. The divine motive is that when a man does all acts as acts of 
sacrifice, for the sake of the Lord and to carryout His Will, without asking for any reward. 
Such Karmas lead the soul beyond Triloki. Human Karmas are performed with the motive 
of reward—enjoyment of heaven or worldly prosperity. Such Karmas carry the soul to 
one of the heavens of the Astral or Mental planes. Demoniac motive makes a man do a Karma 
with tho pure and simple object of injuring another. It leads the soul to lower worlds. 
“Frail are these rafts of sacrifice ”—is a sentence applied to the second class of Karmas. 
Such Karmas do not lead to unikti, but to a transmigratory existence. The karmas taught 
in the eighteen topics mentioned above are, therefore, transitory in their results when not 
illumined and directed by the right motive. The second Chapter thus teaches the Great 
Laws of Karina and Ke-incarnation and the planes in which they find their scope. The 
Triloki (Physical, Astral and Lower mental) is the field of karma—the Kuruksetra where 
takes place the eighteen days' fight of the eighteen Aksauhini of army corps. The 
number eighteen thus appears to be the type and symbol of the Karmic planes. 

The planes of Juana are above these : 

The second Chapter deals with the third Imperishable, namely, Matter, Karma or the 
eternal chain of Causation, Yajnas or the employment of the forces of nature to bring 
about certain results-all deal with Matter and her forces. These forces on the plane 
of Unity—called the Krita Plane or the plane of Buddlii of tho Tlieosophical literature 
—are not diverse. It is one force there. As the current comes down into the three lower 
planes—called the Treta, Dvapara and Kali—the Third, Second and First plane—it branches 
off into various kinds. But even on the lowest plane (physical) we can see the unity of 
forces—the transformation of energy is a great proof of this. This is the meaning of the 
phrase “ the Karmas which the sages saw in the Krita became diverse in the Treta, etc.” 

The Veda was one before, like one caste—subsequent ages have divided the Veda 
into four, as subsequent evolution divided the one Brahmin caste into the variety of 
castes and races of the world. The first key, therefore, to the interpretation of the Vedas 
(and as a matter of fact of all sacred scriptures) is this idea of unitary force. All the so- 
called Gods of the Vedas—Indra, Agni, Vayu, Marut, etc.—are but different names of one 
God Visnu. Ekam sad Viprah bahndha vadanti. Agni means Visnu. Vayu means Visnu. 
Indra means Visnu and so on. This was in the Krita age. With the progress of time, the 
words degenerated. Agni which meant Visnu before now came to mean tho Deva of a 
high order, presiding over a hierarchy called “ The Hierarchy of Fire" and so with Vayu 
and other Vedic terms. This was in the Treta age. In tho Dvapara, a further degenera¬ 
tion took place in the meaning of this word—it came to ineau the elementals of Fire. While 
in this Kali age, Agni means fire—the physical fire. The history of the meaning of this 
term from the Vedic upto the present time shows through what stages this word has ^ 
passed, and how corruption gradually has set in. 





1 MUKDAKA, 11 KHANVA, 13. 


225 


The First Law, therefore, by which we can find out the Esoteric meaning of the 
scriptures is to take all these words to mean Visnu, the Supreme God. Tho Corrollary that 
follows from it is that all Yajfias or religious and* occult ceremonies must be addressed 
to Visnu. He alone should bo worshipped and no inferior deity. 

Those men, whose nature is that of Krita age men, should worship Yisnu alone as 
God. Yaga means offering of anything with recitation of mantras in honour of any Devata. 
So when a Yaga is performed in honor of Visnu and Yedic mantras are recited therein, 
those mantras must necessarily apply to Visnu, in order to be appropriately used in a 
Visnu Yaga. Since all Vedic Mantras can be employed in Visnu Yaga, consequently 
all Vedic Mantras must denote Visnu, otherwise they cannot be so employed. For 
example, we cannot employ an Agni Mantra in offering Yaga to Vayu or Indra, as indi¬ 
vidual Pevatas of those names; but Krita Y T uga people employed all mantras whether 
addressed to Agni, Vayu, Indra, &c., in offering Yaga to Visnu. Tlieir conduct, therefore, 
showed by Agni, Vayu, &c., they understood Visnu and these words had this connota¬ 
tion in that age. The words, however, have a tendency to change their meaning, some time 
for the better, some time for the worse. Tn course of time these words came to mean 
different persons. 

If Visnu alone was worshipped as God, then it follows that cither Brahma and 
others should never be worshipped at all, or should never be worshipped as God. This 
objection, Madhva answers by slying they should also be worshipped in the sense of 
“honoured, as we honour our elders and benefactors as a mark of love and gratitude ; but 
they should never be worshipped as God.” In Krita age also, Brahma and others were 
worshipped, i.c., honoured, as Gurus—Great Ones, Teachers. The above passage does not 
prohibit their worship, or paying respect to them, but it teaches that they should never 
be worshipped as God. It should further be remembered that some fallen Devatas bear 
also the name of Brahma, &c.: they must not be worshipped, even in this secondary 
sense : as says a text: “ one should never worship the fallen (apa bhrasta) and the non- 
devas, though they may bear the name of Brahma, &c., the word deva is applied to them 
in the sense of dina or poor.” The J)cvas like Brahma, &c., bear the name of Manu also, 
because they possess intelligence (manas). 



SECOND MUNDAKA. 

First Khanda. 

Mantra i. 

SfVPRJ HW: I ^PSPTPTT: 

cT^T %fTfqqT-cT II f < II 

rTf^ Tar, that, Etad, this Satyam, truth, Yathd, as. 

Sudiptat, from a blazing, from a well-lit. Pavakat, fire, purifier. 

Visphulingah, sparks. Sahasrasah, thousand-fold. J?*rqHr{ 

Prabhavanti, come out, proceed, ^qr: Sarupah, of the same form, similar to 
each other. Every spark is exactly similar to the spark that preceded it in 
emanation and that will follow it. All jivas are similar in essence. All objects 
created in one Kalpa are similar to the objeets created in the preceding Kalpa. 
rmr Tatha, so, thus. ^STUrt Aksarat, from the Imperishable. Vividb&h, 

various, (like Devas, d^navas, man, animal, &c.) Somya, O friend, child, 

one who is entitled to drink the mystic nectar called the Soma or the Moon — 
fluid of Immortality, an initiate, HPir: Bhavah, being, jivas, souls, objects. 
5T5TW% Prajayante, are born or produced. Tatra, in that. ^ Cha, and. 
qq Eva, even, Api, also. Yanti, return, go, at the time of Pralaya. 

1. This is the (Second) Truth (about the Jivas.) As 
from a well-lit lire, sparks, similar to fire, come out a thou¬ 
sand-fold, thus are various Jivas produced, 0 initiate, from 
the imperishable, and even go back to Him (at the time of 
Pralaya).—23. 

Note .—This khamla teaches the Truth about the Jivas or souls, as the preceding 
Chapter taught the truth about the Yajfias or occultism in its two-fold aspects, the lower 
and the higher. The last chapter thus dealt with matter (Prakriti) and its various forces 
and the planes and how to control them. As the Prakriti is true, so also the Jivas are 
true. All Jivas have tlie same nature (svarupa) as Brahman ; like sparks and the fire. God 
made the man after His own image (Svartipa). 

Mantra 2. 

T^TT iqp: H ST3T: I 

srsrrcrr utrd 11 * u 

Divyah, luminous, heavenly, very wonderful. Divine body. 1 he 
body consisting of pure knowledge and bliss. Hi, verily, because. 
AmQrtati, without physical body, without form, has no limited body, made up 











IT MCJNVAKA , I I\ IIANT)A, 3 . 


227 


of earth, water, fire, See. Purusah, the person, the Lord, h* Sail, Me. 
Bahyah, without. Abhyantnrah, within, ft Hi, verily, because. 

Ajah, without birth, unborn, not produced. ^quir: Apranah, without prana, 
re Hi, verily, because. Amanah, without manas. Subhrah, pure. He 

who delights (ra) in auspicious senses (subha) whose senses consist of know¬ 
ledge and bliss, re Hi, verily, ^renjrl Aksarat, than the Imperishable (Prakri¬ 
ti.) Wf- Paratah, than the Imperishable High (Jivatman). Madhva explains 
the Para to be the Sri Tattva, which is higher than the Prakriti, but lower than 
the Purusa or isvara. m: Parah, higher. 

2. The Divine Person is verily without (Prakritic) 
body ; He is both within and without. He is unborn and 
without (Prakritic) Prana and Manas. He is pure and high¬ 
er than the Imperishable Prakriti and Higher than the High 
(Sri Tattwa.)—24. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Aksara or the Imperishable is of three sorts as shown in the 
following verse :—“ The Lower Imperishable is that which is called 
Jada Prakriti —the matter-stuff. The Higher Imperishable is Sri ; and 
the Highest Imperishable is the Lord Vasudeva, the Highest Bliss.” 

Note.— This shows that the Divya Purusa or the isvara has no Prakritic body, and 
consequently no such Prana or Manas ; because they come out of him. He is higher than 
the other two Imporishables the Prakriti and the Purasas (Jivas) or the Prakriti and 
the Sri Tattva. 

Because the Person, the Lord has a Divine body consisting of knowledge and bliss 
He is without a physical body ; because he has senses made up of knowledge and bliss 
He has no ordinary Prana and Manas. Because He is outside and inside of all objects 
therefore He is unlimited, though having a body. But as ITe has no physical body, His 
activities are not followed by fatigue, weariness, anxiety or worry. But being outside 
He creates all external objects, by being inside He produces the pleasure, &c., of all 
beings. The objection so often raised how can a Being without body, create anything, 
is answered by saying that the Lord has a divine body. The objection that if He has 
a body He must be limited, is answered that He is both in and out. His body has no 
limitations. The third objection that if He has a body, he must be born, die, &c., is 
answered by saying because He is unborn, so He is above all such vicissitudes. In'fact, 
He has not a Prakritic body. On the contrary, He controls the Prakriti and its Devata 
Laksmi and this is shown by saying He is higher than the High Imperishable. The Im- 
perishables are three, (1) Aparam, the Lower Imperishable, the Jatla Prakriti, (2) Paramam, 
the High Imperishable, the Sri Tattva, (3) Paratah Param, the Higher than the High 
Imperishable, the Lord Himself. 

MANTRA 3. 

srrcrr *r: ^ i 

^ T^TFI MTTHUT I) 3 |) 


3Q 





22S 


MUNDA KA-UPA N1 SAD. 


gcHFIA Etasmat, from this, the Highest Imperishable, Jayate, is 

born. n( 7 !j: Pr^nah, the prana. Manah, the manas. ^ Sarve, all. 

Ind riyani, senses. ^ Cha, and. Khani, ether, space, akasa. qrg: 
VayuJ}, air. Jyotih, light, ^rnr Apah, the water. Priihivi, the 

earth, Visvasya, of all. qiRtlfr Dharini, the support. 

3. From this is born Prana, Manas and all the senses, 
ether, air, light, water and the earth, the support of all.—25. 

Note.— This shows how the seventeen come out of the Brahman : namely, the five ele¬ 
ments, the ten Indriyas and the Prana and the Manas. These seventeen include all the 
form side of creation : and they con*e out of the body of 1 - vara : His various members 
(angas) give birth to these. This is the aiiga-Creation, in which no help is taken from the 
fe'ri-tattva. The next verse explains it further showing from wlint part of is vara these 
come out. 

MANTRA 4. 

: I SfTWT f^FT^T T2>Trr TTW m 

U 2 II 

^nr: Agnih, fire. The Lord Visnu as the guide (ni) of the immoveable 
worlds (aga). The presiding devata of fire also, ijqr iMurdha, head, 
Chaksusi, the two eyes. Chandra, the moon. The delight-giver. T he 

presiding devata of the moon also, Suryau, the sun. The goal of the 
wise (sfiris, wise). The presiding deity of the sun also. festf; Disah, the quar¬ 
ters, the space (the khani of the last verse). The pointers, the Load-stars. 
The four presiding deities of the four quarters. Srotre, the two ears. 

Vak, the speech, Vivritah, revealed, disclosed. Accompanied by 

(their six ahgas, ltihasas and Puranas). Cha, and. Vedah, the Vedas. 

The knowledge. The deity presiding over the Veda, qrg: Vayuh, the air, 
energy, blowing. The chidananda Va) u. Pianah, the chief vital air. 

Hridayam, the heart, Visvain, the all, i.e ., the manas. Or Rudra, the 

Lord of tapas. Asya, his Of the Lord called heiethe Imperishable. 

Padbhyam, from the foot. gfaTr Prithivi, the earth. The Bhu Loka ; and 
its presiding devata. f| Hi, verily, Esah, he. The Lord. ^: Sarvab, all. 

Bliuta, beings. Antaratma, inner self. The antaryamin. 

4. The fire came out of his head, the sun and the 
moon from His eyes, the space from His ears, the revealed 
Vedas from His speech, the prana from His energy ; from 
His heart the All of Rudra, from flis feet, the earth He 
verily is the Inner Self of all beings. — 20. 


















II MUNDAKA , 1 KHANDA , 5. 


229 


MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

The various members of the body of Visnu are always known by tbe 
terms dyu, &c., because they possess powers like sporting, &c. These 
teims are applied secondarily to other objects inasmuch as they are 
produced from him. 

Note ,—Thus dyu comes from the root div “ to sport,” “to shine” and when the Upani- 
sad says “ The dyu is His head, ” it ineans that the head of the Lord has the power of 
illumination, &c. Secondarily, the word dyu means “ heaven ” only in a secondary sense. 
Similarly the word “ Agni ” means the guide of the world (literally “ aga the immmove- 
ble world ; and “ ni ” to guide). Similarly “ Chandra ” means primarily “ the delight-giver* 
and “ Surya ” the “ goal of the Suris or wise.” 

This shows how* the various augas of the Divya Purusa are co-related with the 
cosmos. The word Visva in the above literally means the All, the Universe and refers to 
the manas. The manas arises from the heart of the J)ivya Purusa ; as the prana comes not 
of the Yayu or breath or energy of the Divinity:—The word of the Divya Purusa 
generates Agni or the essence of fire, the seventh principle or Jiva. The eye generates 
the sun and the moon —the mind and the emotions and so on. These represent the various 
parts of Isvara that go to form the vehicles of a man. 

The verse fourth shows the Auga—Sristi—how from the various members of the body 
of the Lord, the different Devas came out. The various members of the body of the Lord 
are known by these names of Agni, Chandra, Surya, Disa, &c. 

Mantra. 5. 

I h#: t^tt- 

II * II 

Tasmat, from Him. 57 Agnih, fire. ^ffipR Samidhah, fuel. 
From Him the fire and the fuel are produced : —the energy and the matter that 
keeps up the energy in earth. Yasya, whose. Madhva reads ^ 

and Ayas. The word aya means destiny producing auspicious results. Its 
another name is vidhi. *3$: Suryali, the sun. Somat, from the moon. 

From that sun and moon is produced rain. Parjanyfih, the rain. 

Osadhayah, annual herbs. The Agni, the Surya, the Soma and the 
Parjanya are the four devas of sacrifice, the herbs like bai ley, &c., are sacrificial 
oblation and good destiny is the fifth ingredient of a complete sacrifice, 

Prithivyam, in the earth. 

5. From Him are produced the sacrificial fire, and 
the sacrificial fuel and the good destiny of the sacrificer — 
from Him the sun and the moon and the rain ; and from Him 
the herbs, with which they sacrifice, grow on the earth. —27. 

The first half of the fifth verse shows how the sacrifice and all its Devas and. offerings 
were also created by Yisuu. 




230 


MUNDA KA-UPAmSAD. 


Mantra 5.—(continued). 

Sir? Puman, the male. The Lord Vasudeva, called Puman because He 
fills (purnatva) all. Retail, seed < RT>^TR Sihchati, emits. ^rfqRRR Yosita- 
vam, in the female, Rama. Baiivih, many, snin Prajah, creatures. 

Beings like Brahma, &c. gsqpT. Purusat, from the Person. From the full : 
Him who has all the six lordly attributes. Samprasutah, are begotten. 

5. The Lord Vasudeva emits seed upon Rama ; and 
thus many creatures are begotten from that Person—27- 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Lord Vasudeva is called Puman because He fills all. He places 
the seed in His spouse Rama,; and thence are produced all beings (like 
Brahma called Virincha, &c.) 

Note .—This verse describes the creation of the Jivas. The last verse described the 
Auga-Sristi—how the various planes Ivosas came out of the different members of the 
Primeval Person. This describes the production of the Jivas by the joint co-operation of 
Vasudeva and Rama. The Jivas which were withdrawn at the time of the Pralaya into 
the body of the Lord, arc now thrown out in the womb of Hama, the Highest Tattva, called 
also the -Sri Tattva. Thus are produced many grades of Jivas from that Purusa. Compare 
the Gita where Sri lvrisna says “ 1 am the seed-giver ” (XIV. 4.) 

This shows the Suksma creation. The bodies of Pevas like Virincha, &c., are of 
Sattva matter. The verses *2 and 3 described tho creation of the Tattvas, the verso 4 
described the Anga-Sristi, and this verse describes the Suksma Sristi or subtle emanation 
of the Lord. The next verse describes the creation of more gross objects. 

Mantra* 6. 

hr Tr^rr m ^r%nrr$r i 
^ *rsmR«r ^fr^r: dwr ^ ^r ^thku 

Tasmat, from that Purusa. 3^: Richah, Rig-verses. *tr Sama, 
tlie Saman verses. Yajumsi, the Yajus. Cr^Tf Diksa, the Atharva-Veda or 

the Veda of initiation. Yajnali, sacrifices, (or prayers and ritual magic), 

offering of oblations in honour of the Deva. =q- Cha, and. ^ Sarve, all. 

Kratavah, offerings of animals, [the magic of Will (Kratu) the spiritual 
magic]. The Soma Yajnas are called Kratu. Those rites in which Soma is 
not used are called Yajnas. Big ceremonies like Agnistoma, &c., are called 
Kratus. Daksindh, the fee bestowed on priests. (Right-band quali¬ 

fying “Kratavah Yajnah,” the hand magic, the white magic). ^ Cha, 
and. Samvatsarah, the year, (the planetary periods or rounds.) =q- Cha, 

and. ST5HR: Yajamanah, the sacrificer, the pious. (If the reading be Yajama- 
nasyalokah the meaning would be consistent. Yajmaua may also stand for 
Karma or the works, the law of the cause and effect). Lokah, the worlds. 

Somali, the Moon. 2R Yatra, where, qqvf Pavate, purifies, moves, 
revolves. I he word ‘ Vayu f must be supplied to complete the sentence. 3 R 
Yatra, where, Suryah, the sun. 








11 MUNI) AKA, I K HAND A, 7. 


231 


6. From Him come the Rik, the Saman, the Yajus 
and the Atliarva-Vedas ; from Him the ordinary sacrifices and 
the Soma Yajflas ; and the cost thereof. From Him come the 
Planetary periods and the sacrificer, and the worlds of the 
pious where shine the Sun and the Moon. — 28. 

Note .—This verse again describes the ten-fold Ariga-Sristi. The four Vedas, the 
ceremonial and spiritual magics, the law of daksina, the iconic periods, and the two 
Heavens of the pious obtained by the path of the Sun and the Moon (the Deva Yana and 
the Pitri Yana) eome out from the Lord. This represents the creation of Cosmic Intelli¬ 
gences. The ten Yidyas enumerated here have some analog}^ with the ten Vidyas of I. 5. 

As applied to the Jiva, the four Vedas represent the Manomayakosa (see Taitt. Up. 
II. 3, 2), the Yajfia, the kratu, the Daksina and Samvatsara represent the Vijuanamaya- 
kosa, with sraddha, ritam, satyarn and yoga as its four-fold division (Taitt. Up. II. 4, 2) 
while Yajainana represents the Self-Consciousness. The Jiva is a triad of Ahaukara (Self- 
Consciousness), Buddhi (or moral and ethical nature): aud Manas ; or in other words, Will 
= Ynjamana) feeling (Budhi-Yajha, kratu, &c.) and cognition ( = Manas). 

The creation of the Vedas with its auxiliaries was mentioned in verse 4 also. Their 
creation is again described here. This is, however, not a tautology ; for in the fourth 
verse the Vedas in their undivided form were taken, here they are taken in their divided 
form—the form they assumed in the Treta and other ages. By saying that the Rik, &e., 
came into existence is meant that the names of Rik, Yajus, &e., came into existence then. 

The words ‘ Sun, Moon and Wind’ refer to the Surya, Chandra and Yayu Lokas. 
They include the other Lokas also not specially mentioned here, but which are on the 
Path of Light. 

Mantra 7. 

rHHT^T ^TT JR^TH q^l I 

HHFNHT sftffqfr rTOST ^ ftfirST ||VSII 

Tasmat, from Him. ^ Cba, and, Devan, the Devas; the 

Senses of Perception and Cognition—all senses, Bahudha, in many ways. 

Such as by union with suksma deha, or by union with sthula deha or with anga, 
matter-deln. SamprasGtah, were begotten or produced. Sadh- 

y£s, the demi-gods. The organs of action or sadhana. Astral faculties. These 
are Gana-Devatas. Manusyal;, the human beings. [The intellectual 

organs or human faculties.] qso^: Pasavah, cattle, quadrupeds, beasts. The 
animal appetites, qsnro Vayamsi, birds. (The flight or imaginative faculties ?). 
srprj Prana, the Prana, breathing out. Apanau, the Apana. Breathing 

in. The Respiratory function, suit Vrihi, rice. [Growth], Yavau, barle}'. 
[Reproduction. 'Phe vegetative functions]. rPT • Tapah, the penance, austerities: 
endurance. Cba, and. Sraddha, faith. Satyarn, truth. 

Brahmacharyain, abstinence, celibacy, the duties of a Brahman student, ftui: 
Vidhih, observance, law, the ordinances, the loyalty. ^ Cha, and. 



232 


MONO A KA-UPA NISAD. 


7. From Him also were produced the various classes 
of gods and deini-gods, human beings, beasts and birds : life 
and death, rice and barley, penance and faith, truth and 
abstinence, yea all the ordinances.—29. 

Note .—This shows the fourteen-fold creation produced by the Primeval Purusa with 
the help of the Female Principle called the £ri Tattva. 

Applied to the Jiva, it shows that all the active functions are created from this union 
of 1 svara and Fri—while the vehicles come from the body of isvara—the functions or ener¬ 
gies or faculties have a dual or “sexual” origin. The highest spiritual faculties like 
abstinence, faith, endurance, truth, loyalty—and the lowest vegetative functions like 
growth and reproduction (vrihi and java)—all come out of this union. 

Mantra 8. 

BB 5TRTT: BWB: WB fTHT*- I 

RRTT3fTW BB BB llsll 

JRH Sapta, the seven. Pranah, 'life-forces; senses. Seven kinds 

of sensations. The seven cognitional senses, viz., hearing, touch, sight, taste, 
smell, manas, buddhi. Prabhavanti, proceed. Tasmat, from Him. 

*TR Sapta, the seven, Archisah, rays, flames, lights: or acts of 

sensation. Functions. Seven kinds of perceptions. Samidhah, fuels, 

or the objects by which the senses are lighted, ^r Sapta, seven, f\B\: Homah, 
oblations or sacrifices, the results of sensation. The conjunction of the senses 
with the objects, Sapta, seven. line, these, Lokah, worlds, the 

places of senses, the worlds determined by the senses. The seats or organs of 
senses, qq Yesu, in which. Charanti, move. Rirur: Pranali, the life- 

forces or the senses. r Guha, cavity of the heart [The Auric Egg (?).] 
Asayam, resting in. That which rests in the cavity is called guhasaya, 
namely Buddhi. Guhasayam, therefore, means ‘‘ for the sake of Buddhi.” In 
guhasaya} r am the Locative lias the force of nimitta. In order to generate 
knowledge in the living beings, there arc placed seven pranas, in every body. 
RftHT Nihitah, are placed, ^r Sapta, seven. *tr Sapta, seven. 

8. The seven sense-currents are produced from Him, 
with their corresponding seven perceptions, the seven kinds 
of objects of perception, the seven co-relations and these 
seven organs in which move the sense currents. For the 
purpose of producing knowledge, the seven are placed in 
every human being.—30. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

“ The seven flames or archis ” are the seven functions ; the know¬ 
ledge produced by sensations, i.e., seven perceptions. The Homas or 










71 MUNDAKA, 7 KIIANDA, 10. 


233 


oblations are the correlation of the senses with their objects. The lokas 
are the seven organs of senses. “ Resting in the cavity ” means resting 
in Buddhi. Guhasfayam is a shortened form of “ guha sayayam the 
sjdlable q is elided, because it is followed by a similar letter. The 
words Sapta Sapta are to be taken in a distributive sense, i.e., in every 
being seven. 

Note.—As the Jivas have to acquire the experience of the seven planes, they are en¬ 
dowed with seven Life energies, seven senses, the seven bodies, and the seven relations. 
In every world there is this seven-fold division. Thus the Pranas become 49 or the well- 
known forty-nine Yayus. See Vedanta Sutra, II. 4-5. 

Mantra 9. 

*rt: Hwqr 1 

glrWrr imi 

Atah, hence, Samudrah, the seas, receptacles of water, prw ^ 

girayah cha, and hills. gq Sarve, all. Asmat, from him. Syan- 

dante, flow, proceed, pulsate. Sindhavah, rivers; (the blood-currents). 

Sarvarupak, of every form; flowing in all directions, Atah, hence. 

X* Cha, and. Sarvah, all. Osadhayah, herbs, hair, &c. 

Rasah, the juice, the sap. Cha, and. Ira Yena, by whom, namety, by the Divine 
Purusa. qq: Esak, this (Lord), gff: Bhutaib, together with the beings (thus 
created by the Lord and the Sri). In all beings. The instrumental case has the 
force of locative here. Tisthate, subsists, is upheld; dwells, ft Hi, 

verily. Antaratma, the Inner Self; the Suksma Sarira; the 

Antaryamin Purusa. 

9. Hence proceed all the seas and mountains, heuce 
flow the rivers in all directions, hence all the herbs and the 
sap, and thus this Inner Self dwells within all beings.— 31. 

Note .—This describes the various organs of the body such as the blood-vessels, 
bones, &c., and the Lord Himself takes up His residence in this temple of human body along 
with the Jiva-soul. He is the Antaryamin Purusa. 

3 

Mantra io. 

W* ^ htt m i 

rt n \ o n 

Purusah, the person, the Lord, trq Eva, even, Idam, this. 

Visvam, universe, all. 3$ Karma, creative act. The £3akti or power of 
creation or Visvam Karma—all acts. The Purusa is one in all acts. The unity 
of consciousness remains in all acts, gq: Tapah, penance, knowledge, wisdom. 








234 


MUNI) A KA-UPA NISA D. 


This is illustrative of other attributes like strength, luminosity, &c Or 
Vis'vam may qualify tapas also. Ali-tapas, he is the unifying principle of all 
penances, gjgj Brahma, the Brahman. Para, the supreme. Amritarn, 

the Immortal. The Eternally Free. Paramritam, the High Immortal. 

The Purusa called Paramritam is the Lord Himself. This word occurs in the 
last Khanda, verse 6 : where it is somewhat differently explained. Etat, 

this, Yah, wlm, Veda, knows. Hears from the Guru about this Brah¬ 
man. Nihitam, resting in, placed, hidden. Guhayam, in the 

cavity of the heart. Sab, he. Avictya, ignorance, Prakriti. 

Granthim, knot, bond. The bond of ignorance. The positive want of know¬ 
ledge. The absence of even intellectual knowledge. RfnkHcT Vikiratf, scatters, 
unloosens, throws aside, I ha, here. Madhva reads it as ^ and not and ^ 

means easily, gladly, Somya, O disciple, O Initiate. 

10. The Lord is this all,—the creative act, the wis¬ 
dom, the Highest Immortal. He who knows Him thus (as 
possessing creative power, wisdom, &c.) and dwelling in the 
cavity (of the hearts of all beings), he gladly unloosens the 
bond of Prakriti, 0 Initiate.—32. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

This karma or activity of the Lord (such as, creating, destroying, 
&c.), His tapas or knowledge ; and the Purusa called the Eternally Free 
are not different from the Lord but the Lord Himself. 

That which is called the activity of the Lord, that which is styled 
the wisdom of the Supreme Self, all that verily is the Lord—so also His 
Divine attributes like strength, power, &c. 

Note .—In ordinary men tlie action is different from the agent, the knowledge is differ¬ 
ent from the knower, the qualities different from the thing qualified—not so, however, in \\ 
the case of the Lord. 

So also we have the Sruti: — “ Wisdom, Power and Action are His essential nature” 
(Svetasvatara 1. C). 

This describes the Third Truth—the Truth about the Lord, the Supreme Brahman; 
as the previous mantras described the Truth about the Jiva ; and the Khanda preceding 
that, the Truth about Yajfias and the Cosmos. Cosmology and Psychology are the subjects 
of these two Khanrtas. This verse, which properly stands at the head of Khanda fourth, 
deals with Is vara or Brahman. 

The creative act (karma) of the Lord, and his tapas (knowledge) are not different 
from the Lord. He and His activities arc one. The Lord, the Sakti and the Wisdom are 
one. All (he acts of th ^ Lord (such asereation, &c.) His Wisdom called Tapas, and the 
Brahman called Eternally Free (Paramritam) — all is verily Lord. (They are not different 
from Him). O Somya ! He who knows Him thus, as resting in the cavity of the he^rt 
easily unloosens the bonds of ignorance. 








11 MUNDAKA , / KHANDA, 10 . 


235 


This verse describes the Brahman as possessed first of Karnvt or the power to create, 
preserve, destroy and secondly, of tapas or Supreme Wisdom to design and create the 
Universe; and thirdly, of Paramriram or the Highest Immortality or Anandam or Bliss, 
and fourthly, as Pnrusa or a person, not a mere abstraction. It further teaches that this 
Brahman should be meditated upon in the heart. This unloosens the bond of ignorance but 
does not totally destroy it. This is the first stage of Juana or paroksa knowledge. By study 
and getting instruction from a Guru this paroksa or indirect knowledge is obtained. It 
loosens a little the fetter of Avidya. The total destruction of this fetter takes place 
later. See verse 10 of the next Kliaiyla. There are various stages of Jiianam: the first 
is paroksa or indirect knowledge of a thing (such as the knowledge of internal anatomy 
obtained from the mer6 study of books and models). Such Jhanam unloosens or slackens 
the bonds of Avidya. 

Kaghavendra Yati places this verse as the first verse of the next Khan da. It is 
more appropriate there, as it starts a new topic. 


31 





SECOND MU N DAK A. 

Second Khanda. 

Mantra t. 

^TTT%: ^qRJ- 

TRRm q( f^RR^RE ^RRIRll \ 

^nfq: Avili, manifest. Who is always manifest. RlRriR* Sannihitam, near 
(because all-pervading). Near to all beings, Guhacharam, moving in 

the cavity, dwelling in the heart, ^r Nama, the well-known. Mahat, 

the Great, the Highest, the Best. Padam, goal, that which is attained 

(padyate) always, by every body, in deep sleep or in Mukti. No one can help 
entering it. ^p=r Atra, in Him (possessing the attributes of manifest, near, 
cave-dweller, &c.). qcfR Etat, this. Sarvain, all. Arpitam, is found¬ 

ed, created, protected, (another reading is samarpitam instead of sarvam arpi¬ 
tam). q^trT Ejat, moving, (but not having motion of the highest kind). Inani- * 
mate moving objects, like trees and lower animals. The ejat or moving des¬ 
cribe the jagrata or the waking state. Or it refers to all the activities of the 
organs of action, Kai mendriyas. qRJR Pranat, breathing (like animals, &c.) 
This describes the dreaming state (svapna) when there is mere breathing, but 
no movement. RRTR Nimisat, the closed eyes. This refers to the susupti 
state, the dreamless sleep, the third state. Or it refers to the activities of the 
organs of sensation like eyes, Sec Cha, and. hjr Vat, what Etat, 

this, (universe). Janatha, know ye. Thou knowest. All this universe 

of waking, dreaming, sleeping, physical, astral, mental —know ye—rest in Brah¬ 
man. “Know ye” mean “learn this by Sravana—hearing, studying.” g?r 
Sat, the Being, that which has form. The cause. Asat, the non-Being f 

that which has no form. The effect, Varcnyam, the adorable, the 

Highest, the best, lie is higher than the Sat (the world of form or the 
causal world) and than the Asat or the formless world or the world of effect.^ 
Param, higher than. R5JRPT Vijnanat, the Wisdom—the four-faced Brah¬ 
ma. The Chaturmukha Brahma is called Vijnana. See Bhagvat Purina, qq 
Yat, what. Varistham, best. q^Rtq Prajanam, of creatures. 

1. He is manifest, near, yea even moving in the hearts 
of all beings. He is the well-known Highest goal. Know 
that all this whatever, waking, dreaming or sleeping, which 
moves, breathes or blinks, is founded on Him. He is higher 
than Being and Non-being : higher than the Wisdom, He is 
the best object of adoration for all creatures.—33. 





IT MUNDAKA, Tl KHAKDA, 2. 


237 


Mantra 2. 

_ _ "V r\ w v rs rv 

^T^Tfr^r Rifrrr i 

r srrcrecr^ u c re^d 

rT^^T Frt^r II R II 

^ Yat, what, Arcbimat, possesses light, luminous, brilliant, 

beautiful. 3a; Yar, what. %[*!?%: Anubhyah, than the smallest, than the 
atoms. ^33 Anu, small. ^ Cha, and. srfw*. Yasmin, in whom. Lokah, 

the worlds, Nihitah, are founded, Lokinah, the world-dwel¬ 

lers. The inhabitants of the world. The World-Protectors ; the Rulers of the 
world system. ^ Cha, and. rpr Tat, that. (Brahman who is Invisible, &c.). 

Etat, this. The Brahman who is the Creator. Aksaram, imperishable. 

The Lord. ^ Brnhm, Brahman. Having all qualities in superabundance. 
*T: Sab, he. qnTT: Pranah, the life, the Creator (lit. He who works best 
prakarasena aniti cheshtata) who piesides over the Chief Prana even, as Antar- 
yamin. cja Pat, that. 3 U, alone. The force of U is to denote that He is 
not ordinary speech Yak, speed). The Revealer of the Vedas, who 

presides over the Deity of speech even as Antaryamin. rjq: Manah, the mind. 
Knows all. Omniscient. Who presides over the Deity of manas even as An¬ 
taryamin. rlH 'Pat, that. Etat, this. Satyam, truth, independent : 

not subject to any one else. Or Sata=jiva, yam = controller; satvam = the con¬ 
troller of the Jivas, whether they be Muktas or bound. Or sata = Immortal, ti — 
Mortal, ya = Ruler, Satyam —the Ruler of the Mortals and the Immortals, fjh Tat, 
that. Amritam, immortal. Having an undying body. ?jcT 7 "at, that. 

Veddhavyam, that which is to be pierced or aimed at. The target, 
Somya, O Initiate, Yiddhi, know. That is, practise Manana or meditation. 

2. He who is brilliant, who is smaller than the smallest, 
in whom the worlds are founded and the Rulers thereof, He 
is this Imperishable Brahman. He is the Creator (Life), the 
Revealer of Sacred knowledge (Speech) and Omniscient (or 
cosmic Mind). This is the (third) Truth. He is Immortal, 
0 Somya ! Know that He is the target to be hit.—34. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The words ‘ higher than Wisdom’ mean ‘higher than Brahma’ 
(Brahma is the highest of all jivas—higher than Brahma means higher than 
all creatures. The word Yijiiana denotes Brahma as we find in the follow¬ 
ing speech of Bralnna in the Bhagavat Purana)—“ I, the Wisdom Energy 
(Vijnana-rfaktb, was horn from the navel of this Being resting on the 
waters and possessed of Infinite powers. 1 ’ 










m 


MUNOA KA-UPANISAD. 


Visnu is called “ Prana ” because He is the leader of all, (Prana- 
yet.ri). He is called Vak, because He is the Teacher of all (Vaktri), Visnu 
is called Manas because He is the adviser of all (Mantri). He is the con¬ 
troller of all jlvas.” The above we read in the Sabda-Nirnaya. 

The second verse lays down that Brahman is to be meditated upon : or that manana 
should be performed ; as the first verse taught that Sravana should be done. The next verse 
teaches that Dhyana or concentration also is necessary. 

Mantra 3. 

rFSTBFRR \\\\\ 

^5: Dhanuh, bow. Girihttva, having taken or seized. 

Aupanisadam, appertaining to the Upanisad, />., the syllable Om. The mystic 
word“Aum” which is the chief topic of explanation in all Upanisads. 
Maha, the great, Astram, weapon. Saram, the arrow i.e. the 

mind. f| Hi, verily. Upasa, by meditation, devotion. The upasa is of 

two sorts : first, the study of scriptures and, secondly, concentration. fdP ffrT** 
Nigitam, sharpened. Upasa nigitam means sharpened by devotion or upasanfi. 
The devotion is of two sorts : first, the constant study of Sastras and secondly, 
concentration. T he latter is the higher. The first kind of upasa is meant here 
and not dhyana, the second kind. g v J*frcf Sandhaita, let him put or place. Another 
reading is San-dadhit, let him aim at. A)amya, drawing the bow. 

Withdrawing the mind from all objects. cpr Tat, that (Brahman). “ That " 
may refer to the devotee also. Bhava-gatena, with the sole aim, with 

thought or idea (bhava), directed or absorbed (galena). Or bhava may mean 
existence. Tad-biiava, he who is existence. %cT^r Chetasa, with the mind. 
Laksyam, the mark, the aim. epr Tat, that. ^ Eva, alone. Aksaram, 

imperishable. Somya, O initiate, O friend. Viddhi, know. Medi¬ 

tate upon. 

3. Take hold of the Mystic Name as the bow, and 
know that the Brahman is the aim to be hit. Put on this 
the great weapon (Om), the arrow (of the mind), sharpened 
by meditation. Withdraw thyself from all objects, and with 
the mind absorbed in the idea of that Brahman, hit the aim— 
for know, 0 Somya! That Imperishable alone to be the 
Mark.—35. 

Mantra 4. 

5 npr ^5: w 1 

SnRrRRT II 3 l| 

















II MUNPAKA , II KHANPA , 5 . 


230 


srctTf: Pranavah, the glory, the syllable Oin, Dhanuh, the bow, the 

instrument. stfC Sarah ; the arrow. ft Hi, veriiy. Atma, the self, the 

mind, ggj Brahma the imperishable BrAhman. Tat, that. 5^5 Lakh- 
syam, the mark, the aim, the target. 3^^ Uehvate, is said. Apramat- 

tena, by not heedless, not thought-distracted, Veddhavyam, to be pierced, 

to be hit, to be known and meditated upon, Saravar, like the arrow. 

Tanmayah, entered in Him, fixed in Him. Bhavet, let him become. 

4. The Great name is the bow, the mind is the arrow, 

and the Brahman is said to be the mark. It is to be hit by 
a man whose thoughts are concentrated, for then he enters 
the target.—36. 

Note .—Tims tiravaiia, manana, and dliyana of Braliman have been taught. This is the 
method of Brahma-upasana. 

Ad ANTRA 5. 

3??*?^ Yasmm, in whom. *sjf: Dyauh, the heaven. 1 he Devachan. 

Prithivi, the earth. The physical plane, Cha, and. Antariksam, 

the skv, the interspace. Tne astral plane. 3JTcf*Otam, are woven, are based. 
The three worlds are supported by Brahman. So also the other worlds. *t?t: 
Alanali, the mind. ^ Saha, with. nr% : Pranaih, with the pranas, the senses. 
The seven senses of cognition and the five organs of action. ^ Cha, and. 
gtf: Sarvaih, all. Tam, him. Eva, alone, Ekam, one. 

Janatha, know ye. Admanam, the self, ^qr Anyah, other: other 

deities, Vaehah, words. Vimunchatha, leave off, abandon, re¬ 
nounce. Leave off worship of other deities. Amritasya, of the immor¬ 
tals, of themuktas. Esah, this Brahman, Setuh, the bridge; the 

refuge. 

5. In Him are woven the heaven, and the interspace, 
and the mind also with all the senses. Know Him to he 
the one support of all, the atman. Leave off all other words 
(as well as worship of other deities). This (atmau) is the 
refuge of the immortals.—37. 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

“ He is the bridge of the immortal ”—the word amrita or immortal 
means the mukta jivas. In the Vedanta Sutra 1. 3. 2, it has been 

taught that the Lord is the refuge of the muktas. So also that “ He is the 
Highest goal of the muktas” —(Visnu Sahasra nama.) 




240 


MUKpAKA U PAN IS AD. 


- ' Mantra 6. 

mj ^ ht^i: i 

<JRR qRrTPTJlMl 

5 ETTT: Aral), spokes, fq Iva, like. Tqqplf Ratlia-nabhau, in the nave of 
the wheel, or the wheel of the chariot. Saaihatah, fastened. Yatra, 

where, in whom (/ e., in the Saviour). In the Lord who dwells in the heart, 
qiw: Nadyah, the arteries. The principal nadis called Bralima-nadi, &c. u: 
Sal), he. qq: Esali, this wish. The wrrd esafi is derived from the N /is, “to 
wish ” with the affix ghan. It is equivalent to esana “wishing.” It is in the 
nominative case here, but has the foice of the ins’rumental case. “ B}' 
mere willing.” Antascharate, moves within the antar or body 

or heart. Pervades the body. Antar also means space. He moves within 
all organs like eyes, ears, &c. qfqr Bahudha, in many ways; such as 
Visva, Taijasa, &c. The word “ekadha” also should be read here. He 
is not only Bahudha, but ekadha also. strqRH: Jayamanah, becoming mani¬ 
festing. Om, full of infinite attributes. Iti. this, qqq Evam, even, 

eqpqq Dhyayatha, meditate. Atmanam, the self. Svasti, 

hail, welfare. Val.i, to you. qmq Paraya, in order to cross; in order 
to obtain knowledge of the Supreme who is beyond Prakriti and Sri. Another 
reading is qtjq "for the sake of the Highest.” fjqq-: Tamasah, (beyond) 
darkness, or Prakriti or Avyakta or death. qUrfr-r Parastat, beyond para or 
Sritattva. That is having a non-prakritic body. Or beyond death, deathless. 

6. In him the life-webs (nadis) are fastened, as the 
spokes to the nave of a chariot. He is this (Atman) that per¬ 
vades the heart, and by his own free will manifests Himself 
in diverse ways (as Visva, Taijasa, &c., in waking, sleeping, 
Ac., states) ; and also as One as Prajuain the dreamless state. 
Meditate on the Atman as Om (full of all auspicious qualities 
and who is the chief aim of the Vedas), in order to acquire 
knowledge of the Paramatman, who is beyond the Prakriti 
and the £>ri Tattva. Your welfare consists in such know¬ 
ledge.—38. 

Note .—This shows that the Brahman is the Antaryamin Purnsa. He resides in the 
heart whore all the 72,000 nadis meet, as the spokes meet in the navel of the wheel. He 
moves within the organs, not for his own pleasure, but to give life and energy to them 
all. The Om with all its attributes must be constantly meditated upon. He manifests 
Himself in manifold ways in the waking and dreaming states as Yisva and Taijasa; while 






II MUNQAKA, II KHANOA, 7. 


241 


He manifests as one in the state of Susupti or Dreamless Sleep as Prajna. He is beyond 
Darkness : has no mortal body. Meditate on such Vis nil in the heart in order co get the 
Supreme Brahman, with the help of the Mantra Om. The result of such meditation is 
that there is welfare of yours—all evils will cease, and you will get the bliss of the mani¬ 
festation of the divinity—your Heal Self. 

Mantra 7. 

ftoq- m o#t^T^T STr%T5rf: llvsil 

Yah, who. grqjq: Saivajnah, all-wise, who understands everything. 

Sarvavit, all-knowing. Or who obtains everything. Whcse desires are 
all fulfilled. Yasya, whose, qq: Esah, tills. Self or Yisnu. qf|qr Mahima, 
glory. This manifestation in waking, sleeping and dreaming states : as Visva 
Taijasa and Prajna. Bhuvi, in the world ; not in Heaven ; for Dwellers of 

Heaven never sleep —they are always awake. Divye, in the Divine, the 

heavenly, the shining. Formed of Bhutakasa. Bi ahmapure, in the city of 

Brahman. In the body, the temple of God. The akasa within the heart is Bhu- 
takasa. f| Hi, verily, qq : Esah, this. sqrfyq Vyomni, in space, the ether. In the 
Bhutakasa of the heart. Atma, the self, qfqrgcT Pratishthitah, is placed. 

The Lord always manifests himself there. 

7. He wlio is all-wise, and all-knowing, whose great¬ 
ness is thus manifested in the world, is to he meditated upon 
as the Atman residing in the ether in the-shining city of 
Brahman (the heart).—39. 

Mantra 7 ( continued ) 

rUtSTTHH qRT 1|V5U 

qqfqsj: Manomayah, full of knowledge; where knowledge abounds. Or 
manomaya may mean he who controls (mayati) the manas so he who controls 
mind is manomaya. qro Prana, the vital airs and the senses. tufft SarTra, the 
body,Neta, the leader, the inciter, the guide. The controller. The controller 
of the prana and the body. srRrr&cT Pratisthitab, is placed, abides. ^ Anne, in 
(the body of) food, the dense body. The mortal Hridayam, the heart. 

mtwm Sannidhaya, superintending. rTq Tat, that. Vijnanena, through 

knowledge or intuition or aparoksa through the illumination produced when the 
heart is purified by meditation, concentration and free from desires. Through 
purity of heart. Through meditation on the appropriate foim of Visnu, accord¬ 
ing to the class of the adhikari. qKq*gf?<T Paripasyanti, see qftf: Dhirab, the wise 






242 


MUNVAKA-UPANtSAb. 


who possess Sravana and Manana. Anandarupam, the fuH of bliss. 

Whose nature or form is bliss. Amritam, the Immortal. The bod}’ which 

never perishes for it is not made of Prakptic matter. Yat, who. HRTTfl’ 

Vibbati, manifests Himself. Self-manifesting, which is self-luminous. 

7. He is the controller of the mind and the guide of 
the senses and the body. He abides in the dense body, 
controlling the heart. He, the Atman, -when manifesting 
Himself as Blissful and Immortal is seen by the wise through 
the purity of heart.—39. 


or 

He who corrects the mind and guides the senses and the body is the 
Lord dwelling in the Mortal man in the ether of the heart. The wise see 
by meditation the Lord as having a form which consists of bliss, which 
does not perish and which is self-luminous. 

MADHYA’S COM ME XT ARY. 

Hie Lord Visnu always residing in the heart, manifests Himself as 
One and as Manifold. He moves within all, out of His own free will : and 
thus He controls all living beings. 

Note .'—This shows that the Divine Yision is possible. God is seen in the Heart when 
it is purified. The shape in which lie appears is full of bliss and 4 in unchanging Immortal 
form. 

Mantra 8. 

r\ , *\ e r\ "\ *\ 

3vRTFW tTlWfS II q II 

Bhidyate, is broken, is destroyed, pierced, Hridaya, the neart. 
Or Hridaya may mean the Jiva or the Lord : being compounded of the words 
hrid, “heart/' and aya, “moving, dwelling’’ — lie whose seat is the heart, namely, 
the Jiva or the Lord Visnu. Granthih, knot, bond, fetter, which con¬ 

sists of ignorance, love and hatred. The fetter of the heart: or the fetter of 
the Jiva and of the Lord. Chiddyante, are cut asunder, are solved, are 

destroyed. Sarva, all ; namely, the remaining three bonds of Libga-deba, 
kSma-krodha and Prakriti-bandbas, as described below, ^rqr: Sainsayaf\ 
doubts Bonds. The word samgay’a etymologically can mean “ bonds ” also. 
For “ doubts ” had already been destroyed in the lirst degree. The bonds 
are many, such as avidya-bond, the Liuga-deha-bond, the Prakriti-bond, Kama- 
krodlia-bond and the Karma-bond. The destruction of Avidy^-bond and Karma- 
bond are specially mentioned in this verse : the remaining three are meant 







243 


II MUKDAKA, II KHAK1M, 0. 


here. Ksiyante, are exhausted, perish. >5* Cha, and. Asya, his. 

g^m% Karmani, works. The Sanchita and the Againin karmas: as well as 
the Prarabdhas. Some say the Prarabdha is not destroyed : these karmas 
produce their effects but the Jiva does not suffer them so keenly, 

Tasmin, when he. ?? Driste, >s seen, then the grace of God falls on the man. 
qrpft Paravare, in whose comparison, the Highest (Para) beings like Rama 
(WT), Brahma, &c., are low and insignificant (avara) Tike Supremely High. 

J " 

8. The fetters of the Jiva are cut asunder, the ties 
of Lihga-deha and Prakriti are removed, (the effects of all) 
his works perish, when He is seen who is Supremely High : 
(or when the Supremely High look at the Jiva).—40. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Visnu is called Paravara, because Para or High Beings like Rama, 
Brahma, &c., are Avara. or inferior in His comparison. 

J\ lote .—This shows the result of Divine Vision mentioned in the last verse. The 
avidysi covers both Is vara und Jiva. It prevents is vara being seen by Jiva and Jiva 
seeing isvara. It is a direct bondage of Jiva, and a metaphorical fetter of Isvara. Avidva 
is the name given to Prakriti in her active state : when her three qualities, Sattva, Rajas, 
and Tamas, are actively manifest. Destruction of Avidya means putting these gunas in 

their latent state. There is a great difference between the destruction of the Avidya_ 

fetters as taught in this verse, and the unloosening of them as previously described in 
verse 1. There Avidya still remained, for it was merely a Paroksa or intellectual appre¬ 
hension of Truth. Here Avidya itself is destroyed by aparoksa or Intuitive knowledge 
of Brahman. 

The bonds or bandhas are five : the lowest is Avidya-bond, then the Liuga-deha- 
bond, then the Paramachhadaka-Prakriti-boud, the Kama-bond and the Karma-bond. 
When all these bonds are destroyed, then the Juani goes by the Path of Light to the 
Santanika Loka. Before proceeding further all have to salute Sisu-mSra—the Dweller 
on the threshold,—the hub of the universe. 

The Sisu-mara literally means the Infant-killer and means the porpoise and is 
the name of a constellation, in the north, near the Pole. It corresponds, perhaps, with 
the Draco or the Ursa Minor. For a fuller description of it, see Bhagavad Pur ana, Book 5, 
Chapter 23. Here it has a mystical reference to a Being of an exalted order, which every 
Jiiani passes by, in his way beyond this universe. It may correspond with the ring-pass- 
not of the “ Secret Doctrine.” It is the name of Hari also, as we find in the following 
verse: “ The Supreme Hari, the support of infinity of worlds and whojs called Sisu-mara, 
is saluted by all knowers of Brahman on their way to the Supreme God.” 

Mantra 9. 

ffun# fkrii si^r i 

%: I) * || 

Hiranmaye, in the golden. ^ Pare, in the highest. zrtj Kose, 
in the sheath. The cosmic egg. That is, in the centre of the cosmic dgg. 

32 







244 


MIND A KA-UPANIBA D. 


Virajam, without Rajas or passion : free from all Prakritic gunas. Free 
from evil, Brahma, the Brahman, Niskalam, without parts, free 

from the i6 kalas of parts. See Prasna VII. Sisumara, whose body does 
not consist of 16 kalas. ^ Tat, that (central sun). ^5 Subhram, pure. 
White, Jyotisam, of shining bodies, like suns, &c. Turret: Jyotih, the 

light. Rd Tat, that, therefore, qar Yat, which, because. = 5 TRdTdd : Atmavidali, 
the knovver of Atman. Viduh, know. Because the past knowers of Self 

knew this Sisumara, therefore the present-day knowers must also do the 
same. 

9. The Brahman (called Sisumaram) free from all 
passions and parts, (manifests in the external world) in the 
highest golden sheath (the Cosmic Egg). That is pure, that 
is the highest of lights, it is that which the knowers of 
Atm an know. — 41. 


MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

“He is in the (Jeiilre of the Cosmos (as Sisumara, the light of all 
cosmic suns). He is even in the centre of our sun and illumining all 
planets.” 

In the first aspect He is meditated upon as SisumAra, and in the 
second as Gay at it. 

Note .—In man, the Brahman manifests in the heart or the Auric egg called the city 
of Brahman. In the universe, He manifests Himself in the Cosmic Egg called the “Golden 
sheath.” Those arc the two places where Brahman may be meditated upon. 

This verso lias been explained in two different ways: first, as applying to Sisumara 
and secondly, as teaching how to meditate oil Narayaua in the sun. The “ golden sheath ” 
would then mean the Solar sphere. The Supremely High Brahman resides in the excellent 
golden slicath. He is Pure and without parts. 

Mantra io. 

d dd HTT dTTd d d^dTRfc ddT fd^dt dfRd fdT SddHT: I 
ddd dFddgdrfd Hd dRT *TRTT RdTdd fddTTd 11^ °I1 

d Na, not. cpd'Iatrn, Him: the Lord Willi regard to that Brahman, 
who is the Light of Lights. The word tatra is here equivalent to tarn “ Him,” 
thought it literally means ‘there.’ *3$: Sflryah, the sun *rrfd Bnati, illumines. 
The sun cannot reveal that Brahman. It is to he taken in a causative sense, 
meaning “illumines,” and not “shines.” So also in “ bhanti ” later on. 
Literally the words mean, “ The sun docs not shine there nor the nmon and 
stars, &c.” r Na, not. =r Cha, and. Chandra, the moon. rlRdid Tara- 

kam, and stars. d Na, not. ^df Ima, these, fd^d* Vidyutah, lightnings. 









II MUNDAKA , II KII AND A, 11. 


245 


HTRT Bhanti, illumine. ^ : Kutah, how. ^rr Ayani, this. Agnih, fire. 

cT* Tam, him. Eva, alone. Bhantam, shining. When He alone 

illumines all the sun, moon, &c. they shine after him. Anubhati, shine 

after. The force of Anu 44 after ” is to denote dependence. 'The light of the 
sun, &c., depends upon that of the Lord. ^re^Sarvani, all. tpq Tasya, his. 
*rrSTT Bhasa, light, Sarvam, all. Idam, this (world). Vibhati, 

manifests, illumines. 

10. The sun does" not shine there in His Presence nor 
the moon and the stars (for His Light is greater than theirs, 
they appear as if dark in lhat effulgence, like the candle¬ 
light in the sun). Nor do these lightnings, and much less 
this fire shines there. When He shines, everything shines 
after Him ; by His light all this becomes manifest.— 42. 

or 

Him the sun does not illumine nor the moon and the stars. Nor 
do these lightnings much less this fire illumine Him. When He illu¬ 
mines all (the sun, <kc.), then they shine after (Him with His light). 
This whole universe reveals Ills Light (is His light and its light is His.) 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

This sun, &c., do not illumine Him, i.e., cannot make Him manifest. 

Mantra ii. 

siNsnjcT ^r^rffTr^r i 

sraaNf ^ iihii 

II R || 

3^1 Brahma, the Brahman. ^ Eva, alone. f^JT Idam, this. The word 
“ idam” qualifies the word Brahman. 44 This Brahman alone is Amritam.” 

Amritam, immortal, eternally free. Purastat, in the front ; in 

the east. && Brahma, the Brahman. Paschat, in the back ; the west. 

^f%*Urr Daksinatah, in the right, the south. ^ Cha, and Uttarena, in 

the left, the north, Adhah, below, nadir. ^ Cha, and. (Jrdhvam, 

above, zenith. ^ Cha, and. ST^cpr Prasritam, gone forth, pervading, imma¬ 
nent, dwelling. Brahma, the Brahman, Eva, alone, Idam, this 

(Brahman). Idam Brahman eva visvam : This Brahman alone is the Plenum. 
The word “ idam ” does not qualify visvam, but 44 Brahma.” {i This universe is 
Brahman” would be wrong meaning. The word 44 idam ” occurs thrice in this 
verse, in the other two places it clearly refers to Brahman, why should it not 
refer to it here also ? The word Visvam does also not mean the <4 universe” 






246 


MU NBA KA-UPA NISA D. 


here but the u Full "—the all-pervading in space, time and qualities. 

Visvam, universe, all. Full (purnam\ all-pervading (Vispati sarvam, vis- 
vam). Plenum: the Eternity, Idam, this (Brahman alone is the Varis¬ 
tham). Varistham, the best. 

11. The Eternally Free is verily this Brahman only 
He is in the east and in the west, in the north and the 
south, in the zenith and the nadir. The Brahman alone is it 
who pervades all directions. This Brahman alone is the 
Full (that exists in all time—the Eternity). This Brahman 
is the best:—43. 

M A DHYA’S COMMENT A RY. 

This (idam) Brahman is alone the Visvam or Infinity or Full (pur- 
nam), This alone is the Best, the Highest of all. As the word 4 idam * is 
used several times in this verse it qualifies the word Brahman and not 
4 visvam.’ 

Note .—The Brahman was taught to be meditated upon as in the heart and the hiran- 
yamaya kosn. But lest one should mistake that He is thus limited in those two places 
only, this verse declares that He is everywhere: though for the purposes of meditation 
those two places are selected as the best. 

Brahman is said to be the best (varistham); but how can that be when the Jiva and 
Brahman are identical ? Tire next verse shows that the Jiva and Brahman are not iden¬ 
tical. 









THIRD MHNDAKA 

Fihst Iyhanda. 

Mantra i. 

w.i gqqrr ^3 tt bww oth qftq^m i 

rTqr^q: fir^ ^qT^SRSTST^qf qTW^TqjjrfrfrT \\\\\ 

5t L)va (dvau), two. gqqjr Suparna (Suparnau), of handsome plumage 
or strong-winged birds, namely, the Jiva and the Isvara. Sayuja (Sayu- 

jau), (rivals), always united, inseparable (friends). Sakha\ r a (Sakhayau), 

of equal name, friends. By Vedic license the dual affix au is replaced by a, 
in alt these four words, Samanam, the same, the one. ^ Yriks'am, the 

(Asvattha) tree (The body). Parisasvajate, dwell upon, em¬ 
brace, cling to, nestle. cTqr: P avail, uf two (birds), Anyah, one (the Jiva). 

Pippalam, the fruit of the Asvattha tree, i.e., the effects of karrnas 
generated by the body, *qrj Svadu, sweet : as if it was sweet. qrf% Atti, eats. 
The fruit is really bitter, but it eats it always as if it was sweet. 

Anasnan, not eating, the non-essential portion of the fruits of good works and 
no portion of the fruits of evil deeds, 3T*g: Anyah, the other. 3 rp*^T 3 Wr?rsr 
Abhi-chakasiti, looks on, illumines all around. 

1. Two birds of handsome plumage, inseparable 
friends, nestle on the same tree. The one of them eats the 
fruit, as if it was sweet, the other, without eating, illumines 
all around.—44. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Jiva-bird eats the fruit as if it was sweet: and not that it eats 
the sweet fruits only and rejects the bitter ones. It has to eat both the 
sweet and the bitter fruit. As says a text (Rig Veda I. 164. 22) “He 
who is the foremost, for him alone is the sweet fruit and not for the 
mortal Jiva who does not know the Father.” This shows that the igno¬ 
rant do not taste the sweet fruit. 

The Lord does not eat that fruit which is destined for the Jiva and 
not that He alone eats the sweet fruit. So also we read in the Tattvasara : 
“ The Lord Visnu, the unchangeable, is said to be tbe eater as well as the 
non-eater. He is the eater in the sense that ITe is above the law of necessi¬ 
ty, His enjoyment is not conditioned by karma. He is the non-eater 
because He never suffers any sorrow,” 





248 


MUN[) A KA-UPA NISAD. 


Note. —In the last kharula it was said that the Supreme moves in the hearts of all ar/* 
becomes manifold. Lest one should mistake that Brahman is therefore the Jiva and there 
is no difference between the two, the present k hand a declares their difference. 

Having taught the three Truths—the world or Yajha, the soul or Jrva and the Isvara 
or God—the present khainla declares the relationship in which the Jiva stands to Brahman. 
The God and the soul both dwell together in invariable union in the same body; but while 
God is Pure Consciousness illuminiug all, the Jiva is the experiencer. 

The Lord also eats only the essence of the good works. The truly sweet fruit is for 
the Lord alone and for those who knew the Lord ;,but for the ignorant who do not know 
the Father, there is no sweet fruit. 

Mantra 2. 

1% gw HHsfrsifrw gimR: 1 
gs w hr 11 

TO Samane, on the same (viz., in the same body). Vrikse, on the 

tree. g^r: Purusah, the spiiit ; the Jiva ; the man. R*DT* Nimagnah, immers¬ 
ed, seated, perched, but having the idea of “i M and “ mine,” and hence “ absorb¬ 
ed in the tree. Anisaya, through want of power, impotence She 

who has no other Lord (Isa) is called Anisa. That is she who is inde¬ 
pendent—the Divine Maya, Power or Wisdom (Bhagawat Matih). By Her —by 
that Anisa, by the Divine Power. iJr^TR Sochati, grieves, suffers the pains of 
tlie world by not knowing the Lord. g^RR: Muhyamanah, being deluded, by 
feeling attachment for the body, &c. Justam, contented, the worshipped of 

all, viz., Visnu, Yada, when. <prr Pasyati, lie sees. ^r?qg Anyam, 

the other, as separate from the Jiva. fsjg Isam, the Lord Visnu. Asya, 

His. *rf|*TR?r Mahimanam, glory. fR 11 i, thus. ^RSir^ Vitasokah, free from 
sorrow or grief. Becomes Mukta. 

2. Though seated on oue and the same tree, the Jiva 
bewildered by the Divine Power sees not the Lord and so 
grieves. But when he sees the eternally worshipped Lord 
and his glory, as separate from himself, then lie becomes 
free from grief (and lit for Mukti).—45. 

MADIIVA'S COMMENTARY. 

The Will or Wisdom of Hari is called AnitLi because there is no Lord 
over Hei. His Will is not dominated by anybody else’s will. Ilis is the 
true free will. The Jiva is deluded by this Anisa, this Will or Power of the 
Lord. The Jiva gets the Mukti when lie knows the Lord as separate from 
him. As we read in the Brahman Sara: “ The Lord is separate from the 
Jiva and as lie is independent, He is called the best of all Beings/’ 

iVofe.—The first half of this verse describes the cause of bondage, namely, the soul 
bciug immersed in bodily enjoyment and the Delusion of the mine and thine. The next 
half shows the method of emancipation—seeing the Lord the over-content and the ador¬ 
able. Discontentment is the cause of bondage, contentment the cause of Mukti. 





HI MONO AKA, I KHAKI.) A, 4 


249 


Mantra 3. 

TN: qRTRFT sT^TTF^ I 

cT^r fq^q htsfl 'F+t qFqgqfq iuii 

qqT Yada, when, qqq: Pasyah, seer, the Jiva. qqq% Pasyate, sees, ^qq 
Ruknia, golden. Another reading is “ rugma ” formed from the root “ ruj.” 
qifiq Varnam, coloured. The golden coloured Creator is the Lord. Phis is the 
color of His Aura. qrTTK^ Kai tararn, the creator (of the world), fscpr tsam, the 
Lord. Purusam, the Purusa, the person. ^ Brahma, the Brahma or 

Hiranyagarbha. zfrfqR Yonim, the cause, the source of Brahma, qqr Tada, 
then Vidvan, the wise, the aparoksa Jnanin. Punya, virtue, good, 

qfq Pape, vice, evil. The good and evil. All Punya is not destroyed by Jn^na, 
but on]}' that punya which has not begun to manifest its fruit. The non-pra- 
rabdha. The punya is of two sorts : Kamya and non-Kamyn. The kamya- 
punya (good deeds done with a particular desire) is of two sorts —that which 
has begun to manifest its fruit (prarabdhn) arid non-prarabdha. The latter only 
is destroyed, fqtjq Yidhuya, shaking oft, destroyed. fqi^R Niranjanah, with¬ 
out blemish, free from passion. Free from Avidya. Anjana is another name 
of avidya. q*qq Paramam, the highest. ^r*qq Samyam, similarity. The simi¬ 
larity consisting in being free from grief, and possessing full joy. qqfq Upaiti, 
reaches, attains. 

3. When the Jiva sees the golden coloured Creator 
and Lord, as the Person from whom Brahma comes out, 
then the wise, shaking off virtue and vice and becoming free 
from Avidya, attains the highest similarity.—46. 

JIADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

He shakes off that good deed only, tiie fruit of which he does not 
desire to enjoy. 

Note .—This shows that the Lord has a visible form and color. See also the Vedanta 
Sutra I, 2, 23, The divine qualities were in the Jiva from before—so it was similar with 
the Lord from eternity. The similarity which the Jiva attains on Mukti consists in the 
unfoldmcnt of Divine Powers which were latent before in the soul. See Vedanta Sutra 

II. 3, 31. 

Mantra 4. 

smor IN q: qqqrtFTqrfq TqjTRrNspqqq qncNNT I 
WFRffre ^TR'RJFrl: FFNNFN s^rfqqT I Nil 

qntP Pianah, the Breath, the Lord. Literally the Prime mover (Pra- 
krista Chestaka.) ft Hi, because, qq: Esali, this (Visnu the Lord), q Yah, 
who. ^fq Sarva, all. vr: Bhutaih, creatures, beings, senses. Sarva-bhutaih, 






250 


M UNDA KA-UPA NTS A D. 


by all the Devas presiding over the senses. fipTTr^ Vibhati, shines forth. 

Vijanan, knowing, understanding. f%£pr Vidvan, the wise, Bha- 

vate, becomes q Na, not. Ativadi, much-talker; conceited by the 

idea 11 I am the worker, the agent.” One who makes a supreme and final 
declaration. Dogmatic (?). Atma, the Self, the Lord. Kridah, sport¬ 

ing, revelling. He who sports with the self is called Atma-krida. Or he who 
constantly meditates on the Krida or sport of the Lord—how the Atma creates 
and destroys the world. This is the samprajnatah meditation. Atma- 

ratih, delighting in the Self. Or who has got the pleasure (ratih) of seeing 

the Atman (the Self) Svarupa-sukha. This describes Asamprajhata 
Samadhi. Kriyavan, performing works, viz., constantly meditating on 

the Lord, carrying out the will of the Loid, that being his sole work. 

Performing only Prarabdha acts, during the time when he is not in 

Asamprajnata-Samadhi. nq: Esah, this, namely, the jnanT, the wise. 
Brahmavidam, among the knowers of Brahman. 'Those who are inferior to 
him in the knowledge of Brahman, qftg: Varisthah, the best, the teacher. That 
is during the time when he is not in asamprajhata samadhi, he teaches others 
as well as is active in the performance of good deeds. 

4. For the Lord shines forth in all beings and senses, 
knowing this the wise ceases from useless controversy. He 
contemplates on the Lord, enjoys the bliss of His company, 
(and when out of trance) is active in performing works of 
the Lord—such a Jivan-mukta is also the teacher of those 
who are seekers of the knowledge of Brahman.—47. 

MADUAVA’«) COMMEXTARY. 

The true jhanin, called here vidvAn, is kriyavan, perforins all duties 
and works off liis prarabdha. This Lord I lari manifests or shines forth 
as Prana, the Prime worker, in all the activities of the Devas like Indra, 
&c., who preside over the various organs of the human body. The jhanin, 
therefore, realises that all Ids activities are primarily of the Lord, 
and lie then says, “lam not an independent worker, but the real agent 
is Hari.” When he realises this, lie does not become an ati-vadi—does 
no longer say “ I am the agent.” On the contrary, lie now begins to 
see in the functioning of all his senses and organs, the play of the Lord, 
the Lila of Hari, and thus he becomes Atma-krida, one who is absorbed 
in the contemplation of the graceful sports of the Lord of all sports. In 
his own body and in the universe, he sees the sport of the Lord—as He 
ereates, preserves and destroys it. Thus absorbed in the dliyana of the 
Lord, lie attains the state of Samprajnata samadhi. This leads naturally 
to the next stage : the Asamprajhata Samadhi — for the contemplation of 






Ill MUNI?AKA, I KUANDA, 5. 


251 


the works of the Lord Atma-krida merges into Atma-rati—the self-oblivion 
resulting from the vision of the Divine—the pleasure of enjoying the 
Self. When one becomes unconscious of external objects, one is said to 
be in Asamprajnata Samadhi. 

When such a jnanin is not in this state of Asamprajnata Samadhi, 
then he is always active, always kriyavan, always performing puja of the 
Lord, engaged in prayers and* worship. Not only this, he explains to 
others the sacred books of the Lord, he becomes a teacher among seekers 
of Brahman. 

Note. The last verse showed that the Sanehita and A gamin karmas of the Aparoksa- 
jnanin are destroyed: hut he goes on enjoying or suffering the good or bad effects'of 
Prarabdha karmas. During this period, before his prarabdha is exhausted, does he do any 
act or not ? This verse answers that question. It shows that he works (kriyavan) ; he 
performs prfirabdha acts only. Not only this, ho is active in teaching those who are inferior 
to him. This is possible when he is out of Atma-rati trance. The Jnanin is not a self-cen¬ 
tred egoist like many of the present day pretenders of that irame. 

Mantra 5. 

iren ire wreur srgreqfy i 

SlfmnWt If Ijsfr 11 * 11 

Satvena, by truthfulness. Truth is that which conduces to the 
greatest welfare of the good, Labhyah, is to be obtained or gained. That 

is, the direct vision or aparoksa is to be gained by truth, &c. The Beatitude 
is to be obtained by truth, &c. Tapasa, by penance, performing properly 

the duties of one’s stage of life and caste, and constantly thinking about and 
meditating on the Lord. The three-fold tapas consisting in worshipping the 
Devas, the Regenerates, the Guru and the Wise, with thoughts, words and deed, 
qq: Esab, this, this bliss, this purnananda, perfect bliss. Atma, Self. 

The essential bliss of the Self. The bliss of being in one's own Self. 

Samyak, complete, perfect, great, Jnanena, by knowledge, by the 

knowledge of the Truth obtained from the teaching of a Master. By perfect 
or ripe Aparoksa knowledge. By the knowledge of the greatness of the Lord 
and loving devotion towards Him. Brahmacharyena, by abstinence, 

by celibacy: by discharging the duties of a Brahma-student. By controlling 
the senses or studying Vedas, Nityam, always. This word should be con¬ 

strued with Satyena, Tapasa, &c. Antah, within, in the midst. $kk Sarire, 
in the body. TO Antah-gai ire, within the body. Jyotirmayah, 

full of light, abounding in luminousity. f| Hi, verily, sn*: Subhrah, pure, 
untouched by matter. Yam, whom. Pasyanti, see. Yatayah, the 

devotees, the anchorites. The persons who exert or strive or endeavour, 
the energetic, the painstaking, Ksinadosab, sinless, whose faults have 

become exhausted, spotless- 

33 







252 


MUND A KA-UPANISAD. 


5 . By truthfulness is to be gained verily this Atmaic 
bliss, by penance and right knowledge and constant prac¬ 
tice of self-control. He, whom the faultless devotees see, 
is verily in the midst of the body, full of light and pure.—48. 

Note. _Meditation or clliyana was said to be the method to find out the nature of the 

Lord by aparoksa. This verse describes some accessories to such meditation such as 
truthful ness, jDenance, celibacy, &c. 

It has been mentioned in the last verse that the Jnauins must perform karmas. Such 
action is not merely for the sake of welfare of the world. (Gita III. 20 and 25.) : but for 
the sake of attaining bliss. The works like bravana, &c., performed without any desire 
of fruit, after one has ataained paroksa, as well as aparoksa jiiiina, lead to this beatitude 
of self-perception : the Anaucla transcending all Anandas. This is not a mere assertion 
but there is authority for it. The word “ Ili ” indicates this : “ By jfiana is produced the 

cessation of all the sorrows and doubts ; but by worship and actions performed with 
bhakti after the attainment of wisdom there arises the bliss of the Self.” Meditation 
leads to direct and intuitive knowledge. The accessories to such dhyana are truthfulness, 
&c. The Yatis—the strivers after meditation, &c., (not necessarily Saunyasins, the 
householders may be Yatis in this sense) freed from faults, see the Lord within the Self. 
This Lord is light, effulgent, pure, untainted by Matter—the Atman—the Self. 

Mantra 6. 

l 3 RR hihT q-m TTHHT i 

1 UTHqffRT ^ RR \\i\\ 

Satyam, the true or truth, the Lord Visnu. 1 'he Lord Visnu is called 
Satya because He possesses all good (Sat) attributes ; while the Asuras possess 
all the opposite attributes and hence are called asatya u false ” ; ahrita “ unright¬ 
eous/' The person who is intensely devoted to Him is also called Satya, 
The Lord Visnu should not be confounded with the minor deity of that name. 
fTcj Eva, alone. Jayate, conquers, obtains. The great devotee obtains 

the Lord. H Na, not. Anritam, the false, the Asuras, the unrighteous. 

Those who are opposed to the Lord. The Asuras do not obtain Him. Because 
the path by which the Lord is reached is controlled by the Lord. Satyena 

by the True, Pantha, the path, Vitatah, is opened, is opened out, t\e. t 

is controlled. Is created (by the Lord, so that His devotees may pass over to 
Him.) Devayanah, the Devayana, the path of the Devas, sr Yena, by 

which. Akramanti, proceed, go. rjrsl Risayah, the seers, the wise. 

The word 4< Risi " is not used here in the technical sense of the second class 
of adhikaris." f| Hi, verily. qrrR^Rf: Apta, obtained, satisfied. Kamah, 
desires, highest knowledge. ^HRTiRr: Aptakamah, whose desires are satisfied, 
who have gained the highest knowledge. It qualifies the word Risayah. The 
highest Risis alone go there and not those of inferior degrees, 2R Yntra, 
where. 5^ Tat, that. Satyasya, of the Huth, of tlie Lord. rr* Para- 

mam, the highest. RRR*f Nidhauam, abode, place. I lie Vaikuntha. 











TII MUNI}AKA, T KHAKI)A, 6. 


253 


6. The True alone conquers (reaches the True), and 
not the Untrue. By the True is guarded the path called 
the Devavana, by which proceed the Risis who are satisfied 
in their desires, to where there is that highest place of the 
True. —49. 


MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Lord Visum is called Satya because He possesses all auspicious 
(sat) qualities. The Asuras are called asatyas because they possess quali¬ 
ties opposite to those. 

The highest Vaikunthaloka is said to be the abode of Visnu. 

Note .—In the last book of the Vedanta Sutras four kinds of release (Mukti) have 
been taught: viz., the destruction of the fruits of action (Karmas), the destruction of the 
final body, the path and the enjoyment. The first kind of Moksa or Karma Ksaya has 
been taught in the verse 11 (Ksiyante cha asya Karmani), when the aparoksa knowledge 
is obtained. 

The second class of Mukti is of two sorts—the Charma-Deha nasa, of the Devas, 
and the Charama-Deha liasa of the perfects other than the Devas. The falling off of the 
body of the Deva occurs only at the great Cosmic Pralaya, and even then it is not a 
falling off. The Devas merge with their bodies into the body of the higher Deva of their 
hierarchy and so on. This will be fully described under verse III. 2, 6. In the case 
of the Jnanis other than the Devas (such as the human Jnanis, Risis, &c.) the falling off 
of the last body takes place when they die, not to be re-born, when they transcend 
the circle of Saihsara. This is their last compulsory incarnation on Earth. When 
they throw off their Charama-Deha, the}' go to Mahar or other higher Lokas by the path 
of Archis. This has been described under verse I. 2, 6. 

The Marga or the path is also of two kinds—the path on which the Devas get Mukti 
called the path of Garuda, and the path of feesa—and the path, on which other than the 
Devas attain salvation, called the path of Archis. The paths of Gar ml a and &esa will be 
described in the verse III. 2, 6, while the second path by which Brahman is attained is 
described in the next verse- 

The Jnanis are also of three kinds,—the highest, the middle and the lowest. The 
Devatas are the highest, the Risis the middling, and the lowest are the best of the human 
race. The Jnanis—human or Divine—are sub-divided into three classes. Those who 
worship without symbol (apratik-alambana) are the highest, because they see God 
everywhere as all-pervading. The other two classes are described later. They (the 
human Jnanis of the highest kind) go by the path of Light (Archis). This verse describes 
that in a particular evolutionary period only a limited number reaches this stage. All 
Devatas are generally of this class : among the Risis one hundred, among the Rajas one 
hundred, among Gandharvas one hundred. The dead on leaving the body go to the 
Archis (flame). From that place they- reach the«son of Vayu, called the Ativahika : from 
there to Ahar (Day), then the Bright Fortnight, then the six northern months, then the 
year, then the lightning, Varuna, Prajapati and Surya ; thence Soma (moon), Vaisvanara, 
Indra, Dhruva, Devi and Diva. Thence they reach the Supreme Vayu (the first-be¬ 
gotten) who carries them to God. 



254 


MUNI? A KA-UPAKISAD. 


Mantra 7. 

11^ ftnrfrr i 

rTrf^TT-n% =q q?qr%% Rff?T gfT^TH (IvSll 

®T^<T Brihat, great, grand in all respects of time, space and causality. The 
middling Great. The Super-relative Great will be mentioned later on. He 
has ananda—form also. The Brihat Brahman manifestation is for the best 
among men : they are the lowest adhikaris. ^ Cha, and. efer Tat, that, 
Divyan, divine, wonderful. Achintyn, inconceivable, Rupam, 

form. The Divine form, Suksm&t, than the subtle, ie. t than the 

Prakriti. ^ Cha, and. Tat, that. Suksmataram, more subtle. This 

is manifestation of Brahman as reflection : as the sun can appear as very small 
in a focus. The subtle manifestation is for Risis and the rest: who are middl¬ 
ing adhikaris. This is the Biinba-Brahman. fq^rfcT Vibhati, shines forth, 
manifests, Durat, than the far. jg^jSudure, greatly far, farther, cT<t Tat, 

that. I ha, here, in the middle. Antike, at the end, because He is all- 

pervading. This all-pervading or vyapta Brahman is for the highest adhikaris, 
who worship without any symbol. ^ Cha, and. qqqcg Pasyatsu, among the 
seeing, among the wise, whether men, Risis, or Devas. fg Iha, here, in this 
body. In this heart, qq Eva, alone. Nihitam, placed, hidden, residing, 

resting. ggrertr Guhayfim, in the cavity. (Auric egg?). 

• 7. That true shines forth as great, divine, and incon¬ 
ceivable. He manifests as power (to men) ; and as smaller 
than the small He manifests to the Risis. He appears as far 
beyond what is far, also here (in the middle) and at the end 
(i.<3., all-pervading to the Devas). For the discerning (when 
they see the appropriate form) here (within their own body), 
in the cavity of the heart, then there is Release.—50. 

M A DI IVA’S COM ME AT A RY. 

As lie is all-pervading he is said to be both far and near. 

Note .—An objection is raised : “ You have said that the Supreme Brahman is reached 
by the direct perception (aparoksa jiiana) of Brahman. In the fifth verse of the next 
chapter is taught that the karya or effected Brahman is only reached by aparoksa jiidna 
and not the Supreme. Whereas in other parts of this bjok it is said that the lokas like 
Mahar, Jana, and Tapas are so reached. The aparoksa jiiana being of uniform nature cannot 
lead to so diverse results.” To this is the reply that the aparoksa jiiana is not of a uniform 
nature for all. It varies with the object of Sdf jiidna. This verse describes that according 
to the differences of adhikaris, the aspects of Bralnnan that they see by aparoksa are 
different. The Brihat Brahman is the object of aparoksa for the human jfidnins, the suksma 
or Bimba Brahman for the Risis, and the all-pervading or Vyapta Brahman for the Devas. 
The one and the same Brahman, by His mysterious power (achiutya sakti) appears as smaller 







ITT HUNT) AKA, I KIT AND A, 8. 


255 


than the atom—a focus point in the heart of the Hi.si: as Virat purusa to Human Per¬ 
fects, and as all-prevading to the Devas. Thus the no size of the atom, the all size of the 
all-pervading, and the middle size of the Virat are all possible to brahman, and hence 
the phrase “aehintya i npam” is applied to Him in the verse. Humanity, as a rule, wants an 
Incarnation, an Avatara of God to satisfy its heart. God must appear to it outside as 
some Bahih prakasah. Therefore the first portion of the verse “briliat cha tad, ” applies 
to Brahman as seen by Human juanins. Not only He appears as great (Briliat) and posses¬ 
sing supernatural Divine Powers, but appears also full of bliss, &c. To the Risi adhikaris 
He appears as suksuiat suksmatara, “ ^mailer than the small, ” the point in the focus—the 
Bimba. For Risis are said to have antarprakasa. While to the Devas, He appears as 
all-pervading, who is farther than the far— durat sudure and who is “ilia ” in the middle 
and “ antike ” at the end—“far off,” “here’’ and “ at the end”—in other words, all-pervading. 

Thus the three objects of aparoksa perception have been declared, according to the 
class of the adliikari.as they are uttama (best), madhyama (middling) and adhama (lowest!. 
How this aparoksa jiiana arises in them is described in the last sentence of this verse : pas- 
vasu iha eva, &c., when these various adhikaris see the appropriate object of their aparok¬ 
sa preception in their heart, then they get Release. See Vedanta Sutra III. 3.51. The 
Lokas beginning with Mahar and ending with Yaikuntha — Mahar, Jana, Tapas, Satyam and 
Yaikuntha are to be reached byjuana alone : while three Lokas—Bhuh, Bhnvah andSvar are 
obtained by karma. The apratikalambana worshippers reach the Brahman in Yaikuntha, 
when they see the all-pervading form of the Lord. The Risis,A’C., by seeing the Bimba-Brah- 
man, reach the satya-loka Brahman in Satya-loka. The human Jhanins by seeing the Briliat- 
Brahman reach the Mahar, Jana or Tapas Loka according to their grade. The human juanins 
are of three kinds : the Tapasvins who performs penance. They go to the Tapas world. 
The Yogins are the second class—they go to the Jana-loka ; and Quarter Yogins (Pada- 
yogins) go to the Mahar-lokah. All these three sorts of adhikaris get Mukti by seeing 
the Bimba in their heart. Thus Moksa may be defined to be the cessation of infinite evils 
accompanied by the residing in one’s own form (svarupa). Thus Moksa is not of various 
kinds—it is the same for all : but the variety is in the different kinds of aparokasa-jfiana. 

Now this seeing of Bimba, which is the immediate cause of mukti, results from the 
teaching of Hiranyagarblia. See Prasna Up. Y. 5, where the Jivaghana or Brahma is 
said to teach the juanins the final wisdom. So also in the Katha Up. I. 2.20, where then 
grace of the Dhata is said to be the cause of Mukti. 

This Bimba-vision obtained through the grace of Chaturmukha is diffierent from the 
bimba-darsan of the Madhyama adhikaris, i.e., the Risis. For it was already mentioned 
before that the Deva juanins see the Vyapta, Brahman, the Risi juanins see the Birnba- 
Brahman, &c., the Human juanins see that the Avatara-Brahman. The Bimba-vision through 
the grace of Chaturmukha is not the vision of the “ smaller than the smallest which is 
the ordinary Bimba-vision of the Risi juanins. The Bimba-vision here consists in manifest 
ing transcendental qualities and attributes, and size and proportion greater than any jiva. 
Therefore the Kathaka verse uses the words “ atmanah maliimanam, ” “ greater than the 
jiva The word Atman there means jiva and maliimanam means “ greater than.” “Yisnu is 
called mahiman because He is greater in quantity and quality than the jiva.” (Katha 
bhasya). Therefore the Risis also must see this Bimba before they can get Mukti. For it is 
essentially necessary for Moksa that one (whether a Deva juanin or a Risi jiianin or a Human 
jiianin) should see this Bimba—this mahiman form, through the grace of the first-begotten. 

Mantra 8. 

* i 







256 


MON DA KA-UPANISAD. 


^ Na, not. Chaksusa, by the eye. By the grace of the divinity 

presiding over the eye. He is one of the deities in the guha or cavity. 
Grihyate, is seized, apprehended. Na, not. gfqp Api, even, Vacha, by speech. 
By the grace of the Divinity presiding over speech, by revelation. ^ Na, not. 

Anyaih, by the other, Devaih, davas, or shining ones, senses. By the 
grace of any other devas. ?TWr Tapasa, by penance or fasting, &c. ^tot 
K armana, by works appropriate to one's caste and stage of life, qr Va, or, and, 
Jnana, knowledge. Namely, by Vayu, who is ^ all knowledge. Or by Brahma 
who is also called Jnanam or wisdom. Prasadena, by the grace of. Jnana : 

by the grace of Vayu or Chaturmukha Brahma or Hari himself. *TR-5^rR 5 T 
Jnanaprasadena, through the grace of wisdom (Hari the Most High, and Brahma 
the Teacher). The grace is the immediate cause of Mukti, meditation, &c., are 
only occasions or nimitta cause. Visuddha, pure, sattva, nature, 

mind. By the sattva element becoming free from the admixture of rajas and 
tamas. Visudhasattvab, pure in heart. fr: 'Fatah, then, g Tu, but, only, alone. 
That is, by grace alone. fr Tam, him. Pasyate, he sees, Ni§- 

kalam, without kalas or parts. Without the sixteen-fold body. See Prasana 
Up. V. The body of I lari is not like that of the Jiva having sixteen parts. 

Dhyayamanah, meditating. Constantly thinking. 

8. He cannot be apprehended by senses like the eye 
nor by revealed texts, nor by the grace of any other shining- 
one. Only through the grace of Wisdom, when one has 
become free from rajas and tamas, and thrown off the sixteen¬ 
fold body, he sees Him by means of constant meditation. Or 
the pure in heart see in meditation Him who is without a six¬ 
teen-fold body, then only when there is grace of Wisdom.—51. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Hari cannot be seen through the grace of any other devas, except of 
Vayu who is Wisdom personified, or through the grace of Brahma or of 
Hari who is the Supreme Wisdom himself. When these are gracious, then 
alone Brahman is seen. Other devas can give only subsidiary knowledge 
that would help such realisation. 

The word niskalah means lie who has not a body consiting of six¬ 
teen elements or kalas. The body is of the fjord is of bliss, as says the 
Sruti :—“ When the seer sees the Golden coloured Lord whose shape is 
Blissful, who is immortal, &c., Om.” 

Note. — The Vision of God is entirely a matter of grace. When the Son of God—called 
Vayu—becomes gracious, the Father is seen. No one lias seen the Father but through the 
Son. See Vedanta Sutra 111. 2 2G. The various devas, like Indra and others, cannot give 
this vision : except when they act as channels of the Snpro no. Thus tlioy (devas) are not 
useless—indirectly they can also load to Mukti. 





Ill MUNDAKA, 1 K HAND A, 9. 


257 


The organs like the eye, &c., cannot give the knowledge of Brahman, nor can speech 
or revelation give God-Vision : nor can any other devas. Because by penance and by 
sacrifices He cannot be seen, because the »aclhikari whose heart is pure, and who 
meditates on Him, who is free from 1G parts, cannot see Him through the grace of 
any other deity, therefore the necessity of grace ; for by the grace of Wisdom, namely, of 
Vayu, or of Chaturmukha Brahma or of Supreme Wisdom Hari himself, can Brahman be seen. 
Brahman is seen only through grace and grace alone. 


Mantra 9. 

smtfkTr shirt wtrt irii 


qqi Esali, this (atman). Anuh, subtle, atomic. It is illustrative of 

the other two sizes also, viz, the madhyama Parimana and the Vyapta. 

Atma, self. The Supreme, The Lord. The atman appears anu to the ma- 
dhyaina adhikari; and All-pervading and Great to the other two. All three are 
meant here : anu is merely illustrative, and includes the other two. ^rf^T Che- 
tasa, by thought, by that mind (in which the pranas, &c., have entered as des 
cribed below), Veditavyah, is to be known : to be realised by direct vision. 

Yasmin, in whom, in the chief vital Air or in which mind : yasmin referring 
to the mind. 5 ?pr: Pranah, the breath, the Pranas. The mukhya prana— the 
chief prana. Panchadha, five-fold : prana, apana, vyana, samana, 

and udana. Or five-fold chetas, i.e. f Manas (cogitation, sensation, Buddhi (deter¬ 
mination, preception), ahankara (will) chittam (thought) and chetana (feeling). 
These are the five-fold chetas. This word ‘five-fold’ qualifies both chetas and 
pranaib — five-fold mind and the five-fold pranas, ^rfqqq-: Sariivivesah, has enter¬ 
ed. Pranaib, with the pranas, with the senses. With the five pranas 

like prana, apana, &c. Chittam, the mind, Sarvam, all, entire. sJirR 

Otam, is interwoven : is sustained, protected, has entered. srsTRrw prajanam, 
of the created beings. Yasmin, when this (thought). In which, ie. f in the 

Lord. In which mind. Visuddhe, is pure. In the Pure (Hari) In which 

pure mind. Vibhavati, manifests its powers, becomes manifold in its 

activities such as studying, meditating, &c. qq: Esah, this. ^rr^RT Atma, atman 
(This Jiva). 

9. This Atomic Self (the Supreme Lord) is to be 
known by tbat mind alone in which (first) the Chief Prana 
(through His grace) has completely withdrawn (the out¬ 
going activities of his subordinate) five-fold pranas : for the 
(five-fold) mind of all created beings is entirely interwoven 
by this five pranas and is consequently never quiet : (and 
secondly) by that mind, which being perfectly pure, makes 
the soul manifet its powers. — 52. 






258 


MUNDA KA-UPA NISA7). 


According to Raghavendrci Yati. 

This Atman (Mukhya Prana) abides in all as an atom. It is to be 
known by the mind. All the mind of the created beings, along with the 
senses, is supported by the Chief Prana. That Prana with its five-fold 
sub-divisions is completely sustained in the pure Hari. Thus this Self 
becomes glorious. 

Note .—Max Mil Her, following Sankara, translates this verse thus That subtle 
Self is to be known by thought : there where breath has entered five-fold : for every 
thought of men is interwoven with the senses ; and when thought is purified, then 
the Self arises.” According to Raghavendra Yati, the first yasinin refers to the Mukhya 
Prana, the second yasmin to Hari, the Lord. The Atman is atomic, and to be appre¬ 
hended by thought. The method is : — that first all the senses and the chittam should 
be merged in the Mukhya Prana. Then this chief Vital Air with the five permanent 
atoms —prana, apana, &c., should be merged in the Pure Hari, who is its support. When this 
is done, the Atman manifests its powers. 

By what organ or sense is tho Lord then to be apprehended ? This verse answers 
this query. This ehetas is the organ by which the Atman can bo known. But it is not 
ordinary mind that can see the Lord, for with regard to such mind the prohibition still 
holds good—the Brahman is not to be perceived by mind—yan rndnasa na manute (see 
Ive nop an is ad). Bub by the mind which is pure (visuddha) — by that mind where this 
Jlva manifests its activities of manana, 6’ravaua, &c., can Brahman bo seen. Moreover 
this mind must get the grace of the Mukhya Prana before it can see God. Thus tho 
dictum that the Atman cannot bo apprehended by the mind holds good, with these 
reservations. It cannot bo known by the mind which is not pure and whose powers 
have not been unfolded by study, meditation, &c., and which has not attracted the grace 
of the First-Begotten—Prathama Pranah. 

The Chief Prana, with his live-fold functions—prana (inspiration \ apana (expiration), 
vyana (circulation of blood), samana (alimentation) and udana (tiie hypnotic or dying 
function) enters completely into the five-fold mind (cogitation, determination, will, cogni 
tion, and feeling) of all creatures, and thus disablos the mind to see ParaiBrahma. So Ion 
as the Chief Prana does not draw in tho subordinate live pranas from their out-going 
activities and merge them into the five-fold mind, the latter is always distracted and 
cannot perceive the God. It is thus tho Chief Prana that gives the mind quietness 
and the Will and Faith necessary for the Divine Vision. By its own ordinary powers, tho 
mind cannot get tho Divine Vision. 

Mantra io. 

iron; *3^: ii ' ii 

Yam, what. tgR Yam, what, i.e., whatever. Lokam, place, state. 

Worlds like Svargn, &c. rrcm Manasa, by mind. tsnPTfW Samvibhati, imagines, 
goes, makes an object of conception, wishes for. rjjjvgfr?*: Visuddha-sattvah, 
the person whose sattva is purified. He ligw knows the Self. Who has got 








Ill MUNDAKA , I KIIANDA , 10. 


259 


the aparoksa knowledge of the Lord Kamayate, he desires, wishes for. 

3FT Yan, what. ^ Cha, and Katnan, desires, objects of desires. rT^ Tam, 

that, Tam, that, Lokam, the’place, the worlds. Jayate, he 

conquers, he obtains, because his will becomes invincible, rfpr Tan, those. 
^ Cha, and. Kaman, desires. Tasmat, therefore. Atma- 

jnanam, the knower of Self. Fie who knows the Lord by aparoksa-jnana. f| Hi, 
verily, indeed. Arch aye t, let him worship, honour, Bhutikamah, 

who desires happiness or prosperity. 

10. To whatever Loka the man whose nature is puri¬ 
fied imagines to go, or whatever objects of desire he wishes 
to get—to that loka he transports himself at once, and those 
desires lie obtains. Therefore let the man who desires pros¬ 
perity, honor the man who knows the Self.—53. 

Note.—This verse declares the glory of the knower of the Self. It was mentioned 
before that the karmas were exhausted by aparoksa jfiAna of the Lord. But this is 
not the sole result of such knowledge. On the contrary, the gaining of Heaven., &c., also 
results from it as well as of other pleasures. 


U 




THIRD "MUNDAKA. 

Second Khanda. 

Mantra i. 

^ sI^T MR 3?T TT-4 RlfM ‘HTTcf SJSR I 

STRH 3 UMiTHTR SIMRH^TcT^HTR MTCT: II S II 

^: Sah, He (the worshipper of the atmajna, i.e. f of the sage who knows 
the self). 35 Veda, knows q^ar Etat, this 3*3 Paramam, highest, the chief. 
Pgl vjffi Brahma-dhama, Brahman’s home, abode. That is, the Mukhya Prana. 
33- Yatra, where (in the Prana). [333 Yisvam, all full, entire. The infinite 
(Purna) Brahman, Nihitam, is placed, is contained, dwells, abides. The 

word sthitam must be supplied to complete the sentence, vrrfar Bhati, shines, 
manifests. Bubhram, biightly or bright. The giver of Moksa. (Moksa- 

rupa-subha-pradam). 33^% Upasate, worship by sravana (hearing), manana 
(meditation), &c. 3^3 Purusam, the person. The Infinite (Purna) possessing 

the six (sat) transcendental attributes, q Ye, who. f| Hi, verily, because. 
3 ^ 3331 : Akamah, without desires, without faults, like kama, &c. % Te, they. 
53^ Sukram, pure, free from grief. • The word prati is understood here and 
governs “sukra.” Etat, this (Brahman). The word gantam “in order to 

reach’' should be supplied here to complete the sentence. Any at, other 

things, like avidya, ignorance, &c. Other works. 333 Ati, transcending, cross¬ 
ing over (ignorance, &c.) 33^3 Vartanti, g> towards, are absorbed in Hari. 

*?rcr: Dhirah, wise, (those who are not worshippers of atmajna sages.) 

1. He,' the worshipper of Self-knower, knows (first the 
Prana) that highest home of Brahman, in which abides the 
All, (then the Bralnnan) shines forth (in his heart), and be¬ 
comes the giver of Moksa. The wise who, free from desires, 
worship the Purusa, having crossed over (the sea of ignorance, 
Ac.) also get this pure Brahman. — 54. 

MADHAVA’S COMMENTARY. 

“ He,” namely, the worshipper of the knower of the Self, ‘ knows the 
abode of Brahman,’ i e., the Prana. The Prana is called the Brahma- 
dhfuna or the abode of Brahman. In it the “ all” (vish-a), namely, the full 
Brahman (Purnam Brahman) has its home. Tlie word “ viAa ” here means 
the “ all,” “ the full Brahman.” “ The highest and chief abode of Visini is 
celebrated to be the Prana alone, lie who knows by right means (such 
as Sravaua, Manana, &c.) the supreme Lord dwelling in Prana verily causes 









Ill MUNDAKA , T1 KII AND A, 1. 


201 


the Lord Hari to dwell in his prana permanently, for, Hari enters into 
his life. 

Though Visnu is always dwelling* in Prana, yet He is metaphorical ]} 7 
said to enter a man in the sense that through the instrumentality of 
Prana, He expands the consciousness of the wise, and lends greater illumi¬ 
nation to it. It is something like obsession. When an evil person attracts 
elementals, they throng round him and enjoy all the coarse pleasures of 
drink, &c., through his organs of mouth, &c., he being unconscious of their 
presence. But these evil elementals may grow so strong that they may 
eventually take total possession of such a person. Then the man is said 
to be obsessed, though these entities were present even before obsession 
in the aura of that man. 

Note .—See Mrs. Besant’s Ancient Wisdom , p. 122. 

Thus Hari, though always present in every human being, is said to enter the wise, in 
the sense that the light of their knowledge is invigorated by him. 

The sense.of the phrase “sukram etad ativartanti dhirah” is sukram prati anyad 
ativartante, i.e., towards this sukram or griefless the wise go, after crossing over every¬ 
thing else. 

Note .—The Brahman is called sukram because He is free or rahitam, from soka or 
grief. The wise throw aside all karmas and go to the griefless Brahman. Leaving 
everything else, the mind of the wise is pointed towards Hari alone, the griefless one. 
This concentration of mind on Hari is release. Xo one can go beyond it. This we find 
in the Maha Yaraha Parana. 

(This duelling in the same loka with Hari is called Mukti). 

Note— : his shows that the Mukti is obtained through the meditation of the Son. The 
worshipper first gains the knowledge of the Son or Prana—the highest home of Brahman 
where He manifests in all His glory. Then Brahman shines forth on him and gives him 
salvation. The worshipper of the knower of Atman understands the abode of Brahman— 
namely, the Muhkhya Prana—that in which abides the all, the infinite, full Brahman. 
“The Prana is celebrated to be the principal abode of Yisnu. He who knows by 
proper means the supreme Lord dwelling in the Prana—verily has constantly God 
interwoven with his life. The Lord enters the human soul through the Prana always 
and through the instrumentality of Prana He illumines the knowledge of His devo¬ 
tees. Though the Lord is always all-pervading and consequently eternally present in 
every soul, yet He is said to enter a soul and inspire it through Prana; just as ghosts 
are said to be made to obsess men, through mantras, &c., though every man has 
within him always these pisachas who eat the same food as eaten by the man. Thus 
Visnu though always dwelling in the prana, gives additioual light to the light of the 
wise.” 

The pisachas or ghosts are said to exist in men and partake also of the food which 
the men eat, but the latter are not conscious of their existence, till by mantras, &c„ the 
ghosts are made to manifest their presence by trance utterances, &c. A modern illustra¬ 
tion would be the emergence of the subliminal self (secondary personality), in hypnotic 
and other allied states. The subliminal self is a part and parcel of the human personali¬ 
ty, but man is not ordinarily conscious of it. In abnormal states he becomes aware of it 
So also the Divinity in man. The Lord Yisnu is in man from eternity, but the man knows, 
him only when he attains perfection. 



262 


MUNDA KA-U PANTS AD. 


The sense of the verse is that since Yi^nu, the eternal Brahman dwelling in the 
Life (Prana), supports the world, and since the Brahman by superintending and dwelling in 
the Prana becomes manifest, lienee the^iLife (Prana) is the highest abode of Brahman 
higher than even Yaikuntha, &c. Therefore the worshipper of the atmajha—the worship¬ 
per of the Masters of Wisdom and Compassion—first comes to know this mansion of Brahman, 
this Prana and afterwards he knows indirectly the Brahman that dwells in this Prana, 
by Sravana, &e. Then that Brahman manifests or shines in his pranadhisthana or the 
receptacle of prana, the auric egg. Then that Brahman benomcs Subhra (oubhapradam, 
giver of Moksa) to that person. Thus the Bhuti (prosperity), gained by the worshipper 
of the Wise has been described as he attains Moksa through the above stages. But this 
bhuti is nob eonflned to the worshippers of the Masters. Every person who worships 
the Lord, in the name of this first-begotten, the Prana, gets Mukti. Worshipping Brahman 
through Prana leads to higher result than the mere worship of Brahman. 

Mantra 2. 


^ I 

irrsfrj m qrmi: irii 

Kaman, objects of desire. q: Yah, who. Kamayate, desires, 

longs after, who worships the Lord for the sake of worldly things. *rrr: 
Manyamanah, thinking (them to be beneficial and helpful), Sab, he. 
Kamabhih, through desires, on account of those desires. tjfRST Jayate, is born. 
rr^rT^ Tatra tatra, there, i.e. t in many births and wombs ; he is carried to 
those places and spheres which he had desired. Paryaptaka- 

masya, of him who desires the highest (paryapta) t\e . 9 the Moksa. Or 
whose desires are all (satisfied paryapta, satiated by enjoyment). fScfRR: 
Kritatmanah, of him whose mind (Atman) is satisfied or contented. Tu, but. 

lba, here, qq Eva, indeed, even. Sarve, all. Praviliyanti, 

merge, vanish. cRRC Kamah, desires. 

2. He who longs after objects of desire thinking 
(that they are the highest) is horn in those places (where 
those objects can he enjoyed). Bnt all desires of him who 
aspires for the highest and whose mind is contented, vanish 
even here on earth.—55. 

Note .—This shows that aparoksa-jnana is the only means for the entire destruction 
of all desires. 


Mantra 3. 

HfqHRHT 5T«ift H ^ sgrR I 

^ Na, not. Ayam, this. Atma, self. Pravachanena, 

by sacred saying through the explanation of scriptures given by persons 
devoid of Bhakti, devotionless dissertations. The study of sacred scriptures 










Ill MUNDAKA , II KBANDA, 4 . 


203 


is not the principal means of acquiring aparoksa knowledge. Labhyah, 

to be gained, to be known, to be seen by direct Saksatkara. ^ Na, not. 
MedhayA, by genius, or understanding, by*retentive memory and intellect, or by 
meditation and reflection. The retentive intellect is not the chief means of 
acquiring aparoksa knowledge. ^ Na, not. Bahuna, by much, 

Srutena, learning, hearing. The learning by itself is not the chief means of 
gaining aparoksa knowledge, qw Yam, whom, qq Eva, even. qq\* Esah, this 
Supreme self. ^73% Vrinute, elects, chooses, accepts, because of the devotion 
or bhakti of that person. qq 1 Tena, by him. Labhyah, to be gained. 

Tasya, for him, for that bhakta. qsp Esah, this, Atma, self. 

Vivrinute, reveals. qg Tanum, body', form : own divine form. Svam, his. 

The God becomes the object of immediate, direct, intuitive perception. 

3. This Self cannot be gained by dissertations devoid 
of devotion, nor by mere keen intellect, nor by much hear¬ 
ing. It is gained only by him whom the Self chooses. To 
him this Self reveals His form.—56. 

Note— This shows that no one can know God but through the grace on the part of 
God, coupled with Bhakti on the part of Man. Jt was taught in a previous mantra, that 
the grace of God was necessary for attaining aparoksa-knowledge : that was the princi¬ 
pal cause of such knowledge, from one point of view. See juana-prasadena, &c.—(Munil. 
III. 1. 8). This mantra teaches that devotion towards and love of the Lord (Bhakti) is also 
a principal cause in the acquisition of this knowledge. Among the means (sadhana) of 
acquiringe this knowledge, some entirely depend upon the adhikari or the properly quali¬ 
fied person, while others are beyond his control. Among the personal means, tlie highest 
is Bhakti ; among the non-personal the grace is the highest. 

Mantra 4. 

pnn nan 

^ Na, not. A yam, this, ^rr^r Atma, Self, Brahman, Visnu. 

Balahinena, devoid of strength Who has not the strength to study, reflect and 
meditate. sp-q: Labhyah, to be gained, to be seen. * Na, not. ^ Cha, and. 

Pramadai, by the heedless, not earnest. Who forgets the Lord. Who 
has not Bhakti. Tapasah, by penance. The tapas must be sattvic ; do¬ 

ing works with supreme faith, without any desire of fruits and with attention 
fixed on Visnu. The tapas in the shape of the worship of the Devas, the Re¬ 
generates and the Wise cannot lead to divine vision, Va, and. Api, 

even. Alingat, not having authority (linga) for it. Nou-scriptural ; 

non-authoritative. This word qualifies the ‘‘ tapas ’’ — the penance must not 
be non-scriptural or tamasa ; but sattvic tapas. See Gita, Chap. 18. q%: Etaih, 

by these (Sravana, &c.). qqrq: Upayaib, means (by hearing, Sravana, reflecting, 
Manana, &c.). qqq- Yatate, (who) endeavours, q: Yah, who, (qualifies the 




264 


MUNDA KA-UPA NIKA D. 


wise). The wise who knows that Sravana, &c„ cannot lead to direct God-Vi¬ 
sion, yet employs those means as secondaries, to help and strengthen his 
bhakti, gets such vision, g Tu, but. RfR, Vidvan, the wise. Tasya, for his. 
The words are “ for his sake, they become propitious.” Esali, this. RrRr 
Atma, self The Supreme Self. Visate, enters. Manifests Himself in this 

Abode of Brahman. Brahmadhama, the home of Brahman, the Vayu ; 

the First-Begotten. 

4. This Self is not to he gained by one who is desti¬ 
tute of power, nor by the heedless, nor by one who performs 
penances not countenanced by scriptures. But the Avise, who 
stri\ r es after him by those means (by Sravana, Manana, &c., 
coupled with Bhakti, wliile praying always for grace) obtains 
Him and then for him (these become helpful). To Him this 
Supreme Self manifests in the home of Brahman—reveals 
Himself through Vavu.—-57. 

o «/ 

/ , 

Note .—This shows that Pravachana, Sravana, &e., arc not all useless. They are abso¬ 
lutely neecssary, they are in fact the means of Divine Vision, but not the highest or the 
principal. The chief is Grace of Vayu, the Son, as the Divine means ; and among Personal 
means the Highest is Bhakti on the side of Man, to produce the Aparoksa jnanam. 

Mantra 5. 

fRIRRT TRTFTP SFTFcTn \ 

H drc HTR sfftr tHRTfHRFT livui 

Samprapya, having reached, Enam, Him (Brahma) Vayu or 

Brahma called Brahma-dhama, the abode of Brahman —the first-begotten. 
In the texts dealing with the stages of Mukti, Vayu alway • means Brahma. 

Risayah, the sages. It includes the best among human adhikaris also. 
The pratika worshippers. It includes the Risis, the C’hira-pitris, the Deva- 
gandharvas, and the Manusya Gandharvas. Jhana-triptah, satisfied 

through knowledge. When the Jnanins reach Brahma, they become satisfied 
in knowledge, because being taught by Hiranyagarblia (Brahma) they attain 
aparoksa-knowledge in the shape of seeing the Bitnba or the Original which 
leads to release. 1 herefore they become satisfied. The Bimba-aparoksa- 
jnana is obtained only through Vayu (Brahma), called also Jivaghana. See 
Praytia Up. v. 5. The jhana-tripti thus varies according to the adhikari— 
whether it be the immediate perception of Bimba or of Avatara. gRrRR: Kri- 
tatmauah, contented of heart, who have realised the Atman or the Supreme 
Self. TTcTUnp Vitaragali, devoid of attachment. qRRTP Brasantah, tranquil, 
firm in bhakti. ft Te, they. Jt includes the Nirguna (eka-guna really upasa- 
kas also. Those who have reached directly the Vaikuntha Loka and others who 






Ill MJNDAKA , II K1LANDA 5. 


265 


are in Satya Loka. Sarvagaih, the all-pervading. The Visnu in that 

form which pervades the tattvas beginning from Prithivi and ending with 
avyakta. This is beyond the Vaikuntha loka—beyond the Brahmanda. 
Sarvatah, from all. Being free from all vehicles, astral, mental, &c., up to the 
last, Prapva, having reached, qftr: Dhtrah, the wise, the jnanins. 

Yuktatmanah, devoted to the self. Sarvatah, from all (dehadeh bodies, 
&c.) f muktatmanah, becoming free. ; Sarvam, all, wholly. “He is called 
Sarva by whom is filled the whole universe.” The Full, the purnam. Eva, 
even. Avisanti, enter. Madhva reads it api-yanti. 

5. The sages satisfied through knowledge, contented 
in heart, with passions all gone and tranquil of mind, attain 
Him, the Brahma. Being free from all bodies, the wise reach 
the Omnipresent, yea even enter into the All.—58. 

Note.— They, the Risis, being free from attachment (through Vairagya), and so calm of 
mind ; having realised the Supreme Self, and thus satisfied in knowledge, reach Him (Brahma 
and there being taught by Him, attain the direct vision of God). They, the wise, being com- 
pie tel y free from all bodies, and attaining the all-pervading Lord, even enter into the Full. 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

The word “ sarvatah,” “ from all/’ means being free from bodies, 
The woid saivagam, all-pervading, means the Lord. As says an 
authority “ Being free from all bodies, and having reached the all- 
pervading Purusa and having entered into Him, they become happy both 
in and out of the Cosmos.” 

Note .—In the verse satyameva jayate (III. 1. 6.) it was mentioned that the devotees 
called apratikalambana go direct to Vaikuntha and attain Mukti. Now in the present 
verse is shown the method of the Mukti of Pratikalambana devotees. They do not at once 
go out of Brahma ml a to Visnu Loka (Vaikuntha), but after some time. In fact, all jnanins, 
to whatever class they may belong, go out of Brahman.la sometime or other. The word “sar¬ 
vatah ” in the verse refers to Dehadeh understood, be., freed completely from all dehas or 
bodies. The word “body” refers to the charama-deha or the ultimate body. Human jnanins 
throw off their ultimate body—the last body—on attaining Mukti, not so the Devas. They 
attain Mukti, but do not throw off their charama-deha at the same time, It is only at the 
time of the great cosmic Pralaya—Para nta kala-that the Devas lose their final * body. 
The worshippers of so-called Nirguna Brahman (who are really worshippers of Eka-guna 
only) also belong to this category. They have no special path assigned to them : but 
with the dropping down of their physical bodies owing to disease, &c., they become* free 
from all dehas. Thus there is some similarity between the Devas and Nirguna (Eka-guna) 
upasakas. The Eka-guna Upasakas have already, while in the body, become free from the 
bonds of karma, &c., like the Devas; and wait only for the falling off of the material deha 
t°. becom ® completely free, as the Devas wait for the falling off of the body of Brahma to 
gain final liberation. The eka-guna upasakas never go to Vaikuntha Loka, but get libera¬ 
tion on earth. They are also included in the word “ tc,” “ they,” of the verse. 

At the time of Pralaya, all jiianins together with Brahma enter into the Supreme 
Self in Ills “ Earth-abiding (parthiva) form," then with the latter into his “ Water-abiding 



266 


MUNDA KA-UPAblSAD. 


form,” then with the latter into the “ Fire-abiding form,” then with the latter into his 
“ Yayu-abiding form,” then with the last they enter into the “ Akasa-abiding form,” thence 
into the “ Buddhi-abiding form,”—thence with it to the “ manas-dwelling form ”—thence 
into the Bnddhi-abiding Hari, thence into the Akahkara-abiding Hari, thence into the 
Yijhana-abiding (mahattatva) Hari, thence into the Avyakta-abiding (Auanda-abiding) 
Hari. Thus reaching Hari in the final abode they never come back.” Thus the jfianins 
abiding within the cosmic Egg go out of it, by successively leaving the various coverings 
of tattvas which surround the Egg. These tattva-spheres must be passed through : and 
when it is done, then the Released Souls enjoy all happiness whether inside the Brahmanda 
or outside. 

The Pratika Upasakas go to the four-faced Brahma but not so the apratika-upasakas. 
The Risis are all Pratika-alambana : and arc raadhyama adliikaris. They possess inner 
light and sec God inside. “ Pratika is the body. Those who see the Lord in the body are 
called pratika-upasaka.” While Human adliikaris are Bahih-prakasa they see the Lord 
outside. To men the Lord appears in incarnations (avatars). Strictly speaking, Human 
adliikaris cannot be called pratika-alambana : but pratika-alambana in the sense that 
they worship the Lord as manifested in an external body or pratika. Thus the Pratika- 
alambanas become of two sorts :—Deha-alambana and Pratika-alambana : the first applying 
to the Risis, and the second to the Human perfect. 

Both classes of Pratika Upasakas—the Risis and men—go to Brahma. The difference 
however is this. The Risis (who are Dehalambanas) go by the path of archis (flame), &c., 
at once to Brahma without staying in the intermediate lokas. But not so the Human-best, 
the Pratima-alambanas. They stop at the intermediate Lokas—some in the Maliar Loka, 
some in the Jana Loka, and some in the Tapa Loka. After some time—more or loss.accord¬ 
ing to their evolution—they roach Braliuia in His Satya Loka. 

The jfianins are of three kinds : high, middling and low. The apratika-alambanas are 
the high ; because the}' seo God as all-pervading. They at once go to Satya Loka or to 
the true. The Pratika-worshippers are of two sorts : Deha-alambana and Pratika-alam¬ 
bana. The Risis, &e., belong to the delialainbana class, and are madhyama (middle class) 
jfianins : becanse they see Brahman in the body. Tho host among men are adhama (low) 
jfianins ; they are pratima-alambana because they see the avatara of God outsido thoir own 
bodies, in symbols, men, &c. Of these, the Dehalambanas reach the Brahma of Satya Loka 
aud being taught by him, get perfect satisfaction of knowledge : and bccomo full of the 
wisdom gained of the immediate perception of solf-bimba. 

The lluman-best also are subdivided into three classes : high, middle, low. The high 
or first class consist of those who are in constant unbroken meditation and contemplation 
(dhyana) of God. Such meditation is called Tapas. They go to Tapas Loka. The second 
class of Human perfects are also in unbroken meditation—but it is tho meditation of Yoga 
aud not Tapas. By this practice of Yoga they go to Jana Loka : for Yoga leads to Jana Loka. 
Tho third class Human perfects arc those who possoss partial Yoga (a quarter only), but are 
also in unbroken meditation. They go to JNIahar Loka. These throe classes of Human 
perfects reach tho Satya Loka after some time : and when they reach it, they are taught by 
Brahma and thus bccomo jfiana-triptas. 

Thus, the first half of this mantra describes how the pratika-lambanas (consist¬ 
ing of Dehalambanas and PratirmUambaiias) reach tho higher planes within tho Brah- 
m a nil a or cosmic Egg. Tho next half of this verse describes how both tho pratika 
and the apratika worshippers go out of the Cosmos and see the form of lho Lord which 
is outside. 






Ill MUNI.) AKA, II Ii IIAND A, 6. 


207 


Mantra 6 . 

% f§rar%3 iRjprfcr *# nui 

%5RT Vedanta, the Vedanta. The finding out the meaning of the Vedas is 
Vedanta-sravana or study. The word 41 anta ” means to ascertain. Vedanta 
means ascertaining the sense ’of the Vedas by studying it. r=jr Vijnana, 
knowledge. The knowledge obtained from yravana is vijnana, namely reflec¬ 
tion or manana and mediation or dhyana. ^RfWcTr^r: Suniychitarthah, well (su) 
ascertained (niychita) the object (artha), the highest tattva is called artha, 

T%^TR Vedatua-vijnana-sum’schitarthah, having well ascertained 

the object of the knowledge of the Vedanta. He who by studying the Vedas 
and by meditating on its meaning, has realised the highest truth, is called Ve- 
danta-vijnana-suniych it artha. Sannyasa, renunciation, />., offering the 

fruit of all actions to the Lord. Renouncing the fruit of action. Yogat, by 

yoga, performing all works appropriate to one’s caste and stage of life with the 
thought that it is the work of the Lord. Sanuyasa-yogat, by the yoga 

of renunciation. sjcR: Yatayah, anchorites ; the strivers : who have conquered 
the senses, : Suddhasattvah, pure-minded. Pure of heart. ^ Te, they. 

Brahmalokesu, in the worlds of Brahman, in the five higher lokas. 
The five lokas, viz. y Vaikuntha, Satyam, Janah, Tapas and Mahar are Brahma 
Lokas, also called the Visnu Lokas. Parantakale, at the time of the 

Great End. The word Para denotes the full period of the hundred years of the 
life of Brahma. In the last semi-quarter of that Para period, i.e , in the final 12^ 
years. qTPJcfn Paramritah, highest immortality. Madhva’s reading is Paramritat, 
from the bondage of Prakriti. Another reading is Paranritat from the great 
untrue. Pari, having renounced, having abandoned (parityajya) the places of 
Mahar, &c. 5=5^% Muchyanti, become free, from the Paramrita. Sarve, all. 

6. Having well ascertained tlie true object, through 
the knowledge obtained from the study of the Veda, and 
having purified their nature by renunciation of fruits of ac¬ 
tion and due performance of duties, the pious dwell in the 
worlds of Brahma. And when the period of Brahma’s life 
approaches to its close, they abandon those lokas (like Vla- 
har, &c., and crossing the tattva-sphere, at the end of Brah¬ 
ma’s life) throw away the bondage of Prakriti and attain 
all the Highest Mukti.—59. 

MADHVA’S C<).MAIENTARY. 

Tliey dwell (for ages) in the worlds of Bralmia and become com¬ 
pletely Mukta at the time of Pralaya called the Great End. 

35 









268 


MUNI) A KA-UPA NTS AD. 


Note .—The Human Perfects, when they die and thus throw off their last body, go to 
Mahar, Jana, or Tapas Loka through the path of Light. They remain these till the ap¬ 
proach of the cosmic dissolution. Then* the fire emitted from the mouth of Sankarsana 
burns up the lower three planes, Bliur, Bhuvar and Svar. When this fire reaches 
the Mahar Loka, the perfects leave that sphere and proceed to the Satya loka. Thore 
these are taught the final wisdom by Brahma and thus become jnanatriptas. The 
iiisis directly reach Satya loka, as was mentioned before. These Risis (Dehalambanas) 
together with the newly arrived Human Perfects (Pratimalambanas) now abandon the 
Satya loka in the company of Brahma, and go to Hari dwelling in the Vaikuntha Loka. Here 
the Chaturmukha Brahma loses his body and merges into the Virat Brahma. Vaikuntha 
is the abode of apratikalambanas. These apratikalambanas together with the new arrivals 
(Dehalambanas and the Pratimalambanas) now leave Vaikuntha (in the company of Virat 
Brahma). 

They go out of Brakmatula (the Cosmic Egg), and successively pass through the 
elements beginning with Prithivi and ending with avyakta. Then the Virat Brahma unites 
in the Brahma called Pum. Thus these juanins cross the Viraja narti with Pum-Brahma. 
Here their Liiiga-Dehas drop down : and they attain the highest freedom. This is what 
is meant by the phrase “ svarupe avasthanam ’’—remaining in one’s own form. But the 
Prakriti Bandha still subsists. It falls off only with the Mukti of Brahma : and not before. 
The bond of Piukriti-fetter of the iivas also drops down when the Highest Brahma gets 
liberation. This is the method of liberation of men. 

To recapitulate :—The first stage of Mukti is when all men go from Satya Loka to 
Vaikuntha Loka with Chaturmukha Brahma. Here this Brahma loses his body. The se¬ 
cond stage is when the souls go beyond Vaikuntha, through the coverings of the Brah¬ 
ma nrla Egg, along with Viral Brahma. When the end of the avarana is reached, the Virat 
Brahma merges into and becomes one with the Mahat Brahma called Pum. This Pum- 
Brahma and the Jivas plunge into the river Viraja in which they east off their Liiiga- 
Dehas. 

The Prakriti bond is distinct from the Liiiga-Deha. The falling off of the Linga- 
Deha does not necessitate the freedom from Prakriti bond. 

This is the method of the Mukti of Jininins other than the Devas. IIow the Devas 
got freedom from Prakriti bond is now described. The Devas dwelling in the Vaikuntha 
Loka, Brahma Loka (Satya Loka), &c., learn the highest truths of Vedanta there. When 
the last days of the cosmos arrive— when of the hundred years of Brahma's life 12J years 
only remain more to be lived—when the Swarga and other lower lokas begin to bo burnt 
up, they go out of the Cosmic Egg and reach the All-pervading who is beyond the Cosmic 
coverings. Thence they go to the “ Brahma Loka ”—“ to the officers of Brahman”—the 
word Loka here means “ officials.” These officials of Brahma are Immortals on tho Path 
cal led Garuila-Sesa-m a rga. 

The Path of Devas is two-fold —the Path of the Eagle (Gamut) and tho Path of 
of the Serpent (Sosa). Vanina, Soma, &c., are officials on the Path of the Eagle ; Agni, Siirya, 
&e., on the Path of the Serpent. It is on these paths that the Devas drop down their final 
or ultimate bodies, when the Pralaya comes. The first body of the Devas is also their last 
body : for unlike man, the Deva retains one and the same body throughout one Cosmic 
period. Having dropped down their final body in one of those paths, the Devas in their 
Linga-Dchas enter into the Viraja river along with Pum-Brahma. There the Liiiga-Dehas 
also fall off and the Devas become free from the Prakriti bond. Thus they become per¬ 
fectly Mukta. 

The method by which the Devas lose their body is different from that of men. While 
a man loses a dense body and proceeds with one more refined to a higher sphere, not so 
the Devas. Tho Devas enter with their entire body into tho body of tho Headofthoir 




Ill MUKVAKA, II KIIAKDA 7 . 


209 


hierarchy. Thus the Devas on the Path of &esa merge successively first into the body of 
Yanina who merges into Soma, who into Auiruddiia, who into Kama, who into \ariiui, who 
into Sesa, who into Sarasvati, who into Viriiiiha. Thus there are seven stages between 
the Chatnrmukha Brahma and the Devas on this Path. The Devas called As winau and Apas 
devatas lose their bodies by entering into the body of Yaruna. Yaruna along with Kubera 
merges into the body of Soma. Soma along with the companions of Hari called Yisvaksena, 
&e., merges into the body of Anirnddha, who along with Sanaka and the rest merges into 
the body of Kama. Kama merges into Yariuu. Yarnui merges into besa. Se.sa into 
Sarasvati. Sarasvati finally merges into the body of Yirificha. 

The Devas on the Path of the Eagle also follow a similar involution. The lower 
Devas than Agni, not specially mentioned before, enter into the body of Agni : the 
latter merges in Surya, he in Briliaspati. So the Devas called Viuayakas merge into 
Ganesa ; the Devas called Ttibhus merge into Prithivi. Gauesa and Prithivi merge 
into Brihaspati. Brihasjiati along with Svayambhuva Mann, Nirriti, and Maruts 
enter Chandra. Yama merges his body in Svii 3 7 ambhuva Maun. Chandra into the Patni of 
Garuda, ho into Sarasvati. She in Brahma. Thus hero also we see seven stages between 
the lowest Devas and Brahma, viz., Agni, Surya, Brihaspati, Chandra, Gannla-patni Garuda, 
and Sarasvati. This Deva-dissolucion takes place after all the tattvas like the Prithivi, 
Apas, &e., have been dissolved. 

Here the method is the reverse of the creation. When there is the creation of the 
suksrna element, the conjunction of the Devas with this suksma matter, the material of 
body, is the first creation. After the creation of the tattvas, there takes place the creation 
of the bodies of the Devas—this is the secondary creation. Thus the creation of the 
tattvas takes place first, and then the creation of the bodies of Devas. This order is re¬ 
versed at the time of the dissolution. The tattvas dissolve first and then the Deva bodies. 

Mantra. 7. 

*Tcrr: -w. strtot m 1 

TRTRf wmi I1VSII 

*TtTT: Gat ah, gone, ^r* Kalali, the parts. See Prasna Up. VI. 2, 3. for 
the kalas. Panchadasa, the fifteen. The Devas who have the fifteen 

kalas as their bodj\ Pratisthah, elements, the controllers of the Sansari 

Jivas. Devalj, the senses, or the devas other than the fifteen kala devatas. 

=ET Cha, and. g-q Sarve, all. Pratidevatasu, in the corresponding 

deities. Karmani, works, the Jivas or the deity'called Puskara presid¬ 
ing over all karmas. Vijnanamayah, full of knowledge. ^ Cha, and. 

^ITcRr Atma, self, Pare, the highest, ^*33 Avyaye, in the unchangeable, 
imperishable, Sarve, all. Eki, one, not identical with, but remaining 

in the same place as Brahman. Bhavanti, become. 

7. The fifteen Devas, who preside over kalas and 
control the Jivas, become also liberated (when the Jiva 
becomes liberated) ; so also all the Devas with their corres¬ 
ponding devatas or goddesses (become liberated). The 
Deva presiding over karma gets free at the time when this 







270 


MUNVAKA-UPAMSA D. 


jivatman, called vijuanamaya, enters tlie highest Imperish¬ 
able, where they all become one — 60. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The words “become one” have a three-fold meaning: first, unani¬ 
mity of opinion ; second, similarity ; third, being in the same locality. It 
does not mean identity, nor oneness of essenqe. 

Note.- — First, as the Brakmauas and the Ksatriyas have become one,;namely, are 
unanimous in opinion, so when the Muktas have the same W ill as that of the Lord, 
and their organs become the channel of His W ill, or when they use the organs of the 
Lord of their Will, that is one form of becoming One , which is called Saynjya Mukti. 
second, as the insect becomes a beetle by constant meditation on the beetle, the Mukta 
gets the form of the Lord such as four-fold power, &e. This is Sarupya Mukti. third, as in 
the evening all cows become one, meaning that they all unite in one locality, the cow-pen, 
and are not scattered all over the pasture, this is Salokya Mukti. In these senses, 
there is unity and not that there is identity. Nor does unity here mean oneness of 
essence. For the Jiva and the Brahman are essentially the same and no one can make 
them one in this sense. 

The word “ ekibhavanti ” is a compound formed by the affix chvi, 
which has the force of making a thing that which it was not before. 
As the Jiva and Brahman are essentially the same, the force of chvi is not 
here to denote that they become one in essence for they already were one 
essentially. Therefore, ekibhavanti means either uniting with the Lord, 
as the rivers join the sea or having the same Will as the Lord, as men 
of divers opinions may come to hold one common opinion and thus 
be one. Therefore, ekibhava means union or coming in contact with each 
other. Or having the same Will and removing the conflict of Wills : 
but not unity of essence, for therein the Jiva and Brahman were already one 
from eternity. The statement of “ becoming one,” made with regard 
to beings that were already one in form with Uari, therefore, means union 
by contact, and not making them one in cssense which they already are. 
Nor beings which arc eternally separate entities, can become one in the 
sense of losing their individuality. 

The word ‘ Gatah 5 in the text means freed : become mukta. The 
fifteen devatAs called the Prana, Ac., get release at the time that the 
jiva gets release. And all other Devas which exist in every created being, 
who is itself a reflection of a DevatA, also then get release, (but they 
control him still.) 

Note. —Tlie word “ Pratistlia ” in the text means (prati-stliita, ‘ dwelling in each ’) 
All actions and tlie Jiva called the Vijuanamaya enter into tlie Supreme Self. 

Prana is the reflection of Uari. The other Kala-Devas arc reflections of 
prana, Ac., each succeeding being the reflection of the one preceding it in 






Ill MUNDAKA , II KHANDA , 7 . 


271 


the series. Other devatas are reflections of these Kala-Devatfis. Men are 
reflections of the devatas. These devatas, therefore, stand as controlling 
the class beneath them. Even in release, men are governed by the devas 
above them, while all of them exist in the Supreme Self. Thus we read 
in Mukta Viveka. 

Note .—From Yisnu comes out Prana, from Him Sraddha, from Her Rudra called also 

the mind, from him Iiulra, the Lord of the senses, from him Soma, the devata of foot, from 

) A 

him Yarnna, from him Agni, from him Aka*a, from him Yighna, from him Marut, the son of 
Yayu, from him Agni called Pavaka, the son of first Agni, from him Parjanya, from him 
Svaha, from her Udakatmaka Budlia, from him Usa, from her &an i, from him Pnskara, 
Lord of all Karmas. All other Devas come out of Kala-Devas. 

The Karma-Devata is also one of the Kala-Devatas. Its separate men¬ 
tion in the verse sliows that it is one of the lowest of the devatas in the above 
hierarchy, for Puskara, the Devata of Karma, is lowest in the above hierarchy. 

Note .—The sense of the mantra is that all become free from the bonds of Prakriti. 
Every Devata becomes free and controls its reflection in human beings. Fifteen Kala-Devas 
like Prana, &o., and the other Devas along with the Devata of Karma together with the 
individual soul called Yijiianamaya, all enter in Yasudeva, the fourth form of Hari and 
remain there till the end of a Mahapralaya. When the creation again starts, they come out 
of Hari and first enter the globe called frvetadvipa and there see the Lord of that globe. 
And when they get His command, they descend to other globes. In the Mahapralaya all 
Jivas become one, lose their pettinesses and get their wills unified with that of the Lord. 
Those who are fit to get Saynjya Mnkti, work through the eyes, and ears. &c., of the Lord, 
those who are fit for Sarsti or Sarupya Mnkti get a body like that of the Lord ; those who 
are fit for Salokya and Sumipya Mnkti remain ever in the presence of the Lord. 

The explanation that the gatah kalah means that the presiding 
devas of the kalas merge in their cause, as say the Advaitins, is open to 
objection. They explain the word prati-devatasu by saying each 
devata goes back to its root form. The word prati-devata cannot mean the 
root form of the devas : for there is no grammatical authority for this inter¬ 
pretation. The force of prati in prati-devatasu is like that of prati in 
prati-rupa ; not the original form, but its reflection. So prati-devata means 
the reflection of the devata, subordinate to the devatas, their reflection, not 
equal. The explanation given is consistent with other passages such as : 
the Vijnanatma along with all the other Devas, the Pranas and the elements 
is firmly established in Him. These sixteen kalas belonging to the Pu- 
rusa, after reaching the Supreme Self, go to rest, as, 0 Soinya ! these rivers 
going towards the sea, enter the sea and find their rest there.—(Pr. Up.) 

The illustration of the Prarfna Up. shows that the reaching of the 
Purusa by the Jivas, is like the reaching of the sea by the rivers. (As the 
rivers which have not reached the sea, at first, subsequently reach it, so 
the kalas, which have not reached the Purusa at first now reach him It 
does not mean the material kalas, nor the non-free devas of those kalas.) 




272 


MUND AKA-UP ANISAD. 


The word Purusa here, in the last chapter of the Pr. Up , means the 
Supreme Self, the Lord, as says the same Scripture “ The Purus-a created 
the Prana.” For the Pr. Up. opens with the statement that the Lord 
created the Prana, and ends with the statement “ all enter the Purusa.” 
Therefore the Purusa mentioned in the concluding passage, must be the 
Lord mentioned in the opening passage of that Upanisad. 


Mantra 8. 

qqr stst: i 

rf^r fez rt m r ^ r*. mwi r%qv ii^n 

Yatha, as. to: Nadyah, the rivers. Syandamanal), flowing. 

^5^ Samudre, in the sea. g-fcpr Astam, the end, become invisible, 
Gachchhanti, go. *TR^r Nama-rupc, the name and form. I'iie distinctive 
individuality, the substance, Avihaya, not leaving, not losing cpir Tatha, 

so. RCRVidvan, the wise. ?{R 4 £TR Namarupat. from name and form, from 
his distinct individuality. RjpFf;: Vimuklah, not freed; Vi has the force of 
‘‘not’' as in “Vi-priya,” not pleasant. Parat, than the great, Pa ram, 

the greater. Purusam, the Purusa. the Person. 3 %r Upaiti, reaches, 

goes, Divyam, the divine, the wonderful. 

8. As the flowing rivers, whose home is the sea, when 
reaching the sea, become invisible, but do not lose their 
substance or individuality, so the wise, without losing his 
individuality, goes to the Divine Person who is Greater than 
the great.—01. 


MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

To the persons who are not muktas, the latter appear as if devoid of 
name and form, because the Non-free are incapable to ascertain the name and 
form of the Free, not that they really have no name and form. As the wind 
is not seen-by ordinary people, because it has no form and bodily shape so 
the rivers lose their name and form, when they enter the sea. It is only 
to ordinary perception that name and form are lost. They do not know 
what particles belonged to them in that vastness of the sea, but the Vayu 
knows every particle of water that constituted the river, and separates it 
from the ocean, and rains it back in the form of cloud. 

The word “ Yimukta ” means “ not losing.” The force of the particle 
Vi is that of negation ; as “ Vipriya” means noil-pleasant. 

The word is “ Avihaya” in the text. The ^ is elided by sandhi 
The name and form are never lost actually, even in Mukti, as says a scrip¬ 
ture text “ Unending verily is the name.’* 







Ill MUNI? AKA, II K HAND A, 9. 


273 


Mantra 9. 

f 'I cPTO ^ 3m *ptfcT ?TOTsr^N%^T H^TcT I 
cttrt qr^TR 5fT?rr^qr *twt% imi 

W* Sah, he. Yah, who. 5 Ha, verily, % Vai, verily, ^5 Tat, that. 
TO Faramam, highest, gff Brahman, Brahman. ^ Veda, knows, gjp Brahma, 
Brahman ; the great, magnificent, glorious, q? Eva, even, vrro Bhavati, be- 
comes. ^ Na, not. =ro Asya, his. Abrahmavit, non-knower Brahma, 

prf Kule, in his family. HTO Bhavati, is born, Tarati, crosses over, 

Sokam, grief, cHrW Tarati, overcomes. 17 THR Papmanam, sin, evil, 3^7 Guha, 
heart, cavit}\ Granthibh)'ah, from the fetters. QfHTRB-g: Guhagranthi- 

bhyah, from the fetters of the heart, Vimuktah, liberated. Amritah, 

immortal. Bhavati, becomes. 




9. He who knows the highest Brahman becomes great 
(i.e., gets something of the greatness of the Brahman). In 
his family, no one is born who is ignorant of Brahman. He 
crosses over (the ocean of) grief and evil, breaks the fetters of 
his heart and becomes immortal.—62. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 


He who knows the Supreme Brahman becomes verily Great (Brah¬ 
man) according to his fitness. 

Note .—The word “ Param” is employed with regard to Brahman, in order to distinguish 
the Param Brahman from the Brahman used in the subsequent portion of the verse. The 
word Brahman is to be taken there in its etymological sense : i.e., Great, expansive grow¬ 
ing. According to Advaita system, in the state of Mukti there is no distinction of Para and 
Apara Brahman. So the use of the word 4 * Para” in this verse is useless according to them. 
According to Madhva, the knower of the Supreme Brahman becomes Purua, Perfect, 
according to his nature. He does not become Brahman in the sense of God. 

The unfit does not get anything of the attributes of Hari. As says 
the Skanda Purana •—“ When it is said ‘the Jiva becomes Brahman’ 
it is meant that he becomes full and perfect, and not that lie becomes 
the Supreme Self- The Jiva being ever dependent on the Lord, how 
can it get eternal independence ? ” 

Moreover in various passages of this Upanisad, difference between 
the Jiva and the Brahman, even in the state of Mukti, is repeatedly 
asserted. As “ where dwells that Purasa, the changeless atman ” (i. 2. 11), 
“ Where is the Supreme abode of the True (111. 1. 6.) This is the 
bridge of the Immortals ” (II. 2. 5.) “ He should enter into Him, as 

the arrow the target ” (II. 2. J.) “ Brahman is the target ” (II. 2. 4.) 

“ Becoming free from Avidya, he attains the highest similarity "(JIT. 1. 3). 







274 


MU NT) A KA-UPA NTS AD. 


All these show that the Muktas always chvell in the presence of 
the Lord and are separate from Him : (and do not lose their identity 
in Him, nor become one with Him'in the Advaita sense). 

Moreover, the Lord Bfdarnyana also in his aphorisms indicates 
that the jiva remains distinct from the Brahman even in the state of 
Release. Thus in the Vedanta Sutra, i, 3, 2, he shows that Brahman 
is the goal to be reached by the Muktas. The object reached must be 
different from the object reaching. So also in the Vedanta Sutras, IV, 4, 
17. Badarayana clearly indicates the fundamental difference between 
the Muktas and the Lord. The Muktas never possess the power of 
creating a Universe—that is the unique attribute of the Lord. Thus 
both Badarayana and this Upanisad show that the Muktas remain different 
from the Lord. 

So also says the Rig Veda VII. 99. 1 ; “0 Visnu, Thou art beyond 
all measure. None reaches Thy Greatness, be he a Mukta or a bound 
Soul. Thou art Infinitely Full in Thy essential Form.” “ He enjo 3 r s all 
desires along with the Omniscient Brahman ”—;Taitt. Up. II. 1. 1). 

That Kaivalya which neither Brahmi nor Is ana nor any other Deva, 
free or bound, can ever attain, that art Thou, 0 Lord I lari, in thy own 
essential nature. 

The Devas are greater in attribute than even the Mukta men ; while 
Vayu is greater than all the Devas. Higher than Vayu is Visnu full 
of Infinite auspicious attributes. Who think otherwise go to deep dark¬ 
ness, but those who know it properly attain even the Supreme I lari. 

In the family of Devas following the dharma of the Krita age, 
the jhanins alone are born, as a general rule : exceptionally, owing to 
some extraordinary cause (such as a curse, &c.), non-jnanins may be 
born in the family of a Deva. The general rule is, that all Devas who 
follow the dharma of the Krita age, are knowers of Brahman. But as a 
general rule, the son of a human j nan in is not necessarily a jfianin. The 
case of the Devas is opposite to it. Such is the law that was made 
in the Krita age, with regard to all who follow the dharma of that age 
even in this age. 

Therefore the Lord Visnu, the best of all beings, full of all qualities, 
the Infinite, the Highest Person, should always be known. 

Note .—(As a general rule, the son of a Deva is born a Brahma-knower : not so the son 
of a Man. He must acquire the knowledge of Brahman. The sense of fcho whole mantra 
is this. He who knows this brahman called here the True, verily becomes Great and Berfcct 
(Brahman). In the family of such .a knower of Brahman, there is born no person who is 
ignorant of Brahman. On the other hand, if such a knower of Brahman is a Deva, then as a 





UI MUNDAKA, II I{HAND A, 11. 


275 


general rule Ins children are born as knowers of Brahman. If such a kuowcr of Brahman is 
a human being, then exceptionally a Brahman-knowcr is born in his family. Such a pcr- 
sou crosses over the sea of sorrow and sin. He becomes free from the bond of Mula Prakrit! 
consisting of the the three gunas, namely, Saliva, Rajas and Tamas : and from the bond of 
Liuga Sarira. Ho becomes Immortal (i.c., the bliss manifests in him.) 

Mantra io. 

H^HSRTsvgH: i Or h?h jgto: n 

fcjfPRT: «Wlrar StglPrgT: ^ ffH STgHRT: I 

ttamtHr ggifasrT hVh rhthh #§rq h»oii 

HR Tat, that, it^r Etat, this. Hj’gf Richa, by a verse. Abhyuk- 

tam, declared. Madhva’s reading is tadesa slokah “ on it there is this 
slokah.” r%HRW: Kriyavantah, performers of tlie sacred rites; religious. 
’Sirrah Srotriyfth, learned in the Vedas. srgrfHgf: Brahmanisthah, devoted to 
Brahman. Svayam, themselves, Juhvatah, offering oblations to the 

(ire. tjefi Eka, one. Hjrg Risim, sage, tr^rg' Ekarsim, to the chief risi (fire) Madh¬ 
va’s reading is chief sages, namely, those who have promulgated this 

Brahma vidya, and who form the great hierarchy of Teachers, ^rad- 

dhayantah, worshipping with faith, Tesani, for them, qn Eva, even, alone. 
qHf Etam, this, stgUHSH Brahmavidyam, the Brahma Vidya. hrh Vadeta, tell. 
TOHstH Siro-vratam, the vow of (shaving?) the head. fgfHHR Vidhivat, according 
to rule. Yaih, by whom. 5 Tu, verily. Chirnam,has been performed. 

10. On this there is the following verse ; let one teach 
this Brahma vidya to those only who are religions, who are 
versed in the sacred lore and firmly devoted to Brahman, 
who perform themselves the fire sacrifice and have faith in 
the existence of the Great Sages, who have performed the 
vow of the head, according to the rale.—63. 

Mantra i i 

qRRjrawit hr: ’HRstfrqvH: 11 n 11 

sfh mg: II R II 

HR Tat, that, qnn; Etat, this. Satyam, truth. Hjrg: Risih, the sage. 

sriffW Angirah, the sage Angirfl. gn Pura, in former times. hhT=H Uvach, said.% 
Na, no. qHR Etat, this. Acbtrna, not performed. 5 jh: Vratah, vow 

Achirnavratah, one who has not performed the vow. ^thtr Adhiteh 
should study, hr: Namah, adoration, gw Parama, the highest. Hjfqw: Risibhyalt 
36 











276 


MUNDA KA-UPANISA D. 


the Seers, Paramarisibhyah, to the highest Sages, sr: Namah, ado¬ 
ration. Paramarisibhyah, to the highest Sages. 

11. This is the truth.; the sage Angina declared it 
of old ; let no person who has not performed the vow study it. 
Out, Hail to the Great Sages, hail to the Great Sages.—04. 

MADFIVA’S SALUTATION. 

I bow to the supremely compassionate r Lord, full of all auspicious 
qualities. May that Lord be pleased always with me. lie is ever the 
most beloved of all beloved objects to me. 

& vrt qqu u q^HT^rre- 

felT: 11 U oq$r*r qqffq 

q^: 11 *qfcr H I^qqT: ^UrT H: tW 

%qr: 11 11 *qT% HI 

^ 11 & *m?cT: ^TRcT. ?TTPq: 11 

Sfe m^#.TtTFmrCTHTHT || 


TilE END. 



fcki: ' **ji < 


fR> 


■HiS SCDX 










Alphabetical Index of the Mantras 


’-rr ...II; 1 , 4 

^L.n, 1 , 9 
*ri sra%r...l, 1 , 2 
^«Rr^T...ll, 2 , g 
Outsit...I, 2 , 8 
?riw*ri ^n^r...l, 2 , 9 

^1%: srfsntcr ggrs rc »i re ...H, 2 , 1 

ssrji gfcg..J, 2, 10 

ftfiwsrra^ srnn:...IT, ], 3 

0^5 greraFfg...!, 2 , 5 

0.'4TSWncHT %cT^rr ^crar:...lir, 1 , 9 

<*gfcrfcr ?rai 3 crc:...l 2 , 6 
s* ^inr: tv&m STTfcr: 
SRTHI^i: fRrRR:...III, 2 , 2 

^ =ar... T, 2 , 4 

ITCTT: ^5T! tn^ST FRr£T:...I N, 2, 7 
cT^Tf gTSWJrfj I %?II5Rr: SltfsRTT... 11 

cftcT^^r JT?tg...I, 2 , 1 

crtcT^TFT 57«1T ^THT^... U, 1, 1 
stt^T ^^%J...I, 1, 5 
cT’TOT #*TcT sffT...T, 1, 8 
cTO ^ .. I, 2, 11 

o 

CRUTCH: ^lOT^T ^... II, 1, O 

^ro^&fa...ll, l, g 

^nr^T:...II, 1, 7 
cisl ^ FT5T3F^rara...I, 2, 13 
cT^ || W. TW...I, 1, 4 

f^srr inr^r: pr....ll, l, 2 
5T gqnft ^prr sraraT...in, i, i 
V!3^ClxlrTR^...II, 2, 3 


Page. 


... 

... 

... ZZS 

... 

. • . 

... 233 

... 

... 

... 203 

... 

... 

... 240 

... 

... 

... 219 

... 

• • . 

... 210 

... 

... 

... 23G 



... 220 

... 

... 

... 227 

... 

... 

... 214 



... 257 



... 215 



... 201 

... 

... 

... 202 

... 

... 

... 214 



... 2GO 

,2, 10 


... 275 



... 275 

• • 1 

... 

... 211 

• • • 


... 204 

... 

... 

... 200 


... 

... 221 

... 

... 

... 220 

... 

... 

... 230 

... 

... 

... 231 

... 

... 

... 222 

... 

. • . 

... 204 

. . . 

. • . 

... 226 

. . . 

... 

... 247 

... 

... 

... 238 












( ii ) 


* error... 111, i, 8 

5T cTO WfeT *T...H, 2, 10 ' ... 

»TT?IJTTcJTT SR^R 55W?5...III, 2, 3 

?TT*TOT<HT 5raCFR 55WP...UI, 2, 4 

qfr^q ST^^rarTR...!, 2, 12 

3^r 1, 10 

snnilT ^TfrTcHT...II, 2, 4 

srrar w ^^ffviT^r...lll, l, 4 ... 

SRT 3RS7...!, 2, 7 

cr^^w^rew.-.m, l, 7 
an'^rrqer 3*SetTT...II, 2, ll 

anT^rroRSrarr...l, 1, 1 

rosier ^TORif^prr... 11, 2, s 

^^^raTiroiirojp...l, l, 0 

?TOT mxi RRJTHT5 ..111,2,8 ... 

eTOITfRTro: *53Ief... I, j, 7 

^f4msi^pitsi...II, 2, 2 

?I^T iro: 1, 3 

?RT %55PIcl nf^P 1, 2 , 2 

?i ?i ^roTfcr...in, l, 10 ... 

aftirorr: $*jerrorerrcn...lf, 2, 5 

q^T^rlroir^rq!...!, 2, 3 

a: *Nhr. ci#rtpt...1, 2, 9 

?i; ^ir: ?r^ra^...n, 2,7 

...111,2,(5 

|iro%T jrfi5iT%Tsff^...I, l, 3 

nsraer srqcT ^rg<r...lll, l, G 

«roiR , renn c r ^rrror...in, l, 5 ... 
*rrr anno sroerfR crroR...Il, 1,8 
*raR f^r 3 ^tt Graft... HI, l, 2 

^rro^ro...lll, 2, 5 
5B qT I cTcqrfi 5T?r^...IIl, 2, 9 
sr ^Tc^ot srugro...IH, 2, l 
^ ^...11, 2, 9 


Page. 

... 255 
... 244 
... 262 
... 263 


221 

... 233 
... 238 
... 249 


218 


254 


245 

202 

242 

207 

272 


208 

237 

249 

212 

258 

239 

213 

209 

241 

267 


2u3 

252 

251 

232 

248 

264 

273 

260 

243 












1 




' 


* 











INTRODUCTION. 


This is ail Upanisad of the Atharva Veda. It has not been trans¬ 
lated by Max Milller, nor it is referred to by Sankara or Ramanuja in 
their commentaries on the Vedanta Sutras. It is, however, one of the 
classical Upanisads and Sahkara has left a commentary on it. It has been 
translated into English by Dr. E. Rocr in the Bibliotheca Indica series. 

According to Madhva, this Upanisad is called Mrnduka because 
it was revealed by a frog (Manduka) Vanina, the Lord of the Seas, 
assuming the form of a frog praised Ilari with the hymns of this poem. 

This Upanisad contains twelve verses. But Sri Madhva reads the 
Kirikas, passing under the name of Gauclapada, as part of the text 
itself. The Kariki verses are shown here as Iv 1 , Ac., while the Upanisad 
verses are indicated by U' J , Ac. Altogether there are 41 verses. 

This short Upanisad gives the secret meaning of Om, which is the 
name of the Lord. The Lord has four aspects. In His aspect as Virfva, 
He makes the waking consciousness of the jivas, and establishes relations 
between the jiva-consciousness and external objects. In His aspect as 
Taijasa, He withdraws the jiva-consciousness from the external objects, 
and revives the internal impressions and makes him see dreams. In His 
third aspect as Prajna, He scops all consciousness of the jivas and makes 
them enjoy rest and bliss. In Ilis aspect as Turiya He gives them 
niukti. The letters ^ and the Nada correspond with these four 

aspects. When a note is struck the overtone which merges into laya 
is the N.kla of that tone. When Om is properly pronounced the vibra¬ 
tion produced by it is the Nada. The mystical powers acquired by 
the right use of A U M are eightfold—four relating to the vehicles or 
bodies and four relating to consciousness or Life. 

This Upanisad gives an analysis of consciousness on all planes. 
When a monad perceives the objects of a plane, that is called waking 
consciousness—whether those objects exist on the physical oi astral 
or mental or any higher plane. When external objects are shut off 
from consciousness, and there is a revival of the impressions existing 
in his vehicles—in his brains—whether physical, astral, Ac—that state 
of consciousness is called svapna or dream. Of course, sometimes in 
sleep the soul goes out of the body and sees things existing in other 



( ii ) 


places and times. These visions appear like dreams, but psychologically 
they are not dreams. The soul perceives here something external , and 
so it is a iodizing consciousness. 

The third state of consciousness is the sleep or neutral or absence 
of consciousness. It is the laya centre of consciousness—a point which 
the consciousness must cross in order to pass to a higher state. 

The fourth is that higher state oE consciousness—which is called 
Turiya or Fourth. 

Thus when passing from the physical waking consciousness to 
astral, the stages are—1st, tire stoppage of physical impressions, 2nd, 
Revival of brain impressions or dreams, 3rd, Grossing the neutral line, 
the line or point between the physical and the astral, 4th Waking up 
on the astral plane, being Mukta or free from the trammels of the physi¬ 
cal consciousness altogether. 

Similarly, when passing from the astral consciousness to the mental, 
again there are these stages. Here the waking or jagrat is the astral con¬ 
sciousness. The jiva that performs Samadhi on the astral plane, first puts 
a stop to the astral waking state, the objects of the astral plane do not make 
any impression on his astral senses. Then his astral brain becomes active 
and he dreams astrally. Then the neutral point is reached, the point 
between the astral and the mental planes ; and herein inversion (to borrow 
a figure of speech from Optics) of consciousness takes place and the mental 
consciousness is reached. The soul becomes mukta from the trammels of 
the astral consciousness and wakes upon the mental piane. He perceives 
now the objects of the mental plane, and this is his jagrat consciousness. 
The jiva now practises Samadhi on the mental plane, and through the 
above steps rises to the Buddhic plane. Thus in passing from one plane 
to another, these four and only four stages occur. The consciousness of a 
higher plane is Turiya, the consciousness of the plane lower to it is Jagrat: 
between these two is the dream and the mental consciousness. These 
terms—‘ waking/ ‘ dreaming* 4 sleeping/ 4 transcendental ’—are therefore 
relative terms. These will have a higher or lower meaning according to 
the plane on which the jiva is consciously awake, and the degree of Mukti 
(or Initiation) he has attained. 


S. C. V. 




MANDUKA UPANISAD- 

Fikst Khan da, 
l J eace chant. 

grarnr: i stsc i 

srenjfas I arete ^?rg;: \\ ^ifer ^ s^r f^c^rerr: i ^ifet m <jqr 

i ^fer ?m;ctefo: i ^ife ht ^^ricrrarg n ^rn srr%: 

^rtfcf: 5nf%; n 

(a) 0 Devas of senses ! May we (live long to) listen with our ears 
what is pleasant, and to see with our eyes what is beautiful. OHolv Ones ! 
may we with firm limbs and bodies strong, extolling you always, attain 
the full term of our god-ordained life.—(Rig Veda, I. 89. 8.) 

(b) May Yisnu the powerful, the ancient of fame, vouchsafe us 
prosperity, may Yisnu, the nonrisher, the knower of all hearts, give us 
what is well for us, may Visnu, the Lord of swift motions, the felly of 
whose wheel never wears out, be propitious to us, may Visnu, the protec¬ 
tor of the great ones, protect us too.—(Rig Veda, 1. 89. G.) 

MADHYA’S SALUTATION. 

1 always bow to Yisnu, the Supreme Goal, the enjoyer in the four-fold states, whose 
essential nature consists of fill 1 bliss, infinite wisdom and Omnipotence, who is eternal 
and changeless. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

In this Upanisad, Varuiia taking the form of a frog (maiuluka) praises N a ray ana and 
His four-fold aspects. As says the Padma Parana 

“ Yanina in the form of a frog praised the changeless Hari by the verses of the Upani¬ 
sad beginning with Om : while meditating upon the Gcd Narayana with mind concentrat¬ 
ed on Om. ” 

[Note .—Yarn na is the Risi or Re veal er of this Upanisad, the Lord Yisnu of the Four- 
form is the Devata ; the metre is anus tup as a general rule, and the person qualified to 
study it is any one who seeks liberation.] 

Mantra, i. 

^TPjf^^raTcT cT^TfR llUl 

sjp* Om, the Auni, diat which is denoted by Om. That in which the 
world is woven, Iti, thus, Elat, this. Aksaram, the imperish¬ 

able, the syllable, ///, iiot-changing in the three times; indestructible. 

37 







284 


MANDUKA-UPANISAD. 


Idam, this. Sarvam, full, all, all-filling, for He is full of all qualities. 

FR3 Tasya, of Him, of this Pranava. Upavyakhyanam, near expla¬ 

nation (is now being made). Upa, ndar, because Om is near every one ; vyakh- 
yana, explanation, an explanation of Him who is near to all. An explanation of 
God in His aspect of nearness to man. Bhutam, the past, that what was, 

Om is existing in the past, vrqH Bhavat, present, what is. He exists in 

the present also, Bhavisyat, future, what will be, He is in the future 

too. Eternal, ff^r Iti, thus. The existing in' the three times is not a specific 
attribute of the Pranava, for the jivas also exist in the three times, but the 
sense *s that He exists in one unchanged form throughout the three-fold time 
while the jiva changes its form. ^7 Sarvam, full, all. Onkarah, the 

Aurn. irq Eva, even. Yat, that which ^ Cha, and. Any at, another 

than the ordinary trikalatitas like space, prakriti, Trikalatitam, 

beyond the three-fold time. The form which remains unmodified by threefold 
time is said to be other than trikalatita. rT?r Tat, that, Api, also, 

Ohkara, the Aum-designated. He whose designation is Onkara is derived 
from the root krin with the affix ghan having the force of denoting an object. 

1. (U 1 ) That which is denoted by the word Om is verily this Im¬ 

perishable Brahman. That (Brahman) is Full (because He is full of all 
auspicious attributes). This (Upanisad) is an explanation of that Om. 
The Imperishable is in the Past, Present and Future. The Full is 
verily Om. That Lord, designated by O 111 , is even other than that which 
is beyond the three times.—1. 

[Sole. —Vanina, the Lord of waters, praises Hari with the vorses of this Upanisad. 
That Being who is denoted by Om is this imperishable, indestructible Brahman. He on 
account of his being full of all attributes is called sarvam, the full. The word aksara does 
not mean the letters A, U, or M which compose the word Om, but denotes imperish¬ 
able. The Lord is denoted by the word Om, and He possesses the transcendental 
attributes of existing in all times without modification. The Om called the full is Brahman 
alone ; beyond the three-fold time nothing else can be called full, nor is there anything so 
t ran seen den tall y beyond the three-fold time as Brahman. None else can be said to be 
trikalatita in the true sense of that word. Though space (Avyakrita akiisa), time and 
letters or sound are also trikalatita, Brahman is above this, and so it is said ‘ Om is even 
other than that which is trikalatita. ’ The bri tattva is also trikalatita anclan unmodifiable 
and unchanging trikalatita, blit it is under the Lord and dependent. 

Or the phrase ‘anyat yat yat trikalatitam, ’ may bo explained by saying ‘ That which is 
beyond the three times is Om alone, and the other also, namely, the bri tattva. Besides 
those two, namely, tho Lord Vis mi called Om, and the Sri tattva, none else is trikalatita 
in the true sense of the word.’] 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Om is the designation of Brahman, and it is called aksara or the imperishable 
also. For the word Om means literally “ that by which everything is pervaded (otam). ” 
Because this word is woven in Him, therefore Om denotes the Lord Ilari. 

[Note ,—Yarnna is tho Tti.si of this Upanisad. Ho assuming the form of a frog or 
mandnka praised Hari with these verses, honce this Upanisad is called the Manilukya Up, 





I K HAND A, 2. 


285 


or “ the mystery teaching of the Frog.” The pranava or Om is the name of Brahman. 
It is derived from the v/ava ‘to protect,’ * to go,’ ‘tube brilliant,’ ‘to enter.’ It is the 
last meaning which is predominant in it. Tljat which enters into every tiling is Om. 

^ * [Unadi I. 142 and my Edition of the Siddhanta Kaumudi, 

(Vol, II, Part II, p. 181).] 

Thus in the Brihat Samhita we find The Brahman denoted by the word ‘Om ’ is 
full of all auspicious attributes, and hence, He is called sarvam or full also. It is the name 
of Hari, who exists without change of form as one in all times, past, present or future. lie 
is absolutely and always eternal. In short, this is the explanation of Om that He is 
sarvada nitya.” So also in Nairgunya “Because all is created or made through Om, or 
rather Om is the maker of all, He is called Om-kara—Om the Maker. Since all-ness and 
full-noss do not belong to any one else than Hari, and since Om means literally the all, 
tlie full, therefore it is the name of Hari.” 

Ike phrase “the full is Om” implies that nothing else is full, but partial. Hari alone 
is above the three-fold time. (The time can produce no change in Him). Prakriti, and 
space and jiva also are beyond the three-fold time (so being beyond time is no peculiar 

attribute of Hari). Therefore, the Upanisad uses the words “other than ”-that which 

is other than time-transcending is Om. 

[Note. —The jiva and prakriti are both trikalatita—beyond the three-fold time. The 
Lord Hari is something more than trikalatita—that which is other than trikalatita is Om. 
That is, while the jiva and prakriti, are trikalatita, yet they are changed by time, and 
they undergo changes in time. Not so the Lord. He is one in all times, without any 
change.] 

The Word ‘eternal’ is sometimes used in the sense of that which persists in a long 
duration of time. But Om is not such secondary eternal. It is “ always (sarvada) eternal.”] 

Mantra 2 . 

I I II ^ II 

Sarvam, the Full, possessing all auspicious gunas. 1 he ‘'Full,” is a 
name of Brahman, as we know from the text tjirjjp*;; &c. f| Hi, well- 

known, verilv, Elat, this being called the imperishable aksara. ggj Brah¬ 

ma, the supreme Brahma, denoted by Ohkara ; and called the Imperishable 
(aksara). Ay am, this, Atma, alma, the Higer Self, the tiue agent. 

Brahma, Brahman, h: Sah, he. sraw A yam, this inner controller, Atma, 

a^ma, the conscience impelling jivas to right action, Chatuspat, with 

four-feet, i.e. } four portions or aspects. 

2. (U 8 ). The Full (designated by Om is verily this imperishable 

Brahman. This conscience or controller (Atman) in Sri, Brahma, &c., is 
Brahman. He lias four parts or aspects. — 2. 

[Note. —The goddess Sri.and the jivas like Brahma, &c., are seen to have no indepen¬ 
dence of their own ; and so we infer that there is some Higher Self who dwelling in Sri, 
&c., causes all their activities. This Higher Self must also be called the “ Full ” and “ be¬ 
yond the Threefold time.” The Upanisad endorses this view and says “ayam atma Brah¬ 
ma”—“ This Higher Self in all is Brahman.” The true self in all, which also appears to be 
full, is not something different. He is this Brahman. The Jivas find that they are not 
independent, some one within them controls them. This inner controller of all Jivas is 
Brahman too, and not somebody else. As the inner controller of all jivas, Brahman has 
four aspects.] 




286 


mAnduka-Upanisad. 


MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

In the sentence “ Sarvam hy ctad Brahma,” the word Brahma denotes the Supreme, 
the Highest. • 

[jVoic.—Brahman is derived from the^/brih To increase and means full. ] 

The word “hi” implies that it is a well-known thing that Brahman means “full.” 
As in the text : “tad eva brahma paramam kavinam (that alone is the highest fullness of 
the sages).” ‘‘Pur 11 am adah, &c.”-“ that is full, &c.” Therefore the Srnti says “sarvam 

hy ctad brahma”—“verily this Full is Brahman.” 

[Note—The phrase “ayam atm a Brahma” is generally translated as “this self is 
Brahman” and is taken.by the Advaitins to mean that this jivatma is Brahman. The word 

at man, however, here docs not mean ‘ self’)]. / 

He who dwelling in the bodies of all beings such as Sri, Brahma, &c., is inferred to 
be the controller of all their actions of giving, taking, eating, &c, (adana-kartiVatma) that 
being (whose existence is so inferred) is Brahman. For jivas (like us) arc seen to be not 
independent in their actions (for they do not do that which they know to bo good, and do 
that which they know to be evil. This want of free-will in the jivas shows that there is 
some one else controlling all their actions'. This real agent behind all jivas is Brahman, 
and this is declared by the phrase “ ayam atma brahma,”—“ this (unknown) agent is 
Brahman” and is designated also by the name Om, the Imperishable. 

[Note. — In these two verses four propos'd ions have been laid down—(l) sarvam Ohkara 
eva - The full alone is designated by the word Om. (2) anyat Trikalatitam tad apy Ohkara 

eva _That one who is beyond the three times is alone designated by the word Om. (8) 

Sarvam hy clad brahma-The full is verily this well-known Bralimar. (4) Ayam Atma 
brahma— this true Agent in all beings is Brahman. J? ri Madhva now quotes the authority 
of llari vaihsa for the interpretation that he has placed on these verses.] 

Thus we read in the Hariva nsa :—“llari alone is full and no one else can ever be full. 
Nor is anything beyond the three times, except the Prakriti and the Supreme. The time, 
space and the Vedas are included in the word Prakriti. But the epithet ‘ anvat,’ other than, 
shows that Brahman is higher Mian the ordinary trikalatita. This phrase also means that 
which remains unchanged in three times, and as time, space and the Vedas remain un¬ 
changed in three times, they are also trikalatita. Therefore, when the Sruti says, “He 
is other than trikalatita which is Prakriti"—it excludes lime, space, &c., also. The 
jivas, moreover, cannot be said to be ‘beyond the three l imes,’ for though they be essen- 
tiallv timeless, vet every jiva identifies itself with its vehicle and thinks that it is high or 
low lives and dies. Nor can the Perfected (Muktas) jivas be called timeless, for they 
were under the dominion of time before their Release. The all-pervading Fullness of 
Yisiui is verily called Atma, in all the Vedas, because unporceived by them, He is the 
real agent in all acts of taking, eating, &c., of all beings, yea of such even high entities as 
Rama, Brahma, Rndra, Auanla, &e. Yanina in the shape of a frog discovered this fe'rufci- 
Trutli.” 

[Note. —The Commentator next explains the phrase “ this Atma has four feet,” hy 
the following extract from the Mahftyoga). 

Mantua 3. 

II il 

Jagaritasthana, waking-state-placc, />., the Right eye, where 
Vi^va dwells in the waking state. Jagarita means eye. Bahihprajnah, 

outside consciousness. 1 he cause or producer of the consciousness of the 






/ RUANDA, 4 . 


287 


external objects. Saptaugali with the seven-limbed, i.c. t two feet, four 

hands, one proboscis. Ekonavinigati, nineteen. Mukhah, faces, 

mouths. Eighteen of these are human fa$es, and one is that of an elephant. 

Sthulabhuk, external or gross-eater. He enjoys through the senses of 
the jivas all external objects : or cater of many and good experiences. 
Vaisvanarah, Vai^vanara, the Imperishable Lord of the Physical plane. It is 
compounded of Yaisva, the enjoyer of the physical plane or Yisva ; and nara, non- 
perishable. Prathamalj, ih,c first, Padah, foot, state or aspect, or 

amga or part. 

3. (U 3 ) In the region of waking : the Lord causes the jiva to perceive 
the external objects. He is represented as seven-limbed, and nineteen-faced 
and enjoys dense objects, and is called Yaisvanara or the Imperish¬ 
able Lord of the dense plane. This is the first foot or aspect of the 
Lord. — 3. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

As wc read in the Maha-yoga :— 

The Ancient Supreme Self resides in the body, in a four-fold aspect. As Yaisvanara, 
He dwells in the Right eye, the place of waking consciousness. He lias an elephant face 
and causes the perception of external consciousness of the jivas, but is unperceivcd by 
them. He has eighteen human faces on all sides, but the nineteenth, the middle, is that of 
an elephant. This Supreme Man lias four hands. Its seven limbs are : two feet, four-hands, 
and one proboscis and hence He is called seven-limbed. Through the.senses He experiences 
all dense objects—all experiences which arc auspicious, but none which arc painful. The 
word Yisvanara is thus derived. The dense physical plane is called the visva, because 
it is pervaded or apprehended through and through (vis = to enter) by the senses. The word 
nara means undying, the eternal, from 11 a and •,/ ri to be lost, destroyed. The compound 
word Yaisvanara therefore literal^ means the Imperishable Being connected with the 
dense world. Yin ay aka (Gancsa) by meditating on the Yisva obtained the status of the 
Elephant-headed Deity in the physical plane. Similarly, by meditating on the Taijas he 
obtained the same status in the astral plane. By meditating on the three (Yisva, Taijasa 
and Prajfia) Indra obtained his Indrahood. By meditating on the four-fold, Rudra obtained 
from the Sifter of men, the Rudra-hood. Thus Yisnu, possessed of these attributes (of con¬ 
ferring Gaucsa-hood, &c.) is four-fold, the Higher than the highest." 

[Note .—The word Yisva is derived from the root, ./vis to enter. Blit as roots have 
various meanings, here we take it to mean “to know.” To this s/x'ni hs added the 
affix ^ ; that which is known by all = visva, he., the physical plane, the dense object which 
all know. The enjoyer of the Yisva is called Yisva. The word nara is compounded of 
two words na-not, ra = destroyed : m is derived from the root rui HI? ksayc ; with the 
affix ^ ila. -f Yaisvanara. The shorty of Yisva is lengthened before nara 

by Paniui ^ I YI. 3. 129 S. 1048.], 

Mantra 4. 

11 y 11 

Svnpnasthanah, the place of dream ; seated in the throat, which 
is the place of dreams, for when the soul abides there then dreams are dreamt. 
The place of imagination. Antah-prajnah, inward consciousness. The 



288 


MANDU KA-UPAtsIlSA D. 


Lord here makes the jiva perceive the inner objects, the impressions latent in 
the soul. Such impressions are called here anlar or inner, Saptangali, 

seven limbs. The same as the last, , Ekonavimsati, nineteen. 

Mukhah, mouths, faces. The same as the last Praviviktabhuk, eating 

the differentiated objects, the subtle as different from the dense : experiencing 
the differentiated, namely, the impressions left by the objects perceived in the 
waking state. Taijasah, the chitta or mind consists of tejas or light. Hence 

it means, the luminous, (became the objects have here a brilliancy not to be 
found in tlie physical objects—or the objects of perception in this state are 
modifications of the light (tejas of the chitta-—the astral and the mental matter.) 
f§[rffzr: Dvitiyah, second. Pad a h, part. 

4. (U*) In the rigion of dreams, the Lord is called the maker of 

the inner perception. He also has seven limbs, ninteen mouths, enjoys 
subtle objects, is called Taijasa, the llluminer. This is the second foot of 
Visnu.—4. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

[A T ote.— licforc describing Taijasa and other states, the commentator now describes the 
nature of dreams, lie first explains what is meant by the phrase “ enjoying the subtle 
objects,” “having inner perception, &e.”] 

In the Yaraha Parana we find : “ Pravivikta or ‘ subtle’ is that which manifests itself 
in dreams, being impressions of objects perceived in the waking state. The state of con¬ 
sciousness by which these subtle objects are perceived is called antarprajfia or inner percep¬ 
tion and the Lord is called the Antarprajfia because lie causes this internal perception.” 

[The word pravivikta literally means specifically (pra), distinguished or differ¬ 
entiated (vivikta) from the waking object. The objects perceived in the waking state have 
an external reality, common to all beings in the same plane : the objects perceived in 
dreams are revivals of impressions received in the waking state, and have an external 
reality, only to the dreamer. The perception takes place through the internal organ called 
manas ; so it is called inner perception. The Lord causes the jiva to peiceive these 
through the Inner Organ ; and lie also knows them : therefore it is called antarprajfia. 
The commentator next mentions the dreamless state called snsuptaj. 

Mantra 5. 

TT?: ||^|| 

Yalra, at what time or place, in what stale, *|R: Suptab, sleeping, 
covered by nescience. Or fj + R He who has obtained (apta) the happiness 
(su) : the state in which the Lord is reached, r Na, not. RfRR Kancliana, 
anything at all, except—(1) the essential form of the jiva, (2) Time, (3) Nescience 
and (4) the rest of sleep. The perception or consciousness of these four docs not 
vanish even in deep sleep. ^[gw Kamam, desire (or object of desire). 
Kamayate, he desires, r Na, not. rv=rr Kancliana, any (dream) at all. 
Svapnam, dream. r>rtr Pasyati, be sees. rr Tat, that. *jrr« Susuptam, 
the condition of deep sleep : the same as susupli. gRR^RfR: Susuptasthanah, 
the region of sleep, i.e. } the ctelir of the heart. T'lic place of sushupti, i.c. f the 




I K HAND A, 5. 


289 


particular petal of the heart, the entrance of the sou) in which produces 
susupti. EkibhCitah, having become one (as in darkness all things 

become one, being covered by darkness, without however really becoming 
one). Or when the Vi. 4 va and the Taijasa aspects are united in Prajna. 

Prajnanaghniiah, the revealer to the jiva of the nescience only. 
The word ghana means ‘ ignorance.’ The whole word means “ He who 
produces ihe consciousness of ignorance or absence of knowledge.’' Igno¬ 
rance here includes l ime, and the bliss of sleep and the idea of Self. The 
Lord produces in the jiva the c msciousness of these only, and takes 
away the consciousness of every thing else. Compare this word with the 
jiva-ghana of the Prasna Up, V. r>. The jiva wrapped in nescience is 
called ghana. qq Eva, even, only. It qualifies Prajnana-ghaiin. 

A nan dam ay at, blissful; full of infinite Anauda: whose essential nature is 
bliss, ft He, verily. 37R*<r*I37 Anandabhuk, eater of bliss. Enjoys bliss, 
pure and simple, without objects of sense. The Lord is always il enjoj'er of 
bliss ; M but as Vtsva and Taijasa He enjoys bliss through the objects; here 
He enjoys bibs itself. Chetomukhah, whose face is wisdom, i.e , 

whose whole body is wisdom. Wisdom faced. The superconscious root of 
mental consciousness.* Prajnali, completely non-knower; according to 

Sankara it means All-knower, because it knows all things, hence called prajna 
or All-knower. But according to Madhva it means non-revealer : little-knower. 
Hrffa: Tritiyah, third, Padah, part, form 

5 (U 5 ). That is called deep sleep where the sleeper desires no 

desires and sees no dreams. In the region of deep sleep, Haw has unified 
(Himself with Vi4va and Taijasa), is the maker of tlie torpidity of conscious¬ 
ness of the jiva, is full of abundance of bliss, enjoys bliss alone, and lias 
a body consisting of pure Intelligence and is called Prajna—the Maker 
of Unconsciousness. This is the third foot of Visrm.—5. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The dreamless sleep called susupti should be understood to be a state of Tamas or 
ignorance. The jiva in that state has reached Hari, called Prajna, and remains then 
enveloped in tamas. It, therefore, desires nothing and perceives no objects, except the 
tamas, and itself, and time (and bliss). Hari Himself under the name of Prajna is the Lord 
of this state of sleep or susupta. Hari, the Maker of Dreams, is called Taijasa because 
He illumines (tejas) the impressions of external objects in the mental body, or chitta 
called also Taijasa and shows them to the jiva. Hari, the sifter of Men, is called 
Prajna, because He does not cause the perception of any external object to the jiva -He 
prevents external objects or their impressions to reach the jiva-conseiousness. The 
word Prajna is compounded of two words % (pra) highest f Ajfia (ignorance.) 
That which causes highest ignorance or unconsciousness is Prajna—for then Hari causes 
the jiva to be enveloped in darkness. * (The commentator next explains the word ekibhiita). 

* The word ‘ mukha ’ is illustrative of the whole body. Or the word mukha may 

mean here mnkhya or the chief, the best, the “ best ” here would mean “ full of ”_and so 

ehetoinukha would mean “full of wisdom,” i.e., or = | J77f: it The 

other two aspects, i.e., the Yisva and the Taijasa also possess these two attributes of beino- 
“ fujfof bliss” (anandamaya) and “ full of wisdom ” (chetomukha). 






290 


MANDUKA-UPA NISA D. 


The Prajfia makes the Yisva ancl Taijasa l)CCome one in Susnpti, therefore Prajfia 
is said to be eki-bhuta,—unified or become one : because Visva and Taijasa liavc entered 
the condition of oneness here. 

(Next the word Prajliana-gliana is explained). The jiva wlien enveloped in tamas is 
called ghana (or frigid, or congealed or torpid). Hari is called Prajirana-ghana because He 
makes the ghana or torpid jiva have consciousness (prajfia) of merely itself (jiva), of time, 
and of bliss in the sleep-state. The maker of ghana-eonsciousness is, therefore, called 
Prajiiana-ghana. This we find in Prakasika. 

The word “ Anandamaya ” means “full of entire bliss.” The word “ chetomukha ” 
means the face, the essential nature of which is Intelligence or Jfianam, i.e. t the pure 
intelligence is the mouth. The word K^TR^R is an example of inverted compound. The 
proper form would be SRST^TR glia nap raj nan a. We say so because in thsKarika verse the 
word used is ghana-prajfia. 

Though the Lord in the state of Visva and Taijasa also enjoys bliss, yet there the 
bliss is mixed up with objects. Put here Tie enjoys bliss and bliss alone, untinged by 
objects: and, therefore, He is called Ananda-bluik especially. 

The attributes Anandamaya, ‘ full of bliss,’chetomukha, “ pure intelligence-faced,” 
sarvajfia, ‘ Omniscient,’ and sarvesvara, “ Lord of all,” though specially mentioned with 
regard to Prajfia, must be understood to apply to His other three states also; and 
though the two attributes Anandamaya and chetomukha are read in the verse specially 
describing prajfia, yet they arc by analogy, to be applied to the other states also. The 
other attributes like omniscient, &c., are read in a verse not specific of Prajfia. 

Mantra 6. 




^ II 

qq-: Esah, this, Hari having these four aspects (three already described 
and the fourth to be mentioned), Sarvesvarah, ruler of all. <rq: -Esah, 

this. Sarvajnah, All-knower. n-qk Esab, this. ^rRRT Antaryami, the 

Inner Ruler of all, Inner-controller, irq: Esah, this. *frR: Yonih, the womb; 
the Creator, the Cause. Sarvasya, of all. Pi ahhavapyayau, the 

origin and end. f| Hi, because. ^cTRT Bhutanam, of creatures. 

G. (L 8 ). This is 1 lie Lord of all, this the Knowcr of all, this t.lio 
Internal Ruler, this the Cause of all, this is verily the origin and end 
of all creatures.—G. 


MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

‘This,’ the Atman having four forms, has the attributes of possessing lordliness 
over all and knowledge of all. The Supreme Self has four forms, and is inside the bodies of 
all living beings, ami is known by the name of Yisva, Taijasa, Prajfia and Turiya. All 
those forms are full of perfect Miss; all of them are chetomukha or body of intelligence, 
because their essential nature consists of Perfect Knowledge. The word Mukha or 
month is illustrative of the whole body. Or the ‘Mukha’ means nmkhya ‘best’ or 
‘full’ and cheto-mukha would moan “full of intelligence wisdom is whose primary 
attribute. Thus in the Markandcya we readThough the word mukha primarily 
denotes ‘face,’ yet it here suggests the fullness of the knowledge of the Lord, because 
the word mukha is here to be taken in the sense of mnkhya or chief or best or full. 
So elicto-mukha = chetasa jfianena mukhah puru ih “ full (mukha) with wisdom (chetas.)” 




r KII AND A, 9. 


201 


[iVotr.—The Lord has been said to be here the enjoyer of the dense and of subtle 
objects iu the states of Visva and Taijasa. This is inappropriate. The bliss of the Lord 
would then be dependent on objects. Moreover this is against his nature of being all-bliss 
iu Himself. This objection is answered next.] ° 

We read in the Brahma-Tarka“ llari who is all-bliss, enjoys the dense and subtle 
objects merely as a sport, and not because they can give Him joy; as the sun’s light is 
not at all increased when a lamp is shown to Him (in puja).” 

KAkikA-Verse i. 

I 

51%: mt fogflssrr Ufci: RfRfJ I 
sRsnresiT rtst iw ^^cr: ii I n 

^ Attra, in this. q% E’e, these. : Slokah, verses. HdRT Bha- 

vanti, are. ^f>: Bihih, outside, external, Prajnah, consciousness, : 

Vibliuh, the all-pervading, the Lord, : Visvali, Visva. f| Hi, verily. 

Antar, interior, inner, subjective. : Prajnah, com-ciousuess. 5 Fn, 

but, and. Taijasa, Taijasa. Ghana-prajiiah, congealed or torpid 

consciousness or the consciousness of jiva’s ownself alone. cRf Tatha, simi¬ 
larly. jjr^: Prajnah, Prajha. rr^: Ekah, one. qT Eva, alone Tridha, 

three-fold, f: Smritah, is called. 

On this there are the following verses: — 

7. (K 1 ). The Lord is called Visva when lie produces consciousness 
of the external world, He is styled Taijasa when causing subjective 
consciousness, He is Prajha when He stops all consciousness of the object, 
and jiva-consciousiiess only remains. Thus One alone is said to be 
three-fold—7. 

KArikA-Verse 2. 

^ snf%srr ^ arsmsen irii 

Daksina, right. Aksi, eye. 5% Mukhe, in the front portion, 

in the front of the right eye. : Visvajji, the Visva. Manasi, in the inner 
sensory (Manas), Amar, within. 5 Tu, but. : Taijasah, the Taijasa. 

Akase, in the ether. ^ Cha, and. Hridi, in the heart, sjr$T: Prajnah, 
the Prajha. Tridha, three-fold. Dehe, in the body. Vyavas- 

tliitah, residing, staying, placed. 

S. (K*h The seat of Visva is the right eye, witliin tlie manas 
dwells Taijas, while Prajha is in the ether of the heart; thus He dwells 
three-fold in the body.—8. 

KarikA-Verse 3. 

% ^5^ RcR ?T3T*T: | 

cT'or vun frqr-jcr iriT 

Visvali, the Visva. ft Hi, verily Stliula-bhuk, the eater of 

the dense, Nityam, always. faijasab, the Taijasa. Pravi- 

vikta-bhuk, the eater of the subtle. Auanda-bhuk, the eater of bliss. 

38 






292 


MAVVUKA-UPANiSAD. 


^ Tatha, similarly. qr*U Prajnab, the prajiia. r% v ir Tridha, three-fold. 
Bhogam, experience, enjoyment. URRcT Nibodhata, know ye. 

9. (K s ). The Vis$va verily enjoys tlie dense objects, theTaijasa is the 
enjoyer of the subtle; similarly, the PrAjfia is the cxperiencer of bliss; 
thus know ye the three-fold objects enjoyed.—9. 

KArikA-Verse 4. 

fax*' 3 I 

^^ ^ cf^T vm* Brar rtf* ii«ii 

Sthulam, the dense. rH*m Tarpayate, satisfies, Vigvam, the 

Visva. qRR^ Praviviktam, the subtle, g l u, and. cr*R Jaijasam, the Taijasn. 

Anandam, the bliss. ^ Cha, and. rT^?rr Tatha, similarly. qi*T Pi ajnam, 
the Prajha. firqf Tridha, three-fold, 1 riptim, satisfaction. R^TRZT Vija- 

natha, know ye. 

10. (K>) The dense gives satisfaction to the Vis'va ; the subtle satis¬ 
fies the Taijasa, the bliss similarly satisfies the PrAjfia, understand ye 
thus the three-fold satisfaction.—10. 

KarikA- Verse 5 - 

feg i 

^ 5T iimi 

firg Trisu, in the three. quug Dhamasu, in the mansions. Yat, what, 

Bhojyam, the object of enjoyment. Bhokta, the enjoyer. q: Yah, 

who. ^ Cha, and. q^rfrR: Prakirtitah, described. Veda, knows, 

Etad, this, sqq Ubhayam, both. Yah, who. 5 Tu, but. Sa, he. g^R: 
Bhunjanah, enjoying, experiencing. ^ Na, not. ruzr Lipyate, besmirclied, 
stained. 

11. (lv 5 ) But lie who knows both the enjoyer and the objects 
enjoyed, in these three mansions as above described, is not tainted (by 
action) though experiencing all objects.—11. 

i\ote .—The above verses 7 to 11 arc njally Karikas of Gaiulapada, but arc taken by 
Madliva as part of the Upanisad. He calls them mantras seen by a seer 
He naturally then asks, are these verses authority for what lias been taught in the preced¬ 
ing part of the Upanisad or are they not? If they arc authoritative, then the Upanisad 
verses are of weak authority, as requiring the help of these to support them. If these 
verses do not lend authority to what preccds, then they are useless. This dilemma is 
answored by the commentator in the following words: 

MADITVA’S COMMENTARY. 

Thus wo read in the Garuda Parana :—“O sago I sometime a precept itself autho¬ 
ritative may be supported by another authority in order to strengthen it; as Vanina, 
the Lord of the Ocean, himself an authority, strengthens his revealed mantras “Om, 
&e.” by quoting the authority of another seer, with the words “ on this there aro the 
following verses.” Moreover these verses are not mere repetitions, but an analysis of 
the mantras revealed to Yarn 11 a. They state explicitly v hat was suggested implicitly 
before. They show the four-fold nature of this triad. 














/ KF1AN0A , 13. 


293 


[Note. —(1) The three kinds of prajiia or consciousness—(.i) bahi prajiia (externalised 
consciousness), ( 0 ) antar prajiia (internal consciousness), (c) ghana-prajiia (torpid 
• consciousness). ( 2 ) the three regions (ci) rigirjt eye, (b) internal-sensory or mana [c) the 
ether of the heart. (3) The three objects of enjoyment (4) the three-fold satisfaction.] 

KArikA-Verse 6 . 

^rr+TRr^t ^TcrrmfcT i 

3^7: 11^11 

Prabbavah. origin, producer. Sarvabhayanam, of all beings, 

inanimate and animate, Satam, of the good, ffar, Iti, thus, Vini- 

schayah, belief, firm conviction. Sarvam, all. : 5 Ul 3 TFr Janayati, produces* 

sflYT: Pranah, Prana, the life. Chetas, consciousness. ariisun, rays 

sparks of consciousness, centres of consciousness. 5^: Purusah, purusa 
the person. Prithak, separately. 

12. (K 6 ) The good have this firm belief that He (Hari) is the crea¬ 

tor of all things. He produces every (material) object, as well as every 
centre of consciousness (Jiva) separately.—12. 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

“ The Creator of all things” in the above verse refers to Hari, for He alone is un¬ 
doubtedly the Creator. The good have this belief, but those who are evil have a contrary 
belief. “ Prana ” in the above means the supreme Narayana, because He is the leader 
(pranetpi) of all. 

KArikA-Verse 7 . 

msr ^q(d 11 vs n 

Vibhutim, the modification, different (vi) transformation or exist¬ 
ences (bhavana) of Visnn, such as Mahat, &c. 'Tliey say Brahman itself be¬ 
comes modified into objects. Prasavam, the origin, the creation, the 

source of the world. Tu, but, Anye, others. Manyante, think. 

Spsti-chintakah, creation-thinkers: those who have the conceit 
that they are expert in the knowledge of cosmogony : such as the followers of 
Bhaskara. ^ 5 T-*Tr 3 T*^^Tr Svapna-maya-svarupa, dream-illusion-like: as is the 
creation of objects of dream, or as the objects of illusion created by a hypnotist 
(aiudrajalika-maya-sadrisa). Sristili, creation. Anyaih, by others, 

such as the followers of Maya-vada, the crypto-Buddhists, Vikalpita, 

imagined, not real. 

13. (K 7 ). Some thinkers (the pantheists or parinam-vadins) are 

of opinion that the creation proceeds from the transformations of Visnn, 
others (the Idealists—vivarta and mayavadins) think that the creation is 
like unto a dream or an illusion (with no reality in it). —13. 

[Note. —If Is vara, the Unchangeable, modifies himself as creation, then he becomes 
something inferior. So the first view cannot be correct. The second view is open to the 
objection, why should the Almighty resort to illusion. “A hypnotist who cannot produce 3 



294 MANOUK A-UPANIS AD. 


real object, creates the illusion of an object. Moreover, the Lord who is always Omni¬ 
scient, can have no dreams—His knowledge is always valid and is subject to no sublation.] 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Both the learned and the ignorant propound various theories as to creation. Some 
say Yisnu himself gets modified or transformed into the various objects such as ether, air, 
Ac. This becoming (bhuti) of diverse (vi) objects is called His vibhuti or transforma¬ 
tion. Only the seeming wise and not the truly wise,however,say so. Another class, equally 
ignorant, assert that the creation is unreal as a dream, or as an illusion created by an 
illusionist. 

KarikA-Verse 8 . 

srirn qqr it c h 

Ichchamatram, mere will. rjdT: Prabhoh. of the Lord Hari. 
Sristih, creation, ffd 11i, thus. Sristau, in creation. Vinischitah, 

ascertained, the conclusion of true sages, like Brahma, Ac., and such they teach. 

14. (K 9 ). The creation of tlie world by the Lord is through His 

mere will. This is the conclusion arrived at (by true sages).—14. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

All true sages like Brahma and the rest declare that the [entire universe proceeds 
from the mere will of the Unchanging, All-Intelligence—the Lord Ilari. Why should the 
All-Powerful have recourse to illusion (like a juggler), and why the All-Knowing should 
dream a false universe, (as think the mayaviidins)? How can the Lord free from all faults 
become modified into various imperfect objects (as think the Bhiiskaras)? Therefore this 
universe is created by the mere will of Yisnu, who is free from all modifications. The 
teaching of the entire Yedas is that the creation is real. 

[Note ,—The word spj is derived from y/bhu with the affix pm. He who exists (bhavati) 
in the same excellent (pra) form is prabhu—i.c., who is above all vikaras. This sets aside 
parinamaviida which supposes the Brahman to undergo all modifications in the shape of 
objects. This is one meaning. The second meaning of prabhu is “lie who lias power 
(prabhavati) to do all the Almighty. This sets aside the illusion theory—for the 
weak man only rests contented with producing illusion, as he cannot create the real object. 
The third meaning of prabhu is, “lie who knows (anubhavati) in the highest (pra) 
degree”—the Omniscient. This sets aside the mayavada. The Lord being All-knowing 
cannot have mayft or nescience. Thus by using one vord prabhu, all the three erroneous 
theories have been set aside.] 

K ArikA-Verse 8 .—(continued). 

^Ri triR h ii 

cFpjTHt Lalat, from time. shjkt Prasutim, birth, origin, Bhutanam, 

of beings. Manyante, think. Kala-chintakah, time-thinkers, 

those who think that the time is the highest. This is illustrative of others 
also. Some think Brahma to be the creator ; some call Pradhana or Nature 
the creator, Ac., and so on, 

14. (K 9 ). The thinkers about Time are of opinion that Time is the 

origin of all beings.—14. 






/ KIIANT)A, 15. 


295 


[Note. —If the creation proceeds from the mere will of God, what is His object in creat¬ 
ing f If He creates with some object for His own satisfaction then he is not full ; if He 
creates without any such desire, then His action is motiveless. This objection is raised 
and answered next.] 

Karika-Verse 9 . 

|| Wf II || 

Bhogartham, for the sake of enjoyment. Rpj: Sristill, creation 
Iti thus, gspj Anye, seme. Kridartham, for the sake of sport. ^ Iti, 

thus. ^ Cha, and. A pa re, others. Devasya, of God. fTq- Esa, this. 

Svabhavah, nature, Ayam, this. Apta-Kamasya, of the 

attained-all-desires. Ka, what. Spriha, object, dcsiie. 

15. (K 9 ) Some think that the creation is for the sake of enjoy¬ 

ment (of the Creator), while others think that it is for the sake of recreation, 
(to shake off the lethargy of pralaya sleep or the ennui of the solitude of 
pralaya). This (act of creation) of God is Ilis nature (without any motive). 

What motive there can be for one who has all His desires satisfied ?—15. 

[Note.— The Lord does not want this creation for His enjoyment, so the question of 
blioga goes ont. Then remains krida or sport. The Ramanujas hold that the Lord creates 
for the sake of recreation, to shake off the lethargy or ennui of pralaya. The siddhanta 
view, however, is that creation is no doubt a lila or sport of the Lord, blit with no such 
object or motive, as the Ramanujas imagine. For Hari is Apta-Kama—whose desires are 
all fulfilled, so he can have no such inclination. However though the Lord has no object 
of Ilis own to be gained by creation, He creates for the sake of others—to make jivas per¬ 
fect. As says the commentator .Srinivasatatha cha Bhagavat sristeh sva prayojana- 
bhavepi paraprayojanapeksatvam asty eva.] 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Some men of little learning say that this creation proceeds from Time. Some say it 
is from Rudra, some say from Brahma, while others say it is from Pradhana. All these are 
deluded verily; because Narayana, the Supreme, is the creator of all and possessed of all 
power. He is the one creator alone, and no one else. The Pradhana (Nature), Time, Brah¬ 
ma, or Rudra and others below them in rank, are all under the command of the Lord (and 
create under His control). Some not very intelligent persons think that Yisnn had some 
desires loft unsatisfied, therefore, He creates (in order to attain the fullness of his being). 
But the wise say the creation is for the sake of sport only, but a sport which is His nature 
(and not for the sake of throwing off laziness). For how can the Lord who wants nothing 
have any wants ? The above is so stated in Harivamsa. 





Second Iyhanda. 

0 

Mantra i. 


HTirDSfr' 3 3 airresrc 3 nir‘ ?uafrn i 

Jm>%T*75W All r d 

*T ^TTrUr 53 fefT*P || VS || 


7 { Na, not. ^rfiP’^r Antah-prajnam, Inner-Revealer, the manifesto!* of 
inner or subtle objects, i.e. f the Taijasa, the maker of inner consciousness when 
He is not the maker of dream conditions of consciousness, and not showing 
dream object. Fie is Nantaprajnah. t\ Na, not. Vahisprajnam, the 

revealer of the external; the revealer of the objects of the waking state, i.e. t 
the Visva. The outer consciousness. When not functioning as the maker of 
the waking state and showing external objects, He is called na-vahisprajna. ?r 
Na, not. Ubhayatah, the intermediate, the both, i.e. t the state of partak¬ 

ing both of waking and dreaming—the reverie or somnambulism, Prajnam, 
the revealer, the manifestor. Na, not. Prajnanaghanam, gbana-praj- 

nanam, the revealer of ghana or Nescience. Ghana is the jiva itself when covered 
by unconsciousness, in the state of deep sleep. ^ Na, not. Prajnam, the 
trance or samprajnata Samadhi. When he does not produce the samprajnata 
Samadhi even. That which is made known exceedingly (prakarsena jnapayati) 
is prajha, a vivid thought picture or object of meditation. ?T Na, not. Ap- 

rajham, the non-giver of knowledge. The Turiya is not entirely a non-giver of 
knowledge. He also gives a kind of knowledge. When Fie is not the non¬ 
giver, /.<?., when he is the, giver of knowledge to the souls, who have thrown 
off their final body and ai c going towards mukti. Adristam, invisible 

(to ordinary people, but visible to the muktas) who have received the grace of 
the chief Prana —the First Begotten. Avyavaharyam, not empirical, 

not perceptible, transcendental, cannot he an object of experience in Samsara, 
but in Mukti only, Agrahyam, not seizablc. Alaksnam, not 

having dharmas like the Visva, &c , incapable ol infeientinl proof. Not possess¬ 
ing the, attributes of vyapti or inferential knowledge like Visva, Taijasa or 
Prajha, in waking, dreaming, and deep sleep. In all these states there is a 
standard by which one can know Him, but not so the Turiya. Achint- 

yam, beyond thought, that about which one cannot reason. Avyapa- 

desyam, undefinable. trqpt Eka, one or supreme. Because Fie is the chief, 
therefore one. ^rr^T Atmya, self, He is full, therefore called atma or full 'Hie 
essential nature of the Lord is Supremacy and Fullness, therefore it is called 
nikatmyam. spqq Pratyaya, belief or knowledge ; whose form is knowledge. 
mi* Saram, bliss or anandam. The Supreme (eka) fulness (fit inn) 

whose form is knowledge (Pratyaya) and bliss (sara), the One Infinity, means 
knowledge and bliss. n’q>=qr ( T^PPf Prapanchopasamaiii. Fite word prapancha, 

* spread out through gunas.’ The word upagama means that whose essential 





IT KII AND Ay 1. 


207 


form is most excellent bliss The highest (upa) bliss (sama) spread through¬ 
out (prapancha) = Visnu, or the all-pervading (prapancha) highest bliss. That 
which destroys (upasama) all evils (prapqncha.) The word upa like lit means 
most excellent, and sama means bliss, upagama, the most excellent bliss. Pra¬ 
paheha—all-full. Santam, peaceful. Sivam, auspicious. Free from 

sorrow and full of joy, the personification of bliss, the joyous, Advaitam, 

erroneous knowledge of a thing is dvaita. The destroyer of dvaita or of false 
knowledge is advaita. This .qualifies Pi ajha also. The meaning of ft or two 
is to denote more than one. i.e. t the essential nature of a thing is called one % 
the non-essential is called tivo. Chatui tliam, the fourth. Manyante, 

they believe or think. Sail, He, having the four-told form of Visva, &c. 

Atma. self. The Lord, of whom it was said in verse 2, that He has four parts ; 
so ayam atma chatuspat, that atman is this. Sail, He, the fourfold. 
Vijneyah, to be known. All the four should be known not only Turiva. 

J. (U a ) When He does not produce the state of dream, nor the 
state of waking, nor the somnambulistic state, ( i.e , not active as Yiava and 
Taijasa), nor the deep sleep state, nor the samprajmita samadlii state, 
when He gives the final knowledge (to the souls that have thrown off 
theii last body and are proceeding towards Release), who is the Invisible, 
the Transcendental, Unseizable, Uninferable, Inconceivable by reasoning, 
Undefinable, the Single Infinity, Knowledge and Bliss, the Destroyer 
of the five-fold bodily bonds, the Peaceful, the Joyous tiie Destroyer of 
false knowledge, He is called the Fourth. Thus is the Atman, the four¬ 
fold. He, the four-fold, must be known.—10. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY: 

Visnu, in the form of Turiva, resides in the space at the end of the twelve. The 
Muktas only know this form of the Lord ; it is not seen by men leading the ordinary 
empirical life of saiiisara. They whose mind is completely concentrated in the Lord, who 
have reached the sixteenth kala and obtained His grace, and who are seers of the aparoksa 
get sometime the vision of this High Goal. 

[Vote.—Dvadas ante—at the end of the twelve—means the open space which is twelve 
fingers above the head. (The aura generally extends so far—therefore, it means outside 
the physical body but within the aura). Or it may mean a point within the brain which 
is twelve lingers from the root of the nose. (May it not refer to the pineal gland ? or 
the pituitary body?) This is the fourth seat of Visnu in the human body. The sixteenth 
kala is the name of the chief life, the First-born, the Mukhya Prana. The grace of this 
Mnkhya Prana is a necessary condition for obtaining Divine Vision or aparoksa. See 
Pr. Up., VI. for the sixteen kalas. The aparoksa is dependent upon the grace of the 
First-begotten.] 

Tho word ekatmya-pratyaya-saram means that He is one (cka), i.e., the Chief, He is 
the atman or full. His form or nature is the Principal All-fullness (eka-atmya) : therefore 
lie is called ekatmya. He is pratyaya or knowledge. He whose form is knowledge is 
called pratyaya. He is Sara or bliss. The whole phrase ckatinya-pratyaya-saram there¬ 
for means ‘the One Infinity, knowledge and bliss. ’ ^ The phrase prapancha-upasama 
means the All-pervading Visnu whose form is the highest bliss: for prapancha means 



298 


MANDUKA-UPAKISAD. 


‘ spread out/ ‘all-pervading, ’ &c. Upa means highest, and Kama means blissful. Or it may 
mean 4 Visnu, the destroyer of bonds’: for prapaficha means 4 bodily bonds, ’ upa-sama 
‘ the destroyer ; for the Lord Turiya destroys all bonds and gives Mnkti. The Turiya 
is called bivam, because He is free from all'sorrows and is essentially all-joy : and this is 
the sense in which the word biva is used in the Scriptures. The Turiaui is called 
advaitam for the following reason as given in the lUahatmyam : — 

“ h, mistaken notion is called ‘dvaita,’ and as Uari, the Turiya, the Highest Person, 
destroys this misconception (by imparting true knowledge or by giving Mukti) He is 
called advaitam, the destroyer of false knowledge.” 

According to Sankalpa, the word Dvaita is thus derived :— 

“ To the ^ ‘ to know,’ is added the atlix ^ kta, and we get meaning ‘ known,’ 
‘knowledge, ’ = ‘ double knowledge ’—knowledge of a thing not as it is, but 

contrary to it: (just as ‘duplicity’ is opposed to ‘simplicity’), knowledge obtained 
not by the simple and single method, but by a second or a false method.” 

Thus D vitam means “known by a circuitous or second-hand method. ” To this 

is added the allix^nr without change of sense tsvarlha), and we get dvaitam. 

The word antar-praj/ia means knowledge (or consciousness) of internal impressions 
(as in dreams) ; lkihi-prajfia means consciousness of external objects: prajnana-ghana 
means deep sleep, prajila means the state midway between waking and dreaming, when 
the jiva perceives external sounds, &c., but dreams dreams as well (somnambulistic state?) 
'When the Lord produces none of these five states of consciousness in the jiva, that form 
of the unborn Lord is called Turiya. In this form He produces none of the above kinds 
of states in the jivas : but lie is the giver of all knowledge, in that Turiya form, to the 
Released Souls (according to their capacities). The above is from the IJrahinantla Purana. 

The Turiya is called invisible, because the noil-free souls cannot see Him, and He 
is not visible except through the grace of the sixteenth (the Chief Life), lie is called 
transcendental (avyavaharyam) because lie does not come within the sphere of sense 
perception unless one get Release (for the Lord is perceived then by the Free Souls). 
The word agrahyam (unseizable) has the same sense as avyavaharyam (transcendental). 
The word alaksaiiam means that which cannot be ail object of inference. The Yisva, 
Taijasa or Prajfia can be inferred or measured; but the Turiya is without such mark: 
and because He is alaksaiiam, therefore, He is beyond thought (achintyam or above 
reasoning). (Localise He cannot be reasoned about) therefore, lie is umlclinablo ; except 
by one mark, namely, chidananda—He is consciousness and bliss. The Turiya is the cause 
of all the activities of the Released Soul. (The Turiya is thus possessed of a laksanam, 
but for the y\ uktas only.) 

The phrase “ sa atma sa vijiicya” does not mean that the Turiya alone is the Self, 
lie alone.is to be known, but that the Atman, of which it was premised in the beginning 
“soyam atina chatuspat “ this atman has four-feet ” has now been described in its 
four-fold divisions. The repetition of “ sa atma ” here is to mark the conclusion, as its 
use in the second verse marked the beginning. The description of the chatuspat Atman 
ends here. Because the next section commences a separate description of it, as regards 
its four-syllables or the aksara or Imperishable atman, the adliyaksaram, by using tho 
phrase “so ’ vain atm a adliyaksaram. ” Thus wo read in the Pratyuya :— 

“ The seekers of Release should know the Atman having the four-fold form of Yisva, 
Taijasa, See.: for though He is without qualifications or divisions, yet the Lord is des¬ 
cribed as having these l'onr-fold forms. ” 

[Sole, —The phrase “ sa atmasa vijhcyah,” marks the conclusion of tho topic started 
by tho phrase “ so ’ yam atma chatuspat. ” The phrase “ so * yam atina adhyaksara ” of the 
next verse starts a new topic, showiug how the syllables of Om correspond with Yisva, 






11 KII AND A, o. 


299 


&c. The first section closeribos'the four-folcl aspect of the Lord, so that the Mumuksu 
by meditating oil Him may get Mukli: the next topic has a different object in view. 
Moreover, the phrase “sa a trail savijnesah ” dops not mean that the Tnriya alone should 
be known, He alone is the atraan : but it applies to all the four, namely, to Yisva, Taijasa, 
&cj 

K A RIKA Verses. 2. 

Atra (on this) ete., (these) slokali (verses) bhavanti are. 
On this are the following verses : 

Fff%: Harare: | 

rag; n \o \\ 

: Nivritteh, on the cessation. Sarva-duhkhanam, of all 

sorrows. The Lord Turiya having brought about the cessation of all sorrows. 
fsaPH Isanah, the life ( 3 R: impeller) of the muktas (fxnA; the controller 

of the perfect ones, who have reached lordliness. qg: Prabhuli, the Lord, the 
cause. Avyayah the unchanging. Advaitah, the destroyer of 

false knowledge. *R->*RRr Sarva-bbavanam, of all jivas or thinkei s. Bhava 
means thejiva because it conies into being (bhava) or manifestation by enter¬ 
ing into a body. That which comes or exists (bhavati) through the Lord, *>., 
a being is called bhava. Or v /bhu, ‘ to think,’ bhava, a thinker. gg: Devah, the goal, 
derived froniy/div, ‘to go.' The goal of all jivas. gq: Turyali, the Turiya. fgvp 
Vibliuh, all- pervading, capable. Smritah, is declared. 

2. (K 10 ) The all-pervading Turiya is said to be the goal of all 

thinkers, when all their sorrows cease (and they get nmkti). lie is 
the controller of the released souls, and is unchanging and the destroyer 
of false knowledge.—17. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The cause of the cessation of all sorrows is the Lord Turiya. Thus says the Pratya- 
hara:—“ Hari in the form of Turiya is declared to bo the giver of salvation. Ho is the 
(deva) goal of all jivas, because towards Him all go. The jivas arc called bhcwu, because 
they come into existence (bhavanti) from the Lord. He is called Is ana, because lie is the 
anana or controller of Isas muktas.” 

Kar ikA- Verses 3. 

!TTfr : g[T rj %^TcT« || U II 

ekr Karya, effect, illusion, the waking state, because it is the effect of 
nescience, by which one gets the false notion of ‘ I y and ‘mine/ Karya-baddha 
would thus mean bound by the idea of T and ‘mine.’ Karana, cause, avidya. 

Baddhau, bound by the chain of cause and effect—existing in the sphere of 
causation. The Lord as Visva and Taijas binds the jivas in the chain of 
cause and effect. Tau, the two. f^r-i^THr Visva-Taijasau, the Visva and 
Taijasa. gsqg Isyate, are desired, are said to be. Prajnah, the p raj ha. SFilW 

Karana, the cause, to** Baddhah, bound. g Tu, but. fr Dvau, the two. gq. 
Turye, in the Turiya. Na sidhyatah, are not valid, do not exist. 

39 







300 


mAnouka-upanisad. 


3. (K* 1 ) Both Visva and Taijasaare held to he bound by cause 

and effect both, Prajna is bound bv the chain of cause alone, but neither 
cause nor effect has any validity in Turiya—18. 

MADHVA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Lord as Visva and Prajna is said in the Scriptures to he bound, by which it is 
meant that the bondage of the jivas in the chain of cause and effect is under His will and 
control. For how this Supreme can ever be bound ? He by whose command everything 
else is bound, He who is the Lord of bondage, the Self of knowledge cannot be bound. As 
says the Kausarava Sruti : The phrases—“ He is bound, He is sorrowful ” when applied to 
Hari mean He causes the bondage, He causes sorrow (to the sinner). So also the phrases 
“ He is Jiva, He is prakriti,” mean, “ He causes animation or jivahood (Jivayati). He fashions 
the world (prakaroti).” So also the phrases “ He is the inferior, he is non-eternal,” mean 
“He makes others inferior, He makes them temporal.” 

The same idea is conveyed by the following speech of the goddess of learning, Sara- 
svati, addressed to the Devas in Mahopanisad O Mighty Devas ! my duty ever is to 
proclaim the glory of Visnu (in songs and poetry) and when I sing out the praises of others 
like Brahma, tfcc., that also refers to Visnu, for they derive their glory from Him. But if 
anything be found anywhere apparently derogatory to Visnu, know that I could never have 
intended it, for I am called Sarasvati because I always flow (sarana) towards Him 
magnifying and proclaiming His gi’eatness and romove (sarana) all ideas derogatory to 
His glory. Therefore know that the scriptural phrases must be so interpreted as to 
redound to the glory of the Lord. 

Xotc. _In the waking state, the Lord as Visva produces double bondage in the jiva, 

first the universal bondage of avidya (the cause) and second the bondage of the effect 
of avidya, namely, the illusion of one being an independent agent, &c. Similarly, two-fold 
is the bondage in the dream state also. In deep sleep, Prajna causes only one bondage 
—the bondage of the Mfila avidya-the Universal Nescience, the cause. In the Turiya 
there is absence of both. This is tho state of lion-bondage, freedom. The very fact that 
the jiva awakens, from the deep sleep back to the world, shews that the seed or tho 
cause was latent in him, to bring him back to the world of effect. The Turiya is, therefore, 
the giver of wisdom and mukti. 

KarikA-Verse 4 . 

unr: 3$ 11 KR 11 

H TTlfRH Na atmanam, not the Self, His own form, the own form of l’rajiia. 
Prajna does not show llis own form, rt Na paran, not the others. Prajna 
docs not reveal to the jiva in deep sleep any other objects, except nescience 
or bliss and time and one’s own identity, xj itt Cha eva, and even. ^ Na 
satyam, not the truths, the virtuous deeds, the puuya. ^ m ^ Na api cha, and 
not even. Anritam, falsehood, the sin as opposed to virtue, nr?: Prajna 

the Lord as prajna. Kincha, whatever, H RTTxt Na samvctti=^R^m 

does not cause (the jiva) to know, gat Turyam, the turiya. RTS* Sarvadnk= 
Sarvam darsayati-shows everything (to the Muktas). Sada, always, for 

ever. 

4. (K. 1 *) Prajua shuts out from the jiva llis own form as well as 
other objects. Ho shows to it then neither the truth nor even the false- 






II KHANVA, 5. 


301 


hood. Nothing whatever is shown to it, On the other hand, the Turiya 
displays all objects eternally to the freed soul.—19. 

MADIIVA’S COMMENTARY. 

Prajna conceals everything from the soul. The Lord as Prajna reveals not to the 
jiva either His own form or those of others. He shows to the jiva neither truth nor 
untruth, except the Jiva’s own form, and Time and Tamas. (In deep sleep, the soul is 
conscious of its own existsnce, of Time and of Avidya or joy). In that state of deep sleep 
He shows nothing to the soul but joy). But the Turiya, the supreme Lord, reveals every¬ 
thing to the soul in Mukti. Thus we read in the Pratyaya. 

[The commentator Sri Madliva takes all these active verbs in a causative sense. 
He explains baddha (bound) by bandhaka (the binder, one who binds) : samvetti (who 
perceives) by samvedayati (causes another to perceive), Sarva-drik (seer of all) by sarva- 
pradarsayita (the revealer of all). Why should these active forms be construed as 
eausative ? To this he answers by the following quotation from Brahmatarka.] In the 
Brahma-tarka we read“ The word agent or grammatical karta is defined to be sva- 
tantra-karta—that which is independent with regard to an action is called agent; 
(therefore karta always applies to the Chief agent. In the Upanisad the ehief agent is 
the Lord.) Therefore Prajna is the ehief agent in the act of unconsciousness—namely, he 
causes or produces unconsciousness in everything else. (Prajna has therefore alone 
freedom or independence in the act of producing unconsciousness). Similarly with regard 
to the act of showing others, the chief agent is the Turiya—therefore Turiya is the karta 
of the action of revealing everything to others. Thus from the very fact that Brahman 
is the highest agent, it follows that these verbs here must be construed in a causative 
sense.. M 

KarikA Verse 5 . 

IrTwmfw 1 

sfrsr wsugcn stnr? m ^ * f^ref \\\\ \\ 

Dvaitasya, the duality, the false notion that the bodies. &c., are 
independent of the Lo^d. Agrahanam, non-acceptance, non-perception. 

Tulyam, equal, Prajna-turyayoh, of Prajna and Turiya. Those 

who have reached the Prajna or the Turiya Brahman have this point in 
common, that both have discarded the illusion or dvaita or the notion of being in¬ 
dependent agents or that they and their bodies are not under the control of 
the Lord. The souls here never fall into the delusion of free-will. ^fnr-PRn-gri: 
Bija-nidra-yutah Prajnah = seed-sleep accompanied (is) Prajna, />., associated 
with the seed or root of sleep or ignorance : the mula avidyA. Prajna is always 
associated with this Root Nescience. As He is the Lord of this Mula avidya 
called also the Bija-nidra, He is said to be joined (Yuta) with her : as we say 
bhritya-vutah svami, the master accompanied by the servant. Hr ^ Sacha, 
but she. Turye, in the Turiya. h Na vidyate, does not exist. 

5. (K |3 ) The jivas who have reached the Prajna or the Turiya 
are both equal in so far as they have risen above the illusion of duality 
(which consists in thinking that they are independet of the Lord). (The 
difference, however, between them is) that those in Prajna are covered by 
the Primeval Nescience, but not so those who are in Turiya. 20. 






302 


MANDUKA-UPANISAD. 


MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

Yisva and the rest are said to be joined (yutah), with sleep ; because she (the Sleep- 
Primeval Nescience) is under the Lord, and is Ilis handmaid, in these three states. The 
force of yutah here is the same as in the sentence bhritya-yutah Svami—the master joined 
with the servant, i.e., the master under whose control is the servant. The phrase nidra- 
yutah Prajnah dees not mean that the Lord Prajna is overpowered by the Sleep or Nes¬ 
cience for there can never be want of knowledge, in the case of the Supreme Self. 

Note.—The Nidra or Mula Avidya is the associate of the Lord in three states 
of Visva, Taijasa and Prajna. He works through Her in those states. 

Though these four forms of the Lord arc identical, yet Brahman is said to do a thing 
in a certain form, and not to do a thing in another form, from the point of view of practical 
reality, and according to the particular power that He wields for the time being. The 
different aspects of Brahman are identical (abheda) yet as different sets of activities 
appertain to different forms, they are said to be different. (Therefore i t is said that as 
Turiya He does not do something which He docs as Yisva, &e. It only means that some 
particular powers are used in one form and not used in another form). 

(The word Sarva-drik has been explained as ‘ He who shows all ” and not as “He who 
sees all,” though both would be appropriate epithets of the Lord. The objection, however, 
to the second meaning is as follows : — 

If the word sarva-drik in not construed as a causative and is not interpreted as 
‘ llo causes the perception of all’ then Sarva-drik must be interpreted as “He secs all” 
and not “He shows all.” This would go against the statement that in Prajna and Turiya 
the non-acceptance of dvaita is the common ground. (For then the pharsc turiyam 
Sarvadrik would mean the Turiya is omniscient and sees everything. What is then 
the force of saying that the Turiya does not see (grahana) the duality : for by the very 
fact of llis seeing all lie would see tho dvaita also, and know it to be an illusion. Sarva- 
drik, therefore, must mean “ shows all ” and not “sees all ”). 

K Arika Verse G. 

* Hsu fir fp II If 

Svapna, dream ; the illusion in the form of effect. The waking state 
is also dream in this sense. Nidra, sleep, the avidya or nescience, gjfjf 

Yutau, joined. Associated with ‘ dream’ and‘sleep.’ Adyau, first two, 

namely,.the Visva and the Taijas. They are associated with both the illusion of 
the phenomenal, and the great Ignorance: in other words with the ” effect and the 
cause. ” ot^: Prajnah, the Prajna. g Tu, but. Asvapnah, without ‘ dream’: 

the illusion of “ effect. ” Nidraya, by sleep (in which there is no dream). 

The Prajna is associated with the ‘ cause’ alone and free from the two-fold 
delusion called ‘dream’ and ‘sleep’, n Na Nidram, neither sleep. q? 
^ Na eva cha, nor even, wf Svapnam, the dream, gq Turye, in the Turiya. 
TOTR Pasyanti, see. fdPffrH': Niscliitah, the persons who have known the real¬ 
ity. They who have thrown off the bond of the “ cause ” and the “ effect.” 

G. (K. 1 *) The first two are accompanied by dream and sleep, the 
Prfijfia (is associated) with sleep without dream. The wise perceive 
neither dream nor sleep in the Ttiriya.— 21. 





II RUANDA , 7. 


303 


Karika-Vf.rse, 7 . 

3TT-4T ^irfr H^yTO^Rcr: I 

rrm: sfnn q^in-gct 11 II 

^ppTT Anyatha, contrary, wrongly ; thinking that this body, house, See., be¬ 
long to him and not to the Lord, Gi ihnatali, of the person accepting or 

comprehending or perceiving, />., perceiving the tattva or reality wrongly is 
‘ dream ’ technically so called.-* Svapnali, dream. The word is used here 
to include both the waking and the dream. The wrong notion of independent 
ownership of body, etc. H?f Nidra, sleep or avidya—the Great Nescience, the 
mother of all illusion. l'attvam, the Reality, the Lord. Not perceiving 

the reality at all is sleep. The real truth about the Lord, that He is independ¬ 
ent. Ajanatah, of not knowing. frqwH - Viparyase, inverted knowledge, 

error or mistake, viparyase ksine when inversion is removed. The constant rota¬ 
tion or revolution is also viparyasa. cHtf: b a 3 7 °ib of these two. Ksine, in the 
destruction, when destroyed: when exhaustion takes place of viparyasa or error, 
gfiq Tuny am, Turiyam. Padam, the goal, Agnute, reaches, attains. 

7. (K 15 ) The word svapna or dream is applied to the wrong no¬ 

tion (such as that one lias independent ownership over his possessions 
and that they are not Lord’s); the word nidra or sleep means the wrong 
conception of truth regarding the attributes of the Lord, such as that He 
is not independent, &c . When the constant rotation of these two wrong 
notions becomes exhausted and ceases, then the Soul attains the goal 
of Turiya.—22. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Prajiia and Turiya do not both cause the imposition of dvaita on the jiva. In 
this both are equal. The Turiya docs not impose dvaita on the jiva, nor does Prajiia also 
cause it—but Prajiia has under Him the Sleep which has latent in her the power of impos¬ 
ing dvaita on the jiva. This is the sense of the Scriptures. From one wrong knowledge 
arises another wrong knowledge, the error has a tendency to reproduce itself. (Thus a 
wrong notion of a person’s entertaining in his waking state that he is an independent 
agent reproduces itself in dream, when he also thinks himself to he an independent agent, 
but with regard to objects which are merely revived impressions of the objects perceived 
in the waking state and which the dreamer mistakes for real objects. The next verse 
describes how this eternal circle of wrong notions may cease.) 

Note.— (The jiva attains the Turiya the goal when both sorts of imperfections are 
destroyed—that of the waking and dream in which the soul takes something unreal to be 
real; and that of the deep sleep in which the true Reality is not known.) 

Note. — One perceives wrongly on account of the ignorance of the true nature of 
things. In the waking state men have the false notion of ‘ I,* ‘ Mine,’ etc., and that they 
have free will, &c. That state is, therefore, also a dream metaphorically. In the dream state 
truly so called, this false notion becomes still more erroneous and is applied to the revived 
false impressions of the waking state and the dreamer takes them as real as waking. In 
the deep sleep, there is total ignorance, perception of nothing. When the soul transcends 
both these imperfections, then the Turiya is reached. 



304 


MANVUKA-UPANISAD. 


The waking and dream are perceiving of inverted (viparyasa) images of reality, as 
one sees the inverted image of a landscape in a photogrphie camera. The deep sleep is 
the focal point from which commences tlijs inversion. One must transcend the lens of 
Avidya to see the landscape properly. So long as one is within the camera, under the 
Great Cause, the ‘lensthe mother of all inversions, he can never see a right picture. 
The camera or Samsara must be left, the Avidya lens must be transcended, to see the 
reality : there must be the turning over (viparyasa) of the inverted image in order to see 
it rightly. 

Note.— From a wrong perception of reality arises ‘ dream from non-perception of 
it, ‘ Sleep.’ When the inversion arising from these two causes is removed, then (the Soul) 
reaches the Turiya goal. 

KArika-verse S. 

?Rrr* i 

cr^r ii K%\\ 

^11^ Anadi, beginning-less. Visnumaya is called beginning-less be¬ 
cause belonging to the time-less Visnu. Ma}'aya, b}’ the power, by the 

Will : by the Prakriti, as being under the will of Visnu The word Maya 
means the will of the Lord, and the Avidaya who is dependent on Him. 

Suptah (Svapitah), sent to sleep : immersed in the samsara. Yada, when. 

Jivah, the soul, the individual self. Prabuddhyate, awakens, gets 

wisdom through (the will of God and His grace and the instruction given by a 
True Master.) Hears the truth that the Lord alone is Independent, every¬ 
thing else is dependent on him. Tada, then. ^ Ajnm, the Unborn, free 
from the faults of birth, decay, &c. Anidram, the non-sleeping, free from 

Nescienee. Asvapnam, the non-dreaming, beyond the waking and the 

dreaming states—free from delusion. Free from the activities of Visva, Taijasa 
and Prajha forms. Advaitam, giver of freedom from wrong knowledge, or 

the remover of false notions, and of all evils. Buddhyate, understands 

or knows immediately (aparoksa), then arises the direct, intuitive, immediate 
knowledge of God. 

8. (K 16 ) When the jlva awakens from the sleep, in which it was 
plunged by the eternal will of the Beginning-less Lord, then he gets the 
direct vision of the Lord who is without birth, without ignorance, without 
delusion and who removes all wrong knowledge.—23. 

MADIIYA’S COMMENTARY. 

When the jiva, sent to sleep by the Maya or Will of the Anadi or the Beginning-less 
Visnu, is awakened by the grace of that will, then it sees Visnu. Thus we read in the 
Prakasikn. (Understanding the Advaitam means seeing Visnu). 

Karika-Verse 9 . 

^ cT H^TrT * I 

n h 

! 7 q>^: Prapanchah, the pentad, the world, the false notion of “ 1 ” and 
u mine,” a notion that depends upon the mistaken relationship of self and owner¬ 
ship. The false noti >n of the jiva arising from pot distinguishing himself from 





II KIIANDA , 10. 


305 


his body and bodily relations. The notion of the jiva that he is the owner, 
and that his body, house, &c., are his possessions is prapaheha. Yadi, if. 

Vidyeta, exists, viz., if it exists, because the soul has put itself as if it was 
independent of the control of the Lord. If this false notion or prapancha exist 
even dependent upon another. If it be assumed, for argument’s sake, that this 
prapancha has an existence, though dependent. Nivarteta, will cease, 

(when the knowledge of the Lord is gained). ^ stcr: Na Samsayah, undoubt¬ 
edly. Maya, will of God. Matram = cieated : merely created by the will 

of God. Idam, this, Dvaitam, the false notion of the ignorant people. 
Advaitam, the true Brahman. The one. Paramarthatah, of the 

Highest end, the supreme. The affix tas ” has the force of genitive. From 
the grace of the Great End — the Lord. 

9. (K 17 ) Even if the false worldly notion (of “1” and “mine”) 

really exist, it would cease undoubtedly when the Lord so wills it. For the 
false notion regarding the one Lord would, in this view, be created by the 
will of the Lord, and cease when He wills otherwise.—24. 

Mote. — If this prapancha—the notion of “I ” and “ mine, ” “ own” and “ ownership” — 
were the essential nature of the jiva or soul, then it would never eeasc, even through the 
grace of God, for the essential attribute cannot be destroyed without destroying the thing. 
It follows, therefore, that the prapancha or the pentad or the pentuple body of the soul, 
the five permanent atoms do not constitute the essential nature of the soul, the jiva takes 
them up through abhimana or false identification with them : and it is under the will of 
the Lord, and consequently when there is His grace, and He wills that this false identifica¬ 
tion should cease and true knowledge arise, it ceases to exist. Therefore the lvarika says 
that if it be admitted that this prapancha exists only because the jiva has not the right 
knowledge, then it would come to an end when the true knowledge of God is obtained. Fer 
this mistaken notion or prapancha or dvaita arises from the mere will of the Great Being — 
the One, the Advaita. The wise know the Lord as One and Advaita, but the ignorant break 
up His unity and think of Him as a plurality. Since the prapancha arises from the will 
of the Lord, it ceases also with regard to any particular jiva, if the Lord so wills it. 

This notion of the jiva that the body, &c., belong to him, has its root in the beginning¬ 
less time. Though this delusion is anadi yet it has an end. This delusion was created by 
the power of the Lord, by His Maya, and when He wills the contrary, it ceases. This is cv 
the assumption that this false knowledge has a real existence. As a matter of fact, it has 
no true existence. Ignorance is mere negation of knowledge. It is not a ‘ natural ’ object. 

K ArikA-Verse jo. 

reformer ^ i 

HTH |[cr || ?fcT || || 

Vikalpah, false knowledge, wrong notion ; perverse (vi) creation 
(kalpa). RnTOrT Vinivarteta, would cease. Kalpitah, created, imagined. 

3 ft Yadi, if, unreal. The word yadi here means the unreal, as explained in the 
Bhagavata, XI. Book. Kenachit, by some cause due to ignorance. 

Upadesat, through instruction (given by the Teacher or by the Lord) 







306 


MANDUKA-U PA NTS A D. 


after this arises bliss of Mukti. A yam, this, qi*: Vadalj, saying, conclu¬ 
sion. ^rif Jnate, on (Brahman) being known rightly. |?jf Dvaitam, the' false 
knowledge of “own” and “ ownership” q Na vidyate, does not exist, 
ffi? Id, thus. It closes the quotation which began with the words “On this are 
the following verses.” 

10. (K 18 ) Therefore, this false notion arises from some cause (due 

to ignorance), and so it is unreal, and would cease when instruction is 
imparted by a Teacher. This is the saying of the wise, that when the One 
is known, the Two ceases to exist—25. 

Note .—The false notion of “ 1 ” and “ mine,” when everything is really “Lord’s,” 
is the creation of some cause that has its root in ignorance. It is consequently 7, unreal, and 
so it can be destroyed through right knowledge and true instruction given by a teacher. 
When such knowledge is obtained, then arises the great bliss of Mukti. The perfects say 
that when the Brahman is known, the unreality ceases and bliss arises. 

The Yikalpa or wrong notion that the body, houses, &c., are mine and belonging to me 
is really not an idea that has any truth in it, it is not Svabhavika. But even, if any 7 one 
owing to ignorance or “ common sense” were to make it a svabhavika tiling, by thinking 
that it is a reality 7 , still even by proper instruction, given by T a teacher it would come to 
an end. For this is tlie saying of the wise q Pf?fq “ 0,1 knowing Brahman right¬ 

ly 7 , the false knowledge comes to an end.” These last verses have been taken also by 
Madhva to prove the reality of the World, in opposition to the theory of its being an illu¬ 
sion. 





Third I'Iiianda. 

Mantra i. 

qr^r *nqr qr^T ^rc sqra 

s^;rc ?:% ii c ii 

Sab, he. ^pqR Ayam, this, tsn^r A turn, The Lord, in the fourfold forms 
of Visva, Taijasa, &c. Adhyaksarani, that which surpasses (adhi) all, 

and is imperishable, tlie Supreme and Imperishable. gjrcfirc: Omkarah, desig¬ 
nated by Om : Om the Maker. The sound Om. stRrhtw Adhimatram, numerous 
(adhi), parts or matras ; whose parts are all infinite and excellent, and full (adhi). 
Whose every portion is an infinity, qr^r* Padah, portions, steps, aspects like Vigva 
&c. Jrr^r: Matrah, (are called) matras. r: Matrah, the matras or measures. 

Cha, and. qr^r* PadaJi, poitions. Akarah, the sound ^designating 

the Visva. LJkarah, the sound U, the name of Taijasa. Makarah, the 

sound M, the name of Prajna. fjd I ti, thus. 

1. (U d ) lie this Atman is the Supreme and Imperishable, and 
called Om. His every part is of surpassing excellence. His portions are 
called measures and His measures are portions. These are the syllable 
A, ^ U and ^ M.— 2G. 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

The word adhi-aksaram means lie who surpasses (adhi) all and is great in every res* 
pect, and wlio is Imperishable (aksara): Or the most Excellent and Imperishable. The 
word adhimatra means lie whose inatius or parts are excellent (adhi) ; or he whose every 
portion is ail infinity. (For every part of the initiate must be infinite). This Infinite is 
called Om : which is made up of three sounds, the sound ^ 3 and jj. He is called 
because he is symbolised by the letter i.e., is His name. 

Note .—This and the last khan:1a eulogise the Pranava. In the previous two kliandas 
have been shown the fourfold aspect of the Lord as Yisva, Taijasa, Prajna and Turiya 
and the four-fold syllables of Omkara, namely ^ 17 , and the nada. This Upanisad verse 
declares first the threefold Pranava, A. U. M. 

Mantra 2. 

vrafo q q*r 11 ii 

*TT*TftrRqR: Jagaritasthanah, waking place. Vaigvanarali, Vaigvana- 

ra. Akarah, designated by the sound A, which is the symbol of Vigva 

aspect of the Lord, Prathama, first. Matra, portion. Apt eh, 

because He brings (apavati or prapayati) all objects to the jivas, or He causes 
all jivas to grasp all objects in this state, therefore, it is a condition of apti or 
acquiring. Adimatvat. Having a beginning. The Vis'va has two 

beginnings. To reach the waking state from that of sleep, the Visva separates 

40 





308 


mAnduka-upanisad. 


from the Prajna. 'Thus the first beginning is Prajna. From dieam also it comes to 
waking so Taijasa is the second beginning, Va, or. ^RTR Apnoti, he obtains. 

S Ha, indeed % Vai, verily. Sarvan, all 3 TRR Kaman, objects of de¬ 

sire, through the grace of Visva, when released, ^nrt: Adih, first, Saviour, 
Visva, becomes the adi or saviour of such a person. ^ Cha, and. Bhava- 

ti, He becomes, q: Yah, who. it % Evam, this. ^ Veda, knows. 

2. (I 9 ) The Lord in waking state is called Vaisvanara and is 
designated by the latter ^ A, and this is His first part; for the word ftpti, 
the approacher, begins with ^ A, or because it has a beginning (adi). He 
verily attains all desires, and Visva becomes his Saviour who knows 
thus.—27. 

MADHYA’S COMM EXT AH Y. 

Conventionally the Visva is spoken of as the (Alpha or) and so it is called akara—• 
He whose symbol is gj. The Yaisvanara, which has already been described in the preceding 
mantras, as the first matra or aspect of the Lord (sec mantra 9) is again taught here and is 
symbolised by %f. The Visva is said to be adiman—“He that has a beginning ” —because 
Prajha and Taijasa precede it in manifestation. When waking from deep sleep (supti) the 
Visva separates from Prajha and so Prajha becomes its adi or beginning. Similarly, when 
waking from dream state, it separates from Taijasa. Thus 1 hose’two arc the beginning of 
visva. The word “adi” in the text also means that the Visva becomes the adi or saviour 
of the worshipper of ^. 

Note— Sometime a jiva suddenly awakes from deep sleep owing to being violently 
shaken or roused and does not pass through the intermediate stage of dream. Thus 
Prajha becomes the beginning of Visva. Similarly, the jiva, often as a general rule, arises 
from a dreaming condition to the waking state and so the Taijasa also becomes the adi or 
beginning of Visva, 

Two reasons arc given for the Visva being called namely, that ^ is the contracted 
form of cither “the Hringer,” or of “adi,” the Saviour. We can derive the noun 
the Bringer from the^^pr, ‘ to pervade ’ taken in a causative sense and adding the allix 
The derivation of ^ from ks problematic. 

Mantra 3. 

ru ^R^msr ssnpct f^#rqr urn srtcr - 51 ^ir- 

^shztr: Svapimstlianah, tlie place of dream, or the Lord presiding over 
svapna or dreams. Taijasah, Taijasa, the shining state, Ukarah, 

the letter U, having the name 511 The name of Taijasa is 31 rafter Hvitiya, 
second. *n<^r Matra, measure, letter, portion. SRiTR (Jtkarsat, drawing away 
from (the idea of body; and takes him to the region of stored up impressions 
or dreams). 'The cessation of external functions: and perception of dream ob¬ 
jects. Ubhayatvat, producing two-fold effects, />,, the stopping the per¬ 

ception of external things and causing the perception of internal dream objects. 

Va, or. LJtkarsati. excels. ^ Ha, indeed. % Vai, verily, ^tr^cTR 

Jnanasantatim, (through the) lines of knowledge. 'The current (santati) of 
knowledge is not broken. There is no gap in Ins consciousness, no break in 





II KHAKI)A, 4. 


300 


the flow of the stream of his knowledge. On attaining Release, he becomes one 
of the perfects in knowledge and wisdom, Samanah, balanced, through 

affection for all and freedom fiom faults, # he becomes an arbitrator among the 
Freed Souls : Judge. One who is equally inclined to both parties. Samana, com¬ 
mon. Or mana means pervading inside, samana=existing as a mana, i.e ., ex¬ 
isting in the midst of all Perfects and Freed Souls : as their harmoniser and 
moderator. ^ Cha, and. v|^ Bhavati, becomes. ^ Na, nor. Asya, in his, 
the knower of why the Taijasa is designated ^ || ^ Rule, family. 
Abrahmavit, a non-knower of Brahman Bhavati, takes birth. Yah, 

who. tt t Evam, thus. ^ Veda, knows. 

3. (U l0 ). The Lord of Dreams called Taijasa is designated by the 
syllable U ; it is the second aspect, lie is called 3 U because He draws 
in the jiva from the waking or outward state, in to the interior world ; or 
because He produces a two-fold elfect. He who thus understands the 
twofold reason for the Taijasa being called 3 U, attains an unbroken flow 
of consciousness and getting Mukti becomes one of the Ever-wise. * He 
becomes a moderator of all and a non-knower of Brahman is not born in 
his family.—-28. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word utkarsa means that which draws up the jiva towards himself by raising it 
from the false identification (abhimana) with the body. The Taijasa does so. He is called 
nbhaya or both, because He stops all external impressions and causes the perception of 
dream objects. The word samana means “ same,” i.e., lie becomes impartial to all ; every 
one looks up to him as to a moderator or a conciliator : (for he loves all and is free from all 
defects of partiality, &c\ 

Note .—The word madhyastha translated as a conciliator, arbitrator, may mean also 
‘one who is in the middle of all.’ 

Mantra. 4. 

OTlfr ^ 5 TT m- 

flcTRT ^ 11 \\ 11 

Susuptushanah, the Lordiof Deep Sleep, Prajnah, prajna. 
Markarah, is called rM. Tritiya, third. Maira, aspect. Ptr: Miteh, 

because it is Miti—He who carries within. Pi ajiia carries the jiva into the 
Atman, within the atman. Apiteh, because it is Apiti—He who destroys 

all consciousness of objects outside one’s self, Va, or. ffRffar Mi not i, mea¬ 
sures. He pervades with his rays of consciousness all objects and jivas, though 
atomic in size, knows all the objects that exist within the cosmic egg, but not 
those which are beyond it. Jivas are like suns, and know everything witlu'n 
the egg through their rays of consciousness, as the sun pervades everything 
through His rays. £ Ha, indeed. % Vai, verily. Idam, this, Sarvam, 

all. ^rqfrfar: Apitih, destroyer of the world of sorrow, &c. ^ Cha, and. Bha¬ 

vati, becomes. r: Yah, who. txR- Evam, thus. ^ Veda, knows. 




310 


MA yVCJXA-UPA NISAD. 


4. (U M ). The Prajfia, the Lord of deep sleep, is designated by the 
letter * M. This is the third aspect. He is called IT, because he is Miti 
or carrier of the Soul into the inmost • or because He is Apiti or destroyer 
of all external consciousness. Verily he prevades all and destroys all 
sorrow, who knows thus.—29. 

MADIIAVA’S COMMENTARY. 

The word comes from a root meaning “ carrying into the interior”! (By His 
embrace, He carries all jivas into Himself). 

(Having explained the above three Upanisad verses in his own words, Sri Madhva 
now quotes Brahma Tarka in support of his interpretation). 

We find in the Brahma Tarka the following “ The Lord is called adhyaksara because 
lie is greater than all, and is eternal, and since all the parts of the Lord are equally in¬ 
finite and full, He is called adliimatra (He whose every portion is an infinity). The word 
matra means part. The Yisuu is called Omkara, because he is symbolised )*y the syllable 
Ora. The first letter of Om, i.e., ^ suggests dpti, the Fetcher, because Yisva brings all 
objects to the jiva. It is also called beenuse it lias a beginning (adi), since Yisva 
arises either from Prajfia or Taijasa. Though the Lord is beginning-less, yet in this sense 
He is said to have a beginning. The worshipper of Yisva gets mukti consisting of the 
True Knowledge) and Bliss : and attains all objects of desires. The Lord of dream called 
Taijasa is symbolised by because this letter suggests utkarsa, namely, He who with¬ 
draws the jiva from all objects except the mind : or because it recalls the world ubhaya, 
namely, lie who produces a two-fold cficot, i.e., withdraws the jiva from external contacts 
and revives all mental or internal impressions. He is called utkarsa because He with- 
dmics(iuldhritya) jiva from the misconception of identifying itself with the body and draws 
it (karsati) to the sphere of dreams (which is nearer the self than the external world). 
This is the idea latent in the word utkarsa when applied to Taijasa. He who knows Tai¬ 
jasa thus, gets eternal wisdom, by separating himself from his body and there is no break 
in his knowledge ; such a person becomes as an arbitrator or moderator or madhyastlia 
or remaining in middle among the Mukta jivas even, because of tlic intensity of his 
love for all and freedom from all faults of partiality, &c. The Prajfia is called Miti, because 
He makes jivas entry into Himself, for indmun means making a thing lo enter within. Prfij- 
fia is called man am because He draws in the jivas within Himself, and overpowers their 
consciousness, lie is called Apiti also because He destroys all sorrows. The knower of 
Prfijfia likewise, when liberated, pervades all, and destroys all sorrows of others, Nre. The 
pervasion of this liberated jiva is through his rays ; and though all jivas are atomic and 
so an atom cannot pervade another atom, yet the mukta jiva is said to be all-pervading, 
because by his light (vibration) he pervades all, i. by Ins knowledge of all he prevades, 
as if, all. This pervasion of the Mukta human jivas stops with the shell of the cosmic 
egg, he cannot go beyond that: (Ho pervades everything within the cosmic egg). Be¬ 
yond the cosmic egg, the Deva Muktas pervade with their light. Thus in the state of 
Mukti, all objects within the egg arc known to the Inman jiva : they are within the scope 
of his knowledge.” 

KaRIKA-Vfrse 5. 

wwj 1 

^ Atrn, on this. Etc, these. Slokah, verses, Bhavnnti 

are. On this there are the following verses. 




II KHAKI)A, 6. 


311 



g- II ^ II 

Yisvasya, of the Yisva. Aiva-vivaksAyam, in desiring 

to explain the appropriateness of His being called a ^ or to meditate on the 

<7-ness of Yisva, to explain the a-ness (atva) of Yisva iTC Adi, beginning. 

Samanyam, similarity, Utkatam, clear, distinct. Hi^r Matra, (of) a 

part of the Lord as Yisva d^’fnr'TTfr Samprmipattau, in performing medita¬ 
tion. =?nfR, Apti, fetching. £f*RRT Samanyam, similarity. Eva, even. =q 
Cha, and. 

5. (Iv ,y ) In meditating on the a-ness of Yisva tlie worshipper 
attains similarity with the Adi -hood of Yisva, it is clear. By medi¬ 
tating on this part of the Lord as Yisva one farther attains similarity with 
JIim in his quality of Apti also. The worshipper of Yiflva gets similarity 
with Him in having a beginning fadi) and in being a fetelier (Apti).—30. 

MADHYA'S COMMENTARY. 

The words matra-sampratipattaxi moan meditating on a portion of the Lord. The 
YHva lias a beginning (on awaking from deep sleep, the Prajiia is the beginning of Yisva, 
and on awaking from dream, the Taijas.i is sneli beginning). The worshipper of Yisva also 
acquires this state of or having a beginning. 

Note .—“ Hebecomcs that on which one constantly meditates is a well-known occult 
formula. Therefore, if one meditates on Yisva as having an adi, he himself becomes an adi : 
if he meditates on Him as apiti, he himself becomes an apiti. By constant meditation on 
an ideal,one becomes that ideal. The worshipper of Yisva becomes similar to Yisva, brings 
all objects to the soul in waking state, and is called apiti or the Fetelier, so the worshipper 
of Yisva becomes an Apiti, i.c., can fulfil the desires of others, and can bring all objects 
which 1 they desire, and as Yisva is adi or has a beginning, so the worshipper of Yisva becomes 
an adi. Thus he attains these two kinds of similarity with Yisva, namely, he acquires the 
power of tclorgy or bringing all objects from the most distant places even, and thus satis¬ 
fying the desires of others, and becoming an adi himself, the power of coming out of deep 
sleep or dream at will. He can r\gnlate the time of his waking to a minute. These two¬ 
fold powers, one for himself and one for others, arc the result of meditating on Yisva 
as a-ness. 

Kv.rik. -Yfrse 6. 

^3^ 1 
11 ii 

Taijasasvn, of Taijasa. Utva-vijnane, on understanding 

the u ness of Taijasa. Utkarsah, drawing in. ZVF 1 Dfi^yate, is seen. 

Spbut.im, clearly. qr^IHS'RRTTr Matra-sampraiipattan, on meditation on a 
portion (/. e.,on Taijasa). mri Syad, takes place. Ubhayatvam, bothness. 

Tatha-vidham, similarly. 

6. (K a0 ) On understanding the a-ness of Taijasa, there takes place 
the distinct manifestation of the quality of utkarsa (attraction) in the 






312 


MANVUKA-UPANISA d. 


worshipper; similarly by meditating on this portion of the Lord, there 
takes place the bothness (the integrity and want of hiatus of knowledge of 
the waking and dream states.).—31. * 

Note. —13y understanding this portion of the Lord, first there takes place ntkarsa or 
expansion of consciousness, and by meditating on it, the power of functioning in both 
states is acquired. The worshipper attains similarity with Taijasa both in the attribute 
of ntkarsa, i.e., in being capable of drawing all towards him and in putting them to hyp¬ 
notic sleep, and in the quality of ubhayatvn, i.e., in retaining unbroken consciousness of 
the waking and dream states. There is no hiatus or gap in his consciousness. Here also 
the powers acquired are two-fold, one subject ive, the other objective. The objective power 
is called ntkarsa or forcible drawing another from tho waking state and sending him to 
sloop or dream world the power of hypnotism. The subjective power is ubhayatva— 
both-ncss — the unbroken memory of dream and waking eonscionness. 

Karika-Versk 7. 

flun^nrfcfnrar ^ 11 11 

Makara-blifive, by understanding the ///-ness, Prajnasya, 

of the prAjna. Mana-Samanyam, similarity of measure. Utkatani, 

distinctly, g IMatra-sampratipattnu in, but on meditating on this 

portion of the Lord. 5T3HRRT Lnya-samanynm, similarity of absorption, qq 
Eva, even. ^ Ch, and. 

7. (K 21 ) By understanding the rn ~ness of FrAjfin there lakes place 

the clear perception of lnanam ; but by meditating on ibis aspect of the 
Lord there arises similarity of laya with the Lord — 32. 

Note . — Similarly the worshipper of Priijfia attains the two-fold power, one subjective 
and the other objective. The objective power is called Birina or the power of entering 
into another consciousness. In ntkarsa the subject is s< lit. to sleep, and it is through 
suggestion that the hypnotiscr works on him. In this higher form of control called Mana 
— he enters, ns if into his very being : and the personality of the subject temporarily merges 
into the personality of the Yogi 11 . This power of JNlana would throw in the seeds of thought 
into the very causal body of the soul of another. It is not working through suggestion 
(as in hypnotic sleep) but through the causal body. The subjective power acquired 
is that of. Laya—namely, carrying the memory through this dreamless sleep state. This 
is called “ similarity of Lnya with the Lord.” For as the Lord in the Laya state retains 
his memory and consciousness, so does the worshipper of Prajna. “ The similarity of 
Laya with the Lord” — has another meaning also, namely, destruction of all sorrows and 
arising of happiness. As there is Laya of all sorrows in the Lord, so his worshipper also 
transcends sorrow and enjoys bliss. 

KArikA-Verse 8. 

nrg i 

raw Irisu, in the three. Dhamasu, in the states or forms, qg Yat, 

what. Tulyam, equal. Samanyam, similar. Vctii, (who) 





11 RUANDA, 9. 


O 1 9 
O 1 O 


knows. Nischitam, firmly. ^ Sa, lie 3*3: Pujyah, respected. nLdrMdr 

Sarva-bhavanam, of all creatures. Vandyah, honoured. ^ Cha, eva, and 

even. HiUgrd: Mabamuni};, a great sage. 1 

8. (K 23 ). He who knows firmly what is common and what is 
equal (between the jiva and the Lord) in these three states, becomes 
honored and respected by all beings, he becomes a great sage.—33. 

Note .—Not only' the worshipper of the Lord in Ilis three aspects acquires such 
powers, but even the person who has this knowledge of three-fold aspect of tlie Lord 
and His similarity with the jiva in those respects, is honoured as a great sage. 

K A r i kA-Verse 9. 

557: Jnfr' flisntoTfr: h h 

A-karah, the syllable ^ Visva designated by Nayate, 

leads. Visvam, to Visva Visva directs him who worships Him as to 

Himself: similarly'. 5 U-karah, the syallable 3. Taijasa represemed 

by 3. = 5 r Cha a pi, and also, Taijasam, to Taijasa. Makaras- 

eha, and the syllable u. 3^: Punali, again. 1715^ Prajnain, to Prajna ^ Na, 
11 >t ^r-rr^r Amitre, ii the Impartible. rT'^H Vidyate, takes place. ^Hrfrp 
agatih, want of entering, want of comprehension. 

9. (K. 33 J. The letter ^ leads to Virfvam ; the letter s to Taijasa ; 
the letter u to Prajna; nor is there 11011 -approach to the Turiya the 
Impartible.—3d. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The words are na vidyate agatih. The is elided by sandhi. The sense is that 
as Visva and other aspects of the Lord arc approachable by the devotee, so also is the 
Turiya. He is not beyond the reach of His devotee or His worshipper. The Turiya is 
called impartible, because He is not like the Visva and the rest who daily separate from 
each other and become again united to each other, (in deep sleep with Prajna). (Objec¬ 
tion). The Visva and the rest incite the jiva to wordly activity and functioning and 
they are causes of all practical worldly (vyavahara) activities; but the Turiya is the 
cause of uo such functioning of the jiva or of practical worldly activity. Therefore, the 
Turiya is Unapproachable and Incomprehensible. (Ans). This doubt is answeied by the 
Karika by saying agatir 11a vidyate—the Turiya is not Unapproachable. Admitting that 
by this analysis of na vidyate gafcih into na vidyate agatih, you may say that the 
Turiya is also approachable : but then arises another objection. I11 the case of Visva, &e. 
wo see that separate letters are mentioned as leading to these. Thus ^ lends to Visva, 
3 leads to Taijas, q leads to Prajna : but no letter is mentioned in the Karika as leading 
to the Turiya. (To this the author answers). The atman or the Lord himself here 
leads the soul: because in the last verse of the Upanisad we find atmaiva atmanam 
samvisati ‘‘the Self leads the Self to the Self.” The loader here is therefore ufmu in its 
entirety and not any aspect or portion of it. This saying of the Upanisad “ that the Self 
leads the Self to the Self ” is an additional reason for holding that the Turiya is approach¬ 
able ; and that the proper analysis of the second line of the above Karika is vidyate 
agatih. 




MAN DU KA-UPA NItjA D. 


o 


o 


14 


Another text says “ Ho who knows that the worshipper of Yisva, &c. by meditating 
on them as &c., partakes in their attributes of adi-hood. apti-hooeV, &e., and the 
worshipper becomes similar with the worshipped, himself becomes the honoured of all.” 

The three similarities become in a sense equalities, when the soul attains niukti. 
In that state there is no difference between these similarities (or those of the Lord). 

[Thus the adi-samanya and apti-samanya arc taught of the jiva by Upaui.sad verse 9 
which declares that he obtains (apnoti) all desires and becomes ail anadi, “having begin¬ 
ning.” Similarly utkarsa-samanya and ubhaya-samanya are taught in verse LO, where the 
jiva is said to become Ever-wiso and a Judge. The mapa-samanya and Laya-Samanya are 
also taught in verse 11, where the jiva is said to become the Pervador of all, and Des¬ 
troyer of all sorrows. All these three-fold similarity of the jiva with the Lord, becomes 
equality, only then when the jiva attains mukti. In states other than uiukti, it is a moro 
similarity without equality]. 

The Turiya is called amal ra or d impartible ” because there is no diurnal separation 
from it (as in the ease of Yisva and Taijasa which daily merge into the Prajna and daily 
come out of it). 

[Note .—The Turiya is not the cause of the waking and other states also.] 

Though the Turiya is not the agent or the producer of (he waking and other slates, 
yet he becomes approachable to the Wise. ( r l he Juanis know the Turiya). 

It is stated in the Atma-Samhita :—“ The jiva in lho state of Release gets similarity 
with the Lord as regards the attributes of fuliinalva, &c., and equality as regards not 
being subject to modification (before umkti there is similarity only). The Turiya is said 
to be amatra or impartible in (he sense that there is not dailj r separation from Him 
(as in the ease of Visva and Taijasa fram IVajila.)” 




Fourth Kiiaxda. 

• • 

Mantra i. 

srq5%nr5m: faster rc 

STT3HT5S3Tffi *T ^ || \R || 

Amatrah, without measure. Chaturthah, fourth. 

Avyavaharyah, beyond worldly experience, not perceptible to one immersed 
in Sainsara, but an object of experience to the released, qq^j Prapanclia, five¬ 
fold universe, the^ world, the evil. All spread out. Upasamah, cessation, the. 

highest bliss, the destroyer Rrq: Sivah, blissfull, free from sorrow and full of 
joy. Advitah, witnout duality, the destroyer of false knowledge, qqq^ 

Evam, thus. ^ffaTTC: Omkarah, the Oinkara, the Nada. Atma, Atma. Being 

or becoming an Atman or self only, repudiating the false notion of being body, 
&c. qq Eva, only, jqfqiqfiq Samvisati, he completely enters. Atmana, by 

the Supreme Atman, through the grace of the Supreme Self, qqRR Atmanam, 
into the Alman, the Turiya. q: Yah, who. qq Evam, thus, qq Veda, knows. 

1. (U 41 ). The partless fourth is not an object of experience to 

the unredeemed. He who knows Him, resembles Him in becom¬ 
ing inscrutable to the unredeemed; in becoming a destroyer of all 
bodily bonds; in getting bliss, and in destroying false knowledge. 
For such is Oinkara. He who knows thus, becomes an Atman pure 
and simple, and through the grace of the Supreme Self enters into that 
SUPREME SELF.—35. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The phrase “atman even*'—“ atmaiva" of the Upanisad text means becoming oven the 
Self, i.e.j experiencing that the Self is not depoudant upon others and removing all wrong 
notions about it (such as identifying it with body, &c.) The phrase “ through tho self— 
“ atmana”—means ‘ through the grace of the Supreme Self.” The worshipper enters into 
the Supreme Self, the Turiya, through the grace of the Supreme Self Himself. 

[Note.—This khan ha establishes that the Turiya as nada. It also declares what is tho 
result when a person realises the Turiya as Nada]. 

(Note—In the previous part of this Upanisad in verse 7 , the, Turiya has been describ¬ 
ed as avyavaharayam and transcendental, &c., and now the present verse reiterates the 
same idea by sayiug that Turiya is transcendental. Why this tautology ? This objection 
is answered by the commentator thus). 

As in the previous mantras, the similarity between the attributes of the Visva, &c., 
and of their worshipper was shown (such as since the Visva is adimat the worshipper of 
Yisva also becomes adimat), so to complete the description, it was necessary to point out 
the similarity between the Turiya and His worshipper. Therefore, the repetition of the 
words “ transcendental, &c.,” in this verse, (The worshipper of the Turiya who is avyava- 
harya, becomes himself avyavaharya ) 

41 




316 


MANPUKA-UPAIUSAD. 


(Lest the phrase “advaita Omkara” of the verse may be mistaken to mean “ the undi¬ 
vided entire Om denotes Turiya,” the commentator says.) 

“ Knowing Ilari the supreme goal as the Turiya called also the Nada, the worshipper 
enters .into Him alone, being pure ip £prm and similar to Him in his soul, (with this excep¬ 
tion) that his knowledge, bliss and power are never equal to those of Ilari, but inferior to 
Him, for even a soul in the state of Mukti is still under the dominion of the Lord, and is 
not absolutely independent.” 

JORika-Verse 2. 

¥pq% I 

Atraite Sloka bhavanti. On this there are the following Slokas. 

TT^5TT fq^ITq T TT^T Him *T STCiq: I 

qr^i q fofsq^fq h n 

Omkaram, the Omkara, the Lord in His three-fold aspects as Visva, 
&e. qj^r: Padsah, according to the three padas or feet Vidyat, let 

one know. qT^T: Padah, the padas. qr^r: Matrah, the portions. Let him know 
that the Lord Omkara is designated by His various parts as^grand*. ^ 

Na samsayah, undoubtedly. Omkaram, the Lord O111 kara, the Tur¬ 
iya. qRSH Padasah, as a part, as the nada, the eternal sound, Jnatva, 

having known. q r% 1%^ Na kinchit, nothing whatsoever. quq Api, even. 

Chintayet, let him think. He thinks. Entering into the Lord he enjoys 
bliss. He thinks or is anxious for nothing. 

2. (K. ")T ,et him learn tlie Oiiikftra in its various feet ; the feet are 
verily the portions (or aspects of the Lord called YWva, & c.) He who 
knows the Omkara as the foot (railed the Turiya has no further anxieties 
(hut enjoys bliss)—30. 

K arika-Verse 3. 

3'^Tri snrr% tier: an i 

qmq H 'flq fq?T^ ?qraq II II 

Yuhjita, let him join or fix. 57x11% Pranave, in the Pranava, the in- 
e{Table word Om ; so called because it leads and guards (pranayana) the three 
states of waking, dreaming and sleep, &c. 'Hie four-aspectcd Hari. Chetah, 
mind, qxrjq: Prannvnh, the Pranava. Brahma, Brahman, R*rq Nirbhayam, the 
Fearless. qnf% Pranave, in the Pranava. Nitya Yuktasya, constantly 

joined or harmonised. q Na, not. vr Bhayani, fear. Vidyate, takes place. 

Kvachit, ever. 

3. (K as ). Let him concentrate bis mind in the Pranava ; for Pranava 
is the Fearless Brahman. The soul that lias harmonised itself with 
Pranava, never feels any fear.—37. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The Yisnu in His four-fold aspect ns Yisva, &c., is called Pranava also : because He 
controls or leads (pranayana) the waking, &c., status of the jiva. 




IV K HAND A, 4. 


317 


Note .—The concentration taught herein is not confined to the Turiya alone ; but to 
all the four aspects of Yisnu. 

K ArikA-$/erse 4, 

isTK qr ^jcp 1 

^x^^: Pranava, the Pranava. f| Hi, verily, Aparam, the later in time : 

the recent. && Brahma, the Brahman, the Great. The manifestations of Brahman 
as Pranava, i.e. % as Vigva, Taijasa, &c. f are subsequent or apara in order to PI is 
manifestation as Vasudeva, &c. qzrjq: ^ Pranavali Cha, and the Pranava. qt 
Param, the ancient avataras like Varudeva, &c. Smritah, is said, 

Apurvah, causeless; beginning-less. Anantarah, destruction-less: antar 

means destruction. Or the Inmost: there is no ether object in the universe as 
Inmost as He, for He dwells in the hearts of all. 3(3137: Abahyali, there is no¬ 
thing external to Him : the utmost, ^q*: Anahparah, He who has no creator : 
He who has no another above Him. muq: Pranavali, the Pranava. Avya- 

yah, the Unchanging. 

4. ( a6 ) The Pranava is the recent manifestation of Brahman, the 

Pranava is the oldest manifestation of Him as well. The unchanging 
Pranava is the Causeless, the Inmost, the Uttermost, the Uncreate and the 
Changeless.—38. 

MADHYA’S COMMENTARY. 

The same four-aspected Pranava is called Brahman also because of its greatness (the 
root meaning of Brahman is great). 

The Lord is called Omkara, because He is designatad by Om. The meanings of Om 
given in the Sruti as “ that which has a beginning,” <Src., should not also be rejected, 
because the Sruti expressly teaches it so. 

The Pranava is called apurva because He has no one purva or prior to Him. Ho is 
called Anantara, because He has no antara or loss or annihilation. He is called Anapara 
because He has no one else above Him, He is perfectly independent ; there is absence of 
dependence on others in Him. Literally it means, He who has no other (apara) as His 
preserver. (He is not only self-existent, but stands in need of no one else to preserve and 
continue His existence). He is called “abahya”or having nothing outside of Him, be¬ 
cause He is all-pervading. He who knows Pranava as such gets complete liberation. 

(Lest one should fall into the mistake that Yasudeva, &e., are anterior avataras of 
Yisnu and consequently of greater power, than Yisva, etc., the subsequent avataras, 
the commentator quotes Brahma Tarka). 

“ When the one and the same Yisnu is called Para and Apara, it does not mean the 
Higher and the Lower Yisnu : uor does it mean that the past and the present manifesta¬ 
tions of Yisnu differ in efficacy and power. There is no such difference at all. A manifes¬ 
tation prior in time, is called Para, and one subsequent in time, Apara. In fact, these two 
words do not mean here the Higher and the Lower—but the anterior and the subsequent.’ 0 
(Brah ma-Tarka). 

The sense of the verse “the Pranava is the Apara Brahma,” &e. ; is that all the ava¬ 
taras are full, whether Past or Present, there is no deficiency in any, nor superiority of one 
over the other. All are infinite. 




318 MANDUKA-VPANISAD. 


KarikA-Verse 5. 

ft fTTc^T ^T^cT || RvS || 

Sai vasya, of all the universe, sure: Pranavah, the Pranava. ft Hi, 
verily. stir: Ad ill, the beginning, the cause or the Creator. Madhyam,the 
middle, the preserver. Antah, the end : the Destroyer. cRf qqf^f Tatha eva 

cha, as well even, qq Evam, thus. Hi, verily, qiijq Pi anavam, the Pranava. 

Jhatva, having known. Vyasnute, reaches fully : pervades. Tad, 

Him, the Brahman. Anantaram, the Inmost. 

5. (K 27 ) The Pranava is the creator of the whole universe, its pre¬ 

server and destroyer as well. Thus knowing the Pranava, one reaches 

finally the Inmost Brahman.—39 

Karika-Vfrse 6. 

qjdj ifireftfarc **fj h 11 ii 

sr*rjq Pranavam, the Pranava. Hi, verily, Isvaram, the God. 

Vidyat, let him know, Sarvasya, of all. Hridaye, in the heart. 

f^i?T Sthitam, residing, staying He is the minutest as dwelling in the heart of 
all. Sarva-vyapinam—All-pervading and consequently the greatest of 

all. Om-karam—the Om-kara. nvw Matva, having realised in mind. 

> 4 fa: Dhirah, the wise. ^ Na, not. Soehati, grieves. 

0. t^ 9B ) Let him know that the Pranava is the God residing in 

the hearts of all beings. The wise having realised the Om-kAra as all- 
pervading does not grieve.—40. 

Karika-Vfrse 7. 

id^ r<re m : fere: i frprrir gn- 

3rTtT 3PT. I H WPRdTT 5R! || ^ || 

Amatrah, pnrtlcss : without difference. HR: Ananta-mntrah, 

having an infinite number of parts, Dvailasyn, of the duality or false 

knowledge. Upasamaii, the remover, destroyer, ftrq: Sivah, auspicious, 

the blissful, free from sorrow, and whose form is bliss and joy. Om- 

kfirah The Om-kara, the Mai i in 11 is four aspects of Vi^va. f% pr: Vi itah, 
known. 2R Yena, by whom. Sail, he. 5R: Munih, the sage, the knower of 
aparoksa. q Na, not f?tc: Itarah, any oilier, Janah. person. 

7. (K 29 ) lie who knows the Om-k ira as part less and yet full 

of infinity of parts, as the destroyer of all false knowledge and bliss¬ 
ful, is verily a sage and no one else : he is verily a sage and no one 
else.—41. 

MADHYA’S SALUTATION. 

I praise Visnu, who lias tlio forms of Visva, &c., wisdom and bliss, who though 
one and without difference, has yet a fourfold aspect in the world. 

Finis. 




k'l 


•a 


30 








Alphabetical Index of the Mantras 


Page. 

... ... ... ... 283 

f?R^...nr, 9, K 23 ... ... ... 313 

srtr[ s, Iv 16 ... ... ... 304 

*r^.‘ mxt IT, 7, K 15 ... ... ... 303 

?WIT?ns^cTI«^^...LV, 7, Iv 29 ... ... ... 318 

14, K 3 ... ... ...294 

r^T n;q- 1, 6, U 6 ... ... ... 290 

^rOTr^cr^fTI^A^r...r, 1, U 1 ... ... ... 283 

^f%T5cqr^5tT 2, K 24 ... ... ... 316 

*n£< • 

sR^nr: ^rrf^cr: ... ... ... 283 

^RqRnr^srsrr It...II, 3, K u ... ... ...299 

3TmftrrsiFtr srfrr...I, 3, U 3 ... ... ... 280 

^mf<rr«n%T 2, U 9 ... ... 307 

^£lc4W^R...III, 6 , K 20 ... ... ... 3ii 

fag *TTTg *raw...in, 8, K 22 ... ... ...312 

fagsrrai*r#fa...l, li, K 5 ... ... ...292 

l, 8, K 2 ... ... ....291 

o, Iv 13 ... ... ...301 

qRTw r *rcfa%sr..il, 4, K 12 ... ... ... 300 

RRH nfr‘ * 5tf|: s^r\..II, 1, U 7 ... ... ... 296 

Wf%i 3%RfRT...ll, 2, K 10 ... ... ... 299 

fam^...IV, 0, K 28 ... ... ...318 

5HI...IV, 4, K 26 ... ... ... 317 

sn75%T 5TT3[ fa€R\..II, 9, Iv 17 ... ... ... 304 

STfR! ^HblTWHT...I, 12, K 6 ... ... ...293 




















( « ) 



Page. 

51%: !Tsfr 7, K 1 ... 

... 291 

vinira .. 1, i.% K :3 

... 295 

ITTir^...in, 7, lv 21 

... 312 

33T gHt * 3TO...I, 5 U 5 ... 

... 288 

2 ^r?T !TO% %cP...lY, 3, K 25 

... 31(1 

f5T^TT f5TR5I?fcr...II, 10, K 18 

... 305 

%PJRf ?5p%...I, 13 K 7 

... 293 

f5T^?TTcg%^IT?JT...IlI, o, K 19 ... 

... 311 

RT^T% 9, Iv 3 ... 

... 191 

^ftdcTT5tUT5fHFHT...l, 2, V 2 

... 285 

^5%J snosUEIT%:...I V, 5, k 27 

... 318 

JUlft WRR:...Ill, -1, l 11 

... 309 

^T5?mTRTS^r?:ftTfR:...lll, 1, 1 3 

... 307 

rT%ct m#...l, 10, K 4 

... 292 

^5TfTR3[T5^T5rraT...[I, (i, K 14 ’.. 

... 302 

^rcren%cr: iitr:...I,-l U 4 

... 287 

^r:...I 11, h, l T1 °... 

... 308 

& VT3f Sjmqw %5 ti: h qsqmsTWTSRr: 

|| 

|| 5q^rq %%?t || (pCSRT: || *5% W- TTT 

|| || m q^KTroTg || & 511%: 

51T%: 5TT%: II 


ffcr JTTifwqRq^miar ii q ii 





192 4 

























































binding SECT, may 2 0 


1969 


BL Upanishads 

1120 Isa, Kena, Katha, Prasna, 

A3 Mundaka and Kanduka upani sads 

1911 2d ed. 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 












