===== Internet Archive OCR: gss.srivedantadesika0000knar_djvu.txt =====

SANKALPA-SURYODAYA 


\ OR 
THE DAWN OF THE DIVINE WILL. 
P OF 
Sri Vedanta Desika 
WITH 


ENGLISH TRANSLATION. 
bY 
NI copy res ] sy > ar 
Narayanacniarya B.A., 
and 
>. iaghunathaswamy lyengar. 


he Supervision of 


sriman Yoays>ushasa .\. Govindacharya M.R.A.S. 


Vol. j.—Acts I to V. 


SRIRANGAM : 
SRI VANI VILLAS PRESS. 


: 1917. 
Aj? Fights Raserved. | [Copyright Reotstered. 


/ Pe a ‘1 : ? 
Cee Rit eV ALIS! AY take eR OR On. 7 : 

ng Kbit RA TENE Soh Ne AT Sip Lt SE LING 
BE ee NON on Ba Gac oe 
Sia Kil peas? Bn eer ee 4h 
ig Rpt pA SUNS A euch 2 be hor eog rng Firs 
presses wee ei ry me Soa, DE sen epee ay 
a oe SE ITT ey 
RIS MAY Sh Ses eer aS 
Beg ey ee Ee Ect ae 
ORE A Pe EERE 

af 


aay Gt Pike eh bad (eS ; 7 
R WAST CS ae 2 eer My i oe 
: Re as 4 , Rr . 


OR i BS aa a 
yA ye TRIER See BIS LUE 
Has oF TN A ore ANN 
MER EPEROR So 2 BUA AST EES or 


s —_— 


we 
“iT adie 
_ 


as alae 


As a mark of humble devotion , 
THE ENGLISH TRANSLATION 
is 
Very Respectfully Dedicated 
to 


The Sacred Memory of 
‘SRI VEDANTA DESIKA. 


PREFACE. 


The Drama “ Sankalpa Stryddaya” and 

its author Sri Vedanta Desika need no elaborate 
preface to be introduced to the public, suffice 

Jit to say that “ Virtue triumphs and Vice suc- 

eumbs” is the moral of this allegorical Drama. In 

this Drama, the hero Viveka finds Jiva (embodied 
soul) God-forgotten and addicted only to worldly 
pleasures (Samsira). To make confusion worse 
confounded, diverse untrue doctrines about the 
relationship between Soul and God cause no 
little embarassment to Jiva. A discourse bet- 
ween the Guru and the Disciple nicely establishes 
the hollowness of the systems of Hindu Philo- 
sophy other than the Visishtadvaita system.. 
Viveka strains every nerve to wean Jiva from 
the influence of the baser emotions such as 
Passion, Anger, etc., which try to bind Jiva 

closely to Samsara and Viveka eventually suc- 
ceeds in achieving for Jiva salvation with the 
help of Vishnu-Bhakti and Sankalpa. This, in 
brief, is the plot of this play but its chief 


2 


peculiarity lies in the fact that the diverse 
human attributes such as Wisdom, Good-sense, 
Application, Illusion, Cupidity, Anger, etc., are 
the Characters and they speak for themselves 
in flesh and blood. Each of these good and bad 
human attributes presents its case, sings, dances 
-and delights the audience in its own way. In spite 
of the seemingly sarcastic and humorous utteran- 
ces of these Characters the main theme of the rela- 
tionship of Soul to God is never lost sight of. We 
feel that the whole drama will amply repay 
perusal than an attempt to sketch here the plot. 


2. As for Sri Vedanta Desika, -the life- 
sketch that follows this preface is aw attempt, 
however modest and imperfect in its own way, 
to show what a versatile genius, great philo- 
sopher and thinker and what a personification 
of meekness brought to relief by high principles 
of devotion and tolerance to views that are not 
his own, Sri Desika was. | 

3. Lt is a pity that sach a great personage 
and his sublime teachings should be known only 
to the few in south India who are familiar onlv 
with the G'randha characters. This and nothing 
but this impelled usto undertake the edition of this 


» 
o 


Immortal Drama in Devanagari and the thought- 
that our brethren all over the world, who do 
not know Samskrit should not fail to participate: 
in the great bliss resulting from a perusal 
of this Drama, further prompted us to attempt 
the English Translation. We make no secret 
that we are but novices in this highly responsi- 
ble field but the feeling that we are doing a 
real service, however humble, to our brethren 
at large and our prefound personal piety to the 
great Acharya whom Sri Vaishnavas, at any 
rate, regard as none but an Avatira, is our only 
apology for embarking on this heretofore-un- 
attempted enterprise. 


4. For the benefit of our readers, we have 
given the numbers of the verses in the Translation 
just asin the original. We have also added 
notes where we felt the translation is not self- 
explanatory. 


5. Any suggestions for improvement will 
be very thankfully received. 


6. We feel we should not conclude this. 
preface without expressing our great feeling of 
gratitude to Sriman Vidya Bhfishana A. Gévin- 


4 


dacharya Svamin of Mysore but for whom this 
work would not have been a fait accompli. We 
also tender our heart-felt thanks to Brahma Sri 
Gurubhakta-sikhamani T. K. Balasubrahmanya 
Iyer Sastra Prasara Bhushana of the Sri Vani 
Vilas Press for the very valuable suggestions he 
has been kind enough to offer. 


K. Narayanacharya 


D. Raghunatheasamy lyengar. 


= 


Life of Sri Vedanta Desika. 


There is no name in the world of Samskrit 
Literature and Philosophy combined, like the 
name of Sri Vedanta Desika, the reputed author 
of this Drama (the Sankalpa-Sfiryddaya). The 
rising.growth of two great schools of Hindu 
religion—the Raménuja Darsana’ and the 
Maidhva Darsana—characterised an epoch in the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries a.p. It was 
Sri Ramanuja who exploded the fallacy of the 
Maya theory of Sankara and conclusively 
established the true relationship of the indivi- 
dual to the Paramatman. The dissemination of 
the teachings of the Visishtadvaita Philosophy 
was entrusted by Sri Ramanuja to 74 of his 


A postles (Simhasanidhipatis). One such Apos- 


1. System of religio- philosophy: 


a; 8. 1 


tle was AnantasOmayaji, and his grandson was. 
Anantasiiri. Of a family of equal sanctity and 
repute was born Totaramba, the daughter of 
Kidambi Padmanabha, otherwise known as. 
Sriranga Raja Pillan and the sister of Vadiham- 
simbuvaha~ (otherwise known as Ramanuja 
Pillan and Appullar). Totaramba’s descent is. 
also traceable from Kidambi Acchan, one of the 
74 Apostles. It. was in the fitness of things. 
therefore that the most welcome alliance took 
place between Anantasifri and Totarkmba. This 
illustrious couple lived happily at Tappul', 
near Kanchi knowing nothing but service to God 
and God’smen. Of such parents of high 
lineage on both the father’s and the mother’s 

side was our author born at Tappul', under the 
auspicious constellation of Sravana in the month 
of Aanni (Purattasi) of the year Vibhava, 1191 
of the Sadlivahana era (September 1268 a.p.). 
Blest is that day even to-day for all for 
it is the last day of the annual festival of the 
Lord Srinivasa, the Resident Deity on the Holy 
Hills of Tirupati. The observance and consum- 


faa This is @ suburb of Kanchi (Conjeevaram), 
Situated close to the shrine of Dtpaprakasa. 


11 
mation of many a vow and the conclusion of 
many a pilgrimage to the Holy Hills are well 


ie ‘ 
known, even unto this day, to every devout 


Hindu. 


2 The event of this birth is sung in the 


following verse :— 


HRIa TAMA MaRSA aECASTTT AAT AIAAA 
qaraamia safeqea sd alaciaawreaqe 
a Synchronously, before the birth of 
Vedanta Desika, thére arose in the mind of the 
Lord of ‘Tirupatia desire to re-establish in its 
pristine glory the Darsana of Sri Ramanuja. 
The Lord therefore resolved upon His Bell- 
Angel incarnating in the world to ring Rama- 
nuja’s fame. The Lord, to achieve this end, 
commanded Anautastiri in a dream to make a 
pilgrimage to His Shrine, adding that He has 
willed to bless him withason. In wonderment, 


a a 


1. On the concluding day of the holy festival 
of the Lord Venkatesa (the Lord of Tirupati), under 
the constellation of Sravana in the month of Kanni 
(September), up appeared unto the earth the Holy Bel! 


of the Asura-enemy (Vishnu), in the person of the 
Preceptor—the Lion of Rhetoric and Logic. 


lV 

Anantastri wished to communicate his miraculous 
dream to bis wife, but she surprised him with the 
news that she also had a similar dream of a young 
married woman appearing and commanding her to 
goto Tirupati. The Bell in the Tirupati Temple 
is said to have become invisible on the night of the 
above dream. The Archakas (officiant-priests) - 
were charged with the theft of it, but Providence 
could not allow innocent men to be punished, for 
the Jiar (or the chief ascetic functionary) of the 
temple dreamt a dream in which the God 
revealed that the Bell’s invisibility was by His 
own Wdl and commanded that no other bell 
should be substituted. Even to this day no 
bell is used during worship inside the Tirupati 
shrine. The blessed Author is therefore be- 
leved to be an incarnation of the Bell of the 
Holy Lord of Tirupati. He himself has given 
expression to this belief in the 14th sldka of the 
I Act of this Drama. 


eared agaatastrdrat ipaaa waa aR 
SHAT FITETNT IEA Ter at: arate aeraas 1’ 


———— 


1. For translation See page 16, 


Vv 


The efficacy of the Bell in the daily worship 
is well expressed by the following:— 
l. awerafagiars alsa fatacKer: 
AMAIA J Rat WHATY J TAAA Ul 
Yar: Far: ara DAT AMUAAT: | 
are fta aerate Trager: 


ye Ne 


4. Rapturous was the joy of Sri Appullar 
(Ramanuja Pillan), the uncle of Sri Desika when 
he heard of this great miracle and he lost no time 
to see the fresh-born babe. Appropriately was the 
baby named Venkatanatha after Sri Venkatesa, as 
he was born on the marriage day of Sri Venka- 
tesa of Tirupati and in due time were the sacra- 
mental ceremonies correctly conducted; — the 
ceremony of the Sun-showing was celebrated on 
the third month, Moon-showing on the fourth 
month, food-showing on the fifth month, and 
food-feeding on the first anniversary day. On this 


1. All Tantras (rites of worship), unaccompanied 
with the sound of the Holy Bell are ever inefticacious. 

9. To invite the Devas and to drive away the 
Asuras (the bell is sounded). 

3. Goblins, Spirits, Devils, Asuras and Brahma- 
Rakshasas, all turning their faces, run away at the 
sound of the Holy Bell. 


vl 


holy day, our Author-Baby’s ear-boring ceremony 
was duly solemnised and he was taken by his 
uncle Appullar on the same day to the temple 
of Lord Varadaraja, the Resident Deity at 
Kanchi where the baby had the first glimpse of 
his Kternal Lord -here and hereafter, Lord 
Varadaraja was delighted in no small degree at 
the advent of the new Kvafigelist and in the 
fulness of His joy he blessed the baby through 
the Archaka that, even like unto Ramanuja, he 


shall become an_ invincible preacher of his 
Darsana. . 


S. In the third year, Venkatanatha’s 
Tonsure ceremony was celebrated, and on the 
fifth year the alphabet was first taught him. 
One day the young Venkatandtha (also known 
as Tuppul Pillai) came with his unele Sri 
Appullar to pay his respects to the then famous 
_ Pandit and sage Nadaddr Ammil who was 
conducting a series of lectures on religion and 
philosophy, for the benefit of his disciples. 
When Desika appeased, Ammal instinctively 
dropped the lecture and his disciples feasted 
their eyes on Venkatandtha and their ears 
were regaled at hearing his accounts. To 


Vil 


continue the lecture, Ammil asked his disciples 
to remind him where he had broken off, but as all 
had equally been captivated at the boy’s charm- 
ing face, beaming with rare intelligence, they 
were helpless. Our little youth however came 
to their relief, speaking thus :— 


‘Master! was it not at this point that you 
‘stopped when [ came ? ”’ 


Nadadur Ammil’s joy knew no bounds ; he 
kissed the boy, lulled him on his lap, and 
blessed him in the same way as sage Pulastya 
blessed Parksara with a heart filled with bene- 
diction thus :— 

lL. quodizarear wareaea aiaeaic | 

Zaqqrtzara a Aaaaead Aa 

6. In -course of time, the thread-wearing 
ceremony was celebrated on Venkatanitha, who 


thereupon began the study of the secrets of the 


Vedas with all their Angas’, the Ubhaya- 


i, ———— -_ 


1. Ohchild! Thou shalt be the author of Puranas 


and Sambitas and thou shalt know the truth about 


‘God as it is. 7h 


9. Auxiliary studies. 


6 


Le 


vill 
vedanta', the seven Tarkas’, Mimfimsa and the 
other Sastras from his uncle Appullar, who had 


derived all that knowledge in his turn from 
Nadadur Ammial. This is thus described :— 


° SHASTA: Hey AIWTRTRISHIAA: | 
HATA: ADSAAMAT: BV Breacaaaaaqaes: Ih 

* ater ait yeaa TEx a Wa wat wee a 
Wea MS Wea aigarat yaqreqal aqaeAeAA-s: We 

° WR scqeniaqeasiaesiageaeaantiaea: | 
FUT SAAT ANAT: Fal AN SiaaraT aA: 1 


1, Ubhaya—double. 'The Sri Vaishnava Scriptures. 
are two-fold, the Vedas (Samskrit) and the Prabandhas. 
(Dravidian =Tamil), . 

2. Logie. 

3. The Master of all arts (Sri Desika) was an expert’ 
in the Sastras, Astronomy, Metrical science, Grammar: 
well knew Dramatic Composition, Rhetoric and many 
Kavyas’ and also wrote works in the Brahma and Karma 
Mimamsas. 

4. The Master of all arts refuted all those puffed 
up with the study of Sankhya, Yoga, Tantra (of Bhatta) 
the creed of Bribaspati, Pasupata (Tantra), Jainism, the 
Philosophy of Sankara and Bhiskara, the doctrine of 
Buddha and the Philosophy of Yadava. ~ 

9. The son of Anantastri shines in this world with 
peerless glory in the research of the Puranas. 


ix 
7. His Panchasamskira’ was performed by 
Sri Appullar who also instructed him in Srv 
Bhashya a: other works of Sri Ramanuja 
as also the Tamil Prabandha of Ardyirappadi” 
of Tirukkurukhaippiran Pillan. Before _ his 
20th year, our Author is chronicled as having 
mastered all the sciences and arts of the day. 
He says this of himself im verse 15, Act I of this- 
Drama. 
auase fyaararfaataa: | 
g Venkatanitha now married a dame 
(named Tirumangayar) ofa Vaidika family and en- 
tered the life of a Grihastha (householder) which 
he retained till the end of his days. Immensely 
delighted at his nephew's signs of becoming 2 
Vedantie victor, Sri Appullar, with a view to 
Rimanuja Darsana spreading in the world, initia- 
ted Sri Desika into a very efficacious Mantra 
known as the Vainateya Mantra. A little time 


—————— 


the Vedas ete, being an expert in determining the subtle 
meanings of the Smrities aggregate of Bharadvaja, - 
Sandilya and Harita. | 

1. A Samskara observed by Vaishnavas by which 
they get Vishnu’s Marks of the Conch and Discus. 

9. A commentary of Tiruvaimozbi. 


x 


after this, Sri Appullar cast off his mortal frame 
and attained Moksha. 


9. Venkatanatha (Desika) the famed Bell- 
Incarnation of the Lord of Tirupati (whose be- 
Joved he was of course) now began to shine in 
all his greatness and really rang (as became 
the Bell) the glory of God—our Destiny, our 
Hope, our Soul’s Joy, the End of all knowledge 
and of all Bliss the Fountain. 


10. From far and near, men resorted to 
Desika’s holy abode to learn from him the highest 
knowledge or, putting their own knowledge to 
test by comparison, they gave in and joured ae 


ranks of his disciples. 


II. A desire to perform a holy pilgrimage 
now took possession of onr Author and so he 
set out for Tiruvahindrapuram (3 miles from 
Cuddalore New Town) to the temple of Sri Déva- 
navaka, alightine en route at Madurantakam 
where he paid homage to the Resident Deity, Sri 
Rama. Arriving at Tiravahindrapuram, our - 
Author bathed in the Garuda river and worshipped 
the Lord Dévanayaka ; then he went to the top of 
‘the Atishadhadri Hill close by and there, under a 


x1 
Peepul tree, he chanted his Vainatéya Mantra, 
when, Lo! Vainatéya,(Garuda) appeared unto 
him and, pleased highly with his deep devotion, 
-Garuda blessed and taught him a very powerful 
Mantra known as the Hayagriva Mantra by 
chanting which, Hayagriva, the Deity of all Arts 
and Sciences, visualised himself to Desika. 
Highly gratified atthe great perseverance and 
‘readiness of our author, Hayagriva resolved to 
bless him richly and so gave him a kind of 
nectar and told him that henceforth he shall 
have full power for promulgating the Vaishnava 
faith and spreading Ramanuja’s glory. 

12, It stands to reason that our author, 
shroneh the influence of Lord Hayagriva, 
the Omnipotent, the Omniscient and the High, 
attained extraordinary knowledge by such means, 


inasmuchas by virtue of penance™ - Véda- V yasa 


1. ef. Mahabharata, Adiparva, Adhyaya I, Slokas 
39 to 41. 
qua fanaa: We ae fatyeTss | 
fasten 22 aura TAA ATA: WN 
afar: a feeratr sare: aaTeaTear TAA AAAS | 
aaa TAMA AT AT NN 
afar ari aaa aSTeaTaaeaT: I 


— 


XU 


and by the simple grace’ of Brahma, Valmiki 
attained the knowledge which eventuated in the. 
birth of the immortal epics, Mahabharata and 
Sri Ramayana’. (All such instances in all relj- 
gions may be remembered here—for instance, 
the Koran falling from Heaven). It was during 
our author’s stay here that as a tribute to Hayag- 
riva for His boon, he composed “ Hayagriva 
Stotra?”; “Garuda Panchasat?” on Garuda, 
“ Achyutasataka‘ ” purely in Prakrit dialect on 
Devanayaka, “ Devanayaka Panchasat’,” “Mum- 
manikkévai’,” “Navaratnamilai’,” “Unjalpattu’,”’ 


l.. of. Sri Ramayana, Balakanda, Sarga IT, verses 
22 to 37 and particularly verse 31. 
OTH UT GA TSI ATT SAT Haro 
AS-CMeq T ANIA areas 1) 


2. Praises on the Horse-faced form of Vishnu. 


3. 50 stanzas praising Garuda. 

4. 100 ~ Es the Resident Deity of 
Tiruvabindirapuram. | 

5. 650 FS ” ” 

6. <A poem praising the Lord in 3 metres, 

a e ;, 8 pe 

8. 


“ ‘ Lord's Swinging festival. 


x1 
“ Pandupattu',” “ Kazharpattu’,” ‘“ Ammanat- 


atta, “ Esal pattu’ ,’’ were also composed here 
by our author. 


13. The followers of the 18 religions were 
conquered by our author in oral debate and then 
it was he made his monumental work “ Para- 
mata-Bhanga” (the overthrow of alien religions). 
It was also herethat “Raghuviragadya” in honor 
of Sri Rama was composed. 


14. Many learned men from different parts 
of the country, admiring Sri Desika’s superb 
intellect, subtle logic, quick and masterly dis- 
posal of opposite creeds, remarkable poetic 
genius, received their lessons in Vedanta from 
our reputed author and christened him “ Kavi- 
tarkikasimha” (the Lion of Logic and Poetry) 
a happy and rare combination. Desika was also 
Sarvatantrasvatantra (i.e. Master of all 
rts), ‘but a stone mason challenged him 

a construct a well to tall his claim. Sri 


SE ———————— 


1. A poem praising the Lord's Ball- play 

2. ‘ a Sri’g play ab $~2Car'g. 
3. re) ” 39 Pr _9| DIDI ORT « 
4 


19 * Lord’s and Sri's jest-talk. 


XIV 


Desika took up the. gauntlet and built with his 
own hands a pretty well for the usé“of Lord 
Hayaeriva by means of the broken and irregular 
stones handed by the mason, while the well 
constructed by the mason with. the unbroken 
and regular stones handed him by our author 
proved ill-built. Even to this day, the well 
could be seen at Tiruvahindrapuram. 


16. Taking leave of the Lord Devanay aka, 
our author retraced his steps to Kanchi staying 
a few days at Tirukkoilur, erroute. to worship 
the resident vol there, Déhalisa, in whose praise 
he composed “Dé ‘halisa st6tra.” At Kanchi 
he spent some vers, aoepbeing here seven 
important treatises such as “Varadaraja Pancha- 
sat,” and seven more works on other occasions. 
It was here that P undarikaksha, the son-in- law 
of Sri Appullar, cave our author the holy image 
of Hayagriva, wo rshipped by a long line of 
Acharyas down from Ramanuja. 


16. Sri Desika, after this respite, started 
on a tour of pilgrimage to the North. He. 
visited Tirupati and composed the famous “Daya- 
sataka” (100 stanzas iny oking the Lord's Mer ey). 


K¥ 


17, Sri Desika next visited Brindavana, 
Mathura, Avédhya, Kasi, Naimisaranya, Bada- 
rikasrama, Salagrama, Dvaraka, all holv places 
in the north ; on the return journey, he paid his 
respects to the Resident Deities at Sri Purushot- 
tama (Jagannatha),  5ri ‘Kurma, Ahdbila, 
Tirupati, Tiruvellore, whence he proceeded to 
Gri Perumbudfir where he fell prostrate at the 
feet of the immortal Lor d, Ramanuja,. chanting 


his praises thus :-— 


‘ HATA ITAA aa HoT Fart HoAIAAIT | 
HROSFMAASHANCA WAT AA AY TITZOTA, Ut 
9. sala aastaaratadt Azaztet 
afasaaeareataanerae#d | 
fafaopafrarad aeqat 
aaaaapaarpraa Aaez: 
18. He also: visited Tiruvellikkeni, Tir uk- 


1. Bow l, to the Mooi Maienjs, the rewortat i 
eternal Vishnupada (a),—the Moon not bereft of any 
Kala even partially (b), but free from the usual stain- 
eontact,—the Moon that originated not from a Jada- 
saya (c) the Moon that ig immune from the influence of 
the Eclipse. (a) Sky and Vishnu’s feet. (b) Beam and 
Art. (c) Ocean and dull-headed. 

9. For translation See verse 41, page 116. 


xvl 


kadalmalai (the Seven Pagodas) and Tirunirmalai, 
returned to Kanehi and resumed his teaching 
on the Ubhaya Vedanta. 


19. - About this time, an Advaiti Sanyasin 
challenged our Desika for an oral contest, but 
our Simha vanquished him easily. As a _sor- 
cerer, however, the Advatin plied his art against 
Desika. He dived into a tank and drinking its 
water, caused our Author’s belly to swell to burst- 
ing, but being a Sarv ‘atantraswatantra Desika 
knew the antidote to the trick and caused the 
water to spit. out of a tree close by. The 


Advaitin who was Witnessing all this fell at the 
feet of the Victor and apologised, ‘ 


20. When returning from Tirupati, our 
Desika met an old friend of his, the famous 
Vidyiranya on the banks of the Tungabhadra._ 
‘Bukkaraya, a king of Vi ljayanagar in 1335 a. p. 
was long on the look-out for a holy man who 
would exorcise an evil spirit of which his 
daughter was obsessed. V idvaranya’s prayer 
also notwithstanding, Desika made quite light 
of the offer and said :— 


XVil 


\ <yegeey DIET TA 


21. Sri Desika had a supreme scorn for 
eworldly greatness. In answer to another 
‘.cordial invitation of Vidyaranya, to go to his 
_ king with promise of great rewards, our author 

, wrote in reply :— 


2 fas faa wazaaalet arag 
aa: wars fg a aH AAA 
| aaqaaans Wa wat Hat 

wafer fagpat gar area afr: gfe: 

: a at this retort, Vidyaranya 
renewed his invitation after sometime which 
met with the same fate by a further reply as 
follows — 


oo ? duiamaciaieaaergaenas- 


d 
4 


- A FAOLR EAE AMAA AeA | 


ee —— —— 


ae 


1. To @ desireless person, a king is but a straw. 


ic 2. Shall not the grains found in the harvest. field 
‘appease the fire of appetite ? Shall not the handful of 
water from a tank suffice to keep life up ? Shall not 
. the tattered under-cloth found without any effort on the 
Ne high-ways be useful? Vain, alas! Wise men resort to 
kings just for the sake of the spas. spaged stomach. 

3 We consider it not fortunate to flatter paltry 
rulers of men, coriceited merely with the fiery unfettered 

$, 8. li. 

ng: = foe 


XV1ll 


aq afagua fafadue rset eae: gu 
qMageaa gaya cde faaaarea i 
Vidyaranya would not Jet matters drop. 
He renewed his request this time by offering to- 
bring the king of Vijayanagar toa place ten 
miles distant from the capital, where he beseeched 
our author to stop. To this, Sri Desika sent his 
famous reply :— 
‘ atte Mansd farsa war fataentaay | , ¢ 
oe H ee ae Gare way | 
Immensely pleased at this unshakable scorn 
for wealth, Vidyaranya ever remained our 
author’s staunch admirer. Our author alwavs 
led a life of Unchavritti (alms-taking). His scorn 
for wealth is also exemplified by another 
incident. | 


pride, arising from the authority over a 


microscopical: 
moiety of the world’s corner. To gerve that Supreme 
Lord alone, we have made up our minds,—the Lord, 
who formerly transformed the sage Kuchéla, who 
presented a dole-full of rice (#6), into the Lord of the- 
Riches. 

1. Father's earnings I have none : my own earn- 
ings I have none ® Grand-father’s wealth (Lord Varada 
worshipped by Brahma) alone I own, on the summit 
of Hastigiri (Kanchi). 


XIX 


One day Sri Desika’s wife brought to 
his notice that in the doles he had collected, 
a gold coin was found. Our author took a stick 
and pushed it away, as if it were a loathsome 
worm. 


\ 


92. About this time, a trouble arose in 
Srirangam. A number of Advaiti Pandits 
descended from the north of India and chal- 
lenged the Vaishnavas that unless they (Vaish- 
navas) conquered them (the Advaitins) in con- 
troversy, they should embrace their faith. 
The Vaishnavas at Srirangam were in «a puzzle 
as to whom to choose as a suitable Refutant and 
they could think of none other than our Desika. 
They accordingly wrote to him? at Kanchi as 
follows :— ; 

| sfa=dugaae faaaere aady | 

TRARAAAHAL ATAIMTAT TIT 
' 23. Accepting this invitation, Sri Desika 
came all the way from Karichi, paying his 
worship to Lord Uttamar, bathing in the river 


——$—— 
—————_— ON LS OC en eer ee aie = 


1. This is the mandate of the Archangel! Vishvak- 
séna of the all-blessed Sri Ranganatha and it shall be an 
ornament to the crest of His devotees servant's devotee. 


xx 


(the Coleroon) and lifted his bands in worship 
to the shrine of Srirangam from the other side 
of the river. The Vaishnavas of Srirangam 
received him on the northern bank of the Cole- 
roon and escorted him by the northern gate of the 
big shrine into Lord Ranganatha’s temple. He 
was led to the several shrines of the Acharyas and 
the Alvars, in the order, as is customary with all 
visiting devotees. Entering and rounding the 
inner Prdkdra (enclosure) and prostrating the 
Pranavakara Véda Sringa Vimana (the top of 
the sanctum sanctorum) Sri Desika paid his 
obeisance to Lord Ranganatha, chanting his 
famous “ Bhagavaddh yanasdpana ” (making the 
mind dwell on the Lord’s Form from toe 
to top). No sooner did Sri Desika take his seat 
with his disciples on the Mantapam, — than 
an Advaiti opponent came to the place and 
expressed his wonder saying: :-— 


a o ~\ 
qaaeta ATHY SA 


“Great is the fame but small is the frame 
(Akara or the vowel at)”— 


Taking this as the challenge, our author 
retorted that the vowel sf cannot be short and the 


XXl 


controversy between the two faiths thus begun 
raged for several days with the result that the 
Advaitins were defeated in the end. A full report 
of the controversy was taken down by Desika’s 
disciples which he shaped into a book called 
Satadtishani. Lord Ranganatha, now highly 
pleased with our author’s consolidation of the 
Ramanuja Siddhanta, conferred on him the title 
of Védantacharya. So jointly he became 
Vedanta-Desika, a name by which he is popu- 
larly and very widely known— 


sf CATIA AeAMSeAATT-ATATAIS: 


(“having got the ttle of Vedantacharya by : 
the divine command of Sri Ranganatha”.) Lord 
Ranganatha’s Illustrious spouse (Ranganayaki) 
is said to have conferred the title of Sarvatantra- 
svatantra (already mentioned). The vanquished 
Pandits argued with Véddnta Desika that inas- 
much as he and not the other Vaishnavas 
defeated them, the holy Tirtham (sacred water) 
should be offered to them next to our author. 
But our author is more than « match for them 
in the ways of the world as in the wavs of 
religion. He ranged all the Vaishnava Savants 


Xx 


and had them first served with the Tirtha and 
he followed them. Of course the opponents 
came next to him for the honor, as they wished. | 
The Advaitins thenceforth became his disciples 
and returning to their homes, they promulgated 
the teachings of Vedanta Desika round the 
regions of Kasi and Kashmira. 


24. Védanta Desika now resolved to spend 
the rest of his days at Srirangam, discoursing on 
Vedanta to all worthy hearers. 

| aeigaratiaaararaqema: | 

AMZFSAIA AzeaTETTT 1 
; No less than 30 times did he teach Sri 
Bhashya alone— ' 


‘TAMA aArlaqarivaarey: ’ 
During his stay In Srirangam he is eredited 
with writing 25 works in Samskrit and Tamil. 


25. In the 13th century, Srirangam was 
ruled by the Pandyas and the spire of the 
sanctum sanctorum was gold-plated by Jata- 
ee eee 6 OS A 

1. Sri Venkatanatha, (Sri Vedanta, Dasika) the 
Lion to break the head of the Elephant- Arguers, 
prospers. 


a 


XXill 


varma Sundara Pandya, who ruled from 1251 
49 1261 A. p. Malik Kafir, General of Allauddin, 
the Emperor of Delhi, captured Madura in 
1310 a. pv. During their predatory incursions, 
the Mahammadans entered Srérangam and mercl- 
lessly massacred - every one they met. The 
famous Sudarsana_ Bhattarya, the author of 
Sruta-Prakasika', was one of those who were 
killed. Before his death, he consigned the care 
of his works written on Cadjan (palm leaves) 
and his two sons to our author. Desika and 
the two children with the gloss lay hid amidst 
-corpses heaped-all about the fated place. After 
the vandals disappeared, Desika hastened with 
‘the children to Mysore country (Tiranarayana- 
puram) where he lived some years. It was here 
jhe composed his Abhitistava—a work of deep 
devotion addressed to the Deity of Srirangam 
to spare the country and the Srirangam shrine 
in particular from the hands of the Maham- 
madans. 

26. Sage Vidyaranya rehabilitated the dec- 
Jining kingdom of Vijayanagara in 1335 a.p. and 


-_ ee 


1. The great gloss on the Bhashya of Ramanuja 
(Brahma-Siitras). 


XXVI 


Akshébhyamani. Our author was invited to be 
the umpire but he declined to go personally. The 
two antagonists (the former an Advaitin and 
the latter a Dvaitin) submitted their points of 
dissension to Desika in writing. The Advaitins 
maintain that our author expressed his opinion 
in favor of Vidyaranya on the authority .of the 
following verse :— 
Fay AAA aa werala: 1 

“The great sage Vidyaranya defeated Akshobhya.” 

While the Madhvas maintain on the 
authority of the following verse that the deci- 
sion was in favor of Akshébhvamuni :— 

| Saal aaa Westrawaear | 

COINPCMEPECieoriccoc cree, 

Our author had the occasion to refer his 
Satadfishani to V idvaranya for criticism but the 
latter could find no fault except an aspirate over 
too much. ‘It was then Sri Desika js sald to 
have written a treatise called—* Chakara-samar- 
thana”’ 


A; Safle Aen chi cut asunder ave great forest of 
Vidyaranya by the sword—the sword of © Tatvamasi”’ 
that well set forth to the world the difference between 
God and Soul, 


XxvVll 


28. Again another Pandit hailed from the 
north and showed our author Krishnamisra’s 
Philosophical Drama “ Prabédha-Chandrédaya ”’ 
(the rising of the Moon of Intellect) which, 
according to the followers of Sankara, dispels the 
darkness of ignorance and effects salvation. On 
reading this work, Sri Desika wrote—* Sankalpa 
Sfiryddaya”’ in ten acts (the Drama for which 
this life-sketch is prefixed) meaning ‘the Dawn 
of the Divine Will or Grace,” which, according 
to the followers of Ramanuja dispels the 
darkness of Samsara. | 


29. Our author, it was said, had a great 
esteem for Kalidasa whom he called Kavisarva- 
bhauma (the prince of poets). Desika composed 
the “ Hamsasandésa” one of the ~melodious 
poems in Samskrit on the analogy of Kalidasa’s 
Méghasandesa. “Yadavabhyudaya” is another of 
ourauthor’s works written as a rejoinder to Poet 
Dindima’s “ Raghavabhyudaya.” His “ Tatva- 
muktikal4pa ” with his own commentary on the 
same, “Sarvartha-siddhi” is a poetical treatise on 
philosophical and religious themes. His famous 
work * Adhikaranasdravali” is a compendium of 
Sri Bhashya. Nainacharya, Sri Desika’s son 


XXVIlI 
wrote an excellent commentary on this work. The 
St6tras (or praises to God, etc) of Vedanta Desika 
are the specimens in themselves of superior 
literature and enshrine superb ideas. Vast again 
are his prose writings. “ Sarvarthasiddhi,” 
alluded to already and ‘“Nvayaparisuddhi,” the 
“Nyayasiddhanjana,”’ the ‘‘Tatvatika,” the “Tat- 
parya chandrika,” the ‘‘Sesvara-Mimamsa,” the 
“Mimamsa-Paduka” and ‘‘Nikshéparaksha,” are 
some of them. The Rahasya-Traya-Sara is one of 
our author’s best treatises, written chiefly for the 
sake of those to whom the study of the Vedas is 
prohibited. It contains 32 chapters and each 
chapter begins and ends with Samskrit and 
Tamil verses which sum up the matter contained 
in the same. The subject matter of Tiruvay- 
mozhi' was epitomised by Desika into 100 
stanzas called the <« Dramiddépanishatsara ”’, 
Doddayacharya of Socha-simhapura (sholingar) 
who wrote Chandamaruta, a commentary on 
Satadfishani wrote also a4 biography of our 
author named Vaibhava-Prakasika and its full 
commentary in tamil has been written by 


et ee ee 
1. The Tamil Prabandhas, of which this is St. 
Satbagopa’s Facile Princeps. 


XXX 


Mabaryadasa. Our author's devotion to Sri 
Ramanuja is beyend description, He wrote 
4 Yatirajasaptati,’’? an exemplary work on 
Ramanuja, bis great ideal Pontiff of , ,the 
Vaishnavic Visishtadvaitic Faith. | 
30. Sri Vedanta Desika was not only 
a prolific writer, bat a genius in impromptu 
works. The ‘Paduka-sabasra” a work in 
thousand verses, all with reference to a single 
theme, viz the Holy Sandals: of the Lord, was 
for example composed in three hours when his 
tle of Kavitdrkikasimha was questioned by 
other Pandits, one of whom was able to compose 
but 500 slokas called “ Padakamalasahasra ve Att 
praise of the holy feet of the Lord, taking a 
whole night for it. The unique personality of 
Desika was evident in his being a personification 
of gentleness and modesty, meekness and humi- 
lity. Only two instances out of many to prove 
this may be mentioned in this brief sketch. 
When the unfinished “ Padakamalasahasra ”’ was 
not even read in the next morning before Lord 
Ranganatha (which is the usual procedure), our 
author, whose ¢¢ Padukasahasra ’? was read and 
applauded by the scholars assembled, very 


XXX 


modestly referred to his wagerer’s production, 


instead of gloating on his own glory, as follows:— 


| gd qargadt qaacaaeagat afeta | 


FR PAU Fa aaesad essed FAT 1) 


Agaim to test Desika’s humility he was- 


invited by «a Vaishnava gentleman to his house. 
He hung some slippers over the doorway. 
Desika came and discovering that this was inten- 
ded to humiliate him, when he must pass beneath 
the slippers, he clasped them and placed them 
on his head, exclaiming :— 

° FATAGETH: BACH ASHANTI: | 

qa Xo astararal Weveasraasr: |) 
. 

31. Sri Desika had now stayed long at 
Srirangam and so a longing to visit some of the 
Holy Shrines, in the Pandya, Chera, and Chéla 
kingdoms, seized him. He therefore started on 


a tour worshipping enroute the Resident Deities 
| SECs Bee ER ee ee 


1. Ina trice doth a she-pig bring forth a hundred 
of its young ones, extremely wretched, but after a long 
time only doth a she-elephant produce a baby-elephant 


esteem-worthy of all kings. “ 


P 
2. Some lean on duties(Karma); others on wisdom. 


but we lean on the shoes of God’s lieges. 


> 


on ee ee ee ee 


XXXi 


at Srivilliputhdr, Tirunagari, ‘Tiruvellarai, 
Tiruk-kudandai, Sri Mushnam etc. and returned 
again to Kanchi to have a sight again of his most 
cloved -Lord Varadaraja. Here hewwas ex- 
pounding the Ubhaya Vedanta to his numerous 
audiences, when a snake-charmer appeared 
on the scene and challengeed his title to Sarva- 
tantrasvatantra. Though unwilling at first to 
deal with a man of this description, his disciples 
would have him do some miracle. In every 
religion we have had men who would not be 
convinced unless they saw miracles done by 
their Saviours. So Desika stooped to them and 
drawing seven lines he asked the snake charmer 
to draw forth his venomous reptiles. These were 
Jet out but none of them dare eross the lines, 
when, enraged, the charmer let out his most 
powerful cobra Sankhapala, which, crossing all 
the seven lines and hissing, made for Désika. 
But our Desika, as is already known, was Master 
of the Garuda-Mantra, antidote meet to the 
race of the cobras, and as soon as he uttered the 
same, (Garuda (the Brahman Kite) suddenly 
came and, swooping down, made away with the 


cobra. 


XXX 


39. From Kanchi, next Désika proceeded 


to Tirupati, worshipped once again Lord Srini- 
vasa and finally returned to Srirangam to spend 
the rest of his days in quiet contemplation, 
retiring from all religious wranglings, ex- 
claiming :— 

fais alaaradtaaazararaiaraaiaa 
fagaacacaesaraear arate: BA AAT: | 
aiieg adi safaaaat walsit frariqa: 

aarp araerazaraiaasiearaY 


) 


33 Pesika had vowed himself, as already 
said, to lead a life of absolute poverty. — 
A bachelor who was collecting money for his 
marriage was directed to apply to Désika for 
help. This was a mischief devised by his 
adversaries to test Desika. Our author, however, 
was meet enough to perceive the intended hoax 


ie By many repetitions of ses study of the works 
of the king of Ascetics, (Ramanuja), passed we our young 
age. Many are the days that we spent in happiness, ever 
hating the bane of service under men. Acting on the 
tradition of the virtuous, have we humbled the conceit of 
the vicious. For the rest of life, we only look forward to 
the vow of realising the fruition of the grace of the 
Perpetual Divine Couple. 


OM=(A-U-M) 
stad Waa AA: 


Bow to Blessed Ramanuja 


SANKALPA-SURYODAYA 


OR 


The Dawn of the Divine Will. 


ACT I. 


1. May Narayana, the Lord of Sri serve me 
to overcome (overcross) all contretemps,'—Nara- 
yana who is envisaged when dev otion-steeped 
dawn breaketh,—Narayana whose Will-Sunrise 
dispelleth the darkness of worldly wanderings of 
all Jivas? at the termination of Prarabdha- 


karma,’— Narayana whose super-excellence is 


1. Conception, Birth, Dotage, Death, etc., also mean- 
ing impediments in the way of completing this 
work. 

9. Embodied Souls. The word Jiva or Jiv-atman 
wherever used in this book means embodied 
Atman (soul.) 

3 That part of Karma, which has begun to fructify. 


g, g. | 


2 


ever typified by His  Truth’-(indicating p 
Weapons’ and Adornments.* 

2. May Padma’s*t Spouse, of Compassion, the 
Milky Sea, be with us to compass our success,— 
Spouse—the Target,’ right-hit by the Soul-shaft, 
from Pranava’-bow well shot by those holy’ ones 
whose fixed thoughts are, by sruti proved 


1. The Tatvas, viz, the Twente -SIX De esorick: 
According to the Sankhya-Vedantins, the 26 
categories are :— 

Fire, Air, Ether, Harth, Water (the elements) 5 


Their respective rudiments or Tanmatras 5 
2 Kiyes, 2 Ears, 2 Noses, Tongue, Skin, 

Brain and Rectum ie 
Nature (Prakriti), Mahat, Anarene Mina 

Soul and God 523 Les 

26- 

The Holy Discus ete. See Astra-biishan- 


-adhyaya in the Vishnu- 

The Holy Kaustubhba ete. ) Purana 
Sri or Lakshmi—the wife of Vishnu. 
of. WaT 4a: WTA AMABAAA | 

HIATT TA WAAAM AIL Ui 
6. The Holy Mantra Hf (Aum) 
7. Also means © The Strong. ”’ 
8. Means the Vedas (the Hindu Scriptures or 
Revelations.) 


Sone | 


) 
3) 


Graces’ (Divine), lured,—(Spouse) in whose 
bosom-mid, flasheth full the Aauwstubha® -Soul. 


Prologue ends. 


ENTER SUTRADHARA.® 


Esteemed Gentry! I am bid by 
this august assembly composed of saintly 


Sutradhara. 


men like yourselves, who, in order to 
witness festivals, have trod far and wide 
over several holy places like Srirangam, 
Tirupati, Kancbipura,  Tiru-Narayana- 
pura, Purfshdttama and Panduranga 
where our (Sarvesvaray, the Blessed Lord® 


1. With relorenae to the stron man, it mean 
Bow-string drawn to the ear. 
2. The gem obtained at the churning of the ocean and 
worn by Vishnu on his breast. (See n. 3, p. 2.) 
General Notes:—The first benedictory verse is 
intended to succinctly set forth the great efficacy of 
Bhakti (love to God), and the second, that of Prapatti 
(Surrender to God.) 
3. Stage-manager. 
4. All-Lord 7. e., Universal God. 
5. Bhagavan. (See this word explained in J.R. A.S 
by A. G. Acharya.) 


bo 


4 


is installed,—the Lord before whose lotus- 
feet the gem-set diadems of myriads of Devas 
and Asuras form, as it were, sO many 
waving lights,—the Lord whose vow always 
is to protect all who seek refuge of Him, 
whose duties are right-well done, with 
lotus-born Lakshmi co-operate,— Who, like 
the cloud (rain), quencheth the wild-fire of 
mundane misery. The dust of the different 
places of the earth hath been holy-made by 
the dust of your holy steps. Ye have 
chanced to visit, and sojourn in, this Isle of 
Srirangam, begirt by Adavéri',—your steps, 
bent hither by longings to witness festivals. 
Bid by ye, who in saintliness match with 
Ananta,? Garuda,’ Vishvakséna,'—bid by 
ye, the universally worship-worthy,—(by ye) 
exempt of the least trace of sin,—(by ye) 
whose character is in tune with high birth 


— 


egal the wind-increased 7.e., gaining freshes 
by the blowing of the South-West winds. 

The serpent-couch on which the Almighty reposes. 
The principal bird-vehicle of Vishnu, 

The Archangel and First-in-command of Vishnu. 


4 
Jv 


and learning,—(by ye) who fall foul, as doth 
the mad elephant on plantain-plants, on 
opponents heretical and agnostic, whirling 
in the vortex of perpetual illusion,—(bid by 
ye) who are the ornaments of the vast 
world,—(by ye), who are master-teachers of 
the mysteries of the Upanishads,—(by ye) 
the versed in the Circle of Sciences, by 
such worshipful Arya-worthies then (i 
am bid.) Bidden what ? 


8 This:—That I should entertain this 
august gathering with a troupe of actors 
who enact the parts of diverse human 
attributes, such as Wisdom, ete., which 
removeth the lust of men for weltering 
‘n Samsira,' by enacting a Drama in which 
the superb ninth emotion,-—Peace,—findeth 


——— 


_—— er tCtCtOtt~—~— 


1. 


2. 


The tendency to be always wordly without any 
thought of spirituality. 


Hindu Dramatists recognise ordinarily eight 
emotions :— SRST ARE MT AAA AT \ 

frre gaaa AAS Ae TAT: SAAT: Uh 

—while others recognise afeata as the ninth 


emotion. 


6 


a prominent place like other emotions, 
such as Heroism, etc., which captivate 
the minds of men, bent on Dharma,’ 
Artha’ and Kama.’ 


The mandate of this learned gathering is 
now accepted by me, with the wager,’ (that 
I shall forfeit these titles)—me known as 
Vaikuntha Vinéddin,® the son of that Master 
Dramatist Santdshapala,® the disciple of 
Sanmirgavardhana,’ the founder of the His- 
trionic Art and Lion to the actor-elephants 
of the opposite creed. And now this 
House, crowded with the elite of the place, 


Duty or Works. | These three and salva- 
tion (Mdksha) are the recog- 
(soods or Riches. \ nised 4 ends and aims of 


iinjopaneiee, | life (purusharthas). Peace is 
required for Moksha, 

The wager is the relinquishment of the claim for 

all the good qualities for the manager, ii the 

particular Drama bidden be not enacted to the 

satisfaction of the said audience. 

Lit., Entertainer of the residents of Vaikuntha, 

the abode of Sri Narayana. 

Lit., The enhancer of happiness. 

Lit.,. The cultivator of righteous ways. 


7 


seemeth all eager to witness this divine 


performance. 


4. Now doth shine this assembly with 
highly illustrious men, who well discrimi- 
nate Natya,' Désa,” Marga,” but who would 
turn deaf ears to all unscientific perfor- 
mances, and who seem, as it were, the 
guardian-angels of the Histrionic Art. 


I now therefore bow to the Primeval 
Lord, the Donor of all treasures of wisdom, 
the Manifester of Supreme Essence, even 
in His different Incarnations such as the 
Fish ete., the Exsiccator of the ocean of 
ignorance, and the Destroyer of devotion 


to other deities. 


5. May, the Horse-faced! VAsudeva’s’ 


——————$——————— 


Gesturing by putting oneself in the position of 
the character impersonated. 

Dancing in keeping with beating time and music. 
Dancing with gesturing. 

Hayanana (Hayagriva)-—one of Vishyu’s incar- 
nations. 

Sri Nardyana,—the All-pervader. 


8 


Form known as Vigisa', the Dawn to the 
night of nescience, the unique Collyrium 
to the eye of wisdom and the Elucidator 
of the Vedas, illumine me ! 


(With hands suppliant). 


6. May Sriman Narfyana, who assumeth 
the twice-five Incarnations, to Whom the 
pious, full of devotion in the holy shrine of 
Srirangam, ever do resort,—Nardyana with 
whose diverse Incarnations, Lakshmi, 
assuming appropriate Forms Herself, doth 
co-operate with him in His manifold works,” 


make us all blessed. 


1. Muse or the Lord of poetic inspiration. 


The double meaning implied in the 6th Sloka is :— 
May the sportive Nata, (Chief Actor) who 
assumeth the guise of different characters, who 
is assisted by several actors, all highly appreci- 
ative of the stage,—the Nata in whose diverse 
actions the Nati herself, also putting om 
appropriate guises, doth co-operate with. 
suitable gestures, give us all joy. 


2. Works such as saving the good ete. 


——_——_——_ 


Lk 


9 


(Seeming meditative for a moment, and 
then with joy.) 


Graced am I now by the mercy ot 
the Almighty, who hath in His hands. 
the very be-ness of all beings. 


| and 


- | shall therefore now establish the faith 
of the Acharyas,! making Wisdom’ the pivot 
of this Drama, discussing at the same time 
the moot points of the Histrionic Art, 
rendered fragrant by constant researches. 
conducted in the field of the Upanishads”. 


(Turning towards the curtain ) 


Let this stage now.be graced with 


the presence of thy ladyship. 


The founders of Visishtadvaita Philosophy— 


Nathamuni, Yamuna, Ramanuyja etc. 
The Drama in which Vivéka (wisdom ) is the hero, 


The metaphysical writings attached to the Brah- 
manas, the chief aim of which 1s to ascertain the 


gecret meaning of the Vedas. 


10 
ENTER NATI.' 


Nati.—At thy service, Sir! This thy beloved 


servant awaiteth thy commands. 


Sutradhara.—Are our expert dramatis persone 
getting ready by wearing various 
guises, suited to the rdle to be played in 
obedience to the behests of this serene 
assembly ? 


Nati.—My Lord! Surely the troupe of actors 
hasten, who are as much subject to thy 
control, as thy limbs, hands, legs, eyes, 
ete, are, the moment thou thinkest of them. 
By the way, I have one thing to ask of 
thee :—What is the name and nature of 


the play about to be staged ? 


Sutradhara.—My Love! lKnowest thou not 
the new Drama, named Sankalpa-stiryddaya, 


the hero of which is Vivéka P 


8. It is only the wise, who know the 


——  C~ ee — —_ —E fetes 


1. Chief actress—generally the wife of the Sitra- 
dhara. 


11 


true nature of Paramatman' and of 
Jivatman? that will appreciate the singular 
plot of this Drama, where, the good and 
bad aspects of Jiva’ personate their res- 
pective presiding deities, and constitute 
the diverse characters (consequent). 


9. This striking performance will appeal 
even to men worldly disposed, for as much 
as it aboundeth in, (the demonstration of) 
the emotion of Heroism, evidenced in the 
conquest of Mahéméha® by Vivéka,—in the 
emotion of Mercy by the attitude’ of the 
Lord,—in the emotion of Peace by the 
attitude of the Jiva seeking for salvation. 


Words fail me to adequately convey 
the singular significance of this Drama. 
‘ountless are the conches in the ocean, but 


not one of them can be the Conch Pancha- 


Supreme Spirit (God.) 92. Embodied Soul. 
Grand Illusion. 


Protecting the virtuous and destroying the vicious 
&e.  [vide, Bhagavad-gita ; paritranaya &e. | 


12 


janya,! adorning the lotus hand of Vishnu ! 


10. Let those ordinary rubies of little 
lustre which deceive the simple world 
remain in the mansions of the rich; of 
what avail are these ?—think of this for 
a while ; could any even among the oldest 
rubies? stand comparison, with that ruby 
which illumineth the Mole Srivatsa on 
Vishnu’s breast and which acteth as a 
mirror to Sri Lakshmi’s sports 


The matter to be mentioned presently 
is the rarer feature of this Drama :— 


1. The name of the Conch worn as a Weapon in the 
hand of Vishnu. 


The implied meaning of verse (10) is :— 
Wordly dramas seduce the minds of simple- 
tons . who eannot discriminate the main 
essentials of a scientific drama, but this is a rare 
drama (spiritual) which baffles all comparison 
with other dramas. 


2. Such as the Syamantaka—a ruby for which Lord 
Krishna fought hard with Jambavan, Sri Rama's 
Bear-Chieftain. or fuller particulars, read Sya- 
mantaka-Upakhydna, Canto X, Sri Bhagavata. 


13 


11. The plot of this Drama is so arranged 
as to discriminate the good from the bad. 
It is wrought by a playwright. of high 
altruistic temperament, whose mastery of 
the Upanishads is well | renowned, the 

_ special object set in view being the salva- 
tion of mankind. 


Nati.—My Lord’! Whose opus. is this Drama ? 
This audience doth evince sympathy for 
-begot,.by its sense of high veneration 

held for this. self-same dramaturgist ! 


‘Sutradhara.—My Love ! Didst thou not hear 
this :-— 


That there is a Poet named Sré 
Vénkatanatha, the: son of Anantasdri,—res- 
pected all over the world,—the wonder of the 
universe,—the ornament of the Visvdmitra’- 


Gotra,—the Lotus’ to the “td ‘of - cciaiabel 


|) —<—$—<— + T —$—$—$<—— 


1. Kausika-Gotra or descent, ong of the ‘auiiant 
Gotras by which the twiee-born are recognised. 


2. The Goddess of learning;’' Sarasvati, is supposed 
to live in the lotus flower. Stripped of the figure, 
the meaning is the seat of all Jearning. 


14 


Sarasvati,—the Treasure-house of injinite vir- 
tues, and himself the son of Pundarikaksha- 
Sdmayajii—Venkatanatha, the acquirer of 
the additional name of Véddntacharya 
through the divine commands’ of Lord 


Ranganatha,—the wearer of the renowned 


I. A large number of Advaiti Pandits trom the North 
of India hailed once to Srirangam and challenged 
the Vaishnava savants there that they must 
either conquer them in controversy or embrace 
their creed. In fear and anxiety the Vaishnavas 
of Srirangam sent word to Vénkatanatha 
at Kanehi (Conjeevaram), who, responding, came 
all the way to Srirangam and in Lord Ranga- 
natha’s temple defeated the Advaitins, after seven 
days’ disputation. A full report of this disputation 
is collected and shaped into a book called 
Sataddshani. Lord Raiganatba, immensely 
pleased at the great abilities of our Venkatanatha 
addressed him thus :— 


“ Well are we pleased that thou hast put 
down thy opponents and established the 
Ramanfja-Siddhanta which alone describes 
our nature truly. From now thou shalt be 


known in the world by our own title ‘ Sri 
Vedantacharya.” (See Biographical sketch.) 


15 


title of Kavitarkika-simha,'—by virtue of his 
abilities, the dispeller of all doubts likely 
to arise in all sciences and arts’,—the 
Acharya whose disciples hoist his triumph- 
ant banners in all the quarters ten. 


12. Ever do the virtuous, who appreciate 
the sweet fragrance of this author’s work 
which are composed of soft®, hard,* and 
middiing® expressions resembling a garland 
made of (diverse) flowers, admire him. 


13. Of the race, the progenitor of which 
WAS eapable of endowing® the cosmos. with 


Lit. The Lion of Poetry and Logic. 


Sarvatantra-svatantra—the title given by Sri 
Ranganayaki on the same occasion. For fuller 
particulars the readers are referred to the life 
sketch of Vedanta Desika prefixed to this book. 


HaRAsaTeATAI 
HAR SATa ATT 
The allusion here is to Visvamitra proclaiming 
in anger, disappointed at Indra's obstrueting 


16 


anew Indra, or creating a new cosmos 
without an Indra, the self-same race as 
that of the universal mother Savitri—the 
cause of rebirth’, according to the sages, 
of the twice-born, our author was born. 


Further— 
14. Wise men surmise, through close 
reasoning that this author is the Incar- 
nation? of the Vishnu’s Bell, used in 
His ME ge ey the lotus-seated (Praja- 


Piicunku's Pre to Svarga because of the 
latter’s desire to enter into Svarga with his 
physical body, which Visvamitra undertook to 
do. The implication is, our author Vénkata- 
natha is capable of miracles no less than that 
of his renowned ancestor. 

of, Beqreyes BRITA Sar aT Balas: | 

Ramayana—Bala Kanda. 

1. The Upanayana or Thread Ceremony in which 
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, and Vaisyas, take their 
spiritual birth after chanting the Gayatri; hence 
these three castes are also known as the Twice- 
Born. 

of. alfasar araraaaa: 

2. Vedintichirya is the incarnation of the Holy 

: Bell at Tirupati, vide his life sketch. 


17 


pati!), the Bell that frighteneth the 
armies of the Asuras’. 


15. To gratify the Lord Supreme, the 
Blessed Venkatanatha, the master of all 
knowledge at his twentieth year, and 
the expounder of Brahmasiitra- Bhashya® 
to his disciples a score and ten times, 
composed this superb and melodious’ drama, 
surcharged with superior sense. 


Nati.—My Lord! How shall the tough com- 


1 
2 
3. 
4 


on 


position of this Poet, always bent on 
Védantic researches, and whose adamantine 
logic uprooteth the trees of Pashandas,’ 


be fit tobe put on boards by persone 
like us? 


Sutradhara.—(Smiling) Lady! I shall just 


Semi Creator (Brahma or the Demiurge.) 

The Demons—the enemies of the Gods. 

Srt Bhashya of Sri Ramanuja. 

The word used in the origina) has another 
meaning v22., “+5 conformity with the Srutis.” 


Those who treat the Supreme Lord Sri Nara- 
yana as but the equal of other deities. 


% 8 2 


18 


reply to the first of your two questions!. 
Thinkest thou this Author is one who 
hath merely restrained the actions of his 
senses and who hath merely fixed his 
mind intently on the enjoyment of the 
Supreme Being ? If so, I shall just tell 
thee the following :— 


16. If the Muse, worthy of the galaxy 
of the sages, Manu, Vyasa and Valmiki, 
fragrant with ambrosia, desireth herself to 
grace a person, who could stay her ? 
Will any stop the Ganga which falleth on 
the matted hair of Siva, as arid as the 
Vindhya Mount, if she falleth. of her own 
accord, on a lame person? I shall now 
answer the second question. 


17. Doth not the celestial Ganga, with a 
a eee 
1. The two questions are:—1. How could language 


used for philosophic researches be made to suit a 
dramatic production? 2. How could language 
used for vehement disputations with opponents 
fit in for a dramatic production ? : 


The implication in verse 17 is:—There igs nothing 
inconsistent in an author who is usually an 
expert disputant composing a melodious drama. 


19 


force sublime and so terrible as to split 
mountains like the Himilaya, and which 
maketh even the head of Siva tremble, 
spread her sweet, clear and beautiful waters 
on the Earth as well? 


Nati.—_(With joy). What my Lord sayeth 
is right, but how to account for the 
embodiment of the Emotion of Peace in 
this Drama when the Masters .of the His- 
trionie Art maintain that there is no such 
thing as that emotion ? 


Sutradhara.—(contemptuously.) 


Lady ! Them, then, I do not consider 
as connoisseurs of the Histrionic Art. 


18. Methinks that they hold the opinion 
that tae Emotion of Peace could not be 
enacted, perhaps because of the difficulty to 
Gnd in this world an audience to appreciate 
that emotion. 


Further :— 


19. The Erotic Emotion pampereth the 
ways of the wicked; the Emotion of 


20 


Valour breedeth mutual contempt; the 
Kmotion of Wonder bordereth on the 
grotesque ; the other Emotions are paltry 
enough. But Peacealone then by elimination 
is the Emotion that allayeth the agony of 
the mind. 


Nati.—This superior Emotion (Peace) is of 
the experience of great sages, such as, 
Sanaka, Sanandana and others. Still how 
could this Emotion, the essence of which is. 
Y6ga which is attainable only by the 
control of the sense-group, be represented 
in a drama, fit alone to be witnessed by 


philistines ? 


Sutradhara.—Lady ! Say notso. For:— 
for thee to raise this doubt, we are not going 
to depict the creed of Alépakas,' who give 
up the performance of all duties. 


There are the Varndsrama’ duties, 
expounded times without number, by the 


1. Those who maintain that the renunciation of 
‘dutios entails no sin on man e.q. the Sankhyas ete. 


9. Duties ordained for the different Castes and Orders. 


we 


& 


21 


Divine Lord Krishna,'—duties ennobled by 
the doctrine of Satvikatydga’ and which 
could not be abandoned even by the adhe- 
rents of Nivritti-Dharma.’ It 1s the dis- 
charge of these duties that giveth the 
lovers of Ranga’ their lives’ goal.’ Further 
hear and see more, about the greatness of 
the true Histrionic Art. 


For, it is said :— 


20, That which could not be depicted in 
a Drama is neither Sastra’ nor Vidya," 


LEcf. aaa aa wate ep fa 
eqisaa | ax aa HS WTA cqmeareaat AA: Uh 
[Bh. Gi.] 
Dedication of the fruit of action to God. [ See n. 1.| 
Duties pertaining to the realisation of Mdksha. 
Two meanings:—(1) Lovers of Srirangam; (2) 
Lovers of the Stage. 
Two meanings :—(1) Livelihood. (2) Soul-pilgri- 
mage. The implication is that the performance of 
Nityakarma is obligatory even for Yogis so long 
as they retain life. 
Sciences relating to Véda, 14 in number. 
Study relating to Vedanta. 

Dahara, Kubara, Madhu, etc. 


22 


Silpa,* nor Kala,? Yoga’ nor Jnana‘. 


Nati.—A herculian task hast thou taken upon 


thyself ! With fickleness natural to woman- 
folk, I tremble with fear at the thought of 
the leaders of the opposite creed who are 
seized with the demon of envy. 


Sutradhara.—lLady! Enough of thy timidity. 


OM Se 


Now fortune is in our favor. 
For: — 


21. Faultless are the rich characteristics 
of this Drama, and its exquisite elegance 
is to the taste of a friendly audience. 
No small circumstances these, conducive 
to the appreciation of a dramatic troupe. 


Further :— 


22. All alert (too) is the best of poets 
Vénkatésa—the seat of the treasure of 


Ayurvéda ete. 
(64) Arts. 
Yama, Niyama, etc. 


Knowledge of the Brahman. 


i. 


23 


knowledge ;_ proficient in the art of 
Drama is our troupe by long practice ; 
renowned and impartial is this distin- 
guished gathering . and our stage is 
Srirangam, the heirloom! of Sri Rama 
and others (of the Raghu- Race). 


Thou hast also to consider this :— 


23 Let men devoid of quiescence choose 
to extol or censure this work, itself full 


Lord Ranga appeared before Prajipati in His 
Pranavakara- Vimana and Prajapati was worship- 
ping Him for several years in Satyaléka, when 
the latter presented Him to Ikshvaku, the pro- 
genitor of the race of Sri Rama, through his son 
Manu. Sri Rima made a present of this, his family 
deity, Ranga to Vibhishana, who then set out 
for Lanka, with the desire of installing Lord 
Ranga there for his worship, but lo! when he 
reached the present isle of Srirangam between 
the two branches of the Kaveri, Ranga was so 
enamoured of the shady groves and green 
verdure of the isle that he took His abode there 
and declined to accompany Vibhishana any 
further. Such is the sanctity of Srirangam, the 
place where this drama was first staged. (“ Sri- 


ranga- Mahatmyam ”’ will give fuller particulars.) 


dy 
2. 


ef. 


24 


of the Emotion of Peace and the treasure 
of the serene, according to the bent of 
their own minds. Why say much here ? 
It matters not. The universe is not 
without an Isvara!; the fourteen witnesses? 
appointed by Him watch everything, 


Surely, even if envy and other bad 
passions by chance enter the minds of 
the wise,. they disappear as quickly as 
they rise, like the lightning-flash. 


24. Seized with envy, may men droop 


their heads down and remain silent at 
the first mention of this work, but the 
self-same persons (on hearing a few words 
of this work) shall nod their heads, their 


Shprenia: fora: 


(1) The Sun. (8) Mina. 

(2) ,, Moon. (9) God of Death. 
03)? cs Waid, (10) Day. 

(4): 5 Bie: (11) Night. 

(5) ,, “Ether. (12) Dawn. 

(6) ,, Water. (13) Dusk. 

(7) Harth. (14) Duty. 

oa feoraezra acinar anyad ea aa 


Hea UAA BAT PA qa waa aweq a i 


25 


body thrilling through like the cluster 
of Kadamba' flowers, blossoming at the 
first appearance of Winter. Then, though 
they half-close their eyes for shame, they 
suddenly lift their heads up and extol 
of their own accord the elegance of our 
work. 
Or = 


Let it be that these men part nob 
with their envy and let their hearts 


burn with malice. In any case:— 


95. Ousted we are not by the lovers of 
the Histrionic Art which the high-souled 
Bharata ordained for the good of the world, 
—Art?, the essence of which is indicated 
by the three letters of the alphabet 4, %, 4, 
constituting his name, and which stand 
respectively for Thought’, Music’ and 


Action’. 


cal is. ss 

1. A kind of tree (said to put forth buds at the 
roaring of thunder-clouds. ) 

9. The Science of Music which is the auxiliary to 
Sama-Véda. 

3. wa, 4. ct, 5. ae. 


26 


Nati.—Be it so, my Lord! Still how shall 


we in spite of our vigilance fulfil our 
promise, when so many are our opponents, 
so learned’ in several of the sciences and 
eager to pick holes in us ? 


Sutradhara.—Ah, thou extoller of others’ 


virtue! Why so much regard for 
numerical superiority ? Or perhaps, some 
indulge in putting endless questions, 
just to make doubly sure of what they 
already know; probably thou art one of 
them,—never mind. Esteem only the 
purely intelligent persons. 


For :— 


“6. One®, though gifted with several 
stained’ kalas, decayeth gradually, but one 
though gifted with a single stainless‘ kala, 


Also means :-— 


2. 
3. 


Capable of only putting endless questions. 
The Moon or a certain person. 


The decaying phases of the Moon or little: 
knowledge in all the 64 arts. 


Chandra Kala or full knowledge in one art. 


27 
attaineth the estate of Girisa’. 


Therefore gratifying the Lord Supreme 
through this Histrionic Art, commended 
by sages such as Parasara? and Vy4sa",— 
Art which would not countenance the 
ways of the wicked and which is of 
ancient practice, we shall make the audience 
so blest, all alert. 


(With suppliant hands and humility ). 


27, Oh, ye learned savanis of the 
Histrionic Art! ye shall now be all steady 
and all attentive to witness the several 
connecting links’ of this Drama, wherein, 


the hero of the play, Viv¢ka; shall embark 


——————— 
——$——— 


1. Siva or Eloquence in words. 
26-cf. Drink deep or touch not the Pierian Spring. 
A little learning is a dangerous thing ; 
9 The author of the Smriti of the same name 
and the father of Vyasa. 


3. The reputed author of Brahma: sitras, Maha- 
bharata ete. 

4 Fe, Maya, 4, aaqat, Tae, STAT. In this 
gloka the whole plot of the play 1s briefly 
indicated. 


or 


28 


on his enterprise’, (to accomplish Méksha 
for Jiva), shall attempt to put down his 
enemies’, shall create an infinite longing 
for liberation’, shall practice Ydga to 
please Murari thereby, and shall bring 
about the consummation to Jiva of the 
joy of the Brahman’. 


(Behind the curtain ). 


28. The endeavours of the vicious® are: 
thwarted like darkness dispelled by the 


POUT TATARSTAN AAAaaA 
—The argument of the first Act. 

MATAR | faesaaaaqaey— 
The argument of the second Act. 

The arguments of the third to the eighth acts, 


both inclusive. 


Murari=The Enemy of the demon Mura= Vishnu. 


The argument of the ninth act—etaqaiiy- 
aarqyEa 


The argument of the tenth act—@#Manenma- 
AAeqIEY, 


When applied in the case of Vivéka, this means 
the enterprise of Mahamoha, etc. 


29 


rays of the sun by the performance’ of this 
Drama enacted by experts’ so as to suit 
the occasion,>—performance not conflict- 
inet with the ways of the virtuous. 


Sutradhara.—(Listening with joy). 


a 


on 


Lady! Hear this well ; -——This song 
introducing the actors indicateth our goal 
as well as that of the Mumukshu’. 


99. This far-sighted self,’ as well as- 
Vivéka is capable of vanquishing respec- 
tively wicked rival actors and Mahamoha. 


(Behind the curtain). 


‘© When I, wearing the hard and sweet 
sugar-cane bow, and the fragrant vernal 
flower-shafts in my hand, am alive, and 


- Algo means practice of Karrmanushthana in the: 


case of Prapanna. 
Other meanings: —(1) Expert actors (2) Prapannas - 
(3) The Sun. 

Also means—Karma prescribed for the different 
Varnasramas. 

Also means—The sun not transgressing the 
prescribed bounds in the sky. 

One longing for Bliss. 

Means:—Sttradbara. 


30 


inspire terror to my enemy-hosts, who is 
this cursed member of the dramatic troupe 
that longeth from the side of our enemy, 
for something not fit to be mentioned 
before our sovereign Lord, Mahimdha, the 
Ruler of the minds of all Dévas, Asuras, 
sages and men, the partner in life of 
Durmati,’ and the great actor in the theatre 


of war @”’. 


Sutradhara—( Looking round in fear and 


A Se ee 


canfusion),. 


Lady! Who is yon fellow coming 
attended, with eyes reddened, with bound- 
less anger ? I now see to my dismay :— 


30. That this is no other than Kama, 
the guardian-angel of the chief goal of 
life of those who uphold, Dharma,? Artha® 
and Kama,‘ the impediments to the attain- 
ment of Moksha’, 


Evil sense. 

Duty or works. 

Wealth or goods. 

Passion. When personified, this is Cupid. 
Bliss. | | 


1. 


yo 


31 


31. It is this Kama that reduced the 
manliness of Mahésvara' by just one-half, 
that chastiseth those who scoff at Passion, 
the Third End of life. Facing us cometh 
this flower-weaponed Kama, leaning his 
throbbing arm on Rati? who walketh with 
an amorous, sportive gait. 


Therefore we shall withdraw quickly 
and conceal ourselves from this mortal 
world, where Cupid’s festivals are in full 
swing and in tune with the current season, 
and deliberate what should be done later. 


(Hveunt). 
| Preface ends. ] 


(Enter Kama, reclining his arm on 
Vasantae and accompanied by his sweet- 
heart). 
Lord Siva, through the influence of Kama 
had to transform himself to a form, half-man, 
half-woman, and is known as Ardhanartsvara. 
Goddess of Love and Wife of Kama. 

Spring. 


32 


Kama.—(Repeating “When I, wearing the 
hard and sweet sugar-cane-bow, ete.” 


Ah, thou disgrace to the Bharata race? 


32. What quarter in, will timid Vivéka hide, 
Shot by arrow-glances of the dames 
[ blue-lotus-eyed,. 
Whose bow-brows vie with lovely creepers” 
[charms, 
Glances aiming at minds tender, besmeared 
[ with lustful conquering charms ?' 


Vasanta.—(Aside). What vain castles in the 
air doth this insolent Kama _ build ? 
Though I am counted’ as one among 
the conductors of the Archiridi-marga,” 
my long friendship with Kama, I am 
not, all of a sudden, able to sever. 


(Aloud) Friend, Fish-bannered Kama ! 


——— 


Vasanta or the Spring being one of the seasons 
in UttarAyana,—one of the conductors of the 
virtuous to Moksha. 


2. The way to Moksha by which virtuous men 
are conducted. 


33 


True! I shall inaugurate thy great 
festival, which bringeth victory to our 
oreat King Mahdmoha and driveth Vivéka 
away- 


Look there:— 


o> 


33. In spring do sport lustful lovers, 
who have the bees hovering over the 
blossomed blue lilies worn on their tufts, 
who hold in their arms golden-syringes 
and who have disordered forelocks which 
are besmeared with saffron-paste drenched 
by water driblets, diffusing the fragrance 
of musk, emanating from the lJeather- 
sprinklers, pressed by damsels’ hands. 


Kama.—Very well, Vasanta! This is iv our 


———————— 


1. 


favor. This vile Vivéka is in every way 
vanquished almost, for, this great festival 
is begun in the regions bordering the 
Kaveri, before which the places of diversion 
in Svarga’ pale. 


34. Here we see the Kaveri, which aboun- 


The abode of the Devas (Immortals.)—the Hindu 
paradise. 


$. 5. 3 


34 


deth in full-blown lotuses,—Kaveri which 
spreadeth her freshes, overflowing her 
either banks, and filling the several stream- 
lets branching off, and watering the adjacent 
lands,—K veri which looketh mossy with 
the daily-bathing sportive Chola-damsels’ 
tresses, and which seemeth smiling with 
white swan-pair’s’ presence. 


Rati._My Lord! This great festival lacketh 
its usual eclat, for, troubled is my mind 
at the thought that for some inexplicable 
reason the invincible and persevering Vivéka 
is the enemy of our Lord Mahdamdha ! 


Kama.—Ah, thou simpleton! Ah, thou life of 
Kama! thou presiding deity of damsels ! 
How is it that when thou shouldst rejoice 

at the gain of a mighty foe, thou with 

fiickleness natural to women, praisest the 


1. The presence of white swan-pairs i.c., husband 
and wife in the Kaveri makes one fancy that 
the river is smiling. Sanskrit rhetoricians con- 
cede a white colour to smiles and the Hamsa’s 
(Swan's) colour being also white, the river is said 
to be smiling. 


35 


alory of Viveka? 


Look here :— 


35. Was not even Siva, of the mighty 
Méru!-bow, with fire-shafts accompanied. 
by high-wind, for a moment unable to 
transgress the mandates of me, whose hand 
holdeth the charming sugarcane-bow, and 
whose fllower-shafts are fixed in the bee- 
made bow-string ? 


Vasanta._Madam! True! Take this not for 


pee 


a joke. The musquito can never the 
elephant’s foe be, or perhaps, ignorant thou 
art of the world’s ways. Thy lover's 
heroic exploits are known throughout the 
world. . 


For :— 


36. Sarasvati,? the first Védhah® beareth in 
his tongue, full of the chant of the Védas ; 


to a feminine! form, Siva’s left side was 


a ee. 


The golden mountain. 

The goddess of learning. 

The four-faced Demiurge. 
Ardhanarisvara (See n. 1, p. 31.) 


36 


transformed ; even the supreme Vishnu* 
was under the sway of cowherdesses. How 
then shall others escape the torments of 
Kama P 


Kama.—Well, Vasanta ! Thou _ speakest 


opportunely. 


37. Shall Viveka face me, when I oppose 
him with the flower-shafts lent by thee, 
to bring the whole universe under the 


sway of young damsels ? 


Rati.—Forsooth, my Lord! But my mind is 


still perturbed at the thought, when and 
what the persevering Vivéka, safely instal- 
led in the invulnerable strong fortress 
of Vairaigya? and guarded by the ever 
vigilant ministers, Sama®, Dama‘ etc, 


himself a matchless warrior, may do ? 


with the Gdopis. 
Dispassion. 
Control of the five external senses. 


do, do. the internal sense. 


The reference is to Lord Krishna’s dalliance: 


37 
Kama.—Ah, timid lady! Enough of thy 
excessive doubts. Thou seemest to be 
deceived by the simple fools devoted to 
our enemies, and so dost not understand 


the greatness of thy own party. 


Look for a while on the victo rious 
weapons known in all the worlds three, of 


thy beloved, the conqueror of the universe ! 


38. Is not my premier bow the matchless 
frame of damsels, whose slender waist doth 
not exceed my wrist-hold, whose constant 
beauty is the bow-string, and whose ear- 
reaching and daintily curved eyes are the 
beautiful shafts ? 


Further— 


39. If the melodious names of the sweet 
prattling damsels be but heard, it driveth 
all demeanour to a distance; good-bye it 
biddeth to peace of mind ; modesty, it 
doth destroy ; dispassion, it doth extermi- 


nate ; what else will it not do? 


Vasanta.--Surely, this 1s a proposition a fortiori. 
Even the casual mention or hearing of 


38 
a Woman’s name causeth mental distraction. 


40. Let alone the fact that the thought 
of women and their glances, prattles, etc, 
in an admiring spirit, driveth dispassion 
away toa distance. The thought of them, 
even In a carping spirit, doth surely drive 
dispassion away. 


Besides— 


41. The attempt to restrain the mind, 
full of passion and wandering in the 
various woodlands of the senses, purely 
by one’s own effort', is as impossible as: 
that of trying to bind the Airfvata? with 
a lotus-fibre. 


Rati.—My lord! Thou shalt so ply thy prowess 
as to evade the ken of the great yogis*, 
who are able to break the strone old 
illusion-that body and soul are identical. 


Kama.—( Laughing) My love! Methinks the 
fear of thy eyes hath seized thy heart 


a 
1. Also means without God’s grace. 


2. Indra’s elephant. 3. Practicers of Yoga. 


39 


as well. Even the best of yogis shall be 
made by me to prostrate at the feet of 
the (young) maiden yogis-in-chief ! 


42. Hast thou not heard (too) of a superior 
dual form, blended in one’, by (means of) 
my apparently tender but really hard 
missiles,—form, the half of which formeth 
the armour of the other, the half life of 
which dependeth on the half life of the 
other ? 


Rati._My Lord! Thy greatness is well known 
to me, but Lam distressed, like the plantain 
(tree) shaken in a heavy gale, to think 
when and what may befall us, through 
the force of our ever- persevering, far- 
sighted foe, strong to command and 
counsel alike, favored by God, and aided 
by several co-operators, such as Yama,” 
Niyama,” ete. Well known it is that the 


i ann eS 


1. The form referred to 1s Ardhanarisvara, See, 
n. 1,—p. 31. 

9 adticaraaria fa WF ATA: | 

9g faqng a ean AAAI ATTA, | 


9&3. The first two angas oF means of attaining Yoga. 


40 


power of knowledge bringeth about reali- 
sation of rare results, stretching unto 


Moksha itself ! 
Kama,—( With sarcastic smile). 


Ah, thou simplteton and sweet prattler ! 


Where is the scope for wisdom in 
the presence of me—thy beloved, whose 
flower-shafts fixed on the humming bee 
bowstring, have the universe for their 
target, and whois ever confident of victory ? 


By what means can salvation be 
(possibly) secured (while Lam) ? Indeed the 
Slenderness of thy waist is perhaps not 
evident in thy mind! 


(Smiling again in jest). 
Yes, my love! That, I See! [ See !! 


The heaviness of thy breasts hath 
(evidently) obsessed thy brain (or mind) 
as well, or, perhaps thou art no exception 
to thoughtless talk, characteristic of char- 
ming women! 


41 


Look here! 


43. Incited by me, Krodha’ shall create 
infinite ignorance ; this shall bring about 
failure of memory, which in turn shall 
obstruct the ‘influence of intellect on Jiva $ 
Jiva, bereft of intellect, shall fall mto 
abysmal darkness and perish there. When it 
doth so matter, what shall stupid Viveka do? 


Therefore Vivéka’s ministers, Sama,” 
Dama? and others, shall never withstand 
the overwhelming might of our phalanx. 
By himself, invincible is Mahamdoha, whose 
left foot is planted on the diadems of all 
Dévas and Asuras. A hyena is no equal 
to the Lion, the lord of beasts ! 


44. Even the mightiest of foes shall, in 


due time, be discomfited by my weapons* 


43. 


Be 
4. 


of. AAA FIA: PATRAS AAT | 
arargata aare: aaleresiataaa: | 
ea aMaUgreara Jaarasaqreait 


(Bh. Gi.] 
Anger. 2&3. See n, 3&4 p. 36. 


afaezaarh A Ad A ATAHAT | 
ASKS A TAA THANE AAT: | 


Rati. 


a 


cr 


42 


five, which compare indeed with the 
weapons’ five of the Lord Supreme 


(Himself). 


45. Not to speak of the other Dévas, the 
ever-penanceful Lord’? of Badarikfsrama 
Himself, who expoundeth before the assem- 
bly of sages the doctrines of Mdksha, 
as acceptable as the Védas, betrayeth - his 
Vairigya by His thigh-posts, procreating 
the woman-jem Urvasi’. 


Husband dear! I take thy word for 
truth. Thy prowess never failed from over 
the First Maker down to the last worm. Still 


UG Ah Wal Ws aA 
Narayana. 


The allusion here is:—When Narayana was 
practising severe austerities in Badarikasrama, 
Indra, afraid of his position, sent down some of 
his nymphs to distract the penance of Narayana, 
who to put the nymphs to shame created from 
His thigh a woman who surpassed the nymphs 
in beauty. On seeing Urvasi (7.e., born of thigh), 
the nymphs went away, seeing their efforts 
fell fruitless against Narayana. 


43 


I have one thing more to ask of thee, not 


known to me yet. 


Kama.— What is that ? 


Rati. 


What is the cause of the enmity, as 
between the lion and the elephant, 
between Viveka and his party on the one 
side, and Mahamoha and his party on the 
other P 


Kama.—Love mine ! Thou shalt hear about this: 


——— 


1. 


3. 


from the very beginning. 


46. The chaste lady named Buddhi! lived 
with Jiva, in the abode of MAalaprakriti,” 
and was ever devoted to him. She brought 
forth three sets of progeny from the tri- 
quality-bounded Jiva, each at a time, with 
a quality preponderating. The first of 
these is the set, Vivéka and his band— 
the haters of worldly enjoyments, the 
second and third set is the joint family of 


Raga® and Moha’* combined. 


ee 


Intellect 2. The root cause of nature composed 
of the attributes, Satva, Rajas and Tamas 
(Goodness, Passion and Inertia.) 

Attachment. 4. [llusion. 


44 


In this triple family, Vivéka and 
Mahdimoha were respectively installed, as 
suzerain lords, by subjects akin to them in 
disposition. 


47. Of these, the wedded wife of Mdha 
is Durmati," with an eye ever adverse to 
Moksha, and the devoted wife of Vivéka 
is Sumati,” with an eye ever adverse to 
sense-lusts. 


Rati.— And then ? 


Kama.—Like the clan of Rakshasas co-operating 
with Asuras, Radga and others, having 
passion as their dominant trait fulfil the 
function of ministers to MahAmoha, born 
of the race of Tamas and the Lord Para- 
mount of Samsara, The race of Vivéka, 
born of Satva, lacketh a large following 
and claimeth but few votaries in the world. 
Our progenitor Jiva, though by nature 
neutral, is now, through the influence of 
his wedded wife Buddhi, just at this 
moment inclined towards us, and this, the 


1. Evil mind. 2. Good mind. 


- 


49 


ever wicked Viveka and bis band brook. 
not. Like the man of polemics defeating his 
own argument, not realising its weakness, 
these, unmindful of their own ruin, long 
to deprive Jiva of his temporal joys, along 
with us, who desire to advance those Joys. 
They impute iniquities to Prakriti so 
long enjoyed by our progenitor Jiva and 
have so far, by some unknown meansy 
succeeded in creating in him an aversion 
for the same, and they attempt to make 
him embark on a long never -to-return 
journey’. In this, Viyeka and his brood 
‘Illustrate the action of the mos' wicked 
Sugriva and Vibhishana, the respective 
lords of the Monkey and Rikshasa races 
who deserted? their own kith and kin. 
Difficult it is to describe the state of Jiva,. 


—————— 


Archiridimarga. 

The allusion here is to Sugriva desorting his 
brother Valin, and Vibhishana his brother 
Ravana, the two joining the side of Sri Rama 
and thus bringing about the destruction of their 
brothers. For fuller particulars, vide Ramayana— 
Kishkindha, and Yuddha, Kandas. 


46 


at the time when Viveka maketh such an 


attempt. 


48. Owing to the vile Viveka and his 
_ party, born-blind is this Jiva in discerning 
others’ faults; foremost among the dumb 
in censuring others ; stone-deaf in hearing 
others censured ; practically effeminate in 
enticing others’ wives ; ignorant in influen- 
cing others; and abashed even to behold 
others. 


Therefore it is that we desire to 
exterminate them, rupturing all fraternity. 
We oppose them with the aid of Pravritti’ 
Dharma, and they oppose us with the 
aid of Nivritti? Dharma. - Their clan, having 
Satva for its essence, shall soon be over- 
powered by ours, like the glow-worm by 


the sun’s ravs. 


49. Thus it was that love between the 
two brotherly families was lost, and enmity 
arose, owing to the difference in their 


— 


1. Occupation. 


2. Renunciation. 


47 


respective prime inborn qualities. Are 

not the Devas and Asuras, born of the same 

Kasyapa' Prajapati, life-long enemies 2 
Rati.—Hush, Heaven forbid!” 


After all, the sons despoil the father 
of his joys; otherwise why would brothers 
plot each other’s ruin ? 

My Lord! Is not peace that averteth 
abhorrent war possible between them and 
ye? 


Kama.—Ah, simpleton! Peace is impossible 


under any circumstances whatsoever. 

50. The virtuous and the vicious offend 
each other merely by the difference in their 
respective inherent qualities. How can 
even the lapse of myriads of Kalpas® bring 
about a reconcilation between the two ? 

51. Vivéka’s partisans and ours are of 


different mould in each Jiva, and are 


—$<$<<——<——— 


———o 


1. The father of Indra. 

2. Lit. med Wt, Wet TN. 

3. A day of Brahma, or one thousand yugas, being 
a period of 432 million years of mortals and 
measuring the duration of the world. For details 
see Bhagavadgita by Govindachary a. 


48 


diametrically opposed to each other. If 
we two meet in one and the same subject, 
oh, sweet lady!, we either finish them or 


be finished. 

Even for parley, peace is impossible 
with our enemies—the votaries of Narayana, 
and us—the votaries of Artha and Kama. 
Even if, perchance, peace be brought about 
by some effort extraordinary, our King 
Mahimoha, expert in destroying all 
enemies, shall brook it not. Myself, a 
matchless warrior, shall never subscribe to 
it. (The keenest hunger of) a tiger shall 
never (drive it to) feed on grass. 


Rati.—How have those exterminators of the 
race plotted to destroy mighty warriors 
such as ye ? 

Kama.—Ah, timid lady! This  state-secret 


ought not to be divulged, particularly to 
women. 


Rati.—(Taking Kama by the hand). Dear 
Lord! Oath on me, oath on thy dear 
friend Vasanta, thou shalt disclose the 
state-secret in all its integrity (to me). 


49 


Vasanta.—(Aside). How to disclose it here ? 
Hard, indeed, are the undetermined ways 
of Providence to surmount ! 


52. (Aloud). Friend, Kama ! The plot 
of the enemies’ of Mahdimdha, capable only 
of rearing castles in the air, shall now be 
exposed by us—their enemies. 


Kama.—\f so, hear me speak. There is Nivritti- 
Dharma promoted by several perverse 
doctrines, disavowal of selfness in Karmas 
etc, all propounded by Vivéka—the fore- 
most of fools, and practised by some austere 
philosophers plodding in the barren field 
of Upanishads and longing to exterminate 
our race by witchery. It is said that 
when Jiva is thus intent on Nivritt- 
Dharma, great mishaps befall him such 
as blindness, deafness, impotence, lameness, 
dumbness etc, in (the event of) discerning 
the fault of others. By way of revenge 
that selfsame Fiend of Nivritti- Dharma 
is going to prevail on Jiva to bring about 
a re-union with Buddhi. Therefore, out 


1. Viveka and his party. 
s & 4 


A 
~ 
. 


o 


50 


of this re-union, one, intently hateful 
towards our race, with an appearance sweet 
and serene, a Brahmarakshas', otherwise 
known as Para-bhakti?, the exterminator® 
of all sense-lusts, shall be born. 


For:— 


53. Buddhi, the housewife of Jiva—the 


progenitor (with her) of the two races— 
undergoing endless modifications, — accor- 
dant with the preponderance of the three* 
qualities, one over another, yet (intrinst- 
cally) remaineth faithful to the same Jiva,. 
and engendereth, in right” time, the horrid 
Para-bhakti, more hidious-made by the 
chanting of vicious Mantras” that eventuate 
(at last) in the deluge of terrific Moksha. 


54. Then, this Para-bhakti, characterised 
by renunciation etc, (on the one hand) 


Goblin. 2. Supreme Devotion to God. 

WAU — ATA TI AAA ATA AAT | 
Usa ATA Aas | 

Satva, Rajas, Tamas. 

aryaraaerane angers rarer rata 

Ashtakshari-Mantra, etc. 


51 


and faithful devotion to the Supreme Lord 
(on the other hand) is to practise severe 
penance, involving the inhibiting of all the 
senses. Pleased by this penance, Sri 
Janardana’s' Mercy is to fashion a demon, 
surpassing the strength of myriads of 
Kaitabhasuras’, tobe her (Bhakti’s) servant 
—(stops suddenly half uttering this). 

Vasanta.—(Aside). ‘This (demon) can be no 
other than Sankalpa-Siryédaya—the extin- 
guisher of our race” must be the close 
of the sentence. [ shall however conclude 
it otherwise. 


(Aloud), The rest must be difficult 


to mention. 
Rati.—(With fear and confusion). 
My Lord! Protect me, protect me. 
(Hmbraces her husband). 


Kama.—([/mbracing firmly and gesturing a 
never-before-enjoyed pleasure). 


1. Lit—One full of mercy on all=Epithet of Sri 
Narayana. 

2. In Kaéma’s eyes the name to be mentioned is 
an Asura, as he is going to destroy his clan. 
Kaitabha is the demon who stole away the 
Vedas from Brahma. 


52 


55. (Aside). With this timid and tur- 
bulent embrace of the tremulous-eyed Rati, 
which causeth her bangles to break, 
throweth her pearl-necklace out of place, 
brusheth away all afilictions, and produceth 
everv pleasure though passing, the soul 
inward spurneth all notions of the duality of 
our dual frames ! 


(Aloud)—Dear Kati, the (lady) love of 
the foremost warrior of Mahimodha’s forces ! 
fear not ! take heart, take heart! This (that 
] spoke) meaneth nothing more than a 
tradition invented by the amateur travellers 
in Upanishads, to beguile the tediousness 
of the journey, in the manner the juggler 
performeth the trick of a town being 
swallowed. 


56. Chandra’, Indra? and others, who 
denounce (acts of) ravishment, themselves 
swerve from (the path of) rectitude. The 


The Moon—the allusion is to the seduction of 
Tar&—the wife of Bribaspati. 


The King of the Dévas—the allusion is to the 
seduction of Ahalya—the wife of Gautama. 


53 


moment my bow is bent, resounding with 
the rows of humming bees, who then can to 
the doors of Virakti bend—let alone our 
powerful cabinet ministers. 


57. How shall Modha, whose essential 
(strength) is made up of the different 
squadrons of indifference, indolence, slum- 
ber, etc, and who possesseth tremendous 
power to eclipse knowledge, be conquered’ 
by any body ? 

Rati.—(Aside). By accident my lord’s utterance 
sounds equivocal. 


(Aloud). May prosperity attend our 
great king! 


Vasanta.—Ah, thou wife of Kama ! 


58.* Fear not, for, so long that Méha and 
his followers are well armed, shall Jiva, 


1. There is also the implication that by no means 
Moha would conquer. 

“This utteraace is ambiguous and another mean- 
ing implied in verse 58 is.—The moment Moha 
and his partisans are no more, Jiva regaineth 
his innate nature WIAWAT ote and shall 
attain liberation through the influence of Virakti. 


54 


covetous of Prakritic' association, shake 


himself off from the influence of Virakti ? 


Rati—(Aside). Alas! Vasanta’s utterance soun- 


deth ambiguous. 


(Aloud). My Lord! Is Vivéka bereft 
of sense, as also his ministers Sama, Dama 
and others? If Jiva discardeth Prakriti,’ 
the finale for them and for us, would 
seem to be the same! 


Kama.—Rightly so. But this. sinful (brood) 


1. Body or nature v.e., matter. 


Vivéka and others, jealous of the joy of 
our race, play at games that tend to extin- 
guish both the races, under the very nose 
of Jiva; blunt indeed are they of their 
wits as not to perceive their own ruin 
thereby, These ignorant people shall not, 
by any means, be successful in their 
enterprise. 


For :-— 


59. The irresistible force of Karma. shall 


put life into us again, albeit slain in battle. 


55 


We shall revive even like Sugriva’s famous? 
warriors of old. 


(Behind the curtain). 


Who is this perverse person that reck- 
oneth us as sinners, who wish the 
ereatest good for all ? Thou fellow, immo- 
dest and_ ill-behaved! We, who subject 
all our actions to the Mercy of Madhu’s 
conqueror,” strive to overthrow ye the 
wicked, who put the progenitor (Jiva) in 
unshakable shackles. We also strive to 
bring about eternal bliss to Jiva after 
liberating him from all miseries and even 


then keep our race sapient under the 
influence of (Jiva’s) Buddhi. 


Do not the Upanishads proclaim thus ?:— 


60. Sri Narayana,—even by the mask of 
Bhakti or Prapatti donned by the actor- 


The Monkey and Bear warriors of Sugriva, who 
died in the battles at Lanka, especially in the 
great havoe caused by Kumbhakarna, regained 
their lives through the boon of Indra after the 
termination of the war. 

Vishnu 


56 


Jiva delighted,—Jiva who playeth the 
different rdles' in the melodrama of Sam- 
sira,— doth lift him to the utmost eminence, 
doth make him, through His Mercy, His 
peer in all respects, save Sri-Lordship? 
and Cosmos creationship. 


Hence :— 


61. As sure as anything is the fact that 
the great fame of having overthrown 
our foes Moha ete, the high duty of 
protecting our father (Jiva) (from falling 
into Samsira), and the joy of having 
accomplished our ambition—these shall 
anon come to us of their own accord. 


Kama.—(Looking with jear and scorn). My 
love! Yonder cometh Vivéka himself, 
facing us, the head of all the adversaries of 
Mahamoha, accompanied by his co-partner 
in life—Sumati. 


62. This Vivéka, ever defending Sama, 


1. Birth, youth, dotage, etc. 
2. pxa:afacq—Being the husband of Sri. 
3. STA TI=Being the cause of the comos. 


7 


Dama, and other virtues, monopolising 
the secrets’ of Mantras like the Ashtakshari, 
aud desirous of demolishing Moha, _ res- 
traineth all desire for sense-lusts, maketh 
researches in Vedanta, consulteth the rules. 
relating to Méksha, and studieth Bhagavad- 
Gita with unswerving devotion. 


Further :— 


63. This Sun of Vivéka, augmenting the 
lustre of Sumati, to whose (Sumati’s) heart 
the truth about God and soul is most 
near,— Vivéka who again is full of the 
ardent love for Moksha, though in great 
prosperity, doth now attain the feet of 
Vishnu, on Whom he leaneth, after scatter- 
ing the (twofold) mist of Ahamkara wz. 


selfness in body and selfness in soul. 


“¢ . . . ‘ 
Also means— Keeping his councils secret ’’. 


The double meaning implied in verse 63. is—The sun, 


now increasing the lustre of the quarter opposite 
to the West, (Hast), though rising, is still invested 
by the excessive redness of the dawn, doth now 
clear the mist, and reacheth the sky. 


58 


It is therefore not meet that we 
should unmask ourselves to our enemies 
too soon, sand without proper precaution. 


(Thus exveunt Kdma_ with his wife and 
priend ). 
Mediate Interlude ends. 


(THEN ENTER KING AND SUMATI). 
King. —(Vivcéka)—(Musing). Love mine ! 


Hearest thou the rant of this fellow Kama, 
the source of the noxions thicket of endless 


sins,—the seat of boundless conceit @ 


See, how he scorneth at us—the very 


persons who strive to obliterate all sins. 


Or :— 


64. A person void of sense perceiveth 
faults in others, though they exist not ; 
similarly perceiveth he in himself virtues 
that exist not. This frailtv cometh as the 
effect of Mohas’ eye-salve. 


Ag 


Sumati.—* Aryaputra! Do not ugly-faced persons 
impute their ugliness to the fault of the 
mirror, which by nature is clean ? 


King. —Forsooth, my (ueen ! 


Thou kennest things as they are and 


speakest as thou kennest. 


Further :— 


65. Thou art one, free of all faults and art 
ever intent on compassing infinite supreme 
Bliss to man. Thou art endowed with 
Guna,! Alankara, Bhava,? and Rasa," like 


the work of a good poet. 


(Again musing). Alas, My love! 
these Kféma, Krédha, Lobha,® and their 


*Lit: Noble son. This term is usually used by 

ladies when accosting their husbands. 

When applied to Poets’ work.— 
1. Diction etc. 2. Rhetoric. 3. Gesture. 
4. Emotion. 

When applied to Sumati.-— 
1. Understanding, retentiveness, etc. 
2. Ornaments. 3. Thought. 4. Attachment. 
5. Greed. 


60 


ilk who divert themselves in tormenting 
the abiding Jiva, pose themselves as the 
upholders of righteousness, and look upon 
us, as the augmenters of vice,—us who 
strive to compass Moksha for Jiva and 
to draw down (upon him) the merciful 
look of the Lord Divine—the natural friend 
to one and all alike,—merciful look, the 
panacea to all persons agonised by the 
anguish of Samsira. Alas ! Queer is this 
buffoon’s bluff! Never mind, mark my 
great vow, for earning the Almighty’s bless- 
ings. Its carrying out solely dependeth 
on thee. 


66. Ah! Beautiful lady ! By this vow, so 
auspiciously taken, I draw courage through 
the mercy of Madhu’s foe’ and by keeping 
away from Jiva his foes, external? and inter- 
nal,’ [ will plant him firmly in Yoga, will 
divest him of the influence of both Papa’ and 


Ciahne. 2. Tanase a Paver ts. 

Lust, Passion, Anger. etc. 4. Vice. 
Virtue—According to Visishtadvaita philosophy 
both virtue and Vice are impediments to attain 
Emancipation. 


° 


61 


Punya’ and will vouchsafe all blessedness to 
him by making him attain the Parabrahman., 


Sumati.—Aryaputra! How is this eternal, 


stainless, highly-blissful and self-luminons 
Jiva, whose nature is self-evident to all 
mankind, consigned to the Ocean of 
misery, awful-made by great waves of 
sin dashing, and agitated by the resistless 
Ahamkara,? by the mephistophelian Maha- 
mdéha, Mana,® Mada,‘ Matsara,’ ete. ? 


King.—My love! [Keen perceiver of subtilties ! 


Can the Evident be denied or the Agamic® 
contents rejected ? Just see this :— 


67. In this universe we have seen objects 
deprived of their natural quality by 
accidents of contact’ with some other object, 


Supreme Lord. 


Phil-—The fallacy that body and soul are one 
and the same. 


Conceit. 4. Pride. 5. Jealousy. 6. Vedic. 


The formless clean mirror reflects the image of 
a flower when the latter is held before a mirror. 


a 


cA 


62 


and the accident passing, the object spring- 
ing back to its original quality. Similarly,. 
this eternal Samsfra enshroudeth Jiva,’ 
through the influence of eternal nescience, 
yelept Karma, and_ releaseth him the 
moment it vanisheth. 


Sumati.—True indeed! But how is it the 


all-benevolent Lord of Sri, hath so long 
neglected Jiva tormented by unbearable 
manifold miseries ? 


King.—Hast thou not heard that Jiva whe 


biddeth for Samsara, by the bonds of 
nescience—( Eternal Karma) was bidden 
away by the Almighty for the very reason 
that He bid for Samsara and that the 
self same Almighty will extricate him on 
an opportunity lending itself ? 


Por 


68. The Lord, whose impartiality is 
evident in His equal solicitude to placate 


1. fratrionerraeenstt staq:— aafataaneaiter 


aaa gaanaata— afara a anfayaeararaaedy 
wart | 7 


Z. 
3. 


63 


both Sport and Mercy, typified as Lila! 
and Daya,’ working ever at cross purposes, 
(the Lord) improveth upon the accident 
of merit gotten by His own Grace, and 
lifteth us, the fallen, in the manner of the 
worm’ etching out (unconsciously, as_ it 
were) auspicious letters (on a piece of 
timber ). 


Further :— 


69, From the ever-flowine river of Merit 
and Demerit, incapable of avoidance, 
diversion or crossing, the Lord lifteth 
us the fallen, and rejoiceth. 


Lilda—There is no exact English equivalent to 
this. But Lila is connoted by the desire of 
the Lord to indulge Himself in the sport of 
making souls take birth and rebirth, ete. in 
Samsara. See Introduction to Lives of Azhvars 
by Govindacharya on word Lila. 

Mercy. 

Called the Guna-kshata-lipi Nyaya—The worm 
ig a wood-insect. The sense implied in verse (68) 
is—The Lord punishing us Sinners, through 
Lila, Himself imparteth virtue to one of the 
manifold Karmas through Mercy and _ thus 
protecteth us. 


64 


Sumati.—Aryaputra! My mind is perplexed 


by the serious doubt, as to how one can 
attain Moksha in the infinite future, when 
an infinite past hath merely lapsed in 
vain ? 


King.—()ueen mine! The consort of Vivéka 


as thou art, how is it that thou dost 
indulge in such doubts as if thou art 
ignorant of the ways of logical reasoning ? 


Or :— 


70. Even the sages still debate as to the 
trne cause of this amidst so many 
(principles or) things, such as, Time, Nature, 
Fate, Accident, ete. 


This here is to be investigated :— 


71. All Vedantic' schools agree in think- 
ing that in this cyele of Karma and 
Nescience, incessantly and strangely whirl- 
ing, each Jiva cometh to ripen differently 
in its own due season. Catching the right 
moment in this ripening—by the First 


+e ee erensseteeenngalpinentdeneaspnimasiias 


1. Except Charvaka=The materialist who holds that 


body itself is the soul. 


1. 
2. 


65 


Teacher' caught—the enlightened? Jiva 


thus (caught) reapeth in plenty all the 
riches stretching up to Méksha. 


72. Inthe manner of the Daughter* of 
Vidéha, Jiva, confined in the body of 
Lanka, girt by the sea of Samsara, ruled 
by the proud ten-headed demon of mind 
with the senses ten,  (Jiva, like her, 


Vaidehi) pineth, thus humbled. Anon by 


a Hanuman-like Guru is (Jiva) instructed 


of the Truth (of God, etc.) 


73. In this carnal body known as 
Brahmapura, having several portals of 
sins countless, Jiva, unrestrained of action, 
being incentived by a will free (-given) 
but kept in limits by a Providence 
Almighty, is thus fast bound to the power 
of the senses, even like a demented 


king 
influenced by the advice of his 


evil 
God is spoken of as the First Teacher. 
Jiva doth feel a longing to investigate the Truth 


about God, the means of attaining Him and 
Beatitude. (Tatva, Hita, Purush4rtha ). 


Sita, or the daughter of Videha’s king, Janaka. 
$. 8. 3 


66 


ministers, each striving to contrive his 
own objective. 


Sumati.—Aryaputra | Though tormented by 
this flesh (body), like one lodged in a 
fire-begirt lodging, how is it that the 
listless Jiva: desireth not to rid himself 
of this body ? 


King.—Eh My love, all-wise ! It is no easy task 
to cross the great ocean of attachment. 


74. Like the well-polished gem-set wall, 
the soul inviolate, beareth on it the most 
wonderful picture, made up of the stable 
and unstable’, tri-colored,” distinctly limned 
by the Six- Atanbitell Painter; with His 
tri-qualitied’ brush. 


Sumatt.—( With grief) If s0, how is it that 
the most beloved Buddhi doth not remind 
her mad husband ? 


1. The cosmos composed of moving and stationary 
objects: 
9. Three colours and three attachments, TANT, 


PRAIA, VITAL. 


3. God of the attributes Jnana, Sakti, etc. 
A. Satva, Rajas, Tamas. 


67 


‘King.—My quick-witted love! Buddhi also, 
self-luminons though she be, is for the 
nonce practically dormant. rete 


For :— 


75. Like the lotus fading at the setting 
sun and like the charmless night by the 
Rahu'-eclipsed snow-beamed Moon, our 
Mother Buddhi, lovely lady ! fadeth for 
the time being, remaining inert, struck 
out of her luminosity, resembling soul 
itself—her Lord, bereft of attributes, by 
Mayic’ contact. 


Sumati.—Aryaputra! Profoundly pitiable is this 
bonded state of Jiva along with Buddhi! 
Thou shalt now elucidate for me at length, 


the means by which Jiva,—ever so much 
misery-molested, shall attain Méksha. May 
I have peace of mind thus! 


King.—My ever well-wishing Queen! [ shall 
now dwell in detail on the means of attain- 
ing Beatitude and in doing so, shall be 


ee iach —_—$—$—$ $$ —— 


1. A serpent named R&hu is said to swallow the 
moon during an eclipse. 2. Illusion. 


68 


only reminding thee of what thou already 
knowest. 


76. Samsara, hardened by hoarded sins, 
hard to stem, is the great curse of all 
Jivas and past palliation. Its only Deli- 
verer is the Lord’s Free Will-Power,' acting 
in concert with His causeless Mercy and 
it (Will-Power) gratifieth itself, by pitch- 


ing upon a cause (for Karma-cessation). 


Sumati.—Aryaputra! If that cause is fit for 
my hearing, may it please thee to inform 
me of the same. 


King.—My love, so pure of tongue! Thou 
shalt hear the gist of the subtle truth. 


77. Full of Lust, Envy and Pride, the 
soul like the child, is, obsessed by several 
spirits. By the gracious look of a Royal 
Personage,’ Veda-famed, it (soul) entereth 
the way of the Wise. 


78. To the soul, soaked in the nectareous 
look of the sinless Teacher, providentially 


1. Sankalpa 2. May mean either Sri-Nardyana 
or Acharya. 


ie 
2. 


69 


obtained, the many pure attributes,’ pure 
knowledge, etc, sprout up, making for 
boundless bliss. 


And then— 


79. While the soul embodied, is on all 
sides pulled by cords of evil-smelling past 
pleasures of Svarga, fraught with fall 
inevitable,—brimfull Bhakti (love) in 
Brahma High the Goal,—the milky Sea of 
mercy, heaving high, springeth, influenced 


by his (soul’s) previous birth’s good Karma. 


In the interim, this other feast fit for 
universal suffrage superveneth (viz Prapatti 


or surrender to God). 


80. With thee for my wife, I shall, at the 
time of Bhakti’s fruition, myself perform 
this peculiar (feast) sacrifice? no fruit 


expecting. The manifold attributes led 


by Sama, Dama, etc, shall be the officiat. 


Such as Sama, Dama, etc. 


A Vedic feast literally (Adhvara) and is considered 
a sacred feast; hence is a sacrifice. 


70 


ing-Ritviks’ of this sacrifice. For reasons 
beyond our ken, the Eternal Lord doth 
become the goal of the offering of atman’, 
and then shuffling off the shackles of 
karma, the bonded Jiva-(Pasu*) doth get 


unbound. 
Thou hast to consider this as well :— 


81. The Divine Lord of Sri, whose 
power is eternally manifest, in Creation, 
Duration and Dissolution of the uni- 
verse, performeth through His Mercy a 
supernatural and matchless conversion on 
Jiva that performeth the momentary* sacri- 
fice of self-surrender and resignation, and 
so despatcheth his sins that they return 
never. 


Sumati.—Aryaputra! When shall the above 


the joy of Jiva ? 


a. NaS 


described state of Supreme bliss become 


Officiating Priests in a sacrifice. 
Soul. 
The animal sacrificed in a yaga. 


As opposed to the long time taken for Bhakti. 


71 


King.—My (Queen, versed in the knowledge 
of the triple realms! 


We have thus far to rejoice at the 
fact that rescue from Samsira hath some- 
how become possible to Jiva,—plunged 
in the main of misery intolerable-—by 
(the authority of) Revelation as well as 


Reason. 


82. <A blessed being, graduating® along the 
scale of Sri—Lord’s Merey—led by Teachers 
taintless, reigneth in the abode of Supreme 
Bliss bedecked? with suddhasatva.’ 


Further:— 


83. Sure it is that the Divine Lord’s 
Mercy, unaffectable even by post-Surrender 
sins befalling, curbeth His wilful Lila, 
imparteth to Jivas a taste for karmas, 


congenial and inductive to the Lord Divine, 


ED 


1. Weare | 
MIAVS TAT | 
3. Refulgent matter. 


bo 


72 


and bringeth about infinite bliss now' or 
hence.” 


84. Free of all obstacles, the Divine 
Koad of the Mercy of Madhu’s Foe,’ 
leadeth one, as revealed in the Vedas, to 
the city of Paramapada,‘—the Mercy-Road, 
thick shaded by auspicious attributes, (such 
as Sausilya®)—the Averter of the glare 
of Mayaé,°—exempt from _ sins _ of 
Kajoguna’ and, by the TAapatrayis*, un- 
affected. 


At the annihilation of this body in the case of 
Prapannas. 


At the termination of St=Te4 (a Karma already 
begun) in the case of Bhaktas. 

Vishnu the sayer of the demon Madhu. 

Another meaning of verse (84) is--Free of all 
thorns on the way, the Path of firm belief in 
the Mercy of Madhu’s Foe, leadeth one to the 
royal road leading into the city of Ayodhya | 
unassailed by anybody,—Path cool with the 
beautiful shade which alleviates the glare of the 
Sun,—path free of all dust and heat. 

Abode of Supreme Bliss. 5. Accessible 
disposition. 6. Illusion. 7. Passion. 
8. SATaerarre. 


73 


Sumati.—Aryaputra! Methinks that thy word 


that Jiva, replete with sins innumerable, 
shall from the ocean of misery be rescued, 
may but be a hope held forth like the toy 
offered to a crying child! 


King.—My lady charming! thou believer in the 


———__—_—_—_ 


1. 


Revelations! Follow not the lead of falsity. 
Art thou not Sumati? Hast thou ever 
heard of the fallibility of the Revelations, 
or that of the Lord’s promise to protect 
His devotees ? Here is convincing state- 
ment for thee. 


85. Sumati! Oath upon Fate’, oath 
upon thee, oath upon me ; if only thou 
resign thy slumber and look with eyes wide 
awake, thou shalt thyself perceive the 
greatness of the Will of Demon Mura’s 
Victor’, so swift evinced in_ rescuing 


the loudly wailing Gajéndra’ from agony, 


Lot, or God’s free-gift of Grace, or Will. 

Vishnu. 

The allusion here is to the Gajéndra Upakhyana 
in Sri Bhagavata which briefly stated is as 
follows :— 

Once the head of a herd of Elephants tormented 


74 


caught as he was warring, by the 
crocodile Ahamkara’. Why, tochampion the 
oppressed is a matter of course. 

For :-— 


86. Be a refugee humble, or be he 
proud or be he culprit or non-default 
it matters not, for, he is eligible for 
protection, as far as possible. This is the 


great ethical canon, firmly established 


by the highly virtuous, such as Visvamitra?, 


Ee ee ee 


bo 


by excessive thirst went to a pool of water 
to quench its thirst, when lo! an alligator 
caught hold of the foot of the elephant which, 
knowing of no other protector, appealed loudly 
to the Mercy of the First Cause of the universe 
(Adimalam). The Lord, loth to tarry a 
second longer, rode upon His vehicle Garutman 
and appeared at the scene of trouble. Fast 
sent He His Discus which cut in twain 
the head of the alligator; and the liberated 
elephant was no other than a great Gandharva 
or allegorically Jiva, liberated from the agonies 
of Samsara. 

cf. hed Fila. Tere Tz, etc. 

The delusion that body and soul are identical. 

A sage had to perform a sacrifice for which 
he required a human being as the victim. 


75 


the Dove', Sri Rama’, King Raghu’*, 
the Dévapatnis‘, the crane Nalijangha’, 


Brihaspati® and several others. 


‘Sumati.—Aryaputra! Even the great Prajapati 


and others are worshipped by several 
votaries, whose ambition is Méksha. Such 


ao fF & 


A king whom he entreated for this purpose 
would not part with his eldest son; similarly 
his wife would not part with her last son; 
the chance therefore fell to the lot of the middle 
son who was called Stnassépha. This latter 
asa last resort took refuge under Visvamitra 
who eventually saved him. 

Kapétopikhy4na, (see Mahabharata.) 


Kakasura was let off with his life by Sri Rama’s 
Brahm-istra, though the former offended at 
Sita’s breast. When all the worlds would 
not give him protection against Brahm-astra, 
Rama spared his life by the mere fact of his 
falling at Rama’s feet after vainly circuiting im 
all the worlds three. 

See Raghuvamsa for the story. 


b 


Vedic story— Deva vai tvashtaram ”’ etc. 
See Yadavagiri-MAhatmya, 9th Adhyaya. 
The story of Indra being saved by Brihaspati— 


See Bhagavatam. 


76 


being the case, how is it that thou 
speakest of Sri’s Lord alone as the granter 


of Méksha ? 


King.-—Oh my sharp-witted love! just think 
how exceptional forsooth is the greatness 
of Madhu’s Victor ! 


87. Firm faith in the Supreme as the 
Root of all Beings from Brahm’ down to 
the worm, effecteth deliverance from Sam- 
sira. But the numskull who, though aiming 
at Moksha, payeth worship to the innu- 
merable lower divinities, is like him who 
hopeth to quench his thirst by dew-drops! 


A thousand suns may be drawn in 
a picture but would they dispel a dot of 
darkness ? 


88. The night of Prakriti, imposing xonic 
nescientic sleep on Jiva, can vanish only 
by the blaze of the sun of Sankalpa’ of 
our Lord, the Conqueror of Naraka2 : 


1. Divine Will. 
2. Hell or thedemon Naraka whom Lord Krishna. 
killed, vide Sribhagavata—10th Skandha. 


77 


Sumati. 


Aryaputra ! Ever doth the mind of the 
Devas and the sages waver as to the know- 
ledge of the exact relationship between 
the soul and the Lord High. But thou fixest 
thy mind on Sri-Narayana alone. How? 

King.—Queen mine! This decision is dependent 
on the Upanishads, interpreted by (the key 
of) several Smritis, Puranas and Upabrih- 
mands." The harmony subsisting between 


the Védas, the Brahmanas and Narayana 
is well known. 


89. The truth to be searched is Vishnu 
(7.¢., Narayana) alone. The authorities 
are the Vedas alone. The True-perceivers 
are the Satvic? Brahmanas® alone. Thus 
judged are that these three do constitute a 
harmonious group. What use then of the 
other (lesser) deities who are but worms! 
by comparison ? 


i 


1. Those which exegetise the matter briefly touched 
upon in the Srutis. 


2. Peace-preponderant. 


3. The sacredotal class entrusted with the Védas 
and their teaching and practising. 


4. In so far as their dependence on Srt Naréyana 
is concerned. 


78 
Further:— 


9). Ifasage Vyisa, the arranger of the 
Védas, after reconnoitering all sciences di- 
vine, and subjecting them to severe ratiocina- 
tion, solemnly declared thrice in a council of 
sages—by upraising his hands—the truth 
arrived at by him;—with him then for our 
authority, which other than Sri Narayana 
can pose as the Great Truth’ ? 


The saying of the great sages is to the 
effect—‘‘ the way by which the great ones 
have gone is the best way.” 


91. logic hath no finality ; the Védas. 
are found contentious ; the authorities 
of the Rishis are mutually conflicting. 
Why mention other paltry utterances ‘¢ 
Thus is. verity hidden, like hidden is- 
treasure in a cave. The wise man there- 


oe 

1. Paratatva. 

90. of. araren Tae FIAT AT GA! qa: | 
eCaH BATA AAT ATTA Uh 
aa Tet FAMATGA YAGAG | 
Aaararcat aka A tA RATATAT Ul” 


I. 


79 


fore would prefer the spiritual ways of 
the Great. 

The great sages Vydsa, Valmiki, Manu 
Brihaspati, Suka, Saunaka, and _ others- 


confirm our view. 


Let alone these several sages. Look 
at this one :— 


92. Pardsara,’—the real perceiver of truth 


Once during boyhood Pardsara, learning that 
his father had been consumed by a Rikshasa 
incited by VisvAmitra, wanted to perform a 
sacrifice to exterminate all the Rakshasas. 
Vasishta intervened and requested Paradsara to. 
desist from his desire to kill other Rakshasas 
who were quite innocent in the matter of the 
death of his father and then Pardsara stopped 
his sacrifice. Hearing this glad tidings, sage 
Pulastya came to the scene and feeling glad 
that his descendants were saved from a tragical 
death, blessed our Par&sara with the boon that 
he alone would perceive the true God. Vasishta 
also blessed him that the boon of Pulastya 
should prove true. Parfsara has _ himself 
mentioned this in Vishnupurina. cf. 9feag 


area oahteweaeat | oaufei the 


colophon of the Vishnu: pur4Ana. 


80 


that pertaineth to the Supreme God, who 
prayeth for Moksha’s eternal bliss, to come 
to all mankind,—bliss exempt from all 
pangs of birth, dotage and death,—himself 
supporteth our view, and this is quite 
enough. 


Sumati.—Aryaputra? This statement of thine 
doth not admit of a further rejoinder. 
I beseech thee to present to Jiva, in a 
nut-shell, the quintessence of all the Védanta. 
He is in earnest to arrive at truth, but 
is now perplexed in Vedantic searchings 
demanding several substantial supports. 


King.—Well conceived. I shall meet thy desire. 


93. The Lord of Sri, whose Sankalpa is the 
main prop of the three kinds of conscients 
and non-conscients' and who is the only 
Prime Origin of the four Purusharthas’, is 
the only resting place of all the cluster of 
the Srutis as the ocean is of all the 
rivers, 


1. The three kinds of conscients are-—T@I:, YNA:, fra: & 
»» »» bOn-conscients are ,, sHtd, 41S, Barcdy | 
2. Four ends of lif e—qH, IY, lq, ATT 


31 
Further :— 


‘94. Supreme is the spouse of Sri; most 
beneficial is Bhakti or Prapatti towards 
Him. His blessed Sankalpa sucketh up 
the Samséra-sea. In no time can a person 
overcome the Nescience-fiend through the 
Noblest Mantra, the Ashtakshara', bequeath- 
ing the knowledge (therefor.) 


My love! That which cleareth the 
doubts of even dullards hath now been 
briefly stated. 


95. But in this Kali-age, some perverts, 
ander the tight cloak of Veda-VAda? only 
seem to combat the apostates like Saugata,’ 
by insincere language like that passed 
between brothers-in-law. Pity! 


But these have been refuted thread- 
bare ny the best peepounders, of Vedanta. 


Se eT 


1. The Holy Maniile of 8 syllables. 
2. Only ostensibly supporting the Vedic teachings 
but really following the teachings of Buddhiste. 
V4da= Argument. 


3, A division amongst Buddhiats. 


Y 


a. 8. 6 


82 


For, savants adopt styles, terse and dif— 
fuse (as occasion demands). 

Sumati.—Well said, my lord! For, my mind 
is perturbed by the fear whether the Upa- 
nishads would all end in misinterpretation 
by endless arguments of diverse sages, like 
cows driven and dragged hither and thither 
by thieves. 

King.—Enough of thy doubts ! 


96. Sruti, followed by the several Smritis,. 
such as that of Manu, ete, unquestionably 
accepted as authorities by eminent men, 
countenanceth not, even in dream, the 
Smritis of Kapila, etc, involving self— 
contradiction, but that Sruti, the authority 
per se, well fortified too by steady logic, 
deafeneth the uproar of sophistry 


(Behind the curtain.) 


97. Like Ugraséna,' thrown into prison by 
the wicked Kamsa,' our Lord Jiva hath been 


— 


me -Ugrasena the maternal grand-father of Lord 
Krishna was the ruler of Madhura (North). He- 
was deposed and imprisoned by his own son 


ey 
Qo 


cast in prison’ hy Mahamdha, who 
knoweth not that this will bring about his 
own complete ruin. As by Krishna assis- 
ted by Balaraéma,* Jiva will be liberated 
by the very renowned, merciful and _all- 
benevolent king Vivéka and shall attain 
Moksha? 


King.—(Listening with j017.) 


Love mine! This is the heavenly 
oracle predicting the unfailing future, even 
like unto the Revel:utions of the Védas. 


Sumati,—( With joy). -Aryaputra ! Indeed this 
is the voice of the Immortals which can 
never turn false. 


Kamsa labouring under the dread of an oracle, 
(during the bridal procession of his own sister 
Devaki,) that her 8th son shall kill him (Kamsa). 
Lord Krishna (the Sti son) in due time slew 
Kamsa in a duel, liberated Ugraséna and 
reinstated him as the king of the Yadavas. 


i. Samsara. 


Brother of Lord Krishna. T4l4%—In the original 
also means Mightwv IXvishna. 


bo 


84 


King.—Love mine! Verily indeed! By thy 
co-operation, 1 fancy that the attainment 
of success is now within reach. 


98. May the drop of desire to conquer 
the hosts of agnostics and apostates 
develop into the river of Madhustidana’s 
grace, watering well the Kalpaka tree of 
Perseverance, so much esteemed by savants, 


and fulfil my wish. 
(Again behind the curtain, drums beating.) 


Sumati.—(With wonder)—Aryaputra ! Far off 
seemeth the event to celebrate the liber- 
ation of Jiva with the beat of drums, 
as also the occasion for our herds of 
elephants to be seized with frenzy for 
war. Hallo! but how then is it that the 
sky reverberateth with loud uproar, like 
the roar of clouds at the time of the 
great Cataclysm $ 


King.—Love mine! This is the drum beaten 
by the Immortals who hasten our prepar- 


ation for victory. Now ‘that we have 


85 


strengthened our own side, we must now 
strive to overthrow our enemy’s side. 


(Thus saying both exeunt.) 


Finis Act I, termed Svapakshaprakdsa 
(Demonstration of one’s own creed.) 


AUM. 


OM=(A-U-M) 


SANKALPA-SURYODAYA 


AtSa Ii. 


THEN ENTER SRADDHA! AND VICHARANA.” 


Vicharana,—W ith thy brow bedewed with beads 


of sweat, thou seemest as flurried as the 
cow to see her calf. 


1. Lovely are thy globules of sweat, 
resembling nectar from thy face-moon 
dripping, or in the lustrous Malli-blossom* 
blown dewing, or from the noble creeper 
of youth budding. 


Sraddha.—\My beloved companion! With a wish 


to prosecute (to a good end) what hath 
been undertaken by her husband (Vivéka), 
who is firmly planted in the one-pointed 


Zeal. 2. Investigation. 3. Jasmine flower. 


87 


verdict of the Upanishads, and who hath 
taken the resolve to combat the opponents 
(thereof), Sumati the faithful, the blessed 
wife of Vivéka, hath, to symbolize the 
welfare (of the mission) sped to the hill 
of gems fringing the woodland of pramada,' 
-bidding me cull a cluster of lotuses golden, 
worthy to lay at the lotus-feet of Sri’s 
Spouse (Vishnu). She there sits, heart full 
of joy, and I shall speed to Ganga as 
smiling with her freshes as Sarasvati, the 
‘swan in the lotus-face of the Lotus-born’. 


(Gesturing fatique of journey). 


2. When will the clear fair Mandé- 
kini,’ with banks on either side of its 
stream, fragrant with the odours of jasmine 
that creep up the Kalpaka-trees flourishing 
amidst cool ponds between, (when will this 
Mandakini,) alas! wear away the sorrows 
which, by (souls) violently whirled in 
samsiric wheel,‘ are hard to bear ? 


1. A Pleasure Garden where ladies of the harem sport. 
2. The Demiurge, son of Vishnu. 3. The Ganges. 
4. 12.., rebirths without number. 


88 
Vicharana.—( Pointing in front). 


Here floweth in our vicinity the Ganga. 
Thou shalt rest for a while, to ward off the 
Sun’s heat,—as piercing as the poignant 
words of a villain,—in the jasmine bower 
grown on an islet in Ganga that issueth 
flowing from the feet of Madhu’s Conquerer 
(Vishnu) and rich with the odour of the 
honey of Kalpaka-blossoms, scattered by the 
gentle breeze as cool as the heart of the 
good, and then proceed. 


3. In the self-same place— 


The wind-tossed trees shower from 
their branch-tops flowers _ prodigally 
redolent,—flowers fit to deck the fillets 
circling the locks of the ladies of Mahén- 
dra’s court, reposing in the shade,—flowers 
reminding the shafts of the great archer 
KAma, the betrayer of the coyness of women. 


Sraddha.—Be it as it pleaseth thee, my friend ! 
(Both sit down with ease.) 


Sraddha.—Lo! Vichirani! What brought thee 
to this place P 


89 


Vicharana.—My beloved friend! Hear me. 


Some apostates and agnostics, clever 
in establishing the doctrine of Buddha 
and Jina, have now been ordered by king 
Mahimoha—irate at hearing the prepar- 
ations of king Vivéka, assisted by his chief 
Vyavasdya,'—to perturb Jiva whose mind 
is now firmly fixed on Purushdéttama’s 
(Vishnu’s) lotus-feet, by diverting it 
to some other object, just like a tiller 
leaving his plough and running after a 
jackal’, The rumour that these atheists 
surround the Jiva hath reached Sumati, 
our queen, who hath asked me to convey 
this news confidentially to the chief 
Vyavasiya, who is now closetted with 
the great king Vivéka. I have now set 
out to see this Vyavasdya., 


Sraddha, —That the Perverts have joined hands 


1. 


with Mahdmoha in his enterprise is just like 
the asses’ song in the ghost’s marriage. 
But mind not. It is no difficult task at alh 


Industry or Effort. 


9, Memirqneaary 


90 


for our great king to overthrow the doctrines 
of our opponents. 


Vicharana.—Hallo ! Sraddhi! How  thinkest 
thou that the doctrines of several able 
apostates, pursuing the creed of Brihas- 
pati! and others, could be subverted by a 
single person ? 


-Sraddha.—Thou shalt realise the truth of what 
I say, on the basis of the popular dictum 
that truth alone endureth and_ untruth 
betrayeth itself in time. 


4. Quick ean Vivéka_ overthrow’ the 
creeds of all Heretics like the rising Sun 
driving darkness dense, like the raging 
wild fire devouring the forest dry,—the 
forest of the Vindhya range,—like the 
mighty hurricane blowing off cotton 
mountains high. 


1. The School of Philosophy founded by Bribaspati 
the main doctrine of which is :-—‘ Enjoy whilst 
thou livest, for it is but blank after death.’’ 
‘ Eat and live to-day, let to-morrow take care of 
itself.” &c. See Paramata-bhanga by Desika, 


$} 


Therefore the attempt of Mahimdha 
in collecting a host of Perverts to 
conquer Vivéka is no better than that 
of a stone-raft sought out for crossing the 
high seas. 


Vicharana,—Dear friend ! Thy words have swift 
imparted courage to me, and my mis-givings 
have given way. | shall see my lady 
after speedily executing her commands. 


Sraddha.—Hallo! Vichdrana ! Thy level-headed- 
ness, and friendship as well, have been 
demonstrated. | will now gather lotus 
blossoms, and thou wilt betake to the royal 
castle. 


(Both exeunt.) 


Interlude ends. 


THEN ENTER KING AND VYAVASAYA. 


King.—General mine! ‘This indeed is_ the 
best time for me to take stock of work 
done and of work remaining as regards Jiva 
journeying to the goal of Bliss,—Jiva 


92 


distracted by pursuits vain and bound by 
karmas severe, So many times over. 


(Brooding for a while and sighing.) 

2. In this perfect world, teeming mostly 
with ignoramuses, God’s_ displeasure 
compelleth crafty men being born, to range 
themselves in hostile camps, to devise 
doctrines diverse, and by their inculcation 
to provoke wranglings many. Inno way 
do these differ from the ravings of men 
gone daft. 

Alas ! How shall true Védainta thrive 
in this world pestered by (such) doctrines 
distractingly diverse, causing confusion 
worse confounded ? 

(Looking at the sky.) 

Ah, thou vile Mahaiméha ! By render- 
ing the worlds three bewildered what hath 
been or what will be thy gain ? 


; ee 
6. Where drugs life-giving have begome 
scarce, noxious ones beteem the sea-girt 
earth. 


To remove this pain, [ shall resort to 
the Lord Almighty. 


93 
(Gesturing recollection.) 


7. I adore the causeless and stainless 
splendour of Hayagriva, present as a pure 
mount crystal-made, depriving the agonies 
of the worlds three by His dazzle, nectar- 
like,—Hayagriva whose neighing voice 
resembleth the Upanishads Eternal. 


. 
8. Further, may the neigh of Hayagriva— 
the sum and sense and seat of Vedas, Sima, 
Rig and Yajur,—of all obstacles the Re- 
mover,—the surging swell of the sea of self- 
knowledge—eftace my inner ignorance, 
caused by the clamour of heretics, conceited, 
combative and carrying a roaring trade 


(of theirs.) 


Senapati.—Ah. Great King! By valour over 


3. 


Mahimoha, thy success is as_ sure 
as the unfailing noise of the Aranyakas* 
that compare only with Anaranyaé’s® curse. 


The horse-faced form of Vishnu. 

The main body of the Upanishads. 

A king of the Ikshv4ku race, an ancestor of 
Sri Rama, was forced to wage a battle with Ravana 
when the former was quite unprepared ard 


94 


9. Thou hast just! imparted Vedanta- 
knowledge to Jiva; all that remaineth 
now to be done is to remove his inattention’. 


King.—(With joy.) Genial soul. In _ all 


i 


2. 


‘on 


modesty hast thou rightly reminded me. 
With thee to aid, what yet remaineth 
to be done, I guess, hath already been done. 


10. Let alone Sama, Dama and others, 
arrayed in hosts of hundreds and thousands, 
heroic enough to cripple Mahamdha’s 
gratuitous hate for me. Like unto Vishvak-- 
séna®, the all-devoted to Vishnu in the 
work of overthrowing Asuras, art thou 
(to me) the efficient tool to fell faiths, 
faithless. 


was eventually slain, and who before his deatb- 
pronounced the following curse on Ravana. 

ef. Uttara Ramayana. | 

sad So ORAReaE AeA 

TAT TAA TEA AMSAT Ut 

The reference is that in the lst Act the Vedanta 
knowledge has been imparted to Jiva. 

In this act the subversion of other heterodox 
faiths is to be undertaken. __ 

The Lord of Hosts under Vishnu, 


95 


Senapatii-My Lord! I am like thy weapons. 


but a dependent of thine, for thy foes to 
be worsted. 


11. Thy majesty, firm in combating thy 
opponents,—for thou art faultless of know-- 
ledge in diverse SAstras thriving unfettered 
Logic ete., needest little help, an unrivalled 
warrior: as thou art of high prowess. 
Such being the case, like but thy shadow,. 
thee, I follow, filled as thou art with 
the flood of “ food reflective'” in all thy 
acts which go to make, and keep and 
unmake (matters). Therefore either Sumati 
or myself cannot, like the fish separated 
from water, live? even for a moment 
apart from thee. 


King. —( Musing). 


12, General! Mark thee! Several creeds 
sophistic are current in this world as against 
reasoned argument, designed for stultifying 


i.e. Jiana=knowledge, Darsana= Vision, Prapti= 
Fruition. | 

ef. 4 4 Alar cag afar a areata crag | 

qedart staat aareaeerraaraat 1 (Ramayana, ) 


1. 


96 


the wits of theAsuras etc. They are like 
darkness to be swept by the Sun. 


These silly disputants, who indulge 
in diverse meaningless arguments—which 
differ not from the uproar of the great 
ocean churned by Madtstidana’s strong arms 
with the Mandara mount revolving— 
attempt to metamorphose even a Brihaspati’ 
into a Vanaspati.” These Pervert-Ele- 
phants, eagerly raiding the plantain-grove 
—Path of Virtue, are surely fit to be 
overthrown by the most mighty Lion of 
Forceful Authority, which always hath a 
cautious beginning,—Lion which hath for 
its shining fangs, the founding of the 
Right Creed and the overthrow of the 
Wrong Creeds,—Lion, which hath for its 
claws sharp, the five kinds of Taraka® 
and which dwelleth in the forest of the 
Upanishads. 


The Preceptor of the Devas, 2. The forest 
deity, 3. The five are--(1) ameqpyqa = (2) &- 
“MAY «= (3) AHETAT (4) AAT (5) Aiw¥- 
TIRRT 


97 
Senapati.—My Lord! Indeed thou hast appoint- 
ed Vada' and Védanta Siddhanta? to over- 
throw the heretical creeds. The coup de 
main of that dialectic warfare is come nigh. 
(Then enter Siddhdnta® and Védat 
guised as Guru-preceptor-and disciple.) 


Live thou long! Adept of the highest 
truth and opposed to opponents as Hanu- 
min to the Lanka-hosts, I judge that thou 
hast by agitation and clarification established 
Spiritual Science according to the maxim 
“planting the post.’ 


Argument 2, The Vedantic apodictic, 
Siddhanta is here Sri Ramanuja. 

4, Vada is here Sri Védanta Desika; Chronologi- 
cally Sri Védanta Désika was not a con- 
temporary of Sri Ramanuja but the {ajith 
founded by the latter was firmly esta- 
blished and amply improved by the former. 
Naturally enough the yearning to meet his 
preceptor was so dominant in the mind of our 
Sri Védanta Désika that the much-longed for 
meeting is arranged for dramaturgically in the 
discourse and criticism of other faiths that is 
found in the rest of this Act. 

5. Sthina-nikhananyfya maxim: an analogy 


b. Be @ 


98 


Pupil.—13. (With humility) Divine sire! In 
the ascetic garb thou seemest a Dattatreya’ 
described by the great sages as having 
defended the Vedas,—Dattitreya who was 
Vishnu Himself incarnate bearing the Trid- 
anda?, when inroads were made into them 


by Kéanadas,” Buddhast and Pashandas’. 


Guru.—Long life to thee! These outcastes and 
perverts are in truth Asuras. I vanquish 


them, assuming the form of Vishnu. 


Pupil.—Divine sire | Worship-worthy art thou, 
in thy form of Vishnu, with the reverence 
meet for Vishnu. 


14. Now I adore thee, the wearer of the 


for establishing a truth on a firm basis, viz., a 
pillar inserted in loose soil and firmly planted 
therein by continued to and fro movement. 

1. An incarnation of Vishnu as son of Atri. 
The triple bamboo staff carried by the Vaishnava 
Sanyasins representing the subjugation of thought: 
word and deed. 

8 Followers of the Vaiséshika doctrine which 
recognised 7 instead of 16 categories. 

4. The followers of Buddhism. 

5. See n. 5, p. Ll. 


i 


holy thread and irdhva-pundra, the 
bearer of the holy staf{—Tridanda?, the 
sum-total of the virtues of the worlds 
three, the protector of all refugees and 
the wearer of the ornamented sikha?, 


(Thus saying prostrates.) 


Guru.—15. May thou live long ! May thou 


establish the Védanta, and the heresies 
overthrow. May thou be esteemed by the 
pious and of vast bliss be thou receptacle, 

(Thus saying, hands a ring of Kusa 
grass symbolic of Divine Power.) 


Pupil. (Receives and wears it on the right hand 


after placing the same on the head). 
16. May the varied rivers of the creat 
bliss of Brahmanubhava,! diversified with 
the emulating billows of ardour, number- 
less and ceaseless, descend on thee,—(rivers) 
easy of reach to Sages and Siddhas’, 


a Sn 


1. 
2. 


9 


The Vaishnava vertical marks borne on the forehead. 

See n. 2.—p. 98. 

Tuft of hair grown on the head of an Arya, the 
mark of a Vaidika. 

The enjoyment of God. 

Yogia. 


100 


(rivers) mingling with the milk and honey 
of Brahman’s perfections par excellence. 


Pupil.—(With humility) Methinks that all my 
hopes are practically realised through thy 
divine blessings which never prove futile. 
Divine sire! If lam fit to hear what | 
propose to ask thee, I pray it might be put 
into my ears. 


Guru.—When a pupil, good and lowly, dotb 
approach, what is there that cannot in its 
good time be imparted to him ? 


Pupil.—Divine sire! Victory by logomachic 
methods is by great sages forbidden. For, 
they say that he who eloateth over such a 
victory over a Brihmana shall be born a 
cursed! tree in the burning ground. How 
else are our disputants of the opposite side 
to be vanquished ? 


Guru.—(With favour) Youth! In right good 
spirit hast thou put me this question, but 


1. area arernt reat eet Ware AT Rar 
qa Baa Jat: BETANAAA: U1 


101 


bounds of duties bidden are surely deter- 
mined by differences of caste, order, birth, 
race, clan, community, place, time ete. 
Therefore I desire to defeat these heretics 
through thee, as myself by my order is 
debarred from doing so, even as Visvamitra 
did slay’ the Rakshsas through Rama only. 
In this affair then,— 


17. Able lad! Let Jalpa? along with 
Vitanda® be far from thee. Win thy oppo- 
nents, inspired by well-established truth. 


Or acting under my behests even like 
Sri Raghava plying Bala and Atibala‘ under 


1. The allusion is to the Rakshasas, Subahu 


2. 
3. 


A. 


Ma4richa and the Rakshasi Tataka who all caused 
havoc to Visv4mitra’s sacritice. Sage Visvamitra 
to avert this evil begged Dasaratha of Rama's help, 
who was just then in his teens. Rama accom- 
panied VisvAmitra, killed Subahu and Tataka 
and made Maricha flee for life. 

eq: = faring *41(Prattling with intent for victory.) 

fravet—eareMTae aT WaT saaTaTaT Tar 
(criticism. ) 

Two mantras taught by Visvamitra to Rama for 
vanquishing enemies. 


102 


the tutelage of Visvamitra, thou shalt 
conquer the apostates who abuse the 
Védas and the Almighty, even Jalpa' and 
Vitanda? pressed into service under my 
guidance, but as tests of Tatva’, save when 
thou dost argue with virtuous souls. 


Pupil.—(With suppliant hands) Thy divine 
commands I bear on my head, but how 
is it that this onerous work of capable 
debators is laid by thee—the world-teacher 
on my insignificant self ? 


Guru.— Listen. 


18. Several are my disciples in this world 
who grasp more than what 1s taught, and 
who are adepts in the tenets of diverse 
doctrines such as those of Buddhism ete, 
mutually conflicting, but none but thou 
whom I approve and whose clear wit 
streameth full and startling, art sought after 
by the opponents to take up the gauntlet. 


Pupil.—Revered sire! I note thy commands. 
No debate can proceed without some doc- 


1. See n. 2, page 101. 2. See n. 3, page 101. 3. Truth. 


103 


trine agreed upon. Hence assign to me as 
thou willest. 


Guru. 


Charming child! When there is a 
difference of opinion among our own 
adherents, thou shalt stand by a Sastra 
common to them, but when the difference 
is with rival thinkers, by the Védanta 
Siddhanta ; even here, there are five or 
six high-class works dignified by brevity 
and glossary composed by us under the inspi- 
ration of Acharyas—Parasara, Vy4sa, Suka, 
Saunaka, Bodhayana and others. Well- 
versed in these works, and heart set on them, 
thou shalt employ authorities and -argu- 
ments that will carry convincing joy to the 
assembly. 


Pupil.—So long as thou art vouchsafing to me, 
J shali not in the least err. 


19. In a mind elevated in character by the 
grace of the Guru, what (truth) instinctively 
flasheth can vanish never. But when wrong 
interpretations are fabricated even by 
Rishis or others, they shall in no time 
pass into limbo. 


104 


Guru.—Lad ! Dreading the world-deluding 
sophistries (extant), I commend thee to 
close attention. 


20. The fallacies established by ill-witted 
apostates and perverts, causing a moment- 
ary confusion even to (the intellect of) a 
council of adepts in( Védantic) debate, —only 
connoting nonsense, genetic of false deve- 
lopments—and as stony as the heart of 
women, excite much fear. 


Pupil.—Divine sire! This dread concerning me 
can only arise from thy inordinate affection 
for me. 


21. Breatheth there a man, desirous of 
wordy-war who dare challenge me_ to 
contest, whilst at thy hands [ have 
received all knowledge, and whilst under 
thy commands, [ am acting ? 


Guru.—Pupil ! Beware of this as well. 


Pupil.—May it please thy reverence to favour 
me with thy further will. 


22. Our utterances, lighted up by the 


105 


grace of the Acharyas, delightful- made for 
instruction, convenient, the crowning jewel 
of Dame Sruti espoused of the Lord,— 
utterances terse' or elaborate’, appealing to 
soft minds,’ approvable to high minds‘— 
compiled with due attention to importance,’ 
—utterances which elucidate the Lord’s® 
Song,—are fit to be believed in by the wise. 


Pupil._-That thou shouldst so say is a super- 


1. 
3 
5. 


fluity, for thy works are forsooth the 
props of the Upanishads. 


23. For, ve have lit the lamp of Sri 
Bhashya, feeding it daily with theeoil of 
your love,—the joy of the savants, in 
their hours of happiness,—lit up for the 
delectation of the postulants in the foul 
night of Samsara, 


24. Though small the acquaintance, the 
Sastra thou hast ordained  sufticeth to 
uproot atheism and appraise the Lord’s 


Védanta-Dipa. 2. Sri-Bhashya. 

Gadya-Traya. 4. Védanta-sara. 

Védartha-sangraha. -6. Gita-Bhashya. 
All by Ramanuja. 


106 


Grace, to drive darkness and enhance the 
joy’ of God-knowledge,’ to redeem from 
evil ways and to implant in The Way. 


However owing. to my vascilating 
disposition, I submit to thee a matter 
once remembered, but now escaping my 
memory. | 


Guru.—What may that be ? 


Pupil. 
this-wise, how is one (God) rendered a 


25. Ordering that-wise and ordaining 


well-wisher ? 


‘Guru. 


Humph! How clever in _ proposing 
subtle questions ! 
Pupil.—How is redemption possible from sin, 


which is hard to surmount, on account of 
its attendant circumstances ? 


Guru.—Thou hast now propounded another 


question more subtle still ! 


Pupil.—How is punishment inflictable on one 
freely permitted to err ? 


Guru. 


Considering Karma as the conditioning 


1. Knowledge ofGod, 2. Verity (Tatva-jiana). 


107 


cause and as destined to end, all these 
three-fold difficulties disappear.’ : 


Pupil.—(With joy) How tersely recondite and 
dignified, and patent only tocultured minds, 
are thy good self’s words ? I shall propound 
this same before the august assembly. 


26. The High Pontiff’s utterances rain the 
nectar of Moksha—(the nectareous flood) 
abrading the banks of the modern ill- 
witted,” quenching, medicine-like, the 
poisonous fire of false faiths’ burning up 
1. The implication is:—Ze question (1) God’s well- 
wishes to jivas are in no way affected as jivas 
indulge in sins owing to the result of their past 
Karmas. Re question (2), the cause of even 
a learned man committing sin is due to his 
Karma. Re question (3), though it may be that 
the sins are the making of God, jivas neverthe- 
less indulge in sins owing to the force of their 
previous Karmas and as the result thereof get 
punished. 
2. Reference to the out-Vedic creeds such as 
Buddhism and Jainism. 
3. Reference to masked Vedantism such as 
Advaitism. 


108 


the soul,—the toilet-maids (7.¢., the utter- 
ances) who plait the top-knot' of Eternal 
Sarasvati’s” tresses. 


27. Other creeds, knit together by 
hundreds of jargon-words, © conveying 
nonsense and eventuating in nothing but 
confusion, cannot be palatable to those 
that have tasted the High Yogi’s* works. 
Can Siva accustomed to wear on his head 
the sacred Ganga, teeming with pearls 
and oysters, bear a slimy ditch infested 
with frogs ? 


Divine sire! Some _ near in this 
assembly whisper that thy creed hath 
but few adherents in this world where 
so many creeds obtain. I shall just 


—— 


- 


deliver them a repartee (looking around) 


Reference to the closing or crowning parts of the 
Vedas 7.c., the Upanishads. 


The Goddess of speech personifying the Veda 
itself. ‘ 
Sri Ramanuja is referred to in this verse and the 


rest of the Act variously as 4Tdqt@t, Falex, afa- 
WA, AAAZ, etc., 


109 


Ha! Pets of Devas !' 

28. Hearts set on voluminous’ works 
composed by the wrong-witted, take the 
words of the Lord of Yatis’? (Ramanuja) 
as light. But the Kaustubha® gem decorat- 
ing the broad bosom of Murari (Vishnu) 
certainly in the scales weigheth light 
as against a mountain ! 


29. Let the works of the Lord of Yatis 
which fix the sense of ancient Vedas, be 
lauded or cajoled, by those whose minds 
are warped by false faiths! What doth a 
salt-dealer know of the value of camphor, 
the essence and fragrance of which are so 
loudly lauded as to shiver the city (into 
pieces) ? 

(Listening) What! Sayest thou that 
our faith is but new P (clapping hands and 


laughing) 


Goats—as besiniae as goats. 

Ascetics. 

The ornament worn on the chest of Vishnu. 
The implication is that though Kaustubha is 
lighter than Kalachala mountain, its superiority 
is unquestionable. 


110 


30. A thing is conceived by one as beyond 
dispute ; another by another similarly, both 
claiming adherents. No sane man can 
here say both are right. Hence when one 
party demolisheth the other, no finding and 
judgment are _ possible. Ergo, that 
(doctrine)—Old or New—is to be accepted 
which accordeth with Truth.’ 


Further :— 


31. At its time allis new, after which, 
it is old. Hence old and new do not cons- 
titute the ground for good and bad. 


Guru.—Enough with these stupid. Let those 


be attacked now who dispute the sense. 


Pupil.—Holy sire! Who, even ina dream, can 


i 


9 


ade 


fabricate flaws of sense in thy creed, 


exempt from all trace of fault ? 
32. That vain person who imputeth 
fallacies of his own creed to thy creed 


harmonising with the Crest? of the course 


= Ss we Se ae 
That which is arrived at by viewing it from the 
right perspective. 

Upanishads. 


111 


of Srutis, can be no better than a person 
who, flinging dirt with his own hands, but 
which falleth on his own person, wisheth 
to stain the sky therewith! Further. 


By none can thy school be assailed. 
Vain ranters thus are these stupid oppo- 


nents ! 


33. Let one close one’s eyes, the Sun is not 
screened thereby ; let one close one’s ears 
firmly, the cuckoo into a crow is_ not 
transformed; let a lad whirl fast round, 
with him the Earth rotateth not; let him 
fight with his fist, the sky is not disturbed 
thereby. 


Guru.—Lovely lad! Right well hast thou 
spoken. I am just on the look-out for 
a suitable president and an assembly for 
thee, who hath launched the capaign against 
all pugilistic heretics. | 


( Gestures meditation. ) 


King.—Generalissimo !_ Opportune — ’tis now, 


for us also to join. 


112 


Senapati.—| fully agree with thy Majesty’s 
resolve. 


(Both approach.) 


Pupil.—Divine sire! Close at hand is the 
President attended by his Generalissimo. 


Guru.—_( Turning round and looking with joy and 


regard.) 


34. Anon, and in right time hath (he 
Sun of) Vivéka risen, attended by his sun- 
shine, Vyavasiya; he will himself dispel 
the night of scepticism, weaned of all 
wisdom. 


35. Yonder shineth the paragon of virtue, 
Vyavasiya, Vivéka’s generalissimo stand- 
ing there willy all ‘savants that espouse 
his school. | . 


King.—( With humility) Here Vivéka with his — 


generalissimo payeth his respects due to 
thy divinity. 


Garu.—Great king! May thou be blest in 
every respect. 


113 
Further:— 


36. The Sruti, though violated in various 
ways by Bauddhas* Kanddas,? Naiyayikas,* 
Jinas,* Kapilas,> Charvakas,® and Gému- 
khavyaghras’ shining in the (ostensible) coat 
of Vedic research, is, in this world, 
protected by thy (Vivéka’s)® Saviour—the 
Almighty who incarnateth Himself in 
diverse ways, and doth thrive, coming out 
unscathed from the turmoil of perverts. 


SS 


2. 


See n. 4, p- 98. 

One of the 6 principal systems of Hindu 
Philosophy founded by KanAda. 

A system of Hindu Philosophy founded vy the 
sage Gautama. 

Jaina. 

The founder of the Sankhya system of Philosophy. 
A sophistical system of Philosophy founded by 
Brihaspati who propounded the grossest form of 
materialism. | 

Prachhanna Bauddhas 27.c., Believers in Vedas, only 
fo appearance but really professing Buddhistic 
doctrines, as deceptive to appearance as one. 
possessing the tame cow’s face with the ferocity 
of a tiger hidden under it. 


fazfadiatacataas: | 


s. Ss. 8 


114 


King.—Holy sire! Thy mere look is fraught 
with all kinds of blessings for us; thy 
well-wishing (again) seemeth a super- 


fluity. 


Guru.—King! When I have been in dire need 
of a President, thou hast, by the swing 
of merit, appeared ou the spot, attended 
by thy general. President majesty ! 
Then bid this disciple of mine to perform 


the task on hand. 
King.—I shall direct him as thou willest. 
(Turning to the pupil.) 


Sweet Brahman! Deeply devoted art 
thou to this all-knowing sage. 


97. Methinks, this our Guru is no other 
than the Vedanta creed itself (incarnate) 
and thyself the debate, lord of disputants 
(incarnate. ) 


To this, imprimis, thy attention is 
to be bestowed. | 


Pupil. —Great King ! Command. 


115 


King.—Peace to thee! 


38. With humility, please good men; 
the ways of the wise, demonstrate ; 
offenders of holy men, dread; _ the 
Trivarga-addict,' treat as straw; resting 
thy load in thy Lord Kternal,—All- 
forgiving Sri’s Spouse,—adopt the habit 
of the Chataka? bird, ever on cloud 
intent. | 


Senapati.—Holy youth! Understandest thou 
His Majesty’s will ? 


Pupil.—Is there more to attend to ? 


King.—39, Learn the letters of the Upa- 
nishads, and avoid association of the 
aliens; serve as a rule sage-souls, and 


despise the averse® and the perverse. 
FE cae eS es seh 
1. The three aims or ambitions of men, of lower 
sort viz., Dharma, Artha and Kama. 
2. The cloud must rain before the Chataka bird will 
drink. The God-aspirant likewise looks up to 
God alone for His d rops of grace. 


3. Avert from God and therefore averse to the 
Vedantins. 


—— 


116 


Guru.—Live thou long! listen attentively. 


Pupil.—Great is thy grace ! 


King.—Pious youth ! 


40. By knocking down the misconstruc- 
tions, strayed from authoritative paths, 
adversaries shall be expelled on the 
principle called Sthalipulaka’, Surely all 


the gold ingot is not rubbed on the touch- 


} stone to test its quality. 


Pupil.—Aye! As willeth thy Majesty, will I 


summon these quidnunes for verbal 


gymnastics. 
(A little louder). 


41. Here haileth Yatindra—the hill-fount 
of the rivers of all knowledge,—Yatindra, 
the tree assuaging the fatigue and refreshing 
those tired of ceaseless circling in Samsara,— 
the rising sun to the night of illusion of the 


a 


Ascertaining by testing only a few grains in the 
pot, that the whole rice in the pot is boiled ; 
hence using a test. 


117 


perverts, and the full-orbed Moon to the 


tides of the Vedic sea. 
(/nside the curtain.) 


42. Schooled well in the systems of 
Tarka,' Vydkarana” and Mimamsa’, and our 
manliness paraded in systems counter also, 
we declare boldly in this assembly that we 
care not our contesting foes—from Sétu 
up. to Himalaya—a yarn, straw or 


chaff. 


Senapati.—Arya! Hearest thou the proud 


challenge of the opponents P 


Pupil. —( With anger) Enough of insolence! 


= © DO — 


43. On my head humbly bear I, the 
lotus-feet of the wise whose hearts are 
redolent with the lore of Yatiraja, but 
on the head of those’ whose hearts are 


Logic. 

Grammer. 

One of the six chief systems of Hindu Philosophy. 
Sankhyas, Vaiséshikas, etc. 


118 


burning with faiths adverse, | plant my 
left foot’. 


Sri Desika does not mean literally what he states 
here. It is a mannerism he adapts such as 
Sahadeva’s similar assertion when in the great 
Rajastya sacrifice his discretion to do the first 
honor to Lord Krishna in preference to all great 
kings, sages and elders assembled was question- 
ed by Sisupdla. Read Mahabharata Sabhaparva. 
thus :— 
Asked by Sisupala thus :— 
“ger aaa Tat Naa Aaa: | 
sfasetal Was: Talat a faaas: uv” 
Sahadeva replied thus :-— 
“aq quart aaa Je: HST Fe 
AAIAMAGSEATA: Fa TAGS | 
Gt al a Ged BARA AAAS: | 
Gs qe fate der Tafed Tey NN” 
* * * 
adl a aS BAghanat aay t 
alfrat asat Val Aer AahIt Ts 
Similar instances lead one to think that one 
of the ancient ways to assert incontrovertible 


truths is by some such open taunt. All that 
ig meant here therefore is that Sri Desika is. 


119 


King.—Blessed sire! Timely is this Arya’s 
bravado, like Hanuman’s’ _ breathing 
implicit devotion to the master. 


Guru.—(Aside) What can be the motive of 
the king in giving prominence to this 
boast P 
44. (Aloud.)—A hero in the system of 
Sruti and adept in ousting the adverse 
(thereto), may it be that .the boast of 
such a Debater is not gloried ? 


Pupil.—( Humbled and trembling)—( Aside) 


Alack! To efface’ the sin of self- 
praise, unconscious, let me laud my masters 
and their teachings, 


45. (Aloud) Here standeth triumphant our 

Apostolic lineage,—consoling,—proud of 
firmly convinced of the truth of Ramanuja 
Darsana and that he is equally convinced of 
the hollowness of the other Darsanas. 


1. ef. #4 Mamas a ae sMdas WaT 
2. Itis a belief among the pious that the mention 


of the Achary4’s name alone will wipe off the 
most heinous sins. 


a 


9 


“a 


Go 4 Ga 


120 


the pride of rivals quelled by the vibrating 
waves of Hayagriva’s’ neigh, revelling in 
(our) heart-thrones,—lineage revealing the 
right way by the yarn-pile of other creeds 
being swept away by winds,” borne of the 
fluttering pennons’ hoisted on the mansions 


of the quarters ten. 


46. Had Sri Rimanuja not promulgated 
the ancient system of Philosophy, which 
saveth “Dame Sruti from widowhood,‘ 
by still vouchsafing for her the embrace 
of her Lord,’—ridiculous would be Vyasa’, 
oblivious would be Valmiki’, a toy 
would be Sri Suka®, and vain indeed 


The horse-faced Avatara of Vishnu. 
The allusion is to Nyaya-Tatva, (of Nathamuni) 
-—Siddhi-traya (of Yamuna), Sri-Bhashya (of 
Ramanuja.) 
Satadishani, (of Desika) ete. 
By refuting materialists who impute wrong 
meanings to the Sruti by denying the Godhead &e. 
The Parabrahman. 
The reputed author of the Mababharata. 

" 3 x » Ramayana. 

i; 4 », sri Bhagavata. 

the word Suka means a parrot as well. 


121 


the labours of the great Bédhayana’. 


King.—( With delight.) Who can not be won 


by this Arya, of such lasting love to his 
master ? 


For :— 


47. O£ love unabating for his master,’ 
ever intent on his praise, and with care 
for his goods, house, etc., and conserving 
Tradition for use for the fit, this grateful, 


sinless (disciple), is sure to earn his 
treasure. 


Pupil.—l hope to come out victorious only 


zm 


2. 
3. 


by the strength of our siddhanta. Thy 
majesty shall anon witness it. 


48. The compositions? of Yatiraja are 
immune from contradictions; lovely by 
reason of being distilled from Bddhayana’s 


work®, and blazing with fau!tless arguments; 


The reputed author of Vritti-grantha on Brahma- 
sutras. 


Sri Bhashya and other works. 
Vritti-grantha. 


122 


by such incontrovertible annotations, 
they (compositions) serve to tap that 


nerve! (in man) that is suffused with 
full-blossomed knowledge. 


Moreover:— 


49.' This, our Dispensation thinneth all 
darkness, by reason of its compatibility 
with Perception®, its simplicity of Infe- 
rence’, and its imperilment of atheism* 
by (God’s) knowability from Scriptures 
indefective. This (Dispensation) is 


Knowledge is here the light or the illumination 
or the spiritual virtue the soul possesses intrinsi- 
cally, and which is effectually hidden in 
“earthen vessels.’ The physiological counter- 
part of this psychical fact is the nerve or nervous. 
centre alluded to, or it may be taken as a 
sy mbol. 


The reference is to Saugatas who deny the 
reality of the world. 

The reference is to Vaiséshikas who harp on 
arguing about the atomicity of atoms. 


The reference is to Mimamsakas who deny the 
Godhead. 


123 
demonstrative of Nathamuni’s' intuitions, 
promoted by many works as those by 
Yamuna’, and fostered so well by 
Yatindra’. 
King.—What say ye now ? 
(Behind the curtain.) 


Great uproar by repeating “ Tarka, etc.. 
verse 42.” 


(All listen.) 


Pupil.—(Repeating verse 43 in his turn, stops 
half way and looks at the King.) 


King.—lepeat, repeat. 
Pupil.—( Repeats the rest.) 


King.—Arya! I desire to have all doubts 
dissolved by thee,—the treasure of all 
knowledge, gained from thy master, by dis- 
putations held, with the learned men here 


congregated. 


Pupil.—( Proud and slighting). Thy Majesty! 
Listen intently. 


— 


1. Founders of the Sri Vaishnava-Siddbanta. 


124 


50. xanada’s story, | have only too well 
studied, and those of Akshapada have taught. 
With Pfirva Mimimsa I am puffed. As to 
Sankhya and Yéga, I have oft discoursed 
upon them. Ha! Ha! Is there thus (yet) 
an iota for me to reflect about those, 
wandering in the wilderness of several 
false systems shattered indeed by 
Yatindra,—those blinded by the night 
of inner illusion P 


Besides :— 


91. Whoso, in this last age (Kali), lear- 
neth this Yati-king’s dialectic dissertations, 
disclosing the peculiar  Visishtadvaita 
doctrine',—the day-break to the darkness 
of nescience before him, anon declineth 
the wrangling waves of Casuists, 


aiqaiitaig: — That the souls constitute the 
Infinite body of God. This doctrine is 
peculiar to Visishtadvaitism or qualified Monism 
and reconciles in the most satisfactory manner, 


so far ever attempted, of the true relation of Soul 
to God, 


125 


competing with each other to standardise 
their respective dogmas. 


Guru.—Great king! These pedantic perverts, 


who blow their own trumpets by their | 
blatant tongues, are eager to throw the 
gauntlet. 

52. On’the analogy of a ‘Dog-Hog fight” 
these ravishers of Védanta-Siddhanta, 
lead the attack, in company. Let there- 
fore thy General check them, so that they 
may each in turn argue with our pupil. 


Pupil.—53. (Smiling) A pre-conceived notion 


I 


that Perception and Revelation are weaker 
than Inference, taketh hold of these con- 
testants, But of no avail is Reasoning (7.¢., 
inference) in arriving at Truth; therefore 
mere Reasoning is of little practical utility 


A pack of dogs, though quarrelling with each 
other, yet band together, forgetting for the time 
being their own mutual malice and chase a hog. 
Even so are the followers of creeds other than 
Vedanta-Siddhanta, who, though mutually 
differring from each other, club together when 
opposing the creed of Vedanta-Siddhanta, 


126 


in this world. Mind not the sundries: some 
wicked men, with conceit brimming in 
their minds, desire to overthrow, alas ! 
the virtuous with arguments unworthy 
to be pronounced in an assembly. The 
foremost’ in _ this assembly and_ the 


foremost” in the army, shall hear this 
as well :— 


54. Self-condemned standeth the mass of 
arguments adduced by these Casuists by 
their mental conflict with each other : 
their Sistras are refuted by the eternal 
Vedas. Now the contestants relying on 
mere bombastry, are no match for me, 
even if they bodily oppose me. 


\ (Smiling.) Hallo! The blind lead the 
‘blind with the staff, and the lame carry the 
Jame !! Even so are these perverts, whose 
wits are blinded by the darkness—Karma, 
and who are the trusted counsellors of 
Mahamoha. “ 


ee 
1, Vivéka, the President (King.) 


2, Vyavasiya, the General. 


127 


55. With their oratorical effusions 
matching rills but swelling sudden under 
pour of rain,—bristling with vulgar slang, 
—and resembling shingles rattling in the 
mouth,’—these (casuists) entice only 
numskulls who enthuse (over such effu- 
sions). 


Ha! ha! These satellites of Mahi- 
moha flattering these orations, bring to our 
mind the jackals, belauding asses’ music. 


King.—General! Direct, for debate one after 
another, these individuals, small-witted in 
that they flout at the Vedanta, pregnant 
with sense. 


Senapati.—I shall call to order these senselessly 
blatant men. 


1. «e., slurring and indistinct pronunciation; or 
their arguments are as much not amenable to 
reason as the improbable tale that a person 
swallowed a rock, or a8 deceptive as a juggler 
feigning to eat stones—or it also may mean 
offering stones to the listener to eat, instead 
of food r fruit. 


128 


(Turning round and looking.) 


Listen Oh non-Vedins and Veda- 
misinterpreters ! 


56. Stop now with your false jargon, 
dear only to the mean,—puffed up with 
mutual admiration but repugnant to the 
galaxy of savants. In troth see your 
methods lame before these truth-speaking 
lions of good men! 


Pupil.—Blessed sire! Cast thy looks this way. 


57. These men embrace corrupt dialects 
such as the Mahdradshtra, Magadhi, Saura- 
soni, Lati, Gaudi, ete., which Buddha, Jina, 
and others, have passed off as Scriptures,— 
dialects that are the laughing-stock (of the 


Samskritists. ) 


I also, nevertheless, versed in all these 
dialects, shall win these disputants by their 
own weapons ; So goeth the saying, that 
| devils must be met by devils’ patovs.’ 


- ney 
% 


Guru.—Help . thyself to language divine (ze., 
Samskrita) or non-divine z.e., Prakritic but 


129 


the divine would appear to be all-agreeable, 
for it seemeth to be so to the king, in all 
likelihood, 


King.—Sire divine! Mightily bold is this 
eminent personage, the object of thy grace. 


Senapati.__What wonder ! 


58. Here stand (arrayed in glory) these 
Agastyas,, who have drained dry the 
ocean-streams of these boasting  casuists, 
captured by the demons of vain debate,— 
Agastyas, ripe with the voice of wisdom, 
by sitting at the feet of the king of 
asceties( = Ramanuja). 


59. The great tumult uprising from the 
mutually-contending and dry-discoursing 
elephant-army of these wranglers burst- 
ing with boast, and violating with vain 
talk the ways of the Veda, ceaseth, the 


1. The implieation is that savants versed in Rams- 
nujas lore will put an end to the notoriety 
of the followers of rival creeds even as quickly 
as Agastya dried up the ocean by one sip of his. 


‘. 2 


130 


moment Yatindra’s blessed word is uttered,. 
albeit casually. 


Pupil.—Acting as I do in the presence of the 


si 


president (king) and the commander-in- 
chief, and armoured as | am firmly. by the 
grace-filled eyes of my _ teacher, what 
fear is there in this wordy-war ? 


Now:— 


60. Brilliant from my birth reigneth my 
intellect, and purposive. So it is by 
virtue of my Pontiff (=Ramanuja),—the 
axe to the dreadful world-evil. liven 
the God-ordained great illusion-night can 
never bring sleep on me, drunk as | am 
in the nectar-drug, drawn from — his 
(Pontiff’s) milk-sea like sermons’. 


Besides :— 


Unrivalled, have we all these days 
passed among the disputants, filling the 
royal courts of the countries, Tundira, 


Chéla, Pandya, Kerala, Karnata, Nepiala,. 


ee, 


Sri Bhashya Xe. 


131 


Malava, Gauda, Lata, etc, and never 
were there brow-beaten. Walking as 
we do, in the kingly ways of the Vedas, 
and keeping as we do the company of 
good men, we are happy. 


But why so contentious ? 
For:— 


61. Let alone the fact that Sri Réma- 
nuja’s followers have a spotless wisdom 
from their very birth. Let, alone again 
the fact of his eternal works being by 
nature supreme, sportive and savoury. 
Who shall even dare to lift his eyes before 
my debate, conducted with a weapon-to- 


weapon vebemence, in the war of words ? 


Senapati.— Indeed ! 


} 


62. What is achieved through the 
Acharya’s single eye of grace or his 
two physical eyes cannot be achieved by 
the Three-eyed,' the Kight-eyed,? or even 
the Thousand-eyed.’ 

63. No other deem we our Deity, equa] 


Rudra. 2. Prajapati. 3. Indra» 


132 


or high, than our Acharya whose tongue- 
tip is bright, throne-made as it is by the 
Horse-faced', not even the Deity Narayana 
Himself, who,—His pristine glory un- 
affected—putteth on the Acharya’s garb’, 
to uplift souls, sunk in the sea of Samsara. 


Guru.—Great king! By polite speech alone; 


hath thy General managed these leading 
debaters of other creeds. Let them now 
range themselves (before us) one after 
another. 


(Looking at the pupil.). 


Listen, lad! the first to be is the 
exposition of the creed of the Sankhyas, 
approximating to the Vedanta. 


64. These adepts of the Sankhya creed, 
viz. Kapila, Asuri, Panchasikha, ete. dis- 
criminating Matter and Soul, treat not 
of God. Sin-smitten (sure) are their 
minds. 


1. See. -2p e120. 


2. 


of ATARI Fa: HAT AUAAT Ta 
AAAS SAERVOAAATTTAT Ut 


133 


Pupil.—(Aside.) In the contest about to open, 


a 
2. 
3. 


I must first enlist the sympathy of this 
audience. 


65. (Aloud.) Deign to me, I beseech, 
oh! ye, who are bees in the lotus-feet 
of Murabhit', tapping therein the honey 
of Peace! (deign to me) that I may 
heartily regale your ears with the honey 
(of words.) 


(Turning to the Preceptor, bowing, and 
hands clasped) :— 


Sire divine! by thy command, let 
me refute these Sankhyas.: 


66. Materially influenced, if -ye (Sankh- 
yas) only admit Matter and Soul, how 
hath God—the Crest-jewel? of Srutis 
by the hundred—offended ? If by severe 
sophistry, the Lord (God) hath been 
ejected, let other swindlers® swindle ye 
of your faith ! 


Vishnu. 
WAM AANA 
Charvakas and Nihilists who are still more 


134 
Senapati.—My lord! 


67. These Sinkhyas, of their obstinacy 
bereft, by this Arya’s arguments, now 
categorise! this Lord of the Cosmos 
(God ) as the twenty-fifth, as the twenty- 
sixth, as the twenty-seventh. 


King.—Holy sire ! If these SAnkhyas have 
been won over to the With-God doctrine, 
grant them pardon and range them with 
the Vedantins. 


Guru.—Stop, great king! For, these Sankhyas, 
though God-recognising, do yet generally 
grant a God of limited power, as under- 
stood “by the Ydga philosophy. Hence 
direct this Vedantin to confute them 
(on this score.) 


an 


argumentative, deny the existence of Matter 
and Soul. 


1. For details of categories, vide n. 1, p. 2. 
Some count God as the 25th Category. Others 
count Soul as the 25th Category and God as the 
26th Category. Yet others count Time as the 
26th Category and God as the 27th Category. 


135 


King.—He is already directed, sire! by thy 
command. 


Pupil.—68. These Sankhyas, read in the per- 
verted doctrines comprised under Ydga, 
prate that God’s sovereignty is but 
reflection. The fit rejoinder to these also 
is the Vedic creed which recogniseth for 
the Godhead, the attributes of knowledge, 
power, strength, ete.' 


69. Lord! These poor adherents 
of Sankhya, now chastened, may _ be 
dismissed. Let now the Arya be set 
to the refutation of the Kanada doctrines. 


Senapati. 


King.—He has already been so set to it (by 
our Guru) in the manner how best 
to overcome those who range themselves 
against Vedanta. 


Pupil.—Great king! I shall do according to 


thy will. 


70. By conceptions such as the creation 


1, Sraraat araaaieat At and such other Srutis 
proclaiming the Godhead. 


136 


of ‘non-being” (or non-ens), and by 
controversions of the methods' of the 


Veda, the notoriety obtained for the 


School of Kandda, by an Ulfka’ setting 


up a teaching, hath now passed off into 
mere memory’. 


Guru.—(/yeing with regards.) 


Pupil.—(As if laughing):—But let (our) king 


mind this, the yet more strange ! 


King.—What may that be ? 


Pupil.—These followers of the Kandda School 


3. 
4. 


postulate Méksha (liberation) as a stony 


condition, per contra to Divine Likeness. 
In that case, glory be to Kumbhakarna, 
and his curse’ prove a blessing. 


FAAATEASMAT and such other Srutis proclaiming 
the Godhead. 


Some say that Rudra taught the Vaiseshika- 
Sastra to the Kanaidas, assuming the form of 


‘an owl. Ulika is also the name of the sage 


of the Kanada School. 
FAFATAAMAA SAT | 


The curse referred to is the boon granted to 


137 


King.—F orsooth right ! 


Senapati.—Lord ! 


71. These Semi-Bauddhas (Kanadas etc.) 
have been brow-beaten by (our) Arya. Next 
have to be beaten these full (-fledged) 


_Bauddhas who vituperate the Vedas, 


King.—( With doubt.) Arya! Art thou pre- 


pared to subdue these Bauddhas, adepts 


as they are in juggling arguments ? 


Pupil.—(A bit out of temper.) King! Acting 


under thy will as I do, all these comba- 
tants put together may fail before my 
single self. 
Thus :— 

72. The dull Vaibhashikas' boast that 
the cosmos is momentary; the Sautran- 
tikas' infer the objective universe to. be 
but modifications of the mind; the 
Yogacharas' aver this same cosmos as 
_ unreal ; and the rest (the Madhyamikas',) 


1. 


Kumbhakéiin Rivana’s brother, that he should 
enjoy eternal sleep. 

Different theorists of the Saugata (Buddhist) 
System of Philosophy. 


if 


bo 


138 


assert that all is unreal (even mind). 
Hence, their mutually-conflicting theories, 
self-condemned, stand before me, these 
(doctrinaires ), denuded of their boast. 


Again _— 


73. Stupid these, Dingnaga’, ete., bidding 
for tusk-to-tusk (kind of) fight! But 
attend, your school-methods _ utterly 
collapse ; for the Bauddhas fail in either 
case, whether, knowing what is to be 
taught, they venture on expositions, or 
unknowing—(i. e. in both cases, their 
argument for momentary doctrine fails’). 
Founder: of the Saugata-creed. There is also 
an implication in this thinker possessing the 
strength of the elephants, supporting the diree- 
tions ten of the Earth. | 

The meaning is this:—If the present moment 
vanishes giving place to the next moment, then 
the teaching of the present moment vanishes, 
and it is useless ; again if the present moment is 
existent, and the future or the next moment is non- 
existent, the teaching also becomes non-existent. 


Hence, as in either case, if the teaching is to 


Senapati. 


1. 


139 


Hence ours is the victory,—let trumpets 
be beaten ! 


(Applauding). Lord! Hearing this 
Arya’s tersely sublime and _ irresistible 
harangue, cordially appealing to the 
assembly, the vile Saugatas have fled in 
every direction, but Madhyamika alone— 
the leader of the van of the Bauddhas— 
disregardeth the accusation with temerity, 
parading his pedantry. He must in 
particular be uprooted for his bombasts 
thus :— 

74. Let the Vaibhashika’s oration enjoy 
peace ; to the Sautrantikas, well-wishings ; 
let the Ydgacharas leave their means of 
proof ; let alone the adherents of Sankara 
&e. who only follow' them (Y6gucharas). But 
here emergeth this Madhyamika, bursting 
with his ability to make and unmake 
theories of non-entity, the upholder of the 
monistie doctrine of negation, hard to 


persist, the “momentary doctrine must he 
abandoned. 

Aecepting Yogachara’s. doctrine -—faaaalazaa aL 
aereaqaarara | 


140 


win by unsophisticated arguments. He 
attempteth victory. 


King.—Arya! This disputatious Pandit-churl, 
the scholastic of ‘total illusion’ and 
advocate of ‘negation,’ should himself be 
relegated to negation’. 


Guru. —Lad! Ponder over this matter deliberately. 


Pupil.—Why such deep deliberation? He argueth 
for himself eternal silence, by reckless 
arguments, akin to those, a son would 


employ for the barrenness of his mother. 
Further :— 


75. This wrangler sa amika? Ue eae 


1, Anybunees that is unreal cannot be perceived or 
known by the sense, just as a man cannot say 
that his mother is a barren woman, for the 
very idea of barrenness connotes the fact of 
being sonless. Similarly the very idea of percep- 
tion or knowledge implies the existence of a 
real object. To say that unreality ‘alone is real 
is a contradiction of words. 


2. Who form only a sub-sect of Yogichara and 
who hold :-—faaraaa aa. | 


141 


self-condemned, inasmuchas his own 
wit is unwitted -by the arrows of his 
own self-contradicting arguments, opposing 
each other, and breaking down. There 
seemeth no occasion therefore to advance 
any more (on our part), for as much as 
that would be to club-beat_ one. already 
beaten. : 


eT Tae me rng 


(Behind the curtain), (A ery) :— 
Devils! Devils! ! 


Senapati.— Not so, not so. These are Digambaras 
with the mingled’ (feelings of) joy and 
sorrow at the overthrow of the Saugata 
ereed, and vetoers of the evidences of 
Perception and Inference. So do they 
dupe others. 


76. Dirt-smearing folk? these, and pea- 
1. Digambaras. (a sect of theJainas). 

aat anaearaa Feary: 

TAME MAA faTTa: 
2. Dirty because they are afraid of taking a clean 


bath, lest they may hurt the vermin in the dirt 
of the body. 


142 


cock-feather-flourishers to beguile the 


unwary. Ashamed are they at their own 


odd doctrine of Sapta-bhangi', long ago 


exploded. 


Let this Arya be set to controvert 


these. 


King.—77. Where is controverting needed 


ay 


(a) 


when by their own admission they affirm: 


negation and negate affirmation ? 


(Lurning to the Guru.) Holy sire! 


These Philosophers who indulge in several. 
tricks such as Sun-stopping, Rock-split- 
ting, Doll-speaking, ete, shall be van- 


qutshed through thy grace alone. 


eared, (a) errata, (+) erafta a ante a, 
(c) Rargamey (cl) Srratet arasnet +(e) eqrariea 
arawet 4, (7°) Crater a ale aTaHET 11 (g) 


Ifsoitis. (b) Ifsoitis not. (c) If so it is 
and it is not. (d) If so it cannot be described. 
(¢) If it is so it cannot be described. (O°. If it 
is not so it cannot be described. (g) Ifso and 
if if is not so it cannot be described. 


143 


Guru.—Great king ! To such mischief-makers: 
the king alone must assign punishment. 


Pupil.—(Smiling.) 


78. Rules of eating proper and improper 
(food) and canons of logic for defence 
of own, and accusation of other’s, doctrines, 
they have abjured; and they know not 
their own defeat. As for punishment, 
the gods themselves,—angered by their 
denunciation of the Vedas—have inflicted 
punishment in the shape of (their 
resorting to the habit of painfully) pulling. 
the hairs of the head’. 


Further punishment dependeth on 
thy majesty and the Guru. 


King.—Ah generall To sight them paineth. 
May they pass beyond my vision! 


Senapati.—Lord! Blinded by thy glory-sun, 
they, like owls, bide themselves in_ hill 


1. The reference is to the prevalent custom of Jains 
refraining from shaving lest they should 
hurt the lice. Hence they pluck the hair, repeat- 


ing, Jina, Jina! 


144 


and sea-side caverns, the abodes of the 
aborigines. 


King.—Who are these men  again,—bearing 
un-vedic marks (on their persons) resembl- 
ing the Kshapanakas (=Jains), engaged 
in severe’ austerities passing for eremites, 
and imitating the practices of the Pra- 


matha-hosts'—who oppose the Vedas ? 


Guru.—Laike stray-cattle stealing into the rice- 
fields of Védic-Dharma, these must be 


driven to a distance. 


Pupil.—They, themselves, will stay far off. 


For :— 


79. Now that the turbulent — professors 
of the doctrines of Kapila, Kansda, 
Buddha, and the Hair-puller (Jina), have 
been befooled, these followers of the doc- 
trines of ~Pasupati’, designed by him to 
delude the offenders of Gautama, shall 
follow suite. 


Ea —- KR, 


Goblins attending on Rudra. 


ie 
2. Rudra. Onan occasion of great famine which 


145 


Senapati. 


Lord! These (PAsupatas) like the 
Digambaras (Jains) resent our Arya’s 
words, and in order to encourage belief 
in their creed, resort to such strategems, 
as the producing of rain out of season (&c ) 


lasted for 12 years, sage Gautama’s hermitage 
was the only rain-fed area. All other sages 
found resort here to shelter themselves from 
famine. For along time, the refugees enjoyed 
the hospitality of Gautama and he would not 
permit them to depart. Thereupon one set 
of these guests who wanted to return to 
their own hermitages, contrived a plan to get 
out of the place by creating a false cow 
which devastated Gautama’s crops. Gautama 
enraged, burnt the cow by bis mere look and 
the guests left Gautama’s hermitage on the 
pretext that they could not stay with a cow- 
killer. Gautama came to know the true state 
of affairs through his ATMA (aye of wisdom) 
and eursed them to be Aaa: thus :— 
APS 44 waqQetaew: | 

aa FFT PATMATST TA: tt 

Thus cursed, they invented anew faith called 


Pasupata-Tantra whose teachings are antagonistic 
to the Vedas. 


s. 4. 10 


146 
(Behind the curtain) (A voice) :— 
“det Tae a 


King.— Looks round, exclaiming What? what ? 


Unnatural this ! for, (surely) :— 
/ 


80. There loom the serried clouds. Can 


General. 


they be the brush for eye-collyriuming ? 
Can thev be the (stage-) curtain before 
the Lightning-actresses @ Can they be 
the Yamuna to the celestial Gang 


are they the Tamala grove fringing the 


At 
ay Or 


shore of Ocean-sky, or are they the 
(dark) tresses of the Rain-damsels, or 
again may they not be the (dark) musk- 
mark (on the forehead) of the East-maid % 
Nay, are they not again like the flowing 
floods proud-bubbling from the ichor of 
the Cupid- Elephant? P 


1. Ganga is white, and Yamun4 is dark. Clouds 
being dark are said to be like Yamuna, 
2. Thus did the spectators of the magic clouds 


invented by the Pasupatas figure to themselves. 
those clouds in various similies, 


147 
Further :— 
81. There issue from the bosom of these 
clouds, zephyrs—the offspring of winds, 
bearing the aroma of ambrosial honey 
freely flowing from the wildly-blossoming 
buds of Nipa-woods',—zepbyrs so much 
relished by elephant-herds and wafting 
fragrance, fuming from rain-soaked earth. 


(All look flurried and wondering.) 


King.—Holy sire! How (then) to counteract 
this (illusion) ? 


Guru. —No effort on our part is needed ! 
For :— 


82, Here is He, the Sun’ to Kaitabha- 


darkness, 
(He) the Gust® driving the Madhu- 
dust, 


1. Kadamba or a species of Asoka. 

2. Vishnu is compared to the Sun and his uprooting 
Kaitabha (the Demon) is compared to the sun’s 
dispelling darkness. 

3 Vishnu is compared to the gust and his slaying 


148 


(He) the Cleaver’ of the Hiranya- 
hill, 
(He) the Feller? of the Kélanemi- 
tree,—in short 
(He) the Gulper of the Samsira-Sea, 


How then can feats of illusion not 


eradicated be ? 


(Joying and Wondering). Anon all 
the quarters and sub-quarters of space 
clear up! 


Guru, 


What all not shall clear up, when the 
Holy, the Lover of votaries, deigneth ? 


King.—Venerable sire! These are versed in 


the Satvata®-sistra and seem to be at 


—— 


demon Madhu is compared to a gust of wind 
driving away dust. 

1, Demon Hiranya is spoken of as a hill and 
Vishnu’s killing him is spoken of as cleaving it. 
(The incarnation of Nrisimha, Man-lion, is 
referred to here.) 


2: Demon Kalanemi is compared to a tree and 
Vishnu’s destroying him is referred to as felling. 


3. Pancharitra Tantra, containing the direct oracles 


bo 


mm 


149 


one with the followers of Védanta-sid- 
dhanta ; they have turned their minds 
away from the study of diverse trifling 
Vidyfs and pure both within and without, 
like Svétadvipa'-residents, are blest, walk- 
ing the way of the Upanishad-wise. 


Further :— 


83. Deeply devoted to the Lord Supreme, 
these (versed in the Satvata-Tantra) have 
severed (their connection) from others, 
with hearts content with worship of the 
Lord, (of the deseription) Abbigamana’, 
Upadana®, etc. Though the Deva-hosts 
prostrate to them, they, esteeming® each 
other, owing to their clear perception of the 


of God. (Vide Pdfchardtras by Gévindacharya 
in J. R. A. S. 1911.) 

White Island, chronicled to be in the centre of 
the Milky Sea. 

Morning worship. 

Collection of materials for worship. 

ef. aittiriya Upanishad:—@eaa aTemy fare 
aqey Far Hara, aaeH 2ay afemraatec | 


150 


Lord’s glory, put down the puff of pride 
(which may on that account obsess them.) . 


So then, is there anything in their 
system to rebut ? 


Guru.—( Shaking his head and shutting’ his ears.) 
Nothing, nothing ; (for) :— 


84. Neither conflict nor objection riseth, 
_When the Vedas and the Satvata are com- 
pared. But for judges it is meet to dispel 
doubts that Skeptics may entertain,—such 
(doubts) occurring between (parts of) 
Vedas themselves. 


Pupil.—| shall dispel it. Wiseacres find Fault, 
in some respects, with God-revealed Pancha- 
ratras, as with other Tantras.2 Listen: — 


80. May the Pancharatra-word, incorpo- 
rated with the Krita® (age)-famed Vedas,— 


ee ene 


1. Shutting ears is a Hindu habit, meaning something 
untoward heard, or to be heard, or some- 
thing inauspicious to ward off. 

2. Such as that of the Paisupata. 

8. Thissage is: noted. for the Supreme authority 
of the Vedas: Witness.the verse quoted by 


151 


the creed espoused by men like ourselves, 


(the word) 


irradiated by rays streaming from the crest- 


past-masters in spotless logic, 


cems of Garutman’s pendants,’ (when) as 
adept in Vedic essence, nodding” his head, 
—(may this word) made authoritative by 
impartial souls (like Vydsa,*) glory forth. 


As authoritative is the Satvata (Pan- 
charatra) established by the Holy Vyasa— 
Narayana (Incarnate),—( Vyasa) — deeply 
learnt in all the Vedas,—(V vasa) who dis- 
pelled all the inner darkness of the worlds 


eee ___ ~ —______—_ — eal 


Sri Ptrnapragia in his Atharvandpanishad 
Bhashya:— TaUFTSNa aFAF GSAT | 

qaaz zd Ae FIG HAAN AAT | 

Also Tal 7: HA UAT | 

Serpents named Padma and Mahapadma. 
worn by Garuda.as pendants. 
This is with reference to Vihagésvara (=Garut- 
man)-Sambita of the Pancharatras, listened 
to by nodding, when taught by the Guru. 
This is with reference to Vedanta-Sitras by 


Vyasa, such as Utpattyasambhavat ete. 
[1I: 2. 8.] 


152 


by the moon-light of the Mahabharata- 
Moon, born out of the Vedic sea, churned’ 
by his wisdom. 


86. The Omniscient Himself (Narayana) 
created this spotless Tantra, as salvation 
for us, slaves;—Nardyana of the (Holy) feet 
guarding the hundreds of the Véda. And 
Parasarya,” the sage, promulgated it by 
asserting that it is blessed, holy, and salu- 
tary. 


Senapati.—Lord ! Like another Vyssa, hath 


he (the Pupil) established the Pancharstra- 
Tantra. 


King.—Holy sire! Are these followers of 


a 


i: 


~Prabhakara and Kumirila also to be defeat- 


ed by thine disciple ? 

Churning of the sea in the Hish-Avatara, when 
the Moon was born, is here the allusion from 
which the metaphor is taken. 


The son of Parasara= Vyasa. 
_Refering to 3 NY se Daae feqaaaay 1 and 


other verses in the Narayaniya of the Méksha- 
Peed in Santi-Parva of the Mahabharata. 


153 


Guru. —Great king ! As defenders of the Vedas- 


Pupil. 


1. 


bo 


but deserters of the Vedanta, they deserve 
to be extolled as well as condemned. 


(Jeeringly). 


87. Devoid of all defects as the Vedantas- 
are, how in this assembly, can these follow 
the headless trunk, the Pirvamiméamsa' ? 


This indeed is the decision of the 
spiritual scientists, the vanguard of all 
the Vaidika-societies ; viz., that Vishnu- 
votaries abstain, as from sin, from Kamya? 


Dharmas, and deeply engage in Nitya’ and 


Naimittikas.‘ Hence, savants (like Boda-- 


yana) postulate that Karma and Brahma 
(or -Indna) Mimamsas constitute together 
but one Science. 
Parva and Uttara Mimamsas, or the Karma aud 
Jnana Kandas, constitute one Science. Hence 
the former without the latter is a headless trunk 
and hence lifeless. Veddnta is therefore Sruti- 
Siras or the Head of the Vedas. 
Duties performed with some motive or reward: 
other then the attainment of beatitude. 
Perpetual duties. 4. Periodical duties. 


154 


King.—(Pleased) Holy sire ! 


By his exposition, faithful to teaching 
and congenial, hath thy disciple proved his 
ereed of wisdom and disproved that ofthe 
others,—as if firmly founding’ a pillar, 
and hath thus relieved himself of all 
‘Vedanta-concern. But wedded to the 
Vedic coat, and yet weaned not from alien 
Ways, as these (Kumarilas etc.) are, what 
is the retort for them ? 


Guru.— (Smiling. ) 


88. By cruel fate, have these missed 
the Vedic path ; replete with ridicule 
are their utterances, their zest for them 
| appealing only to their wives. How then- 
ean this earth brook their boast 2 


Pupil.—Great king! By the routing of the 


aliens (Bauddhas ete.) alone, have these 
(Kumiarilas ete.) been uprooted. 


Thus then :— 


89. Installed as Yatipati®. is on the holy 


See n. 5, p. 97. 2. Ra&amAnaja. 


OM RP we 


155 


Vedic dais, in this world the Tathagata’ 
-sayings slid away; the Kapili? method 
sank somewhere; the Kdaéndada?-talk dis- 
solved; the Druhina*-and Hara’-exposi- 
tions lost all dignity; the Kaumarila’- 
word famished; the Guru’-creed thrown 
far out by its own burden. Where 
then is alarm from Sankara and others” ? 


Or :— 


I shall combat these (Sankarites) who 
delude people with ideas of fulfilled 
fruition (such as Moksha) by an epidemic 
of ineonceivable ambiguities’, born of a 


seething turmoil of superficial imagination. 


(Clapping hands and laughing.) 


90. Influenced by nescience, these (Maya- 
Bauddha. 2. Kapila (Sage.) 

Followers of Kanada doctrine. 

Yoga. 5. Pasupata. 

Also called Bhatta briefly. 7. Prabbakara. 
Yadava and Bhaskara are also implied here. 
Dogmas postulating nescience to Jiva ataersit- 


aeaeoray 


156 


vadin’s') assert this cosmos to be categorised 
under what is not /?(7.e¢. subjective), 
and what is not ¢his® (7.¢., objective) This 
attempt seemeth a fairy castle built in the 
void. By such plausible but conflicting and 
out-Vindhyaic* sort of hard gibberish, 
these deserve to be counted amongst the 


toadies fawning on a king, begot of a barren. 
dame. 


Moreover:— 


91. Let sane men judge this, that by these 
self-same twaddlers of universal negation 
hath from the first been admitted that an 
object, full of holy, and reft of unholy, 
excellences (=God alone) is worship- 


worthy. Based thus then, as truth is, 


1. Philosophers who argue, assuming the existence 
of Maya. 
2. 4.e., Noumenal Cosmos. 
3. 2é., Phenomenal Cosmos. 
~The cosmos is reduced to what is neither 
Subjective nor objective. Hence the reduction 
is into Brahman as they think; but it becomes. 
Non-entity. 
4, 


ar surpassing the hardness of Vindhya-Rock. 


5. 


157 ° 


the vain contest conflicting with perceptive 
and other proofs for the Attributeless 


(Brahman tantamount to negation) becometh 


untenable. 


Hence, it is meet that Lakshmana- 


charya* should incarnate in order to over- 


throw those Samanaddhikarana?-rivals, of 
the Maya’ school, championed by a world- 
imposing Sankara, Meghanada’-like ,— 


those doers of dark deeds’, perpetually 


Double meaning in 1 to 5:— 


Laksbmana as Ramanuja (=Rama’s brother) as 
against Indrajit, and Lakshmana=(Ram4nuja) as 
against the Illusionist Sankara ete. 

Samanadhikarana=Equal and unequal battle 


in one case; one substance by many 
attributes, in the other. 


Jugglery or sorcery in one case; Illusion 
doetrine in the other. 

Indrajit (Son of Ravana.) ; Méghanada (=thunder- 
voiced) ; 


Deeds under cover of darkness in one cuse: 
nefarious deeds in the other. 


158 


spotted ‘natures, the Brahma-Mimimsins* 
after (the pattern of) Kali. 


The Nitya-mukta theory? of those 
who can only compare with the monistic 
Paundraka® deserve but eternal silence. 


Forsooth :— 


92. The man who essayeth to invent a 
(new or) non-existent Mukti for an 
ever-Mukta characterless essence (Soul or 
Brahman) may as well attempt to invent 
a new taste for the honey of a dream- 
flower. 


Judge (then) this Subhaga-bhikshukat 


Double meaning :—Brahmana pests in one case ; 
misinterpretation of Brahma-Sttras in the otber. 
For the monists who assert identity with 
Brahman, there is no liberation at all, for it is 
ever-existent. 

An Asura named Paundraka. pretending identi- 
fication with Krishna, imitated him. The 
pretender was eventually killed by Krishna. 
FAMAAyAqaz—The maxim referred to here is 


the attitude of that mother-in-law, who, not 
approving of her daughter-in-law’s refusal of 


1, 


159 


method of these Rahu-mimaimsakas’, kin 
to Rakshasas, For, having themselves 
discarded Vedanta, they traduce others 
(aliens), while vilifying themselves (so-called) 
V edantins. 


Verily do we blush to trv conclusions 
with these silly-talking folk, and feel 
as the person, who, when advising a dolt 
to have no “Stage-fright”? (Sabhikampa), - 
would (be silly enough to) himself blubber 


‘have no ‘frage-stright ’’ (Bhasa-panka). 


The three-world-saving Srutis them- 


alms toa beggar, would call him back, only to 
tell him herself that she cannot on any account 
give him alms; 7.e., the right of refusal was an 
usurpation by the daughter-in-law. Hence the 
application of this maxim here is thus:—The 
Bauddhas reject the Vedanta but the Advaitins 
call in the Vedanta to their doors again.only to 
say: | We have the right to reject you and not 
the Bauddhas.” 

Trunkless-head (as Rahu is)—as opposed to two 
trunk or Kétu or the Kabandha-mimamsakas ), 

— Maydévadins:— ana :— Tareraiataan aaa a- 
SM Fara TT aT aT ATA ATA, 


160 


selves refute them best. The fourfold 
means of Moksha, these fourth -yuga Sanyd- 
sins—pirates of the triune Truism, Vedic 
Chid- Achid-Isvara’—assert, the wise mock- 


ingly understand antinomically thus :— 


41) For (Nityinitya-vastu-vivéka) = Diseri- 

mination as ‘to what is Eternal and what is 
not Eternal> <(Tatvi tatva-vicharabhiva) 
=Want of discrimination as to what is 
Truth and what is not Truth. 


(2) For (Sama-damidi-sidhana sampat)== 
The good means viz. control of senses, 
internal, external, ete.><(Raga-dveshidi 
sidhana  sampat)=The means of love, 
hate, ete. 


(3) For (Lhamutra—phala-bhoga-viriga)= 
Abandonment of the pleasures of this and 
the world to come><(Laukika-vaidika- 
karmanushthana-vaimtikhya)=A bjuration of 


doing good works, temporal and spiritual. 


1. The Visishtadvaitic thesis of the Vedanta viz. 
Soul, Non-soul and God together constituting 
One Substance. 


161 


(4) For (Mamukshutva)=Love of Libera- 
tion><(Bubhukshutva)=Love of lust. 


Guru.—Good pupil ! What good is it harping on 
this ? 


Pupil.—Holy sire! (Then) I shall rebut the- 
other variants (of this Advaitie doctrine.) 


93. If Bbaskara and Yadava-prakasa 
could be adepts in determining the real 
position of the Védanta, what affront is 
imputable to the other protagonists’ (Jainas 
ete,) experts in expounding self-contra- 
dietions P 


It is for this reason then we hear 
that inthe manner the Absolute Brahman- 
upholders’ (Sankara ete.) are held to be 
pseudo-Bauddhas’, these (Bhaskara and 
Yadava) also are held to be Jaina*-smacking 
Vedantins. 


1, Buddha, Jina, cte., 
2. Upholdere of Brahman divoreed of every attribute 


—or the subjective Idealists. - 


3. 9 =eAaTST: 
4, Rega aeqa: THEcqraaanra Aaa 


66° 3) 


162 


But this is the quintessence of alk 
the Upanishads, (thus) :— 


94, The Bhéda’-texts proclaim — relative 
differences amongst the Verities’, and the 
holy Aikya-texts® are significant by their 
relative Unity. And to support — both 
these senses, other scriptural’ texts declare 
the Verity (to be) the Cosmos-lmmanent 
Over-Lord—the Lakshmi- Lord. 


King. —O, Brabmana best ! 


95. Wise thou art, that by thee, this 
(Kali- Wages vitiated as it is by the eee 


———————————————————————————— —_ 


1. Bhéda= Duality = Dvaita:— Zhe &e. AAT ANF 
YR A AAT Ke. 


9. Verities or Categories are 
(a) Matter=non-soul. 
(b) Soul, and 
(c) God, all the three existing as a Unity-in- 
Difference, 7.¢c., in Visishtadvaitic Unison, or 
in indiscerptible relation together. 
3. Aikya=Monietic—Advaita—aq @feae Aa. 


4. 9: grea fast (Ghataka-Sruti)=Reconeiling or 


harmonising texts. 


163 


heretics, —Tatva'-lost, Vritta?-lost, and 
beth-lost’,—hath into Krita-age — been 
transmuted, 


Pupil.(reat king! All that, by the grace 
of this Acharya. 


96. What by Kanada-methods, and 
Kapila-designed drama, what by Kumiérila’s 
jargons and Guru-tied knots, what 
(again) by Tathagata-rigmaroles and others’ 
ravings, was the world imposed upon, 
hath all now, by Yatindra’s deliverances, 
been restored to sense. 


Further :-— 


97. The verdicts of the Muni-lord 
(= a which act as the moon- adil 


—— 


1. Those who have missed the true perception of 
Verity =(Reality) Bhatta ete. 


2. Those who have missed the true virtuous practice 
or conduct (Achara) Sankara, etc. 
3. Both (1) and (2) absent 2.¢., neither perceivers 


of truth nor knowers of good conduct—-Charvaka. 
atc. 


164 


to the .(blue-) lotus'-garden of Vaikuntha- 
love, provoke (in all) yearning for deathless 
deliverance. They are like the sun risen, 
piercing into the eyes of those owls, 
viz., the synod that revels in the night 
of its own school. 


Senapati. My lord! 


98. Master of speech, veteran of word- 
debate, victor over factions, this (Arya) 


meriteth honors. 
Pupil.—General ! 


99. By this Acharya’s grace, by this 
king’s favor and by thy appreciation too, 
have L already been honored. 


King.—Holy sire! Fair and sweet speaketh he. 
Senapati.—But then. 


100. Him, the victor in this assembly 
proved, this holy Guru’s disciple, dight 
with his (Guru’s) love, | should like to 
honor. 


1. The blue lotus blossoms at the appearance of 
the Moon, like the red lotus, at that of the Sun. 


165 


Pupit.—Great king ! This holy sire deserveth it. 


Guru.--Thou too, (pupil !) by my mandate. 


King.— Holy sire ! 


101. He (thy disciple) hath — stoutly 
defended Vedanta. He hath also spread 
the knowledge of Truth. Gladly, I bid 
diminutive Dindimas'’ to be drummed in all 
directions. May he wear this gold bangle 
round his left foot, to serve as the 
toyish skull-splitter of those noisy wise- 
acre foes, firm in the faded farrago of 
their teachings. 


(Thus saying presents the bangle.) 


Pupil.—(Turns to the Guru-for permission—) 


Guru.—So be it. Irrefragable forsooth is the 


King’s fiat. 


Pupil.—With thy permission, holy sire ! 


(So saying accepts the bangle.) 


Guru.—Lone-lived! Attend to this, what hence- 


1, 


forward thou shalt do :— 


A species of kettle-drum. 


166 


102. Coveting no honor, fame or 
wealth, gracious unto (thy) disciples, eager 
to learn, be engaged, as long as thy body 
lasteth, in the promulgation of the Sariraka- 
Science’, supported by sound logic. 


Pupil.— Ave, as the holy sire directeth. 
( Behind the curtain. ) 


Avaunt! Avaunt! ’Sdeath! What 
disaster hath befallen ! 


For:— 
103. These demons of dolts, Mdha’s 
slaves, called Raga and Dvesha (Lust and 
Hate), afore referred to have emerged, in’ 
order (after all) to bind irresistibly Virakti? 
with Vishnu-bhakti®. 


(Alarmed, ail listen.) 


King. —Holy sire! In our attempt to suppress 


(ghosts), those very ghosts start up; 


1. The Brahma-Sittras and their right Commen- 
taries based on the Upanishads. 

2. Dispassion or Renunciation. 

3. Devotion or Love to Vishnu. 


167 


Endeavour for what best may be done for 
success. We shall also now strive to 


totally uproot our foes’ might. 


(Thus exeunt all.) 


Finis Act IT, termed Parapaksha-Pratikshépa 
(Refutation of opponents. ) 


AUM., 


OM=(A-U-M) 


SANKALPA-SURYODAYA 


ACT III. 


THEN ENTER RAGA’ AND DVESHA?. 


Raga. 


Friend! With thee for my help, the 
achievement of my master’s mission, 
I fancy, as (already) accomplished. 


Dvesha.—Companion ! [am in the same boat 
with thee, as [I am ordered by his: 
Majesty to create obstacles against the 
efforts of Vivéka, who worketh against 
thee. é 


Raga.—Vriend!. Other mandates (too) there 
are to carry out as occasion may demand. 
I shall just disclose them. 


1. Lust—Attachment to wordlinaass. 
2. Hate—for Godliness. 


Or go bo 


169 


1. Now that the heretics’ have been 
overthrown through the mancuvre of 
Vivéka, the way to Trivarga’ is the only 
outlet for Mahamdha’s energies. Beggarly 
Virakti’, I shall just decoy to a distance, 
and thou shalt entice Vishnu-bhakti’ all 


at once. 


Their disjunction with Jiva can be, by 
all means, effected, by casting the nets of 
making Svarga appear worthy and Médksha 
unworthy,—in all places. Expert as I am 
in a thousand and one deceits, I shall just 
beguile the beggarly Virakti, as Maricha’ 


Buddhists and others, 

See n. 1, p. 115. 

Dispassion or Renunciation. 

Love or Devotion to Vishnu. 

The allusion is to the well known incident of 
Maricha being asked by Ravana to decoy Sri 
Rama into the Dandaka forest. Maricha assumed 
the form of a golden deer and appeared in the 
vicinity of Sita, who, enchanted by its charming 
appearance, persisted in Rama catching the 
game. Rama was decoyed to a distance by 
Maricha, when Ravana enticed away Sita 
(Aranya-Kanda—Sri Ramayana.) 


i70 


did Mithili! and thou shalt entice Vishnu- 
Bhakti as Péulastya? did. 


Dvesha.— Then what ? 


Raga. —True, the Teacher® of Védanta Siddhanta 


hath routed the head-less Pirvamimamsakas, 
the foremost of the wishers of Mahamdéha’s 
success—the very Purdhits* of demon 
Hiranya® as it were re-incarnate on earth, 
yet [ shall propound their very creed 
ingeniously and thus accomplish “my 
master’s mission. 


Dvesha.—Kightly opportune is thy resolve to 
stand by the victorious banner of the 
arch-chiefs of | Mahamdha — promoting 
Atheism, viz., the creed of Nirisvara 
Mimamsa.® 


Raga.—2. \f it becometh a passion to long 


1. Another name of Sita. 2. Ravana. 


dus 


3. The pupil referred to in the previous Act, (VAda.) 
4. Officiating Priests. 


or 


The demon killed by Vishnu in His avatara of 
man-lion, 


‘6, Materialism denying the God-bead. 


lél 


after the paltry and ephemeral pleasures’ 
how can dispassion possess one who long- 
eth for endless and eternal joy ? 


3. It is mistaken to aver that bheatitude 
is Self-realisation®; but if beatitude be one 
intereoursing with another, then what else 
but KAama‘ can best constitute what is called 
beatitude (Méksha), coveted by one and all ? 
Beatitude therefore can be no other than 
Svarga, the seat of all (carnal) enjoyments at 
will, and this view is supported by the 
authority of our betters, the Nirisvara- 
Mimamsakas (Godless philosophers). 


Dvesha, _\ndeed! It is this that is accepted 
to be the final decision, arrived at 
after a careful study of the traditions of 
Mahamoha, by savants well-versed in 


Mah4Amdha’s lore’. 


1. Enjoyment of Svarga, etc, 


2. * ,, Moksha. 
9 maqeie MaMa sNAIATANRASTAsT- 
ara. 


4. Atheism and Hedonism. 


172 


4. Misery is expelled not, if beatitude be 
the attainment of Glory (Brahman) conjoin- 
ed again with mind (soul) and matter 
(non-soul).' But if beatitude be the attain- 
ment of Glory (Brahman), denuded of all 
this, then it is no joy at all. And then 
the Vedic conclusion becometh but a mere 
verbal expression.” 


Raga. —Well spoken, friend! Like the exodus 


— 


bo 


_ of the swarm of birds from their nests in 


the hollow of a branch of a tree, burning 
with wild fire, surely this utterance of 
thine will drive Vishnu-bhakti to a dis- 
tance. How now is this stupid Vivéka 
going to create for Jiva a diversion from 
Samsira,—Jiva whose mind is blinded by 


his eagerness for enjoyment eternal? The 


si 


The attainment of a Brahman with attributes, 
mind and matter (=the body of God) must still 
give one the continuance of worldly experiences, 
for according to the Visishtadvaitw doctrine, 
God is never separable from the cosmos, for it 
is His ever-united body. 

An attributeless Brahman is only non-existent 
like the hare’s horn. 


9 


ae 


173 


more that Viveka becometh anxious to 
condemn the graces par excellence of damsels, 
celestial and mundane, the more shall he be 
bound firm by those ropes’, (damsels). Just 


- view the nectar-born, lotus-eyed, damsels,— 


the ornaments of Svarga. 


~ 


5. Their bosom is beseiged by their ever- 
expanding bud-like breasts ; their eyes, 
stealing the loveliness of blue lotuses, long 
to tresspass on their ears ; Hallo ! possessed 


is their entire frame by emotions whose 
preceptor is Cupid (himself)! Methinks 
the whole universe is designed vanquished 
by the lovely seductive youth’ of slender- 
waisted damsels ! 


But apart from the exuberance of 
fresh-blossoming juvenility, witness their 
amorous display ! 


6. Their eyebrows, Cupid’s victorious 
penons, gesticulate that the true end of 
life is lust, their gait condemneth that 


Also means qualities. 


aay. The period when maiden-hood «and youth 
meet. 


Dvesha. 


bo 


174 


every other goal of life is vile; their 
eyes, lovely with the moving pupils and 
excited by excessive passion, proclaim 
the truth of the KAama’-Sastra that the only 
true Brahman is Kama (Lust or carnal} 
enjoyments). 


(With joy and impatience ). 


Friend! What a pity it is that even 
the erudite indulge in the unpalatable 
prattle that there be a bliss beyond the 
enjoyment of the celestial wenches,—en- 
Joyment which is understood by. some 
sages as Moksha  itself,—the mark 
of the highest bliss, according to the 
votaries of thy creed who are thoroughly 
conversant with the relative differences of 
the diverse * nds of Life’ (purush-artha) 
and who always pursue (the End) Kama ! 


7. How shall the All-sustainer® — be 


cf. SARAMARATMATA. 
If God sustains and permeates everything, it 
follows that he permeates sin as well and it is 


hence a contradiction to gay that he ig free from 
all sins. 


175 


uncontaminated with sin, and how again 
the Lord, the All-Desirer’ be free from 


desire 7 
Raga. riend | This is not the whole of it. 


8. Some fiendish people would dupe the 
simple folk and make them believe that the 
pair of breasts, honey-full, of lovely looking 
damsels, surpassing the loveliness of golden 


clobes, are but (tumps of) flesh. 
(A voice in the air). 


What saidst thou, Raga? What I said 
cannot be denied, for, only the blind behold 


not the purity of clear water ! 


Dvesha.— Alas ! Strange indeed is this attach- 
ment of the fiendish followers of Vivéka 
towards Brahman! Perhaps it is but 
proper—for, to the deaf, the cuckoo’s 
cooing can certainly create no emotion. But 
never mind these, Vivéka himself shall be 
vanquished, 


1. As evidenced by Krishna owning 60,000 wives 


176 
For :— 


y. The victory over Vivéka’s adherents 
followeth as a matter of natural sequence 
from the victory over Vivéka (himself), for, 
doth not the creeper wither of its own 
accord when its prop-poplar is felled 


down ? 
Raga —Well conceived ! 
Dvesha.—( Laughing aloud). 


10. So long as I exist, surely this Viveka 
whose wits are blinded by wallowing in the 
barren regions of the Upanishads, shall never 
attain the faultless, blessed, matchless, 
adorable supreme B ‘ahman,—Brahman that 
hath in Him the gift of all ‘ Ends of Life’. 


(Behind the curtain). 
Who is that ? Who is that ? 


(Both listen, with fear and confusion). 


Alas! what mishap! What may befall 
us who are intent on executing our master’s ° 
command 2? Alas !-Our luck would seem to 


take a new turn now ! 


177 


1]. Mark! Virakti and Vishnu-Bhakti 
have escaped from the inextricable net! 


out-spread by us and are retracing their 
steps towards Vivéka. 


He wlio. facing us, “cometh yonder, 


cheered by Virakti and Vishnu-Bhakti and 
led by the arm by Sumati is surely none 


but Viveka ; in his presence whom victory 
favoureth, we unfortunates should not 
make a stand. For, if if life exists, _ good 
things come. _Our younger brothren Kama 
and Krédha, capable of accomplishing 
our master’s mission ina trice, also must 


tarry awhile, for, in good time, all will 
be well. None is invincible to this Viveka, 


assisted es ‘he is) by ‘Vyavasaya. Thus 


may our royal mission land in jeopardy. 


12. Fie, Fie, on Indra’s heavenly 
harlot’s rolling looks ! 
Hie, Fie, on Cupid’s bow betwanging 
the pompous twang in battles ! 
Fie, Fie, on euckoo’s penta-chorded 
3 | tunes ! 


1. 


The aforesata net of teputing gin t Mdksha. 
% 6. 12 


| 


178 


Fie, Fie, on Royal Moha’s chivalrous 
pomp—dancing on Kama-Sastre 


a.» 
stage > 

4 -e . 

Why mention more of matters more 


inert © 
For, Now :— 
13. Vanquishing Moha soon, like Indra, 
The head-demon— Vivéka releaseth 
quick from Samsara Jiva enbound. 
Srutis’ tears of grief, by insult made 
to shed,. 


Transformeth he to tears of joy. 


(Thus saying eveunt.) 


Pure Interlude ends. 


THEN ENTER VIVEKA AND SUMATI. 


Viveka.— Queen mine! Take heart, take heart. 
Virakti and Vishnu-Bhakti have just 
been made to join thee, their fears caused 
by the thieves’, incited by Mahaméha, 


1. Raga and Dvésba are sarcastically called thieves- 
here. | | 


179 
having now been dispelled. ° 


Sumati.—(Sobbing.) My lord! Still troubled 
is my mind as to what shall happen. 
What. shall I say? Do not Raga and 
Dvésha lie in ambush and, wait for an 
opportunity ? | | 


Viveka.—Ah timid lady! Be ‘not so weak in 
heart. Can Raga and Dvésha have ‘room 
even in our presence ? 


Young dame! Enough of thy wail- 
ings, due to the recollection of rambles 
in unworthy paths! . The. Sarnga'-bowed 
Krishna, the Preacher of sublime Gita 
to a fit diseiple? shall surely protect us, 
who seek His refuge. 


Sumati.—(With sorrow, using Samskrit). 


15. Aryaputra! Jiva, methinks, is much 
to be pitied, like a half-burnt live tree, in 
his state of grief, of inaction, of beast- 
like dependence, in the different: stages 
of creation, annihilation, experience: of 


1. Name of the bow of Vishnu, 
2. Arjuna. 


tt oes 


}80 


Svarga’ and Naraka,? waking, dreaming, 


_ sleeping, swooning and agony of death. 
Besides :— 


16. -Jiva doth wander im this Samsara, 
madé horrid by dotage, death, and 
fleeting sweet youth and by the manifold 
J inter-related sins, flowing like the flood 
of the wild torrent, wherein the miracul- 
ously quick cosmic Creator seemeth to 
_ have distinguished the different Karmas 


by the force of his hurricane: Lila’. 
Viveka.—( With remorse.) (Queen ! 


| What thou hast till now said is 
true. But listen ‘to me now describing 
the long-accumulated Punya‘ of the Jiva 
which maketh him long to trod in the 


Never-to-return Path.” 


PES Oe a rare a’ 


Abode of the Devas. 


i. 

'g,° Hell. 
3 Séen. 1, p. 63. 
4. Virtue. ) 
5. 


Archiradimarga—The path, leading to Mdksha, 
led by the messengers of the Lord, and which 


finally shuts off rebirth. 


Z, 
2. 


131 


17.. With his predisposition . for. .a so- 
journ in Svarga, countered however by the 
frequent spectacle of the falls therefrom, 
the mind of Jiva doth engender in him an 
infinite thirst for the Para-Brahman’. Even 
if this thirst at times becometh languid 
by mental weakness, it is again revived 
and it firmly establisheth in Jivaa penchant 
for either Bhakti or Prapatti’ according 
to his personal aptitude. 


Further :— 


18. Jiva, by sole decree of fortune, shall 
acquire an intense love for the Para- 
Brahman', engendered by the correct 
understanding of His Blessed Attributes, 
devoid of all defect, and shall know the 
natural difference in results, existing in 
the knowledge of the diverse Vidyas, 
the one as equally congenial as the other, 
like the different nectar-waves. 


Then, the Jiva, like the bee, shall enjoy 
the honey of Parama-purusha’s' lotus- Feet, 


Supreme Lord. 
Taking refuge on God. 


382 


and: shall look upon even the Deva- 
woe as but a sie 


19. ee the moment Jiva casteth away 
his attachment to Samsara, on account of 
his recollection of his endless wanderings, 
an eager longing to attain the Supreme 
Brahman doth seize him through the 
_ knowledge: of His ‘singular attributes, 
and he then doth rightly indulge in the 
study of the several groups of sciences, 
relating to Godhead,’ pure, and devoid 
' of all delusions and by discerning as 
‘to which of the manifold attributes of 
(jod are specifically dealt with and which 
not in any particular science (thereof). 


I shall just dwell in brief on the 
methods of overcoming this illusion. 


20. Mdéksha, reached through a knowledge 
of the different (God) Sciences’ is either 
one or many. If they are one, the 
existence of several sciences is not justified, 


1. Nana-Vidyas=the varied ways of divine medi- 
tation which are 32 such as BRUIT, ete. 


183 


as one of them alone may bring about 
Moksha. Tf they are many, there may be 
a durational difference ete., in their enjoy- 
ment, like the difference attributed by the 
Mimémsakas to the enjoyment of Svarga, 
and the existence of several (God)' \ sciences 
is then justified. This fallacious argu- 
ment—of the babblers who do_ not 
understand correctly the meanings of the 
Pramanas’? which re-iterate, that difference 
there is none, either in time or enjoyment 
in Moksha, but only among the (God)! 
selences which. treat of this end,—fails, 
through its lack of sense. 


In spite of this, those who err, will 
ever err. For, even if the crows are 
washed with thousands of water-pots, they 
shall never turn white. The virtuous, 
will with no hesitation “understand the 
truth propounded by those? who apprehend 
the truth of God and who abjure the 
whole conclave of agnostics, and will] attain 
Sarvesvara.’ 

1. "See n. 1, p. 182. 2, Authorities. 3. Vyasa, Bodha- 
yana, Nathamuni, ete. 4. The Lord of all power. 


184 


Sumati:—( With approbation) My lord! 


Restored am [ now, by thy language, 
disclosing a leaning for sound authorities. 
Umparallelled indeed is thy greatness in 
sifting the drift of Pramanas, by savants 
respect-worthy. 


Ffore— 


21. Now the Naga' damsels, residing 
in mountain-caves on ocean-shore, sing 
aloud thy fame, which shineth like the 
moon, washed of her stain by the billows: 
of the Ganga, on the crest of Siva, when 
he is disturbed by his dreadful Deluge- 
dance, and they get» delighted at the 
perennial flow of nectar, exuding from 
each letter of the alphabet, making up thy 
praise ! 


(Pondering on the glory of WVedanta- 
sdstra, with joy and thrilling sensation.) 


22. These (God) sciences, through the 
knowledge of a part of which,  Jiva, 


—  —__ _____— ee 


i, 


Serpent. 


185 


tormented by samsfara-fire, doth feel that 
Moksha already percheth on his palm’, 
eve! ‘when this carnal body—the 
seat of all illusions—doth exist, thrive 
through the ever-expanding Madhusfi- 
dana’s" grace that is so cool and clear,. 
pure and pleasing, like the celestial waves 
of Ganga. 


Viveka.—What sayest thou? The burden of 


— 
. 


> oO. 


the care of Jiva is now indeed practically 
lightened. For, his Virdgya,’ springing 
from his desire to vision Brahman, . 
conduceth in a greater measure to help 
towards ((rod) sciences, than that Virigya® 
which springeth from the knowledge of 
the ills of Samsiira, 


23. Relinquishing Prohibited (Nishedha) 
and Optional (Kamya*) duties which are 
not on to sgt the (God) 


serrata. 
Vishnu. 

See n. 2, p. 166. 
See n. 2, p. 153. 


eer ee 


186 


sciences, the Jiva performeth the Natya’ 
and Naimittika? duties for the sole pleasure 
of Para-Brahman, and delighted with the 
doing of these duties, he now hasteneth 
to fix his mind in Yoga, made blissful by 
currents of fresh nectar, flowing in the 
milky ocean of devotion, directed to the 
Divine Presence of the Para- Brahman—the 


Seat of all bliss.” 


94. Further, when Jiva—abasbed—mueseth 
in his mind about the unreal nature of 
sense-delights, resembling but a Gandharva- 
city,? I stretch out to him my helping 
hand and he~ quickly tideth over the 
-perplexities of mind and doth fix the same 
exclusively on the Para-Brahman, © thus 
easily crossing the Samsiric-ocean, as if it 


did cover a cow foot-space* 


Sumati. 


Still, when even the 
Prajapati? and other great Ydgis are 
themselves entangled by oe fish i like 


Ls and -2, uae notes 3 &- 4, p. 153. 
9. Baraya, 3. aah. 
4, eGR. 5, 


~<a a 


The creator. 


187 


sense-lusts, my mind feeleth the humiliating 
doubt as to how Jiva, who resembleth the 


| 


child owt-stretching its hand to catch the ] 


moon, shall ever attain Moksha. — 


Viveks. —Timid dame! Knowing, as thou art, 


the whole truth, how is it that thou dost 
indulge in doubts, like a witless woman? 


25. A certain resolute person, who hath 


detached himself from Samsara, renounceth 


all external sense-pleasures, as if it were 


honey-mixed poison,  setteth _ his face 
against the finitely blissful Kaivalya,’ and 


even in this world evinceth fitfully an 
intense longing for the enjoyment of the 
infinite and eternally blissful Brahman. 


It is but natural that a. ripe. fruit, 
which even an expert who: hath elimbed 
up the branch of a tree cannot pluck, 


falleth before -a way-farer—a result of the | 


strength of mere matured? merit, expecting 


_ no-effort on his part. 


l. 
2. 


Soul Isolation. 


FETT TS, 


188 
Besides :— 


96. If Jiva himself longeth to attain 
Paramapada,' resorted to by Nityastris’, 
atoneth for all past sins, and abstaineth 
from committing further sins, and if the 
benevolent-natured Isvara fixeth His 
will on a goal, what could not all be Jiva’s 
own? Sure as anything, he attaineth. 


liberation ! 


Sumati.—My lord! If Jiva doth thus cross the 


Ne 
2. 


Samsaric ocean, how then doth he (mean- 
while)endure agony, like a worm in the 
hollow between the two ends of a tree 
burning with wild fire, like an antelope 
surrounded by a pack of hounds, like a 
caravan of traders ina ship tossed by a 
stormy tempest, like a jackal blinking in 
flood-begirt islet, like a house-holder in 
dread hard-breathing at the ingress of a 
huge cobra inside the house, like the trunk 
of a rootless tree battered by the waves of 


Méksha. 
Eternally freed souls. 


189 


the Gangd,..and like the fish in the ocean- 
midst molested by the shafts of Sri 
Rama ? 


Viveka. Charming dame! Thou betrayest but 


childishness, casting (to the winds) thy 
erudition. For, thou fanciest that the 
Jiva, who is yet to be liberated, as if already 


liberated. 
f 
Behold! Behold 1! 
97. Caste,' Order,? Conduet, Place,* Time,* 


etc. described in the Sdstras .as_ highly 
conducive to, and as being the causes of, 
Moksha, shall in the case of listless 
minds prove but a perpetual source of fear.” 


T will now prove to thy mind the 
relative difference that will be felt by 
others (of a different mould of mind)’. 


Brabmana ete. 
Brahmacharya, ete. 

Satyavrata, ete. 

Uttariyana, ete. 

Fear of Samsara: 

Attentive minds. ~~: + |} 


co bo be 


190 


98: Tothe Jiva, who well discerneth the 


difference between Kéamya duties, and 
Nitya and Nimittika duties,—who is not 
indifferent and who per formeth everything 
after due inv estigation, and eager that no 


obstacles shall bar the enjoyment of Para- 


Brahman, even those causes’ of fear, trans- 


mute to absence of fear. 


Unaccountably then to assert that 
even the wise should indulge in fear tilf 
actual emancipation (is reached) is like 
trying to smell the fragrance of the lotus 
blossoming in the sky”. 


29. To a person who perceiveth the 
possibilities involved in the perennial and 
strange . windings of evil Karma, what not 
shall operate’ as the cause.of fear, whether 
it be direction, or place, or time, whether 


Caste, Order, ate. | 

No such fear has any foundation. , 
The implication is that everything will operate 
as the cause of fear unless perceiyed properly. 
array a aay fey aay areqa 

att a adh aft add a meerTA Uw [ditantd.] 


191 


it be commission of prohibited duties and: 
omission of ordained duties, whether it 
be 'the body ete,—these though the’ means. 


to achieve his longed-for object ? 


Sumati.— If indeed everything be the source of 
’ fear, then how shall Ydea, achievable 
only. in the absence of fear, become 


suecessfid ? 


Viveka.—Charming lady! Rightly hast. thou’ 
questioned. There is a certain subtle 
truth of which, though thou knowest 
already, | shall only remind, thee. Listen 
then with attention undistracted. 


Sumati.—Aryaputra! Proceed, 

30. Renouncing the Lord’s grace, which is 
as it were the cataclysmic-fire to the ever- 
growing infatuation of the mind and which 
swalloweth the oceans of sin, riding a bad 
horse of Karma, is as futile as the erection | 


of a salt dam _across_the brackish ocean !. 


Just hear the success, beggaring all 
description, of the person who: betaketh. 


192 


himself with one-ness of purpose to the 
grace of the Eternal Lord. 


31. Longing seclusion, hating all sense- 
dictates, all evil propensities for enjoyment 
suppressed by the force of V irakti, Jiva, 
the speeder in the path of Nivritt *-path 


shall focus all attention and take refuge 


ander Sri Murari’s’ feet and thus, trans- | 
gressing Samsira, attain liberation. 


Rightly so. L shall just ask thee 
who hast so thoroughly grasped the truth 
of truths one: thing more. Why is not 
the realisation of Méksha swiftly accomp- 
lished even by high-souled men with a 
thorough comprehension of the inmost 
truths of Upanishads, learnt at the hands of 
spotless Acharyas,—men who have u prooted 
opposite creeds, who have viven up the 
tendency to indulge in Svargic sojourn, who 
have set their hearts on the great bliss of the 
worahip ¢ of /“Madhusudana’ s* blessed feet, 


193 


exempt from the faintest trace of stain, 
who have betaken to Nivritti-dharma' 
without the slightest inattention and who 
know no obstacles ? 


Viveka.—Lady dear! I shall | just unfold 


to thee another subtle truth, fit to be 
treasured up by the wise in their hearts. 
Hear me with unalloyed attention what 
the great Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumara, 
Narada, Sandilya and other Paramekantins: 
have often propounded. 


32. The thousand-ydjana®? whale doth 
consume a hundred-ydjana whale; the 


bigger whale doth swallow even this 
thousand-y6jana whale and the still bigger 
whale doth gulp down even the aforesaid 
whale ; suchthen is the course of Karma. 
The insult offered to an innocent perceiver 
of oe shall consume, Agastya-like, 


See n. 3, p 21. 
Exclusive enjoyers of Brahman. 


Eight miles. 
4. Ss. 13 


194 


even Nivritti-dharma,—Agastya who dis- 
played himself in exsiccating the great: 
ocean of all sins. 


Listen to some other truths (also) 
. gumilar. 


38. Well known it is that a great sinner 

“Gs he who doth forget the good done in 

' the past,’ but a still worse sinner is he who 

J doth forget the good done in the present 
‘and the worst sinner of all is he who will 
forget the good that in the future will be 
done. 


Sumati.—{ Musing) Lord! Such indeed is the 
unique heinousness -of the sin of insulting 
the true realiser of Brahman, so ably 

elucidated by thee: 


Is there then no remedy for this sin? 


Viveka, —There is but one remedy and that 


is seeking the pardon of the one that was: 
insulted. 


ll — 


1. ok amt gua ait AAAT TT es 
farafatatedt ate: sarees rete: ul 


> SS ee 


195 
Fer :— 


34. An aquatic animal’  falleth into 
great anguish by being out of water, but 
the same doth revive by water gradually 
gained. Similarly, the Jiva, cast away by 
the insult offered to the great, falleth into 
Samsdra and getteth true knowledge 
back by resorting to the very person. 


Besides :— 


35. A person, deserved by good deeds 
done during diverse births and who hath ~ 
refrained from sinning against the godly, 
dame Vidya?, leading to Moksha, approa- 
cheth anon with love abundant. 


36.. Para-bhakti’,—the ship, as it were, 
to cross the ocean of Samsara, well fastened 
by ropes of Sédtvika-tydga*, so helpful 
to Nivrittidharma, saileth clear and acqui- 
reth momentum day by day. 


Fist, to wit. 
Vidy& is personified here as a woman. 


Devotion toway ds the Brabman. 


See n, 2, p. 21. 


196 


Sumati._(Musing) Rightly so, if Anima’, 


Mahimd?, Garima®, Laghima‘,  Vasitva’, ‘ 
Isitva’, Prapti’, Prakimya*, etc. ordained 
by dire Destiny to a person who is yet 
not quite exempt from all past sins and 
which are capable of being used for 
Moksha, do not therefore impede the 
means by which Méksha is reached. 


Viveka.—Queen ! True. The ever-hostile obsta- 


cles to (God-) Yédga are indeed dificult 
to surmount. The attainment of Moksha 
will be unfettered only if these Yoga- 
obstacles are prevented from appearing 
at all, instead of renouncing them after they 


actually occur. 


(Then enter a messenger with palm leaf 
adorning his head). 


SS Se ee 


Atomicness. 

Greatness. 

Heaviness. 

Lightness. 

Self-Control. 

Lordliness. 

Power to reach the desired place. 
Realisation of desires by mere thought. 


197 


Messenger.—( With hands suppliant.) 


King ! This messenger—myself, named 
Samvriti-satya' who never escapeth the 
eye of my suzerain’ lord Mahamdéha, whose 
movements are everywhere unobstructed, 
saluteth thee with thy queen. 


Viveka. —( Aside). Why hath he come here ? 


(Aloud, in humour). May thou live 
long, but without casting away thy nature, 
ever addicted to perverse understanding. 


Messenger.—(Pointing to the palm leaf, in his 


suppliant hands, taken from his head). 
Great king! This indeed is an irrefrag- 
able mandate, indited by the Accountant 
Lobha? and brought to thee by me, who 
amin the confidence of my lord Maha- 
mOha,—the emperor of the fourteen worlds, 
whose affairs are all determined by his 
minister Dvapara®, and who is established 
in the faith of Durmati’. 


Posing as the speaker of truth but not really 
speaking truthe 92. Greed. 
Doubt: 4. Kvil sense. 


198 


Viveka.—( With concealed contempt). 


Man! Thou art acceptable to us as well ; 
hence read the message in all privacy. 


Messenger.—As thy Majesty commands. 


(Reads the message humbly). 


37. Thus (runneth) the mandate of 
Mahamoéha, so esteemed by Kama and 
others. It is also not obnoxious to the 
residents of Svarga, who are repugnant’ to 
the decline of Samsiara. 


Viveka.—(Interrupting and smiling) Queen ! 
Mark that we are treated as objects 
of wicked Mah&amodha’s commands! But 
just to know the enemy’s mind, we 
should hear the rest of the message. Well 
then, messenger !_ proceed. 


« LT 


1. The idea here is that the Devas resident in 
Svarga fear that the Samsara will decline, if 
Vivéka is given free scope for the spread of 
Vairagya, which would eventually minimise their 
own enjoyment. 


199 


Messenger. —‘‘ We forgive thee for all thy 
mischief ending with creating faith in the 
worship of the Para-Brahman, if it 
(mischief) bringeth about the realisation 
of (sense-) delights ”’. 


Viveka. —( Gesturing contempt). 


Lady ! Dost thou hear the strange 
Bhikshupddaprasarana method'P Or it 
becometh Mahamdha, bent upon carrying 
out his wish, unyieldingly like the corpse’s 
clenched fist. ee 

Sumati.— Yes, so it is. 


Viveka.—And then P 


Messenger.—38. “If thou dost  transgress 
what we are yoing to bid, our veteran 
warrior Krédha and others, inflamed at 
the mere sign of our brows’ knit will 
arrest thee and thou shalt exist no more ”’. 


——— nn 
any 


1. A certain beggar besought of a householder 
some standing room in the verandah. He took 
advantage of it, gradually encroaching on the 
whole house. . “Introducing the thin end of 
the wedge’, in other words. 


200 


Viveka.—Love mine! That is a blessing to 
us, who follow our own (ordained) duties. 
Ah, Moha’s messenger! yet anything 
remaining of the message ? 


Messenger.—There is something yet on the 


subject of the prowess of the chieftains. 
Kama, Kroédha, ete. 


Viveka.--\WWhat harm can there be ? Let us hear 
it also. 


Messenger.—39. ‘‘ Whose valour shall subjugate 
Kima, the matchless warrior of the 
universe, the one so respected by the im- 
mortals,— Kama the power of whose great- 
ness metamorphosed even Siva’s third eye, 
burning with anger, into an eye, cooled with 
the erotic sentiment of love ?”’ 


40. “The ancient Sruti' proclaimeth 
that Kama did exist even before creation. 
Through the power of K:ma alone, even the 
First Being sporteth in creation, susten- 
tation and dissolution of the universe; 


l. cf, SARA ARAMA asaMag agra WoT 


201 


even he who is free of all desire doth 
difficult Moksha attain by Kama (desire) 
only. How then is Kama under the 
influence of any body and who not is 
under the influence of Kama in this 
universe ?”’ 


Sumati.—Great king ! Is then the fish-bannered 
.Kama invincible even to thee P 


Viveka.—(Queen mine ! Is there any rejoinder 
for the twaddle of Mahamdha, loved by 
Mithya-drishti'? But let us hear the rest 
as well. 


Messenger.—41. ‘If one doth fret? at Krodha, 
(anger), one cannot be said to be free from 
anger, If one is angry, how could he 
be said to have vanquished Krodha ? In 


with snares at either end. 


Sumati.—My lord! Krodha seemeth to be 
even more unconquerable than Kama, 


——_.— 


1. False vision. . 
2. Tries to refrain from anger. 


202 


for, it is Krédha that is the prime cause 
for victory over Kama ! 


“Viveka.—Love mine !_ Deprecated not is anger 


J 


in right time, for, the Truth-perceivers 
do approve of anger in the matter of 
subduing Kama etc. 


(Looking at the Messenger). 


2 


Well, messenger! We have heard (from 
thee) what was intended for our hearing. 
Inform thy master this from me :— 


42. ‘The world shall reverence Vivéka 
who hath made Mahamodha soulless, who 
hath rejected Kama and who hath driven 


Krédha away ”’ 


Messenger. —| shall take leave. 


(Thus saying walks two or three paces). 


43. (Aside) Who in this universe shall be 
able to conquer Vivéka, assisted as he is, in 
his mission of doing good to every one, 
by his wife Sumati, who again is anxious 
to rouse Jiva from his lethargy ? Still 


203 


my master Mahiméha doth enjoin on 
us these errands. 


(Aloud) Great king! Transgress not 
the adage’ “ Abandon the individual to 


1 


save the family ’’.' etc ; 


(Thus saying exit.) 


Sumati.—Aryaputra ! If Jiva, who is ready to 


attain Mdksha, is subdued by Kama, 
Krédha, Ldébha?, Mada®, Matsara‘, etc. 
incited by Mahimodha, all thy efforts so 
far prove futile. 


Viveka.—Queen mine ! Think not so. But bid 


2. 


A 


only for our good. 


44. Now that the true nature of 
God divine hath been ascertained by 
the Upanishads, now that all doubts 
concerning them have been cleared, and 
now that vive: hath = knowledge—(means) 


Do not strive to liberate Jiva, lest the whole 


family will perish 

cf. Qazh Foes aaa Fs AIT | ( ne 
qa aaa arat grat asta | 

Greed. 3. Seen.4,p.61. 4. Seen. 5, p. 6l. 


Pe a 


204 


to discriminate Bhakti with its entourage, 
the Jiva shall attain Méksha by a path, 
so cool, delivered from the thick mire of 
perplexities, crowding round the sharp 
thorns of Kama and Krodha. 


(Behind the curtain) 


(Two Divine Bards) Victory be to- 
thy Majesty. 


(First Bard). 


45. Yon expandeth red eve’s twilight, 
_ The lovely red baize stretched for 

dame Night’s steps, 

The Swell overflowing Ragi’s' 
Ocean-shore, 
The pollen-pile of Kadamba*—Kama, 
The Japa-garland® of Sringara’s* tuft, 

The blood-rut of Elephant— 


infatuation, 


See n-1, p. 168. 

See n-], D. 25. 

A kind of flower (China Rose). 
Erotic sentiment personified. 


205 


The red-saffron resplendence of 

dame West’s’ bosoms. 
(Second Bard). 

46. Darkness doth pervade the world all, 

Dishevelled hair, as it were, of 
dame Sandhya,” 

Pining at the separation from her 

lord, the Sun, 


Pitch-dark as overflowing Yamuna’s 
roaring waves. 


Viveka.—(Listening). (ueen mine! These two 


bards, ever speaking what they see, just 
hint to us that we are on the close of day, 
when our owl-like opponents make them- 
selves ready to entrap Jiva, in his slumber. 


Ah! charm-faced lady! Behold. 


47. At sunset doth luminosity decline, 
Darkness deep Prachi’s® face doth cover, 
Wicked Kama with Vasanta, all universe 


overpowering, 
Plungeth same, my dear! in vices 
manifold. 
1. The direction West. 2. Twilight, 


3. The direction Kast. 


206 
| Further:— 


48. Yon fawn, -eyed damsel’s ornament- 
lustre, 
ADE. -lit lamp s luminosity doth 
double, 
To Hsoforts usual nightly Nirajana,’ 
Do they walk in groups unbroken, 
| to adorn seraglio.. 
Therefore I shall now perform the 
evening ablutions and guard Jiva whose 
mind is now intently fixed on the supreme 
- Brahman. Attended by thy chamber-maids: 
Kshanti,? Sinti,? etc, thou shalt enter the 
mansion of Mangalicharana* and await our 
arrival. 
| (Thus saying exit with Sumati). 


Finis Act II named re : Mukti- -upfiya- Prribi 
(Preparation of the means of Mukti). 


AUM. 


ee 


1.: Lights waved as an act of adoration... .2. . Patience. 
3. Peace. 4. Place.of the practice of good. 


OM=(A-U-M) 


SANKALPA-SURYODAYA 


ACT’ IV 
THEN ENTER KAMA AND VASANTA. 
Kama.—Friend Vasanta ! 

1. Sugar-cane so tender for my bow, 
yon flowers for my shafts, 

Bee-swarm humming sweet harp’s 
melody for my bow-string, 

Fait sex, timid and weak, for my 
battalion 3 all these true. 


With these aids tender, of my own 
will, prosper [—the conquerer 
of the Trident-wearer.’ 


Further :— 


2. With missiles and shafts, by thee 
granted, 


1. Siva. 


208 


And with thee for my help ever 

7 unfailing, 
See how Moba great wieldeth, 
The universe under one umbrella.’ 


Vasanta.—What sayest thou? Thou art Adma 
indeed ! 


3. Through prescribed and proscribed 
Karmas with their senses performed, 
Longing for some results, the 
‘savants awakened, 
To thee of infinite marvel, impute they, 
Their deeds, saying ‘“‘ Kama did 
them and Manyu’ did them”’. 


4. With Siva and others, thy sportive 

battles thou didst have, 

Thy free diversion-resorts are Déva- 
chief’s mansions, 

Thy pleasure-park is this sea-girt 

earth, 
Ah Madana! How to describe thee, the 
splendour’s ocean P 


1. The meaning is that the whole world is under 
Moha’s Lord paramountcy' 


2. Anger. of. aratseraid, aeqcareia, 


209 


Kama.—Friend! Just think of thy greatness 


i 
2. 
3. 
4 


or 


known all the world over. 
For :— 


5. Well-known it is that the origin 
of Sumanas’ is thyself ;: the whole 
universe delighteth in thee; thou art 
indeed the foremost of the thrice-two 
seasons; Jétis’ entirely doth depend 
on thee ; Madhava? where Sri‘ doth dwell, 
bearing Pankaja, is all thy own and 
Kama is thy minister. What other 
better season is there that can match 
with thee ? 


Besides :— 


6. Thou art the Fire named Vasanta : this 


, 


Malaya’ zephyr is thy charioteer ; Asdka 


Two meanings in 4 to 7 :— 

Devas— Flowers. 

Sacrifice ( sayfeata ). and Para- Brahman. 
Vishnu, month of Vaisdkha. 

Lakshmi living in the Lotus Tank—Lovelinegs 
of Lotus Tank.’ 

Malaya mountain. 

a.s, 14 


210 


and other flowers, thy Hames ; bee-swarms,,. 
the array of smoke ; nectar-born moon, 
the feeding fluid ; therefore the tree of 
Virakti' of the Creator, Siva and others, 
is burnt away by thee, who hast wiped 
away even the name of Santi” 


Vasanta,—Great warrior and fish-bannered: 
Kiama! The greatness of persons like my- 
self is entirely of thy making. 


For :— 
7. The seasons, of whom [| am_ the 
chief, are the artists granting thee 


thy diverse weapons. The Moon and the 
Sun betoken thy time of victory® and rest.’ 


Cama.—Inough of this abundancy of mutual 


belanding ! State business should first be 
attended to. 


Vasanta. 


{ shallact, my friend! as thou dost 
bid. Of one bent of mind as we are, the 


duty of enkindling’ the sentiment of 


1. Seen2.p166. 2 Peace. 3. Night time. 


4. Day. 5. aareqaredaifeerarnte + 


211 


providing all the ways and means of sexual 
love in Jiva, now engaged in the practice 
of Yoga, shall be mine exclusively, and 
that of thine the wherewithal’ to provide 
suitable objects of love. 


Kama. 


Comrade ! [ shall act up to thy wishes. 
Jiva, whose meditation of the blessed Lord 
is but recent, could easily be turned away, 
by holding up before him the allurements® 
of ephemeral pleasures, accustomed to 
which he has been all along. Is there 
not this Brahman (for him, viz ,)—the 
fair-eyed damsels, themselves the end and 
aim of all ambition, visible indeed to the eye 
of all Beings, the Dévas, the Asuras, the 
Siddhas, the Gandharvas,? the Vidyadharas,® 
the Kinnaras,? the NKimpurushds’ and the 
Manushas®—all # 


Se 


g, FTAs | 2. Celestial musicians. 

3. Divine bards. 

4&5. Mythical beings with human figuras and 
horse-heads, ° 

6. Human beings. 


212 
Think not that this is improper :-— 

8. Why could not the damsels, who 
| minister to the exquisite of pleasures and 
| 

who are the cause of the procreation of the 


universe, be called Brahman, in so far as 
they do possess the Brahman’s attributes! ? 


Vasanta.—Friend ! This, thine opinion, is 
borne out by chapter and verse in the 
Upanishads’, for quoth. they (Upanishads) 
that damsels alone are the Brahman. To 


say that Brahman is a male is but a 


complimentary twaddle. 


9. Youthful maidens’ sidelooks bashful 
and lovely, 
And their amorous tricks (or play), 
adorned most in their unadorned 
simplicity, 
Even the best Ydgis, captivate, 
Even Eternal Brahman—a hundred— 
rejecting ! 


1. The two principal attributes of Brahman are— 
aiagacd —Grant of salvation; HIATT creative 
cause of the Universe. y 

2. Raarfe aatraar qare | 


213 


Kama, 


(With joy) Dear Vasanta! What thou 
gayest is true indeed. 


For :— 


10. This assemblage of celestial nymphs, 
whose looks make one mistake them for 
ranks of arrows, shall now, under my 
commands, goa-dancing and anon capture 
Jiva, albeit so intent on attaining Peace 
beyond works (7.e. Brahman). 


Vasanta.__Flower-shafted friend! So _ long 
as the fair sex is under thy dispensation, 
our mission is as good as fulfilled. 


Now :— 


11. With ears made merry by the honey 
of melodious music, with eyes carried away 
by rapturous dance and with heart enslaved 
by diverse emotions erotic, the mind’ of 
Y6gis can never decline from the bevy 
of blooming damsels. 


Kama.—(Pondering and with a sardonic smile). 


pa a i iia 


1. Resolve not to give up Yéga. 


214 


12. Should, disregarding me, Vivéka— 
proud in the company of Vyavasaya' and 
others, would yet fight with me, he himself 
should bring about the fate of Saubhari?, 


- captivated by a hundred damsels. 


Vasanta. 


No wonder! For, renowned indeed 


are thy valorous deeds ! 


13. The merry she-euckoos, (as if they 


were)—the musical instruments of Panava,® 


: Venu,’ Vina’, ete.—ever sing the valor 


.. of thee, blossom-bowed Cupid, that hath 


1. 
2. 


the bow-string made up of the swarm of 
bees, delirious with the drink of honey, 
flowing from the blossoming Kalpaka 
blooms that make thy bow ! 


Application. 

A sage named Saubhari, while penancing in the 
midst of water, beheld a fish, surrounded by 
its offspring. Hnamoured of this, he gave up the 
penance, himself longing to enjoy a similar 
happiness and married the hundred daughters of 
Mandbata for the purpose. (See Vishnu Purana). 
A kind of musical instrumens. 

Flute. 5. Harp. 


215 


Henee thou needst use not much effort 


to accomplish such a simple task. 


14. Bend not in vain thy bow whose 
tlower-shafts never yet missed their aim ; 
fll not thy bow-string with the lovely 
flower-arrows. Friend ! Even at the mere 
sight of thy weapons—the flowers—brought 
by me into existence and laid in reserve 
by hundreds in thy quiver—the trees’ 
branches,—quiver indeed shall Vivéka. 


ama.—This sort of mild enthusiasm will not 


do in the matter of a mighty foe. 
For :— 


15. Doth not the sun rise with a full 
thousand rays to dispel the darkness which 
could (though) be dissipated even by a 
little ha@ht ? 


16. Set aside the story of fight ; for have 
not the poets chronicled that indescribable 
misfortunes ,have attended persons who 
allowed themselves to be slighted, even 


Vasanta. 


x 
2, 


216 


in a small measure, as in (stories of) gamb- 
ling’ and verbal debates?. 


How is it that thou, though holding 
the whole universe under thy grip, under- 
rate thy own greatness and anticipate 
the slightest slight from any person what- 
soever ? 


A thousand locusts cannot. screen 
the thousand-rayed sun ! 


17. So long as thy army is active, with 
its infantry—the charming beauty of lovely 
women, its cavalry—their amorous gait, its 
elephant-division—delirium from draughts 
of wine, and its chariot-division—sexual 
enjoyment, who with any regard for Yoga 
can ever remain alive ? 


Now the Jiva hath not yet sealed up 
to the high pinnacle of Yéga. Such being 
the case, why for no reason doubtest thou 


that we shall not achieve our object ! 
a a 
Vide the chronicle of Dharmaputra and Nala. 
3 5 Sisupala. 


217 
For it is found :-— 


18. That the Jiva, aware as he is of the 


pit-falls of Samsara, doth still long for: 


the same; though he speaketh of the 
attainment of Brahman, _ still he doth 


hanker after mundane prosperity ; though , 


he yearneth for the Ocean of Joy, he 


doth at the same time shamelessly shrink. 


Therefore the Yooa of the Jiva in such 
a dilemma, could with very little effort be 
frustrated, 


Kama.—Thou seemest to hint that the best 
opportunity to slay the Jiva is this,—while 
asleep. 


19. Most opportune therefore is this time 
for me to exhaust all (my) weapons on the 
Jiva who hath not yet completed his Yéga, 
—like Arjuna attacking Karna, when 
the latter felt’ abashed at seeing his chariot 
slightly sunk in earth! 


Vasanta.Very well. If thou dost so, thy 
efforts shall sure with success be crowned. 


a i et senate 


1. Vide Karna parva wot Mahabharata. 


218 


20. The person, who hath solely set his 
heart on tumbling into the mire of Yd6ga, 
that could not dry by ever so many 
sins, owing to Virakti’s fraudulent ways, 
shall yet have all his Nirvéda' and conceit 
shaken out by the blows of thy weapons 
all and he shall again hanker after diverse 


delights, to which Rudra, ete, are addict. 
21. Breaths there the Y6gi with soul so 


dead against desire who longeth not for 
the pretty prattle of women,—pretty-made 
by smiles,—halting accents and sensuous 
feastings,—the prattle, serving as it were, 
for the triumphal flag of our victorious 
army, what by Malaya wind and the 
moon-light, what by jasmine and the 
hum of bees and such composed ? 


Kame.—Friend | A simpleton surely is Vivéka, 


x 


inasmuchas he trieth to effect for the 
Jiva, who is such a victim to physical 
and mental infirmities,—the suecess of 
Yoga. But it shall be as futile as crossing 


Detachment. 


219 


across the blue vault of heaven, as drink- 
ing at the mirage, and as taking a bath. 
on earth. 


Further :— 


22, Vivéka, intent on liberating the Jiva, 
and—who is rolling dissipate in revelry 
and delirious with draughts of sense- 
delights—knoweti not (it seems) the worth 
of the amorous sports of celestial courte- 
sans, their charms resembling honey, dripp- 
ing from nectar-soaked grapes. 


Just mark here the two horns of the 
dilemma :— 


23. If, through the power of discrimina- 
tion, a person, in whom the power of aversion 

{to worldly pleasures) hath just dawned, 
doth fret at me, how could he possibly 4 
be said to have subdued Anger (Krédha) ? 

If (however) on the other hand he casteth 
away anger, how could he be said to have 
shunned me (Kama)? Vain therefore is 

the twaddle of fools who speak of the 
subdual of (both) Anger and Desire! 


220 


(Then enter Krédha dressed in ao 
horrid guise.) 


Krodha—(Approaching in haste). Hail my 


friend ! Hail, my blossom-bowed Kama !— 
the vanquisher of Vivéka by movements 
unhindered! Who is this partisan of 
Vivéka who prattleth in vain about the 
subdual of Anger and Desire 4 


(Walking round horridly and with a 
loud laugh). 


24. How is it possible here to speak of 
Vivéka, when [—the Vanguard _ of 
several arch-chiefs, dancing on the horrid 
stage of war 


am here, [, whose followers, 
the Asuras, raise feverish panic in the 
bosoms of Deva-damsels, whose (Deva- 
damsels’) sandal-paste, put on to cool 
heat, anon drieth up? 


Kama.—Welcome, my good friend Krddha, 


the foremost among charioteers and ever 
ferocious towards my enemies! Thou hast 
come in right time, intent on helping 
me, when I have been deeply deliberating 


221 


as to how I should fulfil my master’s 
mission. Thou hast under thy sway 
the great Mahésvara' and others, who 
(ever so much may) exercise self-control. 
Hurrah! Our great king hath conquered ! 


Further :— 


25. When vanity hath vanquished, when 
I (Kama) have stopped havoc, when Méha 
hath ceased enthusiasm, when the forest of 
sin hath burnt away, vet thou, alone of 
all, fed by the manifold kinds of fuel, say 
of a particle of contempt, art capable of 
disrupting Yoga for the Supreme Brahman ! 


Vasanta. —Surely this meeting of Kama with 


thee (Krodha) doth resemble the conjunction 
of wind with fire! With materials, all so 
ready, why should we tarry any further ? 
Success surely followeth in the wake 


of enthusiasm. Methinks success. will 


1. 


dear friend. Kama. 


crown us, if we only adopt the plan (of 
nocturnal slaughter) advocated by our 


Siva. 


222 
For :— 


26. Let fawn-eyed celestial damsels,— 
with their glances dancing like the bees that 
form Kama’s sugar-cane bow-string— with 
lovely breasts bending that make them be 
mistaken for the ruby-creepers’ flower 
bunches, guarded by Kima’s demireps,— 
walk round the Jiva, who is absorbed in 
Virakti. | 


Kama.—Friend! The best of seasons, Vasanta, 
remindeth us opportunely of what we 
should do. With Krédha marching in 
front, heading the — celestial-courtesan- 
battalions, [ shall follow, with the string 
firmly braced to my bow ; and thou shalt 
follow at my heels, guarding the flanks, 
with all wistfulness, vigilant all round. 


(All march as described above ) 


Oh Kama and Krédha—the foremost 
in Mahamoéha’s army! Hear my advice. 
This is the occasion to despoil Yoga that 
is about to be begun, by nocturnal slaughter. 
For yon riseth the moon — lustrous, 


Vasanta. 


223 


making the oceans four swell. Behold 
now in our front the rising moon-beams— 
harbingers, as it were, of the emerging 
moon—the lover of the blue-lotus tank 
and the servant of the moon-faced young 


damsels, marching in thy front. 


27. Yon moon-beams, as they are, 
milky sea’s swell, 
From the whale’s mouth, drunk 
and emitted, lovely as dame Night’s 
amorous smile, 
Shining as white sandal- paste mixed 
with camphor white, 
Feast the eyes onlooking the Hast, as 
if drenching them in ambrosia cool. 


Besides :— 


28. Behold yon Udaya Mountain’s 
splendour, doubled by the rising 
Moon’s lustre, 
Seeming, as it were, an elephant with 
conch-deeked ears and with flowing 
ichor color ! 


224 


Krodha.—Ah dear destroyer of demon Sam- 


bhara’! In troth Vasanta but spake the— 
fact. 


Now :— 


29. The damsel moonlight, shining as the 
rising Milky Ocean, doth beget in the 
direction Kast, the daughter—peerless 
Loveliness who maketh blue-lotuses blossom. 
Behold the waxing night when lovely stars 
do twinkle and when the tress-like Dark- 
ness, seemeth, as it were, somewhat 
dishevelled by the throes of childbirth ! 


OO 


Kama. Al]l regard is indeed due to my friend 


—the Lord’ of the galaxy of stars, who is 
armed with weapons, mighty to dispel 
piteh-darkness and who doth adorn the 
plaited hair of Siva. : 


30, This Moon, the shedder of lovely 


moonlight, the wishing-gem? of the anguish 


iis 


7) 
an 


The allusion is to Kama’s incarnation as Ani- 
ruddha, Sri Krishna's grandson, when he killed 
demon Sambhara and married his daughtor 
Usha (vide 10th Skandha of Sri Bhagavata). 
The Moon. | 3. Lit: Chintamani. 


225 


of the love-lorn She-Chakravdka,' the 
instructor of K4éma-Sastra, the mirth- 


maker of the triple-world, the vouchsafer 


of delight on the — blue-lotus tank, doth 
dissipate steadily the darkness that hath 


_ held possession of all the directions. 
- - Further :— | 


"31, “You moon-beams, distilled from 


its 


rise from Vishnupada,? making the twink- 


ling stars look like piles of foam, risi 


from the Udaya mountain and resembling 
celestial Ganga, doth give variegated colors 


ne 


tor »the Yamuna- like darkness. Friend 


- - 


help! 


32, Tos Lover of the stars is my loved 
friend ; moon-licht is my mate; Vasanta, 


Krédha | “Behold the apenas of my 


who equippeth me with Boweiy weapons 
in abundance, is my relative esteem- -worthy ; 
in the event of danger, thou, 0 Krédha 
of irresistible force! art my nee: Who 


ii 


‘1. Ruddy- -goose. tbiva) 


2. Two meanings :—Blue vault and Vishnu’s feet. 
s. & 15 


"so 


226 


then with any regard for life shall stand 
before me, armed with my bow of blooms ?” 


\{ Krodha.—Friend! When fortune favors, what 
all to us shall favorable not be ? 


Further :— 


38. How to calla person desireless, wher 
he doth desire to conquer thee (Kama) © 
{f he doth not *desire to shun thee, he 
is certainly not devoid of desire, inasmuck 
as thou desertest him not. e 


Vee camps of this procrastination, which 
is but the thief of time. This Jiva who- 
hath entered on Yoea shall now be 

approached by us. 


a 


(All do accordingly). 


\ 
Vasanta.—-Behold this Jiva, who hath just 


embarked on Yoga, by Vivéka directed, 
the latter doing all things opportunely for 
Jiva whe is absorbed in meditation on the 
twin-feet of the Supreme Lord, renouncing 
all his attachment for senge-dictates. 


=’ 


227 


34. The Jiva peruseth the puranas* which 


speak about the terrors of hell and yet 


falleth frequently into sloth; he 
perceiveth the soul as distinct from. the 
body and at the same time tendeth the 
body with all care; he ‘longeth deliverance 
from the ocean of sorrow and yet 
hankereth after  sense-lusts. Pining 
thus, in a double life, he seemeth as if 
rocking in a swing? ! 


Kama.—Friend Wrodha! YVasanta  hinteth 


that Jiva hath not yet attained the stage 
of profound meditation. Our help-mate 
Vishaya-vasané*, ever (busy) begetting 


eternal and inarvellous et perennial 


stream—is unassailable even by those 
who have subdued the enemies—the senses 
external’ and internal’. 


SSS ee ee ee — - linia ¥ aba 


” 


Sacred legendary chronicles, 18 in aumber. 

The implication is that Jiva is alwara in a 
dilemma 

Sense-assoeiation. 

Sensuousness, 

Kama, Krodha, ete, (Anger, Lust, ate). 


228 


, 35. Even granting that Jiva transgresseth 


the ocean of samsdra in secrecy (thus) 
engendering a longing for salvation and 
that he indulgeth in pleasing parleys with 
Yogis, even then, the mind, vestured 
by garments woven by evil propensities 
manifold, such as egotism, loseth anon its 
equilibrium. 


Vasanta.—‘Yerror of the enemy host thou art 


1 


(sure)! Beware also of another matter. 
Even though one hath dissociated from 


society, self- esteem alone is enough to 


violate one’s s Yoga. It i is for this self-same - 
reason that Samvarta,  Jada-bharata, 
Vidura and others, rightly understanding 
the moral of Hiranyagarbha’s text’, courted 


public contumely, serving as sin-remover 


and led alife as if of madmen. There- 
fore before the Jiva might arrive at this 
state of contumely-courting, let Krdédha 
seize him swift, using ‘contumely itself as 
the medium. sa 


_ aaaar wi af alas: Hed aa: 1 


aaaranar a aaa a Peeks 


VF 


10. 


229, 


36. But now the Jiva is at hearing", 
. ° 3 * 8 ° 4 d 5.2. 

instructing’, learning®, asking‘, adoring*, 
singing®, touching’, __ realising’ — and 
praising’, the Lord. Thus perpetually 


- revelling in the enjoyment of the worship 


of Murari’s feet, it may be that ‘Jiva, 
seated firmly in his fortress of wisdom, 
is well nigh unassailable. 


Further :— 


37. The Jiva, who, weaned from vain 
wants, is happy, and even from law-allowed 
wants free, spurning them even when they 
spontaneously approach, and injuring none, 
liveth thus the life of a boa-constrictor”. 


< 


Kama.—(Smiling and shy) Friend! How is it 


The attributes of God. 2. What he heard to 
others. 3. The lore allied to the subject (of 
Yéga). 4. His doubts through his Acharya. 
5. The Lord. 6. His Holy names. 7. His 
materials of worship ie. Basil ete. 8, His form. 
9. God, 

The life of a boa-constrictor lies in the fact that 
it only receives its food reaching its mouth of 
its own accord. 


230 


that at war time, thou art as timid as a child. 
For, thon dost not appear like taking 
time by the forelock. 


_ 38. Thou, the best of seasons and right 
. Worthy to enjoy pleasures infinite, art 
my friend. Myself am Kama_ great, 
holding under my grip mortals and 
immortals and = animals, and this is 
Krédha, cruel by nature and resenting all 
opposition to me. We three therefore shall 
jointly now perpetrate nocturnal slaughter 

as did Asvatthama and others’ of old. 


Vasanta.—FKriend! tam not unmindful of all 
the pros and cons in this affair but | doubt 
how we shall be otherwise than unsuccessful 


when Jiva doth not allow us the slightest 
\loop hole, for, what availeth the waking 
Ee ae 

otis after the house has been rifled by 


a gang of thieves P 


39. To promote Nivritti-Dharma and to 
refrain from Pravritti- Dharma, the Jiva 


-~—— 


ae ene ree ane a ata a 


1. Kripacharya and Kritavarma. 


* 


231 


resorteth to the Universe-Maker, just hke 
. ° ba * . ,, Sesame “pipareil 
an invalid resorting to a physician. 


hee ae amar i ne rg eaayaoennmmetenipmame ear emma)  e 


Krodha.—(With haste). Vasanta and Kama 
shall presently know my extraordimary 
skill in carrying out what I will. 


40. Several are the persons of wondrous 
valour, ruined by this,—myself, by various 
expedients, without actually taking hold 
of (the victims), as in the case of Jamad- 
agni' and, others, and actually taking hold 
of (the victims), as in the case of Ravana 
and others. 


Vasanta.—Well known is this, thine exploit ! 
But where is thy opportunity to seize the 


$e ee 


1. A sage named Jamadagni, while penaneing in his 
hermitage, was met by Kartavirya, who, not 
getting the sacred cow, he asked for, flung a 
gnake in the sage’s neck and the sage, enraged 
at this, eursed Kartavirya, even before the sage 
was killed by him. The implication is that Jamad- 
agni lost his life through Kartavirya, as ide (the 
sage) beeame a victim to anger apparently 
through a snake and not through Anger (Krédha) 
seizing him directly. 


232. 


Jiva who hath thoroughly renounced the 
world? 


Krodha.(Shouting Ha! Ha!!). (have Opport- 
unities even for such a person. 


41. By just robbing a person though he 
hath detached his mind thoroughly, of a 
shattered garment of his, a seat, a Kaman- 
dalu,' ete, by contriving to hide such 
articles, of a sudden, I shall disconcert 
the Yoga of a person by bringing about 
uneasiness of mind, false prattles, untrue 
imputations, mischief, ignorance, ete. 


Further:-— 


What wonder is there in unhinging 
Jiva’s concentration of mind, when Pionid 
disturb the minds of highly eminent 
personages such as Mahésvara ? 


42, For an Airavata, which weareth the 
flowery -bunch- h-like Harth as its crest- “jewel! 


1. Pot used by an ascetic for Keeping water. 

The Airfvata is supposed to bear the Bastern 
quarter of the Earth on its head and the Earth 
supported on its head is compared to the wear- 
ing of flower bunches, 


233 


with no- effort, can the carrying of 
the Lord of the -Dévas (Indra), the 
overthrowing of the Asura hosts, the 
shattering of the Kulachala mountain, and 
the devastation of forests vast, be a cause 
of wonder ? 


Kama,—Friend Vasanta! Beware that what 
Krédha sayeth may not prove untrue. 


43. Who dare resist the force of the 
darkness of Krdédha, more powerful than 
sleep, swoon and death-agony, effacing 
all established distinctions of castes and 
ideas of high and low and_ resembling 
the dark billows of Yamuna, overflowing 
its banks, swelled by downpours of coveys 
of clouds (gathering) at the time of the 
great cataclysm ? 


Further :-— 


My glory, proclaimed by sages great, 
such as Valmiki, is a thing also not to 
be lightly passed over. 

; : a 


44. Was not even Sri Rama the victim of 


254 


my. contempt’ through the influence of my 


weapon,—Sri-Rama—the Lion of the Ele- 


phant-like Virddha*, the exsiccator® of the 


ocean, through the fire of his shaft, the 
conqueror of Khara,* Dhfishana, and their 


hosts, the severer of the ten heads of 
Ravana and the decimator of Kumbha- 
karnaP 3 


Vasanta.—Kama ! Well done. 


Kama.--Friend ! All praise is thine ; for it is 


bo 


through thine influence, all this was done 
by me. 


Indulging in lamentations ete. over the loss of 
his wife Sitia. 

A giant slain by Rama in the Dandaka forest, 
immediately after Stta was taken away by 
Ravana. 

The allusion is to Rama drying up the ocean by 
sending forth his arrows, enraged at the presid- 
ing deity of Ocean not answering his call 
promptly. 


At Dandaka forest these two giants with their 
followers of 14000 Rakshasas were slain by 
Rama all alone. 


235 


WVasanta.-—Hallo, Fish-bannered Kama! Even the 
' greatest warriors plunge into grief through 
thy greatness and become lunatics. 


For :-— 


45. A person, whose eyes' are reddened 
and who is intoxicated with the wine-like // 
wenches, doth bewail, faint, waver, bemoan 
and discriminateth not good from evil. 


(Musing). | Unconquerable as _ ye, 
Kama and Krédha are, something still 
lurketh in my mind. In all business 
the greater the succour, the more successtul 
_are the results. 


(Gesturing as if approaching footsteps 
were heard). 


46. Yonder cometh JLébha, attended 
by his consort Jrishné?, despatched 
by Mahdméha, to despoil Jiva’s craving 
for Méksha,—Ldbha, the foremost of the 
devastators of Dharma, the ruiner of 


et tL A tN ——- ee 


1. Eyes blinded wifh passion. 
9. Covetousnese. 


> 


236 


the efforts of Sama and Dama, the 


swallower of the ocean of knowledge 
and the deviser of obstacles to Yégis. 


Kama and Krodha.—(See with delight). 


Vasanta.—Invite here Lédbha, the one coveted 
after, by all minds in the universe. 


Kama and Krodha.— \\ || conceived, friend 
Vasanta ! 


Kama.—(Snapping the thumb and Jore-jinger 
together). 


Krodha.—(Seconds with loud applause). / 


(Then enter Lébha and Trishna). 


Lobha.—47, Here in -haste approach I[—the 
consort of /rishnd, bearing Mah&amdha’s 
commands on my head, that are as it were, 
a garland (to the head). Who shall bring 
about contentment to this self of mine. even 
with the gift of golden Brahmanda worlds, 
so famous for immensity and for numbers 2 | 


Dy 


(Embracing Trishnd). Love mine t 


237 
The Maker Himself seemeth, dear 
ee ! to have created thee—of unfailing 


youth,’ rolling together the beauties of all 
the maidens of the Devas ! 


I shall just demonstrate this :— 


49. Even were -thy belly filled with 
several mountains of gold® and _ silver, 
Trishna! its emaciation inereaseth* all 
the more! 


Trishna.—Smali wonder that the beauty of 
this, thine wife, surpasseth that of every 
other woman! Yet make for me more 
necklets, armlets, waistlets and anklets, 
fitting my beauty, gathering together 
‘all gems from the mansions of the Dévas 
and the Asuras. 


\ 


Lobha.—Love mine! Easy done this, thy request. 
‘Vanquished by me are the Dévas and the 
Asuras, the Mipharas and the Aimpuru- 


inti en 


ght cea Temya.  (Smriti). 
2. Meru. | ag Kailasa. 
4.. And not the belly. 


shas,. the Vidyddharas and the Munis’,. 
and men and beasts, in that they mutually 
kill each other and take even a particle 
of chaff for the golden Méru. Just hear 
‘the pitiable plight [ subject him who styleth 
himself as Kubéra, the Lord of Riches and 
the companion of Tryambaka?. 


50. Spendeth not the King of Kings* 
his begotten wealth, 
With his wits all bewildered, nor doth 
; | he enjoy, 
Yet longeth he for more and more 
wealth, knowing not the joy 
of sleep: 
Yet guardeth he like the devil, the 
createst of treasures. 


Trishna.—Aryaputra! Now that by thee 
are the worlds three made greedy 
of wealth which is the second Aim of 
life, what mav be the situation of the — 
person possessed of Vivéka ?. 


a 


eee ee 


239 


Lobha.—Love mine? What hath yet to be 
ascertained is this. Here, awaiting my 
arrival, remain Kama and Krédha—insti- 
gated by Mahiméha—to damp the enthu- 
siasm of the Jiva for yoga, We shall just 
approach them. 


(Approaching). Here is Lobha, prost- 
rating “his elder brothers, Kama and: 
Kroédha. 

Trishna,—Here is she prostrating—thy daughter 


in-law, ve elders ! 


Kama and Krodha. 


Long may ve both live! 


Vasanta. Ha! Your meeting is like the 
conjunction of heat, wind and wild fire! 
Successful shall prove king Mahdmoha’s 
enterprise and your wives, Rati, Jighamsa’ 
and Trishn& shall never to widowhood 
be victims by (any efforts of) Vivéka. 


(All embrace each other). 


Kama._Welcome to Lobha, the protector of 
~ -wealth—all my world (art thou). 


- he ee Fi a 


1. Desire to Siiissiavatien. 


240 


Lobha,— Yes, | am indeed the object of thy 


grace. 


' 


Krodha.—Dost thou conduct carefully our 


— 


a ee x 


¥ 


of life. : eg 


master’s business,—thou who turnest away 
at the mere mention of Médksha ? 


Lobha—Through thy grace, unfettered are 


my ways everywhere. Behold now the 
present unique condition of the world, 
ardently intent, like Duryédhana, on beget- 
tine weatlh, which is the second: End 


§—_—_—_ — a 


51. These kings of the earth, ever so 
firmly greedy for even a particle of a sod of 
this mean earthy earth, distract themselves : 
the lords of the immortals do ever 
tremble with fear, lest their position be 
coveted. by anyone somewhere performing 
penance ; even the ascetics who have 


‘renounced the world are not free from the 


weakness of censuring a person extolled by 
another. The whole universe is therefore 
under the influence of Durmati’s maids 
/ Asuya’ and Irsha." ee 


a 


Envy. 9. Malice, oe as 


3 


eet 
F, 


- 241 


52. Persons, seized Hen the demon” of 
insatiable greed, trot. though all the Quar- 


ters Ten; make the surface of the earth | 


disturbed ; sing the praises of the rich : 
volunteer menial service to others : cross 
the high seas with ships and wage vain 
wars. Y - 


‘Wisante. —Ah ! long live sia Mahamoha’s prime 


minister |! What Ghieacles shall there be for 
thee—the promoter of the Second End of 
life, so liked by all minds ‘alike, owing 
to its susceptibility (as means) for enjoy- 
ment, —the End, proclaimed itt Artha- 
sa ira, that is so patronised by multitudes 
of kiviguentie end that is the Incarnation of 
wealth itself, so well co-operated by Trishnd ? 


93. The End of life named Wealth (Artha) 
patronised by the votaries of Kdmasdstra? 
and begotten by means fair or foul, as 
may the tides of time determine, is entirely 
of thy making, what of earning, of 
hoarding and of refeelag to the needy ! 


phe ES ee 


1. 


Science of Wealth, (Second End of Life) 
m » ove, (Third End of Life) 


a. s&s, 16 


“oA 


242 


Ye shall heed this my proposal. How 
shall we capthre a person clothed in the 
unassailable armour of wisdom  viz.,. 


Viveka ? 


Kama.—Friend! It is thus that I have made 
up my mind :—Tf shall advance in front 5: 
ye three shall, placing Trishna in the 
centre, follow me and protect both the 
flanks and the rear. With such unassail- 
able squadron as we are, the baffling of 
Viveka’s efforts, bent upon ruining his 
own clan, shall be a fait accompli. 


(All range themselves accordingly and 
walk five or siw paces). 


Kama.—(Waving his flowery bow jized with 
shafts in haste). Behold ye, the target 
secured for the darts of my bow,—darts- 
nice and sharp, now braced to the string. 


54. Look here how yon person, espousing 
the way of surrender, realiseth his own self, 
by singular Ydga-practices, is steady by his. 
senses multitudinous being restrained, breath 
controlled and weaned (from the worlds), 


243 
treading the way of Nivritti (renunciation). 


Vasanta.—(Looking carefully). Heigho! all 
attention we must now be. | 


55. Here museth Vivéka over some secret, 
helped by Sumati, and all secluded, after 
retrieving the Jiva from the Ocean of 
Maya’, so as to make him reach Parama- 


pada’. . 


Krodha—(Kuutting his eyebrows). Ah Vasanta ! 
Let the wicked Vivéka deliberate what he 
may, but the Jiva shall never defeat our 
designs, led (as we are) by Kama in the 
van. 


56. The self-born Kama, who eateth up 
the wealth of faultless Yoga, catcheth 
witless beings’, sporting themselves in the 
Samsara-sea, boisterous with mighty billows, — 
by his hook of sense-enjoyment, making | 
them thus his condiment. 


1. Seen. 6, p. 72. 
See n. 4, p. 72. 

3. Fish to wit. (a@e.; souls in Saméara are, like fish, 
caught by lust). a 


244 


Behold the quaint meditative mood 
of the Jiva! 


57. The Yogi, construing knowledge of 
the True Self as the mansion, blessed 
attribute-groups—his ornaments, medita- 
tion—his sexual enjoyment, secluded habit 
of austerity—his love-prattle, resorteth to 
his seraglio of Upanishads, shutting 
himself off from all the world. Thus 
doth he enjoy the moods of Love under 
the pretext of Peace. 


Vasanta.—(Aside). Enough of these vain 
hopes. These are mere castles in the air. 


(Aloud). Friend ! In the presence of 
amighty foe, of what avail are these 
bragging words ? | 


Lobha.—Friend Vasanta!. My wife Trishna 
hath to be consoled as she is afraid of the 
enemies’ tumult. 


( Looking at Trishna). Charmed looking 
Trishna! Fear not tae foe, howsoever 
mighty, so long as thou art in the midst of 


245 
this great warrior-squadron. 


Trishna.—So long as thou, esteemed by all the 
Dévas and the Asuras, art alive, I am ever 
free from fear. 


Kama.—(Looking round with fear). Now we 
must retrace our steps. 


58. For, Vivéka, with his natural 
strength’ of unfailing knowledge, with 
wondrous walk, well equipped with the 
firm armour of forbearance and content — 
ment, appeareth before us, seated in the 
chariot of Pranava? sent by Brahman, and 
he disperseth our squadron, 


(All fear). 


59. If one of ye three, peradventure, 
meet with danger, surely Mah4mdéha whose 
very life is in the lives of those devoted 
to him, shall himself put an end to his 
life. Instantaneously shall his wife Dur 
mati commit Saf*. Therefore retreat from 


1. Army. 2. See n. 6, p. 2. 
3. The Hindu custom of the wife being cremated 
with her departed husband. 


246 
the presence of Vivéka is at this juncture 


most advisable. 


Lebha.—Fight we must not here, without our 
king. He himself will decide what yet 
remaineth to be done. 


Krodha.—( With disgust). But so far what have 
. we done for our king’s business ? 


Friend ! 
' 


Lobha. 
60. The march of time, with the high 


\} speed of the sun’s car revolving fast, can 
not be impeded by the impact of a gust 


of wind from the opposite direction. The 
wise won’t shut the door-after the horse 
is stolen. Therefore it is better for us 
now to think how best we may tide over 
our future troubles. 


Therefore, in this affair, we must first 
protect our lives. For, it is said that one 
must protect oneself by every means in 
1s power. 


- 


Kama. 


Our Lébha, who knoweth the ways of 
the world, giveth us advice most apt. 


247 


61. It is not meet that we, who wanted 
to adopt the policy of night-slaughter till 
now, should fall into the great abysmal 
pit of angry  Vivéka. Now shall Maha- 
mOha himself strive to defeat our foe in 
action, himself leading Dambha' with his 
wife Kuhand? and Garva’® with his wife 
Astiya* ete. 


Therefore we shall now disperse in 
different directions, for, they say that 
to save oneself he should forego the world. 


(Thus saying exeunt all). 
Finis Act LV termed Kamadi- V yfiha- Bhéda 
(Dispersion of the Squadron of Kama etc.) 


AUM. 


Vanity. . 3. Pride. 
Fraud. 4. Envy. 


OM=(A-U-M) 


SANKALPA-SURYODAYA 


i OS Ea 
THEN ENTER DAMBHA AND KUHANA. 


Dambha.—Halloo ! Kuhana ! my dutiful wife f 
I want thee. For, thou art my co-partner, 
by none unpolluted, as was Tara’ owned by 
Brihaspati, and Ahalyd? owned by Gautama. 
Thou wouldst not brook even a moment’s 
separation from me. 


1. Tara, the wife of Brihaspati was seduced by 
Chandra, under the pretext of discipleship. The 
Drama of Térd Sasdnka is too well known to be 
reproduced hore in extenso. 

2. Ahalyd, the wife of Gautama was seduced by 
Indra. The latter, enraged at this seduction, 
cursed his wife and transformed her to a stone. 
She continued in this stony state till Sri Rama 
gave her back her former feérm by the touch of his. 
feet, on his way to Mithila. 


249 


Kuhana.—Thou, the best of Brihmanas, hast 


expressed correctly. And yet I blush at 
the illustrations cited. Thou, my miaster,. 
shouldst have said : “‘ As Arundhati! owned 
by Vasishta.” Whenever [ am courted by 
thieves, gamblers, village headmen, royal 
ministers, heretics and such others, [ resort 
to them, taking them, quotha, for thyself! 


Dambha.—(Smiling). Therefore thou art the 


3. 


best of chaste women in all the worlds. 
My Agnihotra’ and other sacred fires, even 
if interrupted, are kept burning by thee— 
my sacrificial wife, by fires, brought from 
some place or other, when my Garhapatya? 

fire is extinguished. 


Arundhati, the wife of Vasishta, is reputed to be 


~ one Of the unquestionably chaste ladies ever 


known. 


A ceremony performed daily, both morn and 
eve, wherein the housewife has to look to the 
unbroken continuance of Fire, all through her 
life. 


One of the three’kinds of sacred fires pertaining 
to married life. 


250 


My Sthdlip4ka’ ceremony is similarly 
never interrupted, as thou concealest even 
thy menstrual course. Similarly again the 
Vaisvadeva? and Pitriyajfiya* ceremonies 
are never interrupted. Where then is the 
occasion for expiation ? 


Kuhana.—Hush! Heaven forbid !! There is 


Dambha. 
1e 


need for substitution, only when there hap- 
peneth interruption to Fire. In our home, 
interruption to Fire is a thing yet unheard 
of, for, our ever-pleased Lares et Pendies 
euard our Fires perpetually. Similarly, 
concealment of the periodical course shall 
be necessary, only if that monthly sickness 
ever appear at all. The same Lares et Penates 
delay its happening, should it chance to 
appear during the parvas’. 


Well, WKuhani! Indeed, thou art 


A ceremony done with grain as the chief in- 
sredient before the fire and completed on the 
full-moon day. 

A ceremony done with oblations to fire after 
the daily midday worship. 

Ceremonies relating to departed souls. 

Full-moon days when Sthalipika is performed. 


251 


my co-partner in life. Much I esteem 


thee, as thou dost maintain my Brahma- 


nism, thou—my sacrificial wife—the law- 


fully wedded wife of a creat Srotriya'. 
Always thou observest the Dvadasi’ vow, 
after sumptuously feeding me, who 1s ever 
pinched by hunger and thirst, even on 
Harivésara® days, privately and well thou 
showest thine vow to others, by ostensibly 


‘wandering from door to door under the 


pretext of gathering materials‘ therefor. 
[ shall now however unfold thee a secret. 


There now exist some Asuras, who 
have bid goodbye to all Dharmas, putting 
on the garb of ascetics, maintaining argu- 
ments’ tending to Maya, seeming, as they 


One well-versed in the Védas.- 

The 12th day of the Lunar and the Solar fortnights 
when Brahmanas take sumptuous meals early 
in the morning after a fast on the previous day. 
That time of Dvadasi during which fast is 
prescribed. 

9435482007, FOOL FEU), @savaparef etc. 
Arguing that all the world is a delusion and an 
unreality. 


252 


are, Kali-yuga itself incarnate. Thou shalt, 
at no time, leave my presence, seeing 
that these Asuras desire to entice thee, 
as Ravana' and Arjuna? once did) None 
but thou shalt even for a moment. serve 
me, the best of Brahmanas. 


‘ Queen Durmati hath, just now, 
“requested me to practise some witchcraft 
on Vivéka, the desperado, who broodeth 
over some evil or other (to use) against our 
king Mahaméha, the Lord paramount of 


all pleasures, both mundane and svargic. 
It is as follows :-— 


“Well, boy Dambha! Thou who 
spoilest all the Dharmas of the universe 


shalt exterminate Viveka’”’. 


Averse as | am ever to desires, out 
of extreme civility, believing in the sages’ 
dictum—“ There is no sin in exorcising 


1. Ravana carried away Siti in the guise of an 
ascetic from the Panchayati forest. 

9. Arjuna carried away Subhadraé (sister of Lord 
Krishna) in the guise of an ascetic. 


253 


the six'” [I have now undertaken the 
vow to gratify an unknown deity. Fetch 
me therefore Parijata? flowers and fruits, 
collected by Loékapala’s’ Purdhits‘, after 
their bathing in the waters of the celestial 
Ganga. 


Kuhana.—Fie! Fie!! Alas! How witc raft 


could be practised against Vivéka, the 
master of the quintessence of all the Sastras, 
well protected by his cabinet ministers 
Sama, Dama, and _ others? They say* 
that witchcraft practised in such a case 
recolleth on, and bringeth evil to, the 
practiser himself, 


Dambha.—Ah, silly Brahmani® ! What speakest 


3 


aaa wea wernt: | 

AACE Fea BTA: 1 

Flowers of the Kalpaka tree. 

The guardians of the 8 Directions such as 
Kubera, Varuna, ete. 

Priests—The implication is that Dambha’s hath- 
materials are furnished by personages no legs 
yea than the | Lokapalas. 


. gaieafrarceqa. 


A Brabmana woman. 


Kuhana, 


254 


thou, without knowing my greatness ? 


1. Weill versed I am in the sciences 
twice-seven and four, 
As also in thesarts sixteen times four. 
In time have I completed several 
sacrifices with abundance of gifts, 
Implanted all over the world are my 
virtue-proclaiming flags. 
Ah, thou co-partner of this most 
virtuous self ! 
Let alone the eminence of my 
erudition and good conduct, 
Just think for a while over my 


contentment. 


9. After conquering the whole surface 
of the earth, Parasurdma, in all humility 
entreated me to accept the same asa 
present. I, treating the universe no better 


than a straw, rejected the offer. The — 


Lords of the immortals, surprisingly grati- 
fied at my glory, desired to give me 
 Svarga and Méksha, but rich in serenity, 
I rejected this offer as well. 


(Musing). Never mind. Is_ the 


ee ee eS 


255 


sorcery, that thy distinguished self pro- 
posest to practise against Vivéka and in 
which thou requirest my co-operation, 
of the type of Syéna' or of any other kind? 


Dambha.—Ali! great Srdtriya’s lawful wife ! 
I just tell thee the secret of secrets, 
known only to my most dutiful disciples. 
Tell this not .even to thy companions, 
Trishna and others. The proposed witch- 
craft is not specially prescribed like Syéna’. 


po 


5. All that is ordained as virtuous by the 
Sratis and Smritis, but when done at my 
instance, do wholly act as sorcery against 
Vivéka. 7 
Kuhana.— Well conceived, but who is it that 
“initiated thee in this mystery of injury to 
others ? 


Dambha. 
knoweth everything, who is the initiator ? 
All who fancy themselves erudite only 
resort to me* and get ; their doubts cleared. 


Pah, simpleton! To me _ who 


a ee) 


—_- -—---- 


1.28 Sivtiealar fort of sorcery. 


256 


Albeit, I have taken one by the name of 
Garva, the disdainer of all worthy people, 
and one in the liking of all, who is the 
propounder of Mahamdha’s cult, as a mere 
witness in this affair. © Awaiting his arrival, 
I sit with all materials ready on this seat 
of Kusd grass, spread by the sages seven, 
in this siddha hermitage, purified nine 
times over. 


Kuhana.—\Vell done. The success of the enter- 
prise shall equally be fruitful. 


Dambha. _(Gesturing omen). My guardian 
angel Kuhana! My _ right eye throbbeth 
and this surely doth indicate the encounter 
with a friend—{ Looking in front). 


* 

_ Who is yon great soul that deseendeth 
to this mortal world and approacheth 
towards this hermitage with a form whose 


burning _ brilliance blindfoldeth . the on- 
lookers ? om ; 


(Lhen enter Darpa wearing large san- 
dals on the feet, waving his big arms every 
moment and with a flag-staff on which was 


2 


257 


tied firm a parchinent inscribed with an 
oath). =. 


( 4, #3 q ; ' ; g : 
Darpa.—Jlucited by king Mahaméha to condemn 


the best men, far and wide, I have 
wandered, just to discern the differences 
existing in the different worlds, and I have 
but now descended from Satyaléka! to 
this middle world?, after thoroughly survey- 
ing all the quarters, up to the Chakravala 
Mountain. Worshipped by the guardians 
of the Points of Space headed by Indra, I 
wear this ruby-garland, ‘a present given 
to me by the Ocean®, the relativet of the 
Vanquisher of the demons Madhu ‘and 
Kaitabha,—the Ocean, the donor to the 
Dévas of the great presents, the cow, the 


© wine,'the nectar, the Moon, the Parijata, the 


Me; 


K\austubha, the Chintémani,—the Ocean, 
le as 


- 1. The world of the Prajapati. i 
“%, Human world. 
3. The presiding deity of the Ocean is referred to 


4, 


here. . 


The relationship meant here is the Ocean being 
the father-in-la® of Vishnu, as Lakshmi, his wife 
was born during the churning of the Ovean. 

8. 8. 17 


bo 


258 


the patient endurer of all commotions- 
caused by the churning of the Mandara 
Mountain, and just now, I resort to 


this land of Bharata. 


4. Me, the world doth fancy, as the 
thirteenth? Aditya, the twelfth’ Rudra, 
and the ninth' Vasu. 


(Musing and laughing sardenically). 


Strange is this world’s folly ! Those, 
whom even to think as equals to my 
servants is ridiculous, fondly fancy them- 
selves to be my equals and betters ! 


5. In this world, men, whose rhinde ahi 
with Védie knowledge, the grammarians, 
those from all doubts in the Kalpa-sitras 
free, again those toiled hard in the. Vedan- 
gas, and others well-versed in astronomy, 
others again who have mastered the verdict 
of Nirukti,* and those strong in the three* 


a eee Se fe eee Se 


As a matter of fact there exist only 12 Adityas, 
11 Rudras and 8 Vasis. , 

Etymology. | 8. Karma, Devata and Brahma 
Kandas. 


259 


Mimamsas, and vet others who ever plod 
in the vast fields of Nyaya,—all have been 


routed by me. 
(Gazing at the sky). 


Ah, fool! askest thou whence and 
how [ got all this learning ? 


(Clapping the hands and laughing). 


6. Who but Providence endowed the swan 
with the power of distinguishing milk from 
water? Tell me how long it took Agastya 
to learn, to swallow the ocean deep. 


But mind not this superiority of know- 
ledge, known all over the universe. Even 
as regards good antecedents and conduct, 
[ am matchless. 


7. For, well known is my race in this 
world, 3 Se having given up the perfor- 
mance of even a single sacrifice, since the 
time of. its first progenitor, for want of 
a suitable sacrificial priest to preside 
at the ceremeny! Who knoweth my 
super-eminent, unrestrained penance, which 


260 


beggars all description and which is not 
understandable by  any,—penance, — the 
cardinal doctrine of which is that the senses 


should not be subjected to pain 4 


8. Many are my disciples in this world 
who are known as Atheists and Heretics, 
quite competent to hide even the great 
Méru',—under the very nose of the Devas, 
—through their artful arguments, striking 
and hypocritic ! Aye, they would make 
us believe that the whole world is mad, 
deaf, lame and blind ! 


9. If they do not doso, of what good 
are their arguments based on experience 
but which would not shut the mouths of the 
opponents ? The whole universe I shall 
bring under my sway, bymeans of diverse 
frauds,—Mani?, Mantra, Medicine ! 


(What sayeth another?) “Sayest 
thou that when arguments based on 
Pramanas are firmly established, why 


—— —$—$_—$ 


1. yqeTqertta:, Aeraraad: = 
2, aftrersir: 


261 
adopt the ways'of the villain?” 


(frowning and hissing). Thou mean- 
est of Brahmanas behold ! Do the believers 
in Pramdnas decline to believe in the black 
color of the sky which is borne out by 
Observation ? 


10. Enough of the Six’ schools of Philo- 
sophy, founded by the ancient Kanada 
and others,—schools which are authorities 
only to those who believe in them ! 
What fixity is there when these schools, 
conflicting with each other, deny the main 
doctrine that God is only one ? Let there- 
fore the followers of my creed, perpetuate 
my doctrines, ratiocinatively and_ easily 

: arrived at, and with but two or three 
determinate steps of reasoning, holding its 
own irrefutably. 


(Looking to the South). Are not yon 
kingdoms those of Magadha, _ Kalinga, 


1. Denying the reality of the World. 
2. Kanada, (2) Akshapada, (3) Vyasa, (4) Kapila, 
(5) Patanjali, (6) Jaimini. 


a 


OF a ee 


262 
Andhra, Dravida, Karnata, Chola, Konkana 
and others ? 


Alas ! 


ad 


iT. Sitting at ease at the foot of the 
Asvattha' tree, I have formulated two scores 
and eight kinds of Buddhism, in several 
coarse dialects,2 and I have overcome the 
pedantic pride of the followers of the Védas. 


Thenceforth our renowned disciples 
move (unshackled) all over the world, 
leaving their enemies with their bare 
names® and implanting their triumphant 


banners in all the Islands Seven. 


12. The monistic doctrine, I have given 
to some ;‘ to some others’ I have given the 
dualistic doctrine, and yet® to others I have 


Banyan (i.e., after becoming a Jina.) 
(1) Maharashtra, (2) Magadha, (3) Saurasenf. 
(4) Apabhramsa, (5) Paisacha, ete., 
Depriving them of everything else. 

The Illusionists. 

Tarkikas. ; 

Bhaskara, etc., 


263 


given the untenable mono-dualistic doctrine. 
Methinks that soon I shall taste the — 
pleasure of beholding the war (of words) 
as between two fighting goats,—war, caused 
by the vain zeal of the respective votaries 
for their chains of arguments. 


(Viewing round). 
These are regions, bordering on the 


seas, overrun by the Musalmans and the 
Greeks. 


15. A certain Brahmana,' laying wager 
in the gambling of the war of words, 
argued his theory but was soon defeated by 
his enemy and, thus deprived of his pride, 
he was made by me to abandon his adher- 
ence to Vedic ways. He readeth to- 


EERE EREEEREEE Se 


One named Mandanamisra was defeated in a 
disputation by Sankara, the disciple of Bhatta- 
charya, and true to his wager, the former embraced 
the faith of the latter and compiled a work named 
“ Surésvara Vartika ’—“ Message from the Lord 
of the Immortals’’. The cardinal points in his 
theory are that Vijiidna alone is real and every- 
thing else is unreal and that Charvaka faith alone 
is true and that the Vedas are false. 


i, 


264 


‘ 


gether the mutually conflicting doctrines: 
of Jina, Buddha, Brihaspati, etc, with 
deadly differences among themselves and 
tantaliseth credulous minds (not versed 
in Sastras). 

These countries, infested by — bar- 
barians, who are no better than goats, 
beasts and birds, deserve not even a look 
from me. In these countries those who do 
not know even the alphabet carry big books 
under their arm-pits, and with heavy eye- 
brows put on the airs of erudite persons. 
Ah! deceived I am by my sight, directed. 
to a distance ! 


14. Enough of beholding these who 
prattle all manner of nonsense, conceited 
with their little knowledge, disregarding 
their own hierarchy of preceptors, ignorant 
of either Svarga or Moksha, fancying them- 
selves as erudite, (their only virtue being 
the frequent dance’ of their fingers) and 


The implication is that the erudition of these men 
lies only in their frequevt movement of their 
fingers, thus posing as if they were learned men. 


265 
acting as ministers to foolish kings. 


(Looking to the North). Yonder some one 
cometh, facing the South, either from 
Kasmira, or Jalindhara. [ shall just ascer- 
tain from him how my wives fare? Ah! 
good Brihmana! “ Knowest thou the pre- 
sent plight of my wives Irshad, and Astiyé,. 
who have set out to go round the Méru 
mountain, under the leading of Durmati ? ”” 


(Then listening). 


“What! Sayest thou that they are 
imprisoned in the depths of  Mivritti 
Dharma, by Sumati’s deceitful companions 
Maitri', Karuna,’ Mudita,? and Upékshat” ? 
(With anger). Ah, this devil of a sinful 


~Brahmana speaketh untruth. Ah thou 


mischievous bastard Srédtriya ! Thou 
Brahma-Rakshasa ! 


How could this mishap befall my 
Friendship towards the virtuous. 

Pity towards the miserable. 

Joy towards the *happy. 

Indifference towards the sinners. 


266 


chaste wives, who, though enticing all the 
world, never for a moment lack in their 
sole devotion for me! (Musing). Already 
known to me is this wandering wayfarer, 
used as a messenger to different climes by 
the hunting chiefs of the mountainous tribes. 


(Mocking). . Alas! Several are the 
vices converging in one centre, through 
singularities of places and times ! 


15. For, his mother-in-law  followeth 
Digambara’s' doctrine; Saugatas’ gre his 
relatives ; his mother and father are the 
votaries of Pasupati;? Vibhashika* is his 
teacher ; his wife stands by Sankhya-ydga 35 
Charvaka’s disciple is his friend; himself, 
known as Mithyachéra,® fouleth the Védas. 

Therefore this hunter’s spy, Mithya- 
chara, ever habituated to utter lies, is unfit to 


_—— 


i; See nae. 141. 2. Buddhists, such as 
Sautrantika, Yogachira who hold that the whole 
external world is unreal, and asthe Mayavadins 
also believe similarly, the appropriateness of 
the relationship is evident. 3. See n. 2,p. 144. 

4. Seen. 1, p.137. 5. Follower of false practices. 


1. 


bo 


é 
267 


be conversed with by high souls like myself ; 
to wipe off the sin of having seen him, I 
shall just see the sun or myself.’ (Walking 
quickly). Alas! Are not yon countries 
in the midland regions between the great 
rivers the Ganga and the Yamuna ? Who 
is here, though gifted with boons by 
Brahma and Siva, that will understand my 
doctrine, full of diverse theories which 
would bafle even those who profess the 
knowledge of Brihaspati? Much less he who 
could controvert, criticise or support my 
doctrine! These great cities are topsy- 
turvied by the barbarian kings of the West, 
invited by our sovereign Mahimoha to 
shut off the doors to Méksha. Here moveth 
about some Dambhika-Chakravarti ! 


16. These, though they will never go 


abegging and will scorn even voluntary 


The idea is that the sanctity of his own self is 
no less efficacious to eradicate sin than the | 
ganetity of the sun. 3 
The first in rank &mongst the (Dambhikas) proud 


men. 


V/ 


1. 
2. 


268 
gifts, always regulate their amorous' gait 
to the dance of the Actress—Greed. They 
behave, as if, of their own accord, they 


uphold the Dharma called Nivritti, their 
eyes betokening all love for the emotion 


of Peace and they are saluted by virtuous. 


men, 


Alas! What shall [ say about this 


unrestricted sway of Kali, or of the ripe 


fruition of the penance of Mahamoha P 


17. This universe, drained of all its. 


wealth, is duped by audacious cheats, who 
revel at night-time secretly in- lecherous 
lust, which is augmented by the drink of 
wine at the special Sautrdmani’ sacrifice 
of amorous sexual enjovment with harlots, 


but who, at break of day, put on diverse 


deceptive appearances. 


Yonder loom rows of villages of 
conservative brahmanas, who have not 


fully severed their connection with the 


Walk of a lover under some pretext or other. 


° : : & . . 
A sacrifice in which wine is prescribed to be 


drunk. 


ey ee a a 


rm co 


a 


269 


country of the Mlechas (barbarians) and 
who, to all appearance, pose themselves 
as the defenders of the Varndsramas. 


In these villages :— 


18. The Samskaras' are. mere merry- 
making festivities? ; Sandhya is performed 
only for diversion’s sake ; Sdvitrit is ever 
interrupted by gossip; voiding of excre- 
ment is a mere show ; thus is this universe 
topsy-tarvied by the force of this Kali age, 
which acteth in harmony with king Méha 
and which setteth forth the doctrine of 


the Alepakas’. 


Oh, strange also is this course of 
Dharma practised here! 


19. Ever the young® couples of this 


Upanayana (=The ceremony of wearing the holy 


thread), Vivaha (marviage) etc. 


Consisé only in singing, dancing, and adorning 
houses, sans all Vedic rights. 

Religious ablutions performed thrice a day. 
Gayatri performed during Sandhya ceremony. 
aera, Agata TATA 
FAAAAH ITAA AT: 


270 


village, with hairs black', perform the 
Acnihotra? sacrifice of sexual intercourse 
that could be performed only by wedded 
couples,—sacrifice that is inaugurated by 
Cupid and’ in which the woman fancieth, 
the man and the man fancieth the woman 
as their mutual deity. 


Further :— 


20. All these wander from street to street 
and thrive by usury, full of deceitful words. 
They never examine the (capacity of their) 
students, but merely make them chant 
the Védas like parrots, themselves not 
knowing the meaning and thrive in mere 


appearances. 

(Leoking in another direction). 

These, looking like liberated men, 
painted in a picture, observe the vow of 
silence, sitting in the corner of a dilapidat- 
ed convent. (Discerning carefully). Ha, 


Ha! They feign the performance of 


1. ef. Sruti: AGA: PouaV SAAT NO 
2. Seen. 2. p. 249. é' 


271 


Prandydma', seeming, as if they have 
ceased living, holding their noses by 
their right hands, the fingers of which are. 
fully covered with long Kusa grass, 


(Clapping the hands). 


21.. 44 ‘great men follow the vow of 
silence ‘through | sheer want of ability to: 
talk ; ye esteem each other, as no body 
else care for ye ; ye resort to alms, having 
no other go go and ye follow the celibacy of 


a horse i in n_harness?, for a a long time. 


ee —e 


(Flinging the hands with contempt). 


22. IKnough of these wicked men, mad- 
dened with no small pride, unrestrained 
in (the matter of) the Demon of Conceit,— 


The act of restraining the breath with the utter- 
ance of Gayatri. 
A horse ever tied and used could not enjoy its 
mate and so becomes a perpetual celibate for 
all practical purposes, though not of its own 
accord, but out of necessity. The insinuation 
here is that the particular persons referred to 
are celibates {rom necessity and not of 
free will. 


272 


men, not proficient in the war of words, 
not conversant in the course of logic,— 
men prone to all manner of vows not 
authorised, —men not rid of the influence 
of vanity, and not known for high talents! 
Ge: asting the look § mn nother direction). 


tu 


These are men who cover their whole 
chest with the holy-thread, not containable 
in a fist-hold, who hold the — japa-¢ -garlands 
in their hands, and who frequently touch 
their hands, eyes, ‘lees, ete, chanting 
hymns as they do so. They stretch their 
clothes, antelope’s skin, Kusa grass, ete, 
as seats and sit on them near the high 
ways resorted to by caravans of way-farers, 
going on holy pilgrimages, Alas! Look 
at these great Ydégis’ strange aversion to— 
desire ; they cannot but laugh themselves 
in their own sleeves ! de 

f 
For :— 2 
23, Planting before them very long holy- 


staffs, which are decked with no small 
bundles of Kusa grass, and which remind 


}, 


273° 


_-one =r Damiilgs fag, yon hypocritical 
ascetics, preceptors but in name, con- 
descend not even to look at those folk who 
deposit money po at their feet, bent 


in al devotion. * * 


x s, 

Hatloo ! Pretending as if in incessant 
and intense devotion, these look not at 
even the deity installed before them ! 
Though | looking with half-ope eyes at the 
teacher, parents, ete, who approach them, 
they affect, as if they do not see them ; 
why speak then of their prostrating ete ? 


24. Phe Dambhikas', really proud by 
their mind- and sense-control, © of their 
conduct, meditation and absence of greed, 
atter all, fail to approach even by a 
millionth part the pride of those Dambhi- 
kas', who feign to pose as men, bereft 
of all pride. 


Here js another—the foremost amongst 
the pious, practising penances in the 
ps 


Vain men. 
3. sf 18 


274 / 
manner of the cat! and of the erane’, 


| 25. This vainest of the vain, with a body, 
| kept steady by long practice and with 
hands stretched aloft, as if proclaiming his 
own devotion to penance, standeth himself 
‘on his single foot on earth, spread over 
with Kusa-grass, like a live-figure painted 
in a picture. 

Here is a strange kind of Saerificer :— 
26. Performing frequent prostrations, with - 
holy fragrant-earth smeared all over the 
forehead, chin, nose, knees, arma, belly, 
ete, there is another, kindling his sacrificial 
fire, as if coveting the Golden Mountain 
(itself) and looketh with his half-closed& 
eves Dambba personified ° 

(Turning round and gazing). 


(Indeed Strange is the greedlessness 


~=—[—_— ——_$__—_—_— 


1. The Sait Slande in the A ature of attention in a 
corner and seizes allof a sudden an approach- 
ing prey. 

9 The erane frst creates confidence by show of 
indifference but seizes upon the prey approach- 


ing. 


of the Sanydsins of this Kali age whose only 

boast is their colored! robe and holy staff." 

27. For alms, for wherewithal to 
maintain disciples, 

For robes, for funds to convents 

permanent endow, 

For equipping library, saying thus, 

Do Sanyasins even, ever cherish 

lust of Iuere. 
(With delight) 

Surely as long as this mortal world is 
beset by men of this stamp, Maha- 
mOoha’s mission cannot but prove, a success. 
Still, von place between the confluence of 
the White* and the Black’ rivers seemeth 
somewhat to be the resort of wisdom’. 

For :— 
28. In one portion® (of this hermitage) 
there is a mound of mrittiza, resembling 
sand-heaps of the ocean of dchdra?; in 


Bras. 2, QWs. 
Ganga, 4, Yamuni, 5. Vivéka. 
Harth used for “washing. 

Cereinonia! practices. 


276 


another place there are blades of Kusa- 
vrass, as sharp as weapons collected to 
root away sins ;_ yet in another place 
appear gathered, flowers, tendrils and 
fruits, the relics of worship. Methinks, 
this is the holy hermitage of some true 
yogi! 

29. Having traversed beyond, the mire 
of knowledge opposed to (the teachings 
of the Védas), the wilderness of the 
Vindhya-like sense-dictates, the mirage 
of Trivarga’ and the net of 7riguna’ by 
various austerities, here is some one, 
shining almost like a J/ukta®. He is 
either the offspring or the elder brother, 
or may be the father, of the Sun.— 


1 shall just approach him, ' 
* 
(Thus saying enters the hermitage). 


. (Gesturing a good omen) (With joy). 
Surely this throbbing ‘of my right eye 


1. Seettvienp. 115. 
2. Prakriti. 
3. Absolved person. 


277 


indicateth that my meeting with my sweet- 
heart is close at hand. 
(Then enters Astyd, disguised as an ascetic). 


Asuya.—| am now commanded by Diurmati, 
the queen of Mahaméha, the foremost of 
Vivéka’s foes, to corrupt the minds of the 
wise, sO masquerading as would strike 
confidence into the minds of the whole 
universe. All the worlds ten and four I 
have wandered and after bathing in the holy 
waters of the Praydga, [ am just approaching 
the hermitage of this venerable ancestor 
named Dharmadhvaja. Clever espionage 
| should practise so as to make even good 
appear evil, 


(Praising her own skill). 


50. Vigilant that Tam, even Isvara, the 
extirpator of the sins of the universe, 
could not afford to remain exempt from 
blemish. 


Unrestrainedly, the persons obsessed by / 
,me ever impuée faults even in cases where 
they exist not in the least. What to say 


a 


278 


in eases where faults exist ? 


31. Of even the stainless Sri Rima—the 
paragon of all virtues, this world which 
by its sharp-edged sword-like tongue 
driveth discrimination away, speaketh ill 
in the presence of the virtuous, for his 
slaughter of Tataka’, for his unfairness 
towards Valin’ and for his slight step-back® 
in battle. Shall it then neglect ordinary 


The killing of a woman is not sanctioned by the 
Hindu S4stras. T&tak& being a giantess, her 
slaughter was instigated by Visv&amitra as she 
caused great havoc tio the sacrifices of great sages. 


Unfairness is attributed as Rama laid himself in 
ambush to kill V4lin instead of striking him 
direct face fo face. The controversy between 
Syi Rama and Valin hereon is dwelt at length 
in the Kishkindha K&nda of Sri Ramayana. 


Sri Rama bad to face the tremendous odds of 
Khara’s hosts of 14,000 men in Janasthana and 
in the heat ofthe raging battle, he, ever known 
not to flinch even a step in all his valiant 
fights, had to retrace by. a single step, over- 
whelmed by the might of the opposed forees— 
(vide Aranyakfnda of Sri Ramayana). 


279 


mortals of limited virtue and in whom 
fault is plain ? 


Who are yon sages who have spread 
their Ydga seats ander the AKadamba trees, 
on the regions close by the Ganga, whose 
bodies are erect and steady owing to the 
Paryanka'-posture ? Some of them are 
clean-shaven, others are full of matted hairs, 
and vet others have plaited tufts. 


(Hyeing attentively). 
Alas! Noted are these people ! 


: (Smiling). 


32, Communing with that Brehman 
(woman) and bowed down, with burdening 
bosoms, with frames held in thrilling 
sensations, these votaries of Kamasastra, 
under thorough control of their sense-group, 
are too well known, and having bid 
goodbye to all Dharmas, they pose them- 
selves as Muhtas. 


—_—--— - ——_--- --- -- 


1. A kind of asfumed posture when performing 
Yoga. 


ee a ne — 


Ae 


pai as ee 


280 
I shall just mention their names :— 


33, These are Sraddhiydji,’ Shadrasa- 
Brahmavadin, Kamaikanti? Kakani-nishke 


dasa.* Some are the disciples of Marjara,* 


others of Kukkuta® and still others of 


Baka.” Firm votaries these are of the 


Charvaka faith! 


May these self-servers prosper! For 


it is evident that :— 


» 


34, These beggars, to make their good 
with drinking vessel, wistfully eye 


every moment at the fresh and tender 


He who performs sacrifice to create love fr 


himself from others. 

He who construes the six beastly emotiona 
themselves to be the Brahman. 

He who js over head and ears in lust. 

He who takes a cowry for a Pagoda. 

He who seizes on an object like a cat. 2 
He who commits rape like a cock. 


He who robs others of «their belongings by 
make-beliefs like the crane. 


a a a 


bo 


— 281 


shoots of the Banyan tree that Lord Vishnu’ 


Himself desireth to repose under,—the tree - 


under which the Great Dancer? seeketh 
himself rest. 


.” the ear towards the air). 


‘What say ye, beggars 177? Say ye 


\ 


that for me, an ascetic, to scorn (others) » 


i$ inconsistent ? If so, ye yourselves stand 


self-condemned. For, ye are supposed to- 


be ascetics and yet scorn me ! 


(Turning in another direction). 


Yonder approacheth another, wearing © 


golden pendants and bearing staff and 
jar, thick girdle of Kusa-grass tied firmly 


round his waist and a belly puffed with. 
sumptuous Ashtaka®-sraddha dinners. He 


At the end of the great Deluge, after Annihilation | 


the great Kosmos, Vishnu is believed to float on 
a banyan leaf. 

Rudra is believed to take rest under the banyan 
tree after his dance. 


This ig an annual ceremony performed in tha: 


month of “March in which the Brahmanas are 


sumptuously fed®for the benefif of the departed. 


soul, 


282 


trieth to enter this hermitage, inaccessible 
aven to immortals, forcing people in front, 
muttering threats by shouts of frequent 
hums, casting his looks here and there and 
counting the triple worlds for naught but 
straw ! I shall just prevent his ingress 
by interposing at the gate of the hermitage 
and find ont who he really is. 


Darpa.— (Approaching and gesturing respect). 
Ah, divine lady! Thy greatness is well 
known in the story! of the' Mahabharata; thou 
seemest to be the presiding deity of the 
ascetic order. Thy success in Yoga 
unquestionable. Thou seemest to be quite 
affable. | therefore wish to know parti- 


cularly thine residence, hneage, race, etc. 


Asuya.—Charming man! Thou askest me some- 
thing unfit to be told by those belonging 
to the aseetic order, Without prostrating 
to me, how is it that thou standest hke a 


sacrificial post ? 


lef. Be antatstt diftatsia zara 
gras a sereqne faat Gea Sarq tt 


. 


Te a ee ee Se 


* 
Se 


283 


‘Darpa.—By age, act, erudition, etc, superior 
I am, but by thy holy order, superior thou 
art. SolIwas in a dilemma as to who 
should prostrate whom in such a ease. 


Asuya.—If so, in this hermitage, there is the all- 


Dharma-knowing sage. Through him, we 
shal] have our conflict of duties cleared. 


Darpa._-| shall try to accommodate thy wish in 
the matter, but jet that alone for a while. 
/ [ have something else in my mind. 


39. By thy conduct, look, thought and 
action, | fancy thee, as being acquainted 
with me before, but thou seemest strangely 
disguised ! 


Asuya.—| also fancy thee as having been seen 
by me before. But never mind this con- 
troversy now. I wish to prescribe some 
explatory rite for thee, who simply wearest 
white clothes and standest like a lamp- 
post, without prostrating to my noble 
self, whose feet is worshipped frequently 
at every ceremony, by even the foremost 
of ascetics, who take me for their superior 


284 
in achara. { will thus make thee holy. 


Darpa.—( Aside). This votary of the ascetic order 
prattleth some nonsense. 


(Aloud). (With hesitancy). Beit so. We 
shall then ask the master of this hermitage. 


(Thus saying, both advance). 


Dambha.—(On seeing both, feigns to be under a 
vow of silence, and orders his wife by 
gestures.) 


Kuhana.—( Advancing tn haste). 


Ah, divine Sanyasini !' Stand ye 
must, ata distance from the presence of. 
the master of my house. For, it is not 
proper for my master to remain near ye, 
who have not taken your bath and who are 
polluted by long travel. Let not your shadow 
which would vitiate the efficacy of Mantraa, 
defile the holy person of this great Yogi. 
Him, even the high-souled sages, prostrate 
at a distance. The water of the Bhagirathi, 

° 


een 


1. Ascetic woman. 


285 


- brought even by these (sages), my master 
deigneth not to touch by his hand. 


Darpa.—Great is this observance of ceremony by 
ye, a strange couple! At the confluence of 
the Ganga and the Yamuna, we have 
bathed and have sprinkled .on our heads, 
over and over again, water sanctified by 
the most virtuous Mantras. Could ye 
possibly be even the shadow of our 
likeness, having forms, self-luminious and 
splendrously bright as the Sun ? ** Drop 
into perdition” is all that you deserve. 
Alas! This, thy husband, a disgrace 
to his order, surely betrayeth his ignorance 
under the pretext of silence, »by disregarding 
me, the greatest of the great, and esteem- 
worthy for all the4 universe and this guest 
of an ascetic woman who have resorted to 
thee, to clear the doubt :—‘“who should 
prostrate whom ma 


Dambha, (Knitting his brows and 9 Hum- 
kdra’.) pit. : 


€ 1. A sound of Hum. 


286 


Kuhana.—( Approaching in haste and shutting 
his mouth with her hand). Highly 
illustrious Dharmadhvajat Breaking thy 
vow of silence, by at appropriate act’, 
thou shalt give a fit reply to these two 
worthy guests. 


Dambha.—(Gesturing Pranayama’ and uttering 
Pranava® aloud.) 


(Aside) Unexpected is this conver- 
sation with one unfit to be conversed with. 


(Aloud). Ah, thou vilest of Brab- 
manas and foremost of fools! Sayest thou 
that itis [ that exhibit ignorance ? Luckily 
thou wast not cursed by me so far, lest 
my penance would suffer. Many are the 
persons that [ have cursed and reduced 
to ashes! 


Al, miscreant, strange and unheard-of 
hitherto-fore! Get thee gone. Let not thee 
be burnt to ashes by the flame of my eyes. 


1. When the vow of silence is abandoned, the 
Pranava is recited. e 
2. Restraint of the breath. 3. See n. 6, p. 2 


+. pee 


yen nee a a 7 


287 


Darpa.—( With anger). Thou fool! Out of 
‘respect for caste that thon art also a 
Brabmana, thou wast not so fur besten on 
thy head. 


Further :-— 


86. My country is Tandira ; even kine 
Skanda’s esteem m Vy aneéestor did 

merit, 

Earth's ornament Satyavrata is my 
Kshetra’; little Kanchi is my 

| residence, 

Through disciples numberless, 

quarters ten well Tam known, 

Thoa old man ! Stolid ! Thou tortoise 

7 in the well ! heardest or Knowest, 


thou me as the greatest. of disputants ? 


a 


(Chuckling). Alas! Thou vainest of 
the vain! Thou stranger to my dehdra’! 
Tellest thou that [am a miscreant ? Per- 
haps who bat [ shall know my greatness ? 
Kventhe Youis great merit not a sixteenth 


ee 


1. Native village. 
2. Vide n. 7, p. 275. 


288 


part of my antecedents and  «dchara. 
Paltry men then deserve no special mention. 
Therefore it is that I prostrate not even 
to the Brabmanas, elder even by three, 
years. Knowest thou not my deep desire to 
advance righteousness ? 


37. Just because my mother exchanged 
a word with some one connected with an 
old hag—a mere suspect of a street scandal, 
T disowned her (mother), otherwise so 
chaste, so good! As for me, by virtue of 
jearning, high connection and character, 
| excel even the founder of my family. 
Who then is match to me, not to say 
superior ? 


Dambha.—-Ah, thou immodest and ambitions 
Brahmana! If thou art really one, strictly 
following good dchdra, how is it thou 
didst not prostrate to this She-ascetic? Why 
again thou didst not salute me,—revered as 
[am like a father by all the world, and 
possessing a fame, unknown even to omnis- 

cient and high-souled men,—ine, a Sroériya,' 


—————— es 


1. searsete ate nia: 


289 ‘ 


elder to thee by three! years, as also this lawful 
and all-chaste wife of mine, bowed? to, by 
even Prajapati and others,—who know the 
truth about God and Soul sat the crowning 
act of all ceremonies ? 


‘Darpa. —A}), Dharmadhvaja | Sinning — self- 


eee oe TENE 


} & 


Hatrerer! As thon transgressed the rules 
of veneration, thou shalt be born in 
« low womb, may be, a doz’s ‘womb or 
a Panchama’s womb. Never have I in 
all my vambles all over the world come 
across anywhere one, who esteemeth thee 


yet. 


(With a loud laugh). Thou foolish cheat ! 
38. Several are the Prajapatis®, Pasu- 
patis‘, and Brihaspatis®’ J have seen! In 
no Way thou art their superior. Being so, 
thou alone - me no oo, 


A Deshi should prostrate to another, elder bs 
3 years. 

The implieation is that even Brahma performs 
ceremonies with mingled feelings of fraud 
(Kuhané, wife of Dambha) and piety. 

Brahmas. 4. Rudras. o. Deva-Preceptors. 
6. Ss. 19 " 


290 


Surely, for scorning thy betcers, thow 
shalt anon fall into perdition. 


Kuhana.—Ah, thou she-ascetic! This vile 
Brahmana shall rue for his contempt of 


this great sage. 


Asuya.—Ah, thou dutiful housewife ! How is 
it that thou, like a wicked Brahman, 
reproachest a guest ? Tarry we must for 
a while, when these high-souls indulge in 
mutual scorn. 


Dambha._(With anger). Ab, thou crow of a 
chatter-box ! Like a dog, to vainly. wander 
is thy nature. 


¥ For :— 


39. Some there are addicted to all 
manner of vices, wandering like thee, 
vainly in this world and claiming shelter 
under the strength of. their mere racial 
superiority. They are avoided by the 
virtuous ; they get angry and they invoke 
without any sense of shame disgrace on. 
the onlooker. 


= 


291 


Darpa.— (Clapping his hands and mocking) 


Why so frownest thou on me, like 8 mon- 
key, when [ but speak facts as they are P 


Dambha.—-Ah, thou vain fellow, as massive 


~ 


asa pillar! Surely thon knowest not 
the episode known to all the universe. 


40. Once when on the confines of Sa tya- 
oka" Y loitered, the Lotus-born Brahma 
received me, all of a sudden, with the 
sages headed by Sanaka,? and- with his 


hands washed seven times over, ‘Aimeelf . 


gave me Arghya,* all humble and 
lowly ! 


tpi , 
41. How many = in rb world are the 
sages ancient, who, claiming their descent 


from the Lotus-born Brahma himeelf, 


win across the darkest of sins, purified, i 


indeed by the water, washed of my feet ? 


Kuhana.—So it is | An eye-witness [| was 


as well, Ia dutiful wife 


— ne 


World of the eels 4. A divine sage. 


Water offered to wash the hands to » gueskh — 


during reception | j 


% 


es 


292 


Darpa.—(Aside). Surely this is my esteemed 
elder Dambha, and that, Kuhana, 


For, others are not forsooth capable 
of either conduct or loquacity of this 
description, I shall therefore treat them 
as my relatives. 


(Aloud). Ab, all-knowing divine lady ! 
Imagination léadeth me to conjecture some- 
thing and [ shall presently acquaint thee 
of this. © 


42. This venerable lady is no other than 
the pervert Kuhand, ever skilled in depriv- 
ing’ others of their riches and this is 

no other than  Dambha himself who 
hath the whole universe under his control 
and whose sacrifices consist in nothing. 
better than the slaughter of goats. 


How then shall we have our conkeg 
of duties solved by him ? 


Asuya. That) is exactly the thomsie: in my mind. 


Dambha. —(Smiling). » Your indentity also | 
‘can determine by reasoning out. 


293 
43. Surely thou art none other than 
Darpa, ever casting slander on good 
men and strong only in garrulity;_ and 
this, in ascetic guise, is no other than thy 
wife Ashya,- 


(Behind the curtain), 


Thou, master of the house, — the most. 
virtuous of the Ganda country and thou 
guest, the most virtuous of the. Lata 
country, surely but spake truth ! 


(All gaze at each other, ls their 
mutual identity and express delight). 


Dambha.—(With joy). Friend Darpia 2 itt 
identity is now disclosed through ‘this 
heavenly voice. 


Darpa.--Never did a heavenly voice prove 
untrue. [ owe many apologies to thee, 


my elder. 
: é 


Pambha.—Indeed | too have offended thee. 


(Dambhaand Darpa lift their hands 
in salutation and speak affectionate words) 


* 


294 


(Astya and Kuhana embrace each 
other tightly). 


Dembha & Darpa.—As we wished, 30 have we 


met here, by chance. Now we should be 
with our king in time. 


(Then enter Mahamoha and Durmati). 


_ Mabamoha.—(Musing). My love ! 


We, having taken the vow to exter- : 
minate the most reckless ruiner of our 
elan, Vivéka, have just heard that Kama 
Krédha and others, sent by us to spoil 
Jiva’s Yéga, have retreated,- with 


their squadron, all broken up like a dam 


made of sand, seized with an unexpected 
panic, protecting each other, on the analogy 
of the maxim of the Lion and the Forest,’ 
and that they, ashamed to behold our face, 


1 


fazqaaieeary:—The lion cannot exist without 
the forest, for hunters will bave easy access and 
will make short work of the lion; similarly the 
forest cannot exist without the lion, for, then, the 
forest in the absence o: the lion will be 
transformed into cultivable land. 


298 


have fled in different directions, with 
intent to commit suicide. Therefore thou 
shalt hasten their  sweathearts, Rati,' 
Jighamsd and Trishnd® to their presence to 
console them, our ministers. 


Durmati.—Aryaputra ! Already on that errand 
have they been despatched to their presence. 


Mahamoha.—Well, my love! Thou hast 
rightly divined thy lerd’s wishes. We 
shall recall them to service at the outbreak 
of hostilities, after they recover heart for a . 


while. 
‘Durmati._-\V erily so! 
Mahamoha.—(With deep grief). 


My love! With my glory everywhere 
undiminished, T blush (at the thought) that 
this quarrel should have arisen in respect of 
this vile Vivéka, my unequal in every respect. 
As peerless as thou art amongst the weaker) 
sex, Lam so amongst the stronger sex, 


intend ep me erent 


1. Goddoss of Love. 
2. Desire to kill, 8. Thirst for wealth. 


296 
For :— 


"s 44. Ever on their heads the Deva and 
| the Asura hosts wear’; 
The parchment of my order, whose 
text Is engraven, 
With ink made of their coronets’ 
*. lustre, 
Their diadems reflecting the 
. alphabets? across their heads. 


; Further -— 


45. Deva-hosts control ; more so 
: 3 mortal kings, 
Trimirtis—Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, 
confined Lin Lotus, Sea and Mountain, 
Unfailing my brow-foree in the 
universe—making, unmaking and 


transforming— 


1. The implication is that the Devas and the Asuras 
are the servants at the beck and eal! of 
Mabamoha. 

2. A popular belief is that imperceptible iphwei 
are written on the head of every: person whick 
indicate the longevity of a‘person’s life, fortune,. 
position, rank, ate. 


1. Seen. 2, p. 61. 


297 


Whose grip then am [ in, and who 
my grasp could escape? this is an 
open truth ! 


{Asrde). How then to revenge myself 
on Vivéka.on whom. fortune now smileth 
for some reason unknown? Never mind. 
Am [ot the Great Méha ? 


(Aloud). Love mine! In any case, like 
the sun screened by ‘the clouds, diverse 
religions, sown broadeast by me in all 
quarters are somewhat mystified by a few 


fools, the Upanishad-followers. Kama and- 


others, ashamed at the failure of their plot, 
prefer incognito now. | can yet topsy- 
turvy the prima facie argument as the 
conclusion and vice versa, creating differ- 
ence in objects where it éxisteth not and 
sameness where if also existeth not and 
thus confuse this world: or, I. shall 
strengthen the credible doctrine, so much 
in harmony with Ahamkéra' ete, and 


a ei al tt tl a te a pecdetilegnenl a ee 


pivoting round the cardinal doctrine of 


% 


298 


Experience, the doctrine, where the vain 


endeavour to establish an invisible Entity, 
is fully saved and where the end and’ aim 
of life are Artha and Kama,—all by the sub- 
limity of my arguments—and thus damp 
the vain enthusiasm of stupid Viveka. 


Hah! Hah!! 5 
46. Earth, Water, Fire and Air, are the 
elements ; the admixture of these bringeth 
about knowledge on the analogy’ of 
~ Intoxication. Who is at that hath seen 
a son! over and above. this, and what 
happiness can there remain, the moment the 


body becometh extinct? This is the 
Charvaka doctrine, founded by Brihaspati! 


The Upanishads quoth that the faith 
acceptable to the largest number is the 
stronger faith. It is said that this is 


the Asura’s Upanishat. Therefore the 


Oe 


Intoxicatian is brought about by taking in an 
admixture of fety (A drug or seed used io 
cause farmentation in “the manufacture of 
spirits). 


a 


—— oe 


299 


conclusion of the followers of Vedénta 
Siddhdnta, that the Upanishads are the 
only real authorities, indirectly acteth as _ 
the document admitting our victory, 
written by our enemy in his own hand- 
writing. 

47. The heretics of our creed’, with an 
aching heart, reconcile their theory, through 
Experience, which is contrary to their 
accredited faith; but the followers of our 
creed, taught in the school of Brihaspati, 
can act up to the dictates of their mind. 


Dormati.— Aryaputra! How shall the creed of 
Brihaspati, based only on Experience, 
stand before the diverse other creeds, based 
on several Authorities, which establish the 
existence of several inferential entities? 2 


Mahamoha.—My love! Surely thou seemest 
to put this question, just to strengthen the 
soundness of our faith! 


48. These Védas, simply believed in by 


i as Twit sisines ieniseunanisintenseeeeee, ——._— 


‘1. Followers of the Upanishads, 
2. God and soul. 


300 


some self-styled Pandits, seem to preach 4 
something unreal, but this creed of Brihas- 
pati is no sooner advocated, than they (the 
Vedas) lose all their force and stand stupi-— 
fied in silence. Qe 


nat 
Could even myriad reflected images 


of the Sun form themselves into a real Sun ? 
£ 
Durmati.—Aryapuira! Before this paramount 


faith propounded by Brihaspati, what is 
Mukti, what is enjoyment and what is God? 
: : 
Mahamoha.— Just hearken. 
49. The dissolution of body is Mukts ; 
| superb sexual pleasure is enjoyment ; ; and. 
“| damsels giving this pleasure,and adorned 
| with youth are the gods. 


And so it is, my queen, who knoweth 
the truth of truths! These, thy questions, 


have been replied to in consonance with — 


E 
»xperience, 


The grace of these visible gods is the : 
' one thing to be sought after, for conquering — 


our foe in the person of Viveka. 


AONE ete aS APN Guage me ee 


ei, Se eee a 


ce sv 4) 


ay oe 


ee 


301 


Durmeti.—May thou receive the crace of these 
damsels—living gods, and fit to be convers- 
ed with. But how is it possible to 
conquer Vivéka, through their grace ? 


we 


Mahamoha. — Thus surely — j | ‘s 


_ 50. The Yéga of even the men, intent 
~ on deep penance,—men who have mastered 
all the Vedas and who have restrained 
the senses outer and inner, the picture in 
the shape of slender-waisted damsels, paint- 
ed on the wadls—Imagination, even without 
the aid of the artist’s brash, shall undo. 


The Vedantins state that even those 
dearto the Supreme Lord on account of 
their aversion to sense-enjoyments refrain 
not from pleasures but indulge in diverse 
pleasures, eating, drinking, sporting with 
women, riding on carriages, etc, and this 
is the great virtue (of our faith). Indeed 
none would fly from the fear of the 
scorpion to the mouth of the dragon. 


} 


Further — 


51. Breatheth there the man who faileth 


< 


_ 


wo to 


302 


not in courage, even at the sight of dam~ — 
sels, who are shaped together with the — 
collected materials of darkpess,’ the moon," 
flower-bunch,® the sky’, the eddy,’ the 
plantain-tree,” the mirror,’ the quiver, 
and the lotus? ,—damsels who resemble the 
waving pennons, implanted in the front of 


*: >, - oe ‘ 


Cupid’s hosts ? os , oy 


Ha! Hal! Quoth not the V redagi 
that many are the wives of Garuda, brook+ — 
ing not a moment's separation from him, as 
also of the other eternal lov ers of Vaikuntha: 


who are ever free from family-ties ? Quoth ; 
not again the Srutis that the Supreme Lord 7 


“who liberateth men from all samsara is the 


spouse of no less than three wives, Sri, 
Bhi and Nila? Therefore the monkey 
like revilers of Kama—the true aim of life, — 


Bair. 6. Thighs. . 
Face. 7. Knee. i . 
Breasts 5. Shank. 

Waist. 9. Foot. 3 
Navel. " ' 


The hoad-to- foot description of a damee! iss 
meant here. 


.* 


* 


Pos 
ig # 


wm 6 bo ee | 


308 


burn their own fingers, like one setting ones __ 
own city in flames when trying to burn & 
the city of ones foe. 
Behold Him whom the Mumukshust 
% : or ee 
proclaim as the Donor of Eternal Bljsa 'e 


52. . Even the Ancient? Lord, though pro- 


_taulgating Satva-guna, diverteth Himself in 


several chief* cities with several wives, 
reposingt Himself on His thousand -hooded 
Sesha-couch, 


Therefore refuting the Charvaka’s 
faith and premising the existence. of the 
Divine Couple isas Wdierous as the wit 
of a simpleton who would refuse to Bivey, 
a hundred but would offer only a five-score !! 


Farther :— | 


- 6) 


33.’ The vow of celibacy suffered by 
Brahma and others who have compiled 


_ works relating to the attainment of salva- 


ee ee ae - - Steering i a 


Seen. 5, p. 29. 

The Lord without an Origin 7. ¢. Srt-Narayana. 
Such as Srirangam, ate. 

Also means :—In the company of gallants. 


304 


tion, but whieh are fit to be believed only by 
fools, maketh after all for greater enjoyment. 


(Listening) :— 

: . 
— , 
What sayeth some one : 


54. “The wedded life of the Parents’ of 
the Universe is natural? and is the out. 
come of. their free volition. Even the 
division of human beings into men and 
women is only designed for the service of 
the First Couple!. Every other design is also 
to be similarly interpreted. Brihaspati’s 
faith merely enbanceth the pleasures of 
temporal men but it hath no relish to the 


really learned men, alas ag 


(Frowning). Who is there ? Let this 
owl of a Believer be thrust away from my 


ken. 
+ 
Dormati.—Aryaputra! Surely my votaries are 
all women.. I am really proud that, 


Viveka is to be conquered through them. 


1. Sri and the Lord of Sri. 
2. Not due to the force of Karma. 


Fc nett 


305 


(Musing). How is it that the world, 
neglecting thy creed, the main theory of 


which is flirting with young damsels, - 


bankereth after diverse different creeds P _ 


Mahamoha.— My dear! Wan 
gation is the cause of t} 


t of proper investi- 
18 blind obstinacy 


of the fiendish Believers. 


99. People, eager to indulge in vain 
quibbling arguments, thus abandoning the 
faultless faith propounded by Brihaspati, 
set their hearts on diverse other creedy 
established by ‘Kapila, Hiranyagarbha, 


Kanada, Buddha, Jina a 


56. Both movable and 
are wondrous by nature, 
hues of the peacock’s ph 
assign any reason for 


sharp ? 


nd others. 


immovable objects 
like the variegated 
image. Need poets 
the thorn being 


; ‘ 
i , 


Such is the Indomitable force of the 


theory of nature, The 


law of cause and 


effect also followeth the Kika-téliva-n vaya.! 
: 7 CA ae Ai caida 


arn 
—— 


1. The maxim of the erow and the palm fruit. Ig 


takes its origin fram the un 
s. §, 20 


6xpected and « der 


Ss 


nn 


i 


2. 


306 
Even thus :— 


57 Ab! How. loud in the world,. 
fourish systems of sophistry, by the 
hundred, sharp as shingle, agitating the 
world by the legerdemain of befangled 
controversies, raging by “No”s pitted 
avainst “ Yes”’s, and “Yes’’s against 
“No’’s ! 


58. Virdchana’, taught by the all-know- 
ing Prajapati who was pleased with his long: 
service to him, promulgated for mankind 
the quintessence of the Asurépanishat?®. 
Even in this matter— 


59. Mukti, it was said, by the elders to be 
the annihilation of the body and the senses. 
But considering this as absurd, I composed 


— Neen ae cate ea a IETS 


fall of a palm-fruit upon the head of a crow 
(so as to kill it) at the very moment of its sitting: 
on a branch of that tree and is used to denote 
a very unexpected and accidental occurrence, 
but not a linked cause and effect. 

The progenitor of the Asuras, father of Bali. 

of ah a & Qararagaaart facraatsay It 


(Chandogya U panishad.} 


307 


‘ 


a treatise, therein Stating that both by 
largeness' (Brahman), and glory? (Brabman) 
the bulging bosoms of damsels maatched 
Brahma-bliss. 


Darmati.- Aryaputra! This mortal world belts’ 


so well protected by thee, how is it that our 
unreasonable foes, with their partiality to 
other faiths, torment it ? 


Mahamoha._.Be they what they would! I¢ 


1. The necessary atiribute of Brahman, Zit: Large- 


harmeth us not. Thieves abandon not their 


mature, but the wary-minded are in no 
wrk 
way affected by these. 


69. Let the Véddntins induige in mockery 
against us as they please. Let others, in- 
different, desire to despise us-——great in 
every way; let yet others prattle their 
own wits by saying that this is the 
attitude of the virtuous. Of what avaid to 
us are all these ways of self-conceited 
perverts @ 


Settee - et seater ee 


ness, 


9. eet (superh beauty), aya (supremacy) ete. 


308 


”, 


~ 
- 


(Musing). Love mine! Now we must 
' tnd out the men who are capable’ -of esta- 


blishing our theory. 


Who there ¢ 


7 e Reig - 
ss . 


( S enbha and others duane auic kly) 
Here we are. (Thus saying, approach. ) 


s 


_— to you—the well-wishers 
3: of our race. 
ee sia ene aria: —{ With humilrty a 
ott & 
Great king! We are here, our movement 
always everywhere and unrestrained, by 
thy grace. What may by these servants 
of thine be done.? 
Mahamoha. —W hat news then about Kama and 
; . others ? : 
Dambha.—( Aside). What shall Isay to the 
ho king? 


” A 


(Aloud.) My lord ! Durmati’s Lous ! 
{Uta ——" Truth shineth in kings.” 
] shall therefore inform thy Majesty, what 


T saw, though it may be disliking to me. 


509 


* 
For, I know too well the. present 
condition of Kama and Lébha. 


61. Immersed though men are in the 
Ocean of?myriad lusts, though the season of 
Spring reigneth, though the Malaya breezes 
blow, Kama, abashed,fas it were, at reverses’, 
due to his slight remissness (in attacking 
the Jiva), it seems, hath fallen into slumber, 
and never toucheth his shafts ! 


What need then to speak-of the other 
( Lobha) e y sat 


‘Listen :— 


62. What hold can Lébha, an object of 
praise by misers, obtain in a diva, 
beguiled as he is by Viveka, and who neglects 
his very body}? 


Darpa.—My Lord, Wise in” the company of 
Durmati*#! [ have seen Krédha in his 
present plight ; I shall acquaint thee with 


a cae 


i. Failure of the Pian to captivate Jiva and make 
him enjoy the dictates of senses when bis mind 
is distracted from Yoga. 

2. Also means, expert in base wit. 


J3LO 


what I saw, in deference to the preceaies 


as By 1 Trath. shall the Wise be followed. ’ 


63. Even Krédha—the enhancer of the 
,  bappmess of veteran warriors, whose 
prowess 1s manifest in the knitting of his 
eyebrow —premonitory of the coming cata- 
clysm, destroying the cosmos of the twice- 
seven worlds, remaineth all stupified by 
the influence of the poisonous drug, Virakti. 


Mabamoha. 


(With a Sardonic laugh.) Ah! 
These are the evil counsels of the ruiner of 
our race, Vivéka. All wary then, we must 
eover the whole universe with vice, in such 
a way that there could be no opportunity for 

Vivéka. Vice alone is virtue for us,who 

| are mntent on preserving ‘our race. The 
[phasins’ aver :——‘t Virtue and Vice alter- 
nate according to individual situations.” 
Vivéka, by himself not very strong, thus 
reduced to straits, shall easily surrender. 
After all, what is this Vivéka? It is certainly 
no hard task for the sickle to cut the herb’, 


—_———— - —— ns 


1. Bpic-writers. F 


A. Ophiorrhira mungo. 


31] 


nor doth the fire need help to burn the 


thorn! | 
eres 


(Musing) Love mine! My  race’s- 
guardian angel! Mark the studied persever- 
ance (in me, not leaving a thing begun, 
unto the limit of life) and ever true to thy 
wishes ! 


64, Hither let Kama pine with Krédha 
and Ldbha, or join me in time. Sri Rama’s 
irresistable stand in his fight with the 
Rékshasas, I shall re-enact jn my fight 
with Vivéka, This Kali-age shall be my 
chariot, thou Durmati my charioteer, Dam- 
dha be my triumphal trumpet and Darpa 
my armour ! 


Dambha.—Great king! When thy success depen- 
deth entirely upon thyself, what availeth 
our effort ? 


65. Who dare stand before thee, when 
thou takest it into thy head to romp 
on the stage of war, and who as thy foe dare 
challenge thee when thou amusest thyself in 
Kama-sastra? A person but once earnestly 


cotton ee 


312 


espied by thee hecometh capable of 
pulverising the earth', uplifting the 
Mountain Kailasa2 and exsiccating® the 
Oceans Seven. 


Still, we, acting under thy commands, 
shall put ourselves unreservedly at thy 
disposal and exert our very best. Even 
monkeys did assist Sri Rama and so did: 
the shepherd women, Sri Krishna. 


Mahamoha. 


I shall allot ve duties exactly as- 
your hearts may desire. 


66. Now Dambha! Thou shalt in all 
' vigilance again resort’ to regions border- 
ing on holy rivers to continue thy duties, 
and Darpa shall take his residence in 


1. The reference is to Parasurama who in anger 
powdered the Farth. 


Sf * " . to Ravana who uplifted Kailasa- 
when he went.to fight with 
Siva. — 

3. v 4 , to Agastya who drank the 


oceans in anger. 
4. Where sacrifices are perfermed, there vanity 
(Dambha) is manifest. 


313 


the holy hermitages, where the conceit 
of Vairdgya is in full evidence. 


Dambha and Darpa,_T hy Majesty’s command 


Gb ee 


on 


shall be obeyed, (Exeunt.)- 


(Aside.) What shall be done first 
to baffle the enemy? Ah, now [ recollect, 


67. Helped by Durmati, I shall fling 
into the burning belly-fire, the four! 
kinds of oblations and shall solely maintain 
Pranagnihotra?. 


Then, when the Jiya revelleth himself 
in feasting on dainty dishes, made of stuffs, 
wholesome and at the same time forbidden 
by canons related to caste’, person* and 
place’, where is the least chance to Vivéka’s 
victory ? 


65. (Aloud.)—If I defeat not Vivéka, of 
what use are they to me,—clusters of Méru 
mountains, ranges of Kaildsa mountains, 


aa, 7, 71, aa. 

The only fire sacrifice of Keeping up life 
Onions, atc. 4. Stuff belonging to out-castes.. 
Stuff grown in filthy places ete. 


314 


the thrice-six islands, or all the worlds ? 
Contented I shall never be, even with all the 
Cosmos entire. Now therefore my mind 


yearneth to kill the enemy. 


Durmati.— Thy ministers alone shall be favored 
by entrusting them with the errand to 
slaughter the foe. 


Mahamoha.— Love mine! Rightly thou dost 
discriminate. In similar strain was the 
thought in my mind. Therefore let some 
confidant of ours be summoned from 


the harem. 
Burmati. — Friend Durvasana! Come here. 
(Then enter Durvdsana.) 


Durvasana.—Here | am, awaiting the king’s and 


the queen’s mandates, 


Mahamoha.—My = good Durvasana! Proelaim 
under my command to my different  Secre- 
taries, expert in all learning and writmg:— 


Be it known to all that the King of 
Kings and Suzerain Lord, the great Mah3- 
moha with Queen Durmati commandeth :— 


315 


“Let it be written that Mahiméha hath 
made a free grant of the famous metro- 
polises seven, known all the worlds 
over, as the seven Mukti-kshetras? 
the great islands seven, the oceans 
seven, to his ministers seven, Kama, 
Krédha, Lébha, Mada’, Dambha, 
Matsarya® and Stambha*” _ 


And :— 


69. “Leaving now Indra and the other 
Devas, who retire from their high 
estates at each suecessive Manvantara’, 
and who tremble with fear at the very 
mention of my name, all this universe 
shall interpret the use of the words 
—Nama’, Svast®, Svaha’, Svadhé*, 
uttered even casually, as appertaining 
to myself—Mahamdha.”’ 


Shrines of Salvation. 2. Pride. 
Jealousy. 4. Confusion. 
The period or age of » Mani. 


These are the*® words with which Vedie hymns 
end. 


316 


Durvasana.—Duly shall the King’s and the 


Queens’ commands be obeyed. 
(Exit.) 
(A ery behind the curtatn.) 


,”? 


“ Victory to the Lord ! 


70. “Oh, Moha great! Like unto thee is the 
fierce-rayed Sun, unfavorable owing to its 
heat! to men’s movements”, causing a time* 
suitable for eating, and desiring to get 
into the opposite direction‘ — West. 

71. Now—a cook, the servant of Durmat, 
both from the home of Indra’, and the 
home® of Varuna, bringeth a fit meal? made 
of the ingredients of sweet nectar, and 
wine flowing incessantly, for Mahamoha. 


Mahamoha.—(Listening.) We shall now retire 


into. our imner rooms, as the herald 


70. The epithets when deplied 4 to Mahaméha mean 


re 


cn 


Prowess 2. Torments of Samsara, unfavor- 
able to the attainment of Méksha. 


Midday-also means founding the Charvaka faith, 
liked by all. 4. Longing to conquer Viveks 
Svarga. 6. Westarn Ocean. 

eral TNT = SUT 


\ 


317 


declareth that it is time to adore the deities, 
who pervade all bodies and who are accepted 
by all religionists viz. our very lives 


( Pré naAS. ) 


(Thus exeunt.) 


> > r ¥ b-¥. 23 ? 
Minis Act V termed Dam bhadyupdlambhana 


(Taunt of Dambha and others.) 


AUM. 


«MMMM DORR 4. 
eC GE UC UE UE VE edt 1,” 


4 
‘on 
Ry 


YM. 
ae 


a*t 
yw? 


2 
S 
> 
4 


cae wae 
FES 


Pee AN 
| 3 ar Xt 
WS apa 


¢ 


> 


~f 


vi 
& 


we R 
aR 
yi 
Je, 
gas 
t 


a 


fk 


* 
aM 
“A 


3 


» 
o 


: «i 2 [eae a . a te 
- s® 2 ge “Si Ee ae F yee S Bg, eS = of an ©. DS cs 

rl Se EF: ae Se “iM ; nition ee = 
> Sg SP eo SS ee Se ee 
wa. a agi aan &> A 262 ” aes * 5 

> ww cine” nie ae 5s Se a Ree gh = : ihe 

- ep ee Fo x I 

sate Ts “se S Pes Fg 

ie - 
ee => 


. 5 ial ~ 
> Pd & 
- ; aoe : f 
Y nA , Ry « Fae . & 
P = Pest y . 
; . eae P . ry ,~ 
oy ‘= f ~ - 
; 3 : diy . pr. . ie > 
. SS gf). ws: We PR Lek 
S ay Sede x c & day ® wy} 


