===== Internet Archive OCR: vedantasara00sadauoft_djvu.txt =====

THE 


=5  VEDANTA-SARA: 


<     1 

H 
H 

H 


TRANSLATED 


PR.  3.  11.  BALLANTYNE, 

t 

Prii.  eipal, 
SANSKRIT     COLLEGE,     BENARES, 


WITH 

AN     INTRODUCTION, 
NOTES, 

AND 

,X  EXAMINATION  OF  ITS  CONTEXTS, 


f^ 

(¥ 


PK 
K3861 

IS314 
1898 

Ic.l 

'ROBARTS 


^    LITERATURE    SOCIETY    FOR    INDIA: 
LONDON    AND    MADRAS. 

1898. 
ce  4    A* ;  Poft-free,  5  As. 


*!>> 


rmTfjiTfr  rrn 


( 


Presented  to  the 

LIBRARY  of  the 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 

by 


KNOX  COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


THE 

VEDANTA-SARA 


BY 

DE.  J.  E.  BALLANTYNE, 

Principal, 
SANSKRIT    COLLEGE,     BENARES, 


AN  INTRODUCTION, 


AND 

AN  EXAMINATION  OF  ITS  CONTENTS. 


"  The  Vedanta,  the  highest  conclusion  of  Indian  thought,  is  based  on  a 
mistaken  and  pessimistic  view  of  life  ;  on  a  formulated  dogma  unsupported 
by  any  evidence  and  untaught  in  the  hymns  of  the  Big- Veda :  the  whole  an 
elaborate  and  subtle  process  of  false  reasoning."— Rev.  T.  E.  Slater,  SMiet  i»the 
Upauithads,  p.  47. 

• 

^^ 

FIRST   EDITION,   3,000   COPIES. 


THE    CHRISTIAN    LITEEATUEE    SOCIETY    TOE   INDIA: 
LONDON    AND    MADRAS. 

1898. 


NOTE. 

The  References  to  the  Upanishads  are  taken  from  Hindu 
Pantheism,  by  Colonel  Gr.  A.  Jacob,  who  has  als«  kindly  read 
the  proofs  of  the  following  pages.  In  addition  to  the  Concord- 
ance to  the  Upanishads,  the  following  works  have  been  prepared 
by  Colonel  Jacob  : 

a.    Hindu  Pantheism  (Triibner's  Oriental  Series.) 

&.    Mahanarayana-Upanishad,   with    Commentary    (Bombay    Sanskrit 
Series.) 

c.  Suresvara's  Naishkarmyasiddhi,  with  Commentary  (Bombay  Sanskrit 

Series.) 

d.  Eleven  Atharvana-Upanishads,  with  Commentaries   ( Bombay  Sans- 

krit Series.) 

e.  Vedantasara,  with  2  Commentaries.     (Nirnayasagar  Press.) 


•  CONTENTS. 


Page 

INTRODUCTION              ...            ...             ...             ...             ...  1 

ORIGIN  OP  HINDU  PHILOSOPHY           ...             ...             2 

THE  Six  SCHOOLS  OF  HINDU  PHILOSOPHY  ...             ...             ...  7 

The  Nyaya,  8;  The  Vaiseshika,  9;  The  Sankhya,  10; 
The  Yoga,  12;  Mimansa,  13;  The  Vedanta,  14;  The 
Eclectic  School,  14. 

THE  VEDANTA-SUTRAS...             ...             ...             ...             ...  15 

VEDANTA-SARA           ...             22 

INTRODUCTION              ...             ...             ...             ...             ...  22 

TRANSLATION        ...             ...             ...             ...             25 

I.    INTRODUCTION              ...             ...            ...             ...  25 

II.     QUALIFICATIONS  NECESSARY  IN  A  STUDENT,  ETC.          ...  25 

III.  ERRONEOUS  IMPUTATION  ;  THE  '  REAL*  AND  THE  '  UN- 

REAL'      ...             ...             ...             ...             ...  28 

IV.  COLLECTIVE  AND   DISTRIBUTIVE  IGNORANCE  ;  I'SVARA 

AND  PRAJNA     ...             ...             ...             29 

V.     THE  CAUSAL,  SUBTILE  AND  GROSS  BODIES,  &c.           ...  32 
VI.     REFUTATION  OF  CHARVAKA,  BUDDHA,  AND  OTHER  FALLA- 
CIES, &c.          ...            ...             ...             37 

VII.     MEANING  OF  "  REFUTATION  "  &c.                ...             ...  39 

VIII.    MEANING  OF  "  THAT  "  AND  "  THOU  "  IN  THE  GREAT 

SENTENCE                ...             ...             ...             ...  40 

IX.  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  GREAT  SENTENCE,  "  THAT  ART 

THOU"&C.   ...     ...     ...      40 

X.     ERRONEOUS  EXPLANATIONS  OF  THE  GREAT  SENTENCE  AND 

THE  TRUE  MEANING...             ...             ...             ...  42 

XI.    MEANING  OF  THE  SENTENCE,  '  I  AM  BRAHMA,  '  &c.     ...  44 

XII.    MEANS    TO    BE    EMPLOYED    TO    REALIZE    THE   GREAT 

SENTENCE                ...             ...             ...             ...  46 

XIII.  MEDITATION  WITHOUT   DISTINCTION  OP  SUBJECT   AND 

OBJECT     ...             ...             ...             ...             ...  48 

XIV.  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  JIVANMUKTA  ...             50 

EXAMINATION  OF  VEDANTISM    ...             ...            ...  52 

INTRODUCTION      ...             ...             ...             ...             52 

CHIEF  DOCTRINE  OF  AD VAITISM  ...             ...             ...  54 

AVIDYA  AND  MAYA             ...             55 

Three  Modes  of  Existence  57. 


IV  CONTENTS. 

Page 

"ONE  WITHOUT  A  SECOND"  ...  ...  fie 

BKAHMA  OR  BRAHM...  ...  ...  ...  ...  G^ 

Attributes  of  Brahma  65. 
I'SWAKA 

CREATION  ...  ...  ...  ...  

MAN:  BODY  AND  SOUL 

TRANSMIGRATION...  ...  ...  ...  

THE  GREAT  SENTENCES,  TAT  TWAM  Asi,  BRAHMASMI... 

MUKTI  OR  LIBERATION         ...  ...  . .  

EUROPEAN  ESTIMATES  OF  VEDANTISM  ...  ...  ...       112 

CONCLUDING  REVIEW  ...  ...  ...  116 

CAUSES  OF  THE  FAILURE  OF  HINDU  PHILOSOPHY 

THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  BELT QION  ...  ...  118 

Two  GREAT  DOCTRINES,  THE  FATHERHOOD  OF  GOD  AND  BROTHER- 
HOOD OF  MAN 

Two  GREAT  DUTIES  .;.  ...  ...  

MAN'S  SINFULNESS      ...  ...  ...  ..'. 

OUR  DUTY  AS  SINFUL          ...  ...  ...  ...     -.. 

APPENDIX,  LIST  OF  PUBLICATIONS 


THE  VEDANTA-SARA. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Carlyle  says  :  "  Of  a  man  or  of  a  nation  we  inquire  first  of  all : 
What  religion  they  had  ?  Answering  this  question  is  giving  us  the 
soul  of  the  history  of  the  man  or  of  the  nation.  The  thoughts  they 
had  were  the  parents  of  the  actions  they  did  ;  their  feelings  were 
the  parents  of  their  thoughts  :  it  was  the  unseen  and  spiritual  in 
them  that  determined  the  outward  and  the  actual ;  their  religion, 
as  I  say,  was  the  great  fact  about  them." 

Man  is  a  religious  being  :  he  will  worship.  In  whatever  part 
of  the  world  he  may  be  found,  however  degraded  in  many  respects, 
he  has  a  religion  of  some  kind  or  another. 

India  is  now  the  scene  of  a  momentous  revolution.  Railways, 
education,  the  press,  and  contact  with  the  West  are  producing 
vast  changes.  Of  all,  the  most  important  are  those  connected  with 
religion.  It  is  true  that  comparatively  few  are  yet  thus  affected ; 
the  masses  are  largely  untouched.  But  the  new  ideas  will  filter 
down,  and  gradually  influence  the  whole.  Lyall  thus  indicates  the 
probable  course  of  events  : 

"  It  seems  possible  that  the  old  gods  of  Hinduism  will  die  in  these 
new  elements  of  intellectual  light  and  air  as  qnickly  as  a  net  full  of  fish 
lifted  up  out  of  the  water  ;  that  the  alteration  in  the  religions  needs  of 
such  an  intellectual  people  as  the  Hindus,  which  will  have  been  caused 
by  a  change  in  their  circumstances,  will  make  it  impossible  for  them  to 
find  in  their  new  world  a  place  for  their  ancient  deities.  Their  primitive 
forms  will  fade  and  disappear  silently,  as  witchcraft  vanished  from 
Europe,  and  as  all  such  delusions  become  gradually  extinguished."  * 

An  effort  is  now  being  made  to  prevent  the  "  old  gods  of 
Hinduism"  from  dying  in  the  "  new  elements  of  intellectual  light 
and  air."  This  has  been  tried  even  in  the  case  of  Krishna.  All 
such  attempts  will  be  as  fruitless  as  those  made  to  arrest  the 
decline  of  polytheism  in  Europe. 

Educated  Hindus  generally  profess  to  be  adherents  only  of  the 
"  Higher  Hinduism."  By  this  is  understood  the  VEDANTA  or  the 
eclectic  system  of  the  BHAGAVAD  GITA. 

It  is  very  desirable  that  the  followers  of  every  religion  should 
have  an  accurate  acquaintance  with  its  principles ;  and  know  the 

1  Asiatic  Studies,  pp.  299,300. 


a  THE   VEDANTA-SARA. 

light  in  which  it  is  regarded  by  intelligent  men  of  the  present 
day.  The  Vedanta  is  at  least  two  thousand  years  old.  Much 
knowledge  has  been  accumulated  during  that  long  period.  Students 
of  the  Vedanta  should  not  only  know  what  Veda-Vyasa  actually 
taught,  but  what  is  thought  of  his  system  viewed  in  the  light  of 
the  nineteenth  century.  To  aid  them,  a  summary  is  given  in  the 
following  pages  of  the  Vedanta- Sutras  and  a  complete  translation 
of  the  Vedanta- Sara,  the  next  standard  on  the  subject.  Explana- 
tory notes,  from  the  best  Orientalists,  are  added  where  necessary, 
and  there  is  a  complete  examination  of  the  system.  The  whole 
has  been  revised  by  Colonel  G.  A.  Jacob,  author  of  Hindu  Pan- 
theism, and  a  Concordance  to  the  Upanishads,  one  of  the  first  Euro- 
pean authorities  on  Hindu  Philosophy. 

THE  BHAGAVAD  GITA  may  be  regarded  as  the  loftiest  production 
of  Hindu  religious  thought.  It  contains  some  noble  sentiments, 
beautifully  expressed ;  but  it  teaches  polytheism  and  pantheism, 
besides  claiming  a  divine  origin  for  caste.  An  English  transla- 
tion of  the  complete  work  is  given  in  the  publication  noted  below.1 

To  enable  the  reader  to  form  his  own  judgment  of  Vedan- 
tism,  one  of  the  standard  treatises  is  given  in  full,  followed  by  an 
examination  of  its  doctrines. 


ORIGIN  OF  HINDU  PHILOSOPHY. 

Intellectual  Growth. — "  The  life  of  a  nation,"  says  Morell, 
"  bears  an  obvious  analogy  to  that  of  the  individual." 

The  child  gives  life  to  every  object  around  it.  Whatever 
strikes  the  imagination  affords  delight ;  the  most  extravagant 
tales  are  accepted  as  true. 

"  The  severing  of  imagination  on  the  one  hand  from  abstract 
principles  on  the  other,  marks  the  rise  of  another  era  in  a  nation's 
development, — that,  namely,  which  corresponds  with  the  sphere  of 
THOUGHT,  -properly  so  called.  The  separation  is  effected  by  the 
understanding,  and  is  marked  by  a  decided  tendency  to  meta- 
physical speculations. 

"  When  these  periods  have  run  their  rounds,  then  the  age  of 
positive  science  commences, — that  in  which  the  reason  gathers 
up  all  the  results  of  the  other  faculties,  and  employs  them  for  the 
direct  investigation  of  truth."2 

1  THH    BHAGAVAD  GITA.  8vo.   108   pp.   4  As.     Post-free,   5   As.    An   Enplish 
•Translation,   carefully  revised  ;    numerous  Explanatory  Notes,  and  an  Examination 
of  its  Doctrines.     Sold  by  Mr.  A.  T.  Scott,  Tract  Dep6fc,  Madras. 
2  MorelFs  Elements  of  Psychology,  pp.  263,  264. 


OEIGIN    OF   HINDU    PHILOSOPHY.  6 

The  Hindus,  in  general,  represent  the  childhood  of  humanity. 
Every  thing  around  them  is  instinct  with  life.  "  The  idlest  legend," 
says  Professor  Cowell,  "  passes  current  as  readily  as  the  most  authen- 
tic fact,  nay,  more  readily,  because  it  is  more  likely  to  charm  the 
imagination ;  and  in  this  phase  of  mind,  imagination  and  feeling 
supply  the  only  proof  which  is  needed  to  win  the  belief  of  the 
audience." 

The  tendency  to  metaphysical  thought,  the  speculative  stage  of 
the  human  intellect,  may  be  called  the  "  childhood  of  philosophy." 
In  Hinduism,  this  may  be  described  as  the  religion  of  the  Upa- 
nishads,  the  Darsanas,  and  Bhagavad  Gita. 

There  is  no  sharp  line  of  demarcation  between  popular  and 
philosophic  Hinduism.  They  blend  into  each  other.  Some  combine 
the  two.  Even  the  common  people  are  leavened,  more  or  less,  with 
some  of  the  notions  of  philosophic  Hinduism. 

The  "  Age  of  Positive  Science"  is  yet  represented  in  India  by 
only  a  handful ;  but  the  minority  will  grow. 

Course  of  Hindu  Thought* — India  was  first  occupied  by  non- 
Aryan  races,  generally  like  the  wild  tribes  still  found  in  various 
parts  of  the  country,  although  some  had  attained  an  elementary 
civilisation.  Their  religion  apparently  consisted  in  propitiating  the 
demons  and  tutelary  gods ;  and  this,  to  the  present  day,  forms  the 
actual  cult  of  the  masses. 

The  Aryans  poured  in  from  Central  Asia  through  the  western 
passes,  and  spread  over  the  great  river-basins  of  the  Indus  and 
Granges,  where  they  gradually  became  mingled  with  the  pre-existing 
population,  the  two  races  mutually  acting  upon  each  other. 

In  later  Vedic  times  the  Indian  tribes  were  gathered  together 
in  farms,  in  huts  of  sun-dried  mud,  in  houses  of  stone,  in  hamlets, 
and  in  fenced  towns,  under  village  chiefs  and  Rajas.  The  outward 
aspects  of  their  life  were  not  unlike  those  of  rural  India  of  to-day. 
The  Indians  of  the  Vedic  age  tilled  their  rice  and  barley,  irrigated 
their  fields  with  water  courses,  watched  the  increase  of  their  fiocks 
and  herds,  and  made  a  hard  or  easy  livelihood  as  blacksmiths, 
wheelwrights,  boat-builders,  weavers,  doctors,  soldiers,  poets, 
priests.  They  lived  upon  the  produce  of  their  cattle  and  their  fields, 
drank  wine  and  soma  juice,  and  exercised  their  leisure  in  sacrificial 
feasts,  in  games,  and  spectacles. 

The  powers  of  nature  present  themselves  to  them  as  so  many 
personal  objects.  The  child  personifies  the  stone  that  hurts  him  ; 
the  child  of  superstition  personifies  the  laws  of  nature  as  gods.  Sky 
and  Earth  are  the  father  and  mother  of  gods  and  men.  Mitra, 
presiding  over  the  day,  wakes  men,  and  bids  them  bestir  themselves 
betimes,  and  stands  watching  all  things  with  unwinking  eye. 
Varuna,  ruling  the  night,  prepares  a  cool  place  of  rest  for  all  that 
move,  fashions  a  pathway  for  the  sun,  knows  every  wink  of  men's 
eyes,  cherishes  truth,  seizes  the  evil-doer  with  his  noose,  and  ia 


4  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

prayed  to  have  mercy  on  the  sinful.  Agni,  the  fire-god,  boars  the 
oblation  aloft  to  the  gods.  Indra,  ruling  the  firmament,  over- 
throws Vritra ;  Soma  invigorates  the  gods,  and  cheers  mankind. 

The  gods  require  to  be  flattered  with  hymns,  to  be  fed  with 
butter,  to  be  refreshed  with  soma  juice,  that  they  may  send  rain, 
food,  cattle,  children,  and  length  of  days  to  their  worshippers. 
Life  is  as  yet  no  burden ;  there  is  nothing  of  the  blank  despair 
that  came  in  later  with  the  tenet  of  transmigration,  and  the 
misery  of  every  form  of  sentient  life.  Pleasures  are  looked  for  in 
this  world  ;  their  harvests  are  enough  for  the  wants  of  all ;  their 
flocks  and  herds  are  many  ;  and  pleasures  are  looked  for  again  in 
the  affcer-life  in  the  body  in  the  kingdom  of  Yama. 

So  far  from  life  being  regarded  as  a  curse,  "  May  you  live  a 
hundred  winters !"  was  looked  upon  as  a  benediction. 

This  worship  of  the  personified  powers  of  nature  with  a  view 
to  material  benefits  gradually  hardened  into  a  series  of  rites  to  be 
performed  by  the  priesthood.  In  course  of  time  it  came  to  be  held 
that  the  sacrifices  performed  without  knowledge  of  their  import 
produced  their  desired  effect, — some  material  good,  the  birth  of 
children,  long  life,  or  future  happiness.  This  later  form  of  Vedic 
religion  received  the  name  of  the  Karmak/inda,  or  ritual  department 
of  the  Vodas. 

But  in  the  midst  of  this  life  of  the  primitive  Hindu,  there  are 
discernible  the  first  stirrings  of  reflection.  Questions  began  to  be 
raised  in  the  hymns  of  the  Bishis  in  regard  to  the  origin  of  earth 
and  sky.  One  of  them  asks,  "  Which  of  them  was  first  and  which 
was  later  ?  You  wise,  which  of  you  knows  ?"  Another  asks,  "  What 
was  the  fruit,  what  the  tree,  out  of  which  they  cut  the  sky  and 
earth  ?"  In  one  hymn  earth  and  sky  are  the  work  of  Visvakarman. 
In  another  it  is  Hiranyagarbha,  the  golden  Grerm,  that  arose  in  the 
beginning  ;  in  another  it  is  Varuna.  Agni  is  sometimes  the  son  of 
Earth  and  Sky ;  at  other  times  he  is  said  to  have  stretched  out  the 
earth  and  sky.  In  a  few  of  the  later  hymns  there  are  touching 
confessions  of  ignorance ;  such  as,  "  Who  truly  knows  or  who  has 
told  what  path  leads  to  the  gods  ?" 

"  This  creation,  whether  any  made  it,  or  any  made  it  not  ?  He 
that  is  the  overseer  in  the  highest  heaven,  he  indeed  knows,  or 
haply  he  knows  not." 

The  period  of  the  hymns  was  followed  by  that  of  the  ritual  and 
legendary  compilations  known  as  the  Brahmanas.  Of  these  Brah- 
manas,  particular  portions,  to  be  repeated  only  by  jihe  hermits  of 
the  forests,  were  styled  Aranyakas,  and  to  the  Aranyakas  were 
attached  the  treatises  setting  forth  as  a  hidden  wisdom  the  fictitious 
nature  of  the  religion  of  rites,  and  the  sole  reality  of  the  all-per- 
vading and  all-animating  self,  or  Brahman.  This  hidden  wisdom, 
the  philosophy  of  the  Upanishads,  in  contradistinction  from  the 
Karmaktinda,  or  ritual  portion,  received  the  name  of  Jniinakdnda, 


ORIGIN    OF   HINDU    PHILOSOPHY.  5 

or  knowledge  portion  of  the  Sruti,  or  everlasting  revelation.  There 
were  now  virtually  two  religions,  the  Karmamdrga,  or  path  of  rites, 
for  the  people  of  the  villages,  living  as  if  life  with  its  pleasures 
were  real,  and  theJndnamdrga,  or  path  of  knowledge,  for  the  sages 
that  had  quitted  the  world,  and  sought  the  quiet  of  the  jungle, 
renouncing  the  false  ends  and  empty  fictions  of  common  life,  and 
intent  upon  reunion  with  the  sole  reality,  the  Self  that  is  one  in  all 
things  living.1 

Rise  of  Hindu  Pessimism. — Dr.  Murray  Mitchell  says  : 
"  With  them  (the  Upanishads)  commences  that  great  wail  of  sorrow 
which,  for  countless  ages,  has  iu  India  been  rising  up  to  heaven.  All 
the  earlier  Vedic  hymns  take  a  cheerful  view  of  life;  but  with  the 
Upanishads  we  see  the  beginning  of  that  despondency  which,  as  time 
goes  on,  will  deepen  almost  into  despair."2 

Three  causes  may  be  assigned  for  this  : 

1.  After  the  Aryans  had  settled  in  India  for  some  time,  they 
began  to  feel  the  influence  of  the  hot,  enervating  climate.     Labour 
was  a  burden,  undisturbed  repose  seemed  the  highest  bliss. 

2.  "  The  unhappiriess   of  the  environment.     Warfare   was    almost 
the  normal  state  of  Indian  society  ; — war  with  the  aborigines  ;  war  of  one 
Aryan  tribe  with  another  ;  a  long  struggle  between  princes  and  priests, 
and  steady  exaltation  of  the  latter ;   the  rise  and  rapid  progress  of  Bud- 
dhism ;  war  with  Scythian  hoides; —  in  all  this  there  was  undoubtedly 
enough  to  distract  and  depress  the  Indian  mind."2 

3.  Chiefly,  the  belief  in  transmigration.     Of  this  there  are 
only  the  faintest  traces,  if   any,  in  the  Vedas.     It  is  uncertain 
whether  the  idea  sprang  up  in  the  Hindu  mind,  or  was  derived 
from  the  aborigines,  Dr.  Murray  Mitchell  inclines  to  the  former 
supposition. 

The  pessimistic  feeling  was  intensified  by  Buddha.  The  first 
of  the  "  four  noble  truths  "  which  he  professed  to  have  discovered  is 
that  "  EXISTENCE  is  SUFFEKING."  As  a  devout  Buddhist  counts  his 
beads,  he  mutters  Anitya,  Dukha,  Anatta,  "  Transience,  Sorrow, 
Unreality." 

Prince  Mahanama  thus  describes  to  his  brother  Anuradha  the 
alternate  happiness  and  misery  of  life  : 

"  The  being  who  is  still  subject  to  birth  may  at  one  time  sport  in 
the  beautiful  garden  of  a  dewa-loka,  and  at  another  be  cut  to  a  thousand 
pieces  in  hell ;  at  one  time  he  may  be  Hah  a  Brahma,  and  at  another  a 
degraded  outcaste  ;  at  one  time  he  may  eat  the  food  of  the  devas,  and  at 
another  he  may  have  molten  lead  poured  down  his  throat ;  at  one  time 
he  may  sip  nectar,  and  at  another  he  may  be  made  to  drink  blood. 
Alternately,  he  may  repose  on  a  couch  with  the  dewas,  and  writhe  on  a 
bed  of  red-hot  iron  ;  enjoy  the  society  of  the  dewas,  and  be  dragged 
through  a  thicket  of  thorns ;  bathe  in  a  celestial  river,  and  be  plunged  iu 

Abridged  from  Gough's  Philosophy  of  the  Vpaninhads,  pp.  7-17. 
8  Hinduism^  Past  and  Present,  p.  48. 


6  THE    VEDANTA-SABA. 

the  briny  ocean  of  hell ;  become  wild  with  pleasure,  and  then  mad  with 
pain  ;  reside  in  a  mansion  of  gold,  and  be  exposed  on  a  burning  mountain  ; 
sit  on  the  throne  of  the  dewas,  and  be  impaled  with  hungry  dogs  around  ; 
drawn  in  a  chariot  of  the  dewas,  and  dragged  in  a  chariot  of  fire  ;  he  may 
now  be  a  king  who  can  receive  countless  gems  by  the  mere  clapping  of 
his  hands,  and  now  a  mendicant,  taking  a  skull  from  door  to  door  to 
seek  alms." 

Monier  Williams  says : 

"  Transmigration  is  the  great  bugbear,  the  terrible  nightmare  and 
daymare  of  Indian  philosophers  and  metaphysicians.  All  their  efforts  are 
directed  to  getting  rid  of  this  oppressive  scare.  The  question  is  not, 
What  is  truth  ?  Nor  is  it  the  soul's  desire  to  be  released  from  the 
burden  of  sin.  The  one  engrossing  problem  is,  How  is  a  man  to  break 
this  iron  chain  of  repeated  existences  ?  How  is  he  to  shake  off  all 
personality  ?" 

All  systems  of  Hindu  Philosophy  are  pessimistic.  The 
Brahmavddin  says : 

"  Every  system  of  Hindu  philosophy  starts  with  the  conviction  that 
individual  existence  is  a  journey  full  of  torments  from  death  to  death, 
that  the  individual  soul  is  tossed  about,  as  result  of  its  errors,  ignorances, 
and  sins,  from  life  to  life,  from  billow  to  billow  in  the  great  ocean  of 
transmigration,  that  desire  is  the  motive  power  that  makes  for  the 
eternal  continuance  of  life,  that  this  desire  has  its  root  in  ignorance  or 
the  non-discrimination  of  the  true  nature  and  value  of  things,  that  the 
law  which  fetters  living  beings  to  the  existence  in  the  world  can  be 
broken  and  that  salvation  from  samsdra,  or  the  cycle  of  life  and  death, 
can  be  attained  by  spiritual  knowledge  of  the  eternal  verities.  These 
great  ideas  form  the  woof  and  the  warp  of  Indian  thought,  permeating 
its  whole  outlook,  its  attitude  towards  life,  its  most  sacred  aspirations 
and  its  most  cherished  wishes  and  hopes."  May  22,  1897- 

The  popular  feeling  is  the  same.  In  every  Indian  bazar  the 
expression  may  be  heard  almost  daily,  "  This  is  the  Kali  Yuga," 
the  Iron  Age.  The  venerable  Vedic  Rishi,  Parasara,  in  the  Vishnu 
Purana,  thus  describes  some  of  its  evils  : 

«'  The  observance  of  caste,  order,  and  institutes  will  not  prevail  in 
the  Kali  Age  .  .  .  Men  of  all  degrees  will  conceit  themselves  to  be  equal 
with  Brahmans,  cows  will  be  held  in  esteem  only  as  they  supply  milk. 
The  people  will  be  almost  always  in  dread  of  dearth,  and  apprehension  of 
scarcity,  they  will  all  live,  like  anchorets,  upon  leaves,  and  roots,  and 
fruits,  and  put  a  period  to  their  lives  through  fear  of  famine  and  want .  . . 
Princes,  instead  of  protecting,  will  plundertheir  subjects  .  .  .  women  will 
bear  children  at  the  age  of  5,  6,  or  7  years;  and  men  beget  them  when 
they  are  8,  9,  or  10.  A  man  will  be  grey  when  he  is  12  ;  and.no  one  will 
exceed  20  years  of  life."  l 

What  a  sad  contrast  to  the  Krita  (Golden)  Age,  when  the 
fruits  of  the  earth  were  obtained  by  the  mere  wish,  and  men  lived 
four  thousand  years ! 

1  Wilson's  Translation  of  the  Vishnu  Purdna,  pp.  622,  624. 


THE    SIX    SCHOOLS    OP    HINDU    PHILOSOPHY.  / 

THE  SIX  SCHOOLS  OF  HINDU  PHILOSOPHY. 

"  The  Upanishads  contain  the  first  attempts  to  comprehend  the 
mysteries  of  existence ;  and  their  teachings  cannot  be  gathered  up 
into  an  harmonious  system.  But  as  time  went  on,  a  desire  was  felt 
to  expand,  classify,  and  arrange  these  earlier  utterances — to  make 
them  more  definite  and  more  consistent.  Hence  gradually  arose 
what  we  may  call  the  official  philosophy  of  India,  which  is  comprised 
in  a  number  of  methodical  treatises.  These  are  generally  called 
the  six  Darsanas,  or  'exhibitions.1  No  doubt  it  was  only  by 
degrees  that  they  assumed  their  present  elaborated  shape,  which 
cannot  be  much  older  than  the  Christian  era."2  They  consist  of 
the  following : 

1.  The  Nyctya,  founded  by  Gautama. 

2.  The  Vaiseshika,  by  Kanada. 

3.  The  SanJchya,  by  Kapila. 

4.  The  Yoga,  by  Patanjali. 

5.  The  Mimdnsd,  by  Jaimini. 

6.  The  Vedanta,  by  Badarayana  or  Vy£sa. 

The  original  text-books  of  the  various  systems  consist  of  Sutras, 
which  are  held  to  be  the  basis  of  all  subsequent  teaching.  The 
word  properly  signifies  'a  string.'  We  may  understand  it  to 
denote  a  string  of  rules,  or  rather  aphorisms.  "  They  are  expressed 
with  extreme  conciseness — doubtless  for  the  purpose  of  being 
committed  to  memory  ;  and  without  a  commentary  they  are  exceed- 
ingly obscure." 

The  Darsanas  belong  to  the  division  of  Hindu  books,  called 
Smriti  (that  which  is  remembered).  They  are  therefore  authori- 
tative ;  but  not  to  the  same  extent  as  the  Vedas  and  Upanishads, 
which  are  termed  Sruti  (heard). 

"  It  is  usual  to  classify  these  systems  in  pairs,  making  three  pairs  in 
the  order  given  above ;  but  this  arrangement  is  not  satisfactory.  The 
Nyaya  and  Vaiseshika  may  indeed  go  well  enough  together ;  and  the 
Sankhya  and  Yoga  may  with  some  difficulty  do  the  same ;  but  the 
Mirnausa  and  Vedanta  have  very  little  in  common.  Their  conjunction 
has  arisen  from  the  circumstance  that  the  Mimansa  (otherwise  called 
the  Piirva  or  Earlier  Mimansa)  deals  with  the  ritual  portion  of  the  Vedas 
as  explained  in  the  Brahmanas;  while  the  Vedanta  or  Uttara  (later) 
Mimansa  seeks  to  unfold  and  apply  the  principles  of  the  Upanishads  ;  and 
thus,  as  each  expounds  a  portion  of  what  had  come  to  be  called  the 
Veda,  the  two  systems  came  to  be  bracketed  together." 

*'  None  of  the  six  systems  professedly  attack,  or  deny,  the  authority  of 
the  Vedas:  on  the  contrary,  they  all  profess  the  profoundest  reverence 
for  the  sacred  books.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  authors  of  some  of 
the  systems  could  do  this  with  sincerity.  Yet  the  Hindu  mind  has  long 

1  Or  "  Demonstrations  of  Truth."     Sir  Monier  Williams. 
9  Hinduism  Past  and  Present,  p.  53. 


8  THE    VEDANTA-SABA. 

surpassed  all  other  minds  in  the  ability  to  hold,  or  believe  itself  to  hold, 
at  the  same  time,  two  or  more  opinions  which  appear  to  be  wholly  irre- 
concilable :  indeed  an  acknowledged  note  of  the  Hindu  mind  is  'eclecti- 
cism issuing  in  confusion  ;'  it  has  been  said  to  be  « the  very  method  of 
Hindu  thought/  But  the  contradictions  among  the  philosophical 
systems  were  too  glaring  to  escape  the  notice  of  men  capable  of  reflection  ; 
and  accordingly  the  author  of  one  Darsana  and  his  followers  frequently 
attack  the  supporters  of  the  others.  Thus  the  great  controversialist 
Sankara  denounces  a  follower  of  the  Nyaya  philosophy  as  a  bullock 
minus  the  horns  and  tail — implying,  we  supposet  that  he  had  all  a 
bullock's  stupidity  without  his  power  of  fighting.  The  author  of  the 
Sankhya  charges  the  followers  of  the  Vedanta  with  'babbling  like 
children  or  madmen.'  The  Mimansa  accuses  the  Vedanta  of  being 
disguised  Buddhism.  The  Padma  Purana  maintains  that  four  of  the  six 
systems  are  simply  atheism. 

"  But  while  thus  radically  opposed  to  each  other,  the  six  official 
systems  of  philosophy  are  all  held  to  be  orthodox."  1 

1.     THE  NYAYA. 

Gautama,  the  founder  of  this  system,  is  claimed  to  have  been 
a  Kishi,  married  to  Ahalya,  the  daughter  of  Brahmd.  She  was 
seduced  by  Indra,  who  had  to  suffer  in  a  way  too  indecent  to  be 
mentioned. 

The  word  Nyaya  signifies  "  going  into  a  subject/'  taking  it,  as 
it  were,  to  pieces.  The  system  was  intended  to  furnish  a  correct 
method  of  philosophical  inquiry  into  all  the  objects  and  subjects  of 
human  knowledge,  including,  amongst  others,  the  process  of  reason- 
ing and  laws  of  thought. 

The  different  processes  by  which  the  mind  arrives  at  true  and 
accurate  knowledge  are  four  ;  viz. — a.  PratyaTcsha,  '  perception  by 
the  senses  ;'  b.  Anumdna, '  inference ;'  c.  Upamdna, '  comparison  ;' 
d.  Sabda,  '  verbal  authority,'  or  '  trustworthy  testimony,'  including 
Vedic  revelation. 

*  Inference'  is  divided  into  five  Avayavas,  or  ( members/  1 .  The 
pratijnd,  or  proposition.  2.  The  hetu,  or  reason.  3.  Theuddharana, 
or  example.  4.  The  upanaya,  or  application  of  the  reason.  5.  The 
nigamana,  or  conclusion.  The  following  is  an  example  :  1.  The 
hill  is  fiery ;  2.  for  it  smokes  ;  3.  whatever  smokes  is  fiery,  as  a 
kitchen-hearth  ;  4.  this  hill  smokes  ;  5.  therefore  this  hill  is  fiery. 

The  second  topic  of  the  Nyaya  proper  is  Prameyd,  i.  e.}  the 
subjects  of  Pramd,  or  the  subjects  about  which  right  knowledge  is 
to  be  obtained.  These  are  twelve  :  viz.  1.  Soul  (dtmari).  2.  Body 
(sarird).  3.  Senses  (indriya).  4.  Objects  of  sense~(ar£7ia) .  5. 
Understanding  or  intellection  (buddhi).  6.  Mind  (manas.)  7. 
Activity  (pravritti).  8.  Faults  (dosha).  9.  Transmigration  (pretya- 
bhdva).  10.  Consequences  or  fruits  (phala).  11.  Pain  (duhkha), 
12.  Emancipation  (apavarga). 

1  Hinduism  Past  and  Present,  pp.  53-55.  Abridged. 


THE   VAISESHIKA.  9 

With  regard  to  the  fourteen  other  topics,  they  seem  to  be  not 
so  much  philosophical  categories*  as  an  enumeration  of  the  regular 
stages  through  which  a  controversy  is  likely  to  pass.  In  India 
argument  slides  into  wrangling  disputation  even  more  easily  than  in 
Europe,  and  the  remaining  topics  certainly  illustrate  very  curiously 
the  captious  propensities  of  a  Hindu  disputant,  leading  him  to  be 
quick  in  repartee,  and  ready  with  specious  objections  to  the  most 
conclusive  argument. 

There  is  first  the  state  of  Samsaya,  or  '  doubt  about  the  point 
to  be  discussed.'  Next,  the  Prayojana,  or  '  motive  for  discussing  it.' 
Next  follows  a  Drishtdnta,  or,  '  example'  leading  to  the  Siddhdnta, 
or  '  established  conclusion.'  Then  comes  au  objector  with  his 
Avayava,  or  '  argument  split  up,'  as  we  have  seen,  into  five  members. 
Next  follows  the  Tarka  or  '  refutation/  (reductio  ad  absurdum)  of 
his  '  objection/  and  the  Nirnaya,  or  '  ascertainment  of  the  true  state 
of  the  case.'  But  this  is  not  enough  to  satisfy  a  Hindu's  passion 
for  disputation.  Every  side  of  a  question  must  be  examined — every 
possible  objection  stated — and  so  a  further  Vdda,  or  '  controversy' 
takes  place,  which  of  course  leads  to  Jalpa,  '  mere  wrangling/ 
followed  by  Vitanda,  (  cavilling;'  Hetv-dbhdsa,  ' fallacious  reason- 
ing ;'  Chhala,  ( quibbling  artifices  /  Jdti  '  futile  replies  /  and 
Nigrahasthdna,  '  the  putting  an  end  to  all  discussion,  by  a  demons- 
tration of  the  objector's  incapacity  for  argument.' 

After  enumerating  these  sixteen  topics,  Gautama  proceeds  to 
show  how  false  notions  are  at  the  root  of  all  misery.  For  from 
false  notions  comes  the  fault  of  liking  or  disliking,  or  being 
indifferent  to  anything ;  from  that  fault  proceeds  activity  ;  from 
this  mistaken  activity  proceed  actions,  involving  either  merit  or 
demerit,  which  merit  or  demerit  forces  a  man  to  pass  through 
repeated  births  for  the  sake  of  its  rewards  or  punishment.  From 
these  births  proceeds  misery,  and  it  is  the  aim  of  philosophy  to 
correct  the  false  notions  at  the  root  of  this  misery.1 

The  name  Iswara  occurs  once  in  the  Sutras  of  Gautama,  the 
founder  of  the  Nyaya,  but  they  say  nothing  of  moral  attributes  as 
belonging  to  God,  nor  is  His  government  of  the  world  recognized. 
Nor  can  the  system  be  said  to  believe  in  creation,  inasmuch  as  it 
holds  matter  to  be  composed  of  eternal  atoms.  Confluent  atoms, 
in  themselves  uncreated,  composed  the  world.  Soul,  or  rather 
spirit,  is  represented  as  multitudinous,  and  (like  atoms)  eternal. 
It  is  distinct  from  mind. 2 

2.     THE  VAISESHIKA. 

The  Vaieeshika  may  be  called  a  supplement  of  the  Nyaya.  It 
is  attributed  to  a  sage,  nicknamed  Kanada  (atom-eater) .  Colebrooke 

1  Abridged  from  Hinduism,  by  Monier  Williams,  pp.  187 — 190. 
8  Dr.  Murray  Mitchell,  Hinduism  Past  and  Present,  pp.  56,  57. 


10  THE    VEDANTA-SARA.  % 

explains  Vaiseshika  as  meaning  "  particular,"  as  dealing  with 
"  particulars"  or  sensible  objects.  It  begins  by  arranging  its 
inquiries  under  seven  Paddrthas,  or  certain  general  properties  or 
attributes  that  may  be  predicated  of  existing  things. 

The  Vaiseshika  Sutras  do  not  mention.  God.  They  go  very 
fully  into  the  doctrine  of  atoms — which,  like  the  Nyaya,  they 
declare  to  be  uncaused  and  eternal.  An  atom  is  thus  denned  by 
Kanada  :  "  Something  existing,  without  a  cause,  without  beginning 
and  end.  It  is  contrary  to  what  has  a  measure."  Atoms  are  so 
exceedingly  small  that  it  requires  three  of  them  to  be  perceptible 
like  a  mote  in  a  sunbeam. 

It  is  held  that  the  living  individual  souls  of  men  (jivdtman)  are 
eternal,  manifold,  and  diffused  everywhere  throughout  space  ;  so  that 
a  man's  soul  is  as  much  in  England  as  in  Calcutta,  though  it  can 
apprehend  and  feel  and  act  only  where  the  body  happens  to  be. 

The  Vaiseshika  is  dualistic  in  the  sense  of  •  assuming  the 
existence  of  eternal  atoms,  side  by  side  either  with  eternal  souls,  or 
with  the  Supreme  Soul  of  the  universe. 

The  Vaiseshika  Aphorisms  of  Kanada,  with  comments,  have 
been  translated  by  Mr.  (rough,  formerly  Anglo-Sanskrit  Professor 
in  the  '  Government  College,  Benares.'1 

3.    THE  SANKHYA. 

The  founder  of  this  school  is  said  to  have  been  Kapila.  In 
Gaudapada's  commentary  he  is  claimed  to  have  been  one  of  the 
seven  Rishis,  the  "mind-born"  sons  of  Brahma.  He  was  the 
irascible  sage  who  reduced  to  ashes  the  60,000  sons  of  King 
Sagara.  Unlike  the  Nyaya,  this  is  a  synthetic  system,  as  it  were, 
placing  things  together.  It  is  essentially  dualistic.  It  holds  that 
there  are  two  primary  eternal  agencies.  There  is  an  eternally 
existing  essence,  called  Prakriti,  "  that  which  produces  or  brings 
forth  every  thing  else."  This  is  sometimes,  not  very  accurately, 
rendered  by  "  Nature." 

Prakriti  is  variously  called  Mula-prakriti,  '  root-principle  j' 
Amulammulam,  (  rootless  root ;'  Pradhdna,  '  chief  one ;'  Avyakta, 
'  un evolved  evolver;'  Brahman,  'supreme;'  Mdyd,  'power  of 
illusion.'  '  Producer,  originator'  would  express  the  meaning  more 
nearly  than  '  Nature.'  From  the  absence  of  a  root  in  the  root,  the 
root  of  all  things  is  rootless. 

Prakriti  is  supposed  to  be  made  up  of  three  principles,  called 
Gunas,  or  cords,  supposed  to  bind  the  soul.  They  are  Sattva,  Rajas, 
Tamas  ;  or  Truth,  Passion,  and  Darkness.  These  principles  enter 
into  all  things ;  and  on  the  relative  quantity  of  each  in  any  object 
depends  the  quality  of  the  object. 

1  Published  by  Dr.  J.  Lazarus,  Benares,  Price,  Rs.  4. 


THE    SANKttYA.  11 

Souls  (Punish)  are  countless  in  number ;  individual,  sensitive, 
eternal,  unchangeable.  All  that  is  done  by  Prakriti  is  done  on 
behalf  of  soul.  In  its  own  nature  soul  is  without  qualities,  until 
united  with  Prakriti.  The  union  of  the  two  is  compared  to  a  lame 
man  mounted  on  a  blind  man's  shoulder ;  the  pair  are  then  both 
(as  it  were)  capable  of  perception  and  movement. 

Beginning  from  the  original  rootless  germ  Prakriti,  the 
Sankhya  counts  up  (San-khydti)  synthetically  (whence  its  name  of 
'  synthetic  enumeration')  twenty-three  other  Tattwas  or  entities — all 
productions  of  the  first,  and  evolving  themselves  spontaneously 
out  of  it,  as  cream  out  of  milk,  or  milk  out  of  a  cow, — while  it 
carefully  distinguishes  them  all  from  a  twenty-fifth,  Purusha,  the 
soul,  which  is  wholly  in  its  own  nature  destitute  of  Gunas,  though 
liable  to  be  bound  by  the  Gunas  of  Prakriti. 

The  process  is  thus  stated  in  the  Sankhya-karika  :  "  The  root 
and  substance  of  all  things  (except  soul)  is  Prakriti.  It  is  no 
production.  Seven  things  produced  by  it  are  also  producers. 
Thence  come  sixteen  productions  (vikdra).  Soul,  the  twenty-fifth 
essence,  is  neither  a  production  nor  producer." 

According  to  the  Sankhya  system,  the  five  grosser  elements, 
(mahdbhuta)  with  their  distinguishing  properties  and  corresponding 
organs  of  sense,  are  the  following  : 

Distinguishing  Property.     Organ  of  Sense. 

1.  Akdsa,  ether  Sound  The  Ear 

2.  Vdyu,  air  Tangibility  The  Skin 

3.  Tejas,  fire,  light  Colour  The -Eye 

4.  Apas,  water  Taste  The  Tongue 

5.  Prithivi,  earth  Smell  The  Nose 
There  are  eleven  organs  produced  by  Ahankdra,  the  five  organs  of 
sense,  ear,  skin,   eye,  tongue,  nose  ;    and   five  organs    of  action, 
larynx  (the   throat),  hand,   foot,    and    excretory   and   generative 
organs,  and  an  eleventh  organ  standing  between  them  viz.,  Manas, 
'  the  mind'  which  is  regarded  as  an  internal  organ  of  perception, 
volition,  and  action. 

The  liberation  of  Purusha,  or  soul,  from  the  fetters  which 
bind  it  in  consequence  of  its  union  with  Prakriti,  is  done  by  con- 
veying the  correct  knowledge  of  the  24  constituent  principles  of 
creation ;  and  rightly  discriminating  the  soul  from  them. 

In  the  Sankhya  there  is  no  place  for  God  ;  and  accordingly 
it  is  known  among  Hindus  by  the  name  of  Niriswara  Sankhya, 
or  the  Sankhya  without  the  Lord. 

The  chief  exponents  of  the  system  are  the  Sankhya  Kdrikd 
and  the  Sankhya  Pravachana  or  Sutras.  The  former  has  been  trans- 
lated into  English  by  Mr.  Davies  ;  the  latter  by  Dr.  Ballantyne. 
The  Sankhya  Pravachana  consists  of  six  books  and  526  sutras. 


12  THE  VEDANTA-SABA. 

4.     THE  YOGA. 

The  Yoga,  founded  by  Patanjali,  is  often  styled  the  Theistic 
Sankhya.  It  agrees  in  its  general  principles  with  the  Sankhya 
proper,  but  claims  greater  orthodoxy  by  directly  acknowledging 
the  existence  of  God.  The  Supreme  Being  of  the  Yoga  is  a  soul 
distinct  from  other  souls,  unaffected  by  the  ills  with  which  they  are 
beset ;  unconcerned  with  good  or  bad  deeds  and  their  consequences, 
"  a  spirit  unaffected  by  works,  having  for  one  of  his  appellations 
the  mystical  monosyllable  Om."  Practically  he  is  a  nonentity, 
introduced  to  satisfy  popular  feeling,  prejudiced  against  the 
Sankhya  as  atheistic. 

Indian  philosophy  makes  salvation  dependent  upon  right 
knowledge — that  is  the  knowledge  of  the  essential  distinction 
between  soul  and  non-soul.  This  right  knowledge  is  generally 
supposed  to  be  attainable  only  with  the  aid  of  the  ascetic  exercises 
prescribed  in  the  Yoga  Sastra. 

The  word  Yoga  now  usually  means  union;  and  it  is  generally 
understood  to  teach  how  the  human  soul  may  attain  complete  union 
with  the  Supreme  Soul.  But  Patanjali  gives  it  a  different  meaning : 
"  Yoga  is  the  suppression  of  the  transformations  of  the  thinking 
principle."  The  mind  is  reduced  to  a  state  of  vacuity,  so  that  it 
ceases  to  act.  The  following  are  the  exercises  to  be  employed  : — 

1.  Yama,  restraint.  2.  Niyama,  religious  observances. 
3.  Asana,  postures.  4.  Prdndydma,  regulation  of  the  breath. 
5.  Pratydhdra,  restraint  of  the  senses.  6.  Dhdrana,  fixed  attention. 
7.  Dhydna,  -contemplation.  8.  Samddhi,  profound  meditation. 

All  wandering  thoughts  are  to  be  called  in,  and  attention  fixed 
on  some  one  object.  Any  object  will  answer  if  it  is  thought  of 
alone ;  other  thoughts  must  be  suppressed.  At  last  there  is  pro- 
found meditation  without  any  object. 

Great  importance  is  attached  to  dsana,  or  postures.  At  an 
early  period  they  were  fixed  as  84,  but  of  this  number  ten  are 
specially  recommended.  The  following  directions  are  given  regard- 
ing some  of  them  : 

The  Lotus  Posture. — The  right  foot  should  be  placed  on  the 
left  thigh,  and  the  left  foot  on  the  right  thigh;  the  hands  should  be 
crossed,  and  the  two  great  toes  should  be  firmly  held  thereby  ;  the 
chin  should  be  bent  down  to  the  chest ;  and  in  this  posture  the 
eyes  should  be  directed  to  the  tip  of  the  nose. 

Gomulcha,  or  Coiv's  Mouth  Posture. — Put  the  right  ankle  on  the 
left  side  of  the  chest,  and  similarly  the  left  ankle  on'th~e  right  side. 

Fowl  Posture. — Having  established  the  lotus  posture,  if  the  hand 
be  passed  between  the  thigh  and  the  knees  and  placed  on  the  earth 
so  as  to  lift  the  body  aloft,  it  will  produce  the  fowl  seat. 

Bow  Posture. — Hold  the  great  toes  with  the  hands  and  draw 
them  to  the  ears  as  in  drawing  a  bowstring. 


MIMANSA.  13     | 

The  regulation  of  the  breath,  prdndyama,  is  likewise  of  great 
importance.  "  The  usual  mode  is  after  assuming  the  posture 
prescribed,  to  place  the  ring  finger  of  the  right  hand  on  the  left 
nostril,  pressing  it  so  as  to  close  it,  and  to  expire  with  the  right ; 
then  to  press  the  right  nostril  with  the  thumb,  and  to  inspire 
through  the  left  nostril,  and  then  to  close  the  two  nostrils  with  the 
ring  finger  and  the  thumb,  and  to  stop  all  breathing.  The  order 
is  reversed  in  the  next  operation,  and  in  the  third  act  the  first  form 
is  required/'1 

Marvellous  powers  are  attributed  to  the  man  fully  initiated  in 
the  Yoga.  The  past  and  present  are  unveiled  to  his  gaze.  He 
sees  things  invisible  to  others.  He  hears  the  sounds  that  are  in 
distant  worlds.  He  becomes  stronger  than  the  elephant,  bolder 
than  the  lion,  swifter  than  the  wind.  He  mounts  at  pleasure  into 
the  air  or  dives  into  the  depths  of  the  earth  and  the  ocean.  He 
acquires  mastery  over  all  things,  whether  animated  or  inanimate. 

The  whole  belief  is  a  delusion.  The  brain  is  the  organ  of  the 
mind.  To  enable  it  to  act  properly,  it  must  have  a  good  supply  of 
pure  blood.  The  blood  is  purified  by  fresh  air  entering  into  the 
lungs  by  breathing.  From  want  of  sufficient  food  and  suppression 
of  the  breath,  the  blood  of  the  Yogi  is  small  in  quantity  and  impure. 
The  brain  does  not  act  properly.  He  may  be  in  a  dreamy  condition 
or  almost  unconscious.  Barth,  a  French  writer,  a  distinguished 
Sanskrit  scholar,  says  of  the  Yoga  exercises  :  "  Conscientiously 
observed,  they  can  only  issue  in  folly  and  idiocy."2 

YOGA  SASTRA,  noticed  below,  contains  a  full  account  of  the 
system,  with  numerous  extracts  from  Patanjali's  Sutras.3 

5.  MIMANSA. 

This  is  sometimes  called  Purva-Mim£nsa,  because  founded  on 
the  Mantras  and  Brahmanas,  in  contradistinction  to  the  Uttara- 
Mimansa  or  Vedanta,  based  on  the  later  Upanishads- 

Jaimini,  its  founder,  did  not  deny  the  existence  of  God,  but 
practically  ho  makes  the  Veda  the  only  God.  The  Veda,  he  says, 
is  itself  authority,  and  has  no  need  of  an  authorizer.  Dharma 
consists  in  the  performance  of  the  rites  and  sacrifices  prescribed  in 
the  Veda,  because  they  are  so  prescribed,  without  reference  to  the 
will  or  approval  of  any  personal  god,  for  Dharma  is  itself  the 
bestower  of  reward. 

Jaimini  asserts  the  absolute  eternity  of  the  Veda,  and  he 
declares  that  only  eternally  pre-existing  objects  are  mentioned  in  it. 
Another  doctrine  maintained  by  him  is  that  sound  is  eternal,  or 
rather,  that  an  eternal  sound  underlies  all  temporary  sound. 4 

1  Quoted  by  Mr.  K.  C.  Boae  from  the  translation  of  the  Yoga  Shastra  by 
Dr.  Rajendralala  Mitra.  2  Religions  of  India,  p.  83.  3  8vo.  78  pp.  2£  As.  Post-free,  3  As. 
Sold  by  Mr.  A.  T.  Scott.  *  Abridged  from  Monier  Williams.  An  excellent  sketch  of 
the  different  systems  of  philosophy  is  given  in  his  Hinduism.  S.  P.  C.  K.;  2s.  6d. 


„  11  THE  VEDANTA-SABA. 

6.  THE  VEDANTA. 

This  system,  though  described  last,  has  long  been  the  chief 
philosophy  of  India.  It  is  the  truest  exponent  of  the  habits  of 
thought  of  the  Hindu  mind.  The  term1,  says  Colebrooke,  "  literally 
signifies,  l  conclusion  of  the  Veda,'  and  bears  reference  to  the 
Upanishads,  which  are,  for  the  most  part,  terminating  sections  of 
the  Vedas  to  which  they  belong.  It  implies,  however,  the  doctrine 
derived  from  them,  and  extends  to  books  of  sacred  authority,  in 
which  that  doctrine  is  thence  deduced ;  and  in  this  large  accepta- 
tion, it  is  '  the  end  and  scope  of  the  Vedas."2 

An  explanation  of  the  system  is  given  in  the  following  pages. 

ECLECTIC  SCHOOL — THE  BHAQAVAD  GITA. 

Dr.  Murray  Mitchell  gives  the  following  sketch  of  the  Bhagavad 
Gita: 

'•  Its  great  effort  is  to  harmonise  the  doctrines  of  the  Toga,  the 
Sankhya,  and  the  Vedauta.  It  begins  by  dwelling  on  the  exceeding 
value  of  concentrating  the  mind,  according  to  the  first  of  these  systems, 
and  so  attaining  to  union  with  Deity.  Quiescence  is  essential ;  the  sage 
must  be  absorbed  in  contemplation.  While  lauding  the  Yoga,  the  Gita 
steers  clear  of  the  wild  asceticism  and  magic  that  are  the  main  character- 
istics of  the  system.  The  metaphysics  of  the  Sankhya  as  regards 
Purasha,  Prakriti,  &c.,  are  adopted.  But  the  doctrine  of  a  Supreme  Spirit 
as  presiding  over  them  is  added — an  alteration  of  a  fundamental  character. 
There  are  also  said  to  be  two  kinds  of  Prakriti ;  which  also  is  an  essential 
change.  .  .  .  Finally  Krishna  reveals  himself  to  Arjuna  in  his  supreme 
form  as  possessed  of  countless  faces,  countless  mouths,  countless  eyes — as, 
in  fact,  all  things — and  blazing  like  a  thousand  suns.  This  passage  is  a 
striking  proof  of  the  extravagance  of  the  Hindu  mind,  which,  in  fact, 
can  never  discriminate  between  greatness  and  bigness,  and  totally 
lacks  the  taste  for  natural  simplicity.  The  practical  conclusion  of  the 
whole  is  that  every  man  should  strenuously  perform  the  'duties  of  bis 
caste  ;  and  Arjuna,  being  a  Kshatriya  has  nothing  to  do  with  whimpering  ; 
for  fighting,  killing,  is  his  function.  And  so  the  warrior  is  convinced  and 
plunges  into  the  battle. 

"  The  book  is  full  of  contradictions.  Contemplative  quietism  is 
enjoined  in  one  place;  and  in  another  energetic  action.  Further,  the 
attempt  to  harmonize  the  three  systems  of  philosophy  ends  in  total 
failure.  Two  of  them  must  be  stripped  of  their  distinctive  features  before 
even  the  semblance  of  unity  can  be  secured.  The  *  Song'  is  mainly,  though 
not  wholly.  Vedantist,  that  is  pantheistic,  in  its  doctrine."3 

A  complete  English  translation  of  the  Bhagavad  Gitd,  with 
explanatory  notes,  and  an  examination  of  its  doctrines,  is  sold  at 
four  annas  by  Mr.  A.  T.  Scott. 

1  Veda-anta,  end  of  the  Veda. 

8  Essays  o»i  the  Philosophy  of  the  Hindus. 

3  Hinduism  Past  and  Present,  pp.  72-74  (slightly  abridged.) 


THE    VEDANTA-SDTfcAS.  15 

Vedantism,  in  its  earlier  form,  as  given  in  the  VEDANTA- 
SUTRAS  and  its  later  form,  in  the  VEDANTA-SARA,  will  now 
be  described. 


THE  VEDANTA-SUTRAS. 

(rough  and  Indian  scholars  generally  claim  to  find  traces  of 
Veclantic  doctrines  in  some  of  the  later  Vedic  hymns  ;  but  all  are 
agreed  that  the  Upanishads  form  their  foundation. 

The  meaning  of   Upanishad   is  disputed.     According  to  Max 

Miiller  : 

"  All  we  can  say  for  the  present  is  that  Upanishad,  besides  being  the 
recognized  title  of  certain  philosophical  treatises,  occurs  also  in  the  sense 
of  doctrine  and  of  secret  doctrine,  and  that  it  seems  to  have  assumed  this 
meaning  from  having  been  used  originally  in  the  sense  of  session  or 
assembly  in  which  one  or  more  pupils  receive  instruction  from  a 
teacher."1 

They  have  been  estimated  at  170  in  number,  but  new  names 
are  being  added  to  the  list.  Max  Miiller  says  in  his  History  of 

Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature  : 

"  During  the  latter  ages  of  Indian  history,  when  none  of  the  ancient 
Upanishads  could  be  found  to  suit  the  purpose,  the  founders  of  new  sects 
had  no  scruple  and  no  difficulty  in  composing  new  Upanishads  of  their 
own.  This  accounts  for  the  large  and  evergrowing  number  of  these 
treatises.  Every  new  collection  of  MSS.,  every  new  list  of  Upanishads 
given  by  native  writers,  adds  to  the  number  of  those  which  were  known 
before  ;  and  the  most  modern  compilations  seem  now  to  enjoy  the  game 
authority  as  the  really  genuine  treatises." 

Dr.  Murray  Mitchell  says  of  the  Upanishads  : 

"  These  are  by  no  means  either  systematic  or  homogeneous.  They 
have  well  been  called  '  guesses  at  truth* ;  for  they  present  no  formal 
solution  of  great  problems.  They  contradict  one  another;  the  same 
writer  sometimes  contradicts  himself.  They  are  often  exceedingly 
obscure,  and  to  Western  minds  repellent — vague,  mystical,  incomprehen- 
sible. A  few  rise  to  sublimity  ;  others  are  nonsensical — '  wild  and 
whirling  words,'  and  nothing  more.  Yet  there  is  frequently  earnestness 
— a  groping  after  something  felt  to  be  needful ;  there  is  the  yearning 
of  hearts  dissatisfied  and  empty.  In  this  lies  the  value  of  the 
Upanishads.'52 

An  attempt  is  made  to  systematise  the  teaching  of  the 
Upanishads  in  the  Veddnta-Siitras,  called  also  the  Brahma  Sutras, 
Uttara  Mimdnsd  Sutras,  and  Sdrirdka  Sutras. 

Authorship. — The  Vedanta- Sutras  are  attributed  to  BA"DAB£- 
YANA,  supposed  to  be  the  same  with  Vydsa  or  Veda-Vydsa  ;  also  called 

1  The  UpaniahadS)  Vol.  I.    p.  Ixxxii.  8  Hinduism  Past  and  Present,  p.  4. 


16  THE   VEDANTA-SABA. 

Krishna  Dwaipayana,  Krishna  island-born.  According  to  mythology, 
he  hdd  in  a  former  state,  being  then  a  Brahman,  bearing  the  name 
of  Apantara-Tamas,  acquired  a  perfect  knowledge  of  revelation 
and  of  the  divinity,  and  was  consequently  qualified  for  eternal 
beatitude.  Nevertheless,  by  special  command  of  the  deity,  he 
resumed  a  corporeal  frame  and  the  human  shape,  at  the  period 
intervening  between  the  third  and  fourth  ages  of  the  present  world, 
and  was  compiler  of  the  Yedas,  as  his  title  of  Vyasa  implies."  * 

With  the  want  of  ability  to  weigh  evidence  characteristic  of 
Hindus,2  Vyasa,  besides  arranging  the  Vedas,  is  generally  believed 
to  have  written  the  Vedauta- Sutras,  the  Mahabharata,  and  some 
of  the  principal  Puranas.  Books  with  such  discordant  opinions 
could  not  have  proceeded  from  a  single  person.  It  was  a  common 
practice  in  India,  to  secure  favourable  notice  of  a  work,  to  attribute 
it  to  some  rishi.  In  South  India  there  are  treatises  not  more  than 
one  or  two  centuries  old,  which  profess  to  have  been  written  by 
Agastya ! 

Thibaut,  referring  to  the  Sutras  of  the  two  branches  of  the 
Mimansa,  says : — 

"There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  composition  of  these  two  collections 
of  Sutras  was  preceded  by  a  long  series  of  preparatory  literary  efforts 
of  which  they  merely  represent  the  highly  condensed  outcome.  This  is 
rendered  probable  by  the  analogy  of  other  Sastras,  as  well  as  by  the 
exhaustive  thoroughness  with  which  the  Sutras  perform  their  task  of 
systematising  the  teaching  of  the  Veda,  and  is  further  proved  by 
the  freqnent  references  which  the  Sutras  make  to  the  views  of  earlier 
teachers."3 

When  Composed — Thibaut  says  :  "  The  time  at  which  the  two 
Mimansa-Sutras  were  composed  we  are  at  present  unable  to  fix 
with  any  certainty."  But  he  adds  :  "  It  appears  that  already  at  a 
very  early  period  the  Vedanta-Sutras  had  come  to  be  looked  upon 
as  an  authoritative  work,  not  to  be  neglected  by  any  who  wished  to 
affiliate  their  own  doctrines  to  the  Veda."3 

The  references  to  the  Yoga  of  Patanjali,  the  atheistical 
Sankhya  of  Kapila,  and  the  atomic  system  of  Kanada,  show  the 
Vedanta-Sutras  to  be  posterior  to  them.  "  From  this,"  says 
Colebrooke,  "  which  is  also  supported  by  other  reasons,  there  seems 
to  bo  good  ground  for  considering  the  Sariraka  to  be  the  latest 
of  the  six  grand  systems  of  doctrine  (darsana)in  Indian  philosophy." 

Obscurity  of  the  Vedanta-Sutras. — Thibaut  ^says : 

"  All  Sutras  aim  at  conciseness  ;  that  is  clearly  the  reason  to  which 
this  whole  species  of  literary  composition  owes  its  existence  ...  At  the 
sametimethe  manifestintentionof  theSutra  writers  istoexpressthemselves 

1  Colebrooke's  Essays.  3  See  Dr.  Bhandarkar's  Lecture  on  the  Critical,  Comparative, 
and  Historical  Meihod  of  Enquiry.  Bombay  Nirnaya  Sagar  Press,  1888. 
3  Introduction  to  Translation  of  Vedanta-Satras,  pp.  xi,  xii.  xiii,  xvi. 


THE    VEDANTA-SUTRAS.  17 

with  as  much  clearness  as  the  conciseness  affected  by  them  admits  of. 
.  .  .  Hence  the  possibility  of  understanding  without,  a  commentary  a 
very  considerable  portion  at  any  rate  of  the  ordinary  Sutras.  Altogether 
different  is  the  case  of  the  two  Mimansa  Sutras.  There  scarcely  one 
single  Sutra  is  intelligible  without  a  commentary.  The  most  essential 
words  are  habitually  dispensed  with  ;  nothing  is,  for  instance,  more 
common  than  the  simple  omission  of  the  subject  or  predicate  of  a 
sentence.  And  when  here  and  there  a  Sutra  occurs  whose  words 
construe  without  anything  having  to  be  supplied  the  phraseology  is  so 
eminently  vague  and  obscure,  that  without  the  help  derived  from  a 
commentary  we  should  be  unable  to  make  out  to  what  subject  the 
Sutra  refers."1 

Colebrooke  expresses  the  same  opinion  :  "  The  Sariraka  Sutras 
are  in  the  highest  degree  obscure,  and  could  never  have  been 
intelligible  without  an  ample  interpretation." 

As  an  illustration,  the  first  four  Sutras  may  be  quoted,  the 
translation  giving  the  exact  words  in  the  original : 

1.  Then  therefore  the  enquiry  into  Brahman. 

2.  From  which  the  origin  of  this. 

3.  From  its  being  the  source  of  Scripture. 

4.  But  that  because  it  is  connected  as  their  purport. 
Sankara's    Commentary  on  the  above  occupies  about   32    octavo 
pages ;  nearly  three  pages  are  devoted  to  "  then." 

Commentaries. — "  Fitz-Edward  Hall,  in  his  Bibliographical 
Index,  mentions  14  commentaries,  copies  of  which  had  been 
inspected  by  himself.  Some  of  them  are  indeed  not  commentaries 
in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  but  rather  systematic  expositions 
of  the  doctrine  supposed  to  be  propounded  in  the  Sutras  ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  there  are  in  existence  several  true  commentaries  which 
had  not  been  accessible  to  Fitz-Edward  Hall."2 

"  Among  ancient  scholiasts  of  the  Brahma-Sutras,"  says 
Colebrooke,  "  the  name  of  Baudhayana  occurs :  an  appellation  to 
which  reverence,  as  to  that  of  a  saint  or  rishi,  attaches.  He  is  like- 
wise the  reputed  author  of  a  treatise  on  law.  An  early  gloss 
(commentary) ,  under  the  designation  of  Vritti,  is  quoted  without  the 
author's  name,  and  is  understood  to  be  adverted  to  in  the  remarks 
of  later  writers,  in  several  instances,  when  no  particular  reference 
is  however  expressed.  It  is  apparently  Baudhayana's."3 

Of  all  the  commentaries  the  oldest  extant  and  most  celebrated, 
is  that  of  Sankaracharya,  selected  by  Thibaut  for  translation.  He 
says: 

"  The  Sankara-bhashya  is  the  authority  most  generally  deferred  to 
in  India  as  to  the  right  understanding  of  the  Vedanta-Sutras,  and  ever 
since  Sankara's  time  the  majority  of  the  best  thinkers  of  India  Lave  been 
men  belonging  to  his  school." 

1  Introduction  to  translation  of  Vedanta-Sutras.     pp.  14,  15. 

9Thibaut,  Introduction,  p.  xvi-         3  Essays  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Hindus. 

3 


18  THIS   VEDANTA-SABA. 

14  But  to  the  European  a  question  will  of  course  suggest  itself  at 
once,  viz.  whether  or  not  Sankara'e  explanations  faithfully  render  the 
intended  meaning  of  the  author  of  the  Sutras  Y 

"  This  is  a  task  which  would  have  to  be  undertaken  even  if 
Sankara's  views  as  to  the  true  meaning  of  the  Sutras  and  Upanishaite 
had  never  been  called  into  doubt  on  Indian  soil;  but  it  becomes  much 
more  n'-gent,  and  at  fhe  same  time  more  feasible  when  we  meet  in  India 
itself  with  systems  claiming  to  be  Vedantic  and  baaed  on  interpretations 
of  the  Sutras  and  Upanishads  more  or  less  different  from  those  of 
Sankara.  The  claims  of  those  systems  to  be  in  possession  of  the  right 
understanding  of  the  fundamental  authorities  of  the  Vedanta  must  at 
any  rate  be  examined,  even  if  we  should  finally  be  compelled  to  reject 
them. 

"  The  bbashya,  which  in  this  connexion  is  the  first  to  press  itself 
upon  our  attention,  is  the  one  composed  by  the  famous  Vaiahnava 
theologian  and  philosopher,  Bamanuja,  who  is  supposed  to  have  lived  in 
the  12th  century.  The  Rarnauuja,  or,  as  it  is  often  called*  the  Sri-bhashya, 
appears  to  be  the  oldest  commentary  extant  next  to  Saukara's.  It  is 
further  to  be  noted  that  the  sect  of  the  Ramanujas  occupies  a 
pre-eminent  position  among  the  Vaishnava  sects.  The  Srf-bhashya 
strikes  one  throughout  as  a  very  solid  performance,  due  to  a  writer  of 
extensive  learning  and  great  power  of  argumentation.  Ramanuja 
also  claims  to  follow  in  his  bhashya  the  authority  of  Bodhayana."1 

Thibaut  shows,  by  quotations,  "  that  the  ancient  teachers,  the 
ripest  outcome  of  whose  speculations  and  discussions  is  embodied  in 
the  Vedanta-Sutras,  disagreed  among  themselves  on  points  of  vital 
importance."  .  .  .  They  show  "  that  recognised  authorities — deemed 
worthy  of  being  quoted  in  the  Sutras — denied  that  doctrine  on 
which  the  whole  system  of  Sankara  hinges,  viz.,  the  doctrine  of  the 
absolute  identity  of  the  individual  soul  with  Brahman."2 

Colebrooke  mentions  the  following,  in  addition  to  Baudhayana 
and  Ramanuja,  as  having  written  commentaries  on  the  Sariraka- 
Sutras,  differing  essentially  on  some  points  from  Sankara's : 
Ballabha  Acharya,  Bhatta  Bhascara,  Ananta  Tirtha,  surnamecJ 
Madhu,  and  Nilakantha. 

He  adds  :  "  These  multiplied  expositions  of  the  text  and  of  the 
gloss  furnish  an  inexhaustible  fund  of  controversial  disquisition, 
suited  to  the  disputatious  schoolmen  of  India."3 

Size  and  Divisions — Colebrooke  thus  describes  them  : 

"  The  Sutras  of  Badarayana  are  arranged  in  four  books  or  lectures 
(adhydya),  each  subdivided  into  four  chapters  or  quarters  (pdda).  They 
are  distributed  very  unequally  into  sections,  argument^,  cases  or  topics 
(adhikarana) .  The  entire  number  of  Sutras  is  555  ;  of  adhikaranas,  191. 
But  in  this  there  is  a  little  uncertainty,  for  it  appears  from  Sankara,  that 
earlier  commentaries  subdivided  some  adhikaranas,  where  he  writes  the 
aphorisms  in  one  section. 

1  Abridged  from  Thibaut's  Introduction,  pp.  14-17. 
"  Introduction,  pp.  xix,  xx.  3  Essay  on  Vedanta. 


THE    VEDANTA-SUTRAS.  19 

"  An  adhikarana  consists  of  five  members  or  parts  ;  1st,  the  subject 
and  matter  to  be  explained  ;  2nd,  the  doubt  or  qut-stion^couceruing  it ;  3rd, 
the  plausible  solution  or  primd  facie  argument ;  4th,  answer,  or  demon- 
strated conclusion  and  true  solution;  5th,  the  pertinence  or  relevancy  and 
connexion. 

"  But  in  Badarayana's  aphorisms  no  adhikarana  is  fully  set  forth. 
Very  frequently  the  solution  only  is  given  by  a  single  sutra,  which 
obscurely  hints  the  question,  and  makes  no  allusion  to  any  different 
plausible  solution,  nor  to  arguments  in  favour  of  it.  More  rarely  the 
opposed  solution  is  examined  at  some  length,  and  arguments  in  support 
of  it  are  discussed  through  a  string  of  brief  sentences."1 

Contents. — The  following  summary  is  abridged  from  a  very 
full  analysis  given  by  Thibaut  in  his  Introduction.  Thibaut 
compares  the  different  explanations  of  Sutras  given  by  Sankara  and 
Ramanuja ;  but,  as  a  rule,  only  the  views  of  the  former  are 
mentioned  in  the  following  outline. 

I.  ADHYAYA. — The  First  Pdda  begins  with  laying  down  the 
fundamental  positions  with  regard  to  Brahma  ;  it  is  that  from  which 
the  world  originates,  the  source  of  the  Vedas,  the  uniform  topic  of 
all  Vedauta  texts.     It  is  shown  that  the  cause  of  the  world  is  an 
intelligent    principle,    and    cannot    be    identified   with    the  non- 
intelligent  pradhana  from  which  the  world  springs  according  to  the 
Sankhyas.     The  Second  Pada  shows  that  the  being  which  consists  of 
mind,  whose   body  is  breath,  &c.,  is  not  the  individual  soul,  but 
Brahma.     The  Sutras  emphatically  dwell  on  the  difference  of  the 
individual  soul  and  the  highest  Self,  whence  Sankara  is  obliged  to 
add  an  explanation  that  the  difference  is  to  be  understood  as  not 
real,  but  as  due  to  false  limiting  adjuncts  of  the  highest  Self.    The 
Third  Pada  shows   that   the  Imperishable  in  which  the   ether  is 
woven,  the  highest  person  who  is  to  be  meditated  upon  with  the 
syllable  Om,  the  small  ether  within  the  lotus  of  the  heart,  &c.,  is 
Brahma.     The  gods  are  capable  of  the  knowledge  of  Brahma,  but 
Sudras   are   altogether   disqualified.     The   last  Pada   is   specially 
directed  against  the  Sankhyas.     Brahma  is  held  to  be  not  only  the 
efficient  cause  of  the  world,  but  its  material  cause  as  well.     The 
world  springs  from  Brahma  by  way  of  modification  (parindma) .   The 
refutation  of  the  Sankhya  views  is  applicable  to  other  theories  also, 
such  as  the  doctrine  of  the  world  having  originated  from  atoms. 

II.  AJDHYAYA. — The  First  Pada  shows  that  Brahma,  although 
of  the  nature  of  intelligence,  may  yet  be  the  cause  of  the  non- 
intelligent  material  world,  and  that  it  is  not   contaminated  by  the 
qualities  of  the  world  when  the  latter  is  refunded  into  Brahma. 
Like  does  not  always  spring  from  like.     Brahma,  though  destitute 
of  material  and  instruments  of  action,  may  yet  produce  the  world  just 
as  the  gods  by  their  mere  power  create  palaces.  &c.,  and  as  milk  by 
itself    turns  into  curds;    Brahma,    although    emitting   the    world 

1  Essay  on  the  Veddnta. 


20  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

from  itself,  remains  one  and  undivided  ;  Brahma  is  able  to  create 
the  world  by  means  of  the  manifold  powers  which  it  possesses. 
Brahma,  in  creating  the  world,  has  no  motive,  but  follows  a  sportive 
impulse.  Brahma  is  justified  from  the  charges  of  partiality  and 
cruelty  from  the  inequalities  of  life  as  it  acts  with  a  view  to  the 
merit  and  demerit  of  individual  souls.  The  Second  Pada  refutes 
by  arguments  independent  cf  Vedic  passages  the  more  important 
philosophical  theories  concerning  the  origin  of  the  world  which 
are  opposed  to  the  Vedanta  view.  It  is  shown  that  a  non-intelligent 
first  cause,  such  as  the  pradhana  of  the  Sankhyas,  is  unable  to 
create  and  dispose ;  the  Vaiseshika  doctrine  is  refuted  that  the 
world  originates  from  atoms  set  in  motion  by  Adrishta.  Various 
schools  of  Bauddha  philosophers  are  impugned.  The  last  part 
refers  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Bhagavatas,  the  forerunners  of 
Ramanuja.  The  Third  P<lda  discusses  'the  question  whether  the 
different  forms  of  existence  which,  in  their  totality,  constitute  the 
world,  have  an  origin  or  not,  i.e.,  whether  they  are  co-eternal  with 
Brahma  or  issue  from  it  and  are  refunded  into  it  at  stated  intervals. 
The  first  part  treats  of  the  five  elementary  substances.  Ether  is 
not  co-eternal  with  Brahma,  but  springs  from  it  as  its  first  effect ; 
air  springs  from  ether,  fire  from  air,  water  from  fire,  earth  from 
water.  The  reabsorption  takes  place  in  the  inverse  order  of  the 
emission.  The  remainder  of  the  Pada  is  taken  up  by  a  discussion 
of  the  nature  of  the  individual  soul.  It  is  held  to  be  eternal,  and 
therefore  not  produced  like  the  elements.  The  question  is  discussed 
whether  the  soul  is  of  very  minute  size  or  all-pervading.  Sutra  43 
declares  that  the  soul  is  a  part  (amsa)  of  Brahma,  but  Sankara  holds 
that  is  only  "  as  it  were,"  the  one  universal  indivisible  Brahma 
having  no  real  parts,  but  appearing  to  be  divided  owing  to  its 
limiting  adjuncts.  Eamanuja  holds  that  the  souls  are  in  reality  parts 
of  Brahma.  The  Fourth  Pada  treats  of  the  Pranas,  1 1  in  number, 
and  of  minute  size.  They  sprung  from  Brahma  and  are  guided  by 
special  divinities.  The  evolution  of  names  and  forms  is  the  work 
of  the  highest  Lord. 

III.  ADHYAYA. — The  First  Pada  treats  of  what  happens  to  the 
soul  after  death,  and  discusses  the  fate  of  those  who  go  to  the  moon 
and  those  whose  good  works  do  not  entitle  them  to  that  privilege. 
The  descent  from  the  moon  is  very  rapid ;  souls  which  finally  enter 
plants  do  not  participate  in  their  life,  but  are  merely  in  external 
contact  with  them.  The  Second  Pada  treats  of  the  soul  in  a 
dreaming  state ;  in  deep  dreamless  sleep  the  soul  abides  within 
Brahma  in  the  heart ;  in  a  SWOOQ  there  is  half  union  ;  the  nature  of 
the  highest  Brahma  in  which  the  individual  soul  is  merged  in  the 
state  of  deep  sleep  is  discussed;  Brahma  is  held  to  be  in  reality 
void  of  all  distinctive  attributes  which  are  altogether  due  to  the 
Upddhis  ;  lastly  it  is  held,  in  opposition  to  Jaimini,  that  the  reward 
of  works  is  allotted  by  the  Lord.  The  Third  Pada  describes  how  the 


THE    VEDANTA-SUTKAS.  21 

individual  soul  is  enabled  by  meditation  on  Brahma  to  obtain  final 
release.  The  question  is  considered  whether  in  all  the  meditations 
on  Brahma  all  its  qualities  are  to  be  included  or  only  those 
mentioned  in  the  special  vidyd.  It  is  asserted  that  a  man  dying 
possessed  of  true  knowledge  shakes  off  all  his  good  and  evil  deeds,1 
the  former  passing  to  his  friends,  the  latter  to  his  enemies.  The 
Fourth  Pada  proves  that  the  knowledge  of  Brahma  is  not 
subordinate  to  action,  but  independent ;  from  ascetics  rio  actions 
but  only  knowledge  is  required.  Nevertheless  the  actions  enjoined 
by  Scripture,  as  sacrifices,  &c.,  are  required  as  conducive  to 
the  rise  of  vidyd  in  the  mind.  Certain  relaxations  allowed 
of  the  laws  regarding  food,  are  meant  only  for  cases  of  extreme 
need.  The  duties  of  the  four  stages  are  obligatory  on  him  who  does 
not  strive  after  mukti.  Some  of  the  results  of  vidyd  are  described. 
IY.  ADHYAYA  : — The  First  Pada  gives  rules  for  meditation  on 
the  Atman.  It  is  not  an  act  to  be  accomplished  once  only,  but  is  to 
be  repeated  again  and  again.  The  Atman  is  to  be  viewed  as  consti- 
tuting one's  own  Self  ;  meditation  is  to  be  carried  on  in  a  sitting 
posture  at  any  time,  and  in  any  favourable  place,  and  to  be 
continued  until  death.  When  through  these  meditations  the 
knowledge  of  Brahma  has  been  reached,  the  vidvdn  is  no  longer 
affected  by  the  consequences  of  either  past  or  future  evil  deeds ;  but 
this  does  not  extend  to  works  on  which  the  present  existence  of  the 
devotee  depends.  When  the  latter  have  been  fully  worked  out, 
the  vidvdn  becomes  united  with  Brahma.  The  Second  Pdda  and 
the  two  remaining  describe  the  fate  of  the  vidvdn  after  death.  In 
explaining  the  Sutras,  Sankara  and  Ramanuja  generally  differ 
widely.  Only  the  explanations  of  the  former  will  be  noticed.  On 
the  death  of  the  vidvdn  who  possesses  the  lower  knowledge,  his 
senses  are  merged  in  the  manas,  the  manas  in  the.  pruna,  the  prdna 
in  the  jiva,  the  jiva  in  the  subtile  elements.  On  the  death  of  him 
who  possesses  the  higher  knowledge,  his  prdnas,  elements,  &c.,  are 
merged  in  Brahma,  so  as  to  be  no  longer  distinct  in  any  way. 
The  vidvdn  leaves  the  body  by  the  artery  called  sushumnd,  the 
avidvdn  by  another  one.  The  departing  soul  passes  up  to  the  sun 
by  a  ray  of  light  what  exists  at  night  as  well  as  during  day. 
The  Third  Pada  reconciles  the  different  accounts  given  in  the 
Upanishads  as  to  the  stations  of  the  way  which  leads  the  vidvdn  up 
to  Brahma.  By  the  '  stations'  are  to  be  understood,  not  only  the 
subdivisions  of  the  way,  but  also  the  divine  beings  which  lead  the 
soul  on. 

The  Brahma  to  which  the  departed  soul  is  led  by  the  guardians 
of  the  path  of  the  gods  is  not  the  highest  Brahma  ;  but  the  Saguna 
Brahma.  Those  only  are  guided  to  Brahma  who  have  not  worship- 

1  The  illustrations  given  in  the  commentary  are  "  Shaking  off  all  evil  as  a  horse 
shakes  his  hair,  and  shaking  off  the  body  as  the  moon  frees  herself  from  the  mouth 
of  Rahu."  Thibaut,  Vol.  II.  p.  225. 


22  T1IE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

pod  it  under  a  symbolic  form.  The  Fourth  Pada  teaches  that  when, 
on  his  death,  the  soul  of  the  owner  of  the  highest  knowledge 
obtains  final  release,  it  does  not  acquire  any  new  characteristics, 
but  merely  manifests  itself  in  its  true  nature.  The  relation  of  the 
released  soul  to  Brahma  means  absolute  non-separation,  identity. 
The  released  are  embodied  or  disembodied  according  to  their  wish. 
The  soul  of  the  released  can  animate  several  bodies  at  the  same 
time,  as  the  same  lamp  may  have  several  wicks.  The  released  souls 
participate  in  all  the  perfections  and  powers  of  Brahma,  with  the 
exception  of  the  power  of  creating  and  sustaining  the  world.  They 
do  not  return  to  new  forms  of  embodied  existence. 

Thibaut,  when  contrasting  the  opinions  of  Sankara  and 
Ramauuja  generally  accepts  the  latter  as  the  more  reasonable.  la 
the  examination  of  Vedanta  doctrines,  there  will  be  numerous 
references  to  the  Vedanta-Sdtras. 

A  full  and  accurate  account  of  the  Vedanta  is  given  in 
Cjlebrooke's  Essays. 

The  more  modern  form  of  Vedantism  will  now  be  described. 


VEDANTA-SARA. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  VEDANTA-SAEA,  '  Essence  of  the  Vedanta/  says  Colebrooke, 
ft  is  a  popular  compendium  of  the  entire  doctrine  of  the  Vedanta. 
It  is  the  work  of  Sadananda,  disciple  of  Advayananda  or  Ad- 
vaitananda,  and  has  become  the  text  for  several  commentaries, 
among  the  rest  the  Vidvanmano-ranjini,  *  Rejoicer  of  the  Mind  of 
the  Learned/  by  Rama-tirtha,  and  the  Subodhini,  by  Nrisimha 
Sarasvati,  disciple  of  Krishnananda." 

The  Vedanta-Sara  is  held  in  esteem  as  a  correct  exponent  of 
orthodox  Vedantism.  Ballantyne  says  that  it  is  "  the  compendium 
in  which  this  doctrine  is  usually  first  studied/' 

Nothing  seems  to  be  known  of  the  author.  Though  the  time 
of  its  composition  cannot  be  fixed  definitely,  it  is  known  to  be 
comparatively  modern.  Professor  Venis,  in  the  Preface  to  his 
translation  of  the  Vedantie  Siddhdnta  muktavali  of  Prakasananda, 
says : 

"  The  exact  date  of  the  Siddhdnta  muktavali  is  unknown.  The 
•work  may  however  be  assigned  with  some  probability  to  the  last  quarter 
of  the  sixteenth  century  ;  for  it,  is  referred  to  by  Appaya-dikshiti,  who  had 
reached  a  good  old  age  in  1626  A.D.,  and  who  (it  would  appear  from  the 
evidence  now  available)  was  contemporary  with  Prakasanaiida."  p.  iii. 

Colonel  Jacob,  the  latest  translator  of  the  Vedanta-Sara, 
considers  that  it  was  composed  shortly  after  the  above  work. 


INTEOIHJCTION.  23 

There  are  three  English  translations.  The  first,  by  Dr.  Eoer, 
was  published  in  the  Journal  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society  in  1845. 
A  greatly  improved  translation  was  incorporated  by  Dr.  J.  E. 
Ballantyue,  Principal  of  the  Sanskrit  College,  Benares,  in  a  lecture 
on  the  Vedanta  delivered  in  1850.  A  third  translation,  by  Colonel 
G.  A.  Jacob,  was  published  in  1881.  The  third  edition,  revised, 
appeared  in  1891. !  Besides  being  an  improved  translation,  it 
contains  copious  valuable  annotations.  The  following  translation 
is  from  Ballantyne;  but,  here  and  there,  important  clearer 
renderings  are  given  from  Colonel  Jacob.  Colonel  Jacob  has  also 
published  the  Veddnta-Sara  in  Sanskrit  with  the  commentaries  of 
Nrisimhasarasvati  and  Eamatirtha,  with  Notes  and  Indices.2 

The  latest  phase  of  Vedantism  is  found  also  in  another  standard 
treatise,  probably  posterior  to  the  Yedanta-Sara,  called  the  Veddnta 
Paribhdshd.  It  has  been  translated  by  Professor  Venis,  and 
published  in  The  Pandit  for  1882-85.  Numerous  extracts  from  it 
are  given  by  Nehemiah  Goreh  in  his  Refutation  of  Hindu  Philoso- 
phical Systems. 

The  Vedanta-S&ra  is  continuous ;  but,  for  greater  clearness, 
Colonel  Jacob  has  divided  his  translation  into  fourteen  sections, 
adopted  below,  to  which  a  brief  summary  has  been  added. 

I.     Introductory  stanzas. 

II".  The  Qualifications  necessary  in  a  student  of  the  Veddnta  ; 
the  Subject-Matter ;  the  Connection  between  the  subject-matter 
and  the  treatise  ;  the  Advantages  of  the  Study. 

III.  Erroneous   Imputation  ;   the  '  Eeal'  and  the   '  Unreal', 
Brahma  and  Ignorance. 

IV.  Collective    and    Distributive    Ignorance,     I'svara   and 
Prajna  identical  ;  the  '  Fourth' ;  the  two  powers  of  Ignorance, — 
Envelopment  and  Projection. 

V.  The  Causal,  Subtile  and  Gross  Bodies,  with  which  Brahma 
is  illusorily  associated  ;  the  '  Fourth  State.' 

VI.  Meaning  of  the  sentence,  '  Truly  all  this  is  Brahma'j; 
Eefutation  of  Charvdka,  Bauddha,  and  other  fallacies. 

VII.  Meaning  of  '  Eefutation';  the  phenomenal  world   only 
the  illusory  effect  of  Brahma,  who  is  its  illusory  material  cause. 

VIII.  Meaning  of  '  That'  and   '  Thou'  in  the  great  sentence 
determined  by  erroneous  Imputation  and  its  Eefutation. 

IX.  Explanations  of  the  Great  Sentence,  '  That  art  Thou  ;' 
the  three  Eolations. 

X.  Erroneous  explanations  of  the  Great  Sentence ;  the  true 
meaning. 

1  It  appeared  in  Triibner's  Oriental  Series,  entitled  A  Manual  of  Hindu 
Pantheism.  It  is  now  published  by  Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Triibner  &  Co.,  Price  5s. 

*  Printed  and  Published  by  Tukaram  Javaii,  Nirnaya  Sagar  Press,  Bombay. 
Price  Re.  J  *. 


24  THK    VBDANTA-SAEA. 

XI.  Meaning   of   the   sentence,   ( I   am    Brahma' ;    he    who 
understands  the  Great  Sentence  realises  his  union  with  It. 

XII.  Means  to  be  employed  to  realize  the  Great  Sentence. 

XIII.  The    eight    Means  subservient    to  Meditation  without 
distinction  of  Subject  and  Object. 

XIV.  Characteristics  of  the  Jivanmukta. 


TRANSLATION 


OP 


THE   VEDANTA-SARA. 


i. 

(INTRODUCTION.) 
Salutation  to  Ganesa  ! 

For  the  accomplishment  of  what  is  desired,  I  take  refuge  with 
the  Indivisible  (akhanda],  (that  consists  of)1  existence,  knowledge, 
and  joy, — no  object  fitted  for  the  organ  of  voice  (to  declare),  nor 
for  the  mind  (to  comprehend) — Soul — the  substrate2  of  all. 

Having  reverenced  my  preceptor,  Advayananda,  who  is 
significantly  so  named  (undivided  joy) — because  the  notion  of 
duality  is  (in  his  case)  destroyed — I  shall,  according  to  my 
understanding  of  it,  declare  the  Essence  of  the  Vedanta. 

(But  what  is  meant  by  the  term)  Vedanta  ?  (By  this  is 
meant)  the  evidence  (of  there  being  nothing  but  Brahma) 
constituted  by  the  Upanishads,  and  (by  the  same  term  are  denoted) 
such  works  ancillary  thereto,  as  the  S&ririka  Sutras. 

II. 

(THE  QUALIFICATIONS  NECESSARY  IN  A  STUDENT  OP  THE  VEDANTA; 
THE  SUBJECT-MATTER  ;  THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  THE  SUBJECT- 
MATTER  AND  THE  TREATISE  ;  THE  ADVANTAGES  OP  THE  STUDY.) 

Since,  in  consequence  of  this  work  being  concerned  about 
the  Vedauta,  it  is  clear  that  this  has  the  same  moving  considera- 
tions (anubandha)3  as  that  has,  these  do  not  require  to  be  considered 
as  if  they  were  something  different  (from,  what  the  readers  of  the 
Vedanta  are  accustomed  to). 

In  that  (the  Veddnta — what  are)  the  moving  considerations  ?4 
(They  are)  (1)  The  competent  person  (adhikdriri),  (2)  The  object- 

1  English  words,  enclosed  within  brackets,  are  added  to  complete  the  sense. 

9  That  which  is  spread  under.  The  substance  supposed  to  furnish  the  basis  in 
which  the  perceptible  qualities  inhere. 

*  Things  previously  known  in  order  to  understand  other  things. 

* "  Moving  considerations."  Col.  Jacob  says  :  "  Various  readings  of  this 
technical  term  have  been  proposed,  such  as  '  motives,'  praecognita,  (things  needful  to 
be  kuowu  before),  &c.  A  lucid  explanation  of  it  is  given  by  Dr,  Ballantyne  in  bis 

4 


26  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

matter  (vishaya) ,  (3)  The  relation  (sambandha) ,  and  (4)  The  purpose 
(prayojana) . 

I.  The  '  competent  person'  is  that  well-regulated  person  who, 
by  the  perusal,  as  prescribed,  of  the  Vedas  and  their  dependent 
sciences,  has  attained  to  a  rough  notion 1  of  the  sense  of  the 
whole  Veda  : — who,  by  renouncing,  in  this  or  in  a  former  life, 
things  desirable  and  things  forbidden  ;  and  by  observance  of  the 
constant  and  of  the  occasional  ceremonies,  of  penances,  and  of 
devotions,  being  freed  from  all  sin,  is  thoroughly  purified  in  his 
heart,  and  who  is  possessed  of  the  four  requisites,  (hereafter 
mentioned) . 

'  Things  desirable '  are  the  means,  such  as  the  jyotishtoma2 
sacrifice,  of  obtaining  things  desired — such  as  heaven. 

'  Things  forbidden'  such  as  the  killing  of  a  Brahman,  are  what 
lead  to  things  un desired — such  as  heil. 

f  Constant  ceremonies,'  (nitya) ,  such  as  the  morning  and  evening 
prayers,3  &c.,  are  those  which,  in  their  omission  (under  any  circum- 
stances) are  causes  of  sin. 

'Occasional  ceremonies  (naimitiikfi) ,  such  as  the  jdteshti,^  are 
those  contingent  on  some  occasion,  such  as  the  birth  of  a  son. 

'  Penances'  (prdyaschitta) ,  such  as  the  Chdndrdyana^  are  what 
cause  (not  the  acquisition  of  anything  positive,  but)  merely  the 
removal  of  sin. 

'  Devotions'  (upasana],  such  as  (are  inculcated  in)  the  doctrine 
of  the  saint  Sdndilycfi,  consist  of  mental  operations  whose  object 
is  Brahma  with  qualities. 

Of  these  (three  sets)  of  which  the  '  constant  ceremonies' 
are  the  first,  the  chief  purpose  is  the  purification  of  the  intellect ; 
but  of  the  '  devotions'  the  chief  purpose  is  the  concentration 
of  it. 

(The  positions  above  laid  down  are  deduced)  from  such 
scriptural  texts  as  this,  that  "  Him  do  the  Brahmans  seek  to  know 
by  means  of  sacrifices  (performed)  in  conformity  with  (the  direc- 

article  entitled,  The  Gist  of  the  Veddnta  as  a  Philosophy  (Pandit,  for  July  1667), 
and  is  as  follows  :  '  With  reference  to  the  commencing  of  any  scientific  work, 
according  to  Hindu  opinion,  fonr  questions  present  themselves — (1)  what 
qualifications  are  required  to  render  one  competent  to  enter  upon  the  study  ? — (2) 
what  is  the  subject-matter  ? — (3)  what  connexion  is  there  between  the  subject- 
matter  and  the  book  itself  P — and  (4)  what  inducement  is  there  to  enter  upon  the 
study  at  all  ?  The  answer  to  each  of  these  questions  is  called  an  anulandha — a 
'  bond  of  connection*  or  '  cause' — because,  unless  a  man  knows  what  a  given  book  is 
about,  and  whether  he  is  competent  to  understand  it,  and  what  good  the  knowledge 
will  do  him,  he  cannot  be  expected  to  apply  himself  to  the  study  of  the  book.'" 
Sanskrit  Ed.  of  Veddnta-Sdra,  p.  168. 

1  "  General  idea."  Col.  "Jacob.  2  Seven,  sacrifices  of  which  Agnishtoma  was 
the  first.  On  the  last  day  the  squeezing,  offering  and  drinking  of  the  Soma  juice 
took  place.  It  was  considered  the  holiest  of  all  Brahinanical  services.  '  The 
repetition  of  the  Gdyatri,  5,  10,  28  or  100  times.  4  Birth-sacrifice.  s  Increasing 
or  diminishing  food  by  one  mouthful  daily  during  the  light  and  dark  fortnights 
of  the  moon.  '  The  doctrine  ascribed  to  the  sage  Sandilya. 


TRANSLATION.  27 

tions  of)  the  Veda"  j1  and  (they  are  deduced  also)  from  such 
regulations  as  this  that  "  By  austerities  one  destroys  sin 2 — by 
knowledge  one  obtains  the  water  of  immortality." 

The  result  attendant  on  the  constant  and  occasional  cere- 
monies, and  on  devotion,  is  the  attaining  to  the  abode  of  the 
progenitors  and  of  the  celestials — (and  this  is  deduced)  from  the 
text,  "  The  abode  of  the  progenitors  is  (to  be  attained  to)  by 
works,  and -the  abode  of  the  gods  by  knowledge."3 

'  Requisites'  (sddhana)  are  (1)  the  discrimination  of  eternal 
substance  from  the  transient ;  (2)  disregard  of  the  enjoyment  of 
the  fruits  of  here  and  hereafter ;  (3)  the  possession  of  tranquillity 
and  self-restraint ;  and  (4)  desire  of  liberation. 

(1.)  '  Discrimination  of  the  eternal  substance  from  the 
transient/  is  the  discerning  that  Brahma  is  the  eternal  substance, 
and  that  all  else  is  non-eternal. 

(2.)  'Disregard  of  the  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  here  and 
hereafter'  is  the  entire  neglect  of  them,  because  of  the  fact  that 
the  enjoyments  of  the  things  of  hereafter,  also,  such  as  the  water  of 
immortality,  are  un-eternal,  just  as  the  enjoyments  of  the  things  of 
the  present,  such  as  garlands  and  unguents  are  un-eternal,  because 
they  are  produced  by  works. 

(3.)  '  Tranquillity,  Self-restraint,'  &c.,  are  (1)  Tranquillity, 
(2)  self-restraint,  (3)  quiescence,  (4)  endurance,  (5)  contemplation, 
and  (6)  faith. 

a.  '  Tranquillity'  is  the  restraining  of  (the  internal  organ) 
the  mind  from  objects  different  from  the  hearing,  &c.  (about 
Isvara.) 

6.  '  Self-Restraint'  is  the  restraining  of  the  external  organs 
from  objects  different  therefrom. 

c.  (  Quiescence'  is  the  inaction  of  the  organs  thus  restrained 
from    objects    different  therefrom.     Or — it    is    the    abandonment, 
according  to  the  injunction,  of  works  enjoined. 

d.  '  Endurance'  is  the  sustaining  of  such  pairs  as  cold  and 
heat  (with  indifference  alike  for  the  pain  or  pleasure  they  may  tend 
to  produce.) 

e.  '  Contemplation'    (samddhdna)    is    the    intentness    of    the 
mind  restrained  (from  all  else)  on  the  hearing,  &c.,  (concerning  the 
Lord)  or  on  kindred  objects. 

/.  '  Faith'  (sraddhd)  is  belief  in  the  assertions  of  the  spiritual 
guide  and  of  the  Yedanta. 

(4.)  '  Desire  of  liberation'  is  the  wish  to  be  liberated. 

Such  a  well-regulated  person  is  a  competent  person  (to  engage 
in  the  study  of  the  Vedanta) . 

1  Brikaddranyaka,  4.   4,    22.  sifanu,  xii.  104.  3  Brihad.  i.  5»  16. 


28  THE    VEDANTA-SABA. 

(That  such  is  the  character  of  a  fit  enquirer  may  be  inferred) 
from  the  scriptural  text  beginniug,  "Tranquil  and  self -restrained,1 
&c."  And  it  has  been  said,  "  To  him  who  is  tranquil  in  mind,  who  has 
his  organs  in  subjection,  whose  sins  have  disappeared,  who  acts 
according  to  the  commandments,  who  is  possessed  of  good  qualities, 
docile,  ever  desiring  liberation — this  (doctrine  of  the  Vedanta)  is 
always  proper  to  be  imparted."2 

II.  The  '  Object- matter'  (visliayn],  is  the  fact — to-  be  known 
for  certain — that  the  soul  and  Brahma  are   one;  for  this  is  the 
drift  of  all  Vedanta  treatises. 

III.  The  '  Relation'  (sambandha) .    This,  between  the  identity 
(of   Soul  and  Brahma)  which  is  to  be  known  as  certain,  and  the 
evidence   thereof    contained    in    the    scriptural    treatises    which 
ascertain  it,  is  that   of  the  information    (communicated)  and  the 
informer. 

IV.  The  '  End'  (prayojana)  is  the  cessation  of  the  ignorance 
which  invades  this  identity  that  is  tobe  known  (of  Soul  and  Brahma) 
and  the  attainment   (by   Soul,  thereon)  of  that  bliss  which  is  his 
essence. 

(This  may  be  inferred)  from  the  scriptural  text,  that  "  He 
who  knows  what  Soul  is,  gets  beyond  grief  ;"3  and  from  the  text, 
that,  "  He  who  knows  Brahma  becomes  Brahma."4. 

This  qualified  person  being  burned  by  the  fire  of  this  world  in 
the  shape  of  birth,  death,  and  the  like,  as  one  whose  head  is 
hexted  (takes  refuge)  in  a  body  of  water,  having  approached,  with 
tribute  in  his  hands,  a  teacher  who  knows  the  Vedas,  and  who  is 
intent  on  Brahma,  follows  him  ;  for  (there  is)  the  Scriptural  text, 
'  With  fuel  in  his  hands  (as  an  offering,  the  enquirer  approaches) 
him  who  knows  the  Vedas  and  is  intent  on  Brahma,  &c."5 

The  teacher,  with  the  greatest  kindness,  instructs  him  by  the 
method  of  the  '  Refutation  of  erroneous  Imputation  ;'  (as  might  be 
inferred)  from  such  texts  as  the  one  beginning,  "To  him,  when 
he  had  approached,  the  learned  man  thus  spoke,  &c."6 

III. 

(ERRONEOUS  IMPUTATION;  THE  /  REAL' AND  THE  (  UNREAL'; 
BRAHMA  AND  IGNORANCE.) 

'  Erroneous  Imputation'7  (adhydropa)  is  the  allegation  that 
the  Unreal  is  the  Real — like  the  judgment,  in  respect  of  a  rope 
which  is  no  serpent,  that  it  is  a  serpent. 

1  Brihaddranyaka.  4.  4«  26.         2  Upadesasdhasrt,  324.  3  Chhdndogya,  7,  1.  3. 

4  MundaTea,  3.  2.  9.  5  MunduTca,  i.  2.  12.  6  MundaTca,  i.  2.  13. 

7  Rendered  by  Col.  Jacob,  "  Illusory  Attribution."  "  In  order  to  describe  the 
pure  abstraction  Brahma,  the  teacher  attributes  to  him,  or  superimposes  on  him, 
certain  qualities  which  in  reality  do  not  belong  to  him,  and  then  afterwards  with- 
drawing them  teaeheathafc  the  residuum  is  the  undiffereneed  Absolute." — Jacob,  p.  42. 


TRANSLATION.  29 

The  '  Real'  (vastu)  is  Brahma,  existence,  knowledge,  and 
happiness,  without  a  second.  The  '  Unreal'  (avastu)  is  the  whole 
aggregate  of  the  senseless — beginning  with  Ignorance. 

'  Ignorance.'  They  (the  Vedantins)  declare  that  this  is  a 
somewhat  that  is  not  be  called  positively  either  entity  or  non- 
entity1— not  a  mere  negation  (but)  the  opponent  of  knowledge, — 
consisting  of  the  three  fetters. 

(That  there  is  such  a  thing  as  Ignorance  may  be  deduced) 
from  the  consciousness  of  every  man  of  being  ignorant,  and  from 
such  scriptural  texts  beginning  with,  "  The  power  of  the  divine 
soul  clothed  with  its  qualities."  &c.2 

IV. 

(COLLECTIVE  AND  DISTRIBUTIVE  IGNORANCE  ;  I'SVARA  AND  PRAJNA 

IDENTICAL  ;  THE  '  FOURTH'  ;  THE  TWO  POWERS  OF  IGNORANCE 

ENVELOPMENT  AND  PROJECTION.) 

This  Ignorance  is  treated  as  one  or  as  many  accordingly  as  it 
is  regarded  collectively  or  distributively.3  That  is  to  say — as  of 
trees,  when  regarded  as  a  collection,  the  singular  denomination  is 
'  forest' — or,  as  of  waters,  when  regarded  as  a  collection,  it  (the 
singular  denomination)  is  '  a  lake,' — so  the  ignorances,  attached  to 
souls  and  apparently  multitudinous,  receive,  when  regarded  as  a 
collection,  the  singular  denomination  thereof  (the  name  of 
*  Ignorance'  in  the  singular.) 

(That  it  is  proper  to  speak  of  Ignorance  as  one,  may  be 
deduced)  from  such  scriptural  texts  (as  that  which  speaks  of  it)  as 
"  The  unborn,  the  single,  &c."4 

This  aggregation  (of  Ignorance),  since  it  is  the  abode  of  its 
superior,5  has  chiefly  pure  goodness  in  it.  Intellect  (chaitanya) 
of  which  this  is  the  abode  being  possessed  of  such  qualities  as 
omniscience,  omnipotence,  superintendence  over  all,  impercep- 
tible, all-pervading,  Maker  of  the  world,  is  called  Isvara. 

His  omniscience  (may  be  inferred)  from  the  fact  that  he  is 
the  enlightener  of  all  Ignorance  ;  and  from  such  scriptural  texts  as, 
"  Who  is  omniscient — who  knoweth  all."6 

This  aggregation  (of  Ignorance),  since  it  is  the  cause  of  all,  is 
Isvara's  causal  body.7  Since  there  is  in  it  a  plenitude  of  happiness, 
and  it  envelopes  all  as  the  cocoon  (of  the  silkworm  does  its  tenant); 
it  is  this  that  is  called  the  sheath  of  happiness.  This  (body  of  the 

1  Existence  or  non-existence.  If  the  world  were  allowed  really  to  exist* 
dualism  would  follow.  On  the  other  hand  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  absolutely  non- 
existent, for  it  has  an  appearance  as  in  a  dream.  9  Svetdsvatara,  i.  3.  3  Taken 
together  or  singularly.  4  Svetdsvatara,  iv.  5.  5"  Having  as  its  associate  (vpddhi) 
that  which  is  most  excellent."  Jacob.  Mvnduka,  i.  1.  9.  '"  As  illusion 

overlying  Brahma  is  the  cause  of  the  production  of  all  things,  it  is  called  Isvara's 
causal  or  all-originating  body."     Jacob,  p.  10. 


30  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

doity)  is  (nothing  different  from)  profound  sleep,  for  it  is  into  this 
that  every  soul  (in  profound  sleep)  subsides.  Hence  it  is  called 
the  place  of  the  dissolution  of  both  the  gross  and  subtile  world.1 

As  a  forest,  when  regarded  distributively,  takes  the  plural 
denomination  '  trees' — or  as  a  lake,  when  regarded  distributively, 
takes  that  of  *  waters,'  so  Ignorance,  when  regarded  distributively, 
receives  the  plural  name  (Ignorances.)  (This  follows)  from  such 
scriptural  texts  as  "  Indra,  by  his  powers,  appears  manifold."2 

"  Ignorance  is  regarded  collectively  or  distributively  according 
as  it  is  viewed  as  a  whole  or  as  separate  parts."3 

Distributive  Ignorance,  since  it  is  the  abode  of  its  Inferior  (the 
human  soul) ,  has  chiefly  impure  goodness  in  it.  Intelligence  locat- 
ed in  this,  having  such  qualities  as  want  of  knowledge  and  want  of 
power,  is  called,  the  very  defective  intelligence,  (prdjna).*  The 
smallness  of  its  intelligence  (may  be  inferred)  from  the  fact  that  it 
is  the  illuminator  of  (but)  one  Igaorance.  It  has  not  the  power  of 
illuminating  much,  because  its  abode  is  not  clear  (being  tainted  by 
Passion  and  Darkness) . 

Since  (Distributive  Ignorance)  is  the  cause  of  the  conceit  of 
individuality5  and  the  like,  it  is  (spoken  of  as)  the  individual's 
causal  body.  Since  there  is  in  it  a  plenitude  of  happiness,  it  (also) 
is  called  the  sheath  of  happiness.  It  is  (nothing  different  from) 
profound  sleep,  for  it  is  in  this  that  all  ceases  to  do  aught.  Hence 
it  (also)  is  called  the  place  of  the  dissolution  of  both  the  gross  and 
subtile  body.  At  that  time  (during  dreamless  sleep)  both  Isvara  and 
Prajna  enjoy  blessedness  by  means  of  the  very  subtile  modifications 
of  Ignorance,  illumined  by  intellect.  As  the  Scriptures  say,  "  Prajna 
(the  individual  intelligence)  enjoys  bliss6  (during  dreamless  sleep) 
being  (then)  more  peculiarly  that  intelligence  (which  unfettered 
altogether,  is  joy  simply).  (It  may  also  be  inferred)  from  the  fact 
that  one  in  rising  says,  "  I  slept  pleasantly, — I  knew  nothing." 

Between  these  two,  Ignorance  regarded  collectively  and 
distributively,  there  is  no  difference,  as  there  is  none  between  a 
forest  and  its  trees,  or  between  a  lake  and  its  waters. 

There  is  likewise  no  difference  between  Isvara  and  Prajna 
affected  by  these  (two  kinds  of  really  identical  Ignorance)  as 
there  is  none  between  the  ethereal  space  that  is  occupied  by 
the  forest  and  by  the  trees  (that  constitute  the  forest),  or  between 
the  ethereal  expanse  that  is  reflected  in  the  lake  and  in  the  waters 
thereof.  (This  may  be  inferred)  from  such  texts  as,  "  This  Prajua 
is  none  other  than  the  omniscient."7 

1  "  When  a  man  falls  into  a  profound  sleept  the  external  world  and  the  world  of 
dreams  both  cease  to  exist  for  him  and  then  his  position  is  held  to  be  that  described 
above."     Ballantyne. 

2  Rig-Veda,  6,  47.  18.      3  Jacob.     4  Prajna,  means  intelligent.  Applied  here  to  an 
individual  it  is  said  to  denote  defective  or  limited  intelligence,  but  in  the  Mandiikya 
Upan.  6,  it  is   described  as  '  omniscient."  5  "  Cause   of   the  making   of   '  I.'  " 
Jacob.        '  Mdndukya,  5.          '  Mctnd&tya,  6. 


TRANSLATION.  31 

As  there  is  for  the  forest  and  its  trees  and  for  the  ethereal 
space  occupied  by  these,  or  for  the  lake  and  its  waters,  and  for  the 
ethereal  expanse  that  is  reflected  therein,  an  absolute  expanse  in 
which  these  are  located,  so  for  these  "  two  Ignorances  and  for 
Intelligence  associated  with  them,"*  there  is  an  absolute  intelli* 
gence  which  is  their  basis.  This  is  called  "  the  Fourth,"2  as  it 
is  said  in  such  texts  as,  "  They  regard  him  as  blessed,  tranquil, 
without  duality,  the  Fourth."3 

This  one,  the  Fourth,  pure  intelligence,  when  not  discrimi- 
nated4 apart  from  Ignorance  and  the  intelligence  located  therein, 
like  (the  fire  and  the  iron  viewed  indiscriminately  in)  an  ignited 
iron  ball,  is  what  is  the  express  meaning  of  (the  term  Thou  in)  the 
great  sentence  (That  art  Thou — meaning  "Thou  art  Brahma"). 
But  when  discriminated,  it  is  called  the  meaning  indicated.5 

This  Ignorance  has  two  powers — envelopment  (dvarana)  and 
projection  (vilcshepa) . 

As  even  a  small  cloud,  by  obstructing  the  path  of  the  eye  of 
the  spectator,  hides  the  sun's  disc  which  extends  over  many  leagues, 
such  also  is  the  enveloping  power  of  Ignorance,  which,  though 
finite,  by  obstructing  the  mind  of  the  observer,  hides  as  it  were  the 
Soul  which  is  infinite  and  not  subject  to  worldly  vicissitude.  Thus 
it  is  said,  "  As  the  very  stupid  man,  whose  eye  is  covered  by  a 
cloud,  thinks  that  the  sun  is  covered  by  a  cloud  and  void  of  radiance, 
so  that  (Soul)  which,  in  the  sight  of  the  stupid,  is  as  it  were  bound, 
that,  in  the  shape  of  the  eternal  understanding,  am  I  myself."6 

In  the  Soul  enveloped  with  this,  there  arises  the  impression  that 
it  is  liable  to  worldly  vicissitude — that  it  is  an  agent,  a  patient, 
happy,  grieved,  and  so  forth  ;  as  in  the  case  of  a  rope  concealed  by 
ignorance  iu  regard  to  its  character  (there  arises)  the  impression  that 
it  is  a  snake. 

The  protective  power  is  such  that  as  ignorance  regarding  a  rope 
produces  by  its  own  power  on  the  rope  enveloped  by  it  (the 
appearance  of)  a  snake  or  the  like,  so  (this  projective)  Ignorance, 
by  its  own  power  raises  up,  on  the  soul  enveloped  by  it  (the 
appearance  of)  a  world,  ether,  &c.,  (and  thus  the  thinker  mistakes 
himself  for  &  mere  mortal,  as  he  mistook  the  rope  for  a  snake.) 
Thus  it  is  said,  "  The  projective  power  can  create  (everything) 

1  Improved  rendering  from  Jacob. 

8  There  are  four  conditions  of  the  soul,  viz.,  (1)  waking,  (2)  dreaming,  (3) 
dreamless  sleep ;  and  (4)  that  which  is  here  called  "  the  fourth."  Ballantyne. 

'  Mdndukya,  7.  *  Distinguished.  5  Ballantyne,  in  his  translation  of  Sdhityadar, 
pana,  quoted  by  Jacob,  says  :  "  The  meaning  (that  may  belong  to  a  word,  is  held 
to  be  three  fold,  namely  Express,  Indicated,  and  Suggested.  The  Express  meaning 
is  that  conveyed  to  the  understanding  by  the  (word's)  Denotation ;  The  (meaning) 
Indicated  is  held  to  be  conveyed  by  the  (word's)  suggestion.  Let  these  be  the  three 
powers  of  a  word."  People  say  '  the  hot  iron  burns  the  hand,  "  meaning  that  the  heat 
in  the  iron  burns  the  hand.  This  is  the  meaning  indicated.  Thus  in  the  great  sentence 
"That  artThon,1'  the  meaning  is  "  Thou,  apart  from  the  ignorance  that  now  envelops 
thee,  art  That."  Ballantyne  abridged.  6  Hastdmalika,  10. 


32  THE    VKDANTA-SAKA. 

beginning  with  the  subtile  body,  and  ending  with  the  whole  external 
universe."1 

Intellect  (chaitanya)  located  in  Ignorance  with  its  two  powers 
(envelopment  and  projection)  is  in  its  own  right  the  instrumental 
cause ;  and  in  virtue  of  what  it  is  located  in  (Ignorance)  the 
material  cause  (of  all) — as  the  spider  is  personally  the  instrument 
and  in  virtue  of  its  own  body  the  material  cause  of  its  web.2 

V. 

(  THE   CAUSAL,    SUBTILE   AND  GROSS  BODIES  WITH  WHICH  BEAHMA  is 

ILLUSORILY  ASSOCIATED  ;    THE  FOURTH    STATE.) 

From  Intellect  immersed  in  Ignorance  with  the  protective 
power  in  which  tamas  prevails,  there  arises  the  Ether  : — from  the 
Ether,  Air  ;  from  Air,  Fire  ',  from  Fire,  Water  ;  from  Water,  Earth. 
(This  may  be  inferred)  from  su«h  texts  of  Scripture  as  "  From  that 
(Intellect)  from  this  same  self  was  the  Ether  produced,  &c."3  That 
there  is  the  prevalence  of  tamas  in  the  cause  of  these  (five 
elements — may  be  inferred)  from  the  excess  of  senselessness 
observed  in  them,  ( — the  elements  being  unenlightened  by  Intellect 
which  they  quite  obscure). 

Then  (although  darkness  is  the  chief  ingredient  in  the  cause 
of  these,  yet  as  it  is  not  the  sole  one,  therefore)  Purity,  Foulness, 
and  Darkness  are  produced  in  these  (elemental  products)  Ether, 
&c.,  in  the  degree  in  which  they  exist  in  the  cause. 

It  is  these  same  (five)  that  are  called  also  the  '  subtile  elements,' 
(sukshamabhuta) ,  the  '  that  merely  '  (tan-mdtra)  and  the  '  not  (yet) 
made  into  the  (gross)  five'  (a-panchikrita)  (by  intermixture] . 

From  these  (subtile  elements)  are  produced  the  subtile  bodies 
and  the  gross  elements  (sthula-bhutdni)  (afterwards  explained). 

The  'subtile  bodies'  are  the  bodies  whereby  (the  individuated  Soul) 
is  recognised  (linga-sarira) ,  consisting  of  the  seventeen  members. 

The  '  members'  are  the  set  of  five  organs  of  sense,  understand- 
ing and  mind,  the  set  of  five  organs  of  action  and  the  five  vital  airs. 

The  '  organs  of  sense'  are  those  called  the  hearing,  the  touch, 
the  sight,  the  taste,  and  the  smell.  These  are  produced  from  the 
separate  pure  particles  of  the  Ether,  &c.,  severally  in  their  order.4 

'  Understanding'^  (buddhi)  is  that  condition  of  the  internal 
instrument  (antah-lcarana, the  'inner  man)',  which  consists  in  assur- 

1  Vdkyasudhd,  v.  13. 

*  Brahma,    regarded   as   pare   spirit,   is   the  instrumental   cause,  but   not  the 
•material  cause  of  the  world.    He  is  the  material  cause  in  virtue  only  of  that  wherewith 
he  hath  invested  himself,  which  some  people  call  '  matter,"   and  regard   as   really 
existing  and  which  the  Vedantins  prefer  calling  '  Ignorance,' — denying  its  right  to 
be  regarded  as  really  existing.     Ballantyne. 

*  Tditttrya  Upan.  ii.  1. 

*  The  organ  of  hearing  is  produced  from  pure  etherial  particles,  that  of  feeling 
from  pure  aerial  particles,   that  of   sight  from  light,  taste  from  water,  and  smell 
from  earth.  Ballantyue.          *  Or  Intellect. 


TRANSLATION".  33 

anco.  '  Mind'  (manas)  is  that  condition  of  the  inner  man  which 
consists  in  doubting  or  judging.  In  these  two  are  included 
thinking  and  self-cousciousnoss  (or  egoism).  Thoao  are  produced 
from  the  mingled  pure  portions  belonging  to  the  Ether,  &c.  That 
they  aro  formed  from  the  pure  (sdttwika)  particles  (is  evident) 
from  their  being  luminous. 

This  understanding,  being  associated  with  the  organs  of  sense, 
is  the '  intelligent  sheath'  (vijndnamaya-kosha)  (of  the  soul).1  This, 
practically  regarded,  haunting  this  world  or  the  other  world, 
through  its  having  the  conceit  that  it  is  an  agent  and  a  patient,  is 
called  the  '  inferior2  soul*  (jiva) . 

The  mind,  associated  with  the  organs  of  action,3  becomes  tho 
'  mental  sheath',  (manomaya-kosha)  .4 

The  '  organs  of  action'  are  tho  voice,  the  hands,  the  feet,  the 
organs  of  excretion,  and  generation.  These  again,  severally  in 
their  order,  are  produced  from  the  energetic  particles  of  the  Ether, 
&c.,  separately. 

The  '  vital  airs'  are  respiration  (prdna),  flatulence  (vydna), 
inspiration  (updna),  expiration  (ud&na),  and  assimilation  (samdna). 
'Respiration'  ia  that  which  goes  forward,  having  its  place  in  tho 
fore  part  of  the  nose.  '  Flatulence,'  which  goes  downwards,  has 
its  place  in  the  lower  intestine,  &c.  '  Inspiration,'  which  goes 
everywhere,  is  found  in  the  whole  body.  '  Expiration,'  having  its 
place  in  the  throat,  is  the  ascending  air  that  goes  upwards. 
'  Assimilation,'  moving  in  the  middle  of  the  body,  assimilates  the 
food  that  is  eaten  or  drunk. 

Some  say  there  are  five  other  airs,  named  Ndga,  Kurma, 
Krikala,  Devadatta  and  Dhananjaya.  '  Ndga'  is  that  (vhich  causes 
belching ;  '  Kurma'  produces  winking,  *  krikala'  produces  hunger, 
'  Devadatta,'  yawning  ;  '  Dhananjaya,'  nourishes.5 

Others  (the  Vedantins)  say  that  there  are  only  five,  because 
these  are  included  nnder  respiration  and  the  rest. 

This  set  of  five  vital  airs  (respiration,  &c.)  is  produced  from 
tho  mingled  energetic  particles  that  belong  to  the  Ether,  &c.  This 
set  of  five,  associated  with  the  organs  of  action,  becomes  the 
'  respiratory  sheath'  (prdnamaya-koshd) .  That  this  (set)  is  a 

1  The  individual  Soul  ia  regarded  aa   deposited  in    a   succession   of  sheaths, 
enveloping  one  another  like  the  coats  of  an  onion.  The  first,  or  innermost,  is  the  one 
just  described.     The  outmost  sheath  is  our  body  of  flesh  and  blood.     The  interme- 
diate ones  will  be  described  in  their  order.     Ballantyne. 

2  The  Sanskrit  word   (Vydvahdrikn)  here  means  rather  'belonging  to  the  every- 
day  life, — conventional, — practical.'     Jacob. 

3  In  his  edition  of  the  Sanskrit  text,  Col.  Jacob  has  shown  that  the  reading  here 
should  rather  be  '  organs  of  sense.'     See  his  note  on  p.  177  of  that  work. 

*  The  soul  (jiva)  was  divided  from  Brahma,  first  by  the  conceit  of  its  own 
individuality.  It  ia  removed  a  step  further  by  the  operations  of  thinking  and 
doubting.  Ballantyne. 

5  Some  others  are  the  followers  of  Kapila.  Ballantyne  translates  the  airs  as  the 
snake,  the  tortoise,  the  partridge,  the  conch  of  Arjuuo,  and  the  god  of  fire. 

5 


34  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

product  of  the  energetic  particles  (is  evident)  from  the  fact  that  it 
consists  of  action.1 

Among  these  sheaths  the  '  intelligent  sheath/  having  the 
faculty  of  knowledge,  is  an  agent.  The  '  mental  sheath/  having 
the  faculty  of  volition,  is  an  instrument.  The  '  respiratory 
sheath/  which  has  the  faculty  of  action,  is  a  product  (of  the  union 
of  the  two  former).  They  say  that  such  is  the  division  of  these 
(three  sheaths,)  for  there  is  a  fitness  (in  their  mutual  relations  thus 
regarded).  These  three  sheaths  being  united  form  the  '  subtile 
body'  (si'tkshma  Sarira)% 

Here  also  the  totality  of  the  subtile  bodies,  by  being  the 
locus  (seat)  of  the  one  intelligence  (sutrdtmd),  is  collective,  like  the 
forest  or  the  lake  ;  and  by  its  being  the  locus  it  is  more  than  one 
intelligence,  it  is  distributive,  like  the  trees  or  the  lake  waters. 

Intellect  located  in3  this  collective  totality  (of  subtile  bodies) 
is  called  sutrdtmd  (Thread-soM),  because  it  is  passed  like  a  thread 
through  all ;  it  is  called  Hiranyagarbha  (Embryo  of  Light)  because 
it  is  the  superintendent  of  (that  sheath  possessing)  the  power  of 
knowledge  ;  and  it  is  called  Prdna  (Life)  because  it  is  the  super- 
intendent of  (that  sheath  possessing)  the  power  of  action. 

This  collective  totality  (of  the  subtile  bodies)  from  its  being 
subtile  in  comparison  with  the  totality  of  the  gross,  is  called  the 
subtile  body  of  him  (Hiranyagarbha).  This  triad  of  the  sheaths, 
formed  of  knowledge,  &c.,  as  it  is  made  up  of  the  continuance 
of  our  waking  thoughts  is  (called)  a  dream,  and  therefore  is  called 
the  scene  of  the  dissolution  of  the  totality  of  the  gross.4 

Intellect  located  in  the  distributive  arrangement  of  this 
(aggregate  of  subtile  bodies)  is  (called)  Taijasa,,  (the  Resplendent)', 
because  it  is  located  in  that  inner  man  which  is  formed  of  illumina- 
tion, (light  being  the  type  of  knowledge). 

This  distributive  totality  (of  the  subtile  bodies)  of  him  (the 
Resplendent)  from  its  being  subtile  in  comparison  with  the  gross 
body,  is  also  called  the  subtile  body.  It  (also)  is  the  triad  of 
sheaths  formed  of  intelligence,  &c.,  and  as  it  is  made  up  of  the 
continuance  of  our  waking  thoughts,  it  is  called  a  dream  ;  and  for 
that  reason  it  (also)  is  called  the  scene  of  the  dissolution  of  the 
totality  of  the  gross.' 

These  two,  Sutrdtmd  and  Taijasa,  (at  the  time  of  one's 
dreaming)  by  means  of  the  subtile  modifications  of  the  mind, 
perceive  the  subtile  objects.  (This  may  be  inferred)  from  such 
texts  as  "  Taijasa,  the  enjoyer  of  the  subtile."5 

« 

1  '•  The  characteristic  of  the  rajoguna."  Jacob.  2  "  It  attends  the  soul  in  its 
transmigration?."  Jacob.  3  "  Associated  with."  Jacob. 

*Por  then  the  sight  of  trees  and  rivers  and  the  sounds  of  voices  &c.»  are  present 
to  us  without  the  actual  things  called  trees  &c., being  present  at  all.  To  the  dreamer 
the  whole  external  world  is  as  it  were  not— andi  in  the  opinion  of  the  Veddntin,  to 
the  dreamer  it  really  is  not.  Ballantyne,  *  Mdnd&tyu,  4. 


TRANSLATION.  35 

Here  also  there  is  no  difference  between  the  collective  totality 
and  the  distributive  totality  (of  subtile  bodies),  nor  between 
8'Uratma  and  Taijasa,  located  therein,  just  as  there  is  no  difference 
between  a  forest  and  its  trees,  nor  between  the  space  occupied 
by  them,  and  as  there  is  no  difference  between  a  lake  and  its 
waters,  nor  between  the  sky  reflected  therein. 

Thus  is  the  production  of  the  subtile  body. 

The  '  gross  elements  '  (stnla-bhutdni)  are  what  have  been  made 
(by  combining)  the  five.  Making  five  (is  this)  :  Having  divided 
each  of  the  five  (elements)  Ether,  &c.,  into  two  equal  parts ; 
having  next  divided  severally  into  four  equal  parts  the  five  first 
portions  out  of  those  ten  portions  ;  the  uniting  of  those  four  por- 
tions,— leaving  the  (undivided) second  half,  with  the  other  portions  ; 
this  is  (called)  the  making  (one  to  possess  the  various  qualities  of 
the)  five.1 

And  the  doubt  is  not  to  be  entertained  that  there  is  no  proof 
of  this,  because,  by  the  text  which  speaks  of  the  combination  by 
throes,2  the  combination  by  fives  is  indicated.  Although  the  five 
are  alike  in  respect  that  each  is  made  up  of  all  the  five,  yet  the 
name  of  Ether  is  appropriate  to  one  and  of  another  to  another 
according  to  the  maxim,  "  But  as  they  differ,  the  one  is  called 
this,  and  the  other  is  called  that".3  Then  in  the  Ether  sound  is 
manifested;  in  Air,  sound  and  tangibility;  in  Fire,  sound,  tangi- 
bility and  colour ;  in  the  Waters,  sound,  tangibility,  colour,  and 
savour  ;  in  Earth,  sound,  tangibility,  colour,  savour,  and  odour. 

From  these  gross  elements  (having  the  qualities  of  the  five) 
arise  the  worlds  that  are  one  above  the  other,  viz.,  BTiur,  Bhuvar 
Svar,  Mahar,  Janas,  Tapas,  and  Satya ;  and  those  that  are  beneath 
the  other;  called  Atala,  Vitala,  Sutala,  Rasdtala,  Taldtala,  Mahdtala 
and  Pdtdla ;  also  Brahma's  egg  (this  vaulted  world)  with  the  four 
kinds  of  gross  bodies  contained  in  it,  and  their  food  and  drink. 

The/o%?'  kinds  of  bodies  are  the  viviparous,  oviparous,  the  mois- 
ture-engendered (svedaja)  and  the  germinating.  The  viviparous  are 
those  produced  from  a  womb,  as  men  and  the  like.  The  oviparous  are 
those  produced  from  eggs,  as  birds  and  snakes ;  the  moisture-engen- 
dered are  those  produced  from  moisture,  as  lice,  gnats.'4  The  germi- 
nating are  those  which  spring  up  from  the  earth,  as  creepers,  trees. 

1  Thus  a  measure — say  of  eight  parts — of  any  of  the  gross  elements  is  held  to 
consist  of  four  parts  of  the  subtile  element  which  it  bears  the  name  of,  and  one  part 
of  each  of  the  other  subtile  elements.  Hence  while  the  subtile  elements  are  tho 
substrata  severally  of  a  single  quality — as  Ether  of  sound,  Water  of  savour  and  so 
on;  the  gross  elements  exhibit  the  qualities  blended,  Earth,  for  example,  exhibiting 
all  the  five  qualities  that  the  five  senses  take  cognizance  of."  Ballantyne. 

8  Chhdndor/ya  Upanishad,  vi.  3.  3.  3  Veddnta-Sutra,  2.  4,  22.  See  Col.  Jacob's 

remarks  on  Ballantyne's  rendering  of  it  in  the  Notes  to  his  edition  of  the  Sanskrit  text 
(p.179).  Dr.Thibant  renders  the  aphorism  thus: — "But  on  account  of  their  distinctivo 
nature  there  is  a  (distinctive)  designation  of  them  "  Tl.e  bhashya  says,  "  By 
'  distinctive  nature'  we  hnve  to  understand  preponderance." 

*No  auimals  are  produced  simply  from  moisture.    Lice  &  gnat    come  from  eggs. 


36  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

Here,  too,  the  gross  bodies  of  the  four  descriptions  (viviparous, 
&c.,)  since  they  may  be  the  object  of  cognizance  as  one  or  many, 
are  (viewable  as)  either  a  collection — as  a  forest  or  a  lake — or  a 
distributive  aggregate — as  the  trees  or  as  the  waters. 

Intellect  located  in  this  collective  aggregate  is  called 
Vaisvdnara  (the Spirit  of  Humanity)  and  Virdt  (Ruler  of  the  various), 
because  it  arrogates  to  itself  that  it  is  all  mankind,  and  because  it 
rules  over1  various  forms. 

This  collective  aggregate  is  the  gross  body,  and  since  it 
is  a  modification  of  food,  it  is  called  the  '  nutrimentitious  sheath* 
(annamaya-kosha)  ;  and  as  it  is  the  scene  of  the  experience  of  the 
gross,  it  is  called  the  waking  world,  (in  contradistinction  to  the 
world  of  dreams). 

Intellect  located  in  the  distributive  aggregate  is  called  Visva 
(the  Pervader),  because,  without  abandoning  the  subtile  body,  it 
enters  into  the  gross  bodies.  This  distributive  aggregate  also  is 
the  gross  body  (of  the  Pervader)  and  since  it  is  a  modification  if 
food,  it  is  called  the  '  nutrimentitious  sheath';  and  as  it  is  the  scene 
of  the  experience  of  the  gross,  it  is  also  called  '  the  awake.' 

Visva  and  Vaisvdnara  take  cognizance  of  sounds,  feelings, 
colours,  savours,  and  odours  by  means  respectively  of  the  five 
organs  (of  sense),  whereof  hearing  is  the  first,  which  are  presided 
over  in  their  order  by  the  Sky,  the  Wind,  the  Sun,  the  Regent  of  the 
Waters,  and  the  Asvins.  (Further,  they  are  concerned  about) 
speaking,  taking,  walking,  evacuating,  and  enjoying,  by  means 
respectively  of  the  five  organs  (of  action)  whereof  the  voice  is  the 
first,  which  are  presided  over  in  their  order  by  Agni,  Indra,  Upendra, 
Yama,  and  Prajapati.  (Lastly,  they  are  concerned  about)  judging, 
determining,  feeling,  self-consciousness,  and  thinking  by  means  of 
the  four  internal  faculties,  called  mind,  intellect,  egoism,  and 
thinking,  which  are  presided  over  in  their  order  by  the  Moon, 
Brahma,  Siva  and  Yishnu.  As  it  is  said  in  the  Veda  "  (The  first 
quarter  is  Vaisvanara),  who  is  in  the  waking  state  and  has 
cognition  of  externals."2 

Here  too,  as  before,  there  is  no  difference  between  the  dis- 
tributive aggregate  and  the  collective  aggregate  of  the  gross,  and 
between  Visva  and  Vaisvanara,  located  in  these,  as  (there  is  none) 
between  the  forest  and  its  trees,  and  between  the  space  occupied 
by  these  severally,  and  as  there  is  none  between  a  lake  and  its 
waters,  and  between  the  sky  as  reflected  in  these  severally. 

Thus  does  the  gross  (or  material)  world  arise  out  of  the  five 
elements  intermingled. 


Appears  in"-  Jacob. 

Upanishud,    3, 


TRANSLATION.  37 

VI. 

(THE  MEANING  OF  THE  SENTENCE,  "TRULY  ALL  THIS  IS  BRAHMA ;" 
REFUTATION  OF  CHARVAKA,  BAUDDHA,  AND  OTHER  FALLACIES.) 

The  collective  aggregate  of  these  worlds — the  gross,  the  subtile, 
and  the  causal — is  one  great  world  ;  just  as  the  collective  aggregate 
of  all  the  included  forests  constitutes  one  great  forest ;  or  as  the 
collective  aggregate  of  bodies  of  water  is  one  great  mass  of  water. 
Intellect  located  therein  from  Vaisvaiiara  up  to  Isvara  is  one  only  ; 
just  as  the  space  occupied  by  the  forests  included  in  the  great  forest, 
and  as  the  sky  (is  but  one)  reflected  in  the  (smaller)  bodies  of 
water  included  (in  the  great  body  of  water.) 

Unassociated  intellect,  not  seen  to  be  distinct  from  the  great 
world  and  the  intellect  associated  with  it,  like  a  heated  ball  of  iron 
(in  which  the  iron  and  the  heat  are  not  discriminated),  is  the  literal 
meaning  of  the  sentence,  " Truly  all  this  is  Brahma";  but  when 
seen  as  distinct,  it  is  what  is  indicated  by  that  sentence."1 

Thus  have  we  exhibited,  under  its  general  aspect,  the  (great 
error  of)  investing  the  Real  with  the  Unreal.2 

Now  this  or  that  person  attributes  this  or  that  (erroneous) 
investment  to  Soul.  The  varieties  (of  opinions)  shall  now  be  stated.3 

A  very  uncultivated  man  says,  "  My  son  is  my  Soul  (better- 
self)  ;"  because  the  Veda  declares  that  "  Soul  is  born  as  one's 
son,"4  and  because  one  sees  that  one  has  love  for  one's  son  just  as 
for  one's  self  ;  and  because  one  feels  that  "  If  my  son  be  destroyed 
or  be  in  good  case,  I  myself  am  destroyed  or  am  in  good  case/' 

A  Charvaka5  says  that  the  gross  body  is  the  Soul,  because 
the  Veda  declares,  "This  same  man  (by  which  is  meant  the  Soul) 
consists  of  solid  food  and  juices  ;6  and  because  one  sees  that  one 
escapes  from  a  house  on  fire — even  leaving  one's  son  ;  and  because 
one  is  conscious  that  "  I  am  fat,"  or  "  I  am  lean"  (so  that  this  "  I" 
must  be  the  body.) 

Another  Charvaka  says  that  the  organs  (of  sense  and  action) 
are  the  Soul ;  because  the  Veda-  declares  that  "  Those  vital  airs, 
having  approached  Prajapati,  said  (Lord,  which  of  us  is  the 
chief  ?  &c.)"7  and  so  on ;  and  because  in  the  absence  of  the  organs, 
there  is  the  absence  of  the  functions  of  the  body,  and  because  one 
is  conscious  that  "  It  is  I  that  am  one-eyed,"  or  "  It  is  /  that  am 
deaf." 

1  Quoted  chiefly  from  Jacob  as  clearer  than  the  rendering  of  Ballantyne. 

'The  error  is  imputing  to  Brahma  the  vesture  of  a  phenomenal  world,  when 
there  is  really  no  such  thing. 

3  Particular  aspects  of  this  are  pointed  out.  Each  man  cites  Scripture  in  favour 
of  his  own  view  ;  offers  a  reason,  and  makes  an  appeal  to  consciousness.  Ballantyne. 

*  Cf.  Satapatha  Brahmana,  14,  9,  4,  26.  5  ChSrvaka  was  a  philosopher  regarded 
as  an  atheist  or  materialist.  He  is  supposed  to  have  lived  before  the  composition 
of  the  Ramayana.  The  Charvakas  condemned  all  sacrificial  rites,  and  called  the 
authors  of  the  Vedas  fools  and  knaves.  '  Tait,  Vfanishad,  2.  1.  '  Chhdndogyar 
5.  1.  7. 


38  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

Another  Charvnka  says  that  the  vital  airs  are  the  Soul ;  because 
the  Veda  declares  that  "  The  other  inner  Soul  is  that  that  consists 
of  the  vital  airs,"1  and  so  on  ;  and  because  in  the  absence  of  the 
vital  airs  the  organs  are  not  capable  of  their  functions  ;  and  because 
one  is  conscious  that  "  It  is  I  that  am  hungry,"  or  "  It  is  /  that  am 
thirsty,"  &c. 

Another  Charvaka  says  that  the  mind  is  the  Soul  because  the 
Veda  declares  that  "  The  other,  the  inner  Soul,  consists  of  mind,"2 
and  so  on  j  and  because  one  observes  that,  when  the  mind  is  asleep, 
the  vital  airs  are  absent ;  and  because  one  is  conscious  that  "  It  is 
/  who  opine,"  or  "  It  is  I  who  doubt." 

A  Bauddha3  says  that  understanding  is  the  Soul,  because  the 
Veda  declares  that  "  the  other,  the  inner  Soul,  consists  of  know- 
ledge;"4 and  because,~ifi:  the  absence  of  an  agent,  there  is  no 
power  in  the  instrument ;  and  because  one  is  conscious  that  "  It  is 
/  that  act,"  or  "  it  is  /  that  experience." 

The  Prabhakaras5  and  the  Tarkikas^  say  that  ignorance  is 
the  Soul,  because  there  is  the  text  beginning  with  "  The  other,  the 
inner  Soul,  consisting  of  joy,"6  and  so  on  ;  and  because  we  see  that 
the  understanding  and  the  rest  resolve  into  unconsciousness 
(during  profound  sleep)  ;  and  because  one  is  aware  that  "  /  am 
ignorant"  and  that  "  Jam  cognizant." 

The  Bhatta7  says  that  intelligence  united  with  ignorance  is 
the  Soul,  because  the  Veda  declares  that  "  The  Soul  consists  of 
knowledge  alone,  with  much  happiness," s  &c. ;  and  because  in 
profound  sleep  there  are  present  both  light  (in  the  soul)  and  the 
absence  of  light ;  and  because  (every)  one  has  the  consciousness 
that,  "  Myself  I  do  not  know." 

Another  Bauddha  says  that  nihility9  is  the  Soul,  because  the 
Veda  declares  that  '  This  (universe)  previously  was  simply  non- 
existent,10 &c.,  and  because  in  profound  sleep  everything  ceases  to 
exist ;  and  because  one,  on  arising  from  a  deep  sleep,  has  a  con- 
viction which  has  for  its  object  the  recollection  of  his  own  non- 
existence. —  (thus),  "During  that  deep  sleep,  I  was  not." 

It  shall  be  now  explained  how  these,  beginning  with  "  the 
son"  and  ending  with  "  nihility"  are  not  the  Soul. 

As  for  these  mere  semblances  of  scriptural  evidence,  of 
argument,  and  of  judgment,  adduced  by  the  speakers,  from  the 

1  Tait.   Upanifh'id,   2.   2.  *  Ibid.,   2.3.  3  The  Bauddhas  were  followers 

of  Buddha,  and  were  regarded  as  atheists.  4  Ibid.,  2.  4.  5  The  PrdVhdkaras 

were  the  followers  of  Piabhakara,  the  well-known  scholiast  of  the  Purva  Miuiansa  ; 
theTdrkikas  are  the  followers  of  the  Nyaya.    Jacob. 

6  Tait.     Upanirhid,  2.  5. 

7  The    khittan   were  followers  of  Kumarila   Bhatta,  a  famotis  teacher   of   the 
JlimAnsa  philosophy  aud  opponent  of  the  liuddhists.  lie  lived  before  Saukarauharya. 

'  Mdndukyu,  5. 

9  Nothingness  ;    the  void.     Balluntyue. 

10  C'lihdndojya,  6.  '£.  i. 


TRANSLATION.  39 

"  very  uncultivated  man"  downwards,  since  we  see  that  the 
seeming  texts,  arguments,  and  judgments  of  each  one  that  comes 
first  are  rendered  nugatory  by  the  seeming  texts,  arguments,  and 
judgments  of  each  that  follows,  it  is  clear  that  "  the  son"  or  any 
of  the  others  (suggested)  is  not  the  Soul. 

Moreover,  (such  opinions  are  incorrect)  because,  (first)  they 
are  at  variance  with  such  very  forcible  texts  as  this  that  "  The  Soul 
is  not  mind,  it  is  not  an  agent,  it  is  mere  Thought  existent ;" 
(secondly)  because  whatever  is  other  than  thought,  beginning  with 
"  the  son"  and  ending  with  "  nihility,"  is  no  more  eternal  than  a 
water-jar  or  the  lake,  seeing  that  it  is  only  through  Thought  that  it 
appears  at  all  ;  and  (thirdly)  because  the  wise  man's  consciousness, 
that  "  I  am  Brahma"  is  of  more  force  ;  and  also  because  each  of 
the  seeming  texts,  arguments,  and  judgments  is  rendered  nugatory 
(by  others);  (it  follows  that)  each  of  these,  beginning  with  "  the  son" 
and  ending  with  "  nihility,"  is  not  the  Soul. 

Therefore,  the  eternal,  pure,  intelligent,  free,  self-existent, 
and  self-evident  Thought  alone,  to  which  each  of  these  (regarded  as 
the  Soul)  owes  that  it  appears  at  all,  is  the  Soul.  Such  is  the  direct 
conviction  of  those  who  understand  the  scope  of  the  Veda. 

VII. 

(MEANING  OF   "  REFUTATION"  ;  THE  PHENOMENAL  WORLD  ONLY  THE 
ILLUSORY  EFFECT  OF  BRAHMA,  WHO  IS  ITS  ILLUSORY  MATERIAL 

CAUSE.) 

The  "  Refutation  "1  (of  the  Erroneous  Imputation)  is  the 
recognition  of  the  reality  itself  instead  of  the  unreal  world,  which, 
originating  in  ignorance,  envelopes  the  reality;  and  this  is  like  the 
recognition  of  the  rope  itself  instead  of  the  serpent  (the  erroneous 
notion  of)  which  enveloped  the  rope. 

[It  has  been  said,  "An  actual  change  of  form  is  called  vihara, 
whilst  a  merely  apparent  change  of  form  is  called  mvartta."  This 
shall  now  be  illustrated.]2 

This  scene  of  fruition,  consisting  of  the  four  kinds  of  gross 
bodies,  and  the  food  and  drink  and  other  things  in  the  shape  of 
what  is  adapted  to  their  fruition,  and  the  fourteen  worlds  begin- 
ning with  the  Earth  which  sustain  these  (bodies),  and  the  substrate 
of  (all)  this,  Brahma's  egg,  all  this  is  merely  the  gross  elements 
•which  are  the  cause  therec  f. 

Those  (mentioned  above)  along  with  Sound  and  the  other 
objects  of  sense  originating  in  the  gross  elements  and  whatever  is  the 
product  of  the  subtile  body,  all  this  is  nothing  else  than  the 
unmingled  elements  which  are  the  cause  thereof. 

1  "  Withdrawal."  (  Apavdda)  Jacob. 

8  From  Jacob.     This  extract  is  omitted  in  some  MSS. 


40  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

These  unraingled  elements  along  with  the  Qualities,  beginning 
with  g>orlness,  in  the  converse  order  of  their  origination,  all 
this  is  nothing  else  than  Intellect  immersed  in  Ignorance  which  is 
the  cause  thereof. 

This  Ignorance,  and  Intellect  immersed  in  Ignorance,  taking 
the  shape  of  Isvara,  &c.,  all  this  is  nothing  else  than  Brahma, 
'  the  Fourth,'  in  the  shape  of  Intellect  not  immersed  (iu  any 
qualities)  and  which  is  the  substratum  of  all. 

VIII. 
(MEANING  OP  "THAT"  AND  "Tnou"  IN  THE  GREAT  SENTENCE 

DETERMINED    BY    ERRONEOUS   IMPUTATION    AND   ITS    REFUTATION.) 

The  clearing  up  ofHhe  sense  of  the  words  '  That'  and  *  Thou' 
(in  the  sentence  '  Thou  art  That,')  is  effected  by  (a  right 
understanding  of)  these  two — Erroneous  Imputation  and  the 
Refutation  thereof. 

(To  explain)  : — (1)  the  collective  aggregate  of  Ignorance,  (2) 
Intellect  immersed  in  this  and  distinguished  by  the  possession  of 
omniscience,  &c.  (Isvara),  and  (3)  that  not  immersed  in  this  (the 
'  Fourth')  these  three,  when  they  seem  to  be  one,  like  a  red-hot 
iron  ball,  are  what  the  word  '  That'  literally  means  (the  collective 
aggregate  of  all  things),  (again)  : — the  real  (or  the  '  indicated'  as 
opposed  to  the  '  literal')  meaning  of  the  word  *  That,'  is  the  absolute 
Intellect  which  is  the  substratum  of  that  (qualified  Intellect) 
which  is  immersed  therein  (i.e.  in  Ignorance). 

(Further)  : — (1)  the  distributive  aggregate  of  Ignorance,  (2) 
Intellect  immersed  in  this  and  distinguished  by  the  possession  of 
partial  knowledge  (Prdjna)  and  (3)  that  not  immersed  in  this  (the 
'  Fourth')  these  three,  when  they  seem  to  be  one,  like  a  red  hot  iron 
ball,  are  what  the  word  '  Thou'  literally  means  (any  individual  in  the 
distributive  aggregate  of  all  things),  (again);  the  real  meaning  of 
the  word  '  Thou'  is  the  absolute  Intellect,  in  the  shape  of  joy,  the 
1  Fourth,'  which  is  the  substratum  of  that  (qualified  Intellect)  which 
is  immersed  therein  (i.e.  in  Ignorance) . 

IX. 

(EXPLANATION  OF  THE  GREAT  SENTENCE,  "  THAT  ART  THOU"  ; 
THE  THREE  RELATIONS).1 

Now  the  sense  of  the  great  sentence  shall  be  explained.  This 
great  sentence,  '  That  art  Thou',  declares  to  us,  through  the  three 
relations,  what  is  meant  by  '  the  Indivisible'. 

1  The  object  is  to  prove  that  "  That"  and  "  Thru'/  mean  the  same  thing.     This 
is  atte0ipted  by  showing  that  the  only  apparent  difference  between  the  senses  of 


TRANSLATION.  41 

The  { three  relatio  is'  are  (1)  the  reference  to  one  and  the 
same  thing  of  the  two  words  ('  That'  and  'Thou')  (2)  the  relation 
of  subject  and  predicate,  in  which  the  things  stand  that  these  two 
words  (primarily)  denote,  and  (3)  the  relation  of  what  is  '  indicated' 
(or  really  meant)  and  the  '  indicator'  which  is  the  relati<  n  between 
pure  Soul  and  the  (primary)  senses  of  the  two  terms  ('  That'  and 
'Thou'). 

This  has  been  declared  (by  an  ancient  writer)  as  follows  : — 
'•  Reference  to  the  same  thing,  and  the  relation  cf  subject  and 
predicate,  and  the  relation  of  '  indicated'  and  '  indicator,'  are  the 
relations  between  soul  and  the  primary  senses  (of  '  That'  and 
'Thou').! 

(a)  Reference  to  one  and  the  same  thing. 

As,  in  the  sentence,  '  That  is  this  same  Devadatta,'2  there  is 
between  the  word  '  That' — which  denotes  the  Devadatta  of  the 
previous  occasion — and  the  word  '  This,'  which  denotes  the 
Devadatta  of  the  present  occasion — the  relation  that  consists  in 
their  both  referring  to  one  and  the  same  person  ;  so  also,  in  the 
sentence  '  That  art  Thou,'  there  is  between  the  word  '  That'  which 
denotes  the  Soul  with  the  attributes  of  invisibility,  &c.  and  the 
word  'Thou'  which  denotes  the  Soul  with  the  attributes  of  visibility, 
&c.  the  relation  that  consists  in  their  both  referring  to  one  and  the 
same  Intelligence. 

(b)  Relation  as  subject  and  predicate. 

As  in  that  same  sentence  ('  That  is  this  same  Devadatta'),  there 
is  between  the  Devadatta  of  the  prior  occasion,  who  is  denoted  by 
the  word  '  That'  and  the  Devadatta  of  the  present  occasion,  who  is 
denoted  by  the  word  '  This'  the  relation  of  subject  and  predicate, 
which  is  constituted  by  the  exclusion  of  their  mutual  difference 
(of  time)  ;  so  also  in  this  sentence  ('  That  art  Thou')  there  is 
between  the  Soul  with  the  attributes  of  invisibility,  &c.  which  is 
denoted  by  '  That,'  and  the  Soul  with  the  attributes  of 
visibility,  the  relation  of  'subject  and  predicate,'  which  is 
constituted  by  the  exclusion  of  their  mutual  difference,  (viz.,  the 
Ignorance  which  is  no  '  Reality.'). 

(c.)     Relation  as  indicator  and  indicated.3 

the  two  terras  is  that  which  appears  to  exist  between  Ignorance  in  its  collective 
aggregate,  aud  Ignorance  in  its  distributive  aggregate.  As  it  has  been  ruled  that 
these  have  no  difference — '  as  there  is  uone  between  a  forest  and  its  trees' — it  follows 
that  there  is  no  difference  between  the  term  '  That"  and  '  Thon'  in  the  sentence 
'  That  art  Thou.'  Ballantyne. 

"  The  false  reasoning  is  thus  pointed  out  by  Ballantyne:  "  It  is  tacitly  aspumed 
that  each  tree  severally  is  the  forest.  The  trees  might  fairly  say,  •  We  are  the 
forest  ;  but  no  single  one  can  be  suffered  to  say,  '  I  am  the  forest,' — much  less  can 
they  all  be  suffered  to  say  this  each  of  himself."  p.  83.  The  reasoning  is  that  a 
part  is  identical  with  the  whole.  *  NoAxJikartnyasidclhi,  in.  3. 

8  "  That  person  whom  I  saw  on  some  former  occasion  ie  this  same  Devadatta 
whom  I  now  behold."  Ballantyne. 

3  The  reasoning  will  hereafter   be  shown  to  be  fallacious. 
6 


42  THE   VEDANTA-SAKA. 

As  in  the  same  sentence  (That  is  this  same  Devadatta)  when  we 
leave  out  the  distinction  of  contradictory  times,  past  and  present, 
belonging  to  the  word,  '  That'  and  *  This,'  or  to  what  these 
primarily  denote,  then  these  words  stand  in  the  relation  of  '  indi- 
cator and  indicated'  as  regards  Devadatta,  who  is  not  the  contra- 
dictory of  himself ;  so  also  in  this  sentence  (That  art  Thou),  when 
we  leave  out  the  contradictory  properties,  '  invisibility,  &c.'  and 
*  visibility,  &c.'  pertaining  to  the  words  '  That'  and  '  Thou'  or  to 
what  these  primarily  denote  (the  invisible  Soul  and  the  embodied 
Soul) ,  then  these  words  stand  in  the  relation  of  f  indicator  and 
indicated'  as  regards  the  (absolute)  Intelligence,  which  is  not  the 
contradictory  of  itself. 

This  is  what  is  called  (in  Rhetoric)  '  bhdgalalcshand'  i.e.  the 
indication  of  a  portion.1 

X. 

(BBEONEOUS  EXPLANATIONS  OF  THE  GREAT  SENTENCE; 
THE  TRUE  MEANING.)2 

In  the  sentence  (That  art  Thou)  the  literal  meaning  of  the 
sentence  is  not  coherent,  as  it  is  in  the  expression,  '  The  lotus  is 
blue.'  3  In  that  expression,  since  the  blue — the  quality  denoted  by 
the  word  '  blue,'  and  the  lotus — the  substance  denoted  by  the 
word  '  lotus,  excludes  such  qualities  as  'white,'  and  such  substances 
as  '  cloth,'  the  literal  meaning  of  the  sentence  is  coherent,  because 
no  evidence,  from  any  other  quarter,  opposes  our  accepting  this  as 
the  sense  of  the  sentence  that  the  two  are  united  as  subject  and 
attribute,  or  that  either  one,  to  which  the  other  is  attributed,  is 
identical  with  it. 

But  in  this  sentence  ('  That  art  Thou'  as  opposed  to  '  The 
lotus  is  blue')  since  the  Soul  '  invisible,  fyc.,'  denoted  by  the  word 
'  That,'  and  the  Soul  '  visible  &c., '  denoted  by  the  word  '  Thou,' 
exclude  each  other  mutually,  the  literal  meaning  of  the  sentence  is 
not  coherent,  because  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  &c.  opposes  our 
accepting  this  as  the  sense  of  the  sentence  that  the  two  (which 

1  According  to  Hindu  rhetoricians,  the  meaning  of  every  word  or  sentence 
comes  under  one  of  three  heads,  that  is,  it  is  either  literal  (vachya),  indicative 
(laTeshya),  or  suggestive  (vyangya).  'Indication'  is  thus  defined  in  the  KdvyapraJcdsa 
(ii.  9.)  :  '  When  the  literal  meaning  is  incompatible  (with  the  rest  of  the  sentence), 
and  either  from,  usage  or  from  some  motive,  another  meaning  is  indicated,  in 
connection  with  the  primary  one,  that  imposed  function  is  called  'Indication.'" 
Abridged  from  Col.  Jacob.  See  Hindu  Pantheism,  pp.  92,  93. 

*  The  author  now  proceeds  to  contend  that  the  meaning  of  the  '  Great  Sentence' 
cannot  be  accounted  for  on  other  principles  of  interpretation  than  those  that  have 
been  just  set  forth.  Ballantyne. 

3  The  '  lotus'  being  the  thing  that  we  call  '  blue,'  and  the  '  blue'  thing  what  we 
call '  lotus.'  Ballantyne. 


TRANSLATION.  43 

mutually  exclude  each  other)  are  united  as  subject  and  attribute, 
or  that  either  one,  to  which  the  other  is  attributed,  is  identical 
with  it.1 

But  again,  their  coherence  (in  'That  art  Thou')  is  not  arrived  at 
by  our  supposing  the  terms  to  be  '  indicatory  with  the  relinquish- 
ment  of  their  own  primary  meaning3,  as  is  the  case  in  the  sentence, 
'  The  herdsman  dwells  on  the  Ganges.'  In  the  case  of  this  latter 
sentence,  since  there  is  a  complete  incompatibility  in  the  primary 
meaning  of  the  sentence  which  indicates  that  the  Ganges  and  the 
herdsman  stand  in  the  relation  of  '  location  and  located  ,  we  do 
arrive  at  a  coherent  sense  by  holding  that  the  case  is  one  of  indica- 
tion with  the  abandonment  of  the  primary  meaning  (the  word 
Ganges  standing  for  the  bank  thereof)  seeing  that  it  (the  stream) 
is  quite  qualified  to  indicate  the  bank  adjoining  it. 

In  this  sentence  (That  art  Thou)  on  the  other  hand,  (as 
distinguished  from  'The  herdsman  on  the  Ganges')  coherence  is 
not  to  be  arrived  at  by  our  supposing  the  terms  to  be  '  indicatory 
with  the  relinquishment  of  their  own  primary  meaning/  because, 
since  there  is  only  a  partial  incompatibility  between  the  things 
denoted  in  the  sentence  ('  That  art  Thou')  which  asserts  the  identity 
of  the  invisible  Soul  and  of  the  Soul  visible  (as  embodied);  it  would 
not  be  fit,  that,  abandoning  the  residue  of  the  meaning,  there 
should  be  indicated  something  else  (quite  different.) 

And  you  must  not  say,  "  as  the  word  '  Ganges,'  by  relin- 
quishing its  own  primary  meaning,  indicates  that  which  is  the 
primary  meaning  of  the  word  (  bank,'  so  also  let  the  word  '  That' 
or  the  word  '  Thou',  by  relinquishing  its  own  primary  meaning, 
convey  the  meaning  of  the  word  '  Thou*  or  of  the  word  '  That/ ; 
and  therefore  why  does  'Indication  with  the  abandonment  of 
primary  meaning'  not  apply  here  ?"  (The  two  cases  differ)  because, 
although,  in  the  case  of  the  one  expression, — since,  from  the  word 
bank's  not  being  heard,  the  sense  of  that  word  did  not  offer  itself, 
— it  was  to  be  expected  that  it  should  be  conveyed  by  indication  j; 
still  it  was  not  to  be  expected  that,  where  the  sense  of  the  two 
terms  '  That'  and  '  Thou'  had  been  apprehended  by  the  hearing 
of  the  terms  'That'  and  'Thou/  the  sense  of  each  should  be  con- 
veyed over  again,  indicatorily,  by  each  term  reciprocally. 

To  this  sentence  (That  art  Thou)  also  (the  figure  of 
speech  called)  Indication  without  relinquishment  of  the  primary 
meaning,  does  not  apply  as  it  does  in  the  expression  '  The 
Red  gallops.'  In  the  case  of  this  expression  since  the  primary 
meaning  is  incoherent — purporting,  as  it  does,  that  a  quality,  viz., 
'  red'  moves,  the  application  of  '  Indication  without  relinquish- 
ment of  the  primary  meaning/  may  take  place,  since  we  may 
get  rid  of  the  incoherency  of  the  sentence  by  holding  that 

1  The   author  now  proceeds   to  reject  another  principle   of  interpretation   on 
which  it  has  been  sought  to   account  for  the  '  Great  Sentence '.    Ballantyne. 


44  THE    VEDANTA-SABA. 

some  substratum  of  the  quality — for  example  a  (chestnut)  horse, 
is  indicated  without  the  relinquishment  of  the  primary  meaning. 
But  in  the  case  of  this  expression  (That  art  Thou),  the  application 
of  '  Indication  without  relinquishment  of  the  primary  meaning ' 
cannot  take  place ;  because,  whilst  the  primary  import  of  the 
sentence — viz.  the  oneness  of  the  invisible  and  of  the  (embodied) 
visible  Soul  — is  incoherent,  the  incoherence  cannot  be  removed  by 
either  terms,  indicating  anything  else  whatever  in  connection  with 
its  own  primary  meaning  retained. 

And  you  must  not  say,  '  Let  the  word  '  That '  or  the  word 
(  Thou '  by  relinquishing  the  inconsistent  portion  of  its  primary 
meaning,  indicate  ^(severally  and  reciprocally)  the  thing  meant  by 
the  word  '  Thou  '  or  by  the  word  '  That' ;  and  why  then  postulate 
an  indicatory  power  of  another  description,  viz.  '  Indication  of  a 
portion '?  (This  you  must  not  say)  because  it  is  impossible  that 
one  single  word  should  indicate  both  a  portion  of  its  own  primary 
meaning  and  also  the  sense  of  another  word,  and  because  no  one 
expects  that  what  has  beeii  already  intimated  by  a  separate  word 
shall  be  indicatorily  intimated  over  again. 

Therefore,  as  the  sentence  '  That  is  this  same  Devadatta',  or 
what  is  primarily  meant  by  the  terms  thereof — since  there  is  a 
partial  inconsistency  in  the  sentence,  importing,  as  it  does,  the 
Devadatta  of  prior  times  and  the  Devadatta  of  the  present  time — 
having  abandoned  the  inconsistent  portion,  viz.  the  being  one  of 
prior  times  and  the  being  one  of  the  present  time, — indicates 
merely  that  portion  of  Devadatta  which  involves  no  inconsistency ; — 
so  also  the  sentence  f  That  art  Thou/  or  what  is  primarily  meant 
by  the  terms  thereof, — since  there  is  a  partial  inconsistency  in  the 
sentence,  importing,  as  it  does,  the  invisible  and  the  (embodied) 
visible  Soul, — having  abandoned  the  inconsistent  portion,  viz.  the 
being  one  possessed  of  invisibility  &c.  and  the  being  one  possessed 
of  visibility,  &c. — indicates  merely  the  Indivisible  Intellect,  which 
involves  no  inconsistency.1 

XI. 

(MEANING  OP  THE  SENTENCE  '  I  AM  BRAHMA';   HE  WHO   UNDERSTANDS 
THE  GREAT  SENTENCE  REALIZES  HIS  UNION  WITH  IT.) 

Now  we  shall  explain  the  import  of  that  expression  of 
consciousness,  ( I  am  Brahma'.  When  the  meaning  of  the 

1  This  view  of  the  matter  may  be  illustrated  algebraically.  Not  being  able  to 
admit  as  an  equation  th'1  expression  '  Devadatta  +  past  time  =  Devadatta  +  present 
time,'  we  reflect  that  the  conception  of  time  is  not  essential  to  the  conception  of 
Deradatta's  nature;  and  we  strike  it  out  of  both  sides  of  the  expression  which  then 
gives  '  Devndatta  =  Devadatta'1. — the  equal  it}' being  that  of  identity  In  the  same 
w«y,  not  boin^r  able  to  admit  ns  nn  equation  'Soul  +  invisibility  -  Soul  + 
visibility,  &c."  we  reflect  that  the  Ti&ibility  &c.  are  but  the  modifications  of 


TRANSLATION.  45 

'  Indivisible'  has  thus  been  communicated  by  means  of  the  sentence 
(That  art  Thou),  after  the  teacher  has  in  the  foregoing  manner 
cleared  up  the  sense  of  the  two  terms  'That'  and  'Thou'  —  then 
does  there  occur  to  the  competent  student  a  modification  of  the 
understanding1  as  moulded  in  the  form  of  the  'Indivisible'  viz., 
"  I  am  the  eternal,  pure,  knowing,  free,  true,  self  -existent,  most 
blessed  Brahma,  —  (one)  without  a  second." 

But  this  modification  of  the  understanding  being  accompanied 
by  the  reflection  of  Brahma  (thus  accurately  mirrored  in  the 
understanding)  having  taken  as  its  object  what  was  not  previously 
recognised,  viz.,  the  supreme  Brahma,  who  differs  not  from  the 
individual  Soul,  puts  an  end  to  the  '  Ignorance'  in  respect  thereof. 
Then,  as  a  web  is  burnt  when  the  yarn  that  was  the  cause  of  it  is 
burnt;  so  too,  when  'Ignorance',  which  is  the  cause  of  all 
productions,  is  put  an  end  to,  since  every  one  of  its  effects  is  put  an 
end  to,  then  this  modification  of  the  understanding,  mirroring  the 
form  of  the  '  Indivisible'  is  put  an  end  to  also  —  it  being  one 
(product)  among  these  (various  productions  which  all  have 
'  Ignorance'  as  their  cause.) 

As  the  shine  of  a  lamp,  having  no  power  to  illuminate  the 
shine  of  the  sun,  is  overpowered  thereby  ;  so  too  the  (reflected) 
S°ul,  as  reflected  in  that  '  modification  of  the  understanding  ', 
through  its  having  no  power  to  illuminate  that  self-luminous 
Supreme  Brahma,  who  is  none  other  than  the  individual  Soul,  being 
overpowered  thereby,  leaves  nothing  besides  the  Supreme  Brahma, 
who  is  none  other  than  the  individual  Soul,  —  just  as,  on  the  removal 
of  a  mirror,  the  reflection  of  a  countenance  leaves  nothing  besides 
the  countenance  itself,  because  that  '  modification  of  the  under- 
standing,' which  is  a  portion  of  that  ('Ignorance,')  in  which  He  was 
immersed,  has  been  put  an  end  to  (by  the  recognition  of  the  fact 
that  nothing  besides  Him  exists)  . 

And,  the  matter  standing  thus,  there  is  no  inconsistency 
between  the  two  texts  of  scripture,  '  By  the  mind  He  is  to  be 
apprehended,'  &c.,  and  '  who  is  not  comprehended  by  the  mind,'2  &c. 
because,  while  admitting  that  He  is  made  an  object  of  the  under- 
standing, we  laid  down  a  denial  that  this  involved  the  (usual) 
consequence. 

And  (in  regard  to  the  point  referred  to  above)   it  has  been 


tyne.     The  reasoning 

Chittavritti.  The  understanding  is  elsewhere  called  the  '  internal  organ. 
(antahkarana.)  According  to  the  Vedanta,  perception  of  an  object,  such  as  a  jar, 
takes  place  in  the  following  way  :  When  the  eye  is  fixed  upon  the  jar,  the  internal 
organ,  with  the  intelligence  appropriated  to  or  reflected  in  it,  goes  out  towards  it,  and 
its  light  dispels  the  darkness  of  Ignorance  enveloping  it,  illuminates  it,  assumes  its 
shape,  and  so  cognises  it.  Jacob.  The  change  is  called  Chittavritti, 
',  4,  4,  19.  Kena,  i,  5. 


46  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

declared  as  follows :  '  Whilst  it  is  necessary  that  the  understanding 
should  be  available  for  the  destruction  of  ignorance  respecting  God, 
it  is  denied  by  the  authors  of  the  Institutes  that  the  usual  result  of 
this  applies  to  Him  also."1  For  again,  "  Since  He  is  self-luminous 
there  is  no  need  of  light  (to  be  thrown  on  Him.)2 

There  is  a  (great)  difference  between  a  '  modification  of  the 
understanding,'  when  moulded  on  a  material  object  and  this  (when 
mirroring  the  Supreme  Intelligence).  To  explain; — Suppose  we 
have  the  case,  "  This  (I  perceive)  is  a  jar." — Here,  having  taken 
as  its  object  the  jar,  previously  unrecognized,  the  '  modification  of 
the  understanding'  mirroring  the  form  of  the  jar,  on  dispelling 
the  ignorance  that  previously  attached  to  the  object,  throws  light 
upon  the  jar  by  the  light  of  its  own  intelligence ;  just  as  the  shine 
of  a  lamp,  when  it  throws  itself  upon  the  surrounding  jars,  &c.,  in 
the  dark,  on  dispelling  the  darkness  illuminates  them  with  its  own 
light :  —  (but  this  usual  sequel  to  the  removal  of  intervening  dark- 
ness or  ignorance  does  not  apply  when  the  object  of  the  understand- 
ing is  the  Supreme  Intelligence).3 

XII. 
(MEANS  TO  BE  EMPLOYED  TO  EEALIZE  THE  GREAT  SENTENCE). 

Until  Intellect  (or  Deity)  becomes  in  this  way  directly 
manifest  in  its  own  form,  since  it  is  necessary  to  persevere  in 
(1)  hearing  (sravana),  (2)  pondering  (manana,  (3)  contemplation, 
(iiididhydtana),  and  (4)  meditation  (samddhi),  these  also  shall 
now  be  explained. 

(a.)  ( Hearing'  implies  the  determining  through  the  six 
characters  (or  conducers  to  knowledge)  the  import  of  the  whole 
of  the  theological  sections  of  the  Vedas,  in  regard  to  the  '  Real,' 
besides  which  there  is  nought  else.  These  (cgnducers  to  knowledge) 
are  (1)  the  'beginning  and  ending  with,'  (2)  'inculcation/  (3) 
novelty,'  (4)  the  '  fruit,'  (5)  '  eulogizing  of  the  subject,'  and  (6) 
'  illustration  from  analogy.' 

1.  '  The  beginning  and  the  ending  (upakramopasamharau) 
imply  that  the  matter  to  be  declared  in  any  given  section  is  declared 
both  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  thereof : — as,  for  instance,  in 
the  sixth  section  of  the  Chhdndogya  Upanishad,  the  '  Real,  besides 
which  there  is  nought  else' — which  is  to  be  explained  in  that  section 
— is  declared  at  the  outset  in  the  terms  "  One  only,  without  a 
second,"  and  at  the  end  in  the  terms  "  All  this  consists  of  That." 

1  Pancadasi,  vii.         2  Ibid. 

* '  The  perception,  of  Brahma  differs  from  that  of  an  ordinary  object  in  that  It, 
being  self-luminous,  is  not  revealed  by  the  light  of  the  intelligence  reflected  in  the 
internal  organ,  but  shines  forth  as  soon  as  the  latter  has  dispelled  the  Ignorance, 
enveloping  It."  Jacob. 


TRANSLATION.  47 

2.  '  Inculcation^  &c.s   (abhydso)  is  the  declaration  again  and 
again   therein    of  that  thing  which  the  section   (of  the  Veda)   is 
concerned  with  declaring  : — as,  for  example,  in   that  same  section 
the  '  Real,  besides  which   there  is  nought  else,'  is  set  forth  nine 
times  in  the  shape  of  the  assertion,  '  That  art  Thou.' 

3.  '  Novelty'  (apurvatd)  here  means  that  the  Thing  which  the 
section  is  concerned  in  declaring  is  not  an  object  of  any  other  proof ; 
as,  for  example,  in  that  same  section,  the  truth  regarding  the '  Real, 
besides  which  there  is  nought  else'  is  not  the  object  of  any  other 
proof. 

4.  By  the  (  Fruit'  (phala)  we  mean  the  motive  which  is  heard 
stated  in  this  or  that    (section  of  the  Veda),  for  seeking  the  know- 
ledge respecting  Soul  that  is  brought  forward  in  the  section,  or  for 
persevering    therein ;  as,    for    example,    in    that    same    section, 
(vi.  14,  2.),  we  learn  that  the  inducement  for  acquiring  a  knowledge 
of    the    '  Real,    besides  which  there  is  nought  else,'    is    that  we 
may  attain  to  (being  ourselves)  that  (Reality)  ;  for,  "  The  man  that 
hath  a  teacher  knoweth  (the  truth)  ;  but  he  must  abide  until  he  be 
released  (from  the  body)  ;  then  will  he  attain  (to  absorption  into 
the  one  Reality.)" 

5.  Eulogizing  of  the   Subject  (aithavdda)   is  the  glorifying  of 
what  is  set  forth  in  this  or  that  section  (of  the  Veda)  ;  as  for  exam- 
ple, in  that  same  section   (vi.  1.  3)    the  glorifying  of  the  '  Real, 
besides  which  there  is  nought  else,'  in  the  following  terms  :  "  Thou, 
O  disciple,  hast  asked  for  that  instruction  whereby  the  unheard  of 
becomes   heard,    the   inconceivable   becomes   conceived,   and   the 
unknowable  becomes  thoroughly  known." 

6.  "Illustration  from  analogy  "  (upapatti)  is  the  exhibition  of  a 
reason,  heard  stated  in  this  or  that  (section  of   the  Veda),  for  the 
establishment  of  what  is  set  forth  in  the  section : — as,  for  example, 
in  that  same  section  (vi.  1-4)  we  hear  stated,  as  illustrations  from 
analogy,  such  arguments  as  the  following,  to  show,  when  establish- 
ing what  is  the  '  Real,  besides  which  there  is  nought  else, '  that  His 
(supposed)   mutations    (are  mere  figures   of   speech,  or)    rest   on 
nothing  but  words  :  "  0  gentle  one !  as  by  means  of  a  lump  of  clay 
everything  that  is  made  of  the  clay  is  perfectly  known    to  us, — its 
modifications  or  various  names,  resting  merely  on  language,  whilst 
the  truth  is  that  there  is  (nothing  else  than)  the  clay." 

(&) .  '  Pondering  '  is  the  dwelling  with  uninterrupted  attention 
on  the  '  Real,  besides  which  there  is  nought  else,'  which  he  has 
heard,  together  with  such  illustrations  as  are  in  accordance  with 
the  Vedantic  Doctrine. 

(c).  'Contemplation*  is  the  homogeneous  flow  of  the  under- 
standing mirroring  its  object,  when  this  object  is  the  '  Real,  besides 
which  there  is  nought  else,' — to  the  exclusion  of  the  notion  of  body 
or  any  thing  heterogeneous  (to  the  one  Reality). 

1  Repetition.     Jacob. 


48  THE    VEDANTA-SAEA. 

(d.)  'Meditation'  (aamidhi)  is  of  two  kinds  (1)  (  recognising 
such  distinctions  as  that  of  subject  aiid  object'  (saviJcalpaka) ,  and 
(2)  c  recognising  no  such  distinctions  as  that  of  subject  and  object' 
(nirvikalpaka) . 

(1.)  'Meditation  recognising  such  distinctions  as  that  of 
subject  and  object/  consists  in  the  continuance  of  the  understanding 
in  that  modification  in  which  it  mirrors  the  '  Real,  besides  which 
there  is  nought  else/ — without  any  concern  about  the  sinking  of  the 
distinction  between  the  knower,  the  knowledge,  &c.  Then  the 
'  Real,  without  a  second/  does  shine  forth  even  whilst  there  is  the 
appearance  of  duality  ; — just  as  there  is  the  recognition  of  the  clay, 
when  we  perceive  such  a  thing  as  an  elephant  formed  of  clay. 
Such  (meditations)  have  been  attained  by  (sages)  intent  (on 
emancipation), — in  terms  such  as  the  following  : — '  I  am  that  being, 
in  the  shape  of  vision,  like  the  ether  (all-pervading),  pre-eminent, 
immediately  manifest,  unproduced,  one  and  imperishable,  unsoiled, 
omnipresent,  self-existent,  without  a  second,  and  for  ever  free.  I  am 
the  pure  (act  of)  vision  unchangeable;  I  have  no  fetter,  nor  am  I  net 
free  (having  always  been  so.)1 

(2.)  ( Meditation  which  recognises  no  such  distinction  as 
that  of  subject  and  object'  consists  in  the  continuance  of  the 
Understanding  modified  so  as  to  mirror  the  '  Real,  besides  which 
there  is  nought  else/  with  advertence  to  the  sinking  of  all  distinction 
between  the  knower,  the  knowledge,  and  the  known, — in  absolute 
oneness  ("  so  as  to  be  completely  identified  with  it.")2 

Then  the  '  Real,  besides  which  there  is  nought  else/  shines 
forth  alone,  in  the  absence  of  the  (separate)  recognition  of  the 
understanding  as  mirroring  the  solitary  Reality  ;  just  as  there 
appears  nothing  but  the  water  when  the  salt,  which  (on  solution) 
took  the  form  of  the  water  for  its  own,  is  no  longer  recognised. 

And  you  must  not  entertain  the  doubt  whether  there  be 
therefore  no  difference  between  this  and  sound  sleep  ;  because, 
whilst  the  non-appearance  of  the  modification  is  common  to  both 
cases,  the  two  cases  differ  just  in  this  that  it  is  present  in  the  one 
case  (though  not  perceived),  while  in  the  other  (in  deep  sleep)  it  is 
not  present  at  all. 

XIII. 

(THE  EIGHT  MEANS  SUBSERVIENT  TO  MEDITATION  WITHOUT  DISTINCTION 
OF  SUBJECT  AND  OBJECT.) 

The  practices  subservient  to  this  (nirvikalpaka  samadhi)  are  : 

1.  Forbearance  (yama). 

2.  Religious  Observances  (niyama). 

3.  Postures  (dsana). 

1  Upadesasahasri,  verge  73.  2  Jacob. 


TRANSLATION.  49 

4.  Suppression  of  the  Breath  (prdndydma). 

5.  Restraint  (pratydhdra) . 

6.  Attention  (dhdrana). 

7.  Contemplation  (dhydna). 

8.  Meditation  (samddhij. 

1.  Acts    of  '  forbearance'    are   not   killing,   not   lying,   not 
stealing,  chastity,  and  not  accepting  gifts. 

2.  '  Religious    Observances'    are    purification,  contentment, 
penance,  study,  and  persevering  meditation  on  I'svara. 

3.  '  Postures'  are  the  various  modes  of  disposing  the  hands, 
feet,  &c.,  spoken  of  as  pndmdsana  (lotus  posture) ,  Svastikasana,  &c. 

4.  '  Suppression  of  the  breath'  are  those  methods  for  checking 
respiration,  spoken    of  as  slow  expiration,    slow   inspiration,  and 
stopping   the  breath  by  shutting    the    mouth    and    closing   both 
nostrils  with  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand. 

5.  '  Restraint'  is  the  restraining   of  the  senses   from   their 
respective  objects. 

6.  '  Attention'  is  the  fixing  of  the  internal  organs  upon  the 
solitary  Reality. 

7.  '  Contemplation'  is  the  flowing  forth  of  the  internal  organ 
upon    the    solitary    Reality,    on    separate    occasions    (not   uninter- 
ruptedly so). 

8.  '  Meditation,'  here  spoken  of,  is  only  that  which  recog- 
nises such  a  distinction  as  that  of  subject  and  object. 

To  the  meditation,  with  exclusion  of  distinction  between 
subject  and  object,  to  which  the  above  are  subservient,  four  things 
may  be  obstacles  :  viz. 

1.  Listlessness.  2.  Distraction.  3.  Passion.  4.  The  tasting 
of  Joy. 

1.  '  Listlessness'   (lay a)   is   the   sleep  of   the  understanding 
whilst  not  sustaining  (or  mirroring)  the  Indivisible  Reality. 

2.  '  Distraction'  fvikshepaj  is  the  understanding's  mirroring 
any  thing  else  instead  of  mirroring  the  Indivisible  Reality. 

3.  '  Passion'  (kashdyaj   consists  in   the  understanding's  not 
mirroring  the  Indivisible  Reality,  even  in  the  absence  of  *  listless- 
ness'  and  '  distraction,'  through  its  being  paralysed  by  the  fancies 
of  desire,  &c. 

4.  'The  tasting  of  Joy   (rasdsvddanaj  is  the  understanding's 
experience  of  felicity,  whilst  recognizing  such  distinctions  as  that  of 
subject  and  object,  when  it  does  not  mirror  the  Indivisible  Reality  ; 
or  it  is  the  experience  of  felicity  recognised  as  distinct  from  the 
enjoyer  at  the  time  of  commencing  Meditation. 

When  the  understanding,  free  from  this  quaternion  of  obsta- 
cles, like  a  lamp  unagitated  when  unaffected  by  the  wind,  remains 
simply  (in  the  shape  of)  the  really  existent  indivisible  Intellect, 
then  is  there  said  to  be  "  Meditation  recognizing  no  distinction  of 
subject  and  object." 
7 


KO  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

It  has  been  said :  "  When  listlessness  comes  on  he  should 
awaken  the  understanding ;  when  distracted,  again,  he  should 
quiet  it ;  when  assailed  by  passion,  he  should  bring  it  to  understand ; 
when  it  has  attained  to  quietism,  he  should  not  disturb  it ;  he 
should  not  let  it  enjoy  happiness  ;  by  rightly  discerning  he  ought 
to  become  unattached  to  these  (external  and  unreal  objects)"  j1 
and  again  "  As  a  lamp,  standing  where  there  is  no  wind/'2  &c. 

XIV. 

(CHARACTERISTICS  OP  THE  JIVANMUKTA.) 

Now  we  shall  describe  him  '  who,  yet  living,  is  liberated.'  He  is 
'  liberated  while  yet  living,'  who,  intent  on  Brahma,  is  freed  from 
all  bonds  through  the  removal  of  Ignorance  and  its  resultant 
mass  of  actions,  doubts,  and  errors,  &c.,  on  Brahma  becoming 
manifested  as  He  really  is — the  Indivisible — through  the  removal 
of  ignorance  in  regard  to  Him — this  being  consequent  on  the 
knowledge  of  Brahma  as  He  is — the  Indivisible,  the  Pure.  This 
may  be  inferred  from  such  texts  as  the  following  :  "  When  He,  the 
First  and  the  Last,  has  been  discerned,  then  the  knot  of  the  heart 
is  severed,  all  doubts  are  resolved,  and  one's  acts  are  annihilated."3 

Such  a  one,  with  his  body,  which  is  a  vessel  of  flesh,  blood, 
urine,  excrement,  &c.,  and  his  set  of  organs — vessels  of  blindness, 
torpor,  stupidity,  &c.,  and  his  mind, — a  vessel  of  hunger,  thirst, 
sorrow,  bewilderment,  &c. — though  beholding  the  actions  that  he 
performs  in  accordance  with  this  or  that  preceding  fancy,  and  the 
fruits  of  past  deeds  which  he  experiences  without  their  obstructing 
his  knowledge  (of  the  truth),  does  not  behold  them  as  realities,  for 
to  him  they  have  ceased  to  exist ; — just  as  the  man  who  knows  that 
so  and  so  is  a  juggler's  trick,  though  looking  upon  the  illusion,  does 
not  look  upon  it  as  a  reality.  (This  may  be  inferred)  from  such 
texts  as  the  following:  "Seeing,  yet  as  not  seeing; — hearing, 
yet  as  not  hearing."  And  it  has  been  declared  that  ' '  He,  and  no 
other,  knoweth  Soul,  who,  in  his  waking  state,  sees  not, — just  as 
one  in  profound  sleep  (sees  not)  ;  and  who,  looking  on  (what 
seems)  more  than  one,  sees  it  not  under  the  aspect  of  duality ;  so 
too  who,  while  acting,  yet  (in  his  inmost  conviction)  acts  not ; 
this  is  certain."4 

As  he  (the  jivanmukta)  previously  to  the  attaining  of  right 
knowledge,  followed  the  ordinary  appetites  and  amusements  ;  so 
he  now  follows  the  impulse  to  good  works  only,  or  else  he  is  alike 
indifferent  to  good  or  bad. 

As  it  is  said,  "  If  he  who  rightly  understands  that  there  is 
no  duality  may  act  as  he  chooses,  then  what  difference  is  there 


1  Gaudapadas  Kdrikds,  iii.  44,  45.          2  Bhagavad  Gttd,  vi.  19. 
3  Munilakopanishad,  2.  2.  8.  *  UfKidesas'asdhfisri,    x.  13. 


TRANSLATION.  51 

between  dogs  and  those  who  know  the  truth — in  respect  of  eating 
what  is  unclean  ?"*  (And  again,  by  Sankaracarya)  "  Abandoning2 
also  the  fact  of  his  being  a  knower  of  Brahma,  he  knows  the  Self 
and  no  one  else  does."3 

Thereon  freedom  from  egotism,  and  other  such  perfecters  of 
knowledge,  and  such  good  qualities  as  freedom  from  malice,  will 
attend  him  like  ornaments.  And  so  it  has  been  declared:  "To  him 
who  has  obtained  a  knowledge  of  Soul,  such  qualities  asf  reedom  from 
malice  belong  without  effort,  but  these  are  not  now  employed  as 
means."^  What  more  need  be  said  ?  This  one,  merely  for  the  sus- 
tenance of  his  body,  acquiescing  in  the  experience  of  those  retribu- 
tive fruits,  in  the  shape  of  pleasure  or  pain  procured  from  desire  or 
aversion  on  our  own  part  or  on  another's ;  and  being  the  spirit 
that  enlightens  the  modifications  of  the  understanding,  on  the 
cessation  thereof  his  life  dissolving  away  into  the  Supreme  Deity, 
who  is  unmingled  beatitude,  on  the  destruction  of  Ignorance  and 
the  vis  inertias  of  its  results  abideth  Brahma,  in  absolute  simplicity, 
unvarying  felicity,  free  from  every  semblance  of  difference.  (This 
may  be  learned  from  such  texts  as  this,)  viz.  (  His  vital  ^spirit 
does  not  transmigrate,  but  is  absorbed'5  ;'and,  'absolutely  liberated 
he  is  absolutely  liberated.'6 

Thus  is  completed  the  treatise  called  the  Vedo.-nta-Kdra, 
composed  by  the  pre-eminent  ascetic,  the  illustrious  Sadananda, 
the  chief  of  devotees. 


1  Naishlcarmyctsiddhi  iv.  62. 

5  A  corrected  rendering  by  Col.  Jacob  instead  of  the  following  translation  by 
Ballantyne  :  •'  (Well  the  difference  consists)  in  the  knowledge  of  God.  So  such  a  one 
(as  knows  God,  and  not  the  dog  who  knows  nothing  of  the  truth)  being  liberated  is 
and  no  one  else  is  the  knower  of  sonls." 

8  Upadesaxdhasri ,  xii.  13.  4  yaishkarmyasiddhi  iv.  69. 

4  Brihadaranyaka,  4,.  4.  6.  fl  Kathopaniehad,  5.  1. 


EXAMINATION 


OF 


VEDANTISM. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Definition.  —  VEDANTISM,  in  the  following  remarks,  is  under- 
stood to  denote  the  Advaita  (non^dual)  theory  of  Sankara,  as 
explained  in  his  commentary  on  the  Vedanta-  Sutras,  and  as 
expounded  in  the  Veddnta-Sdra,  and  the  Veddnta  Paribhdshd.  There 
are  other  sects  who  claim  to  be  Vedantists.  The  principal  are  the 
Visishtadvaita  (qualified  non-duality)  sect  of  Ramanuja  and  the 
Dvaita  (dual)  sect  of  Madhva,  or  Ananda-tirtha.  The  Vallabhas 
form  a  third  sect.  Professor  Deussen,  during  his  visit  to  India, 
sought  to  ascertain  the  percentage  of  followers  belonging  to  each 
sect.  .  A  Ramanujist,  "  a  zealous  adversary  of  Sankara,  estimated 
that  out  of  a  hundred  Vedantins,  fifteen  perhaps  adhere  to  Ramanuja, 
five  to  Madhva,five  to  Vallabha,  and  seventy-five  to  Sankaracharya."1 

Colonel  Jacob  says  in  the  Preface  to  his  translation  of  the 
Veddnta-Sdra  : 

"  If  the  people  of  India  can  be  said  to  have  now  any  system  of 
religion  at  all,  apart  from  mere  caste  observances,  it  is  to  be  found  in 
the  Vedanta  philosophy,  the  leading  tenets  of  which  are  known  to  some 
extent  in  every  village.  The  subject  is  therefore  one  of  great  importance, 
and  the  Vedanta-sara  is  generally  acknowledged  to  be  the  most  satis- 
factory summary  of  the  modern  phases  of  it."  p.  i. 

The  ESSENCE  of  the  Vedanta  is  that  nothing  exists  but  Brahma  ; 
"  One  only  without  a  second." 

PEELIMINAKY  QUESTIONS.  —  Indian  treatises  on  any  subject  often 
begin  with  four  questions  : 

"  (1)  What  qualifications  are  required  to  render  one  competent  bo 
enter  upon  the  study  "f  —  (2)  What  is  the  subject-matter?  —  (3)  What, 
connection  is  there  between  the  subject-matter  and  the  book  itself?  — 
and  (4)  What  inducement  is  there  to  enter  upon  the  study  at  all  ?  The 
answer  to  each  of  these  questions  is  called  an  anubandha  —  a  '  bond  of 
connection'  or  '  cause1—  because,  unless  a  mau  knows  what  a  book  is 
about,  and  whether  he  is  competent  to  understand  it,  and  what  good  the 
knowledge  will  do  him,  he  cannot  be  expected  to  apply  himself  to  the 
study  of  the  book,  instead  of  employing  himself  otherwise."2 

The  above  points  and  others  arising  out  of  them  are  considered 
in  the  Second  Section  into  which  the  Vedanta-Sara  has  been 
divided  . 


1  Address  'it  Bombay,  25th  February, 

2  The  Pandit  for  July,  1867,  p.  48.    Quoted  by  Colonel  Jacob. 


EXAMINATION.  *  53 

"  The  Competent  Person." — The  Vedanta-Sara  begins  by  de- 
scribing the  adhikdrin,  the  person  qualified  to  undertake  the 
study.  The  qualifications  are  thus  summarised  by  Dr.  M.ullens  : 

"  He  must  first  find  out  the  sense  of  the  Vedas,  as  books  of  the 
language,  by  the  study,  according  to  rule,  of  the  Vedangas.  He  must 
either  in  bis  present  birth,  or  in  a  preceding  one,  renounce  all  the  objects 
of  desire,  such  as  sacrifices  which  obtain  heaven,  and  works  which  are 
forbidden,  as  Brahman  murder  and  the  like.  By  the  performance  of  the 
Sandhyd  bandhana.  and  other  appointed  ceremonies  ;  by  offering  expia- 
tions ;  and  engaging  in  acts  of  internal  worship,  he  must  purify  his  mind 
from  errors,  and  fix  it  upon  Brahma."1 

"  The  Four  Requisites." — Here  also  the  summary  of  Mullens 
may  be  given  : — 

(1.)  He  must  distinguish  between  the  real  and  unreal;  i*e.,  he 
most  regard  everything  unreal  except  Brahma.  (2.)  He  must  free 
himself  from  all  desire  of  enjoying  the  fruits  of  merit,  whether  in  this 
life  or  a  future  one.  (3.)  He  must  exclude  from  his  mind  and  from 
sense  everything  which  does  not  refer  to  Brahma.  He  must  endure 
cold  and  heat,  pleasure  and  paini  without  recognizing  a  difference 
between  them.  (4.)  He  must  have  an  intense  desire  after  liberation 
from  self,  and  absorption  into  Brahma.  These  exercises  duly  completed, 
he  will  be  qualified  to  learn  more.  With  earnestness  of  soul,  let  him 
now  hasten  to  a  teacher,  with  offerings  in  his  hand,  and  becoming  bis 
disciple,  beg  him  to  impart  that  knowledge  which  is  the  highest  that 
can  be  attained."2 

The  Subject. — This  is  that  the  Soul  and  Brahma  are  one — 
the  drift  of  all  Vedanta  treatises. 

The  End. — The  removal  of  the  ignorance  regarding  the 
identity  of  Soul  and  Brahma — and  the  attainment  of  the  joy 
which  is  the  essence  of  Brahma.  "  Thus  aided,"  says  Mullens, 
"  by  divine  choice ;  thus  prepared  by  ritual  services,  by  self- 
subjugation,  and  by  the  desire  of  obtaining  the  knowledge  of  the 
Supreme;  and  thus  provided  with  a  competent  teacher,  the  student 
must  place  himself  at  his  master's  feet,  to  receive  with  undoubting 
faith  whatever  that  master  may  choose  to  teach." 

To  enable  the  reader  to  form  his  own  judgment  of  Vedantism, 
a  summary  has  been  given  of  the  Vedanta- Sutras,  and  the  Vedanta- 
Sara  has  been  quoted  in  full.  Some  remarks  will  now  be  offered 
on  its  leading  tenets  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Nineteenth 
Century. 

While  the  subjects  discussed  in  the  Vedanta-Sara  will  be 
considered,  its  arrangement  will  not  be  followed.  The  chief 
dogma  will  hrst  be  examined,  and  then  others  with  which  it  is 
connected. 


Hindu  Philosophy,  p.  119.  '  I&td,  p.  120. 


64  THE    VEDANTA-aAKA. 

THE  CHIEF  DOCTRINE  OF  ADVAITISM. 

This  is  briefly  stated  in  two  celebrated  formulas : 

Ekam  evdduitiyam,   "  ONE  ONLY  WITHOUT  A  SECOND." 
Sarvam  Khalvidam  Brahma,  "  ALL  THIS   (UNIVERSE)  is  BKAHMA." 

Rammohun  Roy  and  Keshub  Chunder  Sen  interpreted  the 
first  to  signify  that  there  is  only  one  God ;  but  the  real  meaning  is 
that  nothing  exists  but  God — a  very  different  doctrine.  The 
second  formula  expresses  it  clearly.  It  declares  that  all  that 
exists  is  Brahma. 

THE  FOUNDATION  OF  ADVAITISM. 

In  the  twilight  a  rope  is  mistaken  for  a  serpent. 
'    Mother-of-pearl  is  mistaken  for  silver. 
A  thousand  suns  may  be  seen  in  a  thousand  pots  of  water. 

Conclusions. 

The  universe,  supposed  to  be  real,  is  only  imaginary,  like  the 
serpent  or  mother-of-pearl. 

Our  souls  are  only  like  the  reflection  of  the  sun  in  the  pots  of 
water :  Brahma  is  the  only  real  existence. 

On  this  very  slender  basis  the  lofty  superstructure  of 
Advaitism  has  been  reared. 

Grand  Defect  of  Hindu  Reasoning. — This  is  to  accept  illustra- 
tion as  argument.  That  there  may  be  several  roads  to  the  same 
city  is  regarded  as  proving  that  all  religions  lead  to  God.  Rama- 
krishna,  the  guru  of  Swami  Vivekananda,  expressed  it  thus  : 

"  As  one  may  ascend  to  the  top  of  a  house  by  means  of  a  ladder  or 
a  bamboo  or  a  stmrcase  or  a  ropef  so  divers  are  the  ways  and  means  to 
approach  God»and  every  religion  in  the  world  shows  one  of  these  ways." 

Ramakrishna's  argument  amounts  to  this :  "  As  there  are 
several  ways  of  getting  to  the  top  of  a  house,  so  atheism  and 
polytheism,  pantheism  and  monotheism  are  all  true."  Swami  Vive- 
kananda,  with  logic  equal  to  that  of  his  Guru,  said  at  Chicago, 
"  We  accept  all  religions  to  be  true." 

One  illustration  may  appear  to  prove  one  thing,  but  another 
may  be  adduced  leading  to  an  opposite  conclusion.  It  is  some- 
times said,  "  As  there  is  only  one  sun  in  the  sky,  so  there  is  only 
one  God."  This  is  a  great  truth,  but  the  reasoning  is  no  better 
than  the  following,  "  As  there  are  innumerable  stars  in  the  sky,  so 
the  number  of  gods  is  countless." 

Kapila  justly  says  :  "  There  is  no  acceptance  of  the  inconsist- 
ent, else  we  come  to  the  level  of  children,  madmen,  and  the  like."1 

1  Sdnkhya  Aphorisms.  Book  I. 


AVIDYA   AND   MAYA.  55 

Advaitism  is  based  on  "  ILLUSORY  ANALOGIES  or  DEDUCTIONS  PROM 

FALSE  PREMISES." 

Before  considering  at  length  the  formula,  "  One  only  without 
a  Second/'  some  account  will  be  given  of  Avidyd  and  Aid  yd, 
invented  to  explain  away  the  apparent  reality  of  the  Universe. 


AVIDYA  AND  MAYA. 

When  a  man  makes  one  false  statement,  he  is  often  obliged 
to  invent  others  for  its  support.  Advaitists,  starting  with  the  false 
assumption  that  nothing  exists  but  Brahma,  are  forced  to  devise 
another  to  account  for  what  is  so  opposite  to  the  evidence  of  our 
senses.  The  result  is  the  figment  of  Avidyd  and  Maya. 

Avidya. —  Vidya  means  knowledge;  avidyd  means  non- 
knowledge  or  Ignorance.  Thibaut  explains  "  adhydsa  as  literally 
'  superimposition/  in  the  sense  of  (mistaken)  ascription  or  imputa- 
tion to  something  of  an  essential  nature  or  attributes  not  belonging 
to  it."  "  The  Vedanta-Sara  says  that  "  Erroneous  Imputation" 
or  "  Illusory  Attribution"  is  supposing  the  unreal  to  be  real  ;  as 
when  a  rope  is  imagined  to  be  a  serpent. 

Avidya  is  said  to  be  neither  existent  nor  non-existent.  Ballan- 
tyne  thus  describes  its  two  powers  : 

*'  Ignorance  has  two  powers  ;  that  by  which  it  envelopes  soul,  giving 
rise  to  the  conceit  of  personality  or  conscious  individuality,  and  that  by 
which  it  projects  the  phantasmagoria  of  a  world  which  the  individual 
regards  as  external  to  himself."1 

Sankara  thus  explains  avidyd  : 

"  This  superimposition,  thus  defined,  learned  men  consider  to 
be  Avidyd,  and  the  ascertainment  of  the  true  nature  of  that  which  is 
(the  Self)  by  means  of  the  discrimination  of  that  (which  is  superimposed 
on  the  Self)  they  call  Knowledge  (Vidyd).")* 

The  explanation  of  Sankara  is  not  very  lucid.  The  following 
seems  to  be  the  main  point :  So  long  as  a  man  imagines  himself 
to  be  different  from  Brahma,  he  is  in  a  state  of  Avidyd.  When  he 
can  say  Brahmdsmi,  '  I  am  Brahma/  then  he  possesses  Vidya,,  and 
is  the  wise  man. 

Maya. — The  meaning  of  Mdyd  has  varied.  The  Brahmavddin 
thus  describes  the  changes  : 

"  A  reference  to  the  Sarvdnukramanikd  of  Katyayana  shows  ns  that 
the  word  Maya  occurs  in  many  of  the  hymns  of  the  Rig-Veda,  in  almost 
all  its  different  grammatical  forms,  and  is  used  in  connection  with  several 
of  the  gods  whose  praises  are  sung  therein.  Tn  all  these  places  Sayana 
invariably  interprets  Maya  to  mean  prdjnd  (intelligence).  In  Yaska's 

1   Christianity  contrasted  with  Hindu  Philosophy,  p.  xxxvi. 
»  Veddntu-SHira*,  Vol.  T.  p.  6. 


5fi  THE    VEDANTA-8ARA. 

Nirukta  it  i8  derived  from  ma,  to  measure;  and  is  made  to  mean  thereby 
the   intelligence   through    which    all    things   are    measured  and   compre-  ' 
hended.      Inhere  are  also  a  few   places  where  Maya  is   interpreted  as 
'  wonderful  power.' 

"  The  Vedauta  is  based  on  the  Upanishads  :  but  in  these  scriptural 
discourses  on  philosophy  and  religion  there  is  no  system  ;  and  it  has  been 
the  endeavour  of  the  Sutrakdra,  the  composer  of  the  aphorisms  and  his 
commentators,  to  evolve  a  system  out  of  the  materials  furnished  by  them. 
The  word  Maya  scarcely  occurs  in  the  principal  Upanishads.  But  where 
it  does  occur  it  seems  to  be  used  mostly  in  the  old  Vedic  sense.  The 
only  two  Upanishada  where  this  word  may  be  taken  to  be  used  in  a 
new  sense  are  the  Scetdsvatara  and  Mnitrdyani.  However  it  is  quite 
certain  that  the  philosophic  system  of  thought  which  subsequently 
grew  out  of  the  Upanishads  led  to  the  elaboration  of  the  Vedantic  idea 
of  Maya  .  .  . 

"  The  import  of  Maya  as  matured  by  Sankara  in  his  A.dvaita  system 
is  partly  an  internal  growth  of  the  Upanishads  and  partly  due  to  the 
Maya  theory  of  the  Buddhists  against  whom  Sankara  mainly  contended."1 

In  the  Vedas  the  reality  of  the  external  world  is  recognised. 
In  the  Upanishads  generally  Brahma  is  the  material  cause  of  the 
world  as  well  as  its  efficient  cause.  He  is  compared  to  a  spider, 
weaving  its  web  out  of  its  own  body.  This  will  be  noticed  more 
fully  under  "  Creation."  The  supposed  illusory  nature  of  external 
objects  was  a  later  development. 

Dr.  Krishna  Mohun  Banerjea  attributes  the  origin  of  Maya  to 
Buddhism  : 

"  V^yasa  does  not  inculcate  that  doctrine,  nor  do  the  Upaniehads, 
Taittiriya,  Aitareya,&nd  Kena.  Vijnana  Bhikshu,  in  his  commentary  on  the 
Sankhya  Sutra  (i.  22),  draws  a  marked  distinction  between  the  Brahma 
Sutras  and  the  theory  of  Maya.  '  There  is  not  a  single  Brahma  Sutra/ 
says  he,  in  which  our  bondage  is  declared  to  be  a  mere  deception.  As  to 
the  novel  theory  of  Maya,  propounded  by  persons  calling  themselves 
Vedantists,  it  is  only  a  species  of  the  Vijnana-vada  (of  Buddhists^.  The 
commentator  then  quotes  the  well-known  passage  in  the  Padma-Purana 
in  which  that  theory  is  called  disguised  Buddhism.  He  proceeds  to  say, 
'  that  theory  is  not  a  tenet  of  the  Vedanta,  and  it  must  be  understood  that 
the  doctrine  of  the  new  fangled  disguised  Buddhists,  who  assert  the 
theory  of  Maya  and  reduce  our  bondage  to  a  mere  delusion  is  in  this  way 
refuted.'"8 

"  It  is  only  in  the  Svetdsvatara  that  we  have  the  theory  of  Maya,  and 
we  hear  of  God  as  its  projector  in  the  sense  of  a  juggler."3 

Maya  now  generally  means  '  illusion'  or  '  power  of  illusion.' 
(rough  says: 

"The  world,  with  its  apparent  duality  of  subject  and  object,  of 
external  and  internal  orders,  is  the  figrment  of  Maya,  the  imagination  of 
illusion. . .  .  All  the  stir  of  daily  life,  all  the  feverish  pleasures  and  pains  of 

1  Brahmavddin,  Vol.  I.  pp.  295,  296.  . 

'  Dialoguea  on  Hindu  Philosophy,  p.  313,  3  Ibid,,  p.  321. 


THBEE  MODES   OF  EXISTENCE.  57 

life,  after  life,  are  the  phantaamagory  of  a  waking  dream.  For  the  soul 
that  wakes  to  its  own  nature  these  things  cease  to  be,  and,  what  is  more, 
have  never  so  much  as  been."1 

Avidyd  and  Mdyd  are  often  used  as  synonymous  :  but,  strictly, 
Avidyd  is  the  cause  and  Mdyd  the  effect, 


The  gradual  development  of  the  doctrine  of  Maya  has  been  de- 
scribed. The  Paribfydshd  gives  a  later.r.ennementjU^known  to  Sankara 
—  that  of  the  three  modes  of  existence.  These  are  defined  as  pdra- 
mdrthika,  real,  vydvahdrika,  practical,  and  prdtibhdsikay  appar.en^ 
Brahma  is.  the  only  real  existence.  I'syara,  individual  souls,  heaven, 
hell,  the  earth  and  all  that  it  contains,  are  said  to  be  imagined  by 
ignorance,  and  to  have  no  more,  true  existence  than  things  seen  in 
a  dream.  Only  the  ignorant  mistake  them  as  existent,  and  by 
means  of  them  transact  practical  life  ;  whence  the  epithet.  The; 
apparent  include  such  things  as  a  rope  imagined  to  be  a  snake, 
nacre  mistaken  for  silver,  &c. 

The  three  modes  of  existence  were  invented  by  Vedantins  to 
support  the  doctrine  of  non-duality.  Dr.  K.  Mohun  Banerjea  says  : 

"The  denial  of  a  world,  which  was  evident  to  all  onr  senses,  was 
itself  so  much  opposed  to  nature  and  common  sense,  tha,tj  they  taxed  their 
ingenuity  as  far  as  they  could,  to  qualify  that  denial.  They  introduced 
the  terms  Vydvahdrika  and  pdramdrthika,  or  conventional  (or  practical) 
and  real  existences,  in  order  to  save  their  doctrine.  The  former  they 
attributed,  the  latter  they  denied,  to  the  world.  If  asked,  how  all  this 
can  be  Ood>  —  they  would  tell  you  the  material  world  was  a  Mdyd,  an 
illusion/' 

"  If  however  charged,  on  the  other  hand,  with  the,  absurdities,  so 
well  set  forth  in  the  Vidwanmodatarangini,  they  instantly  shift  from 
their  position,  and  tell  you  they  did  not  entirely  deny  the  visible  world. 
It  had  an  existence  in  vyavahdra,  though  it  was  paramdrthatah,  no 
reality. 

"  But  the  soul  of  man  itself  has  no  other  than  vydvahdrika  existence. 
Do  you  think  you  are  an  entity?  —  You  may  be  one  in  popular  parlance  — 
you  are  not  so  paramdrthatah,  in  reality.  '  This  one,'  says  the  Vedan- 
ta-Sara,  '  which  fancies  itself  to  be  agent  and  patient,  and  passes  to  and 
fro  between  this  and  the  other  world,  is  called  the  vyavdhariha  jtvo,  or 
conventional  soul.'"2 

Dr.  K.  Mohun  Banerjea  thus  denies  the  doctrines  of  three 
modes  of  existence  : 

"  Now  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  a  substance  existing  conven- 
tionally, but  not  really.  Things  there  may  be  existing  in  the  opinions  of 
man,  or  implied  in  their  conduct,  but  if  we  deny  their  reality,  we  can 
only  mean  that,  they  are  mere  fancies,  and  therefore  not  actually  existing 


1  Philosophy  of  th«  TJ'&nijhafy,  p.  4$.    ?  Dialogue*  o»  5Kn<fct  Pktiotophy,  p.  SSI. 

8 


58  THE   VEDANTA-SABA. 

substances.  Sankar&oharya  has  said  what  it  is  impossible  to  gainsay, '  that 
the  question  of  the  reality  of  a  substance  is  not  dependent  on  human 
notions.  It  depends  on  the  substance  itself.  To  say  of  a  post  that  it  is 
either  a  post,  or  a  man,  or  something  else,  is  not  to  enunciate  the  truth. 
That  it  is  a  man  or  something  else  is  a  false  notion.  That  it  is  a  post  is 
alone  the  truth,  since  it  is  dependent  on  the  substance  itself  '  Thus  the 
determination  of  an  existing  substance  depends  '  on  the  substance  itself.' 
It  must  either  exist,  or  not  exist,  whatever  men  may  say  or  think.  In 
fact  conventional,  as  opposed  to  real,  can  only  mean  imaginary,  in  other 
words,  false."1 

Parinamavadins  and  Vivartavadins.—  Parindma  denotes 
change,  modification ;  vivarta  denotes  illusory  manifestation  of 
Brahma.  The  Parinamavadins  hold  that  the  world  is  the  effect  of 
Brahma's  undergoing  a  real  change  ;  while  the  latter  maintain  that 
it  is  only  illusory.  The  former  is  undoubtedly  the  older  view.  In 
the  Vedanta-Sutras,  Brahma  is  held  to  be  the  material  cause  of  the 
universe. 

Avidya  eternally  associated  with  Brahma. — Grough  says  : 

"  Brahman  per  se  is  the  principle  of  reality,  the  one  and  only  being ; 
Self  alone  is,  and  all  else  only  seems  to  be.  This  principle  of  unreality, 
however,  has  been  from  everlasting  associated  with  an  inexplicable  prin- 
ciple of  unreality  ;  and  it  is  from  the  fictitious  union  of  these  principles, 
the  one  real,  the  other  only  a  self-feigned  fiction,  that  the  spheres  and  the 
migrating  forms  of  life,  the  external  and  internal  world,  proceed."2 

Avidya  admitted  to  be  inexplicable. — Deussen  says: 

c<  All  the  different  actions  in  the  world  and  the  various  forces 
developed  thereon,  all  depend  on  Ignorance  (Avidya)  or  false  knowledge. 
All  enquiry  rebounds  from  this  idea  of  Avidya.  Whence  this  ignorance 
arises  which  is  innate  in  us,  we  do  not  learn."3 

Max  Miiller  says : — 

"  To  know  what  this  Nescience  or  Avidya  is,  is  impossible ,  nay  self- 
contradictory  ."  * 

But  absurdity  does  not  trouble  a  Hindu.  Purushottama  Misra 
says :  "  In  this  system  which  maintains  that  everything  transcends 
explanation,  unreasonableness  is  no  objection." 

Avidya,  a  mere  assumption. — The  Veddntasiddhdntamuktdvali, 
as  translated  by  Professor  Venis,  says  5  : 

"  Of  the  reality  of  Avidya  there  is  no  evidence,  revealed  or  human. 
...  Is  Avidya  proved  by  Veda  or  by  perception,  &o.,  or  is  it  assumed 
to  account  for  the  world  of  experience,  which  cannot  otherwise  be  account- 
ed for  P  Not  by  Veda,  nor  by  perception,  inference,  or  human  teaching  ; 
For,  if  by  any  of  these  Avidya  were  clearly  proved,  controversy  would 
be  at  an  end.  And  since  there  is  no  evidence  for  Avidyd,  it  must  need 

1  Dialogues,  pp.394,  895.  2  Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads,  pp.  45,  46. 

*  Short  Account  of  the  Veddnta  Philosophy,  p.  13. 

4  Vtddnta  Philosophy,  p.  99.          8  Quoted  by  Col.  Jacob. 


THREE  MODES  07  EXISTENCE.  59 

be  granted  that  Avidyd  is  assumed  to  account  for  the  otherwise  inexpli- 
cable production  of  the  unreal  world  ....  For  there  is  no  other  course 
apart  from  this  assumption  of  Avidyd''  pp  14,  15. 

Maya  charges  God  with  Deception. — Deussen  says  : 

"  The  whole  world  is  illusion  (mayo)  which  Brahman*  as  a  magician 
(mdydvin),  draws  out  of  himself,  and  by  which,  as  magician  he 
is  in  BO  way  affected  ;  or  by  another  turn  of  the  picture  Brahman  becomes 
through  Ignorance  (avidya),  as  the  magician  by  his  magic,  indistinctly 
seen.  He  is  the  cause  of  the  world  as  the  magician  of  his  magio,  the 
cause  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  world  into  his  own  self,  like  as  the  earth 
draws  into  itself  all  living  beings."  l 

The  whole  universe  is  a  gigantic  lie,  and  the  Liar  is  the  Supreme 

Brahma ! 
To  the  above  Dr.  K.  Mohun  Banerjea  replies  : 

''You  say  the  world  is  a  mdyd,  an  illusion,  and  that  God  is  the 
mdyi,  the  conjurer  who  thus  deceives  you.  Is  it  not  grossly  revolting 
to  oar  moral  feelings  to  say  that  God  has  deliberately  projected  a  false 
appearance  with  a  view  to  beguile  rational  minds  of  His  own  creation  ? 

'«  We  are  all  agreed  that  religious  errors  are  the  most  serious  of  all 
errors,  and  of  all  religious  errors  the  greatest  must  be  that  which 
consists  in  a  false  notion  of  Divine  Attributes.  Is  it  possible  to  believe 
that  God  would  deliberately  produce  such  an  error  in  His  creatures  ?"  3 

How  can  Maya  be  known  ? — The  question  has  been  asked : 

"  If  my  consciousness  is  deceived  by  Maya,  how  am  I  to  know  it  ? 
My  very  knowledge  itself  is  illusion  ;  all  things  within  me  and  around  me 
are  products  of  illusion,  deception,  and  error.  How  then  am  I  to  know 
them  to  be  such  ?  The  knowledge  of  the  illusion  is  itself  an  illusion, 
and  the  power  which  recognises  the  confusion  is  itself  confused.  Hence 
the  knowing  mind  denies  the  illusion  altogether,  and  the  effort  to  deny 
it  proves  it  is  untrue."  3 

Contradictory  Assertions  about  Ignorance.— Nehemiah  Goreh 
has  the  following  remarks  on  this  point : 

"  Vedantins  say  that  the  world  does  not  really  exist,  but  appears 
to  exist  through  Ignorance.  But  does  that  Ignorance  really  exist  P 
Surely  it  must  really  exist,  for  if  it  did  not  really  exist  what  would  cause 
the  false  world  to  appear  true  ?  But  they  cannot  admit  that  Ignorance 
really  exists,  for  if  they  admit  Ignorance  to  be  an  entity  additional  to 
Brahma,  their  doctrine  of  non-duality  will,  as  Parthasarathi  says,  perish. 
Moreover,  if  Ignorance  be  real,  Brahma  itself  must  be  believed  to  be  its 
subject,  but  that  would  again  contradict  their  doctrine  that  Brahma  is 
ever  free  from  Ignorance ;  they  say  therefore  that  Ignorance  also  is  not 
real.  It  does  not  really  exist,  but,  like  the  world,  is  imagined  to  exist, 
and  therefore  false.  But  by  whom  as  it  imagined  to  exist  ?  By  itself 
is  the  reply.  Is  not  absnroity  now  carried  to  the  highest  pitch  ?  But  is  it 

1  Short  Account  of  Veddnla  Philosophy,  p.  13,  Madras  Ed* 

*  Dialogues,  pp.  898  and  406,  407.          *Veddntism,  &c.,  by  MallenB,  p.  149, 


60  THE   VEDANTA-8AEA. 

possible  for  the  human  mind  to  believe  that  a  thing  which  does  not  exist  can 
imagine  itself  to  exist?  Though  then  they  call  Ignoranoe  false,  they  feel 
in  their  hearts  that  it  really  exists.  All  their  talk  about  various  kinds  of 
existence  is  mere  nonsense.  There  is  only  one  kind  of  existence."1 

Realities. — Mr.  Slater  well  says  : 

"  The  God  who  made  us,  made  us  real  •  and  real  we  must  remain  for 
all  eternity.  God  is  real,  the  world  is  real,  self  is  real,  sin  is  real,  and 
judgment  real  enough  to  make  men  tremble.  There  is  no  Mdyd  but 
what  man  cheats  himself  to  imagine.  Some  day  the  awful  reality  of 
everything  will  be  brought  home  to  us  in  such  force  that  escape  will  be 
impossible.  To  grasp  reality  now  is  the  only  way  to  avoid  being 
grasped  by  it  hereafter."2 

'Tnle  question  of  M3ya  is 'also  discussed  under  the  next  head. 


"  ONE  ONLY  WITHOUT  A  SECOND." 
This  leading  doctrine  of  Vedantism  will  now  be  considered. 

1.  It  is  a  dogma  unsupported  by  proof— a  mere  assumption.— 
As  already  mentioned,  its  only  basis  is  that  in  the  twilight  a  rope 
may  be  mistaken  for  a  serpent,  mother-of-pearl  for  silver. 

2.  It  is  contradicted  by  the  evidence  of  all  our  senses  under 
the 'most  favourable  circumstances  for  forming  a  correct  judgment. 

— Kanada  has  well  said  that  it  is  only  when  the  senses  are  unsound  or 
defective,  or  when  some  bad  habit  is  contracted  that  a  person  may  be 
deceived.  Even  if  one  sense  is  deceived,  the  other  senses  disabuse 
the  mind.  The  rope  can  easily  be  found  by  the  touch  not  to  be  a 
serpent.  All  our  senses  at  noonday,  when  we  are  in  the  enjoyment 
of  perfect  health,  testify  to  the  real  existence  of  the  external  world. 

Sankara  himself ,  when  arguing  with  Buddhists,  admitted  the 
evidence  of  the  senses : 

"  To  all  this  we  reply  that  external  things  do  exist.  It  is  impossi- 
ble to  judge  that  external  things  have  no  existence,  and  why  ?  because  we 
are  conscious  of  them.  In  every  act  of  perception  some  or  other  outward 
thing  is  presented  to  the  consciousness,  be  it  post  or  wall,  or  cloth  or  jar, 
or  whatever  else  it  may  be ;  and  that  of  which  we  are  conscious  cannot 
but  exist.  If  a  man*  at  the  very  moment  he  is  conscious  of  outward 
things  through  his  senses*  tells  us  that  he  is  not  conscious  of  them,  and 
that  they  have  no  existence,  why  should  we  listen  to  him,  any  more  than 
we  should  listen  to  a  man  who  in  the  moment  of  eating  and  enjoying 
told  us  that  he  was  not  eating  and  was  not  enjoying  what  he  ate  P"3 

Nehemiah  Gtoreh  argues  similarly : 

"  I  demand  of  the  Vedantins,  How  is  that  you  assert  falseness  of 
the  world,  which  is  Certified  to  us,   by  senses)  &c.,  to  be   true  ?    Since 

1  Indian  Church  Quarterly  Review,  April  1891,  pp.  148, 149. 

8  Studies  in  the  Upanishads,  p.  56. 

8  Quoted  by  Gough.  ''  PMfoHolphy  of  the  Upanishads,  pp.  192. 193. 


ONE   ONLY    WITHOUT  A  SECOND.  61 

yon  thus  despise  those  proofsf  what  credit  can  be  attached  to  anything 
that  you  advance  ?  Proceeding  in  this  way,  you  unsettle  the  foundations 
of  everything,  whether  as  regards  this  world,  or  as  regards  the  next.  And 
on  your  own  grounds,  how  can  you  refute  the  doctrines  of  others,  or 
establish  your  own  ? 

"  Perhaps  you  will  urge,  that,  since  the  senses,  <fec.  often  deceive  us, 
they  are  totally  unreliable.  For  instance,  we  are  sure, that  we  see  chariots, 
elephants,  and  other  things,  in  our  dreams  ;  and  yet  they  are  proved  to 
be  false.  I  reply,  that,  if  a  seeming  proof  is  made  out,  by  a  real  proof, 
to  be  faulty,  we  reject  it.  But  how  can  we  contemn  a  proof  which  can- 
not be  shown  to  be  faulty  ?  As  for  the  things  that  we  see  in  dreams, 
we  call  them  false,  because,  on  awaking,  we  find  them  to  be  so ;  and  their 
falsity,  as  being  matter  of  e very-day  experience,  is  indubitable.  But  who 
has  ever  found  the  external  objects  of  nature  to  be  false?  Has  not  every 
man  of  all  generations  borne  evidence  to  their  truth  ? 

"If  you  say,  that,  to  a  man  in  dreamless  sleep,  the  world  disappears, 
and  that  his  experience  goes  to  disapprove  the  truth  of  the  world,  I  de- 
mur to  the  conclusion  ;  since,  a  man's  cognition  being  then  suspended,  he 
cannot  be  brought  forward  as  witness  for  anything  that  then  had  place. 
It  is  the  belief  of  the  Vedantins,  that,  even  in  dreamless  sleep,  there  subsists 
a  sort  of  cognition.  Let  this  be  granted  :  still,  external  things  are  not 
proved,  thereby,  to  be  false.  To  form  any  jdgment  whatever  about  them 
is  not  competent  to  this  cognition  ;  and  therefore,  it  cannot  conclude 
their  falsity.  In  like  manner,  a  blind  man  is  able  to  appreciate 
sound, touch,  &c.,  but  not  colours  ;  and  so  he  can  be  no  witness  of  their 
truth,  or  of  their  falseness."1 

3.  It  is  refuted  by  our  Natural  Convictions. — "  An  English 
philosopher  says  that  while  man  has  the  exclusive  privilege  of 
forming  general  theorems,  he  has  also  a  monopoly  of  the  privilege 
of  absurdity  ;  to  which  no  other  living  creature  is  subject.  And  of 
men"  he  adds,  "  those  are  of  all  most  subject  to  it  that  profess 
philosophy.''  Cicero  had  the  same  opinion.  "  There  is  nothing  so 
absurd/'  says  he,  "  which  has  not  been  held  by  some  philosopher." 
To  none  does  this  apply  more  than  to  Hindu  philosophers.  As 
'Monier  Williams  remarks,  "The  more  evidently  physical  and 
metaphysical  speculations  are  opposed  to  common  sense,  the  more 
favour  do  they  find  with  some  Hindu  thinkers."2  Mr.  Slater 


"A  system,  however  logical,  condemns  itself,  when  it  contradicts 
any  of  those  natural  convictions  which  are  intended,  as  Dr.  Thomas 
Brown  says,  to  save  us  from  the  folly  of  our  own  ratiocinations. }>3 

The  Latin  for  '  I'  is  ego,  said  non  means  '  not.'  We  naturally 
distinguish  between  the  ego,  and  the  non-ego,  the  '  I5  and  the 
'  not  I,'  the  subject  and  the  object,  ourselves  and  things  around  us. 
No  one  but  a  learned  fool  need  as%  like  Ribhu  in  the  Vishnu 

1  Rational  Refutation,  pp.  170,  171.  a  Brahmanism  and  Hinduism,  p.  37, 

*  Studies  *n  the  Upantshads,  pp.  47-50. 


62  THE   VEDANTA-SABA. 

Parana  (II.  16),  "which  is  you  and  which  is  I?"    The  doctrine  of 
non-duality  is  therefore  refuted  by  our  natural  convictions. 

4.  It  is  contradicted  by  Reason. — This  is  shown  in  different 
ways.     Flint  says : 

"  Vedantism  admits  that  besides  the  one  real  being  there  are 
appearances  or  illusions.  But  even  appearances  or  illusions  are 
phenomena  which  require  to  be  explained.  And  they  cannot  be  explained 
on  the  hypothesis  of  absolute  unity.  They  imply  that  besides  the 
absolute  being  there  are  minds  which  can  be  haunted  by  appearances, 
which  can  be  deluded  into  believing  that  these  appearances  are 
realities."1 

The  universe  contains  countless  objects  differing  widely  from 
each  other — mineral,  vegetable,  and  animal.  Among  the  last 
some  are  constantly  engaged  in  devouring  one  another.  With 
what  reason  can  it  be  alleged  that  only  one  being  exists  ? 

Lastly,  it  leads  to  the  blasphemous  assertion,  Brahmdsmi,  '  I  am 
Brahma.'  This  will  be  noticed  at  length  under  another  head. 

5.  Vedantism  cats  at  the  roots  of  Morality. — A   writer  in 
Awakened  India  makes  an  opposite  claim : 

"  The  Vedanta  philosophy  shows  that  the  relation  between  man  and 
God  is  far  closer  and  more  intimate  than  that  set  forth  by  any  other 
system.  It  establishes  the  identity  of  the  human  soul  with  the  Supreme 
Soul,  and  thus  inculcates  a  higher  morality."  Sept.  1897. 

If  the  human  soul  and  the  Supreme  Soul  are  identical,  then 
the  latter  is  responsible  for  every  action  of  the  former.  As  He  is 
the  sole  being,  every  action  that  is  performed  is  an  action  of  God. 
The  most  wicked  deeds  which  men  vainly  fancying  themselves  free 
agents  are  tempted  to  perform,  are  actually  perpetrated  by  God. 
Flint  says : 

"  The  worst  passions  and  vilest  actions  of  humanity  are  states  and 
operations  of  the  One  Absolute  Being.  Man  cannot  be  justly  held 
responsible  for  what  truly  belongs  to  God — for  affections  or  deeds  which 
are  necessarily  manifestations  of  the  Divine  nature."2 

According  to  Vedantism,  "  The  distinctions  of  right  and  wrong 
are  mere  appearances  which  will  vanish  as  soon  as  the  dream  state 
of  life  is  dispelled."  The  Brahmavddin  says  : 

"  If  we  know  that  there  is  nothing  else  but  the  A'tman,  that 
everything  else  is  but  a  dream,  that  the  world's  poverties,  its  miseries, 
its  wickedness  and  goodness  are  mere  delusions  and  hallucinations,  then 
we  become  Jnana  Yogins."  June  5,  1897. 

"  Wickedness  and  goodness  mere  delusions  and  hallucina- 
tions I"  Prahl&da  says  to  Vishnu,  "Thou  art  knowledge  and 
ignorance,  thou  art  truth  and  falsehood  j  thou  art  poison  and 

1  Anti'Theistic  Theories,   pp.  418,  419.  *  Anti-Theistic  Theories,  p.  395. 


BRAHMAN  OB  BBAHMA.  63 

nectar."1  The  eternal  distinction  between  right  and  wrong  is 
thus  blotted  out. 

According  to  Swami  Vivekananda,  Ved&ntism  says  :  "  Our 
evil  is  of  no  more  value  than  our  good,  and  our  good  of  no  more 
value  than  our  evil."2 

Man  feels  himself  a  free  agent  and  responsible  for  his  con- 
duct. Conscience  is  the  highest  principle  of  the  human  spirit. 
Ved&ntism  contradicts  its  most  sacred  and  certain  convictions, 
and  directly  tends  to  deaden  and  destroy  it. 

Flint  says : 

"  Right  and  wrong  are  absolutely  exclusive  of  each  other.  There 
can  be  no  compromise  between  them,  or  reconciliation  of  them.  They 
cannot  blend  and  merge  into  any  common  higher  result.  The  one  can 
only  be  satisfied  by  the  annihilation  of  the  other.  All  this  pantheism  is 
logically  necessitated  to  deny,  but  in  so  doing  dashes  itself  against  a 
rock."3 

It  has  been  shown  that  the  dogma  of  n  on -duality,  "  One 
only  without  a  second,"  is 

1.  A  mere  Assumption,  unsupported  by  proof. 

2.  That  it  is  contradicted  by  the  Evidence  of  all  our  Senses, 
under  the  most  favourable  circumstances  for  forming  a  correct 
judgment. 

3.  That  it  is  refuted  by  our  Natural  Convictions. 

4.  That  it  is  contradicted  by  Eeason. 

5.  That  it  cuts  at  the  roots  of  Morality,  making  God  the 
author  of  every  crime  perpetrated. 

For  the  reasons  given,  it  is  evident  that  the  Advaita  theory  is 
a  mere  fiction,  invented  by  a  few  so-called  philosophers.  The 
great  bulk  of  mankind,  including  the  wisest  and  best  that  have 
ever  lived,  have  always  held  the  distinction  between  the  Creator 
and  His  creatures.  As  Tennyson  says  : 

"  Eternal  form  shall  still  divide 
The  eternal  Soul  from  all  beside." 

Some  other  Vedantic  doctrines  will  next  be  examined. 


BRAHMAN   OE  BRAHMA. 

"  As  is  the  god  so  is  the  worshipper."4 — There  is  no  more 
important  question  for  a  nation  than  this,  What  is  the  nature  of 
the  God  it  worships  ? 

"  The  worshipper  looks  upon  the  character  of  the  object  which  he 
worships  as  the  standard  of  perfection.  He  therefore  condemns  everything 
in  himself  which  is  unlike,  and  approves  of  everything  which  is  like  that 
character.  The  tendency  of  this  is  to  lead  him  to  abandon  everything 

1  Vishnu  Purdna,  1.  19.  8  Brahmavddin,  Jan.  19th,  1897. 

3  Anti-Thtistic  Theories,  p.  403.  4  Tathd  devah,  tathd  lhaktah. 


64  THE   VEDANTA-SABA. 

in  himself  and  in  his  coarse  of  life,  which  is  condemned  by  the  character 
and  precepts  of  his  god,  and  to  conform  himself  to  that  standard  which  is 
approved  by  the  same  criterion.  The  worshipper  desires  the  favour  of 
the  object  worshipped,  and  this,  reason  dictates,  can  be  obtained  only 
by  conformity  to  the  will  and  the  character  of  that  object.  To  become 
assimilated  to  the  image  of  the  object  worshipped  must  be  the  end  of 
desire  with  the  worshipper.  His  aspirations,  therefore,  every  time  he 
worships,  do,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  assimilate  his  character  more 
and  more  to  the  model  of  the  object  that  receives  his  homage. 

"  To  this  fact  the  whole  history  of  the  world  bears  testimony. 
Without  an  exception,  the  character  of  every  nation  and  tribe  of  the 
human  family  has  been  formed  and  modified  in  a  great  degree,  by  the 
character  attributed  to  their  gods."1 

"  Show  me  your  gods,"  said  an  old  Greek  writer,  "  and  I  will 
show  you  your  men."  Long  ago  Aristotle  remarked  :  "  Men  create 
the  gods  after  their  own  image,  not  only  with  regard  to  their  form, 
but  also  with  regard  to  their  manner  of  life ."  Cicero  said  of  his 
countrymen  and  the  Greeks,  "  Instead  of  the  transfer  to  man  of 
that  which  is  Divine,  they  transferred  human  sins  to  their  gods 
and  experienced  again  the  necessary  action." 

The  gods  of  the  Hindus  are  typical  of  themselves  at  different 
periods  in  their  history.  In  Vedic  times  Indra  is  the  soma-drinking 
martial  god  who  recovers  the  celestial  cows  from  the  fort  of  Pani, 
and  helps  the  Aryans  in  their  wars  against  the  aborigines.  When 
the  Aryans  had  overcome  their  enemies  and  were  settled  in  India, 
Indra,  as  described  in  the  Puranas,  "  is  a  gorgeous  king  of  a 
luxurious  and  somewhat  voluptuous  court,  where  dance  and  music 
occupy  most  of  his  time."  The  gods  of  the  Puranas  are  Hindu 
Rajas,  with  their  tastes  and  surroundings,  but  possessed  of  super- 
human powers. 

After  the  dogma  of  transmigration  was  accepted  and  a  pessi- 
mistic view  was  taken  of  life,  a  new  type  of  God  was  invented, 
called  Brahma.  It  was  supposed  to  exist  in  a  state  of  dreamless 
sleep,  happy  in  being  free  from  the  miseries  of  samsdra.  It  was 
called  "  Brahman  (nominative  neuter,  Brahma,  from  the  root  brih, 
'  to  expand,'  because  it  expanded  itself  through  all  space.  It  was  a 
pure  essence  which  not  only  diffused  itself  everywhere,  but  con- 
stituted everything.  Men,  gods,  the  visible  world  were  merely  its 
manifestations.  "2 

It  is  very  important  to  discriminate  between  Brahman  or 
Brahma,  neuter,  from  Brahmd,  masculine,  denoting  Brahma  with 
attributes.  To  avoid  confusion  the  latter  will  be  called  I'svara,  the 
Lord.  The  former  is  also  called  Pararna  A'tman,  the  highest  spirit 
or  self. 

1  Philosophy  of  the  Plan  of  Salvation.    See  also  Pealm  cxxxv.  18. 
*  Monier  Williams,  Bfahtnanism  and  Hiautuism,  p.  2JL. 


BRAHMAN  OE   BEAHMA.  65 


ATTRIBUTES  OP  BBAHMA. 

The  general  confession  is  made  that  Brahma  is  unknowable.1 
The  Brahmavddin  says  : 

"  The  fundamental  doctrine  of  agnosticism, '  that  God  is  inaccessible 
to  human  thoughts  and  words',  is  also  accepted  by  the  Vedanta,  and  is 
in  entire  accord  with  the  general  view  of  its  theology.'  Reason  cau 
describe  the  Lord  only  as  '  na  iti?  na  iti,'  as '  NoV  No.' "  Vol.  II.  p.  €5. 

While  making  this  acknowledgment  of  nescience,  the  Vedan- 
tists  have  not  scrupled  to  dogmatise  about  Brahma  as  if  they  were 
fully  acquainted  with  its  nature.  Some  of  their  assertions  will 
now  be  noticed. 

Brahma  Impersonal. — The  question  might  first  be  asked,  If 
Brahma  is  unknowable,  how  can  it  be  affirmed  that  It  is  impersonal  ? 
The  chief  idea  is  that  Brahma  is  not  conscious  of  Its  own  existence. 
Hindu  philosophers  generally  think  this  a  higher  state  than  the 
opposite.  Deussen  says  that  we  should  not  "  think  so  low  of  God  as 
to  impute  him  personality/'2 

As  the  question  is  of  great  importance,  it  will  be  considered  at 
some  length.  There  is  a  whole  volume  on  the  subject  by  Illing- 
worth,  Personality  Human  and  Divine,  from  which  a  few  extracts 
will  be  taken. 

Meaning  of  Personality. — Person  usually  denotes  a  bodily 
form  j  but  this  is  not  the  sense  in  which  it  is  here  understood. 
Illingworth  says : 

"  The  fundamental  characteristic  of  personality  is  self-consciousness, 
the  quality  in  a  subject  of  becoming  an  object  to  itself,  or  in  Locke's 
language, '  considering  itself  as  itself,'  and  saying  '  I  am  I.'  "3 

A  consciousness  of  our  own  existence,  in  Tennyson's  words, 
"  power  to  feel  '  I  am  I'  "4  is  the  first  point.  It  is  evident  that 
a  pure  spirit  may  have  this  feeling  as  well  as  one  connected  with 
a  material  body. 

But  more  is  included.     Secondly,  Illingworth  says : 

"  Our  self-consciousness  involves  freedom,  or  the  power  of  pelf- 
determination....  The  freedom  of  the  will  does  not  mean  the  ability  to 
act  without  a  motive. ..but  it  does  mean  the  ability  to  create  or  co-operate 
in  creating  our  own  motives,  or  to  choose  our  motive,  or  to  form  a 
weaker  motive  into  a  stronger  by  adding  weights  to  the  scale  of  our  own 
accord,  and  thus  to  determine  our  conduct  by  our  reason  ;  whence  it  is 
now  usually  called  the  power  of  self-determination."* 

1  There  is  a  valuable  work  by  Iverach,    Is  God  KnowaWe  *  3s.  6d.  Hodder  and 
Stoughton. 

9  Short  Account  ofVeddnta  Philosophy,  p.  13. 

3  Personality,  Human  and  Divine,  p.  28. 

'  Higher  Pantheism.  5  Personality,  &c.  p  3. 

9 


66  THK    VBDANTA-8ARA. 

Thirdly,  Illingworth  says,  "  Desire  is  a  co-essential  element  in 
our  personality." 

<l  These,  then,  are  the  constituent  elements  of  personality,  as  such — 
self-consciousness,  the  power  of  self-determination,  and  desires  which 
iiresistibly  impel  us  into  communion  with  other  persons — or,  in  other 
words,  reason,  will,  and  love.  These  are  three  perfectly  distinct  and 
distinguishable  functions,  but  they  are  united  as  being  the  functions  of 
one  and  the  selfsame  subject."  p.  38. 

Impersonality  implies  the  absence  of  self-consciousness,  self- 
determination,  and  desire.  The  Impersonal  Brahma  is  unconscious 
of  Its  own  existence ;  It  neither  determines  nor  desires.  Its  condi- 
tion is  fitly  represented  by  dreamless  sleep.  The  Vedanta-Sutras 
(I.  iii.,  42)  say,  "  And  (on  account  of  the  designation)  (of  the 
highest  Self)  as  different  (from  the  individual  soul)  in  the  states  of 
deep  sleep  and  departing."  Sankara,  in  his  Commentary,  says, 
"  We  thus  understand  that  '  on  account  of  his  being  designated  as 
something  different  in  the  states  of  deep  sleep  and  departure,' 
the  highest  Lord  forms  the  subject  of  the  passage."1  A  person  in 
a  dreamless  sleep  is  not  self-conscious,  he  has  no  self-determina- 
tion, he  is  desireless.  The  more  nearly  a  person  resembles  this, 
the  more  he  is  like  Brahma.  The  following  explanation  is  abridged 
from  Ballantyne  : 

"  A.  person  wide  awake  in  the  full  possession  of  all  his  faculties  is 
considered  as  being  furthest  removed  from  Brahma,  being  enveloped  in 
the  densest  investment  of  Avidya.  This  is  said  to  be  the  first  quarter. 
During  dreamy  sleep,  he  is  considered  to  have  shuffled  off  the  outermost 
coil,  and  so  far  resembles  Brahma.  This  is  called  the  second  quarter. 
Dreamless  sleep  is  the  third  quarter.  The  dtman  is  then  supposed  to  be 
united  with  Brahma.  For  the  time  being  the  dtman  is  now  '  pre- 
eminent in  being  as  no  longer  exposed  to  the  varied  miseries  that  arise 
from  the  fictitious  semblances  of  duality.'  On  awaking  it  returns  to 
the  first  quarter." 

The  Yedanta-Sdtras  thus  explain  what  takes  place  in  a  swoon  ' 

"  In  him  who  is  senseless  (in  a  swoon,  &c.,)  there  is  half-union  ;  on 
account  of  this  remaining  (as  the  only  possible  hypothesis)." 

Sankara,  after  a  long  commentary,  comes  to  the  conclusion 
"  Therefore  those  who  know  Brahman  declare  a  swoon  and  the  like 
to  be  a  half-union."2 

In  the  scale  of  creation,  a  plant  is  higher  than  a  stone,  a  beast 
than  a  plant,  a  man  than  a  beast.  Is  it  consistent  with  common 
sense  to  suppose  that  a  man  in  dreamless  sleep,  unconscious  of  his 
own  existence,  stands  on  a  higher  level  than  the  same  person 
cognizant  of  all  around  him  and  able  to  benefit  his  fellow-crea- 
tures ? 

1  Thibaut's  Veddnta-SAtras,  Vol.  I,  p.  235-         2  Ibid,  Vol.  II.  pp.  149, 150,  152. 


BEAHMAN   OE   BEAHMA.  67 

Hindu  ideas  of  personality  are  vague.     Fisher  says  : 

*'  Belief  in  the  personality  of  man  and  belief  in  the  personality  of 
God  stand  or  fall  together.  A  glance  at  the  history  of  religion  would 
suggest  that  these  two  beliefs  are  for  some  reason  inseparable.  When 
faith  in  the  personality  of  God  is  weak,  or  is  altogether  wanting,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  pantheistic  religions  of  the  East,  the  perception  which  men 
have  of  their  own  personality  is  found  to  be,  in  an  equal  degree,  indis- 
tinct. The  feeling  of  individuality  is  dormant.  The  soul  indolently 
ascribes  to  itself  a  merely  phenomenal  being.  It  conceives  of  itself  as 
appearing  for  a  moment,  like  a  wavelet  on  the  ocean,  to  vanish  again  in 
the  all-ingulfing  essence  whence  it  emerged.''1 

In  the  Yishnu  Purana2  Nidagha  is  represented  as  standing  afar 
off,  waiting  till  a  prince  should  enter  the  city. 

"  Tell  me,"  said  Ribhu,  "  which  is  here  the  king,  and  which  is  any 
other  man."  "The  king,"  answered  Nidagha,  "is  he  who  is  seated  on 
the  elephant ;  the  others  are  his  attendants."  "  Tell  me,  venerable  sir, 
which  is  the  king  and  which  is  the  elephant  ?"  "  The  elephant,"  answer- 
ed Nidagha,  '« is  underneath,  the  king  is  above  him."  To  this  Ribhu 
rejoined,  "  What  is  meant  by  underneath,  and  what  is  termed  above  ?'* 
Upon  this  Nidagha  jumped  upon  Ribhu  and  said,  "  I  am  above  like  the 
Raja  ;  you  are  underneath  like  the  elephant.''  "  Very  well/5  said  Ribhu, 
"  tell  me  which  of  us  two  is  you  ;  which  is  I?" 

"  When  Nidagha  heard  these  words,  he  immediately  fell  at  the  feet 
of  the  stranger  and  said,  '  Of  a  surety,  thou  art  my  saintly  preceptor 
Ribhu  ;  the  mind  of  no  other  person  is  so  fully  imbued  with  the  doc- 
trine of  unity  as  that  of  my  teacher.' " 

It  is  looked  upon  as  profound  wisdom  not  to  know  "  which  is 
you,  which  is  /?"  Bibhu  has  apparently  been  incarnated  in  Pro- 
fessor Deussen.  In  his  Elements  of  Metaphysics  he  says  : — 

"  You  shall  love  your  neighbour  as  yourselves — because  you  are  your 
neighbour,  and  mere  illusion  makes  you  believe  that  your  neighbour  is 
something  different  from  yourselves."  p.  336. 

The  absurdity  of  this  will  be  noticed  under  another  head.  The 
vagueness  of  the  Hindu  idea  of  personality  is  shown  by  the  belief 
that  the  same  atman  may  successively  be  associated  with  a  god,  a 
man,  a  dog,  a  musquito,  or  even  a  plant. 

The  following  are  some  of  the  arguments  in  favour  of  belief  in 
a  personal  God : 

1.  "The  fact  of  the  universality,  or  at  least  the  extreme 
generality,  of  the  belief,  in  an  elementary  form." 

Prayer  is  an  instinctive  belief  in  a  personal  God,  and  it  is 
universal  except  among  a  few  who  have  adopted  the  dogma  of  an 
Impersonal  God.  Guizot,  the  great  French  statesman,  eloquently 
says : 

"  Alone  of  all  beings  here  below,  man  prays  1  Among  his  moral 
instincts  none  is  more  natural,  more  universal,  more  indestructible  than 

1  Fisher's  Grounds  of  Theistic  and  Christian  Belief ;  p..  1.  s  Book  II.  Cbap.  16. 


68  THE  VEDANTA-SABA. 

prayer.  The  child  inclines  to  it  with  eager  docility.  The  old  man  betakes 
himself  thither,  as  to  refuge  against  decay  and  solitude.  Prayer  comes 
spontaneously  to  young  lips  which  with  difficulty  stammer  out  the  name 
of  God,  and  to  dying  lips  which  no  longer  have  strength  to  pronounce  it. 
Among  all  nations,  celebrated  or  obscure,  civilised  or  barbarous,  one 
meets  at  every  step  acts  and  forms  of  invocation.  Wherever  men  live, 
in  certain  circumstances,  at  certain  times,  under  the  control  of  certain 
impressions  of  the  soul  the  eyes  are  raised,  the  hands  clasped,  the  knees 
bent  to  implore  aid  or  render  thanks,  to  adore  or  to  appease.  With 
transport  or  with  fear,  publicly  or  in  the  secrecy  of  his  heart,  it  is  to 
prayer  that  man  betakes  himself,  in  the  last  resort  to  fill  up  the  void  of 
his  soul,  or  to  bear  the  burdens  of  his  destiny  ;  it  is  in  prayer  that  he 
seeks,  when  all  else  fails,  strength  for  his  weakness,  consolation  in  his 
grief,  hope  in  his  virtue." 

Prayer  would  be  useless  addressed  to  a  Being  unconscious  even 
of  its  own  existence ;  hence  the  Ved&nta  nowhere  inculcates  it  as 
a  dutv.  In  this  it  contradicts  a  natural  instinct. 

2.  The  argument  from  Evidences  of  Design  in  the  world.     '  Do 
you  not  think,'  asks  Socrates,  "  that  man's  Maker  must  have  given 
him    eyes  on  purpose  that  he   might  see'  ?    with  the  suggested 
inference  that  the  existence  of  eyes  must  be  proof  of  a  purposeful 
Creator.     This  argument,  from  the  date  of  its  first  appearance  in 
Greek  philosophy,  has  been  one  of  the  strongest  supports  of  natural 
theology  in  the  ordinary  mind.     It  has  had  a  long  controversial 
history  ;  but  none  of  the  objections  raised  against  it  have  really 
differed  from  those  which  Aristotle  saw  and  answered  in  his  day."l 

Some  think  that  it  has  been  weakened  by  the  Darwinian  doctrine 
of  evolution ;  but  Huxley  admits  that  it  leaves  the  argument  where 
it  found  it. 

3.  The  Moral  Argument. — This  consists  in  the  fact  that  we  are 
conscious  of  being  free,  and  yet  under  the  obligation  of  a  moral 
law  which  can  only  be  conceived  as  emanating  from  a  personal 
Author.2 

Sin  is  viewed  as  not  only  the  breach,  of  a  law,  but  also  of  dis- 
obedience to  a  person.  "  '  Against  Thee  only  have  I  sinned  and  done 
this  evil  in  Thy  sight,'  has  been  the  cry  of  religion  the  whole 
world  over."3 

Existence  in  a  dreamless  sleep  may  be  the  highest  ideal  of  the 
Supreme  Deity  with  persons  who  regard  existence  as  a  curse,  but 
not  with  others.  The  Christian  belief  is  that  God  is  not  only 
self-conscious,  but  cognizant  of  whatever  takes  place  throughout  the 
vast  universe  which  He  has  created.  He  also  possesses  infinite 
wisdom ,  exerted  for  the  benefit  of  His  creatures. 

"  Pantheism,"  says  Flint  "  under  pretence  of  exalting  God 
above  all  categories  of  thought  and  existence,  reduces  Him  to  the 
level  of  dead  things,  of  necessary  processes,  of  abstract  ideas, 

1  Personality,  $'c.  pp.  93,  94.         2  Ibid,  p.  103.         3 Ibid,  p.  121. 


BRAHMAN    OB    BRAHMA.  69 

or  even  to  the  still  lower  level  of  the  unknowable  and  non- 
existent."1 

There  must  therefore  be  "  a  personal  God,  a  Being  whose  mode 
of  existence  is  indeed  beyond  our  power  to  conceive  ;  but  who,  in 
however  transcendent  a  manner,  thinks,  wills,  loves,  and  holds 
personal  intercourse  with  persons."2 

Brahma  is  often  defined  as  Sat,  Chit,  Ananda.  These  will  be 
considered  in  turn. 

Sat. — The  term  denotes  simple  existence.  Upon  this  the  late 
Eamachandra  Bose  remarks : 

u  God  (Brahma)  is  the  Pure  Being;  of  some  schools  of  Greek  philo- 
sophy ;  bat  as  according  to  no  less  a  philosopher  than  Hegel,  Pure  Being 
equals  nothing*  He  is  a  non-entity.  Ancient  philosophy  laboured,  not 
only  in  India,  but  in  all  famous  centres  of  speculative  thonght  to  reduce 
God  to  nothing  ;  and  such  phrases  as  the  '  Eternal  Void'  '  the  everlasting 
Night,'  etc.,  were  most  ingeniously  invented  to  set  forth  His  real  nothing- 
ness under  a  cloud  of  high- sounding  words.  And  modern  philosophers 
are  simply  following  their  example  in  their  attempts  to  maintain  the 
nothingness  of  God  behind  an  array  of  imposing  technicalities.  According 
to  them,  God  is  the  Absolute  and  the  Unconditioned.  If  these  technical 
expressions  mean  anything,  they  represent  God  as  Pure  Being  and  nothing 
more — that  subtile,  impalpable  nonetity  which  defies  every  attempt  to 
determine  it  or  give  it  some  definite  shape."3 

Dr.  Murray  Mitchell  says :  "  Instead  of  existence,  it  would  be 
more  precise  to  say,  that  which  exists,  or  an  existing  thing."* 
Chit. — Intelligence,  Gough  thus  explains  the  term  : 

"If  we  are  to  use  the  language  of  European  philosophy,  we  must 
pronounce  the  Brahman  of  the  Upanishads  to  be  unconscious,  for  con- 
sciousness begins  where  duality  begins. 

"  Brahma  is  not  intelligence  in  our  sense  of  the  word.  The  Indian 
philosophers  everywhere  affirm  that  Brahman  is  knowledge,  not  that 
Brahman  has  knowledge;  that  this  knowledge  is  without  an  object  known, 
and  that  omniscience  is  predicable  of  Brahman  only  by  a  metaphor.  If 
we  were  to  misinterpret  such  knowledge  by  the  word  '  consciousness,' 
we  should  still  have  to  say  that  Brahma  is  consciousness,  not  that 
Brahman  has  consciousness  or  is  a  conscious  spirit.  Brahman  is  the 
pure  light  of  characterless  knowledge."6 

"  Intelligence  or  thought,"  says  Thibaut,  "  is  not  to  be  pre- 
dicated of  Brahman  as  its  attribute,  but  constitutes  its  substance  ; 
Brahma  is  not  a  thinking  being,  but  thought  itself."6 

Nehemiah  Goreh  says,  "  The  so-called  knowledge  of  Brahma  is 
nirvishaya,  objectless,  that  is,  it  is  not  a  knowledge  of  anything, 
and  is  therefore  no  knowledge  at  all."7 

1  Anti-Theistic  Theories,  p.  387.  2  Illingworth,  p.  21 1. 

3  Hindu  Philosophy,  pp.  368,  369.  *  Hinduism,  p.  51. 

5  Philosophy  of  the  Upanitthads,  pp.  41,  42.          '  Introduction  to  Veddntd'Sutras, 
p.  xxv.         7  Indian  Church  Quarterly  Review,  April  1891,  p.  163. 


70  THK    VKDANTA-SABA. 

Dr.  Murray  Mitchell  says  that  the  Vedanta  doctrine  on  this 
point  is  self-contradictory : 

<(  Where  knowledge  exists,  there  must  be  a  knower,  and  also  some- 
thing known,  knowledge  being  the  relation  between  the  two.  But  the 
Vedanta  explicitly  denies  that  there  is  such  a  distinction."1 

"  In  Brahma  there  is  no  consciousness  such  as  is   denoted  by 

*  I,'  '  thou/  and  '  it ; '  It  apprehends  no  person  or  thing  nor  is 
apprehended  by  any."     "  If  Brahma  were  conscious,  there  would  be 
objects  of  consciousness,  which  would  involve  dualism ;  for  '  wher- 
ever there  is  consciousness  there  is  relation,  and  wherever  there  is 
relation  there  is  dualism.' 5 

Nehemiah  Goreh  says : 

"  The  Vedantists  do  not  hold  that  the  pure  spirit,  Brahma,  really 
cognizes  objects  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  do  not  allege  that  the  pure  spirit, 
cognizes  objects  in  this  manner  '  This  is  a  jar,'  *  This  is  a  web,'  &c.  For 
if  they  allowed  this  sort  of  cognition  to  him,  they  would  have  to  allow  to 
him  willi  activity,  happiness,  misery,  and  so  forth ;  and  as  a  consequence, 
he  would  be  a  doer  of  good  and  of  evil  works,  an  heir  of  Elysium  or  of  Hell, 
and  a  partaker  of  three  fold  pain."2 

Ananda, — Gough  describes  it  as  "  Bliss  without  self-gratu- 
lation,  bliss  in  which  there  is  nothing  that  rejoices  and 
nothing  rejoiced  at ;  the  unspeakable  blessedness  of  exemption  from 
vicissitude  and  misery."3 

cf  Bliss,"  says  Deussen,  "  is  only  a  negative  quality,  and  is 
regarded  simply  as  absence  of  pain  which  alone  befits  Brahma; 
for,  What  is  different  from  Him  is  full  of  pain."4 

Col.  Jacob  says : 

"  This  has  been  characterised  as  '  a  bliss  without  the  fruition  of 
happiness,1  and  rightly  so.  For  absorption  into  Brahma  is  described  as 
a  permanent  state,  'resembling  precisely  that  of  deep  sleep,' — '  a  condition 
>of  insensibility,' — in  which  the  emancipated  spirit  is  without  a  body,  mind, 
or  cognition  !  Where  is  there  any  room  in  such  a  state  for  joy  ?  '  But 
what,  in  that  case/  says  the  author  of  the  SdnJchya-pravachana-hhdshya, 

*  becomes  of  the  scripture  which  lays  down  that  the  soul'  is  happiness  ?  The 
answer  is>  Because   of  there  being   cessation   of  misery,   only  in  a    loose 
acceptation  does  the  term  happiness  denote  soul.  .  .   To  move  ambition  in 
the  dull  or  ignorant,  the   emancipated  state,  which    really  is   stoppage  of 
-misery,   Soul    itself,  is    landed    to   them    by    the   Vedas  as    happiness.' 
Brahma,  then,  as  joy,  is  wholly  a  product  of  the  imagination."5 

Besides  Sat,  Chit,  Ananda,  two  other  attributes  of  Brahma 
may  be  noticed. 

Indivisibility. — In  the  Veddnta-Sdra  Brahma  is  described  as 
Akhanda,  without  parts.  It  is  argued  that  if  Brahma  were  made 

1  Lettp.ru  on  the  Evidences  of  Christianity,  p.  191. 

8  Rational  Refutation,  $"c.  p.  154.         3  Philosophy  of  the  TJpanishads,  pp.  36,  37. 

*  Short  Account,  frc.  p.  5.  *  Hindu  Pantheism,  pp.  5,  6. 


BEAHMAN    OB    BRAHMA.  71 

up  of  parts,  it  would  follow  that  It  was  non-eternal.1  Sankara 
says,  "  We  admit  Brahman  to  be  without  parts  just  because 
Scripture  reveals  it."  2  "  Brahma,"  says  Jacob,  "  is  an  absolute  and 
unchangeable  unity."  3  It  follows  from  this  that  each  individual 
soul  is  the  complete  indivisible  Brahma ! 

Sankara  explains  that  the  apparent  division  of  Brahma  is 
only  a  mere  fiction  of  Ignorance  : 

"  By  a  break  of  that  nature  a  thing  is  not  really  broken  up  into  parts, 
not  any  more  than  the  moon  is  really  multiplied  by  appearing  doable  to 
a  person  of  defective  vision.  By  that  element  of  plurality  which  is  the 
fiction  of  Ignorance,  which  is  characterised  by  name  and  form,  which  is 
evolved  as  well  as  non-evolved,  which  is  not  to  be  defined  either  as  the 
existing  or  the  non-existing,  Brahma  becomes  the  basis  of  this  entire 
apparent  world  with  its  changes,  and  so  on,  while  in  its  true  and  real 
nature  it  at  the  same  time  remains  unchanged,  lifted  above  the 
puenomenal  universe."4 

Individual  souls,  according  to  Sankara,  are  only  like  the 
reflections  of  the  sun  seen  in  pots  of  water :  they  have  no  real 
existence. 

Unchangea'bleness. — This  is  implied  in  the  epithets  nirv&ara, 
kutastha.  Nehemiah  Goreh  thus  notices  a  common  error  : 

"  I  warn  my  readers  against  being  misled  by  the  notions,  so  preva- 
lent among  the  vulgar,  that,  according  to  the  Vedanta,  Brahma  was  once 
void  of  qualities,  and  then,  assuming  them  made  the  world  ;  and  that 
some  small  portion  of  the  pure  Brahman  parted  from  him,  got  deluded 
by  illusion  and  then  became  souls  ;  which  pouls,  when  they  free  them- 
selves from  illusion,  will  be  united  to  Brahma  ;  &c.,  &c.  The  teachers 
of  the  Vedanta  do  not  allege  that  Brahma  was  once  void  of  qualities, 
and  subsequently,  taking  them  upon  him,  formed  the  universe  ;  but  they 
allege,  that  to  be  without  them  has  ever  distinguished  him,  and  ever 
will  distinguish  him."  * 

The  above  is  confirmed  by  Sankara  in  the  Vedanta- Sutras. : 

*'  A  number  of  scriptural  passages  by  denying  all  modifications  of' 
Brahma  teach  it  to  be  absolutely  changeless,  (Kutastlia)....'Yo  the  one 
Brahman  the  two  qualities  of  being  subject  to  modification  and  of  being 
free  from  it  cannot  both  be  ascribed.  But  if  you  say, '  Why  should  they 
not  be  both  predicated  of  Brahma  (the  former  during  the  time  of  the 
subsistence  of  the  world,  the  latter  during  the  period  of  re-absorption) 
just  as  rest  and  motion  may  be  predicated  (of  one  body  at  different, 
times)  ?'  We  remark  that  the  qualification  '  absolutely  changeless* 
(Kutastha)  precludes  this.  For  the  changeless  Brahma  cannot  be  the 
substratum  of  varying  attributes."6 

1  Veddnta-Sutras,  Vol.   I.  350.          *  Hid,  p.  350. 

3  Hindu  Pantheism,  p.  6  *  Veddnta-Stitras,  Vol.  I.  p.  352. 

b  Rational   Refutation,  p.  137.  6  Veddnta- Sufrus,  Vol.  I.  p.  327. 


72  THE  VEDANTA-SABA. 

MORAL  AND  RELIGIOUS  OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  VEDANTTC  BEAHMA. 

1.     Utter  Selfishness  is  the  highest   Vedantic    Ideal. — The 

prayojana,  or  end,  set  forth  in  the  Veddnta  is  liberation,  freedom 
from  the  miseries  of  sam*ara,  the  attainment  of  a  state  of  dream- 
less sleep.  The  last  stage  prescribed  by  Hinduism  is  to  retire  to 
the  desert.  The  hermit  is  to  care  only  for  himself.  He  is  not 
to  give  the  young  the  benefit  of  his  experience,  he  is  not  to  feed 
the  hungry,  instruct  the  ignorant,  visit  the  sick,  comfort  the 
sorrowing,  extend  a  helping  hand  to  those  struggling  in  the  ocean 
of  life  ;  he  is  to  care  only  for  himself.  It  must  be  confessed  that 
in  this  he  is  simply  imitating  Brahma,  in  whom  the  doctrine 
reaches  its  full  development. 

The  rise  of  Hindu  Pessimism  has  been  described  (p.  5). 
Labour  was  a  burden  in  a  hot  climate,  and  undisturbed  repose 
seemed  the  highest  bliss.  This  feeling  was  intensi6ed  by  the  wars 
that  prevailed,  but  chiefly  by  the  belief  in  transmigration.  The 
Jews  of  old  were  thus  addressed  by  God,  "  Thou  thoughtest  that  I 
was  altogether  such  an  one  as  thyself."  The  Hindus  imagined 
a  Brahma  after  their  own  heart.  He  may  be  compared  to  a 
Hindu  Raja  who  spends  his  life  in  sloth  within  his  palace,  heedless 
of  what  is  going  on  throughout  his  dominions,  and  leaving  every- 
thing to  his  ministers. 

"  Unencumbered  by  the  cares  of  empire,"  says  Dr.  Duff,  "  or 
the  functions  of  a  superintending  providence,  he  effectuates  no 
good,  inflicts  no  evil,  suffers  no  pain.  He  exists  in  a  state  of 
undisturbed  repose — a  sleep  so  deep  as  never  to  be  disturbed  by 
a  dream — even  without  any  consciousness  of  his  own  existence." 

The  more  a  man  resembles  Brahma,  the  more  selfish  and 
useless  he  becomes. 

Contrast  the  foregoing  with  the  Christian  conception  of  God. 
He  is  the  self -existent,  the  unchanging  God,  "  the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever."  He  called  the  universe  into  being,  and  His 
government  extends  over  all  creation.  He  is  never  unconscious.  He 
never  slumbers  nor  sleeps.  "  The  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth 
fainteth  not,  nor  is  weary."  He  knows  everything  that  takes  place 
throughout  His  vast  dominions.  Every  thought  of  our  heart  is 
known  to  Him.  His  ear  is  ever  open  to  the  cry  of  His  children. 
His  character  is  expressed  in  the  words,  "  Thou  art  good  and 
doest  good ;  "  "God  is  love."  Still,  it  is  not  the  feeling  which  looks 
upon  good  and  evil  with  equal  eye.  If  a  king  allowed  crime  to  go 
unpunished,  his  kingdom  would  become  like  a  hell. 

The  proverb  has  been  quoted  '  As  is  the  god,  so  is  the 
worshipper.'  It  will  hereafter  be  shown  that  Vedantism,  tested  by 
its  fruits,  is  found  wanting,  that  the  belief  in  a  supposed  Brahma  has 
had  a  tendency  to  discountenance  philanthropic  effort.  On  the  other 
hand,  every  encouragement  has  been  given  to  it  by  the  Christian 


BRAHMAN   OB   BEAHMA.  73 

conception  of  God.  It  is  admitted  that  sad  evils  prevail  among 
nations  nominally  Christian,  but  among  them  and  them  alone  are 
there  systematic  agencies  to  combat  them.  There  are  Peace 
Societies  to  discourage  war,  there  are  Eed  Cross  Societies  to  look 
after  the  wounded  in  battle  ;  there  are  Societies  for  the  Poor,  the 
Blind,  the  Deaf  and  Dumb,  the  Aged,  the  Orphan,  the  Widow, 
for  almost  every  benevolent  object. 

2.  The  Vedantic  Conception  of  Brahma  stifles  Religion.— 
Love,  prayer,  worship  are  three  great  elements  of  religion : 
Vedantism  destroys  them  all. 

Miss  Waldo,  a  lecturer  on  Vedantism  in  America,  admits  that 
"  Brahman  is  too  much  of  an  abstraction  to  be  thought  of — far 
more  to  be  loved."  "The  Vedantic  God,"  says  The  Hindu,  "  is  a 
cold  dreary  philosophic  conception  which  the  Hindu  masses  have 
never  cared  for,  which  the  vast  majority  of  mankind  can  never  be 
brought  to  reverence,  and  which  is  quite  incapable  of  influencing 
them  in  the  formation  of  life  and  character."  * 

Thibaut  says : 

"  The  only  religious  books  of  wide-spread  influence  are  such  as  the 
Eamayan  of  Tulsidas,  which  lay  no  stress  on  the  distinction  between  an 
absolute  Brahman  inaccessible  to  all  human  wants  and  sympathies,  and 
a  shadowy  Lord  whose  very  conception  depends  on  the  illusory  principle 
of  Maya,  but  love  to  dwell  on  the  delights  of  devotion  to  one  all-wise 
and  merciful  R,uler,  who  is  able  and  willing  to  lend  a  gracious  ear  to  the 
supplication  of  the  worshipper."' 

Love  to  God  is  the  very  essence  of  religion.  This  feeling 
cannot  exist  towards  a  being  like  Brahma. 

"  If  Vedantism  be  true,"  says  the  Eev.  T.  B.  Slater,  "  then 
prayer — the  universal  religion  where  men  of  every  creed  can  meet 
at  the  feet  of  a  heavenly  Father — and  worship — the  noblest  activi- 
ties of  the  soul  must  be  abandoned."  3  Tennyson  well  says : 

"  For  what  are  men  better  than  sheep  or  goats 
lliat  nourish  a  blind  life  within  the  brain, 
If,  knowing  God,  they  lift  not  hands  of  prayer 
Both  for  themselves  and  those  who  call  them  friend  ?  " 

It  is  useless  to  address  in  prayer  or  worship  a  God  unconscious 
even  of  its  own  existence.  The  same  truths  are  thus  set  forth  by 
Professor  Flint: 

"  Religion  supposes  faith,  love,  hope  ;  but  pantheism  when  it  denies 
the  personality  of  God  refuses  to  these  affections  an  appropriate  object. 
It  withholds  from  the  view  of  the  spirit  what  can  alone  satisfy  its  best 
and  deepest  feelings.  The  less  of  determinate  personal  character  God  is 
regarded  as  having,  the  less  is  it  possible  to  love  or  trust  Him.  * 

"'The  mystical  piety  of  India,  when  strictly  pantheistic,  knows 
nothing  of  the  gratitude  for  Divine  mercy  and  the  trust  in  Divine 

1  Brahmavddin.  Vol.  II.  p.  141.         8  Introduction  to  Veddnta-Sbtras,  p.  crxviii. 

3  Quoted  by  Rev.  T.  E.  Slater,  Studies  in  the  Upanishads,  p.  19. 

4  Anti-Theixtic  Theories,  pp.  61,  62. 

10 


74  THE   VEDANTA-8ABA. 

righteousness  which  characterise  evangelical  piety.  Instead  of  love  and 
communion  in  love,  it  can  only  commend  to  us  the  contemplation  of  an 
object  which  is  incomprehensible,  devoid  of  all  affections,  and  indifferent 
to, all  actions.  When  feelings  like  love,  gratitude,  and  trust  are  express- 
ed in  the  hymns  and  prayers  of  Hindu  worship,  it  is  in  consequence  of  a 
virtual  denial  of  the  principles  of  pantheism ;  it  is  because  the  mind  has 
consented  to  regard  as  real  what  it  had  previously  pronounced  illusory, 
and  to  personify  what  it  had  declared  to  be  impersonal.  Hinduism  holds 
it  to  be  a  fundamental  truth  that  the  absolute  Being  can  have  no  personal 
attributes,  and  yet  it  has  not  only  to  allow  but  to  encourage  its  adherents 
to  invest  that  Being  with  these  attributes,  in  order  that  by  thus  tempora- 
rily  deluding  themselves  they  may  evoke  in  their  hearts  at  least  a  feeble 
and  transient  glow  of  devotion.  It  has  even  been  forced,  by  its  inability 
to  elicit  and  sustain  a  religious  life  by  what  is  strictly  pantheistic  in  its 
doctrine,  to  crave  the  help  of  polytheism,  and  to  treat  the  foulest  orgies 
and  cruellest  rites  of  idolatry  as  acts  of  reasonable  worship  paid  indirectly 
to  the  sole  and  supreme  Being.  It  finds  polytheism  to  be  the  indis- 
pensable supplement  of  its  pantheism.  It  is  the  personal  gods  of  Hindu 
polytheism,  and  not  the  impersonal  principle  of  Hindu  pantheism,  that 
the  Hindu  people  worship.  No  people  can  worship  what  they  believe  to 
be  entirely  impersonal.  Even  in  the  so-called  religions  of  nature  the 
deified  natural  powers  are  always  personified.  It  is  only  as  persons  that 
they  are  offered  prayers  and  sacrifices." 

The  pernicious  effects  of  pantheism  on  Indian  polytheism  are 
thus  shown  by  Professor  Flint : 

"  I  have  said  that  the  ability  of  pantheism  to  ally  itself  with  poly- 
theism accounts  for  its  prevalence  in  certain  lands ;  but  I  mast  add  that 
although  a  power,  this  ability  is  not  a  merit.  It  is  a  power  for  evil — 
power  which  sustains  superstition,  corrupts  the  system  which  possesses  it, 
deludes  and  degrades  the  human  mind  and  heart,  and  arresta  social  pro- 
gress. Educated  Hindus  are  often  found  to  represent  it  is  an  excellence 
of  Brahmanism,  that  it  not  only  tolerates  but  embraces  and  incorporates 
the  lower  phases  of  religion.  They  contend  that  it  thereby  elevates  and 
purifies  polytheism,  and  helps  the  mind  of  men  to  pass  from  the  lowest 
stage  of  religious  development  gradually  up  to  the  highest.  The  opinion 
may  seem  plausible,  but  neither  reason  nor  experience  confirms  it. 
Pantheism  can  give  support  to  polytheism  and  receive  support  from  it,  but 
only  at  the  cost  of  sacrificing  all  its  claims  to  be  a  rational  system,  and 
of  losing  such  moral  virtue  as  it  possesses.  If  it  look  upon  the  popular 
deities  as  mere  fictions  of  the  popular  mind,  its  association  with  poly- 
theism can  only  mean  a  conscious  alliance  with  falsehood,  the  deliberate 
propagation  of  lies,  a  persistent  career  of  hypocrisy  .  .  .  India  alone  is 
surely  sufficient  proof  that  the  union  of  pantheism  with  polytheism  does 
not  correct  but  stimulate  the  extravagances  of  the  latter.  Pantheism, 
instead  of  elevating  and  purifying  Hindu  polytheism,  has  contributed  to 
increase  the  number,  the  absurdity,  and  the  foulness  of  its  superstitions."1 

It  has'  already  been  shown  that  Ved^ntism  cuts  the  roots  of 
morality. 

1  Anti'Theistic  Theories,  pp.  386-591  abridged. 

• 


IBVAEA.  75 


ISVARA. 

BRAHMA  is  said  to  exist  in  two  conditions — nirguna,  unbound, 
and  saguna,  bound.  The  two  states  are  sometimes  called  the 
Higher  and  Lower  Brahma.  The  former  is  called  Brahma,  neuter  ; 
the  latter  Brahma,  masculine.  The  name  I'svara,  lord,  is  also 
often  applied  to  the  latter. 

Brahma  nirguna,  as  already  mentioned,  exists  in  a  state  of 
dreamless  sleep,  unconscious  of  its  own  existence.  It  is  a  common 
error  to  imagine  that  the  nirguna  Brahma,  assuming  qualities, 
made  the  world.  According  to  the  Vedanta  the  nirguna  Brahma 
never  changes,  never  acquires  qualities.  The  saguna  Brahma  con- 
sists of  Brahma  associated  with  ignorance — a  union  which  is  said 
to  be  eternal. 

The  Brahma  of  the  Puranas  and  the  Brahma  of  Vedantism  are 
two  very  different  beings.  Bach  will  be  noticed  in  turn. 

Brahma  of  the  Puranas. — The  'sacred  books  of  the  Hindus 
give  conflicting  accounts  of  the  origin  of  Brahma,  the  first  of  the 
Hindu  triad.  The  Satapatha  Brdhmana  says  that  at  first  nothing 
but  water  existed.  The  waters  performed  austerities  and  produced 
the  golden  egg  from  which  Brahma,  called  Prajapati,  arose.  The 
same  Brahmana  elsewhere  represents  the  gods  as  the  creators  of 
Prajapati.  The  Mahabharata  asserts  that  Brahma  sprang  from  the 
navel  of  Yishnu  or  from  a  lotus  which  grew  thereout.  His  five 
heads  are  said  to  have  arisen  from  lusting  after  his  daughter. 
Siva  cut  off  one  of  them  with  the  thumb  of  his  left  hand.  Very 
contradictory  accounts  are  given  of  creation  by  Brahma.  He  was 
afterwards  married  to  Sarasvati,  and  had  a  heaven  of  his  own, 
called  Brahma  or  Satya  loka. 

Brahma  or  Isvara  in  the  Vedanta. — The  description  given  of 
him  by  some  of  the  foremost  Orientalists  will  first  be  quoted : 

"  Brahma,"  says  Colonel  Jacob,  "  is  illusorily  associated  with  three 
kinds  of  bodies  : 

"  Firstly,  with  a  causal  body,  composed  of  Ignorance  or  Illusion, 
which  in  the  aggregate  is  I'svara,  or  god,  and  distributively,  individual 
souls  or  Prajna-  It  is  likened  to  a  state  of  dreamless  sleep. 

"  Secondly,  with  a  subtile  body  composed  of  the  five  organs  of  sense 
and  of  action,  mind,  intellect,  and  the  five  vital  airs,  seventeen  in  all. 
This,  in  the  aggregate,  is  called  Hiranyagarbha,  or  the  Thread  Soul,  and, 
in  the  distributed  state,  Taijasa.  It  is  likened  to  a  state  of  dream. 

"  Thirdly,  with  a  gross  body,  composed  of  the  compound  elements. 
Viewed  in  the  aggregate,  it  is  called  Vaisvanara,  and,  distributively, 
Visva.  It  is  likened  to  the  waking  state. 

"  A  fourth  state  ia  that  of  the  unassociated  pure  Brahma  which  is 
technically  styled  '  The  Fourth.'  * 

1  Hindu  Pantheism,  p.  74. 


76,  THE   VEDANTA-SAEA. 

G-ough  gives  further  details  regarding  I'svara's  three  emana- 
tions : 

Isvara  not  a  personal  God  but  the  universal  soul. — Gough 
says: 

"  This  conception  of  the  world -projecting  deity  is  not  theistic- 
He  is  nothing  else  than  the  totality  of  souls  in  dreamless  sleep, 
present  in  the  heart  of  every  living  thing  ;  himself  only  the  first 
figment  of  the  world-fiction ;  resolved  into  the  characterless  unity 
of  Brahman,  at  the  close  of  each  age  of  the  world,  and  issuing  out  of 
that  unity  at  each  paling enesia  (second  birth)  in  the  eternal 
procession  of  the  aeons.  He  is  eternal,  but  every  migrating  soul  is 
co-eternal  with  him,  a  co-eternal  and  only  equally  fictitious  emanation  of 
the  one  and  only  self.  He  can  hardly  be  conceived  to  have  any  separate 
personality  apart  from  the  souls  he  permeates  and  vivifies  ;  and  his  state 
is  not  one  of  consciousness,  but  that  of  the  pure  bliss  of  dreamless  sleep. 
One  with  the  sum  of  living  beings  in  that  state,  he  is  yet  said  to  allot  to 
each  of  them  their  portion  of  weal  and  woe,  bat  only  in  accordance  with 
their  merits  in  prior  forms  of  embodied  existence....  I'svara  is  no  less 
unreal  than  the  migrating  soul  ;  and  both  I'svara  and  the  soul  are  only 
so  far  existent  as  they  are  fictitious  manifestations  of  the  one  and  only 
Self." 

"  Hiranyagarbha,  the  spirit  of  dreaming  seutiencies. — The  next 
emanation  in  the  order  of  descent  is  Hiranyagarbha,  Prana,  ^>he  Thread- 
spirit.  This  divine  emanation  is  the  totality  of  migrating  souls  in  the 
state  of  dreaming  sleep,  the  sum  of  the  dreaming  consciousness  of  the 
world.  His  body  is  the  sum  of  the  invisible  bodies,  the  tenuous  involucra 
( wrappers,  sheaths)  clothed  in  which  the  soul  passes  from  body  to  body 
in  the  long  process  of  metempsychosis.  These  invisible  bodies  are  made 
up  of  three  vestures  one  upon  the  other,  the  cognitional,  the  sensorial, 
aud  the  aerial  garments  of  soul.  These  three  wrappers  clothe  Hiranya- 
garbha (the  embryo  of  light.)  He  is  called  Sutrdtma,  the  Thread- spirit,  as 
stringing  together  all  dreaming  souls  clothed  in  the  invisible  bodies  that 
accompany  them  in  their  migrations,  as  pearls  are  strung  upon  a  thread 
to  form  a  necklace. 

'"Viraj,  the  spirit  of  waking  sentiencies. — The  third  and  lowest  of 
the  progressive  emanations  is  Viraj,  Vaisvanara,  PrajapatI,  or  Purusha. 
His  body  is  the  whole  mundane  egg,  the  outer  shell  of  the  visible  world, 
or  the  sum  of  the  visible  and  perishing  bodies  of  migrating  souls.  He  is 
identified  with  the  totality  of  waking  consciousness,  with  the  sum  of  souls 
in  the  waking  state  and  the  sum  of  their  gross  visible  and  tangible 
environments.  He  is  the  sum  of  souls  that  illusively  identify  themselves 
with  their  outer  bodies,  and  thus  suffer  hunger,  thirst  and  faintness.  and 
all  the  other  miseries  of  metempsychosis."  ] 

Subdivisions  of  Isvara. — These  are  described  at  great  length 
.in  the  Vedanta  Sara  (See  pp.  29-36).  Some  of  the  points  have 
already  been  noticed.  R.  C.  Bose  says  : 

"Every  soul  is,  according  to  the  Vedantic  system,  a  synthesis 
(compound)  of  a  particle  of  Ignorance  and  a  particle  of  Brahman  invaria- 

1  Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads,  abridged,  pp.  55-58. 


1SVABA, 

bly  called  Intelligence.  Every  sonl  therefore  represents  Ignorance  in  its 
distributive  form  or  as  a  distributive  aggregate.  The  Ignorances 
attached  to  the  innumerable  souls  in  the  world  emanated  from  and  are 
to  be  re-absorbed  in  one  mass  of  Ignorance,  called  '  Collective  Ignorance.' 
This  Collective  Ignorance  or  totality  of  Ignorance,  is  called  i'svara  or 
God,  the  Creator  and  Preserver  and  Destroyer  of  the  world.  It  is,  how- 
ever, not  appropriately  called  I'svara,  for  it  forms  only  the  'causal  body'  of 
this  Being.  I'svara,  like  the  individual  soul,  is  a  synthesis,  and  consists 
of  the  compound  of  all  Ignorances,  called  Collective  Ignorance,  and  a  very 
large  portion  of  Brahma,  the  sum  total  of  all  the  particles  of  Brahma 
attached  to  the  innumerable  souls  in  the  world.  Collective  Ignorance  is, 
therefore,  his  causal  body  rather  than  his  entire  self.  Distributive 
Ignorance  is  in  the  same  way  the  '  causal  body'  of  the  individuated  soul, 
and  not  its  entire  self.  The  relationship  between  Collective  Ignorance 
and  Distributive  Ignorance  is  illustrated  in  the  Vedanta-Sara  by  that 
subsisting  between  a  '  forest'  and  '  the  trees'  of  which  it  consists,  or  that 
between  '  a  lake'  and  '  the  waters'  of  which  it  consists. 

"  A  thing  is  regarded  as  a  collective  or  distributive  aggregate  accord- 
ing as  it  is  viewed  as  a  whole  or  as  a  collection  of  parts." 

'•  But  these  divisions  and  subdivisions  of  Brahma  into  innumerable 
parts,  associated  to  various  spheres  of  existence  and  various  classes  of 
objects,  subtle  and  gross,  cannot  but  suggest  the  idea  of  dualism.  How 
is  the  integrity  of  monism  to  be  maintained  in  the  teeth  of  descriptions 
so  obviously  at  war  with  it  ?  To  understand  this  it  is  necessary  to  com- 
prehend the  Vedantic  notion  of  '  erroneous  imputations'  (adhyaropa) 
and  its  '  refutation.' l 

'Erroneous  Imputation'  is  the  allegation  that  the  Unreal  is  the 
Real — like  the  judgment  in  respect  of  a  rope  which  is  no  serpent,  that  it 
is  a  serpent. 

"  The  '  Real'  is  Brahma,  existence,  knowledge,  and  happiness,  with- 
out a  second  ;  the  '  Unreal*  is  the  whole  aggregate  of  the  senseless- 
beginning  with  Ignorance."  2 

"  Brahma  is  real,  absolute,  unconditioned*  unrelated  existence,  with- 
out consciousness,  without  feeling,  without  qualities.  But  in  all  ordinary 
descriptions  of  Brahma  certain  attributes  and  operations  are  attributed 
to  him.  He  is  represented  as  omnipotent  and  omniscient,  as  creator 
and  preserver,  as  associated  to  various  spheres  of  existence  and  various 
classes  of  objects,  as  enslaved  by  and  emancipated  from  ignorance.  But 
the  representations  by  which  he  is  set  forth  as  conditioned  and  related, 
determined  by  qualities,  states  and  acts,  are  all  '  false,'  knowingly 
resorted  to  by  the  learned  for  the  purpose  of  making  the  absolute 
intelligible  to  the  unlearned."  3 

(rough  has  the  following  remarks  on  the  same  subject : 
"  Isvara  passes  into  seeming  plurality — It  is  through  the  union 
from  before  all  time  of  Brahma  with  the  inexplicable  illusion,  that 
the  one  and  only  self  presents  itself  in  the  endless  plurality  and 
diversity  of  transient  deities,  of  migrating  spirits,  and  of  the 
worlds  through  which  they  migrate.  It  is  through  this  union  that 

1 "  Illusory  Attribution."     "  Withdrawal,"  Jacob.  8  Veddntd  Sara. 

3  B,  C.  Bose,  Hindu  Philosophy,  pp.  350,  351. 


78  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

the  one  and  only  Self  is  present  in  every  creature,  as  one  and  the 
same  ether  is  present  in  many  water-jars,  as  one  and  the  same 
sun  is  mirrored  in  countless  sheets  of  water.  It  is  through  this 
union  that  the  one  and  only  Self  permeates  and  animates  the 
world.  In  the  words  of  Sankara :  '  The  image  of  the  sun  upon 
a  piece  of  water  expands  with  the  expansion,  and  contracts  with 
the  contraction,  of  the  ripples  on  the  surface ;  moves  with  the 
motion,  and  is  severed  by  the  breaking  of  the  ripples.  The 
reflection  of  the  sun  thus  follows  the  various  conditions  of  the 
surface,  but  not  so  the  real  sun  in  the  heavens.  It  is  in  a  similar 
manner  that  the  real  Self  is  reflected  upon  its  counterfeits,  the 
bodies  of  sentient  creatures,  and  thus  fictitiously  limited,  shares 
their  growth  and  diminution,  and  other  sensible  modes  of  being. 
Apart  from  its  various  counterfeits,  the  Self  is  changeless  and 
unvaried.  *  The  one  and  only  Self  is  present  in  the  heart  of  every 
living  one  as  one  and  the  same  face  may  be  reflected  by  a  succes- 
sion of  mirrors."  2 

REMARKS  ON  I'SVARA. 

As  already  mentioned,  the  false  dogma  was  assumed  by  the 
Vedanta  that  Brahma  alone  exists,  "  One  without  a  second."  As 
this  was  contradicted  by  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  and  the 
experience  of  the  whole  human  race,  it  was  sought  to  be  supported 
by  another  invented  dogma,  Avidya,  Ignorance.  It  has  been  shown 
that  Avidya  is  a  mere  fiction  to  bolster  up  another  error. 

In  the  Puranasthe  highest  gods  are  charged  with  crimes  which 
would  disgrace  a  human  being.  In  the  Vedanta  almost  equal 
dishonour  is  done  to  God  by  eternally  associating  Ignorance  with 
Him,  whereas  God,  the  Great  Creator  and  Lord  of  the  universe,  is 
possessed  of  unbounded  knowledge  and  wisdom.  '  God  is  light ;  in 
Him  is  no  darkness  at  all.' 

The  doctrines  of  Avidya  and  the  three  emanations  of  I'svara 
which  have  been  described  are  altogether  destitute  of  proof.  They 
are  like  the  other  wild  speculations  of  the  Hindu  sacred  books  about 
the  human  body,  geography,  and  astronomy.  Intelligent  Hindus 
will  allow  that  the  disgraceful  stories  told  about  Brahm&  in  the 
Puranas  are  fictions,  proceeding  from  a  wicked  filthy  imagination. 
The  Ved<mtic  speculations  about  I'svara  are  equally  baseless. 

According  to  the  Vedanta-Sara,  I'svara  is  the  collective 
aggregate  of  all  animated  beings,  from  the  highest  deities  down  to 
a  blade  of  grass,  just  as  a  forest  is  a  collective  aggregate  of  trees. 
Upon  this  Colonel  Jacob  remarks  : 

"  This,  to  any  ordinary  mind,  is  tantamount  to  saying  there  is  no 
personal  God  at  all ;  for  how  can  it  be  supposed  that  this  aggregate  of 

*  Introduction  to  Svetdsvatara  Upanishad. 
2  Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads,  pp.  49,  50. 


CREATION.  79 

sentiencies  has,  or  has  ever  had,  any  power  of  united  action,  so  as  to 
constitute  it  a  personal  Being  ?  Yet,  after  describing  God  as  identical 
with  the  aggregate  of  individual  sentiencies,  apart  from  which  he  can 
have  no  more  existence  than  a  forest  can  have  apart  from  the  trees  which 
compose  it,  the  text  proceeds  to  treat  him  as  a  personal  Being,  endowed 
with  the  qualities  of  omniscience,  &c.,  and  bearing  rule  over  individual 
souls ! 

"  The  attributes  assigned  to  him  are  thus  explained  by  the  commen- 
tator. His  omniscience  is  merely  his  being  a  witness  of  the  whole 
universe,  animate  and  inanimate.  He  is  called  '  I'svara,'  because  he 
presides  over  individual  souls  and  allots  rewards  according  to  their  works. 
How  this  aggregate  of  individual  souls  is  to  preside  over  itself  and  reward 
each  soul  included  in  it  according  to  its  works,  it  is  impossible  to  say ; 
b*ut  his  functions  in  this  capacity  ought  to  be  a  sinecure,  inasmuch  as 
it  is  strongly  insisted  upon  that  works,  whether  good  or  bad,  are  followed 
by  an  exactly  proportioned  measure  of  reward  or  punishment  without 
the  intervention  of  anybody.  He  is  the  '  controller'  in  the  sense  of  being 
the  mover  or  impeller  of  souls  ;  and  the  'internal  ruler'  as  dwelling  in  the 
heart  of  each,  and  restraining  the  intellect.  He  is  the  '  cause  of  the 
world,'  not  as  its  creator,  but  as  the  seat  of  the  evolution  of  that  illusory 
effect.  Indeed,  it  would  be  inconsistent  to  speak  of  a  creator  of  a  world 
which  has  no  greater  reality  than  belongs  to  things  seen  in  a  dream  !"  * 

"The  so-called  persona]  God,  the  first  manifestation  of  the  Impersonal, 
turns  out  on  examination  to  be  a  myth.''  2 

I's'wara,  in  reality,  is  a  non-entity.   Nehemiah  Goreh  says  : 

"  The  Vedanta  recognizes,  as  existent,  an  I'swara,  maker  of  the 
world,  all- wise,  and  all-powerful ;  and  souls,  also,  and  their  ignorance, 
their  doing  good  and  evil,  their  requital  in  Elysium  and  in  Hell,  and 
their  transmigration.  "And,  again,  all  these  are  regarded  as  non-existent, 
and  as  absolutely  so.  Neither  are  they,  nor  have  they  been,  nor  are  they 
to  be.  Brahma  alone  exists, — without  qualities,  and  eternal.  All  besides — 
I's'wara,  the  world,  and  everything  else, — has  but  a  false  existence,  and 
owes  its  being  to  imagination  by  ignorance.  In  very  truth,  it  is  nothing. 
Such,  in  a  few  words,  is  the. creed  of  the  Vedantins."  3 


CKEATION. 

According  to  Hinduism,  there  is  no  creation  in  the  strict  sense  of 
the  word.  This  is  the  result  of  that  fixed  dogma  of  a  Hindu  philo- 
sopher's belief — ndvastuno  vastusiddhih,  nothing  can  be  produced 
out  of  nothing. 

The  Eev.  Nehemiah  Goreh  thus  states  the  case  : — 

u  By  the  word  Creator,  Christians  as  well  as  Theists  mean  one  who 
gave  being  to  things  which  had  no  being  before,  or  according  to  the 
phrase  used  in  Christian  Theology,  created  things  out  of  nothing.  In 

1  Hindu  Pantheism,  pp.  58,  59.  8  Hindu  Pantheism,  p.  129. 

3  Rational  Refutation,  p.  126. 


80  THE   VEDANTA-SARA. 

this  sense  no  sect  of  religion  or  school  of  philosophy  among  the  Hindus 
believes  God  to  have  created  anything. 

"  And  here  I  wish  to  say  that  such  of  our  countrymen  as  have  been 
educated  in  English  schools  and  colleges,  and  are  not  familiar  with  the 
true  tenets  of  Hinduism  are  apt  to  be  misled  by  certain  words  and 
phrases  used  in  the  religious  books  of  our  country.  They  are  apt  to 
think  that  those  words  and  phrases  were  used  by  the  authors  of  those 
books  and  are  understood  by  orthodox  Hindus,  in  the  same  sense  which 
they  themselves  attach  to  them,  having  acquired  more  enlightened  notions 
of  religious  truths  by  coming  in  contact  with  Christianity,  and  then  to 
think  that  those  very  notions  are  taught  in  those  books.  For  instance 
it  is  stated  in  those  books  that  God  is  Sarva-kartd,  that  is,  maker  of  all. 
Yet  it  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  think  that  they  teach  that  God  is 
the  Creator  of  all  things.  It  is  a  fixed  principle  with  the  teachers  of  all 
the  schools  of  philosophy  in  our  country  (and  remember  that  with  the 
Hindus  philosophy  is  religion  and  religion  is  philosophy)  that  every 
Kdrya,  that  is,  effect,  must  have  a  Samavdyior  Updddna  Kdrana,  that  is, 
a  cause  out  of  which  an  effect  is  produced  or  formed,  such  as  clay  is  to 
an  earthen  pot.  It  may  be  translated  by  the  English  word  '  material 
cause  '  in  some  cases  though  not  in  all.  Therefore  the  world  could  not  be 
created  out  of  nothing.  According  to  the  Hindus' belief  the  world  has  an 
Updddna  Kdrana,  or  a  material  cause,  and  that  material  cause  is 
uncreated,  self-existing,  and  eternal  like  God  Himself.  According  to  the 
Nyaya  school,  theparamdnus,  or  atoms  of  earth,  water,  fire,  and  air,  which 
are  infinite  in  number,  are  the  material  cause  of  visible  and  tangible 
parts  of  this  universe,  and  are  themselves  self  >existent  and  eternal.  More- 
over A'kdsa,  time,  space,  souls,  not  only  of  men,  but  also  of  gods,  animals, 
and  plants,  and  manas,  the  internal  organs  which  together  with  souls  are 
infinite  in  number,  are  all  uncreated, self-existent,  and  eternal.  Very  little 
indeed  have  they  left  for  God  to  do.  He  only  frames,  with  these  self- 
existent  substances,  the  world.  According  to  the  Sankhya  system  prakriti 
is  the  material  cause  of  the  universe,  and  it  is  of  course  self-existent  and 
eternal. 

"  Even  the  false  god  of  the  Vedantists.the  maker  of  the  false  world,  is 
only  a  framer  of  it  like  the  God  of  the  Nyaya,  and  not  a  Oreator,  Maya 
being  the  Updddna  Kdrana,  or  material  cause  of  it.  From  this  Maya, 
though  false  yet  eternal,  the  whole  universe  is  evolved,  as  according  to 
the  Sankhya  it  is  evolved  from  their  eternal  prakriti." l 

It  lias  been  stated  that  the  fundamental  error  of  Hinduism  is 
to  judge  by  our  own  standard.  A  carpenter  cannot  work  without 
materials  ;  in  like  manner  it  is  supposed  that  God  must  have  formed 
all  things  from  eternally  existing  matter.  The  fallacy  of  this  is 
thus  shown  by  the  late  Rev.  Dr.  K.  M.  Banerjea : 

"  That  no  man  can  work  without  materials  is  denied  by  none,  simply 
because  man  is  not  omnipotent,  and  has  not  creative  power.  But  when 
one  looks  at  an  exquisite  production  of  art,  he  is  so  lost  in  admiration  at 
the  skill  of  the  artist,  that  he  almost  forgets  the  minor  question  of  the 
material.  And  yet  so  banefully  has  the  theory  of  material  causality 

1  Theism  and  Christianity,  Part  I.  pp.  5-7. 


OMAWOK.  81 

worked  among  us  that  the  mental  energy  of  onr  philosophers  has  found 
moat  active  exercise  NOT  in  the  exclamation,  How  wonderful  is  the 
arrangement  of  the  universe  !  BUT  in  the  interrogation,  Of  what  pre- 
existing substance  is  all  this  made?  Nay  they  have  been  so  lost  in  that 
question,  as  to  forget  that  a  Creator  of  infinite  power  and  perfection 
needs  not,  like  weak  and  imperfect  man,  to  stop  for  materials,  but  can 
make  materials  by  the  mere  -flat  of  His  will.  If  the  natural  instincts  of 
the  human  soul  lead  us  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  an  all-powerful  and 
perfect  Being,  if  the  irresistible  arguments  of  the  Yeddnta  itself  drive 
ns  to  the  conclusion  that  the  universe  was  created  by  a  God,  infinite  in 
wisdom  and  contri ranee ;  then  there  can  be  no  possible  necessity  for 
speculating  on  the  material  of  the  world  :  then  the  most  philosophical 
course  is  to  consider  the  object  originally  created  by  such  a  GoH  as  at 
once  the  matter  and  form  of  the  world.  To  assume  tbe  eternity  of 
some  gross  material,  existing  side  by  side  with  an  intellierent  and  all- 
perfect  God,  is  not  only  unnecessary  (and  therefore  unphiloponlvcal,) 
inasmuch  as  it  assumes  two  principle?,  where  one  is  amply  sufficient  to 
account  for  all  we  see  ;  but  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  perfection 
which  we  must  attribute  to  the  Deity.  If  he  had  some  material  to  work 
upon,  previously  existing  independent  of  Him,  then  there  was  nothing 
peculiar  in  His  agency  ;  then  it  was  of  the  same  species  as  that  of  a 
human  architect ;  then  he  was  our  creator  in  no  higher  sense  than  that 
in  which  a  potter  is  the  maker  of  a  jar.  The  Yedantist,  on  the  other 
hand,  places  himself  in  a  false  position,  by  seeking  in  a  spiritual  essence, 
the  substance  of  such  a  world,  consisting  of  pure  and  impure,  intelligent, 
and  unintelligent,  rational  and  irrational,  animated  and  inanimated 
creatures." 

"  Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  power  of  God,"  applies  to 
Hindus  as  well  as  those  to  whom  the  words  were  addressed  by  the 
Great  Teacher.  Even  the  Brahmavddin  makes  the  acknowledg- 
ment: 

"  He,  in  whom  all  things  iti  the  universe  live  and  move  and  have  their 
being  possesses  potentialities  'inscrutable  to  human  wisdom  and  capable 
of  infinite  and  very  wonderful  manifestations."  Aug.  29,  1897. 

Whether  is  it  more  rational  to  suppose  the  eternal  existence 
of  one  Being,  infinite  in  power  and  wisdom,  or  to  imagine*  that 
innumerable  unintelligent  atoms  and  spirits  existed  from  all 
eternity  ?  Besides  the  latter,  an  eternal,  intelligent  Arranger  is 
also  required.  Some  Veddntic  ideas  about  creation  will  now  be 
noticed. 

Creation  ascribed  to  "  mere  sport." — The  Ved&nta-Sutra  II., 
1-33,  is  as  follows  : 

"  But  (Brahman's  creative  activity)  is  mere  sport  such  as  we  see  in 
ordinary  life." 

On  the  above  S'ankara  makes  the  following  comment : 

"  We  see  in  every-day  life  that  certain  doings  of  princes  or  other 
men  of  high  position  who  have  no  unfulfilled  desires  left  have  no 
reference  to  any  extraneous  purpose,  but  proceed  from  mere  gportfulness 

11 


82  THE   VEDANTA-8ARA. 

as,  for  instance,  their  recreations  in  places  of  amusement ....  Analogously, 
the  activity  of  the  Lord  also  may  be  supposed  to  be  mere  sport,  proceed- 
ing from  his  own  natare,  without  reference  to  any  purpose."1 

The  Hindu  gods  are  sometimes  said  to  commit  sin  "  in  sport 
or  as  a  divine  amusement."  With  this  motive  the  Small-Pox 
goddess  is  said  to  scatter  the  seeds  of  the  disease.  What  degrad- 
ing conceptions  do  all  these  show  of  the  Divine  Being ! 

Contradictory  Hindu  Accounts  of  Creation- — Several  of  these 
are  described  in  the  fourth  volume  of  Muir's  Sanskrit  Texts.  Here 
only  a  short  quotation  may  be  made  from  Sankara's  commentary  on 
the  Brahma-Sutras.  II.  2,  3. 

"  The  Chhandogya  intimates  that  fire  was  created  first,  while  the 
Taittiryaka  assigns  the  same  position  to  ether,  and  because  it  is  impossi- 
ble that  both  should  have  been  created  first."8 

Only  one  or  two  of  the  principal  notions  on  the  subject  can  be 
examined. 

Two  Hindu  Theories  of  Creation. — When  a  potter  makes  a 
pot,  he  is  the  operative  cause,  while  the  clay  is  the  material  or 
updddna  cause.  Sutras  23-26.  I  Adhyaya,  4  Pada,  Brahma- Sutras, 
hold  that  Brahma  is  the  material  cause  of  the  universe,  framing  it 
out  of  himself  as  a  spider  evolves  its  web  out  of  its  own  body. 

The  later  theory  is  that  Maya  is  both  the  operative  and  material 
cause  of  the  world. 

The  World  no  Beginning. — The  great  Hindu  problem  is  to 
account  for  the  inequalities  of  life.  The  solution  given  is  that 
they  arise  from  merit  and  demerit  in  a  former  birth.  To  this  it  is 
replied  that  beings  must  have  existed  before  there  could  be  merit 
or  demerit.  Merit  and  demerit  may  be  compared  to  a  hen,  and  the 
body  produced  to  the  egg.  A  hen  could  not  be  produced  from  its 
own  egg.  It  is  argued  "  that  the  first  creation  in  the  series  of 
creations  must  have  been  one  of  pure  equality,  there  not  having 
yet  arisen  any  such  retributive  fatality  in  consequence  of  a  prior 
variety  of  embodiment." 

The  Vedanta  Sutras  thus  reply  to  this  : 

"  If  it  be  objected  that  it  (viz.  the  Lord's  having  regard  to  merit 
and  demerit)  is  impossible  on  accountof  thenon-distinction  (of  merit  and 
demerit,  previous  to  the  first  creation)  ;  we  refute  the  objection  on  the 
ground  of  (the  world)  being  without  a  beginning."  II.  i.  35. 

Sankara  thus  replies  to  the  objection : 

"  The  series  of  creations  has  had  no  beginning,  Your  plea  would  be 
good  if  the  series  had  a  beginning,  but  it  has  none;  and  consequently 
there  is  nothing  to  gainsay  the  position  that  the  law  of  retribution  and 
the  inequalities  of  life  produce  and  reproduce  each  other  like  seed  and 
plant,  and  plant  and  seed. 

1  Thibant's  Translation,  Vol.  II.  p.  5. 

1  Gough's  Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads,  p.  208. 


CREATION.  83 

"  You  will  next  ask  us,  how  we  know  that  the  series  of  creations 
has  had  no  beginning.  Our  reply  is  this — that  if  the  series  had  beginning, 
something  must  have  come  out  of  nothing.  . . .  There  would  no  longer  be 
anything  to  account  for  the  inequalities  of  happiness  and  misery  in  the 
world." 

Sankara  thus  refutes  his  own  reply  : 

"  This  difficulty  is  not  removed  by  the  consideration  that  the  works 
of  living  beings  and  the  resulting  dispositions  made  by  the  Lord  form  a 
chain  which  has  no  beginning ;  for  in  past  time  as  well  as  in  the  present 
mutnal  interdependence  of  the  two  take  place,  so  that  the  beginningless 
series  is  like  an  endless  chain  of  blind  men  leading  other  blind  men."1 

Sankara  justly  says  that  the  difficulty  is  not  removed  by  a 
supposed  endless  chain — however  far  back  we  go,  there  would  be 
the  same  impossibility  of  a  hen  being  produced  from  its  own  egg — 
merit  and  demerit  existing  before  beings  who  could  originate  them. 

Sankara  starts  with  the  assumption  that  God  cannot  create. 
It  has  been  shown  that  for  this  there  is  no  proof  ;  that  we  cannot 
judge  of  the  Almighty  by  comparing  him  with  a  carpenter  or 
potter. 

The  World  was  formed  out  of  Frakriti  or  Pradhana. — This  is 
the  Sankhya  doctrine,  explained  at  page  10. 

Sankara  thus,  replies : 

"  The  origin,  &c.,  of  a'world  possessing  the  attributes  stated  above 
cannot  possibly  proceed  from  anything  else  but  a  Lord  possessing  the 
stated  qualities ;  not  either  from  a  non-intelligent  pradhana  or  from 
atoms,  or  from  non-being,  or  from  a  being  subject  to  transmigration; 
nor  again,  can  it  proceed  from  its  own  nature  (i.e.,  spontaneously  without 
a  cause)  since  we  observe  that  (for  the  production  of  effects.)  special 
places,  times,  and  causes  have  invariably  to  be  employed."2 

Elsewhere  he  goes  more  into  detail : 

"  If  you  Sankhyas  base  your  theory  on  parallel  instances  merely,  we 
point  out  that  a  non-intelligent  thing  which,  without  being  guided  by  an 
intelligent  being,  spontaneously  produces  effects  capable  of  subserving, 
the  purposes  of  some  particular  person  is  nowhere  observed  in  the  world. 
We  rather  observe  that  houses,  palaces,  couches,  pleasure-grounds,  and 
the  like, — things  which  according  to  circumstances  are  conducive  to  the 
attainment  of  pleasure  or  the  avoidance  of  pain — are  made  by  workmen 
endowed  with  intelligence.  Now  look  at  this  entire  world  which  appears, 
on  the  one  hand,  as  external  (i.e.,  inanimate)  in  the  form  of  earth  and 
the  other  elements  enabling  (the  souls)  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  their 
various  actions,  andi  on  the  other  hand,  as  animate,  in  the  form  of  bodiev 
which  belong  to  the  different  classes  of  beings,  possess  a  definite  arrange- 
ment of  organs,  and  are  therefore  capable  of  constituting  the  abodes  of 
fruition;  look,  we  say,  at  this  world,  of  which  the  most  ingenious 
workmen  cannot  even  form  a  conception  in  their  minds,  and  then  say.  if 
a  non-intelligent  principle  like  the  pradhana  is  able  to  fashion  it.  Other 

1  Thibaut's  Translation,  Vol.  I.  p.  435:  3  /bid,  Vol,  1,  pp.  16,]^  - 


84  THE    VEDANTA-SA&A. 

non-intelligent  things  such  as  stones  and  clods  of  earth  are  certainly  not 
seen  to  possess  analogous  powers.  We  rather  mast  assume  that  just  as  clay 
and  similar  substances  are  seen  to  fashion  themselves  into  vauous  forms 
if  worked  upon  by  potters  and  the  like,  so  the  pradkdiui  also  (when 
modifying  itself  iuto  its  effects)  is  ruled  by  some  intelligent  principle."  ' 

By  somewhat  similar  reasoning,  Sankara  refutes  Kanada's 
doctrine  of  atoms  : 

"As  we  have  shown  in  our  examination  of  the  Saukhya  system,  a 
non-intelligent  thing  which  is  not  directed  by  an  intelligent  principle 
cannot  of  itself  either  act  or  be  the  cause  of  action,  and  the  soul  cannot 
be  the  guiding  principle  of  the  udriehta  because  at  the  time  of  ^ralaya, 
its  intelligence  has  not  yet  arisen,  it,  on  the  other  hand,  the  unseen 
principle  is  supposed  to  inhere  in  the  soul,  it  cannot  be  the  cause  of  motion 
in  the  atoms,  because  there  exists  no  connexion  of  it  with  the  latter. 
If  you  say  that  the  soul  in  which  the  unseen  principle  inheres  is  con- 
nected with  the  atoms,  then  there  would  result,  from  the  continuity 
of  connexion,  continuity  of  action,  as  there  is  no  other  restricting 
principle.—  Hence,  there  being  no  definite  cause  of  action,  original  action 
cannot  take  place  in  the  atoms  ;  there  being  no  action,  conjunction  of  the 
atoms  which  depends  on  action  cannot  take  place  ;  there  being  no 
conjunction,  all  the  effects  depending  on  it;  viz.,  tue  formation  of  living 
atomic  compounds,  &c.,  cannot  originate."  2 

The  reasoning  of  Sankara  in  the  above  quotations  cannot  be 
disputed  ;  but  he  does  nut  see  that  the  same  argument  equally 
demolishes  his  own  theory  of  Avidyd,  which  is  practically  prakriti, 
or  pradhdna. 

Creation  is  ascribed  to  Brahma  associated  with  Avidyd  or 
Mayd.  Brahma  exists  in  a  state  of  dreamless  sleep  ;  hence  the 
work  of  creation  is  due  to  avidyd.  The  word  signifies  '  non- 
knowledge.'  Mdyd  likewise,  says  Thibaut,  is  of  a  non-intelligent 
nature,  owing  to  which  it  is  by  so  many  Vedantic  writers  identi- 
fied with  the  prakriti  of  the  fciaukhyas.  It  may  well  be  asked  how 
can  that  which  is  "  non-knowledge"  frame  >a  world  so  wonder- 
fully constructed  as  ours  ?  baukara's  objections  to  prukriti, 
pradhdna  and  atoms  apply  to  avidyd  or  mdyd. 

HINDU  SPECULATIONS  ABOUT  TBE  UNIVEBSE. 


Speculation  instead  of  Observation.  —  A  so-called  Hindu  phil- 
osopher sat  in  his  house  and  framed  a  description  of  the  world 
out  of  his  own  head.  In  the  centre  he  placed  an  immense  rock, 
called  Meru,  84,000  yojanas  in  height  and  lb',000  yojanas  below  the 
surface  of  the  earth.  Around  this  mountain  he  imagined  seven 
continents  separated  by  eeven  seas  of  salt  water,  sugar-cane  juice, 
wine,  milk,  &c. 

1  Thibant's  Translation,  Vol.  1.  pp.  364,  865. 
3  V^ddnt*  Sttrtu,  Vol.  I.  p.  388. 


CREATION.  85 

Careful  measurement  has  shown  that  the  Earth  is  only  about 
8,000  miles  in  diameter,  so  that  all  the  above  statements  are  mere 
fictions.  The  same  want  of  observation  is  shown,  though  in  a  less 
degree,  in  the  statement  about  the  four  kinds  of  bodies,  "  vivipar- 
ous, oviparous,  moisture-engendered,  and  germinating."  The 
"  moisture-engendered  are  those  produced  from  moisture  as  lice, 
gnats."  No  creatures  are  produced  from  moisture.  Lice,  gnats, 
ants,  &c.,  are  produced  from  eggs. 

Happily  in  India  a  beginning  «has  been  made  in  the  right 
direction.  Professor^Bose  and  Dr.  Roy,  by  careful  investigation, 
have  been  made  to  command  the  respect  of  European  scientists. 

TRUE  ACCOUNT  OP  CREATION. 

The  Need  of  a  Great  First  Cause. — The  truth  of  the  Sanskrit 
proverb  ndvastuno  vastusicUlhi,  and  the  Latin  proverb  ex  nihilo, 
nihil  Jit,  '  nothing  can  be  produced  out  of  nothing '  is  admitted. 
If  ever  there  had  been  no  existence,  there  would  be  no  existence 
still.  Nothing  cannot  make  something.  Hence,  something  has 
always  existed.  Herbert  Spencer  says, 

"  The  existence  of  a  first  cause  of  the  unieeree  is  a  necessity  of 
thought.  .  .  .  Amid  the  mysteries  which  become  more  mysterious  the  more 
they  are  thought  about,  there  will  remain  tue  one  absolute  ceitainty 
that  we  are  ever  m  the  presence  of  an  Infinite,  Eternal  Energy  from 
which  all  things  proceed." 

That  which  is  unconscious  and  unintelligent  cannot  will,  and 
cannot  act  intelligently.  Unconscious  and  unintelligent  particles 
of  matter  could  never  arrange  themselves  into  a  universe  so 
wonderful  as  the  present.  That  which  has  not  life  cannot  give 
life;  that  which  cannot  think  cannot  form  beings  with  reason. 
The  eternal  self-existent  First  Cause  must,  therefore,  be  conscious 
and  intelligent.  The  acts  of  a  mind  prove  the  existence  of  a 
mind ;  and  a  mind  proves  a  person. 

There  is  therefore  a  Self-existent,  Eternal,  Personal  Being, 
whom  wise  men  reverence  and  call  God. 

When  it  is  said  that  God  made  all  things,  it  is  sometimes 
asked,  Who  made  God  ?  This  is  thought  to  be  a  proof  that  there 
is  no  Creator.  The  folly  of  such  an  argument  can  easily  be  shown 
by  taking  a  similar  case.  A  person  says  that  a  watch  must  have 
been  made  by  some  wise  man.  An  objector  asks,  Who  made  the 
man  ?  Therefore  the  watch  had  no  maker  1 

Buddhists  consider  that  beings  are  formed  by  merit  and 
demerit.  This  does  not  explain  the  origin  of  things.  As  already 
explained,  creatures  must  have  existed  and  acted  before  there 
could  be  merit  and  demerit. 


86 


THE    VEDANTA-SABA, 


Row  says,  "  I  have  heard  it  urged  that  we  must  give  an 
account  of  the  origin  of  this  first  cause.  But  if  this  first  cause 
could  be  conceived  of  as  itself  caused,  it  would  cease  to  be  a  first 
cause ;  and  so  we  should  have  to  give  an  account  of  the  origin 
of  this  cause,  and  then  of  its  cause,  until  we  arrived  at  a  first 
cause,  which  is  itself  uncaused." 

2.  The  Argument  from  Design. — Wherever  we  see  order  and 
means  intended  to  accomplish  some  end,  we  are  certain  that  they 
must  have  originated  in  the  action  of  an  intelligent  being. 

If  on  landing  on  an  island,  apparently  desert  and  uninhabited, 
mathematical  figures  were  seen  traced  on  the  sand,  it  would  at 
once  be  inferred  that  some  person  had  been  there :  the  figures 
could  not  have  come  by  chance.  Suppose  that  on  exploring  the 
island  further  we  found  a  palace,  without  a  human  being,  but 


completely  furnished  with  every  necessary  for  the  want  of 
what  would  be  the  conclusion  ?  "  Every  house  is  builded  by 


man  : 
some 


We  know  that  stones,  mortar,  wood,  and  iron,  without  life  or 
reason,  could  not  have  arranged  themselves  into  a  house.  We  are 
certain,  therefore,  that  the  house  must  have  had  an  intelligent 
builder.  In  like  manner,  we  know  that  the  world  must  have  had 
a  wise  and  powerful  Creator. 

Cicero,  a  celebrated  Eoman  writer,  says  :  "  If  a  concourse  of 
atoms  can  make  a  world,  why  not  a  porch,  a  temple,  a  house,  a 
city,  which  are  works  of  less  labour  and  difficulty  ?" 

In  a  fine  building,  each  stone  is  made  of  a  particular  shape  to 
suit  its  future  position.  Chemistry  tells  us,  that  the  whole  universe 
is  composed  of  atoms  so  excessively  small  that  they  cannot  be 
seen.  It  further  shows  that  each  atom  is,  as  it  were,  cast  in  a  fixed 
mould,  so  that  it  will  unite  with  others  only  in  certain  proportions. 
The  very  atoms  therefore,  afford  irresistible  proof  that  they  were 
fashioned  by  the  great  Architect  of  nature. 

If  a  Designing  Mind  is  denied,  we  are  driven  to  the  absurdity 
of  supposing  that  all  the  wonderful  arrangements  in  Nature  are  the 
result  of  chance.  As  well  might  the  origin  of  the  Ramayana  be 
ascribed  to  shaking  a  large  number  of  letters  out  of  a  bag,  which 
grouped  themselves  into  verses,  the  admiration  of  the  world. 

The  word  Nature  is  sometimes  used  to  express  a  power,  but  to 
deny  a  personal  agent.  A  disbeliever  in  the  existence  of  God  was 
once  asked  how  all  things  around  us  were  produced.  He  replied, 
"  By  Nature."  The  question  was  then  put,  "  What  is  Nature  ?*' 
The  answer  was  "  All  around  us."  So  then  "  AIL  around  us 
produced  all  around  usl" 

Evolution  is  also  given  as  an  explanation.  By  this  is  meant 
that  all  plants  and  animals  that  have  ever  lived  on  the  earth  have 


CREATION.  87 

come  from  one  simple  form  into  which  life  was  first  breathed. 
Whether  this  is  true  or  false,  it  does  not  supersede  the  necessity  of 
a  Creator.  It  makes  no  difference  whether  He  acts  in  Nature 
every  moment  or  at  once  contrived  and  executed  His  own  part  in 
the  plan  of  the  world. 

Design  does  not  cease  to  be  design,  because  the  Designer, 
instead  of  directly  framing  plants  and  animals,  made  the  material 
in  such  a  way  and  with  such  skill  as  to  enable  it  in  the  course  of 
ages  to  run  itself,  so  to  speak,  into  myriad  shapes  of  life  and 
beauty. 

Paley  shows  that  if  a  watch  were  so  constructed  that  it  would 
produce  other  watches,  this,  instead  of  proving  that  it  had  no 
maker,  would  only  enhance  the  idea  of  his  skill.  Such  an  arrange- 
ment could  not  have  been  devised  by  unconscious  matter.  In  like 
manner  children  are  not  born  through  the  wisdom  of  their  parents. 

3.  The  wisest  men  in  all  ages  have  acknowledged  the  ex- 
istence of  a  Great  Creator,  possessed  of  infinite  power  and 
wisdom.— Socrates,  wisest  of  the  Greeks,  has  an  interesting  dialogue 
in  support  of  this  truth.  Aristotle,  a  profound  Greek  philosopher, 
says,  "  Although  invisible  to  every  mortal  nature,  God  is  yet 
manifested  by  His  works." 

Sir  Isaac  Newton  has  been  called  the  "  Prince  of  Mathema- 
ticians." His  Latin  treatise.  Principia,  treating  of  the  grand  law 
by  which  the  heavenly  bodies  are  regulated  in  their  movements, 
is  considered  the  greatest  work  of  the  kind  which  has  ever 
appeared.  His  conclusion  is  as  follows : 

"  This  most  beautiful  .system  of  the  sun,  planets,  and  comets,  could 
only  proceed  from  the  counsel  and  dominion  of  an  intelligent  and 
powerful  Being." 

Lord  Kelvin  is  one  of  the  most  distinguished  scientific  men 
of  the  present  day.  It  was  through  him  that  the  electric  telegraph 
cable  was  laid  across  the  Atlantic.  Addressing  some  of  the 
most  learned  men  in  Europe,  he  said  : — 

"  Overpowering  proof  of  intelligence  and  benevolent  design  lies 
around  us  ;  and  if  ever  perplexities,  whether  metaphysical  or  scientific, 
turn  us  away  from  them  for  a  time,  they  come  back  upon  us  with 
irresistible  force,  showing  to  us,  through  Nature,  the  influence  of  a  free- 
will, and  teaching  us  that  all  living  beings  depend  upon  the  ever-acting 
Creator  and  Ruler." 

The  more  we  know  of  God's  works,  the  more  wonderful  they 
appear.  The  telescope  shows  their  infinite  greatness ;  the  micros- 
cope unveils  the  wisdom  with  which  the  smallest  creatures  are 
formed. 

Every  person  who  reflects  seriously  must  scout  the  idea  that 
the  universe  proceeded  from  an  unintelligent  cause,  called  avidyd 
or  mdyd,  and  must  say  with  Milton  : 


88  THE    VBDANTA-SABA. 

"  These  ar6  Thy  glorious  works,  Parent  of  good, 
Almighty  !     Thine  this  universal  frame, 
Thus  wondrous  fair  ;  Thyself  how  wondrous  then  ! 
Unspeakable,  who  sit'st  above  these  heavens, 
To  us  invisible,  or  dimly  seen 
In  these  Thy  lowest  works  ;  yet  these  declare 
Thy  goodness  beyond  thought,  and  power  divine." 

MAN:  BODY  AND  SOUL. 
THE  BODY. 

The  ancient  Hindus  thought  that  a  man  was  rendered  impure 
by  touching  a  dead  body.  Hence  they  did  not  dissect  and  examine 
it  minutely  as  is  done  in  modern  Medical  Colleges.  The  writers  of 
the  Upanishads  simply  framed  an  imaginary  body  out  of  their  own 
heads,  and,  to  impose  upon  the  ignorant,  said  that  it  had  been 
revealed  by  Brahma. 

The  folio  wing  assertion  is  made  intheChhandogya  Upanishad: — 

"  There  are  a  hundred   and  one  arteries  of  the  heart,  one  of  these 

penetrates  the  crown  of  the  head  ;  moving  upwards  by  it  a  man  reaches 

the  immortals  ;  the  others  serve  for  departing  in  different  directions,  yea, 

in  different  directions."     VIIT.  6.  6. 

When  the  soul  proceeds  to  Brahma,  it  ascends  by  the  coronal 
artery,  sushnmnd,  which  springs  from  the  upper  part  of  the  heart 
and  goes  to  the  top  of  the  head.  This  is  called  the  door  of  rejoicing. 
When  the  soul  goes  out  to  some  other  body  it  proceeds  by  the 
other  arteries. 

Hindu  philosophers  agree  that  mind  (manns)  is  distinct  from 
spirit  or  soul.  Mind  is  not  eternal  in  the  same  way. 

It  is  an  internal  organ  of  the  body,  standing  between  the  four 
organs  of  perception  and  the  five  organs  of  action,  connected 
with  both,  receiving  the  impressions  conveyed  by  both,  and  direct- 
ing both  through  the  exercise  of  volition.  To  the  mind  appertains 
the  faculties  of  perception  (buddhi)  volition  (xankalpa,  vikalpa), 
self-consciousness  and  thought ;  and  the  spirit  cannot  possess  these, 
unless  "joined  to  mind  and  invested  with  a  bodily  covering  or  vehicle. 

Monier  Williams  says : 

"  Of  actual  bodily  coverings  there  are  three  according  to  the  Vedanta 
system.  The  caudal  body  ( Kdrana-sarira)  comes  first.  This  is 
identified  with  Ajndna  or  Mdyd  and  is  therefore  no  real  body.  Secondly 
the  subtle  body,  (linga,  or  sukshma-sarira)  which  encloses  a  portion  of  the 
universal  spirit  in  three  sheaths  (kosha),  cognitional,  sensorial  and  aerial, 
constituting  it  a  living  individual  personal  spirit  (jivdtman)  and  carry- 
ing it  through  all  its  corporeal  migrations, — till,  on  its  reunion  with 
its  source,  even  its  subtle  body  becomes  extinct.  Thirdly  the  gross 
body  (sthula-sarira),  which  surrounds  the  subtle  vehicle,  and  is  of 
various  forms  in  the  various  conditions  of  existence  through  animate 
or  inanimate,  organic  or  inorganic  life."1 

lJ3rahmanism  and  Hinduism,  pp.  37,  28. 


THE   SOUL.  89 

THE  SOUL. 

Disparity  between  Hindu  and  European  Ideas  of  the  Soul. — 

Crozier  says : 

"  When  we  Europeans,  speak  of  soul  and  when  the  Hindus  speak  of 
it,  we  mean  two  quite  different  and  indeed  opposite  things.  With  us  eoul 
is  a  principle  of  self-conscious  intelligence  and  will;  with  the  Hindus  it 
is  a  mere  vague  diffused  essence  pervading  Nature,  the  distinctive  quality 
of  which  is  that  it  is  without  thought,  emotion,  will,  self-consciousness, 
or,  indeed,  any  other  quality  whatever  except  that  of  extension  and 
life."' 

According  to  Hindu  philosophy  the  same  soul  may,  in  different 
births,  be  connected  with  a  human  being,  a  beast,  fish,  insect  or 
even  attached  to  a  vegetable  or  mineral,  all  the  time  remaining 
unconscious.  The  European  idea  is  that  the  soul  is  the  great 
animating  and  directing  principle,  the  internal  ruler,  though,  alas, 
it  often  yields  to  the  bodily  appetites. 

Some  Vedantic  dogmas  about  the  soul  will  now  be  examined. 

The  Soul  partakes  of  the  attributes  of  Brahma. — As  already 
explained,  Brahma  is  said  to  be  pure  being,  unconscious  of  its  own 
existence,  happy  simply  in  being  free  from  the  miseries  of  samsdra, 
Its  state  is  described  as  a  dreamless  sleep.  Practically,  it  is  a 
nonentity. 

The  soul  may  be  described  as  a  miniature  Brahma. 

When  we  know  anything,  the  Vedantists  suppose  that  it 
is  not  the  soul  that  knows,  but  the  antah-karana,  the  internal 
ruler.  "  The  latter  is  a  sort  of  inlet  of  thought,  belonging  only  to 
the  body  and  existing  with  it,  and  quite  as  distinct  from  the  spirit 
as  any  of  the  external  organs  of  the  body." 

'  The  antah-karana  is  divided  into  Buddhi,  '  perception'; 
Ahankdra,  '  self-consciousness ';  and  Manas  '  determination  ';  to 
which  the  Vedantists  add  a  fourth  division,  Chitta,  '  the  thinking  or 
reasoning  organ."2 

The  soul  being  unconscious  does  not  cognize  anything.  It  has 
always  been  like  a  stone,  and  will  ever  remain  like  a  stone.  It  is 
the  antah-karana  which  cognizes. 

The  Vedantists  hold  that  if  cognition  belonged  to  the  soul,  will, 
activity,  happiness,  misery,  &c.  would  follow  ;  the  soul  would  be  a 
doer  of  good  and  evil,  an  experiencer  of  three-fold  misery,  whereas 
the  soul  is,  like  Brahma,  eternally  pure  and  free.  Hence  Vedantists 
ascribe  cognition  to  the  antah-karana. 

2.  The  Soul  eternal  and  Svayambhu  (self -existent) .  Cole- 
brooke  says :  "  The  soul  is  likewise  declared  expressly  to  be 

1  History  of  Intellectual  Development,  $"c.  p.  86. 
8  Monier  Williams,  Indian  Wisdom,  pp.  53,  54. 

12 


90  THE   VEDANTA-SARA. 

eternal  and   unborn.     Its    emanation   is   no   birth,   nor   original 
production."     The  Vedanta-Sutra,  [I.  3,  17  is  as  follows  : 

"  The  (living)  self  is  not  (produced)  as  there  is  no  scriptural  state- 
ment, and  as  it  is  eternal  according  to  them  (i.e.,  scriptural  passages.'') 

The  Katha  Upanishad,  II.  18,  quoted  in  the  Bhagavad  Gita, 
II.  19,  20,  says  : 

"The  wise  one  (the  soul)  is  not  born  nor  does  it  die;  it  was  not 
produced  from  any  one,  nor  was  any  produced  from  it;  unborn,  eternal, 
without  decay,  ancient,  it  is  not  slain  when  the  body  is  slain." 

3.  Conflicting  Statements  about  the  Size  of  the  Soul.  — - 
Nehemiah  Goreh  says  : 

"  According  to  the  pandits  dimension  is  of  three  descriptions  ;  atomic, 
intermediate,  and  infinite.  Atomic  dimension  is  the  last  degree  of 
minuteness.  Intermediate  dimension  is  that  of  a  jar,  &c.  However  great 
it  may  be,  it;  has  limits.  Infinite  dimension  the  third  kind  is  unlimited. 
It  is  this  opinion  of  dimension  which,  the  pandits  teach  belongs  to  God, 
to  souls,  to  ether,  to  time  and  to  space  ;  and  whatever  has  this  dimension  is 
all-pervading.  Further,  according  to  them,  things  of  atomic  or  of  infinite 
dimension  are  indestructible,  but  those  of  intermediate  dimension  cannot 
be  indestructible.  A  soul,  then,  to  be  indestructible  must  needs  be,  in 
size,  either  atomic  or  infinite.  If  atomic  its  qualities  cannot  be  cognized  ; 
hence  the  pandits  are  compelled,  on  their  principles  to  regard  the  soul 
as  of  infinite  dimension."1 

In  the  Upanishads  the  soul  is  generally  said  to  be  of  the  size  of 
a  thumb,  and  to  dwell  in  the  heart.  Thus  the  Katha  Upanishad 
says  : 

"  The  soul,  which,  in  the  measure  of  a  thumb,  dwells  in  the  middle 
of  the  body  (in  the  ether  of  the  heart)."  (IV.  12.) 

It  is  elsewhere  said  to  be  both  infinitely  small  and  infinitely 
great.  The  Svetasvatara  Upanishad  says  : 

"  The  embodied  soul  is  to  be  thought  like  the  hundredth  part  of  the 
point  of  a  hair,  divided  into  a  hundred  parts ;  he  is  considered  to  be 
infinite."  (V.  9.) 

The  Chhandogya  Upanishad  says  : 

"  Is  the  soul  within  me;  it  is  lighter  than  a  corn,  or  a  barley,  or  a 
mustard,  or  a  canary  seed,  or  the  substance  within  it.  Such  a  soul  is 
within  me,  as  is  greater  than  this  earth,  and  greater  than  the  sky,  and 
greater  than  the  heaven,  and  greater  than  all  these  regions  [put 
together]."  III.  H,  3. 

The  Grit£  agrees  with  the  Vais'eshika  school.  Krishna  says 
that  the  soul  is  "  all-pervading."  (II.  24.) 

Nehemiah  G-oreh  well  remarks,  "  Those  who  can  believe  that 
the  soul  of  a  musquito  fills  heaven  and  earth  ....  can  believe  any- 
thing!" 

1  Rational  Refutation,  pp.  87,  88. 


THE   SOUL.  91 

4.  Is  the  Soul  a  part  of  Brahma  or  wholly  Brahma  Itself?— 
Several   texts  seem  to  intimate  that  the  soul  is  only  a  part  of 
Brahma.     The  Mundaka  Upanishad,  II.  1,  says  : 

"  This  is  the  truth  :  As  its  kindred  sparks  fly  out  in  thousands 
from  a  blazing  fire,  so  the  various  living  souls  proceed  out  of  that 
imperishable  principle,  and  return  into  it  again." 

The  Vedanta-Sutra,  II.  3,  43  says  : 

"  (The  soul  is)  a  part  of  the  Lord,  on  account  of  the  declarations  of 
difference,  aud  (because)  in  a  different  way  also  some  record  that 
(Brahman)  is  of  the  nature  of  slaves,  fishers,  and  so  on." 

On  the  other  hand  Deussen  maintains  that  "  the  soul  of  each 
one  of  us  is  not  a  part,  an  emanation  of  Brahma,  but  fully  and 
wholly  the  eternal,  indivisible  Brahman  itself."  His  reasoning  is 
as  follows  : 

"  (1)  The  soul  cannot  be  different  from  Brahman,  because  besides 
Brahman  there  is  no  being  ;  (2)  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  transforma- 
tion of  Brahman  because  Brahman  is  unchangeable;  (3)  and  still  less  is 
it  a  part  of  Brahman  because  Brahman  has  no  parts.  Nothing  remains 
then  but  to  conclude  that  the  soul  is  identical  with  Brahman,  that  each 
one  of  us  is  the  all-unchangeable  Brahman,  without  parts  and  compre- 
hending in  itself  all  being."  l 

If  this  is  correct,  the  number  of  Brahmas  must  be  far  beyond 
computation  !  Deussen  has  not  the  common  sense  to  see  the  folly 
into  which  he  is  led  by  his  own  ratiocinations. 

Sankara,  in  his  commentary  on  the  Sutra  quoted  above,  says : 

"  By  '  part'  we  mean  '  a  part  as  it  were,3  since  a  being  not  composed 
of  parts  cannot  have  parts  in  the  literal  sense."  * 

Souls,  strictly  speaking,  have  no  real  existence.  They  are 
only  like  the  reflection  of  suns  seen  in  pots  of  water. 

5.  The  State  of  the  Soul. — The  condition  of  the  soul  during 
the  waking  state,  dreaming,  deep  sleep^in  a  swoon  and  at  death  is 
considered  at  considerable  length  by  Sankara  in  his  commentaries 
on  the  Vedanta-Sutras.      Deussen  gives  the  following  summary  of 
Vedantic  teaching  on  the  subject : 

"  There  are  four  states  of  the  soul — the  waking,  the  dream,  the  deep 
sleep,  and  death  states.  In  the  waking  state  the  soul  dwelling  in  the 
heart,  and  in  union  with  the  manas,  consciously  rules  over  the  body  by  the 
help  of  the  manas  and  indriyas  (sense-organs).  In  the  dream  state  the 
indriyas  repose,  whilst  the  manas  remains  active  ;  and  the  soul,  encom- 
passed by  the  manas  and  the  indriyas  which  have  retreated  therein,  travels 
through  the  veins  of  the  body  and  then  experiences  dreams  fashioned  from 
the  impressions  (vdsana)  of  the  waking  state.  In  the  state  of  deep  sleep 
the  union  of  the  soul  with  the  manas  is  dissolved  ;  the  manas  and  the  in- 
driyas now  repose,  retreating  into  the  veins  or  pericardium  and  thence  into 

1  Short  Account,  &c.  p.  14.          3  Thibant,  Vol.  II.  61* 


92  THE   VEDANTA-SAEA. 

the  mukhyaprdna  (vital  air).  The  activity  of  the  latter,  however,  continues, 
whilst  the  soul  freed  from  its  upddhis  (limiting  adjuncts)  enters  into 
Brahman  in  the  ether  of  the  heart.  As  the  soul  without  the  upddhis  is 
Brahman  itself,  this  entry  into  Brahman  is  only  another  way  of  express- 
ing the  complete  freedom  of  the  soul  from  the  upddhis.  From  this 
passing  absorption  into  Brahman  the  soul,  on  waking,  again  returns  with 
all  its  individual  characteristics  to  its  previous  state."1 

The  Brahma- Sutras  say,  "In  him  who  is  senseless  (in  a  swoon, 
&c.)  there  is  half  union."  III.  2.  9. 

6.     Condition  of  Souls  at  a  Mahapralaya. — Thibaut  says  : 

"  At  the  end  of  each  of  the  great  world  periods  called  Kalpas  the 
Lord  (iVvara)  retracts  the  whole  world,  i.e.,  the  whole  material  world  is 
dissolved  and  merged  into  non-distinct  Mdyd,  while  the  individual  souls, 
free  for  the  time  from  actual  connection  with  upddliis,  lie  in  deep  slumber 
as  it  were.  But  as  the  consequences  of  their  former  deeds  are  not  yet 
exhausted,  they  have  again  to  enter  on  embodied  existence  as  soon  as  the 
Lord  sends  forth  a  new  material  world,  and  the  old  round  of  birth,  action, 
death,  begins  anew  to  last  to  all  eternity  as  it  lasted  from  all  eternity."8 

All  this  is  mere  imagination,  entirely  destitute  of  proof.  The 
Vishnu  Purana  and  other  works  which  describe  it  contain  false 
geography,  false  astronomy,  &c.  Their  description  of  a  Mahapralaya 
is  equally  untrustworthy. 

REMAKES  ON  THE  PEECEDING  STATEMENTS. 

Ignorant  Presumption  of  Hindu  Philosophers. — Nehemiah 
Goreh  has  the  following  just  remarks  on  this  point : 

"  The  truth  is,  that  the  nature  of  the  soul  transcends  our  knowledge, 
and  does  not  lend  itself  to  description.  All  that  we  know  of  the  soul  is, 
that  it  is  something  which  possesses  apprehension,  will,  and  other 
qualities.  More  than  this  we  cannot  affirm  concerning  it ;  as,  for  instance, 
that,  like  earth,  water,  and  other  mate  rial  substances,  it  has  dimension 
and  suchlike  qualities.  Much,  therefore,  that  is  predicable  of  a  jar,  of 
cloth,  and  of  other  material  substances,  is  not  to  be  predicated  of  the 
eoul.  Such,  however*  is  the  dispositions  of  the  pandits,  that  they  refuse 
to  consider  what  things  are  within  the«leach  of  our  understanding,  and 
what  things  lie  beyond.  They  would  fain  take  the  visible  and  the 
invisible,  God  and  souls  included,  and  measure  them,  and  turn  them 
round  and  over,  and  pry  into  them,  and  at  last  get  their  complete 
quiddities  inside  their  fist.  To  their  minds,  if  one  is  to  know  anything 
one  should  know  everything  :  otherwise,  it  is  better  to  know  nothing. 
And  so  they  wander  on  in  the  wilderness  of  vain  inquiry.  I  would  remind 
them,  that,  be  the  essence  of  the  soul  of  what  sort  soever,  its  origin, 
duration,  and  end  are  in  subordination  to  the  will  of  God  ;  and,  therefore 
it  God  thinks  good  that  the  soul  shall  exist  for  ever,  it  can  in  no  wise 
incur  destruction."3 

1 A  Short  Account,  Sfc.  p.  18.  2  Vedd nta-Sutras,  vol.  I.  pp.  xxvi.  xxvii, 

3  Rational  Refutation,  Sfe.  p.  90. 


THE    SOUL.  93 

This  failing  was  not  peculiar  to  them.  Macaulay  says  of 
the  philosophers  of  ancient  Europe  that  "  they  despised  what  was 
practicable,  and  attempted  to  solve  insoluble  enigmas."1 

Vedan tic  descriptions  of  theHumaii  Body,  &c.,  grossly  Incorrect. 
— The  Katha  Upanishad  contains  the  following  : 

•'  16.  .There  are  hundred  and  one  arteries  of  the  heart  ;  the  one  of 
them  (SushumnaJ  proceeds  to  the  head.  By  this  (at  the  time  of  death) 
rising  upwards  (by  the  door  of  Aditya)  a  person  gains  immortality  ;  or 
the  other  (arteries)  are  of  various  course."  VI.  Valli. 

The  Prasna  Upanishad  gives  the  following  additional  details  : 

"  For  the  (ether  of  the)  heart  is  verily  that  soul.  There  (arise)  the 
hundred  and  one  (principal)  arteries  ;  each  of  them  is  a  hundred  times 
divided  ;  72,000  are  the  branches  of  every  branch  artery  ;  within  them 
moves  the  circulating  air.''  III.  6. 

The  whole  number  of  arteries  is  therefore  727,200,000 ! 

The  slightest  examination  of  the  heart  shows  that  all  this  is 
purely  imaginary.  There  are  just  two  branches  of  a  large  artery 
from  the  heart,  containing  impure  blood,  leading  to  the  lungs,  and 
one  great  artery,  which,  afterwards,  subdivided,  conveys  pure 
blood,  to  the  whole  body.  In  like  manner,  there  are  two  great 
veins  carrying  impure  blood  to  the  heart  from  the  whole  body,  and 
four  veins,  containing  pure  blood,  leading  from  the  lungs  to  the 
heart. 

The  Prasna  Upanishad  says  that "  within  the  arteries  moves 
the  circulating  air."  Arteries  mean  air-pipes.  They  were  thought 
to  contain  only  air,  because  after  death  they  are  empty.  When  a 
person  is  alive,  blood  flows  through  them.  This  is  proved  by  the 
fact  that  if  one  of  them  is  cut,  blood  gushes  out.  When  a  person 
dies,  the  heart  loses  its  power  to  send  out  blood,  and  the  arteries 
are  found  empty. 

The  "  three  sheaths/'  "  the  five  vital  airs,"  &c.  are  similar 
fictions. 

The  Veddnta-8dra  makes  the  following  statement : 

"  Prom  these  gross  elements  (having  the  qualities  of  the  five)  arise 
the  worlds  that  are  one  above  the  other,  viz.,  Bhur,  Bhuvar,  Svar,  Mahar, 
Janas,  Tapas,  and  Satya  ;  and  those  that  are  beneath  the  other;  called  ; 
Atala,  Vitala,  Sutala,  Rasatala,  Taldtala,  Mahdtala,  Patdla;  also  Brahma's 
egg  (this  vaulted  world) with  the  four  kinds  of  gross  bodies  contained 
in  it,  and  their  food  and  drink."  (See  page  35.) 

As  already  mentioned,  the  Earth  is  only  about  8,000  miles  in 
diameter,  and  floats  in  the  air,  like  the  moon,  moving  round  the 
sun.  The  seven  worlds  above  the  earth  and  the  seven  below  it  are 
all  imaginary. 

Vedantic  Speculation  about  the  Soul  as  incorrect  as  those 
about  the  Body. — If  a  traveller  gives  an  account  of  our  own  country 

1  Essay  en  Bacon. 


94  THE    VEDANTA-SABA. 

which  we  know  to  be  false,  we  cannot  trust  his  descriptions  of 
foreign  lands.  When  Vedantists  make  such  mistakes  about  the 
body,  which  could  easily  have  been  corrected  by  observation,  there 
is  still  greater  reason  to  reject  their  speculations  about  the  soul. 

Ideas  about  the  soul  are  chiefly  based  on  the  conception  of 
Brahma,  described  as  existing  in  a  state  of  dreamless  repose,  un- 
conscious even  of  its  own  existence.  As  each  individual  soul  is 
asserted  to  be  "  fully  and  wholly  the  eternal  indivisable  Brahma 
itself,"  it  must  be  of  the  same  character.  The  soul  is  said  to  be 
like  Brahma  eternally  pure ;  it  neither  acts  nor  enjoys.  Practically, 
like  Brahma,  it  is  a  non-entity. 

As  Brahma,  according  to  Vedantism,  could  do  nothing,  the 
fiction  of  Maya  had  to  be  invented  to  account  for  the  appearance  of 
the  universe.  As  the  soul  was  similarly  helpless  the  figment  of 
an  antah-karana  had  to  be  devised.  It  is  the  antah-karana  which 
actually  cognizes,  acts,  enjoys,  suffers.  The  soul,  amid  all  its 
transmigrations,  must  for  ever  remain  unconscious  like  Brahma. 

As  already  mentioned,  the  Vedantic  soul  is  a  non-entity,  while 
the  antah-karana  is  invested  with  its  functions.  The  truth  is  that 
the  Vedantic  soul  has  no  existence,  while  the  real  soul  is  the 
internal  ruler.  It  is  the  soul  which  cognizes,  acts,  does  right  or 
wrong,  enjoys  or  suffers  either  directly  or  through  the  body. 
The  soul  should  be  the  ruler  ;  the  body  tne  servant. 

Instead  of  dogmatizing  like  Vedantists  about  the  size  of  the  soul, 
&c.,  the  wisest  men  confess  their  ignorance.  They  believe  that 
they  have  souls  capable  of  knowing  about  God,  able  to  distinguish 
between  right  and  wrong,  rendering  them  responsible  beings  ;  but 
there  are  insoluble  problems  connected  with  them. 

Vedantic  Arguments  for  the  Eternity  of  Souls. — One  argument 
for  the  eternity  of  the  soul  is  the  supposed  axiom  :  "  Whatever 
exists  must  always  have  existed."  As  already  shown,  this  denies 
God's  omnipotence.  By  His  will  He  can  create  things  or  call  them 
out  of  nothing  into  existence. 

Another  argument  is  that  "  Whatever  had  a  beginning  must 
have  an  end."  This  is  also  a  denial  of  God's  power.  He  can  give 
a  future  eternal  existence  to  any  creature  He  has  called  into  being. 
According  to  Hinduism,  souls  may  pass  into  gods,  demons,  beasts, 
birds,  reptiles,  fishes,  insects,  into  plants,  and  even  into  inanimate 
objects.  "  Who  can  estimate  the  number  of  these  eternal  sva- 
yambhu  essences !  Is  it  not  perfectly  unphilosophical,  because 
absolutely  unnecessary  and  egregiously  extravagant,  to  assume 
such  an  indefinite  number  of  eternal  essences,  when  one  Supreme 
Essence  is  sufficient  to  account  for  all  things,  visible  or  invisible, 
material  or  spiritual  ?'n 

Vedantism  denies  the  Fatherhood  of  God.— If    our    souls    are 

1  Dr.  K.  M.  Banerjea,  Dialogues^  p.  164. 


THE    SOUL.  95 

eternal  and  self-existent,  we  are  a  sort  o£  miniature  gods.  Our 
relation  to  God  is  changed.  It  is  only  that  of  king  and  subjects. 
His  right  over  us  is  only  that  of  might.  It  is  only  because  He  is 
mightier  than  we  and  because  He  possesses  power  to  benefit  and  to 
harm  us  that  we  should  be  anxious  to  pay  homage  to  Him.  There 
is  not  the  love  which  a  child  should  cherish  towards  a  father. 
True  religion  is  thus  destroyed. 

It  is  a  pleasing  sign  of  progress  that  the  Fatherhood  of  God  is 
beginning  to  be  admitted  by  educated  Hindus.  Some  even  claim 
that  this  doctrine  is  taught  in  their  own  sacred  books.  In  the 
Sastras,  Father  may  be  one  of  the  many  names  given  to  God  ;  but 
not  as  the  source  of  our  existence.  What  particularly  distinguishes 
an  earthly  father  is,  that  under  God,  he  is.  the  author  of  the  child's 
existence.  This  can  be  said  of  no  other  person.  In  that  sense 
neither  Brahma  nor  any  Hindu  deity  can  be  called  father.  Accord- 
ing to  Vedantism  and  all  other  systems  of  Hindu  philosophy,  souls 
are  as  eternal  as  Brahma  himself.  The  Bible,  on  the  other  hand, 
says,  that  God  is  our  Father  by  creation.  "  Have  we  not  all  one 
Father  ?  Hath  not  one  God  created  us  ?"  Christianity  teaches  us 
to  address  God  as  our  ' '  Father  in  heaven."  It  is  true  that  we 
have  been  disobedient,  rebellious  children,  but  we  are  earnestly 
invited  to  return,  asking  forgiveness. 

The  ancestors  of  Europeans  and  Aryan  Hindus  once  worship- 
ped the  same  God  under  the  same  name,  Dyaush-Pitar,  Heaven- 
Father.  Max  Miiller  beautifully  says  : 

"Thousands  of  years  have  passed  away  since  the  Aryan  nations 
separated  to  travel  to  the  North  and  the  Sonth,  the  West  and  the  East  : 
they  have  each  formed  their  languages,  they  have  each  founded  empires 
and  philosophies,  they  have  each  bnilt  temples  and  razed  them  to  the 
ground;  they  have  all  grown  older,  and  it  may  be  wiser  and  better;  but 
when  they  search  for  a  name  for  that  which  is  most  exalted  and  yet 
most  dear  to  every  one  of  us,  when  they  wish  to  express  both  awe  and 
love,  the  infinite  and  the  finite,  they  can  but  do  what  their  old  fathers 
did  when  gazing  up  to  the  eternal  sky,  and  feeling  the  presence  of  a  Being 
as  far  as  far  and  as  near  as  near  can  be  ;  they  can  but  combine  the  self- 
same words  and  utter  once  more  the  primeval  Aryan  prayer,  Heaven- 
Father,  in  that  form  which  will  endure  for  ever,  '  Our  Father,  which  art 
in  heaven.'"1 

Vedantism  denies  the  Brotherhood  of  Man. — This  is  strongly 
denied  by  the  system  of  caste,  but  it  is  so  likewise  by  the  Ved&nta. 
Brothers  are  children  of  the  same  father.  As  already  shown, 
according  to  the  Yedanta,  we  have  no  father,  and  therefore  we  are 
not  brothers. 

Deussen,  with  a  want  of  common  sense  worthy  of  a  Hindu 
philosopher,  tries  to  improve  upon  the  second  commandment  of 
Christianity,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  We 

1  Science  of  Religion,  pp.  172,  173. 


96  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

are  brothers  of  the  same  great  Father,  and  should  therefore  "  love 
as  brethren." 

Deussen,  in  his  Elements  of  Metaphysics,  thus  explains  our  duty 
to  others  : 

"  You  shall  love  your  neighbour  as  yourselves — because  you  are 
your  neighbour,  and  mere  illusion  makes  you  believe  that  your  neighbour 
is  something  different  from  yourselves.  Or  in  the  words  of  the  Bhagavad 
Gita  :  he,  who  knows  himself  in  everything  and  everything  in  himself, 
will  not  injure  himself  by  himself,  na  hinasti  dtmand  dtmdnam.  This  is 
the  sum  and  tenor  of  all  morality,  and  this  is  the  standpoint  of  a  man 
knowing  himself  as  Brahman.  He  feels  himself  as  everything, — so  he  will 
not  desire  anything,  for  he  has  whatever  can  be  had  ;  he  feels  himself  as 
everything, — so  he  will  not  injure  anything,  for  nobody  injures  himself." 
p.  336. 

Test  this  practically.  A  starving  beggar  asks  charity.  The 
Professor  says,  "  Why  do  you  ask  alms  of  me  ?  You  and  I  are  the 
same  ;  it  is  mere  illusion  makes  you  believe  yourself  to  be  different. 
You  will  not  desire  anything,  for  you  have  already  whatever  can 
be  had."  Would  the  beggar  be  satisfied  with  such  reasoning  ?] 

The  Christian  doctrine  is  briefly  as  follows  : — 

(rod  alone  is  self-existent,  without  beginning  or  end.  He  is 
omnipotent,  able  to  call  beings  or  things  into  existence  out  of 
nothing.  He  gave  us  a  body  and  a  soul.  The  soul  never  existed 
before  our  present  birth.  The  body  is  mortal ;  the  soul  returns  to 
God  who  gave  it.  At  the  great  day  of  judgment,  all  must  appear 
before  God,  to  answer  for  the  deeds  done  in  the  body,  whether 
good  or  evil. 

As  already  mentioned,  it  is  unphilosophic  to  maintain  that 
there  are  innumerable  self-existent  beings,  when  One  possessed  of 
almighty  power  is  sufficient.  The  explanation  given  by  Christianity 
is  beautifully  simple,  and  meets  all  the  requirements  of  the  case. 


TRANSMIGRATION. 

From  the  dawn  of  philosophy,  how  to  account  for  the  suffering 
in  the  world  has  been  a  great  problem.  Mansel  says : 

"  Against  this  immovable  barrier  of  the  existence  of  evil,  the  waves  of 
philosophy  have  dashed  themselves  unceasingly  since  the  birthday  of 
human  thought,  and  have  retired  broken  and  powerless,  without  displacing 
the  minutest  fragment  of  the  stubborn  rock,  without  softening  one  feature 
of  its  dark  and  rugged  surface."2 

Atheism  is  an  attempt  to  solve  the  problem.  There  is  so  much 
evil,  because  there  is  no  Creator  or  overruling  Providence.  The 
great  majority  of  mankind  have  rejected  this  theory.  How  could 

1  See  Pice  Papers  on  The  Fatherhood  of  God  and  The  Brotherhood  of  Man, 
8  Limits  of  Religious  Thought. 


TBANSMIGRATION.  97 

a  universe  so  wonderfully  constructed  have  come  into  existence 
without  an  intelligent  Creator  ? 

Transmigration  is  the  second  attempt  to  account  for  the  state 
of  the  world.  It  is  supposed  to  be  necessary  to  explain  the  unequal 
distribution  of  happiness  and  misery  which  exists.  If  an  infant 
agonize,  it  is  supposed  to  arise  from  a  great,  sin  committed  in  a 
former  birth.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a  wicked  man  prospers,  it  is 
thought  to  be  plainly  the  reward  of  meritorious  actions  in  a 
previous  state  of  existence. 

The  universe  is,  in  Sanskrit,  sometimes  called  samsdra,  denoting 
motion.  It  is  supposed  to  consist  of  innumerable  souls  and  innum- 
erable bodies.  The  bodies  are  of  all  kinds,  mineral,  vegetable, 
animal,  human,  divine,  demoniac.  Souls  are  supposed  to  be 
constantly  leaving  their  bodies,  and  seeking  other  bodies  some 
rising,  some  falling,  others  stationary  according  to  their  Karma. 
Only  in  this  way,  it  is  imagined,  can  God  be  saved  from  the 
charge  of  injustice. 

Origin  of  the  Doctrine. — Transmigration  is  not  found  in  the 
four  Vedas.  In  them,  as  already  mentioned,  a  cheerful  view  is  taken 
of  life,  and  after  death  a  happy  reunion  with  relations  is  expected 
in  the  world  of  the  Pitris.  The  belief  arose  with  Hindu  pessimism 
in  the  time  of  the  Upanishads,  and  was  intensified  by  Buddha. 
A  few  quotations  may  first  be  given  on  the  subject.  The 
Katha  Upanishad  says  : — 

"  7.  Some  enter  the  womb  (again  after  death)  for  assuming  a 
body  ;  others  go  inside  a  trunk,  according  to  their  works,  according  to 
their  knowledge."  V.  Valli. 

The  Chhandogy a  Upanishad  sayg  :  — 

"  7.  Thereof  he,  whose  conduct  is  good,  quickly  attains  to  some 
good  existence,  such  as  that  of  a  Brahmana,  a  Kshatriya  or  a  Vaisya. 
Next,  he  who  is  viciously  disposed,  soon  assumes  the  form  of  sorce 
inferior  creature  ;  such  as  that  of  a  dog,  a  hog,  or  a  Chandala."  V.  10, 

In  the  Bhagavad  Gft&  Krishna  says  to  Arjuna : — 

"  As  a  man,  having  cast  off  his  old  garments  taketh  others  that  are 
new,  so  the  embodied  (soul)  casting  off  old  bodies,  entereth  others  that 
are  new." 

The  doctrine  pervades  the  whole  of  the  later  sacred  books  of 
the  Hindus,  and  is  universally  received.  "  It  is,"  says  Dr.  Hooper, 
"  as  if  every  Hindu  imbibed  it  from  his  mother.  With  the  excep- 
tion of  the  few  whose  thoughts  have  been  changed  by  Western 
education,  no  Hindu  seems  able  to  conceive  a  condition  of  the 
universe,  which  does  not  involve  the  truth  of  this  doctrine."1 


1  Transmigration,  p.  2. 

13 


98  THE    VEDANTA-SAEA. 

Object  to  prove  that  Justice  rales  the  world- — Dr.  Hooper 
says: 

"  There  can  be  no  doubt,  that  this  was  the  original  cause  of  the 
invention  of  the  theory  ;  as  ib  is  still  the  reason  commonly  given  for 
maintaining  it.  Men's  instinct  of  justice  is  so  strong  and  so  uncontrol- 
lable, that  they  cannot  be  content  with  the  present  state  of  things,  in 
which  the  good  suffer  and  the  wicked  enjoy  themselves  or  believe  that  it 
can  possibly  be  permanent.  And  so  this  system  was  framed  ;  a  system  in 
which  the  sway  of  justice  is  absolute  and  flawless.  According  to  it, 
every  action  must  inevitably,  sooner  or  later,  receive  its  exactly  due 
reward,  in  pleasure  or  pain.  There  is  no  possibility  of  deviation  even 
by  a  hair's  breadth  from  strict  and  infallable  justice.  The  retribution 
may  be  long  delayed  ;  but  come  it  must  with  absolute  certainty  and  with 
undeviating  precision."1 

The  doctrine  also,  as  the  Rev.  T.  E.  Slater  remarks,  bear 
witness  to  the  following  truths  : 

(a).  To  the  immoitality  of  the  soul ;  to  the  continued  existence 
of  the  soul  in  a  future  life. 

(6).  Another  important  truth  witnessed  to  is  the  sense  of  sin,  and 
that  sin  is  inevitably  followed  by  suffering  ;  that  demerit  must  receive  its 
penalty. 

(c).  Further,  the  soul  receives  the  dne  reward  of  its  deeds  in  a  body, 
hereby  resembling  Christian  belief,  sharply  contrasted  with  the  idea 
of  the  ghostly  spectres  of  Greek  philosophy.9 

While  the  object  is  good  and  some  great  truths  are  acknowledg- 
ed, it  will  be  shown,  on  careful  examination,  that  the  doctrine  is 
as  untenable  as  atheism.  It  makes  baseless  assumptions,  and 
results  in  robbing  God  of  His  most  glorious  attribute  of  mercy. 

OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  DOCTBINE. 

1.  It  is  contrary  to  our  Experience. — By  transmigration  is 
meant  that  the  same  soul  in  the  course  of  time  takes  up  its  residence 
in  different  bodies.  Only  the  body  is  changed,  the  soul  in  the  same 
soul.  The  soul  therefore,  being  the  same,  possesses  the  same 
faculties  in  its  present  and  in  its  former  births.  A  traveller  who 
journeys  through  the  earth  from  city  to  city  carries  with  him  the 
remembrance  of  his  native  place,  the  persons  that  he  met,  and 
other  events  that  occurred.  The  soul  ought  to  carry  with  it  a 
complete  remembrance  of  its  past  history ;  but  no  man  has  experi- 
enced anything  of  the  kind.  Any  claims  to  its  possession  are  just 
as  false  as  those  with  regard  to  magical  powers. 

Dr.  Scudder  thus  answers  an  objection:-— 

"Tt  will  not  do  to  say  that  yon  have  forgotten  those  thines  just  as 
you  have  forgotten  things  which  occurred  in  your  infancy.  It  is  quite 
true  that  you  cannot  remember  matters  which  took  place  during  your 

1  Transmigration,  pp.  4,  5.         *  Christian  College  Magattine,  Vol.  xv.  p.  262. 


TRANSMIGRATION.  99 

infancy  in  this  present  birth.  It  would  not  be  strange,  therefore,  that 
you  should  fail  to  recall  what  happened  during  your  infancy  in  a  former 
birth.  But  if  you  really  existed  in  a  former  birth,  you  surely  weie  not 
infants  throughout  its  entire  duration.  Did  you  not  then  grow  into 
youth  ?  Did  you  not  attain  to  manhood  ?  Did  you  not  many  ?  Did 
you  not  work  hard  for  a  living?  Did  you  not  toil  for  the  puppoi  t  of 
jour  children  ?  Did  you  not  feel  hunger  and  thir.»t,  disease  and  pain  ? 
Did  you  not  experience  joys  and  sorrows  inuuuitrable  ?  Can  it  be 
possible  that  you  have  entirely  lor^otten  all  this  ?  Purely  the  thoughts 
and  words  and  deeds  of  a  previous  existence  could  not  all  have  thus 
passed  into  entire  forgetfuluess !  Know  clearly  that  you  never  existed 
before  the  present  birth."1 

It  is  objected  that  we  cannot  recall  the  events  of  our  former 

births,  because  we  are  under  the  power  of  mdyd,  or  illusion.     How 

is  it  that  mdyd  extends  only  to  alleged  former  births  and  not  to  the 

present  ?     The  fact  is  that  one  false  theory  is  attempted  to  bo 

supported   by  another.     We  cannot    recollect  events    in   alleged 

former  births,  because  they  had  no  existence.     We  remember  the 

present  life,  mdyd,  notwithstanding,  because  we  have  really  existed. 

2.     It  fails  to  explain,  the  Origin  of  things. — Deussen  says  : 

"  No  life  can  be  the  first,  for  it  is  the  fruit  of   previous  actions,   nor 

the  last,  for  its  actions  must  be  expiated  in  a  next  following  life."8 

The  advocates  of  the  doctrine  have  been  forced  to  deny  that 
the  universe  ever  had  a  beginning.  Inequalities  in  life  are  said 
to  be  the  results  of  peculiar  habits  and  works  in  a  previous  state  of 
existence.  This  only  removes  the  difficulty  one  single  step,  for  the 
question  will  recur,  Whence  those  peculiar  habits  and  works  ? — and, 
whence  the  inequalities  in  that  life  ?  Thus  Hindus  were  compelled 
to  fly  from  stage  to  stage,  until  they  were  forced  to  declare  that 
the  world  was  never  created — that  it  is  without  beginning,  that  it 
is  eternal.  And  that  which  is  eternal  is,  in  their  conception,  not 
dependent  on  a  cause.  How  can  such  men  consistently  find  fault 
with  the  Charvakas,  who  deny  the  necessity  of  an  intelligent  First 
Cause,  when  they  themselves  pronounce  the  world  to  be  without  a 
beginning  ?  The  theory  involves  difficulties  far  greater  than  those 
it  is  intended  to  remove. 

Before  there  could  be  merit  or  demerit,  beings  must  have 
existed  and  acted.  The  first  in  order  could  no  more  have  been 
produced  by  Karma  than  a  hen  could  be  born  from  her  own  egg. 
Sankaracharya  ridicules  the  idea  of  an  eternal  succession  of  works 
and  creations  as  a  troop  of  blind  leaders  of  the  blind.  However 
far  back  we  go,  the  same  impossibility  remains. 

3.  Itis Unjust. — The  object  of  transmigration  is  to  purify  the 
soul  by  lessons  of  warning  from  past  history.  rihisis  lost  when  a 
person  knows  not  what  he  did  and  why  he  is  punished.  Suppose 
a  magistrate  said  to  a  peon,  "  Give  that  man  fifty  lashes/'  would* 

1  Batar  Addresses.  *  Elements  of  Metaphysics,  p.  829. 


100  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

the  man  not  ask,  "  Why  am  I  flogged  ?"  What  would  be  thought 
of  such  a  magistrate  ?  What  is  the  use  of  shutting  up  a  soul  in 
the  body  of  a  pig,  which  has  no  sense  of  degradation,  which  cannot 
possibly  know  either  that  it  has  ever  committed  a  fault  or  that  it 
is  suffering  the  penalty  due  to  that  fault  ?  It  is  said  that  if  a 
man  has  stolen  paddy  he  will  be  born  a  rat,  whose  chief  occupation 
is  to  steal  paddy.  A  man  must,  by  way  of  atoning  for  one  act  of 
theft,  become  a  thief  all  his  life!1 

Should  a  son  be  hanged  because  his  father  committed  murder  ? 
According  to  transmigration,  people  suffer,  not  on  account  of  their 
own  deeds  ;  but,  as  it  were,  for  those  of  their  ancestors  of  which 
they  know  nothing. 

For  if  a  man  is  so  changed  at  each  birth  as  to  forget  all  his 
previous  history,  he  becomes  virtually  a  new  being.  What  he 
suffers  now  he  suffers  on  account  of  sins  committed  by  another ; 
and  these  sufferings  he  has  no  choice  but  to  endure.  Even  the 
very  sins  a  man  now  commits  are  punishments  of  previous  sins, 
and  he  cannot  but  commit  them.  Their  punishment,  again,  he 
cannot  bear  in  this  life  if  he  would ;  they  must  be  borne  by  him 
in  another  birth,  when  the  loss  of  all  consciousness  of  the  present  has 
made  him,  in  fact,  another  person.  His  present  happiness  is  the 
reward  of  a  previous  person's  good  deeds,  his  present  good  deeds 
will  be  rewarded  to  some  future  person.  In  all  this  there  is  an 
absence  of  justice.2 

4.  It  denies  Divine  Mercy. — The  Rev.  Dr.  Hooper  has  the 
following  remarks  on  this  point : — 

"  The  system  of  Transmigration  leaves  absolutely  no  room  for  divine 
mercy.  Four  of  the  six  philosophical  systems  do,  indeed,  acknowledge 
an  '  I'swara ' ;  but  what  for  ?  Mis  one  work  is  to  arrange  that  each  soul 
shall  enjoy  or  suffer  precisely  the  fruit  of  his  doings,  shall  enter  the  body 
which  exactly  suits  his  deserts.  In  other  words,  I'swara's  one  work  is  to 
carry  out  strict,  unswerving  justice-  He  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  icith 
mercy.  There  is  no  possible  room  for  ifc  in  the  system.  The  very  slightest 
exercise  of  mercy  would  be,  so  far,  a  derogation  from  the  completeness 
of  the  system  of  Transmigration,  a  blot  on  its  fair  name.  What  then  ? 
Do  not  Hindus  believe  in  divine  mercy  ?  Indeed  they  do  ;  and  that  in 
two  ways,  but  both  are  entirely  irrespective  of,  indeed  they  ignore,  Trans- 
migration. The  statement,  "  I's'wara  dayalu  hai  "  (God  is  merciful)  is 
one  which  very  few  Hindus  indeed  would  not  subscribe  to.  So  far  have 
foreign  influences  permeated  the  modern  Hindu  mind,  that  very  few 
indeed  perceive,  what  however  is  obvious  to  any  one  who  thinks,  that 
the  above  statement  is  a  flat  contradiction,  so  far  as  it  extends,  of  the 
Doctrine  of  Transmigration." 

Hindus  accept  the  most  contradictory  doctrines.  Sankard- 
chdrya  says  that  even  I'svara  cannot  alter  Karma  any  more  than 
he  can  produce  rice  out  of  wheat  seed.  Yet  it  is  believed  that  all 

1  From  Dr.  Scudder. 

8  Abridged  from  Robson's  Hinduism  and  Christianity.  2nd  Ed.  pp,  191, 192. 


TKANSMIGEATION.  101 

sins  may  be  washed   away  by  bathing  in   the  Ganges  or  other 
supposed  sacred  waters. 

The  Epiphany  thus  strikingly  shows  the  cruelty  of  the 
supposed  system  of  transmigration  and  the  helplessness  of  God : 

"  In  reality,  the  suggested  solution  only  seems  to  lead  us  into  greater 
difficulties  than  ever.  God  did  not  create  souls,  or  affix  their  varying 
characters  or  karmas ;  they  have  existed  thus  eternally,  in  independence 
of  Him.  Granted  this,  the  question  at  once  arises,  who  or  what  is  re- 
sponsible for  these  cruel  variations  and  inequalities  ?  These  eternally 
existing  souls  suffer  from  a  strange  injustice,  also  existing  from  eternity, 
and  apparently  they  will  eternally  so  suffer.  Partiality  is  then  coeval, 
and  coeternal  with  finite  existence ;  is  inherent  in  the  very  nature  of 
things.  Who  or  what  is  the  author  of  this  harsh  and  arbitrary  law  of 
karma  that  has  thus  been  going  on  and  will  thus  go  on  for  ever  ?" 

"  The  system  only  seems  to  make  the  injustice  of  the  universe  more 
irremediable  and  more  hopeless :  it  is  eternal,  necessary,  and  cannot  be 
bettered.  God  himself  can  only  look  on  eternally  at  the  course  of 
things  as  a  helpless  spectator,  compelled  by  some  cruel  necessity  to 
apportion  reward  and  punishment,  according  to  an  unjust  law  over  which 
He  has  no  control ;  He  cannot  intervene  to  re-adjust  the  harsh  measure 
that  has  been  meted  out  by  a  power  independent  of  Him,  or  redress  the 
eternally  wrong  balance.  Human  life  is  beyond  His  control  altogether : 
He  is  conniving,  from  sheer  impotence,  at  a  great  scheme  of  eternal 
injustice."  December  13,  1895. 

Christianity,  on  the  other  hand,  shows  how  Divine  Justice  and 
Mercy  are  reconciled  through  Jesus  Christ. 

5.  It  leads  people  to  impute  the  results  of  their  own  miscon- 
duct in  this  life  to  sins  in  a  former  birth. — The  chief  sufferings  of 
men  are  caused  by  poverty,  sickness,  and  evil  conduct.  Poverty  is 
often  occasioned  by  laziness  or  want  of  thrift.  One  great  reason 
why  the  people  of  India  are  poor  is  their  extravagant  expenditure 
on  marriages.  Most  sickness  is  caused  by  bad  water,  filth,  and 
unwholesome  food.  When  people  believe  that  their  misfortunes 
arise  from  sins  in  a  former  birth,  they  rest  contented  and  make  no 
efforts  to  remove  them. 

A  father  neglects  his  child  and  allows  him  to  mix  with  bad 
companions.  He  turns  out  a  drunkard,  gambler,  and  thief.  The 
father,  instead  of  blaming  himself ,  attributes  the  misconduct  of  his 
sons  to  sins  in  a  former  birth.  The  constant  excuse  for  almost 
everything  that  ought  not  to  be  is,  "  What  can  we  do  ?  It  is  all  the 
fruit  of  former  births/'  Even  murderers  comfort  themselves  with 
such  an  excuse. 

Deussen  says  that  the  doctrine  is  "  &  consolation  in  the 
distresses  of  life."  The  Hindu  forms  a  different  estimate  of  its 
effects.  "  The  contentment  of  our  people  is  the  result  of  moral 
death  during  centuries."  The  tendency  is  to  lead  people  to  submit 
to  evils  instead  of  trying  to  remedy  them. 


102  THE   VEDANTA-SARA. 

5.  It  discourages  Virtue  and  encourages  Vice. — The  effects  of 
rewards  and  punishments  depend  greatly  upon  their  nearness.  If 
very  far  off,  they  have  very  little  influence.  According  to  transmi- 
gration, people  here  eat  the  fruit,  sweet  or  bitter, of  actions  informer 
births,  while  good  or  evil  deeds  in  this  life  will  be  rewarded  or 
punished  in  some  future  birth,  how  distant  no  one  can  tell.  The 
natural  tendency  is  therefore  what  is  described. 

The  Christian  doctrine  is  that  we  never  existed  before  our 
present  life.  This  is  confirmed  by  universal  human  experience. 
We  are  here  in  a  state  of  probation,  and  shall  be  rewarded  or 
punished  after  death,  and  shall  not  transmigrate. 

A  few  other  observations  may  be  offered. 

1.  Inequalities  of  happiness  are  less  than  is  supposed. — There 
are  many  poor  men  far  happier  than  the  rich.     There  is  a  proverb  : 
"  The  fruit  of  austerities,  a  kingdom  ;  the  fruit  of  a  kingdom,  hell." 
Great  men  are  tempted  to  vices  from  which  the  poor  are  free. 
Wealth  and  power  are,  not  unfrequently,  a  curse  rather  than  a 
blessing. 

2.  We  can  look  forward  as  well  as  backward. — The  Epiphany 
says : 

'*  It  seems  possible  to  interpret  the  puzzling  inequalities  of  life  at 
least  as  well  on  the  theory  of  probation  as  on  the  theory  of  retribution. 
And  to  effect  this,  different  kinds  of  moral  development  are  necessary. 
One  soul  is  developed  to  perfection  through  the  process  of  adversity, 
another  through  that  of  prosperity.  The  former  may  be  the  higher 
mode  ;  but  both  courses  have  their  appropriate  tests  and  crises  for  free 
will  to  go  through.  We  believe  tliat  all  inequalities  will  be  redressed 
and  exhibited  in  their  true  light  at  the  Last  Judgment,  when  it  will  be 
seen  that  '<  many  who  are  first  shall  be  last.3  The  justice  of  God  will 
then  be  manifest,  and  till  that  time  we  can  wait  in  faith." 

3.  Most  of  our  sufferings  are  caused  by  our  breach  of  God's 
righteous  law  and  are  intended  for  our  amendment. 

God  has  made  us  persons,  and  not  things.  We  are  not  like 
watches  which  can  only  act  as  they  are  moved.  We  have  the 
power  of  self-determination,  we  are  free  to  do  wrong  if  we  choose. 
But  things  are  so  ordered  that,  as  a  rule,  sin,  in  the  end,  leads  to 
suffering.  The  burning  words  of  Kingsley  ought  to  be  impressed 
upon  the  minds  of  all : 

"  Foremost  among  them  stands  a  law  which  I  must  insist  on,  boldly 
and  perpetually,  a  law  which  man  has  been  trying  in  all  age?,  as  uow,  to 
deny,  or  at  least  to  ignore;  though  he  might  have  seen  it,  if  he  had  willed, 
working  steadily  in  all  times  and  nations,  And  that  ih — that  as  the  fruit 
of  righteousness  is  wealth  and  peace,  strength  and  honour;  the  fruit  of 
Unrighteousness  is  poverty  and  anarchy,  weakness  and  shame.  It  is  an 
ancient  doctrine  and  yet  one  ever  young."1 

1  Limits  of  Exact  Science  applied  to  History. 


TBANSMIGRATION.  103 

The  Kev.  T.  E.  Slater  says  : 

"  Happiness  and  misery  are  very  largely  the  result  of  our  own 
character  and  conduct  here  and  now.  The  idle,  the  imprudent,  the 
intemperate,  live  in  poverty  and  suffering  ;  while  the  industrious  and  the 
virtuous,  as  a  rule,  enjoy  prosperity  and  happiness. 

"The  conditions  of  life  depend,  too,  very  much  on  the  conduct  of 
others.  If  a  man  does  good,  others  will  be  benefited  ;  if  evil,  others  will 
suffer.  Why  do  so  many  suffer  ?  Not  because  they  are  in  faulfc ;  not 
because  God  ia  partial ;  bub  because  they  happened  to  live  near  one 
another.  If  all  men  were  good  and  honest  and  just  in  their  dealings 
with  others,  there  would  be  far  less  misery  in  the  world.  By  removing 
the  evils  that  men  inflict  on  one  another,  one  reason  assigned  for  the 
belief  in  transmigration  would  disappear."1 

4.  Children  inherit  largely  the  Characteristics  of  their 
Parents. — This  is  called  the  doctrine  of  '  heredity/  a  demonstrated 
proof,  instead  of  a  mere  assumption,  like  transmigration,  invented 
in  an  age  ignorant  of  modern  science. 

"  Nofc  our  own  virtues  and  vices  contracted  in  some  former 
birth,  but  the  virtues  and  vices  of  those  who  have  lived  before  us 
reach  into  our  time ;  and  moral  and  intellectual  qualities,  virtues 
and  vicious  habits,  and  certain  diseases,  are  all  in  the  stream  of 
heritage  which  flows  from  the  distant  past."2 

This  shows  how  careful  parents  ought  to  be.  Their  conduct 
affects,  not  only  themselves,  but  their  posterity.  They  may  leave 
them  a  heritage  of  blessing  or  woe. 

5-  We  are  much  influenced  by  our  Surroundings. — This  is 
called  the  law  of  '  environment/  A  child  born  among  vicious  people 
is  almost  certain  to  follow  their  example  ;  while  one  brought  up 
among  the  virtuous  may  be  hoped  to  imitate  them.  Keformatories 
have  been  established  by  some  Christian  Governments  by  which 
young  criminals  have  frequently  been  led  to  lead  new  lives. 

6.  Affliction,  properly  improved,  may  have  a  most  beneficial 
influence  on  the  character.— 

A  holy  man  of  old  said ,  "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been 
afflicted.  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray ;  but  now  have  I 
kept  Thy  word."  Millions  upon  millions  have  had  the  same 
experience.  Good  men,  who  suffer  affliction  rightly,  come  out  of  it 
purified,  like  gold  which  has  been  tried  by  fire.  Many  parents 
have  been  led  by  the  sickness  and  death  of  their  children  to  think 
of  a  world  where  there  is  no  more  pain  or  death,  and  where  they 
shall  meet  again  their  loved  ones,  never  more  to  be  separated. 

"  Life,  "  says  Dr.  Fairbairn,  "  is  all  the  nobler  from  being  a 
battle  agaiust  evil ;  all  the  worthier  to  be  lived  that  its  Maker  has 
designed  that  it  should  at  once  educate  and  redeem  through  suffer- 
ing."* 

1  Christian  College  Magazine,    Vol.  XV.  p.  271. 

9  Rev.  T.  E.  Slater,  Christian  College  Magazine,  Vol.  XV.  p.  278. 

3  The  City  of  God,  p.  186. 


104  THE   VEDANTA-SABA. 

7.  "I  know  not,  God  knoweth." — It  is  admitted  that,  after  all 
the  explanations  which  can  be  offered,  there  is  a  residue  which  is 
inexplicable.  We  are  like  young  children  trying  to  understand 
the  government  of  a  mighty  empire. 

"  What  am  I  p 

An  infant  crying  in  the  night ; 
An  infant  crying  for  the  light ; 
And  with  no  language  but  a  cry." 

"  Behind   the  veil,   behind  the  veil,"  in   a   future  state  of 
existence,  then  God's  ways  to  man  will  be  justified.  "  What  I  do  thou 
knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."     Meanwhile 
"  Falling  with  my  weight  of  cares, 
Upon  the  great  world's  altar  stairs 
That  slope  thro'  darkness  up  to  God, 
I  stretch  lame  hands  of  faith  and  grope. 

Oh  yet  we  trust  that  somehow  good 
Will  be  the  final  goal  of  ill." 

At  all  events,  the  above  explanation  is  far  better  than  atheism > 
transmigration,  or  any  other  which  has  been  offered.  A  belief  in 
the  doctrine  of  transmigration  is  now  confined  to  uncivilised  or 
half -civilised  nations. 

Some  of  the  injurious  effects  of  the  belief  in  the  doctrine  upon 
Hindus  are  thus  stated  by  Mr.  Slater : 

'*  The  transmigration  of  the  soul  has  always  been  regarded  as  the 
direst  calamity  by  people  of  India — as  the  root  of  all  evil.  The  soul  is 
tossed  hither  and  thither,  at  the  mercy  of  a  force  set  in  motion  by  itself 
alone,  but  which  can  never  be  arrested,  because  its  operation  depends  on 
past  actions  wholly  beyond  control  and  even  unremembered.  Hence  the 
desire  of  means  to  put  a  stop  to  further  transmigration,  to  shorten  the 
duration  of  the  wanderings,  has  been  the  object  of  philosophical  research 
in  all  the  systems. 

"  And  is  not  this  one  great  reason  why  the  Hindu  has  declined  in 
power  and  degenerated  ?  He  feels  held  as  by  an  iron  hand  in  the  dread 
bonds  of  fate,  from  which  even  death  allows  no  escape,  but  only  sets  him 
revolving  in  an  endless  cycle  of  being  ;  whereas  his  younger  brother  of 
the  West,  under  the  bracing  influence  of  a  more  joyous  faith,  knowing 
himself  to  be  a  son  of  God,  and  possessing  in  Christ  a  blessed  im- 
mortality, has  widened  with  the  '  process  of  the  suns.'  There  is  little 
doubt  which  is  the  more  acceptable  and  invigorating  creed."1 

"  The  system  has  now  been  going  on  for  thousands  of  years  ;  has  the 
Hindu  nation  become  better,  age  after  age  ?  Its  own  shastras  say,  No. 
The  first  age  was  the  age  of  truth — the  Krita,  age  :  the  present  is  the 
Kali  Yuga,  the  age  of  ignorance,  folly,  and  sin  ;  one  '  period'  of 
which  is  now  drawing  to  a  close.  Is  it  not  the  universal  lamentation  of 
Hindu  reformers  that  the  nation  has  degenerated  ?  And  any  improve- 
ment that  is  taking  place  at  the  present  time,  is  due,  not  to  the  belief  in 
transmigration,  but  to  foreign  influences  that  are,  indirectly,  destructive 
of  it."» 

1  Christian  College  Magaxine,  Vol.  XV.  p.  279.  *  /bid,  p.  337- 


THE    GREAT   SENTENCES.  105 

THE  GKEAT  SENTENCES. 

TAT  TWAM  ASI,  '  That  thou  art.5 

BKAHMASMI,  '  I  am  Brahma.' 

The  assertions  are  that  Brahma  and  the  Soul  are  identical; 
that  the  soul  may  say,  "  I  am  Brahma." 

With  regard  to  the  first  text,  (rough  remarks  : 

"  In  the  view  of  the  Indian  schoolmen,  the  greatest  of  all  the  texts 
of  the  Upanishads  is  the  texti  That  art  thou,  in  the  sixth  Lecture  of  the 
Chhaudogya  Upanishad.  This  is  pre-eminently  the  Mahavakya,  the  sup- 
reme announcement.  It  is  on  the  comprehension  of  this  text  that 
spiritual  intuition  (samyagdarsana)  or  ecstatic  vision  rises  in  the  purified 
intelligence  of  the  aspirant  to  extrication  from  metempsychosis" 
(samsdra). 

"  The  sense  is  this  :  the  individual  soul  is  one  with  the  universal 
Soul,  and  the  universal  Soul  is  one  with  the  one  and  only  Self." l 

The  Prabuddha  Ijhdrata  says  : 

Vedanta  "  is  the  one  philosophy  which  dares  to  call  man  God 
Himself,  not  merely  the  son  of  God  or  His  servant."  Vol.  I.  p.  75. 

The  Brahmavddin  (Oct.  12,  1895,  p.  30)  makes  the  same 
claim  in  terms  equally  blasphemous  : 

"  Man  is  not  the  mere  creature  of  a  God  ;  he  is  God  himself.  He 
has  not  simply  the  image  impressed  upon  him  of  his  Creator.  He  is 
himself  the  Creator." 

The  two  main  proofs  in  the  Veddnta-Sdra  are  the  following  : 
I.     There  is  no  difference  between  things  taken  collectively  and 
distributively,  as  there  is  none  between  a  forest  and  its  trees,  or 
between  a  lake  and  its  waters.     Page  30. 

This  is  supposed  to  prove  that  there  is  no  difference  between 
Brahma  and  an  individual  soul. 

It  is  true  that  there  is  no  difference  between  a  forest  and  all 
the  trees  taken  together ;  but  an  individual  tree  cannot  say  "  I  am 
the  forest." 

In  like  manner  a  house  is  equal  to  all  the  bricks  of  which  it  is 
composed,  but  a  single  brick  cannot  say  "  I  am  the  house."  A. 
lakh  of  rupees  is  equal  to  a  hundred  thousand  rupees,  but  a  rupee 
is  not  therefore  equal  to  a  lakh. 

In  logic  this  reasoning  is  called  the  Fallacy  of  Division.  It 
consists  in  arguing  from  the  collective  to  the  distributive  use  of  a 
term. 

II.     The  second  great  argument  is  founded  on  the  sentence, 

"  This  is  that  same  Devadatta." 

Hence,  This  =  that;  Twam  =  Tat. 

It  is  asserted  that  Tat  and  Twam  "  refer  to  one  and  the  same 

1  Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads,  pp.  89,  94. 

14 


106  THE   VEDANTA-SARA. 

thing";  that  they  are  "  related  as  subject  and  predicate";  as 
"  indicator  and  indicated."  pp.  40,  41. 

The  sentence,  ''This  is  that  same  Devadatta,"  is  what  is 
called  in  logic  a  petitio  principii,  a  begging  of  the  principle  in 
question,  taking  a  thing  for  true  and  drawing  conclusions  from  it 
as  such,  when  it  requires  to  be  proved  before  any  conclusions  can 
be  deduced  from  it. 

It  is  true  that  differences  in  point  of  time  and  other  non- 
essentials  are  acknowledged ;  but  it  is  held .  that  they  agree 
substantially.  This  is  attempted  to  be  proved  by  a  subtle  chain  of 
false  reasoning,  pp.  42-44.  After  comparing  the  attributes  of 
Tat  and  Twam,  let  it  be  decided  whether  they  are  the  same. 

Tat,  God.  Twam)  Man. 


The  Creator 
Eternal 
Omnipresent 
Omniscient 
Omnipotent 
Unchangeable 
Infinitely  Holy 
Infinitely  Happy 


A  Creature. 

Began  to  be. 

Confined  to  a  small  space. 

Parviscient. 

Parvipotent. 

Subject  to  change. 

Sinful. 

S abject  to  misery. 


If  two  beings  with  attributes  so  different  are  the  same,  so  are 
light  and  darkness,  knowledge  and  ignorance,  virtue  and  vice  : 

Graudapurndnanda  thus  contrasts  the  two  : 

"  Thou  art  verily  rifled,  0  thou  animal  soul,  of  thy  understanding, 
by  this  dark  theory  of  Maya,  because  like  a  maniac,  thou  constantly 
ravest,  '  I  am  Brahma.'  Where  is  thy  divinity,  thy  sovereignty,  thy 
omniscience  ?  On  thou  animal  soul !  thou  art  as  different  from  Brahma 
as  is  a  mustard  seed  from  Mount  Meru.  Thou  art  a  finite  soul>  He  is 
infinite.  Thou  canst  occupy  but  one  space  at  a  time,  He  is 
always  everywhere.  Thou  art  momentarily  happy  or  miserable,  He  is 
happy  at  all  times.  How  canst  thou  say  '  I  am  He  ?'  Hast  thou 
no  shame  ?" l 

R&mdnuja,  another  celebrated  Hindu  writer,  argues  against  it 
similarly : 

"  The  word  tat  (it)  stands  for  the  ocean  of  immortality,  full  of 
supreme  felicity.  The  word  twam  (thou)  stands  for  a  miserable  person, 
distracted  through  fear  of  the  world.  The  two  cannot  therefore  be  one. 
They  are  substantially  different.  He  is  to  be  worshipped  by  the  whole 
world.  Thou  art  but  His  slave.  How  could  there  be  an  image  or 
reflection  of  the  infinite  and  spotless  One  ?  There  may  be  a  reflection  of 
a  finite  substance ;  how  could  there  be  such  a  thing  of  the  Infinite  ? 
How  canst  thou,  oh  slow  of  thought !  say,  I  am  He,  who  has  set  up  this 
immense  sphere  of  the  universe  in  its  fulness?  By  the  mercy  of  the 
most  High  a  little  understanding  has  been  committed  to  thee  ;  it  is  not 
for  thee,  oh  perverse  one,  to  say,  therefore  1  am  God-"' 

1  Ban^rjea's  Dialogues,  p.  878.        2  Rid,  p.  408. 


MDKTJ  OB  WBEBAWON.  107 

Taking  the  words  in  their  plain  meaning,  the  climax  of 
Hindu  philosophy  is  a  blasphemous  falsehood,  too  horrible  almost 
to  be  mentioned.  With  Satanic  pride,  a  puny,  ignorant,  sinful, 
mortal  presumes  to  say,  "  I  am  God  1 "  When  he  believes  this 
monstrous  lie,  according  to  Hindu  philosophy,  he  is  the  only  wise 
man !  How  true  are  the  words,  "  Professing  themselves  to  be  wise, 
they  became  fools." 


MUKTI  OR  LIBERATION. 

Grand  Aim  of  Hindu  Philosophy. — As  already  mentioned, 
Hindu  philosophy  arose  when  a  pessimistic  view  began  to  be  taken 
of  life — when  existence  was  regarded  as  a  curse,  and  freedom  from 
future  births  was  considered  the  highest  good.  All  the.six  systems 
agree  in  this.  Gough  says  : 

"  This  philosophy  was  a  new  religion,  with  a  new  promise,  a 
religion,  not  of  fche  many,  but  of  the  few.  The  promise  is  no  longer  a 
promise  of  felicity  in  this  life  or  in  a  higher  life,  but  a  promise  of  release 
Irom  the  Borrows  of  the  heart,  of  a  repose  an  broken  by  a  dream,  of 
everlastmg  peace,  in  which  the  soul  shall  cease  to  be  a  soul,  and  shall  be 
merged  in  the  one  and  only  Self  the  characterless  being,  characterless 
thought,  and  characterless  beatitude."  l 

This  freedom  from  future  births  is  called  mukti  or  moksha, 
liberation.  The  doctrine  is  not  found  in  the  four  Vedas ;  it  is  a 
later  development. 

Means  to  be  employed. — Mukti  is  supposed  to  be  attained  when 
a  person  realizes  the  great  sentence,  Brahmdsmi. 

There  are  two  main  stages — meditation  with  an  object  and 
meditation  without  an  object.  The  means  to  be  employed  for  both 
are  described  at  length  in  pp.  46 — 49  of  the  Vedanta-S&ra 
translation,  and  more  fully  in  the  Yoga  Sutras  of  Patanjali. 

The  object  is  to  attain  likeness  to  Brahma,  represented  as  in  a 
state  of  dreamless  sleep. 

Yama  (' Forbearance'),  and  niyama,  'Religious  Observances,' 
are  both  enjoined  as  subservient  to  the  object  in  view.  As  explained 
in  the  Vedanta-Sara,  Acts  of  '  Forbearance'  are  not  killing,  not 
lying,  not  stealing,  chastity,  and  not  accepting  gifts.  '  Religious 
Observances'  are  purifications,  contentment,  penance,  study,  and 
persevering  meditations  on  I'svara." 

But  other  special  means  are  necessary. 

Patanjali  defines  yoga  as  follows  : 

"  Yoga  is  the  suppression  of  the  transformations  of  the  thinking 
principle."  I.  2.  2 

Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads  p.  262. 
Translation  by  Manilal  Nabhubhai  Dvivedi,  p.  1, 


108  THE   VEDANTA-SABA. 

According  to  Hindu  philosophy,  the  mind  assumes  the  form 
of  any  object  seen  or  conceived.  The  number  of  such  changes 
daily  must  be  almost  countless.  The  design  of  Yoga  is  to  put  a 
stop  to  the  transformations  of  the  mind,  so  that  at  last  meditation 
may  be  objectless. 

Mechanical  means  were  also  employed. 

Asana. — There  were  various  modes  of  disposing  the  hands, 
feet,  &c.,  one  or  two  of  which  may  be  described. 

The  Lotus  Posture. — The  right  foot  should  be  placed  on  the 
left  thigh,  and  the  left  foot  on  the  right  thigh ;  the  hands  should 
be  crossed,  and  the  two  great  toes  should  be  firmly  held  thereby ; 
the  chin  should  be  bent  down  to  the  chest ;  and  in  this  posture  the 
eyes  should  be  directed  to  the  tip  of  the  nose. 

Gomukha,  or  Cow's  Mouth  Posture. — Put  the  right  ankle  on  the 
lef tw  side  of  the  chest,  and  similarly  the  left  ankle  on  the  right 
side. 

Fowl  Posture. — Having  established  the  lotus  posture,  if  the 
hand  be  passed  between  the  thigh  and  the  knees  and  placed  on  the 
earth  so  as  to  lift  the  body  aloft,  it  will  produce  the  fowl  seat. 

Pranayama,  the  regulation  of  the  breath,  is  also  considered 
of  great  importance.  It  is  thus  described  : 

"  The  usual  mode  is  after  assuming  the  posture  prescribed,  to  place 
the  ring  finger  of  the  right  hand  on  the  left  nostril,  pressing  it  so  as  to 
close  it,  and  to  expire  with  the  right,  then  to  press  the  right  nostril  with 
the  thumb,  and  to  inspire  through  the  left  nostril,  and  then  to  close  the 
two  nostrils  with  the  ring  finger  and  the  thumb,  and  to  stop  all  breath- 
ing. The  order  is  reversed  in  the  next  operation,  and  in  the  third  act 
the  first  form  is  required."1 

Other  exercises  are  mentioned  : 

"  Uddiydna  consists  in  drawing  in  the  navel  and  the  parts  above  and 
below  it.  Mulabandha  consists  in  drawing  in  the  parts  of  the  anus,  and 
in  mentally  exerting  as  if  to  draw  the  apdna  upward  towards  the  navel. 
The  jdlandhara  consists  in  pressing  the  chin  to  the  heart."  III.  58,  27. 
Appendix  v. 

Marvellous  powers  are  attributed  to  the  man  fully  initiated  in 
the  Yoga.  The  past  and  present  are  unveiled  to  his  gaze.  He 
sees  things  invisible  to  others.  He  hears  the  sounds  that  are  in 
distant  worlds.  He  becomes  stronger  than  the  elephant,  bolder 
than  the  lion,  swifter  than  the  wind.  He  mounts  at  pleasure  into 
the  air  or  dives  into  the  depths  of  the  earth  and  the  ocean.  He 
acquires  mastery  over  all  things,  whether  animated  or  inanimate. 

The  whole  belief  is  a  delusion.  The  brain  is  the  organ  of  the 
mind.  To  enable  it  to  act  properly,  it  must  have  a  good  supply  of 
pure  blood.  The  blood  is  purified  by  fresh  air  entering  into  the 

1  Quoted  by  Mr.  R.  C.  Boae  from  the  translation  of  the  Yoga  Shastra  by 
Dr.  Rajendralala  Mitra. 


MUKTI   OB  LIBEEATION.  109 

lungs  by  breathing.  From  want  of  sufficient  food  and  suppression 
of  the  breath,  the  blood  of  the  Yogi  is  small  in  quantity  and  impure. 
The  brain  does  not  act  properly.  He  may  be  in  a  dreamy  condition 
or  almost  unconscious.  Earth,  a  French  writer,  a  distinguished 
Orientalist,  says  of  Yoga  exercises : 

"  Conscientiously  observed  they  can  only  issue  in  folly  and  idiocy."1 

Jivanniukta. — The  last  section  into  which  the  Veddnta-Sdra 
has  been  divided  treats  of  the  Jivanmukta,  ( liberated  but  still 
living.' 

Colonel  Jacob  says : 

"  According  to  the  Systems,  works  are  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  accumu- 
lated (sanchita),  fructesceut  (prdrabdha),  and  current  (kriyamdna).  The 
first  are  the  works  of  former  births  which  have  not  yet  borne  fruit ;  the 
second  are  those  which  have  brought  about  the  present  life,  and  so  have 
begun  to  bear  fruit;  and  the  third  are  those  which  are  being  performed 
during  the  present  life>  and  which  will  bear  fruit  in  a  future  one.  Ac- 
cording to  the  Yedanta,  the  true  knowledge  of  Brahma  and  of  one's  own 
identity  with  It  burns  up  the  accumulated  works  and  cancels  the  effects 
of  the  current  ones.  The  fruits  of  the  fructescent  ones  must  be  exhausted 
during  the  present  life,  and  theu  at  death  emancipation  is  realised."  2 

The  Jivanmukta  is  experiencing  these  fructescent  fruits,  which 
cannot  be  destroyed  by  the  knowledge  of  Brahma.  "  But,  according 
to  the  Yoga,  the  meditation  which  is  styled  in  that  system  asam- 
prajndta,  '  meditation  without  an  object/  can  destroy  them,  and 
so  is  considered  by  Yogins  to  be  superior  to  knowledge."  3 

Deussen  gives  the  following  account  of  the  Jivanmukta  : 

"42.  Abolition  of  all  Duties. — As  for  the  wise  man,  there  is  no  world, 
no  body,  no  further  sufferings,  there  is  also  for  him  no  further  obligation 
to  action.  For  all  that  he  will  do  no  evil,  for  false  illusion,  the  cause  of 
all  action  good  or  bad,  has  been  annihilated.  Whether  he  performs  any 
more  works  or  not  is  a  matter  of  indifference,  whether  he  does  them  or 
not,  they  are  not  his  works  and  do  not  cling  to  him.  It  is  difficult  to  say 
if  rules  of  conduct,  expressing  themselves  in  justice  and  love,  are 
necessary  for  the  wise  man  who  has  acquired  the  knowledge  that  he 
himself  is  Brahma.  Such  rules  maybe  found  in  the  Bhagavad  Gitd,  but 
not  in  the  writings  of  Sankara."  * 

Jivanmuktas  are  said  to  be  subject  to  no  law ;  to  them  there  is 
no  such  thing  as  virtue  and  vice.  In  support  of  this  Col.  Jacob 
quotes  the  following : 

"  By  no  deed  soever  is  his  future  bliss  harmed,  not  by  theft,  not  by  a 

1  Religions  of  India,     p.  83. 

2  Hindu  Pantheism,  p.  125. 

3  A  full  account  of  Yoga  exercises,  with  the  wonderful  powers  they  are  alleged 
to  confer,  is  given  in  YOGA  SASTEA  :  the   Yoga  Sutras  of   Patanjali  Examined,  8vo. 
78  pp.  2i  As.     Post-free  3  As.     Sold  by  Mr.  A.  T.  Scott,  Tract  Dep6t,  Madras. 

*  Short  Account  of  the  Vedanta  Philosophy,  p.  24. 


110  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

Brahman's  murder,  nor  by  a  mother's  murder,  nor  by  a  father's  murder ; 
nor,  if  he  wishes  to  commit  sin,  departs  the  bloom  from  his  face." 

Kausbitaki-Upauishad,  iii.  1.     (Coweli.) 

"  The  thought  afflicts  him  not,  '  What  good  have  I  left  undone,  what 
evil  done  F  ' ; 

Taittirfya-Upanisbad,  ii.  9.     (Gough.) 
"  He  is  not  defiled  by  an  evil  deed." 

Brihadaranyaka,  4,  4,  23. l 

It  is  argued,  however,  that  such  passages  in  the  Sruti  and 
Smriti  are  merely  designed  to  extol  the  position  of  the  enlightened 
man,  and  not  to  impel  him  to  act  in  the  manner  there  described."2 

Final  Liberation. — Deussen  says  : 

"  After  works,  whereof  the  fruit  has  not  yet  appeared,  have  been 
annihilated  by  knowledge,  and  those,  whereof  the  fruit  pertains  to  this 
present  existence  have  come  to  their  term  with  the  completion  of  the 
present  life,  full  and  eternal  release  comes  to  the  knower  at  the  moment 
of  death  ;  the  spirits  of  his  life  do  not  depart,  but  he  is  Brahman  and 
into  Brahman  is  he  absorbed.  '  As  streams  flow  and  vanish  in  the  ocean, 
losing  name  and  form,  so  does  the  wise  soul,  resigning  name  and  form, 
pass  into  the  heavenly  and  supreme  Spirit/  "3 

The  condition  of  the  liberated  soul  must  be  similar  to  that  of 
Brahma  itself.  As  already  explained,  it  is  compared  to  a  state  of 
dreamless  sleep,  in  which  the  sleeper  is  unconscious  of  his  own 
existence,  and  happy  only  in  the  sense  of  being  free  from  the 
miseries  of  Samsdra.  Virtually  the  happiness  is  that  of  a  stone. 
"W  ilson  says : 

"  Annihilation,  then,  as  regards  individuals,  is  as  much  the 
ultimate  destiny  of  the  soul  as  it  is  of  the  body,  and  '  Not  to  be  '  is  the 
melancholy  result  of  the  religion  aud  philosophy  of  the  Hindus."^ 

Liberation  merely  the  End  of  a  Dream. — Grough  quotes  the 
following : 

"  On  the  liberation  of  the  sage,  to  use  the  language  of  the  ViveJca- 
chuddmani,  all  things  visible  melt  away  into  the  original  Self,  ,as  the 
darkness  faints  and  melts  away  before  the  rising  sun.  Its  fictitiously 
limiting  mind  with  all  its  modes  has  been  dissolved,  and  the  soul  is  the 
Self  again  ;  the  jar  is  broken,  and  the  ether  that  was  in  it  is  one  with  the 
one  and  undivided  ether,  from  which  the  jar  once  seemed  to  sever  it.  The 
sage  has  seen  the  Self,  and  passed  into  oneness  with  it,  lost  like  a  water- 
drop  in  water.  His  implication  in  metempsychosis,  and  his  extrication 
from  it,  have  been  but  figments^of  the  cosmic  fiction  ;  unreal  as  the  snake 
that  appears  and  vanishes  in  place  of  the  piece  of  rope,  to  the  eyes  of 
the  belated  ti-aveller.  He  has  had  life  after  life  from  time  without 
beginning,  but  these  were  but  a  series  of  dreams.  At  last  he  is  awake, 
and  his  dream-lives  are  nullities.  In  pure  verity  it  is  only  the  Self  that 
ever  is  or  has  been.  The  world  has  neither  come  into  being  nor  passed 

1  Hindat,  Pantheism,  p.  128.     Other  similar  quotations  are  made. 

8  Ibid,  p.  129.  84  Short  Account  of  the  Veddnta  Philosophrj,p.  24. 

4  Essays  on  the  Religion  of  the  Hindus,  ii.  114.     Quoted  by  Col.  Jacob. 


MUKfl   OB   LIBERATION.  Ill 

out  of  being.  There  has  been  no  fatal  migration  of  the  soul,  no  worship- 
per seeking  recompense  or  mental  purity,  no  sage  yearning  after  libera- 
tion, and  no  soul  has  been  liberated.  These  things  were  phantasmagoric 
figments,  a  play  of  semblances,  a  darkness,  an  absence  of  light.  Now  the 
light  is  Veiled  no  more,  and  remains  a  pure  undifferenced  light,  and  is  in 
troth  the  only  thing  that  ever  has  been  and  ever  is."1 


EEMAEKS  ON  MUKTJ. 

1.  The  Aim  is  purely  Selfish. — There  is  neither  thought  nor 
effort  for  others ;  the  attention  of  the  Vedantist  is  concentrated 
upon  himself.     In  this  he  is  simply  imitating  Brahma,  according 
to  the  proverb,  "  As  is  the  god,  so  is  the  worshipper." 

2.  There  is  no  desire  to  become  wiser  and  more  useful ;  no 
aspirations  for  deliverance  from  the  burden  of  sin  and  for  a  purer 
and  higher  character :  there  is  only  a  yearning  for  release  from  the 
miseries  of  life. 

Gough  says : 

"  The  Indian  sages,  as  the  Upanishads  picture  them,  seek  for 
participation  in  the  divine  life,  not  by  pure  feelingf,  high  thought,  and 
strenuous  endeavour — not  by  an  unceasing  effort  to  learn  the  true  and  do 
the  right, — but  by  the  crushing  out  of  every  feeling  and  every 
thought,  by  vacuity,  apathy,  inertion,  and  ecstasy.  They  do  not  for  a 
moment  mean  that  the  purely  individual  feelings  and  volitions  are  to  be 
suppressed  in  order  that  the  philosopher  may  live  in  free  obedience  to 
the  monitions  of  a  higher  common  nature.  Their  highest  Self  (Brahma)  is 
little  more  than  an  empty  name.  Their  pursuit  is  not  a  pursuit  of  perfect 
character,  but  of  perfect  characterlessness.  They  place  perfection  in  the 
pure  indetermination  of  thought,  the  final  residence  of  prolonged 
abstraction ;  not  in  the  higher  and  higher  types  of  life  and  thought 
successively  intimated  in  the  idealising  tendencies  of  the  mind,  as  among 
the  progressive  portions  of  the  human  race."2 

3.  The  Happiness  is  only  that  of  a  Stone. — To  exist  for  ever 
in  a  state  of  dreamless  sleep,  unconscious  of  existence,  is  only  the 
happiness  of  an  inanimate  object. 

Vedantism  is  well  summed  up  by  Mr.  Earn  Chandra  Bose  in 
the  following  words : 

"  It  begins  with  a  recognition  of  human  sorrow,  goes  out  in  vain 
quest  of  a  proper  remedy,  and  ultimately  arrives  at  annihilation  as 
the  goal  where  human  misery  terminates  only  with  the  extinction  of 
life."  3 

The  Christian  View  of  Heaven. — The  Christian  conception 
of  God  is  very  different  from  that  of  the  Vedantic  Brahma.  As 
already  explained,  He  is  never  unconscious  of  His  own  existence  ; 

1  Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads,  pp.  60,  61 

Ibid,  pp.  266, 26?. 
3  Hindu  Philosophy,  p.  363. 


112  THE   VEDANTA-SARA. 

He  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps.  He  knows  whatever  happens 
throughout  His  vast  dominions,  and  His  ear  is  ever  open  to  the  cry 
of  His  children.  He  is  the  fountain  of  life,  wisdom,  holiness,  and 
bliss.  In  heaven  His  creatures  behold  Him  in  unclouded  splendour, 
and  are  filled  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  They  are 
continually  growing  in  wisdom  and  holiness,  and,  we  may  believe, 
becoming  greater  and  greater  blessings  to  all  around  them.  The 
special  happiness  of  heaven  is  that  it  is  eternal.  There  is  no 
passing  from  heaven  to  hell  as  according  to  Hinduism.  Those  who 
enter  there  shall  be  "  for  ever  with  the  Lord."  The  Christian  does 
not  get  to  heaven  by  his  own  merit,  but  as  a  gift  of  God,  and  hence 
he  has  no  fear  of  his  merit  being  exhausted,  and  that  he  will  have 
to  fall  down  again  to  this  world  of  sin  and  sorrow. 

The  Kev.  Nehemiah  Goreh  thus  contrasts  his  feelings  as  a 
Christian  and  a  Hindu  with  regard  to  his  duty  to  God  : — 

"  Since  Christianity  has  taught  me  that  God  gave  me  my  very  being, 
I  have  begun  to  acknowledge  that  my  obligation  of  worshipping,  honour- 
ing and  loving  Him  would  not  cease  as  long  as  I  had  my  being.  So  our 
Scriptures  also  expressly  teach  us.  The  holy  Psalmist  says  :  '  Pi'aise  the 
Lord,  0  my  soul.  While  I  live  I  will  praise  the  Lord.  I  will  sing 
praises  unto  my  God  while  I  have  any  beinq.'  I,  as  a  Christian,  have  been 
taught  to  believe  that  to  love  and  glorify  God  is  the  very  end  of  my  exis- 
tence. In  this  will  consist  my  eternal  joy  and  happiness.  Not  so  was 
my  faith  when  I  was  a  Hindu.  The  state  of  salvation,  according  to 
my  belief  at.  that  time,  was  to  be  free  from  transmigration,  and  to  be 
separated,  not  only  from  the  body,  but  even  from  the  antah-karana,  which 
is  the  organ  of  all  our  thoughts  and  consciousness,  and  to  remain 
unconscious  for  ever.  Indeed  the  teaching  of  the  Vedanta,  which 
represents  the  orthodox  view,  an 3  which  I  followed,  is  that  souls,  when 
saved,  became  Brahma  itself,  and  of  course  lose  their  individual 
consciousness.  So  then,  according  to  teaching  of  the  Vedanta  as  well 
as  according  to  all  other  ancient  schools  of  religion  among  the  Hindus, 
worship  of  God  is  only  possible  until  one  obtains  salvation." 

EUROPEAN  ESTIMATES  OF  THE  VEDANTA. 

Of  late  much  importance  has  been  attached  to  the  favourable 
opinions  of  the  Veddnta  expressed  by  Schopenhauer  and  Max 
Miiller,  They  may  be  briefly  noticed.  The  former  says : 

"  In  the  whole  world  there  is  no  study  so  beneficial  aod  so  elevating 
as  tbat  of  the  Oupnek'hat.  It  has  been  the  solace  of  my  life,  it  will  be 
the  solace  of  my  death." 

Schopenhauer's  knowledge  of  what  he  called  the  (  Oupnek'- 
hat '  (Upanishads)  was  derived  from  a  Latin  translation,  made 
by  a  Frenchman  from  a  Persian  translation.  The  Latin  translation 
Max  Miiller  admits  was  written  "  in  an  utterly  unintelligible 
style." 


EUROPEAN    ESTIMATES   OF   THE    VEDANTA.  113 

Schopenhauer  has  been  called  the  "Founder  of  Modern 
Pessimism  " — that  everything  in  nature  is  the  worst,  that  life  is 
essentially  an  evil,  and  the  duty  of  man  is  to  seek  extinction 
of  being.  This  is  Hinduism.  Its  grand  enquiry  is  not,  what 
is  truth  ?  but,  how  to  cut  short  the  84  lakhs  of  births  ? 

Schopenhauer  defined  himself  as  a  "  despiser  of  men  : " 

"  In  woman  he  saw  only  a  wayward,  mindless  animal — ugly  too,  he 
said — existing  solely  for  the  propagation  of  the  epecies,  an  end  which 
perpetuated  the  woe  of  the  world."1 

Schopenhauer  claimed  that  the  study  of  the  TJpanishads  was 
"  beneficial  and  elevating."  It  certainly  failed  to  produce  that 
effect  on  himself.  His  character  is  thus  described :  "  His 
disposition  was  heavy  and  severe,  dark,  mistrustful  and  suspicious, 
preventing  him  from  entering  into  permanent  trustful  relations 
with  men  or  women."2  After  the  death  of  his  father,  he  treated 
his  mother  with  such  insolence,  that  she  could  not  live  in  the  same 
house  with  him.  • 

Max  Miiller  adds  that  Schopenhauer  was  "  certainly  not  a  man 
given  to  deal  in  extravagant  praise  of  any  philosophy  but  his  own." 
This  is  quite  true,  but  his  "  extravagant  praise"  of  the  Upanishads 
arose  from  the  fact  that  he  thought  he  was  praising  "  his  own 
philosophy." 

Max  Miiller,  after  quoting  the  opinion  of  Schopenhauer,  adds  : 

"  If  these   words   of   Schopenhauer's  required  any   endorsement,   I 
-    should  willingly  give  it  as  the  result  of  my  own  experience  during  a  long 
life  devoted  to  the  study  of  many  philosophies  and  many  religions. 

"  If  philosophy  is  meant  to  be  a  preparation  for  a  happy  death,  or 
euthanasia,  I  know  of  no  better  preparation  for  it  than  the  Vedanta 
philosophy."3 

The  Brahmavddin  quotes  the  following  as  from  Max  Miiller : 

"  As  it  has  been  well  remarked  by  no  less  an  authority  than  Max 
Miiller,  her  Vedanta,  while  being  the  most  sublime  philosophy,  is  also 
the  most  satisfying  religion."  Sept.  14,  1895. 

Professor  Max  Miiller  is  just  the  opposite,  in  some  respects,  of 
Schopenhauer.  He 

"  loveth  well 
Both  man  and  bird,  and  beast ." 

In  his  intercourse  with  every  one  he  seeks  to  be  as  pleasant 
as  possible.  It  should,  however,  be  remembered  that  he  has 
"  Two  Voices."  By  listening  only  to  one  of  them,  a  very  erroneous 
conclusion  may  be  drawn.  The  Professor's  proviso  must  also  be 
taken  into  account.  Writing  to  the  Brahmavddin  he  says: 

1  Upanishads,  vol.  I.,  p.  Iviii. 

8  Chambers'  Encyclopaedia,  vol.  ix.,  p.  221. 

3  Lee  turn  ft  on  the  Vectdnla  Philosrtfky,   p.  8. 

15 


114  THE   VKDANTA-SARA. 

"  I  spend  my  happiest  hours  in  reading  Vedantic  books.  They  are 
to  me  like  the  light  of  the  morning,  like  the  pure  air  of  the  mountains — 
so  simple,  so  true,  if  once  understood."  Dec.  7,  1897. 

Observe  the  qualification,  "  if  once  understood."  The  fact  is 
that  the  Professor,  like  Schopenhauer,  has  his  private  interpretation 
of  Vedantism.  He  and  S'ankara  differ  on  some  important  points. 

Colonel  Jacob  resided  in  India  for  29  years,  and  made  Hindu 
Philosophy  his  speciality.  He  has  published  several  works  on 
Vedanta1  and  compiled  a  Concordance  to  the  Upanishads.  Max 
Miiller's  Lectures  on  the  Vedanta  Philosophy  were  reviewed  by 
Colonel  Jacob  in  The  Academy.  While  giving  them  credit  for 
presenting  the  system  in  "  an  extremely  lucid  and  attractive 
form,"  it  is  claimed  that  the  author  apparently  does  not  clearly 
understand  one  of  its  leading  features  : 

"  The  great  philosopher  S'ankara  gives  clear  definitions  of  God  and 
Brahman,  but,  not  infrequently,  as  I  have  shown  in  my  recent  edition 
of  the  text  of  the  Veddnta-sdra,  he  ignores  the  distinction  between  them* 
although  that  distinction  is  one  of  the  main  features  of  his  system. 
Amongst  us,  at  any  rate,  to  avoid  confusion,  the  term  Brahman  (neuter) 
should  be  strictly  confined  to  the  pure,  unassociated,  Brahman  ;  whilst 
God  is  Brahma-associated-with  ignorance.  In  the  work  before  us  Prof. 
Max  Miiller  has  not  preserved  this  distinction  with  sufficient  care. 
We  read  : 

'  The  Self  can  never  be  known  as  objective,  but  can  only  be  itself,  and 
thus  be  conscious  of  itself  ....  it  knows,  but  it  cannot  be  known'  (p.  67). 
'  "Whose  very  being  is  knowing,  and  whose  knowing  is  being'  (p.  70).  '  The 
only  attributes  of  this  Brahman,  if  attributes  they  can  be  called,  are  that  he 
is,  that  he  knows,  and  that  he  is  full  of  bliss'  (p.  71).  '  The  soul  or  Self  has 
but  three  qualities.  It  is,  it  perceives,  and  it  rejoices'  (p.  94).  'Brahman 
was  before  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  had  always  something  to  know  and 
think  upon'  (p.  139). 

"  Now  a  Vedantist  of  S'ankara's  schools  would  take  exception  to 
every  one  of  these  statements,  and  rightly  so  ;  for  to  attribute  to  pure 
Brahman  perception,  knowing,  thinking',  rejoicing,  or  even  consciousness, 
is  to  destroy  his  system  of  non-duality." 

In  defence  of  Max  Miiller  it  may  be  said  that  the  Upani- 
shads,  which  are  full  of  contradictions,  in  some  passages  assert  that 
Brahma  knows ;  but  the  true  doctrine  of  Vedanta  on  the  subject 
is  as  stated  above. 

The  Professor  also  seems  to  regard  as  blasphemous  another 
doctrine  of  S'ankara — the  identity  of  Brahman  and  the  individual 
Self  or  Soul.2 

The  Professor's  ( '  Second  Voice"  may  now  be  quoted.  He  says 
in  his  Lectures  on  the  Vedanta  Philosophy  : 

"  I  know  I  have  often  been  blamed  for  calling  rnbbish  what  to  the 
Indian  mind  seemed  to  contain  profound  wisdom,  and  to  deserve  the 

1  For  list  of  them,  see  Prefatory  Note.  *  Lectures,  p.  107. 


EXAMINATION.  115 

highest  respect  ....  Every  attempt  to  discover  reason  in  what  is 
unreasonable  is  accepted  as  legitimate  so  long  as  it  enables  us  to  keep 
what  we  are  unwilling  to  part  with.  Still  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East  are  full  of  rubbish,  and  that  the  same  stream 
which  carries  down  fragments  of  pure  gold  carries  also  sand  and  mud, 
and  much  that  is  dead  and  offensive."  pp.  112,  113. 

"  Much,  for  instance,  that  is  said  in  the  Upanishads  about  the 
sacred  syllable  Om,  seems  to  my  mind  mere  twaddle,  at  least  in  its 
present  form."  p.  115- 

The  Professor  is  most  severe  on  the  Brahmanas.  Here  his 
"  Voice"  is  "  no  whisper  breathing  low."  After  allowing  that  they 
contain  "  no  lack  of  striking  thoughts/'  he  adds  : 

"  These  works  deserve  to  be  studied  as  the  physician  studies  the 
twaddle  of  idiots  and  the  raving  of  madmen." 

Vedantism  is  a  "  satisfying  religion"  only  in  the  sense  of 
acting  as  an  opiate  upon  the  conscience.  (See  p.  63) . 

To  the  foregoing  may  be  added  the  opinion  of  Professor 
Deussen,  of  Kiel.  Adaressing  Hindus,  he  said  : 

"  The  Vedanta  in  its  unfalsified  form  is  the  strongest  support  of 
pure  morality,  is  the  greatest  consolation  in  the  sufferings  of  life  and 
death, — Indians  keep  to  it." 

Deussen,  like  Schopenhauer,  extols  the  Vedanta,  because  he 
thinks  it  substantially  the  same  as  his  own  philosophy.  There  is 
no  material  world,  all  is  mdyd,  illusion. 

As  already  mentioned,  Deussen,  like  Eibhu  (p.  67)  cannot 
distinguish  between  "  you"  and  "  I",  and  would  tell  a  beggar  who 
asked  alms,  "  You  and  I  are  the  same." 

It  may  be  noticed  that  the  three  favourable  opinions  quoted 
are  all  from  Germans.  The  Eev.  Isaac  Daniel,  B.A.  thus  explains 
the  German  predilection  for  Hindu  philosophy  : 

"  The  mind  of  the  typical  German  is  purely  speculative  and  not 
practical,  and  the  ancient  Hindu  philosopher  was  exactly  of  the  same 
caste  of  mind. 

"  The  groat  contrast  between  Germans  and  the  English  is  this,  that 
while  the  former  are  self-centred  dreamy,  dogmatic,  aod  speculative,  the 
latter  are  philanthropic,  practical,  and  mindful  of  truth." 

Monier  Williams  says : 

"  The  more  evidently  physical  and  metaphysical  speculations  are 
opposed  to  common  sense,  the  more  favour  do  they  find  with  some  Hindu 
thinkers-  Common  sense  tells  an  Englishman  that  he  really  exists 
himself  and  that  everything  he  sees  around  him  really  exists  also.  He 
cannot  abandon  these  two  primary  convictions.  Not  so  the  Hindu 
Vedantist." 

Max  Miiller  characterizes  as  "  twaddle"  and  (<  rubbish"  much 
of  what  seems  "  to  the  Indian  mind  to  contain  profound  wisdom 
and  to  deserve  the  highest  respect." 


116  THE    VEDANTA-SA&A. 

But  the  best  epithet  is  that  used  by  one  of  the  most  eminent 
citizens  of  Calcutta,  Dr.  Mohendralal  Sircar.  Addressing  a  public 
meeting  a  few  years  ago  he  said  : — 

"  You  must  have  observed  a  retrograde  movement  going  on  in  our 
midst  which  1  fear  is  calculated  to  retard  the  progress  of  the  Hindu  race. 
I  mean  a  return  towards  superstitions  and  idolatries  which  lie  as  the 
blackest  blot  upon  this  part  of  the  world.  The  crude  words  and  hazy 
conceptions  of  the  sages  are  looked  upon  as  absolute  truth.  No  man  is 
allowed  to  differ  from  them  however  much  they  may  have  differed  from 
one  another,  or  however  much  they  may  differ  from  modern  science. 
Indeed,  if  we  are  to  believe  these  reactionaries,  it  is  so  much  the  worse 
for  modern  science  if  she  will  not  conform  her  doctrines  to  the  transcen- 
dental nonsense  of  the  sages." — The  Epiphany,  November  5th,  1887. 


CONCLUDING-  REVIEW. 
REASONS  FOR  THE  REJECTION  OF  VEDANTISM. 

The  following  may  be  mentioned : 

1.  Its  unworthy  representations  of  God — Its  Supreme  Being 
is  unconscious  of  its  own  existence.     It  neither  knows  nor  cares 
for  any  one  else.     It  is  without  love  or  mercy ;  it  has  neither  the 
power  to  do  good  or  evil — to  reward  the  righteous  or  punish  the 
wicked.     Under  the  pretence  of  exalting  Brahma,  its  condition  is 
virtually  reduced  to  that  of  a  stone. 

2.  Its  blasphemous  claims  to  Divinity. — Its  Great  Sentences 
are,  Tat  twam  asi  ;    Brahdsmi.     The  Brahmavddin  says  : 

"  Man  is  not  the  mere  creature  of  a  God ;  he  is  God  himself."  "  He 
is  himself  the  Creator." 

Such  assertions  can  only  be  compared  to  the  ravings  of  a 
maniac  in  a  lunatic  asylum  who  fancies  himself  a  king. 

On  the  other  hand,  man  is  also  reduced  to  the  level  of  the 
brute.  The  soul,  when  it  leaves  a  human  being,  may  next  be 
united  to  the  body  of  a  dog,  crow,  or  insect. 

3.  Its  denial  of  the  eternal  distinction  between  Bight  and 
Wrong, — The  Brahmavddin  says  :     "The  distinctions  of  right  and 
wrong  are  mere    appearances  which  will  vanish  as  soon   as  the 
dream-state  of  life  is  dispelled."     (June   19,  1897).     Vedantism 
thus  denies  the  most  sacred  convictions  of  conscience,  the  highest 
principle  of  the  human  spirit,  and  cuts  at  the  roots  of  morality. 

4.  Its  Physical  Errors — Vedantism  is  based  on  the  Upanish- 
ads.     At  Page  93  the  erroneous  accounts  given  of  the  human  body 
are  noticed.     The  seven  worlds  above  the  earth  and  below  the  earth 
are  shown  to  be  imaginary.     That  some   animals   are  "  moisture- 
engendered"  (See  page  35),  is  a  fiction. 


EXAMINATION.  Il7 

5.  Its   denial  of  the   United  Evidence  of  all  our   Senses  — 

Because  a  rope  in  the  twilight  is  mistaken  for  a  snake  ;  therefore  all 
our  senses  deceive  us.  The  world  has  no  real  existence ;  all  is 
Maya. 

6.  Its  denial  of  our  Natural  Convictions. — As  explained  at 
page  61,  we  instinctively  distinguish  between  ourselves  and  the 
objects  around  us.     Vedantism  contradicts  this  feeling  of  individ- 
uality. 

7.  Its  flagrant  Absurdities. — The  universe  contains  countless 
objects,    differing   widely   from  each    other, — mineral,   vegetable, 
animal.     Among  the  last  some  are  constantly  engaged  in  devouring 
one  another.     With  what  reason  can  it  be  alleged  that    only  one 
Being  exists  ? 

According  to  Deussen,  Vedantism  teaches  that  "  the  soul  of 
each  one  of  us  is  not  a  part  or  an  emanation  of  Brahman,  but  fully 
and  wholly  the  eternal  indivisible  Brahman  itself."  If  this  is 
correct,  the  number  of  Brahmans  must  be  countless.  Even  a 
rnusquito  is  the  "  eternal  indivisible  Brahma  !"  See  page  91. 

8.  Its  denial  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God  and  Brotherhood  of 
Man. — A  father  is  one  who  gives  birth  to  another.     According  to 
Vedantism,  we  are  as  eternal  as  Brahma  itself,  and  therefore  have 
no  father.     Brothers  are  children  of  the  same  parent.     As  we  have 
no  father,  we  are  therefore  not  brothers.     (See  page  95) . 

9.  Its  Selfishness. — The    grand  aim  is  liberation  from  the 
miseries  of  life,  to  be  as  useless  to  others  as  Brahma  itself.     On  the 
other  hand,  the  Christian  conception  of  God  is,  "  Thou  art  good 
and  doest  good,"  and  to  imitate  Him  is  the  great  desire  of  every 
true  Christian.     (See  page  72). 

10.  Its  stifling  Beligion. — Love,  worship,  prayer,  are  three 
great  elements  of  religion.     Vedantism  destroys  them   all.     We 
cannot  love  a  selfish  being  like  Brahma ;  it  is  useless  to  worship  or 
pray   to   a  Being  unconscious  even  of   its   own   existence.     (See 
page  73). 

11.  Its   Fruits. — Bishop    Caldwell    thus     asks     what     has 
Vedantism  done  for  India,  the  land  of  its  birth  ? 

"  Has  it  promoted  popular  education,  civilization,  and  good  govern- 
ment? Has  it  educated  the  people  in  generous  emotions?  Has  it 
abolished  caste  or  even  mitigated  its  evils?  Has  it  obtained  for  widows 
the  liberty  of  remarriage  ?  Has  it  driven  away  dancing  girls  from  the 
temples?  Has  it  abolished  polygamy?  Has  it  repressed  vice  and 
encouraged  virtue  ?  Was  it  .this  philosophy  which  abolished  female 
infaiiticide>  the  meriah  sacrifice,  and  the  burning  of  widows?  Is  it  this 
which  is  covering  the  country  with  a  network  of  railways  and 
telegraphs  ?  Is  it  this  which  has  kindled  amongst  the  Native  intabi* 
tants  of  India  the  spirit  of  improvement  and  enterprise  which  is  now 
apparent  ?  Need  1  ask  the  question  ?  All  this  time  the  philoeophy  of 


Ii8  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

quietism  has  been  sound  asleep,  or  '  with  its  eyes  fixed  on  the  point  of 
its  nose,'  according  to  the  directions  of  the  Gita,  it  has  been  thinking 
itself  out  of  its  wits.  This  philosophy  has  substantially  been  the  creed 
of  the  majority  of  the  people  for  upwards  of  two  thousand  years  ;  and  if 
it  had  emanated  from  God,  the  proofs  of  its  divine  origin  ought  long  ere 
this  to  have  been  apparent;  but  it  has  all  this  time  been  too  much  absorbed 
in  'contemplating  self  by  means. of  self  to  have  had  any  time  or  thought 
left  for  endeavouring  to  improve  the  world.  What  could  be  expected  of 
the  philosophy  of  apathy,  but  that  it  should  leave  things  to  take  their 
course  ?  There  is  much  real  work  now  being  done  in  India  in  the  way 
of  teaching  truth,  putting  down  evil,  and  promoting  the  public  welfare ; 
but  that  work  is  being  done,  not  by  Vedantists  or  quietists  of  any  school, 
but  by  Christians  from  Europe,  whose  highest  philosophy  is  to  do  good, 
and  by  those  Natives  of  India  who  have  been  stimulated  by  the  teaching 
and  example  of  Europeans  to  choose  a  similar  philosophy." 

The  Eev.  T.  E.  Slater  thus  sums  up  the  whole  : 
"  The  Veddnta,  the  highest  conclusion  of  Indian  thought,  is 
based  on  a  mistaken  and  pessimistic  view  of  life  ;  on  a  formulated 
dogma  unsupported  by  any  evidence  and  untaught  in  the  hymns  of  the 
Rig-Veda :  the  whole  an  elaborate  and  subtle  process  of  false 
reasoning"^ 

Tennyson  thus  writes  of  Pantheism  in  his  In  Memoriam  : 

"  That  each  who  seems  a  separate  whole 
Should  move  his  round  and  fusing  all 
The  skirts  of  self  again  should  fall 
Kemergiiig  in  the  general  soul— 
Is  faith  as  vague  as  all  unsweet ; — 
Eternal  form  shall  still  divide 
The  eternal  soul  from  all  beside," 


THE  IMPOETANCE  OF  RELIGION. 

The  Hindus  are  fond  of  speculating  about  religion,  but  often 
they  do  not  realize  that  it  is  far  more  than  an  abstract  theory,  that 
it  is  a  matter  which  intimately  concerns  their  own  well-being  both 
in  this  life  and  the  eternal  unseen  world  which  they  must  enter  at 
death. 

The  following  remarks  of  Bishop  Caldwell  apply  to  most 
Hindus,  educated  or  uneducated : 

"  Practically  it  matters  very  little  in  general  what  theosophy  or  philo- 
sophy a  Hindu  professes,  what  his  ideas  may  be  about  the  most  ancient 
form  of  his  religion;  or  even  what  his  ideas  may  be  about  the  religious 
reforms  that  the  age  is  said  to  require.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  and  in  so  far 
as  his  actual  course  in  life  is  concerned,  he  is  content,  except  in  a  small 
number  of  exceptional  cases,  to  adhere  with  scrupulous  care  to  the 

1  Studies  in  the  Upanishads,  p.  47. 


EXAMINATION,  119 

traditionary  usages  of  his  caste  and  sect  His  ideas  may  have  received  a 
tincture  from  his  English  education,  but  ordinarily  his  actions  differ,  in 
no  particular  of  any  importance,  from  those  of  his  progenitors." 

Most  men  are  absorbed  by  pursuit  of  the  present.  The  insuffi- 
ciency of  this  is  well  illustrated  by  the  following  anecdote  : 

About  three  hundred  years  ago,  a  young  man  came  to  a  dis- 
tinguished University  in  Europe  to  study  law.  His  long  cherished 
desire  was  at  last  gratified.  He  possessed  considerable  talents,  and 
commenced  his  studies  with  bright  hopes. 

Soon  afterwards,  the  student  called  on  a  good  old  man,  who 
devoted  his  life  to  the  benefit  of  the  people  among  whom  he  lived. 
The  young  man  told  him  that  he  had  come  to  the  University  on 
account  of  its  great  fame,  and  that  he  intended  to  spare  no  pains 
or  labour  to  get  through  his  studies  as  quickly  as  possible. 

The  good  old  man  listened  with  great  patience  and  then  said : — 

"  Well,  and  when  you  have  got  through  your  course  of  studies, 
what  do  you  mean  to  clo  ?" 

"  Then  I  shall  take  my  degree,"  answered  the  young  man. 

"  And  then  ?"  asked  his  venerable  friend. 

"  And  then,"  continued  the  youth,  "  I  shall  have  a  number  of 
difficult  questions  to  manage,  shall  catch  people's  notice  by  my 
eloquence,  my  zeal,  my  learning,  my  acuteness,  and  gain  a  great 
reputation." 

"And  then  ?"  repeated  the  good  man. 

"  And  then,"  replied  the  young  student,  "  why  there  cannot 
be  a  question  I  shall  be  promoted  to  some  high  office.  Besides,  I 
shall  make  money  and  grow  rich." 

"  And  then  ?"  continued  the  old  man. 

"  And  then,"  added  the  young  lawyer,  "  then  I  shall  be  com- 
fortably and  honourably  settled  in  wealth  and  dignity." 

"  And  then  ?"  asked  his  friend. 

"  And  then,"  said  the  vouth,  { '  and  then — and  then — than  1 
shall  die." 

Here  the  good  old  man  raised  his  voice  :  "  AND  WHAT  THEN  ?" 
Whereupon  the  young  man  made  no  answer,  but  cast  down  his  head 
and  went  away.  The  last,  "  And  what  then  ?"  had,  like  lightning, 
pierced  his  soul,  and  he  could  not  get  rid  of  it.  The  student,  instead 
of  devoting  his  life  to  the  pursuit  of  the  pleasures  and  honours  of 
this  world,  sought  to  promote  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  his 
country. 

Man  needs  a  religion.  In  youth,  in  the  time  of  prosperity,  the 
thoughts  of  Grod,  of  death,  and  a  future  state,  may  be  distasteful, 
and  the  world  may  be  considered  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  desires. 
But  a  change  will  take  place  in  all.  The  dark  clouds  of  affliction 
will  overcast  the  sky  ;  wealth  may  take  to  itself  wings  and  fly  away; 
the  coveted  office  may  not  be  gained ;  health,  the  absence  of  which 


120  THE    VEDANTA-SARA. 

embitters  every  earthly  pleasure,  may  be  broken;  loved  ones  may 
be  removed  by  death,  and,  sooner  or  later,  the  inexorable  summons 
will  reach  ourselves. 


TWO  GKEAT  RELIGIOUS  DOCTEINES. 

Space  does  not  permit  the  doctrines  of  religion  to  be  described 
in  detail.  Two  have  already  been  noticed ;  but  on  account  of 
their  great  importance,  some  additional  remarks  will  be  offered. 

THE  FATHERHOOD  OF  GOD. 

To  a  child  the  word  father  represents  love,  authority,  and 
wisdom.  A  mother  has  the  same  tender  affection,  but  the  other 
qualities  are  not  so  clearly  shown.  Hence,  when  we  seek  for  a 
name  for  God  which  is  most  exalted  and  yet  most  dear,  which 
expresses  love  and  awe,  we  call  Him  our  "  Father  in  Heaven." 

Two  reasons  may  be  mentioned  why  God  is  called  our  Father. 

1.  He  gave  us  being. — As    already  mentioned,  what  particu- 
larly distinguishes  an  earthly  father  is  that,  under  God,  he  is  the 
author  of  the   child's  existence.     This  can  be  said  of  no  other 
person.     However  much  another  may  love  the  child  and  be  kind 
to  him,  he  has  no  claim  to  the  name  of  father.     Educated  Hindus 
now  generally  admit  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  and  regard  Him  as 
their  Creator,  but   such  is  not  the  teaching  of  Hinduism  :  it  was 
learned  from  Christianity.     By  the  word  Creator  Christians  means 
one  who  gave  being  to  things  which  had  no  being  before.     In  this 
sense  no  Hindu  sect  believes  God  to  have  created  anything. 

According  to  Hinduism,  souls  are  eternal  svyainbhu  essences, 
without  beginning  or  end,  continually  in  the  process  of  samsdra  or 
transmigration.  We  are  all  little  gods  as  eternal  as  Brahma  himself. 

2.  God  may  be  called  our    Father    in  heaven  because  He 
supplies  all  our  wants. — A  father  provides  his  children  with  food, 
clothing,  and   every  thing   they   need.      He  does  not  do  so  on 
account  of  any  service  they  have  rendered  to  him,  but  from  pure 
love.     What  has  our  Father  in  heaven  done  for  us  ?    He  not  only 
gave  us  life,  but  He  keeps  us  in  life.     We  are  dependent  upon 
Him  for  every  breath  we  draw  ;  we  live  upon  His  earth  ;   it  is  His 
sun  that  shines  upon  us.     Every  thing  we  have  is  His  gift.     This 
is  the  teaching  of  Christianity,  and  Christians  therefore  praise  and 
thank  God  for  His  goodness. 

In  the  above  respect  Hinduism  does  not  acknowledge  the 
Fatherhood  of  God.  According  to  it,  everything  that  happens  to 
a  person  is  determined  by  his  karma.  Every  thing  that  God  does 
to  souls  Ho  does  with  reference  to  their  good  and  evil  deeds  only, 
in  order  that  they  may  receive  reward  for  good  deeds,  and  suffer 


TWO  GREAT   RELIGIOUS   DOCTRINES.  121 

for  evil  deeds.  The  bless'ng-s  we  receive  have  their  source,  not  in 
God's  benevolence,  but  in  oar  own  good  deeds  in  a  previous  birth. 
Why  should  we  be  grateful  to  Him  ?  True  religion  is  thus 
destroyed. 

Early  Worship  of  the  Heaven-Father. — It  is  a  very  interest- 
ing fact  that  the  ancestors  of  Aryan  Hindus  and  the  English  once 
spoke  the  same  languasre,  and  worshipped  the  same  God  under  the 
same  name.  Max  Miiller  says  : — 

"  Thousands  of  years  ago,  before  Greek  was  Greek,  and  Sanskrit 
was  Sanskrit,  the  ancestors  of  the  Aryan  races  dwelt  together  in  the 
high  lands  of  Central  Asia,  speaking  one  common  language. 

"  The  terras  for  God,  for  house,  for  father,  mother,  son  and  daugh- 
ter, for  dog  and  cow,  for  heart  and  tears,  for  axe  and  tree,  identical  in  all 
the  Irido-Earopean  idioms  are  like  the  watchwords  of  soldiers.  We 
challenge  the  seeming  stranger ;  and  whether  he  answer  with  the  lips 
of  a  Greek,  a  Get-man,  or  an  Indian,  we  recognise  him  as  one  of  our- 
selves. There  was  a  time  when  the  ancestors  of  the  Celts,  the  Germans, 
the  Slavonians,  the  Greeks  and  Italians,  the  Persians  and  Hindus,  were 
living  together  within  the  same  fences,  separate  from  the  ancestors  of 
the  Semitic  and  Turanian  races.'* 

<(  The  Aryans  were  then  no  longer  dwellers  in  tents,  but  builders 
of  permanent  houses.  As  the  name  forking  is  the  same  in  Sanskrit; 
Latin,  Teutonic,  and  Celtic,  we  know  that  kingly  government  was 
established  and  recognized  by  the  Aryan  at  the  prehistoric  period. 
They  also  worshipped  an  unseen  Being,  under  the  self-same  name." 

"  If  I  were  asked  what  I  consider  the  most  important  discovery 
which  has  been  made  during  the  nineteenth  century  with  respect  to  the 
ancient  history  of  mankind,  I  should  answer  by  the  following  short 
line  : 

Sanskrit  DYAUSH-PITAR=Greek,  ZETSHATHP  (ZEUS 
PATER)  =  Latin  JUPITER= Old  Norse  TYR. 

'•  Think  what  this  equation  implies  !  It  implies  not  only  that  our 
own  ancestors  and  the  ancestors  of  Homer  and  Cicero  (the  Greeks  and 
Romans)  spoke  the  same  language  as  the  people  of  India — this  is  a 
discovery  which,  however  incredible  it  sounded  at  first,  has  long  ceased 
to  cause  any  surprise — -but  it  implies  and  proves  that  they  all  had  once 
the  same  faith,  and  worshipped  for  a  time  the  same  supreme  Deity 
under  exactly  the  same  name — name  which  meant  Heaven-Father. 

"  There  is  a  monotheism  which  precedes  the  polytheism  of  the  Veda, 
and  even  in  the  invocation  of  their  innumerable  gods,  the  remembrance 
of  a  God,  one  and  infinite,  breaks  through  the  mist  of  an  idolatrous 
phraseology,  like  the  blue  sky  that  is  hidden  by  passing  clouds."1 

"  Have  we  not  all  one  Father  ?  Hath  not  one  God  created  us  ?" 
The  Eastern  and  Western  Aryans,  after  separation  for  thousands  of 
years,  should  again  unite  in  the  worship  of  the  great  Heaven- 
Father. 

1  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature  and  Nineteenth  Century,  October  1885. 

16 


122  THE  VEDANTA-SARA. 

THE  BROTHERHOOD  OP  MAN. 

Brothers  are  sons  of  the  same  father.  As  already  mentioned, 
according  to  the  Yedanta,  we  are  eternal,  self-existent  beings.  By 
thus  denying  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  the  Brotherhood  of  Man  is 
also  denied. 

Dr.  John  Muir,  in  his  learned  work,  Sanskrit  Texts,  (Vol.  I), 
quotes  about  fifteen  contradictory  accounts  of  the  origin  of  man 
from  different  or  the  same  Hindu  sacred  books.  This  shows  that 
they  are  untrustworthy.  Caste  is  directly  opposed  to  the  Brother- 
hood of  Man.  On  the  other  hand  Christianity  teaches  that 

"  Children  we  are  all 
Of  one  Great  Father,  in  whatever  clime 
His  providence  hath  cast  the  seed  of  life  ; 
All  tongues,  all  colours." 

The  differences  in  colour  and  features  have  been  produced 
by  the  influence  of  climate,  mode  of  living,  and  descent. 

Although  caste  promotes  a  stationary  semi-civilisation  and  has 
some  other  advantages,  these  are  far  more  than  counterbalanced 
by  its  pernicious  effects.  To  tyrannise  over  their  fellow-beings, 
the  Brahman  claimed  a  divine  origin  for  caste.  Dr.  K.  M.  Baner- 
jea  well  says,  "  Of  all  forgeries  the  most  flagitious  and  profane  is 
that  which  counects  the  name  of  the  Almighty  with  an  untruth." 
Hinduis-n,  to  use  the  words  of  Principal  Caird,  "  instead  of  break- 
ing down  artificial  barriers,  waging  war  with  false  separations, 
softening  divisions,  and  undermining  class  hatred  and  antipathies, 
becomes  itself  the  very  consecration  of  them." 

Christianity,  on  the  other  hand,  tends  to  draw  men  together. 


TWO  GREAT  DUTIES. 

1.  Love  to  God. — As  already  shown,  this  feeling  cannot  exist 
towards  Brahma,  unconscious  of  its  own  existence,  neither  know- 
ing nor  caring  for  any  other  being.  Christianity,  on  the  other 
hand,  calls  it  forth  in  the  warmest  manner. 

Some  of  the  ways  in  which  our  love  to  God  will  be  shown  may 
be  mentioned. 

1.  A  desire  to  live  an  in  God's  presence. — An  affectionate  child 
delights  in  his  father's  society.  If  obliged  to  leave  him,  he  laments 
the  separation,  and  wishes  to  return.     So  should  we  feel  towards 
God.     It  is  true  that  He  is  always  with  us,  but  very  often  we  do 
not  realise  His  presence.     We*  should  live  as  continually  in  His 
sight.     We  should  .strive  to  "  walk  with  God." 

2.  A  love  of  Prayer. — We  delight  to   converse  with  those  we 
love.     Can  we  conceive  of  a  son,   living  in    his   father's  house  and 
constantly  m  his  sight,  yet  never  speaking  to  him,  or  saying  only 


I  WO   GHEA.T    DUTIES.  123 

a  few  heartless  words  at  distant  intervals  ?  Such  conduct  would 
show  that  he  was  entirely  destitute  of  filial  affection.  God  is  ever 
near  us.  We  speak  to  Him  in  prayer.  If  we  love  Him,  it  will  be 
a  pleasure  to  tell  Him  all  our  sorrows,  to  seek  His  guidance,  and 
to  thank  Him  for  His  goodness. 

3.  A  wish  to  do  God's  will. — If  we  are  attached  to  a  friend,  we 
try  to  avoid  whatever  will  grieve  him,  and  seek  to  do  what  will 
give  him   pleasure.     Thus   it   will    be   with   us  if   we  love  God. 
Before  doing  anything,  we  shall  think  how  God  will  regard  it,  and 
act  accordingly.     His  laws  will  be  our  guide.     Obedience  is  a  great 
test   of   love.      Jesus    Christ    says,   "  If  ye   love   me,   keep   my 
commandments." 

4.  A  desire  to  be  like    God. — Children  frequently  resemble 
their  parents  in  outward  looks  ;  they  catch  the  tone  of  their  voice ; 
they  often  copy  them  in  their  conduct.     Even  the  best  earthly 
parents  have  their  faults,  but  we  are  safe  in  following  the  example 
of  our  heavenly  Father.     Plato  makes  "  likeness  to  God"  the  final 
aim  of  man.     Jesus  Christ  says,  "  Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even  as 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect." 

The  Hindu  idea  of  "  absorption"  into  the  Deity  is  a  great 
error,  but  it  is  our  highest  duty  and  privilege  to  become  "  partakers 
of  the  Divine  nature,"  to  be  like  God,  to  have  our  will  swallowed 
up  in  His.  Thus  we  shall,  in  some  faint  measure,  share  in  the 
Divino  happiness. 

Such  are  some  of  the  feelings  we  should  cherish. 

2.  Love  to  Man. — The  "  first  and  great  commandment"  is  to 
love  God  with  all  our  heart.  The  second  is  to  love  our  neighbours 
as  ourselves.  Jesus  Christ  explained  it  by  saying,  "  All  things 
whatever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to 
them."  This  includes  the  following  : 

1 .  All  should  be  treated  icith  justice. — The  Bible  says,  "  Masters, 
give  unto  your  servants  that  which  is  just  and  equal."  It 
condemns  strongly  the  rich  who  oppress  the  poor. 

2.  No  insulting  language  should  be  addressed  to  any.— The 
Bible  says,  "  Honour  all  men."      Those  who   have  disagreeable 
duties  to  perform  are  entitled  to  gratitude  rather  than  disdain. 
W  ithout  them  cities  would  be  uninhabitable. 

The  rudeness  of  some  Europeans  is  a  frequent  and,  in  some 
cases,  a  just  complaint  in  Indian  papers.  None  regret  it  more  than 
some  of  their  own  countrymen.  But  the  Times  of  India  says, 
"No  Englishman  treats  the  Natives  of  this  country  with  the 
contempt  and  insolence  which  high  caste  Hindus  habitually  display 
towards  their  low-caste  brethren." 

3.  We  should  show  our  love  Lit  every  possible  way. — We  should 
sympathise   with   others   in   their  joys   and  sorrows.     Especially 
should  We  seek  to  comfort  them  when  sick  or  otherwise  afflicted. 
When  they  are  disheartened,  we  should  try  to  cheer  them  j  when 


124  THE   VEDANTA-SARA. 

they  are  doubtful  what  to  do,  we  should  give  them  our  advice.  We 
should  strive  to  encourage  them  in  well-doing,  while  we  ought  also 
to  warn  them  against  any  wrong  course  of  conduct. 

It  is  said  of  God,  "  Thou  art  good,  and  doest  good."  GTod  is 
the  happiest  Being  in  existence,  and  if  we  had  His  spirit  we  should 
share,  in  some  measure,  His  happiness.  Like  him,  we  should  love 
to  do  good. 

After  a  life  thus  spent  on  earth,  Christianity  teachea  us  to 
look  forward  to  an  eternity  of  conscious  happiness  in  heaven. 


MAN'S  SINPULNESS. 

Nothing  perhaps  shows  more  the  unfitrfess  of  Swami  Vive- 
kananda  to  be  a  safe  religious  guide  than  his  denial  that  man  is  a 
sinner. 

At  Chicago  he  said : — 

"  Ye  are  the  children  of  God,  the  sharers  of  immortal  bliss,  holy 
and  perfect  beings.  Ye,  divinities  ou  earth,  sinners  !  It  is  a  sin  to  call  a 
man  so.  It  is  a  standing  libel  on  human  nature." 

Nearly  the  whole  human  race,  in  a,ll  ages,  with  one  voice, 
acknowledge  themselves  to  be  sinners. 

The  Rig- Veda  contains  some  petitions  for  the  pardon  of  sin. 
Varuna  is  thus  addressed : 

"Thou,  0  righteous  king,  have  mercy  on  me  !  Like  as  a  rope  from 
a  calf,  remove  from  me  my  Bin."  II.  28. 

In  the  Atharva-Veda  the  burden  of  mental  sins  is  felt : 

"  Whatever  wrong  we  have  committed,  sleeping  or  waking,  by  ill 
wish,  dislike  or  slander. 

"  All  these  offences,  which  deserve  displeasure,  may  Agni  take  from 
us  and  keep  them  distant."  VI.  45. 

In  the  Brahmanas  sacrifice  is  enjoined  as  the  annulment  of  sin. 
Max  Miiller,  referring  to  the  whole  continent  of  Africa,  says  : 

"  Wherever  we  now  see  kraals  and  cattle-pens  depend  upon  it  there 
was  to  be  seen  once,  as  there  is  to  be  seen  even  now,  the  smoke  of  sacri- 
fice rising  up  from  earth  to  heaven." 

The  many  millions  of  Hindus,  by  bathing  in  the  Ganges  and 
other  supposed  sacred  waters,  with  one  voice,  confess  that  they  are 
sinners. 

It  is  only  pride  and  ignorance  that  make  a  man  deny  that  he 
is  a  sinner.  The  holiest  men  are  the  first  to  acknowledge  it. 
Some  Brahmans  daily  make  this  acknowledgment : — 

Papo'ham  papakarmaham  papitma  papasambhava. 

"  I  am  evil ;  evil  in  origin  ;  evil-minded  ;  evil  in  deed." 


TWO   QRSAT   DUTIES.  125 

The  Eev.  F.  W.  Kellett,  M.A.,  in  a  paper  entitled,  The  Sense 
of  Sin  in  the  Light  of  History, 1  shows  "  that  the  deeper  the  sense  of 
sin,  the  truer  the  religion." 

The  two  great  sins  chargeable  against  every  human  being  are 
ungodliness  and  selfishness. 

The  verdict  pronounced  upon  Belshazzar,  king  of  Babylon, 
was  :  "  Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  art  found  wanting." 
The  prophet  Daniel  explained  the  grounds  of  this  judgment  when 
he  said,  "  The  God  in  whose  hand  thy  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all 
thy  ways,  hast  thou  not  glorified."  When  conscience  awakes,  we 
see  nothing  in  the  past  but  a  career  of  guilt — the  grand  purpose  of 
our  lives  neglected,  the  great  God  treated  with  indifference,  His 
holy  law  trampled  under  foot.  God  contrasts  the  gratitude  of  the 
very  beasts  with  the  regardlessness  of  man.  "  I  have  nourished 
and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against  me.  The 
ox  knoweth  his  owner  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib  ;  but  Israel  doth 
not  know,  my  people  doth  not  consider." 

Principal  Fairburn  thus  expresses  the  feelings  of  every  one 
who  reflects  seriously  on  life : 

"  Man  has  noble  instincts  and  impulses  that  impel  him  to  seek  the 
true,  to  admire  the  lovely,  to  worship  the  good,  to  feel  after  and  find  the 
Infinite  Perfection  in  which  the  true,  and  right,  and  beautiful,  blend  into 
a  divine  and  personal  Unity.  Man  has  deep  moral  convictions  of  rights 
that  are  his  due,  of  duties  that  he  owes,  of  an  eternal  law  he  is  bound  to 
discover  and  obey.  Man  has  sad  and  remorsef al  experiences,  the  sense 
of  unfulfilled  duties,  of  wasted  hours,  of  sorrows  that  have  turned  the 
anticipated  joys  of  his  life  into  utter  miseries,  of  mean  and  unmanly  sins 
against  conscience  and  heart,  against  man  and  God,  of  losses  unredeemed 
by  gain,  of  the  lonely  anguish  that  comes  in  the  hour  of  bereavement  and 
throws  across  life  a  shadow  that  no  sunshine  can  pierce.  And  out 
of  these  mingling  instincts  and  impulses,  convictions  and  experiences, 
rise  man's  manifold  needs,  those  cravings  after  rest,  those  gropings  after 
a  strong  hand  to  hold  and  trust,  those  cries  for  pardon,  those  unutter- 
able groanings  after  light  shed  from  a  Divine  face  upon  his  gloom,  in 
which  lie  at  once  the  greatness  and  misery  of  man."  * 

OUB  DUTY  AS  SINFUL. 

If  a  child  has  been  ungrateful  and  disobedient,  it  is  his 
bounden  duty  to  confess  his  fault,  with  deep  sorrow,  and  ask  for- 
giveness. This  is  our  duty  also  to  our  heavenly  Father. 

It  sometimes  happens  that  an  ungrateful  wicked  son  leaves 
his  father's  house,  and  lives  among  companions  like  himself,  never 
thinking  of  his  father,  and  caring  nothing  about  him.  Although 
men  have  thus  acted  towards  their  heavenly  Father,  His  heart  still 

i  Sol.l  by  Mr.  A.  T.  Scott,  Tract  Dep6t,  Madras,  Price  £  Auna. 
9  The  City  of  Qod,  pp.  41,  42. 


126  TflJS    VEDANTA-SAEA. 

yearns  over  them,  and  He  would  welcome  their  return.  This  is 
vividly  shown  in  a  parable  spoken  by  the  Great  Teacher,  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ : 

A  certain  man  had  two  sons.  The  younger  of  them  said  to 
his  father,  "  Father,  give  me  the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth  to 
ine."  The  father  then  divided  all  he  had  between  his  two  "sons. 
A  few  days  after,  his  younger  son  went  away  to  a  far  country, 
where  he  soon  spent  all  his  property  among  bad  companions.  He 
was  now  so  poor  that  he  went  into  the  fields  to  feed  swine,  and 
he  was  so  hungry,  that  he  would  gladly  have  taken  some  of  the 
food  that  the  swine  did  eat. 

Afterwards,  the  younger  son  thought  that,  while  he  was  starv- 
ing, his  lather's  servants  had  more  than,  they  could  eat.  Then  he 
said,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father,  and  will  say  to  him,  Father, 
I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and  in  thy  sight,  and  am  no  more  wor- 
thy to  be  called  thy  son."  As  soon  as  his  father  saw  him  coming, 
he  ran,  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him.  He  told  the  servants  to 
bring  the  best  robe,  and  make  ready  the  finest  food.  Full  of  joy, 
he  said,  "  This  my  son  was  dead  and  is  alive  again  :  he  was  lost 
and  is  found." 

An  Atonement  needed. — A  father  may  forgive  his  disobedient 
children  when  they  are  sorry  for  their  conduct  and  try  to  be  lov- 
ing in  future.  It  is  different,  however,  with  a  king  or  judge.  A 
criminal  may  be  sorry  for  his  conduct,  and  wish  to  reform ;  but  lie 
is  not  let  off  on  that  account.  If  this  were  done,  men  would  be 
tempted  to  break  the  laws,  hoping  to  be  pardoned  on  their 
repentance. 

The  question  is,  How  can  (rod's  justice  and  mercy  be  recon- 
ciled ?  how  can  we  be  forgiven  and  the  honour  of  God's  law 
maintained  ? 

In  all  ages  the  hope  has  been  more  or  less  entertained  that 
God  would  become  incarnate  to  deliver  man  from  the  burden  of  sin 
and  misery  under  which  the  world  is  groaning.  Hinduism  has  its 
incarnations.  The  Kalki  Avatara  is  yet  to  come,  when  Vishnu,  at 
the  end  of  the  Kali  Yug,  is  to  appear  seated  on  a  white  horse,  with 
drawn  sword  in  his  hand  blazing  like  a  comet,  for  the  destruction 
of  the  wicked,  and  the  restoration  of  purity. 

Christianity  also  teaches  that  man  is  so  deeply  plunged  in  sin 
and  his  guilt  is  so  great,  that  a  Divine  incarnation  was  necessary 
for  his  deliverance.  The  first  promise  of  this  was  given  by  God 
Himself  thousands  of  years  ago.  The  Son  of  God,  pitying  the 
human  race,  came  down  from  heaven  for  our  salvation.  By  His 
death  on  the  cross  He  bore  the  punishment  due  to  our  sins; 
by  His  obedience  to  the  law  of  God  He  wrought  out  a  perfect 
righteousness,  which,  like  a  spotless  robe,  is  given  to  His  followers* 

The  following  illustration  has  been  used  :  A  part  of  the  army 
of  one  of  the  wisest  and  best  of  kings  conspired  against  him. 


TWO    ftREAT    DUTIES.  127 

They  were  seized,  disarmed,  and  condemned  to  die.  The  king 
wished  to  save  their  lives,  but  a  free  pardon  would  have  tempted 
others  to  rebel.  The  king's  only  son,  who  was  commander-in-chief 
of  the  army,  also  wished  to  deliver  the  condemned  men.  It  was 
agreed  that  the  prince  should  suffer  punishment  in  their  stead,  and 
when  this  was  done,  those  who  asked  pardon  in  his  name  would  be 
forgiven. 

As  the  king's  son  in  the  parable  offered  to  suffer  that  the  rebel 
soldiers  might  be  spared,  so  the  eternal  Son  of  God  agreed  to 
become  man  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  suffer  and  die  in  our 
stead.  For  33  years  He  lived  on  eai'th,  perfectly  obeying  all  God's 
laws,  and  at  last  died  on  the  cross.  On  the  third  day  He  rose  from 
the  dead,  and  afterwards  ascended  to  heaven,  where  He  occupies 
the  highest  place  of  honour.  Pardon  is  now  freely  offered  to  all 
who  seek  it  in  His  name,  accepting  Him  as  their  Saviour. 

No  illustration  that  can  be  given  fully  meets  the  case  ;  but  the 
foregoing  may  give  stime  idea  of  the  way  in  which  God's  justice  and 
mercy  are  reconciled  through  Christianity. 

Objections. — The  Christian  doctrine  of  the  Atonement  has 
been  assailed  on  various  grounds.  Some  of  the  objections  are 
diametrically  opposed  to  one  another.  "  By  one  critic,"  says 
Mansel,  "  the  doctrine  is  rejected  because  it  is  more  consistent  with 
the  infinite  mercy  of  God  to  pardon  sin  freely,  without  any  atone- 
ment whatsoever.  By  another,  because  from  the  unchangeable 
nature  of  God's  laws,  it  is  impossible  that  sin  can  be  pardoned  at 
all."  The  former  would  sacrifice  God's  justice  ;  the  latter  His  mercy. 

Another  objection  may  be  noticed.  It  is  maintained  that  it 
is  unjust  that  the  innocent  should  suffer  for  the  sins  of  the  guilty. 
Newman  Hall  makes  the  following  reply  : 

*'  It  would  indeed  be  most  unrighteous  in  any  earthly  ruler,  were 
he  to  seize  an  innocent  person,  and  make  him  suffer  the  sentence  of  the 
law,  while  the  cnlprit  himself  was  allowed  to  escape.  Supposing, 
however,  the  purposes  of  law  were  equally  accomplished,  by  an  innocent 
person  voluntarily  submitting  to  death  on  behalf  of  a  large  multitude  of 
offenders  who  must  otherwise  have  died,  there  would  be  no  departure 
from  justice ;  neither  would  any  alarm  be  caused  to  the  inno~cent,  by  the 
expectation  of  being  themselves  compelled  to  suffer  for  the  guilty.  But 
if,  by  such  voluntary  transference  of  suffering,  those  offenders  were  also 
reclaimed  and  made  good  citizens, — and  if  moreover  he  who  became 
their  substitute,  were  restored  to  life,  and  as  the  result  of  his  mediation 
were  raised  to  higher  honour  than  before,  not  only  justice  would  be 
satisfied,  but  benevolence  would  rejoice.  So  with  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. 
Re,  the  righteous,  suffered  ;  that  we,  the  unrighteous,  misrht  escape. 
But  the  act  was  voluntary.  The  suffering  of  Christ  was  brief,  while 
His  triumph  is  everlasting." 

A  very  erroneous  impression  prevails  among  some  Hindus. 
They  think  that  Christianity  represents  God  as  angry  till  propitia- 


128  THE   VEDANTA-SABA. 

ted  by  the  Son.  On  the  contrary,  the  atonement  originated  in  the 
love  of  the  Father.  It  was  to  show  that  He  is  a  hoi  v  God  in  hating 
sin,  a  righteous  God  in  punishing  it,  and  a  merciful  God  at  the 
same  time  in  forgiving  it. 

Our  TJntv. — Like  the  prodigal  in  the  parable,  with  deep  sorrow, 
we  should  make  the  confession,  Father,  I  have  sinned,  and  am  no 
more  worthy  to  be  called  Thy  son."  Feeling  that  we  cannot 
ourselves  atone  for  our  sins,  nor  merit  heaven  by  our  best  actions 
which  are  only  like  filthy  rags,  we  should  take  refuge  in  Jesus 
Christ,  and  trust  in  Him  alone  for  salvation. 

While  Jesns  Christ  was  on  earth,  a  man,  in  deep  distress,  said 
to  Him,  "  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  Thou  mine  unbelief."  Though  the 
reader  may  only  be  able  to 

"  Stretch  the  lame  hands  of  faith  and  grope," 
let  him  go  to  Jesus,  saying, 

"  Jnst  as  I  am, — though  toss'd  ahout, 
With  many  a  conflict,  many  a  doubt, 
Fightings  and  fenrs  within,  without, 
O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come !" 

Henceforth  we  should  try  to  live  as  continually  in  the  presence 
of  our  Heavenly  Father,  speaking  to  Him  in  prayer,  and  trying  to 
fulfil  the  duties  mentioned  on  pages  122-128. 

Sad  experience  will  teach  us  that  we  need  Divine  help  to 
resist  temptation  and  overcome  sin.  Here  the  Christian  doctrine 
of  the  Trinity  is  felt  to  be  adapted  to  our  needs.  Although 
Christians  firmly  hold  God's  unity,  yet  in  some  mysterious  way 
there  is  a  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  who  all  unite  for  man's 
redemption.  The  peculiar  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  sanctify, 
to  enable  us  to  overcome  sin,  and  to  be  adorned  with  all  the 
beauties  of  holiness.  His  help  is  given  in  answer  to  prayer.  The 
promise  is,  "  If  ye  being  evil  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto 
your  children  ;  how  much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him  ?" 

Besides  prayer  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  there  must  be  watchfulness 
against  sin,  avoidance  of  temptation,  study  of  the  scriptures  and 
other  good  books,  observance  of  the  Lord's  day,  attendance  at 
public  worship,  association  with  good  men,  etc. 

Repentant  children  are  drawn  far  more  closely  to  God  than 
those  who  are  merely  His  children  by  creation.  They  are  His 
redeemed  children, ;  Jesus  Christ  is  their  Elder  Brother.  What  will 
He  do  for  them  ? 

They  will  have  a  father's  eye  to  watch  over  them.  Wherever 
they  are,  by  day  or  by  night,  they  can  never  be  out  of  His  sight. 
They  will  have  the  ear  of  a  father  to  listen  to  their  requests.  An 
earthly  parent  cannot  always  give  his  child  what  he  needs,  but  God 
has  all  power.  They  will  have  a  father's  hand  to  guide  and  pro- 


TWO   GREAT   DUTIES.  129 

tect  them.  Earthly  parents,  even  though  wise,  may  err  ;  they  may 
be  too  weak  to  deliver  from  danger.  Not  so  with  God.  They  will 
have  a  father's  home  to  receive  them  at  last.  All  who  love  God 
here  will  be  taken  to  the  "  many  mansions  "  prepared  for  them 
above,  there  to  dwell  for  ever. 

Thus  the  beautiful  prayer  of  the  Upanishads  will  be  fulfilled  : 


THE    UNEBAL    LEAD   ME    TO    THE    REAL. 
FROM    DARKNESS   LEAD   ME    TO    LIGHT. 
FROM    DEATH    LEAD    ME    TO   IMMORTALITY.' 

In  the  foregoing  remarks,  some  of  the  great  doctrines  of  Chris- 
tianity are  only  very  briefly  stated.  For  fuller  information  the 
following  are  recommended. 

Short  Papers  for  Seekers  after  Truth.  —  12mo.  112  pp.  1  Anna 

Elements  of  Christian  Truth.  —  12mo.  71  pp.  l^  An.  A  series. 
of  Lectures  by  the  KQV.  Dr.  Murray  Mitchell. 

But  the  study  of  the  Scriptures  themselves  is  specially  urged. 
A  commencement  may  be  made  with  the  Gospel  .of  Luke,  which 
was  originally  written  for  the  benefit  of  a  convert  to  Christianity, 
This  was  followed  by  its  sequel,  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
written  by  the  same  author,  which  gives  an  account  of  the  rise 
of  the  Christian  Church.  The  two  Scripture  portions  may  be 
obtained  in  cheap  editions  at  half  an  anna  each  at  Bible  Depots. 

To  assist  in  the  study  of  these  two  books  of  Scripture,  a  little 
work,  The  Beginnings  of  Christianity,  has  been  published.  Besides 
an  Introduction  to  the  two  books,  it  contains  two  coloured 
Maps,  and  an  explanatory  Vocabulary  of  words  presenting  any 
difficulty.  Price  1^  An.  Post-free,  2  As. 

The  New  Testament  may  form  the  next  study.  English 
editions  may  be  obtained  at  prices  varying  from  1  to  4  As.  An 
introduction  to  its  study,  called  The  Founder  of  Christianity, 
intended  specially  for  Indian  students,  is  sold  at  4  As.  post-rfree. 
The  vernacular  edition  of  the  Scriptures  would  be  helpful  to 
many  in  understanding  their  meaning.  The  complete  Bible 
may  afterwards  be  studied,  and  even  during  the  whole  course 
portions  of  it  may  be  read,  especially  the  Psalms. 

Evidences  of  Christianity.  —  There  is  an  excellent  manual  on 
the  subject  by  the  Eev.  Dr.  Murray  Mitchell,  Letters  to  Indian 
Youth  on  the  Evidences  of  Christianity.  —  12mo.  280  pp.  price  6  As. 
post-free. 

Numerous  other  works  are  mentioned  in  the  appended 
Catalogue  of  Publications. 


17 


PUBLICATIONS  FOE  INDIAN  EEADEES. 


Papers  on  Indian  Reform. 

This  is  a   Series  of  Papers  treating  of  the   great   questions 
connected  with  Indian  progress — material  and  moral. 

SOCIAL  REFORM. 

ON  DECISION  OF  CHARACTER  AND  MORAL  COURAGE.     8vo.  56  pp.  1£  As. 
Post-free,  2  As. 

A  reprint  of  Foster's  Celebrated  Essay,    with   some   remarks   on  its  application 
to  India. 

SANITARY  REFORM  IN  INDIA.     55  pp,  2  As.     Post-free,  2^  As. 

How  lakhs  of   Lives   may  be  saved  every  year,  and    crores  of  cases  of  Sickness 
prevented  ;  Precautions  against  Fever,  Cholera,  Diabetes.  &c. 

Is  INDIA  BECOMING  POORER  OR  RICHER  ?      WITH  REMEDIES   FOR   THE 
EXISTING  POVERTY.     8vo.  82  pp.  2^  As.     Post-free,  3  As. 

The  prevailing  idea   with    regard   to  the  increasing  poverty  of  India  shown  to 
be  incorrect,  and  the  true  means  of  promoting  its  wealth  explained. 

DEBT  AND  THE  RIGHT  USE  OF  MONEY.     8vo.  32  pp.  1  Anna. 

Prevalence  of   Debt  in  India;  its    Causes;    Evils;    how  to    get    out  of  it;   with 
Franklin's  Way  to  Wealth,  &c. 

PDRITY  REFORM.     8vo.  32  pp.  1  Anna. 
TEMPERANCE  REFORM  IN  INDIA.     8vo.  40  pp.  ]  ^  As. 
CASTE.     8vo.  66  pp.  2  As.     Post-free,  2^  As. 

Supposed  and  real  origin  of  Caste;  Laws  of  Caste  according  to  Manu  ;  its  Effects; 
Duty  with  regard  to  it. 

THE  WOMEN  OF  INDIA   AND   WHAT   CAN   BE  DONE   FOR  THEM.     8vo. 
1 55  pp.     4  As.     Post-free,  5^  As. 

Women   in    Hindu  literature ;    Female    Education ;    Marriage     Customs ;     Widow 
Marriage ;   means  to  be  adopted  to  raise  the  position  of  Women. 

THE  ABOVE  COMPLETE  IN  ONE  VOLUME,  1  Rupee.     Postage,  24  As. 
PRIZE  ESSAY  ON  THE  PROMOTION  OF  INDIAN  DOMESTIC  REFORM.     8vo. 

144  pp.     4  As.     Post-free,  5  As. 

THE  SUPPRESSION  OF  THUGGEE  AND  DACOITY.    8vo.  56  pp.     2  As. 
THE     SUPPRESSION    OF  HUMAN     SACRIFICE,     SUTTEE,     AND     FEMALE 

INFANTICIDE.     8vo.  80  pp.  2  4  As. 
INDIA  BEFORE  THE  ENGLISH.     8vo.  48  pp.     2  As. 

A  lecture  by   R.    Sewel   Esq.  T.  C.  8.  (Retired)  showing  the  condition  of  the 
country  in  ancient  times. 


ENGLISH    PUBLICATIONS.  131 

RELIGIOUS  REFORM. 

HISTORY  OP  THE  HINDU  TRIAD.  (Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva.)  8vo. 
64  pp.  2  As.  Post-free,  2 4  As. 

An  account  is  first  given  of  the  earliest  gods  of  the  Hindus  ;  the  changes  which 
afterwards  took  place  are  described,  with  the  development  of  the  Triad  as  given  in 
the  Hindu  sacred  books. 

POPULAR  HINDUISM,     8vo.  96  pp.  2|  As.     Post-free,  34  As. 

Keview  of  the  Hinduism,  of  the  Lpic  Poems  and  Puranas,  &c. ;  Kites  and  Obser- 
vances ;  Effects  of  Hinduism,  and  Suggested  Iteforms. 

PHILOSOPHIC  HINDUISM.     8vo.  72  pp.  2^  As.     Post-free,  3  As. 

The  Upanishads;  the  Six  Schools  of  Hindu  Philosophy  ;  the  Minor  Schools  ; 
Doctrines  of  Philosophic  Hinduism;  the  Bhagavad  Gita;  Causes  of  the  Failure  of 
Hindu  Philosophy, 

THE  BRAHMA  SAMAJ,  AND  OTHEE  MODERN  ECLECTIC  RELIGIOUS  SYSTEMS. 
108  pp.  3  As.  Post-free,  4  As. 

Modern  Hindu  Theism;  Ram  Mohun  Hoy ;  Debendranath  Tagore  ;  Keshub  Chuuder 
Sen  ;  the  Sadharau  Brahmo  feamaj ;  Madras  Brahmoism  ;  Prarthana  Samajes. 

INDIA  HINDU,  AND  INDIA  CHRISTIAN  ;  OR,  WHAT  HINDUISM  HAS  DONE 
FOR  INDIA,  AND  WHAT  CHRISTIANITY  WOULD  DO  FOR  JT.  8vo.  72  pp. 
24  As.  Post-free,  3  As. 

KRISHNA  AS  DESCRIBED  IN  THE  PURANAS  AND  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  8vo. 
72  pp.  2|  As.  Post-free,  3  As. 

ACCOUNT  OP  THE  TEMPLE  OF  JAGANNATH  AT  PURI.     8vo.  48  pp.  H  As. 

CHRISTIANITY  EXPLAINED  TO  A  HINDU  ;  OR,  TEE  DOCTRINES  OP  CHRIS- 
TIANITY AND  HINDUISM  COMPARED.  60  pp.  2  As. 

Doctrines  about  God,  Creation,  the  Soul,  Karma,  Transmigration,  Sin,  Incarnations, 
Salvation,  Prospects  at  death,  and  Comparative  Jtffects. 

SWAMI  VIVEKANANDA  ON  HINDUISM.  8vo.  96  pp.  3  As.  Post-free,  4  As. 

The  Swami's  Chicago  Address  is  quoted  in  full  and  examined  ;  important  facts 
are  brought  out  which  he  omitted  to  state. 

SWAMI  VIVEKANANDA  AND  HIS  GURU.  8vo.  125  pp.  3  As.  Post- 
free,  4  As. 

A  history  of  the  Swami  and  his  Guru  ia  given ;  the  Swami's  boasted  success  in  the 
West  is  shown  to  be  untrue  by  the  letters  of  45  prominent  Americans  ;  the  Vedanta 
philosophy  examined ;  portraits  are  given  of  Schopenhauer  and  Max  Miiller,  with 
an  estimate  of  the  importance  to  be  attached  to  their  approval  of  Vedantism. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  CHRISTIANITY  IN  INDIA  ;  WITH  ITS  PROSPECTS.     8vo. 

150  pp.  5  As.     Post-free,  6  As. 
BARROWS  LECTURES.     8vo.  188  pp.     6  As. 

Seven  Lectures,  by  the  liev.  Dr.  J.  11.  Barrows;  on  CHRISTIANITY,  THB  WOELD- 
WIDB  KELIQION. 


Descriptions  of  Countries  and  Peoples. 

PICTORIAL  TOUR  ROUND  INDIA.  Imperial  8vo.  116  pp.  6  As.  Post-free, 
1\  As. 

An  imaginary  tour  round  India,  with  visits  to  Nepal  and  Cashmere,  describing  the 
principal  cities  and  other  objects  of  interest.  With  97  woodcuts  illustrative  of  the 
Himalayas,  Calcutta,  Benares,  Agra,  Delhi,  Bombay,  Madras,  &o. 


132  ENGLISH    PUBLICATIONS. 

THE   INDIAN    EMPIEB.     8vo.    215    pp.   6    As ;  limp  cloth,   8   As. 

Postage,  1  Anna. 

A  Hand-book  of  Information  for  Indian  citizens.  India,  Past  and  Present,  with 
the  work  yet  to  be  done,  both  by  Government  and  people,  to  render  the  country 
prosperous  and  happy. 

THE   PRINCIPAL  NATIONS  OP  INDIA.     8vo.  160  pp.  4  As.     Post-free, 
5  As. 

An  account  of  42  Nations  and  Tribes  of  India,  with  specimens  of  some  of  their 
languages,  and  55  illustrations 

THE  NATIVE  STATES  OF  INDIA  AND  THEIR  PRINCES  ;   WITH   NOTICES  OP 
SOME  IMPORTANT  ZsMiNDARis.  4to.  100  pp.  5  As.  Post-free,  6  As. 

157  States  are  described,  and  32  portraits  are  given.  The  little  book  will  help  to 
enable  Indians  to  understand  the  vast  extent  of  their  country,  and  what  is  being 
done  for  its  improvement. 

KASI,  OR  BENARES,  the  Holy  City  of  the  Hindus.     Imperial  8vo. 
44  pp.  3  As.     Post-free,  4  As. 

An  account  of  the  city;  its  Sanskrit  schools,  ghats,  temples,  and  pilgrimages; 
with  23  illustrations. 

THE  BEAUTIFUL  GARDEN  OF  INDIA.  8vo.  86  pp.  2|  As.  Post-free,  3  As. 

A  dream  and  its  Interpretation  by  a  Friend  of  India.  A  description  of  India, 
Past  and  Present. 

THE  GREAT  TEMPLES  OF  INDIA,  CEYLON,   AND  BURMA.     Imperial  8vo. 
104  pp.  with  60  illustrations.  6  As.    Post-free,  7£  As. 

There  are  pictures  and  descriptions  of  some  of  the  most  celebrated  Hindu,  Sikh, 
Jaiii  and  Buddhist  temples ;  as  Puri,  Budh-Gaya,  Benares,  Hurdwar,  Gangotri,  Ellora, 
Elephanta,  Amritsar,  Gwalior,  Tanjore,  Srirangam,  Kandy,  Prome  and  Mandalay. 

BURMA  AND  THK  BURMESE.    4to.  54  pp.  2|  As.     Post-free,  3  As. 

A  description  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  Burmese  ;  an  account  of  their 
government,  religion,  and  history,  with  illustrative  woodcuts,  and  portraits  of  King 
Theebaw  and  his  Queen. 

LANKA  AND  ITS  PEOPLE  ;  or,  *A  DESCRIPTION  OF  CEYLON.  4to.  72  pp. 
3  As.     Post-free,  3£  As. 

The   account  of  Lanka  given  in  the  Uamayana  is  first  mentioned.     Its  history, 
and  present  condition  are  then  described,  with  numerous  illustrative  woodcats. 

TIBET  :  THE  HIGHEST  COUNTRY  IN  THE  WORLD.    ,4to.  62  pp.  2£  As. 

An  account  of  the  country,  its  productions,  the  curious  customs  of  the  people, 
their  religion,  and  supposed  living  incarnations  ;  with  numerous  illustrations. 

PICTURES  OF  CHINA  AND  ITS  PEOPLE.     4to.  56  pp.  2^  As.     Post-free, 
3  As. 

Extent,  History,  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  People ;  Schools,  Examinations, 
Industries  ;  Travelling ;  Language  and  Literature ;  Government ;  Religions  ;  India 
and  China  compared  ;  with  64  Illustrations. 

JAPAN  :  THE  LAND  OF  THE  RISING  SUN.     4to.  68  pp.  2£  As.  Post-free, 
3  As. 

With  49  illustrations.  An  interesting  description  of  this  beautiful  country,  and 
an  account  of  the  remarkable  changes  which  have  taken  place  in  it. 

PICTORIAL  TOUR  ROUND  BIBLE  LANDS.    Imperial  8 vo.  100pp.  6  As. 
Post-free,  7 \  As. 

The  principal  countries  mentioned  in  the  Bible  and  in  ancient  history  are  described; 
as  Palestine,  ^yria,  Babylon,  Asia  Minor,  Greece  and  Italy  ;  with  104  Illustrations. 

ARABIA,  AND  ITS  PROPHET*     4to.  64  pp.  2£  As.     Post-free,  3  As. 

An  account  of  the  Arabs  ;  with  descriptions  of  Jeddah,  Mecca,  Medina ;  the  History 
of  Muhammad  and  the  early  Caliphs  ;  the  Koran,  Muslim  Doctrines,  Sects,  Prayers, 
Pilgrimage,  &c. ;  with  numerous  illustrations. 


ENGLISH    PUBLICATIONS.  133 

PICTURES  OF  RUSSIA  AND  ITS  PEOPLES.    Imperial  8vo.  83  pp.     5  As. 
Post-free,  6  As. 

A  description  both  of  European  and  Asiatic  Russia,  including  an  account  of  the 
different  races  by  which  they  are  peopled,  their  manners  and  customs,  the  Govern- 
ment, &c. ;  with  89  Illustrations  and  maps. 

EGYPT:  THE  LAND  OP  THE  PYRAMIDS.     Imperial  8 vo.   80. pp.     5  As. 
Post-free,  6  As. 

A  description  of  this  interesting  country,  one  of  the  oldest  seats  of  civilization  in 
the  world  ;  its  ancient  religion,  its  famous  temples  and  other  buildings  ;  the  manners 
and  customs  of  the  people,  etc. ;  with  numerous  illustrations. 

THE  LAND  OP  SNOWS  :  with  an  account  of  Missions  to  Greenland. 
4to.  56  pp.  24  As.     Post-free,  3  As. 

A  description  of  Greenland,  so  different  from  India;  giving  an  account  of  its 
people  ;  and  the  efforts  to  elevate  them  ;  with  numerous  illustrations. 

THE  OVERLAND  JOURNEY  TO  ENGLAND.     4to.  72  pp.     3  As. 

A  description  of  the  principal  places  passed,  with  some  account  of  the  expense, 
and  directions  on  arrival  in  England  :  copiously  illustrated. 

PICTORIAL  TOUR  ROUND  ENGLAND,  SCOTLAND,  AND  IRELAND.     Imperial 
8vo.  114  pp.     (5  As.     Post-free,  74  As. 

Description  of  the  chief  places  of  interest ;  Public  Schools  and  Universities  ;  Coal 
Mines  and  Manufactures  ;  the  British  Government ;  Home  Life  ;  England  an  example 
and  warning  to  India.  With  104  woodcuts,  and  a  coloured  engraving  of  the  Queen- 
Empress. 

ITALY  :   ANCIENT   AND  MODERN,   Imperial   8vo.   80  pp.  5  As.  Post- 
free,  6  As. 

Remarkable  events  in  the  history  of  the  country  are  described;  accounts  are  given 
of  Rome,  Vesuvius,  the  Buried  Cities,  and  other  places  of  interest;  with  numerous 
illustrations. 

PICTURES  OP  WOMEN  IN  MANY  LANDS.     Imperial  8vo.  112  pp.     6  As. 
Post-free,  74  As. 

Descriptions  of  women,  beginning  with  the  most  degraded  nations  of  the  world, 
and  gradually  ascending  to  the  most  enlightened ;  with  suggestions,  from  the 
review,  .for  Indian  women.  172  illustrations. 


Biographies. 

STATESMEN  OF  RECENT  TIMES.     8vo.  192  pp.  8  As.  Post-free,  94  As. 

Accounts  are  given  of  the  leading  Statesmen  in  the  great  countries  of  the  world  ; 
as  Gladstone,  Salisbury,  Bismarck,  and  others.  Special  notice  is  taken  of  those 
interested  in  India.  In  all  182  are  mentioned,  with  122  portraits. 

THE  GOVERNORS-GENERAL  OP  INDIA,  First  Series.     By  Henry  Morris, 
M.  C.  S.  (retired)  8vo.  145  pp.  4  As.     Post-free,  5  As. 

Contains  sketches  of  the  lives  of  Warren  Hastings,  Lord  Cornwallis,  Sir  John  Shore, 
Marquis  Wellesley,  the  Earl  of  Minto,  and  the  Marquis  of  Hastings,  with  portraits. 
Interesting  personal  details  are  given,  such  as  are  not  usually  found  in  histories. 

THE  GOVERNORS-GENERAL  OP  INDIA,  Second  Series.       By  the  same 
author,  8vo.  175  pp.  4  As.     Post-free,  5  As. 

Includes  sketches  of  Lord  Amherst,  Lord  William  Bentinck,  Lord  Auckland,  Lord 
Ellenborough,  Lord  Hardiuge,  and  the  Marquis  of  Dalhousie. 


134  ENGLISH  PUBLICATIONS. 

SKETCHES  OP  INDIAN  CHRISTIANS;  WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY 
S.  SATTHIANADHAN,  M.A.  8vo.  268  pp.  half  cloth  with  gilt  title, 
10  As.  Post-free,  1H  As. 

An  account  of  42  Indian  Protestant  Christians ;  Tamil,  Telugu,  Canarese,  Mala- 
yalam,  Bengali,  Hindustani,  Panjabi,  Afghan,  Gujarati,  Marathi,  Parsi,  and  Karen  ; 
with  several  portraits. 

ANGLO-INDIAN  WORTHIES.  By  Henry  Morris,  MADRAS  C.  S.  (Retired.) 
8vo.  160  pp.  4  As.  Post-free,  5  As.  Full  cloth,  gilt  title, 

8  As. 

Lives  of  Sir  Thomas  Munro,  Sir  John  Malcolm,  Lord  Metcalfe,  Mountstuart 
Elphinstone,  James  Thomason,  Sir  Henry  Lawrence,  Sir  James  Oatram,  Sir  Donald 
Macleod,  and  Sir  Bartle  Frere,  with  portraits. 

EMINENT  FRIENDS  OP  MAN  ;  or  LIVES  OP  DISTINGUISHED  PHILAN- 
THROPISTS. 8vo.  158  pp.  4  As.  Post-free,  5  As.  Full  cloth, 
gilt  title,  10  As. 

Sketches  of  Howard,  Obeiiin,  Granville  Sharp,  Clarkson,  Wilberforce,  Buxton, 
Pounds,  Davies  of  Devauden,  George  Moore,  Montefiore,  Livesey,  the  Earl  of 
Shaf  tesbury,  and  others ;  with  remarks  on  what  might  be  done  in  India. 

SOME  NOTED  INDIANS  OP  MODERN  TIMES.     8vo.  164  pp.   4  As. 

Sketches  of  Indian  Religious  and  Social  Reformers,  Philanthropists,  Scholars, 
Statesmen,  Judges,  Journalists,  and  others ;  with  several  portraits. 

BAB  A  PADMANJI.  An  Autobiography.  8vo.  108  pp.  2^  As.  Post-free, 
3  As. 

An  interesting  account  by  himself  of  this  popular  Marathi  author,  describing  his 
conversion  from  Hinduism  to  Christianity. 

PICTURE  STORIES  OP  NOBLE  WOMEN.  4to.  50  pp.  2i  As.  Post- 
free,  3  As. 

Accounts  of  Cornelia,  Agrippina,  Padmani  of  Ohittore,  Lady  Jane  Grey,  Ahaliya 
Bai,  Mrs.  Fry,  Princess  Alice,  Miss  Carpenter,  Maharani  Surnomayi,  Pandita 
Raonabai,  Miss  Nightingale,  and  Lady  DufBerin. 

THE    QUEEN-EMPRESS  OF  INDIA  AND   HER  FAMILY.     43  pp.     3  As. 
Post-free,  3^  As. 

Her  early  life;  marriage;  widowhood;  children;  progress  in  India  during  her 
reign ;  traits  of  character  and  lessons  from  her  life.  With  27  illustrations,  and 
coloured  portrait  of  the  Empress. 

SIR  HERBERT  EDWARDES.     By  Henry  Morris.  8vo.  20  pp.  ^  Anna. 

He  is  described  as  the  hereof  Multan  ;  the  peace-maker  among  wild  Afghan  tribes; 
the  true  friend  of  India;  the  earnest  Christian. 

CHARLES     GRANT  :     the     Christian    Director  of   the   East     India 

Company.     By  Henry  Morris.    8vo.     48  pp.  1  Anna. 
JOHN  CHRYSOSTOM  :  "  THE  GOLDEN-MOUTHED."  4to.  52  pp.  2  As. 


Papers  for  Thoughtful  Hindus. 

No.  1.  THE  RELATION  BETWEEN  CHRISTIANITY  AND  HINDUISM.  8vo. 
82  pp.  By  the  Rev.  DR.  KRISHNA  MOHUN  BANERJEA,  late  Sans- 
krit Examiner  to  the  Calcutta  University,  i  Anna. 

The  remarkable  resemblances,  in  some  respects,  between  ancient  Hinduism  and 
Christianity  are  pointed  out. 


ENGLISH    PUBLICATIONS.  135 

No.  2.     THE  SUPPOSED  AND  REAL  DOCTRINES  OP  HINDUISM,  AS  HELD  BY 
EDUCATED    HINDUS.     8vo.  32    pp.     By   the   Rev.     Nehemiah 
(Nilakanth)  Groreh.     ^  Anna. 
It  is  shown  that  the  belief  of  educated  Hindus  with  regard  to  God,  His  Attributes, 

Creation,  &c.,  are  not  found  in  the  Vedas;  but  have  been  derived  from  Christianity. 

No.  3.     MORAL  COURAGE.     8vo.  32  pp.     ^  Anna. 

A  lecture  by  the  Bishop  of  Bombay. 

No.  4.     THE  IMPORTANCE  OP  RELIGION.  8vo.  48  pp.  f  Anna. 

An  appeal  to  the  young,  by  John  Foster,  author  of  Essays  on  Decision  of  Character. 

No.  5.  CHRISTIANITY,  OR — WHAT?  8vo.  16  pp.  £  Anna.  By  the 
Rev.  H.  Rice. 

Christianity  is  shown  to  be  the  only  religion  which  meets  the  wants  of  man. 

No.  6.  THE  SENSE  OP  SIN  IN  THE  LIGHT  OP  HISTORY.  A  Lecture 
by  t-he  Rev.  F.  W.  KELLETT,  M.A.,  Madras  Christian  College. 
8vo.  20  pp.  £  Anna. 

It  is  shown  that  the  deeper  the  sense  of  sin,  the  more  nature  the  religious  life. 

No.  7.      BISHOP   CALDWELL  ON   KRISHNA  AND   THE    BHAGAVAD    GITA. 

8vo.  32  pp.     f  Anna. 

A  reprint  of  Remarks  on  the  late  Hon.  Sadagopah  Chavloo's  introduction  to  a 
Reprint  of  a  Pamphlet  entitled,  "  Theosophy  of  the  Hindus ;"  with  a  preface  by  the 
Rev.  J.  L.  Wyatt. 

No.  8.  THE  DUTIES  OP  EDUCATED  YOUNG  MEN  TO  THEIR  COUNTRY. 
8vo.  16  pp.  |  Anna. 

An  address,  by  the  Rev.  H.  Ballantine,  at  a  Meeting  of  the  Ahmednagar  Debating 
Society.  Translated  from  the  Marathi. 

No.  9.     CHRIST  THE  FULFILMENT  OP  HINDUISM.     8vo.  23  pp.  £  Anna. 

A  lecture  by  the  Rev.  F.  W.  KELLETT,  M.A ,  Madras  Christian  College. 
No.  10.     VEDANTISM.     8vo.  21  pp.  £  Anna. 

By  the  Rev.  Lai  Behari  Day,  with  numerous  Sanskrit  quotations. 

No.  11.     THEDEPECTIVENESSOPBRAHMOISM.    8vo.  24  pp.  ^  Anna. 

A  Lecture  by  the  Rev.  Lai  Behari  Day. 

No.  12.  PRELIMINARY  DIALOGUES  ON  IMPORTANT  QUESTIONS  IN  INDIA. 
8vo.  74  pp.  2  As.  Post-free,  2 \  As. 

By  a  member  of  the  Oxford  Mission,  Calcutta.  Hindu  and  Christian  Conceptions 
of  God,  Theism  versus  Pantheism,  Personality,  Merit  and  Demerit,  Sin,  Ac. 

No.  13.     HELPS  TO  TRUTH-SEEKERS.    8vo.  32  pp.  1  Anna. 

By   the    Rev.  H.    Rice.    Current  objections  to  Christianity  considered. 

No.  14.     HINDU  PANTHKISM.     8vo.  18  pp.  ^  Anna. 

From  Anti-iheistic  Theories,  by  Professor  Flint,  an  able  writer. 


Pice  Papers  on  Indian  Reform,  i  Anna  each. 

Some  are  original;  others  are  abridged  from  the  foregoing  for  popular  use. 

1 .  CAUSES  OP  INDIAN  POVERTY. 

2.  INDIAN  MARRIAGE  CUSTOMS. 

3.  SUPPOSED  AND  REAL  CAUSES  OP  DISEASE. 

4.  PATRIOTISM  :  FALSE  AND  TRUE. 

5.  MANAGEMENT  OP  INFANTS. 


136  ENGLISH    PUBLICATIONS. 

6.  DEBT,  AND  How  TO  GET  ODT  OF  IT. 

7.  THE  PURDAH  ;  OB  THE  SECLUSION  OF  INDIAN  WOMKN. 

8.  CASTE  :  ITS  ORIGIN  AND  EFFECTS. 

9.  ASTROLOGY. 

10.  WHAT  HAS  THE  BRITISH  GOVERNMENT  DONE  FOR  INDIA  ? 

11.  WHO  WEOTE  THE  VEDAS  ? 

12.  MANAVA-DHARMA  SASTBA. 

13.  THK  BHAGAVAD  GITA. 

14.  THE  SCIENCE  OF  THE  HINDU  SASTRAS. 

15.  FEVEBS  :  THEIR  CAUSES,  TREATMENT,  AND  PREVENTION. 

16.  CHOLERA  AND  BOWEL  COMPLAINTS. 

17.  ANIMAL  WORSHIP. 

18.  EARLY  MARRIAGE;  ITS  EVILS  AND  SUGGESTED  REFORMS. 

19.  DOTY  TO  A  WIFE. 

20.  THE  FRUITS  OF  HINDUISM. 

21.  INDIAN  WIDOWS,  AND  WHAT  SHOULD  BE  DONE  FOK  THEM. 

22.  THE  ADVANTAGES  OF  FEMALE  EDUCATION. 

23.  HINDU  AND  CHRISTIAN  WORSHIP  COMPAEED. 

24.  HINDU  PILGRIMAGES. 

25.  CHARITY:  FALSE  AND  TRUE. 

26.  THE  Two  WATCHWORDS — CUSTOM  AND  PROGRESS. 

27.  THE  VALUE  OF  PURE  WATER. 

28.  CHAKMS,  MANTRAS,  AND  OTHKR  SUPERSTITIONS. 

29.  NAUTCHES. 

30.  IMPORTANCE  OF  CLEANLINESS. 

31.  How  TO  HAVE  HEALTHY  CHILDREN. 

32.  HOW  TO  BRING  UP  CHILDREN. 

33.  HOW  TO  TAKE  CARE  OF  THE  SlCK. 

34.  ECLIPSES. 

35.  FAMILY  PRAYER. 

36.  GIVING  ABUSE. 

37.  SHRADDHAS. 

38.  KARMA  OR  FATE. 

39.  THE  FATHERHOOD  OF  GOD. 

40.  THE  BROTHERHOOD  OF  MAN. 

41.  HINDU  AND  CHRISTIAN  IDEALS  ON  PIETY. 

42.  PBAYASCHITTA. 

Complete  in  a  volume,  half  bound,  gilt  title,  1  Re.     Postage,  2  As. 

43.  AN  APPEAL  TO  YOUNG  INDIA. 

Progress. 

This  is  a  monthly  illustrated  Periodical  for  the  educated  classes  in 
India  and  Ceylon.  The  subscription  is  only  8  As  a  year  ;  with 
postage  14  As.  Three  copies  may  be  sent  for  \  anna  postage. 

Orders  to  be  addressed  to  Mr.  A.  T.  SCOTT,  Tract  Dep6t,  MADRAS. 

PRINTED   AT    THE    S.    P.    C.    K.    PBESS,    VEPEBY,    MADRAS — 1898. 


TEE  SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  r.AST  1  HED  AND 

JR2 

Attention  is  invited  !o   rno  foil 
row  available  : 

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  VITH  IJ.LU^I  %.mv! 

RlG-\rEPA.       «C   '  j.       166  pp.      t.'    As.       Po:-: 
Tlic  principal  F  the  Vec!  .    with  liu 

gods    of  i.l)  e  Vei-.-i,  the  offerings   and    sac.^ti   es.     Through  th 
Mr.K,    T.  H.  Griffith,  translations  of  some  ot  MIJ  most  important  hymns  in  th  t 
uoted  in  full. 

THARVA-VEDA.     8vo.     76  pp.  2\  As.     Post-free,  3  A  a. 

A  el  .3sifi>d  selection  of  the  Hymns  is  given,  including  charms  to   enredis< 
expei  demons,  secure  success  in  life>  destroy  enemies,  &c.;  with  a  Review  of  the 
whole. 

THE  BRUIMANAS  OF  THE  VED vs.  8vo.  232  pp.  BY  THE  KEV.  K.  3. 
MACDOXALD,  M.A.,  D.D.,  Author  of  The  Vedic  Rdigion.  8  As. 
Post-free,  10  As.  Half  cloth,  12  As. 

Accounts  are  given  of  the  Brahman  as  of  the  Rig-Veda,  Sama   VeJa.  Black  and 
White  Yajur  Vedas,  and  the  Atharva  Veda,  showing  the  development  <>f    Hinduism. 
The  state  ot  Society,  the  Human,  Horse,  and  01  h 
of  the  Brahmanas  are  described,  with  many  interesting  details. 
£  EJECTIONS    FKOJ1    THE    TTpANISHADS.       8vO.      ]  20    pp.  4  As.      PoSu-frOe, 

5 'An. 

The    V  .  ch;-..   J's*,  and   Svetasvatara,   us   tr;  :•  sin  ted  into   English   by  Dr.  Roe: 
quoted  in  full,  with  the  notes  of  Sankara  Acharya  and  others  ;  and  there  ;> 
extracts  from  tVie  Brihad  Aranya  and  Ohhandogya  Upanishads  ;  with  an  e 
of  their  teaching. 

STUDIES  IN  THE  UPANISHADS,  8vo.     80  pp.  2^  As.     Post-free,  3  As. 

Five  Lectures  by  the  Rev.  T.  E.  Slater.     An  interesting   account  is   given  of  the 
development  of  ancient  Indian  thought,   and   its   practical  Jesuits    in    the   lil'i 
religion  of  the  people.    The  Vedanta  is  centnv-ted  with  Christianity. 

THE  BHAGAVAD  GITA.     8vo.  108  pp.  4  As.     Post-free,  5  As. 

An   E/rglish  Translation  carefully  revised,  numerous  Explanatory  Notes,   and   an 
Examination  of  its  Doctrines. 

THE  VISHNU  PURANA.     8vo.  96  pp.  3  As.     Post-free,  4  As. 

An  abridgment  is  given,  verbatim,  from  ti,  •  English   fr:-n;-  !a-  ion  of  I*     !I    Wilson, 
Professor  '  .  Uni  varsity  o'J  Oxford  :  with  an  examination  of  the  Book  ID  the 

ligh    01     '  ft  present  da\T. 

TH,  EAMAYANA.     Svo.    180  pp.    7    As.     Post-free,  8i  As.      Half 
clooh,  11  As. 

^  ."all  ".bri'' ;:n\ent  of  this  celebrated  poem  is  given  in  English,  with  explanatory 
n<xte:-,  v,  liere  necessary.  An  Introduction  treats  of  the  author  and  age  of  the  poem, 
with  explanation?  of  its  aims  b™  eminent  Oriental  scholars;  it  is  compared  with. 
"M.  'libbarata  urd  th.'  tireek  epic  poems. 

YOGA  84STRA.     8vo.  78  pp.  2^  As.     Posfc-free,  3  As. 

ihi  Yog?.  Sutras  of  Patanjali  °xamiued.  and  i,he  supposed  Yoga  powers  shoi 
be  a  delusion.  rl  he  true  Yoga  t>z-stra  is  explained  ;  with  a  notice  of  Swami  Vi 
na-i.^  'i'tiy 

:;OM  THK    '•  8vo.  2^2  pp.  8  A.s. 

»lh; 

•,o  1)0  uil;:  -e  ;  ^ed  to  Mr.  A.  T.  SCOTT,  T  •  >t,  AI(-.r 

'no  Calcutta,  Allahabad,  Lahore,  L;mia    Bombay,  Baiv,;.t 
Colombo  Book  Depots. 


