===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.218962.A-Sketch_djvu.txt =====







A SKETCH 


OF 

THE VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY 

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED THAT OF 

THE LIFE OF 

SUJNA GOKULAJI zAlA, 

A TYPICAL VEDANTIN, 

BY 

MANASSUKHARAMA SURYARAMA TRIPATHI. 

SECOND EDITION. 

BOMBAY : 

N. M. T. AND CompAi^y. 

KinKiDEvi Road. 


1901. 



BOMBAY : 

Printed at JAvaji Dadaji’s ‘‘ NmNAYA-«AGAH ” Press 



PREFACE. 


Ik presenting this revised and extended second 
edition of the Sketch of the Vedanta Philosophy, 
and that of the Life of Sujna Grokulaji Ziila, which 
^^“iginally formed the English introduction to a 
larger Gujarati work entitled ^ Stijna Golulaji Zaht 
mid the Vedanta,' the writer has to express his 
•siiScere thanks to the public for the kind apprecia- 
tion accorded to the first edition published in 1881. 

' For the necessarily limited number of students 
interested in poetry, religion, and philosophy, at one 
and the same time, an observation of a seeker after 
truth may be given here in reference to the Vedanta 
sketch, namely, that the best way of judging philo- 
sophical thoughts is to try to enter fully into the 
opinions of those whom we read, to make them, for 
a time at least, our own, till at last we discover the 
point of view from which the writers looked at the 
facts before them, and catch the light in which they 
struck the mental vision of the writers. 

The writer of this sketch purposes humbly to 
|)|rer a garland of choice flowers of the Vedanta 
™ilosophy — of which the central thread is the right 
ppowledge of Brahman ( ) — to encircle our 
life with the fragrance and hues of Heaven. Such 
garland, it is hardly necessary to remind the reader. 



IV 


PEEFACE. 


does not include the earth, root, stem, branches, leaves^ 
or dust of the plant, and yet it is none the less 
genuine. Similarly, matters open to discussion, ex- 
planation, and criticism are absent from this sketch, 
the principal aim being, not to controvert, but to 
understand and unfold truths for the adoption of 
those with whom they might find favour, and who 
wish to awaken within themselves the diviner mind 
and to rouse themselves to a consciousness of Avhat 
is best in man and Nature, in themselves and 
others, and to live a noble life dedicated to the 
glory of God and the relief of man’s estate. 

The true and felt knowledge of Brahman, the 
Highest Self, God, the Infinite, the All, the One 
and only Substance, the Sole Being, the Sole 
Reality, the all-satisfying Good, with that of the 
relations of man and of the universe to It, is the 
means of man’s highest well-being and the security 
of his upward progress and final release. 

The writer is deeply and firmly convinced that the 
Vedanta in its pursuit of truth teaches this very 
satisfactorily, and hence his humble attempt to 
give a sketch of it hereby. The Vedanta is ‘the 
desire of the thoughtful among all nations of the 
waiting world,’ because it has power to transform 
the whole man and make him see in the living 
consciousness of union with God the highest effort 
of human genius. In short, it teaches us to feel, in 



PREFACE. 


V 


the moments of spiritual exaltation, that 'we are 
greater than we know.’ We experience therein 
a ‘peace that passeth understanding,’ a 'joy un- 
speakable and full of glory.’ 

All that needs saying here is that to realise the 
great, noble and Divine truths contained in the 
Vedanta, we must read and re-read it till its music 
and its spirit become a part of our nature. The 
subject is to be thought over, digested and assimi- 
lated till its ideal world habitually surrounds us in 
the midst of the practical world. We have need, 
hour by hour, to have our mind enlightened and 
warmed by its truths: just as we need each day to 
have our eyes filled by the light of heaven and our 
blood warmed by the glow of the sun. 

The writer begs permission to repeat here what 
he has said in his Essay ‘ The Astodaya,’ that he 
' has tried to keep in view the well-known rule, 
namely, to learn the best that is known and thought 
in the world, and to propagate it for the benefit of 
others.’ 

nadiAd IK gujarAta. 

< B. B. & C. I. B. STATION. ) 

9th May 1901. 




M. S. TRIPATHI. 




CONTENTS 


PAGES. 

PREFACE III^V. 

GOKULAJI S. ZALA, A TYPICAL VEDANTIN* 

( A SKETCH OP THE LIFE OP ) 

Biography, 1. Birth and education, 2. The Vedanta, 5. 
Gokulaji enters the State service, 7. HLs capacity, 

9. Becomes Diwan — Minister, 11. Col. Keatinge, 

13. Gokulaji’s continued pursuit of the Vedanta 
Philosophy, 13. Correspondence on the same with 
Messrs. Gauris'ankara and Samaldasa, and the writer 
of this, 14. On S'ankara, 14. Gokulaji’s visit to 
Bombay, 15. Tennyson on Friendship quoted, 16. 
Gokulaji’s independence, 17. The Rajasthanika Sabha, 

20. Mr. J. B. Peile’s opinion of, 22. Gokulaji’s forced 
retirement, and reinstatement, 23. The Delhi Darabar, 

24. Gokulaji’s opinion of Mr. DMabhai Naoroji, 25. 

His broad views on Government, 25. His work in the 
JunagMh State, 26. His guide in the life of thought, 
Vedanta; in that of action. Selections from Europe- 
an and Indian precepts, 28. Pythagoras, Socrates, 

Plato, 28. Zeno, the Stoic, 29. Seneca, 30. Epic- 
tetus, 3 1. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius, 32. Goethe, 

33. Gokulaji’s views on Education and reform, 34. 

On British Representatives, 36. Gokulaji’s death, 38. 

His character, 38. Opinion of Blackwood’s Edin- 
burgh Magazine, Mr. Haridasa V. Desai, and Mr- 
H. A. Wadia, 39-42. Lessons from his life, 43. 

The Sujna Gokulaji Z&la Ved&nta Pidze, 44. ... 1~45 



VIII 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER I. 

THE VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY 

( A SKETCH OP ) 

The importance and excellence of Philosophy, — Milton, 

Victor Cousin, 49. Schopenhauer on the Vedanta, 

50. Max Muller, 51. Lewes on Pantheism, 51. Dr. 

Paul Deussen, 51. Gladstone, 52. Goldstiicker, 52. 

The Ved&nta is poetry, philosophy and religion sim- 
ultaneously, 52. Indian Philosophers, 52. The aim 
and teaching of the Vedanta, 53. S'ankara on the 
Vedanta 53. S'ankara as a paragon, 54. S'ankara’s 
summary of the Vedanta, 56. The excellence of the 
Vedanta Philosophy, 59. Goethe, 60. Reconciliation 
of Religion and Philosophy, 61. Salient points in 
both, Jxva^ Jagat, Paramdtman, Man, Nature, and 
God, 62. The leading ideas of the Vedanta Philosophy. 

— A Sanskrita Couplet on Brahman, M^ya-produced 
Jagat — universe, and Jtva — the individual Self, 64. 
Similar ideas from Kant and Fichte, 65-66, By 
knowing Brahman all is known, 66. Beahman, — Theo- 
logy, Kosmology, Psychology, 67. Methods for indic- 
ation of Brahman, ( ) &c., 68. The doc- 
trine of Manifestation ( ), 7 0. The Negative 

Method-^ftr ^ftr-Not that, Not that, 71. The un- 

A 

qualified and qualified Brahman, 72. Is'vara, the 
Lord. He, like the giver of rain, gives fruits accord- 
ing to the merit and demerit of the actions of the 
Agents, the souls, 73. Knowledge of Brahman at- 
tainable, 75. Tennyson, 75. Poetical language, 76. 
Upanishads on Brahman, SairChiuAnanda^ 77. The 
Brahma-(Vedanta-)Sutras on Brahman, Sat-Chit- 
Ananda^ 79. The Bhagavad-Gitd on Brahman, 81. 
S'ankara on Brahman, 84. Brahman and the simile 
of the Sun, 86. Parallel ideas of Modern Thinkers, 

87. Socrates on God, 88. Plotinus, 89. The Con- 
temporary Review^ 90. The Fortnightly Eemew^ 91. 

Pope, 92. The SiddhdntOrMuktdvalij 93. Advantage 
of presenting ideas in different lights, 94. The 
Ved&nta and Plato’s Philosophy, 94, ... ... ... 49-100 



CONTENTS. 


IX 


CHAPTER II. 

MAYA. 

The Vedanta leaves the learner to adopt any theory that 
may satisfy liim on Creation projected by May^i, 101. 

What is Maya? 101. Her three qualities, 102. She 
is called Avidyd in connection with individual souls, 

104. She is extraordinary, practically or phenomenal- 
ly real, but not really real, 104. The Bhagavad-Gitd 
on Maya, 105. The Panchadasi on Maya, 106. All 
is possible with Maya, 108. An inscrutable something 
that cannot be further solved is Maya, 110. Parallel 
idea of Herbert Spencer, 110. Maya is assumed to 
construct a science. 111. The Vedanta aims to show 
the way out of M%a and that there is the One 
Highest Brahman, 112. Lower and Higher Know- 
ledge, 114. Comte’s Method, 115. Jagat, the uni- 
vei’se, Emanation, 117. The Bhagavad-Gxtd on the 
universe Samsdra, 118. Vasishtha, 119. Jada^ insenti- 
ent Matter, and Chaitanya^ Intelligence, Mind, 119. 

The Five Elements of the TJiiiverse — Existence, Know- 
ledge, Joy, Name, and Form, 119. The Noumenal 
and Phenomenal, the Invisible and visible, 120. Sat 
the true, 122. Maya is inexplicable, 123. Two kinds 
of illusions, 124. Grades in Creation, 124. Sat, Chit, 
Ananda, — Existence, Intelligence, Happiness, 125. The 
Vedanta unity — Harmony between Egoism and Al- 
truism. Manu, Vyasa, quoted, 126. True Knowledge 
is gained by right Thinking; S'ankara, V. Cousin, 127. 

The Vedanta Unity, the all-pervading Being, 128. 

The best Worship of the Lord, Vasishtha, Coleridge, 

Dean Stanley, H. Dinimmond, 128. The Vedtota 
affords common ground to all religions and Philo- 
sophies, 130. The Vedanta knowledge removes 
Maya, 131 101-132 



X 


CONTENTS, 


CHAPTER III. 

THE INDIVIDUAL SOUL, JIVA. 

Man should study himself for true knowledge, 133. 
S'ankara’s views on the Self and the non-self, and 
Nescience, 134. The nature of the Self and the non- 
self, 135. What are Subject and Object ? 136. The 
qualifications for the Vedanta Student, 138. The Self- 
knowledge, 139. Three Classes in Mankind, 140. 
An ignorant selfish man, 141. An educated man, 
142. A well-to-do class of men, 143. Miseries of 
Life, Hume, 144. We are what we have made ourselves, 
145. Know Thyself, 146. The Higher Pantheism, 
Tennyson, 147. The Divine and Demoniac Natures, 
the Bhagavad-Gxidy 148. The knowledge of Jxva^ 
Jagaty Baramatmariy i, e.. Soul, Nature, and God, 151. 
The Nature of the individual Soul, Jtva, 153. The 
Three Bodies and Four States of Man, from S'ankara^s 
Tattvahodha, 155. Atmaxi, the Self, 157. Discrimi- 
native knowledge, 159. San-nydsOy the greatest re- 
nunciation, 159. Carlyle, 160. Release results from 
Imowdedge, 161. Philosophy, 161. Two constituent 
parts in man, physical and spiritual, 163. Truths are 
strange. Sir John Herschel, 164. The Vedanta 
Identity, 165. The Divine in the Human and the 
Divine in the Universe are identical with the Divine 
Itself, 167. The meaning of — “ Thou art That.” — the 
Chhdndogya Upanishad, 168. The Brahma-SiltraSy 
169. Blidgatydga-LahshaTiLd ; the Method of close 
reasoning, surrendering the contradictory portions, 
or the System of Identity, 170. The oneness of the 
Divine and the Human, the simile of the Sun and its 
rays, 171. Hegel, 172. Emerson, 173. The Self of 
man, the Self of the Universe, and the Highest Self 
are one, 174. Parallel passages from St. John, and 
St. Paul, 175. From the Mohammedan Religion, 
175. The Union of the soul or Self with God is de- 
scribed as the essential feature of Christianity, 176. The 
Mohammedan poet, J^mi, Jal^luddin Rumi, in Ifes- 
navi, 176. S'ankara's prayer unfolding the relations 



CONTENTS. 


XI 


of man with his God, 178. The Vedantin sees his 
Self and all as the Highest Self, 180. Tat'tmnvmi 
and the simile of charcoal and diamond, 180. That 
of the caterpillar, lai-va, and butterfly, 181. The best 
things come out of the lowest, Tennyson, Ruskin, 

181-2. Goethe on a great Idea, 183, Supreme hap- 
piness ill returning to the Highest Self, 184. The 
Eye of Knoivledge, 185. Three kinds of knowledge, 

186. The highest aim of man, 189. The Liberated 
but still Living {Jxvanmukia\ 190. Rama, Janaka, 
Krishna, 193. Philosophy, Hegel, Max Muller, 194. 

The variety of the world, Shakespeare, Carlyle, Emer- 
son, 195-6. True knowledge, the highest end of life, 
Mundakopanishad^ , Unity of the Self with the 
highest Self, 198. Parallel idea in Christianity, 
Fichte, 200. Max Mliller, Hegel, Dr. Caird, 201. 

Seeing good everywhere, S'ankara, Milton, Shakes- 
peare, 202-3. The Yedanta is a reasoned system of 
knowledge, 203. Conclusion, 204. Masterpieces are 
understood by the kindred mind, 205. The Advaita 
Vedanta, 206. No rest till the unity with the centre, 
Brahman, 207. The Vedanta method of the Jahad- 
ajahad-Loksharid, Indication, three forms of Syllogism, 

— Deduction, Induction, and Identification, 208. 
Anvayavyaiireha^ — Negation, Position and Identity, 

209. As in the tody, so in the Universe, 210. Know'- 
ledge of the Divine whole, Plato, 210. Parallel ideas 
from Kant, 211. Adhydropdpavdda^ the Method of 
Imputation and Rescission, 215. The Order of Crea- 

A 

tion, Brahman, Maya, Is'vara^ Jiva, 215. The Vedanta 
teaches the knowledge of Brahman, 216. Philosophy, 

218. Praiibimhavdda, the Metaphor of Reflection, 

A 

Brahman, 218. Maya, h'vara^ Jim^ 220. S^ankara, 

221. Upanishads, the highest end of man, final 
release, 222 133-5^ 

Index, by Mr. Kausikarama V. Mehta, B. A, 


... 




THE LATE LEARNED 


OOKULAJI SAMPATTIRAMA ZALA. 




?r 53*^5 sftgwl^cr H” K. 

“ Yes, I will sing, although the hope be vain 
To tell their glories in a worthy strain, 

Whose holy fame in earliest life was won. 

Who toiled unresting till the task was done. 


Come, hear my song, ye just, whose bosoms glow 
With Virtue’s flame, and good from evil know.” 

— Kalidasa, Raghuvcm'a. 


For various reasons it is thought expedient to 
preface with a brief biographical sketch in English 
the following Gujarati Memoirs of Rao BahMur Sujna 
Gokulaji Sampattir^ma ZMA, who, by his thought, 
action and virtues, which deserve to be remembered, 
has made a name in the history of his time and 
country. There is little need in these days to dilate 
upon the advantages which may be derived from 
biographies of good and great men. The necessity 
of such a thing has been felt in every age. In 
former times, the Epics and PurAnas supplied it to a 
certain extent in India. They are now considered 
out of date for this purpose. Memoirs of the good, 
therefore, must fill up their place. 



2 


Good men are very profitable companions, whether 
in biography or in person. We cannot look upon 
them without gravitating towards them and gaining 
something. It is truly said that they serve us as a 
mirror as well as a statue. We behold ourselves 
reflected in the mirror, and find out our defects. Our 
latent and dormant powers come out, as it were, by 
the contact into which we are brought with the 
good and great, while reading their lives. We know 
thereby what to imitate and what to avoid. If we 
enshrine them in our hearts as statues, and let them 
shine there without those little blemishes that clung 
to them in life, and worship them there as inspiring 
idols, we may be sure, amidst all the shifting circum- 
stances of life, of drawing much encouragement, 
guidance, benefit, and comfort. We also catch un- 
consciously their traits of character, and become 
moulded after their fashion. In brief, biographies 
show us what we are and what we ought to be. They 
teach us in unmistakable language that we can be 
what others have been, if we strive our best to be so. 
Good lives are lodestones to all hearts and the pas- 
ture of great souls. If we would have fine chara- 
cters in our country, we must present before our 
countrymen fine models. It is truly observed by 
Wordsworth 

“ There is 

One great society alone on earth, 

The noble living and the noble Dead.” 

The Prdude. 

Gokulaji Z&hb was born at Jun%adha,inSaur4shtra, 
in A. D. 1824. His birth was regarded in the family as 
very auspicious, as in the same year the ministership 



3 


of the Jun^igadh State was conferred upon his grand- 
uncle Mr. Govindaji ZAli and his grandfather Mr. 
Indraji 7&\k. The infant Gokulaji's feet were consid- 
ered as worthy of being washed with milk; since they 
brought with them the rise of the family. His genius 
and the signs of a promising future were very early 
displayed. The family grew very fond and proud of 
him. His education commenced when he had com- 
pleted his fourth year, under the direction of his 
grandfather Mr. Indraji. His studies were prosecuted 
with extraordinary success. Persian being the Court 
language, Mr. Indraji took care to give him a good 
knowledge of it under a learned Persian scholar, 
Mr. RAmad^sa of Canoj. 

One day a young N4gara boy of the same age as 
Gokulaji visited Mr. Indraji in the company of his 
father. The boy recited a couplet in Sanskrita so well 
that Mr. Indraji was much pleased, and remarked to 
Gokulaji who was by him: — ‘Lo, how well instructed 
in Sanskrita this boy is; you don’t know anything of 
it. We Br&hmanas must learn such things.’ As he 
was generally praised for his quickness in learning, he 
took the remark to heart, and determined to make up 
for this deficiency. The boy with whom this rivalry 
was started and carried on, was Mr. Daulataiima 
Pandit. These two boys contracted a liking for each 
other, and became great friends afterwards. 

Gokulaji began to learn Sanskrita after the old 
fashion under the family priest, Mr. Anandaji 
Ach^lrya. The latter was struck with his quick ap- 
prehension and accurate memory, and congratulated 
his grandfather on the scion of the house displaying 
so extraordinary a c^ipacity. 



4 


Vicissitudes ia humisn affairs axe proverbial. The 
PivS,nship was tranferred from Ookulaji's family 
after a few years. Though the iucome and influence 
.of the position were lost, they improvidently and 
vainly tried to keep up the old appearances. This 
involved the family in debt. Qokulaji was very in- 
telligent, and deeply felt the fall of his family. He, 
however, turned the adversity to good account. He 
became more industrious and studious. He saw 
with great concern t^e difficulties his family had to 
labour under, owing to their improvidence in mcmey 
matters. This made an indelible impression upon 
his young mind, which was discernible in after-years 
when he himself became Div^n. 

According to the custom of the country, Gokulaji 
was thought to be an accomplished scholar, and fit 
to enter the world, in his sixteenth year. His grand- 
father, therefore, placed him as a candidate under an 
influential favourite of the court. Mr. Indraji had to 
go to the camp of the Political Agent, Captain 
LeGrand Jacob, in A.C. 1842. He took his grandson 
with him in order, as it were, to complete his educa- 
tion with travel. Here met for the firet time the two 
men, Messrs. Gauris'ankara and Gokulaji, thereafter 
destined to be celebrated administrators of two first 
class States in Saurdshtra. The latter, being junior, 
was introduced to the former, who conceived an 
affectionate regard for him, which subsequently ri- 
pened into close friendship. 

Soon after their return to Jundgadh, Mr. Indraji 
died. Gokulaj^s father, Mr. Sampattirdma Zdld, did 
not possess sufficient pecuniary means, influence or 
power to maintain the position of the femily. The 



hopes of it were, therefore, naturally centred in the 
promising young man Gokulaji. In Native States it 
is necessary for a youth, who desires to enter the 
public service, to have a patron, Mr. Gokulaji had 
now none left. He, believing in the truth of the 
principle that knowledge is power, and is its own 
reward, applied himself devotedly to that most potent 
patron. His superior attainments and self-respect 
would not allow him to dance attendance on, or court 
in a degrading manner the favour of, men in power. 
The members of his family could not appreciate this 
unusual conduct. They felt disappointed, and began 
to murmur at his devotion to learning and, as it 
seemed to them, his indifference to the main chance 
of success. Though he was anxious to be useful 
to them, he could not see his way. He, in the mean- 
time, therefore, watching opportunities, continued to 
devote himself to knowledge. He learned the Mantra 
Sdstra and studied Astrology, which were recom- 
mended to him by some one as helps towards success 
in the world. His natural intelligence, however, 
made him think for himself. He felt doubtful about 
their cogency. He also perceived that worldly success 
ought not to be the only aim or the final goal of man's 
life. He ruminated on the subject, and then inquir- 
ed of his preceptor Mr. Anandaji Acb^rya what the 
highest knowledge was. The latter observed that 
the Vedilnta Philosophy was considered to impart 
the high^t knowledge to be desired. On further 
investigation he found that the Vedanta was theoso- 
phy, teaching philosophy and religion, and leading 
step by step to the highest conception of the universe, 
both subjective and objective, and eventually to the 



6 


most sublime knowledge of the Highest Self ( Para- 
mdtrmn ). A little insight into this knowledge turn- 
ed his heart to higher objects. It also promised him 
freedom from grief, and blessedness, the highest aim 
of all. 

This was the turning point of his inner life. He 
felt attracted to the study of the Vedanta, and applied 
himself — heart and soul — ^to it from this time to the 
last moment of his freedom from bodily ties. The 
Adhy&tma E^m^yana was the first work on the 
subject which he transcribed with his own hand 
(for it had not then been printed) and studied. This 
prepared his mind to start aright in the life-loving 
work of self-culture ; and the up-lifting power of the 
Soul took him to the most sublime knowledge of 
the Highest Self. 

His Persian studies were also continued under 
the supervision of his admirer and friend Mr. Ma- 
thur4d4sa Bakshi. 

In 1847 the E^n^ of Porbandar, at the instance 
of Mr. Anandaji Ach^rya, in whose astrological 
knowledge he had great faith, invited Mr. Gokulaji 
to his capital. He went there and waited upon the 
ii^nd. The effect produced on the parsimonious 
H^n^ by his prepossessing noble, countenance, winn- 
ing manners, and bright intelligence, was quite the 
reverse of what it should have been. The BAn&, re- 
garded Gokulaji as too good and great for himself, 
treated him well, but did not assign him any woi’k. 
He, therefore, returned to J unagadh after a month. 
While at Porbandar, he first became acquainted with 
the well-known Vedanta preacher, Mr. Jayakrishna 
Vy&sa. 



7 


The celebrated Ved^ntin anchorite, R^ma 
visited Jun%adh in the following year. His virtues, 
knowledge, contentment and consequent happiness, 
as well as his preaching, made a very deep impression 
on Gokulaji’s mind. He was a genuine follower of 
the most venerable S'ankara, who has done the 
greatest good by propagating very successfully the 
best that is known and thought of the Vedanta in 
the world with a view to make man better, wiser 
and happier. 

The natural bent of Gokulaji’s mind for the high- 
est and best knowledge received a powerful stimulus 
from Rama which determined the whole course 
of his subsequent studies. 

Next year another anchorite, Paramahansa Sach- 
chid^nanda, visited Jundgadh on a pilgrimage to 
the Girnar, Gokulaji eagerly entreated him to initiate 
him into the Vedanta by regularly teaching him its 
principles froju a standard work. The Paramahansa 
taught him the Panchadasi, which forms an intro- 
ductory text-book of the Vedanta philosophy. This 
opened a rich store to Gokulaji’s view. Some of the 
transcendental thoughts were beyond his capacity of 
exactly and properly understanding at that time. 
But, as is usual with young beginners, he thought 
that he understood them all. He, however, soon 
became aware of his presumption on advancing 
further in the subject. 

The same auspicious year introduced him into 
the Jun%adh State service. The Daftari ( Record- 
keeper ) of the State, feeling old, was anxious to have 
a clever assistant. The fame of Gokulaji’s acquire- 
ments and qualifications had reached his ears, and 



8 


he recommended him to the then Nav^lb S^heb 
Hamidkh^nji. Gokulaji was immediately sent for 
and offered an appointment on a monthly salary of 
Kories 60 ( about Rs. 15 ). Though this was a very 
small appointment, he thought it advisable to accept 
it with thanks, as it was offered uriholicited. He 
thus got the first step on the ladder and then he 
continued rapidly to rise from step to step until he 
reached the stage wherefrom he could descend to 
help his fellowmen, as well as ascend to the throne 
of the Highest Self, 

The following lines are well applicable to his case:- 
“ Man is his own star, and the soul that can 
Render an honest and a perfect man, 

Commands all light, all influence, all fate ; ” 

In a few months he more than satisfied his superior 
by his work, and got promotion. 

The Paramahansa proceeded to Bh4vanagar, whei*e 
Mr. S^tmaladdsa came in contact with him. The 
Paramahansa perceived in Mr. S^malad&sa capacities 
and qualities similar to what he had seen in Goku- 
laji. He wished, therefore, that they should be 
united in friendship. At his suggestion Mr. S4mala- 
d4sa wrote a letter to Gokulaji, and thus commenced 
a friendship which continued to the end with ever 
increasing affection and regard. 

In 1851 Hamidkh^nji died and Nav^b Saheb H. 
H. Mohabatkh^nji, K.C.S.I. succeeded to the throne. 
Mr. PrSjgial^la Mathur^^sa was soon appointed 
tutor to him. He was the first English-knowing 
native gentleman whom Gokulaji saw. 

After a few interviews each discerned the other's 



al>ilities and the advantages to be gained from further 
contact and they became mutually attached. 

In 1853, differences arose between the minor 
Nav4b S^heb’s mother and the able minister Mr. 
Anantaji. Gokulaji remained faithful to his superior, 
who was on the mother^s side, though he foresaw 
the consequences of his so doing. Mr. Anantaji, 
of course, dismissed him. The mother, however, 
retained his services on the personal staff of His 
Highness the Navdb S4heb. This brought Gokulaji 
in closer friendship with Mr. Pr^naMl. He turned this 
opportunity to good account, and learned English 
and Mathematics from Mr. PrinaMl, who observes; — 
During the daily recess allowed to the Nav^b, 
Mr. Gokulaji used to study English and Mathematics 
under me. His capacity for Mathematics ap- 
peared to me to be marvellous. Only a few minutes 
were available for teaching him. He required the 
rules and method but once to be explained to him, 
and he would work out all the examples correctly. 
His memory was so retentive that he would repeat 
each day’s lessons next day with more knowledge 
of the subject than could be expected. This 
wonderful feat made me think that he must be a 
very able man.’' 

Mr. Pr^nalMa was succeeded in 1855 by Mr. Soma- 
n&r^lyana, who bears the same testimony to Gokula- 
ji's wonderful powers and fitness, and adds that “Go- 
kulajibhai's intelligence and acquirements were so 
extraordinary, that he could not but predict his 
rise to the highest position of Divanship in the 
state.” This prediction was indeed fulfilled, as was 
also singularly enough another prediction by the 



10 


same prophet, who foretold that Mr. N^nllbhai Hari- 
d&sa*s good fortune would lead him to a seat on the 
bench of the Bombay High Court. 

In the meantime Gokulaji's reputation reached 
the ear of the then Political Agent, Col. I^ang, who 
ordered the Darb^r to reinstate him in the Daftar 
department as Head Officer. 

The differences between the Nav^b S^heb’s mother 
and the minister assumed such a serious turn in 
1859, that the British Government, fearing a dis- 
turbance in the province, appointed as Political 
Agent, the late Hon’ble Mr. Kinloch Forbes, who 
was considered to possess the tact, high character, 
kind disposition aud sympathy which go so far to 
win the confidence of natives. He came to Jun%adh 
and settled the dispute amicably by inducing Mr. 
Anantaji to resign. Mr. Dungarsi Devji was appoint- 
ed in his place. 

A happy addition was made this year to the limit- 
ed number of GokuljPs friends. Though he was 
related to Mr. Narasinhaprasada on his mother's 
side, they were politically on opposite sides. Mr. 
Narasinhaprasdda’s father and Gokulaji's maternal 
uncle Mr. Hariprasada cemented the union between 
these two most intelligent and promising youths in 
Jun^gadh by observing that ‘union is strength,’ and 
that their mutual relation was such that it behoved 
them to be united politically also. Thus became 
attached by mutual regard two of the four future 
pillars of the Jun^gadh State. 

During the changes above referred to, Gokulaji 
Was doing his work quietly but most efficiently. 



11 


and his industry, ability, honesty and faithfulness 
were channelling his path like the waterfall. The 
new Div4n could not continue in harmony with 
the Nav&b Saheb's mother and the all-influential 
ChMti Bu. He was asked to resign. The two ladies 
sought to find out such a person as possessed their 
confidence, and might also be approved by the Poli- 
tical Agent, as fit to hold the responsible office of 
Div4n. After balancing the merits of all persons 
available, they fixed on Ookulaji, and proposed to 
appoint him minister. This was quite unexpected 
and an agreeable surprise to Gokulaji, who complied 
with their wishes after some hesitation. His nomi- 
nation was submitted to Col, Barr, the then Political 
Agent, who forwarded it for the approval of Govern- 
ment in May 1861, with his remarks, that: — 

“ The new minister by the Nav^b is Gokulaji Z^l^, 
hitherto the keeper of the Darb^r records, a name of 
respectability, whose uncle was also minister in 1830, 
and with a view to the maintenance of the peace 
of the T^luka and protection of the general interest, 
I have reason to be sufficiently well satisfied with 
Gokulaji’s nomination. * * * He will, I am sure, 

do his best to promote the well-being of the popula- 
tion, though as parties now existing in the Darbiir, 
I do not expect him to be able to guard against mis- 
appropriation and undue expenditure of the revenue 
altogether.'’ 

The Bombay Government issued a resolution on 
the subject in these words : — 

'' The Governor in Council will only repeat on 
this occasion that they have no desire to interfere 
with the Nav^b’s choice of his own minister, and 



12 


that they trust His Highness will be satisfied with 
the person whom he has now selected.” 

Thus Gokulaji’s high character led him to the 
highest step of the ladder he had begun to ascend a 
few years before. The same year brought Gokulaji- 
bhai and Mr. S^tmalad^sa into personal contact with 
each other. Both being learned and of kindred 
character in many respects, they became very inti- 
mate friends, carried on correspondence on philoso- 
phical subjects, and delighted each other by instruc- 
tive conversation on different topics when they met, 
which happened not infrequently. The conflicting 
interests prevailing at Jun%adh did not allow rest. 
Many intrigues were going on. Gokulaji was not 
allowed to exercise his powers. He remained a 
nominal Div4n. He foresaw the evil consequences 
of this deplorable state of affairs. He, therefore, 
thought it advisable to repair to the Political 
Agent’s Camp, where he found congenial company. 

A great stroke of policy was effected at Jun^gadh 
in 1862. The young Navab Saheb was detatched 
from his mother and a revolution took place in the 
State. The services of Mr. Connon, of the ‘ Bombay 
Gazette,’ were secured in this crisis. By means of 
thundering articles in his paper he was instrumental 
in getting Col. Barr, the Political Agent, suspended. 

Col. Keatinge was sent as Political Agent in 
1863 with special instructions. He accordingly 
adopted quite a new policy in the relations of the 
Native States under the Agency. His firm dealings 
spread dismay in many Courts. Mr. Anantaji, 
believed to be veiy competent, was deputed to re- 
present the Jun^adh State before Col. Keatinge. 



13 


In his first visit he touched on extraneous subjects 
as usual. Col. Keatinge did not like this, and 
restricted him to Jun^adha afiairs. At the time of 
taking leave, Mr. Anantaji was told that, in future, 
the minister, whosoever he might be, should attend 
the Agent. 

The next time, of course, Div^n Gokulaji was sent. 
The fame of his acquirements, truthfulness and 
honesty, had preceded him. Col. Keatinge was very 
much pleased at meeting him. His dignified appear- 
ance, his straightforwardness, his conversation in pure 
Hindustani, his wide knowledge and his learned 
remarks, impressed that officer very favourably. 
This estimation grew higher and higher the more 
they came in contact. They became great friends 
and helped each other. Gokulaji now began to in- 
troduce improvements into the State by the kind 
advice of Col. Keatinge. He became in reality, instead 
of nominally, Div^n of the first of the four first class 
States of Saur^shtra. His salary was increased. 
It became well known that the British Agent enter- 
tained the highest regard for him. His virtues shone 
forth more conspicuously. In short, he was consider- 
ed the most deserving, fortunate, and influential 
gentleman in the Province. 

Col, Keatinge was desirous of drawing closer the 
relations between Europeans and natives. He used, 
therefore, to invite them to meet together socially at 
evening-parties and conversaziones. 

Amidst all this earthly prosperity, Gokulajibhii’s 
interest in the elevating Vedanta never slackened. 
The worldly prosperity he had acquired enabled him 
to devote his time and attention with greater ease to 
2 



li 

saldime aim of his life. After qualifying himself 
by mastering most of the principal works on ths 
V«iAnta philosophy, he b^an to expound its noble 
and transcendental doctrines, first, in the temple of 
the H^takes'vara MahMeva, and afterwards at his 
own residence, before a select and pious audience. 
He ako entered into correspondence on the same 
subject with Mr. Gauris'ankara Udayas'ankara, the 
able minister of Bhd-vanagara, his intimate friend 
Mr. S&maladSsa Param^nandaddsa, to whom this 
biography is dedicated, and with the writer of this, 
who now has the honour to pay a humble tribute to 
his memory by writing his life. The valuable and 
learned letters here referred to are incorporated in 
the Gujarati portion of this biography, which they 
so richly adorn. 

He was so well versed in the Veddnta, that even 
some of its able andiproficient saints, the Samny^ins, 
were struck with his deep knowledge of its esoteric 
as well as exoteric doctrines, and highly praised 
him for it. In fact, his stock of knowledge was very 
extraordinary, and the more easily acquired, because 
he took the greatest delight in philosophy. It was 
the all-absorbing subject of his life. He paid the 
greatest respect to the most philosophical, transcen- 
dental, convincing, elevating and noble master-pieces 
of the unsurpassable S'ankara, who recognising the 
divineness of Nature, and the divineness of Man, and 
having sincere communion with the mysterious invi- 
sible Powers visibly seen at work in the world round 
him, and continually unfolding the Godlike to men 
has (hstilled from the hearts of the Upanishads and 
other S'^stras — philosophical and religious works,— , 



15 


the gems of most glorious, helpful and lovely light 
for the enlightenment of mankind, the problems of 
whose highest and most sacred interests in life are 
successfully solved therein. He is one of the few 
writers who, while marked by strongly national 
characteristics, belong to the world rather than to a 
particular country. 

In 1867, the Nav^b Mohabatkh&nji’s desire of 
seeing his son, B^pumi^ S^heb, recognised as heir- 
apparent by the British Government, was fulfilled. 
A Darbir was held by Col. Keatinge at R&jkot for 
declaring the same to the Nav^b S^heb in public. 
GokuljibhM delivered a speech on the occasion 
with such eloquence as to elicit expressions of admi- 
ration jfrom the whole audience. 

About the same time, Gokuljibh^i, accompanied 
by his friend and colleague, Kb^n Bahadur S&^leh 
Hindi, visited Bombay for the first time, at the 
urgent advice of Col. Keatinge. Mr. DhirajaUl 
treated them very hospitably. Mr. PrinalM under- 
took to be their guide. Col. Keatinge happened 
also to be in Bombay at the same time. He introduc- 
ed Gokulajibh&i to the Governor, Sir Bartle Frere, 
in a Darb&r, in flattering language. GokulajibhS.i 
and SMeh Hindi remained in Bombay for about 
three months, and saw much that was worth seeing. 
Mr. Karsandds Mulji entertained them by giving a 
party in their honour, to which the Bombay gentry 
were invited. GokulajibhM had been led to entertain 
a very high opinion of the Buddhi Vardhaka 
Sabb& by Mr. PrS^lM when he was at Jun&gadh. 
GokulajitMi was anxious to see a meeting of 
the society personally. But the times were greatly 



16 


changed. The society was not now what Mr. Prd^a- 
IM had described it to be. He, therefore, tried to 
evade the question, but Gokuljibh&i again and again 
expressed his desire to have the pleasure of being 
present at a meeting of the Society. Its Secretary, 
Mr. DalapatiAm P. Khakhar, was requested by 
Mr. Pr^nalM to convene a meeting. He in his turn, 
in vain requested many members to deliver a lecture 
therein. At last he came to the present writer and 
stated the position. In a very happy moment, he 
complied with the Secretary’s wishes, and consented 
to read a paper. A meeting was called in Moti 
Raghun^th’s Hall. Dr. Bh^u D^ji presided, and 
a paper on “ Native States, ’’ specially prepared for 
the occasion, was read. Thus began the acquaint- 
ance, which ripening into close connection and 
friendship, continued ever increasing ‘like a river’ 
in affection and esteem with great benefit, not only 
to the writer himself, but also to many others of 
the happy band of friends, among whom he is a link. 
Gokulajibhili, being a N&gara BiAhmana by caste, 
gave a dinner-party to the Bombay N%aras, a day 
before his departure, and we there met again. At 
the time of parting he said : — “ It is f^frr. Know- 
ledge, that has accidentally brought us together 
and joined us into friendship, and we should hence- 
forth regard each other as ‘ hereditary * friends 
and carry on correspondence.” In fact, it seemed 
as if we were but renewing the relations of a 
previous existence. 

“ So, friend, when first I looked upon your face 
Our thoughts gave answer each to each, so true. 

Opposed mirrors each reflecting each— 



17 


Although I knew not in what time or place, 

Methought that I had often met with you 
And each had lived in other’s mind and speech. ” 

Tennyson's Sonnet. 

In 1867, Col. Keatinge, while in England on 
furlough, was appointed Agent -to the Governor 
General in Rajput^nsl. He, on returning to India, 
went directly there, and was succeeded by Col. 
Anderson. 

Col. Keatinge’s departure was an irreparable loss to 
Gokuljibh&i. He, accompanied by Messrs. Nara- 
sinhaprasMa and BapubhM, the Agency Daftard^r, 
went to Serohi to pay respects to Col. Keatinge, 
who heartily welcomed them. Col. Keatinge address- 
ed a letter from Serohi to the Navd,b Saheb, in which 
he shrewdly observed, “ Messrs. Gokulajibhii, B&.U- 
dinbh^i, SMeh Hindi, and NarasinhaprasMa, are the 
four pillars of the State, and as long as they are in 
harmony, the State will prosper. 

They visited many places of pilgrimage during 
this journey. 

In 1868, the V^ghira disturbance was suppressed, 
but the people of the Province suffered from another 
cause. Some interested persons tried to implicate 
respectable men in the matter. One, Mr. Mangalaji 
Bucha, then in the Gondal State’s service, was 
accused of clandestinely supporting the VSghira 
out-laws, and put on his trial. 

A Court was held at Rajkote consisting of Col. 
Anderson as Judge and President, and Mr. Gokulaji- 
bhS,i and three others as Assessors. At the end of 
the trial, CoL Anderson found the accused 'guilty. ’ 



18 


GoktilajibhM with his colleagues returned a verdict 
of ‘ not guilty. ' This very much surprised the Presi- 
dent, but not so much the people, as the latter 
had faith in GokulajibhS,p8 character and indepen- 
dence. The matter was, of course, submitted to the 
Bombay Government. They, after fully examining 
the case, issued orders to acquit and release the 
accused, thus adding to the reputation for impar- 
tial justice which the British Government so deser- 
vedly enjoys among the people generally. 

Through this incident Gukulajibh^ first incurred 
the wrath of Col. Anderson. 

In December 1868, the Broach Exhibition was 
opened. 'Gokulajibh&i went there to attend the open- 
ing ceremony with the Heir-apparent of Jun^gadha, 
Bjlpumi^ Saheb. After the ceremony was over, 
GokuiajibhM arranged to go to N^ndoda, to pay his 
respects to his first ) Guru, Sachchidinanda Parama- 
hansa, and invited the present writer to accompany 
him there. The quiet, courteous and amiable Bakshi 
MathurMtlsa was also with us. The whole of the 
Panchadas'i was known by heart to GokulajibbM. 
He most kindly expounded it to us with great effect 
while we were travelling. We talked over a great 
many subjects during this journey, and on one 
occasion he spoke very highly of his friend Mr. 
S^maiadS.sa’s abilities and learning, and asked the 
present writer to make his acquaintance when an 
opportunity offered. 

In 1869, at the instance of GokulajibhAi, the pre- 
sent writer was appointed the Jundgadha State 
Agent in Bombay. The Morvi Jortalbi case brou^t 
Gokulajibh4i to Bombay in the rainy season of the 



19 


same year. We went to Puna, as the Governor Sir 
Seymour Fitzgerald was there, and remained there for 
three months and enjoyed the trip very much. We 
returned to Bombay during the Divaii Holidays. Goku- 
lajibhai was much pleased with the highly spoken-of 
Bombay Divaii. He then left for Gujardta. At 
Baroda, we met Mr. Pranalal, then Deputy Collector 
of Pancha Mahaia, who wished us to go to the Pavag- 
adha Hills. Gokulajibhai, having faith in the Mahd- 
mdyd, consented to go there and see the temple 
consecrated to one of her forms, Kaiika. While return- 
ing thence, Gokulajibhai suddenly appeared irri- 
tated and lost his temper with Baksbiji Mathuradas 
for a very slight reason. This was the first 
time the writer saw this weakness in him. But 
his returning to himself was as rapid. In a few 
minutes he became composed and as pleasant as 
before. 

Gokulajibhai did the writer the honour of visiting 
his house at Nadiad on his way back to Junagadh. 

Gokulajibhai fully appreciated the value and use- 
fulness of well-educated young men of character, and 
was always anxious to enlist such gentlemen in the 
Junagadh service without any distinction of caste 
or creed. His views were very liberal. He used to 
observe that he regarded those as his relatives who 
were deserving of the State service by their educa" 
tion, qualifications and honesty, and would only 
employ such. This spirit is unusual in those who 
have places in their gift. 

Gokulajibhai asked the writer to recommend to 
him some professional gentlemen for the medical and 
judicial services. He, accordingly, recommended Mr. 



20 


Amid&s Manaji, L. M. of the Bombay University, 
who was at once employed at Jun^gadh as a Doctor. 

The other gentleman recommended was Mr. Mani- 
hhii Jasbh^i, who temporarily joined the JunS,gadha 
State for one year, as Judicial Member of the Council, 
during which time he won such high estimation, 
that the Durbar long after continued desirous of ob- 
taining his valuable services on his own terms. 

Messrs. Harid^sa Vih^ridisa, Motil^la lAlabh^i, 
Jan^rdana Sakh^lr^ma G^dgil, Hormasji Ardesir Wd.- 
dia, Jamasedji Ardesir DalM, and many others, were 
subsequently offered places at Jun&gadha, but some 
cause or other prevented them from going there. 

In 1870 arose the question of interference by the 
Political Agent in cases between the Native States 
and their Grdsi^s. 

The Political Agent, Col. Anderson, made the 
cause of the Gr^site and Bh^y&ds his own. The 
Chiefs regarded the measure contemplated by the Po- 
litical officers as very injurious to their administration. 

The matter grew serious. As the measure was 
taken in hand at the instance of the Secretary of 
State for India, and all the Political officers were on 
the opposite side, there was no hope of the Chiefs’ 
gaining their point. All the States, however, became 
united and proved the truth of the proverb — ‘Union 
is strength/ as effectively as they had formerly 
proved in many cases, — ‘Divison is death.’ 

The first class States deputed their Ministers to 
Government and they sought and obtained an inter- 
view with His Excellency the Governor, Sir Seymour 
Fitzgerald. The just and considerate Mr. W. Wedder- 
bum, then Political Secretary to Government, assist- 



21 


ed by Mr. John Jardine, smoothed the way by his 
judicious settlement of the preliminaries of the 
scheihe at Fund, where the ministers had gone. They 
all returned to Bombay after the monsoon was over. 
A conference was held at Government House, Mala- 
hiv Point, between the Governor, his Political Secre- 
tary Mr. Wedderburn, and the Political Agent Col. 
Anderson, on the one side, and the K^rabh^ris (mini- 
sters) with their deputies on the other side ; the pre- 
sent writer acting as interpreter. Prolonged discus- 
sions, extending over several weeks, took place on the 
subject, and as to the best practical means and ways 
of carrying out the desired object. GokulajibhS,i 
was the spokesman on the side of the Chiefs. He 
conducted the discussion in such a manner as evoked, 
not unfrequently, very high praise from His Excel- 
lency the Governor. In the last interview after the 
settlement. Sir Seymour Fitzgerald paid very flatter- 
ing compliments, stating that he was very much 
pleased by the meetings; that the abilities, knowledge, 
experience, and statesmanship displayed by the dele- 
gates were praiseworthy; and that he must add that 
he had seen very few debaters so competent in dis- 
cussion as their spokesman Gokulaji S^heb. 

Gokulajibh^i was of opinion that many difficulties 
and causes of injustice would be removed, and to the 
eventual interest of both, the bond of mutual affection 
would be drawn closer, if good men from among 
Europeans and natives were actuated by an abiding 
desire to aid in the better knowledge and more 
honest understanding of the East and West. 

They returned to EAthi&v&d, after effecting an 
honorable settlement of a grave question. The 



22 


satellites of the Political Agent made him regard the 
success of the KHrabh^ris, as his own failure and low 
of prestige. His wrath descended on GokulajibhAi 
and Gauris'ankara, the leaders. In his annual 
report he made very unfavourable remarks about 
the J un&gadha administration, forgetting the praises 
he had himself bestowed upon it in previous years. 

Gokulajibh^i fully experienced the great difficulties 
of the delicate position of a K^rabh^ri of a Native 
State, who had to please not only the proverbial two 
but three masters, — his own Chief, his subjects, and 
the Political Agent. 

Col. Anderson went on furlough, and was succeed- 
ed by Mr. J. B. Peile. He called for a report from Major 
Watson, the Assistant Political Agent in Sorath, and 
submitted it to the Government along with his own, 
showing that there was nothing wrong in the Jun^- 
gadha State which required special attention from 
Government. Mr. Peile, like Col. Keatinge, fully 
appreciated the many good qualities and qualifications 
of Gokulajibh^i, and entertained a very high opinion 
of his character, as may be seen from the following 
letter addressed to the writer, in 18 T9. 

He says : — " I had very much to do with him in 
an official way, and many difficulties to meet as 
you are well aware. His own position was an 
embarrassing one, and I have always considered 
that his policy was single-minded, and that he 
acted rightly as far as the measures taken by the 
Jun%adha State were directed by his authority. 
I also saw much of him as a private person, and 
had a great esteem and liking for him. He was 
fond of seeking the society of Englishmen, and 



2d 


■wm always genial and amusing in conversation 
on the topics of the day. I much regretted his 
death, and if I had remained in Kithi^vM, I should 
have missed him constantly from the circle of 
able men who used to consult with me on the 
affairs of the province. There was only one other 
Ajam Gauris'ankara, whom I placed in the same 
rank in my regard.’’ 

CoL Anderson returned from his furlough, and 
resumed charge of the Political Agency. He, being 
k good gentleman by nature, had almost forgotten 
his former ill-feeling towards Gokulajibh^i. But 
his satellites revived it in him by poisoning 
his mind afresh. Unfortunately, he this time tried 
to get Gokulajibh^li dismissed by the Nav4b Siheb. 
The latter wished to present a bold front and refuse. 
But Gokulajibhai perceived the consequence of all 
this and himself proposed to retire, fearing that the 
Political Agent might otherwise injure the interests 
of the State in other ways. After some months, the 
Political Agent went to JunS,gadha and personally 
pressed the Nav4b S3,heb to remove Gokulajibhii. 
He was first deputed to attend a wedding at the 
Hon. Mr. Mor^raji’s at Bombay, and on his return, 
was asked to retire from his office on full pay. His 
own friend Khan Bahadur S^leh Hindi, took charge 
of the Div^lnship. 

Col. Anderson soon after retired on pension and 
was again succeeded by Mr. Peile. 

The Nav&b S^heb re-instated GokulajibM,i in his 
Div^nship immediately on the change in the person- 
nel of the Agency. 

During the time of adversity Gokulajibhii found 



24 


a good opportunity of testing the sincerity of friends 
and acquaintances. Col. Law, Mr. John Jardine, 
Col. Lester, amongst European local officers and 
many others used to give him sincere help and con- 
solation. 

Thus, after experiencing the changes incident to 
human affairs, he was again blessed with the enjoy- 
ment of worldly influence and honour. Like a per- 
fect gentleman, he behaved with the same true dig- 
nity under adversity as in prosperity. After this, 
his way remained clear of difficulties. The Political 
Agent, Mr. Peile, and the Assistants, Major Watson, 
Major Wodehouse, and Major Phillips, had always 
high esteem and kind regard for him. 

On the occasion of the Delhi Darbdr in 1877, 
Gokulajibhdi and the present writer accompanied 
the Nav^b S^heb, and travelled over a great part 
of Northern India^ Gokulajibh^i took advantage of 
this journey to visit many places of pilgrimage in the 
intervals of travel. 

Gokulajibhdi had a very quick eye for discerning 
gentlemen of character. His remarkable penetration 
and judgment of character enabled him to dis- 
tinguish men of kindred character — who, of course, 
are necessarily very few. He appreciated their 
value and tried to promote their interests. He was 
generally reticent, but spoke his mind openly and 
boldly when occasion called for it, but never said 
more than he meant. 

He was much pleased with the intelligence, 
moderation, sound judgment, and high character of 
Mr. DM4bh&i Naoroji, a Franklin of India. His 
Highness the Nav4b S^heb once desired to appoint 



26 


an Agent in London. It was a sinecure worth 
about Rs, 3,000 a year. Mr. Dad&bh^i Naoroji was 
asked to accept it through the present writer, but 
he declined it with thanks, so as to put it out of the 
power of any one to throw any suspicion on the 
purity of his motives in his public career, and thus 
lessen his influence for good. 

Gokulajibhai highly praised this noble devotedness 
to his country, regarding monetary advantages 
as mere dirt beneath his feet when compared with 
public interest and usefulness. He used to hold Mr. 
Diid&bhai up as an example of a genuine honest man. 

He also entertained a high opinion of the Editor of 
the R^st Goftar, Mr. K. N. K^biAji, for his honesty; 
for when once offered by the Navdb Stfheb a present 
of Rs. 1,000 for his public services, Mr. KibiAji 
declined it with thanks. 

It is scarcely necessary to remark here that Go- 
kulajibh&i himself was admitted on all hands to be a 
paragon of honesty. 

His mental powers, cultivated and developed by 
the highest intellectual studies, enabled him to 
transact his administrative work rapidly and well. 
The ease with which he penetrated the substance 
of most intiicate cases and statements astonished 
even such an able gentleman as R4v Bahddur Mani- 
bhM Jasabhai, who often came in contact with able 
English statesmen and judges. Mr. ManibhM’s 
estimate of Gokulajibhfti is given in extenso in the 
following Gujarati pages. 

Gokulajibh4Es views as a statesman were very 
commendable. He believed in the truth of the 
principle, that the end of Government is the hap- 
3 



26 


piness of the governed; that the ruler is for the 
people, and not the people for the ruler ; that the 
ruler must be the servant as well as the master of his 
people. In short, his political creed was according 
to the Sanskrita passage of K^lid^sa in S'akuntaM, 
viz: — 




‘ Let the King reign for the benefit of his subject.’ 
" to follow this principle as far as lay in 

his power. He heia^uud^t the^prov^^e of a ruler is 
to think, to form great designs, and to ii^^ke choice of 
men properly qualified to carry tliem into execution', 
and that he should first qualify himself by knowledge, 
and keep company with learned, wise and good 
persons of experience, and learn to rule himself, so 
that he might be kind, generous, and sympathetic to 
the people. ' 


Gokulaji has done a great deal for the good of 
the Junagadha State. During the period of his 
Div^nship many schools for boys and girls were 
founded; endeavours were made to improve the 
revenue system and to develop the resources of the 
country, ( and the revenue gradually increased four- 
fold ); attempts to improve the ports of Veraval and 
Bheifli were made, and trade was very much en- 
couraged; trunk roads were constructed; great re- 
forms in the judicial system were inaugurated; a code 
of laws was framed, and courts of justice were es- 
tablished; the department of Public-works was 
started; a library, a hospital and dispensaries were 
founded; disputed boundary-questions between the 
Junagadha and the adjoining native states of BarodS,, 



27 


Gondal, Por bandar, &c., were settled; the long- 
standing and important cases of the vassal estate of 
Mangrol and the Morvi Jortalbi tribute were ably 
fought and won; and a survey for constructing a rail- 
way was made. In short, he sowed the seeds of almost 
all the improvements by which the State has benefited. 
But in comparison with what he seemed capable of 
elfecting with his mental powers, moral force, and 
elevation of character, he may be said to liave 
accomplished less than might have been expected. 
This was owing to many unfavourable circumstances, 
which disturbed the harmony in the State, that 
was essential in order to carry out his good 
intentions. He felt this very much; for while he 
had the desire to do great things, he had at the 
same time the certain knowledge that he could do 
only a part of what was necessary for the well-being of 
the State. 

The best and the bravest of men have moments 
of doubt and weakness, and Gokulaji had them; 
but he recovered from passing depression by recurr- 
ing to such teachings of the Veddnta as, that the 
universe is wisely ordered by the Lord {Is'vara)-, that 
every man (Jiva) is a part of it, and must conform to 
that order which he cannot change, that 

is to say since he could not alter what is without 
him she should resolve to alter what is within, and 
that man should do his duty to the best of his 
power, and when it is done, he should not desire the 
reward it may bring nor its fruits ; that he should 
dedicate to God every thing he says and he does 
with the mind or body and leave the rest to his 
Providence. This sentiment finds expression also 



28 


in the Sermon on the Mount: — '^Do good hop- 

ing for nothing again/^ 

Man has to live two lives — that of thought and that 
of action. In his life of thought Gokulaji was guided 
by the Vedanta philosophy, in that of action he was 
guided by selections from both European and Indian 
precepts. His temporal and practical views were, 
therefore, very commendable. He much appreciated 
the noble thoughts and sentiments of European 
thinkers, like those as will be quoted in the following 
paragraphs from Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Zeno 
the Stoic, Seneca, Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, 
Goethe, &c, 

“ Life is a festival. And as some people come to a festival 
to contend for the prizes, and others for tlic purposes of traffic, 
and the best as spectators; so also in life the inen of slavish 
dispositions are bom) hunters after glory and covetousness, 
but philosophers (lovers or embracers of Wisdom ) are seekers 
after truths. 

“ People should associate with one another in such a way 
as not to make their friends enemies, but to render their 
enemies friends. ” (1) 

“ How many things are there which I do not want ! 

Those who want fewest things are nearest to the gods. 

“ There was one only good, namely, knowledge; and one 
only evil, namely ignorance. 

“ Virtue consists of knowledge. 

To do right is the only road to happiness; and if every 
man seeks to be happy, vice can rise only from ignorance or 
mistake as to the means. 

The proper study of mankind is man. ” (2.) 


(1) I^hagoras. (2) Socrates. 



29 


‘‘The highest good is the greatest possible likeness to 

God, as the absolute good. The virtue of the human soul is 
its fitness for its proper work Virtue should be de- 

sired, not from motives of reward and punishment, but be- 
cause it is in itself the health and beauty of the souL 

“ The task and destiny of the soul is flight from inward 
and outward evils of sense, purification and emancipation 
from corporeal influence, the striving to become pure, just, 
and like withal to God. '' 

“ Vice is ignorance. Virtue is knowledge. Death is merely 
the separation of soul and body, and this is the very consum- 
mation at which philosophy aims. The body hinders 
thought. The mind attains to truth by retiring into herself. 
Through no bodily sense does she perceive justice, beauty, 
goodness and other ideas. The philosopher has a life-long 
quarrel with bodily desires, and he should welcome the 
release of his soul. 

“ The soul commands, the body serves, therefore the soul is 
akin to the divine The soul, if pui’e, departs to the in- 

visible world, but, if tainted by communion with the bodyi 
she Angel'S hovering near tlie earth, and is afterwards born 
into the likeness of the lower form. That which true philo- 
sophy has purified alone rises ultimately to the gods.” (I) 

“ Live in agreement with thy own rational nature, so 
far as it is not corrupted and distorted by art, but remains in 
its natural simplicity; be knowingly and willingly that 
which by nature thou art, a rational part of the rational 
whole. 

“ Virtue, the sole end of man as a rational being, is also 
his sole happiness, his sole good: only the inner reason, and 

strength of the soul can render man happy, and 

supply him with a counterpoise to the contingencies and 

obstructions of external life External goods, health, 

wealth, &C., are, one and all of them, indifferent; they contri- 


(1) Socrates-Plato. 



30 


l)ute nothing to reason, nothing to the greatness and strength 

of the soul they may issue in grief and they may 

issue in joy; they are not, therefore, any thing really good; 
only Virtue is profitable; to want or to lose external possess- 
ions affects not the happiness of the virtuous. (1) 

“ Good counsel is the best service one can do to mankind. 

“ Man should be estimated according to what he is and not 
^according to what he has. 

“ The great blessings of mankind are witliin us, and within 
our reach; but we shut our eyes, and, like people in the dark, 
we fall foul of the very thing we search for without finding 
it. 

“No man is happy but he that needs no other happiness 
than what he has within himself; no man is great or power- 
ful that is not master of himself. The greatest felicity of all 
is, not to stand in need of any. 

“ He is only great who is not elevated or dejected with 
good or ill fortune, bi:^ content with his lot, whatever it be, 
and performs the business of his life, like nature, without 
tumult or noise. 

“ He that would be truly happy must think his own lot 
best, and so live with men, as if considering that God sees 
liim, and so speak to God as if man heard him. 

“ Those are the only certain and profitable delights which 
arise from the conscience of a well-acted life. 

“ There is not in the scale of nature a more inseparable 
connection of cause and effect than in the case of virtue and 
happiness. 

“ Whoever observes the world, and the order of it, will find 
all the motions in it to be only vicissitude of falling and 
rising: nothing extinguished, and even those things which 
seem to us to perish, are in truth but changed. 

“ Hope the best and provide for the worst 


(1) Zeno, the Stoic. 




31 


“ One sovereign remedy against all misfortunes is constancy 
of mind. Nothing can be above him tliat is above fortune. 

‘‘ It is the mind that makes us rich and happy, in what 
condition so-ever we are. 

There is nothing ill that is well taken. 

“An injury cannot be received without being done : but it 
may be done and not received. 

“ That man only is happy that draws good out of evil. 

“ Noble examples stir us up to noble actions, and the very 
history of large and public souls inspires a man with generous 

thoughts Those are the best instructors that teach in 

their lives. 

“ True friends are the whole world to one another. 

“ Every one can secure his own happiness, if he learns to 
seek it, not in external circumstances, but in himself. 

“ Expect nothing and be prepared for all things.” (1) 

“ A wise man is always content with that which liappens; 
for he thinks that what God chooses is better than what 
he cliooses. 

“ If a man is unhappy, this must be his own fault; for God 
made all men to be happy. 

“ Seek not that things should happen as you wish; but 
wish the things which happen to be as they are, and you will 
have a tranquil flow of life. 

“ The soul is a much better thing than all the others which 
you possess. Can you then show me in what way you-so 
wise a man-have taken care of it ? 

“ Contentment-happiness-consists not in great wealth, 
but in few wanta 

“ You will do the greatest service to the State if you shall 
raise, not the roofs of the houses, but the souls of the citizens: 
for it is better that great souls should dwell in small houses 
rather tlian for mean slaves to lurk in great houses. 


(1) The Morals of Seneca. 




32 


“ Tliink of God oftener than you breathe. Let the dis- 
course of God be renewed daily more surely than your food. 

** Remember that you are an actor of just such a part as is 
«issigned you by the Poet of the play ; of a short part, if the 
part be short ; of a long part, if it be long. Should He wish 
you to act the part of a beggar, take care to act it naturally 
iand nobly ; and the same if it be the part of a lame man, or 
^ ruler, or a private man ; for this is in your power, to act 
well the part assigned to you ; but to choose that part is the 
function of another. 

Set before you the examples of the great and good. 

“ Do what is right quite irrespective of what people will 
my or think. 

" We all have been in some special manner born of God, 
and God is the father of gods and men, ( and therefore we 
must not have) any ignoble, any humble thoughts about 
( 1 ) 

Do not act as if thou wert going to live ten thousand 
years. Death hangs over thee. While thou livcst, while it 
is in thy power, be good. (IV-17 ) 

‘‘ A (good) man, like a bee when it has made the honey, 
when he has done a good act, does not call out for others to 
come and see, but he goes on to another act, as a vine goes on 
to produce again the grapes in season. (V. G ), 

“ Such as are thy habitual thoughts, such also will be the 
character of thy mind; for the soul is dyed by the thoughts, 
(V. 16) 

Let the part of thy soul which leads and govenis be 
undisturbed by the movements in the flesh, whether of 
pleasure or of pain. (V. 26 ) 

“ (Man) consists of a little body and a soul. Now to this 
little body all things are indifferent, for it is not able to per- 
ceive differences. But to the understanding those things 
only are indifferent which are not the works of its own 
activity. (VI. 32) 


(1) Bpictetus. 




33 


“ Whatever any one does or says, I must be good, just as 
if the gold, or the emerald, or purple were always saying 
this, whatever any one does or says I must be emerald and 
keep my colour. (VIL 15). 

“Nature which governs the whole will soon change all 
things which thou seest, and out of their substance will 
make other things, and again other things from the substance 
of them in order that the world may be ever new. (VIL 25). 

“ Think not so much of what thou hast not, as of what 
thou hast: but of the things which thou hast select the best 
and then reflect liow eagerly tliey would have been sought, if 
thou liadst them not (VIL 27). 

“ Look within. Within is the fountain of good, and it vull 
ever bubble up, if thou wilt ever dig. (VIL 59). 

“ It is not men’s acts which disturb us, for those acts have 
their foundation in men’s ruling principles, but it is our own 
opinions which disturb us. (XL 18). 

“ I have often wondered how it is that every man loves 
himself more than all the rest of men, but yet sets less value 
on his own opinion of himself than on the opinions of others 
... (XIL 4) 

“ I have not seen my own soul and yet I honour it Thus 
then with respect to the gods, from what I constantly ex- 
perience of their ]>ower, from this I comprehend that they 
exist and I venerate them. ” (XII. 28) (1) 

Inspired as he was by such thoughts as the above, 
Gokulaji^s rule of conduct was mostly similar in 
spirit to a concentrated admonition of Goethe, ‘who 
combines the higher and lower wisdom and has skill 
to put moral truths in forms of words that fix them* 
selves with stings in the reader’s mind/ 

“ Wouldst fashion for thyself a seemly life?- 
Then fret not over what is past and gone; 


(1) The Thoughts of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius Anto- 
ninus, (Prof. G. Long.) 




34 


And spite of all thou inayst have lost behind, 

Yet act as if thy life has just begun. 

What each day wills, enough for thee to know; 

What each day wills, the day itself will tell. 

Do thine own task, and be there with content; 

What others do, that shalt thou fairly judge; 

Be sure that thou no brother-mortal hate. 

Then all besides leave to the Master-Pow'er, ” (1) 

Whatever character GokulajibhS,i established as a 
minister, his memory will be cherished most 
as a good man and a philosopher. 

In his case the notion-Just as we think, so we 
become — was not less trne than that in the saying,— 
As we sow, so we reap. It is well observed that every 
man is Avorth just so much as the things are worth 
about which he busies himself. In short, his conduct 
was governed by high thinking and plain living. 
His life, it is hoped, Avill inspire many with a 
consciousness of the noble work they may do for 
God and their fellow-men by thinking lofty 
thoughts and doing generous deeds. 

Gokulaji held that political and social progress 
depended upon intellectual progress. We must, he 
used to say, therefore, first endeavour to increase 
knowledge among our people by spreading education 
and educing thereby from their own minds their own 
natural treasures by stimulating their reflective 
capacities, and trust to it and not to dictation in our 
campaign against popular beliefs and prejudices for 
the improvement and the progress of our country. 
We must remember that compulsion is not convic- 
tion. In all progress the process of Nature is the 


(1) Goethe. 



35 


fittest and most efiective. This process is to maintain 
uninterruptedly and in continuous action a portion of 
the useful old that is already established and has 
been tried, reject a portion of what has grown too 
old and corrupted, and in its stead create and 
establish a portion that is new and useful, but not 
what only exists in speculation. 

Let the light of knowledge destroy darkness 
and our people Avill see for themselves all things in 
their true colours, and the desired progress all round 
will follow. Though Gokulaji held to the best that 
is in ideas of old institutions and old ways of 
thinking under which, he believed, could well flourish 
all virtues such as manliness and reverence, strength 
and tendei-ness, love of truth and jnty for man, &c,, 
he was on the side of improvement and progress. He 
Avould advise the reformer not to talk of his ancestors 
with contempt, but to judge them as he would have 
his descendants judge of himself. 

Some questions of social reform had already begun 
to be raised in his time. Gokulaji's opinion about 
the reform (piestion seemed to be that hasty reforms 
were always attended with certain evils and promised 
but an uncertain good, 'especially those that ai-e 
recommended by the young, the thoughtless, the 
busy, or the interested.’ His advice, therefore, to 
the wise reformer Avas similar in substance to Burke’s 
maxim that 'men might employ their sagacity in 
discovering the latent wisdom which underlies 
general prejudices, and old institutions, instead of 
exploding them’; and honestly endeavour to harmo- 
nise and reconcile old and new forces and ideas 'that 
make man’s destiny easier to him... through rever- 



36 


ence for the past, for duty, for institutions/ We 
must be very discriminate and cautious in our zeal 
for reform. All the spirit of reform should be 
tempered with circumspection of surrounding circum- 
stances and connections, lest youth-corrupting and 
manners-moral-and-religion-undermining sham re- 
forms might fasten upon the very vitals of our noble 
national existence, and end in a mere change of 
tyrants; and we and our posterity may have to 
bewail that ‘the age of our fathers, worse than that 
of our grandsires, has produced us who are yet 
baser, and who are doomed to give birth to a still 
more degraded off-spring/ 

Gokulajibh^i admired many British institutions, 
but he used to observe that he was surprised by 
inconsistencies in some of them, and instanced 
as one in point, that — ‘The British Government 
require any intending candidate to be examined 
and found competent before he is sent to teach even 
the rudiments of knowledge to boys in villages, but 
when they have to send their representatives to the 
Courts of Native States, where it is essential that 
they should be most com])etent, in order to set a 
good example to, inspire confidence in, and retain 
good relations with, Native Princes, no test of 
any kind is provided/ Political Officers are con- 
necting links between the British Government and 
Native States, or rather, bridges over which the 
good in the one is to be carried to the other, and 
vice versa ; and it is through them that mutual re- 
lations are drawn closer, to the benefit of all concern- 
ed. They, therefore, should be selected from among 
the best in the Services. 



37 


They are expected to be held up as models to the 
officers and others in the Native States, to colferi- 
bute to raise the character of public men, so as to 
form good statesmen, and to develop in themselves, 
as well as in those who come in contact with them 
the high principles of good government. 

It is implied in their very nationality that they 
are imbued with principles such as: — "The king is 
the representative of the people ; so are the Lords ; 
so are the judges; they are all trustees for the 
people as well as the Commons, because no power is 
given for the sole sake of the holder ; and although 
government certainly is an institution of divine 
authority, yet its forms, and the persons who 
administer it, all originate from the people.” "Their 
representatives are a control for the people and not 
upon the people.” 

If the British representatives who are styled and 
meant by the Government to be friends and advisers 
to the Native States, are desirous of truly accomplish- 
ing the noble mission of their nation to elevate 
Natives upto themselves and prove that, — ‘ the 
British Empire is the greatest instrument for good 
the world has ever seen/ they should endeavour to 
inspire Princes and their subjects with some such idea 
of good government as above quoted. If this part 
is conscientiously performed, the Native States will 
not only be a real support to the British Empire, 
but will also produce statesmen who, while governed 
by the principle that ‘ the end of government is to 
produce the greatest happiness to mankind/ will 
consider it their duty : — 

“ To keep the golden mean, their golden rule, 

4 



38 


The end to prize, to learn in Nature’s School ; 

^ To serve their countiy, their whole life to spend, 

The world’s good, not their own, their being’s end.” 

H. E. The Viceroy, Lord Lytton, conferred 
upon Gokulajibhai on the 1st of January 1877, in 
recognition of his loyal conduct and services, the 
title of HAo Bahadur as a personal distinction. 

Gokulaji died on the 28th of November 1878, in 
office, and in the full enjoyment of public respect and 
royal regard, or, to speak in the Ved^lntic language, 
he, having done his task, became, through the true 
Self-knowledge, free from the three frames — causal, 
subtile, and gross, that disguise the Self — and then, 
his Self, absorbed into the Highest Self, became all- 
happiness, just as the space, enclosed by a pot, be- 
comes one with the infinite space and free, on that 
pot being broken. It is distinctly pronounced in the 
Veda, that ‘ One knowing Brahman, becomes Brah- 
man,’ because ‘ to know is to be,’ according to the 
Vedanta. 

GokulajibhM was a self-helped, a self-educated, and 
a self-made man, in the true sense of the words. He 
was resolved to excel, and he did excel in his great 
and single aim, which was, to unfold his spiritual 
faculties by study and contemplation, and to return 
to the Highest Self. 

It is said that the three strings — Kanaka, Kdntd 
and Kirti, i. e., fortune, female, and fame, have chain- 
ed the whole world. Not to be so drawn and 
enslaved by any of these as to do any wrong, is the 
proper test of a truly good man. In worldly affairs, 
Gokulajibhai had many occasions to be tried by the 
test, but was proved genuine. Illusory temptations 



39 


of the world passed over him harmless. It is true 
that rank, wealth, influence and other worldly pos- 
sessions are useful as means for the sake of doing 
good, and so far they are desired by good men, who, 
however, always regard them .as the means only, 
and never as the end. Gokulajibh^i was content 
with what he had honestly acquired. He never de- 
sired to seem to be other than what he was in matters 
of wealth, influence and knowledge. He used to live 
within his means. His habits were simple. He 
devoted the best portion of his time to the study of 
philosophy which is justly styled ‘the pursuit of 
absolute truth, or of the absolute real, that is, of the 
true and real as they exist for all intelligence; and 
this pursuit is conducted under the direction of the 
universal faculty in man, or, in other words, is con- 
ducted under the direction of necessary thinking.’ (1) 
This raised him into the region of universal or unin- 
dividual thinking. He ranked the intellectual 
pleasure highest, and in it he felt the greatest satis- 
faction. He set his affection on Brahman, Which 
in each case really exists, and was able to apprehend 
the eternal and immutable Highest Self. ‘Just as 
one thinks so he becomes,' was truly applicable here. 
There was no parade, no affectation, about him. He 
worked quietly, and never coveted publicity. True 
character, however, seldom remains in the dark. 
The fame of his good qualities had travelled very 
far, and was noticed in Blackwood’s Edinburgh 
Magazine for August 1876. A celebrated English 
gentleman says therein 

“ The Divan of Jun%adh, when I visited KS.thi4- 

(1) Ferrier’s Lecture on Greek Philosophy. 




40 


vM, was also an exceedingly courteous, dignified and 
intelligent gentleman. This was Azam Gokul^i 
Sampattiram. At this time he was absent at 
Il4jcote...but I met him there and had before made 
very friendly acquaintance with him. His disposi- 
tion was very kind and pleasing, his knowledge 
great, his piety unaffected; and in the course of much 
intercourse with him relating to business affairs, in 
which there was some temptation to depart from 
strict rectitude, I never saw in him the least shadow 
of guile, or anything which would be deemed un- 
worthy of the highest class of English gentlemen. 
Even those, who found most fault with the State of 
Jun^gadh, had nothing to say against his personal 
character.” In truth, he required only to be person- 
ally known, to be admired. As a specimen of how 
he was estimated by the Natives, the following letter 
from Mr. HaridS.^ Viharidasa, the sole Administra- 
tor at Wadhav^n, who is well-known for being not 
given to overpraise is transcribed : — 

“My Dear Manasukharam, 

I am very much grieved to learn the sad news of 
the demise of our accomplished, and so widely res- 
pected friend and well-wisher, Eao Bahddur Gokulaji- 
bhdi. I have always admired, as you are aware, his 
many good qualities, of which truthfulness, firm dis- 
position, straightforwardness, integrity, singleness of 
purpose, and religious turn of mind, were most con- 
spicuous. He was a noble, able, shrewd, and in- 
telligent statesman. He was not only respected 
but revered by all who knew him personally, or by 
his well-known, unstained reputation, as a really 
great and representative man> He possessed a very 



41 


good knowledge of our Hindu philosophy and reli- 
gion, which drew a still greater reverence for him 
from the people. As a mortal being, he had of 
course some failings, but they were so few and small,^ 
and his virtues so many and great, that the former 
remained almost always eclipsed by the latter. 

What a loss has KS,thiiwM suffered in his death 1 
His absence will be keenly felt for a long time by 
the prominent members of our political circle, of 
which he was the prop. The States of El^thi^wltd 
in general will miss in him an able, truthful, and 
fearless advocate of their common interests. The 
loss to Jun^gadh, of which he was Divin for several 

years, can be better imagined than described. 

# * # * # 

I well remember that some leading members in 
the administration of a big rival State in K4thi§.v4d 
were at one time underestimating, nay denouncing, 
the abilities and good qualities of this great man, 
more out of envy than anything else, but occasions 
brought them very often in closer contact with him, 
which converted their sneers and condemnation into 
love and admiration for him. 

I wish I could have written this letter to his son, 
if he had fortunately left one after him, but in the 
absence of one, I am sui-e I hit the next proper mark 
in addressing this to you, inasmuch as the deceased 
entertained most affectionate regards for you. 

May God give him eternal repose is my sincere 
prayer to Him. 

Hoping you are well, 

I am, 

Ever yours, 

Harida's Viha'rida's.” 



42 


Mr. H. A. Wadia, Barrister-at-Law, writes as 
follows : — " I knew EAo Bahadur Gokulajibhai from 
1873 till his death. I knew him intimately because 
in some important cases, notably the Mangrol Juris- 
diction case, we had occasion to meet very frequent- 
ly. What struck me most was his absolute fidelity 
to Jundgadh’s interests. I have never seen a more 
zealous and capable Dewan. Although of the old 
school he was as far from corruption personally 
as the most incorruptible of the new school of 
Karhharees. If he was mistaken or misled, harsh 
or exacting, it was owing to excessive zeal for the 
interests of his state. It is worthy of note how he 
— a thorough Hindu — was a most devoted and faith- 
ful servant to Mahommedan rulers. His personal 
virtues were many and they had their source in the 
purest tenets of his I'eligion. He did not know 
English but he w^s a scholar nevertheless. He may 
not have studied politics but he was still a states- 
man. He knew Persian well and I am sure it was 
this knowledge which helped him to search through 
the Persian records of the State to collect a mass of 
ancient original evidence which saved JunSgadh 
from the perilous attempt to wrest Mangrol from its 
jurisdiction. We all know now how clever and un- 
scrupulous the fabrications wei*e on which that 
attempt was based. I must not fail to mention an- 
other characteristic of the deceased. This was his 
sterling independence. It was due to his disinterest- 
edness. He was not afraid to tell the truth, when 
the occasion required, whether to the Darbar or to 
the Political Agent or even to the Governor. As he 
was one of the best, so also was he one of the last, 
^ alas 1 — of the Great Karhharees'' 



43 


Gokulajibhii's life inculcates many useful and 
eloquent lessons of virtue, and will enduringly exer- 
cise a wholesome influence on many. He was kind- 
hearted and prudent, anxious to attend to those 
matters which might make him better, and to bring 
them to light for the benefit of others. Besides 
the noble qualities of his intellect there was in 
his nature a lofty integrity and truth, together with 
a high earnestness on behalf of what was right and 
good. He possessed a genial Stoicism — an estimable 
faculty of taking the good and leaving the bad 
alone. He had the sincerity of motive and earnest- 
ness of conviction which are the characteristics of 
great men, and the change his personal influence 
wrought in intelligent and good minds that came in 
contact with him was grave and noble. He illustrat- 
ed in his life the true principle conveyed in the 
Vedanta. He successfully performed the duty of 
the Religion of Works, and rose to 
the highest position in the province of Surd- 
shtra, and used in his best moment to enjoy, 
though in GrihastMs'rama, even the result of 
the Religion of Retirement and 
Reflection ( characterised by Knowledge ), by the 
attainment of the Supreme Bliss, or the 

liberation of soul through perfection. His youth 
SfFPifsnT was devoted to the toil of acquiring educa- 
tion and qualifications, so that his manhood 
might be consecrated to the duty of a house-holder 
and to the realization of the teachings of the Vedanta 
Philosophy. He was an honour to humanity. May 
his good character mould many after him 1 It will 
awaken many to try to distil out their Self or Soul 



44 


of goodness surrounded by evils. It will ennoble 
them, and lift them up to a higher region of ob- 
jects and aims than that in which they, unaided, 
habitually dwell. It will induce them to call forth 
the best treasure — everybody's Self — lying hidden in 
them, but whose existence was not before suspected; 
nnd it will thus light a bright flame in those who 
■cherish high aims, like faculties, and vigorous and 
■earnest effort. 

The present writer cannot more fitly close this 
sketch than by quoting the Poet Laureate’s following 
lines of prayer to God : — 

“ Forgive my grief for one removed, 

Thy creature, whom I found so fair. 

I trust he lives in thee, and there 
I find him worthier to be loved.” 


P. S. The first edition of this sketch was published 
in 1881. After a few years, Sujna Gokulaji Z4lS,’s 
friends and admirers raised a fund to perpetuate his 
memory. Government Promissory notes of the value 
of Rs. 1 5,000 ( fifteen thousand ) bearing interest at 
4 per-cent were handed over, in 1888, to the 
Bombay University, with the request to keep the 
amount intact and award annually a prize out of the 
yearly interest called '‘The Sujna Gokulaji 
Vedanta Prize,'’ to the M. A. of that year who may 
be reported by the examiners as most proficient in the 
VedS,nta of the S'ankaiAch^rya system of Philosophy; 
failing this a prize to one who should write the 
best essay in ^English on the Vedanta as expounded 
by the S'ankara school ; failing either of the above 



45 


alternatives, the prize be awarded to the best 
translator or editor of any work selected on the said 
subject. 

A bx'ief sketch of a very few of the most promi- 
nent doctrines of the all-embracing Vedanta (Pan- 
theism, Theosophy, the highest knowledge of God 
within the reach of the human mind) will not be 
considered as out of place in connection with a 
sketch of one who identified himself with the Ved- 
anta. It is given in the following pages. 




THE 

VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY. 




THE VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY. 


( The Importance and Excellence of the Philosophy. ) 

“ How charming is divine Philosophy ! 

Not harsh and crabbed, as dull fools suppose, 

But musical as is Apollo’s lute, 

And a perpetual feast of nectar’d sweets, 

Where no crude surfeit reigns.” 

Milton, Comus, 476 . 

“The day on which man first reflected was the birth-day 
of philosophy. Philosophy is nothing else than reflection in 
a vast form; reflection accompanied by all the retinue of pro- 
cesses belonging to it, reflection elevated to the rank and 
authority of a method. Philosophy is little else than a 
method; there is perhaps no truth whicli belongs exclusively 
to it; but all truths belong to it for this very reason, that it 
alone can account for them, subject them to the test of 

examination and analysis, and convert them into ideas 

Philosophy is the complete development of thought 

But phiWsophy, like religion, art, the State, industry, and the 
sciences, is not less a special and real want of the understand- 
ing, a necessary result, not of the genius of such or such a 

man, but of the genius itself of humanity Philosophy 

is then the light of all lights, the authority of all authorities. 
In fact, philosophy is the understanding and the ex- 
planation of all things 

“When we read with attention the poetical and philosophi- 
cal monuments.... of India,... we discover there so many 
truths, and truths so profound, and which make such a con- 
trast with the meanness of the results at which the European 
genius has sometimes stopped, that we are constrained to 
bend the knee before that of the East, and to see in this 



50 


cradle of the human race the native land of the highest 
philosophy”! 

The Vedanta, which is poetry, religion, and philo- 
sophy all in one, and which is sometimes called 
Pantheism, Theosophy, Psychology, Metaphysics, and 
is the knowledge of the infinite Wisdom and the un- 
changing and eternal Righteousness, proclaims to all 
ages and countries the vast treasures of most vitally 
essential and sublime truths and thoughts, which, if 
rightly understood, lead to the highest goal — the 
Summum Bonum — the supreme good. 

The Veddnta is judged to be the highest and best 
philosophy and metaphysics, not only by the thinkers 
of India, who are called a ‘Nation of philosophers', 
but also by those competent philosophers of Europe 
and America, who have studied it. 

The great German philosopher, Schopenhauer, 
proclaims: — “From every sentence (of the Upani- 
shads or Vedanta) deep, original, and sublime 
thoughts arise, and the whole is pervaded by a high 
and holy and earnest spirit.... In the whole world 
there is no study... so beneficial and so elevating as 
that of the Upanishads (the Vedanta)... (They) are 
products of the highest wisdom ... It ' is destined 
sooner or later to become the faith of the people.” 

1 The History of Modern Philosophy^ by M. Victor Cousin, — 
tlio greatest among the historians of philosophy in France, about 
whose work it is observed that — “Whoever...^ wishes to make 
himself acquainted with Eclecticism, which is fast becoming the 
dominant philosophy of the Nineteenth Century, will do well to 
study this production of its founder and ablest teacher.”— Vol. 
I. pp. 22, 23, 24, 25, 32. 



51 


Dr. Max Muller says: — "If these words of 
Schopenhauer^s required any endorsement, I should 
willingly give it as the result of my own experience 
during a long life devoted to the study of many 
philosophies and many religious.”^ 

Mr. G. H. Lewis, in his Biographical History of 
Philosophy says: — "In some way or other. Pantheism 
seems to result from every Philosophy of Religion, 
if the consequences be rigorously carried out ; but 
Germany, above all European countries, has, both in 
feeling and speculation, the most constantly repro- 
duced it. Her poets, her artists, her musicians, and 
her thinkers, have been more or less pantheists.... It 
may be recognized in the clear Gbthe no less than 
in the mystical Novalis." p. 602. 

Dr, Paul Deussen, a German professor of philo- 
sophy, observes in his work The Elements of 
Metaphysics : — 

“The Vedanta is, now as in the ancient time, 
living in the mind and heart of every thoughtful 

Hindu This fact may be for poor India in so 

many misfortunes a great consolation; for the eternal 
interests are higher than the temporary; and the 
system of the Ved4nta, as founded on the Upani- 
shads and Ved4nta-s4tra8 and accomplished by 
Qankara's commentaries on them,-equal in rank to 
Plato and Kant-is one of the most valuable products 
of the genifls of mankind in its search for the eternal 
truth-as I propose to show now by a short sketch of 
^ankara’s Advaita and comparison of its principal 

1. Three Lectures on the- Vedd'nta Philosophy by Dr. Max 
Muller, p. 8. 




52 


doctrines with the best that occidental philosophy 
has produced till now." pp. 323-324. 

Or, in the words of Mr. Gladstone, the illustrious 
statesman and scholar: — ^“It (Pantheism) is a candidate 
in greater favour for the place which it is supposed 
Christianity and Theism are about to vacate;... 
Pantheism is, or may be, the highest Christianity.’' 
In the language of the celebrated Dr. Groldstucker,— 
“The Ved&,nta is the sublimest machinery set into 
motion by oriental thought.’’ It is, moreover, a 
system which is not only transcendental, but which 
is also never in antagonism to science or any reason- 
able theories that are or may be propounded. It is 
most tolerant, catholic, and comprehensive. 

The special beauty of the Vedinta is, as stated in 
the beginning, that it is the most beautiful Poetry, the 
most sublime Philosophy, and the most satisfying Re- 
ligion simultaneously, with which the highest and 
dearest interests of our life are bound up. It is, in fact, 
the most fragrant flower and the sweetest fruit of the 
precious tree of the Upanishad religion — the highest 
consummation of the spirit of all religions in the 
world. Dr. Max Muller observes: — “The Upanishada 

are the... sources of. the Vedanta philosophy, a 

system in which human speculation seems to me to 
have reached its very acme.” And the reason for such 
a high flight is not far to seek. The Indian philoso- 
phers were privileged individuals, living in high, 
calm, and cool places of retirement, whose minds were 
untrammelled by the thoughts of the great mass of 
the people. They raised themselves into the region of 
universal, or unindividual thinking, and reached the 
First Principle, the Unity amidst diversity, the Cause 



53 


or Origin of all things, the Universal, the Necessary, 
the Ultimate. They had a certain gravitation to- 
wards truth. They sincerely devoted themselves to 
dhe sublime study with unswerving love of truth, 
and most fully developed some of the choicest gifts 
of mind pondering on the greatest problems of life, 
and have found solutions which are treasured up in 
their philosophy. Having a profound respect for 
truth, they inquired into and investigated the nature 
of (fsRn) Knowledge, as well as the nature of 
Ignorance, and deeply saw, scientifically worked out, 
and boldly proclaimed logical and vital truths far 
beyond the reach of their fellow-men. They never 
shrunk back from the consequences whither the 
truth irresistibly led them. Their love of Truth and 
God was far greater than their fear of men. 

Thrice happy is the man who, it is truly observed, — 

“ Finds comfort in himself and his cause, 

And while the mortal mist is gathering, draws 
His breath in confidence of Heaven’s applause.” 

Such is the Ved^ntin philosopher and the 
V ed^nta-philosophy. 

The Aim and Teaching of the Vedanta. 

The (tRTf JTVt^) noble aim and object of the Vedanta 
philosophy, as the venerable (^ankara says in his 
‘ Introduction to the Bhagavadgit4’ which Krishna,— 
the Lord of the Univer8e,-who was seen by the 
world as though He was born, whereas really He is 
unborn,-taught to Arjuna with the sole view of 
helping his creatures, deeply plunged in the ocean of 
grief and illusion, is,^ *'biiefly the Supreme 

1. I avail myself of Mahftdeva S'&stri’s Translation. 



54 


Bliss, a complete cessation of ( ) Samdru or 
transmigratory life as well as its cause 
Nescience). This accrues from that religion which 
consists in a steady devotion to the knowledge of 

the(3ntlR) Self. The Religion 

of Works which is a means of attaining worldly 

prosperity is also enjoined on all Though it is 

a means of attaining to the condition of the Devas 
and the like, still when (disinterestedly) practised in 
complete devotion to the Lord, without regard to the 
(immediate) results (or rewards,) it conduces to 
purity of the mind. The man whose mind is pure is 
competent to tread the path of knowledge, and to 
him comes (^TR) Knowledge ; and thus (indirectly) 
the Religion of Works forms also a means to (f^- 

salvation (or the supreme bliss.). The Gitd. 

S'^stra specially expounds this two-fold Religion, 
whose aim is the Supreme Bliss. It also expounds 
the nature of the Supreme Being and Reality known 
as the Para-Brahman which forms the subject of the 
discourse.... A knowledge of its teaching leads to the 
realization of all human aspirations 

A great preparation is necessary for the attain- 
ment of this Bummum Bonum, viz., the 

fulfilment of the duties incumbent on a house-holder 
— a good citizen ; the subduing of his passions ; the 
development of a wide, large, penetrating, pure, 
and lofty intellect; all energies to be concentrated on 
the accumulation of true knowledge, &c. 

Among the noble personages who, asking them- 
selves 'What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain 
the whole world and lose his own soul V, have accom- 
plished the highest purpose of their life, (^ankara is 



55 


regarded as a paragon. He serves as an ideal and a 
model for mankind inasmuch as he nobly enshrines 
and reflects the goodness, the greatness, the glory, 
the beauty of God, the highest Self. 

“Through such Souls alone 
God, stooping, shows suflScient of His light 
For us in the dark to rise by.” 

Browning, 

(^ankara is one of the most revered names in 
the world’s Pantheon, who gave a new impulse to 
the human mind, and left, as an inheritance to man- 
kind, the grand example of a noble and heroic life 
devoted to Truth and Knowledge. His exalted 
virtues were luminous, and surrounded with the 
halo of imperishable glory. 

Qankara’s sublime writings are full of suggestive 
thoughts and wisdom. As we read them again from 
time to time they seem every time like new books: 
so little do we perceive at first all that is px’esuppos- 
ed in them — the accumulated mould of thought and 
truth. 

Qankara’s exposition of the teaching of the 
Upanishads or the Vedanta philosophy, as given in 
his universally admired and admittedly best 
commentary on the VedS.nta Sdtras, contains the 
inexhaustible germs of latent wealth. Every time 
his pages are turned they throw forth new seeds 
of knowledge or wisdom, new scintillations of 
thought, so teeming is the fertility, so impressive the 
fulness of his genius. All philosophy has been fore- 
shadowed by his divine and prophetic intelligence. 
It is briefly summarised as follows: — 



56 


"Whatever is, is in reality one; there truly exists 
only one universal being called Brahman or Par- 
in^ltman, the highest Self. This being is of an ab- 
«olutely homogeneous nature; it is pure “Being/* or, 
which comes to the same, pure intelligence or thought 
ifiJiaitanya, Jndna). Intelligence or thought is not 
to be predicated of Brahman as its attribute (!PT), 
but constitutes its substance Brahman is not 

a> thinking being, but thought itself. It is absolute- 
ly destitute of qualities (^^); whatever qualities 
or attributes are conceivable, can only be denied of 
it. — But, if nothing exists but one absolutely simple 
being, whence the appearance of the world by which 
we see ourselves surrounded, and in which we our- 
selves exist as individual beings? — Brahman, the 
answer runs, is associated with a certain power called 
Mdyd or Avidya to which the 
appearance of this entire world is due. This power 
cannot be called “being’* (Sat), for being is only 
Brahman;. nor can it be called ‘non-being’ {asat), in 
the strict sense, for it at any rate produces the ap- 
pearance of this world. It is, in fact, a 
principle of illusion; the undefinable cause owing to 
which there seems to exist a material world compre- 
bending distinct individual existences Mdya thus 

constitutes the UpOMna, the material cause 

of the world; or we may say that the material 

cause of the world is Brahman in so far as it 
is associated with Mdyd (or S'ahti). In this 
latter quality Brahman is more properly called 
Js'vara, the Lord. 

“ Mdyd, under the guidance of the Lord, modifies 
itself by a progressive evolution into all the individ- 



57 


ual existences — Bheda), distinguished by special 

names and forms, of which the world 
consists; from it there spring in due succession the 
diflferent material elements and the whole bodily 
apparatus belonging to sentient beings. In all those 
apparently individual forms of existence the one 
indivisible Brahman is present, but, owing to the 
particular adjuncts (wf^) into which Mayd has 
specialized itself, it appears to be broken up — ^it is 
broken up, as it were — into a multiplicity of intellec- 
tual or sentient principles, the so called Jivas 
(individual or personal souls). What is real in each 
Jiva is only the universal Brahman itself; the whole 
aggregate of individualising bodily organs and men- 
tal functions, which in our ordinary experience 
separate and distinguish one Jiva from another, is 
the offspring of Mdyd and as such unreal. 

" The phenomenal world or world of ordinary ex- 
perience ( Vyavalidra ) thus consists of a number of 
individual souls engaged in specific cognitions, voli- 
tions, and so on, and of the external material 
objects with which those cognitions and volitions 
are concerned. Neither the specific cognitions nor 
their objects are real in the true sense of the word, 
for both are altogether due to Mayd 

“The non-enlightened soul is unable to look through 
and beyond Mdyd, which, like a veil, hides from it 
its true nature. Instead of recognising itself to be 
Brahman, it blindly identifies itself with its adjuncts 
( Upddhi ), the fictitious offspring of Mdyd, and thus 
looks for its true Self in the body, the sense-organs^ 
and the internal organ ( Manas ), t. e. the organ of 
specific cognition. The soul, which in reality is pure 



intelligence, non-active, infinite, thus becomes limit- 
ed in extent, as it were, limited in knowledge and 
power, an agent and enjoyer. Through its actions it 
burdens itself with merit and demerit (gnijrnq), the 
consequences of which it has to bear or enjoy in 
series of future embodied existences, the Lord — as a 
retributor and dispenser — allotting to each soul that 
form of embodiment to which it is entitled by its 

previous actions The round of birth, action, 

death, begins anew ( recurs ) to last to all eternity 
as it has lasted from all eternity. 

“ The means of escaping from this endless Sam- 
sdra, the way out of which can never be found by 
the non-enlightened soul, are furnished by the 
Veda. The KarmaMnda, indeed, whose purport it 
is to enjoin certain actions, cannot lead to final 
release ; for even the most meritorious works neces- 
sarily lead to new forms of embodied existence. And 
in the Jndnakdnda of the Veda also, two different 
parts have to be distinguished, viz., firstly, those 
chapters and passages which treat of Brahman in so 
far as related to the world, and hence characterised 

A 

by various attributes, i- e, of Is'vara or the 
lower Brahman ; and secondly, those texts which set 
forth the nature of the highest Brahman 

transcending all qualities, and the fundamental 
identity of the individual soul with that highest 
Bi’ahman. Devout meditation on Brahman as sug- 
gested by passages of the former kind does not 
directly lead to final emancipation ; the pious wor- 
shipper passes on his death into the world of the 
lower Brahmstn only, where he continues to exist as 
a> distinct individual soul — although in the enjoy- 



59 


ment of great power and knowledge — until at last he 
reaches the highest knowledge, and through it, final 
release. — That student of the Veda, on the other 
hand, whose soul has been enlightened by the texts 
embodying the higher knowledge of 

Brahman, whom passages such as the great saying 
‘That art thou,* have taught 

that there is no difference between his true Self 
(stTOT) and the highest Self (totRJTT) obtains at the 
moment of death immediate final release 
i. e. he withdraws altogether from the influence of 
Mdyd, and asserts himself in the true nature ( Self), 
which is nothing else but the (tRJiTrJTT) absolute 
highest Brahman.”^ 

The excellence of this philosophy is that it begins 
with the idea of God, who is, as it were, a circle 
whose centre is everywhere, and whose circumference 
is nowhere; who transforms into His own likeness 
the mind that receives Him. It ‘is at once the 
centre and circumference of knowledge’ and is 
capable of continual expansion. It leads to all that 
is good, just, and beautiful. ‘It is at the same time 
the root and the blossom of all other systems of 
thought.’ It is, in short, ‘the record of the best and 
happiest moments of the happiest and best minds.’ 
While general ideas are powerful, while abstractions 
are necessary, while mankind are apt to crave after 
perfection, and ideals have an acknowledged value, 
so long the Veddnta philosophy is sure to continue. 
All philosophic truth is the Vedanta rightly divined; 

!• See Tlie Sacred Books of the East Vol. XXXIV. The 
Veddnta SHtra with Scmkara^s Commentary, Translated by Dr, 
G. Thibaut, Introduction, p. xxiv. 



60 


and all good, philanthropic, philosophic truth-seekers 
in their best moments are unconscious Ved^ntins. 

It is, therefore, justly remarked that a genuine lik- 
ing for the Vedanta philosophy may be reckoned 
the touch-stone of a thinker's capacity for under- 
standing sublime philosophical thoughts, 

A hymn from Goethe's Proemium to Gottund Welt 
is quoted below in proof of the above remark. It 
conveys ‘something of the burning faith which ani- 
mated that extraordinary prophet of the scientific 
creed’. ‘It expresses’. Prof. Tyndal observes while 
quoting it in his Essays, ‘ the religion to which 
Science can ally itself.' 

“ To Him, who from eternity, self-stirred. 

Himself hath made by His creative word ! 

To Him, Supreme, who causeth faith to be. 

Trust, love, hope, power, and endless energy ! 

To Him, who, seek to name Him as we will, 
Unknown, within Himself abideth still ! 

Strain ear and eye, till sight and sense be dim ; 
Thou’lt find but faint similitudes of Him ; 

Yea, and thy spirit in her flight of flame. 

Still strives to gauge the symbol and the name : 
Charmed and compelled, thou climb’st from height 
to height, 

And round thy path the world shines wondrous 
bright ; 

Time, space, and size, and distance cease to be. 
And every step is fresh infinity. 

What were the God who sat outside to scan 
The spheres that ’neath His finger circling ran ? 

God dwells within and moves the world and 
moulds, 

Himself and Nature in one form enfolds; 

Thus all that lives in Him, and breathes, and is, 
Shall ne’er His puissance, ne’er His spirit miss. 



G1 


The soul of man, too, is an universe ; 

Whence follows it that race with race concurs 
In naming all it knows of good and true, 

God — yea, its own God ; and with homage due, 
Sui'renders to His sway both earth and heaven ; 
Fears Him, and loves, where place for love is 
given.” 

It may be observed by students of philosophy 
how most of the ideas contained in the above noble 
hymn approximate to the transcendental doctrines 
of the Vedanta, though they are arrived at from a 
different point of view, by a representative writer 
and thinker of a school of the scientific creed which 
conceives philosophy to be ‘the knowledge of things 
divine and human, the science of principles, the 
science of sciences, the attainment of truth by the 
way of reason, or the systematisation of the concep- 
tions furnished by science^ It is hoped that 
Vedanta ideas will gain for the student in distinct- 
ness by being presented as above under different 
forms of expression ; and that the so-called obscuri- 
ties and perplexities of some of the ideas will be found 
to exist nowhere but in the misapprehension of 
uninitiated readers. 

We shall see as we proceed that the main object 
of the (^ankara Veddnta is the I’econciliation of reli- 
gion with philosophy and of philosophy with reli- 
gion. It delights to turn all things to the glory of 
God, for ‘Heaven hides nothing from its view^ It 
sees in the glass of temporal things, the phenomenal 
world, the image of the Divine, just as we see in 
the water the image of the sun. It maps out the 
whole realm of Knowledge ( ITR ) in ordered beauty, 



62 


and ‘ justifies the ways of God to man/ Dr. Newman 
says that 'real religion is founded on a true percep- 
tion of the relation of the soul to God and of God to 
the soul\ The be all and end all of true religion 
is said to be to re-unite the bond or relation between 
the Divine and the Human, which was severed 
by Nescience prevailing in the world. Lord Bacon 
observes that: — "In philosophy the contemplations of 
man do either penetrate unto God, or are circumferred 
to nature, or are reflected or reverted upon himself/' 
The object matter of philosophy may be distinguish- 
ed as God, or Nature, or Man. True philosophy 
seeks to bring their multiplicity to something like 
the unity underlying them all, and to remedy all ills 
arising from difterence. 

Thus, in both, religion and philosophy, the salient 
points are what a well-known maxim of the Vedanta 
declares, viz., (^^), (’T^JTTtJTT) — the soul, the 

universe, and God. 

The (^ankara Vedanta teaches the knowledge of 
the highest degree of generality, complete unified 
knowledge of the Highest Self, the Universe, and 
the Self; and restores the relation of God and the 

1. The Advancement of Learning^ Book 11. V. 2. See also 
Bacon’s Novum Organum — Advancement of Learning^ Bk. III. 
Ch. I. ( Bohn's Philosophical Library, ) 

Philosophy has three objects, viz., God, nature, and man ; as 
also three kinds of rays — for nature strikes the human intellect 
with a direct ray, God with a refracted ray, from the inequality of 
the medium betwixt the Creator and the creatures, and man, as 
exhibited to himself, with a refracted ray; whence it is proper to 
divide philosophy into the doctrine of the Deity, the doctrine of 
nature^ and the doctrine of man.” 



63 


Self, and thus enables us to find heaven on earth by 
discovering (^iva (%5r-God) in Jiva-( ^#t^-man ) 
and man in God ; or in the words of the fourth 
Gospel ; — “As Thou, Father, art in me, and I in Thee, 
that they also may be one in us ( St. John, xvii, 
21 ). The glory which Thou gavest me, I have given 
them ; that they may be one, even as we are one” (St. 
John, XVII. 22 ). The Vedanta is principally occupied 
Avith the thought of the ascent of the human soul, Self. 
It leaves it to material and scientific knowledge to 
discover and make known the things, such as the 
creation of the world, and similar topics-the origin and 
descent of species— protoplasm, sperms, germs, here- 
dity, the influence of environment, ‘ natural selection 
or the survival of the fittest in the universal struggle 
for existence, to Avhich we OAve the extinction, pre- 

servation, and distribution of organic forms on the 
earth’ of which that knoAvledge thinks it has giv’en 
in the above method an explanation, though the 
appearance both of the forms that conquer and 
of those that perish still remains a secret. 

The province of the Vedanta philosophy is higher. 
It purposes to reveal the Lorfl, the cause of the 
Avoi'ld, and the oneness of God, man, and the 
universe. ^ 

It is evident to the thoughtful that all nature is 
working its way onward and npAvard to full self by 
the uplifting power — the Self — inherent in it. The 
‘full self’ is knoAvledge (?T!f ), which it reaches in man, 
and through which alone it attains to salvation. To 
know higher we must he higher. The Vedanta raises 


1. Brahnia-Siitra, I, 4-14. 



64 


its appreciative disciples to a height from which the 
social and political life seems dwindling away into 
mere phantoms. They learn to grasp the inner soul 
rather than external environment. They see much 
which is unseen to others, and find all that truth 
concerning the Divine, — man’s Self and the High* 
est Self, — which has, in one form or othei’, fascinated 
the enlightened of all times and countries. 

On the Vedanta philosophy a vast literature, con- 
taining thousands of volumes, has been created, and 
much more still will continue to be created. A 
study of this literature permanently enlarges the 
intellectual horizon of whoever approaches it. 

The Leading Ideas of the Vedanta Philosophy. 

Here only the quintessence of this system can be 
touched upon. An ancient sage gives it in a couplet 
as follows: — 

^ ^ grm; H” 

‘ In half a verse I shall tell you what has been 
taught in ( kotis ) thousands of volumes: — Brahman 
( the highest Self) is true; jagat (the world ) is 
false ( not true in the same sense as God ); and 
Jlva, ( the soul, the Self, i. e. the part of all- 
pervading Highest Self immanent in the living 
body ) is even Brahman, and nothing else.’^ 

Here, there are three or four fundamental terms 
which predominate, and on which the superetructure 

1. It may be stated here once for all that I have availed 
myself mostly of the translations of the original Sanskrata pass- 
ages by Principal G. Thibaut, Dr. Max Muller, Prof. Dr. Paul 
Deussen, and Mr. Mab&deva S'Sstri. 




65 


of the sublime Vedanta philosophy is constructed, 
viz,, (1) Brahman (the highest Self), (2) Mdyd 
( universe-projecting-connecting link ), and ( Mdyd- 
produced) Jagat (the world), and (3)Jipa(the 
individual Self). 

Modern philosophical inquiry has led to conclu- 
sions identical not only in the spirit but with the 
letter of the Ved5.nta Philosophy as will be seen 
from the following passage: — 

“Having thus reduced all the varieties of the ego 
to an unconditional unity, viz., soul, and having also 
reduced all the varieties of the non-ego to an uncon- 
ditional unity, viz., the world, our task would seem 
completed; yet on looking deeper, we find that these 
two ideas presuppose a third — a unity still higher, 
the source of both the world and of the ego — ^viz., 
God. 

“God ( Brahman ), the soul ( Jiva ), and the world 
( Jagat ) are therefore the three ideas of reason, the 
laws of its operation, the pure form of its existence. 
They are to it what space and time are to sensibility, 
and what the categories are to understanding.”^ 

After reducing multiplicity to trinity, as above, 
the VedS,nta again reduces the trinity to unity. It 
declares that there is in reality only one without a 
second. Brahman. 

To this the conclusion of . modem philosopher’s 
bears a remarkable similarity, as will appear from 
the following: — 


1. hewea' Biographical History of PhUosoj^y, Kant’s Psycho- 
logy. p. 657. 



66 


"Fichte said that the Non-Ego was created by the 
Ego. Schelling said that the two were equally real, 
and that both were identibed in the Absolute.”^ 

Brahman is All in All ; whatever is, is Brahman. 
It appears through its association with M4y&, as it 
were, all difference and plurality, such as the universe 
and the souls, just as in the mirage the sun’s refracted 
rays appear like a lake, &c. Or, as clouds hiding the 
rays of the sun show themselves in various colours 
and forms by the light of the very sun, so the Mdyd- 
cloud hiding Brahman from the common sight, 
shows itself under innumerable names and various 
forms of the world and souls. But behind her 
appearances there is nothing but Brahman. As by 
knowing the source we know all that proceeds from 
it, so by knowing Brahman and Mdyd one is enabled 
to know all that is necessary to know about the 
world and souls. 

The Chhandogya Upanishad ( Prapilthaka vi ) 
teaches that ‘by knowing one clod of clay all that 
is made of clay is known, or by knowing one nugget 
of gold all that is made of gold is known, the dif- 
ference being only the name (and form) arising from 
speech (and sight), but the truth being that all (made 
of clay ) is clay or all ( made of gold ) is gold.* 
For these modifications or effects are names only, 
while in reality there exists no such thing as a mo- 
dification. In so far as they are names they are un- 
true, in so far as they are clay or gold- they are true. 

The Vedanta knowledge, like all scientific know- 
ledge, is based upon exj^erience. But to acquire it, a 


1. Lewes’ Biographical History of Philosophy, p. 605. 



67 


certain method of its own is to be followed, just as 
in science, which in each of its branches, has its own 
method. To acquire a knowledge of Chemistry one 
must go to the laboratory, take different substances, 
mix them up, compound them, experiment with 
them, and a result is known. 

For the Vedanta knowledge one has to do several 
things. He has to do good to the world by thought, 
word, and action, and to purify his internal- 

sense-organ or mind, which then is to be illumined 
by higher knowledge. When its powers are con- 
centrated, by true knowledge, or by meditation, into 
one focus, the true light is brought forward. With 
this light he can see his own divine Self which is 
Sat-chit-dnanda, Existence, Intelligence, and Beatitude, 
immortal and perfect; and his gross part of Mdyd dis- 
appears. The aim and end of science is to find a unit 
— that One out of which all these manifold pheno- 
mena are being manufactured, — the One Real appear- 
ing as many. The Vedanta convincingly demonstra- 
tes that One to be Brahman. It teaches us how to 
observe facts, and how, then, to generalise and draw 
our conclusions. 

Brahman ( sTfR.). 

The Vedfinta doctrine is divided into three chief 
parts : (1) Theology, the doctrine of Brahman, God, 
or of the philosophical principle; (2) Kosmology, the 
doctrine of May4, Jagat, the universe; (3) Psychology, 
the doctrine of Jiva, the soul.’ This Tt'ipiUi, trinity, 

1. See The Panchadaa'i Chitra D!pa. vi, 12. Compare the 
Christian Trinity : — God the Father and the One Absolute, Jesus 
Christ and the First Intelligence or Universal Mind, and the 
Holy Spirit and the World-Soul. ( J ules Simon, i, 308. ) 



68 


is to be clearly understood in order to reduce it 
eventually to the Absolute One, Brahman, i. e. to 
acquire a knowledge of the Unity, the essence and 
first principle of all. 

Though it is impossible to adequately describe the 
true nature ( ) of Brahman, attempts have 
been made to adumbrate It by innumerable words 
and phrases, by the varieties of expressions and 
illustrations, by allegories and anecdotes, some of 
which it is supposed are sure to remove the veil of 
Nescience from our mind, and the effulgent glory of 
Brahman is then cognized everywhere. 

With a view to facilitate the apprehension of 
Brahman, a popular maxim of ‘ the bough and the 
moon ’ called ‘S'dhM-Chandra-Nydya!^ is resorted to 
in the Vedanta. By means of this and many other 
devices the extremely subtle and incomprehensible 
Brahman is indicated. 

In (^ankara’s Bhdshya of the Chh^ndogya Upani- 
shad ( VIII, 12 ) it is observed that ‘ when one who 
wishes to show to some one the thin crescent of the 
new moon on the second day, first shows ( the 
branch of) the tree in the front of the moon, saying: 
‘Just look here, there is the moon;’ then he points 


1. Nyaya is an a inference from a familiar instance. It is consi- 
dered fortunate, and consequently is very usual in this country, to 
see the new moon on the 2nd day, when the crescent is very thin. 
One who has seen it first is asked to point it out to others. He 
then makes them face the West, then direct their attention to a 
tree and then to its bough, near which she appears, though con- 
siderably distant from it. This contrivance is used when the 
position of an object, though at a very great distance, is fixed by 
that of another object, to which it appears to be contiguous. 



69 


to another higher object, then still another, such as 
the top of a hill, which may be nearer to the moon,' 
Going on in this manner, he is enabled at last to 
point out the very distant and subtle crescent to the 
other. In the same manner a good and competent 
teacher guides his pupil, and by one or another 
method indicates Brahman to him. 

The Vedanta now contains the true knowledge of 
Brahman, the one unknowable and unnamable God, 
the Supreme Being, the Absolute, the Greatest, the 
Beyond ; and is chiefly occupied with the highest 
conceptions possible of Him, or rather of It. It 
makes It intelligible to all whose minds are happily 
developed enough to undei-stand It. The Vedanta 
proves It to be the One only, without a second 
or the secondless. It shows It to be 
i. e. by nature and essence. It is ( 1 ) Existence or Pure 
Entity, ( 2 ) Knowledge or Pure Thought, and ( 3 ) 
Joy, Pure Felicity or Perfect Bliss, which three? 
however, are only one, — ^The existence-thought-joy. 
Therein It is demonstrated to be ( M4.<lk44<) the 
Highest Self, the Supreme Ego, the Perfect Self of 
the Universe, and very much more ; the Supremely 
Divine Soul, Essence, or Spirit. 

The Vedanta establishes that It is the Absolute 
Reality underlying the phenomenal universe — 
visible and invisible ; that It is the Invisible behind 
the visible ; that it permeates the Universe within 
and without, abiding for ever in all, unchangeable ; 
that It is the Infinite within the finite ; that It is 
the root through May4, and the ultimate happy end 
through knowledge, of all created things, and yet 
independent of creation and above the act of ere- 



70 


ation ; and that It only is the substance, Universe 
) is merely a modality or shadow. 

This position is beautifully illustrated by adopt- 
ing the i. e. the Doctrine of Manifestation, * 

In this Vivaria ( turning away, illusory emana- 
tion ) doctrine, there is always something on which 
Vivaria is at work. And that something is Brahman. 
According to the Vedanta the Universe (^) is 
not creation but Emanation and Evolution, or rather 
Vivaria that is to say. Brahman is not the 

material cause but only the substratum, the illusoi’y 
material cause of tlie universe, which is superimposed 
on It. Brahman, being unchangeable, remains al- 
ways the same, but through Nescience we cannot see 
It in Its true nature, but mistake It for the universe, 
just as one through dai’kness, mistakes a rope for 
a snake, but the rope remains all the time what it is. 
There would be no snake without the rope, and there 
would be no universe without Brahman ; and yet 
the rope does not become the snake, nor does 
Brahman, the Universe; they only appear so. It is only 
the darkness which makes us see the snake super- 
imposed on the rope, and frightens us and deter- 
mines our actions. Analogously, it is only our sub- 
jective Nescience ( arfsrfiT ) which makes us see the 
phenomenal Universe which is super-imposed on 


1. “The Doctrine of Manifestation is exemplified by the 
appearance of the mirage in the refracted rays of the sun, or by 
the reflection of the sun itself in the waters, to show that the 
fundamental Substance remains unchanged, though it seems to 
wear a difierent aspect, which is unreal in itself, but evidences 
a reality sustaining it.” 



71 


Brahraan. But all along, the rope and the snake 
as well as Brahman and the Universe ai-e one. 

When the universe is said to he Brahman, it is 
meant that the reality of the universe is not its own, 
but Brahman’s, or in the language of European 
Monists ( who hold the doctrine of Absolute identi- 
ty,) ‘mind and matter are only phenomenal modifica- 
tions of the same common substance’ (Brahman). 

This ( ) doctrine is properly understood 
only by the advanced Vedantist, possessing deeper 
knowledge which enables him to reconcile seeming 
conti'adictions and explain paradoxes. 

Thus the Vediinta tries to describe the indescrib- 
able Brahman or Paramiltman, the Highest Self, by 
lavishing innumerable epithets— adopted and coined 
— exhausting the whole vocabulary of human 
speech, but remains unsatisfied at finding that no 
Avord could adequately express what It is. 

The most ardent desire which the Vediintins felt 
to adumbrate Brahman’s greatness made them try 
positive, constructive, affirmative, negative, interrog- 
ative and all sorts of methods. 

They find, however, that it is iinj)ossible for the 
finite human intellect to predicate anything worthy 
of the Infinite; that whatever attributes are con- 
ceivable can only be denied of It. They, therefore, 
.try the method of Neti, Neti,^ not so, not so. This 
negatives the cosmic plurality fictitiously super- 
imposed on Brahman, leaving It untouched, and 
implies that different from everything else there 
exists the ‘ non-negatived ’ Brahman. 

1. See Brahma-SHtra, Adhy&ya III, 2, 22. 



72 


Thus they proceed by the method of n^ation 
leading to abstraction, and end in keeping silence 
and ' becoming quite still,’ thereby intimating that It 
being unshadowable in words could be apprehended, 
like necessary truths, but cannot be adequately expres- 
sed in words, as It transcends all speech and thought. 
They observe: — ‘Fi-om Brahman all speech with the 
mind turns away unable to reach It.’^ Or as a great 
theosophist expresses : — “The one, from which all pro- 
ceeds, in which all exists, and to which all must return. 
As to that, all words are idle, all thoughts impossible, 
all speculations useless; by us, the manifested and 
conditioned, the unmanifested, unconditioned, can- 
not be known.” Overpowering is Its grandness — so 
grand that it overwhelmed their powerful intellect 
and convinced them that the incomprehensible im- 
mense gi-andeur could not be even partially expressed, 
though internally understood and felt in happy 
moments by the learned, awakened, devoted, and 
enlightened. 

" He who knows Para-Brahman, the Highest Self, 
attains the highest beatitude,” proclaims Taittiriya 
Upanishad. But this highest aim cannot be achieved 
by all, as it requires the highest preparations and 
superior intelligence. A middle and more practical 
course is, therefore, devised for the benefit of the ma- 
jority. 

Two forms are attributed to Brahman for easy 
apprehension : — the unqualified Brahman, 

and the qualified Brahman. The first is in- 

finite and free from all conditions. It transcends all 


1. See TaiUirtya Upanishad, 11, 4. 




73 


attributes, and is the object of knowledge for the 
enlightened few. 

( f ) Is'vara, the Lord. 

Its infinitesimal part becomes the quali- 

fied Brahman, through Its association with the 
unreal principle of M^y^. It is then called 
Is'vara, the Lord. Being thus qualified through 
reflection into M4ya, the root of the multiformity 
of evolutions of name and form of the universe, 
the Lord is its Creator, Pi-eserver, and Ruler. 
He is then conceived to be omnipresent and om- 
niscient, eternal, greater than the sky, greater than 
the ether, &c. He provides for the creation, the 
subsistence and the absoi’ption of the world ; knows 
all the differences of place and time; and distri- 
butes the threefold fruits of action, viz., pain, 
pleasure, and a mixture of the two. Though He 
is the giver of the fruits ( ) He is not open 
to be taxed with partiality and cruelty, 

because He gives them according to the merit 
and demerit of the actions of the agents, the souls. ^ 
The circumstance of creation being unequal ( the in- 
equality of destiny ) is due to the merit and demerit 
of the living creatures created, and is not a fault for 
which the Lord is to blame. The position of the 
Lord is to be looked on as analogous to that of 
Parjanya, the Giver of rain. For as Parjanya is the 
common cause of the production of rice, barley, &c., 
while the difference between the various species is 
due to the various potentialities lying hidden in the 
respective seeds, so the Lord is the common cause of 

1. Bee the BrahmorSHUras, 111,2, 39-41, and 11, 34. 

7 




74 


the creation of gods, men &c., while the differences 
between these classes of beings are due to the differ- 
ent merit belonging to the individual souls. Hence, 
the Lord cannot be reproached with inequality of dis- 
pensation and cruelty. Or, in other words, the Lord 
of the universe is not the author of evil, but simply 
superintends the universal working of cause and 
effect. What rain is in the vegetable world, the 

A 

Lord, Is'mra is in the moral world and in the whole 
creation. Works, good or evil, done by man, grow 
and bear good or evil fruit under the discriminating 
influence of the omnipotent and omniscient Lord. 

But it must be remembered that the so-called 
Is'vara, the qualified Brahman, and Nirguna, the 
unqualified Brahman, is substantially the same. 
There is and there could be, in reality, one Brahman 
only, and not two. For all practical purposes, and 
specially for worship, the Is'vara or the qualified 
form of Brahman is allowed ; because in worship the 
ordinary human intellect requires a qualified and 
objective form of God. 

The above method was naturally suggested to the 
religio-philosophic teachers of India from the first. 
They thought that as the food of a child and that 
of a man, or as mathematical books for a beginner 
and for an advanced student, cannot be and ought 
not to be the same, so the religious ideas of the 
non-enlightened must differ from those of the 
enlightened. 

Those who, without the necessary training, try to 
uplift the veil of the highest truth through idle curio- 
sity, are unable to stand its glare, and mistake and 



75 


misunderstand it. This led. to the wise method of the 
two forms of the one Brahman. 

The very oiganisation of the human intellect— 
which is bound once for ever to its innate forms of 
perception, space ( ), time ( ), and causality 

( ) — excludes unenlightened men from a know- 
ledge of the spaceless and timeless Brahman, God. 
But to the enlightened Its knowledge is attainable, 
for It is not far from us. Brahman is in ourselves,, 
as our own metaphysical entity, for it is part of It& 
nature as being omnipresent that It is present in 
every one. And on our withdrawing oui-selves from 
the outside apparent world and returning to the 
substratum of our own nature we come to Brahman, 
the Highest Self, by absorption into It 
when subject and object coincide in the Self of the 
soul. 

“ For more than once when I 
Sat all alone, revolving in myself 
The woid that is the symbol of myself, 

The mortal limit of the Self was loosed. 

And passed into the Nameless, as a cloud 

Melts into Heaven. I touched my limbs — the limbs 

Were strange, not mine — and yet no shade of doubt. 

But utter clearness, and thro’ loss of Self 
The gain of such large life as matched with ours 
Were Sun to spark — unshadow able in words. 
Themselves but shows of a shadow- world.” 

Tennyson, The Ancient Sage. 

Brahman is always subjective, and therefore 
It cannot be known in the same way as all other 
objects are known, but only as a knower knows that 
he is and that he knows. 



76 


We see a wondrous universe peopled with wond* 
rous beings, yet none of these beings exists by itself, 
but through another ; they are not the authors of 
their own existence; they do not rest upon their own 
reality, but on a greater Reality, Substance, 
Brahman, which is standing under all phenomena, 
supporting them and giving them reality. 

It is called absolute Existence, Sat (^^). From 
It all individual concrete existences arise. All that 
exists, exists in and by Sat. It is the fountain of 
life. The inconceivable variety of phenomena re- 
solves itself into the unity of Sat. 

A few passages of special importance from the 
Upanishads, the Brahma-SAtras,’^ the Bhagvad-GltA, 
and (^ankarAchArya's works are given below, in order 
to help the reader approximately to understand and 
realize the incomprehensible Highest Brahman, 
whose cognition constitutes the task of the VedAnta- 
philosophy and is the only road to final release. 

A 

The Vedanta conceives that the Srutis, like a very 
kind mother, while disclosing simple and gracious 
truths, use a variety of expressions, fascinating 
illustrations and pregnant similes and metaphors 
adapted to our human understanding, to make clearer 
and more intelligible the fundamental ideas about 
Brahman, MAy^, the universe, and the soul. They 
are very interesting and valuable in our search after- 
truth. But the Vedanta asks us at the same time 
to remember that in its poetical language an illustra- 

1. The Brahma-Shtras are also knovn by the names of the 
Ved&nta-Shtras, VyftsarShtras, Uttara-MtmansfirShtras, Shfirimka 
Mtmftns&rShtras. 




77 


tiv® simile is meant to illustrate one point only, not 
all. Whenever two things are compared, they are so 
compared only with reference to some particular point 
they have in common. No entire equality of the two 
can ever be demonstrated; indeed, if it could be de- 
monstrated, there would be an end of that particular 
relation which gives rise to the comparison. ( Br. 

S. IIL 2. 21 ). 

Upanishads on Brahman, Sat-Chit-Ananda. 

“ Brahman is true Being ; Knowledge, without end ( in- 
finite ).” ( Taittiriya Up. II, 1. ) “ Brahman is knowledge 
and bliss.” ( Briliaddranyaica Up. Ill, 9, 28. ) “ The in- 
finite ( Bhhman ) is bliss, the infinite alone is bliss 

The infinite is immortal. It rests in its own greatness.” 

( Chhdndogya Up. VII, 23, 24. ) “ Brahman is Bliss. 

From Bliss these things are born ; by Bliss when bom, they 
live ; into Bliss they enter at their death.” ( Taitt. Up» 
III, 6. ) “ There is no likeness oi him whose ( Brahman’s ) 
name is great glory.” ( Vd’josneyi Samhitd XXXII, 3 ). 

“ He is the one God ; hidden in all beings, all-pervading, 
the self within all beings, watching over all works, dwelling 
in all beings, the witness, the perceiver, the only one ; free 
from qualitiea” { Svetds'vatara Up. FI, 11. ) “Brahman 
alone is all this.” ( Mundaka Up. II, 2, 11. ) “The Self is all 
this.” ( Chhando. Up. VII, 25, 2. ) “ In it ( Brahman ) there 
is no diversity.” ( Brih. Up. IF, 4, 19 ). “ He to whom 
there is nothing superior, from whom there is nothing 
different. ” ( Svet, Up. Ill, 9. ) “ He is all substance every- 
where, the Self of all, the source of all ; that in which every 
thing is absorbed, that the sages know as Brahman.” ( Svet. 
Up. Ill, 17. ) “ As a mass of salt has neither inside nor 
outmde, but is altogether a mass of taste, thus, indeed, has 



78 


that Self ( Brahman ) neither inside nor outside, but is alto- 
gether a mass of knowledge”! {Brih. Up, /F, 5, 13 ). 
“Grasping without hands, hasting without feet, He sees 
without eyes, He hears without ears. He knows what can 
be known but no one knows Him ; they call Him the first, 
the great person.” ( Svet. Up, III, 19 ). “Brahman is with- 
out sound, without touch, without decay.” ( Katha, Up, /> 
3,15). “ That within which forms and names are, that is 
Brahman.” ( Clihdndo. Up. VIII, 14, 1. ) “ That heavenly 
Person is without body, He is both without and within, not 
produced.” ( Mund, Up. II, 1,2.) “That Brahman is with- 
out cause, and without effect, without any thing inside or 
outside, this Self is Brahman, omnipresent and omniscient.” 
{Brih, Up. II, 5, 19.) “ It (Brahman) is. the ear of the ear, the 
mind of the mind, the speech of speech, the breath of breathe 

and the eye of the eye The eye does not go thither, nor 

speech, nor mind. It is different from the known. It is 

also above the unknown, thus we have heard from those of 
old, who taught us this.” ( Tcdavakdra or Kena. Up. I, 2, 4. ) 
The pupil says: — “I do not think I know It ( Brahman ) well, 
nor do I know that I do not know It. 2 He among us who 
knows this, he knows It, nor does he know that he does not 

1. That means : — ‘That Self has neither inside nor outside any 
characteristic form but intelligence ; simple non-differentiated in- 
telligence constitutes its nature.’ S'ankara. 

2. That is to say: — ‘We cannot know Brahman, as we know 
other objects by referring them to a class and pointing out their 
differences. But, on the other hand, we do nob know that we 
know It (Brahman) not, {, e. no one can assert that we know It 
not, for we want Brahman in order to know anything. He, 
therefore, who knows this double peculiarity of the knowledge 
of Brahman, knows Brahman as much as It can be known.* 

A 

Bankara. 

This is a true sign of the philosophic ii|)irit of the seeker after 
truth. Cp. the reply of Socrates when he was declared to be the 
wisest man in Greece by the Delphic Oracle. He observed ;-“Because 
I know that I know nothing.” Also Spencer’s conclusion: — “The 
God, that we know, is not, but the God, that we know not, is,” 



79 . 


know It It is thought to be known (as if) by awakening, 

and (then) we obtain immortality indeed. By the Self we obtain 
strength, by knowledge we obtain immortality. If a man 
know this here, that is the true ( end of life ).” ( Ken. or 

Tal Up. II, 2, 5 ), '' As the one fire, after it has entered the 
world, though one, becomes like unto every form which it 
takes ( like unto whatever form it bums ), thus the one Self 
within all things becomes different, according to whatever it 
enters, but it exists also without.” ( Katha. Up., Valli V, 9. ) 
As the sun, ( by its light ) the eye of the whole world, is not 
contaminated by the external impurities seen by the eyes, 
thus the one Self within all things is never contaminated by 
the misery of the world, being himself without.” ( Katha. 
Up., Valli. F. 11. ) There is one ruler, the self within all 
things, who makes the one form manifold. The wise who 
perceive him within tlieir Self or soul, to them belongs eternal 
happiness, not to others.” ^ {Katha. Up., Valli. F. 12. ) 
“ The higher knowledge is this by which the indestructible is 
apprehended. That which cannot be seen nor seized, which 
is without origin and qualities, without eyes and ears, with- 
out hands and feet, the eternal, all-pervading, omnipresent, 
infinitesimal ( which is imperishable, that It 

is which the wise regard as the source of all beinga” 
( Mitnd. U^x 1, 1, 5-6. ) 

The Brahma-Sutras on Brahman, Sat-Chit-Ananda. 

The nature ( ) of Brahman is ( ) 

Sat-Chit-Ananda, 

The Brahma-SAtra (Adhyaya I, Vkda I, SAtra 2), 
declares : — Brahman is that) from which the origin 
(subsistence, and dissolution) of this (world proceeds).’^ 

The full sense of this Sfitra, as explained by 
<^ankara, is : ‘ That omniscient, omnipotent Cause 

1. Here, to perceive Him, the immortal soul or Self, means^ 
that He is imaged by the ( pure and steady ) heart, by wisdom, 
by ( the enlightened ) mind. 



80 


from which proceed the origin, subsistence, and dis- 
solution of this world — which world is differentiated 
by names and forms, contains many agents and en* 
joyers, is the abode of the fruits of actions, these 
fruits have their definite places, times, and causes, 
and the nature of whose arrangement cannot even 
be conceived by the mind, — ^that cause is Brahman.’ 
This and some other Sfitras treat of Sat, Existence. 

“And ( scripture ) declares ( Brahman ) to consist 
of that ( i, e. intelligence ).” ( Br. S. Ill, 2, 16 ). 

The meaning of this Sfitra is that ; ‘ Brahman con- 
sists of intelligence ( Ckaitanya, Chit ), is devoid of 
any other characteristic, and is altogether without 
difference.* 

“For this very reason ( there are applied to 
Brahman ) comparisons such as that of the images 
of the sun and the like.” ( Br. S. Ill, 2, 18. ) 

That means : — ' Because Brahman is of the natm’e 
of intelligence, devoid of all difference, transcending 
speech and mind, to be described only by denying 
of It all other characteristics, therefore the Moksha 
, Sdstras compare It to the images of the sun reflected 
into water and the like ; meaning thereby that all 
difference in Brahman is unreal, only due to Its 
limiting conditions.’ This and some other Sfitras 
treat of Chit, Knowledge. 

“ Bliss and other ( qualities ) as belonging to the 
subject of the qualities ( have to be attributed to 
Brahman everywhere ).” ( Br. S. Ill, 3, 11 ). 

The sense of this Sfitra is : — ‘ Those scriptural texts 
which aim at intimating the characteristics of Brah- 
man separately ascribe to It various qualiti^, such 



81 


as having bliss for Its nature, being one mass 
of knowledge, being omnipresent, being the Self of all 

A 

and so on. This and some other Sditras treat o£Ananda, 
Bliss, and suggest that other attributes set forth 
for the purpose of teaching the true nature of Brah- 
man may be viewed as belonging to Brahman.’ 

‘ Brahman being all-knowing, all-powerful, and 
possessing the great power of M^yS., — on that ac- 
count this our system founded on the Upanishads, 
is not open to any objection.’ 

( (^ankara’s Commentary Br. S. II, 1, 37. ) 

^ A 

“Consisting of bliss ( Anandamaya is the Highest 
Self) on account of the repetition (of the word ‘bliss*), 
as denoting the Highest Self.” ( Br. S. I, ], 12. ) 

This means, ‘ that as the word ‘ bliss ’ is repeatedly 

used (in the Sruti ) with reference to Brahman 

and because the Highest Self is declared to be the 
cause of bliss, It is through and through bliss.’ 

‘ He who causes bliss must himself abound in bliss; 
just as we infer in ordinary life, that a man who en- 
riches others must himself possess abundant wealth.* 
((^ankara’s Com. Br. S. I, 1, 14. ) 

The Bhagvad Gita^ on Brahman. 

I 

3To 1^, 

1 , The Song Celestial or The Teachings of Crishna about whom 
M, E. Schure, in his article in the Revue des deux Mondes, in 1888 
says; — “ The idea that infinite God, truth, beauty, and goodness 
are revealed in conscious man with a redemptive power which 
regains the sublimities of divine existence by the force of love and 
sacrifice, thfdi prolific idea appears for the first time in Crish^.” 



82 


' The Lord of all things dwells 
In ev’ry living being, 

Not dying when it dies — 

He who knows Him, is seeing.” 

“ Brahman is the imperishable (sT^), the Supreme, 
that (Brahman) Itself is said to be Adhydtma (sraTFJT) 
that which dwells in the body. ( Bli. G. VIII, 3. ) 

“ I will proclaim that which is the object of know- 
ledge, knowing which one reaches immortality; the 
Highest Brahman without either beginning or end, 
which cannot be said either to be or not to be. 
(XIII. 12). 

“ With hands and feet everywhere, with eyes and 
heads and mouths everywhere, with hearing every- 
where, That ( Brahman ) remains pervading all. 
(XIII. 13). 

“ Shining by the functions of all the senses, yet 
without the senses; unattached, yet supporting all; 
devoid of qualities, yet enjoying qualities. (XIII. 14). 

Without and within all beings; unmoving and 
also moving; because subtle. That (Brahman) is in- 
comprehensible ; and near and far away is That. 
(XIII. 15). 

"And undivided, yet remaining divided, as it were, 
in beings; supporter of beings is That ( Brahman ) 
which has to be known ; devouring yet generating. 
( XIII. 16 ). 

"The Light even of lights. That (Brahman) is said 
to be beyond darkness. Knowledge, the Knowable* 



83 


the Goal of knowledge, (It) is seated especially in 
the heart of every one. ( XIII. 1 7 ). 

The Bhagvad (XIII, 12-17). 


1. The Bhagvad Gild entitled in the English versions as ‘The 
Divine Lay/ ‘The Song Celestial/ ‘The Lord’s Song/ is translat- 
ed into almost all ancient and modern classical languages of 
Europe, — in Greek by Galanos, in Latin by Lassen, in Italian 
by S. Gatti, in French by Burnouf, in German by Lorinser. In 
English there are many translations, severally, by Sir Charles 
Wilkins (published in 1785), Mr. Cockburn Thomson, Mr. 
Davies, Mr. K. T. Telang ( two translations — one in verse and 
other in prose ), Sir Edwin Arnold, and Mrs. Annie Besant, 
Sir Edwin Arnold in his Sanscrita dedication says of this most 
noble and marvellous poem: — 

“So have I read this wonderful and spirit-thrilling speech; 

By Crishna and Prince Arjuna held, each to each; 

So have I to writ its wisdom here, — its hidden mystery; 

For England; O our India ! as dear to me as She !” 

He also declares in his preface : — “ In plain but noble 
language it enfolds a philosophical system which remains to 
this d»y the prevailing Brahmanic belief, blending as it does 
the doctrines of Kapila, Patanjali, and the Vedas. So lofty 
are many of its declarations, so sublime its aspirations, so 
pure and tender its piety, that Schlegel, after his study of the 
poem, breaks forth into this outburst of delight and praise 
towards its unknown author : ‘The reverences of the great are due 
to the Brahman in his most sacred and holy work. And foremost 
to thee, O most holy poet and off-spring of the God-head, what- 
ever, in short, thou hast been called among mortals, O author of 
this song, whose oracular mind was wrapt in the Most High, 
Eternal, and Divine, with an inexpressible and unerring pleasure 
— to thee, foremost, I say, I offer my respectful salutations, and 
my constant adoration to the vestiges thou hast left/ Lassen re- 
echoes this splendid tribute, and indeed, so striking are some of 
the moralities here inculcated, and so close the parallelism — often- 
times actually verbal — between its teachings and those of the New 
Testament that a controversy has arisen between Panditas and 



84 


S'ankara on Brahman (from his Atmahodha). 

"One should know that to be Brahman than the gain 
the intuitional knowledge) of Which, there 
is no other gain (worth gaining); than the (highest) 
bliss of (experience of) Which, there is no other bliss 
(worth enjoying); than the knowledge of Which, there 
is no other knowledge (worth knowing), ( 54 ). 

“ One should know that to be Brahman after hav- 
ing seen Which there is no other ( thing to be seen); 
after becoming Which there is no becoming again, 
({. e. no re-birth), having known Which there re- 
mains no other knowable. (55). 

" One should know that to be Brahman Which is 
cross-wise, above, below and complete, Which is Ex- 
istence, Intelligence and Bliss, and secondless, end- 
less, eternal, and one. (56). 

Missionaries on the point whether the author borrowed from 
Christian sources, or the Evangelists and Apostles from him.” 
(pp. VII.f.) 

Mrs. Annie Besant states in her preface : — “ Among the price- 
less teachings that may be found in the great Hindu poem of the 
Mahdhhdrata, there is none so rare and precious as this, “ The 
Lord’s Song.” Since it fell from the Divine lips of Sri Krishna 
on the field of battle, and stilled the surging emotions of his 
disciple and friend ( Arjuna ), how many troubled hearts has it 
quieted and strengthened, how many weary souls has it led to 
him ! It is meant to lift the aspirant from the lower level of 
renunciation, where objects are renounced to the loftier heights, 
where desires are dead, and where the Yogi dwells in calm 
and ceaseless contemplation, while his body and mind are actively 
employed in discharging the duties that fall to his lot in life. 
That the spiritual man need not be a recluse, that union with the 
divine life may be achieved and maintained in the midst of 
worMiy aflEairs, that the obstacles to that union lie not outside us 
but ^thin us— such is the central lesson of the Bhagvad GMt&.” 




** One should know that to be Brahman, which is 
apprehended by the Vedintins as non-dual through 
the process of exclusion of non-that (i. e. 
phenomena), Which is entire bliss and one. (57). 

“ Like an iron ball heated by fire. Brahman shines 
by Itself, pervading all the universe — inside and out- 
side — and making it appear. (62). 

“One who has the eye of knowledge can see the all- 
pervading omnipresent Sat-chiddtman Brahman, but 
the ignorant cannot see It, just as a blind man can- 
not see the shining sun. (65).’^ 

It is impossible to predicate anything of Brahman, 
as It transcends all attributes and is Itself super- 
impersonal and absolutely homogeneous, and conse- 
quently all difierencG and plurality must be illusory. 
The appearance of a manifold world is due to M&y^, 
which is unable to break the unitv of Brahman 
on account of her own unreality. Still some ap- 
proximate ideas of Brahman, such as oneness, all- 
existence, all-knowledge, all-happiness, all-perfection, 
all-pervading, &c., are conspicuous in works treating 
and indicating It for the purpose of easier ap- 

1. That gain than which there is no greater gain, 

That joy than which there is no greater joy, 

That lore than which there is no greater lore, 

Is the one Brahma — this is certain truth. 

That which is through, above, below, complete, 
Existence, wnsdom, bliss, without a second. 

Endless, eternal one — know that as Brahma. 

Nothing exists but Brahma, when aught else 
Appears to be, ^tis, like the mirage, false. 

lyidian 122-123* 


8 



prehension. They nre the attempts of thought 
•v^ishing to conceive and to convey information about 
Brahman, and adapting themselves to common 
notions. 

Brahman and the simile of the Sun. 

Amongst many illustrative similes a most favour- 
ite one employed to indicate various views in con- 
nection with Brahman is that of the sun, the source 
of light. There being an analogy in all conclusions^ 
similes and metaphors are considered very useful 
in order to make the meaning more clear. It is 
hardly necessary to remind the reader that in a 
comparison, the two things compared are similar 
only with reference to some particular points they 
have in common. 

Brahman is one, and devoid of form and difference, 
but assumes, as it were, the name and form of limit- 
ing adjuncts with which It appears to enter into 
connection. For this reason It is compared to the 
images of the sun reflected in the water and the like, 
meaning thereby that all difference in Brahman is 
unreal, only due to Its limiting conditions. As the one 
luminous sun entering into relation with many dif- 
ferent waters is himself rendered multiform by his 
limiting adjuncts, so also the one all-pervading 
Brahman of the universe appears multiplied. Thus 
Brahman is one and many at the same time. The 
reflected image dilates and contracts according to the 
surface of the water ; it trembles when the water is 
agitated, it divides itself when the water is divided. 
It thus participates in all the attributes and conditions 
of the water; while the real sun remains all the time 



87 


the same and unaffected in the least. Similarly^ 
Brahman, although in reality uniform and never 
changing, participates, as it were, in the attributes 
and the states of the body and the other limiting 
adjuncts within which It abides without bemg 
affected in the least. 

The one infinite Brahman, the one without a 
second, thus appears as many in the universe; yet it 
is always and all along one and the same, just as is 
the sun reflected a thousand-fold in the waves of 
the sea, the ripples of the rivers and the lakes, &c., 
and yet there is but one sun. 

Many similes are founded upon this -resemblance 
of Brahman and the sun, some of which will be 
noted later on. 

Parallel Ideas of Modem Thinkers- 

From the above authoritative passages an ap- 
proximate conception of Brahman may be formed. 
The reader of philosophical literature often meets 
with ideas parallel to those of the Vedilnta. A few 
of them are slightly touched upon below. They 
offer striking and deep-rooted parallels to the Veddnta. 

The most usual definition given of philosophy is 
'the study and knowledge of first principles,’ 'First 
principles may be taken as equivalent to unity amidst 
diversity, — to the causes or origins of all things, — to 
the universal, the necessary, the Ultimate.’ Some de- 
fine philosophy as the knowledge of the highest degree 
of generality. Philosophy thus leads the student away 
from phenomena, appearances, to Nou- 

menon, the Reality, which lies beneath all phenomena. 

1. See the Brahnm-S'&tras, III, 2, 15. 




88 


We everywhere transforinationa, |)erisbahle aud 
p^riahing; yet there must be somethiug beneath, 
;which is imperishable, immutable. Aud this is what 
the Vedanta calls Brahman. 

Socrates is reported to have said:— *' That which 
imparts truth to the known, and the power ©f 
knowing to the knower, is what I would have you 
term the idea of good,^ and that you will regard as 
the cause of science and of truth, as known by us ; 
beautiful too, as are both truth and knowledge, 
you will be right in esteeming this other nature 
as more beautiful than either; and, as in the previ- 
ous instance, light and sight may be truly said to 
be like the sun, and yet not to be the sun, so in this 
other sphere, science and truth may be deemed like 
the good, but not the good ; the good has a place 
of honour yet higher. 

** The sun is not only the author of visibility in all 
visible things, Ibut of generation and nourishment 
and growth, though he himself is not a generation. 
In like manner the good may be said to be not only 
the author of knowledge in all things known, but 
of their being and essence, and yet the good ( almost 
analogous to Brahman of theVedS^nta) is not essence, 
but far exceeds essence in dignity and power.®” 

1. This highest idea of the Good is what in religions language 
would be called the Supreme Being or God, or what the Yedanta 
would call Brahman. 

2, Plato’s Sepuhlic, Bk, VI, 508-9, translated by Jowett. 

This ideal Good of the Kepublic is the ideal Beauty of the 

Symposium. The one seems to say to us, remarks Jowett, ‘the 
idea is truth,’ the other ‘ the idea is love.' In both the lover of 
wisdom is the spectator (wnft ) of all time all eiu^enoe. 



89 


“ The whole system of Plotinus revolves round the 
idea of a threefold principle, trichotomy, or trinity, 
and of pure intuition. In these respects, it bears a 
remarkable similarity to the great Ved^ntic system 
of Indian Philosophy. Deity, Spirit, soul, body, 
macrocosmic and microcosmic (5^), (i. «• 

Brahman, Jtva, and Jagat ) and the essential identity 
of the divine in man with the divine in the universe, 
— or of the Jivdtnian with the Paramdtman — are 
the main subjects of his system. 

" Thus from the point of view of the great 
universe, we have the One Reality, or the Real, the 
One, the Good ; this is the All-self of the Upanishads, 
Brahman, or Faramdtman. 

“ Plotinus bestows much labour on the problem 
of the Absolute, and reaches the only conclusion 
possible, viz., that it is inexpressible.”^ • 

“ There is but one infinite Substance, and that is 
God. Whatever is, is in God ; and without Him 
nothing can be conceived. He is the universal Being 
of which all things are the manifestations. He is the 
sole Substance, everything else is a Mode; yet, 

Avithout Substance, Mode cannot exist 

He is the cause of all things, and that immanently, 
but not transiently. He has two infinite attributes— ; 
Extension and Thought. Extension is visible 
Thought; and Thought is invisible Extension : they 
are the Objective and Subjective of which God is 

the Identity There may be many existing 

things, but only one existence; many forms, but only 

1. See Sdwt Works of Plotinus, Preface p. x*., Bohn’s 
Philosophical Library. 




90 


one Substance. God is the 'idea immanens’ — One 
and A11.”J 

Modern Philosophy draws a distinction between 
the Unknowable and the Knowable, The sentiment 
of a First Cause, infinite and absolute, is the eternal 
and secure basis of all religion. This Unknowable is 
the Deity ( almost Brahman of the Vedanta ) whom 
under different names and forms, the votaries of all 
creeds ignorantly worship. When we turn to phy- 
sical sciences every persistent impression made upon 
our consciousness reveals to us an external reality, a 
reaction, a resistance, and, consequently, a force. 
The indecomposable mode of consciousness is force. . . 
All forces are manifestations of the dynamic 
energy ( Cp. Mdyd or S'ahti of the Vedanta, jrPIT 
^ ) everywhere diffused, which co-oi'dinates 

the whole range of phenomena, past, present and 
future : an immanent and eternal energy, at once 
active and passive, subject to perpetual revolution, 
and maintaining all things in an ever-changing 
equilibrium. But what is this dynamic energy? 
We know not. Whether we analyse what passes 
within or without ourselves, its essence escapes us. 
The Power which the universe manifests to us is 
utterly inscrutable. ( This is what the Vedanta calls 
M&yd, S'ahti.) This theory is described as 
an attempt to find the solution of the problem of the 
universe in a sole law: the persistence of force 
under multiform transformations. Physical forces, 
vital forces, mental forces, social forces are all only 

1. See Lewes’ Biographietd History of Philosophy. New Ed; 

p. 430. 



91 


diflferent manifestations of the self-same Force (Mdyd, 
S' ahti 

The whole scheme of things is now regarded as a 
single organism, advancing methodically through 
stages of its growth in obedience to inevitable laws 

of self-expansion (Cp. of the Vedanta) 

This form-giving spiritual potency is inherent in 


organism All things in the universe exist in 

process It is impossible to isolate phenomena 


from their antecedents and their consequents. 

The tendency of scientific ideas, in so far as 
these are remoulding thought in those high regions, 

is to spiritualise religion and to emancipate 

the individual from egotism face to face with that 
universal Being ( Brahman of the Vedanta ) of 
which he is a part and to the manifestation of which 
he contributes. 

In the scientific theory of the universe Nature 
comes to be regarded as a manifestation of infinite 
vitality ( ^rst^of the Vedanta ). 

We are part of Nature; and if in a true sense 
part, then the truest part of us — ourselves, our con- 
sciousness, our thought, our emotion, — must be part 
of Nature; and Nature everywhere, and in all her 
parts, must contain what corresponds to our spiritual 
essence. 

Finding thought to be the very essence of man 
considered as a natural product, we are ccnnpelled 
to believe that there is thought of the Vedanta) 
in all the products which compose this universe. 

1. See the Contemporary Review, Art. “ Our Great Philo- 
sopher.” Mav. 



92 


To this Power ( God, Brahman of the Ved^lnta) 
in whom we live and move and have our being, in 
whom the infinitely great and the infinitely small 
alike exist, we commit ourselves with the assurance 
that self, purged of egotism, is seeking its own best 

through dedication Law and God — the order 

of the whole regarded as a process of unerringly 

unfolding energy have become for religious men 

of scientific spirit so all in all that a wish for self, an 
egotistical aspiration is quelled at once as infantine, 
undisciplined, irrelevant. 

Love ( siT'Paf, Bliss of the Ved&nta) forms 

the binding element of human existence 

What an extension of its province has the virtue of 
love received from Science I It is no longer confined 

to families and friends and fellow-countrymen 

It covers the whole creation and the world of man^s 
inventions.^ 

“From Thee, great God ! we spring, to Thee we tend, 
Path, motive, guide. Original, and end.” 

Boethius de cons. (Translated by Dr. Johnson.) 

Boswell’s Life P. I. -p. 97. 
“All are but parts of one stupendous whole. 

Whose body Nature is, and God the soul; 

That, chang’d thro’ all, and yet in all the same; 

Great in the earth, as in th’ ethereal frame; 

Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze. 

Glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees. 

Lives thro’ all life, extends thro’ all extent. 

Spreads undivided, operates unspent; 

Breathes in our soul, informs our mortal part. 

As full, as perfect, in a hair as heart: 


1. See the Fortnightly Bevieto, Art. ‘ Ihe i^ogress of Thought 
in Our Time.’ June, 1887. 



As full, 8s perfect, in vile l^Utn that mourns, 

As the rapt Seraph that adores and bums : 

To him no high, no low, no great, no small ; 

He fills, he bounds, connects and equals alL " 

Pope’s Eamy on Man, Epistle 1. 1. ^7-SSO. 

To sum up this iu the words of Prak&s'^nanda who 
in his SiddMnta-MuhtdvaU ^ supporting by argu- 
ment declares Brahman to be 

‘That Reality which lies hidden in the Veda, abso- 
lute Bliss, in its own nature eternal and unrelated 
to aught else, the existent, smaller than the small, 
and infinite ; this is ( the immortal light or 
final ) emancipation and is to be apprehended only 
by the emancipated, a small part of a part of it is all 
this false world, It is in Its essence the light within. 
It is blessed/ 

The Ved^n tin's object in the conduct of his 
%vritings, as remarked by impartial readers, is simply 
to teach the principles and truth he knows and is in 
possession of. 

It may be remembered that even in an ordinary 
subject, ideas which are easy to the one are dif- 
ficult to the other ; nor is their evidence presented in 
the same way to the mind of each. For this and 
many other reasons the Vedantin thinks it of ad- 

1. This SiddhAnta-MuMvali is rradeied into BkigliBh by Dr. 
Arthur Veuis, and is published at Benares, 1890. 



94 


vantage to present Vedanta knowledge to the mind, 
in as great a variety of different lights as possible. 
He generally offers ' a familiar parallel or an illustra- 
tion drawn from something of which the student 
has that direct or indirect impression which gives 
a reality to the sublime idea to be communicated to 
him, and thus infuses an animated meaning into 
what was before lifeless. It is a property of 
knowledge and illustrations of this kind, ( says an 
observer), to strike no two minds in the same manner, 
or with the same force ; because no two minds are 
stored with the same images, or have acquired 
their notions of them by similar habits. It may 
place transcendent ideas not merely in a new and 
uncommon, but in a more impressive and satis- 
factory light. It may dispel some obscurity, clear 
up some inward mis-giving, and supply some link 
which may lead to the understanding of connections 
and deductions unknown before.’ 

The Vedanta and Plato’s Philosophy. 

In studying the Vedanta philosophy the student 
of ancient and modern philosophies will recog- 
nise many nearer approaches to it in the writing of 
the representative philosopher Plato and Kant and 
their numerous followers. They reflect the sublime 
and magnanimous truths of the Veddnta which have 
delighted the hearts of good men from time imme- 
morial. 

The following two remarkable passages taken for 
brevity’s sake from the analysis by J owett of Plato's 
"Eepublic" are quoted here for ready reference. It 
will assist such readers as are conversant with the 
philosophical thoughts of Europe and America in 



understanding more clearly some of the ennobling 
and great ideas of the Vedinta, which are to follow. 
The reader will observe that the accord of Ved^nt- 
ism and Platonism is wonderful. 

The Platonic Socrates says in his parable: — 
^'Imagine human beings living in a sort of under- 
ground den which has a mouth wide open towards 
the light; they have been there from childhood, and, 
having their necks and legs chained, can only see 
before them ( towards the lower end of the cave. 
Whewell’s Translation ). At a distance there is a fire, 

( opposite to the mouth of the den so as to throw 
the shadows of objects at the lower end of the den ), 
and between the fire and the prisoners a raised way, 
and a low wall built along the way, like that over 
which marionette players show their puppets. Above 
the wall are seen moving figures, who hold in their 
hands various works of art, and among them images 
of men and animals, wood and stone, and some of 
the passers by are talking and others silent. ‘A. 
strange parable,' he ( Gloucon ) said, ‘and strange 
captives.’ They are ourselves, I ( Socrates ) replied ; 
and they see nothing but the shadows which the fire 
throws on the wall of the cave; to these they give 
names, and if we add an echo which returns from 
the wall, ( of the cave on which the shadows were 
seen ), the voices of the passengers will seem to 
proceed from the shadows. Suppose now that you 
suddenly turn them round aird make them look with 
pain and grief to themselves at the real images; 
will they believe them to be real \ Will not 
their eyes be dazzled, and will they not try to 
get away from the light to something which 



they are able to behold without blinking t 
And suppose further, that they are dragged up 
a steep and rugged ascent into the presence of 
‘the sun himself, will not their sight be darkened 
with the excess of light ? Some time will pass before 
they get the habit of perceiving at all; and at first 
they will be able to perceive only shadows and 
reflections in the water; then they will recognize the 
moon and the stars, and will at length behold the 
sun in his own proper jjlace as he is. Last of all 
they will conclude: — This is he who gives us the 
year and the seasons, and is the author of all that 
we see. How will they rejoice in passing from dark- 
ness to light ! How worthless to them will seem the 
honours and glories of the den or cave out of 
which they came ! • As Homer says: ' Better to 
be the servant of a poor (living) master than a 
prince over all the dead.’ And now imagine 
further, that they ( the enlightened ) descend 
into their old habitations; — in that underground 
dwelling they will not see as well as their fellows, 
and will not be able to compete with them in the 
measurement of the shadows on the wall; there will 
be many jokes about the man who went on a visit 
to the sun and lost his eyes — men should not do 
such things — and if they find anybody trying to set 
free and enlighten one of their number, they will 
put him to death, if they can catch him. Which 
things are an allegory: The cave or den is the 
world of sight, the fire is the sun, the way upwards 
is the way to knowledge, and in the world of know- 
ledge the idea of good is at last seen and with dif- 
ficulty, but when seen is inferred to be the author of 



97 


good aiul l iglit — parent of the lord of light in this 
world and of truth and understanding in the other. 
He who attains to the beatific vision is always going 
upwards ; he is unwilling to d|^cend into political as- 
semblies and courts of law ; for his eyes are apt to 
blink at the images or shadows of images which 
they behold in them — he cannot enter into the ideas 
of those who have never in their lives understood the 
relation of the shadow to the substance. Now blind- 
ness is of two kinds, and may be caused either by 
passing out of darkness into light or out of light in- 
to darkness, and a man of sense will distinguish 
between them, and will not laugh equally at both of 
them, but the blindness which arises from fulness of 
light he will deem blessed, and pity the other; or if 
he laugh at the blinking idiot looking up at the sun, 
he will have more reason to laugh than the in- 
habitants of the den at those who descend from 
above. There is a further lesson taught by this 
parable of ours. Some persons fancy that insti'uc- 
tion is like giviiig eyes to the blind, but we say 
that the faculty of sight was always there, and that 
the soul only requires to be turned round towards 
the light. And this is conversion; other virtues are 
almost like bodily habits, and may be acquired in 
the same manner, but intelligence has a diviner life 
and is indestructible, turning either to good or evil 
according to the direction given. Did you never 
observe how the mind of a clever rogue peers out 
of his eyes, and the more clearly he sees the more 
evil he does ? Now if you take such an one and 
circumcise his passions, and cut away from him the 

leaden weights which drag him down and keep the 

9 



98 


eye of his soul fixed upon the ground, the same 
faculty in him will be turned round, and he will be- 
hold the truth as clearly as he now discerns his 
meaner ends. And hjjve we not decided that our 
rulers must neither be so uneducated as to have no 
fixed rule of life, nor so over-educated as to be un- 
willing to leave their paradise for the business of 
the world! And we must choose out the natures 
who are most likely to ascend to the light and 
knowledge of the good, and not allow them to do 
as they do now. 1 mean to say that they must not 
be allowed to romai)i in the region of light, but 
must be forced down again among the captives in 
the den to partake of their labours and honours. 

Is not this hard ? and what if tliey had rather 
not V You should remcmbei-, my friend, that our 
purpose in framing tlie State was not that our 
citizens should do what they like, but that they 
should serve the State for the coinmongood ofall."^ 

Further on Socrates observes: — 

''He ( a maker ) makes out only vessels but plants 
.and animals, himself, and all other things, the earth 
and heaven, and tilings under the earth; he makes 
the Gods also 

“There is a sense in which you ( any man ) could 
do the same. You have only to take a mirror, and 

catch the reflection of the sun, and the earth, and 

• 

plants and animals, and yourself in it, — there now 
you have made them. ‘Yes, in appearance, but not 
in reality’ ; 

1. The Dialogues of Plato, translated by Jowett. Vol. Ill, p. 
« 3 - 85 . 



99 


" Reflect: — Here are three beds ; one in nature, 
(<". e. the idea of a bed ) which is made by God ; an- 
other, which is made by the carpenter ( according to 
the idea ); and the third, by the painter, and there 
are three artists, who preside over them, — God, the 
maker of the bed, the painter. God only made one 

We may therefore conceive God to be 

the natural maker of the bed, and in a lower sense 
the carpenter is also the maker, but the painter may 
be more pi’operly described as the imitator of what 
the other two make ; he has to do with a creation 
Avhich is thrice removed from reality.”^ 

The impression, conveyed by the notion connected 
with such words and phrases as ‘the world of sight,’ 
*the chained ])risoners,' 'the shadows,’ ‘the way up- 
wards or the ascent,’ ‘the reflection,’ 'the idea of 
good and right,’ ‘the rejoicing on passing from the 
darkness to the light,’ ‘the Sun,’ ‘the attainer'of 
the beatific vision ;’ and ‘the three kinds of makers 
or artists — the Lord, the carpenter, and the painter, 
of things or creation — the real, the imitated and 
imagined,’ — is almost identical with what is con- 
veyed by the Vedanta terms, r?:., 
the Dras'yamnna Via'va, (3ftw)the Jivet, (^FTT-JIFn') 
the Chlidyd or MCiyd^ (fTHJTT^) the Jmna-Mdrga, 
(sifdF*(4l) the Pratihimha, the Snvichdnui, 

the Tuttva-Jnaiidncmda, the 

Lord, the Jnuid-, and the Is'mrct 

sras'thi, Jiva-sras'thi, and Mano- 

rdjya. &c. 

The ecstatic bliss felt and experienced by the mind 

1. The Dialogues of Plato, translated by Jowett. Vol. III. 
pp. 128-129. 



100 


of him who could return to Brahman, his Self, the 
highest Self, after becoming pure, serene, and en- 
lightened by the true knowledge is unspeakable. 
This is a truth for those who can comprehend it, and 
an extravagance for those who cannot. 



101 


CHAPTER II. 

Maya. 

After unfolding the conception of Brahman the 
VedS-nta proceeds to describe (jTPTl) Illusion, 

the self-feigning world-fiction, and 
emanation, creation projected by her, and the pro- 
cess of things during a period of evolution, though' 
it is not directly concerned with it. The A’edanta, 
however, ijicidentally touches the subject, but in 
truth leaves the learner to adopt any theory that 
might satisfy him, and thus becomes the most 
eclectic, selecting from all rational schools the 
doctrines that would best serve his ])Ui'pose. 

The more one examines creation, the more be- 
wildered he finds himself, and becomes hopeless of 
understanding it, seeing its infinite multiplicity and 
variableness. The conviction grows upon him that, 
‘human knowledge, at its best, goes but a very little 
way back to wauls the beginning of its tilings. Tt 
is so baffling.’ 

The Vedanta, therefore, at once assumes one 
Originant of the ever-changing and astounding 
creation, Maya. 

One of a few theories, propounded and propagated 
by the Vedanta as the least objectionable, is to 
ascribe Maya^ to an infinitesimal quarter of the 

]. Many names are given her. Nature or plastic origin 

of all, (ajfiiwi) Non-knowledge, Energy, Power, Force, &c. 

Ill a note on lii.s poem on Maya, the Earl of Southesk says; — 
“ The liveliness of the Nature-Spirit leads man to seek her for 
Ills own, but her being is too subtle to be grasped; bo, to escape 
despair, he must either renounce her for the sensuous 'World- 
Spirit, or win his way to her at last through the union with the 
Heaven-Spirit.” p. 233. 



102 


highest Self, whose existence-knowledge-joy is re- 
flected in her as the rays of the sun are reflected 
in a mirage. This reflection gives her a little 
partial reality and great powers. 

M^y^ (»inn), the Vedantin proclaims, is that 
which defies definition. The word May4 (*?!???) consists 
of two letters which are originally two words, -(w) 
M4 and (?n) yil. The first means hiot’ and the second 
‘that’. She is consequently interpi'eted to be that, 
w^hich in the darkness of ignorance, is, but when be- 
ing sought w'ith the light of right knowledge, is not. 
She is so eluding that, like the horizon, she appears and 
tempts, but is never to be caught. She is the type 
of uncertainty and change. She is incessantly and 
marvellously changing. She is the greatest riddle, 
and partakes both of existence and of non-existence. 
No sooner is the mind fixed on her than she appears 
quite different every instant and perpetually. 
She is capable of engendering any and all possible 
and impossible phenomena. 

She is constituted of three qualities ( ), viz, 

{^ 1 ^) goodness or purity, ( passion or acti- 
vity, and darkness or ignorance (indifference). 

The infinitesimal quarter of Brahman reflected in 
her form characterised by ( ) pure goodness, 

and by which she is rided, is called ( ) 
Sarvajna Is vara, the omniscient Lord. This Lord, 
owing to His association with Maya, through reflec- 
tion, is sometimes called also the originant of the 
everchanging — phenomenal but not fictitious— and 
astounding Jagat, emanation. 

It may be observed here that in ti’eating of M4yS. 



103 


and M4y4’s various effects, which are naturally in- 
numerable and inexpressible, some apparently dif- 
ferent views are given by the Tndian philosophic 
schools and even by the Vedanta school itself. They 
are so for the benefit of learners, and are not irrecon- 
cilable. Keeping in mind the unequal mental 
capacities of learners, they arc intended as so many 
stepping-stones to the one truth, — ‘that Brahman 
alone is real.’ 

M^y4 is called ( 5Tf% ) power and ( St^f^ ) nature 
of the Lord. Name and form are her figments and 
presentations. She is the germ of the entire expanse 
of the phenomenal world. ^ She is 
indescribable or inexplicable and ( ) can 
only be inferred, like ether, from her effects, and 
is capable of everything and anything unimaginable 
and impossible. 

When the same Mitya is characterised by good- 
ness mixed with the other two qualities of passion 
and darkness, and assumes various forms and rules 
individual living souls, she is called ( ) Nes- 

cience, the subjective ignoi’ance of individuals. 

May^ may be regarded both in parts and in the 
whole. Viewed in parts, she is the particular illu- 
sion that veils from each form of life ( ) its own 

true nature (^g^qr) as the one and only Self (stRUT). 
Under her influence every kind of sentient being 
is said to identify itself, not with the Self ( ) 

that is one and the same in all, but with its counter- 
feit presentment ( ). Mi\yi\, regarded in the 

whole is the Upddhi, adjunct, of Is' vara, the Lord; 


1. See the Brahma-SiUrag, II, 1, 14. 



104 


regarded in parts is TJpddhis, adjuncts of individual 
souls. Thus every living thing is a fictitiously de- 
tached portion, an illusive emanation of Brahman. 
Mdya, associated with Is'vara and viewed as a whole, 
is the cosmical illusion ( f%$«nTnn ), associated with 
Jivas, individual souls and viewed as parts is indivi- 
dual illusion ( )• 

The sum total of the universal Avldyds is called 
May4, the cause of the objective phenomenal world. 
Or, in other words, the individual ignorance, the 
microcosm, is Av 'uhjd ( ) Nescience, and the 

universal primeval ignorance, the )nacrocosm, is 
Mdya. Avidyd also means what is opposed to 
Vidyd, knowledge. 

Mayd is termed ( ) the Sat-asat- 
vilaxand, that is to say, she cannot be called cither 
‘ Sad real, or ‘Amt/ unreal. ' Sat ’ is that which really 
is, and which never ceases to be. As Miiya is anni- 
hilated by the Vedanta knowledge, and consequently 
ceases to be, she is not ‘ Sat/ real. Before the 
Vedanta knowledge she is there, for all 

practical purposes, and therefore she cannot be called 
‘ Asat, ’ unreal. She is therefore extraordinary. 

It is by this extraordinary and creative May^ 
that all the individual Egos and the whole pheno- 
menal world seem to exist. MayiVprojected-emana- 
tion — creation of name and form, is ( VydvahdriJca ) 
practically or phenomenally real, but not ( Pdramdr- 
thilca ) really real in the highest sense in which 
Brahman is real. Emanation is real so far as it is 
phenomenal, for nothing can be phenomenal except 
as the phenomenon of something that is real, or 
except as super-imposed on something that is real. 



105 


It is stated in ih.e Bralma-Sntras ih^i : — 
has the highest Lord for her substratum, and has 
the causal potentiality of illusion. She is called 
( ) undeveloped, unmanifested, since she can- 

not be defined either as that which is or that which 
is not’ ( 1,4,3. ). 

It is also stated in the Brahma- Sutr an that: — 

‘MAyA or Nescience ( si^t) makes us conceive 
body and other things contained in the sphere of the 
Not-self ( Andtman ) as ourselves ; from it there 
spring desires with regard to whatever promotes the 
well-being of the body and so on, and aversions 
with regard to whatever tends to injiu-e it’ ( 1,3,2 ). 

The Bhagvad-GHd pronounces: — 

‘Modifications and attributes are all Pral-nti-horn.’ 

Annie Besant's Translation. 

MAyA or Prahnti is the cause of Samsdra, emana- 
tion, creation. Is'vara, the Lord, through Prah'iti 
causes the origin, subsistence, and re-absorption of 

the universe All emanations or modifications 

( Vihdras ) from Buddhi ( mind ) to the phj^sical 
body, and all qualities ( Guna^ ) such as those which 
manifest themselves as pleasure, pain, delusion, and 

other mental states spring from Prakriti, 

the MAj'A, — composed of three Gunas — goodness, 
passion, and darkness.’ 

Thus ( ITHTT ) MAyA with the reflection of the 
Infinite Highest Self into her, and with the Highest 
Self immanent in her, is the Creator of all Creations, 

1. Soe the Bhagvad-Oitd with S'ankara Bh&shja, XIII, 19. 



106 


and a first cause of all causes. She is supposed to 
have no beginning, but to have an end; to have two 
powers — ( ) powder of envelopment, and 

power of projection. The Universe is 
supposed to be protracted out of and retracted into 
her. Her Production, Evolution, and Development 
are inconceiv'able. They are so extraordinary that 
they cannot be called either ( entity, or ( 
non-entity. Though some of them are tangible and 
clear, yet they elude the scientist, philosopher, and 
the entire body of wise men, when they attempt to 
analyse them and explain their phenomena, and 
make them confess that ‘ Nescience (srfw^-JTPTT ) 
presents itself at some stage or other before them, 
and that their explanation is impossible.’ 

In the Panchadas'i,’ Chitradipa VI. Mays! and 
Is' vara are described as follows; — 

'Know that inexplicable M^y^ is (si^fcT) Nature, 
and (»Tnfy) Mdyi — the May<i-associated one — is 
>oR) the great Lord. The whole world is filled with 
his parts. Maya may be regarded in three ways, as 
( an absurdity, or ( a mystery, 

a reality, according to the three sources of 
knowledge, viz. revelation, argument, 

and the unphilosophic consciousness. 

Maya makes this world of phenomena appear and 
disappear just as the folding or unfolding of the 
picture-canvass ( exhibits or conceals the picture ). 
MA,yA. cannot be ( ) an independent entity, for 

1. The PancJiadas'i is translated in part into English by Mr. 
Arthur Venis, M. A., Principal, Benai-es College, and published 
in the Pandiia, Vols. V, VI, VIII. ( 1883,84 

and 86 ). 



107 


apart from Intelligence she cannot be present to 
consciousness. Again, she may be regarded as in- 
dependent in that she modifies ( seemingly ) 
the unrelated (Reality). Maya makes the impersonal, 
unchanging, unrelated Self appear under the form 
of the phenomenal ( sc. personal consciousness, &c. ), 
and creates ( f ) the tiord and the personal 

soul by means of ( ) a refiection ( upon her- 

self) of the absolute Intelligence {Chit, the Reality). 
( Just as) fluidity in water, heat in fire, hardness in 
stone, ( are taken to be iiatural attiibutes ) so, in 
]\[aya the power of iiroducing or accomplish- 

ing things difficult, is self-jn-oved. A man Avonders 
so long as he does not clearly know this power, but 
when knowledge has come, he rests satisfied with it; 

this is the inscrutable Majni No question can 

be raised against Maya, which is ( ) essen- 
tially a questioning. And since Mayi\, consisting 
pi-e-emineutly of wondei-, is in the form of a question 
let Avise ]nen diligently seek to overthroAV it. If you 
Avmukl knoAV the nature of Maya, deliberate and 
examine the definition of Maya, as knoAAUi in the 
Avorld. tShe is that Avhich cannot bo explained and 
yet is clearly manifest. This is Avhat ordinary men 
accept AAuth regard to magic and the like. The 
phenomenal world is clearly manifest ; an explana- 
tion of it is impossible. Regard it impartially, there- 
fore, as made by MayJ. When even all the Avise 
start to give an explanation. Nescience — May4 — in 
some one quarter or anothei*, appears before them. 
And, therefore, they ascribe ( ) a magical 
character to this Avorld. And Avhat greater magic 
than this, that a germ taking up its abode in a -womb 



108 


should become conscious, gifted with the off-shoots 
springing from it — head, hand and foot — and passing 
in order through the stages of child-hood, youth and 
old age, should see, hear, smell, and come and go ! 
Pondering well the case of the seed of the baniaii 
tree, like that of our body, look now at the tiny seed 
and now at the mighty tree ! This, therefore, is M4ya, 
rest assured. Things unthinkable we should not 
force into our deliberations. The world, forsooth, as 
a product is ( ) unthinkable by the mind. Be 

assured that the cause endowed with ( 

5rf^) the pow’er of producing unthinkable things is 
M^yfl. Tliis cause, M^yfi, is alone present to cons- 
ciousness during dreamless sleep. That germinal 
Maytl, with that very reflection upon her of im- 
personal Intelligence, is modified ( into personal 
consciousness ) in the form of the phenomenal mind. 
Hence it is that the reflection of Intelligence clearly 
shines upon the mind. "Maya produces the personal 
•‘oul and the Lord by means of a reflection” ( upon 
herself of Intelligence ); thus it has been revealed in 
(^f^) fbe Scripture. These two ( the Lord 
and the personal soul ) are practically like 
the cloud-ether and the water-ether. That 

reflection of Intelligence which has May^ as Its 
subordinate is revealed as the Maya-associated one, 
( the great Lord, the Archimegus. The same 

is ( ) the internal ruler, ( ) the om- 
niscient, ) the source of the world. All is 

possible with M^ya. "(The Lord) residing in the 
mind ; within the mind ; unperceived by mind ; whose 
body mind is : ( who ) rules the mind:” — ^thus the 
Veda proclaims ( ) the internal ruler. The 



109 


Bhagvad-GitS, (xviii; 61) proclaims: — is'cara, the 
Lord, dwelleth in the hearts of all beings, O Arjuna 1 
by His Maya whirling all beings as though mounted 
on a machine." 

M&y^ is also described as follows: — 

"M^ya is confined to the name and form of a thing, 
and not to its substance. The ever-changing pheno- 
menal world is termed M4ya. All the transient 
states which matter assumes are called Mayti,. Change 
is the criterion which will tell you whether a thing 
is within the province of May^ or not. Whatever 
is subject to change is unreal, false, mirage-like, 
M^y^, If you can go beyond the world of changes, 
if you can peep through the veil of phenomenon and 
catch a glimpse of noumenon, you will be able to go 
beyond the range of ( Illusion ). The substra- 
tum and the noumenon of all things, consciousness 
pure and simple, is alone beyond the pale of M^yd, 
The univei’se is the phenomenal appearance of 
consciousness, a mere show of ever-changing names 
and forms. All states of matter are unreal. The 
hard solid block of ice melts into the soft liquid 
water; the latter in its turn becomes steamy vapour, 
the steam is tranformed into something else, and so 
forth. Now all these unreal, ever-changing, pheno- 
menal states of matter are within the province of 
M4y^, unreality or illusion. The substance into 
which matter merges in its most refined state is 
^'mind," and mind, too, loses itself in Absolute 
Consciousness. This is the Advaita doctrine.’^ 

1. The MdhA~Bhdrctta. S. C. Mukhopfidhy&ya’s Esoteric Com- 
mentary, p. 11. 

10 



110 


What the Ved^ntin calls M^ya, Plato calls 'a 
world of shadows, not of realities’, and Kant calls 
' appearance only, not the thing in itself.’ 

In brief, then, there is an unknown element at the 
bottom of the varieties of creation, whether we agree 
to call that element a volition of a supernatural be- 
ing, or an undiscovered set of facts in embryology, 
or the shadow — distorted shadow — of the Almighty, 
or modes of the unconditioned as presented under 
the conditions of our consciousness. 

This inscrutable something that cannot be further 
resolved is Ma)A. 

Mr. Herbert Spencer, in an Article on “Religious 
Retrospect and Prospect,” says : — 

“ Scientidc progress is a gradational transfigura- 
tion of Nature. Where ordinary perception saw per- 
fect simplicity, it reveals great complexity ; where 
there seemed absolute inertness, it discloses intense 
activity ; and in what appears mere vacancy, it finds 

a marvellous play of forces behind every 

group of phenomenal manifestations there is always 
a nexus, which is the reality, tliat remains fixed 

amidst appearances which are variable 

Science enlarges the sphere for religious senti- 
ment the astronomer sees in the Sun a mass so 

vast that even into one of his spots our earth might 
be plunged without touching its edges ; and who, by 
every finer telescope, is shown an increased multitude 

of such suns, many of them far larger But 

amid the mysteries (the Ved4nta-M^y& ) which 
become the more mysterious the more they are 
thought about, there will remain the one absolute 



Ill 


certainty that he is ever in presence of an Infinite 
and Eternal Energy, from which all things proceed.** 

M4y4 is assumed to be a point in the immensity 
of Brahman. It is an assumption, but is the only 
assumption necessary for the construction of a 
science. That once admitted, the existence of Non- 
Ego (Andtman) as a })roduct of Jiva^ the Ego, follows 
as a necessary consequence, and the problems of the 
Universe ( are solved ; and the most perfect 

harmony reigns, Maytl or Avidya is, therefore, not 
supposed altogether unreal, because she has at all 
events caused all that seems to be real though for a 
time. Her reality, however, consists only in the 
fact that she has to be assumed, and that there is 
no other assumption possible to account for what is 
called the real world. It is no use to go beyond 
human depth in this matter. As no natural philo- 
sopher, with all his pretensions to discoveries busies 
himself with the attempt to discover the cause of 
attraction ; so we must content ourselves advancing 
to a certain point with knowing that there is M^yk, 
that ' thitherto man shall go, and no farther.* In 
celestial physics ( astronomy ) 'and all terrestrial 
physics universal gravitation is a condition, so is 
MUy^ the condition of all the phenomena of inorgan- 
ised and organised bodies. 

It is impossible to know M^y^, the universal il- 
lusion and its cause. Knowing pre-supposes some 
light. When a true light appi'oaches M&yd, she 
disappears, like darkness, leaving no trace behind. 
She is a long dream. While we are under her in- 
fluence, Ave do not doubt the reality of the Samsdra, 
the world; but the moment we are duly awakened by 



112 


the VedlLnta knowledge she is nowhere, and gives 
place to a truer reality, which we were not aware of 
while dreaming. 

The Ved3,ntin does not enter into the labyrinth of 
M&y4. He honestly confesses his own 
nescience, ignorance, and ascribes all that we cannot 
understand in the phenomenal universe to the 
principle of the subjective Nescience which is in- 
herent in our nature as men. To know the way out 
of this M^y^ or Avidya, to raise his individuality out 
of the shadow into the light, is the highest wisdom 
for man, says he. 

The aim of the Veddnta is, according to him, to 
show that there is only the one highest Lord 
ever-unchanging, whose substance is 
cognition, and who, by means of M&yd, 
manifests Himself in various ways.^ 

Or, in other words, “ Brahman described as ( 

) 'the existent, knowledge, infinite,' is the 
sole substance ; the notions of ( fjsR: ) Creator and 
{ ) individual soul, ( commonly ascribed to It ) 

are erroneously surmised (by means of MayS.) through 
two limiting adjuncts. (37) 

"That inexplicable M&yti, appears, as it were, her- 
self ( ) conscious by the occurrence upon her of 

( ) a reflection of the absolute Intelligence. 
The Absolute obtains for us ( ) the notion of 
Creator through the contact of Mdy& as limiting 
condition. (40) 

" The Absolute appears as or becomes for us the 
individual soul when we think of ( ) at- 


1. See the Brahma-SUk'a 1,3,19. 



113 


tributes of the five vestures as its limitations. Just 
as the same man may be father and grand-father to 
his son and grand-son, and is neither father nor grand- 
father when son and grand-son are not in mind; so 
when ( ) Maya and ( ) the five vestures 

are kept out of view, the Absolute is neither 
Creator nor personal Soul.” (12)’^ 

The Ved^ntin divides knowledge into two, the 
knowledge of ( STiTTrinrs Andtma-Jada ) the non-self, 
the unreal and phenomenal objective world, matter, 

and that of Atman ) the Self, the real and 

noumenal subjective spirit. He has always contented 
himself by adopting necessary notions about the 
objective world, matter, the physical nature of things 
&c., from other schools, and devoted himself to the 
knowledge of the Self, the subjective, in which he 
has distanced all philosophers of Asia, Europe, and 
America, as much as they have distanced him in the 
investigation and discoveries of the objective and 
visible world, matter, &c. 

He has built up in the centre of the busy world 
the grandest pyramid of knowledge of the highest 
Self. One has only to ascend it, step by step, as far* 
as his strength of thought and intelligence will carry 
him, in order to understand the skilled labour and 
enjoy the comprehensive view on the lower ground, 
and the pure bliss of the most serene and sublime and 
high atmosphere which it affords. When he mounts 
high enough, he will feel that none of world’s philoso- 
phers has ventured to build such a monument. 

The light of higher knowledge set upon it illumines 

1. See the Panchada8% Panchakos'aviveka, IIL, 37-42. 



114 


the moral and religious atmosphere around and 
below it, and continues to shine upon all succeeding 
generations. 

In erecting this sublime and brilliant monument of 
knowledge the Ved^ntin has in some cases utilized 
some of the methods used by other schools, and 
adapted to the average of human capacity. Know- 
ledge ( jffpf ) supposes three terms : (^I?n) a being or 
a subject who knows, (^) a thing or an object 
to be known, and (frT»r) a relation determined 
between the knowing subject and the known object. 
This relation properly constitutes knowledge. 

Knowledge of things is of two kinds-lower and 
higher. The former embraces the whole objective 
phenomenal world (sTSfTrJPl,) — including our body — 
extended in time and space; the latter the subjective 
Self of all. There are two stand-points from which 
the nature of things is investigated. One is empi- 
rical, in which we regard things in the form in which 
they appear to us ( that is as they are reflected in 
human consciousness ). This is the knowledge obtain- 
ed by observation. The result is Physics. Another 
stand-point is transcendental, in which we try to 
discover what things are in themselves, ( independent 
of our consciousness ). This is the knowledge ob- 
tained by principles or reasons. The result is Meta- 
physics. It is remarked that ‘when we look abroad 
upon Nature, we observe an endless variety of trans- 
formations. At first these seem without order ; on 
looking deeper we find that there is a regular series 
of development from the lowest to the highest. 
These transformations are the struggles of the Idee 
to manifest itself objectively. Nature is a dumb In- 



115 


telligence striving to articulate. At first she 
mumbles ; with succeeding etForts she articulates ; at 
last she speaks’ A 

To understand Nature there are vai'ious methods 
or paths of transit whereon mankind may travel in 
quest of truth. All thinkers try to find a path from 
the phenomenal to the nouroenal in order to he in 
possession of the truth. 

According to Comte, the founder of the Positive 
school of philosophy : — 

" Every branch of knowledge passes successively 
through three stages: 1st, the supernattiral, or ficti- 
tious; 2nd, the metaphysical, or abstract; 8rd, the 
positive, or scientific. The first is the necessary point 
of departure taken by human intelligence; the second 
is merely a stage of transition from the supernatural 
to the positive • and the third is the fixed and definite 
condition which knowledge is alone capable of pro- 
gressive development. 

“ In the supernatural stage, the mind seeks after 
causes ; aspires to know the essnices of things and 
their modes of operation. It regards all effects as 
the productions of supernatural agents, whose inter- 
vention is the cause of all the apparent anomalies 
and irregularities. Nature is animated by superna- 
tural beings. Every unusual phenomenon is a sign 
of the pleasure or displeasure of some being adored 
and propitiated as a God. The lowest condition of 
this stage, is that of the savages, viz, Fetichism. The 
highest condition is when one being is substituted for 


1, Lewes’ Biographical History of Philosophy^ p, 627. 



116 


many, as the cause of all phenomena. ( This is near 
to Brahman reflected into May^ of the Vedanta. ) 

"In the metaphysical stage, which is only a modi- 
fication of the former, but which is important as a 
transitional stage, the supernatural agents give place 
to abstract forces ( personified abstractions ) supposed 
to inhere in the various substances, and capable them- 
selves of engendering phenomena. The highest condi- 
tion of this stage is when all these forces are 
brought under one general force named Nature. 

( This is near to M^y^. ) 

" In the positive stage, the mind convinced of the 
futility of all inquiry into causes and essences, applies 
itself to the observation and classification of laivs 
which regulate effects ; that is to say, the invariable 
relations of succession and similitude which all things 
bear to each other. The highest condition of this 
stage would be, to be able to represent all phenomena 
as the various particulars of one general view. 

“ But no science could have its orgin in simple 
observation; for if, on the one hand, all positive 
theories must be founded on observation, so, on the 
other, it is equally necessary to have some sort of 
theory before we address ourselves to the task of 
steady observation. If, in contemplating phenomena, 
we do not connect them with some principle, it would 
not only be impossible for us to combine our isolated 
observations, and consequently to draw any benefit 
from them ; but we should also be unable even to 
retain them, and most frequently the important facts 
would remain unperceived. We are consequently 



117 


forced to theorize. A theory is necessary to ob- 
servation.*^^ 

In short, the seeker after truth has, as is well- 
observed, to fix his mind on the laws of nature in 
their sequence and connection ; on the truths which 
are acknowledged by the few, not on the opinions 
of the many. There is no part of truth, whether 
great or small, which he will dishonor; and in the 
least things he will discern the greatest. 

Keeping in view such method and law as these, of 
mental evolution, along with their own methods and 
laws Vedanta philosophers, blessed with the noblest 
gifts of nature and desiring to make the best and 
highest use of them, treat their sublime and elevating 
subject in such a manner as carries conviction home 
to the students and leads them to the truth. 

Their profound and luminous doctrines are so 
striking and satisfactory that when once they are 
grasped the reflective mind feels some difficulty in 
conceiving any other possible. They love truth and 
hate falsehood. They cannot rest in the multipli- 
city of phenomena, but are led by a sympathy in 
their own nature to the contemplation of the Ab- 
solute, Brahman, 

One of their methods for this is to proceed by 
regular steps to a system of universal knowledge, 
which infers the parts from the whole rather than 
the whole from the parts. 

( ) The Universe, Emanation. 

All the visible and invisible Jagat, Emanation, 

1. Lewes’ Biographical History of Philosophy^ pp. 646-7A 
Sir John Lubbock^s Hundred Books. 16. 




118 


Univerae, Samsdra (the endless cycle of birth, 
action and death ) proceeds from this Mkyk or 
Nescience. She is the seed of it. Samsdra is her 
effect, product. 

The Samsdra is thus described in the Bhagvad- 
Gitd : — 

‘They speak of the indestructible — inexhaustible — 
eternal Advattha (fig-tree) with roots above and 
branches below.’ 

Qankara-Bhflshya thus explains this:— 

" Brahman, with its unmanifested potential energy ' 
of M^ya, is referred to by ‘above’, for it is unlimited 
in time, being the Cause, Eternal and Vast. Brahman 
is the root of this tree of Samsdra, and the tree is, 
therefore, said to be ‘with roots above . (He quotes) 
From the S'ruti: — “whose roots are above and 
branches below”, ( Katha Up. 111,2,1. ) In the Pu- 
rina also ( it is thus described ); — 

‘The eternal — inexhaustible — tree of As'vattha 
( Sa/msdra) has sprung from the root of Avyahta, the 
Unmanifested, and has developed by the strength of 
the same Unmanifested. Its trunk is Buddhi ( intel- 
lect, mind ), Indrtyas, the senses are its hollows, the 
great elements its boughs, the sense-objects its leaves, 
Dharma — merits and Adharma — demerits its fair 
blossoms, ( Sukha ) pleasure and ( Didikha ). pain its 

fruits, affording livelihood to all creatures 

Having cut down and split the tree ( of Samsdra ) 
with the mighty sword of knowledge, and then at- 
tained to the Bliss of the Self, ( Brahman ), which 
is beyond that tree, one does not come back 



119 


again from -there, the supreme abode of Brahman, 
((^ankara continues) They speak of the illusory Scm- 
sdra as a tree with roots above. The Mahat ( the 
great ), Ahamhdra ( Egoism ) and the Tanmdtrds 
( elemental essences ) are its branches, as it were, 
and these are evolved further down ; whence the 
tree is said to he 'with branches below.’ Js'taltha 
is so called because it will ( ST ) not abide even 
till ( J^) s'va — to-morrovT, and is liable to destruction 
every moment. The illusion of Savisdra having 
existed in time without beginning, this tree of Sam- 
Sara is eternal — inexhaustible ; for, it rests, as is 
well-known, on a continuous series of births, which is 
without a beginning or an end (i. e. a final limit, as 
it appears and vanishes every other moment ), and is 

thus inexhaustible He who knows the 

tree of Samsara and the roots as described above is 
a knovrer of the teachings of the Vedas. Indeed, 

nothing else remains to be known beyond 

this tree of Samsdra and its root. Brahman.’ 

Or in the words of His Keverence Vasis'tha: — 

II” 

‘ In that pure mirror ( Brahman ) are reflected 
all these things ( the universe ) whose esse ( 

is pereqn as trees on its banks are 

reflected in a stream.’ 

The Vedanta arranges the universe first into two 
natural classes: — (^T?) insentient Matter, and 
Intelligence, Mind, (Motion, Force). Vast and 
various combinations of these two ( Matter and Mind) 
form the innumerable things the Universe is made of. 
It is classified also under, or rather divided into, five 



120 


principal heads or parts for certain explanations, 
viz: — Existence, Knowledge, and Joy; and Name 
and Form. The first three, being the essence of 
Brahman, are <^) Sat, x-eal; the last two, Mdy4’s 
parts, are ( Asat, not real. 

Ordinary persons, though they see the five parts 
in everything, are but cognizant of the last two, viz., 
name and form, which present themselves conspicu- 
ously to their sight, and cannot perceive the first 
Three, the Noumenal, on which the phenomenal last 
two are super-imposed. The latter so much claim 
attention for themselves that the former remains 
concealed, just as the central thread on which pearls 
or beads are strung remains concealed from the eye 
of the gazer. 

The enlightened, who can see deeper, find all the 
three of the first group underlying all the names and 
forms of the Universe, and enjoy the highest hap- 
piness derived from knowing the truth. 

In our knowledge of man and matter the process 
in reference to matter is as follows: — 

The existence of the whole visible universe 
is but an inference or apprehension, following upon 
impressions thx-ough the medium of light-undulations 
on the retina. The ether-waves affect our eyes and 
make us aware of this, and our belief in its reality 
is derived from the ( ^ ) Form. 

In reference to man the process is as follows: — 
when we apprehend — through the medium of light- 
undulations — those changes of facial expression, and 
through the waves of sormd, — ^those changes of the 
tone of voice which indicate the joy, the sorrow. 



121 


the fear, the love, the hatred of those with whom 
we talk, the direct analysable knowledge from the 
waves of ether that affect our eye and our ear, is 
but of the shadow, the Name and Form. We 

pass from seeing the looks and hearing the words to 
the feelings and thoughts which are the Reality 
behind them. This knowledge of the substance 
through the shadow demonstrates in like manner that 
all we directly know in this world of appearances is 
but the shadow and the sign. We must pass from 
the indication of name and form to the 

Reality beyond, which is the Existence- 

Knowledge-Bliss. 

The Vedflnta leads up its student to a point of 
view whence the small fragments, as it were, of the 
Infinite Whole, of which he is able to obtain a 
glimpse, appear to him in their true relative propoi’- 
tions. For this purpose the classification of Jim, 
Jagat, and Parmdtman is made. 

To the Ved^ntin every point of the objective uni- 
verse of the five parts or elements is as a window 
through which he looks into the Infinite itself. He 
knows how * to look through Nature up to Nature’s 
God ’ and finds the sole bliss in his love of God, 
Nature, and Man. 

It is ignorance which makes us unconscious of the 
first Three, but they are there none the less. The 
Panchadas'ik^ra says; — 

5:^! II” 

*As without seeing the glass, there is no possibility 
11 



122 


of a sight of whatever is reflected therein, so without 
perceiving first Sat-chit-dnanda, existence, know- 
ledge, and joy, whence could there be any possibility 
of the perception of name and form ? * 

But transcendental idealism is the intellectual pos- 
session of a few persons of philosophic mind. The 
common mass can see phenomena only, which appear 
and are distinguished from something more real 
which does not appear. The Ved^Lnta Metaphysics 
gives the knowledge respecting Reality, which is 
not phenomenal, e, God, the highest Self. Jagat, 
the universe, is revealed to us through perception, 
and is the subject-matter of the natural sciences. 

( 'Sa^, Ens, the True, is defined to be that 
which has continued existence, or which has been, 
is, and shall ever be, i. e., which truly and really 
exists ever in the past, present, and future. Asat 
( Not-true ), according to the VedS.nta, is that which 
is wanting in existence during one or more of the 
three divisions of Time. Asat is also called 
untrue, false, which does not mean, as is errone- 
ously supposed, to be illusive or fictitious, but 
simply phenomenal. Whatever has either beginn- 
ingorend, is cIT Biwn) phenomenal. The 

universe has either beginning or end, and therefore 
it is called ( ) phenomenal, unreal. But it is 

supposed to exist for all practical purposes, and its 
VydmMrihi SaM) practical or 
conventional existence is allowed, which is sufiicient 
for acting upon, but insuflScient to the reason. 

The Vedanta does not deny, as is commonly su])- 
posed, the existence of ( or rather in ) matter, but 
corrects the popular notion of it. It only contends 



123 


that the phenomenal name and form of it has no 
essence independent of mental perception, that ( in 
this case) existence and perceptibility are convertible 
terms, that external appearances and sensations are 
illusory and would vanish into nothing if the divine 
energy, the higher Reality, the substratum (^(||^r), 
which alone sustains them were suspended for a 
moment. 

In the Brahma- StUras (11,2,28) it is plainly 
declared that ' the non-existence of external things 
cannot be maintained, because we are conscious of 
external things’. We must always remember, when 
M&y& and her effects are spoken of in the Vedanta, 
to distinguish their kinds. 

is ( ) in the form of darkness, igno- 
rance. She is ( gr¥ ) insentient, and consists in de- 
lusion. Wherever in this phenomenal world one 
finds ignorance, iiisentiency and delusion, it is owing 
to MS,y^. This is experienced from the ordinary 
stand-point by all, and it is called ( JTPTT ) Real 
MS,y4. In the light of argument Miiyi\ is 
inexplicable, a mystery, for she cannot be proved 
as {^) entity nor as non-entity. In the 

light of true knowledge Maysi is ( g^gi) absurdity. 
She thus appears according to the stand-point as a 
reality, a mystery, or an absurdity.^ Keeping this 
view in mind Colebrooke says: — ‘that the notion 
that the versatile world is an entire illusion ( 
absurdity ) and all that passes to the apprehension 
of the waking individual is but a phantasy, present- 
ed to his imagination, nay, that every seeming thing 

1. See the Panchadatn, Ohitradtpa VI, S. 125-130. 



124 


is unreal, and all is visionary, does not appear to be 
the doctrine of the text of the Vedllnta*. 

There are two kinds of illusions: — (1) When one 
imagines he sees a serpent instead of a rope, there is 
( ) something real behind the illusion. When 

the Ved^ntin says the phenomenal world is an illu- 
sion, May&, he always means that there is something, 
the reality of Brahman, behind it. (2) Another kind 
of illusion is where there is nothing, no reality, be- 
hind the appearance. When one hears of ( ) 
the horn of a man or ( ) rabbit’s horn, 
( ) the son of a barren woman ( i. e. an im- 

possibility,) or, when a man in an access of fever ima- 
gines he sees a god or a devil, there is nothing real 
behind. This is called emptiness, nothingness, 
which is not a Veddnta doctrine. The Veddntin holds 
that there is ( ) the absolutely real Brahmau 
behind MS.ytl and her relatively real phenomenal 
world. 

The absolute higher reality can be conceived only 
by a very few of philosophic turn of mind, and not by 
the many. ‘To those who cannot see a higher reality 
behind the phenomenal world, the phenomenal world 
possesses, of course, the most absolute reality, while 
in their eyes the real postulated by the philosopher, 
behind the veil of the senses, is utterly unreal/’^ 

We see grades in Creation. All things from the 
loftiest spiritual entity to the tiniest molecule are 

!• Three Lectures on the Veddnia Philosophy by Dr, Max 
Muller, p. 125. 

Also see the Bhagvad-Giid^ II. 69, 

“ m ftvr fmi 5smfi!r ffinft i 

m ftnprr m ’’ 



125 


manifestations of the Highest Self under certain 
limiting conditions, but occupying different places in 
an ascending scale. In Nature inorganic matter is 
succeeded by organic, and amongst organized beings 
there is a graduated scale from the plant up to man, 
the highest point of development. In endless grada- 
tions, endless combinations of subtle and gross, end- 
less varieties of consciousness, all things come forth. 
Nature is divine in principle, i. e.. Nature is 
Brahman, but Brahman is not Nature, as is errone- 
ously supposed by the uninitiated in the VedS^nta 
philosophy. God is the substratum, the essence 
of Nature, and Nature is but the visible form, 
the exteriority, of the invisible Substance. Some, 
like inanimate insentient matter or mineral bodies, 
merely exist ; some have what is called life, sentient 
soul, consciousness, or intelligence, as well as exist- 
ence; and some feel a shadow of happiness along 
with existence and intelligence. 

The Vedanta demonstrates that the existence or 
reality appearing in the universe is simply a trans- 
ference of the Sat, the Existence of the Highest 
Self. The whole creation, invisible and visible, with 
all minerals and living bodies, derives its real being 
from the One Sat. The Sat is the root or the highest 
essence of the universe. It is the Self of all and 
everything in it. It is the higher reality underly- 
ing all appearances. 

Similarly, wherever intelligence is presented in 
the universe, it is owing to or brought by ( the 
Chit, the Knowledge or Intelligence of the Highest 
Self. 

In the same manner, wherever happiness is ex- 



perienced, it is on account of a reflection of ( ) 

the Ananda, the Joy of the Highest Self. 

The Vedanta Unity. Harmony between Egoism 
and Altrnism. 

In shoi't, the real and eternal substance of the 
universe, appearing under innumerable names and 
forms, is of the One Highest Self. This fact leaves 
man, when he is enlightened, no choice but to con- 
sider all the universe ) including himselfi as a 
portion eventually of Idvara, the Lord, the One 
Highest Self reflected in M^ya, and consequently to 
love and treat all not only as his brothers but as 
himsdf, all being emanated from and sustained in 
the same one fundamental Substance, the Highest 
Self. The idea of difference must be demolished. 
All live and move and have their being in Him, and 
He lives in all and beyond all. He is the All in All. 

Manu glorifies the seeing of one highest Self in 
everything thus: — 

I 

'He who equally sees the Self in all beings and all 
beings in the Self, he as a sacrificer to the Self, 
attains self-luminousness, i. e. becomes Brahman.* 

The venerable Vy4sa avers in the MahOhh^rata : — 

5r jufi; li” 

'There is one universal Self. He is the internal 
Self of me, of thee, and of all other embodied beings, 
the internal witness of all not to be apprehended by 
any one.’ 



127 


But this ennobling knowledge can only be gained 
by right thinking. The Vedinta declares that; — 

f^srr ^rni i 

«TOT snRF^ ^sn 

‘Knowledge is not produced by any means other 
than ( ) right thinking, reflection ; just as 
objects are never perceived but by the help of 
light^ The AparohJidmibhiiti.^ 

The peculiar characteristic of reflection is 

liberty. It illuminates every pre-existing thing 
which is obscure, or developes that which is enve- 
loped. Like the microscope and the telescope, it is 
an instrument to discover to us the true character 
and law of the object of thought. It destroys mis- 
leading illusions and forms mixed with truth, and 
makes it luminous. 

"Philosophy*’ says M. V. Cousin, "is nothing else 
than reflection on a great scale, reflection in itself 
and for itself, with no other design than that of un- 
derstanding”. It shows the connection of the parts 
which constitutes the whole unity, or the relations 
which bind the parts together. Reflection searches 
for and finds unity, oneness, because it comprehends 
the whole. 

The Vedanta utilizes both the methods of analysis 
or decomposition, and synthesis, collecting again, re- 
composition of parts. It asks us to analyse the uni- 
verse into ( 31^ ) Spiritual and physical, Intel- 

ligent and non-intelligent, parts. This substitutes 
for obscure varieties a whole that has the greatest 

1. See Prof. N, DvivMfs SSjairYoga^ 



128 


possible clearness; and then to synthesise or re- 
compose, as it were, the one spiritual hidden behind 
the physical. The Veddnta thus unites and em- 
braces the system of ( entity, and in doing so 
it reflects the Reality. It raises the mind from the 
particular to the general, from the known phenome- 
nal visible universe to the unknown invisible Sub- 
stratum, the Lord, the hidden Entity, the universal 
Self. 

This brings the universe, including all animated 
creatures therein, under the Unity, oneness. This 
combination of both methods — analytic and synthetic 
—is considered as best suited in the present case. 

The Ved&ntin thus commands a vast horizon and 
sees ( SHrYTT ) the Self, everywhere and in every 
being, and exhorts us to love all, not only for them- 
selves as they appear, but for the Self ( God ) that 
is in them, for their eternal Self, for that universal 
Self in which we all share. Thus we have to love 
all creatures on higher grounds, — rather than mere 
phenomenal ones, — for the divine Self in all of them. 
For in loving all creatures we really love God, and in 
loving God ( who is also within us ) we love 
ourselves. 

The Vedanta discloses to us and in us a gracious, 
benevolent, and all-pervading Being, who asks no 
more from us than that we should prove our love 
of Him Whom we have not seen, by love of our 
brothers and ourselves whom we have seen. 

This might be translated by the more familiar 
words of Vasistha to Rd.ma. 

The venerable Vasistha avers: — 



129 


“ ^ ?rpr i 

II ” . 

‘0 R^ma 1 by any means whatever, one must cause 
satisfaction to any embodied soul whatever. This 
is the worship of the Lord.* 

Or, to use an European expression for the same: — 
“ He prayeth best, who loveth best 
All things both great and small ; 

For the dear God who loveth us, 

He made and loveth all. ” — Coleridge. 

Dean Stanley, in his book on Christian Institu- 
tions, gives the following statement of the general 
teaching of Christ: — 

" The whole point of the description of the last 
Judgment is, that even the good heathens having 
never heard His name yet have seen Him and served 
Him; and when they ask Him, 'When saw we Thee I’ 
He answers without hesitation or reserve, 'In-as- 
much as ye did it to the least of these My brethren, 
ye did it unto Me. It was I who was hungry, and 
ye gave Me food. It was I who was thirsty, and ye 
gave Me drink. It was I who was shut up in prison, 
and ye visited Me.*’ 

In his work entitled ‘ The Ascent of Man ’ Mr. 
Henry Drummond says : — The path of progress 
and the path of Altruism are one. Evolution is no- 
thing but the Involution of Love, the revelation 
of Infinite Spirit, the Eternal Life returning to 
Itself.** p. 46. 

What a deep, instructive, important and effective 
ethical truth is hidden in thisl It provides a 
complete harmony between egoism (^cirSr) and 



130 


altruism ), between the pursuit of the 

highest happiness for one’s self, and that for other 
beings. 

The all-embracing Vedanta can exclude nothing 
from its precinct. Of whatever the verb-'to exist’ or 
‘to be’ could be predicated, it is ultimately within 
the limit of the Vedanta. There is nothing in the 
world, especially no i*eligion in the world, which the 
Vedanta regards as foreign. It affords a common 
ground to all good religions and philosophies, on 
which they could best meet one another and join 
hands in carrying out the high object at which they 
are aiming, viz., to satisfy all the wants both of the 
human heart and of the human head. 

It is well observed that if you look at the great 
religions of the world from the outside, you see mere- 
ly discord, but penetrate them and seek the inner 
doctrine, and harmony will come to light. Penetrate 
into the arcana even of one of the religions, and 
you will unveil them all. Then a strange pheno- 
menon is revealed. Little by little, but by ever 
Avidening sweep, we see the hidden doctrine shining 
in the centre of the religions, like a sun dispersing 
mist. Each religion appears like a different planet. 
With each of them we change our atmosphere and 
our plane of orbit, but it is always one and the same 
sun that gives the light. 

The Vedanta shows that it is but his own 
shir) Nescience, false knowledge, or ignorance, a 
part, as it were, of M^y&, which veils the intel- 
ligence of man and makes him impute something in 
that which is not that thing; creates differences where 
they ought not to exist, and then leads him astray. 



131 


and inflicts all the consequences resulting therefrom. 
Man thereby becomes most interested in and devoted 
to fleeting worldly objects, to which he erroneously 
imputes, and in which he yearns to find, happiness 
which is never to be found therein, and grows indif- 
ferent to the immortalizing knowledge of God — the 
fountain of happiness. 

The Vedanta gives us light to remove this 
Nescience, May^, and guides us to the most blissful 
knowledge of ( ) the real Universal 
Sat-Chit-Anarvda which is in all things, and enables 
us to drop ( ) the phenomenal Name and 
Form; when Brahman alone remains. 

It is truly remarked that being is the object of 
knowledge, and not-heing of ignorance. Knowledge 
must be of something which is, as ignorance is of 
something which is not. If we test the foregoing 
by this rule the true knowledge can be but that of 
Brahman which alone really is, and the so-called 
knowledge of phenomenal name and form, — M^yii, 
which really is not, is ignorance. 

Right knowledge is a system of ideas leading up- 
wards by regular stages to the idea of God. 

The light of the Vedilnta knowledge removes the 
darkness of Mkyh, and moulds man to the divine 
image until there is a perfect harmony or fusion 
of the divine and the human. 

Many notions in relation to M4ya seem paradoxi- 
cal. Sometimes, it is said, she is there, every- 
where, sometimes she is not there, nowhere ; some- 
times she is called real, sometimes unreal; some- 
times she is entity, sometimes non-entity; &c. This 



132 


is explained as follows:— ‘As long as we are under 
the influence of ( Nescience, M&ya reigns 
supreme and Brahman remains hidden. As soon 
as the delusion of Nescience is removed and the 
light of ( f^Terr ) the true knowledge arises, May4 
with her products becomes sublated and disappears 
and Brahman shines effulgent. 



133 


CHAPTER III. 

The Individual Soul- 

For this true knowledge the Vedanta asks man to 
study himself. Though every atom in the universe 
mirrors Brahman in its constitution, man is a minia- 
ture image offering special advantages for study. 
We thereby proceed from the Self — the nearest to be 
known, the knowable — to the most Unknowable. 
The Vedanta knowledge indicates us who have fallen 
down how to ascend to the highest Self. 

The Vedanta observes the curious fact that man, 
like the eye, is always ready to see and perceive all 
other outward things, but takes no notice of himself 
within ; that he often meddles with things beyond the 
reach of human capacity, but seldom sees into him- 
self. It directs him, therefore, to the knowledge of 
himself, and then of his Self, and promises that by 
this introspection he will get sufficient knowledge of 
the Highest Self, and secure his great concernments. 
This Self-knowledge gives him a basis of certitude — 
a starting point in himself — to ascend and remove 
the veil thrown by ( ) non-knowledge, and 
enables him to reveal truths. Like the line of the 
sailor, it is enough to give him a knowledge of the 
depth that is necessary for him. 

The Vedanta teaches that the true 

knowledge of one's Self leading to that of the 
Highest Self — God, is the only means which frees 
man from the miseries of Samsdra, the world, imposed 
by ignorance, and creates in him a serene felicity of 
combined reflection and satisfaction, and finally 
12 



134 


secures for him liberation, recovery and eternal 
bliss. 

This right knowledge ( flrsn ) is obtained by the 
ascertainment of the true nature of the Self. It 
then becomes evident to the enlightened and a- 
wakened from Self-forgetfulness, that the Self 
( 3n?*IT ) is free from all Avants and transmigratory 
existence Sams^ra ); the Self is the witness 

of all modifications, the mutual super-imposition of 
the Self and the non-Self, — the body, the senses, 
&c. — was quite erroneous ; the true Self is identical 
with the highest Self ; It is eternal, ever pure and 
blissful. 

Here is given, in a briefly summarised form, a 
portion bearing on the subject from (^ankara’s In- 
troduction to the Brahma-StUras, It declares : — ‘man 
super-imposes upon ( the Real, the 
Subject, the Ego, the Self — which is quite opposed 
to ( the unreal, the object, the non- 
Ego, the non-Self ( the body, senses and so on ) as 
light is to darkness, — the chai’acteristic nature and 
the attributes of the non-Self, the unreal, and vice 
versa. This super-imposition ( Adhydsa ) i. c. 

the notion of something in some other thing, or, the 
apparent presentation of the attributes of one thing 
in another, or, in the present case, the mutual 
super-imposition of the Self and the Non-Self, is 
called Avidyd) Nescience, on which all 

distinctions are based, and which is the cause of 
•wrong conceptions and all consequent evil. 

‘ This mutual super-imposition of the Self and the 
Non-Self, which is the cause of all evil, is then Ne- 



135 


gcience ( ). What removes this Nescience is 
called ( firETT Vidyd, ) the knowledge which ascertains 
the true nature of the subject. Self, and the object, 
non-self, by means of the discrimination of that 
which is super-imposed on the Self. 

‘The Vedanta philosophy, by means of (f^ETT) 
this knowledge, teaches us to free ourselves from the 
wrong notion which is the cause of all evil and to 
attain thereby the knowledge of the absolute unity 
of the Self, after which knowledge there no longer 
remains anything to be desired or avoided, as the 
conception of duality is destroyed thereby. 

* The knowledge of active religious duty, which is 
called lower knowledge ( ), has for its fruit 

transitory felicity; the knowledge of Brahman, which 
is called the higher knowledge ( ), has for its 
fruit eternal bliss. Thus ( ) the highest 

aim of men is realised by the higher knowledge of 
Brahman.’ 1 

The nature of ( STRSfr ) Self, is ( 

SRTf^.) Existence, Intelligence, Bliss, Endlessness, 
Secondlessness, &c. Out of these the first two are 
through Nescience super-imposed on ( the 

non-Self, and consequently, though the latter does not 
really possess existence and intelligence yet it seems 
to possess them on account of the super-imposition. 
The nature of (aTrncJR.) non-Self is (?iT^rar^:^F5r- 
the negation of, or opposite to, (siTrJH.) Self, 
such as non-existence, (3T¥) non-intelligence, 

(^;gr) misery, ( ) limitedness, ( ) duality, &c. 

The last three of the non-self ( are super- 

1. See the BrahmorSHtray I, 1, 1. Introduction by S^ankara. 



136 


imposed on the Self ( «nc*T^), just as in a heated iron 
piece the heat and brightness of fire is super-imposed 
on the iron, and the form and malleability of the 
iron are super-imposed on the fire. They appear as 
one, the fire is not viewed as distinct from the iron, 
and vice versa. This mutual super-imposition is the 
cause of all evil from which man suffers. 

The Ved^lnta shows us how to free ourselves from 
the wrong notion, which is the cause of all evil, and 
how to attain the knowledge of the absolute unity 
of the Self. 

It is very important to the student of a philoso- 
phy to know the exact meaning of the principal 
terms used therein. 

Object and Subject ( ), bearing almost 
the same meaning as Jagat and Jtva, are most im- 
portant terms in the Vedanta philosophy, as well as 
in all others. 

The ordinary meaning of the object and subject is 
the Non-Ego and Ego, the object is what is per- 
ceived, and the subject is what perceives. The whole 
world is the object; and ‘ 1 / or the Ego, — the per- 
ceiver, including the body, the senses and all the 
environment in which we live, and determined by 
space, time, and cause, and by birth and death, — is 
the subject. 

But the subject of the Vedanta is quite different. 
According to the VedS.nta the Subject 

means (stTcHT) Atman, the Self (whether Divine or 
human, whether universal or individual), that which 
is (l?w) the invisible perceiver, the real; while 
. ( ) the object means ( Andtman, non- 



137 


self, ( the veil through which the Self looks at the 
universe, ) that which is ( ) the visible — per- 
ceived, unreal, the whole visible universe and the 
body with its organs. The subject is the knower ; 
the object is all the knowable. The subject 
the Self, could not be known as an object (^[^). 
To know it is to be it, to hwiv ourselves is, in the 
Vedanta sense, to he the eternal Self within us, that is 
to say, conceiving ourselves free from Nescience and 
the super-imposed wrong notions and adjuncts. 

Its knowing even in the case of object is its being 
present, i. c., Avhen it is present, then and then only 
can the senses know their objects ; just as when the 
sun shines or is present, it lightens all objects, the 
whole world, and then we can see them. Our true 
Self is ( ) unrelated. Like the sun, it may 

pass through ail — good, bad, and indifferent, and yet 
itself remains as pure and unrelated as before. This 
kind of knowing is the true knowing of the Self, 
( 3TTrJT?rT*T ) the Self-knowledge. 

One knows all objects by his Self, the subject, but 
he cannot know the Self in the same sense. The 
knower cannot know the knower. His knowing the 
knower, is only his being the true knower. In this 
case ( ) the true knower ( SfMT ) is one in 

whom subject and object are one, or, one in whom 
there is no distinction between subject and object, 
between knowing and being known. He is the AIJ 
in All ; the eternal source of all existence. 

One who, destroying his nescience, reaches the 
complete comprehension of the Self which is identic- 
al with the Highest Self, Brahman, becomes 
Brahman. 



138 


This is the irresistible, universal, necessary, and 
exalted conception of the inevitable truth. 

The qualifications for the Vedanta Student. 

In order to qualify himself for the highest know- 
ledge, man must, according to the Ved^ntin doctrine, 
perform disinterested good actions which give 
( ) purity to his ( ) internal organ, 

and must meditate on God, which gives ( ) 

concentration, serenity, to the same. These two 
qualities are essential to properly create in him 
the Brahma-inquisitiveness, e,, the 
desire of knowing Brahman, the only really exis- 
ting Being. 

But very few try to make themselves all they 
might be. Men are 'noble in reason, infinite in fa- 
culty ; in form and in movement express and admi- 
rable.’ A duly prepared and initiated Vedanta 
student feels that he is on the road to higher mental 
powers, and must make the most of his mind. Pro- 
blems, which seem to others beyond the range of 
human thought, receive their sol ution and open the way 
to still further advance for him. It becomes dearer 
to him to agree with the spirit of truth within him- 
self. He subdues his passions, and grows pure and 
steady in order that the sublime teaching may be 
properly understood. He devotes himself to the 
ennobling study of the Vedanta, treating of the one 
Brahman, which is present in all, just as one sun 
reflects upon many pools, and spreads through all 
creation, or just as the one ether does through many 
water-jars. The Brahma-inquisitiveness (siflBlirT^f) 
pre-supposes also, as its antecedents, the four spiritual 



139 


means, viz., the discrimination of what is 

eternal and what is non-eternal; the renun- 

ciation of all desire to enjoy the fruit of one’s actions ; 

six accomplishments, viz., (5W) the 
acquirement of tranquillity, ( ) self-restraint, 
discontinuance of worldly ceremonies, 
patience in suffering, (^:g[T) faith in the 
instructions conveyed by the Vedanta philosophy and 
its instructor attention and concentra- 
tion ; and ( the desire of final release. When 

he is thus duly qualified, knowledge renders him 
worthy to receive the light, which shows that he 
has everything within himself, and he is richer than 
heaven and earth. It enables him to arrive at the 
highest stage of perfection by realising his unity 
with the Divine Being, which is eternal, unalloyed, 
through and through pure bliss itself. This is 

called Atmajadna, the knowledge of 

the Self. 

The Self-knowledge ( STTriTflT?! ). 

From the knowledge of the Self, a duly qualified 
aspirant is to ascend to the knowledge of the Highest 
Self, just as in the more perfect of the sciences we 
ascend, by generalization from particulars to the 
cause, and then reason downward to the effects of 
the same cause. 

The Vedanta considers Man to be made up of 
three component parts of M^yil, and the highest Self, 
viz., ( 1 ) Physical body, ( 2 ) 

) internal organ with the reflection of the 
highest Self, and ( 3 ) ( ) the substrate 

and enlightener, the all-pervading highest Self im- 



140 


manent in the body. The immanent enshrined 
Self lends, like a magnet, animation, consciousness, 
&c., to the physical portion of man, ( the MflyA 
portion); and M^y^’s power of envelopment (sn?- 
) makes him ignorant of his true nature. He 
becomes thus, as it were, blind, entrapped, and en- 
tangled in ignorance, and loses the power of discri- 
mination between right and wrong. He believes 
himself to be doer or agent and (^rlgn') enjoyer, 

and suffers all the consequences that issue therefrom. 
He wrongly imputes to the physical portion in him 
what really belongs to the portion of the highest 
Self, and vice versa. A kind of very intricate knot 
( ) takes place in him. It makes him 
commit errors after errors. The darkness in him 
extends very much. He thinks he knows many 
things, while he is most ignorant of what he is most 
assured of. The bondage and attraction of ( ) 

I-ness and ( JWcfT ) Mine-ness, and the repulsion of 
('n:aT)separateness — otherness, hostility, very curious- 
ly make him restless. He hangs oscillating between 
them. He grows, as it were, giddy, and sees himself 
and everything around him erroneously. He anxiously 
seeks happiness in and from things which have never 
had it. The more he becomes of the world, the less 
he feels near to God and happiness. 

Three Classes in Mankind. 

Mankind may be divided into three main classes:- 
the wild, the worldly, and (9^) 

those desirous of final release. The former is grovel- 
ling in ignorance and misery, and leads not the life of 
a man but the wretched one of an animal, the nature 
of which is only sensual. The worldly class adds 



141 


rational nature to a sensual one. The third is a very 
small class which rises above and combines the 
angelic nature with the two others. Men of this 
class desire to enquire into and know Brahman. 

In the make of man strange extremes are brought 
together. In his mind different natures— divine and 
brutal-are marvellously mixed. He is of kin to the 
beasts by his body, and of kin to God by his spirit. 
He is ‘born but to die, and reasoning but to err.' ‘He 
thinks too little or too much’. Generally, man 
grows very selfish. He thinks and believes that all 
things are made for him, and he not for anyone ; 
and covets to be tyrant of the whole. In his 
self-love and ambition he many a time falls into the 
notion ‘ that vice or virtue there is none at all.’ On 
entering upon life he directs his eyes to whatever 
comes within his sphere, and tries by fair or foul 
means to possess it. He knows no rest. He believes 
whatever he sees to be that which will make him 
happy. First, small things please and seem great 
to him, but his desire extends itself more and more. 
Just as we see a child desii'es and is pleased most 
greatly by a rattle or an apple, and then proceeding 
further on desiring playthings and fine raiment, then 
in youth riches, not great, then greater and greater, 
then women and children. But in none of these 
things does he find that which he goes seeking. 
One desirable stands before another in his eye, in a 
fashion, as it were, pyramidal. The further he goes, 
the desirables appear greater, and this is the reason 
why human desires become wider one after another. 
He is never pleased with these baubles, because he 
finds that with their ‘rosy pleasures kindred griefs 



142 


pursue/ He is ignorant of the truth that the true 
quietness of heart is got by resisting our passions, 
not by obeying them ; that there is no peace in the 
heart which is given to outward things ; that only 
the spiritual and devout hearts can have it. He never 
knows the benefit of self-acquaintance. He is blind 
in relation to himself, and suffers the mischief of 
self-ignorance. 

An educated man conceives an object in life. His 
conception of his own happiness is entirely identical 
with this object. He imagines that by placing his 
happiness on something durable and distant, in 
which some progress might be always making, he 
Avill enjoy a happy life. For some time this seems 
enough to fill up an interesting and animated 
existence. But the time comes when he awakes 
from this as from a dream. He finds himself un- 
susceptible to enjoyment or j)leasurable excitement. 
In this frame of mind it occurs to him to put the 
question directly to himself: “Suppose that all your 
objects in life were realized, would this be a great 
joy and happiness to you ? And an irrepressible 
answer generally is, “No’^ The end ceases to charm ; 
and how could there be any interest in the means ? 
He seems to have nothing left to live for. The 
woful fact remains present to his mind. If lie is 
more thoughtful, the cloud of dejection grows 
thicker and thicker. He in vain seeks relief from 
his books or occupations. He believes, — 'that all 
mental and moral feeling and qualities, whether of 
a good or of a bad kind, are the results of associ- 
ation ; that man loves one thing, and hates another, 
takes pleasure in one sort of action or contem- 



143 


plation, and pain in another sort, through ( ) 
the clinging of pleasurable or painful ideas to these 
things, from the effect of education or of experience. 
His education has perhaps taught him that the 
pleasure of sympathy with human beings, and the 
feelings which make the good of others the object 
of existence, are the greatest and surest sources of 
happiness. But the real desire for the end has 
ceased with the above-mentioned question and the 
answer, and he grows indifferent to the pursuit. 
He cannot enjoy life, and remains miserable and 
helpless. This is the result of mere so-called 
education.’^ 

The phenomena of moral and physical evil on the 
earth, and the arrival of disasters which make no 
discrimination between their victims, are proverbial. 
To the religiously disposed well-to-do class of people 
of optimist conceptions, who enjoy a measure of 
material prosperity, the black side of life remains 
strange and a matter only of hearsay for some time. 
They enjoy the loveliness and variety of external 
nature, the delight of all young creatures, the order 
of the seasons bearing their copious fruit, the vivid 
intelligence and serviceable power of man, who, they 
think, is the divinely appointed recipient of all these 
multitudinous favours. 

But the facts of life are that all things, all forms, 
all living beings, undergo constant changes. liiving 
beings also suffer pain, and man suffers most of all, 
for he suffers both in and by his body and by his 
intelligent part. Men suffer also from one another, 
and perhaps the largest part of human suffering 

1. See J. S. Mill’s Autobiography, Chap. V. 




144 


comes to man from those whom he calls his rela- 
tives. In short, the mass of men have to endure 
the hardships of the brutes, but yet to preserve the 
intelligence of men. 

This makes the suffering world doubly miserable. 
This intelligence shows thoughtful men ^the vastness 
of the agony of earth, the vainness of its joys, 
the mockery of all its best, the anguish of its worst; 

"Since pleasures end in pain, and youth in age, 

And love in loss, and life in hateful death. ” 

'Man has to whirl the round of false delights and 
woes that are not false.’ 

In his Natural Religion, Hume paints the mise- 
ries of life as follows:— 

"The whole earth is cursed and polluted. A per- 
petual war is kindled amongst all living creatures. 
Necessity, hunger, want, stimulate the strong and 
courageous ; fear, anxiety, terror agitate the weak 
and infirm. The first entrance into life gives 
anguish to the new-born infant and to its wretched 
parent ; weakness, impotence, distress, attend each 
stage of that life ; and is at last finished in agony 

and horror The stronger prey upon the weaker 

The weakei*, too, in their turn, often prey 

upon the stronger and vex and molest them 

Man, by combination in society, can master 

all creatures 

" But this very society by which we surmount 

those wild beasts what woe and misery does 

it not occasion ? Man is the greatest enemy of 
man. Oppression, injustice, contempt, contumely, 
violence, sedition, war, calumny, treachery, fraud ; 
by these they mutually torment each other 



145 


“ But though these external insults form a 

frightful catalogue of woes, they are nothing in 
comparison of those which arise within ourselves, 
from the distempered condition of our mind and 
body. How many lie under the lingering torment 

of diseases? The disorders of the mind 

though more secret, are not perhaps less dismal 
and vexatious. Remorse, shame, anguish, rage, 
disappointment, anxiety, fear, dejection, despair, who 
has ever passed through life without cruel inroads 
from these tormentors ? ” 

It is quite true that the things of this world will 
not bear a scrutinizing examination. They are the 
effects of and so must have the nature of the 

cause in them. Ask yourself whether you are happy, 
and you cease to be so. 

If one wants to be really happy and contented he 
must guide himself by the light of such knowledge 
as that of the Vedanta. It teaches us the true na- 
ture of ourselves, and asks us first to cultivate the 
passive susceptibilities and the active capacities and 
to maintain a due balance. 

It also teaches us that we are what we made our- 
selves by our own ( ) Karman ( acts ), we suffer 
what we have done, we reap what we have sown, 
and that now it is our interest to sow good seeds to 
reap good harvests. 

“ New life reaps what the old life did sow ; 

Holding the gain and answering for the loss. 

In each life good begets more good. 

Evil fresh evil” 


The true inward nature of man is known by the 
13 



146 


kind of knowledge he seeks. A desire for knowledge 
is natural to the mind of man. The particular kind 
of knowledge it is fond of discovers its true quality 
and disposition. Little minds are delighted with 
the knowledge of trifles, as in the case of children ; 
worldly minds are pleased with the knowledge of the 
world ; but a pi’operly educated and wise mind pre- 
fers the knowledge of his own Self and of God. 

It is declared by Pythagoras that “ The know- 
ledge of things divine and most honourable, is 
principle, cause, and rule of human felicity.” 

Another philosopher says: — 

“ He who has not even a knowledge of common 
things is a brute among men. He who has an ac- 
curate knowledge of human concerns alone is a man 
among brutes. But he who knows all that can be 
known by intellectual energy is a god among men.’^ 

Self-knowledge is the most important and bene- 
ficial of all. It is a true guide to duty and happi- 
ness, By it, as in a glass, we may survey ourselves, 
and know what manner of persons we are. 

"Know Thyself” 

i. e. Self-knowledge is considered one of the most 
useful and comprehensive precepts in the whole moral 
system of Europe as well as of Asia — ancient and 
modern. It is held in great veneration. Such emi- 
nent names as those of Thales, Chylon, Socrates, 
Plato, Zeno, &c., are connected with it. Pliny says 
it has been consecrated at Delphos in golden letters. 
It was afterwards greatly admired and used by wise 
men, till at length it acquired the authority of a 
divine music, and was supposed to have been given 



147 


originally by Apollo himself; because, Cicero says, 
‘ it hath such a weight of sense and wisdom in it as 
appears too great to be attributed to any man.' 

Self-knowledge is said to be that acquaintance 
with ourselves which shows us what we are, and do, 
and ought to do, in order to our living comfortably 
and usefully here and happily hereafter. The means 
of it is self-examination, the end of it is self govern- 
ment and self-fruition. 

Pope concludes his Essay on Man by these telling 
lines : — 

“ That Virtue only makes our Bliss below ; 

And all our Knowledge is, Ourselves to Know.” 

The wise believe that the knowledge of the Self 
ought to be man’s highest end and aim. Nothing 
is more strange and injurious than negligence of it. 
It is well declared in the Sicldhdnta-Miiktdvali : — 

“ ^ i 

^ li ” li 

‘ That which is the'Self of all things; for the sake 
of which the whole world is ; that ocean of bliss, 
independent of aught else ; — pray declare how this 
Self is to be rejected (neglected) as the aim of man'. 

The knowledge of Self expands our view, and 
eventually leads us to the Higher Pantheism, which 
identifies us with the Highest Self. 

The Higher Pantheism. 

“ The sun, the moon, the stars, the seas, the hills and the 
plains — 

Are not these, O Soul, the Vision of Him who reigns ? 



148 


Is not the Vision He ? tho* He be not that which He 
seems ? 

Dreams are true while they last, and do we not live 
in dreams ? 

Earth, these solid stars, this weight of body and limb, 
Are they not sign and sjmibol of thy division from 
him ? 

Dark is the world to thee : thyself art the reason why ; 
For is He not all but thou, thou hast power to feel 
* I am I * ? 

Glory about thee, without thee; and thou fulfillest 
thy doom 

Making Him broken gleams, and a stifled splendour 
and gloom. 

Speak to Him thou for He hears, and Spirit with 
Spirit can meet — 

Closer is He than breathing, and nearer than hands 
and feet. 

God is law, say the wise ; O Soul, and let us rejoice, 
For if He thunder by law the thunder is yet His voice. 
Law is God, say some : no God at all, says the fool ; 

For all we have power to see is a straight staff bent 
in a pool ; 

And the ear of man cannot hear, and the eye of man 
cannot see ; 

But if we could see and hear, this Vision — were it not 
He ? ” — Tennyson. 

The first step to this knowledge is to examine 
ourselves, and find as far as we can what manner of 
persons we are. 

The Divine and Demoniac (Asuric) Natures. 

In the Bhagvad-GitQr mankind is classified under 
two main heads of Asurisam'pat and Daivisampat. 

In the greater number of men are found what are 
called ( dsuri-sampat, demoniac proper- 



149 


ties or endowments) namely, — Hypocrisy, arrogance 
and conceit, wrath and also harshness and unwisdom... 
( 4 ) Men of Asuric properties know not either right 
energy or right abstinence ; nor purity, nor even 
propriety, nor truth is in them ( 7 ), 'The universe 
is without truth, without moral basis,’ they say, 

‘ without a God ( Is' vara ), brought about by mutual 
union and caused by lust and nothing else’ ( 8 ). 
Holding this view, these ruined selves of small 
Buddhi ( intellect ), of fierce deeds, come forth as 
enemies for the destruction of the world ( 9 ). Sur- 
rendering themselves to insatiable desires, possessed 
with vanity, conceit and arrogance, holding evil 
ideas through delusion, ( they ) engage in action 
with impure resolves ( 10 ). Giving themselves 
over to unmeasured thought whose end is death, 
regarding the gratification of desires as the highest, 
feeling sure that this is all (11 ), held in bondage 
by a hundred ties of expectation, given over to lust 
and anger, they strive to obtain by unlawful means 
hoards of wealth for sensual enjoyments ( 12 ). Be- 
wildered by numerous thoughts, enmeshed in the 
web of delusion, addicted to the gratification of 
desire, they fall downwards (16). These mali- 

cious ones hate me ( the Lord who am ) in the bodies 
of others and in their own ( Chap. XVI. 18 ). 

There is also a very small minority of men in 
whom are found what are called ( Daivi- 

sampat. Divine properties or endowments. They 
are: — Fearlessness, cleanness of life (or purity of 



150 


heart ), steadfastness in the Yoga^ of wisdom, alms- 
giving, self-restraint and sacrifice and study of the 
bistros, austerity and straightforwardness ( 1 ), 
harmlessness, truth, absence of wrath, renunciation, 
peacefulness, absence of crookedness, compassion to 
living beings, uncovetousness, mildness, modesty, 
absence of fickleness ( 2 ), vigour, forgiveness, forti- 
tude, purity, absence of envy and pride ( 3 ).* 

The former class of mankind, trusting only to the 
false shows of sense-perception ( ) vainly 

conceive that they are one with bodies, and that 
the whole assemblage of things from the substrate, 
^ )> to the gross body are the Self ( 

Atman ). 

Some hold that the Self is distinct from the body, 
for the dead body is seen in this world after the 
living self has departed. Others hold that the 
sense-organs are Self; some others that 

the vital breath (sTPir) is Self; others again that 
the common sensory (tr) is Self; others that 
the consciousness is Self ; others that an 

original blank is Self, and the whole world of 

cognitions and cognita ( ) is imagined 

1. 2-50. ‘Yoga’ = skill in action. Mr. K. T. 
'Telang renders it by ‘Devotion in ( all ) actions is wisdom.’ Mr. 
Mfidi&deva S&stri, by ‘ in actions devotion is power,’ i. Devotion 
consisting in the equanimity of mind in success and failure on 
the part of him who is engaged in the performance of his proper 
•duties, while his mind rests on Is^vara, the Lord. — S^ankara 
Bhfts'ya. 

2. See the Sha^vad-OUd, XVI. Mrs. Annie Besant’s translsr 
tion is the ! 



151 


through error; some say the Self has intelligence, 
others say it has not. 

So many and various are the opinions of mankind 
with reference to the Self-hood of man. 

The knowledge of Jiva, Jagat, Paramktman. 


The Vedanta disproves these, and establishes that 
{ ) a special complete knowledge of the 
whole — Jiva, Jagat, Parmdtman, ( the soul, the Uni- 
verse and God ) — is the only means to learn the 
truth. 

The nature of (srflraT) ignorance and (f^) 
such special knowledge is described in the Pancha- 
das'V- as follows: — 

The misapprehension that ( ) this world of 

phenomena is x’eal and attaches to the ( impersonal ) 
Self, must be regarded as (srfIrEIT) Nescience. It 
is destroyed by (f^) knowledge. 

(f^) Knowledge is this: — the phenomenal 
world ( ) is relative to ( ) the personal 

( transmigrating ) sentiency, which is an appearance 
( reflexion ) of the Self ( ) •’ it does not per- 

tain to the Self, the (one real) .substance ( 

This knowledge is obtained through deliberation. 


li 


One should therefore ever ponder these: — 

Emanation, the world of appearance, 
Jiva ) the transmigrating sentiency, and 
( TCHRW PotTwAimA ) the highest Self. When the 


1. See the Pans/tac^'t, Chitra-Dtpa VI. 10-17. 




152 


false notions of the personal sentiency and of the 
world of phenomena are sublated, one's own Self 
( i. e. the highest Self) alone remains behind. ( 12 ) 
The sublation ( ura ) of the first two ( Jagat, 
Jiva ) does not consist in our not being conscious of 
them, but in the certain knowledge of their unreali- 
ty (13); S'lid 'the remaining behind of the 

highest Self’ means the certain knowledge, the 
firm conviction of Its reality ; not the entire forget- 
fulness of the world of experience ( 14 ), (as in the 
state of dreamless sleep or in a fainting fit). 
Such knowledge is called ( ) intuitive 
knowledge ( 16 ). For acquiring this knowledge 
the real nature of Self is examined. Because by this 
true knowledge, one is at once freed from all further 
transmigration, and attains the final beatitude.’ (17). 

In the Chhdndogya Upanishad ( VIII, 7,1 )’ it is 
declared that ‘( eTTciTT ) the Self which is free from 
evil, undecaying, undying, free from sorrow, &c., that 
is what is to be sought after, and must be under- 
stood. One who has sought after this Self and 
understands it, obtains all worlds and all desires.’ 
(See also Br. S. IV, 1,1 ). 

Of what nature the sublation or so-called an- 
nihilation of Jiva- Jagat the apparent world is 2 The 
actual annihilation of this whole existing world, with 
all its animated bodies and all its elementary sub- 
stances, is impossible for any one, and is not meant. 
What is meant is this: — The phenomenal world is 
super-imposed upon Brahman by Nescience, which 

1. The ChhAndogya Upanithad, with S'ankara’s commentary is 
translated into English by Mr. Oang&n&tha Jhft, M. A., F. T. S., 



153 


should be sublated by the knowledge of Brahman, 
such as, ‘ Brahman is one, without a second,’ ‘ It is 
the true, It is the Self.’ (ChMndo. Up. "VI, 2, 1; 
8, 7. ) As soon as Brahman is indicated in this 
way, knowledge arising of itself discards Nescience, 
and this whole world of names and forms, which 
had been hiding Brahman from us, melts away like 

the imagery of a dream ; just as the pointing 

out of the true nature of the rope has for its imme- 
diate result the cognition of the true nature of the 
rope, and the dissolution of the appearance of a 
snake or the like. And what is done once need not 
be done again. ^ 

It may be remarked here once for all that this 
subject being most sublime, difficult, and unfamiliar, 
what is to be said has been, and is, and will be 
repeated in various ways so as to secure intelligibility. 

The Nature of the Individual Soul or Jiva- 

The Vedllnta assrimes, as has been mentioned at 
the outset, that (^) the pei’sonal transmigrating 
sentiency, man, is a combination of the following: — 
( 1 ) Intelligence, Brahman, ( ) as the substrate 
( in Which is surmised ( 2 ) the subtle body 

and ( 3 ) the reflexion of Intelligence 
(f^TS^BIT) upon this subtle body.^ 

Or ( 1 ) ( ) the Self, which is internal to 

(i. €. the witness of) that complex whole body, and 
which shines forth in its own light, { 2 ) ( 

^<01 ) the internal organ with the reflexion of the 

1. See the Brahtna-SiUras, III, 2, 21. 

2. See the Panchada$% Dvaitaviveka, IV., 11. 



154 


Self, and ( 3 ) the body, all these are called ( 
ifN") ‘I’, man, individual soul.^ 

Or, ( ) Jiva, man, is a complex being, a com- 

pound creature, consisting of (t) the Spirit, the im- 
mortal part, ( 2 ) the Soul, the animal or sensitive 
part, ( 3 ) the body, the earthly or mortal part. 

The rays of the primal unity, Atman, are deflected 
by the above (f^) trichotomy. 

Thus the aggregate of man consists of the physical 
part, viz., ( ) the body, sense- 

organs and mind, and ( antin’ ) the spiritual part, the 
Self, whose true nature is existence-intelligence- joy. 
The former is always changing and mortal; the latter 
unchanging and immortal, eternal. The former hides 
the true nature of the latter, whose specific qualities 
become non-apparent by the contact, just as the true 
nature of gold becomes hidden by quick-silver. But 

A 

the true nature of the Atman and the gold becomes 
manifest when they are cleansed by knowledge and 
fire respectively. 

The immortal spiritual part, Atman, is ( ) 

the substratum on which man’s Nescience has super- 
imposed adjuncts, the mortal physical 

part. 2 

This Upddhi is also divided into three bodies and 
three states veiling the Self. By the removal of the 
veil of the Upddhi super-imposed by Avidyd, — Nes- 
cience, the Self is revealed. 

1. The Panchadas'i, Mahav&kyaviveka, V., 7. 

2. Or, we may liken the two constituents of man, — the phy- 
sical one to a harp, and the other to the breeze, ‘ at once the soul 




155 


The Three Bodies and Four States of Man. 

The following brilliant resume from (^ankara’s 
Tattvabodha — 'Awakening to Reality’ — will elucidate 
the above idea more clearly and intelligibly to the 
reader. 

Man is represented as a prismatic trinity, veil- 
ing and looked through by ( STcJnTTrffl ) a primordial 
unity of light — ( 1 ) gross outward body ( 
or )» (2) subtle internal body or soul 

( or ); (3) a being neither body 

nor soul, but absolute self-forgetfulness, called the 
cause-body ( or ), because it is 

the original sin of ignorance of his true nature 
( Self ) which precipitates him from the spirit into 
the life-condition. These thi’ee bodies, existing in the 
waking, dreaming, sleeping states, are all known, 
witnessed, and watched by the spirit (sTTrJTT, Atman) 
which standeth behind and apart from them, in the 
unwinking vigilance of ecstasy or S]:»irit-waking. 

"There are four spheres of existence, one enfold- 
ing the other — (1 ) the inmost sphere of Turiyd, 

in which the individualized spirit lives the ecstatic 
life; (2) the sphere of transition, or Lethe-(g^f^^ 
Sushujpti, in which the spii'it, plunged in the 
ocean of (^njTSl) Ajnnna, or total unconscious- 
ness, and utterly forgetting its real self, under- 
goes a change of gnostic tendency; and from not 
knowing at all, or absolute unconsciousness, emerges 
on the hither side of the Lethean boundary to a 
false or reversed knowledge of things ( ), 
under the influence of an illusive ( ) Prajnd, or 

belief in, and tendency to, knowledge outward from 



156 


itself, in which delusion it thoroughly believes, and 
now endeavours to realize; whereas the true know- 
ledge, which it had in the state of Turiyd, or the 
ecstatic life, was all within itself, in which it intui- 
tively knew and experienced all ( real ) things. And 
from the sphere of Prajtid, or out-knowing, — this 
struggle to reach and recover, outside itself, all that 
it once possessed, within itself, and lost, — to regain 
for the lost intuition an objective perception through 
the senses and understanding, — in which the spirit 
became an intelligence, — it merges into the third 
sphere, which is (3) the sphere of dreams ( 
svapna ), where it believes in a universe of light 
and shade, and where all existence is in the way of 

( STTflra' ) Abhdsa, or phantasm. There it imagines 
itself into the Linga Deha { m ) 

( Psyche ), or subtle, semi-material, ethereal soul... 

From this subtle personification and phantasmal 
sphere, in due time, it progresses into the fourth or 
outermost sphere, (4) where matter and sense are 
triumphant ; where the universe is believed a solid 
reality; where all things exist in the mode of 

( ) Ahdra, or substantial form ; and where 
that which successively forgot itself from spirit into 
absolute unconsciousness, and awoke on this side of 
that boundary of oblivion into an intelligence strug- 
gling outward, and from this outward struggling, 
intelligence imagined itself into a conscious, feeling, 
breathing nervous soul, prepared for further cloth- 
ing, now out- realizes itself from soul into a body... 

“The first or spiritual state was ecstasy ; from 
ecstasy it forgot itself into deep sleep ; from pro- 



157 


found sleep it awoke out of unconsciousness, but 
still within itself, into the internal world of dreams ; 
from dreaming it passed finally into a thoroughly 
waking state, and the outer world of sense." ^ 

It will be evident from this that the primeval 
veil of (arf^Hr) Nescience is at the bottom of all 
false or reversed knowledge, which is the source of 
all the misery and suffering that man undergoes. 

The VedS-nta knowledge ( ) removes 
Nescience, and then the knowledge arises of the true 
nature of the Self as free from all wants, raised above 
the distinctions of caste and creed and outward cir- 
cumstances, transcending transmigratory existence. 

Thus Atman (aTTrtni,), the Self, is a far more 
abstract name than the soul. It has no predicate 
except existence — immortal existence, knowledge and 
bliss. As the sun is distinct from the earth which it 

A 

fills with life, light and warmth, so the Atman,t\iQ 
Self, is distinct from the body which It fills with 
existence, intelligence and happiness. Atman is the 
essence of man and nature as well as of God. When 
it is spoken of in relation to God, It is called Para- 
mdtman, the Highest Self. When the same is 
objectively seen in nature It is called ( ) the 

Universal Self. When subjectively perceived in the 
soul of man. It is called ( sir^FTTcJIT ) the inward or 
Interior Self. It is ( ) Self-evident. 

To borrow poetical language, the soul is different 
from the body, yet closely allied to it. What the 

1. Quoted by G. E. S. Mead, B. A., from “ The Dublin 
University Magazine ” of 1853-54, in his Preface to Select Works 
ofPhtiwm. Bohn’s Philosophical Library.” Page xxv. 

14 



158 


fragrance is to the flower, or what the oil is to the 
oil-seed, or what butter is to the milk, the Self is 
to the body. 

It is a common law of nature that all things 
which participate in anything which is common to 
them all move towards that which is of the same 
kind with themselves, when the hindrance is re- 
moved. Everything which is earthly turns towards 
the earth, all things which are liquid flow together, 
and everything which is of an aerial kind does the 
same. The soul of man is divine, and turns towards 
the Divine. 

Man is an efflux from the divinity ; he has body 
like an animal, but has also divine soul and intelli- 
gence. This is the Self hidden within man, the man 
himself. All the rest is vesture. It is the prime law 
of nature, as just observed, for everything to love 
and return to its source. Man’s soul, from its original 
instinct, verges towards the Self ( God in him ), as its 
centre, and can have no rest and happiness till it be 
fixed on its own centre. Brahman. This alone can 
satisfy the vast capacity of man’s mind, and fill his 
boundless desires. 

The desire for happiness exercises universal domi- 
nion over man. Pleasures are pursued and pains 
are avoided by him. The former are regarded as 
the elements of happiness, and the latter as those of 
misery. He pursues the one as his Summum honum, 
and shuns the other as Summum malum. It is the 
Ved5,nta philosophy which enables its true followers 
to attain to ( ) the supreme good, the 
ultimate end of aU human endeavour, the magnet 
whose power of attraction no human being could 



159 


successfully resist. It is, in fact, what each individual 
has most at heart, the goal which, consciously or 
unconsciously, all are struggling to reach. But the 
thoughtful find that the happiness of the phenomenal 
world, like the mirage of the desert, is visible but 
unreal, because it excites the thirst but never 
quenches it. 

Discriminative Knowledge- 

The vivifying, transforming, and elevating influence 
of the light of the Vedanta philosophy dispels the 
dark veil, and then the bliss shines effulgent. Men 
who become perfectly jJure or simj)lified gain union or 
At-one-ment with the Deity, the Highest Self, the 
ceirtre, the Essence and first principle of all things. 
This union is not the gaining of something new, but 
regaining of what has been lost, and the realization 
of the ever-present Deity. This is what is called in 
the Vedanta the essential identity of the Jimtman, 
the divine in man, with the Parmdtman, the divine in 
the univei'se and the Beyond. But it should be 
remembered that the consummation takes place only 
when ‘ man can cease to become man and becomes 
God; but man cannot be God and man at the same 
time.’ 

One has to pay the highest price for a thing of 
the highest value. The price is commensurate with 
the value. For the highest happiness the price is 
( ) the greatest renunciation, which has been 
one of the four orders ( ) in India for the good 

and learned, the characteristic mark of which is 
( f WM f Vi t Rcq ' ) the pre-eminence of knowledge.^ 

1. See the Brahma-Sdtras III, 4, 47-50. 



160 


It is well-known that Buddha gave up his empire 
as a price for saving the world. He truly says: — 

“I cast away my world to save my world. 

What good gift have my brothers, but it came 

From seareh and strife and loving sacrifice ?” 

So did Christ sacrifice himself to save the world. 

By renunciation, by being selfless, we gain all. 
Carlyle observes: — “So true is it that the Fraction 
of Life can be increased in value not so much by 
increasing yom' Numerator as by lessening your 
Denominator. Nay, unless my Algebra deceive me, 
Unity itself divided by Zero Avill give Infinity. 
Make thy claim of wages a zero, then ; thou hast 
the world under thy feet. Well *did the Wisest 
of our time write : “It is only with renunciation 
( ) that Life, properly speaking, can be said 
to begin.’’ Sartor Resartus p. 132. 

ChMndogya Upanishad. declares (III, 14, 1): — 

According to what man’s thought is so will he 

become The wise, who thinks and knows the Self 

as bodiless within the bodies, as unchanging among 
changing things, as unconnected with or not 

joined to the three bodies, as one to which merit and 
demerit with their consequences and three-fold time 
do not apply, as identical with Brahman and as 
consisting of bliss, attains ) release. He thinks 
and knows Brahman and becomes Brahman. (Br. S. I. 
1,4). The knowledge of Brahman, which 

discards Nescience and effects (^) final release 
terminates in ( ) a perception — intuition — of 

Brahman. (Br. S. II, 1, 4. ) 

Whoever wants to know the true nature of Brah- 



161 


man must first annihilate the appearance of plurali- 
ty that obstructs true knowledge, just as a man 
wishing to ascertain the true nature of some jar or 
similar object placed in a dark room must at first 
remove the darkness. For the apparent world has 
Brahman for its true nature, not vice versa ; there- 
fore, the cognition of Brahman is effected through 
the previous annihilation (sublation) of the apparent 
world of names and forms,’ 

The final release results from ) per- 

fect knowledge. Perfect Icnowledge has the charac- 
teristic mark of uniformity, because it depends on 
accomplished actually existing things ( ) ; 

for whatever thing is permanently of one and the 
same nature is acknowledged to be a true and real 
thing, and knowledge conversant about such is 
called perfect knowledge.^ The knowledge of 
the )Self ( STicTn ) is alone of such perfect nature. 

It is said that philosophy aims at absolute truth, 
which is truth for all intelligence, and from know- 
ing which no intellect is necessarily shut out. The 
absolute truth for all intelligence is unity, the one- 
ness of all things. Because the diversity of things 
is addressed to what is peculiar to each order of 
intellect, their unity can be taken up only by what 
is common to all oi'ders of intellect. Unity is thus 
the object of philosophical pursuit, inasmuch as it 
is the truth for all, the absolutely true. Existence 
and Thought of the Self ( ) is the unity of 
the universe. The thought of the Self consisting of 
Existence-Thought is the highest duty of all sensi- 

1. See the BrahmorSdtras. Ill, 2, 21. 

2. See the Brahma-SiUras II, 1, 11. 



162 


ble men. The knowledge of the Self is the noblest 
source of purification and enlightenment. 

The Vedanta shows a method or a path of transit 
to the domain of the absolute truth. Those who 
ti’avel on it in quest of the truth discover it. The 
first step is to free ourselves from Nescience, 
and then lift ourselves above the vain conceit of 
being one with our body, and advance, rise, to the 
knowledge of the Self, whose nature is unchangeable, 
eternal cognition ( ), pure intelligence. This 
is called ( ) the discriminative knowledge. 

Before the rise of the discriminative knowledge 
the nature of the individual soul, which is ( in 
reality ) pure light, is non-discriminated, as it were, 
from its limiting adjuncts consisting of body, senses, 
mind, sense-objects and feelings, and appears as con- 
sisting of the energies of seeing and so on. Simi- 
larly — to quote an analogous case from ordinary ex- 
perience — the true nature of a pure crystal, 

i. c. its transparency and whiteness, is, before the rise 
of discriminative knowledge ( on the part of the 
observer ), non-discriminated as it were, from any 
limiting adjuncts of red or blue colour; while, as 
soon as through some means of true cognition, dis- 
criminating knowledge has arisen, it is said to have 
now accomplished its tr4ie nature, i. e. transparency 
and whiteness, although in reality it had already 
done so before. Thus the discriminative know- 
ledge, effected by Sruti, on the part of ( ^ ) the 
individual soul which previously is non- 

discriminated, as it were, from its limiting adjuncts, 
is ( according to the scriptural passage under discus- 
sion) the soul's ( ) rising from the body. 



163 


and the fruit of that discriminative knowledge is its 
accomplishment in its true nature, i. e. ( ) the 

comprehension that its nature is ( ) the pure 

Self. Thus the non-embodiedness ( ) and the 

embodiedness ( ) of the Self are due merely 

to discrimination and non-discrimination.^ 

The Vedanta points out such useful ideas on the 
make and nature of man very forcibly, but its main 
object is to help him in removing the suffering 
caused by Nescience (erf^^r) and to save him by 
the means of ( ) the true knowledge of the 

Self of all, which alone gives the highest happiness. 
It enjoins upon him, first, to acquire discri- 

mination or the power of sifting the true and untrue, 
the eternal and non-eternal, right and wrong, good 
and evil, and then to go on nourishing and securing 
good qualities and rooting out bad ones, till he 
arrives at a state of purity and serenity. This 
prepares him to understand the truth, which the 
Vedanta teaches. He learns to retire into himself^ 
and perceives that he is made of the two constituent 
parts, viz; — The physical, — mortal, and the intel- 
lectual or spiritual, — immortal. Through devout 
meditation, he is led to see plainly the two parts 
in himself. He has to relinquish his selfness in the 
physical part, and recognize it in the true Intel- 
lectual part. He has then to identify himself with 
the Self in him which is, in a certain sense, a part, 
as it were, of the Highest Self. He is conducted by 
certain processes till he reaches a point, when the 
truth it teaches becomes self-evident and self-proved. 
Just as the light of the sun is its own evidence of 

1. See the Bmhtna-B'&trai, I, 3, 19. 



164 


light, and at the same time the direct means of our 
knowledge of form and colour, so the light of the 
Veddnta knowledge is so self-luminous as to be the 
evidence of its own truth, Brahman, and a means of 
showing other things in their own nature by remov- 
ing the darkness surrrounding them. 

Truths are Strange. 

It has been rightly observed that the student who 
is desirous to arrive at truth must prepare his mind 
for the reception of it by dismissing all previously 
formed crude notions, and strengthen himself by a 
resolve for the unprejudiced admission of any con- 
clusion reached by logical argument. This intellectual 
liberty to adopt whatever is demonstrated is one 
which all sciences stand in need of. The higher the 
science, the greater the need. It is well said that ‘the 
truths of science are stranger than fictions.’ To the 
ordinary untutored comprehension, the moon is 
greater than the stars, and almost equal to the sun. 
But quite the reverse is the fact to the astronomer. 
Sir John Herschel says: — 

“Almost all its (astronomy’s) conclusions stand in 
open and striking contradiction with those of super- 
ficial and vulgar observation, and with what appears 
to every one, until he has understood and weighed 
the proofs to the contrary, the most positive evidence 
of his senses. Thus, the earth on which he stands, 
and which has served for ages as the unshaken founda- 
tion of the firmest structure is divested by the 

astronomer of its attribute of fixity, and conceived by 
him as turning swiftly on its centre, and at the same 
time moving onwards through space with great ra- 
pidity. The sun and the moon, which appear to un- 



165 


taught eyes round bodies of no very considerable 
size, become enlarged in his imagination into vast 
globes, — the one approaching in magnitude to the 
earth itself, the other immensely surpassing it. 

“The stars properly so called, which to 

ordinary apprehension present only lucid sparks or 
brilliant atoms, are to him suns of various and 
transcendent glory — effulgent centres of life and 

light to myriads of unseen worlds His native 

sphere ( the earth ) he finds in comparision a mere 
point ; so lost — even in the minute system to which 
it belongs— as to be invisible and unsuspected from 
some of the principal and remoter members^.” 

Every word of the above quotation should be 
borne in mind by the student of the Vedanta. 

To the common reader it will seem strange to 
class the earth with the heavenly bodies, and to 
assume any community of nature among things ap- 
parently so different. The earth is dark, the heaven- 
ly bodies are brilliant. But to the astronomer who 
has studied the science that treats of motions, mag- 
nitudes, and everything coimected with the heaven- 
ly bodies, the earth is one of the heavenly bodies 
and is regarded as a principal object of consideration, 
from its proximity and relation to us, who draw from 
it the supply of all our wants. It is the station from 
which we see all the rest. 

Now, to the VedSiiitin, like his earth to the astro- 
nomer, his own Self is heavenly. 

The Vedanta unfolds the fundamental identity of 
the universe with Brahman, an identity to be realized 

1. A Treatise on Astronomy by Sir John Herschel p, 2. 



166 


the true knowledge without which there is not any 
chance of man’s obtaining final release. ‘There is no 
other way to release but knowledge’, says the 
S'vetds'vatara Upanisliad. 

When the individual soul emerges from its 

ignorance, regains its lost knowledge, and returns 
into its true being, the Self, he becomes conscioi\s of 
its loftier origin, of its pristine exaltation over the 
world of sense. 

That all qualities and weaknesses of Jim, the indi- 
vidual soul, are owing to its adjuncts, is demon- 
strated by the Vedanta. The temporal Self, if di- 
vested by true knowledge of its temporal character, 
returns to the divine nature, and is identical with 
the highest Self. J ust as coal is the treasured sun- 
beams or fire-beams, so man is the treasured Brahma- 
beams capable of glowing and brightening now, even 
as before their prisoned light was packed up. The fire 
and knowledge respectively kindles them, smoke 
arises at first, as the fire and knowledge gain strength, 
the nature of the coal is being transformed into the 
nature of fire, and the nature of man is being trans- 
formed into the nature of Brahman. Then there 
remains tranquil brightness. The master-element 
subdues all into itself. Nothing of the blackness is 
left but brightness, and nothing of the man is left 
but the highest Self. 

To understand this most important and highest 
truth, and then to be restored to one’s true nature, 
the preliminary acquirements which it is desirable 
for the student to possess are, pure and independent 
mind, intellectual development by education, moral 
discipline, readiness for the reception of truth, and 



167 


taste for 'poetry, religion, and philosophy.'^ The 
more of these acquirements he brings to the study, 
the easier will be his progress, and the more satis- 
factory his knowledge. 

The Divine in the Human and the Divine in the 
Universe are Identical with the 
Divine Itself. 

Sruti the revealed Scripture, most gra- 

ciously comes to the help of such a student, and 
shows him the way out of Nescience and into the 

1. As said at the out-set, the Vedanta covers Poetry, Religion 
and Philosophy. The Vedanta enjoys such liberty of thought as 
is not allowed to the extremest latitudinarian of the present 
day. And yet it gains authority in harmony with the rights of 
intelligence and the light of free thought. So sublime is it. 

The character of Nature is said to be self-externaliza- 

tion, sunderedness, out-of-itself-ness, and at last its self-develop- 
ment into spirit. Nature is unconscious in the beginning, but 
it rises in ascendent gradation and ends in the disimprisonment 
of spirit from itself, in the form of man ( ). The Vedanta, 

like Poetry, makes the dumb Nature lay open its secrets before, 
and speaks to, it. It ascends to bring light from the eternal 
region, and interprets the Divine knowledge, and power, and 
pleasure, and makes immortal all that is best and most beautiful 
in the universe. The idea is present for perception here and 
Poetry perceives it. 

The Vedanta, like Religion, ( the voice o£ which is poetry) 
exalts inwardly the Nature and Man to the Absolute as the 
all-comprehending, all-reconciling substance of existence, and 
enables Man to know himself as in unity with God. It is well 
known that all religions seek unity of the Divine and the human. 
The idea is present for conception here, and Religion conceives it. 

The abstraction from the form of religious conception is Phi- 
losophy. The Vedanta, like Philosophy, makes the abstraction. 
It is the complete development of thought. It is the result of the 
genius itself of humanity. It is the light of all lights. 



168 


right knowledge. The true Self ( is hidden 

in man, as light in matches, unseen by us, but 
ready to appear, when properly rubbed by one who 
knows how to kindle them. The Vedanta furnishes 
all necessary knowledge on the subject. 

A 

When the oneness of Atman is properly under- 
stood, there remains nothing to be known. In the 
ChMndogya Upanishad ( VI ) the learned and en- 
lightened father teaches his beloved son the highest 
lesson that, *Sat, the entity (sTf^rRTmT^), pure Being, 
pure consciousness, ( ) extremely 
subtle, ( ) the one without a second 
alone exists and is all in all. 

‘That ((Sat) is subtle essence, the root of the 
universe, in that Sat all that exists, all this universe 
its Self. That Sat is ( 

the True, the absolute Reality, that Sat is ( eTTRT ) 
the Self. ( ). “Tat tvam asi*’ i. e. ‘That 

thou art’.^ 

It should be remembered that in this sentence the 
literal meaning is not to be taken. To understand 
it rightly, the conflicting portions should be abandon- 
ed and non-conflicting retained. It indicates the 
identity of the non-conflicting portion, ( ) 
Existence-Intelligence-Bliss. The relation of predi- 
cate and subject between ‘ that ' ( Entity, Intelli- 
gence, the highest Self, distinguished by invisibility ) 
and ‘ thou ’ ( individual inward Self distinguished by 

1, In his Six Systems of Iridmn Philosophy Dr. Max Muller 
says: — “This fearless synthesis, embodied in the simple words 
‘Tat tvam asi\ seems to me the boldest and truest synthesis in 
the whole history of philosophy,” ( p. 161 ) 



169 


visibility ) is a relation constituted by tbe exclusion 
of the difference which there is between them. By 
the omission of the contradictory charactei'istics of 
the Lord and the individual Self, such as ( ) 

omniscience, sinlessness, &c., and ( ) parvi- 

science, sinfulness, &c., respectively, the substrate, 
the Self, alone remains. The unity and identity of the 
universal Lord and the particular Jtva becomes 
appropriately and conclusively established. 

In the BrahmorSutras the same MaMvAhya, 
great saying, is thus expounded: — 

‘Thou art That* teaches that what is denoted by 
the term ‘Thou’ is identical with what is denot- 
ed by ‘That*. Now the latter the 

entity which is free from all qualities is 

denoted by the term ‘That*. What is denoted by 
the term ‘thou’ is ( snqiTTttrT ) the inward Self, which 
is the agent in seeing and hearing, and is apprehend- 
ed ( ) as the inward Self of all the outward 

involucra beginning with the gross body, and finally 
ascertained as of the nature of (%RP«r) intelligence... 

Only ( ) deep-witted persons, in whose 
mind the sense of the words is not obstructed by 
(win^) ignorance, &c., are able to intuite 
the sense of the sentence ‘Thou art That.* 

The intuition of the Self ( ) consists in 

the knowledge, ‘My Self is pure intelligence, free 
from all pain*. F or him who possesses that know- 
ledge there remains nothing else to do ( ), 

i, e., his task is done. 

The non-dual Lord ( the Self) is free from all 

evil qualities.. but it is admitted that before 

15 



true knowledge springs up, the seul is implicated in 
the transmigratory state ( ).^ 

Or in other words, ‘Thou,’ i. e., man’s Self, spiritual 
soul, discriminated from the physical part, art not 
different from ‘That’, Sat, the Real, the Existence, 
the divine essence, which pervades the whole world, 
as salt pervades the sea ; or, ‘thou,’ while Nescience 
is not removed by the true knowledge, didst seem 
to be something by thyself, art, in reality, nothing 
apart from ‘That’, Sat, the True, the Self, the divine 
essence of the universe, Nmra, the Lord. 

This conclusion is arrived at by the method called 
( ), i. c., by close reasoning surrender- 
ing the contradictory portions of ‘That’ and ‘thou,’ 
viz., omniscient, omnipresent, infinite, sinless, &c., of 
‘That’ ( the Lord ), and parviscient, limited, finite, 
and sinful, &c., of ‘thou’ ( man ), and establishing 
the identity of ‘That’, the supreme Self, and ‘thou’, 
the personal Self. This Indication ( ) 

must be thoroughly understood in order to compre- 
hend the purport of the great saying — 'Tat tvam asiJ 

This is a characteristic system of the Vedanta and 
has been lately introduced in Europe and America. 
It is termed “ the System of Identity.” The 
distinction of different Selfs is due to 

limiting adjuncts only, while the unity of all Selfs 
is natural and original. For on the doctrine of 
the non-difference of the individual soul 

(^T^) and the highest Self, the Ved^lnta texts 
insist again and again. 

Hence, i. e., because the non-difference of all Selfs 


1. The Brahma-SHtras IV, 1, 2-3. 


171 


is essential ( their difference ( ^ ) 

due to Nescience only, the individual soul, After hav- 
ing dispelled Nescience by true knowledge, passes 
over into unity ( (^?rr ) with the highest Self. For 
this is indicated by scripture, cp. e. g., (Mund. Up. 
Ill, 2, 9.) '"He who knows that highest Brahman 
becomes even Brahman ; ( Brih. Up. IV, 4.6. ) 

"Being Brahman he goes to Brahman’’.^ 

The relation of the two may be viewed as follows. 
Just as the light of the sun ( sran^T*) and its substra- 
tum, i. e , the sun himself ( ), are not absolute- 

ly different — for they both consist of fire — (light 
) and yet are spoken of as different, so also the 
soul and the highest Self. ( The Br. Sii. Ill, 2, 28 ). 

Thus there is essential oneness of the Divine and 
the human. Adjuncts make extrinsic difference, but 
in reality there is intrinsic oneness. 

If there is but one Infinite God, the individual 
soul also can, in its true essence, be nothing but God. 
If there really existed anything besides. He would 
no longer be Infinite God in the highest sense. 
This same VedAntic metaphor of the sun is employed 
by the religio-philosophical writers and poets of 
almost all countries for establishing the same eternal 
oneness of human and divine nature, the Self of 
the VedAnta. It is summarized as follows: — 

‘They say, the sun is not the sun, unless it shines 
forth j and God is not God unless he shines forth, 
i. e., unless He manifests himself. 

‘All the rays of the sun are of the sun, they can 
never be separated from it, though their oneness with 

1. The Srahma-SHtras III, 2, 25-26. 




172 


the source of light may for a time be obscured by in- 
tervening dart ness All the rays of God^ 

every soul, every son of God, is of God; they cannot 
be separated from God, though their oneness with 
the Divine Source may for a time be obscured by 
self-hood, passion, and sin. 

‘Every ray is different from the other rays ; yet 
there cannot be any substantial difference between 
them. Each soul is different from the other souls ; 
yet there cannot beany substantial difference between 
them. 

'As soon as the intervening darkness is removed,each 
ray is seen to be a part of the sun, and yet apart from 
it and from the other rays. As soon as the interven- 
ing ignorance is removed, each soul knows itself to 
be a part of God, and yet apart from God and from 
the other souls. 

‘No ray is lost, and though it seems to be a ray by 
itself, it remains for ever what it has always been, 
not separated from the light, nor lost in the light, 
but ever present in the sim. No soul is lost, and 
though it seems to be a soul by itself, it remains 
for ever what it always has been, not separated 
from God, nor lost in God, but ever present in God.’^ 

A Cambridge Platonist, Henry More, says : — 

“I came from God, am an immortal ray 
Of God ; O joy ! and back to God shall go.” 

A great German philosopher, Hegel, says : — 

“Positive reconciliation of God and the world 
is only attained at last in the revealed or Christian 

1. See Dr. Max Muller’s Theosophy or Psychological BeKgion, 
p. 63940. 



173 


religion, which, in the pereon of Christ, contemplates 
the God-Man, the realized unity of the Divine and 
the human.” 

Now the same Reality, which pervades individual 
souls, pervades also the whole phenomenal Universe. 
That Reality or True is the one only with- 
out a second, though It seems, like substance, to 
be distributed among countless bodies which have 
their several qualities, natures and individuals, just 
as, to borrow an idea of an European thinker, the 
light of the sun is one, though it is intercepted by 
walls, mountains and other things. Or, as by one 
light we see, one air we breathe, on one earth we 
live, so by the one Real we exist. 

‘In the beginning there can have been but One, as 
there will be but One in the end, — whether we call 

it Atman or Brahman’. “The mind is urged to ask 
for one cause of many effects ; then for the cause of 
that ; and again the cause, diving still into the pro- 
found, self-assured that it shall arrive at an absolute 
and sufficient one, — a one that shall be all. “In the 
midst of the sun is the light, in the midst of the 
light is truth, and in the midst of truth is the impe- 
rishable Being”, say the Vedas. All philosophy, of 
east and west, has the same centripetence. Urged 
by an opposite necessity, the mind returns from 
the One to that which is not one, but other or 
many; from cause to effect; and affirms the 
necessary existence of variety, the self-existence of 
both, as each is involved in the other. These strict- 
ly blended elements it is the problem of thought to 
separate and to reconcile. Their existence is mu- 



3174 


tually contradictory and exclusive ; and each so fast 
slides into the other that we can never say what is 
one and what it is not.”^ 

As stated above, man is composed of two parts — 
one ever-changing, phenomenal, material, mortal 
part, and the other never-changing, noumenal, 
spiritual, immortal part. 

While his Nescience ( ) is not removed he 

identifies himself with the former. When the veil 
of his nescience is destroyed, the light comes out and 
he finds that his individual soul, his real self ( 

) is the spiritual part in him, which is one and 
the same with the highest self, Brahman. 

Similarly, the whole universe has two parts ; — 
material visible, and spiritual invisible. The material 
part is phenomenal, always changing. The spiritual 
invisible part is Is' vara, the Lord, the Demiurgus 
( the active personal God of other religions ) con- 
ditioned by the universe penetrating and 

pervading the whole universe to its utmost circum- 
ference. The Lord is one and the same with the 
Highest Self which is immanent in all individual souls 
and the Universe, and everywhere beyond them both. 

The VedS,nta concludes with inexorable consistency 
and exclaims that these three Selfs — the Self of 
man, the Self of the Universe, and the Highest Self- 
ai’e one and identical. This may at first sight seem 
irreverent and mere twaddle to those who have not 
properly understood its deeper meaning, but it will 
be found in full harmony with the highest doctrines 
of many philosophies of the world, and wilh the most 

1. "EnaBtaoxi’a Com^tte Works, Plato. Yol. I;p. 292. 




175 


intimate convictions of the learned and truly devoted 
persons of all great religions. It is the same esoteric 
doctrine which runs through their religious books, 
expressed in different words. 

In quoting below some parallel passages from 
European thinkers, to show that the fundamental 
ideas of the East and of the West are in full harmony 
with each other, it may be repeated that the com- 
parison and resulting similarity are of the highest 
interest and importance. Where both agree, the 
presumption is that their conclusions are correct, 
no less than in a case where two calculators working 
by different methods arrive at the same result. 

The Ved^ntin says: — ‘Thou art That,* i. e., 
the Self of God and man is the same. Christ says: — 
“Thou, Father, art in me, and I in Thee, that they 

( the men ) may also be one in us. — ’* “that they 

may be one even as we are one. I in them and thou 
in me, that they may be made perfect in one.*’ 
(St. John XVII, 21, 23). St. Paul says that; — “For in 
him ( God ) we live, and move, and have our being.” 
(Acts XVII, 28 ). 

In many a prayer the body is spoken of 
( sftgr; ^ ^ ^^0 as the temple of 
God and the dweller therein, as God. 

In the Epistle to the Corinthians, ( 1. 3-16 ) it is 
said: — “Know ye not that ye are the temple of 
God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you ?” 

The Mohammedan religion has the same idea in 
the remarkable phrase (.4nctIa/iaA;-srif^^q5) ‘I am He.’ 

Expressions may vary, but the underlying views 
are the same. 



176 


^Thou art That’ is in one sense nothing but 
to surrender ourselves entirely to God, deadening, 
the love of self; to be so completely devoted as 
to be in God and of God ; to bring ourselves back 
to our Source, and our Home; to discover our mis- 
take and restore ourselves to our nature — our true 
Self-hood in God; to make God our all in all. 
Is not this the highest possible devotion to God ? 
Is it not the greatest offering we can make to our 
God, not only of our property and heart, but also of 
ourselves ? How could our life be more truly con- 
secrated ? Is it not the truest indication of our sincere 
love of God ? Emerson says : — ‘ The raptures of 
prayer and ecstacy of devotion lose all being in 
one Being.’ 

A Christian describes in a poem the union of the 
soul or Self with God as the essential feature of 
Christianity, 

"Dost thou know what Christianity is ? I shall tell it thee. 

It digs up thy own Ego, and carries thee to God. 

Thy soul is a monastery, wherein dwells oneness. 

Thou art Jerusalem, where the Eternal is enthroned ; 

The Holy Spirit works this miracle, for know that 
God’s being 

Rests in Holy Spirit as in His own spirit. 

The spirit of God gives to thy spirit the fire of the spirit, 

He moves in thy spirit beneath a thin veil ; 

If thou art delivered by the Spirit from manhood, 

Thou hast found eternal rest in the sanctuary of God ; 

He who has directed himself so that all passions are 
silent 

Will surely, like Jesus, ascend to heaven.”! 

1. Quoted by Dr. Max Muller, Tlmtofhy, p. 343. 




177 


A Mohammedan poet, Jdmi, prays to God in these 
words: — 

“Thou lurkest under all the forms of thought, 

Under the form of all created things ; 

Look where I may, still nothing I discern 
But Thee throughout this universe, wherein 
Thyself Thou dost reflect, and through those eyes 
Of him whom Man Thou madest, scrutinise.” 

Thus among the Mohammedans almost the same 
idea is held by the Sufis. ‘ They believe that the souls 
of men differ infinitely in degree, but not at all in 
hind, from the divine spirit of which they are 
particles, and in which they will ultimately be 
absorbed.'^ 

It is declared in the Arabic work, the Mesnavi 
by Meul^nfi, Jalflluddin Rurni, Book I., that 'man’s 
soul, like the reed flute, ever sighs at its separation 
from the Divine source from which it sprang. This 
is the key-note of the mystic philosophy. God is 
everywhere, and everything is God; God is only 
the legitimate object of man’s love 'and aspiration, 
bht the veil of matter and of sense prevents the 
union of the two.’ 

The same idea is put in verse thus: — 

“Nature’s great secret let me now rehearse— 

Long have I pondered over the wondrous tale 
How Love immortal fills the universe, 

Tarrying till mortals shall His presence hail ; 

But man, alas 1 hath interposed a veil, 

And Love behind the lover’s self doth hide. 

Shall Love’s great kindness prove of none avail ? 

When will ye cast the veil of sense aside. 

Content in finding Love to lose all else beside ?” 

1. See Sir William Jones’ Worhs, 1807, Vol IV, p. 212. 




178 


On realising the truth of the ‘ Thou art That ’ the 
qualified aspirant further realises that, ( ) 
* I am Brahman.* When this stage is reached 
through proper true self-knowledge he is free from 
all ( ) adjuncts, limitations, fetters, encum- 
brances, conditions. He is no more the body, nor the 
senses, nor the mind, but he is what he always has 
been, the True, the Real, the Self, whose nature is 
pure Existence, Intelligence, and Bliss. He now 
clearly sees that his true Self was hidden for a 
time by the Nescience, as the true nature of diamond 
or gold is hidden and its specific qualities become 
non-apparent, until it is cleaned by proper cutting 
or acid. 

As soon as the complete insight ( ) re- 

moves the impurities, he is again what he has been, 
and win remain so eternally. 

Or, to put this in another way, the enlightened 
Ved^ntin sees that his heart and head received the 
pure light from the highest lessons and became so 
luminous as to remove the Nescience ( ) and 

to illuminate the true nature of all the knowable ; 
and that he has regained his identity with the 
Highest Self. 

S'ankara’s Prayer. 

The Relation of Man with his Qod. 

The relation of man with his God, the perception 
and definition of which is declared by high authori- 
ties to be the purpose of true religion, is best describ- 
ed in the following prayer to God of (^ankara, to 
whom while rising, the Highest, as it were, has 
descended, and revealed Itself, and who raises the 



179 


lowest who conscientiously endeavour to mount up, 
and reveals It in turn to such worthies. It will also 
show in what noblest sense and deepest essence, the 
divine soul and God, the individual Self and the 
Highest Self, are regarded as one and the same. He 
prays: — 

3 i 

^ II” 

‘ ( While ) regarding my body as myself, I am Thy 
servant ; ( while ) regarding my individual soul as 
myself, I am an atom, scintillation, ray, reflection 
of Thine ; ( but when ) regarding my ( interior ) Self 
as myself, I am the very Thou.’ 

The Vedanta proves by unimpeachable and unde- 
niable evidence, incontrovertible reasoning result- 
ing in immediate presentation or intuitional 
knowledge ( si^n^snTTJT ) and conviction, that the 
Three Selfs — the individual Self, the universal Self, 
and the highest Self — are one and the same. The 
seeming difterence between them is simply caused by 
the Nescience. The right knowledge destroys it by 
the conception of absolute Unity, arising from the 
complete comprehension of ‘Thou art That/ 

( ) 'AH this Universe is veriJy Brah- 
man ; ( ) Brahman is Sachchiddnanda, 

that is, on surrendering the contradictory portions— 
phenomenal and finite — in the soul and in the uni- 
verse, all the Eeal that remains behind is identical 
with Brahman, the highest Self, just as three spaces 
—the space in a small jar, the space in a very large 
hall, and the whole endless space outside them— r. 
are, on surrendering or removing from our mind 



180 


the notions of the jar and the hall, not different but 
one and the same. 

The touch of Vedanta makes the whole world kin 
in the highest sense. The Ved&ntin thus sees not 
only his Self in the Highest Self, but also sees all as 
the Highest Self. He always sees one Reality be- 
hind the unreal. For the glory of his ecstatic ex- 
perience and highest rapturous happiness human 
language has no adequate expression. It is beyond 
the power of words to express and beyond the power 
of all thoughts of any one else to conceive. It is 
simply unspeakable. 

There is something grand in the idea of the Unity 
of all being. A knowledge of this noble idea leads 
us first to study man, to know man, and with all 
his weaknesses and follies, to learn to love man, 
which is one of the highest aims of good men. It 
also teaches us, like chemistry, how to extract what 
is excellent in man, and to let fall what is impure 
and useless. 

“There is a soul of goodness in things evil 
If one had power to distil it out” — Shakespeara 

There is no transcendental thought which is not 
called extravagant and absurd in its previous stage ; 
but what may seem most absurd in the limited ho- 
rizon of our so-called common-sense-wisdom, is 
sometimes, like a paradox, true in fact. Who, by the 
mere help of his common sense, can believe that 
common charcoal, divested of all its impurities, is, 
in fact, nothing but what, in its most simple state, 
makes the diamond !— But no truth is more plain 
to the experimenting chemist than this. 



181 


The analogy derived from the transformation of 
insects is beantifuUy applicable in the case of how 
a mortal human Self can become the immcwtal divine 
Highest Self, Brahman. The three states of the 
caterpillar, larva, and butterfly have been applied to 
the human being — its ignorant state, its initiated 
state, and its enlightened state or final release. If a 
sordid and crawling worm — an inhabitant of the dark 
and foetid dung-hill — entirely changes its form, rises 
into the air, and enjoys the sun beams, what wonder 
or impossibility is there for a man, who, living in 
good society, purifies himself and pursues true know- 
ledge, to rise into a state from which he has fallen, 
and recover his own source, the highest Self, Brah- 
man ? 

Some more instances may be given to illustrate 
how in Nature the best things come out of 
the lowest or meanest. Moral observers say: — Out 
of poverty grows virtue; out of suffering grows 
righteousness ; out of adversity grows the develop- 
ment of character ; out of bitter herbs the healing 
of maladies ; the fairest lotus comes up from the 
most forbidding ooze at the bottom of the lake ; 
the most brilliant and valuable diamonds are formed 
from purified carbons ; sapphire out of purified clay ; 
luscious fruit grows out of manure ; and to crown all, 
out of man, duly purified, comes or is unveiled 
Nescience-hidden God, Brahman. 

"I held it truth, with him who sings 

To one clear harp in diverse tones, 

That men may rise on stepping-stones 
Of their dead selves to higher things.” 

Tennyson. In Memmam, I 


16 



182 


The following striking passage, which appropria- 
tely illustrates a parallel idea in science, will, it is 
hoped, convince the reader of the truth of the above 
transcendental principle. It is confirmatory testi- 
mony, all the more valuable, considering the source 
from which it comes. 

"Where the untrained eye will see nothing but 
mire and dirt. Science ( S'dstra ) will often reveal 
exquisite possibilities. The mud we tread under our 
feet in the street is a grimy mixture of clay and 
sand, soot and water. Separate the sand, however, 
as Kuskin observes — let the atoms arrange them- 
selves in peace according to their nature — and 
you have the opal. Separate the clay, and it 
becomes a white earth, fit for the finest porcelain ; 
or, if it still further purifies itself, you have a 
sapphire. Take the soot, and if properly treated, 
it will give you a diamond. While, lastly, the 
water purified and distilled, will become a dew- 
drop, or crystalize into a lovely star."’^ 

What is said above of the dirty mixture is even 
truer of ( ) the mixture of 
soul ( the divine spirit ) and body, the Self and 
non-self. 

The reader will see that by extending a little the 
above illustrations, the truth of the great phrase 
( ) ‘Thou art That’ will be plain. 

The wise consider it to be the noblest object of their 
life to seek for and find within themselves the Divine 
— ^pure and simple — which they find everywhere 

1. Bnskis quoted by Sir John Lubbock iu his Pleasures of 
Li/e, Part I. Chap. IX, on Science, p. 165. 



183 


without. This may sound curious to the lay mind; 
nevertheless, it is true. Here may be added a parallel 
idea from Goethe, which also confirms what has 
been brought forward in the above paragraphs: — 

" When a great idea enters the world as a Gospel, 
it becomes an offence to the multitude, which stag- 
nates in pedantry ; and to those who have much 
learning but little depth, it is folly, 

“ Every idea appears at first as a strange visitor, 
and when it begins to be realised, it is hardly dis- 
tinguishable from phantasy and phantastery. 

“ This it is that has been called, in a good and in 
a bad sense, ideology ; and this is why the ideologist 
is so repugnant to the hard-working, practical man 
of every day, 

"You may recognise the utility of an idea, and 
yet not quite understand how to make a perfect use 
of'it, 

" Credo Deum ! That is a fine, a worthy thing to 
say ; but to recognise God, where and as he reveals 
himself, is the only true bliss on earth, 

“ Kepler said : ' My wish is that I may perceive 
the God whom I find everywhere in the external 
world, in like manner also within and inside me.’ 
The good man was not aw^are that in that very 
moment the divine in him stood in the closest con- 
nection with the divine in the Universe.”^ 

“That God, which ever lives and loves, 

One God, one law, one element. 

And one far-off divine event, 

■ To which the whole creation moves.” 

Tennyson, — ^In MemoTiam. CXXXI, 

1, The Maxims and Bejlections of Goethe — translated by 
Bailey Saunders, pp. 135-6, 



184 


The position, in short, is simply this: — Of man, 
divested of all his impurities by undergoing parti- 
ciilar processes, only the Self remains* and this Self 
is identical with the Highest Self, Brahman. This 
is what is meant by * Thou ax*t That/ 

But the Nescience has veiled it. To all who are 
under the influence of Nescience the Vedanta points 
out, as a specimen of the promised supreme happi* 
ness to be derived from returning to the Highest 
Self, the following fact daily experienced by all:— • 
When one is in sound ■ dreamless sleep ( ), he 
does not experience his bodily or mental miseries, 
however insufferable they may be, and feels freed 
from them and finds rest and happiness, for the 
sound sleep gives him a faint reflection of the real 
happiness of the Self. This dreamless sleep, where 
there remains Nescience ( ) only, is a transient 

union with the one and only Self that is pure happi- 
ness and untouched with miseries, beyond the 
duality of subject and object, and beyond the plural- 
ity of things of experience. It is a state in which 
for the sleeper, all differences are merged, and the 
world has disappeared. His very personality has 
nearly passed back into the impersonality of the 
true Self. 

This absence of miseries and the feeling of rest 
and faint reflection of happiness are caused, because 
in that state he goes only near to his Self ivith the 
screen of ignorance on. ( This position is establish- 
ed after weighing other views accounting for it ). 

How intense, the Ved^lnta asks us to conclude, 
must then be the perfect bliss of him who, divested 
of his veil of ignorance by knowledge, returns en- 



185 


lightened to the Highest Self, as it were, face to 
face, and becomes reunited 1 He cannot but experience 
the perfect rest and supreme happiness inherent in 
Him. The tendency of everything in the Universe, 
to return to its ^rst cause to find rest, is well-known 
in these days. We cannot have rest and happiness 
till we return to our first cause, the Highest Self, 
and are merged in Him. 

Ignorance prevents us from doing so. It must 
be removed first by the light of knowledge ; and 
then by the way of one-pointedness or concentration 
( ) on the Highest Self, man becomes 
able to return to his Self and recover ultimately his 
true Self in the Highest Self, It is affirmed that 
at some stage of his meditation («tr) he 
clearly perceives the essence of which he consists. 
It gives him a new sense, and complete content- 
ment, lifts him up above the physical part, and 
makes him feel the omnipresence of a higher Power. 
He then experiences that there rejnains only 
the subjective Self ( and the Highest Self 
( and passes his allotted day ‘with in- 
ward glory crowned " believing that the highest end 
of man, who has ‘the likest God within his soul,’ 
can only be likeness with God, which can be reached 
by the true knowledge. 

The Eye of knowledg'e. 

The true knowledge leads to the highest beati- 
tude, which is the highest perfection of human 
nature. What distinguishes man from all other 
creatures is his desire to know God — ( ) 

inquiry into Brahman-which is the highest end and 



186 


the real beatitude of man. The knowledge of God 
{s^nSTR) is of three degrees: — (1) a 

natural knowledge of God, which is common to all 
human beings, ( 2 ) ( ) a knowledge of God, 

demonstrated by the S'dstra ( Scripture ), ( 3 ) ( 

) an immediate knowledge of God by intuition. 

I\Ian is endowed with a three-fold eye ( ),-i. e., 
intellect, ( 1 ) the eye of the flesh (^^^),(2)the 
eye of reason ( ), and ( 3 ) the eye of intui- 
tion ( By the first, man sees the 
external world ; by the second, he sees the ideal or 
spiritual world ; and by the third, he sees the 
highest Self within himself and everywhere, and 
derives the highest and fullest happiness from this 
intuitional knowledge or immediate intuition of the 
Infinite, Brahman. It is ordained that: — 


ag rT g.f4^r^ g[ JT%: II 




II II 


Man cannot see the true until his eye of know- 
ledge (^TPIFI^) is opened. An unintelligent — unthink- 
ing — man ( STS' ) believes his body to be himself ; 
an intelligent man ( f^g[RC.) sees that he cannot be the 
body which is no better than dust, and is incessantly 
changing and transient. He sees that there is some- 
thing lasting in the body, for which he cares more. 
It is the ' I.’ He calls it his soul, and the body is 
then its garment. He further finds that the I, the 
soul, throughout remains constant and the same, 
while the body undergoes various changes. If he 
knows something of philosophy he speaks about his 
Ego, but he seldom asks himself what this Ego is, 



187 


what it can be, and what it can not be ; what lies 
behind it, what is its real substance. He says that 
he has a soul, but who or what it is that has a soul, 
he never thinks of. He speaks of I and of I my- 
self, but who and what that Self is, which he calls 
myself, and who the my is to whom that self be- 
longs, is but seldom thought of. He I’egards his 
body and his soul to be himself. All these problems 
are solved by the knowledge-eye ( In the 

Chhdndogyopanishud Praj^pati declares: — “That the 
I ( ), the soul, can become free by knowledge 
( ) only, by properly knowing itself as free from 
the body and all other adjuncts 

A discriminating learned personage 

knows the highest Self to be himself. “The 
serene Being, Jiva, (having been awakened 
to its reality by the knowledge that ‘ thou art not of 
the body or of the senses, thou art That — Sat’ ) 
rising above this body (i. e., recognising its own true 
nature as diiferent from the body, renouncing the 
notion of the body being his Self), and having 
reached the highest Light, appears in its own form 
( )• That is the highest person.^'’ 


It does not require death to free the soul from 
the body. Knowledge would effect that liberation, 
and leave the soul even in this life a mere spectator 
of its bodily abode, of its bodily joys and 
sufferings, and of the decay and death of the body. 
They concern his body only or his bodily self, his 
Ego. The knowledge brings him perfect serenity. 


1. See the Chhdnd, Up. VIII. 12, 3. 



188 


He duly knows himself to be the highest Self, 
and therefore is the highest Self. 

Thought may be arranged into three kinds: — ( 1 ) 
instinctive or unconscious, ( 2 ) conscious, ( 3 ) super- 
conscious. The unconscious thought is lower, and 
super-conscious thought is higher, than conscious 
thought. The first is common to man and brute, and 
is, therefore, called animal. Pas' avajn^na 
The second belongs to man, and distinguishes him 
from brutes, and is, therefore, called rational, Mdna- 
vajndna ( ). The third, super-conscious, is 

called the true knowledge, Yathdrthajndna ( ?T«JT5|- 
^TR). It could only be developed in the mind of 
one who has made its faculty higher by pui'ifying and 
illumining it by profound meditation or perfect con- 
centration ( on the knowledge 
of God, Brahman. This super-conscious thought or 
knowledge enables the enlightened to sec truths 
beyond the reach of common reason. 

The highest Vedanta truth — to discern the identi- 
ty of all, — the souls, the whole universe, and Brah- 
man — is realized in this super-conscious state 
CR, ), where all difference (^) is lost in 

the knowledge of non-difference This 

is not only the brotherhood of men and the Father- 
hood of God, but the self-hood in the best and 
widest sense of men, and the Brahma-hood of all. 

To arrive at this super-conscious knowledge one 
has to change his point of view. 

1. The same is called ‘Ecstacy’ by Plotinus, and intellectual 
Intuition* by Schelling. It was held to be the endowment only 
of a few of the privileged ; it was the faculty of philosophising. 

See Lewes* Biog, Hist, of Phil^ p. 603. 




189 


Seeing that the highest aim of man is the removal 
of suffering which is caused by Nescience 
iRl) and the attainment of the highest happiness 
which is produced by the right knowledge ( 
arfe), the VedS,nta asks us, for the above object, to 
arrange the universe into the two usual principal 
parts: — body and soul, or, the gross phenomenal 
and inert material part (sT?), and the Divine 
Real ( ) behind the phenomenal and material 
part, and shows us how to see the inner Divine 
Real everywhere. The initiated student has thus 
to transfer his mind from the phenomenal world, 
which is full of miseries, to the Divine Reality 
which is full of happiness. He then comprehends 
the truth of the great phrases ( ), such as, 

all this is verily Brahman lam 

Brahman ST^TT^). He feels the presence of 
the immanent God everywhere and in himself as the 
realisation resulting from ( ) 'Thou art That’. 

He is all happiness and perfection. His highest aim of 
knowing Brahman everywhere has been reached. This 
restrains him from committing, before the eyes of 
God, seen by him everywhere, what he is ashamed 
to commit before the eyes of men. All his move- 
ments in life are regulated and created in this 
constant sense of the presence of the same supreme 
Self in Whom we live, and move, and have our being. 
While he is destined to live he devotes himself to the 
performance of his essential duty, caring nothing for 
the fruit of his action. In fact he, remaining untouch- 
ed and tmdisturbed, acts as an instrument in the 
hands of, or as a channel for the working of, the 



190 


Lord of the creation, and surrenders the fruit to Him 
as a loving offering. He desires not what does not 
come to him, nor does he reject what has come to 
him unasked. 

The Liberated but still Living. Jivanmukta 

Such a rare personage is called a Jivanmukta 
( ), i. e., ‘liberated but still living.’ It is he 

who, by knowing the impartite Brahman ( 

5^) which is his own essence ( ), — a result 
brought about by the removal of the Ignorance 
( ST^TR ) enveloping It, — ^perceives It ( Brahman ) 
clearly as the Impartite and his own essence ; and, 
in consequence of the removal of ignorance, and its 
effects, such as accumulated works 
doubt, and error, abides in Brahman ( ), e., 

remains intent on Brahman, free from all fetters. 
Humility (sTOrf^jR), the absence of enmity 
?.!ld other good qualities ( ) cling to him as 
ornaments, or exist in him without an effort”.’ 

He may be an Emperor like R^ma, or an humble 
ascetic like (^ukadeva ; he is the highest of all in the 
world. Man should be estimated according to what 
he is and not according to what he has. 

“Pigmies are pigmies still, though placed on the Alps; 

And pyramids are pyramids in vales. ” 

Although all men are eligible for the exalted 
position of Jivanmukti, just as in a Republican 
State any and all are eligible for the President- 
ship, but very very few endeavour conscientiously 

1. See Sad&nanda’s Veddntasdra, khandas 34-35. It is 
translated into English by Col. O. A. Jacob. 




191 


and perseveringly to qualify themselves to become 
what they can be in the Republic of higher 
knowledge. 

Though such characters advancing in the highest 
and best directions, are very rare but still their bea- 
conlike example remains an enduring and encouraging 
monument of human accomplishment. The body 
— the material tenement — of the best and greatest 
man dies, but his thoughts, words, and deeds sur- 
vive and leave an indelible stamp upon his race, 
moulding the thoughts and the will, and lifting up, 
illuminating, and hallowing those coming within its 
sphere. He thus leaves, in his example, the most glori- 
ous of legacies to mankind, and fills their minds with 
all that is most worthy and noble in life. Common 
clay becomes aromatic earth when roses are planted 
in it. Good makes good. This is a very just obser- 
vation. 

The Jivanmuhta lives a life of self- 

consecration and righteousness, and humanitarian- 
ism ( ), whose sympathies are for the 
benefit of all others, and are not bounded by 
any motive of interest. He works lasting good to 
all. He lives and reigns in the hearts of the good 
even after his ( ) emancipation from his 
adjuncts and his return to Brahman, which Muhti is 
undifferenced existence, undifferenced intelligence, 
and undifferenced beatitude, the consummation of 
BraJmavidyd the knowledge of Brahman. 

The superiority of the Jivanmvkta is of the highest 
kind, and leads him to march in thought on the 
outside margin of the crowd, watching them, sym- 



192 


pathising with them, and hoping for them, but apart. 
His business becomes to modify the wills, without 
ever commanding the acts of men, and thus to 
preserve his characteristic universality. 

The example set by the Jivanmukta exerts a 
commanding influence on our life, though we may 
be quite unconscious thereof. To be cognizant of 
one awakened, enlightened, steadfast, and stainless 
soul, is to have heaven’s light as our guide in dark- 
ness, encouragement in difficulty, and a secret in- 
centive to the best thought and action. Though 
silent and apart, it is the witness of what is great 
and noble, and our life is always seeking to rise 
within its sphere ; while by a secret transference— 
for such souls are not retentive of their own good- 
ness— our standards of thinking and living are 
maintained at their highest level, like water fed by 
a distant spring. 

A poet truly addresses such a personage thus:— 
“With a high and holy purpose 
Doing all thou hast to do ; 

Seeking ever man’s upraising 
With the highest end in view. 

Heights attained, revealing higher 
Onward, upward, ever press. ” 

One who has reached the true knowledge through 
discrimination of the Self and the non-self, ( a rT ti TI - 
) sees that the embodiedness of Self is 
( not real but ) caused by wrong conception, and that 
the Self is free from his body even while still he is 
alive. He has comprehended Brahman to be the 



193 


Self, and therefore does not belong to this .transmi- 
gratory world ( ) as he did before.^ The 
Brihaddranyaka Up, ( IV, 4, 7 ) declares : — ‘ He is 
without desire ( ), free from desire ( ), 

whose desires have been fulfilled ( ), whose 

desire is the Self ( ), his vital spirits (srr>T) 

do not emigrate; being Brahman b® be- 

comes Brahman ( STflT'^flT ).’ Thus he feels himself 
as everything, so lie has no desire for anything, he 
has whatever can be had ; and regarding all as him- 
self, he will not injure any one, for no one injures 
himself. 

The life-liberated, Jivamnulcta, seems to act and 
enjoy, but he is conscious all the time that it is not 
his Self but his body, senses, &c., which do so. This 
is the result of the true knowledge. It gives him 
complete freedom and the highest bliss, and a 
kind of divine self-recollection. Everything else 
remains as it is. He believes that it is quite possible 
to take part, like R4ma, Janaka, Orishna, &c,, in the 
practical work of life and yet to maintain 

a perfect tranquillity of mind within 
enjoying the divine Self-recollection. Rdma and 
many others took a prominent and active part in 
the affairs of the State, as rulers. They knew their 
Self to be the highest Self, and therefore tvere 
the highest Self. Though they moved about among 
the pleasant sights of the world they did not mind 
them, as they concerned their body only, which was 
not their Self. 

The Jivanmukta’s is a noble and sublime life. He 

1. See the Brahma-StUras, I, 1,4, 




194 


lives surrounded by every object, and yet is absolutely 
indiflferent to all. He moves through riches or 
poverty, through pleasure or pain, with equal con- 
tentment and serenity. The deepest joy derived 
from the true knowledge suflfuses the whole of his 
nature. 

" Philosophy is,” says Hegel, precisely the 
doctrine which is to free man from innumerable 
finite aims and ends, and to make him so indifferent 
to them that it is really all the same whether such 
things exist or not.” 

The true Ved4ntin^s religious knowledge is a reali- 
sation, not talk, nor doctrines, nor theories. It is 
being and becoming, not hearing and acknowledg- 
ing. 

Dr. Max Muller wisely and considerately observes:— 
“After lifting the Self above body and soul, after 
uniting heaven and earth, God and man. Brahman 
and Atman, these Vedanta philosophers have destroy- 
ed nothing in the life of the phenomenal beings who 
have to act and to fulfil their duties in this 
phenomenal world. On the contrary, they have 
shown that there can be nothing phenomenal with- 
out something that is real, and that goodness and 
virtue, faith and works, are necessary as a preparation, 
nay as a sine qua non, for the attainment of that 
highest knowledge which brings the soul back to its 
source and to its home, and restores it to its true 
nature, to its true Self-hood in Brahman.”^ 

The JivanmuTcta feels he has found out what he 

1. The Six Systems of Indian Philosophy, pp. 240-1. 




195 


was seeking, and what can never be taken away from 
him. Henceforward he does not allow the sins of 
the world to soil him, just as the leaf of the lotus 
does not allow the water ( in which it is ) to wet it, 
itself remaining always above the water. 

He realises the truth of such phrases as these : — God 
is the ocean of happiness, and in Him alone happi- 
ness should be sought, and is got. This world is all 
but a show. All is vanity. 

“We are such stuff 
As dreams are made of, and our little life 
Is rounded with a sleep !” — Shak. Tempest. Act. IV. 

This so solid-seeming World, after all, were but 
an air-image, our Me the only reality: and Nature, 
with its thousandfold production, and destruction, 
but the reflex of our own inward Force, ‘the 
phantasy of our Dream’; or what the Earth-Spirit in 
Faust names it, the living visible Garment of God : 

“In Being’s floods, in Action’s storm, 

I walk and work, above, beneath. 

Work and weave in endless motion! 

Bu'th and Death, 

An infinite ocean; 

A seizing and giving 
The fire of Living ; 

’T is thus at the roaring Loom of Time I ply. 

And weave for God the Garment thou seest Him by,” 

*' Him, the Unslumbering, whose work both Dream 
and Dreamer are, we see not ; except in rare half- 
waking moments, suspect not. Creation lies be- 

fore us, like a glorious Rainbow; but the Sun that 
made it lies behind us, hidden from us. Then, in 



196 


that strange Dream, how we clutch at shadows as 
if they were substances ; and sleep deepest while 

fancying ourselves most awake I This Dreaming, 

this Somnambulism is what we on Earth call Life ; 
wherein the most indeed undoubtingly wander, as 
if they knew right hand from left ; yet they only 
are wise who know that they know nothing.*’^ 

“ Man is always throwing his praise or blame on 
events, and does not see that he only is real, and the 
world is mirror and echo. He imputes the stroke to 
fortune, which in reality himself strikes. The student 
discovers one day that he lives in enchantment: the 
house, the works, the persons, the days, the weathers, 
— all that he calls Nature, all that he calls institu- 
tions, when once his mind is active, are visions mere- 
ly — ^wonderful allegories, significant pictures of the 
laws of the mind, and through this enchanted gallery 
he is led by unseen guides to read and learn the 
laws of Heaven. This discovery may come early-— 
sometimes in the nursery, to a rare child ; later in 
the school, but oftener when the mind is more 
mature ; and to multitudes of men wanting in mental 
activity it never comes — any more than poetry or 
art. But it ought to come ; it belongs to the human 
intellect, and is an insight which we cannot spare. 

“Wondrous state of manl never so happy as 
when he has lost all private interests and regards, 
and exists only in obedience and love of the 

Author.’*^ 


1, Carlyle’s Sartor Besartw, pp, 36-37. 

2. The Sovereignty of Ethics, by B. W, Emerson. The North 
American Review, May-Jane 1878. 




197 


The Jivanmuhta fiads that he was estranged from 
God and suffered for it, but is received back by Him, 
as it were, as soon as he earnestly desired to return 
to Him. The riddle is explained to him. He sees 
that the same is applicable to the Universe. 

He is convinced by his own experience that the 
true course for him who desires to attain to the 
highest end of life is to acquire the true 

knowledge of the highest Self, who is hidden in the 
heart of all. The great Being is manifest, near 
and moving in the heart. In It everything is 
centred. It is the True, It is the Immortal. It is 
to be hit as ordained in the Mundahopanishad. He 
should take the Upanishad or Om , — the symbolic 
word for Brahman — as the bow ( ^15 ), as the great 
weapon, and placing the arrow ( of the indivi- 

dual Self), sharpened by devotion, and drawing it 
with a thought ( withdrawn from all other objects 
and ) directed to Brahman, the highest Self, the aim 
{ 55^ ), which is indestructible, he should hit the 
mark. Be it remembered that it is to be hit by a 
qualified man who is not thoughtless; and then, as 
the arrow ( becomes one with the target ), he be- 
comes one with Brahman ( ). 

The wise (^) who understands this beholds 
the Immortal which shines forth full of Bliss 
( ). The fruit of the true knowledge of 

the highest Self ( ) is final release. It iS 

also declared therein that: — 



T’he fetter— knot-— ( all desire) of the heart is 



198 


broken, all doubts are solved (i. e., nescience is 
discarded), all his ( accumulated and current ) works 
( and their effects ) perish, when He, who is high 
and low ( cause and effect ) has been beheld ( as ‘in 
Him I am’).^ 

Or, as declared in the Bhagvad-Gitd (IV.37): — 

‘‘ As a fire well-kindled, O Arjuna, reduces fuel 
to ashes, so the fire of knowledge reduces all actions 
( and their consequences ) to ashes. He has ac- 
complished his task.” 

Or, as the blazing fire makes flame and bright- 
ness out of everything that is thrown into it, so the 
awakened and enlightened make everything coming 
in true contact with them pure and bright. 

When wrong knowledge is removed by the know- 
ledge of one’s Self being one with the highest Self, 
Brahman, then the memoiy of the Highest Self, 
once experienced, remains firm, and all selfish indi- 
viduality vanishes. 

Whenever, withdrawing himself from other objects, 
he is in meditation and comes back to his Self, he 
finds that he is at rest, he is free, he is blessed. He 
feels that nothing can separate him again from that 
eternal Self. He ceases to be what he seemed to be ; 
he is thenceforward what he knows himself to be. 
He remains in the world, as observed above, but 
quite a different man, till his fructescent work or 
appointed task is done, and his physical 

and phenomenal body becomes lifeless, and he is then 
and there returned and absorbed in the Highest 


1. See tbe Mundabopemi^Md, II, 2, 4, 8. 



199 


Self. He views everything in, and refers it to, God, 
He being one in all. All ideas are true to him, in- 
asmuch as they refer to God, the Highest Self. His 
views become extensive, tolerant, and comprehensive. 
His worldly life is a picture of moral purity, noble 
conduct, and intellectual indifference to the transi- 
tory and deceiving charms cf this world. His 
worldly happiness and freedom consist in con- 
stant and unchangeable love of all wherein he sees 
the Highest Self, and in viewing optimistically the 
Universe which manifests more impressively its 
fundamental Substance ( ), Brahman. This 

most exalted belief in One Infinite Being, the High- 
est Self of all phenomenal manifestations, — brought 
into so-called existence by Mkyt, and Which is not 
only in and around everything of the Universe, but 
beyond it — becomes part and parcel of the Ved4ntin. 
This belief, resulting from conviction, gilds and 
sweetens everything he sees. 

In short, he knows that the Highest Self, God, is 
in all, permeates and pervades all, and is above all, 
and that the Highest Self is ( not has ) the Sack- 
chiddnanda Svart{ 2 )a, and that according to the 
Vedanta ' to know is to be.* 

It is proclaimed in the Mtindakopatiishad ( III, 
2, 9 ) “ aniT He who knows 

that Highest Brahman becomes (is) Brahman Itself; 
and the final release from the fetters of Nescience 
is nothing but being Brahman ( ). 

It is ordained: — " Let a man tell this science 
of Brahman ( ) to those only who have per- 
formed all necessary acts who are versed 



200 


in the Vedas ( ), and firmly established in 

( the lower) Brahman ( sr^rfsiST’ )»” that is to say, 
to those who have performed their duties, who are 
learned and devoted to God. 

The Jimnmvkta becomes all happiness and joy 
when he is finally detached from his gross parts, 
never again to undergo tbo miseries of births and 
deaths, and returns to the Highest Self. This is 
the emancipation or liberation of the Veddnta 

It will be obvious that it is this idea which is 
reflected more or less in what Fichte, a great German 
philosopher, maintains in his later work. He says 
that his doctrine is the doctrine of Christianity, and 
particularly of the Gospel of John. It is this : — 

“The absolute and eternally true position is that... 
( he ) who vitally perceives his unity with God, and 
who really and in deed devotes his entire individual 

life to the divine life within him, coalesces 

in the one common vital source of all, the Godhead. 
And so, then, Christianity, its end attained, coincides 
once more with absolute truth, and proclaims that all 
require to come into unity with God. So long as a 
man wants to become something for himself, God 
comes not into him, for no man can become God. 
So soon, however, as he annuls himself perfectly, 
completely, and to the last root, there remains but 
God alone, and He is All in All. Man cannot make for 
himself a God ; nevertheless himself, as the negation 
proper, he can annul, and then he is merged in God,” 
Fichte’s advanced philosophizing is summed up by 
himself in the following verses: — 



201 


“Th’ undying One 
Lives as thou liv’st, and sees in all thou see’st, 

Nought is but God ; and God is nought but hfe. 

Quite clear the veil is raised from thee, and lo ! 

’T is Self : let die, then, this destructible ; 

And henceforth God will live in all thy strife. 

Consider what survives this strife below ; 

Then will the veil as veil be visible, 

And all revealed thou’lt see celestial hfe.”i 

Dr. Max Muller rightly judges and says:—“ The 
highest aim of all thought and study with the 
BrQJimana of the Upanishads was to recognise his 
own Self as a mere limited reflection of the Highest 
Self, to know his Self in the Highest Self, and 
through that knowledge to return to it, and to 
regain his identity with it.” 

Another thinker pronounces that, ‘The study of 
the Ved^ntic doctrines is wealth in poverty, liberty 
in bondage, health in sickness, society in solitude." 

The system is certainly the most sublime. Its 
natural tendency is upwards. Dr. Caird defines re- 
ligion as ‘Simply the return of the Finite conscious- 
ness into union with the Infinite.’ Hegel regards 
religion as ‘the effort of the soul to realise its unity 
with the Absolute’: — 

“God only to behold and know and feel. 

Till by exclusive consciousness of God 
All-self annihilated, it shall make 
God its identity.” 

One, who is enlightened and advanced enough to 

1 Sohwegler’s HUtory of Philoaoyhy, p. 277. 




202 


understand the esoteric doctrines of any good reli- 
gion, is sure to find therein, among its crown and 
choicest jewels, thoughts and notions, — developed or 
in embryo— more or less approaching those which 
are infused in the VedS.nta. 

The supreme and universal excellence of the 
Vedanta is acknowledged by those greatest thinkers 
of foreign countries as well as those of India, who 
have been fortunate enough to understand it. It 
possesses a charm of its own. It strikes out of other 
minds that fire which sets light to original thoughts. 
It creates a sublimity and harmonious unity, which 
satisfy both the aspirations of the heai’t and the de- 
mands of the intellect. 

Seeing Good Everywhere. 

The purifying and ennobling influence of the 
Vedanta on its students is wonderful. It teaches 
them to see, with the eye of knowledge, everywhere 
Brahman, i. e., Being-Thought-Bliss. 

^ankara’s AparoJcsMnuhhUti. 

‘Having made the sight — mind — ^full of knowledge, 
one should see the woi ld full of Brahman, bliss, 
&c,’ A genuine student learns to inhale happiness 
with the air he breathes. Milton says 

“The mind is its own place, and in itself 
Can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.” 

There are two kinds of sight — ^mind. One sees 
good in evil, and another sees evil in good. One 
sees a beautiful rose in the thorns, and admires 
and enjoys it. The other sees the thorns surround- 



203 


ing the rose, and despises it. In a pure shallow 
pool there is the mud lying at the bottom, 
and an image of the heavens above. The seer of 
good sees therein the image of the heavens, while 
the other sees only the mud. 

The Veddnta inculcates in us the former habit of 
perceiving good everywhere. It establishes that 
everything is fuU of happiness if we know how to 
derive it. Shakespeare says : — 

"All places that the eye of Heaven visits 
Are to the wise man ports and happy havena” 

The Veddnta has nothing to fear from research 
and progress of any kind, but on the contrary, it 
will grow stronger and fuller with every advance- 
ment of true philosophy and sound science, remain- 
ing changeless amidst perpetual change, and exempt 
from all the influence of time and space and causali- 
ty. It allows Science to supply all the premises on 
which its conclusions about the Universe are based. 
It is a reasoned system of knowledge. It calls forth 
one’s admiration in the same degree as he is able 
to fathom its depth. It is truly said that all the 
triumphs of truth and genius in every country and 
every age have been the triumphs of the spirit of 
the transcendental Vedanta doctrines, the God of 
which is everywhere. It may be repeated here that 
there is no religion, from fetichism to a most 
exalted one, that could or might be conceived, 
but comes under its wing. It is all-pervading and 
all-including. The true Ved&ntin has to love every 
good thing and hate nothing, though he has to 
pity many. It is his bounden duty, as long as he 



204 


lives in the world, to show himself worthy of the 
Highest Self in him, by learning the best that is 
known and thought in the world, and then propa* 
gating the same, and doing what may lead all to- 
wards perfection and bliss. He must, in brief, dis- 
interestedly try his best to make others as well as 
himself, better, wiser, and happier, and thus glorify 
Him from whom he has come and to whom he is to 
return at last. 

“Seeking nothing, he gains all ; 

Foregoing self, the Universe grows ‘ L’ ” 

Conclusion 

Though the all-absorbing knowledge of the all- 
embracing and all-important Vedanta is self-evidenc- 
ing, being the most sublime, it is not within easy 
reach of all. A few of the privileged, — whose super- 
conscious faculty of mind is liberated from finite 
anxieties, and is duly developed, whose Divine Essence 
is discovered, and who are no longer their finite 
seifs, can apprehend the necessary, xmiversal, and 
apodictical truths of the Vedilnta which scales the 
loftiest height and plumbs abysmal depth. It 
teaches us to find the One in Many and the Many in 
One. 

The Vedanta tries, however, by various means — 
arguments, reasonings, illustrations, parallel passages 
from the highest authorities, repetitions, varying 
expressions, &c., — to make its truths intelligible to 
the student, on whose preparation and capacity of 
sound pure mind depends their attainment and reali- 
zation. The Vedanta furnishes flowers. The student 



205 


is expected to imitate the bee. He should gather 
the stores of the flowers and transmute them into 
honey. 

His Learned Reverence Vasis'tha, in congratulat- 
ing his beloved pupil, E4ma, on his having success- 
fully annihilated Nescience and compre- 

hended the highest truth, observes that:— - 

"O R&mal it is only the discriminating high 
intellect of the student, which is the cause of the 
highest knowledge.” It is truly said that man is 
the architect of his own goodness, greatness, and 
happiness. 

A great philosopher rightly remarks that, — ''Just 
as the sun cannot shed its light but to the eye that 
sees it, nor music sound but to the hearing ear, so 

the value of all masterly work is conditioned by 

the kinship and capacity of the mind to which it 
speaks The impression made by a master- 

piece varies with the capacity of the mind to under- 
stand it Every man must necessarily take his 

chief pleasure in the work of people like him... 

The works of genius cannot be fully enjoyed 

except by those who are themselves of the privi- 
leged order.” ^ 

Amongst Philosophical and Transcendental ideas, 
there are some which, in spite of all efforts, cannot 
become international. " There is,” says Mr. Arthur 
Balfour, “ in matters speculative, as in matters 
poetical, a certain amount of natmal protection for 

J. The Art of lAtoraturo by A. Schopenhauer, pp, 94, 96, 96. 

18 



206 


the home-producer, which commentators and trans* 
lators seem unable altogether to overcome." 

Of so vast a subject as the Vedanta only a glimpse 
of a few principal points could be hinted at here in 
this sketch. 

It will be evident therefrom that the purpose 
of it is to discover the truth, irresistible and neces- 
sary truth, scattered more or less in all religions, 
that there is but the one real Unity underlying all 
phenomenal multiplicity. It is, therefore, specially 
called the Advaita Vedanta. It teaches 

non-duality or Monism. It demonstrates that there 
exists only one all-embracing absolute Being, Brah- 
man ; all difference (^, and plurality 

are illusory. The entire complex of pheno- 
menal existence is considered as true as long as 
<fw5r) the knowledge of Brahman being the Self 
of all has not ai'isen ; just as the phantoms of a 
dream are considered to be true until the sleeper 
awakes. (Br. S, II, 1, 14). 

It demonstrates that all things proceed from, live 
in, and are resolved into. Brahman, the Sal-chit- 
dnanda, Existence-Intelligence-Bliss, the Universal, 
the Absolute, the Essential Spirit, Which is space- 
less, timeless, and causeless, and upon an infinitesimal 
part of which is super-imposed by Nescience the 
visible universe, the perishable and ever-perishing 
phenomenon. Man, men, are necessary singulars in 
whom Brahman (the noumenon) and the phenomenal 
or the universal and the particular meet and are 
realised. It establishes the presence of Brahman in 
all things, and demonstratively reduces all things 



207 


into Its ideviAity and unity. All things by defined 
gradations ascend to unity. 

How this truth is the essential principle for man’s 
Summum honum, will be seen from the following:— 
Gravity is said to be 'the self-internality ( the being 
within self) of matter, and its longing to come to 
itself’ is now a universally admitted fact. The centre 
of gravity of a body is the oneness which it seeks. 
The same tendency towards reduction of multiplici- 
ty into individuality, unity, oneness, is the funda- 
mental princiiale of universal gravitation, of the 
whole solar system. There is no rest for a body till 
it is united to its centre, which it pei'petually seeks. 

This is the nature of the universal insentient mat- 
ter. How immensely greater must it be of the 
sentient soul, the spirit, confined in matter ? How 
could there be any rest or happiness till its unity 
with its centre, the highest Self, is an accomplished 
fact ? 

The Vedanta teaches us ‘how blessed it is to have 
the oi'b of the mind concentric with the orb of the 
Universe,’ and how to reach the highest beatitude 
by being re-instated in Brahman, the highest Self 
and centre of all. 

It is necessary here to draw the student^s atten- 
tion to the one characteristic feature of the Vedanta in 
relation to the science of thought. We are familiar 
with the two forms of the Syllogism : — viz., ( 1 ) the 
Aristotelian Deduction, under which we have a conr- 
sideration of those transcendental facts or traths 
acquired intuitively or inductively, through which 
alone experience becomes possible, or which leads 



208 


from; the universal to the particular and individual ; 
( 2 ) the Baconian Induction, which leads from the 
particular to the universal. 

Besides these two forms, viz., ( 1 ) Deduction,—* 
passing from more general to less general truths, 
and ( 2 ) Induction, — the contrary process of passing 
from less to more general truths, — there is a third 
form, that of ( 3 ) Identification. This is a character- 
istically especial form of the Vedanta philosophy. 
It is termed ( ^ ). 

This Jahadajahad — or Bhdgatydga-Laxan^'^ is an 
Indication in which, Avhen two things of the same 
nature, but with different adjuncts, or different names 
and forms, are concerned, there is the abandonment 
of the conflicting adjuncts or parts, and the reten- 
tion of the substrate, or the part, which is the same. 
The rmification of the same remaining substance or 
part is the Identification. 

In European philosophy it is described as ' the re- 
lation of total sameness in which a concept stands 
to all, and the relation of partial sameness in which 
it stands to each, of the constituent characters.’ ^ 

This third form of Syllogism — Identification — ^is 
said to have been introduced in Europe only in the 
last century by a great German philosopher, Hegel, 
and the Germans have proclaimed him 'worthy of im- 
mortal glory’ for it. The three, namely. Deduction, 
Induction, and Identification, together form a triad 
mutually supporting each other. By 
means of it the separate results of different forms 


1. See page 170. 


2. Hamilton, Logic 1. 179. 




209 


may be combined together in a harmonious and sub- 
stantial whole, and we arrive at a unity. ^ 

There is also another similar system in the 
Ved4nta named ( ) the BddJiasa- 

mdndclhikarnyam, in which with the elimination of 
contrary adjuncts all strangeness between smallness 
and greatness, &c., disappears, and the substrate 
alone remains as identical. 

The method of ( ) Anvaya-tyatireha 

is also used. It is the joint method of concomitance 
and non-concomitance, or, the inductive method of 
conjoint agreement and difference, or, the method of 
positive and negative instances. 

The Vedanta philosophy demonstrates its truths 
by means of such perfect tripartite systems of 
Negation, Position, and Identity, and arrives at the 
irrefragable conclusion of the Identification and 
unity of all the real. It establishes that there is but 
one Noumenon, and all else is but its phenomena, 
though, as it were, amongst the very phenomena, 
there are reflections of the Noumenon, the subject 
itself. Brahman, on various stages. It penetrates 
everywhere and embraces all. 

1. A critic says: — ‘ Indeed, no course of reasoning can be con- 
sidered sound unless conducted by this method, and the results 
of deduction, induction, and identification, are made to harmonize 
and combine with each other as naturally and perfectly as the 
elements in a chemical compound.’ 

The same critic further observes : — ‘He ( Hegel ) is in philo- 
sophy what Browning is in poetiyr — gold in a quartz rock which 
has to go through a milling process in our own minds before we 

can get at it next to Bismarck and Von Moltke no other has 

done so much for German national unity, itself a historical event 
of the first magnitude.’ 



210 


The knowledge of the identity of all releases 
the individual soul, into complete independency from 
the adjuncts, and restores it in unity with Brahman. 
Bacon says: — ‘Things are preserved from destruction 
by bringing them back to their first principles.’ 

The process of ratiocination, reducing particulars 
to some genera], and deducing particulars from the 
general, is seen iii the Ved4nta phrase “ 

“The Lord hath set the world in the mind 
of men, that man may find it out.’’ 

Qankara in his Dakshindmnrtistotra says: — 

This may be translated in the words of Bacon 
thus : — 

‘ The Lord hath framed the mind of man as a 
glass capable of the image of the universal world 
joying to receive the signature thereof, as the eye 
is of light.’ ^ 

The Vedanta subordinates the natural to the in- 
tellectual element, and after reducing the varieties 
of sentient being and those of insentient things, to 
an unconditional unity, proceeds still higher and 
arrives at the absolute unity, the substratum 
SR) of all. Brahman, which is whole and sole, a 
perfectly and universally self-identical, being-thought- 
bliss The thought directed to this 

Brahman is alone the true knowledge. This is called 
the knowledge of the divine whole ( )• 

It elevates the soul. 

“ True knowledge is a whole, and is at rest. 
Consistency and universality are the tests of truth. 


1. Bacon’s Works. Vol. III. p. 220. 



211 


To this self-evidencing knowledge of the whole the 
faculty of mind is supposed to correspond. 

"Without the idea of good (God ) though a man 
gain the world he has no good of it. When the sun 
shines the eye sees, and in the intellectual world 
where truth is, there is sight and light,”’ 

Transcendent ideas reflect in no two minds with 
the same clearness and brightness, much less in 
many minds. They are differently judged by men in 
accordance with their own capacity. Those who could 
not understand them call them dreaming, those few 
whose intellectual powers are high call them the 
wisest and the best interpreters of the human and 
Divine thoughts. 

For the general reader an idea almost similar to 
that of the Vedflnta is giv'en below from the German 
philosopher Kant, which, it is hoped, wflll make the 
above most sublime Vedanta idea intelligible to him. 
Kant is said to have arrived at the same conclusion 
by the way of abstract reasoning and scientific proof. 

"There are not two sources of Knowledge’’, says 
Kant ; "on the one side external Objects, and on the 
other Human understanding. Knowledge has but 
one source, and that is the union of object and sub- 
ject. Thus water is the union of oxygen and hydro- 
gen, but you cannot say that water has two causes, 
oxygen and hydrogen ; it has only one cause ; viz., 
the union of the two. 

"The whole world is to us a series of Phenomena. 
Are these Appearances the production of the mind to 
which they appear ; or ai'e they the pure prcseuiah’on 

1. See Plato^ translated by Jowet. Vol. Ill, p. 83. 



212 


of the things themselves ? Idealism or Kealism ? 
Neither; yet , both. The Mind and the object co- 
operating produce the appearance or Perception. In 
their union Perception is effectuated ‘A know- 

ledge of things per se is impossible’... Although we 
cannot know if our knowledge has any objective 
truth, we can be certain of its subjective truth. 
“ The non-ego and the ego, the objective world 
and the subjective mind, being jdaced face to face, 

the two co-operate to produce knowledge 

The objects are diverse and multiple, or 

numerous and various. The subject re- 

mains invariably the same. 

“ Sensibility has given us intuitions (i)erceptions), 
understanding has given us perceptions;understanding 
isdefined the faculty of judging. Reason is the faculty 
of ratiocination, of drawing conclusions from given 
premises. Reason reduces the variety of concep- 
tions to their utmost unity. It proceeds from ge- 
nerality to generality till it reaches the uncondi- 
tional. Every conception must be reduced to some 
general idea, that idea again reduced to some still 
more general idea, and so on till we arrive at an 
ultimate and unconditional principle, such as God. 
( The Parmdtman of the Vedanta ). 

“ Reason not only reduces particulars to a general, 

it also reduces the particular from the general 

These two processes of reducing a particular to some 
general, and of deducing some particular from a 
general, constitute ratiocination. 

“Reason has three pure forms or ideas. These 
are wholly independent of experience ; they are 
above sensibility — above the understanding ; their 



213 


domain is reason, their function that of giving unity 
and coherence to our conceptions. 

“The understanding can form certain general 
conceptions, such as man, animal, tree ; but these 
general conceptions themselves are subordinate to 
a still more general idea, embracing all these ge- 
neral conceptions in the same way as the conception 
of man embraces several particulars of bone, blood, 
muscle, &c. This idea is that of the universe. (The 
Jagat of the Vedanta ). 

“In the same way all the modifications of think- 
ing being — all the sensations, thoughts and passions 
— require to be embraced in some general idea, as 
the ultimate ground and possibility for these modi- 
fications, as the noumenon of these phenomena. This 
idea is that of an ego—oi a personality — of a soul, 
( of a self), in short. ^ ( The Sim or VramAtci of the 
Vedinta ). 

“Having thus reduced all the varieties of the ego 
to an unconditional unity, viz., soul, and having also 
reduced all the varieties of the non-ego to an un- 
conditional unity, viz ., — the world, our task would 
seem completed ; yet, on looking deeper, Ave find that 
these two ideas pre-suppose a third, a unity still 

1, “That ‘Self (ego) which is the prior condition of there be- 
ing a natural world cannot be the creature of that world. It 
stands above and beyond the sphere of causes and effects ; it is 
no mere object among other objects driven along its pre-destined 
course by external forces in obedience to alien laws. On the 
contrary, it is a free autonomous Spirit, not only bound, but able, 
to fulfil the moral commands which are but the expression of its 
most essential being.” See Mr. Arthur Balfour’s jPouncblion^ of 
Belief pp. 141-2. 




214 


higher, the source of both the woi'ld and of the 
ego — viz., God. 

“God, the soul, and the world are therefore the 
three ideas of reason, the laws of its operation, the 
pure forms of its existence. They are to it what 
space and time are to sensibility, and what the 
catagories are to understanding.” ^ 

“And so each stage in the consciousness of the 

philosophising subject rising ever into a 

higher one, the evolution continues, till, with the 
complete elimination of contradiction, all strange- 
ness between subject and object disappears, and the 
soul comes to perfect self-cognition, and perfect self- 
certainty 

This is the position upon which Descartes stood ; 
the position upon which Spinoza stood. Schelling 
and Hegel arrived at this position by a different 
route. 

The student will find with an agreeable surprise 
the same idea as the foregoing, ( quoted below from 
the Brahma- s Atr as, I. 1, 4.) of the unity of the sub- 
ject and object, on a still higher and more sublime 
principle of embracing all as one and identical with 
Brahman, the Highest Self. 

It is rightly observed that the thing-in-itself is 
unknowable for man. Only a creative, divine mind, 
that gives it reality at the same time that it 
thinks it, can have power truly to know it. 
“ Things-in-themselves do not conform themselves 

1. Lewes* Ewgraphical History of Philosophy, pp. 546-557. 

2. See Dr. Schwegler*s Handbook of the History of Philoso- 
phy, pp. 319-20. 



215 


to the foi'm of human knowledge, because 

human perception is not free from subjective ele- 
ments, is not “intellectual intuition/'' Nor do the 
forms of human knowledge conform themselves to 

things-in-themselves, Hence we can know 

empirical objects or phenomena, but only these.”^ 

In order to show Creation in successive order, and 
to describe the True underlying it. Brahman, certain 
attributes and qualities, which in reality do not 
belong to Brahman, are super-imposed on It, to be 
withdrawn at a further stage of instruction, and then 
the true knowledge arises that the residuum is the 
undifferenced Absolute, Brahman. This method is 
styled Ad]iydropa-A2)avQ,da ( ) which 

means Imputation and Rescission. It is employed in 
accomodation to the intelligence of the uninitiated 
and consists in holding for true for some time that 
which is phenomenal and when the time arrives for 
propounding the noumenal, the True, Brahman, it 
is gainsaid or rescinded. In accordance with this it 
is surmised that : — 

From Brahman, the one rvithout a second, 
proceeds, as it were, Maya ; from Mdya, the union 
( ) ( the beginning of Avhich is unknown ) 
between Brahman and Mdyd; from this union 
proceeds the resultant procession of Is'vara, the 
Lord, and Jivas, the individual souls, and the whole 
universe. Brahman pet' sc is the principle of reali- 
ty. This principle of Reality, Brahman, seems, 
through nescience, associated with an inexplicable 
principle of unreality, M^yA; and it is from the 


1. See Dr. F, Ueberweg’s History of Philosophy. Vol. II, p. 156 



216 


fictitious union of these principles, Brahman and 
that the spheres and migrating forms of life, 
the external and internal world, proceed. Though- 
M^lya is thus assumed, through nescience ( ) 

associated with Brahman, Brahman is not there- 
by any the less the one and the only Being. 
M^y&, though unconscious, energises through her 
proximity to, and the immanence and the reflection 
of. Brahman in her, as the unconscious iron is set 
in motion by the load-stone. Out of this union 
emanate all things. The world, with its duality of 
subject and object, is the figment of this union. 
They are super-imposed by nescience on the Real, 
like the snake seen in a piece of rope by the belated 
wayfarer. These manifestations are not cssence- 
less appearances, but appearances that are filled-up, 
full-filled, implemented by essence. 

For the enlightened and truly awakened person 
these appearances, the non-beent, cease to be, and 
the Essence, the Beent, Brahman, becomes self- 
evident. The highest end of man is gained when 
through right knowledge he knows the Absolute, 
Brahman, and I'ecovers his Self in the highest Self.^ 

1. In her Introduction to Theosophy, Annie Besant says: — 

“ The identity of the origin of religions may be proved by the 
identity of their fundamental teachings, both as to the spiritual 
nature and as to ethical obligations : that the universe has its 
source in One Life ; that man’s spirit is the offspring of that 
Life ; that man may therefore rise to his source and re-become 
one with It ; that human life on earth is a means to an end, and 
that end the perfecting of the soul ; that man is an immortal 
spirit linked with a lower nature, and that the purification of the 
lower nature and its union with the spirit are the means where- 
by the lower may share the immortality of the higher j that all 
men are brethren, and that the law of love is the law of progress ; 




217 


Virgil ainga: — 

“One Life tlirough all the immense creation runs, 

One Spirit is the moon’s, the sea’s, the sun’s ; 

Each breathing thing obeys one Mind’s control, 

And in all substance is a single Soul 

Tlien since from God those lesser lives began, 

And the eager spirits entered into man, 

To God again the enfranchised soul must tend, 
m is her home, her Author is her end ; 

No death is hers ; when earthly eyes grow dim 
Starlike she soars and Godlike melts in Him.” 

, Georgies, Book IV., 223. 

To glance back on the road that has been travell- 
ed, the'task of the VedA.nta is to teach the cognition 
of Sachchiddnanda Brahman It {Brahma- 

jndna) is the only road to the pei'fect beatitude, 
the highest aim of man, the final release ( 

). It establishes that Jtva, the indi- 
vidual Self, is, in reality, identical with Brahman, 
the highest Self, and is separated from It, as it 
were, only by a false surmise due to Nescience 
(srfMlT)- The Vedanta assumes the doctrine of 
Mdy^ from which successive emanations proceed, to 
enable the student to understand more easily the 

such are some of the truths that will be found in every religion, 
however great may be the diflferences in the intellectual present- 
ment of them as dogmas, or in the rites and ceremonies used in 
different communities. As the same water may be held in vessels 
differing in size, in shape, in decoration, but drawn from any of 
them, quenches the thirst of men, so may the water of spiritual 
life be found in all religious vessels, and may be drawn from 
them for the refreshment of the soul athirst.” pp. 15-16. 

19 



218 


inscrutable problem of Creation, and Ml 

is superimposed on Brahman by Nescie#^^i»^ 
but when the higher knowledge 11^^ 1 

becomes sublated, and the identity of the i^lf-<-;W 
Divine in man and the Divine in the universe*— w* ^ 
the Highest Self becomes self-evident. 

The Vedanta is very decided on the true knc | 
ledge of Brahman, but makes many conceswouf rl 
treating of Jagat and Jiva, the universe and the.^ 
dividual soul, they being products of M&ydi whiiii 
very nature is to be inexplicable. P^loSophj’’ j 
described as the offspring of the cf ii'- ’• rjs 
deavour to reconstruct the given world of \ " 

experience— the world found constructed in 
— accoi’ding to its possibility ; or, to be essentially 
conscious and reasoned effort to explain the univers^ 
Its leading problem is Theory of Knowledg<’^ 
To discover the conditions under which knowled^, 
or experience, is possible, in order to reconstruct hi 
the forms of abstract thought according to Its '©la- 
ments, the world given as constructed in 
intuition,^ and to accommodate the mental state 
of some of its learners, the Vedanta adopts 
propounds various doctrines on the Jug^. 
the Jitra, and utilizes such illustrations as ni(l^ :l||i 
familiar to the student from his other 
or individual impressions. Thus, like a kind psienl^ 
the Ved&nta sometimes stoops but to lift uyp flvd 
student. One of them, called the metapl^ o! 
Eeflexion is, in very brief, as follows;— 

Brahman, the Absolute Existence-Intelligence* 


1. Bee £. B. Box’s Handbtok of the History qf Phiiotqph/j4 
pp. 1-7. 




219 


) is the reflected object, 
it idwaTs remains, like the solar orb, nnohanged 
and tiniform unrelated 

i Till) Eleatic school, whose speculations are said to have risen 
to a higher regicn of abstraction or pure thought than other 
ecian r^hools, and which is characterised as dialectical, had 
Aiiophanes ifcs founder. The antithesis around which the 
iole EltJatic philosophy revolves and gravitates is the antithesis 
^tbe one and the many, the permanent and the changeable, the 
Riversal and the particular. Xanophanes dwells on the concep- 
of the oiH unity as the essence of all things. He holds 
f th® everywhere. 

I ^ there is a unity in all things, rad that 

\ >yrrv i It is in a: *d through God that the universe 

The one permanent and unchangeable in all things, 
||>d, is the ground of all, the ultimately and absolutely real. 
!|ds alone is the certain and the true. In antithesis whatever 
f?edicafco is applied to one of its terms, the counter-predicate 
Sj^st be applied to the other term. It follows, then, that if we 
^ the unchangeable, or the one, real, we must call the change- 
or the many, unreal. In short, if we say that the one, the 
^toanenfc, or the unchangeable, is, we must say that the many, 
fltiotuating, the changeable, are not. The former is the world 
I ireason, the latter the world of sense, and the former is repre- 
, seated as the sphere of reality, the latter that of unreality. 

|The latter is a mere subjective phenomenon, and possesses no 
V truth as that which reason compels us to attribute to the 
oanent one, God. Xanophanes’ tenet on this point is illus- 
as follows: — 

^‘Suppose that the sun ( Brahman or Atman of the Vedanta ) 
[lining on the sea, ( MayH or Samsdra including Jtva-Ja^at, 

\ sentient beings and the world, of the Ved&nta ) and that his 
bt is broken by the waves into a multitude of lesser lights, of 
|colours and of all forms ; and suppose that the sea is conscious, 
cious of this multitude of lights, this diversity of shifting 
ours, this plurality of dancing forms ; would this consciousness 
^tain or represent the truth, the real ? Certainly, it would not. 
i objectively true, the real in itself, is in this case the sun in 



220 


variously described, is the reflecting me- 
dium and material cause ( ) of the phe- 

nomenal world. When viewed as a whole, it is call- 
ed M&y4: her numberless small parts are called 
AvidyQ,. She has two powers, viz., to conceal what 
exists and to project what exists not (3n^?:Q[- 
). Miyi is a previous stage ( ) 

of the world dependent on the highest Self ( 

»!R: ), who, without her, could not be conceived as 
Creator. She is neither being nor non-being, but 
rather a becoming, causal potentiality ' 

having Brahman for her substance. On her limit- 
ing adjuncts are based all the practical 

distinctions of life. By them the unity of Brahman 
is, as it were, broken up, and the appearance of 
multiplicity is created. She is destroyed by perfect 
knowledge. ( Br. S. I. 4, 3. ) 

Is'vara ( the Lord ) is the reflection of Brahman 
in SattvapradMna Mdyd, wherein sattva, the pure 
substance, predominates as not overcome by passion 
and ignorance — rajas and tamas. Jivas ( individual 

the heavens, the one permanent, the persistent in colour and in 
form. Its diversified appearance in the sea, the dispersion of its 
light in a myriad colours and in a myriad forms, is nothing, and 
represents nothing which substantially exists, but is only some- 
thing which exists phenomenally, that is unsubstantially and 
unreaJly, in the sea. Take away the sea, and these various re- 
flections no longer are. This dancing play of lights is a truth 
only for the sea, not a truth for the land ; there the light falls 
differently ; therefore it is not a universal truth, and nothing in 
strict philosophy being admitted as true which is not universally 
true, it is not, strictly speaking, a truth at all.” 

See Prof. J. F. Ferrier^s Lectures on Greek Philosophy^ 
pp. 79^7. 




221 


souls) are the reflections of Brahman in the Avidyds, 
the numberless parts of Mdy^, wherein the pure 
substance mixed with or overcome by the r<yas 
(passion) and tamos ( ignorance ) pre- 

dominates. Or, IsVara, is the qualified or the 
lower Brahman, i. e., an insignificant part, as it 
were, of the higher Brahman plus the limiting 
adjuncts of Miy4 ( ). 

The higher Brahman is the unlimited highest 
Self, ( i1^lllril<), pure and simple, including the 
lower Brahman minus the limiting adjuncts of MSiy^. 
The higher Brahman is the supreme concept of the 
higher knowledge ( ). By the right know- 

ledge (^TT^TVlgrR) the Vedintin thinks away the 
adjuncts ( ) and there remains Brahman alone, 
which is reality-thought-bliss, one and absolute. 

The perfect knowledge of the Self ( 3||r<49T^ ) is 
the highest goal for the good, great, and true, as it 
leads the truly instructed to recover his or her Self 
in the Highest Self and to the highest beatitude 
( ). This spiritual life is, in other words, 
the negation of the false self to rise to a life in 
which renunciation of the old false self is the re- 
.alisation of a new, better and true Self, or in which 
abnegation of the finite life is participation in an 
infinite and eternal life. 

(^ankara, — ^the best philosopher and blest seer 
and best teacher of truth, to whose spiritual gaze 
the book of Nature was legible, and 

“ On whom those truths do rest, 

Which we are toiling all our lives to find,” 

concludes with the following citation from the 



222 


Brahmavidy the first section comprising the first 
four SAtras of the Vedanta Philosophy — the 
Brahma-sAtras. The conclusion is ai’rived at after 
the exhaustive deduction of a single, actually exist- 
ent principle that has been inductively acquired, 
and is verified by the method of Identification. 
It contains the highest idea possible, to under 
stand which properly an extensive knowledge of 
Philosophy, Metaphysics and Psychology, in the 
qualified and enlightened student, is presupposed. 

"The subject of the V ed^nta philosophy 

is Brahman. It leads us to the comprehension of 
the unity of Brahman and the Self 
and as soon as the comprehension of the non-dual 
Self ( ) supervenes, all objects 

and knowing agents vanish. 


“(airfln:) Brahma-knowing men declare: 

snrnJT ii 


" When there has arisen ( in a man’s mind ) the* 
knowledge, I am that which is. Brahman is my 
Self,” and when, owing to the sublation of the 
conceptions of body, relatives, and the like, ( the 
imagination of ) the figurative and the false self has 
come to an end ; how should then the effect ( i. e., 
the apparent world with all its distinctions, ) of that 
wrong imagination exist any longer ? As long as 
the knowledge of the Self, which Scripture tells 



223 


us to search after, has not arisen, so long the 
Self is knowing subject ( ); l^ut that same 
subject is that which is searched after, viz., 
(the Highest Self ) free from all evil and blenaish. 
Just as the idea of the Self being the body is as- 
sumed as valid ( in ordinary life ), so all the ordinary 
sources of knowledge ( perception and the like ) are 
valid only until the one Self is ascertained.”^ 

The Upa7iishads^ proclaim that; — 

“The knower of the Self ( overcomes 
grief (^). He who is firm in Brahman 
attains immortality ( ). He who knows 

Brahman attains the Highest. ( 

And he who knows the highest Brahman becomes 
even Brahman. 

“cRTO sigr ^ srira i” 


1, See the Brahma-Sutras I, 1, 4. 

2. The treatises aiming at the destruction of ignorance 
through the knowledge of ( Brahman ) and the supreme identifi- 
cation of the inmost Self of all and the highest Self. The Learn- 
ed pray to them : — 




“ Lead me from the unreal to the Beal, 

Lead me from darkness to light, 

Lead me from death to immortality — Br. U. 1, 3, 28* 




225 


INDEX. 


Adhydrojhl^avdda (the Method of 
Imputation and Rescission). 215 
Ad^aita Vedanta (Monism) •„ 206 

Ajahad LaTtahand 208 

Andtman (non-self) 135-6 

Anderson ( Col. )...17, 18, 20, 22, 23 

Avmya-VyatlreUa 209 

A^aroksTidnuhhdti 127, 202 

Arnold (Sir Edwin) 

— on the Bliagavad’Gitd 83 

Aurelius (Emperor Marcus) ... 33 

Avidyd^ defined ... 151 

— the source of misery and suf- 
fering ... ... ... ... ... 157 

Bacon (Lord), on philosophy ... 62 
—on first principles ... ... ... 210 

—on the mind of man ... 210 

Bddlia (sublation), nature of... 152 
Bddhaadmdnddhiliaranya ... 209 
Balfour (Mr. Arthur)... 205-6, 213 

Bslpumi^ S^heb 15, 18 

Barr (Col.) 11,12 

Blludinbh^i ... 17 

Besant (Mrs. Annie) 

—on the Bhagavad-Qitd,„ ... 84 
— on the identity of the origin 
of religions ... ... ...216-7 

Bhagavad'GUd, on Bmhmau. 81-3 
— M. E. Schure on ... ... ... 81 

— Sir Edwin Arnold on ... ... 83 

— Mrs. Annie Besant on 84 

— on the real and the unreal ... 124 
— on the Divine and Demoniac 

Natures 148-51 

—on the annihilation of works 

by knowledge 198 

Bh^u D4ji (Dr.) 16 

Biography, value of 2 

Bodies, three kinds of, in man. 155 

Brahman ^ nature of 56, 67-77 

— unquaMed and qualified ...72-3 

— the UpanUhada on .77-9 

—the BrahmaBdtraa on ...79-81 
—the Bhagamd- Qttd on... ...81-3 


Brahman f S^ankara on 84-6 

— explanation of, by the sun- 
simile ... ... • •• ••• «•« 86-7 
— as the unknowable of Modem 
Philosophy ... ... ••• ... 90 

— association of Mdyd with ,. ,215-6 
Brahma-Siitraa, the 
— on Brahman,,, ... ... ... 79-81 

— on external things •.. ... 123 

— S'ankara’s introduction to... 134-6 

— on Mahardhya 169-71 

Brihaddranyaha Upanishad 


77, 78, 193, 223, n. 

Browning 

,,, 55 

Burke 

...35, 36 

Caird (Dr.), religion defined by. 201 

(^ankara, (See S^ankara) 
Carlyle, on renunciation... 

... 160 

— on the world 

...195-6 

Chhdndogya TJpaniahad ,, 

. 66, 77. 


78, 152, 160, 168, 187 


— S'ankara’s Bhdahya on ...68-9 

Christ, on Identity 175 

Colebrooke, on the doctrine of 

the Vedanta 123-4 

Coleridge, on love and prayer. 129 

Comte, on knowledge 115-7 

Contemporary Review ••• ••• 90-1 

Cousin (Victor), on philo- 
sophy 49-50, 127 

Creation, various grades in ...124-5 
Bahshindmurtistotra quoted ... 210 

Dadabhai Navroji (Mr.) 24 

Deussen, on the importance and 

excellence of the Vedanta. 51 
Discriminative Knowledge ... 159-64 
Drummond (Henry) 

— on progress and evolution ... 129 

Education.. ...142-3 

Eleatic School, the, 219, n, 

Emerson (R. \V.) 196 

Epictetus 32 

Eye, the three-fold, of man. 186 
Ferrier, Prof. J. F., ••• ...220, 

Fichte 66, 200-1 



226 


Fitzgerald (Sir Seymour) ...19, 21 

Forbes (Mr. A. Kinlooh) 10 

Fortnightly Review ... •*. ••• 92 
Frere (Sir Bartle) ... •*. 15 

Gauris'ankara Udayas'ankara 

OzA ... ... ... •«. ...4, 14 
Gladstone, on Pantheism ... ... 52 
God (See IsVara and Brahman) 
Go^*the 

-^n combination of higher and 

lower wisdom •4. ... 33, 34 I 

-—on God ••• ••• ••• ••• 60-1 

--on a great idea ••• ••• 183 

Gokulajibh^— 

—his birth, parentage and 

early education ... ... ... 2-3 
—meets Gauris'aukara Oza ... 4 

—is thrown on his own re- 
sources... ... ... ... ... 4-5 

— feels attracted to the Vedanta 5-6 
—studies Persian ... ... ... 6 

— meets the B^na of Porbandar. 6 

— becomes acquainted with 

Jayakrishna VyUsa tst 6 

—is deeply impressed by Rama 
Bkvk ••• ••• 7 

— receives instructions in the 
Panchadasl from Parama- 
haiijsa SachchidSnanda ... 7 

—enters the Junagadh State 

service ... ... ... ... ... 7-8 

— ^forms friendship with Mr. 

StoaladSsa ..8, 12, 14 

— his friendship with Mr. 

Pranlal Mathur^d^s 8-9 

— is dismissed from the State 
service; but taken up on 
the personal staff of the 
Nawab Saheb ... ... ... 9 

— Mr. SomanarSLyana's esti- 
mate of ... 9 

—gets reinstated, through Col. 

Lang, in his former position. 10 
—becomes united with Nara- 
simhaprasada ... ... ... 10 
—is nominated Dfwan ... ... 11 
—meets and impresses CoL 

Kea^nge ... ... ... ... 13 


Gokulajibhai, masters and ex 
pounds the doctrines of the 
Vedilnta •s# »»» 

—delivers a speech in 0 |)en 
Darb&r tse •*« 

-visits Bombay ... ... 15 

— attends a meeting of the 

BuddhlV ardhaka 8abh a , . , 1 5-f , 
—beginning of aqualiitance with 

the present writer Ifj 

— Coh Keatinge’s opinion of . . . 1 7 
— independent character of ..clT- H 
— attends the Broach Kxhibi- 
tion and his Guru 1 

—visits Pun^, Bombay, Pfiva- 
gadha Hills and 19 

— his broad views uml sclo'. 

tions for the State Ber\ icfc.I9-2t> 
— ^represents the Native Statej? 

in the Grassia question ,..20-1 
— delicate position of, as Diwan. 22 

— Mr. Peile’s opinion of 22-3 

—strained relations with Col. 

Anderson 23 

— at the Delhi Darbar 21 

—his high opinion about Mr. 
Dadabhai Naoroji and Mr. 

K.N. Kabraji 24-5 

— his views as a statesman ...25-6 
— remains fortified by the teach- 
ing of the Vedanta 27 

— his life of thought and action. 29,^ 
—on intellectual progress ...34-3^ 
— ^hia views on the true reform. 35-6 
— on British institutions and 

representatives ... 36-7 

— receives the title of Rao 

Bahadur ... 38 

— his death ... 38 

— ^his character, extract from 
Blackwood’s Edinburgh 
Magazine, letters from Mr. 
Harid^sa V. Desli and Mr. 

H. A.Wadia 38-4» 

— the Sujna Gokulaji Zkla 

Vedanta Prize ... ... ...44^ 
Goldstueker, on the V^dlnta... 



227 


Maxnilton (Sir W.) on Identifi- 
oation t«« ••• 208 

Hariddsa VihS-ridasa Des^i (Mr.) 

20, 40-1 

Hegel, on Unity,.. ... ... 172 

—on Philosophy ««• ••• 1^ 

— ^position of, in philosophy ... 209 
Herschel (Sir John) ... ...164-5 
Homer ... ... ... ••• 96 

Hume, on the miseries of life. 144-5 
Identification 

—as a characteristically espeoi- 


al form of the Ved^ta 

... 208 

— Hamilton on ... ... ... 

... 208 

“identity. System of 

... 170 

/ — in various religions ... 

...175-7 

Illusions, two kinds of ... 

... 124 

is'vara 

...73—4 

— Pafichadas^t on 

...106-8 

— according to Pratihimha- 


‘V(ida ... ... ... ... 

... 220 

Jardine (Mr. John) 

...21, 24 

Jayakrishna Vy^sa ... .„ 

... 6 

Jtva three constituents of . 

...139-40 

—three main classes of ... 

...140-1 

— strange extremes in the make 

of ... ... ... ... 

...141-2 

—nature of 

...153-4 

according to Prat Ibimbavdda, 220 

\'^lm7imukta (life-liberated) 


— description of 190-202 

Kabr^ji (Mr. K. N.) 

... 25 

:K&lid^sa 

... 1 

‘^ant, on self, the world 

and 

" God ... 

... 65 

—the philosophy of ... , 

... 211-4 

Karsandas Mulji (Mr.) ... 

... 15 

KarmaUy law of 

... 145 

Katha Upanisliad ... ... 

...78, 79 

Keatinge (Col.) 12, 13, 15, 17 

Kena ( or TaXamk&ra, ) Upa- 

nislmd ... ... ... 

...78, 79 

Knowledge, two kinds of 

... 114 

-f-Comte on 

... 115 


right Knowledge 131, 134-5 

Belf 139-40, 146-7 

•—nature of speolal ooxnplete 

Knowledge^,. ... ... 131 


Knowledge, the eye of 185-90 

—three degrees of the Know- 
ledge of God ... ... ... 186 
Lewes (G. H.), on Pantheism... 51 
—on Kant ... • •• ••• ••• 65 

—on Fichte 66 

—on Schelling • ••• ••• 66 

Lytton (Lord) 38 

Mangalaji Bucha (Mr.) ... ... 17, 18 

ManibhM Jasbhai (Mr.) 20 

Mathur^dis Baxi (Mr.) ...6, 18, 19 
Mahd Bhdrata^ on Mdyd ... 109 

Mahdtdkyay Dr. Max Milller on 168 
—the Brahma- Sutras on ... 169-71 

Manu 126 

Matter 

— attitude of the Vedanta to- 
wards 122-3 

nature of ...56-7 

— many names of ...101, 103, 104 

— as defying definition ...102, 105 

106 

on 109 

— as a necessary assumption ... Ill 
—the attitude of the Vedanta 
and Vedantins towards ... 112 

— the paradox about 131-2 

— association of, with Brah- 

matt ... ... ... ... ...215—6 

— according to Pratibimbavdda* 220 
Milton, on philosophy ••• ••• 49 

I —on the mind ... ... ... ... 202 

Mohabatkh^ji (Navab Saheb). 8, 15 
More (Henry) ... ... ... •*. 172 

Muller (Dr. Max) 

— on the importance and excel- 
lence of the Ved^ta ... 51 
—on the real and the unreal ... 124 

— on Mahdvdkya 168 

—on the Ved^tic metaphor of 
the sun ... ... ... ... 171-2 
—on Jlranmuhti ... ... ... 194 
—on the highest aim of thought 

and study ... ... a*. a*. 201 

Mundaka UpanUhad ,,.77, 78, 79, 
197-^, 199 

Narasimhapraslda H. (Mr.) ...lO, 17 



228 


Nature, Demoniac .«• •.•148>9 

— Divine 149-60 

Newman (Dr ), on real religion. 62 
Object (flw*r) f«e ••• ••• 136-7 

Panchadas't 

...106-8 

— on the relations of the Ab- 
solute Intelligence and 
][£dyd .«• ... ... ... •..112—8 

~on SaUcUit’dnanda as the 
necessary substratum of 

...121-2 

151 

Pantheism, G. H. Lewes on ... 61 

—Gladstone on 52 

—Tennyson on ...147-8 

Peile (Mr. J. B.) 22, 24 

Philosophers, the Indian 52-3 

Philosophy, Milton on 49 

—Victor Cousin on... ...49-50, 127 

—definitions of ... 87 

— ^province &c. of 61-2, 161, 194, 218 

Plato 88, 95-9, 210-1 

Plotinus •«. ... ... ••• ... 89 

Pope (Alexander) ... ...92-3, 147 

Pratibivibavdda 218-20 

Pranalal M. (Mr.) 8, 9, 15 

Purina as biography 1 

Pythagoras ... .28, 146 

Bama Bav^... ••• ... ... ... 7 

Kefiection, nature of... 127 

Reform ...34, 35 

Representatives (British) ... 37 

Renunciation 159-60 

— Carlyle on ••• 160 

Buskin ••• ••• 182 

^achchidAnanda Paramahamsa.7, 18 

Baleh Hindi (Jam^d^) 16, 17 

B^malad^a Param^nanda (Mr.) 

8, 12, 14, 18 

S'ankara, (also ^anka 
— on the aim and object of the 

V'edanta ... ... ... ..•63—4 

— as an ideal and model for 
mankind ... •*« •.. ...64—5 

—as an expounder of the 

Veddnta ... ... ... 65 

^•^Bralman ...84-6 


S'ankara, prayer of 179 

— quotation from Brahma^ 


vtd ... ... ,,, 

221-2 

Sat, definition of ... ... 

... 122 

Schelling ... ... 

... 66 

Schopenhauer 


— on the importance and excel- 

lence of the Vedanta... 

... 60 

—on the works of genius... 

... 205 


Schure (M. E.) 

— on the teaching of S'ri Crishna.81 
Science, the attitude of, to* 

wards religion 91 

— the attitude 
nature 

— truths of, stranger than 
fictions ... ... .. 

Self, knowledge of ...139-40, 14(^7 
— various theories about ...150-1 
— nature of .,157»-8 

180, 195, 203 

Slddhdnta-Multtdvali,,, ... 93, 147 
Socrates (the Platonic) 28, 29, 88, 

Somanar^yana'N. (Mr.) 9 

I Southesk (Earl of) 

— on nature-spirit 101 

Spencer (Herbert) ... ... ... 110-1 

Stanley (Dean) 

— on the teaching of Christ ... 129 

States, the four in man 155 

Subject 13f-7 

S'vetaa'mtara TJpaniihad^Tly 78, "^66 
Taittir\ya Ujyanuhad ... .,,72, 77 
Tennyson 

— on absorption into self 75 

—on the Higher Pantheism ...147-8 
— on the elevation of Man^s 
Nature . 

— on the unity of God and 

Creation ... •*. ... .*• 183 

Thibaut (Dr. G.) 

— summary of the Ved&nta by. 66-9 
Thought, three kinds of ... ... 188 
Trichotomy (ftrspft) in man 1^4 
Trinity, the Vedftntic ••• ^ 

Truths, strangeness of 



229 


Universe 

— as the result of Mdyd.,, ... 117-8 
— nature of, according to 

Bhagavad’Oitd 118 

— nature of, according to 

Sdtni-Blidshya 118 

— nature of, according to 

Vasishtha ...119 

— vpri^us classifications of ...119-20 
— analysis of, according to the 


Vedaria 

• •• 

00 

1 

— two parts of 


... 174 

— the attitude of tin 

Vedanta 

towards 

, ... 

... 189 

i pe ,'i i shads, on . : / 


... 77-9 

-- pi 1 *clHtnation of ,,, 

... 

... 222 

•“■'lin of ... ... . , 

... 

222, w. 

1 rja V c /teyi Sa m h • / < r . . 

. ... 

... 77 

Stasis }' 1 ha, on tu)i 


... 119 

— (;U Worship <<■! tiu* 1 

iord 

...128-9 

on the caiui< (d th 

o highest 

knowledge 


... 205 


sin on the import- 
t"vc»j:neiio{‘ of ...49—50 
uei on tlic iinport- 
I exciillencc of ... 50 

—Max . (n- on tlic im}K)rt- 

ance excoilouoe of ... 51 

—Paul I^eu&stn oji the iinport- 
'ujcc and t^xceilencc of ... 51 

— (Voidstucker on tin* iroiort- 

tiace and o’i iallenne of 52 

p-aiin and teaching of 53-64 

—summary of, from the intro- 
duction of the Vedanta- 

Sutras 56-9 

—excellence of ...59-60 

—the leading ideas of 64-94 


Vedanta, preparations for the 

knowledge of 67 

— comparison of, with Plato’s 

Philosophy 94-1 CK) 

— attitude of, towards matter. 122-3 
— harmony between egoism and 

altruism inculcated by... 126 -30 
— analysis of the universe, ac- 
cording to 127-8 

— the all-embracing character 

of 130-2 

— teaching of 133-34 

— qualifications of the student 

of 138-9 

— as covering poetry, religion 

and philosophy 167, n. 

— on the identity of the three 

Selves 174 

— on the unity of all being ... 180 
— attitude of, towards the 

universe 189 

— the habit of seeing good 

everywhere inculcated by .202-4 


— sublimity of 

... 

204 

— purpose of 

... 

206 

— relation of, to the science 

of 


thought ... |. 

.20 

7-11 

— the leading problem of... 


218 

Vidyd, defined ... 

... 

.151 

Virgil 


217 

Vivartardda (the Doctrine 

of 


Manifestation) 

... 

70-1 

ViVchachuddinani 

... 

186 

Vyasa 

... 

126 


Wadia (Mr. H. A.) 20, 42 

Watson (Major) 22, 24 

Wedderburn (Mr. W.) 20, 21 

Wordsworth 2 

Xanophanes 219-20, w. 

Zeno (the Stoic),.. 30 








